LESTER HENDERSHOT'S FUELLESS MOTOR — CONTEMPORARY 1928 PRESS ACCOUNTS
Transcripts of original newspaper reporting, February-March 1928:
  - The New York Times, Feb 25, 1928: "Col. Lindbergh Helps to Test a New Motor"
  - The New York Times, Feb 26, 1928: "Fuelless Motor Impresses Experts" (W.B. Stout)
  - New York American, Feb 27, 1928: "Lindy in N.Y. to Perfect Magnet Motor"
  - The New York Times, Feb 27, 1928: "Fuelless Motor Is a Generator" (Lanphier)
  - The New York Times, Mar 10, 1928: "Hendershot Fails to Come"
  - The New York Times, Mar 25, 1928: "Shows Early Type of Fuelless Motor" (Hochstetter)

All 1928 US newspaper articles — public domain.
Transcribed from "The Hendershot Mystery" compilation (files.hoza.me);
only the 1928 primary-source transcripts are reproduced here.

================================================================

HENDERSHOT NEWSPAPER TRANSCRIPTS

The New York Times
Sat. Feb 25, 1928s 1-283, V, 77, N, 25, 599

      Col. Lindbergh Helps to Test a New Motor,
       Said to Use Electro-Magnetism, No Fuel
                     Special to the New York Times
DETROIT, Mich., Feb 24 - Colonel Charles A. Lindbergh and Major Thomas Lanphier tested at
Selfridge Field today a new type of motor which, it is predicted, will revolutionize power for
airplanes and possibly automobiles and electrical power machines.

The motor is said to employ electro-magnetism in connection with the rotary motion of the
earth. It uses no fuel. Colonel Lindbergh and Major Lanphier joined in the test with Lester
j. Hendershot, the inventor, and D. Barr Peat, his business partner, both from Pittsburgh.

The motor has been guarded with the greatest care since it was brought to Selfridge Field by
Hendershot and Peat. Late today it was taken to an experimental hangar, where the transat-
lantic flier aided in the tryout. This was declared to have exceeded the hopes of the inven-
tor.

So far as experiments have been made, the power has only been applied to airplanes. Later
developments are planned to extend the scope of operations to other fields of locomotion.

No other facts were obtainable tonight other than the machine runs on electro-magnetism.
It is in no sense connected with a perpetual motion idea, although recent tests have shown
that it will run indefinitely.

On the test blocks today, it was learned the motor turned up 1,800 revolutions a minute. It
would run at this rate for between 2,000 and 3,000 hours before it would be necessary to
recharge the magnet centre, it is said.

Colonel Lindbergh and his mother are expected to leave Selfridge Field early tomorrow morn-
ing on the first hop of a flight to Boston, where they will attend the annual meeting of the
National Education Association.

The plane in which Mrs. Lindbergh will be a passenger, a three-motored army transport, ar-
rived this afternoon from Dayton. It is piloted by Lieutenant Harry Johnson and Albert P.
Hegenberger, the latter a transpacific flier.

DETROIT, Mich. Feb. 24 - The Detroit Free Press will say in a copyrighted article, tomorrow
that the Guggenheim interests have arranged for an immediate conference with Lindbergh,
Lanphier and the owners of the new motor.

                                              I
      THE HENDERSHOT J.tYSTEllY                           1===== .ilPPENDIX A

The New York Times
Sun, Feb. 26, 1928, 1-4;2-4thru7, V. 77,N.25.600

                      FUELLESS MOTOR IMPRESSES EXPERTS
                  W.B. Stout. Says, "Invention Works Uncannily - Washington
                                       Think It Important.
                                Built on Radio Principle

Armature Winding New -Inventor Inspired by Young Son
Lindbergh Flies Here

DETROIT Mitch Feb 25. W.B. Stout head of the Stout Air Lines and designer of the all-metal tri-
motored Ford monoplane, declared here today that he had seen what he characterized as an
"impressive" demonstration  the Hendershot fuelless motor two weeks ago in Pittsburgh.

Lester J Hendershot, the inventor, and his associate D. Barr Peat, who is manager of the Bettis
Field at McKeesport Pa., demonstrated the motor secretly yesterday in a hangar at Selfridge
Field. This block test was \JVitnessed by Major Thomas     Lanphier, Colonel Charles A. lind-
bergh and others.

It was explained today that the model used in the demonstration was a much smaller machine
than an actual working motor capable of deveioping power enough to lift and propel an air-
plane. Its designers claim for it that it runs on an electromagnetic principle, by which it draws
its force directly from the earth's field, and through the properties within the motor itself trans-
forms these electric currents into power that can be delivered efficiently at a propeller shaft.

      Demonstration Uncanny - "The demonstration was very impressive," Mr. Stout
said. "It was actually uncanny. I would like very much to see how a larger model designed to
develop power enough to lift an airplane would operate.

Mr. Stout         model he saw was about the size of the tiny electric motors         in vacuum
cleaners. "I was told that the revolutionary feature was a hitherto unknown manner of winding
the armature." Mr. Stout continued:, "Hendershot said he had succeeded in winding it in such
a way that it draws energy directly from electrical currents which exist constantly in the air or
in the ~jround. Such sources of cheap and inexhaustible power of course never have been
reached before. The small model appeared to operate exactly as Hendershot explained that it
did."

Neither Colonel Lindbergh nor Major Lanphier would express themselves at length on the test
they witnessed yesterday. Major Lanphier admitted, however, that they were experimenting
with it and referred an questions to Hendershot.

"He is the only one who knows all about it," the Major said.    "Lindbergh has nothing to do with
it although he saw it."

William B Mayo, chief engineer for the Ford Motor Company was in conference with Major lan-
       Hendershot and Peat at Major lanphier's quarters today"
==t THE HENIJERSHOT MYSTERY                                Corporation Being Formed

DETROIT, Feb 25 - A corporation has been formed to develop the "free energy" motor invented
by Lester J. Hendershot, Pittsburgh electrical engineer, and incorporation papers are to be filed
by Henry Breckinridge, attorney, in New York it was said here today by Major Thomas G. Lan-
phier, Selfridge Field flight commander.

Major Lanphier who left this afternoon by air for Mitchell Field, Long Island, said before his de-
parture that he was interested in the corporation, but he declined to name other persons inter-
ested.

Earlier in the day Major Lanphier said Colonel Charles A. Lindbergh was not connected with the
enterprise, yet Mr. Breckinridge is Colonel Lindbergh's attorney.

Whether the motor will prove practical and revolutionize the automotive world will depend
upon future tests, it was said today, by aeronautical experts who have viewed tests of the
model.

Major Lanphier, who with Colonel Lindbergh witnessed a private demonstration yesterday said
the motor had great possibilities, but "it might not amount to anything. It is too early to tell
anything about it", he said.

William B. Mayo, chief engineer of the Ford Motor Company, was in conference with Major Lan-
phier, Hendershot and Peat in Major Lanphier's office prior to the Major's departure today. He
declined to make any statement upon leaving. Major Lanphier and Colonel Lindbergh held a
previous conference with Ford officials at the Ford plant on Thursday. Whether these confer-
ences had any connection with the development of the Hendershot motor was not learned.

                             INVENTION RESULT OF DREAM
               Hendershot Made First Filelless Motor for His Son's Toy Plane

WEST ELIZABETH Pa., Feb. 25. - The invention of the fuelless motor, tested at Detroit was the
result of a dream by its inventor Lester Jennings Hendershot who lives on "the street back of
the railroad" in this town of about 3,000 inhabitants, fifteen miles from Pittsburgh.

Although Hendershot was on his way from Selfridge Field today and is not expected home until
tomorrow, his wife told of his conception of the machine and of how the miniature model was
constructed from the parts of a worn out radio which had been given to the inventor by his un-
cle.

Several years ago the vision of a machine which would operate form "earth currents" came to
Hendershot in a dream, according to his wife, but it was not until last November that he actu-
ally started work on it.

His 4 year old boy had a small airplane at that time and was considerably chagrined because it
would not operate. The father was disturbed too, so he told his son he would build an air-
plane which would work. The result of that was the fuelless machine.

                                                3
      TlIIIIlEltlJJIlBSHOT MYSTERY

First ModeJ Worked Toy Plane - When the miniature motor model had been constructed, Hen-
dershot built a small airplane and placed the machine in it. A switch was turned and immedi-
ately the propeller begun to move. The machine was not connected to any electrical current,
but was running of its own accord from "earth currents."

For several weeks the little motor and airplane rested upon a small table in the living room of
the Hendershot home, which faces an unpaved street near the railroad tracks. One day D. Barr
Peat of Bettisfield, the air mail port near McKeesport Pa., visited the Hendershot home to see
the model. He immediately became enthusiastic and a few weeks later he and Hendershot
were at Selfridge Field where permission had been grated to build a model large enough to op-
erate an airplane.

Hendershot who is only 29 years old, was born in Hyndman Pa., His schooling has not been
extensive although he spent a few months several years ago at Cornel! University. where he
took a few courses in mechanics. He has not been consistentiy employed at any particular
task and has been known as a "free lance" worker. He has been a fireman, an engineer on the
railroad, has worked in the mills near Pittsburgh, has inspected concrete and done electrical
work. During the war he was a bugler with a machine gun company, but did not get overseas.

     Wants to See "How They Work"

According to his mother, he has always been interested in mechanics and when a child he
would insist upon taking his play things apart.

And that desire has not escaped him as a man for even now he takes his own son's playthings
apart to see how they work ..

It required only a few weeks    him to construct the miniature model of his fuel less motor, al-
though he worked day and night during that time. He had a crude work bench in the cellar of
his home, which was placed near the furnace, where it was warm. Early in the morning he
would be there, tinkering about and late at night he still could be found there.

Hendershot's idea was that the earth currents which make the aurora borealis in the skies
could be harnessed    man and made to produce power that would operate an engine.

The youthful inventor has no other inventions to his credit.

Works on Principle of Compass

PITTSBURGH Pa. Feb 25 lester Hendershot first came to Bettis airplane field in McKeesport
between two and three years ago, and soon afterward brought one of his motor models to the
officers of the field for inspection.

The fuelless motor works somewhat on the principle of a compass and the original model
would always operate when pointing       or south as does the compass but would not move
when pointed east or west.

Young Hendershot worked nearly two years to overcome this defect and finally he brought a
motor to the Bettis Field that appeared to be working perfectly. This motor was installed in a
small model airplane and the plane flew, but owing to the failure to rig it property, it crashed to
   ground during one of the experiments.
==l THE HENIJERSHOT .YSTERY                              1=1===A.PPENDIX A.

Constantly improving the motor Hendershot finally interested D. Barr Peat, manager of the Bet-
tis Field, in his invention.

After a short time several capitalists were interested, and a few weeks ago the motor was taken
to Detroit by Hendershot and Peat for an exhibition.

While no person at the field was in position to say authoritatively, it was stated that the capital-
ists who have become interested in the Hendershot motor have about completed their arrange-
ments for the purchase of the invention and for controlling its production.

The fuelless motor, it is said, appears to have tremendous power and easily made, between
1,500 and 2,000 revolutions per minute on several occasions while being tested at the field.
Pilots and mechanics believe it to be the greatest invention of the age, and all appear sure it
will be a practical success as an airship motor.

It was stated at the field that the inspection of the motor by Colonel Lindbergh was made in
the interests of the capitalists who are arranging to purchase the invention.

                              WASHINGTON INTERESTED
              Army Officers Had Heard of a Revolutionary Invention

WASHINGTON Feb 2S - Keen interest was shown in Government aviation circles today over re-
ports from Detroit that Colonel Lindbergh and Major Lanphier had witnessed a test of an al-
leged fuelless motor.

Among officers who know Major Lanphier, there was a disposition to believe that the invention
was important. Some recalled that recently he was reported to have intimated that he was in-
terested in a matter that would have revolutionary results on aviation. Navy officers said it
had long been recognized that some such engine might be developed.

Lieut Commander J.M. Shoemaker, head of the airplane engine department of the Navy Bureau
of Aeronautics, who is a member of the subcommittee, said "the invention would be remarkable
if true".

Members of the subcommittee on power plants for airplanes of the National Advisory Commit-
tee of Aeronautics were in session today, but their only information was contained in the press
accounts from Detroit.

Dr. S.W. Stratton, President of the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, who is Chairman of
the subcommittee, said he could form little idea of what the engine might be but thought that
as described, it would appear to be "not practical". It might be pOSSible, he admitted, to build
a magnetic engine that would work, but it probably would weight 1,000 times as much as an
airplane.

Major Lanphier has long been a close friend of Colonel Lindbergh. Graduated from the Military
Academy in 1914, he has been in the Army Air Corps since 1920. He has made noteworthy
flights from Selfridge Field to Cuba and to Texas.

                                                 5

                           GUG ENHEIM CALLS IT INFANT
                Says No Predictions Can Be Made Yet for New Motor

SANTA BARBARA Cal. Feb 25 - Harry F. Guggenheim, President of the Guggenheim Foundation
for the Advancement of Aeronautics, believes the new electro-magnetic motor tested yesterday
at Selfridge Field is too infantile in its development to warrant predictions as to its effect on lo-
comotion.

Mr Guggenheim who is spending six weeks in Santa Barbara, said today that Major Thomas G.
Lanphier brought the motor to his attention several weeks ago.

"I suggest that patent rights be secured before anything further was done." Said Mr. Guggen··
heim, 'The Guggenheim Fund will be glad to carry out investigations and experiments. But it
is too early to announce the effect the new motor will have on locomotion."

Mr. Guggenheim expressed surprise that any report of the experiments had been made public,
saying premature predictions that the new motor would revolutionize locomotion might retard
the advancement of aeronautics.

                          WANTS
          Engineers                 Loath             uu<c..,,,   on Reported Invention

While aviation engineers and pilots here were much interested yesterday in the reports from
Detroit of a fuelless motor they all wanted more information on the mysterious power plant be-
fore expressing an opinion about it.

William H. Meadowcroft, a pioneer experimenter in electricity since i 881 , who has been associ-
ated with the Thomas A. Edison laboratories in East Orange, said last night that he had not
       of any experiments being carried out with an electric motor using the earth's currents di-
rectly as a source of power exclusive of generating plant and batteries. "I would like to know
more about it before commenting on it," he said.

Professor Alexander Klemin, physicist of the Guggenheim School of Aeronautics at New York
University, to whom the funds refers, plans and inventions having to do with aviation, said last
night of the Detroit test:

"I am interested of course, but on the meager descriptions in the press, I would not care to
comment. The laws of physics are pretty rigid and there is no way of getting something for
nothing. Of course, we know of the magnetic field around the earth, but it is only through
some chemical or atomic means that we can derive energy." Neither he nor H. Allen Sullivan of
the Guggenheim Fund were inclined to take the new motor seriously until they had received a
more detailed description of it.

Dr. Michael L. Pupin, Professor of Electro-Mechanics at Columbia University, told the Associated
Press that he could not consider the subject seriously.
"According to my knowledge of science I cannot understand how sufficient power can be gen-
erated in this manner to operate a heavy object. I do not understand it and fail to place any
importance in it he declared."

                                                  G
      TlIl1l1liNlJlillSBOT MYSTERY                    1===== APPENDIX A

Baltimore Professor Dubious

BALTIMORE Feb 25 - The theory that the new motor tested at Detroit derived its motive power
from an earth current was received skeptically today by Dr. J.B. Whitehead, Dean of the John
Hopkins School of Engineering. His reaction to newspaper accounts he said, was that they
were "interesting if true".

            LINDY IN N ..Y~ TO PERFECT MAGNET MOTOR

                             Inches Long and Weighs 110 Pounds,
                                    Designer States

NEW YORK Feb 26 -       New York American in a copyrighted article will say tomorrow that
Colonel Charles A. lindbergh or Major Thomas Lanphier has brought to New York the electro-
magnetic motor of lester Hendershot for purposes of perfection and production.

The motor will be taken to the office of the Guggenheim Fund for the promotion of aeronautics
tomorrow, the paper will say.

"Despite protestations of Lindbergh, H.K. Knight and others that they were in New York on a
pleasure jaunt and that they positively would have nothing to do with production of the inven-
tion, it was learned     had          the motor here    that       purpose," the paper    as-
sert.

Hendershot,         of the engine will arrive Tuesday to continue negotiations with Lanphier,
Lindbergh and the Guggenheim representatives, the paper       say.

In commenting on the invention it      say Hendershot said, 'The engine actually makes its own
electricity. There is a magnet which acts as a starter. From that point on it generates its own
power.        magnet      not wear out under 2000 hours, nearer 3000."

"And contrary to reports already circulated, the model is not the size of a vacuum cleaner mo-
tor. it is twenty-eight inches long. It weighs 130 pounds, it has developed 45 horsepower at
1800 revolutions a minute, the average speed of internai combustion motors."

                                              7
      TilE HENDERSHOT JlYSTERY                            1======= APPENDIX A
The New York Times February 27, 1928

                        FUELLESS MOTOR IS A GENERATOR
                   New Hendershot Device Has Enough Power to Kill a Man
                                      Lanphier Says

                              EXTENSIVE TESTS AHEAD
                          Major Adds That Much Remains to Be Done
                          Before Invention Can Be Applied Practically

The Hendershot "fueiless motor" is not a motor at ali but a generator, according to Major
Thomas Lanphier, commandant at Selfridge Field, which, were he with lester Hendershot, the
inventor and D Barr Peat have been quietly working on an experimental model. Major Lan-
phier started for New York from Selfridge Field in an army pursuit plane a few hours after
Colonel Lindbergh took off. The army officer was forced down at Buffalo and completed his
journey by train arriving here yesterday morning.

Major Lanphier said he first became interested in the Hendershot electrical machine several
weeks ago through Peat; that in common with others he thought it was more of less "bunk"
but after seeing it work he became interested.

"I saw the first model which Hendershot built hooked up to a small electric motor of the type
used to operate a sewing machine. It not only ran that motor but it burned it out", Major Lan-
phier said.

Why this generator acts as it does, where the energy (omes from that transforms it into power
Major Lanphier was not prepared to say beyond quoting Hendershot. It is the inventor's the-
ory that his machine draws its energy from the earth's magnetic field. While unwilling to de-
scribe it in detail until pending patents have been received, Major Lanphier told a little about it.
The first model consisted of a ring magnet less than three inches in diameter. Around the
magnet were coils rigged as only Hendershot knows how to rig them and another set of coils
pass through the centre of the ring.

With     contrivance we burned out the sewing machine motor and we also kept a 100 watt
lamp going with it for twenty-six hours, he said.

The larger mode! which has not yet been hooked up to a motor that can deliver power to a
crankshaft, Major Lanphier himself helped to bu

"We put it together out of stuff we picked up at the field and with it we lighted two 110 watt
lamps." Major Lanphier said. "I think that we have got enough electricity in this second
model to kill a man."

The second model is built around a ring magnet, the outside of which is seven inches and the
inside is six inches. The army officer in explaining the generator declared that he himself was
no electrical wizard. His knowledge of physics ceased he said, with what he acquired in his
classes at West Pointe He is convinced however, with the results attained so far that the
is well worth experimenting with.
      THE HENDERSHOT JlY6TEllY                          1=====llPPENDIX 1l

It was suggested that perhaps the Hendershot engine was "stealing" power from some big radio
broadcasting station.

"We thought of that" Lanphier said, "but we ran it for twenty-six hours when stations were go-
ing and when they were not and we got the same results.

The army officer paused in his meager description of the generator to declare that Colonel
Lindbergh had no connection with the group interested in it.

"There are only Hendershot, Peat, myself and Henry Breckinridge," Major Lanphier said.

Professor Alexander Klemin of the Guggenheim School of Aeronautics, whose said last night
that he would be glad to provide a place for the proper laboratory experiment on the Hender-
shot device, asserted that the weight of the motor would be no great bar to its use in a plane,
because of the great weight saved in not having a fuel load.

Major Lanphier spent some time yesterday in conference      Mr Breckinridge and Colonel
lindbergh adhered to his declared program of "keeping out of sight."

"Slim wants to get out of the picture and rest and we are going to help him," Major Lanphier
said, and then declared that lindbergh's closest friends had persuaded him for the present, at
least, not to align himself with any business organization in aviation or out of it.

"Lindbergh means too much to aviation", Major Lanphier said, "as he is.   Once he        some
company he becomes a competitor. He belongs to      aviation now."

Beyond his trip to Albany as the guest of     Legislature on Wednesday, his friends said Und-
bergh     no plans beyond rest and play.

                                             1

                              E                  COMI
PITTSBURGH Feb 28 1928. Lester j. Hendershot at West Elizabeth, inventor of the "fuelless mo-
tor" today denied all knowledge of a corporation in process of formation by Detroit friends to
exploit his creation,    made known that he would go to New York Tuesday to confer with
Colonel Charles A Lindbergh and others prominent in the worid of aviation. The model of the
motor which was on display in Detroit last week has been sent to New York, Hendershot said.
      THE IIENIJE.IlSHOT MYSTERY                                          APPENDIX 1\

                                LAYS A C          M TO iDEA
                Seattle Youth Says He Discovered Principle of "Free Energy".

SEATTLE Feb 28, The Post lntelligencer will say tomorrow in a copyright story that Alfred M.
Hubbard, Seattle youth, was probably the discoverer of at least the principle of the "free en-
ergy" motor privately demonstrated in Detroit last week.

!n 1918 Hubbard, when only 18 years old, demonstrated an apparatus by which he claimed ex-
tracted its electric energy directly from the air. Today Hubbard declared he believed the motor
demonstrated in Detroit by lester J. Hendershot is a development of his apparatus.

In a demonstration here in 1918, Hubbard propelled an eighteen foot motor boat equipped
with a 35 HP electric motor apparently getting its power from a coil 11 inches in diameter and
14 inches long.

The New York
February     1928

                    EXPLAINS MAGNET I               FUELLESS MOTOR
                     Hendersftwt Says Shifting its   to East and West
                                   Causes Rotary Motion
                              Winding of Magnet Secret

          Asserts Engine Weighs about 4                      Per Horsepower
Expected Here Today
Special to the New York Times

PITTSBURGH Pen. Feb. 28. Initially indignant because the manner in which his fuelless motor
gains its power had been misrepresented in dispatches from Detroit and Washington, Lester J
Hendershot today                 was nothing mysterious about his motor that the force that en-
ergizes it is the "same force that pulls the needle of the compass around, and there is nothing
mysterious about that".

The fuelless motor was not his objective, he explained, at the time he began his experiments
some three years ago, when he first became interested in aviation.

He soon learned that "the ultimate development of aviation depended largely upon the discov-
ery or invention of an absolutely true and reliable compass," he explained, 'The ordinary mag-
netic compass does not point to the true north - it points to the magnetic north, and varies
from the true north to a different extent at almost every point on the earth's surface."

'There is another compass, the magnetic induction compass, that indicates the true north.    But
it must be set before each flight, and is not always reliable."

"I found that with a pre-magnetized core, I could set up a magnetized field that would indicate
the true north, but I didn't know just how to utilize that in the compass i set out to find."

                                               10
=9 THE HENIJEBSHOT }lYSTEBY                              1:1=== l1PPENDIX 11
"In continuing my experiments, I learned that by cutting the same line of magnetic force - north
and south, I had an indicator of the true north, and that by cutting the magnetic field, east and
west, I could develop a rotary motion."

"I now have a motor built on that principle that will rotate at a constant speed, a speed prede-
termined when the motor is built. It can be built for any desired speed, and a reliable constant
speed motor is one of the greatest needs of aviation."

The main secret of Mr. Hendershot's invention, his friend, Barr Peat declares, is, "the method of
winding a magnet in the motor so that it will rotate in the opposite direction than the earth re-
volves." He says there is no heat, because magnetic forces are cold and the motor is stopped
only by breaking the magnetic field in the windings. The magnet in the motor, he thinks prob-
ably would have to be recharged after about 2,000 hours of operation.
Mr. Hendershot declares that one of his motors, complete and ready to be installed in an air-
plane, would weight little more than four ounces for every horsepower it developed, while the
best of the gas engines now built weighs about two pounds per horsepower.

Mr Hendershot says that altitude would not affect the efficient operation of his motor, for the
magnetic influence of the earth has been found to remain the same as high as man has ever
reached.

He said the same principle which made his original model operate only when it was placed in
one direction - north and south, will be developed so that it will provide a compass that will al-
ways indicate true north.

Lester J. Hendershot inventor of the "fuelless motor" or self-driven generator or electrical, en-
ergy collector, nobody seems to known quite Which, is expected in New York today to dissipate
some of the mystery surrounding his machine. It has aroused a good deal of skepticism among
men who have dealt with electrical energy all their lives, and among physicists who do not be-
lieve that the law of the conservation of energy has been repealed.

However, Major Thomas Lanphier, commander of the First Pursuit Group at Selfridge Field,
Henry Breckinridge attorney for Colonel Charles A. lindbergh, and D. Barr Peat, a friend of Mr.
Hendershot, are just as confident that the inventor has stumbled on something which may be
capable of development into a revolutionary power source.

Whether the machine has yet arrived in the City, Major Lanphier would not say, and he said
yesterday that he did not care to say anything more about the motor until Mr. Hendershot ar-
rives. He did deny again, however, that Colonel lindbergh had any interest in the machine
aside from his examination of it while at Selfridge Field.

                                                II

The New York Times
March 1J 1928
                           HENDERSHOT FAilS TO COME

Guggenheim Fund Disclaims Connection With l&Fuelless" Motor.

Lester Hendershot Inventor of the so called "fuelless" motor, didn't appear in New York yester-
day although it had been reported that he was on his way here. At the office of the Guggen-
heim Foundation it was said that they had not heard from him, and later issued the following
statement.

"During the last few days newspaper reports have mistakenly connected the name of the Danie!
Guggenheim Fund for the Promotion of aeronautics with a reported invention of an electromag-
netic motor. The fund has no connection whatever with this enterprise. Some months ago
the reported invention was submitted to certain members of the fund for their consideration,
but the fund was unwilling to take any action in regard to it until it had been extensively
tested."

    NEW YORK TIMES
March 25 1928

                    SHOWS EARLY TYPE OF FU EllESS MOTOR
        Hochstetter Exhibits Previous Invention by Hendershot at Which He Scoffed
                               PROPOSES TEST OF ENGINE
 If New Device Stops      Shielded Box Says Critic, He Will Admit It Is Wonderful Discovery

Frederick Hochstetter, head of the Hochstetter Research laboratory of Pittsburgh New York,
yesterday .......
               0"   exhibited a model of a motor which he said, Lester Hendershot inventor of
the so-called "fuelless"        had invented several years ago and     which much had been
ciaimed, but not proved. This was the model, Dr. Hochstetter said, which had concealed in
tubes small batteries which actuated it instead of the magnetic currents of the earth, which the
inventor contended was its motive force.

Mr. Hochstetter set up the model in a room of the Waldorf and expounded at length his techni-
cal reasons for asserting it would not work. He was accompanied by E.H. Wicks, a Pittsburgh
attorney, and lloyd Wheeler, an engineer from his laboratory. He also said that he repre-
sented the view of a committee composed of Dr. L.P. Seig, dean of the graduate school of the
University of Pittsburgh, Dr. W.R. Worth, director of electrical engineers at Carnegie Technical
Institute,    Dilling, a Pittsburgh engineer, R.H. Brownlee and H.O. Swaboda of Pittsburgh.

It was this model, Mr Hochstetter said, which Hendershot had exhibited in Pittsburgh. It was
never developed, Hochstetter said, and Hendershot never revealed the principle by which he
contended it worked, although the inventor had signed an agreement to explain it to Hochstet-
ter. He challenged the inventor to test it on      newest mode! by enclosing it in a shielded
box, which would intercept any ordinary electrical current in the atmosphere and if it stopped
after it were shielded he said he would be willing to admit that Hendershot had a wonderful in-
vention. Otherwise it is not ..... "... (end)

                                               12
==i THE HENDERSHOT MYSTERY                              1=1===APPtiNDIX 1\

Hendershot himself was not to be found yesterday, although it was reported from Washington
that he had started for New York from there.

NEW HAVEN Con. March I - The Hendershot "fuelless" motor, is amazing as an experiment, but
a fluke from the standpoint of electrical engineering, declared W.B. Hall, Assistant Professor of
Electrical Engineering at Yale, today.

The hesitancy of the inventor to permit the motor to be investigated by experts because, as he
has put it, he desires to protect the rights to a patent, indicates that there is something wrong
with the invention, Professor Hall said.

The New York Times
Wed. March 7, 1928

                            MOTOR RUN BY ION ENERGY
                Jesuit Inventor From Brazil is Here to Market Production,
                             Now Undergoing Patent Tests.
                               NOT A FUELLESS MACHINE
              "Inter-Atomic", Force Increases Electric Battery Power, He Says.
                                 Doubts Hendershot Claims

An Italian Jesuit priest from Brazil announced here yesterday that he had invented a motor that
makes use of "interatomic" energy to generate many times the power it receives originally from
an electric battery. The motor is now at Washington, where it is undergoing the Patent Office
investigation.

The priest is the Rev. Antonio d"Angelo, Sj., a stocky, earnest little man who combines mission-
ary work in Brazil with tinkering in his own electrical laboratory. He speaks no English, but
told of his machine through his brother, Biaglo d'Angelo of 1,475 Leland Avenue, the Bronx.

Father d'Angelo became interested in electricity twenty years ago when he was a student at a
Jesuit seminary in Naples. A year and a half ago he was sent out by his Order to Brazil to carry
on missionary work at Ribelrao Preto among the Italian immigrants. He had to get a special dis-
pensation from Bishop Alberto Gonzales of Ribelrao Preto to visit the United States, where,: so
his brother had written to him, fortune comes more easily to the man with a new money-saving
device. He came here in November, 1927, and has ....... six months.

"I challenge anyone," he said yesterday, "to use the magnetic field of the earth for running a
motor. The energy from that would be too smaiL"

His motor, he said, could be used in the home to supply electric lighting cheaply, and even
heating. He said that it could be used to run trains, airplanes and automobiles.

Father d'Angelo had a plan of his motor with him yesterday. He showed how it started to de-
velop energy from an electric battery and how this original impulse worked on the machine to
generate many times its power through the "electricity produced by the interatomic energy of
the ions".

                                               13
      TIIElIllNlJEIlSIIOT MYSTERY                       1======== APPENDIX A

The New York Times March 10, 1928

              2,000 VOLT SHOCK FROM IS FUElLESS MOTOR
                 Paralyzes Hendershot During Experiment

WASHINGTON March 9 - Lester J. Hendershot of West Elizabeth Pa. Who became famous
overnight as inventor of the so-called "fuelless " motor after Colonel Charles A. lindbergh in-
spected the machine, is a patient at the Emergency Hospital recovering from temporary paraly-
sis. It was caused by a severe electric shock sustained while experimenting with the motor
here in the Washington Loan and Trust Building, Ninth and F. Streets.

The accident occurred about noon Tuesday, March 6, when, according to statements at the hos-
pital tonight, its ambulance was summoned to the Loan and Trust Company's building, where
Mr. Hendershot, it is declared, was found in a temporarily paralyzed condition. A physician at
the hospital stated that Mr. Hendershot had been rendered unconscious by the shock and that
he did not recover until about 6 o'clock Tuesday afternoon.

The electric shock, it was stated at the hospital had temporarily paralyzed Mr. Hendershot's
legs, arms and palate for several hours, and while his condition was today still described as se-
rious at the hospital, it was added that he had greatly improved, although he could not be dis-
charged for several weeks. Only two of his dose friends have been allowed to visit him at the
hospital.

At the hospital, where he is a private patient, it was stated by one   the staff physicians, that
no information could be given beyond the understanding of that physician that Mr. Hendershot
was injured while working around his motor, the            being caused by 2,000 volts passing
through his body.

First information that Mr. Hendershot had been injured in Washington came in inquiries from
friends in Pittsburgh, came as a distinct surprise.

Mr. Hendershot and J Barr Peat, his associate, have been in Washington for nearly a week, con-
ferring with a patent attorney and it is understood, also with Major Thomas G. Lanphier, com-
mander of the First Pursuit Group at Selfridge Field, Michigan, and with Colonel Henry Breckin-
ridge, legal adviser to Colonel Charles A. Lindbergh.

PiTTSBURGH March 9, - If Lester j. Hendershot has been seriously injured by an electric shock
in Washington, as reported from that city today, neither his mother nor Mrs. Hendershot had
received word of    his mother said this afternoon, when inquiry was made at the Hendershot
home in West Elizabeth, as to the extent of the inventor's injuries.
     Tllli' HENDERSHOT IIYSTERY                        1===== APPENDIX A
The New           Times November 12 1928    j

                            MAY SEEK MOTOR PATENT
               M. C Kelly to Ask       Scientists to Test Hendershot Device

PITTSBURGH Nov 11 Fed. Representative M. Clyde Kelly of Pennsylvania. It became known
here today, plans to seek a Congressional Patent for the "fuelless" motor of lester J. Hender-
shot of West Elizabeth Pa., if five scientists approve the invention as practical. A Congres-
sional patent gives the patentee full protection for seventeen years.

Hendershot's invention, which he describes as a "magnetic induction" motor was first an-
nounced in March. At that time in some quarters it was regarded with skepticism.

The motor, according to its inventor is without visible means of power. It obtains its initial
impulse, Hendershot maintains, from a pre-energized magnetic core, and its secondary and
greatest power pulse by magnetic induction, from        earth.

Hendershot today said several of the motors had been built here, and the last one, which de-
veloped sixty horsepower, had been in operation constantly for two weeks without re-
energizing the magnetic core.

                                                15
