A Text-book in Psychology
Johann Friedrich Herbart (Margaret K. Smith, trans.) (1891)
========================================================================

PROVENANCE NOTE (Tower of Babel staging): Herbart's Lehrbuch zur Psychologie (1816) — psychology as the mechanics of ideas, the root of his pedagogy. Margaret K. Smith's 1891 translation.

========================================================================

w


I 32

HS22


INTERNATIONAL EDUCATION SERIES.

Editkd bt W. T. Habius.


{ IT is proposed to publish, under the above title, a library tor teachers

1 and school managers, and text-books for normal classes. The aim will
[ be to proYide works of a useful practical character in the broadest sense.

I The following conspectus will show the ground to be covered by the series :
I.— History of Education, (a.) Original systems as ex-
pounded by their founders, (b.) Critical histories which set forth the
customs of the past and point out their advantages and defects, explain-
ing the grounds of their adoption, and also of their final disuse.

IL— Educational Criticism, (a.) The noteworthy arraign
metits which educational reformers have put forth against existing sye
tems : these compose the classics of pedagogy, (b.) The critical histories
above mentioned.

in.— Systematic Treatises on the Theory of Edu-
cation, (a.) Works written from the historical standpoint; these,
for the most part, show a tendency to justify the traditional course of
study and to defend the prevailing methods of instruction, (b.) Works
written from critical standpoints, and to a greater or less degree revolu-
tionary in their tendency.

IV.— The Art of Education, (a.) Works on instruction
and discipline, and the practical details of the school-room, (b.) Works
on the organization and supervision of schools.

Practical insight into the educational methods in vogue can not be
attained without a knowledge of the process by which they have come to
be established. For this reason it is proposed to give special prominence
to the history of the systems that have prevailed.

Again, since history is incompetent to furnish the ideal of the future,
it is necessary to devote large space to works of educational criticism.
Critidsm is the purifying process by which ideals are rendered clear and
potent, so that progress becomes possible.

History and criticism combined make possible a theory of the whole.
For, with an ideal toward which the entire movement tends, and an ac-
count of the phases that have appeared in time, the connected develop-
ment of the whole can be shown, and all united into one system.

Lastly, after the science, comes the practice. The art of education is
treated in special works devoted to the devices and technical details use-
ful in the school-room.

It is believed that the teacher does not need authority so much as in
sight in matters of education. When he understands the theory of edu-
cation and the history of its growth, and has matured his own point
of view by careful study of the critical literature of education, then he is
competent to select or invent such practical devices as are best adapted
to his own wants.

The series will contain works from European as well as Aroericnn
authors, and will be under the editorship of W. T. Harris, A. M., LL. D


Vol. I. The Philosophy of Edncation. By Johahv Kabl Fjiud-

BIOH BOBBNKBANE. $1.60.

Vol. II. A History of £dncatioii« By Piofessor F. V. N. Paistib,

of Boanoke, Vir^ia. $1.60.

Vol. III. The Rise and Early Constitution of UnlTersities.

With a Survey of Me<U8eval Educatioo. By S. S. Laubis, LL. D.,
ProfeMor of the Institutes and UiBtory of Education in the Univenity
of Edinburgh. $1.60.

Vol. IV. The Ventilation and Warming of School Buildings.

By GiLBBBT B. MoBBisoK, Teacher of Physics and Chcinif«try in Kan-
sas City High School. 76 cents.

Vol. V. The Education of Man. By Fbibdbioh Fboebel. Trans^
lated from the Qerman and annotated by W. N. Haiuiavn, Superin-
tendent of Public Schools at La Porte, Indiana. $1.60.

Vol. VI. Elementary Psychology and Education. By Jobbph
Baldwih, Principal of the Sam Houston State Normal School, HuutSr
vilie, Texas. $1.60.

Vol. VII. The Senses and the Will. Observations oonoeminff the
Mental Development of the Human Being^ in the i^irst Years of ijite.
By W. Pbetbb, Professor of Physiology in Jena. Translated ^m
the original Qerman, by H. W. Bbown, Teacher in the State Normal
School at Worcester, Mass. Part I of Thb Mind of tub Child. $1.60.

Vol. Vni. Memory. What it is and how to improve it. By David
Kat, F. B. a. S. $1.60.

Vol. IX. The Development of the Intellect. Observations con-
cerning the Mental Development of the Human Being in the First
Years of Life. Bv W. Pbeysb, Professor of Physiology in Jena.
Translated from the original German, by H. W. Bbown, Teacher in
the State Normal School at Worcester, Mass. Part II of The Mind
OF thb Child. $1.60.

Vol. X. How to Study Geo^aphy. Bj Fbawcis W. Pabioeb.
Prepared for the Professional Training Class of the Cook County Nor-
mal School. $1.60.

Vol. XI. Education in the United States. Its History from the
Earliest Settlements. By Bioiiabd G. Bookb, A. M., Professor of
Pedagogy in Indiana University. $1.60.

Vol. XII. European Schools. Or what I saw in the Schools of Ger-
many, France, Austria, and Switzerland. By L. B. Elemv, Ph. D.,
Author of " Chips from a Teacher's Workshop/' and numerous school-
books. $2.00.

Vol. XIII. Practical Hints for the Teachers of Public Schools.

By Geobgb Howland, Superintendent of the Chicago Schools. $1.00.

Vol. XIV. Pestalozzi : His Life and Work. By Roqeb Db Gvimps.
Authorized translation from the second French edition, by J. Russell,
B. A., Assistant Master in University College School, London. With
an Introduction by Bev. B. H. Quick, M. A. $1.60.

Vol. XV. School Supervision. By J. L. Piokabd, LL. D. $1.00.

Vol. XVI. Higher Education of Women in Europe. By Helens
Lakoe, Berlin. Translated and accompanied by Comparative Statis-
tics, by L. K. Klemm, Ph. D. $1.00.

Vol. XVII. Essays on Educational Reformers. By Bobebt He-
bebt Quioe, M. a. Trin. Coll., Cambrid|£^e, Formerly Assistant Master
at Harrow, and Lecturer on tne History of Education at Cambrid^re,
late Vicar of Sedhergh. Only authorized edition of the work as rewrit-
ten in 1890. $1.60.


EDITED BT

WILLIAM T. H AERIS, A. M., LL, D.


Volume XVIIL


INTERNATIONAL EDUCATION SERIES


A TEXT-BOOK
IN PSYCHOLOGY


AN ATTEMPT TO FOUND THE SCIENCE OF PSYCHOLOGY
ON EXPERIENCE, METAPHYSICS, AND MATHEMATICS


i


BY

JOHANN FRIEDRICH HERBART


TBANSLATED FBOH THE OBIGINAL OEBMAN

By MARGARET K. SMITH

TBAOHSB IK THB SV4TB NOBICAL SCHOOL AT OSWEGO, NBW TORE


NEW YORK
D. APPLETON AND COMPANY

1891


I


COFTBIOBT, 1891,

By D. APPLETON AND COMPANY.


\uS^CrA ^U.^


EDITOR'S PREFACE.


The present work is a translation o Johann Fried-
rich Herbart's Lehrbuch zur Psychologie, from the
second revised edition published in 1834 — the date of
the first edition being 1816.*

The fact that Herbart's philosophical writings have
given a great impulse to scientific study and experi-
ment in education is a sufficient reason for including
this volume in the International Education Series.

He succeeded Krug in 1809, and filled for a quar-
ter of a century afterward the chair long occupied by
the celebrated Kant at the University of Konigsberg,
supplementing his philosophical labors by founding
and directing a pedagogical seminary (or normal school,
as we call it in the United States). It is interesting
to note that Herbart's successor at Konigsberg was
Karl Rosenkranz, also eminent in the philosophy of
pedagogy.

Although a German philosopher and occupying th^
chair of Kant, Herbart set out from an entirely differ-
ent basis, and produced a system unlike those of the
great geniuses who have made German philosophy for
ever memorable. So unlike them^ indeed, is his sys-

* G. Hartenstein's edition, Hamburg and Leipsic, 1886.


Vi EDITOR'S PREFACE.

tern that one has great difficulty to trace their infln-
ence upon his thoughts. Strange to say, howeyer, his
system becomes fruitful in the following generation,
in two directions : first, in the line of physiological
psychology, especially in the attempt to reduce the
facts of the mind to mathematical statements ; and,
secondly, in the line of the philosophy and art of edu-
cation.

A careful examination of the pedagogical writings
of the followers of Herbart shows that the important
thought which has become so fruitful is that of " ap-
perception." This is specially named or referred to in
§§ 26, 40, 41, 43, 59, 123, 182, 183, and in many other
places in the following work. It is, in fact, the central
thought from which the author proceeds and to which
he always returns.

To explain this idea we contrast perception with
apperception. In perception we have an object pre-
sented to our senses, but in apperception we identify
the object or those features of it which were familiar
to us before ; we recognize it ; we explain it ; we in-
terpret the new by our previous knowledge, and thus
are enabled to proceed from the known to the un-
known and make new acquisitions ; in recognizing the
object we classify it under various general classes ; in
identifying it with what we have seen before, we note
also differences which characterize the new object and
lead to the definition of new species or varieties. All
this and much more belong to the process called ap-
perception^ and we see at once that it is the chief busi-
ness ofv school instruction to build up the process of
apperception. By it we re-enforce the perception of
the present moment by the aggregate of our own past


e


r^


EDITOR'S PREFACE. , yii

sense-perception, and by all that we have learned of
the experience of mankind.

Here, then, is the great good that comes from the
Herbartian pedagogics ; it lifts up the so-called " New
Education " from its first step where it was left by
Pestalozzi to a second step which retains all that was
valuable in the new education, and at the same time
unites with it the permanent good that remained in
the old education.

For Pestalozzianism laid great stress on sense-
perception {Anschauung) without considering what
it is that makes sense-perception fruitful. It is not
what we see and hear and feel, but what we inwardly
digest or assimilate — what we apperceive — that really
adds to our knowledge.

As soon as instruction mounts to this second step
it ceases to talk about the cultivation of outer percep-
tion — as if mere acuteness of sense were in itself the
end of instruction — and turns its attention upon the
systematic building up of the inner faculty of per-
ception — the recognizing faculty. It accordingly in-
vestigates carefully the course of study. What shall
one study to give him most assimilative power? What
shall he study to make him at home in the world of
Man and the world of Nature, so that he may readily
comprehend all that comes into his experience ?

What items shall enter the course of study, is a
( question that concerns vitally the practical success of
the school. But it is equally important to fix the
true order of studies. The knowledge of appercep-
tion gives the clew to the order in which the separate
bmnches and disciplines should follow one another.
Those studies should precede which furnish the data


1


Yiii EDITOR'S PREFACE.

for apperceiying the elements of the studies that fol-
low. Those studies should come later which presup-
pose the results reached in the earlier branches. The
interesting experiments in "concentric instruction,*'
wherein Grimm's Fairy Stories or Bobinson Crusoe is
used as the central theme of interest and all the other
studies of the course are brought into connection with
it for purposes of apperception, may be referred to
here * as illustrating the mode and manner in which
the idea is applied in some parts of Germany. Each
class is to have its Qesinnungsstoffy or subject-matter
that interests all the pupils and appeals to their imag-
ination and feelings. This furnishes a center of inter-
est for everything else — ^geography, history, arithmetic,
language-study, etc.

It is obvious that the pedagogy of all lands will
take a great step forward when it leaves the crude first
stage of work that is characterized by bald verbal
memorizing or by equally defective training of sense-
perception by object-lessons, and takes its stand on
the theory of apperception. It will then subordinate
verbal memorizing and aimless lessons in sense-per-
ception for really nourishing instruction and inward ^j
growth.

Herbart's Scaffoldik^g to the Doctrike of P

Apperception.

The idea of apperception underlies, as we have said,
the entire treatise presented in this book. The other
matter may be regarded as scaffolding erected for
the purpose of explaining the operations of this act.

* See Dr. L. R. Klemm's European Schools, pp. 184, 311.


1


EDITOE'S PREFACE. ix

There must be, it is evident, ideas stored up in the
mind from former experience, and these ideas may be
in the mind but out of conscioosness at any given
inomeni This gives ns the theory of the threshold
of consciousness (p. 12), and of the ideas that rise from
unconsciousness above that threshold into conscious-
ness when incited by other ideas which are kindred to
them. The doctrine of complexes and Uendings (p.
17) gives his notion of the close association of ideas in
the case of thing and properties, or of the union of
opposites. These views he grounds in a theory of the
unity and simplicity of the soul and an interrelation
between one simple essence {Wesen) or monad and
another, in which relation one monad acts upon another,
which reacts again upon it (p. 119). This action and
reaction is a process of self-preservation. The self-
preservations, or the results of this reaction, are ideas
or concepts ( Vorstellung means mental image, or con-
cept, or representation, or presentation — in short, any
and all mental products included under the English
word idea in its widest application).

Then there naturally follows a consideration of
the mathematical relations of the rising and sinking
of these ideas in consciousness (pp. 18-22). Here the
doctrine of series is suggested ; for, since one idea calls
up another complicated or blended with it, it must be
clear that ideas are always to be found as members of
series or groups ; and, moreover, the same idea will like-
ly enough form a link in each one of several different
series. Hence the complexity of association becomes
apparent. The interaction between mind and body
(p. 34) is an element to be considered in the mathe-
matical calculations. The classification of the mental


X EDITOR'S PREFACK

phenomena and the old theory of faculties can not be
passed without notice, and the author discusses it
throughout Part Second of the work.

Herbart's scaffoldings of explanation may be true
or false, but even if false his investigation is of perma-
nent value, because it singles out for its object this
problem of apperception. Thus few will find what he
says in regard to the will (pp. 82, ff.) satisfactory, be-
cause the will is included under desire : " The will is
desire, accompanied with the conviction that the ob-
ject desired can be attained." But the comparative
psychology of the will may trace desire and will to one
root in creatures below man. So, too, intellect and
feeling have one root in the same lower order of
creatures.

Mathematics in Psychology.

In this Text-book of Psychology Herbart indicates
the mathematical application that may be made in
psychology, but does not develop it so fully as in a sub-
sequent work published in 1824 entitled " Psychology
as a Science founded for the First Time on Experience,
Metaphysics, and Mathematics." There are three im-
portant mathematical formulae treated : (1) Of two
concepts, no matter how unequal their respective
strength, the one can never quite obscure or arrest the j
other (i. e., drive it out of consciousness) ; but of three j
or more concepts, it may happen that one is so weak i
as to be entirely arrested by the other two (p. 12). \
This is proved in the Psychology as Science, by show- |
ing of two concepts a and 5, that the amount of arrest j

ab
is expressed in the proportion a-^-i: a :: h: _ . ^ •


>


1


I'


EDITOR'S PREFACE. xi


So that a has a remainder = a —  > > while S has a

ai J* /I 'f •

remaiiider after arrest = J — , t — ^ . ^ 5 *^^ ^^ ^^

obvious that this can become zero only when a is in-
finite. The case in which there are three concepts, a,
J, and c, give for the remainder of c the expression

c — 7 — r^ — r^^ » and the conclusion that there may

be zero for result — where, for example, a and } are
equal and their sum is equal to three times the yalue
of c. (Psychol, als. Wiss., §§ 44, 45.)

The second mathematical formula (p. 13, § 17)
states that, while the arrested portion of the concept
sinks, the sinking portion is at every moment propor-
tional to the part not arrested. Herbart gives the in-
tegrated expression for this, namely, cr=/S'il — e"" j

in which ;?= the aggregate amount arrested ; t = the
time elapsed during the collision of concepts ; or = the
arrested portion of all the concepts in the time indi- ^/-^

cated by ^ ; e = the basis of the natural system of
logarithms. In § 74 of the Psychology as Science he
gives the differential equation from which this is de-
rived : (/? — or) dt = da:

The third mathematical statement (§§ 24-28, pp,
18-22) concerns the assistance which one idea gives
another to recall it into consciousness. Herbart gives,
in § 25, both equations, the differential and integral.

The expression ~ indicates how much help n (a concept

in the mind but unconscious) received from P (a con-
scious concept or percept) to lift it above the threshold of


xii EDITOR'S PREFACE.

consciousness, n also aids P to the extent indicated by

•p-. In this expression r = the remainder of P that is

not arrested) and p the remainder of n unarrested. Now
the aid given by P to II is greater before the union of
r with p than after some part of the union has taken
place. Herbart lets the portion of p which is already
united with r and brought into consciousness = oi.

Then the differential equation =^ . - — ^ . dt = d(a ex-

n p

presses the mode in which the influence of P on H to
bring up a new part of p into consciousness is condi-
tioned by the amount remaining of that part after
subtracting the part already become conscious (i. e.,

p — 0) whose ratio to the total remainder of n is ).

P


The integral equation « = p 1 1 — e -^=j— I wherein e is

the base of the natural system of logarithms, as Her-
bart remarks (Psychology as Science, § 86), " shows
us in a perfectly clear manner how co depends on p, r,
t, and n " ; or, in other words, how the amount of an
idea or concept that is recalled to consciousness, de-
pends on (a) its total amount = n, (b) the size of the
part of it = p, which can blend with P, the assisting
concept ; (c) the portion of P = r which may blend
with n, and on (d) the time elapsed during the opera-
tion.

Vaulting and Tapering.

This doctrine of the help given by one concept to
another involves the curious phenomenon that Her-
bart describes (§ 26, p. 21) as vaulting ( Wolbung)
and tapering {Zuspitzung). The first effect of the


EDITOR'S PREFACE. xiii

conscions idea, P, on the nnconscious one allied to it,
n, is to bring the latter into consciousness in general
without accurate discrimination of the part p which
may blend with the part r. But time being given, the
other portions of n incongruent with r are arrested
and sent back, and thus the assisted idea is arched,
figuratively speaking, in such a manner that its part
P is the top of^e arch and extends into consciousness.
By the further action of separating p from the re-
mainder of n, the arch becomes more and more pointed,
until finally, only p remains in consciousness and all
the rest of n has been arrested and sunk from view.
The reader, therefore, will find it necessary to learn how
to interpret readily this figurative expression which
Herbart uses, technically, into the description of the
process of apperception — ^the first part of the process
identifying wholes which do not perfectly blend, and
the later steps of the process eliminating more and
more the portions which can not blend, and thus
*' arching *' the portion of n which can blend, until at
last there is left only the pure p which unites com-
pletely with r, and the pointing is accomplished.

Heebakt's Place in^ the History of Philosophy.

From the point of view of apperception the anom-
alous position of Herbart's system in the history of
philosophy may be explained— or rather the anomaly
may be removed.

All modem philosophy in general has for its prob-
lem the exploration of the subjective factor in knowl-
edge, as the Greek philosophy sought to discover the
objective factor. Thus modern philosophy has a psy-
jbhological tendency, while ancient philosophy had

I


xiv EDITOR'S PREFACE.

an ontological tendency. The former asks for the
subjective coefficient in cognition, while the latter asks
the necessary conditions of true being.

If apperception be divided into two kinds — first,
that dependent on the nature of the mind itself, and,
second, that dependent on the acquired experience of
the mind* — then we may say that Herbart under-
takes to explore the second field of apperception,
while Kant explores the first. Kant seeks to ex-
plain the apperception which arises through the
logical structure of intelligence itself — that is to
say, through \hQ forms of the mind. These forms of
the mind are the a priori intuitions of time and space
and the categories of quantity, quality, relation (includ-
ing^ inherence and causality), and modality. Fichte,
Schelling, Hegel, and others followed the lead of Kant,
and in the sequel there arose as complete a view of the
world from the subjective standpoint as there had been
from the objective standpoint of the Greeks. The
psychologic theory of the world duplicated the onto-
logic theory, and the insight of Hegel into this identity
of the two world-solutions is the greatest triumph in
the entire history of human thought.

Herbart, rising in the midst of the great ferment
of thought that surrounds the advent of Kantianism,
seems to be unaffected by it. This, however, is seem-
ing rather than truth. For he deals with the problem
of his time, and takes the Kantian question back to the
place where Leibnitz had left it. "Nothing in the
intellect that was not previously in sense-perception '*
had been the motto of the psychologists who like Locke

* See Lazariis's Daa Leben der Seele,


\


\
{

{


EDITOR'S PREFACE. xv

explained all thinking as a modified sensation. Bat
Leibnitz added the limitation, "Nothing except the
intellect itself " — ^that is to say, the structure of the
mind itself is not and can not be derived from sense-
perception, but must be there before in order to render
such perception possible. The knowing faculty must
have a structure or constitution of its own, and this
structure must furnish an element or factor in the
product of knowledge. Leibnitz was the first to use
the word apperception in a philosophic sense. The
French verb apercevoir signifies to perceive^ and
s^apercevoir signifies to notice with attention. But
Leibnitz distinguishes perception from appercq)tion
in the fact that the latter is a knowledge that brings
with it a reflection upon the interior nature of the
soul, and he explains this reflection {actes reflexifs) as
having for its object " the ego, substance, self-existence
(monade)^ soul, and spirit, in a word immaterial things
and truths." Such knowledge he calls self-conscious-
ness,* Self -consciousness (" conscience ") he explains
as that reflective act which gives us a knowledge of the
Ego and of the true being of God — ^in short, a knowl-
edge of the structure of mind, or Beason. Here we
see that Leibnitz meant by apperception almost exactly
what Kant describes as the " transcendental unity of
apperception," making allowance for the acute and
protracted analysis of Kant, who expands the brief
mention of Leibnitz into three extensive treatises.
Herbart starts with the fertile suggestion of Leib-

* See Prinoiples of Nature and Grace, §i$ 4, 5 ; also The
Monadology, § 14, and especially §§ 29, 30, in which he explains
the object of la conscienee,
2


xvi EDITOR'S PREFACE.

nitz and moves off in the direction of the sensation-
alists, who like Locke explain all by means of sense-
perception. Bat Herbart takes with him also Leibnitz's
idea of the soul as a 'monad ; omitting, however, the
important attribute of self-activity, which endows
Leibnitz's monad (^^ natural changes that proceed from
an internal principle," " which change is perception "
— Monadology, §§ 11, 12). In the place of this self-
activity Herbart places a sort of mechanical action
and reaction {Druck and Oegendruch) in direct oppo-
sition to the doctrine of Leibnitz (Monadology, § 7),
who denies the possibility of mechanical interaction
between independent beings.

In the history of philosophy all systems are profit-
able lessons in the comprehension of human thought.
If true systems, they help us to see the positive road ;
if false, they stand as guide-posts which warn the
traveler not to take the by-paths leading ad absurdum.
Herbart's system may undertake to explain too much
by the ideas of mechanical action and reaction; or
perhaps, on the other hand, it may be truly said that
he never intended his " pressure, counter-pressure, and
self-preservation " to be taken in a mechanical sense.
But whatever he has done is worthy of being faith-
fully studied and mastered, if for no other reason than
for the discipline that he gives us in the habit of re-
ferring all mental phenomena to the act of appercep-
tion for their explanation.

In conclusion, I present the analysis of Steinthal
(one of the ablest of the thinkers who have followed
Herbart), in which he gives the essential elements oijE
the act of apperception in its four stages : |

1. Identification — as in the case where we recogl


EDITOR'S PREFACE. xvii

nize the person before us to be the same we have
known.

2. Classification — as in the case where we recog-
nize the object before us to be an individual of a class
well known to us.

3. Hai-monizing or reconciling apperception—
wherever we unite two opposed or incongruent con-
cepts (as, for example, the concept of something that
has existed and served our purposes with the concept
of the same thing as changed and destroyed — a friend
who has died ; a house that has been burned, etc.).

4. Creative or formative apperception — which
makes combinations, poetic or scientific — inductive or
deductive discoveries, solutions of enigmas, illusions
and hallucinations. In this sort of apperception the
mind creates the apperceiving factor.

The old doctrine of " association of ideas," which,
since the time of Locke, has furnished one of the
most dismal chapters in "mental philosophy," so-
called, is to be supplanted by this new doctrine of ap-
perception.

It has been asked. Why employ this bizarre techni-
cal term for what we can express in terms already fa-
miliar to us? The answer is, that the word appercep-
tion has no synonjrm already become familiar to us.
It is a term for a new idea — ^a synthesis of many other
ideas variously expressed already by such words as as-
similate, associate, identify, recognize, explain, inter-
pret, comprehend, classify, subsume, conception, elabo-
ration, thought, etc.

The association of ideas looks merely to their con-
nection, which may be a matter of accident. But ap-
perception looks to the modification of ideas one


xviii EDITOK'S PREFACE.

through the other, and hence leads to the process of
formation of ideas, which is the central point of in-
terest in psychology and education.

I append a note giving some information as to the
bibliography of this subject.

W. T. Habbis.

Washington, D. C, August, 1891.


BIBLIOGRAPHY.

The student who desires to pursue this subject further may
be referred to the following lists of books selected out of the
immense literature that has grown up round the theme :

I. The Philosophers :

M. W. Dbobisch : Empirische Psychologic nach naturwlssen-
schaftlicher Methode. [Drobisch has labored with most success
on the mathematical phase of Herbart's system.]

M. Lazabus : Das Leben der Seele, etc.

H. Steinthal : Einleitung in die Psychologic und Sprach-
wissenschaft. [Messrs. Lazarus and Steinthal have applied Her-
bart's ideas of apperception with distinguished success in the
province of comparative philology, and their grasp of this im-
portant thought seems to me a great advance in philosophic
clearness over the exposition made by Herbart himself.]

W. WuNDT : GrundzQge der Physiologischen Psychologic.
[For independent criticism of Herbart's doctrines and an able
restatement of doctrines approved by him.]

T. Fechneb : Revision der Hauptpunkte der Psychophysik.
[This contains Fechner's review of the existing status of scien-
tific investigation into the quantitative measurement of the
intensity of sensations by reference to the force of different
stimuli, and was written on the occasion of G. E. MUller's
critique of his earlier works.]

n. Works on Education :

Th. Waitz: Allgemeine PSdagogik (1852). [Republished
and enlarged by Dr. 0. Willman in 1875.]


EDITOR'S PREFACE.

E. y. Stot ; in Jena : EncyclopSdie der Pftdagogik (1861),
and in the " Allgemeine Schnlzeitong."

TuiSKO ZiLLEK, in Leipzig : Grundlegung der Pftdagogik
(1865). "Vorlesnngen fiber allgemeine Pftdagogik" (1876),
** Leipziger Seminarbuch," and ** Jahrb&cher des Vereins f Or
wissenschaf tliche Pftdagogik."

H. Eekn, in Berlin : Grundriss der Pftdagogik (1873).

W. Rein, in Jena : Pftdagogische Studien (1889-'90).

W. Rein, A. Pickel, vkd E. Scheller : Theorie nnd Praxis
des Volksschulunterrichts nach Herbartischen Grondsfttzen. 8
vols. (1888).

G. A. Lindner, in Prag : Lehrbuch der empirischen Psy-
chologie (English translation by Charles de Garmo, 1889), und
Grnndriss der Pftdagogik als Wissenschaft (1889).

Karl Lange : Ueber Apperception (1887).

0. WiLLMANN : Didaktik als Bildungslehre (1883 und 1888).

Ed. Wiessner : Herbart's Pftdagogik, dargestellt in Ihrer
Entwicklong und Anwendung (1885).

G. Wiget: Die formalen Stufendes Unterrichts ; Einftlh-
rung in das Studium der Herbart-Zillerschen Pftdagogik (1886).

Karl Richter: Die Herbart-Zillerschen formalen Stufen
(1888).

T. G. RooPER : Apperception, or the Essential Mental Op-
eration in the Act of Learning. [The original title to this essay
was A Pot of Green Feathers]. Published by C. W. Bardeen,
Syracuse, N. Y.


I


i


\


INTRODUCTION BY THE TRANSLATOR.

At the time of Herbart's death, August 11, 1841,
it was said of him that he was a man to be appreciated
only after centuries had passed away. The world has
moved more rapidly than was anticipated, so that, after
a lapse of barely fifty years, a very general apprecia-
tion of Herbart's psychological and pedagogical work
prevails. Since the time of Locke no man has done
so much for psychology.

In America, it is true, the number of educators
who have any useful knowledge concerning the Her-
bartian system is somewhat limited ; yet in the cur-
rent philosophical and educational literature may be
found occasionally a brief mention, which is probably
an indication of the broader study that is yet to follow.

The design of the present translation is not so
much to furnish information as to awaken an interest
which may develop a desire for a clearer insight into
principles that seem to form the best foundation that
has yet been discovered for a rational system of sci-
entific pedagogy.

Herbart believed that a knowledge of psychology
is of the first importance to the teacher. To igno-
rance of the subject he attributed the many errors and
gaps existing in pedagogical knowledge and practice.
He opposed the theory that the soul is composed of


xxii INTRODUCTION BY THE TRANSLATOR.

faculties which are born with the child and which
constitute a great part of its mental organization.
This, as well as the theory of the higher and lower
inherent capabilities of the soul, he regarded as be-
longing to that which might be termed psychological
myth rather than to scientific psychology. He held
that the doctrine of the faculties is proved through
metaphysics to be untenable. He argued that the fun-
damental principle upon which a possibility for psy-
chological investigation rests lies in the fact that at
the bottom of all psychological phenomena is a real ex-
istence, the soul, which he regarded as an absolutely
simple existence, without any inherent powers or tal-
ents.

He believed representations or concepts * to be the
elements of the united psychical life, and regarded
them as the soul's acts of self-preservation. Owing to
the simplicity or singleness of the soul, its separate
acts of self-preservation must be single as well. All
the remaining facts or manifestations of consciousness
he regarded as the results of the combinations of con-
cepts, and of their alternate action and reaction upon
one another.

He believed that the effective forces of the mental
life consist, not in fictitious faculties, but in concepts
in the soul.

To concepts, in their action and interaction upon
one another, he ascribed all the capacities usually
attributed of faculties. Concepts working in combi-

* The term concept as employed here does not, as is usual
with the English metaphysicians, indicate the general notion,
but the individual presentation formed through the process of
perception — e. g., the concept of a house, a tree, etc.


INTRODUCTION BY THE TRANSLATOR, xxiii

nation with, and in -opposition to one another furnish
explanations of the phenomena of thinking, feeling,
desiring, willing, etc. The general principles under-
lying the above-mentioned operations may be illus-
trated or indicated by mathematical calculations.

Upon the theory of the existence of concepts in
the soul, which are susceptible of a variety of combi-
nations, Herbart's psychology treats first of presenta-
tions or sensations — e. g. of size, form, color, etc. ;
and, secondly, of concepts formed through the combi-
nations of these sensations — e. g., concepts of a house,
a tree, a man, etc. This is to be distinguished from
the general notion — ^house, tree, man, etc.

In connection with the above may be considered
psychical states — e. g., thought, feeling, desire, inter-
est, etc. — which are the results of the action and inter-
action of concepts, and which are determined by laws
that may be indicated through mathematical formulae.

The unity of the soul is the easily comprehensible
metaphysical explanation of the tendency of concepts,
in meeting together, to resist or arrest one another,
and, so far as they are not opposed to one another, to
combine into a whole.

This resistance or arrest implies neither distinction
from nor change in the concept. The effect is merely
that the weaker presentation, or concept, is partially
or totally removed out of consciousness, while the
stronger is raised into clearness. The word con-
sciousness here indicates the totality of all simultane-
ous concepts. As soon as the resistance weakens, or,
through an opposing force, becomes ineffective, the
removed concept has a tendency within itself to re-
turn into consciousness.


xxiv INTRODUCTION BY THE TRANSLATOR.

Concepts are said to be in equilibrium when there
occurs among them a sufficiency of force to place them
equally in a condition of arrest. This condition indi-
cates a very gradual change from clearness to obscurity.
The change in the grade of obscurity to which it is
subject is called the movement of the concept.

In a so-called ^' statics and mechanics " of the mind,
Herbart has indicated the equilibrium and movement
of concepts by mathematical formulae, with a view to
illustrating the simplest psychical laws with scientific
exactness.

The result of the arrest of concepts must be subject
to modifications on account of the different degrees of
strength possessed by concepts, as well as of their dif-
ferent grades of resistance, together with the conse-
quent differences in their combinations.

By computation, Herbarfc reached the conclusion
that, in the case of two concepts, one can never become
entirely obscured by the other, but in the case of three
or four, etc., one may become obscured very easily, and
its constant effort to recover itself being unobserved, it
may be as ineffective as if it were not present.

Concepts are said to combine in two ways: those
which are not opposed to one another, so far as they
are unrestricted, unite in what is called a complex;
while those which are opposed become blended or
fused together, so far as they do not suffer from recip-
rocal arrest.

Through thjp tendency to blend, concepts entering
consciousness in succession become connected, and thus
longer or shorter concept series are formed. The law
according to which a concept released from arrest, as
it returns to consciousness, strives to bring with it


INTRODUCTION BY THE TRANSLATOR, xxv

those with which it is connected, is of special impor-
tance.

The theory of the mechanism of memory is largely
based upon the construction of the concept series.

Though Herbart did so much for the development
of psychology, he was convinced that all possible in-
vestigations are quite insufficient to furnish a thorough
knowledge of the subject, and seems to have believed
that psychology can only be regarded as a science on
condition that a large part of it be '^ relegated to the
unknown." He also held that psychology must re-
main incomplete and inadequate so long as it considers
merely the psychical phenomena of the individual man.
He believed that society wherever organized is subject
to psychical laws peculiar to itself. In society the in-
dividual in his relations to the whole corresponds to
the concept in its relation to the psychical organism of
which it is a member. Upon this assumption he for-
mulated a statics and mechanics of the state in a way
corresponding to the statics and mechanics of the men-
tal life.

To the mere reader of psychology, the Herbartian
theories may at first appear peculiar, and in the minds
of some may verge upon the absurd ; but the careful
student will probably find no psychological theories
that ai*e so well calculated to stand the test of actual
experience.

The Herbartian Pedagogy.

Herbart regarded concepts in their action and re-
action upon one another as the source of the psychi-
cal life, and believed that, without regular systematic
instruction, mental activity must be irregular and in-


xxvi INTRODUCTION BY THE TRANSLATOR.

definite, while the results are more or less worthless.
The mental processes, the laws of which the teacher
should thoroughly understand, are : perception, repro-
duction, and apperception. A rule upon these pro-
cesses has been given, which enjoins clear perception,
exact reproduction, and thorough apperception.

In this connection these processes are exercised in
the four steps of instruction, viz. :

1. Clearness.

2. Comparison (association).

3. System.

4. Philosophical method or application.

According to Herbart, the aim of education is ethi-
cal — ^i. e., the moral development of the individual.
Everything lower than this is valueless except as it
serves to secure this end.

This end is to be secured through discipline, train-
ing, and instruction.

Discipline has a twofold task : First, negative ; the
suppression of the natural impatience of restraint and
wildness of the child. Second, positive ; the care of
the soul in its intellectual, moral, and spiritual devel-
opment.

Training consists in directing the attention to de-
sirable objects of study, and in fixing the results of
that which is learned.

Instruction does not merely imply putting the
child in possession of technical skill, but it rather im-
plies the training of the child in the observation of
relations, and must result in power to recognize under-
lying principles, and to appreciate aesthetic and eth-
ical relations.

One of the tasks of instruction is to awaken in the


INTRODUCTION BY THE TRANSLATOR, xxvii

child a many-sided interest which will fit the future
man to make himself at home in any society or in any
country, and will enable him to adapt himself to any
change of circumstances, as well as make him ready
in resources that will be equal to any emergency.
This many-sided interest may be secured through the
development of two groups of interests : First, the in-
terests of knowledge, viz., empirical, speculative, and
aesthetic interests; second, the interests of participa-
tion, viz., sympathetic, social, and religious interests.

The development of the interests of the first group
depends largely upon the child's experience in connec-
tion with material objects, or with the world around
him, while the development of the interests of the sec-
ond group depends upon the child's experience in
connection with his fellow-creatures.

The first condition of instruction in any subject is
attention, which is almost synonymous with interest.
Attention is of two kinds, involuntary and voluntary.
Involuntary attention is classified into primitive and
apperceiving attention.

The course of instruction is either analytic or syn-
thetic.

Here we shall leave the description of Herbart
and his work, with the hope that the teachers of Amer-
ica may have an early opportunity of availing them-
selves of a system at once clear, simple, and rational,
and in every respect calculated to supply our lack in
the direction of philosophical pedagogy.

To those who may be still uncertain regarding a
system of which so little is as yet known, Herbart's
declaration of his fundamental principle may be pre-
sented : " I stand, not upon the single point of the


xxviii INTRODUCTION BY THB TEANSLATOB.

Ego, but npon a foandation ae broad as aniversal ex-
perience,"

In closing, the translator takes this opportanity to
acknowledge her indebtedness to Dr. William T. Har-
ria. But for his kindly patience the pablication of
the book must have been deferred to a mncb later
date.

Also thanks are due to Prof. Otto H. L. Schwetzky,
who always readily gave such aid as could only he ren-
dered by one possessing a thorough knowledge of
German language and thought.

Margaset K. Shith.
OawtGO, Sew Yobk, April S, 1891.


CONTENTS,


TAOm

Editor's Preface v

Introduction by the Translator xxi

Introduction by the Author 1

PART FIRST.

CHAPTKB FUNDAMENTAL PRINCIPLES.

I. — Condition op Concepts when they act as Forces 9
II. — ^Equilibrium and Movement of Concepts . .11

III. — Complications and Blendings 16

IV. — Concepts as the Source of Mental States . . 26
V. — The Co-operation of Several Masses of Concepts

OF Unequal Strength 80

VI. — A Glance over the Connection between Body and

Soul 33


PART SECOND.

EMPIRICAL PSYCHOLOGY.

FIRST division. — PSYCHOLOGICAL PHENOMENA ACCORDING TO THE

hypothesis of mental FACULTIES.

I. — A Survey of the Assumed Mental Faculties . 86
II. — The Boundary-Line between the Lower and

Higher Faculties 45

III. — ^Faculty of Representation 63

IV. — The Faculty of Feeling .74


XXX CONTENTa

OHAPm PAQS

V. — ^The Faculty of Desire 82

VI. — ^The Co-operation and Cultivation of the Mental

Faculties 93

second division. — MENTAL CONDITIONS.

L — The General Variability of Conditions . , 97

II. — Natural Talents 99

III. — External Influences 104

IV. — Anomalous Conditions 108

PART THIRD.

RATIONAL P8TCH0L0OT.
SECTION FIRST. — THEOREMS FROM METAPHYSICS AND NATURAL

PHILOSOPHY.

I. — The Soul and Matter 119

II.— The Vital Forces 122

III. — The Connection between Soul and Body . . 125

SECTION second — EXPLANATIONS OF PHENOMENA.

I.— Concepts of Space and Time 129

II. — The Development of Ideas 140

III. — Our Comprehension of Things and of Ourselves 150
IV. — The Ungoverned Play of the Psychical Mech-
anism 163

V, — Self-Control and especdllly Duty as a Psychical

Phenomenon 178

VI. — Psychological Observations upon the Destiny of

Man . .190


ANALYSIS OF CONTENTS.


INTRODUCTION BY THE AUTHOR (p. 1).— § 1. Mar
terial and work of psychology. § 2. Concepts in regard to the
senses. Memory and imagination. Manifestations of intelli-
gence and rationality. Opinions in regard to faculties. § 3.
Self-observation. (Note, — In psychology the general ideas are
clearest ; the particular most obscure.) § 4 Empirical physics
has discovered certain laws. Psychology can not experiment
with men. § 5. Comparison of representation, feeling, and desire
with the psychological states of vegetation, sensibility, and irri-
tability respectively. § 6. Man an aggregate of contradictions.
All mental life a constant change. § 7. Solution of many of
the problems of mental life to be found in metaphysics and
higher mathematics. § 8. The old hypothesis of mental facul-
ties is a tradition reflecting the total impression of psychologi-
cal observation, hence can not be dispensed with. (Note 1. —
The present treatise divided into — Part I. Fundamental Princi-
ples ; Part II. Empirical Psychology ; Part III. Rational Psy-
chology. Note 2. — In modem times, psychology has rather gone
backward than forward. Psychology can not deal with the
beautiful.)

PART FIRST.— Chapter I.— The Condition of Concepts
when they act as Forces (p. 9). § 10. Resistance between con-
cepts. Resistance an expression of force. § 11. Do concepts
destroy one another, or do they remain unchanged f § 12. A
concept which has in part become transformed into an effort
must not be regarded as a severed portion of the whole concept.

Chapter II. — Equilibrium and Movement of Concepts
8


xxxii ANALYSIS OP CONTENTS.

(p. 11). § 18. Equilibrium depends upon a sufficiency of oppo-
sition between concepts, g 14. The sum of the resistances and
the ratio of their limitations are considered in investigations
into the statics of the mind, g 15. The sum and ratio of the
mutual limitation depend upon the strength of the individual
concepts. § 16. Two concepts never entirely obscure each other.
^ Threshold of Consciousness." (Note. — A distinction between
^ A concept is in consciousness " and ** I am conscious of my
concepts." § 17. Law underlying the movement of concepts.
§ 18. Effect of a new concept coming upon concept near equi-
librium. § 19. " The mechanical threshold." § 20. Extension
of time during which concepts linger on the mechanical thresh-
old, g 21. Cause of changes in the laws of reciprocal move-
ment. {Note. — Concepts which rise simultaneously.)

Chaptee III.— Complications and Blendings (p. 16). § 22.
Why opposed concepts resist one another. (Note. — Partially
complete complexes.) g 23. An aggregate of force furnished by
the complication or blending of several concepts, g 24. Prob-
lem : The encounter between two concepts and the blending of
the remainders. § 25. Principles upon which the blending of
concepts is based, g 26. Mediate and immediate reproduction*
g 27. Mediate reproduction, g 28. Application of the theories
of mediate and immediate reproduction, g 29. Reproduction,
or memory. Blendings existing between concepts in a series,
g 30. Several series may cross one another. The same number
may be held as a common point of intersection for many hun-
dred series, g 31. Dependence of the foregoing upon the pre-
supposed difference in the remainders, g 32. The blending of
free-rising concepts. The conflict between things as we perceive
them and as we think them.

Chapteb IV. — Concepts as the Source of Mental States (p.
26). g 33. Objections against mathematical psychology. The
soul as mind. The emotional nature, g 34. .diathetic judg-
ment. (Note. — The series of true relations may be presented
here. Conditions under which disharmony and harmony may
arise.) g 35. A principle of contrast to be found in the com-
plexes, g 36. The source of unpleasant feeling and of desire,
g 37. The source of pleasant feeling. § 38. The sources of feel-
ings and desires always in particular concepts.


ANALYSIS OF CONTENTS. xxxiii

Chaptee V, — ^The Co-operation of Several Masses of Concepts
of Unequal Strength (p. 80). § 39. The effect of a new act of
perception upon combinations of concepts. § 40. Inner percep-
tion analogous to the outer, g 41. Inner perception always ac-
tive. § 42. Difference between concepts in an active and in an
inactive state. § 43. Conditions under which inner perception
is interrupted. The inner perception seldom rises to its second
power.

Chapter VI. — A Glance over the Connection between the
Body and Soul (p. 32). § 44 Hitherto no question concerning
the origin of concepts, g 45. Time required for each act of
perception. Limit to the strength of a concept. § 46. Every
human concept consists of infinitely small elementary apprehen-
sion. § 47. The largest supply of sense-concepts generated in
early childhood. The susceptibility of the senses never entirely
extinguished. § 48. The foregoing relates to concepts of the
same kind. § 49. Influence of the body upon psychical mani-
festations shown in three ways. § 50. Conditions under which
physiological pressure arises. This pressura often merely a
retarding force. Oftener an arresting force. § 51. Conditions
of physiological reaction, g 52. Origin of the co-operation of
soul and body.

PART SECOND.— Empirical Psychology.— ^*r«< Divis-
ion : Psychological Phenometia according to the Hypothesia of
Mental Faculties.

Chapter L — A Survey of the Assumed Mental Faculties (p.
36). § 53. Explanation of fundamental facts from the forego-
ing. A separation of that which does not admit of union im-
plied in the effort to bring together a manifold. An original
and essential differentiation of the human mind considered in
the first division of the second part of this manual. § 54 The
teachers of psychology present the social, the educated man. All
higher mental activity potentially present in children and sav-
ages. A limited condition of man to be described. § 55. The
division into higher and lower faculties. § 56. The extremes
of the lowest and highest mental faculties ; sensuousness and
reason, § 57. In the faculty of representation, we find imagi-
nation and memory; in reason, imagination and judgment,
w^thetic and moral feelings and the emotions in the faculty of


xxxiv ANALYSIS OF CONTENTS.

feeliDg. In desire on the one side, willing ; on the other, pas-
sion. § 58. (a.) These classifications were empirical groupings.
The emotions not to be classified with the feelings. Morals
and aesthetics are felt, cognized, and desired, {b,} The classifi-
cations made merely preliminary. The emotions not to be
classified with the passions, (c.) The classified mental faculties
exist side by side and in relation to one another. The work of
memory, fantasy (or imagination), and desire upon the same
material. The causal relation of the different faculties to one
another. § 59. The first treatment of sensuous presentations.
The lower sensuous phase of mental life to be met most fre-
quently. The true Ego appears to us by a so-called process of
apperception. Signification of apperception. The relation of
a moral volition to free will. Assumption of transcendental
freedom. Reason quite different from sensuousness. Reason
and sensuousness the beginning points of two series. Idea of
the Ego and of transcendental freedom contradictory. A fac-
ulty of reason not consistent with truth. {Note, — The four
principal kinds of mental diseases. The notions of mental
soundness.)

Chapter II. — ^The Boundary-line between the Higher and
Lower Faculties (p. 45). g 60. The line of demarkation in the
representative faculties can not be drawn with precision. Es-
thetic faculty is wanting in uncivilized men. § 61. If a lower
faculty be attributed to brutes, it is to be regarded as defective,
arrested, or suppressed. We are not authorized regarding the
humali mind as an aggregate of higher and lower faculties.
The educated^man has power to apportion his attention to
differwit acts. § 63. Wolff places voluntary attention between
the higher and lower faculties of representation. Attention
makes a notion distinct. Understanding is the faculty by
which oar thoughts are united, etc. § 63. All combination is a
spontaneous act of the power of presentation. Kant's service
to speculative philosophy. The combination of a manifold is
the immediate result of unity in the soul. When thinking in-
tensely, we feel ourselves active. Activity neither an attribute
of the understanding nor a source of combinations. The con-
cepts of space and time. The power to distinguish character-
istics from the substance to which they are attributed belongs


ANALYSIS OP CONTENT& xxxy

to the higher faculties, g 64 The abstracting of the general
notions from concrete examples belongs to the work of the
higher faculties, as does the distinction between object and
space, event and time. § 65. In savages sBsthetic and moral
apprehensions rare. The brute depends upon instinct, g 66b
No series of fixed differences between humanity and animality,,
or between the higher and lower faculties. Very little is known
of brutes. The brute receives training according to the inner
laws of its nature. The differences between men more .easily
explained than those between brutes. Man has needed tools.
Human activity not to be regarded as complete.

Chapter III.— Faculty of Representation (p. 53). §67.
Conspectus showing the aspects belonging to the faculty of
representation. § 68. The work of touch, taste, smell, hearing,
seeing. Classes of sense-impressions greater in number than
the organs of sense. § 69. Pressure, warmth, cold. Touch
originally feeling. § 70. Taste furnishes distinguishable sensa-
tion. * § 71. Apparatus of smell less under our control than that
of the other senses. Odors mostly pleasant or unpleasant.
§ 72. Hearing richest of all the senses in variety of sensations.
Probably every musical tone has its own peculiar place in the
organ. § 73. Sight distinguishes colors. The color-sense is
sometimes wanting. (Note, — Every sense has its acuteness and
delicacy, its extent and duration.) § 74. The inner sense an
assumption from analogy with the outer sense ; the inner sense
a somewhat defective invention of psychologists; the inner
sense not able long to endure the strain of intentional effort ;
the inner sense rises to higher and higher powers. {Note. —
Question whether there are concepts without consciousness.)
§ 75. Theory of space and time incorrect. The tone-series ;
the color-surface. Whether the color-realm requires a third
dimension. (Note. — In the difference between high and dark,
as well as between high and low tones, a concept of succession
to be perceived. The series in every logical arrangement where
the varieties are opposed and at the same time united in the
species. The theory of intelligible space.) § 76. Concept of a
series shown in the notions of integral positive numbers. Arith-
metic an example of a series constantly becoming more ab-
stracted. § 77. The geometrical concept of space not original


xxxvi ANALYSIS OP CONTENTa '

in man. We habitually carry a standard of meafnirement with
us. § 78. Philosophers in difficult cases copy the procedure of
logic ; Kant's categories warning examples of this. Understand-
ing, judgmeijit, and reason correspond to notions, judgment,
and syllogisms. Whether notions are logical ideals, § 79.
What dictionaries and grammars reveal concerning notions.
General notions can not be shown to exist, g 80. Human
thought assumes the form of judgment. § 81. A wonderful
psychological phenomenon. The representation as a copy
should resemble the object itself ; the painter in a sketch gives
a more exact knowledge of an object than one who tries to de-
scribe it in words. The principles of logic only applied to
judgments. (Note, — The ideal of an intuiting cognition.) g 82,
The passive attitude of the subject. Judgment is manifested
only in speech ; inclination to communicate with others influ-
ences the form of one's thought ; expression often a necessity :
preference and rejection special kinds of judgments ; the union
of the new with that which is already known ; the general often
to be explained by the particular. {Note, — School formulas.
Arching and pointing. Pleasure in judging injures construct-
ive power.) § 83. Syllogisms progressive unfoldings of the
steps of a thought ; such progressive unfoldings only met with
in ordinary speech. Creations of thought rarely possess the
accuracy of the syllogism. § 84. Power to infer an attribute of
reason. § 85. Logical approval different from aesthetic ap-
proval. § 86. Difficult to determine what transcends experi-
ence. Notion of substance not the same as notion of thing;
notion of force depends upon the notion of substance. § 87.
Notions of force and substance comprehending space and time,
g 88. Pure geometric notions of bodies. § 89. Psychologists
careless in regard to the question of reproduction. § 90. Viv-
idness and accuracy of reproduction. § 91. Accuracy and viv-
idness of reproduction seldom found at the same time in equal
proportions. {Note, — With some psychologists memory implies
reproduction and recollection.) § 92. Upon the association of
concepts and the way in which they reproduce one another.
{Note, — In inventions, creation the essential element.) § 93.
Agreement between memory and imagination. § 94. Difference
between memory and imagination.


ANALYSIS OF CONTENT& xxxvii

Chaptke IV.— The Faculty of Feeling (p. 74). % 95. Neces-
sity for assuming faculties in addition to the representing fac-
ulty, g 96. Boundary-line between feeling and desire drawn
near representation. (Note. — Explanation of feeling.) § 97.
Difficult to separate feelings from desires and aversions. Three
kiuds of feelings ; indifferent feelings, g 98. Feelings which
depend upon the nature of that which is felt. § 99. Difference
between unpleasant feelings of this kind, g 100. Analogy of the
above feelings to SBsthetic feeling. {Noie. — Sense of the sub-
lime; sense of the ridiculous; comic sensations; laughter.)
g 101. Feeling the source of desire and aversion. Desires which
are independent of the pleasure or pain of their object. § 102.
Intermediate feelings. § 103. Mixed feelings, {^ote 1.— False
speculations in regard to feelings, ^ote 2. — ^Poets mingle feel-
ings in their works of art.) g 104. Emotions not merely stronger
feelings, g 105. Kant's classification of the emotions. § 106.
Emotions to be regarded physiologically as well as psychologic-
ally. (Note 1. — Action and reaction between soul and body.
I^ote 2.— Effect of emotion upon physical organs.)

Chapter V.— The Faculty of Desire (p. 82). § 107. The
faculties of representation, feeling, and desire should furnish an
exhaustive classification of mental activities. Difference be-
tween a strong will and a strong desire, g 108. Desires to bo
distinguished according to the above classification of feelings,
g 109. The most important distinction is between the lower
and higher faculties of desire, g 110. Impulses and instincts
implied in the lower faculties of desire, g 111. Psychologists
have placed the impulses of self-love, imitation, etc., side by side
with the organic impulses. The assumption of special faculties
frequent in the theory of desire, g 112. Inclinations different
in different people, g 113. The passions the most striking spec-
tacle in psychology, g 114. Deliberation precedes judgment
and action, g 115. Reason is not a source of willing nor of
knowledge, g 116. The connection between means and ends
complicates moral deliberation, g 117. Circumspection the
mental condition of a man who reflects. The work of delibera-
tion is to make prominent the lesthetic judgment upon the will.
The ideas of inner freedom, of perfection, of benevolence, of
right, and of equity, g 118. Freedom of the will. A man's


xxxviii ANALYSIS OP CONTENTS.

choice a co-operation of reason and desire. {Note 1, — The
ground for illusion is in regard to freedom. An act is respon-
sible in proportion as it discloses a weak or a strong wilL)
{Note £. — Transcendental freedom a stranger in psychology.)
§ 119. Reason regarded as the seat of freedom. The passionate
man a slave.

Chaptee VI. — The Co-operation and Cultivation of the Men-
tal Faculties (p. 92). § 120. The assumption of faculties defective,
g 121. Reproduction the chief seat of mental life next to the
senses. § 122. Value of reproduction in regard to habits and
accomplishments. § 123. The two directions of cultivation de-
termined by the inner sense and the outer action. Self -con-
sciousness necessary to self-control. External action includes
desires, observation, and judgment. Effect of external deeds
upon a man's character. Employment pursued determines
character. § 124. Permanent feelings rise from inner think-
ing and external action, g 125. Disastrous effect of passions
upon development, upon imagination, and understanding.

Second Division : Mental Conditions.

Chapter I. — The General Variability of Conditions (p. 97).
§ 126. No one condition of human life resembles another. § 127.
Reproduction proves that no concept once found is ever lost.
§ 128. A change of concepts in consciousness a necessity to
man. The need of change increases through gratification.
§ 129. Hunger and satiety, waking and sleep, have a well-known
cycle. § 130. The physical life has its period of growth, full
strength, and decline. Variations to be observed throughout
the life of the child, the boy, the man.

Chapter II. — Natural Talents (p. 99). § 131. The course of
life modified through difference of sex. Girls develop earlier
than boys. § 132. The temperaments in connection with the feel-
ings and the emotions. The mingling of temperaments. {Note.
— A physiological view of temperament.) § 133. The emotions
strengthened or weakened by the responsiveness or the imper-
turbability of the body. {Note. — Physiognomy and craniology
too indefinite at present to have any value in psychology.)
§ 134. The natural talents of humanity. § 135. The question
concerning the races comes between those concerning the tal-
ents of the individual and of humanity.


ANALYSIS OF CONTENTS. xxxix

Chapter IIL — ^External inflaenoes (p. 104). § 136. From
the empirical standpoint no decision concerning the original
talents of human nature. § 137. Influences of climate, soil,
etc., upon man. § 138. The nation has a predominating tem-
perament and a history. § 139. Difference of ranks or castes in
every civilized nation. § 140. The youth is influenced by his
family, his education, his surroundings, etc. g 141. The free*
dom that remains to a man in the midst of external influencesr
Kant endeavored to secure responsibility. The force with which
a man works on himself or against himself.

Chapter IV. — Anomalous Conditions (p. 108). § 142. Man
subjected to anomalous conditions. Difficulty in contrasting the
well man with the mentally diseased. § 143. Anomalous condi-
tions to be compared with the mental disorders, illusion, madness,
dementia, idiocy. § 144. Illusion depends upon a flxed idea. In-
tervals of sound health in a diseased imagination. In delusions
the disorder not purely mental. § 145. Madness an impulse to
bodily action without aim. In healthy men, action occasionally
appears at the same time voluntary and involuntary. {Note, —
Madness without delusion.) g 146. In dementia, a mingling of
concepts without regular connection. The fool resembles the
stupid child. The proper cure of dementia is bodily. § 147.
Idiocy or imbecility is general weakness of the mind. § 148.
The classes of mental disorders are extremes under which modi-
fied disorders may be subsumed. § 149. Anomalous mental
states analogous to mental disorders. The peculiarities of the
dream. Conclvdirhg Remarks, — The opposite of mental disor-
der is a healthy mental condition. The same degree of mental
health not to be found in all mental faculties. Comparison be-
tween insanity and the passions. No passion is a pure force.
The kinds of passions belonging to the different kinds of insan-
ity. Concepts manifest themselves at one time as passions, at
another as reason.

PART THIRD.— Rational Vsyctlouooy,— Section First:
Theorems from Metaphysics and Natural Philosophy.

Chapter I.— The Soul and Matter (p. 119). § 150. Notion of
the soul to be restored. The soul a simple essence with no space
relations. § 151. The soul has no time relations. § 152. The
soul has no immediate natural talents. § 153. The nature of


xl ANALYSIS OP CONTENTS.

the sonl unknown. § 154 Resistance among essences. § 155.
The self-preservations of the souL § 156. The difference be-
tween soul and matter. Space conditions belong to essences.
Matter does not fill space as a geometric. Matter always pene-
trable by its solvent.

Chaptee XL— Vital Forces (p. 122). § 157. Vital forces.
§ 158. Each element has its own vital force. {Note, — No matter
entirely inorganic.) § 159. The source of vital force referred to
Providence. § 160. The soul an example of the internal devel-
opment of a simple essence. The relation between psychology
and physiology. (Note, — A characteristic of vitality is assimila-
tion.) § 161. Vital forces differ in kind as well as in degree.
The difference between parts of the body nourished by the same
kind of food. Causality depends upon the dissimilarity of the
^ elements.

Chapter III. — ^The Connection between Soul and Body
(p. 125). § 162. Connection between mind and matter in brutes
and in man. § 163. The location of. the soul. {Note 1, — The
spheres of the physiologist and metaphysician differ. Note 2, —
No reason for assuming the soul of brutes and man to be in the
same place. § 164. The nervous system in the human body
serves a single souL § 165. The dependence of the mind upon
the body not to be regarded as strange. § 166. The theory con-
cerning a general organic connection of the whole univei*se.

Section Second : jExplanation of Phenomena,

Chapter I.— Concepts of Space and Time (p. 129). § 167.
A psychological disclosure needed as to how the world and we
ourselves appear to ourselves. § 168. Investigations into the
nature of series of concepts necessary to explain things in the
relation of time and space. § 169. The limitation of the repro-
duction depends upon accompanying conditions. The relation
of intermediate concept between two others will never be
changed. § 170. The general form of the concept depends
upon a definite starting-point. § 171. If the beginning point
be dispensed with, the perception and the reproduction seen
constantly in one direction. § 172. In the soul the concept of
space is intensive. The fundamental idea of number is that of
more or less. True and complete symbols for the notion of
number. § 173. The original apprehension of the eye not spa-


ANALYSIS OP CONTENTS. xK

tial. The moyement of the eye furnishes the spatial concepts.
§ 174. The concept of space relations depends upon reproduc-
tions just occurring. (1.) Succession in representation not a rep-
resented succession. (2.) Only an imperceptibly short interval
of time required to furnish a concept of space relations. § 175.
Distinction between time and space perceptions. PropositioiSs
1 and 2 in § 174 apply to the representation of the temporal.
§ 176. Only educated people can compr^end long extrasions in
time, g 177. In a psychological sense everything temporal and
spiritual is infinitely divisible. (Note i.— Geometry needed in
commensurable quantities on account of the infinite divisibility
of space and time. Note _£. — Spatial and temporal relations not
dependent on space and time. Note 3, — The beautiful in space.)
§ 178. Concepts of intensive magnitudes. Origin of the stand-
ard by which we characterize our sensations of strong and weak.

SUPPLKMBKT.— The Difference between Series (p. 138). The
differences in the series in general. 1. The series are longer or
shorter. 2. Degree of union among the terms stronger or weaker.
3. The series similar or not in regard to strength of terms as
well as in degree of combination. 4. Several series often serve
for one. 5. Many series return into themselves. 6. Strong
among dissimilar often form a series among themselves. 7. A
term often has a side series. 8. Side series may progress simul-
taneously. 9. Each element of a complex may be the beginning
point of a series. 10. Series may start simply, and later may
form a complex. Reproduction fluctuates between two kinds
of opposed possible influences.

Chapter II. — ^The Development of Notions (p. 140). § 179.
All concepts subject to the laws of blending, etc. Notions, as
such, exist only in our abstraction. The union of the practical
with the theoretical understanding. § 180. That notions are a
peculiar class of concepts, a delusion. General notions and logi-
cal ideals. How are they constructed! § 181. Why do con-
cepts so often occur in the form of judgments f Judgments not
mere complexes or blendings, § 182. Collective impressions
from similar perceptions. § 183. Reproduction of concepts
through similarity. § 184 Collective concepts in which series
lie infolded to be regarded as subjects, etc. § 185. The place of
the subject. § 186. Each word in the language fitted to be the


xlii ANALYSIS OP CONTENTS.

subject of a judgment. § 187. In an expressed judgment, for
the hearer, two cases possible. § 188. Intelligible jspeech must
be connected. (Note. — In music, distinctions between the intel-
ligible and the senseless to be made. The intelligible not also
the beautiful.) § 189. The development of ideas the result of
continuous judgment. § 190. The relation between a genus and
its species. § 191. The determination of the content of com-
plexes, or the definition of ideas, g 192. The definition and
separation of general notions are problems to be solved, etc.

Chapter III. — Our Comprehension of Things and Ourselves
(p. 150). § 194. Concepts become combined so far as they are
not arrested. For a child there are no individual objects. The
first chaos of concepts subjected to a separation. Movement of
objects aids in making distinctions. § 195. Objects separated into
individual things ; things separated into their properties. The
question concerning substance, g 196. Contradictions in the
notion of the thing with several properties. § 197. Differences
in the human apprehension of things to be considered prepara-
tory to the theory of self-consciousness. The object in motion
occupies more attention than the object at rest, g 198. The
brute as well as man occupies himself less with the inanimate
than with the living object. (Note, — That the Ego opposes to
itself a non-Ego, an error of idealism.) g 199. The origin of the
concept of a concept. § 200. The concept of self-knowledge.
The possibility of apprehending two opposite concepts, the rep-
resenting and the represented, as one and the same. The iden-
tity of self, g 201. The concept of the Ego. Man the movable
central point of things. (Note, — The concept of the we,) g 202.
The unity of personality depends upon the blendings of all the
concepts which in the course of life are added to the complex
which makes up the self of each person. The Ego develops
differently in different concept masses, g 203. A correct notion
of ourselves to be obtained through the notion of the soul.
(Note, — The Ego as a metaphysical principle, g 204. The
meaning of intuition. Intuition a complicated process. Pas-
sivity in intuition.

Chapter IV. — The Ungovemed Play of the Psychical Mech-
anism (p. 163). g 205. The mental activity may originate in
concepts themselves in the psychical organism or in external


ANALYSIS OP CONTENTS. jliif

impressions. § 206. A small number of concepts would soon
approach a statical point. This movement toward the statical
point is influenced by the number of concepts. § 307. Changes
in the arrest of concepts occur in consequence of new complica-
tions. Hence changes in mental conditions. § 206. The stat-
ical threshold is developed from the mechanicaL § 200. Older
(earlier) concepts are stronger than later ones. § 310. The pur-
pose of the reproduction determines the purpose of the elabora-
tion, (^ote. — Distinction between analytic and synthetic in-
struction.) i§ 211. Concepts become more firmly and more vari-
ously interwoven in following the tendency toward equilibrium.
The intelligence has ite seat in the general connection among
concepts. § 212. Conversation is the ordinary stimulant to the
imagination, g 213. A man's sense-perception and attention
depend upon his imagination and thought. Attention partly
involuntary, partly voluntary. Four circumstances to be ob-
served during the act of attention. Iteproduced concepts may
be unfavorable to involuntary observation. (Note, — Attention
belongs to the fundamental notions of general pedagogy.)
§ 214 Every physical feeling is in a condition to bring the
series of concepts complicated with it into consciousness. § 215.
Changes in the physical condition must correspond to changes
in the mental state. {Note. — An increased velocity in the
changes of bodily conditions renders the play of the psychical
mechanism difficult of controL) § 216. The effect of emotion
should not be apparent upon the healthy body. A system of
possible emotions exists in every human organism. The effects
of physiological pressure are to be ascertained from a knowl-
edge of the psychical mechanism. (1.) Under physiological
pressure obscurity arises. (2.) This pressure retards the vault-
ing and tapering of a series of concepts. (3.) With many this
pressure is not constantly effective. (4.) A constant pressure
acting upon free-rising concepts disarranges their movement.
§217. Different concept masses depend upon outside impress
sions. § 218. The external world regarded as the sphere of
action. The functions of body and soul combined in move-
ments in different parts of the body and the feelings arising
therefrom, g 219. Illustration of § 218 by a series of concepts,
a, by Cy dy etc. g 220. The position of a hindrance often repre-


xliv ANALYSIS OF COI^TENTS.

sents merely something lacking in an ordinary enrironment.
§ 221. Effect of a tissue of series. § 222. The first essential of
a man's character famished in the object and manner of his
love. § 223. The nature of will. § 224. The will has its imagi-
nation and its memory. § 225. How the will is strengthened,
g 226. Desires may meet and oppose one another. (Note, — The
greater the number of concept masses so much the more har-
moniously do they work together.) g 227. The external life
often hinders a man from turning his whole will inward.

Chapter V. — Self-control, especially Duty, as a Psychical
Phenomenon (p. 178). g 228. Self-control to be distinguished
from that which a man exacts of himself, g 229. The child
controls himself when he delays an action which serves as a
means to an end. g 230. Experiences showing the inconsistency
of the will more striking in great than in small things. The
sign of a good law. § 231. Conscience follows from self-con-
sciousness. A fixed law preceding cases to be decided, necessity
as security against partiality, g 232. In the beginning practical
principles are individual, g 233. The basis of duty in practical
(moral) philosophy. § 234. Actual self-control depends upon
the co-operation of several concept masses. The demands of
labor upon the wilL {Note, — Necessity for guarding against
theories representing one's freedom greater than it really is.)
§ 235. Self-control conformed to an end or purpose. (Note 1. —
The assumption of a transcendental freedom of the wilL Note
2, — Discussion concerning the mental condition of criminals.)
§ 236. Where the conditions of self-control are to be found.
The cultured man and savages have hardly any faculty of the
understanding except the passions. We can not speak of sev-
eral understandings, several imaginations, g 237. The consid-
eration of moral self-control Moral feeling arises from moral
judgments, g 238. A purely moral self-control an ideal, g 239«'
No particular time of life can be held as decisive in regard to
the power of self-controL

Chapter VI. — Psychological Observations upon the Destiny
of Man (p. 190). § 240. Man not to be considered as standing
alone. The individuals of a social whole related to one another
in almost the same way as the concepts in the soul of an indi-
vidual, g 241. A science of politics similar to the empirical


ANALYSIS OP CONTBNTa xlv

psychology of this work. § 242. Philosophy of history depends
upon psychology. No history of known countries can furnish
a history of the world. The statesman demands of the philos-
ophy of history that which the educator demands of psychology.
§ 243. Comparison of mental diseases with social desires and
delusions. Man assigns to himself the place he would like to
occapy in an ideal society. The importance of the will in ma-
turing character. § 245. To fill his place in the social whole is
the highest aim of the individual. § 246. The career of the in-
dividual man not to be confined to the earthly life. Death is
rejuvenescence. § 247. Revolutions among concepts may be
necessary after death, g 248. The product created by concepts
striving after equilibrium not the same in any two souls. § 249.
Eternal life a gentle fluctuation of concepts. § 250. The souls
knowledge of its former career upon earth, g 251. The differ-
ences between individuals may be lessened after death, g 252.
The future as seen from the standpoint of science.


{


HERBAET'S PSTOHOLOGT.


INTEODUCTION.

1. The material of psychology may be gained from
inner perception, intercourse with men of different
degrees of development, the observations of educators
and statesmen, the writings of travelers, historians,
poets, and moralists, and finally from observations on
insane people, sick people, and the lower animals.
The work of psychology is not merely to collect this
material, but to make the total of inner experience
comprehensible, while it is the work of the philosophy
of nature to accomplish the same in regard to outer ex-
perience limited as it is by space-conditions. As the
two circles of experience are different and yet united,
so also are the two sciences. In respect to their funda-
mental ideas, they depend in common upon general
metaphysics, yet psychology has this peculiar relation
to the latter, that many questions, which upon occasion
arise in metaphysics and then must be postponed, are
answered in psychology. For this reason the trea-
tise on psychology may very well be allowed to pre-
cede that on metaphysics, and in this way the meta-
physical idea of the soul (the substance of the mind)
may be dispensed with at first. By this the beginner

lightens his task, partly because he can tarry longer in
4


2 INTRODUCTION.

the circle of experience, and partly because the mani-
fold relations of psychology to morals, pedagogy, poli-
tics, philosophy of history, and to art, heighten the
interest of the study.

V" 2. That concepts {Vorstellungen^ideaA or repre-
sentations) are received through the senses, preserved
by the memory, reproduced by the imagination, and
anew combined ; that the understanding ( Verstand)
shows itself in the understanding of a language or an
art ; the Eeason ( Vernunft) in perceiving reasons and
counter-reasons; this generally received opinion has
been adopted and carried out by psychologists, and the
distinction between the beautiful and the ugly has
been assigned to the aesthetic judgment, the passions
to the faculty of desire, the emotions to the faculty of
feeling. The opinion is, that these faculties are al-
ways to be found together in every man ; but the great
contest over the explanation and classification of facul-
ties must long ago have brought to notice the fact that
psychology needs another branch of investigation in
which at the beginning the attention must be directed
toward changing conditions. These changes (but not
those faculties) we experience directly in ourselves.

3. A preliminary compai'ison of psychology with
the three principal branches of natural science is use-
ful. Natural history may first present individual ex-
amples of the objects which it afterward classifies ; it
may enumerate definitely the characteristics perceived.
Now, inasmuch as a regular process of abstraction is
possible, beginning with the individuals and ascending
toward the species and genera [by omitting one after
another the characteristics that differentiate the indi-
viduals from the species, and the lower classes from


UNCERTAINTY OF MENTAL FACTS. 3

the higher], it follows that we have before ub these
characteristics [omitted in the process of rising to the
abstract classes], and can add them as we descend to
the concrete. When these logical operations are prop-
erly performed, and ascent is made from the concrete
to the abstract, and descent from the abstract to the
concrete, no one is misled into supposing the abstract
to be anything real. Everybody knows the abstract
terms to be mere devices of thought, invented by it for
the purpose of conveniently surveying at a glance the
manifold objects of nature.

On the contrary, no material of facts lies at the
foundation of psychology, spread out before the eyes
so that it can be definitely shown .and classified into
subordinate and higher classes without any gaps in the
series. Self-observation mutilates the facts of con-
sciousness even in the act of seizing them ; it wrests
them from their natural combinations and delivers
them over to a restless process of abstraction which
finds a point of repose only when it has reached the
ultimate species — namely, conception, feeling, and de-
sire. Under these three general classes, by definitions (a
method precisely opposite to that of empirical science),
it subsumes the mental facts observed so far as it can
be done. Now, if to these vague and unscientific!
classifications there be added a theory of mental f acul- :
ties which we are supposed to possess, then psychology !
is changed into a mythology in which no one will con- *
fess a serious belief, but upon which the most impor-/
tant investigations are made dependent, so that, if thia
foundation were removed, nothing clear would remain.*

Note. — It is noteworthy that in psychology the highest ideas
are the clearest ; the lower, however, are always obscure. Thus


4 INTRODUCTION.

for some time we have been tolerably (though not entirely)
united in regarding the three classes, conception, feeling, desire,
as the ultimate species of mental faculties, but the discrimination
of the emotions from the passions is of later origin, and even yet
has not thoroughly penetrated the usages of speech : if we ask
exhaustively about the kinds of memory, as memory of place,
memory of names, memory of things, etc., no one undertakes to
name for us in reply all the classes, nor are the poetic, the
mathematical, and the military imaginations discriminated from
one another, although manifest differences are to be found among
men in this respect. By this indefiniteness in the subordinate
classes, it may be perceived at once that the original apprehen-
sion of psychological facts is so inexact that it admits of no pure
natural history of the mind. Nevertheless, on account of the
customs of speech already established, in our logical review of
empirical psychology we shall sometimes make use of the cus-
tomary names.

4. Empirical physics, though it has not as yet dis-
covered the real forces of nature, has learned certain
laws according to which phenomena take place. By
recalling the latter, a connection in the variety of phe-
nomena is perceived. Experiments with artificial ap-
paratus and the application of mathematics aid greatly
in the discovery of these laws.

^ Psychology can not experiment with men, and there
is no apparatus for this purpose. So much the more
carefully must we make use of mathematics ; by it sci-
entific accuracy is gained for the fundamental ideas ;
then the work of referring individual cases to the law
beginX' Suppose, for example, that one has the idea
of the tension of opposed concepts ; then we go back
to the different conditions possible in this, among
others to the difference in mental states. In this
way the rules of reproduction are first learned, ac-
cording to which, in the concept series, every concept


PHYSIOLOGY AND PSYCHOLOGY. 6

presents itself between others ; then we go back to the
space-and-time constitution of sensuous objects and to
the logical aspect of ideas.

5. In the observation of animal life, physiology
makes use of three principal ideas, yiz., vegetation
[i. e., nutrition or assimilation], irritability [i. e., reac-
tion against foreign influences], and sensibility. We
may attempt to compare the faculty of feeling with sen-
sibility, the faculty of desire with irritability, the faculty
of concepts with vegetation ; then we see that this analo-
gy gives a little light inasmuch as vegetation continues
during sleep while sensibility disappears, and through
the refreshment (of sleep) the irritability of the mus-
cles gains new force. Duration also belongs to con-
cepts. When they are once perfected to the extent of
definite knowledge they remain to old age, while feel-
ings and desires change and weaken. Moreover, vege-
tation is the foundation of bodily life, as concepts are
the foundation of the mental life. But the analogy
must not be carried too far. In plants only vegetation
exists, there being no perceptible sensibility and irri-
tability (or reaction against environment) save with the
rarest and most imperfect exceptions. On the con-
trary, representation, feeling, and willing, are constant-
ly to be found in combination. And, besides this, the
whole mental existence of man is immeasurably more
changeable than any object of physiology whatever.

6. If we regard man with a speculative glance sharp-
ened by the fundamental ideas of metaphysics, we find
him to be an aggregate of contradictions. Inner expe-
rience has not the least claim to more value than the
outer, notwithstanding all that enthusiasm for inner
observation has imagined and may still imagine to be of


6 INTRODUCTION.

special truth and yalue, and which it is impossible to
wrest from those who wish to believe therein. On the
other hand, a field of investigation is disclosed by
which empirical material is elaborated into trae knowl-
edge, a result which in empirical psychology, on ac-
count of its indefiniteness and instability, is more dif-
ficult to accomplish than in many other parts of hu-
mm experience.

! All mental life, as we observe it in ourselves and
others, is shown to be an occurrence in time, a con-
stant change, a manifold of unlike conditions com-
bined in one, finally a consciousness of the Ego and
the non-Ego, all of which belong to the form of expe-
rience and are unthinkable [as its content]. Even the
difficulties in regard to material existence are not far
away, for we know the mind of man only in combi-
nation with the body, and mere experience can not
determine whether the separation of the one from the
other actually occurs. /

7. The readiest solution of these problems is found
in general metaphysics, but further elaboration from a
psychological standpoint demands, besides this, higher
mathematics, inasmuch as the concepts must be re-
garded as forces whose effectiveness depends upon their
strength, their oppositions, and their combinations, all
of which are different in degree.

8. In such a simple, almost popular, presentation
as is proposed here, the old hypothesis of mental facul-
ties can not be entirely dispensed with, for that hy-
pothesis is a work of ages, and indicates the nearest
approach attainable by natural effort to bring together
the mental life of man into one picture. It is a tradi-
tion "which reflects the total impression of all psycho-


CLASSIFICATIONS OF FACULTIES. 7

logical observations ; guided by it, we shall sketch the
outlines of empiric^ psychology, and, in order to make
the necessity for an explanation of the facts percepti-
ble, shall note its most striking effects.

Note.— The whole treatise will be divided into the following
principal parts :

Part I. Fundamental Theories.
Part II. Empirical Psychology.
Part IIL Rational Psychology.

9. A work of Carus is extant upon the history of
psychology, the third volume of which is composed of
his posthumous writings.

Note. — ^It may be briefly stated here, but not shown in detail,
that in modem times psychology has rather gone backward than
forward. In regard to this science, Locke and Leibnitz were
both upon a better path than that along which we have been|
led by Woljff and Kant. The two latter advocate in a peculiar'
manner the discrimination of mental faculties, and for this reason
must be classed together, howerer much they differ from each
other in other respects. Wolff had in mind the logical task of
classifying ment-al phenomena, without troubling himself more
closely with their inner origination, and for this reason he is un-
equaled in the thoughtlessness with which he covers up the
greatest difficulties with mere verbal definitions. Kant makes
use of the hypothetical mental faculties to present his investiga-
tions clearly according to form, tiiat he might accompany human
knowledge in its progress from the senses to the understanding
and the reason, and it is not easy to rid his writings of this
hypothesis.

It is not our purpose to mention here later errors, since in
empirical psychology one will be inclined to relate a second time,
facts which every person knows already, or, with a pretended
gift for observation into his own inner life, will have made dis-
coveries which others can not find in themselves, or will have
effaced from psychology here a metaphysical, there an ethical,
here a religious, there a physiological color by which either the


8 INTEODUCTION.

mutiMl limitations or the combinations of Bcienoe ara diere-
garded, while the source of the pejchical mechanism remains
entirely hidden. Bui this one thing maj be said, that psycholo-
gy can not portray the beautifuL Its work is not to admire, but
to explain ; not to exhibit cariosities, but to make man as he is
generally comprehensible ; neither to raise him to heaven, nor to
Ax him immovably in the dust ; not to dose the lines of inves-
tigation, but to open them.


PAKT FIRST.

FUNDAMENTAL PRINCIPLES.


CHAPTER L

THE OONDITIOlif OP CONCEPTS, WHEN THBT ACT AS

FORCES.

10. CfoNCEPTS become forces when they resist one
another. This resistance occurs when two or more
opposed concepts encounter one another.

At first let us take this proposition as simply as
possible. In this connection, therefore, we shall not
think of complex nor of compound concepts of any
kind whatever ; nor of such as indicate an object with
several characteristics, neither of anything in time nor
space, but of entirely simple concepts or sensations —
e. g., red, blue, sour, sweet, etc. It is not our purpose
to consider the general notions of the above-mentioned
sensations, but to consider such representations as may
result from an instantaneous act of sense-perception.

Again, the question concerning the origin of the
sensations mentioned does not belong here, much less
has the discussion to do with the consideration of any-
thing else that might have previously existed or oc-
curred in the soul.

The proposition as it stands is that opposed con-
cepts resist one another. Concepts that are not op-


10 FUNDAMENTAL PRINCIPLES.

posed — e. g., a tone and a color — may exist, in which
case it will be assamed that such concepts offer
no resistance to one another. (Exceptions to this
latter proposition may occur, of which more here-
after.)

Eesistance is an expression of force. To the re-
sisting concept, however, its action is quite accidental;
it adjusts itself to the attack which is mutual among
concepts, and which is determined by the degree of
opposition existing between them. This opposition
may be regarded as that by which they are affected
collectively. In themselves, however, concepts are
not forces.

11. Now, what is the result of the resistance men-
tioned ?

Do concepts partially or wholly destroy one another,
or, notwithstanding the resistance, do they remain un-
changed ?

Destroyed concepts are the same as none at all.
However, if, notwithstanding the mutual attack, con-
cepts remain unchanged, then one could not be re-
moved or suppressed by another (as we see every
moment that they are). Finally, if all that is con-
ceived of each concept were changed by the contest,
then this would signify nothing more than, at the be-
ginning, quite another concept had been present in
consciousness.

The presentation (concept), then, must yield with-
out being destroyed — ^i. e., the real concept is changed
into an effort to present itself.

Here it is in effect stated that, as soon as the hin-
drance yields, the concept by its own effort will again
make its appearance in consciousness. In this lies the


EQUILIBRIUM AND MOVEMENT OF CONCEPTS. H

possibility (although not for all cases the only ground)
of reproduction.

12. When a concept becomes not entirely, but only
in part, transformed into an effort, we must guard
against considering this part as a severed portion of
the whole concept. It has certainly a definite magni-
tude (upon the knowledge of which much depends)?
but this magnitude indicates only a degree of the ob-
scuration of the whole concept. If the question be
in regard to several parts of one and the same concept,
these parts must not be regarded as different, severed
portions, but the smaller divisions may be regarded
as being contained in the larger. The same is true of
the remainders after the collisions — i. e., of those parts
of a concept which remain unobscured, for those parts
are also degrees of the real concept.


CHAPTER 11.

EQUILIBRIUM AND MOVEMENT OF CONCEPTS.

13. When a sufficiency of opposition exists be-
tween concepts, the latter are in equilibrium. They
come only gradually to this point. The continuous
change of their degree of obscuration may be called
their movement.

The statics and mechanics of the mind have to do
with the calculation of the equilibrium and movement
of the concepts.

14. All investigations into the statics of the mind


12 FUNDAMENTAL PRINCIPLEa

begin with two different quantitative factors, viz.,
the sum (or the aggregate amount) of the resistances
and the ratio of their limitation. The former is the
quantity which rises from their encounter, to be divided
between the opposing concepts. If one knows how to
state it, and knows also the ratio in which the different
concepts yield in the encounter, then, by a simple cal-
culation in proportion, the statical point of each con-
cept — i. e., the degree of its obscuration in equilibrium
— may be found.

; 15. The sum as well as the ratio of the mutual
limitation depends upon the strength of each indi-
vidual concept which is affected in inverse ratio to its
^strength, and upon the degree of opposition between
the two concepts. For their influence upon each other
stands in direct ratio to the strength of each.

The principle determining the sum of the mutual
limitation is, that it shall be considered as small as
possible, because all concepts strive against suppres-
sion, and certainly submit to no more of it than is
absolutely necessary.

16. By actual calculation, the remarkable result is
obtained that, in the case of the two concepts, the one
never entirely obscures the other, but, in the case of
three or more, one is very easily obscured, and can be
made as ineffective — notwithstanding its continuous
struggle — as if it were not present at all. Indeed, this
obscuration may happen to a large number of con-
cepts as well as to one, and may be effected through
the agency of two, and even through the combined in-
fluence of concepts less strong than those which are
suppressed.
sy Here the expression " threshold of consciousness "


1

I


EQUILIBRIUM AND MOVEMENT OF CONCEPTS. 13

must be explained, as we shall have occasion to nse it. i
A concept is in consciousness in so far as it is not
suppressed, but is an actual representation. When it
rises out of a condition of complete suppression, it
enters into consciousness. Here, then, it is on the
threshold of consciousness. It is very important to
determine by calculation the degree of strength which
a concept must attain in order to be able to stand beside
two or more stronger ones exactly on the threshold of
consciousness, so that, at the slightest yielding of the
hindrance, it would begin to rise into consciousness^.^

Note. — ^The expression " A concept is in consciousness " must
be distinguished from that, ^ I am conscious of my concept."
To the latter belongs inner perception ; to the former not. In
psychology, we need a word that will indicate the totality of all
simultaneous actual presentations. No word except conscious-
ness can be found for this purpose.

Here We are obliged to be content with a circumlocution — and
this ail the more, because the inner perception which is usually
attributed to consciousness has no fixed limit where it begins or
ceases, and, moreover, the act of perceiving is not itself per-
ceived ; so that, since we are not conscious of it in ourselves, we
must exclude it from consciousness, although it is an active
knowing, and in no way a restricted or suppressed concept.

17. Among the many, and, for the most part, very
complicated laws underlying the movement of con-
cepts, the following is the simplest :

While the arrested portion {Hemmungssumme) of
the concept sinks, the sinking part is at every mo-
ment proportional to the part unsuppressed.

By this it is possible to calculate the whole course
of the sinking even to the statical point.

Note. — Mathematically, the above law may be expressed:
<r = S(|_Q"" jin which S = the aggregate amount sup-


/


14 FUNDAMENTAL PEINCIPLES.

pressed, t = the time elapsed daring the enoonnter, a = the
suppressed portion of all the concepts in the time indicated
byt.

As the latter quantity is apportioned among the indiyidual
concepts, it is found that those which fall directly beneath the
statical threshold (16) are yery quickly driven thence, while the
rest do not reach exactly their statical point in any given finite
time. On account of this latter circumstance, the concepts in
the mind of a man of most equable temperament are, while he
is awake, always in a state of gentle motion. This is also the
primary reason why the inner perception never meets an object
which holds it quite motionless.

18. When to several concepts already near equi-
librium a new one comes, a movement arises which
causes them to sink for a short time beneath their
, statical point, after which they quickly and entirely of
j themselves rise again — something as a liquid, when
an object is thrown into it, first sinks and then rises.
In this connection several remarkable circumstances
occur :

' 19. First, upon an occasion of this kind, one of the
tolder concepts may be removed entirely out of con-
sciousness even by a new concept that is much weaker
than itself.] In this case, however, the striving of the
suppressed concept is not to be considered wholly in-
effective, as shown above (see 16) ; jt works with all
its force against the concepts in consciousness. Al-
though its object is not conceived, it produces a certain
condition of consciousness.^ The way in which these
concepts are removed out of consciousness and yet are
effective therein may be indicated by the expression,
" They are on the mechanical threshold." The thresh-
old mentioned above (16) is called for the sake of dis-
tinction the statical threshold.


i


EQUILIBRIUM AND MOVEMENT OF CONCEPTS. 15

Note. — If the concepts on the statical threshold acted in the
same way as on the mechanical threshold we should find our-
selves in a state of the most intolerable uneasiness, or rather
the body would be subjected to a condition of tension that must
in a few moments prove fatal, even as under present conditions
sudden fright will sometimes cause death ; for all the concepts
which, as we are accustomed to say, the memory preserves, and
which we well know can upon the slightest occasion be repro-
duced, are in a state of incessant striving to rise, although the
condition of consciousness is not at all affected by them.

20. Second, the time during which one or more
concepts linger upon the mechanical threshold can be
extended if a series of new, although weaker, concepts
come in succession to them.

Every employment to which we are unaccustomed
puts us in this condition. The earlier concepts are
pressed back of the later ones. The former, however,
because they are the stronger, remain tense, affect the
physical organism more and more, and finally make
it necessary that the employment cease, when the old
concepts immediately rise, and we experience what is
called a feeling of relief which depends in part upon
the physical organism, although the first cause is pure-
ly psychological.

21. Third, when several concepts are driven in
succession to the mechanical threshold, several sudden
successive changes in the laws of reciprocal move-
ments arise.

In this way is to be explained the fact that the
course of our thoughts is so often inconsequent,
abrupt, and apparently irregular. This appearance
deceives in the same way as the wandering of the
planets. The conformity to law in the human mind
resembles exactly that in the firmament.


16 FUNDAMENTAL PRINCIPLES.

Note. — ^As a counterpart to the concepts which sink simul-
taneously are to be observed those which rise simultaneouslj,
especially when they rise free — L e., when a restricting environ-
ment or a general pressure suddenly disappears. With the ris-
ing the amount of suppression increases. Hence, in the case of
three, one may be, as it were, bent back, and under certain con-
ditions may sink quite to the threshold. Their elevation is
greater than the depression to which, sinking together, they
would have pressed one another, because in sinking the. sum of
their mutual limitation depends upon the total strength, which
in the gradual rising is not the case.


CHAPTEE IIL

COMPLICATIONS AKD BLBNDINGS.

22. The easily conceivable metaphysical reason
why opposed concepts resist one another is the unity
of the soul, of which they are the self-preservations.
This reason explains without difficulty the combina-
tion of our concepts (which combination is known to
exist). If, on account of their opposition, they did
not suppress one another, all concepts would compose
but one act of one soul ; and, indeed, in so far as they
are not divided into a manifold by any kind of arrests
whatever, they really constitute but one act. Con-
cepts that are on the threshold of consciousness can
not enter into combination with others, as they are
completely transformed into effort directed against
other definite concepts, and are thereby, as it were,
isolated. 'In consciousness, however, concepts combine
in two ways : First, concepts which are not opposed or


COMPLICATIONS AND BLENDINGS. 17

contrasted with one another (as a tone and a color) so
far as they meet unhindered, form a complex ; second,
contrasted concepts [e. g., red and yellow], in so far
as they are affected neither by accidental foreign con-
cepts nor by unavoidable opposition, become blended
(fused).

Complexes may be complete; blendings (fusions)
from their nature must always be (more or less) in-
complete.

Note. — Of such complexes as are partially or almost com-
plete, we have remarkable instances in the concepts of things
with several characteristics and of words used as signs of
thoughts. In the mother-tongue the latter, words and thoughts,
are so closely connected that it would appear that we think by
means of words. (Concerning both examples more hereafter.)
Among the blendings are especially remarkable, partly those
which include in themselves an esthetic relation (which, taken
psychologically, is created at the same time with the blending),
partly those which involve succession, in which serial forms
have their origin.

23. That which is complicated or blended out of
several concepts furnishes an aggregate of force, and
for this reason works according to quite other statical
and mechanical laws than those according to which
the individual concepts would have acted. Also the
thresholds of consciousness change according to the
complex or blending (fusion), so that on account of a
combination a concept of the very weakest kind may
be able to remain and exert an influence in conscious-i
ness.

Note 1. — ^The computation for complexes and blendings de-
pends upon the same principles as that for simple concepts ; it
is, however, much more intricate, especially for the reason that
5


18 FUNDAMENTAL PRINCIPLEa

in the case of incomplete combinations the forces as well as their
arrests are only partially interwoven with one another (and do
not fully enter as factors into the prodact).

Note 2. — Combinations of concepts consist not only of two
or three members, but they often contain many members in yery
unequal degrees of complication, or blending, in which case no
calculation can estimate the multiplicity. Nevertheless, from
the latter, the simplest cases may be chosen and the more intri-
cate ones estimated according to them. For every science the
simplest laws are the most important.

24. Problem: After an encounter between two
concepts, P and n, the remainders, r and p, are blended
(or incompletely united). The problem is to indicate
what help one of the two concepts, in case it should
be still more suppressed, would receive from the other.

Note. — Solution: Let P be the helping concept; it helps
with a force equal to r, but n can only appropriate this force in

the ratio of p : IL Hence through P, n receives the help -J,

To

and in the same way P receives from n the help -^

The proof lies immediately in the analysis of the
ideas. It is plain that the two remainders, r and p,
taken together, determine the degree of union between
the two concepts. One of them is the helping force ;
the other, compared with the concept to which it be-
longs, is to be considered as a fraction of the whole ;
and, of the totality of help which could be rendered
by the first remainder, it yields that portion which
here attains efficient activity.

25. The following principles may be observed
here:

a. Beyond the point of union no help extends its
influence.


COMPLICATIOJiS AND BLENDINGS. 19

If the concept n has more clearness in conscious-
ness than the remainder p indicates, then by the striv-
ing of the concept P, which might come to the help
of the former, aiready more than enough has been
done ; hence for the present it exerts no more influ-
ence.

b. The farther the one of the concepts is below the
point of union, so much the more eflectiyely does the
other help.

Note.— This gives the following differential equation :

n p

whence by integration « = p(i_g f[*)

This equation contains the germ of manifold investigations
which penetrate the whole of psychology. It is indeed so sim-
ple that it can never really occur in the human soul, but all in-
vestigations into applied mathematics begin with such simple
presuppositions as only exist in abstraction—^ g., the mathe-
matical lever, or the laws of bodies falling in a vacuum. Here
merely the influence of the help is considered, which, if every-
thing depended upon it alone, would bring into consciousness
during the time t a quantity w from IL Besides, if we take into
consideration the single circumstance that n meets with an un-
avoidable arrest from other concepts, then the calculation be-
comes so complicated that it can be only approximately solved
by an integration of the following form :

d*M = acPvdt + hdttdt^ + evdfi.

It is self-evident that it much more nearly expresses the
facts which are to be observed experimentally.

26. The foregoing contains the foundation of the
theory of mediate reproduction, which, according to
ordinary language, is derived from the association of
ideas or concepts. Before pursuing this further we
must mention immediate reproduction — ^i. e., that re-


20 FUNDAMENTAL PRINCIPLES.

production which by its own force follows upon the
yielding of the hindrances. The ordinary case is that
a concept gained by a new act of perception causes the
old concept of the same or of a similar object to rise
into consciousness. This occurs when the concept
furnished by the new act of perception presses back
everything present in consciousness opposed to the
old concept, which is similar to the new one. Then,
without further difficulty, the old concept rises of it-
self. From this are to be observed the following con-
ditions, which are to be found by calculation, of which,
however, no idea can be given here :

a. In the beginning the rising is in proportion to
the square of the time, if the new act of perception
occurs suddenly ; but to the cube of the time, if the
latter (as is usual) is formed by a gradual and linger-
ing act of apprehension.

h. The course of the rising is adjusted principally
to the strength of the concept furnished by the new
act of perception in proportion to the opposing one
which it has pressed back ; but the individual strength
,of the rising concept only has influence under special
conditions. It can, as it were, only use this strength
in the free space which is given to it.

c. The rising concept blends as such with the con-
cept, similar to it, furnished by the new act of percep-
tion. Since it does not rise entirely, however, the
blending is incomplete.

d. The fact that immediate reproduction is not
limited entirely to the old concept of exactly the same
kind, but extends to the more or less similar so far
as to receive partial freedom from the new act of per-
ception, is of special importance. The wliole repro^


COMPLICATIONS AND BLENDINGS. 21

daction may be indicated by the name of vaulting
(or arching). In the case of a long duration, or of
a frequent repetition of a new act of perception, a
second important process, which we call tapering (or
pointing), follows. The peculiarity of this latter con-
sists in the fact that the concepts which are less
similar are again arrested by the concepts received
through the new act of perception, as the old con-
cepts bring with them into consciousness others which
are opposed to the new, so that finally the concept
that is entirely homogeneous finds itself alone favored,
and forms, as it were, a tapering summit where the
highest point of the vault (or arch) was heretofore.

27. Where the circumstances allow, with this im-
mediate reproduction is united that mediate repro-
duction mentioned in 25. The concept P, mentioned
above, is reproduced immediately (i. e., without the
mediation of others), then the free space allowed it may
be regarded as that r (spoken of in 25) or as a force
which strives to raise the U blended with it to its point
of blending p.

Note.— As the free space gradually increasing (and again
decreasing) is given, we must for the present observation regard

r in the formula » = p /^^ _ e~~ni ^ * variable quantity, and

indeed as a function of that quantity upon which the proposi-
tions in 26 depend.

28. The most important applications of the previ-
ous theories are, if with different remainders r, r\ r'\
etc., of one and the same concept P several n, n', n",
etc., are united, by which, for the sake of brevity, we
may assume, the remainders of the latter, viz., p, p\ p\
to be equal; also, 11, n', etc., may be equal.


22 FUNDAMENTAL PRINCIPLES.

J (A concept acts upon several united with it in the
same series according to the time in which its remain-
ders {by which it is united with those others according
to quantity) stand,

KoTE. — In order to avoid diffuseness, this most important
law is here only very incompletely expressed in words. We
recognize it better and more clearly in the formula given:

« = p(^ "" — lif instead of one r we substitute different

smaller and greater, r, r', r", etc But the more exact calcula-
tion mentioned in 25 shows that the n, n', n", etc., blended
with them, not only rise, but sink again, as it were, to make
place for each other, and in the order of r, r,' r", etc.


- J


/


— )


29. Here is discovered the ground of the genuine
reproduction or of memory so far as it brings to us a
series of concepts in the same order in which they
were first received. In order to comprehend this, we
must consider what union arises among several con-
cepts that are successively given.

Let a series, a, b^ c, d, be given by perception ; then,
from the first movement of the perception and during
its continuance, a is exposed to an arrest from other
concepts already in consciousness. In the mean time,
a, already partially sunken in consciousness, became
more and more obscured when b came to it. This b
at first, unobscured, blended with the sinking a ; then
followed c, which itself unobscured, united with J,
which was becoming obscured, and also with a, which
was still more obscured. Similarly followed rf, to be-
come united in different degrees with a, S, c. 7 From
this arises a law for each of these concepts that states
how, after the whole series has been, for a time, removed
out of consciousness, upon the re-emergence of one of


OF COMPLEXES AND BLENDINGS. 23


the concepts of such a series into consciousness, everjl
other concept of the same series is called up.yljet it be
assumed that a rises first, then it is united more with
b^ less with c, and still less with d ; backward, however,
by Cy and d are blended collectively in an unobscured
condition with the remainders of a ; hence a seeks to
bring them all again into an unobscured condition
[i. e., into full consciousness]. But a acts the most
quickly and strongly upon J, more slowly upon Cj still
more slowly upon d, etc., by which close investiga-
tion shows that b sinks again, while c rises, even as
c sinks when d rises; in short, the series follows in
the same order as first given. On the contrary, let us
assume that c is originally reproduced, then c acts
upon d and the following members of the series ex-
actly in the same way as was indicated in the case
of a — ^i. e., the series c, rf, etc., unfolds gradually in the
order of its succession. On the contrary, b and a
experience quite another influence. The unobscured
c was blended with their different remainders. Then
c acts upon them with its whole strength, and without
delay, but only to call back the remainders of a and b
united with it, to bring a part of b and a smaller part
of a into consciousness. Thus it happens that when
we remember something in the middle of a known
series, the preceding part of the series presents itself all
at once in a lessened degree of clearness, while the por-
tion following comes before the mind in the same order
as the series it brings with tt. But the series never
runs backward ; an anagram from a well-comprehended
word never originates without intentional effort.

30. Several series may cross one another, e. g., a, J,
Cy dy By and a, )9, Cy 8, c, in which c is common to the two


24 FUNDAMENTAL PRINCIPLES.

series. If c were reproduced alone, it would strive to
call up d and e as well as 8 and c If, howeyer, h
comes into consciousness first, then the first series
comes decidedly forward on account of the united help
of h and c, yet the oppositions among the members of
both series, in this case, have each their own influence.

We may remark that, to the simple type or model
here given, a variety of complicated psychological oc-
currences may be adjusted. The same c can be held
as the common point of intersection for many hun-
dred scries. On account of the manifold oppositions
in these series^ the common c may cause none of the
members to rise perceptibly, but so soon as t and a
come forward, determining c more closely, the inde-
cision will disappear, and the uppermost series will
really come before the mind.

31. The foregoing depends upon the difference
presupposed in the remainders r, r', r", etc. (28). But
in order that this difference may have its influence,
the concept to which these remainders belong must
come forward sufficiently into consciousness. Let it
be granted that it is arrested to such a degree that
its active representation amounts to no more than that
of the smallest among the remainders r, r\ r", etc.,
then it works equally on the whole series of concepts
blended with it so that a vague total impression of all
comes into consciousness. The reason for this is ex-
plained in sections 27 and 12. The remainders are not
different parts severed from one and the same concept ;
hence if a little of the latter is in consciousness, we
must not first question whether this little may be one
and perhaps quite the smallest among those remainders,
but we must assume that it really is so, although at


OF. COMPLEXES AND BLENDINGS. 26

the same time it may be a part of every other greater
remainder. If the active concept gradually rises into
consciousness, then the remainders, from the smaller
to the greater, one after the other, gain a special law
of action. By this the above vague impression of the
whole rises, in which lies a whole series of concepts,
and these are gradually developed out of one another.

KoTE. — Here, among others, must be compared the phenom-
ena resulting from exercise and skill ; that, moreover, not every
course of thought repeats faithfully the series constructed ; and
upon that is based, in part, the ground of the inequalities in the
quantities n and p (25), with whose possible difference we can
not deal further here. Additional facts may be deduced from
the following •

32. If free-rising concepts (of which mention was
made in the closing remarks of the last chapter) should
blend in regular gradation, they would be subject to
other laws of reproduction which originate out of the
blending, and are distinguished and determined ac-
cording to their differences. Upon occasion, likewise
arises a process of construction and formation of series
which differ from the form of analogous concepts in
case the latter are given and then sink out of con-
sciousness. From this may be explained the conflict
between things as we perceive them and as we think
them, as well as the tendency to regard them otherwise
than as they first present themselves; consequently
the modifying action of the self-activity upon that
which lies before the perception. This may be ob-
served especially in the case of children who can have
no set purpose in the matter.


26 FUNDAMENTAL PRINCIPLES.

CHAPTER IV.

CONCEPTS AS THE SOURCE OF MENTAL STATES.

33. One of the objections against mathematical
psychology is that mathematics defines only quantity,
whUe psychology must especially consider quality. It
is now time to meet this objection, and to collect the
explanations of those mental states which the forego-
ing presents.

Here we must first remark that the peculiar striv-
ing of concepts for representation (11) never appears
immediately in consciousness, for, just so far as con-
cepts change into striving, they are removed out of
consciousness. Also, the gradual sinking of concepts
can not be perceived. A special instance of this is,
that no one is able to observe his own falling asleep.

So far as it represents or conceives, the soul is
called mind ; so far as it feels and desires, it is called
the heart or disposition (Oemiith), The disposition
of the hearty however^ has its source in the mind — in
other words, feeling and desiring are conditions, and,
for the most part, changeable conditions of concepts.
The emotions indicate this, while experience, upon the
whole, confirms it : the man feels little of the joys and
sorrows of his youth ; but what the boy learns correct-
ly, the graybeard still knows. The extent, however, to
which a steadfast disposition and, above all, character
can be given, will be shown later in the explanations
of the principles above presented.

34. First, there is a blending of concepts not
only after the arrest (22), but quite a different one
before it, provided the degree of opposition (15) be


CONCEPTS, SOURCE OP ALL MENTAL STATES. 27

safficiently smalL A principle of aesthetic judgment
lies in this. Pleasant feelings in their narrowest sense,
together with their opposites, must be regarded as
anaJogons to these sBsthetic judgments — ^i. e., as spring-
ing from the relation of many concepts which do not
assert themselves individually, but rather which per-
haps, for psychological reasons, can not be perceived
when separated.

NoTB. — In carrying out this investigation, the series of tone
relations upon which music depends may be presented as a sub-
ject of experiment. Among simple tones, the degree of arrest
(the interval of tones), entirely alone and without means, deter-
mines the aesthetic character of its relation. It is also certain
that the psychological explanation (widely different from the
acoustical) of all harmony is to be sought in the difference be-
tween the degrees of arrest, and that it must be found there.
The necessary calculations for this are, for the most part, to be
found in the second volume of the E()nigsberg Archives for
Philosophy. Of the somewhat extensive investigations, only
the principal ones which experience decidedly confirms can be
given here :

When the forces^ into which concepts^ through their
similarity and their contrasts^ separate one anothery
are equally strong^ there arises disharmony. If, how-
ever, one of these forces be opposed to the others in such
a relation that it is driven to the statical threshold (16)
by them, then a harmonious relation will prevail.

35. Second, a principle of contrast is to be found
in the complexes (22), which we here consider com-
plete. The complexes « -f- o and b + p are similar,
provided a :a=b : P; if not, they are dissimilar. Let
the degree of arrest between a and b equal p, and that
between a and p equal w. Now, if in similar com-
plexes, JI7 = IT, then, and then only, will the individual


28 FUNDAMENTAL PRINCIPLES.

concepts be arrested, exactly as if they had not been
in any combination ; also no feeling of contrast arises,
inasmuch as the arrest is successful only when the opr
posing forces bring the feeling of contrast with them ;
but, in every variation from the case presented, the less
opposed concepts are affected by their combination
with the other two, but in this very way a part of the
arrest will be withheld from the latter.; consequently,
notwithstanding the opposition, something remains in
consciousness that resists, and in this lies the feeling
of contrast. If «■ < j9, then the contrast between a
and b will be felt, not that between a and fi. If n* > ^,
the case is reversed. When ir = ^, the contrast be-
tween a and b is the greatest.

36. Third, a complex a + o is reproduced by a
concept furnished by a new act of perception similar
to a (26). Now, when a, on account of its combina-
tion with a, comes forward, it meets in consciousness
a concept opposed to it, p. Then a will Je, at the
same time^ driven forward and held back. In this
situation, it is the source of an unpleasant feeling
which may give rise to desire^ viz., for the object rep-
resented by a provided the opposition offered by p is
weaker than the force which a brings with it.

This is ordinarily the case; desires are excited by a
remembrance of their object. When the remembrance
is strengthened by several incidental concepts, the im-
pulses of desire are renewed. As often as the oppos-
ing concepts (i. e., concepts of the hindrances which
stand in the way of the longing) attain preponderance,
they produce a painful feeling of privation.

37. Fourth, a concept comes forward into con-
sciousness by its own strength (p^haps reproduced


CONCEPTS, SOURCE OP ALL MENTAL STATES. 29

according to the method described in 26), at the same
time being called forward by several helping concepts
(24). Since each of these helps has its own measure
of time in which it acts (according to the formula in
25), then the helps may strengthen one another against
a possible resistance, but they can not increase their
own velocity. The movement in advancing takes place
only with that velocity which is the greatest among
several concepts meeting together, but it is favored by
all the rest. This favoring is part of the process which
takes place in consciousness, but in no way is it any-
thing represented or conceived. Hence it can only be
called a feeling — without doubt a feeling of pleasure.

Here is the source of the cheerful disposition, es-
pecially of joy in successful activity. Here belong
various movements, instigated from without, which
do not accelerate but favor one another as in the case
of dancing and music. Of the same character is the
action according to several centering motives, and
such too is the insight based on understanding several
reasons which confirm one another.

38. In general, it may be observed that feelings
and desires have not their source in the process or act
of conception in general, but always in certain par-
ticular concepts. Hence there may be at the same
time many different feelings and desires, and these
may either agree or entirely disagree one with the
other.


80 FUNDAMENTAL PRINCIPLEa

CHAPTER V.

THE CO-OPERATIOK OF SEVERAL MASSES OF COK^CEPTS

OF UNEQUAL STBElifGTH.

/ 39. From the foregoing, it may, in a way, be per-
ceived that after a considerable number of concepts in
all kinds of combinations is present, every new act of
perception must work as an excitant by which some
will be arrested, others called forward and strength-
ened, progressing series interrupted or set again in mo-
tion, and this or that mental state occasioned^ These
manifestations must become more complex if, as is
usual, the concept received by the new act of percep-
tion contains in itself a multiplicity or variety, that at
the same time enables it to hold its place in several
combinations and series, and gives them a fresh im-
pulse which brings them into new relations of opposi-
tion or blending with one another. By this, the con-
cepts brought by the new act of perception are assimi-
lated to the older concepts in such a way as to suffer
somewhat after the first excitation has worked to the
extent of its power, because the old concepts — on
account of their combinations with one another — are
much stronger than the new individuals which are
added.

40. If, however, already very strong complexes and
blendings with many members have been formed,
then the same relation which existed between the old
and the new concepts may be repeated within between
the old concepts. Weaker concepts, which, according
to any kind of law, enter into consciousness, act as ex-
citants upon those masses before mentioned, and are


CO-OPERATION OP UNEQUAL CONCEPTS. 31

received and appropriated by them (apperceived) jnst
as in the case of a new sense-impression; hence the
inner perception is analogous to the outer. Self-con-
fifciousness is not the subject of discussion here, al-
though it is very often combined with the above.

41. In what has been said, lies that which experi-
ence confirms, viz., that the inner perception is never
a passive apprehension, but always (even against the
will) active. The apperceived concepts do not con-
tinue rising or sinking according to their own laws,
but they are interrupted in their movements by the
more powerful masses which drive back whatever is
opposed to them although it is inclined to rise ; and
in the case of that which is similar to them although
it is on the point of sinking, they take hold of it and
blend it with themselves.

42. It is worth the trouble to indicate how far this
difference among concepts — which we might be in-
clined to divide into dead and living — may be carried.

Let us recall the concepts on the statical thresh-
old (16). These are, indeed, in effect nothing less than
dead; for, in the condition of arrest in which they
stand, they are not able by their own effort to effect
anything whatever [toward rising into consciousness].
Nevertheless, through the combination in which they
stand, they may be reproduced, and, besides, they will
often be driven back in whole heaps and series by
those more powerful masses, as when the leaves of a
book are turned hurriedly.

43. If the apperceived concepts — or at least some of
them — are not on the statical threshold, then the ap-
perceiving concepts suffer some violence from them ;
also the latter may be subject to arrest from another


32 FUNDAMENTAL PRINCIPLES.

side, in which case the inner perception is interrupted ;
through this, uncertainty and irresolution may be ex-
plained, f

The apperceiving mass may be, in its turn apper-
ceived by another mass ; but for this to occur, there
must be present several concept masses of distinctly
different degrees of strength. Hence it is somewhat
seldom that the inner perception rises to this second
power [the apperception of apperception], and only in j^
the case of philosophical ideas is this series considered
as one which might be prolonged into infinity.


CHAPTER VI.


f


A GLANCE OVER THE CONNECTION BETWEEN BODY [

AND SOUL. ^


44. Up to the present chapter, concepts have been J
considered as present in the soul without any question '
concerning their origin or concerning foreign influ- f
ences. This has been done for simplicity. Qf ow, sense- \
perception in part and physiological influences in part,
together with concepts already present, must be con-
sidered.)

45. Even from experience it may be assumed that
each act of perception of any considerable strength re-
quires a short space of time for its creation ; but expe-
rience and metaphysics at the same time teach that
by delaying longer, the strength of the perception in l
no way increases in proportion to the time, but, the '


1


\


THE CONNECTION BETWEEN BODY AND SOUL. 33

stronger the perception already is^ so much the less does
it increase^ and from this it follows, by an easy calcula-
tion, that there is a final limit to its strength which
the attained concept very soon reaches, and above
which even by an infinite delay the same perception
will not be able to rise. This is the law of diminish-
ing susceptibility^ and the strength of the sense-im- j
pression is quite indifferent in regard to this limit. /
The weakest sense-perception may give the concept-
quite as much strength as the strongest, only it re-^
quires for this a somewhat longer time.

46. Every human concept really consists of infi-
nitely small elementary apprehensions very unlike one
another, which in the different moments of time dur-
ing the continuance of the act of perception were
created little by little. However, if during the con-
tinuance of the perception an arrest cai^sed by old
opposed concepts did not occur, these apprehensions
would be aU neceasarily blended into a single, undi-
vided total force. For this reason the total force will
be perceptibly less than the sum of all the elementary
apprehensions.

47. In early childhood a much larger supply of
simple sense-concepts is generated than in all the fol-
lowing years. Indeed, the work of the after-years con-
sists in making the greatest possible number of com-
binations from this supply. Although this suscepti-
bility is never entirely extinguished, yet, if there were
not a kind of renewal of it, the age of manhood would
be more indifferent and more unfruitful in sense-im-
pressions than it really is.

Though concepts on the statical threshold are
quite without influence for that which goes on in con-
6


34 FUNDAMENTAL PRINCIPLES.

Bciousness (16), they can not weaken the susceptibility
to new perceptions similar to themselves. Hence this
receptivity would be completely re-established if the
earlier ratio of arrest were not quite changed by the
new acts of perception, and a certain freedom to re-
produce themselves directly given to the older con-
cepts (26). When this happens, the receptivity de-
creases. The greater the number of old concepts of
the same kind present in consciousness — this means
usually the longer one has lived — so much greater is
the number of concepts which upon a given occasion
enter at the same time into consciousness ; and thus
with years the renewal of receptivity diminishes.

48. The above statements refer not only to con-
cepts of exactly the same kind, but to all whose de-
gree of opposition is a fraction. This can not be
developed here, since in the foregoing nothing exact
could be said of the difference between the degrees of
opposition.

/ 49. It is to be especially observed that the influ-
ence of the body upon psychical manifestations is
shown in three ways — its repression {DrucJk)^ its ex-
citation (Resonanz), and its co-operation in acfion.
Upon this are the following preliminary remarks :

50. Physiological repression arises when the accom-
panying conditions, which should correspond to the
changes in the soul, can not follow without hin-
drance ; hence the hindrance will also be felt as such
in the soul because the conditions of each affect
both. This repression is often merely a retarding
force, to suit which the mental movements must pro-
ceed more slowly, as is the case with slow minds that
consume time and are stupefied by quick changes.


1


i


\


1


THE CONNECTION BETWEEN BODY AND SOUL. 35

Often, however, repression is similar to an arresting
force, and as such it can be mathematically calculated,
as when it increases the number of opposed concepts
by one or more. By it all active concepts may be
driven to the statical threshold ; and here we have the
explanation of sleep. In this case it would be a deep
and complete sleep.

51. Physiological excitation (Resonanz) arises when
the accompanying bodily conditions change more
quickly or become stronger than would be necessary to
merely cause no hindrance to the mental movements.
Then the soul, again in response to the body, will act
more quickly and more vigorously. The soul must
also share the resulting relaxations of the body, as in
intoxication and passion.

52. The co-operation of the soul and body in ex-
ternal action can not originally proceed from the soul,
for the will does not know in the least what influence
it really exerts upon the nerves and muscles. But in
the child exists an organic necessity for movement* .
At first the soul accompanies this and the active move- /
ments arising from it, with its feelings. The f eelitgs,
however, become connected with perceptions of the
members moved. If, in the result, the concept arising
from such a perception acts as a means of arousing
desire (16), then the feeling connected with it arises,
and to this latter as accompanying bodily condition
belong all those phenomena in the nerves and muscles
by which organic movement is actually determined or
defined. Thus it happens that concepts come to ap-
pear as a source of mechanical forces in the outer
world.


PAET SECOND.

EMPIRICAL PSYCHOLOGY.

FIRST DIVISION : (I) PSYCHOLOGICAL PHENOMENA

ACCORDING TO THE HYPOTHESIS OF

MENTAL FACULTIES.


CHAPTER L

A SURVEY OF THE ASSUMED MEHTTAL FACULTIES.

53. From the foregoing fundamental principles
many known facts are to be explained, while many
others still remain obscure. It is not necessary at
present to define this difference more closely. The
question how far the proposed explanations reach may
silently accompany the following exposition until the
facts are examined, for then the thread of investiga-
tion may be more ^conveniently taken up ; but the
commonly accepted mental faculties need now a criti-
cal elucidation which must advance gradually with the
observation of the facts themselves.

Combined with the effort to bring together a mani-
fold is naturally implied a separation of that which
manifestly does not admit of union, since it is either
excluded or else makes its appearance only under un-
usual circumstances. Inasmuch as the teachers of
psychology have undertaken to show the human mind


THE ASSUMED MENTAL FACULTIES. 87

in the form of a picture, they have at first omitted
those features which constitute the distinguishing
characteristics of the individual, as well as the chang-
ing conditions of human nature. We reserve these
for the second division, and keep for the first only that
which is considered an original and essential differ-
entiation of the human mind into various functions.

54. Eight here, however, on account of the peculiar
indeflniteness of psychological facts, it is impossible
to draw a dividing line. The man presented by the
teachers of psychology is the social, the educated man,
who stands on the summit of the whole past history
of his race. In this man the various functions are
found apparently in combination, and under the name
of mental faculties are regarded as a universal inher-
itance of mankind. Facts are silent as to whether
this variety be originally found together or whether
it be a manifold. The savage and the infant give
us much less opportunity to admire the compass of
their minds than the nobler among the brutes. Here
psychologists help themselves by the evasive assump-
tion that all higher mental activity is potentially pres-
ent, not in brutes, but in children and savages, and
may be regarded as undeveloped talents or as psychic
faculties ; and the most insignificant resemblances be-
tween the demeanor of the savage or the child, and
that of the educated man, are valued by them as per-
ceptible traces of awakening intelligence, awakening
reasoning, or awakening moral sense. But the ob-
servation must not escape us that in the following
discussion a special and accurately limited condition
of man will be described, according to the total im-
pression which those men whom we call by the vague


88 EMPIRICAL PSYCHOLOGY.

expression ^^ educated'^ have made upon us. Oreat
uncertainty in regard to this total impression can not
be avoided. There are no universal facts. Purely
psychological facts lie in the region of transitory con-
ditions of individuals, and are immeasurably far re-
moved from the height of the general notion of man
in general.

55. The comparison just mentioned between man
and the lower animals occasions the first division into
what is considered the original manifold of mental
faculties, ^n so far as man rises perceptibly above the
brute, higher faculties, and, in so far as he is similar
to the brute, lower faculties are attributed to himJ
This classification crosses the one already mentioned,
viz., presentation, feeling, and desire, each one of these
being divided into an upper and a lower faculty.

As an aid in the survey of empirical psychology
the two classifications are equally useful, and we shall
use both.

56. Since in psychology one activity passes gradu-
ally into another, we shall not begin at the very equiv-
ocal line of demarkation between the two, but shall at
first place the extremes opposite each other. For the
lowest mental state, sensuousness ; for the highest, rea-
son will be assumed. The two are similar in that they
both appear in the several members of the second
division. We speak of a sensuous representation ( Vor^
steUen)y a sensuous feeling, and a sensuous desire ; we
speak also of a theoretic and a practical reason — i. e.,
of a conceptive reason and of a willing or regulative
reason ; but we are careful not to speak of a feeling
reason, because we think of reason never as passive,
but always as active, since it is to be regarded as


THE ASSUMED MENTAL FACULTIES. 39

the highest faculty of man. The signification of the
expression used here is, according to the common usages
of speech, after a sort intelligible to every one. This
is not the right place for nicer distinctions, as they
themselves become the points in dispute.

57. If we go from the two extremes toward the
middle, first of all, in the faculty of representation, in i
the region near sensuousness, we find imagination and ^
memory ; in the region of reason, we find understand**
ing and power of judgment Secondly, in the Jaculty
ofjeeling, over against the sensuous feelings of pleasure
and pain, we find the aesthetic and moral feelings, and
the emotions. Thirdly, in the faculty^qf desire oppo-
site the sensuous appetites an<fliistincts, we find, on
the one hand, intelligent and rational willing ; on the ,
other, the passions.

58. Before we lay out this rough sketch of the
psychological field more in detail, we must observe the
following : {a.) These classifications are mere empirical .
groupings without any indication of completeness,
without any fixed, definite, and authorized division^;
hence, it will be no matter for wonder if, upon a closer
investigation of the facts, subjects are discovered which
either belong in more than one of the departments
already made, or which can not be classified in any
one of them whatever. Here are a few examples :

In Wolff's exposition, the faculty of feeling is not
distinguished from the faculty of desire, nor, conse-
quently, the emotions from the passions. We shall
show hereafter that the emotions do not belong in the
class of feelings, much less in the other classes ; hence
they do not belong in any one of the classes made,
although feelings accompany the emotions, as well as


40 EMPIRICAL PSYCHOLOGY.

emotions the passions. Morals and aBsthetics are,
according to experience, felt, cognized, and desired,
notwithstanding which we are not inclined, as perhaps
in the case of sensuousness, to allow them to extend
through all three principal faculties, as if moral feel-
ings, cognitions, and volitions existed co-ordinate,
equally independent of one another ; but it is a dis-
puted question whether morality has its origin in a
command, in a cognition, or in a feeling. If we ask
ej^perience, the answer is undeniably this : morality is
n^fbst often felt, more seldom rightly perceived, and
n^ost seldom willed In this, however, there is nothing
evident excepting insecurity and fluctuation on the
part of empirical psychology, and on the part of
every investigation which has no better foundation.
-^ (6.) The classifications made can be used only in the

. preliminary examination, but in no way can they be

^ used as an exact description of that which takes place

in man, for they separate that which in reality is con-

i stantly united./ Whether there can be a presentation
in consciousness without feeling and desire, experience
does not indicate ; these movements of the emotional
nature pass over incessantly one into another. It is
evident that to every feeling, something felt, and to
every desire something desired, belong, but whether
in every case each must be a representation in con-
sciousness, experience neither denies nor affirms, for a
representation may be so vague as to be impossible of
recognition. The affirmative answer has, however, the
advantage, because in most cases it is manifestly the
right one. The emotions (Affecten) do not belong in
a class with the passions, yet we can by no means think
of an entirely emotionless passion. Whoever describes


I

I


THE ASSUMED MENTAL PACULTIEa 41

the history of only a single passionate outbreak must
regard it, with all the emotions aroused by it, as a
single transaction or occurrence. The continuous flow
of this occurrence does not admit of its being pre-
sented as a mosaic painting, the individual bits of
which might be collected from the several divisions of
empirical psychology.

(c.) That the classified mental faculties exist not
only side by side with one another, but in relation to
one another, empirical psychology acknowledges, in
the fact that it employs them throughout in the
elaboration of one and the same material. This
material is supposed to be received by the sensory
[Sinnlichkeit = sensuous phase of the mind], and
this gives rise to the question relating to the causal
action of the outer world upon man. If this should
be denied, then sensuousness must be regarded rather
as a creative faculty. Memory, according to it,
preserves this same material, but, unmodified by this
preservation, fantasy makes it into new forms ; and
again unmodified by these new forms, understanding
constructs notions from it ; also the faculty of desire
transformsr it into an object of desire or aversion;
and again fantasies, ideas, desires, etc., are to be pre-
served by the memory and upon occasion replaced
vrith fresh material, and again subjected to the elabo-
rating faculties, or, in case this appears inconceivable,
is it perhaps only a part of the material which mem-
ory holds fast in its storehouse, and to fantasy will be
surrendered another part, still another to the under-
standing, still another to the faculty of desire, etc. ?
Concerning this question we ask in vain of experience.
So much the more necessary is it that we perceive


42 EMPIRICAL PSYCHOLOGY.

and acknowledge the indispensable, metaphysical pre-
supposition of some kind of a manifold and compli-
cated causal relation of the different faculties to one
another, as well as to the alleged material which they
are to elaborate in common.

59. By the admission of the causal relation just
mentioned, psychology has hitherto fixed the order
of presenting its doctrines. Sensuous presentations
are first treated according to the statement, ^^ Nihil est
in intellectu, quod non prius f uerit in sensu," and for
the others an order is given which makes them proceed
gradually from the former. The gradual development
of individual man and of peoples, likewise the differ-
ence between the brute and man, furnish a guide here.

Experience shows that we meet with the lower
sensuous phase much more frequently than with any
other phases of the mental life, in reality, however, the
latter never without the former; indeed, this is so
much the case that we have great trouble in giving
even a tolerably definite meaning to the expression
" pure reason." Nevertheless, there are two important
psychological facts which we can not understand oth-
erwise than as incompatible with the causal relation
between sense and reason, viz., pure self-consciousness
and moral volition. What we, in the current of time,
observe always as shifting accidents, that must we dis-
tinguish from our true Ego ; we know the latter appears
to us, independent even of the inner sense, by a so-called
pure apperception. In its general acceptation, apper-
ception signifies the knowing of that which takes place
in our own minds ; and a volition shows itself more
clearly as genuinely moral when it scorns consideration
of advantages and disadvantages as they lie before one


THE ASSUMED MENTAL FACULTIES. 43

in experience^ in which case the mind rises above sen-
suous f eelingd and directly opposes them. How is this
elevation possible ? The answer, through free-will, is
one quite commensurable to the inner perception
which is generally conceded in such cases. Hence a
so-called transcendental freedom, independent of all
causality, will be assumed, an assumption parallel with
that of pure apperception. Now, if we attribute both
to reason, as to that which in man stands the farthest
removed from sensuousness, then in this signification
reason is not so much something higher than sen<^
suotHtness, but rather something quite different from
it ; and sensuousness can no longer be considered a
basid, nor even as a condition of all the rest.

Upon this supposition, psychology in the arrange-
ment of its material ought not to present a progress
from sensuousness to reason, but ought to present two
series of observations originally parallel, of which
reason and sensuousness constitute the beginning
points ; the meeting-place of the two, however, in its
manifold modifications, would be the highest region,
and, as it were, the goal. Empirical psychology can
oppose nothing to this demand. In my Introduction
to Philosophy (103 and 107), however, it is already
shown that the idea of the Ego and of transoendental
freedom are contradictory. Hence, also, the idea just
advanced, of a faculty of reason, is not consistent with
truth. The common idea of sensuousness, however,
especially when considered as the source of evil, is not
more correct. The greatest evil is quite as little
purely sensuous as sensuousness is pure evil.

Note. — When in common life we hear it said that one man
has more understanding, another more memory, a third more


44 EMPIRICAL PSYCHOLOGY.

imagination, a fourth a sounder judgment, and yet, npon the
whole, no greater nor less degree of mental health can be
attributed to the one than to the other, then the conjecture
arises that all this distinction of the so-called mental f^ulties
has more to do with the products of mental activity than with
the internal nature of the latter, whether this nature be sound
or diseased.

Of the mental diseases, the four principal kinds or species
empirically known — idiocy, dementia, madness, hallucination —
will be more closely defined hereafter. It may be useful, how-
ever, to construct here the notion of mental soundness from
the opposites of these terms, namely, susceptibility to reaction,
concentration, repose, and mutual adjustment of all concepts
through one another, since a lack in any one of these four
requisites indicates an approach to mental disease much more
directly than a defect in imagination, memory, or understand-
ing, etc. The requisites mentioned, however, refer plainly
enough to the previously mentioned theory of concepts as
forces whose readiness to move upon the least change in their
strength or combination is quite as perceptible as their ten-
dency to remain at rest in equilibrium. By this theory, the
collection of concepts of the same kind and of those already
in combination, quite as much as every kind of possible recip-
rocal influence, are completely secured by the laws of reproduc-
tion, provided that no foreign influence on the part of the body
disturbs the mental state. Nevertheless, the relation of the
body to the mind can not be more closely estimated without
mentioning some principles of the philosophy of nature, which,
at this point, would be premature. To begin with, the first of the
above-mentioned classifications (55) must be, if not freed from
its iudefiniteness, at least recognized in its many significations.


/


LOWER AND HIGHER FACULTIES. 45


CHAPTER IL

THE BOUNDABT-LINB BETWEEN THE LOWEB AND

HIGHEE FACULTIES.

60. In the representative faculties, the line of de-
markation between the lower and higher runs between
the imagination and the understanding ; in the faculty
of feeling, between sensuous pleasure and SBsthetic
feeling ; in the faculty of desire, between the passions
and deliberate choice. On account of the uncertainty
in the definition of these faculties the line can not be
drawn with precision ; psychologists, too, admit that
it can not be sharply defined ; at least, so says Wolff,
in his Empirical l^sychology (233). This is so much
the more evident because an analogon rationis is at-
tributed even to the brutes, while no one concedes to
them imagination similar to that possessed by human
beings. The brutes would have, according to this, a
share in the higher faculty of representation, and, on
the contrary, would lack in something that is to be
attributed to the lower faculty. The view held in
regard to the faculty of feeling seems to be some-
what mo.re satisfactory, as no one expects sesthetic
judgment from brutes. Also in uncivilized men the
8Bsthetic faculty seems to be wanting, and appears to
be a higher degree of culture rather than a faculty
peculiar to human nature. Finally, in regard to the
passions we shall find some, and very wicked ones they
are, which with the noblest have their origin in the
highest regions of human thought, so that it is impos^
sible to reckon them among the lower faculties, or


46 EMPIRICAL PSYCHOLOGY.

among those attributed to brutes. The subject must
then be treated in some other way.

61. To attribute a lower faculty to the brutes in
comparison with man, means to regard the mental
power of the former either as defective, arrested, or
suppressed.

Granted, first, that it is defective in itself in com-
parison with the more complete, wider-reaching, power
of man ; for this there are very significant reasons in
the lack of hands and speech. Because of this, the
opportunity of the brute to get concepts from objects
is very much more limited than that of man, and while
the understanding and intelligence of man are most
closely related to speech, the brute at the most can at-
tain to the understanding of only a few signs. The
child, however, in the lowest grades of its education is
in the same state at first ; its knowledge of the use of
its hands is quite as limited as of the use of speech.

Granted, secondly, that this mental power is ar-
rested—as it originally might have been greater — then
it is also arrested in the brutes, and, indeed, in a two-
fold manner ; for first, with them, some disturbing ele-
ment enters into their circle of concepts which does
not oppress man so much. In the case of brutes with
mechanical instincts, it is quite clear that this disturb-
ing element is an organic excitation which they obey ;
in the case of others, premature puberty comes into
consideration. Besides this, however, on account of
the comparative smallness of the brain of the brute,
the physical organism probably may not yield to men-
tal excitations as in the case of man.

Granted, thirdly, that this mental power or faculty
be considered suppressed, this may be a faculty sub-


t


(


LOWER AND HIGHER FACULTIES. 47

jected to service, or one entirely subdued ; in that case
this designation is not generally appropriate to brutes,
but rather to the lower faculty of man so far as he
controls himself. But, again, the control is so very
dependent upon the degree of education already ob-
tained, that it fluctuates, according to the kind, be-
tween cunning and morality, according to the degree
to which the uncultured or sick man is proportion-
ately incapable of exercising judgment. Finally, if
exceptions are of any value, among trained animals
there are so many cases of self-control acquired by
practice that a distinction in the mental faculty which
naturally would hold good in all cases can not be
shown; we must rather fall back upon distinctions

I which are based upon favoring or hindering the

growth of faculties or upon the training acquired.
Consequently, we are neither necessitated nor author-

^ ized to regard the human mind as an aggregate of two

specifically different faculties, fitted as it were into
each other. But it appears that the mental excita-
bility, according to the difference in the combinations
and obstructions of concepts, is expressed in an in-
finite variety of forms. All these observations are

'^ independent of metaphysics. The question, however,

whether if once metaphysics be called in, these ob-
servations would be refuted or established, is not to be
discussed here.

To the man who rises to a higher degree of educa-
tion we shall attribute empirically, not merely a sim-
ple, but a versatile capacity to apportion his attention,
as it were, to many different acts — now intentionally
to direct his thoughts, now to change the tone of his
feelings, and again to prescribe for himself at one time


*s


i

i


48 EMPIRICAL PSYCHOLOGY.

intermission or, at another, regular effort. It is known
that among brutes little or no trace of this appears. In
regard to the human faculty, attention has already been
drawn to this point in the first part of this work (40-
43). In this sense we shall recognize a higher and a
lower faculty.

62. Between the lower and higher faculties of rep-
resentation, Wolff places attention (however, only the
voluntary, while the involuntary is perhaps even more
important). According to him, the higher faculty
begins with the distinguishing of notions whose char-
acteristics the attention analyzes. This definition is,
indeed, more limited in its compass than is indicated
by ordinary language in the words, understanding and
intelligent^ yet it coincides in part with this distinction
in a remarkable manner. Inasmuch as attention makes
a notion distinct it brings forward in succession with
equal emphasis the partial concepts existing in it. It
levels or evens, as it were, the notion whose character-
istics were heretofore projected unevenly and acci-
dentally. Thus it is according to the nature of the
thing thought, all of whose properties are independent
of the differences which individual thinking brings
into it, that more attention is exercised upon this than
upon that characteristic. Also, it accords with the ex-
planation (given elsewhere) of the understanding,
which accounts for the meaning that the ordinary
custom of speech associates with that word, viz., un-
derstanding is the faculty by which our thoughts are
united according to the nature of the object thought.
Sufficient examples of disproportionate individual
thinking are to be found in common life. Such is
the fragmentary knowledge of the routinist compared


LOWER AND HIGHER FACULTIES. 49

with the symmetrically elahorated knowledge of the
true scholar. The latter is without douht a work of
progressive attention.

63. In regard to the boundaries between the lower
and the higher faculties, Kant was guided by the fun-
damental thought: "The union of a manifold can
never occur through the senses. . . . All combination
is a spontaneous [or self-active] act of the power of
representation, which, in order to be distinguished from
sensuousness, must be called understanding" {Ver-
stand) (see Krit. d. R. F., § 15). This very plausible
assertion is, from its nature, speculative. (It occasions
the higher Skepsis, which is described in my Intro-
duction to Philosophy, 22-29 ; also, 98-103.)

In strongly emphasizing this thought Kant has
rendered a great service to speculative philosophy, but
he has only begun the most important investigations
growing out of the above; in no wise has he com-
pleted them, and, while they necessarily must always
hold their place as the foundation of general meta-
physics, everything like this Kantian assertion must
disappear completely from the dogmas of psychology,
for the end of investigation is exactly' the opposite of
that which its beginning seems to indicate. The com-
bination of a manifold (of concepts) does not take place
by any process that could be called an act — at least, a
spontaneous act ; it is the immediate result of unity
in the soul. Further, the combination of the mani-
fold depends upon the manner in which the sense-
impressions meet, and this is determined by external
conditions, as already intimated in my Introduction
to Philosophy. Finally, Kant's assertion can not
in any way be supported by empirical psychology.


60 EMPIRICALi PSYCHOLOGY.

When thinking intensely we feel ourselves active, and
then are sometimes conscious of intentionally group-
ing notions according to their characteristics, hut,
where we originally unite the manifold of a given in-
tuition (Anschauung) into the notion of an object, we
find ourselves obliged to take the object as it presents
itself; we are limited to this, and know nothing of
acts of spontaneity.

While activity is neither an attribute of the under-
standing nor the source of combinations, the under-
standing has, on the contrary, its seat in a certain kind
of combination ; indeed, the whole higher faculty en-
croaches upon sensuousness, memory, and imagination
(which are usually reckoned among the lower facul-
ties), so that in educated men it is manifested in such
elaborate combinations as are not to be expected in
savages and brutes. Here, first of all, belongs the ex-
tension of the concepts of space and time, which ex-
tend far beyond the sphere of sensuous impressions,
even into infinity. By this we especially recognize the
fact that power to look resolutely into the past and to
anticipate a somewhat remote future is wanting in the
brute and the savage.

Furthermore, there is a great difference between
the mere meeting together of the characteristics of an
object and the distinguishing of these characteristics
from the substance to which they are attributed ; like-
wise between the mere apprehension of a limited series
of occurrences and the deduction of the same from
causes and forces. The second power, but not the
first, belongs to the higher faculties-

This remark, although occasioned by Kant's theory,
belongs to the following :


LOWER AND HIGHER FACULTIES. 51

64. Little as the logical polish of ideas can serve
for the measure of the intelligence (we have but to
think of the understanding of women, artists, states-
men, merchants) it constitutes, nevertheless, a part of
the difference which we seek. The savage and the
brute also have, without doubt, total impressions of
objects that resemble one another, complex concepts
of trees, houses, men, etc., but in this case the contrast
between the abstract and the concrete is wanting. The
general notion has not been separated from its exam-
ples. This separation belongs to the higher faculty,
as does also the difference between object and space,
event and time, as likewise the difference between our
Ego and our changing conditions; while one brute cer-
tainly distinguishes itself from the other with which it
contends for food.

65. Esthetic and moral apprehensions in savages
are rare and limited ; in brutes they seem to be en-
tirely wanting. Choice is much less deliberate, and
upon the whole appears not to be so persistent as in
the case of cultured men. The brute has here, side
by side with the lack of higher powers, a positive
peculiarity, viz., a visibly greater dependence upon
instinct, which is in part periodical, and stands in the
closest connection with the physical organism.

66. All that has been cited gives no conclusive
series of fixed differences either between humanity
and animality, or between the higher and lower facul-
ties. But we have no reason to demand causes and
fixed differences where we meet transient ones suffi-
cient to explain satisfactorily how one could have
come to ask about the difference which is everywhere
assumed to be one and the same. However, if it


52 EMPIRICAL PSYCHOLOGY.

should be thought that the brute is brought too near
to man, the following remarks are of weight on the
opposite side :

We know very little of brutes. We distinguish
their different classes much too little. In the training
of brutes, from which we learn to recognize a percep-
tible versatility of talent, we find in most cases, at the
foundation, that quite as false a notion exists as in the
case of the defective education of the child. The brute
can receive no training save that which is according
to the inner laws of its nature; and, even when we
intend to use the brute only as a brute, the greatest
part of the applied force, even if it was necessary for
the attainment of the aim, is without doubt coarse
abuse. Whoever has observed young brutes, must have
remarked how often they strive to use their fore-feet as
hands — a vain effort to overcome the limitations of
their organization. To man, however, instead of in-
solence, a little more gratitude for the advantage of
education, in the possession of which he especially re-
joices, is to be recommended. Besides, while manifold
differences in the mental activity of different brutes re-
main a secret to us, the differences between men are
much more plainly to be perceived. To the question
whether concepts can completely manifest themselves
as forces in man, or whether here, perhaps, something
of the limitation observed in the brutes remains, the
following may furnish a general answer : The hands
of man have been obliged to furnish themselves with
innumerable tools. Language has needed the print-
ing-press. Geniuses reveal the great extent to which
free mental activity is lacking in an ordinary man, and
idiots show how closely in the human form the bands


FACULTY OF REPRESENTATION^. 53

which the physical places upon the mental life may
be tied. Finally, self-control, a work of higher edu-
cation, suffers in every failure in training and educa-
tion. Hence it is sufficiently clear that the human ac-
tivity, as hitherto known, is not to be regarded as a
complete, conclusive exposition of what concepts act-
ing as forces, may be able to accomplish, and the con-
jecture quickly rises that in the other heavenly bodies,
under other conditions of gravitation, atmosphere,
illumination, etc., may be found physical organizations
furnishing much better opportunity for the develop-
ment of the mental activity.


CHAPTER III.

FACULTY OF KEPRESENTATION.

67. The following conspectus shows those aspects
which are considered to belong to the faculty of repre-
sentation :

r . ( (aa) According to matter.

A. Production ) (^) ^^ expenence : -j ^jj^ According to form.

( (2) of ideas which transcend experience.

B, Reproduction:

According to this outline, we shall examine the
faculty of representation, and in doing so shall con-
sider the usual classification of the assumed mental
faculties.


/


54 EMPIRICAL PSYCHOLOGY.

A. T7ie Outer Sense.

68. The production of the material of experience
is principally the work of the outer senses, of touch,
taste, smell, hearing, and seeing.

What is called the material and form of experience is dis-
cussed in my Introduction to Philosophy (25-29).

The five senses mentioned are enumerated accord-
ing to the organs of sense. \There is a larger number
of the different classes of sensuous impressions. More-
over, the organs themselves contain sensitive surfaces,
hence innumerable sensitive places ; with the remark-
able difference that in the case of some senses only a
total sensation arises, while in the case of others every
single spot of the sensitive surface furnishes a separate
presentation. \

69. The feeling of pressure, and that of warmth
and cold, has its organ extended over the whole sur-
face of the body. Pressure is perceived in very many
different ways, according as it is uniform or not uni-
form in the different parts of the sensitive surface and
in the successive moments of time during the con-
tinuance of the sensation. Thus we distinguish sharp,
smooth, rough, elastic, etc. Warmth and cold are
perhaps perceived more in the inner parts of the
nerves, pressure more in the outer.

The sense of touch is originally feeling, but this
feeling has a special application by which it helps to
determine the form of the experience. At the begin-
ning we may remark that in touching, several fingers,
several parts of the tongue — in a word, several por-
tions of the sensitive surface — ^are brought into play.

70. Taste furnishes very many distinguishable sen-


THE OUTER SENSE. 55

sations, which, however, coming simultaneously, inter-
fere with one another. The tongue is, at the same
time, an excellent organ of feeling of every kind.
It receives different kinds of nerves.

71. Odors, like tones, are obtrusive; but they do
not, like the latter, admit of being distinguished into
separate elements. The apparatus of smell is less un-
der our control than the organs of the other senses ;
even when in our power, it suffers much in its func-
tions. Odors may cause death, and may propagate
infectious diseases. They are mostly pleasant or un-
pleasant, seldom indifferent, but none can be long per-
ceived ; each quickly blunts or overtaxes the organ.
In comparison with the savage, and with many brutes,
the susceptibility of the civilized man in regard to this
sense seems to be blunted.

72. Of all the senses, hearing is the richest in the
variety of sensations which it furnishes. Musical tones
are distinguishable, even coming simultaneously. The
distinguishing of vowels is independent of them, and
in addition to these two classes comes the perception
of consonants which appear to belong to the class of
complex noises. The unrhythmical and yet intelligible
speech of man is a noteworthy phenomenon; those
who from birth are quite unmusical yet hear very well
what is said to them.

Probably every musical tone has its own peculiar place in
the organ. Unless this is so, it is not easy to comprehend how
simultaneous tones remain separate, and why they do not pro-
duce a third mixed tone which would destroy the aesthetic ap-
prehension of the interval.

73. Sight distinguishes colors, and, independently
of these, the degrees of light and shade. Every spot


56 EMPIRICAL PSYCHOLOGY.

of the retina of the eye sees individually, and furnishes
a separate sensation. In many eyes which otherwise
posL keen sight, the color-sense is in part wanting,
while in others it fails entirely. The greatest mo-
bility, the capacity to adapt itself to near and remote
objects, to strong and faint light, finally to cover itself
voluntarily with the eyelid, are peculiarities of this
organ.

It will be shown hereafter that mobility aids most especially
the apprehension of the space forms. This apprehension is by
no means so original as it appears; it is learned and passes
through very different steps of development.

Note. — Every sense has its degree of acuteness and delicacy,
its extent and duration. Up to this time, everything that has
been said refers only to sensations, not to perceptions, which
latter presuppose the concept of an object opposed to other ob-
jects and to the subject, and hence bring into play at the same
time most of the so-called mental faculties (by no means merely
those of sense). He who forgets himself and becomes absorbed
in sensuous contemplation (AnseJhauung), as it is called, is only
in a condition for the reception of mere sensations.

B. The Inner Sense.

74. No perceptible organ of the body indicates an
inner sense ; but, from analogy with the outer senses,
it has been assumed, in order that we may attribute to
it the apprehension of our own conditions in their
actual succession. The inner sense, so far as it is held
to be a special component of our mental constitution
(the explanation is to be found in The Principles
above discussed, see sections 40-43), is consequently
entirely an invention of psychologists, and indeed a
somewhat defective invention ; for they know neither
how to reckon definitely the classes of concepts which


I ' THE INNER SENSE. 67

it furnishes, nor how to point out any semblance of
a law, according to which the extreme irregularity of
its working might be explained. The outer senses
perform their functions, if they can, and, in case
they fail to do so, we know the reason for the failure ;
but the inner sense, at times watching sharply every-
thing that occurs in the innermost recesses of the
heart (also, indeed, inventing much there) is at other
times so dull and so idle that, although we may be
I conscious of having had a thought, we feel ourselves

! incapable of finding it again. The inner sense is not

able long to endure the strain of intentional effort;
that which we wish to see accurately in ourselves
becomes obscured during the observation. Besides,
wonderful as is that material of experience which the
I inner sense furnishes us, just as wonderful does the

' mental activity ascribed to it sometimes appear. Not

seldom the self-apprehension seizes upon the most
violent emotions and tames them. Sometimes in the
midst of the most intense labor in the outer world, a
I man restrains himself notwithstanding the pressure, in

i order to complete his work rightly. The actor, who

represents a cunning deceiver, is conscious, first, of his
} own person; second, of the character of his r6le;

third, of the art of simulation and of the appearance
assumed, which are attributed to this character as the
! means of the deception. Indeed, the inner sense rises

in a scale of higher and higher powers ad infinitum;
e. g., we may observe our self-observation and again an
observation of that, and so on forever.

Note. — In the controversy between the Cartesians, on the
one hand, and Locke and Leibnitz on the other, the disputed
question is, whether there are concepts without consciousness.


^ I


58 EMPIBICAL PSYCHOLOGY.

The simplest and shortest answer is, that if all representation
had to be again represented, then the inner sense would be
obliged to rise in an unbroken series to an infinitely higher
power. In the Leibnitz theory, however, the assertion of uncon-
scious concepts is made to depend on the metaphysical idea of
substance.

^ C. Forms of Series.

75. Space and time have been explained by a very
incorrect theory, inasmuch as they are regarded as
existing forms of sensnousness which are individual,
single, and independent of one another. Space is the
only completely elaborated series-form. It is produced
especially in connection with sensations of sight and
feeling; it is, however, not by any mesins limited to
these sensations, but quite a similar kind of produc-
tion, either complete or within certain limits, occurs
from many other causes, either clearly or vaguely
thought ; sometimes with characteristic accompanying
conditions which cause other series connected with it
to be distinguished from space. Such a series is time.
Another is number. Another is degree or intensive

(magnitude.

Less distinct, but nevertheless indispensable, is the
eries produced by the putting together of sensations

/ of the same kind according to the possibility of tran-

vsition one to another^) Prom this we have the tone
series (to be distinguished from the scale, which de-
pends upon aesthetic conditions). Similar to it would
be the color surface between the three primary colors,
yellow, red, and blue, if we knew certainly whether all

• the colors were connected with the grades of difference
between light and dark (perhaps we should say black
and white), and could be traced back to those three ;


^e


FORMS OP SERIES. 69

or whether the color realm does not rather require a
third dimension.

Note. — ^In the difference between light and dark, as well as
in the tone-series in the contrast between high and low tones, a
concept of succession in the ascent is to be perceived, which dis-
closes the fact that the process of arching and pointing (see § 26)
moves more slowly in the lower and darker, and, on the con-
trary, more quickly in the higher (tones) and lighter (shades). In
music, the bass voice generally moves more slowly than the treble.

Still less distinct, but quite as indispensable, is the series in
every logical arrangement where the varieties are opposed to
one another, and are, at the same time, united in the species.
Not merely the expressions here are space symbols. In the
thing itself there is something through which such expressions
as the circumference or sphere of a notion is called up, although
these words, so far as they are borrowed from space which is
the elaborated series, are only metaphysical.

Quit« as necessary in metaphysics is the theoiy of intelligible
space, which, with perfect clearness, is construed according to all
three dimensions, merely for the convenience of metaphysical
thought without mingling anything sensuous.

76. The concept of a series is shown most compre-
hensively in the notions of integral positive numbers.
But these notions, gradually created and extended
(savages and children have not a little trouble with
them), do not suffice in themselves to express all vari-
eties of progression increasing or decreasing, the pro-
duction of the series in numbers becomes constantly
more artificial and complicated : e. g., between whole
numbers continuous transitions are made by means of
fractions ; also a backward prolongation of the series
may be made by means of minus numbers. Again,
the ideas of surd roots, logarithms, and exponential
quantities, are developed ; finally, we have the count-
less functions resulting from integration, at the foun-


V


60 EMPIRICAL PSYCHOLOGY,

dation of which lies a differential — i. e., the idea of a
certain ratio of increase or decrease.

Briefly, for psychologists, arithmetic furnishes the
remarkable example of a concept of a series constantly
becoming more abstracted, which may be traversed in
both directions and by infinitely minute steps.

77. Now, by analogy with this undeniable fact, one
is expected to find it at least probable that also the
geometrical concept of space in which are infinite
quantity and divisibility is a result of a process of pro-
ducing or drawing out {Productmi) that has gradually
become stationary, but which is in no wise something
original in man. This is so much the more true, in-
asmuch as the infinite plasticity of space notions is
shown continually in that which geometry, in its con-
tinued onward progress, makes out of it. The princi-
ples for the explanation of this production of space
will be found in the third division of this book. Here
we may especially call attention to the notion of a
middle between two opposed sides. This is charac-
teristic of every series. A number lies between num-
bers, a place in space between other places, a point of
time between two points of time, a degree between a
higher and lower degree, a tone between other tones,
etc.

[ further, we may remark the psychological fact
xhat we habitually carry with us a certain standard of
measurement, a unit of distance, be it full or empty, in
space, in time, and in the tone-series, and also some-
thing of the same kind in dealing with intensive
magnitudes, as is noticeable in the case of measuring
by the eye, and of beating time.


LOGICAL FORMS. 61

D, Logical Forms.

78. Philosophers have a bad habit of leaning heav-
ily on logic in difficult cases — not for the purpose of
following its prescriptions with special care — which
would be very laudable — but to imitate or copy its
procedure, which they have observed in its scientific
development. Warning examples of this are Kant's
categories, put together according to a very defective
table of logical judgments, and also his categorical
imperative which contains nothing but a reminiscence
of the logical relation of the general to the particu-
lar. Therefore, in psychology, one has found it un-
necessary to say anything upon notions, judgments,
and syllogisms, except that to each logical operation
there is doubtless a corresponding faculty in the soul ;
and because logic in order to proceed from the simple
to the complex, treats first of notions, then of judg-
ments, and finally of syllogisms, the psychologist has
unhesitatingly treated the so-called faculties of these
things, viz., understanding, judgment, and reason, in
the same order. But several circumstances make the
fact doubtful whether notions, in the strict logical
sense, really occur in human thinking, and it is a
question whether they are not rather logical ideals
which our actual thinking strives more and more to
approach. In the third division of this book this
question will be answered affirmatively ; besides this,
it will be shown that it is through judgments that no-
tions more and more nearly approach the ideal ; hence,
in a certain sense, judgments precede notions. It will
finally bo made clear that from this influence of
judgments very important results, especially for meta-
physical notions, will be found.


62 EMPIRICAL PSYCHOLOGY.

79. For information regarding those ideas which
we call notions we may inquire of dictionaries and
grammars. For each word, the dictionaries show us a
thought which fluctuates between a mass of different
characteristics that are sometimes hardly reconcilable.
The grammars reveal the fact that, wherever strictly
logical demands do not require it, instead of general
notions (as man, tree), we generally think but one in-
dividual, and indicate it by the indefinite article (a
man, a tree). Hence, it is no wonder that most men,
when they are asked what they mean by this or that
word, have not a good verbal definition ready. Hence,
too, men do not present each general notion according
to its content (as ought to be the case in logic) and
then proceed to regard the application to the extent
as something accidental to the notion itself. On the
contrary, they indicate certain total impressions of
many similar objects by means of words, and the sig-
nification of these words, which is in no case firmly
fixed, must, in the use, suggest the connection every
time to such a degree that one may recall prominent-
ly certain characteristics of an otherwise indefinite
thought.

From this we can see how we should burden psy-
chology with a problem based upon misconception if
we should propose to explain the source of truly gen-
eral notions in the human soul.

. General notions can not be shown to actually exist,
except in the sciences, where one can plainly see how
they are formed — viz., by positive and negative judg-
ments which affirm all the kinds of characteristics that
belong to the definition we seek, and deny all others.

80. Now, on the contrarv, it is a fact not to be


LOGICAL PORMa 63

doubted that human thought very often (although not
always) assumes the form of judgments. The combi-
nation of a subject and predicate lies at the founda-
tion of nearly all forms of speech in the languages of
civilized peoples. It must not be forgotten, however,
that the logical demand that the subject and predicate
shall be clearly defined notions, is not complied with
in actual usage.

81. The fact just mentioned may appear a won-
derful psychological phenomenon. Upon the suppo-
sition that a being that forms ideas should recognize
a real or only an apparent world, or even only think
a world as possible, it does not by any means follow
that this thinking and recognition must assume ex-
actly the form of judgments, but one may be tempted
to consider such a remarkable condition as a peculiar
trait in the constitution of human nature.

The representation, considered as a copy of the
objects presented, should resemble the objects them-
selves, and should correspond to them in the most
exact manner ; but no one will consider the connection
of subjects and (for the most part negative) predicates
to be a combination that takes place in the objects.
The painter who sketches for us the person about
whom we inquire, gives us a much more exact knowl-
edge than he who, with words, should enumerate all
the predicates which are perceived by a single glance
at the sketch. Moreover the whole scaffolding of va-
rieties and species which, according to the principles
laid down in the introduction to logic, we may be able
to build into notions, is entirely foreign to reality, and
is never used except in our cognitions expressed in the
form of judgments.


6A EMPIRICAL PSYCHOLOGY.

Note. — To the mind of many a philosopher (e. g., Spinoza)
has occurred the ideal of an intuiting cognition, for which, in-
deed, if it were a reality, a so-called intellectual intuition, non-
sensuous in its origin, and beholding the truth directly, would
be demanded. If contradictory notions were taken for the ob-
jects actually intuited, and as such recommended to us, the
result would be such as has already been in part experienced
by the present age. If we do not desist from following artifi-
cially the cum ratione inaanire, psychology may, however, still
be enriched with quite as sad as remarkable facts. On the con-
trary, if we understood how to place false systems at a distance
and to observe them from the right standpoint, we should learn
something from them.

82. The main question which we have to put to
speculative psychology is, Whence comes the passive
attitude of the subject — viz., that thought to which a
determination must be given by the predicate ? Inas-
much as, in thinking, the subject and predicate come
together in the relation of substantive and adjective,
why are they not so placed at once? Why does it
appear that a real psychic faculty called judgment
must first connect them ?

In view of facts, the following observations are to
be made :

(a.) It is abegging of the question to assert that
all human thought is an unconscious judgment. In
reality, judgment is manifested only in speech, but a
man has many thoughts which he can not express in
language.

(S.) A. man's inclination to communicate with oth-
ers has a great influence upon the development of his
thought in expressed judgments. Perhaps the con-
verse of this is also true ; the reserved man may be
one whose concepts do not readily assume the form of


LOGICAL FORMS. 65

judgments. Among children may be observed very
striking differences in regard to talkativeness and re-
serve, even when the latter does not arise from shy-
ness or indolence.

(c.) Expression is often a necessity, and gives re-
lief. The judging in this case is connected with in-
stinct and feeling.

{d.) The decisions which express preference and
rejection are special kinds of judgment in which sub-
ject and predicate are very sharply separated. The
tendency to these is so great that one believes readily
in omens — i. e., he is inclined to consider every event
as threatening or favorable. From the repeated at-
tempts of philosophers to refer good and bad to affir-
mation and negation, it may be supposed that between
the judgment on one side, and desire and repulsion on
the other, no fundamental, natural, but rather a psy-
chological, relation must exist.

(e,) ' Another principal kind of judgment in which
the separation and the fusion of the two component
elements are very observable, presents itself in the
union of the new with that which is already known.
Either that which is known is the subject here, and
the new constitutes the predicate, with changes which
we observe in the things — e. g., the tree blooms ; or
the new is the subject, and is subsumed under a known
predicate — e. g., in all answers to the question. What
is that ?

The latter remarks are, it is true, only an enumera-
tion of instances, but, takeii psychologically, the gen-
eral is often only to be explained by the .particular,
because very frequently particular concepts are made

general by transferring them to others. As the notions
8


66 EMPIRICAL PSYCHOLOGY.

of irrational quantities arise while the concept of a
division into equal factors is transfei^ed to those num-
bers which do not consist of several equal factors, so
also universal custom, in order to bring all speech into
the form of judgments, may have had a very special
beginning, and we are in no way justified in supposing
that all thoughts which now appear in the form of a
combination of subject and predicate contain in them-
selves the reason for such an arrangement.

Note. — Judgments, such as A = A, or. The stone is not
sweet, are school formulas and school examples. But if the
judgment made be original, then the standpoint of the one
making the judgment is disclosed. Children judge and question
where the adult no longer separates his already united substan-
tive and adjective, and where he is restrained partly by knowing
the limits of human knowledge, partly by custom, and partly by
his inclination to regard things only from a business point of
view.

The process of arching and pointing (see sec. 26) is easily to
be recognized where an answer is given to the question, ** What
is thatf" '*It is nothing but snow," said a child to whom a
snow-cake was offered. Here the cake was the subject, sthe ap-
prehension of which occasioned the arching. What kind of a
cakef until the pointing left only the snow remaining. The
final propositions. This cake is not edible ; it will melt, are of
a similar kind. The predicates here come from within — i. e.,
they are contained in the nature of the subject. The case would
be reversed when a person, who hitherto has been accustomed to
see dogs run free, for the first time sees and expresses the judg-
ment that the dog carries goods to the market. He would have
passed by a wagon drawn by horses without expressing any
judgment. The arching causes tension, the pointing satisfies :
hence there is a pleasure in judgment; hence we have hasty
judgments and chatter, which injure observation and thinking.
The observer would have remarked more if he had not gone
away satisfied with one kind of pointing. In the case of the
thinker, the arching would have been more complete and its


LOGICAL FORMa 67

elevation greater. Besides this, the pleasure in judging injures
the constructive power. Critical minds are seldom creative.

The observer goes successively from one arching to another ;
he forms series of judgments. Mere sense-perception does not
separate the predicates ; it is less acute : the arching is defective,
and therefore the pointing is also defective. Often inaccurate
repetition follows upon this. Language, with its many signifi-
cations attached to words, exerts an influence here, provided no
effort be made to secure a constant correction.

83. Logic considers syllogisms to be progressive
unf oldings of the steps of a thought. Ufton this point
only two observations are suggested :

(a,) Very rarely in ordinary speech is such a pro-
gressive development presented in the form of a com-
plete syllogism. The syllogism has nearly always
something tedious in it, unless it be abridged, as in
the enthymeme. This is in no way a fault in the
syllogism (as it is often considered), but merely a re-
minder that logic and psychology are different things.
The concept series, for the most part, deal with the
minor premises, while they only touch the major pre-
mises in passing — so to speak.

(J.) Very rarely have the creations of thought
originally (in the act of invention) the accuracy of the
syllogism. In most cases they are attempts to unite
into one a pair of notions which relate to the same
middle term, even before the necessary quantities of
the propositions and the precise form of their identity
with the middle term are proved. Correct conclusion
and correct measuring are closely related. The middle
term as the standard of measurement must be firmly
held.

84. Hence, if the power to infer be attributed to
the faculty of reason, then, again, an inadmissible


68 EMPIRICAL PSYCHOLOGY.

limitation of the faculties of the soul becomes visible.
To form syllogisms and to test and confirm them are
two quite different things, which, in reality, are for the
most part widely separated. The first may be ascribed
to imagination, the second to reason.

85. Finally, mention must be made here of logical
approval, which is very different from aesthetic ap-
proval. The former, unlike the latter, does not con-
sist in a preference, the opposite of which is rejec-
tion, but in a recognition by which, upon the whole,
one is pleased with the object as it is ; but with the
recognition is combined a peculiar kind of feeling
in which the pressure of evidence and the gratifica-
tion of a claim are mingled, and the question as to
whether it is more pleasant or unpleasant can only be
determined by the circumstances. The principal
thing here is to observe how the alleged faculties of
recognition and feelings are related, or, as the psy-
chologists prefer to say, flow into one another, with
which they are contented and do not trouble them-
selves to inquire further concerning the causal rela-
tion existing in this influx.

E. Transcendental Notions.

86. It is not easy to determine what belongs to ex-
perience and what transcends it. Kant reckons the
notions of substance and force as belonging to that
which enters into experience as a condition of the
latter, and, according to him, there is a substantia
phmnomenon. In this we must differ from him on
the grounds which have in part been presented in my
Introduction to Philosophy, and which will be further
developed in the General Metaphysics — that is to say,


TRAKSCEN DENTAL NOTIONS. 69

the notion of substance is not the same as the notion
of thing, but has arisen from it. Thing is conceived
as a complex of characteristics without calling up the
question of the real unity of those characteristics which
are therein blindly presupposed. Substance is the
bearer of all the characteristics, and something differ-
ent from them, a notion which first arises when we
perceive that we must distinguish the characteristics
from their unity. This notion is contradictory; it
must be transformed into the notion of an essence
which, by virtue of disturbances and self-adjustments,
presents to us the phenomenon of a complex of charac-
teristics which in truth do not by any means belong
to it. The notion of force depends upon that of sub-
stance, and is developed in almost the same way with
it, viz., out of the notion of a changing thing ; also,
it is to be subjected to a similar metaphysical correc-
tion. Both notions arise at the outermost limit of
experience as contradictions which extend into the
department of metaphysics — ^i. e., which oblige us to
go beyond experience, and to establish beliefs or con-
victions in us whose objects can not be furnished by
any experience.

87. Furnished with the notions of substance and
force (however obscure and incorrect the thought of
them may otherwise be), the human mind penetrates
into all parts of space and time, both into the infin-
itesimally small terms of the same series, and also
into the maxima in order to find the highest and
most sublime. Thus arise questions concerning the
infinity of the world, concerning the constituent ele-
ments of matter (either masses or atoms), concerning
the world of spirits and of God.


70 EMPIRICAL PSYCHOLOGY.

Note. — It is highly inopportune at this point to raise psy-
chological questions upon subjects of this kind, as has been the
ten4ency of late, under the mistaken notion that in this way
we may gain a certain, scientific basis. Invariably the notions
of the mental faculties by which these subjects are to be recog-
nized are formed according to the opinions upon the subjects
themselves ; and, first, one must have sufficient metaphysics to
enable one to correct these opinions before one can even ask
what capacity for the knowledge which lies beyond the senses
may dwell in man. If one could invent a false logic for the
pleasure of false speculation, then one might also venture the
same thing with psychology ; but experience will not yield.

88. Here belong the purified geometric notions of
bodies as uniform productions of pure surfaces, lines,
and points. Moreover, they transcend experience, or
rather experience transcends them, because each sen-
suous object adds something to these notions by which
it specializes them. The question concerning the men-
tal faculties which furnish the fundamental notions of
geometry is so much the less necessary because at the
first glance one can see that these notions (by the pre-
supposed production of the space series) are obtained
from experience, provided it be possible to analyze that
which the senses present in a confused condition ; an
operation which is not dissimilar to the formation of
scientific general notions.

F. Reproduction,

89. In the case of reproduction which refers en-
tirely to the temporal life of man, viz., to the continu-
ance of concepts once created, we again find on the
part of psychologists a carelessness in regard to the
real question. Our concepts recede from consciousness
and return again. For which shall we first seek reason


REPRODUCTION OP CONCEPTS. 71

— the receding or the returning ? The question must
first be directed toward the former, although, in fact,
it is usual to discuss only the latter.

90. Eeproduction offers two special points for dis-
cussion — its vividness and its accuracy. The former
is ascribed to imagination, the latter to memory. Thus
two mental faculties are invented for one and the same
thing which is regarded from two different sides ; for
this there is, however, an excuse which is easily recog-
nizable in that which directly follows.

91. A high degree of accuracy and vividness of re-
production, at the same time and in equal proportions,
is very seldom found. Accuracy depends mainly upon
the fact, that a concept reappears in the same connec-
tion with others as that in which it first appeared —
i. e., with the same characteristics of a thing, the same
circumstances of a transaction, the same combination
of time and place relations, etc. This requirement
will very seldom be fulfilled in cases where the vividness
of the reproduction allows the return almost simul-
taneously into consciousness of many concepts which
are connected with one another, and which cross one
another in various ways. Thus it is found that men
of much imagination possess but little accuracy of
memory, although in this respect there are exceptions.

Note. — Several psychologists include, under memory, repro-
duction with recollection. The latter is to express the judgment
that one has had the same concept before. From this some-
times a special faculty of memory is very unnecessarily assumed.
But the judgment mentioned, by which subject and predicate
are really separated, can be very seldom proved to take place,
and the whole theory is in nowise accordant with the usages of
language. We say of a man who easily learns a speech by rote,
and without taking it out of its connection repeats it accurately,


72 EMPIRICAL PSYCHOLOGY.

he has a good memory, even if he does not remember during the
repetition that it is the same discourse which is written on this
or that paper, and wliich he memorized at this or that hour.

92. Psychological writings are full of remarks,
which it is not necessary to record here, upon the
association of concepts or ideas ; in other words, upon
the manner in which the latter call one another up,
not only according to perceived combinations of time
and space, but also according to resemblances, and even
apparently according to contrast. Bather we may men-
tion here the varied complicated course which repro-
duction often takes — e. g., he who finds coals and ashes
in a forest thinks immediately of burning wood which
(farther backward) may have lain dry in the forest,
then (forward) of men who may have encamped there
and who may have set fire to it. But how came the
men there? (This question goes backward.) What
has become of them ? (Forwiird.) What fire might
have originated had a storm arisen ? (Side wise into
the region of possibility, at the same time looking
back upon the storm and forward to the injury,) Or
a man finds old coins in the ground. How do they
come there ? To what time do they belong? Where-
fore were they buried ? To whom does the treasure
belong ? Every seed recalls the plant from which it
started, and points forward to that which may arise
from it, while at the same time it suggests the use
which may perhaps be made of it without planting it.
It is a useful exercise to observe in many such exam-
ples as the above the changing directions and ramifi-
cations of a course of thought. Besides, it is well
known that in the case of association, according to
resemblances, one thing is put in the place of the


REPRODUCTION OF CONCEPTS. 73

other many times, out of which arise many naw com-
plications, or inventions, for whicli an inventive fac-
ulty has been found.

Note. — In all inventions creation in its broadest sense is the
most essential element. Quite as much imagination belongs to
original scientific thinking as to poetic creation, and it is very
doubtful whether Newton or ShaJLespeare possessed the more
imagination.

93. Memory and imagination agree in this, that in
every man their special strength is limited to certain
classes of subjects* For him who wishes geometrical
imagination, exercise in the so-called art of poetry
would be quite useless ; and he who retains, without
any trouble, the technical terms of a science which
interests him, has often a bad memory for village gos-
sip. Here we find that reproduction, as well in regard
to its vividness as to its faithfulness, is most closely
related to other mental activity, and that the assump-
tion of peculiar psychical faculties which take care of
reproduction as a means only of grouping manifesta-
tions satisfactorily is in the highest degree awkward.

94. Memory and imagination differ from one an-
other in that the former appears to bring up only rep-
resented and, as it were, dead pictures, while the lat-
ter appears to be employed in the process of active
representing. The transition of concepts from one
condition into another is very perceptible in the re-
reading of something which one has one's self written ;
also, in verifying what one has one's self thought out.


74 EMPIRICAL PSYCHOLOGY.

CHAPTER IV.

THE FACULTY OF FEELIKG (GEFUHLVEBMOGEK).*

95. If we begin to assume psychic facilities, there
arises the necessity for assaming one or more additional
besides the representing faculty, for the reason that,
by an account of that which we represent, or of how
the representation arises in us, we are by no means able
to indicate all that goes on in our minds. Especially is
it to be seen that in us are manifested manifold phases
of preference and rejection, on account of which the
faculties of desire and aversion have been set up side
by side with the faculty of representation.

96. Now, in the broad and dim space near repre-
sentation, the boundary between feeling and desire has
recently been drawn. But if psychologists are asked
concerning the origin of this boundary, they say that
desire relates to objects, and feeling to conditions or
states ; yet their explanations move in a circle, or at
least do not touch the question as to whether perhaps
feeling and desire are one kind of occurrence, which
we in our representation observe from different sides,
and hence call by two different names.

Note. — Maass, in his work upon feelings, explains feeling
through desire (" A feeling is pleasant, in so far as it is desired
for its own sake ") ; but, in his work upon the passions, he says
that it is a well-known law of Nature to desire that which is con-
ceived as good, and to detest that which is represented as bad.
From this the question arises. What is good and what is bad f To

r?

* The reader will observe that the word feeling is restricted
here to the meaning implied by the German word GefuM^ and is
not used indiscriminatefy to indicate feeling, emotion, and desire.


THE FACULTY OF FEELING. 75

this we receive the answer, Sensuousness represents as good that
by which it is pleasantly affected, etc., and here we find our-
selves in a circle. Hoffbauer, in his Outlines of Empirical Psy-
chology, begins the chapter upon faculties of feeling and desire
thus : '* We are conscious of many conditions in our minds
which we try to reproduce; these we call pleasant. Certain
concepts create in us the effort to make their object real ; this
we call desire." Here is one and the same basis, viz., effort, un-
derlying feelings and desires, and, if the distinction be in the
objects and conditions, then the question is, whether perhaps the
feelings, consequently the conditions, which were expected from
the objects, may not be what is really desired. This important
point appears to be treated no better by other authors. They
ought to have noticed the excellent remark by Locke, in his
work on the Human Understanding. It does not exhaust the
subject, but proceeds in the right way, and shows that many
desires (if not all) are independent of feelings, although they
may have the latter as results. That which Locke calls dissatis-
faction is no feeling, but the first movement of desire.

97. Now, as the facts wliicli we call feelings can
only with the greatest difficulty be separated from
those called desires and aversions, to enumerate the
kinds of feelings is a very uncertain undertaking.
Three kinds are prominent: sensuous comfort and
pain ; feeling of the beautiful and the ugly (with
which the sublime and trivial may be included) ;* and
the emotions which as yet we are accustomed to discuss
under the subject of the feelings. But with this the
subject is not exhausted. In the first place, we must
observe that the feelings are doubled through sym-
pathy with that which others feel. In the next place,
we may remark that each kind of outer and inner ac-
tivity, according as it succeeds or fails (i. e., according
as the desire underlying the activity is satisfied or not),
carries with it comfort or discomfort. Furthermore,


76 EMPIRICAL PSYCHOLOGY.

that feelings mingle in yarions ways (a disputed point
like the following). Finally, there are conditions of
feeling which, if not indifferent, are, nevertheless, so
constituted that pleasure and discomfort are not char-
acteristic of them, and theii strength can not be meas-
ured by those sensations

98. In order to have at least a fixed standpoint, we
shall divide feelings into those which depend upon the
nature of what is felt, and into others which depend
upon accidental mental conditions ; here a third class
may be mentioned as existing between them, viz., a
class which depends upon a certain mental condition,
so that this, in connection with the nature of the ob-
ject felt, gives rise to a corresponding feeling. Next
we must speak of the intermediate condition between
the pleasant and the unpleasant ; and, lastly, the emo-

' tions will come in their turn.

yf A. Feelings toliich arise front the Nature of that
^ which 18 felt.

99. That there are such feelings is an evident fact.
Every bodily pain, as such, is unpleasant, without re-
gard to the question how much ado we make about it,
or how patiently we bear it. Moreover, unpleasant feel-
ings of this kind are specifically different Burning,
cutting, electric shock, aching teeth, each of these ex-
cites its own peculiar pain, which may be distinguished
from every other, although a mere imaginary pain that
in itself would be neither pleasant nor unpleasant,
does not admit of being separated ; rather the sensation
and its opposite are one and the same. Sweet viands,
soft tones, a mild temperature, furnish examples of
pleasant sensations of this kind, the pleasure of which


THE FACULTY OF FEELING. 77


I

i


i& understood, without regard to the question as to its
value, or whether by it one is inclined to seek their

I continuance or to give one's self up to these sensations.

100. These feelings are analogous to all aesthetic

feeling, from which they differ only in this, that in the

latter case the object presented is made the subject of

^ a predicate, which expresses approbation or blame ;
hence the aesthetic feeling is brought into the form of
a judgment and is scientifically treated, which from a
practical standpoint is infinitely superior.

Note. — When, in the beautiful, size predominates, a sense of
the sublime arises. This is a genuine species of beauty, because
relations of magnitude themselves belong to the elements of
beauty. But we seek in vain for the definition of the ridiculous,
which has its origin in the possibility of laughing, and which
can not be considered without reference to a human body and
its organic vital sensations. The most purely comic sensations
would to the pure intellect amount to mere contrast. Laugh-
ing belongs to the emotions ; like the latter, it shakes the body,
and again, in reversed order through the latter, it shakes the
mind. Like the emotions, it is a mental condition of short
duration, for which, according to the whim of the moment, we
find ourselves in readiness or not. Besides, the ridiculous is an
example of that which is strongly felt, without either pleasure
or the reverse' being a characteristic of it. As we know, there is
' a joyous and a bitter laugh, and between the two a certain in-

difference toward the ridiculous, as in the case of the comedian,
whose serious business it is to arouse laughter in others.


B. Feelings that depend upon the Mental Conditions. J

101. In connection with the above first class of
feelings, it may be correctly stated that feeling is the
source and (at least in part) the ground of explanation
of the corresponding desire and aversion. In the sec-
ond class, just to be considered, desire, on the contrary.


78 EMPIRICAL PSYCHOLOGY.

must be regarded as something original, and the feel-
ing is not to be considered an effect, but the associate
and follower of the desire.

We may mention here the numerous desires which
are either independent of the pleasure or pain of their
object, or which have no relation to the latter. All
the things which are wished for to-day and despised
to-morrow, everything whose value decreases and aug-
ments according to individual caprice and partiality,
furnish us striking examples here. The desire for
these things is, as is known, accompanied by much
unpleasant feeling, and, in the case of gratification, by
a brief pleasure. Such pleasant and unpleasant feel-
ings can be called neither sensuous nor rational. It is
connected with the arousing of our activity, just as the
object of our deed may be so constituted as to affect
our activity. Whether a child wishes to untie a knot
in a string, or a mathematician wishes to solve a prob-
lem in numbers and geometrical figures, the feeling
of exertion and of ineffective effort remains always of
the same kind. The restless activity of man (con-
trasted with the natural effort of the brute) is generally
of this kind. Here belong also the feelings which
appear to entirely lack an object, as in the case of
anxiety, or in that of comfortable repose.

(7. Intermediate and Mixed Feelings.

102. All feelings of contrast, and of amazement,
which latter are in a way related to the former, may
be regarded as intermediate feelings — i. e., such as
can neither be described nor estimated by the pleas-
ure or the pain which they bring with them. Amaze-
ment may be pleasant quite as well as unpleasant. In


THE FACULTY OF FEELING. 79

all beautiful art, contrasts are indispensable, and yet
they are very seldom connected with essentially aesthetic
relations; rather they serve, first of all, to hold the
manifold asunder, and thereby to promote the intelli-
gibility of the aesthetic relations.

103. That there may be mixed feelings follows in
any case from the difference between the two classes
before mentioned. An example of this is curiosity,
which desires to see something foreign to itself, and
which is satisfied by a sensation which has become in
part really unpleasant to itself. Besides, no one who
studies experimentally can be willing to deny mixed
feelings, inasmuch as cases daily occur where one and
the same event affects our feelings in different respects,
and very often in opposite ways.

Note 1. — False speculations have succeeded in obscuring
these simple facts. People fancy that they have discovered a
twofold delusion : first, an exchange of the feeling itself for its
manifold causes ; second, a misapprehension of the transition
from one feeling into another. These remarks may not make the
facts doubtful, but will still less establish the opposite assertion.
It has already been shown (see sections 34-38) that the feeling
and the willing of man are founded in the concept masses, and
not by any means directly in the soul. Hence the variety and
conflict of feeling, as well as of willing, are given in experience
quite as intelligibly as certainly.

Note 2.— Only too often poets are moved to mingle feelings
in their works of art. Thus they may reach the piquant, but
not the beautiful. Great masterpieces may frequently be misun-
derstood. Shakespeare introduces the comic into his tragedies,
but, if by this he for the moment relaxes a tense condition in
order so much the more certainly to increase it again, he is
careful never to allow the ridiculous to become/ attached to his
principal characters. In his narration of the journey of Odys-
seus, Homer is romantic ; but that is a narration of extraordi-


80 EMPIRICAL PSYCHOLOGY.

nary sufferings, and portrays the character of Odysseus himself,
from whom no one would expect a purely serious and faithful
account.

D, The Emotions (Affecten).

104. After the emotions (transitory variations from
the condition of equanimity) have been separated from
<the passions (rooted desires), a prevailing opinion has
arisen that the emotions are nothing but stronger feel-
ings. But there are very strong enduring feelings
which have grown into the deepest recesses in the

1 foundation of human character (e. g., adherence to
. one's own people and to the fatherland), with which
the most complete equanimity exists so long as nothing
I of an opposite nature which may disturb them appears.
The moment of danger to one's own, or to the father-
land, may arouse emotion, but this emotion is widely
different from feeling itself. In the same way, a man
may possess a strong and lasting feeling of honor with-
out being in a condition of emotion from it. So far
from emotions being feelings, they rather make feeling
tame or dull. The moralist and the artist have great
cause to guard against insipidity, which arises when
one from pure emotion finally no longer knows at what
he weeps or laughs.

105. Kant's classification of the emotions into melt-
ing (i. e., paralyzing to activity) and stirring {rustige
= arousing to activity) throws light upon the subject.
Variation from equanimity may occur from two causes :
either there is too much or too little present in con-
sciousness. To the first class belong mental shock,
sadness, fear ; to the second, joy and anger.

106. The emotions are not merely a psychological
but also a physiological subject, for they act upon the


THE EMOTlONa 81

body with remarkable, often dangerous power, and by
this means, in reverse order, make the mind dependent
upon the body, partly from the continuance of the
bodily condition (which does not cease so quickly as
would the mental state by itself), partly from the tend-
ency of the body to yield to emotion. Thus courage
and timidity are very often dependent upon health and
sickness.

It is a remarkable circumstance that different bodily
conditions belong to different emotions. For example,
shame drives the blood to the cheeks, fear makes one
pale, anger and despair increase the strength of the
muscles, etc.

From this we see that it would be wrong to enu-
merate and distinguish the possible emotions accord-
ing to a merely psychological principle.

Note, — Without presenting here the theory of the union
between soul and body, according to the laws of natural
philosophy, we may make further use of the two preceding
observations :

1. Every gradual excitation of one system by another works
by reflex action in such a manner that from the part of the
system excited the disturbance is extended into the exciting
part. Under the excitement of emotion, not only the body is dis-
turbed, but the mind suffers a prolonged uneasiness, and indeed
the different systems of the bodily organism must be disturbed
in the same way. The excitation goes from the soul to the
brain, from the brain to the spinal marrow, from the spinal
marrow to the ganglia, from there to the circulatory system,
from there to the individual organs, and thence to the nutritive
system — and then the influence returns in reversed order [from
the nutritive system to the soul], and not suddenly but succes-
sively, just as the excitation proceeded, which latter may be
regarded as an accelerating force (according to the technique
of mechanics).

9


82 EMPIRICAL PSYCHOLOGY.

2. The partial effect upon definite organs, of which the
emotions give proof, must also occur where we do not observe
it. In the reproduction of visual concepts arises an excitation
of the optic nerve, in that of auditory concepts an excitation of
the auditory nerve, etc. ; but, in the concept of a movement, the
nerves of motion are excited, so that the special act of holding
back is necessary, if the movement is not to follow.

If we combine these two explanations just given, then the
most varied tendencies are explicable without any occasion for
the current theory which confounds life and soul, thus giving
rise to the error of materialism, so called, which in regard to
matter is still more preposterous than in regard to sovlL


CHAPTER V.

THE FACULTY OF DESIRE.

107. In regard to the word desire, we must, at the
very first, correct a wrong use of speech which ob-
tains generally in treatises on psychology. The fac-
ulty of desire, together with those of representation
and feeling, should furnish an exhaustive classification
of the mental activities. It must, therefore, include
wishes, instincts, and every species of longing, inas-
much as they belong neither to feelings nor to repre-
sentations. In works upon psychology is to be found
the assertion that that which is desired must be rep-
resented as attainable ; the belief in the impossibility
of attainment kills the desire. This statement is true
in regard to willing, which is a desire combined with
the supposition that it can be fulfilled. Hence there
is a great difference between a strong will and a strong


TEE FACULTY OP DESIRE. 83

desire. Napoleon willed when emperor, and desired
when at St. Helena. The expression desire must not
be so limited as to exclude those wishes which remain,
though they may be vain or so-called pious wishes, and
which, for the very reason that they do remain, con-
stantly incite men to new efforts, because through them
the thought of a possibility is ever anew suggested in
spite of all reasons which appear to prove the impossi-
bility of attainment. It is very important to give to
the concept of the unattainability of the wished-for
object strength enough so that a peaceful renunciation
may take the place of the desire. A man dreams of a
desirable future for himself, even when he knows it
will never come.

108. According to the classification of feelings
made above, we must now distinguish among desires
(the word taken in its widest sense) those which have
for object something pleasant as such (aversions having
something unpleasant as such) from others whose di-
rection is determined by no feeling, but merely by the
present mental condition.

Note. — Usually the latter kind of desires is misunderstood.
We think that the object desired must necessarily be represented
as a good thing. This is either a tautology — if good means the
same as the thing desired— or it is an error which, from an
empirical point of view, belongs to the numberless gratuitous
assumptions of psychologists. In Alexander Baumgarten's
Metaphysics (665) is to be found the statement : '* Qusb placentia
priBTidens exstitura nisu meo pnesagio, nitor producere. Quas
displicentia pneyidens impedienda nisu meo prsesagio, eorum
opposita appeto." This is given as the law of the faculty of
desire (lex faoultatis appetitiysB). But regarded as a general law
this theory of that otherwise yaluable work is defective in every
point. Ffaeere, so far as it means anticipation of something


84 EMPIRICAL PSYCHOLOGY.

pleasant or beautiful, Is not necessary. PrcBvidere has likewise
crept in. It is true that whoever represents to himself a desire,
will find his concept develop time conditions. But the lowest
animals also desire, and yet we can not assume that they sepa-
rate the present from the future. Eocstitura nisu meo presup-
poses the concept of the Ego, or at least a feeling of self, which
has a much later origin than the simple desires of brutes and of
young children.

109. The most important distinction, however, is
that between the lower and higher faculties of desire.
For the two separate into hostile classes, while feelings
exist side by side, or mingle together ; and, in regard
to concepts, most people, even cultured men and
scholars, remain at the sensuous standpoint without
being seriously troubled by the metaphysical protest
against sense- knowledge.

'AJ The Lotoer Faculties of Desire.

110. Here we are first met by impulses and in-
ducts. Of the latter, man has only a fragment ; we
find them existing in the brutes in more perfect form
and in greater variety, where it is clearly shown that
by means of them the organic structure constitutes
the essential and governing principle. The construct-
ive art-impulses of brutes are special examples of in-
stincts.

But the most important and the most general of the
impulses is that for movement and change, the rest-
less activity which is especially displayed in children
and young animals, in which we find much vitality
with little mind. Such examples afford practice in
distinguishing between life and soul. Since this ac-
tivity varies according to age, and, besides, is different
in individuals from birth, we may believe that it is a


THE LOWER FACULTIES OF DESIRE. 86

result of the organism, hence rather a physiological
than a psychological subject.

111. Now, as psychologists have made their discov-
eries by the analogy which the outer sense bears to the
inner, side by side with the organic impulses they place
several others, such as seU-love, the impulse of imita-
tion and of exaggeration, the social instincts, etc. Yes,
they even assume a general instinct to seek happiness,
although no one can specify definitely the object of
this latter instinct, as it differs in different individ-
uals.

It is clear that nothing but psychological abstrac-
tion, under the name of instinct, has given the very
indefinite idea of happiness a foundation. But in
regard to self-love and the social instincts, the case is
no better. Desire here precedes all thought of I, thou,
he. Experience shows plainly enough that egoistic
prudence as well as resolution to sacrifice something
for others is only formed gradually, according as the
knowledge of the collisions that take place between
selfish and altruistic interests is more deeply impressed.

The insidious introduction of real forces, or at least
of special talents and native germs, is particularly fre-
quent in the theory of faculties of desire, because man
shows himself active in his desire, and is, above all,
inclined to assume as many forces as classes of real or
apparent activities.

112. The inclinations, or those lasting mental con-
ditions which are favorable to the rise of certain kinds
of desires, show themselves more than the so-called
instincts to be different in different people. They are
for the most part results of the habit which appears
to extend from the faculty of representation into the


86 EMPIRICAL PSYCHOLOGY.

faculty of desire. For there are, first, the thoughts
which follow the accustomed direction, and which, if
no hindrance intervenes before there is opportunity
for perceptible feeling and desire, pass directly into
action ; but if something is placed in the way, then
the desire, accompanied by a feeling of effort and
fatiguing activity, increases.

113. The most striking, and, next to madness, the
saddest spectacle in psychology is furnished by the
passions. In his Anthropology, Kant has delineated
them excellently well. They are not inclinations or
mental conditions, but are desires, and every desire,
without exception, the noblest as well as the worst,
may become a passion. It becomes such in so far as
it attains dominion to such an extent that moral de-
liberation is out of the question. A tendency to at-
tach undue importance to trifles is the peculiar sign of
the passions. Hence, they can only be defined and
described in contrast with practical reason. A perfect
classification of the passions is quite impossible, for
the reason that every desire, strengthened by circum-
stances and habit, may give a perverted direction to
internal deliberation. Every classification of passions
is at the same time a classification of desires in generaL
In history, the passions play a conspicuous part. One
should beware of attributing this part to Providence ;
by doing so one would resemble Mephistopheles too
much, and finally, like him, would fall out of his
part.

B. The Higher Faculties of Desire.

114. Deliberation precedes judgment and action,
when a man, before he joins a predicate to a subject,


THE HIGHER FACULTIES OP DESIRE. §7

and before he changes the present places of things,
compares other possible ways of thought and action.
In deliberation lie deferring and delay, as well as con-
centration and pondering. Deliberation is supposed
to obviate revocation and repentance. It accomplishes
this in so far as every one among the possible kinds
of representation, each desire that might come into col-
lision with another, is allowed to enter fully into con-
sciousness, and as strongly as possible to work against
the others, or to co-operate with them. If in this pro-
cess something is forgotten — if during a period of de-
liberation something is hindered in manifesting its full
value, then there is danger that another mental state
will follow, and the decision of the former mental
state be found objectionable. Hence deliberation is
an inner experiment, the result of which must be ac-
cepted with entire submission; from this, reason in
thought and action has its names [i. e., the " theoreti-
cal reason " and the " practical reason "].

115. Hence, reason is originally neither command-
ing nor law-giving ; above all, it is not the source of
willing. It is quite as little a source of knowledge.
Nevertheless, it is regarded as such; indeed, it is
thought to be the highest judge and authority, which
is a very natural result, inasmuch as (with the custom-
ary habit of making gratuitous assumptions) the dan-
ger of having to repent — if one does not act according
to the results of reflection — ^leads one, in connection
with the threat, to think of a command, and, in con-
nection with the command, of one who gives the com-
mand.

116. Moral (Praktische) deliberation becomes more
complicated by reason of the connection between means


88 EMPIRICAL PSYCHOLOGY.

and ends. It has not indeed to weigh a manifold
immediate desire against another (in order to choose
among several ends), but also to go through the series
of possible results which are connected with the ends,
and which make their attainability probable. In the
latter respect, deliberation is ascribed to practical un-
derstanding, which is the faculty of adjusting itself to
the nature of the thing thought, independent of imagi-
nation and passion. When this kind of deliberation
is completely perfected it creates plans. The choice
among ends, however, is restricted by practical reason.

117. Circumspection is the mental condition of a
man who reflects. If it becomes a habit, deliberation
is extended continuously in every direction ; finally, an
effort is made to include every possible desire in one
act of deliberation, while more and more one's wishes
are constantly limited and subordinated. The ques-
tion is concerning the ultimate aim of all human action
and impulse — viz., the highest good. In this, delibera-
tion makes use of general notions. Maxims (very dif-
ferent from plans) and principles are originated, and,
these being collected, a science of morals is developed.

In practical philosophy it is shown that after set-
ting aside all changeable desires depending upon the
momentary inclination, only the non-arbitrary prefer-
ence and rejection can hold the highest rank, and such
is in fact assigned in the aesthetic judgments upon the
will.

For this reason the work of deliberation (or if one
prefers, of practical [moral] reason) is to bring forward
those judgments, and the ideas arising from them —
viz., of inner freedom, of perfection, of benevolence, of
right, and of equity. These ideas must be disentangled


FREEDOM OP THE WILL. 89

from their complication with all other thinking and
willing wherein they lie, at first hidden, and they must
be placed at the summit of all wisdom, while desires
and wishes are collectively made subordinate to them.

CI Freedom of the Will.

118. When a decision, the result of a completed
act of deliberation, is on the point of presenting itself,
it often happens that a desire arises and opposes this
decision. In that case a man does not know what he
wishes — ^he regards himself as standing between two
forces which draw him toward opposite sides. In this
act of self-consideration he places reason and desire
opposite each other, as if they were foreign counselors,
and regards himself as a third, who listens to the two
and then decides. He believes himself to be free to
decide as he will.

He finds himself sufficiently rational to compre-
hend what reason may say to him, and sufficiently sus-
ceptible to allow the enticements of desire to influence
him. If this were not so, his freedom would have no
value ; he would only be able to incline blindly in this
or that direction, but he could not choose. Now, how-
ever, the reason to which he gives heed, and the desire
which excites and entices him, are not really outside of
him, but within him, and he himself is not a third,
on a level with those two, but his own mental life lies
in each and works in each. Hence, when he finally
chooses, this choice is nothing but a co-operation of
those two factors, reason and desire, between which he
thought he stood free.

When a man finds that reason and desire in their
co-operation have decided over him, he seems to him-


90 EMPIRICAL PSYCHOLOGY.

self not to be free, but rather subjected to foreign
arts and influences.

Manifestly, this is again an illusion, and from ex-
actly the same source as the first. Just because reason
and desire are nothing outside of him, and he nothing
outside of them, the decision which arises from them
is not foreign, but his own. He has chosen only with
self-activity, yet not with a force different from his
reason and from his desire, and which could give a
result different from those two.

Note 1. — Here is the principle ground for psychological
illusions in regard to freedom. We can not here consider the
deeper lying metaphysical and moral misapprehensions mingled
with the illusions mentioned. It may be very briefly stated that
the difficulties that are found in responsibility are the easiest of
all to remove. An act is held to be responsible so far as it can
be regarded as a product of a will ; it is more or less responsible
the more or less it discloses weak or strong will. So far every-
thing is clearly and generally well understood. Now, however,
all this is thrown away if the will itself may in turn be deter-
mined by something else, for this is no better than if the stand-
ard by which everything else is to be measured should itself be
subjected to a measurement. Thus the fear arises that if the
will has had other causes from which it unavoidably proceeded,
these causes should bear the blame, since not only the will but
the actions arising from it should be imputed to them. Hence
we prefer to ascribe to the will a self-determination. From this
arises an infinite series (compare Introduction to Philosophy,
g 107). But that fear is quite groundless : responsibility stops
with the actor, just as soon as the action is referred to the will ;
for this is at once subjected to a " practical [or moral] judg-
ment " (Kant*s " categorical imperative **), which remains in per-
fect self-idefttity and independence whatever may be mentioned
as the causes and occasion of the will. However, if it be found
that the will had an earlier will as its source, the responsibility
begins again anew. The depraved man after he has become en-


FREEDOM OF THE WILL. 91

tirely bad, will be held to be completely responsible for his crimes,
but these again may be laid as a burden upon his corruptor, and
so on backward as long as somewhere a will may be pointed out
as the originator of those crimes.

Note 2. — Transcendental freedom, which Kant wished to be
assumed as a necessary article of faith for the sake of the cate-
gorical imperative (because he had failed in finding the right
foundation for practical philosophy) is an entire stranger in psy-
chology. Let him who does not perceive this, study Kant's two
Critiques of Pure and Practical Reason, and learn from them to
treat this subject with caution. Kant has taken great pains to
create in himself a clear conviction upon this point ; he has, how-
ever, produced the confusion that adheres to his categorical im-
perative, but which with his followers took on quite other forms.

119. Now, while the consciousness of freedom, so
far as it is to stand between reason and desire, rests
upon no better facts than have been given above, quite
another result is reached if reason itself be considered
the seat of freedom. Nothing is more evident than
that the passionate man is a slave. His incapacity to
consider motives of advantage or duty, his ruin through
his own fault, are clearly evident. In contrast with
him, the reasoning man who represses his desires as
soon as they are opposed by considerations of good,
may rightly be called free, and, the stronger he is in
this power of repression, the freer he is. But, whether
such a strength may be increased ad infinitum^ can not
be determined by existing cases, for these indicate only
a limited power.


V


92 EMPIRICAL PSYCHOLOGY.

CHAPTER VL

THE CO-OPERATION AND DEVELOPMENT OF THE

MENTAL FACULTIES.

120. The hypothetical assumption of faculties, in
the foregoing discussion, has been shown to be so de-
fective that the attempt to give an exhaustive survey
of their mutual influence in all their combinations
would necessarily appear useless. However, before we
observe the human mind in its changing conditions
more closely, a few remarks will be useful in facilitat-
ing the summing up of the preceding discussion.

121. Next to the outer senses, whose indispensa-
•bility is at first glance evident (what would a man be,
born blind, deaf, and without hands ?), reproduction
in its forms of memory and imagination is without
doubt the chief seat of the mental life. The exercise
of the senses, confined as it is to the present moment,
gives very little, and we should be limited to mere
animal existence if the past did not remain to us, as
a treasure into which we are constantly dipping. At
the time when the flow of unsought thoughts is weak,
or quite stopped, we best realize the poverty of feelings,
the crudity of desires, the inactivity or ineffective effort
of the understanding and reason without the imagina-
tion.

The work of imagination ripens into permanent
products in myths and traditions, which are elevated
into objects of faith by the art-power of representation.

122. This is the place to mention habits and ac-
complishments. For these reproduction is especially
necessary ; we can secure them in permanent form by


DEVELOPMENT OP THE FACULTIES. 93

no other means, and the same may also be said of the
necessity of the exercise of the understanding, of rea-
son, and of moral culture. For tlie facts that may be
cited for this indicate that earlier formed ideas, judg-
, ments, feelings, volitions, quite as well as sensuous
; representations, are reproduced, and that they obtain
a new influence by means of this reproduction ; they
j show also that reproduction occurs the more quickly,
j surely, and accurately the oftener and more carefully
; the attention has been occupied with those notions.
Moreover, facts show that habit has much less to do
j with memory and imagination than with the concepts
\ that are reproduced. To the person who learns much
by rote, memorizing will become gradually easier,
though this facility is restricted to the circle of con-
cepts to which he is accustomed. Let the person who
has a great memory for music attempt to commit to
memory a series of names or numbers, and he will soon
see of how little benefit to him the previous exercise
of the memory is to him in this field.

123. Cultivation takes place in two principal direc-
tions, which are determined first by the inner sense and
secondly the outer action. Eefiection is connected with
both, which fact occasions the^rst remark that this
reflection (the bending back of the course of thought to
a definite point) sometimes intentionally revives and
forms concepts (in work), and at others it is employed
in the apperception of the object given in experience ;
therefore, that in the first case the activity proceeds
from it, and is controlled by it ; in the second case, on
the contrary, the excitation lies in the object presented.
But the two cases are never entirely separated. More-
over, the work of reflection creates a new object every


94 EMPIRICAL PSYCEOLOGY.

moment, inasmuch as the work advances and comes
under observation, and just here reflection connects
itself with it Conversely, experience leads us to com-
parison and judgment, but with these comes further
reflection which deals with the notions, or opinions, or
caprices present, as the objects fixed upon by reflection,
according to the peculiarity of each. Keflection upon
an object which exists merely in thought is of a differ-
ent character. Here the movement lies in the reflect-
ing mass of concepts themselves. The continuous fix-
ing of this object of pure thought, however, to which
the observation is to confine its attention, still costs
not a little effort.

The inner sense, which is usually placed on a par
with the outer sense, on account of this similarity, is
in this case quite out of its natural relation. It is
rather the great principle which lies at the bottom of
all regular activity, especially of artistic fancy and
of practical reason. Without self-consciousness man
could control neither himself in general nor his ac-
tivity in particular.

External action which objectifies a man's thought
and embodies it for him, but at the same time gives
an opportunity for various distortions, always includes
within its compass desires, observation, and judgment.
In so far as it succeeds or fails, it changes desire either
into express volition or into a mere wish, accompanied
by pleasure or pain, by which the foundation is laid
for the habitual disposition of the man. New condi-
tions of life often furnish new incentives to action;
thus, a man often appears to change all at once. This
is most striking in a case where a common need occa-
sions a new common action, and from the isolated


DEVELOPMENT OF THE FACULTIES. 95

" I'a " a new " we " is created. Yet it is perhaps more
remarkable to observe how after a time a person appa-
rently changed becomes again the same as formerly.

The deepest impressions are given to a man's char-
acter through his external deeds when they belong to
his vocation or his daily occupation. Here we see in
the clearest manner both the conflict and the co-opera-
tion that exist in the dominant masses of concepts
that belong to the series which is actually passing
through the mind. During labor these masses of con-
cepts are in equipoise in consciousness, and every indi-
vidual act depends on the flowing series for its place
and time, and it must be undertaken at the point fixed
by the stage of advancement of the work.

Very important determinations of character flow
from the peculiarity of the employment pursued. The
series of concepts that determine the life of the gar-
dener, or of the farmer, move slowly with disturbances
through natural causes which often necessitate his
watching and waiting. The series of the musician,
actor, etc., have, on the contrary, their distinct rhythm.
Again, the concept series of the fencer, juggler, etc.,
move quite differently and require that without definite
rhythm the right moment must be most accurately
perceived. One of the most important directions for
the practical educator and teacher is that he observe
as accurately as possible how the concept series ought
to proceed among his pupils, and how they can and
actually do proceed. Important differences which de-
mand attention are to be found here.

124. Whatever a man by inner thinking or exter-
nal action may attempt, certain permanent feelings
rise more and more out of the fluctuating mental con-


96 EMPIRICAL PSYCHOLOGY.

ditions, and these feelings become decisive criteria for
him in his actual deliberation, and consequently in his
understanding and in his reason. They become these
special criteria, provided he possesses a deliberation of
sufficient strength to resist changing desires.

This is especially true in the aesthetic apprehension
of the world peculiar to every person (which in many
respects may be one-sided, and consequently even be-
come morally perverted), according to which every per-
son habitually determines his relations with the world.
The impression which family and fatherland, human-
ity and human history make upon the individual is
explained by this. This impression is compounded
of all that involuntarily pleases or displeases him.
Hence everything that hinders a man in seeing clearly
and in judging fairly works injuriously upon his in-
nermost character.

125. The passions act most disastrously upon all
development. They are the extreme opposite of the
aesthetic judgment ; moreover, through them all versa-
tility of effort is destroyed. Through their influence
imagination and understanding receive a one-sided
direction. They themselves, in case they find gratifi-
cation, result in weariness and vacuity to mind and
heart, and in case they remain ungratified they end in
sorrow and illness. Those who boast as to what they
have willed to become through passionate excitement
deceive themselves ; they ought to rejoice that, in their
shipwreck, they have not lost everything, and many
are to be commended, inasmuch as they make a better
use of the goods saved than they did formerly of their
whole fortune.


SECOND DIVISION— MENTAL CONDITIONS.


CHAPTER I.

THE GENERAL VARIABILITY OF CONDITIONS.

126. Accurately considered, no one condition of
human life exactly resembles another. Everything
which is presented to the inner perception is wavering
and fluctuating. This remark which discloses the
impossibility of a fixed and definite psychological ex-
perience, was made at the beginning of the present
treatise, and must now be further elaborated. With it
is connected the observation of the different conditions
of life as every person passes through them ; further,
it suggests the sketch of the most striking differences
in human habits and human development under the
influence of external conditions ; and, finally, it calls
for a brief description of anomalous mental conditions.

127. Reproduction through memory and.imagina4

tion proves (see section 90) that no concept once

created is ever lost, and that a meeting of concepts

which has once occurred can hardly be without results.

But when, with the multitude of concepts that the

mind of a mature man has accumulated, we compare

that which he is conscious of doing each individual

moment — we must be astonished at the disproportion

between the riches of the former and the poverty of the

latter. By way of comparison, we might ascribe to

the human mind an eye which possessed an extremely
10


L


98 EMPIRICAL PSyCHOLOQY.

small pupil but the highest degree of movability. The
explanation of this lies directly in what has heretofore
been taught concerning the threshold of consciousness
(16-19). Besides, the small number of concepts which
we are able to take in at any one time is often grasped
in a moment of quick transition, and by this it is pos-
sible for the intellectual man to bring his concepts into
the most yaried relations, and to modify them through
one another.

128. Certain incitements resulting in a change of
concepts, by means of external impressions, are a ne-
cessity to manr^The lonely man seeks social inter-
course, and if no means have been taken to keep the
mind in activity, a long stay in one place is painful
on account of the monotony of the surroundings. If
this necessity remains long unsatisfied, human life
gradually narrows down in a degree to correspond with
the slow periodical changes to be observed. Converse-
ly, the need increases through gratification. Those
who make history (like Napoleon) for this reason al-
ways find enough men ready to devote themselves to
their service just because they are restless. Even be-
hind the stove one complains of empty newspapers.

129. By virtue of the arrangement of the human
body, hunger and satiety, waking and sleep, have every
day their well-known cycle, and, in addition, seasons
bring with them their variety of gratifications and of
augmentations of bodily needs. It is not n^essary to
discuss here the tension and relaxation, the reflection,
resolution, action, and rest which follow therefrom.

Note. — The noteworthy modification of sleep through dreams
may be deferred more conveniently to the discussion of anoma-
lous conditions.


NATURAL TALENTS. 99

130. The earthly life, taken as a whole, has its
period of growth, of full strength, and of decline.
The child, from psychological reasons, if it be well,
moves restlessly, pursues simple, artless fancies and
plays ; it is indisposed to think connectedly, but is in
the highest degree susceptible to everything new.
Hence it is not capable of freeing itself from mo-
mentary feelings. The boy, though still very weak in
this respect, can, nevertheless, be elevated through
education without undue haste to a significant de-
gree of true insight and self-control. The youth
receives an increase of strength, but also of unrest.
If he can not act, he dreams. The man to whom
these powers are no longer new, but to whom the dif-
ficulties of human action are known, makes a judicious
use of what he has, if his childhood and youth have
not been spoiled. He acts more, and therefore he
dreams less. The later years retain as much manli*
ness as the body permits, with great individual varia-
tions. In the most favorable examples thinking takes
the place of dreaming and of action, even though it is
too late to accomplish much. Every age atones for
the sins, and suffers for the misfortunes, of the pre-
ceding one.


CHAPTER IL

NATURAL TALENTS.

131. The course of life is, in the first place, modi-
fied through difference ^f sex. This is often observa-
ble in early youth. Girls develop worldly wisdom at an


•J
■J J


'- J'


100 EMPIRICAL PSYCHOLOGY.

earlier age than boys, and are earlier inclined to hold
themselves within the bounds of propriety. On the
contrary, their period of education is shorter than that
of boys. Hence they collect less mental material, but
they elaborate it more quickly and with less variety
and specialization. The result is to be seen in the
whole life. The female sex depends upon its feelings.
The man acts more from knowledge, principles, and
relations. This explains the great variety of callings
which men follow.

132. In connection with the so-called tempera-
ment, every man has another original peculiarity, that
is to be explained by physiological predisposition in re-
gard to feelings and emotions. Of the four known
temperaments, the joyous and the sad (sanguine and
melancholy) relate to the feelings ; the excitable and
the slow (choleric and phlegmatic) to the excitability
of the emotions. The rationale of these temperaments
is generally easy to perceive ; for the common state of
feeling which the body brings with it, and which accom-
panies a man through his whole life, can not easily oc-
cupy exactly the middle place between the pleasant and
the unpleasant ; according as it inclines toward this
or that side, a man becomes sanguine or melancholy.
He can not be both at the same time, but he has his
place somewhere on the line which runs in the two
directions. However, a fluctuating temperament is
not only conceivable, but is sometimes to be met with
in experience, by virtue of which a man is disposed to
change from joyousness to sadness without special
cause. Furthermore, as the emotions call the physical
organism into play, and find in it, as it were, the
sounding-board through which they are strengthened


NATURAL TALENTS. iQl

and made more lasting, there must be a degree of
adaptability in this organism by virtue of which a man
is either more choleric or more phlegmatic, so that he
may not be both at the same time, but may fluctuate
between the two.

From this arises the possible mingling of temper-
aments according to the combinations of these two
series. The sanguine temperament is either choleric
or phlegmatic, and so, too, the melancholy may be
choleric or phlegmatic. It is conceivable that one may
be neither sanguine nor melancholy, for the zero-point
lies just between the two. But it is inconceivable that
one should be indifferent in regard to the choleric and
phlegmatic temperament, for to have no excitability
whatever of the emotions would indicate an extreme
phlegmatic temperament. Here the zero-point lies at
one of the extremes. The middle is the accustomed
excitability — an arithmetical mean, which is to be
found by experience, almost like tlie average stature of
the human body.

Note. — The names of the temperaments may also be other-
wise derived; and if the expression, choleric temperament, be
applied to a persistent tendency to anger,. then the foregoing
does not hold good. As the subject is not purely psychological,
a physiological view may be in place here. Of the three systems
or factors in animal life, a concealed defect in any one of them
may influence the mind. If irritability (i. e., reaction against
the enyironment) and sensibility are uninjured, and if the nutri-
tive system suffers only in so far as to cause a constant discom-
fort in the general feeling, a choleric bitterness of temperament
may arise. This is to be perceived in a few sad cases in chil-
dren. If the irritability suffers, good-nature, and, perhaps,
talent may exist, but a sufficiently strong external life will be
wanting. If the sensibility suffel^ generally, the difficulty ap-
pears to proceed from a so-called Boeotian or peasant tempera-


102 EMPIRICAL PSYCHOLOGY.

ment. If only the sensibility of the brain suffers relatively, or,
to use a clearer expression, the ganglionic system predominates,
this may be the cause of the sanguine temperament. If the
nutritive system and irritability are both at the same time weak,
we find the phlegmatic temperament. Thus it appears that all
temperaments perceptibly prominent imply some defect

133. As the body strengthens the emotions by
means of its responsiveness, or by its imperturbability
weakens their outbreaks, even so it mingles in all the
changes of feeling and of thought — sometimes like the
fly-wheel, which prolongs the motion received ; and at
other times like an inert weight, which delays the
motion or renders it quite impossible. At least, it is
known that the waking of a man is not always or
merely an indication that he has done sleeping. That
narrow pupil which in a foregoing section (127) we
attributed to the human mind in general, is in the
case of individuals more or less narrow, and the'
mobility of the concepts which come and go in con-
sciousness is in such cases less or greater. If to this
we add the special tendency of many persons for this
or that kind of thinking and feeling, then we have a
scale of differences, the extremes of which are called
genius and imbecility. The latter is classed with
anomalous conditions, because it is often found with
them, and like them renders a man useless in society.

Note.— That which is connected with physiognomy and cra-
niology is too uncertain and too indefinite to have at present
any value in psychology beyond that of being a curiosity. Many
singular facts (no matter from what department of knowledge)
may be true, but to be of scientific importance they must be re-
lated in a demonstrable manner to what is already known and
tried ; if they remain alone, they are of no value. To wish to
subordinate psychology entirely to physiology means to exactly


NATURAL TALENTS. 103

reverse the true relation of the two sciences, a mistake that has
often been made in both modern and ancient times. In the
third part of this book the true relation will in a measure be
indicated.

134. The question may be asked, What talents hu-
manity is endowed with by nature. It is known that
long experience and careful study of the human dispo-
sition serves to detract much from the good opinion
which a youth may have formed from an outside view
of cultivated society ; he does not yet know how much
that is bad is hidden in men and secretly nourished
by them. But this fact shows less against the natural
talents of humanity than against the coarse treatment
which up to the present time has been generally ap-
plied where an effort has been made to educate men.
Inasmuch as this treatment, especially on account of
the imperfections of church and state, has from early
times influenced the external demeanor of men, for
centuries a disproportion has arisen between seeming
and being, which in ancient and mediaeval times could
hardly have been known to such a degree as at present,
as in those former times there was much less of trans-
planted and imitated culture than at present. Besides,
the talent of humanity is quite different from the
talent of the individual man. The former has to do
with social development in general ; hence it has to do
quite especially with the relation between the rare great
minds that make epochs in history, and the multitude
of common men who can only receive and carry for-
ward culture. Our history of humanity, which in-
cludes only a few thousand years, is much too short to
enable us to judge with any degree of certainty con-
cerning facts upon this question. Regardless of the


104 EMPIRICAL PSYCEOLOGY.

old saying, " Nothing new under the sun," much, too
much that is new occurs, to render possible a general
survey of the earthly path of humanity.

135. Between the questions concerning the talents
of the individual and concerning those of humanity
we should have to place that concerning the races
of mankind, if observation furnished anything certain
in a psychological connection. But that which might
perhaps be said upon this has a closer connection with
the following subject.


CHAPTER III.

EXTERNAL INFLUENCES.

136. From the empirical standpoint, no decision

/ feas been reached in regard to what may have origi-
V .nated in human nature, and what may be produced by
(influence from without. Our introduction to meta-
physics has warned us not to trust much to either kind
of concepts, inasmuch as the idea of a manifold of tal-

] ents in the individual, as well as that of causes and
influences of every kind, belong to those concepts that
can not be retained as they are first presented to us by
experience. Here, therefore, we can only consider the

j most striking phenomena as we find them vary in the

* external conditions of man.

/ 137. First, we have to consider the place where the
man lives, with all the numerous and wide-reaching
influences of climate, the nature of the ground and


EXTERNAL INFLUENCES. lo5

soil, the situation and neighborhood. This will be
more fully developed in our historical lectures.

138. The nation to which the individual belongs
has not merely a predominating temperament, but it
has also its history, and the individu^Q enters this his- /
tory at a certain point of time. With it is united k'
degree of culture, a national feeling and conscience tci
which the individual at all points in the course of his;,
life is linked, and through it elevated and repressed. '

139. In every nation that has freed itself from bar-
barism there is a difference of ranks or castes (merely ^
transplanted in the case of the women, in the case of
the men original). This difference of rank is partly
a work of violence and necessity, partly a result of
natural talents, and partly a consequence of the divis-
ion of labor. A rank is assigned to the individual,
provided one is conceded him, only in so far as he
himself can produce a conformity of his action to
the special function marked out for his province (not
in so far as he is active for his own aims, for in the
idea of division of labor it is plain that he works for
all, or at least for many). Now, inasmuch as the
man seeks to concentrate his whole action into con-
formity to the specific function proposed, an outside
form that is impressed on each arises, together with
a standard of honor for each order, by which not only
(as may happen) the means used causes even the aim
to be displaced, and in part forgotten, but also the
thoughts and intentions of the man are adjusted to his
action ; they vanish together in the circle of their
utility, and the efforts which remain are divided into
two parts, one of which belongs to the demands of
one's rank or station, while the other in spite of the


106 EMPIRICAL PSYCHOLOGY.

rank seeks its individual gratification. In case this
contest increases, the man and his station are of no
value to each other, and injure each other mutually.

The less one has to produce conformity of his action
to the end in view — i. e., the more he is the employee
of another— so much the less does he trouble himself
with his actions and so much the less honor is there
for him; so much the more weight, however, falls
upon that second part of the effort which, notwith-
standing the limited position, seeks gratification. For
the sake of this individual gratification, if a mild
and, at the same time, firm treatment on the part
of the employer does not obviate the evil, all oppor-
tunities are made use of, and the arts of falsity are
exerted.

As a rule, we find the better class in each nation
among those who have undertaken a share of the gen-
eral labor, and who manage it according to their own
judgment.

140. As his rank influences the mature man, so
the family to which the youth belongs, as well as the
education which he receives, together with the exam-
ples, and all his surroundings, influence him. One

I seldom trains himself in opposition to his environ-
\ient, never independently of it.

141. The principal question is how much and what

^eedom remains to man in the midst of all the ex-

, ternal influences. It is easy to carry out these reflec-

/ tions to such a point that, when one yields to the im-

< pression made on him by the contemplation of the

; facts, the conviction arises that man either becomes

'what he is through external influences combined with

natural talent which precedes his will, or at least that


EXTERNAL INFLUENCES. 107

the circle of freedom is so small that its Talae must b^
insignificant.

Kant admitted that the whole temporal existence
of man comes under the law of natural necessity. In
order to save Freedom he placed it in the intelligible
world as an article of faith for the moral man.

K one may presume to understand a man better
than he understood himself, then it is very easy to
show what Kant intended. Eesponsibility was to be
secured. But that is secured without any theory of
freedom (see note to section 118). Then, practically
to reach the essential idea of the Kantian view, we
need neither metaphysics nor speculative psychology,
nor even a critique of reason, but only on the one side
an untrammeled search for facts ; on the other, a cor-
rect concept of practical philosophy.

But it is very important to go beyond this, in order
to recognize more completely the force with which
a man often with great results works on himself, or
even against himself. This is especially important at
an age when one stands between the education just
ended and the vestibule opening into the future rank
or station. At this period the self-determination may
be greater, or at least richer in results, than before and
after. Explanations upon this point will be found
in the third part of this book.


v


/


108 EMPIRICAL PSYCHOLOGY.

CHAPTER IV.

ANOMALOUS CONDITIONS.

142. For the most part, we see man subjected to
'anomalous conditions, among which the dream even

[ in the healthy man may be reckoned. But the bom
imbecile is lost beyond ordinary measure in simplicity
and mediocrity of talent. Also in the other kinds of
mental disorder are to be found many a resemblance
(quite as striking as sad) to errors, emotions, and pas-
sions, so that it is difficult to contrast closely the well
man with the mentally diseased.

143. In all cases where an empirical manifold does
not easily admit of accurate analysis, we are safest
in beginning with the most manifest differences, with
the extremes, and afterward comparing the interven-
ing members with them. Upon this ground we begin
with peculiar mental disorders, and later shall mention
conditions of illness similar to them, together with
phenomena which are associated with sleep.

Mental disorders which make their appearance in
waking'hours, and in, at least apparent, bodily health,
come under four classes (according to Eeil and Pinel,
the latter of whom has found some valid grounds for
assuming a fifth) — illusion, madness, dementia, idiocy.

144. Mental illusion ( Wahnsinn) depends upon a
so-called fixed idea, upon a wrong concept which af-
fects a part of the circle of thought, while in other
respects the thinking remains in its due course and
proceeds consistently from that concept. It is there-
fore self-evident that the wrong concept must really
deceive and will not be recognized as a delusion ; like-


f


i


* INSANITY. 109


wise that it contains a groundless eiTor from which
one can not successfully disengage the sound part of
the knowledge which he possesses. If an assumption
of mental faculties is to be based on this, then the
source of insane delusion is to be regarded as a dis-
eased imagination which in most cases has suffered
through an injurious influence of the faculty of de-
sire, or sometimes of the understanding or reason,
and sometimes also it has suffered merely from bodily
causes. With the disease of imagination is combined
a weakness of judgment and of power to reason, so that
the clearest refutations of the delusion are not under-,
stood by the person who is ill. Furthermore, the dis-
ease acts upon emotions, desires, opinions, etc

The same diseased imagination, however, shows
itself to have intervals of sound health and often a
genial, exalted activity in everything that is not con-
nected with a fixed idea- Likewise the other mental
faculties show clearly that they are not weak, but are
disposed to regular activity.

If the hypothesis of the mental faculties be set
aside, the occasion for surprise at this disappears.

Moreover, the following kinds of delusions may be
marked : Imagined change of body, or of person ; im-
agined influence of the devil, etc. ; imagined inspira-
tion, especially religious fanaticism, a morbid desire
to make one's self known by self-sacrifices ; fixed re-
proaches with which a man torments himself ; amorous
illusions ; weariness of life ; fear of death ; fear of pov-
erty and hunger ; and finally stupid as well as restless
insanity. The explanation of all these phenomena is
not far to seek. First, the disorder of the mind is not
always purely mental, for in the psychical mechanism


110 EMPIRICAL PSYCHOLOGY.

there is to be found no reason for the unyielding op-
position against plain experience. Further, in all
mental disorder an emotion is unmistakable. The
latter is a paralysis in the nerrous system. Hence the
concept mass in which the emotion has its seat can
not undergo such a change as is necessary to affect the
body in an opposite way. From the innumerable cases
which are narrated as very remarkable, the psycholo-
gist, as soon as he has recognized the psychical mech-
anism and its possible arrests, learns little or nothing
new whatever.
\J I 145. Madness (Wufh) or trenzj (Tobsucht), -proj^-
jBrly delirium, consists in an impulse to bodily actions
without aim; indeed, even against the will. Very
generally it is an impulse to destructive acts with ex-
treme and dangerous violence. That bodily disease
lies at the foundation of this is clear enough, for in
the intellect is to be found no principle of unity for
these conditions.

Yet, as a pure psychological phenomenon in healthy
men, action {Handeln) occasionally appears to be at
the same time voluntary and involuntary. Hence, we
can not by any means regard the actions of a delirious
(raving) man as merely automatic if he tries to resist
them. The diflSculty lies in the error of regarding the
will as a mental faculty which appears to oppose itself,
inasmuch as the same person will and at the same time
will not.

Note. — The strange question, whether there can be madness
without delusion, might be answered by the phenomenon of
hydrophobia. Certainly the stormy agitation of the vascular
system proceeding from the abdomen may give rise to raving
actions without proportionate injury to the brain, just as in


INSANITY. Ill

cholera the blood stops and becomes almost stiffened through
nervous influence, while the sensibility of the dying man is but
little troubled. In discussing the emotions we have already
called attention to the partial action of certain mental states
upon certain organs ; the converse action also takes place. The
question here is not concerning the possible resistance of the
will, but concerning the attack upon the mind which proceeds
from the body.

146. In dementia (Narrheit) the connection be- ^
tween the concepts ceases, while the latter, withou
regard to any rule whatever, mingle together gro
tesquely. Moreover, here in the realm of mind ever
principle of unity is wanting. The reason for thd
change of concepts is no longer psychological, it must^
be physiological.

According to the hypothesis of the mental facul-
ties, the principal seat of the evil would be in the
understanding, and really the fool bears some resem-
blance to the stupid, unintelligent child. But the
lawlessness of the other mental faculties in dementia
would long ago have been noticed if one had ever
ventured to think of an exact conformity to law in
that faculty. [The essential point is, here, that every
long series of concepts is hindered in its passage be- V
cause the nervous system opposes itself to the kind of
tension involved in such a train of thought.") It is
clearly evident that such a disease is much more
general and much more certainly incurable than the
torpidity of an individual emotion in insanity. fThe
psychical cure of delusion or insanity proper is es-
sentially protection and prevention lest the emotion
reach a state of fury, and the delusion attain an in- v
creased power.^ The proper cure is bodily, though
often merely Nature's cure. Discipline (punishment)


112 EMPIRICAL PSYCHOLOGY.

can effect something pedagogically, and in many cases
responsibility is not entirely wanting, especially in
actions which do not follow directly from the delu-
sion ; the responsibility is, however, lessened by un-
fortunate ill-humor, which has in it no essentially
fixed delusion. Of infinitely greater importance than
all the insane asylums and psychical cures would be
prevention of that fanaticism which may lead to in-
sanity.
y I 147. Idiocy or imbecility {BVddsinn) which alone
of all the mental disorders appears to be inborn, and
(which in the foregoing we have indicated as the
^opposite extreme of genius, is general weakness of
mind, without admitting the mention of one mental
faculty as superior to the other. It does not differ so
much in quality as in degree, and may go so far that
the man almost resembles a plant, but as such grows
and is healthy.

148. The classes of mental disorders above given
serve not so much for immediate classification of ac-
tual cases (which for the most part present themselves
as hybrid or complex) as for the definition of simple
characteristics under which the admitted mental dis-
eases are to be subsumed. Mental delusion and demen-
tia, madness and idiocy, are extremes between which
the middle conditions lie. Delusion may be united
with madness, and with lesser degrees of idiocy ; also
with dementia. The collection of notions here is simi-
lar to that in the temperaments.

149. Nearly all anomalous states of mind are analo-
vy gous to mental disorders. The dream resembles insani-
ty, especially in the imagining of persistent embarrass-
ment in which one does not escape from the situation.


INSANITY. lis

The frenzy of fever appears as delirium. Dizziness,
fainting, and such conditions are similar to idiocy.
Intoxication causes a man to waver between dementia

r

and madness. It is, however, manifest that we must .'
not extend these comparisons too far.^ The delusion I
of the dream is much more varied" and changeable
than in the corresponding mental disorder. Dreams
possess a certain kind of unity, viz., unity of feeling.
A dream of thieves in the night, where the scene
suddenly changes to a room lighted by the sun, and is
filled with many strangers who offer congratulations
upon the attainment of a high honor — ^such a dream
one perceives was not really dreamed, but invented
as a psychological example (Maass upon the Passions,
Part I, p. 171). Similar changes from a painful to a
much-desired condition will often occur during the
dream when the bodily position suddenly changes.

The duplication of self -consciousness into different
parties is one of the most remarkable peculiarities of
the dream and its affiliated states. The dreamer often
ascribes to others his own thoughts, sometimes feeling
ashamed that he himself has not perceived or has not
known them. In changing states of dreaming and
waking, of paroxysms and of intervals of quiet, there
is often a double personality without that memory of
a former state that is retained on passing out of one
into the other when waking from a dream. There are
examples of violent fright, after which persons ask,
" Who am I ? " and must be reminded again of their
own name, position, calling, etc., by some circumstance.

In this comparative study of the fundamental forms

of mental disorders there seem to be excluded from

the anomalous conditions only the facts of so-called
11


114 EMPIBICAL PSYCHOLOGY.

V animal magnetism, which are too little understood.
These facts indicate a change in the bond of union
between the body and soul — a change which, however,
.' may be quickly reversed, and the former state re-estab-
lished. (Compare 163.)

Concluding Remarks.

If from mental disorders we turn back again to
ordinary psychological phenomena, and compare the
different orders, mental delusion recalls the passions ;
madness, the emotions ; dementia, mental distraction ;
and idiocy, indolence and idleness (the latter recalls
also stupidity; but this itself is a degree of idiocy).
Passions, emotions, mental distraction, and indolence
are also diseased conditions of the mind, only less stub-
bom than insanity itself.

The opposite of them all is the healthy condition of
the mind :

(a.) Hence, as the opposite of mental delusion and
of passions, the sound mind involves mutual determi-
nation of all concepts and desires through one another,
or freedom from fixed ideas and fixed desires.

(&.) As the opposite of madness and emotion, it
involves repose and equanimity.

(c.) As the opposite of dementia and distraction, it
involves coherence and concentration of thought.

(J.) As an opposite of idiocy and indolence, it in-
volves excitability and sprightliness.

We do not seek for the same degree of mental
health in all mental faculties, but we find current
in language such expressions as sound understanding,
sound judgment, and sound reason. The nature of
reason, understanding, and judgment will be more


SANITY AND INSANITY. 115

clearly understood through a comparative study of the
alleged characteristics of mental health. Of this, more
in the third part of this book.

The comparison between insanity and the passions
may be carried somewhat further. The most similar
to the fixed ideas of the former are the objective pas-
sions, or those which aim at definite objects of desire.
As we can classify (with Maass) the latter into those
which refer to one's own individuality, those which
refer to other men, and those which have to do with
things, so also we may find that insanity differs in re-
spect to its object. The imagined transformations into
princes and kings, or even into persons of the Deity,
correspond to pride. The fear of death and of imagi-
nary adversaries and persecutors is joined to egoism or
selfishness. Desire for liberty recalls the intractability
of most insane people, and the necessity of governing
them by force and authority. Love, hate, jealousy,
often pass into insanity. Ambition, become insanity,
seeks to make itself known by self-sacrifices of an un-
usual kind, while the desire to govern often erects for
itself a throne in an insane asylum ; the desire for en-
joyment sometimes partakes of a crazy state of blessed-
ness, which believes that it has direct communication
with heaven. Avarice, on the contrary, labors under
a foolish anxiety about poverty and hunger.

As to what concerns the subjective passions — desire
for pleasure, dread of disgust and emptiness (accord-
ing to Maass) — it may be remarked that the common
usages of speech furnish no words for this mental phase,
which can not be exactly indicated by the expression,
passion (Leidenschaft). Where there is no definite
object, there is also no definite act of attention, but a


116 BMPIEICAL PSYCHOLOGY.

fluctuating mental condition which is not in harmony
with itself, and is for this reason weak ; so that if rea-
son can not govern it the cause does not proceed so
much from the opposition which it meets as from in-
capacity to come to a fixed resolution at the command
of reason. Hence, it appears that we can not consider
the states of mind here mentioned among the passions.

/But the ideas of empirical psychology are too fluctu-
ating to admit of firm reliance on such conclusions.

^No passion is a pure force or strength. Each carries
with it its weakness, its misery, its pitiably helpless
condition. And, on the other hand, it is not to be
denied that the desire for pleasure, even the most com-
mon, which frequently changes with objects — ^and so,
too, the dread of disgust and of the feeling of emptiness
— often by its continuous strength can fill only too well
the place of an objective passion. Various excitations
of desire for this or that pleasure, or of aversion for
this or that discomfort, are capable of a combination,
and, as it were, of an accumulated intensity, by which
they [neutralize one another and] ♦are changed into a
complex force which drives men in a middle direction.
If we ask here for analogous kinds of insanity, it
may be remarked, first, that after shame has disap-
peared, together with intelligence, all pleasures have
a tendency to express themselves freely and boldly.
Moreover, it is remarkable that stupid insanity, which,
in case it is not quite idiocy, expresses itself in every
movement only as an abhorrence of uncomfortable
feeling ; and therefore it shows itself in a very general
dread of pain. Bestless insanity implies more dis-
tinctly dread of emptiness ; it likewise implies weari-
ness of life, which leads to suicide.


SANITY AND INSANITY. 117

Now, as we have searched for kinds of illusion
similar to the passions (inasmuch as we followed the
classification of passions made by Maass), so, converse-
ly ly, we must be allowed to investigate the kinds of
passions corresponding to the different kinds of illu-
sion. Whichever of these is exhaustively presented, in
a complete tabular view, will furnish, without doubt, a
complete classification of the other. A supernumerary
member of the one list, however, will indicate a miss-
ing term in the other.

Among the kinds of illusion we find, imagined re-
proaches against one's self, pretended suggestions of
the devil, doubt in the mercy of God, etc. In the se-
ries of passions, what corresponds to these mental
aberrations? Very manifestly a moral and religious
enthusiasm, which passes over into self-torture. And
I furthermore, this recalls political and learned passions,

1^ as well as all kinds of fanaticism. The true nature of

these passions must necessarily have escaped previous
^^psychologists (and not Maass alone), because they were
' ^TgsoIvedTo^arry out consistently the theory that the

passions belonged to sensuousness, and hence were to
be entirely separated from reason. The source of
-V moral and religious concepts is ascribed to reason.

j These concepts, together with the scientific thoughts

^ and theories collectively related to them, may become

^ objects of passionate search. Nothing is so sacred

that it can not inflame the human mind in an unholy
way. Just as hunger and thirst, those lowest wants
\ may change the unfortunate man into a thief, a

/ robber, and a murderer, so may the thirst of knowl-

nU edge, so may higher efforts of every kind, lead to crim-

inal acts. Indeed, reason (if such a mental faculty


118 EMPIRICAL PSYCHOLOGY.

really exists) not infrequently enters into peaceful
coalition with passionate sensuousness. This is seen
most clearly in the idea of right, to which men very
generally allow only a restricted sphere, inasmuch as
outside of and in spite of it they permit themselves
every gratification of their desires. The robber-cap-
tain administers justice to his band.

The fundamental principle, hcsreticis non est ser-
vanda fides^ had force at one time in the one holy
Church ; a multitude of similar examples is to be
found in common life, where men find it necessary to
act uprightly only toward those whom they consider
their equals, while they regard all others as strangers
and enemies. Would one seriously admit that reason,
negating itself, had in this concluded a disgraceful
treaty with sensuousness, to which it gave up the
whole foreign territory?

All these and many other difficulties disappear at
once as soon as it is perceived how concepts manifest
themselves, now as passion, now as reason ; while they
are in themselves neither the one nor the other, and,
moreover, contain nothing as a previously - formed
germ similar to either. Hence, also, they contain no
idea of justice, nor any other idea or category.


PAET THIED.

RATIONAL PSYCHOLOGY.

SECTION FIRST.— THEOREMS FROM METAPHYSICS
AND NATURAL PHILOSOPHY.


CHAPTEE I.

THE SOUL AND MATTER.

150. The notion of the soul which some modem
systems have unreasonably subjected to suspicion must
be restored, although under characteristics hitherto
unknown.

The soul is a simple essence ( Wesen), not merely
without parts, but also without any kind of diversity
or multiplicity in its quality; hence it has no space
relations. In thinking it, however, with other es-
sences, it is included necessarily in space, and for every
moment of time it is located in a definite place. This
place is the simple in space, or, what is the same, the
nothing in space, a mathematical point.

Note. — For certain theories of natural philosophy and
physiology, but not for psychology, necessary fictions are le-
gitimate, in which the simple is regarded as if it admitted of
separation into parts. Such fictions must be employed with
reference to the soul's union with the body, but without, for
that reason, ascribing to the soul itself any real space conditions
whatever. The fictions of geometricians are in some respects


120 RATIONAL PSYCHOLOGY.

similar when they regard the curve as consisting of indefinitely
short straight lines.

u( 151. Furthermore the soul has no time relations.
In thinking, however, wherein it is included with other
essences, it must be conceived as in time and indeed
as in eternity, although this eternity, and stiU more
the temporal duration, must not be predicated of the
soul. (Introd. to Phil., 116 )
(/. /' 152. The soul has no innate natural talents nor

/faculties whatever, either for the purpose of receiving
^ or for the purpose of producing. It is, therefore, no
tabula rasa in the sense that impressions foreign to
i itself may be made upon it; moreover, in the sense
i indicated by Leibnitz, it is not a substance which in-
cludes in itself original activity. It has originally
neither concepts, nor feelings, nor desires. It knows
nothing of itself, and nothing of other things ; also in
it* lie no forms of perception and thought, no laws of
willing and action, and not even a remote predisposi-
tion to any of these.

153. The simple nature {Das einfache Was) of the
/soul is totally unknown and will forever remain so.

^"^ I It is as little an object of speculative as of empirical
\ psychology.

154. Between several dissimilar simple essences
exists a relation which, with the help of a comparison
from the physical world, may be described as pressure
and resistance. For the reason that pressure is the
retardation of movement, the relation mentioned con-
sists in the capacity of the simple quality of each exist-
ence to be changed through the other, if each did not
resist and maintain itself in its quality against the
disturbance. Self-preservations of this kind are the


THE SOUL AND MATTER. 121

only events which really occur in nature, and this is
the combination of event with being.

155. The self-preservations of the soul are (at least ^
in part and so far as we know them) concepts and in-
deed simple concepts, for the act of self-preserva-
tion is as simple as is the essence which is preserved.
Hence there exists an infinite manifold of other such
acts of self-preservation, which differ as the disturb-/ »/
ances differ. With this explanation the manifold of
concepts and their infinitely varied complexes prescn^
no difficulty whatever.

This is not the place to discuss feelings and de-
sires. They appear to be composed of something
objective, added to a preference and rejection, which
will be explained later. Nor can we at this point dis-
cuss self-consciousness, or anything whatever that may
be considered as belonging to the inner sense.

156. The difference between soul and matter is not
a difference in the nature of the simple essences, but
it is a difference in the manner of our apprehending
them. Matter, represented as a spatial reality with
spatial forces, as we are accustomed to think it, be-
longs neither in the realm of essence {^Sein) nor in that
of actual events, but is merely an appearance. This
matter is real, however, as an aggregate of simple
essences, and in these essences something really occurs
which results in the phenomenon of a space exist-
ence.

The explanation of matter depends entirely upon
showing how to the inner states of the essences (self-
preservations) certain space-conditions belong, as means
necessary for the act of comprehension by the specta-
tor, which space-conditions, just because they are noth-


122 RATIONAL PSYCHOLOGY.

ing real, must be adjusted to those inner conditions ;
and by this an appearance of attraction and repulsion
arises. The equilibrium of the two latter (attraction
and repulsion) determines for matter its degree of
density, likewise its elasticity, its form of crystalization
in free condensation, in a word its essential properties,
which in this form are originally based upon the quali-
ties of simple essences.

Matter never fills space as a geometric continuum
(it can not be composed of simple parts), but with im-
perfect mutual penetration of its adjacent simple parts.
(Concerning this contradiction compare the remark in
section 150.)

Matter is impenetrable only for those substances
which are not capable of changing the equilibrium of
attraction and repulsion that exists in it. It is always
penetrable for that agent which is capable of dissolv-
ing it.

Note. — Concerning the foregoing and what follows, refer-
ence must be made to the author's Metaphysics, in which is
found his Philosophy of Nature.


CHAPTER IL

VITAL FORCES.

157. Vital forces are nothing, original (I have
named them in the plural because they can neither
originate nor act alone), and there is nothing similar
to them in the nature of essences.


\


^BB^l^-lBI


VITAL FORCES. 123

Only a system of self-preservations in one and the
same essence is capable of creating them, and they
are to be regarded as the inner development of simple
i^ essences. Generally, they originate in the elements of

organic bodies whose arrangement is fitted for pro-
ducing systems of self-preservation in the individ-
ual elements. This is shown in the assimilation of
food.

158. Once acquired, there remains with each ele-
ment its own vital force, even though the element be
separated from the organic body to which it belonged.
This is shown in the sustenance of the higher organ-
ism by the lower, and of the vegetable organism by
decayed parts of other organic bodies.

Note. — To this belongs the explanation of all generation,
without exception, including that of some lower organisms
from apparently crude material — i. e., from such material as pos-
sesses no organic structure (structure is a space-predicate)— but
from this deficiency of structure the lack of vital force can by
% no means be inferred. To assume, however, an original vital

/ force in this is an unwarranted procedure. In our circle of ex-

' perience there is no matter whatever of which it could with cer-

f tainty be asserted that it is entirely inorganic. The whole at-

mosphere is full of elements which have already gained vital
force in some organic body or other, and the number of such
elements is constantly increasing in nature. Indeed, we do not
know whether the same mutual exchange of vital force does not
occur among the stars.

159. All human investigation must recognize the
fundamental source of vital forces by referring them
to that Providence according to whose designs they
were originated. No metaphysics and no experience
reaches further. Every theory as to the probable crea-
tion of lower organisms by a natural process from iu-»


124 RATIONAL PSYCHOLOGY.

organic matter, and the deyelopment of higher organ-
isms from those of a lower order, can be refuted.

160. In the example of the soul, psychology shows
us an excellent internal development of a simple es-
sence. According to this type, one must explain the
deyelopment of all other essences, eyen those that are
not able to represent or conceiye. To this may be
added a former remark that, where several essences
make up a material whole, the inner state determines
an adequate external condition for it — i. e., a position
in space. For this reason vital forces generally ap-
pear moving forces ; just for this reason, however, their
movements can not be comprehended through chemi-
cal or mechanical laws. With the latter, no inner
development comes into consideration.

In the above the relation between psychology and
physiology is indicated. Psychology is the first, the
preceding ; physiology, in case it is to be something
more than a mere empirical science, the second ; for it
must learn from the former to understand the notion
of inner development. We can not have a correct
definition of life without the help of psychology.

Note. — On this difficulty of defining life consult among oth-
ers Treviranus (Biology, vol. i, p. 16). The most comprehensive
empirical characteristic of vitality is assimilation, which, for
this reason, is first mentioned in the foregoing. If an organism
should be found without this peculiarity, we might doubt
whether it could be considered to be living, even if it were
granted that it might possess a soul (a case which may very
well be admitted in the general notion).

161. From the above it is self-evident that the
vital forces may be very different in kind as well as in
degree. For a system of self-preservations might be


CONNECTION BETWEEN SOUL AND BODY. 125

different in different essences ; in similar essences the
self-preservations vary according to the difference in
the disturbances; finally, there may be a greater or
smaller number of self-preservations belonging to
them.

From this may be explained the difference in those
parts which are nourished by the same kind of food.
The elements of which the heart and the nerves con-
sist certainly do not differ in their chemical constitu-
ents so much as in their internal structure.

The causal relation between the different parts of
the same living body, likewise that between this body
and the outer world, offers upon the whole no difficulty
whatever. All causality, and especially all cohesion of

'^ matter, depends upon the dissimilarity of the elements.

Hence, for example, the action of the nerves upon the

k muscles can excite no special wonder, much less can it

justify hypotheses of electric currents, polarizations,
etc., which are empty vagaries that owe their existence
to the latest hobbies of the physicist. There might
be something true in them, and yet, even then, the most
important questions remain unanswered, and in the
end one riddle take the place of the other.


\


CHAPTER III

THE CONNECTIOiq^ BETWEEN SOUL AND BODY.

162. The connection between mind and matter in
the brutes, and especially in man, has in it much that
is surprising, which must be referred to the wisdom of


126 RATIONAL PSYCHOLOGY.

Providence ; but this is not where we are accustomed
first of all to seek it, because we consider matter real
so far as it occupies space, and because we regard the
human mind as an original thinking, feeling, and will-
ing existence, so that between the two (matter and
mind) there is no middle term. We may seek beyond
matter, as a spatial manifestation, for the simple es-
sences possessing capacity for internal development
from which this manifestation arises. We may regard
the mind as the soul endowed with power of repre-
sentation. We may remember that to the concepts, as
self-preservations of the soul, other self-preservations in
other essences (in the nervous system) must corre-
spond. Thus we perceive that the chain of self-pres-
ervations belonging together may indeed extend still
further ; that it may run through a whole system of
essences which present themselves as one body ; and we
48hall no longer consider it enigmatic if from the foot
to the brain, and even into the soul, a succession of in-
ternal states having nothing to do with the lapse of
time nor with any movement in space is extended for-
ward and backward. Time and space may appear,
however, as accompanying phenomena.

163. First of all, the question concerning the loca-
tion of the soul, which has been wrongly refused a
hearing, presents itself here. It is acknowledged upon
physiological grounds that we can not with any degree
of probability indicate a place but only a region for it
(in the point of junction between the brain and the
spinal cord). Nor is a fixed position necessary, but
the soul may move in a certain region without the
least indication of it being given in its concepts ; nor
can the slightest trace of its movements be found by


CONNECTION BETWEEN SOUL AND BODY. 127

making an anatomical inyestigation. The change of
its seat, however, may be regarded as a very fruitful
hypothesis for the explanation of its anomalous condi-
tions.

Note 1. — This statement has aroused much astonishment,
yet physiologists may remember that their sphere of observation
lies in the regions of spaoe, and they might leave it to the meta-
physician to see that nothing more be allowed to space than be-
longs to it. If they wish, however, to share his cares with him
they must earnestly study metaphysics, and then one will be able
to talk further with them.

Note 2. — We should have no reason for assuming that in all
brutes and in man the seat of the soul is in the same place.
Probably in the brutes, especially in the lower orders, it is in
the spinal cord. Furthermore, we can not assume that each
brute has only one soul. In worms whose severed parts con-
tinue to live the opposite assumption is probable. In the hu-
man nervous system may be found many elements whose inner
development widely surpasses the soul of an animal of the low-
er order. (Besides, we must not forget that indications of life
are not indications of soul. In organic parts that have been
separated from their organism, life may continue for some time
without soul.)

If we wished, however, to attribute to man several souls in
one body, we should beware of thinking of mental activities as
divided among them, rather the latter must be regarded as
being entire in each soul. Secondly, the most exact harmony
among these souls would have to be assumed so that they might
serve for identical examples of the same kind. This is, however,
in the highest degree improbable, and hence the whole thought
is to be rejected. If, in the contest between reason and passion,
it sometimes seems to a man that he has several souls, this is a
psychical phenomenon which can not be considered in connec-
tion with the paradoxical thoughts just mentioned, but which
will be explained later.

164. The whole nervous system in the human body ] j
serves a single soul, and by means of this system the


128 RATIONAL PSYCHOLOGY.

soul is implanted in this body, more a burden than a
help to it, for the body lives as a plant for itself, pro-
vided nourishment and a suitable place be given it, as
sometimes has to be done for idiots. Stories of some
who were idiots from birth give rise to the thought
that they may be merely vegetating bodies without
souls.

165. With the close causal connection of all parts
in the whole system which we call man, the varied de-
pendence of the mind upon the body can appear in no

f way strange. So much more wonderful is it that, upon
yi the whole, the nervous system appears to be made al*
\ most entirely to obey the mind. We shall perceive this
hiore and more when we see how little the physiologi-
/cal conditions are necessary to explain the states and
/ activities of the mind. Yet only in the healthy man
is the nervous system a good servant. In illness it
shows itself disobedient and obstinate, and in many
mental disorders, especially in dementia, the relation
between the nerves and the soul is entirely reversed.
This is an indication that we are not to regard the
healthy condition merely as a natural phenomenon
which could not be otherwise, but in it we have to re-
vere a beneficent arrangement of Providence.

166. It would be hardly necessary to mention the
intercourse with the outer world which is afforded to
the human soul and at the same time limited through
its body, were we not obliged to remark in regard to the
theory, now very wide-spread, concerning a general or-
ganic connection of the whole universe, that we can
not bring the latter into relation with the theories
advanced here if we do not wish to mix up entirely
heterogeneous concepts.


t


^4^-


SPACE AND TIME. 129

Note. — ^There are no tenable grounds a priori for a universal
causal relation, and experience ends with the feeble glimmer of
light which remote suns throw on one another.


SECTION SECOND.— EXPLANATIONS OF PHENOMENA.

CHAPTER I.

CONCEPTS OF SPACE AND TIME. "^

167. It is as yet too early to explain everything in
psychology. Meanwhile much has explained itself in
the foregoing, and the comparison of facts with the
principles established will gradually lead us to further
explanations.

How the world, and we ourselves, as phenomena,
come to appear to ourselves, is the first point upon
which we need a psychological revelation, in order
especially to learn to comprehend the origin of meta-
physical problems. After that the question must be
concerning our position in the world from a practical
[moral] standpoint, especially that we may compare
that which we can be with that which we ought to be.

168. Why we apprehend things in the world in\
the relations of space and time, must be answered by /
an investigation into the nature of series of concepts/
(29). The following serves as an introduction : ^

In section 28, instead of the definite particular

remainders r, r', r', of a single concept P, the infinite

multitude of all its possible remainders is given, and

these are considered to be blended with innumerable

concepts IT H' n'', etc. Thus for the concept P will
12


130 RATIONAL PSYCHOLOGY.

arise a continnons enccession of reproductions, each
of which has, however, its own law which depends
upon its remainder r, according to the formula in sec-
tion 25.

Moreover, in section 29, instead of the series a, 3, c^ d,
etc., there is posited a continuous succession, of which
each member like P, with all its possible remainders,
is blended with other members, but each in a peculiar
manner.

Besides, let this succession of blended concepts be
considered to be extended indefinitely on both sides,
and finally let it be remarked that, if it be not made
impossible by accompanying conditions, each member
of the succession may be such that in it several such
successions may cross one another (as in c, section 30).

Moreover, when any one member in this whole
system of concepts moves even in the slightest degree,
the movement is transferred to the next member, and
so on, with the inviolable law that if of three remain-
ders r, r', r'y of one and the same concept, r' lies be-
tween r and r^, then also the concept n' (between n
and n') blended with r' will be reproduced as well as
those concepts which are blended with r and r'. This
relation of intermediary between two others must
always be present, even though the degree of repro-
duction be very slight. This is the general law in all
series.

169. Whether, and in what way, the kind of re-
production is limited, depends upon accompanying
conditions, as follows :

A. If in the sense-perception the series a, J, c, rf,
etc., — or rather if, instead of the latter, the conceivable
continuum can change its order by all possible trans-


SPACE AND TIMK 131

positions (e. g., as in acidy a db c, etc.) — ^then each
time, from the perceived succession, a new succession
arises in the reproduction. But in this case the laws
for reproduction become so involved that no percepti-
ble order remains (as if a number of small arches of
different curvatures were attached to one another).

B. Let it be assumed, however, that the sense-per-
ception is reversed — i. e., the series be is changed into c b
and abed into dcba^ etc., — the relation of the interme-
diate concept between two others will never be changed
for any other ; moreover, the series of concepts might
begin here or there, and there be no definite starting-
point. The law of reproduction arising from this fur-
nishes a spatial concept with a progress from each point
in the series toward at least the two opposite sides.

170. Let there be a definite starting-point, and for
the rest let everything be as heretofore ; then arises the
most general form of the concept, namely, that real-
ized in the series of numbers.

171. Let the beginning point be dispensed with;
then the perception series runs without reversal, con-
stantly in one direction; then also the reproduction
can take only this one direction. Now if, while the
perception is at o?, a is at the same time reproduced,
then from d the series abed is recalled back to a ; the
same series, however, will be held in consciousness by
d, according to another law (as in section 29 c re-
calls b and a). From this arises the representation of
the concept of time.

172. First, for illustration, we may remark that in
the soul the concept of space is not itself extended, but
is necessarily completely intensive, and that time does
not elapse during the representation of the temporal '


132 RATIONAL PSYCHOLOGY.

"fco such an amount as to equal the time represented.
lAs for number, its fundamental idea is only that of the
taoLore or less ; the one, two, three, etc., together with
^he inserted fractions, are only transferred to this f un-
jdamental idea. The abscissas of analytical geometry
tare the true and complete symbols for the notion of
Wumber in its universality.

173. The original apprehension of the eye can not
/be spatial; for the perceptions of all colored places
I converge in the unity of the soul and in this every
•■ trace is lost of right and left, above and below, etc.,

which found a place upon the retina of the eye. The
' same is true of touching with the tongue and the
hands.

But in seeing the eye moves ; it changes the center
of its surface of sight. By this movement there is a
constant blending of the concepts gained, an incitation
of those which are strengthened by perceptions of what
lies outside the middle of the field of vision, and an in-
numerable multitude of reproductions interlacing one
another — all these are combined, and for them no
words could be found if we, educated as we are, were
to meet them as new objects. Those bom blind who
subsequently attain sight, already know space inas-
much as touch prepares for them successions of re-
productions similar to those which sight furnishes
more conveniently and more rapidly. By this we see
how two widely differing senses produce the same result.

174. The concept of space relations demands a suc-
cession that takes place in the act of representation,
for it depends upon reproductions which are Just oc-
curring. In this connection two points are to be ob-
served :


Vi.


SPACE AND TIME. I33

(1.) The succession in representation is not a repre-
sented succession.

(2.) It does not require a measurable duration of
time, but only an imperceptibly short interval, espe-
cially as by the movement of the eye in its field of vision
numberless apprehensions of colored surfaces at every
movement arise simultaneously and act upon the con-
cepts previously gained, both strengthening and excit-
ing them. The spatial seeing includes in it an infinite
variety of extremely weak simultaneous reproductions
which are united with the apprehensions actually taking
place, which latter in themselves alone would not be
considered to be spatial. Since in this spatial seeing
it is not necessary that any single reproduction series
should require a perceptible length of time to pass be-
fore the mind, no measurable duration is necessary for
it, and therefore it appears to us as though space intui-
tions are quite simultaneous and entirely free from all
succession in time.

175. In order to distinguish between time and
space perceptions in their origin more accurately, we
may suppose the following case :

From a, two series, abed and a B C D^ may begin
both of which are presented to the attention simulta-
neously. Up to this point in the representation there
is nothing temporal nor spatial, nor is there anything
of the kind if, after the whole series of perceptions is
removed out of consciousness, at some later time a is
again brought into consciousness and then both series
are simultaneously reproduced. Such a reproduction is
rather an example of the kind that we are accustomed
to attribute to memory, in which time is consumed, but
no time and no space represented. The matter is dif-


134 RATIONAL PSYCHOLOGY.

ferent if, while D and d are still perceived (or thought)
a again rises (perhaps on account of a concept similar
to it that has just now arisen), and recalls to mind the
remaining terms of its series. For then this successive
recollection of the several terms occurs during a simul-
taneous collective presentation of the whole series as
remarked in section 171. Thus the collective survey of
the earlier and later moments of time and the view of
the time extension would be accomplished, whereas
those persons who could not hold together the begin-
ning and the end of the series, and could not observe
a transition from the former to the latter, would never
know anything of time. We should get still another
result if a should not immediately rise again, but if a
series c 17 8, should enter between D and d which in
the perception goes from D to d and also backward,
and if, moreover, the perception should return also
from D through G and B to a, and from d through c
and b to a. By this I) and d would diverge, and the
differences between that which was the first and that
which was the last would be obliterated ; the different
series would in the reproduction converge from all
points toward one another at any new excitation, and
the apprehension would be spatial.

Both propositions in section 174 apply to the repre-
sentation of the temporal. We consume only a short
time in representing to ourselves a whole year or
even a century, provided the partial concepts in the
series here necessary are blended with one another;
the time, however, which we consume is not repre-
sented in the object. The concept of a period of time
arises when one runs through the time series backward
and forward with equal facility.


SPACE AND TIME. 135

176. It is possible only for educated people to com-
prehend long extensions in time. In its earliest years,
the child can realize only very short periods of time.
The reason lies simply in the necessity for reaction of
the later concepts upon the earlier ones in the series
(section 171). The child has great susceptibility (sec-
tion 47) : for this reason, and, because the complexes ;
and blendings possess little strength, the impression
of the present moment throws the one previously ap-i
prehended too quickly below the threshold of con-
sciousness, and thus long series can not be formed.

177. Psychologically considered, everything tem-
poral and spatial is infinitely divisible ; for it depends
upon such remainders of one and the same concept, as
r, r', r,", etc. (28). If there could be only a definite
number of such remainders, then also a corresponding
number of different laws of reproduction for the same
concept would be possible. But the whole concept is
in no way a complex of such parts as those remain-
ders ; rather, all obscuration by which the remainders
aridfe is accidental to the concept, and even opposed to
it. Since here the whole precedes the parts, so the
division has no limits, and the possibility of different
laws of reproduction is likewise unlimited. Thus it
happens that for the senses and the imagination, in
space and in time, the whole appears to precede the
parts, and from this arises the contradiction in the
notion of matter. (See Introduction to Philosophy,
section 119.)

Note 1. — Geometry is to be considered in this connection.
On account of the infinite divisibility of space and time it
needed its incommensurable quantities. From this, however,
much evil has arisen for metaphysics, which was so incautious


136 RATIONAL PSYCHOLOGY.

as to consider this view of space to be the primary and only
correct one.

Note 2. — We have proceeded from spatial and temporal re-
lations, but not from space and time. To make the former
dependent upon the latter is an error which can not be explained
here. Empty spaces are seen just as empty intervals (pauses)
are heard, viz., by expecting that which is omitted. Concepts
already present are in these examples carried further forward ; in
the empty spaces or time intervals they sink constantly, how-
ever, until something new is given, which now becomes blended
with the remainders still in the mind. If the transfer be con-
tinued further, and exceed the last conceived limits, then, there
being no other limits, infinity is disclosed. Not only the given
forms, but also the forms gained through free rising concepts
(to which belongs the creation or construction of geometrical
figures), offer very rich material for investigation if we consider
the difference of their apprehension from different points of view.

Note 3. — For the explanation of the beautiful in space, we
must take into consideration not only the favoring in the repro-
duction of the series which variously unite, but especially we
must consider also the effort to blend all things beheld into a
one. The latter act has some analogy with the blending before
the arrest (section 34). All forms approaching roundness re-
spond to this effort, while on the contrary the angular, the ex-
tended, the crooked, resist it. Variegated flourishes please for a
time, but we turn again to the more simple. Works of art are for
the most part interesting for what they say or signify ; the pure
space relations with their peculiar beauty are often forgotten.

178. By way of supplement we may add a word
upon the origin of concepts of intensive magnitudes.
The question here is, What is the origin of the stand-
ard which we use when we characterize our simple
sensations as strong or weak? The reawakening of
similar old concepts alone does not suffice for an ex-
planation ; for, in the first place, the concept does not
adjust itself to the strength of that which is reawak-
ened, although the awakening occurs through its own


SPACE AND TIME. 137

forces ; in the second place, the result is only a blend-
ing of the old and new, but it is not a measure of one
by the other. We have here one of the numerous ex-
amples of that class of psychological problems which
are scarcely ever observed on account of their simplici-
ty, but which are very difficult to solve. The reason
seems to lie in the law of helps (25). These helps have
their measure, not merely of time, but also of strength,
up to the point to which they endeavor to raise the
old similar concepts. If the approaching new percep-
tion be too weak to furnish free space enough by re-
sistance to the hindrances of the former old concepts
(26), then the effort of the helping concepts remains
unsatisfied and arouses the disagreeable feeling of
weakness, opposed to the pleasant feeling described in
section 37. If the new perception be stronger than
might be necessary here, then the percipient would feel
himself raised out of his accustomed sphere, for the
helps can not make it equal to the former old concepts.
The pleasantness of this feeling lies, nevertheless, in
the favoring of those helps. It is hardly necessary to
mention what is presupposed here, viz., that the old
similar concept is united with some kind of a helping
one. The more there are of these, and the more
equally they work together, so much the more accurate
will be the valuation of the intensive magnitude.

Here belongs the investigation into the time-stand-
ard {Zeitmaass),

Note. — In my lectures upon general metaphysics 1 shall
discuss in detail the three dimensions of space, likewise the de-
velopment of the idea of number and its relation to logical geu'
eral notions, which discussion has no place here, though it is
indispensable in metaphysics.


138 RATIONAL PSYCHOLOGY.

Supplement. — The Difference between Series.

In the foregoing, the dependence of the psychical
processes npon the form of the series has akeady been
made clear. As the latter will appear still more in the
result, it is to the purpose to observe the possible dif-
ferences of the series in general :

(1.) The series are longer or shorter. In order to
bring this comparison back to a definite point of view,
let us take the series a, d, e;, . . . g, so that a remainder
from a may be blended withjo, but none with q^ then
a will work so as to reproduce p ; on the other hand, b
or c may be combined with q or r; in this way the
series may be prolonged indefinitely, but there is no
immediate connection between the beginning and the
end.

(2.) The degree of union among the terms is
stronger or weaker.

(3.) The series are throughout similar or not, as
well in regard to the strength of their terms as to their
degree of combination. The strongest terms or com-
binations are either at the beginning, in the middle, or
at the end.

(4.) Often several series serve for one — e. g., after
frequent repetition. By this the dissimilarities may
be lessened, but often the beginnings only are strength-
ened. If this should not happen, then the series must
not receive additions at the end, but at the beginning
— e. g.<i c d^b c d^ ab c d.

(5.) Many series return into themselves when either
the beginning or one of the later members is repeated.

(6.) In the case of dissimilar series the stronger
terms often form a series among themselves. It is


DIFFERENCES OF SERIES. 139

then in the power of reflection to reproduce the series
either in the form of a summary or synopsis or more
in detail.

(7.) In complicated series often a term (or seyeral
terms) has a side* series — i. e., a series whose course
does not lead into the principal series ; also one term
may have several side series, so that either one series
or another may proceed from it.

(8.) The side series may progress simultaneously,
in which case, however, provided they are not to coin-
cide, a third series must be interposed between them,
just as several radii of a circle have between them the
surface of the sector (which contains innumerable pos-
sible lines).

(9.) In the case of complexes of characteristics (of
which kind are all notions of objects that appeal to
the senses) each element of the complex (every sen-
suous characteristic) may be the beginning point of a
series — e. g., a series of changes.

(10.) Series which begin simply may later on flow
together into a complex.

This discussion may be sufiicient here to indicate
the number of possibilities which must be kept con-
stantly in mind at one time in order to study the
psychical mechanism accurately.

In this we must not overlook the fact that the re-
production fluctuates between two kinds of opposed
possible influences. Either reflection may be added
(this proceeds from a more powerful mass of concepts,
generally from free-rising concepts, section 32), or there
is present an arrest by which either the reproduction
of the principal series or side series is stopped. In the
latter case, in dreaming (or in feigning) we combine


140 RATIONAL PSYCHOLOGY.

series which when we are fully awake require many se-
ries between them if they do not even neutralize each
other, as, for example, in a dialogue of the dead, in
which Alexander, Hannibal, Caesar, and Napoleon con-
verse with one another. In regard to *^ what concerns
free-rising concepts, the latter can not be considered
to be such absolutely, but only in relation to the men-
tal state and the surroundings. Observations of this
kind require a practical experience which can not be
taught.


CHAPTER 11.

THE DEVELOPMENT OF NOTIONS.

179. All our concepts without exception are sub-
jected to the laws of arrest, of blending, etc. They may
constitute the source of the feelings or they may strug-
gle for realization as desires, etc. Then where do no-
tions (Begriffe) have their seat or whence do they come ?

At the beginning of Logic (Introd. to Phil., section
34) it has been said that our concepts collectively are no-
tions in regard to that which is represented by them.
Hence notions exist as such only in our abstraction ;
they are in reality quite as little a particular kind of
concepts as the understanding is a special faculty, out-
side, and by the side of the imagination, memory, etc.
From this it may be remarked furthermore that, be-
cause all concepts without exception may be expressed
as desires and feelings, the union of the so-called prac-
tical with the theoretical understanding is no mystery,


DEVELOPMENT OF NOTIONS. 141

but self-evident, inasmuch as here two kinds which
must first be combined are present, rather the practi-
cal understanding and the theoretical understanding
are two imaginary objects which we have first created
tlirough our abstractions and then considered to be
something real.

180. The delusion, however, that notions are a pe-
culiar class of concepts has its source principally in
general notions. (In his Logic, Kant posits the es-
sence of notions directly in their generality.) It might
occur to one that perhaps under certain circumstances
the laws of arrest between concepts might effect a sep-
aration of the dissimilar from the common character-
istics of concepts, such as logicians unhesitatingly
ascribe to the faculty of abstraction ; but investigation
teaches that such a faculty belongs not merely to the
creations of fancy, but to impossibilities. From com-
plexes and blendings which have once been formed
nothing can be separated. Partial concepts in a com-
plex or blending carry every arrest in common, and
hence remain constantly together; and from simple
sensations one can not even in thought separate any-
thing and leave anything else remaining. How is the
general notion of color to arise from red, blue, and
yellow? What are the specific differences here from
which abstraction is made ? No one can give them.

General notions which are thought merely through
their content without the introduction of the products
of representation for the sake of applications are, as
already remarked (78), logical ideals, just as logic as
a whole is, so to speak, the ethics of thinking, but not
a natural history of the understanding.

Hence we can only ask. How is it that we construct


142 RATIONAL PSYCHOLOGY.

sach ideals and approach nearer and nearer to them?
The answer, by means of the judgment, has been
given already, and we must now develop it. In this
certain total impressions of similar objects are presup-
posed as raw material from which general notions are
gradually constructed. These total impressions are,
however, nothing but complexes in which the similar
characteristics of the partial concepts have a prepon-
derance over the different characteristics. Such ex-
cess becomes gradually stronger and more decisive.
At first the repeated apprehensions of similar objects
form a time series (we remember when and where and
in what order we have seen such objects). If the se-
ries becomes too long, however, it ceases to develope
further ; but the frequently recurring becomes a per-
manent concept which remains in a condition of in-
volution (31). The arrest among the concepts of dif-
ferent characteristics has caused their permanent
obscuration, although they have not been entirely sep-
arated from the concept of what is of the same kind.

181. What happens to concepts when they unite
into judgments, and why do they so often occur in
this form ?

Judgments can not be mere complexes or blend-
ings ; otherwise subject and predicate could not be sep-
arated, rather they would flow together in such a way
that they would be represented as an undivided unit,
without a trace of the union. The subject, as such,
must fluctuate between several conditions, inasmuch
as it must stand opposed to the predicate as the one
capable of being determined by the latter. If this re-
quirement can be complied with in more than one
way, then there is more than one source of judgments.


DEVELOPMENT OF NOTIONS. 143

182. First, those collective impressions from simi-
lar perceptions flit from one to another of the several
characteristics. He who has seen a man often in vari-
ous attitudes, now standing, now sitting, now working,
now resting, has such a wavering collective concept ;
he who sees him now again, decides, by aid of the col-
lective concept, as to his present attitude, and thus
a judgment is formed. A multitude of negatives (in-
dicating the conditions in which he does not find him)
are contained in this, though hardly observable, but
they will become perceptible in cases where the ex-
pectation is contradicted. He who to-day sees a tree
from which the storm of last night broke a branch,
judges first negatively : the tree has not its branch ; it
is broken, splintered in this or that place, etc.

183. Secondly, a multitude of concepts are aroused
in a person looking upon an object new to him, which
concepts are reproduced, to a limited extent, on ac-
count of a partial similarity to the object mentioned.
The new concept, as the one to be determined, fluctu-
ates between the old concepts, which constitute the
determining characteristics. And from this arises the
question, What is this object ?

184. Thirdly, those collective concepts in which
series lie infolded (31) are to be regarded as subjects
whose predicates appear one after the other in the un-
folding.

185. Fourthly, the fluctuation between difiPerent
mental states gives to the concept to which the fluctu-
ation is attached the place of the subject.

186. Fifthly, and principally, on account of its
fluctuating among several significations, each word in
the language is fitted to be the subject of a judgment.


144 RATIONAL PSYCHOLOGY.

A sign that was repeatedly afSxed to the objects indi-
cated, with their changeable accompanying conditions,
carries the total impression of the latter with it ; now,
if with it a more definite object is to be designated,
then the total impression must be corrected ; this cor-
rection occurs through the predicates, which, however,
in a developed language are often changed into adjec-
tives, or are clothed in other kindred forms of speech,
80 that only the most important among the corrections
are expressed in the form of predicate. Children, on
the contrary, speak in short sentences ; they know no
full, rounded sentences as yet. Their concepts arrange
themselves in the form of judgments shortly after they
have learned the words.

187. When one hears a judgment expressed, there
are for him two cases possible : either the predicate is
found among the several characteristics between which
his concept of the subject fluctuates, or it is not. In
the first case, there is no doubt but he will understand
the judgment as such. We must make further dis-
tinctions in the second case. The predicate either
agrees with these characteristics or it does not. If
the former is the case, then with the act of appre-
hending arises a combination of concepts which is no
judgment, but plainly a new complex or blending.
Thus when something is related to us, we, unperceived,
arrange the individual features presented together in
a picture, without thinking that the narrator has made
use of those forms of speech which are employed to
unite the subject with the predicate. If the predicate,
however, is opposed to those characteristics, then still
another distinction must be made — viz., it is either in
contrast or in complete opposition to them. The first


DEVELOPMENT OP NOTIONS. I45

requires a certain kind of complexes which were defi-
nitely given in the foregoing (35), and the result is that
the judgment as such is to be perceived as a paradox
or as false. In the case of complete opposition, how-
ever, the judgment appears not so much false as
senseless.*

188. On the contrary, intelligible speech, above
everything else, must be connected ; it must hold fast
a significant portion of the concepts present, and he
who holds fast the whole connection will understand
best, and will perceive all the reciprocal influences
that prevail with it. Hence the understanding ranks

 [The first edition of Herbart's Manual of Psychology dis-
cusses as an example :] " Psychology has need of the differ-
ential and integral calculus." This statement should appear
acceptable to those who have considered before that all objects
of inner experience are presented as changeable magnitudes,
and who, besides, know how important it is to be acquainted
with the general laws according to which changeable mag-
nitudes depend upon one another. Others who have never
thought of mathematical calculations in connection with psy-
\ chology will consider this sentence historically, perhaps, indeed,
I as a literary peculiarity. Those, however, will name it wrongly
who have elaborated the differential and integral calculus con-
stantly with a view to an application which requires magnitudes
that may be measured and sharply observed, which it is true may
succeed in the outer but not in the inner experience. Finally,
many will find the foregoing sentence quite senseless, because
they do not know in the least how to compare mathematics and
psychology, but regard the two as opposites, like death and life.
(188) The senseless, inasmuch as it fixes the limits for that
which is intelligible, teaches us to know the understanding and
its operation more accurately. Mere opposition without contrast
only causes the opposed concepts to sink, and this is just the
Influence of the senseless — it expels, it kills thought, while con-
trast elevates at least some thoughts.
13


146 RATIONAL PSYCHOLOGY.

as a finer sense. We say a discourse has sense and
intelligence, it is full of meaning, etc.

Note. — ^It is a very important fact that in music also the
distinction between the senseless and the intelligible is made.
Those musical composers who strive after contrasts sometimes
touch upon the former condition. The intelligible, however, is
not for this reason by any means also the beautiful. Besides,
music is so like discourse (with its periods, its premises, and
conclusions) that ignorant or enthusiastic people very easily
imagine that music says something to which only words are
lacking. Thus, in its highest eloquence, music is held to be a
dumb creature. What it wishes to say, however, that it expresses
perfectly and completely, and translations of its meaning into
another language are extremely poor. Music has its understand-
ing in itself, and by this it teaches us that the understanding
is not to be sought in any kind of category whatever, but in the
connection of concepts with one another (of whatever kind the
latter may be).

189. The development of ideas is then the slow,
gradual result of continuous judgment. It may be
observed here that poor languages appear to use many
metaphors, which indicates that remote similarities
suffice to reproduce old concepts and blend them, to-
gether with their names, with the new. From this
condition human thought passes to an ever greater
and finer division of thoughts. At one time the com-
plex A may serve as subject for the predicate a, at
another time for the predicate S, then in bringing to-
gether the two judgments, the contrasts between a and
b will not only be felt (section 35), but will also be
expressed or clearly thought in the judgments ; this
A is a, and that A is h. Here, in the representation
occurs an intentional discrimination, by which, how-
ever, the representation is in no way divided into two


DEVELOPMENT OF NOTIONS. I47

separate acts, but the psychical mechanism always
holds together the separate parts.

190. A multitude of such judgments as A is a,
^ is ^, -4 is c, A is d, etc., by which not one and the
same A is to be taken, but several, with the opposed
a, &, Cy rf, of themselves form a series ; since the a, by
Cy dy blend in different degrees according to their
lesser or greater contrasts (e. g., the three judgments —
this fruit is green, that yellow, a third yellowish green —
blend in such a way as to bring with them the colors
in their orders — ^green, yellowish green, and yellow;
for between yellow and green the opposition is the
strongest, consequently the blending the least). From
this arises the relation between the genus A and its
species (.4 which is a, A which is by etc.). At the
same time between these species, on account of their
differences a, ^, c, dy there is a variety of reproduction
laws, and from this arise the vaguely comprehended
series, such as the gamut in music and the spectrum in
color. The same A will coincide with a, Py y, 8, as here
with a, by Cy dy in case the species differ from A not
merely in one but in several characteristics.

Note. — The construction of a series, pedagogically consid-
ered, is of the greatest importance, as upon it depends clear
thinking, as well as construction of every kind.

191. The more the series of characteristics form
and separate in this way, through the comparison of
similarities, and in part of differences, so much the
sooner will it be possible, by means of them, to deter-
mine the content of the complexes, or to approach the
definitions of ideas. For now every element of a com-
plex — i. e., every characteristic of a notion — has its


148 RATIONAL PSYCHOLOGY.

place in one of the series of characteristics. The la-
bor of finding this place is indicated among others in
such questions as: How does the object look? How
large is it ? What is its smell and taste ? But, in order
to find the place of all characteristics in the correspond-
ing series, a number of reproductions of different series
is necessary, which the psychical mechanism will not
furnish otherwise than by virtue of a dominating con-
cept mass. The Platonic dialogues show what labor
this costs, and how many partly positive, partly nega-
tive judgments are necessary to accomplish it, espe-
cially with ideas of the higher kinds ; and we may per-
ceive in the limited development of the notions of the
majority to what a limited extent this labor can be
considered as finished.

192. Thus it is shown in every way that the defi-
nition and separation of general notions, clear and
distinct thinking, are problems which the psychical
mechanism does not solve by really separating its com-
plexes, but by allowing each individual element of the
same to remain connected with some series of charac-
teristics already formed. General notions are never
really thought through their content, but with regard
to their extent, though with intentional distinction

from it.

193. The attempt, however, to think the notions
merely or at least principally through their content,
consequently through a summary of the characteristics
of the series (which characteristics are no longer gath-
ered directly from experience but from the series of
signs already established)— this attempt, I say, effects
a remarkable change. It gives rise to philosophizing,
and this causes notions to become objects of thought.


DEVELOPMENT OP NOTIONS. Ii9

The first notions which philosophy discovered were
numbers and geometrical figures. Later, the same
proceeding extended to all logical general notions. In
this province, Plato, who carried out what the Pytha-
goreans and Socrates had begun, stands at the head of
philosophers. The next step is the philosophy of lan-
guage, inasmuch as the notions are shown as objects
associated with the words found in the languages-
Aristotle, following a Pythagorean track, sought the
categories — i. e., the most general notions in language.
The influence of this is threefold :

(a.) The great majority of educated people to
whom philosophy at least in part belongs, refer the ab-
stracted notions back again to things. Experience is ar-
ranged, scientifically treated, and in the sciences are to
be found firmly fixed points of dispute, where it is asked
how things are to be correctly thought through no-
tions and indicated through words.

(b.) Philosophers, through the effort, partly in
themselves, but in greater part in others, to hold notions
fast as objects of thought, are led to overdo the matter
by placing notions among the number of real objects.
By this the peculiarity of sensuous things (by virtue of
which they contain metaphysical problems) aids them
in such a way that they are supposed to be real in a
much higher sense than the objects of experience.
This is a characteristic of the Platonic doctrine of
ideas which has its influence even now. Hence the
embarrassment of Aristotle, who found sensuous ob-
jects, mathematical figures, together with numbers
and notions, side by side with one another, and seems
never to have succeeded in making their relations
clear.


150 RATIONAL PSYCHOLOGY.

(c.) Another delusion is the one peculiar to the
school of Kant, which regards the categories as the
fundamental notions of understanding taken as a men-
tal faculty. Traces of this belief appear in Plato and
later in Descartes and Leibnitz.

By this the relationship of the categories with the
forms of series is obscured, which relationship, never-
theless, is recognized analytically. The categories of
the inner apperception are thereby forgotten.

We may observe the principal categories — things
property^ relation, negative — at the bottom of which lie
the form of judgment and the form of series. The
notion of the negative, the no in general, is the clear-
est proof of the existence of such a notion, which in
judging arises from experience, although in experience
it has no given object.


CHAPTER IIL

OUR APPREHENSION OF THINGS AND OF OUR-
SELVES.

194. Entirely of themselves, and without the
slightest action which could be called an action of syn-
thesis (63), our concepts become combined so far as
they are not hindered by an arrest. Hence, for a child
of tenderest years, there are no individual objects as
yet, but entire surroundings which, even as regards
space relations, only become separated in successive
representations (174).

The first chaos of concepts, while it constantly re-


THING AND PROPERTIES. 151

ceives new additions, is, at the same time, subjected to
a continuous separation. Not that combinations once)
completed would ever be broken up (180) ; on the con-
trary the number of concepts is constantly increased and ;
their inner contents augmented. But, on the one hand^
if the number of distinctions increases (189), on the
other hand there are more frequent spatial separations
of that which in the beginning was seen or in some
way perceived as a whole. The objects move, and
chiefly because of this the environment is broken up
into distinctions ; in this manner a plurality of things
originates for man's power of conception. At first the
table seems one with the floor, also the table-leaf is one
with the table-legs. The table, however, is moved
from its place, while the leaf is not separated from the
legs. All things that are not removed from one an-
other preserve their original unity in the conception.

195. As the surroundings are gradually separated
into individual things, so the things again become
separated into their properties (191). If it be asked
here to which subject the properties really belong, the
answer is : The subject is always the total complex of
these properties, provided the physical mechanism rep-
resents them in one single undivided act. In this
there is no difficulty whatever, so long as not all the
judgments through which all its properties are ascribed
to one and the same thing are united.

But when the thought once reaches this degree of
maturity (which never happens with most men), then
the case is different. The judgments have now quite
dissolved the complex and have, separated its properties
from one another as a manifold, and hence one subject
will always be presupposed for the many predicates.


152 RATIONAL PSYCHOLOGY.

This notion has lost its content, however, and here a
metaphysical abyss yawns, viz., the question concerning
substance (86) as an unknown something, the presup-
position of which is so much the more necessary, as it
is to be not merely that subject, which never becomes
predicate while really the judgments have changed
their subject into pure predicates ; but the pei*sistent
thing which through all change remains self-identical
while, in fact, the complex which serves for the ob-
ject (in the sensuous world) has not only simultaneous
but also successive properties, and hence is in no wise
seU-identical.

196. The contradictions in the notion of the thing
with several properties, and in the notion of change
are familiar to us (Introduction to Philosophy, sec-
tions 122-135). Here we have only to explain how
it happens that the ordinary understanding does not
observe these contradictions. The simple explanation
upon this point is this : The psychical mechanism pos-
sesses originally and quite of itself exactly the unity
which the metaphysician loses at the beginning of his
investigation, and which the form of experience de-
mands, while the matter even of the very same experi-
ence does not admit this unity — ^for this matter includes
the many of the simultaneous properties and the
contrast of the successive characteristic properties.
In order to represent a material object we do not need
nearly so many concepts as sensuous properties, but
the unity of the act of representation, which consti-
tutes the nature of the complexes, allows no question
whatever to arise in the ordinary understanding con-
cerning the unity of the object represented. To under-
stand this question is always difficult for men, even


THEORY OF SELF-CONSCIOUSNESS. 153

after the acts of judgment have long since separated
the complexes. Thus the psychical mechanism con-
stantly deceives many who are even philosophers.

Note. — It would be quite useless to hope that, in the progress
of the sciences, one might perhaps find a more convenient mode
of access to metaphysics than that through the contradictions
which exist in the form of experience. The unity of the soul is
itself the deep source from which that unity enters our act of rep-
resentation, and which we afterward lose in the object presented.
In this and in the completeness and exhaustiveness of those laws
of reproduction which are formed according to the principle
laid down in section 168 lies the answer to the question as to
how the forms of experience may be given (Introduction to
Philosophy, sections 11^133, fourth edition).

197. In order to be able to approach the difficult
theory of self-consciousness, we must first mention
some of the most important varieties in the human
apprehension of things.

Objects in motion occupy the spectator more than
those which are at rest ; for the observation of an ob-
ject in motion is an incessant interchange of an ex-
cited and a satisfied desire. Let the object in motion
be in any given place; the concept of it is blended
with those of the surroundings. Then let it leave
this place, and instead of it something of the back-
ground becomes visible which was before hidden by
it. This latter perception aiTests that concept of the
object moved ; at the same time, however, the latter
will be driven forward by the concepts of the environ-
ment which appears the same as at the beginning.
Also the driving forward is for the most part much
stronger than the arrest, for it depends on a much
larger aggregate of concepts than the arrest, which


154 RATIONAL PSYCHOLOGY.

arises from the view of only a small part of the back-
ground ; hence the concept of the thing moTed is in
the condition of desire (36). This desire, however, is
satisfied, for the thing moved has not escaped from the
field of vision (or from the circle of perception), but
only from the central point of the field of vision, and
the full gratification will be reached by a scarcely per-
ceptible turning of the eye. Thus the apprehension
of the thing moved (of which we have here described
the differential) proceeds gradually.

The reason that the thing moved not merely occu-
pies more of the attention but also makes a deeper
impression than the object at rest, lies in the multiplici-
ty of small helps, which remain from every environ-
ment in which the object has been seen.

198. Since the living object, especially a sentient
one, is seen in incomparably more and more varied
movements than the inanimate object, we may under-
stand from this why eyen in the earUest periods of ex-
istence, not only man, but also the brute, troubles him-
self much less about the inanimate object than about
the living one. Here, however, it may be remarked
that originally things were not regarded as being in-
animate, but as sentient ; for, upon the sight of an ob-
ject which is pounded or beaten, a memory of one's
own feeling, upon the occasion of similar suffering in
one's own body causes one to attribute similar feeling
to the object. Where this fails, we have a sign of
stupidity ; the more sensitive the man, so much the
more life does he everywhere presuppose before he
tests more closely.

Note. — It was an error of idealism, violent in its creation,
and adhered to with equal violence that the Ego opposes to it-


T
*
«


THEORY OP SELF-CONSCIOUSNESS. 165

self a Non-ego (Pichte), as if the negation of the Ego were
inherent in objects. In this way a thou or a Jie would never
originate— another personality than one's own would never be
recognized ; that which has been inwardly perceived is, wherever
possible, transferred or imputed to the external object. Hence
with the /, the thou is formed at the same time, and, almost
simultaneously with the two, the tee which idealism forgot, and
was obliged to forget, if it would not be awakened out of its
dream. For the concept of the we is quite manifestly depend-
ent upon the enyironment ; it originates sometimes in larger,
sometimes in smaller circles, and always so that it at the same
time includes the Ego within it. This object is exposed more
clearly to our analysis than the mysterious Ego. As Plato re-
garded the state as a book with large letters legible for weak
eyes, in order that one might through it learn to read smaller
writing more fluently, so, in order to make a good preparation
for the more difficult problem, we ought to investigate the we
before the /,

199. Bat whence is the concept of a concept?
And whence the concept of concept-forming things
or objects ? At first this question must be taken up
in its simplest form How it is possible that to some-
thing extended in space, and to its other characteris-
tics a power of forming concepts may be joined, in-
deed may be one with it, this hardly any educated,
much less any uneducated man considers ; but, that
there are things which have concepts, even the brute
knows. It learns this, inasmuch as it sees that these
things adjust themselves to others without touching
them.

The common understanding is ready to believe
that the needle has some sort of concept of an attract-
ing magnet. In the same way every one is convinced
that A contains in it the characteristics of B if the
former shows itself to be definitely affected by the lat-


156 RATIONAL PSYCHOLOGY.

ter. The characteristics of B without its actuality
constitute the picture of J9, or, in other words, the
concept of B. Now, if A is affected by the properties
(movements, etc.) of B^ (7, Z>, and others in its entire
environment, then to ^ is attributed the power of con-
ceiving or representing ; and hence, in special cases,
will come such predication as A seeSy hearsy smells^ etc.

Note. — It is almost too difficult a subject for the purposes
of the present manual to treat of the categories of inner apper-
ception—of the object which, entering into the environment
(field of vision), interrupts the current of thought by engaging
it in the apprehension of this object — ^and causing it to enter
into reciprocal action with it — and which furthermore, in fre-
quent repetitions, pointing back to that which preceded, inter-
feres with the involved time-series of the feelings, whence arises
the concept of the subject. Suffice it to remark that the con-
fusions of idealism must be removed by the distinction of the
mere subject, as time-existence, from the Ego, although the lat-
ter is necessarily connected with the former, inasmuch as, when
considered separately, it leads to absurdities.

The gradual penetration of sensations into the
nerves (as when the child eats a spicy sweet fruit, or
the man empties his glass), likewise the penetration
of words heard, or of transactions seen, into the masses
of concepts — this internal echo does not call up the
concept of the Ego, but only the concept of the subject
into consciousness. It is otherwise when we surren-
der ourselves intentionally to the sensation, in which
\ case the enjoyment enters after and because it is
I sought.

200. In most cases of the kind just mentioned are
A and j5, the representing and the represented, mani-
festly two different things which in space stand op-
posed to one another. It is evident, however, that in


.V


THEORY OF SELF-CONSCIOUSNESS. 157

case the two happen in some way to be one and the
same, then the concept of self-knowledge (conscious-
ness) must arise.

Here let no one ask, how it is possible to appre-
hend the two opposite concepts, the representing and
the represented, as one and the same. This difficult
metaphysical problem is, in a psychological sense, quite
as simple as the one mentioned above, viz., how the
apprehension of several characteristics together make
up the concept of one object ; or, the still earlier one,
how the finite space-magnitudes can appear infinitely
divisible. In the soul many representations merge
into one act of representation when arrests do not
prevent; but how can the slightest suspicion exist
originally in the soul as to whether this representa-
tion can persist when analytical judgments are ap-
plied to it (191), and it is subjected to metaphysical
thought ?

Let a person look at or touch his own limbs : the
spectator, according to ordinary custom of speech,
says he has seen himself, he has touched himself. The
identity in this self is manifestly not a true one, for
the eye and the touching hand are manifestly differ-
ent from the arm which was seen and touched. How-
ever, in the original, psychological sense, the identity
exists, for the whole body is regarded as one, because
all partial concepts of it are most closely blended. To
see or feel one's self is only a special case of knowing
about one's self.

201. All this is, however, only a preparation foi;
the explanation of self -consciousness. In the forego^
ing lies only the beginning of the concept of some
one Ego ; the concept of me — i. e., of my Ego — is quite


153 RATIONAL PSYCHOLOGY.

/ different from this. The former is, however, the f oun-

, dation of the latter, as experience proves, for at first

t the child speaks of himself in the third person.

^ On the contrary, the first person, as the first, is the

1 beginning point of a series, and must be explained j

\ according to the method of explaining a series (29

^ and 168-177).

Man, as soon as his ideas of space are in a measure
matured, finds himself the movable central point of
things, from which ray out not only distances but also
• other obstacles in the way of reaching the thing de- '^

sired, and, on the other hand, toward which the thing
moves when it is obtained as desired. Thus, egoism
[selfhood] is not the ground of desires, but it is a spe-
cies of concept that can be referred to them. However,
the egoism [selfhood] will be interrupted in a person
if he assumes another central point of things. To ^

this central point he feels himself inevitably drawn :
e. g., as in the sense-world, to the capital of his coun-
try ; or in the mental world, to the Deity. .

Note. — The concept of the we, which depends upon the pre-
supposition of common sensation and apprehension, is of the J
greatest moral and, in general, of the greatest practical impor-
tance. It gives a natural counterpoise to the egoism proper. j
Also the concept of the we exists naturally, for no one knows
really who he would be if he were to be quite alone. The notion !
of uprightness and the sense of honor are originated in the cir- |
cle of the tve, when it is resolved into a manifold of egos ; but
a you and a they are opposed to the toe with all the evils of a
corporation soul. The most wonderful thing is that we our-
selves are now this, now that society ; upon some one point men
agree and are friends, upon another they are enemies. In this
inferiors are complained of by superiors, in that both unite and
oomplain about their common superiors.


THEORY OP SELF-CONSCIOUSNESS. 159

202. The complex which makes up 'the self of each
person receives incessant additions in the course of
life, which are blended together with it in the closest
manner. If this blending did not take place, the
unity of the personality would be lost, as in many kinds
of insanity really happens, inasmuch as a new ego is
created out of a certain mass of concepts which act
separately, and when the masses, as a result of a change
in the organism, enter consciousness one after the
other, a changing personality also arises.

The additions are not so much new apprehensions
of the individual body for which the susceptibility is
already very limited (45) as inner perceptions (40) of
concepts, desires, and feelings. Hence the concept of
the ego tends constantly more to the notion of a spirit
which is completely separated, inasmuch as the ego is
considered as abiding uninjured by the mutilations of
the body, during the changes of life, and even after
death.

With every man, the ego develops differently in
different concept-masses, and, although, in the person
mentally sound, no manifold ego arises, this difference
of origination is not insignificant for the formation of
character in general and for morality in particular.
The boy who is one person at home, another in the
school, and still another among his companions, is in
danger. The man who has a different tone for per-
sons of rank, for his friends, and for people of a lower
order, is not so secure morally as the simple man who
remains constantly the same. Among different men,
difference is unavoidable, inasmuch as one man feels
more in enjoyment, another more in sorrow, a third
more in action ; and, indeed, some more in inner action


160 RATIONAL PSYCHOLOGY.

and others more in outer. The former, inner action,
often prepares the plan outlined for the latter. The
mystic and the propagandist of liberty are most widely
separated here ; the former considers himself obliged
to destroy the individual will, to give up the individual
ego ; the latter preaches the absolute independence of
the ego. Most rarely, however, is to be found the self-
delusion of those who, in the midst of mysticism, wish
still to assert their personal freedom, in order to com-
bine everything that has a good sound. It is useless
to talk to such people of a middle course. They have
from the beginning missed the right way, and, in order
to find it, must go the whole way backward.

, 203. Wo receive a correct notion of ourselves

/ through the notion of the soul, but not directly through
that of the ego just explained. Indeed, the latter
must be transformed into the former ; for the ego of

j the ordinary understanding contains purely accidental
^1 characteristics, which ego, by means of analytical judg-
ments (of answers to such questions as " Who am I ? "),

i reveals [its composite character] just as the concepts
of material objects are resolved through judgments
(195) into pure predicates whose subject, long a gratui-
tous assumption, is finally lost altogether. These judg-
ments, inasmuch as they separate from it all that is
individual, leave nothing remaining in this ego except

:.the idea of identity of the object and subject.7 This
latter is a contradictory notion whose transfof-mation
into that of the soul is the business of general meta^^ >|

physics, just as the idea of substance, force (196),
spatial and temporal things (177) are transformed into
the theory of simple essences and of their disturbances
and self-preservations.


i


THEORY OF SELF-CONSCIOUSNESS. 161

Note. — ^The contradictory notion of the pure ego is the meta-
physical principle from which has proceeded all the systematic
investigations which lie at the foundation of the present treatise.
The ego as a metaphysical principle knows and contains none of
the distinctions which are found in the actual ego and which
arise according as a man feels himself depressed or elevated, and
either stimulated or wearied in his efforts. Now, if it be asked
how these distinctions arise, the answer is, Investigation itself,
impelled by the principle, demands such variety and such con-
trasts, and leads to the path along which we seek them. It is the
peculiarity of true metaphysical principles that they point back
beyond themselves to the connection of inner experience. If the
connection in experience were known through mere experience,
then no metaphysics would be necessary, and such a science
would not have arisen at alL The movement of thought, how-
ever, which metaphysics secures in different problems is only in the
smallest part uniform ; hence a very varied practice is required.
The spirit of investigation is not promoted, but destroyed, by
the ruinous tendency to smuggle everything into the four-
cornered box of the so-called categories, or into the three-
cornered one of thesis, antithesis, and synthesis : one of these
mannerisms is of as much value as the other.

204. It is now possible to explain the meaning of in-
tuition (AnscJiauen = sense-perception), an expression
which has been subjected to a wicked misuse. Intui-
tion (Anschauen) means the apprehension of an object
when it is presented, as such, and as nothing else.

The object must stand over against the subject and
also other objects. To find it thus is possible after
the ego, as first person, has been assumed spatially as
the center of things. Usually the object will be found
to be a complex of properties, like sensuous things;
these properties, however, must first have been sep-
arated from the whole environment (194), in order
that the apprehension may seize the object as this and
as no other. By such separation, the object appears,
14


162 RATIONAL PSYCHOLOGY.

as it were, upon a background of earlier concepts which
it at the same time reproduces and arrests ; itself re-
ceiving thereby definite outlines as well in space as in
every other respect. For this reason, every intuition
(very unlike the mere sensation) has the tendency to
burst at once into a variety of judgments (182) which
for the most part stifle one another, partly on account
of the arrest among their predicates, partly because
they can not all find words at the same time ; often,
also, because the apprehension leads from one subject
to another.

For this reason intuition is a very complicated pro-
cess which must be prepared through many earlier acts
of j)roduction (not through any kind of forms inherent
in the mind), and which then, with psychological ne-
cessity, results as it can, it being all the same whether
an actual object or a delusive form be constructed. To
test this is the business of thought, give it what other
name we may, and no intuition can anticipate the de-
cision of the latter (thought). ^

Finally, passivity in intuition (which is expressed
by the word apprehension, viz., the reception of a thing
given) is not really a passive condition of the soul by
which intuition is produced, although it is without
any consciousness of activity ; but those concepts stand
in a passive relation and upon them as a background
perception draws its outlines, or (without a metaphor)
these, by virtue of the similarity which they have with
the perception, are reproduced by it, but, on account
of dissimilarities, are arrested by it.

This peculiarity in sense-perception or intuition
by virtue of which the older concepts are acted upon
by the new perception, can, however, revert easily and


THEORY OF SELF-CONSCIOUSNESS. 163

rapidly into the opposite if a long succession of observa-
tions does not hold the mind in its passive state ; and we
have already indicated what occurs in such a case (39).
The intuition is then at an end ; instead of it, memory,
imagination, thought, begin.


CHAPTER IV.

THE UNGOVERNED PLAY OP THE PSYCHICAL

MECHANISM.

' 205. On account of the limitations of this manual,
we shall, to the subject of self-control and its opposite
(practically so important), unite the consideration of
other points which, in an elaborated treatise, would re-
quire to be discussed more in detail.

Independently of an internal dominating influence,
the mental activity may have its origin either in the
concepts themselves, or in the physical organism, or in
external impressions.

206. A small number of concepts, if left to them-
selves, would very soon approach a statical point, and
would retain only a very slow movement toward it,
through which it (the statical point) would never be
quite reached (17).

A considerable change in this movement is effected,
however, through the great number of concepts, and
the very complicated combinations of them, which a
man gains in the course of time.

207. Take a series of concepts in the process of


164 RATIONAL PSYCHOLOGY.

elapsing [i. e., passing through consciousness] : every
moment there is a change in the arrest, which the con-
cepts that are entirely or almost removed out of con-
sciousness suffer. Some may become active because
they are less restrained by others ; others will be re-
produced by such members of the passing series as
they resemble. But the reproduced concepts may have
their own series, which also now begin to pass through
consciousness and thus these series become compli-
cated with one another as well as with the first one.
There arise from this complication new arrests and
blendings. Through such new combinations, however,
new total forces (23) are formed, by means of which
the statical points become displaced; consequently
new laws of movement are secured.

A manifold change of mental conditions (33-38)
can by this hardly fail to occur. Such a change brings
the physical organism into play, which influence, min-
gling with the others (we shall not consider it further
here), causes the matter to become still more compli-
cated.

With this play of the imagination (for it is imagi-
nation more or less active) are combined very often
actions in the external world ; and the audible expres-
sion of thought is only one species of this. With
children who have not yet learned to restrain them-
selves, such expression of that which goes on in the
soul is the rule. To this (expression) is added the per-
ception of the product of the expression, and this in-
fluences the course of the psychological process.

208. The flow of human perceptions, if it is in any
way rapid, does not allow to the concepts which it
calls up, time to place themselves in equilibrium with


THE PLAY OF THE PSYCHICAL MECHANISM. 165

one another : the preceding ones are thrown by the
succeeding ones upon the mechanical threshold, with-
out forming those combinations which they are capa-
ble of making ; and, provided the influx of the new
concepts continues still longer, the statical threshold
is very soon developed from the mechanical. On ac-
count of these premature arrests, a mass of undigested
matter is collected which is gradually elaborated when
subsequent reproductions bring it again into con-
sciousness..

209. The later elaboration of the material pre»
viously collected is the more important since the older
coiicepts are generally the stronger on account of
decreasing susceptibility. The elaboration, however,
will be more difficult the longer it is delayed, for the
reason that, in consequence of the constant influx of
new perceptions, the mental state, together with the
corresponding physical condition, constantly changes,
so that the older concepts with the combinations that
have previously been made become less and less fit for
this modification ; consequently, their reproduction is
attended with increasing hindrances. In this may be
found the explanation of the fact that that which is
not frequently recalled to memory sinks further and
further into oblivion. Accurately speaking, however,
nothing in the soul is lost.

210. The purpose of the elaboration is determined
by the purpose of the reproduction, for those concepts
which are reproduced simultaneously, and no others,
enter into new and closer combination.

Note. — Some of the principal pedagogical notions are con-
nected with this principle. Among others we may mention first
of all thfr distinction between analytic and synthetic instruction.


166 RATIONAL PSYCHOLOGY.

The former occurs through reproduction for a purpose ; the hitter
seeks to produce a combination of new concepts in conformity
with a purpose. Furthermore in this connection belongs the
universal requirement that absorption (Vertiefung) and self-
possession (Besinnung) should alternate with each other like a
sort of mental respiration. Absorption ( Vertiefung) occurs when
some concepts are brought, in their strength and purity, one
after the other (as free as possible from arrests), into conscious-
ness. Self-possession implies the collecting and combining of
these concepts. [ Vertiefwng signifies that absorption in the de-
tails of some object which is attained when we lose ourselyes in
its contemplation. Besinnung, on the other hand, is the recov-
ery of ourselves which is attained when we subordinate the ob-
ject to the unity of our knowledge ; by this we comlb to ourselves
or to our sen8es,'\ Both take place as well in analytic as in
synthetic instruction. The more completely and the more ac-
curately these operations are performed, so much the better does
the instruction prosper. (See the author's Allgemeine Pftda-
gogik, at the beginning and end of the second book.)

211. While, for the reasons above mentioned, con-
cepts, when they constantly follow the tendency toward
equilibrium, thereby change from one movement into
another, they become more firmly and more variously
interwoven, so that each excitation of a single one
among them is communicated more and more to the
remaining ones, thus assuring their reaction. In other
words, the play of the imagination partakes more and
more of the nature of thinking, and man becomes
more and more intelligent. For the intelligence has
its seat in this general connection among concepts, but
not in notions and judgments taken individually (188).
With this, however, a gradual cultivation of notions
and judgments is combined, inasmuch as the circum-
stances which were considered above occur in this con-
nection (179-192).


THE PLAY OF THE PSYCHICAL MECHANISM. 167

212. As no man lives alone, but humanity exists
in the form of society, it may be remarked here that
conversation is the ordinary stimulant for the imagina-
tion ; customs and general opinions, however, are usually
the halting-places in which concepts become so crossed
and interlaced that, from there on, each movement of
the concept receives a determination (or direction) or
as we also may say, common understanding is based
upon . common opinion, which, by the way, may be
groundless and untrue, therefore may in a higher sense
of the word be strongly opposed to the understanding.

213. A man's sense-perception {Anschauen) and at-
tention, in general his interest, depend upon his imagi-
nation and thought. Even in the same surroundings
every man ha^ his own world.

Attention is partly involuntary and passive, partly
voluntary and active. The latter, being connected with
self-control, will not be considered here. The former
has its foundation in part in the momentary attitude
of the mind during the act of observing {Merken)\
moreover, it is partly determined by the older concepts
which the object observed reproduces.

(a.) During the act of attention four circumstances
are to be observed in the mental state, viz. : the
strength of the impression ; the freshness of the sus-
ceptibility; the degree of opposition to concepts al-
readj present in consciousness ; and the extent to
which the mind was occupied previous to this act of
attention.

(5.) In regard to the co-operation of the older con-
cepts reproduced, these latter may be unfavorable to
the involuntary observation, because of the fact that too
little or too much is in consciousness, inasmuch as in


168 RATIONAL PSYCHOLOGY.

both of these cases it is impossible for that which is
newly apprehended to adjust the mental condition to
itself. For, if the new concept finds nothing, or too
little, of the old with which to combine, it is of itself
generally too weak to resist being overpowered by
other concepts which have abready proceeded further
in collecting and combining. If, however, too many
similar old concepts present themselves in conscious-
ness, they weaken the susceptibility for the new. On
the other hand, the act of observing will be promoted
by two circumstances : first, when the new is contrasted
with the old, by which the reproduction is strong
enough for union without doing serious harm through
an excess of susceptibility ; second, when a reproduc-
tion of old concepts is promoted by the new, and the
old concepts would have striven after this in any case.
In this case it establishes new combinations, while it
gratifies a desire at the same time, or at least brings
up a pleasant feeling. This happens especially with
previously aroused expectation.

Note. — Attention and expect-ation, as the two steps of inter-
est, belong likewise to the fundamental notions of general peda-
gogy.

214. Among these excitations of the psychical
mechanism which have their origin in the physical or-
ganism, we may be here allowed to pass over such as
present more physiological than psychological phe-
nomena — i. e., those in which the bodily needs are to
be considered.

Generally, however, it is very clear that every phys-
ical feeling is in a condition to bring the series of con-
cepts that are complicated with it into consciousness j


TOE PLAY OP THE PSYCHICAL MECHANISM. 169

and that these series of concepts will come up so much
the more certainly, since with all other concepts other
physical feelings are connected (weak as they may be),
and to these physical feelings may correspond other
physical conditions which can not be brought up now.
Upon this ground, we should expect a greater (rather
than a less) dependence of the mind upon the body,
than that which experience shows us.

215. Moreover, the changes in the physical condi-
tion must correspond to the changes in the mental state,
and to the movement and interaction of the concept
series. By this the measure of time and the velocity
of the mental change may meet a favorable or un-
favorable condition of the body which suffices to ex-
plain the alternating pleasure in, and inclination
toward, this or that occupation, provided no purely
psychological reasons influence it besides.

Note. — That play of the psychical mechanism is especially
an uncontrolled one, or at least one difficult of control, which
arises when the velocity in the change of bodily conditions in-
creases to an unusual extent and thereby hastens the corre-
sponding course of the concepts. Such a phenomenon occurs
in the transition from illness to health ; during the development
of puberty; in many conditions of sickness, etc. The imagi-
nation runs away from the understanding ; in other words, the
rapidity of the self-developing concepts increases the violence
with which they remove out of consciousness those concepts
which could resist them.

216. The foregoing acquires a greater practical im-
portance when, behind the manifold and variable color-
ing of the Ego (202), we attempt to investigate the
persisting individuality of man. That coloring offers
itself to the observation of the practical educator, and


170 RATIONAL PSYCHOLOGY.

is difficult to distingnish from the Ego. Here belongs
the following considerations :

(a.) In a condition of complete health, at least of
the mature body of a man, the influence of emotion
upon the body (100) ought not to be apparent at all,
or at the most should occur only to a limited degree ;
so that no perceptible reaction of the mental activity
upon digestion and circulation, or the reverse, should
take place. The intrepidity of the warrior in the
midst of danger is (not without reason) called cold-
bloodedness.

(b.) On the contrary, in every human organism ac-
tually exists a system of possible emotions predispos-
ing it in such a manner that a careful education only
delays, rather than removes and avoids, the outbreak
of these emotions. For this reason no man can be en-
tirely spared the experiences to which he is predisposed,
because he will bring them upon himself.

(c) The explanation of the variety of ways in
which physiological pressure (50) arises from the
organs and systems of the body belongs to physiology,
but the changes in the mental activity which this
pressure may effect must be ascertained from a knowl-
edge of the psychical mechanism and of its manifold
possibilities of arrest. The least difficult of these are
the following :

(1.) Under the influence of this pressure, instead of
immediate reproduction taking place, obscurity arises,
inasmuch as the new concepts obtained through new
acts of perception do not so much create free space for *

the older similar concepts as that the concepts already
present (which had attained equilibrium with the
pressure) weaken in the reaction ; so that now the in- ^


THE PLAY OF THE PSYCHICAL MECHANISM. I7I

flaence of the pressure increases, and the older con-
cepts, which were to receive and appropriate the new,
only present themselves in a disturbed, scanty way.
Hence, very often, where lively interest would be ex-
pected, a stupid astonishment is exhibited.

(2.) The same pressure retards much more easily
the vaulting, consequently also the pointing or taper-
ing ; hence the concepts do not stand out sharp, al-
though they are distinguished from others, as in the
case of men who intuitively perceive nothing, who
comprehend nothing in its full relations, and who
have no fine feeling, while they perhaps learn by
means of mechanical application.

(3.) With many persons the pressure is not con-
stantly effective ; it appears only as a reaction in con-
sequence of the tension proceeding from the mental
activity. Such minds are active and easily aroused,
but without depth and sequence. For every moment
their thoughts are cut off or separated ; they can only
construct short series of concepts. They do not like
to be alone, because they are incapable of following a
line of thought.

(4.) If a constant pressure acts upon free-rising
concepts' (32), their movement is disarranged, as it
enters into conflict with the strongest of the concepts
which ought to rise the highest ; and by means of this
conflict the weaker concepts become free to enter con-
sciousness in place of the former. Under such condi-
tions, active and energetic minds show themselves un-
even (rhapsodic) in their action. They may be brill-
iant, but, unless great care be taken, their culture will
have rents and fissures.

(5.) We find the rhythm of mental movements in


172 RATIONAL PSYCHOLOGY.

general very different ; hence for this reason some at-
tain better that which is quickly, others that which is
slowly, done. These indications of very complicated
investigations may suffice here.

217. The different concept -masses depend upon
outside impressions derived from the environment.
Every new environment, indeed every new condition
of life, brings its own masses of concepts in great part,
but not entirely separated from the others. Among
these masses the right relations necessary for self-gov-
ernment do not by any means always arise. Here in-
struction and all kinds of educational training have
their use. We shall first consider here not the recip<^
rocal action of concept-masses upon one another, but
the external relation of the man to his environment.

218. After considering, in the above, the excitation
which brings forward new perceptions, we regard the
external world here as the sphere of action ; and this
is the seat of hindrance to action as the second aspect
of the external world in its function of arousing men-
tal life. The connection between representation, ac-
tion, desire, will (the words are placed in this order
intentionally), must now be more accurately developed
than before (52).

Movements in different parts of the body, and the
feelings arising from these movements, are the con-
ditions that combine the functions of body and soul.
If, with the feeling, some kind of a concept, perhaps
of the member moved, or only of an external object,
be united, then every excitation of this concept, in case
no hindrance intervenes, effects immediately a repro-
duction of the former feeling, and of the movement
belonging to it. In regard to the latter, it will not be


I


^


THE PLAY OF THE PSYCHICAL MECHANISM. 173

necessary that the concept be in a condition of desire,
but without anything further it will be accompanied
by action. (This is the case with the lower animals and
with children ; only the mature human being knows
the restraining influence of other concept-masses.)
Further investigation of this requires the aid of the
theory of the concept series.

219. In a series, a, J, c, d, let the concept just men-
tioned, which is immediately accompanied by an ac-
tion, be indicated hy d; if the action meets no hin-
drance in the external world, then it occurs without
being noticed, and the series runs further on into con-
sciousness to e,/, etc., as though no action had occurred.
Examples of the above are to be found in the move-
ment of the eyeball, also in many movements of the
organs of speech, while the movemepts of the arms
and legs, on account of the weight and inertia of these
limbs, belong in this respect to the following cases :

If the action find a hindrance in the outer world,
the feeling belonging to the action is arrested, and by
means of it the concept d is also arrested. Since d is
blended with a remainder of c, a smaller remainder of
J, and with a still smaller remainder of a ; further-
more, since the rapidity of the effect of these remain-
ders varies according to their magnitude, and is in
each case a different one, while the passage of the
series is stopped, the smaller remainders gain time to
co-operate as helps to d^ and to strengthen one another.
If no hindrance had existed, then c would have acted
first upon e?, and the smaller remainders would have
had no influence, because that which they could do
would already have been done without them. If the
hindrance yields upon the co-operation of 5, then a


174 RATIONAL PSYCHOLOGY.

does not come to its help ; but if it does not yet yield,
then gradually every member, however many may be-
long to the series, will give its contribution to the gen-
eral activity. So long as this lasts, every member of
the series up to ^ is in a condition of desire. At the
moment, however, when the whole force of all the
united helps is at its highest tension, the defiire, pto^
vided the hindrance is not yet overcome, passes into
unpleasant feeling (section 36).

All this is very easy to be recognized in experience.
One of the frequent acts of ordinary life — e. g., the
opening of a door— occurs when no special hindrance
interferes, almost unobserved, and without disturbing
our course of thought. If, however, any kind of fric-
tion opposes, then we gradually exert more force, we
desire more and more strongly that the door be
opened, until this really happens; if, however, the
effort is in vain, the desire leaves room for uncom-
fortable feeling, which lasts at least until a new series
of thoughts outside the circle of this undertaking pre-
sents itself.

220. The position of a hindrance represents often
merely something lacking in an ordinary environment.
To a series of concepts, a, ^, c, t?, ^, corresponds the
series of sense-perceptions, a, J, c, e, in which d is lack-
ing, hence it will be missed, because the remaining
concepts can not come into the condition in which
they can re-establish the degree of undimmed clearness
which existed when d was blended with the others ; in
which case it would be natural for them to bring for-
ward not only in the soul, but also in the organ of
sense, the concomitant conditions of the actual sense-
perception. If the series a, J, c, be strong enough, and


THE PLAY OF THE PSYCHICAL MECHANISM. 175

the mind absorbed in it, the regret for the missing
member d becomes a longing.

221. Now, in the place of one series, let a tissue
of many series be assumed here, which may extend
through the whole circle of a man's thought, then a
general keen longing for the missing object will fill
the whole mind. This is the foundation of that spe-
cies of love to which its object is indispensable, and
which abhors every possible intimation of physical or
mental separation. It is known that love is modified
through its many different occasions, also that it re-
ceives many admixtures, some of them sensuous feel-
ings ; where it arises from mere custom, however, it is
to be observed in its simplest form.

222. The first essential of a man's character is fur-
nished in the object and manner of his love — from
mere diverting preferences all the way up to love as a
consuming passion. But just here many formal con •
ditions must be considered, that must be connected
with the notion of willing. (In this connection see
first four chapters of the third book of my General
Pedagogy.)

223. Will is desire accompanied with the presup-
position of the attainment of that which is desired.
This presupposition becomes united with the desire,
when, in similar cases the effort of action has been
followed by a result — ^i. e., by success (219) ; for then
the concept of a period of time which contained the
gratification of the desire suggested by association the
beginning of a new similar action. From this arises a
glance into the future, which glance is continually ex-
tended in proportion as a man learns to use more
numerous means to secure his ends. Let a series, a, )8,


176 RATIONAL PSYCHOLOGY.

y, S, be formed in the first perception of the course of
an event. Now let the concept 8 be in a condition of
desire. Although as such it strives against an arrest,
yet the helps which it sends to y, /9, a may act un-
hindered in case those concepts just indicated are not
arrested in consciousness. Then y, j3» a will be repro-
duced in proper gradation (as were 6 and a mentioned
toward the end of section 29), and, provided one of
these concepts be combined with an action (218), then
an action occurs of such a nature that, under favorable
external conditions, the previous course of the event
may be actually renewed, in such a manner that a, ^, y
act as means to the end 8.

224. The will has its imagination and its memory,
and the more it possesses of this latter so much the
more decisive is it. For a reproduction similar to that
just mentioned may run through long and very com-
plicated series in many directions, and call up action
in some remote member. Moreover, if we assume that
8 (in section 223) be one and the same concept with d
(in section 219), the effort in this action is easily ex-
plained, so that in the co-operation of a, 6, c, d, lies the
strength of the will by which y, p, etc., are roused to
the point of action which is the means to the end.
The decisive presupposition, however, that the end will
be reached is so much the firmer and more certain the
more the means are at command — i. e., the further the
reproductions just indicated reach.

225. The will is strengthened through the knowl-
edge of dangers and through self-denials.

True, a danger is not the less to be feared because
we know it, but the concept of the danger does not
effect so strong an arrest if it be blended with the


THE PLAY OF THE PSYCHICAL MECHANISM. 177

other concepts. Then also not so much the purpose,
as the attempt to attain the purpose, will be resolved
upon ; but self-denials free the mind from cares and
considerations which might cause the will to waver.

226. If, in several points of the circle of thought,
places exist in which concepts rise as desires, then in
the reproductions through which means and hindrances
are considered they may easily meet and oppose one
another. The fluctuation in this contest is the prac-
tical deliberation which will end in choice.

This latter is originally not a work of practical
[i. e., moral] principles ; rather, it makes such princi-
ples possible, inasmuch as from the frequently repeated
choices in similar cases a general will gradually arises,
and is established through additional judgments ex-
actly in the same way as the general notions (179-192).

Here, however, is the transition to the following,
chapter.

Note. — The fact that the greater the number of the concept-
masses which have been formed in the mind, so much the more
harmoniously do they work together, when a desire passes into
action as will, is to be distinguished from the fact of general
wilL But this remark is at the same time to be regarded as
preparatory to the following chapter. On the other hand, often
in one concept-mass everything is ready for willing, but the
other concept-masses hinder the willing ; thus dissatisfaction
may for a long time precede revolt.

227. The circumstances of the external life often
hinder a man from turning his whole will inwardly,
with a purpose to develop his character. At other
times the favoring circumstances of the will are too
large for the limitations of his circle of thought.

The first case is by far the most frequent. For
15


178 RATIONAL PSYCHOLOGY.

this reason, especially under an oppressive state of
government, a dangerous reserve of unknown forces
is to be dreaded. Hence the political necessity to
preserve a regulated freedom for human activity.


CHAPTER V.

SELF-CONTROL AND ESPECIALLY DUTY AS A
PSYCHICAL PHENOMENON.

228. Actual self-control is to be distinguished
from that which a man exacts of himself, and this
again from that which he ought to exact of himself.

229. The child, almost unobserved, and without
being acquainted with the difl&culties of the matter,
controls himself, when he puts oif an action which
serves as a means to an end, and resolves to do it at a
future time. Afterward, when the future has become
the present, it is found that that present moment has a
will of its own, and that the earlier moment could not
decide for the present ; and, further, that it is a ques-
tion whether the present will is the same as the former
one — meanwhile, perhaps, hardly any thought has
been given to this question. The man only gradually
learns how easily he can be unfaithful to himself.

230. Experiences of this kind [i. e., wherein we
learn the inconsistency of the will] are more striking
in great than in small affairs [i. e., in public rather
than in private matters] because the injury is more
obvious there. Long before a man recognizes the


DUTY AS A PSYCHICAL PHENOMENON. 179

psychological necessity for making a rale for himself,
and for binding himself to it, laws exist in civil
society, and these laws are the type of all that which
is enounced in later times as ethical laws.

The ruder the man, so much less considerate the
laws. On the contrary, the less the danger in making
the exception into a rule, so much the more nicely
is legislation inclined to distinguish cases; and the
greater the faith in the integrity and insight of the
judges, the more will be left to their judgment. Yet
it is a sign of a good law if it was established before
the event occurs to which it is applied, for the war-
ranty of the complete impartiality required lies alone
in the fact that the lawgiver can not know the in-
dividual case which will be subsumed under it because
it has not yet occurred.

231. Conscience follows from self-consciousness,
for, when a man beholds himself as an object, he
passes judgment upon himself. The inner percep-
tion, however, may rise to the second power, and then
a man may judge his manner of judging himself.

The question, whether the inner judge may also be
partial, arises now, and the danger of a corrupted self-
judgment may be learned in a very short series of in-
ner perceptions.

As a necessary security against such partiality, for
the inner life of a man as well as for civil society, there
is required a fixed law which precedes the cases to be
decided. The severity of the construction of this law
also becomes gradually relaxed, and it is modified to
suit the different kinds of cases until an exaggerated
mildness leads back again to the necessity for sharper
attention to the rule.


180 RATIONAL PSYCHOLOGY.

232. In this we see as yet nothing settled in regard
to the subject-matter of self -legislation. The necessity
for this is met by a general will, as described in section
226, which is, however, very different in individuals ;
hence, in the beginning, practical (or moral) principles
are individual. Decisions as to that which one pre-
fers, or which one finds less tolerable, combined with
empirical rules dictated by prudence, furnish the
largest part of the earliest system of morality which
seeks to control whims and to quench passions through
a notion of true and lasting happiness.

233. In practical [i. e., moral] philosophy it is
shown that duty is based upon practical (moral) ideas.
These latter possess an eternal youth, and through this
feature they gradually separate from the class of wishes
and enjoyments that grow weaker with time, and they
are recognized as the only unchangeable thing which
can answer the requirements of a law to the inner
man (231). Besides, they bear in themselves the
stamp of an unavoidable decree, because a man posi-
tively can not escape that judgment whose general
form they indicate ; hence in those practical ideas is
to be found the necessary content which must fill up
the general form of self-legislation.

Note. — In this is explained the kind of self-government
which a man is to exact of himself (228), bat it does not deter-
mine how much of it he is able to carry out. This latter item
is indefinite, and, moreover, a constantly unknown quantity to
the individual, inasmuch as no man is able to discern accurately
his own psychological states. It is no wonder that so simple a
concept of duty does not appear suflBciently emphatic for the
general use of moralists, nor that, in order to preach more im-
pressively, they attempt additions which are of an exciting as
well as imposing character. In many cases this attempt, If it


DUTY AS A PSYCHICAL PHENOMENON. 181

be not oyerdone, is much to be commended. But we can not
restrain our astonishment when some philosophers appeal to
metaphysical opinions in order to make clear the necessity for
duty. For opinion only can be considered here, inasmuch as
no one will think of making the obligation of all to duty de-
pendent upon metaphysical knowledge. On such a basis the
eternity of the punishment of hell may finally return to philo-
sophical ethics, which is certainly an effective and probable
theory, if pursued with suitable explanation and limitation, and
is based upon psychological grounds as may be seen at the end
of this book. A system of ethics, however, which is not lax, is
bound to have its sharp penalties. And this severity must not
be made to depend upon certain decisive expressions of absolute
obligation, etc., but only upon the clearness and distinctness of
the notions of that which may be condemned, opposed to that
which may be commended. That blame which allows no excuse
can not be withstood, but if one be resolved to incur such blame,
then no system of ethics influences him any longer ; he is a sick
man who must be healed — ^i. e., brought to repentance by suffer-
ing. Blame does its part of the work when it shames passion.
Clear discrimination and analysis of the practical (moral) ideas
which make up the ultimate content and true meaning of all
moral precepts is the best stimulant for the conscience.

234. Actaal self-control and the possibility that a
man may carry out that which he demands and should
demand of himself depends upon the co-operation of
several concept-masses. In this, that general will is
manifested, if such has already been formed (226), and
in that case it is always located in some kind of concept-
mass, a great power which may be recognized in every
activity that has a purpose. In this connection we may
recall the notion of labor (123). Every kind of labor
demands that the will shall keep constantly striving to
realize the general purpose, while those voluntary acts
which deal with the details and execute the several steps
of the process in logical order succeed one another in


182 RATIONAL PSYCHOLOGY.

and by means of a series of concepts in consciousness,
although sometimes with delays and fatiguing efforts,
as shown in section 219 ; but the rational activity of an
educated man is composed of many and different labors
which of themselves make up a series of a higher kind.
The more complicated such an activity is, the more
manifest is the power of that dominating concept-mass
in which the will of the chief design has its seat over
all the others which are subordinated to it in different
degrees. Also facts are not wanting which show more
strongly than is necessary how tyrannically the domi-
nating will often sacrifices all lesser wishes, so that a
single prejudice or a single passion* is able, as it were,
to desolate and lay waste the whole mind. We must
beware of considering self-control merely as such, as
something morally good ; if it is to be so regarded,
then the quality, and not merely the strength of the
dominating concept-masses, must be considered.

Note. — He who earnestly desire? to achieve the highest de-
gree of self-control should, above everything, guard against the
delusion of false theories which represent his freedom greater
than it really is. These theories are not capable of making one
free, they rather plunge one into all the dangers of false security.
On the other hand, let every one acknowledge his weak side and
strive to strengthen it. This is not accomplished through direct
watchfulness alone, but the whole interaction of the man's en-
vironment in actual life is involved. As the will originally had
its origin in the circle of thought, so through the choice of em-
ployments and expedients, it leads back to the further culture
and development of the same. The Bible and hymn-book are
infinitely important supports to self-oontroL To many, also,
Horace and Cicero are helps. Diet, movement, the bath, and
mineral springs, work against mental relaxation. For the edu-
cated classes, art (if it did not work for bread I), especially the
theatre, could accomplish much. To be sure, when we see that


DUTY AS A PSYCHICAL PHENOMENON. 183

great poets, with all their love for the theatre, are not willing
to confine their poetical fancies within the limits of theatrical
representation, we can only lament the lack of German inde-
pendence which, repelled by French over-refinements, gave it-
self up not only to the admiration but also to the imitation of
Shakespeare. But the real fault of the theatre lies in the specu-
lation upon the purses of the rich and the desire of the masses
for a spectacle. The danger which threatens the age in its
striving after freedom is that of being caught in the snares of
the moneyed aristocracy. For examples, look at England and
America.

235. Self-control is a psychological phenomenon,
always strictly conformed to an end or purpose, and the
power which it exercises has a finite magnitude, not-
withstanding that we never can assert that that strength
or self-control which a definite individual possesses in
a definite moment is the greatest which any person, or
to which that individual himself, has been able to
attain. Hence ethics in general presupposes rightly,
that every passion may be governed, and if a person
can not control his passions, then he is justly blamed
for this weakness and held to be without excuso accord-
ing to the idea of perfection.

Note 1. — ^Those who assume a transcendental freedom of the
will are bound to attribute to it an infinite amount of power
over the passions, or otherwise incur the charge of the grossest
inconsistency. For the word transcendental, in this connection,
indicates an opposition to all causality of nature; hence the
natural power of the passions would be capable of nothing what-
ever against such a freedom. The relation, however, of nothing
to something is as something to infinite magnitude ; so that if
the power of passion be considered something, transcendental
freedom must be considered infinitely strong. It is unnecessary
here to discuss further the fact that, on account of its own action,
transcendental freedom falls into the same causal relation from
which it ought to be free.


184 RATIONAL PSYCHOLOGY.

NoTF 2.— A short discussion of the questions that arise con-
cerning the mental condition of criminals, which sometimes
come from judges and physicians, may make the preceding and
the following clearer. The question does not concern philo-
sophic instruction upon the nature of free actions, but the judge
assumes that, if at the age of puberty, the criminal was of sound
mind, he knew the injurious result of his action ; that he would
not will such an act to be performed against himself ; that he
had developed in himself the general notion of this not-willing
(or renunciation) ; and that he knew that civil society would
not suffer such actions. By this, if he were an honorable man,
he would certainly have been deterred from the action ; if he
be not an honorable man, then the more firmly fixed his bad
character is, so much the more certainly will he be punished,
and so much the more certainly will bad action upon every op*
portunity proceed from this badness. The question then is
only, Was the man sick, and in such a condition that we may
believe that he acted like one in a dream f For example, might
the youthful incendiary be overcome by a morbid desire for fire
in such a way that his reproduction did not penetrate to the
concept of danger to the inhabitants; or that the universal
maxim to bring no one into danger (the higher concept-mass)
was hindered in its action ', and, finally, that the recollection
of civil order, of right and law, was lost t In the last case the
criminal would be similar to the unreflecting child, and the
culpability so much the less.

236. The conditions of self-control, consequently
also the proof of its finite quantity, are to be found in
the proportion that exists between the dominating to
the subordinate concept-masses. This is in general
clear, yet more special remarks, pa^ly upon the do-
minion of desires and passions, partly upon moral self-
control, may be added.

How a desire gradually extends its compass may be
seen in sections 223 and 224. The flow of concepts
stops and expands at the point which is desired and


DUTY AS A PSYCHICAL PHENOMENON. 185

not immediately reached. The reproductions awak-
ened by it are collected (at first without order) as fan-
cies, but fancying is gradually transformed into think-
ing (211), and notions and judgments are formed more
and more in regard to desires and in the service
thereof. This is incorrectly expressed in the saying,
" Passion sets the understanding in motion." Not an
entire mental faculty is here moved to a one-sided ac-
tivity, but only a certain phase of thinking (which we
may attribute to the understanding in so far as it is
merely a general term for certain kinds of activity in
concepts) is created in the thought-mass which has
gathered around the desire. Uncultured men, to say
nothing of savages, have hardly any other faculty of
understanding than that of their passions. But among
educated men there are other concept-masses elabo-
rated to the stage of thought called " understanding,"
and here still another phenomenon is added to that
partial understanding that belongs to the passions
which is quite as incorrectly (as the above) expressed
in the maxim, '^ Passion suppresses the understand-
ing." For, in the first place, either the other concept-
masses of the understanding present themselves too
late — after the passion has been gratified — ^and the
flow of the concepts hindered by it has been again
established, in which case we say rightly, " The man
has been pi'ecipitate " ; and he himself even will lament
that he can not comprehend his precipitation, for his
previous act now hangs like a lifeless picture before
him (42), and only those concept-masses are active
which look down upon these others reproachfully.
Or, in the second place, at the same time with the
grade of understanding that belongs to the passion.


186 RATIONAL PSYCHOLOGY.

the higher grade of understanding is awakened in con-
sciousness, although it is not strong enough nor suffi-
ciently excited. From this arises the still more unfor-
tunate result that that combination of concepts in
which it has its seat is corrupted and ruined through
the notions furnished by passion, which latter, the
of tener this occurs, attains so much the more domin-
ion, and shows itself so much the more worthy the
name of passion.

We have spoken here of more than one understand-
ing, and there must be more than one, in case the
understanding be regarded as a force or as a faculty.
For the causal power, the mental energy, lies nowhere
else than in certain concept-masses, and of these there
are many and very different ones which can all act as
understanding. The same is true of the power of
imagination, of memory, of reason ; in a word, of all
the so-called mental faculties ; but if one were to allow
one's self to indulge in such an innovation in the use
of language it would not be well to recommend it for
adoption by everybody ; for he who would speak of
several understandings, of several imaginations, etc.,
would appear to assert that the several were to be re-
garded as distinct and separate. The different con-
cept-masses, however, to which all this points, do not
by any means admit of any such nice discrimination,
but rather, with every encounter of the latter, arise
new and often only weak blendings of similar concepts
out of which, as their ingredients, they (imagination,
memory, etc.) are compounded. The manner of speak-
ing just used is then exceptional, and it remains true
that a man possesses only one understanding, one im-
agination, etc. These, however, are not forces, not


DUTY AS A PSYCHICAL PHENOMENON. 187

faculties, indeed nothing real, but merely logical desig-
nations for the preliminary classification of psychical
phenomena.

237. The consideration of moral self-control is now
in order. As a preparation for this, we must make
moral feeling comprehensible. In the Kantian phi-
losophy, it has been explained that this is useless as a
foundation for ethics, and rightly so, for we can in no
way substitute it for the moral judgments, or, to give
them their general name, " aesthetical " judgments,
upon which, as was shown in the practical philosophy,
practical ideas depend. Such substitution would con-
found grounds and conclusions. Moral feeling arises
from moral judgments ; it is the first effect of the lat-
ter upon the total complex of all concepts present in
consciousness. The judgments mentioned have their
seat in only a few concepts, and these are such concepts
as form an aesthetic relation with one another. Upon
every encounter of the latter, they (the judgments)
arise always and infallibly, provided (and in so far as)
a blending of those concepts is not made impossible
by the remaining concepts of the series. When they
arise, they have the same effect, as if something pleasant
or unpleasant suddenly entered consciousness (i. e., ac-
cording as they contain approbation or blame). By
this, they either favor the course of thought present,
or they hinder it, and in the latter case action upon
the physical organism is often occasioned (e. g., blush-
ing) as well as reaction of the latter on the former.

Before we go further, we may remark here that in
the influence just mentioned of the moral judgments
upon the remaining concepts, hence in the moral feel-
ing, the specific difference of those judgments is mani-


188 RATIONAL PSYCHOLOGY.

fested yery little or not at all. Whether an unrea-
sonableness, or an injustice, or a malevolence, or a
cowardice, or that which otherwise may be a moral
perversity is felt, that disturbance which may cause
the thread of thought which is running through con-
sciousness to suffer, will in all these cases be about the
same. In this respect, much will depend upon the
relations which the concepts present in consciousness
hold toward one another, and upon the rapidity with
which their series pass before consciousness. The most
essential task of practical (or ethical) philosophy, how-
ever, is to make quite clear the specific difference be^
tween the different moral judgments; consequently,
the moral feeling which does not give this difference,
also does not give us the principles of that science.

Let it be assumed that a desire is just projecting
its plans (236), and while a means is devised for its
gratification, the moral perversity of this means is felt,
then the feeling acts as a hindrance and checks the
course of the concepts, exactly as when an action in
the outer world does not succeed (219). During this
suspension two things occur simultaneously: First,
the concepts which proceed from the desire increase
in volume; secondly, however, the moral judgment
also gains time to present itself. Now the question is
whether this judgment is connected with a strong
thought-mass which, as it spreads more and more in
consciousness, gradually suppresses that increasing de-
sire, without, on its side, suffering in its development
from the unpleasant feeling into which the suppressed
desire changes ? If this question can be answered
affirmatively, the self-control is present.

238. A purely moral self-control which is uniformly


DUTY AS A PSYCHICAL PHENOMENON. 189

present in every act of commission and omission, as
well as most careful to protect all subordinate interests
and wishes, is an ideal to which the name psychical or-
ganism may be given. For to it belong such a union and
subordination of concepts as is not only adapted to the
smallest as well as the largest combinations, but is
also capable of appropriating to good purpose all addi-
tional new external impressions. This self-control is
the aim of education and of self-development. How
near a man may come to this aim can not be determined,
and for that reason the effort toward it is unlimited.

239. As the power of self-control is never the work
of a moment, but rather the result of the whole past
life, so also no particular time of life can be consid-
ered to be decisive in regard to it. A considerable
stock of thoughts and feelings which has no compara-
tively great addition to expect (the decrease in suscep-
tibility is to be borne in mind) must first be present,
before such an effective concentration of mind can oc-
cur that a man is able to come to a successful resolu-
tion concerning himself in general. Then, however,
when this condition is fulfilled (as a rule, at the end
of the educational period) it is time for the deepest
reflection, for the most comprehensive practical delib-
eration. For upon the thoroughness of the combina-
tion into which the concepts enter, upon the exact
knowledge of his innermost wishes which a man now
attains, upon the right position in the outer world
which he now prepares for himself, depends the
strength as well as the correctness of the guidance
which he will give himself henceforth, and just upon
this depends also the right reception of everything
new to which the course of life will further lead.


190 BATIONAL PSYCHOLOGY.

CHAPTER VI.

PSYCHOLOGICAL OBSERVATIONS UPON THE DESTINY

OF MAN.

240. Psychology will remain one-sided so long as
it considers man as standing alone. For, in the first
place, he lives in society and not merely for this world ;
secondly, these two facts give rise to yarioos attempts
to sketch ideals whose attractiveness elevates them (the
ideals) to an actual mental power.

In every social whole the individual persons are
related to one another in almost the same way as the
concepts in the soul of the individual if the social ties
are sufficiently close to secure the mutual influence
completely. Conflicting interests take the place of the
opposition among concepts. The inclinations and
needs of assistance from others furnish those condi-
tions which were known in the foregoing under the
name of complexes and blendings. The direct results
of the psychological mechanism which here makes
itself felt on a large scale are, that the many are de-
pressed by the few so much as to lose social signifi-
cance ; that even of these few only a small minority
attain prominence ; that every society in a condition
of natural equilibrium assumes a pointed (pyramidal)
form (see section 82) at the top. The laws of move-
ment controlling the psychical mechanism do not
suffer complete stagnation any more here (in the social
organization) than in the individual. On the con-
trary, they secure reproductions of that which often
seemed to have entirely disappeared, which reproduc-
tions often work through long series of social combi-


THE DESTINY OF MAN. 191

nations. Such movements [of the struggling lower
masses in the social whole] are often much more ap-
parent to the apperception of cultured people on the
higher planes than is the relation of the subordinate
to the higher concept masses in the inner world, pro-
vided the individuals [of these lower masses] are not
warned and are not sufficiently watchful to guard
against audible and visible expressions. For, in case
the governing power is harsh and violent, they [the
individuals of the lower orders] are accustomed to hide
from it ; but when in any place the throne becomes a
bed of rest, then it is with society as it is with [the
psychological mechanism of] those individuals who ex-
ercise no supervision over themselves.

241. If observations of this kind were completely
elaborated, they would furnish a science of politics [or
of sociology] similar to the empirical psychology in the
first part of this book. After it would follow an em-
pirical summary of that which may be found in the
history of nations as permanent contrasted with the
transient If one does not perhaps prefer to consider
the different ranks and orders of society as correspond-
ing to the so-called faculties, he may take up the three
separate powers of the state, the legislative, the execu-
tive, and the judiciary, and these will take the place of
those psychical faculties and afford suggestive analo-
gies. History, however, will deal with the changing
conditions of nations. Finally, in order to give a com-
panion picture to rational psychology, we must, after
the manner of the science of statistics, first describe
the body of the state — as a part of the earth's sur-
face — together with the traffic taking place on it ; and
the reaction of this upon the mind of the people — i. e..


192 RATIONAL PSYCHOLOGY.

upon their social sentiments and views. The discus*
sion of the true moving principles of the historical
events narrated, however, is to be looked for only in
the philosophy of history.

242. The foregoing remark reminds us that the
philosophy of history depends upon psychology, and
that it does not presume to investigate the ways of
Providence, which, notwithstanding the often-heard
discussions upon the spirit of the age, still are and
will remain obscure. Here are to be found illusions
similar to those in the philosophy of nature, as for ex*
ample when the teleological phenomena of nature are
confounded with biological phenomena, as if one in-
vestigation might include both series of phenomena
in one view, and even as if the type of a general
necessary course of nature might be discovered by in-
ventorying and comparing the phenomena which occur
upon the earth before our eyes.

It is certain that no history of known countries
and nations can ever furnish a world history in the
true sense of the word. Furthermore, it is certain
that no theory is able to give a notion upon it which
will have even a shadow of truth. On the other hand,
it is just as certain that every attempt of this kind,
however remote, exhibits a foolish forgetf ulness of hu-
man limitations. Just as certainly ought the philoso-
phy of history to guard against smuggling in a sys-
tematic totality into the different forms in which
historical events and social combinations are shown,
as if one were to be the necessary complement of the
other, and all united were supposed to make up a com-
plete exposition of the human mind. All history up
to the present time is a beginning whose sequel no one


THE DESTINY OF MAN. 198

can foretell, and the present condition of things is as
little a condition of general wickedness as of perfection*

However, as psychology keeps in view the sinking
and the already sunken concepts together with their
combinations, in order not to be taken by surprise at
the renewed rising of those concepts, so also shall the
philosophy of history trace out the suppressed forces
and the germs of better and worse hidden in them, so
that the combinations under which the good may rise
and the bad be overcome, may be made clear ; for, in
order to know what is to be done and what avoided
every age wishes information upon this question. The
statesman demands of the philosophy of history that
which the educator demands of psychology. For both,
iron necessity which admits nothing else, and absolute
freedom, which holds nothing firmly, are equally inju-
rious delusions. Movable and tractable forces which,
however, under certain circumstances gain a definite
form, and gradually a lasting character, are the fun-
damental hypotheses of pedagogy and politics. Such
forces have been indicated in the foregoing.

243. The conditions of mental health already rec-
ognized, which change into the health of the citizen
life, demand a useful survey of that concerning which
the philosophy of history inquires in every state for
every epoch, and for the secure establishment of which
it has to seek. If with mania, delusion, dementia, and
idiocy, we wished to compare the madness of the de-
sire for innovation, the delusion of party spirit not
curable through any experience, the capricious sep-
aration of ranks or castes, communes, provinces, from
the bond of union of universal order and unavoidable

reciprocal action, the slack and blind toleration of such
16


194 RATIONAL PSYCHOLOGY.

mischievous perrersions — such a comparison, since it
can not be accurately carried out, would indeed seem
too difficult and too little instructive. But certainly
equanimity, susceptibility, concentration, and recipro-
cal determination of all concepts thi*ough one another
find their counterpart in the healthy and well-ordered
nation wherein each one applies himself peacefully to
his business, yet, upon the call of a general need, each
one obeys and acts, and all together accomplish what
is required ; and also the whole receives the impulse
communicated to it from all parts. The last point
may appear the most difficult to secure, but certainly
that public life is not sound which separates itself
from the concerns of the smaller circles instead of
taking advantage of them.

244. Men form an ideal of society, similar to these
psychological features just sketched, of tener, no doubt,
than they would if under the guidance of a practical
[i. e., moral] philosophy. For that which lacks the co-
operation of the social forces, that which collides with
the rest and makes too much friction without serving
any good purpose, will be easily observed, and con-
demned as unfitting.

However, as we may imagine that which is defect-
ive improved by something better, so man assigns to
himself the place which he would like to occupy in an
ideal society. He believes it his destiny to take this.
His calling or vocation is an approximation to it, or
his position and influence, which in actual society are
as nearly as possible similar to destiny, serve the same i

purpose. f

Here, where all plans are, as much as possible, ]

united, lies the unit point of his character, although


THE DESTINY OF MAN. 196

with great differences ; for the concept-masses which
concentrate here do not always hold a secure control.
Many can only at moments think of a special elevation
in their condition.

If a character, however, is to become quite mature,
a chief directing motive of the will, which furnishes
the trend for all individual acts of willing, must exist.
The man's ideal of his place in society is, in this case,
the soul, as it were, of that psychical organism men-
tioned in section 238. The forms of character differ ^
as greatly as do the relations of the concept-masses.

Through the above, the great difference between
plans and maxims comes to view. Men who have once
found their sphere, and have reached their place ac-
cording to their own view, now, without demanding
anything more, adjust themselves to it according to
rules of prudeiice, order, morality, right, duty; and
the punctual observance of these points without ex-
ception is the foundation of their inner satisfaction.

Observed psychologically as well as morally, these
characters are very different from those who live ac-
cording to dominating plans, and consequently either
have something to seek, or else something to save, so
that it may not be entirely lost. It is true that we do
not by any means find an entirely pure morality always
connected with punctilious observances; on the con-
trary, the application of the received maxims varies
greatly. On the other hand, the ideal of the vocation
and calling which is the source of all practical plans
is not by any means something indifferent to morality,
but what is held most righteous and pure by society
may constitute the foundation of this idea. But, let
plans for life be what they will, they may miscarry, and


196 RATIONAL PSYCHOLOGY.

whoever depends upon them alone may go to the
bottom ; consequently, in order to save himself, a man
may come to the place where he will make use of bad
means. At least he may not avoid the thought of
them, and will by this to some extent be disturbed.
We must admit, accordingly, all other things being
equal, that characters with dominating plans are the
more energetic; characters with dominating maxims
are the purer.

245. A man can not be blamed, however, for con-
necting his plans according to his idea of his rank and
vocation, and for fixing the latter according to his idea
of society ; for, however necessary the moral self-con-
trol of his inner life, it is not enough to form one's
chief occupation. The individual, knowing himself as
earthly and fragile, separated from society, is in his
own eyes too small, too narrow. He needs at least a
family, and even this does not fill his mental horizon.
To fill his place in the social whole is the highest aim
which he can see clearly ; not to see so much as this
would be narrow-mindedness.

Even in the strongest characters, a source of suffer-
ing is to be found in this connection. If they wish by
means of maxims and principles to stand morally firm
above all practical details {Pldne\ they must suffer
whenever the movement of society carries them away
from their ideal ; indeed, the suffering begins as soon
as their actual occupation, instead of approaching the
ideal, begins to deviate from it. Under such circum-
stances, a man looks higher ; he peers into the ob-
scurest distances, and tries whether it be possible,
without becoming visionary, to draw a mental picture
of that distance.


THE DESTINY OF MAN. 197

246. Since the soul is immortal, the career of the
individual man can not be confined to the earthly life.
Totally unacquainted with the arrangements of Provi-
dence for the remote future, we can, however, ask
what would necessarily occur, merely according to psy-
chological laws, and without any other influences, when
the bodily covering is dissolved and the dissimilar ele-
ments are scattered.

First must disappear the special influences which
the body was fitted to exercise at the age the man
has reached; hence must disappear the obstruction
through which the oldest concepts, which in them-
selves are the strongest, were limited in the vigor of
their action. Hence death is rejuvenescence without
bringing back childhood; for none of the combina-
tions of concepts that were gi*adually united can be
again set free. Meanwhile, the condition of the earth-
ly life which was last present, with its cares and bur-
dens, is reduced to its due share of importance in the
whole past.

247. While in general the striving for equilibrium
determines the movements of all concepts, yet, in
order to attain this equilibrium, very great revolutions
among them may be necessary. For it has been shown
how, out of the movements, new laws of movement
arise (207), and how the irregular accumulation of con-
cepts during life (208) make necessary a subsequent
rearrangement. This new elaboration and rearrange-
ment after death must, it is evident, differ greatly from
that which occurs during life here in the midst of
earthly, sensuous things. A dream can have no simi-
larity whatever to it ; for, although the senses become
closed by sleep, the latter (sleep) also depresses the


V


198 RATIONAL PSYCHOLOGY.

concepts so that the laws of their connection only act
partially. Through this partial action the distorted
figures of the dream arise (216). After death^however,
when free from the body, the soul must reach a more
complete state of wakefulness than it ever did in life.

248. However, the product which concepts striving
after equilibrium gradually create can not be quite
the same in any two human souls, since all differences
of the earthly existence- must exert an influence upon
them. The concepts of the child that has died young
would very soon approach their general equilibrium,
and so also the thoughts of the man of peaceful con-
science, who is simple in his actions and desires, are
not destined to any great change. On the contrary,
no restless, far-reaching mind, fettered by the world
and suddenly torn therefrom, can attain the stillness
of eternity otherwise than by a passage through violent
transformations which, owing to entirely changed con-
ditions, may be still more stormy and painful than
those by which the passionate man is so often tor-
mented in this world.

249. Finally, however, after the lapse, longer or
shorter, of what we call hours, days, and years, for
every soul, however deep and confused its disorder
may be, such a movement of concepts must take place
as will approach more and more gently, and by less
and less intervals, to the general equilibrium, yet with-
out ever entirely reaching it.

Finally, for the dying man, time becomes extinct ;
yet even this takes place in a manner that implies time.
Eternal life is an infinitely gentle fiuctuation of con-
cepts, an exceedingly faint trace of that which we call
life.


THE DESTINY OP MAN. 199

250. Without agitation, but in a state of the clear-
est wakefulness, the soul knows and feels the nobility
or want of nobility of its former career upon earth,
which it carries within itself as the imperishable char-
acter given to its Ego, and for that reason as an insep-
arable good or evil ; and it is incapable even of de-
siring or even of wishing that its state or condition
should be otherwise than it is.

Yet here the fact must not be overlooked that in
these disordered souls, after the great inner revolu-
tions which ensue upon death, it is impossible that all
the misery which they had brought together while
they existed in body should continue to endure. Ex-
actly the opposite. The objects of desire and the
brief period of endazzlement by the same, together
with the discord in the bodily conditions brought
about through violent passions, all this has long ago
disappeared; the child-like peace has not entirely,
though it has in part, returned, and has soothed the
wounded feelings, and healed the madness of passion.
As the delusion weakens, the truth comes forward.
More loudly and clearly the conscience speaks ; finally,
it speaks alone : the sinner is converted, and remorse
loses its sting.

261. Providence has permitted that very different
destinies be prepared for men in the world. To us
the difFerence seems great and important, a few years
after death it may be very much lessened. The sim-?
pie sense-perceptions, this first material of the mental
existence, are for all persons the same, and, even in
the short life before the power of speech is gained, the
child, by reason of its great susceptibility, receives a
considerable number of them. Many combinations


200 RATIONAL PSYCHOLOGY.

of this raw material which the earthly life had not se-
cured through its experience will be completed in the
future, not to create new knowledge (at least this
might be difficult to indicate), but to produce a peaceful
well-being. Now, if something of the difference that
exists in the earthly career be continued into eternity
— ^a difference distinguishing good men from bad — ^then
the life here may be for all full of purpose, and every
indiyidual, considered for himself alone, without any
comparison with others, justifies the act of Providence
which caused him to enter upon an earthly existence.
252. Thus appears the remote future, seen from
the standpoint of science, whose foundation is nothing
but common human experience. Upon this nothing
can be positively asserted. Probably everything is oth-
erwise arranged because some kind of divine govern-
ment is probable ; in the foregoing statement, how-
ever, only that has been suggested which, without any
fore-ordination, might ensue of itself. If we wish to
investigate this last question more closely, the possi-
bility of such an investigation will improve with the
progress of the statics and mechanics of the mind ;
but, as all metaphysics arise from experience, and as
no experience without metaphysics furnishes a genu-
ine scientific knowledge, so on the other hand meta-
physics is not able to take a single step beyond the
limits at which the necessary development of the ideas
of experience ends.


THE END.


D. APPLETON & 00/8 PUBUOATIONS.

^

Professor R. A. PROCTOR'S WORKS.

THE EXPANSE OF HEAVEN. A Series of Essays on the

Wonders of the Firmament. 12mo. Cloth, $2.00.

THE MOON : Her Motions, Aspect, Scenert, and Ehtsical Condi-
TioNS, WITH Two Lunar Photographs and many Illustrations.
New edition. 12mo. Cloth, $8.50.

OTHER WORLDS THAN OURS : The Plurality of Worlds,
studied under the Light of Regent Scientific Researches. With
lUastrations, some colored. 12mo. Cloth, |2.50.

OUR PLACE AMONG INFINITIES. A Series of Essays con-
trasting our Little Abode in Space and Time with the Infinities around
us. To which are added Essays on the Jewish Sabbath and Astrology.
12mo. Cloth, $1.75.

LIGHT SCIENCE FOR LEISURE HOURS. Familiar Essays
on Scientific Subjects, Natural Phenomena, etc. 12mo. Cloth, $1 .75.

J. NORMAN LOCKYER'S WORKS.

ELEMENTS OF ASTRONOMY; accompanied with numerous
Illustrations, a Colored Representation of the Solar, Stellar,
AND Nebular Spectra, and Arago's Celestial Charts of the
Northern and the Southern Hemisphere. By J. Norman Lockyer,
Fellow of the Royal Astronomical Society. American edition, re-
yised and specially adapted to the Schools of the United States.
12mo. Cloth, $1.50.

STUDIES IN SPECTRUM ANALYSIS. By J. Norman Lock-
yer, F. R. S. With 60 Illustrations. 1 2mo. Cloth, $2.60.

By Professor YOUNG.

THE SUN. By C. A. Young, Ph. D., LL. D., Professor of Astronomy

in the College of New Jersey. With numerous Illustrations. Third

edition. With Supplementary Note. 12mo. Cloth, |2.00.

"Profeasor Yoxmg is an authority on *The Sun.' and writes from intimate knowl-
odffe. He has studiM that great luminary all his life, invented and improved instru'
ments for observing it gone to all quarters of the world in search of th<> best places
and opportunities to watch it and has contributed important discoveries that have ex-
tended our knowledge oi \V— Popular Science Monthly.

D. APPLETON & CO., Publishers, 1, 8, & 6 Bond Street, New York.


D. APPLETON d CO/8 PUBLICATIONS.


ALEXANDER BAIN'S ^VORKS.

THE SENSES AND THE IKTELI^ECT. 8to. Cloth, $5.00.

The object of this treatise is to give a full and systematic accoont (rf two
Iirincipal diirisions of the science (rf mind— the senses and the intellect The
value 'of the third edition of the woric is greatly enhancfd by an account of the
psychology of Aristotle, which has been contri bated by Mr. Grote.

THE EMOTIONS AND THE WILL. 8yo. aoth, $5.00.

The present publication is a sequel to the former one on " The Senses and the
Intellect,^ ' and completes a systematic exposition of the human mind.

MIND AND BODY. Theories of their Belatioiis. 12mo. Cloth,

$1.50.

"A forcible statement of the connection between mind and body, stodying
their subtile interwwkings l^ the light of the most recent philological investi-
gations."— C^ftrfo^iofi i26^^.

EDUCATION AS A SCIENCE. 12mo. Ooth, $1.75.

ON TEACHING ENGLISH. With DetaUed Examples and an
Inquiry into the Definition of Poetry. 12mo. Cloth, $1.25.

PRACTICAL ESSAYS. 12mo. Cloth, $1.50.


Dr. H. ALLEYNE NICHOLSON'S WORKS.

MANUAL OF ZOOLOGY, for the Use of Students, with a Gen-
eral Introduction to the Principles of Zoology. Second edition.
ReTised and enlarged, with 243 Woodcuts. 12mo. Cloth, $2.50.

THE ANCIENT LIFE-HISTORY OF THE EARTH.

A Comprehensive Outline of the Principles and Leading Facts of
PalaBontological Science. 12mo. Cloth, $2.00.

" A work by a master in the science who understands the significance of every
phenomenon which he records, and knows how to make it reveal its lessons. As
regards its value there can scarcely exist two opinions. As a text-book of the
historical phase of palaeontology it will be indispensable to students, whether
specially pursuing geology or biology ; and without it no man who aspires even to
an outline knowledge of natural science can deem his library complete." — The
Quarterly Journal qf Science.


New York: D. APPLETON & CO., 1, 8, & 5 Bond Street.


D. APPLETON & 00/ 8 PUBLIOATIONS.


Professor JOSEPH LE CONTE'S WORKS.

EVOLUTION AND ITS RELATION TO RELIGIOUS
THOUGHT. Bj Joskth Le Conte, LL. D., Professor of Geology
and Natural Historj in the Uniyersity of California. With numer-
ous niustrations. 12mo. Cloth, |1.5U.

** Much, very much has been written, especially on <he natnre and the evi-
dences of evolntion, hot the literatnre Ih bo volnminoos, mnch of it so fragment-
ary, and most of it so technical, that even very intelligent persons have stfll very
vagne ideas on the sabject. I have attempted to give (1) a very concise account
of what we mean by evolution, (2) an outline of the evidences or its truth drawn
from many different sources, and (b> its relation to fundamental retigioos beliefs/*
—Extract from Pr^ace.

ELEMENTS OF GEOLOGY. A Text-book for Colletres and for
the General Reader. By Joseph Lb Contb, LL. D. With upward
of 900 Illustrations. New and enlarged edition. Svo. Cloth, $4.00.

"Besides preparing a comprehensive text-book, suited to preeent demands.
Professor Le Conte has given ns a volume of great value as an eiposition of the


subject, thoroughly up to date. The examples and applications of the work are


full, authentic, the result of devoted study and of long experience in teaching/
—Bjpular Science Monthly.

RELIGION AND SCIENCE. A Series of Sunday Lectures on the
Relation of Natural and Revealed Religion, or the Truths revealed
in Nature and Scripture. By Joseph Lb Contb, LL. D. 12mo.
Cloth, $1.60.

** We commend the book cordially to the regard of all who are interested in
whatever pertains to the discussion of these grave questions, and especially to
those who desire to examine cloeely the strong foundations on which the Chris-
tian faith is reared."— jSo0ton Joui'nal.

SIGHT : An Exposition of the Principles of Monocular and Binocular
Vision. By Joseph Le Conte, LL. D. With Illustrations. 12mo.
Cloth, 11.50.

** Professor Le Conte has long been known as an original investigator in this
department : all that he gives us is treated with a master-hand. It is pleasant to
find an American book that can rank with the very best of foreign books on this
subject.''— 7%6 Nation.


New York: D. APPLETON k CO., 1, 8, & 6 Pond Street.


D. APPLET ON A 00/8 PUBU0ATI0N8.


t4


IfbratUU hiffher order qf studenii, toe kaee a mriei qf *Cla$tleai Writert.
Thii we can noi praise too miM^"— WestmiiMter Beview.


CLASSICAL WRITERS

Editcd bt JOHN RICnABD GREEN, M. A., LL. D.


16mo, flezlVto cloth • . • . eO oente eaoh.


MILTOH • By Stopvobd A. Bbookb.

" Hie life is AcoomiMaiied by carefal tynopees of Milton^s proee and poettcal
woriu, and by actaolarly estimates and ctitfcisms of them. Arranged in Inrlef para-
graphs, and dothed in a simple and perspiciioos style, the volnme introdnoes the
papil directly to the aathor ft describes, and not only familiarizes him with his
method of composition, bat with his exooisite fancies and lofty conceptions, and
enables him to see practically and intelligently what an expressiye and sonorous
Instmment our tongoe is in the hands of one m its mightiest maeten,^*Sarper^9
Magazine.

EURIPIDES. By Profesaor J. P. Mahafft.

" A better book on the subject than has previonsly been written in English.
He is scholarly and not pedantic, appreciative and yet jwL^''— London Academy,

TERGIL. By Professor H. Xbttleship.

" The information is all soand and good, and no snch hand-book has before
been within the reach of the yonng sta^nt. Any one who wishes to read Yergll
intelligraitly, and not merely to cram so many books of the *■ JBneid ^ for an exami-
nation, should bay Professor Nettleship's scholarly monograph."— Zoiulon Athe-
natum.

SOPHOCLES. By Professor Lewis Campbell.

" We can not close without again recommending the little book to all lovers of
Sophocles, as an able and eloquent picture of the life and work of one of the
greatest dramatic writers the worid has ever seen."— Zoiu2on Athenaswn,

UVY. By Rev. W. W. Capis, M. A.

*^ Well deserves attentive study on many accounts, especially for the variety of
its theme and the concise perspicuity of its treatment."— Xomlon Saturday Bemew,

DEMOSTHENES* By S. H. Butcher, Fellow of UniTersity College,
Oxford.

"This is an admirable little book. Mr. Butcher has brought his finished
scholarship to bear on a difficult but most interesting chapter of Oreek literary
history ; ... the primer is as fresh and attractive in form as it is ripe hi learning
and thorough in meiXxoA."*— London Academy.


New York : D. .VPPLETON & CO., 1, 8, & 6 Bond Street


D. APPLETON & CO.'S PUBLICATIONS.


I^AIVDMARKS OF ENGLISH LITERATURE. By Hxnrt
J. NicoLL. 12mo. Cloth, $1.75.

** Ti}e plan adopted in this book has been to deal solely viiiti the very
grreatest names in the several departments of English literature— with those
writers whose works are among the most imperishable glories of Britain,
and with whom it is a disgrace for even the busiest to remain unacquainted."
—From the F^rfaoe.

**The * Landmarks of English Literatora* is a work of exceptional value. It
reveals scholarship and high literary ability. Mr. Nicoll has a proper conception
of the age in which he lives, and or its requirements in the sp^uai line in which
he has attempted to work."-— i\r«u' York Herald.

*^ We can warmly recommend this excellent manual."— /S'^. Jamea'^s Gazette.

" Mr. Nicoll is not ambitions, save to state things precisely as they are, to give
the common orthodox judgment on great authors bud their places in history, and
he has brought to his task a mild enthusiasm of st^^le and a conscientiousness cf
exact Btatement that can not be overpraised. He wiites out of a full mind, and >et
he writes on a level with the ordinary intelligence."— JV^etr York Times.

**It would be hard to find anywhere an example of a more pithy, compact, yet
attractive presentation of the real landmarks of the literature than Is comprieed in
this duodecimo of 460 pages."— iVinff York Home Journal.

" The work abounds in personal incident and anecdote connected with various
authors, which assist the reader in making their acquaintance, and which give to
the book a more lively aspect than one of cold criticuBm."— iV^et<; York Observer,

"A book to be most heartily commended."— i?offton Traveller.

" It has ample narrative and happy criticisms, and is filled with instructive ard
entertainine matter admirably presented. It would be hard to suggest improve-
ment in style or arrangement. "—.Bo»to» Commonwealth.

THE DEYELOPKElfT OF ENGLISH THOUGHT. The

Old English Period. By Brother Azarias, Professor of English
Literature in Rock Hill College, Maryland. 1 2mo. Cloth, $1.26.

*' In some respects the author has written a text-book superior to any we know
now in use. There are few writers so well prepared in what might be termed the
technique of Old Bnelish histonr and literature. His chapter on the Kelt and
Teuton is admirable. '^iV«t0 York Times.

"The work will commend itself to notice for its concise and ajgreeable style,
its logical method, and the philosophic and poetic, as well as histor^al, treatment
of the theme. The author is master of his BVLbjecV^-^Providence Journal.

**The author has exhibited great skill In presenting to the reader a clear and
correct view of the literature and condition of things in England at that remote
age, and the work is one of special interest"— .S^w^a FOst.

*' A valuable text-book."— JS'M^tm Globe.

** A work of remarkable interest."— J3o»Am Evening Transcript.

"A book of genuine literary Interest and Ytiine.^^— Cleveland Herald.

" Within its covers there is a wealth of erudition, research, and scholarly labor,
which places the book beside those of Wright, Spalding, and Craik. The English
of the writer is a model for clearness and point."— ZTS^ica Daily Observer.

" One of the most thorough and best-arranged books on the subject that we
have seen."— TVoy Press.

New York : D. APPLETON & CO., 1, 8, 5 Bond Street.


i

I

D. APPLETON & CO.fe PUBLICATIONS.


^rff£ SCIENCE OF LA tv. By Professor Sheldon
-^ Amos, M. A. i2ino. Cloth, $1.75.

CONTENTS.~Chapter I. Recent History and Present Condidon of tbe»Science
of Law; H. Province and Limits of the Science of Law; ilL Law and Morality;
IV. The Gfowdi of Law; V. The Growth of Law (continued); VI. Elementary Con-
cmtions and Terms; VI L Law in Relation to (x) the State, (3) die Family, (3) the
other Constituent Elements of the Race; VIH. Laws of Ownership of Property; IX
Law uf Contract; X. Criminal Law and Procedure ; XL The Law of Civil Procedure;
Xn. International Law ; XIII. Codification; XIV. Law and Government

" Professor Amos has certainly done much to clear die science of law from the tech-
nical obscurities which darken it txi minds which have had no legal training, and to make
clear to his ' lay ' readers in how true and high a sense it can assert its right to be con-
sidered a idence, and not a mere practice." — CAnstioH Register,


T


^HE SCIENCE OF POLITICS, By Professor
Sheldon Amos, M.A., author of "The Science of Law,"
etc. i2mo. Cloth, $1.75.

CONTENTS.— <:hai>ter I. Nature and Limits of the Science of Politics: II. Po-
litical Terms; III. Political Reasoning ; IV. The Geographical Area of Modem Poli-
tics; V. The Primary Elements of Pohtical Life and Action ; VI. Constitutions; VII.
Local Government; V I II. The Govtrrnment of Dependencies; IX. Foreign Relations;
X. The Province of Government ; XI. K evolutions in States; XII. Right and Wrong
in Politics.

*' The author traces the subject from Plato and Aristotle in Greece, and Cicero in
Kome, to the modem schools m the Knglish field, not sUe^hting the teachings of the
American Revolution or the lessons of the French Revolution of 1793. Forms of gov-
ernment, political terms, the relation of law, written and unwritten, to the subject, a
codification from Justinian to Napoleon in France and Field in America, are^ treated as
parts of the subject in hand. Necessarily the subjects of executive and legislative au-
thority, Dolice, liquor, and land laws are considered, and the question ever growing in
importance in all countries, the relations of corporations to the state. "—AT. Y. Observer,

r\TGEST OF THE LAWS, CUSTOMS, MAN-

J-^ NERS, AND INSTITUTIONS OF ANCIENT AND
MODERN NA TIONS, By Thomas Dew, late President of
the College of William and Mary. 8vo. Cloth, $2.00.

No pains have been spared by the author to secure accuracy in facts and figures ; and
in doubtfiil cases references are given in parentheses, so that the student can readily
satisfy himself by going to original sources. The department of Modern History, too
<^ten neglected in worlu of this kind, has received special care and attention.

DOM AN LA W ; Its History and System of Private
J- ^ Law, In Twelve Academical Lectures. By Professor James
Hadley. i2mo. Cloth, $1.25.


(f •


' The most valuable short account of the nature and importance of the body of Ro-
man law. The lectures are free from embarrassing technical details, while at the same
time thsy are sufficiently elaborate to i^ve a definite idea of the nature and the great-
ness of me subject "'->Z>r. C. K. A dams* s Manual of Historical Literature.


New York: D. APPLETON & CO., i, 3, & 5 Bond Street


D. APPLETON & CO.'S PUBLICATIONS.


n^HE HISTOR Y OF ANCIENT CTVILIZA TION

Jl a Hand-book based upon M. Gustave Ducoudray's " His-
toire Sommaire de la Civilisation." Edited by the Rev. J. Ver-
SCHOYLE, M. A. With numerous Illustrations. Large i2mo.

Cloth. $1.75.

*' With M. Ducoudray's work as a basis, many additions having been made, derived
from s|)ecial writers, Mr. Verschoyle has | reduced an excellent work, which gives a
comprehensive view of early civilization. . . . ^s to the world of the past, die volume
under notice treats of Egypt, Assyria, the Far E^t, of Greece and Rome, in the most
comprehensive manner, it is not the arts alone which are fully illustrated, but the
literature, laws, manners, and customs, the beliefs of all these countries are contrasted.
If the book gave alone the hbtory of the monuments of the past it would be valuable,
but it is its all-around character which renders it so usehil. A great many volumes
have been produced Ureating of a past civilization, but we have seen none which in tne
same space gives such varied information." — New York 'limes,

7 'HE HISTOR V OF MODERN CIVILIZA TION.
A Hand-book also based upon M. Gustave Ducoudray's
*• Histoire Sommaire de la Civilisation " ; edited by the Rev. J.
Verschoyle, M. A. Illustrated. Uniform with "The His-
tory of Ancient Civilization." i2mo. Cloth, $2.25.

" Contains a vast quantity of information on many subjects, generally arranged
with much i^^V* '^Saturday Review.

" The work of author and adapter has been admirably executed, and the result is
that rarest of literary portents — ^a summary at once comprehensive and readable."—
London Telegraph.


T


HE ICE AGE IN NORTH AMERICA, and its
Bearings upon the Antiqmty of Man, By G. Frederick
Wright, D. D., LL. D., F. G. S.A., Professor in Oberlin
Theological Seminary ; Assistant on the United States Geo-
logical Survey. With an Appendix on " The Probable Cause
of Glaciation," by Warren Upham, F. G S. A., Assistant on
the Geological Surveys of New Hampshire, Minnesota, and
the United States. With 147 Maps and Illustrations. New
and enlarged edition, 1891. One vol., 8vo, 625 pages, and
Index. Cloth, $5.00.

"Not a novel in all the list of this year's publications has in it any pages of more
thrilling interest than can be fonnd in this book by Professor Wright. There is noth-
ing pedantic in the nanative, and the most serious themes and startling discoveries are
treated with such charming naturdness and simplicity that boys and girls, as well as
their seniors, will be attracted to the story, and find it difficult to lay it aside."— AVw
York Journal of Commerce,


New York : D. APPLETON & CO., i, 3, & 5 Pond Street.


D. APPLETON & CO.'S PUBLICATIONS.


T


USEFUL BOOKS FOR LITERARY WORKERS.

'HE VERBALIST. A Manual devoted to Brief Discus-
sions of the Right and the Wrong Use of Words, and to some
other Matters of Interest to those who would Speak and Write
with Propriety. By Alfr£D Ayres. i8mo. Cloth, $i.oa


T


'HE ORTHOEPIST, A Pronouncing Manual, contain-
ing about Three Thousand Five Hundred Words, including a
considerable Number of the Names of Foreign Authors, Art-
ists, etc., that are often mispronounced. By Alfred Ayres.
i8mo. Cloth, $i.oo.


rrHE RHYMESTER ; or the Rules of Rhyme. A

J- Gui4e to English Versification. With a Dictionary of Rhymes,

an Examination of Classical Measures, and Comments upon

Burlesque, Comic Verse, and Song- Writing. By the late Tom

Hood. Edited by Arthur Penn. i8mo. Cloth, )i.oo.


T


HE CORRESPONDENT. By James Wood David-
son. Small i2mo. Cloth, 60 cents. Information, with forms
of address, salutation, etc


CRRORS IN THE USE OF ENGLISH. By the
-/-^ late William B. Hodgson, LL. D., Professor of Political
Economy in the University of Edinbuigh. American revised
edition. i2mo. Cloth, $1.50.

C'L/PS OF TONGUE AND PEN. By J. H. Long,
^^ M. A., Principal of Collegiate Institute, Peterboroughi Ontario.
Z2mo. Cloth, 60 cents.


T


HE ART OF AUTHORSHIP. Literaiy Reminis-
cences. Methods of Work, and Advice to Young Beginners.
Opinions of many Leading Authors of the Day. Compiled
and edited by George Bainton. i2mo. Cloth, untrimmed
edges, $1.25.


New York: D. APPLETON & CO., i, 3, & 5 Bond Street.
