The Guiding Symptoms of Our Materia Medica, Vol. I
Constantine Hering
The Guiding Symptoms of Our Materia Medica, vol. I. Philadelphia: Globe, 1879.
Public domain. Transcribed from the Internet Archive copy (https://archive.org/details/guidingsymptomso00heri).
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

p


,^v


Boston  Medical  Library
in  the  Francis  A.  Countwaj
Libraryof  Medicine -Boston


COLUMBIAN NATURAL CLASP NO.  ION

PAT  1,290.083  PAT.  1,593,048

THE  UNITED  STATES  ENVELOPE  CO. SPRINGFIELD,MASS.

S'^  X  6


Digitized  by  the  Internet  Archive

in  2010  with  funding  from

Open  Knowledge  Commons  and  Harvard  Medical  School


THE


GUIDING  SYMPTOMS


OF  OUR


MATERIA  MEDIOA


BY


0.  HERING,  M.  D.


VOLUME  I.


PHILADELPHIA:

THE  AMERICAN  HOMCEOPATHIC  PUBLISHING  SOCIETY.

J.  ]yE.  STODD^RT & CO.

1879.


Copyright,  iSyg,  by  Constantine  JEering


Author's  Mark.


PRESS  OF  GLOBE  PRINTING  HOUSE,  PHILADELPHIA.


PREFACE.


THIS  work  will  especially  commend  itself  to  the
busy  practitioner,  because  it  is  an  attempt  to
give  our  Materia  Medica  in  such  a  form  as  will  make
the  selection  of  a  curative  medicine  in  any  given  case
as  easy  as  possible.  It  is  a  comioUment  to  all  other
works  on  our  Materia  Medica,  being  principally  a  col-
lection of  CURED  SYMPTOMS.  Wc  could  fill  pagcs  with
quotations  from  our  best  practitioners  in  favor  of  their
use  in  the  selection  of  remedies.  A  symptom  only
cured  has  never  such  an  intrinsic  value  as  one  produced
and  cured,  and  yet,  such  an  one  should  not  be  ignored ;
in  course  of  time  it  may  be  added  to  lYiQ  characteristics.
Of  course  all  characteristics  will  be  found  here,  and
many  other  symptoms  produced  and  cured,  which
further  experience  may  warrant  us  in  marking  up  in
degree  until  they  attain  the  grade  we  denominate
characteristic.

As  so  many  peculiar  views  have  been  expressed  in
regard  to  what  is  meant  by  a  characteristic,  a  few
words  on  the  subject  may  not  be  out  of  place.  Some
of  our  best  observers  have  been  sneered  at  by  would-
be-critics,  as  if  they  had  been  guilty  of  manufacturing
characteristics.  This  of  course  proves  them  to  be
sadly  deficient  in  a  knowledge  of  the  Organon. Let  us


PREFACE.

see  what  Hahnemann  says  there,  in  his  masterly  ad- '
vice  how  to  examine  the  sick.

§  95.  In  chronic  diseases  the  investigation  of  all
symptoms  should  be  conducted  as  carefully  and  cir-
cumstantially as  possible,  and  made  to  penetrate  the
minutest  details,  because  they  are  most  peculiar  and
most  unlike  those  of  acute  affections,  and  also  because
they  never  can  be  too  accurately  considered  for  the
purpose  of  successful  treatment.  Again,  chronic  pa-
tients are  so  inured  to  suffering,  that  circumstances
however  characteristic  and  decisive  in  the  selection  of  the
remedy,  are  rarely,  if  at  all,  mentioned  by  them,  but
rather  considered  as  a  part  of  their  unavoidable  condi-
tion. It  rarely  occurs  to  them  that  other  small  or
great  deviations  from  the  healthy  condition,  might  be
connected  with  the  main  disease.

§  101.  A  physician  accustomed  to  exact  observation,
may  approach  the  true  condition  of  an  epidemic  so
closely  that  he  is  enabled  to  construe  a  characteristic
image  of  the  same,  and  even  to  discover  the  appropri-
ate homoeopathic  remedy.

§  102.  By  writing  down  the  symptoms  of  several
cases  of  this  kind,  the  sketch  of  the  disease  will  gradu-
ally become  more  complete;  without  being  enlarged
by  additional  phrases,  it  will  be  more  closely  defined
(more  characteristic),  and  made  to  embrace  more  of  the
peculiarity  of  such  collective  diseases.  General  signs,
such  as  want  of  appetite,  sleeplessness,  etc.,  are  speci-
fied and  defined.  More  prominent  and  special  symp-
toms will  be  made  conspicuous  by  proper  notation,
and  constitute  the  characteristics  of  the  epidemic.

§  104. When  all  the  prominent  and  characteristic


V  PREFACE.

symptoms,  collectively  forming  an  image  of  a  disease,
have  been  carefully  committed  to  writing,  the  most
difficult  part  of  the  work  will  have  been  done.

§  153.  The  search  for  a  remedy  consists  in  the  com-
parison of  the  totality  of  the  symptoms  (of  the  sick),
with  the  symptoms  of  our  proved  drugs.  In  making
this  comparison,  the  more  prominent,  uncommon  and
peculiar  (characteristic)  features  of  the  case,  are  espe-
cially and  almost  exclusively  considered  and  noted;
for  these  in  particular,  should  hear  the  closest  similitude  to
the  symptoms  of  the  desired  medicine,  if  that  is  to  accom-
plish the  cure.  More  general  and  indefinite  symptoms,
such  as  want  of  appetite,  headache,  weakness,  restless
sleep,  distress,  etc.,  unless  more  clearly  defined,  deserve
but  little  notice  on  account  of  their  vagueness.

In  paragraphs  164,  165  and  178,  nearly  the  same  is
repeated.

For  the  benefit  of  all  who  may  have  an  opportunity
of  comparing  the  master's  first  edition  of  LSIO,  we
quote  the  paragraphs  and  pages  where  he  used  the
word  ''  characteristic."  §  74,  p.  73,  more  fully  ex-
plained;  §  129,  p.  108;  §  135,  p.  114;  §  152,  p.  122;
§  169,  p.  132;  §  183,  p.  151.

Every  word  contained  in  his  masterly  advice  how
to  examine  the  sick,  was  new  and  unheard  of  in  the
history  of  medical  science.

According  to  this  practical  advice  of  Hahnemann,
we  have  endeavored  to  find  out  the  characteristics  of
our  drugs.

What  are  the  ways  our  school  has  followed?  The
first  is,  we  allow  the  jjossihility  that  symptoms  may
follow  when  a  drug  is  taken  in  health,  and  that  these


PREFACE.  - vi

symptoms  are  produced  conjointly  by  the  drug  and
the  prover.

Could  Cinchona  bark  produce  altered  sensations  on
myself,  if  I  took  it  now  in  health  ?  This  was  the  ques-
tion which  induced  Hahnemann  to  make  his  first
proving,  in  1790.  The  answer  was,  he  felt  a  group  of
symptoms  exactly  such  as  he  had  when  he  suffered
from  intermittent  fever,  twenty  years  before,  in  Sie-
benblirgen.  Was  he  satisfied  with  this  observation?
Certainly  not.  He  repeated  his  experiment,  and  he
repeated  it  several  times,  with  exactly  the  same  result,
"I  stopped  taking  it,  and  got  well,"  he  says.

Throughout  all,  we  see  the  fine  result  of  the  think-
ing lessons  given  to  Hahnemann  by  his  father,  when  a
boy.

His  very  first  step  already  refuted  the  slander  which
Avas  subsequently  fiung  at  our  school,  that  it  was  based
on  the  conclusion  :  post  hoc,  ergo  propter  hoc.  If  the
same  or  similar  symptoms  appeared  in  the  proving  of
a  drug  on  the  healthy,  they  were  considered  as  having
been  probably  caused  by  it,  and  the  oftener  the  symp-
toms appeared  in  the  provings,  the  greater  became  the
jpr  oh  ability .  How  anxiously  the  first  builders  of  our
Materia  Medica  looked  for  the  printing  of  the  provings,
in  order  to  compare  their  own  with  the  symptoms  of
others,  deriving  enjoyment  from  each  confirmation!

The  next  step  was  to  look  for  physiological  and
pathological  corroborations.  But  all  this  was  only  con-
sidered as  magnifying  the  probability.

The  next  step  was  to  give  a  drug  to  the  sick,  accord-
ing to  the  symptoms  it  had  produced  on  the  healthy,
and  the  cures  made  were  the  verifications.


vu


PREFACE.


Finally  we  obtained  the  characteristic,  the  ripe
fruit  hanging  upon  the  tree.

We  never  selected  the  remedy  according  to  the  loose
generalizations  in  fashion  with  many,  and  considered
more  scientific.  We  never  walked  on  pathological
stilts,  but  always  took  the  symptom  as  a  reality,  on
the  one  side  observed  by  the  prover,  and  on  the  other
side  observed  on  the  sick.

Phrases  of  ''  grand  starting-points  "  and  "  centres  of
action  in  the  ganglionic  nerve-centres,"  are  vagaries  of
a  scientific  appearance  which  every  tyro  can  manu-
facture anew  according  to  the  latest  fashion.

The  definition  of  a  characteristic  being  "  a  symptom
not  found  under  more  than  one  remedy,"  is  quite  erro-
neous. Such  a  unicum  occurring  among  a  large  collec-
tion of  symptoms,  should  be  looked  upon  with  suspi-
cion. On  the  contrary,  all  our  most  approved  charac-
teristics, as  they  have  been  corroborated  time  and  time
again,  are  never  such  as  are  found  in  one  medicine
alone.

Many  years  ago,  for  the  benefit  of  the  students  at
Allentown,  the  following  little  scheme  was  written  on
the  blackboard  in  the  lectures  on  Materia  Medica.


PREFACE.  viii

The  characteristic  may  be  found  in  one  or  more  of
these.  Three  points  of  rest,  according  to  mathematics,
being  enough  to  support  any  object,  we  may  assume
that  three  characteristics  should  be  sufficient  to  make
a  cure  very  probable.

All  the  so-called  dynamics  have  been  omitted.  Thus
the  various  applications  of  heat  and  "cold,  the  water
treatment,  the  two  electricities,  light  and  the  use  of
colors,  especially  the  indispensable  blue  light,  magnet-
ism (the  work  of  many  years  of  our  master),  the  con-
tact of  metals  (lately  taken  up  again  by  the  Old
School),  the  highly  valuable  mesmerism,  and  the
movement  cure ;  not  as  if  one  could  be  a  physician
without  them,  but  because  they  ought  to  be  treated  of
in  a  separate  work.  So  also  all  medicinal  springs  have
been  left  out,  for  the  same  reason.  Some  of  the  drugs
have  not  found  a  place  in  this  work  for  want  of  trust-
worthy cures.

Very  little  notice  has  been  taken  of  the  so-called
"  critics,"  remembering  the  "  razzia  "  of  Roth  in  Paris,
who  had  no  other  intention  but  to  destroy  our  Materia
Medica,  and  that  by  striking  out  for  the  most  trivial
reasons  symptoms  by  the  thousand.  Like  a  Don
Quixote  he  was  fighting  with  windmills  and  was  not
without  a  Sancho  Panza,  who  wrote  a  treatise  to  show
that  Hahnemann's  quotations  of  Dulcamara  were  erro-
neous, and  that  we  had  no  right  to  give  it  for  symp-
toms following  exposure  to  cold.  The  poor  critic  did
not  know  that  there  was  scarcely  a  practitioner  of
homoeopathy  who  had  not  made  such  cures  by  the
score.


ix  PREFACE.

Like  all  employers  with  a  good  conscience,  we  are
not  goverened  by  "  strikers."

It  has  been  my  rule  through  life  never  to  accept
anything  as  true,  unless  it  came  as  near  mathematical
proof  as  possible  in  its  domain  of  science,  and  on  the
other  hand,  never  to  reject  anything  as  false,  unless
there  was  stronger  proof  of  its  falsity.

Some  will  say,  but  so  many  things — a  majority  of  all
observations — will  thus  remain  between  the  two,  unde-
cided. So  they  will;  and  can  it  be  helped?  It  can,
but  only  by  accumulating  most  careful  observations  and
contributing  them  to  the  general  fund  of  knowledge.

CONSTANTII^E HeRING.


THE  ARRANGEMENT

Is  the  same  as  that  in  the  ''Analytical  Therapeutics,"
and  in  the  '-Condensed  Materia  Medica."  A  more
complete  and  concise  review  of  the  arrangement  will
precede  the  repertory,  which  is  to  follow  close  upon
the  last  volume  of  this  work.

To  facilitate  the  study  of  the  relative  value  of  symp-
toms, four  marks  of  distinction  have  been  adopted,
I,  II,  I,  II,  which  correspond  to  the  four  degrees  in
Bonninghausen's  repertory.

I  Is  the  lowest,  and  designates  an  occasionally  con-
firmed symptom.  It  is  omitted  in  most  cases,  but  is
sometimes  used  to  mark  a  difference  of  value  in  the
same  line.

I I  More  frequently  confirmed.
■  Symptoms  verified  by  cures.
1 1  Repeatedly  verified.

^^^  Indicates  an  approved  characteristic,  but  is
seldom  used,  by  reason  of  our  not  wishing  to  appear
authoritative.  It  is  to  be  hoped  that  the  combined  ex-
perience of  many  practitioners,  solicited  from  all  sides,
will  enable  us  in  a  future  edition  to  designate  many
more  symptoms  with  this  mark.

d  The  Greek  letter  "theta"  stands  between  the  cured
symptom  and  the  pathological  condition,  or  the  physi-
ological general  state,  f.  i.,  pregnancy  or  climateric
years.  This  by  no  means  excludes  the  characteristic
nature  of  the  symptom  in  other  forms  of  disease.

:  Such  observations  from  the Old School or  the
New,  as  are  worth}^  of  our  consideration.

t.  Toxicological.

r.  Right. 1.  Left.

<  Increase,  or  aggravation.

>  Decrease,  or  amelioration.

ii  The  Greek  "Pi"  stands  before  symptoms  observed
only  on  the  sick.


GUIDING  SYMPTOMS


OF OUR


MATERIA MEDICA


ABIES  NIGRA.

Black  Spruce. Coniferoe.

The  Pinus  nigra  or  black  spruce  of  this  country.

Proved  by  Dr.  Leaman,  Ohio  Medical  and  Surgical  Reporter.


^  Mind. Inability  to  think  or  study.

I  Very  low-spirited ;  melancholy.
^  Sensorium, Dizziness  ;  bad  feeling  in  the  head.
^  Inner  Head, i  i  Headache.

I  Terrible  distress  in  the  head,  generally  with  some  flushing  of
the  face, d  Dyspepsia.
*  Outer  Head. Head  hot,  with  flushed  cheeks.
^  Face. Cheeks  flushed.
^"  Gums. :  Scurvy.

13  Throat. Choking  sensation  in  the  throat.'
^^  Appetite. Exceedingly  hungry  and  wakeful  at  night.

I  I  Total  loss  of  appetite  in  the  morning,  craving  for  food  at
noon  and  at  night.
^^  Eating. iPain  after  a  hearty  meal. See  17.

I  Abstinence  from  any  particular food does not relieve the
symptoms, d  Dyspepsia.
^®  Belching  and  Vomiting, i  Belching.

I  Acid,  eructations.

I  Frequent  vomiting  of  food.

(1)


ABIES  NIGRA.  2

^^  Scrobiculum  and  Stomach, l  Severe  pain  in  stomach  after
eating.
I  1  Distressing  pain  in  stomach,  extending  to  left  side.
I  Sensation  of  an  undigested  hard  boiled  egg  in  stomach. 6  Dys-
pepsia.
■  Continual  distressing  constriction  just  above  the  pit  of  stom-
ach, as  if  everything  was  knotted  up,  or  as  if  a  hard  lump
of  undigested  food  remained  there. 6  Dyspepsia.
^^  Rectum  and  Stool. 1 1  Constipation.
2^  Female  Sexual  Organs. Menses  did  not  appear  until  third

month  after  proving.
^^  Respiration. Gets  out  of  breath  easily.
^^  Back. Pain  in  small  of  back.
2^  Nerves. Nervousness.

Fatigue.
^^  Sleep. Dull  and  sleepy  during  the  day ;  restless  and  wakeful
at  night.
Wakeful  at  night  with  hunger.
Bad  dreams.
^^  Time. Morning : total  loss  of  appetite. Noon : craving  for
food. Night : hungry  ;  wakeful  and  restless. Day  :  dull
and  sleepy.
^^  Fever. Alternate  heat  and  cold.
\  Malarial  fevers.*

I  Chronic  intermittent  fever,  accompanied  by  stomachache.
*''  Locality  and  Direction. Left :  pain  in  stomach  extends  to

side.
^*  Tissues. Rheumatic  pains  and  aching  in  the  bones.
^®  Relationship. Used  in  the  preparation  of  spruce  beer.

Similar  to  :  Nux  vom.  (pressure  as  from  a  stone  after  a  meal) ;
Bismuth  ;  Calc.  carh.  (like  a  load  after  a  moderate  supper)  ;
Bryon.  (like  a  stone,  worse  moving);  Kali  carh.;  Arsen.  ;
Zincum  (as  if  food  lodged  in  oesophagus) ;  Ignat.  (food  feels
as  if  lying  above  cardiac  orifice) ;  Sepia  (nightly  pressure
as  from  a  stone,  also  after  food) ;  Agar,  (burning  after  food,
followed  by  pressure  as  from  a  foreign  body) ;  Phosphor. ;
Pulsat.  (like  a  stone,  early  on  awaking) ;  Sulphur  ;  Cinchon.
(accompanied  by  bloating) ;  JYatr.  mur.  (sensation  of  a  for-
eign body  sticking  in  cardiac  orifice).

*  Used  in  New  York  in  the  fall  of  1877. Abies  nigra  is  said  to  be  one  of
the  ingredients  in  "  Holman's  Fever  and  Ague  Pad."


ABROTANUM.


ABROTANUM.

Southernwood. Compositce.


Artemisia  abrotanum,  or  southernwood,  growing  on  sunny  hills  in  South-
ern Europe,  and  cultivated  in  gardens.  Celebrated  as  an  old  popular
medicine-  Introduced  into  our  practice  by  Deventer.  Proved  by  Gat-
chell  on  two  women.


^  Mind. Feebleness  and  dullness  of  mind.

No  capacity  for  thinking,  as  if  all  bodily  and  mental  power
were  gone.

Thinks  her  brain  is  softening.

Excited,  loquacious,  feels  like  shouting.

Taciturnity.

Indolence,  aversion  to  physical  exercise.

Good  humored,  happy.

Gloomy,  desponding.

I  Great  anxiety  and  depression. ^  Gastralgia.

I  The  child  is  cross  and  depressed. ^Marasmus.

Ill-natured,  irritable,  violent.

Exceedingly  peevish,  feels  as  if  she  would  like  to  do  something
cruel;  no  humanity.

Easily  fatigued  by  conversation  or  mental  eifort.
^  Inner  Head. The  left  brain  seemed  especially  weak ;  easily
fatigued  by  conversation  or  mental  eifort.

Sensation  as  of  creeping  chills  along  the  convolutions  of  the
brain,  accompanied  by  prickling  sensation.
*  Outer  Head. Head  weak,  could  not  hold  it  up.

Scalp  sore,  especially  left  side.

Itching  of  the  scalp.
'  Eyes. I  Blue  rings  around  dull  looking  eyes, d  Chlorosis.

Inflamed  eyes.
^  Nose. Dryness  of  the  inner  nose.

■  Nosebleed  with  boys.
^  Face. I  Face  wrinkled,  old,  pale. ^Marasmus.

I  Comedones  with  emaciation.

Face  feels  cold.

Drawing  pains  in  the  upper  maxilla.
"^  Teeth. Drawing  and  tearing  pains  in  the  carious  teeth.
'^  Taste. ■  Slimy  taste, d  Gastralgia.

Acid  taste.
'^  Throat. Scraping  in  the  throat.
'^  Appetite. Gnawing  hunger ;  craves  bread,  boiled  in  milk.


ABROTANUM.  4

■  Appetite  very  great;  sometimes  ravenous  while  emaciating.

I  Marasmus.
I  Loss  of  appetite. ^  Gastralgia.
^^  Scrobiculum  and  Stomach. Burning  in  the  stomach  as  from
acidity.
Fullness  and  bloating  in  region  of  stomach.

■  Sensation  as  if  the  stomach  were  hanging  or  swimming  in

water,  with  a  peculiar  feeling  of  coldness  and  a  dullness  to
all  irritants. 6  Gastralgia.
I  Pains  cutting,  gnawing,  burning,  sometimes  contracting  and
stinging,  mostly  worse  at  night, d  Gastralgia.

■  Never  entirely  free  from  pain,  even  in  the  intervals  of  the

spasms, d  Gastralgia.

■  Disturbed  digestion. ^Chlorosis.

^^  Abdomen. Weak,  sinking  feeling  in  the  bowels.

■  Frequent  colicky  pain. ^Marasmus.

■  Distended  abdomen. ^Chlorosis;  marasmus;  hemorrhoidal

colic.
I  Hard  lumps  may  be  felt  in  different  parts  of  the  abdomen.
6  Marasmus.
^"^  Rectum  and  Stool. After  sudden  checking  of  diarrhoea,  rheu-
matism.
Piles appeared and became  worse as the rheumatic pains
abated,  with  frequent  inclination  to  stool,  hardly  anything
but  blood  being  passed.

■  Constipation ^Gastralgia.

•  Destroys  worms,  especially  ascarides. 6  Marasmus.

■  Alternate  diarrhoea  and  constipation. ^Marasmus.

■  The  food  passed  undigested. 6  Marasmus.

■  Protruding  hemorrhoidal  tumors,  with  a  burning  pain  when

touched  and  when  pressing.
^^  Urinary  Organs. Bladder  full,  urging  to  urinate.

Urine  scanty.
"^  Male  Sexual  Organs. ■Hydrocele  of  children.
^^  Female  Sexual  Organs. Darting  pain  in  region  of  left  ovary.

Twitching  in both ovarian  regions,  seems  to  extend  to  the
back.

\  Ulcers  on  the  os  tincse.

I  Dysmenorrhoea.

I  Suppressed  catamenia.
24  Pregnancy  and  Parturition, i  Difficult  parturition.

■  Blood  and  moisture  oozing  from  the  navel  of  newborn  children.
"  Voice  and  Larynx. Sudden  hoarseness.

Weak  voice.
^®  Respiration. ■Impeded  breathing.
'''  Cough. ■  Troublesome  cough. 6  Rheumatism.
^^  Inner  Chest. Raw  feeling  in  respiratory  tract,  caused  by  cold
air.


5  ABROTANUM.

lln  pleurisy  (after  Aeon,  and  Bryon.),  when  a  pressing  sensa-
tion remains  in  the  affected  side,  impeding  free  breathing.
^^  Heart,  Pulse  and  Circulation. iPain  across  the  chest,
sharp  and  severe  in  the  region  of  the  heart, d  Rheumatism.
iPulse  weak  and  small. ^Chlorosis.

I  Ebullitions,  with  general  heat  and  distended  veins  on  fore-
head and  hands, d  Hemorrhoidal  colic.
^"  Outer  Chest. Drawing  pains  in  the  chest  muscles,  especially

from  motion.
^^  Back. Weak  back,  with  ovarian  pains.

iPains  in  the  sacrum. ^Hemorrhoidal  colic.
^^  Upper  Limbs. Fugitive  pains  in  the  shoulders  all  night,  pre-
venting sleep.
Aching  from  shoulder-joints  to  elbow.
Arms  very  weak.
Numb  sensation  in  fingers.
Dull  aching  in  first  finger  of  right  hand,  followed  by  similar

pain  in  other  fingers  of  right  and  left  hand.
Pricking  and  coldness  of  the  finger  tips.
^^  Lower  Limbs. lEmaciation,  mostly  of  legs. ^Marasmus.
Drawing  sensation  in  ankle-joint.
Deadness  and  coldness  of  the  feet.

Sticking,  tearing  and  itching  sensations  in  old  foot-sores.
^^  Limbs  in  General. Inability  to  move  arms ;  legs  only  with
difficulty. 6  Rheumatism.
Frost-bitten  limbs.
^^  Rest. Position. Motion. Lies  prone.
Motion  causes  pains  in  muscles  of  chest.
Inability  to  move  arras ;  legs  with  difficulty.
^^  Nerves. Remains  very  much  relaxed  and  incapacitated.
Disposed  to  lie  prone.

A  weak,  sickly  feeling  continued  many  days,  with internal
trembling  when  excited.

I  Very  lame  and  sore  all  over, d  Rheumatism.

I I  Great  weakness  and  prostration,  and  a  kind  of  hectic  fever
with  children,  after  the  influenza.

Head  so  weak,  cannot  hold  it  up.

I  Hysteria.
^^  Sleep. I  Sleepless  and  restless. ^Hemorrhoidal  colic.
^'^  Time. Night : cutting,  gnawing,  stinging  in  stomach  worse ;

fugitive  pains  in  shoulders.
^^  Temperature  and  Weather. Cold  air  produces  raw  feeling
in  chest.

Hitching  chilblains.
^"  Fever. ■  High  fever. 6  Rheumatism.

I  Hectic  fever,  very  weakening. ^Marasmus.
^'  Attacks. Suddenly  :  hoarseness.


ABROTANUM.  6

^^  Locality and Direction. Left : brain  seems  weak ; scalp
sore ;  darting  in  ovary  ;  sharp  pains  in  region  of  heart.

Right  to  left :  dull  aching  in  fingers.

Right  and  left :  twitching  in  ovarian  region.
^^  Sensations. Aching  in  shoulder-joints  and  first  finger  of  right
hand.

Coldness :  in  face,  stomach,  finger  tips  and  feet ;  numbness :
in  fingers  ;  creeping  chills  :  over  convolutions  of  brain  ;  dead-
ness  :  of  feet ;  pricking :  in  brain,  stiff  joints  and  finger  tips  ;
stinging :  in  stomach  ;  itching  :  of  scalp,  foot-sores  and  chil-
blains ;  gnawing :  in  stomach ;  drawing :  in  upper  maxilla,
carious  teeth,  chest,  muscles  and  ankle-joint ;  darting :  in  left
ovary ;  tearing :  in  teeth  and  foot-sores ;  cutting :  in  stom-
ach ;  sticking  :  in  foot-sores ;  scraping :  in  throat ;  pressing :
in  pleurisy  ;  soreness :  of  scalp  ;  rawness :  in  respiratory
tract;  dryness:  of  inner  nose;  twitching :  in  ovaries  ;  burn-
ing :  in  stomach  and  hemorrhoids ;  as  if  hanging  and  swim-
ming in  water :  stomach.
"**  Tissues. 1 1  Gout;  painful  and  inflamed  wrists  and  ankle-joints.

Joints  stijff,  with  pricking  sensation.

I I  Painful,  inflammatory  rheumatism  before  the  swelling  com-
mences.

I  Chlorosis.

\  In  phagedenic  diseases.

■  Rheumatism  from  suddenly  checked  diarrhoea,  cannot  move
her  head,  arms  or  limbs,  and  sufiers  much  pain,  no  swelling.
After  suppressed  gout. 6  Gastralgia.

I I I  Marasmus  of  children.

Contractions  of  the  limbs  from  cramps  or  following  colic.
'^^  Skin. I  Furuncles,  li  Separ  sulph.  is  insufficient.

BThe  skin  is  flabby  and  hangs  loose. 6  Marasmus.

Hitching  chilblains.
*^  Stages  of  Life,  Constitution. Children  :  emaciation,  especi-
ally of  legs. 6  Marasmus.

Boys, d  Epistaxis. 6  Hydrocele.
^^  Relationship. After  Aeon,  and  Bryon.,  in  pleurisy ; after
Hepar  sulph.,  in  furuncle.

Itching  chilblains. Compare  Nux  vom.  and  Agar.


ABSINTHIUM.


ABSINTHIUM.

Wormwood. Compositce.

Wormwood.  A  bitter  herb,  a  native  of  Europe,  and  cultivated  in
gardens,  much  used  in  France  for  a  liqueur  the  effects  of  which  are  very
injurious.

Most  sj'mptoms  toxicological  from  French  authorities.  The  only  prov-
ings,  by  Gatchell,  in  Medical  Investigator.

^  Mind. After  recovering,  no  recollection  of  taking  the  poison,
nor  the  cause  of  his  doing  so. d  Epileptic  spasms.

Brutality,  mental  dullness,  insanity.

The  mania  from  the  liqueur  is  worse  than  that  from  alcohol
alone.

Soothed,  as  if  going  into  a  beautiful  dream.

Great  terror ;  terrifying  hallucinations.
^  Sensorium. Stupefaction,  alternately  with  dangerous  violence.

Drunkenness.

Vertigo,  dizzy  on  rising.

Insensibility  (with  convulsions).
^  Inner  Head. Causes  congestion  of  head,  medulla  and  spine.

Headache.
^  Outer  Head. Wants  to  lie  with  the  head  low.

\  Baldness  and  chronic  tinea.
^  Sight  and  Eyes. Dim-sightedness.

Pain  in  the  eyes.

Eyelids  swollen ;  eyes  red  and  suffused  with  tears.

Eyes  itch.

Lids  heavy.
^  Ears. lOtorrhoea. ^  Especially  after  hemicrania.
^  Face. Foolish  look.

Makes  facial  grimaces, d  Epileptiform  convulsions.

Ebullitions  of  blood  in  the  face.
^  Lower  Part  of  Face. Jaws  firmly  fixed.
"  Tongue. Bites  his  tongue, d  Epileptiform  convulsions.

Tongue  thick,  protruding,  can  scarcely  talk.

Trembling  of  the  tongue.

Complains  that  the  tongue  is  paralyzed.
^^  Inner  Mouth. Foams  at  the  mouth, d  Epileptiform  convul-
sions.
13  Throat. Scalded  feeling  in  the  throat.

Throat  inflamed.
^^  Belching  and  Nausea. Eructations.


ABSINTHIUM.  .  8

Nausea  and  vomiting  in  the  morning.
Nausea,  apparently  in  the  region  of  the  gall-bladder.
^^  Stomach. Food  lies  heavy.

Stomach  feels  cold  and  oppressed ;  thinks  it  would  not  absorb
much.
^*  Hypochondria. Liver  feels  swollen. See  40.
j  Liver  and  stomach  diseases.
Pain  in  the  spleen  ;  it  feels  as  if  swollen.
'^  Abdomen. Bloated  around  the  waist  and  in  the  abdomen,  as
after  ague.
Bloated  with  flatus.
-"  Rectum  and  Stool. Constipation.
Destroys  worms.
Hemorrhoids.
"^'  Urinary  Organs. Constant  desire  to  urinate.

Urine  deep  orange,  having  a  strong,  horse-like  smell.
'"  Male  Sexual  Organs. Spermatorrhoea  with  relaxed  parts.
"^  Female  Sexual  Organs. Pains  in  the  uterus.
Darting  pain  in  the  right  ovary.
Promotes  the  menses.
'''  Cough. Cough  with  liver  complaint.
'"  Heart. Tremor  of  the  heart,  felt  toward  the  back.

Heart  thumps  ;  can  be  heard  in  the  scapular  region.
'^  Back, Pain  in  the  sacrum.
^'  Upper  Limbs. Pain  in  the  shoulders.
Trembling  of  the  hands.

Ower  Limbs. I  Horses  kick  with  the  hind  legs  toward  the
belly. 6  Ascarides.
^^  Limbs  in  General. Throws  about  the  limbs, d  Epileptiform
convulsions.
Pains  in  the  limbs.
Limbs  swell.
^^  Position  and  Motion. Rising :  causes  vertigo.
Wants  to  lie  with  head  low.
Bends  backwards  :  in  spasms.
36  Jferygg, Trembling  precedes  epileptic  attack.

Epileptiform  convulsions :  loses  consciousness,  falls,  bites  his

tongue,  foams  at  the  mouth,  features  distorted ;  throws  his

limbs  about ;  weak  afterwards.

Excited,  opisthotonos,  grinding  the  teeth ;  followed  by  stupor.

^^  Sleep. Restless  at  night,  with  disturbing  dreams.

^'' Time. Morning: nausea  and  vomiting. Night: restlessness,

with  disturbing  dreams.
^^  Fever. Chill,  heat, then  sweat ; thirst  in  all  stages ; sleeps
during  the  heat.
Obstinate  autumnal  fevers,  with  swollen  liver  and  spleen.
^^  Attacks. Attacks  antepone.
^^  Locality. Right:  darting  pain  in  ovary.


9  ABSINTH.— ACALYPHA  INDICA.

**  Tissues, Causes  hypergemia  of  brain,  medulla  and  spine,  more
intense  when  combined  with  alcohol.
Occasionally  the  stomach,  more  frequently  the endocardium

and  pericardium  show  small  ecchymoses.
I  I  Paralysis  of  inner  organs.
^'  Injuries. Bruises  and  consequent  inflammation.
^^  Skin. Jaundiced  skin.

^^  Stages  of  Life. lEspecially  younger  patients. ^Chlorosis.
^®  Relationship. Collateral  relations: At^t.  vulg.,  Abi^ot.
Similar  to:  Alcohol,  Bellad.,  Chamon.,  Hyosc,  Stramon.
Is  said  to  cure  poisoning  by  mushrooms.

Secondary  effects  of  absinthe  are  much  worse  than  those  from
abuse  of  alcohol,  opium  or  tobacco.


ACALYPHA  INDICA.

Acalypha  Indiea  Linn. EupJiorhiacece.


A  common  weed  in  the  East  Indies,  like  nettle. Proved  and  applied  by
Tonnere,  of  Calcutta,  and  Payne,  of  Bath. Holcombe's  cure.


^  Mind. I  Gloomy and despairing,  but  very unwilling to die.

d  Haemoptysis.
^^  Female Sexual Organs. iLeucorrhoea, sometimes thick,

sometimes  watery. 6  Consumptive  patient.
^^  Cough. I  Cough,  with  bloody  expectoration. ^Tuberculosis.

■  Violent  dry  cough,  followed  by  bloody  expectoration.
1 1  Hgemoptysis.

Hsemoptysis: expectorates  pure  blood in  the  morning,  dark
lumps (clotted) in the evening. Cough most  violent at
night. 6  Tubercular  deposits  in  apex  of  left  lung.
^^  Inner  Chest. I  Dullness  in  chest  on  percussion, d  Haemopty-
sis.

■  Constant  and  severe  pain  in  chest, d  Haemoptysis.
^^  Pulse. Pulse  small  and  depressed.

■  Pulse  from  100  to  120. ^Haemoptysis.

^^  Time.  Night :  cough  most  violent.  Morning :  expectorates
pure  blood. Evening  :  expectorates  dark  clotted  blood.

^°  Fever. Slow  fever.

^■*  Tissues. ■■Progressive  emaciation. ^Haemoptysis.

^^  Other  Drugs.  Collaterally  related  to  all  Ewphorhiacece  ;  espe-
cially to  Mercurialis  annua  and  Mancin.


ACETICUM  ACIDUM.  10


ACETICUM  ACIDUM.


Acetic  Acid. C^  H^  0^.


Should  be  procured  from  trustworthy  chemists  ;  vinegar  from  the  shops
is  generally  adulterated.

Introduced  by  C.  Hg.  See  Jahr^s  Manual,  p.  19,  published  in  Allentown,
1838.

Toxicological  symptoms  have  been  collected  from  several  authors;  really
I^roved  only  by  Berridge.

^  Mind. Intellect  clouded,  can  hardly  express  herself.
Confusion  of  ideas. 6  Headache.
Fancies  he  has  an  ulcer  in  his  stomach.
Does  not  recollect  what  has  happened; knows  no  one,  not

even  her  own  children.
•  Horrible  attacks  of  anxiety  with  diflScult  hreathing. ^  Liver

complaint.
Anxiety  ;  grieves  about  his  sickness  and  his  children.
Apparently  alarmed  at  everybody  and  everything  about  her

(poisoning).
B  Irritable,  with  abdominal  complaints.
I  Greatest  irritability. /?  Headache. ^  Liver  complaint.
Worse  from  any  nervous  excitement. 6  Headache.
Dull  and  low-spirited.
B  Delirium:  with  distended  belly  and  obstinate  constipation,  or

with  rumbling  in  the  bowels,  bellyache  and  diarrhoea ;  —

alternately  with  stupor, d  Typhus.
B Delirium,  violent,  with  colic  and  diarrbosa. ^Typhus.
^  Seusorium. I  '  Vertigo,  with  feebleness  and  fainting.
Giddy,  dull  aching  in  forehead  and  top  of  head.
Giddiness,  symptoms  of  cerebral  congestion. 6  Headache.
Blood  rushes  to  the  head,  with  delirium.
Appears  as  if  drunk,  with  heavy  head.
I  Stupor  only  interrupted  by  delirious  talking;  with  a  boy  set.

2. d  Typhus.
Falls  to  the  ground  insensible;  foaming  at  the  mouth.
B  Faints.
^  Inner  Head. Dull  pains  in  forehead  and  vertex.
Heaviness  of  head,  Aviih  sense  of  drunkenness.
Confused  dull  aching  over  frontal  region, d  Nervous  cephal-
algia.
Shooting  through  the  temples.


11  ACETICUM  ACIDUM.

Nervous  headache,  caused  by  abuse  of  narcotic  stimulants  or

by  chronic  gastric  irritation.
Headache  from  abuse  of  tobacco,  opium,  coffee  or  alcohol.
■*  Outer  Head. Dull  aching  on  the  right  frontal  protuberance  ;
later  on  the  left.
Distension  of  temporal  blood-vessels,  with  increased  heat  of

head.
Blood-vessels  on  the  temples  distended.
Red  patches  on  scalp,  crusts  between  the  hair.
Hair  bristles.
^  Sight  and  Eyes. Weak  sight. 6  Liver  complaint.
Dilated  pupils.
Protruding  eyeballs.

Conjunctiva  inflamed,  accompanied  by  sour  stomach.
Flow  of  tears.
'^  Nose. I  Nosebleed,  especially  from  a  fall  or  a  blow.

Liable  to  frequent  catarrhal  attacks.
^  Face. Expression  wild,  pupils  dilated.

I  Face  pale,  waxen,  emaciated. ^Dropsy.
Eyes  sunken  and  surrounded  by  dark  rings.
Left  cheek  bright  red  with  the  fever. 6  Croup.
Sweat  on  the  forehead  in  spots.
^  Lower  Part  of  Face. Lips  become  of  a  deep  purple  tint.

Aching  in  the  upper  part  of  joint  of  the  left  jaw ;  worse  from
pressure  and  motion.
'"  Teeth  and  Gums. '  l  Scorbutic  ulcers; I  toothache,
"  Taste  and  Tongue. Taste  sour.

Pain  across  the  root  of  the  tongue  impedes  speech  and  motion

of  the  jaw.
Tongue : pale  and  flabby,  with  diminished  appetite and no
thirst ;  —  dry  and  cold  ;  —  red,  sore  and  burning ;  —  livid,
swollen,  protruding.
Glands  under  tongue  and  on  lower  jaw  swollen  and  sore  to
touch.
'-  Inner  Mouth. Foul  breath.

Buccal  membrane  whitish,  like  aphthae.
I  I  Salivation.
13  Throat. Children thirsty,  but swallow  with  some difiiculty,
even  a  teaspoonful  of  water, d  Croup.
Has  to  eat  very  slowly,  difficult  swallowing.
Throat  inflamed,  ulcerated.
A  white  film  low  down  in  the  fauces. 0  Croup.

I  False  membranes  in  throat.

^^  Appetite,  Thirst. Desires,  Aversions. Loss  of  appetite.
■  Greatest burning thirst, insatiable even by taking large
quantities.

I I  Intense  thirst. ^Diabetes,  dropsy,  chronic  diarrhoea.


ACETICUM  ACIDUM.  12

Shrieks  for  water  at  night,  notwithstanding  he  has  drunk  co-
piously.

Ko  thirst  with  fever. 6  Croup.

Disgust  for  salted  things  and  cold  victuals.
^^  Eating  and  Drinking. After  a  meal :  vomiting.

Bread  and  butter  disagree.

I  Vomits  after  every  kind  of  food. ^  Liver  complaint.

Cannot  drink  anything  cold,  it  lies  like  a  load  in  the  stomach.
^'  Hiccough,  Belching,  Nausea  and  Vomiting. Hiccough
and  fetid  belching.

Hot  eructations,  heat  in  the  stomach.

Nausea  and  sweat ;  retching  with  anxiety ;  sour  risings.

Towards  12  p.m.  very  sick ;  vomits  a  thick  gruelly  substance
with  great  relief

Vomiting  :  after  every  meal ;  —  of  blood;  —  like  yeast.
^'^  Scrobiculum  and  Stomach. Great  pain  in  the  scrobiculum ;
cannot  bear  the  slightest  pressure.

Contents  of  stomach  feel  as  if  in  a  ferment.

Violent  burning  pain  in  stomach  and  chest,  followed  by  cold-
ness of  skin  and  cold  sweat  on  forehead.

Heat  with  colicky  uneasiness,  as  if  diarrhoea  would  follow.

Ulcerative  gnawing  at  a  single  spot  in  the  stomach. 6  Cancer.

Hypertrophy  of  the  walls  of  the  stomach.

I  i  Local  indurations  in  the  stomach.

BScirrhus  of  pylorus.
"Hypochondria. I  Violent  local  pains. ^  Liver  complaint.
^^  Abdomen. Pain  in  the  abdomen  and  rumbling  in  the  gastric
region.

Bellyache,  rumbling,  diarrhoea,  followed  by  delirium, d  Ty-
phus.

Severe  burning  in  the  intestines  ; I  plethora  abdominalis.

I  Abdomen  distended  with  costiveness. ^Typhus.

Tympany,  with  difficult  breathing.

I  Ascites,  with  violent  orthopnoea. Compare  dropsy  :  44.

I  I  Incarcerated  hernia  (as  clysmata).

Abdomen  sore  to  touch.

Abdomen  feels  as  if  sunken  in  when  lying  on  the  back.
^"  Stool  and  Rectum. Liquid  stools  with  pain.

I  I  Diarrhoea,  with  swelling  of  the  legs  and  feet  (phthisical  sub-
jects).

I  I  Diarrhoea  in  the  later  stages  of  abdominal  typhus.

Chronic  diarrhoea  with  thirst. ^Ascites.

Diarrhoea  more  in  the  morning.

I  Profuse,  very  weakening  diarrhoea  (fifteen  passages)  on  the
seventeenth  day. 6  Typhus.

I  I  Costiveness,  with  tympanitis  and  stupor.

I  Chronic  constipation.

Profuse  hemorrhoidal  bleeding.


13  ACETICUM  ACIDUM.

Hemorrhage  from  the  bowels,  after  checked  metrorrhagia.
I  Ascarides.
^^  Urinary Organs. Urine : increased and light-colored ; —
acid,  with  increased  sweat ;  —  cloudy,  with  phosphatic  de
posits.
Diabetes.
^^  Male  Sexual  Organs. (Very  weakening  nightly  emissions.
Semen  passes  at  stool.
Male  parts  flush  and  sweat.
^^  Female  Sexual  Organs, s  i  Metrorrhagia.
24  Pregnancy  and  Parturition. During  pregnancy,  sour  belch-
ing and  vomiting,  with  profuse  water-brash  and  salivation,
day  and  night.
I  After  labor,  hemorrhages  (outward  application  of  vinegar).
Breasts  greatly  and  painfully  distended  with  milk. Mammary

abscesses  threatening.
'Milk  impoverished,  bluish,  transparent,  strong  sour  taste  and

odor ;  deficient  in  caseine  and  butter.
Sucklings  droop,  lose  flesh. 6  Marasmus.
^^  Voice  and  Larynx. Hoarse,  with  laryngeal  irritation.

I  Hissing  respiration,  with  rattling  in  the  throat. ^Membran-
ous croup  (10  drops  to  a  tumbler  of  sweetened  water,  a  tea-
spoonful  every  hour  or  two).
^^  Respiration. I Breathing :  difficult  from  laryngeal  obstruction  ;

—  hissing  in  croup;  —  I  I  hurried  and  laborious;  loses
breath  on  going  up  stairs ;  —  labored  when  lying  on  back.

Difficult  breathing,  with  attacks  of  anxiety. 6  Liver  complaint.
Must  often  take  a  deep  breath,  which  relieves.
Heaviness,  with  sense  of  oppression.
^^  Cough. Cough  :  croupy  ;  a  hollow  sound  with  the  inhalation  ;

—  dry,  with  oppression,  later  moist  with  fever,  greater
dyspnoea,  emaciation,  diarrhoea,  night  sweats,  oedema  of
feet  and  legs.

Cough titillating, with much purulent sputum ; oppressed

breathing ;  hectic  fever.
Attacks  of  cough  in  the  evening  with  coldness;  at  night,  heat,

dry  skin  and  delirium.
I  I  Haemoptysis  ;  coughs  blood.
^^  Inner  Chest  and Lungs. A^iolent pain and sensation of

burning  in  region  of  chest  and  stomach.
Lungs  beginning  to  fill  with  tubercles.
■  Chronic  bronchitis.
Hydrothorax.
Phthisis.
Many  complaints  apparently  overcome  by  Borax,  disappear

after  the  use  of  Acet.  ac,  especially  the  shooting  in  the

chest.
^^  Heart  and  Pulse. Angina  pectoris.


ACETICUM  ACIDUM.  14

Heart  beats  more  frequently.

Heart-beat  cannot  be  felt  by  the  hand.

Pulse  :  96  and  full  (poisoning) ;  —  accelerated  and  small,  con-
tracted ;  —  weak  and  small.
^^  Upper  Limbs, Sensation  of  lameness  in  wrists  and  hands.

Coldness  and  pricking  of  hands.

Skin  on  hands  dry.
^^  Lower  Limbs. Weak  and  weary.

Lessened  sensibility.

■  (Edematous  swelling,  with  diarrhoea.

^'  Position  and  Motion.  Cannot  remain  long  in  the  same  posi-
tion.

Springs  from  bed ;  crawls  on  the  ground  from  pain.

Lying  on  back  :  cannot  sleep,  labored  breathing.

Lying  on  belly :  rests  better  during  sleep.

Ascending  stairs  :  loses  breath.

Motion:  aching  in  jaw  worse;  —  of  jaw  impeded  by  pain
across  root  of  tongue.
^®  Nerves. Great  prostration  after  injuries  ;  shock.

I  Great  debility, d  Chronic  diarrhoea,  diabetes,  etc.

Prostration  and  lameness.

Paralyzed  and  giddy.

Trembling  from  head  to  foot  (poisoning).

■  Apparent  death.
Hysterical  spasm.

Spasms  :  with  insensibility  ;  —  with  great  debility.

Springs  out  of  bed,  crawls  on  the  ground  howling  with  pain.

\  Hydrophobia.
^^  Sleep. Cannot  sleep  lying  on  his  back ;  feels  as  if  the  abdo-
men was  sinking  in,  causing  labored  breathing ;  rests  better
lying  on  the  belly.

Sleep  broken  without  known  cause.

Cannot  fall  asleep  because  of  distress  and  agony.

Sleepless,  with  other  sufferings.

■  Sleeplessness. ^  Liver  complaint.

^^  Time.  Night :  heat,  dry  skin,  delirium ;  sweating.  Day  and
night :  stomach  symptoms  during  pregnancy.  Morning  :
diarrhoea. Evening:  cough. Toward  midnight :  vomiting.

*"  Fever, Skin  cold ;  bodily  warmth  decreased.

Flushes  of  heat  more  in  outer  parts,  increasing  the  sweat.

■  Febrile  heat,  with  a  dry,  hot  skin;  in  bilious,  ■putrid  and

typhoid  fevers.

■  ■Profuse  sweating; ■night-sweats.
Typhus,  with  delirium.

I  I  Hectic  fevers,  with  cough,  dyspnoea,  diarrhoea,  night-sweats,

oedema  and  emaciation.
I  ■  Inflammatory  fever.
Slow  fever,  with  night-sweats.


15  ACETICUM  ACIDUM.

Bathed  in  sweat.
Severe  paroxymal  headache.
^^  Attacks. '  I  Lethargic  paroxysms.

I  Hysteric  paroxysms.
^2  Locality  and  Direction. Right  then  left :  dull  aching  in
frontal  protuberances.
Left :  cheek  bright  red  in  fever ;  aching  in  upper  joint  of  jaw.
"  Sensations. Burning  on  inner  and  outer  parts.

Diminished  sensibility  on  the  whole  surface  of  body.
^*  Tissues. I  Ebullitions.

Hemorrhages  from  nose,  lungs,  stomach,  bowels,  uterus ;  also

passive  hemorrhages.
Blood  coagulated  in  the  veins.
Blood-vessels  contracted.
1  I  Varicose  swellings.

Chlorosis  ;  anaemia ;  wasting  away  of  the  body ;  great  emacia-
tion.
Prevents  corpulency,  but  may  superinduce  fatal  marasmus.
Dissolves  cancer  cells. Separates  sequestrum  from  the  new

bone.
Scurvy.
I  Dropsy  of  the  abdomen  and  legs; anasarca;  great  thirst;

pale,  waxen  skin.
Changes  gangrenous  ulcers ;  hospital  gangrene ;  prevents  de-
composition of  animal  matter.
'^  Touch. Passive  Motion. Injuries. Touch : soreness  of
glands  on  lower  jaw;  soreness  of  abdomen.
Pressure:  aching  in  jaw  worse;  pain  in  scrobiculum  worse.
Diminished  sensibility  over  whole  surface  of  body.
Burns  and  scalds.
I  Sting  of  wasps  or  other  insects.
I  After  the  bite  of  a  mad  cat,  lacerated  wound,  upper  and  lower

leg  swollen  (externally  and  internally).
I  I  Sugillations.

Bruises  or  sprains,  if  dry  heat  follows.
Fall  or  blow :  nosebleed.
^^  Skin. I  I  Tetter-like  eruptions.

Diseased  cuticle  separates  in  flakes.
I  Skin  pale  and  waxen.
Broad,  flat  condylomata,  dry  or  moist.
llNgevi,  warts,  corns.
I  Dropsy  after  scarlet  fever,
j  Scarlet  fever  and  sraall-pox.
Morbus  maculosus  Werlhofii.
'^  Stages  of  Life,  Constitution. Injurious  to  children  and  the
aged.
Lax,  pale,  lean  persons.
*^  Relationship. Antidotes  to  Acet.  ac. :  large  doses  are  best


ACET.  AC— ACONITUM  NAPELLUS.  16

counteracted  by  Magnesia  or  Calcarea,  according  to  the
bodily  peculiarities  of  the  sick  ;  fluid  magnesia  or  lime-water,
a  teaspoonful  in  a  cup  of  water  taken  in  sips.  Higher  pre-
parations :  for  the  depressing,  agonizing  feeling :  Tahac,
if  insufficient,  Aeon.;  for  the  gastric,  pulmonary  and  febrile
symptoms :  Natr.  mur.  may  be  followed  by  Sepia.

Aeet.  ae.  is  an  antidote  to  all  anaesthetic  vapors  ;  a  finger
dipped  in  vinegar,  rubbed  within  the  lips,  antidotes  fumes  of
charcoal ;  further,  to  Aeon.,  Asar.,  Coffea,  Euphorb.,  Hepar,
\\Ignat.,  t  Opium,  Plumbum  (colic),  Sepia,  llStramon.,
Tabac,  Jongo  and  Aleohol.

May  be  given  in  cases  of  sausage  poisoning.

It  follows  well  after  Cinehon.  in  hemorrhages.

The  sick  have  an  aversion  to  it  in  poisonings  with  Agar.  emet.

Unpleasant  symptoms  of  Bellad.  are  aggravated  by  it ;  head-
ache from  Bellad.  became  unbearable.

It  aggravates  also  the  symptoms  of  Arnie.,  Laches,  and
Mercur.

Disagrees  when  given  after  Borax,  Caustic.,  Niix  vom..  Ban.
bulb,  and  Sarsap.

Seilla,  Colehie.  and  Sanguin.,  have  had  more  effect  in  curing
some  diseases  when  prepared  with  Acet.  ac,  than  with  al-
cohol.

What  had  disappeared  after  Borax,  returned  after  its  use.

Has  been  used  after  Digit,  in  dropsy.


ACONITUM  NAPELLUS.

Monkshood. Ranunculacece.


Abundant  in  the  mountain  forests  of  France,  Switzerland  and  Germany.
Also  cultivated  in  gardens.

The  root  is  stronger  than  the  herb,  and  the  seed  most  uniform  in
strength.  The  symptoms  of  the  herb,  root  and  seed  have  not  been  sepa-
ated,  not  even  those  of  somewhat  different  species.

^  Mind. Now  perfectly  conscious,  now  raving.

Clairvoyance ; conscious  that  his beloved,  miles away,  was

singing  a  certain  piece.
I  Dullness  and  confusion  of  mind.  ^

Unconscious,  as  if  dying ;  speechless. 6  Apoplexy.
Unsensible,  stupid;  also  during  the  convulsions.


17  ACONITUM  NAPELLUS.

Stupid,  eyes  closed,  facial  muscles  twitch,  mouth  compressed,

no  power  of  speech.
Memory  lively,  or  weakness  of  memory. What  has  just  been

done  seems  like  a  remote  dream. Cannot  remember  dates.
Ideas  haunt  him,  he  cannot  get  rid  of  them.
Cannot  finish  a  half  written  idea  without  great  effort.
Attention  distracted  while  reading,  thought  seems  to  cease.
Cannot  reflect,  ideas  seem  to  come  from  the  stomach ; after

two  attacks  of  vertigo,  thought  is  again  normal.
Excited,  or  sits  buried  in  thought.
Rapid  change  of  thought ;  great  exertion  is  required  to  fix

the  train  of  thought.
On  attempting  to  think  of  one  thing,  another  intrudes  itself;

this  is  soon  surplanted  by  another  and  so  on.
Diminished intellectual power, cannot perform even light

mental  work.
Lively  imagination.

Ecstacy ;  inclined  to  be  gay,  to  dance  and  sing.
Delirium,  crying  out,  staring look. 6  Inflammation  of  the

brain.
Delirium,  with  convulsive  motions. 6  Myelitis.
Delirium,  with  great  heat,  dilated  pupils  or  convulsions ;  talk

is  childish,  nonsensical.

I  Delirium,  with  talk  about  death. ^  In  childbed.

II Delirium,  especially  at  night,  raves,  springs  out  of  bed;  in
the  morning,  excessive  sweat.

I I  Pains  are  so  intolerable,  they  drive  him  crazy;  he  becomes
very  restless.

Desire  to  be  alone ; I  I  shuns  people.

■  Disposition  to  weep; I  cried  violently,  with  facial  jactitation.
Loquacity ;  speech  hurried.

■  Alternate  laughter  and  crying; I  at  one  time  gay,  at  another

gloomy.
1 1  Moaning, anxious  lamentations; reproaches  from trifling
causes.

I  Screams  aloud  at  the  slightest  touch,  screams  with  the  pains ;

cannot  bear  the  light ;  will  not  be  touched  or  uncovered ;
buzzing  in  the  ears.

■  Impatience,  throws  himself  about,  constantly  changes  position.

I I  Restlessness,  agony,  internal  anxiety; does  everything  in
great  haste ;  must  move  about  or  change  position  often.

I  Cannot  continue  long  at  one  thing.

I  I  Dislikes  to  talk  ; I  I  answers  laconically  yes  or  no.

I I  Music  is  unbearable,  it  makes  her  quite  sad.

I  Sadness  with  solicitude;  concerned  about  the  future;  about
her  recovery  or  fears  loss  of  reason.

■  Extreme  timidity,  especially  after  a  fright;  is  afraid  in  the

dark.


ACONITUM  NAPELLUS.  18

! Fears  to  go  out  wliere  there  is  any  excitement  or  many  people;
thinks  she  is  jostling  against  every  one  she  meets  ;  counte-
nance expressive  of  timidity  ;  constant  dread  lest  she  stagger
and  fall. 6  During  pregnancy.

Fear  of  ghosts.

)|@^Fear of  death. d  During pregnancy or confinement.
6  Prolapsus  uteri.
' I  Fear  of  death,  with  great  loquacity  or  great  anxiety  in  the
region  of  the  heart.

Thrice  he  became  blind  and  affirmed  that  death  was  at  hand.

■  Predicts  the  day  of  death;  bids  her  friends  good-bye. ^In

childbed.

I  Inconsolable  anxiety,  piteous  wailing;  peevish  and  impatient.
Anxiety  only  transiently  relieved  by  drinking  cold  water.
Anxiety  followed  by  total  apathy.

I I  Has  no  affection  for  anybody. ^During  pregnancy.
Morose,  misanthropic,  peevish  ;  malicious  mood.

I  Children  get  angry  and  have  spells  of  rage.

I  Vexed  at  trifles  ;  takes  every  joke  in  bad  part.
Quarrelsome,  with  constantly  varying  delirium ;  chatters  like

a  child,  is  gay.

■  Obstinate,  tosses  about  impatiently.

Sinks  into  lethargy,  but  rarely  sleeps ;  complains  of  crawls.

I I  Ailments  from  fright:  I  afraid  in  the  dark  (see  above);
I  vertigo;  Bfaintness;  trembling;  I  I  cardiac  weakness;
Ithreatened  miscarriage;  limpending  cessation  of  the
menstrual  flow;  1  1  burning  in  the  stomach.  B Remote  ef-
fects of  fright :  especially  jaundice.

Ailments  from  vexation,  with  fear  or  vehemence:  IB  conges-
tion; palpitation;  fever;  B  anxiety,  beside  himself;  B  threat-
ened miscarriage  ; B apoplectic  congestion.

fi Anxiety,  with  cold  sweat. ^Prolapsus  uteri.
'  Sensorium. Confusion,  as  after  drunkenness,  with  pressure  in
the  temples ;  also  early  in  the  morning  on  awaking.

Head  feels  dull,  stupefied. 6  Coryza. 6  Fevers.

Dull,  stupid ;  pressure  outwards,  worse  sitting  up ;  with  anx-
iety and  fear  of  death, d  Sun-stroke.

I  I  Apoplexy  or  Bapoplectic  congestions.

Vertigo:  BBfrom  congestion,  as  in  the  sun;  Bon  stooping;
B  staggers  to  the  right;  Bas  if  drunk,  with  nausea,  worse  on
rising  from  a  seat,  less  while  walking,  none  while  sitting;

—  Band  blackness  before  the  eyes  when  shaking  the  head  ;

—  Bwith  nosebleed.

B  B  On  rising  from  a  recumbent  posture,  the  red  face  becomes
deathly  pale,  or  he  becomes  dizzy  and  falls  over,  he  fears
to  rise  again ;  often  accompanied  by  nausea,  vanishing  of
sight  or  unconsciousness.

I  Vertigo  after  fright,  anxious,  as  if  dying  ;  must  lie  down.


19  ACONITUM  NAPELLUS.

1  Vertigo,  headache,  nausea,  gagging,  coldness  and  diarrhoea.
d  Cholera.

■  Vertigo  from  sudden  suppression  of  the  catamenia,  by  cold.
Turns  suddenly  red  and  falls  unconscious. 6  Teething  child.

■  Vertigo  from  a  fall  or  concussion  ;  face  pale  or  red,  but  no

stupor.
Fullness  of  the  head,  with  erratic  pains  in  the  right  supraorbital,

temporal  or  frontal  regions.
Suddenly  faints  while  standing  to  urinate ;  all  the  blood  seemed

to  rush  to  the  head ;  he  fell  unconscious.
Alternate  stupefaction  and restlessness, with mild delirium

twitchings,  starts  as  in a  fright,  pulse  frequent. ^  Brain

fever.

■  Stupor,  with  cold  feet.

^  Inner  Head. Constant  burning  in  the  forehead. 0  Jaundice.

■  ■Burning  headache,  as  if  the  brain  was  agitated  by  boiling

water.
Headache,  as  if  a  hot  iron  was  bound  around  the  head.

■  ■Fullness  and  heavy  feeling,  as  if  everything  would  push  out

of  the  forehead.

■  Squeezing  in  the  forehead  above  the  root  of  the  nose,  feels  as

if  she  would  lose  her  reason  ;  worse  walking  in  the  open  air.
Furious  headache,  vision  obscured,  pain  mostly  pressing  'and
contracting  in  the  upper  part  of  the  forehead ;  face  swollen,
pale ;  light  or  noise  aggravate ;  lying  quietly  in  a  dark  room
relieves.

■  Pressing  shooting  pain  in  forehead, d  Coryza.

Violent  headache  limited  to  a  small  spot  over  the  left  supra-
orbital ridge.

■  Pulsation  in  the  left  side  of  the  forehead  along  with  attacks,

as  from  severe  blows  in  the  right  side  of  the  forehead.
Headache  in  the  vertex,  as  if  compressed  uniformly  by  a  pitch
cap  ;  ceases  when  walking  in  the  open  air.

■  ■Sun-stroke  ;  especially  from  sleeping  in  the  sun's  rays.

■  Headache,  as  if  the  brain  was  moved  or  raised;  worse  dur-

ing motion,  drinking,  talking  or  sunlight.

■  Congestive  headaches, d  Menorrhagia.

■  ■Congestion,  anxiety; face  hot  and  red,  or  pale; carotids

pulsate  strongly; pulse  full,  strong,  or  small  and  quick;

worse  toward  evening, d  Apoplexy.
Headache,  with  increased  secretion  of  urine.
On  going  into  a  warm  room,  forehead  feels  as  if  compressed.
Throbbing  in  the  temples, d  Rheumatic  ophthalmia.
Pressure  in  the  forehead,  temples  and  top  of  the  head.

■  Headache  and  roaring  in  the  ears. 0  Coryza.
Pressive,  stupefying  headache. ^Childbed  fever. See  23.
Headache  and  sleeplessness. 6  Childbed  fever.

■  ■Congestion  to  the  head, d  Heart  disease.


ACONITUM  NAPELLUS.  20

I  Head  hot,  throbbing  carotids,  limbs  cold ;  left  side  lame  ;  star-
ing, burning  pain  in  the  brain, d  Apoplexy.

■  Inflammation  of  the  brain  in  children.

I  Congestion  to  the  head, d  Cystitis.

*  Outer  Head. ' '  Head  excessively  hot.
Head  drawn  backwards.

I I  Bends  the  head  far  back. 6  Croup.
Sensation  in  the  vertex  as  if  pulled  by  the  hair.

Sensation  of  crackling,  as  from  bending  tinsel,  in  temples,  fore-
head and  nose ;  worse  toward  evening,  from  motion,  better
from  sitting.

Formication  of  the  scalp,  relieved  by  heat.

Constantly  tosses  the  head  about, d  Croup.

I  Sensation  as  if  the  hair  stood  on  end.

Vertex  feels  hot  to  the  touch;  hair  bristles  up.

If  he  raises  his  head,  he  vomits  phlegm  or  what  he  drank.
d  Inflammation  of  the  brain.

Constantly  puts  the  hand  to  the  head. ^Meningitis.

Better  lying  with  the  head  high.

Stitches  under  the  scalp.

Sweat  on  the  head  ;  better  out  of  doors.

I  Cold  sweat  on  the  forehead.
^  Sight  and  Eyes. Disturbed  by  flickering ;  fears  he  may  touch
others  passing  by.

Vision  of  sparks,  with  burning  and  twitching  in  the  eyes.

I  I  Vision  as  if  through  a  veil ;  diSicult  to  distinguish  faces ;
with  anxiety  and  vertigo.

I  Total  blindness  after  catching  cold.
Optical  illusions  in  dark  colors,  or  black.

I I  Sensitive  to  light,  especially  of  the  sun;  light  dazzles  the
eyes.

■  Desire  for  light ;  photomania.

I  Eyes  excessively  hot  and  dry;  conjunctiva  of  lids  very  red,

constant  winking  and  closing  of  the  lids,  could  hardly  force
them  open ;  temporary  relief  from  cold  water ;  asthenopia
from  straining  the  eyes.
Staring. 6  Apoplexy. 6  Asthma.

I I  Eyes  glaring. ^  Pleuritis  and  pneumonia.
Eyes  contorted. 6  Tetanus.

I  Pupils  contracted,  then  dilated.

I I  Eyeball  feels  enlarged,  as  if  coming  out  of  the  socket.
Sclerotica  yellow. 6  Enteritis.

1 1  Eyes  blood-shot.

Sticking  pains  in  the  right  eyeball.

Rough  feeling,  as  from  sand  in  the  left  inner  canthus.

1 1  Inflammatory  conditions,  resulting  from  the  irritant  action
of  foreign  bodies,  as  chips  of  steel,  or  stone,  or  coal,  in  the
cornea,  which  produce  dry  rubbing  of  the  lid  over  the  ball,


21  ACONITUM  NAPELLUS.

with  injected  vessels;  also  irritation  caused  by  ingrowing
lashes.

Min  true  sclerotitis,  acute  stage,  with  contracted  pupils,  stick-
ing or  tearing  pains,  photophobia,  a  blue  circle  around  the
cornea  and  violent  aching  in  the  balls.

1 1  Eyes  red,  inflamed,  vessels  deep  red  ;  burning,  pressive  shoot-
ing pains,  especially  on  moving  the  balls ;  no  discharge ;
conjunctivitis  from  exposure  to  cold,  dry  winds.

1 1  Catarrhal  inflammation,  first  stage  prior  to  exudation  ;  che-
mosis  of  conjunctiva,  with  pains  so  terrible  that  one  wishes
to  die.

I  Ophthalmia  neonatorum  ;  in  the  beginning.

I  Acute  aggravations  of  granulated  lids  and  pannus  of  the  cor-

nea, with  excessive  hypergemia,  heat  and  dryness,  especially
if  induced  by  overheating  from  violent  exercise,  I  lor  by  ex-
posure to  dry,  cold  air.

I I  In  the  earlier  stages  of  violent  acute  inflammations  of  the
deep  structures  of  the  ball,  when  it  becomes  sensitive  to
touch  and  feels  as  if  it  were  protruding ;  rarely  after  exuda-
tion.

Itching,  smarting,  burning  in  the  eyes,  worse  in  the  evening.

■  Sticking  and  tearing  pains  around  the  eyes;  worse  at  night.
Violent  pain  over  the  right  eye.

Stitches  in  the  upper  orbital  region,  from  pressure  and  toward
evening.

1  Upper  half  of  the  eyeball  sore  when  moved;  feels  as  if  it
would  be  forced  out  of  the  orbit  (relieved  on  stooping).

Eyes  water,  more  evening  and  night ;  tarsi  sore,  red  and  in-
flamed.

I  Profuse  lachrymation  with  intense  pain;  tears  flow,  with  a

slight  local  inflammation  or  without.
Copious  tears  and  red  conjunctiva, d  Coryza. 6  Cough.

I I  Lids  feel  dry,  burn  and  are  sensitive  to  the  air.

Pressure  in  the  upper  lids  as  if  the  whole  ball  was  pushed  into
the  orbit,  causing  a  bruised  pain  in  the  eye.

I  Lids  hard,  swollen,  red,  with  a  tense  feeling;  worse  mornings.
®  Hearing  and  Ears.  Il Averse  to  noises,  they  startle  him;
they  are  intolerable.

I  iMusic  goes  through  every  limb  ;  makes  her  sad.

I  Roaring  in  the  ears;  humming; I  I  ringing.

Left  ear  deaf,  with  buzzing  in  the  whole  head, d  Apoplexy.

Tearing  (left  ear). I  Pains  in  the  right  ear.

■  Stinging  in  the  ear ;  meatus  red  and  narrowed; ■■external

ear  hot  and  red,  and  ■noise  intolerable.
^  Smell  and  Nose. ■■Sense  of  smell  very  acute,  especially  for
unpleasant  odors.

■  Distressing  cramp  or  pressure  at  the  root  of  the  nose.


ACONITUM  NAPELLUS.  22

1 1  Nosebleed;  blood  bright  red.  ^Plethora.  ^  Fever.  ^En-
docarditis. 6  Measles.

Nosebleeding  and  headache. 6  Menorrhagia.

Frequent  sneezing.

Nose  dry,  stopped  up,  cannot  breathe  through  the  nose.

llCoryza  dry,  with  headache,  roaring  in  the  ears,  fever,  thirst,
sleeplessness ; 1 1  Icoryza  caused  by  cold,  dry  winds.

I  Checked  coryza,  with  headache ;  better  in  the  open  air,  worse
from  talking.

I  Fluent  coryza,  frequent  sneezing;  dropping  of  a  clear,  hot
water ;  fluent  mornings.

Inner  nose  red,  swollen,  interfering  with  breathing,  d  Coryza.
^  Face. !  I  Anxious  expression  ; Ifrightened.

I  Face  pale,  with  restlessness  and  expression  of  anxiety.

iFace  burning,  Ifieryred;  1 1  bloated,  unequally  red;  feels  as
if  it  was  growing  larger.

Red  cheeks  with  fear  of  death, d  In  pregnancy.

I  One  cheek  red  the  other  pale.

Between  attacks,  face  pale;  now  and  then  flying  heat. 6  Croup.

iFace  and  whole  body  pale. ^Measles.

I  Red  and  pale  alternately.

I  Face  livid;  lips  blackish.

I  Face  dark  red. ^Apoplexy.

I  Face  dark  red,  lips  blue, d  Croup.

I  Rush  of  blood  to  the  face. ^  Fever.

Convulsive  twitching  of  the  facial  muscles.

llNeuralgia  of  the  trigeminus,  left  side;  face  red  and  hot;
restlessness,  anguish  ;  rolling  about,  screaming.

IB  Rheumatism  in  face  and  teeth.

■  Sweat  on  the  cheek  on  which  he  lies.

Sensation  as  if  the  muscles  were  firmly  but  not  spasmodically
contracted ;  numbness,  heavy  feeling  of  the  whole  face.

■  Creeping,  tingling,  crawling.

9  Lower  Part  of  Face. Lips  blue.
iLips  dry,  black,  peeling  ofi".
Complaints  on  the  upper  lip.

Burning  and  numbness  of  lips  and  mouth ;  heat  and  tingling.
Lips  swollen,  inflamed.

Burning  of  lips  and  tongue,  as  after  eating  pepper  or  smoking.
Swelling  of  the  lower  jaw,  with  aching  in  the  face.
Stitching  thrusts  in  the  lower  jaw.
Mouth  drawn  to  one  side  (right), d  Convulsions.
Lips  on  the  left  side  motionless,  during  breathing. ^Apo-
plexy.

■  Trismus.

■  Constantly  moving  the  lower  jaw,  as  in  chewing. ^Menin-

gitis.
^^  Teeth  and  Gums. Cold  feeling  in  the  incisors.


23  ACONITUM  NAPELLUS.

■  Grinding  the  teeth.

I  Teeth  sensitive  to  the  air.
Toothache  even  in  sound  teeth.

I I  Toothache,  with  throbbing  in  one  side  of  the  face,  intense
redness  of  one  cheek,  congestion  to  the  head,  restlessness ;
most  left-sided,  or  going  from  right  to  left.  Caused  by
II  dry,  cold  winds;  Staking  cold  in  a  raw  air;  I  during
pregnancy.  1 1  Especially  in  young,  plethoric,  sedentary
persons.

Teeth  feel  as  if  they  would  fall  out.

After  getting  wet,  tearing,  beating  pain  in  a  carious  molar,  in-
creasing after  going  to  bed.
"Taste,  Speech,  Tongue.  Taste:  H bitter;  _n everything
tastes  bitter  except  water ;  —  slimy,  d  Jaundice.  —  foul ;
—  fishy ;  —  flat,  nauseous,  compels  hawking  of  tough  mu-
cus, which  he  swallows.

I  Mouth  as  if  filled  with  air,  tasting  of  rotten  eggs.

Things  which  formerly  tasted  strong,  now  have  no  taste.

Worse  from  talking ;  stinging,  choking,  in  the  throat. 0  Head-
ache. 6  Checked  coryza.

■  Trembling  and  temporary  stammering.
Speech  imperfect,  lisping, d  Apoplexy.

■  I  Tongue feels swollen, burning, prickling and tingling.

6  Glossitis.
I  I  Tongue  numb  ;  also  mouth  and  lips.

■  Sensation  of  dryness  and  numbness  in  the  middle  of  the

tongue,  without  thirst.

■  Sensation  of  dryness  and  rawness  in  the  middle  of  the  tongue.
Burning  on  the  tip  of  the  tongue  and  lips.

■  Burning  vesicles  on  the  tongue.
Sensation  of  cold  air  passing  over  the  tongue.

■  ■Tongue  coated  white  or ■■thick  yellow-white. ^Bilious

fever.
Tongue  dry,  furred  white. ^Fevers.
Tongue  red,  with  great  thirst. 6  Liver  complaint.
I  Tongue  dry,  red  on  the sides,  centre  thinly  coated  white.
6  Peritonitis.

■  Tongue  red  and  dry. 6  Cystitis.

■  ■Chronic  affections  of  the  tongue.
'2  Inner  Mouth. ■■Mouth  dry.

Burning,  biting  in  the  mouth.

Saliva  frothy,  ■copious,  streaked  red,  with  sweet  taste  in  the

mouth.
Accumulation  of  water  in  the  mouth. 6  Seat  worms.
Orifices  of  the  salivary  ducts  sore,  as  if  corroded.
Yellowish-white  thick  fur  in  the  mouth. 6  Jaundice.
^^  Palate  and  Throat. Dry  feeling  in  the  palate  and  posterior
nares.


ACONITUM  NAPELLUS.  24

1 1  Redness  of  the  uvula  and  soft  palate.

Uvula  swollen  and  elongated.

I  Uvula  feels  as  if  elongated  and  coming  in  contact  -witli  the

tongue. 6  Cough.
I  Feeling of  dryness and as if  something  had  stuck  in  the

throat.
B I  Acute  inflammation  of  the  throat  (palate,  tonsils  and  fauces)

with  high  fever,  dark  redness  of  the  parts,  burning  and

stinging  in  the  fauces.
Burning  sensation  in  the  back  of  the  throat,  causing  him  to

hawk.
I  Severe  sticking  pains  in  the  posterior  fauces.
I  Burning  and  numbness  in  the  throat ;  throat  almost  insensible.
I  I  Pricking,  burning  in  the  throat  and  along  the  eustachian

tube,  compelling  swallowing.
I  Roof  of  the  mouth  and  fauces  dotted  with  eruption. 6  Scar-
latina.

■  Burning  sensation  in  the  pharynx.

Constriction  of  the  throat,  causing  hawking  and  spitting  even

to  an  irritation  to  vomit.
Swallowing:  1 1  stinging  choking  in  the  throat.
When  swallowing  food,  it  feels  as  if  it  had  lodged  in  the  cardiac

region, d  Stricture  of  the  oesophagus.

■  Swallowing  much  impeded. 6  Tonsillitis.
I  Muscles  extremely  sore  in  swallowing.

Almost  entire  inability  to  swallow. 6  Hoarseness.
Urging  to  swallow.

■  Burning  from  the  mouth  along  the  oesophagus  to  the  stomach.

■  Tingling  in  the  oesophagus.

^^  Appetite,  Thirst  and  Desires. '  Lively  sensation  of  hunger,
which  is  renewed  even  after  eating.

■  Excessive  hunger  and  thirst,  but  eats  slowly.

■  llThirst  burning, unquenchable. ^During all stages of

fever. 6  Local  inflammations.
Excessive  thirst,  yet  can  retain  nothing. 6  Cholera.

■  No  appetite; lloathing  of  food,  qualmishness.
Desires: Iwine;  brandy; ■■beer;  bitter  drinks.

^^  Eating  and  Drinking. Worse  before  breakfast.

After  eating  :  distressed  feeling ;  vomits  food,  d  Liver  com-
plaint. —  bitter  vomit;  ■violent  pain  in  the  stomach,  with
warmth  and  tenderness;  —  !  I  hiccough;  —  nausea  (after
meat  broths).

Momentary  relief  from  cold  water, d  Anxiety.

Generally  worse  after  drinking.

■  ■  Gastric  catarrh  from  chilling  the  stomach  with  ice  water,

especially  when  overheated.
I  I  Drinking  ice  water  excites  the  cough ;  but  generally  better
from  cold  drink,  especiallly  the  anxiety.


25  ACONITUM  NAPELLUS.

I  Worse  from  smoking. ^Palpitation  of  heart.

B I  Wine  generally  relieves;  but  sometimes  brings  on  conges-
tions, haemoptysis  or  palpitation,  and  augments  the  rheu-
matic pains.

^^  Hiccough,  Nausea  and  Vomiting. iPainful  hiccough.

Hiccough  and  belching.

Better  from  eructations. ^Tension  in  the  stomach.

Nausea  in  oesophagus  or  stomach,  rarely  in  the  throat.

Violent  but  ineffectual  urging  to  vomit. 6  Gastric  catarrh.

Gagging,  retching,  gasping  for  breath, d  After  scarlatina.

iVomiting  of  lumbrici ;  lof  bile;  of  green  masses,  with  diar-
rhoea of  the  same  appearance;  lof  mucus;  lof  blood,  lof
bloody  mucus  ; lof  what  has  been  drunk,  followed  by  thirst.

I  Vomiting  bile. ^Incarcerated  hernia  with  inflammation.

I  IVomiting  with  anxiety,  heat,  thirst,  profuse  sweat  and  in-
creased micturition.

Vomiting  of  bile,  with  bitter  taste  and  dark,  turbid  urine.

Green  vomit,  like  verdigris, d  Meningitis.

Vomiting,  meteorism  and  inability  to  make  water.  d  Peri-
tonitis.

On  sitting  up,  vomits  clear  water, d  After  a  fall  on  the  head.

IVomiting  and  purging  of  a  green  water. 6  Cholera.

Vomits  sour  phlegm, d  Cholera  sporadica.

After  repeated  vomiting  and  stools,  still  complained  of  a  feel-
ing as  if  a  cold  stone  lay  in  the  stomach.
"  Scrobiculum  and  Stomach, i  Region  of  the  pit  of  the  stom-
ach is  sore  to  touch  and  meteoristic. d  Jaundice.

I  Burning  from  stomach  up  through  the  oesophagus  to  mouth.

I I  Sudden  excruciating  pain,  with  gagging,  retching,  vomiting
of  blood,  gasping ;  cold  sweat  on  forehead ;  congestion  of
mucous  lining  of  stomach,  d  Scarlatina ;  stage  of  desquama-
tion.

iWhen  breathing,  the  pit  of  the  stomach  is  drawn  back  to  the
spine, d  Croup.

Palpitation  in  pit  of  stomach,  with  peevish  anxiety.

■  Pressure  in  stomach  and  pit  of  stomach,  as  from  a  weight  or
hard  stone.

I  Stitch-like,  burning,  pressing  pain  in  pit  of  stomach,  with
fear  of  death, d  Gastritis  from  chilling  the  stomach.

Warmth  in  the  stomach.

Pressive,  tensive  pain,  as  from  fullness  or  an  oppressive  weight
in  stomach  and  hypochondria.
'^  Hypochondria. Anxious  feeling  in  the  prsecordia.

Liver  somewhat  sensitive  to  deep  pressure.

I  Burning,  stinging,  hepatic  pains.

I  Hot,  tense  swelling  under  the  right  short  rib?.

I  Pressure  and  constriction  in  the  hepatic  region,  with  obstruc-
tion of  breathing.


ACONITUM  NAPELLUS.  26

1 1  Acute  hepatitis,  with  violent  fever.

Pain  on  pressure  over  the  left  lobe  of  the  liver.

■  Tension  and  heaviness  in  the  hypochondria.

Agony,  has  to  sit  straight  up,  can  hardly  breathe,  pulse  thread-
like, vomituritio,  sweats  with  anxiety ;  abdonaen  swollen,
particularly  under  the  short  ribs. 6  After  scarlet  fever.

I  Stitches  in  the  region  of  the  liver  taking  the  breath.
Severe  and  constant  pain  in  epigastrium,  pressing  outwards.

d  Jaundice.

II  Stitches  and  heat  in  the  diaphragm,

8  Pain  going  to  the  umbilicus,  or  changing  from  stomach  to
liver, d  Jaundice.

1 1  Jaundice  during  pregnancy,  1  liver  even  atrophied;  iSin
newborn  children;  lafter  fright;  llfrom  a  cold,  with  ca-
tarrh of  the  small  intestines.

■  Splenitis,  with  inflammatory  fever.

^^  Abdomen  and  Loins. '  l  Colic  forces  him  double,  yet  relieved
in  no  position. 6  Inflammatory,  after  a  cold.

■  Colic  involving  the  bladder,  contraction  of  the  hypogastrium

in  the  region  of  the  bladder ;  constant  ineffectual  urging  to
urinate.
Cuttings  in  the  intestines,  extending  through  the  chest  to  the
right  shoulder,  almost  making  him  cry  out,  during  stool.

■  Burning  in  the  umbilical  region.

■  Umbilical  region  hard,  swollen. 6  Seat  worms.

■  SMeteorism,  vomiting,  inability  to  urinate. ^Peritonitis.

■  ■Abdomen  burning  hot,  tense,  tympanitic,  sensitive  to  the

least  touch,  cutting  pains,  fever,  anguish. 6  Peritonitis.

■  Abdomen  puff"ed  and  hard.

■  A  feeling  of  weight,  as  if  a  heavy  load  were  resting  on  the

abdomen  and  bearing  one  down.
Paralyzed,  inactive  feeling  in  the  intestines,  worse  about  the
transverse  colon.

■  Hernia,  recent  and  small,  also  incarcerated  with  bilious  vom-

iting and  cold  sweat ;  burning  as  from  coals  of  fire.

■  Sensitiveness  of  the  lower  abdomen  to  touch.
I  I  Pain  in  the  loins,  as  if  bruised.

^°  Stools  and  Rectum. ■Watery  diarrhoea.
Frequent  small  stools.

■  ■Like  chopped  spinach. ^Summer  complaint.

■  ■  Bilious  diarrhoea  of  infants,  with  colic,  which  no  position  re-

lieves.

■  ■Diarrhoea  from  getting  wet;  slimy,  bloody  stools,  violent

pains  in  the  bowels  ;  tenesmus,  also  between  discharges.

■  Scanty,  loose,  frequent,  with  tenesmus;  small,  brown,  pain-

ful ;  at  last  bloody, d  Dysentery.
Pure  blood  passes  without  fgeces. d  Dysentery.


27  ACONITUM  NAPELLUS.

II Urging;  slimy  stools;  intolerable  nightly  tingling,  itching

at  the  anus. 6  Seat  worms.
1 1  Dysentery  or  inflammatory  diarrhoea  during  hot  days  and

cold  nights.
I  Cutting,  griping,  followed  by  frequent  urging  to  stool,  after

anger  or  fright.
Hemorrhage  from  the  bowels  bright  red,  in  streams.
I  Alternate  slimy  stools  and  constipation. ^Icterus.
I  1  Constipation  ;  clay-colored  stools.
Stool  and  urine  suppressed, d  Myelitis.
I  Stool  white,  with  dark  red  urine.
I  Stool  white,  with  saff"ron  colored  urine. ^Jaundice.
Stools  black,  with  dry  skin  and  fever ;  despondency,  anxiety,

etc.
Cholera,  congestive  stage  ;  stage  of  reaction.
Involuntary  stools,  passing  when  flatus  passes.
B  Bleeding  piles  ;  stinging  and  pressure  in  the  anus,  burning

and  heat  in  the  piles.
Sensation  as  of  a  warm  fluid  escaping  from  the  anus.
"^  Urinary  Organs, i Stinging  and  pressing  pains  in  the  region

of  the  kidneys, d  Nephritis.
Kidneys  act  but  slightly ;  urine  contained  albumen  and  frag-
ments of  casts  (poisoning).
I  Renal  region  sensitive,  with  shooting  pains. ^Nephritis.

I  Violent  burning  in  the  bladder. 6  Cystitis.

I I  Inflammation  of  the  bladder;  constant  urging,  water  passes
in  drops,  with  burning,  admixed  with  blood ;  tension,  heat
and  tenderness  over  the  pubes.

Burning  in  the  neck  of  the  bladder  when  not  urinating.
Tenesmus  of  the  neck  of  the  bladder.
1 1  Painful  anxious  urging  to  urinate.

I  Children  reach  with  their  hands  to  the  genitals  and  cry  out.
d  Cystitis.

■  Burning  in  the  urethra  when  urinating.

I  Must  rise  each  night  between  12  and  3  a.m.  to  urinate. 6  In

pregnancy.
iDysuria  during  pregnancy.

I I  Urine  scanty,  red  and  hot. 6  Rheumatism, d  Peritonitis.

1 1  Urine  hot,  dark  colored; I  red,  with  white  feces; I  red  and

clear.
Urine  dark  broAvn,  frothy  or  yellow. 6  Jaundice.
Urine  turbid, d  Enteritis.

Urine  yellow-red  and  no  sediment, d  Peritonitis.
Ischuria, d  Cholera.
Involuntary  urination. 6  Apoplexy.

■  Enuresis,  with  thirst. I  I  Diuresis,  with  headache  and  pro-

fuse sweat.


ACONITUM  NAPELLUS.  28

1 1  Retention  or  suppression  of  urine,  with  pressure  in  the
bladder  or  stitches  in  the  region  of  the  kidneys.

1 1  Retention  from  cold,  especially  in  children,  with  much  cry-
ing and  restlessness.

iHsematuria,  with  hemorrhoids  of  anus  or  bladder;  burning
distress  in  the  urethra.

During  urination  :  faint  feeling;  —  splashing  sensation  in  the
region  of  the  bladder ;  —  pinching  about  the  navel ;  —  pain
in  the  glans  penis.
^'  Male  Sexual  Organs. '  l  Increased  sexual  desire ;  lascivious
dreams  ;  fits  of  lasciviousness.

Sexual  desire  lessened,  parts  relaxed  ;  tingling.

Emissions  even  after  coitus.

■  Testicles  feel  swollen  and  hard,  as  if  surcharged  with  semen.

■  Bruised  pain  in  the  testicles.

I  iViolent  orchitis.

Slight  drawing  pain  in  the  right  testicle,  and  slight  uneasiness
in  the  right  renal  region.

Scrotum  drawn  up.

Skin  of  left  side  of  scrotum  studded  with  minute  vesicles,  pour-
ing out  a  humid  discharge.

Several  painful,  fugitive  stitches  in  the  glans,  as  though  the
poles  of  a  galvanic  battery  had  been  applied  to  the  part ;
the  pains  came  on  most  unexpectedly.

I I  Gonorrhoea,  first  stage.

^^  Female  Sexual  Organs. I  Stitching  pains,  more  to  the  right
of  the  fundus  uteri; 1 1  sharp,  shooting  pains,  abdomen  ex-
ceedingly sensitive.
llOvaritis  from  suddenly  checked  menstrual  flow.

■  Prolapsus  uteri,  occurring  suddenly,  with  inflammation,  bitter

vomit,  cold  sweat,  or  dry,  hot  skin ;  with  or  without  hemor-
rhage.

1 1  Labor-like  pressing  in  the  womb  ;  has  to  bend  double,  but
relieved  in  no  position. 6  Dysmenorrhoea.

II  Uterine  hemorrhage,  active,  much  excitability,  giddy,  cannot
sit  up,  fear  of  death.

1 1  After  a  fright  with  vexation ;  particularly  during  catamenia,
to  prevent  suppression.

I  Menses  too  1  ite,  diminished  and  protracted  ;  plethoric  females,
who  lead  a  sedentary  life.

I  Menses  profuse  in  plethoric  women.

I  Menses  suppressed  by  getting  the  feet  wet,  or  by  a  cold  bath.
BAmenorrhoea  during  puberty; nosebleed,  palpitation;  con-
gestions.

I I  Restores  the  menses  of  plethoric  women,  after  their  suppres-
sion from  any  cause.

■  Inflammation  of  genitals. ^Prolapsus  uteri.
1 1  Vagina  dry,  hot,  sensitive.


29  ACONITUM  NAPELLUS.

I  I  Leucorrhoea  copious,  tenacious,  yellow.
2*  Pregnancy  and  Parturition. During  pregnancy  : l restless-
ness, llfear  of  death,  predicts  time  of  death. ^Jaundice.
Blood-spitting,
Disturbed  between  twelve  and  three  o'clock  at  night,  compelled
to  get  up  to  urinate ;  has  no  affection  for  anybody.

■  Impending  abortion  from  fright,  with  vexation;  circulation

excited,  rapid  breathing.
I  Pains  of  labor  distressing;  vagina  hot,  dry,  tender  and  un-
dilatable.

■  Violent  labor-pains,  following  in  rapid succession,  particu-

larly with  a  large  child  (head  seems  immovable),  contrac-
tions insufficient, pains overwhelming ; shrieking ; red,
sweating  face ;  thirsty.
I  Head  and  hands  glowing,  pulse  hard,  skin  scarcely  moist  and
increased  action  of  the  heart, d  Dui'ing  labor.

I  I  Pains  violent  and  rapid,  yet  ineffectual  from  defective  posi-

tion of  the  child.

■  Puerperal convulsions, cerebral congestion,  hot,  dry skin,

thirst,  restlessness,  and  fear  of  death.

I I  After  tedious  and  difficult  parturition.
After-pains  too  painful,  too  long-lasting.

Milk-fever with delirium ; niammse hot, hard, tense, with

scanty  milk.
Lochia  offensive,  bloody,  slimy, d  Childbed  fever.
Return  of  the  lochial  discharge,  when  women  commence  going

about  after  confinement.

I  Childbed  fever  after  suppression  of  lochia;  mammae  lax,  no

milk  ;  dry,  hot  skin  ;  hard,  frequent  pulse,  or  tensive,  con-
tracted ;  fearful,  wild,  staring,  glittering  eyes ;  dry  tongue,
great  thirst ;  inflated  abdomen,  sensitive  to  the  slightest
touch.
Newborn  children:  lasphyxia,  apoplectic  symptoms,  hot,  pur-
plish, breathless,  pulseless ;  licterus;  lophthalmia;  retained
urine ;  vomit  blood,  with  bloody  stools.
^^  Voice,  Larynx  and  Trachea. Voice  tremulous ;  croaking.

■  Hoarseness  and  rattling. 6  Coryza.
Hoarseness,  with  pain  when  talking.

Painful  hoarseness, d  Measles. Hoarseness  after  speaking  or

singing.
Voice  crowing,  croupy.
Voice  husky,  can  scarcely  speak,  points  to  the  larynx,  wants

to  cough,  but  cannot, d  Croup.

I I  Larynx  sensitive  to  touch  and  to  the  inspired  air,  as  if  de-
nuded.

1 1  Laryngitis,  with  inflammatory  fever;  also  with  suffocative

spasms  (spasms  of  glottis).
I  I  Laryngeal  complaints  after  straining  the  voice.


ACONITUM  NAPELLUS.  30

Dryness  in  the  windpipe  causing  a  frequent  little  cough.

9 1 1  Croup  :  awaking  in  first  sleep  ;  child  in  agony,  impatient,
tosses  about ;  dry,  short  cough,  but  not  much  wheezing  nor
sawing  breathing ;  cough  and  loud  breathing  during  expira-
tion ;  every  expiration  ending  with  a  hoarse,  hacking  cough  ;
1 1  after  exposure  to  dry,  cold  winds.

Burning  low  down  in  the  larynx, d  Peritonitis.
-®  Respiration. Breath  cold, d  Cholera.

lllBreath  hot. ^  Croup. ^Blood-spitting.

Breath  fetid.

Breathing:  Ishort  in  sleep,  after  12  p.m.  ;  —  lllabored,  anx-
ious or  quick,  and  superficial;  —  Ideep,  slow,  sighing;  —
■  difficult,  must  breathe  deeply;  — slow,  rattling.  ^Apo-
plexy. —  whistling.  6  Croup  in  old  age.  —  short  when
raising  one's  self.

1 1  Asthma  from  active  hypersemia  of  the  lungs  and  brain  ;  face
red,  eyes  staring;  afier  emotions.  I  Can  talk  but  little  at
a  time.

1 1  Asthma  after  suppression  of  an  acute  rash  ;  feeling  of  a  band
around  the  chest ;  muscles  of  the  chest  are  rigid ;  occasion-
ally vomiting ;  urine  scanty,  dark.  After  the  paroxysm,
the  sputa  are  yellow  or  blood-streaked.

IB  Agony,  sits  up  straight,  can  hardly  breathe;  pulse  like  a
thread,  vomituritio ;  sweat,  with  anxiety ;  swelling  under
the  short  ribs, d  After  scarlatina.

1 1  Oppression  of  the  chest  when  moving  fast  or  ascending.
d  Heart  disease.

■  Inhalation  difficult  and  noisy. /?  Tracheitis.

■  Worse  during  inspiration;  better  during  expiration.

■  ■  Constant  short,  dry  cough,  with  feeling  of  suffocation,  which

increases  with  every  inspiration.

■  Difficult  breathing. ^Endocarditis.
Breathes  only  with  the  diaphragm, d  Pneumonia.

■  Cannot  breathe  freely  from  a  sensation  as  if  the  lungs  would

not  expand ;  frequently  takes  deep  breaths.
^^  Cough. B  B  Clear  ringing  or  whistling  cough,  caused  by  burn-
ing, pricking  in  the  larynx  or  trachea.

■  Cough  short,  dry,  forcible,  excited  by  scratching  in  the  throat.
Short  cough  after  12  p.m.,  from  tickling  in  the  larynx  ;  the

more  he  attempts  to  repress  it,  the  more  severe  it  becomes.

■  ■Cough  hoarse,  dry,  loud; Bspasmodic,  rough,  croaking,  with

danger of  suffocation ; B  dry, hard, ringing. d  Infantile

bronchitis.
BDry  cough,  with  shooting  in  the  chest;  with  raw  pain  in  the

chest ;  caused  by  change  of  temperature.
Wants  to  cough  but  cannot, d  Croup.
I  Cough  hollow,  hoarse,  choking,  causing  blueness  of  face.


31  ACONITUM  NAPELLUS.

Violent  hollow  cough  at  night ;  shorter  and  more  panting  dur-
ing the  day. d  Laryngitis.

■  Dry,  barking  cough. ^Measles.

I  Dry,  whistling  cough;  beginning  of  pertussis;  feverish,  anx-
ious, restless.

Hjemoptysis  :  blood  comes  up  with  an  easy  hawking,  hemming
or  slight  cough  ;  expression  of  anxiety  ;  great  fear  of  death  ;
palpitation,  quick  pulse ;  stitches  in  the  chest.

Hgemoptysis  :  caused  by  mental  excitement ;  exposure  to  dry,
cold  air ;  after  taking  wine.

Sputa:  !i absent;  or,  Bthin,  gelatinous,  more  mornings  and
during  the  day  ;  I  I  scanty,  falls  in  round  lumps,  dark  cherry-
red.  ^Pneumonia.  I B Bloody  or  blood-streaked  ;  BSbright
red  blood.

B Expectoration  brownish-red,  rust-colored;  cough  frequent,
with  severe  pains  from  the  shock  through  the  chest.

BB  Cough  awakens  him  from  sleep,  is  dry,  croupy,  suifocating ;
great  anxiety.

Cough  better  lying  on  the  back ;  worse  on  the  side ;  cough,
with  nervous  excitability.

Worse:  B after  eating  or  drinking;  —  'lying,  must  sit  up
from  a  constrictive  feeling  and  suffocation.  6  Tracheitis. —
until  3  A.M. ;  —  evening,  night,  more  after  12  p.m.  ;  —
I  from  tobacco  smoke;  —  B  during  sleep;  —  Bfrom  vexa-
tion, especially  fright;  —  when  overheated;  —  B I  Bfrom
dry,  cold  winds,  or  currents  of  air ;  —  from  walking  in  the
open  air ;  —  when  assuming  an  upright  position ;  —  from
deep  inspiration  ;  —  from  speaking.
^^  Inner  Chest  and  Lungs, b  Tightness  of  the  chest.

B  Oppression  of  the  chest,  feeling  of  great  weight,  must  breathe
deeply,  with  anxiety.

B Pressure,  weight  and  burning  under  the  sternum.

BPain  in  the  middle  of  the  chest  drawing  toward  the  back,
worse  with  every  motion  of  the  body. 0  Q^^sophagitis.

B  Stitches  in  the  right  side  of  the  chest,  but  only  when  lying
on  that  side, d  Endocarditis.

B I B Stitches:  when  breathing;  with  the  cough;  —  Bfrom  the
lowest  rib,  right  side,  through  the  lung  to  the  apex  of  the
scapula,  at  every  inspiration ;  ■ —  Bin  the  left  chest ;  —
Blast  rib,  right  side,  through  to  the  back ;  —  transient,
now  here,  now  there;  —  B worse  bending  sideways;  —
—  Bbetween  the  scapulae,  on  deep  breathing ;  —  Band  burn-
ing, shooting  in  the  chest.

B  B Cannot  lie  on  the  right  side,  but  only  on  the  back,  d  Pleu-
risy.

B  Lancinating  through  the  chest,  with  dry  heat,  diflScult  breath-
ing, often  violent  chill.


ACONITUM  NAPELLUS.  32

1 1 1  Synochal  fever,  hot  sweat,  oppression  ;  children  have  rat-
tlino;  in  the  chest;  sensation  of  fullness  in  the  chest:  must
lie  on  the  back. 6  Pneumonia,  first  stage.

I I  Cough  after  drinking,  sputum  thin,  frothy,  blood-streaked  ;
burning,  shooting  in  the  chest ;  dullness  on  percussion.
6  Pneumonia,  second  stage.

I  Heat  in  the  lungs.

Rush  of  blood  to  the  lungs, d  Childbed  fever.
^^  Heart,  Pulse  and  Circulation. Palpitation,  anxiety,  rest-
lessness ; worse  lying ; face pale,  anxious, d  Blood-spit-
ting.

llHypersemia  of  the  lungs,  violent  palpitation  of  the  heart;
face  red ;  spitting  of  blood.

Palpitation,  with  a  feeling  as  if  boiling  water  was  poured  into
the  chest.

■  Oppression  about  the  heart,  burning  flushes  along  the  back.

I I I  Anxiety  about  the  prsecordia,  heart  beats  quicker  and
stronger  ;  fear  of  death. 6  During  pregnancy.

Anxiety,  difficulty  of  breathing,  flying  heat  in  face,  sensation
of  something  rushing  into  the  head.

I I  Feeling  of  fullness;  pulse  hard,  strong,  contracted;  stitches
at  the  heart ;  lies  on  the  back,  with  raised  shoulders  ;  con-
striction of  the  chest. 6  Pericarditis.

IB  Uncomplicated  cardiac  hypertrophy  ;  especially  with  numb-
ness in  the  left  arm  and  tingling  in  the  fingers.

1 1  Great  agitation  of  the  heart,  anxiety.  ^  Acute  muscular
rheumatism.

Heart  beats  quickly,  pulse  slow,  apparently  intermitting  with
attacks  of  powerlessness.

Heart's  action  feeble,  quick,  incomplete ;  pulse  small  and
weak ;  cardiac  weakness.

■  Intense  pains  in  all  directions,  especially  down  the  left  arm,

with  numbness  and  tingling ;  anxiety,  fear  of  death,  cold-
ness, cold  sweat ;  feeble  pulse. 6  Angina  pectoris.

I I  Fainting,  with  tingling. ^Hypertrophy.

I  1  Pulse  quicker  than  the  beat  of  the  heart ; I  I  during  three

beats  the  apex  strikes  only  once.

I I I  Pulse  strong,  full,  hard, d  In  fever  and  inflammations.

I I  Full,  strong,  hard  pulse,  with  heat  and  thirst.  6  Meningitis
infantum.

iPulse:  small,  intermitting,  irregular.  ^Asthma.  lAccelerated,
with  heat  of  the  skin.  0  Jaundice.  I  Contracted,  full,  power-
ful, over  100  per  minute ;  IfuU,  powerful,  intermitting  every
6  beats  with  cardiac  heaviness;  I  slow,  intermittent;  I  slow,
feeble,  weak  and  small ;  Hike  a  thread,  with  anxiety ;
B quick,  hard  and  small. ^Peritonitis.

Carotids  beat  violently. 0  Apoplexy.

Veins  of  the  throat  expanded. 6  Inflammation  of  the  lungs.


33  ACONITUM  NAPELLUS.

^^  Outer  Chest. Muscles  rigid. /?  Asthma.
^*  Neck  and  Back. Neck  sore  and painful ; glands  swollen.
d  Scarlet  fever.

Drawing  in  the  muscles  of  the  throat  and  neck.

Weariness  in  the  neck  on  motion  as  if  involving  single  mus-
cles, especially  evenings  and  nights.

1 1  Tearing  in  nape  of  neck.

iPainful  stiff  neck,  worse  moving  the  neck ;  pains  down  the
neck  to  the  right  shoulder.

Bruised  pain  between  the  shoulders.

Drawing,  tearing  pain  in  the  scapulse.

Stiffness  of  the  back.

Burning,  shooting  in  the  spine.

■  Cutting  pains  extending  in  a  circle  from  spine  to  abdomen  ;
a  I  crawling  in  the  spine,  as  from  beetles;  formication  ;  high
fever.

I  After  an  injury  or  suddenly  checked  sweat,  d  Spinal  menin-
gitis.

Pain  in  small  of  back,  especially  at  last  lumbar  vertebra,  as  if
beaten.

I  iNumbness of  the small of  the  back, extending  into  the

lower  limbs. 6  Spinal  meningitis.

Spasms  from  inflammatory  affections  of  the  spine.

Slightest  touch  of  the  spine  excites  spasms.

Pain,  as  if  bruised,  in  the  last  lumbar  vertebra  at  its  junction
with  the  sacrum.

Tensive, pressive  pain  in  the  lumbar  and  sacral  regions,  no-
ticed on  stepping.
'^  Upper  Limbs. Tearing  pain  in  the  shoulder-joint.

I I  Formication  in  arms,  hands  and  fingers.

1 1  Arms  hang  powerless,  as  if  paralyzed  by  blows.  (9  Menin-
gitis.

I  INumbness  of  the  left  arm ;  can  scarcely  move  the  hand;
tingling  of  the  fingers, d  Heart  disease.

■  Shooting  pains,  tearing,  erratic;  in  arms,  forearms,  wrists

and  finger-joints.
Shooting  in  wrist-joint,  as  if  from  needles.
Automatic motion of  the left hand ; he strikes his face,

0  Measles.
Drawing  and  tearing  pains  in  wrists  and  fingers.

■  Trembling  of  the  hands.

■  Paralysis  of  the  wrists.
Palms  of  hands  quite  insensible.

■  Creeping  pain  in  fingers.

■  ■Creeping  in  the  fingers,  also  while  writing.

■  Hands  icy  cold;  cold,  sweaty  palms.
Fingernails  blue.

■  ■Hot  palms.

3


ACONITUM  NAPELLUS.  34

I  I  Red  pimples  on  the  back  of  the  hands  ;  stinging-itching.
^^  Lower  Limbs. iHip  and  hip-joint  (left)  swollen,  hot  and  ex-
ceedingly painful to touch ; feverish, thirsty, anxious.
d  Acute  articular  rheumatism.

I  I  Drawing  tearing,  in  left  hip-joint  on  moving.

Sensation  as  if  drops  of  cold  water  trickled  down  the  front  of
the  thighs.

I  I  Thighs  when  walking  feel  as  if  tightly  bandaged.

Drawing  pain,  especially  in  joints  of  limbs.

Drawing  in  tendinous  expansions  of  the  lower  limbs.

Lower  limbs  sore. 6  Peritonitis.

■  Shooting,  tearing  pains  in  legs,  knees,  ankles,  toes,  etc.

I  Limbs  feel  tired  during  repose.

I I  Legs  almost  powerless  ;  after  sitting, numbness. ^Spinal
meningitis.

■  Numbness  in  the  gouty  limb. See  34.
Trembling  of  limbs.

■  Unsteadiness of  the knees ;  they bend while standing  or

walking.

■  Knees  swollen  ;  painful, throbbing, cutting, stinging  pains  ;

cannot  sleep,  had  to  sit  up. 6  Acute  rheumatism.

■  Knife-like  pains  in  the  knee-joint.

■  Legs  stiff  when  moved,  after  taking  cold.
Coldness  of  knee,  alternating  with  flying  shooting.

■  Cramps  in  the  calves,  also  in  the  feet.

■  Legs  and  feet  feel  numb  ; ■  ■tingling,  commencing  in  the  feet

and  spreading  upwards.
I  I  Ankles  feel  as  if  tied  with  a  ligature.

■  Hot  pricking  in  the  toes  ;  they  "  go  to  sleep  "  while  walking.

■  Coldness  of  the  feet  and  ankles; I  I  soles  and  toes  cold  and

sweaty.
^*  Limbs  in  GeneraL Drawing,  tearing  pains  in  the  limbs.

Transient  pains, like  bone  pains, in  the  long  bones  of  the
limbs  and  in  the  metacarpal  bones.

■  Rheumatic  inflammation of  the  joints, worse  evening  and

night ;  intense,  bright  red,  shining  swelling  of  the  parts  ;
sensitive  to  the  least  contact,  with  high  fever.
Crawling  in  upper  and  lower  limbs.

■  Trembling  and  tingling  in  the  limbs,  accompanied  by  shoot-

ing pains.

■  Convulsive  trembling  of  the  limbs.

■  Convulsive  contraction  of  the  limbs.

Slight starting of the limbs, alternating with trembling.

d  Meningitis.
Limbs  feel  weak,  heavy  and  painful, d  Coryza.

■  Lameness  and  numb  feeling  in  the  affected  parts ;  pain  intol-

erable, d  Rheumatism.


35  ACONITUM  NAPELLUS.

I  Numbness,  icj  coldness  and  insensibility  of  hands  and  feet,

d  Meningitis.
Bruised,  heavy  feeling.

■  Coldness  of  the  extremities.
Hot  hands  and  cold  feet,

■  Twitching  of  fingers  and  toes.

^'  Rest.  Position.  Motion.  Rest :  generally  better,  but
during  night,  in  bed,  pains  intolerable ;  limbs  feel  tired ;
rigors  worse.

Lying  :  headache  better ;  palpitation  worse ;  shudders  ;  fever
unbearable.

Lying  on  back :  cough  better ;  stitches  in  chest  better.
6  Pericarditis.

Lying  with  head  high  :  headache  relieved.

Lying  on  right  side  :  stitches  in  chest.

Lying  on  side :  cough  worse ;  cheek  lain  on  sweats.

Must  lie  down  :  with  vertigo.

Cannot  sit  up. d  Uterine  hemorrhage.

Sitting :  vertigo  better ;  crackling  in  forehead  better.

Sitting  up  :  pressure  in  sensorium  worse  ;  cough  worse.

Must  sit  up  :  in  difficult  breathing ;  with  painful  knees.

Rising  from  a  seat :  vertigo ;  red  face  becomes  pale. See  2.

After  sitting  :  legs  numb.

Rising  :  shortness  of  breath  ;  fainting.

Springs  out  of  bed  :  in  delirium  at  night.

Changes  position  constantly :  when  impatient ;  during  anxi-
ety ;  at  night.

Standing:  faints  while  urinating;  causes  great  weakness.
See  36.

Stooping :  vertigo  increased ;  sensation  as  if  eyeballs  were
forced  out  relieved.

Bent  backwards  :  head  in  croup  ;  body  in  spasms. See  36.

Bending  sideways  :  causes  stitches  in  chest.

Must  bend  double. 6  Colic, d  Dysmenorrhoea.

Shaking  head:  vertigo;  blackness  before  the  eyes.

Raising  head :  vomits.

Walking :  vertigo  ;  squeezing  in  forehead  worse  ;  vertex  head-
ache better  ;  cough  worse  ;  thighs  feel  as  if  bandaged  ;  un-
steady knees; toes  "go  to  sleep."

Stepping :  tensive,  pressive  pain  in  back.

Must  walk  or  move  about :  at  night  from  restlessness  and
fever.

Motion :  sensation  as  if  brain  moved  worse  ;  causes  crackling
in  temples,  forehead  and  nose  ;  pain  in  chest  worse ;  in-
creases weariness  in  neck ;  stiff  neck  worse ;  produces
drawing,  tearing  in  left  hip;  legs  stiff;  chill;  improves
rigors.

Violent  exercise  :  produces  overheating  and  conjunctivitis.


ACONITUM  NAPELLUS.  36

2^  Nerves, l Restless,  though  motion  increases  the  pain. ^Pleu-
risy.
iNervous  excitability, d  Prolapsus  uteri.
Fearful  and  uncertain  in  his  actions.

llExcessive  restlessness  and  tossing  about  for  several hours.
Trembling  and  tendency  to  palpitation.
Jerks  of  the  left  leg or  arm,  grinding  the  teeth  ;  comatose ;

restless,  moaning, d  Measles.
1 1  Convulsions  of  teething  children  ;  heat,  startings,  twitches

of  single muscles; 1 1  child gnaws its  fists, frets, cries;

costive  or  dark  watery  stools.
Spasms  of  the  eyes;  clenched  jaws;  the  body. becomes  rigid

and  bends  backwards ;  the  limbs  are  distorted  with  spasms.
iLoud lamentations;  body rigid  and  bent  backwards;  fists

clenched  across the  throat ;  gnashing of  the teeth  ; eyes

drawn  up  spasmodically  under  the  lids.
Towards  noon  convulsions  of  the  whole  body. 6  Myelitis.
Whole  body  feels  as  heavy  as  lead ;  swollen  in  size  and  stature,

except  head  and  neck.
I  Great  muscular  weakness,  weariness,  prostration,  almost  total

inability  to  stand.
Progressive  failure  of  strength.
iFeeling  very drowsy,  languid  and  unable  to rise  from the

couch ;  obliged  to  discontinue  all  work  ;  the  system  feels

prostrated  with  sense  of  inward  fever.
llNumbness,  tingling;  left  side. ^Paralysis  of  the  limbs.
Sudden  falling  down  senseless, d  Apoplexy.
Collapse  ;  cholera.
I  iFaintness  on  attempting  to  sit  up.
Formication,  now  in  one,  now  in  another  part.
^^  Sleep. Sleepiness  ;  spasmodic  yawning.

On going to sleep: Hfever becomes intolerable; Ijerks  ;

I  restless  tossing.

I  I  Somnolency,  eyes  closed  ;  in  a  little  child.
Senseless, snoring, d  Apoplexy.

Sleeping  light, imagines  in  the  morning  he  has not  slept  at

all,  yet  not  weak.
During sleep: I  delirium ; I  starts ; Iprofuse sweat; Ihot,

restless  and  talking ; I  slow  breathing.

I I  Restless  nights  ;  must  walk  or  move  about ; — land  alternately
cold  and  hot,  partial  sweat.

■  Excessive  wakefulness.

Nervous  sleeplessness.

1 1  Sleeplessness  after  midnight  with  anxiety,  restlessness,  con-
tinual tossing  about ;  eyes  closed.

BB  Sleeplessness  caused  by  fear,  fright,  or  anxiety,  with  fear
of  the  future, d  Consumption  of  lungs.

■Vivid  dreams  of  the  day's  occurrences.


37  ACONITUM  NAPELLUS.

lAt  night  anxious  dreams,  and  several  times  waking  with  a
start.

I  Long  dreams  with  anxiety  in  the  chest,  taking  away  the
breath  and  causing  him  to  awaken.

■  Anxious  heavy  dreams  with  oppression  of  chest.

Awakened:  Iby  asthma;  Iby  nightmare;  Iwith  starts;  Iby
cough.

Worse  after  sleep.
^  Time. Night :  delirium  ;  sticking,  tearing  around  eyes  worse  ;
lachrymation ;  violent  hollow  cough  ; weariness  of  neck ;
rheumatic pains in joints worse ; sleepless  ; dreaming ;
shuddering ;  alternate  heat  and  chill ;  pains  intolerable.

Midnight :  burning  in  throat,  causing  hawking.

After  midnight :  short  breath  during  sleep ;  short  cough  ;
sweat.

Midnight  to  3  a.m.:  must  rise  to  urinate.

Until  3  A.M.:  cough  worse.

Morning :  excessive  sweat ;  anxious  lamentations ;  confused
as  if  drunken ;  swollen  eyelids  worse ;  coryza  fluent ;
thin,  gelatinous  sputum ;  thinks  he  has  not  slept.

Toward  noon :  convulsions.

Day :  short  cough  and  panting ;  thin  gelatinous  sputum.

Toward  evening:  fever  unbearable.

Evening :  congestive  headache  worse ;  crackling  in  temples,
forehead  and  nose ;  itching,  burning,  smarting  in  eye ;
stitches  in  eye  worse ;  lachrymation ;  cough  worse ;  weari-
ness of  neck ;  rheumatic  pains  in  joints  worse ;  sudden
chill.
^^  Temperature  and  "Weather.  Heat  of  sun  :  headache  aggra-
vated.

Rays  of  sun  :  produces  erythema.

Heat :  relieves  formication  of  scalp.

Warm  room  :  forehead  feels  compressed ;  chill  worse.

Overheating  :  causes  eye  troubles  ;  cough  results.

In  bed :  fever  unbearable.

When  covered: sweats.

Uncovering :  will  not  be  uncovered. See  1.

Open  air :  headache  in  forehead  worse ;  vertex  headache  bet-
ter ;  sweat  on  head  better ;  eyelids  sensitive ;  headache
from  checked  coryza  better ;  teeth  sensitive  ;  cough  worse.

Cold  dry  winds :  produce  conjunctivitis,  coryza,  toothache,
croup;  aggravate  cough  ;  cause  articular  rheumatism.

Raw  air  :  produces  toothache.

Cold  water:  relieves  conjunctivitis.

Cold  bathing  :  suppresses  menses.

Getting  wet :  causes  tearing  and  beating  in  carious  molar  ;  sup-
presses menses.
*^  Fever. Sensation  of  coldness  in  the  blood-vessels.


ACONITUM  NAPELLUS.  38

Chill:  lanxious;  Ion  slightest  movement;  being  uncovered
or  touched ;  I  I  ascends  from  the  feet  to  the  chest ;  with
formication  between  the  shoulders  and  down  the  back  ;  fin-
ger-tips cold,  nails  blue,  worse  in  a  warm  room.

I  Shuddering  on  lying  down  at  night.

Rigor  commencing  in  the  limbs  and  going  over  the  whole
body,  with  gooseflesh ;  worse  in  rest ;  disappearing  on  mo-
tion.

I  Skin  cool,  dry  or  cold  and  viscous ;  or  cold  to  the  touch,  but
patient  feels  as  if  burning, d  Cholera.

Whole  body  stiff  and  cold. 6  Myelitis.

Rigors  and  vomiting, d  Puerperal  convulsions.

■  Frequent  shudders. Inflammation  of  the  lungs.
Cold  crawls  over  the  back,  with  hot  skin. 6  Catarrh.

I  Sudden  chill  in  the  evening,  followed  by  heat.

I I  After  a  violent  chill,  dry  heat  with  difficult  breathing  and
lancinating  pain  through  the  chest.

■  With the chill, internal heat, anxiety, red cheeks ;  body

chilly,  hot  forehead  and  ears,  internal  heat.
I  Chill  at  the  beginning  violent, more  in  the  evening  after  ly-
ing down,  often  with  one  hot  cheek  and  contracted  pupils.

■  Alternate  heat  and  chill  all  night ;  restless,  wants  to  uncover,

yet  chilly  therefrom.
I  Face  hot,  hands  and  feet  cold;  face  flushes,  with  cold  hands
and  feet,  mostly  evenings.

I  Skin  hot  and  dry,  with  anxious  tossing  about. ^Meningitis

infantum.
iHeat  and  dry  skin. 6  Prolapsus  uteri.

I I  Heat  with  thirst,  hard,  full  and  frequent  pulse,  anxious
impatience,  inappeasible,  beside  himself,  tossing  about  with
agony.

1 1  Heat,  with  agonized  tossing  about.

IB  Pry,  burning  heat,  generally  extending  from  the  head  and
face,  with  much  thirst  for  cold  drinks.

1 1  Heat,  with  inclination  to  uncover;  I  fever  unbearable  to-
wards evening  and  after  getting  into  bed.

I  Heat,  with  chilliness  at  the  same  time.

I  Red  cheeks,  with  obstinacy,  complaining  mood ;  burning  in
the  region  of  the  navel  and  pressive  headache.

I  Thirst  for  beer  during  the  heat; llburning  thirst  during  the

heat.

I I  Inflammatory  fevers  and  inflammations,  with  much  heat,
dry  burning  skin,  violent  thirst,  red  face,  or  alternate  red
and  pale  face ;  nervous  excitability,  groaning  and  agonized
tossing  about ;  shortness  of  breath,  and  congestion  to  the
head, d  Synochal  fever.

Profuse  sweat,  with  copious  flow  of  urine  and  diarrhoea.
1 1  Free  sweat.


39  ACONITUM  NAPELLUS.

I  Profuse  sweat  during  sleep,  even  in  consumptives;  sweat
after  12  p.m.

I  Long  continued,  general  sweat,  of  a  somewhat  sour  odor.

I  The  affected  parts  and  covered  parts  sweat;  likes  to  be  un-
covered.

I  Worse  while  sweating;  better  afterwards.

I  Profuse  sweat  relieves  the  rheumatic  pains.

I I  Bad  effects  of  suppressed  sweat:  catarrhs;  fever;  local  in-
flammations, etc.

I  Cold  sweat.
*^  Attacks. Attacks  of  pain,  with  redness  of  the  face  and  thirst.

Suddenly  :  turns  red  and  falls  unconscious  ;  faints  while  stand-
ing to  urinate.

Alternately :  heat  and  chill.
*^  Locality  and  Direction.  Right :  erratic  pains  in  head ;
pains  like  severe  blows  in  forehead ;  sticking  in  eyeballs ;
pains  over  eye ;  ear  painful ;  mouth  drawn  to  right  side ;
tense  swelling  under  short  ribs  ;  drawing  in  testicle  and  un-
easiness in  renal  region  ;  stitching  pains  in  fundus  uteri ;
stitches  in  chest ;  pains  in  neck  and  shoulder.

Left :  pain  in  small  spot  over  supra-orbital  ridge ;  pulsations
in  forehead ;  side  lame ;  as  if  sand  in  inner  canthus ;  deaf-
ness, with  buzzing  in  head ;  tearing  in  ear ;  neuralgia  of
trigeminus  ;  lips  motionless  during  breathing ;  toothache ;
lobe  of  liver  painful ;  side  of  scrotum  studded  with  vesicles  ;
stitches  in  chest ;  numbness  of  arm ;  tingling  in  fingers  ;  hip
swollen  ;  jerking  of  arm  or  leg ;  side  lame.

Within  outwards  :  pressure  in  head ;  fullness  in  forehead ;
eyeballs  feel  as  if  protruding ;  pressing  in  the  epigastrium.

Out  inwards :  pressure  in  upper  eyelids.

Below  upwards  :  cutting  in  intestines ;  numbness  and  tingling
in  lower  extremities ;  chill.

Left  to  right :  paralysis  (poisoning).

Right  to  left :  toothache.

Front  to  back  :  pain  in  chest.

Towards  right  side :  staggers  to  right  in  vertigo.
*' Sensations. 1 1  iPains  intolerable; more  so  at  night.

1 1  Stitches  here  and  there  ;  erratic.

I  Stinging-burning,  as  if  in  the  skin.

llTearing,  cutting,  wandering  pains. ^Rheumatism,  etc.

I I  Neuralgia  with  congestions,  from  dry  cold  air  or  checked
sweat.

I  iNumbness,  tingling,  formication.

Trembling,  like  a  boiling  and  seething, as  if  the parts  were

going  to  sleep  ;  or as if  becoming  drunk ;  always  with  an

unpleasant  sensation  of  coldness.
I  As  if  bruised  or  beaten  in  different  parts.
Burning  in  internal  parts.


ACONITUM  NAPELLUS.  40

Sensation  of  swelling  of  many  parts,  generally  with  shudder-
ing, cold  or  rigor.
■**  Tissues. 1 1  Has  but  little  effect  on  disorganized  blood-globules,
hence  seldom  useful  in  true  typhoid  states.

lActs  more  on  the  arterial  system.

1 1  Plethora;  active  capillary  congestions  (from  overactive
serous  membranes).

I  I  I  Local  congestions  and  inflammations.

I I  Neuritis,  with  tingling.'

I I  Complaints  in  the  joints:  shooting,  cramp,  cracking,  loss  of
power  ;  drawing  in  joints  and  aponeuroses.

I I I  Articular  rheumatism,  much  fever,  restlessness  and  anxiety  ;
swellings  are  red  and  hot  or  pale ;  shifting  from  one  point
to  another.  Especially  if  caused  by  suddenly  checked
sweat  or  by  dry  cold  air  or  winds.

1 1  Acute  catarrhs,  with  the  usual  Aconite  fever.

Skin  and  muscles  rigid.

I  Muscular  rheumatism  with  high  fever.

I  Glands  painful,  hot,  swollen.

^^  Touch.  Injuries.  Touch  :  pains  worse  ;  eyeballs  sensitive  ;
soreness  in  pit  of  stomach  worse ;  pains  of  peritonitis  worse  ;
lower  abdomen  sensitive ;  larynx  sensitive  ;  excites  spasms  ;
hip  painful;  rheumatic  swelling  of  joints  sensitive;  chilly.

Pressure :  stitches  in  supra-orbital  region  worse ;  liver  sensi-
tive.

Scratching :  no  effect  on  itching.

Fall : vertigo.

Contusion : vertigo.

Foreign  bodies  : irritation  of  eyes.

Wounds  after  surgical  operations  are  painfully  sensitive ;  fever.

I I  Shock  from  injury  ;  surgical  operations.
^^  Skin. 8  Skin  dry  ;  absence  of  sweat.

iTino-lino;  over  the  whole  surface.

H  Red,  shining,  hot  swellings  ;  violent  pains.

I  Fine  prickings,  as  from  needles,  here  and  there.

I I  Spots  like  flea-bites  ;  itching  unchanged  by  scratching.

I  Erythema  from  the  sun's  rays  ;  papular  erythema.
■  Erysipelas,  smooth  skin  ;  violent  fever.

B I  Yellow  skin. ^Jaundice. ^  During  pregnancy.
Red  rash  all  over,  except  on  the  abdomen, d  Childbed  fever,
second  week.

I I  Measles:  Dry,  barking  cough;  painful  hoarseness;  eyes
red ;  cannot  bear  light ;  tongue  red ;  jerks  of  left  leg  or  arm,
or  grinding  of  teeth ;  restless  moaning  and  lamenting ;  ly-
ing in  a  comatose  state  ;  pains  in  the  joints  ;  free  sweat.

Bin  red  miliary  fever:  increasing  restlessness,  agonizing  anxi-
ety and  heat  of  body.
BRash  of  children.


41  ACONITUM  NAPELLUS.

B I  Seldom  in  scarlatina,  except  as  specified  below  or  during
desquamation.

i  I  Scarlet  rash,  with  high  fever.

B  Scarlet  fever,  with  dry  skin  and  very  great  restlessness  and
distress ;  must  frequently  sit  erect  in  bed  in  consequence  of
dyspnoea.

Skin  cold  and  dry ;  cold,  clammy.

Single  long  dartings,  here  and  there,  mixed  with  a  raw  sensa-
tion, ending  with  pain  as  of  a  wound.
*''  Stages  of  Life. Constitution. B  B  Children's  diseases  ;  with
high  fever.

B  Especially  persons  with  tonicity  (rigidity)  of  fibre.

BOld  age;  sleeplessness.

B  Contra-indicated  in  fevers  which  bring  out  eruptions  or  are
otherwise  salutary,  unless  there  is  agonizing  tossing  with
dry  skin.

BDark  hair  and  eyes.  BBPersons  leading  a  sedentary  life;
plethora,  etc.

B Tendency  to  apoplectic  congestion;  plethora.
*^  Relationship. Antidotes  to  Aeon.:  Acet.  ac.^  Paris, Vin.

Is  antidote  to  iBellad.,  iChamom.,  iCoffea,  iNux  vom.,
Petrol.,  Sepia,  I  Sulphur,  B  Veratr.,  and  secondary  symp-
toms of  MorpJdne.
After  Aeon,  follow  well:  lArnic,  HBellad.,  in  gastric
states ;  after  pulmonary  febrile  afiections  :  Ipee.,  Bryon.,
Hepar,  Pulsat.,  i  Sepia  and  B I  Sulphur  ;  in  colic  :  I  I  Arseti.;
in  cough  :  I  Bryon.,  Spongia  ;  in  croup  :  Spongia  or  Hepar  ;
in  strangury  of  children  :  Pulsat.;  in  dysentery:  llMereur.
Aeon,  may  often  be  indicated  after  lArnie.^  ii  Coffea,  ii  Sul-
phur and  B  Veratr.

B  B  Complementary  to Coffea,  in fever, sleeplessness,  intoler-
ance of pain ; to Arnie. in  bruises ; to  Sulphur high
in  all  cases.
Ailments  from:  Act.  rae., iChamom., iCoffea, iNux  vom.,
Petrol.,  Sepia,  I  Sulphur.

IB  Abuse  of  Aeon,  calls  for  Sulphur.


ACTEA  RACEMOSA.  42

ACTEA  RACEMOSA.*

Actea  raeemosa,  Linnee. Black  Coliosh. Ranunculacece.


Grows  in  woodlands  from  Canada  to  Florida.  Famous  as  a  popular
medicine,  particularly  for  snake-bites.  Has  received  so  many  improper
names  that  the  oldest  one  is  preferred.  Proved  in  1853  by  H.  M.  Paine,  in
1858  by  Ch.  H.  Burr,  in  1859  by  Hill  and  Douglas,  in  1871  by  Bacmeister,
and  used  like  a  polychrest  by  most  practitioners.


^  Mind.  I  Sensation  as  if  a  heavy  black  cloud  had  settled  all  over
her,  and  enveloped  her  head,  so  that  all  was  darkness  and
confusion,  while,  at  the  same  time,  it  weighed  like  lead  on
her  head.

Forgetful.

Unable  to  find  the  right  word  in  speaking.

Mind  dull  and  heavy.

1 1  Thinks  she  is  going  crazy.

I  Often  started  by  the  illusion  of  a  mouse  running  from  under
her  chair.

I  Imagines  strange  objects  about  the  bed,  as  rats,  sheep,  etc.

d  Delirium  tremens.
Delirium  with  great  headache, d  Puerperal  fever.
Delirium  with  nausea,  retching,  dilated  pupils.
iFear  of  death;  fears  those  in  the  house  will  kill  him;  saw

wires  encaging  him ;  visions  of  rats  and  of  strange  objects.

d  Delirium  tremens.

I I  Mania  following  disappearance  of  neuralgia.
13  Puerperal  mania.

Desire  for  solitude,  or  to  wander  from  place  to  place.
Answers  questions  hurriedly  and  evasively.

*  The  observation  that  a  drug  may  produce  different  symptoms  on  the
different  sexes,  is  of  the  utmost  importance  for  the  scientific  development
of  our  Materia  Medica.

Professors  Hill  and  Douglas  state  in  their  valuable  report  of  provings
with  Actea  raeemosa,  in  the  New  York  Quarterly,  Vol.  VII.,  1859,  p.  450 :
"  It  produced  nausea,  vomiting,  and  much  gastric  irritation  in  the  six
women,  while  in  forty  men  it  was  hardly  noticed  as  affecting  the  stomach
in  the  least.  Being  an  important  remedy  in  morning  sickness  of  the  preg-
nant, we  may  conclude  that  all  the  gastric  symptoms  observed  by  female
provers  depended  on  the  uterus.

It  has  also  been  observed  that  Cuprum  acts  more  on  the  female  and
Ferrum  on  the  male  organs.


43  ACTEA  RACEMOSA.

Declares  she  has  been  poisoned.

1 1  Incessant  talking,  changing  from  one  subject  to  another.
6  Delirium  tremens.

I  Frequent  sighs  and  ejaculations. 6  Mental  disorder.

Would  not  answer  ;  at  other  times  very  loquacious.

llFeels  grieved  and  troubled,  with  sighing;  Inext  day  a  feel-
ing of  tremulous  joy,  with  mirthfulness,  playfulness  and
clear  intellect.

a  Miserable  dejected  feeling.

I  Mental  depression,  with  suicidal  mood;  also  after  checked
neuralgia.

I  Weeping  mood;  dejected;  anxious.

I  Great  melancholy  with  sleeplessness.

lApprehensiveness  and  sleeplessness. ^Pregnancy.

I  Fears  she  will  become  crazy,  with  headache  on  vertex.

I I  Fear  of  death.

Ilndiiference,  taciturn,  takes  no  interest  in  household  matters.
d  Mental  disorder.

■  Irritable ;  the  least  thing  that  goes  wrong  makes  her  angry.
Nervous  and  irritable.

I  She  was  suspicious  of  everything,  would  not  take  medicine  if

she  knew  it. d  Mental  disorder.
I  I  Restless  and  impatient,  can  read  only  a  few  minutes,  must

get  up  and  walk  about,  yet  soon  tires.
Headache  when reading or  writing. Cannot  even  write  a

letter.

■  Headache  of  students.

Mental  emotions  cause: lamennorhoea; I  suppression  of  the

lochia.
I  Mind  disturbed  by  disappointed  love,  business  failures,  etc.
I  Feels  faint  at  the  epigastrium  when  meeting  a  friend.
I  After  fright :  threatened  abortion.
^  Sensorium. Constant  dull  feeling  in  the  vertex.

■  Dullness  and  heaviness  in  head;  like  after  "  a  spree."
Dizzy  on  rising  in  the  morning,  with  pain  over  the  eyes ;  faint-

ness,  nausea,  and  occasional  vomiting. 6  In  mental  diseases.
Vertigo,  head  feels  too  large  and  heavy ,  when  stooping,  head

swims.
Vertigo,  dizziness  with  impaired  vision.
I  Fainting  fits  generally  with  some  uterine  affection.

■  Sensation  as  if  a  heavy  black  cloud  had  settled  all  over  her

and  enveloped  her  head,  so  that  all  was  darkness  and  confu-
sion, d  Mental  disorder.
^  Inner  Head. Dullness  in  the  head  as  after  "  a  spree."

I  Rush  of  blood  to  the  head,  brain  feels  too  large  for  the  cra-
nium ;  after  suppressed  uterine  discharges  or  suddenly  ceas-
ing neuralgic  pains.
Waving  sensation  in  the  brain.


ACTEA  RACEMOSA.  44

An  opening  and  shutting  sensation  when  moving  head  and

eyes.
Dull  frontal  headache  relieved  by  pressure.

I  Great  pain  in  head  and  eyeballs,  increased  by  the  slightest

movement  of  head  or  eyeballs, d  Meningitis.
Sensation  as  if  temples  were  compressed.

■  Headache  down  to  the  nose.

■  Headache  every  day  at  the  same  hour.

I I  Severe  pains  in  right  side  of  head,  back  of  the  orbit, d  After-
pains.

I  Aching  and  shooting  pains  in  vertex,  occiput,  left  temple,  eye

and  ear  ;  worse  lying  down  ;  hysterical  crying.

I I  Brain  as  if  too  large  ;  pressing  from  within  outward.

■  Head  feels  as  if  pounded,  full ;  as  if  too  large, d  Intermittent.
I  Top  of  head  feels  as  if  it  would  fly  oflF,  worse  going  up  stairs  ;

declares  she  will  go  crazy.

■  Intense  pain  as  if  a  ball  had  been  driven  from  neck  to  vertex,

worse  at  every  throb  of  the  heart.

■  Aching  pain  in  the  head,  particularly  at  the  occiput,  only  in-

doors ;  worse  in  the  afternoon  and  still  more  in  the  evening,
disappearing  entirely  at  9  p.m.  after  a  walk  in  the  open  air.

■  Great  pain  in  head,  back  and  limbs.

■  Pain  over  and  in  the  eyes,  extending  along  the  back  to  occiput.
I  ■Excruciating  pain  in  forehead,  eyeballs  and  temples,  with

cold  forehead  on  waking,  2  a.m.
Dull  boring  in  forehead  over  left  brow,  10  a.m.

■  Pain  in  forehead,  temple  and  vertex,  with  fullness,  throbbing

and  heat.

■  Dull  pain  in  occiput,  with  shooting  down  back  of  neck.

■  Headache  better  in  open  air.

^  Outer  Head. Sensation  as  if  the  vertex  opened  and  let  in  cold
air. d  Climaxis.

^  Sight  and  Eyes. ■Peculiar  wild  look  out  of  the  eyes. 6  De-
lirium tremens.
Eyes  expressionless, d  Chorea.

■  Dark  spots  before  the  eyes.
Pupils  dilated, d  Delirium.
Aching  and  heaviness  of  the  eyes.
Eyeballs  painful,  with  lachrymation.

Sensation  of  enlargement  of  the  eyeballs  ;  they  feel  as  if  they

would  be  pressed  out  of  the  head.
Ulcerated  cornea,  I  with  sharp  pains  through  the  eye  into  the

head.

■  Eyes  congested  during  the  headache.

■  Pain  in  the  centre  of  the  eyeballs,  and  also  a  sensation  as  if

pain  was  situated  between  eyeball  and  orbital  plate  of  the
parietal  bone ;  more  severe  in  the  morning,  worse  on  going
up  stairs.


45  ACTEA  RACEMOSA.

iPain  over  the  eyes  extending  to  occiput.

I  Ciliary  neuralgia  ;  aching  pains  in  eyeballs  or  in  the  temples
extending  to  the  eyes,  so  severe,  especially  at  night,  it
seemed  as  if  the  patient  would  go  crazy.

Ciliary  neuralgia  ;  sharp,  shooting  pains  from  occiput  through
to  eyes,  or  darting  from  the  eyes  to  the  top  of  the  head,  with
redness  of  the  eyes  and  photophobia ;  worse  on  the  right
side,  afternoon  and  night ;  better  on  lying  down.

■  Blisters  on  the  eyelids.

■  Severe  pains  darting  into  left  eye  ;  feels  as  if  needles  were  run

into  the  eyeball  through  the  cornea ;  worse  on  closing  the
eyes  ;  sleepy,  but  cannot  sleep  on  this  account, d  Neuralgia.
^  Hearing  and  Ears. Sensitive  to  least  noise,  with  spasmodic
labor-pains.
Singing  in  the  left,  later  in  both  ears.
Buzzing  in  ears, d  Puerperal  fever.
Sweat  behind  the  ears.
^  Nose. Pain  in  the  head  followed  by  coryza  and  sore  throat.
Coryza : dry  in the  evening,  white mucus  during  the day  ;
sneezing ;  aching  pains  in  the  head  and  eyes,  sensitive  to
cold  air;  every  inhalation  seems  to  bring  the  cold  air  in
contact  with  the  brain.
Greenish,  slightly  bloody  coryza.
*  Face. Face  bluish. 6  Puerperal  fever.

■  Wild,  fearful  expression. ^  Delirium  tremens.

Face :  pale  ;  eyes  large  and  sunken,  surrounded  by  dark  rings.

■  Forehead  feels  cold; deadly  pale.

■  Neuralgia  affecting  the  malar  bone,  pain  goes  off  at  night,  re-

appears the  next  day.
Frequent  flushes  of  heat,  wants  to  be  in  the  open  air.
Suddenly very  faint,  face  became ashy white, weakness  so
great  that  she  believed  she  was  dying. 6  Puerperal  fever.
^  Lower  Part  of  Face. Lips  dry.
Lower  lip  cracked,  as  if  bitten.
Jaw  sunken. 6  Typhus.
^^  Teeth. Toothache  in  neuralgic  and  rheumatic  patients.

Thick  mucus  on  the  teeth.
^1  Taste,  Speech,  Tongue. Taste  :  disagreeable  ;  coppery.
Cannot  speak  a  syllable,  though  she  makes  the  effort.
Talking  provokes  cough.

Tongue:  clean  but  pointed  and  trembling ;  —  Bswollen. /?  Ce-
rebral diseases.
^^  Inner  Mouth. Breath  offensive.

Mouth  and  tongue  feel  warm  and  dry.
Spitting  of  thick,  sticky  saliva.
^3  Palate  and  Throat. Dry  spot  in  the  throat,  causing  cough ;
dryness  of  the  pharynx,  with  constant  desire  to  swallow;
fullness  in  the  pharynx  ;  uvula  and  palate  swollen  ;  neck  stiff.


ACTEA  RACEMOSA.  46

Hawks  up  a  viscid,  coppery  tasting  mucus.
Thick  mucus  lodges  in  the  throat.
Inilamed  throat,  pains  awaking  him  at  night.
^*  Appetite,  Thirst. No  thirst,  slight  feeling  of  hunger  in  the
stomach  ;  rumbling  in  abdomen.
Appetite  variable.
No  appetite  for  dinner,  wants  to  drink  cold  water ;  little  at  a

time  suffices.
Great  thirst, d  Puerperal  fever.
'^  Eating  and Drinking. After breakfast :  headache better ;
pain  in  the  left  temple. Faint  before  breakfast,  overfilled
after.
After  dinner :  pain  through  chest.
'^  Nausea  and  Vomiting. I Eructations,  with  nausea,  vomiting
and  headache,  more  in  women.
Nausea  with  pain  in  the  region  of  the  kidneys.
Vomiting  of  a  green  substance;  groans,  raves;  presses  both

hands  to  her  head  for  relief.
llNausea,  retching,  dilated  pupils,  tremor  of  limbs. ^De-
lirium tremens.
^^  Scrobiculum  and  Stomach. Acute, darting  pains  in the
stomach.
I  Sinking  or  goneness  in the  epigastrium, nausea,  internal

tremor ;  women.
Faint  sinking  feeling  at  the  epigastrium  with  palpitation  of
the  heart.
^^  Abdomen. I  Periodical  colicky  pains,  better  bending  double
and  after  stool.
Flatulence,  causing  a  sensation  of  fullness.
Severe  pains  in  bowels,  small  of  back  and  down  the  limbs.
Excruciating  pains  in  bowels,  much  rumbling  and  wind.
IB  Sharp  pain across  the  hypogastrium. ^  In  uterine  affec-
tions.
H  Abdominal  muscles  sore.
^"  Stools. I  Frequent, thin, dark, offensive stools. d  Spotted
fever.
Morning  diarrhoea,  of  children.
Pains  go  from  limbs  to  bowels,  producing  diarrhoea  and  partial

retention  of  urine.
I  Alternate  diarrhoea  and  constipation.
-^  Urinary  Organs. Pressing  in  the  region  of  the  kidneys  and
small  of  back.
I  Irritable  bladder.
Urine :  profuse,  pale,  watery  ;  bloody,  frequent ;  scanty,  feels

hot.
I  Increased  flow  of  urine  makes  her  feel  weak.
Sp.  gr.  1.005,  then  1.019,  1.020;  deposit  of  uric  acid.
^^  Male  Sexual  Organs. Pain  and  tenderness  in  the  testicles.


47  ACTEA  RACEMOSA.

Pain  and  retraction  in  the  right  cord.
^^  Female  Sexual  Organs. Spasms  of  the  broad  ligaments.
Ovarian  pains  shoot  up  to  the  side.

■  Severe  pain  in  lower  part  of  abdomen,  worse  from  motion.

I  Uterine  neuralgia.

I I  Pains  in  the  uterine  region  dart  from  side  to  side.

Dull  dragging  in  the  uterine  region,  with  frontal  headache.
I  Bearing  down  as  if  something  was  passing  out;  better  lying
down.

■  Bearing  down  in  uterine  region  and  small  of  back  ;  limbs  feel

heavy,  torpid.
Great  tenderness  on  pressure  over  the  uterine  region.

■  Menses:  profuse, early;  dark, coagulated blood; I  scanty,

slightly coagulated ; sharp pains across abdomen,  has to
double up ; labor-like pains ; debility between periods ;
scanty  flow  between  menses.
Menses  suppressed  : Iby  emotions  ; I  from  cold;  from  fever.

■  ■  Menses  irregular,  delayed  or  suppressed  ;  with  chorea,  hyste-

ria, or  mental  disease.
During  the  menses: llhysterical  or  epileptic  spasms; ilin-
crease  of  mental  symptoms  ; ■"  shivers."

■  Severe  bearing  down  pains.

■  Rheumatic  dysmenorrhoea.

■  Leucorrhoea,  with  sensation  of  weight  in  the  uterus.

■  Exhausting  menstruation  ;  with  a  young  girl  who  was  unable

to  open  her  eyelids.
2*  Pregnancy  and Parturition. ■■Given during the last

month,  it  shortens  labor.
Complaints  in  pregnancy: ■■nausea: ■  false  labor-like  pains  ;

■  sharp  pains  across  the  abdomen; Isleeplessness.
Threatened  miscarriage,  third  month  ;  nervous,  anxious.

■  Labor-pains  severe,  tedious  or  spasmodic,  with  fainting  fits  or

cramps.
Labor-pains  too  strong,  spasmodic ;  feels  worse  from  the  least
_ noise.
Labor -pains  ceased  for  thirty-six  hours.

■  Cardiac  neuralgia  in  parturition.

■  Convulsions  in  labor  from  nervous  excitement.

■  ■"  Shivers,"  first  stage  of  labor.

■  After-pains,  worse  in  the  groins ;  oversensitiveness ;  nausea

and  vomiting.

■  Lochia  suppressed,  by  cold  or  emotions.
Lochia  watery,  mixed  with  small  clots.
Lochia  suddenly  ceased. 6  Puerperal  fever.

■  ■Infra-mammary  pains,  worse  left  side.

■  Burning  in  the  mammae.

■  In  labor  rigidity  of  os  uteri  (should  be  taken  some  weeks  be-

fore parturition.)


ACTEA  RACEMOSA.  48

Puerperal  fever.

I  Puerperal  mania :  does  not  know  what  is  the  matter  with  her
head,  it  feels  so  strange,  talks  incoherently,  screams,  clutches
her  breast  as  though  in  pain,  tries  to  injure  herself.
^^  Larnyx, Bronchia. Hoarseness, roughness and scraping,
worse  in  the  evening ;  very  sensitive  to  cold  air.
I  Tickling  in  throat,  with  violent  cough.
^®  Respir?ltion. Frequent sighing, respiration quickened on
waking.
Difficult  breathing  after  slight  exertion,  with  general  feeling  of
illness.
"  Cough. Dry  spot  in  the  throat  causes  cough.

BlNight  cough,  dry,  constant,  short. ^Incipient  tuberculosis.
I  Cough  at  every  attempt  to  speak.
Expectoration  of  a  viscid,  stringy  mucus.
^^  Inner  Chest  and  Lungs. I  Severe  pain  in  the  left  chest,  be-
low fifth  or  sixth  rib.
Pain  in  right  side  of  chest,  must  lie  quietly  on  back  and  press

with  the  hand  ;  breath  short ;  slight  cough.
Congestion  to  the  chest  from  exposure  to  cold  air,  with  dry

cough,  night-sweats  and  diarrhoea.
Pain  through  the  left  lung  and  heaviness  over  the  heart.

■  Tuberculosis  not  hereditary,  but  from  exposure.
I  Sharp  pains  from  side  to  side.

Acute  pain  from  apex  to  base  of  right  lung,  worse  from  every
inspiration.
^^  Heart,  Pulse  and  Circulation. Palpitation  from  the  least
motion.

■  Pains  from  the  region  of  the  heart,  all over  the chest  and

down  the  left  arm ;  palpitation ;  unconsciousness ;  cerebral
congestion  ;  dyspnoea  ;  face  livid ;  cold  sweat  on  the  hands  ;
numbness  of  the  body ;  the  left  arm  numb  and  as  if  bound
to  the  side. 6  Angina  pectoris.

■  Heart's  action  ceases  suddenly;  impending  suffocation.
Pulse  weak,  ■irregular,  eighty  per  minute;  feeble  in  the  morn-
ing, with  trembling  and  weakness.

■  Quick  full  pulse. ^  Delirium  tremens.

Sensation  as  if  a  heavy  black  cloud  had  settled  all  over  her,  and
weighed  like  lead  upon  her  heart, d  Mental  disorder.

^^  Outer  Chest.  ■  Pains  about  the  right  chest,  worse  from  motion,
extorting  cries. 6  Pleurodynia.

^^  Neck  and  Back. ■  ■Head  and  neck  retracted.  6  Spotted  fever.

■  ■Rheumatic  pains  in  the  muscles  of  the  neck  and  back  ;  feel-

ing of  stiffness  and  contraction.
Cramp  in  the  muscles  of  the  neck  on  moving  the  head.

■  Stiff  neck  from  cold  air,  pain  from  moving  even  the  hands.

■  Sensitiveness  of  the  spine,  especially  in  the  cervical  and  upper

dorsal  regions  ;  soreness  of  all  the  muscles, d  Spotted  fever.


49  ACTEA  RACEMOSA.

Rheumatism  of  the  dorsal  muscles.

■  Severe  pain  in the  back,  down  the  thighs  and  through  the

hips,  with  heavy  pressing  down.
I  Violent  aching  in  small  of  back. ^Uterine  affections.

■  Weight  and  pain  in  the  lumbar  and  sacral  regions,  sometimes

extending  all  around  the  body.
Weak  trembling  pain  in  the  small  of  the  back.
Pulsating  pains  in  the  lumbar  region.
Dull,  heavy  aching  in  the  small  of  the  back,  relieved  by  rest,

increased  by  motion.
^^  Upper  Limbs. Severe  pains  down  the  arms,  with  numbness  as

if  a  nerve  had  been  compressed.
Excruciating  pains  in  the  arms,  worse  as  evening  approaches.

d  Rheumatism.
Pains  in  the  muscles,  worse  from  motion.
Left  arm  feels  as  if  bound  to  the  side. 6  Chorea.

■  Constant  irregular  motions  of  1.  arm;  is  useless. ^Chorea.

■  Cold  sweat  on  the  hands.

Trembling  of  the  fingers,  especially  when  writing.
^^  Lower  Limbs. Aching  in the  sacrum, lumbar  region, and
down  the  left  leg. d  Sciatica.

Severe  pain  in  the  ileo-sacral  symphysis  and  down  the  leg.

Pressure  around  the  hips,  with  pain  in  the  sacrum. ^!  Threat-
ened miscarriage.

Fearful  pains  through  the  lower  limbs,  like  growing  pains.

■  Rheumatic pains in the joints, with heat and swelling.

6  Pleurodynia.
Towards  evening  soreness,  aching  and  stiffness  in  the  region
of  the  tendo  Achilles  ; worse  walking.

■  Dull  aching-burning  pain  in the  second  joint  of  the  right

great  toe,  extending  up  the  limb.
^*  Limbs,  in  General. ■  Aching  in  the  limbs.

■  ■Excessive  muscular  soreness.

■  Rheumatism  affecting  the  bellies  of  the  muscles;  cramping,

stitching  pains.

Uneasy  feeling  in  limbs,  causing  restlessness.

Torpidity  of  limbs,  with  uterine  affections.

Joints  feel  stiff  in  the  morning,  as  if  he  had  worked  hard  the
day  before.
^^  Rest. Position. Motion. Rest :  improves  aching  in  back.

Wants  to  lie  down  and  close  the  eyes.

Lying  down :  shooting  and  aching  in  head  worse ;  ciliary  neu-
ralgia better;  uterine  troubles  better;  jerking  commences.

Must  lie  (quietly  on  the  back :  in  chest  pains.

Rising  from  bed  : dizzy.

Stooping :  head  swims.

Bending  double :  colic  relieved ; menstrual troubles amelio-
rated.


ACTEA  RACEMOSA.  50

Must  change  position  :  to  quiet  jerking,  in  bed.

Walking :  aggravates  soreness,  aching  and  stiffness  of  tendo
Achilles.

After  walking  in  open  air :  headache  relieved.

Can  scarcely  walk  :  from  trembling  of  legs.

Must  walk  about :  when  restless  and  impatient.

Desire  to  move  about :  when  restless.

Exertion  :  sighing,  difficult  respiration.

Motion :  increases  pain  in  head  and  eyeballs ;  causes  palpita-
tion ;  increases  pain  in  right  side  of  chest ;  aggravates  dull
aching  in  back.

Going  up  stairs  :  aggravates  feeling  as  if  top  of  head  would  fly
off;  pain  in  eyes  worse.

Moving  the  head :  causes  opening  and  shutting  sensation  of
head  ;  produces  cramps  in  muscles  of  neck.

Moving  eyes :  causes  opening  and  shutting  sensation  of  head.

Moving  the  eyelids  :  aggravates  pain  through  left  eye.

Moving  the  hands  :  increases  the  pains  of  stiff  neck.

When  writing :  fingers  tremble.

Clutches  at  breast :  in  puerperal  mania.
36  Jferves. l Nervous  shuddering  through  the  upper  and  back  part
of  the  body.

■  Twitching  of  fingers  and  toes.

I  Trembling  of  the  legs,  scarcely  able  to  walk.

Great  debility  between  the  menses.

Irregular  motion of  the  limbs, worse left; legs unsteady.

6  Chorea.
I  Alternate  tonic  and  clonic  spasms. 6  Spotted  fever.
I  Epilepsy,  periodical  convulsions,  with  uterine  diseases.

■  Hysteric  spasms.

■  Restless  forenoon;  desire  to  move  about,  not  knowing  where

to  go  or  what  to  do.

■  Nervous uneasiness during  the afternoon, so uneasy can

scarcely  fix  his  attention  on  any  subject.

■  Paralytic  affections.

Limbs  cold,  twitching,  subsultus. d  Puerperal  fever.
^^  Sleep. ■  Comatose  state.

Sleeplessness:  with  excited  brain. ■  ^  After  nursing  the  sick.

6  During  pregnancy, d  Delirium  tremens.
I  I  Cannot  sleep,  because  she  feels  numb  all  over. 6  After  an

abortion.
Sleepy  but  cannot  sleep  because  of  pain  through  left  eye  on

closing  lid.
Awakens  11  p.m.  as  in  a  fright.

■  Unpleasant  dreams  of  being  in  trouble  or  in  a  sad  plight.

■  After  going  to  bed  jerking  commences  on  the  side on  which

he  is  lying,  must  change  position.
^^  Time. Night :  ciliary  neuralgia  worse ;  facial  neuralgia  better ;


51  ACTEA  RACEMOSA.

sore  throat  aAvakens ;  cough  constant ;  sweats ;  fever  with
clammy  sweat.

Morning  :  dizzy  ;  pains  in  eyeballs  worse ;  diarrhoea  in  teeth-
ing children  ;  pulse  feeble  ;  joints  feel  stiif.

2  A.M. :  violent  headache.

Forenoon :  restless.

10  A.M. :  dull  boring  in  forehead,  chilliness,  heat,  languor.

11  A.M.  to  noon:  chilliness.

Day :  mucous  discharge  in  coryza ;  facial  neuralgia  worse.
Afternoon  :  headache  ;  ciliary  neuralgia ;  uneasy,  nervous.
5  P.M. :  chill,  heat  and  sweat.
Towards  evening :  pains  in  arms  worse ;  pain  in  region  of  tendo

Achilles  worse.
Evening :  headache  ;  coryza  dry  ;  hoarseness  worse.
9  P.M. :  headache  disappears  after  a  walk  in  open  air.
11  P.M. :  awakes  as  if  frightened.
^^  Temperature  and  Weather. Cold  air :  seems  to  penetrate

the  system :  aching  pains  in  head  and  eyes  sensitive  to  it ;

larynx sensitive to it ; from exposure  congestion to the

chest ;  causes  stiff  neck  ;  when  suffering  with  flushes  of  heat

wants  to  be  in  cold  air.
Open  air  :  relieves  headache.
In-doors  :  headache,  mostly  occipital.
^^  Fever. Chilliness  down  the  back,  from  11  to  12  m.,  with  pain

under  left  scapula.
Chilly  before  and  during  discharge, d  Dysmenorrhoea.
Chilliness,  then  heat;  languid,  stretches  her  limbs,  10  A.M.
Feet  and  hands  cold,  then  hot.
Chill,  then  heat,  then  sweat,  alternating  with  dryness  of  skin,

5  P.M.
Chills,  cold  tremors from  the  back  ;  hot  flushes,  then  slight

sweat  on  the  abdomen.
Night-sweats,  diarrhoea. 6  Tuberculosis  of  the  lungs.
Sweat  smells  offensive.
Skin  cold  and  moist, d  Delirium  tremens.
Fever  during  the  night  with clammy  sweat,  pulse  150  and

small,  with  great  prostration. ^Puerperal  fever.
■*^  Attacks. Periodical  attacks  of  colic.
Pains  come  on  suddenly.
Headache  at  intervals.
Headache  every  day  at  same  hour.
Tendency  to  abort  at  third  month.
*^  Locality  and  Direction. Right :  pains  in  head  and  back  of

orbit;  ciliary neuralgia;  pain in  spermatic  cord;  pain  in

chest ;  aching  in  great  toe.
Left:  dull  boring  over  brow,  aching  and  shooting  in  temple,

eye  and  ear;  pain  in  temple;  infra-mammary  pains;  pain

in  chest ;  arm  numb  and  seems  bound  to  the  side ;  irregular


ACTEA  RACEMOSA.  52

motions  of  arm ;  aching  down  the  leg ;  pain  under  scapula,

with  chill.
Side  to  side :  darting  pains  in  uterine  region  ;  pains  in  chest.
Behind  forwards,  diagonally  :  shooting  pains  through  the  head.
Below upwards : shooting  pains through the  head, ovarian

pains  ;  aching  and  burning  beginning  in  right  toe.
Above  downwards :  shooting  from  occiput  along  neck  ;  sharp

pains  in  lung;  pain  from  heart ;  pain  in  arms  ;  chilliness  in

the  back.
Within  outward  :  pressure  of  brain  ;  pressure  of  eyeballs.
Without  inward:  sharp  pains  with  keratitis.
*^  Sensations. Like  electric  shocks  here  and  there.

1 1  Sharp,  lancinating  pains  in  various parts,  associated  with

ovarian  or  uterine  irritation.
Whole  body,  especially  the  arms,  feels  numb.

■  General  bruised  feeling  as  if  sore.
Pricking  all  over.

^*  Tissues. lllAifects  the  nerves, especially muscular nerves.
6  Myalgia.
I  Serous  membranes.

I  Chorea  from  rheumatic  irritation.

*'  Touch. Passive  Motion. I  Surface  sensitive.
Pressure : relieves dull  frontal headache ; desires it during

vomiting ;  aggravates  tenderness  over  uterine  region.
Must  press  with the hand ;  during  pain  in  right  side  of  the
chest.
^^  Skin. Eruption  of  white  pustules  over  the  face  and  neck  ;  some-
times large,  red,  papular.
Pricklino;,  itchincr,  heat  of  the  whole  surface.
*''  stages  of  Life,  Constitution. Climacteric  years.

■  Nervousness  from  anxiety  or  overexertion.

I I  Rheumatic  persons.
Children,  teething;  diarrhoea.

*^  Relationship. Side  relations,  Act.  spic,  and  other Ranun-
culaceoe.

I  Aeon,  relieves  the  sleeplessness.

Act.  spic,  Bryon.,  and  Puhat.,  similar  in  rheumatism.
Baptis.  relieved  headache  and  nausea.

I I  Oauloph.  similar  in  uterine  and  rheumatic  affections.
Compare:  Pulsat.,  Sepia,  Nat.  mur.,  Lit  tig.,  and  Ignat.


63  ACTEA  SPICATA.

ACTEA  SPICATA.

Baneherry.  Jtanunculacece.

Grows  in  the  woods  of  Europe  and  Asia,  as  does  the  racemosa  in  North
America.  Proved  by  Petroz  and  Lemercier  in  France,  and  Macfarlan
of  Philadelphia.

^  Mind. Weakness  of  memory,  incapacity  to  recollect.

Occasional  absence  of  mind.

Judgement  perplexed.

Bewildering  fits,  almost  to  the  degree  of  insanity.

Self  deception.

Furious  delirium  ;  also  during  the  fever.

Great  desire  to  work,  though  incapable  of  it.

Inclined  to  debauchery.

Indisposed  to  close  thinking.

Self  satisfaction.

Mental  enjoyment  while  exercising.

Sad,  lamenting  and  sighing.

Dejection  with  inclination  to  weep.

Melancholy.

Hopelessness.

Constant  apprehension.

Anxious  solicitude  when  quiet.

Anxiety  with  urging  in  the  heart. See  29.

Fear  of  death,  especially  at  night  in  bed.

Distaste  of  life.

Desperation  about  the  success  of  every,  even  the  most  trifling
undertaking.

Irresolution,  inconstancy  and  caprice.

Obstinacy  and  anger.

Impatient  and  restless, d  Rheumatism.

Mental  exhaustion.

After  exertions  of  the  mind. See  40.

Worse  from  fright : 23  ;  from  mental  anxiety  :  6.
^  Sensorium. Loss  of  consciousness.

A  kind  of  drunkenness.

Giddiness  and  reeling  in  the  open  air.

Vertigo  with  darkness  before  the  eyes.

Dizziness;  forehead  feels  empty  when  stooping.
^  Inner Head. Twitching in  the temples  ; I  pain  from  a  de-
cayed tooth  to  temples.

Pressure  in  the  vertex.


ACTEA  SPICATA.  54

Hammering  pain  in  the  occiput.
Boring  pain  in  the  head.

Pressure  in  the  forehead  after  having  been  in  the  sun.
Head  symptoms  worse  at  night,  from  walking  ;  return  period-
ically; I  also  after  the  fever.
Tearing  and  dullness  in  forehead.

Racking  in  the  vertex,  extending  to  eyebrows,  causing  despair.
^  Outer  Head. Pain,  seemingly  in  the  periosteum,  and  even  in
the  bones.
I  Warm  sweat  on  the  head.
I  Small  pimples  on  the  scalp.
'  Sight  and  Eyes. Objects  seem  colored  blue.
Spots  before  the  eyes  when  looking  steadily.
Catarrhal  inflammation  of  the  eyes.
Sharp  pain  through  the  eye  into  the  head.
Flow  of  burning  tears .
"  Hearing  and  Ears. Murmuring  in  the  ears after  sleeping  ;
worse  from  mental  anxiety.
Twitching  pain  in  the  ears  when  blowing  the  nose  or  sneezing.
"^  Nose. Nose  bleed  during  oppression  of  chest.
Nostrils  red.

Nasal  mucus  blood- tinged;  bruised  pain  in  the  nose.
*  Face. Face  sensitive.

I  Pain  as  of  rheumatism  in  the  face;  pulling,  tearing  from  a
decayed  tooth to the  temples ;  worse from the slightest
touch  or  movement  of  the  muscles.
The  cheek  he  lies  on  sweats.
'  Lower  Part  of  Face. Yellow  around  the  mouth.
Lips  chapped.

Submaxillary  glands  hurt  during  mastication.
^^  Teeth. Pulling,  tearing  from  a  decayed  tooth to the temples.
^^  Inner  Mouth. Increased  saliva.

Fetid  odor  from  the  mouth.
^^  Throat' Throat  becomes  sore  when  speaking.

Tearing  pains  in  the  throat,  especially  when breathing  cold
air.
^*  Appetite. Hunger,  with  aversion  to  food.
More  appetite  in  the  morning.
Disgust  for  food, d  Rheumatism.
^^  Eating  and  Drinking. Worse  from  salt  meat ;  beer  ; smok-
ing tobacco.
After  a  meal :  uneasiness ;  lassitude.
After  drinking,  shuddering.
^^  Belching. Nausea  and  Vomiting. Belching  during  the
chill.
Nausea;  vomituritio,  with  dizziness.
Sour  vomiting. 6  Cancer  of  stomach.


55  ACTEA  SPICATA.

^^  Scrobiculum  and  Stomach. Painful  pressure  in  the  pit  of

tlie  stomach.
Drawing  in  the  epigastrium.

■  Tearing,  darting  pain  in  the  epigastric  region,  with  vomiting.

d  Cancer.
Cramp  in  the  stomach.
^^  Hypochondria, Beating,  throbbing  in  hypochondria, d  Hepa-
titis.
Pressure  in  region  of  liver  hurts, d  Hepatitis.
Region  of  spleen  insensible.
^*  Abdomen. Spasmodic  contraction  of  the  bowels.
Uneasiness ;  as  before  diarrhoea.
Abdomen  sensitive.
^^  Stool. Copious emission of wind ; no stool ; constipation

from  lack  of  bile.
^^  Urinary  Organs. Throbbing  in  the  region  of  the  kidneys,
Renal  calculi.

Frequent  urging  ;  pains  in  passing  urine.
White  sediment.

Urine  deposits  a  brick-dust  sediment. ^Rheumatism.
^^  Female  Sexual  Organs. Menses  suppressed  by  fright.

Menses  suppressed  from  cold. 6  Pleurisy.
^^  Respiration. Too weak  to breathe ;  obvious  mostly  during
expiration.
Nosebleed,  with  oppression  of  the  chest.

Difficult  inhalation ;  stitches in  the  epigastrium during  deep
breathing  or  a  painful  shock ;  or  pain  in  the  hip.
■^^  Heart  and  Pulse. Urging  sensation  in  the  heart  towards  the
abdomen and region  of  the  liver,  with great  anxiety at
night.
Pulse,  120. ^  Fever, ^Rheumatism.
^'  Back. Bruised  pain  in  the  sacral  region,  when  lying  on  the

side.
^^  Upper  Limbs. I Lameness  in  the  right  arm.

1 1  Right  wrist  pains  intolerably, is  swollen;  motion  impossi-
ble ;  slightest  pressure  on  the  palm  of  the  hand  near  the
little  finger  causes  him  to  cry  out. 6  Rheumatism.
I  Pain,  as  from  paralytic  weakness  of  the  hands.
Fingers  numb,  cold,  discolored.
^^  Lower  Limbs. Boring  pains,  better  from  stretching.
Thighs  tremble  when  raised.
Knees  weary.

Legs  weak  after  changes  of  temperature.
^*  Limbs in General. I  Swelling of  the  joints after slight
fatigue.

■  Rheumatism  of  the small  joints, especially  of  those  of  the

hands.

■  Small  joints  swell  after  walking. ^Rheumatism.


ACTEA  SPICATA.  56

^^  Rest. Position. Motion. After  slight  fatigue,  joints  swell.
Lying  on  side  :  bruised  pain  in  sacral  region.
Motion  :  rheumatic  pains  of  face worse  ;  impossible in right

wrist.
Exertion  :  causes  cold  sweat.
Walking  :  afterwards  small  joints  swell : 34  ;  debility  results  :

36.
Raising  thighs  :  they  tremble.
Stretching  :  relieves  boring  : 33.
^^  Strength. Sudden  lassitude.

Debility  from  walking  in  the  open  air.

■  Weakness  and  tingling.

^^  Time. Night :  headache  worse.

Morning :  appetite  better.
^^  Temperature  and  Weather. Change  of  temperature :  legs
weak  afterwards.

Sun :  pressure  in  forehead  from  being  in  it.

Open  air :  debility  when  walking  in  it.

Cold  air  :  tearing  pains  in  throat  when  breathing  it.
^^  Fever. Chill,  with  belching.

Shuddering,  with  vomiting  after  heat.

Delirium  during  fever.

After  fever,  headache  persists.

Sweat :  viscid ; cold after  the  slightest  exertion  of  mind  or
body  in  nervous  people.

Suppressed  sweat, d  Rheumatism.
■'^  Attacks. Periodical :  headache  and  other  symptoms.
^^  Locality. Right:  lameness  of  arm  ;  wrist  pains  and  is  swollen.
^^  Sensations. Throbbing  in  the  whole  body.

I  Tearing,  drawing  pains.

Sharp,  acute,  rheumatic  pains  in  small  spots.
**  Tissues. Aifections  of  parenchymatous  organs.

Seat  of  old  inflammations.

Active  sanguineous  congestions.

BiRheumatism  showing  itself  partly  in  the  small  joints;  pains
in  the  wrists  or  finger-joints, very  tender  to  the  touch,  ex-
cruciating, worse  at  night.
*^  Touch. Touch  :  rheumatic  pains  of  face  worse.

Pressure :  causes  pain  in  palm  of  hand.
^''  Stages  of  Life, Constitution. Especially suited to men
{Act.  7XIC.  to  women).

Weak,  nervous  ;  cold  sweat. See  40.

■  Rheumatic  diathesis.

^-  Relationship. Answers  well  after  Niix  vom.

Collateral  relations  : Act.  rac.  and  other  Ranunculacege.
Discrete  relations  :  Aryiic;  Bryon.; Caulojjh.  (rheumatism  of
fingers) ; Lycop.; Rhus  tox.; Sal.  ac.  and  Sticta  (small
joints).


57  AESCULCS  GLABRA.

AESCULUS  GLABRA.

Ohio  Buckeye.  Sapindacece.


A  beautiful  tree  growing  in  the  bottom  lands  of  the  Ohio  river.  The
tincture  is  to  be  made  of  the  whole  fruit ;  the  bark  may  differ.  Symp-
toms mostly  toxic ;  provings  commenced  only  by  Hale.


^  Sensonilin. Confusion  of  mind, with  vertigo, often  followed
by  stupefaction  and  coma.
Vertigo  with  staggering,  reeling,  unconsciousness.
Vertigo  with  full  heavy  head,  dim  sight,  thick  speech,  nausea
and  vomiting.
^  Inner  Head. H Fullness  and  heaviness  in  the  head  without  pain,
with  vertigo  and  faintness  toward  evening.
\  According  to  the  wry  neck,  the  vertigo,  sensation  of  fullness
and heaviness of  head, stupor, great  weakness and  trem-
bling of  limbs,  it  may  be  used  in  meningitis.
^  Sight  and  Eyes. Sight  dim  or  lost.
Eyes  fixed  and  dead.
Eyes  expressionless.
^^  Speech. Tongue. Speech  thick,  and  tongue  as  if  lame.
^^  Nausea  and  Vomiting. Nausea, with loathing  of  food  and

vomiting.
^'^  Stomach. Distension  (with  cattle).
Cramp-like  pain.
Sensation  of  fullness.
^^  Abdomen. Distension  (with  cattle).
""  Rectum  and  Stool. Hard,  knotty  stools.
Constipation  (cattle), Iwith men.
I  Very painful, dark  purple  haemorrhoidal  tumors,  with  lame

back  and  lower  limbs.
It  is  popular  to  carry the  fruit  in the  breeches  pocket,  as  a
preventive  of  piles.
^^  Neck. Back. Wry  neck  (cattle).

Great  lameness  and  weakness  of  back.
^^  Lower  Limbs. Trembling  of  lower  limbs.
Hind  limbs  lame  ;  falling  (cattle).
A  strong  tendency  to  contraction  of  the  legs.
36  I^eryeg^ Spasms and convulsions, followed by lameness
(cattle).
Great  weakness.  *

^^  Sleep. Stupor  and  confusion,  followed  by  coma.


AESC.  GLAB.— AESC.  HIPP.  58

^^  Time. Towards  evening :  vertigo  and  faintness.

^°  Fever. iSome  typhoid  symptoms,

^*  Relationship. Collateral  relations  :  Aesc.  hipp.

Discrete  relations  :  Aloes  ; Collinsonia  ;  Ignat.;  Nux  vom.


iECDLUS  HIPPOCASTANUM.

Horse  Chestnut.  Sapindacece.

Brought  from  the  East,  and  extensively  cultivated  as  an  ornamental  tree.
Both  fruit  and  capsule  should  be  used  for  the  best  preparations.

Proved  by  Helbig,  in  1844;  by  Buchman,  in  1859,  and  later,  by  C.  W.
Boyce,  Cooley,  Duncan,  Warren,  H.  M.  Paine,  W.  H.  Burt,  C.  H.  Lee,  and
J.  C.  Raymond,  to  which  we  add  a  very  good  proving  by  Neville,  from  a
Thesis  in  1864  to  '65.


^  Mind. Mind  clear ; anterior  lobes  feel  light ;  posterior  dull,
heavy.
On  awaking  knoAvs  not  where  she  is  nor  whence  came  the  ob-
jects around  her.
I  I  Unable  to  fix  his  attention.
Disinclination  to  perform  any  labor.
Inward  cheerfulness  and  placidity  of  temper.
Feeling  of  sadness,  lasting  all  day.

■  Depressed,  low-spirited.

I  Feels  dull,  gloomy  and  despondent.

Very  irritable  all  day,  and  restless  during  forepart  of  the  night.

■  Extremely  irritable;  loses  temper  easily,  and  gains  control

over  it  again  but  slowly.
I  Feels  miserably  cross.
^  Sensorium. Confused feeling in the head, with giddiness ;

slight  while  sitting,  worse  when  rising  from  a  seat,  afternoon.
Vertigo  with  a  sensation  as  if  he  had  to  balance  the  head  ;  very

annoying  all  afternoon.
^  Inner  Head. Dull  pain  in  r.  temple  and  occiput,  followed  by

dull  stitches  in  forehead  and  1.  temple.
Feeling  as  if  a  board were  on  the  head ; <<  rising from a

seat.
Neuralgic  pains  in  the  different  parts  of  the  head,  temples,

occiput  and  frontal  regions,  coming  and  going.

■  Severe  lancinating  headache  at  the  base  of  the  brain,  as  if  too

full ;  tympany ;  tongue  white.
Dull  heavy  pain  deep  in  the  brain.


59  AESCULUS  HIPPOCASTANUM.

Headache  all  over  as  if  it  would  burst. 6  Fever.

A  sensation  of  fullness  and  pressure,  rather  than  of  acute  pain.

Sensation  of  fullness  in  the  head,  beating  of  the  temporal  arte-
ries, and  pain  extending  through  the  head  from  one  tempo-
ral region  to  the  other ;  aggravated  by  stooping,  laughing
and  study.

Congestion  to  the  head  with  beating  of  the  temporal  arteries,
lasting  half  an  hour,  and  accompanied  by  a  dull  pain  on  the
top  of  the  head.

Heaviness,  with  dull  stupefying  pain  in  the  head.

Heaviness  in  the  forehead,  with  aching  pain  in  the  back  part
of  the  head.

Fullness  in  the  forehead  with  dull  heavy  pain.

Dull  aching  pain  in  the  forehead  over  the  orbits.

Aching  in  the  forehead ;  sometimes  over  the  left,  sometimes
over  the  right  eye ;  also  the  right  temple.

Dull  pain  over  the  right  eye ;  eyes  heavy  ;  after  sleep.

iDull  pressure  in  the  forehead  with  slight  nausea  in  the  stomach,
followed  at  once  by  stitches  in  the  right  hypochondrium.

I  Dull  frontal  headache,  from  right  to  left,  with  constrictive
feeling  of  the  skin  of  the  forehead,  followed  by  flying  pains
in  the  epigastrium.

Shooting  pain  in  the  forehead.

Neuralgic  pains  in  the  right  supra-orbital  region.

Severe  frontal  headache ;  back  aches  and  is  weak.

Pressing  in  the  left  temple,  followed  by  the  same  sensation  in
the  right.

Beating  in  the  right  temple.

Frequent  flying  pains  through  the  temples  and  forehead  ;  throat
constricted.

Dull  heavy  pain  extending  through  the  top  of  the  head.

Neuralgic  pains  in  the  left  side  of  the  head.

Very  severe  pain  in  the  right  side  of  the  head  above  the  temple.

Dull  aching  pain  in  the  left  side  of  the  head.

Dull  pain  in  the  right  side  of  the  head,  folloAved  by  the  same
sensation  in  the  left  side,  continuing  about  an  hour.

Dull  pain  in  the  occiput,  with  flushes  of  heat  over  the  occiput,
neck  and  shoulders,  and  lame  feeling  in  the  small  of  the  back.
d  Prolapsus  uteri.

Heavy  feeling  in  back  of  head.

Dull  aching  sensation  in  the  back  part  of  the  head,  afterwards
extending  to  the  forehead,  and  made  much  worse  by  stooping.

Dull  pain  in  the  occiput ;  also  a  bruised  feeling  with  heat,  ex-
tending to  the  ears.

Burning  pain  in  the  back  part  of  the  head.

Headache  with  dull  pain  and  stitches,  chiefly  in  forehead,
temple  and  occiput ;  accompanied  by  confusion  and  vertigo.


AESCULUS  HIPPOCASTANUM.  60

with  sensation  of  fullness  and  pressure  rather  than  other
pain.

Sensations  in  the  head,  accompanied  by  beating  of  the  arte-
ries all  over  the  body  and  accelerated  pulse.

Sick  headache ;  feeling  of  fullness  in  the  forehead,  with sick-
ness of  the  stomach  in  the  evening.

Neuralgic  darting  from  right  to  left  across  the  forehead ;  fol-
lowed by  flying  pains  in  the  epigastrium.

Stitches  in  the  right  side  of  the  head,  right  breast,  and  anterior
part  of  the  right  thigh  simultaneously.

Sensation  of  fullness  in  upper  part  of  head,  with  stiffness  of
neck  and  spine.

Dull  aching  sensation in the  forehead, with  beating  in the
temples,  flashes  of  heat  and  accelerated  pulse.

Dull  heavy  pains  in  the  forehead,  and  pains  in  the  back,  loins,
left  shoulder  and  elbow,  as  if  from  overexertion.

Headache  with  drowsiness,  too  weak  to  walk.
*  Outer  Head. Shooting  in  1.  parietal  bone,  later  in  the  right.

Pains  in  vertex,  with  a  very  annoying  sensation,  as  though  a
number  of  pin-points  were  inserted  in  the  skin.

Hypersesthesia  of  scalp.

Soreness  of  the  side  of  the  scalp  rested  on  (right).

Formication  in  front  of  temple.
^  Sight  and  Eyes. Flickering  before  the  eyes.

Pupils  dilated  ;  contract  slowly.

■  Can  read  well  at  a  distance,  can  now  read  without  spectacles.
Eyes  feel  heavy  and  hot.

Burning  and  stinging  deep  in  the  left  orbit,  as  if  the  pain  sur-
rounded the  ball.
Painful  aching  over  the  left  eye.

■  Weight  in  eyes,  they  feel  heavy  and  dull.
Twitching:  of  lids;  of  the  muscles  under  left  eye.
Eyes  filled  with  tears.

Balls  feel  sore,  dull  aching  in  them.

I  I  Sharp  shooting  in  1.  eyeball,  sometimes  through  1.  ear.

Dull  pain  over  the  eyes  ;  shooting  over  the  left.
®  Hearing  and  Ears. "Ringing  in  r.  ear.

Shooting  pain  in  1.  ear  and  eye,  later  in  r.  ear.

Burning  in  ears  ;  pressure.

Fullness. See  44.
''  Smell  and  Nose. iDryness  of  the  posterior  nares  and  throat,
with  sneezing,  followed  by  severe  coryza.

Fluent  coryza,  dull  frontal  headache,  thin watery  discharge ;
burning,  rawness  ;  sensitive  to  inhaled  air.

Pain  in  the  r.  nasal  bone ;  soreness  in  the  left.

Sneezing.

I  Stinging  and  burning  in  the  posterior  nares  and  soft  palate.

Dryness  of  posterior  nares  and  throat.


61  AESCULUS  HIPPOCASTANUM.

Formication  on  the  nose.
^  Face. Stitches  in  1.  malar  bone.
I  Pale,  miserable  appearance.
Ill-looking  countenance.
Flying  heat  and  redness  of  left  side  of  face.
After  rubbing  the  face  it  flushes.
Rubbing  after  washing  causes  red  spots.
Face  swells  enormously  after  washing  in  water.
^  Lower  Part  of  Face. Severe  neuralgic  pains  from  upper  lip,
extending  around  to  right  side  of  head  ;  all  forenoon.
Severe  pains  in  r.  mastoid  region.
Lips  hot.
^^  Teeth. Shooting  in  lower  molar  teeth,  later  in  the  r.  only.

Ache  in  middle  lower  molar,  worse  by  warm  drinks  and  press-
ing teeth together, better  by holding cold  water in the
mouth.
Teeth  feel  as  if  covered  with  oil.
"  Taste,  Speech,  Tongue. Taste :  bitter,  afterwards  sweetish  ;
sweet  with  the  ropy  mucus  ;  oily  or  coppery,  with  salivation  ;
metallic.
Cannot  control  the  tongue  so  as  to  form  words  rightly.
Tongue  furred, d  Hemorrhoids.

Tongue  coated  white  or  yellow  ;  feels  scalded. See  fauces.
Tip  of  the  tongue  sore,  as  if  ulcerated.
^^  Inner  Mouth. Thick  yellow  phlegm in  the  mouth,  and on
tongue.
Month  dry,  as  if  excoriated  and  constricted.
Increased  flow  of  saliva,  with  oily  taste. See  teeth.
'^  Palate,  Fauces  and  Throat. Stinging  and  burning  in  soft

palate.

I  Pricking,  formication,  burning  and  stinging  in the  fauces;
shooting  in  1.  side.

Feeling  as  if  something  had  lodged  in  the  fauces,  causing  con-
stant inclination  to  swallow.

Throat  feels  dry  and  stiff  when  swallowing.

Dry  feeling,  or  a  constrictive  sensation,  with  desire  to  swallow.

Tonsils  swollen,  fiery  red ;  neck  swollen  and  stiff.

Tonsils  dark,  congested,  with  an  aching  distress.

I  Violent  burning  in  throat,  with  raw  feeling.

Frequent  neuralgic  pains  in  fauces.

Constricted  sensation  in  fauces,  tongue  feels  as  if  scalded.

Hawks  up  ropy  mucus,  of  a  sweetish  taste.

Tonsils  dark  and  congested,  swollen ;  the  left  worse ;  inclina-
tion to  swallow,  with  dull  aching  pain,  burning  like  fire.

iFeeling  of  dryness  and  roughness  of  throat  as  from  taking  cold.

■  Frequent  inclination  to  swallow,  with  dry  constricted  fauces,

burning.
I  I  Throat  and  oesophagus  constricted,  scraped,  causes  hawking.


AESCULUS  HIPPOCASTANUM.  62

I  Dark  congested  state  of  fauces,  with  a  full  feeling  and  irrita-
tion, d  Chronic  angina.
^^  Appetite  and  Thirst. iLoss  of  appetite. ^Hemorrhoids.

I  Considerable  thirst.
'■''  Eating  and  Drinking. Burning  in  pit  of  stomach  and  feeling
as  if  about  to  vomit,  is  removed  by  eating  dinner.

Stomach  feels  full,  as  if  the  walls  were  thickened,  after  eating.

A  distended  feeling  was  the  only  sign  which  told  him  to  stop
eating.

Pain  in  stomach,  continuing  until  he  eats  again.

Regurgitation  of  the  food  an  hour  after  eating.
^®  Belching, Nausea  and Vomiting. Eructations : sour ;
greasy; bitter; frequent;  empty; I  I  taste  of  food; thick
mucus.

Belching  and  nausea.

iNausea. ^Hemorrhoids.

Nausea  with  increase  of  saliva  and  slight  burning  in  stomach.

I  I  Nausea  most  after  eating  or  in  the  afternoon.

1  Nausea  with  heavy  pressure  in  epigastric  region.

Sickness  with  heaviness  in  base  of  brain  from forehead  to
occiput.

I  I  Desire  to  vomit.

■  Violent  retching  and  vomiting,  with  burning  in  stomach.

I  Heartburn and  gulping up all  the  food  after eating; can

hardly  eat  anything. 6  A  young  girl.
^^  Scrobiculum  and  Stomach. I  l  Pressure  as  from  a  stone  in

pit  of  stomach.
Periodical  tightness  in  scrobiculum,  with  labored  breathing.
At  the  epigastrium: II fullness; Iburning  distress,  aching;

■  pressure as  from  a  stone; flying pains after headache.

See  3.
Sinking  at  pit  of  stomach,  emptiness  with  gnawing.
Gnawing  and  emptiness  in  stomach  early  mornings.
Fluttering,  with  faintness  in  stomach.

■  Constant  distress  and  burning  in  stomach,  with  inclination  to

vomit.
Aching,  cutting,  burning  distress  in  stomach.
Sharp  pain  in  region  of  stomach  and  apex  of  heart.
Pain  in  stomach  and  rumbling  in  abdomen.

■  Violent  burning  in  stomach,  bowels  and  liver,  with  distress,

nausea  and  violent  vomiting.
'^  Hypochondria. Dull  aching  in  r.  hypochondriac  region.

■  Constant,  severe  aching,  from  pit  of  stomach  to  the  lower  lobe

of  liver.
Tenderness  in  r.  hypochondrium.
Pinching  pain  in  r.  hypochondrium,  with  colic ;  pain  through

to  the  back  on  inspiring.
Stitches  following  the  headache.


63  AESCULUS  HIPPOCASTANUM.

Stitches,  pinching  and  aching  in  liver,  extending  between  the

shoulders.
I  Tenderness  in  the  r.  hypochondriac  region; I  full  feeling.
I  I  Constant  dull  aching  distress  in  right  lower  lobe  of  the  liver

and  region  of  the  gall-bladder; I  much  distress  in  liver  and

epigastrium.

■  Constant  aching  pain  from  the  pit  of  stomach  to  the  right  lobe

of  liver.

■  Congestion  of  liver  and  portal  system.

Fine  stitching  in  1.  hypochondrium,  <C  moving  and  laughing.

Pain  in  region  of  spleen.
^^  Abdomen  and  Groins. Burning  distress,  soreness  and  ach-
ing at  the  navel.

I  I  Abdomen  tender  to  touch.

Rumbling  in  the  bowels,  with  cutting  about  the  navel,  with
distension  and  bearing  down.

■  Flatulent  pains  in  bowels, d  Hemorrhoids.

Rumbling  noise  and  abdominal  pain  extending  downward,  even-

At  the  navel:  pain,  soreness  and  aching;  pricking;  great  dis-
tress with  urging  to  stool;  colicky  pains  after  the  hard  stool.

■  Sensation  of  fullness  in  abdomen. ^Hemorrhoids.
Stitches  in  left  side  below  the  ribs.

Sensation  of  soreness  in  the  lumbar  region.
Deep  seated  shooting  in  the  right  side  just  above  the  hip  ;  tear-
ing above  r.  hip.
Flying  pains  in  the  bowels.
Cramp  pain,  cutting  in  the  bowels  before  stool.
Cramp-like  contraction  of  the  bowels.
Colicky  pains  in  bowels,  with  severe  cutting  in  rectum.

■  Throbbing  in  the  abdomen. See  23. ^  Portal  congestion.

■  Hemorrhoidal  colic.

■  Throbbing  in  the  pelvic  cavity  and  hypogastrium. ^Prolap-

sus uteri.

■  Pain  in  hypogastric  region. ^Prolapsus  uteri.
Cutting  in  the  r.  inguinal  region.

Severe  neuralgic  pain  in  the  right  inguinal  region.

■  Inguinal  hernia.

^"Rectum  and  Stool. ■!  ■Rectum:  feels  full; ■■dryness  and
itching; ■■dryness. ^Hemorrhoids.

■  ■Rectum  feels  as  if  full  of  small  sticks.
Dryness,  heat  and  constriction  of  the  rectum.

I  Mucous  lining  feels  thickened,  obstructing  defecation.
Dryness  and  itching  in  the  rectum,  with  a  feeling  of  stiffness
of  the  skin  and  adjacent  cellular  tissues.
. Sensation  in  the  rectum  as  though  a  bug  was  creeping  out.
Feeling  in  the  rectum  as  though  folds  of  the  mucous  membrane


AESCULUS  HIPPOCASTANUM.  64

obstructed  the  passage,  and  as  if,  were  the  effort  continued,

the  rectum  would  protrude.
Prolapsus  of  the  rectum.
Soreness  of  the  rectum,  with  a  feeling  as  if  something  would

pass  off  all  the  time.
Soreness,  aching  and  fullness  of  the  rectum.
B I  Rectum  sore,  with  burning  and  itching.
Soreness  of  the  rectum,  with  increased  secretion  of  mucus.
I  Considerable  pain,  aching,  swelling and  rigid hardness of

rectum,  commencing  an hour  after  stool,  continuing  from

two  to  six  hours. 6  Hemorrhoids.
Pressure  in  the  rectum,  with  constant  desire  but  ineffectual

efforts  to  stool.

■  Urging  to  stool,  often  ineffectual;  rectum  seems  swollen.
Passes  fetid  flatus.

Much  flatus  passed  in  the  evening.
Stool  softer  than  natural.
Stools  loose,  preceded  by  "griping.

Frequent  loose  stools,  with  constant  urging ;  composed  of  in-
gesta.

■  Light  colored  soft  stool. ^Prolapsus  uteri.
Stools  mushy,  light  brown.

Copious,  soft  stool,  followed  by  burning,  and  a  feeling  of  swell-
ing and  constriction  of  the  rectum.

Diarrhoea ;  the  desire  to  have  the  boAvels  evacuated  coming  on
suddenly,  preceded  by  passage  of  flatulence  and  followed  by
pain  in  the  abdomen  and  eructations  tasting  of  the  ingesta.

Diarrhoea,  evacuations  yellow,  thin,  preceded  by  pain  in  the
abdomen  which  passed  off  with  the  stool.

In  the  afternoon,  watery  discharges  from  the  bowels  not  at-
tended with  any  pain.

■  Chronic  diarrhoea.

An  evacuation,  at  first  black  and  hard,  then  white  and  soft.

■  First  part  hard,  black,  the  last  of  about  natural  consistency,

but  white  as  milk. 6  Liver  complaint.
Stool  at  first  black  and  hard  ;  later  white  ;  followed  by  tearing
in  the  anus.

■  Very  dark  stools. ^Hemorrhoids.
Stool  large,  dry,  hard,  difiicult,  dark.

Stool  very  hard  and  dry,  with  colicky  pains  in  the  umbilical
region,  followed  by  severe  cutting  pains  in  the  rectum.

■  Stool  large,  hard,  dry,  knotted,  voided  with difficulty  and

followed  by  severe  cutting,  burning  or  constricting  pains  in
the  anus,  a  portion  of  which  seems  to  protrude ;  with  dull
pains  in  the  lower  abdomen  and  ■■severe  lumbo-sacral  back-
ache.

■  Sense  of  fullness  and  bearing  down  with  constipation. 6  Hem-

orrhoids.


Q5  AESCULUS  HIPPOCASTANUM.

I  Bowels  always  wanted  to  be  relieved, d  Hemorrhoids.

I I  Constipation, d  Hemorrhoids.

II  Hard  dry  stool  passed  with  difficulty,  with  dryness  of  rectum
and  heat ;  no  bleeding.

I  After  stool,  pain  in  anus  intense,  lasting  till  evening;  every

other  day  stool,  inclined  to  bleeding. 6  Hemorrhoids.

I I  Stool  followed  by  rectal  fullness. ^Hemorrhoids.

I  Much  pain  after  stool  in  the  morning,  not  subsiding  till  even-
ing-

■  Soreness,  burning,  itching  and  fullness  at  the  anus.

■  Intolerable  burning,  itching,  stinging  pain  at  anus,  with  feel-

ing of  fullness,  which  could  only  be  relieved  by  rubbing  or
by  pressure ;.  only  felt  while  walking,

I  Anus  feels  raw.

I  Pain  like  a  knife  sawing  backwards  and  forwards  through
anus. 6  Hemorrhoids.

Dryness  of  the  passage  for  several  days,  followed  by  a  secre-
tion of  moisture.

•  Stricture  of  the  sphincter  ani.

I  Anus  sore,  it  protrudes  at  or  after  stool.
Prolapsed  feeling  of  the  anus  after  a  natural  stool.

■  Prolapsus  ani  after  stool,  with  dull  backache.
Causes  prolapsus  ani  in  cattle  which  feed  on  it.

■  Fullness  and  itching  in  anus  after  a  walk.

Rubbing  induces  a  flow  of  blood  to  the  anus. See  8,  32.
Troublesome  itching  of  the  anus.

•  Fissure  of  the  anus.

Pain  in  the  anus  commences  about  an  hour  after  an  evacua-
tion, and  continues  from  two  to  six  hours, d  Hemorrhoids.

■  Occasional  attacks  of  hemorrhoids,  attended  with  very  little

hemorrhage,  although  considerable  pain,  aching,  swelling
and  rigid  hardness  of  the  rectum ;  attacks  usually  accom-
pany constipation.

■  ■Hemorrhoids,  blind  and  painful,  rarely  bleeding.

■  Blind  piles  of  ten  years'  standing;  bleeding  of  twenty  years.

■  Several  large  piles  which  seem  to  block  up  the  rectum,  little

or  no  bleeding,  great  suffering,  constipation.
Sharp,  shooting  pains  running  through  the  hemorrhoidal  tu-
mors, up  to  the  sacrum  and  along  the  back.

■  Large  protruding  painful  hemorrhoids. ^Prolapsus  uteri.

■  Appearance  of  hemorrhoids,  like  ground-nuts,  of  a purple

color,  very  painful,  and  with  a  sensation  of  burning.

■  ■Hemorrhoids  painful,  burning,  purplish  ;  generally  "  blind  ;"

aching  and  lameness,  or  sharp,  shooting  pains  up  the  back.
Hemorrhoids  severe  and  of  long  standing,  patient  felt  as  if  the

gut  was  turned  inside  out.
Pain  worse  in  the  tumors  when  standing  on  the  feet  or  walking.

■  Hemorrhoids,  could  not  sit  or  lie  down  with  ease.


AESCULUS  HIPPOCASTANUM.  66

I  Pain  in  hemorrhoids,  like  a  knife  sawing  up  and  down,  could

not  sit,  stand  or  lie,  only  possible  position  was  kneeling ;
slight  protrusion.

I I  Some  carry  the  nuts  in  their  breeches-pockets  as  a  pre-
ventive.

^^  Urinary  Organs. Terrible  pain  in  the  region  of  the  left  kid-
ney, continuing  about  an  hour  and  aggravated  by  motion.

Shooting  pains  in  the  left  kidney.

Shooting  pain  in  the  left  ureter,  from  below  upwards.

I  Desires  to  urinate  often,  but  passes  little  at  a  time,  scanty
and  dark  yellow,  with  scalding  in  passing  through  the  ure-
thra.

Frequent  urging  to  urinate,  with  scanty,  highcolored  urine.

Urine:  Idark,  muddy,  passed  with  much  pain;  scalding;
■  with  dark  brown  sediment;  —  lyellow,  with  thick  white
mucous  sediment.

I  Urine  hot.

Diminished  quantity  of  urine  passed  during  the  day.

During  the  day  the  urine  passed  was  deep  red,  with  strong
odor.
^^  Male  Sexual Organs. Amorous dreams  and  seminal  emis-
sions.

Seminal  emissions, d  Disease  of  the  prostate.

Transient  pains  in  the  genitals.

Testicles  :  feel  sore ;  itch  ;  drawing  in  the  left.

Drawing  from  the  right  testicle  in  the  direction  of  the  sper-
matic cord.

Dull  and  heavy  shooting  pain  through  the  belt  of  penis.

Shooting  pain  in  the  right  testicle.
"  Female  Sexual  Organs. I  Inflamed  cervix  uteri  attended  with
retroversion,  prolapsus,  ulceration,  enlargement  and  indura-
tion, when  characterized  by  great  tenderness,  heat  and  throb-
bing.

I  Uterine  soreness,  with  throbbing  in  the  hypogastrium.
d  Hemorrhoids.

Old  cases  of  leucorrhoea ;  discharge  of  a  dark,  yellow  color,
thick  and  sticky ;  worse  after  a  menstrual  period,  increased
by  walking,  corrodes  the  labia,  with  aching  in  the  sacrum
and  knees.

i  I  Leucorrhoea,  with  lameness  in  the  back,  across  the  sacro-
iliac articulations,  and  great  fatigue  from  walking,  because
that  part  of  the  back  gives  out  in  walking  even  but  a  little
way.

■  Thick,  dark  and  corroding  leucorrhoea,  with  constant  back-
ache, d  Prolapsus  uteri.
^^  Pregnancy. I  During pregnancy, the sacro-iliac symphysis
gives  out  while  she  walks  ;  she  must  sit  down ;  feels  best
lying.


67  ■ AESCULUS  HIPPOCASTANUM.

■  Piles  troublesome  during  pregnancy.
^^  Voice  and  Larynx, i  Hoarse  voice.

Larynx  feels  dry  and  stiff ;  later  mucus  is  secreted.

Glottis  feels  dry  and  stiff;  also  pharyngo-laryngeal  mucous
membrane.

Tickling  in  the  larynx,  causing  a  cough,  with  mucous  expecto-
ration.

Throbbing,  darting  pain  in  the  trachea,  produces  titillation.

■  Catarrhal laryngitis, laryngeal cough, and perhaps those

coughs  dependent  on  hepatic  disorders.
Pressure  in  the  throat-pit,  as  if  something  had  stuck  there

Avhich  required  to  be  expelled.
^^  Respiration. Rapid,  labored  breathing. See  17.

After  a  full  breath,  lungs  feel  sore,  with  great  rush  of  blood.

See  27.
Pain  on  inhaling. See  32.
^^  Cough. Short  cough,  increased  by  swallowing  and  breathing

deeply.
Cough  caused  by  tickling  in  the  larynx ; constriction  of  the

fauces,  with  great  irritation  of  the  epiglottis.

■  Dry  short  cough,  increased  by  swallowing  and  deep  breathing.
Dry  hacking  cough,  caused  by  constriction  of  the  fauces,  with

irritation  of  the  epiglottis.
Spits  blood  on  getting  up  in  the  morning. See  26.

I  Chronic  cough,  with  emaciation.

^^  Inner  Chest  and  Lungs. Heat  in  thorax  and  stomach.
Hot  feeling  in  chest  with  cold  rising,  as  after  peppermint.
Raw  feeling  in  the  chest  and  throat.
Stitches  in  1.  side  10  p.m.
Sudden  stitches  through  the  chest ;  going  from  left  to  right

side.
Crampy  pain  in  chest,  10  to  11  a.m.
Tightness  of  the  chest.
Constant  burning  distress,  with  a  constrictive  feeling  of  the

lower  part  of  the  chest.
Pains  alternate  with  those  in  the  abdomen.
Lungs  feel  engorged,  heavy.
Soreness  over  the  lungs  on  taking  a  deep  breath. 6  Rush  of

blood.
Sensation  as  if  the  lung  moved  up  and  down  painfully,  on

r.  side,  with  each  respiration.
Stitching  pain  in  the  lower  and  lateral  parts  of  the  right  chest,

increased  by  breathing.
Pain  in  right  scapula  and  in  the  left  side  of  the  chest,  increased

on  inspiration.
iPituitous  consumption.

I I  Chest-complaints  of  horses.


AESCULUS  HIPPOCASTANUM.  68

^^  Heart. Darting  in  the  region  of  the  heart,  with  fullness  and
palpitation.

Dull  aching,  burning  in  the  region  of  the  heart.

Frequent  stitches  and  shooting,  worse  when  breathing,  4  p.m.

Twitching  over  the  region  of  the  heart,  darting,  with  fullness
and  palpitation.

Neuralgic  pain  so  severe  as  to  arrest  the  breath,  also  pain  at
the  apex,  and  pit  of  stomach.

Sharp  pains  about  apex,  forehead  and  between  shoulders.  A
peculiar  sensation  from  the  apex  of  the  heart  to  the  left  ax-
illa, and  at  times,  down  the  arras.

Heart-beat  full  and  rapid ;  jars  the  prover  while  lying  down.
See  40.

Palpitation,  heart's  action  full,  heavy  ;  can  feel  the  pulsation
all  over  the  body.

Severe  periodical  palpitation,  with  great  anguish.

Pulse :  accelerated  and  hard,  or  soft  and  weak.

Pulse  66,  soft  and  regular,  with  burning  pain  in  heart.

■  Functional disturbances of  heart from hemorrhoidal com-
plaints.
^^  Outer  Chest. Pains  in  sternum,  as  if  a  piece  were  torn  out  of

the  chest.
^^  Neck  and  Back. Neck  :  dull  heavy  pain  ;  stiff  and  swollen,
(with  tonsillitis);  glands  sensitive,  slightly  swollen.

I  I  Lameness  and  weariness  in  back  of  neck.

Aching  between  the  shoulder-blades.

Continual  pain  in  back,  neck  and  shoulders,  at  times  with
pricking  sensation  and  with  fullness  in  both  ears.

Drawing;  in  the  muscles  of  the  right  side  of  the  neck.

Stiffness  in  the  muscles  of  the  neck.

Weakness,  weariness  and  lameness  in  the  back  of  the  neck.

Heat  in  the  back  of  the  neck  and  shoulders.

I  Spine  feels  weak.

Great  lameness  of  the  back,  worse  on  walking, d  Prolapsus

uteri.
Chillmess  extending  up  the  back.
Stiffness  of  the  back  when  moving.

Backache  is  attended  with  aching  in  the  legs  and  knees.
Caused  spinal  diseases  with  sheep.
Pains  attending  curvature  of  the  spine.

I I  Constant,  dull  backache;  walking  almost  impossible;
■  scarcely  able  to  stoop  or  to  rise  after  sitting.

Dull  aching  sensation  in  the  lumbar  region.

Weak  and  bruised  feeling  in  the  lumbar  region.

Painful  weakness  of  the  loins  with  dull  aching  pain,  accompa-
nied by  several  tumors  around  the  anus.

Chilly  sensation  followed  by  pain  in  the  lumbar  region,  ren-
dered much  worse  by  pressure.


69  AESCULUS  HIPPOCASTANUM.

Severe  dull  aching  pain  in  the  lumbar  and  sacral  region,  ag-
gravated by  walking.

Weakness,  weariness  and  lameness  in  the  small  of  the  back.

Pain  extends  from  the  bowels  to  small  of  back.

Sensation  of  laxneness  and  soreness  in  the  small  of  the  back.

1 1  Constant  .ftoaaxiche  affecting the sacrum and  hips, much
worse  by  walking  or  stooping  forwards.

B  Tearing  in  the  small  of  back  and  hips,  when  walking.

I  Severe  pain  across  the  back  and  hips,  as  if  they  would  break
in  two. d  Hemorrhoids.

I  Pain,  especially  in  hip  and  sacrum. ^Prolapsus  uteri.

Backache  in  cervical,  lumbar  and  sacral  region,  or  the  sacro-
iliac symphysis,  worse  from  motion.

■  Constant  dull  pain  across  hips  and  sacrum.

iDull  aching  in  small  of  back,  worse  from  motion.
■  Pain  and  lameness  in  each  sacro-iliac  symphysis,  worse  when
walking :  patient  can  hardly  walk  on  account  of  this  lame-
ness in  the  back,  which  seems  to  be  of  a  rheumatic  character.
d  With  leucorrhoea,  constipation,  hemorrhoids  or  rheumatism.

Pain  across  the  sacro-iliac  symphysis,  more  or  less  constant,

with  a  feeling  as  if  the  back  would  give  way  at  that  point,

causing  great  fatigue  when  walking, d  Uterine  complaints.

^^  Upper  Limbs. I Rheumatic  pain  in  the  right  scapula  and  right

side  of  chest ; I  worse  when  inhaling.

Pains  in  scapula  and  chest ;  worse  during  inspiration.

Strange  trembling  of  the  muscles  of  the  left  shoulder,  contin-
uing two  hours  and  followed  by  a  sensation  of  soreness.

Aching  sensation  in  the  left  acromion process,  with  shooting
down  the  arms.

The  left  upper  arm  and  shoulder  feel  as  if  one  had  taken  vio-
lent exercise.

Shooting  pain extending down the  left  arm,  also down  the
right  arm.

Neuralgic  pains  in  the  arms.

Twitches  in  the  left  arm.

The  arm  and  hand  of  the  left  side  become  numb,  as  if  par-
alyzed.

Right  arm  feels  paralyzed,  cannot  raise  it.

Hands  weak,  cannot  control  the  muscles  well  when  Avriting.

Shooting  pain  in  the  left  arm  extending  to  the  wrist.

Neuralgic  pain  of  the  left arm  extending down  to  the  end  of
the  index  finger,  followed  by  a  tingling  sensation.

Tearing  pain  in  the  right  arm  extending  down  the  index  finger.

Pain  extending  to  the  ulnar  side  of  the  forearm  from  the  elbow
to  the  little  finger,  as  if  the  ne^ve  had  been  compressed.

Drawing  tearing  in  the  left  arm extending  to  the  ends  of  the
fingers.

Stinging  sensation  in  the  right  arm extending  to  the  fingers.


AESCULUS  HIPPOCASTANUM.  70

Drawing  in  the  metacarpal  bones  of  the  left  hand.

Left  arm  and  hand  much  warmer,  feel  heavy  and  swollen.

Pricking,  swollen  feeling  of  hands  after  washing  them.

I  Cracking  of  the  skin  on  the  hands.

Nails  blue.
^3  Lower  Limbs. Constant  aching  bruised  feeling  in  right  hip-
joint,  the  pain  extending  downwards.

Shooting  pain down  right  thigh ;  sensation  of  soreness  and
lameness  in  right  hip-joint.

Stinging pain on anterior  part  of right  thigh,  just  above
knee.

Sensation  of  soreness  in  left  hip  and  knee-joints.

In  the  morning  pain  in  right  knee  and  leg,  as  after  violent  ex-
ercise.

Stiffness  of  the  knee-joints, particularly when  rising  from  a
seat.

■  Left  knee  swollen, painful  and stiff; unable  to  bear  the
slightest  pressure  on  it.

Aching  in  legs  and  knees.

I  Legs  so  weak  she  can  hardly  walk  ;  spine  weak. See  31.

I  Back  and  legs  weak :  can  hardly  walk,  must  lie  down.

Calves  feel  sore.

Neuralgic  pains  in  the  right  leg  extending  downwards.

Wandering  pains  in  lower  extremities.

Soreness  of  lower  extremities  felt  most  when  walking.

Legs  much  affected,  can't  walk ;  bowels  loose.

Feet  swell  after  walking.

Tendo-achillis  sore.

Tension  and  soreness  in  left  ankle.

Tension  in  right  ankle,  also  in  left  knee.

Boring  pain  in  dorsum  of  left  foot.

Burning  pain  in  left  great  toe.
^*  Limbs  in  General. Darting  and  shooting  pains  in  upper  and
lower  extremities  ;  most  on  left  side.

Shooting  pains  extending  down  left  arm  and  leg.

Feeling  of  lameness  in  left  shoulder  and  right  ankle-joints.

Joints  stiff,  aching  and  painful.

Limbs  feel  heavy.  '

Spasms  of  the  muscles  of  the  limbs.

Muscles  sore,  worse  on  awaking  and  on  motion.
^^  Position. Motion. I Could  not  sit  nor  lie  down  with  ease;
bleeding  of  piles  gives  some  relief. 6  Hemorrhoids.

Dreadful  pain,  could  not  sit,  stand or  lie ;  only  possible  mo-
tion was  kneeling. 6  Hemorrhoids.

Lying:  back  feels  best  in  pregnancy;  increases  heart  troubles.

Must  sit  down  :  during  pregnancy  when  back  gives  out. See  24.

Stooping  :  back  aches  more.

Rising  after  sitting  :  backache  worse ;  can  hardly, get  up.


71  AESCULUS  HIPPOCASTANUM.

Motion  :  muscles  feel  sore,  34  ;  II  backache  worse  ;  II  soreness
worse.

Walking :  increases  leucorrhoea ;  causes  burning  in  epigastri-
um; fullness  and  itching  in  anus  ;  back  gives  out ;  aching
tearing  in  back  and  hips,  24 ;  almost  impossible  when  back
aches,  31 ;  causes  feet  to  swell ;  totters,  36.

Writing  :  hands  become  weak.
^^  Nerves. Flying,  neuralgic  pains.

Lameness  and  paralytic  feelings.

Feels  faint,  weak ;  weariness,  faintness  at  the  stomach.

Cannot  control  muscles  to  speak  or  to  write.

Cannot  walk,  feels  so  weak, d  Headache  with  drowsiness.

I  Very  much  weakened. ^Hemorrhoids.
Feels  faint  and  weak  ;  totters  when  walking.
Weariness  and  faintness  in  stomach.
Feeling  of  malaise.

I I  Paralytic  feeling  in  arms,  legs  and  spine.
Too  sore  and  languid  to  attend  to  business.

Feeling  of  extreme  illness,  great  weakness,  faintness,  and  tot-
tering gait.

I A  kind  of  tetanus  after  a  horrible  constriction  in  pit  of
stomach,  she  got  stiff  with  the  pain,  hands  blue  with  a
pricking  and  stinging,  lasting  two  hours  ;  second  attack  of
the  same  kind.
^^  Sleep.  Dreams  and  restless  nights,  with  obstinate  erections
but  no  emission.

Disposition  to  stretch  and  yawn.

Yawning  and  stupefying  sleepiness.

Drowsy  ;  falls  asleep  ;  on  awaking,  knows  not  where  she  is.

I  I  Restless  all  night ;  1  thoughts  continually  crowding  on  the
mind  prevent  sleep.

Awakened  by  burning  pain  in  the  stomach.

Mornings,  on  awaking,  sore  and  tired.

Awaking : does  not  want  to  rise ;  wants  to  sleep  again  ;  eyes

heavy,  dull  headache  over  right  eye ;  feels  sore  and  is  red

all  over,  morning ;  muscles  sore, 34;  pressing  in  stomach.

38  Time. Morning  :  gnawing  emptiness  in  stomach  ;  feels  sore  all

over,  37  ;  spitting  blood.

Day  :  drowsy,  37.

Afternoon  :  throat  better ;  vertigo.

4  P.M.:  chills.

7  to  12  P.M.:  fever.

Forepart  of  the  night :  restless.
3^  Temperature,  Weather  and  Seasons. Chilly  from  cold  air.

Cold  air :  in  it  teeth  chatter  and  skin  feels  chilly ;  riding  in  it
makes  him  chilly  ;  nose  and  throat  sensitive  when  inhaling.

After  washing  in  water :  hands  prick  ;  skin,  face  and  hands
swell  and  redden,  8.


AESCULUS  HIPPOCASTANUM.  72

Heat  of  stove :  relieves  the  chill.

Worse  in  winter  and  better  in  summer, d  Hemorrhoids.
*^  Fever. Chilliness  :  creeping  up  and  down  the  back  ;  with  burn-
ing in  the  anus ;  better  from  heat  of  fire.

Chills  :  along  the  spine ;  up  the  back  ;  cannot  get  warm.

Chill  4  P.M.,  with  goose-skin,  better  from  heat  of  fire;  fever
7  to  12  P.M.

Chilliness,  with  rigor.

Feverish  pulsations,  with  hot  and  dry  hands.

Flashes  of  heat  over  the  occiput,  face,  neck  and  shoulders.

Flushes  of  heat  over  the  body.

Skin  hot  and  dry  ;  evening  fever ;  palms  and  soles  burn  ;  dis-
posed to  yawn  and  stretch  ;  head  aches  as  if  it  would  burst.
See  3.

Fever  :  7  to  12  p.m.,  no  thirst,  bursting  headache,  photophobia ;
with  profuse  hot  sweat  ;  lungs  feel  engorged,  heart  beats
violently.

Sweat  profuse,  hot,  with  the  fever.

Sweat :  the  abdominal  symptoms  decline ;  on  head and  face.

■  Intermittent  fevers.
^'  Attacks. Periodically  :  tightness in scrobiculum  ;  palpitation

and  anxiety.
^^  Locality  and  Direction.  Right :  dull  pain  over  eye,  3,  37 :
stitches  in  the  hypochondrium,  3  ;  soreness  of  scalp  ;  pain
and  aching  in  lower  lobe  of  liver,  17,  18  ;  pinching  pain
in  hypochondrium  ;  tenderness  in  hypochondrium  ;  shoot-
ing in  side  above  hip,  19  ;  neuralgia  in  inguinal  region,  19  ;
lung  painful ;  rheumatic  pain  in  scapula,  32 ;  rheumatic
pain  in  side  of  chest,  32  ;  arm  feels  paralyzed.

Left :  stinging  and  burning  deep  in  orbit ;  heat  and  redness
of  side  of  face ;  spleen  painful,  18 ;  drawing  in  testicle ;
arm  and  hand  feel  warm,  heavy  and  swollen.

Right  to  left:  dull  frontal  headache;  stitches  in  chest,  28.

Left  to  right :  stitches  in  chest,  28  ;  lameness  of  arms.

Front  to  back  :  pinching  pain  in  right  hypochondrium.

Below  upwards  :  shooting  in  back,  20  ;  chills  along  spine,  31.
^^  Sensations. Sensation  of  fullness, as  from  too  much  blood  in
different  parts  of  the  body.

i  I  Sensation  like  hot  lightning.

Soreness  of  the  muscles  on  awaking  and  on  motion.

The  whole  body  feels  as  if  bruised  or  beaten.

Soreness :  on  side  of  scalp  rested  on,  4  ;  eyeballs,  5  ;  nose,
stomach,  hypochondrium  ;  protruding  anus,  20 ;  testicles,
22  ;  calves,  33  ; tendo-achillis,  33  ;  muscles,  34  ;  all  over,  37.

Dull  aching  in  head,  over  eyes,  tonsils,  stomach  and  1  I  back.

Pricking  and  sticking  in  fauces  and  rectum.

Stinging,  burning,  itching.

Weakness  and  weight :  in  head,  chest,  back  and  eyes.


73  AESCULUS  HIPPOCASTANUM.

Pressure  in  head,  ears,  bones  of  nose, stomach  and I  I  rectum.

B I  Heaviness  and  lameness.

I  1  Constriction  :  in  fauces,  stomach,  bowels,  I  I  rectum  and
I  chest.

Fullness :  in  ears,  nose,  throat,  epigastrium,  stomach,  colon,
hypochondrium,  rectum,  anus,  heart,  etc.

Stiifness  in  neck  and  spine.

Stitches,  darting,  flying  pains;  lancinating;  flying  through
temples ;  stinging  in  left  orbit,  in  fauces ;  pricking  in  hypo-
chondrium, at  umbilicus,  rectum,  urethra  ;  shooting  up  the
back  ;  stitches  in  chest ;  darting  in  heart.

Twitches  and  jerking:  in  eyelids,  heart,  arm  and  chest.

Burning :  in  eyes,  ears,  nose,  cheek,  throat,  stomach,  bowels,
rectum,  piles,  chest  and I  I  heart.
"Tissues. IB  Fullness  in  various  parts,  as  if  they contained an
undue  amount  of  blood  :  heart,  lungs,  stomach,  brain,  skin,
etc.

Venous  congestion, especially  portal and  hemorrhoidal.

Fullness  as  from  too  much  blood  in  heart,  head  and  skin.

Sore  feeling  of  muscles,  mornings  on  awaking  and  on  motion.

B I  Mucous  membranes  dry,  swollen;  burn  and  feel  raw.

BB  Glandular  swellings  of  bone.

Joints  weak  ;  lumbo-sacral  region  aches.

Muscles  sore  in  the morniug  on  aAvaking  and  from  motion.
''^  Touch. Passive  Motions. Touch  :  abdomen  tender  ;  glands
sensitive ;  the  side  of  the  head  he  has  been  lying  on  feels
sore.

Rubbing :  causes  face  to  flush  ;  produces  red spots  on  hands
after  washing ;  induces  a  flow  of  blood  to  the  anus.
*^  Skin. Formication  :  scalp,  nose,  fauces.

Itching  of  the  body,  especially  about  the  waist.

After  washing :  red  spots  on  face.
*^  Stages  of  Life,  Constitution. Bilious  temperament, d  Anal
troubles.

Climacteric  years. ^  Piles.

Suitable  in  persons  with  hemorrhoidal  tendencies  and  who  suf-
fer with  gastric,  bilious  or  catarrhal  troubles.
^*  Relationship. Collateral  relation  :  Aesc.  glob.

Similar  to :  Aloe^^  Collinsonia,  3Iercu7\,  Nux  vom.,  Podoph.,
Sulphur  (weak  spine).

Nux  vom.  antidotes  the  symptoms  of  piles.

Found  useful  after  Collinsonia  had  improved  piles.

Useful  after  Nux  vom.  and  Sulpliur  had  failed  in  piles.


^THUSA  CYNAPIUM.  74

iETHUSA  CYNAPIUM.

FooVs  Parsley.  UmbelUferce.

Apt  to  be  mistaken  for  parsley  ;  a  narcotico-acrid  poison  on  account  of
an  adherent  alkaloid  substance  called  cynapine.  The  plant  mentioned  by
Hahnemann  in  the  Organon.  Proved  1828  by  Nenning,  later  by  Hartlaub,
Sr. ;  edited  with  the  toxic  symptoms,  Annalen,  4,  113,  1833.  Observations
on  a  patient  by  Bigler,  1872.  Brugman's  and  Touman's  valuable  observa-
tions, A.  H.  Z.,  72,  56,  and  Catell's  in  Br.  Q.,  11,  523,  from  Med.  Times,
omitted  by  Alien.

^  Mind. Lies  unconscious,  dilated  pupils,  staring  eyes  (child).
Loss  of  comprehension  ;  a  kind  of  stupefaction,  as  if  there  was

a  barrier  between  the  senses  and  external  objects.
I  Unable  to  read  anything  after  overexertion  of  the  mental  fac-
ulties.

I  Incapacity  to  think  ;  confused.
Cannot  retain  any  idea.

I I  Idiocy,  in  some  cases  alternating  with  Ifuror.
Idiotic  children.

■  Hallucinations.

■  Imagined  she  saw  rats  run  across  the  room.

■  Delirium  ;  he  imagines  he  sees  cats  and  dogs.

■  Delirium;  he  jumps  out  of  window.
Delirium,  even  with  the  chill.

After  a  glass  of  wine,  all  the  mind  symptoms  became  predom-
inant.

Cries  of  anguish  (in  a  child).

I  i  Welldisposed,  serene,  in  the  forenoon ;  in  the  afternoon,  ill-
humored,  anxious  and  sad.

I  I  Great  sadness  when  alone.

Anxiousness,  with  sensation  as  if  a  heavy  load  was  lying  on
the  chest.

Constant  anxiety  and  weak  feeling.

■  Great  anxiety  and  restlessness  ;  soon  afterward,  violent  pains

in  head  and  abdomen.
Great  moroseness,  with  heavy  feeling  in  forehead.
Morose  and  cross,  with  heat  in  head.

■  Bad  humor,  irritability,  especially  in  the  afternoon,  and  in

the  open  air.
Great  agitation.

■  Anxiety  and  restlessness. ^Megrim,

After  social  talking,  all  the  symptoms  disappear.


75  ^THUSA  CYNAPIUM.

^  Sensorium. A  kind  of  stupefaction,  as  if  there  was  a  barrier
between  his  organs  of  sense  and  external  objects.

Dizziness,  with  headache.

I  Head  confused;  brain  feels  bound  up.

Dizziness  ;  he  cannot  keep  erect.

Vertigo:  Iwith  sleepiness,  can't  raise  the  head;  giddiness
ceases  and  head  gets  hot ;  —  with  palpitation.

Vertigo  and  weakness.

Complete  insensibility  ;  eyes  staring,  pupils  dilated.

Stupor.
^  Inner  Head. Heaviness  in  the  forehead;  ill-humor.

Headache  in  the  whole  forepart  of  head,  as  if  strongly  com-
pressed, behind  and  above.

■  Sensation  as  if  both  sides  of  the  head  were  in  a  vice.

■  Pressing  pain  in  the  forehead,  as  if  it  would  split; at  its

height  vomiting  and  finally  diarrhoea.

■  All  day  constant  throbbing  pain  in  left  forehead,  temple  and

side  of  head,  relieved  by  pressure  (she  felt  as  though  she
would  like  a  band  tightly  fixed  around  the  head)  and  in  the
open  air,  aggravated  by  walking.

Stitches  and  pulsations  in  the  head.

Violent  pain,  as  if  the  brain  were  dashed  to  pieces.

■  Headache  with  vertigo,  worse  walking  and  looking  upwards.
Violent  headache,  with  thirst  and  nausea.

Headache  ceases,  with  discharge  of  fiatus  downwards.

■  Headache  since  five  weeks,  after  checked  menses.

The  pains  in  the  head  return  periodically,  and  are  often  ac-
companied by  pale  face,  trembling  in  the  jaws  and  pains  in
the  prsecordial  region.

Heat  rises  to  the  head ;  the  body  becomes  warmer ;  the  face
becomes  red  and  the  giddiness  ceases.

Distressing  pains  in  occiput. See  31.
*  Outer  Head. ■  Distressing  pain  in  the  occiput,  nape,  and  down
the  spine,  relieved  by  friction  with  hot  whiskey.

■  Inability  to  hold  the  head  erect  or  to  sit  up.

■  Sensation  as  if  she  was  constantly  pulled  by  the  hair.

®  Sight  and  Eyes. Looking  upward  increases  headache  with
vertigo.

■  Pupils  dilated,  but  sensitive  to  touch.

■  Pupils  dilated,  staring  eyes,  stupid. ^Cholera  infantum.
Chronic  photophobia.

Objects  seem  much  larger  than  natural.

Vision  confused,  sometimes  objects  appear  double.

Great  pain  in  the  eyes  ;  eyes  inflamed  and  blood-shot,

■  Eyes  brilliant  and  protruding.

■  Eyeballs  turned  downwards, d  Convulsions  of  children.

■  Pustules  on  the  cornea.

■  Chronic  inflammation  of  the  edges  of  the  eyelids.


^THUSA  CYNAPIUM.  76.

I  Adhesion  of  the  eyelids  in  the  morning,  requiring  them  to  be

softened  by  a  fluid  to  prevent  pulling  out  the  lashes.
Scrofulous  ophthalmia ; I  swelling  of  the  Meibomian  glands.
^  Ears. Stitches  in  the  ears,  especially  in  the  right  one ;  sensa-
tion as  if  something  hot  was  streaming  from  it.
Yellow  discharge  from  the  right  ear,  with  stitching  pains.
^  Nose. Nose  stopped  up  with  thick  mucus  ;  frequent  but  ineffec-
tual desire  to  sneeze.

I I  Herpetic  eruption  at  the  end  of  the  nose.

^  Face. Tearing  in  the  face,  in  the  malar  bones.

Face  wears  a  cold  expression.

Displeased  morose  face,  during  the  headache.

I  Face  pale. ^Megrim.

Face  sunken,  earthy  pale,  withered, d  Cholerine.

Red,  sunken  face.

CEdematous  swellings  of  the  cheeks.

flying  from  place  to  place.

Heat  in  face  with  trembling  in  head. 6  Cholerine.

I  Face  pale,  pufied  and  spotted  red.

llA  drawn  condition,  beginning  at  the  alse  nasi,  and  extend-
ing to  the  angle  of  the  mouth,  gave  the  face  an  expression
of  great  anxiety  and  pain.

I  The  features  have  an  expression  of  great  anguish  and  pain.
^  Lower  Part  of  Face. Trembling  of  the  jaws.

Inability  to  swalloAV ;  the  lower  jaw  is  fixed  to  the  upper.

Chin  and  corners  of  the  mouth  feel  cold.
^^  Gums. Stinging  or  tearing  in  the  gums.

^^  Taste, Speech, Tongue. Taste: bitter; like cheese; like
onions ;  sweetish  in  the  morning  when  awaking.

Speech  impeded,  slow.

Feeling  as  if  the  tongue  was  too  long, d  Aphthae.

Moist  tongue.

Tongue  black.
^^  Inner  Mouth. A  very  copious  salivation  relieved  the  poison-
ing symptoms.

Aphthfe  in  mouth  and  throat; tongue  feels  as  if  too  long.
See  11.
^^  Palate  and  Throat. Soft  palate,  red  and  swollen.

Burning  in  throat.

Sensation  of  pungent  heat  in  the  mouth  and  throat,  with  great
difficulty  in  swallowing.

Sensation  of  constriction,  preventing  deglutition.

Stinging  in  the  throat,  between  the  acts  of  deglutition.

Inflamed  aphthae  and  pustules  in  throat,  making  the  patient's
condition  almost  desperate.
^^  Appetite  and  Thirst. Thirst  with  total  loss  of  appetite  for
every  kind  of  aliment.


77  ^THUSA  CYNAPIUM.

Burning  thirst ;  t.

Desire  for  wine,  aggravation  from  its  use. See  1.
Illntolerance  of  milk.
^^  Eating  and  Drinking. While  eating : sudden  heaviness  in
the  forehead.
After  eating:  pain  below  the  navel,  lienteric  stool,  dry  cough.

■  Regurgitation  of  food  an  hour  or  so  after  eating.

■  I  Suitable  to  children  who  cannot  bear  milk.
Worse  from  coffee.

Desire  for  wine,  but  the  mental  symptoms  are  increased  after
taking  it.

^^  Hiccough,  Belching  and  Vomiting, i  Spasmodic  hiccough.

d  Megrim. 6  Cholerine.
lEmpty  eructation, d  Megrim.
Violent  sudden  vomiting: lof  a  frothy  milk-white  substance;

of  yellow fluid, BIfollowed by  curdled milk and  cheesy

matter.
I  Vomiting  of  greenish  phlegm,  similar  to  the  stools. 81  The

milk  is  forcibly  ejected  soon  after  taken ; then  weakness

causes  drowsiness. ^Nursing  children. See  24.
Profuse  vomiting  of  water, d  Young  children.

■  Copious  greenish  vomiting.

Kiripes  accompanied  by  fearful  vomiting,  weakness  and  inde-
scribable anguish.
Vomits  bloody  mucus,  with  swollen  abdomen.

■  Vomiting  spells  at  the  height  of  the  headache. ^Megrim.
After  vomiting,  cold  and  clammy, d  Cholera  infantum.
Vomiting,  with  diarrhoea.

^^  Scrobiculum  and  Stomach. Tearing,  rending  pains  in  pit  of
stomach,  extending  to  the  oesophagus.

■  Pain  in  the  pit  of  stomach  and  abdomen,  followed  by  nausea,

with  or  without  vomiting.

■  Cramp  in  stomach. ^Megrim.

■  Painful  contractions  of  the  stomach  so  severe  as  to  prevent

vomiting. 6  Cholerine.
Sense  of  pungent  heat  in  the  stomach.
Complaints  with  cramp  in  stomach  and  cries  with  anguish.
'^  Hypochondria. ■Painfulness of  the  epigastric  region,  with
nausea.
Stitches  in  epigastrium.

Lancinating  in  the  right  hypochondrium,  in  the  afternoon.
Painful  pressing,  with  burning  and  stitching  in  the  left  hypo-
chondrium.
Shooting  in  the  left  hypochondrium,  often  and  long  continued.
Soreness  and  painfulness  in  both  hypochondria.
Liver  hard,  yellowish,  spleen  livid,  tongue  black ;  t.
^^  Abdomen. Excessive  griping  pains  in  belly.

■  Colic,  with  diarrhoea.


^THUSA  CYNAPIUM.  78

■  Excessive  griping  pain  in  the  abdomen.

I  Colic,  followed  by  vomiting,  vertigo  and  weakness.

I  1  Cutting  and  violent  vomiting.

I  I  Cutting,  with  distension  of  abdomen.

Contracted  and  tense  abdomen.

lAbdomen  puffed,  sensitive  to  touch;  convulsions  of  children.
6  Gastroenteritis.

Violent  colic,  followed  by  death  of  the  boy.

Abdomen  distended,  with  tension  ;  t.

I  Sensation  of  coldness  in  the  abdomen.

Coldness  of  the  abdomen  and  lower  limbs,  especially  left  one,
with  aching  of  bowels ;  relieved  by  warm,  wet  applications.

Black  bluish  swelling  of  the  abdomen.
^^  Stools  and  Rectum. Loose  stools,  preceded  by  cutting  in  the
abdomen,  wnth  tenesmus  in  the  morning,  after  rising.

I A  thin  stool  finishes  the  headache, d  Megrim.

1  Stools  of  partly  digested  food,  shortly  after  a  meal  or  at  night.

I  Diarrhoea — discharges  green,  thin,  bilious,  with  violent  tenes-
mus before  and  after  stool,  d  Convulsions  of  children.
d  Gastroenteritis.

■  Bright  yellow  or  greenish  watery  slimy  stools;  crying,  draw-

ing up  the  feet. Child,  get.  6  months.
Evacuations  of  a  thin,  bright  yellow  or  greenish  fluid,  mixed

with  much  bile,  with  severe  tenesmus.
I  Grayish-green  fluid  stools, d  Cholerine.
Bloody  stools.
I  With  the  stools,  painful  contraction  in  stomach, d  Cholerine.

■  Most  obstinate  constipation,  with  feeling  as  if  all  action  of  the

bowels  had  been  lost.
"'^  Urinary  Organs. Pain  in  the  kidneys,  worse  from  sneezing,
deep  inhalation  and  lying  down.

Cutting  pains  in  the  bladder,  with  frequent  calls  to  urinate.

Urine:  red,  sediment  white;  I  copious,  clear  as  water;  too
frequent  after  exertion.

Nocturnal  enuresis,  with  vomiting  of  coagulated  milk  after
sucking  the  bottle ;  greenish  watery  diarrhoea.

No  urine, d  Cholerine.
"^  Male  Sexual  Organs. Right  testicle  drawn  up,  with  pain  in
the  kidneys.
Female  Sexual  Organs. Checked  catamenia.

I  Menses  checked  by  a  warm  bath, d  Headache.

Menses  watery.

Lancinating  pains  in  the  sexual  organs.

Pimples  on  the  external  parts,  itching  when  the  patient  be-
comes warm.
-  Parturition  and  Nursing. Labor-pains,  too  weak ;  not  reg-
ular.

Violent  stinging  pain  in  the  mammae ;  t.


23


79  ^THUSA  CYNAPIUM.

1 1  Intolerance  of  milk; the  child by  a  sudden  and  violent

effort  throws  it  up,  curdled  or  not;  then  weakness  makes

it  drowsy  for  some  minutes.
2^  Voice  and  Larynx. No  voice. 0  Cholerine.
The  sufferings  seem  to  render  him  speechless.
^^  Respiration. Short  breath,  interrupted  by  hiccough.

Short,  anxious,  whistling  breathing,  while  lying  on  the  back.
Great  dyspnoea ;  t.
^'^  Cough. Cough,  with  stunning  pain  in  the  head.
^^  Inner  Chest  and  Lungs. Stitches  in  the  left  side  of  the

chest.
Sensation  as  if  the  chest  were  in  a  vice,  with  difficult  breathing.
^^  Heart  and  Pulse. Anxiety  in  the  prgecordia  ;  t.
Violent  palpitation  of  the  heart.
I  Palpitation,  with  headache.
Palpitation,  with  vertigo.
Palpitation,  with  weariness  and  exaltation  ;  t.
I  Pulse  frequent,  small,  somewhat  hard  and  unrythmical.
Pulse  full,  rapid.

■  Weak  intermittent  pulse,  with  palpitation  and  headache.
Pulse feeble, sometimes not to be felt, much exhausted.

d  Cholerine.
Slow  strong  beats  of  heart,  stupor  and  death  (dog).
^^  Neck  and  Back. Distressing  pain  in  occiput  and  nape  of

neck,  extending  down  the  spine,  relieved  by  friction  with

hot  whiskey.
Lymphatic  ganglions  of  the  neck  swollen,  like  beads.
Sensation  as  if  the  small  of  back  was  in  a  vice.
Painful  furuncle  in  the  sacral  region.
A  feeling  as  if  the  pain  in  the  back  would  be  ameliorated  by

straightening  out  and  bending  stiffly  backwards,  as  in  opis-
thotonos.
^^  Upper  Limbs. Axillary  glands  swollen.

Sensation  as  if  the  arms  had  become  much  shorter.
Numbness  of  the  arms.

Aching  about  the  scapulae,  extending  to  the  arms.
I  Thumb  and  fingers  bent  inwards, d  Convulsions  of  children.
^^  Lower  Limbs. I Excoriations  of  the  thighs  from  walking.
Boring  and  shooting  in  lower  limbs,  with  great  weariness.
Lancinating  and  drawing  from  left  hip  into  thigh.
Laming  ache  in  the  middle  of  right  thigh  while  sitting  ;  better

when  rubbing.
Lancinating  in  the  sole,  from  the  right  heel  as  far  as  ball  of

toes.
Crawling  in  the  feet.
^*  Limbs  in  General. Coldness,  stiffness  and  rigor  of  the  limbs.
Cold  limbs  and  body  convulsed.
Eruption  in  the  neighborhood  of  the  joints.


iETHUSA  CYNAPIUM.  80

^^  Position. Motion. Cannot  keep  erect :  when  dizzy. See  3.
Inability  to  raise  head :  with  vertigo.
Cannot  sit  up.

Cannot  stand:  from  weakness. See  36.
Lying  down  :  pain  in  kidneys.

Lying  on  back  :  short,  anxious,  whistling  breathing.
Sitting :  laming  ache  in  right  thigh.
Exertion  :  urinates  too  frequently  ;  sweats  therefrom.
Walking :  throbbing  headache  worse ;  headache  with  vertigo

worse ; causes  excoriation  of  thighs  ; causes languor  and

listlessness  to  such  a  degree,  that  he  supports  himself  with

difficulty.
^^  Nerves. Trembling at the heart  with anxious restlessness.

6  Cholerine.
Body  convulsed,  with  cold  limbs  ;  t.

■  Epileptic  spasms,  with  clenched  thumbs,  red  face,  eyes  turned

downwards,  pupils  fixed,  dilated;  foam  at  the  mouth,  jaws

locked ;  small,  hard  and  quick  pulse.
I  Spasms,  with  stupor  and  delirium.
iGreneral  malaise.
Convulsions. 6  Gastroenteritis.

■  Weakness  after  the  colic.

■  Great  weakness;  children  cannot  stand;  cannot  hold  up  the

head.

■  Great  weakness  and  prostration,  with  sleepiness.

■  He  lies  stretched  out  without  consciousness.
^^  Sleep. Sleepiness  all  day.

Longing  for  sleep.

■  ■Dozing  of  the  child  after  vomiting  spells  or  after  the  stool.

■  On  falling  asleep,  rolling  of  the  eyes  or  slight  convulsions.

■  Sleep  after  headache. ^Megrim.
Sopor,  dilated  pupils  ;  t.

Sleep  restless  the  first  hours.

Restless  night ;  great  disposition  to  slumber,  but  calm  repose

is  prevented  by  frequent  startings  and  excessive  agitation.
Deep  sleep,  with  snoring.
Sopor,  dilated  pupils  and  death  (dog).
^^  Time. Night: stools  of  partly  digested food; enuresis and

vomiting : 21 ;  restless,  cannot  sleep,  though  disposed  to.
3 — 4  A.M. :  aggravation  of  all  symptoms.
Morning  :  sweetish  taste  on  awaking  ;  tenesmus. See  20.
Day :  sleepy.

Forenoon  :  well  disposed  and  serene.
Afternoon  :  ill-humored,  anxious  and  sad ;  lancinating  in  right

hypochondrium.
Toward  evening :  aggravation  of  all  symptoms.
At  6  P.M. : cramps  in  stomach.
^^  Temperature  and  Weather. Frequently  indicated  in  summer.


81  JETHUSA  CYNAPIUM.

Open  air :  relieves  throbbing  in  head.

Room  :  relieves  mental  conditions,  relieves  sensation  of  swell-
ing of  head,  face  and  hands.

Warmth  :  causes  itching. See  23.

Warmth  of  bed  :  causes  vesicular  eruption  to  itch. See  46.

Heat :  causes  itching  and  burning. See  46.

Moist  heat :  relieves  itching,  and  coldness  in  abdomen  and
lower  limbs.

Warm  bath  :  checked  catamenia. See  23.

Hot  whiskey :  friction  with  it  relieves  pain  in  occiput,  neck
and  spine.

Washing : increases  sensation  of  swelling  of  head,  face  and
hands.
^^  Fever. Delirium  during  the  cold  stage.

Coldness,  rigors,  stiffness  of  the  limbs.

Skin  hot,  dry  ;  absence  of  thirst.

Sweats  from  the  least  exertion.

Cannot  bear  uncovering  during  sweat.

Sweat  profuse,  cold.

Sweat  relieves  malaise  and  tendency  to  delirium.
*^  Attacks. I  Periodical  headache. ^Megrim.
*^  Locality  and  Direction. Right :  discharge  from  ear ;  stitches
in  ear ;  sensation  of  something  hot  streaming  from  ear ;  lan-
cinating in  hypochondrium  ;  testicle  drawn  up  ;  laming  ache
in  middle  of  thigh.

Left :  throbbing  in  head ;  pressing,  burning,  stitching  and
shooting  in  hypochondrium ;  coldness  of  leg ;  stitches  in
chest ;  lancinating  and  drawing  from  hip  into  thigh  ;  ap-
pearance and  disappearance  of  reddish-blue  spots  on  leg.

Fly  from  place  to  place :  painful  swellings  in  the  face.
**  Sensations. Sensation  as  if  head,  face  and  hands  were  swollen  ;
worse  after  washing ;  better  coming  in  the  room.

Sensation  of  parts  as  if  in  a  vice :  head;  chest;  small  of  back.
**  Tissues. Ecchymoses ;  black  and  blue  spots  all  over.

Whole  body  livid  and  swollen ;  and  death  of  the  boy ;  poisoning.

Anasarca.

Wasting  away  of  children.
^'  Touch. Passive  Motion. Injuries. Touch :  abdomen  sen-
sitive.

Pressure :  relieves  throbbing  headache.

Rubbing :  with  hot  whiskey  relieves  pain  in  occiput,  neck  and
spine ;  relieves  laming  ache  of  right  thigh.
*^  Skin. Dryness  of  the  skin.
,  Dry  burning  skin  ;  red  spots.

Cool  skin, d  Cholerine.

Hard  knots  in  the  skin.

Liability  to  excoriation  of  the  thighs  when  walking.

During  one  day,  appearance  and  disappearance  of  reddish  blue

6


^TH.  CYN.— AGAR.  MUSC— AGNUS  CASTUS.  82

spots  on  the  trunk  and  left  leg,  causing  an  apprehension  of

spotted  fever ;  aggravation  of  all  symptoms  toward  evening

and  during  the  night,  3  to  4  A.M.
Tetters  bleed  easily.
Little  water  blisters  ;  itching  in  bed.
Eruption  itching  when  exposed  to  heat.
Herpetic  eruptions,  itching  and  burning  during  heat.
Phlyctenular  eruption ;  t.
^^  Stages  of  Life,  Constitution. I  Children,  during  dentition.

I  Old  woman,  during  cholera. season, d  Cholerine.
^*  Relationship. Similar  to : Ant. erud.  (vomiting of  milk) ;

Arsen. ;  Asar.  ; Cale.  ostr.  (vomiting  of  milk) ; Cuprum  ;

Ipec. ; Opium.
Related  to  Cieut.,  Conium,  (Enanth.  croc.
Is  antidoted  by  vegetable  acids.
It  antidotes  Opium.


AGARICUS  fflUSCARlUS. (See  Amanita.)


AGNUS  CASTUS.

Vitex  Agnus  Castus.  Verhenaceoe.

A  shrub  growing  in  damp  places  in  Southern  Europe.  Since  Dioscorides
one  of  the  most  famous  medicines.

Proved  by  Hahnemann  and  his  school,  and  published  in  1841,  in  the
Archives,  by  Stapf ;  later  proved  by  Helbig.

^  Mind. 1 1  Absent-minded,  reduced power of  insight; cannot

recollect  things.
I  He  finds  reading  difficult ;  he  has  to  read  several  things  twice  ;

he  is  unable  to  fix  his  attention.
I  Low-spirited,  fears  of  approaching  death.
■  Despairing  sadness;  keeps  repeating  that  she  will  die,, that

there  is  no  use  doing  anything, d  Cephalalgia.
Melancholy,  hypochondriac  mood, d  Cephalalgia.
Anxious,  fear  and  weakness.
Peevish  ;  inclined  to  get  angry. See  16.


83  AGNUS  CASTUS.

^  Sensorlum, After  dullness  in  the  head,  a  pressing,  long-lasting
headache,  followed  by  vomiting  and  spasmodic  trembling.

Heaviness  of  head  and  pressure  in  the  neck,  as  if  the  head
would  fall  forward.
^  Inner  Head. Tearing,  with  pressure  in  the  temples  and  fore-
head, in  the  brain,  worse  during  motion.

Tearing  pain  above  the  right  eye  and  temple,  as  if  one  had  re-
ceived a  blow  upon  the  eye,  attended  with  soreness  to  touch,
increased  by  motion,  aggravated  in  the  evening,  and  lasting
for  several  days.

Contractive  headache  above  the  temples  from  reading.

■  Headache  in  the  upper  part  of  the  head,  as  from  staying  in  a

room  filled  with  a  thick  and  dusky  atmosphere ;  looking  to
one  point  relieves  it.

Pain  in  the  temple  as  from  a  blow.

Megrim.
*  Outer  Head. Biting  itching  on  the  scalp,  worse  evenings  and
when  falling  asleep.

Tearing,  tension  and  chilliness  in  the  scalp,  which  is  warm  to
the  touch.

Biting  pains  on  upper  right  side,  on  the  bone,  from  behind  for-
wards, worse  evening  and  in  sleep.
^  Sight  and  Eyes. Burning  in  eyes  and  headache  from  reading
in  the  evening.

I  Pupils  widely  dilated.

■  Dilated  pupils.

■  Photophobia.

Looking  at  a  fixed  point  relieves  pain  in  upper  head.

Tearing  pains  above  the  right  eye  and  temple,  as  if  one  had

received  a  blow  upon  the  eye. d  Cephalalgia.
Corrosive  itching  over  and  on  the  eyebrows  and  lids,  and  below
the  eyes.
^  Hearing  and  Ears. Ringing  or  roaring  in  the  ears.
Hardness  of  hearing.
Drawing  pain  in  the  left  parotid.
'^  Smell  and  Nose. Illusion  of  smell ;  as  of  herring ;  musk.
Soreness  and  pain  in  the  left  side  of  the  nose.
Hard  aching  pain  in  the  dorsum  of  the  nose,  as  if  a  stone  were
pressing  there,  relieved  by  pressure.
^  Face. Corrosive  itching  on  either  cheek,  obliging  him  to  scratch.
Erysipelas  on  the  left  cheek,  spreading  from  the  nose  over  face

and  head.
A  long  stitch  followed  by  a  fine  pricking-itching.
Formication  of  the  cheeks.
^  Lower  Part  of  Face. Rending,  tearing,  under  the  alveoli  of
right  lower  jaw.
Deep  tearing  in  right  ramus  of  lower  jaw,  below  the  socket.
'"  Teeth  and  Gums. Toothache  from  warm  things.


AGNUS  CASTUS.  84

Teeth  painful,  when  touched  by  warm  food  or  drink.

I  Throbbing,  tearing  toothache  in  left  eye-tooth,  small  boil  near
the  tooth,  very  painful  to  touch ;  in  attacks.

Ulcers  on  the  gums.
^^  Taste  and  Tongue. Taste  : metallic  ; I  I  coppery  ;  bitter.

I  Tongue  coated  white.
^^  Mouth. Mouth  very  dry,  saliva  viscid  and  tough,  drawing  out
in  strings.

•  Ulcers  on  gums  and  in  the  mouth.
13  Throat. Corrosive  itching  in  pit  of  throat.  »

^*  Appetite  and  Thirst. Hunger.

Kelishes  food  but  it  does  not  agree  with  him.

Lessened  appetite.

iThirstlessness  ;  aversion  to  drink.
^^  Eating  and  Drinking. I  Abdomen  distended  after  meals.

Nausea  in  the  pit  of  the  stomach  after  eating.

Food  makes  him  feel  uneasy  and  replete.

Warm  food  and  drink  cause  teeth  to  ache.
^^  Belching,  Hiccough  and  Nausea. The  wind  he  brings  up
smells  like  old  urine  allowed  to  remain  on  the  clothes.

Hiccough  ;  inclined  to  get  angry  ;  peevish.

iNausea  in  pit  of  stomach  when  standing  ;  later,  qualmishness
in  the  abdomen,  with  a  sensation  as  if  the  intestines  were
pressing  downwards  ;  wants  to  support  himself  with  his  hands.

Nausea  as  from  eating  fat  food, d  Checked  catamenia.
^^  Scrobiculum. Pinching  in  scrobiculum  when  sitting  bent  over.
^^  Hypochondria. Aching  in  region  of  liver,  worse  from  touch.

■  Soreness  in  the  region  of  the  spleen.

I  SAvelling  and  induration  of  the  spleen. 6  Intermittent.
/^  Abdomen. I  Rumbling  in  the  abdomen  during  sleep.
I  Abdomen  sensitive  to  pressure.
Incarcerated  flatus.
I  Abdomen  sore  to  the  touch.

■  Flatulency.

1  Feels  as  if  the  entrails  were  sinking  down,  constantly  inclined
to  support  the  bowels  with  the  hands. 6  Uterine  complaint.

Violent,  contracting  bellyache,  coming  suddenly  in  the  morn-
ing, with  bearing  down. 6  Suppressed  menses.

I  Ascites.
^"  Stools,  Rectum  and  Anus. I  Diarrhoea  of  children,  I  chronic
diarrhoea  of  adults.

Feels  as  if  diarrhoea  would  set  in,  when  standing ;  anguish,
great  weakness. See  36.

DiOicult  expulsion  of  soft  stool.

I  Hard  stools. ^Constipation.

I  When  pressing  at  stool,  discharge  of  prostatic  fluid.

Great  accumulation  of  wind.


85  AGNUS  CASTUS.

Wind  expelled  by  tlie  rectum  smells  like  urine  remaining  long

on  the  clothes.
lAscarides.
I A sore  feeling  under the skin near  the  anus, only when

walking.
Corrosive  itching  of  the  perineum,  I  pruritus  podicis.
Excoriated  anus.

I  Deep  rhagades  or  fissures  of  the  anus.
21  Urinary  Organs. Pains  in  the  bladder.
Passes  more  urine.

I  I  Gets  up  twice  at  night  and  even  once  during  the  siesta.
When  urinating,  sometimes  pain  in  lower  abdomen,  sometimes

in  the  kidneys.
Red,  turbid  urine,  with  burning  and  pressure  in  urethra.

■  Emission  of  prostatic  fluid. See  20,  22.
A  yellow  discharge  from  the  urethra.

^^  Male  Sexual  Organs. >  '  Complete  loss  of  sexual  desire,  penis
is  small,  flaccid  and  cold.
I  I  Frequent  erections,  but  without  voluptuous  thoughts.

I  Has  the  usual  morning  erection with  desire,  but  the  parts

are  flaccid.
After  an  embrace  involuntary  emissions  the  same  night,  and
long-continued  erection.

I I  Sexual  desire  lessened,  almost  lost.

1 1  Penis  so  relaxed,  that  voluptuous  fancies  excite  no  erections.
1 1  Testes  cold,  swollen,  hard  and  painful;  penis  small,  flaccid.
Spermatic  fluid  thin.

1 1  Impotence,  with  gleet,  especially  with  those  who  have  fre-
quently had  gonorrhoea.
1 1  Yellow  urethral  discharge. ^Gonorrhoea.
1 1  Gleet,  with  want  of  sexual  desire  or  erections.
Induration  of  testicles, d  Suppressed  gonorrhoea.
Drawing  along  spermatic  cords.

■  Pollutions  from  irritable  weakness  with  prostatorrhoea.
I  Prostatic  juice  passes  with  hard  stools.

I  Impotence.

■  Want  of  erection  and  sexual  desire,  d  Secondary  gonorrhoea.
Itching  of  genitals.

"^  Female  Sexual  Organs. Hysteria,  with  maniacal  lascivious-
ness.
Sterility;  absence  of  menses,  and  sexual  desire.
Menses  lasting  from  ten  to  eighteen  days.

■  Metrorrhagia.

Suppressed  menses,  with  drawing  pain  in  the  abdomen.

I A  transparent  leucorrhoeal  discharge  passes  imperceptibly
from  the  livery  relaxed  parts.

Leucorrhoea,  not  copious,  but  spotting  her  linen  yellow,  d  Sup-
pressed menses.


AGNUS  CASTUS.  . .  86

I  Intumescence  of  the  uterus.

Before  menses :  vertigo,  headache,  dim  sight.

During  menses  :  pain  in  pelvis  and  loins.

I  Inflammation  of  the  uterus.
^*  Parturition  and  Nursing. ■  Retained  placenta.

BlMilk  scanty,  or  disappears;  often  with  great  sadness;  sajs
she  will  die.

Suppression  of  milk  in  childbed,  or  during  the  nursing  period.
^^  Voice. Voice  as  if  passing  through  wool,  has  no  timbre.
^^  Respiration. Oppression  on  going  up  stairs.

Dyspnoea ;  worse  in  the  evening.
^^  Cough. In  the  evening,  in  bed,  before  falling  asleep.

With  raising  of  blood,  followed  by  copious  mucus.

In  paroxysms,  with palpitation  and  nosebleed,  mostly  in  the
morning.

When  inhaling  cold  air.

Tough  sputa,  hanging  like  a  rag  in  the  fauces.
^^  Lungs. Feeling  of  dryness  in  the  chest.
"^  Heart  and  Pulse. Palpitation. See  27.

Slow  and  weak  pulse,  often  imperceptible.
^^  Outer  Chest. Pressure  in region of  sternum, worse when
breathing  deeply.

Pressure  in  xiphoid  cartilage,  just  above  pit  of  stomach.
^^  Back. A  creaking  noise  in  the  vertebrae.

Acute,  sharp  stitches  in  the  coccyx,  and  on  the  left  side  near
the  coccyx  and  sacrum.

Pain  in  sacrum  from  flatus.
^^  Upper  Limbs. Hard  pressure  in  right  axilla  and  upper  arm,
worse  from  touch  or  motion.

Swelling  of  finger-joints,  tearing  pains,  arthritic  nodes.

Gouty  swelling  of  the  finger-joints.
2^  Lower  Limbs. Pain  in  left  hip.

I  Thighs  feel  tired  and  swollen  towards  evening.
.  Lancinating  pain  in  the  right  hip-joint,  worse  during  motion,
somewhat  better  in  rest.

Legs  much  fatigued  and  swollen  towards  evening.

I  Cold  knees.

Ankles  swollen  after  a  sprain.

Tearing, rending  in  feet  and  toes, worse  on  walking.

Stitches  in  legs  and  left  big  toe.

Fine  lancinations  in  the  bottoms  of  either  foot.

I  iFeet easily turn under  when  walking on a  stone  pave-
ment.
^^  Rest. Position. Motion. Rest :  relieves  pain  in  hip.

Sitting  bent  over :  causes  pain  in  scrobiculum.

Standing :  causes nausea  and qualmishness  in  stomach  and
abdomen ;  sensation  as  if  diarrhoea  would  set  in.


87  AGNUS  CASTUS.

Motion :  aggravates  tearing  and  pressure  in  head ;  pressure  in

axilla  and  arm  ;  pain  in  hips.
Walking :  causes  soreness near anus  ;  aggravates tearing  in
feet  and  toes  ;  causes  feet  to  turn  under ;  during  walking
hands  sweat.
Ascending  stairs  :  causes  oppressed  breathing.
35  Nerves. Spasmodic  complaints  of  hypochondriac  men.
Nervous  weakness, d  Agalactia.
Great  weakness  :  as  from  violent  anguish  ;  from  depression  of

spirits, d  Agalactia.
Lethargy  or  phrenzy.
^^  Sleep. Coma.
I  Sleeplessness.

I  I  Awaking  often,  las  if  alarmed; Bstartings.
Anxious  dreams.
^  Time. Night :  gets  up  twice  to  urinate.

Morning : violent belly-ache ; cough, with  palpitation  and

nosebleed.
Evening: tearing  pains,  with pressure  above  right  eye  and
temple  ;  itching  on  scalp  worse ;  eyes  burn  when  reading ;
dyspnoea worse ;  cough'  in  bed ;  legs  tired  and swollen  ;
chilliness, followed by  heat and sweat ;  flushes of  heat,
knees  cold.
^^  Temperature  and  "Weather. Bad  effects  from  getting  feet
wet.
Warm  things :  teeth  pain.
In  bed  :  heat  of  face,  coldness  of  knees.
Cold  air :  coughs  when  inhaling  it.
Open  air :  hands  sweat  when  walking.
*°  Fever. Internal  chilliness,  with  trembling,  skin  warm.

Slight  chilliness  towards  evening,  followed  by  heat,  with  head-
ache, no  thirst,  slight  delirium, tormenting,  profuse  sweat.
Chill  and  heat  alternate.

I  I  Chilly  all  over,  but  only  hands  feel  cold  to  touch.
Flushes  of  burning  heat,  mostly  in  face, with  cold  knees ;

evening  in  bed.
Heat,  with  coryza,  thirst. 6  Borborygmus.
Sweat  on  the  hands  when  walking  in  the  open  air.
Sweats  easily.
^'  Attacks. Sudden  attacks  of  bellyache.

'^Locality and Direction. Right: tearing  in  lower jaAv;
aching  in  liver ;  pressure  in  axilla  and  arm  ; lancinating
in  hip-joint.
Left :  drawing  in  parotid  gland  ; painful  soreness  in  side  of
nose ;  erysipelas  on  cheek ;  I  I  soreness  in  spleen  ;  stitches  side
of  sacrum  and  coccyx.
Above  downwards  :  nausea  and  qualmishness. See  16,  19.
^^  Sensations. Bruised  feeling  all  over.


AGNUS  CASTUS.  88

Soreness :  in  nose.

Pressure:  in  head  ;  in  neck.

Pains  :  as  if  luxated.

Drawing  :  in  left  parotid.

Tearing:  in  head;  in  jaw.

Burning  :  eyelids,  throat,  nose,  mouth,  bladder,  skin.

Stitches:  head,  face,  eyes,  ears,  rectum  and  skin.
■•-  Tissues, Inflammatory,  rheumatic  swelling  of  the  joints.

Gouty  nodosities.
^^  Touch. Passive  Motions. •  May  be indicated  in  bruises
or  wounds.

■  Sprains  and  luxations  of  joints.

I  I  Strains  from  lifting  a  little  too  much.

■  Prevents  excoriation,  from  walking.

Pressure :  relieves  aching  on  dorsum  of  nose  ;  abdomen  sensi-
tive therefrom.

Touch  :  aggravates  toothache  ;  aching  in  liver  ;  abdomen  sore ;
pressure  in  axilla  and  arm.

Must  scratch :  in  corrosive  itching  of  cheeks.
■'^  Skin. Pungent  odor exhaled  from  him,  gives  him a  dullness
and  headache,  followed  by  vomiting  and  trembling.

Gnawing  or  itching  on  different  parts  of  the  body,  relieved
temporarily  by  scratching.

Itching  around  the  ulcers,  in  the  evening.

Yellow  tint  of  the  skin.
^^  Stages of  Life, Constitution. Lymphatic constitution.
6  Agalactia.

Premature  old  age,  which  arises  in  young  persons  from  abuse
of  the  sexual  powers,  marked  by  melancholy,  apathy,  men-
tal distraction,  self-contempt,  general  debility,  frequent  loss
of  spermatic  fluid.

Unmarried  persons  suffering  from  nervous  debility.  6  Cepha-
lalgia.

"  Old  sinners,"  with  impotence  and  gleet.
*^  Relationship. The  only  one  proved  from  the  large  family  of
VerbenacejB. Ilelbig  calls  attention  to  the  nearly  related
family  of  Labiatge, from which we  have several  valuable
remedies.

Antidotes  to  Agn.  cast.:  Camphor.,  Natr.  mur.  (the  head-
ache), strong  solution  of  table-salt.

After  Agnus  are  useful :  Ai^sen.,  Brgon.,  Ignat.,  Lyco'p.,
Pulsat.,  Sulphur,  Selen.  (impotence).


89  AILANTUS  GLANDULOSA.

AILANTUS  GLANDULOSA.

Tree  of  Heaven.  Simaruhece.


"  A  very  poisonous  tree  introduced  from  the  Molucca  islands,  and  culti-
vated extensively  as  a  shade  tree,  on  account  of  its  rapid  growth,  straight
stem  and  shady  leaves,  until  it  was  observed  <bo  make  the  month  of  June,
the  most  healthy  in  the  year,  a  sickly  one,  by  the  stench  of  its  flowers.
See  20  and  36.  The  opening  flowers  are  used  for  a  tincture.  Introduced  by
Dr.  P.  P.  Wells,  of  Brooklyn,  in  1864,  as  corresponding  to  Scarlatina,  and
proved  by  H.  Minton  and  J.  T.  Alley,  1861.  Toxic  observations  were
made  by  many.

^  Mind. Past  events  are  forgotten,  remembered  as  belonging  to

some  one  else,  or  as  matters  read.
Cannot  concentrate  mental  effort;  compelled  to  read  a  subject

several  times  to  get  even  a  dim  understanding  of  it.
I  Great  anxiety  and  restlessness.
Stoical  indifference  to  what  happens.
I  Semi-conscious, cannot comprehend  what is said  to him.

d  Scarlatina.
1  Low-spirited. ^Bronchial  catarrh.

■  Continual  sighing,  with  depression  of  spirits.
Stupor ;  mental  indifference  and  weakness.

■  Great  anxiety.
Restlessness,  with  great  anxiety.

■  Extremely  irritable.

Confusion  of  intellect;  found  it  almost  impossible  to  add
columns  of  figures  correctly ;  had  to  go  over  it  several
times  to  get  it  right.

Loss  of  memory.

Mental  alienation.

Recklessness  in  regard  to  present  and  future  events.

■  ■Semi-conscious,  evidently  cannot  comprehend  what  is  said

to  him. d  Scarlatina.

■  Stupor,  delirium  and  insensibility, d  After  suppressed  scar-

latinal eruption.

■  Muttering delirium with sleeplessness and restlessness.

d  Typhoid  scarlatina.
^  Seusorium. Since  the  poisoning  all  antecedents  of  her life
are  forgotten,  or  remembered  as  belonging  to  another  or  as
matters  she  has  read  about.

■  Dizzy  and  throat  dry.

Vertigo,  with  nausea,  faintness  and  cold  sweat.


AILANTUS  GLANDULOSA.  90

Vertigo  when  stooping.

1 1  Dizzy,  face  hot,  cannot  sit  up;  drowsy,  yet  very  restless
and  anxious ;  later  insensible,  with  muttering  delirium ;
recognizes  no  one. 6  Scarlatina,

Staggers  when  rising  or  moving.

Drunken  feeling  in  the  brain,  with  fullness.

Thick,  heavy  feeling  in  the  head ;  figures  look  blurred.

Feeling  as  if  an  electric  current  were  passing  through  the
left  side  of  the  head  or  down  to  the  extremities.

Apoplectic  fullness  of  the  head.

I  Dizziness  when  rising  up. ^Typhoid  scarlatina.
^  Inner Head. Severe  headache  and  giddiness ;  face  red  and
hot.

Headache,  with  nausea.

Dull  headache  :  with  burning  in  the  eyes ;  with  great  oppres-
sion of  the  chest ;  with  heavy  feeling  in  the  sternal  region ;
with  tingling  in  left  arm  and  hand.

Dull  compressed  feeling,  with  confusion  and  pain  in  the  fore-
head.

I  Dull  heavy  pressing  in  the  forehead;  disinclined  to  think  or
to  act.

I  I  Darting  through  the  temples  and  back  part  of  the  head,
with  confusion  of  ideas.

Darting  pain  in  back  of  head,  with  beating  in  occiput.

Thick,  heavy  feeling  in  the  base  and  right  side  of  the  head.

Severe  pain  through  the  temple  on  awaking.

Pain  in  the  occiput,  with  dizziness  and  ringing  pain  in  the
forehead ;  also  swelling  under  the  left  eye  from  the  cheek.

I  Head  burning  hot,  with  piercing  pains.

1  Severe  headache,  interrupted  by  delirium  of  a  frightful  kind,
with  fever  and  anxiety, d  Typhoid  scarlatina.
^  Outer  Head. Beating  in  the  occipital  arteries.

Tender,  bruised  feeling  over  the  parieto-frontal  sutures.
^  Sight  and  Eyes. Uncertainty  in  seeing.

Figures  and  letters  look  blurred  ;  thick  feeling  in  head.

■  Shunning  light.

"Wild  looking  eyes  with  intolerance  of  light.

I  Pupils  widely  dilated. 6  Scarlatina.

I I  Eyes  suffused  and  congested;  startled  look  when  aroused  ;
pupils  dilated  and  sluggish, d  Scarlatina.

Burning  in  the  eyes.

Conjunctivitis, with redness and inflammation extending

around  the  external  canthus.
Purulent  discharge  agglutinating  the  lids  in  the  morning.
Smarting  and  aching  in  the  eyes.
Lachrymation  in  the  open  air  or  brilliant  light.
®  Ears. Pain  in  the  ear  when  swallowing.

The  ear,  when  touched  or  scratched,  gets  red  all  over.


91  AILANTUS  GLANDULOSA.

I  Parotid  gland  sensitive  and  enlarged. 6  Scarlatina.
^  Smell  and  Nose. Loss  of  smell.

Copious  thin,  ichorous  discharge  without  fetor, d  Coryza.

Coryza,  with  rawness  in  the  nostrils ;  nose  and  upper  lip  cov-
ered with  thick  gray-brown  scabs ;  ichorous  pus  discharged
every  forenoon.

iFluent  catarrh,  with  sneezing.

I I  Copious,  thin,  ichorous  and  bloody  discharge  from  the  nose.
d  Scarlatina.

Chronic  catarrh,  difficult  breathing  through  the  nose.
Dryness  of  the  nose :  secretion  suppressed.
Itching  and  uneasy  feeling  around  the  nose.
1 1  Nostrils  congested. ^Scarlatina.
^  Face. Face  sallow,  jaundiced  ;  pale  ;  blue  circles  around  the

eyes.
Irregular  spots  of  capillary  congestion,  as  after  a  debauch.
I  Face  red  and  hot,  I  covered  with  a  rash, d  Scarlatina.
■  Face  dark  as  mahogany, d  Suppressed  scarlatina.
Face  puffed,  erysipelatous ;  soreness  and  pain  on  the  left  side

of  the  nose.
Tearing  in  the  face  and  head,  with  toothache.

I  Chronic  speckled,  spotted  face ;  a  sort  of  acne.
Eruption  miliary,  more  on  forehead  and  face.

I I  Great  prostration  and  a  countenance  indicating  much  dis-
tress, d  Typhoid  scarlatina.

^  Lower  Part  of  Face. Lips  cracked.

Lip  becomes  puffed  and  sore  when  touched.
Small,  but  deep,  ragged  ulcer  near  the  angle  of  the  mouth.
Inflamed  vesicles  on  the  lower  lip  ;  chin  bright  red.
^"^  Teeth. 1 1  Teeth  covered  with  sordes. d  Scarlatina.

Tearing  in  upper  and  lower  teeth, left  side, also  in  the  face  ;
worse  by  lying  down, forcing  him  to  walk  about ;  external
pressure  relieves.
^'  Taste. Tongue. Great  bitterness  (chewing  the  bark).
Taste  insipid,  flat,  feverish, d  Bronchial  catarrh.
1 1  Tongue dry, parched, cracked.
Tongue  moist  and  covered  with  white  fur; I  tip  and  edges

livid, d  Scarlatina.
Tongue  thickly  covered  with  a  whitish  coat,  brown  in  the
centre.
^^  Inner  Mouth. Fetid  discharge  from  the  throat.
^^  Throat. I Thick, oedematous  and  dry  choky  feeling in the
throat.
I  Throat  dry,  rough  and  scrapy  ;  worse  in  the  morning.
I  Irritability  of  the  throat  and  hawking  up  of  mucus.
I  Hawks  up  greenish  puruloid  matter.

I  Throat  tender  and  sore  on  swallowing,  or  on  admission  of
air.


AILANTUS  GLANDULOSA.  92

1 1  Throat  livid,  swollen;  tonsils  prominent  and  studded  with
deep  ulcers,  oozing  a  fetid,  scanty  discharge ;  external  neck
swollen,  sensitive. 6  Scarlatina.

Hawking  of  mucus,  constant  effort  to  raise  hard  lumps  of
whitish  matter.

Thyroid  gland  enlarged  and  tender.

I  Diphtheria,  with  extreme  prostration.

■  I  Refused  to  swallow  anything  for  12  hours, d  Scarlatina.

I I  Throat  much  swollen,  dark  red,  almost  purple  in  color.
6  Scarlatina.

^^  Appetite. Thirst. No  appetite, everything  tastes insipid  ;
sight  of  food  makes  her  worse ;  disgust  for  food.
Hunger  and  distressing  sense  of  general  emptiness  during  the

chill.
Thirst  for  cold  drinks,  for  brandy.
^^  Eating  and  Drinking. After  wine,  sleepy.

Water  tastes  brackish  and  flat ;  no  desire  for  drinks except
when  eating.
^®  Belching, Nausea and  Vomiting. Frequent belching,
with  sick  headache.
Nausea:  with  the  giddiness;  —  similar  to  that  in  pregnancy;
—  with  vomiting  diarrhoea  and  spasmodic  pains  in  abdomen.
Vomits  food  speedily  during  the chill ;  —  suddenly and  vio-
lently when  sitting  up ;  —  with  stupor.
'^  Stomach. Stomach  inactive,  as  though  its  contractive  power
was  impaired.
Constant,  violent  increasing  pain  in  the  stomach.
Peculiar  feeling  of  emptiness  in  the  stomach.
'^  Hypochondria. Debilitating  oppression  like  a  stricture  below
the  hypochondria,  with  the  nausea.
Tenderness  over  the  hepatic  region.
'^  Abdomen. Weak,  burning,  uneasy  feeling  in  the  bowels,  as  of
approaching  diarrhoea.
Tympanitis.

Burning  in  stomach  and  bowels.
Colicky,  griping  pains  in  the  bowels.
Pains  in  hypogastrium  and  hips.
~^  Stool and  Rectum. Stools frequent, watery,  forcibly ex-
pelled ;  burning  in  stomach  and  bowels  with  griping  (from
smoking).
Frequent  painful  stool,  little  fecal  matter, much  bloody  mu-
cus, with  very  little  fever  (from  the  odor  of  the  blossoms).
1 1  Bowels  for  days  too  freely  moved  ;  thin, watery, offensive,
passing  involuntarily  with  the  urine, d  Scarlatina.

■  I  Tapeworm.

"'  Urinary  Organs. Urine  suppressed  or  scanty  ;  passed  uncon-
sciously ;  acid.


93  AILANTUS  GLANDULOSA.

^^  Male  Sexual  Organs. Sore  on  the  prepuce  looking  like  an

incipient  chancre. See  46.
^*  Parturition. Malignant  puerperal  fever.
^^  Voice,  Larynx  and  Bronchia. Aphonia  preceding  cough.

See  27.

Voice  hoarse,  failing  ; 8  almost  lost  on  awaking  in  the  morning.

iCroupy  choking.

Oppression  of  the  bronchia,  with  dull  headache.
^®  Respiration. Il Breathing  hurried,  irregular,  heavy. ^Scar-
latina.

Equable  oppression  as  if  the  chest  was  strapped ;  feels  as
though  the  air  cells  were  stuck  together.

Sensation  of.  fullness  and  smothering  before  expectorating.

I  I  Wheezing,  fluent  coryza  and  sneezing ;  asthmatic  oppres-
sion in  the  bronchi ;  dyspnoea.  6  Bronchial  catarrh.
^^  Cough.  Cough  deep,  exhausting,  with  asthmatic  expansion  of
the  lungs;  —  (deep  and  painful;  —  IB  dry,  hacking;  —
I  in  violent  fits  before  retiring  and  en  rising  until  sputum  is
raised ;  —  dry,  constant,  with  oppression,  burning  and
pains  in  the  chest.

Cough  preceded  by  aphonia  for  a  day  or  two.

I  Cough  with  headache  and  congestion  of  the  face.  6  Bron-
chial catarrh.

Cough  with  breathing  somewhat  oppressed  ;  muco-purulent
sputum  ;  free  in  the  morning,  sticky  and  scanty  during  the
day.

I  Sputa:  blood-mixed;  twice  raised  a  mouthful  of  blood;  bit-
ter, yellow,  more  mornings.
^^  Inner  Chest  and  Lungs. I  Stitching  and  aching  in  the  chest,
under  the  clavicle,  sometimes  extending  to  the  sternum.

■  Pressure  on  the  chest  and  sense  of  fullness.

I  I  Lungs feel excessively sore  and  tender.

I  I  Burning  in  the  right  lung  and  under  the  left  shoulder.

I  Pain  and  contracted  feeling  especially  through  the  centre  of
the  left  lung,  sternal  edge.

Tired feeling in the lungs, almost too much exertion to
breathe.
^^  Heart  and  Pulse. iDull pain  and  contracted  feeling  in  the
region  of  the  base  of  the  heart  and  through  the  centre  of
the  left  lung.

Pulse :  so  rapid  and  small  as  scarcely  to  be  counted,  surface
cold  and  dry;  —  I  weak,  frequent,  irregular. 6  Scarlatina.

Pulse  accelerated.

I  Rapid  small  pulse, d  Typhoid  scarlatina.
^^  Outer  Chest. Pressure  of  the  clothes  on  the  chest  is  uncom-
fortable, d  Bronchial  catarrh.
^^  Neck  and  Back. Soreness  in  the  glands,  with  pain  under  the
left  shoulder-blade.


AILANTUS  GLANDULOSA.  94

Thickened  swollen  feeling  of  the  muscles  of  the  neck.

Constant  aching  between  the  shoulders.

1 1  Neck  tender  and  very  much  swollen. 6  Scarlatina.

Constant  sharp  pain  through the  small  of  the  back  and  hips.
^-  Upper  Limbs. Pain  deep  in  the  right  scapula,  hindering  mo-
tion of  the  arm.

Numbness  of  the  left  arm ;  fingers  feel  as  if  asleep  ;  tingling
of  arm  and  fingers  on  awaking.

Large  water  blisters  on  the  end  of  the  thumb, with  smaller
ones  at  the  side  of  the  finger  nails.
^^  Lower  Limbs. Feeling  of  uneasiness  and  aching  restlessness
in  the  limbs.

Left  leg  feels  numb,  with  tingling  and  pricking  pain  in  foot
and  toes.

Limbs  feel  as  if  they  were  asleep.

Severe  pain  in  the  left  foot ;  a  tension  while  walking.
^^  Position. Motion. Lying  on  right  side  :  can  sleep  better  in
bronchial  affections.

Lying  down  :  aggravates  toothache.

Sitting  up  :  vomits  violently.

Cannot  sit  up :  owing  to  dizziness.

Rising :  siaggers  ;  cough.

Motion  :  staggers ;  prevented  by  pain  in  scapula.

While  walking :  tension  in  foot.

Must  walk  about :  with  toothache.

Standing:  debility.
^^  Nerves. I Jerking  cramps  of  the  limbs  during  sleep. ^Bron-
chial catarrh.

Electric  thrill  from  brain  to  extremities.

■  Great  debility,  I  tottering  gait,  I  cannot  stand  long.
Heaviness  of  the  limbs.

Limbs  feel  as  if  they  were  asleep.

General  malaise,  increasing  weakness.

I  In  low,  adynamic  forms  of  disease, characterized  by  sudden

and  extreme  prostration,  torpor,  vomiting,  pulse  small  and

rapid,  purplish  appearance  of  skin.
Kills  canary  birds,  if  the  cage  is  hung  over night  in  the  tree

while  in  flower.
^'^  Sleep. Sleep  heavy  or  disturbed  and  unrefreshing.

Sleepy  :  morning  and  forenoon  ;  —  after  a  glass  of  wine,  with

fullness  of  the  head.
Drowsiness,  followed  by  insensibility.

■  During  sleep  :  talks,  moans,  has  sweat,  is  restless.
Sleeps  best  on  the  right  side. -^Bronchial  affections.
Worse  on  awaking.

■  Restless  and  incoherent,  most  at  night;  kept  with  difficulty

in  bed. 6  Scarlatina.
^^  Time. Night :  itching  of  skin.


95  .  AILANTUS  GLANDULOSA.

Morning :  eyes  agglutinated ;  throat  worse ;  voice  lost  on
awaking ;  free  expectoration  ;  yellow,  bitter  expectoration
worse ;  sleepy  ; dry  hot  skin.

Forenoon :  ichorous  nasal  discharge ;  sleepy ;  skin  dry  and
hot.

Day  :  sticky  and  scanty  expectoration.
^^  Temperature  and  Weather. Air :  throat  more  tender.

Open  air :  lachrymation.
^^  Fever. Chill  preceded  by  a  miliary  eruption,  worse  on  forehead
and  face.

During  chill :  hunger,  empty  feeling ;  intolerable  pain  in  back
of  neck,  upper  part  of  back  and  hip-joint.

After  chill :  flushes  of  heat,  severe  pain  in  the  head  and
soreness  of  the  lungs.

During  heat :  delirium,  urgent  thirst,  longing  for  brandy.

Skin  dry  and  hot,  especially  in  the  morning,  until  midday.

Cold  sweat  and  nausea.

I  Cold  sweat. 6  Cholera.
*^  Attacks. I  Attacks characterized by  fullness of  head, with
heat ;  pains  burning,  darting  in  temples  and  occiput ;  verti-
go and  nausea.

Every  forenoon :  ichorous  nasal  discharge.

Rash  returns  annually.
*^  Locality  and  Direction. Right :  heaviness  of  side  of  head ;
tenderness  over  liver ; burning  in  lung ;  pain in scapula ;
pain  in  hip-joint.

Left :  electric  current  through  head ;  tingling  in  arm  and
hand  ;  swelling  under  eye ;  sore  pain  side  of  nose ;  tearing
in  teeth  and  face ;  burning  under  shoulder ;  pain  and  con-
traction in  lung ;  pain  under  scapula ;  arm  and  fingers  feel
numb  and  as  if  asleep ;  leg  feels  numb,  foot  and  toes  tingle
and  prick ;  pain  in  foot ;  tension  in  foot  while  walking ;
itching  around  ear.

Above  downwards  :  electric  current  from  head  to  extremities ;
stitching  and  aching  in  chest.
*^  Sensations. Feeling  of  fullness  everywhere.

Soreness,  irritability,  pricking  and  tingling.

Sensation  of  passage  of  electric  current  from  head  into  the
limbs.
*^  Touch. Passive  Motions. Touch : reddens  ear ; lips  be-
come sore  and  puffy.

Pressure :  relieves  heaviness  in  head,  toothache ;  pressure  of
clothes  on  chest  uncomfortable ;  —  causes  eruptions  to  dis-
appear.

Scratching :  reddens  ear.
*®  Skin. Skin  cold,  dry,  livid.

Itching  around  the  left  ear,  face,  back  and  neck  at  night ;  felt
as  if  she  would  go  crazy.


AILANTUS  GLANDULOSA.  96

I  Skin  dry  but  not  hot. d  Scarlatina.

Rash  returns  annually  when  the  Ailantus  blossoms  (after  poi-
soning).

I I  Eruption  of  miliary  rash  in  patches  of  a  dark,  almost
livid  color.

Rash  looking  like  measles  but  without  catarrh  (looks  like
syphilis). See  22.

■  Irregular  patchy,  livid  eruption,  disappearing  on  pressure
and  returning  very  slowly  ;  interspersed  with  small  vesicles  ;
worse  on  forehead,  neck  and  chest, d  Scarlatina.

1 1  Eruption  appeared  scantily  for  two  days,  with  sore  throat
and  mild  fever. 6  Scarlatina.

Largre  bullee  filled  with  a  claret-colored  serum.

iPetechiae. ^Scarlatina.

1 1  Malignant  scarlet  fever.

Purple  rash,  with  stupor. 6  Scarlet  fever.

I A  livid  miliary  eruption. ^Scarlatina.

1 1  Eruption  plentiful,  of  a  bluish  tint. ^Typhoid scarlatina.

•  Eruption  is  slow  to  make  its  appearance,  remains  livid,  and
even  the  forehead  and  face  take  on  a  rather  purplish  color.
d  Typhoid  scarlatina.

1 1  Body  and  limbs  covered  with  an  irregular  patchy  eruption
of  a  very  livid  color,  disappearing  on  pressure  and  return-
ing very  slowly,  d  Scarlatina.
*^  Stages  of  Life,  Constitution.  The  odor  affects  the  asth-
matic ;  also  women  and  children  more  than  men,  and  old
people  least  of  all.

Nervous,  sensitive  persons.

Bilious  temperaments  ;  stout  and  robust.
■*^  Relationship. The  nearest  relation  is  Ptelea,  proved  by  G.
Bute,  and  the  Zanthoxylese,  if  any  ever  should  be  proved.

Similar  are  :  Amrri.  carh.;  Arnic.  (sore  lungs) ;  I  I  Arum,
triph.;  Aloes;  Baptis.;  Bryon.;  G-elsem.;  Hi/os.;  \ Laches.;
Niir.  acid;  Nux  vom.;  \ Phytol. ;  Prussic  acid;  WRlius
tox.;  Stramon.

Antidoted  by  :  Bourbon  whisky  (poisoning) ;  Rhus  tox.  (head-
ache and  erysipelatous  face,  nausea,  heavy  sleepy  feeling) ;
Nux  vom.  (general  effects).


97  ALETRIS  FARINOSA.

ALETRIS  FARINOSA.

Star  G-rass.  HcemadoracecB.


The  most  bitter  plant;  much  more  so  than  Aloes,  Gentian,  or  Quassia.

— (BiGELOW.)


^  Mind. Weariness  of  body  and  mind.

^  Sensorium. Vertigo,  sleepiness,  vomiting  and  purging;  even
stupefaction.
Dizzy  when  stooping.
^  Sight  and  Eyes. Eyes  feel  sore  and  look  dim.
^^  Inner  Mouth. Spits  a  good  deal  and  raises  froth.
^^  Appetite. •  Want  of  appetite  with  weakness.

I  Want  of  appetite. 6  Prolapsus  uteri.
^^  Eating  and  Driking. I  l  Least  food  distresses  the  stomach ;
fainting  attacks  with  vertigo  ;  sleepy,  emaciated ;  disgust  for
food,  nausea ;  obstinate  indigestion  ;  constipation  ;  debility.

■  Indigestion. ^  Prolapsus  uteri.

*^  Vomiting. I  l  Obstinate  vomiting  during  pregnancy.
^^  Abdomen, l  Flatulent  colic  in  weak,  emaciated  persons.

\  Hysteric  colic.
^°  Rectum  and  Stool. Fearful  pains  in  rectum  and  anus  ;  during

a  movement  terrible  pains  as  if  forcing  a  passage.
^^  Female  Sexual  Organs. I  Premature,  profuse  menses,  with

labor-like  pains.
I  lAmenorrhoea  or  delayed  menses,  from uterine  or  ovarian

atony ;  weariness  of  mind  and  body ;  abdomen  distended,

bearing  down ;  lassitude.

■  Prolapsus  from  muscular  atony.

I  I  Menorrhagia  from  a  congested  state  of  uterus  and  ovaries ;
profuse,  black  blood  and  coagula ;  fullness  and  weight  in
uterine  region.

I  I  Leucorrhoea  from  loss  of  fluids  or  defective  nutrition ;  de-
bility from  protracted  illness.

■  Leucorrhoea. <^  Prolapsus  uteri.

■  Menses  too  early  and  too  profuse. ^Prolapsus  uteri.

■  Sterility  from  uterine  atony.

^*  Pregnancy. ■  Habitual tendency to abortion, sensation of
weight  in  the  uterine  region,  and  tendency  to  prolapsus.

■  Myalgic  pains,  simulating  "  false  pains,"  during  pregnancy.
"  Cough. Raises  a  great  deal  of  froth  ;  feels  as  if  wanted  to  cough

but  couldn't.


ALET.  FAR.— ALL.  CEP.— ALL.  SAT.  98

^'  Motion. Stooping :  causes  dizziness  ;  has  a  great  sense  of  weak-
ness.
3*  Nerves. Il  Debility,  especially  of  females,  from  protracted  ill-
ness or  defective  nutrition ;  no  organic  disease.
■  Great  debility. ^  Prolapsus  uteri.
I  I  Debility  after  dij)htheria.
•  Fits. :  Epilepsy  with  young  persons.
^^  Fever. •  In  many  fevers.
**  Tissues. :  Chronic  rheumatism.

I  Dropsy.
^^  Stages  of  Life,  Constitution. iiMost  suitable  for  chlorotic
girls  and  pregnant  women.
iWeak,  emaciated  people.
^*  Relationship. Similar  to:  Helon.,  Cinchon.,  Hydrast.,  Sahin.,
Senec,  Pulsat.  and  Cauloph.
In  collecting  the  root  not  to  be  mistaken  for  Helon.  dioic.


ALLIUM  CEPA. (See  Cepa.)


ALLIUM  SATIVUM.

G-arlic.  Liliacece.


Tincture  from  the  fresh  bulb ;  used  as  a  condiment  since  olden  times,  and
against  worms  and  some  fevers.

Proved  in  France  by  Petroz  and  Teste,  1852.

^  Mind. Weak  memory.
Lack  of  ideas.
Desire  to  escape.
Sadness  when  alone.
Moral  uneasiness.
Afraid  of  never  getting  well.

Fear  of  not  being  able  to  bear  any  kind  of  medicine.
Fear  of  being  poisoned.
Sensitiveness.
Cannot  bear  anything ;  wants  many  things  and  is  not  pleased

with  any;  every  afternoon.
Impatience.


99  ALLIUM  SATIVUM.

^  Sensorium. Vertigo  on  looking  long  and  steadily  at  anything.
Vertigo  when  looking  at  an  object  for  a  long  time.
Transient  vertigo  on  rising  from  a  seat.
Vertigo  and  heaviness  of  the  head,  relieved  as  soon  as  the

menses  appear.
^  Inner  Head. Heaviness  in  the  head : in  the forehead,  can

hardly  open  the  eyes ; with  mucus  in  the  throat ;  ceases

with  the  onset  of  the  menses,  and  returns  afterwards.
Pulsations  in  temples.
Dull  pain  in  the  occiput  in  the  morning  when  lying  on  the

back.
Pressing  pains  from  within  outwards-
I  Headache, d  In  dyspeptic  subjects.

*  Outer  Head, i  Dandruff.

Baldness.
^  Sight  and  Eyes. Could  read  only  with  spectacles  ;  heaviness

in  the  eyes.
I  Catarrhal  ophthalmia  at  night ;  smarting,  burning,  lachryma-

tion ;  eyelids  agglutinated ;  returns  every  night  when  he

tries  to  read.
Tarsi  sore,  with  irritation  of  the  eyes.
Profuse  watering  of  the  eyes  without  coryza.
®  Hearing  and  Ears. I  Deafness  of  the  left  ear  (catarrhal).
I  I  Hardened  earwax  (topically  with  milk).
I  I  Hardened  crusts  in  the  outer  canal.
I  His  customary  aural  catarrh  disappeared;  he  heard  better

in  the  diseased  ear.
^  Nose, Increased  secretion  of  nasal  mucus,  with  slight  stoppage

of  both  nostrils.
Coryza  more  dry  than  fluent,  with  pressive  pain  from  above

the  root  of  the  nose.
Ozsena.
Smarting  at  the  junction  of  the  alse  and  face,  mostly  the  left.

*  Face. Smarting,  itching  of  the  face.

I  Spots  in  the  face.
Stinging  in  one  side  of  the  face.
^  Lower  Part  of  Face. Smarting  as  from  herpetic  eruption,
near  the  left  angle  of  the  lips.
Lips  dry.
^"  Teeth  and  Gums. Toothache  paroxysmal  and  severe.
Tickling  sensation  in  the  lower  teeth.
Drawing  in  the  teeth,  swollen  gums,  sensation  of  a  hair  on  the

tongue,  worse  from  reading.
Pressing,  transitory  jerking  in  the  jaws  and  upper  molars  of

right  side,  in  the  forenoon.
Scurvy.
"  Taste  and  Tongue. Taste :  hot,  as  from  the  throat,  causing
increase  of  saliva.


ALLIUM  SATIVUM.  100

Tongue  furred  white,  with  a  disagreeable  taste.

I  Tongue  dry  at  night,
^^  Mouth. Copious,  sweetish  saliva ;  after  meals,  more  after  sup-
per and  at  night.

Mouth  symptoms  worse  from  reading.

I  Sores  in  the  mouth.
13  Throat, l  Sticky  feeling  in  the  throat,  with  dryness,  tickling
heat  and  raw  feeling  in  the  larynx.

Anterior  part  of  throat  not  sensitive  to  touch.

Ulcerated  throat.

Accumulation  of  mucus  in  the  throat  with  heaviness  of  the
head  in  the  morning.

Feels  as  if  something  cold,  then  again  something  hot  and  sting-
ing ascended  the  oesophagus.
^^  Appetite  and  Thirst. Voracious  appetite.

Hunger  and  emptiness  in  the  stomach,  without  appetite.

Desire  for  butter.

Thirst.
^'  Eating  and  Drinking, l  Bowels  disturbed  by  the  slightest
deviation  in  diet.

I  The  least  change  in  his  usual  manner  of  living  increases  the
dyspepsia.

■  Complaints  from  bad  water.
Chest  complaints  worse  after  eating.
•  Copious  flow  of  saliva  after  eating.
Burning  eructations  after  a  meal.

Weight  in  the  hypogastrium  immediately  after  a  meal.

■  Complaints  of  those  who  eat  to  excess;  gluttony.
'®  Belching. I Belching  after  every  change  of  diet.

"  Stomach. I  Heartburn.
Pressure  as  from  a  stone.

Long-standing dyspepsia, especially in old, fleshy people,
whose  bowels  are  disturbed  by  the  slightest  deviation  from  a
regular  diet.
^^  Hypochondria. In  the  forenoon  pressure  in  the  epigastrium
and  transverse  colon,  had  to  sit  bent  forward  and  press  with
his  hands.
Pain  under  the  short  ribs,  back,  right  side.
'^  Abdomen. Pain  in  the  region  of  the  descending  colon,  just
below  the  ribs.
Violent  burning  in  the  abdomen.
I  Wind-colic.

Everything  (in  the  abdomen)  seems  to  drag  downwards.
Every  step  on  the  pavement  caused  excruciating  pain,  as  if  the
intestines  would  be  torn  apart;  better  by  lying  down.
^"  Flatus,  Stool  and  Rectum. Expels  flatus.
Stools  at  first  foecal,  then  watery  and  hot.
Looseness  of  the  bowels.


101  ALLIUM  SATIVUM.

Constipation  with  almost  constant  dull  pains  in  the  bowels.

Normal  stool  immediately  after  a  meal.

Prolapsus  ani.

Expels  worms.
^^  Urinary  Organs. Pain  in  the  region  of  the  kidneys.

Bladder  distended,  could  bear  no  pressure ;  continual  urging
to  urinate  with  passing  of  a  few  drops.

•  Ulceration  of  bladder,  caused  by  calculi.

I  Urine  whitish,  abundant,  becomes  cloudy  from  nitric  acid.

Urine  increased.

Urine  lessened  in  quantity.

I  Urine  dark  brown  with  copious  sediment.

A  kind  of  diabetes.
^^  Female  Sexual  Organs. Menses  too  early ;  headache  and
dizziness  lessen  as  the  flow  becomes  established.

Soreness  of  vulva  and  thighs  during  the  menstrual  flow.

Pustules  on  the  vulva  during  the  menses.

Bright  red  spots,  with  itching  and  smarting  on  the  inside  of
the  labia  majora  and  at  the  vulva.
^^  Pregnancy,  Parturition  and  Nursing. Said  to  be  injuri-
ous during  pregnancy.

After-birth  remains.

Mammse  swollen  and  painful  to  touch.

Dull  stitches  in  the  right  mammse.

Said  to  be  injurious  to  the  nursing.

Mammge  swell  after  weaning.
"  Voice,  Larynx  and  Bronchia, i  Voice  rough ;  hoarse.

Sore  sensation  in  the  larynx.

I  Chronic  catarrh  of  the  windpipe  without  fever,  but  with  diffi-
cult breathing  and  moist  cough.

Almost  continuous  mucous  rales  in  the  bronchi.
^^  Respiration. Difficult  respiration  as  if  the  sternum  was  com-
pressed.

■  Periodical  asthma.
"  Cough. Chronic  cough,  dyspnoea ;  ropy  sputum.

Cough  hollow,  dry,  not  very  frequent.

Morning cough,  after  leaving  his  bed-room,  with extremely
copious  mucous  expectoration.

Cough  which  seems  to  come  from  the  stomach.

Dry  cough  after  eating.

Cough  which  gives  rise  to  a  fetid  smell.

Sudden  paroxysm  of  hard  dry  cough  while  smoking,  obliging
him  to  quit.

Expectoration of  a  thin, yellowish, purulent-looking,  blood-
streaked  mucus,  of  a  putrid  odor.

Great  difficulty  in  expectorating  a  glutinous  mucus.
^^  Inner  Chest. Pain  in  the  left  side  of  the  chest, with  dark
urine.


ALLIUM  SATIVUM.  102

Lancinating  in  one  side  of  the  chest.
^^  Heart  and  Circulation. Palpitation.

Jerking  pulsations  of  the  heart.

Accelerates  the  circulation.
^^  External  Chest. Stitches  in  the  pectoral  muscles  and  beneath

the  scapulae.
^^  Neck  and  Back. Drawing  pains  in  the  neck.

Darting  pains  in  the  back.

Backache.

Weak  back,  child  does  not  learn  to  walk ;  marasmus  (topically).

Red  spots  like  ringworm  on  the  back.

Cutting  pain  in  the  sacrum  in  the  morning.
^^  Upper  Limbs. Red  spots  on  the  hands.

I  Skin  peels  off  of  the  hand.

BDry  heat  on  the  back  of  the  hands;  slight  moisture  of  the
palms.
^^  Lower  Limbs. •  '  Rheumatism  of  the  hips. See  48.

Tearing  pain  in  the  hip.

Intolerable  pain  confined  to  the  common  tendon  of  the  iliac  and
psoas  muscles  ;  worse  from  the  least  movement ;  it  is  so  acute
as  to  extort  cries  when  he  tries  to  cross  his  limbs  ;  but  this
causes  no  pain  if  he  lifts  the  leg  gently  with  his  hand ;
worse  8  p.m.  in  bed,  cannot  then  change  his  position  or
sleep.

Pains  in  the  limbs  worse  from  changes  of  temperature  and
under  the  influence  of  moist  heat.

I  Weakness  of  the  legs  ;  worse  at  the  knees.

I  Legs  do  not  grow  as  rapidly  as  the  rest  of  the  body.

Pain  as  from  a  sprain  in  the  ankle-joint.

Tearing  pain  in  the  feet.

Sensation  of  stiffness  in  the  feet.

Toe-joints  pain  as  if  sprained.

Burning  in  the  soles.
^^  Rest,  Position,  Motion. Lying  down :  relieves  pain  in  ab-
domen.

Lying  on  back :  dull  pain  in  occiput.

In  bed :  pain  in  tendon  worse,  33 ;  cold  at  night.

Must  sit  bent  forward :  with  pain  in  epigastrium,  18.

Rising  from  a  seat :  transient  vertigo.

Motion  :  increases  pain  in  common  tendon  of  iliac  and  psoas
muscles,  33  ;  makes  rheumatism  worse.

Every  step  :  causes  excruciating  pain  in  intestines.
^^  Nerves. Lassitude,  especially  in  lower  limbs  ;  a  muscular  weak-
ness, with  rheumatic  pains  ;  generally  worse  in  the  morning.

Child  drowsy,  lifeless  ;  would  not  walk  ;  torpor  of  the  bowels  ;
great  paleness.
^^  Sleep. Drowsiness  after  a  meal.

Muscles  twitching  on  falling  asleep.


103  ALLIUM  SATIVUM.

Sleep  prevented  by :  stitches  in  the  chest ;  —  weight  in  the

stomach  ;  —  thirst.
Coldness  felt  in  sleep  and  awakening  him  frequently.
Restless  sleep.

Dreams  :  of  water  and  storms ;  —  of  rapid  transit  from  place
to  place ;  —  anxious  ;  —  continue  after  waking.
^^  Time. Night :  catarrhal  ophthalmia.

Morning :  dull  pain  in  occiput ;  heaviness  of  head  and  accu-
mulation of  mucus  in  throat;  cutting  pain  in  sacrum  ;  rheu-
matic pains  worse,  36.
Forenoon  :  jerking  in  jaws  and  upper  molars  ;  pressure  in  epi-
gastrium and  transverse  colon.
Afternoon :  sweat,
^^  Temperature  and  Weather. Worse  in  open  air  :  chest  com-
plaints.
Change  of  temperature  :  pains  in  limbs  worse.
Moist  heat :  pains  in  limbs  worse.

Damp  cold  weather :  tearing  and  stinging  in  different  parts  of
the  body.
*"  Fever. Chilliness  and  heat  alternate, more  evenings ; acrid
sweat  causing  itching ;  hard  pulse.
Cold  at  night  in  bed. See  37.
Vomiting  during  the  fever.
Sweat  acrid,  offensive.
Sweat  in  the  afternoon.
*^  Attacks. I  Periodical  asthma.

Pains  go  from  within  out,  expanding  sensation.
Stitches  with  paralytic  weakness  or  tearing ;  sometimes  increas-
ing to  a  high  degree  and  then  diminishing  in  the  same  way.
^^  Locality. Right:  pressing,  jerking  in  upper  molars  ;  pain  in
side ;  dull  stitches  in  mammae.
Left :  catarrhal  deafness  ;  smarting  at  junction  of  alge  nasi  and
face ;  smarting  near  angle  of  lips ;  pain  in  chest.
**  Tissues. Stings  and  bites.

Dropsy ;  also  after protracted  intermittent  fever  in  marshy
districts.
*^  Touch. Passive  Motion. Injuries. Touch :  causes  pain
in  swollen  mammse.
Pressure :  must  use  it  during  pain  in  epigastrium  and  trans-
verse colon  ;  cannot  bear  it  on  distended  bladder.
Stings  and  bites.
^®  Skin. Skin  sensitive.

Swelling  with  itching  and  burning.
Wilted  skin.
Skin  dry.

Red  spots. See  23,  32.

Herpetic,  itching,  burning,  red  or  whitish  spots  on  a  swollen
surface.


ALL.  SAT.— ALOE  SOC.  104

I  Tetter  on  the  ankle.
^^  Stages  of  Life,  Constitution. >  Fleshy  people:  catarrhs.
I  Fleshy,  old  people:  dyspepsia.

I  Those  accustomed  to  high  living  and  excessive  eating.
*^  Relationship. Similar to : Bryon. ; Capsic.  (asthma,  fetid

breath with cough) ; Coloc. (colic, hip-pain) ; Ignat. ;

Lycop.  ;  Nux  voin.  and  Senega.
Not  following  well :  Aloes,  All.  cep.,  Scilla.
Complementary  to  Arsen.,  especially  in  catarrh,  asthma,  and

effects  of  over-exertion.
Antidote  to  All.  sat. :  Lycop.


ALOE  SOCOTRINA.

Socotrine  Aloes.  Liliacece.


One  of  the  oldest  and  most  famous  drugs,  largely  cultivated,  and  in  use  as
a  horse-medicine,  hence  rarely  to  be  obtained  pure  from  the  shops.  From
the  collection  of  the  College  of  Pharmacy  some  of  the  genuine  socrotine  aloes
was  obtained.  It  was  brought  from  the  Sultan  of  Muscat,  by  a  physician
in  the  service  of  the  U.  S.  Navy,  who  made  the  Sultan's  acquaintance  while
on  an  expedition  from  the  United  States.  This  was  made  the  basis  of  all
of  Boericke  &  Tafel's  preparations.

Aloe  was  most  proved  by  Helbig  in  1833,  and  several  under  his  lead.  The
first  publication  of  provings  was  made  by  Buchner,  1821.  A  complete
monography,  adding  to  all  the  former  the  provings  made  in  this  country
with  the  genuine  Socotrina,  was  given  by  C.  Hg.  in  his  American  provings,
1856,  pp.  764  to  862.


^  Mind. Lassitude,  alternating  with  great  mental  activity.
I  She  knew  she  would  die  in  a  week. 6  Hysteria.
I  Life  is  a  burden, d  Colic.
Great  disposition  for  desultory  thinking.
Children  chat  and  laugh.
Aversion  to  labor.
Great  disinclination  to  mental  labor ;  it  fatigues  him  ;  general

languor.
I  Disinclined  to  move.
Anxiety.

Anxiety  and  ebullitions.
Restlessness  and  fear ;  fear  of  men.
Ill-humored ;  hypochondriacal,  worse  in  cloudy  weather.


105  ALOE  SOCOTRINA.

Dissatisfied  and  angry  about  himself,  more  so  when  he  is  con-
stipated or  suffers  from  pain.

I  An  easily  excited,  angry,  revengeful  state  of  mind,  could  not
brook  opposition,  wanted  to  destroy  the  object  of  wrath  ;
relief  from  tea  or  mild  stimulant ;  worse  in  the  middle  of  the
day.

■  Attacks  make  her  frantic,  often  loses  consciousness, d  Colic.
Hates  people,  repels  everyone.

I  When  sitting  in  a  chair  or  lying  in  bed,  complains  of  persons

stepping  hard  or  quickly, d  Hysteria.
Restlessness,  with  ebullitions  of  blood.
Fright  at  slight  noises,  after  a  nocturnal  emission.
^  Sensorium. Giddiness  and  starts.

Giddiness,  with  anxiety  when  moving ;  he  feels  as  if  he  were

sitting  too  high  (after  dinner).
Dullness  in  the  forehead,  with  chilliness.
Vertigo  :  as  if  everything  whirled  with  her,  worse  on  going  up

stairs  or  turning  quickly  ;  everything  seems  insecure ;  better

after  nasal  catarrh  sets  in.
Loses  consciousness,  with  frantic  spells.
^  Inner  Head. ■  Congestion  to  the  head,  compelling  one  to  sit

up.

I I  Headache  across  the  forehead,  with  heaviness  of  the  eyes
and  nausea.

■  Weight  on  the  vertex ;  pressure  in  the  forehead  and  occiput.

■  Dull  pressive  pain  :  in  supra-orbital  region ;  in  ■sinciput.
Pressing  outwards  to  the  temples,  with  periodic  heat  of  the

face  and  flickering  before  the  eyes.

■  Stitches  in  the  temples  aggravated  by  every  footstep.

■  Headache  after  insufficient  stool;  with  abdominal  pains.

■  ■Headaches  are  worse  from  heat  and  better  from  cold  appli-

cations.
I  I A  pain  in  the  forehead  which  compels  the  patient  to  close

the  eyes,  or,  if  he  wishes  to  look  at  anything,  he  must  make

the  aperture  of  the  lids  very  small.
Headache  alternating  with  lumbago.
^  Outer  Head. Sensitiveness  of  the  scalp  in  spots.

Dryness  of  the  hair.
°  Sight  and  Eyes. I  Yellow  rings  moving  before  the  eyes.
Unsteady,  anxious  look.
Dimness  before  the  eyes  while  writing.
Flickering. See  3.

■  Pain  deep  in  the  orbits,  as  if  in  the  muscles,  worse  on  the

right  side.
Congestion  to  the  eyes ;  pressure  in  the  orbits.
Lachrymation.

■  Occasional  attacks  of  twitching  of  left eyelids during  the


ALOE  SOCOTRINA.  106

day,  and  a  spasmodic  jerk  of  the  whole  body  just  when  fall-
ing asleep  at  night.
Heaviness  of  eyes,  with  frontal  headache.
Has  to  close  the  eyes,  with  pain  in  forehead.
^  Hearing  and  Ears. Hates  musical  sounds  and  noises,  they

set  her  all  in  a  tremor, d  Hysteria.
Cracking  in  the  ears  when  moving  the  jaw.
Sticking  pain  in  the  left  ear,  later  in  the  right.
Internal  and  external  heat  of  the  ears.
'  Nose. Nosebleed,  in  bed  after  waking.

Coryza, with burning and  pain in  the  nose ; on sneezing,

stitches  in  the  umbilical  region.
Redness  of  the  nose  in  the  open  cold  air.
Coldness  of  the  point  of  the  nose.
Dryness  of  the  nose  in  the  morning,  in  bed.
^  Face. Heat  of  the  face  with  the  headache  or  when  excited.
Face  pale,  during  cloudy  weather.
Face  sickly,  sunken.
^  Lower  Part  of  Face. Lips :  redder  than  usual ;  dry,  cracked ;

moist,  soreness  of  the  borders ;  white,  scaly.
Pain  when  yawning  or  masticating  solid  food ;  worse  in  the

evening  and  in  the  morning,  when  waking.
^^  Teeth  and Gums. Sensitiveness  in  a  hollow  molar ;  worse

when  eating ;  later  a  pustule  appears  on  the  gum,  near  the

diseased  tooth.
The  concave  edges  of  the  teeth  seem  sharp,  they  hurt  the

tongue.
^^  Taste,  Speech,  Tongue. I  Metallic  taste,  with  dry,  irritative

hacking.
Taste:  bitter,  sour,  like  ink  or  iron.
Tongue:  coated  yellowish-white ;  stiff;  dry,  red.
Severe  fine  stitches,  from  behind  forwards,  in  the  under  part

of  the  tongue  when  moving  it.
Yellow  ulcers  on  the  tongue.

Dry  tongue  and  mouth,  with  increased  thirst  and  greater  red-
ness of  the  lips.
^^  Inner Mouth. Inflamed, sore  spots in the mouth, on the

tongue,  inside  of  cheeks ;  yellow  ulcers  on  the  tongue.
Sickening  smell  from  the  mouth.
Increase  of  saliva.
^^  Palate  and  Throat. Fauces  raw,  hot,  as  if  burned.

Palate  swollen ;  arches  of  the  velum  palati  pain  on  chewing

hard  food,  or  on  yawning,  worse  in  the  evening,  and  in  the

morning  on  awaking ;  worse  on  empty  swallowing.
Hawking  of  thick  jelly-like  mucus,  in  lumps,  from  the  fauces

and  posterior  nares ; rawness  and  swollen  feeling in  the

pharynx.  *


107  ALOE  SOCOTRINA.

^^  Appetite,  Thirst,  Desires,  Aversions, i  Appetite  for  salt
food.
No  appetite, d  Hysteria.

Thirst :  with  dryness  of  mouth  ;  —  awakens  at  night.
Longing  for  juicy  articles ;  fruits,  especially  apples.
Aversion  to  meat.
^^  Eating  and  Drinking. Soon  after  supper,  growling  in  the
abdomen,  as  if  griping  of  the  bowels  would  take  place.

I  As  soon  as  he  eats  anything,  he  must  go  to  stool.

I I  Has  to  hurry  to  the  closet  immediately  after  eating  and
drinking. 6  Colic.

After  eating :  flatulency,  pulsations  in  the  rectum  and  sexual
irritation.  .

After  meals  :  distension  of  abdomen.

Hungry  during  the  diarrhoea ;  hungry  after  the  morning  stool.

Sour  food  does  not  agree.

Beer  relieves  the  pains  in  the  anus ;  drinking  vinegar,  the  colic.

Water  causes  pains  in  the  stomach.

Thirst  while  eating,  after  eating,  and  during  the  night.

Sweats  after  drinking.
^^  Belching,  Nausea  and  Vomiting. Belching,  with  oppres-
sion of  the  stomach.

Eructations  :  bitter  ;  acrid ;  sour  or  tasteless.

Rising  of  flatulence  toward  the  throat,  with  sensation  as  if
vomiting  were  coming  on.

Nausea : with  frontal  headache ; with  empty  feeling  in the
stomach  ;  with  pain  at  the  umbilicus.

Vomiting  of  blood.
^^  Scrobiculum and Stomach. Painful pressure under  the
sternum ;  pressure  through  the  pit  of  the  stomach  to  the
back.

Pain  in  the  scrobiculum  on  making  a  false  step.

Fullness  in  the  stomach,  followed  by  distention  of  the  epigas-
trium.

Pain  and  fullness  in  the  stomach  after  drinking  water.
^^  Hypochondria. Painfulness  in  the  hypochondria,  with  chilli-
ness and  diarrhoea  ;  painful  weakness  of  the  legs.

Hepatic  region:  burning; I  uneasiness,  heat  pressure  and  ten-
sion ;  dull  pain,  worse  on  standing,  so  that  he  bends  forward.

Stitches  from  the  liver  into  the  chest,  obstructing  respiration.

Stitches  in  the  liver,  when  drawing  a  long  breath.

Distension  of  the  hypochondria,  better  after  passing  flatus.

Increases  the  flow  of  bile.

Stitches  from  the spleen  into  the  chest,  or  drawing  into  the
loins.
^^  Abdomen. Pulsation  in  the  region  of  the  navel.

Distension  of  the  abdomen, especially  the  epigastrium,  with


ALOE  SOCOTRINA.  108

flatus  moving  about ;  worse  after  meals ;  during  menstrua-
tion ;  on  motion.

■  Congestion  to  the  abdomen  (portal  system) ;  burning  sensation,
II  Sensation  of  fullness,  heaviness  ;  heat  and  inflammation.
Pelvis  feels  as  if  filled  with  hot  water.

Pain  around  the  navel,  worse  from  pressure.
Stitches  in  umbilical  region  from  sneezing.

■  Rumbling  in  the  abdomen.

B I  Discharge  of  much  flatulency,  burning,  smelling  offensive,
relieving  the  pain  in  the  abdomen ;  after  each  meal,  in  the
evening  and  morning,  before  stool.

■  Cutting  across  the  abdomen  ;  with  ill-humor,  anthropophobia ;

not  disposed  to  go  into  the  open  air  although  it  relieves.

■  The  abdominal  walls  are  painful  when  rising,  pressing  to  stool,

when  touched,  and  when  standing  erect.

■  Heaviness,  fullness,  and  pressing  downwards  in  the  pelvis.
Left  side  of  the  abdomen  bloated,  with  gurgling  in  the  descend-
ing colon  ;  worse  after  eating,

■  A  twisting  and  griping  pain  in  the  upper  abdomen  and  around

the  navel,  forcing  him  to  sit  bent  up,  which  relieves  ;  there-
with, repeated  urging  to  stool,  but  only  offensive  burning
flatus  passes  with  short  relief  of  the  pain.

■  Griping  in  the  abdomen,  before  with  and  after  the  stool.

■  Feeling  of  weakness  in  the  abdomen  as  if  diarrhoea  would  re-

sult ;  but  evacuation  did  not  ensue  for  eight  hours.
Shooting and  boring  in the  region of  the navel, <  from
pressure.

■  Painfulness  in  the  whole  abdomen,  especially  in  the  sides  and

along  both  sides  of  the  navel,  which  parts  cannot  endure
being  touched ;  on  making  a  false  step  on  stone  pavements
it  hurts  very  much  in  the  pit  of  the  stomach.

■  Dull  abdominal  pain,  as  after  taking  cold,  morning  and  eve-

ning repeatedly,  still  without  inclination  to  stool.

■  ■Great  and  cutting-griping  pain  in  the  right  and  lower  portion

of  abdomen,  which  was  excruciating  before  and  during  stool ;
after  stool  all  pains  ceased,  leaving  a  profuse  sweating  and
extreme  weakness, d  Colic.

■  Fullness,  heat  and  heaviness  in  hypogastrium. ^Prolapsus

uteri.

■  Labor-like  pains  in  groins  and  loins,  worse  when standing.

d  Prolapsus  uteri.
I  I  Feeling  as  if  a  plug  was  wedged  in  between  the  symphysis
pubis  and  the  os  coccygis.

■  Dragging  down  in  the  abdomen.

^^  Stools,  Rectum  and  Anus.  Urging  to  stool  continuously ;
worse  immediately  after  eating ;  feeling  of  fullness  and
weight  in  the  pelvis  ;  only  flatus  passes.


109  ALOE  SOCOTRINA.

I  Urging  to  stool  with  passage  of  urine ;  every  time  on  passing

urine,  feeling  as  if  stool  would  pass.

I I  Urging  to  stool,  only  hot  flatus  passes,  giving  relief;  but  the
urging  soon  returns,  with  a  sensation  as  of  a  plug  wedged
between  the  symphysis  pubis  and  the  os  coccygis.

1 1  Flatus  offensive,  burning,  copious  ;  much  flatus  with  small
stool ;  burning  in  the  anus  after  passage  of  flatus.

Stools  quite  profuse  with  jelly-like  lumps,  and  accompanied
with  wind, d  Colic.

■  Watery  stools,  aggravated  by  standing  or  walking.
Bloody  water. 6  Dysentery.

1 1 1 1  Lumpy  watery  stool.

I  Profuse  watery  diarrhoea,  accompanied  by  wind,  containing
lumps  "  looking  like  frog-spawn." d  Colic.

■  Diarrhoea  yelloAV  fecal,  bright  yellow,  bilious  ;  great  rumbling

in  the  bowels,  escape  of  large  quantities  of  wind ;  -<
morning ;  evening ;  in  damp  weather ;  from  overheating ;
after  cold  taken  in  a  damp  room ;  after  chagrin.

■  1  Diarrhoea  driving  out  of  bed  very  early  in  the  morning  (like

Sulphur.)
Stools  yellow  fecal,  worse  after  eating ; before  stool  violent

urging ;  during  stool  tenesmus  and  discharge  of  much  flatus  ;

after  stool  faintness.
Hospital  diarrhoea.
Small  stools.

■  ■Dysenteric  diarrhoea.

■  Frequent  stools  of  bloody  water,  violent  tenesmus;  fainting;

passage  of  mucus  in  jelly-like  lumps,  much  flatus,  d  Dysen-
tery.

■  ■When  passing  wind,  feeling  as  if  stool  would  escape  with  it.

■  ■Want  of  confidence  in  the  sphincter  ani ;  the  rectum  seems

full  of  fluid  which  feels  heavy,  as  if  it  would  fall  out.
d  Diarrhoea.

■  Stool  passes  without  making  any exertion ; when  walking

or  standing ;  after  eating.

■  ■Solid  stool  passes  involuntarily;  dropping  away  unnoticed

by  the  sick,  even  children  at  night  in  bed.
During  stool  congestion  to  the  head  and  face  ;  hunger  ;  cutting
about  the  navel  extorting  cries ;  chilliness ;  fainting ;  heat
in  the  rectum  ;  much  flatus  ;  tenesmus.

■  Pains  disappear  after  the  stool,  when  she  appeared  very  weak

and  covered  by  a  cold  sweat.

■  ■Stools  leaving  him  with  a  feeling  of  extreme  weakness  and

prostration.

■  Sensation  of  heat  and  burning  in  the  rectum.

■  Heaviness  in  the  rectum.

■  Stricture  of  the  rectum.

■  Itching,  pulsating  in  the  rectum  as  from  fissures,  worse  sitting.


ALOE  SOCOTRINA.  110

After  stool  burning  weight  and  itching  in  the  anus  ;  protruding
piles  ;  cutting ;  feeling  as  if  still  more  would  come.

■  The  not  too  hard  faeces  causes  a  pricking  in  the  anus,  later

continuous  pain  in  the  anus  compelling  him  to  draw  it  to-
gether frequently,  whereby  it  becomes  tense  and  achy.

■  Fullness  and  pressing  out  in  the  anus.

1 1  Hemorrhoids  :  protrude  like  a  bunch  of  grapes  ;  constant
bearing  down  in  the  rectum ;  bleeding ;  sore,  tender,  hot ;
relieved  by  cold  water.

■  Itching  and  burning  in  the  anus,  preventing  sleep.

^'  Urinary  Organs. Pain  in  the  left  side  down  along  the  ureters.
d  Hysteria.

■  Every  time  on  passing  urine,  feeling  as  if  some  thin  stool

would  escape  with  it. See  20.

■  Burning  when  urinating.

■  Frequent  urging  to  urinate;  worse  at  night;  or  in  the  after-

noon.
Urine  copious ;  especially  after  stool.
Urine  saffron-yellow,  becoming  cloudy ;  scanty,  hot.
Sediment  yellowish,  like  bran,  or  slimy.

■  Incontinence  of  urine.  6  In  an  old  man  with  enlarged  prostate

(diarrhoea  and  urinary  symptoms  were  also  present).

I  I  So  urgent  a  desire  he  can  hardly  retain  the  urine.

Erections  after  urinating. See  22.
^^  Male  Sexual  Organs. Semen  comes  too  soon.

All  the  semen  is  not  ejected.

I  I  Sexual  desire  increased :  after  awaking ;  after  eating ;  in  the
evening.

Seminal  emissions  ;  strong  desire  afterwards.

Involuntary  emissions  during  siesta.

Testicles  cold  ;  penis  small;  scrotum  relaxed ;  epididymis  sen-
sitive, especially  to  touch  or  while  walking.

Offensive  sweat  on  the  genitals.

Erections  in  the  morning  and  after  passing  water.

Gonorrhoea.

Itching  of  the  prepuce.
^^  Female  Sexual  Organs. ■  Pain  in  the  hypogastrium  as  if  the
menses  were  coming  on.

■  Fullness, heaviness  in  the  uterine  region, with  labor-like

pains  in  the  loins  and  groin  ;  worse  standing.

■  Labor-like  pains  extending  down  the  legs, d  Prolapsus  uteri.

■  Uterine  hemorrhage  about  the  climaxis. ^Prolapsus  uteri.

■  Menses  too  early  and  too  profuse  ;  with  dragging  down  in  the

rectum  and  fullness  in  the  pelvis, d  Prolapsus  uteri.

■  Menses  too  early  and  last  too  long. ^Prolapsus  uteri.
During  the  menses  :  earache  ;  headache  relieved  by  cold  water ;

distension  of  abdomen  ;  backache.


Ill  ALOE  SOCOTRINA.

iLeucorrhoea  of  bloody  mucus  preceded  by  colic, d  Prolapsus
uteri.
2*  Pregnancy  and  Parturition. Lameness,  which  seems  to
arise  from  a  sense  of  weight  and  pressure  into  the  pelvis.
d  During  pregnancy.

I  I  After  confinement,  dysentery  with  faint  feeling  after  each
effort  at  stool.
2^  Voice  and  Larynx. Voice  husky. Hawking.

Scraping  in  the  larynx.
^^  Respiration. Whistling  in  the throat, as  if  something  had
fallen  into  the  trachea.

Difficult  respiration.

Respiration  impeded  :  by  stitches  through  the  left  side  of  the
chest ;  by  stitches  from  the  liver  into  the  chest.

When  drawing  a  long  breath :  stitches  in  the  liver.
^^  Cough. Cough  with  stitches  in  the  right  side  of  the  larynx  ;
sputa  of  yellow,  tenacious  mucus.

Cough  with  scratching  in  the  throat.

When  she  would  sit  down  after  standing,  or  stand  up  after  sit-
ting down,  she  would  cough  and  the  tears  would  flow.
d  Hysteria.

Spitting  blood.
^^  Inner  Chest. Congestion  to  the  chest ;  dry  cough  ;  bloody  ex-
pectoration.

Front  of  the  chest  feels  sore  on  deep  inspiration.

Weakness  of  the  chest.

Stitches  into  chest  from  spleen.
^^  Heart,  Pulse  and  Circulation. Strong  beat  of  the  heart
occasionally ;  pain  through  to  the  left  scapula.

Pulse :  accelerated ;  weak,  suppressed,  after  vomiting ;  slow
in  the  afternoon.

Ebullitions,  with  anxiety ;  restlessness.
^^  Back.  Dull,  steady  pain  on  either  side,  just  above  the  innomi-
nata,  running  into  the  rectum,  later  becomes  a  throbbing,
itching  sensation  of  fullness,  always  with  a  feeling  as  if  the
prostate  was  swollen  and  sensitive ;  worse  in  wet  weather.
Some  times  there  was  twitching  in  the  perineum,  at  one
time  feeling  as  if  "asleep,"  all  ending  with  a  slight  pain
and  lameness  in  the  left  thigh  of  short  duration.

■  Backache, d  Prolapsus  uteri.

Lumbago,  alternating  with  headache.

Stitches  through  the  sacrum  to  the  loins.

Pressure  and  heaviness  in  the  sacral  region  while  sitting ;  bet-
ter from  motion.

Creeping  beginning  in  the  sacrum,  in  the  bone,  extending  to
the  coccyx,  until  it  was  a  creeping  in  the  bones  over  the
whole  body.


ALOE  SOCOTRINA.  112

32  Upper  Limbs. Heaviness  of  the  right  arm  ;  weakness  of  the

wrist-joint.
^^  Lower  Limbs. Extending  down  the  legs  :  labor-like  pains.
6  Prolapsus  uteri.

Painful  weakness  of  the  legs. See  18.

I  Painful  weariness  in  the  calves.

Weakness  of  the  ankle-joint.

I  Soles  of  the  feet  pain  when  walking  on  the  pavement.

Great  toe  feels  as  if  sprained.
^^  Limbs in General. l Lameness, weariness in the limbs;
weakness of the  joints ;  often with the abdominal dis-
turbances.

Pains of  short  duration,  as  if  bruised  or  dislocated  (left  fore-
arm, right  scapula,  left  ribs).

Pricking,  dull  twitching,  drawing  pains  in  the  joints  (fingers,
knees,  elbows).

Cold  hands  with  warm  feet.
^^  Position. Motion. Standing :  dull  pain  in hepatic  region,
watery stools worse ; causes involuntary stools ; in-
creases labor-like  pains.

Sitting  bent :  relieves  griping  in  abdomen.

Sitting :  aggravates  pulsating  pains  in  rectum  ;  backache  ;  re-
lieves congestion.

Motion :  causes  giddiness, with anxiety ;  nausea  and  pain  in
distended  abdomen.

Walking : watery stools worse ; causes  involuntary stools ;
epididymis  sensitive.

False  step  :  causes  pain  in  scrobiculum. See  17,  19.

Stepping  :  aggravates  stitches  in  temples.

Rising :  abdominal  walls  painful. See  19.

Turning  quickly :  vertigo.

Ascending  stairs  :  vertigo.
^®  Nerves. I Debility. ^Prolapsus  uteri.
I  1  General  weakness,  weariness.

I  Weakness  inconsiderable,  even  when  the  skin  was  very  golden-

color.
Lassitude  alternating  with  mental  activity.

I I  1 1  Extreme  prostration,  with  perspiration.
Paralytic  drawing  in  the  muscles.

Faint  feeling  after  stool, d  Dysentery.

Trembling  from hearing  musical  sounds  or  noises. 6  Hys-
teria.

I  Hysteria  from  poisoning  of  blood  with  uric  acid.
^^  Sleep. ■  Sleeps  soundly  for  8  hours,  awakes  very  lazy  and  re-
freshed: feels  better  in  a.m.

Drowsy,  dozing  in  the  morning.

Awakened: by thirst;  urgency to  urinate; pollutions  and
sexual  desire ;  pains  in  the  back  ;  chill.


113  ALOE  SOCOTRINA.

Cannot  sleep,  heat  and  a  crowd  of  thoughts  busy  him.
Oppressive  dreams  of  danger,  could  not  cry  out ;  dreams  of

soiling  himself.
Spasmodic  jerks  when  falling  asleep.
Cannot  sleep  :  on  account  of  itching  and  burning  in  anus  ;  on

account  of  cold  hands  and  feet.
During  siesta :  seminal  emission.
^^  Time. Middle  of  day :  angry,  revengeful  disposition.
Afternoon  :  frequent  urging  to  urinate.
Night :  urging  to  urinate  worse ;  sweat.
^^  Temperature  and  Weather. i  Relieved by  cold  water.

d  Headache, d  Prolapsus  uteri.
Heat :  aggravates  headache.
In  cloudy  weather :  out  of  humor  ;  face  pale.
Damp  weather :  causes  diarrhoea ;  flatulency  worse.
Wet  weather :  pain  in  back. See  31.
Worse  in  hot,  damp  weather.
Cold  applications :  relieve  headache  and  piles.
In  the  open  air :  nose  red ;  raw  voice ;  averse  to  walk  in  the

wind ;  not  disposed  to  go  into  the  air  although  it  relieves.

■  Better  in  cold  weather;  but  cannot  take  a  cold  water  bath

as  it  acts  as  stimulus  to  genitals.
^^  Fever. Chilly:  with  coryza,  in  the  cold  open  air;  —  at  stool,

shivering.
Cold  hands  and  feet  in  bed,  preventing  sleep.
Cold  hands,  warm  feet.
Heat  in  spots,  on  the  scalp  or  in  the  face.
Ebullitions,  with  anxiety  and  restlessness.
Sweat :  smells strong ;  — offensive  on the genitals :  —  at

night,  after  drinking.
^^  Attacks. Twitching  of  eyelids. See  3.
Periodic  heat  of  face,  with  headache.

■  Attacks  preceded  by  obstinate  constipation, d  Colic.
Sudden,  quickly  passing,  I  urging  to  stool.

Pains  of  short  duration.

I  As  winter  approaches  each  year,  itch  manifests  itself.
^^  Locality  and  Direction. Right  side :  eyes,  nose,  stitches  in

the larynx ; scapula bruised ; arm heavy ; wrist-joint

weak.
Left  side :  wind  in  descending  colon ;  stitches  in  the  chest ;

pain  through  to  left  scapula,  29 ;  ribs  bruised,  34 ;  pain

along  ureter ;  pain  and  lameness  in  thigh.
Left  to  right :  earache.
^^  Sensations. Feeling of vermin running over the body.

d  Hysteria.
Bruised  or  sprained  feeling :  in  left  forearm,  right scapula,

left  ribs,  great  toe.
Lameness :  in  limbs.


ALOE  SOCOTRINA.  114

Pressure  :  in  many  parts-
Heaviness  :  in  the  abdomen,  rectum,  back,  limbs ;  "weight  on
the  vertex  ;  eyes  heavy.

Fullness :  especially  in  stomach,  hypochondria,  abdomen,  pel-
vis.

Stitches :  sticking,  temples,  ears,  tongue,  throat,  epigastrium,
spleen,  liver  to  chest,  back,  limbs,  through  chest,  larynx,
region  of  heart ;  sacrum  to  loins.

Pricking,  twitching :  joints.

Cutting :  abdomen,  navel.

Twisting,  griping :  navel.

Female  organs  feel  as  if  torn.

Drawing :  in  various  parts,  as  if  the  bones  were  involved ;  in
joints.

Jerking,  drawing:  in  fingers,  knees,  elbows,  etc.

Soreness :  of  the  muscles  ;  soles  of  the  feet ;  scalp  in  spots. "

Sensation  of  hairs  on  the  back  of  the  hand  and  fingers.

Creeping  :  spreading  from  sacral  bone  over  whole  body.
*^  Tissues. Congestion  to  head  and  chest,  but  especially  to  por-
tal system.

Mucous  membranes ;  especially  causes  the  production  of  mu-
cus in  jelly-like  lumps  or  cakes.

Acts  mainly  on  the  rectal  mucous  lining.
■*'  Touch,  Passive  Motions. Touch  :  muscles  (especially  of  ab-
domen) sensitive ;  scalp  tender  ;  epididymis  sensitive.

Pressure :  aggravates  pains  in  head ;  abdominal  pains.
'^^  Skin. Itching,  especially  of  the  legs.

Pimples  on  the  abdomen.

Spots  which,  when  scratched,  pain  and  become  sensitive.
^'Stages  of  Life,  Constitution. iiOld  people. ^ Colic  and

diarrhoea.

Man  get.  45  taken  with  dysentery  confining  him  to  his  bed  a
month  at  a  time.

Old  men  with  enlarged  prostate. See  21.

Woman  get.  55. Woman  set.  65. 6  Colic.

Climacteric  years. See  23.

Phlegmatic,  indolent.

I  Women  of  relaxed  phlegmatic  habit. ^Prolapsus  uteri.
*^  Relationship. Aloe  has  many  symptoms  like  Sulphur,  and  is
equally  important  in  chronic  diseases,  with  abdominal  pleth-
ora, etc.

Similar  to  Ailant.  (dull  frontal  headache) ;  Crum.  gutt.  (diar-
rhoea) ;  Amm.  mur.  (abdominal  and  diarrhoeic  symptoms) ;
Nux  vom.  (gastric,  abdominal  and  uterine  troubles ;  bad
effects  of  sedentary  habits).

Antidotes  to  Aloe  :  jSulphu7%  mustard.

Camphor  relieves  for  awhile.

JS^ux  vom.  and  LycoiJ.  relieve  the  earache.


115  ALUMEN.

ALUMEN.

Alum.  Aluminii  et  Potassii  Sulphas.

The  well-known  astringent  double  salt,  found  as  a  native  mineral  near
the  volcanoes  of  the  Lipari  Isles,  in  Sicily;  abundant  in  this  country  in
Maryland  and  in  Tennessee. One  of  the  oldest  medicines  ever  used.

Introduced  and  proved  by  C.  Hg.,  in  1845,  with  the  assistance  of  Drs.
Husmann  and  Rhees.  .  Also  proved  by  Dr.  Jeanes,  whose  frequently  cor-
roborated symptoms  are  included.

A  full  monography  was  published  in  the  Journals,  in  1872,  and  is  con-
tained in  C.  Hg's  Mai.  Med.,  Vol.  I,  published  by  Boericke  &  Tafel,  1873.
734  numbers  on  39  pages.

^  Mind. Lectrophilie,  keeps  bed  without  necessity,  plaguing  her
family.

I  I  Anxiety,  doubts  if  medicine  will  relieve  her.

Feels  like  after  unpleasant  news.

Spells  of  rage,  attacks  people.

Thinking  about  her  disease  causes  palpitation.

Unpleasant  news  excite  and  cause  nervous  tremors.
^  Sensorium. Vertigo  lying  on  his  back,  with  weakness  in  pit  of
stomach ;  ^  opening  eyes ;  >  turning  on  r.  side.

Giddy  looking  down,  as  if  falling  forward;  rush  of  blood  to
head.

Death-like  fainting  spell,  with  loss  of  all  faculties.
^  Inner  Head. I  Neuralgic  headache. ^  Nasal  polypus.

Jerking  in  left  forehead,  evening.

I  I  Pressing  on  top  of  head.

Pains  coming  and  going,  from  place  to  place ;  in  the  forenoon.

I  I  Pain  •<  morning,  on  awaking.

Shooting  through  temples,  with  sickness,  relieved  by  drinking
cold  water.

Rush  of  blood  to  head.
^  Sight  and  Eyes. iWild  look,  with  spells  of  rage.

I  Sees  things  double  by  candlelight.

Pupils  dilated.

I  Right  eye  squints  towards  the  nose.

■  Spots  on  the  cornea.

■  Prolapsus  iridis  after  cataract  operation.

■  Staphyloma  cornese.

Bruised  feeling  on  the  inferior  edge  of  orbit  of  left  eye,  on
pressure,  or  by  moving  the  eyelids.

■  Varicosities  of  the  conjunctiva.


ALUMEN.  116

I  Trachoma  (topically  and  internally).
iPurulent  ophthalmia  of  infants.

Itching  burning  on  the  border  of  the  lower  lids ;  right  to  left.
^  Hearing  and  Ears. I  l  Hears  every  little  noise  in  sleep.
Heat  in  both  ears  and  left  side  of  face  at  night.

■  Purulent  otorrhoea.

''  Nose. Dryness  of  the  nostrils  and  choanse.
Nosebleed.
I  Nasal  polypus  left  side,  with  rough  skin  all  over  the  face  and

body,  and  neuralgic  headache.
I  Lupus  or  cancer.
^  Face. Expression  animated ;  with  fever.
Left  side  red  and  hot.
Complexion  sickly,  sallow  ;  yellow.
Pale  as  a  corpse,  lips  blue.
^  Jaw. Pain  in  the  left  articulation  of  the  jaw  close  to  the  ear.
^^  Teeth  and  Gums, i  Teeth  loose.

I  Gums  swollen  and  inflamed,  spongy;  covered  with  a  gray,
dirty  coating. Teeth  surrounded  by  proud  flesh, d  Stoma-
titis.
I  Profuse  hemorrhage  after  extraction  of  a  tooth.
"  Taste,  Speech,  Tongue. Taste  : l  bitter ;  sourish,  astringent ;
sweetish,  disgusting  after-taste.
Tongue  clean,  except  a  slight  coating  of  slime  on  the  back  part.
Tongue : I  I  dry ;  burning  in  evening ;  sour  feeling ;  stitches

worse  at  the  tip.
iScirrhus  of  the  tongue.
^^  Mouth. Mouth  dry,  without  thirst.

■  Spreading  ulcers  in  the  mouth.
iNoma.

Mouth  burning,  ulcerated ;  gray,  dirty  spongy  skin  about  a
tooth,  which  is  surrounded  with  proud  flesh  ;  offensive  saliva.
I  Profuse  ptyalism,  mercurial  in  origin  or  not.
^^  Hard  Palate  to  (Esophagus. I  Uvula  inflamed  and  enlarged.
I  Uvula  elongated,  relaxed  after  catarrh.

■  Predisposed  to  tonsillitis.

I  Veins  about  the  fauces  distended  ;  velum  red ;  much  hawking.

Catarrh  of  fauces  and  throat.

I  Neuralgia  of  the  throat.

Spat  a  lump  of  coagulated  blood  in  the  morning  after  rising.

I  Throat  sore  and  dry  when  talking  or  swallowing  fluids ;  diflB-

cult  swallowing.
I  Throat  relaxed,  ulcerated.

■  Burning  and  severe  pains ;  heat  up  from  the  stomach.

■  Spasmodic  constriction  in  oesophagus;  fluids  can  scarcely  be

swallowed.
Prickling  sensation  in  both  sides  of  throat  and  great  dryness,
with  constant  desire  to  drink.


117  ALUMEN.

I  Throat  chronically  aiFected ;  mucous  membrane  covered  with
mucus,  causing  troublesome  cough.
^*  Appetite  and  Thirst. Appetite  increased,  even  with  a  fullness
in  stomach.

Loathes  food.

Thirst :  throat  dry ;  and  increased  appetite ;  with  heat  in  the
stomach,  relieved  by  drinking  cold  water ;  intense,  with
fever.

Mouth  dry,  but  no  increase  of  thirst.
^^  Eating  and  Drinking. Before  breakfast :  attacks  of  nausea ;
cough.

During  breakfast :  cough  worse.

After  breakfast :  cough  better.

Eating  something  relieves  her  sinking  feeling  in  the  stomach.

After  the  meal,  heaviness  in  the  stomach ;  throbbing ;  disten-
sion ;  vomited  everything.

At  dinner  :  unusual  erections.

Drinking  cold  water :  relieves  headache.
^^  Nausea  and  Vomiting. Squalmish  at  intervals,  when  awak-
ing at  night,  prevents  falling  asleep  again.

Nausea  with  headache,  pain  in  the  stomach  and  retching.

Nausea  with  faintness  and  weakness,  more  in  the  morning,
with  restlessness  and  excitement,  giddiness ;  chilliness.

I  Vomits  large  quantities  of  glairy  mucus;  or  tough,  colorless,
sour  slime,  seldom  containing  bile,  oftener  food.

I  I  Atonic  hsematemesis ;  vomiting  of  blood.

Habitual  hsematemesis  in  hard  drinkers.

■Vomits  everything  he  eats.

■  Vomiting,  with  colic.

''^  Scrobiculum  and  Stomach.  A  sensation  of  fullness  in  pit
of  stomach  urges  him  to  take  a  deep  breath,  but  he  cannot.

Weak  faint  feeling  in  pit  of  stomach  ;  sinking  sensation.

Pain,  nausea  and  rush  of  blood  to  the  head  and  drowsiness.

I  I  Pain  with  faintness,  sickness  and  cold  sweat.

I  I  Burning  heat  and  feeling  of  fullness.

I  I  Heat  in  stomach,  relieved  by  drinking  cold  water.

Severe  pain  to  left  of  scrobiculum,  better  standing  still  and
pressing  on  it.

■  Pyrosis  and  gastric  catarrh.

Villi  of  the  stomach  becoming  disorganized ;  mucous  lining
dark  red  or  brown :  walls  thickened,  more  at  the  pylorus,
and  hardened,  as  if  tanned  (toxic).

Pressing  followed  by  throbbing ;  lying  on  the  back  in  the  eve-
ning.
'^  Abdomen. Warm  creeps  running  down,  followed  by  jerking
contractions  of  abdominal  muscles,  towards  the  linea  alba.

Relaxed  feeling  in  abdomen.

Distension  from  wind.


ALUMEN.  118

I  I  Burning  pain  low  down  and  in  small  of  back  prevents  him

getting  up  ;  as  if  the  back  would  break.
I  Colic  pain  better  from  pressure;  worse  when  walking,  with

fullness  and  heaviness.
I  I  Spasmodic  wind-colic.

I  Abdomen  sensitive  to  touch  during  the  colic.
I  Abdomen  and  navel  sunken  in;  walls  hard  and  retracted

towards  the  spine.
I  Potter's  colic  with  sleeplessness,  headache,  crawling  tingling

in  the  limbs,  constipation ;  better  from  pressure  ;  abdomen

retracted ;  tongue  dry,  black  ;  urine  red  and  scanty  ;  violent

delirium  and  debility  ;  also  after  opium.
iLead  colic, violent  as  if  drunk  and  enraged; pulse  slow;

tongue  in  folds  and  dry ;  trembling  of  the  limbs  and  pain  as

if  they  were  beaten.
-"  Stools,  Rectum  and  Anus. Violent,  ineffectual  urging.

Stool :  less  frequent,  dryer  and  harder ;  large,  black,  hard  or

in  small  pieces  like  sheep's  dung ;  no  relief  afterwards.
I  I  Difficult  stool  with  some  blood  and  subsequent  beating  in

the  anus.
I  First  hard,  then  soft  stools  and  pains  following.

■  Diarrhoea  yellow  as  an  infant's  ;  Bslimy  after  colic  pains,  caus-

ing great  weakness.

■  Diarrhoea  ichorous,  mixed  with  blood  of  an  offensive  odor;

abdominal  typhus  ; ■  great  exhaustion.

■  Very  weakening  colliquative  diarrhoea.

■  ■Masses  of  coagulated  blood. ^  Typhus  abdominalis.

■  Putrid  dysentery.

Violent  pains  going  from  rectum  down  the  thighs.

During  stool: ■  dyspnoea; ■pains in the  rectum; tenesmus.

After  stool:  ■■scarcely  endurable  pain,  with  scirrhous  indura-
tions in  rectum  ;  no  fissures.

I fi Ulcerations  in  rectum,  painful  excrescences;  fetid  bloody
ichor.

■  Anus  protruding,  tumors  inflamed  and  painful.

A  small  lump  at  anus  itching  violently,  worse  at  night.
Itching  at  anus  all  the  evening ;  pruritus.

■  Long-lasting  pain  in  rectum  after  each  stool.

■  Painful,  bleeding  piles  ;  with  aching  in  the  anus.
Bleeding  from  the  anus  after  wine  or  whiskey.

^'  Urinary  Organs, i  i  Diabetes  mellitus.

I  I  Contractive  sensations  deep  in  the  pelvis  with  complaints  of

rectum  and  bladder.
Urine  increased,  free,  acid.

■  Frequent  urging,  with scanty, clear  flow,  containing  lumps

of  blood ;  sediment  slimy,  tough  or  membranaceous.

■  Frequent  and painful  urging, with  painful  passing  of  small

quantities;  now and then mixed  with blood, at  others,


119  ALUMEN.

clear ;  after  standing,  thick  as  if  mixed  with  clay,  dirty,
fibrous  sediment ;  catarrh  of  bladder,  mostly  with  the
aged.

Incontinentia  urmse. Enuresis.

iMust  urinate  every  hour  or  two,  night  and  day.

Urine  has  an  oily,  iridescent  film  on  it.

Urine  scanty,  reddish,  in  colic ;  bloody.

Blennorrhoea  urethrse.

Itching  of  the  orifice  of  the  urethra.
^^  Male  Organs. Unusual  erections  while  at  dinner.

I  Male parts weak, frequent emissions, d  Consequences  of

onanism.
Spongy,  sycotic  warts.

I I  Gonorrhoea  ;  gonorrhoea  preputialis  ;  gleet.

Shooting  pain  from  the  middle  line  of  the  belly,  as  along  a

thread,  down  into  the  penis.
Cutting  pain  in  the  left  side  of  the  penis.
^^  Female Sexual  Organs, a  Affections  of  left  ovary  with

troublesome  constipation.
Insupportable  pain  near  the  left  groin,  towards  the  region  of

the  ovary.

■  Weight  of  the  uterus  presses  down  the  collum  ;  granulations

of  the  vagina ;  leucorrhoea  copious ;  emaciation,  yellow
complexion.

■  Indurations  of  the  uterus,  even  scirrhus.
I  Ulcers  of  the  uterus.

■  Discharge  of  coagula  fromx  uterus (and  rectum). ^Typhus.
Menses  scanty,  watery. During  catamenia,  hands  weak.
Metrorrhagia  with  atony.

Vagina  very  sensitive  and  narrowed  by  swellings  of  various

size.
Pruritus  vaginae.
2*  Pregnancy  and  Parturition. Faintish  weakness during

pregnancy,  no  vomiting ;  flushing,  followed  by  throbbing  of

the  heart.

■  Flooding  after  child-birth.
\  Cancer  of  mammae.

■  Sore,  inflamed  nipples.

"  Voice  and  Larynx. Trachea  and  Bronchia. Hoarse-
ness ;  voice  shrill,  cannot  talk  loud ;  worse  from  talking.
Voice  sometimes  high,  sometimes  low.

■  ■Voice  entirely  lost.

Talking  increases  hoarseness,  causes  tickling  cough.
Scratching  in  the  larynx  as  from  dust, roughness, brings  up
much  clear  mucus.

■  Epidemic  membranous  croup.
Constrictive  feeling  in  the  windpipe.

■  Bronchitis.


ALUMEN.  120

^^  Respiration. I  l  Inclined  to  take  a  deep  breath.

I  I  Cannot  take  a  full  breath.

I  Oppression  of  the  chest,  with  colic.

Breathing  oppressed,  anxious  as  from  a  heavy  stone  in  the
chest.

Tightness  across  the  upper  part  of  the  chest.

Rapid  short  breathing  with  uneasiness  in  the  stomach.
^^  Cough, iWith  the  cough  scraping  in  the  throat.

I  Dry  cough  in  the  evening  after  lying  down.

I  Cough  from  tickling  in  the  larynx  caused  by  talking.

Coughs  a  long  time  every  morning,  with  scratching  in  the
middle  of  the  sternum,  pain  in  the  groin,  in  the  region  of
the  ovary. ^Whooping-cough.

I  Cough  immediately  after  rising,  excited  by  a  tickling  in  the
throat ;  worse  during,  better  after,  breakfast.

I  Chronic  morning  cough  of  old  people.

Sputa: Iropy. ^ Bronchitis  and  phthisis. — Iscanty.

I  Atonic  haemoptysis.

\  Phthisis.
^^  Inner  Chest  and  Lungs. Pain  under  the  clavicle  and  right
shoulder  when  inhaling.

Stinging  from  upper  chest  through  to  back,  wakens  at  night.

When  bending,  sore  pain  under  the  right  nipple  or  in  left
chest.

Feeling  of  weakness  in  the  lower  part  of  the  chest  and  in  the
abdomen.
"^  Heart  and  Pulse. Feels  warm  in  the  left  side  opposite  the
shoulder,  also  very  tired.

At  times  feels  well,  then,  when  beginning  to  think  of  her  dis-
ease, she  feels  the  heart  beat  and  yet  to  the  hand  it  seems
to  beat  very  little  stronger  than  natural,  and  at  other  times
motion  is  scarcely  perceptible ;  sometimes  the  contractions
are  frequent,  at  others  seldom.

Violent  palpitation  from  a  throbbing  in  the  epigastrium  ex-
tending to  heart.

Palpitation  from  mental  excitement.

Rapid,  violent  palpitation,  worse  lying  on  the  right  side,  or  a
length  of  time  in  one  position.

Palpitation  in  attacks.

■  Dilatation  of  heart.

I  1  Pain  from  heart  to  lower  part  of  right  leg.

Pulse  frequent  with  fever ;  slow  or  thread-like  with  colic ;  in-
termitting.

Strong  pulsation  through  the  whole  body.
^°  Outer  Chest. Chest  sore  and  tender  to  the  touch  above  clav-
icle and  over  second  or  third  rib,  left  side.
^^  Back. Spine  weak  ;  evening.


121  ALUMEN.

Feels  as  if  cold  water  was  poured  down  the  back,  with  head-
ache.

Pain  where  shoulder-blade  ends,  near  spine,  right  side.

A  warm,  cramp-like  feeling  below  hips,  going  up  left  side.

Pain  all  evening  on both  sides  of  the  spine  on  a  line  with  in-
ferior angles  of  scapulae,  with  every  deep  inhalation.
^^  Upper  Limbs. Weakness  in  shoulders,  >  bending  forward.

Pain  in  left  shoulder ;  >>  from  motion.

Feels  as  if  a  cord  was  drawn  tightly  around  upper  arm,  caus-
ing pain  in  lines  from  the  ligature.

Trembling  and  twitching  of  the  arms.

Right  wrist  feels  sprained.

Hands  weak,  dropping  things, d  During  menses.

Pains  in  the  hands  with  other  suffering.
^^  Lower  Limbs. Pains  in  the  limbs,  particularly  at  night.

Lassitude,  numbness.

Bruised  pain  when  standing.

Feels  as  if  a  cord  was  tied  around  the  leg  under  the  knee.

Cramps  in  the  calves.

Soles  sensitive  to  pressure,  when  walking.

Stitches  in  right  big  toe.

1  I  Feet  numb  and  cold,  although  covered  up  warm  in  bed.

Legs  cold  from  knees  down.

■  Frozen  feet.

:  Ingrowing  toe  nails.
^*  Limbs  in  General, i  Bruised  pains.

■  Crawling,  tingling.

Cold  hands  and  feet  with  stomachache.
^^  Position. Motion. Lying on back :  vertigo ;  pressing  fol-
lowed by  throbbing  in  stomach.

Lying  down  : dry  cough  in  evening.

Lying  on  right  side :  palpitation  worse.

Lying  in  one  position  long  :  palpitation  worse.

Turning  on  right  side  :  relieves  vertigo.

Standing  still :  pain  in  scrobiculum  better ;  bruised  feeling  in
limbs.

Motion : of  eyelids,  bruised  feeling  of  orbit ; pain in  left
shoulder  better.

Bending :  sore  pain  in  chest ;  weakness  in  shoulders  better.

Cannot  get  up  :  pain  in  small  of  back.

Can  hardly  hold  head  up :  with  fever.

Walking  :  colic  worse  ;  soles  sensitive.
36  Jf  erves. Trembling,  after  rising,  most  in  arms  ;  excited.

I  I  Trembling  with  pain  as  if  beaten.

Nervous  tremor  and  excitability  of  feeling  as  if  agitated  by  un-
pleasant news.

I  Weak, d  Typhus.

I  I  Weak  and  relaxed  in  stomach,  abdomen  and  all  the  limbs.


ALUMEN.  122

1  Tired,  faint,  as  if  he  would  fall  from  his  seat,  forenoon.
^"^  Sleep. Light  sleep,  hears  every  little  noise.
Cannot  get  to  sleep  on  account  of  orgasm.
Anxiety  at  night,  nausea,  headache.
Sleepless  from  fever, d  Colic.
Wakened  by  stitches  in  the  chest.
Disturbed  by  nightmare,  4  a.m.
^^  Time. Night :  heat  in  ears  and  face  ;  squalmish  when  awak-
ing ;  itching  lump  in  anus  worse ;  stinging  in  chest ;  pain

in  limbs  ;  anxiety,  nausea  and  headache.
Night  and  day  :  must  urinate.
Forenoon :  pains  in  head  change  from place  to  place ;  tired

and  faint ;  internal  heat.
Evening:  jerking  in  left  forehead;  tongue burns;  pressing

and  throbbing  in  stomach  ;  itching  at  the  anus  ;  dry  cough  ;

spine  weak  ;  pain  on  both  sides  of  spine.
Morning  :  pain in head  on awaking  ;  spat  coagulated  blood

after rising ; nausea, fainting, giddiness  and  chilliness ;

coughs  a  long  time.
4  A.M.:  nightmare.

^^  Temperature  and  Weather, i '  Very  sensitive  to  cold.

After  taking  cold,  has  a  sore  throat.

While  washing,  chest  pains.

Exposure  to  air  :  roughens  and  chaps  skin.
■***  Fever.  Chill :  metallic  taste,  slight  nausea,  palpitation  ;  pain
striking  from  the  heart  across  to  the  lower  extremity  of  the
right  lung ;  a  sensation  as  of  cold  water  poured  down  the
back,  and  numbing  coldness  of  the  feet,  though  covered
warmly  in  bed ;  death-like  faintness  with  the  chill.

Chilly  with  sick  stomach.

Coldness  followed  by  headache.

Coldness  of  skin  followed  by  heat  and  tingling.  •

Fever  with  intense  thirst,  nausea,  etc.

Inward  heat  throughout  body,  in  forehead.

Warm  creeps  over  belly.

Chilliness,  and  another  time  inward  heat.

Coldness  with  stomach  pain, followed  by  heat  with  rush  of
blood  to  head ;  can  hardly  hold  it  up.
*^  Attacks. B  Sudden  attacks  disappearing  quickly:  of  beating  or
fluttering  of  the  heart.

Nausea,  flushes,  cramps,  etc.,  disappear  soon,  return  quickly.

I  I  Same  hour,  3  p.m.,  pain  in  arm.

I  Every  other  morning  : nausea,  faintness  and  weakness,  with
restlessness  and  excitement.

Every  hour  or  two  :  must  urinate.
^^  Locality  and  Direction. Right :  eye  squints  towards  nose ;
pain  under  shoulder  ;  soreness  under  nipple  when  bending  ;


123  ALUMEN.

pain  to  leg  from  heart ;  pain  near  spine  ;  wrist  feels  sprained  ;
stitches  in  big  toe.

Right  to  left :  itching  on  border  of  eyelids.

Left:  jerking  in  forehead;  heat  in  side  of  face  ;  nasal  poly-
pus ;  pain  in  jaw ;  pain  in  scrobiculum  ;  cutting  side  of
penis :  affection  of  ovary ;  pain  in  groin ;  pain  in  chest
when  bending ;  soreness  about  clavicle  and  second  and  third
ribs  ;  warm  feeling  from  hips  up  side  ;  pain  in  shoulder.

Above  .downwards :  warm  creeps  in  abdomen ;  pains  from
rectum  to  thighs ;  shooting  from  belly  to  penis  ;  pain  from
heart  to  right  leg ;  feeling  as  of  water  being  poured  down
the  back.

Front  to  back  :  stinging  in  upper  chest.

Diagonally  :  pain  from  heart  to  right  leg.

Below  upwards :  warm  sensation  from  hips.
^^  Sensations. Throbbing:  stomach,  anus,  chest,  whole  body.

I  Like  a  cord  or  ligament  about  the  part.

Burning :  lids,  tongue,  mouth,  anus,  etc.

Stinging :  vertex,  temple,  chest,  sides,  tip  of  tongue,  rectum,
etc.
*^  Tissues. 8  Hemorrhages  from  leech  bites,  extracting  teeth,  etc.

I  I  Parenchymatous  bleeding  from  mouth,  gums,  nose,  uterus,.

etc.

Mucous  membrane :  dry ;  nose,  on  tongue,  in  mouth,  larynx,
etc.

Emaciation.

Joints  of  arms,  hands  and  feet  feel  bruised.
^^  Touch. Passive  Motion. Touch  :  abdomen  sensitive  ;  ten-
derness of  upper  left  chest.

Slight  scratches  bleed.

After  extracting  teeth,  profuse  bleeding.

After  cataract  operation,  prolapse  of  iris.

■  After  metallic  pessaries,  scirrhus.
Pressure  relieves  or  increases  colic.

II  In  powdered  substance  or  solutions,  in  burns  or  scalds,
after  a  plunge  of  arm  in  boiling  oil.

Pressure : causes bruised  feeling  in  orbit ;  relieves  pain  in
scrobiculum ;  colic  better.
^^  Skin. Itching  in  eyelids,  anus,  scrotum  and  shoulder.
I  Skin  dry  ;  exposed  to  air,  rough  and  chapped.

■  Rough  skin  all  over  the  body  and  face. ^  Nasal  polypus.
Furuncles  on  body,  on  thighs.

■  ■Ulceration  less  after  a  burning,  or  such  as  remain  after  dif-

ferent other  applications  to  the  skin.

■  Fungous  granulations.

■  Proud  flesh.

■  Chilblains.

■  Indolent  ulcers.


ALUMEN.  124

■  Scorbutic  ulcers.
*^  Stages  of  Life,  Constitution. Old  people, d  Disease  of  the
bladder. See  21.

Children,  profuse  bronchial  catarrh.
*^  Relationship.  Similar  to  its  relatives,  Ahiminium,
Alumina,  etc.,  and  to  :  Aloes  (rectum) ;  Capsio.  (long  uvula) ;
Ferrum  (relaxed  abdominal  walls,  prolapsed  uterus,  etc.) ;
Ferr.  jod.  (leucorrhoea  and  prolapsus) ;  Kali  bieJir.  (stringy
discharges  from  mucous  membranes) ;  Meinour,  (prolapsed
vagina,  uterus  and  rectum ;  tenesmus  of  rectum,  etc.) ;
Merc.  corr.  (burning  and  tenesmus  of  rectum) ;  Mur.  ac.
(fluttering  of  heart,  anal  pains  after  stool  with  fissures)  ;
Nitr.  ac.  (ulcers ;  cancer  recti ;  hemorrhages  from  all  ori-
fices ;  clots  from  rectum  in  typhoid ;  tenesmus,  fissures,
etc.,  of  rectum) ;  N^ux  vom.  (rectum) ;  Opium;  Plumbum
(colic ;  tenesmus  of  rectum  ;  granular  lids,  etc.) ;  Ratan.
(fissure  of  rectum) ;  Stannum  (prolapsed  vagina) ;  Sulphur
(pain  through  left  lung,  etc.) ;  Sulph.  ac.  (hemorrhages,
etc.) ;  Zinc.  met.  et  sulph.  (eyelids  ;  ulcers  of  cervix  uteri  ;
colic,  etc.)

Antidote  to: Head  poisoning ;  calomel  and  other  mercurial
preparations  :  Aloes  (for  vomiting  of  blood).

Antidoted  by: Chamom. (cramps  in  abdomen);  Nux  vom.;
Ipec.  (nausea  and  faintness) ;  Sulphur.


125  ALUMINA.

ALUMINA,  OR  ARGILLA.

Pure  Clay.  Aluminium  Oxide.  Al^.O^.

Used  by  the  Old  School,  but  only  according  to  very  poor  indications.
Hahnemann  had  proved  the  pure  earth  when  Hartlaub  edited  a  collection
of  975  symptoms,  obtained  from  four  provers,  in  his  Mat. Med.,  in  1829.  The
year  after,  Hahnemann  published  his  own  observations  in  Stapfs  Archiv.,
viz.,  215  symptoms,  from  a  much  better  preparation.  Hartlaub  simply
purified  his  preparation  by  washing  it,  which  never  can  sufiice,  but  Hah-
nemann subjected  his  to  red  heat.  A  careful  comparison  of  the  symptoms
will  show  that  there  is  a  difference.  In  1835,  in  the  second  edition  of  his
Chronic  Diseases,  Hahnemann  gives  it  place  among  the  antipsorics,  adding
a  few  symptoms  from  Dr.  Bute,  and  condensing  Hartlaub's  collection  to
about  900  symptoms.

Boenninghausen  published  very  remarkable  cures  with  the  pure  metal,
in  the  A.  H.  Z.,  being  guided  by  the  symptoms  of  the  oxide.

The  symptoms  of  a  remarkable  cure  of  spinal  disease  with  Alum,  metal-
licum,  by  Kehfuss,  translated  by  Dunham,  and  distinguished  by  the  abbre-
viation met.,  are  here  included.

^  Mind. Consciousness  not  clear.

Consciousness  of  his  personal  identity  confused.

■  Great  weakness  or  loss  of  memory.

Inability  to  recollect  things  or  follow  up  a  train  of  thought.

d  Cephalalgia.
I  Confusion  and  obscuration  of  intellect ;  met. d  Spinal  disease.
Makes  mistakes  in  speaking,  using  words  not  intended.

■  Time  passes  too  slowly ; lintolerable  ennui;  an  hour  seems

half  a  day.

Difficulty  of  thinking.

Mania  to  kill  himself  with  a  sharp  weapon.

^Seeing  blood  on  a  knife,  she  has  horrid  ideas  of  killing  her-
self, though  she  abhors  the  idea.

Crying,  against  his  will.

No  desire  to  do  anything,  especially  anything  serious,  d  Ce-
phalalgia.

■  Depressed  and  lachrymose. ^Melancholia.
Fearfulness.

Sad  thoughts  in  the  morning,  is  joyless  and  comfortless  on

waking.
Low-spirited,  trifling  things  appeared  insurmountable. 6  Liver

complaint.


ALUMINA.  126

Apprehensiveness.

■  Apprehensive  of  losing  his  reason.
Uneasy  evenings,  as  from  impending  evil.
Fears  he  is  not  to  recover.

Dread  of  death,  with  thoughts  of  suicide.

Great  anxiety,  is  fearful  and  peevish.

Anguish,  oppressive  and  vague  fearfulness,  or  uneasiness,  as  if

he  had  committed  a  crime, d  Cephalalgia.
Anxiety  as  if  threatened  with  an  epileptic  fit ;  depressed  with

grief.

■  Variable  mood,  at  one  time  confident,  at  another  timid.

■  Disposition  quiet  and  resigned;  met. ^  Spinal  disease.
Moroseness.

■  Peevish  and  whining,  with  hot  earlobes.
Easily  startled.

Sufferings  following  anger.

■  Mental  symptoms  worse  in  the  morning  on  awaking.
^  Sensorium. Quickly  passing  vertigo  in  the  morning.

I  I  Vertigo  : ■everything  turns  in  a  circle ;  with  nausea ;  worse

before  breakfast ; ■on  opening  the  eyes.
Vertigo  on  stooping ;  better  after  breakfast,  and  from  wiping

the  eyes ;  nausea,  faintness,  pain  in  the  nape  of  the  neck.
B  Stupefaction,  with  dread  of  falling  forward.
Heaviness  of  the  head,  with  pale,  languid  face.
Dullness  and  numbness  of  the  head.
Vertigo  as  if  drunken.
Vertigo  with  seeing  white  stars.
Vertigo  when  closing  the  eyes.

■  Inability  to  walk,  except  with  the  eyes  open,  and  in  day-

time, d  Locomotor  ataxia.

■  Cloudiness  and  drunken  feeling,  alternating  with  pain  in  the

kidneys.
Easily  made  drunk,  even  by  the  weakest  spirituous  drink.

■  When  his  eyes  were  closed,  his  whole  body  tottered ;  if  not

firmly  held,  he  fell  to  the  ground  ;  met. d  Spinal  disease.
^  Inner Head. Headache  attended  with  nausea,  pressure  in  the

forehead  and  congestion  to  eyes  and  nose,  with  nosebleed.
Pressure  in  forehead  from  without  inward,  or  rather  outward,

or  over  the  eyes ;  in  the  evening,  sometimes  with  a  chill,  or

nocturnal  heat  or  sweat.
Throbbing,  frontal  pain,  worse  going  up  stairs,  or  stepping.
Burning,  pressive  pain,  with  heat  in  forehead,  while  standing

or  sitting,  better  in  open  air.
Headache  sometimes  in  1.  side,  <  by  walking  in  open  air.
Lacerating  pain  in  head.
Severe  stitches  in  the  brain,  with  nausea  and  dullness  of  the

mind.


127  ALUMINA.

Sensation  in  the  head  as  if  its  contents  were  in  a  vice,  with  a
weight  on  the  top.

■  Headache  resulting  from  chronic  catarrhs  of  the  head.

■  Headache  with  constipation.

Headache,  relieved  by  lying  quiet  in  bed,  or  resting  the  head
upon  a  cushion.

■  Heaviness  of  the  head,  with  pale,  languid  face;  the  vertex

feels  painful  to  touch.
Pulsations  in  the  vertex  with  congestion  to  eyes  and  nose.
Stupefying  tightness  in  r.  temple,  >  by  pressing  upon  it.
Heat  in  the  head.

■  Headache  in  region  of  both  parietal  bones, d  Spinal  disease.
Pulsative  headache  in  vertex, over right  temple, early on

waking.

Pain  in  vertex,  <  on  moving  head  or  stooping,  >  by  pressure  ;
shooting  in  vertex  on  coughing.

Tightness,  with  drawing  and  beating  in  r.  side  of  occiput.

Pain  in  head  and  nape  of  neck,  it  increases  on  going  to  bed,
and  only  leaves  off  in  the  morning  on  rising.

Semilateral  affections  of  the  head,  old  rheumatic  affections,  al-
ways appearing  on  the  same  side.

■  Increased  pulsation  of  the  temporal  arteries, d  Spinal  disease.
*  Outer  Head. Itching  of  the  scalp,  with  dry,  white  scales.

Humid  scurf,  worse  about  the  temples,  bleeding  when  scratched  ;

worse  in  the  evening,  or  at  new  and  full  moon.
Scalp  feels  numb.
Pressure  on  the  forehead,  as  from  a  tight  hat.

■  Headache  as  if  the  hair  was  pulled;  with  nausea.

I  I  Falling  off  and excessive  dryness  of  the  hair ;  scalp  sore

when  the  hair  is  touched ;  creeping  and  titillation  of  scalp.

■Pain  in  the  head  and  nape  of  the  neck  worse  on  going  to  bed  ;

leaves  on  rising  in  the  morning.
Itching  on  forehead.

Exanthema  on  the  forehead,  feels  as  if  glue  had  dried  on  it.
^  Sight  and  Eyes. Far-sightedness.

■  Vision  dim  and  eyes  dry  in  the  evening, d  Chronic  catarrh.

■  Seeing  fiery  spots  ;  met. 6  Spinal  disease.
White  stars  before  the  eyes,  with  vertigo.

■  Dim-sightedness,  like  looking  through  a  fog,  or  as  if  feathers

were  before  the  eyes ;  must  rub  the  eyes.
Objects  appear  yellow. ^  Liver  complaint.

■  Burning  and  pressure  in  the  eyes.
I  I  Red  eyes  with  lachrymation.

■  ■Eyes  inflamed,  itching  at  the  inner  can  thus;  agglutination

at  night,  and  lachrymation  by  day ;  yellow  halo  around  the
candle ;  burning  and  dryness,  smarting,  but  with  very  little
ulceration.
Sensation  of  coldness  in  eyes  when  walking  in  open  air.


ALUMINA.  128

■  Spasmodic  closure  of  the  lids  at  night,  and  burning  in  the

eyes  in  the  morning  and  evening. 6  Ophthalmia.
Inclination  to  stare.

I  I  Strabismus  of  either  eye ;  especially  from  loss  of  power  of

the  internal  rectus.
Sensation  of  coldness  in  the  eyes,  in  the  open  air.

■  Pressure  in  the  eyes  which  are  sensitive  to  the  light.
Stitches  in  the  eyes.

In  evening  pressure  in  canthus  as  from  a  grain  of  sand.

I I  Eyelids  thickened,  dry,  burning.

■  Chronic  granular  lids.

Eyelids  stick  together  with  matter ;  lachrymation.

■  Upper  lids  seem  to  hang  down  as  if  paralyzed,  especially  the

left, d  Old,  dry  granular  lids.

■  Burning  and  dryness  in  the  lids  every  evening,  with  pain  in

the  internal  canthus  of  left  eye,  with  much  dry  mucus  in  the
morning  on  waking.

■  Burning,  dryness;  burning  on  waking,  especially  on  looking

up,  with  dread  of  light.
Eyes  generally  better  from  being  bathed.
I  I  Itching  in  the  canthi  with  burning.
Eyelashes  fall  out.

■  Tottering  and  falling  when  closing  eyes  ;  met. d  Spinal  dis-

ease. See  2.
^  Hearing  and  Ears. I  '  Buzzing  as  if  outside  the  ear.
Humming ;  roaring ;  whistling ;  sound  as  of  large  bells.

■  Redness  and  heat  of  one  ear  ;  evenings.
Hot  earlobes  with  peevishness  and  whining.

Sensation  as  if  something  lay  before  the  ear ;  on  blowing  the
nose  it  is  felt,  swallowing  removes  it.

■  Stitches  in  the  ears,  evening  or  night.

■  Purulent  otorrhoea.

Crepitation  in  the  ears  on  swallowing  or  chewing.
^  Smell  and  Nose. ■  Sense  of  smell  weak.

Nosebleed  with  pressure  in  forehead  and  congestion  to  eyes.
Disposition  to  colds  in  head.

I  I  Nose  stopped  up,  more  1.  side,  with  glairy  mucus.
Fluent  coryza,  with  frequent  sneezing,  free  from  one  nostril,
the  other  obstructed ;  lachrymation.

■  Chronic  nasal  catarrh,  with  scurfy  sore  nostrils,  and  discharge

of  thick  yellow  mucus.

■  Catarrhs  of  long  standing  with  old  people.

■  Discharge  of  dry,  hard,  yellow-green  mucus  from  nose;  nose

swollen,  red  and  sore  to  touch,  worse  in  the  evening.
■Nose  dry ;  met. d  Spinal  disease.

■  Violent  pain  in  root  of  nose, d  Ozgena.

■  Copious, yellow, sour-smelling mucus, with sore nostrils.

d  Ozgena.


129  ALUMINA.

I  Septum  narium  swollen,  red  and  painful  to  touch  ;  more  pain-
ful evenings.
Bl  Redness  of  nose.
I  I  Nose  ulcerated.

■  Swelling  and  hardness  of  the  left  alse  nasi.
I  iPoint  of  nose  cracked.

After  blowing  the  nose,  glittering  before  the  eyes.
^  Face. Sallow  skin.

Pale  languid  face  with  heaviness  of  the  head.
Tearing  and  lancinating  in  the  malar  bone.

■  Tension  of  the  skin  of  the  face,  as  though  white  of  egg  had

dried  on  it.
Itching  of  various  parts  of  the  face  ;  of  the  forehead,  with  rough

skin.
Blood-boils  on  face  and  nose.

■  Tetter  on  temples  and  forearm. ^  Leucorrhoea.
Gloomy,  pale,  or  alternately  red  and  pale.

■  Heat  and  redness  ;  met. d  Spinal  disease.
Coppery  cheeks.

Bloated  places,  like  bulbous  excrescences ;  nodular  swellings.
^  Lower  Part  of  Face. Tension  and  drawing  in  the  jaws  and
cheeks  with  increase  of  saliva.
Tensive  pain  in  articulation  of  jaw,  when  chewing  or  opening

the  mouth.
Upper  lip  covered  with  little  blisters.
Lower  jaw  seems  shortened.
Lips  dry,  chapped.

■  ■Involuntary  spasmodic  twitching  of  lower  jaw,  with  haemor-

rhage of  bowels ;  dark  offensive  stools.
I  I  Trismus.
^^  Teeth  and  Gums. '  l  Teeth  feel  long  and  sore.

■  Toothache;  teeth  feel  loose  and  elongated,  <  from  chewing,

in  open  air,  evening.

■  Drawing  toothache, extending  to  other  parts, as  down  the

larynx,  neck,  or  shoulders. 6  During  pregnancy.
Teeth  covered  with  sordes.

Swelling  of  gums ;  they  easily  bleed  and  ulcerate.
Saltish  blood  seems  to  come  from  the  teeth.
"Taste. Speech. Tongue. ■Taste  flat;  met. ^  Spinal  disease.

■  Tongue  coated  with  a  thin  slimy  fur  ;  met. d  Spinal  disease.
Taste: I  I  acrid,  sweetish,  or  fatty; almost  lost;  like  blood.
Tingling,  itching  on  the  tongue,  must  scratch  it. d  During

pregnancy.
Bites  his  tongue  while  asleep.
^^  Inner  Mouth. ■  Musty,  bad  odor  from  mouth.

■  Small  ulcers  in  mouth.

■  Saliva  increased,  although  mouth  may  feel  dry.
Sensation  of  soreness  in  mouth  when  eating.


ALUMINA.  130

iTncreased  saliva  and  mucus.
Dryness  in  mouth.
^^  Palate and Throat. I  Inflammatory redness in back of
throat.

■  Transient  stitches  in  throat.

■  Dryness  of  throat,  as  if  parched.

I  Rawness  and  roughness  in  throat,  inducing  hawking  or
coughing  in  the  evening,  with  secretion  of  mucus.

I  Pressure  in  throat  as  from  a  plug,  with  soreness  and  dry-
ness.

Sensation  of  swelling  in  sides  of  throat.

■  Sense  of  constriction  from  pharynx  down  to  stomach,  as  if

food  could  not  pass.

■  Great  dryness  of  throat,  especially  on  awaking,  voice  husky;

constant  hawking,  and  sensation  of  a  lump  in  throat.
d  Chronic  catarrh.

■  Feeling  of  a  splinter  in  throat,  ■stinging  on  swallowing.

Copious,  thick,  tenacious  mucus  in  throat,  evening  and  morn-
ing on  awaking ;  can  be  expectorated  only  in  lumps,  with
great  effort.

■  Thick  mucus,  dropping  from  posterior  nares.

■  Ulcers  in  fauces,  spongy;  secreting  a  yellowish-brown,  badly

smelling  pus ;  with  boring  pains  from  fauces  to  right  tem-
ple and  head.

Painful  soreness  in  throat  and  upper  part  of  oesophagus,
worse  swallowing  empty.

I  Throat  feels  relaxed.

■  Feels  the  food  the  whole  length  of  the  oesophagus.

■  Swallowing  painful,  better  after  warm  drinks;  swallowing  saliva

or  liquids  often  relieves ; but  swallows  solids  with  difficulty.
On  waking  in  the  morning  pharynx  feels  narrower  than  usual,
as  if  contracted  and  lame.

■  Violent,  pressive  pain,  as  if  a  portion  of  the  oesophagus  were

contracted  or  compressed,  in  the  middle  of  the  chest,
especially  during  deglutition,  but  also  when  not  swallowing,
with  oppression  of  the  chest,  alternately  with  palpitation  of
the  heart,  especially  after  a  meal.

Swallowing  causes  crepitation  in  ears. See  6.

Pains  in  the  throat ; <  evening  and  night.
^^  Appetite. Thirst. '  '  No  desire  to  eat.

■  Has  no  appetite,  food  has  no  taste.
I  I  Irregular  appetite.

Longing  for  fruit  and  vegetables,  ■potatoes  disagree.

■  Aversion  to  meat;  to  beer;  meat  has  no  taste.
Thirst  all  day.

■  Appetite for starch, chalk; clean white rags; charcoal,

cloves,  acids,  coffee  or  tea-grounds,  dry  rice,  and  other  in-
digestible things, d  Chlorosis. See  44,  47.


131  ALUMINA.

^^  Eating  and  Drinking. Before  eating  :  canine  hunger  ;  seems
to  quiver  all  over.
Better  while  eating.

1 1  Worse  from  eating  potatoes, d  Colic, d  Indigestion.
Worse  from  tobacco-smoke.

■  All  irritating  things, like  salt, wine,  vinegar, pepper,  etc.,

immediately  start  cough.
Throat  sore  after  using  onions  in  food.

■  Easily  drunken  from  the  weakest  spirituous  drinks.
Mucus  in  throat,  tasting  sweet,  after  dinner.
Worse  from  cold,  better  from  warm  diet.

Worse  after  eating  soups.

After  eating :  languor  in  the  evening ;  must  lie  down  at  noon  ;

phlegm  on  the  chest.
Eating  removes  the  faintness  at  the  stomach.
After  breakfast :  vertigo  ;  nausea  better.
After  dinner  :  sweet  tasting  mucus.
Aggravation  or  appearance  of  all  the  symptoms  immediately

after  dinner  or  in  the  evening.
Worse  from  warm  drink  :  chill. See  40.
Better  from  warm  drink  :  throat. See  13.
^®  Belching. Nausea. Vomiting. Chronic inclination to

belch,  in  old  people.
Eructations: Isour; I  bitter,  after  potatoes ;  ■<  evenings.
Heartburn  after  supper  ;  sourish  risings,  with  profuse  flow  of

water  from  the  mouth.
Nausea : with vertigo ; stitches in  brain ; chilliness ; pale

face,  desire  to  lie  down,  faintness ;  better  after  breakfast.
Frequent  nausea  ;  faint  nausea.
Vomits  mucus  and  water.

Vomiting  of  food,  mucus  or  bile ;  met. d  Spinal  disease.
^^  Stomach. Distension  of  stomach.

■  Constriction  and  twisting  in  stomach,  extending  up  oesopha-

gus to  throat. See  13.

Stitches  in  pit  of  stomach,  extending  upwards  to  chest.

Drawing, or oppressive pain, going  upwards  to  chest  and
throat ;  after  potatoes.
^^  Hypochondria. I  l  Pains  in  the  epigastrium  and  hypochon-
dria when  stooping.

Contractions  in  both  hypochonders.

Spasmodic pains in the hypochondria and stomach with
dyspnoea  almost  to  suffocation.

I  Liver  pains, as if  bruised, when  stooping;  stitches when
rising  again.

Tearing  from  the  liver  to  the  hip.

Shooting  pain  in  the  region  of  the  spleen.

Stitches  in  both  hypochondria  ; <  from  motion.


ALUMINA.  132

Shooting  in  left  hypochondriura going upwards  and  forwards
to  cardiac  region,  worse  on  deep  inspiration.
^^  Abdomen. Seems  to  hang  down  heavily,  like  a  load,  when
walking,  afternoons.

Reaching  too  high  strains  the  abdominal  muscles.

Pains  ■<  sitting  bent.

■  Pressing  in  both  groins,  toward  the  sexual  organs,  evenings.

I  Stitching, pressing  pain in region of  abdominal  ring,  like

from hernia,  with  tension  as  far  as  the  side  of  the  ab-
domen.

Flatulent  colic,  bellyache.

Colic  in  the  morning.

I I  Painters'  colic.

I  i  Soreness  and  twitching  of  the  r.^ inguinal  glands.

^*^  Rectum  and  Stool. Il Inactivity of  the rectum;  even  the
soft  stool  requires  great  straining.

I I  No  desire  for,  and  no  ability  to  pass  stool,  until  there  is  a
large  accumulation.

After  each  dysenteric  stool,  involuntary  urination.

1 1  Severe hemorrhage  from the bowels  with  flow  of  urine.

6  Typhoid.
Pressing  to  stool  aggravates  her  symptoms.
Tenesmus  in  rectum  and  bladder  at  the  same  time. ^Proc-
titis.
Stools  too  scanty.
1 1  Stools: hard and knotty or covered with mucus; like

sheep's  dung,  with  cutting  in  the  anus,  followed  by  blood ;

like  pipe  stems.
Constipation  from  great  dryness  of  the  mucous  follicles  of  the

rectum,  with  long-lasting  pain  in  the  rectum.
I  Diarrhoea,  with  urging  in rectum, also  with  bloody,  scanty

stools.
I  Clots  of  blood  pass  from  the  anus.
1  I  Dropping  of  blood  during  an  evacuation.
Hemorrhoids,  worse  in  evening,  better  after  night's  rest.
I  Itching  and  burning  at  anus.
Perineum :  pressure  when  blowing  the  nose  ;  —  sweats  and  is

tender  to  touch.
llSoft  and  thin  stool,  passing  with  difficulty.

I  Chronic  diarrhoea;  <C  on  alternate  days  ; from  walking  ;  >

from  a  short  sleep  or  warm  applications.

I I  Diarrhoea  whenever  she  urinates.
Chronic  diarrhoea. 6  Chlorosis.

I  Blind  piles  protrude,  become  moist,  with  lancinating  pain ;
are  hard  and  itch.

During  stool :  I  rectum  as  if  constricted  and  dried  up  ;  throb-
bing in  the  small  of  the  back;  I  excoriated  feeling  in  the
rectum  ;  chills  all  over ;  discharge  of  prostatic  juice.


133  ALUMINA.

I  I  Varices  become  moist,  sting  and  burn.

■  Itching  with  burning excoriation and great  sensitiveness.

d  Hemorrhoids.

■  Fistula  ani.

Sensation  of  weakness  of  sphincter  ani.
Pulsating  in  the  anus.

Torpidity  of  rectum  ;  rectum  seems  paralyzed.
Itching  of  the  anus.
^'  Urinary  Organs. Renal  pains as from  riding  over  a  rough

road ; alternating with cloudiness as if drunk ;  dancing

makes  worse.

■  Frequent  micturition. ^Prolapsus  uteri.
I  I  Tenesmus  vesicse. d  Dysentery.

■  I Urine  voided  while  straining  at  stool;  or,  cannot  pass  urine

without  such  straining. See  20.

Frequent  urination  at  night.

Frequent  emissions  of  very  small  quantities  of  light  colored
urine  with  great  straining,  severe  smarting  and  burning,
with  a  feeling  as  though  a  few  drops  remained  in  urethra,
which  could  not  be  expelled.

Urine :  scanty,  with  red  sediment,  in  arthritic  affections ;
copious  and  pale,  in  nervous  diseases ;  with  thick,  white
sediment ;  more  frequent,  copious  and  dark.

■  Urine  red  without  sediment ;  met. ^  Spinal  disease.
Feeling  of  weakness  in  bladder  and  genitals,  in  evening,  with

fear  that  he  will  wet  the  bed.

Pouting  of  the  meatus  urinarius,  with  swelling  and  discharge
of  light  yellow  pus  from  urethra.

During  urination :  burning,  wiih  discharge  of  urine  and  de-
sire to  evacuate  the  bowels ;  the  stream  assumes  a  spiral
shape.

■  Urine  smarting,  corroding. ^Prolapsus  uteri.

^^  Male  Sexual  Organs  and  Perineum. 1 1  Excessive  sexual
desire.
I  I  Frequent  and  painful  erections,  <  at  night.

■  Involuntary  emissions,  followed  by  all  his  old  symptoms.
Sexual  desire  lessened. 6  Impotence.

■  Feeling  of  weakness  in  bladder  and  genitals ;  he  fears  he  will

wet  the  bed.
I  I  Discharge  of  prostatic  fluid  during  difficult  stool.
Light  yellow  pus  from  urethra,  causing  itching  of  glans  penis.
Sensation  of  weakness  in  the  penis.
Left  testicle  hard  and  very  painful.
Tickling  on  the  genitals  and  thighs.
Sweat  on  the  perineum,  with  sensitiveness  to  touch.

■  Pressure  in  the  perineum  at  the  beginning  of  an  erection  or

during  coitus.
^^  Female  Sexual  Organs. Sexual  desire  decreased.


ALUMINA.  134

Weakness  of  the  sexual  parts.

■  Prolapsus  uteri.

iBland,  painless  ulcers  upon  the  os. ^Prolapsus  uteri.
Severe  painful  swelling  in  either  or  both  ovaries,  very  sensitive

to  touch, d  Metritis.
During  an  evacuation  before  the  menses,  she has  pinching,

writhing  and  pressing  like  labor-pains.
Menses  :  too  early,  short,  scanty,  and  of  pale  blood ;  too  early,

preceded  by  headache ;  delay,  finally  appear,  being  pale  and

scanty.
iMenses  scanty,  pale  and  painful. ^Prolapsus  uteri.
Before  menses :  many  dreams,  on  awaking  face  hot,  headache

and  palpitation  ;  abundant  mucous  discharge.
During  menses  :  corroding  urine  and  diarrhoea ;  bloatedness.
After  menses :  1 1  exhausted  in  body  and  mind, d  Leucorrhoea.
Leucorrhoea  of  transparent  mucus,  attended  with  tremor  and

sensation  as  if  everything  would  fall  out  of  the  abdomen.
I  Leucorrhoea : acrid, corrosive; profuse, relieved by cold

washing; I  transparent; during  the  day; I  with  tetter  on

the  temples.

■  Leucorrhoea  corroding,  profuse,  running  down  to  the  heels,

often  only  in  the  daytime,  relieved  by  cold  washes, d  Pro-
lapsus uteri.

Painful  throbbing  in  left  side  of  vagina,  like  the  tick  of  a  watch.

Stitches  in  left  side  of  vulva,  extending  up  to  chest.

I  I  Free  light  yellow  excoriating  discharge  from  the  vagina.

I  I  Itching  and  burning  pimples  on  the  labia.

I  I  Inflammation  and  swelling  of  the  vagina.

I  Stitches,  throbbing  and  itching  in  vagina. 6  Prolapsus  uteri.
'*  Pregnancy  and  Nursing. I  Gastric  and  abdominal  symptoms

during  pregnancy  :  heartburn; 1 1  constipation  from  inactive
rectum ; I  I  groaning  at  night,  crying  out  "  it  is  not  I,"  beg-
ging them to  stop ; tongue tingles ; mucous leucorrhoea,
which  runs  down  the  limbs.
Itching  in  the  mammge.

I I  Constipation  of  sucklings.

^^  Voice and Larynx. Voice : has a nasal twang ; husky ;

rough.
Hoarseness,  evening  and  night,  especially  toward morning;

disappearing  while  walking  in  the  open  air.
Sudden,  complete  aphonia.
Hoarseness.

Hoarse  afternoons  and  evenings,  with  roughness  and  dryness.
I  Voice  hoarse,  rough,  hollow,  almost  aphonic  ;  met. ^Spinal

disease.
Much talking, particularly in lively company, makes her

hoarse.
Talking  or  singing  makes  him  cough.


135  ALUMINA.

Talking  increases  soreness  of  chest.
Rawness  in  the  larynx  on  awaking.

■  Tickling  in  the  larynx,  with  irritation  to  cough.
Sensation  of  tightly  adhering  phlegm  in  larynx,  not  removed

by  hawking  or  cough  ;  wheezing  on  inspiration.
Thyroid  cartilage  painful  to  touch.
Throat  dry  and  voice  husky  on  waking.
^^  Respiration, Rattling,  asthmatic  breathing ; <  coughing.

Oppression <  when  sitting  stooped ; >  straightening  up,  or

walking  in  open  air.
Talking  or  singing  makes  him  cough.

Breathing  arrested  by  copious,  thick,  tenacious,  saltish  mucus.
Oppressive  pain  in  the  chest,  tight  feeling.
Dyspnoea,  with  spasmodic  pains  in  stomach  and  hypochondria.
Short-breathed  when  lying  on  the  back  ;  goes  off  by  turning  on

to  the  side.
Worse  getting  tired  from  exerting  the  voice.
Worse  from  deep  inspiration ;  shooting  from  left  hypochondria

to  heart.
Wheezing  inspiration,  with  tough  mucus  in  larynx. See  25.
^^  Cough, HDry,  hacking  cough,  with  frequent  sneezing.

Cough: from  sensation  as  of  loose  skin  hanging  in  throat;

from  tickling  in  larynx; I  from  elongated  uvula; I  I  from

talking  or  singing.
Cough  short ;  causes  pains  in  right  temple  and  top  of  head,

sometimes  also  difficult  breathing.
Cough: I  I  soon  after  waking  in  the  morning; llevery  morn-
ing a  long  attack  of  dry  cough,  ending  in  difficult  raising  of

a  little  white  mucus.
Cough : I  with  tearing  pain  and  involuntary  emission  of  urine,

in  old  or  withered  looking  people.
All  irritating  things  excite  cough. See  15.
Painless  evening  cough.
I  Dry  cough  at  night,  with  dryness  of  the  throat.

■  Continued  dry  hacking  cough,  with  vomiting  and  arrest  of

breathing.

Sudden,  violent  irrepressible  cough  in  the  evening  while  sit-
ting.

Cough  sometimes  yields  a  piece  of  mucus  mixed  with  blood.

Coughing  causes  shooting  in  vertex. See  3.

Sputum  difficult  and  of  a  putrid  taste.
^^  Inner  Chest  and  Lungs. Chronic  bronchitis  with  inclination
to  sing.

Constriction  of  the  chest,  with  apprehension.

Oppression  of  chest,  with  constriction  in  oesophagus.

Violent,  oppressive  pain  in  chest,  worse  at  night.

Chest  feels  constricted,  worse  from  sitting  bent  or  stooping,
better  on  straightening  up,  or  on  walking.


ALUMINA.  136

Congestion  of  blood  to  chest  and  head,  with  redness  of  face  and

one  ear,  caused  by  suppressed  hemorrhoidal  flux.
Shooting  stitches  right  to  left  in  the  afternoon,  worse  on  going

down  stairs.
I  Talking increases soreness  of  chest; lifting  aggravates  or

produces  soreness  in  left  chest.
Riding  in  a  carriage  gives  pain  in  chest.
iWhen  stooping,  a  stitch  from  left  side  of  abdomen  to  middle

of  chest.
Stitches  extending  from  left  side  of  vulva  to  chest.
Chest  feels  as  if  too  large.
Chilliness  in  chest.
^^  Heart  and  Pulse. Shocks  in  the  cardiac  region ; shooting

from  left  hypochonder.
Awakens  with  palpitation.
I  I  Palpitation  of  heart. 6  Prolapsus  uteri. 6  Dysphagia.

■  Palpitation  irregular,  large  and  small  beats  intermixed.
Pulse  either  unchanged,  or  full  and  accelerated.
iPulse  hard,  90  to  100;  met. ^Spinal  disease.

^'  Neck  and  Back. Itching  in  the  nape  of  the  neck  and  of  the

throat.
I  I  Shooting  in  right  side  of  neck,  posterior  portion.
Pain  in  the  back,  and  small  of  back,  as  if  beaten.
I  Pain  in  the  back,  as  if  a  hot  iron  were  thrust  through  the

lower  vertebrae. See  36.
At  intervals,  sudden  sharp  pains  like  a  stab  in  lower  part  of

back,  which  made  her  feel  for  the  moment  as  if  she  could

not  straighten  the  spine.
I  Cervical  muscles  drew  head  back  during  sleep  ;  met. d  Spinal

disease.

■  Violent  stitch  in  the  middle  of  the  back.
I  I  Gnawing  pain  in  the  back.
Throbbing  in  small  of  back  during  stool.
Pain  in  the  small  of  the  back  during  rest.
I  I  Pain  in  sacrum, d  Uterine  troubles.

^^  Upper  Limbs. Skin  of  the  hands  peels  off.

Red  rhagades  on  hands,  worse  in  Avinter  and  from  washing.
Panaritium,  with  brittle  nails,  lancinating  pains  and  tendency

to  ulceration  of  the  fingertips.
Brittle  nails  and  brittle  skin  on  tips  of  fingers.
Nails  brittle,  or  thick ;  spots  on  the  nails.
Pain  in  arms  when  letting  them  hang  down,  or  on  stretching

in  bed.
Sudden  jerk  or  concussion  in  the  shoulder.
Pain,  as  from  a  sprain,  in  shoulder-joint,  especially  on  raising

the  arm.
Sense  of  tightness  in  the  arm,  as  from  cold.


137  ALUMINA.

Burning  on  the  arms  and  fingers,  and  in  elbow,  as  from  a  glow-
ing iron.

Arms  feel  heavy,  as  if  paralyzed ;  they  go  to  sleep.

Arms  feel  shorter.

I  Tetter  on  forearm. ^  Leucorrhoea.

Veins  of  the  hands  distended.

Gnawing  beneath  the  finger  nails,  with  crawling  along  the  arm,
as  far  as  the  clavicle.

Stitches  in  the  wrist  while  working.
^^  Lower  Limbs. Tearing  in  the  legs,  the  thighs  and  legs,  when
sitting  and  lying,  especially  at  night.

■  Long  continued  tension  in  thighs and legs,  almost like  a

cramp,  extending  downwards.
Legs  feel  numb  and  stiff,  especially  at  night.
I  Nates  go  to  sleep  when  sitting.

■  Great  heaviness  in  the  lower  limbs,  can  scarcely  drag  them ;

when  walking  he  staggers,  and  must  sit  down ;  evenings.
Burning and smarting itching on the thighs,  better  from

scratching.
I  Frequent  cramps  in  the  calves.
Tearing  in  the  knees  and  patellae,  or  from  knee  to  toes.

■  Trembling  of  the  knees.

■  Numbness  of  the  heel  when  stepping.
Soles  of  feet  too  sore  to  step  on.

■  Pain  in  the  sole  of  the  foot,  on  stepping,  as  though  it  were

too  soft  and  swollen. 6  Tabes  dorsalis. See  36.
Itching  and  redness  of  the  toes,  worse  after  scratching.
Stitches  in  corns  and  toes.
Great  weariness  of  the  legs  when  sitting.

■  Heaviness  in  the  feet  with  great  lassitude  of  the  legs.
Cold  feet,  followed  by  burning  under  the  toes.
Smarting  stitches  in  corns.

Pain  as  from  fatigue,  in  the  articulation  of  the  foot  when  sit-
ting.
^^  Limbs  in  General. lArms  and  legs  feel  heavy.
Frequent  stretching  of  the  limbs  when  sitting.
Trembling  of  the  limbs.
Jerking  and  twitching  of  the  limbs.

■  Pains  in  the  limbs  as  if  the  bones  were  squeezed  narrower,

with  pressure  in  the  joints.

■  Drawing  in  the  extremities.

^^  Position. Motion. Resting  head  relieves  the  headache.

■  Raising  head :  increases  vertigo,  nausea  and  vomiting;  met.

6  Spinal  disease.
During  rest :  pain  in  small  of  back.
Aversion  to  motion.

Complaints  from  carrying  on  the  back  ;  bodily  exertion.
Pain  in  chest  from  lifting  or  carrying  things.


ALUMINA.  138

Stitches  in  hypochondria,  worse  from  motion.
Moderate  exercise  (in  open  air)  relieves.
Walking  about  or  moving  feet  relieves  uneasiness.
Headache,  >  lying,  <C  walking  in  open  air.

I  When  attempting  to  walk,  great  weakness  and  uncertainty  in

lower  limbs,  has  to  be  led ;  met. 6  Spinal  disease.
When  walking; I  abdomen  hangs  heavily;  discharge  of  dark

blood  from  the  rectum  ;  fluor  albus  more  profuse.
Talking  or  a  short  walk  fatigues  very  much;  causes  numbness

of  limbs,  flushes  of  heat.
Lying  down :  >  headache  ;  <  lassitude,  yet  there  is  desire  to

lie  down.
Going  down  stairs  :  stitches  in  chest.
Worse  from  dancing :  renal  pains. See  21.
Worse  ascending :  frontal  headache.
Stepping : <  frontal  headache ; numbness  of  heel ;  pain  in

sole  of  foot.
Straining,  lifting,  etc.,  cause  soreness  in  chest  and  abdomen.
Reaching  high  :  strains  abdominal  muscles.
When  sitting :  weariness  of  legs  ;  pain  in  foot-joint ;  stretching

limbs.
Sitting  bent: pain  in abdomen  <; oppressed respiration;

constriction  in  chest.
Stooping  causes  vertigo ;  pain  in  vertex  ;  constriction  of  chest ;

pain in scrobiculum, liver, hypochondria and abdomen ;

stitch  from  abdomen  to  chest.
Short-breathed  lying  on  back,  not  on  side. See  26.
Better  lying  on  1.  side ; <C  lyiiig  on  right.
Worse  from  standing  and  sitting :  pain  and  heat  in  forehead.
2^  Nerves. Want  of  bodily  irritability.

Great  exhaustion  of  strength,  especially  after  walking  in  open

air; accompanied  by  yawning,  stretching, drowsiness  and

inclination  to  lie  down ;  lying,  however,  increases  the  lassi-
tude.

■  Much  fatigued  by  talking. See  25,  28.

I I  Faint  and  tired,  must  sit  down.

■  Involuntary  movements  of  single  parts.

I  Spasms,  with  attacks  of  laughing  and  weeping.

■  Paralysis from spinal disease; cannot  walk  with  the  eyes

closed. See  31,  32,  33.
Rheumatic  and  traumatic  paralysis,  in  gouty  patients.
One-sided  paralysis,  especially  of  the  extensors.
Hysteria, d  Prolapsus  uteri.
Excited  condition  of  mind  and  body  ;  acute  smell,  red  face,

tingling  tongue,  constriction  in  internal  parts,  involuntary

jerks,  all  alternating  with  dullness  of  sight,  loss  of  smell,

pale  face,  lassitude  and  drowsiness.
Tremor, d  Leucorrhoea  and  prolapsus.


139  ALUMINA.

Trernulousness,  when  he  touches  anything,  he  feels  electrified.
Suddenly  jerks  the  head backwards ; involuntary  motions ;
laughing  and  crying.

■  Slow  tottering  gait,  as  after  severe  illness.
^^  Sleep. Drowsiness  by  day.

Lies  awake  from  crowding  of  ideas  or  fancies,  or  from  heavi-
ness in  the  arms.

■  Sleepiness,  with  inclination  to  lie  down. See  36.
Unrefreshing  night  sleep  ;  a  mere  slumbering,  with  feeling  in

the  morning  as  if  he  had  not  slept  enough, d  Cephalalgia.

Restless  sleep  ;  turns  frequently  ;  feels  too  warm  ;  lies  uncov-
ered in  unrefreshing  slumber,  I  with  many  dreams  and  fre-
quent awaking  ;  starts  in  affright ;  muttering  or  crying.

I  Restless  sleep,  always  awaking  with  palpitation  of  heart.

Dreams  :  anxious  ;  of  boat  foundering  ;  ghosts  ;  thieves ;  con-
fused.

Bites  his  tongue  during  sleep.

During  sleep,  lies  on  the  side.

Frequent  urination  in  the  night.

I  During  sleep  the  cervical  muscles  drew  the  head  backwards;
met. 6  Spinal  disease.

Worse  on  awaking  :  mind  ;  weak  and  faint,  until  he  eats ;  wakes
unrefreshed  ;  heat  in  the  face ;  huskiness  ;  dryness  in  throat,
tenacious  mucus  ;  rawness  in  larynx  ;  palpitation.
^^  Time. Time  passes  too  slowly. See  1.

Remission  from  evening  until  morning.

Worse  evening  and  night :  throat  complaints.

Toward  morning :  hoarseness.

Before  breakfast :  vertigo,  faint  nausea,  relieved  after  eating.

Morning  :  mental  depression  ;  transient  vertigo  ;  pain  in  head
and  neck  better ;  burning  in  eyes ;  dry  mucus  in  eyes ;
cough  and  sputa  ;  pressure  on  chest ;  colic.

Worse  morning  and  evening  :  burning  of  eyes  ;  mucus  in  throat.

Worse  all  day  :  mucous  leucorrhoea  ;  drowsiness.

Worse  alternate  days :  constipation ;  chronic  diarrhoea ;  pro-
lapsus uteri ;  chlorosis.

Worse  afternoon  :  hoarseness.

Worse  evening  :  apprehension  ;  tetter  on  scalp  ;  dim  sight,  dry-
ness, pressure  and  burning  in  eyes ;  spasmodic  closure  of
eyelids ;  one  ear  red  and  hot ;  tearing  and  stitches  in  ear ;
ozsena ;  toothache ;  pains  in  throat ;  eructations ;  hemor-
rhoids ;  weakness  in  bladder ;  hoarseness ;  languor ;  heavi-
ness in  lower  limbs  ;  heat.

On  going  to  bed :  pains  in  head  and  neck.

From  A  p.m.  till  going  to  bed  she  feels  well. ^Melancholy.

At  night :  headache  <  ;  spasmodic  closure  of  lids ;  pains  in
throat  worse  ;  frequent  urination  ;  pain  in  chest  <.

New  and  full  moon  ;  tetter  on  scalp  ;  heat.


ALUMINA.  140

^^  Temperature and  "Weather. Unpleasant want of  animal
heat.
Warm  food  and  drinks  relieve  throat.

■  She  feels  better  in  open  air. ^Prolapsus  uteri.

Takes  cold  easily  sitting  in  the  room,  gets  hoarse ;  this  lessens

when  walking  in  the  open  air.
Generally  better  in  warmth  ;  worse  in  cold  air,  out-doors.
Better  walking,  out-doors,  in  mild  weather ;  inclination  to  be

in  the  open  air.
Cannot  bear  the  cold,  nor  a  warm  room.
Warmth  of  bed  :  body  itches.
Open  air :  pain  in  forehead,  dullness  of  sight,  cold  feeling  in

eyes ; toothache worse ; hoarseness ; oppressed breathing

better ;  chilliness  with  headache.
Worse  in  dry  weather; I  thin  fecal  stools.
Winter  :  rhagades  ; eruptions.
Cold  washing :  leucorrhoea  >  ;  rhagades.
Better  in  Yv'et  weather  or  moistening  the  diseased  part.
^^  Pever. Unpleasant  want  of  animal  heat.
Chill :  with  great  thirst ;  with  nausea.
Internal  chill  and  shivering,  with  desire  for  warmth  of  stove,

with stretching  and  bending of  limbs, worse  after warm

drink  ;  often  with  heat  of  the  face.
Chill  during  the  day,  heat  at  night.
Frequent  repetition  of  chills  in  the  evening.
Heat  at  night,  with  anxiety  and  sweat.
Heat  in  the  evening,  commencing  in  and  spreading  from  the

ffice,  sometimes  of  only  the  right  side.
I  Chill  appeared  after  eating  the  soup  at  dinner, d  Intermittent

fever.

■  Slight  chill  in  the  evening;  met. ^Spinal  disease.

Sweat  at  night,  toward  morning  most  profuse  in  face,  frequently

only  on  right  side  of  face;  less  when  walking  out-of-doors.
Entire  inability  to  sweat.
*^  Attacks. At intervals sudden, sharp pains, like a stab.

See  31.
Worse  at  new  and  full  moon. 6  Skin  symptoms.
Worse  in  winter, d  Skin  symptoms.
I  Worse  on  alternate  days, d  Chronic  diarrhoea. 6  Chlorosis.

d  Prolapsus  uteri.
*^  Locality and Direction. Complaints chiefly in external

parts  (burning,  etc.).
Semilateral  affections  of  head. See  3.
Paralysis  left-sided,  painless.
Pains  go  upwards. See  19,  28.
Jerks  go  from  head  over  body.
Upper  left,  lower  right  side,  most  affected.


141  ALUMINA.

Drawing  toothache,  extending  to  other  parts,  as  down  to  the
larynx,  neck,  shoulder,  etc.

Left :  headache  ;  upper  lid  hangs  down  ;  pain  in  internal  can-
thus  ;  side  of  nose  stopped  up ;  throbbing  from  hypochon-
dria to  heart ;  throbbing  in  vagina ;  stitches  in  vulva.

Right :  heat  and  sweat  of  face ;  inguinal  glands  sore  and
swollen  ;  shooting  in  side  of  neck.

Right  to  left :  stitches  in  lungs.
*^  Sensations. Illusive  sensations  ;  some  parts  of  the  body  feel  as
if  they  had  become  larger.

Sensation  of  constriction  in  internal  organs  (oesophagus,
stomach,  rectum,  bladder).

Cutting  in  outer  parts.

Lancinating  in  head ;  malar  bone;  hemorrhoids;  panaritium.

Boring :  from  fauces  to  temple.

Dryness : inner  parts.

Gnawing :  in  back  ;  beneath  fingernails.

Throbbing :  in  back.

Heaviness  :  in  arms,  legs  and  feet.

Creeping  and  titillation  :  on  hairy  scalp.

Crawling :  on  arm.

Pressure  :  in  forehead  ;  eyes  ;  canthus  ;  throat ;  groins  ;  peri-
neum and  joints.

As  if  squeezed  together :  bones  of  limbs.

Pricking :  in  muscles,  from  within  outward.

Stitches  :  in  brain  ;  eyes ;  ears  ;  throat ;  scrobiculum  ;  liver ;
hypochondria ;  abdominal  ring ;  from  vulva  extending  to
chest;  back;  wrist  and  corns.

Pulsation  :  in  inner  parts.

Soreness  :  (excoriation)  outer  and  inner  parts  ;  inguinal  glands.

Drawing :  from  stomach  to  chest  and  throat ;  in  extremities.

Tearing :  in  outer  parts ;  most  in  soft  parts ;  in  malar  bone ;
from  liver  to  hip ;  in  thighs  and  legs  ;  on  knees.

Shooting  in  spleen  :  in  left  hypochonder ;  in  side  of  neck.

Bruised  pains  :  outer  parts.

Burning :  in  forehead ;  in  eyelids ;  with  pressure  in  eyes  ;  in
anus  ;  when  passing  water ;  on  arms,  fingers  and  elbow ;  on
thighs ;  under  toes.

Coldness  :  in  eyes.

Numbness:  in  scalp ;  in  legs  ;  in  nates;  of  heel.

Sprained  feeling:  in  shoulder-joint.

Complaints  predominate  on  outer  part  of  thighs ;  patella ;
wrist ;  leg ;  forearm  ;  sole  of  foot,  etc.

Tension :  in  jaws  and  cheeks  ;  in  groin  ;  in  arm  ;  thighs  and
legs.

Of  hot  iron :  through  lower  vertebrse ;  on  arms,  fingers  and
elbow.


ALUMINA.  142

Sensation  as  if  white  of  egg  had  dried  on  the  skin :  forehead ;

face.
Irritability  of  body  lessened.
^*  Tissues. Veins  distended. See  33.

Mucous  membranes  very  dry  or  secreting  scantily. See  5, 13.
Emaciation. See  47.
I  Chlorosis. See  14,  47.

■  Scrofula.

*^  Touch. Passive Motions. Touch and pressure relieves
pain  in  r.  temple.

Sensitive  to  touch  :  vertex  ;  scalp  ;  perineum  ;  ovaries.

Better  from  scratching,  but  bleeding  follows.

Pressing  teeth  together  aggravates.

Better  from  wiping  the  eyes. See  5.

Riding  in  a  carriage  gives  her  pain  in  chest.
*®  Skin. Skin  yellow, d  Liver  complaint,

■  Intolerable  itching  of  whole  body,  especially  when  getting

warm  and  in  bed  ;  scratches  until  the  skin  bleeds,  which  is
then  painful.

Eruptions  humid,  scabby,  sore,  gnawing.

Ulcerated  surface  secretes  a  yellow-brownish,  badly  smelling
pus.

Blood-boils. Rhagades. Bulbous  excrescences. I  Leprosy.

iDry,  tettery,  itching  eruption.

Tetter  itching  in  the  evening. See  23.

Formication  in  the  skin.
^^  Stages  of  Life,  Constitution. Suitable  to  persons  of  a
scrofulous  habit  who  suffer  from  chronic  diseases.

Constitutions  with  diminished  animal  heat.

Infancy :  constipation,  especially  when  artificial  food  is  used.
See  24.

Cholera  infantum,  llstools  green;  acidity  of  primse  vise.
6  Strabismus.

Puberty :  chlorosis,  with  longing  for  indigestible  substances.
See  14,  44.

Dark  complexion,  excitable.

Mild  disposition :  mild,  tearful,  anxious.  6  Constipation  and  ca-
tarrh.

Spare  habit;  dry  thin  subjects.

Boy,  set.  12,  cerebro-spinal  disease.  After  Bellad.,  Phos.  and
Nux.  vom.  had  been  given  with  very  little  improvement.
Alum,  met.'^^  cured.

Old  people,  hypochondriacal,  or  suffering  from  chronic  dis-
eases, especially  catarrhs.

Vertigo  in  old  people,  with  atheromata  or  earthy  deposits
on  the  cerebral  or  cardiac  arteries.

I  Chronic  catarrh  of  the  head.


143  ALUMINA.

Cough  with  involuntary  emission  of  urine  in  old  withered
looking  people.
■*^  Relationship.  Similar  to :  Bar.  carh.  (hypochondriasis  of
aged ;  constipation) ;  Bryon.  (peevish,  irritable ;  gastric  and
abdominal  symptoms  ;  constipation  ;  throbbing  headache  ;
dry  cough  with  vomiting ;  stitches  in  chest ;  dryness  of
mucous  surfaces ;  fever,  etc.,) ;  Calc.  ostr.;  Chamom.
(useful  as  an  intermediate  remedy)  ;  Conium  (old  people ;
loss  of  power  of  internal  recti  of  eyes) ;  Ferrum  (chlorosis  ;
relaxed  abdomen ;  disgust  for  meat,  etc.) ;  Ferr.  jod.  (pro-
fuse, transparent  leucorrhoea) ;  Crraphit.  (chlorosis  ;  skin
rough,  chapped,  itching;  nails;  blepharitis,  etc.);  Ipec;
Laches,  (sad  on  waking  ;  climaxis) ;  Pulsat.  (tearful,  peev-
ish ;  head,  etc.,  better  in  open  air;  ozsena;  taste  lost;
averse  to  meat ;  chlorosis ;  scanty  menses ;  complaints  at
puberty ;  lack  of  animal  heat ;  soles  of  feet  sore,  <  walk-
ing; toes  red,  itching,  etc.);  Plumhum  (colic;  constipa-
tion, etc.) ;  Buta  (loss  of  power  of  internal  recti  of  eyes) ;
Sejpia  (irritable,  tearful ;  ozsena ;  scanty  menses  ;  puberty  ;
prolapsus  uteri ;  inactive  rectum ;  weakness  in  urinary  or-
gans, etc.);  Silio.;  Sulphur;  Zincum  (inner  can  thus  ;
granular  lids).

Compare  with  the  following  in  clergyman's  sore-throat :  Arg.
nitr.,  Kali  hich.,  Lycop.,  etc.

Alumin.  follows:  Bryon.,  Laches.,  Sulphur ;  and  is  followed
by :  Bryon.

Alumin.  and  Bryon.  are  complementary.

Antidotes  to  Alumin.:  Bryon.,  Camphor,  Chamom.,  Ipec.

Alumin.  antidotes :  lead-poisoning,  as  in  painters'  colic  ;  ail-
ments from  lead.


AMANITA.  144

AMANITA,  OR  AGARICUS  fflUSCARIUS.

Fly  Fungus.  Nat.  order,  Fungi.

One  of  the  most  poisonous  fungi  known  as  Agaricus  muscarius,  abused  by
Asiatic  tribes  of  savages  in  the  form  of  a  real  intoxicating  drink,  the  effects
of  which  have  been  reported  by  numerous  travellers.

The  usual  name  of  "  Agaricus  "  given  by  Linnee  is  too  vague.

Persoon  and  Fries  have  split  this  Linnean  geniis  into  seven  families,  and
the  numerous  species  received  forty-four  d liferent  generic  names,  of  which
Amanita  is  one.  Before  long  we  may  have  a  few  relations  introduced  on
account  of  their  essential  difference  in  effect.

First  proved  by  Schreter  and  E.  Stapf,  and  published  by  the  latter  in
1828.  Hahnemann  and  his  students'  proving  was  published  in  the  Ar-
chives, 1830,  with  some  toxic  symptoms.

In  1831  the  best  proving  of  all,  that  of  Apelt,  was  published  in  connection
with  many  reliable  provings  on  the  sick,  and  some  valuable  cured  symp-
toms.

In  the  same  year  Hartlaub  published  in  the  third  volume  of  his  Materia
Medica,  two  provings  by  very  trustworthy  men,  Drs.  Woost  and  Seidel,
with  some  of  the  observations  of  travellers  in  Asia.

In  1835  Hahnemann  incorporated  it  in  the  second  edition  of  his  Chronic
Diseases,  as  one  of  the  antipsories,  adopting  only  715  symptoms.

In  1859  in  Clotar  Miiller's  Quarterly,  Vol.  x.,  p.  217  to  260,  a  so-called  crit-
ical review  was  made  ;  it  is  enough  to  say  that  nearly  every  symptom  there
condemned  to  be  stricken  out,  has  been  confirmed  by  the  Vienna  provings
published  since ;  in  the  list  of  toxic  symptoms,  given  with  great  pretension,
one  of  the  main  sources  was  overlooked,  the  report  of  Langsdorf  (therefore
not  in  Allen),  and  15  symptoms  of  it  belong  to  an  entirely  different
Agaricus.

In  1869  Zlatarowich  published  the  provings  of  the  Vienna  Society,  un-
dertaken with  great  zeal  and  courage.  We  may  say  Amanita  has  suffered
an  overproving,  similar  to  what  our  Thuya  and  Lycopodium  had  to  undergo.

An  addition  has  been  made  of  Th.  Riickert's  essay,  comparing  the  symp-
toms of  this  remedy  with  the  symptoms  of  incipient  tuberculosis,  they  are
marked  ]

The  carefully  dried  cap  (pileus)  is  triturated  in  the  regular  way.


Mind. Cannot  find  the  proper  word,  uses  wrong  words ;  worse

after  exertion  and  sleepless  nights.
Dullness  almost  amounting  to  idiocy. 6  Chorea.
The  whole  pscychological  sphere  as  if  paralyzed,  hence  a  kind

of  idiocy.
Ecstacy,  fancies  excited  ;  makes  verses  ;  prophesies.
Talks  incoherently;  passes  rapidly  from  subject  to  subject.


145  AMANITA.

Falls  into  a  delirium  as  with  high  fever ;  becomes  now  gay,
now  melancholic.

■  Delirium,  tries  to  get  out  of  bed. ^Typhus.

1 1  Delirium  with  constant  raving;  without  exacerbation.
d  Typhus.

■  Delirium  constant,  does  not  know  his  relations  and  throws

his  wine  and  medicine  at  his  nurse, d  Typhus.
Fearless,  menacing,  mischievous  frenzy ;  also,  frenzy  causing
him  to assail  and  injure  himself, with  great  exertion  of
power.

■  ■  Delirium  tremens.
Silly  merriness.

Great  loquacity,  convulsive  motions  of  facial  and  cervical  mus-
cles, mostly  right  side,  drawing  head  down  to  shoulder;
merry,  incoherent  talk,  I  followed  by  malaise.

■  Sings,  talks, but  does  not  answer  questions ;  strength  aug-

mented.
Laughs  at  his  attempts  to  stand  and  walk.

■  Disinclined  to  answer  questions.

■  Aversion  to  work. ^Prolapsus  uteri.
Indisposed  to  perform  any  labor,  especially  mental.

■  She  is  indij[ferent,  though  naturally  very  solicitous.

■  Very  much  out  of  humor.
Takes  offence  easily.

Mental  solicitude  about  his  condition,  d  Incipient  tubercu-
losis.

■  Cross,  self-willed,  stubborn. A  child. ^Chronic  spasms  of

eyes.

■  His  mind  much  depressed. ^Chorea.
Great  selfishness. ^Nymphomania.

■  Morose,  self-willed,  stubborn,  slow  in  learning  to  walk  and

talk  ;  on  trying  to  walk  stumbled  singularly  often, d  Nys-
tagmus.

■  Protracted  mental  application  or  exciting  debates  brought  on

vertigo.

Complaint  after  getting  angry.

•  Epilepsy  after  fright.

While  meditating :  vertigo.

When thinking of  the pain  :  undefined  disagreeable sensa-
tion.
^  Sensorium. Vertigo with stupefaction and burning in the
vertex.

Attacks  of  vertigo,  combined  with  a  tottering  gait  and  indis-
tinct sight,  even  of  near  objects ;  better  when  thinking  of
something  else.

Vertigo  :  when  walking  in  the  open  air,  reeling  as  if  drunk  ;
long-lasting,  with  great  sensitiveness  to  cold  air ;  momen-
tary ; I  I  from  strong  light  of  the  sun.
10


AMANITA.  146

When  walking  he  does  not  arrive  at  the  point  he  sets  out  for.
6  Chorea.

Vertigo  in  attacks;  objects  whirling;  tendency  to  fall  for-
ward.

■  Constant  dizziness. ^  From  overwork  at  the  desk.
Vertigo  brought  on  by  protracted  mental  application  or  ex-
citing debates.

■  Lay  almost  always  unconscious, though  he  could  be  raised

for  a  minute  when  questioned, d  Typhoid.
I  I  Confusion  of  head.
Heaviness  as  after  drunkeness.
As  if  drunken  and  always  sleepy. 6  Epilepsy.
Unconscious and speechless  with  the  convulsions ;  t.
Fainting  after  moving  the  head,  hearing  others  talk,  smelling

aromatics  or  perfumeries,  even  smelling  vinegar.
^  Inner  Head. Nervous  headache.

I  I  Great  weight  in  the  head,  a.m. d  Chorea.

■  Throbbing,  beating  cephalalgia,  with  a  sensation  of  stiffness

of  the  muscles  of  the  face, d  Climacteric  years.
I  I  Beating  pain,  with  despair  bordering  on  rage.
Burning  in  the  head.
I  Pain  as  though  sharp  ice  touched  the  head  or  cold  needles

pierced  it.
Dull  pain,  especially  in  the  forehead ;  must  move  the  head

constantly  to  and  fro  and  close  eyes  as  for  sleep.
Violent  oppressive  pains, chiefly  in  forehead,  with  delirium.

6  Headache.

■  Fullness  and  pain  in  temples, d  From  overwork  at  desk.

In  temples :  burrowing  pain ;  drawing ;  shooting  cramp-like
pain.

■  Pressing  in  r.  side,  as  if  a  nail  was  thrust  in  ;  worse  sitting

quietly  ;  better  moving  slowly  about.

■  Tearing  and  pressure  in  1.  half  of  brain.

Heaviness  or  sense  of  bearing  down ;  weight  in  top  of  head,

with  a  feeling  of  pressing  together  of  brain.
In  the  vertex  :  pressure  ;  burning ;  throbbing.
Dull  fullness  after  waking.
Heaviness,  drawing  and  tension ;  heaviness  toward  the  nape

of  neck.

■  ■Dull,  drawing  headache  in  the  morning,  extending  into  root

of  nose,  with  nosebleed  or  thick  mucous  discharge.
Headache  from  spine  affection. See  31.

■  ■Headaches of  those who  are  subject  to  chorea;  or who

readily  become  delirious  in  fever  or  with  pain  ;  twitchings
or  grimaces.
*  Outer  Head. Various  sensations  in  1.  half  of  occipital  bone,
when  seated.


147  AMANITA.

Sensation  of  coldness  on  right  side  of  frontal  bone, though

warm  to  the  touch.
I  I  Icy  coldness  in  region  of  coronal  suture after  itching  and

scratching.

■  Sensation  of  icy  coldness  on  the  head.

Icy  coldness  of  scalp  after  itching  and  scratching.

Twitching  in  the  skin  of  forehead,  above  r.  eye.

Twitching  of  head  and  cervical  muscles  on  right  side  ;  drawing

of  head  towards  the  shoulder,  d  Pregnancy.
I  I  Drawing  or  stitching  pains  in  the  head,  shifting  from  side

to  side. 6  Neuralgia.
Such  a  violent  shock  of  the  whole  head,  starting  in  the  first

cervical  articulation,  that  he  involuntarily  bit  his  tongue.
Drawing  from  both  sides  in  frontal  bone  as  far  as  the  root  of

nose.
Chronic  tenderness  of  scalp,  like  that  with  spinal  irritations.
Chorea-like  muscular  motions  of  the  galea  aponeurotica  (scalp),

temporal  muscles  in  cheek  and  lower  jaw.
Head  constantly  falling  backward  as  if  a  weight  were  attach-
ed to  the  occiput.
SHead  in  constant  motion, d  Chorea.
I  I  Sweat  all  over,  even  on  the  scalp.
I  I  Biting  itching  on  scalp  and  other  parts  of  head ; Hike  tetter

on  a  small  spot  on  border  of  forehead,  1.  side.
Scalp  sensitive  as  from  subcutaneous  ulcera,tion.
Itching  of  hairy scalp, especially early in morning,  after

rising.
Itching  nettle-rash  on  the  scalp  with  stupefaction  and  vertigo.

d  Climacteric  years.
I  Tinea  capitis  with  crusts  sometimes  spreading  to  other  parts

of  body.
I  Right  half  of  head  higher  and  thicker  at  birth  of  child.
I  The  whole  head  appeared  crooked  and  displaced ;  both  halves

of  the  head  grew  almost  entirely  even, d  Clonic  spasms  of

eyes.
°  Sight  and  Eyes. Sensitive  to  light, even  candle  light ;  con-
fusion, dizziness  from  it.
iFeeling  of  weakness  in  eyes  without  having  exerted  them.
I  I  Shortsightedness.
Indistinct  sight ;  focal  distance  changes  while  reading, first

grows  shorter  then  longer.
1  I  Dim  sight ;  things  look obscured  as  from  turbid  water ;

Imuscse  volitantes  ;  vibrating  spectra;  with  vertigo.

■  Reads  with  difiiculty,  type  seems  to  move.
Flickering  before  the  eyes  while  writing.

Ilf  she  grasped  at  any  object  held  before  her, her  hand  did

not  generally  come  near  it. d  Nystagmus.
Yellow,  brown,  or  black  spot  before  the  1.  eye.


AMANITA.  148

I  Brown  muscae  volitantes.

I  I  Pupils  dilated ;  light  glares.

Black  mote  before  1.  eye.

Optical  illusion  in  dark  colors.

Sees  things  double  ; Idiplopia. ^  From  overwork  at  the  desk.

Eyes  feel  weak,  without  any  exertion.

I  Myopia,  dependent  upon  spasm  of  the  ciliary  muscle,  especi-
ally if  complicated  with  twitching  of  the  lids.

Floating  muscse  and  vibrating  spectra,  with  vertigo  and  loss  of
sight.

I  I  Muscular  asthenoipia  consequent  upon  uterine  disorders  and
spinal  ansemia ;  cannot  fix  the  eyes  long  even  on  distant  ob-
jects, could  not  converge  them ;  lids  heavy,  as  if  stuck  to-
gether, but  are  not.

iMuscular  asthenopia,  with  weakness  of  the  internal  recti,  and
consequent  inability  to  keep  the  eyes  fixed  on  reading  (van-
ishing of  sight),  with  pain  around  the  eyes,  soreness  of  the
balls,  twitchings  and  jerkings  of  the  balls  and  lids.

I  Pupils  dilated,  eyes  dull,  tarsi  reddened;  constant  lachryma-
tion  ; 1  I  balls  and  lids  twitch, d  Chorea.

I  Pupils  rather  contracted. ^Typhus.

Exertion  of  eyes  makes  a  pressure  in  the  balls,  fiimmering  and
mistiness.

I  Black  motes  hover  before  the  eyes,  everything  surrounded  by
mist,  as  if  covered  by  cobweb,  eyes  hurt ;  dizzy ;  disposed
to  shut  eyes, d  Headache.

I  I  Viscid  yellow  humor  gluing  the  lids ;  gum  in  the  canthi.

Heat  in  eyes.

I  1  Burning  most  in  the  inner  canthi ;  they  itch,  burn,  and  are
I  I  red ;  <  from  touch  ;  stitch  together,  d  Lachrymal  fis-
tula.

Frequent  slight  twitching  in  the  eyelids.

I  Spasmodic  twitching  in  eyes  and  lids,  clear  water  runs  out  of
them.

Twitching  in  the  eyeballs ;  while  reading,  frequent  twitching
and  pressing  in  the  left  eyeball.

I  I  Moving  eyes  hurts,  burns  and  presses,  and  brows  are  sore
to  the  touch.

Jerks  and  pressing  pain  in  1.  eyeball  at  all  times  of  the  day,
and  under  all  conditions.

Jerks  in  the  eyeballs  frequently  following  each  other.

While  reading,  frequent  jerking  and  pressing  in  the  eyeballs.

Trembling  and  jerking  of  eyelids.

I  The  child  usually  stared  blankly  and  without  taking  notice  of
things,  also  squinted. 6  Clonic  spasms  of  eyes.

I  As  soon  as  she  opens  her  eyes  in  the  morning,  both  eyeballs,
no  matter  whether  they  are  fixed  upon  an  object  or  not,  be-
gin to  revolve  toward  the  r.  and  1.  with  a  velocity  of  half  a


149  AMANITA.

second,  and  this  continues  the  whole  day,  with  but  few  in-
termissions. 6  Clonic  spasms  of  eyes.

Spasms,  with  aching  in  the  left  eyeball.

Narrowing  of  space  between  eyelids.

Clonic  spasms ;  lids  open  and  close  in  quick  succession  ;
I  I  quivering  of  lids.

I  Eyes  suffused, d  Typhus.
Swelling  of  tear-glands.

iLittle  blisters  on  the  cornea; lulcers  of  cornea; lleyes  in-
flamed, with  flow  of  tears,  from  smells,  from  coughing.
®  Hearing  and  Ears. After  listening  to  exciting  debates,  vertigo.
Every  slight  noise  causes  palpitation.
Hearing  very  acute  ;  t.

Feels  worse  from  hearing  people  talk. See  2.
Dullness  of  hearing.

■  Increasing  deafness,  seventeenth  day. ^Typhus.
Creaking  in  both  ears,  as  from  a  wooden  screw  at  each  attempt

to  swallow.

Jumping  of  the  tensor  tympani,  sounding  like  a  leather-cov-
ered metal  valve.

Twitching,  rattling,  fluttering  in  tympanic  cavity.

Tearing  in  the  r.  ear.

Painful  stitches  in  1.  ear.

Twitching  stitches  inside  of  the  r.  ear.

Itching  in  1.  external  auditory  tube,  with  a  stitch  in  inner  ear,
as  of  an  ice-cold  needle.

Stitches  in  1.  mastoid  process.

Stitches  from  fauces  along  the  eustachian  tube,  r.  side.

Excessive  secretion  of  wax.

I I  Redness,  burning  itching  of  the  ears,  as  if  they  had  been
frozen.

I  Frost-bitten  ears  pain  and  itch.
^  Smell  and  Nose. Smell  of  vinegar  unbearable.
Smell  sensitive.
I  Nosebleed  of  old  people,  with  a  relaxed  state  of  blood-vessels.

■  Profuse  fetid discharge  from  the  nose; epistaxis. ^From

overwork  at  the  desk.
Mucous  membrane  very  sensitive.

Frequent  dropping  of  clear  water  from  the  nose,  without  coryza.
I  I  Dry  and  fluent  coryza,  with  sneezing.
I  I  Frequent  sneezing,  even  when  there  is  no  coryza,  in  the

morning  in  bed.
I  I  Copious  discharge  of  thick  tenacious  mucus  from  the  nose.
I  Occasionally  the  discharge  was  dark  or  bloody. ^Chronic

nasal  catarrh.
I  Running  coryza,  with  bad  odor  from  the  nose  and  running  of

water  from  the  eyes.


AMANITA.  150

I  I  I  Accumulation  of  dry  mucus  in  nose,  with  sensation  as  if

the  nose  was  entirely  filled  with  it.
I  I  Stoppage  of  the  nose,  especially  when  stooping.

■  Constant  copious  and  ofiensive  discharge  from  the  nose,  no

one  could  inhale  his  breath  without  disgust. d  Chronic

nasal  catarrh.
Nose  turns  bluish.

I  Chronic  inflammation  of  external  nose.
\  Frost-bitten  nose  with  itching.
Little  hard  pimples  break  out  on  side  of  her  nose  and  about

her  lips.
Headache  extending  into  root  of  nose. See  3.
Drawing  in  the  nose  (see  3),  with  nosebleed  or  much  thick

nasal  mucus,  followed  by  dropping  of  water  from  nose.
^  Face. Face  red  and  hot. 6  Headache.

\  Heat  in  face  and  upper  part  of  body,  in  spells  lasting  from  five

to  ten  minutes, d  Incipient  tuberculosis.
Pufiy,  pale ;  blue  under  eyes ;  nose  and  lips  bluish.
I  Face  blue  and  pufi"ed. d  Epilepsy.
Tearing  in  face  and  jaw  bones.
Twitching  in  r.  cheek.
Pulsating  and  throbbing  in  the  cheeks.
8 Twitching  of  the  facial  muscles, d  Chorea.

■  Lancinating,  tearing  and  drawing  pain  in  the  right  cheek.
iFaceache  with  toothache.

Itching  in  the  face,  with  redness  and  burning,  as  if  frost-bitten.

■  Paralysis  of  muscles  of  face,  so  that  one  or  both  corners  of  the

mouth  drop  down,  allowing  the  saliva  to  run  out  upon  the
pillow, d  Typhus.
lExpression  of  face  somewhat  idiotic;  child  had  a  senseless
stare  right  before  her  and  sometimes  squinted. 6  Nystagmus.

■  Expression of the face wore the appearance of idiocy.

d  Clonic  spasms  of  eyes.
^  Lower  Part  of  Face. ■Froth  at  the  mouth,  face  bluish  and
pufi"ed. d  Epilepsy.

Jaws  clenched.

Sensation  as  if  splinters  had  been  run  into  the  right  lower  jaw.

Trembling  vibration  in  lips  and  muscles  of  lower  jaw;  convul-
sive shaking.

Pricking  in  the  chin,  as  from  needles.

On  awaking,  so  violent  a  pain  in  1.  articulation  of  jaw,  he
could  scarcely  open  his  mouth.

Violent  tearing  in  r.  side  of  lower  jaw.

•  Chaps  and  fissures  of  lips.

Herpetic  eruption  principally  on  upper  lip.

Many  little  blisters  on  the  skin.
'^^  Teeth  and  Gums. ■Pains  in  the  superior  maxillary  bones  and
teeth.


151  AMANITA.

Teeth  feel  too  long.

Teeth  sensitive  to  touch,  pressure,  or  while  chewing.

Painful  jerk  in  teeth  each  time  he  drinks  cold  water.

Tearing  in  lower  molars,  worse  from  cold  air.

I  I  Swelling  and  bleeding  of  the  gums,  with  pain.

iBIeeding  gums.

I  Shooting  from  r.  lower  teeth  up  to  r.  side  of  head.

•  Inflammation  of  the  lining  membrane  of  the  alveolar  pro-

cesses.
^^  Taste,  Speech,  Tongue. Disgusting  sweet  nauseous  taste  in
mouth,  with  a  painless  mushy  stool.
Taste : I  I  sweetish  disagreeable  nauseous  ; foul ; flat ; I  I  bit-
ter ;  sharp  and  bitter ; I  I  metallic ;  offensive,  gummy,  sweet,
after  breakfast ;  sweetish-bitter  when  smoking ;  bad  at  the
root  of  the  tongue,  with  slight  nausea ;  salty,  as  after  her-
ring ;  rancid.
I  Inarticulate  speech. 6  Chorea.

■  Inarticulate  speech,  like  from  trismus. ^Typhoid  fever.

■  Learned  to  speak  with  diflSculty. d  Clonic  spasm  of  eyes.
I  I  Left  side  of  tongue  numb,  with  vertigo.

Tongue :  I  I  coated  white,  mornings  ;  smarting,  burning  in  tip,
as  from  pepper ;  coated  with  thick,  tough  mucus  in  the
morning.

Tongue  very  tremulous  and  quite  dry  and  bluish, d  Typhus.

■  i  Tongue  dry. d  Typhus.
Soreness  of  the  tongue.

•  Tip  of  tongue  studded  with  small  dirty  yellow  aphthas. d  In-

cipient tuberculosis.
I  I  Papillge  enlarged,  sensation  of  dryness  and  contraction  like
after  an  astringent,  the  tongue  covered  with  a  tough  viscid
phlegm,  especially  in  the  morning.

■  Phagadenic  ulcers  on  the  ligament  of  the  tongue.

^^  Mouth. I  I  Off'ensive  odor  like  that  after  eating horseradish.
Bad  smell  from  the  mouth  with  catarrh. See  7.

•  Bad  odor  from  the  mouth, d  Incipient  tuberculosis.
I  I  Dryness  of  the  whole  mouth  and  back  of  it.
Increased  flow  of  acrid  saliva.

I  I  Water  accumulates  in  the  mouth,  with  pain  in  the  abdomen.

■  Mercurial  aphthae  on  the  roof  of  mouth  and  tongue.
Sometimes  in  erecting  the  head  saliva  gets  into  the  windpipe,

causing  a  violent  ejecting  cough.

■  Frequently  suffering  from  aphthae,  want  of  appetite,  diarrhoea.

d  Clonic  spasms  of  eyes.
'^  Hard  Palate  to  (Esophagus. ■Feeling  of  dryness  of  fauces
extending into pharynx, causing contraction, as when
drinking  an  astringent.

■  Great difficulty in swallowing, with ravenous appetite.

6  Chorea.


AMANITA.  . 152

I  Throws  up  some  flocculi  or  solid  lumps  of  phlegm,  almost

without  cough.
Pressure  in  the  fauces  as  though  a  foreign  body  stuck  there,

which  could  not  be  removed  by  swallowing.
1  I  Angina  tonsillaris  with  great  dryness  in  throat  and  general

weakness, d  Cured  by  Pulsat.

■  Induration  of  the  tonsils,  the  thymus  and  other  glands.
Feeling  of  tension  externally  in  the  region  of  the  thyroid  gland.
Neck  distended ;  cravat  feels  too  tight.

A  burning-cooling  feeling  along  the  oesophagus  to  the  stomach,
as  after  eating  cress.

I A  scratching  sensation  in  the  throat,  renewed  with  every  at-
tempt to  sing,  d  A  professional  singer  after  an  epidemic
influenza.
^*  Changes  in  Appetite,  Thirst.  Much  hunger  but  no  appetite.
Towards  evening,  suddenly  attacked  with  rabid  hunger;
body  covered  with  sweat ;  tremor  and  weariness  of  the  limbs.

Increased  appetite  ;  could  hardly  wait  for  breakfast.

Ravenous  appetite  but  difficult  swallowing, d  Chorea.

I  I  Much  hunger,  but  no  appetite ;  early  in  the  morning ;  sto-
mach feels  as  if  empty.

I  I  Violent  thirst.

■  Burning  thirst. ^Typhus.

Thirst  rather  rare,  particularly  in  throat  during  the  chill.
'^  Eating  and  Drinking. Before  breakfast :  better  ;  before  din-
ner :  bitter  taste  but  eats  with  appetite.

During  breakfast:  nausea ;  very  soon  satisfied  while  eating,  and
pressure  and  bearing  down  in  stomach.

I  I  After  breakfast :  headache,  a  very  offensive  taste,  dryness,
burning  in  throat,  nausea  and  vomiting,  and  pressure  in  the
stomach.

After  dinner :  inability  to  think  ;  inner  uneasiness  ;  disgust  for
work ;  pressing  in  forehead  and  temples ;  painful  drawing
in  occiput ;  the  same  in  the  eyeballs  ;  buzzing  in  ears  ;  ear-
ache; uneasiness  in  the  muscles  of  the  lower  jaw  and  lips;
unpleasant  taste ;  biting  behind  on  the  left  edge  of  the
tongue  ;  a  tearing  sensation  in  the  pharynx,  when  swallow-
ing saliva  ;  very  soon  hungry  again ;  belching ;  nausea  and
gagging ;  vomiting ;  sore  feeling  under  the  ribs  ;  I  1  fullness
in  stomach,  even  after  using  light  food  moderately  ;  pressure
and  fullness  in  abdomen  ;  expansion,  bloating;  wind  passing
off;  a  stool  with  pain  in  anus  ;  short  dry  cough  or  sneezing,
causing  violent  pain  ;  tension  in  the  sides  of  chest,  and  burn-
ing ;  pain  in  back :  convulsive  shaking  of  left  shoulder ;
a  cold  feeling  as  from  quicksilver  on  the  left  nates,  in  the
hollow  of  the  knee,  on  a  small  spot  towards  the  right ;  tear-
ing pain  in  left  tibia ;  prostration  of  the  lower  limbs ;  burn-


153  -  AMANITA.

ing  in  thighs ;  violent  burning  in  a  corn  on  the  right  little

toe,  which  does  not  allow  him  to  take  his  siesta.
1 1  Very  drowsy  after  dinner,  quite  unusual;  he  sleeps  very

deeply  and  gets  awake  with  pains  in  all  the  limbs.
After  supper :  molesting  fullness  in  abdomen,  backache,  chills.
Sleepy  while  eating,  distended  abdomen ;  griping  around  the

navel ;  pappy  stools  ;  tension  across  chest ;  nervous  sensation

running  through  the  body.
Better  for  an  hour  after  eating  while  he  is  so  exhausted ;  but

great  sleepiness  remains.
After  a  meal :  nausea,  eructations ;  abdomen  distended  (even

after  moderate  eating).
Eating is  most always followed  by heartburn ; prunes by

pressure  in  stomach  ;  after  a  swallow  of  cold  water,  nausea  ;

the  same  quiets vomiting  of  phlegm ; wine  indisposes  to

work  ;  coffee  accelerates  the  pulse.
B  Daily  about  three  hours  after  a  meal  she  has  a  burning  at  the

stomach,  which  changes  into  a  dull  pressure  with  nausea.
After  smoking :  peeling  off  inside  of  lips  ;  saltish  bitter,  exceed-
ingly  offensive  taste ;  belching  and  hiccough alternating ;

sudden  nausea  and  vomiting ;  attacks  of  violent  cough.
^^  Hiccough,  Belching,  Nausea  and  Vomiting. 1 1  Hiccough

alternating  with  belching.
With  hiccoughing :  burning  pains  in  region  of  heart.
I  I  Belching  :  with  the  taste  of  the  food.

Eructations:  empty; I  taste  of  rotten  eggs  ;  taste  of  apples.
I  I  Nausea: with  anxiety,  depression,  vertigo, sneezing, un-
pleasant sensation  in  stomach,  stitches  in  liver,  cutting  in

abdomen,  rapid  breathing,  great  weakness ;  in  the  chest.
I  I  Heartburn.

I  I  Vomituritio  and  great  prostration,  fainting.
Vomiting :  in  evenings ;  middle  of  the  night ;  of  the  ingesta.
I  I  Bitter  vomit,  with  stitches  in  rectum  and  loin,  followed  by

headache  and  irritation  to  sneeze.
^^  Scrobiculum  and  Stomach. B  Sensitive  to  pressure  in  pit  of

stomach. 6  Chorea.
Spasmodic  drawing  from  pit  of  stomach  up  into  chest.
Drawing  in  of  pit  of  stomach.
I  I  Burning  below  the  sternum.
B  Sense  of  oppression  at  the  cardiac  region,  as  if  the  cavity  of

the  thorax  were  narrowed.
':  Bilious  dyspepsia  in  very  nervous  persons.
B  Cardialgia  for  three  hours  after  a  meal.
Burning  in  the  stomach,  changing  into  a  dull  pressure  as  from

a  foreign  body,  with  nausea.
I  Heavy  sensation  in  the  stomach ;  faintness,  with  an  empty

feeling,  sometimes  alternating  with  a  jerking  sensation  as  of

some  heavy  object. See  angina  pectoris,  29.


AMANITA.  154

I  I  From  12  to  2  p.m.  daily,  cramp  from  the  middle  of  the  spine
through  into  the  stomach ; severe  gagging  and  vomiting ;
legs  feel  as  if  pricked  all  over  with  ice-cold  needles.
^^  Hypochondria. ■  Liver  enlarged,  congested.

Sensation  of  pain  and  drawing  in  the  right  hypochondrium,  as
if  the  liver  had  increased  in  weight  and  dragged  at  its  liga-
ments.

I  I  Sharp  stitches,  as  from  needles,  in  the  region  of  the  liver ;
dull  stitches  during  breathing.

I  I  Stitches  under  short  ribs,  left  side.

I  Pain  in  stomach  and  liver,  burning  from  acidity.

\  Enlargement  of  the  liver.

I  Pain  in  1.  hypochondrium,  with  rumbling  in  the  region  of
left  superior  flexure  of  the  colon.
^^  Abdomen,  Loins  and Groins. 1 1  Violent  colic,  cutting,
griping,  pinching.

I  Popular  medicine  for  colic  with  the  Korjakes.

I  I  Great  noises  in  abdomen.

Rumbling,  with  constant  pain  deep  in  umbilical  region;  <
from  pressure.

I  Loud  rolling  and  rumbling  in  bowels,  with  constipation.
d  During  pregnancy.

I  Flatulency  of  stomach  and  bowels.

Pinching  below  the  umbilicus,  attended  with  a  bloated  condi-
tion of  the  abdomen.

iPain  in  abdomen  with  fetid  discharges, d  Typhus.

1  Burning  in  abdomen.

l  Ulceration  of  stomach  and  bowels, d  Typhoid  fever.

A  great  heaviness  like  from  a  weight,  most  below  the  navel.

I A  pressure  as  from  a  swelling  from  the  left  hypogastrium  to
the  back. See  24.

I  I  In  region  of  coecum,  violent  stitches,  with  sneezing.

Sensation  of  emptiness,  hollowness,  or  coldness  in  abdomen.

I  I  Distension  of  abdomen.

Undulatory  jumping  of  the  upper  abdominal  muscles.

Twitching,  tension,  tearing  and  stitches  in  the  loins.

I  I  Subsultus  of  abdominal  muscles.

Bruised  feeling  in  loins,  in  sitting  and  lying.

Laming  pains  in  loins,  <C  walking  and  standing.

]  Abdominal  plethora.

■  Weakness  in  loins. ^Rheumatism.

In  groins,  peculiar  tensive  sensation  as  if  wrenched,  less  when
walking,  I  quivering  in  the  left.
^^  Rectum,  Stool  and  Anus.  In  rectum :  a  sharp  itching,  in-
vites to  drawing  upwards,  but  is  only  relieved  by  pressing
down ;  burning  and  loss  of  blood  ;  biting  after  wind  passes  ;
bearing  down,  tenesmus.

Prickling,  itching  in  the  rectum  and  anus,  as  from  worms.


155  AMANITA.

Passes  much  inodorous  flatus,  every  day  for  weeks ;  more  after

breakfast.
Wind  of  odor  like  carrion  ;  like  garlic.
Stool  thin,  yellow,  fecal,  slimy.

I  I  Stool  mushy,  most  after  breakfast,  oftener  than  usual.
Stool  pappy  and  at  the  same  time  passage  of  a  large  quantity

of  wind.
I  I  Stool  has  an  abominable  stench  ;  t.
I  Fetid  stools. See  19.
Diarrhoea  mostly  in  the  morning,  after  rising  and  eating,  with

much  rumbling  ;  crampy  colic  and  passing  of  wind.

■  Diarrhoea  in  children;  liver  involved,  with  grass-green,  bil-

ious stools.
Diarrhoea,  with  cutting  in  the  abdomen ;  bowels  loose,  stools
light  and  offensive, d  Typhus.

■  Looseness  commencing  in  the  morning,  immediately  after  ris-

ing, returning  after  each  meal  with  much  rumbling,  passing
wind  and  spasmodic  bellyache ;  crampy  colic.  6  Chronic
diarrhoea.

Yery  hard  stools ;  at  first  hard  and  knotty,  then  soft,  finally
diarrhoetic.

iCostiveness. ^Rheumatism.

Before  stool:  pinching  and  cutting  in  the  abdomen;  urgent
tenesmus ;  painful  straining  in  the  rectum.

During  stool :  colic  and  passing  of  flatus ;  burning  soreness,
smarting  and  cutting  in  anus  ;  sweat ;  pain  in  loins  to  legs,
continuing  after  stool.

After  stool :  headache  >  ;  biting  in  anus  ;  straining  in  rectum  ;
cutting  pain  in  anus ;  griping  in  hypogastrium  ;  distension
of  abdomen  ;  heaviness  in  abdomen  and  around  navel ;  pain
in  chest.

In  anus :  periodical  violent  stitches,  afternoon ;  tearing  pain
with  hard  stool ;  I  I  heaviness  and  fullness ;  I  I  pressing,  at
noon ;  an  urging  toward  it  from  wind ;  very  unpleasant  sen-
sation of  dryness,  I  I  had  to  draw  it  upwards ;  sensation  as  if
completely  closed  ;  I  I  paralytic  weakness  in  the  sphincter ;
warm  feeling,  I  I  burning  with  cadaverous  smelling  flatus ;
heat  and  itching,  I  I  itching  and  burning  ;  crawling  as  from
worms,  has  to  scratch ;  moisture  and  oozing  out ;  slime  ap-
pears without  a  stool.

A  copious  mush-like  stool,  followed  by  burning  in  anus.

Hemorrhoidal  tumors  burning,  inflamed,  swollen.
^^  Urinary  Organs. Pressing  pain  in  region  of  kidneys,  disturb
sleep.

Stitch  in  r.  kidney.

1  Lameness  in  left  kidney,  sore  to  touch,  with  cramp  extending
into  the  thighs.

Tensive  pain  while  riding.


AMANITA.  156

Twitching  pain  in  the  bladder.

I  I  Paralytic  weakness  in  the  sphincter,  can  hardly  hold  the

urine.
The  desire  to  urinate  is  urgent.
Sphincter  vesicae  weak,  with  dribbling.

■  The  urine  passes  at  intervals  and  dribbles  away,  I  I  with  a  cold

shrunken  penis.
Urine  passes  in  intermissions  ;  flows  and  stops.
I  I  Constant  desire  to  urinate.
I  I  The  quantity  of  urine  is  very  much  increased,  even  with

diarrhoea.
Urination,  with  coldness  down  the  legs,  numbness  and  twitches.
After  urination,  urine  passes  off  involuntarily.
Urine  passes  slowly  in  a  small  stream  or  in  drops,  has  to  press

to  promote  the  flow.
Urine:  watery,  clear,  lemon-colored, I  I  bright  yellow; dark

yellow  and  hot ;  red ;  red  flocculent  or  powdery  sediment ;

watery  in  the  forenoon, I  I  in the  afternoon milky; like

whey ; turbid ; with  a  red  or  white sediment  (phosphate

of  magnesia) ;  iridizing  on  surface.
I  Urine  profuse,  colorless, d  Chorea.

■  Urination  lessened. ^Rheumatism.

A  little  shimmering  pellicle  on  the  urine.

Urine  with  red,  flaky  sediment ;  sediment  white,  of  phosphate
of  magnesia.

With  urination  :  spasmodic  drawing  in  1.  groin  ;  I  I  burning  in
urethra,  I  at  night  in  the  orifice;  sensation  as  if  a  cold  drop
of  cold  urine  was  passing ;  I  painful  urging  along  the  urethra.

Urethra :  burning  stitches ;  stitch  like  from  a  red  hot  iron ;
I  I  several  fine  stitches,  most  in  the  orifice ;  I  I  crawling,
itching,  tickling  in  the  orifice  I  lessened  by  cold  water ;
I  I  discharge  of  prostatic  juice  or  of  a  tough  viscous  slime  ;
momentary  burning  in  the  orifice  during  the  night.

Viscid,  glutinous  mucus  from  the  urethra.
^^  Male  Sexual  Organs. I  '  Excited  sexual  desire,  most  mornings.

After  siesta,  an  irresistible  urging,  and  after  emission,  tensive
pressure  in  the  hypochondria.

Erections  night  and  morning.

Great  desire  for  coition,  with  relaxed  penis.

1  I  Pollutions  several  nights  ; I  in  siesta.

I  After  emission,  pains  and  weakness  in  thighs.

I  I  Sexual  power  much  diminished,  apathy,  nothing  can  pro-
duce an  erection.

I  During  coition:  burning  in  urethra;  most  painful  with  the
ejaculation ;  insufiicient  ejaculation,  or  very  late ;  volup-
tuous ecstasy  wanting.

After  coitus:  I  loss  of  appetite;  I  leach  time  great  relaxation
for  several  days,  I  lassitude; I  night-sweats  ;  for  two  nights


15T  AMANITA.

burning  itching  of  skin, with  sweat  on  upper  chest  and
shoulders,  afterwards  on  abdomen  and  arms.

1 1  Complaints  after  sexual  debauches.

I  I  Drawing  in  testicles,  with  a  sense  of  discomfort,  heaviness
and  drowsiness ;  evenings.

Spasmodic  drawing  in  left  testicle  and  spermatic  cord.

I  I  Excessive  and  painful  retraction  of  the  testes  toward  the  in-
guinal ring,  has  to  palliate  it  by  pressing  them  off  with  the
fingers.

Disagreeable  sensation  in  the  urethra,  only  in  front  part  of
penis,  like  a  crawling,  has  to  squeeze  the  penis.

Penis  cold  and  shrunken.

Itching  in  penis,  on  foreskin  and  scrotum.

On  left  side  of  scrotum  red  swelling,  tickles  and  itches.

I  Old  gleets  and  other  sequels  of  gonorrhoea.

I  I  Excessive  itching  of  the  genitals,  in  mons  veneris;  unbear-
able for  several  days.

I  I  Itching and burning at night  above  the  genitals,  lichen
pilaris  urticatus.
"^  Female  Sexual  Organs. I  ■>  l  Awfully  bearing  down  pain  al-
most intolerable.

Cramps  as  if  she  must  have  a  child,  obliged  to  lie  down.

I  Itching  and  irritation  of  the  parts,  with  strong  desire  for  an
embrace.

I  I  Menses  too  profuse,  with  tearing,  pressive  pains  in  back  and
abdomen.

At  beginning  of  menses :  nightly  restlessness  on  account  of
troublesome  rigors  ;  toothache  and  wakefulness.

During  menses :  headache,  toothache,  pain  and  itching  in  left
ear,  lessened  by  boring ;  pains  like  those  of  labor,  in  belly
and  back ;  pains  in  left  arm  ;  itching  here  and  there,  par-
ticularly about  genitals ;  rigors ;  palpitation ;  running  of
water  from  mouth.

■  Swelling  of  vagina  and  several  nodules  (with  horses).

After  menses :  pain  as  from  exhaustion ;  palpitation ;  head-
ache and  dizziness;  i prolapsus  after  cessation  of  menses;
interrupted  sleep  with  anxiety.

Leucorrhoea  very  profuse,  dark  colored. ^Prolapsus  uteri.

Leucorrhoea,  with  much  itching  internally  and  externally.
2^  Pregnancy  and  Parturition, i  Constipation  with  rumbling  in
bowels  during  pregnancy.

I  Four  weeks  after  childbirth  a  pressing  pain  like  a  swelling
from  the  left  side  of  hypogastrium,  extending  towards  the
back  ;  motion  aggravates  ;  thirst,  but  loss  of  appetite.

■  Metastasis  of  milk  to  the  brain. ^Epilepsy.
Nipples  itch,  burn,  look  red.

"  Voice,  Larynx  and  Trachea, i  "Worse  from  singing.

■  During  singing  a  scratching  in  throat;  after  the  "grippe."


AMANITA.  158

Oppression  and  constriction  of  larynx ;  he  fears  suffocation.
Tickling  along  the  windpipe,  with  a  violent,  raking  dry  cough.

■  Tickling  in  trachea. ^  Laryngo-phthisis.

•  Frequent  tickling  irritation  in  the  windpipe, d  Incipient  tu-
berculosis.
^'^  Kespiration. lAt  night  breathing  was  impeded,  owing  to  the
closure  of  the  nose  by  the  thick  mucus, d  Chronic  nasal
catarrh.

I  I  Oppression  of  chest  with  pain  in  stomach.

During  inhalation  :  stitches  in  left  side  and  I  I  below  the  short
ribs ;  increasing  pressure  on  the  middle  of  sternum ;  dull
stitches  in  liver.

With  a  deep  inspiration :  pains  in  different  parts  of  chest  and
abdomen  ;  shooting  from  heart  to  shoulder-blade.

I  I  Frequent  deep  inspirations.

Rapid  breathing,  evenings,  with  heat  all  over  and  sweat,  most
in  face.

I  I  Great  inclination  to  sighing,  involuntary,  with  rapid  beating
of  heart.

Suffocative  fits  with  anxiety  and  fainting ;  t.

I  I  Difficulty  in  breathing,  as  if  the  chest  was  too  full ;  he  must
breathe  more  deeply.

I  I  Chest  as  if  too  narrow,  pressure  on  both  sides  of  sternum.

I  I  Difficult  and  noisy  respiration.

:  Short  breath  in  walking,  has  to  stand  still  to  get  breath.
d  Incipient  tuberculosis.

Constriction  of  the  chest,  with  deep  inspirations  at  times,  and
visible  beating  of  the  heart,  and  a  kind  of  oppression,  espe-
cially behind  the  two  borders  of  the  sternum,  along  its  whole
length.

In  region  of  diaphragm  painful  drawing  with  difficult  breathing.
^^  Cough. Dry  cough  with  whistling  behind  the  sternum.

[  Frequent  dry  cough,  after  meals, d  Incipient  tuberculosis.

I  I  Cough  with  rattling  of  phlegm,  without  expectoration.

I  I  Dry  cough  from  a  tickling  in  trachea  at  night,  shaking  the
whole  body  violently.

1  I  Constant  irritation  to  cough  which  can  mostly  be  suppressed,
but,  if  he  cannot  resist  it,  several  violent  convulsive  shocks
of  cough  succeed  one  another,  which  are  very  painful,  tears
run  from  eyes  and  he  has  to  double  up.

■  Violent  cough  in  isolated  attacks,  ending  in  repeated  sneezing.
':  Hacking  cough, d  Incipient  tuberculosis.

I  I  Convulsive,  hacking  cough,  with  oppressive  sweat.

■  ■Sudden  convulsive  coughs,  worse  forenoons,  or  during  the

day.
I  I  Violent  spasmodic  cough  at  night.
Cough  most  at  night,  less  in  the  morning,  in  the  forenoon,

worse  towards  evening.


159  AMANITA.

I  I  Dry  cough  after  dinner.

During  cough :  burning  in  chest;  stitches  in  leftside;  palpi-
tation.

I  Convulsive  cough  with  anxious  sweat.

I  I  Has  to  sit  up  in  bed  or  the  cough  takes  his  breath.

With  the  cough  pressure  in  1.  head,  running  in  the  scalp  ;  burn-
ing in  eyes,  tears  run  from  eyes.

Spasmodic  contraction  of  chest,  threatening  suffocation ;  raw-
ness of  chest,  shooting  in  left  side  of  chest ;  some  saliva  flies
out  of  the  mouth;  nausea,  retching;  burning  in  stomach;
heaviness  in  abdomen ;  colicky  pain  impedes  coughing.

I  Cough  towards  evening  with  frequent  pulse  (100)  intermitting.

I  I  After  each  cough  violent  sneezing ;  sometimes  so  rapidly
that  he  does  not  know  if  he  coughs  or  sneezes.

■  Frequent  hemming  and  bringing  up small, firm lumps of

phlegm,  without  cough, d  Laryngo  phthisis.
I  1  Mucous  sputa  most  in  the  morning.

•  Mucus  is  loosened  by  slight  clearing  and  comes  up  in  small,

hard,  round  balls, d  Incipient  tuberculosis.

•  Expectoration  of  small  flakes  of  mucus  raised  almost  without

any  cough. 6  Incipient  tuberculosis.
Sputa  sometimes  consisting  of  large  brown  lumps.
I  Long-lasting  cough  and  pus-like  sputa.
I  I  Rattling  of  phlegm  in  chest,  <  mornings  and  when  lying  on

the  back.

■  Chronic  catarrh.

Loose  cough ;  with  distension  of  abdomen ;  heaviness  most  in
region  of  navel ;  noise  in  belly ; I  I  passing  of  wind.
^®  Inner  Chest  and  Lungs. Sudden  stitches  in  the  middle  of
chest.

•  Incipient  tuberculosis.

Stitching  behind  sternum  most  at  the  end  of  expiration.
Very  painful  stinging  pressure  in  chest,  below  the  shoulder

blades,  and  on  corresponding  places  in  front ;  has  to  breathe

deeply.
I  I  Stitches  in  1.  breast  with  inhalation.
Sudden  stitches  in  r.  lung  while  walking ;  a  stitch  with  every

breath  in  left  chest;  between  sternum and nipple, pulse

90,  hard  and  full,  3  p.m.
I  Jerking  stitches  through  the  right  lung.
I  Oppression  of  the  chest  in  the  region  of  the  diaphragm,  with

drawing  pains, d  Angina  pectoris.
I  I  Pressure  on  chest  and  heavy  sensation.
\  Sense  of  constriction  in  the  cardiac  region,  as  if  the  chest

were  too  narrow  or  too  full  of  blood, d  Incipient  tubercu-
losis.
Sprained  sensation  in  chest,  increased  by  taking  a  deep  breath,

evenings.


AMAIJITA.  160

I  I  Tension  in  the  lower  part  of  the  chest  during  motion  and

when  sitting,  taking  away  his  breath. See  22.
Tension,  pressure,  heaviness  and  constriction  of  chest.
I  I  Tension  over  the  whole  chest,  most  in  front  after  breakfast.
Oppression  behind  sternum  with  strange  beating  of  heart.
Anxious  sensation  in  chest.
I  I  Burning  in  left  chest,  worse  after  dinner.
•  Severe  burning  in  chest, d  Incipient  tuberculosis.
I  I  Sensation  of  sore  pain  deep  in  chest,  first  1.  then  r.
1  Inflammation  of  lungs.

All  the  symptoms  of  incipient  phthisis.

Sticking,  under  the  nipple. 6  Incipient  tuberculosis.

Twitches  running  across  the  chest  in  rapid  succession,  accom-
panied by  prickling, d  Incipient  tuberculosis.
I  Consumption  of  lungs ; 1 1  tuberculous  consumption.

Heart,  Pulse  and  Circulation. Sticking  pain  in  apex  of

heart.
Stitches  in  region  of  heart,  through  to  the  shoulder-blade  ; <

from  cough.
1  I  Violent  stitches  in  region  of  heart,  with  an  intermitting

pulse  and  great  weakness.
I  I  Burning,  shooting  pains  in  region  of  heart,  extending  to

left  shoulder-blade ;  caused  by  deep  inspiration  and  much

worse  from  coughing,  sneezing  and  hiccough.
I  Sense  of  oppression  in  the  cardiac  region  as  if  the  cavity  of

the  thorax  was  narrowed  ;  confined  feeling.
I  Constant  feeling  of  a  lump  in  the  epigastrium,  with  pain  un-
der the  sternum ;  drawing  in  region of  diaphragm,  sharp

pains  in  left  side, d  Angina  pectoris,  gastralgic  form.
"When  he  laid  down  at  night  he  felt  several  blows  in  the  heart

with  trembling  in  the  pit  of  the  stomach  and  anxiety,  caused

by  every  slight  noise.
Several  twitching  shocks  of  the  heart.

At  night  transient  painful  shocks  at  the  heart,  with  anxiety.
Oppression  at  the heart on  bending  the  body  down,  with

violent  beating  of  the  heart.
The  r.  heart  overfilled  with  blood ;  t.
When  he  awoke,  trembling  of  the  heart.

■  Palpitation  most  in  the  evening. ^  Real convulsio cordis.
After  a  feeling  of  compression  with  omission  of  the  beats  of

heart,  some  very  quick  irregular  beats.
Palpitation  violent,  strongly  felt,  worse  evenings,  with  redness

of  face  ;  on  sitting  down,  some  irregular,  strong  beats  ;  anx-

iqus  oppression.
Attack  of  violent  palpitation  of  heart, with  anxiety  breaking

out  in  a  sweat.
I  I  Forcible  beats  of  heart,  lifting  the  hand  lying  on  the  chest


161  AMANITA.

and moving a  newspaper  she  had  in  her hand up and

down.
The  prover  hears  the  heart-throbs.
Accompanying palpitation : anxiety ; trembling in pit of

stomach;  dull  headache;  vertigo;  red  face;  oppression.
I  I  Paralyzed  feeling  in  left  arm  and  hand  ;  shudders, crawls  ;

water runs  together  in  mouth ;  all the  limbs are  weary.
I  I  Pulse :  frequent,  100  in  a  minute,  irritated,  full,  strong,  beats

quick,  87  ;  weak,  small,  60 ;  felt  in  all  parts  of  body,  most

in  epigastrium.
Omission  of  pulse  after  30  or  40  beats.
Pulse  unequal,  quicker  and  slower.
Dicrotic  pulse.  '

Weak,  small  pulse.
Pulse  small,  irregular ;  t.
Exceedingly  weak  pulse  ;  t.
j  Small  pulse, d  Incipient  tuberculosis.
Pulse :  feeble, scarcely perceptible ; becomes  slower  during

day,  more  frequent  in  the  morning ;  small, uneven, very

unequal,  irregular,  at  times  intermitting.
I  Weak,  tremulous  pulse. ^From  overworking  at  desk.
I  Pulse  very  frequent  and small,  140;  first sound of  heart

scarcely  audible. 6  Typhus.
General  inactivity  of  the  circulation.
^^  Outer  Chest. Peculiar  sensation  of  contraction  of  the  sternum.
Jerking,  subsultus  of  all  pectoral  muscles.
Pressure on right chest near the nipple, throbbing sore

feeling.
:  Painful  pressure  on  the  middle  of  the  sternum,  worse  when

inhaling. 6  Incipient  tuberculosis.
Sharp  stitches :  like  splinters  in  pectoralis  near  the  nipple,  first

r.  then  1.,  later  on  the  lowest  ribs ;  on  difiierent  parts  of

thorax.
Pain  in  left  intercostal  muscles.
Twitches  of  pectoral  muscles.
Shooting  tearing  pains  in  small  spots.

•  Throbbing  aching  pain  in  small  spots  on  the  chest, d  In-
cipient tuberculosis.
Soreness  deep  in  chest  in  two  spots,  four  inches  on  either  side

of  sternum  ;  it  hurts  or  weakens  her  to  breathe  or  speak.
Copious  sweat  on  the  chest  during  the  night.
Burning,  biting  pimples  on  outer  chest.
^^  Neck  and  Back. Tension  in  the  region  of  the  thymus  gland.
\  Struma.

I  Cervical  glands  swollen, d  Chorea.
I  I  Muscles  in  neck  feel  as  if  beaten.
Stitches  in  the  cervical  vertebrae.
I  Twitching  of  the  cervical  muscles.

11


AMANITA.  162

I  I  Stiff  neck.

I  I  Tension  and  stiffness  of  muscles  of  neck.

1  I  Sensation  as  if  sprained  in  the  neck  when  turning  head  to
the  left.

Extending  to  nape  of  neck:  crick  in  back.

Itching  pimples  on  the  neck.

In  the  back  below  the  shoulder-blades,  a  gnawing,  shooting,
tearing  pain.

•  Sticking  between  the  shoulder-blades,  d  Incipient  tubercu-
losis.

Frequent  sharp  stitches  like  from  splinters  on  dorsal  vertebrae.

I  I  Feels  as  if  large  splinters  were  pushed  into  the  back.

■  Violent  shooting,  burning  pains,  deep  in  the  spine.
Spasmodic,  pressive,  drawing  pain  starts  from  back,  extends  to

middle  of  chest  and  into  oesophagus.

I  I  Painful  pulsation  in  the  spinal  canal.
• I  I  Ankle  muscles  feel  as  if  beaten  or  bruised; Ion  bending
forward  they  feel  short.

I  1  Backaches  disturbing  sleep  at  night ;  cannot  find  a  posi-
tion to  lie  in,  with  heat.

I  I  Aching  along  spine  and  limbs.

Pain  in  the  back,  as  after  continued  stooping.

I  Pain  along  spinal  column,  <  when  stooping.

Every  motion,  every  turn  of  the  body,  causes  pain  in  spine.

I  I  Crepitation  in  the  vertebrse  of  the  neck  when  stooping  and
crackling  all  along  the  spine  when  moving  the  body,  in  the
loins  when  stooping.

Crick  in  back  extending  from  sacrum  to  nape  of  neck.

■  After  dinner,  pain  in  the  spine,  especially  a  spot  the  size  of

the  palm  in  the  middle  of  the  spinal  column  ;  is  very  sensi-
■ tive  to  the  touch,  as  well  as  at  every  motion  of  the  body.
Shooting  pains  in  single  vertebrae.
I  I  Violent  shocks  starting  from  one  of  the  lower  vertebrae.

■  Great  sensitiveness  of  single  vertebrae  to the  hot  sponge.

d  Chorea.
I  I  I  The  whole  spinal  column  is  very  sensitive  to  touch,  even

by  a  sponge,  or  leaning  against  a  chair.
Biting  burning  in  a  small  place  on  the  spine.

■  Spine  sensitive  to  touch  ;  worse  mornings.

Pain  along  the  spine  in  several  places,  tender  to  touch.
Sensation  as  if  cold  air  was  spreading  from  the  spine  over  the

body,  like  an  aura  epileptica.
Coldness  below  the  shoulder-blade,  as  if  touched  by  a  piece

of  ice.
Chilliness  over  the  whole  back.
Crawls  over  the  back  and  limbs.
Running  heat  through  the  limbs.
Sensation  of  soreness  and  great  weakness  in  back.


163  AMANITA.

iNumbness  and  weakness  in  the  back, d  Chorea.

1  Great  uneasiness  and  weakness  in  spine,  with  twitchings.

I  I  Great  weakness  in  the  muscles  of  the  back,  can  hardly  sit
straight.

Peculiar  sensation  of  weakness  and  stiffness  between  shoulders  ;
extends  to  neck.

I  When  stooping,  spine  pains  as  if  too  weak  to  support.

Sensation  of  ants  creeping  along  spine.

Burning,  biting  on  the  back.

Itching  on  back  ;  suppurating  pimples.

Yiolent  pains  in  first  and  second  lumbar  vertebrae  when  turn-
ing the  body.

Pain  in  the  first  two  lumbar  vertebrae,  with  sense  of  coldness
in  the  glutei  muscles,  spreading  down  the  legs,  and  formi-
cation in  the  feet.

I  Spinal  column  sensitive  to  pressure  of  a  hot  sponge  in  the
region  of  the  second  and  third  lumbar  vertebrae. 6  Chorea.

■  Sensitiveness  of  lumbar  vertebras. ^Chorea.

llPain  in  lumbar  region  and  sacrum,  lespecially  during  exer-
tion in  the  daytime  Hand  while  sitting;  pain,  sore  ach-
ing ;  back  not  sensitive  to  touch.

Pressure  in  sacrum  like  a  heavy  load,  as  if  it  would  burst.

Pain  in  sacrum ;  a  sort  of  crick  in  the  back  ;  extends  along
to  the  nape  of  the  neck.

Pain  in  sacrum  extending  through  the  whole  spine  up  to
neck.

I  Sudden  violent  stitch  in  sacrum  while  walking  in  the  open  air.
Pain  in  back  and  sacrum  so  violent  that  he  has  to  keep  in  bed,

some  palpitation, no  appetite, no  stool, but  frequent  dis-
charge of  pale  yellow  urine.
Pain  in  sacrum,  <  in  the  evening,  or  goes  into  lower  limbs.

I I  As  if  beaten  in  sacrum,  or  dislocated  feeling.
Feels  the  palpitation  even  in  the  os  coccyx.
Dry  feeling  in  os  coccyx.

^^  Upper  Limbs. I  '  Shoulder-joint  as  if  dislocated.
Convulsive  shakes  in  1.  shoulder.
Tearing  in  r.  shoulder.
Shooting  in  axilla.
Icy  feeling  in  r.  axilla  and  1.  inner  ankle.

■  Rheumatism  of  r.  deltoid  worse  when  moving  the  joint  back-

wards, with  great  weakness  in  the  loins,  costiveness  and  less

urination.
Spasmodic  pains  in  1. upper  arm  below  the  deltoid,  followed

by  a  similar  pain  in  r.  upper  leg.
Sprained  feeling  in  the  deltoid  and  as  if  thousands  of  splinters

were  in  it  when  lifting  the  arm  ;  at  5  p.m.

■  Drawing pain  from 1. upper arm to forearm  ;  drawing  in

muscles  of  1.  forearm  and  down  over  the  elbow.


AMANITA.  164

Tearing  in  1.  upper  arm,  lower  teeth  and  1.  ear,  with  violent

itching  in  the  ear ;  pains  worse  from  lying  on  the  sore  side ;

from  2  P.M.  till  evening.
I  Irregular  and  hurried  movements  of  the  arms.
Twitching  and  spasms  in  arms,  ceasing  when  doing  hard  work

with  the  hands.
Violent  shock  of  the  left  arm,  followed  by  wave-like  twitchings

of  the  abdominal  muscles  ;  during  siesta.
I  I  Upper  arm  shaken  like  from  an  electric  shock.
Subsultus  tendinum  on  upper  arm.
Such  constant  motions  of  upper  limbs  that  pulse  cannot  be

felt,  lower  limbs  are  drawn  up  to  the  trunk ;  t.
Irregular  quick  motions  in  upper  limbs ;  t.
Tension  in  1.  upper  arm.

Has  to  put  his  arms  often  into  another  position.
Violent  laming  pain  in  left  hand  and  arm  after  palpitation

commences.
Cannot  lift  his  arm ;  the  arms  are  stiff.
Five  minutes  after  the  palpitation  begins  :  a  violent  paralytic

pain  in  left  hand  and  arm.

I  I  Prostration  weariness  and  paralytic  feeling  in  left  arm.
Burning  above  the  1.  elbow.

Itching  on  the  arms.

I I  Burning  itching  on  both  hands, as  if  frozen;  parts  hot,
swollen,  red.

■  Burning  itching  pimples  on  the  arms.

Pimples  on  arms  size  of  millet  seed,  with  burning  itching.
A  small  painful  abscess  on  the  middle  of  the  r.  deltoid.
Violent  rheumatic  pains  in  forearm,  extending  into  the  thumb  ;

afternoon,  in  rest.
1  I  Drawing  in  forearm,  in  left,  or  both.
Tearing  drawing  pains  in  1.  elbow-joint.

■  Rheumatic  or  gouty  stiffness  of  left  hand  and  elbow-joint.
Electric  stitches  in  the  olecranon  of  each  arm.

In  the  point  of  elbow,  coldness  like  from  ice.

Forearm  : I  I  tearing  in  the  bones  of  the  left ;  tearing  between

the bones ;  strong painless pulsation near and above  r.

olecranon  ;  tension,  lameness and  numbness ;  starting  and

quivering  on  upper  surface  of  r.  hand,  extending  to  the  ball

of  the  hand  ;  pressive  trembling  in  r.  hand.
In  the extensor  side  of  r. forearm, sudden awful  pain  like

thousands  of  splinters,  with  a  momentary  sensation  as  if  he

would  lose  consciousness.
Sensation  like  from  splinters  in  point  of  1.  elbow.
Burning  in  front  of  1.  forearm  near  the  wrist  as  if  he  had  burnt

himself.
Burning  itching  on  r.  forearm ;  after  scratching,  white  nodules,

size  of  millet  seed,  and  furfuraceous  peeling  off.


165  AMANITA.

Itching  on  point  of  elbow.
I  I  Tearing  in  1.  wrist.
I  I  Tearing  in  both  hands.

Burning  sore  pain  in  the  skin  of  r.  hand  from  the  wrist  to
thumb  and  index  finger;  even  slightest  touch  with  finger
painful.

I  Trembling  and  coldness  of  hands,  d  From  overwork  at  the  desk.

I I  Trembling  of  hands. ^Typhus.

Right  hand  unsteady  while  writing ;  arm  feels  paralyzed  from
much  writing.

I  I  Left  hand  up  to  forearm  asleep  at  night  in  bed ;  from  lead-
ing a  little  boy  during  a  walk.

Cold  hands.

Hands  chilly,  nails  blue,  with  a  small,  hard  pulse  and  prostra-
tion of  the  whole  body,  at  noon.

Face  and  I  I  hands  blue  and  icy  cold.

Sometimes  a  warm  sweat  on  palms.

I  I  Itching  on  r.  wrist.

Itching,  redness  and  burning  in  the  hands  like  chilblains.

I  I  Tearing  burning  in  thumbs,  stitches  like  needles.

I  I  Spasmodic  pain  in  thumb.

I  I  Tearing  between  thumb  and  index  finger.
Drawing,  tearing  in  left  index  finger  as  from  splinters.
Burning  and  crawling  in  r. index  finger  as  if  a  felon  would

come.
Icy  cold  sensation  in  joint  of  middle  finger  ;  somewhat  reddened

and  sensitive  to  touch  ;  violent  tearing.
Finger  deadens  often  and  remains  a  long  time  very  sensitive

to  the  cold.
Tearing  in  1.  little  finger.
Frequent  sudden  motions  of  right  fingers.
Tearing  in  joints  and  drawing  as  if  in  periosteum,  of  all  fingers.

I I  Stiffness  in  fingers  from  gout.

Fingers  itch,  burn  and  look  red,  as  if  frost-bitten.
Points  of  fingers  blue ;  t.
Nails  blue.
^^  Lower  Limbs. Pains  over  both  hip-joints,  he  gets  up  stiif.
I  I  Tensive,  pressing  tearing  in  the  hip-joints  as  if  the  heads  of

the  bones  were  pulled  from  the  sockets.
Violent  ischiatic pain ;  neither touch  nor  pressure, neither

walking  nor  rest  has  any influence, but  <  by  stooping  or

change  of  position.
Stretching  pain  in  the  acetabula.
Stitches,  pressing  and  feeling  of  dislocation  or  as  if  beaten  in  the

hip-joint.
Coldness in the  region  of  trochanter ;  at  intervals shaking,

pushing  concussions now  in  the  1.  hip  now  in  the  r.  hand,

commencing  in  the  joints  of  lower  limbs.


AMANITA.  166

I  Pains  in legs, especially in region  of  right hip-joint,  like

from  fatigue.
Itching  on  the  condyles  of  the  hipbone.
I  Violent pains in limbs, especially left hip under  gluteal

muscles.  ^

I  I  In  the  1.  buttock  violent  tearing  with  sensation  of  coldness,

wakening  him  out  of  sleep.

I I  Twitching  of  the  gluteal  muscles.

I  llcy  coldness  from  glutei  down  to  the  feet,  most  in  big
toes.

Coldness  spreading  from  glutei  down  the  legs,  with  numbness
and  twitches.

Furuncle  on  r.  gluteus,  size  of  hen's  egg,  very  painful,  dis-
charging black  blood  on  the  seventh  day,  with  the  most
violent  burning  pains  ;  lasted  five  days.

Pressing  in  thighs, ■<  in  right.

Sensation  of  a  plug  on  outer  side  of  thigh,  I  I  above  the  knee.

Rending  drawing  in  thigh,  extending  to  the  knee.

Tendons  of  thigh  are  stretched.

From  groin  down  to  middle  of  anterior  thigh,'  violent  contrac-
tion in  the  flexors.

Tearing  from  hip-joint  to  knee,  with  numbness.

I  I  Crossing  the  legs  causes  pain  in  thighs.

Thighs  pain  as  after  a  long  journey  on  foot.

Painful  weariness  and  heaviness  in  thighs.

I  1  Electric  stitches  or  spasmodic  pain  in  anterior  part  of  thigh.

Burning,  itching  on  inner  and  anterior  portion  of  thigh.

Biting  and  burning  pimples  above  the  knee.

All  along  flexor  side  of  thigh  violent  burning,  and  later  a
thick  rash  like  from  nettles.

On  front  of  thigh and on  buttocks  very  painful furuncles.

In  knee-joint:  drawing,  tearing,  stinging;  I  I  weakness;
I  I  sprained  feeling.

Tearing  drawing  in  knee ; <  sitting,  >  walking.

I  I  Violent  stitches  in  both  knees,  followed  by  weakness.
Muscular twitches, or I  I  weakness  in knees, I  I  they  knock

together.
Itching,  violent  pain,  a  tremulous  feeling, or coldness  on  a
small  spot  in  bend  of  knee.

I I  Pain  in  the  bones  of  lower  legs,  sometimes  as  if  in  the  peri-
osteum.

Pains  in  the  bones  of  the  legs,  as  if  in  the  marrow.

I  I  Violent  pressing  pains  in  1.  tibia  beginning  in  the  morning,

worse  at  noon,  lessening  afternoon  and  evening.
Pains  similar  to  syphilitic  bone-pain  not worse  in  the  warmth

of  the  bed,  but  rather  better.
I  i  Tearing  drawing  pains  in  shin-bones,  -<  sitting,  >•  walking.
Burning  in  the  tibia.


167  AMANITA.

I  Pains  in  legs  most  marked  when  standing  or  sitting ; >  when
walking  or  from  motion.

I  I  Dull pain along the tibia ; drawing  pains in the shin.

In the  calves, I  I  tearing, I  I  painful  contraction, I  I  stitches,
I  burning,  heaviness.
• While  walking,  alternate  stretching  and  flexion  in  lower  limbs,
causing  a  strange  lifting  and  sinking  of  the  body,  accompa-
nied by  merry,  incoherent  talking ;  t.

Heaviness,  weariness,  or  a  tearing  with  a  paralytic  numbness
in  lower  legs.

Painful  prostration  in  legs,  cannot  go  up  stairs.

The  legs  ache  as  after  a  prostrating  sickness.

I  1  Lower  limbs  weak,  weary,  cannot  support  the  body,  cannot
stand,  has  to  sit.

I  1  Heaviness,  as  if  lead  was  hanging  on  the  legs.

I  I  Heaviness  in  the  legs  with  languor.

■  Weight  in  the  legs;  they  feel  weary  and  as  if  they  had  been
knocked  from  under  the  person.

I  Weak  and  heavy  in  the  legs  all  day;  yellow  urine,  clearer
than  usual.

On  crossing  the  thighs  he  feels  a  violent  pain  in  them.

I  I  Trembling  of  lower  limbs.

Electric shock through  lower  limbs,  most  in  left,  suddenly
awaking  him.

Jerking  motion  in  lower  limbs.

Sudden  concussions  in  legs.

Muscular  twitching,  followed  by  biting  itching  on  the  soles.

In  lower  limbs:  coldness,  I  i burning,  evening  and  night  copi-
ous sweat.

At  night  in  the  warmth  of  bed  an  itching  forcing  to  scratch,
leaving  bloody  streaks.

I  I  Burning  on  the  r.  lower  leg.

Burning  itching,  skin  dry  and  peeling  or  small  nodules.

I  I  Sweats  much  on  the  lower  leg.

•  Drawing,  press ive  pains  in  legs  ;  especially  in  ankles.

Pain  worse  in  standing,  has  to  walk  or  sit.

Pains  in  ankle-joint  waken  him  at  2  a.m.

I  I  Crampy  pain  in  ankle-joint  extending  over  the  heels ;  shoot-
ing burning  pains.

I  I  Crawling  and  itching  on  dorsi  of  feet.

I  I  Shooting  in  metatarsal  bones  and  feet  while  walking.

I  I  Feet  cold  like  ice  up  to  ankles.

Burning  in  feet,  as  if  blood  was  glowing  in  the  veins.

I  I  Great  weakness,  I  heaviness,  or  formication  in  feet.

Stiffness  in  tendo-achillis.

Heels :  as  if  beaten,  when  standing.

In  soles:  tearing, I  I  shooting,  like  splinters,  I  I  biting  itching.

I  Cramp  in  the  soles  at  night.


AMANITA.  168

Right  little  toe  pains  as  from  narrow  shoes,  and  in  the  left
second  toe  the  same  sensation  in  a  corn.

In  big  toe:  I  I  tearing,  jerking  pain,  digging,  sudden  stitches
like  splinters.

In  all  the  toes  :  I  I  drawing,  I  digging,  1  I  shooting,  crawling  or
prickling;  painful  swellings,  like  nails  growing  in;  I  I  itch-
ing, burning  and  redness,  as  if  frost-bitten.

1 1  Pain  and  inflammation  of  frost-bitten  toes.

1 1  Chilblains.

I  I  Violent  pains  in  a  corn  on  right  little  toe.

^*  Limbs in General. Tearing  in  1.  forearm  and  r.  thigh.

I I  Tearing  in  limbs,  ■<  in  rest  or  sitting,  >>  moving.
Shooting  pains  in  all  the  limbs ;  most  in  the  knees  and  nape

of  neck  ;  the  r.  knee  worse  going  up  stairs.
Shooting  in  fingers  and  toes.
Violent  pains  all  night  along  the  back,  on  chest,  loins  and  lower

limbs.
I  Pain  in  right  knee  and  left  hand;  pain  shifts  about  every

third  day  ;  during  attack  cough  only  on  moving  about ;  pains

worst when he begins to move about in the morning.

6  Rheumatism.
I  I  Tearing  and  drawing  in  the  tubular  bones,  <  in  their  ends.
Pains  in  bones  of  legs  and  forearm,  alternating  with  similar

pains  in  r.  tibia.
I  I  Cracking  and  other  noises  in  joints.
I  I  Trembling  of  limbs.
Restless, tremulous  feeling  in  upper  and  lower  limbs,  with

shaking  and  twitching.
iSubsultus  tendinum.

■  All  the  limbs  as  if  beaten,  after  slight  exertion.

After  repeated  and  severe  epistaxis,  great  soreness  and  bruised

feeling  of  joints  of  limbs.
Muscular  soreness  as  it  remains  in  some  cases  after  the  fever,

in  attacks  of  influenza.

■  Violent  ulcerative  pains  in  limbs  prevent  sleep  at  night,  from

1.  elbow  to  the  little  finger,  and  from  the  calves  to  the  heel,
with  beating  pains  in  little  toe ;  general  heat.  See  40.  6  A
young  leprous  lame  girl.

I  Feels  as  if  her  limbs  did  not  belong  to  her.

I  iPains  in  limbs  with  lameness  and  numbness.

iWeakness  and  coldness  in  limbs, d  Chorea.

Limbs  cold,  blue  ; t.

■  Livid  limbs. ^Typhus.

1  I  Formication  in  upper  and  lower  limbs,  as  if  gone  to  sleep.
^^  Rest. Position. Motion. In  rest :  pains  in  forearm,  me-
tatarsus, toes  ;  symptoms  generally  worse.
In standing: vertigo;  headache;  pressure  in stomach j  ten-
sion in  groin  ;  prostration  in  chest ; I  I  very  painful  palpita-


169  AMANITA.

tion  ;  pain  in  sacrum,  loins,  thumb,  Hegs,  knees,  heels  and
toes ;  legs  weak.

I  Uncertain  footing  when  standing,  d  From  overwork  at  desk.
I  I  Stooping :  nose  stopped  up  ;  stitches  under  ribs  ;  oppression
at  heart ;  spine  pains.

I  After  using  flexors :  most  after  stooping  or  bending  forward,
painful  tension  and  soreness  in  difiFerent  places.

When  sitting :  vertigo  ;  I  I  headache  ;  pressure  in  stomach  ;
cutting  in  diaphragm  ;  colic-like  spasm  in  stomach  ;  tension
in  groin ;  itching  on  scrotum ;  dry  cough ;  pressure  on
chest ;  sudden  violent  stitches  in  chest ;  tension  lower  part
of  chest ;  anxious,  irregular  beats  of  heart ;  sore  as  if  beaten
in  neck,  loins,  back,  I  I  sacrum,  I  hips,  I  I  thighs,  I  knees,  shin-
bone,  I  I  buttocks  and  I  I  lower  limbs  ;  stitches  on  outer  ankle  ;
tearing  in  inner  heel,  foot,  big  toe,  little  toe  and  corns ;
cramps  in  muscles.

Has  to  sit  down  when  cough  comes.

While  sitting  :  painful  sensations  in  the  anus  disappear.

I  I  After  changing  position,  most  when  rising  from  sitting  and
using  extensor  muscles  :  different  painful  and  other  sensa-
tions in  the  limbs.

Lying  on  back  :  rattling  in  chest ;  pain  in  occiput  through  to
glabella.

Pain  in  sacrum  and  loins  lying  on  r.  side,  >•  turning  to  left.

Worse  lying  on  the  suffering  side.

Lying  in  bed :  headache,  extending  to  left  ear.

Lying  down  :  rushing  in  r.  ear ;  palpitation  ;  shocks  at  heart ;
pains  in  loins,  sacrum,  knees ;  shaking  chill ;  twitches  of
muscles.

I  With  every  attempt  at  voluntary  motion  the  twitches  are  in-
creased ;  no  twitchings  at  night, d  Chorea.

Moderate  motion :  relieves  pain  in  limbs,  in  head  and  limbs,
in  small  of  back,  in  knees,  in  corn,  also  weakness.

Motion:  moving  head  neck  hurts;  any  motion  of  body,
back  pains ;  chilly ;  joints  crack ;  pressure  in  eyes ;  eye
balls  burn  ;  hands  tremble  ;  tension  lower  part  of  chest.

I  I  From  the  slightest  exertion  :  copious  sweat.

In  going  up  stairs  :  greatest  weariness  in  lower  limbs.

Walking  up  hill :  makes  him  faint.

Worse in walking : vertigo ; headache ; thirst ; stitches in

chest ;  pain  in  knees,  they  give  way ;  pain  in  lower  limbs,

in  ankle-joint,  heel,  metatarsus,  soles.
From  walking :  vertigo  ;  oppression  of  stomach  ;  colic  ;  difficult

breathing ; stitches  in  lungs  ; stitch  in  sacrum  ; pressure

in  upper  part  of  chest. See  35  and  39.

I I  Uncertainty  in  walking,  tumbling  over  everything  in  the  way
■  Unsteady  walk. ^Chorea.


AMANITA.  170

While  walking,  the  pains  in  lower  limbs  and  groins  disappear.

I  Thighs  most  affected  and  painful  after  walking.

In  writing :  lameness  in  upper  arm  ; weariness in  forearm  ;

uncertainty  in  hand;  cramp  in  ball  of  thumb.
I  If  she  reaches  for  an  object,  she  usually  misses  her  mark.

6  Clonic  spasms  of  eyes.
I  Uncertainty  in  his  carriage  and  when  walking. 6  Chorea.
He  stumbles  over  everything  in  his  way.

■  Learned  to  walk  and  to  speak  with  difficulty,  and  at  a  late

date, d  Clonic  spasms  of  eyes.

In  turning  around :  pain  in  back  or  neck.
2®  Nerves. Increase  of  strength  during  delirium  ;  t.

The  slightest  influence  of  the  will  seems  to  have  the  most  pow-
erful effect ;  t.

All  motions  are  much  easier  and  are  made  with  much  more
dexterity ;  t.

■  Extraordinary  strength  of  muscles. ^Epilepsy.

They  lift  up  heavy  loads  and  carry  them  with  great  facility  for

distances ;  t.
It  seems  as  if  they  were  dancing,  they  make  the  strangest

pantomimes  with  the  hands  ;  t.
They  run  to  places  where  they  had  no  intention  to  go ;  t.
Nervous  excitement  bordering  on  convulsions.
Extreme  wakefulness  and  restlessness,  and  continual  fever.
At  night,  3  a.m.,  getting  awake  with  an  inner  restlessness  in

all  voluntarily  muscles,  followed  by  a  trembling  and  finally

an  irresistible  playing  and  twitching  of  all  muscles.
iVery  restless, d  Typhus.
I  I  Trembling  of  lower  jaw  and  lips.
I  Chattering  of  jaws  and  trembling  of  limbs, d  Typhoid  fever.

■  Great  weakness  and  trembling, d  Prolapsus  uteri.
I  I  Tremulous  sensation  in  the  whole  body.

■  Tremor  of  the  whole  body, d  Typhus.

■  Trembling  of  parts  or  all  over, d  Chorea.
Trembling,  with  anxiousness  and  prostration.

Trembling  of  legs  and  hands,  with  debility:  soreness  of  spine;

worse  at  approach  of  thunder-storm.
I  I  Twitching of  muscles  in  different  places,  now  here,  now

there ;  subsultus  tendinum.
Twitching  and  spasms  during  sleep.

■  Muscular  twitchings  grow  more  violent; only  a  few  hours

sleep, d  Chorea.

■  ■Twitchings:  of  eyelids  and  eyeballs; of  cheeks; in  chest

posteriorly  ;  in  abdomen.

■  The  twitching  of  the  arms  ceased  when  the  patient  used  them

in  his  work  of  shoemaking. d  Chorea.

■  ■Involuntary movements (especially with children) while

awake  ;  ceasing  during  sleep, d  Chorea.


171  '  AMANITA.

lAs  soon  as  she  opened  her  eyes  in  the  morning,  the  two  eye-
balls began  to  turn  to  the  right  and  left  at  intervals  of  half
a  second,  and  this  continued  all  day.

1 8 Spasmodic  motions,  from  simple  involuntary  motions  and
jerks  of  single  muscles,  to  a  dancing  of  the  whole  body.
6  Chorea. 6  Hysteria.

■  Eclampsia.

I  Frequent  attacks  of  slight  convulsions.  6  Clonic  spasms  of
eyes.

I  Cramps  in  the  hands  and  feet;  body  convulsed,  as  if  a  gal-
vanic battery  was  applied  to  the  spine.

■  Convulsions  and  tremor.

B Convulsions,  fever  with  hot  head,  lying  in  a  lethargic  state;
distortion  of  the  eyes  and  crying  out  in  sleep. 6  Nyctogmus.

■  Catalepsy.

■  Epilepsy,  with  great  exertion  of  strength.

■  Epilepsy  from  fright,  every  seven  days ;  he  falls  and  lies  al-

most motionless.

■  Epilepsy  from  suppressed  eruptions.

■  Epileptic  attacks  two  or  three  a  week,  after  suppression  of

tinea  capitis.

■  Epileptic  attacks  increase  at  first  and  lessen  gradually.

I  I  Discomfort  and  heaviness  in  the  whole  body ;  general  inde-
scribable malaise.

Great  debility.

Powerlessness  and  great  weariness,  had  to  remain  in  bed  on
account  of  great  weakness.

Great  prostration  and  inability  to  think.

Exhaustion  with  the  delirium  ;  t.

Debility  :  after  coitus  ;  with  trembling  of  limbs.

Weak  from  the  least  exertion,  with  frequent  palpitation ;  with
vertigo. See  15.

I  I  Gets  tired  from  a  short  walk.

\  Greatest  lassitude  with  irresistible  drowsiness,  better  after  eat-
ing.

Great  lassitude  and  heaviness  in  the  limbs,  after  a  short  walk,

•  or  even  in  bed,  accompanied  by  anxiety  and  trembling.
d  Incipient  tuberculosis.

Great  weakness  and  viscous  sweats  ;  t.

■  Sense  of  languor  as  if  the  body  were  bruised  and  the  joints

dislocated, d  Headache.

Sense  of  uneasiness  and  weakness  all  down  the  spine,  d  Head-
ache.

Paralysis  of  lower  limbs,  with  slight  spasms  of  arms.

■  ■Paralysis  of  upper  and  lower  limbs. ^  Incipient  softening

of  spinal  marrow.
Paraplegia  from  congestion  of  the  lumbar  part  of  the  cord.


AMANITA.  172

A  child,  set.  15  months,  paralyzed  all  over,  eyes  turned,  face
bluish  pale,  puifed  up,  small,  irregular  pulse,  slight  tearing
and  twitches  in  upper  limbs ;  t.

In  all  paralyzed  parts,  violent  pains.
^^  Sleep. I  I  Very  frequent  gaping  all  day.

Gaping :  followed  each  time  by  involuntary  laughter ;  makes
him  giddy;  —  and  sneezing,  with  pain  in  maxillary-joint;
with  stretching,  most  of  arms  ;  —  and  shaking  chill.

Frequent  yawning :  before  spasms,  or  paroxyms  of  headache.

I  I  Drowsiness,  cannot  resist  sleep,  even  soon  after  getting  up
in  the  morning.

I  Irresistible  drowsiness  in  the  day  time. ^Prolapsus  uteri.

Early  in  the  evening  very  sleepy ;  he  has  to  go  to  bed,  but  a
peculiar  fear  as  if  somebody  could  come  and  disturb  him,
prevents  the  sleep  for  hours.

Great  drowsiness  and  weariness  during  the  day ;  at  night  a  rush
of  ideas  prevents  sleep.

Sleepy  and  heavy  headed,  mist  before  eyes,  pressure  in  eyes,
lower  limbs  very  tired.

Sleepiness,  especially  after  or  even  while  eating.

Afternoon  drowsy  and  weary,  with  sexual  desire.

I  Weary  and  drowsy  by  day,  sleepless  at  night.  ^From  over-
working at  desk.

I  On  falling  asleep  :  starts,  twitches  ;  sudden  complete  awaken-
ing, d  Chorea.

Sopor  and  convulsions  ;  t.

I  Coma,  with  paralysis  of  face  and  limbs. ^Typhus.
Convulsive  affections,  which  cease  during  sleep.

I I  During  sleep,  one  does  not  notice  any  motion  of  the  eyes
whatever. 6  Clonic  spasms  of  eyes.

Uneasy,  restless  sleep  ;  from  violent  itching  and  burning  of  the
skin.

1  I  Restless  night  and  chilliness.

Tosses  about  from  annoying  crawls  over  whole  body,  head,
chest,  abdomen  and  feet.

Restless  nights,  suffers  pains  in  back,  chest,  loins  and  thighs.

Restless  night,  a  burning  itching  pain  on  different  parts,  wak-
ens him.

Restless  night,  a  heaviness  in  the  whole  body  in  head,  chest,
abdomen  and  feet,  induces  him  to  toss  about.

Unpleasant  dreams  waking  him  from  sleep.

Dreams  he  could  not  open  his  mouth  on  account  of  pain  in
maxillary-joint,  and  that  they  made  him  smell  caustic  am-
monia which  wakened  him.

Dream  as  if  he  was  walking  up  and  down  in  his  room  and  read-
ing,, while  he  was  sure  he  was  in  his  bed ;  could  not  over-
come it.

In  his  dreams,  anxiety  as  if  suffocating.


173  AMANITA.

^^  Time.  At  night:  I  1  frequent  anxious  waking ;  tearing  pain  in
scalp ;  buzzing  in  ears ;  I  I  sneezing  in  sleep ;  pain  in  the
cracked  lip  ;  II  toothache,  after  midnight ;  grinding  the  teeth
(an  elderly  man).

Morning :  itching  of  scalp ;  spasm  of  eyes ;  tongue  coated ;
hunger  without  appetite  ;  diarrhoea  ;  excited  sexual  desire  ;
cough  >  ;  mucous  sputa ;  rattling  of  phlegm  in  chest ;  pulse
more  frequent ;  spine  more  sensitive  ;  pains  in  tibia  begin  ;
pain  in  right  knee  and  left  hand  <.

Towards  noon  :  I  I  headache  ;  I  stitch  like  a  needle  over  1,  brow  ;
trembling  of  1.  upper  lid;  nausea;  pressing  around  navel;
disagreeable  full  heavy  feeling  in  anus ;  stinging  and  ten-
sion in  chest ;  backache  ;  I  I  pain  in  both  tibise  ;  out  of  humor.

At  noon  :  I  I  headache ;  pressure  like  a  piece  of  sand  under  the
upper  lid ;  trembling  of  1.  upper  lid ;  II  very  unpleasant,
saltish,  bitter,  sweetish  metallic  taste,  most  on  root  of
tongue ;  cramp  in  stomach  ;  sudden  stitch  in  region  of  liver  ;
colic ;  pressure,  heat  and  itching  in  anus ;  cough  with
sneezing ;  pain  in  chest,  in  region  of  heart ;  stitch  in  sac-
rum ;  in  1.  tibia ;  burning  runs  all along  corn  in  little  toe.

Afternoon :  dizziness  and  dull  head ;  pain  over  the  eyes,  I  I  in
vertex,  in  occiput ;  painful  sensitiveness  in  upper  part  of
nose ;  coryza ;  toothache  and  pain  in  lower  jaw ;  nauseous
sweetish  taste  ;  violent  thirst ;  frequent  belching ;  pressure
or  burning  and  digging  pain  in  epigastrium ;  dull  pressure
in  hypochondrium  ;  stitches  in  region  of  spleen  ;  I  I  rumbling
in  abdomen  ;  I  I  cutting  in  upper  and  later  in  lower  abdomen  ;
soft,  dark  green  stool ;  stool  with  copious  urination ;  urine
milky  ;  fiery  ;  drawing  in  both  testicles  ;  violent  cough;  press-
ure here  and  there  in  chest ;  sudden  stitches  deep  in  chest ;
I  I  soreness  in  chest  ■<  ;  constant  pressure  near  the  heart
and  uninterrupted  palpitation ;  irregular  beats  of  heart ;
the  neck  puffed  up ;  sudden  violent  stitch  in  sacrum ;  pain
and  lameness  in  arm  ;  I  I  pains  in  elbow  ;  in  forearm  ;  burn-
ing in  r.  thumb  ;  in  r.  hip-joint,  and  along  the  outside  of
lower  leg,  annoying  pains ;  drawing,  tearing  in  the  thigh ;
electric  shock  through  the  legs  ;  giving  way  of  the  knee  with
painful  drawing  on  the  back  of  1.  lower  leg ;  stinging  in  r.
little  toe  ;  II  pains  in  the  corns ;  epileptic  shock  of  the  body  ;
sleepiness  ;  crawling  all  over.

In  evening :  general  malaise ;  I  I  dizziness  with  loss  of  sight
and  weakness ;  doublesight ;  momentary  jerk  in  side  of
head  ;  viscous  yellow  moisture  in  internal  canthi ;  bubbling
noise  in  r.  ear  and  noise  as  if  bells  were  ringing  in  the  dis-
tance; warmth  in  face;  front  teeth  as  if  too  long  and  sensitive;
I  I  bad  taste  returns,  with  chest  and  abdominal  symptoms  ;
tip  of  tongue  feels  sore ;  I  I  more  appetite,  even  ravenous  hun-
ger ;  sudden  nausea  and  vomiting  of  the  food ;  burning  in


AMANITA.  174

scrobiculum,  with  a  spasmodic  drawing  up  into  the  chest ;
digging,  pinching  cutting  in  abdomen ;  cutting  itching  in
rectum;  tension  in  r.  groin;  I  unpleasant  sensation  in  ure-
thra ;  drawing  in  testicles ;  I  I  <  cough  with  blowing  the
nose  or  expectoration  of  phlegm  ;  stitches  in  lung ;  I  I  violent
palpitation ;  burning  or  itching  on  sternum  ;  quivering  in
muscles  of  r.  loin  ;  tension  along  the  whole  spine ;  pains  in
back  of  sacrum  ;  itching  on  back  and  inflamed  nodules  ;  tear-
ing in  1.  upper  arm ;  stitches  like  needles  in  1.  thumb ;  in  r.
hip-joint  and  outside  of  r.  lower  leg  very  tormenting  pains ;
electric  shock  in  lower  limbs  ;  I  I  pains  in  lower  limbs  ;  burn-
ing in  upper  part  of  foot  and  violent  pains  in  little  toe  ;  pains
in  corns ;  gaping ;  weakness ;  I  I  crawls  and  chills,  shaking
chill ;  attack  of  heat ;  sweat  without  heat.

^^  Temperature  and  Weather. 1 1  Very  sensitive  to  the  cool  air.

Cold  air  increases  earache ;  looking  out  of  an  open  window,
toothache  and  pains  in  limbs ;  easily  chilled,  the  least  cool
air  makes  "goose-skin."

Easily  chilled  on  slight  movement,  and  in  a  cooler  air,  or  if  the
cold  finger  touches  a  warm  part  of  the  body.

Very  sensitive  to  the  cold,  mostly  hands  and  feet ;  his  face  is
pale  and  haggard.

In  cold  weather  worse,  especially  headache.

I  I  When  lifting  the  bedcovers  at  night,  crawling  and  shaking
chill.

I  I  To  drink  cold  water  after  it  increases  the  effects  and  length-
ens it;  t.

I  I  After  a  swallow  of  cold  water,  toothache  and  nausea.
Washing  or  bathing  palliates.

■  Itching,  burning  and  redness  of  fingers,  toes  and  other  parts,

as  though  they  had  been  frozen.
Complaints  from  frost, d  Headache. 6  Chilblains.

I I  Chilblains,  frost-bite,  and  all  consequences  of  exposure  to
cold,  particularly  in  face.

In  open  air :  vertigo  >  or  <  ;  pressing  in  eye ;  momentary
attacks  of  drunkenness ;  headache ;  nausea ;  colic,  stitches
in  sacrum  ; I  I  dullness  ;  drowsiness.

Walking  in  open  air :  I  1  staggering ;  a  stitch  like  lightning
through  the  brain ;  half-sided  digging  headache;  vanishing
of  sight ;  singing  in  r.  ear ;  pressure  in  stomach  ;  sensation
like  a  dislocation  in  the  groin ;  sudden  violent  stitches  in
sacrum  ;  painful  drawing  in  r.  foot ;  I  I  tired  in  the  feet,
weak  ;  a  painful  pressure  in  region  of  right  nipple,  feeling  as
if  a  deep  breath  would  remove  its  cause ;  frequent  gaping.

After  walking  in  open  air  :  such  a  sudden  weakness  that  he  can
hardly  get  along ;  severe  fluid  stools  with  burning  in  anus,
and  a  copious  sweat  even  on  scalp  ;  pulse  frequent  and  small.


175  AMANITA.

In  room :  vertigo  <  or  >  ;  nausea ;  chilliness ;  all  symp-
toms <  in-doors  and  in  rest.

In  the  bright  sunshine  :  as  if  drunken.

Heat  of  sun  caused  violent  vertigo.

In  the  warmth  of  bed  feet  burn.

I  Vertebrae  sensitive  to  a  hot  sponge, d  Chorea.

■  Worse  before  a  thunder-storm, d  Chorea.
*^  Fever. UShiverings  over  the  body,  running  from  above  down-
wards.

Shudders :  with  bitter  vomiting  after  supper,  lasting  all  night.

I  I  Feels  chilly  with  headache,  giddiness,  cold  hands  and  feet ;
the  chilly  feeling  runs  along  the  limbs.

Chilly  feeling :  with  gaping :  blue  hands ;  want  of  strength ;
bad  humor;  dull  senses  and  no  appetite;  at  noon,  12  to  1
o'clock.

Feels  chilly  all  the  time,  cannot  get  warm  in  the  room,  early
in  the  morning.

After  sleep  a  chilly  sensation  all  over,  but  most  in  the  feet.

Chilly  on  slight  movement,  or  from  raising  the  bedclothes.

Great  chilliness  in  the  open  air,  strikes  through  the  whole  body.

Inner  chilliness  :  with  cool  skin  ;  with  natural  warmth  of  skin ;
in  evening.

Sensation  as  if  touched  by  ice,  keeping  time  with  the  pulse.

Sensation  of  coldness  on  r.  side  of  frontal  bone,  though  the  sur-
face is  warm  to  touch.

Coldness  on  buttocks.

Cold  hands  and  toes,  with  contracted  pulse.

Cold  and  blue  limbs  ;  t.

Coldness  and  heat  in  alternation,  towards  evening.

Unpleasant  coolness  in  whole  body  after  going  to  bed.

Body  cold,  head  hot.

Partial  chill  on  upper  part  of  body.

Chill  with  warm  face,  hands  and  feet.

I  I  Shaking  chill  with  gaping ;  chill  continues  until  he  shakes.

Chill  in  back  as  if  cold  water  was  running  down,  if  he  leans
back  in  the  chair.

Feverish  chill  every  evening  without  thirst  and  without  heat.

Shaking  chills  when  lifting  his  bedcover.

During  the  violent  shaking  chill,  after  undressing  in  the  eve-
ning, a  peculiar  inclination  to  laugh.

A  gradually  increasing  rigor,  face  and  hands  bluish,  icy  cold ;
pulse  very  small  and  hard,  forenoon  10  to  11.

Attacks  of  rigor,  shaking  the  whole  body  ;  cold  hands,  tremble
when  writing ;  face  warm,  no  thirst,  and  no  heat  following.

Violent  rigor  with  goose-flesh,  followed  by  heat  in  head,  pain-
ful throbbing  in  forehead  and  sweat.

After  dozing  awhile,  violent  rigor,  chattering  of  teeth,  hedies
doubled  up,  violent  headache,  hands  blue,  no  thirst.


AMANITA.  176

Heat  slight,  chiefly  on  upper  part  of  body.

Heat  in  face  and  upper  half  of  body  in  repeated  attacks,  last-
ing five  to  ten  minutes.

Heat  all  over  :  becomes  burning,  he  has  to  uncover  the  lower
limbs ;  blood  seems  to  run  glowing  through  the  vessels ;
pulse  strong,  hard,  tense  and  more  frequent,  disappearing
gradually  after  midnight.

Heat  at  night ;  turning  in  bed  or  lifting  the  covers  makes  her
chilly.

Violent  attacks  of  heat,  evenings  ;  cheeks  glowing,  hands  cold,
continual  thirst,  no  sweat.

■  Frequent attacks  of  fever  with  heat  in  the  head,  associated

with  a  soporific  state,  rolling of  eyes  and  screaming  during
sleep, d  Clonic  spasms  of  eyes.
Heat  and  sweat  in  attacks,  all  afternoon,  with  a  dull  headache,
no  thirst.

■  General heat  with  cold  finger  ends, dry lips,  thirst,  clean

tongue,  want  of  appetite,  with  violent  pains  in upper  and

lower  limbs. A  young  leprous  girl.
Continual  heat  followed  by  sweat.

Anxious  palpitation  causing  sweat  to  break  out  at  night.
I  I  Sweat  most  on  lower  limbs,  evening  and  night.
Sweat  all  forenoon.

I  I  Night-sweat,  towards  morning,  with  relief.
Much  sweat  with  fainting.
Sweat  all  over,  even  on  scalp.

I  I  Cold  sweats ;  t.

Viscous  sweat  and  great  prostration  ; t.

With  sweat  exhausted  feeling  and  trembling  of  limbs,  canine

hunger.
Sweat :  greasy, but  not  offensive, all night, during sleep ;

from  the  least  exertion  ; I  I  often  only  on  front  of  body  ;  at

night,  especially  about  the legs  ;  cold, on  face, neck  and

chest; 1 1  profuse.

I I  Sweat  when  walking  or  I  I  with  the  slightest  exertion.

j  Slight  exercise  causes  sweat ;  oily  night-sweats, d  Incipient

tuberculosis.
I  Coma  following  the  febrile  excitement  of  dentition ;  eyes  half

open,  showing  the  white ;  breathing  not  hurried,  but  often  a

deep  inspiration, followed  by a  sigh  and  slight  convulsive

twitchings  of  extremities.
\  Ataxic  typhus.
I  Obstinate  intermittent.
^^  Attacks. In  attacks :  itching  on  scalp  ;  violent  pressure  on  r.

eyeball  upward  and  outward ;  coughing  ;  pain  in  sternum  ;

pain  between  eighth  and  ninth  dorsal  vertebra.
Momentary  stitches  in  eyeball.
Pressure  first  in  1.  then  in  r.  eyebrow.


177  AMANITA.

After  the  toothache  lessens,  the  complaints  in  abdomen  re-
turn.

Periodical  drawing  up  into  the  os  hyoideum.

Gets  awake  exactly  at  midnight  three  nights  in  succession.

lEvery  seven  days. ^Epileptic  attacks.
^  Locality  and  Direction. I  l  Very often  the  complaints  ap-
pear diagonally,  that  is  appear  in  upper  left  and  lower  right
side.*

From  in  out :  stitches  in  chest  and  belly.

From  out  in :  pressing,  boring,  drawing  pains.

From  below  up  :  a  cutting  boring  from  nostrils  up  to  the  frontal
bone  ;  drawing  from  the  pelvis  up  to  the  hypochondria.

From  back  to  front :  violent  momentary  tearing  through  the
chest.

From  left  to  right :  shooting  headache ;  painful  drawing  in  fore-
head ;  pressure  above  the  eyes ;  pain  in  temples ;  running
coryza  ;  I  I  griping  in  belly ;  pain  in  tibia  ;  splinter  sensa-
tion in  lower  limbs.

From  right  to  left :  stitches  in  temples  ;  burning  soreness  in
back.

Worse  left  side:  inner  head,  external  ears,  teeth,  abdomen,
groin,  male  parts,  shoulder,  upper  and  forearm.

Worse  right  side :  outer  head,  hypochondrium,  loins  and  lower
limbs.

Very  few  semilateral  symptoms.
^^  Sensations. Icy  cold  feeling  on  a  small  place  on  1.  side  of  chest,
near  shoulder-blade.

Cold  sensations,  or  as  of  a  plug  in  external  parts.

Cooling  sensation,  as  from  living  quicksilver  in  different  parts
of  body.

I  I  Formication  and  burning  in  glutei  muscles.

Sensation  as  if  the  whole  body  was  shaken  inwardly.

I  I  Electric  concussions  and  twitchings  in  all  the  limbs.

Neuralgic  pains  as  though  sharp  pieces  of  ice  touched  the
parts,  or  cold  needles  ran  through  the  nerves.

It  seems  as  if  the  whole  body  would  dwindle  to  nothing.

■  Internal  burning,  as  well  as  external.

Burning  itching  and  redness  of  various  parts  :  ears,  nose,  face,
upper  and  lower  limbs,  like  chilblains.

I  Pricking,  as  from  pins,  and  burning.

*  If  we  compare  the  symptoms  of  our  Materia  Medica  with  regard  to  right
and  left  sides,  we  will  find  that  in  many  of  them  there  is  a  decided  differ-
ence between  the  upper  and  lower  limbs  as  regards  the  sides,  one  or  the
other  side  predominating.  Amanita  is  one  of  the  few  remedies  in  which
the  symptoms  appear  at  the  same  time  on  opposite  sides,  but  diagonally.
If,  after  giving  a  medicine,  the  symptoms  do  not  disappear  in  a  reverse  di-
rection to  their  origin,  we  may  know  it  is  not  the  right  remedy.
12


AMANITA.  178

I  Itching  and  burning  all  over  with  great  distress. ^Chorea.

Soreness  and  sensation  of  rawness  :  nose,  mouth,  etc.

Corrosive  biting  now  and  then  on  the  skin.

Formication,  crawling.

Cramp-like  pains  in  muscles,  erratic,  when  sitting.

Tearing  pains  in  face  and  legs,  continues  while  at  rest,  disappear-
ing while  moving  about.

1  1  Pains  as  from  splinters.

A  prickling  running  through  fingers,  toes  and  head,  like  that  in
frost-bitten  limbs,  with  change  of  weather.
**  Tissues. Induration  of  glands.

Pains  in  bones  of  the  face,  eyes,  cheeks,  tubular  bones,  and  in
tibia,  sometimes  in  elbow.

In  all  the  joints,  stitching  pain,  stiffness  in  arms,  back  of
neck  and  both  hip-joints.

All  the  joints  stiff  on  getting  up.

Sudden  tearing  in  the  tendinous  tissues  of  diflFerent  parts.

Makes  the  blood  thin.

Veins  swollen,  with  cool  skin.

Mucous  membranes  coated  with  a  yellow  mucus.

I  Muscles  feel  bruised  from  touch;  better  from  walking.
d  Chronic  rheumatism.

Pain  in  long  bones,  as  if  bruised,  after  motion.

Pains  in  bones  morning  and  forenoon,  especially  left  tibia,  con-
dyle of  left  elbow  (like  syphilitic  pains ;  but  better,  rather
than  worse,  in  warmth  of  bed).

I  Joints  feel  as  if  dislocated. 6  Chorea.

Obesity.

■  Emaciation. ^Chorea.

I  Dropsy.
^^  Touch. Passive  Motion. Body sensitive  to  touch  or  pres-
sure ;  burning  in  canthi ;  pain  in  spine,  between  vertebrae ;
muscles  feel  bruised ;  pricking  in  left  thumb,  etc.

Slight  touch  causes  shooting,  even  the  coming  near  of  some
one.

Touch  of  hair :  <  pressure  on  temple.

When  touched :  pain  in  parietal  bones,  in  eyeballs,  above  eyes,
maxillary  joint,  tip  of  tongue;  stitch  in  throat;  abdomen
sensitive;  convulsive  dartings  if  arms  or  chest  are  touched;
small  spot  in  the  middle  of  spine  very  sensitive ;  wrist
pains ;  back  of  hand  sore ;  stitches  in  thumb ;  meta-carpal
joint  of  index  and  middle  finger.

When  touching  or  feeling  with  the  fingers  :  <  headache  ;  pain
in  groins ;  pain  in  vertebrae  ;  all  parts  sensitive.

When  but  feeble  pressure  is  applied  to  any  spot,  it  pains  a
long  while  after.

Pressure :  <  pain  in  scalp,  in  1.  temporal  bone,  pain  in  stomach
and  in  hypochondria.


179  AMANITA.

Sensitive  to  pressure :  dorsal  and  lumbar  vertebrae.

Better from pressure :  pain in temples ;  boring headache ;

colic  in abdomen ; painless pulsation  in the  eighth  and

ninth  dorsal  vertebrae.
I  Limbs  sensitive  to  pressure. ^Chorea.
I  I A  pressure  on  the  painful  parts  increases  the  pain.
Rubbing  :  >■  itching  in  r.  eye.

Scratching  : >  itching  in  scalp  ; I  I  stitch  over  left  brow.
After  scratching : white  nodule,  size  of  millet  seed,  furfuracious

peeling  of  epidermis.
I  I  Better  from  shaving :  blisters  on  chin.
Leaning  back  in  chair : <  pressure  in  sacrum.
Crossing  the  legs: they  fall  asleep.
In  stepping  down :  stitches  in  heel.
Slight  blows  :  cause  ecchymoses.

I  I  While riding in a carriage : tensive pain in region  of

bladder.
*^  Skin. General  jaundice  after  convulsion  ;  t.

I I  Burning  itching,  redness  and swelling,  as  from frost-bites.
Itching  stitches  in  various  parts.

Violent  itching  between  thumb  and  forefinger,  left  hand.

I  Itching  and  burning  all  over  the  body,  causing  great  distress.
6  Chorea.

Miliary  eruptions ;  close  and  white,  with  burning  and
itching.

Feeling  in  the  skin  as  if  it  was  pasted  on.

Skin  very  smooth,  most  in  face.

I  I  Prickling  as  from  needles  on  different  places.

Itching  stitches  on  different  parts  of  body.

Electric  stitches,  stitches  as  from  splinters ;  corroding  biting ;
itching,  burning,  biting,  stinging.

Itching  all  over ;  changing  place ;  disturbing  sleep ;  without
any  eruption.

Itching  eruption  of  easily  bleeding  whitish  nodules  on  abdo-
men and  lower  limbs,  spreading.

■  Miliary  eruption  in  blotches.

Small  suppurating  pimples  between  index  finger  and  thumb ;
on  neck  ;  on  sternum.

Very  painful  furuncle  in  front  of  thigh  and  on  buttock,  very
large,  discharging  blood,  no  pus.

Little  red,  hard  pimples  scattered  all  over  the  body,  like  flea-
bites.

•  Lichen  pilaris  urticatus.

Chronic  eruptions.

Indurations  and  tumors  ;  carbuncles  ;  fistulous  ulcers ;  carious
ulcers ;  phagedenic  ulcers.

■  Lichen  simplex.

■  Sebaceous  tumors.


AMANITA.  .  180

I  Crusty  eruptions.

■  Ulcers  corroding  and  excavated.

■  Indolent  and  fistulous  ulcers.

■  Gangrene.

■  The  hard,  rough  small-pox  of  sheep.

■  Nodules  in  the  skin  on  the  neck,  with  cough  (horses  and

cows).

■  Itching  from  small  nodules  deep  in  skin,  especially  when  eyes

are  also  affected  (horses).
I  Epilepsy  from  checked  eruptions.
^^  Stages  of  Life,  Constitution. Light  hair ;  skin  and  mus-
cles lax.

■  Old  people  with  indolent  circulation. See  nosebleed,  7.
Venous  erethism, d  Diarrhoea.

■  ■Drunkards  ;  especially  for  their  headaches.
Thin,  spare  girl,  set.  18. d  Chorea.

Girl, set. 2J, born with  malformation of head. d  Clonic
spasms  of  eyes.

A  child,  set.  3,  had  a  chronic  nasal  catarrh  for  eighteen
months.
^^  Relationship.  Similar  to :  Act.  rac,  (delirium  of  alcohol-
ism ;  chorea ;  spinal  irritation) ;  Bellad.  (cerebral  excite-
ment, but  more  in  chorea) ;  Calc.  ostr.  (alcoholism  ;  icy  cold
feeling  on  head) ;  Cannab.  ind.  (alcoholism ;  extravagant
fancies)  ;  Cicut.  (spasms  of  eyes)  ;  Codein  (eyelids
twitching,  etc.) ;  Coffea  (ecstasy) ;  Hyosc.  (typhoid  of
drunkards ;  loquacity,  dancing,  muscular  twitchings,  and
with  all  tremor,  tendency  to  stupor  and  feeble  pulse) ;  Ignat.
(hysterical  or  emotional  chorea ;  sighing  ;  convulsive  cough  ;
twitches ;  laughing  and  crying) ;  Laches,  (loquacious  deli-
rium ;  alcoholism ;  typhoid  of  low  type,  tremulous  protru-
sion of  tongue;  tremor,  feeble  pulse,  livid  extremities) ;  ^
Mygale  (chorea) ;  Nux  vom.  (chorea  ;  alcoholism ;  spinal
irritation  ;  convulsions  ;  tremor ;  paraplegic  symptoms ;  en-
larged liver) ;  Opium  (alcoholism  ;  chorea,  with  spasmodic,
angular  jerks  of  flexores ;  hands  tremble,  slow  pulse)  ;
Pulsat.  (spinal  irritation ;  chorea ;  chilblains,  etc.) ;  Sepia
(icy  cold  feeling  on  head;  jerks  of  head  and  tongue,  etc.)  ;
Sticta  (chorea  with  jumping  and  dancing) ;  Str anion,  (deli-
rium tremens ;  singing,  laughing,  dancing  ;  extravagant
recitals ;  loquacity ;  chorea,  with  gyratory  motions,  etc.) ;
Tarant.  (chorea,  one  arm  and  leg  constantly  in  motion,  etc.) ;
Thea  (verbose  ;  spinal  irritation) ;  Ver.  alb.  (icy  cold  feel-
ing on  head) ;  Zincum  (chorea).

Vinegar  and  Eau  de  Cologne  induce  fainting. Sal  Ammonice
also  aggravates ;  t.

Mushrooms  will not  grow  in  ground  containing either  iron
or  coal.


181  AMANITA— AMBRA  GRISEA.

Antidoted  by  :  charcoal ;  coffee  ;  wine  ;  brandy  ;  camphor  ;  fat
or  oil  (relieves  stomach) ;  Calc.  ostr.  (relieves  icy  coldness) ;
Pulsat.;  Rims  tax.  (nightly  backache).

Atropine  is  said  to  be  antagonistic  to  Muscarine,  but  they
both,  when  topically  used,  dilate  the  pupil.

Muscarine  is  very  similar  to  Pilocarpine,  (jaborandi)  since
both  cause  arrest  of  heart's  action ;  profuse  sweat ;  saliva-
tion, lachrymation ;  contracted  pupils,  etc.  Muscarine
acts  more  on  the  lachrymal  glands,  less  on  sweat  and
salivary  glands  ;  Pilocarpine  causes  more  urging  to  urinate.
Muscarine,  given  internally,  contracts  the  pupil  more  than
Pilocarpine;  used  topically,  only  the  former  dilates  the
pupil. GreUem.  is  here  similar  to  Muscarine.

Follow  well :  Bellad.,  Calc.  ostr.,  Mercur.,  Opium.,  Pulsat.,
Rhus  tox.  and  Silicea.

Acted  well  after  Dulcam.,  PJiosph.  ac,  Pulsat.,  and  Cuprum
had  failed, d  Chronic  diarrhoea.

Cured  where  Bellad.,  Stram.  and  Hyosc.  failed,  d  Clonic
spasms  of  eyes.


AMBRA  GRISEA.

Ambergris.


Most  probably  a  nosode  or  morbid  product  found  in  the  belly  of  the
sperm-whale.  The  best  is  that  which  whalers  cut  out  and  which  is  usu-
ally to  be  had  in  Boston.  Most  of  it  is  picked  up  in  the  Eastern  Seas.
Used  by  the  Arabians  and  since.  Introduced  by  Hahnemann  in  1827 ;
especially  proved  by  his  friend,  the  Count  de  Gersdorf,  from  whom  are
nearly  one-third  of  the  symptoms.  The  alcoholic  tincture  is  the  best
preparation.  The  so-called  oil  of  amber  is  oleum  succinum,  and  was  used
by  Holcombe  in  hiccough.

^  Mind. I  Memory  impaired.

■  Comprehension  slow, has to read everything  three  or  four

times  and  then  does  not  understand  it.
lis  not  able  to  reflect upon  anything  properly,  feels  stupid.

d  Often  in  old  age.
Confusion  of  the  head  ;  of  the  occiput.
iDiflScult  thinking  in  the  morning, d  Old  people.

■  Distorted  images, grimaces;  diabolical  faces  crowd  upon  his

fancy.


AMBRA  GRISEA.  182

She  is  excited,  loquacious ;  talking  fatigues  her ;  was  unable

to  sleep  at  night,  or,  averse  to  talking  and  laughing.
Great  sadness.

■  Melancholy,  sits  for  days  weeping;  with  great  weakness,  loss

of  muscular  power  and  pain  in  the  small  of  the  back  and

constipation.
Fears  of  becoming  crazy.
Despair ;  loathing  of  life.
Anguish  and  sweat  all  over,  at  night.
Anxiety,  oppression, nervous  weakness  with  irritability  and

impatience.

■  After  business  embarrassment  cannot  sleep,  must  get  up.
Hurries  too  much  while  engaged  in  mental  labor.
Embarrassed  manner  in  company.

Cough  worse  when  many  persons  are  present.
The  presence  of  other  people  aggravates  the  symptoms. See  2.
^  Sensorium. ■Vertigo  with  feeling  of  weight  on  the  vertex  ;
worse  after  sleep.

■  Had  to  lie  down  on  account  of  vertigo  and  feeling  of  weak-

ness in  the  stomach.
Music  causes  the  blood  to  rush  to  the  head.

■  Great  weakness  in  the  head  with  vertigo.

^  Inner  Head. Pressure  in  forehead  and  vertex  with  fear  of  be-
coming crazy.

Tearing :  in  forehead ;  in  left  temple  up  to  vertex  ;  in  right
frontal  eminence  and  behind  left  ear.

Extremely  painful  tearing  on  top  of  head  and  apparently  in
whole  upper  half  of  brain,  with  paleness  of  face  and  cold-
ness of  left  hand.

Pressive  drawing,  ascending  from  nape  of  neck,  and  extending
through  head  towards  forehead,  considerable  oppression  re-
maining in  lower  part  of  occiput.

Dullness  in  occiput.

Tearing  pains  predominate  in  head.

Rush  of  blood  to  head  caused  by  music.

Weakness  in  head  with  vertigo.
^  Outer  Head. ■Falling  off  of  hair.

■  On  the  right  side  of  the  head,  a  spot,  where  the  hair  when

touched  pains,  as  if  sore.

The  scalp  feels  sore  in  morning, when awaking ;  this  is  fol-
lowed by  a  sensation  of  numbness,  extending  over  the  whole
body.
^  Sight  and  Eyes. Dullness  of  vision,  as  if  from  looking  through
a  mist.

Pressure  and  smarting  in  eyes,  as  from  dust ;  lachrymation.

Pressure  on  eyes,  which  are  difficult  to  open,  and  pain  in  eyes
as  if  they  had  been  closed  too  firmly,  particularly  in  the
morning.


183  AMBRA  GRISEA.

Itching  on  eyelid  as  if  a  stye  were  forming.
®  Hearing  and  Ears. I  Roaring  and  whistling  in  ears,  in  after-
noon.

I  Deafness  of  one  ear.

Crackling  in  left  ear  (like  the  sound  made  when  winding  a
watch).

■  Hearing  decreases  ;  with  cold  sensation  in  abdomen. See  19.
Violent  tearing  pain  in  and  behind  right  auricle.

Tearing  in  right  ear.

Crawling,  itching  and  tickling  in  ears.

I  Music  aggravates  the  cough.

■  Listening  to  music  brings  on  congestion  to  head.
^  Nose. I  Dried  blood  gathered  in  the  nose.

I  Bleeding  of  the  nose  early  in  the  morning.

Nosebleed  with  the  menses. See  23.

I  Copious nosebleed  early in bed, several successive days.
d  Old  lady.

Nose  stopped  up  and  paining  as  if  sore  internally.

Long  continued  dryness  of  the  nose,  frequent  irritation  as  from
sneezing.
^  Face. Paleness  of  face  with  headache. See  3.

Flushes  of  heat  in  face.

Heat  in  face  with  chill  of  other  parts.

Tearing  in  the  upper  part  of  the  face,  particularly  near  the
right  ala  nasi.

Pimples,  and  itching  in  whiskers.

Painful  swelling  of  the  cheek  on  the  upper  jaw,  with  throbbing
in  the  gums.

Jaundiced  color  of  the  face.

Spasmodic  twitching  of  the  facial  muscles.
^  Lower  Part  of  Face. Lips  hot.

Lips  numb  and  dry  in  the  morning  on  awaking.

Cramp  of  the  lower  lip.
'"  Teeth  and  Gums.  Drawing  pain  now  in  one  and  again  in
another  tooth  ;  increased  by  warmth,  momentarily  removed
by  cold ;  not  aggravated  by  chewing  and  passes  off  after  a
meal ;  at  the  same  time  the  inner  portion  of  the  gums  was
swollen.

Bleeding  of  the  gums.
"  Taste,  Speech,  Tongue. Bitter  taste  in  mouth  in  morning
on  awaking.

Sour  taste  after  drinking  milk.

Folds  pain  as  if  sore  under  the  tongue,  like  small  growths.

llRanula.
^^  Inner  Mouth. I  Fetor  of  the  mouth,  worse  mornings,  d  Whoop-
ing-cough.

Blisters  in  mouth,  pain  as  if  burnt.

Smarting  and  cracked  painful  condition  of  mouth.


AMBRA  GRISEA.  184

Accumulation  of  water  in  the  mouth  with  cough. See  27.
^^  Palate and Throat. ■  Sensation of  rawness  in  region  of
velum  pendulum  palati.

Rawness  in  throat  with  cough.

Tearing  pain  in  palate,  extending  into  left  ear.

Dryness  of  throat  in  morning.

Sore  feeling  in  throat  during  empty  deglutition,  and  from  out-
ward pressure,  not  when  swallowing  food,  with  tension  of
glands  of  throat  as  if  swollen.

BSore  throat  after  exposure  to  a  draught  of  air;  stitching  from
throat  into  r.  ear ;  pains  particularly  from  motion  of  the
tongue.

Tickling  in  throat  which  induces  coughing.

Tickling  in  throat  and  thyroid  body,  during  act  of  coughing.

■  Accumulation  of  grayish phlegm  in throat,  which  is  difficult

to  hawk  up,  accompanied  by  rawness.
Plawking the phlegm from fauces produces vomiting and

choking.
Papular-like  eruption  in  pharynx.
'*  Thirst. Thirstlessness.
^^  Eating  and  Drinking. After  breakfast,  nausea.

After  eating:  Icough  and  gagging;  anxiety;  pressure  in  pit
of  stomach,  as  if  the  food  stuck  and  would  not  go  down.

■  Aggravation from warm drinks, especially from warm

milk.
Better after eating  :  toothache ;  oppression in chest ;  chill,

etc.
After  drinking  milk  :  sour  taste ;  heartburn.
^®  Hiccough,  Belching,  Nausea  and  Vomiting. 1 1  Belch-
ing with  and  after  the  cough.

■  Eructations  either  empty,  sour  or  bitter.

■  Eructations  with  cough,  so  as  almost  to  cause  choking.
Belching  removes  pressure  under  scrobiculum.

•  Hiccough.

Heartburn :  with  abortive  eructations ;  when  walking  in  the

open  air;  from  drinking  milk.
Every  evening,  sensation  as  of  disordered  stomach  and  acrid

risings  up  to  larynx.
Nausea  after  breakfast.

Vomiting  and  choking  when  hawking  phlegm  from  fauces.
^^  Scrobiculum and  Stomach. Pressure  and  burning  under

scrobiculum  ;  belching  removes  it.

■  Pressure  in  stomach  and  hypochondria.  ^Whooping-cough.
Tension  and  pressure  or  stitches  and  pressure  in  the  stomach.
Concussion  in  pit  of  stomach  with  the  cough.

Weakness  in  stomach  accompanying  vertigo. See  2.
'^  Hypochondria. Pressing  pain  in  a  small  spot  in  the  upper
right  side  of  the  abdomen,  though  not  felt  to  touch.


185  AMBRA  GRISEA.

Tearing  pain  in  the  region  of  the  spleen,  as  if  something  were

torn  away.
I  Pain  in  r.  hypochondriac  region,  >>  while  lying  upon  it.
^^  Abdomen. Distended  abdomen  ;  accumulation  of  much  flatus,
which  subsides  without  being  passed.
IB  Sensation  of  coldness  in  the  abdomen.
I  Coldness  of  one  side  of  the  abdomen (left) ;  also  with  the

deafness. See  6.
Colic,  sometimes  followed  by  diarrhoea.
Pressure  deep  in  the  hypogastrium  after  the  evacuation.
^°  Stool  and  Anus. First  copious,  soft,  light  brown  stools,  after
a  few  days  constipation.

■  Constipation. ^Whooping-cough. ^Melancholy.
Diarrhoea  preceded  by  colic.

Stool  not  hard,  though  large.

I  Frequent  ineffectual  desire  for  stool ;  this  makes  her  very
anxious.  Hat  this  time  the  presence  of  other  persons  be-
comes unbearable.

I  Large  flow  of  blood  with  the  stool.  ,

Itching  in  anus.

Stitches  in  anus.

After  the  evacuation  pressure  deep  in  hypogastrium.
2^  Urinary  Organs. Frequent  micturition  at  night  and  in  the
morning  after  rising.

I  Urine  when  emitted  is  clouded,  yellowish-brown  and  deposits
a  brownish  sediment,  after  which  the  urine  looks  clear  and
yellow  ;  coffee  ground  sediment, d  Dropsy  after  scarlatina.

I  Sour  smelling  urine. ^Whooping-cough.

Urinates  three  times  as  much  as  the  drink  taken,  especially  in
the  morning ;  followed  by  a  dull  pain  in  the  region  of  the
kidneys.

Sensation  as  if  a  few  drops  passed  through  the  urethra.

■  During  urination,  burning,  smarting,  itching  and  titillation  in

the  urethra  and  vulva, d  Oophoritis.
"  Male  Sexual  Organs. 'A  man, set. 80,  gets  asthma  when

attempting  coition.
:  Impotence.
Violent  morning  erections  without  desire,  with  numbness  in

the  parts.
Internal,  strong,  voluptuous  sensation  in  genital  organs.
Itching  pimple  over  male  genitals.
I  Sore  rawness  between  the  thighs.

■  Voluptuous itching on scrotum. ^Following the use of

StapJtisagria.
"  Female  Sexual  Organs. Nymphomania :  often  with  discharge
of  bluish-white  mucus.
I  I  Burning  in sexual  parts,  with  discharge  of  a  few  drops  of
bl6od.


AMBRA  GRISEA.  186

I  Stitches  in  ovarian  region,  when  drawing  in  abdomen  or  press-
ing upon  it.

llDischarge  of  blood  between  the  periods,  at  every  little  acci-
dent, as  every  hard  stool  or  after  a  walk  a  little  longer  than
usual.

During  the  menses,  the  left  leg  becomes  quite  blue  from  dis-
tended varices,  with  pressive  pain  in  the  leg.

Lying  down  aggravates  the  uterine  symptoms.

Is  said  to  cause  uterine  atony.

:  Suppressed  catamenia.

Menses  too  early  and  too  profuse.

I  Menses  appear  seven  days  before  time.

I  Severe  itching  on  the  pudenda,  must  rub  the  parts.

■  Soreness and itching, with  swelling  of  the  labia. ^Pru-

ritus.
During  urination: itching, titillation,  burning  of  vulva  and

urethra.
Thick,  mucous  leucorrhoea,  increased  from  day  to  day,  or  leu-
»  corrhoea  at  night, of  bluish-white  mucus ;  preceding  each

discharge,  a  stitch  in  the  vagina.
^*  Pregnancy, During  pregnancy  : nervous, restless  ;  pruritus
vulvae.
Impending  abortion.

■  Puerperal  eclampsia.

Lessens  the  severity  of  the  labor-pains.

I  In  childbed  obstinate  constipation  and  tenesmus;  abdomen
puffed,  causing  much  anxiety ;  so  nervous  she  cannot  at-
tempt a  stool  in  the  presence  of  other  people,  not  even  the
nurse.
^'  Voice  and  Larynx.  I Titillation  in  larynx  with  spasmodic
cough.

■  Titillation in throat,  larynx and  trachea, causing  violent

cough.
Hoarseness  and  roughness  of  the  voice,  with  accumulation  of

thick,  tough  mucus,  easily  thrown  off  by  coughing.
I  Itching, scraping  and  soreness  in  the  larynx  and  trachea.

d  Whooping-cough.
Reading  aloud  or  talking  aggravates  the  cough.
Itching  in  thyroid  gland.
^®  Respiration. Tightness of the chest, cannot  take a  deep

breath  or  yawn  deeply.

■  Oppression  felt  in  chest  and  between  scapulse ;  it  subsides  for

a  short  time  after  eating. 6  Asthma.
Feeling  of  pressure  in  chest  worse  during  exhalation.

■  Asthma  of  old  people  and  children. ^Asthma  siccum.

■  Asthma  comes  on  while  he  is  attempting  coition. ^An  old

man.

■  Whistling  in  chest  during  breathing.


187  ^  AMBRA  GRISEA.

Get  out  of  breath  with  the  cough,  which  is  spasmodic ;  rush  of
blood  to  the  head. See  27.
^'^  Cough. Spasmodic  cough,  loses  her  breath  ;  with  rush  of  blood
to  the  head;  finally  some  phlegm  comes  up.

I  Hollow,  spasmodic, barking  cough;  worse  from  talking  or

reading  aloud.

■  Spasmodic  cough  of  elderly  or  of  emaciated  persons.

■  Paroxysms  of  cough  coming  from  deep  in  chest,  excited  by

violent  tickling  in  throat,  evening  without,  morning  with  ex-
pectoration, generally  of  grayish-white,  seldom  of  yellow
mucus,  of  salty  or  sour  taste.

I I  Violent  spasmodic  cough, with frequent eructations and
hoarseness. See  16.

Lifting  a  heavy  weight  aggravates  the  cough.

I  Cough  only  at  night,  produced  by  an  excessive  irritation  in

the  throat.
1  Cough  every  evening  with  pain  under  the  left  ribs, as  if

something  was  torn  loose  there.
Cough  worse  when  many  persons  are  present.
Cough  causes  concussion  in  pit  of  stomach.
I  Cough  with  emaciation.
I A  kind  of  whooping-cough  ;  paroxysmal  but  without  crowing

inspiration.
I  Deep  dry  cough,  with  accumulation  of  water  in  the  mouth,

and  subsequent  rawness  in  the  throat.

■  Choking  and  vomiting  when  hawking  up  phlegm  from  the

fauces.

Sputa  yellow-white,  cream-like.

Collection  of  phlegm  in  the  throat  difficult  to  cough  up.

I  Old  coughs.
^^  Inner  Chest  and  Lungs. Pain  in  lower  part  of  r.  chest  re-
lieved by  lying  on  the  back.

■  Sensation  of  pressure  deep  in  r.  chest;  also  in  1.  chest  or  in

upper  part  of  chest.

■  Sensation  of  rawness  in  chest.

■  Itching  in  chest. ^Whooping-cough.
Sensation  of  a  lump  in  chest.

^^  Heart  and  Pulse. ■Anxiety  at  the  heart,  causing  oppression
of  breathing,  with  flushes  of  heat ;  oppression  beginning  in
the  heart. ^Asthma.
Palpitation when walking in open air, with paleness of
face.

■  Violent  palpitation,  \vith  pressure  in  chest, as  if  a  lump  lay

there,  or  as  if  the  chest  was  stuffed  up.
Pulse  accelerated,  with  ebullitions.

He  perceives  the  pulse  in  the  body ;  it  feels  like  the  tick  of  a
watch.
^"  Outer  Chest. Burning  on  the  chest.


AMBRA  GRISEA.  '  188

^^  Neck  and  Back, Glands  ofthroat  tense  as  if  swollen. See  13.

Burning  in  left  scapula.

Tearing  in  the  left,  or  in  both  shoulders.

Rheumatic  pains  in  the  r.  side  of  the  back.

Painful  tension  in  the  lumbar  muscles.

Stitches  in  small  of  back,  when  sitting.

I  I  Stiffness  in  small  of  back  after  sitting.

Pain  in  small  of  back,  with  loss  of  muscular  power  and  consti-
pation. See  1.
^^  Upper  Limbs. Tearing  in  left  shoulder-joint.

Drawing,  as  if  sprained  and  lame  in  the  shoulder.

I  The  arms  go  to  sleep  when  lying  on  them,  when  carrying
anything  in  the  hands  or  at  night ;  Avith  numbness  espe-
cially of  the  left  arm  in  rest ;  tingling  in  the  thumb.

Tearing  pains  in  the  shoulder,  elbow,  forearm  and  hand.

Weakness  of  the  fingers  at  night.

Stinging  in  hands  and  fingers,  as  from  insects.

Drawing  in  fingers  and  thumb.

Itching  in  palms  of  hands.

Cramps  in  hands,  sometimes  only  when  taking  hold  of  any-
thing.

Tips  of  fingers  are  shrivelled.

Tearing,  lancinating  or  itching  in  tips  of  fingers  and  thumb.

Skin  on  the  fingers  feels  tense.

Long  lasting  icy  coldness  of  hands.

I  Coldness  of  left  hand  with  headache. See  3.

I  Finger  nails  brittle,  with  a  very  old  man;  they  got  soft,  elas-
tic and  pink.
^^  Lower Limbs, Tearing pain, first  in 1., then  in  r.,  hip-
joint.

Sensation  of  contraction  in  right  thigh ;  the  limb  seems  to  be
shortened.

Tearing  in  nates,  hip,  knee,  leg,  ankle  and  foot.

Heaviness  of  the  legs.

Strumming  sensation  in  legs.

Sensation  as  if  "  gone  to  sleep  "  in  both  legs ;  has  no  firm
step.

Cramps  in  legs  and  calves  nearly  every  night.

Cold  feet.

Gouty  pain  in  ball  of  great  toes.

Itching  on  inner  border  of  sole  of  the  right  foot,  not  relieved
by  scratching.

I  Sore  and  raw  between  the  thighs,,  I  land  in  the  hollow  of  the
knees.

Left  leg  becomes  blue  from  distended  varices  during  menses.
See  23.
^*  Limbs  in  General, Tearing  or  rheumatic  pains, in  parts  of
all  the  limbs.


189  AMBRA  GRISEA.

Uncommon  twitching  and  coldness  of  the  body,  at  night.

Uneasiness,  like  a  crawling,  with  anxiety,  only  by  day.

Weariness,  with  painful  soreness  of  all  the  limbs.
^^  Position. Motion. In  rest :  numbness  of  left  arm.

In  bed,  early  in the  morning :  weakness.

Worse  after  lying  down  :  cough.

Desire  to  bend  and  stretch  the  limbs.

Worse  in  room  with  other  persons :  cough.

When  sitting:  stitches  in  small  of  back.

After  sitting  :  stiffness  in  small  of  back.

Better  lying  on  painful  part :  pain  in hypochondriac region  ;
pain  in  right  side  of  chest.

When  lying  on  them :  arms  go  to  sleep.

Lying  down :  aggravates  the  uterine  symptoms.

I  Worse  after  lying  down. 6  Pertussis.

Must  lie  down  :  with  vertigo  and  weakness  in  stomach.

Motion  of  tongue  : ■<  pain  in  throat.

When  walking  in  open  air :  palpitation  and  pale  face  ;  uneas-
iness in  the  blood,  more  rapid  circulation  ; <  weakness.

After  a  longer  walk  than  usual :  discharge  of  blood  between
the  menstrual  periods. See  23.

During  exercise :  profuse  sweat  on  abdomen  and  thighs.

Lifting  a  heavy  weight :  aggravates  the  cough.

When  carrying  anything  in  hands  :  arms  go  to  sleep.

When  taking  hold  of  anything :  cramps  in  hands.

■  Sweat  from  the  slightest  exertion. ^Intermittent.
36  JJeryes, :  Trismus  neonatorum.

Restlessness.
IJerks  and  twitches.
Convulsions.
I  Epilepsy.

■  Infantile  spasms.

■  Spasms  and  twitches  in  the  muscular  parts.
:  Spasmodic  complaints.

■  Arms  and  limbs  "  go  to  sleep  "  easily.

■  Great  lassitude,  especially  mornings  in  bed.
\  Fainting.

■  Weakness:  of the  whole  body; of  the  knees, as if  they

would  give  way ;  of  the  feet,  with  loss  of  sensation ;  in  the

stomach,  so  that  she  must  lie  down.
Great  prostration  after  lingering  fevers.
Chlorosis.

■  Loss  of  muscular  power. ^Melancholy.
Vertigo  and  nervous  apoplexy.
Paralytic  complaints.

Numbness  of  the  whole  body.

When  walking  in  the  open  air,  an  uneasiness  in  the  blood  and
more  rapid  circulation,  with  greater  weakness  of  the  body.


AMBRA  GRISEA.  190

Conversation  causes  fatigue,  heaviness  of  the  head,  sleepless-
ness, oppression of  the  chest, sweat,  anxiety ;  tremor  and
quivering ;  nervousness  and  irritability.
^^  Sleep. I  Cannot  sleep,  must  get  up ;  worriment  from  business
embarrassment.

Cannot  sleep  at  night,  yet  knows  not  why.

Restless  sleep,  with  anxious  dreams.

■  Vexatious,  anxious  dreams  and  talking  in  sleep;  awaken
frightened. 6  Children.

Sleepless  after  1  a.m.

Worse  from  too  little  sleep.

Uneasy  sleep  from  coldness  and  twitching.

Nearly  every  night  cramp  in  calves.

Worse  after  sleep :  vertigo ;  weight  on  vertex ;  whooping-
cough  ;  feels  weak ;  mouth  dry ;  weary,  eyes  feel  as  if  they
had  been  closed  too  tightly.

When  awaking  :  soreness  of  scalp  ;  lips  numb  and  dry ;  bitter
taste  in  mouth.

Early  in  bed :  nosebleed  ;  great  lassitude.
^^  Time. Gi^'^en  in  the  evening  apt  to  make  aggravations.

Worse  evening  and  night, d  Whooping-cough.

At  night :  anguish  and  sweat  all  over  ;  frequent  urination  ;
leucorrhoea  ;  cough ;  numbness  in  arms :  weakness  of  fin-
gers ;  cramp  in  legs  and  calves ;  twitching  in  limbs ;  cold-
ness of  body  ;  profuse  sweat,  worse  after  midnight.

In  morning  :  soreness  of  scalp  ;  pressure  on  eyes  and  difficulty
in  opening  them;  nosebleed;  lips  numb  and  dry;  bitter
taste ;  fetor  of  mouth ;  dryness  of  throat ;  frequent  and
copious  urination ;  violent  erections  with  numbness  in  the
parts.

In  forenoon :  chill  with  lassitude  and  sleepiness.

In  afternoon  :  roaring  and  whistling  in  ears.

Towards  evening : <  anxious  flushes  of  heat.

In  evening  :  sensation  of  disordered  stomach  ;  cough.
^^  Temperature  and  Weather.  Worse  from  warmth :  toothache.

Better  from  cold :  toothache.

Worse  in  warm  room  :  cough.

Better  from  motion  in  open  air.

Aggravation  from  warm  drinks.

After  exposure  to  draught  of  air  :  sore  throat.

When  walking  in  open  air :  heartburn ;  palpitation  ;  uneasi-
ness in  the  blood; <  weakness.

Took  cold  and  had  perspiration  checked,  after  a  thunder-storm,
by  north wind  in the  face  ;  tormenting  cough  for  several
weeks. See  27.
*"  Fever. ■  Chill  in  the  forenoon,  with  lassitude  and  sleepiness  ;
relieved  by  eating, d  Intermittent  fever.

Chill  of  single  parts  of  the  body,  with  heat  of  the  face.


191  AMBRA  GRISEA.

Anxious  flushes  of  heat  returning  every  quarter  hour;  I  most
violent  towards  evening  .  d  Intermittent  fever,  d  Whoop-
ing-cough.

Profuse  sweat  at  night,  worse  after  midnight  and  most  on  the
affected  side.

Profuse  sweat,  particularly  on  the  abdomen  and  thighs,  during
exercise.

•  Malignant  fevers.
*^  Attacks. I  ■  Cough  in  spasmodic  paroxysms.

Anxious  flushes  of  heat  return  every  quarter  of  an  hour.
^^  Locality and  Direction. One-sided  complaints : perspira-
tion,  tearing,  numbness, sensation  of  coldness in  the  ab-
domen.

Right :  spot  on  head  sore  to  touch ;  tearing  pain  in  auricle ;
tearing  pain  in  ear ;  tearing  near  ala  nasi ;  pressing  pain  in
side  of  abdomen ;  pain  in  hypochondriac  region ;  pain  in
lower  part  of  chest ;  rheumatic  pains  in  back ;  itching  on
border  of  foot-sole.

Left :  hand  cold ;  crackling  in  ear ;  coldness  in  abdomen  ;  leg
becomes  blue  during  menses ;  pain  under  ribs,  with  cough ;
burning  in  scapula ;  tearing  in  shoulder ;  arm  gets  numb.

Left  to  right :  tearing  pain  in  hip-joints.

Upper  limbs,  right  side ;  lower  limbs,  left  side.

Ascending :  pressing  drawing  from  nape  of  neck  through
head  to  forehead.

Extending  over  whole  body  :  soreness  in  scalp  on  waking.
*^  Sensations. Ebullitions  and  pulsations  in  the whole  body,
especially  after  walking  in  the  open  air.

Heat :  in  face  ;  in  lips.

Heaviness :  of  legs.

I  Numb  feeling  of  the  whole  surface  of  the  body,  mornings.
d  Pruritus  vaginae.

Numbness :  of  legs  in  morning ;  in  male  sexual  parts ;  of
arms,  particularly  the  left ;  in  legs  ;  of  the  whole  body.

Throbbing :  in  gums.

Twitching :  of  facial  muscles.

Sense  of  contraction :  in  right  thigh.

Pressure :  in  forehead  and  vertex  ;  on  eyes,  difiicult  to  open  ;
and  burning  under  scrobiculum ;  in  stomach  and  hypo-
chondria ;  and  tension  in  stomach  ;  in  small  spot  upper  r.
side  of  abdomen ;  in  hypogastrium ;  in  chest ;  in  left  vari-
cose leg  during  menses.

Drawing :  in  teeth  ;  in  shoulder ;  in  fingers  and  thumb.

Pressive  drawing :  from  nape  of  neck  through  head  to  fore-
head.

Smarting :  in  mouth.

Pressure  and  smarting :  in  eyes.

Rawness  :  velum  palati ;  in  throat ;  in  chest.


AMBRA  GRISEA.  192

Tearing  pain :  in  forehead ;  in  left  temple  up  to  vertex ;  in
right  frontal  eminence ;  behind  left  ear ;  in  upper  half  of
brain  ;  in  right  auricle ;  in  upper  part  of  face,  near  r.  ala
nasi ;  from  palate  into  1.  ear ;  in  region  of  spleen  ;  in
shoulders ;  in  1.  shoulder-joint,  elbow,  forearm  and  hand ;  in
tips  of  fingers  and  thumb ;  in  hip-joints,  nates,  hip,  knee,
leg,  ankle  and  foot.

Stinging  as  from  insects :  in  hands  and  fingers.

Stitches  :  from  throat  into  r.  ear ;  —  and  pressure  in  stomach ;
in  anus ;  in  ovarian  region ;  a  stitch  in  vagina  preceding
leucorrhoeal  discharge ;  in  small  of  back.

Painful  tension :  in  lumbar  muscles ;  skin  in  fingers  feels
tense.

Lancinating :  in  tips  of  fingers  and  thumb.

Cramp  :  of  lower  lip  ;  in  hands ;  in  legs  and  calves.

Sprained  feeling  :  in  shoulder.

Burning :  in  urethra  ;  in  sexual  parts ;  in  left  scapula.

Soreness :  spot  on  side  of  head,  in  scalp ;  in  nose ;  under
tongue ;  in  throat  during  empty  deglutition ;  rawness  be-
tween thighs  and  hollow  of  knees ;  in  female  sexual  parts  ;
in  larynx  and  trachea ;  of  all  the  limbs.

Scraping :  in  larynx  and  trachea.

Crawling :  in  ears  ;  in  all  the  limbs.

Strumming :  in  legs.

Gouty  pain :  in  ball  of  great  toe.

Itching :  on  eyelid ;  in  ears ;  pimples  in  whiskers ;  in  anus ;
pimples  over  male  genitals ;  voluptuous  itching  on  scrotum  ;
itching  on  pudendum,  in  larynx  and  trachea ;  in  thyroid
gland ;  in  chest ;  in  palms  of  hands  ;  in  tips  of  fingers  and
thumbs ;  on  border  of  sole  of  right  foot.

Tickling  :  in  ears  ;  in  throat  induces  cough  ;  in  thyroid  body.

Tingling :  in  thumb.

Burnt  feeling:  blisters  in  mouth.

Coldness  :  of  left  hand  with  headache ;  in  abdomen  ;  of  hands
and  feet.

Dryness  :  of  throat  in  morning.

As  if  something  was  torn  away :  in  region  of  spleen.

Feels  pulse  in  the  body  like  the  tick  of  a  watch.
**  Tissues. Small  growths  under  tongue. See  11.

I  Ranula.

Tearing  in  muscles  and  joints,  often  on  one  side.

•  Softening  of  the  brain.

I  Emaciation.
*^  Touch. Passive  Motion, Slight  touch  : <  pain  in  thumb.

Rubbing :  relieves  itching  and  tickling  in  rectum.

Sore  to  touch :  spot  on  right  side  of  head.

From  outward  pressure : <  soreness  in  throat.

Worse  from  overlifting.


193  AMBRA  GRISEA.

^^  Skin. I  1  Itching.

Jaundiced  color  of  face.

Burning  in  skin.

The  tips  of  fingers  become  shrivelled. See  32.

Soreness  of  a  wart  on  the  finger.

Numbness  of  the  skin.
Burning  herpes.
Leprous  complaints.

Itching  pimples  in  whiskers.

Sore  and  raw  between  legs  and  in  hollow  of  knees.

Distended  varices  on  leg  during  menses. See  23.

Reproduces  the  itch-eruption.
"  Stages  of  Life,  Constitution. » Children  who  are  excitable,
nervous  and  weak.

llNervous  persons,  infants  or  young  girls.

1 1  In  old  age. d  Asthma, d  Colds.

The  so-called  bilious  or  nervous  bilious  temperament.

1 1  Lean  persons.

I  Old  people  and  children, d  Asthma.

I A  very  old  man. ^Brittle finger-nails. ^Asthma when

attempting  coition.
*^  Relationship. Similar  to  :  Arsen.  (cardiac  asthma) ;  Act.  rac.
(night  cough) ; Castor.;  Asaf. (women  who are nervous
and  fail  to  re-act); Coca  (embarrassed,  bashful); Coffea;
Cinchon.;  Ignat.

Kali  hrom.  (increase  of  reflex  action) ;  Moschus  (hysteric
asthma) ;  JVux  vom.  (both  suit  nervous,  thin,  bilious,  per-
sons);  Opium;  Phosphor.,  (asthma;  nervous  excitability ;
"irritable  weakness;"  slender  build,  etc.);  Fhosph.  ac;
Pulsat.;  Sepia.;  Staphis.;  Sulphur;  Sulph.  ac.  (cough
and  belching) ;  Valer.  (nervousness,  hysteria ;  lack  of  re-
action in  nervous  weakness);  Laches.,  and  Sepia  (worse
from  overlifting) ;  Laches.,  Ver.  alb.  (cough  with  belch-
ing ;  coldness,  etc.)

Antidotes  to  Amhra:  Camphor,  Coffea,  Nux  vom.,  Pulsat.,
Staphis.

Amhra  antidotes  :  Staphis.  (especially  the  voluptuous  itching
of  scrotum) ;  Nux  vom.


13


AMMONIUM  BENZOICUM.  194

AMMONIUM  BENZOICUM.

Benzoate  of  Ammonium.  Crj  H^  0{NII^ )  0.

Proved  by  Wibmer ;  also  proved  and  used  by  Jeanes.

^  Eyes. Feeling of  swelling and soreness, apparently  in the
puncta  and  saccus  lachrymalis.
I  Eyelids  swollen. ^Albuminuria.
^  Face. I  Face  bloated. ^Albuminuria,
"  Tongue. Swelling  under  tongue,  right  side,  like  ranula,
^®  Belching. Eructation  of  food  without  acidity,  with  apparent

weakness  of  digestion,  or  acid  eructations.
'^  Stomach. Increased  warmth  in  the  stomach.

Slight  discomfort  in  the  stomach.
^^  Abdomen. Sensation  of  soreness  between  abdominal  rings,  in

the  spermatic  cord,  and  extending  slightly  downwards.
'''^  Stool. Pain  across  the  sacrum  with  urgency  to  stool.
^^  Urinary  Organs. Sensation  of  internal  soreness  on  pressure
in  leaning  the  back  against  the  cushioned  back  of  carriage,
in  region  of  right  kidney.
I  Bloated  face,  eyelids  swollen,  head  heavy,  stupid ;  urine  scanty,
smoky. 6  Albuminuria.
^^  Larynx. Increased  mucous  secretion  in  the  larynx,  causes  fre-
quent hawking  and  spitting.
-^  Pulse. Increased  frequency  of  pulse.
^^  Back. Pain  across  the  sacrum  with  urgency  to  stool.

Soreness  in  region  of  right  kidney  when  pressing  back  against
seat  of  carriage.
^'  Locality. Right :  swelling  under  tongue.
*^  Sensations. Soreness : and  swelling in eyes :  in region of
right  kidney ; between  abdominal  rings,  in  spermatic  cord.
Increased  warmth  and  discomfort  in  stomach.
^^  Tissues. I  Albuminuria.  ,

Gout  with  fluid  in  the  great  toe-joint  or  with  lithates.

*^  Other  Drugs. Similar  to  its  relatives,  the  ammonia  salts  and

Benz. ac, especially  the  latter  in  gout,  rheumatism  and

kidney  affections,  and  the  Amm.  pliosph.,  in  gouty  deposits.

Also similar to : Gnaphal. (gouty concretions) ; Caustic. ;

Tereh.,  (smoky,  albuminous  urine ;  rheumatism).


L


195  AMMONIUM  BROMIDUM.

AMMONIUM  BROMIDUM.

Bromide  of  Ammonium.  NII^  Br.


Proved  b}'  A.  M.  Gushing,  1870,  after  the  very  interesting  report  by  J.
Kitchen. See  Record,  1870,  page  297.

^  Mind. Feared  he  might  die. See  17.

^  Inner  Head. At  times  a  feeling  during  day  as  of  a  band  tied
around  the  head  above  the  ears,  pressing  hardest  just  above
the  ears.
Pain  in  side  of  head  near  the  eye,  as  if  a  nail  were  driven  into  it.
Sharp  pains  in  the  left  side  of  the  head  near  the  eye.
Headache  from  congestion  to  the  brain.
^  Sight  and  Eyes. In  the  evening,  eyes  feel  very  large,  with
constant  blue  before  them.
Right  eye  feels  large  and  smarts  ;  has  to  wear  a  shade  evenings

to  read  or  write.
Right  eye  full  of  stringy  mucus.
Eyes  feel  sore  and  as  if  sand  were  in  them.
Right  eye  feels  as  if  bathed  in  hot  water.

■  Pterygium.

I  In  the  morning  eyes  red  and  sore,  with  white  mucus  in  corners,

•<  left  eye. d  Ophthalmia  scrofulosa.
Lids  swollen.
Every  evening  eyelids  droop ;  difficult  and  painful  to  raise

them.
Lids  stick  together.

■  Scrofulous  ophthalmia.

Pains  around  the  eyes  and  into  the  head.

Sharp  pain  near  eye  in  left  side  of  head.
^  Nose. Sneezing  relieves  stinging  in  throat. See  13.

Nose  stopped  up ;  then  clear  discharge.

Occasional  discharge  of  watery  fluid  from  left  nostril.
"  Tongue. Tongue  smarts  severely  as  if  just  burned;  morning.
^"  Mouth. Must  hold  mouth  open  when  walking,  on  account  of
heat  in  throat  and  lungs.

Mouth  feels  as  if  burned ;  in  the  morning.

Stringy,  tasteless  mucus  in  the  mouth.

Tasting  of  food  eaten  several  hours  before.
13  Throat. Throat  during  day  filled  with  white sticky  mucus,
streaked  with  blood.

Throat  sore,  looks  mottled,  as  if  a  diphtheritic  deposit  were
commencing.


AMMONIUM  BROMIDUM.  196

Irritation  of  the  throat,  mostly  on  the  sides,  with  inclination  to

cough ;  evening.
Fauces  dark  red,  congested.
Preparing  to  swallow  is  painful,  the  act  is  not.
Sensation  of  hot  air  passing  up  the  throat,  right  side,  though

stomach  feels  cold.
Fauces  and  tongue  feel  scalded.
Stinging  in  fauces  with  inclination  to  cough,  but  relieved  by

sneezing.
Stringy,  sometimes  blood-streaked  mucus  in  throat.
'^  Eating. Food  does  not  digest.
^^  Belching. Belching  relieves  faint  stomach.

Something  seems  to  rise  from  pit  of  stomach,  almost  stopping
breath,  and  causing  a  faint  and  very  disagreeable  sensation,
partially  >  by  raising  wind. See  17.
^^  Scrobiculum  and  Stomach. Swallowing  anything  causes  a
distress  the  length  of  the  oesophagus  and  into  the  stomach.
During  afternoon  and  evening,  sensation  of  fainting  or  suffo-
cation, beginning  at  epigastrium  and  rising  on  both  sides  of
the  sternum  to  the  throat,  causing  him  to  sigh  and  walk
around  the  room  ;  feared  he  might  die. See  16  and  36.
Sharp  cutting  pain  in  stomach.

Terrible  distress  in  upper  part  of  epigastrium  ;  could  not  sit
still  had  to  walk  the  room  ;  much  belching  ;  pain  through  to
back and to both hypochondria ; caused sweat ; could
scarcely  get  his  breath.
^^  Abdomen. Sharp  twisting  pain  just  above  crest  of  right  ilium.
'°  Stool  and  Rectum, Sudden  urgent  desire,  with  loose  stool.
I  An  old  hemorrhoidal  tumor  returned  quite  hard,  sore  and
small,  but  soon  left.
^^  Urinary  Organs. Feeling  over  right  kidney  as  if  something
were  pressed  hard  against  it ;  relieved  by  pressure  but  leav-
ing a  pulling  sensation.
^^  Female Sexual Organs. iDull constant pain and hard
swelling  in  1.  ovary.
I  Uterine  hemorrhage  from  ovarian  irritation  or  inflammation.
^°  Larynx. Tickling  in  throat  causing  cough,  in  evening. See  10.
When  walking,  must  hold  mouth  open  on  account  of  heat  in
throat  and  lungs.
^^  Respiration. Inclination  to  draw  a  long  breath.

Sense  of  suffocation  from  the  lung,  she  must  move  about  from
fear  of  suffocation.
^^  Cough  and  Expectoration.  Cough  dry,  spasmodic,  and  very
severe,  at  times  an  interval  of  only  a  few  minutes.
An  almost  continuous  cough  for  hours,  especially  when  lying
down  at  night ;  sensation  of  tickling  irritation,  with  heat  and
burning.


197  AMMONIUM  BROMIDUM.

Sudden  short  cough  when  rising  from  bed  in  the  morning,  from
sensation  of  mucus  in  the  throat.

Sudden  cough  from  tickling  in  the  throat  just  below  the  ton-
sils. See  10.

I  Sudden  desire  to  cough  coming  so  suddenly  it  strangles  one.
d  Pertussis.

Expectoration of  white sticky mucus; sharp pain in both
lungs,  and  during  the  forenoon,  pain  seems  to  be  mostly  in
the  pleura.
^^  Inner  Chest  and  Lungs. Pain  under  middle  of  left  clavicle.

Frequent  constrictive  pain  across  the  chest.

Sharp  pain  in  lungs,  <  upper  part  of  right.

Lungs  feel  cold  inside.

Sharp  pain  in  both  lungs,  and  during  forenoon  pain  seems  to

be  mostly  in  the  pleura.

^'  Back, Feeling  over  right  kidney  as  if  something  pressed  hard

against  it ; >  by  pressure,  but  leaving  a  pulling  sensation.

^^  Upper  Limbs. Sensation  in  the  r.  shoulder  as  if  pressed  by  a

weight.
^^  Lower  Limbs. Legs  ache.

Like  a  cord  around  the  r.  leg,  midway  between  hips  and  knee,
causing  limping  and  pain  all  the  forenoon ;  in  the  afternoon
pain  went  to  left  leg  below  knee ;  in  the  evening  in  the
ankle  then  in  the  foot,  soon  passing  off  and  inclination  to
cough  returning.  *

Feet  cold  in  warm  room,  causing  legs  to  ache.
^^  Motion. Could  not  sit  still,  had  to  walk  the  floor  with  distress
in  stomach.

When  walking :  must  hold  mouth  open  on  account  of  heat  in
throat  and  lungs.

Must  move  about  from  fear  of  suifocation.

When  i^'ising  from  bed  in  morning  sudden  short  cough.
3«  Nerves. •  Epilepsy.

Decrease  of  irritability,  followed  by  tetanic  convulsions ;  later
all  excitability  gone,  the  frog  lies  in  whatever  position  it  is
placed,  the  spasms  become  more  violent  and  death  ensues
from  asphyxia.

Weakness  and  uncertain  movements  in  a  rabbit  (after  non-fatal
doses).
^^  Time. Morning  :  eyes red and sore  ;  tongue dry  ; I  I  tongue
smarts ;  mouth  dry  ;  mouth  as  if  burnt  and  full  of  mucus,
also  throat ;  tickling  in  throat ;  short  cough  on  rising.

Forenoon  :  pain  in  pleura ;  as  if  cord  was  tied  around  leg.

Afternoon :  stomach  easier.

Afternoon  and  evening  :  fainty ;  cough  deeper.

Evening  :  eyes  feel  large,  smart,  lids  droop  ;  tickling  in  throat,
hacking  cough,  feet  cold.


AMMONIUM  BROMIDUM.  198

^^  Temperature and Weather. Swallowing  anything  cold

causes  distress  along  oesophagus.

Feels  the  cold  more  than  usual.

Must  warm  the  feet  while  in  a  warm  room.
^^  Fever. Troubled  with  the  cold  more  than  any  other  time  during
the  winter ;  must  warm  the  feet  even  in  warm  room.

Inclined  to  be  chilly  and  flashes  of  heat.

Flashes  of  heat  over  the  body  as  if  sweat  would  come  on.
^^  Attacks.  Coughing  spells  with  but  a  few  moments  interval.
*^  Locality  and  Direction.  Right :  eye  feels  large  and  smarts  ;
full  of  stringy  mucus,  as  if  bathed  in  hot  water ;  as  if  hot
air  passed  up  throat ;  pain  above  crest  of  ileum ;  pain  over
kidney ;  sharp  pain  in  upper  lung ;  pressure  as  from  a
weight  in  shoulder.

Left :  eye  sore  and  red ;  watery  discharge  from  nostril ;  pain
under  middle  of  clavicle ;  dull  pain  in  ovary.
^^  Sensations. I  Feeling  of  a  band:  around  the  head.

Sensation  as  if  a  nail  were  driven  into  side  of  head.

Stinging :  in  fauces.

Sharp  cutting :  in  stomach.

Sharp  twisting  pains :  above  crest  of  r.  ileum.

Smarting  :  in  r.  eye ;  on  tongue.

Scalded  feeling:  in  fauces  and  tongue.

Pulling  sensation:  over  right  kidney.

Pressure  :  over  right  kidney  ;  in  right  shoulder.

Tickling :  in  throat.

Distress  :  in  oesophagus  and  scrobiculum.

Constrictive  pain : across  chest.

Aching :  in  legs.

Like  a  cord  around  r.  leg.

Cold  feeling :  in  lungs.

Dull  pain  :  in  1.  ovary.
"*  Tissues. I  Obesity.

^^  Touch. Pressure  >■ pain  over  right  kidney.
^^  Other  Drugs. Antidoted  spasms  caused  by  a  low  dose  of  Hyosc.

Similar  to  its  relatives :  Amm.  carh.^  Amm.  mur.,  Amm.
caust.,  Amm.  phosph.,  and  to :  Kali  brom.,  Kali  hichr.
(stringy  mucus) ;  Cinnah.  (scrof.  ophthal.,  pains  around
orbit) ;  Natr.  ars.  (throat) ;  Kali  permang.  (throat) ;
Zincum,  Ratan.,  and  Arg.  nitr.  (pterygium);  Calc.  ostr.
(scrof.  ophthal.) ;  Kali  brom.  ;  Silic.  (aura  begins  in  epi-
gas.) ;  Nux  vom.  (aura  from  stomach) ;  Art.  vulg.  (must
walk  about) ;  Caustic. ;  Sulphur ;  Bufo ;  bromide  of
camphor.


199  AMMONIUM  CAKBONICUM.

AMMONIUM  CARBONICUM.

Smelling  Salts. Ammonice  Sesquicarbonas. 'INHj^O^  SOO^.

Much  used  and  abused  by  the  old  school  and  the  people.  Introduced  by
Hahnemann  in  1828.  Classed  among  the  antipsorics  in  1835,  in  the  second
edition,  with  additions  from  the  six  later  provers.  In  1859  were  published
Professor  Martin's  provings  on  himself,  and  students  under  his  direction.
Buchner's  proving  was  omitted  by  Allen.

^  Mind.  Very  forgetful  and  absent-minded ;  makes  mistakes  in
writing  and  speaking.

Confusion  and  dullness  of  the  head.

Disposition  to  weep,  particularly  in  the  evening.

Aversion  to  work,  not  disposed  for  anything.

Gloomy,  depressed,  with  feeling  of  impending  trouble,  with  sen-
sation of  coldness.

Anxious  concern  about  one's  sickness.

Anxiety,  with  inclination  to  weep.

Anxiety ;  anguish ;  terms  of  anguish  as  if  a  crime  had  been
committed.

iListlessness  and  lethargy. ^Hysteria.

I  Utter  dejection  of  mind, d  Chlorosis.

Ill-humor :  during  wet,  stormy  weather ;  after  dinner,  lasting

the  whole  day.
From  thinking  :  pain  in  face.

Hearing  others  talk,  or  talking  himself,  affects  him.
After  vexation  or  fright,  red  spots  in  the  face.
^  Sensorium. I  l  Feeling  of  lightness  in  the  head.

Giddiness,  especially  in  the  morning,  when  sitting  and  reading  ;

better  when  walking.
Frequent  giddiness,  as  if  the  surroundings  were  turning  with

him  in  a  circle,  in  the  morning  after  rising,  lasting  the  whole

day,  worse  in  evening ;  also  at  night,  when  moving  the  head.
Congestion  of  blood  to  the  head  at  night  and  when  awaking,

heat  of  the  face.
Vertigo  mostly  in  morning ;  on  moving  his  head  sensation  as

if  brain  fell  to  and  fro,  towards  the  side  where  he  stoops ;

sometimes  with  stinging  pain.
^  Inner  Head. ■  Heaviness  and  beating  in  forehead  after  dinner.
Pressing  fullness  in  the  forehead  as  from  vapor  of  coal.
Sensation  as  if  all  were  to  be  pressed  out  at  forehead.

I I  Sense  of  oppressive  fullness,  pushing  as  if  forehead  would
burst.


AMMONIUM  CARBONICUM.  200

Severe  pain  in  forehead. See  7. 6  Undeveloped  measles.

■  Pulsating,  beating,  and  pressing  in  forehead,  as  if  it  would

burst ;  worse  after  eating ;  while  walking  in  open  air ;  bet-
ter from  pressure  ;  in  warm  room.

I  Headache,  thrusts  in  the  forehead,  as  if  it  would  burst.

Tearing  :  in  the  whole  head ;  in  the  temples ;  back  of  left  ear,
ascending  to  vertex.

Boring,  stitching  headache  at  night.

Stitches  in  various  parts  of  head.

Sensation  of  looseness  of  the  brain  ;  as  if  the  brain  fell  to  the
side  toward  which  he  leaned.

Congestive  and  menstrual  headache.

When  stooping,  sensation  as  if  blood  were  accumulating.

Headache :  in  the  morning  in  bed,  with  nausea  and  risings  in
throat,  as  if  to  vomit ;  in  the  morning,  but  worse  in  after-
noon.
^  Outer  Head. Pain  on  head  resembling  hammering  or  hacking
with  a  flat  instrument.

Drawing  pain  in  periosteum  of  forehead,  wakens  from  sleep  in
morning,  passes  ©fi"  after  rising.

Severe  itching  of  scalp,  especially  on  occiput.

Sensation  as  if  the  hair  would  stand  on  end,  with  crawling  and
cold  feeling  on  head,  after  coming  into  room  from  open  air.

Scalp,  even  the  hair,  painful  to  touch.

Hair  falls  out.
^  Sight  and  Eyes, Double  vision.

Aversion  to  light,  with  burning  in  eyes.

Optical  illusions,  particularly  in  white  or  bright  colors.

■  Sparks  before  eyes  at  night. ^Headache.

I  I  Large  black  spot  floats  before  eyes  after  sewing.

I  I  Eyes  weak  and  watery,  especially  after  reading ;  muscular

asthenopia;  afi"ections  from  overstraining  the  eyes.
I  I  Yellow  spots  on  looking  at  white  objects.
I  Cataract  of  the  right  eye.
Burning  in  eyes  all  day.
Inflammation  of  the  eyes  ;  vision  obscured.
Eyes  blood-shot,  with  lachrymation.
Pressure  on  eyelids  so  that  he  cannot  open  them,  even  though

internally  awake.
Pressure  with  cutting  or  stitching ;  in  the  eyes.
Smarting  in  the -eyes  and  itching  on  the  margin  of  lids.
Stye  on  the  right  upper  eyelid,  with  tension.
^  Hearing  and  Ears. Painful  sensitiveness  of  the  dull  ear  to
loud  noise.
•  Dull  sense  of  hearing.
Humming  and  buzzing  before  the  ears.
I  Hard  hearing ;  ear  itches  and  discharges  pus.
Indistinct  hearing.


I


201  AMMONIUM  CARBONICUM.

Itching  above  the  ears,  spreads  over  the  whole  body.
I  I  Hard  swelling  of  the  right  parotid  gland, d  Scarlatina.
^  Smell  and  Nose. Nosebleed  ; dry  coryza,  especially  at  night,

without  the  slightest  air  passing  through ;  redness  of  tip  of

nose,  when  stooping.
B Nosebleed;  severe  pain  as  if  the  brain  was  forcing  itself  out

just  above  the  nose.
uNosebleed:  when  washing  the  face  or  hands  in  the  morning

nosebleeds  from  left  nostril; I  from  the  right  several  days

in  succession,  weakening  the  boy. d  Undeveloped  measles.

■  When  stooping,  blood  rushes  to  tip  of  nose.

I  Bloody  mucus  blown  from  nose  frequently, d  Ozsena.
I  Burning  water  runs  from  the  nose;  worse  when  stooping.
I  i  Stoppage,  mostly  at  night ;  must  breathe  through  the  mouth,
with  long  lasting  coryza. d  Scarlatina.

■  Child's  nose  stopped  up,  starts  from  sleep;  rattling  of  phlegm

in  the  trachea.
I  Coryza  in  hysterical  females,  in  feeble  or  aged  people.
Pustules  on  the  nose.
^  Face. Heat  in  the  face : during  mental  exertion ; during  and

after  dinner.
^  Heat  in  face,  with  red  cheeks.
Redness  of  left  cheek.
Pale  face,  bloated.

Hard  swelling  of  cheek,  also  of  the  parotid  and  cervical  glands.
Pustulous  eruption  on  forehead,  cheeks  and  chin.
Small  boils  and  indurations,  emitting  water  and  blood  on  the

cheek,  at  the  corner  of  the  mouth,  and  on  the  chin.
Freckles.
^  Lower  Jaw. Herpetic  eruption  around  the  mouth.
Itching  eruption  on  the  lips.
Upper  lip- pains,  as  if  cracked.

Lower  lip  cracked  in  the  middle,  bleeding  and  burning.
Painful  burning  blister  on  inside  of  the  lower  lip.
Blueness  of  the  lips.
^"  Teeth  and  Gums. Pricking pain, especially in  the  molars ;

worse  when  masticating  or  touching  the  decayed  teeth  with

the  tongue.
Pressing  the  teeth  together,  sends  a  shock  through  head,  cars

and  nose.
Teeth  feel  too  long,  too  dull.

Violent  toothache,  evenings,  immediately  on  going  to  bed.
Stitching  pain  in  molars  when biting; must  use  the  incisors

only.
Drawing  toothache during catamenia ; better from eating,

worse  froni  warm  fluids.
Sensation  as  of  an  ulcer  at  the  root  of  a  tooth.
Looseness  and  rapid  decay  of  the  teeth.


AMMONIUM  CARBONICUM.  202

Gums  swollen,  easily  bleeding.
'^  Taste,  Speech,  Tongue. Taste: sweetish;  of  blood;  offen-
sive ;  of  food,  sourish  or  metallic  ;  bitter  in  the  morning.

Talking  difficult  at  times,  like  from  weakness  of  the  parts  ;  also
from  pain.

Vesicles  on  the  tongue,  at  the  tip,  on  the  borders,  burning,
hindering  eating  and  speaking.
^^  Mouth. Redness  and  inflammation  of  inner  mouth  and  gullet ;
pain  as  if  raw.

Sensation  as  if  the  mouth  was  swollen.

Great  dryness  of  mouth  and  throat, d  Scarlatina, d  Head-
ache.

■  Swelling  of  the  internal  mouth,  especially  the  inside  of  the

cheeks.
Has  to  spit  a  great  deal.
Salivation  with  headache.
13  Throat. Pain  in  throat, as  if  right  tonsil  was  swollen  when

swallowing.

■  Enlarged  tonsils,  bluish,  much  oflensive  mucus  there. 6  Scar-

latina.

Sensation  as  if  something  had  lodged  in  throat,  impeding  deglu-
tition.

I  Putrid  sore  throat ;  glands  engorged. ^Scarlatina.

■  Tendency to  gangrenous  ulceration of  the  tonsils. ^Scar-

latina.
Angina  after  checking  an  old  ulcer  on  the  leg ;  ceased  when

ulcer  returned.
Dryness  of  throat.

■  Burning  pain  in  the  throat  and  down  the  oesophagus  as  from

alcohol.

■  Roughness  and  scraping  in  the  throat.

■  Diphtheria,  when  the  nose  is  stopped  up;  child  starts  from

sleep,  cannot  get  its  breath.
'*  Appetite  and  Thirst. Continual  thirst ;  no  appetite,  except-
ing for  bread  and  cold  food.

Great  hunger  and  appetite,  yet  a  small  ()[uantity  satiates.

Unconquerable  appetite  for  sugar.
^^  Eating  and  Drinking. Cannot  eat  (dinner)  without  drinking.

Worse during eating : heat in face ; headache,  nausea  and
prostration ;  dizziness.

Worse  after  eating :  nausea ; pressure  in  stomach  and  fore-
head ;  speech  becomes  difficult ;  sweat  increased.

After  dinner:  is  ill-humored;  has  headache ;  face  is  hot.

Worse  from  warm  diet.

When  masticating,  decayed  tooth  pains  more.

After  eating :  heartburn ; drawing  toothache  during menses
better.

Toothache  during  menses  worse  from  warm  fluids.


203  AMMONIUM  CABBONICUM.

^®  Nausea  and  Vomiting. Hiccough, morning  after  the  chill.

Eructations  : I  I  empty  ;  imperfect ;  taste  of  the  food  ;  sour.

Heartburn  after  eating.

Nausea  and  vomiting  of  all  that  has  been  eaten ;  afterwards
sour  taste  in  the  mouth.
^^  Scrobiculum  and  Stomach. Stitches  in  pit  of  stomach,  with
cough.

Burning  and  heat  in  the  stomach.

Pain  as  from  constriction  in  the  stomach,  with  nausea,  water-
brash  and  chilliness,  ameliorated  by  pressure  and  by  lying
down.

Stomach  feels  full,  trembling.

Empty  feeling  in  the  stomach.

■  Pressure  in  stomach  after  eating  or  at  night;  the  clothes  feel

oppressive.
Heat  in  stomach,  spreading  through  bowels.
Pain  in  stomach,  with  tendency  to  water-brash.
^^  Hypochondria. Burning  pain  in  liver.

Boring  stitches  in  liver  in  evening  while  sitting.
Numbness  in  right  hypochondrium.
Pressure  or  sore  feeling  in  hypochondrium.
Stitches  in  hypochondrium.

■  Splenic  affections.

'*  Abdomen,  Groins. Pressure  above  the  navel,  as  from  a  button.

Pressive  pain  in  left  side  of  abdomen.

Sudden  painful  contraction  of  the  bowels,  extending  to  the  epi-
gastrium ;  better  from  pressure ;  on  lying  down  it  ceases.

Cutting  pain,  with  retraction  of  abdominal  walls.

I  Colic  with  pain  between  the  scapulae. ^  Amenorrhoea.

Stitches  through  the  abdomen.

Elastic  swelling  (size  of  a  fist)  in  the  left  groin,  evenings ;
bruised  pain  therein  ;  cannot  lie  on  left  side ;  on  awaking,
both  swelling  and  pain  gone.

Painful concussion  in the  lower  part  of  the  abdomen  when
stepping.
^^  Stool  and  Rectum. Painful  diarrhoea.

Stool  of  feces  and  mucus.

Stools  at  first  retarded,  later  soft.

iCostiveness  on  account  of  hardness  of  feces.

I  I  Constipation ;  stool  hard  and  dry,  difficult  to  expel,  with
headache.

■  Constipation  with  hemorrhoids.

Protrusion  of  hemorrhoids  after  stool,  with  long  lasting  pains ;

cannot  walk.
Hemorrhoids  protrude,  independent  of  stool.
Burning  at  anus  with  tenesmus,  prevents  sleep  at  night ;  must

rise  from  bed  on  that  account.
Itching  at  anus.


AMMONIUM  CARBONICUM.  204

^^  Urinary  Organs. Pressure  of  urine  on  the  bladder,  with  cut-
ting pain.

I  I  Frequent  urination  at  night.

I  Involuntary  urination  during  sleep  ;  urine  pale  with  red  sedi-  ■
ment.

Pale  urine,  with  sandy  sediment.

Whitish  sediment.

I  Diabetes.

During  micturition,  vulva  and  anus,  which  are  sore,  become
painful.
^^  Male  Sexual  Organs. After  coition,  excited  circulation  and
palpitation.

Forcing  (wurgend)  pain  in  the  testicles  and  seminal  cords  ;  sen-
sitiveness of  testicles  to  touch,  aggravated  by  erections.

Testicles  and  scrotum  relaxed,  necessitating  a  supporter.

Erections  without  sexual  desire,  mornings.

Violent  sexual  desire,  almost  without  erections.

Seminal  emissions  almost  every  night.

Itchincr  of  the  genitals.
^^  Female  Sexual  Organs. I  Great  excitement  of  female  sexual
organs. 6  Hysteria.

Before  catamenia  :  face  pale  ;  pain  in  belly  and  small  of  back  ;
want  of  appetite.

I B  Cholera-like  symptoms  at  the  commencement  of  the  cata-
menia.

During  catamenia:  toothache;  colic;  face  pale;  very  sad;
i great  fatigue,  especially  of  the  thighs,  with  yawning,  tooth-
ache, pain  in  small  of  back  and  chilliness.

After  a  long  drive  in  the  open  air,  the  courses  come  on  four  days
too  soon ;  they  are  very  copious,  especially  at  night,  and
when  sitting  and  driving  previously  ;  she  experienced  griping
colic,  with  want  of  appetite.

I  The  courses  come  on  six  days  too  soon.

sThe  menstrual  blood  is  blackish,  often  in  clots,  passing  off
with  spasmodic  pain  in  the  belly  and  hard  stools,  with  tenes-
mus ;  the  flow  is  abundant.

SThe  menstrual  blood  is  acrid,  it  makes  the  thighs  sore;  this
soreness  causes  a  burning  pain.

I  Acrid  leucorrhoea,  with  sensation  of  excoriation  or  ulceration
in  vulva, d  Hysteria.

Leucorrhoea :  watery,  burning,  from  the  uterus  ;  acrid,  profuse,
from  the  vagina.

■  Violent  tearing  in  abdomen  and  vagina.

■  Irritation  of  clitoris, d  Hysteria.

■  Swelling,  itching  and  burning  of  the  pudenda.
I  Vulvitis  with  tendency  to  gangrene.

Menses  premature,  abundant,  blackish,  often  in  clots,  preceded
by  griping  and  colic.


205  AMMONIUM  CARBONICUM.

Menses  scanty and  too  late,  always  accompanied  by  frontal

headache.
^*  Pregnancy. During pregnancy : albuminuria ; yellow spots

before  the  eyes.
Right  mamma  painful  to  touch.
25  Larynx  to  Bronchia. Slight  difficulty  in speech ; incipient

paralysis  of  laryngeal  nerves, d  Softening  of  brain.
Great  dryness  of  throat  and  hoarseness.
Hoarseness,  with  roughness  in  throat.
Hoarseness, cannot speak a loud word ; aggravation from

speaking.
Larynx  as  if  drawn  shut  from  both  sides  of  the  throat.
Rattling  in  the  larynx  as  from  mucus,
i  Accumulation  of  mucus  in  trachea. ^Softening  of  brain.
I  Catarrh.
^®  Respiration. Shortness  of  breath  and  palpitation  after  every

exertion.
Dyspnoea,  with  palpitation  of  heart.

■  Great  difficulty  of  breathing  in  going  up  even  a  few  steps;

less  in  the  open  air.
I  Dares  not come  into a  warm room,  in which he  becomes
deathly  pale  and  can  do  nothing  but  sit  quiet. 6  Asthma.

■  Difficult  breathing  ;  causing  short  cough.

I  Oppression  of  breathing.

■  Catarrh,  dyspnoea,  asthma.

I I  One  of  the  best  remedies  in  emphysema.
Chronic  asthma,  tendency  to  hydrothorax.

iCEdema  pulmonum  with  somnolence  from  poisoning  of  the

blood  with  carbonic  acid.
^^  Cough. Dry  cough  at  night  with  tickling  in  larynx,  headache.
Cough dry  and  worse  at night,  like from feather down in

throat.
1 1  Cough  at  night ;  every  morning,  at  3  o'clock,  dry  cough  from

tickling  in  the  throat,  as  of  dust.
I  Cough,  with  spitting  of  blood,  previous  sweet  taste  and  great

dyspnoea.
Cough,  with  stitches  in  the  small  of  the  back.
With  the  cough  stitches  in  pit  of  stomach.
I  Cough  short,  asthmatic,  from  irritation  in  larynx,  with  pain-
ful sensation  of  spasmodic  contraction  of  the  chest.
I  Cough:  with  asthma,  evening  in  bed;  each  time  with  stitch

in  scrobiculum.
Cough  with  hoarseness,  the  body  being  warm.
I  Cough with spitting  of  bloody phlegm, I  heaviness on  the

chest,  short  breath,  especially  on  ascending  a  hill.
Coughs  up  dark  blood.
Roughness  and  bloody  taste  in  the  mouth,  succeeded  by  cough


AMMONIUM  CARBONICUM.  206

and  sputum  of  light  red  blood,  with  burning  and  heaviness  in

the  chest,  face  red  and  hot,  body  trembling.
Much  hawking  of  saltish  mucus  at  night.
Expectoration  seldom  ;  or  morning  and  during  day.
I  Sputa  thin,  foamy;  adynamic state,  with rattling  of  large

bubbles  in  the  chest, d  Bronchitis  in  the  aged.
^^  Inner  Chest  and  Lungs. Chronic  weakness  of  the  chest  and

coryza.
Cracking  in  the  chest.

iBurning  in  the  chest;  also  with  hydrothorax.
Stitches  in  right  chest :  when  stooping ;  when  walking ;  when

raising  up  in  bed.
Stitches  in  left  chest,  prevents  lying  on  left  side.
Lower  part  of  chest  most  affected.
Heaviness  as  from  accumulation  of  blood  in  the  chest.
Bush  of  blood  to  the  chest  (after  writing).
Tearing  from  upper  left  chest  to  scapula.
Heaviness  and  oppression  at  the  sternum  at  night.
Heaviness  and  tightness  when  walking  in  the  open  air.
\  Pneumonia  with  great  weakness  and  suspected  heart-clot.
"^  Heart. I  Vehement  palpitation  of  heart  and  great  prsecordial

distress,  followed  by  syncope. 6  Hysteria.
Palpitation  of  heart. 6  Headache.
I  Palpitation  and  asthma  after  every  exertion.
Frequent  palpitation,  with  contraction  of  epigastrium  and  weak

feeling  in  pit  of  stomach.
Audible  palpitation,  with  attacks  of  great  anxiety,  as  if  dying  ;

cold  sweat ;  involuntary  flow  of  tears  ;  unable  to  speak  ;  loud,

diflicult  breathing  and  trembling  of  hands.

I  I  Pulse  hard,  tense,  frequent.

Ebullition  of  blood  at  night ;  seems  as  if  heart  and  veins  would
burst.

I I  Angina  pectoris.

^"  Outer  Chest. '  l  Small  pimple  on  the  sternum ;  when  touched

it  feels  as  if  it  had  a  splinter  in  it.
Red  rash  on  the  chest.
^'  Neck  and  Back. Burning  on  the  throat  externally.
Lympathic  glands  swollen, d  Scarlatina.
•  Goitre.

Pain  in  the  nape  of  the  neck.
I  I  Pain  between  the  scapulae.
Violent  pain  in  small  of  back,  with  great  coldness, d  Amenor-

rhoea.
Pressive  drawing  pain  in  small  of  back  and  loins,  only  when  at

rest,  during  the  day ;  passing  ofi"  when  walking.
Stitches  at  the  coccyx,  where  before  there  was  itching.
^^  Upper  Limbs. Axillary  glands  painful  and  swollen.
Tearing,  also  bruised  pains  in  the  shoulder.


207  AMMONIUM  CARBONICUM.

Weight  and  lameness  in  right  arm  ;  has  no  power  in  it,  must
let  it  hang  ;  hand  swollen.

Cramp  in  right  arm,  drawing  it  backwards.

Rigidity  of  the  arms  and  fingers  as  if  dead,  at  night,  early  in
the  morning,  and  when  grasping  things.

Cracking  of  elbow-joint  when  moved.

Boring  pain  in  the  olecranon  depression.

Itching  eruption  on  inside  of  right  forearm.

Pain  in  the  wrist-joint  which  had  been  sprained  some  time  ago.

Pain  in  wrist ;  in  back  of  hands ;  in  fingers  and  thumbs.

Trembling  of  hands.

Cracking  of  skin  of  hands.

Peeling  of  skin  from  the  palms.

Hands  look  blue  and  veins  distended,  after  washing  in  cold
water.

Fingers  swell  when  the  hands  hang  down.

■  Whitlow,  in  the  beginning:  red  streak  up  to  the  axilla.

1 1  Panaritium  ;  finger  inflamed  ;  deep-seated  periosteal  pain.

Fingers  "go  to  sleep."
'^  Lower  Limbs. Restlessness  in  the  legs.

Great  weakness  and  languor  of  lower  limbs.

Soreness  between  the  limbs  of  children.

Violent  pain  in  the  hip-joint  when  walking.

Blue  spot,  with  great  burning,  above  the  knee.

Boring  and  drawing  pains  in  the  knees.

Leg  frequently  "goes  to  sleep  "  when  sitting  or  standing,  also
when  lying  on  it  at  night.

Drawing  pains  in  the  legs  when  sitting.

Cramp  in  the  leg ;  also  in  the  soles  of  the  feet.

Severe  pain  in  the  heels  when  awaking  in the  morning,  as  if
ulcerated  to  the  bone.

I  I  Heel  hurts  when  standing  or  walking  much  ;  sometimes  sup-
puration.

Tearing  in  ankle  and  bones  of  feet ;  ceases  when  warm  in  bed.

Cold  feet,  particularly  when  going  to  bed.

Trembling  of  the  feet.

I  Ball  of  the  great  toe  painful  and  hot.

I  The  great  toe  becomes  red,  swollen  and  painful,  particularly
in  bed,  evenings.

The  big  toe  is  hot  and  burns ; <  from  pressure  of  boots.

Feet  and  I  I  toes  swollen.
■  Crawling  in  the  toes.
^*  Limbs  in  General. Pain  in  all  the  limbs  at  night,  with  gnaw-
ing pain  in  small  of  back.

Inclination  to  stretch  the  limbs.

Burning  of  hands  and  feet.
^®  Position. Motion. At  rest : pain  in  back  and  loins  worse.

Relieved  lying  on  abdomen.


AMMONIUM  CARBONICUM.  208

Lying  down  :  pain  in  stomach  better ;  pain  in  bowels  ceases  ;

leg  goes  to  sleep.
Must  lie  down  from  debility.
Cannot  lie  on  left  side :  owing  to  bruised  pain  in  left  groin ;

from  stitches  in  left  side.
Raising  up  in  bed :  stitches  in  chest.
When  sitting :  dizziness ;  boring  stitches  in  liver ;  leg  goes  to

sleep  ;  drawing  in  legs.
Ascending  steps:  difficult  breathing.
Ascending  a  hill :  shortness  of  breath.
Stepping  causes  painful  concussion  in  abdomen.
Standing  :  leg  goes  to  sleep  ;  heel  hurts.
Walking :  dizziness  better ;  pulsating  pressure  and  beating  in

forehead ;  painful  commotion  in  bowels ;  stitches  in  chest ;

heaviness  and  tightness  in  chest ;  improves  pain  in  back  or

loins  ;  pain  in  hip.
Every  exertion :  heel  hurls ;  weakness  in  limbs ;  palpitation

and  asthma.
Moving  head :  giddiness ;  sensation  as  if  brain  fell  to  and  fro.
Stooping  :  brain  seems  to  fall  towards  the  side  leaned  to  ;  nose-
bleed ;  burning  water  runs  from  nose ;  rush  of  blood  to  tip

of  nose  ;  stitches  in  chest.
^®  Nerves. Tetanic  or  epileptic  convulsions  from  violent  cerebral

irritation.
Debility  :  must  lie  down  ;  also  with  soreness  of  the  whole  body.
Feeling  of  weakness  in  the  limbs  relieved  walking  in  the  open

air.
Great  lassitude.

I  Exhaustion  with  defective  reaction.
B  Hysteria  with  symptoms  simulating  organic  affections.
I  Epilepsy.
^^  Sleep. Loses  breath  at  the  moment  when  falling  asleep ;  wakens

to  get  breath.
Must  sleep  in  the  afternoon,  or  the  eyes  pain.
Restless,  unrefreshing  sleep  ;  tosses  about.
I  Frequent  violent  starting  out  of  sleep,  with  great  fear  after-
wards.

■  Nightmare  every  night,  sometimes  in  a  sweat  when  awaking.

6  Heart  disease.

■  Somnolence,  with  blood  over-carbonized. ^  CEdema  pulmo-

num.
Dreams : vivid; romantic ; lewd ; anxious ; of  danger and

want :  of  ghosts ;  of  dying ;  of  dead  persons ;  offensive,  of

lice ;  of  scolding.
Talks  during  sleep.

Heart-beats  disturb  sleep  ; I  stupor. ^Scarlatina.
Sleepless  until  4  a.m.
Unrefreshing  sleep.


209  AMMONIUM  CARBONICUM.

^  Time.  Night :  giddiness ;  rush  of  blood  to  the  head ;  boring
and  stitching  in  head  ;  nosebleed ;  stoppage  of  nose ;  press-
ure in  stomach ;  burning  at  anus  and  tenesmus ;  frequent
urination ;  seminal  emissions ;  cough  worse ;  hawks  much
saltish  mucus ;  heaviness  and  oppression  at  the  sternum  ;
ebullition  of  blood ;  rigidity  of  hands  and  arms ;  pain  in  all
limbs ;  continuous  sweat.

3  A.M. :  dry  cough  from  tickling  in  throat.

Early  morning :  rigidity  of  arms  and  fingers.

Morning :  vertigo ;  headache  with  nausea,  etc. ;  nosebleed
when  washing  face ;  bitter  taste ;  hiccough ;  erections  with-
out desire ;  expectoration  ;  pain  in  heels  on  awaking ;  sweat
most  about  joints.

All  day :  burning  in  eyes  ;  continuous  sweat.

During  day  :  expectoration  ;  pains  in  back  and  loins.

Afternoon :  must  sleep  to  relieve  pain  in  eyes.

Evening :  disposed  to  weep ;  giddiness  worse ;  violent  tooth-
ache ;  boring  stitches  in  liver  ;  swelling  in  left  groin  ;  cough
with  asthma  in  bed ;  great  toe  swollen  and  painful  in  bed ;
chill  alternating  with  heat  till  midnight ;  much  flatus.

7  P.M. :  strange  uneasiness  arousing  child  from  sleep. See  46.

10  P.M. :  child  falls  asleep  suddenly  after  previous  uneasiness.
^^Temperature  and  Weather.  'In  wet,  stormy  weather:  ill-
humor;  <i  headache.

Winter :  stout  women  readily  take  cold.

I  I  Very  sensitive  to  cold  air  out-doors.

Worse  in  cold  air :  menorrhagia.

Worse  from  wet  poultices.

From  washing:  re- appearance  of  symptoms ;  nosebleed;  blue
hands,  swollen  veins.

I  Children  dislike  washing.

I  In  a  warm  room:  headache  better;  get  deathly  pale.
6  Asthma.

Better  in-doors,  from  warmth,  in  dry  weather.

Worse  while  walking  in  the  open  air,  evening.

■  Averse  to  walking  in  the  open  air.

After  entering  warm  room  from  open  air :  sensation  as  if  hair
stood  on  end.

■  Aversion  to  walking  in  open  air.

Open  air :  increases  headache  while  walking  ;  difficult  breathing
better ;  heaviness  and  tightness  in  chest  when  walking ;
weakness  of  limbs  when  walking ;  chill  increased.

Warmth  of  bed  :  relieves  tearing  in  ankle  and  feet.

In  bed :  great  toe  becomes  red  and  painful.

Warm  room  :  chill  lessened.
*"  Fever. Chill evening ; frequently  alternating with  heat, till
toward  midnight.

Chill  increased  in  open  air,  lessened  in  warm  room.

14


AMMONIUM  CARBONICUM. •  210

Great  chilliness  with  headache.

Thirst  before  the  chill.

In  the  afternoon  a  chill  followed  by  heat.

Heat,  evening,  particularly  of  the  face ;  with  cold  feet.

I  Hectic  fever. ^Scurvy.

Sweat  in  the  morning,  mostly  at  the  joints.

Sweat  on  lower  part  of  body.

Continuous  day  or  night-sweat.

I  Cold,  cyanotic,  semi-conscious,  pulseless. 6  Beginning  of  spot-
ted fever.
^'  Attacks. Worse  during  new  moon.

^^  Locality  and  Direction.  Right :  stye  on  upper  lid ;  cata-
ract ;  swelling  of  parotid  gland ;  tonsil  feels  swollen  ;  numb-
ness in  hypochondrium  ;  stitches  in  chest ;  weight  and  lame-
ness in  arm  ;  cramp  in  arm.

Left :  tearing  behind  ear ;  cheek  red ;  stitches  in  hypochon-
drium ;  pressing  pain  in  side  of  abdomen  ;  swelling  in  groin  ;
tearing  from  upper  chest  to  scapula.
■'^  Sensations. Drawing  tension,  as  from  shortening  of  muscles.

Pain  as  if  joints  were  sprained.

Tearing  in  joints  ;  better  in  warmth  of  bed.

I  Pain  as  from  festering  under  the  skin.

■  Heaviness,  especially  of  internal  parts.

Sensation  of  a  splinter  in  pimple  on  sternum.

As  if  hammering  with  a  flat  instrument  on  head.

As  if  hair  would  stand  on  end.

As  of  an  ulcer :  at  root  of  a  tooth  ;  in  heels.

Stitches :  in  various  parts  of  head ;  in  eyes ;  in  molars  ;  in
scrobiculum,  with  cough  ;  in  hypochondrium  ;  through  abdo-
men ;  in  small  of  back,  with  cough ;  in  chest ;  at  coccyx,
preceded  by  itching.

Boring  stitches :  in  head ;  in  liver ;  boring  pain  in  olecranon
depression  and  in  knees.

Stinging :  in  the  head ;  thrusts  in  forehead.

Pricking :  in  molars.

Cutting :  in  eyes  ;  in  abdomen  ;  in  bladder.

Tearing  pain :  in  head ;  temples ;  back  of  left  ear  to  vertex ;
in  abdomen  and  vagina ;  from  upper  1.  chest  to  scapula ;  in
shoulder  ;  in  ankle  and  bones  of  feet.

Burning :  in  eyes ;  vesicles  on  tongue ;  in  throat  and  down
oesophagus  ;  and  heat  in  stomach ;  in  liver ;  at  anus  ;  leu-
corrhoea ;  of  pudenda  and  heaviness  in  chest ;  on  throat ;  of
hands  and  feet ;  in  big  toe ;  and  stinging  in  the  warts ;
vesicles  and  pustules.

Heat :  in  face  and  stomach.

Smarting :  in  eyes.

Painful  constriction :  in  stomach  ;  in  bowels  ;  of  chest.

Cramp  :  in  r.  arm ;  in  leg  and  soles  of  feet.


211  AMMONIUM  CARBONICUM.

Painful  concussion :  in  lower  part  of  abdomen  when  stepping.

Bruised  pain  :  in  swelling  in  groin  ;  in  shoulder.

Pressive  drawing :  in  small  of  back  and  loins.

Forcing  pain :  in  testicles  and  seminal  cords.

Drawing :  in  periosteum  of  forehead ;  in  teeth  during  catame-

nia  ;  in  legs  when  sitting.
Gnawing  pain  :  in  small  of  back.

Pressure :  outward  in  forehead :  on  eyelids ;  in  eyes ;  in  sto-
mach ;  in  r.  hypochondrium  ;  above  the  navel ;  in  1.  side  of
abdomen  ;  of  urine  on  bladder.
Pulsating :  in  forehead.

Itching :  of  scalp,  especially  on  occiput ;  on  margin  of  lids ;
m and above ear; of  genitals; at coccyx followed by
stitches ;  and  stinging  in  skin.
Tickling :  as  from  feather  in  throat.
Crawling :  on  head ;  in  the  toes.
Heaviness  :  and  beating  in  forehead.
Loose  sensation  :  of  brain.
Roughness  and  scraping :  in  throat.
Tension  :  on  r.  upper  eyelid.
Swollen  feeling :  in  mouth ;  in  r.  tonsil.
Numbness  :  in  r.  hypochondrium.
^  Coldness :  on  head ,  with  backache.
*'  Tissues. Hemorrhagic  diathesis,  from  fluidity  of  blood  and  dis-
solution  of  red  blood-corpuscles; tendency  to  gangrenous
ulcerations.
Hemorrhages  dark.

Hemorrhage  from  nose,  gums  and  bowels.
Lymphatic  and  parotid  gland  swollen  and  indurated.
Erythema, then  vesication; finally  gangrenous  degeneration.
Long  used,  it  develops  a  scorbutic  condition ;  muscles  soft  and
flabby ;  teeth  drop  out ;  haemorrhages  ;  hectic.
*'  Touch. Passive Motion. Worse  from  pressing teeth  to-
gether.

1 1  Outer  pressure:  headache  better;  constrictive  pain  in  sto-
mach better ;  pain  in  bowels  better.

Pressure  of  boot  aggravates  pain  in  big  toe.

After  a  ride:  menses  come  four  days  too  soon; <  at  night
and  when  sitting.

Touch :  scalp  painful ;  testicles  sensitive ;  right  mamma  pain-
ful ;  sensation  of  splinter  in  pimple.

Scratching :  burning  blisters  appear  afterwards.

■  After  a  fall  from  a  horse  and  sprain  of  the  left  great  toe,  fre-
quent inflammation,  joint  red,  hot  and  painful,  and  so  sensi-
tive to  touch  that  he  could  not  bear  the  bed  covers ;  contin-
ual sensation  as  if  the  joint  were  dislocated.
^*  Skin. Chronic  miliary  eruption.

•  Violent  itching;  after  scratching,  burning  blisters  appear.


AMMONIUM  CARBONICUM.  212

Itching  lessened  by  scratching.

1  Desquamation.

Itching  and  stinging  of  the  skin  keeps  him  awake.

Burning  stinging,  tearing  in  the  warts.

Burning  vesicles  and  pustules.

I  Putrid  flat  ulcers  with  a  pungent  sensation,  pain  relieved  by

keeping limb  elevated and  from outward pressure; pus
white  and  putrid.
Child  becomes  sore  between  the  legs.  ,

■  Brought  out  measles  after  three  months'  delay.

Strange  uneasiness  every  evening,  7  o'clock,  which  arouses  the
child  from  sleep ;  it  tosses  about  in  bed  and  screams  until  it
falls  soundly  asleep,  about  10  p.m.  ;  during  the  uneasiness,
head  feels  bloated  and  burning ;  next  day  rash  on  the  face
as  if  scarlatina  would  break  out.

I I  Body  red  as  if  covered  with  scarlatina.

1 1  Malignant  scarlatina  with  somnolence,  starting  from  sleep  ;
dark  red  or  putrid  sore  throat ;  sticky  salivation  ;  parotitis  ;
external  throat  swollen ;  stertorous  breathing ;  involuntary
stools  with  excessive  vomiting ;  body  red,  with  miliary  rash,
or  faintly  developed  eruption  ;  threatened  paralysis  of  brain.

■  Scarlatina  receding.

■  Erysipelas  of  old  people  when  cerebral  symptoms  are  developed;

while  the  eruption  is  still  out,  debility  and  soreness  of  the
whole  body  ;  tendency  to  gangrenous  destruction.

•  Psoriasis.

I  Lepra  vulgaris.
^^  Stages  of  Life,  Constitution. I  Scrofulous  children.

I  Stout  women,  who  lead  a  sedentary  life,  have  various  troubles
in  consequence,  and  readily  catch  cold  in  winter.

Erysipelas  of  old  people.
*^  Relationship.  Similar  to  its  relatives,  Amm.  mur.,  Amm.
phosph.,  etc.,  and  to :  Ant.  tart,  (emphysema,  etc. ;  blood
poisoned  with  carbonic  acid) ;  Arnic. ;  Arsen.  (inflamma-
tions) ;  Aurum  (heart) ;  Apis  (scarlatina,  miliaria ;  burn-
ing-stinging) ;  Bellad. ;  Qoccul.  (muscular  asthenopia) ;
Calc.  ostr.  (parotitis  in  scarlatina ;  pale,  flabby,  etc.) ;  ITe-
par  ;  Kali  bichr.  ;  Kali  carb.  ;  Laches,  (erysipelas) ;  Lau-
roc.  ;  Natr.  mur.  (muscular  asthenopia) ;  Phosphor.  ;  Pul-
sat. ;  Rhus  tox.  (rash,  scarlatina  with  parotitis,  etc.) :  Rata
(muscular  asthenopia) ;  Staphis. ;  Sulphur ;  Veratr.  (cho-
lera-like symptoms  during  menses).

■  The  presence  of  miliary  rash  may  distinguish  it  from the

sometimes  similar  Bellad.  in  scarlatina.

■  Inimical  to  Laches.

Antidote  to  :  poisoning  with  Rhus  tox.  ;  stings  of  insects.
Antidotedby  :  Arnic.,  Camphor,  Hepar  ;  vegetable  acids,  fixed
oils,  as  castor,  linseed,  almond  and  olive  oils.


213  AMMONIUM  MURIATICUM.

AMMONIUM  MURIATICUM.

Sal  Ammonice. Ammonium  chloride,  N  H  4t  CI.


The  first  prover  was  the  much  slandered  Nenning,  whose  masterly
provings,  comprising  448  symptoms,  were  published  by  Hartlaub  in  his
Annalen,  in  1833.  Hahnemann  added  his  own  symptoms  (84)  in  the
second  edition  of  the  Chronic  diseases,  and  a  valuable  proving  of  Rummel,
consisting  of  23  symptoms,  and  condensed  Nenning's  448  to  290,  without
thereby  occasioning  a  loss.  The  symptoms  from  a  poisoning  by  the  fumes
belong  to  Amm.  causticum.


^  Mind. Neither  unconsciousness  nor  delirium  ;  no  apoplexy.
Desire  to  cry,  and  at  times  crying.
Disinclination  to  speak.
Involuntary  aversion  to  certain  persons.
Melancholy  and  anxious,  as  if  laboring  under  some  grief  or

sorrow.
Apprehensive  and  gloomy,  like  from  internal  grief.
Great  earnestness.
Indifferent  mood.
Fretfulness.

Irritability  or  bad  humor,  mostly  mornings.
Mood  irritable,  malicious.
Consequences  of  grief.
*  Sensorium. Fullness  of  head  with  giddiness ;  feels  as  if  it  was

very  heavy.
Heaviness of forehead,  in morning  after  rising  and  during

day.
Vertigo  and  fullness  of  head ;  at  times  as  if  she  would  fall

sideways.
^  Inner Head. iDull heavy pains with vertigo and pallor.

d  Prevailing  fever.
■  Congestive headache  with  flushed  face  and  enlarged  veins.

d  Prevailing  fever.
Heaviness in  forehead,  frequently during  the  day (internal

sensation  of  heat  and  some  sweat).
Pressure  in  forehead,  toward  root  of  nose,  with  sensation  as  if

brain  was  torn  ; <  after  rising.
Tearing  mostly  in  right  temple,  thence  through  right  side  of

face.
Stitches  in  left  temple  and  side  of  head,  and  when  stooping,  in

the  vertex,  with  sensation  as  if  head  would  split.


AMMONIUM  MURIATICUM.  214

Contractive  pain in  occiput as  though screwed  in,  extending

to  the  side  of  the  head.
Rheumatic,  tearing  pains  in  head,  temple  and  occiput.
Rheumatic  pains  in  head  so  severe  as  to  cause  nausea,  burning

of  the  ears  and  deafness.

■  Neuralgic  headaches.

*  Outer  Head. I  Falling  out  of  hair,  with  great  itching  of  scalp.

I  Itching  of  the  scalp;  —  also  with  dandruff.

Itching  pimples  on  right  side  of  occiput.
'  Sight  and  Eyes. Mist  before  eyes, worse  in  bright  light,  out-
doors ;  better  in  room.

Sensation  in  left  eye  as  if  a  body  arose  which  impeded  sight.

Yellow  spots  before  the  eyes.

Optical  illusions  in  dark  colors.  -

■  Capsular  cataract.

i  I  Flying  spots  and  points  before  the  eyes.

Burning  of  the  eyes  at  twilight ;  ceases  after  lighting  the
lamp.

Eyes  gum  together  in  morning,  with  burning  in  canthi  after
washing.

I  I  Eyes  dim,  glassy,  watery.

:  Yellow  eyes.
^  Hearing  and  Ears. Humming  and  roaring  in  right  ear.

Hard  hearing,  with  discharge.

Itching  in  both  ears,  not  relieved  by  scratching,  with  discharge
of  fluid  ear-wax.

Stitches  in  the  ears,  also  with  boring  or  burning,  mostly  when
walking  in  open  air.

Digging  and  tearing  in  right  ear,  also  at  night ;  when  lying
thereon,  a  rooting  and  rolling,  as  if  something  would  come
out.

I  Right  ear  affected  for  years  ;  it  commences  in  the  throat  and
he  cannot  talk  right ;  it  is  as  if  ear  and  throat  were  con-
nected.
^  Smell  and  Nose. iLoss  of  smell,  with  coryza  and  stoppage  of
the  nose.

iNose  sore  internally  and  at  edges  of  nostrils. ^Scarlatina.

Ulcerative  pain  in  left  nostril,  with  sensitiveness  to  touch.

External  swelling  of  left  nostril,  with  discharge  of  bloody
crusts.

Bleeding  from  left  nostril,  preceded  by  itching.

Constant  itching  in  nose,  with  irritation  to  blow  it,  and  sensa-
tion as  of  a  large  rough  body  up  in  the  nose,  with  ob-
struction.

I  Coryza,  with stoppage  of  nose,  hoarseness  and  burning  in

larynx.

I I  Watery,  acrid  coryza,  corroding  the  lip.


215  AMMONIUM  MURIATICUM.

■  Frequent  sneezing ; I  roused  her  from  sleep,  with  crawling  in

throat  making  her  cough.
I  I  Coryza  in  children,  with  bluish  discharge.
Coryza  with  stoppage, great  soreness and  tenderness  of  the

nose,  and  loss  of  smell.
I  The  nose  either  more  dry  than  natural,  or  a  watery  discharge

and  obstruction. 6  Prevailing  fever.
^  Face. I  Very  pale  face.

I  I  Burning  heat  of  face,  passes  off  in  the  open  air.

Tearing  in  bones  of  face,  especially  in  malar  and  lower  maxilla.

Swelling  of  the  cheek,  with  swelling  of  a  gland  under  the  angle

of  lower  jaw,  with  beating,  stitching  pain.
I  I  Eruption  on  the  face  which  burns;  he  cannot  sleep  without

cold  applications.
^  Lower  Part  of  Face. I Mouth  and  lips  sore  and  excoriated.

d  Prevailing  fever.
Lips  burn  like  fire.
I  Corners  of  mouth  ulcerated.
•  Dry,  shrivelled,  cracked  lips, must  moisten  them  with  the

tongue  continually.
Pimples,  blisters,  on  upper  lip.
Tensive  pain  in  articulations  of  jaw  when  chewing  or  opening

the  mouth.
Submaxillary  glands  swollen  ;  pulsating  pains.
^°  Teeth  and  Gums. Pain  in  a  decayed  root,  ceases  when  pressed

upon  with  the  finger.
Stitching  pain  in  upper  incisors.
Swelling  of  gums  of  lower  left  side,  with  stitches  up  to  the

left  temple.
^^  Tongue. ■  Tongue  swollen  and  pasty. 6  Prevailing  fever.

■  Blister  on  tip  of  tongue,  with  burning  pain.
1  I  Tongue  furred  white.

13  Throat.  ■Throat  full  and  sore  with  increase  of  glairy  mucus,
and  difficult  swallowing. 0  Prevailing  fever.

Dryness  in  the  throat.

Stitches  in  throat  during  and  between  deglutition,  also  when
yawning.

■  External  and  internal  swelling  of  throat,  with  pressing  pain

when  swallowing,  and  with  drawing, stitching  pain  in  the
swollen  submaxillary  glands.

■  Sore  throat,  with  viscid  phlegm  ;  so  tough  that  it  cannot  be

hawked  up.

Tonsils  throb,  but  are  not  swollen,  with  uneasiness  and  op-
pressive anxiety.

Throbbing  in  glands  of  neck,  which, however, are  not  swol-
len ;  with  flushes  of  heat  and  want  of  air  in  the  throat.
^*  Appetite. Thirst. Loss  of  appetite.

■  Loss  of  appetite  and  thirstlessness. ^Prevailing  fever.


AMMONIUM  MURIATICUM.  216

Much  thirst,  mostly  evenings.
I  Sometimes  extreme  thirst, d  Prevailing  fever.
I  Want  of  appetite  alternating  with  canine  hunger.
"  Eating  and  Drinking. I  After  eating,  beating  in  the  breast

near  the  oesophagus,  with  heat  of  face  and  restless  mood  ;

worse  on  an  empty  stomach,  but  also  nearly  always  after

eating ;  must  often  eat  a  little,  but  not  enough  to  satisfy  the

hunger.
I  Sore  spot  behind  the  soft  palate,  which  is  relieved  or  passes

away  for  a  short  time  by  eating.
Eating  and  drinking  cold  things  aggravate  cough.
After  dinner :  sudden  prostration  when  walking  in  open  air.
^^  Nausea  and  Vomiting. Hiccough,  with  stitches  in  chest.
Eructations :  empty  ;  bitter ;  tasting  of  food.
Nausea :  with  water-brash,  after  eating,  with  shudderings.
Regurgitation  :  of  food  ;  of  bitter,  sour  water.
I  Frequent  vomiting. ^  Prevailing  fever.
^^  Stomach. I  Stomach  too  apt  to  be  overloaded,  feels  lame  and

sore,  sometimes  flatulent, d  Prevailing  fever.
Empty  or  hungry  feeling  in  stomach.
Sensation  as  from  fasting,  yet  fullness  in  stomach ;  worse  after

breakfast.
Rooting  and  rolling  in  stomach,  in  morning ;  passes  off  after

breakfast.
Gnawing  in  stomach,  as  if  worms  were  in  it.
Burning  and  stitching  in  scrobiculum,  from  thence  drawing  to

the  right  axilla,  and  in  the  upper  arm.
I  I  Empty  sensation  in  stomach,  but  she  cannot  make  up  her

mind  to  eat  anything.
^*  Hypochondria. Intermittent  pains  in  both  hypochondria.

Stitching  and  burning  in  right  hypochondrium,  afternoons,

when  walking.
iSplenitic stitches, while  sitting  ; also in  the morning  on

awaking,  with  difiiculty of  breathing,  obliging  him  to  rise.
\  Liver  complaint. Gallstones.
^^  Abdomen, l  Abdomen  full  and  disturbed, sometimes severe

pains. ^Prevailing  fever.
Bellyache,  griping  pains  about  the  navel.
Heaviness  in  lower  abdomen, as  from  a  load, with  anxiety  as

if  the  abdomen  would  burst ;  ceases  after  sleep.
Distention  of  the  abdomen,  without  accumulation  of  wind.
Stitches  in  the  abdomen,  above  the  left  hip.
Pain  from  right  side  of  pubes,  to  hip  and  small  of  back.
Cutting  and  stitches  from  both  ossa  pubium  to  small  of  back,

with  urging  to  urinate,  evenings.
Stitches  in the  right  groin,  and  coming  out  behind  the  hip,

when  sitting.
Groins  feel  sore  and  as  if  swollen, d  Uterine  displacement.


217  AMMONIUM  MURIATICUM.

Tearing  and  tensive  pain  in  the  groin  when  walking.

I  Pain  as  if  sprained  in  left  abdomen.

I  Pain  as  from  a  sprain  in  left  groin. ^During  pregnancy.

I  Pain  in  the  abdomen  and  back  with  the  menses. 6  Prolapsus

uteri.
lExcessive  amount  of  fat  in  abdomen ;  lax  and  hanging.
^^  Hectum  and  Stool. llThe  various affections  of  the  bowels

are accompanied by a  good  deal  of  flatus. ^Prevailing

fever.
Soreness  up  along  the  rectum,  when  sitting.
I  Itching  soreness  of  the  rectum,  several  pustules  being  formed

at  the  side  of  it ;  often  with  diarrhoea.
I  Much  burning  and  smarting  in the  rectum  during  and  for

hours  after  stool.
I  I  Stitching  or  tearing  pain  in  perineum,  when  walking, d  In

pregnancy.

I  Green,  slimy,  diarrhoeic  stools,  I  in  the  morning.

■  Color  of  stools varies;  white and  undigested,  or  green  and

watery,  or  green  slimy,  or  yellow  and  bloody  watery  or  slimy.
d  Prevailing  fever.
Diarrhoea  after  eating,  with pain  in  abdomen,  back,  small  of
back  and  limbs.

I I  Hard,  crumbling  stools, requiring  great  effort  in  their  ex-
pulsion.

81  Obstinate  and  extreme  constipation. ^Prevailing  fever.
I  Watery  stools  copious,  other  kinds  scanty  though  often  re-
peated. 6  Prevailing  fever.
I  Stool  hard,  crumbling,  scanty.

■  Stools  like scrapings  of  meat or  copious, consisting  of  co-

agulated blood, d  Prevailing  fever.
Discharge  of  blood  during  stool.
Hard  stool  covered  with  mucus.
I  Glassy,  tough  mucus  in  the  stool.

■  Hemorrhoidal trouble with burning and stinging in the

rectum.
I  I  Hemorrhoids  sore  and  smarting, d  After  suppressed  leu-

corrhoea.
\  Constipation  changing  with  diarrhoea.
^^  Urinary  Organs. Constant  tenesmus  vesicae  ;  worse  4  a.m.
Frequent  urging,  with  frequent  urination.
Urging,  yet  only  a  few  drops  pass,  until  next  stool,  when  it

flows  freely.
Profuse  and  frequent  discharge  during  the  night.
Deep  yellow  urine,  with  light,  cloudy  sediment.
Sediment  like  clay.
I  I  Copious  urine  smells  strongly  ammoniacal ;  sometimes  mouldy

or  musty.


AMMONIUM  MURIATICUM.  218

^^  Male  Sexual  Organs. Stitches  and  beating  in  left  spermatic
cord.
Frequent  erections.

■  Hypertrophy  of  the  prostate.
I  Blenorrhoea  of  urethra.

\  Strictures  and  contracted  urethra,
\  Old  gonorrhoea.
^^  Female  Sexual  Organs. Neuralgic  pains  in  the  ovaries,

■  Hypertrophy  of  the  uterus.

I  Uterus  displaced,  with  soreness  in  the  groins  as  if  swollen;
crumbling  stools  ;  profuse  menses.

I  Menses  too  early,  with  pain  in  abdomen  and  small  of  back,
continuing  at  night ;  flow  more  profuse  at  night,  d  Pro-
lapsus uteri.

I  Menses  black,  clotted.

During  menses  :  I  diarrhoea  and  vomiting;  1 1  bloody  discharge
from  the  bowels  ; I  I  neuralgic  pains  in  the  feet.

■  Violent  metrorrhagia; delicate,  small-built  woman,  aet,  47.

■  Leucorrhoea  preceded  by  pain  around  navel.

■  Constant  leucorrhoea.

Leucorrhoea :  with  tension  of  abdomen,  without  collection  of
wind ;  ■like  white  of  egg,  preceded  by  griping  about  the
navel; ■brown,  slimy,  unpainful,  after  every  urination.

■  Painless  leucorrhoea.

^*  Pregnancy, During  pregnancy  : ■crumbling  stool ;  feeling  as

if  sprained  in  the  left  groin  ; I  hemorrhoids.
"  Larynx  to  Bronchia. ■Voice  husky. ^  Prevailing  fever.

■  Hoarseness,  with  burning  in  larynx,  afternoon  ;  could  scarcely

speak.
Frequent  hawking,  with  expectoration  of  small  lumps  of  mu-
cus, with  sensation  of  rawness  in  throat,  back  of  uvula,

■  Every  branch  of  the  bronchial  tubes  affected  to  the end,

d  Prevailing  fever.
I  I  Constant  hawking,  groaning  and  crowing  from  a  tickling  in

throat,  with  raising  much  mucus.
^^  Respiration. Worse  when  taking  a  deep  breath.
Shortness  of  breath.
Heaviness  of  chest,  when  walking  in  the  open  air.

■  Asthma  when  moving  the  arms  with  force  and  when  stooping.
^^  Cough. Many  groups  of  symptoms  are  accompanied  by  cough.

■  Daily  recurring,  dry,  rapid,  suffocating  cough,  with  inability

to  utter  a  single  word  during  the  paroxysms,  attacks  be-
ginning at  6  P.M.;  no  sputa, but  much  water  in  the  mouth.

■  Cough  deep  and  violent,  attended  by  tolerably  free  expec-

toration, d  Prevailing  fever.
Cough: ■dry, from tickling  in the throat; night or  day;
dry  in morning,  with stitches  in chest,  or  left  hypochon-
drium ;  becomes loose  in  afternoon  ;  loose  at  night,  with


219  AMMONIUM  MURIATICUM.

stitches  in  left  hypochondrium, lying  on  back  ;  worse  when

turning on side ; worse before eating or  drinking cold

things.
Expectoration  of  blood,  following  an  itching  in  throat.
^*  Inner  Chest  and  Lungs, i Bronchitis.

Heaviness  on  the  chest  nights  in  bed,  which  awakes  him,  with

restlessness;  awoke  again  at  3  a.m.
Heaviness  so  great  when  walking  she  cannot  breathe,  must

stand  still.
Pressure,  heaviness  and  stitches  in  the  chest,  as  if  a  morsel  of

food  had  lodged  there.
Painful  tension  below  the  right  breast.
Bruised  pain  in  lower  right  chest.
I  Lungs  sore  and  paralytic. 6  Prevailing  fever.

■  Burning  at  small  spots  in  the  chest.

I  I  Beating,  like  a  pulse,  at  a  small  spot  in  the  left  chest,  only

when  standing,  mornings.
I  I  In  pulmonary  affections,  coldness  between  the  scapulae.
^' Heart  and  Pulse. I  Soreness  in  1.  chest.

Tearing  in  region  of  heart,  going  thence  into  left  forearm.
Pulse  accelerated.
^^  Outer  Chest. Burning,  itching,  red  spots  on  left  chest,  which

pale  under  pressure.
^^  Neck  and  Back. Stiff  neck,  with  pain  from  nape  to  between

shoulders,  when  turning.
Tearing  pains  in  sides  of  neck,  alternating  with  tearing  in

the  cheek.
':  A  fatty  swelling  on  the  neck,  extending  from  ear  to  ear.
Small,  painful,  non-suppurating  tubercles  on  the  right  scapula.
Bruised  and  sprained  pain  between  the  scapulae.
Stitches  in  the  left  scapula.
Pinching  in  muscles  of  the  right  scapula.

I  Coldness  in  back  and  between the shoulders,  not  relieved

by  feather  or  wool  covering,  followed  by  itching, d  Pul-
monary affections.

■  Backache,  especially  at  night.

Pain  in  small  of  back,  as  if  bruised  or  crushed,  during  rest  or
motion,  also  at  night,  in  bed ;  could  neither  lie  on  back  nor
side.

Stiffness  in  small  of  back.

I I  Severe  pain  in  lumbo-sacral  region. ^Prevailing  fever.
^^  Upper  Limbs. Swelling  of  the  axillary  glands.

Kheumatic  pain,  first  in  right,  then  in  left  shoulder-joint.
Tearing  in  left  arm,  as  if  in  the  tendons,  to  the  fingers  ;  ceases

from  strong  motion.
Small,  painful,  non-suppurating  tubercles  on  right  scapula.
Stitches  in  right  scapula  when  inspiring.
Blisters  on  right  scapula,  tensive  and  burning  ;  scurf  forms.


AMMONIUM  MUEIATICUM.  220

I  I  Right  arm  heavy  and  feels  rigid.

Drawing  and  tearing,  from  right  elbow  to  fingers.

Itching  on  inside  of  forearm,  with  eruption  in  bend  of  elbow.

\  Fatty  swelling  on  1.  shoulder,  extending  into  axilla.

Right  forearm  heavy  and  as  if  "asleep."

Tearing  in  left  wrist,  with  swelling  of  back  of  hand.

Small  blisters  on  wrist  itching,  then  burning  when  scratched.

■  Pulsation  in  a  finger  like  that  from  panaritium.
Stitches  and  painful  beating  under  nail  of  left  thumb.
Skin  peels  off  between  thumb  and  forefinger  of  both  hands.

^^  Lower  Limbs. Languor  and  weakness  of  lower  limbs,  with
dizziness.
I  Pain  in  left  hip,  as  if  the  tendons  were  too  short,  must  limp
when  walking ;  when  sitting,  gnawing  pain  in  the  bone.

■  Tearing  pain  in  front  part  of  the  thighs,  when  sitting.

■  Drawing  tension  in  the  legs  when  sitting  or  lying.
Restored  mobility  in  the  knee,  which  had  been  swollen  and  stiff

(child).

■  Stitches  in  knee-joint,  evening,  when  sitting.

■  Hamstrings  painful  when  walking,  as  if  too  short.
Cramp-like  contraction  in  lower  part  of  left  leg.

:  Large  buttocks.

Violent  tearing  and  stitches,  with  ulcerative  pain  in heels ;  at

times  relieved  by  rubbing ;  occurs  also  at  night,  in  bed.
Feet  feel  as  if  "  asleep."

■  Cold  feet,  especially  in  evening  in  bed.
Itching  in  sole  of  right  foot ;  evenings.
Stitching  in  toes,  coming  slowly  and  going  slowly.
Offensive  sweat  of  the  feet.

^*  Limbs  in  GeneraL Tearing  and  painful  jerks,  now  here,  and
again  there,  through  all  the  limbs.
Tearing  rheumatic  pains  in  extremities.

^^  Position. Motion. sHas  to  walk  crooked. ^Uterine  dis-
placement.

■  Cannot  walk  erect,  on  account  of  a  pain  as  from  a  sprain  in

the  groins.

During  rest :  backache.

Lying  :  drawing  tension  in  legs ;  chilly  in  evening.

Lying  on  ear :  sensation  as  if  something  would  come  out.

Lying  on  back  :  loose  cough  at  night  with  stitches  in  left  hypo-
chondrium.

Cannot  lie  on  back  or  side :  with  backache.

Walking :  stitches  in  ears  in  open  air ;  stitching  and  burning
in  right  hypochondrium ;  tearing  and  tension  in  groin ;
stitching  and  tearing  in  perineum  ;  heaviness  of  chest  in
open  air  ;  heaviness  on  chest  very  great ;  must  limp  from
pain  in  left  hip  ;  hamstrings  seem  too  short ;  I  sudden  pros-
tration.


221  AMMONIUM  MURIATICUM.

Motion  :  backache  ;  increases  sweat ;  pains  in  limbs  better.

From  exertion  :  heat  and  puflSness  of  face.

After  rising :  pressure  in  forehead.

Must  rise  :  with  stitches  in  spleen.

Stooping  :  stitches  in  head  and  splitting  sensation  ;  asthma.

Turning :  pain  from  stiff  neck  to  between  shoulders.

Turning  from  back  to  side  :  cough with  stitches  in  left  hypo-

chondrium  worse.
Sitting :  stitches  in  spleen  ;  stitches  in  right  groin ;  soreness

up  rectum ;  gnawing  in  left  hip  bone ;  tearing  in  front  of

thighs  ;  drawing  tension  in  legs  ;  stitches  in  knee.
Moving  arms :  asthma.
Must  stand  still :  from  heaviness  on  chest.
Standing  :  beating  like  pulse  in  left  chest.
2^  Nerves. Ebullitions  with  anxiety  and  weakness  as  if  paralyzed.
Sudden  prostration  after  dinner,  when  walking  in  open  air.
Great  weakness,  mornings.
I  I  Prostration  and  great  weariness.
^^  Sleep. Languor  during  the  day,  with  laziness.
Constant  yawning  without  sleepiness,  mornings.
Sleepiness early  in  evening, eyelids  fall  shut; better  after

candle-light.
Cannot  fall  asleep  before  midnight,  on  account  of  cold  feet.
Heat  in  head  prevents  sleep  before midnight.
Restless  sleep,  and  waking  after  midnight.
Anxious,  fearful  dreams,  starts  out  of  sleep.
Dreams  :  of  falling  into  water ;  of  sickness ;  lascivious.

1  Wakes  at  2  a.m.  from  violent  cutting  in  abdomen.
Wakes  at  night :  from  sneezing,  with  tickling  in  throat,  caus-
ing cough  ;  pain  in  small  of  back.

Generally  worse  after  getting  out  of  bed.
^^  Time. Worse  after  rising  in  the  morning.

ISlight:  digging  and  tearing  in  right  ear;  frequent  and  pro-
fuse urination  ;  menstrual  flow  most  profuse ;  cough  loose ;
heaviness  in  chest ;  backache ;  tearing  in  heels,  in  bed ;  cold
feet  in  bed ;  restless  sleep,  awakes  frequently ;  chill  from
uncovering ;  sweating,  most  copious  after  midnight.

2  A.M.:  awakened  by  cutting  in  abdomen.

3  A.M.:  awakened  with  heaviness  in  chest.

4  A.M.:  tenesmus  vesicae  worse.

Early  morning :  sweating  most  copious.

Morning: irritability; heaviness of forehead  after  rising;

eyes agglutinated ; stitches in spleen ; green diarrhoeic

stools;  cough  dry  ;  beating  in  left  chest;  great  weakness  ;

constant  yawning and  sleepiness ; bruised  pain all over

after  rising.
Night  and  day  :  dry  cough  ;  sweat.
All  day  :  heaviness  of  forehead ;  languor  and  laziness.


AMMONIUM  MURIATICUM.  222

Afternoon :  burning  and  stitching  in  right  hypochondrium  ;
hoarseness  and  burning  in  larynx  ;  cough  loose.

Twilight :  burning  of  the  eyes.

6  P.M.:  Attacks  of  cough  begin  daily.

Evening:  has  most  thirst;  cutting  and  stitching  in  ossa
pubium  to  back  ;  stitches  in  knee  when  sitting ;  itching  in
sole  of  right  foot ;  sleepy  early ;  chilliness  ;  itching  in  va-
rious parts.

Midnight :  cannot  fall  asleep  till  then  from  cold  feet  and  heat
in  head.
^^  Temperature  and  Weather. A  warm  bath  relieves  aggra-
vation.

Warm  covering  :  does  not  relieve  coldness  in  back.

Out  doors :  mist  before  eyes  <  .

Open  air :  stitches  in  ears  when  walking ;  heat  of  face  passes
off;  heaviness  of  chest  when  walking;  sudden  prostration
when  walking.

In  room :  mist  before  eyes  >  ;  heat  and  puffiness  of  face  when
warm.

In  bed :  tearing  in  heels  ;  cold  feet ;  itching  in  various  parts
becomes  better.

Uncovering :  chilly  at  night.

After  washing  :  burning  in  canthi.
*^  Fever, l  Chilliness  evenings,  after  lying  down,  and  as  often  as
she  awakens ;  without  thirst.

I  Chill,  with  external  coldness  in  the  evening  and  from  un-
covering at  night.

Chill  running  up  the  back.

Chill  alternating  every  half  hour,  with  heat.

I  I  Chill  and  heat,  ending  with  copious  sweat ;  seventh  day
of  typhoid.

Heat  with  red,  puffed  up  face,  particularly  in  warm  room,  and
after  bodily  exertion.

Thirst  with  the  heat.

Flushes  of  heat  in  frequent  attacks,  ending  each  time  with
sweat,  which  is  most  profuse  in  face,  palms  of  hands,  and
soles  of  feet.

Sweat  day  and  night,  following  heat.

I  Profuse  night-sweat  over  the  whole  body,  most  copious  after
midnight,  and  early  in  morning  in  bed.

Sweat  without  thirst.

I  I  Sweat  increased  by  every  motion.

Sweat  on  the  lower  part  of  the  body.
*^  Attacks. Stitching  pain  in  toes,  comes  slowly  and  goes  slowly.

I  Septimani :  chill  and  fever  followed  by  profuse  sweat  every
seventh  day.

Daily  :  cough  beginning  at  6  p.m.

Chills  alternating  with  heat  every  half  hour.


223  AMMONIUM  MURIATICUM.

Seventh  day  of  typhus ;  chill  and  heat  ending  with  copious
sweat.

Flushes  of  heat  ending  with  sweat  in  frequent  attacks.
^^  Locality  and  Direction. Tearing  and  jerking  through  all  the
limbs  change  locality  often.

Right :  tearing  in  temple  and  side  of  face ;  itching  pimples
side  of  occiput ;  humming  and  roaring  in  ear ;  digging  and
tearing  in  ear ;  ear  affected  for  years ;  burning  and  stitch-
ing in  axilla,  and  in  hypochondrium ;  pain  from  side  of
pubes  to  back ;  stitches  in  groin ;  painful  tension  below
breast ;  bruised  pain  in  lower  chest ;  small  tubercles,  blisters,
scurf  on  scapula ;  pinching  in  muscles  of  scapula ;  stitches
in  scapula  when  inspiring ;  arm  heavy  and  rigid ;  tearing
from  elbow  to  fingers.

Left :  stitches  in  temple  and  side  of  head ;  ulcerative  pain  in
nostril ;  external  swelling  of  nostril ;  bleeding  from  nostril ;
swelling  of  gums  side  of  lower  jaw ;  stitches  in  abdomen
above  hip ;  pain  as  if  sprained  in  side  of  abdomen  and
groin ;  stitches  and  beating  in  spermatic  cord ;  stitches  in
chest  and  hypochondrium  with  cough  ;  beating  at  small  spot
in  chest ;  soreness  in  chest ;  red  spots  on  chest ;  stitches  in
scapula ;  tearing  in  arm  ;  tearing  in  wrist ;  stitching  and
beating  under  thumb-nail ;  pain  in  hip ;  contraction  in  lower
part  of  leg.

Right  and  left :  rheumatic  pain  in  shoulder-joint.

Diagonally :  burning  and  stitching  from  scrobiculum  to  right
axilla.

Before  backwards  :  stitches  in  abdomen  and  groin.

Tearing  from  heart  to  left  forearm.
^^  Sensations. Burning,  stinging,  throbbing,  as  from  a  boil.

I  I  Beating  in  various  places,  as  if  in  the  arteries.

I  Blood  seems  in  constant  ebullition,  with  anxiety  and  weak-
ness.

I  I A  running  sensation  between  skin  and  muscles.

Dull  heavy  pains,  with  vertigo  and  pallor.

Pain  in  1.  hip  as  if  tendons  were  too  short ;  limps  when
walking.

Sensation  as  if  brain  was  torn,  or  as  if  head  would  split.

Stitches  :  in  1.  temple  and  side  of  head  ;  in  vertex  when  stoop-
ing ;  in  ears  ;  and  drawing  in  submaxillary  gland  ;  in  upper
incisors  ;  to  left  temple,  from  swollen  gums ;  in  throat ;  in
chest  with  hiccough  or  cough ;  burning  in  scrobiculum,  in
r.  hypochondrium  ;  in  1.  with  cough  ;  in  spleen,  while  sitting ;
in  abdomen  above  1.  hip  ;  and  cutting  from  pubes  to  small  of
back  ;  in  r.  groin ;  in  perineum  ;  and  beating  in  1.  spermatic
cord  ;  in  1.  scapula ;  in  r.  scapula  when  inspiring ;  and
throbbing  under  1.  thumb-nail;  in  knee-joint ;  and  tearing
in  heels.


AMMONIUM  MURIATICUM.  224

Cutting :  and  stitches  from  ossa  pubium  to  small  of  back.

Tearing  pain :  in  r.  temple  and  through  r.  side  of  face ;  in
temples  and  occiput ;  in  head,  causing  nausea ;  and  digging
in  r.  ear ;  in  bones  of  face ;  in  groin ;  in  perineum  ;  from
cardiac  region  into  1.  arm ;  in  side  of  neck,  alternating  with
tearing  in  cheek  ;  in  left  arm  to  the  fingers ;  and  drawing
from  r.  elbow  to  fingers ;  in  1.  wrist ;  in  front  part  of  thighs ;
and  stitches  in  heels  ;  through  the  limbs.

Burning:  of  eyes;  in  canthi  after  washing;  in  ears;  in
larynx  ;  heat  of  face ;  eruption  on  face  ;  in  lips  ;  in  blister
on  tip  of  tongue  ;  and  stitching  in  scrobiculum  ;  in  r.  hypo-
chondrium  ;  and  smarting  or  stinging  in  rectum  ;  at  small
spots  on  chest ;  and  itching  of  red  spots  on  1.  chest ;  in
small  blisters  on  wrist.

Rawness :  in  throat,  back  of  uvula.

Soreness:  and  tenderness  of  nose;  of  mouth  and  lips;  in
throat ;  in  a  spot  behind  soft  palate ;  in  stomach  ;  in  groins  ;
in  rectum  ;  itching  in  rectum  ;  in  lungs  ;  in  1.  chest.

Pressure :  in  forehead  toward  root  of  nose ;  in  throat  when
swallowing ;  and  stitches  in  chest.

Bruised  pain :  in  lower  r.  chest ;  between  scapulae ;  in  small
of  back ;  in  whole  body  in  the  morning  after  rising.

Tensive  pain :  in  articulations  of  jaws  ;  in  groin ;  below  r.
breast ;  and  burning  in  blisters  on  r.  scapula ;  and  drawing
in  legs.

Ulcerative  pain  in  1.  nostril ;  in  heels.

Gnawing :  in  stomach  ;  in  1.  hip-bone.

Boring  :  in  ears.

Pinching :  in  muscles  of  r.  scapula.

Griping :  about  the  navel.

Contractive  pain  :  in  occiput.

Cramp-like  contraction :  in  1.  hip  ;  in  hamstrings  ;  in  lower  1.

leg.
Sprained  feeling:  in  1.  side  of  abdomen;  in  1.  groin;  between

scapulae.
Rooting  and  rolling :  in  r. ear  as if  something  would  come

out ;  in  stomach.
Neuralgic  pains  :  in  feet.
Rheumatic  pains : first  in r. then in  1. shoulder-joint ;  in

limbs.
Heaviness :  with  fullness  in  head  ;  in forehead ;  in  lower  ab-
domen ;  of  chest ;  and  rigidity  of  r.  arm.
Fullness  :  in  throat ;  in  stomach  ;  in  abdomen.
Empty  sensation:  in  stomach  as  from  fasting;  in  throat  with

no  desire  to  eat.
Pulsating :  in  submaxillary  gland ;  in  tonsils ; in  glands of

neck ;  in  breast  near  oesophagus ;  and  stitching  in  1.  sper-


225  AMMONIUM  MUEIATICUM.

matic  cord ;  small  spot  in  1.  chest ;  in finger, like  panari-
tium ;  under  nail  of  1.  thumb.

"  Gone  to  sleep  "  feeling  :  in  feet.

Itching  :  of  scalp  ;  pimples  on  r.  side  of  occiput ;  in  ears  ;  in
nose  with  sensation  of  a  foreign  body ;  in  throat,  followed
by  expectoration  of  blood ;  and  burning  red  spots  on  1.
chest ;  follows  coldness  between  scapulae ;  on  inside  of  fore-
arm ;  in  small  blisters  on  wrist ;  in  sole  of  r.  foot ;  on  various
parts  before  going  to  bed.

Tickling :  in  throat.

Crawling :  in  throat,  causing  cough.

Coldness  :  between  scapulae  ;  of  feet,
**  Tissues. I  I  Orgasm  of  blood.

B Produces  an  increased  secretion  of  mucus;  hence  useful  in
catarrhs.

■  Burning,  rawness,  on  mucous  surfaces  ;  later  formation  of  ves-
icles and  ulcers.

1 1  Tension  in  the  joints  as  from  shortening  of  the  muscles.

I  Fatty  tumors.

•  Obesity.
^®  Touch. Passive  Motion. Touch  :  left  nostril  sensitive.

Pressure  :  with  finger  relieves  pain  in  decayed  tooth ;  red  spots
on  chest  become  pale.
Scratching :  does  not  relieve  itching  in  ears ;  causes  itching  blis-
ters on  wrist  to  burn.

Rubbing ;  relieves  pain  in  heels.
*^  Skin. Itching  on  various  parts  of  body,  generally  evenings,  be-
fore going  to  bed,  better  afterwards.

Fine  rash  over  the  whole  body,  like  measles.

Small-pox  more  on  trunk  and  upper  limbs.

Blisters  on  various  parts,  with  tension,  burning  and  formation
of  scurf.
^^  Stages  of  Life,  Constitution, i  Suitable  to  those  who  are

fat  and  sluggish  ;  body  fat,  but  legs  thin.
^^  Relationship.  Similar  to  its  relatives  and  to :  Ant.  crud.
(mucous  membranes) ;  Aloes  (abdominal  symptoms) ;  Arsen.
(catarrhs) ;  Arg.  nitr.  (mucus  in  throat) ;  Calc.  ostr.  (fat
people ;  coldness  between  scapulae  ;  profuse  menses) ;  Conium
(night  cough) ;  Caustic,  (stiff  joints,  contractions  of  mus-
cles ;  burning  hoarseness) ;  Carh.  veg.  (hoarseness  ;  burning
on  chest,  etc.);  Ooloc.  (in  colic);  Hepar ;  Iodine;  Kali
bichr.  (stringy  mucus,  etc.) ;  Kali  chlor.  (catarrh) ;  Kali  hydr.
(pimples  on  the  back,  etc.) ;  Mercur.;  Merc,  corr.;  Magn.
mur.  (especially  bloody  sputum ;  crumbling  stool ;  atonic
bladder) ;  Natr.  mur.  (catarrh) ;  Nux  vom.;  Phosphor.;
Rhus  tox.  (sprains  ;  joints  worse  sitting,  etc.) ;  Seneg.  (fat
people ;  mucous  secretions ;  stitches  in  scapula  with  lung
15


AMM.  MUR.— AMMONIACUM.  226

affections,  etc.) ;  Sepia  (blisters  about  joints ;  atonic  blad-
der, etc.)  ;  Silic;  Sulphur.

Aggravations  from  Amm.  mur.  are  relieved  by  a  hot  bath.

Antidoted  by  :  bitter  almonds ; Coffea  ;  Nux  vom.


AMMONIACUM.

Crum  ammoniac. Umhelliferce.


A  Persian  gum  obtained  from  Dorema  ammoniacum,  an  umbelliferous
plant.  A  drug  famous  since  ancient  times.  Proved  and  introduced  by  I.
G.  Jahnel  in  1837,  proved  again  by  J.  B.  Buchner  in  1840,  and  by  several
others  in  1847.


^  Mind. Anxiety,  with  congestion  of  lungs.
Low-spirited  ;  sluggish  ;  drowsy.
Indisposed  to  mental  work.
Intellectual  labor  prevented  by  headache.
^  Sensorium. Aching  in  forehead  with  confusion  of  whole  head,

and  such  drowsiness  that  any  effort  or  labor  was  impossible.
Forehead  confused, with  weakness  of  sight  and  heaviness  in

loins.
Confusion  of  the  head  and  sleepiness,  with  a  sensation  as  if

bruised  in  the  limbs,  and  pains  in  the  course  of  the  crural

nerve.
^  Inner  Head. Pains  throughout  the  whole  forehead ;  increasing

all  day  till  evening,  preventing  intellectual  labor.
Severe headache continuing during the night, preventing

sleep.
Aching  in  forehead,  with  confusion of  the  whole  head,  and

such  drowsiness  that  any  effort  or  labor  was  utterly  im-
possible.
Pressive  pains  in  whole  forehead,  and  over  the  eyes.
Transient,  stitching  pains  in  1.  temporal  region.
Tearings  in  1.  side  of  head.
Pressive  pain  in  whole  head,  especially  in  supra-orbital  region

and  occiput.
Stitching  pains  through  head.
Heaviness  of  the  head.
^  Outer  Head. Itching,  mostly  on  border  of  hair  in  nape  of

neck.
Pimples  on  border  of  scalp.


227  AMMONIACUM.

Frequently  returning  knife-like  stitches in  middle  of  hairy

scalp.
Stitching  in  occiput,  on  the  edge  of  the  hair ;  under  the  hair

pustules  formed.
Numbness  in  occiput.
^  Sight  and  Eyes, l  Stars  and  fiery  points  floating  before  his

eyes.
Beams  of  light  and  sparks  proceeding  from  the  eyes.
Candle-light  surrounded  by  brilliant  colored  rings.
Glaring  as  from  melted  metal  before  the  eyes ; sparks  and

streaks  worse  in  the  evening.
Sees  things  through  a  thick  mist  or  a  cloud  of  dust.

I  I  Dim  sight  after  a  blow  on  the  head.

lEyes  fatigued  from  reading;  they  become  injected  and  throb.
See  29.

I I  Dimness  and  obstruction  of  sight  in  the  evening,  amounting
almost  to  blindness.

I  He  sees  before  him  smoke,  which,  taking  the  flight  of  small
birds,  forms  a  large  circle  and  is  most  distinct  at  twenty
paces  on  a  white  ground.  Generally  smaller  circles  are
present ;  in  which  case  the  smoke  seems  only  an  appendage
to  these  circles.  The  appearance  and  motion  of  these
circles  depend  upon  the  unsteadiness  of  the  look  and  corres-
pond to  an  appearance  of  congestion  at  the  internal  corners
of  the  eye.  The  margins  of  the  circles  are  always  gray
and  become  black  on  sudden  motion.  On  first  looking  at  an
object,  circles  appear  above  the  lens,  but  on  looking  steadily
they  sink  to  the  middle  and  remain  floating  there.  They
are  clearer  in  clear  weather  and  dimmer  in  dark  weather.
Sometimes  he  also  sees  a  black  spot  which  becomes  larger  as
night  advances, d  Amblyopia,  after  a  blow.

Daylight  hurts  his  eyes.

Aching  in  upper  part  of  eye.
*  Hearing  and  Ears. Buzzing,  roaring  in  ears,  with  hardness
of  hearing.

Pain  in  ears,  with  toothache.

Large  secretion  of  ear-wax.
^  Smell  and  Nose. Mucous  discharge  from  nose  with  frequent
sneezing  and  mucous  expectoration. 6  Coryza.

Dry  nose  on  waking.

I  Constant  motion  of  alge  nasi, d  Congestion  of  lungs.
^  Face. Bale  face,  feels  sick  ;  frequent  change  of  color.

Drawing  in  r.  malar  bone  towards  temple.

iDark  face,  anxious,  parched  look. ^Congestion  of  lungs.
^  Lower  Part  of  Face. Darting  from  region  of  lower  jaw  to  the

interior  of  the  mouth.
^^  Teeth. I  Toothache,  the  pain  extending  into  the  ear.
"  Taste. Insipid  taste.


AMMONIACUM.  228

^^  Inner  Mouth. Dartings  from  region  of  lower  jaw  into  mouth.
^^  Palate  and  Throat. Bitterish  unpleasant  taste  in  the  throat.

After  swallowing,  a  sensation  in  throat  as  from  a  dry  cough.

Sensation  of  sharpness  and  burning  in  throat  and  oesophagus.

■  Dryness  of  throat,  most  troublesome  in  the  morning,  always
increases  by  inhaling  fresh  air.
^*  Appetite. Want  of  appetite.
^®  Eating. Belching  after  eating.
^^  Nausea  and  Vomiting. Disgust,  with  inclination  to  vomit.

I  Vomiting  and  purging.
^^  Stomach. Aching  in  pit  of  stomach.
^^  Hypochondria. •  Induration  of  liver.

I  Infarcts  of  liver,  spleen  and  pancreas.
^^  Abdomen. Slight  pains  in  belly  with  borborygmi.

Chilliness and  wandering  pain  in  abdomen, followed  by  an
abundant  mucous  stool.

Dull,  shooting,  jerking  pain  in  region  of  coecum  ;  worse  when
turning  on  to  right  side.

Pressure  and  heaviness  in  pubic  region.
-"  Rectum  and  Stool. Constipation.

Abundant  mucous  stool,  after  chilliness  and  wandering  pain  in
abdomen.

Stools  sometimes  fluid.

Fetid  flatulence  with  papescent  stool.

I  Chronic  diarrhoea,  with  cutting  pains, weakness, discharges
bilious  or  mucous.

I  Summer  complaint  of  children.
^^  Urinary  Organs. After  a  few  days  many  torulse  were  formed
in  the  urine.

Lactate  of  urea  much  increased.

Burning  in  urethra.

Dribbling  after  urination.
^^  Male  Sexual  Organs. Heaviness  and  aching  in  the  pubic
region.

Itching  in  pubic  region.

Shooting  and  drawing  in  the  r.  spermatic  cord  and  penis.

Indurated  testicles.

':  I  Hydrocele.
^^  Female Sexual Organs. Menostasia, dysmenorrhoea  from
obstructions  in  the  portal  system.

I  Irregular  menstruation,  amenorrhoea  from  chlorosis.
2^  Larynx. Bronchia. Rough  throat.

Tickling  without  cough.

I  Chronic  bronchitis.
^^  Respiration. Short,  loud,  accelerated  breathing,  with  anxiety.

Oppression  and  stitches  in  1.  chest,  when  inspiring.

I  Difficult  breathing, d  Congestion  of  lungs.

Oppression  of  the  chest  relieved  by  raising  tough  phlegm.


229  AMMONIACUM.

j  Spasmodic  asthma.
"  Cough  and  Expectoration. Mucous  expectoration.
\  Asthenic  pulmonary  complaints.
Promotes  the  power  of  ejecting  the  sputa  if  the  sick  have  not

the  strength.
Mucus  tough,  profuse  and  hard.
\  Chronic  pulmonary and bronchial catarrh, with  nauseous

thick  fluid,  pus-like  sputa.
I  Large  accumulation  of  purulent  or  viscid  matter,  with  feeble

or  difficult  expectoration.
I  Aged  people  suffer  in  cold  weather  from  bronchial  affections,

with  accumulation  of  mucus  and  much  difficulty  in  raising  it.
^^  Inner  Chest  and  Lungs. Pressure  in  chest.

Dull  and  numb  feeling  in  posterior  part  of  right  chest, fol-
lowed by  pressure  deep  in.
I  Lungs  congested;  dullness  on  both  sides ;  great  difficulty  in

breathing and  anxiety :  constant  motion of  the  alse  nasi ;

face  dark  with  anxious  and  parched  look  ;  no  expectoration  ;

with  this  an attack of  asthma, d  Suppressed  eczema  fol-
lowing vaccination.
"  Heart and Pulse. I  '  Heart-beat stronger, but not  more

rapid ;  extends  into  pit  of  stomach ;  worse  in the  evening

when  lying  down  and  when  lying  on  back  or  left  side.
I  I  At  night,  when  lying  down,  heart  and  arteries  throb  ; eyes

weary  after  reading ;  cannot  get  to  sleep.
Pulse  small,  corded,  quick  and  hard.
Pulse  quickened,  frequent  and  hard.
Pulse  tense.
^^  Back. Weight  and  pressure  in  lumbar  vertebrae,  with  stitches

in  the  loins  during  inhalation,  and  rheumatic  pain  in  left

pelvis.
^^  Upper  Limbs. Lancination  in  shoulder-joints.
Left  arm  weak.
Rheumatic  pain, as if  bruised, most  in elbow-joint  and  left

wrist,  with  tearing  in  right  hand.
Pain  in  left  shoulder-joint  and  arm.
■  Panaritium.
^^  Lower  Limbs. Stitches  in  r.  hip  when  sitting.
Stitches  over  the  hip  when  walking,  he  limps.
Cannot  walk  from  pain  in  right  hip -joint.
Darting  pain  in  1.  thigh  along  the  crural  nerve.
Violent  pain  over  the  knee  when  walking.
Knee  swollen  in  the  evening, while  sitting, with pinching  in

the  bend  of  joint.
Stitches  in  r.  knee,  in  tibia  and  tarsal-joint.
Gouty  pain  in  the  left  big  toe.
Itching  on  the  soles  of  the  feet.
Tingling  in  r.  foot.


AMMONIACUM.  230

Pinching,  tearing,  drawing,  burning  in  1.  foot.
Swelling  of  toes.
^*  Limbs  in  General. Tearing  pain  in  wrist  and  ankles,  followed

by  swollen  toes  and  fingers.
Tired  feeling  and  heaviness  in  limbs, even  after  the  slightest

exertion.
^^  Position. Motion. Lying  down  on  back or on  left  side :

heart  symptoms  worse.
Turning  on  right  side :  increases  pain  in  coecum.
Sitting  :  stitches  in  right  hip ;  knee  swollen,  pricking  in  bend

of  joint.
Walking :  stitches  over  the  hip  ;  pain  over  knee.
Cannot  walk  :  from  pain  in  right  hip-joint.
After  slightest  exertion  :  tiredness  and  heaviness  of  limbs.
*®  Nerves. Uneasiness  ;  weariness.

:  Hysteria  with  weakness.
^^  Sleep. Drowsiness  all  day,  sleep  full  of  dreams.

Drowsiness  with  headache,  making  labor  impossible.

Gaping  because  the  stomach is empty, brings  tears in  the

eyes.
On  awaking:  nose,  mouth  and  throat  very  dry.
On  getting  up  in  the  morning :  lazy,  drowsy  and  depressed  in

spirits.
^^  Time. Night :  headache  continues ;  heart  and  arteries  throb.
Morning :  dryness  of  throat  worse ;  lazy,  drowsy  and  depressed

on  rising.
All  day  till  evening :  pain  throughout  whole  forehead.
All  day :  drowsy.
Evening:  glaring  before  eyes ;  sparks  and  streaks  before  ejfes

worse ; dimness  of  vision ; heart symptoms  worse ;  knee

swollen.
As  night  advances  :  sees  a  black  spot, d  Amblyopia.
^^  "Weather. Fresh air : inhaling it makes dryness of  throat

worse.
Cold  weather :  increase  of  bronchial  troubles.
In  clear  weather :  objects look  clearer ;  in  dull  weather,  dim-
mer, d  Amblyopia.
^^  Fever. Chilliness  followed  by  slight  fever  and  headache.
A  running  chill  from  the  feet  up  over  the  back.
I  I  Disposition  to  sweat.
^^  Locality and  Direction. Right :  drawing  in malar  bone ;

dull  and  numb,  posterior  part of  chest ;  tearing  in  hand  ;

stitches  in  hip ;  stitches  in  knee ;  tingling  in  foot.
Left :  transient  stitches  in  temple ;  tearing  in  side  of  head ;

stitches  in chest ;  rheumatic  pains in pelvis ;  arm  weak ;

rheumatic  pains  in  wrist, arm  and  shoulder-joint ;  darting

pain  in  thigh ;  gouty pain in  big  toe ;  pinching, tearing,

drawing  and  burning  in  foot.


231  AMMONIACUM.

Below  upwards :  running  chill  from  feet  up  the  back.

*^  Sensations. Stitches  :  in  temporal  region  ;  through  head  ;  in

hairy  scalp  ;  in  occiput  on  edge  of  the  hair ;  in  chest  when

inspiring;  in  loins during  inhalation;  in shoulder-joints;

in  hip  when  sitting,  over  hip  when  walking ;  in  r.  knee.  ^

Dartings :  from  region of  lower  jaw into mouth  ;  in thigh

along  crural  nerve.
Tearing: in side of  head; in right hand; in wrist and

ankles.
Cutting  pain  :  with  diarrhoea.
Sharpness  and  burning  :  in  throat  and  oesophagus.
Drawing :  in  r.  malar  bone  toward  temple  ;  and  shooting  in

spermatic  cord  and  penis.
Burning :  in  urethra.
Aching :  in  forehead  with  confusion  of  head ;  in  upper  part  of

eye;  in  pit  of  stomach;  in  pubic  region.
Bruised  feeling :  in  limbs  with  confused  feeling  in  head ;  in

upper  limbs.
Heaviness  :  in  loins  with  headache  ;  of  the  head.
Itching :  on  border  of  hair  in  nape  of  neck  ; in  pubic  region  ;

on  soles  of  feet.
Tingling  :  in  r.  foot.

Numbness  :  in  occiput ;  in  posterior  part  of  r.  chest.
Dryness :  in  throat.

Chilliness :  in  abdomen  with  wandering  pain.
Stinging,  tearing,  pricking  pain,  here  and  there,  most  in  lower

limbs.
Tired  feeling  and  heaviness  in  limbs  after  slight  exertion.
Dull  shooting  jerking  pain:  in  region  of  coecum.
Toothache  extending  into  ears.  "

Pressure  and  heaviness  :  in  pubic  region  ;  in  lumbar  vertebrae.
Gouty  pain  in  left  big  toe.
*^  Tissues. :  Hemorrhages.

Causes  abundant  serous  discharges.
Dropsical  complaints.

Gout  not  developing  in  the  usual form  of  attacks,  but  dis-
turbing general  health.
I  Scrofulous  tumors  or  enlarged  joints.
*^  Touch. Passive  Motion. >  Blows  with  a  stick  over  the  head,

followed  by  dim  sight. 6  Amblyopia.
^^  Skin. Red  rash  over  the  whole  body.

After  itching,  little  blisters  like  the  rash  in  typhus  but  contain-
ing a  yellow  fluid  ;  afternoon,  violent  fever  with  swelling  of
the  face  more  like  a  red  rash.
Suppression  of  eczema  following  vaccination.  6  Congestion  of
lungs.  See  28.
'^  Stages  of  Life,  Constitution.  Man,  aet.  26,  fair  haired,
robust  frame, d  Amblyopia.


AMMON.— AMYGDALA  AMARA.  232

Aged  people  suffering  during  cold  weather.  See  bronchial
affections.
^*  Relationship.  Similar  to  its  relatives :  the  umbelliferas,
especially  Conium  (glands,  eyes,  etc.);  Oj^oponax ;  Asaf.
(asthma) ;  Cicut.  (eruption  in  whiskers) ;  Gialban.;  Sagap.;
Sumhul  (heart-throb  too  strong).  Also  :  Aeon,  (heart) ;
Amhra  (asthma) ;  Arnic.  (traumatic  amblyopia) ;  Arsen.
(heart ;  asthma) ;  Aurum  (congestion  to  eyes ;  heart ;  in-
durated testicle,  etc.) ;  Bellad.  (eyes;  heart;  Ammoniac  m
asthenopia,  stands  between  Bellad.  and  Ruta.);  Clielid.
(strong,  but  not  quickened  heart-throb) ;  Cotyl.  (strong  heart-
throb) ;  Fagopyr.  (strong  throb  of  heart  and  arteries) ;
Iher.  (strong  heart-beat) ;  Lycop.;  Myrrh.;  Natr.  mur.
(asthenopia,  eruption  at  nape,  etc.) ;  Nitr.  ac.  (See  27) ;
Olihan.;  Phosphor,  (strong  heart-throb ;  eyes ;  asthma) ;
Pulsat.  (styes ;  heart  worse  when  lying  on  left  side)  ;  Sulphur
(congestive  palpitation  and  throbbing  all  over  at  night,  etc.)  ;
Seneg.  (asthma  from  mucus ;  heart-beat  too  strong,  etc.)

Antidoted  by  :  Arnic.  and  Bryon.


AMYGDALA  AMARA.

Bitter  almond.  Rosaceoe.


According  to  Wohler  and  Liebig,  the  hydrocyanic  acid  formerly  supposed
to  be  contained  in  the  almond,  is  the  result  of  the  reaction  of  water  on
amygdalin,  the  characteristic  constituent  of  bitter  almonds.

The  bitter  almond  is  used  for  flavoring,  and  peach  kernels  and  cherry
seeds,  which  have  similar  properties,  are  often  substituted.

The  observations  of  Jorg,  made  in  1822,  hardly  deserving  to  be  called  a
proving,  were  published  in  1825.  Eegarding  his  trustworthiness,  see  Brit-
ish Quart.,  XVI,  693.  These  were  added  to  a  collection  of  symptoms  from  the
Laurocerasus,  the  Aqua  laurocerasi,  and  Hydrocyanic  acid,  and  printed  in
Hartlanb's  Mat.  Med.,  in  1828.  In  1844  they  were  printed  separately  in
Noak  and  Trink's  Handbuch,  with  the  addition  of  some  toxic  symptoms.
Allen's  Encyclopedia  contains  all,  and  a  carefully  made,  almost  complete,
collection  of  poisonings.  We  ouly  miss  Gazin,  Traite  Pratique,  1853.  The
experiments  of  Douglas  Maclacan  are  with  a  different  preparation.

^  Mind. I  I  Loss  of  consciousness.
Stupor.

I  1  Delirium,  he  mutters  to  himself  and  converses  with  persons
not  present ;  speaks  incoherently.  .


233  '  AMYGDALA  AMARA.

Delirium  with  face  lit  up  with  an  expression  of  excessive  joy,
ey^es  shine  brilliantly,  with  quiet  intermittent  pulse.

Delirium  with  slight  convulsions.

She  commences  to  cry  ;  t.

She  suddenly  raves  and  looks  wildly  around  her,  with  fully  di-
lated pupils  and  indistinct  vision.
^  Sensorium. Dullness  of  left  half  of  head.

Insensibility.

Drunkenness.

Excitement  as  after  drinking  champagne,  succeeded  by  sudden
insensibility.

I  I  Syncope,  face  deathly  pale,  nauseated;  pulse  imperceptible;
on  reviving  vomits  some  undigested  food  and  bile.

Vertigo  with  nausea  and  dimness  of  sight.

Faintness  and  pallid  look.

Stupor.
^  Inner  Head. Heaviness  in  forehead.

Pressure  over  eyes.

Sense  of  weight  and  oppression  on  top  of  head.

Congestion  or  turgescence  of  vessels  of  brain  ;  t.

General  eifusion  on  both  hemispheres  ;  t.

Dura  mater  gorged.

*  Outer  Head. iHead  drawn  backwards.

*  Sight  and  Eyes. Dimness  of  sight  with  vertigo.

Sight  confused.

Pupils  very  much  contracted,  size  of  a  pinhead.

I  I  Pupils  dilated  and  fixed.

Eyes  rolling  from  side  to  side ;  half  open,  with  dilated  pupils.

Eyeballs  directed  upward,  especially  left.

Pupils  dilated  to  their  fullest  extent,  she  cannot  see  distinctly.

Iris  immovable.

Eyes  almost  protruding  from  their  sockets.

I  I  Excessive  brilliancy  of  the  eyes,  even  after  death.

The  eye  had  a  I  I  brilliant  and  glassy  appearance  throughout ;
mere  physical  brilliancy,  I  I  without  mental  expression.

Lid  does  not  move  when  eye  is  touched.

Eyelids  closed,  both  eyes  drawn  to  left  side.

Eyes  half  shut  and  glassy.

Upper  lids  convulsed  for  hours.
®  Face. Face  wears  a  natural  expression,  even  with  serious  symp-
toms.

I  I  Face  placid  and  deathly  pale.

iMouth  tightly  closed.

I  I  Face  very  livid,  lips  separated,  teeth  clenched,  eyes  fixed
and  open,  pupils  dilated,  features  distorted,  eyes  turned  up-
wards, starting  from  their  sockets.

Face  lights  up  with  an  expression  of  excessive  joy. See  1.
^  Lower  Part  of  Face. Jaws  firmly  clenched  in  rigid  spasm.


AMYGDALA  AMARA.  234

Lips  pale  and  bluish.

Lips  separated,  teeth  clenched,  much  froth  about  the  mouth.
^^  Taste,  Speech, Bitter  taste  in  roof  of  mouth,  palate  and  fauces.

Cannot  speak  a  loud  word.
^^  Palate  and  Throat. Bitter  taste  in  fauces.
Swallowing  impeded,  or  I  I  impossible.
Rattling  in  throat.

Excessive  burning  heat  in  laryngo-pharyngeal  region.
^®  Hiccough,  Nausea  and  Vomiting. Hiccough.
Nausea  with  pallor.

I  I  Vomiting  of  undigested  food  and  bile.
^^  Scrobiculum  and  Stomach. A  disagreeable  sensation  seems
to  come  from  the  epigastric  region.
Pain  and  heat  in  epigastrium  without  tenderness.
Gastric  mucous  membrane  red,  I  I  congested,  especially  at  car-
diac end ;  t.
Gastric  mucous  membrane  pale,  with  some  red  petechial  patches

along  greater  curvature  ;  t.
Mucous  coat  of  stomach  softened ;  t.
^^  Abdomen. Colicky  pains,  abdomen  distended  like  a  balloon ;
convulsive  movements  of  the  jaws,  loss  of  consciousness,  froth-
ing at  the  mouth.
^^  Stool. Involuntary  stools  and  micturition.
^^  Urinary  Organs. Scanty  and  painful  urination.

Involuntary  micturition  and  stools. See  37.
^^  Male  Sexual  Organs. •  Gonorrhoea.

Gangrene  of  the  penis  ;  scrotum  bluish  and  greenish-yellow.
^^  Voice  and  Larynx. Cannot  speak  a  loud  word.

Scratching  in  larynx,  followed  by  copious  phlegm  all  evening

and  next  day.
Hoarseness.
Talking  distresses  her.
^®  Respiration. Difficult  breathing.

Snoring  breathing  getting  slower  and  slower.

Panting. See  28.

Chest  heaved  spasmodically ;  its  movements  were  hurried.

Respiration  slow  and  gentle.

Regular  respiration  had  ceased  ;  chest  expanded  at  intervals  by

convulsive  action.
Rolling  and  panting  for  breath.
Hurried  and  convulsive  heaving  of  the  chest.
Chest  expands  convulsively  at  short  intervals.
Respiration  12,  regular,  slow  and  prolonged,  with  rattling  in

throat.
I  I  Convulsive  and  at  intervals  very  short  respiration,  I  with  fear
of  suffocation.
^"^  Cough. I  Cough with  soreness of  chest extending down to
stomach.


235  AMYGDALA  AMARA.

^*  Inner  Chest  and  Lungs. Great  soreness  of  the  chest  extend-
ing to  the  stomach.

Stitches  under  the  left  nipple,  going  deep  in,  making  exhala-
tion more  difficult.

I  1  Lungs  congested.
^^  Heart,  Pulse  and  Circulation. iSlow,  full,  hard  pulse.

iPulse  almost  imperceptible.

Absence  of  radial  pulse  on  either  side.

Heart  beats  feebly.

Carotids  beat  full  and  quick. See  31.

Heart's  palpitation  extremely  feeble,  scarcely  perceptible,  ab-
sence of  radial  pulse.

Pulse :  slow  and  vibrating ;  strong  or  frequent  and  wiry  ;  rapid
and  feeble ;  quick  and  intermittent ;  30,  very  feeble  in  caro-
tid and  radial  arteries ;  100,  130,  140,  very  small,  thready.

Right  side  of  heart  gorged  with  dark  fluid  blood.
^^  Neck. Considerable  swelling  and  undulatory  motion  of  jugular
veins.

Carotids  beat  free  and  quick.
*^  Upper  Limbs. Jactitation  of  the  arms.
^^  Lower  Limbs. Knees  flexed  on  the  abdomen.

Formication,  staggering  gait.
^*  Limbs  in  General. Limbs  completely  lax,  fall  lifeless  when
lifted.

Limbs  cold,  heavy.

Extremities  almost  bloodless.

Spasms  of  limbs.

Weakness  of  the  limbs.

I  I  Limbs  relaxed,  I  feet  lifeless  when  lifted.

Limbs  numbed,  arms  and  hands  cold  and  livid ;  with  sleepiness.

Limbs  supple  and  powerless.
36  Jf  eryes. Muscular  power  diminished or  entirely  lost, he is
afraid  of  falling.

So  weak  as  to  fall  down,  lost  control  over  the  muscles.

Spasms  of  limbs.

Convulsions ;  head  drawn  back ;  trismus,  knees  drawn  up ;
scanty  urine ;  opisthotonos.

Strong  convulsive  twitches  of  muscles.

Almost  complete  loss  of  motive  power ;  cannot  stand,  limbs  as
if  lifeless ;  or  staggering  gait.

Convulsions :  eyes  open,  staring,  fixed  pupils,  or  with  jactita-
tion of  arms.

Violent  tetanic  convulsions  with  complete  opisthotonos.

Head  and  neck  drawn  backwards,  elbows  drawn  behind  the
back  and  firmly  fixed  there.

I  I  Opisthotonos.
^^  Sleep. Deep  snoring  sleep.

Yawning.


AMYGDALA  AMARA.  236

Drowsiness  and  irresistible  tendency  to  sleep.

Coma  with  stertorous  respiration  and  involuntary  micturition

and  stools.
*"  Fever. Body  cold  ;  surface  cold,  clammy.

Fever.
*^  Locality. Left :  dullness  in  head ;  eyes  drawn  to  side ;  stitches

under  nipple.
^^  Sensations. A  disagreeable  sensation  proceeding  from  scrobic-

ulum.
Stitches  :  under  left  nipple.
Scratching  :  in  larynx.
Soreness  :  of  chest  extending  to  stomach.
Pressure :  over  eyes.
Numbness :  in  limbs.
Heaviness :  in  forehead.

Sense  of  weight  and  oppression  on  top  of  head.
^*  Tissues. Venous  system  gorged  with  dark  liquid  blood.
Blood,  muscles  and  bile  of  a  violet  color.
Congestion  or  turgescence  of  vessels  of  brain  ;  general  effusion

on  both  hemispheres ;  dura  mater  gorged.
^^  Skin. Pallid  skin.

Skm  blue,  bluish-red,  especially  the  scrotum. See  22.
Wheals  over  the  whole  skin.
Urticaria  febrilis.
Surface  cold  clammy.
^^  Relationship. Nearly  identical  with  Amygd.  persic.

Similar  to  its  relatives,  especially  the  Prunece  and  Pomece  of

the  Rosaoece,  and to Manihot  utiL, Chardinia  xeranthe-

moides,  Ximenia  Americana^  Ipomoea  dissecta  and  the  Aga-

ricus  Oreades,  all  of  which  emit  Hydr.  ac. Also  similar  to  :

Opium  (spasms,  stertor,  slow  pulse,  stupor, etc.) ;  Hyosc.

(weeping, spasms, spasmodic twitching, etc.); Stramon.,

Bellad.;  Tahac;  Ant.  tart.;  Laches,  and  Naja  tri.  (heart).
Chewing  the  kernels  prevents  drunkenness  from  wine.
Amygd.  amar.  has  dullness  of  the  left  half  of  the  head,  Hydr.  ac.

of  the  right.
Both  Amygd.  and  Lauroc.  have  heaviness  in  the  forehead.
Amygd.  amar.  is  antidoted  by: Opium  (convulsions),  and  by

strong  coffee,  and  in  bad  cases  cold  water  may  be  poured  over

the  head.


237  AMYLENUM  NITROSUM.

AMYLENUM  NITROSUM.

Nitrite  of  Amyl. 0-^^^  E^^  0,  NO^.

Discovered  by  Ballard  in  1844,  proposed  as  a  medicine  by  Guthrie  in
1859,  introduced  into  the  Materia  Medica  of  Old  School  in  1866.  Intro-
duced into  our  School  in  1871.  Proved  by  T.  F.  Allen  and  published  in
his  Encyclopedia  in  1874.  Again  proved  by  the  Boston  School  and  pub-
lished by  C.  Wesselhoft  in  1876,  a  first-rate  proving,  which  could  not  be
dispensed  with.  There  are  very  few  cures  on  record,  mostly  palliations
of  incurable  cases ;  but  it  is  of  the  utmost  importance  as  regards  euthanasia.
Before  going  to  press  we  received  an  excellent  collection,  through  J.  H.
McClelland,  by  S.  B.  Chanter.

^  Mind. '  '  Mental  confusion  and  a  dream-like  state. 6  Epilepsy,
A  trance-like  state,  everything  seeming  unreal  to  her.
I  Unconsciousness,  with inability  to swallow. ^Convulsions

of  a  child.
I  Unable  to  do  any  business;  head  in  a  constant  state  of  dull

confusion, d  After  long  continued  convulsions.
I  I  Increasing  sense  of  stupefaction, with  flushing  of  face  and

scalp.
Flow  of  ideas  becomes  more  lively.
I  Frequent  piercing  shrieks, d  Child  in  convulsions.
■  Melancholy.

I  Melancholy  without  sensation  of  anguish.
Actual  fright  at  the  throbbing  of  the  head.
I  Cannot  sit  still  for  fear  of  something  dreadful  happening.
Anxiety  as  if  something  might  happen ;  must  have fresh  air.
I  Haunted  many  times  a day  with  an  indescribable  dread  and

sensation  as  of  an  oncoming  fit,  although  it  came  on  only  once

or  twice  a  week. /9  Epilepsy.
From  the  slightest  emotion  flushing  of  the  face.
^  Sensorium. I  Dullness  in  head,  and  peculiar  confusion, d  Head-
ache.
Confused  feeling  after  the  congestion  to  the  head.
Confusion  of  head  with  vertigo  and  drowsiness.
I  Vertigo,  headache  and  nausea  on  rising.
Giddy  ;  drunken  feeling.
I  Dizziness.

I  Heaviness  of  the  head.

I  Dizziness  with  slight  nausea,  worse  when  eyes  are  closed.
Produced  so  much giddiness  and  sensation  of  fullness  in  the

head  that  he  preferred  ether, d  Angina  pectoris.


AMYLENUM  NITROSUM.  238

I  Giddiness,  confusion  of  mind,  heaviness  in  head,  headache

and  general  weakness.
Giddiness,  mental  confusion  and  a  dream -like  state.
Congestive  state  of  head.
I  Great  rush  of  blood  to  head  and  face.
^  Inner  Head. Dull  heavy  aching  all  through  the  head.
I  Conscious  of  a  dull  headache  for  about  three  hours.
I  Headache  in  frontal  region.
I  Severe  dull  heavy  pains  across  the  forehead,  without  marked

external  heat.
I  Heaviness  and  pressure  outward  in  forehead  and  temples.
I  When  pain  in  forehead  was  <,  pain  in  occiput  was  >•
I  I  Sense  of  fullness, pressure, tension  and  throbbing  in  the

temples.
I  Pain  in  r.  temple.
I  Painful  pressure  outward  in  temples,  <  in  left, with  dull,

heavy  aching  pain  in  occipital  region  extending  to  nape  of

neck,  while  walking.
I  Severe  pain  in  temples,  occiput  and  over  eyes,  with  burning

in  stomach.
Visible  pulsating  in  the  temples.
I  Headache  on  1.  side,  parietal  region.
iHemicrania,  especially  where  the  aifected  side  looks  pale  in

comparison  with  the  sound  one.
I A  dull  aching  in  cervical  region, gradually moving  to sub-
occipital region,  during  the  morning.
Sensatioa  of  something  rushing  upward  and  throbbing  in  the

vertex.
No  pain  in  the  head  is  felt  until  some  time  after  the  attack

comes  on,  and  it  is  then  of  a  dull  aching  character  in  the

vertex, accompanied  by  unusual  paleness  of  the  face  and

coldness  of  the  feet  and  hands.
I  Severe occipito-frontal  headache,  felt  most  in  suboccipital

region.
I  Pain  in  r.  occipital  region.
I  Dull  pain  in  occiput.

I  Pain  in  occiput  <  in  heat  of  room  and  from  writing.
Constant  occipital  headache  and  aching  across  loins,  <<  from

fatigue.
Occipito-frontal  headache,  with  aching  in  r.  renal  region.
I  Heat and throbbing in the head ; feeling of  fullness  to

bursting.
I A  quick,  somewhat  sharp  throbbing  in  the  head.
Throbbing  headache  with  flushed  face  and  confusion  of  mind.
Beating  and  throbbing  in  the  head  and  ears  with  constriction

of  the  throat  and  heart.
A  sense  of  fullness  and  distension  of  the  head  amounting  at


239  AMYLENUM  NITROSUM.

last  to  severe  pain,  and  accompanied  by  intense  flushing  of
the  face,  starting  the  perspiration  on  head,  face  and  neck.

I  Pressure  in  head,  forehead  and  temples,  with  moist  skin.

Severe  pain  accompanied  with  sense  of  distension  of  the
head.

Bursting  sensation  in  the  head  and  ears  as  if  all  the  blood
were  rushing  to  the  head.

I  Pain  in  head,  with  a  stupid  drowsy  sensation  and  burning  in
stomach  and  up  the  throat.

I  Hemicrania  or  sick  headache ;  pain  most  violent  left  side.

I  Sick  headache.
*  Outer  Head. I  Oppression  in  fronto-parietal  suture,  extending
to  frontal  bone.

I  Redness  and  heat  of  head,  face  and  neck,  with  violent  throb-
bing in  top  of  head  and  carotids.

I  Intense  crushing  pain  upon  the  head,  which  seemed  to  gather
into  a  feeling  of  confusion,  threatening  for  a  moment  to  make
him  unconscious.

Visible  pulsation  on  the  temples.

■  Temporal  artery  protruding,  hard, pulsating  audibly.

I  Sensation  as  though  the  scalp  was  jerked  forward  from
occiput  towards  forehead,  ceasing  just  before  it  reached  that
point,  repeated  several  times.

Heat  and  perspiration  of  the  head,  face  and  neck,  while  the
hands  and  feet  are  very  cold,  which  continue  so  for  hours.

I  Head  would  first  fall  to  one  side  then  to  the  other.
"  Sight  and  Eyes. If  the  eye  is  fixed  on  a  spot  or  a  blank  wall,
the  spot  itself  with  the  surrounding  surface  appears  of  a
yellowish  hue,  the  yellow  circle  being  encircled  by  a  violet
blue  halo,  with  undulating  lines  at  the  edge.

Objects  appear  pea-green  or  yellow.

I  Slight  blurring  of  letters  when  reading.

I  Everything  appears  as  if  trembling,  wavering.

I  Aching  pains  in  eyes  in  sunlight,  with  profuse  running  of
tears,  followed  by  sneezing.

On  closing  eyes:  dizziness  <^.

I  Pain  back  of  eyes  on  looking  at  near  objects.

I  Dimness  of  sight.

Pupils  dilated.

I  Dull  heavy  pressure  over  eyes,  as  if  a  heavy  weight  were
within.

I  Pain  over  both  eyes.

■  Ciliary  neuralgia;  eye  injected;  face  or  cheek  sufi\ised.

1  Sudden  smarting  of  conjunctivae  with  injection  of  both  eyes,

with  dimness  of  vision,  as  if  caused  by  a  film.
Conjunctivae  smarting  and  bloodshot.
The  eye  shines.


AMYLENUM  NITROSUM.  240

lEyes  glazed,  protruding  with  a  staring  look  and  immovable.
d  Child  in  convulsions.

I  Eyes  protruded,  staring.

I  I  Exophthalmic  goitre.

I  Sudden  sharp  pain  under  1.  eye.

Twitching  under  outer  1.  canthus.

I  Twitching  and  creeping  under  1.  eye,  momentary.

Arteries  of  the  optic  disc  small, but  the  veins  enlarged  and
tortuous.
^  Hearing  and  Ears, Throbbing  in  the  ears ;  bursting  sensa-
tion as  if  the  membrane  would  be  forced  out  with  each  beat
of  the  heart.

I  I  Burning  of  ears.

I  Heat  in  1.  ear.
'  Nose. I  Constant  desire  to  sneeze.

I  Numb  feeling  of  nasal  bones  lasting  several  hours.

I  Slight  nosebleed  from  the  1.  side,  about  an  hour  after  the  in-
halation, very  unusual  with  him.
^  Face. Features  show  more  vivacity.

■  Neuralgia  of  fifth  pair.

I  Creeping  sensation  in  r.  cheek  below  malar  bone,  which  was

momentary.
I  Creeping  in  1.  cheek.

■  Intense  surging  of  blood  to  the  face  and  head,  heat  and  red-

ness ;  feels  as  if  the  blood  would  start through  the skin,
with  lachrymation.
1  Face  flushed  scarlet  and  hot.

■  Face,  and  even  the  back  of  the  hands,  deeply  reddened.
llFace  flushes  at  the  slightest  emotion. ^Climaxis. d  Heart

disease,  etc.

I  I  Intense  redness  of  surface  with  great  subjective  feeling  of
heat  in  face  and  head.

iLeft  side  of  face  and  1.  ear  get  intensely  red,  coming  suddenly
and  disappearing  suddenly  during  the  intervals  of  the
attacks  of  headache;  most  after  mental  symptoms.

Intense  redness  and  heat  in  the  face,  often  with  a  sensation  of
giddiness.

I  Intense  glowing  of  the  face,  with  general  sweat,  most  marked
in  palms  of  hands.

I  I  Burning  sensation  in  face.

I  Burning  of  r.  cheek,  extending  up  into  eye  and  around  to  r.
ear.

Intensely  hot  and  red  face ;  on  passing  off  the  face  is  paler
than  usual.

Turned  deadly  pale,  felt  very  giddy,  became  partially  uncon-
scious for  ten  minutes.

I  Left  side  of  face  pale  and  haggard, d  Headache.


241  AMYLENUM  NITROSUM.

*  Lower  Part  of  Face. '  A  smacking  of  the  lips  as  if  in  the
act  of  tasting.
I A  short  munching  movement of  lower  jaw,  which  was  de-
pressed and  elevated  as  if  in  the  act  of  chewing.
^^  Inner  Mouth. Mouth  dry,  throat  sore.

^^  Throat. I  Awoke  at  5  a.m.  with  an extremely  dry,  parched
sensation  in  throat  and  mouth ;  arose  to rinse  the  mouth
with  water ;  noticed  a  marked  stiffness  and  dryness  of  lips.
As  if  a  vapor  spread  from  the  throat  through  her  head,  ren-
dering her  quite  powerless  for  one  or  two  seconds.
I  Sore  throat.
Feeling  of  constriction  in  the  throat.

■  Choking  feeling  on  either side of  the  trachea,  along  the

carotids  ;  feeling  of  constriction.

■  Inability  to  swallow,  with  unconsciousness, d  Child  in  con-

vulsions.

I  Heat  in  head  and  along  oesophagus  to  stomach,  lasting  thirty
minutes.

Tickling  in  throat.

I  Left  tonsil  swollen  and  inflamed.

Catarrh  and  dysphagia  (sequelae  of  a  recent  attack  of  diph-
theria) entirely  relieved  during  the  action  of  the  drug,  but
returned  after  its  eifects  had  passed  off.

I  Collar  seems  too  tight ;  desires  to  loosen  it.
^*  Appetite. I  Loss  of  appetite.
^^  Hiccough,  Belching,  Nausea  and  Vomiting, i  Hiccough.

I  Eructation.

I  Nausea,  with  dryness  in  throat.

I  Great  nausea.

Nausea  and  uncomfortable  feeling  in  stomach.

Nausea  and  heat  in  stomach,  with  the  pains.

I  Slight  nausea,  followed  by  inclination  to  vomit.
^"^  Stomach. I  Crampy  pains  in  epigastric  region.

I  Fullness  and  pressure  in  the  stomach,  with  belching.

I  Cardialgia.

I  I  Hot  burning  sensation  in  the  stomach,  with  empty  belching.

I  Heat  principally  in  stomach,  moist  skin.

Burning  in  the  stomach  and  up  to  the  throat ;  nausea.
*^  Hypochondria. '  Sense  of  oppression  near  the  liver.
^^  Abdomen. I  Crampy, colicky  pains in  umbilical  region  and
abdomen,  increased  when  lying  down.

I  I  Rumbling  in  bowels.

I  Slight  distension  of  abdomen,  with  dull  pain.
^"Rectum and  Stool. I Bowels moved at 7.40 A.M. with

rumbling,  followed  by  a  feeling  of  emptiness.
^^  Urinary  Organs. Urine,  sp.  grav.  1012,  1014.

I  Urine  clear,  acid,  sp.  gr.  1014 ;  free  from  albumen  and  phos-
phates.

16


AMYLENUM  NITROSUM.  242

I  Light  cloud  of  an  oxalate  and  distinct  traces  of  sugar.

Urine  clear,  free,  acid,  sp.  gr.  1016,  saccharine.
I  Urine  clear,  acid,  sp.  gr.  1020,  trace  of  oxalate  and  sugar  in
marked  quantity.

Increased  flow  of  urine  which  contains  an  abundance  of  sugar.
^^  Female  Sexual  Organs. I  Contraction of  the muscles  in
lower  part  of  abdomen, as though they were  all  being
drawn  together  over  the  region  of  the  uterus.

i  Region  of  uterus,  fallopian  tubes  and  ovaries  felt  very  hard
on  pressure.

I  During  catamenia  most  violent  left-sided  headache,  begin-
ning in  the  morning ;  most  violent  at  noon,  lasting  till
evening, with  frequent  vomiting.

I  Neuralgia  during  catamenia.

I  Chronic  blushing  in  climacteric  years  ;  blushing  with  disease
of  r.  heart  in  the  male.

I  Nervous  dysmenorrhoea.
^*  Parturition. I  Convulsions  occurring  immediately  after de-
livery.
^'  Larynx. I  l  The  feeling  of  constriction  in  throat  extended  to
chest,  and  produced  dyspnoea  and  asthmatic  feeling  in  larynx
and  trachea,  with  desire  to  eructate.
^®  Respiration. Inhalation  followed  immediately  by  dizziness  and
nausea.

After  inhalation  :  the  blood  is  forced  up  to  the  head ;  redness
of  face,  later  very  pale,  more  than  usual, d  Headache.

I  Pains  at  times  accompanied  by  sinking  respiration.

Very  deep,  not  more  frequent  breathing.

I  Oppressed,  difficult  and  rapid  breathing.

I  I  Hastens  and  deepens  breathing.

I  I  Two  or  three  full  inspirations  were  succeeded  by  one  of  ex-
treme depth,  accompanied  by  depression  of  lower  jaw  and
elevation  of  ribs  and  scapulae.

Breathing  panting  in  the  trance-like  state.

Choking  feeling  in  throat  and  chest.

I  Increasing  dyspnoea,  with  sneezings,  nasal  catarrh  and  sigh-
ing respiration.

I  Could  hardly  breathe  for  about  a  minute.

I  Cardiac  dyspnoea  with  extreme  anasarca,  due  to  a  dilated  and
hypertrophied  heart.

Asthma ;  arrests  the  paroxysm,  yet  on  cessation  of  eifect  dysp-
noea returned.

Dyspnoea,  constriction  of  throat  and  heart ;  driven  by  actual
fright  to  the  window  for  fresh  air.

I  Feeling  of  suffocation  from  palpitation  of  heart.

I  Dyspnoea  and  asthmatic  feeling  in  larynx  and  trachea.

■  Suffocation  and  cough  in  paroxysms  of  several  minutes.  6  Dis-
ease of  heart.


243  .  AMYLENUM  NITROSUM.

^^  Cough. Slight  breathlessness  and  cough.

I  Sensation  in  throat  producing  a  desire  to  cough,  similar  to  that
produced  by  the  fumes  of  a  burning  match.

I  I  Some  inclination  to  cough.

I  I  Bronchial  irritation,  cough.

I  Hacking  cough  five  minutes  after  inhalation,  repeated  forty-
five  minutes  after.

:  Wliooping-cough.
^^  Inner  Chest  and  Lungs. '  Slight,  dull,  aching  pain  in  r.
chest,  more  severe  after  a  while.

I  1  Commotion  in  chest.

I  Peculiar  sensation  in  r.  lung  or  chest.

I  Drawing  pains  in  1.  side,  between  seventh  and  ninth  ribs,
short  but  frequent.

I  Feeling  as  if  a  band  were  drawn  tightly  around  chest.

I  Sense  of  oppression  in  chest,  worse  at  lower  part  of  sternum,
■<  on  going  down  stairs.

I  Feeling  as  if  a  weight  was  on  the  sternum.

I  Oppression  of  chest  on  walking  about.
^^  Heart,  Pulse  and  Circulation, ii  Angina  pectoris.

IPrgecordial  anxiety.

■  Cardiac  oppression  and  tumultuous  heart  action.

I  I  Anxious  feeling  in  the  prsecordial  region  with  faintness  and

oppression  of  the  head.
I  Stitching  pains  in  cardiac  region  and  feeling  of  constriction

(no  palpitation).
I  Aching  and  constricted  feeling  about  the  heart.
I  I  Violent  beating  of  the  heart  and  throbbing  of  arteries  with  a

sense  of  constriction.
The  aching  and  constriction  of  the  heart  continued  more  or  less

for  at  least  three  weeks,  when  it  was  relieved  after  taking

Qact.  grand.
I  Depression  of  the  heart's  action.

i  Sharp  pain  in  region  of  heart  <  by  belching,  several  days.
I  Pain  in  1.  side,  in  region  of  heart,  extending  around  to  the

back.
I  I  Quicker  circulation.

Rapid  dilatation  of  arteries,  with  quickened  but  weakened  cir-
culation.
Relaxes  the  whole  arterial  system,  greatly  reducing  arterial

pressure.
Great  dilatation  of  the  arterioles.

Causes  a  dilatation  of  the  capillaries,  especially  of  head.
I  I  Violent  pulsation  of  carotids.
Visible  arteries,  like  the  temporal,  often  become  notably  large,

sometimes  doubled  in  size.

■  Sudden  beating  of  the  carotids,  which  extends  to  the  head  and


AMYLENUM  NITROSUM.  244

temples,  accompanied  with  intense  flushing  of  the  face,  which

precedes  debilitating  perspiration.
I  Throbbing  of  the  heart  and  carotids,  felt  as  high  as  the  ears.

d  Angina  pectoris.
Accelerated  heart's  action,  with  increased  cardiac  pulsations.

■  Fluttering  at  the  heart  on  the  slightest  excitement.
I  I  Violent  palpitation.

■  Tumultuous action of  heart,  with  great  prgecordial  anxiety

and  quick  respiration, d  Disease  of  heart.

■  During  the  paroxysm  of  cough  the  pulsations  of  heart  could

not  be  counted,  neither  was  it  possible  to  count  the  radial
pulsations, d  Disease  of  heart.

■  The  irregular  rumbling  sound  of  heart  could  be  perceived  al-

most instantaneously  to  change  into  a  more  regular  pulsation.
d  Disease  of  heart,

■  The  heart  gave  one  strong  beat,  and  from  the  state  of  agony

the  patient  passed  to  one  of  perfect  repose  and  peace, d  An-
gina pectoris.

■  Aortic insufiiciency with  excessive  hypertrophy of  heart;

with  severe  frontal  headache.

Pulse  slow  and  very  strong,  then  quicker  and  jerking,  accele-
rated.

I  Beating  of  pulse  distinctly  felt  in  fingers.

I  Pulse  accelerated,  full  and  hard.

■  Pulse  slightly  quickened. ^Angina  pectoris.
Quickens  the  pulse  in  a  very  variable  degree.

I  Pulse  increased  about  twelve  beats  in  the  minute,  but  could
not  count  it  at  once  owing  to  the  confusion  of  head.

I  Pulse  rose  twenty  beats,  remaining  a  few  minutes,  gradually
coming  to  normal  standard.

Pulse  increased  in  number  of  beats  but  not  in  force.

I  Pulse  not  accelerated  but  irregular  in  action,  almost  impossible
to  count.

I  1  Increase  of  the  pulse  by  20  to  80  beats  in  a  minute,  during
which  the  tension  of  the  radial  artery  is  much  diminished.

I  Pulse  sitting :  78  to  84,  feeble ;  QQ,  regular,  feeble ;  68,
small,  feeble.

I  Pulse  before  taking  it,  83,  in  25  minutes,  63,  after  2  hours,
73,  not  returning  to  the  usual  state  till  two*days  after.

In  some  pulse  sank  below  average,  in  most  it  rose  higher,  be-
came fast,  full  and  hard.

The  sphygmograph  pulse-curve  ends  abruptly  in  a  very  sudden
downfall.

■  As  the  pain  in  arm  increases,  the  curve  of  the  sphygmograph

becomes  lower,  both  the  ascent  and  the  descent  more  gradual,
and  dichrotism  disappeared, d  Angina  pectoris.
If  blood  does  not  flow  after  cupping,  the  cuts  immediately  be-
gin to  bleed  freely  after  inhaling  it.


245  AMYLENUM  NITROSUM.

^^  Back. I  Twinges  near  dorsal  vertebrae.

I  Pain  and  weakness  in  lower  lumbar  region.
^^  Upper  Limbs. I  Slight  discomfort  in  r.  shoulder.

I  Lameness  in  r.  scapula.

■  Soreness  in  r.  arm  and  shoulder.

I  Lameness  of  flexor  muscles  of  r.  arm.

■  Severe  prsecordial  pain,  extending  to  the  right  arm. ^An-

gina pectoris.
iPain  and  stiffness  in  r.  arm,  most  near  wrist,  <  from  motion  ;

effort  of  bending  arm  or  of  writing  very  painful.
I  Drawing,  tensive  pains  in  the  wrist  and  finger-joints  of  1.  hand.

■  Veins  of  hands  dilating  to  double  the  previous  size.

■  Hands  trembling  and  grasping  at  imaginary  objects, d  Child

in  convulsions.

■  Hands  tremble.

■  Tremulousness  of  hands  and  stiffness  and  slight  numbness  of

fingers.
I  Pulsations  distinctly  felt  in  the  tips  of  the  fingers.
I  Profuse  sweat  on  hands.
^^  Lower  Limbs. '  Stiffness  in  lower  limbs.
I  Rheumatic  pains  in  1.  knee  and  leg.
I  Sharp  pains  in  1.  calf.

■  Cold  feet,  sometimes  cold  hands.

^*  Limbs  in  General. Pain  and  stiffness  in  upper and lower
limbs.

■  Weakness  in  limbs.

■  Lameness  and  soreness  in  muscles  of  arms  and  thighs.

■  Tired  feeling  of  the  limbs.

Stiffness  and  pain  in  r.  side  of  neck  and  r.  shoulder,  extends
down  r.  arm  to  wrist,  neuralgic  or  rheumatic.
^^  Position. Motion. ■The  slightest exertion  brought  on  in-
tense pain, d  Angina  pectoris.

I  After  rising,  sneezing  violently  three  times.

Sub-occipital  and  loin  aching,  •<  by  fatigue.

I  During  and  after  a  walk  of  a  mile  (two  hours  after  inhalation)
heaviness  and  pressure  in  head  and  oppressed  breathing  re-
main, passed  off  two  hours  later.

■  Least  exertion  or  excitement  may  bring  on  the  "heats."
(Violent  exercise  during  one  minute  produced  a  dull  headache.
I  After  exercise  heart  beats  more  violently.

■  Weak,  emaciated,  walking  with  tottering  gait,  inclining  to  go

to  one  side  when  walking,  d  After  long  continued  convul-
sions.

Cannot  sit  still. See  1.

On  rising :  vertigo,  headache  and  nausea.

Worse  from  motion :  pains  and  stiffness  in  right  arm  ;  pains  in
dorsal  surface  of  r.  hand.

Worse  from  writing :  pain  in  occiput.


AMYLENUM  NITROSUM.  246

ft

Worse  on  going  down  stairs  :  oppression  in  chest.
While  walking :  painful  outward  pressure  in  temples,  and  pain
in  occiput ;  oppression  of  chest.
36  Jferves. I  Great  restlessness  and  uneasiness.
I  Trembling  sensation  all  over.
I  Trembling  of  limbs  with  feeling  of  weakness.
I  Every  muscle  seems  to  be  in  motion. 6  Chorea.
Epileptiform  spasms.

■  Convulsions. ^  A  child.
I  Eclampsia.

I  Epilepsy.

I  On  occurrence  of  the  aura  or  before  the  onset  of  the  fit  (inha-
lation), d  Epilepsy.

■  Tetanus.

■  Succession  of  fits,  linking  together  by  intervening  unconscious-

ness, fits  recurring  with  increasing  frequency,  till  at  last  no
sooner  is  one  fit  ended  or  before  it  has  finished  another  be-
gins, d  Status  epilepticus.

■  After  an  extensive  burn,  violent  acute  tetanus,  beginning  the

fourth  day  and  advancing  rapidly  in  forty  hours,  temperature
102,  pulse  133,  breathing  32  in  the  minute,  marked  opistho-
tonos, trismus,  horrid  tetanic  grin ;  swallowing  interfered ;
five  drops  inhaled  twice  a  day,  in  forty-six  days  restored,
having  inhaled  one  ounce.

I  General  lassitude,  did  not  feel  like  doing  anything.

I  I  Relaxed  feeling  in  all  muscles  and  heaviness,  most  when
rising,  with  an  uncertainty.

I  I  General  weakness  with  a  tendency  to  sweat  easily  on  slight
exertion.

■  Weak  feeling  all  over.

^^  Sleep. ■Yawning,  profoundly  and  repeatedly  in  coma  during
an  unconscious  state, d  Status  epilepticus.
I  I  Drowsiness.

1  I  Sleep  restless,  full  of  anxious  dreams.
Restless,  awakes  with  pains  in  the  temples,  stomach,  etc.

■  Sleep  often  much  broken,  waking  with  frequent  starts,  feels

unrefreshed  in  the  morning, d  Flushings.
I  Frequent  waking,  with  severe  pain  in  temples,  stomach  and

bowels.
I  On  awaking  pains  returned  with  increased  intensity,  most  in

spine,  lungs  and  conjunctivae,  with  shifting  pains  caused  by

movement  on  dorsal  surface  of  r.  hand,  1.  patella,  and  from

1.  thumb  to  axilla,  with  catarrhal  symptoms  and  severe  fronto-

orbital  cephalalgia.
^^  Time. ■Hemicrania  beginning  in  morning,  most  violent  at  noon,

lasting  till  evening. See  23.
I  Many  symptoms  returned  with  varying  intensity,  during  the

dav.


247  AMYLENUM  NITROSUM.

I  I  Most  marked  during  the  evenings.
Restless  in  tiie  night.

■  Flushes  sometimes  occur  chiefly  at  night.
At  5  A.M. :  awoke  with  parched  sensation.
At  7.40  A.M. :  bowels  moved.
Morning:  aching  in  neck  and  occiput.

39  Temperature  and  Weather,  i  Warm  room  causes  dull  pain
from  temple  to  occiput,  <;  1.,  for  2,  3  hours.

Must  have  fresh  air. See  1,  26.

I  All  symptoms  ^  by  exercise  out  doors.

I  I  Cold  water  and  air  relieve  the  symptoms.

I  Open  their  clothes  or  remove  the  greater  part  of  bed  covering
and  throw  open  the  window  in  coldest  weather.

■  Severe  burning  sensation  over  the  loins  followed  by  sweat,

burning  so  unendurable  that  she  was  constrained  to  open  the

window  at  night  even  in  winter,  sometimes  to  rush  out  of

doors ;  for  3  years  several  times  daily.
^  Fever. ■  Frequent  chilly  crawlings  over  the  whole  body,  face

pale  all  day.
I  Cold  chills  running  down  the  back,  during  the  sweat.
1  Slight  chill  crept  over  the  back  and  sides  after  the  heat  and

moisture.
Sometimes  the  warmth  and  sweat  affect  the  whole  surface,  or

while  the  surface  glows  hands  and  feet  may  become  very  cold.

■  Flushings  occasionally,  peculiarly  and  abruptly  limited,  reach-

ing to  the  thighs,  knees  or  elbows,  while  all  the  parts  above
it  feel  burning  hot,  the  parts  below  feel  icy  cold. 0  Climaxis.

■  After  the  heats  pass  away  the  skin  sometimes  becomes  cold

and  clammy,  and  may  turn  very  pale.

■  Dry  heats.

■  Flushings  or  "  heats,"  starting  from  various  parts,  as  the  face,

the  epigastrium,  etc.,  thence  spreading  over  the  greater  part
of  the  body.

■  Heats  are  followed  by  sweatings,  often  very  profuse.

■  Heats  with  great  throbbing  throughout  the  whole  body,  and

followed  by  much  prostration,  seeming  scarcely  able  to  rouse

herself.
I  Hands  moist,  head  and  body  warm,  especially  abdomen,  later

greater  warmth  in  chest.
I  Though  not  warm,  sweat  started  freely.
I  Skin  moist,  free  sweat  during  moderate  exercise.
General  sudden  perspiration  with  great  debility.
Lowers  the  temperature  by  checking  oxidation.
Reduces  animal  heat.
*^  Locality  and  Direction. Outward  pressure  :  in  forehead  and

temples.
I  Right  to  left  cheek  and  left  eye.
Right :  pain  in  temple ;  in  occipital  region ;  aching  in  renal


AMYLENUM  NITROSUM.  248

region ;  creeping  sensation  in  cheek  ;  burning  of  cheek  ex-
tending into  eye  and  ear  ;  heart  affected,  see  23 ;  pain  in
chest ;  peculiar  sensation  in  lung ;  lameness  in  scapula ;
soreness  in  and  around  shoulder ;  pain  and  stiffness  in  arm  ;
precordial  pain  extending  to  arm  ;  stiffness  and  pain  inside
of  neck  and  in  shoulder  extending  to  arm ;  pains  in  dorsal
surface  of  hand.

Left :  headache :  outward  pressure  in  temple ;  sharp  pain  un-
der eye;  twitching  pain  under  outer  canthus  and  creeping
under  eye ;  heat  in  ear ;  nosebleed ;  creeping  in  cheek ;
flushing  of  face  and  ear ;  face  pale  and  haggard ;  tonsil
swollen  and  inflamed  ;  headache  during  catamenia  ;  drawing
pains  in  chest ;  contraction  of  heart ;  pains  in  cardiac  re-
gion ;  drawing  tensive  pain  in  wrist  and  finger-joints ;  rheu-
matic pain  in  knee ;  sharp  pain  in  calf.
*^  Sensations.  Confused  feeling  in  head,  as  if  the  scalp  were
jerked  forward.

Stupid  drowsy  sensation.

Sudden  sharp  pain  under  1.  eye ;  sharp  pain  in  1.  calf.

Stitches :  in  cardiac  region.

Twinges  :  near  dorsal  vertebrae.

Rheumatic  pains  :  in  1.  knee.

Burning :  of  ears  ;  in  face ;  in  stomach  and  up  the  throat.

Smarting:  of  conjunctivae.

Soreness :  in r.  arm  and  shoulder ;  in  muscles  of  arms  and
thighs.

Aching:  all  through  head;  in  eyes;  across  loins;  in  r.  renal
region  ;  in  r.  chest.

Drawing :  and  tension  in  1.  wrist  and  finger-joints.

Pressure  :  in  head ;  over  eyes  ;  in  stomach ;  on  sternum.

Crushing  pain  :  upon  the  head.

Tension :  in  temples.

Constriction  :  of  throat  and  heart ;  of  abdominal  muscles,  over
uterus.

Crampy  pains  :  in  epigastric  region.

Twitching :  under  outer  canthus  ;  —  and  creeping  under  1.  eye.

Bursting  sensation  :  in  head  ;  in  ears.

Throbbing :  in  head  ;  in  ears  ;  in  carotids  ;  of  heart.

Fullness  :  in  head  ;  in  stomach.

Heaviness  :  of  head  ;  —  and  pressure  outward  in  forehead  and
temples.

Lameness  :  in  r.  scapula ;  in  flexor  muscles  of  r.  arm  ;  in  mus-
cles of  arms  and  thighs.

Tired  feeling :  of  limbs.

Creeping:  under  1.  eye;  in  cheeks.

Numbness  :  of  nasal  bones.

Heat :  of  head,  face  and  neck  ;  in  1.  ear ;  in  stomach.

Parched  sensation  :  in  throat  and  mouth.


249  AMYLENUM  NITROSUM.

Cold  hands  and  feet.

I  Tingling  sensation  in  different  parts  of  body.

I  Subacute  smartings  in  prsecordial  region,  then  in  renal
region,  then  in  r.  axilla,  then  of  midsternum,  then  in  lum-
bar region,  then  in  lower  lobe  of  r.  lung,  at  apex  of  heart
and  in  lower  lobe  of  r.  lung,  with  tenderness  on  pressure.

I  The  smartings  changed  position  rapidly,  being  most  persistent
in  eyes,  basis  of  lungs  and  spine.

I  Soreness  of  extensor  muscles.

**  Tissues. Intense surging  of  blood  to  face  and head  ; later
veins  turgid.

II  Rapidly  dilates  the  arteries  and  quickens  but  weakens  the
circulation. See  29.

Venous  and  arterial  blood  are  of  the  same  hue.

■  Rigidity  of  muscles  of  limbs, d  Child  in  convulsions.

■  Weak  and  emaciated.  6  A  man  after  convulsions.
A  green  spot  at  the  point  of  subcutaneous  injection.
Quantity  of  urine  increased,  and  2  per  cent,  of  sugar  in  it.

"  Touch. Passive  Motion. Collar  feels  too  tight. See  13.

1 1  Sea  sickness.
*^  Stages  of Life, Constitution. Nervous, sensitive  women
are  far  more  powerfully  affected  by  it  than  men.

I A  man,  set.  60,  with  enlargement  and  softening  of  heart
caused  by  years  of  suppression,  care  and  anxiety  ;  relieved
only,  but  wonderfully.
*^  Relationship.  Ringer  compares  it  with  Gfhnoine,  with  re-
spect to  the  varying  effect  of  even  small  doses  on  different
persons,  but  the  greatest  similarity  is  the  first  accelerated
and  afterwards  retarded  pulse.

There  is  a  remarkable  correspondence  between  this  remedy
and  the  Glonoine,  the  first  characterizing  the  Old  School,
the  second  ours.

In  some  cases  more  useful  than  20,  30  gr.  bromide  of  potas-
sium taken  daily. Old  School.

Sometimes  the  pain  returns  as  soon  as  the  effect  of  the  drug
passes  away, d  Angina  pectoris.

In  some  cases  it  loses  its  effects  and  must  be  taken  in  in-
creased quantities  and  at  shorter  intervals,  even  to  an  ounce
a  week. 6  Angina  pectoris.

Two  drachms  a  fortnight  for  a  year  still  unfailing  relief,  d  An-
gina pectoris.

As  the  sick  grow  accustomed  to  the  remedy  the  dose  must  be
increased. Old  School.

Patients  become  habituated  to  it ;  after  a  while  it  must  be  in-
haled several  times  before  it  affords  relief. Old  School.

Similar  to :  Glonoine  (circulation  of  blood,  congestion,  etc.) ;
Aeon.;  Ether;  Cactus  (constriction  of  heart;  pulsations,
etc.);  Nitr.  dulc.  8pir.  (heart,  lungs,  etc.) ;  Laches,  (flushes


AMYL.  NITR.— ANAC.  OCC.  250

at  climaxis) ;  Qoca  (flushing  when  excited,  as  in  company) ;
chloroform  ;  Bellad. (neuralgia  with  red  face).

Antidote  in  failure  of  respiration  by  chloroform ;  and  to  con-
vulsions of  strychnine.

Antidoted  by  : Cactus  (cardiac  constriction).


ANACARDIUM  OCCIDENTALE.

Cashew  Nut.  Anacardiacece


The  common  cashew-nut  from  the  West  Indies.  It  is  easily  distin-
guished from  our  Anacardium  which  comes  from  the  East  Indies,  by  its
being  kidney-shaped,  while  the  Oriental  nut,  our  well-proved  medicine,  is
heart-shaped.  It  was  never  proved  and  is  only  known  by  the  frequent
cases  of  poisoning  which  occur  from  peeling  or  roasting  the  nut.  The
kernel  is  edible  but  it  is  advisable  first  to  remove  the  germ  between  the
halves.

The  poisonous  black  juice  contained  between  the  outer  and  inner  shell
contains  two  peculiar  principles,  Anacardic  acid  and  Cardol.  Poisonings
are  frequently  mistaken  for  Rhus-poisoning.

The  effects  on  the  skin  are  mentioned  by  C.  Hg.  in  CI.  Miillers  Vierteljahr-
schrift  in  1861,  Vol.  12,  p.  276.  No  cures  on  record  excepting  from  Segin
in  Hygea.

^  Mind. I  Loss  of  will ; cannot  control  the  voluntary  muscles.
d  Paralysis  with  imbecility.
BDid  not  know  his  surroundings. 6  Paralysis  with  imbecility.

■  Weak  memory.

I  Difficult  thinking.

■  Melancholy.

!  Hypochondriasis.
^  Sensorium. I  Apathy  or  anaesthesia.
^  Inner  Head. Tearing  headache  on  left  side.
*  Outer  Head. '  '  Head  falls  forward, difl&cult  to  keep  it  up.

6  Paralysis  and  imbecility.
^  Eyes. :  Scrofulous  ophthalmia.

^  Ears. Swelling  of  ears  with  burning  and  itching. See  8.
^  Face. I  I  Erysipelas  over  the whole  face (from  applying the
juice  to  destroy  marks).
Swelling  of  the  face  with  itching and  burning ;  next night

after  handling  the  nuts.
Applied  to  the  face  to  remove  the  cuticle  and  produce  a  fresher
and  more  youthful  appearance.


251  ANACARDIUM  OCCIDENTALE.

Face  so  much  swollen  that  for  a  time  not  a  feature  was  dis-
cernible (in  a  lady  who  was  exposed  to  the  fumes  of  the  nut
while  roasting).
'  Lower  Part  of  Face. The  juice  corrodes  the  lips  and  mouth.
^^  Tongue. I  Cannot  speak,  only  mutters  unintelligible  sounds.
d  Paralysis  and  imbecility.
Painfully  swollen  tongue  from  handling  the  nuts.
^^  Mouth. :  Aphthae.

"  After  Meals. Drinks  run  out  of  mouth, d  Paralysis  with  im-
becility.
^^  Stool. :  Dysentery.
^^  Urinary  Organs. Increased  urination.
^^  Male  Sexual  Organs. Stimulates  sexual  desire.

Testicles  swelled  when  touched  with  the  hands  after  handling
the  nuts.
^^  Female  Sexual  Organs. When  during  the  menses  the  juice
is  applied,  it  causes  erysipelas  of  the  face.
\  Uterine  complaints  and  dropsy.
2^  Respiration. Respiration  free, d  Paralysis  and  imbecility.
^^  Heart. Pulse. I Pulse  slow,  moderately  full,  60. ^Paralysis

with  imbecility.
^^  Upper  Limbs. Large  blisters  filled  with  a  yellow  fluid  are
raised  on  the  hands,  followed  by  desquamation.
\  Warts.
^^  Lower  Limbs. •  Corns.

^^  Fever. Temperature  of  body  cool, d  Paralysis.
^2  Locality  and  Direction. Left :  tearing  headache.

Left  to  right :  red  itching  spots. See  46.
*^  Sensations. Tearing  pain  :  in  head.

Burning  :  and  itching  of  ears  and  face.
**  Tissues. :  Schirrhous  swellings.
\  Hard  excresences.
:  Proud  flesh.
*®  Skin. If  the  hands  are  not  washed  carefully  after  handling  the
nuts, they cause itching and painful burning  swellings
wherever  they  touch  the  skin.
•  Corroding  or  dry  tetters.
Red  itching  spots  I'ike  nettle-rash  similar  to  that  of  Hhus  tox.,

spreading  from  left  to  right.

Used  as  a  vesicant  it  causes  :  itching  and  burning ;  then  gradual

reddening  and  swelling,  followed  by  vesicles,  which  become

pustular. These  are  large  and  flat  at  first  and  gradually

become  confluent  and  break. The  epidermis  peels  off",  but

leaves  surface  swollen,  hypergemic  and  suppurating  for  days.

The  juice  is  used  on corns,  warts,  ringworms  and  obstinate

ulcers,

*''  Stages  of  Life,  Constitution. lA  woman,  set.  70,  lost  two

grown  up  children  who  died  in  the  insane  asylum  ;  ulcers  on


ANAC.  OCC.  AND  ORIENT.  252

the  leg  and  attacks  of  vertigo  so  that  she  fell  from  the  chair  ;
a  year  ago  had  what  was  called  an  apoplectic  attack,  d  Par-
alysis with  imbecility.

A  lady,  swollen  face,  from  exposure  to  the  fumes  when  roast-
ing the  nuts. See  8.
^^  Relationship. Collateral  relations  :  Anac.  orr.  ; Rhoes.

Similar  to  :  Oanthar.  ;  Mezer.  (as  a  vesicant)  ;  Crot.  tigl.  ;
Rhus  rad.  ;  Rhus  tox.

Antidoted  by  : Rhus  tox.

The  tincture  of  Iodine  was  found  useful  as  a  local  application
to  the  parts  affected.

ANACARDIUM  ORIENTALE.

Marking  Nut.  Anacardiacece.

The  nut  of  Semecarpus  Anacardium  ;  not  identical  with  Avicennia  to-
mentosa,  as  Hahnemann  erroneously  stated.  It  is  imported  from  the  East
Indies,  and  if  Schwabe,  in  his  Pharrnacopcea,  recommends  the  soft  resin  of
the  seed  for  trituration,  it  is  only  to  avoid  too  old  and  dry  ones.

The  common  tincture  of  the  whole  nut  was  proved  by  Hahnemann  and
his  original  disciples,  because  it  had  been  one  of  the  most  famous  medi-
cines in  the  old  Arabian  school,  forgotten  for  nearly  a  thousand  years.

The  provings  were  arranged  and  published  by  E.  Stapf,  in  the  second
volume  of  his  Archives,  in  1823.  The  next  edition  was  made  by  Hahne-
mann, in  his  Chronic  Diseases,  in  1835,  where  he  condensed  the  484  symp-
toms of  the  first  publication,  and  added  (without  having  another  prover)
]58  new  symptoms.

^  Mind. lEverything  appears  as  in  a  dream. ^Melancholia.

Feeling  as  if  the  spirit  was  separated  from  the  body.

I  Stupor.

iDid  not  know  those  around  her. 6  Palsy.

■  Memory  and  senses  are  aflfected.

In  the  afternoon  his  memory  is  better  than  in  the  forenoon,
although  his  recollections  only  come  to  him  after  the  time
when  he  is  in  need  of  them  ;  however,  he  easily  remembers
what  he  reads.

I  OWeak  memory.

I  iLoss  of  memory, d  Meningitis.

I  BLoss  of  memory  after  general  paralysis, d  Apoplexy.

iForgetfulness. ^Hysteria.

I  Forgets  everything  she  had  seen. ^  Mania.


253  ANACARDIUM  ORIENTALE.

I  Her  forgetfulness  troubles  her  so  much  that  she  loses  her  ap-
petite, d  Melancholy.

■  After  having  caressed  her  husband  or  child  she  pushes  them

away  from  her,  as  if  they  were  not  what  she  supposed.
d  Melancholy.

He  remembers  with  diflBculty  ;  he  retains  nothing  in  his  mem-
ory ;  he  is  deficient  in  ideas  and  he  soon  loses  his  subject
without  being  aware  of  it.

I  Cannot  remember  anything  about  his  previous  state,  d  Imbe-
cility.

I A  very  intelligent  man,  set.  60,  after  having  been  a  few  hours
in  his  grapery,  where  powdered  sulphur  had  been  sprinkled,
suddenly  lost  all  power  of  recollection  so  completely,  that
even  what  had  happened  a  few  minutes  or  a  few  hours  ago,
was  gone  from  his  memory,  and  he  was  quite  imbecile.  One
dose  Anac,  2°,  restored  him  very  soon  and  permanently.

Memory  quite  useless,  particularly  for  single  names,  mornings.

Weakness  of  mind.

Dullness  of  mind  and  inability  to  think.

Imbecility, d  After  apoplexy.

I  Idiocy. ^  After  poisoning  with  stramonium  seed.

■  Intellect  remains  weak  or  impaired  after  having  passed  through

severe  fevers,  small-pox,  etc.

From  9  to  10  p.m.  first  extreme  excitement  of  fancy  and  pro-
jective ideas ;  later,  by  degrees,  becomes  dull  and  does  not
think  at  alL

Imagines  he  hears  voice  of  mother  or  sister,  who  are  far  away.

■  Has  a  devil  in  his  ear  whispering  blasphemous  words.

I  Idea  as  if  everything  perceived  had  no  reality,  all  things  ap-
pear as  in  a  dream. 6  Melancholy. 6  Mania.

■  Thinks  he  is  double.

■  Fixed  ideas:  that  mind  and  body  are  separated;  about  re-

demption of  soul  and  about  the  devil ;  that  a  stranger  is  con-
stantly by  his  side ;  that  strange  forms  accompany  him,  one
to  his  right  and  one  to  his  left.

■  Has  the  fixed  idea  that  her  husband  is  not  her  husband,  her

child  not  her  child ;  now  she  fondles  them  and  again  pushes
them  away. 6  Mania.

■  Hallucination;  a  demon  sits  on  his  neck  and  tells  him  most

ofi"ensive  things.
I  Delirious  mania.
Disposed  to  malice,  seems  bent  on  wickedness.

■  ■Irresistible  desire  to  curse  and  swear.

■  Talks  constantly  in  senseless,  stupid  phrases.

■  Extreme  merriment,  laughs  when  he  should  be  serious.
Continual talking  of  senseless  twaddle, d  After  a  grievance.
Strange  temper,  she  laughs  at  serious  and  is  grave  over  ludi-
crous occurrences.


ANACARDIUM  ORIENTALE.  254

Screaming  and  crying  of  infants, d  Fever.

■  Every  five  minutes  he  screams  loudly,  as  if  he  would  call  some

one. d  Rage.

Uses  profane  language,  swears,  thinks  himself  a  demon.

1  Furious,  has  to  be  kept  in  a  straight  jacket.

Dull  and  stupid,  fixed  gaze, d  Imbecility.

Every  motion  extremely  awkward  and  sluggish.

It  is  difficult  to  get  an  answer  from  him,  it  takes  a  long  while ;
his  answers  are  short  and  incomplete  but  correct.  I  Imbe-
cility.

I  Disinclined  to  talk, d  Headache.

Estrangement  from  individuals  and  society,  with  fear  of  the
future.

Cannot  be  persuaded  to  do  any  thing. 6  Imbecility.

Aversion  to  work.

Sadness  :  looks  on  the  dark  side  of  everything.

I  Low-spirited,  disheartened. ^  Dysmenorrhoea.

■  Melancholy. ^Amenorrhoea. ^  After  parturition.
Hypochondriac  mood  in  forenoon,  dejected  and  desponding,

with  foolish,  clumsy  actions.

■  ■Hypochondriasis, d  Hemorrhoids  and  constipation.
Anxiety :  with  wabbling  sensation  in  the  epigastrium ; with

stupidity  ;  with  fidgety  legs.
Anxious  and  hypochondriac,  shuns  people.

■  ■When  walking  he  felt  anxious,  as  if  some  one  were  pursuing

him  ;  he  suspected  everything  around  him.
Apprehensive  of  death  being  close  at  hand.
Fearfulness.

■  Fear  of  paralysis.

Inward  anxiety  and  heat. ■  Angina.
Anxiety  and  feeling  of  impending  misfortune.

■  Internal  anxiety,  which  did  not  leave  him  any  peace;  he  felt

solicitous  on  account  of  every  trifle,  as  if  it  would  lead  to
some  great  trouble  ;  with  apprehension  of  the  future.
Despondency  and  fear  of  approaching  death, d  Pertussis.

■  Anxiousness  ;  despairs  of  getting  well. ^Apoplexy.

He  is  vei-y  indiflFerent  and  unfeeling ;  neither  agreeable  nor  dis-
agreeable objects  excite  his  interest.

■  ■He  is  separated  from  the  whole  world  and  has  so  little  confi-

dence in  himself  that  he  despairs  of  being  able  to  do  that
which  is  required  of  him.

Contradiction  between  reason  and  will,  d  Headache,  d  Per-
tussis.

Feels  as  though  he  had  two  wills,  one  commanding  to  do  what
the  other  forbids.

■  In  one  ear  a  devil,  in  the  other  an  angel  prompts  him  to  do

murder,  or  acts  of  benevolence.
Loss  of  will  power, d  After  apoplexy.


255  ANACARDIUM  ORIENTALE.

Cowardice.

Morose  and  restless.

I  His  great  forgetfulness  makes  him  very  morose.  ^Melan-
choly after  typhus.

Hypochondriac  sullen  mood.

Excessively  peevish  and  ill-humored. 6  Headache.

Extreme  irritability.

Irritable,  passionate  and  contradictory.

I  He  takes  everything  in  bad  part  and  becomes  violent.

Unsocial,  complains  of  weak  memory, d  Coryza.

I A  slight  offence  makes  him  excessively  angry,  breaking  out
in  personal  violence.

Want  of  moral  feeling ;  depravity,  ungodliness,  inhumanity,
and  hardness  of  heart.

Malicious,  wicked  and  cruel.

I  Excited  mood.

Dull  insusceptibility.

Bad  effect  of  mental  exertion.

Exertion  of  mind  brings  on  tearing,  pressing  headache  in  fore-
head, temples  and  occiput.

Weeping  relieves  oppression  of  chest.

■  Melancholy  after  quarreling  with  her  husband. ^Farmer's

wife. See  27.
I  Consequences  of  fright  or  mortification. 6  Loss  of  memory.
*  SensoriuiU. Overacuteness  of  the  senses.

Senses  less  acute  ;  lessening  of  sight,  hearing,  smell  and  taste.
iNumbness  and  pressure  in  head,  most  when  he  exerts  himself

in  writing, d  Apoplexy.

■  Dullness  of  head  and  pale  face. ^  Mania.
Feels  dull  and  prostrated.

■  Weakness  of  special  senses. ^Sequelae  of  meningitis.

■  ■Weakness  of  all  the  senses.

■  Dullness  and  confusion  in  the  head.

Vertigo :  getting  black  before  the  eyes ;  when  walking ;  as  if

surroundings,  or  self  were  tottering.
Sensation  as  if  everything  was  moving  around.

■  Vertigo  on  stooping  and  rising  from  stooping,  as  if  he  were

turning  round  to  the  left ;  with  the  vertigo  dim  sight.
Giddiness  as  if  drunken  out-of-doors, d  Headache.
^  Inner Head. Pressure : in the forehead, mornings when
awaking,  and  in  the  evening.

■  Dull  pressure  as  with  a  plug  on  upper  border  of  right  orbit,

extending  into  brain,  with  stupefaction  of  whole  side  of  head.
Most  headache  in  temples.
Violent  pressure  in  temples.

■  Dull  pressure,  as  from  a  plug,  on  left  side  of  vertex.
Constrictive  headache  in  forehead, with  very  irritable  mood,

pains  increase  hourly ;  momentarily  relieved  by  strong  press-


ANACARDIUM  ORIENTALE.  256

ure ;  finally  whole  head  aifected ;  later  whole  head  pains  as
if  a  tense  band  was  reaching  from  nape  of  neck  to  ears ;
must  lie  down.

Pressing  from  temples  towards  eyes.

Stitches  :  over  right  eye ;  in  left  side  of  head.

■  Throbbing  headache.

Hot  head,  with  icy  cold  hands  and  feet.

■  Digging  and  throbbing  pains  in  r.  side  of  head  and  along  the

border  of  the  orbit ;  llrelieved  entirely  when  eating,  land
when  lying  down  in  bed  at  night  and  when  about  falling
asleep  ; 1 1  <<  during  motion  and  work.

■  Stitches  in  the  brain. ^Pertussis.

■  Nervous  headache. ^Hypochondriasis.

■  Pressive  pain  in  top  of  head  when  coughing  or  taking  a  deep

inspiration.

■  Pressing  headache  mostly  in  temples  from  without  inwards,

with  diminished  sight  and  hearing ;  worse  a  few  hours  after
a  meal,  on  exerting  the  mind  or  stepping  hard.

Tearing  headache  during  hard  labor.

Tearing  throbbing  in  vertex.

Tearing  and  pressing  in  forehead  and  temples.

Tearing  pain  in  occiput.

Throbbing  in  occiput.

Headache  in  occiput,  worse  from  making  a  misstep  and  from
loud  noise.

■  Congestion  of  blood  to  head,  with  pain  in  cerebellum, d  Per-

tussis.
Pressure: in  right  side  of  occiput; from  without  in  jerks,
spreading  from  forehead  over  whole  head ;  from  within  out-
ward ; from  forehead  backwards.

■  ■Gastric  and  nervous  headaches.

*■  Outer  Head. Tearing  headaches  extending  into  the  muscles  of

neck  and  throat.
Bending  head  backwards,  pain  in  occiput  aggravated.
Violent  itching  of  the  scalp.
Itching  on  the  forehead.
Many  lentil-sized  boils  on  the  scalp,  with sore pain  when

touched  or  scratched.
Small  pimply  eruption  on  head.
Dry  heat  on  the  whole  head.
Baldness.
Many  little  boils  on  hairy  scalp,  very  sensitive  to  touch,  and

about  the  size  of  a  flax-seed.
'  Sight  and  Eyes. Great  sensitiveness  to  light.

■  The  light  seems  to  have  a  halo  around  it.

Flickering  before  the  eyes  during  the  day,  blind  at  night.
Optical  illusions  in  dark  colors.
Halo  around  the  light.


257  ANACARDIUM  ORIENTALE.

I  Pupils  first  contracted,  later  dilated.

■  Weakness  of  sight. ^Apoplexy.

I I  Vision  indistinct.

■  Weakness  and  dimness  of  the  eyes, d  Coryza.

■  Blackness  before  the  eyes  with  vertigo.
I  Eyes  sunken.

I  I  Short-sightedness.

After  a  half  hour's  sleep,  every  object  appeared  a  long  way  off.

■  Objects  appear  too  far  off.
Stitches  over  right  eye.

Sensation  as  of  a  plug  in  upper  border  of  right  orbit.

■  Pain  in  left  eye  with  a  twitching  in  it.

■  Strange,  uncanny  look. ^  Mania.

Lachrymation  with  coryza ;  also  with  a  contracting  pain  in  the

nose.
Lids  so  swollen  he  could  scarcely  see.
Eyelids  felt  swollen,  but  without  pain.

■  Pressure  as  from  a  plug,  on  the  upper  margin  of  orbit.
Pressure  on  eyeball  from  before  backwards, or  from  above

downwards.
Blue  circles  around  the  eyes.
®  Hearing  and  Ears. ■  Speaks  of  a  devil  who  whispers  blasphemy

into  his  ear.
Humming  in  the  ears.
Roaring  before  the  ears.
I  Hearing  at  times  very  weak,  at  others  very  acute.

■  Hardness  of  hearing.

Sensation  of  obstruction,  as  from  cotton  or  a  plug  in  ear.
I  I  Want  of  ear-wax. 6  Coryza.
Otorrhoea.

Dragging  pains  with  polypus  auris.

Tearing  or  stitching  pains  in  the  left  ear ;  worse  when  swallow-
ing.
Sore  pain  in  the  ear  when  biting  the  teeth  together.
Itching  in  the  ears.
Painful  swelling  of  the  external  ear.
Ear  inflamed  with  headache.
^  Smell  and  Nose. Worse  from  strong  smells, d  Headache.
I  1  Sense  of  smell  too  acute, d  Coryza.
Sensitive  smell  and  bitter  taste.

■  Illusory  smell  as  of  burning  tinder,  morning,  when  rising.

■  Constant  smell  before  the  nose  like  pigeon  or  chicken  dung,

especially  when  smelling  his  clothes  or  his  body.

■  Smell  seems  quite  lost,  though  the  nose  is  not  obstructed.

d  Coryza.
Nosebleed.

Feeling  of  dryness  in  the  nose.
17


ANACARDIUM  ORIENTALE.  258

Obstruction  of  the  nose; 1  of  the  left  nostril. ^  Coryza.
Chronic  coryza  and  discharge  of  mucus  from  the  nose.
I  Chronic  dry  coryza,  with  anosmia  and  a  discharge  of  purulent
phlegm.

■  Fluent  coryza,  with  sneezing  and  lachrymation.

I  Red  pustule  in  right  nostril  on  the  septum,  with  sore  pain
when  touched.

Much  sneezing  and  long-continued-  disposition  thereto. 6  Per-
tussis.

Irritation  to  sneeze  with  the  cough.
^  Face. I  Strange  expression  in  face. ^  Mania.

I  Face disfigured, look wild, childish, without expression.
^  Palsy.

■  Tearing  pains  in  face. ^Headache.
Violent  burning  in  face.

Complains  of  heat  in  head  and  red  cheeks,  the  forehead  is  cold.

■  Face  red,  more  frequent  pulse, d  Mania.
Heat  in  face  with  great  prostration.
Paleness  efface.

I  Pale,  wan  looking;  blue  rings  around  the  eyes, 0  Headache.
White  scaly  herpes  on  right  cheek,  near  the  upper  lip.
I  I  Strange  expression. 6  Melancholy.
Face  swelled,  beginning  from  the  eyes.

I  Left  side  of  face  swollen  and  covered  with  small  pock-like
blisters.

■  Repeated  tearing  in  right  side  efface  and  neck. ^Faceache.

■  Itching  in  the  face. ^Headache.

■  Acute  eczema  of  face  and  neck,  with  redness  and  eruption  of

small  blisters  with  intense  itching.
^  Lower  Part  of  Face. Rough,  scaly  skin  around  the  mouth,

with  crawling  itching.
Burning  dryness  of  outer  border  of  lips,  almost  like  from  pepper.
Violent  burning  on  chin.
Mouth  twitches  in  sleep.

Small  blisters  oi  chin,  discharging  liquid  when  broken.
'"  Teeth  and  Gums. Tearing  in  teeth  of  left  side.

Toothache  on  taking  something  warm  into  the  mouth.
Toothache  in  one  lower  incisor,  worse  by  contact  with  tongue

and  the  open  air.
Teeth  of  lower  jaw  seem  most  affected.
Swelling  of  the  gums.

■  Bleeding  of  the  gums  upon  slight  rubbing.

"  Taste,  Speech,  Tongue. Bitter  taste  in  mouth  after  smoking
tobacco.
Everything  tastes  like  herring-brine.

■  ■Flat,  offensive  taste  in  the  mouth,  and  taste  of  food.
Taste  lost.


259  ANACARDIUM  ORIENTALE.

■  Heaviness  of  tongue  and  sensation  as  if  swollen; impedes

speech.

■  Impeded  speech. ^Apoplexy.

Speech  firmer  and  surer  in  afternoon  than  forenoon.

iWas  unable  to  speak  and  made  only  unintelligible  sounds.

d  Palsy.
Tongue  white  and  rough  like  a  grater.
^^  Mouth. B  Fetid  odor  from  the  mouth,  without  his  perceiving  it.

6  Headache.

■  Painful  vesicles  in  the  mouth.

■  Ulcers  in  the  mouth.

■  Water  accumulates  in  mouth, I  until  it  provokes  vomiting;

also  with  violent  thirst  and  red  face.

■  Water  flows  together  in  mouth  and  runs  out. ^Apoplexy.
13  Throat, Roughness  and  scraping  in  throat.

Sensation  of  rawness  in  throat,  during  cough,  after  eating.
Firm,  tough  mucus  comes  in  the  pharynx  and  lodges  over  the
posterior  nares ;  removing  it  provokes  vomiting.

■  Firm  tough  mucus  in  fauces; raising  it  causes  gagging  and

retching, d  Coryza.

■  Suppuration  of  tonsils.

^*  Appetite,  Thirst. Loss  of  appetite  and  feverishness,  with  the
cutaneous  symptoms.

■  The  torturing  forgetfulness  makes  her  low-spirited,  and  she

loses  her  appetite. 6  Mania.
All  food  ofl"ensive  and  flat.

■  At  times  violent  hunger,  at  others  no  appetite.

Constant  thirst ;  yet  drinking  takes  the  breath ;  must  stop  fre-
quently during  a  draught.

■  Thirst  during  the  heat.

Thirst  for  milk  with  sweat  all  over.
^®  Eating  and  Drinking. Apt  to  "choke" when  eating  and
drinking. (Verschliickern.)
Swallows  food  and  drink  hastily, d  Rage.

■  ■Symptoms  disappear  during  dinner,. -but  begin  anew  after

two  hours, d  Headache,  dry  throat,  dyspepsia,  etc.

■  Worse  after  eating:  head,  stomach  and  bowel  symptoms  ;  rough

throat ;  nausea ;  pressure  in  the  liver ;  short  breath  ;  violent
cough  (after  drinking) ;  heartburn  ;  flying  heat  over  the  face.

Warm  food  causes  toothache.

Sweat  lessened  while  eating.

■  Weak  digestion  in  hypochondriacs.
Hypochondriac  mood  after  eating.

^®  Hiccough,  Belching,  Nausea  and  Vomiting. Hiccough.
Eructations :  empty ;  fluid,  causing  choking ;  with  spasmodic

pain  in  stomach.
Heartburn  after  eating  soup.
Burning  rising  from  stomach  to  throat.


ANACARDIUM  ORIENTALE.  260

■  Nausea  in  morning  with  empty  feeling  in  stomach.
Nausea, with retching, returning  soon after drinking cold

water ;  vomiting  of  the  water  with  pain,  as  if  the  oesophagus
was  distended  by  a  large  ball.

I  After  the  cough  vomiting  of  ingesta,  which  gives  relief.
''^  Scrobiculum  and  Stomach. Sensation  of  fasting  in  pit  of
stomach,  followed  by  pressure  in  the  stomach  ;  worse  awak-
ing mornings.

Stitch  in  pit  of  stomach  during  inspiration.

Rumbling  and  fermentation  in  pit  of  stomach.

I  Weak  digestion,  with  fullness  and  distension  of  abdomen  and
hypochondriacal  humor.

Spasmodic  pain  in  stomach,  with  belching.

Every  step  shakes  the  stomach.

I  Catarrh  of  the  stomach,  with  drawing  together  and  shooting
pains.

■  Drawing  pain  in  cardiac  end  of  stomach  on  walking  fast.
^^  Hypochondria. Stitches  in  the  hypochondria.

Pressure  in  the  liver.
Pain  in  the  spben,  with  fever.
'^  Abdomen. iPain around  the  navel, as  if  a  blunt  plug  was
pressed  into  the  intestines.
Continual  rumbling  in  abdomen,  especially  in  umbilical  region.
Pinching  and  griping  in  the  abdomen.
Bursting  pain  in  abdomen, d  Pertussis.

■  Hardness  of  the  abdomen.

I  I  Faint-like  weakness  in  abdomen  and  knees.
Fullness  and  distension  of  abdomen.
^^  Stools,  Rectum  and  Anus. Stools  of  very  pale  color.
Stools  mush-like,  bloody,  brown,  liver-like ;  painless.

■  ■Great  and  urgent  desire  for  stool,  but  with  the  effort  the  de-

sire passes  away,  without  an  evacuation ;  the  rectum  seems

powerless,  with  sensation  as  if  plugged  up.
Diarrhoea-like  stools.
Summer  complaint  with  stupor,  thirst,  vomiting,  fever.

■  Frequent  profuse  hemorrhage  when  at  stool. 6  Hemorrhoids.
Itching  at  the  anus.

Moisture  from  the  rectum.

■  Inactivity  of  the  rectum,  even  the  soft  stool  is  passed  with

difficulty.
Unsuccessful  urging  to  stool.

■  Painful  hemorrhoidal  tumors.

■  Internal  piles,  especially  if  fissured.

^^  Urinary  Organs. Constant  desire  to  urinate.
Frequent  urging  with  but  small  discharge.
Urine :  clear  as  water ;  urine  turbid  when  passed,  deposits  a

dirty  sediment.
When  shaken  urine  looks  clay-colored.


261  ANACARDIUM  ORIENTALE.

Urine  passed  involuntarily.

I  Frequent  urination  at  night. 6  Apoplexy.

Prostatic  juice  with  even  a  soft  stool ;  also  after  urinating.
^^  Male  Sexual  Organs. Violent  sexual  desire.

Erections  during  the  day.

Seminal  emissions  at  night,  without  amorous  dreams.

Want  of  enjoyment  during  coitus.

Cutting  pain  along  the  penis.

Voluptuous  itching  of  the  scrotum,  exciting  sexual  desire.

Burning  in  the  glans  before  and  after  urinating.
"^  Female  Sexual  Organs. Pain  in  abdomen  with pressing  in
the  uterus.

iMenses  scanty  but  frequent. ^  Dysmenorrhoea.

!  Spasmodic  pains  deep  in  the  abdomen. ^  Dysmenorrhoea.

I  Leucorrhoea,  causing  soreness  and  itching.
24  Pregnancy  and  Parturition. iNausea  during  pregnancy,
worse  before  and  after,  but  better  while  eating.

Much  loss  of  blood  after  an  abortion.

I  Melancholia  after  childbed.
^^  Voice and Larynx. Trachea and Bronchia. Voice
hoarse  and  deep,  with  roughness  in  throat.

Talking  excites  cough.

Pressure  or  aching  near  larynx.

Pressure  in  pit  of  throat.

Rattling  in  windpipe  when  lying  on  side.
^^  Respiration. The  breath  has  a  bad  odor.

From  breathing  deeply  or  coughing  :  pain  in  vertex.

Shortness  of  breath,  oppression  in  region  of  sternum.

Anxiety  in  region  of  sternum, without  pain;  feels as  if  he
must  go  into  the  open  air  and  busy  himself

Loss  of  breath  on  beginning  to  cough.

Oppression  of  the  chest,  with  internal  heat  and  anxiety  driving
him  into  the  open  air.

■  Attacks  of  suffocation. ^Pertussis.

^^  Cough. Excited  by  :  talking  ;  tickling  in  trachea.

Cough  worse,  not  while  eating,  but  after  eating,  with  vomiting

of  food.
I  Cough  worse  after  meals. ^Apoplexy.
Paroxysms  every  three  to  four  hours  ;  more  violent  every  other

or  every  third  day.

■  Violent  cough,  with  loss  of  smell  and  taste.

When  coughing:  pain  in  occiput;  abdomen  feels  as  if  it  would

burst.
I  I  Deep  hollow  cough,  wakes  him  at  night.
Violent,  concussive  cough. ^Pertussis.

■  Yawning  and  sleepiness  after  cough.

Expectoration : of sweetish,  jflat tasting  mucus ; tenacious
grayish-yellow  ;  purulent.


ANACARDIUM  ORIENTALB.  262

I  Expectoration  only  during  the  day.
^^  Inner  Chest  and  Lungs. Chest  oppressed  with  anxiety  and

internal  heat.
I  Dull  pressure,  as  from  a  plug  in  right  side  of  chest.
Sharp  stitches  in  prsecordial  region,  extending  thence  to  small

of  back.
Rawness  and  scraping  in  chest.

■  Violent  pressure  in  the  chest. ^Pertussis.
I  Chest  contracted  in  walking, d  Headache.

'^^  Heart  and  Pulse. Restless  feeling  at  the  heart.

I  I  Rheumatic  aifections  of  the  pericardium.

Stitch  in  the  region  of  the  heart,  during  inspiration,  at  night.

I  Stitches  piercing  through and  through  at  the  heart;  each
time  two  quickly  succeeding  each  other.

Pulse  generally  accelerated,  with  beating  in  the  blood-vessels.

I  Pulse  frequent,  face  red. ^Melancholia.
^"  Outer  Chest. Itching  on  the  chest.

I  I  Violent  eczema  on  breast  and  throat.

Redness  of  the  skin,  with  little  blisters  itching intolerably.
^^  Neck  and  Back. Pain  in  nape  of  neck  and  occiput.

Stiffness  of  nape  of  neck.

Feeling  as  from  a  tightly  drawn  tape  from  ear  to  ear. See  3.

Dull  intermittent  pressure,  as  from a heavy load  on  right
side  of  neck  and  left  acromion.

Painful  tearing  between  the  scapulae.

Dull  stitches  in  left  scapula. See  32.

I  I  Backache,  upper  part  feels  as  if  beaten. ^Headache.

Stiffness  in  small  of  back.
^"  Upper  Limbs. Dull  stitches in  left scapula,  return slowly
and  radiate  to  all  sides.

Sensation  of  weakness  in  the  arms,  with  trembling.

Very  painful  strokes,  as  from  a  heavy  body  at  the  middle  of
the  left  upper  arm.

Left  arm  "  goes  to  sleep,"  also  the  fingers.

Stitches  and  heaviness  in  the  forearm.

Tensive  pain  and  weakness  in  the  arms.

Small  blisters  on  back  of  hands.

Sweat  in  the  inside  of  hands ; <  1.

Fingers  twitch  during  sleep.

I  Cramp-like  pain  at  the  metacarpo-phalangeal  articulations  ;
cramp-like  twitches  in  the  fingers.

I  Great  feeling  of  dryness  of  the  hands.

Hands,  even  the  palms,  covered  with  warts.

Numbness  of  the  fingers.

1  Fourth  and  fifth  fingers  fall  asleep  if  they  get  cool, d  Anosmia.

■  Writer's  spasm.

■  Panaritium.

Trem.blina:  of  the  right  hand.


263  ANACARDIUM  ORIENTALE.

Pustules  on  the  fingers.
^^  Lower  Limbs. iPain  in  the  head  of  the  femur,  extending  to
the  groin.

■  Shooting  burning  from thigh  to  foot, ceasing  at  times  and

suddenly  returning, d  Rheumatism.

Dull  pressure,  as  from  a  plug,  in  the  left  glutei  muscles.

Painful  dull  pointed  pressure  in  the  thigh,  at  times  in  ryth-
mical intermissions.

Legs  tense,  as  if  too  short.

■  Legs  stiff,  as  if  bandaged,  with  painful  restlessness  in  them,
I  I  Legs  lame  after  apoplexy.

I  Painful  uneasiness  about  the  knees,  with  sensation  of  stiff-
ness as  if  bandaged  or  made  tense,  when  sitting.

Wave-like  twitches,  here  and  there,  in  the  legs.

I  Knees  feel  paralyzed,  with  stiffness,  great  lassitude  and  drow-
siness ;  is  scarcely  able  to  walk.

I  An  ulcer  below  the  knee.

I  Limbs  start  violently  when  lying down;  in an  old  woman.

I I  Cramp  in  the  calves  when  walking,  lor  rising  from  a  seat ;
better  lying  down.

Painful  drawing  in  the  tibia.

I  Cramp-like  pressure  in  the  calves,  externally, towards  the

tibia.
I  Cramp-like,  intermittent  drawing,  from  the  heel  up  into  the

calves.
Pain  in  ankle,  as  if  sprained,  when  stepping  on  left  foot.
I  Stitches  in  dorsum  of  foot.
I  Cramp-like  drawing  and  tearing  pains,  frum  the  toes  to  the

dorsum  of  foot.
Burning  in  soles,  while  sitting.
Coldness  of  feet  in  the  morning.

■  Chilblains.

^*  Limbs  in  General. Tired  feeling  in  the  limbs,  trembling,
with  feverish  restlessness.
I  I  Repeated  tearings  in  paroxysms,  through  upper  and  lower

limbs  at  same  time, d  Headache.
Heaviness  in  the  limbs,  especially  in  the  knees.
Weakness  in  arms  and  knees,  with  trembling.
^'  Position. Motion. Lying  down  :  headache  relieved  ;  limbs
start  violently  ;  cramps  in  calf  better.
Lying  on  the  side :  rattling  in  the  windpipe.
Must  lie  down :  headache.
Sitting :  painful uneasiness  and  stiffness  of  knees ; burning

in  soles ;  sweats.
Rising  from  a  seat :  cramp  in  calf.

Rising  from  stooping :  feels  as  if  turning  around  to  the  left.
Stooping :  feels  as  if  turning  around  to  the  left.


ANACARDIUM  OEIENTALE.  264

Beginning  to  walk : is  toilsome,  but  by  continuing  he  feels

better.
Walking :  feels  anxious ;  vertigo ;  drawing  pain  in  stomach  ;

cramp  in  calf;  pains  in  lower  limbs.
Stepping :  headache  worse ;  stomach  shakes ;  pain in  ankle.
Ascending  stairs :  feels  faint.
Motion: I  I  headache  worse;  causes  trembling.
Playing  piano  :  heaviness  and  fullness  of  the  whole  body.
After  hard  labor  :  headache.
^®  Nerves. Paralysis  of  single  parts.

(Incomplete  palsy  of  the  muscles  subject  to  volition.
Restlessness.

Tired  feeling  in  all  limbs.

I  Wants  to  lie  or  sit  continually  ;  can  scarcely  move  a  hand.
Trembling  :  from  every  motion.
I  Trembling  weakness  of  the  limbs. ^Apoplexy.
lA^ery  faint  from  going  up  stairs.

Heaviness  and  fullness  of  whole  body  from  playing  the  piano.
Violent  concussion  of  the  whole  body. 6  Pertussis.
I  Tetanus.
■  Epilepsy.
^^  Sleep. I  Gaping  and  drowsiness  after  cough. ^Pertussis.
Headache  better  after  falling  asleep.
Sleepless  from  restlessness,  cannot  keep  still.
I  I  Could  not  sleep  well  on  account  of  itching.
Sound  sleep  until  9  a.m.
Vivid  dreams  at  night,  which  recurred  to  him  during  the  day,

as  if  the  things  dreamed  of  had  really  happened.
Dreams :  of smelling  burning  spunk or  sulphur, continues

after  waking ;  of  fire  ;  of  dead  bodies.
On  lying  down  to  sleep  :  legs  start. See  33.
Headache  worse  after  getting  awake  in  the  morning.
^^  Time. Most  prominent  times of  aggravation, morning, and

evening  until  midnight.
Remission  after  midnight  and  during  the  day.
Day : flickering before eyes ; expectoration from cough ;

erections.
Night :  blindness  ;  seminal  emissions  ;  cough  ; vivid  dreams.
Morning:  memory  impaired; pressure  in  forehead;  smell  of

tinder  when  rising ; nausea ; sensation  of  fasting  and  press-
ure in  stomach  ; cold  feet ; sound  sleep  till  9  o'clock.
Forenoon: memory  deficient; hypochondriac  mood; speech

less  firm  than  in  afternoon.
Afternoon :  memory  better  than  in forenoon  ; speech  firmer

than  in  forenoon.
4  P.M.:  heat  daily.
Evening:  pressure  in  forehead;  heat  from  4  p.m.;  sweat  on

abdomen  and  back  ;  itchingr.


265  ANACARDIUM  ORIENTALE.

9  to  10  P.M.:  excitement  of  fancy  ;  later,  dull.

After  10  P.M.:  dull,  does  not  think.
^'  Temperature  and  Weather. Sensitive  to  draft ;  liable  to
take  cold.

Open  air  :  toothache  worse ;  feels  as  if  he  must  go  into  it,  26  ;
chill ;  blisters  harden  to  a  crust.  ♦

Sunshine :  relieves  chill.

Warm  room: internal  chill.
*"  Fever. Chill  especially  in  the  open  air, relieved  in  the  sun-
shine.

Internal  chill,  even  in  a  warm  room.

Shaking  chill,  with  ill-humor  and  restlessness.

Cold  forehead  and  red  cheeks.

External  heat,  with  internal  chill.

Shivering  over  the  back,  as  if  cold  water  was  poured  over  it,
with  heat  of  the  face.

Heat  of  the  upper  part  of  the  body,  with  cold  feet ;  internal
chilliness  and  hot  breath.

Internal  heat  with  cold  sweat.

Outer  and  inner  heat,  with  thirst  and  whimpering  in  sleep.

Heat  from  4  p.m.  till  evening,  daily;  passing  off  after  supper.

Heat  of  left  side.

■  Violent  fever  heat;  headache  and  great  thirst. ^Pemphigus.
Sweat  on  the  head,  abdomen  and  back,  evenings.
Night-sweat  on  abdomen  and  back.

Clammy  sweat  in  the  palms,  particularly  the  left.
Sweat  lessened  while  eating.

■  Sweats  when  sitting.

^'  Attacks. The  attacks  cease  for  one  or  two  days  and  then  con-
tinue again  for  a  couple  of  days.

■  Tertian  and  quartan  intermittents.

Paroxysms  of  cough  every  three  to  four  hours,  more  violent
every  other  or  every  third  day.

Two  stitches  quickly  succeed  each  other. See  29.

Dull,  radiating  stitches  return  slowly. See  32.

Ceasing  and  suddenly  returning. See  33.

Heat  daily  from  4  p.m.  till  evening.
*^  Locality  and  Direction.  Right :  dull  pressure,  digging  and
throbbing  in  upper  border  of  orbit ;  pressure  in  temple ;
stupefaction  of  whole  side  of  head ;  digging  and  throbbing
in  side  of  head ;  pressure  in  side  of  occiput ;  pustule  in
nostril ;  herpes  on  cheek ;  tearing  in  face  and  neck ;
pressure  in  chest ;  dull  pressure  on  side  of  neck ;  trembling
of  hand.

Left :  pressure  in  temple  ;  pressure  in  side  of  vertex  ;  stitches
in  side  of  head ;  I  I  obstruction  in  the  ear ;  I  I  tearing  or
stitching  in  the  ear ;  obstructed  nostril ;  face  swollen  and
covered  with  blisters  ;  tearing  in  the  teeth  ;  sharp  stitches


ANACARDIUM  ORIENTALE.  266

in  chest ;  pressure  in  acromion  ;  dull  stitches  in  scapula  ;
I  I  painfulness  of  middle  of  upper  arm  ;  I  I  arm  and  fingers
"go  to  sleep;"  dull  pressure  in  glutei  muscles;  pain  in
ankle;  heat;  clammy  sweat  in  palm.

Without  inward :  pressive  pain  in  temples.

Before  backwards  :  pressure  on  eyeball.

Above  downwards  :  pressure  on  eyeball.

Below  upwards :  cramp-like  drawing  in  lower  limbs.

Diagonally :  stitches  from  prsecordia  to  small  of  back.
^^  Sensations. I  Pressing  or  penetrating  pain,  as  from a  plug,
in  diiferent  parts.

1 1  Sensation  as  of  a  hoop  or  band  around  the  part.

Sensation  as  if  stuffed  up.

The  burning  changes  to  an  extremely  painful  itching,  com-
bined with  pricking,  like  stings  of  insects.

Stitches  :  over  r.  eye  ;  in  1.  side  of  head  ;  in  brain  ;  in  1.  ear  ;
in  pit  of  stomach  during  inspiration  ;  in  hypochondria ;
in  precordial  region  to  small  of  back  ;  in  region  of  heart
during  inspiration  ;  piercing  heart ;  dull  —  in  1.  scapula ;
in  forearm  ;  in  dorsum  of  foot.

Cutting  :  along  penis.

Pinching  and  griping  :  in  abdomen.

Tearing  pain  :  and  throbbing  in  vertex  ;  —  and  pressing  in
forehead  and  temples ;  in  occiput ;  —  headache  extending
into  muscles  of  neck  and  throat ;  in  1.  ear ;  in  face ;  re-
peatedly in  r.  side  of  face  and  neck  ;  in  teeth  ;  between
scapulae ;  from  toe  to  dorsum  of  foot ;  in  paroxysms  through
limbs.

Burning :  in  face ;  —  dryness  of  lips  ;  on  chin  ;  in  glans,  be-
fore and  after  urinating ;  —  and  shooting  from  thigh  to
foot ;  in  soles  ;  herpes  ;  in  skin.

Soreness  :  in  boils  on  scalp  ;  in  ear  when  biting  teeth  together ;
in  pustule,  in  r.  nostril  when  touched ;  from  leucorrhoea.

Rawness  :  and  roughness  in  throat ;  —  and  scraping  in  chest.

Pressure :  in  forehead ;  as  from  a  plug  on  1.  side  of  vertex  and
on  upper  border  of  r.  orbit ;  in  temples ;  from  temples  to-
wards eyes ;  in  top  of  head ;  from  without  inwards,  in
temples ;  in  r.  side  of  occiput ;  without  inward,  from  fore-
head over  head  ;  from  within  outwai'd,  from  forehead-  back-
wards ;  on  eyeball,  from  before  backward  ;  in  stomach,  pre-
ceded by  emptiness  ;  in  liver ;  as  from  a  plug  around  navel ;
in  rectum  ;  on  uterus  ;  —  or  aching  near  larynx  ;  in  throat-
pit  ;  as  from  a  plug  in  r.  side  of  chest ;  in  1.  glutei  muscles  ;
in  thigh.

Drawing  pain  :  in  cardiac  end  of  stomach  ;  in  tibia ;  cramp-like
drawing  from  heel  into  calves.

Tensive  pain  :  in  arm.

Spasmodic  pain  :  in  stomach ;  deep  in  abdomen.


267  ANACAHDIUM  ORIENTALE.

Cramp-like  pain  :  at  metacarpo-phalangeal  articulations  ;  from

toes  to  dorsum  of  foot ;  in  muscles.
Cramp  :  in  calves  when  walking.
Contracting  pain  :  in  nose.

Constriction  :  in  forehead  ;  like  a  band  around  head.
Sprained  feeling  :  in  ankle.
,  Lameness  :  in  legs  ; in  knees.
Stiffness  :  in  nape  of  neck  ; in  small of  back ; in  legs,  as  if

bandaged  ;  about  the  knees.
Dullness :  of  head.
Stupefaction  :  of  side  of  head.
Tired  feeling  ;  in  limbs.
Heat :  in  head  ;  in  face ; internally  with  anxiety  ; in  upper

part of  body while feet are cold ; internally, with  cold

sweat;  from  4  p.m.  till  evening,  daily;  of  1.  side.
Throbbing : headache ; and  digging  in  r.  side  of  head ; and

tearing  in  vertex  ;  in  occiput.
Bursting  pain  :  in  abdomen,  when  coughing.
Weakness  :  in  arms  and  knees ;  in  arms  with  trembling.
Heaviness :  in  forearm  ;  in  limbs,  especially  in  knees.
Oppression  :  in  region  of  sternum  ;  of  chest.
Numbness  :  1.  arm ;  fingers  ;  in  head.
Itching :  of  scalp ; on  forehead ; in ears ; in face ; —  and

crawling  in  eruption  around  mouth ;  at  anus ; of  scrotum,

exciting  sexual  desire  ; on  chest ;  of  little  blisters  on  breast

and  throat.
Trembling :  in  limbs.
Twitching  :  in  1. eye ; of  mouth  in  sleep ; of  fingers  during

sleep.
Wave-like  twitches  here  and  there  in  the  legs.
Painful  strokes  at  middle  of  1.  upper  arm.
Dryness :  of  hands.
Coldness  :  on  forehead  ; of  feet  in  morning ; as  if  cold  water

were  poured  over  the  back.
**  Tissues. Cramp-like  pains  in  the  muscles.

■  Contraction  of  joints.
Complaints  of  external  parts.
Emaciation.

Such  a  swelling  of  the  affected  parts  that  the  patient  looks  like
a  hogshead  (from  wearing  the  nut).
"  Touch. Passive  Motion. Touch  :  soreness  of  boils  on  scalp
worse  ;  soreness  of  pustule  in  nose  worse  ;  toothache  worse.

Pressure :  relieves  pain  in  forehead  for  a  while.

Scratching :  itching  generally  aggravated,  but  sometimes  im-
proved or  changed  in  location ;  boils  on  scalp  worse.

Rubbing :  gums  bleed.

■  Wounded  tendons.


ANACARDIUM  ORIENTALE.  268

^^  Skin.  Bright  scarlet  eruptions  of  the  whole  body,  especially  of
the  thighs  in  contact  with  the  nut,  and  of  the  abdomen.

Destruction  of  the  epidermis,  leaving  an  inflamed  surface
covered  with  small  miliary  pustules,  with  unbearable  itching
and  discharging  a  yellow  liquid  forming  crusts  (by  applying
the  juice).

Intense  redness  of  the  skin,  with  eruption  of  little  blisters  and
unbearable  itching.

Chest,  neck,  axillae,  upper  arms,  abdomen,  scrotum  and  thighs
were  not  only  covered  with  raised  crusts,  discharging  a
thick  yellowish  liquid,  but  these  had  partly  changed  into
wart-like  excrescences,  with  thickened  epidermis,  the  whole
intermediate  skin  being  of  an  erythematous  redness,  and  the
itching  fearful  (from  wearing  the  nut).

iWhite  herpetic  spots,  scaling.

Want  of  irritability  of  the  skin  ;  sinapisms  will  not  excite  it.

Itching  worse  in  the  evening  and  when  he  went  to  bed.

Burning  and  stinging  herpes.

■  Excessively  itching  eruptions.

Blisters  discharging  a  yellowish  transparant  liquid,  hardening

to  a  crust  in  the  open  air.
Effects  like  those  of  the  Rhus  tox.  plant  on  the  skin.
Warts  even  on  palms  of  hands.
I  Skin  burns  her  very  much. ^Pemphigus.
B  Scarlet  red  oyer  the  whole  body, d  Pemphigus.
I  Covered  all  over  with  blisters  from  size  of  a  pin  head  up  to  a

pea. ^Pemphigus.

■  Furuncles.

■  Memory  impaired  after  small-pox.

*^  Stages  of  Life,  Constitution.  Ill-natured  children  with
pertussis.

■  Old  people.

Frequently  indicated  in  nervous  and  hysterical  females.

Women  during  pregnancy,  gastric  and  nervous  disorders.

Hypochondriacs.

Man,  get. 72,  apoplexy  ; after  it  Bellad.,  Opium  and  Anac.

and  after  it  Baryta.
Widow,  set.  69, talkative soon after mortification ;  tearing,

mortifying  talks. 6  Insanity.
Similar to : Ant. tart, (cough in  high-tempered children ;

gaping,  drowsy  after  cough) ;  Apis  (skin) ;  Coriaria  ruscifolia

(loss  of  memory, etc.);  Ferrum  (occiput  pains  in cough);

lodium  ;  Juglans  ;  Lycop  ;  Nitr.  ae.  (cursing) ;  JVux  vom.;

Phosph. ac. (brain) ;  Platin.; Pulsat.; Urt. ur. (skin) ;

Zincum  (brain) ;  Pulsat.,  Natr.  mur.  (dry  coryza) ;  Caustic.

(in  writers'  spasm).
Relatives : Anac. occid., Comoc,  Rhus  glab., Rhus rad.,

Rhus  tox..  Rhus  ven.


269  ANAC.  ORIENT.— ANAG.  ARVEN.

Antidotes: Coffea  and  Juglans.

Anac.  antidotes:  Rhus  tox.,  especially  if  there  are  gastric
symptoms,  or  the  symptoms  go  from  right  to  left.

It  follows  well  after  Lycop.,  Pulsat.  and  Platin.

After  Anac:  Platin.  follows  well.

Belongs  to  the  same  family  as  the  Rlioes,  and  there  is  a  simi-
larity with  the Terehinthinece.

Neither  Camjolior  nor  Sjnr.  nitr.  dulc.  antidotes  its  eifects,
but  for  the  anger  and  violence  of  mind,  the  smelling  of  raw
coffee  is  a  very  effectual  antidote.

ANAGALLIS  ARVENSIS,

Scarlet  Pimpernel.  Primulaceoe.

The  common  red  chickweed.  A  little  herb  growing  by  the  wayside,  in
fields  and  gardens,  known  since  Dioscorides,  and  a  famous  polychrest
through  all  ages.  Allen  has  only  Schreter's  provings,  not  the  French.
We  add  Dr.  Giinther's  valuable  proving.  He  collected  the  plaoits
in  Rhode  Island.  Giinther  and  his  son  took  10  drops  of  the  tincture  in
water,  finally  the  tincture  itself  from  10  to  15  drops  every  day,  from  Jan-
uary 27th  to  February  14th,  1854.  He  took  the  red  flowered  variety  ;  some
make  a  distinction  between  this  and  the  blue  flowered,  or  coerulea.

^  Mind. Exhilarated,  mind  very  active ;  thinks  of  everything.

Cannot  collect  his  thoughts  while  listening  to  a  sermon,  on  ac-
count of  very  joyful  feelings,  without  special  cause.

Great  hilarity  for  several  days  ;  every  thing  gives  him  pleasure.

Frenzy  in  continued  fever ;  febrile  delirium.

Anxiety  in  the  chest. See  29.

Despondency.

After  mental  exertion,  great  prostration.

•Hypochondriasis,  (hence  its  Greek  name,  signifying  "to
laugh  ").

\  Mania.
Sensorium. I  l  Vertigo  (coerulea).

\  Epilepsy.
^  Inner  Head. Heat  rising  to  the  head, slight  sweat  on  the
forehead,  followed  by  pressing  stitching  in  the  eyeballs  and
a  tickling,  pricking  in  the  urethra,  inclining  him  to  coition.

Headache  just  over  the  supra-orbital  ridges,  with  eructations
and  rumbling  in  the  bowels.

Spasmodic  lancinations  in  both  temples,  extending  to  the  eyes.


ANAGALLIS  ARVENSIS.  270

Headache  with  fever  (coerulea).

Pressive  aching  in  forehead and  occiput  from  a  current  of  air

blowing  on  him.
Intense headache and nausea, with pains throughout the

body.
Occiput : dull or tearing pains and inclination to vomit ;

violent  headache,  with  hard, knotty  stools ;  knocking  pain

in  left  side ;  dull  pain  all  night.
Headache  relieved  by  coffee.
^  Outer  Head. Skin  of  the  forehead  feels  too  tight.

When  closing  the  eyes  or  wrinkling  the  brows,  <  on  1.  side.

Vehement  itching  on  vertex  and  occiput.

Stitches  on  several  places  of  the  scalp,  chiefly  over  the  left  ear

and  on  the  occiput.
Chilly  sensation  on  the  right  frontal  protuberance.
Violent  pain  as  if  occasioned  by  external  pressure  on  occiput

behind  1.  ear.
^  Eyes. I  I  Things  seem  to  float  to  and  fro,  he  cannot  write.
\  Amblyopia.

•  Cataract.

Glittering  before  the  left  eye  ;  evening,  by  candle-light.
Pressing  in  the  eyes  after  the  headache. See  3,  6.
Stitches  in  the  temples  extending  into  the  eyes.
' Pain  in  the  right  eyeball,  worse  from  touching  the  lids.
Itching  of  the  eyelids.

•  Spots  on  the  cornea.

*  Ears. Obstruction  and  pain  in  r.  ear  following  the  pressure  in
the  eyes. See  5.
Violent  stitches  in  the  right  ear.
Pain  in  the  right  ear  as  if  the  meatus  auditorius  externus  was

obstructed.
1 1  Tickling  and  itching  in  the  left  ear.
''  Nose. iNosebleed. d  Syphilis.

Violent  sneezing,  expelling  a  lump  of  viscid  yellow  phlegm.
Unpleasant tickling on the tip of  the nose, with violent

sneezing.
Violent  sneezing  following  pain  in  r.  side  of  back.
Frequent  running  of  water  from  the  nose.
Copious  secretion  of  yellow  phlegm.
^  Face. Neuralgic  pains  in  the  r.  cheek  bone,  extending  to  supra-
orbital region ;  during  the  night.
Pains  in  the  facial  muscles.
I  I  Bran-like,  ring-shaped  tetters  on  the  face.
Itching  on  the  cheek  bones.
^  Lower  Part  of  Face. Itching  and  tickling  stitches  on  left
corner  of  the  mouth  and  lower  lip,  just  under  the  border.
^^  Teeth. Dull  pain  in  a  hollow  tooth, with  trembling  of  the
heart. See  29.


271  ANAGALLIS  ARVENSIS.

Dull  pain  in  upper  molars  and  tearing  pain  in r. cheek  bone.

Teeth  pain  as  from  cold ;  worse  from touch ;  chilly  sensation
in  the  teeth.

Gums  swollen  around  a  hollow  tooth. See  48.

I  I  Dull  pain  in  gums,  accompanied  by  very  hard  stools.
"  Tongue. Sensation  on  the  tongue  as  if  something  cold  were

placed  upon  it ;  also  near  the  frsenum.
^^  Mouth, Viscid  saliva  in  the  mouth,  raised  by  coughing.

Collection  of  water  in  the  mouth,  with  slight  tearing  pains  in
the  molars.
^^  Palate  and  Throat. Il  Sensation  of  dryness  in  the  throat,
with  scraping.

Tickling  at  the  soft  palate  at  night,  as  from  the  touch  of  some-
thing cold.
"  Eating and Drinking. After eating : scratching in the
throat,  25  ;  pressure  on  the  lungs.

Coffee:  relieves  headache.
^®  Belching, Eructations, nausea, inclination to vomit and

rumbling  in  bowels,  with  headache.
^''  Stomach, Inflammation  of  stomach  (horses).
^^  Hypochondria. •  Hepatitis  and  indurated  liver.
^'  Abdomen. Abdomen  distended  with  wind.

Weak  feeling  in  the  abdomen.

Rumbling  in  bowels,  with  headache.

•  Visceral  obstructions.
^"  Rectum  and  Stool, fnflammation  of  rectum  (horses).

Itching  in  the  rectum  ;  pressure  in  the  sacrum  ;  piles.

Passes  offensive  flatus.

Stools  soft  and  pappy.

Diarrhoea  watery.

Stool  hard  like  stone,  knotty. See  3,  10.

Itching  at  the  anus  after  the  evacuation  of  the  bowels.

J  Hemorrhoids.
^^  Urinary  Organs. •  Inflammation  of  kidneys.

Burning  in  the  urethra  when  urinating,  mostly  in  the  morning.

Orifice  seems  agglutinated ;  presses  to  urinate ;  urine  escapes
in  a  divided  stream.

Tickling,  prickling  along  the  urethra,  inclining  to  coitus.

Urine  dark,  sometimes  straw-colored.

Copious  urination  (horses).

I  Gravel.
^^  Male  Sexual  Organs. Desire  for  coition. See  3,  21.

I  Is  said  to  be  useful  in  syphilis  with  deranged  mind,  nosebleed,
pain  in  small  of  back;  skin  itches.

The  burning  in urethra before and during  erection  ceases
during  coition.

I  I  Drawing  pains  in  right  testicle  and  cord.

I  I  Tearing  pains  in  spermatic  cords.


ANAGALLIS  ARYENSIS.  272

Tickling  in  the  symphysis  pubis.
I  Gonorrhoea.
^*  Female  Sexual  Organs. !  Amenorrhoea.

\  Cancer  of  mammiTe.
^*  Pregnancy. Is  given  to  cows  if  they  fail  to  become  pregnant.
^^  Larynx. Sensation  as  if  a  brush  were  brought  in  contact  with
the  epiglottis,  with  hoarseness.
I  I  Scratching  and  scraping  in  the  throat,  especially  after  meals.
1  I  Hoarseness  proceeding  from  the  trachea.
^^  Cough, Cough  dry :  with  a  scratching  sensation  when  reading
aloud  ;  with  yellow  phlegm  from  the  nose  ;  with  spitting  of
saliva.

'^^  Inner  Chest  and  Lungs. A  kind  of  restlessness  in  chest.
I  Soreness  on  the  chest  with  fever.

Pressure  on  the  right  lung  after  a  meal  or  when  walking  fast.
Stitches  in  the  left  side  in  the  region  of  the  fourth  and  fifth  ribs.
Pulsations  in  r.  side  of  chest.
Pains  in  the  lungs  felt  in  front  and  in  the  back  up  to  the

scapulae.
Suddenly  a  feeling  internally  in  the  chest,  as  if  struck  with  a

cushion  full  of  pins.
I  Consumption.

Bluish-red  spot  on  condensed  lungs.
^^  Heart,  Pulse. Violent  trembling  of  heart,  with  general  trem-
bling and  weakness,  preceded  by  aching  in  a  carious  tooth

and  anxiety  in  the  chest  in  the  evening  in  bed. See  1,  10,

28,  36.
I  1  Palpitation.

Coagulated  black  blood  in  chambers  of  heart  (horses).
^^  Outer  Chest. Itching  on  left  side  of  chest,  principally  on  nipple.

I  I  Eruption  on  the  chest.
^^  Neck. Back. Tensive  drawing  from  left  shoulder  up  to  neck  ;

returns  when  lifting  or  stretching  the  arm.
Itching  on  neck  and  scapula ; on  right  scapula.
Pains  in  r.  side  of  back,  followed  by  violent  sneezing.
Trembling  of  muscles  of  neck  (horses). See  34.
Violent  pains  in  the  sacrum  when  lifting  a  slight  load,  they

take  her  breath. See  48.
^^  Upper  Limbs. Tensive  drawing  ascending  from  1.  shoulder  to

the  nape  of  neck,  <  raising  and  extending  the  arm.
Pain  in  the  shoulder  (coerulea).

Pain  in  lungs  and  back  into  the  shoulder  blade. See  28.
Pains  in  the  muscles  of  the  upper  arm, outside, near  the

shoulder.
Drawing  pains  in  the  muscles  of  the  upper  arm,  lasting  for

some  time,  especially  felt  when  moving  the  hand  or  arm,  e.

g.,  in  writing.


273  ANAGALLIS  ARVENSIS.

Pains  in  the  muscles  of  the  upper  arm,  outside,  near  the
shoulder.

Vehement  pains  in  the  muscles  of  the  forearm,  inside,  near  the
elbow-joint.

Pains  in  the  muscles  of  the  forearm,  inside,  near  the  elbow-
joint.

Violent  pains  in  carpal  and  metacarpal  bones,  extending  up  the
arm  to  the  shoulder.

Cramps  in  r.  thenar,  like  that  when  cutting  with  scissors  ;  ceas-
ing on  the  r.,  it  appears  on  the  1.

Drawing  pains  in  the  carpal  and  metacarpal  bones  of  the  r.
hand.

Violent  pains  in  the  carpal  and  metacarpal  bones  of  the  r.
hand,  extending  up  the  arm  to  the  shoulders.

Pains  in  the  1.  thumb,  violent  twitching  in  it.

Violent  pains  in  the  palm  of  the  right  hand,  in  the  fork  of
thumb  and  forefinger.

Drawing  tearing  in  r.  metacarpus,  sometimes  left,  returning  at
regular  intervals.

In  the  metacarpus  of  the  thumb  a  dull  drawing,  or  tearing
mostly  r.  side,  sometimes  also  in  the  1.

When  cutting  with  the  shears  cramp  in  the  ball  of  the  thumb,
when  it  ceased  it  appeared  on  the  left,  in  the  evening.

Intense  pains  in  the  palm  of  the  r.  hand,  in  the  fork  of
thumb  and  forefinger,  with  a  sensation  as  if  a  pin  were  thrust
through  it.

Gouty  swellings  on  the  joints  of  the  fingers.

Itching  on  the  upper  arm,  inside,  immediately  above  the  joint
of  the  elbow.

Itching  on  the  back  of  the  r.  hand.

I  I  Skin  of  the  hands  and  fingers  very  dry,  sticky  and  dirty
looking.

I  I  Tetter  on  the  hands  dry,  bran-like,  st^uamous ;  or  groups  of
small  vesicles,  smarting  and  itchmg,  oozing  a  yellow-brown
lymph  when  scratched,  which  soon  turns  into  a  scurf;  new
vesicles  appear  beneath.

I  I  Dry,  bran-like,  squamous  tetters  on  hands  and  fingers,  prin-
cipally on  the  fore  and  middle  fingers  of  r.  hand.

Tetter  consisting  of  grape-like  groups  of  small  vesicles,  violently
smarting  and  itching  when  scratched,  exuding  a  yellow  or
brownish  lymph,  which soon turns  into a  scurf, beneath
which  rise  again  such  vesicles.
^^  Lower  Limbs. ■  Pain  in  hip  (coerulea).

Lumbago  and  itching.

I  I  Tickling  pains  in  the  right  leg  and  at  the  os  ileum.

Drawing  pains  in  the  muscles  of  the  left  leg ;  tearing  during
the  night.

I  I  Weakness  like  lameness  in  the  right  leg,  as  if  it  was  too  short.
18


ANAGALLIS  ARVENSIS.  274

I  I  Pains  in  the  bend  of  the  left  knee.

Slight  pain  near  the  left  knee  and  in  the  posterior  muscles  of

the  left  leg.
I  I  Sensation  of  tightness  in  the  bend  of  the  left  knee,  as  if  there

was  something  swollen  or  sore.
Pains  in  the  right  leg,  above  the  knee,  in  the  knee  and  shin-
bone,  when  in a sitting  posture  and  having  legs lightly

crossed.
Stitches  in  the  left  shin-bone,  when  in  a  sitting  posture,  but

only  in  moving  leg  or  foot.
Pain  in  r.  shin-bone  when  extending  the  leg.
Cramps  in  the  r.  calf.
Slight  cramps  in  1.  calf.

Pain  at  the  upper  part  of  the  metatarsus  of  right  foot.
Pains  in  the  great  toe  and  little  toe  of  1.  foot,  in  the  morning.
Pain  in  the  curved  or  concave  part  of  the  left  sole.
Pain  in  the  sole  of  the  left  foot  near  the  toes.
^*  Limbs,  in  General. Trembling  of  muscles  of  hind  legs  and

neck  (horses).
•  Gout.
^^  Rest. Position. Motion. In  bed  : trembling  of  the  heart

with  toothache ; chilliness.
Sitting  with  legs  crossed :  pains  in  and  about  right  knee.
Stretching  the  arm  :  tensive  drawing  from  left  shoulder  up  to

neck.
Lifting  :  tensive  drawing  in  left  shoulder  ;  pain  in  sacrum.
Walking:  pressure  on  right  lung.
Motion :  of  leg  or  foot  aggravated  stitches  in  right  and  left

tibia.
^®  Nerves. A  sort  of  chilly  trembling ;  trembling  all  over. See

1,  10,  29.
Great  prostration,  especially  after  mental  work.
I  I  Exhausted  and  drowsy.
I  Epilepsy.
^^  Sleep. Falls  asleep  late ;  sleep  restless  ;  awakens  early,  feeling

unrefreshed.
Agitation  disturbs  rest  at  night.
Sleep  troubled  by  tearing  or  stitching  pains.
Lascivious  dreams.
^^  Time. Night :  dull  pain  in  occiput ;  neuralgia  in  cheek  ;  tick-
ling at  the  palate ;  erections.
Morning :  burning  in  urethra  when  urinating ;  pain  in  feet.
Towards  evening  :  spells  of  chilliness.
Evening :  glittering  before  the  left eye ;  trembling, anxious

feeling  in  chest ;  toothache.
*°  Fever. Trembling  with  chills.

Crawling  and  trembling. See  36.

I  I  Chilliness  followed  by  heat  (coerulea).


275  ANAGALLIS  ARVENSIS.

Spells  of  chilliness  towards  evening  and  in  bed.

Chilliness  penetrating  the  teeth. See  20.

Fever  with  headache  and  sore  chest.

Heat  rises  into  the  head,  with  sweat  on  forehead,  followed  by
sensation  in  eyeballs  and  tickling  in  urethra.

\  Bloody  sweat ;  murrain  of  calves.
*^  Locality and Direction. Below upwards  :  pains in upper
limbs.

Right :  chilly  sensation  on  frontal  protuberance  ;  pain  in  eye-
ball;  pain  and  stitches  in  ear;  drawing  in  testis  and  cord;
pressure  on  lungs ;  itching  on  scapula ;  pains  in  palm  of
hand ;  tickling  pains  in  leg  and  os  ilium  ;  weak,  lame  feel-
ing in  leg ;  pains  in  and  about  knee  and  tibia ;  pain  in  foot.

Left :  knocking  in  side  of  occiput ;  stitches  over  ear ;  glitter-
ing before  the  eye ;  itching  in  ear ;  itching  and  stitches  in
corner  of  mouth ;  itching  on  side  of  chest ;  tensive  drawing
from  shoulder,  31 ;  drawing  in  muscles  of  leg ;  pain  in  knee
and  posterior  muscles  of  leg ;  tight  feeling  in  bend  of  knee  ;
pain  in  tibia ;  pain  in  feet.
*^  Sensations. Teeth  pain  as  from  cold.

Sensation  in  lungs  as  if  struck  with  a  cushion  full  of  pins.

Stitches:  in  eyeballs;  in  temples;  in  scalp;  in  r.  ear;  in  1.
corner  of  mouth ;  in  1.  side,  region  of  fourth  and  fifth  ribs ;
in  1.  tibia;  disturb  sleep.

Neuralgic  pains  :  in  r.  cheek  bone.

Tearing  pain :  in  occiput ;  in  r.  cheek  bone ;  in  molars ;  in
spermatic  cords ;  in  muscles  of  left  leg ; disturbs  sleep.

Drawing  pain :  in  r.  testicle  and  cord ;  tensive  drawing  from
1.  shoulder  to  neck ;  in  r.  metacarpus,  also  tearing ;  in  mus-
cles of  left  leg.

Pressing  pain  :  and  stitching  in  eyeballs  ;  in  forehead  and  oc-
ciput; in  eyes  ;  on  lungs  ;  in  sacrum.

Scratching :  in  throat,  after  eating ;  when  reading  aloud.

Soreness :  on  chest.

Dull  pain  :  in  hollow  tooth  ;  in  upper  molars  ;  in  gums.

Tension  :  in  skin  of  forehead  ;  tensive  drawing  from  1.  shoulder
to  neck  ;  in  bend  of  1.  knee.

Cramp  in  r.  thenar;  in  r.  calf,  slightly  in  left.

Burning :  in  urethra.

Heat :  rising  to  head.

Dryness :  in  throat  with  scraping  ;  of  hands.

Cold  or  chilly  sensation  :  on  r.  frontal  protuberance  ;  in  teeth  ;
as  if  something  cold  were  placed  on  tongue ;  at  soft  palate,
as  from  touch  of  something  cold;  a  sort  of  chilly  trembling.

Tickling :  and  pricking  in  urethra ;  in  1.  ear ;  on  tip  of  nose ;
at  soft  palate  as  from  something  cold  ;  in  urethra,  and  prick-
ling ;  on  symphisis  pubis  ;  as  from  a  brush  against  epiglottis  ;
pains  in  r.  leg  and  at  os  ilium.


ANAG.  ARVEN.— ANANTHERUM MURICATUM. 276

Itching :  on  vertex  and  occiput ;  of  eyelids  ;  in  1.  ear ;  in  face  ;
in  rectum ;  at  anus ;  on  1.  side  of  chest ;  on  neck  and  scap-
ula ;  tetter ;  all  over  skin.
**  Tissues. Pains in the joints going from place to place
(coerulea).

Rheumatic  and  gouty  pains.

\  Dropsy.
^^  Touch, Injuries. Touch  :  aggravates  pain  in  r.  eyeball ;  teeth
painful.

I  Used  in  snake-bites  and  hydrophobia.
*®  Skin. Skin  itches  all  over.

Skin  rough,  dry.

I  I  Dry,  bran-like  tetter  in  rings. See  8,  32.

Ulcers  and  swelling  on  the  joints.

\  Ill-conditioned  ulcers.

j  Promotes  the  expulsion  of  splinters.
*^  Relationship. Collateral  relation  : Cyclam.

Similar  to :  Goffea  (joyous,  excited) ;  Cyclam.  (sneezing) ;
Lith.  c.  (rough  skin,  ringworm) ;  Sepia,  Tellur.  (ring-
worm) ;  Puhat.  (chilliness  ;  catarrhs) ;  Rhus  tox.  (see  below).

Smelling  of  Rhus  tox.  and  an  hour  later  taking  Ooloc,  relieved
the  sacral  pain,  31 ;  Rhus  tox.  relieved  swollen  gums,  10.

Coffee  relieved  the  headache.

It  is  said  to  form  an  important  part  of  Stoy's  medicine  for  hy-
drophobia.


ANANTHERUM  MURICATUM.

Vetiveria  odorata.  Q-raminece.


A  well-known  grass  in  the  East  Indies,  cultivated  on  the  Markarentas
Islands  for  its  medical  use  ;  the  root  is  aromatic  and  stimulating  or  dia-
phoretic.

Proved  and  introduced  by  Dr.  L.  J.  Houat  in  Nouvelles  Donnees,  second
series,  translated  in  Criterio  iledico,  1869,  wol.  10,  p.  183,  and  by  S.  Lilien-
thal,  in  North  American  Journal  of  Homoeopathy,  1870,  vol.  xviii,  p.  176;
again  in  Allen's  Encyclopedia,  Vol.  1,  p.  330.

S.  Lilienthal's  indications  in  his  masterly  treatise  on  Ski7i  Diseases  have
been  inserted  as  cured  symptoms.

^  Mind. Gray  humor,  with  disposition  to  laugh  and  sing.
Sadness,  sheds  tears  easily.
Hypochondriasis  and  dread  of  society.


2/7  ,  ANANTHERUM  MURICATUM.

Restlessness,  irritability  and  suspicion.

Ungovernable  jealousy.

Self  esteem.

Blunted  intellect  and  loss  of  memory.

Monomania  for doing the same  thing  and frequenting  the

same  places.
Delirium,  idiocy,  mania.
^  Sensorium. Vertigo with cerebral  congestion, red  face  and

tendency  to  fall  backwards.
Drunkenness  and  staggering.
Vertigo  with  weakness  in  back  and  legs, unable  to remain

upright.
Vertigo  with  contraction  and  digging  in  inner  canthi  of  eyes,

extending  into  brain.
^  Inner  Head. I  l  Burning,  lancinating,  pulsating  headache,  most

r.  side, forehead  and  temples,  with  nausea, vomiting  and

great  heaviness  of  the  eyes.
I  I  Neuralgic  pain  in  temples,  with  sensation  as  if  pointed  irons

were  thrust  in, producing fits of  craziness ; <<  afternoon

and  night,  from  noise,  light  and  motion.
As  if  head  was  crushed.
Heaviness  and  weakness  of  the  head,  with  pressure  in  occiput,

lets  head  drop  to  one  side.
As  if  something turned  round  in  the  head,  with  pains  in  the

stomach,  great  appetite, colic, venereal  desire, chills  and

choking.
As  if  he  had  water  in  the  head,  <  when  walking.
As  if  the  brain  were  laid  bare  and  cold  air  passed  over  it.
As  if  heavy  objects and  balls moved  about  in  head; <  at

night  and  lying  on  r.  side.
Cramps  and  cold  chill  in  head.
Pains  piercing  the  brain  like steel  arrows from  forehead  to

nape  of  back.
Headache  -<  in  afternoon  :  from  noise,  motion  and  light.
*  Outer  Head. Itching  and  heat  in  head  extending  to  face.
Nervous  trembling  of  head.
■  Herpes  and  ulcers  on  scalp  with  compact,  thick,  humid  scabs

and  prurigo.
Large  tumors  like  lupia  suppurate  and  form  ulcers.
Protuberances  like  exostoses,  on  sinciput  and  temples.
®  Sight  and  Eyes. Photophobia,  light  produces  itching  in  eyes.
Pupils contracted or  dilated,  has to  wink  in order  to  dis-
tinguish objects.
Amaurosis.

The  images  of  objects  are  retained  in  an  annoying  manner.
Black  points,  muscse  volitantes  and  fiery circles  before  eyes.
Everything  seems  excessively  bright  and  shining.


ANANTHERUM  MURICATUM.  278

Sensation of  a great  weight on eyelids  which  keeps  them

closed.
Dull,  dim,  wild,  wandering  eyes,  without  expression.
Heat,  burning,  pressure,  tickling,  pricking  and  painful  stitches

in  eyes.
Swelling  and  pain  as  if  an  abscess  would  form  in  r.  eye.
Spasmodic contraction  of  eyes,  which  remain  turned  upward.
Yellowness  of  sclerotica.
Inflammatory  swelling  and  ulceration  of  margin  of  lids,  with

inability  to  separate  them.
Inverted  lids.

Swelling  and  ulceration  of  lachrymal  glands.
■  Growths  like  warts  and  lupia  on  eyebrows.
^  Hearing  and  Ears. Heat  in  ears, pulsation,  as  of  abscesses.
Digging  stitches  ;  discharge  of  purulent  matter.
Copious  ear-wax  ;  sensation  of  dirt  or  spongy  substance  which

swells  up.
Tissues  in  lobes ;  burning  crusty  eruption,  inability  to  lie  on

ears.
Deafness,  -<  in  evening  and  damp  weather.
Tinnitus.
^  Smell  and  Nose. Stitches  in  nose  with  a  crushing  sensation

at  the  root.
The  air  which  passes  through  the  nostrils  seems  icy  cold  and

causes  sneezing.
Ulcers  in  nostrils. ^Epistaxis.
Fluent  coryza,  with  pressive  pains  in head  and  root  of  nose ;

burning  in  nostrils ;  lachrymation  and  sneezing.
Copious  greenish,  badly  smelling  discharge.
Nose  enlarged,  red  and  covered  with  many  small  blood-vessels.
Inflammation  and  swelling  of  nasal  bones,  with  hammering

pains.
Boils  and  small  tumors,  like  lupia,  on  tip.
Nose  cold,  pale  and  pointed.
®  Face. Tic  douleureux. See  9.

Face  yellowish,  congested,  pale  or  cyanotic.

Itching  and  burning  in  cheeks.

I  Yellow  or  red  spots  ;  stinging  pimples.

I  Ulcers, scabs  or scaly herpes;  falling  off"  of  eyebrows  and

beard.
Erysipelatous swelling ;  closed eyes,  fever, delirium, desire

for  open  air,  even  to  throw  himself  out  of  the  window.
Face  puffy  ;  boils  and  abscesses.
Spasm  of  facial  muscles,  <  left  side.
Painful  shocks  in  different  parts  of  face.
Miliary  and  urticarious  eruptions.
Pain  in  facial  bones  as  if  crushed  or  dislocated.
^  Lower  Part  of  Face. I  '  Convulsive movements  as  from  tic


279  ANANTHERUM  MURICATUM.

douleureux, or  trismus,  with  pains  in lips  and  chin  ;  jaws
spasmodically  clenched.

Lips  fatty,  oily,  enlarged,  inflamed,  covered  with  phlyctenge
constantly  renewed  ;  dry,  pinched  and  contracted.

Lips enormously swollen, ulcerated, everted, of a bluish-
yellow.
I  Submaxillary  and cervical  glands  swell  and tend to sup-
puration.
I  Ulcers  at  labial  commissures;  syphilitic.
*"  Teeth  and  Gums, i  Scurvy.

Lancinating,  digging  and  drawing  in  teeth,  or  as  if  forcibly
separated  or  pulled  and  torn  out  with  pincers.

Constant  inclination  to  clench  the  teeth.

Sensation  of  cold  in  teeth  with  heat  in  gums  and  mouth.

Toothache  in  afternoon  and  from  taking  anything  cold ;  <  at
night,  in  cool  air,  when  eating,  in  changes  of  weather,  from
wine  and  coffee.

Decayed  crumbling  teeth  ;  bad  smell  from  mouth.
^^  Taste,  Speech,  Tongue. Taste  bitter,  bloody,  sweet  or  flat.

Difiicuit  speech,  stammering.

Tongue  inflamed  and  enormously  swollen,  great  diflSculty  in
speaking.

Severe  pains  at  root  of  tongue  as  if  it  were  cut  ofl".

Tongue  fissured,  lacerated,  and  as  if  cut  on  its  edges,  with  co-
pious salivation  and  debility,  as  from  the  efi"ects  of  mercury.

Grayish,  yellowish,  bloody  or  brick-dust  coating  on  the  tongue.
^^  Inner Mouth. Gum-boils, ulcers, aphthae,  swollen  salivary
and  submaxillary  glands.

Flow  of  thick  viscid  saliva.
'^  Throat. Inflammation  of  throat  with  sensation  of  fullness  and
obstruction,  as  if  it  were  plugged.

Burning,  as  of  mustard,  with  violent  convulsive  cough.

Inflammation,  swelling  and  suppuration  of  tonsils.

Angina  with  almost  impossible  deglutition.

Constriction  with  danger  of  suff"ocation  ;  debility.

Burning  and  stitches  in  throat.

Sensation  as  if  he  had  a  burning  stick  in  throat,  reaching  down
into  stomach.

Granulations  and  grayish  ulcers  like  false  membranes ;  much
mucus.

Inability  to  drink,  in  spite  of  great  thirst,  on  account  of
spasms  in  throat,  which  contracts  and  feels  tight,  as  soon  as
he  hears  anything  said  about  water,  or  sees  shining  objects.

Sensation,  sometimes  of  burning  heat,  sometimes  of  icy  cold-
ness in  oesophagus.

Tickling  as  of  some  live  thing  in  oesophagus,  with  fits  of  suffb-
cating  cough.


ANANTHERUM  MURICATUM.  280

"  Appetite. Thirst. Morbid  hunger,  wakes  up  in  the  night  to
eat ;  as  if  he  had  a  tapeworm.

Burning  unquenchable  thirst.

Longing  for  aromatic  drinks.
^'  Eating  and  Drinking. I  l  Worse from  coffee, which  subse-
quently relieves.

Toothache  <<  from  wine  and  coffee.
'*  Belching,  Nausea  and  Vomiting. Frequent  empty  belch-
ing ;  painful ;  tasting  of  food  ;  foul.

Nausea; vomiting  of  food,  bile  or  blood; horrible  pains  in
stomach.
^^  Stomach. Very  painful  pressure, like  a  bar, on  the epigas-
trium, with  short  anxious  respiration.

Fullness  and  ulcerated  feeling.

Stitches  and  cramps  in  stomach  and  extremities ;  watery
vomiting;  urging  to  stool,  very  liquid  diarrhoea;  painful
icy  coldness  over  whole  body ;  excessive  thirst ;  pressure
and  constriction  in  epigastrium  ;  spasms  ;  agitation ;  cold
perspiration  especially  in  head.

Contractive,  gnawing  and  tearing  pain  as  if  caused  by  some
living  thing.

Spasm§  and  cramps  in  stomach  hindering  respiration.

Sensation  as  of  tumors,  holes  or  sharp  pebbles  in  his  stomach.

Extreme  debility  coming  from  stomach.

Sensation  as  of  a  hard  tumor  starting  from  the  pylorus,  ex-
tending to  the  liver.

Stitches  in  stomach  extending  into  chest.
^^  Hypochondria. Cramps  in  hepatic  region;  with  sensation  as  if
it  were  full  of  painful  tuberosities.

Pulsative  burning  and  digging  pains  in  region  of  liver.

Inflammation  and  swelling  of  the  liver  as  if  caused  by  ab-
scesses.

Burning  pulsating  and  lancinating  pain  in  region  of  spleen.
^^  Abdomen. Tympanitis  and  colic.

1  I  Twisting  and  tearing  pains  in  the  bowels,  as  in  iliac  passion,
with  nausea  and  vomiting.

Tumor,  like  hernia,  or  like  buboes  in  groin.
^^  Stool  and  Hectum. Stools  mucous,  bloody,  brownish-yellow,
whitish  choleraic ;  offensive,  with colic,  and  burning  in  ab-
domen and  rectum.

Obstinate  constipation,  stool  hard,  knotty,  like  sheep-dung.

Large  hemorrhoidal  tumors  and  abscesses.

Itching  at  anus.
^^  Urinary  Organs. Stitches  and  crushing  pains  in  kidneys.

I  I  Ardor  urin?e.

Urine  discharged  by  drops.

Chalky  sediment.


281  ANANTHERUM  MURICATUM.

Incontinence ;  involuntary  urination  when  walking,  and  during
sleep.
^■^  Male Sexual Organs. Sores on penis  and  in urethra  re-
sembling chancres.

The  venereal  appetite  is  increased  by  every  attempt  to  satisfy
it,  until  it  drives  him  to  onanism  and  madness.

■  Syphilis;  sycosis.

"^  Female  Sexual  Organs. Burning  pain  in  ovaries.

Burning,  crampy,  pinching  and  gnawing  pain  in  womb,  with

great  debility  and  general  prostration.
Hard  tumors,  like  scirrhus,  on  the  neck  of  the  womb.
Stitches  passing  like  strokes  of  lightning  into  womb.
Prolapsus  and  displacement.
Sterility,  as  from  atrophy  of  ovaries.

■  Eruptions,  whitish  and  reddish,  like  sycosis,  in  vulva.

■  Pustules  like confluent  small-pox, like  measles  and  scarlet

fever.
^*  Pregnancy. Erysipelatous  swelling  of  mammae.

■  Ulcerated,  indurated  tumor  in  breast.

■  Excoriation  of  nipples.

^^  Larynx. Hoarseness  and  frequent  aphonia,  with  symptoms  of
tuberculous  or  granular  laryngitis.

■  Difficulty  of  speaking  with  drowsiness, with  glandular  in-

flammation.
Liquids  pass  frequently  into  larynx  and  through  nasal  fossae,

with  violent  jerking  cough.
Raw  corrosive  sensations  in  larynx, or  as  if  it  were  ulcerated

and  cut.
Very  prominent  swelling  of  laryngeal  cartilages.
^^  Cough. Obstinate,  paroxysmal,  shaking  cough,  <  in  the  even-
ing and  nic^ht  and  from  heat.
Dry  cough  and  bloody  expectoration.
Sensation  during  cough  as  if  a  very rough  cord  were  drawn

through  the  bronchi.
^^  Inner  Chest  and  Lungs. Heaviness  and  stitches  in  various

parts  of  chest.
Burning  and  raw  feeling  in  chest.
^^  Heart  and  Pulse. Burning,  stitches  and  cramps  in  cardiac

region,  with  oppression.
Heart  seems  paralyzed,  with  death-like  weakness.
Pulse  slow  and  full,  then  accelerated,  hard  and  dicrotic.
^^  Neck  and  Back. Stiffness  of  neck  and  back.

Paralytic  weakness  of  the  vertebral  column  and  extremities.
Pain  as  if  the  scapulae  were  broken.
Twisting  stabbing  pains  in  kidneys.
Lumbago.
^^  Upper  Limbs. Rheumatic  pain  and  swelling  of  articulations

of  arms  and  hands.


ANANTHERUM  MURICATUM.  282

Burning,  pulsative  pains,  and  pain as  from  whitlow  on  the

fingers.
Diseased  and  deformed  nails.
I  Swelling  of  ganglia  of  axillge  and  chest  (with  breast  tumor).

■  Abscesses,  ulcers  and  fissures  on  arms  and  hands;  also  erup-

tions like  itch  or  lichen.
^^  Lower Limbs. Stiffness, lancinating and  crampy pains  in
sacrum  and  iliac  bone.

Sciatic,  gouty  and  rheumatic  pains  in  legs  and  feet,  especially
in  heels.

Paralytic  weakness  and  palsy  of  legs, with  complete  insensi-
bility.

The  nails  grow  awry  and  hurt  the  toes.

Offensive  foot-sweat.

■  Ulcers  and  boils  on  legs  and  feet. See  46.

^*  Limbs  in  General. BErysipelatous  swellings  of  arms  and  legs.

I  Boils,  abscesses  and  ulcers  on  legs.

I  Ulcers  on  hands  and  legs  and  soles  offset. See  46.
^^  Motion. Position. Motion : increases neuralgic pains in
temples.

Walking :  sensation of  water in head <^ ; incontinence  of
urine.

Lying  on right  side:  sensation  of  balls  and  heavy  objects  in
head  <.
^^  Sleep. I  Drowsiness,  diflBculty  of  speaking.
^^  Time. Afternoon  :  neuralgia  in  temples  •<  ;  toothache  <<•

Evening:  deafness  <<  ;  cough  ■<.

Night :  neuralgia  in  temples  worse  :  sensation  of  heavy  objects
in  head  <; ; toothache  <  ;  cough  <^.
^^  Temperature  and  Weather. Heat :  cough  < .

Damp  weather: deafness  <C.

Air  passing  through  nostrils  seems  icy  cold.

In  cool  air  :  toothache  ■<•

Desire  for  open  air :  facial  erysipelas.

Changes  of  weather :  toothache  <C-
^•^  Fever. iSkin  cold  and  frigid  and  pale  or  violet.

(Stinging  and  burning  heat.
^  Locality  and  Direction. Right :  headache most  on  side  of
forehead  and  temple ;  as  if  abscess  would  form  in  eye.

Left :  spasm  of  facial  muscles  ■<  on  1.  side.
^^  Sensations. Lancinating, burning, deep-seated pains (in
tumors).

As  if  pointed  irons  were  thrust  into  temples.

As  if  something  turned  round  in  head.

As  if  he  had  Avater  in  the  head.

As  if  brain  was  laid  bare  and  cold  air  passed  over  it.

As  if  head  was  crushed.

As  if  objects  and  balls  moved  about  in  head.


288  ANANTHERUM  MURICATUM.

Pains  piercing  brain  like  steel  arrows.

■  Formication  and  itching  as  of  ants,  with  loss  of  sensibility.

As  if  a  rough  cord  were  drawn  through  bronchi,  when  coughing.

Painful  shocks  in  face.

Sensation  of  tumors,  holes  or  sharp  pebbles  in  stomach.

Pains :  in  stomach ;  as  of  an  abscess  in  r.  eye ;  at  root  of
tongue,  as  if  cut  oflE";  horrible  —  in  stomach ;  in  scapulae,  as
if  broken  ;  in  fingers,  like  whitlow.

Lancinating :  headache ;  in  teeth  ; in  sacrum  and iliac bone.

Stitches  :  in  eyes  ;  digging  —  in  ears  ;  in  nose ;  in  throat ;  in
stomach  ;  in  kidneys ;  through  womb  ;  in  chest ;  in  cardiac
region.

Stinging :  pimples.

Pricking :  in  eyes.

Burning :  headache ;  in  eyes ;  eruption  on  ears ;  in  nostrils  ;
in  cheeks ;  in  throat ;  in  region  of  liver  and  spleen ;  in  ab-
domen and  rectum  ;  in  ovaries  ;  in  chest ;  in  cardiac  region  ;
in  fingers.

Drawing :  in  teeth.

Twisting :  and  tearing  in  bowels  ;  and  stabbing  in  kidneys.

Crushed  sensation  :  in  head  ;  at  root  of  nose ;  in  facial  bones ;
in  kidneys.

Gnawing :  in  stomach  ;  in  womb.

Digging :  in  teeth.

Rawness  :  in  larynx  ;  in  chest.

Ulcerated  feeling :  in  stomach.

Hammering :  in  nasal  bones  ;  in  chest.

Pulsating :  headache ;  in  ears  ;  in  region  of  liver  and  spleen  ;
in  fingers.

Contraction  :  and  digging  in  inner  canthi,  extending  into  brain  ;
spasmodic  —  of  eyes  ;  of  lips  ;  of  throat ;  in  epigastrium  ;
in  stomach.

Cramps :  in  head ;  in  stomach  ;  in  limbs ;  in  hepatic  region ;
in  cardiac  region  ;  crampy  pains  in  sacrum.

Neuralgic  pain  :  in  temples  ;  and  weakness  of  head.

Rheumatic  pain  :  in  joints  ;  in  legs  and  feet.

Dislocated  feeling  :  in  facial  bones.

Pressing :  in  occiput ;  in  head  and  root  of  nose ;  in  eyes ;  on
epigastrium.

Weight :  on  eyelids.

Heaviness :  of  eyes.

Heat :  in  eyes ;  in  ears ;  in  gums  and  mouth ;  in  oesophagus.

Coldness  :  of  inhaled  air,  in  nose ;  of  nose ;  in  teeth  ;  in  oeso-
phagus ;  icy  —  over  whole  body.

Fullness  :  in  throat ;  in  stomach.

Tickling :  in  eyes.

Itching :  in  head,  to  face ;  in  eyes,  from  light ;  in  checks ;  at
anus.


ANANTHERUM  MURICATUM.  284

**  Tissues. I  Glandular  inflammation.

iPainful  swelling  of  various  parts  extending  to  suppuration;
especially  of  submaxillary  and  cervical  glands.
*®  Skin. I  Abscesses,  boils  and  ulcers.

■  Erysipelas.

■  Herpes.

■  Miliaria;  measles,  small-pox,  scarlet  fever.

■  Pruritus.

■  Red  pimples,  like  miliaria  or  urticaria.

■  Bluish  scorbutic  spots  on  body.

■  Scarlet  redness  of  skin.

■  Ulcers  yellowish,  violet,  swollen,  everted,  syphilitic,  on  diifer-

ent  places.
*^  Relationship. Coffee  aggravates  at  first,  relieves  afterwards.

Aromatic  liquors  relieve  the  pains.

Similar  to :  Act.  rac,  Agar.,  Arnic,  Bellad.,  Cannab.,
Coffea,  Ignat.,  Kali  hydr..,  Moschus,  Staphys.  (especially
in  headache) ;  Bellad..,  Ewphras.  (eyes) ;  Caustic,  and  Gel-
sem.  (heaviness  of  eyelids) ;  Act.  rac,  Corall.  rub.,  Hydrast.
(air  feels  cold  in  nose) ;  Bryon.,  Calcar.,  Chamom.,  etc.  (tooth-
ace  <  from  cold  air  or  food) ;  Aeon.,  Carb.  veg.,  Chamom.,
CocouL,  Ignat.,  Mercur.,  Nux  vom.,  Puhat.,  Rhus  tox.,
Zincum  (toothache,  <C  from  wine  or  coffee);  Bellad.,
Canthar.,  Sydroph.,  Hyosc,  Laches.,  Stramon.  (hydro-
phobia), see  13).  Sulphur  (hunger  at  night;  Mercur.
(syphilis) ; Thuya  (sycosis).

Inimical :  wine  and  strong  liquors,  /


285  ANGUSTORA.

ANGUSTURA,

Galipea  cusp  aria,  (CT.  S.  D.).  Rutacece.

A  bark  from  Angustura,  South  America,  said  to  come  from  Galipea  offici-
nalis (Hancock),  or  Bonplandia  trifoliata  (Bonpland  and  Humboldt),  but
according  to  Schomburgk  the  tree  is  not  known.

Proved  by  Hahnemann  and  introduced  on  account  of  the  horrible  poi-
soning cases  which  filled  the  journals  from  1804  to  1815.  He  published  it
in  1821,  in  Part  VI.  of  his  Mat.  Med.  His  own  symptoms,  93  in  number;
those  of  his  pupils,  209.

A  British  wholesale  druggist  had  sent  a  lot  of  unsaleable  bark,  coming
from  the  East  Indies,  to  Holland,  and  from  Holland  it  went  all  over  Ger-
many, under  the  name  of  Angustura,  a  bark  which  had  come  into  fashion
for  fever  and  diarrhoea  until  so  many  were  killed  by  it  that  the  sale  of  it
was  forbidden.  It  was  then  found  that  there  were  two  kinds  of  the  bark  in
trade,  the  one  the  vera  the  other  a  falsa.

Chemistry  showed  that  the  one  called /aZsa  contained  strychnine.  In  our
toxicologies  we  find  eleven  cases  of  poisoning  with  it.  Hahnemann  held
the  erroneous  opinion,  which  he  subsequently  modified  (Mat.  Med.  Pura,
2d  edit.,  1827),  that  the  poisonings  were  due  to  the  massive  doses  given  the
sick,  and  he  did  not  include  the  symptoms  of  Angustura  falsa,  as  did  Boen-
ninghausen  some  time  later.

In  the  last  number  of  his  Archives,  1848,  Stapf  published  valuable  obser-
vations of  Dr.  Schreter  on  a  sensitive  woman,  with  the  30th  centes.,  in
water ;  a  table-spoonful  daily  for  sixteen  consecutive  days.  Lembke  made
a  proving  in  1872.  All  are  contained  in  Allen's  Encyclopedia.  For  symp-
toms of  Angustura  falsa,  see  Nucis  vomicse  cortex  (erroneously  called  Brucea
antidysenterica.)

^  Mind. I  I  Disheartened.

No  confidence  in  the  use  of  the  voluntary  muscles ;  could  not
finish  what  he  attempted.

Ill-humored,  oversensitive  to  jokes,  slight  offences  fill  him  with
bitterness.

■  The  slightest  offence,  a  mere  trifle,  irritates, d  Caries.

Pusillanimity.

Great  gloom, d  Threatening  paralysis  of  lower  limbs.

Lively,  in  the  afternoon.

Thinks  about  one  project  and  nothing  else,  with  great  activity
of  mind.

A  kind  of  waking  dream  in  the  afternoon.

Kind  of  absence  of  mind,  wants  now  this  then  that  thing.

Anxiety  with  outward  pressing  in  abdomen,  and  outward  cut-
ting in  chest,  worse  in  bed,  at  night.


ANGUSTURA.  286

Easily  frightened  and  starts.
^  Sensorium. Vertigo  when  crossing  a  running  stream.

Vertigo  as  if  he  was  turned  backward  and  around ;  periodicah

Vertigo  from  the  occiput  forward,  with  pulsating  in  temples.

Heaviness  in  head  with  dizziness.

When  pressing  the  head  on  the  pillow,  benumbing  dizziness.
^  Inner  Head. iMegrim.

■  Pressure  in  both  temples,  as  if  about  to  faint.
Pressure  in  forehead  with  heat  in  face.
Headache  in  evening  until  falling  asleep.

^  Outer  Head, '  l  Drawing  of  head  to  the  r.  side,  later  to  the  left.

Could  not  turn  the  head.

Tensive  pain  in  temporal  muscles,  when  opening  the  jaws.

Pains  in  bones  of  head.
^  Eyes. Dimness  before  the  eyes  from  obscuration  of  the  cornea,
in  the  morning.

I  Shortsightedness.

Reading  makes  dizzy,  sleepy,  and  causes  quivering  between  the
brows.

Dull  aching  over  the  eyes  while  riding  (improved  by  Coffea).
^  Ears. Hearing  more  acute.

Sensation  as  of  something  sticking  in  ear.

Pains  now  in  the  right  then  in  left  ear.

Burning  in  region  of  the  tympanum.

Heat  in  ears  and  both  cheeks  ;  in  lobe  of  ear.

Cramp  in  external  ear.

Behind  the  ears  a  throbbing  as  from  the  large  artery.

Tearing  pain  in  an  abscess  over  the  right  mastoid  process.
^  Nose. Inner  nose  ulcerated.
*  Face. Tension  in  muscles  of  face.

Drawing  in  facial  muscles.

Crawls  over  the  face  after  stool.

Heat  of  forehead,  during  the  night.

Sweat  on  forehead,  in  the  morning.

I  I  Heat  in  face  with  headache ;  heat  in  forehead  at  night.

Cold  cheek  while  the  body  is  warm.

Feels  heat  in  both  cheeks  and  ears  without  external  warmth.

The  red  cheeks  turn  cold.

1  Acute  pains  in  both  cheeks,  occasionally  darting  through  eye-
balls and  temples,  <C  stooping,  stepping,  or  by  mental  ex-
citement ;  debility,  depression  of  spirits,  frequent  chilly
sensations  and  occasional  attacks  of  nausea  and  loroseness  of
bowels.
^  Lower  Part  of  Face. ■  l Exostosis  of  lower  jaw.

■  Trismus  neonatorum  in  cases  where  much  mercury  had  been

given.
Tensive  pain  in  temporal  muscles,  when  opening  the  jaws.


287  -  ANGUSTURA.

Pain  in  masseter  muscles  as  if  one  had  fatigued  them  by  chew-
ing too  much.
Cramp-like  pain  near  the  articulation  of  the  jaw,  in  the  masti-
■  cator  muscles,  especially  when  at  rest ;  the  pain  is  diminished
by  opening  or  closing  the  jaws.
Lips  dry  and  warm.
^^  Teeth. Drawing  in  upper  teeth  palliated  by  a  cold  finger.
''  Tongue. Stitches  in  tip  of  tongue,  very  painful  even  without
moving  the  tongue.
Burning  like  from  pepper  near  the  left  edge  of  the  tongue.
Ton2;ue  white,  feels  rough.
Bitter  taste  after  dinner,  from  smoking.
Foul  or  flat  taste  in  mouth.
Dry  tongue,  at  night.
'^  Inner  Mouth. Dry,  without  thirst.

Tough,  foul  mucus  in  mouth  during  evening  sleep  ;  could  not

drink  enough.
Saliva  runs  out  of  mouth.
Spits  an  acidulated  saltish  fluid,
'^  Palate  and  Throat. Roughness  and  dryness  on  palate  and  in

fauces  without  thirst,  worse  when  swallowing.  '
^^  Appetite. Aversion to  solid  food,  desires  nothing  but  warm
drink.
I  I  Thirst  without  desire  to  drink.

■  Irresistible  desire  to  drink  coflee. ^Caries.
I  I  Aversion  to  meat,  especially  pork.

Thirst  for  cold  water,  could  not  drink  enough  during  the  eve-
ning. See  12  and  40.

Wants  now  one  thing,  now  another,  which  are  refused  when
off'ered.

He  cannot  get  satisfied,  without  having  much  appetite.
^'  Eating. Crawls  and  uncomfortable  feeling  before  a  meal.

On  commencing  to  eat,  a  cutting  pain  in  stomach  like  a  sore,
disappears  while  eating.

■  Cutting  and  stitches  in  belly  after  taking  warm  milk.
Nausea  while  eating.

After  dinner :  bitter  taste  and  belching  ;  cutting  tearing  in  pit
of  stomach;  increases  when  moving  the  trunk.

Heat  in  face  after  supper.

After  drinking  warm  milk. See  19.
'®  Nausea  and  Vomiting. Empty  or  bitter  belching.

Hiccough  after  cough.

Nausea  in  morning  with  gulping  up  of  a  watery  fluid.

Nausea  while  walking  out-doors,  with  faintness  and  great  weak-
ness ;  the  nausea  seemed  to  rise  up  into  the  head,  and  he  got
hungry.

Incomplete  eructation  with  a  full  feeling  in  the  chest.
'^  Stomach. Painful  tension  in  pit  of  stomach  and  abdomen.


ANGUSTURA.  288

A  contraction  from  region  of  stomach  up  to  r.  shoulder.
After  siesta,  hollow  and  empty  feeling  in  stomach,  with  rising

of  tasteless  water.
Cutting  pains. See  15.

Spasmodic  pinching  below  scrobiculum  in  evening  while  sitting.
Dyspepsia. See  29.

I  Gastric  derangements, indicated  by  acidity, coated  tongue,
pappy,  unpleasant  taste  and  loss  of  appetite.
^^  Hypochondria. Sensation  as  if  something  was  too  short  in  r.
hypochondrium,  contracting  pressure.
Cutting  under  short  ribs  in  r.  side  when  moving  the  trunk.
Fleeting  dull  stitches  in  left  side,  shaking  him  to  and  fro.
Sensation  as  if  "  asleep  "  in  left  hypochondrium.
^^  Abdomen. Very  loud  rumbling ;  in  abdominal  complaints.

■  Distension  of  belly. ^Arthritis.

■  Cutting  in  abdomen,  with  diarrhoea.

■  Indescribable  pain extending  in  a  line  from  the  navel  up  to

the  scrobiculum  and  into  the  sternum. 6*  After  inflamma-
tion of  bowels.

Dull  stitches  near  the  navel.

Stitches»followed  by  drawing.

Pressure  and  cutting  from  within  outward.

I  I  Feeling  as  if  diarrhoea  would  set  in.

Throbbing  over  left  groin.

Right  side  of  abdomen  and  lower  limbs as  if  beaten,  and  in
walking  breaking  down  from  rheumatic  pains.

Cutting  across the  os  pubis,  with  a  pressure  toward  the  rec-
tum ;  cutting  and  rumbling  after  drinking  warm  milk.

Spasmodic  pressure  while  sitting  as  if  something  was  boring
outwards  ;  periodic  throbbing  and  contracting. See  23.

A  drawing  crampy  sensation  in  the  pelvis  when  walking.

Cramp-like  pain  on  crest  of  ilium,  towards  the  spine.

Dull  stitches  at  short  intervals  on the  left  os  innominatum,
behind  the  hip-joint,  increased  with  every  motion.
^^  Stool. I  Diarrhoea,  day  and  night.

■  Whitish  discharges;  very  copious  thin  stools.

Shivering  passing  over  the  face,  with goose-flesh,  after  every
stool.

■  Cured  whole  families  of  diarrhoea  preceded  by  cutting  in  ab-

domen and  nausea  in the  morning, d  Summer  complaint,

1850.
I  I  Diarrhoea  consisting  of  nothing  but  stools  of  slime.
1  I  Insufiicient  stool.
OiFensive  flatus.

■  Chronic  diarrhoea,  with  debility  and  loss  of  flesh.

■  Costiveness.

Urging  in  rectum,  with  crawls  over  the  face.
Pressing,  I  I  contracting,  tickling  in  rectum  and  anus.


289  ANGUSTURA.

With  hard  knotty  stool,  hemorrhoidal  tumors  come  out  with

increased  contracting  pain,  lessened  by  applications  of  wet

cloths.
^^  Urine. Frequent  scanty  urination.

Urine  frequent,  copious  and  clear ;  after  it  urging.
Urine  becomes  black.

While  urinating  the  pimples  on  vagina  burn.
^^  Male  Sexual  Organs. Seminal emissions  two  nights  in  suc-
cession.
Voluptuous  itching  of  tip  of  glans,  which  forces  one  to  rub,

when  walking  in  open  air.
Violent  itching  on  male  organs.
Drawing  and  jerking  in  left testicle  and  cord,  with  a  crawl  in

the  scrotum  and  thigh.
Itching  on  scrotum.
Stitches  on  the  foreskin.
^^  Female  Sexual  Organs. Pressure  in  r.  ovary.
Occasional  sensation  as  if  the  uterus  was  swelling.
Sensation  as  if  the  uterus  was  falling  over.
Dull  motions  as  if  the  uterus  was  beating  against  the  r.  ovary,

and  in  the  r.  hip.
A  kind  of  emission  in  the  morning  sleep;  afterwards  vexatious.
Burning  in  all  the  sexual  parts.
Periodic  throbbing  and  contraction  above  the mons  veneris,

with  a  transient  irritation  in  the  parts and  a  contraction

seemingly  in  the  ligaments.
Uterus  came  down  the vagina  in  the  morning  after  rising,

with  quickly  following  stitches,  relieved  by  cold  washing.
A  milk-like  fluid  passes  from  the  vagina.
Yellow  discharge  a  day  before  the  catamenia.
Delayed  catamenia.
Several nights  before catamenia,  very  restless ;  one  leg  on

which  the  other  was  resting  fell  asleep,  and  the  little  finger

was  as  if  dead,  waking  her  after  midnight.
On  the  morning  of  her  catamenia  all  her  former  symptoms  ap-
peared ;  sacrum  as  if  lame,  could  hardly  move  or  stoop.
Unpleasant  tickling  in  the  genitals,  has  to  scratch;  after  some

blood  appears  it  passes  over.
Instead  of  catamenia,  itching  pustules  appear  on  the  left  outer

labium,  burning  when  urinating  ;  on  the  inner  labium  some

larger  pustules,  itching  when  touched.
2"  Voice,  Larynx  and  Trachea. Voice  louder  and  stronger.
Hoarseness  from  mucus  in  trachea.
A  slight  stitch  in  the  epiglottis.
Tickling  irritation  first  in  upper  part  of  larynx,  makes  him

cough,  later  lower  down.
^®  Respiration. Chest  feels  very  light,  as  if  expiring  with  more

ease.

19  "


ANGUSTURA.  290

Difficulty  in  breathing,  with  headache.

Intermitting  spasmodic  breathing.

Pleaving,  breathing,  groaning  and  closing  eyes.

I  I  With  every  inhalation,  a  sharp  cutting  pressure.

I  I  Oppression  when  walking  fast,  followed  by  backache  and
uterine  symptoms.

Hiccoughing,  pressing, cutting or shooting  in chest, worse
with  inhalation.
^^  Cough. Dry cough,  with scraping and rattling  of  mucus  in
chest.

I  Every  afternoon,  3  o'clock,  loose  cough;  in  a  very  old  woman.

I  Whooping-cough.

I  Cough  with  belching.

I  I A  dry,  hacking  cough  from  a  scratching  in  throat  or  from
an  irritation  in  windpipe  or  behind  sternum  ;  later  a  copious
yellow  expectoration.
^^  luuer  Chest  and  Lungs. Cramp  in chest  as  if  one  had  sud-
denly taken  a  violent  cold.

Cutting  pressure  in  both  sides  of  chest,  first  only  during  in-
spiration ;  afterward  changed  to  cutting  thrusts,  which  con-
tinue even  on  holding  the  breath.

■  Pressure  in  upper  part  of  chest,  like  after  violent  running.

■  Constriction  of  the  lungs.

Contracting  pressure  on  chest,  on  the  ribs  above  hypo-
chondria.

Pressure  on  chest  when  lying  on  belly.

Constriction  of  chest  increased  by  the  slightest  motion,  on  go-
ing up  stairs,  to  a  spasmodic  asthma,  with  anxious  palpi-
tation.

Chest  complaints  with  headache.

Irritation  from  behind  sternum  felt  through  to  back,  as  if  the
whole  right  side  of  chest  and  belly  were  pressed  together
front  and  back,  with  a  sharp  cutting  all  along  the  sternum,
in  the  spine,  worse  from  inhalation  and  moving  the  body.
'*'  Heart,  Pulse  and  Circulation.  Violent  beating  of  the  heart
with  oppression  after  going  up  stairs.

Violent  palpitation  in  the  evening  when  lying  on  the  left  side,
in  bed,  better  when  sitting  up.

Violent  palpitation  when  sitting  bent  over,  with  a  painful  sen-
sation as  if  the  heart  were  constricted.

I  Sudden  attack  as  if  the  heart  was  swollen,  with  great  fear
of  dying,  better  lying  on  left  side, d  Dyspepsia.

A  pushing  pain  like  a  concussion  in  region  of  heart.

Pulse  accelerated,  spasmodic,  irregular  at  times, intermitting.
^^  Outer  Chest. Painful  spasm  in  pectoral  muscles.

Painful  sensitiveness  of  the  chest,  even  to  the  slightest  touch.

A  spasmodic  sensation  like  that  where  the  chest  is  attacked
after  sudden  exposure  to  extreme  cold.


291  ANGUSTURA.

Burning  pressure  on  the  sternum.
Cutting  in  sternum,  stitches.

Pectoral  muscles  ache  when  she  moves  in  bed,  and  when  cross-
ing arms.
Sharp  stinging  itching  on  last  rib,  r.  side.
Pain  in  r.  side  of  chest  when  lifting  the  arm.
^'  Neck  and  Back. I  ■  Drawing  in  the  neck.

■  Sensation of  tremulousness  and  uneasiness in muscles of

neck.

Painful  stiffness  in  neck,  and  between  shoulder-blades.

Twitching  and  jerking  along  the  back,  like  electric  shocks.

Burning  in  the  neck.

Quivering  in  the  muscles  of  the  neck,  left  side.

A  tension  in  front  of  throat,  right  side,  with  sharp  stitches.

Dull  stitches  between  left  acromion  and  between  the  shoulder-
blades,  near  the  spine.

Right  side  of  spine,  a  stitch  going  deep  in  the  chest.

Contracting  pain  under  the  shoulder-joint.

Cutting  in  the  spine,  in  vertebrae,  as  if  beaten  violently  all
along  the  back.

Stiff  pain  like  drawing  between  scapulse  and  nape  of  neck,
early  in  morning  when  in  bed ;  when  rising  she  was  unable
to  move  her  arms  on  account  of  the  pain,  nor  was  she  able
to  turn  her  neck  the  whole  forenoon  ;  several  mornings  in
succession,  lasting  till  noon,  with  weakness  of  the  whole
body.

iPain  in  cervical  vertebrae  as  if  dislocated,  when  lifting  the
arm.

■  Much  pain  in  spine,  at  nape  of  neck  and  sacrum especially,

worse  on  pressure.

Pressure  in  sacrum  all  night,  wakens  her. See  38.

Small  of  back  feels  lame,  cannot  stoop.

Stitches  between  and  near  the  sacrum  while  sitting.

Dull  guggling  in  the  sacral  bone.

As  if  beaten  in  small  of  back,  laterally,  while  sitting.
^^  Tipper  Limbs. Pressing  cutting  in  axilla.

Cramp-like  drawing  down  the  arm  to  the  fingers.

I  After  great  exertion  in  posing  for  an  artist,  in  a  difficult  po-
sition with  uplifted  and  stretched  arms,  a  weakness  in  the
arms,  disabling  him  for  any  work  ;  complained  of  a  stiffness
in  elbow-joints  and  lamy  heaviness  of  the  arms.

Cannot  lift  up  the  arm  on  account  of  a  tension  in  the  muscles,
near  the  axilla.

Sensation  in  bones  of  upper  arm  as  if  beaten ;  rending  in  the
bone.

I  I  Heaviness  in  arm  ;  left  arm  in walking  presses  on  bend  of

.  elbow  as  if  drawing  down  the  arm ;  when  stretching  the
arm,  lameness,  as  after  holding  a  heavy  load.


ANGUSTURA.  292

Painless,  quick  throbbing  and  pricking  or  quivering  in  upper
part  of  shoulder.

I  I  Stinging  in  the  right  shoulder-joint,  with  swelling  of  r.  side

of  throat, cannot turn the head, followed by transient

warmth  through  the  r.  arm.
Stiffness in elbow-joint, with weakness of  the lower  arm ;

pain  in  elbow  on  moving  the  arm  ;  pain  in  the elbow-joint,

as  after  a  concussion,  increased  when moving  the  arms  and

when  resting  on  it.
Cramp-like  drawing  in  forearm  and  hand.
Stitches  from  hand  up  to  elbow.
Heaviness  of  hands.
Hands  swollen,  cannot  close  them.
Sore  pain  in  first  knuckles.

In  the  right  wrist,  sprained  feeling  and  deep  stitches.
In  back  of  hand,  rheumatic  pressing  and  dull  stitches.
Joint  of  thumb  as  if  sprained,  when  bending  it.
Pressing  in  the  ball  of  left  thumb.
Drawing  tearing  or  numbness  in  fingers.
Fingers  of  r.  hand  cold.
^^  Lower Limbs. Sudden heaviness and weakness in lower

limbs,  cannot  walk  quickly,  the  limbs  feel  stiff.
Pressing,  tearing,  stinging  in  lower  limbs.
Tearing  in  thigh  on  bending  the  knee.
Heaviness  in  feet.
Cramps  in  feet,  ■<  in  rest.
Pain  on  the  inner  side  of  the  ankle, when  walking,  causing

limping.
Pressing  pain  in  heels.

■  Threatening  paralysis  of  legs  with  trembling of  the feet.

6  Arthritis.

I I  Pains  in  the  knees.

I  Nodes  on  the  legs  and  feet.

■  Spavin  with  horses.

Hip-joint  as  if  exarticulated,  can  hardly  walk.

Frequently  in  the  hip  a  cramp-like  pain when  moving,  as  if

stiff  or  dislocated.
Constriction  in  r.  hip.
In  both  hip-joints, deep  in  the  tendons,  a  pressing  drawing

pain  when  rising  from  seat.
Boring  laming  pain  along  the  ischiatic  nerve  on  the  posterior

part  of  the  thigh.
I  I  Exceedingly  painful  stitches  in  thigh and  crest  of  ilium,

only  when  sitting.
Muscles of  the  thigh as  if  lame  ;  when moving, a painful

tension.
Tearing  as  if  in  the  bones,  <  in  rest.


293  ANGUSTURA.

When  stretching,  a  pressing  tension  in  the  anterior  muscles  of
the  thigh.
^^  Limbs  in  General. Drawing  in  limbs,  with  soreness.

Gets  stiff  after  sitting  a  while.

Cracking  in  all  the  joints.
^'  Kest. Position. Motion. Nausea  when  walking,  as  if  she
would  faint ;  she  has  to  sit  down.

■  Great  diflGculty  in  walking,  with  threatening  paralysis  of  legs.

I  Very  much  disposed  to  stretch  his  limbs.

In  rest :  cramp  in  muscles  of  jaw,  tearing  in  arms,  pinching  in
loins,  tearing  in  thighs,  cramp  in  front  part  of  the  foot.

After  lying  down  :  cutting  stitches  in  ribs.

Lying  on  the  side :  painful ;  left  side  falls  asleep ;  prickling
in  calves.

Lying  in  bed  :  anxiety. See  37.

Lying  on  belly  :  contractive  pressure  in  chest.

Lying  on  left  side :  palpitation  worse  ;  swollen  sensation  of
heart  better.

Sitting  bent  over  :  violent  palpitation.

Sitting :  vertigo  from  occiput  to  forehead  heaviness  in  head  ;
cramp  below  pit  of  stomach ;  cutting  across  the  pubes  ;  pal-
pitation of  heart  better ;  stitches  on  breast  bone,  below  and
near  the  sacrum,  startling  stitches  in  thighs  and  hip-bone ;
pressing  on  shin ;  dull  drawing  in  r.  foot-joint ;  burning
heat  on  r.  ankle ;  cramps  in  sole  of  foot ;  tearing  in
sole  ;  stiffness  ;  falling  asleep.

Pains  in  face,  temple  and  eyeballs  ■<.

Stooping :  pain  in  face,  temple  and  ankle  ■<  ;  soreness  in  fore-
head ;  palpitation  ;  pressing  in  left  brain.

Moving  the  trunk  :  tearing  in  pit  of  stomach ;  cutting  under
short  ribs  ;  pressure  over  the  whole  side,  chest  and  abdomen.

After  rising  :  prolapsus  uteri  in  morning.

Stepping  :  makes  pain  in  face,  temple  and  eyeballs  worse  ;  pain
in  sacrum  and  lower  foot.

Walking  fast :  contraction  in  head  and  chest ;  backache ;
cramp  ;  legs  feel  stiff.

While  walking  :  head  is  drawn  to  the  right ;  pains  in  bladder
and  pelvis ;  left  arm  heavy ;  the  whole  side  rheumatic,
thighs,  knee,  shin,  foot ;  itching  of  glans  penis.

Walking  over  running  water  :  vertigo.

When  moving:  stitch  in  back;  hips  as  if  out  of  joint;
tension  in  front  of  r.  thigh.

Motion  :  changes  constriction  in  chest  to  spasmodic  asthma ;
in  bed,  aching  of  pectoral  muscles.

Ascending  stairs  :  spasmodic  asthma  following  constriction  in
chest ;  palpitation.

Lifting  arm :  pain  in  right  side  of  chest ;  pain  in  cervical
vertebrae.


ANGUSTURA.  294

2^  Nerves. ■  Cured  tetanus  in  a  horse ;  given  because  the  animal

showed  a  spasmodic  twitching.
I  Rheumatic  and  paralytic  complaints. ^Paralysis.
I  Great  irritability  and  morbid  liveliness.

Great  loss  of  power,  as  if  the  marrow  in  the  bones  were  stiff.
HVery  much  fatigued,  most  in  thighs.
Weariness  with  stiffness  between  shoulders.
^^  Sleep. I  I  Attacks  of  gaping  with  cramps  in  the  jaws,  and  ap-
prehensive about  it.
A  backward  drawing  of  head,  better  after  gaping.
Sudden  attacks  of  anxiety  at  night.
Heat,  mostly  in  the  face  at  3  A.M.,  disturbing  sleep,  followed

by  chilliness.
Falls  asleep  Avhen  reading.
While  lying  in  bed,  anxiety  as  if  she  never  would  get  awake

again.
Restless  sleep,  wakens  often ;  many  dreams.
^  Time. At  night:  tongue  dry  ;  pain  between  shoulder-blades;

sacrum  as  if  beaten ;  heat,  sweat  and  thirst.
All  night :  pressing  in sacrum  as if  broken, awakens  her ;

I  1  worse  at  4  a.m.;  getting  up  lessens  it.
After  midnight:  numbness of  leg and  finger  awakens  her.

See  23.
Cannot  sleep  after  3  o'clock,  heat  prevents  it.
In  the  morning  :  in  bed,  heat  on  head ;  stiff  between  shoulders  ;

crawling  in  feet ; pressing  in  foot ; I  I  chill.
After  rising  :  uncomfortable  ;  thirsty  ;  bellyache;  stiff  neck.
When  getting  up  :  uterus  sinking  down  in  the  vagina.
In the morning : misty before the  eyes,  tension in  them ;

lids  agglutinated,  I  I  looseness  after  bellyache.
Morning :  nausea, gulping up watery fluid ;  cutting  in  ab-
domen.
Forenoon  :  stiff  neck  ;  backache  ;  chill  over  the  back.
Afternoon  :  excitement ;  burning  in  eyes  ;  milky  leucorrhoea  ;

cough ;  at  3  o'clock,  crawls  followed  by  warmth.
Evening:  vertigo; I  I  headache;  heat  in  head ;  pain  in  eyes;

toothache;  pain  in  chest ; very  sleepy  ; I  I  hot.
Evening :  mouth  foul,  etc., with  thirst ;  pinching  below  scro-

biculum.
Evening  in  bed  :  itching.
I  I  Palpitation  in  the  evening  in  bed.
Day  and  night: diarrhoea.

^^  Temperature  and  Weather. Cold  finger  lessens  toothache.
Cold  applications  lessen  pain  in  hemorrhoids.
Cold  washing  relieves  stitches  in  uterus.
Covering  neck,  it  is  too  warm ;  uncovering,  too  cool.
Heat in the  evening  after  entering  a  room.
In  open  air  :  vertigo,  headache  and  heat.


295  ANGUSTURA.

Better  in  open  air :  forehead  as  if  beaten  inwardly  ;  muscles
of  neck  as  if  beaten  ;  crawls  and  goose-flesh.

In  open  air  :  great  serenity  ;  nausea  and  fainting ;  pain  in  side
of  abdomen  ;  voluptuous  itching  on  point  of  glans;  rattling
in  chest;  pain  in  elbow-joint;  stitches  in  the  patella,  in
the  ligaments  of  the  knee  ;  pressing  pain  in  foot ;  great  gaping
and  tiredness.

In  bed  :  anxiety  <.

Must  uncover  arms  when  skin  is  irritable.
**  Fever, Repeated  chilliness  over  the  affected  part.

Early  in  the  morning  in  bed,  chilliness  without  subsequent
heat.

Chill  in  the  morning  and  forenoon,  preceded  by  thirst.

Violent  chill  every  afternoon  at  3  o'clock.

Chills  over  the  back  when  walking  up  and  down  the  room.

I  Coldness,  followed  by  heat  the  same  day ;  recurring  now
in  the  evening,  then  at  noon,  then  in  the  morning,  with
thirst  in  the  beginning  of  the  fever  and  vomiting  of  bile ;
after  travelling  through  swamps  in  a  hot  climate,  d  In-
termittent.

Cold  hands  and  chilliness  in  back.

Flushes  of  heat,  with  sweat  and  anxiety.

Sweat  only  in  the  morning ;  on  the  forehead.

Crawls  up  the  back  with  restlessness  extending  to  inner
parts,  causing  trembling  with  dry  warm  lips  without  thirst,
later  some  heat.
^^  Locality  and  Direction.  Right :  abscess  over  mastoid  pro-
cess ;  drawing  in  side  of  face ;  contracted  feeling  in  hypo-
chondrium  ;  cutting  in  side ;  side  of  abdomen  and  leg  feel
as  if  beaten  ;  pressure  in  ovary  ;  beating  of  uterus  against
ovary  and  hip ;  side  of  chest  feels  pressed  together ;  sharp
stinging  in  side  of  chest,  in  arm ;  swelling  of  throat ;  wrist
feels  sprained.

Left :  burning  on  edge  of  tongue ;  flying  stitches  here  and
there  in  side;  as  if  asleep  in  hypochondrium  ;  throbbing
over  groin  ;  crampy  pain  in  os  innominatum  ;  drawing  and
jerking  in  spermatic  cord;  pustules  on  labium  of  vulva;
thumb  feels  sprained.

From  right  to  left :  head  is  drawn  ;  earache.

To  r.  shoulder  from  stomach  :  contraction.

Within  outward :  pressing  in  abdomen  and  cutting  in  chest,
with  anxiety.

Without  inward :  crawlings  with  trembling.

Below  upward  :  crawlings  in  back.

Nausea  rises  up  in  the  head. See  16.

Vertigo  from  occiput  to  front.
*^  Sensations. Weakness  of  the  whole  body,  as  if  the  marrow  of
the  bones  were  stiff.


ANGUSTURA.  296

Drawing  in  the  limbs,  as  if  all  the  tendons  were  stretched.

A  kind  of  motion  through  the  whole  body,  now  a  prickling
now  a  stinging.

Hollow  and  empty  feeling:  in  stomach.

Sensation  as  of  something  sticking  in  ear.

A  pushing  pain  like  a  concussion  in  region  of  heart.

Stitches :  in  tip  of  tongue ;  in  belly ;  fleeting  and  dull  in  1.
side ;  dull  —  near  navel ;  in  abdomen ;  dull  —  on  1.  os  in-
nominatum,  19  ;  in  foreskin ;  in  prolapsed  uterus ;  a  single
stitch  in  epiglottis  ;  below  and  near  the  sacrum  ;  in  front  of
throat,  r.  side ;  dull  —  near  spine  between  scapula,  1.  side ;
a  stitch  r.  side  of  spine,  penetrating  chest;  from  hand  to
elbow  ;  in  r.  wrist ;  dull  —  in  back  of  hand ;  in  thigh  and
crest  of  ilium.

Cutting :  in  stomach  ;  —  and  stitches  in  belly ;  —  and  tear-
ing in  pit  of  stomach  ;  under  short  ribs,  r.  side ;  in  abdomen  ;
in  OS  pubis  ;  in  abdomen  before  stool ;  —  pressure  with  irri-
tation ;  pressure  in  both  sides  of  chest ;  along  sternum ;  in
spine,  and  pressing  in  axilla.

Darting :  through  eyeballs  and  temples ;  shooting  through
chest.

Stinging;  in  r.  shoulder-joint.

Boring  pain  :  along  ischiatic  nerve.

Tearing  pain  :  in  abscess  over  r.  mastoid ;  in  pit  of  stomach ;
in  fingers ;  in  lower  limbs  ;  in  bones  of  lower  limbs.

Spasmodic  pinching  :  below  scrobiculum.

Burning :  in  region  of  tympanum ;  as  from  pepper  on  edge  of
tongue;  in  pimples  on  vagina,  21;  in  female  sexual  parts;
—  pressure  on  sternum  ;  on  neck.

Drawing :  in  facial  muscles ;  in  upper  teeth ;  in  abdomen ;
crampy  —  in  pelvis  ;  and  jerking  in  1.  testicle  and  cord  ;  in
neck;  between  scapulse ;  cramp-like  —  down  arms  to  fin-
gers ;  in  limbs,  with  soreness.

Tensive  pain :  in  temporal  muscles ;  in  pit  of  stomach  and  ab-
domen ;  in  anterior  muscles  of  thigh.

Pressure:  in  temples;  in  forehead;  contracting  —  in  r.  hypo-
chondrium  ;  and  cutting  in  abdomen  from  interior  outward  ;
towards  rectum  ;  spasmodic  —  in  abdomen  ;  in  rectum  ;  in
r.  ovary  ;  in  chest ;  in  sternum  ;  in  sacrum  ;  and  cutting  in
axilla ;  rheumatic  —  in  back  of  hand ;  in  ball  of  left  thumb  ;
in  lower  limbs  ;  in  heels  ;  and  drawing  in  hip  joints.

Constriction  :  in  chest ;  in  heart ;  in  r.  hip.

Contraction  :  from  region  of  stomach  to  r.  shoulder  ;  in  rectum  ;
above  mons  veneris ;  of  chest ;  under  point  of  shoulder.

Cramp :  in  external  ear ;  cramp-like  pain  in  masticator  mus-
cles ;  on  crest  of  ilium  towards  spine,  19  ;  in  chest ;  in  hip  ;
in  feet.

Aching  :  over  eyes  ;  in  pectoral  muscles.


297  ANGUSTURA.

Pains:  in  bones  of  head;  now  in  r.  now  in  1.  ear;  acute  in
both  cheeks ;  in  masseter  muscles ;  running  from  abdomen
to  sternum  ;  in  r.  side  of  chest  when  lifting  arm  ;  in  spine,
cervical  portion,  and  sacrum  ;  in  elbow ;  sore  —  in  knuckles  ;
in  knees ;  on  inner  side  of  ankle.
Throbbing:  in  temples;  behind  ears;  over  1.  groin  ;  periodic
in  abdomen  ;  above  mons  veneris  ;  in  upper  part  of  shoulder.
Swelling  sensation  :  in  uterus  ;  in  heart.

Tension  :  in  muscles  of  face  ;  as  if  something  was  too  short  in
r.  hypochondrium ;  in  front  of  throat,  r.  side ;  in muscles,
near  axilla ;  in  thigh.
Painful  spasm  :  in  pectoral  muscles.
Quivering :  between brows ;  in cervical muscles ;  in top of

shoulder.
Twitching  :  and  jerking  along  back,  like  electric  shocks.
Sprained  feeling :  in  r.  wrist ;  in  joint  of  thumb.
Pain  as  if  dislocated  :  in  cervical  vertebrse ;  in  hip-joint.
As  if  beaten  :  small  of  back  ;  in  vertebrae  ;  in  bones  of  upper

arm  ;  r.  side  of  abdomen  and  lower  limbs.
Lameness  :  in  sacrum  ;  in  small  of  back ; of  arms  after  exer-
tion ;  in  anterior  muscles  of  thigh.
Lightness  :  in  chest.

Heaviness  :  in  head  ;  in  legs  ;  of  arms  and  hands  ;  in  feet.
Stiffness  :  painful  in  neck  ;  and  drawing  between  scapulas  and

in  nape  ; in  elbow-joints  ;  from  sitting  awhile.'
Tremulousness  :  and  uneasiness  in  cervical  muscles  ;  of  feet.
Dryness  :  of  lips  ;  of  tongue  ;  of  mouth  ;  on  palate.
Roughness  :  on  tongue  ;  on  palate.
"Gone  to sleep" feeling:  in 1. hypochondrium;  in leg  on

which  she  is  resting,  23 ;  little  finger  as  if  dead.
Heat :  in  ears  and  cheeks  ;  of  forehead  ;  in  face.
Coldness  :  of  cheek  ;  of  fingers.
Crawls :  over  face ;  before  a  meal ;  over  face,  with  urging  in

rectum  ;  in  scrotum  and  thigh  ;  up  the  back,  40.
Tickling: in rectum and anus; in genitals; irritation in

larynx.
Itching  :  tip  of  glans  ;  on  male  organs  ;  on  scrotum  ;  pustules
on  labife ;  stinging  —  on  last  rib,  r.  side.
"  Tissues. Spinal  marrow  and  extensor  muscles  are  principally
affected.
Constricting  sensation  in  the  varices.
Cracking  in  all  the  joints.

1 1  Caries,  ulcers  very  painful;  penetrate  to  the  marrow.
1 1  Caries  and  very  painful  ulcers,  which  affect  the  bones  and

pierce  them  to  the  marroM\
1 1  Caries of tubular bones,  particularly  if the  patient has

longing  for  coffee  and  has  a  very  touchy  sensitive  mind.
■  Caries,  with  crumbling  off  of  pieces  of  bone.


ANGUSTURA.  298

I  Rheumatic  and  paralytic  complaints.
^'  Touch. Passive  Motion. Injuries, i  Great  exertion  of
arms  brought  on  a  lameness. See  32.

■  Traumatic  tetanus:  the  lady  ran  a  pin  into  her  foot;  two
weeks  after  she  was  taken  with  tetanic  pains,  striking  from
the  point  injured  back  to  the  heel,  then  up  the  limb  and  up
her  back  ;  she  had  also  darting  spasmodic  pains  in  her  neck,
and  darting  shooting  pains  from  the  nape  of  the  neck  to  the
jaws,  both  sides ;  jaws  stiff,  not  closed.  Angust.  ^°,  every
thirty  minutes.  In  an  hour  the  pains  abated,  and  she  grad-
ually recovered.

Rubbing;  lessens  itching  on  limbs.

Touch  :  causes  itching  on  inner  labia ;  chest  sensitive.

Pressure  of  arms  crossed  causes  aching  in  pectoral  muscles.

Pressure : <;  pain  in  spine.

Riding  causes  dull  aching  over  eyes.

Scratching :  relieves  itching  of  female  genitals  after  bleeding
some.
*^  Skin. Skin  irritable,  burns,  has  to  uncover  the  arms.

Itching,  evening  in  bed,  after  rubbing  painful  ulcerations.

Itching  of  tip  of  glans  penis  ;  so  intense  must  rub  it.

Pruritus,  impetigo. See  23.

Flat  ulcers  eating  into  bones  ;  appear  after  friction.
*^  Stages  and  States. Old  woman  :  loose  cough  every  afternoon
at  3  o'clock.

A  young  girl :  caries  of  r.  ankle.
**  Relationship. Symptoms  caused  by  August.  :  bellyache  after
warm  milk  ;  relieved  by  Bryon.

August,  was  curative  after  Pulsat.  helped  inflammation  of
bo«vels. See  19.

Antidote: Coffea,  not  CampJior.

Belongs  to  the  family  of  Rutacese,  which  are  general  antidotes
to  mercury.

Has  been  given  where  Ciuchon.  failed  to  cure  the  fever.

Hahnemann  already  noticed  the  similarity  of  effect  between
August,  vera  and /a?sa,  or  spurLi ;  a  very  surprising  obser-
vation, but  confirmed  by  facts,  even  cures  of  tetanus.

Similar  to  Bellad.  (aggravation  in  afternoon,  3  p.m.  ;  easily
startled,  heat  in  female  genitals) ;  Bryou.  and  Rhus  tox.  (in
rheumatism) ;  Bryou.,  Cepa,  Chamom.  and  Coffea  (in  tooth-
ache relieved  by  cold) ;  Bellad..,  Cicut.,  Ignat.  and  Nux  vom.
(in  trismus) ;  Mercur.,  Phosphor,  and  Silic.  (in  caries  of
lower  jaw) ;  Aescul.  and  Aloes,  (piles,  backache) ;  Ant.
crud.,  Ant.  tart.,  Lilium,  Natr.  mur.,  Pulsat.  and  Sepia
(in  eruptions) ;  Hyper,  and  Ledum  (punctured  wounds) ;
Ban.  bulb,  (in  pains  in  pectoral  muscles).


299  ANISUM  STELL.— ANTHRAC.


ANISUM  STELLATUM. (See  lllidum.)


ANTHRACINUM,


The  alcoholic  extract  of  the  anthrax  poison  prepared  from  the  spleen  of
cattle  befallen  with  the  disease.  A  nosode  rejected  by  the  Old  School,  and
by  a  majority  of  the  New,  in  spite  of  its  being  a  remedy  which  bears  out
our  theory,  and  one  which  has  proved  of  the  utmost  use  in  practice.  It
has  not  yet  been  proved,  but  the  frequent  use  made  of  it  by  some  of  our
best  practitioners  justifies  its  reception.  The  first  preparation  was  made  ac-
cording to  C.  Hg's  propositions  (laid  down  in  Stapf's  Archives,  1830),  by
Dr.  G.  A.  "Weber,  and  applied  with  the  most  astonishing  success  in  the
cattle  plague.  He  cured  every  case  with  it,  and  also  men  poisoned  by  the
contagium.  His  report,  a  small  treatise  of  114  pages,  was  published  in
1836,  by  Reclam,  Leipzig.  No  notice  was  taken  of  it.  Only  the  talented
Dr.  P.  Dufresne,  the  founder  of  the  Bibliotheque  Homoeopathique,  of  Ge-
neva (see  eulogium  by  Grieselich,  in  Hygea,  VI.,  p.  351,  352),  used  it  and
prevented  the  further  murderous  spread  of  the  disease,  in  a  flock  of  sheep
(among  which  it  is  always  more  fatal  than  among  other  domestic  animals),
and  cured  the  shepherds  as  well  (Biblioth.  Homoeop.  de  Geneve,  Jan.  and
Feb.,  1837).

The  discovery  of  the  bacteria  and  their  incredibly  rapid  propagation,
seemed  to  be  of  much  more  importance  than  the  cure  of  cattle,  and  the  loss
of  millions  of  dollars  by  this  disease.  In  1842  France  sustained  a  loss  of
over  seven  millions  of  francs,  and  every  year  a  small  district  of  Germany
has  a  loss  of  sixty  thousand  thalers,  from  the  cattle  plague ;  in  Siberia,  in
1785,  100,000  horses  died  with  it ;  in  1800,  one  small  district  lost  27,000  horses.
Radiate  heat,  proposed  scores  of  years  ago,  for  other  zymotic  diseases,  by
C.  Hg,  was  discovered,  in  a  very  ingenious  way,  by  Pasteur,  to  prevent  the
increase  of  bacteria.  Now  the  heat  (as  it  has  done  in  hydrophobia),  and
the  nosode  may  suffice  to  cure  every  case.

Doctor  Kasemann  had  moral  courage  enough  to  introduce  anthracine  in
gangrene  and  sphacelus,  in  1853,  and  Doctor  Raiie  has  given  it  in  carbuncles,
since  1858.  See  his  Pathology  and  Diagnosis,  and  in  gangrenic  whitlow,
see  Journal  of  Clinics,  4,  142.

All  symptoms  produced  by  the  poison  on  men  are  inserted,  because  the
symptoms  from  the  snake-bite  and  from  the  bee-sting  have  been  proved  to
be  useful  in  numerous  cases ;  they  are  marked  1 1.


ANTHRACINUM.  300

^  Mind. I  I  Anxiety,  particularly  in  prsecordia.
I  I  Delirium. ^  With  the  fever.
I  I  Excitement, d  With  the  fever.
I  I  Loss  of  consciousness.
I  I  Depression,  with  debility,  and  chill.
I  I  Thinks  she  feels  death  approaching.

Animals  howl,  bite,  run  about,  become  greatly  excited;  followed
by  paralytic  symptoms.

■  Disinclined  to  work, d  Cynanche  cellularis.

^  Sensorium. Dullness  in  head  as  from  narcotics.
I  I  Confusion, d  With  the  fever.

■  Dizziness.

I  i  Dizziness  with  pain  in  head.

Loss  of  consciousness.
^  Inner  Head. llHeadache,  as  if  a  smoke  with  a  heating  pain,
was  passing through  the  head  (fumde  de  douleur  chaude) ;
two  shepherds  who  caught  it  from  their  flock. 6  Anthrax-
carbuncle.

I  Head  is  affected  in  an  indescribable  manner. ^Poisoning  by
a  foul  breath.

I  I  Uncomfortable  feeling  in  head,  slight  chills,  mild  fever.

1  I  If  fully  conscious  they  complain  of  great  pain  in  head.

I  I  Pain  in  head,  dizziness ;  inner  anthrax.

I  I  Here  and  there  in  all  parts  of  brain  small  and  large  hemor-
rhages of  embolic  origin  ;  after  death  from  anthrax.

extended  bloody  infiltrations.

I  I  Headache  with  chill.  '

Cerebral  symptoms  with  carbuncle.

*  Outer  Head. Flying  gangrene.

Small  swellings  on  temples  and  cheeks,  extending  through  the

orbital  sutures  and  foramina  to  the  dura  and  pia  mater.
Carbuncles  mostly  on  head,  near  the  ears  or  temples.

■  Flying  gangrene,  head  swollen,  (in  swine).

■  Swelling  of  the  head,  (sheep).

^  Sight  and  Eyes. '  l  Great  dilatation  of  pupils  ;  inner  anthrax.
I  I A  pale  yellowish  or  greenish  swelling,  if  in  the  eyelids,  of  a

half-translucent  aspect.
I A  pale  redness  above  the  brows  along  the  forehead.

*  Hearing  and  Ears. I  l  Ringing  in  ears  ;  inner  anthrax.

•  Parotitis  gangrenosa,  after  scarlatina.

■  Swelling  extending  backward  over  the  angle  of  the  r.  lower

jaw,  which  could  not  be  felt,  and  up  to  near  the  ear. d  Cy-
nanche cellularis.
^  Smell  and  Nose. Nose  swollen  and  red,  fetid  smell  from  it.
I  I  Bloody  suffusions  on  mucous  membrane  of  nose.

■  Intense,  redness  of  the  r.  half  of  nose,  extending  to  the  cheek.

d  Poisoning  from  foul  breath.


301  ANTHRACINUM.

^  Face.  I  Erysipelatous,  dark  brown  redness  and  swelling  over  the
whole  right  side  of  face,  the  nose  and  part  of  1.  cheek ;
swelling  very  hard,  redness  does  not  disappear  under  the
pressure  of  finger, d  Poisoning  by  foul  breath.

B Extending  to  cheek,  redness  from  nose.
^  Lower  Part  of  Face. B  Could  not  move  the  lower  jaw  as  usual.
d  Cynanche  cellularis.

B  Could  open  the  mouth  only  so  far  as  to  put  the  point  of  the
tongue  out. d  Cynanche  cellularis.

B Impossible  to  open  the  jaws  in  the  least,  d  Cynanche  cellu-
laris.

B Tearing  in  the  right  lower  jaw.

'BBeginning  of  swelling  was  the  region  of  the  r.  submaxillary
gland. 6  Cynanche  cellularis.

BA  stony  swelling  around  the  r.  low^er  maxilla,  the  inner  space
of  the  mandibula  filling  up  to  half,  reaches  to  nearly  half  the
cheek,  and  disfiguring  the  face,  extending  backwards  over
the  angle  of  the  lower  jaw,  very  little  pain,  not  red,  but
sharply  defined  edges, d  Cynanche  cellularis.

B  Swelling  extending  from  the  inner  edge  of  the  left  lower  jaw
across  the  whole  throat,  in  front  and  over  the  edge  of  the  r.
lower  jaw,  and  au  niveau  with  the  upper  surface  of  the  r.
lower  molars, d  Cynanche  cellularis.

BA  large,  stony  hard,  pale  swelling  around  the  r.  lower  jaw,
nearly  painless,  disfiguring  the  face, d  Cynanche  cellularis.

B  Gland  under  the  chin  painfully  swollen, d  Poisoning  by  a

foul  breath.

^^  Teeth  and  Gums. BOn  making  an  incision  near  second  molar

a  mass  of  stinking,  brown  ichor  is  discharged. 6  Cynanche

cellularis.

^^  Taste,  Tongue. BFlabby  taste. ^Poisoning  by  foul  breath.

I  I  Tongue  often  furred  with  a  thick  brown  coat ;  dry.
'^  Inner  Mouth. B  Offensive  odor  from  the  mouth. ^Cynanche
cellularis.

B  Mouth  could  not  be  opened, d  Cynanche  cellularis.

B  Saliva  increased. 6  Cynanche  cellularis.

I  1  Continued  bleeding  from  the  mouth ;  the  blood  shows  a  lack
of  power  to  coagulate  ;  with  inner  anthrax.

I  I  Dark  red,  bloody  ecchymoses  in  mouth.

I  I  Bloody  suff"usions  and  hemorrhagic  collections  on  the  mucous
membranes  of  canthi  of  mouth  and  nose  ;  inner  anthrax.

B  Fundus  of  mouth  is  elevated  by  the  swelling,  as  hard  as  a  cal-
lus, extending  back  to  the  parotis,  and  reaching  up  to  the
external  surface  of  the  lower  jaw. 6  Cynanche  cellularis.

I  I  Superficially  escharred  pustules  in  mouth  after  death.
^^  Fauces  and  Throat. I  '  The  submucous  tissue,  especially  in
fauces  and  around  the  larynx  is  thickened  and  oedematous.


ANTHRACINUM.  302

I  Region  of  the  throat  above  the  larynx  to  the  mouth  swollen.
d  Cynanche  eellularis.

Submaxillary,  laryngeal,  and  retro-pharyngeal  glands  are  infil-
trated, hypergemic,  filled  Avith  hemorrhagic  foci,  colored  of  a
grayish  or  dark  blackish-red,  and  considerably  enlarged.

(Right  tonsil  hurts. ^Carbuncle. ^Erysipelas.

Anthrax-quinsy.

I  Cynanche  eellularis;  a  sharply-marked  margin  about  the
swellings. See  9.

I  I  Slight  difficulty  in  swallowing ;  inner  anthrax.

■  Swallowing  exceedingly  difficult. ^Cynanche  eellularis.
I  Could  not  swallow,  with  great  thirst.

'*  Appetite,  Thirst. Diminished  appetite,  with  heat.
I  I  Loss  of  appetite,  with  chills.

I  I  Loss  of  appetite  and  gastralgia ;  inner  anthrax.

I I  Loss  of  appetite. ^  Cynanche  eellularis.
Thirst  with  heat. See  40.

lExcessive  thirst,  but  can  hardly  swallow. 6  Cynanche  eellu-
laris.
^^  Eating  and  Drinking. ■  Symptoms  from  putrid  water.
^®  Belching,  Nausea  and  Vomiting, i  Belching,  nausea,  and

inclination  to  vomit.

I  I  Nausea  and  vomiting  with  chill.

Vomiting  of  bilious  and  slimy  masses.

I  I  Vomiting  followed  by  diarrhoea.  ■

Nausea  and  vomiting  following  great  pain  in  the  abdomen.
^^  Stomach. I  Pressure  and  burning  in  the  region  of  the  stomach.

I  I  Gastralgia. See  14.

I  I  Walls  of  stomach  and  intestine  oedematous,  discolored,  a
cloudy  red.

I  I  Mucous  membrane  of  stomach  and  intestines  reddish,  swollen,
with  isolated  o.r  numerous  oedematous,  hemorrhagic  promi-
nent infiltrations,  from  size  of  a  lentil  to  that  of  a  coffee  bean,
showing  a  grayish  or  greenish-yellow  discolored  surface,  with
a  positively  sloughing  centre.

I  I  Numerous  peculiar  hemorrhagic  and  superficially  eschared
infiltrations  of  stomach  and  intestines ;  intestinal  anthrax.
'*  Hypochondria. I  Sensation  as  if  the  diaphragm  was  pushed
forward. 6  Poisoning  by  foul  breath, d  Erysipelas.

■  Sensation  of  anxiety  and  constriction,  most  in  the  prsscordia,

liver engorged,  slight  hemorrhage here  and  there, spleen
moderately  enlarged,  soft,  full  of  blood,  dark  color.

I  I  Enlargement  of  spleen.

The  spleen,  the  main  seat  of  the  anthrax  in  animals,  is  rarely

cured  in  men  (Old  School).
HEpidemic  spleen  disease  of  cattle  or  horses,
j  In  alternation  with  Arsen.

I I  The  same  disease  in  sheep. Anthracinum  suum,  is  better


303  ANTHRACINUM.

than Anthracinum ovium  in  the  acute  form, but in the
chronic  form  Anthracinum  ovium  is  better.
^^  Abdomen. Sudden  prostration  with  great  abdominal  soreness,
mostly  in  the  epigastrium  with vomiting,  cold  limbs,  dull
head.

I  I  Bellyache  with  chill.

I  I  Colicky  pains  ;  inner  anthrax.

I A  horse  fell  down  with  colic,  no  motion  except  now  and  then
bending  the  head  towards  the  abdomen.

I  I  Mycosis  intestinalis  ;  intestinal  anthrax.

I  I  In  the  intestines  a  thinly  fluid  material,  slightly  colored
with  blood.

I  I  The  retro-peritoneal  and  mesenteric  connective  tissue  infil-
trated, jelly-like,  and  of  a  yellowish-reddish  color.

I  I  Moderate  serous  or  sero-hemorrhagic  effusion  and  sub-perito-
neal suggilations.

I  I  Simple  hemorrhages  infarctions  and  foci  on  difi"erent  parts
of  intestines.

I  I  Serous  and  sero-hemorrhagic  infiltrations  of  the  peritoneal
and  mesenteric  connective  tissue,  walls  of  stomach  and  in-
testine, and  of  the  mucous  membranes.

I  I  Mesenteric  and  retro-peritoneal  glands  enlarged  to  the  size
of  a  walnut ;  form  blackish-red  masses,  held  together  by  a
jelly-like  congestive  tissue,  infiltrated  with  serum.

Dark  red  carbuncle  in  the  omentum.

I  I  Peculiar  pustular  and  carbuncular  foci  in  the  intestinal  tract.

I  I  Swelling  of  the  abdomen  ;  inner  anthrax.
^^  Rectum  and  Stool. Vomiting,  followed  by  a  painless,  often
bloody,  diarrhoea.

Diarrhoea  with  bellyache.

I  I  Diarrhoea. 6  With  the  fever.

I  I  Vomiting  followed  by  a  painless,  moderate,  more  or  less  in-
tense, often  bloody  diarrhoea ;  inner  anthrax.

I  I  With  the  diarrhoea  sometimes  a  cholera-like  collapse ;  inner
anthrax.

Retarded  stool.
^^  Urinary  Organs. Kidneys  swollen, with  oedema, sprinkled
with  small  hemorrhages,  engorged ;  suggilations  in  mucous
membranes  of  the  pelvis.
^^  Respiration. I  l  Breathing frequent, laborious  ; quick, spas-
modic ;  inner  anthrax.
^^  Lungs. Pulmonary  hypersemia,  ecchymoses.

I  I  Slight  serous  effusions  into  pleural  cavities.

I  I  Sub-pleural  ecchymoses  with  vascular  engorgement,  and  a
dark  coloring  of  the  parenchyma.

I  I  CEdema  of  the  mediastinal  lymphatic  glands.
^^  Heart,  Pulse  and Circulation. Heart-beat  frequent  but
weak.


ANTHRACINUM.  304

I  Her heart beats altogether  different. ^Poison  by  a  foul

breath.
I  I  The  beating  of  the  heart  stronger, more  decided  and  more

perceptible.
iPulse  frequent,  small,  with  violent action  of  the  heart ;  —

soft;  —  B small  and  feverish. ^  Cynanche  cellularis.

■  Soft,  scarcely  frequent pulse. ^Poisoning  by  a  foul  breath.
1  I  Discolored  lines  over  the veins,  or  red  lines  and  stripes in

the  course  of  the  lymphatics.
I  I  Cyanosis  ;  inner  anthrax.
I  I  Blood  of  a dark  cherry  red,  generally  fluid  or  with  some

loose  clots.
I  I  Blood  not  coagulating.
^^  Neck and Back. Axillary glands swollen and painful.

6  Erysipelas.

I  Swelling  in  the  neck  size  of  hazelnut,  burning  and  fiery  red  ;

is  pointed  and  hard, d  Carbuncle  on  neck. See  46.

I I  Carbuncle  on  the  back,  nine  inches  in  length  and  five  inches
in  its  greatest  width  ;  with  sloughing,  abundant  discharge
of  ichorous,  terrible  smelling  pus,  and  blood-poisoning  by
absorption  of  pus. d  Pyemia.

\  Hydrorhachitis  (Grubbe,  Kreuzdrehe),  a  disease  of  sheep.
^^  Upper Limbs. '  l  Tetanic spasms of upper limbs ; inner
anthrax.

■  Arms and  hands covered with  a crusty  eruption,  full of

cracks,  discharging  pus  and  an  acrid  fluid,  with  painful,  un-
bearable itching ;  checked  for  a  while  by  the  Old  School,  it
had  burst  out  again  with  terrible  fury.  After  Anthracine,
the  crusts  peeled  off  and  were  flying  about  like  snow.

I  The  whole  left  hand (not the  fingers) swollen, highly  red-

dened, very  painful ;  the  redness  extended  over  the  whole
hand  and  even  the  wrist,  and  a  red  streak  ran  up  the  fore-
arm, d  Inflammation  of  hand.

■  On  the  middle  of  the  palm  of  the  hand  a  large  blister,  which,

when  opened,  discharged  a  yellow  watery  fluid.

I I  Felon,  the  worst  cases,  with  sloughing.
I  Whitlow.

^^  Lower  Limbs.  I  Thighs  livid  to  the  nates,  hard  and  painful ;
lower  legs  dark  blue,  feet  oedematous ;  when  the  blisters  break
they  discharge  an  offensive  ichor, d  Traumatic  gangrene.

I  The  whole  thigh  was  swollen,  most  above  the  knee,  and  also
the  foot. 6  After  a  fracture  of  tibia.

I  Livid  redness  on  lower  part  of  the  whole  thigh,  up  to  the
buttocks,  hard  and  painful. 6  After  a  fracture  of  tibia.

I  Above  the  knee,  redness,  swelling  and  pain,  and  later  a  large
black  blister  on  inside  of  thigh,  extending  four  inches  up-
ward and  inward ;  after  being  lanced  bloody  water  ran  out.
d  Fracture  of  tibia.


305  ANTHRACINUM.

I  On  outside  of  knee  a  large  fluctuating  swelling,  by  pressure
discharging  a  horribly  smelling  gangrenous  ichor,  d  After
fracture  of  tibia.

■  From  the  openings on  lower  leg, caused  by  the  fracture,  a

copious  stinking  pus  (like  from  carious  bones), d  Traumatic

gangrene.
I  Bluish-brown  spots,  which  break  open.
I  The  whole  lower  limb  blackish-blue;  the  region  of  the  blister

( foolishly lanced ) mortified, discharging much stinking

ichor. 6  After  a  fracture  of  tibia.

■  Ulcers  size  of  a  hand  on  lower  limbs;  no  antipsoric  had  re-

lieved. Anthrac.^'^  helped  very  soon.
Carious  ulcei"s.

I  Foot  oedematous. ^Fracture  of  tibia.
^^  Limbs  in  General. Discolored  lines  trace  out  the  veins  over

the  oedematous  part.
I  I  Severe  pains  in  limbs  and  joints  with  the  fever;  intestinal

anthrax.
Limbs  as  if  beaten.
Limbs  weak.
36  Jferyes, i  i  Great  restlessness.
Paroxysms  of  trembling.

Single  muscles  start  or  tremble.  ~

I  I  Epileptiform  convulsions;  inner  anthrax.
I  I  Clonic spasms, trismus or opisthotonos ; sometimes in

serious  cases.
Clonic  spasms.

I  I  Tetanic  spasms  in  upper  limbs.
I  I  Opisthotonos  ;  inner  anthrax.
Debility  and  depression,  with  pain  in  the  limbs.
I  I  Debility,  with  chill.
I  I  Great  weakness,  with  the  fever.
I  I  Debility  and  depression, with  pains  in  limbs  and  general

sense  of  malaise,  followed  by  disturbance  of  intestinal  canal ;

inner  anthrax.
Debility  and  sweat  all  over, d  Carbuncle.

■  Completely  exhausted,  she  thinks  she  feels  death. ^Poison-

ing by  foul  breath, d  Carbuncle.

I  I  Cholera-like  collapse  after  diarrhoea.

Collapse,  with  difficulty  of  breathing;  loss  of  consciousness;
death.

I  I  Sudden  fatal  issue,  preceded  by  extreme  collapse.

I  I  With  cyanosis,  asphyxia  and  the  most  extreme  collapse,  fol-
lowed by  death  in  all  cases  of  bleeding.

I  I  Marked  rigor  mortis  after  death.
^^  Sleep. I  I  Somnolence  ; inner  anthrax.

Could  not  sleep  for  pain, d  Inflammation  of  hand.

■  Sleeplessness, d  Cynanche  cellularis.
20


ANTHRACINUM.  306

Restless  sleep.

I  Restless,  irritated  at  night.

I  I  Restless  sleep,  with  chill.

Delirium,  sopor,  then  death.

B Sleep  short,  not  refreshing,  more  like  a  stupor.  ^Poisoning
by  a  foul  breath.

^Sleep  short,  unrefreshing. 6  Erysipelas,
^^  Temperature  and  Weather. July,  August  and  September

furnish  the  greatest  contingent.
^^  Fever. I  '  Chilly,  with  debility,  headache,  followed  by  a  general
malaise,  loss  of  appetite,  restless  sleep, great debility  and
depression, and  in  eight  or  ten  days  carbuncles,  most  on
arm,  forearm, head, d  Anthrax from eating  the  meat  of
diseased  animals.

1  I  Decided  chill,  followed  by  bellyache,  nausea,  vomiting  and
in  two  or  three  days  with  the  supervention  of  collapse  and
cyanosis  ;  death, d  Anthrax  after  eating  diseased  meat.

I  I  Slight  chills  with  fever  and  strange  sensation  in  head.

With  great  prostration,  chilliness,  pains  in  the  limbs,  increase
of  fever  and  weakness,  anxiety,  restlessness,  vertigo,  deli-
rium, dull  head  ;  stool  retarded,  urine  scanty ;  skin  dry,
later  covered  with  cold  sweat.

I  1  Temperature  very  slightly  elevated  ;  inner  anthrax.

I  I  Febrile  movement,  slight  in  the  beginning,  is  often  followed
apace  by  high  fever  ;  great  weakness,  delirium,  excitement,
confusion.

BModerate  heat,  little  thirst,  general  sweat.  See  8.  ^Poison-
ing by  foul  breath.

BVery  much  fever. 6  Cynanche  cellularis.

I  Heat,  thirst,  less  appetite,  suffering  and  fatigued.  ^Inflam-
mation of  hand.

I  Fever  with  diarrhoea.

Fever  attended  by  sweating.

I  I  Sweat  all  over  with  debility.

■  Disposed  to  sweat;  rather  sticky. ^  Cynanche  cellularis.

■  Copious  sweat. ^  Cynanche  cellularis. ^Carbuncle.
I  I  Cold  sweats,  in  serious  cases.

Typhoid  type,  with rapidly  sinking  pulse, loss of  strength,
fainting,  delirium.
^^  Attacks. Attacks  :  of  trembling ;  of  headache  with  chills  and
coldness  of  the  head.
Course  in  one  case  irregularly  intermittent ;  inner  anthrax.
Paralytic  symptoms  intermit.
^"^  Locality  and  Direction. I  Right  side  of  nose:  redness.

■  Right  side  of  face  : redness.

■  On  the  r.  lower-jaw  :  softness,  fluctuating.

■  Right  tonsil  hurts.

■  Left  hand  swollen  and  red.


307  ANTIIRACINUM.

From  right  to  left :  dark  brown  redness  in  face. See  8.

B  Sensation  as  if  the  back  part  of  diaphragm  was  pushed  for-
ward. 6  Erysipelas.
^*  Sensations. '  l  Pricking  pain  like  that  of  the  bite  of  a  fly.

■  Swelling  sometimes  very  painful,  as  if  the  skin  was  touched
by  nettles,  more  in  day-time, d  Carbuncle  on  neck.

I  I  Slight  burning  and  itching,  as  from  the  bite  of  an  insect,  on

the  spot  having  come  in  contact.

I I  Terrible  burning. ^Paronychia. ^Carbuncle. See  48.
^*  Tissues. Blood  black,  thick,  like  tar,  decomposing  rapidly.

Injection  and  ecchymosis,  on  motor  organs  of  deglutition.

Hemorrhao-ic  exudations.

Blood  oozes  from  mouth,  nose,  anus  or  sexual  parts.

I  I  Hemorrhages  in  different  parts  of  body.

I  I  Diffuse  phlegmon  ;  inner  anthrax.

Surrounding  tissue  infiltrated  with  coludy  serum  and  small
hemorrhages.

BRed  lines,  streaks  and  stripes  mark  out  the  course  of  the
lymphatics.

I  1  Glands  in  throat  and  under  maxilla  indurated.

B  Gland  painfully  swollen  under  the  chin. See  9.

I  I  Hemorrhagic  infiltration  of  mesenteric  and  other  lymphatic
glands.

Lymphatic  glands  hard,  swollen,  dark-red,  infiltrated  with  a
bloody  serum.

The  lymphatic  vessels  and  glands  swell,  get  hardened  and  if  cut
across,  are  very  red,  harder  or  softer,  always  infiltrated  with
a  hemorrhagic  or  bloody  serous  matter.

Lymphatic  glands  swollen,  dark-red,  brittle  or  softened  as  if
filled  with  extravasations.

I  I  Corresponding  lymphatic  glands  swell.

I  I  Mediastinal  lymphatic  glands  oedematous.

I  I  Most  mucous  membranes  are  injected  and  reddened.

BB  Induration  of  the  cellular  tissue.

I  I  OEdema  and  infiltration  of  cellular  tissue  spread  rapidly ;
skin  on  the  parts  hard  or  doughy,  sometimes  also  oedema-
tous, reddened,  cool  or  hot.

I  I  The  tissues  near  the  pustule  become  indurated  very  quickly,
and  this  oedematous  swelling  rapidly  spreads  over  a  con-
siderable area,  the  entire  arm,  half  the  neck,  occasioning
lively  pain  and  a  feeling  of  heaviness  in  the  affected  limbs.

Q^jdema  of  the  affected  parts,  more  or  less  reddened,  sometimes
cool,  sometimes  hot.

B  (Edema  of  the  affected  parts;  with  anthrax  or  gangrene ;
collapse.

I  I  Edematous  and  phlegmonous  swellings  show  the  changes
of  cloudy  oedema,  often  striped  and  flecked  with  blood.


ANTHRACINUM.  308

(Edema  spreads,  with  a  gangrenous  process,  rapidly  over  the
whole  limb.

I  I  (Edema,  with  a  superadded  gangrenous  process,  spreads
rapidly  over  the  whole  limb,  collapse  quickly  comes  on  with
difficulty  in  breathing,  loss  of  consciousness  and  death.  ^After
eating  diseased  meat.

I  I  Erysipeloid  anthrax-oedema.

I  I  Transudations  into  the  serous  cavities.

I  i  Contents  of  a  regular  pustule  are  neutral  or  alkaline,  some-
times blackening  the  metals.

■  Abundant  ichorous,  offensive  pus.

■  Abundant discharge of ichorous, terribly smelling pus.

d  Carbuncle.

■  Gangrenous  ichor  of  horrible  smell.

■  Stinking  pus  from  wound  on  leg. See  33.

■  Penetrating,  stinking,  thin  ichor  from  a  lanced  swelling.
I  I  Gangrene,  with  inner  anthrax.

In  some  cases  the  gangrene  is extending, and violent  febrile

symptoms  may  follow.
I  I  From  the  tough  infiltration,  which  is  hemorrhagic  and  often

sloughed  in  the  centre, blackish-red  hemorrhagic  bands  go

off  into the  underlying  adipose  tissue and  they  send  into

it  numerous  branches.
The  knot  gets  sphacelous  while  it  is  drying  up  on  the  surface,

the  decomposition is quicker, deeper  in  and  becomes  an

emphysematous  gangrene.
I  I  Gangrenous  destruction.

■  ■Sloughing  on  carbuncles;  on  paronychia.

■  Gangrene  and  sphacelus, d  After  a  fracture  of  tibia.

■  Gangrenous  ulcers  (sheep).

■  Absorption  o!:"  pus  into  the  blood. ^  Pyseraia. ^Gangrenous

carbuncles.
Septic  infection  from  absorption  of  deleterious  substances.
I  I  Septicasmia  with  the  gangrene  and  with  the  sloughing.
^°  Touch. Passive Motion. ■Dark-bro'A'n redness in face,
does  not  disappear  under  pressure.

■  From  the  two  small  wounds,  much  pus  of  a  bad  odor  on  the

twelfth  day. d  After  a  fracture  of  tibia.

■  Reddish  ichor  discharges  from  the  small  wounds. ^  After  a

fracture  of  tibia.

■  After  suspicious  stings,  if  the  swelling  changes  color.

■  Cuts  show  outwardly  a  dark  hemorrhagic  mass,  deeper  in  bright

red,  and  at  the  bottom  a  yellowish  mass.

■  Gangrene  from  inoculating  sheep.

■  After  dissection  wounds  become  gangrenous.
*^  Skin. ■Dark-red  spots  (sheep).

I  lEcchymoses.
Cyanosis.


^^^  ANTHRACINUM.

Skin  of  the  affected  part  either  hard  or  doughy.

I  Skin  dry,  itching  violently  and  burning.

I  Unbearable  itching  on  arms  and  hands.

I  Itching  with  dry  skin; violent  as  if  mad  (horses).

I  Crusty  oozing  eruption,  with  the  most  violent  itchinc^.
See  32,  33.  "=

I  Crusty  eruption  discharging  acrid  fluid.

A  small  red  spot,  sometimes  with  a  blackish  point  in  the  mid-
dle, gradually  becoming  more  sensitive,  has  to  scratch,  it
reddens  more  and  more,  swells  and  forms  a  small  pustule  or
blotch.

I  I A  little  red  speck,  like  a  flea-bite,  with  a  central  black  point,
swells  gradually  and  changes  into  an  itching  papule,  capped
with  a  small,  clear,  reddish  or  bluish  vesicle,  gradually
enlarging.

I  I  The  excoriated  spot  dries  up,  becomes  brown  and  livid  and
a  local  eschar  forms.

I  I  By  inflammatory  swelling  of  the  surrounding  skin  a  red  or
violet  raised  border  is  formed,  around  it  a  bluish  or  pale
yellow  ring,  upon  which  little  vesicles,  size  of  a  hemp  seed,
appear  surrounding  the  central  eschar.

I  I  With  an  increase  of  the  round,  thick  eschar, one-fourth  to

three-fourths  of  an  inch,  the  raised  border  also  extends.
Excoriated  surface  dries  and  mummifies,  but  new  blisters  form
all  around.

I  I  Small  and  large  epidermal  vesicles  filled  with  serum.

■  Blister  on  palm  of  hand.

I  I  The  secondary vesicles contain a yellowish, reddish  and

blackish  fluid.
I  I  Over  the  pustule  a  blister, size  of  a  lentil, with  a  clear,

bright  yellowish,  later  a  reddish  or  bluish  fluid.
I  Black  or  blue  blisters, d  Pustula  maligna.
I  I  Black  blisters,  fatal  in  twenty-four  to  forty-eight  hours.

■  Large  black  blister  on  inside  of  thigh.

I  I  In  case  of  more  than  one  detritus,  the  whole  is  swollen  like
erysipelas,  and  when  cut  it  looks  like  the  Vespajas  of  the
Italian  dermatologists.

■  Erysipelatous  inflammation  about  the  carbuncle.

■  Erysipelas  gangrenosa.

■  Erysipelatous  form  of  chronic  anthrax.

■  Small-pox  of  sheep.

Umbilicated  pustules,  yellow  or  bluish  around,  with  the  de-
pression of  a  dark  red  hue,  and  hemorrhagic  foundation.
6  Pustula  depressa.

If  scraped  off  soon  the  excoriated  spot  dries,  turns  brown  and
livid  and  leaves  a  scar.

I  I  The  dense  or  doughy  soft  papules  or  pustules,  around  and
beneath  the  eschar,  vary  in  size  from  a  pea  to  a  nut.


ANTHRACINUM.  310

I  I  The  papule  promptly  bursts  and  discloses  a  dark  red  base.
Sometimes blisters  looking  more  like  furuncles  ;  a  pus-like

collection  under  the  epidermis,  which  loosens  and  discloses

decomposed  matter.
I  I  Papules and pustules, with extensive oedematous and

phlegmonous  infiltration  of  the  neighboring  skin  and  sub-
cutaneous tissue.
I  I  The  anthrax  pustule  penetrates  deeply  into  the  subcutaneous

cellular  tissue.
I  I  Anthrax  pustules  most  on  face, forearms, hands, fingers,

neck,  less  often  the  ear,  still  less  frequent  the  covered  parts.
Anthrax  carbuncles,  with  typhoid  symptoms.
I  I  Little  carbuncles;  inner  anthrax.
I  Carbuncle.*
I  I  Carbuncle  darkish rod,  greasy, and  is  often  more  eroded

than  ulcerated.
Difi"use,  erysipelatous  carbuncle.

I  I  Carbuncle  on  arm,  forearm,  head. See  chill.

I I  Carbuncle with horrible  burning pains; or discharge  of
ichorous  offensive  pus. See  31.

IB  Anthrax carbuncles  cured  by  Anthracine^^,  every  day,  also

externally,  in  4  days.
Anthrax  contagiosus.

■  Seventh day after  the remedy  several  larger  and  smaller

openings,  discharging  watery,  sometimes  bloody  matter,  very

little  pus  ;  swelling  less  hard  around  the  base. 6  Carbuncle.

v lAll  openings  run  into  one,  discharge  much  pus. d  Carbuncle.

■  After having taken homoeopathic medicine  for malignant

ulcers,  suddenly  the  greatest  malaise,  and  a  black  blister
formed  below  the  knee  with  swelling  all  around,  and  feverish
shaking  chill  through  the  whole  body.

■  Ulcus  excedens  (sheep).

■  Most  malignant  gangrenous  ulcers  (sheep).

■  Chronic  forms  of  anthrax with  indurations  like  knots  under

the  skin.
I  I  Large  cutaneous  eschars.
^^  Stages  of  Life,  Constitution. Girl,  set.  If. d  Carbuncle.
A  girl  not  quite  2  years  old. 6  Inflammation  of  hand.
Girl,  set.  35,  subject  to  blood-spitting,  tuberculous. Anthrac.^

three  doses  daily. 6  Cynanche  cellularis.
A  robust  country  girl,  set.  21,  had  suff'ered  up  to  her  7th  year

with  tetters,  has  had  for  2  years  a  crusty  eruption.

*  To  call  a  carbuncle  a  surgical  case  is  the  greatest  absurdity.  An  in-
cision is  always  injurious  and  often  the  cause  of  death.  Never  a  case  has
been  lost  under  the  right  kind  of  treatment,  and  carbuncle  should  always
be  treated  by  internal  medicine  only.


311  ■  ANTHRACINUM.

A  strong  man,  set.  22,  fell  from  a  wagon  and  a  very  heavy
stone  fell  on  his  leg,  causing  a  compound  fracture  with  two
small  open  wounds.

Man,  set.  35,  liver  complaint  after  drawing  tearing  pains  in
decayed  teeth,  Staphis. 6  Cynanche  cellularis.

A  weakly  hysteric  woman,  get.  43,  after  great  fatigue  and
mental  suffering.  Bedridden  since  years,  after  losing  two
children  with  putrid  diseases. ^Poisoning  by  foul  breath.

A  man,  aet.  43,  strong,  corpulent,  phlegmatic  temperament.
6  Carbuncle.

A  strong,  well-developed  man,  set.  43,  of  a  phlegmatic  tem-
perament, d  Carbuncle  on  neck.

A  strong  man,  set.  60,  had  from  his  youth  brown-bluish  spots
on  lower  limbs,  which  now  broke  open  and  formed  ulcers.
^®  Relationship.  Antidotes :  in  poisoning  from  anthrax  of
animals,  Camphor;  Arsen.;  Cinehon.;  Rhus  tox ;  Silic;
Laches;  Carb.  veg. ;  Pulsat. ;  Kreosot. ;  Carbolic,  ac;
Salycil.  ac.  ;  Apis.

1 1  Give  Anthrac.  after  Arsen.  fails  to  relieve  the  burning  and
ulceration.

Useful  where  Arsen.  had  no  beneficial  effect  in  carbuncles
and  other  complaints  with  burning  and  sloughing.

Often  useful  when  A^'sen.  seems  indicated  and  fails  to
relieve.

Two  days  after  Acon.^^  for  the  fever :  Anthrac.^^  for  the  itch-
ing crusty  eruption.

After  Phosph.  ac.  in  a  poisoning  by  inhaling  the  foul  breath
of  a  child  dying  with  putrid  fever.

Anthrac.  0,8,  three  gtt.  in  12  teaspoonsful  of  water  at  first  in
alternation  with  Phosph.  ac.  0,3,  two  gtt.  in  12  teaspoonfuls
of  water.
d  Poisoning  by  foul  breath.

Silic.  followed  well  after  Anthrac. 6  Fracture  of  tibia.

xlfter  Anthrac:  Aur.  mur.  natr.  (for  a  remaining  peri-
osteal swelling  on  the  lower-jaw) ; Silic.  (cellulitis).

Anthrac.  bovum  ;  from  gangrenous  spleen  of  cattle.

Anthrac.  swum  ;  from  the  bloody  saliva  of  raving  swine.


ANTHEOKOKALI.  312


ANTHROKOKALI.

A  very  absurd  combination  ;  anthracite  coal  of  a  certain  kind,  dissolved
in  boiling  caustic  potash,  invented  by  Joseph  Polya,  in  Pesth,  in  1835;
proved  on  many  people,  but  in  a  very  superficial  way.  Applied  according
to  Old  School  notions,  but  seldom  alone.

Polya  was  followed  by  several  others,  and  in  1839  a  thesis  by  one  C.  F.
Klinger;  in  1840,  an  extract  by  our  "Dr.  G.  Piper,  in  the  A.  H.  Z.,  Vol.
XVIII.,  p.  235  and  253.  It  was  mentioned  as  a  "  renal  "  remedy,  by  Reil,
the  forerunner  of  Sharp,  of  organopathic  notoriety,  and  in  1849  Chapman
mentions  it  as  having  been  "  useful,"  but  says  nothing  but  "  herpes."

It  has  never  been  much  regarded  and  was  of  very  little  use.  The  Old
School  made  one  of  their  experiments  in  1841,  and  gave  it  to  eight  hundred
patients  with  '"tetter,"  in  the  Vienna  hospital,  without  success.

^  Nose. I  Chronic  cracks  and  ulcerations  of  nostrils.
^'  Tongue. Taste  :  unpleasant,  nauseous,  disgusting.

Dirty  tongue,  no  appetite,  nausea.

Dirty  tongue,  with  retching  and  colic.
'^  Mouth. Dry  mouth  and  pharynx.

13  Throat. Warmth  and  hot  feeling  in  the  pharynx,  going  down
into  the  stomach.

Burning  in  pharynx  followed  by  anorexia.

Burning  in  pharynx  with  some  dysphagia.

Pain  in  pharynx  with  a  dirty  tongue.

Dysphagia  with  dry  throat.

Sensation  of  gnawing  and  scraping  in  oesophagus,  soon  disap-
pearing and  going  down  to  stomach.
1*  Desires,  Aversions. Anorexia,  nausea,  vomituritio.

Increased  appetite.

Burning  thirst ;  before  sweat.

Insatiable  thirst.

At  first  no  appetite,  but  soon  after  it  grew  sharper.
1^  Eating  and  Drinking. After  eating  nausea.

After  an  error  in  diet  a  gastro-bilious  fever,  with  erysipelas.
1^  Belching. Anorexia,  nausea,  vomiting,  colic  and  flatulence.

JNausea  and  vomituritio.

Vomiting  and  bilious  stools.

Bilious  vomiting,  with  black  phlegm,  followed  by  too  fluid  stools.
^^  Stomach. Cramplike  pain  in  stomach.

Y\^arm  sensation  in  stomach.
'^  Abdomen. Colic  with  flatulence.

Violent  colic  at  night  relieved  by  a  warm  poultice.

Violent  burning  deep  in  abdomen,  in  evening.

Griping  bellyache  without  diarrhoea.


313  ANTHROKOKALI.

Tympanitic  distension.
^"  Stool. After  colic  and  rumbling  several  mushy  stools.
Copious  diarrhoea  with  colic  and  rumbling.
Diarrhoea  for  several  days  with  increased  secretion  of  urine.
Three  times  during  the  day  a  brown  stool  with  increased  quan-
tity of  pale  urine.
•  Cholera.
^'  Urinary  Organs. Tickling  and  burning  in  urethra  and  at  ori-
fice, while  the  water  passes.
Ischuria,  urine  pale.
Some  diuresis.

I  Copious  evacuations  of  pale,  clear  urine,  without  a  sediment.
Urine  pale,  acrid,  increased.

Urine  pale,  honey-colored,  of  unpleasant  odor,  strongly  alka-
line reaction,  rarely  saturated  and  sharp,  very  seldom  with
a  nubecula,  never  a  sediment.
When  urinating  orifice  of  urethra  itches.
^^  Male  Sexual  Organs. Very  often  long  lasting  painful  erec-
tions.
Frequent  erections.
"  Sycosis.
^^  Female Sexual Organs. Catamenia appeared before the

time.
^^  Heart  and  Pulse. Orgasm  with  heat  of  skin.
Slight  vascular  irritation.
Pulse  excited.

In  the  evening  increased  heat  with  frequent,  full  pulse.
Pulse  and  temperature  feverish.
The beating of  heart sometimes stronger,  with  oppression,

pressing  headache  nightly,  restlessness  and  no  sleep.
Pulse  quicker,  frequent  and  more  full.
^^  Upper  Limbs. Eruption  on  the  hands.

36  Iferves. Debility  of  the  whole  body  with  restlessness  and  heavy
head.
Complete  malaise.
^*  Times. Eruptions  decrease  with  the  full  of  the  moon.

Evening  :  increased  heat  with  frequent  full  pulse ;  night  sweats

begin.
At  night :  colic,  see  V,) ;  copious  warm  sweat ;  skin  itches.
^^  Warmth  and  Cold. Colic  at  night  relieved  by  warm  poultices.

After  baring  skin  night  sweat.
^^  Fever. Horripilation  alternating  with  heat,  followed  by  slight
sweat  and  frequent  pulse.
Heat  and  pressure  in  stomach.
Febris  evanida,  with  disturbed  digestion.

After  baring  of  skin  night-sweats,  continuing  for  several  days.
Skin  moist  for  two  successive  days.
Evening  copious  sweat  lasting  till  morning.


ANTHROKOKALI.  314

General  night-sweat,  returning  every  night.
I  I  Local  cold  or  warm  sweat  on  the  parts  aflFected  by  an  erup-
tion.
After  a  viscous  night-sweat  remission  of  fever.
Sweat  viscous,  the  skin  remains  shining,  glistening.
After  heat  and  itching  skin  moist.
Often  a  general  sweat  commencing  at  night  and  continuing  till

morning  hours.
Copious  warm  night-sweat  with  dizzy  head.
Profuse  night-sweat  with  headache  and  frequent  pulse.
Night-sweat  copious  with  sleeplessness  and  greatest  restlessness,

but  less  pain  in  bowels.
With  the  sweat  restlessness,  headache,  debility  and  frequent

pulse.
Moderate  night-sweats  beginning  in  the  evening  with  sleepless-
ness and  excited  pulse.
*^  Attacks. Sweats  return  every  night.
Sweats  continue  for  several  days.

A  reaction  takes  place  always  before  the  eighteenth  day.
^*  Tissues. :  Chronic  rheumatism, \  gout, •  caries, •  scrofulosis.
■'^  Skin. Itching  at  night.

Eruptions  increase  with  the  general  sweat,  get  more  red  and

ooze  out  more.
Urticaria  or  erysipelas.
Scabies  with  ecthyma.
Scabies  with  prurigo.

■  Scabies.

■  Prurigo.

Eczema  impetigonoides.  *

Impetigo  scabida.-
l  Lichenes.

■  Useful  in  cases  of  chronic  herpes.
Herpes  circumscriptus.

*^  Relationship. Compare  with  the  carbons.

Similar  to  :  Aeon,  (diarrhoea  with  copious  flow  of  urine) ;  An-

tim.  crud. and  Arsen. (thirst,  burning  and  nausea,  skin) ;

Br7/on.,  Carbo  an.,  Oarho  veg.,  and  Kali  earh.  (in  flatulency,

etc.); Rhus  tox. (in skin  symptoms); Veratr.  (in  nausea,

vomiting,  colic  and  diarrhoea).
Given  in  connection  with  Dulcam.  in  sycosis,  scabies,  prurigo,

and  impetigo;  with  Ferrum  jod.  in  eczema  impetigonoides.
Tapeworm  has  been  removed  by  pulverized  anthracite  coal.


315  ANT.  ARS.— ANT.  CHLOR.

ANTIMONIUM  ARSENITUffl.

Arsenite  of  Antimony.  {Sh^O^  As  O^  +  Sj^.c.

Prepared  first  by  Papilland  and  Mousnier  and  introduced  in  the  Old
School  practice  under  the  name  of  antimonial  granulations.
Proved  by  Isnard  and  used  by  Payr  in  emphysema.

^  Inner Head. Rush  of  blood  to  the  head.

Pain  in  forehead.

Pressure  in  temples.
^  Eyes. Pain  in  the  orbits.

I  I  Inflammation  of  eyes.
^  Face. (Edema  of  the  face.
'*  Appetite. Loss  of  appetite.
^®  Nausea. Nausea.

^"  Stool. Slight  diarrhoea,  without  pain  in  abdomen.
^^  Breathing. :  Excessive  dyspnoea, d  Emphysema.
^^  Pulse. Pulse  ninety.

^^  Lower  Limbs. Wandering  pains  along  the  sciatic  nerves.
36  Jferves. General  sick  feeling.

Sense  of  weakness.
^^  Relationship. Similar to : other antimony salts ; Amnion,
carb.  ; Arsen.  ; Aurum  ;  Laches.  ;  Merc,  suljjh.  ;  Phos-
phor. ;  Puis  at.  ;  (ischias,  wandering  pains);  Sulphur.


ANTIMONIUM  CHLORIDUM.

Antimonious  chloride.  Sh  01^.

The  old  and  famous  butter  of  antimony. Not  proved. Poisoning  symp-
toms collected  by  Cattell. Given  in  cancer. See  9.

^  Mind. Stupor,  but  from  which  he  could  be  aroused  by  questions.

Stupor  and  cold  feet. See  8.
^  Sensorium. Insensibility.
'*  Eyes. I  I  Pupils  dilated  and  inactive.

I  1  Eyes  sunken,  lustreless.
^  Face. I  I  Features  set,  pale  and  collapsed.


ANTIMONIUM  CHLORIDUM.  316

Stupor,  face  pale,  collapsed. See  1.
^  Lower  Jaw. I  Cancer  of  the  lower  lip.
"  Speech,  Tongue. Unable  to  speak  for  some  minutes.

Tongue  dry  in  centre.
^^  Mouth. Mouth  full  of  thick,  tenacious,  transparent  mucus.
13  Throat. Great  pain  in  his  throat.
I  I  Severe  pain  in  throat  and  fauces.
Sense  of  burning  in  throat.
Fauces  inflamed.

Heat  and  uneasiness  in  mouth  and  throat,  with  pain  on  swal-
lowing.
Severe  burning  pain  in  throat,  increased  by  deglutition.
Bright  scarlet  patches  in  throat,  with  difficulty  in  swallowing.
Numerous  abrasions  on  mucous  membranes  of  mouth  and  fauces,
with  slight  fever.
^^  Belching. Nausea  and  vomiting.
Incessant  vomiting.

Vomiting  for  two  hours,  followed  by  prostration.
^^  Scrobiculum  and  Stomach. Burning  pain  in  epigastrium,
and  tumefaction  of  abdomen.
Severe  burning  pain  in  stomach.
^^  Abdomen. Tenderness  of  abdomen  to  the  touch,  with  sensation
of  burning.
Excruciating  griping  pains  in  abdomen.

Incessant  efibrt  to  vomit,  and  frequent  abortive  desire  to  defe-
cate, with  cold  skin.
^'^  Stool. Frequent  abortive  efforts  to  defecate.
^^  Breathing. Seems  choked.

Respiration  very  slightly  apparent ;  heavy.
-^  Pulse. Pulse  80,  small.  '

Pulse  small,  accelerated,  very  feeble  or  hard.
Pulse  rises  to  120,  with  sleepiness.
36  Jferyes, Great  or  complete  prostration  of  strength.
Restlessness.

Faintness,  general  weakness.
40  J'ever. I  l  Cold  skin. See  abdomen.
I  I  Surface  of  body  cold  and  clammy.
Slight  feverishness.
**  Tissues. From  mouth  to  jejunum,  black.

Mucous  membranes  destroyed,  and  the  submucous  tissue  and
peritoneum  covered  with  flocculent  matter  easily  scraped  off;
they  are  soft  and  readily  torn.
^^  Skin. Skin  cold  and  mouth  full  of  mucus.

Skin  cold  and  clammy.
*^  Relationship. Similar  to  other  salts  of  antimony,  and  to  the
acids  (typhus),  also  to  Arsen.,  and Carbo  veg.  (in  prostra-
tion, stomach  and  abdominal  symptoms) ; Conium  (cancer  on
lower  lip  and  ineffectual  urging  for  stool).


317  ANTIMONIUM  CRUDUM.

ANTIfflONlUM  CRUDUM.

Natiim  Sulphide  of  Antimo7iy.  ShS^.

The  sulphuret  of  antimony,  a  mineral,  native  in  J? ranee  and  Germany,
found  also  in  the  United  States,  see  Stibnite  of  Dana,  p.  29.  What  is  to  be
had  in  the  shops  is  obtained  b}^  simple  fusion  of  the  ore.  Used  by  the  an-
cients for  dying  hair  and  eyebrows.  First  known  as  a  sulphuret  by  Hohen-
heim  Paracelsus  (not  the  imaginary  person  called  Basil  Valentin),  in  1430.
Since  then  given  by  the  Anti-Galenists  in  numerous  preparations  and  for-
bidden by  the  Academic  Francaise,  15G6  until  1666,  and  in  later  times
considered  inert  because  not  soluble.

Proved  by  Caspari,  in  1<S26,  edited  and  published  by  Hartlaub,  in  1828.
Classed  among  his  antipsorics  by  Hahnemann,  with  many  additions,  in
1835.

^  Mind. Insensible ;  bed  sores  formed,  yet  he  complained  of  no
pain.
Imbecility  more  frequent  than  insanity.
Delirium.

I  Child  delirious,  drowsy  with  nausea,  hot  and  red  face;  pulse

irregular ;  feverish  heat ;  cries  when  washed  in  cold  water ;
better  washed  in  v/arm  water.

I I  Loathing  of  life.

I  inclined  to  suicide  by  shooting  ;  at  night  he  is  obliged  to  get

out  of  bed,  because  he  cannot  free  himself  of  the  idea.
Anxious, lachrymose  mood, the  slightest  thing affects her.

d  Intermittent.
Ill-humor  ;  irritability. 6  Headache.
Sulky,  does  not  wish  to  speak  with  any  one.

I I  Child  is  fretful  and  peevish, turns itself  away,  and  cries
when  touched. 6  Diarrhoea, d  Colic.

Indisposition  to  work,  dull  mood, d  Colic.

Dejection.

Aversion  to  work  and  pain  in  stomach,  with  gulping  up.

Cheerfulness  and  activity  of  mind  and  body.

Sorrowful,  irritable  humor  ;  the  sound  of  a  bell,  as  well  as  the

sight  of  those  around  him,  excites  him  to  tears;  he  breathes

wearily  and  short.
I  The  greatest  sadness  and  woful  mood. ^Intermittent  fever.
■  Sadness,  with  weeping  and  impressibility.
Anxiety  in  relation  to  his  present  and  future  condition. Feeling

of  grief.
Is  driven  to  despair,  resolved  to  drown  himself.


ANTIMONIUM  CRUDUM.  318

Amativeness.

Sentimental  mood  in  the  moonlight,  particularly  ecstatic  love.

Ecstasy  and  exalted  love,  with  great  anxiety  about  his  fate,
and  inclination  to  shoot  himself;  worse  when  walking  in  the
moonlight,  and  then  his  conduct  is  like  that  of  an  insane
person.  •«.

I  Sentimental  or  distrustful  mood. ^Diarrhoea.

Peevishness, d  Chlorosis.

Irresistible  desire  to  talk  in  rhymes  or  verses. 6  Intermittent.

Restless,  inclined  to  be  excited  by  the  least  disturbance.

Consequences  of  disappointed  love.

Anxiety  produces  sweat,  with  headache.
"  Sensorium. iRush  of  blood  to  the  head.

B  Vertigo,  nausea,  nosebleed.

Weakness  of  head.

■  Heaviness  in  forehead.

Vertigo  with  nausea  and  confused  feeling,  as  if  drunk.
6  Headache.

I  Vertigo,  from  deranged  stomach.
^  Inner  Head. I Headache,  mostly  in  forehead,  left  side.

I  Slight,  dull  headache  in  forehead,  and  vertigo;  increased  by
ascending  stairs.

Stupefying,  dull  headache  in  forehead,  so  violent  that  sweat
broke  out  from  anxiety ;  better  when  walking  in  open  air.

Stupefying  headache  with  nausea  in  throat,  I  <  evening,  <
from  smoking,  >>  walking  in  open  air. d  Headache.

In  left  temporal  region  :  pressure  inwards  ;  drawing  ;  slow  pul-
sation, with  fine  pricking.

■  Violent  headache,  after  bathing  in  the  river,  with  weakness

of  limbs  and  aversion  to  food.

Splitting  sensation  in  forehead.

Lacerating  pain  in  whole  head.

B  Headache  over  one  eye  in  a  spot ;  worse  at  noon,  decreases  at
night ;  not  relieved  by  vomiting.

Bx^ching  in  forehead, t' Intermittent.

B  Congestion  to  head,  followed  by  nosebleed.

Momentary  drawing  and  boring  in  temples.

Dull,  frontal  headache  on  awaking.

Into  the  head :  toothache  penetrates.

After  headache  with  giddiness,  nosebleed.

B  Aching  headache,  as  if  the  forehead  would  burst,  from  catarrh
of  the  frontal  sinus,  with  stoppage  of  nose.

Tearing  in  forehead,  temples  and  vertex.

B  B  Headache :  after  bathing  in  the  river,  from  deranging  sto-
mach, drinking  alcoholic  drinks,  after  a  chill,  after  sup-
pressed eruption,  from  taking  cold.

Headache  with  aversion  to  food,  nausea,  loathing,  inclination
to  vomit,  aching  in  limbs,  weakness.


319  ANTIMONIUM  CRUDUM.

I  Gastric  headache  from  fruit,  acids  or  fat.
*  Outer  Head. I  Gnawing  pain  on  top  of  head,  as  if  in  perios-
teum.

Soreness  of  periosteum  on  vertex  with  swelling ;  a  sensation  as
if  bones  were  swollen,  «<  from  warmth,  >>  in  open,  cool
air.

Soreness  in  a  small  spot  on  left  parietal  bone,  as  if  periosteum
was  swollen  ;  painful  to  touch.

Lentil-sized,  flat  tubercles  here  and  there  on  scalp,  painful  to
pressure,  crawling  sensation  around  them.

i Formicating  itching  on  scalp;  losing  the  hair.

■  Disposition  to  take  cold  about  the  head  after  getting  wet,  or

bathing  in  cold  water  ;  worse  evenings  and  on  getting  warm  ;
better  in  open  air  and  when  at  rest.

Head,  sensitive  to  cold,  getting  wet  or  cold  bathing,  <;  even-
ing and  overheating  himself,  >>  in  rest  and  cool  air.

I  Troublesome  itching  on  head,  with  falling  out  of  hair.
'  Sight  and  Eyes. Aversion  to  light.

Looking  into  the  fire  increases  cough.

I  Eyes  red,  inflamed,  with  itching  and  nightly  agglutination
and  morning  photophobia.

Eyes  worse  from  glare  of  snow.

Redness  of  left  eye,  with  aversion  to  light.

Soreness  in  the  canthi.

!B  Soreness  of  outer  canthi.

IB  Redness  and  inflammation  of  eyelids.

I  Small  humid  spots  in  external  canthus,  very  painful  if  sweat

touches  them.
Mucus  in  canthi  mornings,  with  dry  crusts  on  lids.
Lids  red,  with  fine  stitches  in  ball.
Itching  in  canthi.

■  Chronic  inflammation  of  eyes.

II  Chronic  blepharophthalmia  of  children.
I  Ophthalmo-blenorrhoea.

I  Inflammation  of  lachrymal  gland  and  ducts.
J  Metastatic  ophthalmia.

Pain  on  a  small  place  above  either  eyebrow, d  Megrim.
^  Hearing  and  Ears. Slight  noises  startle.
Ringing  before  the  ears,  roaring  in  ears.
A  kind  of  deafness  of  right  ear,  as  if  a  leaflet  was  lying  before

the  tympanum  ;  boring  with  finger  does  not  relieve  it.
Drawing  pain  through  right  ear  and  into  the  eustachian  tube,

after  dinner.
Redness,  burning  and  swelling  of  left  ear.
lOtorrhoea.

I  I  Pains  in  ears. 6  Measles.
Drawing  through  the  r.  ear  and  eustachian  tube.


ANTIMONIUM  CRUDUM.  320

I  On  external  ear  and  behind  ears  moist  eruption. ^Scrofu-
lous otorrhoea.
^  Smell  and  Nose. Nosebleed  with  vertigo.

I  Stoppage  in  nose.

Nosebleed:  evenings; Bafter  headache,  with giddiness; Ifol-
lowing  rush  of  blood  to  head.

Coryza :  fluent  or  dry.

Nose  painful  when  breathing,  as  from  inhalation  of  cold  air  or
of  acrid  vapors.

IB  Sore,  cracked  and  crusty  nostrils. See  9.

Coldness  in  nose  when  breathing  the  air.
^  Face. Sad  expression.

Face  red  and  hot,  a  child. See  40.

Twitches  in  facial  muscles.

Heat  and  itching  on  cheeks.

B  Pimples,  pustules  and  boils  on  face.

B  Eruption  like  nettle-rash.

B  Yellow-crusted  eruption  on  left  cheek,  painful  to  touch  and
easily  detached.

IB  Suppurating  and  long-lasting  eruption  on  cheeks.

Freckles  on  face.
®  Lower  Jaw. Dryness  of  lips.

I  I  Cracks  in  the  corners  of  mouth. See  7.

Burning,  stinging  on  chin,  as  from  a  hot  spark.

I  Small,  honey-colored  granules  on  chin,  with  sore  feeling  when

touched.
^^  Teeth  and  Gums, l Toothache  from  hollow  or  decayed  teeth  ;

<  from  warmth  of  bed,  cold  drinks,  cold  air,  evenings  and

in  bed  ; >>  out  of  doors.
BB  Toothache  in  hollow  teeth,  pain  sometimes  penetrates  into

head ;  worse  at  night  after eating  and  from cold  water ;

touching  the  tooth  with  the  tongue  causes  pain,  as  if  the

nerve  was  torn  ;  better  walking  in  the  open  air.
Stitches  in  the  tooth  when  drawing  air  into  the  mouth.
BJerking  pain  in  hollow  teeth.
BGums  detach  from  teeth  and  bleed  easily.

I I  Gnawing  pain  in  carious  teeth  ;  after  every  meal.
Toothache  after  eating;  before  menses.

"  Taste,  Speech,  Tongue,  i  Taste  lessened.
Bitter  taste  in  the  mouth.  0  Intermittent.
11  Tongue coated: thick and  white; milky white; yellow.

d  Apyrexia.
Much  saltish  saliva  in  the  mouth.
Sore  feeling  and  redness  on border  of  tongue,  bitter  mouth.

6  Apyrexia.
I  iWhite  tongue, d  Gastric  catarrh.
"  Mouth. I  Dryness  of  mouth.

iPtyalism,  with  saltish  tasting  saliva. ^Diarrhoea.


321  ANTIMONIUM  CRUDUM.

"  Palate  and  Throat.  Rawness  of  palate,  with  expectoration  of
much  mucus  when  clearing  throat.

Must  draw  quantities  of  thick  yellowish  mucus  from  posterior
nares  into  throat,  and  spit  it  out.

1  Sensation  as  if  a  foreign  body  had  lodged  in  the  throat,  which
gives  rise  to  a  constant  desire  to  swallow,  d  Chronic  angina.
^*  Appetite,  Thirst.  ■  G-reat  desire  to  eat  but  gets  no  strength.
d  Scrofulous  children.

Good  appetite,  with  burning  at  pit  of  stomach.

Diminished  appetite  in  summer  owing  to  the  heat,  loathing  of
food,  with  a  bitter  taste.

I  Long-lasting  loss  of  appetite,  with  disgust  for  all  food,  d  Gas-
tric catarrh, d  Headache, d  Colic.

I  I  Hunger  early  on  waking,  without  appetite ;  eating  does  not
relieve  it ;  at  the  same  time  sense  of  emptiness  in  pit  of  sto-
mach, and  want  of  animal  heat.

■  Intense  thirst,  with  dryness  of  lips  ; I  more  at  night. ^Head-

ache.
Thirstless. d  Cholera infantum, d  Rheumatism, d  Ovaritis.

d  Intermittent  fever, d  Gastric  complaints  (nausea,  vomiting,

etc).
I  Desire  for  acids,  I  for  sour  pickles. ^Diarrhoea.
Desire  for  beer,  with  chill. See  40.
I  Complete  loss  of  appetite,  with  costiveness  and  dull  head.

I  Total  want  of  appetite,  heaviness  and  fullness  in  stomach,  cos-

tiveness. d  Gastric  fevers.
^°  Eating  and  Drinking. 1 1  Bread  and  pastry  particularly  occa-
sion nausea  and  cutting  colic.

Directly  after  meals  much  flatulency,  wind  does  not  pass.

Laziness,  with  desire  to  lie  down,  after  eating ;  lassitude.

Fullness  and  tension,  after  eating,  alternating  with  lightness,
cheerfulness  and  activity  of  mind  and  body.

I I  After  bad,  sour  wine,  vomiting, d  Gastric  catarrh.
After  nursing,  diarrhoea.

■  Nursing  children  throw  up  a  little  sour  milk,  as  soon  as  they

take  the  breast  or  bottle.
I  I  Worse  from  pork ;  ■  from  acids  ;  especially  vinegar, d  Diar-
rhoea. 6  Whooping-cough.

■  Worse  from  alcoholic  drinks;  after  a  glass  of  wine,  nausea.

■  ■  After  vinegar,  or  acid  wine,  loose  stool.

■  Aggravation  of  gastric  symptoms  by  wine  even  when  diluted

with  water.
After  eating :  drawing  through  right  ear  into  the  eustachian

tube;  toothache;  sensation  of  emptiness  in  intestines  goes

off ;  deep  sighing  respiration ;  fullness  of  chest.
Gastric  catarrh  from  overeating ;  eating  does  not  relieve  the

hunger.
Gastro-intestinal  affections  during  pregnancy.
21


ANTIMONIUM  CRUDUM.  322


16


Nausea and Vomiting. Hiccough after  smoking  tobacco.

1 1  Constant  discharge  of  wind  up  and  down,  immediately  repro-
duced, for  years.

11  Belching,  with  taste  of  what  has  been  eaten.  ^  Colic.
d  Tertian fever. 6  Headache.

Burning  at  pit  of  stomach  like  heart-burn,  with  good  appetite.

I  Nausea:  after  drinking  a  glass  of  wine; I  with  vertigo,  from

overloading  the  stomach.
Nausea  with  a  child. See  45.

I I  Loathing,  nausea  and  desire  to  vomit.

I  In  apyrexia,  nausea,  vomiting,  aching  in  stomach,  desire  for

sour  drinks,  bitter taste, belching, and loss  of  appetite,
d  Tertian.

I I  Gastric  symptoms  predominant;  disgust  for  drink  and  food,
bitter  mouth  and  vomit, d  Apyrexia.

■  Nausea  and  vomiting. ^  Gastric  catarrh. ^Headache.
They  throw  up  a  little  sour  milk. 6  Nursing  children.

1 1  Vomiting :  lof  mucus  and  bile ;  I  I  of  drink  only  ;  id  whoop-
ing cough) ;  —  I  renewed  by  food  or  drink  ;  — I  I  persistent,
tongue  white,  no  thirst ;  {6  marasmus  of  children ;)  gastric
catarrh,  etc.

■  Violent  vomiting  and  diarrhoea.
Nausea  ceases,  vomiting  continues.

■  Vomiting  with  convulsions.

Not  relieved  by  vomiting. ^Headache.

■  Gastric complaints,  with  eructations,  nausea  and  vomiting.

6  Intermittent.
Vomiting  renewed  on  taking  food  or  drink. ^Diarrhoea.
Nausea  and  vomiting  after  getting  overheated,  after  deranging

stomach,  with  vertigo.

■  Gastric  sordes. ^Toothache.

■  Gastric  derangement,  ■after  a  cold.

^^  Stomach.  ■Deranged  stomach  from  eating  together  what  does
not  agree,  particularly  if  the  tongue  is  very  much  coated,  with
belching,  tasting  of  food,  and  aversion  to  any  kind  of  food  ;
after  acid  wine ;  after  fresh  beer ;  with  fever.

Derangement  of  the  stomach,  producing  eructations,  tasting  of
the  ingesta,  and  especially  nausea  and  inclination  to  vomit.

Emptiness  in  pit  of  stomach. See  14.

Chronic  weakness  of  stomach,  much  belching,  frequent  vomit-
ing, acids  disagree,  with  vertigo  and  dullness  in  head.

■  Habitual  sensation  in  stomach  as  if  overloaded.

■  Painful  sense  of  fullness  of  stomach,  which  is  sore  to  pressure.

■  Pain  at  stomach,  (^headache) ;  as  after  eating  too  much,  with

distended  but  not  hard  abdomen. 6  Colic.

■  Cramp-like  pains  at  stomach.

Burning,  spasmodic  pain  at  pit  of  stomach,  driving  to  despair,
resolved  to  drown  himself.


323  ANTIMONIUM  CRUDUM.

1 1  Stomach  weak,  easily  disturbed  digestion.

1 1  Gastric catarrh: white tongue, nausea and vomiting;

cough  ;  bowels  loose  or  stools  in  lumps. Caused  bj :  over

eating,  sour  wine,  hot  weather,  bathing ;  during  measles ;

metastasis  of  gout  or  rheumatism.
Dyspepsia  with  acrid  secretions  ;  rheumatic  or  gouty  pains  in

the  feet.
Gouty  metastasis  to  the  stomach  and  bowels.
Relapses  from  deranging  the  stomach, d  Intermittent.
^^  Hypochondria. Slight  tension  in  the  hypochondria.
^^  Abdomen  and  Groins. Full  feeling  and  distension,  as  after

overeating. See  24.
Abdomen  very  much  distended,  34 ;  after  eating  much,  17.
I  I  Incarcerated  flatus ;  costive.
I  I  Rumbling  in  abdomen.

I  I  Pinching  and  sensation  as  if  diarrhoea  would  come  on.
Sensation  of  emptiness  in  intestines,  going  off  after  a  meal.
I  Colic,  with  loss  of  appetite, 1  Ihard  stool,  red  urine;  child

will  not  be  looked  at.
I  I  Violent  cutting  in  abdomen,  feeling  of  oppression  coming

from  stomach,  indisposition  to  work,  dull  mood  and  pain  at

stomach  with  eructations.
Hard  gland  in  left  groin,  painful  to  pressure.

■  Cutting  in  bowels,  with  watery  diarrhoea.
As  if  arising  from  abdomen  :  cough. See  27.

''*'  Rectum  and  Stool. I  Summer  complaint,  or  diarrhoea  and  vom-
iting of  children ;  hot  dry  skin  ;  vomiting,  expelling  the  drink  ;
yellowish,  very  bad-smelling  stools.
Stinking  flatus.
I  Bowels  loose. ^Gastric  catarrh.

■  Diarrhoea  after  nursing.

Diarrhoea  watery,  with  deranged  stomach,  white  or  yellow-
coated  tongue,  belching  with  taste  of  food,  cutting  in  abdo-
men.

■  Acrid  diarrhoea.

Stools:  watery,  with  vomiting;  watery,  profuse;  ■■watery,
with  little  hard  lumps,  ■or  containing  undigested  food;
■  liquid,  containing  portions  of  solid  matter;  mucous  morn-
ings.

Cutting  pain  before  loose  stools.

■  ■Diarrhoea,  worse  from  vinegar  and  other  acids;  sour  wine;

overheating ;  after  cold  bathing ;  at  night  and  early  morn-
ings.

■  ■Diarrhoea  of  old  people. '

■  ■Alternate  diarrhoea  and  constipation,  with  old  people.
Hard  stools  with  colic.

■  ■Difficult, hard stool; feces too large; ■costive  with in-

carcerated flatus.


ANTIMONIUM  CRUDUM.  324

I  Stools  white,  dry,  irregular.

Hard  lumps  of  curd. ^Nursing  children.

Sensation  of  copious  stool,  but  only  flatus  escapes,  with  finally
very  hard  stool ; I  stools  in  lumps. 6  Gastric  catarrh.

I  Pain  in  rectum  during  stool;  feeling  of  soreness  as  if  an  ulcer
had  been  torn  open.

I  Copious  hemorrhage  from  bowels,  with  solid  feces.  6  Hemor-
rhoids.

II Mucous  piles,  pricking,  burning;  continuous  mucous  dis-
charge, staining  yellow ;  sometimes  ichor  oozes  out.

I  Pain  in  rectum  during  loose  stool.

■  Protrusion  of  rectum  with  loose  stools.

■  Hemorrhoids ; a  good  deal  of mucous is  continually  dis-

charged from  the  anus.

■  Constant  secretion  of  a  yellowish-white  mucus  at  the  anus.

■  Hemorrhoids. ^  During  pregnancy. See  24.

■  Costiveness  in  the  heat  of  summer; ■in  childbed.

■  Diarrhoea  after  nursing.

1  I  Constipation  and  diarrhoea. 6  Intermittent.

Useful  after  abuse  of  laxatives.

Diarrhoea :  after  deranging  the  stomach ;  after  acids ;  after  a

debauch ; of  old people ; changing with constipation ;

watery ;  with  nausea  and  vomiting ;  with  colic ;  with  much

belching.
^^  Urinary  Organs. ■Frequent  and  profuse  emission  of  urine,

with  loose  bowels.
Tenesmus  of  bladder  rouses  him  from  sleep  at  night.

■  Frequent  urination, with  much  mucus,  intense  burning  in

urethra  and  backache  during  emission.

Cutting  in  urethra  while  urinating.

Urine :  gold-yellow,  with  scarcely  perceptible  cloud ;  ■brown-
red;  ■  with  small  red  corpuscles  after  standing  twenty-four
hours  ;  red,  with  colic.

Involuntary  urination.

Involuntary  escape  of  copious  urine  with  the  cough.

■  Chronic  catarrh  of  the  bladder.

^^  Male  Sexual  Organs. Sexual  desire  and  wakefulness. See  37.

■  Excited  sexual  desire,  with  uneasiness  of  whole  body,  which

prevents  him  from  sitting  long.
Impotence.

Nightly  pollutions,  with  or  without  voluptuous  dreams.
Itching :  of  penis  ;  of  tip  of  glans.
Biting,  itching,  as  from  salt  on  left  side  of  scrotum.
\  Gonorrhoea.
^^  Female  Sexual  Organs. Nymphomania  from  checking  cata-
menia.

■  Tenderness  over  ovarian  region, after  catamenia has been

checked  by  taking  a  bath, d  Nymphomania.


325  ANTIMONIUM  CRUDUM.

I  Pressure  in  womb,  as  if  something  would  come  out.
Menses  commence  at  an  early  period,  are  profuse,  then  cease ;
subsequently  chlorosis.

■  Menstrual  molimina.

■  Before  menses,  toothache,  with  boring  into  temples.

■  Discharge  of  acrid  water  from  vagina,  which  caused  a  smart-

ing down  the  thighs.

■  Leucorrhoea  watery  and  containing  lumps.

24  Pregnancy. ■  Nausea,  vomiting  and diarrhoea  during preg-
nancy.
During  pregnancy :  gastro-intestinal  and  hemorrhoidal  affec-
tions ;  feels  full  and  distended  as  after  overeating, d  Diar-
rhoea.
Skin  diseases  during  pregnancy.
^'  Larynx  to  Bronchia. Voice  gone,  scarcely  able  to  utter  a
single  word. 6  Laryngitis  of  singers.

■  Aphonia  from  getting  overheated,  either  from  the  weather  or

in  a  warm  room  ;  better  after  rest.

■  Feebleness  of  voice.

■  Violent  spasms  in  larynx  and  pharynx,  as  if  throat  were  filled

with  a  plug,  which  becomes  alternately  thicker  and  thinner,
accompanied  by  a  feeling  of  soreness.

•  Bronchial  catarrh.

Phthisis  laryngea  with  dry  cough.
^^  Respiration. Short,  heavy  breathing ;  dyspnoea.

Deep,  sighing  breathing,  as  from  fullness  of  chest,  afternoon
and  after  eating.

Oppression  coming  from  stomach.
. Constriction  almost  to  suffocation.

When  exhaling,  sharp  stitches  in  chest.

Deep  sighing  respiration  after  eating.

Spells  of  sighing.

Hot  breath, d  Whooping-cough.
^'  Cough. Frequent  dry  cough.

I  I  Cough  shaking  the  whole  body,  with  involuntary  escape  of
copious  urine.

I  I  Cough :  after  rising  in  the  morning,  in  attacks  ;  ■as  if  arising
from  abdomen;  ■■first  attack  is  always  most  severe,  subse-
quent ones  weaker  and  weaker,  until  the  last  resemble  only
a  hacking, d  Whooping-cough, d  Gastric  cough.

Cough :  in  the  hot  sun ;  on  coming  into  a  warm  room  from
cold  air.

Looking  into  the  fire  increases  cough. See  5,  27.

■  Whooping-cough  as  a  sequel  to  measles.

■  Whooping-cough  aggravated  from  becoming  overheated  in a

warm  atmosphere,  in  the  burning  sun,  and  from  the  radia-
tion of  a  fire.
Cough  with  burning  in  chest.


ANTIMONIUM  CRUDUM.  826

I  Cough  and  oppression  ©n  the  chest.

^^  Inner  Chest  and  Lungs. Oppression  and  pressive  pains  in
chest,  more  the  right.
Stitches  in  chest.

I I  Pain  in  chest  with  heat. ^Intermittent  fever.  .  ,
Burning  and  sticking  in  chest ;  with  the  cough.

I  iBlenorrhoea  pulmonum  or  phthisis  mucosa.
^^  Heart,  Pulse. Violent  palpitation  of  heart.

Pulse  extremely  irregular ;  now  accelerated  and  again  slow,
changing  every  few  beats  ;  with  a  child. See  40.

Slow  pulsation  with  fine  pricking  headache.
^^  Outer  Chest. Severe  itching  upon  chest  continuing  all  day.

Thorax  elevated,  with  dyspnoea.
^^  Neck  and  Back, l  Rheumatic  pains  in  nape  of  neck  and  loins.

Swelling  of  cervical  glands. See  13.

Spasmodic  drawing  pain  in  muscles  of  nape  of  neck,  reaching
to  scapulae,  evening  after  lying  down  and  morning ;  aggra-
vated by  stooping,  exerting  arms  and  turning  head  to  the  left.

Itching  of  neck  and  back.

Spasmodic  stitches  in  right  scapula,  when  sitting.

Violent  pain  in  small  of  back  when  rising  from  sitting ;  disap-
peared when  walking.

Backache, d  Variola.

At  coccyx  a  heavy  weight. See  23.

■  Drawing  in  sacrum. ^Intermittent.

^^  Upper  Limbs. Shoulders  raised  with  diflBcult  breathing. See  26.
Cracking  in  elbow-joint,  when  moving  it.
Drawing  pain  :  in  arms  ;  in  fingers  and  their  joints.
Murrt  let  the  arms  sink  down. See  8.

I  Painful  inflammation  of  ligaments  of  elbow,  with  intense  red-

ness and  contraction  of  arm.
Paralytic  trembling  of  hands  with  every  motion  and  when

writing.
Trembling  of  hands  with  vomiting.

I I  Arthritic  pains  in  fingers.

1  Finger  nails  do  not  grow  as  rapidly  as  formerly,  and  skin  be-
neath the  nails  painfully  sensitive.
I  Crushed  finger  nails  grow  in  splits,  like  warts,  with  horny  spots.
I A  horny  growth  under  the  nail.
Horny  warts  on  hands.
^^  Lower  Limbs. Pustules  on  thighs. See  22.
I  Legs  fall  asleep  while  sitting  quietly.
Painful  drawing  in  hip-joints.
Painful  stiffness  of  the  knee  ;  knees  pain.
Pain  just  below  the  knee,  as  if  it  had  been  tied  too  tightly.

■  Drawing  pain  :  in  knees;  in  lower  part  of  left  tibia;  in  left

heel ;  —  and  tearing  through  right  great  toe. 6  Gout.
Violent  pains  in  lower  limbs.


32T  ANTIMONIUM  CRUDUM.

Smarting  down  the  thighs  from  acrid  water  out  of  vagina.  See
23.

■  Pulling  pain  in  lower  limbs.

■  Numbness  of  legs  during  rest  and  while  sitting.
I  Tumor  of  the  knee;  white  swelling.

Ankles  pain.

Heel  inflamed  and  red.

SI  Large  horny  places  on  the  soles,  close  to  toes.

I  Corns  on  the  soles  and  toes.

■  Inflamed  corns.

B I  Great  sensitiveness  of  soles  when  walking.
^^  Limbs  in  General. Convulsions  and  trembling  of  limbs.

Lassitude,  tremulous  fatigue  and  heaviness  of  all  the  limbs,  as
if  coming  out  of  abdomen ;  with  trembling  of  hands  when
writing,  and  subsequent  discharge  of  much  stinking  flatus ;
abdomen  distended,  after  dinner.

■  Rheumatic  or  gouty  pains,  generally  with  gastric  symptoms.
Heaviness  in  limbs.

Weakness  of  limbs, d  Headache.
Aching  of  the  limbs.
^®  Rest. Position. Motion. Can scarcely  keep  still  during
pregnancy,  on  account  of  hemorrhoids. See  24.
Rest:  outer  head,  >  ;  cold  in  head  >  ;  loss  of  voice  >.
Desire  to  lie  down  :  after  eating.
Lying  down  :  drawing  in  muscles  of  neck.

■  Must  lie  down  for  hours, d  Chlorosis.

Sitting  :  stitches  in  right  scapula,  legs  fall  asleep.

Cannot  sit  long. See  22.

Rising : <<  cough  in  morning ;  <^  pains  in  small  of  back  ;  >

after  rising  from  bed.
Stooping :  aggravates  drawing  in  muscles  of  neck.
I  I  Ascending  stairs  : -<  headache  and  vertigo.
Turning  head  to  left :  aggravates  drawing  in  muscles  of  neck.
Exertion  of  arms  :  aggravates  drawing  in  muscles  of  neck.
Motion  of  elbow  :  cracking  in  joint.
Writing :  hand  trembles.

Walking:  soles  sensitive;  pain  in  small  of  back  >.
Walking  in  open  air:  headache  <;,  3;  toothache,  >  10.
Motion  increases  the  heat,  especially  exercise  in  the  sun.
^®  Nerves. Excessive  depression  and  exhaustion.
Uneasiness  of  whole  body.
Restlessness  with  cough.
Trembling  and  shaking  with  the  chill.

■  Great  jactitation  of  muscles. ^Puerperal  convulsions.

■  Convulsions  with  vomiting;  with  rattling  of  mucus.
Disposition  to  start,  even  at  slight  noises.
Twitching  of  muscles,  of  many  parts  of  body.
Great  lassitude.


ANTIMONIUM  CRUDUM.  -  328

Uncomfortable  feeling  after  eating.

Exhaustion  and  debility  ■  after  severe  illness,  if  appetite  does

not  return.
Faintness  with  nausea.
Great  prostration  after  vomiting.
I  Useful  after  night  debauches; laffcer  getting  drunk.
Collapse  with  diarrhoea.

I  As  if  paralyzed. ^Pneumonia.

^"^  Sleep. Gaping  after  coughing  ;  dozing  of  children,  with  cough.
Drowsiness  with  trembling  of  head,  with  shortness  of  breath,

with  the  cough.
Drowsiness  or  coma ;  a  child. See  40.
Drowsiness. 6  Remittent  fever.
Somnolence  in  day  time.

Sleepy  after  eating,  after  vomiting,  with  bellyache.
During  sleep  unequal  breathing.
Somnolence  with  heat. See  40.
Sleep  restless,  with  sensation  in  stomach. See  27.
Somnolence  with  numbness  of  head,  with  the  chill.

I I  Great  sleepiness  during  the  day  ;  mostly  forenoon.
At  7  P.M.  feels  overwhelmed  with  sleep.

I  Coma. I  I  Deep,  unrefreshing  sleep. ^Chlorosis.

Slight  raving  during  sleep.

I  Restless  sleep. ^Anosmia.

Wakefulness,  with  shivering  over  the  left  side,  on  which  he

does  not  lie ;  or  with  the  sexual  desire  and  erections  when

getting  warm.
Sleepless,  more  after  12  p.m.
Frequent  waking,  as  from  fright ;  from  anxious  dreams  of  being

wounded.
Dreams  ;  of  quarrelling  ; I  voluptuous  ;  horrible,  about  mutila-
tion of  men.
Restless sleep, frequently awakened by itching here and

there.
Ailments  from  night  debauches.
Rouses  from  sleep  at  night :  tenesmus  of  bladder.
On  awaking  : dull  frontal  headache ;  sweat.
^^  Time. Night: <<  suicidal  mood;  headache;  toothache  worse;

dry  lips  and  thirst  <  ;  loose  stools ;  tenesmus  of  bladder ;

pollutions  ;  heat  in  bed  ;  before  midnight  heat.
After  midnight :  sleeplessness  worse.
Morning :  agglutination of  eyelids ;  photophobia ; mucus in

canthi ;  toothache ;  coryza  ;  hunger  ;  mucous  diarrhoea ;  loose

when  cough  after  rising ;  drawing  in  nape  of  neck;  sweat;

stools  ;  lassitude  on  awaking.
Forenoon  : I  sleepiness.
Toward  noon :  chills.
Noon : <  headache.


329  ANTIMONIUM  CRUDUM.

.  Ecstasy  during  the  day,  beginning  in  the  morning, d  Megrim.
All  day  :  toothache  better ;  itching  on  chest ;  sleepiness  ;  chill

predominates.
Afternoon  :  buzzing  in  ear,  deep  sighing  breathing  ;  fullness  in

chest.
7  P.M. :  overwhelmed  with  sleep.
Evening :  out  of  humor ;  outer  head  aches  ;  cold  in  head  worse ;

nosebleed  ;  drawing  in  muscles  of  neck  ;  thirst ;  after  lying

down  pain  in  nape  of  neck.
^^  Temperature  and  Weather. In  moonlight,  mental  symptoms

worse.
Warmth  of  bed  : ■<  itching  of  pimples.
Worse  on  getting  warm  :  headache.
Warmth  :  aggravates  cold  in  head ;  causes  sexual  desire  and

erections.
iWarm weather: < Blexhausted; night sweats; sleepy;

nausea ; vomiting.
Hot  weather  :  caused  gastric  catarrh.

■  Overheated  in  a  warm  atmosphere. ^Pertussis.

Warm  room :  cough  is  produced  when  coming  into  it  from  cold

air ;  chills.
Ailments  from  the  burning  of  the  sun.
Heat of  sun : <  cough ; whooping-cough ; increased heat ;

1 1  cannot  bear  the  heat  of  the  sun  ; <  worse  from  exertion

in  the  sun.
When  becoming  hot  from  getting  overheated :  loss  of  voice.

I  Heat  of  summer  insupportable.

I I  Worse  overheating  near  the  fire,  from  the  radiation  of  the
fire. d  Whooping-cough.

1 1  After  overheating:  diarrhoea.
Child  is  better  after  warm  washing.

Open  air :  headache  >  or  <  ;  outer  head  > ;  cold  in  head
>>  ;  toothache  >  when  walking; I  inclination  for  open  air.

■  I Sensitive  to  the  cold:  inhaling  cold  air;  stitches  in  teeth

from  drawing  air  into  the  mouth  ; H  B  after  taking  cold.
Aversion  to  uncover  with  chill  or  sweat.
Cold  water  :  increases  toothache ;  diarrhoea.
1 1  Cold  washing  : <;  pertussis.
1 1  Cold bathing: causes violent  headache; outer headache;

cold in head therefrom ; caused gastric catarrh ; causes

diarrhoea ;  suppressed  menses.
Child  cries  when  washed  or  bathed  with  cold  water.
After  getting  wet :  head  aches.

Fainting  from  the  heat  of  summer,  or  in  hot,  crowded  rooms.
Injury  by  the  sun;  warm  weather;  after  overheating  I  at  the

fire.
From  exposure  to  excessive  heat. 6  Headache, d  Loose  stools.
Cannot  bear  the  heat  in  the  sunshine, d  Ecstasis. d  Headache.


ANTIMONIUM  CRUDUM.  330

■  Sensitiveness  to  cold.

Bad  effects  from :  getting  cold ;  from  washing ;  after  bathing.
Colds  after  bathing  in  a  river.

■  Worse  from  cold  water  or  cold  food. ^  Loose  stools.
^^  Fever, Cold  to  the  touch  :  limbs.

Coldness  :  with  cholera ;  in  blood-vessels.

Want  of  animal  heat.

Skin  pale  and  cold, d  Convulsions.

Chilliness  at  every  motion,  with  cough.

Chilliness  after  vomiting.

Chill  predominating  during  the  day,  even  in  warm  room.

Violent,  shaking  chill  toward  noon,  with  thirst  (for  beer).

Shivering  over  the  back  ;  feet  cold  as  ice,  with  sweat  on  rest  of

body.
After  shaking  chills  :  cough.
Cold  creeps  :  before  menses  ;  and  pain  in  groins.
Cold  shivers  and  bellyache.
Shivering  over  left  side. See  37. •
Feverish  heat  with  chill. See  40.
Hot  body  but  cold  limbs,  with  cough.

■  iHeat  attended  by  sweat, d  Intermittent.
Fever  with  desire  to  sleep  and  want  of  thirst.
Heat  with  pain  in  chest. See  28.

■  Sweat  breaks  out  during  the  heat,  but  soon  disappears,  and  is

followed  by  dry  heat.

Heat  at  night,  mostly  before  12  p.m.,  with  cold  feet.

Great  heat  from  the  least  exercise,  particularly  in  the  sun.

Sweat  in  the  morning  when  awaking,  which  causes  a  shrivelling
of  tips  of  fingers.

Sweat,  which  returns  at  precisely  the  same  hour,  usually  every
other  (third)  morning.

Sweat  during  the  heat, d  Intermittent.

Cold  clammy  sweat  from  motion.

Cold  sweat  on  hands  with  cough.

After  copious  sweating,  cough.

Sweat  with  rheumatic  pains  ;  with  headache.

Sweat  on  awaking.

Sweat  making  canthi  painful  to  the  touch.

The  child  is  delirious,  drowsy,  with  nausea ;  red,  hot  face,  irre-
gular pulse  and  feverish  heat,  cries  when  washed  or  bathed
in  cold  water.

■  Violent  chill  without  thirst; ■■heat  with  thirst  followed  by

sweat.

■  ■After  the  sweat  is  over,  heat  and  thirst  return.
Quotidian  or  tertian  intermittent  with  ■  loathing,  nausea,  vom-
iting, cutting  in  bowels  and  looseness.

■  No  gastric  symptoms. ^Intermittent.

■  ■  Gastric  fevers.


331  ANTIMONIUM  CRUDUM.

^'  Attacks. Sweat  at  same  hour,  every  other  day.

Symptoms  repeat  every  five,  six,  or  twelve  weeks.

I  Returning  periodically  :  coma,  earache.

Increasing  and  decreasing  headache.

Remitting  types. See  40.

Cough  in  attacks,  first  severe,  the  following  weaker  and
weaker.

In  paroxysms :  leucorrhoea.

Attacks  of  fainting.
*^  Locality,  Direction. On  a  small  place  above  eyebrow,  r.  or  1 :
pain.

Through  thighs  down  to  knees :  labor-like  pains.

Right :  deafness  ;  drawing  through  ear ;  oppression  and  press-
ive  pains  in  side  of  chest;  stitches  in  scapula;  tearing
through  great  toe  ;  back  ;  arm.

Left :  pains  in  temporal  region ;  soreness  on  parietal  bone ;
redness  of  eye ;  swollen  red  ear ;  crusty  eruption  on  cheek  ;
hypochondria ;  hard  gland  in  groin ;  left  abdominal  ring ;
itching  on  side  of  scrotum  ;  drawing  in  tibia  and  heel ;  shiv-
ering over  side  ;  cannot  lie  on  it.

Left  side  predom. ;  particularly  lower  left  and  upper  right
side.

Symptoms  go  from  one  side  of  body  to  the  other.

Without  in  :  pain  in  left  temple.
*^  Sensations. Sensation of  foreign body in  throat. See  13,
and  25.

Tremulous  fatigue  and  heaviness  of  limbs.

Stitches  :  in  eyeball ;  in  tooth  ;  in  chest  when  exhaling.

Cutting :  in  abdomen  ;  before  loose  stools  ;  in  urethra.

Lacerating  in  head.

Tearing :  in  forehead,  temples,  and  vertex  ;  in  r.  great  toe.

Jerking :  in  hollow  teeth.

Boring :  into  temples.

Splitting  sensation  :  in  forehead.

Gnawing  :  on  top  of  head ;  in  carious  teeth.

Pinching :  in  abdomen.

Pricking :  fine,  in  1.  temple.

Burning :  and  stinging  on  chin ;  at  pit  of  stomach ;  —  spas-
modic pain  at  pit  of  stomach ;  in  urethra ;  and  sticking  in
chest.

Smarting :  down  thighs,  from  acrid  vaginal  discharge.

Rawness :  of  palate.

Soreness :  of  periosteum  on  vertex  ;  in  a  small  spot  on  1.  parie-
tal bone ;  in  canthi ;  of  nostrils  and  corners  of  mouth ;  of
eruption  on  face  and  chin  ;  on  border  of  tongue ;  in  stomach ;
to  pressure  ;  of  soles,  when  walking ;  of  skin  when  scratched.

Aching :  in  forehead,  as  if  it  would  burst ;  in  limbs,  with  head-
ache :  in  limbs.


ANTIMONIUM  CRUDUM.  332

Drawing :  in  1.  temple  ;  and  boring  in  temples  ;  through  r.  ear
and  eustachian  tube ;  in  cervical  muscles ;  in  arms  and  fin-
gers ;  in  hip-joints ;  in  knees ;  in  lower  part  of  1.  tibia ;  in
1.  heel ;  —  and  tearing  through  r.  great  toe.
Pressure :  inwards,  in  1.  temporal  region  ;  in  womb ;  in  chest.
Spasmodic  pain :  at  pit  of  stomach ;  —  drawing  in  cervical

muscles.
Cramp-like  pain  :  at  stomach.
Rheumatic  or  gouty  pain :  in  feet  with  dyspepsia ;  in  nape  of

neck  and  loins  ;  with  gastric  complaints.
Pulling  pains  :  in  lower  limbs.

Pain :  in  stomach,  with  aversion  to  work ;  dull  —  in  head ;,
dull  —  in  forehead ;  in  nose,  when  breathing ;  from  teeth,
penetrates  to  head  ;  at  stomach,  as  after  eating  too  much ;  in
rectum,  during  stool ; in  chest ;  in  small  of  back ;  below
knee  as  if  ligated  ;  violent  in  lower  limbs  ;  in  ankles.
Twitching  :  in  facial  muscles  ;  in  muscles  of  many  parts.
Crawling  :  around  tubercles  on  scalp.
Pulsation :  slow  in  1.  temple.
Numbness :  of  legs.
Fullness  :  after  eating,  with  tension.
Heaviness  :  and  fullness  in  stomach  ;  in  limbs.
Stiffness  :  of  knee,  painful.
Tension :  after  eating ;  in  hypochondria.
Dryness  :  of  lips ;  of  mouth.
Heat :  in  face,  and  redness  ;  in  cheeks. See  40.
Coldness  :  in  nose  when  inhaling ;  of  feet  like  ice.
Shivering :  over  1.  side,  see  37 ;  over  back,  see  40.
Itching :  on  scalp,  with  formication  ;  in  eyes ;  on  cheeks ;  of
penis ;  of  tip  of  glans ;  biting  —  on  1.  side  of  scrotum ;  on
chest ;  of  neck  and  back  ;  of  skin  ;  rash.
*^  Tissues. Exceedingly  exsanguineous  condition of  the body.
I  Rheumatism  and  gout  if  the  parts  are  inflamed  or  swollen.
I  Acute  gout  having  left  deposits,  with  gastric  symptoms.
■  Inveterate  (chronic)  gout  without  fever.
Hemorrhages  dark.

B  Dropsical  swellings  of  the  whole  body.
I B  Mucous  membranes  generally  affected.
I  I  Swelling  pain  and  redness  of  glands.
External  parts  turn  black  ;  dry  gangrene.
B  Obesity  of  young  people.
B  Marasmus  of  children.
Glandular  obstructions.
Scrofula.
B  Fungus  articularis.

B  Metastasis  of  gout  and  rheumatism  causing  gastric  catarrh.
Dry  gangrene.
BEmaciation.


333  ANTIMONIUM  CRUDUM.

■  Anasarca.

I  Useful  after  suppressed  discharges.
*®  Touch. Passive Motion. I  ■  Child cannot bear to be
touched  or  looked  at.
Touch :  child  cannot  bear  it ;  increases  pain  on  parietal  bone  ;
causes  eruption  on  face  and  chin  to  pain ;  increases  toothache.
Sore  to  touch  :  region  of  liver.
•  Painful  to  touch  :  larynx.
Pressure :  aggravates  pain  in  tubercles  on  scalp ;  causes  sore
feeling  in  stomach,  vomiting ;  lessens  pain  in  hard  gland  in
groin ;  headache.
Scratching :  causes  soreness  of  skin.
*^  Skin. Before  eruption  breaks  out,  backache. See  31.
Eruptions  repelled  or  not  appearing, d  Convulsions.

■  Eruption  like  boils  and  blisters.

■  Pustules  like  varicella.

■  Itching  of  skin,  feels  sore  when  scratched.

■  Pimples  and  vesicles  as  from  stings  of  insects,  especially  on

face  and  joints  of  limbs.
Eruption  like  bites  of  insects.
Pustules  spread  over  the  body  and  limbs ;  spreading  from  the

fauces.
Red,  itching  rash  on  the  body. See  40.
Ugly  bluish-red  scars.

■  Acne;  with  people  of  a  nervous  constitution.
So-called  liver  spots  ;  brownish  spots.

■  Tetters  in  scrofulous  people.

■  Deep,  spongy  ulcers;  especially  with  gastric  symptoms.
Fistulous  ulcers.

■  Eruption  with  thick,  hard  scabs ;  often  honey-yellow ;  here

and  there  a  crack  oozing  a  green,  sanious  fluid  ;  he  sufi"ered
as  if  immersed  in  burning  embers  ;  much  prostration.

■  ■Horny  excrescences.

■  Smooth  warts,  which  are  often  soft.
Ulcers  breaking  out  around  a  wart.

■  Chronic  skin  (and  other)  affections  traceable  to  suppressed

eruptions  or  ulcers.

■  Urticaria,  white  lumps  with  red  areolae  which  itch; comes

and  goes; <  after  meat;  makes  him  irritable,  very  hot  and
thirsty.
Bed-sores.

■  ■Measle-like eruptions; delayed, vomiting sets in during

measles.
During  measles, d  Gastric  catarrh.
Measles  and  sequelae  to  whooping-cough.
Before  small-pox  appears,  great  oppression.
Small-pox  and  other  eruptions  with  diarrhoea.
•  Chronic  skin  affections,  favus,  lichen,  scald  head,  ulcers  in  face.


ANTIMONIUM  CRUDUM.  334

^^  Stages  of  Life,  Constitution. Hydrbgenoid  constitution.

Nursing  infants :  stool  in  hard  lumps  ;  coughing  and  gaping.
I  Children  :  rash  and  remitting  fevers.
I  Young  people  grow  fat.

I  Old  people  :  alternate  diarrhoea  and  constipation  ;  pulse  hard

and  quick.

I I  Elderly  persons  with  diarrhoea  all  at  once  get  costive.
Drunkard's diarrhoea ; pneumonia ; trembling ; scrofulous

photophobia.
*^  Relationship.  Similar  to :  Apis  (skin) ;  Arsen.  (gastric  ca-
tarrh, burning  eruption,  dropsy) ;  Amm.  mur.  (mucous
flux) ;  Bryon.  (rheumatism,  gastric  symptoms,  effects  of
heat,  etc.) :  Cliamom.  ;  Hepar ;  Ipec.  ;  (gastric  ailments);
Mercur. ;  Nux  vom. ;  Pulsat.  (gastric  symptoms,  relief  in
the  air,  mind,  chills  and  fever,  etc.) ;  Ran.  bulb,  (horny
exanthemata) ;  Rhus  tox.  ;  Sulp>hur ;  Scilla.

Related  to :  Ipec,  still  more  to  Lyeop.  (Teste).

Similar  in  gastric  vertigo  to  Pulsat. ;  gastric  headache  from
sour  things,  to  Pulsat.  or  Arsen. ;  inflamed  eyes,  to  Aeon.,
Euphras. ;  in  toothache  in  hollow  teeth,  to  Pulsat.  ;  in  les-
sened appetite  from  summer  heat,  Bryon.,  Garb.  veg.  ;  cramp
in  stomach,  Pulsat.  or  Ipec. ;  watery  diarrhoea,  Ferrum ;
after  getting  overheated,  gastric  symptoms,  Bryon.

Useful  after  lp>ec.  or  Pulsat.  ;  in  intermittent.

I  Polypi  with  Pulsat.  and  Mercur.

After  Ant.  crud.  follow  well:  Pulsat.,  Mercur.  Sulphur.

Antidotes  to  Ant.  crud. : Calcar.,  Hepar.,  Mercur.

Ant.  crud.  antidotes  :  stings  of  insects.

Complementary :  Squilla.


385  ANTIMONIUM  SULPH.  AURATUM.

ANTIMONIUM  SULPH.  AURATUM.

G- olden  Sulphur et  of  Antimony.  Sh^S^.

Introduced  by  Glauber,  1654,  and  abused  as  a  purgative  and  an  emetic.
Proved  by  Mayrhoffer,  in  1845,  published  by  Buchner,  in  1874.

^  Mind. Apprehensiveness  with  heaviness  in  praecordium.
^  Inner  Head. Pressive  headache.

■  Burning  in  the  head. ^  Eye  complaints.

*  Outer  Head. Reddish  swelling  behind  the  right  ear,  leaving  a

redness  and  scurfiness.
®  Eyes. ! Amaurosis,  in  the  beginning.

■  Spots  on  the  cornea.

I  Iris  protruding  through  the  cornea.
^  Nose. '  '  Bleeding  from  the  nose  on  washing.

Increased  mucus  from  nose  and  throat.
^^  Mouth. Pasty  mouth  and  taste  in  the  morning.
13  Throat. Burning  and  heat  in  the  fauces.

Mucus  from  the  throat  becomes  offensive  to  smell.
Pressure  in  the  throat  as  if  a  plug  stuck  in  it.
Scratching,  rough  feeling  in  the  throat  in  the  morning.
^^  Appetite. Loss  of  appetite  ;  almost  a  loathing  of  food.
^^  Stomach. Pressure  and  fullness  in  stomach.
^^  Abdomen. Pressure,  tension  and  fullness  in  abdomen ;  umbili-
cal region  sensitive.
^^  Stool. Passage  of  much  flatus  with  sudden  urging,  followed  by
a  stool  solid  at  first,  then  bright  yellow  and  pasty ;  after-
wards violent  colic  and  rumbling  around  the  navel.
Constipation  ;  feces  hard  and  passed  with  diflBculty.
^^  Urine. Urine  increased,  dark-red.
^^  Male Sexual Organs. Pustular  eruption  on  scrotum  after

much  itching.
^^  Larynx  and  Bronchia. Accumulation  of  tough  mucus  in  the
bronchi  and  larynx.
I  I  Increased  mucous  secretion  with  fullness  in  the  bronchi,  and
full,  hard  breathing.
^®  Breathing. I  Respiration  difficult.
^''  Cough. 'Dry,  hard  cough,  no  expectoration.

Increased  mucous  sputum,  mixed  with  blood,  of  a  sweetish
taste.
^^  Lungs. B  Passive  congestion  of  the  upper  lobe  of  left  lung,  with

dry,  hard  cough.
^'  Heart. Heaviness  in  the  praecordium  and  apprehensiveness.


ANTIM.  SULPH.  AUR.— ANTIM.  TART.  336

^^  Upper  Limbs. Arms  heavy  in  the  morning.
Coring  and  tearing  in  arms  and  hand-joints.
Swelling  of  the  fingers.
^*  Limbs  in  General. I  Itching  on  hands  and  feet.
36  Nerves. iMalaise,  fatigue  and  lassitude  with  nausea.
"  Sleep. Deep  sleep.

Sleep  dreamy  ;  wakes  after  midnight  with  dull  headache  ;  with

restlessness  and  sexual  desire.
Awoke  suddenly  with  heavy,  confused  head,  pressure  in  the
stomach,  diflBcult  breathing,  fullness  of  the  bronchi,  restless
tossing;  skin  active,  with  slight  warmth  and  even  sweat.
Sleep  dreamy  with  sudden  waking  after  midnight,  gouty  and
rheumatic  pains  increased.
^*  Time. Morning  :  pasty  taste  in  mouth  ;  scratching  in  throat ;
arms  feel  heavy.
After  midnight :  awakens  with  dull  headache ;  restless  ;  sexual
desire  increased ;  gouty  and  rheumatic  pains  worse.
^^  Temperature. Washing  causes  nosebleed.
*^  Locality. Left :  upper  lobe  of  lung  congested.
^^  Skin. Dry?  elevated  pustules  on  inner  surface  of  thighs.
*^  Relationship. Similar to : Antimonies (family relation) ;
Aurum  (chest);  Ar^en.;  Ferrum ;  Merc,  sulph.;  Sulphur;
Amm.  carh.  (nosebleed  after  washing).


ANTIMONIUM  TARTARICUM.

Tartar  Emetic.  2lK{SbO)C^R^ O^'jR^ 0.


An  invention  of  the  alchemists,  very  popular  with  them,  forbidden  by
the  French  Academy,  finally  introduced  and  much  used  and  abused  by  the
Old  School.

Proved  by  Hahnemann  and  some  of  his  students.  Published  by  Stapf,
in  1844,  and  proved  since  by  many  others.  We  have  made  use  of  the  mas-
terly monograph  of  Dr.  R.  Hencke,  from  1874,  who  collected  all  poisonings,
provings  and  cures.

^  Mind. Unconsciousness,  but  rarely.
Stupefaction,  with  numbness  of  head.
I  I  Stupid  and  sleepy ;  stupefying  meningitis. See  3.
Confusion  of  the  head ;  with  feeling  as  if  he  ought  to  sleep.
Dullness  of  mind,  imbecility.

Apathy  and  indifference  to  everything,  even  death  would  have
been  welcome.


^^^  ANTIMONIUM  TARTARICUM.

Delirium,  with  pleasurable  expression. /?  Bronchial  catarrh.

Contradiction  between  mind  and  will.

The  child  must  be  carried,  it  cries  if  touched.

Anxious  face. See  8.

Moaning  and  groaning,  with  oppression  on  chest.

Crying,  with  the  cough.

I  Pitiful  whining  before  and  during  the  attacks. ^Infantile

catarrh.
■  Continual  crying  and  whining  of  a  child  for  three  days,  gets

only  little  sleeps  of  15  or  30  minutes, d  Summer  complaint.
Child  cries  on  attempting  to  take  the  breast.
Child  clings  to  those  around,  calls  for  help  in  a  hoarse  voice

with  cough. See  27.  '

The  child  will  not  allow  itself  to  be  touched  without  whining
and  crying.  °

Fear  and  dread  of  being  alone.

Indolence  ;  aversion  to  all  work. See  19.

Uneasiness  of  mind,  indisposed  to  work,  apparently  proceeding
from  the  abdomen.

IB  Bad  humor. ^  Bronchial  catarrh.

Dejection.

Despondent  and  apprehensive  that  he  would  not  recover ;  t.

Hopelessness,  I  I  despondency.

Hopeless  mood, d  Colic.

Hopeless  and  despairing  when  awake. 6  Intermittent.

I  I  Despondent,  hypochondriacal ;  inclined  to  violence.

I  Melancholic. /^Chronic  metritis.

I  Complains  about  his  numerous  symptoms, d  Pneumonia.

■  Despairs  of  his  recovery. ^Pneumonia.
Depression  of  mind  and  fear  he  will  never  get  well.
Apprehensive  and  restless.

Great  concern  about  future  with  beating  in  stomach. See  17.
Anxiety  and  restlessness.

■  Anxiety  during  the  paroxysm,  often  lasting  2  to  3  hours.

d  Pregnancy,
Anxiety  with  nausea.

■  Indescribable  anxiety  and  oppression  of  the  chest, d  Cholera
Anxiety, d  Intermittent.

Despair  and  hopelessness,  with  lethargy,  with  cold  sweat.

After  attacks,  in  good  humor,  playing. 6  Catarrhal  croup.

During  the  day  hilarity,  in  the  evening  anxious,  timid.

Wild  gaiety  toward  evening.

Merry  all  day,  in  the  evening  anxious  and  full  of  fear.

Gaiety,  wild  mirthfulness,  with  subsequent  ill-humor  and'  anx-
iety for  the  future.

By  day  an  unusual  wild  gaiety,  less  noticeable  by  herself  than
by  others  ;  toward  evening  this  disappeared,  and  on  the  other
hand  there  was  peevishness,  irritability,  and  anxious  thoughts

22


ANTIMONIUM  TARTARICUM.  338

about  the  future ;  she  feared  she  must  remain  in  this  con-
dition.

Boldness.

Desire  to  bite.

I  I  Excessively  peevish  and  quarrelsome  (a  boy  set.  3).

Peevishness. 6  Laryngo-tracheitis.

The  children  get  angry,  weep  and  cry. ^Whooping  cough.

Mental  excitement.

Frightened  at  every  trifle.

Highest  degree  of  mental  restlessness. See  19.

Consequences  of  anger  or  vexation.

Worse  after  getting  angry, d  Cough. See  27.

Strong  emotion  followed  by  amblyopia,  d  During  pregnancy.
^  Sensorium. Heaviness  of  the  head.

Stupefying  dullness  with  unconquerable  drowsiness.

Felt  giddy  and  sick  ;  immediately.

Dizziness,  with  the  cough.

Vertigo  with  alternate  drowsiness.

Vertigo :  on  closing  the  eyes ;  on  walking ;  when  lifting  the
head,  must  lie  down,  with  nausea.

■  Pressing  pain  in  forehead  with  vertigo,  stupor  and  dullness  of

head,  slightly  delirious,  drowsiness  but  cannot  sleep. 6  In-
fluenza.
iVertigo  with  flickering  before  the  eyes, d  Rheumatism.

■  Vertigo with dimness  of  vision and  a  pressing  headache.

d  Pneumonia.
Vertigo  and  violent  chills  running  through  the  body  with  a

sudden  shock.
Fainting,  with  sweat  on  forehead.

■  Child  gets  insensible,  limbs  cold,  pulse  weak,  almost  imper-

ceptible ;  recovery  after  brandy  and  water.
Fainting  after  a  cold  feeling  in  scrobiculum,  followed  by  sleep.
Asphyxia;  t.
After  vomiting  once,  a  heavy  asphyxia,  and  when  coming  to

herself  again,  violent  colic.

■  Asphyxia  from  drowning.

^  Inner  Head. '  '  Cerebral  congestion.
Arachnoid  membrane  too  opaque  ;  t.

■  Dull  head,  like  a  strong  pressure,  more  in  r.  forehead,  with

boring,  sharp  shooting  tearing  deep  in  brain, d  Rheumatism.
Violent  pain  in  forehead  and  giddiness.

■  Headache,  as  from  a  band  compressing  the  forehead.
Tensive  pain  in  forehead  and  one  side  of  head,  as  if  the  brain

were  in  one  lump,  with  drowsiness,  <C  evening,  after  eating
and  sitting  bent ; >  sitting  up,  lying  high  with  head  and  in
the  cold.
Pressing  headache,  as  if  brain  were  put  together  in  lumps.

■  Feels  as  if  the  brain  was  pressed  together ;  stupid  and  sleepy  ;


339  ANTIMONIUM  TARTARIC  UM.

more  when  resting ;  in  the  evenings  and  at  night ;  better
when  moving  about,  or  after  washing  the  head.

I  I  Heavy  pain  in  the  forehead  like  waves  increasing  and  de-
creasing.

Reverberation  of  pulse- in  the  head. See  29.

Very  sensible  pressure  on  vertex  with  violent  pulsation  in  the
temples.

■  Throbbing  in  r. forehead, < evenings,  sitting  bent, from

warmth  and  >>  sitting  up  and  in  the  cold.
Pressive  pains  in  forehead ;  stitching  extending  downwards  into

left  eye.
Painful  drawing  in  right  temple,  extending  down  to  the  zygoma

and  upper  jaw.
Tearing  pains  in  head.

Stitches  in  left  parietal  bone  on  stooping,  extend  forwards.
Headache  and  feeling  as  if  paralyzed, d  Pneumonia.
I  I  Stupefying  headache, d  Meningitis.
Occiput  heavy,  requires  support.

On  stooping,  feeling  in  occiput  as  if  something  fell  forward.
Headache  with  vomiting.

■  Headache. ^Variola.

Headache  with  sensitiveness  of  region  of  stomach.

■  Violent  headache  during  the  heat, d  Tertian.

■  Headache  also  in  the  apyrexia. ^Intermittent.

■  Inflammation  of  brain. See  43.

■  Apoplexia  nervosa  and  serosa.

Headache : <C  evening ;  lying  down ;  getting  warm in bed ;

after  eating ;  sitting  bent ;  in  rest ; >>  sitting  upright ;  in

the  cold ;  lying  high  with  head ;  moving  about ;  and  after

washing  the  head.
^  Outer  Head. '  Head  very  hot. d  Rheumatism.

Head  dull,  forehead  warm,  less  strength,  and  displeased  with

everything.
Forehead  covered  with  sweat ;  head  is  cold.
Sweat  on  forehead  and  on  the  neck.

■  Tinea.

■  Plica  polonica.

Scalp  very  sensitive,  with  heaviness  of  head.

Chronic  trembling  of  head,  most  after  coughing,  with  sense  of

inner trembling, chattering of  teeth and  great  desire  to

sleep  ; «<  evening  and  from  warmth.
Chronic  trembling  of  head  and  hands,  with  great  debility.
Numbness  of  head,  with  stupefaction  and  somnolence.
Cold  sweat  on  head,  with  cough.

■  Head  hot  and  sweaty. ^Atelectasis  pulmonum. ^During

efforts  at  vomiting, d  Pertussis.
Lifting  head. See  2.
^  Sight  and  Eyes. Flickering  before  the  eyes. See  2.


ANTIMONIUM  TARTARICUM.  340

Sees  only  as  through  a  thick  veil.
Vanishing  of  sight.

It  gets  dark  before  the  eyes  and  his  senses  leave  him.
Amblyopia  after  strong  emotion,  and  colic  during  pregnancy.
Amblyopia, d  Meningitis.
Oversensitive  retina.
Photophobia, d  In  scrofulous  persons.
Weak  eyes,  next  day  headache,  most  in  forehead.
Strabismus.
Cataract, d  Of  cattle.
Tearing  pains  in  eyes.

Eyeballs  pain,  as  if  bruised,  especially  on  touching  them.
Burning  and  smarting  in  eyes  and  canthi  with  redness  of  con-
junctiva, evenings.
Eyes  open  ;  pupils  closely  contracted.
Eyes  turned  upwards, with  difficult  breathing, d  Catarrhal

croup.
llDim,  swimming  eyes. ^Diarrhoea.
lEyes  prominent,  glaring. ^Pneumonia.
Jerking,  shooting  in  inner  canthi  and  pressure  in  eyes.
Eyes  fill  with  tears  when  gaping.
Eyes  feel  tired,  as  if  the  lids  would  close.
Inclination  to  press  lids  tightly  together.
On  closing  eyes,  vertigo. See  2.
Inclination  to  shut  eyes,  without  shunning  the  light.
I  I  Eyes  sunken.

I  Eyes  sunken  and  surrounded  by  dark  circles. 6  Cholera.
1  Edges  of  lids  covered  with  mucus. ^Pneumonia.
Lids  and  external  canthi  granulated.
Injected  eyes.
lEyes  slightly  inflamed,  staring,  dull,  unsteady,  half  open  or

one  closed. 6  Pneumonia.
Inflammation  of  conjunctiva  with  much  lachrymation.
Red,  inflamed  eyes,  engorged  ciliary  vessels.
I  Eyes  somewhat  reddened,  aching  with suppuration  of  lids.

6  Rheumatism.
iGonorrhoeal  ophthalmia.
8 1  Ophthalmia  rheumatica  or  arthritica.
®  Hearing  and  Ears. Roaring  in  ears.

Fluttering  before  left  ear,  as  from  a  large  bird ;  at  same  time,

warmth  of  ear.
Twitching,  tearing  in  right  concha ;  evening  on  lying  down ;

disappears  in  bed.
'^  Smell and Nose. I  '  Uncontrollable epistaxis with spongy

gums,  as  in  scurvy.
iNose  dry. d  Rheumatism.
Sneezing,  fluent  coryza  and  chilliness,  with  loss  of  taste  and

smell,  and  a  feeble  voice. See  25.'


341  ANTIMONIUM  TARTARICUM.

Stoppage  of  nose,  alternating  with  fluent  coryza.

Nosebleed,  followed  by  fluent  coryza  with  sneezing.

Stupefying  tension  over  root  of  nose,  as  from  a  band.

Well-marked  motion  of  alse  nasi  with  a  child, d  Pertussis.

Nostrils  widely  dilated. See  26.

I  I  Nose  pointed.

Nostrils  dark,  sooty  and  dilated.

iNostrils  black,  smoky,  inflated  and  moving  rapidly,  like  wings.

d  Pneumonia.
^  Face. Face  animated,  tongue  red,  moderate  thirst,  region  of

stomach  sore,  headache.
iFace  expresses  the  greatest  anxiety. 6  Acute  oedema  of  lungs.
I  Anxious  look. ^  Bronchial  croup.
S Despairing  anxiety  depicted  on  face. ^Pneumonia.
I Suifering  face,  livid  red. ^Pneumonia.
I  I  Remarkable  distortion  of  countenance  with  spasms.
I  Convulsive twitches in almost every muscle of  the face.

d  With  cough. See  27.
81  Tearing  pain  in  the  whole  side  of  face,  even  the  head  and

neck  of  that  side, d  Rheumatic  toothache.
Burning  heat  of  face.

Face  very  much  flushed, d  Catarrhal  croup.
Congested  face,  with  difficult  breathing. See  26.
Face  dark  red  or  purple, d  Puerperal  convulsions.

I  Face  red,  pufied. ^Bronchial  croup.

■  Face  red,  bloated,  anxious. ^Pneumonia.

Despairing,  anxious  look,  face  cool,  pale  and  earthy ;  nostrils

dark,  sooty  and  dilated, d  Pneumonia.
Face  pale. See  26  and  27.
Face  pale,  bluish.

I I  Pallor. ^Bronchial  catarrh.
Face  pale  and  anxious.

BB Pale,  sunken  face. ^Diarrhoea. ^Cholera.
BFace  cool,  pale,  earthy,  bluish  around  the  nose. 6  Pneumonia.
BFace  as  pale  as  a  corpse,  with  bluish  spots,  distorted  and  cold.

d  Cholera.
BFace  pale,  nose  pointed,  eyes  sunken  with  blue  margins;  lips

livid, d  Asphyxia, d  Child  after  birth. See  24.
BCold  and  livid  countenance,  bathed  in  cold  sweat.
Sweat  on  forehead :  with  nausea,  16 ;  with  cough,  27 ;  with

heat,  40.
Maculae  in  face.
BPustules  on  the  face; sometimes  they  leave  ugly  blue-red

scars.
Bif  the  ulcers  last  awhile  on  limbs,  ulcers  also  appear  on  the

face. 6  Leprosy.
^  Lower  Part  of  Face. Mouth  closed  spasmodically.


ANTIMONIUM  TARTARICUM.  342

When  gaping  he  cannot  open  the  mouth  fully. 6  Intermittent.
I  Mouth  remained  open  after  gaping,  he  could  not  shut  it  for  a

while. ^Intermittent.
iMouth  open,  parched,  upper  lip  drawn  up. ^Pneumonia.
Lips  dry,  scurfy.
Lips  chapped,  nights.
Lips  pale,  livid.
Blue  lips. See  26.
Lips  swell  very  much  and  quickly,  and  have  excoriations  on

many  places.
Erythematous  eruption  on  the  lips.
Lips  covered  with  little  blisters, d  After  intermittent.
Itching  vesicles  on  lips.

■  Eruption  around  the  mouth,  of  rheumatic  origin. ^Tertian.

I  Aphthae  around  the  mouth. ^Influenza.
Burning,  as  from  hot  coal,  on  right  side  of  chin.

^^  Teeth  and  Gums. Teeth  chatter  with  inward  trembling.
Tearing  in  roots  of  teeth  after  eating  (left  side  posteriorly).
Violent  toothache  in  the  morning.

I I  Rheumatic  toothache  of  intermitting  type.
Gums  bleed  as  if  scorbutic.

Gums  red.

Scurvy  ;  spongy  gums  with  nosebleed.
Teeth  covered  with  mucus.
1 1  During  dentition  catarrhal  hypersemia.
^^  Taste,  Speech,  Tongue. Taste :  flat ;  salty ;  sour ;  bitter  ;  as
from  rotten  eggs.
Food  seems  tasteless.
Tobacco  has  no  taste.
Sour  taste  of  sputa. See  27.
A  very  unpleasant  taste  in  the  mouth.
I  Mouth  slightly  bitter. ^Pregnancy.
I  Flat  or  bitter  taste, d  Influenza.
Taste  bitter,  with  a  slimy,  furred  tongue.

■  Bitter  taste  in  mouth,  especially  all  night, d  Dyspepsia,
Speechlessness ;  speech  difficult,  tongue  is  swollen.
Difficult  even  painful,  to  move  the  tongue.

I  Tongue  very  thinly  white,  with  reddened  papillae,  red  edges.

I I  Tongue  very  red,  dry  in  the  middle.
1 1  Tongue  red,  in  streaks.

Tongue  dry  and  red.

Tongue  cold, pale, covered  with  a  thin, white, slimy fur.
d  Cholera.

I  Coated  tongue,  bitter  taste  in  mouth  and  nausea.
Slimy  furred  tongue.

I I  Tongue  covered  with  a  thick,  white,  pasty  coat.

■  Tongue  has  a  thick  white  fur. d  Rheumatism.


343  ANTIMONIUM  TARTARICUM.

I  Thick,  white  or  bilious  fur  on  tongue,  with  retching  of  phlegm,
nausea  and  vomiting, d  Influenza.

Tongue  furred,  yellowish-brown,  dry ;  later  thirst  relieved  by
sugar  water.

I  Tongue  brown,  dry. ^Pneumonia.

Tongue  is  covered  with  a  flocculent,  tough  coat.

Tongue  covered  with  a  false  membrane. See  13.

Imprints  of  the  teeth  on  the  border  of  tongue.

Small  round  ulcers  with  lard-like  borders,  on  tongue.
^^  Mouth, Much  heat  in  the  mouth  with  the  eruption ;  t.

Mucous  membrane  of  cavity  of  mouth  and  pharynx  covered
with  a  soft,  gray,  false  membrane  not  continuous.

Tongue  moist  and  yellow  in  the  middle.

Mouth  so  sore  can  scarcely  swallow,  morning  after  rising.

I  Small,  circular  patches,  like  small-pox  pustules,  in  and  upon
the  mouth  and  tongue, d  Diphtheria.

Blisters  and  pustular  eruptions  on  the  mucous  membrane  of  the
whole  cavity  of  the  mouth.

Salivation, d  During  pregnancy. See  24.

Mouth  and  lips  swollen  and  excoriated  as  from  salivation  with
mercury.

Ptyalism  with  buccal  eruptions  ;  t.

Copious  salivation  with  nausea.

Copious  salivation,  he  spits  all  the  time.

Spits  much  after  recovering  from  his  faint ;  t.
"  Palate,  Fauces  and  Throat. A  membranous  exudation  peels
ofl"  in  pieces.

Sensation  of  soreness  on  posterior  part  of  palate  when  not  swal-
lowing.

Soft  palate  and  upper  part  of  pharynx  very  red  and  full  of  little
blisters,  and  so  much  swollen  that  he  could  not  swallow  any
thing,  even  some  fluid ;  it  interferes  with  his  breathing.

Soft  palate  and  throat  deep  red,  covered  with  small  vesicles ;
surrounding  parts  swollen  and  coated  with  mucus.

Lips,  tongue,  hard  and  soft  palate  covered  with  a  score  of  vesi-
cles or  pustules,  of  a  yellowish-white  color,  flattened,  de-
pressed in  the  centre,  and  filled  with  a  purulent  liquid,  of  a
milk-white  color ;  t.

Back  of  pharynx  covered  with  mucus.

Mouth,  tongue  and  pharynx  covered  with  a  soft,  pale,  discon-
nected false  membrane ;  mucous  membrane  beneath  is  red-
dened, or  covered  with  gray,  sometimes  transparent,  flakes.

Fauces  covered  with  pustules,  which  spread  over  the  body  and
limbs  on  the  two  following  days.

Burning  in  fauces. See  14.

Rapid  swelling  of  tonsils  and  cervical  glands.

I  Acute  angina.

Saltish  rising  in  throat. See  16.


ANTIMONIUM  TARTARICUM.  844

IB  Much  mucus  in  throat  with  short  breathing.

Roughness  in  throat,  with  sensation  as  if  a  small  leaf  obstructed
the  windpipe  on  hawking.

Throat  full  of  phlegm,  with  cough. See  27.

Heat  and  constriction  in  throat.

In  throat,  mouth  and  tongue  a  sensation  of  tension,  with  some
pain  and  a  well  marked  metallic  taste.

(Esophagus  dry.

Erythematous  sore  throat ;  t.

Mucous  membrane  of  digestive  tube,  from  mouth  to  cardia,
shows  traces  of  pustular  or  pseudo  membranous  inflamma-
tion ;  t.

Phlegmasia  of  a  portion  of  the  intestinal  canal  with  false  mem-
brane, completely  tubular,  obstructing  oesophagus ;  t.

Intercurrent  pseudo-membranous  sore  throat.

All  along  the  mucous  membrane  of  the  alimentary  canal  innu-
merable small  conical  pustules  filled  with  serum ;  membrane
pale ;  t.

Difficulty  in  swallowing.

Violent  irritation  in  the  throat  with  difiicult  swallowing.

Swelling  of  tonsils  and  highly  reddened  pharynx.

Throat  so  swollen  and  mucus-coated,  he  was  quite  unable  to
swallow  even  liquids,  and  his  breathing  was  obstructed.
• Dysphagia, d  Meningitis.
^*  Appetite,  Thirst. Besires,  Aversions. Good  appetite
with  flat  taste,  and  somewhat  dry  mouth.

Canine  hunger  on  walking  in  the  open  air.

Appetite  diminished.

I  Less  appetite  in  apyrexia. d  Tertian  intermittent.

Loss  of  appetite,  anorexia.

I  Loss  of  appetite,  without  much  thirst. ^Influenza.

■  Weariness,  with  no  appetite;  in  apyrexia. ^Tertian,
. Disgust  for  food  during  pregnancy.

I I  Disgust  for  food,  frequent  nausea  and  relief  by  vomiting.
6  Gastric  derangement.

No  appetite  at  noon.

■  Little  thirst,  no  appetite. ^Rheumatism.

■  Not  much  appetite,  no  thirst. 6  Pregnancy.

■  No  appetite,  great  thirst. ^Rheumatism. ^Pneumonia.

■  Very  little  thirst. ^  Acute  catarrh.

■  Thirstlessness. ^Diarrhoea. ^Bronchial  catarrh.
I  I  Great  thirst.

Eager  desire  for  water  with  vomiting  the  smallest  quantity.
See  16.

■  Greedy  desire  for  water, d  Summer  complaint.

■  Irresistible  thirst  for  cold  water. 6  Catarrhal  diarrhoea.  '
I  I  Much  thirst ;  drinks  little  and  often.

Thirst  with  burning  sensation  in  fauces,  stomach  and  abdomen.


345  ANTIMONIUM  TARTARIC UM.

Thirst  after  stool.

B Desire  for  acids,  for  fruits,  or  for  any  cold  drink, d  Diarrhoea.
Extraordinary  appetite  for  apples,  and  thirst  for  cold  water.
B Aversion  to  milk. ^Diarrhoea.

B  Aversion  and  disgust  for  milk  and  every  other  kind  of  nour-
ishment ;  child  eet.  3  months, d  Summer  complaint.
Great  disgust  for  whiskey.
No  desire  for  tobacco.
^^  After  Eating  and  Drinking. Food  relieves  somewhat  the

pressure  in  the  abdomen.
After  eating :  cough  with  vomiting  of  the  food  and  of  mucus ;

—  sleeps  ;  uncomfortable  feeling ;  toothache ;  squeamishness  ;

pressure  in  the  stomach  ;  backache.
Relishes  food,  but  often  attacked  with  loathing  after  eating.
Worse  after  warm  drinks,  especially  milk, d  Whooping-cough.
After  drinking :  cough.
All  food  is  immediately  vomited  up.

B  After  eating  he  vomits  ingesta  but  without  relief. 6  Pertussis.
B Eating  sour  food  or  drinking  tart  wine  brings  on  the  attack.

d  Asthma.
B After  every  drink  nausea  and  pressure  in pit  of  stomach.

^Pneumonia.
B Febrile  motion  after  every  meal,  with  pungent  heat  in  face.

d  Pregnancy.
^^  Hiccough,  Belching,  Nausea  and Vomiting. Violent

hiccough  without  vomiting.
Frequent  retching  with  eructations  tasting  of  the  food,  bitter  or

acid.
BB Belching,  which  relieves. ^During  pregnancy.
Eructations tasting like rotten eggs, with sensation as if

stomach  had  been  overloaded,  at  night.
BFouI  eructations, d  Pneumonia.
Rising  of  saltish  water  in  the  throat.
Loathing  :  with  desire  for  cooling  things ;  after  eating.
I  I  Qualmishness  in  the  stomach  after  dinner.
I  Nausea  with  anxiety.

BBNausea  causes  great  anxiety. ^Diarrhoea.
BB  Continuous  anxious  nausea,  straining  to  vomit,  with  sweat  on

the  forehead. ^Diarrhoea.
BNausea  with  restlessness  and  great  anxiety, d  Rheumatism.
BNausea  with  faintness. ^Pregnancy.
Nausea  with  bitter  taste.
After  nausea,  stomach  feels  empty.
Nausea,  often  disgust, with  an  apparent  full  stomach, with

vertigo  and  dull  head.
BNausea  during  loose  stools.
Nausea,  sweat,  weariness  and  apathy  continue  till  late  in  the

night.


ANTIMONIUM  TARTARICUM.  346

I  Long-continued  tormenting  nausea. ^Yellow  fever.

I  I  Nausea  and  incessant  vomitino;  all  nio-ht.

I  BNausea,  vomiting  and  want  of  appetite. 6  Intermittent.

In  the  morning,  nausea  and  vomiting  of  slime,  followed  by

sweat.
I  Nausea with frequent vomiting of bitter-sour substances.

d  Dyspepsia.
Violent  retching,  nausea  and  vanishing  of  senses.
Cold  and  hot  flushes,  finally  vomiting  of  slime,  followed  by  a

mushy  substance  and  bilious  fluid,  with  very  great  exertion

of  chest  and  abdomen,  and  breaking  out  of  anxious  sweat.
Nausea  and  vomiting  of  phlegm,  with  increase  of  pulse  from  62

to  75  beats,  which  frequently  continues  into  the  night.
Nausea and vomiting with constipation, d  Pneumonia of

drunkards. 6  Remittent  fever.
After  nursing  at  the  breast,  nausea  and  vomiting  lumps  of  milk.
Attacks  of  nausea  and  vomiting  of  many  lumps  of  milk,  with

a  nursing  infant,  after  the  wet  nurse  had  taken  the  remedy.

■  Copious  vomiting. ^Cholera.
Vomits  at  every  motion.

I  Vomits  even  the  smallest  quantity  of  drink,  with  eager  desire

for  water, d  Summer  complaint.
Vomiting  immediately  after  taking  a  cup  of  broth.

I  I  Vomits  food  and  drink,  even  before  the  attack. ^Pertussis.
All  food  immediately  ejected  from  the  stomach.

I  I  Violent  retching  and  vomiting  food  with  cough.

I I  Vomits  with  great  efibrt. ^Diarrhoea.
Vomiting  slime  with  great  exertion.
Vomits  mucus  ;  with  mucous  diarrhoea.

iVomituritio  with  diarrhoea,  great  masses  of  phlegm  brought

up. 6  Pertussis.
Vomiting  of  large  quantities  of  mucus. 6  Pregnancy.

■  Vomits  tenacious  mucus. ^Diphtheria.
Vomiting  of  slime  and  bile.

Vomiting  of  tough,  watery  mucus,  then  pasty  food,  then  fluid,

mixed  with  bile.
Vomiting  of  bilious  masses  with  great  violence.

■  Gastric  and  bilious  vomiting  with  bitter  taste  in  mouth,  vomit-

ing bitter-sour.
Vomiting  of  bitter,  mushy  and  fluid  matter  of  a  bad  odor,  and

acid  reaction.
Violent  painful  vomiting  of  much  mucus  and  bile,  with  some

blood  next  day.
Vomits  matter  tinged  with  blood ;  bloody  foaming  fluid.

■  Vomiting  bloody  mucus. ^Pneumonia  in  children.

■  Hasmoptysis. ^  Delirium  tremens.

Vomiting:  in  any  position,  except  lying  on  right  side; Biwith
headache  and  trembling  of  the  hands.


347  ANTIMONIUM  TARTARICUM.

During  efforts  of  vomiting,  head  hot  and  sweaty, d  Pertussis.

Vomiting  until  he  faints  away.

Vomiting  and  fainting. 6  Meningitis.

Pressure  on  the  stomach  causes  vomiting.

Vomiting  with  pain  in  belly  and  purging.

I  Vomiting  and  diarrhoea  in  August,  with  a  child  set.  3  months.

IB  Vomiting  is  followed  by  great  languor,  drowsiness,  loathing,
desire  for  cooling  things, d  Diarrhoea.

I  In  the  morning  vomiting  and  cramps  in  arms  and  legs,  after
diarrhoea  all  night, d  Cholera.

I  Retching,  then  vomiting,  followed  by  great  prostration,  chilli-
ness and  sleepiness.

Vomiting  returning  after  sleep.
^^  Stomach. Pressure  in  pit  of  stomach,  dullness  of  head,  and
anxious  difficult  breathing.

I  Tingling  and  pinching  in  pit  of  stomach,  with  violent,  sudden
beats  of  heart, d  Pleurisy.

Violent  tickling  in  pit  of  stomach  (and  trachea)  irritating  to
cough.

Beating  and  throbbing,  particularly  in  pit  of  stomach  or  abdo-
men, with  great  concern  about  the  future.

I  Pit  of  stomach  sensitive,  with  meteorism,  nausea  and  vomiting.
d  Pneumonia  of  drunkards.

Coldness  in  pit  of  stomach  with  fainting.

iNo  pain  in  pit  of  stomach  or  abdomen, d  Cholera.

I  Sensation  of  emptiness  in  stomach. ^Influenza.
Stomach  feels  empty  after  the  nausea.

Pressing  in  stomach  with  belching ;  diminished  appetite.

Pressure  in  stomach  after  eating.

Violent  pains  in  region  of  stomach,  constantly  increasing  un-
til they  cause  fainting.

Cramps  in  stomach.

Unpleasant  feeling  of  warmth  in  region  of  stomach,  followed  by
violent  pain  in  forehead  and  in  back  part  of  throat ;  t.

Unpleasant  feeling  of  warmth  in  region  of  stomach,  gradually
increasing  until  it  is  a  painful  burning,  and  causes  great  rest-
lessness.

Burning  heat  in  region  of  stomach.

Stomach  very  sensitive,  no  appetite.

Irritation  in  stomach  with  nausea.

Sensation  as  if  stomach  had  been  overloaded ;  eructations  fre-
quent, like  foul  eggs  ;  sleep  restless.
*^  Hypochondria. Violent  pains  at  the  epigastrium,  which  was
tense;  t.

Burning  heat  and  pain  in  epigastric  region.

Burning  under  sternum.

Retraction  of  epigastrium  with  cough.

I I  Great  prsecordial  anxiety  with  vomiting  of  mucus  and  bile.


ANTIMONIUM  TARTARIC UM.  348

B Pressure  in  hypochondria  with  distension,  most  in  region  of

liver, d  Influenza.
Region  of  liver  sensitive  to  touch.
I  Gastric  and  hypochondriac  regions  sensitive  and  distended.

^Pneumonia.
I  Icterus  with  pneumonia,  especially  of  the  right  lung.
\  Diaphragmitis.
'^  Abdomen. Upper  part  of  abdomen  tense  and  painful.
Shocks  and  jerks  proceeding  from  abdomen  when  asleep.
Violent  colic  as  if  the  bowels  would  be  cut  to  pieces  ;  worse  sit-
ting bent  forwards.
Violent  bellyache  after  the  vomiting.
IB  Sharp  cutting  colic  before  stool. ^Diarrhoea.
Violent  pain  in  abdomen  with  vomiting  and  purging.
I  Colic,  during  loose  stools.
Colic  around  the  umbilicus,  >>  after  stool.
With  colic  :  pain  going  down  the  thighs. See  33.
Cutting  in  bowels  with  purging.
Abdominal  pains  increasing  and  very  frequent  discharges  from

the  bowels  of  watery  matter.
I  Most  violent  pain  in  abdomen,  sacral  and  coccygeal  region  and

in  loins, d  Chronic  metritis.
Burning  in  abdomen.

Beating  and  pulsation  in  the  abdomen. See  17.
\  Engorgement  of  abdominal  viscera.
Abdomen  feels  as  if  stuffed  full  of  stones,  though  he  has  eaten

nothing,  and  it  does  not  feel  hard.
Shifting  of  flatulence,  with  rumbling  in  bowels  and  diarrhoea.
Rumbling  in  the  bowels,  painless.
After  much  rumbling  in  the  intestines  a  second  discharge  from

the  bowels.
Meteorism  and  diarrhoea.
Abdomen  tympanitic  and  very  sensitive  to  pressure, d  Acute

catarrh.
Pressure  and  aching  in  the  hypogastrium,  with  cold  shivers.
Much  enlargement  at  the  sides  near  the  hips.
Painful  sensation  in  hypogastrium,  causes  the  highest  degree

of  mental  restlessness  and aversion to  all work ; toward

evening  hopeless  moodj  with  chilliness  and  great  sleepiness.
Violent  burning  soreness  in  right  groin.
Violent  cutting  and  labor-like  tearing  from  above  downwards

across  the  groins,  through  thighs  down  to  knees.
I  Pain  in  groins  and  cold  creeps  before  menses. ^  Dysmenor-

rhoea.
Violent  pain  at  epigastrium  and  through  the  whole  abdomen,

with  constant  spasmodic  contractions  of  abdominal  muscles.
Abdominal  breathing. See  26.


349  ANTIMONIUM  TARTARICUM.

Sensitiveness  of  the  external  abdomen,  with  pinching  and  ten-
sion inwardly.

Sensitive  abdomen  with  mushy  stools.

•  Ascites.
^^  Rectum  and  Stool. Stitches  in  the  rectum.

Sudden  violent  stitch  from  hypogastrium  down  through  the  rec-
tum.

■  Burning  at  anus,  after  loose  stool.

Desire  for  stool  ineffectual,  though  the  bowels  seem  full  and

pressing.
Tension  in  perineum. See  21.
Unsuccessful  urging  to  stool  with  apparent  full  abdomen.

■  Tenesmus  during  and  after  loose  stools.
Stool,  after  much  rumbling  in  intestines.

■Violent  shifting  of  flatulence  without  distension  of  abdomen,

before  stool, d  Diarrhoea.
At  first  cutting  pains  in  the  limbs,  then  purging.

■  Relief  of  pains  after  loose  stools.
Copious  alvine  evacuations.

Soft,  semi-fluid  stool,  with  much  discharge  of  urine,  forenoon
and  evening.

■  Frequent,  profuse,  loose  stools.

■  Mucous  diarrhoea  with  colic  and  restlessness.

■  Small,  slimy,  diarrhoeic  stools. ^Pneumonia.

■  At  times  pituitous  not  copious  diarrhoea. 6  Influenza.

The  diarrhoea  was  slimy  and  of  the  appearance  of  yeast,  with  a
marked  cadaverous  smell.

■  Watery,  mucous,  bloody  diarrhoea.

Watery,  slimy  stools,  with  noise  in  bowels  and  urging,  and  now
and  then  some  nausea.

■  Watery,  sometimes  slimy  and  greenish  diarrhoea, increased

each  time  after  taking  the  breast.

■  Stools  as  green  as  grass,  slimy, d  Summer  complaint.
Diarrhoea  with  grass-green,  slimy  stools  and  collapse.

■  Evening,  a  few  watery  stools,  thirty  or  forty  during  the  night.

d  Cholera.
Vomiting  with  rice-water  discharges, d  Cholera.
Violent  vomiting  and  purging.

■  Cholera  when  the  vomiting  is  copious  and  there  is  coldness,

and  thread-like  or  trembling  pulse.

Constant  involuntary  stools ;  profuse,  copious  diarrhoea.

Involuntary  discharge  with  much  phlegm  and  dead  ascarides.

Involuntary  stools, d  Meningitis.

Stools  :  yellowish-brown  ;  thin,  bilious,  mucous  ;  liquid  green-
ish, with  heat  at  the  anus ;  slimy,  appearing  like  yeast  and
of  cadaverous  smell.

■  Light  brownish-yellow,  fecal  discharges. ^Diarrhoea.
Diarrhoea  with  flatulency.


ANTIMONIUM  TARTARICUM.  350

Colliquative  diarrhoea,  with  meteorism.

Purging  with  colic.

Thin  fluid  stools,  with  very  acute  drawing  pain  in  bowels,  con-
stant sickness  and  nausea,  uncomfortable  feeling,  now  chill,
now  heat,  and  after  frequent  drinking  of  sugar  water  frequent
emission  of  pale  urine.

■  Diarrhoea  in  pneumonia,  small-pox,  and  other  eruptive  dis-

eases, especially  if  the  eruption  is  suppressed.

■  Diarrhoea  of  drunkards.

Stool  seldom,  somewhat  hard,  with  tenesmus, d  Rheumatism.

iCostiveness  for  several  days. ^  Acute  catarrh.

Constipation  with  nausea  and  vomiting, d  Pregnancy.

iNo  stool. ^Pneumonia.

After  stool,  tenesmus,  thirst ;  burning  at  the  anus ;  colic  less.
^'  Urinary  Organs.  Sharp  stitches  in  region  of  kidneys  on  mov-
ing arms.

Stricture  of  urethra.

Burning  from  rectum  through  the  urethra.

I  Spasm  of  bladder,  urine  scanty  and  red. ^Pneumonia.

Painful  urging,  with  .scanty,  dark  red,  frequently  at  last  bloody
urine  ;  violent  pains  in  bladder.

More  frequent  urination.

Urine  albuminous.

1  Urine  dark  brownish-red,  turbid,  of  strong  odor;  or,  becomes
cloudy  and  deposits  a  violet-colored  earthy  sediment.

Urine  acid.

Urine  profuse ;  also  at  night.

Urine  deposits  bloody,  red  filaments  on  standing.

■  Highly  reddened  urine. ^Pneumonia.

Urine  at  first  clear,  then  it  deposits  a  flour-like  sediment.
I  Urine  scanty,  dark,  with  a  brick-dust  sediment. ^Rheuma-
tism.

■  Violent tension  in perineum, especially  on walking, with

strong  inclination  to  urinate.
Violent  and  painful  urging  to  urinate,  with  scanty  or  bloody

discharge, d  Diarrhoea.
Urinary  discharge  interrupted  during  the  whole  time  ;  only  in

the  evening,  on  third  day,  scanty  dark  urine, d  Catarrhal

croup.
^^  Male  Sexual Organs. Excitation  of  the  sexual  system.

I  Pain  in  the  testicles ;  after  checked  gonorrhoea. ^Orchitis.
I  Secondary  orchitis.

I  Warts  behind  the  glans  penis,  with  ulcers  elsewhere. ^Sy-

cosis.

I I  Pustules  on  the  genitals  and  thighs.
•  Syphilis.

^^  Female  Sexual  Organs, l  Sensation  as  if  a  heavy  weight  was
tugging  at  the  coccyx. 6  Chronic  metritis.


25


351  ANTIMONIUM  TARTARICUM.

■  Severe  bearing  down  in  the  vagina, d  Diarrhoea.
Menses  too  early,  weak,  and  only  for  two  days.

Before  menses :  pains  in  the  groins  and  cold  creepings.
6  Dysmenorrhoea.

Leucorrhoea  of  watery  blood,  worse  when  sitting;  comes  in
paroxysms.

Pustules  on  external  genitals.

I  Violent  itching  of  the  pudenda, d  Diarrhoea.

Itching  in  vulva.
24  Pregnancy. I  Gastric  derangements;  vomiting  of  mucus ;  belch-
ing ; disgust  for  food ;  salivation ; nausea  with  faintness ;
amblyopia  after  colic  or  strong  emotions.

I  Puerperal-like  convulsions  continuing  after  the  birth  of  the
foetus ;  breathing  short,  difficult ;  oppression  of  the  chest ;
loose  rattling  cough,  no  sputa ;  suffocative  fits ;  face  dark
purple ;  great  jactitation  of  the  muscles.

IB  Child  at  birth  pale,  breathless,  gasping,  although  the  cord
still  pulsates, d  Asphyxia  neonatorum.

\  Metro-peritonitis.
Larynx  to  Bronchia. Voice  weak  and  changed,  in  the  eve-
ning.

I  Feeble  voice,  burning  under  the  sternum,  cough  and  sneezing.

Voice  weak,  soundless;  indescribable  anxiety  and  oppression
on  the  chest,  with  moaning  and  groaning.

I  He  cannot  speak  a  loud  word. 6  Bronchial  croup.

I  Unable  to  speak  a  word. ^  Acute  oedema  of  lungs.

I  Groaning  and  moaning  with  a  weak,  hollow,  soundless  voice.
6  Cholera.

■  Speech  short,  interrupted. ^Pneumonia.
Great  hoarseness  even  when  cough  is  slight.
Creeping  in  larynx  excites  cough.
Child  grasps  at  its  larynx,  with  cough.
iPainfulness of the larynx to touch ; sawing respiration.

d  Croup.

I I  Rattling  of  mucus  when  coughing  or  breathing.
1 1  Rattling  originates  in  the  upper  bronchi  and  can  be  heard  at

a  great  distance. 6  Bronchial  catarrh.
I  Great  rattling  in  larynx  extending  down  to  the  trachea,  neither
cough  nor  vomiting  brought  up  the  phlegm.

I  I  Tracheal  stertor,  bronchial  rhonci.

I I  Much  rattling  of  mucus  in  the  trachea;  cannot  get  it  up.
Comp.  26.

Sensation  as  of  a  leaf  in  windpipe. See  13.
Chronic  bronchial  catarrh.
llBronchioectasis  and  senile  catarrh.
\  Croup  with  inability  to  swallow.

■  Catarrhal  (not  membranaceous)  croup: Bcroup  of  adults.
Obviates  paralysis  in  croup.


ANTIMONIUM  TARTARICUM.  352

^^  E,espiration. Breathing  short ;  t.

I  I  Quick  breathing.

■  Breathing  quick,  short,  trembling  as  it  were. (9  Pneumonia.

■  Breathing  frequent. ^Bronchial  croup.

■  Breathing  short,  frequent. ^  Acute  catarrh. ^Pertussis.

■  Children  breathe  more  quickly  when  lying  down  than  when

carried  about  in  an  upright  position.
Much  phlegm  in  throat  and  short  breathing.
Breathing  short  and  difficult. /?  Puerperal  convulsions.

■  I  Shortness  of  breath  from  suppressed  expectoration,  especially

if  drowsy.
Slow  respiration. 6  Meningitis.
Respiration  short  and  labored  without  stertor.
Breathing  carried  on  only  by  the  aid  of  abdominal  muscles.
Attacks  of  unequal  breathing. See  26,

■  During  sleep,  frequent  attacks  of  unequal,  intermittent  breath-

ing.

■  ■The  unequal  breathing,  now  shorter  then  longer,  is  much

more  frequent  in  lying  down,  >>  when  child  is  carried  up-
right. 6  Bronchial  catarrh.

■  Breath  panting,  more  depending  on  abdominal  muscles  than

on  the  chest;  right  half  of  chest  immovable. ^Pneumonia.
Fullness  and  oppression  in  bronchia.
Diflficult,  anxious  breathing.
Inspirations  gasping  ;  expirations  long  and  slow.

■  Gasping  inhalation. ^Asthma.

■  Gasps  for  air  at  the  beginning  of  every  coughing  spell.
Gasping. 6  Child  after  birth.

Breathing  with  a  moaning  sound,  and  raising  the  shoulders.
6  Catarrhal  croup.

■  Child  expels  the  air  with  a  kind  of  bellowing, d  Pneumonia.
Air  expelled  with  a  crowing,  almost  barking  sound.

■  The  noise  of  breathing  became  more  sharp  and  rough,  a  con-

tinued whistling  and  purring  could  be  heard  in  the  chest.
6  Bronchial  catarrh.

■  Sawing  respiration. ^  Bronchial  croup. See  25.

■  Breathing  from  fifth  to  seventh  rib  (r.  side  behind)  indistinct,

but  bronchial  consoning  rattling, d  Pneumonia.

■  Such  rattling  that  it  threatens  to  suffocate  the  child, d  Pneu-

monia.

II  Respiration  with  great  rattling  of  mucus.

Breathing  impeded  on  account  of  a  swelling  of  upper  part  of
throat  and  accumulation  of  tough  mucus  in  that  region ;  with
it  fever  and  delirium.

Breathing  obstructed. See  12.

Difficulty  of  breathing,  rattling,  etc.,  in  convulsions.

Great  difficulty  in  breathing,  shoulders  raised,  eyes  turned  up-
wards, face  congested.


353  ANTIMONIUM  TARTARICUM.

y  Child cannot nurse, but ends each attempt  "with crying.

d  Broncho-pneumonia,  etc.
I  Great  difficulty  in  breathing, d  Convulsions, d  Bronchial

catarrh. 6  Pneumonia.

■  Oppression  of  breathing,  BIrelieved  by  expectoration. ^In-

fluenza.
He  has  been  asthmatic  ever  since  the  proving.
Anxious  asthma  and  feeling of  fullness  and  contraction of

chest.
I  Asthma.

I  Every  night  suiFocating  attacks. ^Asthma.
I  If  the  attack  of  difficult  breathing  is  very  violent  at  night,

all  next  day  the  breathing  is  impeded, d  Asthma.
I  Must  be  supported  in  a  sitting  posture  in  bed. d  Orthopnoea.

■  Dyspnoea  in  croup;  nostrils  widely  dilated,  thorax  elevated,

much  rattling.
Dyspnoea  with  heat  in  chest.
Dyspnoea  when  awakening. See  37.
I  I  Not  much  pain  in  chest  but  much  dyspnoea, d  Pneumonia.

■  Extreme  want  of  breath. 6  Pneumonia.

■  Danger  of  sufibcation  with  rattling  of  phlegm,  always  comes  on

suddenly. 6  Asthma.

■  Great  orthopnoea. 6  Acute  oedema  of  lungs, d  Dilatation  of

heart.

■  ■Suff'ocated  and  oppressed  about  3  a.m.,  must  sit  up  to  get

air ;  after  cough  and  expectoration  she  became  better.
Suffocation,  with  cough. See  27.

■  Suffocative  attacks  with  heat  about  the  heart.

■  Spells of  suffocation. ^Pneumonia. ^Puerperal convul-

sions.
Spells  of  choking,  in  the  evening,  in  bed ;  with  constriction.

d  Pneumonia.
Child  is  breathless  after  birth.

■  Asphyxia:  from  mechanical  causes,  as  apparent  death  from

drowning ;  from  pneumonia,  capillary  bronchitis,  atelectasis  ;
from  accumulation  of  mucus  which  cannot  be  expectorated ;
neonatorum  (see  24) ;  from  emphysema,  acute  oedema  pul-
monum  with  hydrothorax ;  with  impending  paralysis  of
lungs;  accompanied  by  ■■  drowsiness  or  coma;  pale  or  dark
red  face  ;  blue  lips  ;  delirium,  muscular  twitchings  ;  thread-
like pulse.

■  Relieves  the  "death-rattle."

"Cough. iFrequent  little  cough,  without  expectoration. ^Pneu-
monia.

■  Cough  day  and  night,  returning  at  short  intervals,  no  sputa.

d  Acute  catarrh.
:  Whooping-cough.

■  Whooping-cough  :  preceded  by  the  child  crying,  after  eating
23


ANTIMONIUM  TARTARICUM.  354

or  drinking,  or  when  getting  warm  in  bed;  after  the  attack,
somnolency.
I  Cough  with  the  peculiar  sound  of  whooping-cough.

I  Cough  in attacks,  with  a  hissing  hoarseness,  raises  hand  to

the  larynx,  which  is  sensitive  to  the  touch, d  Catarrhal
croup.

I I  Short  cough  with  a  shrill  sound. ^Bronchial  catarrh.

I  Tormented  from  time  to  time  by  painful  coughs  of  a  shriek-

ing; sound, d  Catarrh  of  a  child.

I I  Cough  compels  the  patient  to  sit  up,  is  moist  and  rattling,
but  without  expectoration. ^Bronchial  catarrh.

1 1  When  the  child  coughs  there  appears  to  be  a  large  collection
of  mucus  in  the  bronchial  tubes,  and  it  seems  as  if  much
would  be  expectorated,  but  nothing  comes  up.

1  1  Rattling  cough,  sounding  as  if  it  were  moist,  without  really
being  so.

I  Great  rattling  but  little  expectoration. ^Pertussis.

Loose  rattling  cough,  no  sputa. ^Puerperal  convulsions.

Cough  with  dentition  of  children,  in  which  the  rales  are  so  loud
that  they  can  be  heard  at  a  distance ;  disappearing  as  soon  as
children  finish  their  bout  of  coughing.

■  Between  the  coughs  faint  or  loud  cries  for  help, d  Catarrhal

croup.

Cough,  accompanied  by  crying  out ;  dizziness  ;  trembling  of
head ;  drowsiness ;  cold  sweat  on  head  and  hands.

Pale  face ;  retraction  of  the  epigastrium ;  retching  and  vomit-
ing of  food.

■  Violent  cough  after  each  meal,  ending  with  vomiting  of  the

food. 6  Bronchial  catarrh.
1  Cough  hollow,  excites  to  vomiting  accompanied  by  great  pain.

d  Pneumonia.
Tickling  cough,  with  violent  eructations  and  retching, even

vomiting  of  watery,  tough  slime ;  with  it  a  running  coryza.

■  Uninterrupted  cough  with  frequent  vomiting  of  bloody,  frothy,

thin  fluid  masses, d  Acute  oedema  of  lungs.
Great  hoarseness  even  when  cough  is  slight.
Gasping  for  breath  at  the  commencement  of  cough.
I  Suifocating  cough.
1  Cough  with  suffocating  attacks.

■  Distracting  cough  day  and  night,  with  short  breath  and  rat-

tling in  chest, d  Catarrh  of  a  child.

■  Child  springs  up,  clings  to  those  around;  calls  for  help  in  a

hoarse  voice,  or  bends  backwards  and  grasps  at  its  larynx.
Cough  with  rattling  of  large  bubbles  and  purring  in  the  chest.

■  Every  cough  causes  unbearable  pains  in  the  sides  of  chest  or  in

abdomen. 6  Pneumonia.

■  Every  attempt  to  cough  increases  the  torture. ^Pneumonia.

■  Pain  in  chest  when  coughing. ^Intermittent.


355  ANTIMONIUM  TARTARICUM.

Cough  with  weak,  quick,  trembling  pulse ;  restlessness ;  hot
body  but  cold  limbs.

■  Cough  in  variola.

1 1  Coughing  and  gaping  consecutively,  particularly  children  ;

with  crying  or  dozing,  and  twitching  in  the  face.
I  Much  fatiguing  cough,  most  nights,  shaking  the  whole  chest

and  causing  headache  most  in  forehead. ^Influenza.
I  Cough  dry,  breathing  sawing,  face  red,  puffed  up,  look  anxious,

could  not  talk, d  Croup.

■  Rattling  or  hollow  cough,  worse  at  night,  with  suffocation,

throat  full  of  phlegm,  sweat  on  forehead,  vomiting  food.
The  sputum  caused  by  the  proving  was  always  white  and  frothy ;
expectoration  at  times  abundant.

■  Constant irritation to cough with  brown expectoration  of

sero-albuminous  kind, d  Influenza.

■  ■Profuse  mucus  with  feeble  expulsive  power. (9  Bronchitis

of  infants  and  old  people.

■  ■Profuse  mucous  sputa,  easily  expectorated.
Nightly  €ough,  with  expectoration  of  mucus.
Expectoration  not  constant ;  in  the  morning  and  during  the  day.

■  Difficult  expectoration, continual  shooting  pain  in  1.  side  of

chest. ^Pleuritis  rheumatica.
Thick  expectoration.
Thick  bloody  sputa.
Expectoration  of  tough  mucus.

■  Sputa  thick  and  yellow. ^Bronchial  catarrh.

■  Expectoration  tough,  foamy,  mixed  with  blood, d  Pneumonia.

■  Frequent  cough,  with  frothy,  sanguineous  sputa.

■  Blood-spitting  when  after  the  attack  there  remains  for  a  long

time,  a  bloody,  slimy  expectoration.
Scraping  cough,  with  a  great  deal  of  pus-like  expectoration ;

after  shaking  chills,  copious  sweating,  with  chilliness  at  every

motion.
Expectoration  of  a  sour  or  salty  taste.
Cough  excited  by  creeping  in  the  larynx  or  trachea.
Gasps  for  air  in  the  beginning  of  a  coughing  spell.
Irritation  to  cough  with  tenacious  phlegm  from  the  bronchia.

■  After  the  cough  lasts  a  while,  it  gets  loose  and  relieves  the

contraction  of  chest. 6  Asthma.

■  After  suffocative  fits  at  night  cough  with  increase  of  asthma.

■  ■Cough  grows  less  frequent,  patient  shows  signs  of  "carbon-

ized blood."

Better :  sitting  upright ;  carrying  the  child  in  an  upright  po-
sition ; >  from  expectoration.

Worse :  after  midnight ;  after  eating ;  after  getting  angry ;
sleeping  in  damp  cellars ;  getting  warm  in  bed.

■  At  11  P.M.  sudden  violent  cough. ^  Acute  oedema  of  lungs.

■  Cough  worse  every  morning, d  Bronchial  catarrh.


ANTIMONIUM  TARTARICUM.  356

^*  Inner  Chest  and  Lungs. iFull  feeling  of  the  chest.
Crushing  weight  on  chest, d  Variola.
Constriction  of  chest. See  26.
Oppression  better  after  cough. See  26.
I  Great  oppression  on  chest. /?  Puerperal  convulsions.

■  Oppression  before  eruption  appears. 6  Small-pox.
I  Velvety  feeling  in  the  chest, d  Heart  disease.

I  Anxious,  with  oppression  of  the  chest  and  warm  rising  from
the  heart.

I  Heat  in  chest  with  dyspnoea.

I  Pain  dull,  pressing  and  burning  extending  to  the  sternum.
6  Pneumonia.

I  Burning  in  the  chest  extending  towards  the  throat.

Stitches  in  the  left  chest  and  oppressed  breathing  in  the  eve-
ning.

I  Shooting  in  the  chest, d  Influenza.

■  Violent  pains  from  chest  to  shoulder,  lancinating  and  tearing.

d  Pleuritis  rheumatica.
I  During  5  hours  had  at  least  6  pounds  of  fluid  evacuated,  and

still  both  lungs  were  filled  with  a  fluid  secretion. 6  Acute

pulmonary  oedema.
I  Motion  of  chest  very  quick  but  heavy,  like  under  a  heavy

load  with  suffocative  anxiety  and  stertorous  rattling  of  phlegm.

d  Pneumonia.

■  Slight  motion  of  the  chest;  principally  abdominal  breathing.

6  Pneumonia.

Rattling  in  chest.

I  Mucous  and  subcrepitant  rales  and  dull  percussion  over  sum-
mit of  r.  lung.

Rattling  of  large  bubbles  with  purring  in  the  chest,  d  With
cough. See  27.

■  Constant  rattling,  can  be  heard  at  a  distance,  mostly  on  the

right  side, d  Acute  catarrh.

■  Rattling  of  phlegm  in  bronchia  very  audible,  with  increased

irritation  to  cough, d  Bronchial  catarrh.

■  ■Rattling  of  phlegm  on  chest,  >  when  carried  in  an  upright

position, < lying down ; with oppression. 6  Bronchial
catarrh, 6  Croup.

■  After  pneumonia  rattling  continuing,  with  much  cough  and

copious,  white,  frothy  expectoration, d  Pneumonia.
Rales  heard  over  the  hepatized  parts  ;  too  weak  to  expectorate.

■  On  the  upper  right  side  and  the  whole  left  side,  numerous  fine

rales, d  Pneumonia, d  CEdema  of  lungs.

■  ■Inflammation  of  respiratory  mucous  membrane.

■  ■Grippe;  ■■acute pneumonia;  ■■broncho-pneumonia;  ■pleuro-

pneumonia.

■  ■  Sputa  blood-streaked,  rust-colored,  adhering  like  glue  to  the

vessel, d  Pleuro-pneumonia.


357  ANTIMONIUM  TARTARICUM.

I  Gastric  or  bilious  pneumonia.

I  Rheumatic  affections  of  pleura  or  peritoneum. ^Pneumonia.

I  Strong  bronchial  breathing  in  front,  r.  side,  above  and  behind;

crepitation  in  1.  lung ; expiratory  murmur. 6  Pneumonia.
Coarse  and  fine  rales;  very  Aveak  vesicular  breathing, d  CEdema

of  lungs.
Complete  hepatization, d  Pneumonia.
I  In  front,  r.  side  a  dull,  empty  percussion  sound. 6  Pneumonia.

■  Percussion  sound  tympanitic, d  Qildema  of  lungs.

■  Percussion  behind  and  below,  r.  side,  up  to  the  3d  rib,  empty

tympanitic. 6  Pneumonia.

I  (Atelectasis,  with  the  symptoms  of  asphyxia  belonging  to  the

remedy ;  with  oedema  of  the  unhepatized  portions  of  the
lungs;  breathing  labored,  orthopnoea;  mucous  rales.
6  Pneumonia.

I I  (Edema  of  the  lungs.

■  Frequent  vomiting  of  a  bloody,  foamy  fluid.

■  ■Emphysema.
Hydrothorax. See  26.

•  Tuberculosis  (palliative).

■  ■Impending  paralysis  of  lungs, i^  Typhus  pneumonia,  etc.

^^  Heart,  Pulse  and  Circulation, Heat  about  the  heart  and
warmth  rising  up  from  it,

■  So  warm  about  the  heart  that  she  must  let  the  arms  sink  down,

with  great  general  weakness. 6  Dilatation  of  heart.

More  frequent  and  shorter  beat  of  the  heart  and  general  in-
crease of  bodily  temperature.

Violent  sudden  beats  of  heart. 0  Pleurisy.

Beat  of  heart  is  felt  in  the  head.

Palpitation  of  the  heart,  without  anxiety.

■  Palpitation  of  heart  with  loose  stools.

■  Pericarditis  with  pleuro-pneumonia.

■  Dilatation  of  the  heart  from  rheumatism  with  feeling  as  if  the

heart  was  strained ;  velvety  feeling  in  the chest ;  warmth

about  the  heart ;  orthopnoea  ; cyanosis.
Oppression  of  the  heart  and  small  unequal  pulsations.
Pleart's  action  feeble  and  intermittent.
Heart's  impulse  scarcely  perceptible.

■  Cyanosis. ^  Dilatation  of  heart.
Sensation  of  coldness  in  the  blood-vessels.

■  Pulse  frequent. ^  Summer  complaint.

Pulse  increases  from  62  to  75  beats,  and  remains  frequent  un-
til night, d  Rheumatism.
Frequent  and  full  pulse  with  quicker  breathing.

■  Pulse  frequent  but  not  quick. ^Bronchial  croup.

■  Pulse  frequent  and  strong.

■  Pulse  very  frequent  and  unequal, d  Catarrh  of  a  child.
Somewhat  irritated  pulse  with  slight  sensation  of  chills.


ANTIMONIUM  TARTARICUM.  358

iPulse  132,  small,  hard. ^Pneumonia.

Pulse  free  and  hard,  skin  warmer.

iPulse  hard  and  quick,  in  old  people.

iPulse  112. ^Pneumonia.

I  Pulse  120  with  a  child. ^Pneumonia.

I  IPulse  hard,  full  and  strong;  sometimes  trembling;  very
much  accelerated  by  every  motion ;  when  the  fever  abates
it  is  often  slow  and  imperceptible.

Pulse  is  sometimes  accelerated,  sometimes  retarded,  in  the  same
person.

Pulse  almost  ceases  or  is  violent,  reverberating  in  the  head.
d  Dilatation  of  heart.

I  I  Pulse  small  and  contracted  ;  t.

I  Pulse  small. ^Influenza.

I  Pulse  quick  and  small. 6  Diarrhoea  of  a  child.

iPulse  small,  hard,  very  quick,  intermitting. ^Pneumonia.

I  IPulse  weak,  quick  and  trembling. ^Bronchial  catarrh.

I  Threadlike  or  trembling  pulse, d  Cholera.

I  Small  threadlike  pulse, d  Meningitis.

IPulse  small,  threadlike,  120,  with  very  little  increased  tempe-
rature ;  girl  get.  11. d  Acute  catarrh.

I  Pulse  confused,  cannot  be  counted  or  estimated. 6  Pneumonia.

Pulse  diflScult  to  be  felt,  now  quick,  then  slow ;  t.

Beats  of  pulse  much  retarded  with  the  indifference. See  1.

I  No  pulse  could  be  felt  on  the  radial  arteries,  and  on  the  caro-
tids, only  a  slight  vibration,  a  man  »t.  30. d  Cholera.
^^  Outer  Chest. Crawling  as  of  insects  above  the  left  mamma.
^^  Neck  and  Back. Does  not  like  anything  to  touch  him  ;  incli-
nation to  unbutton  the  collar  of  his  shirt.

Cramp  in  muscles  of  neck.

Pain  in  back  as  from  fatigue,  especially  after  eating  and  while
sitting.

I  Stiff  neck, d  Influenza.

iNeck  stretched  out,  head  bent  back, d  Catarrhal  croup.

■  Backache  with  the  chill. ^Intermittent.

■  Drawing  down  the  back,  heaviness  in  limbs ;  before  a  leprous

eruption  broke  out.
Burning  in  back.
Sharp  stitches  in  region  of  kidneys,  on  moving  arms.

I I  Violent  pain  in  sacro-lunibar  region;  the  slightest  effort  to
move  causes  retching  and  cold  clammy  sweat. 6  Lumbago.

iPain  in  sacrum  with  sensation  of  lameness, d  Pneumonia.

■  Sensation  as  if  a  heavy  load  was  hanging  on  the  end  of  the

coccyx, dragging downwards all the time. 6  Chronic
metritis.
^^  Upper Limbs. Tearing  and  stitching  pains.
Pain  as  from  dislocation,  in  the  right  shoulder.

■  Most  violent  pain  like  dislocation  in  left  arm,  as  if  the  flesh


359  ANTIMONIUM  TARTARICUM.

were  torn  from  the  bones,  from  axilla  down  to  the  tips  of
fingers, d  Rheumatism.

8  Could  not  move  the  arm  unless  assisted  by  the  other,  d  Rheu-
matism.

Right  arm  and  hand  are  cold  to  the  touch.

■  Twitching  of  the  muscles.

On  moving  arms  kidneys  pain. See  31.
Rheumatic  pain  in  the  left  elbow.

■  Pain  in  wrists,  knees  and  ankles.

Tremor  of  the  hands  and  picking  of  bed  clothes  or  anything

within  reach.
Hands  sweat  and  are  cold.
1 1  Trembling  of  the  hands.
I  Hands  cold  and  moist;  or,  hot  and  moist.

■  Dampness  in  palms  of  hands. ^Pregnancy.

The  tips  of  the  fingers  appear  dead,  dry  and  hard ;  without  sen-
sation.
Brown  spots  on  the  fingers.
Fingers  firmly  contracted  and  the  muscles  quite  rigid.

■  Fingers  are  contracted,  flexors  bent  inward. ^Leprosy.
Itchlike  eruption  on  the  wrist,  which  itches  violently ;  itching

disappears  after  scratching.
^^  Lower  Limbs. Rheumatic  pains  about  the  hips,  thighs  and

calves.
Drawing  tensive  pains  in  the  lower  limbs.
Tearing  and  drawing  in  the  lower  limbs.
Violent  cutting,  tearing  across  the  groins  and  down  the  thighs  ;

with  the  colic.
Fatigued  in  the  lower  limbs.
Numbness  and  coldness  in  the  legs.

Tension in  the hamstrings  on  walking  ;  also  on the  instep.
Spasmodic  starting  of  the  muscles,  of  the  legs.
Painful  cramps  in  legs.
Cramps  in  the  legs ;  with  lumbago.
Trembling  of  the  knees.
I  I  Painful  cramps  in  the  calves.

■  Dropsy  of  the  1.  knee-joint.

■  Pains  in  the  foot  extending  to  the  other  articulations.
Weariness  in  the  feet.

Feet  feel  as  if  beaten.

Feet  go  "to  sleep  "  immediately  after  sitting  down.

Numbness  and  coldness  of  the  feet.

Cold  feet.

Veins  of  the  feet  distended.

Some  swelling  in  the  knuckles  of  the  r.  foot  and  stiffness  of  the

foot.
The  big  toes  of  both  feet  feel  cold  when  touched.


ANTIMONIUM  TARTARICUM.  360

^*  Limbs  in  General, n  Heaviness  in  the  limbs  followed  by  a
leprous  eruption.

Soreness  in  the  calves  of  the  legs  and  shoulder-blades.

iLimbs overfatigued ; a sensation coming from the back.
6  Influenza.

Weakness,  insensibility  and  coldness  of  the  limbs.

Rheumatic  and  bruised  sensation  in  the  limbs,  on  and  shortly
before  rising.

Rheumatic  pains  with  sweat,  which  does  not  relieve ;  pains  are
tearing,  beating,  stinging.

Right  arm  and  hand  and  the  great  toes  of  each  foot  were  cold
to  the  touch.

I  Jerking  up  of  limbs  during  sleep  with  loose  stools.

I  Tonic  spasms  in  arms  and  legs,  most  in  forearms  and  calves.
d  Cholera.

I  On  the  tips  of  the  fingers  and  toes  small  ulcers,  not  very  deep,
little  discharge  and  not  much  pain,  they  spread  and  destroy
one  joint  after  another,  and  one  phalanx  after  another  falls
off,  finally  hands  and  feet  are  separated  in  their  joints;  a
slight  livid  redness  around  the  ulcers,  d  Leprosy  of  the  So-
ciety Isles.
^^  Rest. Position. Motion. Worse  resting :  headache.

Sitting  bent  forward  :  colic  <.

Child  bends  backward  :  with  cough.

After  sitting  down  :  feet  go  to  sleep.

While  sitting :  pain  in  back.

Sitting  erect :  headache  >■:  cough >-.

Can  only  breathe  when  sitting  up. 6  Pleurisy.

I  Has  to  sit  up  and  supported  by  a  servant  he  moves  continually
to  and  fro. d  Acute  oedema  of  lungs.

I  Had  to  sit  on  a  chair  and  lay  the  head  on  the  table,  to  be  re-
lieved, d  Asthma.

Sitting  posture  in  bed. See  26.

Lying  down:  earache  <.

Lying  on  right  side:  vomiting  ^.

I  I  Could  lie  on  his  r.  side  only ;  any  change  from  his  position
was  sure  to  induce  vomiting  ;  t.

Lying  down  :  quick  breathing.

I  Cannot  lie  on  the  side  affected. ^Pneumonia.

I  Child  lies  with  head  bent  back. ^Pneumonia.

Lies  on  her  back,  somewhat  to  the  left,  doubled  up. d  Acute
catarrh.

On  walking :  vertigo.

Worse  on  walking :  tension  in  perineum  ;  in  hamstrings.

Walking,  sitting  and  lying  is  equally  unbearable, d  Chronic
metritis.

Constant  inclination  to  stretch.

On  rising  :  bruised  sensation. See  34.


361  ANTIMONIUM  TARTARICUM.

Stooping : <C  headache ;  pain  in  occiput.
Moving  about:  headache  >-.
Moving  tongue  :  is  painful.

Slightest  effort  to  move :  causes  retching  and  vomiting ;  tremb-
ling of  hands  ;  aggravates  heat.
I  Pain  worse  from  motion. ^Pneumonia.
Every  motion  accelerates  pulse.
Carried  about  in upright  position: children >. ^  Croup.

d Cough.
Before  rising :  bruised  sensation.
36  ]^erves. Alternations  of  unsteadiness  and  syncope.
Extreme  restlessness  and  anxiety.

I  Tossing  about  with  great  restlessness. ^Meningitis.

■  Child  tosses  about  with  anxiety. ^Pneumonia.

I I  Great  restlessness. ^Bronchial  catarrh.

■  Child  throws  its  arms  about  all  the  time. ^Pneumonia,
Unusual  volubility  and  activity.

■  Jactitation  of  the  muscles.

■  Trembling:  of  whole  body;  internal;  of  head  and  paralytic

trembling  of  hands  on  every  motion  ;  of  drunkards.

■  Chorea.

Convulsive  motions  and  loss  of  consciousness ;  t.

Convulsions  with  loss  of  consciousness.

Clonic  spasms, d  Meningitis.

Convulsions  partial  or  general. 6  Meningitis.

Violent  convulsions  and  spasms. See  8.

Convulsions  from  repelled  or  non-appearing  eruptions ; skin

pale,  cold,  great  difficulty  in  breathing.
Constant  spasmodic  contraction  of  the  muscles,  particularly  of

upper  limbs.

■  Tonic  spasm  when  moving  limbs.  ^Intermittent.
Tetanic  rigidity  and  spasm  of  the  jaws,  d  Tetanus.
I  ■  Great  weakness  and  lassitude, d  Intermittent.

■  Enormous  weakness. ^Cholera. ^Pneumonia.

■  Great  loss  of  strength,  slipping  down  in  bed. ^Pneumonia.

6  Acute  catarrh.
I  ■Great  prostration  and  sluggishness  of  the  body  with  -bad

humor.
Complete  prostration  from  frequent  vomiting.

■  ■Prostration  and  collapse. ^Summer  complaint.

■  Great apathy, alternating with restlessness in the night.

6  Influenza.

■  Lies  comatose  with  half-closed  eyes,  when  spoken  to  he  is

fully  conscious, d  Cholera.

■  Very  much  weakened  and  exhausted,  falls  in  a  kind  of  coma

and  can  hardly  be  awakened,  only  a  new  coughing  attack  in-
terrupts it. 6  Pertussis.
I  Attacks  of  fainting  with  coldness  in  pit  of  stomach.


ANTIMONIUM  TARTARICUM.  362

Insensibility  ;  he  lies  motionless  ,  paralysis  ;  t.
^^  Sleep. Frequent  incomplete  gaping. 6  Bronchial  croup.

I  Drowsiness,  with  loose  stools, d  Diarrhoea  of  a  child. See  2.

Unconquerable  sleepiness.

lYawning.

llGrreat  sleepiness;  irresistible  inclination  to  sleep,  with
nearly  all  affections.

Somnolency  after  cough. See  27.

Sleepiness  with  the  sweat, d  Intermittent.

I  I  Sopor,  especially  from  imperfectly  oxygenized  blood.

Sopor,  with  starting, d  Pneumonia. 6  Hydrothorax.

Coma  with  pale,  puffed  face, d  Bronchitis.

Stupor  with  coma.

I  With  muttering  delirium  she  fell  into  a  stupid  sleep,  d  Pneu-
monia.

Deep  sopor, d  Meningitis.

I  Even  in  a  sopor,  as  if  suffocating. ^Bronchial  catarrh.

I I  Coma. ^  Bronchial  catarrh.

I  Child  lies  in  a  stupid  sleep,  starting  sometimes, d  Pneumonia.
Stupor  and  drowsiness,  evening  and  night,  •<  in  rest,  >-  from

motion  and  washing  the  head.
Had  scarcely  fallen  asleep  when  he  was  seized  with  shocks  and

jerks,  all  of  which  came  from  the  abdomen.
During  sleep  jerks  through  the  body.

I I  Sleep  at  night  full  of  dreams,  in  the  morning  dull  head.

■  Very  little  sleep  on  account  of  pain, d  Chronic  metritis.

■  Sleeplessness. ^Pneumonia.

■Nightly  sleeplessness  on  account  of  the  violent  pains  in  head
and  arm. 6  Rheumatism.

1 1  Cannot  sleep  till  towards  morning,  a  few  hours,  d  Rheuma-
tic toothache.

Restless  all  night  with  anxious  tossing  about ;  in  the  morning
pressure  in  forehead  and  occiput.

Morning  awakening  with  a  dizzy  head,  heaviness  and  feeling
very  uncomfortable.

I  Awakens  with  dyspnoea.

I  I  Vomiting  returns  after  sleep.

After  the  sleep  very  great  weariness  but  otherwise  better.

■  When  awake,  hopeless,  despairing, d  Chill  and  fever.

In  the  morning  when  awaking  sweat  all  over  and  clear  remem-
brance of  heavy  anxious  dreams.
38  Time. BMost  attacks  at  night,  with  vomiting  of  slime  and  food.
d  Catarrhal  pertussis.
I  Worse  night,  loose  stools.

■  During  the  night  much  worse, d  Catarrhal  diarrhoea.

■  ■Worse  at  night,  and  sleepless. 6  Bronchial  catarrh.

At  night :  lips  chapped ;  belching  like  rotten  eggs ;  nausea
and  vomiting  ;  profuse  urine ;  cough  <  ;  profuse  sweat.


363  ANTIMONIUM  TARTARICUM.

3  A.M. :  oppression.

After  midnight :  cough.

Morning :  the  head  dizzy  and  dull ;  toothache ;  mouth  sore ;
hoarseness ;  expectoration.

During  the  day  :  expectoration.

Toward  evening :  bellyache.

Evening :  headache ;  earache  ;  voice  weak  ;  choking ;  drowsi-
ness.

I  Morning  9  o'clock  :  heavy  rigor  with  shaking, d  Intermittent.

I  Every  afternoon  some  chills  followed  by  great  heat,  with
thirst  and  sweat,  heat  lasted  all  night. 6  Intermittent.

I  I  Considerable aggravation towards evening continuing all

night, d  Rheumatic  toothache.
^^  Temperature  and  Weather. From  heat:  headache  <.
In  warm  place  :  drowsiness.
In  bed  :  earache;  cough  <<.
Worse  from  lying  in  bed,  especially  on  becoming  warm  there.

d  Whooping  cough.
Warm  drinks  <<  cough. 6  Pertussis.
Desires  cool  things.
Cold  air  :  headache  >■•
Walking  in  open  air ;  hunger.
Longs  for  open  air.

Even  when  riding  in  the  open  air  he  could  scarcely  keep  awake.
Worse  in  damp,  cold  weather :  whooping  cough.
Worse  from  remaining  in  vaulted  chambers,  churches,  cellars.

d  Whooping  cough.
After  washing  the  head:  headache  >>.

■  Keeping  warm  lessens  the  pain, d  Rheumatism.

I I  Warmth  aggravates,  even  getting  warm  in  bed.  d  Rheuma-
tic toothache.

I  After  taking  cold:  rheumatism  of  joints.
I  After  taking  cold  in  summer:  diarrhoea.

I  After  getting  cold  feet : asthma.

■  High  degree  of  sensitiveness  to  every  change  of  weather.-

d  Rheumatism.

I I  In  Spring  and  Fall  when  damp  weather  commences:  rheu-
matic toothache.

1 1  Cold  water  lessens, d  Rheumatic  toothache.

■  After  a  change  in  temperature  during  the  Fall :  coughs  with

children  get  worse.
^^  Fever. Sudden  fall  of  temperature, d  Meningitis.

Slight  chilly  feeling.

Chill  predominating.

Chill  spreading  from  within  and  from  the  vertebras  over  abdo-
men and  limbs, with  retching,  belching  and  a  drawing  tensive
pain  in  the  lower  limbs.


ANTIMONIUM  TARTARICUM.  364

Great  debility  of  the  limbs,  feeling  of  fullness  in  chest,  tearing
in  the  joints,  with  chilly  feeling.

Chill  and  sensation  of  heaviness  in  the  limbs  and  some  tremb-
ling, cannot  get  warm.

I  Chill,  with  external  coldness,  coming  on  at  all  times  of  the
day,  with  somnolency  ;  mostly  with  trembling  and  shaking  ;
frequently  as  if  cold  water  was  poured  over  one.

Rigor  with  shuddering  and  cold  skin  all  over,  remaining  long-
est on  the  hands,  with  it  headache,  small  contracted  pulse,
thirst,  restless  excited  mood  and  drowsiness.

Cold  skin.

I  The  whole  body  very  cold, d  Cholera.

Insensibility  and  coldness  of  limbs,  with  a  weak,  scarcely  per-
ceptible pulse ;  without  vomiting  (child).

I  Skin  of  whole  body,  in  spite  of  many  covers,  icy  cold,  covered
with  colliquative  sweat,  great  thirst,  pulse  frequent  (cannot
be  counted),  like  a  thread.

Violent  palpitation  and  great  anxiety, d  (Edema  of  lungs.

Cold,  pulseless,  speechless  and  apparently  insensible.

Shivering  over  the  whole  body,  nausea,  retching  and  cold  sweat.

Violent  crawls  fly  through  the  body,  with  vertigo ;  t.

Crawls  over  the  whole  body,  cold  sweat.

Nausea,  retching  and  inclination  to  vomit.

I  Skin  chilly  with  very  copious  sweats,  which  do  not  relieve.
^Influenza.

Chill  and  heat  alternating  during  the  day.

I  Chilliness  as  if  water  was  poured  over  him,  with  gooseflesh,
gaping,  want  of  thirst;  drowsiness,  following  heat  with  dull-
ness in  head, d  Intermittent.

I  Chill  lasting  45  minutes  followed  by  vomiting,  headache,  heat
and  thirst ;  after  drinking,  retching. 6  Intermittent.

I  I  Violent  but  not  long-lasting  heat  succeeding  a  long  chill,
aggravated  by  every  motion.

i Long-lasting  heat,  after  a  short  chill,  with  somnolency  and
sweat  on  the  forehead.

! Temperature  increased. ^Pneumonia. ^Rheumatism.

General  warmth  over  the  whole  body.

Heat  about  the  heart. See  28.

Skin  dry  and  warm.

Violent  fever  in  delirium.

Sudden  flushes  over  the  face.

I  Heat,  does  not  want  to  nurse,  and  is  costive.  6  Catarrh  of  a
child.

S Feverish  heat,  body  hot  and  di-y. d  Rheumatism.

Thirst  not  constant  during  the  hot  stage,  but  marked  between
heat  and  sweat.

I  Skin  burning  hot,  only  somewhat  moist  in  scrobiculum  and
upon  the  chest. 6  Pneumonia.


365  ANTIMONIUM  TARTARICUM.

Heat  long  and  great  with  much  sweat,  intense  thirst  and  de-
lirium. 6  Tertian,

Hot  and  sweaty  head. See  4.

Copious  sweat.

I  Profuse  sweat  all  over,  also  at  night. ^Intermittent.

I  I  Profuse  night  sweats.

I  Pains  and  night  sweat  make  restless  and  sleepless,  d  Rheu-
matism.

■  The sweat  follows  long  after,  in the afternoon during  the

sleep, d  Intermittent.
The  affected  parts  sweat  most  profusely.

■  I Skin  covered  with  a  running,  sticky  sweat. ^Bronchial  ca-

tarrh.
Worse  while  sweating ;  but  rather  better  after  sweat.
I  Fever, copious sweats, which do not relieve the pains.

6  Rheumatism.
I  Sweat  is  frequently  cold  and  clammy. See  8.
Skin  on  head  and  limbs  cold  and  viscous;  t.
Forehead  covered  with  sweat,  hands  sweat  and  are  cold ;  t.
Cold  sweat  and  retarded  pulse  ;  t.
I  Gastric  rheumatic  character  of  the  intermittent.

■  Bilious  fever  and  profuse  haemoptysis.

Remitting  type  of  fever;  nausea  and  vomiting, drowsiness;

red,  itching  rash  over  the  body ;  mostly  with  children.
Soporous  intermittent.
*^  Attacks. Wave-like  increase  and  decrease  of  pain  in  forehead.
Paroxysms  return  at  regular  intervals,  and  there  is  comparative

freedom  between  the  attacks.
Attacks  antepone  several  hours, d  Tertian.

■  Every  two  months  an  attack  lasting  two  weeks, d  Bronchial

catarrh.
^^  Locality  and  Direction. Rheumatic  pains  first  in  right  hand
then  through  both  legs  from  above  downwards,  especially  in
the  knees.

Right :  temple,  headache ;  tearing  in  ear ;  burning  of  chin  ;
lying  on  r.  side,  >  vomiting ;  soreness  in  groin ;  lung  in-
flamed ;  shoulder  as  if  dislocated ;  arm  and  hand  and  great
toe  cold.

Left :  parietal  bone,  headache ;  fluttering  before  ear ;  tooth-
ache ;  mamma,  crawling ;  pain  in  elbow.

Down  into  left  eye  :  headache.

Extending  down  to  zygoma  and  upper  jaw  :  headache.

From  above  downwards  :  bellyache.

Downwards  :  to  rectum. See  20.

From  chest  towards  throat :  burning.

Extending  forward :  headache.

As  of  something  falling  forward  from  occiput.


ANTIMONIUM  TARTARICUM.  366

^^  Sensations. Insensibility,  sensation  of  numbness  (not  want  of
irritability).

Sensitiveness  in  internal,  numb  sensation  in  external  parts.

Sensation  of  coldness  in  the  veins.

Tearing,  drawing  pains  in  belly  and  all  the  limbs,  several  days
later.

Beating  and  throbbing  through  the  whole  body,  particularly  in
belly  or  pit  of  stomach.

Sensation  as  if  brain  were  in  one  lump,  or  as  if  it  were  pressed
together.

Pain  in  forehead  like  waves  increasing  and  decreasing.

Sensation  of  band  compressing  forehead.

As  if  something  fell  forward  in  occiput  when  stooping.

Sense  of  inner  trembling  with  trembling  of  head.

Tired  feeling  in  eyes.

Twitching  tearing  in  r.  concha.

Fluttering  before  1.  ear.

As  if  abdomen  were  stuffed  full  of  stones.

As  if  bowels  would  be  cut  to  pieces. 6  Colic.

Spasmodic  contraction  of  abdominal  muscles.

Sensation  as  if  a  small  leaf  obstructed  windpipe. See  13.

As  of  weight  tugging  at  coccyx. See  23.

As  if  flesh  were  torn  from  the  bones  :  left  arm.

Feeling  as  if  paralyzed. See  3.

Pain :  violent,  in  forehead ;  in  teeth ;  in  stomach ;  at  epigas-
trium ;  in  abdomen  ;  in  groins ;  in  bladder ;  in  testicles  ;  in
back,  as  from  fatigue ;  in  sacro-lumbar  region.

Stitches :  in  1.  parietal  bone ;  from  forehead  into  1.  eye ;  in  1.
chest ;  in  rectum ;  in  region  of  kidneys  ;  in  upper  limbs.

Lancinating :  from  chest  to  shoulder.

Shooting :  in  chest.

Cutting :  in  bowels ;  through  groins  and  thigh  to  knee.

Boring :  in  brain.

Tearing  pain  :  deep  in  brain  ;  in  head ;  in  eyes  ;  in  side  of  face,
head  and  neck  ;  in  roots  of  teeth  ;  in  upper  limbs.

Burning :  in  eyes  and  canthi ;  heat  of  face ;  as  from  hot  coal
on  r.  side  of  chin  ;  in  fauces  ;  in  chest,  to  throat ;  in  stomach  ;
under  sternum  ;  in  abdomen  ;  soreness  in  r.  groin ;  at  anus ;
from  rectum  through  urethra ;  in  back.

Smarting  :  in  eyes  and  canthi.

Soreness  :  on  posterior  palate.

Bearing  down  :  in  vagina.

Pressing  pain  :  in  forehead ;  in  vertex  ;  in  stomach  ;  in  hypo-
chondria ;  in  hypogastrium.

Drawing :  in  r.  temple  to  zygoma ;  in  bowels  ;  in  the  back  ;  in
lower  limbs.

Constriction  :  in  throat ;  of  chest.

Cramp  :  in  stomach ;  in  muscles  of  neck ;  in  legs.


367  ANTIMONIUM  TARTARICUM.

As  if  beaten  :  feet  feel  so.

Pain  as  from  dislocation  :  in  r.  shoulder ;  in  1.  arm.

Tingling  and  pinching  :  in  pit  of  stomach.

Rheumatic  pains :  in chest ;  in  1.  elbow ;  about  hips,  thighs

and  calves.
Rheumatic  toothache.
Tensive  pain  :  in  forehead  and  one  side  of  head ;  stupefying  —

over  root  of  nose ;  in  throat  and  mouth ;  in  perineum ;  in

lower  limbs  ;  in  hamstrings.
Heaviness  :  of  the  head  ;  in  forehead ;  in  occiput.
Numbness  :  of  head ;  in  legs  ;  of  feet.
Throbbing :  in  r.  forehead ;  in  pit  of  stomach ;  in  abdomen.
Twitching  :  muscles  of  face ;  of  muscles.
Roughness :  in  throat.
Tickling  :  in  pit  of  stomach  excites  cough.
Crawling  as  of  insects  above  1.  mamma.
Creeping :  in  larynx.
Heat :  in  mouth ;  in  throat ;  in  stomach ;  spreading  from  the

heart.
Unpleasant  warmth  :  in  region  of  stomach.
Coldness  :  in  pit  of  stomach  ;  in  legs  ;  of  feet.
Itching:  on  whole  body,  in  evening;  of  rash  and  pustules;

eruption  on  wrist;  of  pudenda;  in  vulva.
^*  Tissues. Hemorrhages  bright  red.
Oligsemia  ;  angemia  ;  chlorosis  ;  t.
I  I  Varices  with  stitching  pains.

■  Phlebitis.

I  I  Signs  of  poisoning  of  the  blood  with  carbonic  acid.

Where  the  gastric  membrane  was  most  inflamed  there  were  two

or  three  white  spots,  size  of  a  split  pea,  appearing  under  the

glass  as  spots  of  commencing  ulceration ;  t.
Inflammation  of  mucous  membranes  of  stomach  and  intestinal

canal.
Jejunum  studded  with  a  considerable  number  of  pale,  hypertro-

phied  follicles;  t.
Muscular  relaxation.

■  Acute  arthrodynia.

■  Dropsy  of  synovial  membranes.

■  ■  Collection  of  synovia  in  joint, d  Hydrarthrosis.

■  Pain  in  joints,  going  from  one  joint  to  another.

Joints  somewhat  swollen,  reddened,  hot ;  very  painful  at  every

attempt  to  move  them, d  Rheumatism.
•  Shifting  rheumatism.

■  Acute  articular  rheumatism.

■  ■Mucous  membranes  :  catarrhal  inflammation  ;  conjunctivitis  ;

gastritis,  enteritis;  laryngitis,  trachitis,  bronchitis,  extend-
ing even  into  the  air-cells  ;  cystitis.

■  ■Pustular  eruption: on  the  conjunctiva;  face; mouth and


ANTIMONIUM  TARTARICUM.  368

fauces;  oesophagus,  stomach,  jejunum;  genitals. See  46.
Emaciation, d  Acute  catarrh.
I  Granular  vegetations.

■  Emaciation  of  scrofulous  children.
Dropsical  effusion  after  checked  transpiration.
Nausea  with  coldness  followed  by  sweat.
Skin  on  face  and  limbs  cold  and  pale ;  t.

■*^  Touch. Passive  Motion. H  The  child  wants  to  be  carried,
cries  if  any  one  touches  it ;  will  not  let  you  feel  the  pulse.
iPains  increased  by  every  touch. 6  Rheumatism.

■  Asphyxia  from  drowning.

■  Pains  when  being  touched. ^Pneumonia.
^^Skin. Skin  pale.

■  Skin  slightly  icteric. ^Pneumonia.

■  Skin  shrivelled,  dry. ^  Acute  catarrh.
Skin  dry,  wilted ;  cool.

Skin  as  if  dead.

iSkin  dry,  on  chest  and  hands  burning  hot,  on  feet  cool.
6  Pneumonia.

■  Skin  hot  and  dry. ^  Bronchial  croup.
Biting  itching  on  whole  body  in  evening.
Itching  in  the  skin.

Ecthyma  on  face  and  hands,  and  after  a  scratch  on  hand  a  large
flat  ulcer  on  the  side  of  it ;  better  after  Rhus. ;  rash  increased.

■  Red  itching  rash  over  the  body ;  with  the  fever.

Rash  mixed  with  phlyctense  and  furunculi ;  after  vaccination.
Erythema  infantum.

■  Itching  pustules,  which  soon  dry  up.

Blisters  filled  with  serum  and  erysipelatous  tension  of  skin.-

■  Vesicular  eruption  over  the  body.

Morphsea;  crusta  lactea;  vitiligo;  prurigo;  scabies;  obstinate
pustules ;  pustular  impetigo  ;  desquamation  of  cuticle.

■  ■Variola:  backache,  headache; cough  and  crushing  weight

on  the  chest  before  or  at  the  beginning  of  the  eruptive  stage  ;
diarrhoea,  etc. ;  also  when  the  eruption  fails.

I  1  The  breast  and  anterior  surface  of  the  upper  arms,  wrists,
hypogastrium  and  inner  surface  of  the  thighs,  were  thickly
covered  with  an  eruption  of  bright-red,  small,  conical,
hard  pimples,  having  an  inflamed  base  resembling  lichen,
itching  intolerably.  This  eruption  began  to  show  itself
after  the  5th  day  of  taking  four  grains  daily,  and  abated
about  the  3d  day  after  its  discontinuance ;  t.

Skin  gets  hot,  bright  red ;  small,  isolated  nodules  are  developed,
with  a  red  halo,  between  them  the  skin  somewhat  swollen,
soon  they  get  larger  and  fill  with  lymph,  etc.,  very  similar
to  small-pox.

■  ■  Chest,  anterior  surface  of  upper  arms,  wrists,  abdomen  and

inner  side  of  thighs  covered  with  closely  set,  bright  red.


369  ANTIMONIUM  TARTARICUM.


small,  conic,  hard  pustules,  with  an  inflamed,  tetter-like  base,
itching  intolerably.
Vesicles  over  the  whole  body,  filling  quickly  with  pus,  very

painful,  soon  drying  up  and  forming  crusts.
Pustules  and  vesicles  first  on  face  and  forearms,  next  on  the
back,  fill  up  with  pus  in  a  few  days,  and  form  crusts.

Eruption  of  small  papulae  and  vesicles  which  rapidly  enlarge
and  fill  with  pus,  and  of  a  dark  red  color  at  the  base,
so  _  as  to  resemble  mature  variolous  pustules,  and  were  very
painful;  in  a  few  days  they  were  dry  and  crusted  over.
Eruption  appeared  first  on  inner  side  of  forearm,  then  over
the  whole  back,  where  the  pustules  were  partly  solitary,  partly
grouped.

If  the  use  of  Ant.  tart,  was  continued  after  it  had  produced  an
eruption  like  small-pox,  the  pustules  got  large,  full  of  pus,
deepened  in  the  centre  and  became  confluent ;  with  great  pain,
crusts  were  formed,  leaving  deep  scars.

■  Pustular  eruptions  all  over;  pustules  size  of  peas,  some  cov-
ered with  brown  crusts.

1 1  Pustular  eruption  leaves  bluish-red  marks  on  face;  also  simi-
lar eruption  on  genitals,  thighs,  etc. ;  painful. See  44.

H Eruption  fails  to  appear  and  convulsions  set  in;  varicella,
etc. See  36.

llThick^eruption  like  pocks,  often  pustular,  as  large  as  a  pea.
Constitution,  Stages  of  Life. Hydrogenoid  constitutions.

Torpid,  phlegmatic  constitutions.

Women :  suppressed  lochia ;  chlorosis,  hysteria,  etc.

Woman  in  5th  month  of  pregnancy,  good  constitution,  d  Feb-
rile motions.

When  the  new  born  child  is  pale  and  breathless,  although  the
cord  may  still  pulsate.

Infancy  and  childhood:  hydrocephalus;  asthma  Millari;
whooping-cough;  capillary  bronchitis,  broncho-pneumonia;
*croup  ;  spasms  ;  cyanosis  ;  asphyxia,  etc.

Teething  children  with  rattling  cough. See  27.

A  sickly  lean  child,  looking  pale  and  bluish. 6  Diarrhoea.

Constitutions  worn  out  by  vomiting,  in  metastasis  of  hydroce-
phalus.

I A  girl,  set.  6  months, d  Catarrhal  cough.

A  weakly  girl,  jet.  1,  after  fever  and  cough,  catarrh  in  larynx ;
next  day  in  bronchia.

■  Child,  aet.  18  months,  after  febrile  catarrh  and  spasms.
0  Pneumonia.


*  Many  cases  were  treated  by  the  lower  and  soon  got  well,  but  what
the  re^Dorters  never  mentioned,  the  children  remain  liable  to returns
which IS  not  apt  to be  tlie  case  after  cures  with  the  higher  doses  of
Hepar,  Spongla,  Phosphor,  or  Arsen.


24


ANTIMONIUM  TARTARICUM.  370

I A  boy,  set.  2,  short  build,  large  head,  blonde,  subject  to  ca-
tarrh. 6  Catarrhal  croup.

A  boy,  set.  2  years. ^Bronchial  inflammation.

iBoy,  get.  3  years. ^Whooping-cough.

I  Boy,  set.  10. ^Bronchial  croup.

I  Girl,  set.  11  years. ^  Acute  catarrh.

I  Girl,  set.  18,  fever,  oppression  on  chest  and  prostration,  8
days. 6  Inflammation  of  lungs.

A  man,  set.  27,  of  a  weakly  constitution, d  Asthma.

A  man,  set.  27,  weakly ;  oedema  pulmonum.  2  grs.  every
hour,  cured  in  one  day.

Woman,  set.  40,  weak  and  nervous, d  Pneumonia.

I  Man,  set.  52. ^Periodically  returning  asthma.

Often  suitable  for  spasmodic  whooping-cough  of  adults.

Old  a^e  :  orthopnoea ;  bronchitis  ;  trembling ;  paralysis.

Man,  set.  30,  habitual  alcohol  drinker,  got  4  grains  of  Tart,
emet.  daily  in  his  liquor ;  in  15  days  he  was  poisoned.

iFor  drunkards,  d  Diarrhoea.
*^  Relationship  and  Dose.  Similar  to  :  Aeon,  (croup,  spasm  of
larynx) ;  Arsen.  (asthma  ;  heart  symptoms  ;  gastric  catarrh,
etc.);  Baryt.  carh.  ;  Bromine ;  (croup);  Camphor ;  Hep ar ;
lodium ;  Kali  hydr.  (oedema  pul.,  pneumonia);  Laches.
(dyspnoea  on  awaking,  sensitive  larynx,  asthma,  asphyxia,
etc.);  Lycop.  (catarrh  on  the  chest;  but  the  spasmodic  mo-
tion of  alse  is  replaced  by  dilated  nostrils  in  Ant.  tart.);
Veratr.,  (both  have  colic,  vomiting,  coldness,  and  ci'aving
for  acids) ;  Ant.  tart,  has  more  jerks,  drowsiness  and  urging
to  urinate  ; Veratr.  more  cold  sweat  and  fainting.

Similar  to  Ipec.  (but  has  more  drowsiness  from  defective  respi-
ration. It  must  supplant  Ipee.  when  lungs  seem  to  fail,  pa-
tient becomes  sleepy  and  the  cough  ceases  or  becomes  less
frequent.

Effects  of  vaccination  when  Thuja  fails,  and  Silic.  is  not  in-
dicated.

With  Phosphor..,  hydrocephaloid  in  worn-out  constitutions;  also
similar  in  laryngitis,  pneumonia,  etc.

Follow  with  Silic.  for  dyspnoea  from  foreign  substances  in  the
windpipe.

Pulsat.  in  gonorrhoea]  suppression.

Tereh.  in  symptoms  from  damp  cellars.

Conium  cures  pustules  on  the  genitals  caused  by  Ant.  tart.

Camphor.,  Ipec,  Pulsat.,  Sepia,  Sulphur  follow  Ant.  tart.
well.

Ant.  tart,  follows  well  after  Baryt.  carh.,  Pulsat.,  Camphor,
and  Caustic.

Antidotes  to  Ant.  tart. :  Asaf.,  Ginchon.,  Coccul.,  Ipec,
Lauroc,  Opium,  Pulsat.  and  Sepia.

Ant.  tart,  antidotes  : Sepia.


371  ANTIMONIUM  TARTARICUM.

•  Opium  in  large  doses  is  the  best  antidote  in  poisoning.

Kali  sulph.  increased  the  symptoms.

Mercur.  and  Ant.  tart,  always  differ  by  Mercur.  acting  only
indirectly  on  the  mouth,  while  Ant.  tart,  exercises  a  pure
local  action,  similar  to  its  action  on  the  skin.

In  diarrhoea  similar  to  Veratr.

Useful  after  Bryon.  and  Caustic,  in  dyspepsia.

I  After  Pulsat.  did  not  relieve. ^Rheumatic  toothache.

I  The  25th  part  of  a  grain,  every  half  hour,  in  all  half  a  grain.
d  Cholera,

i  First  trituration,  as  much  as  lies  on  the  point  of  a  knife,  in  two
table-spoonfuls  of  water,  a  teaspoonful  every  hour,  d  Sum-
mer complaint.


APHIS.  872


APHIS  CHENOPODII  GLAUCI.


Animals  have  mostly  been  valuable  additions  to  our  materia  medica.
Animalized  plants  may  be  of  the  same  importance.  A  remedy  prepared
from  a  caterpillar  existing  on  the  belladonna  plant  acted  when  the  berries
and  leaves  of  that  plant  appeared  to  be  insufficient.  The  Dory  phora  decem-
lineata  containing  solanine,  promises  much  according  to  the  proving.

Aphis  may  also  become  an  important  animalized  plant  medicine,  and  is
given  a  place  here  to  enable  practitioners  to  try  it.  It  was  proved  and  in-
troduced by  Dr.  Meyer,  and  printed  in  Staff's  Archives,  in  1835.  One  cure  in
a  very  painful  case  of  toothache  was  made  by  Dr.  Raue.

We  quote  the  words  of  the  great  entomologists,  Kirbj'  and  Spence,  from
their  famous  Introduction  to  Entomology,  Vol.  I.,  1815.  In  the  chapter  on  the
direct  benefits  derived  from  insects,  they  mention  how  far  medical  science
is  indebted  to  insects ;  and  after  enumerating  how  many,  according  to
Lesser,  had  been  used  in  olden  time,  and  before  mentioning  the  very  few
"  the  sons  of  Hippocrates  and  Galen  now  have  recourse  to,"  the  following
very  wise  words  are  inserted :  "I  cannot  help  observing  that  their  pro-
"scription  of  the  remainder  may  have  been  too  indiscriminate.  Mankind
"insects  emit  very  powerful  odors  (as  the  acanthia  suaveolens),  and  some
"  produce  extraordinary  effects  on  the  human  frame ;  and  it  is  an  idea  not
"  altogether  to  be  rejected,  that  they  may  concentrate  into  a  smaller  compass,  the
"  j)ruperties  and  virtues  of  the  plants  upon  which  they  feed,  and  thus  afford  rnedi-
"  cines  more  powerfid  in  operation  than  the  plants  themselves.  It  is  at  least  worth
"  while  to  institute  a  set  of  experiments  with  this  view."

The  Old  School  did  not  regard  this  advice,  but  the  New  School  has  done
it,  and  has  found,  if  not  more  power,  more  intensity  of  action  in  them.


^  Sensorium.  Dullness  in  head  as  from  corjza,  with  flushes  of
heat  in  face.

^  Head  Inner.  I  l  Violent  pressure  in  forehead  and  occiput,  ag-
gravated by  motion,  with  sensation  as  if  brain  were  balancing
to  and  fro.

■*  Outer  Head.  Drawing  tearing  in  scalp ;  first  days  and  second
week.

^  Eyes. I  I  Burning  of  eyelids  ;  several  evenings.

^  Ears.  Transient  tearing  in  the  ears,  now  in  one,  then  in  the
other.

^  Nose. Sensation  of  soreness  of  the  nostrils ;  continues  second
week.
I  I  Violent  sneezing,  with  soreness  of  the  larynx.
1  1  Coryza,  with  burning  and I  I  biting  on  the  margins  of  nos-
trils, particularly  of  the  septum.


373  APHIS.

I  Fluent  coryza,  with  secretion  of  thin  mucus  and  burning  of

the  nostrils  ;  with  accelerated  pulse ;  coldness  of  the  feet  up

to  the  knees,  and  a  chill  over  the  back.
All  day  running  coryza,  burning  pimples  on  right  nostril  and

left  upper  lip.
In  evening,  running  coryza  with  pulse  of  eighty-five  beats.
Fluent  coryza ;  continues  second  week.
^  Face. Pale  or  yellowish  color  of  the  face ;  all  day.

Flushes  of  heat  in  the  face,  with  dullness  of  the  head,  like  be-
ginning of  a  coryza  (evening).
Great  inclination  to  sweat  in  face ;  from  early  in  the  morning.
^  Lower  Part  of  Face. I  '  Dryness  of  the  lips,  I  especially  in

the  morning.
Dry  lips  and  warmer  breath ;  his  pulse  ran  up  to  sixty-eight.
Burning  pimples  on  left  upper  lip. See  Coryza.
^^  Teeth. Towards  noon  tearing  drawing  pain  in  a  decayed  molar,

gradually  increasing  and  extending  into  the  other  teeth  r.

side,  into  ear,  temples  and  malar  bone ;  increasing  in  bed,

relieved  after  several  hours  by  a  general  warm  sweat ;  during

the  second  week  of  the  proving.
>  Increase  of  most  violent  toothache  in  bed,  only  relieved  if  after

a  while  a  general  warm  sweat  breaks  out;  all  other  remedies

of  no  avail.
"  Tongue. Painful  vesicle  on  the  tip  of  the  tongue  ;  second  week.
^^  Mouth. More  saliva  in  the  mouth  and  more  phlegm  in  throat ;

second  week.
Dryness  of  mouth  and  throat,  sometimes  with  increased  secre-
tion of  mucus.
All  day  much  mucus  in  mouth  and  throat,  tasting  unpleasantly

flat,  with  continual  disposition  to  hawk  or  spit.
Secretion  of  frothy  mucus  from  the  mouth  and  throat.
13  Throat. Scratching  on  the  palate.

A  cutting  burning  sensation  in  throat, most  in  palate,  when

inhaling.
Scraping  and  burning  in  throat.
Disposed  to  hawk  up  phlegm.
The  palate  is  inflamed.

Biting  burning  in  the  soft  palate,  during  the  afternoon.
Dryness,  scraping  and  burning  like  from  something  acrid  in

the  throat,  and  increased  phlegm  ;  second  week.
^■^  Desires,  Aversions. No  appetite  for  meat  and  wheaten  bread,

with  the  chilliness-
Increased  thirst,  from  sensation  of  dryness  in  throat.
Much  thirst  in  the  evening ;  second  week.
'®  Belching, Frequent  belching  with  the  taste  of  the  food.
^^  Abdomen. Frequent  cutting  pain  in  abdomen, especially  at

night,  or  during  the  day,  with  urging  to  stool,  emission  of

large  quantities  of  flatulence.


APHIS.  374

Frequent  rumbling  of  flatulence  in  bowels  and  passing  of  wind.

Congestion  of  blood  to  all  organs  in  the  pelvis.

I  The  plant  is  a  popular  medicine  in  colic.
^^  Stool. '  I  Ineffectual  urging  to  stool,  with  pressure  on  the  blad-
der and  rectum.

Evacuations  liquid,  papescent,  with  burning  in  the  anus  and
renewed  urging,  or  with  pinching  in  the  abdomen  before  and
after  the  stool.

In  the  morning,  soon  after  rising,  urging  to  stool,  followed  by
a  few,  I  I  thin,  mush-like  evacuations,  repeated  several  times
during  the  day,  with  increased  pinching  I  I  burning  in  anus
and  urging.

Thin,  mush-like  stool,  discharged  with  wind,  with  burning  in
anus  and  urethra.

I  I  Thin,  fluid  stools  early  in  the  morning,  several  days  in  suc-
cession, mostly  thin  slime,  I  I  mixed  with  spots  of  dark  blood,
repeated  5,  6  times  during  the  forenoon,  with  pinching  and
urging  in  the  rectum.

Every  hour  a  stool  with  pinching  in  entrails,  painful  pressure
on  the  rectum,  the  bladder  and  urethra.

After  the  stools  are  more  consistent,  there  is  then  a  painful
urging  in  the  rectum.

Stools  towards  morning  with  pinching  and  urging  in  rectum,
after  sleepless  nights.
^^  Urinary  Organs. I  l  Pressure  on  the  bladder,  with  inefiectual
desire  to  stool.

Irritation  in  the  urethra,  as  from  acridity,  compelling  him  to
urinate  frequently  ;  urine  saturated,  yellow,  foaming.

During  micturition,  I  I  burning  in  mouth  of  urethra.

Frequent  and  copious  emission  of  saturated,  yellow,  foaming
urine,  without  burning  in  urethra ;  another  day  with  an
acrid  sensation  in  the  urethra.

I  I  Urine  brownish  red,  depositing  a  thick,  yellowish  sediment,
foaming  during  the  night.

Passing  urine  burns  in  urethra  during  chill  and  coryza.
^^  Male  Sexual  Organs. At  night  voluptuous  dreams  and  two
seminal  emissions,  which  had  not  occurred  for  a  long  time.

Voluptuous  irritation  on  the  glans  penis.
^*  Larynx. Frequent  roughness  and  huskiness  of  the  voice ;  re-
lieved by  hawking.

Burning  scraping  in  the  larynx,  as  from  acridity ;  titillating
burning  or  stinging,  particularly  in  the  open  air  during  wet
and  cold  weather,  with  constant  irritation  in  the  larynx,
obliging  him  to  cough  or  to  hawk,  and  constant  expectora-
tion of  mucus.

Painful  sensitiveness  on  the  right  side  of  the  larynx.

Tickling  burning  in  larynx.


375  APHIS.

Irritation  from  very  acrid  mucus  in  larynx,  or  like  a  burning
aci-idity,  sometimes  forcing  him  to  cough,  oftener  to  hawk.
Soreness  of  the  larynx,  with  violent  sneezing.
^®  Respiration. Warmer  breath  with  mucus  in  the  mouth.
"  Cough. Now  and  then  irritation  to  cough  in  region  of  larynx.

Dry  cough  from  irritation  in  throat.
^^  Heart,  Pulse. Pulse  80,  continuing  all  day  ;  with  thirst ;  dry
mouth  and  throat,  and  frequent  hawking  ;  limbs  as  if  beaten.
Pulse  accelerated  with  burning  in  palms  of  hands  in  forenoon
and  dry  lips  during  the  day ;  in  the  evening  pulse  eighty-
five. See  Coryza.
^^  Neck. Back. Pain  below  the  left  shoulder-blade.
Frequent  chilliness  running  up  and  down  the  back.
^^  Upper  Limbs. Rheumatic  pains  in  shoulders  and  upper  arms ;

arms  as  if  bruised.
^^  Lower  Limbs. Rheumatic  pains  on  tibia  and  soles  of  feet.
Sensation  of  weariness  in  legs,  most  in  knees.
1  I  Tearing  drawing  above  the  knee,  often  mornings  or  during

day.
Cold  feet  up  to  knees.

Stinging  burning  pain  in  corns  or  little  toes,  alternately,  r.  and  1.
^*  Limbs  in  General. All  the  limbs  feel  bruised.

Frequent  drawing  rending  pains  from  above  the  knees  down  to
feet,  the  worst  on  the  shinbones  and  tops  of  feet.
^^  Motion. Motion  :  pressure  in  forehead  <.
^^  Strength. Tired  feeling.

Every  evening  very  tired  and  weak.
^^  Sleep. I  I  Sleepless  night,  without  much  pain  but  towards  morn-
ing twice  a  thin  stool,  with  pinching  and  urging  in  rectum.
38  Time. From  4  to  6  p.m.  :  more  irritation  to  cough  in  larynx.
Afternoon :  biting  and  burning  in  soft  palate.
Evening :  burning  of  eyelids  ;  fluent  coryza  ;  flushes  of  heat  of

the  face ;  thirst;  pulse  accelerated;  tired  and  weak.
Morning :  dry  lips,  more  warmth  in  mouth  and  breath  warmer,
pulse  accelerated  ;  face  inclined  to  sweat ;  after  rising,  urging
to  stool,  thin  mush-like  passages  with  wind ;  tearing  above
knee.
Towards  noon :  toothache.

All  day :  much  mucus  in  mouth  and  throat ;  cutting  in  abdo-
men and  urging  to  stool;  pulse  increased  to  eighty  ;  tearing
above  knee.
Night :  cutting  in  abdomen,  urging  to  stool ;  seminal  emissions  ;
sleepless  ;  urging,  pinching  and  stool  towards  morning.
^^  Temperature  and  Weather. In  bed  :  increase  of  toothache.
In  open  air,  when  weather  is  damp  and  cold  :  constant  irrita-
tion in  larynx,  hawking  and  expectoration  of  mucus.
*"  Fever. Sweat. Chills,  especially  over  the  back.


APHIS.  376

Burning  in  palms  of  hands,  with  inclination  to  sweat,  in  the
forenoon.

Feet  and  legs  cold  up  to  the  knees,  shudders  run  down  the
back,  fluent  coryza  continuing.

I  I  In  the  morning  transpiration  all  over  the  skin ;  later  in  the
morning  before  getting  up,  a  warm  sweat.

Sweat  relieves  the  toothache.
*^  Right and Left. Right : burning  pimples  on  nostril ;  side
of  larynx  painful.

Left :  burning  pimples  on  upper  lip  ;  pain  below  scapula.
^^  Sensations. Sensation  as  if  brain  were  balancing  to  and  fro.

Drawing  rending  pains :  in  temples,  ears,  decayed  teeth,
shoulders,  upper  arms,  soles  of  the  feet,  above  the  knees,
and  on  the  tibia.

Drawing  and  tearing :  in  scalp ;  in  a  decayed  molar ;  above
knee ;  in  limbs.

Tearing :  in  ears.

Cutting  :  in  abdomen,  and  pinching.

Cutting  burning :  in  throat  and  palate.

Burning  :  of  eyelids  ;  pimples  on  r.  nostril  and  1.  upper  lip  ;  in
anus  ;  in  urethra ;  in  larynx  ;  in  palms  of  hands.

Burning  and  biting  on  margins  of  nostrils  and  of  septum.

Stinging  burning:  in  corns.

Scraping  and  burning  :  in  throat ;  in  larynx.

Biting  burning  :  in  soft  palate.

Titillating  burning  or  stinging  in  larynx  and  painful  sensitive-
ness.

Scratching :  on  palate.

Soreness  :  of  nostrils  ;  of  larynx.

Pressure :  in  forehead  and  occiput ;  on  rectum  and  bladder.

Pain  :  below  left  shoulder-blade.

Rheumatic  pains :  in  shoulders  and  upper  arms ;  in  tibia  and
soles  of  feet.

As  if  bruised :  arms  and  legs.

Weariness  :  in  legs,  most  in  knees.

Dryness  :  of  lips  ;  of  mouth  ;  in  throat.

Heat :  in  face.

Coldness  : of  feet  to  knees  ;  running  up  and  down  back.
*^  Other  Drugs. Relatives :  the  Polygonicese,  Ruviex  and  Rheum.

Similar  to :  Fidsat.,  Chamom.,  Mercur.,  AnHm.  etc  ;  (tooth-
ache worse  in  bed ;  no  other  remedy  has  relief  of  toothache
from  sweat,  though  Qhamom.  has  general  relief  from  sweat ;
^tlmsa  (stool  after  rising,  pinching,  cutting  before,  urging
after) ;  Natr.sul.  (stool  after  rising,  with  discharge  of  wind,
etc.) ;  Nux  vom.  (frequent  urging  in  rectum  and  bladder) ;
Ayis^  Argent,  nitr.,  I)ulcam.,  PJwsph.,  etc.,  (in  laryngeal
aft'ections) ;  Grelsem.  (chills  up  and  down  the  back,  cold  feet,
etc).


3T7  APIS.

APIS.

Poison  of  the  Honey  Bee.  Apium  villus.

Among  all  our  di'ugs  this  is  the  one  of  which  we  have  the  most  different
preparations.  There  is  but  one  right  kind.  It  is  the  pure  poison,  which
is  obtained  by  grasping  the  bee  with  a  small  forceps,  and  catching  the  mi-
nute drop  of  virus  suspended  from  the  point  of  the  sting,  in  a  vial  or  watch
crystal.  After  collecting  a  sufficient  quantity  it  may  be  potentized  in  alco-
hol, distilled  water,  or  prepared  in  oil  or  pure  glycerine,  for  external  use

It  is  absurd  to  dispute  the  solubility  of  the  poison  in  alcohol,  and  foolish
to  take  the  whole  bee  with  all  the  foreign  matter  and  impurities,  which
color  the  tincture.

In  1835  a  clergyman  in  Thuringia,  the  Rev.  Brauns,  the  publisher  of  the
first  popular  homoeopathic  paper,  mentioned  cures  he  had  made  with
the  pure  poison  of  the  honey  bee,  which  he  called  Apisin.  The  same
year  he  commenced  a  work,  an  attempt  at  treating  homoeopathically
domestic  animals:  Part  I,  horses,  1835;  Part  II,  cattle,  1836;  and  Part  III,
sheep,  1843.  A  second  edition  of  Part  I  was  printed  in  1837.  He  reported
numerous  cures  with  Apis,  particularly  of  most  obstinate  diseases  of  horses.

The  great  problem  to  be  solved  with  regard  to  the  snake  poison  (and  of
course  also  the  nosodes),  was:  can  we  use  the  symptoms  from  inoculation,
as  well  as  the  symptoms  obtained  by  proving  the  alcoholic  tinctures.  It
was  thought  that  the  proving  of  the  bee-poison  would  solve  the  problem.

In  1850  dried  and  powdered  bees  were  introduced  by  E.  E.  Marcy,  in  his
Theory  and  Practice.  In  January,  1852,  we  received  a  pamphlet  containing
real  provings,  by  the  New  York  Central  Hom.  Society,  reprinted  in  the  N.
A.  Quarterly,  same  year,  p.  184 — 203,  and  Aug.  10,  1852.

Tliis  was  translated  into  German,  and  numerous  provings  with  the  pure
poison  added  ;  also  all  notices  of  effects  of  the  sting,  that  could  be  found,  these
being  considered  most  important.  The  whole  was  printed  in  the  form  of  a
monography,  in  the  Arnerikanische  Arzneiprilfungen  (American  Provings),
Vol.  I,  p.  171 — 422,  and  forms  the  most  complete  collection  of  the  effects  of
any  animal  poison  in  medical  literature.

In  1858,  Dr.  C.  W.  Wolf  published  a  book  on  bee-poison,  declaring  it  a
polychrest,  but  he  also  used  the  tincture  from  the  whole  bee.  It  happened,
at  the  time  to  correspond  to  the  genius  epidemicus  in  Berlin,  but  Wolf
recommended  it  in  all  intermittent  fevers.  His  little  book  was  translated
in  the  same  year  and  printed  in  New  York;  the  author,  however,  was
not  allowed  to  add  his  notes,  or  he  would  have  given  the  first  provers  in
this  country  credit  for  what  they  had  done.

The  greater  number  of  confirmed  symptoms  were  observed  from  the
pure  virus.

^  Mind. Loss  of  consciousness.

Lost  all  consciousness  of  things  around  him,  and  sank  into  a
state  of  insensibility.


APIS.  378

Loss  of  consciousness  in  eruptive  disease.

iLoss  of  consciousness  and  delirium.  ^Meningitis  infantum.
d  Scarlatina.

I  Unconsciousness,  stupor,  with  muttering  delirium, d  Typhus.

1  Sopor. ^Scarlatina.

I  i  Sopor,  interrupted  by  piercing  shrieks.  ^  Tubercular  men-
ingitis.

I  Child  lies  in  torpor.

■  Impaired  memory. ^Prosopalgia.
B I  Absent-mindedness.

I  Lets  everything  fall  out  of  her  hand,  or  breaks  things  and
laughs  over  it. 6  Amenorrhoea.

■  Very  busy;  restless,  changing  kind  of  work,  with  awkward-

ness, breaking  things ;  lets  everything  fall  out  of  his  hands.
Dullness  of  mind.
Difficulty  of  thinking.

■  Could  not  bring  his  thoughts  to  bear  upon  anything  definite.

d  Diarrhoea.

I  I  Cannot  bring  his  thoughts  to  bear  on  any  subject  continu-
ously.

Imbecility,  more  frequent  than  insanity.

■  Thinks  he  will  die. ^Organic  disease  of  heart.

A  strange  boy  lying  in  bed  with  him  prevents  sleep. 6  Typhus.
I  I  Anticipation  of  death.

■  After  midnight,  slightly  delirious. ^Typhus.

I  I  Delirium  :  with  congestion  ;  eruptions  ;  heat ;  during  sleep.

■  Slightly  delirious. ^Diphtheria.

■  Muttering  delirium. ^Measles.

■  Delirium. ^  After  suppressed  scarlet  eruption. ^Amenor-

rhoea.

■  Muttering delirium alternating with stupor, d  Cancer of

mamma.

■  Violent  delirium,  amounting  to  phrenzy. d  Paralysis.
Mania. ■Nymphomania.

■  ■Manias,  especially  proceeding  from  a  sexual  cause  in  women.
Insanity,  particularly  nymphomania  and  apathy  depending  on

or  alternating  with  sore  throat,  indigestion  or  bladder  affections.
Loquacity.
Happy  expression.
" ■Acts foolishly or with a good deal of frivolous levity.

6  Hysteria.
I  I  Busy,  frivolous,  disposed  to  laugh,  excessively  cheerful.

■  Muttering. ^Gastroenteritis.

■  Continual  moaning  and  screaming. ^Diarrhoea.

■  Sudden  thrilling  cries. ^Hydrocephalus.

■  Shrill  screaming  "  oh  my  baby." d  Pneumonia.

■  Crying  out and screaming loudly  as  from  stabbing pain.

d  Cerebro-spinal  meningitis.


3T9  ,  APIS.

I  Screaming  spells. 6  Dysentery  of  infants.

I  Sudden  sharp  outcry  during  sleep. ^Scarlatina.

■  Children  scream  out  suddenly  and  sharply  during  sleep,  most

at  night;  if  asked  what  hurt  them,  they  reply  "nothing."
6  Dentition.

I  Single  sharp  shrill  screams  while  sleeping  or  waking.  6  In-
cipient meningitis.

I B  Shrill,  sudden  piercing  screams.  6  Hydrocephalus,  pneumo-
nia, and  many  other  complaints.

i  Scream  out  very  sharply  and  shrilly  during  sleep  or  when
awake,  "crie  cerebrale." ^Encephalitis.

■  Shrieking. 6*  Eclampsia.

■  Violent  shrieking  and  screaming  spells  at  longer  or  shorter  in-

tervals, d  Infantile  marasmus.

■  ■Great  tearfulness,  cannot  help  crying.

■  Constantly  busily  engaged  doing  this  or  that,  but  do  nothing

right ;  young  girls, d  Amenorrhoea.

■  Cannot  bear  to  be  left  alone. 6  Organic  disease  of  heart.

■  Dreamy  and  indolent. ^  Acute  Bright's  disease.

■  Feels  too  lazy  to  get  the  water,  but  thirsty. ^Catarrh  of

chest.
Exaggerated  merriment ;  less  frequently  despondency;
Eccentric  cheerfulness,  despondency,  or  hopelessness.
I  I  Mental  depression.

■  Lachrymose disposition, discouraged, desponding mood.

d  Tonsillitis, d  Angina.
Sensitiveness  of  disposition.
Anxious  feeling  in  head.
Premonition  of  death  arose  after  a  few  minutes ;  "  he  believes

he  is  going,"

■  Dread  of  death  or  sensation  as  if  he  should  not  be  able  to

breathe  again.
Dread  of  apoplexy.

■  Will  not  take  spirits  of  camphor,  fears  she  will  be  poisoned.

6  Nymphomania.
I  I  Anxiety.

■  ■Indifference.

Apathy,  unconsciousness,  lying  in  bed  in  a  soporous  condition
with  delirious  muttering,  hard  hearing,  inability  to  pro-
tru<le  the  tongue, d  Typhus.

■  Languid  and  listless, d  Diarrhoea.

■  When asked if  sick, he says: "Nothing is the  matter."

d  Typhus.
Fickle  and  inconsistent  behavior.

■  Discouraged,  desponding  humor. ^Angina.

I  I  Irritable,  contradictory  humor,  nothing  pleases  him.

■  I  Irritable.

Irritable  and  irascible  mood ;  more  rarely  dejection.


APIS.  380

llrritable  disposition. 6  Cerebro-spinal  meningitis.

Is  irritable  ;  hard  to  please  ;  nervous  ;  fidgety.

I  Very  irritable  and  fidgety  about  the  varices  in  anus,  d  Hem-
orrhoids.

Violence,  amounting  to  frenzy.

IJealousy  (in  women).

I  All  her  ideas  turn  around  jealousy,  very  talkative,  sometimes
disgusting  salajeitas. 6  Mania.

I  I  Uneasiness  ;  physical  and  mental.

■  Agitated, impatient, apprehensive. 6  Organic disease of

heart.
I  I  Mental  excitement.

■  Ailments  from  fright,  rage,  vexation,  jealousy,  or  hearing  bad

news.

■  After  a  severe  mental  shock,  paralyzed  on  the  whole  r.  side,

with  a  swelling  of  the  r.  half  of  body,  closing  up  the  r.  eye.
^  Sensorium. Vertigo  on  closing  the  eyes,  disappearing  on  open-
ing them.
I  I  Vertigo  when  standing, sitting, lying  down, shutting  the
eves, with obscuration of vision, nausea, headache and
sneezing.
Spells  of  vertigo  in  the  Spring,  after  least  effort.

■  Confused  vertigo,  worse  when  sitting  than  when  walking,  ex-

treme when  lying  and  on  closing  the  eyes  ;  nausea  and  head-
ache.

■  Frequently  vertigo,  as  if  she  would  fall,  with  obscuration  of

sight,  nausea  and  disgust  for  food. 6  Erysipelas.

■  Head  confused  and  dizzy,  with  constant  pressive  pain  above

and  around  the  eyes;  somewhat  >  by  pressure  of  the  hands.

I  I  Dull  confusion  of  head,  especially  over  the  eyes.

Dullness  of  head  ;  dull,  stupid  state  during  the  day.  6  Tuber-
cular meningitis, d  Incipient  hydrocephalus, d  Paunus.

■  Loss  of  consciousness.

^  Inner  Head. Heat  in  head.
Anxious  feeling  in  head.
Threatened  effusion  in  cerebral  diseases.

■  ■Congestion to head  and  face;  fullness  in  head,  pressure.

d  Suppressed  menses, d  Albuminuria  during  pregnancy.
I  I  Head  as  if  too  full,  it  seems  too  large.

■  Head  dull  and  so  heavy  that  she  could  not  move  it  on  the  pil-

low, d  Typhus.

■  ■General  aching  through  the  head. ^Ascites.

■  Sudden  stabbing  pain  in  the  head. ^  Dysmenorrhoea.
Jerking  headache, d  Catarrh  of  chest.

■  Periodical  headaches.

I  I  Brain  feels  tired  ;  as  if  "  gone  to  sleep,"  tingling.
Pain  from  gums  into  head.
Pain  in  the  head  and  eyeballs.


^^^  '  APIS.

BDull,  heavy,  tensive  headache  over  the  eyes,  with  pain  through
the  orbits.  °

I  I  Pains  in  head,  through  the  eyes,  above  and  around  the  eyes.

I  Dull  heavy  headache,  slight  erysipelatous  inflammation  about
left  orbit  and  down  left  side  of  nose.

I  Frontal  headache. ^Tonsillitis.

■  Pressing,  sometimes  stinging  pain  in  forehead, d  Typhus.
Sense  of  weight  and  fullness  in  forepart  of  head.

Dull  aching  in  forehead.

Violent  pressive  pain  in  forehead  and  temples.

■  Violent  headache,  stitching  in  temples,  throbbing  in  forehead.

u  iyphus.
I  I  Sharp  shooting  pain  in  temples.

■  Violent  pain  in  temples. (?  Tonsillitis.

■  Severe  attack  of  neuralgia  in  and  about  the  1.  temple,  with  pain

as  if  a  bee  had  stung  her,  with  frequent  vomiting, d  During
pregnancy.
Violent  drawing  from  the  back  of  neck,  extending  behind  the
left  ear,  spreading  over  left  half  of  head.

■  Headache  mostly  on  the  right  side. 6  Ovarian  tumor.
Heaviness  and  fullness  in  vertex.

Pressure,  fullness  and  heaviness  in  occiput.

■  Great  pain  in  occiput, d  Cerebro-spinal  meningitis.

■  Burning  and  throbbing  in  the  head,  <  by  motion  and  stoop-

ing, temporarily  > by  pressing  the  head  firmly  with  the

hands ;  occasional  sweat.
I  I  Heaviness,  aching  and  pressure  in  the  head,  especially  on

rising  from  the  sitting  or  lying  posture,  increased  in  the  warm

room,  relieved  by  compression  with  the  hands.
Headaches  are  better  by  exercise  out-of-doors  ; by  looking  up

and  bending  the  head  backwards  ;  pressing  head  between  the

hands; < when reading,  in  a  warm  room,  from  motion,

stooping.

■  Dull  pain  over  the  whole  head  is  relieved  by  pressure.

■  Forehead aches from the exertion of coughing foin

^Catarrh.  & *= v y

Dull  pain  in  occiput  <  from  shaking  the  head.

■  ■Child  lies  in  torpor ;  delirium,  sudden  shrilling  cries,  squint-

ing, grinding  teeth,  boring  head  in  pillow  ;  one  side  twitch-
ing, the  other  paralyzed;  head  wet  from  sweating;  urine
scanty,  milky;  big  toe  turns  up;  nausea  while  lying;
breath  offensive;  tongue  sore.  ^ Acute  hydrocephalus.
0  After  erysipelatous  eruptions.

■  ■Pain  in  occiput  with  occasional  sharp  shrieks. ^Hydroce-

phalus. "^

■  Violent  headache  and  rush  of  blood  to  head  with  delirium.

y  Amenorrhoea.

■  ■Headache  with  vertigo.


APIS.  382

Particularly  disagreeable  pain  in  the  forehead  with  dullness
and  confusion.

I  Chronic  headache,  violent  pain  in  forehead  and  temples,  at
times  involving  the  eyes,  attended  by  vertigo,  nausea  and
vomiting,  must  hold  the  head  and  eyes  down.

I  Nervous  headaches  with  indigestion.
Chronic  sick  headache.

■  Severe  attacks  of  neuralgia  in  and  about  the  left  temple,  with

pains  as  if  a  bee  had  stung  her ;  with  frequent  vomiting.

6  During  pregnancy.
Pain  over  left  eye,  over  whole  left  side  of  head,  with  nausea  and

vomiting, d  Hemicrania.
Her  whole  brain  feels  as  if  tired,  gone  to  sleep,  and  crawling ;

she  feels  it  at  the  same  time  in  both  arms,  especially  the  left,

and  from  the  left  knee  down  to  the  foot.

■  Threatening  cerebral  symptoms  after  scarlatina; if  it  was

fairly  out  and  recedes, d  Arachnitis, d  Meningitis.
iCerebro-spinal  meningitis  in  the  earlier  stages.

■  Meningitis;  after  fully  developed  effusion.

I I  Chronic  meningitis  with  considerable  cephalic  disturbance
and  symptoms  indicating  threatening  if  not  actual  effusion  of
serum  into  the  cavity  of  the  arachnoid.

lApoplexia  sanguinea  and  serosa.

I  Apoplexy  in  old  persons.

Hydrocephalus  ;  the  child  screams  out  very  sharply  in  its  sleep.
Hydrocephaloid  symptoms, d  Scarlatina.

I I  Hydrocephalus  of  children  ;  meningitis  infantum.

■  Hydrocephalus  occurring  suddenly  after  erysipelatous  erup-

tions;  prostration;  unconscious;  one  side  lame  or  jerking;

big  toe  turning  up ;  squinting ;  nausea  while  lying ;  breath

offensive;  tongue  sore.
1 1  Hydrocephalus  acutus  ;  before  the  stage  of  exudation.
Hydrocephalic condition following summer complaint of

children.
1 1  Hydrocephaloid;  stupor;  eyes  red,  head  hot,  shrill  shrieks;

tongue  dry,  skin  dry,  hands  cold  and  blue ;  urine  suppressed ;

abdomen  tender;  diarrhoea  mucous,  offensive,  involuntary,

containing  flakes  of  pus. See  20.

■  Inflammation  of  brain  ;  they  run  the  head  furiously  against  the

wall  (horses).

I  Horses  kick,  and  show  inclination  to  run  off.

*  Outer  Head. Hydrocephalic  enlargement  of  head.

Large  head  and  large  prominent  eyes, d  Incipient  hydroce-
phalus.
iFontanelles  re-open  at  from  6  to  10  months,  with  great  rest-
lessness and  putting  hand  to  head.

I I  Bores  head  into  pillow.  ^Incipient  hydrocephalus.
6  Eclampsia, d  Meningitis  infantum.


383  APIS.

Bending  back  and  rolling  of  the  head. 6  Hydrocephalus.

Ilnability  to  hold  the  head  erect. ^Meningitis  infantum.

I  Scalp  very  sensitive. ^Erysipelas  traumatica.

I  I  Drawing  and  tension  in  scalp.

I  I  Acute  burning  shooting  in  scalp.

1  Burning  in  back  of  head  and  neck,  once  or  twice  a  week  with

nausea.
I  Head  and  whole  surface  of  body  hot  and  dry. d  Typhus.

■  Copious  sweat  of  the  head,  of  musk-like  odor. ^Hydroce-

phalus.
I  I  Itching  prickling  in  scalp.

■  Itching  on  scalp  (oil), d  Catarrh.

I  Whitish  violently  itching  swelling  on  the  head,  sometimes  on

the  neck, d  Paralysis.
Sensation  as  if  head  were  too  large.
I B  Head  feels  swollen  ;  integuments  feel  swollen  and  stiif.
llPufBness  of  scalp,  forehead,  and  around  the  eyes.
I  Innumerable  spots  on  his  head. ^Paralysis.

■  Erysipelas of  the  scalp  spreading  to  the  face;  sphacelous

spots. See  8.

■  Erysipelas  in  head  followed  by  staphyloma.
I  I  Hair  falls  out ; Ibald  places.

Hair  had  to  be  cut  short  as  the  pediculi  increased  too  much

(oil), d  Spinal  disease.
^  Sight  and  Eyes. I  Photophobia, d  Ophthalmia, d  Keratitis,

6  Ophthalmia  arthritica. d  Catarrh  of  chest.
Sensitiveness  to  light,  with  headache  and  redness  of  eyes.
I  I  Light  gives  pain  during  headache.

■  Shunning  light,  constant  winking. 6  Ophthalmia.

■  Keeps  his  eyes  closed,  light  intolerable, d  Ophthalmia.
Severe  pain  in  eyeballs,  increased  by  exposure  to  light.

■  Would  see  better  at  night  than  in  daytime  (oil). ^Pannus.
Objects  appear  too  large.

■  Diplopia. ^  After  meningitis.
I  I  Whirling  before  the  eyes.

I  I  Indistinct  vision, d  Ophthalmia.

■  Vision  very  indistinct,  as  if  a  skin  was  drawn  over  the  eye.
Obscuration  of  sight. 6  Cerebro-spinal  meningitis.

■  She  could  only  observe  the  light  coming  in  at  the  window

when  she  turned  herself  towards  it. 6  Ophthalmia.
Did  not  see  finger  thrust  towards  eye. d  Hydrocephalus.

■  Whitish  grey  mist  before  the  eyes, d  Staphyloma.

■  Blindness  from  obscuration  of  cornea.
Cataract.

■  Eyes  much  inflamed  ;  after  maltreatment  stone  blind.

■  Dilated  pupils, d  Meningitis  infantum.

■  Pupil  in  1.  eye  somewhat  drawn  towards  the  outer  side.


APIS.  384

I  Pupil  not  discoverable  through  the  opaque  cornea.  ^Oph-
thalmia.

I  Pupil  cannot  be  distinctly  seen,  but  appears  to  be  drawn  lat-
erally into  an  oblong  shape.

Weakness  of  eyes,  with  dread  of  straining  the  sight.

Weakness  of  sight,  with  feeling  of  fullness  in  eyes.

I  Eyes  weak,  not  inclined  to  exert  them  ;  they  tire  easily  ;  sen-
sitive to  light.

Eyes  painful,  feel  sore  or  irritated  when  using  them.

B  After  reading  for  an  hour  or  two  by  lamplight,  eyes  became
irritated  with  a  pricking  feeling ;  they  filled  with  water  ;
conjunctival  vessels  slightly  injected,  and  sight  correspond-
ingly indistinct.

Worse  when  looking  fixedly  at  any  object.

BlAsthenopic  troubles,  especially  afTections  from  using  eyes  at
night,  causing  redness  of  the  eyes,  with  lachrymation  and
stinging  pains.

Worse  when  looking  at  something  white.

I  I  Heaviness  of  eyes,  fullness  and  pressure.

Feeling  of  heaviness  in  eyelids  and  eyes.

Aching,  sore  pressing,  tensive,  shooting,  boring,  stinging,
burning  pains  in  and  around  eyes  and  in  forehead.

I  In  eyes  from  time  to  time,  stitches  and  pressing  (oil).
6  Pannus.

Aching  pressure  in  left  eyeball,  mostly  in  the  lower  part,  for
several  hours  ; repeated  twice. <^

Eyes  feel  as  if  they  had  sand  in  them.

I  Pain  in  eyeballs  and  across  the  forehead ;  worse  right  side.
d  Diarrhoea.

Acute  pain  in  eyeballs.

Rheumatic  affections  of  eye.

■  Violent  stitches  in  eye  and  around  it;  worse  at  night.
d  Arthritic  ophthalmia.

Dreadful  darting  pain  through  the  eyes, d  Ophthalmia.

I  Severe  darting,  lancinating  pains  in  eyes.

I I  Burning,  stinging,  shooting  pains. ^Keratitis.

I  I  Violent  shooting  pains  through  the  eyeball ;  tearing,  shooting.

B  Violent  shooting  over  the  right  eye,  extending  down  to  the
eyeball.

B Piercing  in  the  eyes  ;  was  obliged  to  remove  the  spectacles
while  reading  and  writing  (near-sighted  woman).

B Burning  and  stinging  in  eyes. 6  Blepharitis.

B  Smarting  and  burning  sensation  in  eyeballs  and  lids,  d  Oph-
thalmia.

Pains  throbbing  and  burning.

Smarting  and  sensation  of  burning  in  the  eye."^,  with  bright
redness  of  the  conjunctiva;  very  sensitive  to  light.

Pains  aggravated  by  moving  the  eyes.


^85  APIS.

1 1  Squinting  of  one  or  both  eyes, d  Hydrocephalus, d  Men-
ingitis infantum, d  Scarlatina.  •

■  Trembling  of  eyeball,  worse  at  night.
Twitching  of  1.  eyeball,  or  of  both.

I  I  Quivering  and  twitching  of  1.  eyeball  <  at  night.

■  Twitching  and  jerking  of  eyelids. ^  Scrofulous  ophthalmia.

■  Rolling  of  the  eyeballs. 6  Hydrocephalus.

■  Rolling  of  eyeballs  in  sleep  without  waking,  d  Hydrocephalus.
Congestion  of  blood  to  eyes.

■  Conjunctiva  injected. ^Ophthalmia.

■  Conjunctiva  reddened,  full  of  dark  blood-vessels,  which  gradu-

ally lose  themselves  in  the  cornea, d  Ophthalmia.

■  ■  Puffy  chemosed  congested  condition  of  conjunctiva  and  bright

red  appearance, d  Keratitis.

■  Chemosis. ^  Ophthalmia  scrofulosa.

■  ■Keratitis  and  blepharitis,  with  tumefaction  of  the  lids.

■  ■Scrofulous  keratitis (parenchymatous), with  dim  vascular

cornea,  hot  lachrymation,  contracted  pupils,  etc.

■  ■Pustular  keratitis,  with  dark  red  chemosed  conjunctiva  and

swollen  lids.

■  ■Keratitis,  with  dreadful  pains shooting  through  the  eye,

with  swollen  lids  and  conjunctiva; with hot  lachrymation
gushing  out  on  opening  the  eyes ;  with  photophobia.

■  I  Cornea  thick,  having  dark,  smoky  spots ;  grayish,  smoky,

opaque. 6  Keratitis.

■  Leukoma.

■  Each  cornea  full  of  nebulous  spots, d  Scrofulous  ophthalmia.

■  Entire  cornea  scattered  over  with  dark  smoky  clouds  ;  thick-

ened and  covered  with  a  film. 6  Ophthalmia.
Smoky opacity  of  cornea, d  Cerebro-spinal  meningitis.

■  Pupil  could  not  be  seen  through  the  smoky  discolored  cornea.

6  Ophthalmia.

■  Opacity  of  upper  half  of  cornea ;  opaque  and  white.

■  The  disease  went  from  left  to  right. 6  Ophthalmia.

■  Opacity of  almost  the  whole  cornea; only  inferiorly  and

towards  the  right  about  a  sixth  part  is  free.

■  Ugly  looking  conical  tumor,  occupying  the  place  of  the  former

pupil,  preventing  the  use  of  a  glass  eye.

■  Staphyloraatous  projection  in  r. eye,  with  inflammation  of

both  eyes.

■  I  Staphyloma  cornese.

Cornea  obscured,  smoky,  showing  a  few  little  ulcers  here  and
there.

■  On  edge  of  r.  cornea,  ulcer  size  of  a  lentil,  with  dirty  fundus.

d  Scrofulous  ophthalmia.

■  Ulceration  of  the  cornea,  vascular,  with  photophobia,  lachry-

mation and  burning  pain ; lids  everted  and  often  ulcerated
on  the  margins.
25


APIS.  386

I  Ulcers  and  maculae  on  cornea, d  Ophthalmia.

I  Cicatrices  of  cornea.

I  Eyes  brilliant. ^Thrombosis.

I  Iritis.

■  Pressing  pain  in  lower  part  of  eyeball, d  Hydrops  retinse.
Stinging  in  the  ball  and  pain across  the  forehead  ; aching

pressing  in  the  lower  part  of  left  ball. Fullness  inside  the

ball,  with  flushed  head  and  face.
Stinging,  itching  in  left  eye  ;  in  lids  and  around  eye.
Smarting  and  sensation  of  burning  in  the eyes,  with  bright

redness  of  conjunctiva ;  very  sensitive  to  light.
I  I  Cutting,  burning,  with  redness  of  eyes.

■  Congestion  to  eyes;  blood-vessels  injected.
Eyes  red  and  itching.

■  Sclerotic  vessels  injected;  from  the  inner  corner  many  vessels

and  loose  fibres  running  towards  the  cornea,  as  if  a  ptery-
gium would  be  formed,  d  Scrofulous  ophthalmia.
iThe  whole  conjunctiva  of  sclerotica,  as  well  as  cornea,  thick-
ened, full  of  new  blood-vessels  ;  cannot  perceive  the  slightest
light ;  could  not  point  where  windows  were  ;  pupils  could
not  be  detected  (oil), d  Pannus.

■  Sudden  and  violent  inflammation  of  r.  eye. d  Ophthalmia.

■  Greatly  inflamed  eyes, d  Measles.

■  Inflamed  eyes,  with  eruptive  diseases.

■  Left  eye  inflamed; pustule  on  cornea,  and  general diffuse

inflammation  over  whole  eye ;  lid  swollen  and  red.
Inflammation  ;  photophobia,  but  cannot  bear  eyes  covered.

■  Often  the  remedy  for  acute  catarrhal  conjunctivitis,  in  which

there  is  bright  redness  and  chemosis  of  the  conjunctiva,  with
stinging  pains.
Inflammation  of  eyes,  intense  photophopia,  increased  secretions.

■  ■Ophthalmia,  rheumatic,  arthritic,  catarrhal,  strumous,  erysi-

pelatous, or  oedematous,  no  matter  what  part  of  eye  may  be
the  seat  of  the  disease.

■  ■Inflammations,  with  severe  shooting  pains,  heat  of  the  head,

red  face,  cold  feet,  etc.

■  ■First  stage  of  catarrhal  ophthalmia,  especially  in  scrofulous

children.

■  ■It  is  especially  applicable  to  inflammations,  with  burning

biting  pains ;  inflammations  following  eruptive  diseases.

■  Violent  cases  of  Egyptian  ophthalmia  and  ophthalmia  neona-

torum, with  great  swelling  of  the  lids  and  adjacent  cellular
tissue.

■  ■Ophthalmia;  photophobia, but  can  bear no covering on

account  of  soreness.

■  Left  eye  swollen  wholly  shut,  and  the  mouth  so  swollen  that

he  can  scarcely  open  the  lips.

■  ■Erysipelatous inflammations of the lids, with adjacent


^^'^  APIS.

smooth  swelling  of  the  face,  especially  with  chemosed  con-
junctiva, etc.

I  (Edema  of  eyeball.

I I  Puffy, chemosed congested condition of conjunctiva.
d  Keratitis.

iChemosis  of  conjunctiva,  with  light  discharge.
iHypopion.

■  Copious  mucous  secretion  and  lachrymation. /^Pannus.
I  1  Flow  of  tears,  with  headache.

I  Profuse  lachrymation. ^Ophthalmia.

I  I  Flow  of  tears,  with  sensitiveness  to  light. 0  Catarrh  of  chest.

■  Eyes  water  and  are  painful  when  she  looks  at  anything  light.

I  I  Flow  of  tears,  with  redness  and  burning  of  eyes.

I I  Hot  tears  gushed  from  the  eyes, d  Ophthalmia.

■  Scalding  tears; profuse  lachrymation,  with burning,  great

sensitiveness  to  light, d  Ophthalmia.

Burning  stinging  in  the  right  eye,  beginning  with  a  dull
heaviness,  and  causing  flow  of  water.

1 1  Lachrymation,  with  burning  in  the  eyes  and  with  photo-
phobia ;  with  pains  in  the  eyes  on  sewing  evenings,  with
pain  on  looking  at  bright  objects;  with  severe  burning  and
sensation  of  a  foreign  body  in  the  eyes.

Slight  inflammation  of  lachrymal  sac.

I  Fistula  lachry  mails.

I  Eyes  wide  open, d  Hydrocephalus.

■  Eyelids half open, pupils  turned  up. /?  Incipient hydro-

cephalus.

■  Everted  lids, d  Ophthalmia  scrofulosa.
I  I  Heaviness  of  lids.

■  Right  eye  closed  with  paralysis  of  r.  side.

■  Headache  on  the  right  side,  extending  into  the  eye,  must  keep

it  closed, d  Hemicrania.
I  I  Shooting,  itching  in  eyes  and  lids.

■  ■Redness  and  smarting  of  lids.

■  ■Blepharitis.

■  Inflanimation  of  the  eyes  and  eyelids,  with  pressing,  itching,

burning  pains,  with  redness  of  the  lids.

■  Conjunctiva  of  lids,  thickened  and  ragged  (oil). /?Pannus.
Erysipelatous  inflammation  of  lids.

■  Chronic  blepharitis,  with  thickening  of  conjunctival  layer,  so

that  the  lower  lid  is  everted, d  Chronic  catarrh.

■  Various  forms  of  blepharitis,  with  thickening  or  swelling,  such

as  incipient phlegmon,  with  great puffiness  and  stinging

■  Pseudo-ophthalmia  of  old  people. Witches'  sore  eyes.

■  Lids  dark  red,  everted  and  swollen,  with  inflamed  conjunc-

tiva, d  Blepharitis.
Lids  dark  bluish-red,  and  so  swollen  as  to  close  the  eye,  fol-


APIS.  388

lowing  severe  pains ;  the  swelling  extends  around  the  eyes
and  down  over  the  cheek ;  the  conjunctiva  becomes  con-
gested, puffy,  chemosed,  full  of  dark  red  vessels.

■  Swelling  of  upper  lids. 6  Sequel  to  scarlatina.

■  Eyelids  swollen,  inflamed. 6  Ophthalmia  scrofulosa.
I  Swelling  of  eyelids  in  the  eruptive  stage. 6  Variola.

Both  eyes  closed  with  a  purplish- white  swelling,  marked  by

intense  pain  in  r.  eye.
iLids  and  skin  over  orbits  swollen  with  redness,  heat  and  great

sensitiveness  of  outer  surface ; cold water applied gives

relief.
Inflammation  of  the  lids ;  lids  much  swollen,  red  and  blue,

cannot  open  them  ;  lachrymation,  much  pain,  restlessness  at

night ;  cold  water  gives  great  relief

I  Lower  lids  very  much  swollen,  edges  red,  full  of  little  knots,

as  if  several  styes  would  form,  but  had  been  checked,  d  Scrofu-
lous ophthalmia.
IlLids  oedematous  ; llbag-like  swelling  under  eyes  ;  lids  feel
stiff".

I I  The  upper  lids  so  swelled  that  they  hang  like  little  sacs  on  the
face.

IlLids  much  swollen,  red  and  oedematous;  often  everted;  the

upper  lid  hangs  like  a  sac  over  the  eye. 6  Erysipelas  of  the

lids.
I  Lids  swollen  ;  lower  lids  forming  little  sacs ;  edges  red  and

puffy  (oil), d  Pannus.
Soreness  of  the  canthi.

Smarting  on  the  margin  of  the  lids  and  in  the  canthi.
Excoriation  of  canthi  and  edges  of  lids.
I  Stinging  itching  in  the  inner  angle  of  the  left  eye.
Stinging  itching  in  the  internal  canthi,  or  smarting  of  edges

of  lids.
I  I  Itching  in  and  around  the  eyes,  on  the  lids,  and  in  the  canthi ;

with  soreness.
Redness  of  eyelids.
I  Both  lids  of  left  eye  inflamed,  red  and  thickened ;  the  lining

membrane  the  same,  eye  suff'used  with  tears ; conjunctiva

pale  red  ;  photophobia,  margin  of  lids  sore  and  scabby,  some

pimples  on  upper  part  of  cheek.
I  Burning  in  the  margin  of  the  lids,  causing  lachrymation.
Soreness  of  the  lids  and  canthi,  with  agglutination.

■  Secretion  of  mucus  during  the  night  agglutinating  the  lids,

causing  much  pain  when  attempting  to  open  them,  d  Oph-
thalmia.

■  Sticking  together  of  lids, d  Ophthalmia.

■  Granulations  on  edges  of  lids. ^Blepharitis.

■  Hordeola,  or  styes. See  43.


389  APIS.

B  Ulceration  of  the  margin  of  the  lids  and  canthi,  with  stinging
pains.

I  Lupus  of  the  lower  lid,  which  had  gone  on  to  ulceration.

Syndesmitis.

I  Lashes  pressed  inward  by  the  excessive  swelling,  d  Oph-
thalmia.

I  Cilise  very  long,  sticking  together  in  little  bundles,  d  Scrofu-
lous ophthalmia.

■  Falling  out  of  eyelashes. ^Blepharitis.

lEyelids  swollen,  dark  red,  everted,  destitute  of  lashes,  granu-
lations along  their  borders, d  Ophthalmia.

iPain  over  and  in  1.  eye,  and  over  the  whole  1.  side  of  head,
with  nausea  and  vomiting. See  4. d  Hemicrania.

Violent  shooting  pains  over  right  eye,  extending  down  to  ball.

iBurning.  stinging  and  sensation  of  swelling  around  the  left
eye  and  in  the  superciliary  ridge.

I  I  Shooting,  itching,  round  about  the  eye.

Swelling  and  redness  about  the  eyes, d  Ophthalmia.

I  I  Watery,  erysipelatous  swelling  around  the  eyes.

Puffy  swellings  of  lids  and  eyes,  with  a  feeling  of  burning  and
tightness  of  the  skin.

iPuflSness  around  the  eyes. ^Diphtheria.

Piercing  itching  around  the  eyes,  in  the  brows,  lids,  and  the
eyes  themselves,  more  in  the  left,  especially  in  the  inner
canthi,  with  a  desire  to  rub  the  eyes,  while  pressing  them
hard ;  with  this,  soreness  and  smarting  on  the  margins  of
the  lids,  in  the  canthi,  and  in  the  eye  itself;  quivering  of
the  eyeball,  and  a  feeling  in  the  eyes  all  day  as  if  there  were
mucus  in  them,  especially  in  the  left.

■  Swelling  under  the  eyes,  just  as  after  a  bee-sting,  d  Erysipelas.

I I  Bag-like  swelling  under  the  eyes.  ^Erysipelas.  ^Uterine
diseases.

®  Hearing  and  Ears, l  l  Sensitiveness  to  noise.
Noise  frightens  from  sleep.

■  Hardness  of  hearing. ^Typhus.
Deafness.

Violent  pain  in  left  ear  when  chewing.

I  I  Shooting,  burning  of  the  ears, d  Erysipelas.

■  Otitis  after  scarlatina;  desquamation  had  completely  ceased;

traces  of  albumen  in  urine.

■  ■Redness  and  swelling  of  both  ears. ^Erysipelas.
I  I  Tension  about  the  ears.

■  Raises  hand  to  back  of  ears  with  each  scream, d  Incipient

hydrocephalus.
^  Nose. ■  Copious  nosebleeding  towards  morning. 6  Typhus.
I  I  Creeping,  then  pressure  in  the  sinciput  and  vertigo.
Acrid  discharge  from  nostrils.

■  Fluent  coryza. ^Albuminuria.


APIS.  390

■  Thick, white, fetid  mucous discharge, mixed with blood.

6  Scarlatina.

Coryza,  dry  in  the  morning,  fluent  in  the  evening.

I  I  Coryza,  with  feeling  of  swelling  in  the  nose  ;  dryness,  burn-
ing of  lips.

Sudden  coryza,  4  P.M.,  with  dryness  of  nose,  then  burning  of
lips  and  sensation  as  if  they  would  chap.

I  Chronic  nasal  catarrh.

I  Chronic  coryza  with  increased  discharge  and  crusty  nostrils.
d  Scrofulous  ophthalmia.

I  Dry  nose. ^Scarlatina.

lA  fleshy  mass  more  than  an  inch  in  length  and  half  an  inch
in  breadth,  a  real  nasal  polypus,  was  discharged  from  the
left  nostril  and  a  week  after  another  smaller  one.

Tip  of  nose  cold,  with  chilliness  in  evening.

Redness  and  burning  in  the  nostrils.

I  I  Itching,  soreness,  redness  and  swelling  of  nose.

llNose  swollen,  red  and  oedematous. ^Erysipelas.

Burning  itching  and  stinging  eruption  upon  the  nose.
^  Face. I  Peculiar,  happy,  pleasant  expression. /9  Typhus.

■  Expression  of  terror  ;  or,  of  apathy. ^Typhus.

■  Expression  of  the  face  pitiful. 6  Typhus.

■  Anxious  expression. ^Ascites. ^  Ovarian  dropsy.
Appears  as  if  in  an  apoplectic  fit ;  features  distorted,  face  dark

and  much  swollen.

■  Pale face. ^Incipient hydrocephalus. ^  Sopor. ^  Acute

Bright's  disease.

■  Countenance  pale,  sunken,  sickly. ^Ascites.

■  Face  pale  or  yellowish. ^Ascites. ^Albuminuria.

■  ■Face  pale,  waxen. ^  (Edema.

■  Paleness  of  face  and  very  suspicious  puflBness  of  eyelids  with

swelling  of  face,  limbs  and  abdomen,  external  swelling  oede-
matous, with  water  in  abdomen.  ^Post  scarlatinal  com-
plaints.

■  Sallow  countenance. ^Bilious  diarrhoea.

■  Face  and  lips  livid, d  Dropsy  after  scarlatina.
I  I  Livid,  bluish-red  colored  face.

■  Countenance  red,  with  increasing  livid  hue. 6  Bronchitis.

■  Flushed  face  and  head, d  Hydrops  retinae.

■  Pale  redness  of  face. ^Erysipelas.

■  Redness  and  pufiiness  of  1.  cheek. ^  Ilemicrania.

■  Peculiar  burning,  leaving  a  livid,  bluish-red  color  of  the  face.
Face  swollen,  red  and  hot,  with  burning  and  piercing,  more

right  side.
Burning  stinging  heat  in  face  which  is  purple.
Burning  cheeks,  with  cold  feet.

■  Face  glowing,  hot  and  red. ^Thrombosis.
I  I  Desire  for  washino-  face  with  cold  water.


391  APIS.

I  I  Stinging  pain,  pricking  in  face ;  puffiness  below  the  eyes.
d  Erysipelas.

I  I  Burning,  shooting,  with  fullness,  heat  and  redness  in  face.
Stinging  pain  in  left  malar  bone.

Prosopalgia  with  or  followed  by  impaired  memory.

I I  CEdematous  swelling  of  face,  d  Albuminuria,  d  Meningitis.
6  Diphtheria.

1 1  (Edema  of  the  face  ;  eyelids  puffed  ;  sometimes  feel  stiff.

iCEdema  of  face  and  hands, d  After  scarlatina.

I  Lying  on  his  back  with  puffed  face,  slightly  flushed  face  and
ears  ;  breathing  with  some  difiiculty. See  26.

Face  puffy  with  a  feeling  of  stiffness.'

I  Puffiness  of  the  forehead  and  eyes,  d  Albuminuria  during  preg-
nancy.

■  Face  puffed  and  dark  red. d  Typhus.

■  Face  full  and  puffed,  most  about  eyes,  had  an  anxious  expres-

sion, d  Dropsy  after  scarlatina.

I  Whole  face  swollen,  dark  red ;  tensive  pain  ;  delirium  in  sleep.

d  Erysipelas.

I I  Face  swollen  ;  1 1  skin  waxy  pale,  translucent,  d  Cholerine.
d  Dropsy.

1 1  Hard  purplish  spots  on  the  face,  forehead,  neck  and  lower
limbs ;  remaining  hard  and  painful  ten  or  twelve  days.

I  Some  red,  inflamed,  sore  patches  of  inflammation  on  forehead
like  erysipelas ;  with  general  cold,  shivering,  headache,  etc.

I  Eyelids  and  bridge  of  nose  puffy.

Itching  smarting  blotches  of  urticaria  coming  and  going  upon
the  face.

I I  Hives  with  burning,  stinging  and  itching;  particularly  in
the  Fall.

1 1  Erysipelas  of  the  face.

■  Erysipelas  of  one  side  of  face  and  nose,  with  swelling  under

the  eye  resembling  that  from  a  bee-sting.

■  Erysipelas  of  face,  most  the  pale,  livid  kind,  only  on  half  of

the  face,  of  chin,  lower  jaw  and  cervical  region.

■  Phlegmonous erysipelas, right  cheek, creeping  across  nose

and  attacking  left  cheek.

■  ■Erysipelas:  usually  begins  at  one  eye,  goes  r.  to  1; face

intensely  hot  and  red,  or  only  pink  ;  puffy,  shining ;  rarely
pale,  livid ;  either  severe  soreness  to  touch,  or  burning,
stinging  pains ;  dry,  coated  tongue,  thirst ;  fullness  of  the
head ;  delirium  in  sleep,  with  nervous,  fidgety  restlessness.

■  Phlegmonous,  facial  erysipelas.

■  ■Erysipelas faciei; pinkish, sometimes livid; sphacelous

spots ;  comes  periodically ;  right  side  mostly ;  delirious  in
sleep.

■  Chronic  erysipelas,  recurring  periodically.

■  Face  and  limbs  cold. ^Dropsy  after  scarlatina.


APIS.  392

I  Phagedenic  ulcerative  eruption  on  face,  spreading  over  left
half  of  face  and  head ;  when  it  has  healed  white  scars  remain  ;
eruption  spreads  only  by  one  edge :  the  skin  in  front  of  it
becomes  red,  swelled  and  painful,  then  small  pustules  appear,
which  spread  rapidly  and  ulcerate  into  one  another,  the  pus
in  the  meantime  accumulating and  forming  a  thick  yellow-
ish-brown scab  ;  had  gonorrhoea  12  years  ago.
I  I  Formication  and  prickling  in  face-
Running  as  of  an  insect  over  the  cheek.
Desquamation  of  skin  on  face.
^  Lower  Part  of  Face. I  l  Spasmodic  snapping  of  lower  jaw.
I  I  Raging,  violent  pains  in  the  lips,  extending  to  gums  and
head,  finally  to  the  whole  body.

■  Neuralgia  of  lips.
Lips  livid  and  cold.

I  Lips  dry,  covered  with  a  brown  crust. ^Typhus.
Lips  dry,  with  a  black  streak  in  the  red  portion.
Burning  in  the  lips.

iLips  oedematous;  upper  lip  and  nose  swollen,  hot  and  red.

I I  Lips  swollen;  stiff  and  slightly  tender ;  everted,  hanging,
i  I  Prickling  in  the  lips ;  they  feel  as  if  they  had  received  a  con-
tusion.

Roughness  and  tension  in  lips,  especially  upper.

Lower  lip  chapped, d  Gastric  catarrh.

Burning  on  chin.
^°  Teeth  and  Gums. Ilf  a  stick  is  held  before  their  mouths  they
bite  into  it  with  such  force  as  to  break  their  teeth,  but  never
bite  men  or  other  animals. 6  Hydrophobia  of  sheep.

I  Sudden  involuntary  biting  the  teeth  together.

■  Grinding  or  gritting  the  teeth, d  Hydrocephalus, d  Menin-

gitis infantum.
Jumping  pain  in  left  upper  molars.
Jerks  and  throbbing  in  molars.
I  1  Jerking,  twitching  in  1.  upper  molars.
I  I  Toothache  extending  into  the  head.
I  Teeth  covered  with  yellow  mucus. ^Typhus.
B  Teeth  covered  with  brown  sordes. d  Typhus.
Throbbing  pain  in  a  tooth,  with  numb  sensation  in  the  gums.
Sore  pain  in  several  teeth,  with  swelling  and  redness  of  gums

and  cheeks.

■  Neuralgia  of  gums.

I  Swelling  and  redness  of  gums  and  cheek,  with  sore  pain  and

stinging  in  the  teeth.
Gums  bleed  easily.

II  Gums sa'cculated,  look watery,  child wakens  with violent
screams  ;  red  spots  here  and  there  on  the  skin. 6  Dentition.

During  dentition  frequent  waking  at  night  with  violent  screams;
red  spots  here  and  there.


393  APIS.

"  Taste  and  Tongue. Bitter  taste, d  Bilious  diarrhoea.
I  Cannot  taste  anything;  indistinct  speech. ^Typhus.

■  Inability  to  talk  or  put  the  tongue  out;  it  trembles,  catches

in  the  teeth, d  Typhus.

■  Protrusion  of  tongue. ^Meningitis  infantum.

■  Neuralgia  of  tongue.

I  Tongue  feels  as  if  wooden, d  Typhus.
B I  Tongue  red  at  the  tip. d  Albuminuria.
I  Tongue  red. ^Abscess  after  vaccination.

■  Red,  hot,  burning  tongue. ^Scarlatina.

■  Dryness  of  tongue ;  fiery  redness  of  buccal  cavity,  with  pain-

ful tenderness.
I  ■  Dryness,  fiery  redness,  burning,  shooting  and  swelling of
tongue.

■  Tongue  dry. ^Thrombosis.

■  Tongue  dry  and  trembling, d  Typhus.

■  Tongue  dry,  with  a  brown  streak  down  the  middle,  sides

moist, d  Typhus.

■  Tongue  dry  and  white, d  Chronic  diarrhoea.

Dry  tongue,  with  prickling  sensation  in  tongue  and  fauces.
Dry  tongue, d  Catarrh  of  stomach.

■  Dry,  shining,  yellow,  swollen  tongue.
Tongue  swollen,  looks  dry  and  glossy.

Dry,  swollen,  inflamed  tongue,  with  inability  to  swallow.

■  Tongue  red,  swollen,  even  to  suffocation. ^Glossitis.

■  ■  Inflammation  of  tongue, d  After  a  sting  in  temple, d  Ente-

ritis, d  Angina.

■  Tongue  clean  (oil). ^Catarrh.

Taste  normal,  tongue  clean, d  Acute  Bright's  disease.

■  Tongue  looks  as  if  varnished, d  Catarrh  of  the  stomach.

■  Tongue  white, d  Catarrh  of  chest.

■  Tongue  thickly  covered  with  white  phlegm, d  Typhus.

■  Tongue  first  covered  thickly  white,  later  covered  with  a  brown

crust, d  Typhus.

■  Foul  tongue. ^  Gastro-enteritis.

I  I  The  whole  margin  of  the  tongue  feels  as  if  scalded,  as  if
quite  raw  ;  little  papular  elevations  appear  along  the  edge  of
the  tongue.

■  On  tip  of  tongue,  somewhat  to  the  left,  a  row  of  small  vesicles

painfully  sore  and  raw.

■  ■Tongue  deep  red,  and  covered  with  vesicles,  which  burn  and

sting, d  Scarlatina.

■  Tongue cracked,  sore,  ulcerated or  covered with vesicles.

d  Typhus. 6  Scarlatina.

■  Cancer  of  tongue.

*^  Inner  Mouth. 1 1  Salivation.

■  Viscid,  tough,  frothy  saliva.

■  Dryness  of  the  mouth,  fauces  and  throat, d  Tonsillitis.


APIS.  394

■  Scalded  feeling  in  mouth  and  throat.
Inflammation  of  the  mouth.

■  Buccal  cavity  painfully  sensitive.

I  Fetor of  breath. ^Albuminuria. ^Headache. ^Gastro-
enteritis, d  Diphtheria.
'^Palate  and  Throat. iDiphtheritis; characterized  by  great
debility  from  the  beginning.

■  Diphtheria  coming  on  quite  unperceived,  and  progressing  so

insidiously  as  to  ofler  but  little  hope  of  relief. 6  Diphtheria.

II Mouth,  throat,  pharynx  bright  red,  glossy  as  if  varnished;
in  places  coated  white,  like  scales ;  mucous  membrane  cov-
ered sometimes  with  dirty  greyish  tough  membrane ;  not
much  pain,  except  in  ears  when  swallowing. 6  Diphtheria.

I  Puffy,  glossy  varnished  appearance  of  the  highly  inflamed
parts, d  Diphtheria.

IDiphtheritis,  accompanying  scarlatina.

I  Morning  and  evening  secretion  of  tenacious  mucus  from  the
throat, d  Chronic  catarrh.

I  Tenacious  mucus  in  throat ;  very  troublesome. ^Typhus.

Hawking  and  clearing  throat  every  morning.

I  Inflammation  of  palate,  mouth,  fauces  and  throat.

I  Very  long  palate;  looked  as  if  filled  with  water.  ^Diph-
theria.

I  Slight  redness  of  velum  palati ;  fauces  rosy  red  ;  small  blisters
filled  with  clear  lymph  in  clusters  on  back  part  of  throat.
d  Stomatitis, d  Ascites.

Fauces  bright  red. d  Diphtheria.

I  I  Posteriorly  and  superiorly  in  the  fauces  and  throat ;  press-
ive  pain,  as  from  a  hard  body.

I  Soreness  of  throat  and  fauces  ;  constant  soreness,  d  Organic
disease  of  heart.

I  Fauces  violet-red;  both  tonsils  enlarged,  dark,  with  a  throb-
bing pain, d  Angina  tonsillaris.

I  I  Tonsils  red,  swelled,  painfully  smarting.

I  Red,  highly  inflamed  tonsils.

I  Tonsillitis,  with  cutaneous  eruptions.

I I  Left  tonsil  much  inflamed. 6  Scarlatina.
1 1  Tonsils  and  fauces  erysipelatous.

I  Redness  and  swelling  of  tonsils,  uvula  and  fauces. ^Angina.

d  Tonsillitis.
Very  greatly  enlarged  tonsils,  with  redness  and  swelling.
Tonsils  swollen,  bright  red,  stinging  when  swallowing.
I  Tonsils  swollen,  hard  ;  swallowing  difiicult. ^Scarlatina.

I  The  r.  hypertrophic tonsil  swollen  since  two  years,  is  two-

thirds  lessened  within  four  weeks, d  Scrofulous  ophthalmia.

I I  Dry  ulcers  on  the  tonsils  and  palate ;  sloughing  abrasions  on
tonsils, d  Scarlatina.


395  APIS.

Deep  ulcers  on  tonsils  or  palate ;  erysipelatous  and  oedematous

appearance  around  ulcers.
Effusion  of  fluid  into  the  tonsils, d  Scarlatina.
I  I  Dryness  in  throat  without  thirst.
I  Dryness  in  throat. ^Catarrh. /9  Scarlatina.
Dryness  and  heat  in  throat.

■  Dryness,  with  burning  stinging  pains  in  throat. ^Chronic

catarrh.

■  Stinging  burning  pain  in  throat. 6  Variola.

■  Stinging  itching,  deep  in  the  throat,  at  the  lower  part  of  the

neck,  accompanied  by  a  sensation  of  constriction.

■  Violent  stitches  and  throbbing  in  throat, d  Chronic  inflam-

mation.
Stinging  pain  in  throat, d  Scarlatina.

■  Smarting  pain  in  throat. ^Angina. ^Tonsillitis.

Heat  and  smarting  in  throat,  with  occasional  hacking  cough.
I  I  Sensation  as  if  raw  in  throat,  with  tough  saliva  and  hawking.
Roughness  and  sensitiveness  of  the  pharynx.
I  Hot  and  inflamed  throat,  much  phlegmonous  inflammation

diffused  over  fauces  and  velum.
Inflammation  of  throat.
Swelling  of  submucous  tissue  in  the  throat.

■  ■Diphtheritic  angina.

■  Vivid  redness  in  throat,  without  much  swelling,  and  a  very

clean  tongue.

■  Throat  painful,  pharynx  and  whole  mouth  bright  red  ,  in  some

places  as  if  covered  with  wine  dregs,  in  others  three  large
whitish  patches  formed  by  lumps  of  matter,  forming  a  kind  of
soft  scab,  seeming  to  incline  to  invade  the  whole  back  of
throat ;  after  3°  in  water  every  two  hours,  the  throat  was
stripped  of  all  the  clogged  matter.  6  Scarlatina,  5th  day.
Catarrhal  or  habitual  angina  (with  abdominal  complaints)  with
tendency  to  ulceration.

■  ■  Ulcers  in  throat ;  in  scarlatina,  when  the  eruption  does  not

come  out.

■  Eruption  of  scarlatina  just  subsiding,  throat  intensely  red,

dry  and  glazed  looking;  numerous  small  grey  ulcers  on
columns  of  arch  of  palate;  feverish,  headache,  weak,  ex-
hausted, skin  dry,  pulse  quick.

■  ■Erysipelatous  and  oedematous  appearance  around  the  ulcers.

■  Ulcers  in  throat,  erysipelatous  or  urticarious.

■  ■Deep  ulcers  on  tonsils,  palate,  etc.

Three  open  ulcers,  with  callous  edges  in  throat,  discharging  an

ichorous  fluid  (oil), d  Spinal  disease.
Swelling  in  oesophagus.

■  Between  intervals  of  swallowing,  often  a  stinging  pain  in  the

throat.
Swelling  and  sensation  of  narrowing  in  the  throat.


APIS.  396

■  Throat  felt  constricted,  and  as  if  a  foreign  body  was  lodged  in

it ;  deglutition  was  painful.

■  Sensation  of  constriction  and  erosion  in  the  throat,  in  the

mornings;  increases  to  such  a  degree  in  eight  hours  that
swallowing  becomes  difficult.
I  Throat  sore,  swallowing  painful,  especially  solids  and  sour  or
hot  substances,  right  side  worse ;  would  wake  at  night  with
a  strangling  sensation  ;  stringy  phlegm  in  throat.

■  Stinging  pains  on  attempting  to  swallow, d  Quinsy.

■  Talking  painful,  and  a  feeling  when  swallowing  as  if  a  large

fish-bone  was  in  throat.

I  I  Stinging,  burning,  smarting,  shooting,  especially  on  swal-
lowing.

Pain  in  ears  when  swallowing, d  Diphtheria.

Unable  to  swallow  except  with  extreme  pain, d  Scarlatina.

I  I  Throat  swollen,  inside  and  outside ;  hoarse ;  breathing  and
swallowing  difficult.

I  I  Shooting,  itching,  and  contraction  in  throat,  rendering
deglutition  difficult.

Often  inclined  to  swallow,  but  there  being  no  power  in  the
muscles  it  is  difficult.

■  Difficult swallowing, from absence of  power in muscles.

d  Scarlatina. 6  Typhus, d  After  diphtheria.

■  Difficulty  in  swallowing. ^Typhus. ^Angina.

■  From  north  wind  took  cold;  shivered,  throat  inflamed,  uvula,

arch  of  pharynx  and  tonsils  being  very  red  and  swollen  ;
constant  pricking  pain,  shooting  up  both  sides  towards  the
ears ;  almost  entire  loss  of  voice  and  difficulty  in  swallowing ;
feverish,  and  has  a  quick  pulse.

■  Can  swallow  only  a  single  drop,  with  swollen  tongue.

■  Could  not  swallow  solid  food. ^  Angina  tonsillaris.

■  Shivering  fit,  ushering  in  an  attack  of  cynanche  tonsillaris ;

throat  intensely  red  and  swollen,  left  side  worse ;  cannot
swallow  a  drop  of  liquid ;  much  fever,  headache,  pain  in
limbs.

■  Can  swallow  nothing ;  fauces  and  right  tonsil  red  and  swol-

len, and  affected  with  sharp,  pricking  pain ;  has  headache,
is  thirsty,  pain  in  limbs  and  back.

■  No  effort  to  swallow  the  water  which  is  put  into  his  mouth.

6  Typhus. 6  Hydrocephalus.

'*  Appetite,  Thirst. Desires,  Aversions. ■Appetite  good.

6  Amenorrhoea.

■  Appetite  and  thirst  normal  (oil), d  Spinal  disease.
I  I  Anorexia.

■  No appetite, or  desire for  food. ^Tonsillitis. ^Angina.

d  Diarrhoea.  d  Infantile  marasmus.  d  Ascites.  d  Acute
Bright's  disease, d  Menstrual  derangements, d  Typhus.

■  Appetite  previously  voracious,  now  deficient. ^Albuminuria.


397  APIS.

I  Appetite  lessened,  thirst  not  increased  (oil), d  Catarrh.

■  Neither  eats  nor  drinks, d  Typhus.

iFour  weeks  without  eating  and  without  sleep. ^  Mania.

I  No  appetite,  but  much  thirst. ^Typhus.

I  Thirst. ^  Bilious  diarrhoea. ^Scarlatina.

Constant  thirst ;  before  Arsen. d  Hydrothorax.

I  Drinks often, but little at a time. 6  Catarrh of  chest.

d  Diarrhoea, d  Diphtheria, d  Cancer  of  breast.
I  i  Insatiable  thirst, d  Abscess  after  vaccination.
I  So  violent  thirst  that  she  would  like  to  drink  all  the  time.

d  Typhus.

■  Disturbed  by  great  thirst, d  Thrombosis.

I  I  Desire  for  a  draught  of  water,  with  sinking  of  the  forces.
I  Thirst  in  some  cases,  in  others  none, d  Diphtheria.
llThirstless. ^  Cerebro-spinal meningitis. ^Ovarian and

other  dropsies, d  Ascites, d  Pregnancy, d  Hydrothorax.

6  Keratitis.
I  No  thirst,  with  dryness  of  throat  and  heat.

I  Absence  of  thirst  and  scanty  urination, d  Dropsy.
iThirstlessness  in  dropsical  disease,  and  many  other  complaints.

I I  No  thirst  with  the  heat;  mouth  dry.
No  thirst  during  sweat.

Craves  milk,  which  relieves.

1  Child  nurses by day, refuses at night. ^Abscess after
vaccination.

Appetite  for  sour  things.

I  Pure  water  does  not  taste  good,  wants  vinegar  mixed  with  it.
d  Typhus.
^®  Eating  and  Drinking. Continued  swallowing  relieves  sore-
ness and  cough.

■  Heaviness  at  the  stomach  after  meals. ^Ascites.

■  Discharges  renewed  by  food  or  drink. ^Diarrhoea.

■  After  eating  or  drinking,  distress  in  the  stomach, d  Chronic

gastritis.
Strong  craving  for  food  or  drink,  but  nausea,  belching,  heat
and  burning  therefrom.

■  Vomits  food  as  soon  as  taken,  followed  by  retching. ^Incipi-

ent hydrocephalus.
After  meals,  sleepy.

■  After  warm  sugar-water,  retching  and  vomiting  and  bursting

of  tonsillar  abscess, d  Angina  tonsillaris.
Worse  swallowing  drink  or  food ;  also  sour  or  hot  substances.
^^  Belching, Nausea, Vomiting. ■Waterbrash. ^Gastric

catarrh.
Heartburn,  five  or  ten  minutes  after  the  sting.

■  Heartburn  extending  up  into  throat. ^Pregnancy.

I  I  Eructations,  with  the  taste  of  ingesta ;  increased  after  drink-
ing water.


APIS.  398

I  Bitter  or  acrid  belching, d  Chronic  gastritis.

1  I  Eructations,  with  flow  of  water  into  the  mouth.

Nausea,  with  inclination  to  vomit.

I  I  Disgust,  nausea,  with  vertigo,  faintness,  sinking  of  strength

till  it  comes  to  vomiting,  with  headache ;  swelling  of  head,

pains  in  stomach  and  diarrhoea.
With  nausea  and  vertigo,  general  distress  and  prostration,  with

mental  anxiety.
I  Nausea, retching and  vomiting. ^Meningitis infantum.

■  Chronic  gastritis.

Sickness  at  the  stomach,  and  pain  over  the  whole  body  so
severe  as  to  occasion  crying.

■  Desire  to  vomit, d  Meningitis  infantum. 6  Catarrh  of  chest.

■  I  Vomiting.

■  Vomiting  of  ingesta  and  mucus, d  Acute  Bright's  disease.

■  Vomiting of  frothy  mucus  during the  day; after sudden

nausea  felt  in  the  throat, d  Ovarian  tumor.

■  Vomiting  of  mucus,  with  red  specks. ^Albuminuria.
Vomiting  of  slime  and  ingesta  without  loss  of  appetite, d  Acute

Bright's  disease.
Bitter  vomit.

■  Nausea  and  vomiting  of  bile, d  Organic  disease  of  heat.

■  Vomiting  of  bile;  of  ingesta  and  slime. ^Gastric  catarrh.

d  Morbus  Brightii.

■  Vomiting  of  bile, d  Catarrh  of  stomach.

■  Vomiting,  with  inflammation  of  the  stomach.

■  Vomiting  in  the  beginning. ^Gastroenteritis.

■  Vomiting,  extreme  pain  and  tenderness  in  region  of  stomach

and  upper  abdomen. 6  Gastroenteritis.

■  Vomiting,  with  diarrhoea.

^''  Scrobiculum  and  Stomach. Pit  of  stomach  sensitive  ;  burn-
ing as  from  acidity ;  irritability  of  stomach  ;  fullness  ;  pres-
sure aggravates  the  pains. 6  Gastric  catarrh.
Sensitiveness  of  pit  of  stomach  to  touch, d  Gastritis, d  Gas-
tralgia.

■  Great  soreness  when  touched  in  pit  of  stomach,  under  the

ribs,  in  abdomen.

■  Pit  of  stomach,  sensitive  to pressure,  and  burning  therein.

6  Pregnancy.

■  Burning  in  pit  of  stomach, d  Gastritis.
Pressure  in  pit  of  stomach.

■  Pain  and  tenderness  in  epigastrium, d  Erysipelas  in  stomach.

■  Sensation of burning in epigastrium  like  from acidity in

stomach, d  Erysipelas  in  stomach.

■  Excessive  pain  and  tenderness  of  stomachic  region  and  epi-

gastrium, d  Gastro-enteritis.

■  Weak,  faint  sensation  in  epigastrium,  with  loss  of  appetite.

d  Ovarian  tumor.


399  APIS.

I  I  Pains  in  cardiac  region,  shooting,  obstructing  the  breath.

■  Sensitiveness, fullness, and burning  in the  stomach, with

catarrh  of  throat.
Ilrritability  of  the  stomach. 6  Chronic  catarrh  of  stomach.

■  Sensation  of  soreness  in  stomach  and  abdomen.

■  Sensitiveness  and  burning  of  bowels ;  <on  pressure,  d  Chronic

gastritis.

■  Burning  in  stomach  after  erysipelas.

■  Burning  heat  in  stomach.

Violent  pain  and  sensitiveness  in  the  region  of  the  stomach.

■  Extreme  pain  and  tenderness  in  region  of  stomach  and  upper

abdomen,  with  vomiting, d  Gastro-enteritis.
Sharp,  crampy  pains  in  the  stomach  and  abdomen,  followed  by
vomiting  and  diarrhoea  at  intervals,  lasts  two  hours.

■  Gastralgia. ^  Bilious  diarrhoea.

■  Irritation  of  digestive  organs,  with  hot  or  burning  sensations.

6  Dyspepsia.
I  I  Aching  and pressure in  stomach ; pricking,  sore  feeling,

burning,  and  great  tenderness.
Distension  of  stomach,  with  burning  in  epigastrium.
Erysipelas  of  the  stomach  and  bowels.

■  Contusions  of  the  stomach  and  bowels.

^^  Hypochondria. ■Pressure  against  diaphragm  renders  respi-
ration laborious, d  Ascites.
Soreness  at  insertion  of  diaphragm  and  in  the  back.  6  Cholerine.

■  Inflammation  of  diaphragm.

Under  right  ribs,  sensation  as  if  "gone  to  sleep."

■  Hyperaemic  state  of  liver, d  Organic  disease  of  heart.

■  Inflammation  of  the  spleen.

■  Considerable  swelling  of  spleen,  abdomen  sunken  in. 6  Typhus.

■  Pain  left  side,  under  short  ribs,  and  in  mediastinum. 6  Chest

complaint.

■  Pain  under  short  ribs;  -<  leftside. ^Intermittent,  apyrexia.

■  I  Soreness  and  bruised  feeling,  as  after  a  contusion,  most  about

last  ribs,  left  side.
Severe  burning  pain  under  the  short  ribs,  on  both  sides ;  most
severe  on  the  left,  continuing  there  for  weeks,  depriving  her
of  sleep.

■  ■Pains  from  below  ribs,  spreading  upwards.

■  Obliged  to  bend  forward  from  a  painful  contractive  feeling  in

the  hypochondria.
Tension  over  hypochondria,  with  pricking  sensation.

■  Clothes  could  no  longer  be  made  to  meet  around  his  waist,

d  Ascites.
I  I  Sensation  of  soreness  or  burning  under  the  ribs.
^^  Abdomen  and  Groins. Abdomen  contracted.

1  I  Heavy  painful pressure, violent contraction, compression

and  urging  in  the  belly.


APIS.  400

■  Collapse  of  abdominal  walls, d  Meningitis  infantum.

■  Heaviness  in  the  abdomen. ^Menorrhagia. ^Metrorrhagia.

■  Bearing down pain, with tenderness of ovarian region.

d  Prolapsus.
Numbness  in  the  r.  side  of  abdomen.
I  I  Sick  feeling  in  the  abdomen,  inclining  to  sit  quiet.

■  Burning,  stinging  in  abdomen;  sore  to  touch. ^Peritonitis.

■  Soreness  of  the  bowels  felt  when  sneezing  or  pressing  on

them.

■  ■Feeling  as if  the intestines  were  bruised. ^Dysentery.

d  Ascites.
Feeling  in  belly  as  if  something  tight  would  break  if  too  much
effort  were  made  at  stool. 0  Pregnancy.

■  Erysipelas  from  contusions  in  stomach  and  bowels.
Sore  pains  in  the  bowels. 6  Enteritis.

Soreness  and  burning  pain  in  abdomen, d  Bilious  diarrhoea.

■  Great  pain  in  abdomen. ^  Acute  Bright's  disease.

■  Aching  at  the  umbilicus,  worse  in  the  morning. ^Albumi-

nuria.

■  Violent  cutting  pains  in  abdomen, d  Morbus  Brightii.
Severe  griping  pains  in  the  bowels.

I  I  Violent  pains  in  belly  when  lying ;  >■  sitting  up.

I  I  Pains  in  abdomen  when  walking.

I  1  Bellyache  with  call  to  stool  in  the  morning.

■  Inflammation  of  bowels. ^Ascites.

■  ■Peritonitis  with  exudation  ;  often  with  metritis ;  urine  scanty,

dark.

■  Soreness  of  bowels,  felt  when  pressing  upon  them,  or  sneezing.

6  Ascites.
General  soreness  of  abdomen, d  Chronic  dysentery.

■  Abdomen  sore  to  touch. ^Eruptive  diseases. ^Scarlatina.
Burning  in  abdomen  end  tenderness  to  least  pressure.

■  Fullness  and  tenderness  of  abdomen. ^Ascites.

■  Abdomen  very  tender  to  the  touch,  even  to  the  pressure  of

the  bedclothes, d  Ascites.
Tenderness  of  entire  peritoneum  on  pressure  or  on  turning  in
bed.

■  When  pressed  on  r.  side  of  abdomen  she  makes  a  wry  face.

d  Typhus.

■  Tenderness  of  abdomen  on  pressure, d  Enteritis,  d  Diarrhcea.

d  Dysentery. 6  Typhus.
I  I  Burning,  internal  soreness,  with  external  tenderness,  even  to
the  pressure  of  the  bedclothes.

■  Great  soreness  of  abdominal  walls. ^Ascites.
Cutting  pain  in  abdominal  walls.

■  On  pressing  on  ileo  coecal  region  a  gurgling  like  from  a  fluid

is  heard, d  Typhus.


401  APIS.

I  I  Rolling  and  rumbling of  wind  in  bowels,  with  diarrhoea.
d  Typhus.

■  Rumbling  in abdomen. ^Flatulency. ^Typhus.

6  Enteritis, d  Chronic  dysentery.
Great  soreness  and  bloatedness  of  abdomen. 6  Typhus.

■  Fullness  and  sensation  of  bloatedness  in  the  abdomen,  as  if

she  were  inflated.

■  Meteoritic  distension. ^Typhus.

■  Fullness  and  enlargement  of  abdomen. ^Ascites.
Sensation  of  fullness  in  abdomen  with  dull  pains,  <C  on  motion

and  from  pressure.

■  Sense  of  fullness  in  the  bowels. ^Bilious  diarrhoea.

I  I  Abdomen  full,  swollen  and  tender, with  swollen  feet  and
scanty  secretion  of  urine.

■  Sense  of  fullness  and  tightness  of  the  bowels, d  Enteritis.

■  Belly  feels  full  and  hard, d  Dropsy  after  scarlatina.
I  I  Swelling  of  abdomen  without  thirst, d  Ascites.

■  Swelling  of  abdomen  and  limbs, d  Organic  disease  of  heart.

■  Abdomen  very  much  distended  by  fluid, d  Ascites, d  Albu-

minuria, d  Dropsy  after  scarlatina.

■  Circumference  of  abdomen  increased  in  one  day  by  three-

fourths  of  an  inch, d  Ascites.

■  Abdomen  begins  to  swell,  with  much  difficulty  of  breathing,

especially  after  going  up  stairs  quickly, d  Amenorrhoea.

■  ■  Walls  of  abdomen  tense, d  Typhus.

■  ■■Ascites  and  anasarca.

■  Enlargement  of  abdomen. ^Intermittent,  apyrexia.

■  ■Ascites  with  vomiting  and  diarrhoea;  can't  get  breath  ex-

cept when  sitting ;  even  leaning  backwards  causes  sufibca-
tion  ;  urine  scant,  dark,  like  cofiee  grounds.
I  I  Ascites  :  from  albuminuria ;  post  scarlatinal  or  with  uterine
tumors ;  after  peritonitis.

■  Pain  extending  into  the  thigh  or  upwards  to  the  ribs, d  Ova-

ritis.
I  Aching,  pressive  pain  in  the  hypogastrium,  with  bearing  down

in  the  uterus.
I  I  Slow  throbbing  boring  pain  over  the  left  iliac  crest,  relieved

by  eructations.

■  ■Sensitiveness  of  ileocoecal  region. ^Typhus.

■  Severe  aching  in  the  loins, d  Ovarian  tumor.
Neuralgia  in  the  groins.

■  Swelling  in  right  groin  oblong,  hard,  as  large  as  a  cucumber.

■  Hard  swelling  in  the  right  groin.

■  A  large  swelling  in  left  inguinal  region. 6  Syphilis.

■  Long  standing  inguinal  hernia.

^^  Rectum  and  Stool. Throbbing  in  rectum.

I  I  Electric  shock  in  rectum  before  the  urging  to  stool.

■  ■Tenesmus. ^Diphtheria. ^Ascites.

26


APIS.  402

I  I  Feeling  of  approaching  diarrhoea,  urging  pressing  and  tenes-
mus in  bowels.

I  Tenesmus,  bowels  feel  bruised.  ^Dysentery.  ^Prolapsus
ani.

B Repeated  inclination  to  have  a  discharge  from  bowels,  d  Or-
ganic disease  of  heart.

■  Passage  of  flatus  before  stool.

Distended  and  sore  bowels  with  much  flatulence  and  small  al-
vine  discharges  aifording  no  relief.

■  Tendency  to  diarrhoea. ^Enteritis.
Painless  morning  diarrhoea.

Diarrhoea  (with  the  exception  of  dysentery)  predom.  painless.
I  1 A  painless  diarrhoea  appears  before  the  relief  of  the  chest

complaint.
Painless  diarrhoea,  greenish-yellow.

■  Painless  yellow  diarrhoea. ^Gastritis.

Looseness  of  bowels  in  the  morning,  thin,  watery,  yellowish
discharges,  generally  painless,  only  at  times  griping.

■  Yellowish  motions  with  a  tinge  of  green  with  scarcely  any

pain, d  Erysipelas  in  stomach.

■  Painless  diarrhoea,  yellowish,  sometimes  greenish  and  slimy.

d  Bronchitis.
1  I  Greenish, yellow,  watery,  mucous  diarrhoea,  without  pain,
especially  in  the  morning.

■  Frequent  painless  bloody  stools. ^  Dysentery  of  infants.

■  ■Watery  diarrhoea. ^Catarrh  of  stomach.

■  Watery,  copious,  almost  black  motions.
Watery  diarrhoea,  with  smarting  at  the  anus.

Stools  :  watery  ;  yellow,  watery,  with  griping ;  watery  and  foul
smelling ;  watery,  copious,  black  ;  thin  yellow  with  extreme
weakness.

■  Stools  yellowish,  greenish,  with  some  bellyache. 6  Diarrhoea.

d  Catarrh  of  stomach.
Yellow-brown  stools,  with  frequent  painful  urination.

■  Several  thin  yellow  stools  with  extreme  weakness  and  prostra-

tion ;  the  stools  occur  with  every  motion  of  the  body,  as  if
the  anus  were  constantly  open.
Stools :  greenish-yellow  mucus ;  worse  mornings,  slimy,  mucus
and  blood  ;  frequent,  bloody,  painless,  olive  green, slimy,
profuse ;  full  of  bright  red  lumps.

■  Greenish-yellow  mucous,  painless  stools.

I  (Evacuation  of  mucus  with  pain,  as  if  bowels  were  squeezed
to  pieces.

■  Excessive  mucous  secretions. ^Enteritis.

■  Slimy  stools. ^  Catarrh  of  stomach.

■  Olive  green,  slimy,  profuse  stools,  full  of  bright  red  lumps  like

chopped  beets,  with  colic  and  tenesmus, d  Incipient  hydro-
cephalus.


403  APIS.

Copious  evacuations  of  blackish-brown,  green  and  whitish  excre-
ments.

■  Stools  soft  and  pappy,  mixed  with  serum,  as  if  soft  feces  had

been  beaten  in  water,  but  not  dissolved,  orange-colored.

■  Frequent  discharge  of  gelatinous  mucus  with  slight  tenesmus.

d  Chronic  dysentery.
•  Brownish,  watery  or  bloody  discharges, d  Typhus.
Loose  stools  containing  some  mucus  and  considerable  blood.

■  Frequent,  bloody,  painless;  infantile  dysentery; sometimes

only  tenesmus  with  bruised  feeling  in  bowels.

■  Small  stools  smelling  brassy. ^Incipient  hydrocephalus.
I  I  Fetid  diarrhoea,  then  tenesmus,  with  passages  of  blood.
Stools  watery,  foul  smelling.

■  Stools  smelling  very  offensively, d  Typhus.

■  Every day six or  eight diarrhoeic discharges of  a smell

like  carrion, d  Typhus.

■  Frequent,  loose,  painful,  putrid,  bloody  involuntary  discharges.

6  Typhus.
I  I  Diarrhoea  in  morning  or  forenoon,  returning  at  the  same  hour.

■  Diarrhoea  in  the  morning  for  tliree  or  four  weeks;  thin,  wa-

tery, yellowish,  only  sometimes  with  griping.
I  I  Soft  stool,  every  morning,  light-colored.

■  Diarrhoea  in  the  morning;  hands  blue,  cold;  faint;  vomiting.

6  Cholera  infantum. 6  Hydrocephaloid.

■  Diarrhoea  at  night  and  following  day,  stool  like  oat  grits.

d  Typhus.

■  Erysipelatous  stools  (Schonlein). d  Catarrh  of  stomach.

■  Diarrhoea. 6  Intermittent, d  Measles, d  After erysipelas.

■  Chronic  diarrhoea  of  a  bilious  or  erysipelatous  character.

■  1 1  Chronic  diarrhoea  with  many  small  passages  of  blood  and

mucus  ;  woman  at  critical  age.
Nausea,  vomiting  and diarrhoea,  first  lumpy  and  not  fetid ;
afterward watery  and  very  fetid ;  then pappy,  mixed  with
mucus  and  blood.

■  Diarrhoea  only temporarily  stopped by  Arsen. ^Ovarian

dropsy.
Before  stool :  straining; ■passage  of  flatus.
During  stool :  straining, pinching,  nausea, vomiting,  frontal

headache,  backache.

■  Intestinal  catarrh, with  slimy  diarrhoea  and  muttering  de-

lirium, d  Eruptive  diseases.

■  Increasing  prostration  during  diarrhoea.
Diarrhoea  and  vomiting.

■  I  Hemorrhage  from  bowels  with  burning  pains,  excoriation  of

anus,  constant  tenesmus, d  Prolapsus  ani.
After  stool :  faint,  exhausted  ;  tenesmus,  discharge  of  blood ;
burning  at  anus  (typhus); ■■anus  feels  raw.

■  ■Dysentery.


APIS.  404

Frequent  disposition  to  go  to  stool,  with  inability  to  accomplish

anything.
1 1  Hard,  regular  stools,  during  menstruation.

■  Slight  constipation. ^Incipient  hydrocephalus.

I  Stools  seldom  and  very  difficult,  with  stinging  pains. ^Preg-

nancy.

I I  Hard  and  costive  motions. ^Erysipelas.
I  Retention  of  stool. ^Ovaritis. ^Typhus.

■  Prolonged  difficult  constipation. (9  Abortion.

■  Prolonged  constipation,  but  more  frequently  diarrhoea,  d  Den-

tition.
Costive,  restless,  screams  in  sleep  ;  bright  red  pimples  here  and
there.

■  Costive;  large, hard,  difficult  passages. ^Ovarian  dropsy.

d  Ovarian  tumor.

■  Costive,  with  large,  hard,  difficult  stools;  stinging  pains,  and

sensation  in  abdomen  as  from  something  tight,  which  would
break  if  much  effort  w^ere  used, d  During  pregnancy.

■  Stool  once  in  8  or  10  days  (oil). 6  Spinal  disease.

■  Bowels  very  constipated,  sometimes  only  open  once  a  fortnight.

6  Staphyloma.

■  ■  Chronic  constipation.

■  ■Constipation. ^^  Sopor. Cerebro-spinal  meningitis. Me-

ningitis infantum.  Gastro-enteritis.  Hemorrhoids.  Pros-
tatic affections.  Organic  disease  of  heart.  Typhus.  Ab-
scess after  vaccination.

I  I  Feeling  in  anus  as  if  it  were  stuffed  full,  with  heat  and  throb-
bing in  rectum.

I  I  Sensation  of  rawness  in  the  anus  with  diarrhoea.

Small  bilious  discharges,  producing  slight  smarting  at  the  anus
and  tenesmus.

I  ■  Intolerable  itching  with  swelling  in  anus.

■  Whitish-red  swelling  of  anus  with  intolerable  itching. Child

set.  fifteen  months.

■  Stinging  in  anus  and rectum, followed  by  fever,  burning.

d  Hemorrhoids.
I  I  Bloody  exudation  with  the  swelling  of  anus.

■  Prolapsus  ani  with  hemorrhage  from  the  bowels,  with  burning

pain,  excoriation  of  the  anus  and  constant  tenesmus.
I  Stool  with every  motion  of  body,  as  if  the  anus  were  con-
stantly open.

■  Small,  protruding  varices,  which  sting,  burn  and  smart  intole-

rably, d  Hemorrhoids.
Much  stinging  pain  in  the  anus,  constipation  and  scanty  urine.

■  Excessive  soreness  and  smarting  of  anus. ^Diarrhoea.

■  Excoriation  of  anus  with  burning  pain. ^Prolapsus  ani.

■  Sensation of  burning at the anus after  each  evacuation.

d  Typhus.


405  APIS.

Swelling  of  the  anus.

I  Painful  hemorrhoidal  and  other  affections  of  anus.

Hemorrhoids,  with  stinging  pains.

I  I  Intolerable,  shooting,  burning  pains  in  hemorrhoidal  tumors.

BPiles  with  stinging;  protruding,  small;  burn  and  smart  in-
tolerably.
^^  Urinary  Organs. iPain  in  region  of  both  kidneys. ^  Acute
Bright's  disease.

B  Swelling  in  region  of  1.  kidney  with  a  dull  percussion  sound.
d  Acute  Bright's  disease.

iHypergemic  state  of  kidneys. 6  Organic  disease  of  heart.

I  Renal  pains,  soreness  on  pressure  or  when  stooping,  d  Mor-
bus Brightii.

BBin  albuminuria  during  desquamation  in  scarlatina.

Irritation  of  mucous  membrane  of  the  bladder  and  kidneys.

E  Frequent  sudden  attacks  of  pain  along  the  ureters,  lasting  some
minutes, d  Albuminuria.

I  I A  very  disagreeable  sensation  in  the  bladder  with  a  bearing
down  in  region  of  sphincter.

BExcessive  pain  in  vesical  region.  ^Affection  of  prostate
gland.

Vesical  tenesmus  with  frequent  slight  discharges  of  red  urine.

B  Tenesmus  vesicae  during  and  after  urination.

B  Inflammation  of  bladder.

B Irritable  bladder,  must  urinate  every  half  hour,  day  and  night.

Frequent  desire  to  urinate,  so  frequent  that  not  only  passing
urine  very  often  during  the  day,  but  necessary  to  rise  ten  or
twelve  times  during  the  night. 6  Affection  of  prostate  gland.

B  Discharge  of  urine  very  slow,  with  all  the  pressure  it  lasts  often
from  10  to  15  minutes  ;  color  normal, d  Spinal  disease.

BDiflGculty  in  voiding  urine,  must  press  a  long  while  before  he
can  commence. 6  Affection  of  prostate  gland.

Burning  and  scalding  in  urethra,  especially  near  the  neck  of
bladder  during  and  after  urination.

B  Great  irritation  at  neck  of  bladder,  with  frequent  and  burning
urination.

Inflammation  of  neck  of  bladder.

B Frequent  desire  to  urinate  and  pressing  down  in  the  region  of
the  sphincter  vesicae, d  Enlarged  prostate.

BBMorbid  irritability  of  urinary  organs.

BFIow  of  urine  unconscious. ^Typhus.

B  B Incontinence  of  urine  with  great  irritation  of  the  parts,  <C
night  and  from  coughing.

B  Stitching  pain  in  the  urethra  with  enuresis.

Burning  and  smarting  in  the  urethra,  as  if  it  were  scalded.

Burning  and  stinging  in  the  urethra.

BBefore  urination,  burning  in  urethra  as  if  scalded.

After  urination,  burning  smarting  in  the  urethra ;  sharp  cut-


APIS.  406

ting  along  ureters  towards  kidneys  ;  pain  in  neck  of  bladder  ;
mucus.

■  Micturition  sometimes  painful. ^Scarlatina. ^Diphtheria.
I  During  urination  : I  burning,  smarting,  soreness,  constriction

of  urethra ;  agony  ;  uneasy  feeling  in  cords.
With  enuresis,  itching  in  the  urethra.
I  Difficult  urination  with  children.
I  I  Can  pass  little  or  no  water  with  great  pains,

■  Burning  during  emission  of  urine, d  Ovarian  dropsy.
After  urinating,  pain  in  neck  of  bladder  with  shooting  pains

along  the  ureters  towards  kidneys.

■  Sharp  cutting  pains  in  ovarian  region,  with  scanty  urine  and

constipation. 6  Ovarian  dropsy.
I  ■  Strangury, d  Affection of  prostate, d  Metritis. 6  After
parturition.

■  Agony  in  voiding  urine. 6  Affection  of  prostate.
Stricture  of  urethra  and  strangury.

Strangury  caused  by  mechanical  injury.

■  Diuresis,  dysuria.

■  Strangury,  stricture,  retained  urine  or  inflamed  bladder  after

abuse  of  cantharides. 6  Albuminuria.

■  Frequent  desire  to  pass  water. 6  Cystitis.

I  I  Continued  desire  to  urinate, d  Affection  of  prostate.

■  Constant  urging  to  make  water,  passing  but  little  at  the  time  ;

has  to  get  out  of  bed  about  a  dozen  times  in  the  night.
6  Ovaritis.

■  Frequent  desire  with  passage  of  only  a  few  drops;  much  pain.

d  Dysmenorrhoea. 6  Scarlatina.

■  ■Frequent,  painful,  scanty,  bloody  urination.

■  Urine  scanty,  catheter  used  every  day. ^Organic  disease  of

heart.

■  Scanty  urination. /^^  Meningitis. Cerebro-spinal  meningi-

tis. Incipient  hydrocephalus.  Hydrocephalus.  Diph-
theria. Hemorrhoids.  Acute  Bright's  disease.  Ovaritis.
Ovarian  dropsy.  Pregnancy.  Sopor.  Anasarca.  Ascites.
Dropsy  after  catarrh. Scarlatina.

■  I  Urine  scanty  and  high  colored, d  Ascites, d  Scarlatina.

■  Urine  scanty  and  dark. ^Peritonitis. ^Dysmenorrhoea.

d  Scirrhus  mammae.

■  Scanty  urine, with  thirstlessness. ^Anasarca. ^Dropsy

after  scarlatina,  etc.

■  ■Retention  of  urine;  bladder  but  slightly  distended. ^Cystitis.

6  Hydrocephalus, d  Typhus,  etc.,  etc.
Retention  of  urine  in  nursing  infants.

■  Suppression  of  urine.

■  Urine  suppressed,  with  diarrhoea. 6  Typhus.

■  Almost  entire  suppression  of  urine, d  Ascites.

■  Urine  scanty,  or  quite  profuse,  d  Hydrocephalus.  6  Dentition.


407  APIS.

■  Repeated  urination  every  few  minutes,  all  day.
I  I  Increased  micturition  day  and  night.

■  Urine  sometimes  too  profuse, d  Prolapsus  uteri.

Great  secretion  of  urine,  of  pale  or  straw  color,  depositing  a
reddish  or  brick-dust  sediment.

Frequent  urging  to  urinate,  with  copious  discharges  of  straw-
colored  urine.

I  I  Frequent  and  excessively  profuse  discharge  of  normal
urine.

I  Copious,  straw-colored  urine. 6  Diarrhoea, d  Typhus.

■  Passed  great  quantities  of  urine  frequently in the night.

d  Dropsy.

Enormous  secretion  of  urine  (four  to  six  pounds  daily),  great-
est when  at  some  out-door  exercise,  with  flatulence  and
some  looseness  of  the  bowels  (bee-bread).

I  1  Discharges  of  clear,  colorless  urine  during  dentition,  d  Diar-
rhoea.

■  Very  scanty,  high  colored  and  often  scalding  urine, d  Amen-

orrhoea.

Urine:  scanty,  high  colored;  red,  bloody,  hot  and  scanty;
scanty  and  fetid ;  scanty,  reddish  brown ;  after  standing,
turbid ;  scanty,  milky,  albuminous ;  dark,  with  sediment
like  coiFee  grounds ;  containing  uriniferous  tubules  and
epithelium.

I  I  Urine  violet  color, d  After  albuminuria.

I  I  Urine  of  a  greenish  hue. d  Hydrothorax.

■  Urine  scanty,  of  a  dirty  red  color, d  Scarlatina.

■  Urine scanty, reddish-brown; after standing, turbid.

d  Ascites.

■  Reddish, has a brown-colored sediment. ^Dropsy after

scarlatina.

■  Urine  scanty,  flows  thick  from  catheter. 6  Angina  pectoris.

■  Urine  scanty  and  dark,  often  burns  or  smarts, d  Prolapsus

uteri.

■  Urine  dark,  like  cofiee. ^Hydrothorax.

■  Urine  of  a peculiar  dark color,  resembling  an  infusion  of

black  tea  or water with dark molasses, d  Dropsy  after
scarlatina.

■  1  Urine  scanty,  dark,  sediment  like  coff'ee  grounds, d  Ascites.

■  Red  urine, d  Bilious  diarrhoea.

Frequent  urging  to  urinate,  passed  small  piece  of  black  blood
with  the  urine,  which  was  very  scanty,  d  Sequel  of  scar-
latina.

■  Urine  bloody  ;  blood  corpuscles  in  rings. ^Ascites.

■  Frequent  but  scanty  emission of  a  milky  urine. ^Hydro-

cephalus, d  Meningitis  infantum.

■  Clouded  appearance  of  the  urine. /?  Dropsy  after  scarlatina.


APIS.  408

I  Urine  scanty,  dark  colored  and  frothy.  ^Post  scarlatinal
dropsy.

lUrine  scanty  and  fetid. ^Albuminuria.

A  peculiar  light  red  sediment  or  color  of  the  urine,  not  so
much  in  the  urine  as  separating  from  it  and  adhering  to  the
sides,  as  well  as  to  the  bottom  of  the  vessel ;  the  color  ap-
proaching more  that  of  arterial  blood  than  anything  else.

I  Half  the  bulk  of  urine  is  albumen;  girl,  set  5.  ^Albumi-
nuria.

Discharge  of  mucus  after  urination.

B  Urine  contains  largely  albumen  and  blood  corpuscles.  ^  Acute
Bright's  disease.

B Urine  contains  uriniferous  tubes  and  epithelium. ^Morbus
Brightii.
'^  Male  Sexual  Organs. Sexual  desire  increased  or  diminished.

Frequent  and  long  lasting  erections.

Uneasiness  in  the  spermatic  cords.

B Sympathetic  pains  down  the  cords  and  up  through  the  ureters
to  the  kidneys. 6  Ischuria.

Swelling  of  testicles  ;  more  the  right ;  it  had  hardly  room  in
the  scrotum.

Testicles  pain  when  touched.

Affections  of  the  prostate  gland.

Discharge  of  prostatic  fluid.

Gonorrhoea  ;  sycotic  constitution.

B  Balanitis  and  condylomata.

B  Sycosis,  Avith  a  copious  secretion  of  a  thin,  ichorous  discharge  ;
with  burning,  stinging  pain.

B Inflammation  of  glans  and  prepuce, d  Syphilis.

B A  well  developed  chancre  on  glans  penis;  given  according
to  the  kind  of  pain.

B Burning  stinging  pain  in  the  ulcer  and  inflamed  surface.
d  Syphilis.

Violent  itching  and  redness  of  scrotum,  sore  so  touch.

BiDropsy  of  the  scrotum.

B  Hydrocele.

B  Hydrocele  in  multilocular  cysts.

I  I  Erysipelatous  inflammation  and  swelling  of  scrotum,  fol-
lowed bee-stings  on  face  and  neck,  with  a  boy  set  5.

Large  boils  on  pubes.

B  Swelling  of  the  foreskin.

1  Erysipelas  after  circumcision  in  a  child  of  eight  days;  a  scar-
let, bright  redness,  extended  over  the  entire  hypogastrium
to  the  navel,  downward  over  the  scrotum,  and  out  towards
the  thighs ;  the  penis  was  erected,  and  the  glans  had  a  dark
blue  appearance,  the  wound  was  also  bluishly  injected,  and
the  skin  about  the  edges  of  the  wound  oedematously  swollen.
"-^  Female  Sexual  Organs. B Sexual  desire  increased.


409  APIS.

iPains,  worse  from  coition. ^Prolapsus  uteri.
Pains  in  ovaries,  ■<  from  coition.

■  Stinging  in  ovaries  after  sexual  intercourse. 6  Ovaritis.

1 1  Burning,  stinging,  like  after  the  sting  of  a  bee;  in  ovaries  or
other  parts.  ^  Ovarian  and  uterine  troubles.  ^Peritonitis.
6  Dysmenorrhoea.

Stinging,  burning  in  one  or  other  ovarian  region  more  and  more
frequently,  until  labor-pains  set  in. d  Abortion.

■  Burning,  stinging  pain  in  right  ovary  for  several  months;  2°

relieved  in  24  hours. 6  Ovaritis.

■  Pain  in  each  ovary,  sharp,  stinging,  periodic. ^During  mis-

carriage.

■  Sharp,  cutting,  lancinating  pains  in  ovarian  region,  extend-

ing down  the  thigh ;  worse  right  side  ;  numbness  in  side
and  limb, d  Ovaritis, d  Ovarian  tumor.
I  I  Cutting  in  the  left  then  in  the  right  ovary  ;  drawing,  shoot-
ing, with  bearing  down.
' Sharp  cutting  pains  in  left  ovary,  worse  at  intervals,  extending
down  the  thigh.
Drawing  in  right  ovarian  region.

■  Tightness  in  ovarian  region,  worse  on  raising  the  arms.

■  ■Constant  feeling  of  weight  and  heaviness  in  ovarian  region,

left  side, d  Ovarian  dropsy.

■  Feeling of  weight,  heaviness,  in  ovarian  region. 6  Cancer

of  mammge.

■  Irritability  and  pain  mostly  stinging  in  the  ovaries. ^  Amen-

orrhoea.
I  Steady  ovarian pains, with bearing  down in ovaries and
uterus.

■  Painful  bearing  down  in  r.  ovary. 6  Ovaritis.
Tenderness  of  ovaries  on  pressure.

■  Painful  soreness  of  left  ovary,  <  walking. ^Ovaritis.

■  The  right  ovarian  region  is  very  sensitive  during  the  period.

■  Pain  in  r.  ovary  before  or  during  menses. 6  Prolapsus  uteri.

■  Irritation  of  ovaries,  tenderness  of  ovarian  region,  with  severe

pain  on  deep  seated  pressure, d  Dysmenorrhoea.

■  AftSr  metritis  very  severe  pain  in  ovaries. 6  Ovaritis.

■  Soreness  of  r.  ovary, d  Ovaritis.

I  I  Pains  in  ovarian  regions  as  if  sprained ;  tender.

Pain  in  r.  ovary  every  fifteen  or  twenty  minutes ;  each  parox-
ysm lasting  from  one  to  three  minutes.

Strained  pain  in  1.  ovarian  region,-<  when  walking,  evenings,
followed  after  several  hours  by  bearing  down  pain  on  the  r.
side,  and  lame  feeling  in  shoulder  blades ;  is  compelled  to
bend  forward  when  walking.

When  stretching  in  bed,  fine  cutting  pain  in  1.  ovarian  region,
going  across  to  the  right ;  first  very  faint,  then  stronger  and


APIS.  410

stronger,  increased  after  every  repeated  stretching,  four  or

five  times  the  sanae  then  ceasing.
I  Pain  in  ovaries,  least  felt  when  lying  on  r.  side.
I  While  lying  on  r.  side,  a  pulsation  and  movement.
iChieflly  in  the  right,  rarely  in  the  left  ovary. 6  Swelling  of

ovaries.
Numbness  and  dullness,  beginning  in  r.  ovarian  region,  ex-
tending to  hip  and  ribs  and  down  over  the  whole  thigh ;  better

when  lying  upon  it.
I  Pain  in  the  r.  ovary,  with  pain  in  the  left  pectoral  region,  and

cough.
I  Inflammation,  induration,  enlargement,  swelling  and  dropsy

of  the  ovaries,  principally  the  right.
Inflammation  of  ovaries  with  amenorrhoea.
I  Ovary  as  large  as  a  regulation  base  ball  and  a  good  deal

heavier.
Chronic  enlargement  and  induration  of  ovaries,  especially  when

they  have  been  accompanied  by  occasional  paroxysms  of  se-~-

vere  pains.
I B  Enlargement  of  right  ovary  with  pain  in  the  left  pectoral

region,  and  cough.

■  Swelling  and  induration  of  ovaries,  commencing  on  r.  side.
Swelling  and  induration  of  ovaries,  with  pains  on  stooping  and

on  beginning  to  walk.
IB  Dropsy  of  r.  ovary,  with  hardness  and  burning,  stinging,

bruised  sore  pain.
IBDropsy  of  the  right  ovary  with  so  great  an  accumulation  of

fluid  that  she  was  unable  to  move  without  great  inconveni-
ence.
Ovarian dropsy ; burning, stinging, sometimes lancinating

pain,  thirstlessness,  scanty  urine ;  skin  white,  transparent ;

costive,  large,  hard,  difficult  stools.
IB  Ovarian  tumors.

BA  lump  in  left  ovarian  region.  '

Soft  encysted  tumors  of  ovaries.
iCystovarium  size  of  a  head,  since  6  years.
Dropsical  tumors  with  burning,  stinging  and  bruised  sore  pains.
B Ovarian  tumors;  patient  passes  more  urine  than  is  normal  ;

stinging  burning ;  pains  on  stooping  or  beginning  to  walk  ;

menses  irregular,  lasting  but  a  day  or  two.

■  Ovarian  tumor,  with  stinging,  cutting  and  throbbing  pains,  ■<

from  standing,  walking,  and  palpation ;  pains  often  extend-
ing into  right  breast.

BFirm  swelling  lying  towards  the  1.  side  of  navel.

B Ovarian  tumor,  after  tapping  ofi"  eight  quarts  of  a  straw-col-
ored fluid,  and  after  Apis  no  return  for  2  years ;  tapping
again,  6  quarts ;  Apis  again,  remained  well.

Stinging  pains  in  the  region  of  uterus.


411  APIS.

I  Stinging  thrusting  pains  in  region  of  uterus. ^Metritis.

Metritis  with  peritonitis.

1  Sharp,  plunging,  stabbing  pains  in  uterus,  sometimes  followed

by  convulsions, d  Dysmenorrhoea.
Severe  paroxysms  of  contractive,  spasmodic,  pressing  pains  at

the  OS  uteri.
I A  sensation  of  weight  and  heaviness  with  downward  pressing

and  stinging  pains  in  uterus, d  Hypertrophy  of  uterus.
1  I  Aching and  pressive  pain in  hypogastrium,  with  bearing

down  in  the  uterus,  as  if  catamenia  would  appear.
Great  tenderness  over  the  uterine  region,  with  bearing  down

pain,  leucorrhoea  and  painful  urination.

■  Bearing  down  pain,  with  tenderness  over  the  uterine  region.

d  Prolapsus  uteri.

■  Violent,  labor-like,  bearing  down  pains,  followed  by  discharge

of  scanty,  dark,  bloody  mucus, d  Dysmenorrhoea.
Heat  and  fullness  of  uterine  region.
I  Ulceration  and  engorgement  of  os  uteri.

■  Uterine  dropsy.

Uterine  tumors  with  ascites.
Hypertrophy  of  uterus.

■  Diseases  of  the  womb  and  vagina.

Six days previous to the  monthlies, sickness, sensation of

weight  and  heaviness  in  ovaries.
Premature  appearance  of  menses  with  unusually  copious  flow.
Menses  premature,  copious,  or  scanty.
Before  menses  :  eruption ;  labor-like  pains  in  the  abdomen.

■  Pain in r.  ovary,  before and during  menses. ^Prolapsus

uteri.

■  Catamenia  too  profuse  or  too  scanty. ^Prolapsus.

■  Menorrhagia,  with  heaviness  in  the  abdomen,  faintness,  un-

easiness, restlessness,  yawning ;  red  spots  on  body,  stinging
like  bee-stings.

■  Menorrhagia  resulting  from  acute  congestion  of  the  ovaries.

6  Prolapsus  uteri,

■  Metrorrhagia  with  red  spots  stinging  like  a  bee-sting,

I  I  Metrorrhagia  in  the  second  month  of  pregnancy,  with  profuse
flow  of  blood,  heaviness  of  the  abdomen,  great  uneasiness,
restlessness  and  yawning.

■  Menses  mucous. ^  Prolapsus  uteri.

I  I  Catamenia  stops  a  few  days  and  then  returns,  several  times
in  alternation.

■  Menses  at  intervals  of  one  day. ^Prolapsus  uteri.
Interrupted  catamenia.

■  Menses  irregular. ^Prolapsus  uteri.

■  Menses  irregular,  lasting  but  a  day  or  two,  accompanied  with

weakness. 6  Ovarian  tumor.

■  Violent,  cramp-like,  bearing  down  pains,  like  from  labor,  fol-


APIS.  412

lowed  by  a  scanty  flow  of  dark,  bloody  mucus,  lasting  20
hours.

I  The  catamenia  more  copious  but  lumpy,  and  with  great  pain
in  the  spleen,  continuing  after  it  and  molesting  with  every
walk,  even  when  talking  or  coughing.

With  much  pain  catamenia  appeared  in  a  copious  discharge  of
clotted  black  blood,  in  appearance  like  masses  of  putrid  calf's
liver.

Dysmenorrhoea  with  ovarian  neuralgia.

iDysmenorrhoea  from  congestion  of  ovaries.  ^Prolapsus  uteri.

Congestive  type.

Dysmenorrhoea,  with  scanty  discharge  of  slimy  blood.

During  menses  :  eruption  ;  labor-like  pains  in  abdomen,  parti-
cularly in  right  ovarian  region ;  constipation ;  heat  of  the
head ;  stinging  in  abdomen.

Great  sensitiveness  of  the  r.  ovarian  region  during;  menses.

Deep  seated  tenderness,  stinging  and  frequent  micturition
during  menses.

Pain  in  r.  ovarian  region  during  menses.

Bearing  down  pain  in  r.  ovarian  region  during  menses.

Sharp,  cutting,  stinging  pain  in  the  swollen  ovary ;  worse  dur-
ing menstruation.

I  Stinging  in  abdomen  during  catamenia. ^Ovaritis.

Swelling  of  ovarian  region  during  menses.

I  Catamenia  delayed. 6  Ophthalmia.

Menses  scanty, d  Prolapsus  uteri.

Menstruation  suppressed  or  diminished,  with  congestion  to  the
head.

■  Suppression  of  menses.

■  Suppressed  menses  with  congested  or  inflamed  ovaries  ;  con-

gestion to  the  head.

I  Amenorrhoea  or  dysmenorrhoea  with  scanty  discharge  of  slimy
blood ;  oedema  of  the  labia,  ovarian  pains.

Stinging  pain  or  irritability  with  amenorrhoea.

I  Amenorrhoea  with  pain  in  the  r.  hypogastric  region.  6  Pro-
lapsus uteri.

Congestion  of  ovaries  with  amenorrhoea.

Uterine  catarrh  with  eruptive  diseases.

Urethritic  leucorrhoea.

iLeucorrhoea  acrid,  profuse,  green  or  yellowish.  ^Prolapsus
uteri.

I  Green  and  acrid  leucorrhoea,  with  frequent  and  painful  irri-
tation.

Neuralgia  of  labia.

Inflammation  of  labia.

■  Swelling  of  r.  labium  pudendi,  with  violent  inflammation  and

great  pain. A  child.


413  APIS.

■  Extremely  large  and  painful  swelling  of  the  labia,  attended

with  violent  heat  and  stinging  pains ;  set.  38.
I  I  (Edema  of  the  labia.

I  Chronic  diarrhoea,  passages  of  blood  and  mucus, d  Climaxis.
24  Pregnancy,  Parturition,  Nursing,  i  Threatened  miscarriage.

I I  Abortion  during  the  early  months  ;  stinging  pains  in  ovarian
region  until  labor-pains  ensue  ;  scanty  urine ;  no  thirst ;  pro-
fuse flow.

1 1  Miscarriage  in  the  fourth  month,  with  profuse  flooding.

Stinging  pains  occur  in  one  or  the  other  ovarian  region,  more
and  more  frequently  till  labor-pains  are  produced ;  some-
times flowing,  and  finally  abortion.

I  I  Menorrhagia,  with  miscarriage.

During  pregnancy :  stools  seldom  and  very  difficult,  with
stinging  pains  and  sensation  in  abdomen  of  something  tight,
which  would  break  if  too  much  effort  were  made.

I  Constipation  or  diarrhoea, d  Pregnancy.

I  Dropsy  in  latter  period  of  pregnancy,  followed  by  puerperal
convulsions.

Hydrops  amnii.

Puerperal  convulsions.

I  Ovarian  affections,  inflammatory. 6  Childbed.
Milk  diminished  with  nursing  women.

Mammae :  burning,  stinging,  swelling,  hardness,  even  suppu-
ration.

I I  Erysipelatous  inflammation  of  mammge.

iMammse  suppurated,  opened  twice;  r.  breast  hard,  swollen
and  tender ;  used  externally  and  internally.

■  Considerable  swelling  and  hardness  of  mammae. ^Mastitis.
1 1  Stinging,  burning  in  scirrhous  tumors  of  the  mammae,  or  in

open  cancer.

iScirrhus  of  mammae.

I  Cancer  of  mammae ;  open  cancer,  with  stinging,  burning.

I  Ovarian  affections,  with  inverted  nipples.

Ulceration  of  the  umbilicus  with  the  new-born.

Difficult  urination  with  children.

Urine  scanty  or  very  profuse,  d  Dentition,  d  Hydrocephalus.
^^  Voice,  Larynx,  Trachea  and  Bronchia.  ■  Hoarseness  morn-
ings, throat  dry,  but  no  thirst ;  soreness  in  the  supra-sternal
fossa  and  above  the  clavicles ;  feeling  as  of  cords  from  the
fossa  pulling  downwards  and  sideways ;  stitches  through  the
lungs,  hips  and  sides  of  the  chest,  with  aching  all  over,  but
worse  in  the  left  breast.

■  Hoarseness,  with  dryness  and  burning  of  larynx, d  Chronic

laryngitis.
I  Hoarseness  and  scraping  of  larynx  and  trachea, d  Erysipelas.
I  I  Hoarseness,  with  tender  larynx,  rough  throat  and  dryness.
Hoarseness,  in  the  morning.


APIS.  414

Hoarseness  and  dry  cough.

I  Hoarseness, d  Albuminuria.

I  Voice  hoarse,  rough  (oil). 6  Catarrh.

I  Speaks  in  a  thick  voice,  as  in  quinsy, d  Scarlatina.

Speaking  is  painful ;  feels  as  if  it  wearied  the  pharynx,  in
which  there  is  drawing  pain.

Acting  on  the  lining  membrane  of  larynx  ;  controls  a  state  of
inflammation  greater  than  that  for  Bellad.,  even  after  sub-
mucous infiltration  has  taken  place.

I  Sensation  of  weakness  in  the  larynx, d  Diphtheria.
Difficulty of  swallowing not caused  by  the  swelling  in the

throat,  but  by  the  irritation  of  the  epiglottis  ;  every  drop
of  liquid  put  upon  the  tongue  nearly  suffocates  him.

I I  Q^]dema  glottidis.
I  Chronic  laryngitis.

■  Subacute  and  chronic  laryngo-tracheal  irritation.

Dryness  of  throat  in  the  morning,  crouping  cough  and  hoarse-
ness.
Hoarse  voice  and  hoarse  cough  from  irritation  of  trachea.

■  Croup  in  extremis,  preparing  for  tracheotomy.
iQl^dema  of  larynx.

Trachea,  as  if  stopped  up.

■  Rattling  in bronchise,  with inhaling and coughing (oil).

d  Catarrh.
^®  Respiration. I Fetor of  breath. ^Albuminuria. ^Gastro-
enteritis.
I A  deep  inhalation  excites  cough  (oil), d  Catarrh.

■  Breathing  very  frequent, d  Thrombosis.
Respiration  prevalently  quick.

Breathing  hurried  and  difficult,  with  fever  and  headache.

Short,  quick  breathing.

I  I  Breathing  accelerated,  especially  on  moving,  going  upstairs,

or  walking.
Rapid, painful, spasmodic respiration  ; worse lying  down,

better  in  fresh  air,  and  in  an  upright  position.

■  Breathing, gasping and  excessively  rapid, d  Dropsy  after

scarlatina.
Shortness  of  breath,  particularly  on  exercising.

■  Shortness  of  breath,  oppression  of  chest  on  taking  an  inspira-

tion, d  Asthma.

■  Shortness  of  breath. ^  Hydrothorax. ^Intermittent.

■  Breathing  feeble,  interrupted  ;  pale;  lies  stretched  on  a  mat-

tress, d  After  a  sting.
Arthritic  symptoms,  cough,  choking  pain  in  the  chest,  •<  in
cold  weather.

■  Asthma  after  hives.

Oppression  of  the  chest,  shortness  of  breath,  especially  when
ascending ;  inability  to  remain  in  a  warm  room, d  Ascites.


415  APIS.

■  Attacks  of  oppressed  breathing,  worse  at  night  in  bed,  or  in

warm  room, d  Chronic  laryngitis.
Oppression  over  chest  and  epigastrium

■  Breathing  oppressive,  can  scarcely  walk. ^Dropsy.

■  Respiration  oppressed. ^  Hydrothorax.

■  Respiration  torpid,  oppressed. ^Scarlatina.

■  Breathing  accelerated  and  labored, d  Scarlatina, d  Catarrh.
Breathing  labored ;  must  forcibly  exert  the  abdominal  muscles.

■  Labored  breathing,  as  in  croup. ^Bronchitis.

■  Respiration  exceedingly  laborious  and  difficult. ^Ascites.
I  I  Breathing  slow,  difficult,  with  contraction  in  throat.
Difficult  and  anxious  respiration.

■  ■Breathing  heavily  and  with  difficulty,  and  gasping. (9  In-

cipient hydrocephalus.

■  Coughed  and breathed with  great  difficulty,  as  if  he  had

croup,  with  muttering,  delirium,  etc. 6  Chronic  diarrhoea.

■  ■  Difficult, heavy breathing, gasping. 6  Incipient hydro-

cephalus, d  Hydrothorax. d  Ascites,  etc.
After  sleep,  difficulty  in  breathing.

■  Difficult  breathing,  worse  bending forwards  or  backwards;

cannot  breathe  except  when  sitting, d  Ascites.

■  Breathing  difficult  when  lying  on  left  side, d  Ascites.
Awakens  at  night,  with  a  strangling  sensation.

Sense  of  fullness,  constriction,  or  suffocation  in  thorax.

■  Dyspnoea,  with  eruptive  diseases.

Dyspnoea ;  it  seemed  impossible  to  breathe  ;  had  to  fan  him  to

keep  him  alive.
I  I  Feels  as  if  breathing  would  stop.
Great  feeling  of  suffocation  ;  it  seems  as  if  she  could  not  long

survive  for  want  of  air.

■  Feels as if  each  breath would  be the  last. ^Pregnancy.

d  Hydrothorax.  d  Heart  disease,  d  Pericarditis,  d  Cerebro-
spinal meningitis, d  Hepatic  peritonitis.

■  Sensation  as  if  each  respiration  would  be  the  last;  great  dis-

tress, anguish  and  restlessness, d  Heart  disease. 6  Dropsy
after  scarlatina.
Great  feeling  of  suffocation ; cannot  bear  anything  about  the
throat.

■  Intense  sensation  of  suffocation  ;  threw  the  collar  wide  open  ;

could  bear  nothing  about  the  throat ;  with  dusky  hue  of
face  and  bluish  lips ;  he  could  hardly  breathe,  and  said,  "  I
am  suffocating."

■  Can't  get  breath,  except  when  sitting. ^Ascites.

■  Stupefaction  and  stertorous  breathing,  with  an  occasional  start

as  from  sharp  pain, d  Cerebro-spinal  meningitis.
^^  Cough. ■  Cough,  with  that  threatening  resonance  which  denotes
implication  of  the  upper  parts  of  the  windpipe.  6  Bronchitis.
Cough  : croupy ; with ringing  sound  ; dry,  with  gagging ;


APIS.  416

with  soreness of upper  part  of chest ;  with  painful  con-
cussion of  head ;  with  labored  breathing,  as  in  croup.
iCroupy  cough, d  Measles.

■  Violent  cough,  like  whooping-cough, d  Measles.

I  Cough,  with  ringing  sound,  which  denotes  aflFection  of  the  upper

part  of  bronchia, d  Bronchitis.
1  Cough  very  dry,  spasmodic,  morning  and  evening,  but  most

at  night  (oil). ^Catarrh.
I  Dry  cough, d  Typhus.

■  Frequent  fits  of  coughing,  readily  produced  by  the  slightest

pressure  on  larynx, d  Horses.
I  I  Irritation  to  cough,  in  the  supra-sternal  fossa.

■  Short  irritating  cough, d  Chronic  laryngitis.

I  I  Cough  and  tickling  behind  pit  of  throat ;  in  the  morning ;
before  midnight ;  after  lying  and  sleeping  ;  with  painful
concussions  in  the  head ;  ceases  when  the  least  quantity  is
detached.

■  Cough  dry,  with  gagging,  worse  lying  on  left  side, d  Typhus.
Cough  which  looses  with  difficulty,  rouses  from  sleep  before

midnight,  and  ceases  as  soon  as  the  least  particle  is  loosened,
which  is  swallowed  ;  expectoration  seldom.

■  Obstinate  night  cough,  incessant  from  9  p. M.  to  4  A. M. ;

6  woman,  get  72,  after  acute  bronchitis.

■  Cough, which ceases when the  least quantity  is detached.

d  Albuminuria.

■  Cough  pains  the  chest  and  shakes  the  head, d  Ascites.

■  With  violent  attack  of  cough,  blue  in  the  face,  and  puffed  (oil).

6  Catarrh.

■  Coughina;  until  it  seemed  as  if  she  would  vomit.

■  Cough  pains  in  abdomen. ^Ascites.

■  Cough,  with  soreness  in  upper  part  of  left  chest, d  Ovaritis.

■  Cough,  with  soreness  of  chest, d  Catarrh,

■  Heat,  with  cough. ^Albuminuria.
Expectoration  seldom.

■  Expectoration  sweetish  or  tasteless. ^Ascites.
Expectoration  of  a  great  quantity  of  transparent,  somewhat

frothy,  bloody  mucus.

■  Can  raise  sputa  only  to  the  tongue,  whence  it  has  to  be  re-

moved by  wiping, d  Typhus.

■  Cough in morning; expectoration sweetish  and  tasteless.

d  Albuminuria.

■  Short,  dry  cough,  with  expectoration  in  morning. 6  Ovarian

tumor.

■  Laryngo-pharyngeal  cough  of  horses.

■  Cough  suffocative,  painful,  not  so  hard  as  the  Bellad.  cough,

but  with  more  dyspnoea,  leading  to  diagnose  a  thickening  of
membrane,  probably  from  effusion, d  With  horses.


417  APIS.

I  Painful  hoarse  cough,  with  a  clear,  ropy  discharge  from  the
mouth,  similar  to  Mercur. d  With  horses.

I  Sometimes  dull,  sometimes  sharp  pains  in  chest.  ^Hydro-
thorax.

I  I  Sharp  pains  in  chest.

I  Chest  oppressed, d  Meningitis.

I  I  Pressure  on  chest,  most  on  upper  part.

Sense  of  fullness,  constriction  or  suffocation  in  thorax.

■  Sensation  of  fullness  in  chest, d  Hydrothorax.

■  Dull  aching  pain  in  left  side  of  chest,  near  the  middle  of

sternum,  with  sensation  of  fullness  in  the  chest  and  short
breath.
I  I B Fullness  in  chest,  he  must  sit  up. d  Hydrothorax.

I  I  Stitches  most  in  1.  side  of  chest.

■  Stinging  pains  in  left  side  of  chest. 6  Ovarian  dropsy.
Slight  pleuritic  stitches  in  the  sides  of  the  chest.
iPleuritis.

I I  Burning,  stinging  pains  throughout  the  entire  front  of  chest.
I  After  a  walk,  seized  with  a  sticking  pain  in  r.  side  of  chest,

region  of  fifth  rib; ■<  moving  arm  and  body,  extending  to

the  upper  part  of  ensiform  cartilage,  somewhat  impeding

respiration, d  Rheumatism.
Pressure  and  burning  in  the  chest,  with  feeling  as  if  raw  and

inflamed  from  inhaling  frosty  air.
Darting  pains  in  the  chest.

■  Soreness  under  the  upper  part  of  sternum  (oil), d  Catarrh.

■  ■  Hydrothorax. d  After  pleurisy.

■  ■Hydrothorax, fullness  in  the  chest,  dull or  sharp pains;

chest  feels  bruised.
I  I  Coldness  or  heat  in  chest.
Coldness  in  the  middle  of  the  sternum.

■  Sensation  of  heat  in  chest. ^Asthma.

■  If  there  is  evidently  a  mutual  sympathy  between  the  ovaries

and  the  lungs, d  Ovaritis.

■  Hyperaemic  state  of  lungs, d  Organic  disease  of  heart.

■  Dull  percussive  sound  below  the  left  collar-bone  (oil). 6  Ca-

tarrh.
^^  Heart,  Pulse  and  Circulation. Great  anguish,  restlessness ;
feels  as  if  each  breath  would  be  the  last.

■  Cardiac  distress. ^  Amenorrhoea.

Sudden  attack  of  acute  pain  just  below  the  heart,  soon  extend-
ing diagonally  toward  the  right  chest.

■  Feeling  about  the  heart  as  if  something  was  breaking  away.

d  Hydrothorax.

■  Heart-beat  violently,  could  be  distinctly  heard  all  over  the

chest, d  After  scarlatina.

■  Every  contraction  of  heart  shook  the  whole  body, d  Organic

disease  of  heart.

27  .


APIS.  418

I  Heart-beat  intermitting. /?  Thrombosis.
Rapid,  feeble  beats  of  the  heart.

■  Swelling  in  region  of  heart,  sensitive  to  slight  pressure,  d  Hy-

drothorax.

■  Inflammation  of  pericardium.

I  Effusion  into  the  pericardium  following  inflammation.

I  Hydropericardium.

I  Blowing  sound  with  the  diastole;  restless,  but  relief  in  no

position.
Much  pain  about  region  of  heart,  with  a  sense  of  fluctuation

when  turning  on  her  side, d  Hydrothorax.
I  Insufficiency  of  mitral  valves,  sutural  valves  diseased,  eccen-
tric hypertrophy  of  heart.
1  Rasping  sounds  of  systole  and  diastole  unmistakably  audible.
I  Systolic  sound  of  heart  not  well  defined;  tumultuous  sound;

diastolic  sound  of  pulmonary  artery  increased. 6  Organic

disease  of  heart.
I  The  circuit  through  the  collateral  veins  unusually  developed.

d  Thrombosis.
I  The  blood  globule  appeared  diminished  in  size  and  irregular.

d  Ascites.
I  Pulse  not  febrile,  but  temperature  of  skin  had  increased,  and

on  the  fourth  day  a  profuse  sweat  occurred  with  improvement.

6  Chronic  rheumatism.
iPulse  frequent, d  Albuminuria.
I  Pulse  100,  weak. ^Typhus.
I  Pulse  112,  full  and  soft. 6  Typhus.
I  Pulse  112. ^Albuminuria.
IPulse  120,  get.  11. ^Catarrh  of  chest.
I  Pulse  very  quick,  at  least  140. ^Diphtheria.
iPulse  160. ^  Abscess  after  vaccination.
IPulse  160. /9  After  scarlatina,  /

I  I  Pulse  frequent,  full,  strong.
Pulse  accelerated,  full  and  strong.
Pulse  accelerated  and  predominantly  large.
Pulse  quick  and  full,  not  hard.
IPulse  frequent  and  wiry, d  Gastro-enteritis.
IPulse  quick,  somewhat  wiry. ^Ascites.
IPulse  130,  hard, d  Thrombosis.

I  Pulse  quick  and  very  hard. ^Inflammation  of  labia.

I I  Pulse  hard,  small  and  quick.
IPulse  quick,  strong,  hard. ^Typhus.

I  Pulse  feels  under  the  fingers  like  shot  gliding  along,  d  Bronchi-
tis.

I  Radial  pulse  not  synchronous  with  the  heart's  systole,  d  Or-
ganic disease  of  heart.

IPulse  120,  dicrotic. ^Typhus.


419

APIS.

B  bmall  and  rapid  pulse, d  Ascites.
-rulse  small  and  trembling.

■Pulse  changes  frequently  in  character, d  Scarlatina
]1  .  ""f  A^^-5^'  jrregular,  intermitting  every  third  or  fourth
beat. ^  Organic  disease  of  heart.  ^ «  or  lourtH

■i^requently  changing,  weak  and  intermitting  pulse,  d  Tvnhus
iPulse  variable  and  intermitting, d  Meninfitis  ^^

^u  se  at  times  intermittent  and  imperceptible.
Pu  se  scarcely  perceptible,  surface  of  body  cold. 6  After  stints
Pulse  feeble,  scarcely  perceptible  at  wrist.  ^'•

Pulse  indistinct, d  Dropsy  after  scarlatina.
30  Oi/fiTr'  r^"?'-  J^'""''  ^^^g^^'«  disease.

ZnZ  v'^f  '"^  '^S^^  '"^^  Of  «hest  at  fifth  rib,  worse

moving  arm  or  body,  extending  to  upper  part  of  x^Xid
somewhat  impeding  respiration.^ ^I^heumatism ^^ '
fetitches  in  the  left  side  of  the  chest.

feudden  attacks  of  acute  pain  just  below  the  heart,  soon  ex-
tending diagonally  toward  the  right  chest.  '

of h".  r^  P''"'  ^^  '^!  ^'^'  ^^^^  °f  '^'  «h««t'  ^e-r  the  middle
of  fu  In  s  Tthr:r  times  dunng  the  day,  with  sensation

..nu p 1  "^  ^^®^*  ^^d  short  breath.

"■OJiest  feels  as  if  beaten  or  bruised

feensation  of  soreness;  lame,  bruised  feeling,  as  if  from  recent
-  Neck  S  4^^\^-"g  i-^-ed,  bruised  or  beaten.  '^'

Week  and  Back. Rheumatic  stitches  in  r.  side  of  neck
lensive  pain  from  1.  shoulder  to  back  of  neck.
I  I  Ihrobbing  pain  in  the  nape  to  the  left  of  the  shoulder ex-
tending up  over  the  head;  shoots  to  the  right  with  motion
of  head  toward  the  same  side  ^

iSj^se  of  stiffness  in  neck  and  back. ^  Cerebro-spinal  menin-


Stiffness  in  back  of  neck.

iSubcutaneous  swelling  of  neck, d  Diphtheria.

■  Vascular  goitre.

I  Glands  of  neck  swollen, d  Erysipelas  traumatica.

of  left  arm. '""'  ''  '''  ''^^'  ^^^^^^^^^  ''  ^^e^pper  part

^^thel  cTuld"ff  T^'i'^  ^^'^  '  ^^"^^  '^  suffocation,  as  if
uiey  couia  never  breathe  again.

I  I  Pain  in  back,  under  the  scapulae,  worse  on  moving.


APIS.  420

Burning  and  heat,  like  prickly  heat,  on  the  back.

I  Stiffness  in  back. 6  Chronic  rheumatism.

I  I  Exhausted,  as  after  hard  work,  expecially'  in  the  back.

Peculiar  and  great  weakness  of  whole  back  on  both  sides  of

spinal  column ;  she  could  not  lie  on  the  back.
I  I  Weakness,  especially  in  the  back,  by  fits,  with  vertigo.
I  On  stroking  with  both  thumbs  down  along  each  side  of  the

vertebrae,  the  most  pain  is  felt  in  the  lumbar  region  (oil).

d  Spinal  disease.

■  Lower posterior dorsal region, especially left,  feels as  if

bruised.

■  Bearing  down  in  the  small  of  the  back,  as  if  the  menses

would  come  on. d  Ovarian  dropsy.
Sensation  of  stiffness  in  the  sacrum.

■  Could  not  sit  on  account  of  the  most  violent  pains  in  sacrum

(oil), d  Spinal  disease.
Stiffness  in  sacral  region.
I  I  Stiffness  in  small  of  back.

■  Burning  pressing  in  coccygeal  region,  worse  from  any  attempt

to  sit  down ;  evening. 6  Chronic  rheumatism.
^^  Upper  Limbs. ■  Violent  rheumatism  in  r.,  later  in  1.  shoulder.
Tensive  pain  in  1.  shoulder  which  extends  up  to  the  nape.
Pain  in  r.  shoulder  and  forearm  with  pressure  upon  the  chest.

■  Pain  of  a  sticking  character  fixed  itself  in  r.  deltoid  muscle,

radiating  to  scapula  and  elbow-joint  by  lifting  and  by  motion.

d  Chronic  rheumatism.
Lame  feeling  in  the  scapulae.
Pressure  under  the  scapulae,  painful  when  moving.

■  Arm  and  shoulder  swollen  and  sensitive  to  touch, d  Abscess

after  vaccination.

■  Several  very  red  spots  with  painful  red  streaks  to  the  axillary

glands, d  Abscess  after  vaccination.
I  I  Drawing  pain  in  arms,  beginning  in  shoulders  and  extending
to  ends  of  fingers.

■  Pain  in  arm  increasing  darting,  no  longer  able  to  raise  the  r.

arm  to  the  head, d  Chronic  rheumatism.
I  I  Left  arm  as  if  gone  to  sleep.
Numbness  and  tingling  in  both  arms  ; <  in  left.

■  Perfectly  powerless,  she  could  not  take  hold  of  anything,  had

to  be  fed  and  nursed  (oil), d  Spinal  disease.
Right  arm  much  swollen.
Red  and  white  spots  on  the  arms.

■  Right  arm  red,  swollen,  erysipelatous. ^Mammary  cancer.

■  Right  arm  swollen  and  bent  in  elbow-joint,  cannot  be  stretched,

as  the  tendons  are  shortened  (oil), d  Spinal  disease.

■  Sticking pains in r. forearm, with a paralyzed feeling.

d  Chronic  rheumatism.

■  Wrist  and  finger-joints  swollen,  stiff  in  r.  hand,  contracted  to


1


421  APIS

a  fist,  extension  impossible ;  in  1.  hand  other  persons  could

stretch  the  fingers,  but  they  bent  again  immediately  if  let

loose  (oil), d  Spinal  disease.
SOn  inner side of  r.  wrist  a  circular  tetter,  size  of  a  dollar

(oil), d  Catarrh.
iBoth  hands  turned  inward  (in  pronation),  thumbs  were  flexed

on  the  palms  ;  both  hands  cold  (oil). 6  Spinal  disease.
I  Arm  paralyzed;  the  arms  and  hand  swollen,  white  as  putty.
Pricking  and  smarting  sensation  in  hands  and  arms,  afterwards

affecting  the  entire  body  slightly.
I  i  Itching,  burning  and  chapping  of  hands.
I  I  Burning  and  shooting  in  hands.
I  1  Bluish  and  cold  hands, d  Diarrhoea.
8  Hands  and  arms  blue, d  Cholera  infantum.
Hand  swollen,  slightly  bluish- red;  pressure  makes  white  spots,

which  disappear  slowly,  and  leave  no  indentation.
I  I  Redness,  heat  and  swelling  of  hands.
I B  (Edema  of  the  hands.

Marked  redness  of  hands  and  wrists,  also  feet  and  ankles.
Sore  and  red  spots  in  the  palms.
I  Sensation  of  numbness  in  fingers,  especially  the  tips,  about  the

roots  of  the  nails,  which  latter  feel  as  if  loose.

■  Vesicles  between fingers,  itching  after  much  scratching,  in-

clined to  ulcerate, d  Prairie  itch.
i  A  good  deal  of  tumefaction  on  right  forefinger, d  Panaritium.

■  Inflammation  of  the  fingers.

■  Throbbing  pain  occasionally  extending  from  the  finger  up  to

the  arm. d  Panaritium.

BB Panaritium,  with  burning,  stinging  and  throbbing;  very
sensitive  to  touch ;  especially  in  run-arounds,  after  abuse  of
Sulphur.

Pain  violently  stinging,  burning ;  the  whole  finger  much
swollen,  red  as  fire.  Pain  became  after  a  few  hours  tensive,
tearing,  while  the  swelling  continually  increased  and  ex-
tended to  the  forearm  :  the  finger  was  very  tense,  burning
hot,  very  red,  and  numb ;  gradually  the  pain  became  duller
with  the  feeling  in  the  neighboring  fingers  as  of  foreign
bodies  covered  with  velvet.  In  the  first  moments  after  the
sting  and  the  swelling  of  the  place,  a  feeling  of  prickling
heat  spread  over  the  whole  arm  up  to  the  armpit,  which  grad-
ually changed  into  a  painful  itching  and  biting,  especially
along  the  course  of  the  vessels.

■  ■Dissecting  wound  on  the  hand.

^^  Lower  Limbs. I  '  Sore  pain  about  left  hip-joint ;  later  weak-
ness, unsteadiness,  trembling  in  the  joint.

■  Feeling  of  numbness  and  obtusion  in  r.  iliac  fossa,  extending  to

the  hip,  almost  to  the  short  ribs,  down  the  whole  r.  thigh,
>  by  lying  upon  it. d  Ovaritis.


APIS.  422

Relaxation  in  the  hip-joints.

Inflammation  of  hip-joint.

I  At  first  only  dull,  gradually  shooting  and  boring  pain  from
the  middle  of  Poupart's  ligament,  extending  along  the  inner
side  of  thigh  down  to  the  lower  leg  and  into  the  toes.
6  Thrombosis.

Complaints  predominate  on  the  inner  side  of  the  thigh.

I  I  Drawing  through  thighs  to  end  of  toes.

I  Burning  pains  in  both  lower  limbs,  from  thigh  to  ankles,  could
not  move  the  feet, d  Chronic  rheumatism.

iPain  in  1.  lower  limbs  all  the  time  increasing,  most  stitching,
burning,  shooting. 6  Thrombosis.

I  Burning  pains  in  both  lower  limbs,  from  thighs  to  ankles,  could
not  move  the  feet, d  Rheumatism.

I  I  Bruised  feeling  in  the  flesh  of  lower  limbs.

I  Limb  immovable,  covered  with  reddish  and  bluish  streaks  and
spots  ;  hard,  elastic,  hot,  exceedingly  painful,  especially  along
the  crural  vessels  and  nerves. 6  Thrombosis.

iLeft  lower  limb,  in  the  evening,  after  unusual  muscular  exer-
tion, as  heavy  as  lead, d  Thrombosis.

iBoth  lower  limbs  emaciated,  most  the  right;  could  not  be
moved,  had  to  remain  where  they  had  been  laid,  for  several
days ;  both  very  cold  to  the  touch  (oil). 6  Spinal  disease.

I  The  whole  left  lower  extremity  numb  and  heavy  as  lead.
d  Thrombosis.

I  I  In  the  morning  feet  heavy,  stiff,  full  so  that  it  pains,  swollen.

Cold  legs.

Coldness  and  deadness  of  the  extremities,  <  in  cold  weather.

I  Feet  and  legs  up  to  the  middle  of  thighs  always  as  cold  as  ice,
without  sweat ;  even  when  he  walked  in  summer  he  did  not
perspire, d  Staphyloma.

iWhitish  clear  appearance  of  the  broken  limb, d  Phlegmone.

II Legs  and  feet  waxy,  pale  and  oedematous. ^Dropsy.

■  Swelling  of  limb  of  a  whitish,  transparent  look.  ^Phlegmon.
I  CEdematous  swelling  of  the  feet,  ankles  and  legs, d  Ascites.

d  Amenorrhoea.

I  Legs  oedematous.  ^Albuminuria.  ^During  pregnancy.
^Amenorrhoea.  ^Puerperal  convulsions.  ^  Infantum  ma-
rasmus, d  Scirrhus  mammae.

I  Dropsy  of  limbs. ^Angina  pectoris.

I  Left  lower  limb  monstrously  swollen  ;  stretched  out.

iCEdema  of  feet  and  legs  in  a  man  affected  with  chronic  rheu-
matism and  partial  paralysis  so  that  he  could  not  move  about.

■  Violent  pain  in  left  knee,  more  outside  and  to the  front.

d  Synovitis.
I  I  Pains  about  knee,  swelling,  burning  and  shooting.
Complaints  predominant  in  hollow  of  knee.


423  APIS.

■  Swelling from metatarsus up to the knee, very painful.

d  After  hemorrhage  from  uterus.

■  Joints  of  knee,  feet  and  big  toes  swollen,  painful  when  pressed

or  lifted  (oil), d  Spinal  disease.
Left  knee  badly  sprained  by  being  thrown  from  a  horse.
I  Acute  synovitis  of  the  knee.

■  Swelling  of  knee.

■  Swelling  of  left  leg  from  metatarsus  to  knee  and  accompanied

by  great  tenderness ;  some  of  the  lymphatics  near  the  hip
were  also  affected,  feeling  like  hard  cords  under  the  skin  and
being  extremely  tender,  d  Lady  with  fibrous  tumor  of  uterus
who  suffered  from  repeated  and  violent  hemorrhages.

■  Numbness  of  limbs. See  23.

■  Numbness  of  the  lower  limb  same  side  on  which  ovary  is

affected, d  Ovarian  dropsy.
Lower  limbs  feel  paralyzed.

■  On  both  lower  limbs  dirty  blue  spots,  remnants  from  the  suppu-

rations caused  by  blisters  (oil). 6  Spinal  disease.
Tetter-like  eruption  on  both  legs ;  terrible  itching  as  soon  as
the  crusts  have  formed ;  eruption  oozes  a  sticky  moisture.

■  Eczema  of  legs.

■  Eruption  came  out  plentifully  on  the  calves, d  Paralysis.
Phlegmasia  alba-dolens.

1  I  Shooting  in  1.  outer  ankle.

■  Ankles  and  feet  very  oedematous  and  clumsy, ^Ascites.

■  Boring from  thighs  to ankles; could not move the feet.

d  Rheumatism.

■  Pain  in  feet. ^  Acute  Bright's  disease.

■  Podagra.

I  I  Burning  of  the  feet  and  toes.
Suppressed  foot  sweat.

■  Foot  sweat  checked  by  cold, d  Staphyloma.
Swelling  of  the  feet  and  ankles  of  transparent  whiteness.

■  Swelling  of  feet  and  ankles, d  Hydrothorax.

■  Swelling  of  the  left  foot  over  the  instep  to  such  a  degree  that

he  could  not  put  on  his  boot.

■  I  At  night,  on  removing  the  boots,  feet  swollen,  feel  heavy  and

stiff.

■  Large  painful  swelling  of  the  foot.

■  Swollen  feet. ^Ascites.

■  Swollen  feet  and  scanty  urine  during  apyrexia.  d  Intermittent.

■  Painful  turning  up  of  the  big  toe. d  Tubercular  meningitis.

■  Painful  turning  inwards  of  the  big  toes,  extorting  cries  from

the  child. 6  Meningitis  infantum.
I  I  Shooting  in  the  toes.

■  ■Burning  in  the  toes,  with  redness  ;  feet  cold. ^Erysipelas.

■  ■Sensation  in  the  toes  and  whole  feet,  as  if  too  large,  swollen

and  stiff;  also  at  night  on  removing  the  boots.


APIS.  424

Drawing  through  the  thighs  to  the  tips  of  the  toes ;  the  latter

feel  numb.
I  I  Nails  as  if  loose.

iPain  in  limbs,  with  the  fever. 6  Catarrh  of  chest.
I  I  Burning  of  hands  and  feet.

■  Heavy  in  all  the  limbs,  every  motion  causes  pain, d  Typhus.

■  Great  soreness of  all  the  limbs  and  joints. ^Intermittent,

apyrexia.
Trembling  of  hands  and  feet.

■  Trembling  of  limbs. 6  Meningitis  infantum, d  Scarlatina.

■  Occasional  twitching  of  limbs  on  one  side  of  body,  and  appa-

rent paralysis of that of  the other side, d  Meningitis
infantum.
Limbs  cold,  numb  and  bluish.

■  Limbs  numb  and  cold. ^Diphtheria.

■  Rheumatic  lameness  of  limbs,  and  effusion  in  the  joints,  with

affections  of  the  spinal  marrow  (oil), d  Spinal  disease.

■  Numbness  of  the  feet  and  hands,  even  paralysis, d  Diphtheria.
General  paralytic  feeling,  especially  in  the  limbs.

Cold  limbs  ;  blood  settled  under  finger  and  toe-nails.

Phlegmasia  alba  dolens.

I  I  Bright  red  swelling,  with  red  stripes  along  the  limbs.

■  Q^]dema  of  limbs. <?  Albuminuria.

■  Dropsy  of  limbs. 6  Organic  disease  of  heart.

^^  Position,  Motion. Motion : headaches  worse ;  in  diarrhoea,
followed  by  stool ;  pain  under  scapulae  ;  chill  worse.
Exertion  increases  vertigo  and  prostration.

■  Dull  pains  in  region  of  the  tumors,  most  on  commencing  to

walk  and  on  stooping. 6  Swollen  ovaries.
Stooping  increases  headache ;  renal  pains  ;  pains  in  ovarian

tumors.
Rising,  after  sitting,  increases  bruised  pain  in  back  and  limbs.
Bending  backwards  or  forwards  increases  suffocation  in  ascites.

■  Obliged  to  bend  forward  in  contractive  pain  in  hypochondria.

d  Ovaritis.
Bending  head  backwards  relieves  headaches.
Bores  head  back  into  pillow  in  hydrocephalus.
Must  hold  head  and  eyes  down  in  chronic  headaches.
Ascending  increases  oppressed  breathing  in  ascites.
Raising  the  arms  increases  tightness  in  ovarian  region.
Moves  right  arm  now  and  then  in  tubercular  meningitis.
On  removing  boots,  feet  feel  swollen  and  stiff.
Lying : vertigo, extreme ; nausea in hydrocephalus ; pain

violent  in  belly  ;  breathing  worse  ;  cough  worse.
Lying  on  back  :  puffed,  flushed  face,  difficult  breathing.
Lying  on  left  side  :  difficult  breathing  in  ascites  ;  cough  worse.
I  I  Recumbent posture aggravates many of the sufferings,

which  are  better  when  sitting.


425  APIS.

Must  lie  down  from  weakness.

Sitting :  vertigo  worse ;  shortness  of  breath  in  ascites  better.

■  Sitting  in  bed,  head  on  hands,  elbows  on  knee,  cannot  lie

down,  cough  forces  him  up  (oil), d  Catarrh.

■  Obliged  to  remain  in  his  chair  nearly  all  night. ^Ascites.
Attempting  to  sit  down  increases  pain  in  coccygeal  region.
Inclined  to  sit  quiet  with  sickly  feeling  in  abdomen.
Standing  causes  more  pain  in  ovarian  tumor.

Relief  in  no  position  in  heart  disease.

■  The  least  movement,  even  that  of  hands,  increased  the  pains

in  lower  limbs, d  Chronic  rheumatism.
Moving  head  to  right  side,  rheumatic  stitches  in  neck  worse.
I  I  Walking  and  movement  in  general  ameliorate  many  of  the
worst  sufferings  and  attacks.

■  Walks  with  inconvenience. ^Ascites.

■  After  unusual  walking  and  climbing  upstairs, d  Thrombosis.
Walking :  soreness  of  left  ovary  worse.

■  Dyspnoea,  especially  after  exercise, d  Chest  complaint.

■  After  overexertions  dropsical  symptoms  returned.

■  After  carrying  a  child too much  during  sleepless nights.

6  Rheumatism  of  arm.

■  Very  stiff,  could  with  difficulty  stoop  and  rise  up  again  on

account of the great hardness and swelling of legs.
d  Dropsy.

■  Lies  like  a  skeleton  in  bed,  and  on  the  back  (oil), d  Spinal

disease.

■  Lies  all  the  time  on  her  back, d  Typhus.
I  I  He  must  lie  down  flat  on  the  ground.

■  Unable  to  lie  down  without  panting. ^Dropsy.

■  Inability  to  lie  in  a  horizontal  position, d  Hy'drothorax.

■  Unable  to  lie  down, d  Organic  disease  of  heart.

■  She  could  not  lie  down. 6  Dropsy  after  scarlatina.

■  Had  not  been  able  to  lie  down  for  months  for  fear  of  suffo-

cating, d  Anasarca.
36  Nerves. ■Nervous  irritability  ; restless, agitated. 6  Hydro-
cephalus, d  Diphtheria, d  Scarlatina.
I  I  Irritability  and  uneasiness.
Nervous^  excitability. ^  Apyrexia  in^intermittent.

■  Hysteria.
Nervous  erethism.

Nervous  restlessness  at  night,  cannot  remain  in  one  place.
Restless,  with  cutaneous  diseases.

■  Great  restlessness  and  uneasiness, d  Scarlatina.

■  Great  uneasiness  and  yawning. ^Intermittent.

■  Trembling and  jerking of  the limbs. /?  Hydrocephalus.

d  Typhus.
I  I  Trembling,  with  lassitude.
I  I  Weakness,  with  trembling.


APIS.  426

A  single  involuntary  jerk  frequently  repeated.

I  I  Sudden  jerks  through  the  joints  and  other  parts.

■  One-half  of  body  twitching,  the other  lame. ^Tubercular
meningitis, d  Hydrocephalus.

I  Sudden convulsions,  followed by  general  fever. ^Menin-
gitis infantum.

I  Convulsions, d  Hydrocephalus, d  Scarlatina, d  Tubercular
meningitis.

Eclampsia,  with  inflammatory  affection  of  brain.

I  Hysteric  convulsions.

I  I  Faint,  pale  and  cold,  with  vomiting  and  diarrhoea.

I  Faint,  uneasy,  restless,  yawning. ^Uterine  hemorrhage.

Sudden  weakness,  compelling  him  to  lie  down ;  he  loses  all
recollection.

Frequent  loss  of  all  strength,  with  a  trembling  sensation.
I  I  Very  weak,  must  lie  down.

I  Great  weakness  of  all  the  limbs, d  Trichinosa.

I  So  Aveak  that  she  could  only  with  difficulty  stand  on  her  feet.
d  Ovarian  dropsy.

■  Greatest  weakness  on  sliding  down  in  bed. d  Typhus.
I  Weak  and  pale. ^Scarlatina. ^Ascites.

i  I  Amazing  weariness.

Tired,  as  if  bruised  in  every  limb.

"Weariness,  with debility  in  the Spring,  after  the  least  effort,

with  paroxysm  of  vertigo,  paleness  and  chilliness.
Great  debility,  as  if  he  had  worked  hard ;  he  is  obliged  to  lie

down.

■  Great  debility  from  the  beginning, d  Diphtheria.

■  Great debility. ^Chronic  dysentery. ^ Intermittent,  apy-

rexia. d  Ascites.
General  feeling  of  lassitude  and  depression.
Lassitude ; indisposition to mental or physical exertion.

6  Bilious  diarrhoea.

■  Languid,  listless,  unaccountable  feeling. ^Diarrhoea.
I  I  General  feeling  of  lassitude,  with  trembling.

■  Greatest  lassitude  and  languor. ^Incipient  hydrocephalus.

■  Great  prostration. ^Peritonitis. ^  Eruptive  diseases.
Peculiar  prostration,  as  from  within.

Great  prostration  for  several  days.

General  prostration,  particularly  in  cold  weather.

Sudden  prostration,  with  coldnes«.

■  Tendency  to  chilliness,  and  a  quite  peculiar  prostration  of  the

vital  force  of  nerve  centres, d  Chest  complaints.

■  Prostration  and  lassitude. ^Dropsy.

Great  exhaustion,  after  all  symptoms  pass  away.

■  Fell  down  and  declared  he  was  dying. 6  After  stings.

■  Anticipation  of  sudden  death. ^Peritonitis.
Paralysis  generally  one-sided,  often  painful.


427  APIS.

After  excessive  grief  the  whole  right  side  paralyzed.
I  White  puffy  swelling  of  paralyzed  arm  and  hand.
I  Whole  nervous  system  under  a  paralyzing  influence, d  Scar-
latina-
Sudden,  right-sided  paralysis.

■  Partial  paralysis  of  right  side,  with  numbness. ^Cancer  of

breast.

■  Left  side motionless; now  and  then moves  the  right arm

and  leg. d  Tubercular  meningitis, d  Hydrocephalus.
^^  Sleep. I  I  Yawning.

I  Yawning  and  great  uneasiness. 6  Uterine  hemorrhage.
I  I  Yawning  and  great  desire  to  sleep.

■  Sleepiness  more  after  meals.

Great  inclination  to  sleep ;  still  he  walks  a  tenth  of  a  German

mile.
Ilnclined to  sleep. ^  Acute  Bright's  disease. ^Incipient

hydrocephalus, d  Keratitis, d  Intermittent,  etc.
I  ■  Great  inclination  to  sleep,  but  inability  to  do  so  from  great

nervous  restlessness.
I  In  daytime  always  sleepy^  in  a  dull,  stupid  state;  at  night

talking  in  her  sleep,  which was  full  of  dreams  ;  towards

morning  sleep  so  profound  that  she  had  to  be  shaken  to

awake  her. d  Sopor.

■  Great  desire  to  sleep,  he  felt  extremely  drowsy.
I  Very  sleepy  early  in  evening.

Sleepiness,  prostration  and  vomiting  of  bile.

I  Continuous  deep  sleep, d  Hot  stage  of  intermittent  fever.

Somnolence.

Sopor,  with  eruptive  diseases.

I  Stupor;  when  shaken,  looking  about  strangely. ^Typhus.

■  Lies  flat  down  in  a  stupor  ;  even  shaking  does  not  bring  him

to  consciousness, d  Typhus.
Sleepless,  mostly  latter  part  of  night.
I  Restless  sleep ;  child  restless,  fretful,  sleepless,  hot. d  Abscess

after  vaccination.
I  Cough  prevents  sleep. ^Typhus.

■  Restless  nights. ^Hydrocephalus. ^  Bilious  diarrhoea.

■  Restless,  sleepless. ^Erysipelas. ^  Ovarian  tumor.

I  I  Tension  in  face,  shooting  in  skin,  burning  pcin  under  left

ribs,  or  other  ailments  prevent  sleep.
I  I  Frequent  waking.

■  Disturbed  sleep. ^Scarlatina.

■  Wakefulness. ^Hydrocephalus. ^Intermittent.
Sleeplessness,  with  eruptive  diseases.

No  sleep  for  days.

Restless  sleep  and  incessant  dreaming.

Night  sleep  full  of  dreams  ;  mostly  of  traveling.

I  I  Sleep  restless,  frequent  waking,  incoherent  dreaming.


APIS.  '  428

Anxious  dreams.

Sleep disturbed by  oppressed respiration and disagreeable
dreams.

■  Disturbed  sleep  at  night;  dreams, d  Gastro- enteritis.
Dreams  of  journeying;  of  flying  ;  walking  on  a  hot  floor  ;  of

assembled  people ;  full  of  care  and  trouble.
Sleep  disturbed  by  oppression  of  breathing ; by  incoherent

muttering.
E  Sleep  disturbed  at  night  by  muttering  and  dreams. 6  Grastro-

enteritis.

■  Disturbed sleep, with muttering and incoherent talking.

^Bronchitis.

I  Nights  restless,  without  sleep,  constantly  delirious. 6  Typhus.

I  At  night  talking  in  sleep,  dreamy  state. ^Incipient  hydro-
cephalus.

I  I  Starting  out  of  sleep.

■  Anxious  starting  in  sleep. ^  With  cough.

■  Suddenly  starts  from  sleep  with  great  anxiety  and  agitation..

■  All  night  delirious,  furibund. d  Typhus.

Trembling,  convulsive  starting  during  sleep,  as  if  in  aff"right.
Frequent  waking  at  night  with  violent  screams.

■  Awakens  from  sleep  with  a  shrill  shriek. ^Meningitis  in-

fantum.

■  ■Screaming  in  sleep;  "  cri  encephalique."

■  Sopor  while  lying  in  bed  interrupted  by  sudden  cries. ^Me-

ningitis infantum.

■  The  child  is  restless,  screams  out  in  sleep. 6  Constipation  of

sucklings.

■  Agitation  the  latter  part  of  night. ^Incipient  hydrocephalus.
Short  sleep.

I  I  Long  morning  sleep.

■  Sleep  in  morning  profound,  cannot  be  waked  without  being

taken  out  of  bed,  shaken  and  forced  about  for  a  time ;  girl,
set.  8. 6  Incipient  hydrocephalus.  '

I  1  Wakes  from  sleep  in  the  morning  weary  and  unrefreshed.
^^  Time. Night :  nursing  child  refuses  milk,  not  so  in  daytime ;
squinting,  trembling  of  eyeball ;  stitches  in  and  around  eye ;
difiicult  breathing  in laryngitis ; cough ; strangling ; feet
swollen  and  stifi";  sleepless  in  erysipelas.

I  I  Nocturnal  suflferings,  besides  those  dependent  on  sleep  are
most  in  eye  and  chest.

Latter  part  of  night :  sleepless.

Towards  morning :  increase  of  weariness,  rigor,  headache,  mu-
cus in  mouth,  bellyache,  urging  to  stool  and  heartburn.

1  Always  worse  towards  morning, d  Dropsy.

5  A.M. :  heat  and  fever  followed  by  shaking  chill.

Morning :  aching  at  umbilicus  ;  diarrhoea  worse ;  hoarseness  ;
sleeps  till  late.


429  ,  APIS.

I  In the morning less disturbed, weakened consciousness.

d  Typhus.
Day  :  stupid  state  in  tubercular  meningitis  ;  vomiting.
Day  and  night :  must  urinate  every  half  hour.
3 — 4  P.M. :  chill.
4  P.  M. :  sudden  coryza.

II  Afternoon:  fever,  intermittent.

Evening :  tip  of  nose  cold,  with  chilliness ;  pain  in  coccygeal

region  worse ;  chill  worse.
I  I  Evening;  suffering and vertigo, headache, pain  in eyes,

toothache,  bellyache ;  hoarseness,  but  most  cough,  shivering

and  heat.
Before  midnight :  cough  awakens.
I  Every  evening  erysipelas  in  the  face.

■  Before  going  to bed  in the evening  a  hard shivering  fit.

d  Chronic  rheumatism.
^^  Temperature  and  Weather. Heat  of  stove  increases  chill.

Warm  room :  <  headaches ;  breathing  in  laryngitis  and
ascites  <  ;  chill  <.

I  I  Heated  room  intolerable.

Warmth  of  bed  <  rash  with  itching;  breathing  in  laryngitis.

In-doors,  sweat  is  increased.

Open  air,  out-of-doors,  relieves  headache;  difiicult  respiration  ;
rash  with  itching.

Inclination  for  open  air.

I  I  Shunning  the  cold  air.

Uncovering  relieves  heat.

Cold  water  relieves  eyelids  (applied  locally).

Worse  getting  wet  through,  but  better  from  washing  or  moist-
ening the  part  in  cold  water.

I  I  Cold  water  relieves  the  pains,  the  swelling  and  the  burning.

Cold  weather  increases  asthma ;  cough ;  pain  in  chest ;  rash
with  itching.

Changing  weather  increases  rash  with  itching.

Spring  :  spells  of  vertigo ;  prostration.
*"  Fever. Disposed  to  chilliness.

■  Chilliness, d  Acute  Bright's  disease.
Felt  very  cold,  but  was  not  cold  to  touch.
Chill  on  the  suffering  part.

Chill  increased  by  motion.

I  Chill,  3 — 4  P.M.,  <  in  warm  room  or  near  stove  ;  begins  in
front  of  the  chest ;  thirst  during  chill,  burning  and  oppres-
sion of  the  chest  as  if  he  would  smother, d  Intermittent.

Chill,  mostly  towards  evening,  3 — 4  p.m.

Chill  increased  in  the  warm  room.

■  Evening  before  going  to  bed  a  hard  shivering  fit.  ^Rheuma-

tism.
Always  thirst  during  the  chill.


APIS.  430

Chilliness  from  the  slightest  motion,  with  heat  of  face  and
hands ;  toward  evening.

I  I  Shivering  on  the  slightest  movement  when  sitting  in  the  eve-
ning, with  headache,  heat  of  face,  hot  hands.

Chilly  every  p.m.  at  3  o'clock;  she  shudders,  <  in  warmth;
the  chills  run  down  the  back  ;  hands  feel  as  if  dead ;  fever-
ishly hot  after  about  an  hour,  with  a  hoarse  cough ;  heat  of
the  cheeks  and  hands,  without  thirst ;  ceases  gradually  but
she  feels  heavy  and  prostrate.

■  Shivering  followed  by  heat. ^Tonsillitis.

Slight  rigors  followed  by  flushes  of  heat  over  entire  body,  with
headache,  weariness  in  back  and  legs.

Severe  chill,  evening,  following  an  operation  lasting  three  hours ;
followed  by  high  fever  with  great  vascular  excitement ;  the
wound  erysipelatous, d  Erysipelas  traumatica.

1 A  shaking  chill  followed  by  great  heat,  during  which  the  whole
lower  limb  swelled  more  and  more,  and  the  pains  in  it  be-
came insupportable, d  Thrombosis.

Pungent  heat  of  body  while  feet  and  hands  are  cold.

■  Hot  head,  cold  feet. ^Ophthalmia.

I  I  After  heat,  rigor  with  an  eruption  of  nettle-rash.

■  With  general  heat,  feeling  of  chilliness  in  feet  and  legs  up  to

the  knee, d  Typhus.
Increasing  heat  and  fever  for 36  hours,  followed  by  severe
shaking  chill,  5  a.m.

■  Skin  burning  hot  all over,  or  gradually  grows  cool  in  some

places,  hot  in  others.
Heat  in  some  parts,  coldness  in  others.

■  Febrile  excitement, d  Heart  disease.
Flushes  of  heat  over  the  whole  surface  of  body.

■  Great  fever  heat. ^Hydrocephalus.

■  High  fever. ^Phlegmasia,

■  Fever  rises  continually, d  Scarlatina.

■  Burning  heat  of  skin  with  a  stinging  sensation, d  Ovarian

dropsy.

■  Dry  burning  skin. ^Typhus.

■  Little  febrile  excitement  or  other  constitutional  symptoms,

only  in  a  few  instances  considerable, d  Erysipelas.
Burning  heat  all  over.

■  Dry  skin,  no  sweat ^  Mania.

Dry  heat  towards  the  evening,  with  sleepiness.

■  Feverish  heat  during  the  night,  other  times  pale. 6  Chronic

diarrhoea.

■  Heat  most  about  chest,  belly  and  hands. ^Intermittent.

■  Heat  most  in  chest,  pit  of  stomach,  bowels,  female  organs  and

hands,  with  muttering  and  unconsciousness, d  Intermittent.
I  I  Hot  feeling  all  over  the  body,  especially  on  chest  and  in  re-
gion o£  stomach.


431  APIS.

■  During  heat,  delirium,  muttering,  unconsciousness ;  diarrhoea ;

short-breathed ;  drowsy  or  sleepless.

11  During  hot  stage  more  or  less  violent  headache,  generally  a
continuous  deep  sleep. 6  Intermittent.

1  I  Got  hot  all  over,  red  in  face  as  if  he  had  scarlet  fever,  with
an  eruption  like  measles  (after  overdoses).  6  Chronic  diar-
rhoea.

iMost  violent  fever  with  a  puffed,  darkened  face,  eyes  shooting,
shining,  with  a  wild,  obstinate  expression  and  unbearable
headache, d  Typhus.

Thirst  wanting  during  sweat ;  may  or  may  not  be  present  dur-
ing heat.

Fever  without  thirst.

Heat,  with  (or  without)  thirst  and  inclination  to  uncover.

I  Fever  constantly  rising;  dry  hot  skin. ^Scarlatina.

1  Violent  fever  with  dry  skin,  full  pulse. ^Bronchitis.

I  High  fever,  full  pulse, d  Incipient  hydrocephalus.

Fever  with  rapid,  hard  pulse ;  exacerbation  during  evening.

iHeat,  inclined  to  uncover,  which  is  agreeable;  rapid,  hard
pulse ;  after  the  fever  spell,  sleep.

Heavy  and  prostrate  in  fever.

I  Whole  surface  glowing,  hot,  skin  dry,  brittle, d  Typhus.

iHeat,  redness  and  extreme  soreness. ^Erysipelas.

I  iHeat  with  redness  of  skin ;  heat  in  the  evening  and  night,
with  excitement,  headache,  accompanying  diarrhoeas,  swell-
ings, coughs.

Dry  hot  skin,  or  alternate  dry  and  moist  skin.

I  Skin  hot,  moist. ^Diphtheria. ^  Catarrh  of  the  chest.

■  High  fever,  moist  skin. ^Diphtheria.

I  I  Sweat  alternating  with  dryness  of  skin.

■  Alternate  moisture  and  dryness  of  skin. ^Intermittent.

■  Dryness  of  skin,  very  little  sweat. ^Intermittent.

■  ■  Sweating  stage  either  absent  or  of  a  very  light  grade, d  In-

termittent.

■  Sweats  easily.

■  Cold  sweat, d  Dropsy  after  scarlatina.

■  General  warm  sweat  during  recovery,  from  the  effects  of  an

indescribably  bad  odor,  causing  the  physician  a  dull  ache  in
forehead,  lasting  several  hours,  until  Apis^  removed  it.
d  Typhus.

■  Partial  clammy  sweats. ^Typhus.
Profuse  sweat  relieves  rheumatism.

Thirst  wanting  during  sweat ;  may  or  may  not  be  present  dur-
ing heat ;  always  thirst  during  chill.

■  Sweat  after  trembling  and  fainting,  then  nettle-rash.
Better  after  sweating ;  sweat  increased  in  doors.

■  Headache  and  sleeplessness  ;  skin  warm  ;  profuse  sweat  on  the

fourth  day  and  relief, d  Rheumatism.


APIS.  432

I  Chills  and  fever  in  seasons  wlien  the  flies  sting  with  unusual
vigor.

I  Low,  muttering,  delirium; sometimes  a  happy  expression;

apathy ;  stupor ;  cannot  put  the  tongue  out ;  tongue  trem-
bles, catches  in  the  teeth,  or  is  cracked,  sore  and  covered
with  blisters ;  abdomen  sore,  bloated,  stool  frequent,  painful,
foul,  bloody,  often  involuntary, d  Typhus.

II  Typhoid  forms  of  fever,  especially  enteric,  cerebral,  exanthe-
matic  forms  ;  febris  nervosa  putrida.

Typhoid  character  of  the  fever  in  scarlatina.

1 1  Intermittent.  3d  centesimal.  A  very  important  anti-pyretic
(in  one  of  the  most  malarial  countries)  given  according  to
Wolf  in  the  3d  centesimal,  but  for  two  years  the  one  hun-
dredth centesimal  potency ;  they  have  seen  results,  such  as
they  had  not  for  many  years  witnessed  from  any  other  homoe-
opathic remedy  against  intermittent  fever — at  least  as  re-
gards the  rapidity  of  the  result. (Drs.  Stern  and  Miskolez.)

I  Tertian  intermittent.

■  I  Since  a  year,  65  intermittent  cases  of  various  age  and  sex  ;

19  among these had been  suppressed by  large doses  of

quinine,  etc. No  relapse  ever  occurred.
lApyrexia:  pain  under  short  ribs,  left  side; feet  swollen;

urine  scanty;  limbs  and  joints  sore;  restless;  urticaria.
^^  Attacks. Periodically : sick  headache ; erysipelas ; pains  in

ovary  ;  pains  in  diphtheria.
Suddenly :  hydrocephalus  after  erysipelatous  eruptions ; co-

ryza ;  pain  along  ureters.
I  Sharp  sudden  paroxysms  of  pain  in  belly. ^Peritonitis.
Gradually  :  cold  and  hot  places  on  skin.
Increasing  more  and  more :  stinging,  burning  in  ovary.
Increasing  for  36  hours :  heat  and  fever.
Every  half  hour :  must  urinate.
Lasts  a  day  or  two :  catamenia,  with  ovarian  tumor.
Alternately  :  dry  and  moist  skin.
B Pains  suddenly  migrate  from  one  part  and  extend  to  another.

■  Distress  in  paroxysms  lasting  half  an  hour  or  more,  generally

taking  place  in  the  morning,  d  Organic  disease  of  heart.
*^  Locality  and  Direction.  Right  side  :  headache ;  pain  in  eye-
ball ;  shooting  over  and  down  into  eye-ball ;  eye  closed  in
paralysis;  sensation  in  ribs  as  if  "gone  to  sleep;"  hard
swelling  in  groin ;  swelled  testicle ;  ovarian  tumor ;  rheu-
matic stitches  in  neck  ;  arm  erysipelatous  ;  paralysis.
sThe  right  eye  from  the  beginning  more  affected  (oil), d  Pan-

nus.
Left  side : neuralgia in head ; pain  in  eye-ball ; swelling
around  eye ; itching  in  inner  angle  of  eye ; malar  bone ;
upper  molar  teeth ;  sore  throat ;  pain  in  hypochondrium ;
swelling  about  kidney ; pain  in  pectoral  region,  with  en-


433  APIS.

largement  of  right  ovary ;  aching  stitches  in  chest ;  tension

in  shoulder ;  bruised  sensation  in  dorsal  region  ;  swelling  of

leg;  hip-joint  inflamed;  knee  in  synovitis  ;  side  motionless  ;

pain  under  short  ribs.
I  The  left  eye  being  the  last  attacked, improved  first  (oil).

d  Pannus.
Both  sides  :  burning  under  short  ribs  ;  weakness  along  spine  ;

tetter  on  legs ;  one-half  twitching,  the  other  half  lame.
Right  to  left :  erysipelas  of  face  ;  erysipelas  across  back  ;  rheu-
matism in  shoulders.
Descending :  pains  in  ovary ;  drawing  through  thighs  to  toes  ;

chill  down  back.
Descending  then  ascending :  pains  in  male  sexual  organs.
Descending  and  sideways :  sensation  as  of  cords  pulling  from

supra-sternal  fossa.
Ascending :  pains  in  left  hypochondrium.
Diagonally :  sudden  acute  pain  from  below  heart  to  right  chest.
*^  Sensations. Sensation  as  if  head  were  too  large.
As  of  a  small  foreign  body  in  eye.
Running  as  of  an  insect  over  cheek.
Wooden  feeling  in  tongue.
As  of  a  fish-bone  in  throat.
As  if  something  tight  would  break  in  abdomen  when  making

effort  at  stool. See  19.
As  if  bowels  were  squeezed  to  pieces. See  20.
As  of  cords  pulling  from  supra-sternal  fossa  downwards  and

sideways.
As  if  something  was  breaking  away  about  heart.
Nails  feel  loose.
Cutting :  burning  in  eyes ; in  abdomen ; along  ureters ;  in

ovaries.
Lancinating :  through  eyes  ;  in  ovaries.
Darting : through  eyes.
Thrusting  pains :  in  region  of  uterus.
Plunging  stabbing :  in  uterus.
Stabbing :  in  head.
Stitches  :  in  temples  ;  in  eyes  ;  in  throat ;  through  lungs  and

sides  of  chest ;  in  urethra ;  through  hips ;  rheumatic  stitches

in  r.  side  of  neck ;  in  lower  limbs.
Sticking  pain :  in  r.  side  of  chest ;  in  r.  deltoid  muscle ;  in  r.

forearm.
Pricking :  in  scalp  ;  in  eyes  ;  in  face  ;  in  lips  ;  in  tongue ;  in

fauces  ;  in  throat ;  in  stomach  ;  in  arms  and  hands.
Stinging:  in  forehead;  in  1.  temple;  in  eyes;  in  lids;  erup-
tion on  nose ;  in  ears  ;  in  face  ;  in  1.  malar  bone  ;  in  teeth  ;

in  tongue ;  in  tonsils ;  in  throat ;  in  abdomen  ;  in  rectum  ;

in  anus ; in  hemorrhoids ; in  testicles ; in  urethra ; in

28


APIS.  434

chancre;  in  ovaries;  in  uterus;  in  mammae;  in  chest;  in
panaritium.

Shooting :  in  temples ;  in  scalp ;  in  eyes ;  over  r.  eye  into
ball ;  of  ears ;  in  face ;  in  tongue ;  from  throat  to  ears ;  in
ovaries;  in  hands ;  from  Poupart's  ligament  down  the  leg;
in  lower  limbs  ;  in  knee ;  in  1.  outer  ankle.

Boring :  in  eyes ;  from  thighs  to  ankles ;  over  1.  iliac  crest ;
from  Poupart's  ligament  down  the  leg.

Piercing  pain  :  in  eyes  ;  in  lids  ;  in  face.

Griping :  in  bowels.

Burning :  in  head ;  in  scalp ;  in  back  of  head  and  neck  ;  in
eyes  ;  in  lids  ;  of  ears  ;  of  lips  ;  in  nostrils  ;  eruption  on
nose ;  of  face ;  cheeks  ;  in  tongue ;  in  throat ;  in  epigas-
trium ;  under  ribs ;  in  abdomen  ;  in  anus  and  rectum  ;  in
testicles;  in  urethra;  in  chancre ;  in  ovaries ;  in  mammae;
in  larynx  ;  in  chest ;  on  the  back ;  in  coccygeal  region ;  in
hands  ;  in  panaritium  ;  in  lower  limbs  ;  in  knee ;  of  feet
and  toes  ;  in  mucous  membranes  ;  in  skin.

Scalded  feeling:  on  tongue;  in  mouth  and  throat;  in  urethra.

Smarting  :  in  eyeballs  ;  in  tonsils  ;  in  throat ;  at  anus ;  in
arms  and  hands.

Undefined  pain:  from  gums  into  head;  in  head  and  eyeballs;
through  orbits ;  around  eyes ;  in  forehead ;  in  temples ;  in
occiput ;  in  lips,  to  gums  and  head ;  in  stomach  and  abdo-
men ;  in  1.  hypochonder  to  chest ;  in  kidneys  ;  along  ureters ;
in  bladder;  in  ovaries;  in  spleen  during  catamenia;  in
chest  and  head  from  cough;  just  below  heart;  under  scap-
ulas; in  sacrum;  in  1.  knee;  in  feet;  in  limbs,  with  fever.

Soreness  :  of  canthi ;  of  nose ;  in  teeth  ;  in  throat  and  fauces ;
in  pit  of  stomach ;  under  ribs ;  in  abdomen ;  in  ovarian
region  ;  in  supra-sternal  fossa  and  above  clavicles  ;  of  chest
with  cough ;  under  upper  part  of  sternum ;  about  1.  hip-
joint.

Bruised  feeling:  under  ribs;  in  intestines;  in  lower  part  of
back ;  in  limbs.

Drawing  :  from  neck  over  1.  half  of  head ;  in  scalp  ;  in  ovaries ;
in  pharynx ;  in  arms,  from  shoulders  to  fingers ;  through
thighs  to  toes.

Tensive  pain  :  over  and  in  eyes ;  in  scalp ;  from  1.  shoulder  to
back  of  neck ;  in  1.  shoulder.

Stretching  pain  :  in  nape  of  neck  to  shoulder  and  head.

Tearing  pain  :  in  eyes.

Pressing :  in  head ;  in  forehead  and  temples ;  in  occiput ;  in
eyes ;  in  lower  part  of  eyeball ;  in  sinciput ;  in  fauces  and
throat;  in  pit  of  stomach;  in  stomach;  in  abdomen;  in
hypogastrium,  with  bearing  down  ;  at  os  uteri ;  in  chest ;  in
coccygeal  region  ;  upon  chest.

Aching :  through  the  head ;  in  forehead ;  in  eyes ;  —  press-


435  APIS.

ure  in  1.  eyeball ;  in  stomach ; at  umbilicus ;  in  hypogas-

trium  ;  in  loins  ;  in  1.  breast ; dull  aching  in  chest.
Bearing  down  :  in  uterus  ;  in  bladder ;  in  small  of  back.
Scraping :  in  larynx  and  trachea.
Rawness :  in  throat ;  in  anus.
Throbbing :  in  forehead ; in  head ; in  eyes ; in  molars ;  in

tonsils ; in  throat ; over  1.  iliac  crest ; in  rectum ; from

finger  to  arm,  32  ;  in  panaritium.
Twitching :  in  molars.

Jerking  :  headache  ;  of  eyelids ;  in  molars.
Jumping  pain  :  in  1.  upper  molars.
Neuralgic  pain :  in  1.  temple ;  in  lips ;  in  gums ;  in  tongue ;

in  stomach  ;  in  groins.
Constriction  :  in  throat ;  in  thorax  ;  of  urethra.
Contractive  feeling :  in  hypochondria ;  in  abdomen.
Roughness  :  of  lips  ;  in  pharynx.
Uneasiness  :  in  spermatic  cords.
Quivering:  of  1.  eyeball.
Twitching :  of  eyeballs  ;  of  lids.

Trembling :  of  eyeball ;  in  1.  hip-joint ;  of  hands  and  feet.
Fullness :  in  head ; in  forehead ; in  vertex  ; in  occiput ;  in

eyes ;  in  anus  ;  in  thorax  ;  in  face  ;  in  abdomen.
Heaviness :  over  eyes ; in  vertex ; in  occiput ; of  eyes  and

lids  ;  in  abdomen  ;  in  ovarian  region  ;  in  uterine  region  ;  in

1.  leg,  like  lead  ;  in  feet.
Weight :  in  forepart  of  head ; in  ovarian  region ; in  uterine

region.
Tension  :  about  ears  ;  in  lips  ;  over  hypochondria.
Tightness  :  in  ovarian  region.
Stiff  feeling :  in  eyelids ;  in  face,  with  puffiness ;  in  lips ;  in

neck  and  back  ;  between  shoulders  ;  in  sacrum  ;  in  feet ;  in

muscles.
Lame  feeling :  in  scapulae ;  paralyzed  feeling  in  r.  forearm.
Formication :  in  face.
Tingling  :  in  brain  ;  in  arms.

"  Gone  to  sleep"  feeling :  in  brain  ;  in  1.  arm;  under  right  ribs.
Numbness  :  in  gums  ;  in  r.  side  of  abdomen  ;  in  side  and  limb,

see  23 ;  in  arms ;  of  fingers ;  in  r.  iliac  fossa,  extending  up

and  down  ;  of  1.  leg  ;  of  lower  limbs.
Electric  shock  :  in  rectum.
Tickling :  in  throat-pit.
Itching :  in  scalp ;  in  swellings  on  head  and  neck  ;  in  eyes ;

in  lids;  of  nose;  eruption  on  nose ;  in  throat;  in  anus ;  of

scrotum  ;  of  hanbs ;  of  vesicles  between  fingers ; of  tetter

on  legs.
Weakness:  in  larynx  ;  in  back  ;  in  hip-joint;  of  all  the  limbs;

must  lie  down.
Heat:  in  head;  in  face;  in  throat;  in  chest;  on  the  back.


APIS.  436

Coldness :  tip  of  nose  ;  of  face  ;  in  chest ;  in  middle  of  sternum ;
of  hands ;  of  the  legs  and  feet.
^*  Tissues. Affections  of  circulatory  apparatus  and  fluid,  dropsies,
phlebitis,  varicose  veins,  ecchymosed spots,  gangrene,  un-
healthy suppuration.

I  Hemorrhages  dark;  blood  incoagulable  or  coagulates  slowly.

Blood  taken  from  the  veins  is  black,  viscous,  does  not  coagu-
late.

iPhlebitis.

I  Varicose  veins;  burning,  stinging.

iHyperaemic  condition  of  liver,  lungs  and  kidneys,  d  Organic
disease  of  heart.

lEcchymosed  spots. ^Fevers.

I  Skin  dry,  with  a  general  anaemic  appearance.

I A  thick,  very  sensitive  string  from  the  middle  of  bend  of
thighs  all  along  the  inner  side  of  thighs, d  Thrombosis.

Bodies  of  the  poisoned  decompose  rapidly.

I  Blood-poisoning  by  the  virus  of  scarlatina.
Glands  enlarged,  inflamed.

Painful  swelling  of  glands.

iLympathic  vessels  affected,  felt  like  hard  cords  under  the  skin
and  were  very  painful. 6  After  hemorrhage  from  uterus.

I I  Serous  membranes  inflamed ;  effusions  in  serous  membranes  ;
synovitis.

Acts  specifically  upon  the  serous  membranes.

Serous  tissues  disposed  to  effusions.

Serous  membranes  inflamed,  painful,  hot,  burning,  sore  ;  serous
effusions.

Serous  membranes,  muscular  tissues,  especially  in  the  region
of  the  diaphragm,  a  peculiar  sensation  of  heat  and  like  after
a  violent  run  when  sitting  down  "  as  if  his  vitals  were  melt-
ing."

1  Tumors.

■  Indurations;  scirrhus,  or  open  cancers,  with  stinging,  burn-

ing pains.

I  Unhealthy  suppuration  of  ligatures. ^Traumatic  erysipelas.
Suppuration  rare ; parenchyma  seldom  involved ; sometimes

dark,  thick,  fetid  pus  from  ulcers.

■  Centre  of  erysipelas  burst  discharging  a  great  deal  of  pus.

6  Abscess  after  vaccination.
Gangrene.

■  Mortified  cellular  tissue  in  the  opening  of  the  vaccinal  scab,

easily  extracted  at each daily  dressing, d  Abscess  after
vaccination.
Mucous  membranes  inflamed  and  catarrhal.

I I  Irritation  of  mucous  membranes.

Mucous  membranes  red,  with  burning,  fullness,  dryness ;  ery-
sipelas (as  in  throat,  etc.).


^^'^  APIS.

I  Periosteum  inflamed  ;  red  about  the  joints, d  Synovitis.
I  Pains  felt  mostly  in  the  joints  and  ligamentous  tissue  or  in

the  attachment  of  muscles.
Hydrops  articuli.
Muscles  stiflF,  tender  on  pressure,  somewhat  swollen;  rigid-

rheumatic  inflammation.  '

■  Rheumatism  and  gout.

I  Gout; llgouty  nodes.
Skin  and  muscles  rigid.

I I  Redness  and  swelling,  with  stinging  and  burning  pain  in  the
eyes,  eyelids,  ears,  face,  lips,  tongue,  throat,  anus,  testicles.

I  Redness  of  dermoid  tissue,  with  pains  of  a  burning  or  sting-
ing character.  °

I  I  Burning  and  shooting  in  flat  swellings,  with  redness  or
whiteness,  or  both,

(Edematous  and  erysipelatous  swellings.

■  Sharp pain and an erysipelatous swelling  very  hard and

white  in  the  middle.
lDiff"use  inflammation  of  the  cellular  tissues,  ending  in  their

destruction.
Furuncular  diathesis.

■  Carbuncles,

■  Rapid  considerable  swelling,

■  Swelling  over  the  entire  side,  closing  the  right  eye, ^Pa-

ralysis.
Swelling  of  diseased  parts.

■  Hands,  arms  and  face  swollen. 0  Dropsy.

I  I  Watery  swelling  in  the  body,  in  limbs,  hands  and  feet.

■  Swollen  throughout  the  body,  from  face  to  feet;  urine  highly

charged  with  albumen, d  Scarlatina,  "

■  Swelling  of  the  whole  body,

■  iCEdematous  swellings.

■  (Edema  of  lips  and  upper  eyelids,

(Edema  of  the  face  or  larynx,  with  bloody  urine,  without  in-
creased thirst,

■  (Edematous  swelling  of  face  and  hands, d  Sequelae  of  scarla-

tina.

■  (Edema  of  diff"erent  parts  of  the  body, 6  Prolapsus  uteri.

■  ■(Edematous  swelling  of  skin.

■  (Edematous  form  of  erysipelas,

■  General  oedema. /?  Acute  Bright's  disease.

■  ■(Edema,  or  dropsy  without  thirst.

■  Anasarca:  swelled  from  crown  of  head  to  soles  of  feet;  sev-

eral fissures  on  legs.

■  Whole  body  anasarcous, ^  After  scarlatina,

■  Renal  anasarca  following  scarlatina;  albumen  in  urine;  waxy

appearance  of  skin. ^  Ovarian  dropsy,

■  General  anasarca, ^  Amenorrhoea, ^Ascites.


APIS.  438

Dropsical  effusions.

I  Dropsical  swelling  of  chest,  abdomen,  legs  and  feet,  unable  to

lie  down  without  panting, d  Ascites.

I I  Dropsical  affections,  especially  oedema  and  ascites,  with  albu-
minuria.

I  Dropsical  swelling  of  chest,  abdomen,  feet  and  legs. ^  After

influenza.

I I  Dropsy  with  oedematous  lips  and  upper  eyelids  ;  albuminous,
white,  scanty  urine ;  generally  no  thirst ;  skin  pale,  trans-
parent, waxy.

■  General  dropsy,  skin  burst  on  legs  in  several  places,  could  not

lie  down,  could  hardly  breathe.

■  Dropsical  symptoms  during  desquamation, d  Scarlatina.

■  ■Dropsy  without  thirst.

■  Dropsy  with  very  scanty  urine;  sleepless  and  thirstless.

■  Acute  febrile  dropsy  following  a  chill.

■  Dropsy  after  scarlet  fever ;  scanty  urine,  waxy  paleness  of  feet

and  legs,  which  are  much  swollen.

■  ■Hydrops  after  scarlatina,  even  with  ursemic  symptoms.

■  After  three  weeks  he  weighed  21  pounds  lighter. ^Dropsy.

■  Emaciation, ^  Mania. ^Ascites. ^Chronic diarrhoea.

6  Dysentery. 6  Infantile marasmus. 6  Hydrothorax.

d  Dropsy, d  Menstrual  derangement.
^^  Touch,  Passive  Motion. I  '  Pressure  relieves  headache.

Pressure  aggravates  soreness  of  eyes,  pains  in  stomach,  soreness

of  bowels,  renal  pains,  tenderness  of  stiff  muscles.
Pressure:  against  diaphragm  in  ascites  increases  difficult  breath-
ing ;  in  swelling  in  cardiac  region  increases  sensitiveness ;

makes  white  spots  appear  on  swollen  surfaces.
I  I  Excessive  sensitiven-ess  to  touch  and  to  external  pressure,

most  in  abdomen.
Touch  increases  soreness  of  erysipelas,  pains  in  stomach  and

abdomen,  soreness  of  scrotum,  sensitiveness  of  panaritium,

sensitiveness  of  skin.

■  ■The  whole  surface  of  the  body  becomes  exceedingly  sensitive

to  the  touch ;  every  hair  is  painful  when  touched.

■  ■Skin  extremely  sensitive  to  contact;  painful  to  the  slightest

touch  ;  could  not  bear  the  sheet  upon  him.

■  Children  stiffen  when  touched  or  moved, d  Inflammation  of

brain.
Very  sensitive  to  touch  or  pressure,  with  debility,  exhaustion.
Scratching  causes  itching  of  vesicles  between  the  fingers.
Pains  in  ovaries  from  sexual  intercourse.

■  Dissecting  wound  on  hand.

Wounds  and  injuries,  especially  caused  by  stabbing  instruments.

■  After  tapping,  ascites  continually  returned.

■  ■Erysipelas  after  wounds  or  operations.


439  APIS.

I  Wound  much  tumefied  with  the  blush  of  erysipelas  extending
for  two  inches  around  it. ^Erysipelas  traumaticum.

I  Sting  of  bees,  wasps,  and  perhaps  stings  of  other  insects.

I I  Punctured  and  other  wounds.

I  Heat,  redness  and  form  of  the  swellings,  as  well  as  the  pecu-

liar character  of  the  pain  with  it,  resembling  the  bee-stings.
d  Erysipelas.

■  Ophthalmia  from  unslaked  lime.
*^  Skin. Hyperassthesia  of  skin.

IB  Eruptions  sting  and  burn  like  bee-stings.

I I  Stinging;  burning;  prickling;  smarting;  or  itching  of  the
skin  ;  sensitiveness  to  the  slightest  touch.

Prickling  over  the  whole  body,  most  on  the  back,  palms  of  the
hands,  the  face,  forehead  and  under  the  eyes,  chiefly  in  cir-

■  When  the  child  screams  out  suddenly, as  if  from  stinging

pains ;  sleepless  nights ;  the  eruption  inclines  to  spread  all
over  the  child,  or  to  become  gangrenous, d  Erysipelas.

I  I  Sensation  of  burning  heat  and  stinging  in  various  portions  of
the  surface  of  the  body,  at  the  same  time.

I  I  Burning,  shooting,  irritating,  intolerable  itching.

Intense  burning  itching  all  over  his  body,  so  severe  that  he  re-
tired to  his  room,  and  rubbed  himself  vigorously  with  his
flesh  brush.

Itching  and  burning  eruption  upon  the  back,  arms  and  legs.

I  I  Eruption  itches  and  stings, d  Diphtheria.

■  Troublesome  itching  or  stinging  on  the  face,  ears,  lips,  nose,

under  the  eyes,  brows,  throat,  hands,  feet,  wrists  and  ankles.

I  I  Violent  itching,  like  needle  pricks,  recurring  after  motion,  as
if  from  gnats.

Itching,  relieved  by  scratching.

night.

I  I  Itching  pricking  in  the  skin  in  different  parts  of  the  body,
more  on  the  lower  extremities  and  continued  through  the  day.

In  evening  an  intolerable  itching  attended  with  a  burning
fiery  sensation,  commencing  in  the  arras  and  finally  spread-
ing over  the  whole  surface  of  the  body,  reaching  to  the  feet.

I  Skin  either  hot  or  cold;  has  a  bloated,  swollen  appearance.
d  Scarlatina.

I  I  Feels  burning  heat  with  actual  heat  of  the  skin,  followed  by
a  livid  purplish  hue.

I  Skin  very  hot,  red  and  irritated. ^Scarlatina.

I  Skin  harsh  and  dry. d  Dropsy  after  scarlatina.

Dryness  of  skin.

I  Skin  all  the  time  dirty  in  spite  of  frequent  washing  (oil).
d  Spinal  disease.


APIS.  440

I  Skin  of  the  whole  body  dry,  dirty,  withered;  pulse  QQ  (oil).
6  Spinal  disease.

Skin  and  muscles  rigid,

I  Pale  skin. ^  Hydrops  ovarii.

I  Waxy  paleness  of  skin. ^Prolapsus  uteri. ^Dropsies.

I  Skin  wax-colored. ^Menstrual  derangement.

I  White,  wax-like  skin. ^Infantile  marasmus.

I  Skin  unusually  white,  almost  transparent. ^Ovarian  dropsy.

Skin  pale,  waxy,  almost  transparent;  dark  blue,  almost  black.

I  Patch  of  skin  on  arm  remaining  white  amidst  the  surrounding
redness. 6  Scarlatina.

I  Skin  turning  a  dark  blue,  almost  black  ;  sphacelus.  6  Ery-
sipelas.

Skin  very  hot  and  red.

■  Eruption  over  whole  body  of  red  spots,  which  on  close  inspec-

tion revealed  numerous  small  vesicles,  which  at  times  exuded
a  moisture,  forming  thin  or  yellowish  scales  and  crusts  ;  this
eruption  was  attended  with  intolerable  stinging,  burning  and
itching,  so  severe  as  to  cause  the  patient  to  scratch  her  skin
till  it  bled ;  eruption  worse  by  slightest  breath  of  air,  but
was  equally  sensitive  to  warmth  of  room  and  bed.  6  Ovarian
tumor.

I  An  eruption  appears  upon  the  skin,  which  itches  and  stings.
6  Diphtheria.

I  I  Elevations  on  the  skin,  as  after  the  bite  of  insects,  painfully
sore,  sensitive  to  touch.

Red  spots  like  bee-stings  upon  the  skin  and  sensation  as  if
stung  by  bees,  in  the  abdomen  and  different  parts  of  the  body.

■  Red  spots  like  bee-stings, d  Uterine  hemorrhage.

Red  blotches  on  chest  and  limbs,  which  itch  violently  on  ex-
posure to  the  air  or  by  scratching  them.

iRed  spots  scatter  here  and  there  over  the  skin,  often  causing
itching  and  restlessness,  ■<  at  night. 6  Teething  children.

I  Red  points  scatter  over  the  body  here  and  there.  ^Remit-
tent fever.

■  Numerous  spots  or  little  elevations  all  over  the  body,  red  or

purplish, d  Cerebro-spinal  meningitis.
I  Intensely  deep  red  rash. 6  Scarlatina.
B  Bright  red  pimples  on  its  skin, d  Constipation  of  sucklings.

■  Covered with a dry, red, raised eruption, uncomfortably

itching, d  Prairie-itch.
I  I  Bluish-red,  painful,  hard  spots.
Hard,  purplish  spots  on  face,  forehead,  neck,  and  lower  limbs,

lasting  twelve  days,  hard  and  painful.
Eruptions,  with  painless  yellow  stools.
Eruption  general,  with  exception  of  feet.
Receding  eruptions.
I  I  Pale  blotches.


441  APIS.

I  White  miliary  eruption  on  chest  and  abdomen. 6  Typhus.

Sudamina,  miliary  eruption.

Body  covered  with  large,  white  wheals,  deep  scarlet  inter-
spaces.

Hives  ;  red  and  inflamed  patches.

Itching  and  burning  eruption  upon  the  lips,  skin,  nose,  and
under  the  eyebrows ;  spots  like  hives  upon  the  chin  and
cheeks.

Hives  and  their  sequelae,  especially  if  it  be  asthma.

I  Rash,  with  violent  itching  ; <  from  warmth  of  bed,  and  in

cold  or  changing  weather ; >  in  the  open  air.

I I  Red,  inflamed,  raised  patches,  with  burning  stinging  pains.
d  Urticaria.

1 1  Urticaria,  like  bee-stings,  or  stings  from  other  insects,  with

intolerable  itching  at  night.
Urticaria ;  isolated  elevations  painful  and  tender  to  the  touch,

assuming  a  purplish  or  livid  hue.

I  iNettlerash,  red  spots,  small  white  spots,  with  red  areolas,

itching  violently.
Urticaria,  with  heat  of  skin,  slight  fever.
Itching and appearance of blotches like nettlerash, after

scratching.

I I  Red  and  white  blotches  over  the  body,  like  nettlerash.

1  I  Eruption  like  nettlerash  over  the  whole  body,  with  burning

and  itching.
Nettlerash  over  the  whole  body,  with  lessening  of  the  previous

symptoms.
I  I  Nettlerash  after  fever.
Nettlerash  about  a  week  after  the  wheals.

■  Urticaria. ^  Apyrexia  of  intermittent,

■  Faintly  visible  spots  of  urticaria  upon  the  neck  and  forehead.

d  Incipient  hydrocephalus.

■  Spots  of  nettlerash  tender  to  touch,  with  a  purplish  livid  hue

on  the  neck  and  forehead, d  Sopor.

■  Receding  urticaria.

Nettlerash  all  over  the  body,  except  the  feet.
I  I  Swelling  of  skin,  pale  red,  as  if  pufied,  extending  gradually
further  on  the  surface.

■  Acute  subcutaneous  oedema. ^Erysipelas.
Swelling  (oedematous,  erysipelatous)  with  red  stripes.

■  ■Erysipelas:  redness,  with  bruised  sore  feeling,  frequently

only  a  pale  pink  ;  later  purplish,  threatening  gangrene ;
oedematous  swellings,  especially  under  the  eyes,  about  the
glottis,  scrotum,  etc. ;  sleepless  nights,  suddenly  screaming
out  with  shrill  shrieks.

■  ■Erysipelas  at  times  appearing  upon  the  lower  limbs  and  other

parts  of  body,  dark  purplish  and  painful  tumefaction.

■  ■Erysipelas,  with  burning,  stinging  pains.


APIS.  442

Erysipelas,  with  bruised  sore  pain  and  much  swelling.

■  Erysipelatous  redness  of  the  variola  eruption  ;  of  wounds  ;  of

ulcers  ;  after  vaccination.
I  In  from  two  to  six  days  spots  become  livid,  and  swelling,  heat
and  pain  subside,  but  new  ones  continue  to  appear. 6  Ery-
sipelas.

■  Metastasis  of  erysipelas  from  the  lower  limbs. 6  Gastralgia.

■  Erysipelatous redness and swelling,  with  stinging,  burning

pains, d  Variola.

■  Erysipelatous  inflammation,  extending  from the  boil  further

and  further, d  Carbuncle.

■  Smooth  erysipelas;  similar  to  that  of  Belladonna.
General  heat  and  redness  of  skin,  with  eruption  like  measles.

■  Measles  confluent, oedematous, with much prostration;  or,

imperfectly  developing,  with  weakness  and  drowsiness.

■  Measles  did  not  come  out  properly,  had  fever  and  cough,  and

emaciating  diarrhoea.

■  Measles,  with  diphtheritis.

■  Roseola  exanthem. ^Typhus.

■  Sequelae  of  measles. ^  Chronic  diarrhoea.

■  ■Scarlatina,  skin  intensely  hot,  rash  very  red  ;  or,  skin  hot

and  cold  in  places ;  rash  tardy,  typhoid  symptoms  ;  throat
erysipelatous,  ton;  ils  large  ;  stinging  when  swallowing ;  eyes
sensitive ;  or,  ulcers  in  the  throat,  with  repelled  or  delayed
eruption  ;  stinging  itching  of  the  skin,  with  fidgetiness.

■  ■Scarlet  fever,  with  sore  throat,  tonsils enlarged,  very  red,

with  stinging  pains  when  swallowing  ;  stinging  itching  of
the  skin,  causing  restlessness,  with  weeping  and  lamenting,
scanty  secretion  of  urine,  or  complete  suppression.  Eyes
somewhat  sensitive  to  bright  light,  but  not  so  marked  as
with  Bellad. ;  Apis  40™  in  water,  in  repeated  doses,  the
intervals  being  lengthened  as  the  patient  improved.

■  Rash  in  red  spots  and  points  difi'used  over  the  body, d  Scar-

latina.

■  ■During  the  eruptive  stage  of  scarlatina; not  when  glands

began  to  swell  or  larynx  was  much  afiected.
Qlldematous  swelling of  skin  during  desquamation.

■  Rash  disappears  suddenly,  leaving  scattered  red  spots  or  points.

d  Scarlatina.
Scarlet  fever,  with  ascites.
Bad  effects  from  scarlet  fever,  and  suppressed  scarlet  eruptions.

■  ■Consequences  of  acute  exanthemata  that  have  been  reper-

cussed,  suppressed,  or  never  properly  developed,  such  as
nettlerash,  scarlatina,  measles,  urticaria,  etc.

■  I  After  suppressed  eruptions  :  inflammation  of  brain  ;  11  hydro-

cephalus ;  sleepless,  restless  ;  scanty  urine ;  great  thirst,  or
none  at  all ;  I  short  of  breath  ;  erysipelas  leaves  the  legs
and  gastralgia  develops  ; lldropsy.


443  APIS.

■  Eruption  receding,  short  of  breath,  sleepless,  restless,  scanty

urine,  great  thirst,  or  none  at  all. d  Confluent  variola.
I  Herpes.

■  Eruption upon inner thighs, below the knees, upon the

hands,  face,  back  of  neck,  still  more  on  central  portions
of  body ;  small  pustules,  with  burning,  smarting,  stinging,
forming  dry  scabs  of  laminated  form,  scaly,  brownish,  some-
times light  straw-color.

■  Small  pustules  arose  under  the  skin,  with  burning,  smarting

and  stinging ;  when  ripe,  small  scabs  on  them,  dry,  brown-
ish, or  straw-colored ;  on  inside  of  thighs,  under  the  knees,
or  hands,  in  face  or  neck,  most  towards  middle  of  body  ;
tincture  in  water.

I  I  Pustules  on  a  bluish-red,  hard,  hot  base.

I  I  Itching  pimples  on  the  joints.

■  Hard,  red,  somewhat  conical  swellings,  occurring  usually  on

the  lower  limbs,  below  the  knees,  sometimes  on  arms,  rarely
on  other  parts  of  body,  varying  in  number  and  size,  from  a
half  dime  to  an  inch  or  two  in  diameter, d  Erysipelas.

I  I  Body  covered  with  large  wheals,  size  of  a  silver  half  dollar,
slightly  elevated  and  white.

I  I  Large  boils,  burning,  stinging.

Ulcers.

■  Furunculi  and  carbuncles;  to  lessen  the  pain.
Furunculi,  with  manifold  scores  of  dead  connective  tissue.

■  Chronic  furunculi,  could  not  sit  nor  lie.

■  Carbuncles,  burning,  stinging,  or  erysipelatous  far  around;

bluish-black.
Syphilitic-mercurial-scrofulous  dyscrasia.
^^  Stages  of  Life,  Constitution. ■Newborn  children.  ^Ulcera-
tion of  the  navel.

■  Child,  9et.  5  months. ^Diarrhoea.

■  Male  infant,  set.  7  months. /?  Incipient  hydrocephalus.

■  Nervous  temperament,  child  set.  7. d  Swollen  anus.

■  A  girl,  set.  2,  treated  for  3  days  with  Aeon.,  Bryon.  and

Hepar  without  any  improvement ;  cured  in  3  days  by  Apis^.
d  Bronchitis.

■  Girl,  get.  3. ^Inflammation  of  sexual  parts.

■  Weak  children  of  a  rambling  disposition. ^Diarrhoea.

■  Children; difficult  dentition,  infantile  marasmus,  diarrhoea,

hydrocephalus,  etc.

■  Boy,  set.  3|. ^Ascites.
d  Acute  Bright's  disease.

d  Gastro-enteritis.

Since  a  fortnight,  stupid  sleep  ;  mother  subject

d  Dropsy  after  scarlet  fever.
Face  livid. ^  Epidemic  typhus.


■  Girl,

set.

^^

■  Boy,

set.

8.

■  Girl,

set.

8.

to  urticaria,

■  Girl,

set.

9.

■  Boy,

set.

12.

APIS.  444

I A  boy,  get.  12. ^Ascites  after  dysentery.
I  Girl,  get.  15,  weakly,  decidedly  scrofulous; r. tonsil  hyper-
trophic since  quinsy, d  Scrofulous  ophthalmia  of  one  years'

standing.
Girls,  who,  though generally  careful,  become  awkward, and

let  things  fall  while  handling  them.
I  Girl, set. 18, fair complexion, lymphatic temperament.

6  Ophthalmia.
I A  girl,  get.  20,  after  vaccination  and  a  fall,  inflammation  in  r.

ankle,  horribly  maltreated,  getting  sick again and  again  ;

lying  in  hospital,  for  8  weeks,  finally  given  up  (oil), d  Spinal

disease.
iWoman,  get.  20,  dropsical  for  some  years.
iWoman,  get.  24,  unmarried,  ovarian  dropsy  since  18  months.

■  Woman,  get.  26,  subject  to  quinsy.

iWoman,  get.  27,  nervous temperament, irascible, but easily

soothed,  no  catamenia  for  5  or  6  years.
IWoman,  get.  28,  subject  to  sore  throat.

I  Woman,  get.  30,  married  10  years,  no  children. ^Ovaritis.

■  Woman,  get.  30,  sanguine,  nervous  temperament, d  Swelling

of  the  tongue.

■  Woman,  get.  32,  bilious  temperament. ^Menstrual  derange-

ments.

■  A  woman,  get.  40,  with  habitual  dyspnoea  and  weak,  irregular

heart-beats. 6  Venous  thrombosis  with  a  fatty  heart.
■Woman,  set.  40. 6  Liable  to  erysipelatous  attacks  now  and
then  in  the  stomach.

■  Women,  at  climacteric  period.

■  A  woman,  get.  50,  always  of  a  weak  mind,  with  some  sinking

of  uterus ;  pale,  lax  muscles, d  Nymphomania  from  scarla-
tina.

■  Woman  of  apoplectic  habit. ^Erysipelas.

Woman, get. 50, dark complexioned, bilious temperament;
since  3  years  ophthalmia.

■  Old  woman,  light  complexion,  lymphatic  temperament,  with

dropsical  swellings.

■  Woman,  get.  58,  for  years  anasarca,  lately  hydrothorax.

■  A  woman,  get.  80,  sanguine  nervous  bilious  temperament,  had

a  paralyzed  arm.

■  ■Women  and  children.

I I  Infants  and  women  (widows  or  not), d  Erysipelas.

■  Cured  chronic  diarrhoea,  with passages  of  blood  and  mucus,

with  a  woman  at  climateric  period.

■  A  man,  get. 20,  chancre; Ajns^ every 3 hours; later  at

longer  intervals.

■  Man,  get.  23,  light  complexion,  thin,  emaciated,  without  much

muscular  power,  much  addicted  to  tobacco, d  Diarrhoea.

■  Man,  get.  28,  sanguine  nervous  bilious  temperament.


445  APIS.

I A  man,  aet.  30,  after  chancre  was  destroyed  by  cauterizing  a
year  ago. See  balanitis.

I  Man,  aet.  32,  weakly  constitution,  choleric  temperament  (oil).
d  Catarrh.

I A  man,  set.  35,  strong,  athletic, d  Dropsy.

I  Man,  set.  38,  athletic  constitution,  choleric  temperament,  fre-
quent ophthalmia,  badly  treated  (oil), d  Pannus.

lA  man,  get.  70,  feeble  constitution,  lymphatic  temperament,
light  skin,  blue  eyes, d  Dropsy.

I  Man,  get.  76,  nervous  bilious  temperament;  since  16  years
attacks  of  palpitation,  treated  by  alternation  and  getting
worse ;  the  tincture  was  given  in  water,  first  every  hour,
later  less  often  ;  the  solution  was  reduced  for  a  week,  finally
the  2°,  once  a  day,  altertating  with  Ginclion?.  Rapidly  con-
valescing. Q  Organic  disease  of  heart.

I  Old  people. ^Apoplexy. ^Pseudo-ophthalmia. ^Asthma.

I I  Apoplexies  in  old  persons.

■  Old  men. ^Asthma.

I Hydrogenoid  constitution. ^Diphtheria. ^Made  worse  by

vaccination.
Sycosis.

■  Strumous  diathesis. ^Dropsy.

■  Sanguine  bilious  temperament. ^Injured  knee.

I  Dark  complexion,  bilious  temperament. Q  Ophthalmia.

■  Light  complexion,  spare  and  thin. Q  Chronic  diarrhoea.

■  Light  complexion,  lymphatic  temperament. ^Ascites.

■  Fair  complexion,  lymphatic  temperament, ^Ophthalmia.

■  Sanguine  nervous  temperament. ^Swollen  eyes.

■  Sanguine  nervous  bilious  temperament. ^Paralysis.

■  Bilious  nervous  temperament. Q  Hydrothorax.

■  Irritable  people  disatisfied  with  everything. ^Diarrhoea.

■  Nervous,  lymphatic  temperament. ^Dropsy.

■  Lymphatic  temperament,  light  skin,  blue  eyes,  feeble  constitu-

tion, d  Ascites.
*^  Relationship. Antidotes  to  massive  doses  and  in  poisonings  :
Natr.  mur.^ the substance, the solution, the potencies ;
sweet  oil,  as  it  contains  table  salt ;  onions ;  bleeding  is  de-
cidedly a  bad  palliative  and  in  most  cases  injurious.

Antidotes  to  potencies :  after  overdosing,  Ipec,  low,  relieved
much ;  to  drink  coffee,  seems  indifferent ;  some  have  given
Apis,  high,  Laches,  and  Lact.  ac.

(Has  been  given  in  ailments  from  stings,  from  anthrax  infec-
tion).

It  is  an  antidote  to  Canthar.  (ischuria,  inflammation  of  bladder,
acute  Bright's  disease) ;  abuse  of  lodium,  Oinchon.,  Digit.

It  follows  well  after  vaccination  (erysipelas,  painless  diarrhoea);
after  Sulphur,  in  panaritium.

After  it  follows  well : Crraphit.  (tetter  on  ear-lobe) ;  Arsen.


APIS.  446

(hydrothorax) ;  Pliosphor.  (absorption  of  the  false  membrane
in  diphtheria) ;  Stramon.^  after  Afis  had  removed  the  jeal-
ousy in  mania ;  Lycop.  (in  staphyloma) ;  Sulphur  (in  hydro-
thorax;  pleuritic  effusion,  hydrocephalus)  ;  lodium  (in  puffy,
swollen  knee).

Complementary  :  Natr.  mur.

Has  been  given  in  alternation  in  cases  when  the  change  of
symptoms  indicated  it  with  :  lodium  in  swelling  of  knee ;
Sulphur  in  swollen  eyes ;  Hepar  in  urticaria ;  Mercur.  in
ascites  with  peritonitis ;  Lycop.  in  staphyloma.

It  often  disagrees  after  Rhus  tox.  in  eruptive  diseases ;  and
Rhus  tox.  given  after  Apis  has  often  disagreed.

Collateral  relation  (belonging  to  the  same  family) :  Bomhus,
Crabro, Vespa.

It  has  cured  where  Bellad.  failed  in  cough  of  horses ;  where
Bryon.,  Canthar,,  Digit.,  Helleh.,  etc.,  had  failed  in  albu-
minuria after  scarlatina ;  cases  in  which  Rulsat.,  seemingly
indicated,  failed,  especially  uterine  complaints  ;  when  Thuya,
Phosphor.,  Canthar.,  etc.,  had  failed  in  affections  of  the
prostate  gland.

Concordances:  ^cef.  «<?.  (dropsy);  Aeon.;  Jlriac.  (urticaria) ;
Apocyn.  cannab.  (dropsy) ;  Arnic.  (bruised,  sore) ;  Arsen.
(typhoid  forms ;  gangrene;  dropsies;  scarlatina;  urticaria;
chills) ;  Bellad.  (meningites,  especially  of  cerebral  meninges  ;
faucitis  ;  erysipelas  ;  scarlatina ;  glandular  organs,  etc.) ;
Bromin.  (swelling  of  ovary  during  menses) ;  Bryan. ;
Cantharides  (erysipelas  ;  urinary  symptoms)  ;  Cinchona  ;
Colchie.  (rheumatism,  etc.);  Orot.  tig.  (urticaria);  Euphras.
(conjunctiva);  Ferrum ;  Graphit.;  Hepar;  lodium  (swol-
len knee) ;  Laches,  (typhoid  states  ;  gangrene) ;  Lycop. ;
Mercur. ;  Natr.  ars: ;  Natr.  mur.  (chills  ;  urticaria  ;  ten-
sion in  ovarian  region,  etc.);  Puis  at. ;  Rhus  tox.  (eyes,  but
Ajjis  has  less  suppuration ;  vesicular  erysipelas,  but  darker
than  in  Apis,  and  spreading  left  to  right ;  typhoid  states  ;
restlessness,  but  in  Apis  more  fidgetiness,  etc.) ;  Rum.  crisp.
(painless,  greenish-yellow  diarrhoea) ;  Sahin.  (ovarian  and
uterine  symptoms);  Sepia;  Silic.  (ovary  and  inverted  nip-
ple) ;  Sulphur  (tubercular  meningitis ;  checked  eruptions,
especially  urticaria  ;  asthma ;  hydrothorax) ;  Tereh.  (urinary
symptoms) ;  Therid.  (vertigo) ;  Thuya  (sycosis,  evils  of
vaccination)  ; Urt.  ur. ;  Zincum.


447  APOCYNUM  CANNABINUM.

APOCYNUM  CANNABINUM.

Indian  Hemp.  Apocynacece.


In  the  summer  of  1833,  during  a  walk  in  the  suburbs  of  New  York,  at-
tention was  called  to  this  plant  as  being  one  of  the  most  promising,  by  Dr-
John  F.  Gray.  In  Allentown  it  was  proved,  especially  by  Dr.  Freitag;  in
1856  we  got  another  attempt  by  John  C.  Peters,  with  large  doses  of  the  tinc-
ture. Afterwards,  at  the  suggestion  of  Dr.  Gray,  it  was  given  for  dropsies.
Dr.  Marcy  proved  the  3d.  The  best  reports  of  cures  in  hemorrhages  from
uterus  are  from  Dr.  Marsden,  of  York  Spring,  Pa.


^  Mind. Bewildered.

Feels  as  if  she  could  do  nothing  but  cry ;  don't  want  to  speak,

very  low-spirited.
iLow-spirited  and  nervous. ^Ascites  and  chronic  diarrhoea.
I  Stupor. ^Hydrocephalus.
^  Sensorium, Dizzy  in  the  head.

^  Inner  Head. iPain  in  forehead  in  the  morning. ^Ophthal-
mia.
Frontal  headache,  sick  at  stomach,  restless  at  night.
Heaviness  of  the  head,  evenings ;  aching  in  the  small  of  the
back  and  limbs.

■  Hydrocephalus  ;  stupor,  sight  of  one  eye  totally  lost,  the  other

eye  slightly  sensible  ;  constant  involuntary  motion  of  one  arm
and  leg  ;  forehead  projecting  ;  sutures  open.  Stage  of  exu-
dation.

■  Hydrocephalus  acutus.
Dizzy  headache.

*  Outer  Head. iForehead  projecting,  sutures  open, d  Hydro-
cephalus.
"  Sight,  Eyes. I  Sight  of  one  eye  totally  lost,  the  other  slightly
sensible, d  Hydrocephalus.

Pleat,  redness  of  the  left  eye,  feeling  as  of  sand  in  the  eye ;
early  in  the  morning.

I  Eyes  inflamed  ;  worse  morning  and  evening.

Pressure  in  the  right  eye  as  if  pressed  outwards.

Fine  stitches  in  the  right  eye.
^  Nose. I  Violent  irritation  of  the  Schneiderian  membrane,  resem-
bling a  severe  attack  of  coryza.

I  Cold  in  the  head.

Nostrils  and  throat  filled  with  thick,  yellow  mucus,  on  waking
in  the  morning.

I  I  Nose  stopped  up.


APOCYNUM  CANNABINUM.  448

^  Face. I  Face  expressive  of  mucli  anguish. ^Dropsy.

Face  bloated  after  lying  down  ;  passes  off  after  sitting  up.
I  Face  bloated;  of  a  bluish  lead  color,  also  lips. ^  Heart  dis-
ease.

■  Face  much  swollen. ^  Hydrothorax.

^  Lower  Part  of  Face. I  l  Dry  lips  ;  if  taken  in  the  evening  this

is  the  first  symptom  next  morning.
"  Taste  and  Tongue. Taste  bitter,  sub-acrid,  in  the  fauces.
Tongue  greatly  coated,  brownish-white.

I  Tongue  dry,  immoderate  thirst. ^  Hydrothorax.
^^  Mouth. Dryness  of  the  mouth  on  awaking ;  thirst.

Constantly  spitting ;  increased  secretion  of  mucus  and  saliva  in
mouth  and  fauces.
^^  Throat. Thick  yellow  mucus  in  the  throat  in  the  morning ;
unpleasant  degree  of  heat.
Pressure  on  the  r.  side  of  throat.
^*  Thirst. ■  Great  thirst, d  Hydrothorax.

I I  Great  thirst,  but  water  disagrees,  causing  pain,  or  is  imme-
diately thrown  off. 6  Dropsy.

I  Thirst  on  waking.

^°  Eating  and  Drinking. Distension  about  the  stomach  and  hy-
pochondria after  a  moderate  meal.
Feels  as  if  she  was  hungry,  and  when  she  tries  to  eat,  it  settles
in  epigastrium,  turns  sour  and  hurts  her.
^®  Nausea  and  Vomiting. I  l  Nausea  after  sleep.

Violent  vomiting,  with  prostration  and  drowsiness,  cold  skin.

I I  Distressing  vomiting  at  intervals, d  Menorrhagia.

I  Patient  becomes  very  drowsy  and  vomits  very  often;  pulse
slow.

I  Considerable  gastric  disturbance. ^  After  scarlet  fever.

"  Scrobiculum  and  Stomach.  I  Sense  of  oppression  about  the
epigastrium  and  chest,  so  that  there  was  the  greatest  diffi-
culty in  getting  breath  enough  to  smoke  a  cigar,  or  to  speak
with  any  comfort,  and  this  happened  after  lighter  meals  than
ordinary.

■  Sinking  at  the  stomach  on  awaking.

I I  Stomach  so  irritable,  not  even  a  draught  of  water  can  be  re-
tained, d  Dropsy.

■  Great  irritability  of  stomach  and  vomiting. ^Menorrhagia.

■  Congestion  of  the  liver,  of  the  portal  system;  followed  by

ascites.
^^  Abdomen. ■  Abdomen very much distended and painful.
d  Ascites.

■  Bloated  abdomen  and  limbs, d  Amenorrhoea.

■  ■Ascites.

■  Ascites  with  chronic  diarrhoea.

Decided  distension  of  the  abdomen,  especially  after  a  moderate
dinner ;  all  the  sense  of  fullness  seemed  about  the  stomach.


^^^  APOCYNUM  CANNABINUM.

liver  and  spleen,  while  the  lower  bowels  did  not  appear  more
flatulent  than  common.
^^  Stool  and  Rectum. I  Evacuations  very  scanty.

I  Bilious  stools ;  loose,  but  not  very  copious.
21  XT  ?°^®^^  sluggish,  but  feces  not  hard  or  costive.

Urinary  Organs.  Dull  aching  pain  in  kidneys,  with  increased
secretion_  of  straw  colored  urine,  sinking  at  stomach,  dry
mouth,  sighing. See  26,  27.  ''

Very  peculiar  torpid  action  of  kidneys.
Decided  scantiness  of  urine.
■  Scanty  urine. /?  Hydrothorax.

I  Urinary  difficulties, d  Dysuria. 6  Strangury

II  Urine  diminished  to  one-third  of  usual  quantity,
detention  of  the  urine,  with  paralysis  of  the  lower  extremities.
Urine  light or  sherry-yellow  colored,  no  sediment  on  cooling.

I  Very  profuse  light  colored  urine,  several  gallons  a  day.

I  Urme  high  colored  and  very  scanty, d  After  scarlet  fever.

I  Urine  high  colored,  diminished  in  quantity,  and  voided  with
difficulty. 6  Ascites.

I  Urine  diminished  to  one-third  the  usual  amount,  without  pain
or  uneasiness  about  the  kidneys  or  bladder;  on  the  contrary
chest  organs  seemed  remarkably  comfortable ;  they  seemed
simply  torpid.  "^

Th^e  Httle  water  that  was  passed  flowed  as  easily  as  if  it  were

■  Urine  suppressed, d  Meningitis  infantum.

22  w  't^  !^°'^  inveterate  case  of  wetting  the  bed  at  night,  in  a  girl

23  ^^^®  Pagans. I  Penis  and  scrotum  swollen, d  Heart  disease.
Jjemale  Organs. \  Ovarian  tumors.

I  Very  profuse  flow  of  blood,  preceded  for  a  day  or  two  by  a

moderate  discharge, d  Menorrhagia.
Discharge  fluid  and  abundant, d  Menorrhagia.
I  I  Hemorrhage  ceasing  at  intervals,  always  recurred  when  the

vital  powers  rallied, d  Menorrhagia.
I  Most  exhausting  monorrhagia  for  about  six  weeks.

■  Blood expelled in large clots, sometimes in fluid state.

o  Menorrhagia.

■  The  moderate  flow  of  catamenia  for  a  day  or  two  suddenly

sets  in  with  such  violence  that  she  cannot  be  out  of  bed.
tf  Menorrhagia.

■  Shreds  or  pieces  of  membrane,  with  the  fluid  blood. 6  Men-

orrhagia.

Amenorrhcea  in  young  girls;  abdomen  and  legs  bloated.

■  Metrorrhagia  continuous or  paroxysmal; fluid or clotted-

nausea, vomiting, palpitation; pulse  quick, feeble, when
24  p ™^^®^  '  fainting,  when  raising  the  head  from  the  pillow.
l:'regnancy. ■Cough  during  pregnancy,  sometimes  short  and

9Q


APOCYNUM  CANNABINUM.  450

dry,  sometimes  deep  and  loose ;  if  very  deep,  it  pains  in  the
stomach.
^^  Larynx. I  Could  not  utter  a  syllable,  although  perfectly  con-
scious ;  answering  by  signs. 6  Hydrothurax.

Unpleasant  heat  of  larynx  and  fauces.

Hoarseness.

^*  Kespiration. Sighing.

Short  respiration.

I  Could  scarcely  speak  for  want  of  breath. 6  Heart  disease.

I  Could  only  breathe  in  a  sitting  posture,  with  the  head  thrown
forward, d  Hydrothorax.

I  Panting  for  breath, d  Heart  disease.
I  I  Oppression  of  the  chest  on  awaking.

Oppression  about  the  epigastrium  and  chest,  difficulty  in  get-
ting breath  enough  to  speak  ;  after  a  light  meal.  6  Hydro-
thorax.

Irresistible  disposition  to  sigh.

■  Agonizing  difficulty  of  breathing. ^Dropsy.
I  Short  and  unsatisfactory  respiration.

I  Gasping  for  breath. ^Hydrothorax.

■  Difficult  breathing,  entirely  unable  to  remain  in  a recumbent

position. I  Dropsy.

I  Great  dyspnoea,  wheezing  breathing  and  cough;  could  walk
with  great  difficulty, d  Dropsy  of  pericardium.
^'  Cough. Dry  cough,  with  scanty  expectoration.

Short,  dry  cough.

I  Cough  dry,  hacking,  suffocative,  and  incessant,  d  Hydro-
thorax.

Cough  worse  at  night.

■  Violent  attacks  of  a  hoarse  cough  at  night,  with  vomiting.

■  Short  cough,  alternating  with  a  deep  cough.

■  Loose  rattling,  with  oppression  of  the  chest.

■  Scanty  expectoration  of  white  mucus.

■  Hemorrhage  from  lungs.

'^  Inner  Chest. Oppression  on  left  chest.
Stitches  in  right  chest.

■  ■Hydrothorax. d  After  scarlet  fever.

■  Hydrothorax  and  anasarca  depending  on  organic  disease  of

the  heart.
•^  Heart  and  Pulse. ■Palpitation  very  troublesome whenever
she  attempted  to  move  about  the  house, d  Menorrhagia.

■  Dropsy  of  pericardium;  heart's  action  scarcely  perceptible;

face  bloated  and  anxious  looking.

■  Very  feeble,  with  a  quick  pulse.

■  Small  weak  pulse. ^Hydrothorax.

Pulse  45  between  attacks  of  vomiting  ;  feeble, d  Menorrhagia.

■  Pulse  small  and  irregular. 6  Ascites.

■  Pulse  weak  and  irregular, d  After  scarlet  fever.


^^1  APOCYNUM  CANNABINUM.

■  Almost  pulseless  and  disposed  to  faint  whenever  she  attempted

31  -D 1*^  ^^^^^  ^^^  ^^^^  ^^^^  ^^^  P'"^^- ^  Menorrhagia.
Back. Slight  soreness  in  the  region  of  the  kidneys  when  bring-
ing the  muscles  into  action.

''Upper  Limbs. iFinger  nails  of  bluish  lead  color. ^ Heart
disease.

^  Lower  Limbs, i  Stiff  knees.

Hard  aching  in  both  knees  ;  fears  inflammatory  rheumatism.
ILLdema  of  the  feet  and  ankles,  general dropsy; also  after
typhus.

I  Lower extremities, penis,  scrotum and abdomen swollen.

u  Heart  disease.
The  whole  left  leg  is  contracted.
^Pain  in  the  ball  of  the  r.  big  toe.
'*  Limbs  in  General. I  Constant  involuntary  motion  of  one  leg
and  one  arm. 6  Hydrocephalus.
General  stiffness  of  legs  and  body,  can  scarcely  bend.
I  Weakness  of  limbs.
Itching  on  the  limbs.
Pains  in  arms  and  legs.

"  Position,  Motion. iHad  to  be  supported  in  sitting  posture  in
bed. d  Dropsy.
I  Could  not  lie  down. 6  Dropsy  of  pericardium.
Region  of  kidneys  sore  on  using  muscles.
Raising  the  head,  fainting.

Lying,  face  bloated  ;  better  sitting  up ; cannot  lie,  dropsy
Moving  about  the  house,  <  palpitation. See  29

,6  1.T  ^^""^^^  "^'^^  S""^^^  difficulty, d  Dropsy  of  pericardium.
Nerves. General  restlessness.

Ilnvoluntary  motions  of  one  arm  and  leg. d  Hydrocephalus.
I  Greatly  debilitated,  pulse  feeble  and  quick, d  Menorrhagia.
I  Disposition  to  faint ;  vital  powers  much  depressed, d  Menorr-
hagia.

"Sleep. Drowsy  in  afternoon,  restless  in  night.

On  going  to  bed  desire  for  sleep  ;  with  inability  to  sleep.
I  Drowsiness;  vomiting,  weak.
■  Stupor.

Restlessness ;  little  sleep.

After  sleep;  nausea;  thirst;  dry  mouth  and  lips ;  sinking,  at
stomach  ;  oppression  of  chest.
''  Time. Morning :  pains  in  forehead  ;  heat,  redness,  feelincr  of
sand  in  eye;  yellow  mucus  in  nostrils  and  throat ;  dry  lins
and  mouth.  "^ ^

Evening;  heaviness  of  head;  aching  in  back  and  limbs; eyes
more  inflamed ;  going  to  bed,  skin  hot.
39  m  N'gfit:  restless;  wetting  the  bed,  21  ;  violent  attack  of  cough.
Temperature  and  Weather. iFrom  a  cold,  during  a  sleigh-


APOCYNUM  CANNABINUM.  452

ride,  after  the  flow  of  catamenia  had  set  in,  menorrhagia  last-
ing four  and  a  half  weeks.
*^  Fever. Heat  of  the  skin  on  going  to  bed.

Sweat ;  when  the  skin  moistens,  the  dropsy  improves.
I  Clammy  sweat. ^  Hydrothorax.

I  Body  covered  with  large  drops  of  cold  sweat.  ^  Heart
disease.  .

*^  Attacks. Paroxysmal  menorrhagia.

*^  Locality  and  Direction. Right : outward  pressure  in  eye :
fine  stitches  in  eye ; pressure  in  throat ; stitches  in  chest ;
pain  in  ball  of  big  toe.
Left :  oppression  on  chest ;  contraction  of  leg.
*^  Sensations. Feeling  as  of  sand  in  the  eye.
Stitches  :  fine,  in  r.  eye  ;  in  r.  chest.
Aching :  in  small  of  back  and  limbs ; in  kidneys ; in  both

knees.
Soreness  :  in  region  of  kidneys.
Pressure :  as  if  r.  eye  were  pressed  outwards ;  on  r.  side  of

throat.
Undefined  pain :  in  forehead ;  caused  by  drinking  water ;  in
distended  abdomen ;  in  stomach,  from  deep  cough ;  in  ball
of  r.  big  toe ;  in  arms  and  legs.
Fullness  :  about  the  stomach.
Heaviness :  in  head.
Dryness  :  of  lips  :  of  mouth  ;  of  skin.
Heat :  of  1.  eye  ;  in  fauces  and  larynx  ;  of  the  skin.
Itching:  on  limbs.
Weakness :  of  limbs.
^*  Tissues. llExcretions  diminished,  especially  urine  and  sweat.

I  Dropsy  of  the  serous  membranes.

I I  Acute  inflammatory  dropsy.

1 1  Dropsy,  with  great  thirst,  but  water  causes  pain  or  is  vom-
ited ;  after  typhus,  scarlatina,  cirrhosis ;  but  mostly  uncom-
plicated with  organic  disease.

■  General  dropsy  after  scarlet  fever.

I  Rheumatic  stiffness.
^®  Skin. I  I  Skin  dry  and  harsh. 6  Ascites.

Skin  cold,  with  vomiting. See  16.

Skin  hot,  evening  going  to  bed.
^^  Stages  of  Life,  Constitution, i  Woman,  set.  24,  mother  of
three  children,  black hair  and eyes,  fair  complexion,  dis-
posed to  uterine  hemorrhage.

I  Woman,  get.  40,  mother  of  several  children  and  a  hard  worker,
dark  complexion,  dark  eyes  and  black  hair, d  Menorrhagia.

Women  with  amenorrhoea.

I A  girl. ^Enuresis.
^^Relationship. Concordances: Acef.ac; tApis  (which  has
no  thirst  in  dropsies) ;  lArsen.;  Bellad. ;  Bryon.;  Cinchon.;


453  APOC.  CANNAB.— ARGENTUM  METALLICUM.

Colchic; Digit, (dropsy; slow pulse); Elat. ; iHelleh.
(hydrocephalus,  ascites,  etc.);  Kali  carh.;  Lycop.;  Mercur.;
Merc,  sulph. ;  Seilla ;  Sulphur;  Veratr.  alb.
I  Dropsy  after  abuse  of  quinine.


ARGENTUM  METALLICUM.

Pure  Metallic  Silver.


Hahneman  published  in  1813,  in  the  fourth  volume  of  his  Materia  Medica
pura,  the  first  proving  made  by  him  and  his  class,  with  the  Argenium
foliatum,  or  the  silver  leaf  of  the  gold  beaters,  after  having  collected  a  few
symptoms  from  the  nitrate.  But  like  he  had  experienced  with  thegold, and
preferring  always  to  prove  the  chemical  elements,  unaltered  by  their  combi-
nation with  acids,  he  triturated  the  leaves  from  the  shops,  and  proved  the
trituration  on  himself  (40  symptoms)  and  his  class,  W.  Gross,  C.  Franz,  Fr.
Meyer,  W.  E.  Wislicenus,  Ch.  Fr.  Langhammer,  and  E.  Th.  Hermann  (144
symptoms.)  In  1825  appeared  a  second  edition  of  the  Materia  Medica,  when
his  own  had  increased  only  to  56  symptoms,  and  the  others  of  his  class  by
the  valuable  proving  of  F.  A.  Haynel  with  24  symptoms,  one  symptom  of
W.  Gross  having  been  stricken  out.  In  1846  appeared  another  and  a
masterly  proving  of  Wm.  Huber,  made  with  a  trituration  of  the  precipi-
tated metal,  what  the  chemists  had  learned  since  1820,  when  Stapf  pre-
pared Flatina  in  this  way.

Several  other  provings,  most  with  the  higher,  have  been  added  and  used,
especially  from  one  of  our  best  men,  who  does  not  wish  to  be  known  except
by  the  letter  B,  and  have  been  very  useful  as  coi  roborations.

Some  symptoms  of  the  oxide  and  some  of  the  arseniate  have  been  kept
back.

The  symptoms  marked  9  in  Allen,  are  all  from  cures.

^  Mind. All  the  time  as  if  drunken.

Without  anxiety,  again  and  again  the  idea  comes  as  if  he  might
have  an  apoplectic  stroke,  and  could  not  finish  this  proving ;
with  the  spasmodic  contraction  of  heart.

Cannot  occupy  his  mind  regularly,  as  the  imagination  repro-
duces former  exciting  events  ;  all  afternoon.

Imagines  things  about  the  military  which  he  never  liked ;  long
forgotten  old  songs  come  into  his  mind.

I  Mania.

■  Delirious  rage,  after  epileptic  attacks.

Great  inclination  to  talk ;  his  mind  is  very  clear,  and  he  argues
with  great  facility.


ARGENTUM  METALLICUM.  454

Inclined  to  laughter  and  joking.

Inclined  to  play  tenpins,  which  he  never  liked.

I  I  In  society  indisposed  to  talk  ;  he  complains  of  rush  of  blood
to  the  head  and  cheeks,  singing  in  ears ;  itching  in  the  red-
dened eyes.

Increased  cheerfulness  and  disposition  to  talk.

When  contented,  very  merry ;  but  any  trifle  sets  her  to  cry  a
long  while.

Great  serenity,  a  heavenly  sensation  of  peace.

He  feels  unpleasant  and  is  lazy.

Depressed  and  very  sleepy.

I  Anxious  about  her  health  ;  full  of  care, d  Laryngitis.

In  the  forenoon  inclined  to  melancholy,  in  the  afternoon,  to
great  merriment.

Anxious,  as  if  his  clothing  got  too  tight,  with  feverish  heat
and  languor,  when  walking  out  doors.

Fear  of  concussion,  as  if  he  might  run  against  something,  with
the  pain  in  testicles.

I  I  Displeased,  aversion  to  talk. ^Exostosis  of  skull.

I  Mental  agitation  induces  headache  and  indigestion.
^  Sensorium. I  l  Dizziness  on entering  a room after  a  walk  ;
before  midnight,  while  slumbering  in  bed,  it  seemed  as  if
the  head  was  falling  out  of  bed ;  followed  by  a  violent  con-
vulsive starting  of  body.

I  Felt  suddenly  giddy,  and  as  if  a  mist  were  before  the  eyes.

■  Attacks  of  vertigo  ;  he  cannot  think  rightly.
iWhen  looking  at  running  water,  giddy.

IIA  crawling  and  whirling  in  the  head,  as  if  drunken.
Vertigo  when  reading.

I  I  Complete  dizziness  on  entering  the  room  after  a  walk.
^  Inner  Head. I  Frontal  headache  of  business  men.

Congestion  to  the  head,  followed  by  redness  of  the  cheeks.
Cutting  stitches  from  left  ear  into  brain.

■  Pressing  pain,  with  dulness  in  forehead,  and  drawing  pressure

in  occiput.

Dull  pain  in  r.  temple  and  r.  side  of  head,  lasting  one  hour.

iPainful  sensation  of  emptiness  in  head,  feeling  as  if  it  was
hollow,  with  aching  of  the  whole  brain. 6  Exostosis  of  skull.

I  Left  sided  headache,  as  if  in  the  brain  substance ;  at  first  only
slight  drawing,  but  gradually  becoming  more  violent ;  at  its
culmination  raging  as  though  a  nerve  was  being  torn,  ceas-
ing suddenly.

I  iDull,  pressive,  persistent  headache,  encircles  the  calvarium
like  a  wreath.

I  Bad  effects  of  sunstroke.

■  Headache  and  dyspepsias  induced  by  mental  agitation,  nurs-

ing the  sick,  etc.
*  Outer  Head. Tenderness  on  top  of  head,  painful  to  touch.


455  ARGENTUM  METALLICUM.

■  Pressing,  tearing  pain  in  skull,  principally  in  temporal  bones,

renewed  every  day  at  noon,  worse  by  pressure  and  touch,
better  in  open  air.

■  Aching  of  external  parts  of  head.
iPytiriasis.

^  Sight  and  Eyes. ■  Sight  very  weak.
Sight  vanishes.

■  Amaurosis  of  left  eye,  contracted  pupil,  insensible  to  light.
Itching  in  outer  canthi.

1 1  Violent  itching  of  lids  and  corners  of  eyes, d  Blepharitis.
I  Lids  greatly  swollen  and  thickened  ;  margins  thick  and  red.

■  Pustules  along  edges  of  lids  after  measles, d  Blepharitis.

■  Any  effort  to  separate  the  lids  causes  their  edges  to  be  drawn

in  ;  lids  raw,  sore,  red,  slightly  everted,  without  smarting  or
pain, d  Blepharitis.
Abundant  purulent  discharge.

■  Stricture  of  the  lachrymal  duct.

■  Infant,  set.  four  weeks;  since  third  and  fourth  day,  abundant

purulent  discharge, pus  oozing  in  jets,  lids  could  not  be
separated ;  alarmingly  swollen  and  thickened  ;  after  Sulphur
and  Calc.  carh.,  Arg.  met.  ^'  every  four  hours ;  next  day  to
the  mother  at  lengthening  intervals.
Affections  of  the  tarsal  cartilages.

■  Inflammation  of  1.  eye  with  lachrymation,  great  intolerence  of

daylight  and  running  at  the  nose  ;  after  many  medicines
attacking  the  r.  eye,  pain  was  shooting,  itching,  aching;
sometimes  very  violent,  also  without  corresponding  amount
of  redness,  d  After  measles.
*  Hearing,  Ears.  ■  Buzzing  in  ears,  with  ebullitions  and  heat.
d  Palpitation  of  heart.

■  Corrosive  itching;  scratching  until  bleeding  ensues.
Itching,  warmth  and  formication  of  the  concha.

From  the  fossa  under  the  right  ear-lobe,  drawing  pain  at  short
intervals,  as  if  in  the  periosteum,  to  the  cheek  and  lower
maxilla ;  when  chewing,  a  cutting  sensation  into  the  eusta-
chian tube  towards  the  parotid,  as  from  a  sharp  acid.  See
13.
'  Smell,  Nose.  ■Tickling,  crawling  sensation  in  the  nose,  fol-
lowed by  nosebleed.

When  blowing  the  nose,  violent  bleeding.

■  Nosebleed,  with  tickling,  crawling  sensation  in  the  nose.
I  I  Violent  fluent  coryza,  with  frequent  sneezing.

■  ■Most  exhausting  fluent  coryza,  with  sneezing. ^Exostosis

on  the  skull.
Throbbing  in  the  left  nostril,  tension  in  the  external  skin,  as  if
the  nasal  bones  were  compressed,  with  tickling,  prickling  in
the  left  nostril,  causing  violent  sneezing.

■  Affections  of  the  nasal  cartilages.


ARGENTUM  METALLICUM.  456

^  Face. Face  red.

I  I  Great  redness  of  the  face, d  Exostosis  on  the  skull.
iPale  and  earthy  face, d  Diabetes  mellitus.
iFace  straw-colored,  down  to  the  lips,  inclusive, d  Scirrhus
of  OS  uteri.

■  Pressing  and  tearing  of  the  facial  bones  ;  drawing,  tearing  in

the  right  zygoma.
Perceptible  throbbing over whole  left  cheek, as if  muscles

would  be  raised  from  the  mucous  membrane,  with  a  feeling

as  if  cheek  was  larger;  cheeks  both  red;  chilly  burning  in

the  skin.
I  Sudden  heat  in  face. ^Palpitation  of  heart.

■  Burning,  itching  of  face.

^  Lower  part  of  Face. I  Swelling  of  the  upper  lip,  close  under
the  nose.
lA  violent  horrible  pain  in  the  bone  of  the  right  lower  jaw.
^^  Teeth. Severe  aching  in  the  decayed  last  molar,  left  side.

Upper  and  lower  teeth  adhere  together  like  from  glue.
"  Speech,  Tongue. Speech  impeded  by  much  viscid  saliva  in
the  mouth.
Sore  burning  blisters  on  the  tongue  ;  tongue  dry.
Red  streaks  in  the  middle  of  the  tongue.
Dryness  in  the  middle  of  the  tongue.

Tongue  has  a  silvery  coating,  more  dense  than  the  transparent
white  of  Arsen.
^^  Mouth. Dryness  in  the  mouth.
I  Fetid  breath. 6  Scirrhus  uteri.
Saliva  sticky.
^^  Palate  and  Throat. I  l  Sore throat  as  from  swelling  of  the
pharynx, d  Exostosis  on  skull.
I  Region  of  submaxillary  glands  swollen  ;  neck  stiff;  swallow-
ing  difficult,  as from internal  swelling ;  has  to  force  every
mouthful  down  the  oesophagus.

■  Scratching  sensation  in  soft  palate,  as  from  something  rough

sticking  there ;  felt  most  during  empty  swallowing,  forcing
him  to  swallow  saliva.

■  Painful  tension  in  fauces,  as  from  swelling,  when  yawning.

■  ■Throat  feels  raw  and  sore  during  expiration,  or  when  swal-

lowing or  coughing.

■  ■  Viscid,  grey,  jelly-like  mucus  in  pharynx,  easily  hawked  up;

early  morning.

I  I  Aneesthesia  of  the  fauces. 6  Diphtheria.

I  I  Throat  aches  more  with  coughing  than  with  swallowing,  not-
withstanding that  the  food  goes  down  with  difficulty.  6  Exos-
tosis on  skull.

Itching  crawling  in  pharyngeal  orifice  of  eustachian  tube,  ex-
tending to  tympanum.


457  ARGENTUM  METALLICUM.

BA  thick,  viscous saliva  sticks  to the  hard palate,  causes a

scratching.
•  Mercurial  angina.
SB  Tension in the  fauces on r.  side,  felt only  when gaping.

d  Aphonia.
^*  Appetite,  Thirst. Desires,  Aversions. Appetite  very  much

increased ;  hungry  after  eating  a  full  meal.
BB Great  hunger. ^Exostosis  on  skull.

B  Hungry  in  the  morning,  making  her  nauseous, d  Palpitation.
I  I  Appetite  pretty  good, d  Scirrhus  uteri.
I  I  At  times  loss  of  appetite,  with  aversion  to  smoking,  for  a

long  time.
I  I  Aversion  to  all  food,  even  when  thinking  of  it.
I  I  Want  of  thirst,  even  during  the  hot  stage  of  the  fever.
Desire  for  wine.
^^  Eating  and  Drinking. During  and  after  meals, sweating ;

skin  near  sacrum  feels  cold. See  31.
After  dinner,  nosebleed; Bdry  stool.
*®  Nausea and Vomiting. Squeamish nausea in region of

sternum,  with  vertigo  and  burning  in  scrobiculum.
Nauseous  sensations  with  hunger ;  nausea  in  his  dreams.
Vomiting,  with  the  stool  in  afternoon.
Bitter,  acrid  fluid  rises  up  into  throat ;  heartburn.
^^  Stomach. B  Digestion took place without pain at stomach.

6  Scirrhus  uteri.
B Oppression  in  scrobiculum. ^Diabetes  mellitus.
Anxiety  and  pressure  in  pit  of  stomach.
Burning  in  stomach,  ascending  to  chest.
'^  Hypochondria. Cutting  stitches  under  the  last  left  ribs.
^**  Abdomen. Tympanitic  puffing  of  right  side  of  abdomen.

Abdomen sore to hard pressure ;  slowly  lessened  after  wind

passes.
I  I  Expansion and  sensation of  fullness in epigastrium,  with

hunger.
Loud  croaking  in  abdomen,  with  hunger.
I  I  Wind  colic.

BE  very  moment  lancinating  pain  in hypogastrium,  like  pin-
pricks, d  Scirrhus  uteri.
B  Distension  of  hypogastrium,  which  was  exceedingly  sensitive

to  contact, d  Scirrhus  uteri. See  23.
Contraction  and  tension  of  the  abdominal  muscles ;  has  to  walk

bent  forward.
B Bruised  pain  over  the  left  hip,  and  on  whole  left  side  of  pel-
vis, with  uterine  weakness. See  23.
BPainful  soreness  in  the  whole  abdomen,  worse  when  riding  in

a  carriage, d  With  uterine  complaints.
B  Tendency  to  crampy  pains  in  the  groins, d  Scirrhus  uteri.
B Sweat  only  on  the  abdomen  and  on  the  chest.


ARGENTUM  METALLICUM.  458

I  I  Sweat  on  the  abdomen. 6  Exostosis  on  skull.
^'  Stool^  Rectum  and  Anus. '  l  Soft,  but  each  time  scanty  stool.

^Exostosis  on  skull.
Diarrhoea,  with constant  pain in 1.  side  of  stomach,  all the

morning,  afternoon  and  evening,  and  next  day.
Painless  stools  of  undigested  food.
I  Frequent  urging  in  lower  part  of  rectum,  with  discharge  of

small  quantities  of  soft  stool.
I  Dry  stool,  like  sand,  after  dinner.
I  Alvine  evacuation  irregular,  often  lienteric  diarrhoea, d  Scir-

rhus  uteri.
Diarrhoea  with  constant  pain  in  left  side  of  stomach.
Sore  between  nates,  around  anus,  and  in  groin,  on  moderate

walking.
^^  Urinary  Organs. I  Passed  five  or  six  pints  of  urine  in  one

night. 6  Diabetes  mellitus.
I  Turbid,  sweetish,  profuse  at  night. ^Diabetes.
I  Profuse  urine.
B Urination  copious. ^Diphtheria;  scirrhus  uteri,  etc.

■  Polyuria.

I  Urine  like  whey,  slightly  turbid,  of  a  sweet  taste, d  Diabetes

mellitus.
I  Urine  pale,  fetid,  profuse, especially  at  night. ^Scirrhus

uteri.

■  Enuresis  nocturna,  spasmodic  form.
I  Albuminuria.

^^  Male  Sexual  Organs. I Seminal  emissions  almost  every  night,
without  erection,  with  atrophy  of  penis ;  after  onanism.

■  Yellowish  greenish  gonorrhoea,  of  an  indolent  character  from

beginning ;  of  eight  months'  standing.
I  Very  profuse  gonorrhoeal  discharge,  with  contusive  pain  in

testicle.
Grayish  ulcers,  with  shaggy  borders,  on  the  prepuce ;  at  the

same  time  in  the  throat.
I  Crushed  pain  in  the  testicles ;  clothing  increases  the  pain  on

walking ;  also  evenings  in  bed.

I  Scrotum  and  feet  oedematous. ^Diabetes  mellitus.
Pruritus  scroti.

^^  Female  Sexual  Organs. H  Prolapsus  with  pain  in  1.  ovary.

II  Pain  in  left  ovary  and  back,  extending to  front  and  down-
wards, d  Prolapsus.

1 1  Pains  in  left  ovary  and  loins.

I  Purulent,  ichorous,  sometimes  bloody  matter  flows  from  the

uterine  ulcers,  filling  the  room  with an  unbearable  stench.

d  Scirrhus.

■  Neck of  uterus looks spongy,  deeply  corroded ;  face  straw-

colored  ;  bruised  tense  feeling  in  the  groin ;  urine  copious ;
cramps  in  the  thighs.


459  ARGENTUM  METALLICUM.

Metrorrhagia,  large  lumps  with  violent  pains,  increased  with

every  motion-
Hemorrhages  at  the  approach  of  the  climacteric  period.
1 1  Prolapsus  uteri;  pain  in  left  ovary;  pain  in  small  of  back,

extending  to  the  front  and  dovvnwards. See  19.
I  Sore feeling,  as if  ulcerated,  in the  whole abdomen,  worse

when  riding  in  a  carriage, d  Uterine  diseases.
I  Mucous  membrane  of  the  vagina  wrinkled  by  the  descent  of

uterus, d  Scirrhus  uteri.
I  Purulent, ichorous,  horribly  smelling  and at times  bloody

matter  filled  the  vagina, d  Scirrhus  uteri.
I  Ulcers  of  uterus  discharging  purulent,  ichorous  matter,  some-
times  bloody  water,  with unbearable stench, d  Prolapsus

uteri.
iNeck  of  uterus  very  much  swollen,  presented  a  spongy  mass,

deeply  corroded  with ulcers in different directions,  it  was

impossible  to  discover  the  os  tincae.

I  In  less  than  three  days  the  foul  smell  was  lost  almost  entirely.

d  Scirrhus  of  os  tincae.
^*  Pregnancy. I  Palpitation  during  pregnancy.
^^  Voice,  Larynx  and  Bronchia. ■  i  Hoarseness ;  especially  of

professional  singers,  speakers,  etc.

I I  Total  loss  of  voice  with  professional  singers.

I  Very  hoarse,  cannot  speak  a  loud  word. 6  Laryngitis.

I  Hoarseness,  aggravated  by  speaking  for  a  length  of  time.

In  the  evening,  hoarse,  when  reading  aloud,  has  to  hem  and

hawk.
I  Cannot  speak  a  loud  word  ;  constant  tickling  in  the  throat,

provoking  cough, d  Laryngitis.
I  The  sounds  in  singing  came  double.

■  Alteration  in  the  timbre  of  voice  with  singers,  speakers  and

preachers,  with  feeling  of  constriction  and  rawness  in  the
larynx.

■  Aphonia  after  angina,  cannot  sing  and  when  gaping  he  feels

a  tension  in  throat.
I  I  The  cricoid  cartilage  is  painful,  with  a  bruised  sensation  to
the  slightest  touch,  and  a  feeling  as if  stopped up  with  a
foreign  body.

■  ■Rawness  and  soreness  in  the  upper  part  of  the  larynx,  when

coughing,  not  when  swallowing.

■  Laughing  produces  mucus  in  the  larynx  and  excites  cough.

•  When  stooping,  or  ascending  stairs,  mucus  rises  into  the  throat,

easily  brought  up  by  a  single  cough.

■  A  gray,  gelatinous  phlegm  is  easily  raised  from  the  trachea.

■  ■Over  the  bifurcation  of  the  trachea,  a  raw  spot;  worse  when

using  the  voice,  talking  or  singing.

■  I  I  Eating  apples,  a  small  piece  seemed  to  stick  in  the  larynx,


ARGENTUM  METALLICUM.  460

leaving  a  spot  which  feels  cool,  irritates  to  cough,  which  does

not  lessen  the  sensation.
I A  dull  cutting  pain  rises  in  the  trachea,  becomes  a  shooting,

inducing  single  coughs, d  Laryngitis.
I  Chronic  inflammation  of  larynx  with  a  teacher;  3d  followed

by  2".
Very  sudden  transient  pain  in  larynx  up  through  back  of  head

into  vertex,  and  a  little  in  r.  ear ;  after  1  p.m.
I A  roughness  and  soreness  in  the  larynx  when,  coughing,  not

when  swallowing. ^Laryngitis.
I A  soreness  "  at  the  bottom  of  the  windpipe."

■  Phthisis  laryngea;  clergymen,  singers,  public  speakers,  etc.
^^Respiration. iFoul  breath. ^Scirrhus  of os  uteri.

I  When  reading  aloud  in  the  evening,  he  has  to  hem  and  hawk.
I  Stitches  between  sixth  and  seventh  rib,  worse  when  inhaling.
With  a  deep  inhalation,  pressing-out  pain  below  the  second  and

third  rib.
With  every  deep  breath  cutting  on  both  sides  on  the  last  ribs.
Violent  stitches  in  chest  impede  both  in  and  exhalation.
I  Want  of  breath. ^Diabetes.

I  Deep  sighing  inhalations  relieve  the  palpitation.

I I  Laughing  causes  cough  ;  mucus  in  larynx. ^Laryngitis.
Voice  fails  in  singing.

^^  Cough. 1 1  Attacks  of  cough  from  laughing.

I  Complains  about  a  constant  tickling  in  the  throat  setting  her

to  coughing, d  Laryngitis.
I  Dull  cutting, becoming  a  shooting,  rising  up  in  trachea  and

forcing  him  to  single  coughs.
Cough  dry,  caused  by  irritation  in  the  bronchia,  with  a  sore

pain  ;  drawing  stitches  in  the  lowest  rib,  near  the  spine.

I  Cough  in  attacks,  rattling  by  day  and  in  the  room,  not  at  night

nor  in  the  open  air.

I I  Cough  with  easy  expectoration,  white,  thickish,  looking  like
boiled  starch.

I  I  Expectoration  almost  constant,  day  and  evening.

I  When  coughing,  a  raw  sore  feeling  in the  throat,  not  in  the

windpipe,  also  not  when  swallowing.
BDry  cough  and  easy  expectoration.

■  Sputa  like  gelatine  and  gray.

■  Much  gray,  gelatinous  phlegm  in  trachea,  easily  expectorated.

6  Exostosis  on  skull.
I  Sputa  easy,  white,  thick,  like  boiled  starch. ^.Laryngitis.
BlThe cough is  accompanied  with  an  easy  expectoration  of

white,  thick,  starch-like  mucus,  without  taste  or  smell.
^*  Inner Chest. ■  Stitches  in  right  chest  from  within  outwards  ;

he  can  neither  inhale  nor  exhale.

■  Violent  pain  in  chest  and  shoulders  pressing  inwards,  return-

ing every  winter.


461  ARGENTUM  METALLICUM.

■  I Great  weakness  of  the  cliest,  worse  left  side;  as  a  concomi-

tant to  other  symptoms.
^^  Heart,  Pulse. I  Sensation  as  if  heart  suddenly  was  standing
still,  followed  by  a  trembling  at  the  heart,  gradually  passing
into  an  irregular  violent  throbbing,  disappearing  after  a  few
minutes. 6  During  pregnancy.

■  Frequent  palpitation  with  or  without  anxiety.

■  During  pregnancy,  increasing  palpitation.
Palpitation  at  night.

■  During  the  day  or  night  frequent  attacks  of  violent  palpita-

tion of  heart,  with  or  without  feeling  of  anxiety, d  Third
month  of  pregnancy.
Oppressive  burning  in  the  region  of  the  heart.

■  Trembling  and  palpitation  of  heart.
I  I  Beats  sometimes  omit.

I  I  Full  feeling  in  region  of  heart.

■  Frequent,  spasmodic,  though  painless  twitchings  of  the  whole

cardiac  muscle,  especially  on  lying  on  the  back ;  fears  apo-
plexy.
Pulse :  often  unchanged ;  more  frequent  in  evening  in  bed ;
slow  in  the  morning.

■  Pulse  intermitting  and  very  irregular  during  attacks  of  palpi-

tation.
Periodic  jerking; disorderly,  irregular  pulse. Very  annoy-
ing, action  of  the  heart  with  an  intermittent,  irregular  pulse,
most  when  lying  on  the  back.
^•^  Outer  Chest. Cutting,  left  side,  in  cartilages  of  false  ribs,

■  Chest  feels  sore  to  touch.

■  ■Boil  near  last  rib.

■  ■Sweat  on  chest. ^ Exostosis  on  skull.
Affections  of  the  cartilages  of  ribs.

^'  Neck  and  Back. The  sterno-cleido-mastoid  muscles  hurt  when

stretched  by  turning  of  head.
Itching  between  the  shoulder  blades.
On  right  of  pelvis,  near  sacrum,  skin  feels  cold,  as  if  touched

with  ice  ;  returns  after  eating.
Dull  stitches  in  the  second  lumbar  vertebra.
Feels  as  if  the  small  of  the  back  had  been  knocked  away.
Bruised  pain  in  the  small  of  the  back,  loins  and  neck,  worse

from  motion  ;  mornings  on  awaking.
Violent  pain,  as  if  sprained  deep  in  the  left  lumbo-sacral  region  ;

unenduraole on adduction  of the  left thigh,  compelling

to  limp.

■  Chill  spreads  from  the  back.

'^  Upper Limbs. Upper  arms  feel  powerless, as after severe
labor.
Tension  and  tearing  of  the  arms,  especially  in  the  bones  of  the
hands  and  fingers.


ARGENTUM  METALLICUM.  462

A  short  paralytic  drawing  on  the  outside  of  the  left  upper  arm  ;
on  pressure  it  pains  as  if  beaten ;  same  in  left  ■wrist-joint.

I  I  Inflammation  of  arms.

Burning  of  the  hands,  itching.
^^  Lower  Limbs. Stitches  in  the  hip  when  walking.

I  I  Crampy  pains  in  the  thighs  from  time  to  time,  d  Scirrhus  of
OS  uteri.

Inside  of  thighs  pain  as  if  ulcerated.

Weariness  after  rising,  mostly  in  the  region  of  the  great  tro-
chanters, ligaments  and  muscles  feel  as  if  they  had  given
way,  with  painful  tension  in  the  muscles  about  the  tro-
chanters and  buttocks,  as  if  sprained;  worse  walking;  on
hard  pressure  after  using,  feel  bruised.

■  From time  to  time  crampy  pains  in  the  thighs. ^Scirrhus

OS  uteri.
Stiffness  in  the  hips  in  the  morning.
Knee  pains  as  if  bruised,  while  sitting.
Knees  knock  together  when  walking.

■  Calves  feel  as  if  too  short  on  going  down  stairs.
iWhen  stepping,  feet  feel  sore,  as  if  ulcerated.

I  Feet  oedematous,  swollen. ^Diabetes  mellitus. See  23.
I  Tearing  in  the  feet,  at  times  in  the  soles,  dorsum,  heels  or  toes,

in  tarsal  or  metatarsal  bones.
Numbness  in  the  heels.

■  Lower  limbs  get  sometimes,  especially  in  the  morning  after

rising,  so  weak  and  trembling  that  the knees often  knock
together, d  Palpitation.

■  In  left  knee,  when  moving  it,  a  pain  as  if  beaten  and  as  if  out

of  joint,  like  after  much  walking. ^Palpitation.

■  Left lower limb gets stiff and immovable, as if asleep.

d  Palpitation.
^^  Limbs  in  General, Numbness  in  the  limbs,  as  if  asleep.
All  the  limbs  feel  stiff.

■  I  Loss  of  power ; after  walking,  unusual  fatigue  ;  heaviness.

■  Joints  of  hands  and  feet  feel  sore;  drawing  in  the  joints.

■  Rheumatic  pains  in  the  extremities.

■  Burning,  lancinating  pain,  like  sting  of  a  wasp  at  the  knee

and  elbow,  worse  at  the  latter.
^'  Rest,  Position,  Motion. At  rest :  pains  in  limbs  of  all  sorts,
worse  ;  pressing,  squeezing,  below  right  axilla.
Lying  low  with  their  heads.

■  Worse  lying  on  her  back, d  Palpitation.

■  Lying:  on  the  back  brings  on  the  attack of  palpitation or

increases  it,  also  twitching  of  cardiac  muscles.
Sitting: ■■pains  in  back  and  limbs  increase.
Standing :  pain  in  the  knee ; cutting  in  leg ;  crawlings  over

body.


463  ARGENTUM  METALLICUM.

Motion:  1 1  much  inclined  to  move,  feels  as  if  she  had  more
power;  pains  in  monorrhagia  (see  23) ;  patella.

Rising  from  sitting:  relieves  pressure  in  abdomen  (see  19);
Aveariness.

Walking :  after  moderate  walking,  sore  (see  20) ;  has  to  walk
bent  forward  (see  19,  31) ;  dizzy  coming  in  warm  room  after
a  walk  ;  stitches  in  hip  ;  muscles  over  trochanter  sprained ;
thighs  give  out;  knees  knock  ;  sore  nates.

iStooping:  mucus  in  air  passages;  stitches  left  ribs. See  18.

Ascending  stairs  :  mucus  in  larynx. See  25.

Descending :  joints  weak,  sore. See  44.

Sudden  exertion  :  palpitation  ;  knees  pain.
'"  Nerves.  1 1  After  dinner,  during  siesta,  a  violent  electric  shock,
first  proceeds  from  the  1.  afterwards  from  the  r.  hip-joint,
disturbing  the  sleep ;  having  fallen  asleep  again  (10  minutes
later),  with  hands  above  head,  another  shock,  much  more
violent  in  1.  arm,  proceeds  from  arm-joint.

Painless  twitching :  around  right  shoulder  and  right  thigh  ;
of  right  thumb,  abducting  it  while  writing.

Spasmodic,  painful  twitching  of  muscles  on  temple,  forehead,
and  throat,  near  thyroid  cartilage.

■  Convulsive  shocks  of  whole  body; after  previous vertigo;

mostly  when  dropping  off  to  sleep,  preventing  sleep.

■  Epileptic  attacks,  followed  by  delirious  rage,  jumping  about,

striking  those  near.
Weary,  forced  to  lie  down  and  sleep.

■  Paralytic  weakness  on  motion  ;  bruised  feeling.
Paralytic  weakness,  with  all  pains.

■  Legs  weak  and  trembling,  mostly  in  the  morning  after  rising;

knees  give  way. d  Palpitation  of  the  heart.

■  Sudden  weakness,  as  if  she  should  break  down. /?  Palpita-

tion of  the  heart.

■  Very  much  prostrated. <?  Diabetes  mellitus.

'^  Sleep.  I  I  In  bed,  while  slumbering,  seized  with  a  dizziness,  as
\^  head  fell  out  of  the  bed ;  followed  by  a  violent,  convul-
sive starting  of  body ;  vertigo  and  desire  to  sleep  had
disappeared.

■  When  falling  asleep, an electric shock  through  the  whole

body, d  Palpitation.

■  Cannot  fall  asleep  easily,  and  her  sleep  is  very  restless;  as

soon  as  she  sinks  into  a  doze,  an  electric  shock  of  the  whole
body  or  single  limbs  occurs  and  interrupts  sleep. 6  Palpi-
tation.
Gaping,  drowsy,  depressed  in  mind.

■  Restless  sleep  ;  anxious,  frightful  dreams,  on  awaking  believes

them  true;  also  in  cases  of  palpitation  of  heart.
I  I  Nausea  in  dreams; (seminal  emissions. See  22.
On  awaking: (fatigue; I  I  upper  arm  weak; I  I  legs  powerless.


ARGENTUM  METALLICUM.  464

■  Many  anxious  dreams  with  screaming. ^Palpitation.

I  No  rest  at  night,  has  to  urinate  so  often. ^Diabetes  mellitus.
'*  Time. Many  complaints  <  at  noon.

Chill  at  12,  noon.

In  the  morning :  weary  in  all  the  limbs;  sneezing;  I  mucus
in  throat ;  pulse  slower ;  hips  stiiF.

In  the  forenoon  :  out  of  humor ;  heat.

Every  day  at  noon  :  pains  in  skull  renewed  ;  chill.

Afternoon  :  nosebleed  ;  gastric  symptoms  ;  vomiting  with  stool ;
pains  in  joints  ;  chill.

Evening:  mind  depressed,  sad;  pains  in  limbs;  Icrushed  pain
in  testes ;  two  tones  in  larynx  while  inspiring ;  hoarse  read-
ing ;  pulse  increased.

Night:  profuse  urine,  etc. See  37.

Day  and  evening :  expectoration.

Before  midnight :  vertigo,  seems  as  if  head  was  falling  out  of
bed.

I  Remission  of  complaints  evening  and  night.

Night  half  and  day  half  like  3  to  4.

Evening  half  and  morning  half  like  5  to  3.

^^  Temperature  and  Weather. Averse  to  uncovering.

I  After-effects  of  sunstroke.

Entering  a  room  after  a  walk  :  dizzy.
*°  Fever. ■  Chill  before  midnight,  every  time  the  bed  clothes  are
raised.

Coldness  on  small  spots.

Chill :  in  the  afternoon  and  evening,  until  sleep ;  before  mid-
night.

Chilly,  stupid ;  chill  spreads  from  the  back.

Heat  in  the  forenoon  without  thirst.

Heat  all  over,  but  less  on  the  head.

I  Heat  of  the  body,  except  the  head,  with  thirst.  ^Exostoses
on  the  skull.

I  Heat  in  the  forenoon,  over  the  whole  body,  but  less  on  the

head.

I I  Hectic,  11  A.M.  to  12,  or  1  p.m.  ^In  laryngeal  and  bron-
chial troubles.

I  I  Sweats  easily  ;  during  and  after  eating ;  upper  part  of  body,

or  only  front  of  body.
Sweat  after  midnight.
I  I  Sweat  on  abdomen,  chest.
I  Oily  sweat  on  the  abdomen  or  chest.
*^  Attacks. I  I  Paroxysms  of  burning  in  corns.
Pains  increase  gradually,  disappear  suddenly.
Sudden,  momentary  pains ;  belly,  back,  right  shoulder,  etc.
Cough  in  attacks.

■  Symptoms  reappear  at  noon.

■  Attacks  brought  on  by  lying  on  back. ^Palpitation.


465  ARGENTUM  METALLICUM.

*^  Locality  and  Direction.  Right :  dull  pain  in  temple  and
side  of  head ;  fossa  under  ear-lobe  painful ;  zygoma ;  ten-
sion in  fauces ;  tight  feeling  in  ear,  see  25  ;  stitches  in  chest ;
under  axilla ;  pelvis  as  if  touched  with  ice ;  side  of  abdomen
tympanitic.

Left:  cutting  into  brain  from  ear ;  temple;  Iheadache;  amau-
rosis ;  nostril  throbs ;  cheek  throbs ;  molar  aches ;  cutting
under  ribs;  over  pelvis,  bruised;  1 1  ovary;  cartilages,  false
ribs ;  shocks  in  arm  ;  paralytic  drawing  in  upper  arm,  wrist ;
I  patella.

Right  to  left :  ear-lobes  ;  eustachian  tube.

Left  to  right :  hips,  knees. See  33.

Head:  like  3:  4.

Lower  limbs :  like  6:9.

Within  outwards,  stitches  in  chest ;  dull  pains.

Tearing  upwards :  pains  in  legs.
*^  Sensations. As  if  clothing  were  too  tight. See  1.

Painful  emptiness,  or  hollow  feeling  in  head.  f

As  if  1.  cheek  were  larger. See  8.

Sensation  of  something  rough  sticking  in  the  soft  palate.

.Feeling  in  larynx  as  if  filled  up  with  a  foreign  body.

As  if  small  of  back  had  been  knocked  away.

As  if  heart  suddenly  stood  still,  followed  by  trembling  at  the
heart. See  39.

Raging  pain  as  if  a  nerve  were  being  torn  in  1.  side  of  brain.

Lancinating :  in  hypogastrium  like  pin  pricks ;  —  and  burn-
ing, like  sting  of  a  wasp,  knee  and  elbow.

Stitches :  cutting  from  1.  ear  into  brain  ;  cutting  under  last  1.
rib ;  in  air-passages ;  between  sixth  and  seventh  rib ;  in
chest ;  drawing  —  on  lowest  rib,  near  spine ;  in  r.  chest,
from  within  outwards ;  dull  —  in  second  lumbar  vertebra ;
in  hip.

Cutting :  in  eustachian  tube  toward  parotid ;  see  6 ;  on  last
ribs ;  rises  in  trachea,  becomes  a  shooting ;  see  25 ;  1.  side
in  cartilages  of  false  ribs.

Tearing  pain :  in  skull ;  in  facial  bones ;  in  arms,  bones  of
hands  and  fingers  ;  in  feet ;  in  long  bones.

Drawing :  in  1.  side  of  brain  ;  from  fossa  under  r.  ear  to  cheek
and  lower  maxilla ;  and  tearing  in  r.  zygoma ;  paralytic  —
on  outside  of  1.  upper  arm  and  in  1.  wrist  joint ;  in  maxillary
and  parotid  glands  ;  in  bones.

Pressing  pains :  in  forehead ;  and  drawing  in  occiput ;  and
tearing  in  skull ;  in  facial  bones ;  inwards,  in  chest  and
shoulders ;  in  bones.

Dull  pressive  pain  encircles  the  calvarium.

Pressing  out  pain  :  below  second  and  third  rib.

Pressure :  in  pit  of  stomach.

Aching :  of  whole  brain ;  of  external head ;  in  I.  molar.

30


ARGENTUM  METALLICUM.  466

Scratching  :  in  soft  palate.

Rawness :  in  throat ;  in  larynx  ;  above  bifurcation  of  trachea.

Burning  :  and  itching  in  face  ;  blisters  on  tongue ;  in  scrubic-
ulum  ;  in  stomach,  to  chest ;  —  itching  of  hands  ;  —  lan-
cing, knee  and  elbows  ;  in  corns.

Painful  soreness  in  abdomen. See  19.

Soreness  :  in  joints  of  hands  and  feet ;  of  the  eruptions  ;  at
bottom  of  windpipe.

Rheumatic  pain  :  in  extremities.  *

Pain  as  if  ulcerated :  inside  of  thighs  ;  in  feet,  when  stepping.

Dull  pain :  in  r.  temple  and  r.  side  of  head.

Undefined  pain:  in  forehead;  in  r.  lower  jaw,  very  violent;
in  1.  side  of  stomach,  with  diarrhoea;  in  1.  ovary  and  back,
with  prolapsus  ;  in  loins  ;  in  cricoid  cartilage.

Contusive  or  crushed  pains  :  in  testicles.

Bruised  pain :  over  1.  hip ;  1.  side  of  pelvis ;  in  buttocks ;  in
knee.

Bruised  sensation :  in  cricoid  cartilage,  in  small  of  back,  loins
and  neck.

Sprained  feeling :  in  lumbo-sacral  region  ;  see  31 ;  in  buttocks.

As  if  beaten  and  out  of  joint ;  1.  knee.

Crampy  pains  :  in  groins  ;  in  thighs.

Contraction  :  of  abdominal  muscles.

Constriction  :  in  larynx.

Tension :  in  skin  of  nose ;  in  fauces ;  of  abdominal  muscles ;
in  arms  ;  in  muscles  about  trochanters.

Calves  feel  too  short  on  going  down  stairs.

Ligaments  and  muscles  in  region  of  great  trochanter  feel  as  if
they  had  given  way.

Fullness: in  epigastrium,  with  hunger ;  in  region  of  heart.

Throbbing :  in  1.  nostril.

Stiffness:  of  neck  ;  in  1.  leg;  in  all  the  limbs.

Numbness :  in  heels  ;  in  1.  leg  ;  in  limbs.

Crawling  and  whirling,  in  head. See  2.

Electric  shock  :  from  1.  then  r.  hip-joint,  then  in  1.  arm,  dis-
turbing siesta  ;  see  36  ;  of  whole  body.

Spasmodic  painless  twitchings :  of  cardiac  muscle ;  see  29  ;
around  r.  shoulder  and  thigh ;  of  r.  thumb ;  of  muscles  on
temple,  forehead,  and  throat,  near  thyroid  cartilage.

Dryness:  in  mouth.

Heat:  in  face;  of  the  body  except  the  head.

Cold  spot :  in  larynx ;  see  25 ;  on  r.  of  pelvis  near  sacrum ;
in  hips.

Tickling:  in  throat.

Tickling  and  crawling:  in  nose.

Tickling  and  prickling:  in  1.  nostril.

Itching:  incanthi;  of  lids  ;  of  ears  ;  and  crawling  in  pharyn-
geal orifice  of  eustachian  tube;  of  scrotum;  between  shoul-


467  ARGENTUM  METALLICUM.

der  blades ; burning  —  of  hands ; and  crawling  on  head
and  body ;  here  and  there  as  from  fleas.

Formication  and  itching  in  concha.

Weakness:  upper  arms  ;  in  legs,  in  knees  ;  general;  in  joints.
*^  Tissues, Drawing  pains  in  the  maxillary  and  parotid  glands.

a  I  Acts  on  all  cartilages.

a  Joints  feel  weak,  sore;  especially  on  descending.

iJoints  feel  as  if  beaten. ^Exostosis  on  skull.

8 Emaciation, d  Diabetes  mellitus.

I  I  Drawing  pressure  or  tearing  in  the  bones,  especially  long
bones.

a  Articular  rheumatism  without  swelling.

a  Caries.

I  I  Tearing  pain  in  the  bones. ^Exostosis  on  skull.

8  a  Tenderness,  tearing  pressure  and  pain  in  bones.

6  a  Copious  discharges  of  mucus  ;  llofpus;  Baofurine. See  21.
^^  Touch,  Passive  Motion. Touch  :  head  painful.

Pressure:  pain  in  skull  increased.

a  Worse  riding  in  carriage:  painful  soreness  of  the  whole  abdo-
men, also  uterine  complaints.

a  a  Worse  when  touched  :  pain  in  muscles  of  upper  arm  ;  bones
of  the  thumb  and  the  last  phalanges  of  both  big  toes.
See  46.

a  a  When  pressed  upon,  parts  feel  sore  as  if  bruised.

I  I  Every  step  hurts  in  hip-joint.
*^  Skin. Intolerable  itching,  like  from  crawling  on  head  and  body.-

A  sore  burning  itching  here  and  there  as  from  fleas.

Itching,  unchanged  by  scratching.

Sore  exanthemata,  cannot  bear  to  have  them  touched,  even  the
motion  of  skin  is  almost  unbearable.

A  pimple  on  the  left  temple  sore  to  the  touch.

I  I  Eruptions  feel  sore  as  if  excoriated.

Giayish  ulcers  with  shaggy  borders  ;  on  prepuce  and  in  throat.

a  Purulent,  ichorous,  sometimes  bloody  matter  flowing  from  the
ulcers,  constantly  filled  the  vagina,  from  which  proceeded  a
horrible  stench,  driving  all  from  the  room,  d  Scirrhus  of  os
tincse.
"  Stages  of  Life,  Constitution.  Man,  set.  26,  robust,  active,
intelligent;  red  hair,  white  skin,  marked  rheumatic  diathesis.

a  Woman,  aet.  28,  choleric,  black  eyes  and  hair  ;  pregnant  in  the
fourth  month. H  Palpitation.

a  Affections  from  onanism.

Girl,  get.  1,  after  measles,  inflammation  of  1.  eye.

a  Woman,  set.  50,  tall,  thin,  emaciated,  very  irritable  tempera-
ment, d  Scirrhus  of  neck  of  uterus.
*^  Relationship. To be  compared with Zincum in itching on
inner  canthi. [Zincum  more the inner,  and acts  more  on
the  muscular  system  and  on  the  skin).


ARGENTUM  METALLICUM.  468

Cured  gonorrhoea,  after  Cannab.,  Copaiva  and  Mercur.  failed.
Cured  scirrhus  of  os  tincse,  after  Conium,  Cicuta,  Sepia  and

Lycop.  failed.
Uterine  and  ovarian  symptoms,  similar  to  Pallad.,  the  latter

on  the  right  side ;  Argent,  met.  on  the  left.
I  Ailments  from  abuse  of  mercury.
Antidotes  to  Argent,  met. :  Mereur.,  Pulsat.
After  Argent,  met.  follow  well :  Calc.  ostr.,  Pulsat.,  Sepia.
Argent,  met.  follows  well  after  Alum,  and  Platin.
A  return  of  trembling  palpitation  four  months  after  delivery,

after  being  cured  in  the third month of pregnancy by

Argent,  met.,  was  relieved  by  Rhus  tox.
Compare  Stannum  in  cough  excited  by  laughing.


469  ,  ARGENTUM  NITRICUM.

ARGENTUM  NITRICUM.

Nitrate  of  Silver.  AgO,  NO^.

First  prepared  by  the  Arabians.  Introduced  into  practice  by  Paracelsus.
In  olden  times  called  Hell-stone,  a  prophetic  name,  indicating  the  horrible
abuse  of  it  in  our  age. See  Skinner's  pamphlet  on  Diseases  of  Women.

After  the  short  proving  of  the  15th  centesimal  by  Hahnemann  (see  his
Materia  Medica,  1813),  it  was  not  proved  until  Dr.  J.  O.  Miiller  proved  it  and
published  one  of  the  most  learned  treatises  in  medical  literature,  in  1845,
in  the  Austrian  Journal,  under  Watzke's  editorship.  See  Vol.  2,  1846,  page
1  to  112.

The  late  Grauvogl,  who  made  it  a  kind  of  polychrest,  supposed  that  the
silver,  united  with  the  chlorine  always  contained  in  water.  Vol.  II.,  §  315.

This  could  only  be  ascertained  by  a  proving  of  Argent,  mur.,  commenced
by  Dr.  Lembke,  Neue  Zeitschrift  fur  Klinik,  Vol.  II.,  contained  in  Allen's  En-
cyclopaedia, Vol.  I.,  page  452,  but  not  enough  to  compare  it  with  the  other.

^  Mind. I  Loss  of  consciousness;  faint  feeling.
1 1  Loss  of  memory. ^Headache  from  dancing.
I  Loss  of  memory;  lies  with  closed  eyes,  shunning  light  and
conversation, d  Melancholia.

■  Weakness  of  memory,  which  frequently  did  not  allow  him  to

find  the  right  word,  hence  falters  in  speech, d  Melancholia.

I  In  conversation,  forgetting  what  he  wanted  to  say,  he  looked
around  as  if  expecting  some  one  to  help  him  out.  ^Hypo-
chondriasis.

Time  seems  to  pass  very  slowly.

Dullness  of  head,  mental  confusion ;  dizziness ;  tendency  to
fall  sideways.

I  To  fix  his  thoughts  on  anything,  or  give  his  business  any

consideration,  was  impossible  for  him ;  on  attempting  it,  it
immediately  got  dark  before  his  eyes  and  the  headache  in-
creased. 6  Malarial  ataxy.

■  Great  weakness  of  mind. ^Headache.

■  General  appearance  imbecile  ;  talk  very  childish  ;  don't  work

because  he  thinks  it  will  do  him  harm,  or  that  he  is  not  able
to  stand  it. d  Hypochondriasis.
Awful  faces  appear  on  shutting  the  eyes.

I I  The  sight  of  high  houses  always  made  him  dizzy  and  caused
him  to  stagger ;  it  seemed  as  if  the  houses  on  both  sides
would  approach  and  crush  him.

■  Frequently  settled  upon  the time  he  should  die. ^Hypo-

chondriasis.
31


ARGENTUM  NITRICUM.  470

1  Thinks  he  has  softening  of  the  brain,  or  some  other  incurable
affection,  which  almost  drives  him  to  despair,  d  Hypochon-
driasis.

I  When  walking,  gets  nervous,  thinks  he  will  have  a  fit  or  die
suddenly,  which  makes  him  walk  faster,  but  soon  has  to
stop,  because  he  gets  tired, d  Hypochondriasis.

■  Possessed  of  the  distressing  idea  that  all  his  undertakings

would  and  must  fail, d  Melancholia.
I  Feels  as  if  everything  at  home  had  changed  and  that  his
mind  is  weak, d  Hypochondriasis.

■  Thought he was neglected and despised by his family.

d  Melancholia.

I  He  wept  and  assured  every  one  that  he  was  lost  beyond  hope
for  this  world ;  that  no  one  could  delude  him  in  that  respect
and  no  one  could  reason  him  out  of  it. d  Melancholia.

Thoughts  about  suicide.

■  Thinks  about  killing  himself. See  26. 6  Cholera.

■  On  crossing  a  bridge,  almost  irresistible  desire  to  jump  into

the  river ; meeting  some  one  prevented  it. d  Hypochon-
driasis.

■  Often  awakes  his  wife  or  child,  to  have  some  one  to  talk  to.

d  Hypochondriasis.

■  Constantly  talking  about  his  sufferings. ^Hypochondriasis.

■  ■Impulsive,  must  walk  very  fast;  frequent  turns  of  anxiety.

■  Always  hurried. ^  Prolapsus  uteri.

If  a  time  is  set,  they  get  uneasy  already  the  day  before ;  they
are  worried  and  are  ready  a  long  time  before.  6  Chronic
diarrhoea. 6  Epilepsy.

Reserved,  sad,  taciturn,  with  dullness  of  the  head  and  throb-
bing in  the  whole  body.

■  Frequently  remains  in  bed  on  the  slightest  pretext  of  being

"indisposed." ^Hypochondriasis.

■  No  real  inclination  to  work. ^Asthma.

■  Does  not  work,  thinking  it  will  do  him  harm  or  that  he  is  not

able  to  stand  it. 6  Hypochondriasis.

■  Easily  wearied, d  Headache  from  dancing.

■  Great  weariness  and  depression. ^Melancholia.
Gloomy,  dull ;  wishes  to  do  nothing.

Sad ;  fear  of  apoplexy  (no  apoplexy).

Sad  and  taciturn,  with  dullness  of  the  head  and  throbbing  in  the

whole  body.
Weeping  mood.

■  Melancholic,  constantly  complains  of  vertigo.

Great  melancholy  and  weakness  of  mind  with  the  congestion
to  the  head.

■  Melancholy  since  an  undeserved  slight;  fixed  idea  that  he

was  neglected  and  despised  by  his  family  ;  his  calling  became
indifferent  to  him.


^'^^  ARGENTUM  NITRICUM.

■  Despaired  of  help  from  himself  or  others, d  Melancholia.

■  Fits  of  despondency  and  all kinds  of  fanciful notions ;  for

example,  that  whilst  walking  along  the  street  I  could  not

pass  a  given  point  without  falling. Frequently  settled  on

the  time  I  was  to  die. d  Hypochondriasis.
Alarmed  by  vertigo  and  weakness  of  left  side.
B  Apprehension  of  some  serious  disease, d  Hypochondriasis.
1 1  Apprehension  when  ready  to  go  to  church  or  to  the  opera  •

diarrhoea  sets  in.  '

Easily  frightened;  fears  the  disease  may  result  seriously:
weeping  mood.

Fear,  or  thinking  brings  on  diarrhoea.

I  Great  nervousness  and  prostration  ;  fears  to  be  alone,  because
he  thinks  he  will  die ;  is  apprehensive  of  some  serious  dis-
ease, which  almost  drives  him  to  despair.  /?  Hypochon-
driasis.

BFears  if  passing  a  certain  corner  or  building  that  he  will  drop
down  and  create  a  sensation  ;  is  relieved  by  going  in  another
direction, d  Hypochondriasis.

■  Incessant  mental  distress  with  respiration  28,  pulsations  88.

o  Melancholia.

■  Tormented  with  anxiety. /?  Asthma.

■  Frequent  attacks  of  anxiety  with  weakness  in  the  legs,  com-

ing on  about  11  A.M. ; >  after  drinking  a  little  whisky.
tj  Hypochondriasis.

■  When  walking,  becomes  faint  with  anxiety,  which  makes  him

walk  the  faster, d  Hypochondriasis.

■  Became  insensible  to  all  social  pleasures  and  lost  all  desire  for

labor, d  Melancholia.
Apathy.

■  Was  utterly  bereft  of  all  power  of  will, d  Melancholia.

■  Very  irritable  when  nervous.

■  So  much  unstrung  and  irritated  that,  without  the  knowledge

of  his  physician,  he  sprang  up  to  get  into  the  open  air.
6  Malarial  ataxy.

■  Against  whatever  was  proposed  he  had  the  queerest  objections.

6  Melancholia.

She  became  angry  very  easily,  whereupon  she  always  had  to

endure  for  many  days  stitching  pains  in  chest  and  cough.

'^zfm^^^^^ ^^^-^ °^"^^ excited and murmured constantly.
u  Typhus.  "^

■  Sometimes  nerves  got  so  unstrung  that  he  was  in  a  frenzy  of

excitement ;  when  seized  with  these  attacks  did  not  desire  to
move  or  talk,  but  always  sought  a  chair  and  stubbornly  stuck
to  it.  "^

Thinking  intently  increases  the  headache  and  causes  dimness
of  vision.


ARGENTUM  NITRICUM.  472

^  Sensorium.  l  Dullness  of  the  head,  mental  confusion,  dizziness,
with  tendency  to  fall  sideways.

I  Confusion  of  head  during  indigestion, d  Gastralgia.

I  Confusion  of  the  head  and  constipation.

I  Perversion  of  senses, d  Iritis.

I  Vertigo,  with  cerebral  congestion.

I  The  sight  of  high  houses  makes  him  dizzy,  he  feels  as  if  they
would  fall  on  him.

Vertigo  Iwhen  walking  with  eyes  closed,  which  alarms  him ;
■  staggers  when  walking  in  the  dark,  has  to  seize  hold  of
things.

I  On  stooping  while  walking,  he  staggers.

IlBuzzing  in  ears;  llgeneral  debility  of  the  limbs  and  trem-
bling.

■  Vertigo  in  the  morning,  as  if  turning  in  a  circle,  has  to  sit  or

would  fall. 6  With  headache.

■  Vertigo  in  the  morning  with  headache. ^Prolapsus  uteri.

■  Once  during  attack  of  vertigo,  1.  arm  became  paralyzed,  re-

maining so  for  several  days, d  Hypochondriasis.

■  Alarmed by  vertigo and  weakness  of  the  whole left  side.

d  Asthma.

■  In  morning,  pain  in  left  side  of  head,  followed  by  vertigo  and

on  several  occasions  by  momentary  blindness,  d  Hypochon-
driasis.

■  Cerebral  complication. ^Iritis.

■  Loss  of  consciousness,  faint  feeling.

■  Heaviness,  especially  in  occiput. ^Asthma.

Giddiness  as  if  drunk,  with  lassitude  and  weakness  of  lower
limbs.
^  Inner  Head. ■Painful  fullness  and  heaviness  in  the  head,  with
inability  to  recollect,  glowing  red  cheeks.

■  Excessive  congestion  of  blood  to  the  head,  with  throbbing  of

the  carotid  arteries,  obliging  him  to  loosen  his  cravat ;  with
heaviness,  stupifying  dullness  of  the  head,  and  great  melan-
choly and  weakness  of  mind.

■  Spells  of  rush  of  blood  to  the  head,  since  which  objects  are

misty  or  seem  double.

■  Pulsations  in  the  left  side  of  the  forehead.
Congestion  to  head  and  face,  head  feels  much  enlarged.

■  Pain  in  the  head,  it  seems  enlarged.

■  Woke  up  with  dull  headache  over  eyes. ^Hypochondriasis.

■  Boring  in  left  frontal  eminence,  worse  at  night  in  warm  bed.

■  Constant  clawing  digging  in  the  left  frontal  eminence,  with

drawing  tearing  along  the  left  arm.

■  Frontal  headache  during  indigestion. ^Gastralgia.

■  Complains  of  a  constrictive  pain  in  forehead,  as  if  a  small

spot,  size  of  a  dime,  were  daily  contracting  and getting


473  ARGENTUM  NITRICUM.

smaller,  and  thinks  that  as  soon  as  it  has  drawn  together  he
will  be  crazy, d  Hypochondriasis.
I  At  12  o'clock,  violent  boring  in  the  left  temple.

■  Has  left-sided  headache  in  the  morning  for  several hours.

d  Hypochondriasis.

■  Constantly complains of headache,  chiefly confined to r.

side,  although  it  is  the  left  eye  that  is  most  dim ;  girl,  aet.
10. 6  Myopia.

■  Digging  pains  in  the  right  hemisphere  of  the  brain.

■  Digging,  cutting  motion  through  left  hemisphere,  from  occi-

put to  frontal  protuberance,  recurs  frequently,  increases
and  decreases  rapidly.

■  Dull, pressive,  persistent  headache  encircles  the calvarium

like  a  wreath.

■  Stitches  from  right  to  left  ear,  as  from  a  knife.

I  Constant  pains  in  all  parts  of  the  head,  especially  in  the  occi-
put, which  deprived  him  of  sleep. 6  Malarial  ataxy.

■  Pressing  pains  in  the  whole  head,  from  mental  exertion  or

from  dancing ;  better  from  firm  pressure.

■  Tendency to headache, especially  bad whenever she  rose

early  in  the  morning, d  Myopia.
Headache <C in open air,  in  warmth,  at night,  from  light,
mental  labor,  and  >  from  bandaging  the  head  tightly.

■  Congestive  hysterical  headache.

■  Headaches  of  hysterical  young  women.

■  Headaches,  particularly  habitual  gastric  headaches,  to  which

delicate  or  literary  men  are  subject.
Head  symptoms  are  concomitants  of  all  other  diseases.

■  Violent  pressure  in  the  forehead  commencing  over  the  eyes,

spreading  upwards  to  the  coronal  suture ;  in  morning  ;  reel-
ing-
Vertigo,  dim  sight,  ringing  in  the  ears ;  stomach  feels  relaxed ;
better  after  dinner  and  from  wine ;  worse  from  coffee.

■  In  the  morning  pain  in  1.  side  of  head,  followed  by  vertigo,

and  on  several  occasions  by  momentary  blindness,  d  Hypo-
chondriasis.

■  Headache  from  dancing,  with  attacks  of  vertigo.

■  Pains  in  the  head,  finally  extended  to  eyes  and  lower  jaw.

■  Hemicrania;  pressive,  screwing,  throbbing  pain  in  one  frontal

protuberance,  temple  or  into  the  bones  of  the  face.  At  its
height,  trembling  of  the  whole  body,  intense  nausea,  which
ends  in  watery,  bilious  vomit ;  lies  senseless,  eyes  closed,
shuns  light  and  conversation. ^Jaundice  before  the  attack.

Sick  headache  followed  by  debility  ;  profuse  menses.

Pleadache,  with  chilliness  and  trembling  of  body.

Awakes  with  headache,  pressure  deep  in  the  brain,  with  chilli-
ness the  whole  forenoon.


ARGENTUM  NITRICUM.  474

Headache mostly  with  chilliness,  sometimes with increased

temperature.
I  Cerebral  dyspepsia.
*  Outer  Head. llHead  feels  much  enlarged,  or  the  eye  on  the

affected  side.
Feels  as  if  the  bones  of  the  skull  separated,  with  increase  of

temperature.

■  Almost  constant  boring  cutting  in  bones  of  forehead,  vertex,

temples  and  face.
1  Pressing  pains  sometimes  on  vertex,  sometimes  left  frontal

bone,  relieved  by  pressure  or  by  tight bandaging ; worse

from  any  exhaustive  mental  labor ;  letters  would  then  run

together.
I  Frequent  sensation  of  constriction  of  scalp,  as  if  something

were  tightly  drawn  down  over  the  skull, d  Hypochondriasis.
Itching,  creeping,  crawling,  as  from  vermin ;  roots  of  hairs  feel

as  if  pulled  upwards ;  she  had  to  scratch  all  the  time.

■  Herpetic  eruption  on  the  occiput.

■  Burning  in  the  scalp,  which  feels  as  if  drawn  tight;  cold  feel-

ing in  eyes.
^  Sight  and  Eyes. Illntolerance  of  light. ^Want  of  accom-
modation.
Eyes  when  open  are  sensitive  to  light  and  bathed  in  mucus.
d  Typhus.

■  Photophobia,  eyes  filled  with  mucus.

■  Sight  worse  by  candle-light  than  by  daylight, d  Myopia.

■  Cannot walk in the dark  without reeling. 6  Locomotor

ataxia.

■  If  objects  come  closer  than  12  or  14,  they  are  indistinct.

d  Want  of  accommodation.

■  Far  sighted;  has  to  push  the  book  away  to  see  the  letters.

■  Unable  to  see  to  thread  a  needle,  unless  she  holds  it  up  within

an  inch  or  two  of  her  eye. 6  Myopia.

■  A  cloud  continually  over  the  left  eye  in  twilight  and  cloudy

weather.

■  Gray  spots  and  serpent-like  bodies  moved  before  him.

■  Dull  expression  of  eyes ;  black  motes  before  the  eyes,  especi-

ally before  the  right  one.

■  Black  motes  before  eyes, < the  right  eye. ^Hypochon-

driasis.

■  Sight  failed  for  near  objects,  everything  appeared  blurred  or

indistinct, d  Paralysis  of  accommodation.

■  Letters  become  blurred.

i  Photophobia  and  weak  sight,  preventing  his  writing.

■  Right  pupil dilated,  both  acting  feebly; sight  of  left  eye

diminished. 6  Locomotor  ataxy.

■  Vanishing  of  sight,  he  must  constantly  wipe  away  the  mucus.


475  ARGENTUM  NITRICUM.

lAn  attempt  to  use  eyes,  even  on  coarse  work,  produced  pain
in  eyes  and  head, d  Want  of  accommodation.

■  Such  as  have  been  constantly  engaged  in  near  work, and

obliged  to  increase  the  power  of  their  glasses  from  time  to
time  to  overcome  symptoms  of  asthenopia. 6  Hypermetropia.

lEyes  red,_  shuns  light,  after  straining  them  while  sewing;
1 1  worse  in  the  warm  room,  better  in  the  open  air.

1  Pain  from  brain  to  eyes. ^Iritis.

■  Shooting,  itching  biting  pain  in  r.  eye,  I  sometimes  very  vio-

lent, 1  excessive,  photophobia  lessening  toward  night.

■  Sensation  of  fullness,  dryness  and  heat,  especially  on  moving

the  eyeball, d  Iritis.
(An  interesting  case  of  paralysis  of  the  accommodation  is  re-
ported in  which  Arg.  nit.\  four  times  daily,  worked  a  bril-
liant  cure; also  a case of  retino-choroiditis successfully
treated  by  this  remedy).

■  ■Dilated  pupils, d  Want  of  accommodation.

■  Right  pupil  somewhat  contracted, both  sensitive  to light.

d  Locomotor  ataxy.

■  Dull  expression  of  the  eyes, d  Hypochondriasis.

■  Coldness  in  the  eye  with  boring  pain  in  the  head,  scalp  as  if

drawn  tightly.
Heat  and  pain  in  the  ball  on  motion  and  touch.

■  Eyeball  sensitive  to  touch. ^Iritis.

Fundus  of  eye  injected,  large  blood-vessels  indistinct.
Ophthalmia,  often  with  intense  pain,  abating  in  the  cool  and
open  air,  but  intolerable  in  a  warm  room.

■  ■Purulent  ophthalmia.

■  Syphilitic  form  of  iritis.

■  iChemosis  with  strangulated  vessels,  most  profuse  purulent

discharge,  even  the  cornea  beginning  to  get  hazy  and  look-
ing as  though  it  would  slough.

■  ■Cornea opaque; ■■■ulceration  of  the  cornea  in  newborn

infants ;  profuse  purulent  discharge  from  the  lids.

■  Destruction  of  tissue,  as  ulcer  of  the  cornea,  in  one  case  with

pains  like  darts  through  the  eye  mornings,  better  even-
ings ;  kerato-iritis  with  violent  congestion  of  the  conjunc-
tiva;  a  vascular  eroded  cornea,  with  terrific  pains  from  the
vertex  into  the  eye  and  with  burning  heat  in  the  eyes.
From  the  local  application  of  this  drug,  most  violent  inflam-
mation of  the  conjunctiva  of  the  lids  and  ball  ensues,  with
profuse  muco-purulent  discharge  which  is  not  excoriating  to
the  lids.

■  ■Acute  granular  conjunctivitis,  conjunctiva  intensely  pink  or

scarlet  red,  discharge  profuse,  inclined  to  be  muco-purulent.
I  I  Conjunctiva  both  ocular  and  palpebral,  becomes  congested,
swollen  and  infiltrated,  with  scarlet  redness.

■  Chemosis  of  conjunctiva, d  Iritis.


ARGENTUM  NITRICUM.  476

■  I Ciliary  blepharitis  from  being  over  a  fire;  better  from  cold

air  and  cold  applications. 6  Ectropion.
I  Ciliary blepharitis after measles in a hyperopic person.

d  Blepharitis.
iNon-excoriating  lachrymation. ^Iritis.
BCanthi  as  red  as  blood,  the  caruncula  swollen,  standing  out

like  a  lump  of  red  flesh  ; clusters  of  intensely  red  vessels,

extend  from  inner  canthus  to  the  cornea.
The  margins  of  lids  are  thick  and  red ;  canthi  red  and  sore.

■  Conjunctiva  towards  inner  canthus  is  red  and  swollen,  like

pterygium.
Burning,  biting  and  itching  in  the  eyes,  especially  in  the  canthi.
iWith  pannus. d  Blepharitis.

■  Pterygium  of  a  pink  color.

Profuse  mucous  discharge  in  the  morning  on  waking,  with  dull-
ness of  the  head,  especially  in  the  forehead  and  root  of  the
nose.

IB  Blepharitis  if  lids  are  very  red,  thick  and  swollen,  especially
if  complicated  with  granulations,  conjunctivitis  or  some
deeper  inflammation  of  the  eye.

IB  Discharge  causing  firm  agglutination  of  lids  in  morning.
d  Blepharitis.

■  Conjunctiva  of  ball  and  lids  intensely  congested; bright  red

granulations  on  lids ;  lids  swollen,  thick  pus  discharges.
I  Lids  crusty,  swollen,  livery  sore  and  thick. ^Pannus.
I  CEdema  of  the  lids  and  sensation  of  fullness,  dryness  and  heat,

especially  on  moving  the  ball,  which  is  sensitive  to  touch ;

chemosis ;  non-excoriating  lachrymation.
I  CEdema  of  lids, d  Iritis.
Boring  above  1.  eye.
I  Infra-orbital  neuralgia.

I  Left  upper  eyelid  fell  further  over  the  ball  than  the  right.
^Hearing and Ears. Dull hearing; l complete deafness.

6  Typhus.
Ringing  in  the  ears  ;  whizzing  and  feeling  of  obstruction,  with

hard  hearing  in  the  left  ear.
I  Stitches  from  right  into .  left  ear,  with  congestion  to  the  head.
I  Fullness  and  ringing  in  the  ears. ^Meningitis.

■  Tearing  pain  in  the  ears. ^Earache.

■  Otalgia.

^  Smell  and  Nose. ■  Sense  of  smell  blunted. ^Typhus.

■  Smell  as  of  pus  before  the  nose ;  small  ulcers  in  the  nares.

■  Great  pain  in  nose. ^Dyspepsia.

I  Stenosis  of  nasal  parts,  external  ear  or  inferior  part  of  rectum.

■  Discharge  of  whitish  pus,  with  clots  of  blood.

iCoryza  with  stupifying  headache  over  the  eyes,  had  to  lie
down ;  sneezing,  chilliness,  lachrymation,  sickly  look.

■  Violent  itching  of  the  nose,  must  rub  it  constantly.


477  ARGENTUM  NITRICUM.

Nasal  bones  painful  as  if  bruised.

I  I  Nasal  catarrh,  constantly  hawking  thick  tenacious  mucus.

I  Nasal  discharge  like  boiled  starch.

■  Acute  coryza.

,^  Face. B Stupid  weary  look. ^Hypochondriasis.
I  Complexion  sallow. /?  Hypochondriasis.

I  Face  blue,  heavy  breathing,  pulseless.

I I  Looks  prematurely  old ;  also  in  cholera  infantum.

iFace  sunken,  pale,  bluish; I  I  leaden-colored,  with nausea;
I  lyellow,  dirty  looking.


I  I  Left  side  swollen,  with  great  heat  and  burning ; lips  much
swollen  and  burning.

■  Prosopalgia.

■  Neuralgia  of  head  and  face,  which  almost  takes  away  her  eye-

sight. ^Dyspepsia.
During  attack  of  prosopalgia,  sour  taste.

■  Infra-orbital  neuralgia,  left  side.

■  Sweat  stood  in  drops  on  his  face. 6  Typhus.

■  Lupus.

®  Lower  Part  of  Face. Hard,  pale  blotches  in  the  vermilion
border  of  the  upper  lip,  sore  to  the  touch.
Tetter  on  the  chin.

■  Could  not  separate  his  jaws,  can  only  swallow  liquids.

■  Food  escapes  from  the  mouth  during  chewing.

Lips: ■trembled when he spoke; Band finger nails blue.

d  Typhus.
Lips  dry  and  viscid,  without  thirst.
^^  Teeth  and  Gums. ■  Odontalgia.

Teeth  pain,  especially  when  chewing,  eating  sour  things  or

putting  anything  cold  into  the  mouth  ; grumbling,  digging

pains  as  if  becoming  carious.

■  Teeth  sensitive  to  cold  water.

■  Teeth  black. /?  Typhus.

■  Gums  tender  and  bleed  easily  ;  but  neither  painful  nor  swollen.
Gums  inflamed  and  stand  off  from  the  teeth  in  the  shape  of

indentations.

■  Chronic  irritation  of  gums.

"  Taste,  Speech,  Tongue. Taste :  sweetish  bitter  ;  sour ;  me-
tallic, astringent ;  inky  ;  lost.

■  Speech  stammering. /9  Typhus.

■  Cannot  talk  ;  spasms  of  the  muscles  of  tongue  and  throat.

■  Tongue  coated  white;  yellow-white.

■  ■  Red,  painful,  tip  of  the  tongue,  papillae  erect,  prominent.

■  Tongue  dry,  hard  as  a  chip,  and  black  like  the  teeth,  d  Typhus.

■  Red  streak  down  middle  of  tongue.
Tongue  dry,  with  thirst.

■  Glossitis.


ARGENTUM  NITRICUM.  478

1  Tongue  white  and  moist  (Pulsat.  after  Arg.  nitr.).

I  Tongue  furred,  with  clean  edges. ^Dyspepsia.
^^  Mouth. Fetor  from  the  mouth  ;  morning.

Ptyalism.

Inner  mouth  covered  with  a  whitish-gray  coat.
Tough  phlegm  in  the  mouth.
^^  Palate  and  Throat. ■  Chronic  angina.

I I  Uvula  and  fauces  dark  red.

\  Chronic  induration  of  tonsils.

I  i  Thick  tenacious  mucus  in  the  throat,  obliging  him  to  hawk  ;
causing  slight  hoarseness. See  7.

I  Rawness,  soreness; scraping  in  the  throat,  causes  hawking

and  cough.

I I  Sensation  as  if  a  splinter  were  lodged  in  the  throat,  when
swallowing,  eructating,  breathing,  stretching  or  moving  the
neck.

I  Wart-like  excrescences  feel  like  pointed  bodies  when  swallow-
ing.

I  Felt  as  if  he  had  a  stick  in  throat  when  swallowing.

I  Sense  as  if  throat  was  contracted,  swallows  with  pain.
6  Dyspepsia.

■  Swallowing  difficult. ^Typhus.

I  Food  feels  as  if  lodged  in  throat. 6  Dyspepsia.
I  Burning  and  dryness  in  fauces  and  pharynx.

■  Paroxysms  of  cramp  in  oesophagus.

'*  Appetite, Thirst, Desires. I Appetite fair. ^Hypochon-
driasis.

■  Appetite sometimes fair enough, is generally very bad.

d  Myopia.

■  Appetite  good  but  nearly  all  kinds  of  food  distressed,  whether

abstemious  or  eating  heartily, d  Hypochondriasis.

■  Appetite  dulled  by  the  pain. 6  Gastric  ulcer.

■  ■Loss  of  appetite;  much  thirst,  or  no  thirst.

■  Refuses  the  drink  unless  it  is  sweetened,  yet  thirsty.

■  Diminished  appetite,  frequent  eructations,  nausea  with  hum-

ming in  the  ears, d  Locomotor  ataxia.

■  Want  of  appetite. ^Melancholia.

Refused  food,  saying  one  who  does  not  work  should  not  eat ;

but driven by hunger he tried to secretly procure it.

d  Melancholia.
■Most  fond  of  plum  sauce,  though  swallowing  was  difficult.

d  Typhus.

■  ■Irresistable  desire  for  sugar.
I  I  Desire  for  strong  cheese.

^'  Eating  and  Drinking. Eating relieves  squeamishness but
increases  gastric  pains.
Warm  fluids  relieve,  cold  aggravate,  pains  in  stomach.


479  ,  ARGENTUM  NITRICUM.

I  Eating,  or  a  swallow  of  wine,  relieves  the  head;  B  coffee  ag-
gravates. See  3.

Sour  things  lessen  nausea.

I  Pain  immediately  after  eating. ^Dyspepsia.

I  Ten  minutes  after  eating,  flatulence. ^Dyspepsia.

Nausea  after  each  meal,  mostly  after  dinner.

BSoon  after  taking  food  pain  in  stomach  begins  and  continues
so  long  as  the  food  remains  down  ;  vomiting  results  about  an
hour  after, d  Gastric  ulcer.

I  Pains  come  on  soon  after  eating,  sometimes  immediately  on
swallowing,  as  if  oesophagus  were  irritated  as  much  as  the
stomach., d  Gastralgia.

I  Pain  after  every  meal,  half  an  hour  after  eating,  epigastric,
extending  to  left  side, d  Dyspepsia.

I  Pain  after  eating,  sometimes  directly,  sometimes  an  hour  or
more,  with  much  belching  and  rumbling  in  bowels,  d  Dys-
pepsia.

I  Pain  after  eating  extends  from  the  pit  of  sternum  to  round
along  under  the  heart,  corresponding  to  the  situation  of  the
stomach, d  Gastric  ulcer.

I  After  a  hearty  meal,  melancholia,  especially  after  liquid  food.

d  Hypochondriasis.
iBy  a  very  heavy  meal,  epileptiform  convulsions  are  brought  on.
After  drinking,  dyspnoea ;  drinks  suffocate,  d  Cholera. See  20,

26.
llFluids  go  "  right  through  him." ^  Cholera  infantum,  etc.

^^  Hiccough,  Belching,  Nausea  and  Vomiting. Hiccough.

6  Cholera.
Heartburn.
Wind  presses  upwards  but  the  oesophagus  seems  spasmodically

closed,  ineffectual  effort  to  eructate.

I I  Most  gastric  ailments  are  accompanied  by  belching.

1 1  Belching  after  every  meal;  stomach  as  if  it  would  burst
with  wind ;  belching  difficult,  finally  air  rushes  out  with
great  violence.

Tasteless,  lor  sour  eructations,  with  constriction  of  the  bowels.

1 1  Eructation  relieves.

1 1  Flatulence  passes  upwards  in  quantities,  I  inducing  faintness.
6  Dyspepsia.

■  Suffers  much  from  flatulency  by  the  mouth. ^Dyspnoea.

■  Frequent  eructations  and  flatulency.

■  Great  accumulation  of  gas  in  stomach,  tasteless;  when  gas

was  forming  he  was  greatly  distressed,  melancholic,  nervous  ;
relieved  by  belching. 6  Hypochondriasis.

■  Loathing  of  food, d  Dyspepsia.

Deathly  nausea  with  headache,  not  abating  after  vomiting.

■  Nausea  after  each  meal,  most  after  dinner.

■  Nausea  with  constant  and  troublesome  efforts  to  vomit.


ARGENTUM  NITRICUM.  480

I  Awakens  at  midnight,  with  oppression  at  stomach  as  from  a
heavy  lump,  inducing  vomiting ;  in  the  morning  throws  up
glairy  mucus  which  can  be  drawn  into  strings ;  during  the
afternoon  desire  to  vomit,  tremulous  weakness.

I  Vomit  streaked  brown,  flocculent,  like  coffee  grounds.  ^Yel-
low fever.

I  The  vomited  substances  tinge  the  bedding  black,

■  Incessant  vomiting  of  food,  with  a  smooth,  dry  tongue,  appa-

rently destitute  of  papillae.
Vomiting  and  diarrhoea,  with  violent  colicky  pains ;  with  anx-
iety in  the  praecordia.
^''  Stomach. Flatulent  indigestion. 6  After  diphtheria.
B Flatulent  indigestion  ;  loud  rumbling. ^Dyspepsia.

I I  Flatulent  dyspepsia.

■  Irritative  flatulent  gastralgia.

Sensation  as  if  stomach  and  oesophagus  were  filled  with  food  ;

food  oppresses,  lies  like  a  weight.
Pain  under  the  manubrium  sterni. 6  Pharyngitis.

■  Fullness  of  the  stomach;  painful  swelling  at  the  pit,  with

great  anxiety.

■  During  pain  in  stomach  it  becomes  swollen.

■  Periodic  constrictive  sensation  in  the  stomach.
Gnawing  at  the  stomach ;  a  sort  of  hunger  with  nausea.

■  Gnawing pain like something pulling and as a weight.

6  Dyspepsia.

■  Constant  drawing  and  gnawing,  increasing daily  to  violent

attacks,  ending  in  vomiting  of  clear,  saltish  water.

■  ■Gastrodynia. ■Gastralgia.

Throbbing  and  trembling ;  weakness  at  pit  of  stomach,  relaxed

feeling.
I  Gastritis  with  acid  vomiting.

■  Inflammation  of  the  stomach.

■  Ulcerative  pain  in  the  stomach  after  dinner.

■  Perforating  ulcer  of  stomach.

■  Small  spot  between  the  xyphoid  and  navel,  sensitive  to  the

slightest  pressure  ;  pain  radiates  in  all  directions  ;  increases
and  decreases  gradually.
Stomach  feels  relaxed ;  worse  in  wet  weather,  after  warm
drinks,  sour  things,  or  smoking  ;  better  from  alcohol ;  at  its
height,  nausea,  worse  smelling  coffee.  Sometimes  a  fore-
runner of  gout.

■  Terrific  spasms  across  the  lower  part  of  chest  and  in  stomach

(due  to  ulceration  in  mucous  membrane  of  stomach  and  duo-
denum) coming  on  at  about  9  o'clock,  P.M.,  lasting  all
through  night.

■  ■Pain  in  left  side  of  stomach,  below  the  short  ribs,  more  in-

tense during  inspiration  and  on  touching  the  parts,  d  Dys-
pepsia.


481  ARGENTUM  NITRICUM.

Stitches  in  the  stomach  and  short  breathing.

I  Stitches  in  scrobiculum  and  short  breathing, d  Cholera.

■  Stinging,  ulcerative  pain  in  the  left  side  of  stomach,  worse

from  touch  and  deep  inspiration.

■  Regularly  towards  midnight,  attacks  of  pain  preceded  by  vom-

iting of  slimy  and  bilious  fluid.

Gastralgia  in  women  with  irregular  menses,  too  early  and  co-
pious ;  vomiting  a  sour,  bitter,  yellow,  green,  tough  fluid.

Gastralgia,  with  pains  through  to  the  sacrum,  anxiety,  cold
sweat.

■  ■Q-astric  derangements  are  accompanied  by  belching.

■  Pain  in  the  stomach  here  and  there,  frequently  for  weeks  at  a

time,  with  nausea  and  vomiting.

■  After  ice-cream,  gastralgia,  pain  radiating  in  all  directions;

worse  after  food.
^^  Hypochondria. ■Well  marked  spasm  of  diaphragm, d  Cholera
asiatica.

■  Cutting  like  knives  in  hypochondria,  chiefly  in  left  and  at

epigastrium. 6  Gastralgia.

■  Great  pain  in  epigastrium,  extending  around  to  the  cardiac

region  and  left  shoulder-blade, d  Dyspepsia.

■  Pain  at  epigastrium  and  under  left  ribs  immediately  after  eat-

ing, with  flatulence,  loud  rumbling, d  Dyspepsia.

■  Region  of  the  liver  sensitive  to  pressure;  periodical  attacks

of  pain  about  liver  and  navel,  with  nausea,  retching  and  vom-
iting of  tough  phlegm.

■  Tension  as  from  a  band  around  the  hypochondria, d  Asthma.
^^  Abdomen. ■  Griping  in  bowels, d  Cholera.

■  Shooting  pains  through  the  abdomen  and  stomach. ^Pro-

lapsus uteri.

■  Pain  in  left  side  of  abdomen, d  Dyspepsia.

■  Abdomen  swollen  and  distended.

Fullness  and  heaviness  of  the  abdomen,  with  anxiety,  impeding

respiration ;  after  supper.
Rumbling,  gurgling ;  wind  cannot  pass.
Tension  of  the  abdomen,  cannot  bear  to  be  touched.

■  Constriction  in  the  bowels,  as  if  tightly  tied  with  a  band.

■  Stitches  dart  through  the  abdomen  like  electric  shocks,  espe-

cially when  suddenly  changing  from  rest  to  motion  ;  left

side.
Bearing  down  in  the  hypogastrium.
Hemorrhoidal  colic,  mornings ;  during  cold,  misty  weather  ;  >

after  stool.

■  Periodical  abdominal  pains. ^Asthma.

■  Loud  rumbling  with  cutting  pain. ^Dyspepsia.

■  ■Flatulence. ^Dyspepsia.

■  Distension  of  abdomen  and  stomach. ^Prolapsus  uteri.


ARGENTUM  NITRICUM.  482

■  Swells  and  becomes  tympanitic; then  it  passes  away  sud-

denly. ^Dyspepsia.
I  Vermifuge.
^^  Stool  and  Rectum, l  Emission  of  much  flatus  ; I  passing  wind
or  belching  always  relieves.

■  Bowels  regular. ^Hypochondriasis. ^Myopia. ^Dyspepsia.
I  Bowels  regular,  stools  occasionally  black  looking. 6  Gastric

ulcer.

■  Inclined  to  watery  relaxations  of  bowels. 6  Subacute  pleu-

ritis.

■  In  diarrhoea  of  nursing  children,  with tormina  and  viscous

sanguinolent  stools  and  tenesmus ;  after  drinking,  nausea
and  serous  green  and  lienteric  stools.

■  Diarrhoea  of  children after  weaning ;  stools  bright  yellow

thin,  fetid  ;  also  in  chronic  diarrhoea  of  children.

■  Diarrhoea  and  dysentery  especially  during  dentition.
\  Chronic  diarrhoea  of  adults.

Looseness  after  exalted  imagination.

■  Diarrhoea  worse  at  night,  d  During  pregnancy.
Diarrhoea  repeating  several  times  during  the  day.
Diarrhoea  after  a  rich  meal.

■  ■Diarrhoea  as  soon  as  he  drinks.

■  ■Child is  very  fond of  sugar,  but diarrhoea  results  from

eating  it. 6  Cholera  infantum.

■  Diarrhoea  with  very  sensitive  abdomen. 6  Gastric  fever.

■  I  Croup  of  the  rectum  ;  thin,  unshapely  strips  pass  in  masses,

with  burning,  constriction  and  sore  pain  in  left  side  of  abdo-
men.

■  ■Masses  of  epithelium  connected  by  muco-lymph,  looking  red

or  green  and  shreddy,  with  severe  bearing  down  in  hypogas-
trium  ;  advanced  dysentery,  with  suspected  ulceration.
Voluntary  defecation  impossible ;  but  fasces  and  urine  pass  in-
voluntarily.

■  Stool and urine passed involuntarily and unconsciously.

6  Typhus.

■  Constipation  aggravates  every  complaint; ■alternates  with

diarrhoea.
Constipation,  fgeces  dry.

■  When  costive,  he  has  more  tremor,  weariness,  disgust  for  la-

bor and  sleeplessness. 0  Asthma.
Awakened  6  a.m.  with  sudden  urging  to  stool,  which  is  bright
yellow,  copious,  liquid;  no  pain  or  straining.

■  Whitish  stools. 6  Cholera.

■  ■  Stools  of  green,  fetid  mucus,  with  noisy flatus  at  night ;

green,  brown,  bloody,  worse  after  midnight;  slimy,  watery,
greenish,  bloody,  with  tenesmus ;  green,  watery,  sour
taste  in  mouth.

■  ■  Green  stools ;  sopor,  large  pupils.


483  ARGENTUM  NITRICUM.

I  Green,  watery,  sour  stools. 6  Cholerine.

I  Stools  like  spinach  flakes;  passed  forcibly,  with  much  flatus;
belching  and  stool  relieve  pain.

Painless  lienteric  stools.

I  Stool  copious,  fluid,  followed  by  vomiting.

I  Taenia  or  thread- worms  ;  the  latter,  especially  with  much  itch-
ing at  the  anus ;  pieces  of  taenia  with  the  stool.

I  Hemorrhoids:  with  burning  and  tenesmus. ^Asthma.

I  Hemorrhoids  ;  blind,  very  annoying, d  Melancholia.

■  Bleeding  from  the  anus, d  Typhus  abdominalis.

^^  Urinary  Organs. Touching  the  region  of the  kidneys  in-
creases the  pain  to  the  highest  degree. See  35.

■  Paralytic  debility  of  the  lumbar  region  and  kidneys.
Acute  pain  about  kidneys,  extending  down  ureters  to  bladder ;

worse  frona  slightest  touch  or  motion,  even  deep  inspiration.

Ulcerative  pain  in  middle  of  urethra,  as  from  a  splinter.

•  Chronic  induration  of  urethra.

I  No  triple  phosphates  but  epithelium  in  the  urine.  ^Albumi-
nuria.

I  Urine  highly  colored  and  scanty,  passes  gravel,  d  Subacute
pleuritis.

I  Urine  dark  red,  without  albumen ;  deposits  red  crystals  of

uric  acid.

I I  Urine  passed  unconsciously  and  uninterruptedly.
1 1  Incontinence  of  urine  at  night  and  also  by  day.

1 1  Urging  to  urinate;  urine  passes  less  easily  and  freely.

I  Urine  burns  while  passing,  urethra  feels  as  if  swollen,  with

feeling  as  if  the  last  drops  remained  behind.
Stream  of  urine  spreads  asunder.
iBleeding  of  urethra;  painful  erections. ^Gonorrhoea.

■  Urging  to  urinate,  worse  from  obstruction  of  bowels,  d  Asthma.

■  Scanty  and  rare  emission  of  a  dark  yellow  urine.

When  going  to  have  a  stool,  urine  passes  first,  then  feces  in-
voluntarily.

■  Retention  of  urine;  bladder  distended;  dribbling  of  urine.

d  Locomotor  ataxia.

■  Discharge  of  urine  in  drops. ^Prolapsus  uteri.

■  Urine  contained  blood,  was  passed  often  and  little  at  a  time,

in  drops. ^  Nephritic  colic.

■  Quick  urging  to  urinate;  the  flow  is  copious  and  clear.

■  Sensitiveness  near  the  orifice  of  the  urethra.

^^  Male  Sexual  Organs. ■  Impotence;  erections,  but  they  fail
when  coition  is  attempted.

■  Want  of  desire,  organs  shrivelled.

■  In connection  with spermatorrhoea. ^Want of  action  of

ciliary  muscles.

■  Priapism;  dysuria;  bloody  urine. See  21.


ARGENTUM  NITRICUM.  484

I  Coition  painful;  urethra  as  if  put  on  the  stretch,  or  sensitive
at  its  orifice.

I  Ulcers  on  the  prepuce  small,  covered  with  pus ;  later  spread-
ing, bowl-shaped,  with  a  tallow-like  coating.

I  I  Contusive  pain,  with  enlargement  and  hardness  of  right
testicle.

■  Orchitis.

I  Chancre  in  the  urethra.
Urethra  swollen,  hard,  knotty  and  painful.
*^  Female Sexual Organs. ■  Cutting  pain  in  the  r.  ovarian
region  and  back.

I  Pain  in  ovarian  region  radiating  to  the  sacrum  and  thighs.

d  Metrorrhagia.

I I  Coition  painful,  followed  by  bleeding  from  the  vagina.

■  Pains  like  sticks  or  slivers  in  and  about  the  womb,  excited

whilst  walking  or  riding  and  by  the  evacuation  of  the  bowels.
6  Prolapsus  uteri.
I  Uterus  softened ;  metrorrhagia  with  horrible  pains  in  abdomen
and  hips.

I  Granulations  on  the  cervix  uteri.

I I  Prolapsus  with  ulceration  of  os  or  cervix.

I  Ulcers  of  uterus,  bleeding;  hemorrhage  of  short  duration;
shooting  pains  through  the  abdomen  and  stomach,  d  Pro-
lapsus uteri.

Uterine  hemorrhage  with  much  trouble  in  the  head.

Metrorrhagia  returns  in  short  attacks ;  region  of  ovaries  pain-
ful, with  pains  radiating  to  sacrum  and  thighs.

■  Metrorrhagia  in  young  widows. ^Prolapsus  uteri,

■  Metrorrhagia  in  sterility  and  in  those  who  have  borne  no

children. 6  Prolapsus-uteri.

■  Metrorrhagia  with  nervous  erethism  at  change  of  life.

Climaxis :  flushes  ;  congestive  headache  ;  nosebleed ;  conges-
tion to  the  chest ;  melancholy ;  nervous  erethism  ;  itching
of  the  skin.

■  Always  coughs  before  periods, d  Dyspepsia.

■  Monthly  period  is  regular,  but  attended  with  a  great  deal  of

pain,  coming  on  a  day  before  each  period,  makes  her  feel
horribly  faint, 6  Gastric  ulcer.

Menses  :  too  early,  profuse,  long  lasting ;  with  headache ;  cut-
tiDg  in  small  of  back  and  groin ;  at  night  tormenting  press-
ure in  prsecordia ;  internal  trembling  in  epigastrium.

Menses  irregular,  too  soon  or  too  late,  too  copious  or  too
scanty,  but  always  with  thick  coagulated  blood.

■  Menses  clotted. ^  Prolapsus  uteri.

■  Menses  too  early,  too  profuse  and  too  long, d  Prolapsus

uteri.

■  ■Menses  now  too  soon  and  at  other  times  too  late;  irregular.

d  Prolapsus  uteri.


485  ARGENTUM  NITRICUM.

1 1  Menses  scanty, ^Asthma. ^Prolapsus  uteri.

I  Her  monthly  period  lasts  one  day  only,  the  pain  ceasing  with

a  free  discharge, d  Grastric  ulcer.

■  Leucorrhoea  mucous,  bloody,  corroding,  yellow  and  profuse.

d  Prolapsus  uteri.
^*  Pregnancy. Parturition. Nursing. Disposed to abor-
tion.

I I  During  pregnancy  stomach  feels  as  if  it  would  burst  with
wind ;  head  feels  expanded. See  16.

■  Puerperal  convulsions; spasms  preceded  by  a  sensation  of

general  expansion,  mostly  of  face  and  head.
I  Sometimes  just  after  an  attack  she  lies  quiet, but  before

another  she  becomes  very  restless ; has  a  presentiment  of

an  approaching  attack.
iScirrhus  mammae.
Nipples  sore  from  nursing.
Suckling  infants  die  early ;  have  marasmus.
From  weaning,  diarrhoea. See  20.
2^  Voice  and  Larynx, i  Hoarse  voice.
I  Chronic  aphonia.
I  Internal  soreness  of  the  larynx  and  pit  of  the  throat;  <  in

the  morning.
Phlegm  in  the  larynx  causing  a  rattling,  whistling  breathing,

until  removed  in  small  lumps  by  cough.

I  Rawness,  soreness  high  up  in  the  trachea,  when  coughing.

I I  Chronic laryngitis of singers ; raising the voice causes
cough.

I  Chronic  catarrhs  and  laryngitis.

Small,  round,  greasy  lumps  of  mucus  in  the  larynx,  relieved

by  a  slight  cough.
■When  in  bed,  rattling  in  larynx  or  trachea  synchronous  with

the  pulse. ^Aphonia.

■  Tickling, itchiness  and  sometimes  burning  in  the  larynx.

d  Aphonia.
^^  Respiration. I Breath  very  offensive, d  Myopia.

I  Many  people  in  the  room  seem  to  take  away  his  breath.

■  Motion,  going  up  stairs  or  bodily  exertion  cause  asthmatic

attacks  ;  face  congested  ;  palpitation, d  Chronic  asthma.
Short  breathed,  with  deep  sighs ; much  oppression ;  violent

attacks  of  dry,  spasmodic  asthma,  forcing  him  to  rise  and

walk  about.
Respiratio  abdominalis.

■  Upper  abdominal  walls  are  drawn  in  during  inspiration;  ex-

pand during  expiration ;  the  effort  to  breathe  deeply  takes
away  the  breath  at  once, d  Paralysis  of  diaphragm.

■  Spasms  of  the  respiratory  muscles;  great  constriction  and

stitches  in  the  epigastrium ; cannot  talk ;  drinking  suffo-
32


ARGENTUM  NITRICUM.  486

cates ;  even  a  handkerchief  before  the  nose  impedes  breath-
ing ;  agony,  thinks  of  killing  himself, d  Cholera.

■  Respiration  short. ^Typhus.

■  Respiration oppressed, sometimes interrupted by cough.

d  Typhus.

I  Awakes  with  attacks  of  suffocation. ^Asthma.

I  Can  breathe  deeply,  but  cannot  retain  the  breath  long,  d  Head-
ache from  dancing.

Panting,  quick,  sibilant  breathing.

I  The  effort  to  breathe  deeply,  at  once  took  away  his  breath.
d  Locomotor  ataxia.
^^  Cough. I  Very  much cough for  two months,  with pain and
sense  of  soreness  in  1.  side,  preventing  lying  on  it,  thus
interfering  with  sleep, d  Subacute  pleuritis.

■  Evening  cough,  tobacco  smoke  becomes  intolerable.
Irritating,  tormenting  cough,  evening  and  night.
Suffocative  cough  at  noon.

Paroxysms  of  cough  are  brought  on  by :  phlegm  in  larynx ;

irritation  under  the  sternum ;  a  fit  of  passion  ;  laughing ;

stooping ; smoking ; ascending  stairs ;  when  lying  down,

and  on  awaking.
\  Acute  period  of  whooping-cough,  during  the  convulsive  stage.

■  Whooping-cough.

Gets  out  of  breath  with  the  cough.

■  Bloody  sputa. ^Typhus.

■  Expectoration  purulent,  mixed  with  light  blood.

■  Suddenly  coughed  up  blood, d  During  catamenia.
Catarrh at  first  dry,  later  loose,  with  rattling  cough,  profuse

sweat,  sickly  look,  hollow  eyes,  restless  sleep  ;  expectoration
yellow.

Belching,  or  straining  to  vomit,  during  the  attack  of  cough.

I  Often  during  nights,  fits  of  coughing  with  gagging  and  vomit-
ing, d  Aphonia.

■  Nocturnal  aggravation,  with  a  dry  cough  and  flow  of  saliva,

with  some  expectoration  of  mucus  striped  with  blood.
d  Aphonia.

■  Cough  with  occasional  bloody  sputa, d  Dyspepsia.

■  Occasionally spat blood; sputa are always more  or less

streaked  with  it. d  Subacute  pleuritis.
^^  Inner  Chest  and  Lungs. Sensation  of  warmth  between  the
scapulae  and  sternum,  gradually  changing  into  a  pressure  in
the  epigastric  region.

■  Pain  in  chest  and  between  shoulders,  half  an  hour  after  eat-

ing, lasting  two  to  three  hours. 6  Dyspepsia.
Heavy  feeling  on  the  chest,  with  belching.

■  Feels  in  the  morning  as  if  ligated  with  cords  around  chest  or

waist, d  Dyspepsia.

■  Feels  like  a  bar  of  iron  around  her  chest. ^Dyspepsia.


487  ARGENTUM  NITRICUM.

Aching,  tensive  pain  in  the  chest,  in  various  places  of  the  size
of  a  half  dollar.

■  Dead  pain  in  lower  part  of  chest,  1.  side,  coming  on  after  eat-

ing, d  Gastric  ulcer.

■  Severe  cramps  or  spasms  of  chest,  once  or  twice  a  week,  com-

ing with  a  sudden,  violent  piercing  in  chest,  pulse  stopped,
hands  and  face  icy  cold.  In  a  few  moments  pulse  began  to
rise,  face  became  red,  she  cried  out  violently  several  times,
and  had  such  a  working  and  rumbling  in  her  chest  as  if
something  must  give  away  ;  at  the  same  time  the  whole  body
shook  and  trembled  as  in  fever  and  ague ;  tumult  gradually
subsided,  a ,  profuse,  warm  sweat  set  in,  she  fell  asleep  and
nothing  remained  but  great  exhaustion.

iDeep  pains  in  the  chest  not  increased  by  coughing.  ^Pneu-
monia.

I  Violent  pain  in  left  side, d  Dyspepsia.

Bursting  pain  after  going  up  stairs ;  has  to  press  with  both
hands.

Stitching  pains  in  region  of  fifth  rib,  left  side,  with  frequent
blood-spitting.

Coarse,  crepitant  rales  limited  to  a  spot  behind  the  left  5th  rib.

iNo  cough ;  respiratory  murmur  scarcely  audible  in  several
places ;  only  in  upper  part  of  lungs  it  was  dry,  vesicular
and  more  acute. ^Asthma.

Lung  capacity  much  diminished ;  can  attempt  a  deep  breath
without  pain,  but  the  thorax  is  but  slightly  elevated  thereby.

■  Subacute  pleuritis  on  left  side, indicated  by  feebleness of

breathing  opposite  the  seat  of  pain,  with  catching  breathing
in  other  parts  of  lung.

■  Subacute  pleuritis  in  phthisical  subjects.

■  Chronic  pleurodynia.

'^  Heart  and  Pulse. ■Constant anxious  feeling in region  of
heart; ■burning  feeling.
Fearful  pains  about  the  heart ;  they  thought  she  would  die ;
breathing  almost  impossible,  choking.

■  Anxiety,  with  palpitation  and  throbbing  through  the  whole

body,  especially  head  and  abdomen ;  when  sitting  quietly  he
frequently  thinks  his  heart  stops  beating ;  suddenly  he  will
feel  two  strong  beats  apparently  arising  from  the  stomach
and  passing  into  the  head, d  Hypochondriasis.

■  Violent  palpitation  from  the  slightest  mental  emotion  or  sudden

muscular  exertion  ;  in  a  horizontal  position  evenings,  in  bed,
chest  worse.
Palpitation  of  the  heart; ■with  faintish  nausea.

■  Palpitation  of  heart. ^Dyspepsia.

■  Palpitation  at  night.

■  Attack  of  palpitation,  with  anxiety  and  trembling  while  rid-


ARGENTUM  NITRICUM.  488

ing,  compelling  him  to  get  out  of  the  wagon  and  walk,  1  I  and
that  real  fast  too. d  Hypochondriasis.

■  Palpitation  obliges  her  to  press  her  hand  hard  against  her

side  for  relief, d  Gastric  ulcer.
Heart  beats  like  a  sudden  falling  from  above  towards  the  middle,

with  a  bursting  feeling  in  the  upper  chest.
I  I  Heart's  stroke  somewhat  more  frequent  and  rather  weak.

d  Incontinence  of  urine.

■  Heart's  action  irregular,  intermittent,  with  an  unpleasant  sen-

sation of  fullness ;  exertion  causes  strong  beating,  •<  when
noticing  it ; >  when  moving  about.

■  Heart's  stroke  feeble, d  Typhus.

■  Pulse  when  sitting  quiet  for  a  short  time  is  70,  full  and  soft.

d  Hypochondriasis.

■  Pulse  dicrotic,  finally  small,  could  not  be  counted, d  Typhus.
Sudden  violent  piercing  in  the  chest,  pulse  stopped,  hands  and

face  icy  cold ;  then  pulse  rises,  face  reddens ;  violent  cry-
ing, whole  body  trembled,  warm  sweat  broke  out,  and  sleep
ended  the  paroxysm.
^^  Outer  Chest. Violent  pain  in  muscles  of  chest.

Chest  hurts  when  lying  on  it,
^^  Neck  and  Back. ■Indurated  glands  on  the  neck,  with  sus-
picion of  former  syphilis.
Acute  pains  in  the  dorsal  region  after  a  fall.

■  Suffers  much  from  pains  across  loins, d  Subacute  pleuritis.

■  Lower  lumbar  region  is  slightly  sensitive  to  pressure, d  Hy-

pochondriasis.

■  Complains  very  much  of  pain  in  lower  back,  coming  on  after

breakfast,  sometimes  remaining  all  day,  sometimes  going
away  soon  after  breakfast,  but  generally  much  increased
during  the  monthly, d  Gastric  ulcer.

■  Frequently  pains  in  back and  lower  limbs  of  a cramping

character,  especially  in  left  leg. d  Hypochondriasis.
■Backache,  especially  at  night,  with  great  weakness  of  legs.

6  Prolapsus  uteri.
Tensive,  squeezing  pains  in  the  back.
Nightly  pains  in  the  back.

■  Pains  in  the  back,  cannot  walk  with  eyes  closed  or  in  the

dark, d  Locomotor  ataxia.

■  Lower  lumbar  region  slightly  sensitive  to  pressure.

■  Cutting  in  the  small  of  the  back  and  groin. d  Menorrhagia.

■  Pain  in  the  small  of  the  back,  relieved  when  standing  or

walking ;  but  severe  when  rising  from  a  seat.
Pain  in  back  and  lower  ribs  during  pregnancy.
Weakness  in  the  sacro-iliac  symphysis,  as  if  bones  were  loose.
Sense  of  weight  in  lower  part  of  sacrum  and  os  coccygis,  better

standing ;  worse  sitting  and  with  stool.


489  ARGENTUM  NITRICUM.

Small  of  the  back  feels  weary ;  heaviness  and  drawing  in  the

loins,  with  debility  and  trembling  of  the  legs.
B  Crampy  pains  in  back  and  legs, d  Hypochondriasis.
Stiffness,  heaviness,  paralytic  pain  from  sacrum  down  along
pelvis  and  hips.
^'  Upper  Limbs. I  Drawing  in  the  shoulders, d  Melancholia.
I  Pain  in  1.  shoulder  and  arm. d  Dyspepsia.
Paralytic  drawing  pain  in  right  arm.
Nightly  boring  pain  in  the  ulna.
Left  arm  heavy.

Pimple  on  hand  near  wrist,  feels  as  if  a  splinter  was  in  it.
Spasmodic contraction of  the  adductors of  the fingers, can

hardly  separate  them  ;  fingers  half  clenched,
i Hands  tremble. ^Typhus. /? Asthma.
BPain extending down into the middle finger  of  1.  hand.

6  Dyspepsia.
Left  ring  and  little  fingers  insensible ;  hand  trembles.
Numbness  of  finger  tips.
B Nails  blue. ^Typhus.
^^  Lower  Limbs. B  Sciatica.

B Lassitude  of  lower  limbs,  with  dizziness  as  from  intoxication.
B Paralytic  heaviness  and  weakness  of  the  legs,  she  does  not

know  where  to  put  them.
Staggering  gait.

BDebility  and  weakness  of  lower  limbs  the  whole  afternoon;
with  sick  feeling,  dread  of  work,  drowsiness,  chilliness  and
sickly  appearance.
■  B Limbs,  especially  his  knees  start  up  at  night  awaking  him.
.  Legs,  especially  the  left,  often  stiff  and  rigid,  as  if  "gone  to
sleep."
BLegs  feel  as  if  made  of  wood,  or  padded,  with  insensibility  to
touch,  diminished  warmth,  jerks  in  the  toes,  tottering,  irreso-
lute gait;  cannot  walk with  the  eyes  shut. ^Locomotor
ataxia.
B  Calves  weary,  as  after  a  long  journey.
Pains  in  calves  torment  him  all  night.

Emaciation,  particularly  of  the  legs;  also  with  paralytic  weak-
ness.
Itching  pustules  on  the  left  shin  bone,  one  of  which  developed

into  an  ulcer.
^  BCEdema  of  the  feet. 6  Pneumonia.

^*  Limbs  in  GeneraL BB  Lassitude,  weariness  of  forearms  and
legs.
BB  Trembling.

B  Paralysis  of  the  extremities.

B  Rheumatic  tendency  in  right  arm  and  thigh, d  Asthma.
BDuring  the  day,  tormented  with  formication  of  arms  and  legs.


ARGENTUM  NITRICUM.  490

I  Chorea-like  convulsive  motion  of  limbs  ;  legs  drawn  up  ;  arms
jerked  outward  and  upward.

I  Says  his  legs  are  "shaky  "  and  his  hands  tremble. ^Hypo-
chondriasis.
^^  Rest. Position. Motion. Rest :  headache.

I  She  felt  much  worse  in  rest,  than  when  walking  in  the  open
air.

lis  obliged  to  lean  forward  in  order  to  get  breath. ^Asthma.

I  Unable  to  walk  or  even  stand, d  After  a  fall.

She  was  lying  motionless  on  her  back,  since  every  motion  of
her  body  caused  her  inexpressible  pain  ;  touching  the  region
of  the  kidneys  increased  these  pains  at  once  to  the  highest
degree.

I  Unable  to  sleep  on  her  right  side  from  its  bringing  on  palpi-
tation of  heart, d  Gastric  ulcer.

Must  lie  down :  coryza  with  frontal  headache.

Lying  down  after  dinner :  noise  in  larynx.

I  Lying  on  abdomen  :  stitches  in  back.

I  Lying  on  r.  side:  pain  in  stomach;  palpitation.

I  Uncomfortable  lying  on  1.  side.

When  sitting :  heaviness  in  sacrum ;  pain  in  small  of  back ;
gets  very  sleepy.

Cannot  sit  on  account  of  pain  m  sacrum.

While  standing :  drawing  in  side  of  abdomen  ;  pain  in  small  of
back  better.

Stooping :  causes  pain  ;  cough  ;  digging  in  sacrum.

Chewing : <  toothache.

Moving  neck  : <<  sore  throat.

Lifting  arms  high  : ■<  stomachache.

Worse  from  opening  or  spreading  out  the  hands.

Rising  from  a  seat :  backache.

Bending  the  arms  :  chest  muscles  pain.

Putting  boots  on  : ■<  pain  in  chest.

Worse  when  moving  the  part  and  lifting  diseased  limb.

Quick  turning  of  upper  part  of  body,  hurts  in  mammae.

Changing  quickly  from  rest  to  motion :  stitches  through  abdo-
men.

Inclination  for  motion.

Worse  from  moving :  headache ;  eyeball,  heat,  fullness ;  sensa-
tion of  splinter  in  throat  when  moving  neck ;  pain  about
kidneys  ;  sudden  muscular  exertion  causes  palpitation ;  con-
fusion, dullness  and  pain,  with  hemorrhage.

The  slightest  motion  after  having  been  in  rest,  increases  head-
ache.

Curious  feeling  makes  him  walk  very  quickly.

During  walking,  stitches  from  liver  into  the  chest ;  pain  in
small  of  back  ;  tottering ;  afraid  to  walk,  giddy.

Must  rise  and  walk  about :  short-breathed  with  deep  sighs.


491  ,  ARGENTUM  NITRICUM.

After  a  short  walk,  dyspnoea.

Walking  or  standing  relieves  pain  in  small  of  back.

Worse  from  walking  fast, d  Asthma.

Goes  to  the  left  side  instead  of  straight  forward.

After  a  long  walk,  ebullitions  at  night.

Going  up  stairs :  dyspnoea ;  cough ;  bursting pain  in  chest ;

palpitation ;  pain  in  the  calves.
Ascending  : <^  heart  symptoms.
lOn  exposure  to  any  exhausting  labor,  he  always  had  a  pain

which  affected  the  whole  head,  and  which  made  the  letters

when  reading  run  into  one  another.
Bodily  exertion  :  dyspnoea ;  strong  beating  of  heart.
After  bodily  exertion  during  the  day,  attacks  of  suffocation  at

night.
^^  Nerves. I  Walks  and  stands  unsteadily,  after  hard  mental  labor,

especially  when  he  thinks  himself  unobserved.

■  Restless,  in  continual  motion. ^Headache.

■  Very  restless. ^Dyspepsia.

I  Great  nervousness  and  prostration. ^Hypochondriasis.

iNightly  nervousness  with  heat  and  fullness  in  the  head.

I  Nerves  so  unstrung  that  he  got  in  a  frenzy  of  excitement.

d  Hypochondriasis.
I  Hysteria.
iNervous,  faintish,  tremulous  sensation,  as  if  a  severe  disease

were  going  to  attack  him.

■  Tremulous  weakness,  accompanied  with  general  debility,  as

after  great  physical  exertions  and  apathy.
I  Trembling  and  tremulous  sensation.

■  Trembling  of  the  whole  body  and  headache. ^Eye  diseases.

■  ■Periodical  trembling  of  the  body.

■  Chorea,  with  tearing  in  legs. See  34.

■  Creeping  and  jerking  in  various  parts,  more  in  paralyzed

parts.

■  Every  succeeding  spasm  is  announced  by  a  very  marked  degree

of  restlessness. 6  Meningitis, d  Hydrocephalus.

■  ■  Convulsions  preceded  by  great  restlessness. See  24.

■  Convulsions  with  great  restlessness  and  tossing  about,  preced-

ing each  convulsion, d  Scarlatina.

■  Epileptiform  convulsions. ^Meningitis.

■  Epilepsy  from  fright,  during  menstruation;  at  night;  pupils

always  dilated  for  a  day  or  two  before.

■  Very  weak  and  feeble. ^Prolapsus  uteri.

■  So  weak,  must  lie  down;  then  becomes  apathetic,  with  yawn-

ing ;  cold  shuddering.

■  She  feels  so  debilitated  she  is  scarcely  able  to  walk  across  the

room,  complaining  a  good  deal  about  rigidity  in  the  calves.

■  Debility  for  several  days  after  sick  headache. See  3.
Prostrated  state  in  yellow  fever.


ARGENT  [JM  NITRICUM.  492

Paralysis  generally  one-sided.

B  After  a  severe  illness,  most  after  diphtheria.  ^  Want  of  ac-
commodation of  ciliary  muscles.

Incipient  paralysis.

IB  Any  voluntary  motion  of  the  body  was  for  a  long  time  im-
possible for  him. d  Typhus.

B Voluntary  motion  impossible;  left  side  indescribably  weak.

BB Paraplegia  from  debilitating  causes.

B  Paralysis  after  diphtheria.

B Completely  apathetic. ^Headache.
^^  Sleep. I  I  Such  a  weakness  in  all  her  limbs  that  she  was  obliged
to  go  to  bed,  where  she  frequently  fell  into  a  soporous  con-
dition with  yawning,  and  a  cold  shudder  over  the  whole
body,  and  lost  all  her  appetite.

B Sleepless  at  night,  during  the  day  drowsy.  ^Hypochondri-
asis.

Bis  prevented  from  falling  asleep  by  fancies  and  images  before
his  imagination.

After  long  wearisome  fatiguing  night  watching.

BMuch  excited  at  night;  murmured  constantly;  nothing  but
shaking  would  arouse  him  ;  scarcely  are  his  eyes  open  before
he  again  closes  them, d  Typhus.

Ebullitions  at  night  after  a  long  walk.

BAt  night  troubled  with  throbbing  in  the  head,  must  get  out  of
bed ;  when  he  does  sleep  he  is  annoyed  with  horrid  dreams.
d  Hypochondriasis.

Drowsy  by  day,  sleepless  all  night.

B Sleep  is  short;  awakened  often  by  attacks  of  suffocation;
I  I  must  rise  and  open  the  window.

B  Restless  sleep,  awakes  almost  every  hour,  disturbed  with  many
dreams.

B  Sleep  much  broken,  especially  forepart  of  night,  with  horrible
dreams, d  Hypochondriasis.

BSees  departed  friends,  the  dead,  ghosts  at  night;  dreams  of
putrid  water,  B  of  serpents,  which  fill  him  with  horror.

In  the  morning,  dreams  he  is  hungry ;  this  awakens  him,  and
he  finds  he  has  a  violent  spasm  of  the  stomach,  with  hunger,
nausea  and  flatulence.

BNot  refreshed  by  a  night's  rest, d  Subacute  pleuritis.

On  awaking:  B nightly  restlessness;  on  awaking  in  the  morn-
ing, limbs  feel  bruised,  aching  in  the  side  of  the  chest ;  Bfrom
a  good  sleep,  dull  headache  over  the  eyes  ;  spasms  return.

BCannot  sleep  at  night  because  he  is  "  so  nervous."  ^Hypo-
chondriasis.

B  Palpitation  at  night  in  bed ;  must  get  up  and  go  out  of  house
to  get  relief. 6  Hypochondriasis.
38  Time. B  B  Worse  at  night :  heat  in  head,  headache  ;  nose  stopped
up  ;  throat  dry ;  gastralgia  ;  B colic,  diarrhoea ;  Bmuch  urine;


493  ARGENTUM  NITRICUM.

cough ; hoarseness ; beating of  heart ; epileptic attacks ;

pains  in  chest,  oppression  ; I  spasms  ;  nervous  ;  itching  of

skin.
Better  after  midnight :  a  case  of  chorea.
Waking  at  2|  a.m.  several  mornings. ^Diarrhoea.
On  getting  awake :  headache.

■  Worse  in  the  morning:  eyes;  fetor  from  mouth;  gastralgia;

hunger  ;  colic ;  nervousness  ;  sweat ;  soreness  in  larynx.

I  Very  languid,  worse  early  part  of  day. ^Myopia.

Forenoon  :  chill  and  fever,

iNervous  attacks  about  11  o'clock,  A.M.,  relieved  by  stimulat-
ing drinks, d  Hypochondriasis.

Noon  :  tickling,  suffocative  cough.

Afternoon  :  headache  > ;  stitches  in  left  forehead ;  exhausted,
faint.

I  Feels  faint  towards  evening, d  Gastric  ulcer.

■  The  day  half  is  to  the  night  half  as  3  :  2.
B I  Day  half,  more  cough  ;  night,  diarrhoea.

^'  Temperature  and  Weather. Worse  from  cold  diet,  >  from

warm.
Worse  from  warmth  of  bed  :  pains  ;  sweat.
I  Worse  working  over  a  fire :  blepharitis.
Aggravation  in  a  warm  room.
Worse  in  summer :  asthma.
Chill  from  being  uncovered ;  wrapping  up  causes  a  smothered

feeling.

■  Always  kept  himself  covered,  because  he  was  easily  chilled.
Heat,  with  aversion  to  uncover.

■  ■Utter  insensibility  of  the  body,  except  a  sensitiveness  of  the

lowered  temperature,  even  from  removing  the  clothes  when

dressing  the  bed-sores. 6  Typhus.
Worse  from  cold: ■  asthma  in  cold  weather,  from  taking  cold;

■  chill  when  uncovered,  yet  feels  smothered  if  wrapped  up;

after  thorough  exposure  to  cold,  bones  of  skull  pain ;  teeth

sensitive  to  cold  water.
After  eating  ice-cream  :  pain  in  stomach.
Worse  in  wet  weather  :  stomach. See  17.
Worse  in  open  air :  vertigo  and  headache.

■  Indifference  to  moist  and  damp  weather,  longing  for  fresh  air.

d  Pneumonia.

■  I  Great  longing  for  fresh  air, d  Pneumonia.

Irresistible  inclination  to  leave  the  bed  and  sit  by  the  open
window;  every  time  he  sat  by  the  window  he  felt  much  re-
freshed, d  Pneumonia.

■  ■Asthma  drives  him to  the  open  window; if  windows  are

closed,  he  becomes  restless  ;  at  night  he  wakes  up  as  if  suffo-
cating, runs  to  the  window  to  breathe.


ARGENTUM  NITRICUM.  494

I  Bin  March  they  had  to  leave  a  -window  open,  day  and  night,
for  when  it  was  shut  the  patient  became  restless, d  Typhus.
Generally  better  in  open  air,  worse  in-doors.

■  Amelioration  in  cool,  open  air.

General  feeling  better  in  the  open  air,  particularly  catarrhs

(eyes,  stomach).
inOpthalmia  less;  stomach  relieved  in  open  air.
In  rest  he  feels  much  more  unwell  as  when  walking  in  the

open  air.
Better  from  washing  or  bathing  with  cold  water.
^^  Fever, B  Chilliness,  with  nausea.
I  Chilly,  with  many  complaints.
I  Chilly,  with  cold  hands  and  feet.

■  Constant  chilliness  up  the  back  and  over  shoulders  ; <  after

meals ; <  coming  into  the  room  from  the  open  air.

General  chill  followed  after  a  short  interval  by  general  heat ;
the  former  lasting  longer,  and  returning  quickly  on  uncover-
ing, even  during  the  heat ;  the  latter  with  perceptible  pulsa-
tion of  the  left  temporal  artery ;  both  stages  without  thirst.

■Night-sweats.

Morning  sweat.

■  Evening  chill  followed  by  sweat, d  Typhus.

■  Skin  dry,  but  not  very  hot.
Temperature  sunken.

Intermittent  fever,  with  pulmonary  hemorrhage ;  generally  no
thirst.

■  Malarial  fever  in  a  lady,  set.  75; constant retching, most

intensely  bitter  taste,  with  desire  for  fresh  air  (followed  by

Rhus  tox.).
Profuse  sweat ;  it  stands  out  on  the  face  in  beads ;  stitches  in

the  side,  cough  during  the  attack.
Sweat  and  chilliness,  as  soon  as  he  gets  warm  in  bed.

■  Gastric  intermittent.
\  Typhus  abdominalis.

*^  Attacks. ■  Attacks  increasing  and  decreasing  quickly,  or  gradu-
ally increasing  and  decreasing.
■Pains  in  skull  sometimes  remit,  and  are  followed  by  more
violent  hemicrania.

■  Asthmatic  attacks  at  night,  with  rapid  pulse.

■  Moral  and  nervous  disturbances  come  on  in  quite  regular

paroxysms,  d  Prolapsus  uteri.
^^  Locality  and  Direction.  Right :  headache ;  digging  in  hemi-
sphere of  brain  ;  pupil  dilated  ;  shooting  itching  biting  pains
in  eye ;  pupil  contracted ;  contusive  pain  in  testicle ;  cut-
ting in  ovarian  region ;  paralytic  pain  in  arm.
Left :  headache ;  arm  paralyzed,  see  2 ;  weakness  of  whole
side,  see  2 ;  pains  side  of  head ;  throbbing  in  forehead ;
boring  clawing  digging  in  frontal  eminence ;  drawing  tearing


495  ARGENTUM  NITRICUM.

along  arm ;  boring  in  temple ;  dimness  of  eye  ;  digging  and
cutting  through  hemisphere  of  brain ;  sight  of  eye  dimin-
ished;  boring  above  eye;  upper  lid  fallen;  deafness;  face
swollen ;  neuralgia  under  eye;  pain  in  epigastrium  extend-
ing to  side ;  hypochonder ;  cutting  in  hypochonder ;  pains
from  epigastrium  round  to  shoulder  blade ;  pains  in  abdo-
men ;  constriction  in  abdomen ;  soreness  in  side  ;  in  lower
part  of  chest,  dead  pain ;  violent  pain  in  chest ;  stitching
pain  in  region  of  fifth  rib,  and  crepitant  rales ;  subacute
pleuritis ;  crampy  pain  in  leg ;  pain  in  shoulder  and  arm ;
in  middle  finger ;  ring  and  little  fingers  insensible ;  stifi"ness
of  leg  ;  on  shinbone,  itching  pustules.
In  various  places,  ot  the  size  of  half  a  dollar,  aching,  tensive

pain  in  chest.
From  r.  to  1.  ear :  stitches.

From  occiput  to  frontal  protuberance :  digging  cutting.
Spreading  upward  :  pressure  in  forehead,  to  coronal  suture.
Encircling  the  calvarium :  dull  pressive  pain.
Radiating :  to  sacrum  and  thighs,  pain  in  ovarian  region  ;  in  all

directions,  pain  in  stomach.
Through  to  sacrum  :  gastralgia.
Bearing  down  :  in  hypogastrium.
Following  ureters :  acute  pain  in  kidneys.
^^  Sensations. Head  feels  enlarged,  with  congestion ;  eye  feels
enlarged.
Sensation  as  if  bones  of  skull  separated.

Sensation  as  if  a  splinter  were  lodged  in  the  throat,  or  as  if  he
had  a  stick  in  it ;  or  as  if  food  had  lodged  there ;  like  sticks
or  slivers  in  and  about  womb  ;  as  of  a  splinter  in  pimple  near
wrist.
Stitches :  in  chest,  after  anger ;  from  r.  to  1.  ear  like  a  knife ;
in  scrobiculum  and  stomach  ;  like  electric  shocks  through
abdomen ;  in  epigastrium,  see  26 ;  in  region  of  fifth  rib,  1.
side.
Darting  pains  :  in  eyes.
Piercing  pains  :  in  chest  with  cramp.

Cutting :  like  knives  in  hypochondria  and  epigastrium  ;  in  ab-
domen ;  in  r.  ovarian  region  and  back ;  in  small  of  back
and  groin.
Stinging:  in  1.  side  of  stomach.

Shooting,  itching,  biting  in  r.  eye ;  through  abdomen  and  sto-
mach.
Boring :  in  1.  frontal  eminence ;  in  1.  temple ;  and  cutting  in
bones  of  forehead,  vertex,  temples  and  face  above  1.  eye ;  in
ulna  at  night.
Digging :  in  r.  hemisphere  of  brain ;  and  cutting  through  1.

hemisphere  of  brain  ;  in  teeth.
Clawing  digging :  in  1.  frontal  eminence.


ARGENTUM  NITRICUM.  496

Grumbling  digging :  in  teeth.

Griping :  in  bowels.

Gnawing :  at  stomach.

Bursting  pain  :  in  abdomen  ;  in  chest.

Burning :  in  scalp ;  heat  in  eyes ;  in  1.  side  of  face  and  lips ;
in  urethra ;  in  larynx  ;  in  region  of  heart.

Rawness,  soreness  and  scraping :  in  throat ;  in  trachea.

Soreness :  of  larynx  and  pit  of  throat :  in  trachea ;  in  1.  side,
27.

Tearing  pains :  in  ears.

Drawing  tearing  :  along  1.  arm.

Neuralgic  pains :  in  head  and  face  ;  in  stomach,  gastralgia.

Spasms  :  in  lower  part  of  chest  and  in  stomach.

Crampy  pain :  in  back  and  lower  limbs.

Cramp :  in  oesophagus.

Constriction :  in  bowels  as  if  ligated ;  in  epigastrium,  see  26  ;
around  chest  or  waist.

Constrictive  pains :  in  forehead ;  in  scalp ;  in  throat ;  in  sto-
mach.

Feels  like  a  bar  of  iron  around  her  chest.

Squeezing  pains  :  in  back.

Bruised  pain :  in  nasal  bones  ;  in  r.  testicle ;  in  limbs,  on
awaking.

Paralytic  pain  :  from  sacrum  down  along  pelvis  and  hips  ;  in  r.
arm.

Drawing :  in  shoulders  ;  in  r.  arm.

Pressing,  screwing  throbbing  pain  in  the  frontal  protuberance,
temple,  or  into  bones  of  face.

Pressure  :  in  forehead  ;  pressive  headache  encircling  calvarium  ;
pressing  pains  in  whole  head  ;  deep  in  brain ;  in  outer  head  ;
in  prgecordia,  see  23 ;  in  epigastric  region,  28.

Ulcerative  pain :  in  stomach ;  in  middle  of  urethra,  as  from  a
splinter.

Dead  pain  :  in  lower  1.  chest.

Undefined  pain :  in  1.  side  of  head ;  in  head,  which  seems  en-
larged ;  in  all  parts  of  head,  especially  in  occiput,  prevent-
ing sleep ;  in  head,  extends  to  eyes  and  lower  jaw  ;  in  eyes
and  head  from  using  eyes  ;  from  brain  to  eyes  ;  terrific,  from
vertex  into  eye ;  in  nose  ;  in  stomach  ;  about  liver ;  in  abdo-
men ;  in  region  of  kidneys ;  horrible,  in  abdomen  and  hips,
with  metrorrhagia ;  in  chest  and  between  shoulders  ;  fearful
pains  about  heart ;  violent  in  muscles  of  chest ;  in  1.  shoul-
der and  arm  ;  in  calves.

Throbbing :  in  whole  body,  see  1 ;  of  carotids ;  in  1.  side  of
forehead  ;  in  head,  at  night.

Heat :  and  dryness  of  eyeballs  and  lids :  in  1.  side  of  face  and
lips  ;  warmth,  between  scapulae  and  sternum,  see  28.

Dullness  :  of  head ;  forehead  and  root  of  nose.


497  ARGENTUM  NITRICUM.

Heaviness :  in  occiput ;  in  head;  in  abdomen;  on  chest;  and
drawing  in  loins ;  from  sacrum  down  along  pelvis  and  hips ;
of  1.  arm;  of  legs,  paralytic.

Fullness :  in  head ;  in  eyeball ;  in  lids  ;  in  ears ;  in  abdomen.

Sense  of  weight  in  lower  part  of  sacrum  and  os  coccygis.

Faintness:  when  walking.

Weakness :  in  legs,  with  anxiety ;  at  pit  of  stomach  ;  in  legs,
with  backache ;  of  legs,  paralytic.

Tension  :  as  from  a  band  around  hypochondria ;  of  abdomen ;
tensive  pains  in  back.

Jerks :  in  toes.

Chilliness:,  and  trembling  with  headache;  with  pressure  in
brain  ;  up  the  back  and  over  shoulders.

Cold  feeling :  in  eyes.

Tickling :  in  larynx.

Formication  :  of  arms  and  legs.

Numbness :  of  finger-tips ;  of  legs,  as  if  made  of  wood.

Itching :  creeping,  crawling on  scalp ;  in  eyes ; of  nose ;  of
skin during climaxis; in larynx; pustules on 1. shin-
bone  ;  of  thighs  and  axillge,  see  46.
**  Tissues. iMelaena.

Acts  on  the  red  corpuscles,  causing  their  coloring  matter  to
escape  into  the  plasma,  causing  ecchymosis  and  effusions,
and  later  interference  with  oxidation  and  ultimate  chlorosis.

■  Withered,  dried  up,  look  old. d  Children,  etc.

■  Emaciation,  most  marked  in  the  legs ;  progressive  from  year

to  year.
lOEdema  of  legs;  ascites. ^ Affection  of  the  liver.
Muscles  rigid.

I  Septic  forms  of  scarlet  fever.
\  Impetigo  (as  a  caustic).

■  Excrescence  on  the  skin. ^Iritis.

■  Prevents  excessive  granulations  in  ulcers.

■  Chronic  syphilis,  with  papulae  and  osteocopic  pains.

■  ■Bone  affections.

■  Getting  gradually  thinner  for  twelve  months. /?  Subacute

pleuritis.
Infant  loses  flesh,  gets  marasmus ;  looks  as  if  it  would  die

early.
•  Dropsies.

***  Touch, Passive Motions. Must  press chest  with hands.

See  28.
Rubs  nose  until  raw.

Touching  region  of  kidneys,  increased  pain. See  35.
Worse  from  touch :  globe  of  eye  sensitive ;  hard  blotches  on

upper  lip ;  gums  sore ;  small  spot  below  xyphoid,  see  17 ;

stinging  left  side  of  stomach ;  abdomen  tense,  cannot  bear

touch  ;  sternal  region  sensitive ;  pains  about  kidneys.


ARGENTUM  NITRICUM.  498

Itching,  <  by  scratching.

Complaints  from  pressure  of  clothing;  headache,  however,  is
better  from  bandaging.

IB  Erysipelatous  bed-sore  upon  1.  shoulder,  sacrum  and  both
hip-joints;  those  on  the  sacrum  became  black  and  hard.
6  Typhus.

I  Cannot  walk  or  stand  erect, d  After  a  fall.

I  While  riding:  attack  of  palpitation,  with  anxiety  and  trem-
bling, compelling  him  to  get  out  of  the  wagon  and  walk,
and  that  "real  fast,  too."

After  scalding  with  sulphuric  acid,  a  solution  applied  on  the
burnt  place,  healed  it,  and  even  new  hairs  were  formed.
^®  Skin. ■  Cyanosis, d  Cholera.

I  Skin  from  a  blue-gray,  violet  or  bronze  color,  to  real  black.
Skin  brown,  tense,  hard.

Itching,  smarting,  mostly  of  thighs  and  axillae,  when  warm  at
night.

I I  Bluish-black  eruption, d  In  scarlet  fever.

■  Erysipelatous  bed-sores,  centre  covered  with  dry,  bloody  in-

crustations ;  black,  hard  on  sacrum.
Pustulous  ecthyma.

■  Syphilitic  papulae. ^Iritis.
Wart-shaped  excrescences.

Impetigo.
Zona.
Small  pox.
Stages  of  Life,  Constitution. Most  suitable  to  hysteric  or
nervous  persons,  and  for  headaches  from  mental  causes,  cha-
racterized by  dullness  of  the  head.

Women  with  menstrual  disturbances.

Cachectic  states,  with  loss  of  strength.

I  Scrawny,  feeble,  dried-up  looking  women, d  Prolapsus  uteri.

A  stout,  light-haired  boy  with  enuresis.

Boys'  complaints  from  using  tobacco.

Girl,  get.  10,  myopia,  after  taking  drugs  for  goitre.

A  youth,  get.  18,  growing  up  rapidly,  masturbating,  imbecile.
d  Hypochondriasis.

Man,  get.  27,  intemperate  for  years,  now  abstaining,  d  Hypo-
chondriasis.

Girl,  aged  28,  inclined  to  angemia. d  Gastric  ulcer.

Man,  get.  35,  of  intemperate  habits,  also  given  to  venery.
d  Hypochondriasis.

Woman,  get.  43,  after  a  great  deal  of  trial  and  anxiety,  sight
failed. 6  Paralysis  of  accommodation.

Man,  get.  49,  red  face,  nervous,  depressed,  anxious,  ill  for  three
years, d  Dyspepsia.

Woman,  get.  82 ;  low,  after  aggravation,  cured.

In  low  doses  it  corresponds  to  the  carbo-nitrogenoids,  like  Sul-


499  ARGENTUM  NITRICUM.

pTiur  and  Cuprum  ;  in  the  higher  it  corresponds  to  the  hy-
drogenoid  constitutions  (Grauvogl).
*^  Relationship. Antidotes  to  Arg.  nit. : llNatr.  mur.  (chemi-
cal and  dynamic),  Arsen.  and  milk.

Arg.  nit.  antidotes  :  Amm.  caust.

Boys'  complaints,  after  tobacco.

According  to  Boenninghausen,  as  antidotes  to  Arg.  nit.,  and
also  to  Nitr.  ac,  are  prominent  Pulsat.,  Calcar.,  Sepia,  and
next  to  these  three,  Lycop.,  Mercur.,  Silic,  Rhus  tox.,
Phosphor,  and  Sulphur.

1  Coffea  cruda  increases  nervous  headache.

After  Arg.  nitr.  had  failed  in  flatulent  indigestion,  Lyeop.
cured.

It  has  been  given  with  success :  after  Bryon.  and  Spigel.,  in
dyspepsia ;  after  Spongia  was  given  for  a  goitre,  and  myopia
followed ;  after  Veratr.  for  wind  passing  upwards  in  great
quantities,  inducing  faintness.

Similar  to :  Aurum;  Cuprum  ;  Kali  hichr. ;  Laches. ;  Mercur. ;
Merc.  corr.  ;  Merc.  iod.  ;  Natr.  mur. ;  Nitr.  ac.

The  main  difference  between  the  metal  and  the  nitrate,  is,  that
the  latter  acts  more  on  mucous  membrane,  the  skin,  and  es-
pecially on  the  bones  and  periosteum,  and  must  be  beneficial
to  herpetic  patients,  and  the  former  acts  especially  on  the  car-
tilages.

Complaints  from  pressure  of  clothes ;  also  in  Calcar.,  Bryon.,
Caustic,  Lycop.,  Sarsap.,  and  Stannum.


AMORACEA  SATITA.  500

ARMORACEA  SATIVA.

Vulgo  Qochlearia.  Brassicacece  or  Criiciferce.


The  common  horse-radish,  a  popular  rubefacient,  which  has  sometimes
accidentally  proved  of  great  use,  of  course  only  when  the  symptoms  corre-
sponded. Proved  by  Dr.  Franz,  who  introduced  Asafoetida  and  Valeriana  into
our  Materia  Medica;  printed  in  Stapf 's  Archives,  Vol.  17,  No.  3,  p.  176  ;  later
in  the  GaUican  Journal,  No.  3,  p.  7.  In  this  country  applied  and  somewhat
proved  by  Dr.  Gate,  Amer.  Jour.  Horn.,  Vol.  I.,  p.  336,  1851.  In  1868  we  got
another  more  complete  proving  from  one  of  our  students,  J.  C.  D.,  too
modest  to  write  his  name  on  his  treatise.


1  Mind. ■  Difficult  thinking  in  the  evening.
I  Melancholy  is  changed  into  merry  mood.
lAnxiety. d  Hydrothorax. See  28.

■  Driven  to  despair, d  Cramp  in  stomach.

Great  irresoluteness,  stupid  feeling  and  inability  to  collect  one's

thoughts.
■Worse  from  nervous  excitement,  see  20 ;  from  vexation,  see

24.
^  Sensorium, Dullness  of the head, is  unable  to  collect  his

thoughts  quick  enough.
Buzzing  in  the  head,  with  weakness,  <  forenoon  and  when

walking.
•  Syncope.
^  Inner  Head. Dull  pain  in  frontal  sinus.
Sore,  uneasy  feeling  in  frontal  sinus.
Dull,  heavy  headache.
Pressing,  boring  pain  in  the  head,  as  if  frontal  bone  would  fall

out.
Pressure  deep  in  the  brain,  aggravated  by  opening  the  eyes

(wide),  but  not  by  reading  or  motion.
Headache,  now  in  one,  then  in  another  side  of  the  head  ;  worse

when  opening  the  eyes  widely.
Headache,  with  nausea ; <  when  sitting  up.

■  Violent  headache,  with  vomiting.

■  Acute  pain  in  the  head.

*  Outer  Head. Fullness  of  frontal  sinus  and  antrum  highmorii.
^  Sight  and  Eyes. Obscuration  of  the  sight  for  some  minutes.

Lachrymation.

Spots  on  the  cornea.

Swelling  of  the  eyes.

Inflammation  of  the  Meibomean  glands.


501  ARMORACEA  SATIVA.

I  Rheumatic  ophthalmia.
^  Hearing  and  Ears. Pain  in  left  ear,  deep  in.
'  Nose. Sneezing.

Chronic  catarrh.

I  Inflammation  of  the  nose. ^  With  eye  complaints.
^  Face. Pale  face.

*  Lower  part  of  Face. Twitching  of  left  corner  of  mouth,  4  A.M.

Soreness  of  upper  lip.
'"  Teeth  and  Gums. I  Toothache,  especially  of  a  rheumatic  char-
acter.
Dull  sensation  in  the  teeth,  as  if  they  were  soft  and  became
bent  on  chewing.

I I  Scurvy  of  salt  eaters.

■  Toothache  in  carious  teeth, d  Scurvy.
Dental  fistula.

"  Taste,  Speech,  Tongue. Slight  metallic  taste  in  mouth.
iGlossoplegia.
Dull  pain  in  left  sublingual  gland  for  a  few  moments,  followed

by  a  flow  of  saliva.
Burning  biting  sensation  on  the  tongue.
I  Tongue  furred  whitish, d  Cramp  in  stomach.
^^  Inner  Mouth. Very  ofiensive  odor  from  the  mouth  and  lungs.
See  28.

I  Clotted  blood  filled  up  the  mouth, d  Apparent  death.

^^  Palate  and  Throat.  Il  Dryness  of  pharynx,  larynx  and  pos-
terior nares.

Scraping  in  the  throat,  with  nausea.

Hawking  up  thick,  viscid  mucus,  consisting  of  mucous  corpus-
cles and  plasma,  with  little  granular  matter.

Inflammation  of  the  tonsils,  with  difiiculty  in  swallowing.

■  Warm  water  put  in  the  mouth  seemed  to  go  no  further  than

the  throat, d  Apparent  death.
^*  Appetite. Little  appetite  for  breakfast.

Fearful  hungry  feeling,  unnatural  craving  for  food,  with  pro-
fuse painless  diarrhoea. See  20.
^^  Eating  and  Drinking. Dyspepsia.

^^  Belching,  Nausea  and  Vomiting. Troublesome  belching  of
a  sulphurous  odor  similar  to  garlic.
Scraping  in  the  throat,  with  nausea.
Slight  nausea,  with  irritation  of  the  pharynx.
Belching  and  vomiting  of  bilious  fluid.
^^  Scrobiculum  and  Stomach. Highly  stimulant,  exciting  the
stomach and promoting the  secretions, especially  of the
stomach.

I I  From  region  of  stomach  the  pain  draws  through  both  sides
toward  back. 6  Cramp  in  stomach. See  31.

Dull  pain  or  soreness  at  scrobiculum  cordis.

■  Violent  cramp in  stomach  beginning  toward  morning,  con-

34


ARMORACEA  SATIVA.  502

tinually  increasing,  driving  to  despair ;  goes  from  region  of

stomach  through  both  sides  around  to  the  back. A  slight

pressure  on  the  last  dorsal  vertebrce  increases  the  pain  very

much.
I  Cramp  in  stomach  after  taking  cold.
'^  Hypochondria. Crampy,  tensive  pain  above  the  epigastrium,

apparently  in  the  diaphragm,  relieved  by  bending  forward.
Griping  pain  in  the  bowels  (epigastric  region)  for  a  few  moments

upon  lying  down  upon  the  back.
Colicky  pains  in  the  left  side  below  the  short  ribs,  similar  to

that  which  she  has  with  her  monthly,  on  the  right  side.
"  Abdomen  and  Loins. I  Spasmodic  affection  in  abdomen.
Griping  pain  around  the  umbilicus.

■  Tearing  pain  from  the  belly  through  to  the  back,  down  the

back  and  settling  in  the  sacrum.
Borborygmi  in  the  morning.
iLoins  ache.
^^  Rectum  and  Stool. Stools  increased  in  frequency.

Profuse  painless  diarrhoea,  not  sick  with  it,  but  craving  food.

See  14.
Twenty  movements  of  her  bowels  in  one  day.
In  the  afternoon  two  stools,  first  profuse  and  thick,  later  less,

not  thin ;  four  or  five  times  during  the  evening,  with  a  great

deal  of  straining  ;  very  weakening.
After  great  nervous  excitement,  looseness,  six  or  seven  times

during  the  afternoon,  with  much  pain  ;  took  gin  to  check  it ;

fever  followed.
Tenesmus  all  night  until  morning,  sometimes  discharging  a

little  blood.
I  Mucous  stools.

■  Intestinal  catarrh.

Involuntary  passage  of  mucus  from  the  anus.
Straining  at  anus,  with  burning  and  stinging.
I  Itching  and  burning  at  the  anus.
^^  Urinary  Organs. Uneasiness  in  region  of  kidneys,  as  if  con-
gested.
Increased  inclination  to  urinate.

■  Increased  secretion  of  urine.

Urination  eight  or  ten  times  daily,  instead  of  four.

Urine  pale  and  limpid.

Strangury  very  severe  ;  frequent  and  scanty  urinatiou  ;  water

thick,  like  jelly  on  standing,  yellowish  color,  although  neither

yellow  nor  white.
Ischuria  and  bloody  urine.
Dysuria.
I  Gravel.
I  Calculi.
Albuminuria.


503  ARMORACEA  SATIVA.

■  Nephritis  albuminosa,  with  great  paleness,  and  atony  of  kid-
neys.

Frequent  desire  to  urinate ;  the  urine  is  discharged  with  diffi-
culty, causing  burning,  tenderness  and  inflammation  of  the
urethra,  as  in  the  first  (inflammatory)  stages  of  gonorrhoea.
^^  Male  Sexual  Organs. I Impotence,  torpidity.

Burning  or  cutting  at  the  glans  during  micturition,  felt  also
before  or  after.

B I  Inflammatory  stage  of  gonorrhoea.

iGronorrhoea,  with  violent  smarting  and  burning,  difficult  mic-
turition, and  a  rather  scanty  discharge  from  the  urethra.

1 1  Gonorrhoea,  after  cutting  and  Durning  pains  during  micturi-
tion had  been  nearly  removed  by  the  1st  or  2d  dilution,  the
6*th  acted  with  good  efiect.

I  Chronic  and  neglected  gonorrhoea.
^^  Female  Sexual  Organs- During  the  night  pieces  of  coagu-
lated blood  pass  from  the  vagina.

When  urinating  stringy  black  blood  from  vagina.

Menses  every  ten  or  fifteen  days.

Suppressed  menses  and  chlorosis.

iLeucorrhoea  and  menostasis.

I  Since  climaxis,  cramp  in  stomach.
24  Pregnancy  and  Parturition. Milk  tastes  and  smells  like
horse-radish.

■  After  a  vexation  of  the  mother  the  nursing  child  vomits  the

milk.
^'  Voice  and  Larynx. iLoss  of  voice;  whispering.
I  Aphonia,  with  blood-spitting.

■  Hoarseness  and  roughness  in  throat.
Dryness  of  larynx.

Used  by  singers  to  clear  the  throat.
^®  Respiration. Oppression  of  breathing,  with  hoarseness ;  scor-
butus.

■  Pituitous  asthma.

Increases  activity  of  respiratory  organs.
""  Cough. Hard  or  loose  cough,  <  from  suppertime  until  going
to  bed.

Hawking  up  of  thick,  viscid  mucus,  consisting  of  mucous  cor-
puscles, plasma,  and  but  little  granular  matter.

■  Pituitous  consumption.

•  It  relieves  cough  and  promotes  expectoration.
^^  Inner  Chest  and  Lungs. Inflammation  of  the  lungs.

Pleuritis,  with  painfulness  in  the  scapular  region,  •<  afternoon

and  leaning  back.
I  After  violent  cough,  hemorrhage  and  apparent  death.
OEdema  of  the  lungs.
Mucous  asthma. See  44.

■  During  convalescence  from  pneumonia.


ARMORACEA  SATIVA.  504

Relieved  pressing,  stitching  in  chest,  bloody  sputum,  anxiety
and  oppression  (external  application).
^^  Heart  and  Pulse. ^No palpitation of  the heart; apparent
death.
I  Pulse  small. 6  Cramp  in  stomach.
•  Accelerates  the  pulse.
^"  Outer  Chest. Grasping  pain  in  left  side  and  both  shoulders.

Chest  painful  to  touch.
^^  Neck  and  Back. Pain  in  back  as  from  incarcerated  flatulence.
I A  slight  pressure  on  the  last  dorsal  vertebrae  increases  the
pain  exceedingly, d  Cramp  in  stomach. See  17.

I  Pain  from  abdomen  through  to  back  and  down  into  sacrum.
^^  Upper  Limbs. Painful  twitchings  in  third  left  phalanx.

^  Lower  Limbs. Pain  at  the  adductors  of  both  thighs,  upper
part ;  it  almost  drags  her  to  pieces.
Twitching  in  leg  (right),  outside  of  tibia,  middle  third.
Pain  in  left  gastrocnemius.
Twitching  in  right  foot,  third  metatarsal  tendon.

■  Suppressed  foot-sweats.

^^  Limbs  in  General. Toward  morning  pains  in  all  the  joints
when  lying  still; ■<  lying  on  the  side;  pass  off  on  motion
and  when  getting  up.
^^  Position. Rest. Motion. Toward  morning  pain  in  all  the
limbs  when  lying  still,  worse  when  lying  on  the  side,  pass-  ■
ing  off  on  motion  and  when  getting  up.
Bending  forward : >>  cramp. See  18.
Lying  on  side:  pains  in  joints  <C-
Lying  on  back  :  pain  in  bowels.
Motion  : pains  in  every  joint  better.
Rest:  pains  in  every  joint  worse.
^^  Nerves. General  prostration, d  With  backache.  -
\  Palsy.

■  Apparent  death  after  a  hemorrhage  from  lungs,  with  a  child

suffering  from  whooping-cough.
It  raises  the  vital  forces  w^hen  sunken  to  the  lowest  degree.

I I  Asphyxia.

^^  Sleep. Sleep  very  refreshing.
Heavy  sleep.

Awoke  with  a  clearer  mind  than  usual.
Sleepless  nights,  with  bearing  down  in  abdomen. See  19.
^*  Time. Night :  tenesmus  ;  coagulated  blood  from  vagina.

Morning:  borborygmi ; pains  in  joints ; Icramp  in  stomach

worse.
Afternoon  :  4  p.m.  twitching  of  corner  of  mouth ; stools,  see

20.
Evening  :  difficult  thinking  ;  stools  ;  cough.
^^  Temperature  and  Weather. I After  a  cold:  cramp  in  stom-
ach. See  17.


505  ARMORACEA  SATIVA.

*"  Fever. i  Increases  warmth,  local  and  general  exhalation.
Causes  perspiration.
':  Intermittent  fever.
*^  Locality  and  Direction. Right :  twitching  in  leg ;  in  foot.
Left :  pain  deep  in  ear ;  corner  of  mouth  twitches ;  dull  pain

in  sublingual  gland ;  grasping  pain  in  side  and  shoulders ;

third  phalanx,  painful  twitches ;  pain  in  gastrocnemius.
Pain  draws  from  stomach  through  sides  to  back.
'^^  Sensations. Bloated  sensation  as  if  everything  was  distended

without  being  actually  larger.
Externally  applied,  causes  violent  pains.
Stitches:  inchest. See  28.
Cutting :  and  burning  during  micturition.
Burning  :  and  biting  on  tongue ;  —  and  stinging  at  anus  ;  —

and  itching  at  anus ;  in  urethra ;  —  and  cutting  in  glans.
Pressing :  and  boring  in  head,  see  3  ;  deep  in  brain ;  in  chest,

see  28.
Tearing  pains :  from  belly  through  back  into  sacrum.
Grasping  pain  :  in  1.  side  and  both  shoulders  ;  in  r.  foot.
Griping :  in  bowels.

Cramp :  in  stomach ;  crampy,  tensive  pain  above  epigastrium.
Soreness  :  of  upper  lip ;  at  scrobiculum  cordis.
Sore,  uneasy  feeling :  in  frontal  sinus.
Scraping :  in  throat.
Smarting  :  and  burning,  gonorrhoea.
Aching:  in  loins;  in  all  joints  toward  morning.
Rheumatic  toothache.

Dull  pain:  in  frontal  sinus;  in  teeth,  as  if  soft;  in  1.  sublin-
gual gland  ;  at  scrobiculum  cordis.
Undefined  pain  :  in  head  ;  in  1.  ear ;  with  looseness  of  bowels  ;

in  scapular  region ;  in  back ;  in  adductors  of  thighs ;  in  1.

gastrocnemius.
Dullness :  of  head.
Uneasiness  :  in  region  of  kidneys.
Fullness  :  frontal  sinus  and  antrum.
Buzzing :  in  head.
Twitching:  1.  corner  of  mouth;  in  third  1.  phalanx,  painful;

in  r.  leg.
Dryness  :  pharynx,  larynx  and  nares.
Itching :  at  anus.
"  Tissues. Pain  in  all  the  joints. See  34.

1 1  Rheumatism,  wandering,  chronic. See  10.

Gout ;  also  its  suppression,  followed  by  colic  and  retention  of

urine  (used  in  foot-bath). See  19.
1 1  Antiscorbutic. See  also  10,  46.
"  Mucous  "  diseases. See  7,  13,  20,  21,  27,  28.
Torpid,  chronic  catarrhs.
Anasarca  after  intermittents. See  also  28.


ARMORACEA  SATIVA.  506

■  Dropsy,  with  albuminuria.

I  After  pneumonia,  during  reconvalescence.

■  Beginning  enteritis.

■  Beginning  pleurits.
Chronic  catarrhs.

*^  Touch. Passive  Motion. Touching  the  abdomen  and  small
of  back  gives  pain  which  extends  into  the  r.  leg.
Chest  painful  to  touch.

Slight  pressure  on  back  : <  cramp. See  31.
^®  Skill. The  rubefacient  effect  is  shorter  than  that  of  mustard.
The skin is reddened  and irritated, sometimes blisters are
formed.
Erysipelatous  affections  (the  leaves).
Eruptions  of  skin.
Freckles  and  liver-spots.
Scorbutic  ulcers.

*^  Stages  of  Life,  Constitution. A  stout  woman,  get.  40,  sub-
ject to  cramps  in  stomach  ;  violent  attack  with  backache.

■  A  woman  suffering  from  violent  headache,  with  vomiting,  since

the  climaxis. 6  Cramp  in  stomach.
■•^  Relationship. Useful  in  scurvy  of  salt  eaters.

Contains  an  etheric  oil,  very  similar,  if  not  identical  with
Sinapis.

Comparable  with  : Oanthar.,  Capsic,  Rhus  tox.  and  Sinap.

Juniper  berries  antidote  bladder  and  urinary  complaints.

Took  gin  for  the  colic,  and  for  the  fever  following  it,  Bellad.
See  20.

Eating  horse-radish,  after  Merc.  sol.  had  been  given,  was  fol-
lowed by  an  aggravation  of  pain  in  hips,  which  was  followed
by  a  lasting  improvement.

Similar  to  tea,  see  43,  first  symptom.


FIRST  ANNUAL  REPORT


OF THE


BOARD  OF  DIRECTORS


OF THE


AMERICAN  HOMCEOPATHIC


PUBLISHING  SOCIETY


TO THE


STOCKHOLDERS,


PHILADELPHIA:

Gi.oBE  Printing  House,  112  and  114  North  Twelfth  Street.

1879.


OFFICERS 1878.


BOARD  OF  DIRECTORS.

DR.  CONSTANTINE  HERING,

DR.  ADOLPH  LIPPE,

DR.  HENRY  N.  GUERNSEY,

DR.  JOHN  K.  LEE,

DR.  THOMAS  MOORE,

DR.  JOHN  MALIN,

DR.  JOSEPH  C.  GUERNSEY.

President,  DR.  CONSTANTINE  HERING.
Treasurer,  DR.  THOMAS  MOORE.
Secretary,  DR.  J.  C.  GUERNSEY.


COMMITTEES


ON  PUBLICATION.

DR.  A.  LIPPE,
DR.  H.  N.  GUERNSEY,
DR.  THOS.  MOORE,
DR.  J.  C.  GUERNSEY,
DR.  J.  K.  LEE.

ON  FINANCE.

DR.  JOHN  MALIN,

DR.  J.  K.  LEE,

DR.  J.  C.  GUERNSEY.


FIRST  ANNUAL  REPORT


OF THE


BOARD  or  DIRECTORS  TO  THE  STOCKHOLDERS.


Philadelphia,  November  ^th,  i8y8.
Gentlemen  :

On  the  1 6th  day  of  August,  1877,  a  number  of  the  physicians
in  the  city  of  Philadelphia  met  at  the  residence  of  Dr.  Constan-
tine  Hering  for  consultation  upon  the  expediency  of  organizing
a  society  for  the  publication  of  Homoeopathic  Medical  Works.
Several  adjourned  meetings  were  held  at  which  there  was  marked
unanimity  of  opinion  that  the  establishing  of  a  society  that
would  publish  works  of  certified  merit  and  furnish  them  to  its
members  at  the  cost  of  manufacture  was  "desirable,  necessary
and  feasible."

A  call  was  therefore  issued  for  a  general  meeting  to  be  held  in
Dr.  Hering' s  parlors,  No.  112  North  Twelfth  St.,  Philadelphia,
on  the  evening  of  September  25th,  1877.  The  meeting  was
largely  attended,  and  among  those  present  were  the  recognized
leaders  in  the  Homoeopathic  School  of  Medicine  practising  in
Philadelphia,  and  letters  were  read  from  physicians  of  note  in
other  cities.  This  meeting  resolved  to  organize  the  "American
Homceopathic  Publishing  Society"  with  a  capital  stock  of  ten
thousand  dollars,  and  about  one-tenth  of  the  stock  was  sub-

An  adjourned  meeting  was  held  at  the  same  place  on  the  2d
day  of  October,  when  it  appearing  that  over  one-tenth  of  the
manner  provided  for  by  the  General  Act  of  Assembly  of  Penn-
sylvania to  form  an  organization.

Dr.  John  K.  Lee  was  president  of  the  meeting  for  organiza-
tion. A  Board  of  Directors,  consisting  of  seven,  was  elected  as
follows: Dr.  Constantine  Hering,  Dr.  Adolph  Lippe,  Dr.  Henry


N. Guernsey,  Dr.  John  K. Lee,  Dr.  Thomas  Moore,  Dr.  John
Malin  and  Dr.  Joseph  C.  Guernsey  to  serve  for  one  year.

The  meeting  adopted  a  resolution  declaring  that  "Every
stockholder  shall  be  entitled  to  purchase  annually  books  pub-
lished by  the  Society  equal  in  amount  to  the  par  value  of  his
stock  at  the  price  determined  upon  by  the  Board  of  Directors —
such  purchases  to  be  paid  for  in  cash."

The  price  of  stock  was  fixed  at  ten  dollars  per  share.  Stock
must  be  paid  for  in  full  before  the  certificate  will  be  issued  to

The  meeting  adopted  a  series  of  By-Laws  providing,  among
other  things,  that  the  Board  of  Directors  shall  generally  conduct
the  affairs  of  the  Society  and  then  adjourned  siiie  die.

The  members  who  were  elected  Directors  convened  immedi-
diately  after  the  adjournment  of  the  general  meeting  and  pro-
ceeded to  organize  and  to  the  transaction  of  business.  Officers
were  elected  as  follows  :

President^  Dr.  Constantine  Hering.
Treasurer,  Dr.  Thomas  Moore.
Secretary,  Dr.  J.  C.  Guernsey.

Josiah  R.  Sypher,  Attorney  at  Law,  was  elected  Solicitor  to
the  Board,  and  was,  by  resolution,  instructed  to  make  applica-
tion to  the  Governor  of  the  Commonwealth  of  Pennsylvania  for
a  charter  under  the  General  Corporation  Act  of  29th  April,
A.D.,  1874.

At  a  subsequent  meeting  of  the  Board  the  By-Laws  published
herewith  were  adopted,  and  the  President  announced  the  com-
mittees as  follows :

Committee  on  Publication  : — Drs.  A.  Lippe,  H.  N.  Guernsey,
Thomas  Moore,  J.  K.  Lee  and  J.  C.  Guernsey.

Committee  on  Finance : — Drs.  John  Malin,  J.  K.  Lee  and  J.  C.
Guernsey.

The  Board  proceeded  to  provide  for  its  use  and  the  use  of  the
Society,  proper  books,  certificates  of  stock  and  a  common  seal.

The  charter  or  certificate  of  incorporation  was  granted  to  the
Society  under  the  Great  Seal  of  the  Commonwealth  on  the  loth
day  of  June,  1878.  The  Act  of  Assembly  under  which  tlie
Society  is  incorporated  provides  that  stockholders  shall  be  liable
for  the  debts  of  the  incorporation  only  to  the  amount  of  their
individual  shares.  Inasmuch  as  no  certificate  of  stock  is  issued
by  this  Society  until  it  has  been  paid  for,  there  can  be  no
further  liability  to  the  holder ;  there  can  be  no  assessments  by
the  Society,  and  there  is  no  liability  to  creditors.


The  business  of  the  Society  is  managed  upon  a  purely  cash
basis ;  no  debts  are  contracted  or  liabilities  incurred  beyond
what  can  be  met  by  the  funds  in  hand.  The  object  is  to  manu-
capital  and  pay  the  actual  cost  of  the  works  published  ;  there  is
no  speculative  element  in  the  business  that  might  lead  to  loss
or  misventures.

The  Board  has  contracted  with  Dr.  Constantine  Hering  for
the  publication  of  a  work  entitled  ^'^  Guiding  Symptoms,''''  to  be
completed  in  about  ten  octavo  volumes  of  about  500  pages  each.

A  contract  for  the  printing  of  this  work  has  been  made  on
favorable  terms  with  the  "Globe  Printing  House,"  and  the
work  is  progressing  in  a  manner  satisfactory  to  the  managers.

The  Report  of  the  Treasurer  will  inform  the  stockholders  of
the  financial  condition  of  the  Society.  The  profession  and  the
friends  of  Homoeopathy  are  invited  to  give  their  substantial  aid
and  sympathy  to  this  effort  to  provide  for  all,  at  the  smallest
possible  cost,  a  sound,  thorough  and  comprehensive  literature
for  the  use  of  both  physicians  and  laymen.  The  Society,  having
passed  successfully  through  the  trials  and  dangers  of  birth  and
the  period  of  preparation,  has  now  entered  fairly  and  fully  upon
the  business  of  its  life,  with  fair  prospects,  that,  under  careful
management,  it  may  achieve  great  and  lasting  results  for  its
members  as  well  as  for  the  public  at  large.

C.  HERING,  President.


Report  of  Thomas  Moore,  M.D.,  Treasurer.

Received  for  127  Shares  of  Stock  paid  up, .  . $1,270  00

Expenses  of  Charter  and  Solicitor's  Fees, . $126  05

To  Cash  to  Dr.  C.  Hering  on  account  of  roy-
alty for  Guiding  Symptoms, . .  150  00

To  Globe  Printing  House,  first  instalment  for

printing  Vol.  I.  of  Guiding  Symptoms,  250  00

Miscellaneous  expenditures, . .  2550 5515S


Balance, 718  45

THOMAS  MOORE,  Treasurer.


CHARTER.

Pennsylvania  ss  :
(Signed)  J.  F.  HARTRANFT.

In  the  name  and  authority  of  the  Commonwealth  of


f.^TriP  Pennsylvania,

JOHN  F.  HARTRANFT,
Governor  of  the  said  Commonwealth.

To  all  to  whom  these  presents  shall  come  sends  greeting :

Whereas,  In  and  by  an  act  of  the  General  Assembly  of  the
Commonwealth  of  Pennsylvania,  entitled  "An  act  to  provide  for
the  incorporation  and  regulation  of  certain  corporations,"  ap-
proved the  twenty-ninth  day  of  April,  Anno  Domini  one  thou-
sand eight  hundred  and  seventy-four,  the  Governor  of  this  Com-
monwealth is  authorized  and  required  to  issue


Letters  Patent

to  all  corporations  formed  under  the  provisions  of  said  act,  em-
braced within  in  the  second  class  named  therein. And

Whereas,  The  stipulations,  conditions  and  things  directed  to
be  performed  in  said  recited  act  of  the  General  Assembly  have
been  fully  complied  with  by  the  American  HonKxopathic  Publish-
ing Society  formed  under  the  provisions  of  said  recited  act.  The
business  of  said  Corporation  is  to  be  transacted  in  the  City  of
Philadelphia,  County  of  Philadelphia,  State  of  Pennsylvania.

Now  Know  Ye,  That  in  pursuance  of  the  power  and  authority
to  me  given  by  law,  I,  John  F.  Hartranft,  Governor  of  the
said  Commonwealth,  do  by  these  presents,  which  I  have  caused
to  be  made  patent  and  sealed  with  the  Great  Seal  of  the  State,


Horace  Howard  Furness,

15

W.  C.  Goodno,

5

Con  Stan  tine  Hering,

15

C.  B.  Knerr,

5

Wm.  P.  Wesselhoeft,

15

M.  Lang,

5

H.  N.  Guernsey,

10

J.  K.  Lee,

I

Ad.  Lippe,

10

J.  C.  Guernsey,

I

Thomas  Moore,

10

John  Malin,

5

C.  Neidhard,

I

J.  R.  Sypher,

I

James  B.  Bell,

5

Malcolm  Macfarlan,

5

George  W.  Malin,

5

Atnounting  in  the  whole  to  one  hundred  and  fourteen  shares.


holders  of  the  stock  of  the  said  corporation,  into  one  body
politic  and  corporate,  in  deed  and  in  law,  by  the  name,  style  and
title  of  the  American  Homceopathic  Publishing  Society,  and
cession, and  all  the  privileges  and  franchises  incident  to  a  cor-
cessors and  assigns,  are  generally  to  be  invested  with  all  the
rights,  powers  and  privileges,  with  full  force  and  effect,  and  sub-
ject to  all  the  duties,  requisites  and  restrictions  specified  and  en-
joined in  and  by  the  said  act  of  the  General  Assembly,  and  all
other  laws  of  this  Commonwealth.

Given  under  my  hand  and  the  Great  Seal  of  the  State,  at
Harrisburg,  this  tenth  day  of  June,  in  the  year  of  our  Lord,  one
thousand  eight  hundred  and  seventy-eight,  and  of  the  Common-
wealth the  one  hundred  and  second.

By  the  Governor.  (Signed)  John  B.  Linn,

Secretary  of  the  Commonwealth.


BY-LAWS.

ARTICLE  I.

Stated  meetings  of  the  Society  shall  be  held  annually  on  the
first  Monday  of  November  in  every  year,  unless  otherwise  di-
rected by  the  Board  of  Directors,  and  adjournments  of  such
meetings  may  be  made  when  necessary.

ARTICLE  II.

The  Society  at  each  annual  meeting  shall  elect  a  Board  of  Di-
rectors, seven  in  number ;  and  they  (the  Directors)  shall  elect,
at  such  meetings,  a  President,  Treasurer  and  Secretary,  who  shall
be  members  of  the  Board,  and  they  (the  Directors)  shall  also
appoint  such  other  officers  as  may  be  required,  who  shall  hold
office  for  one  year  or  until  their  successors  are  elected.

ARTICLE  III.

The  Treasurer  shall  enter  into  bonds  with  the  Society,  to  be
approved  by  the  Board  before  entering  upon  his  duties,  in  the
sum  of  two  thousand  dollars  for  the  faithful  performance  of  his
duties,  or  in  such  larger  sums  as  the  Society  from  time  to  time
shall  determine.

ARTICLE  IV.

The  Board  of  Directors  shall  define  the  duties  of  its  officers,
and  shall  generally  conduct  the  affairs  of  the  Society.


ARTICLE  V.

The  Board  of  Directors  shall  ascertain  the  cost  of  the  publica-
tion of  each  work  upon  the  issue  thereof,  and  shall  add  to  such
cost,  five  per  cent,  of  said  cost;  and  the  sum  so  obtained  shall
be  the  price  of  each  publication  to  the  Stockholders.


BY-LAWS  FOR  THE  BOARD  OF  DIRECTORS.

ARTICLE  I.

Stated  Meetings  of  the  Board  of  Directors  shall  be  held  on
the  first  Monday  of  every  month,  unless  otherwise  directed  by
the  Board,  and  adjournments  of  such  meetings  may  be  made
when  necessary.

ARTICLE  II.

Four  members  of  the  Board  shall  be  necessary  to  form  a
QUORUM  for  the  transaction  of  business.

ARTICLE  III.

The  Board  shall  by  election  fill  all  vacancies  which  may  occur
by  death,  resignation  or  otherwise,  and  the  officers  so  elected
shall  continue  in  office  until  the  next  annual  election,  and  until
their  successors  are  elected.

ARTICLE  IV.

The  Secretary  shall  attend  all  meetings  of  the  Board  of  Di-
rectors.

It  shall  be  his  duty  to  keep  fair  minutes  and  records  of  their
proceedings,  to  issue  notice  to  the  members  of  all  meetings,  and
to  prepare  a  yearly  report  to  be  laid  before  the  stockholders  at  the
annual  meeting  in  November.

ARTICLE  V.

The  Treasurer  shall  upon  full  payment  to  him  of  ten  dollars
(;^io)  for  each  share  of  stock  of  the  Corporation,  issue  certifi-
cates therefor  signed  by  the  President  and  Secretary,  and  count-
ersigned by  him.  He  shall  receive  all  monies  paid  for  publica-
tions sold.  He  shall,  out  of  the  funds  so  received  by  him,  pay
such  claims  as  the  Board  may  direct,  the  orders  to  be  signed  by
the  President  and  Secretary.  He  shall  pay  all  current  bills
against  the  Corporation  upon  approval  by  the  Committee  on
Finance,  or  when  directed  by  a  resolution  of  the  Board  of
Directors,  and  shall  take  and  keep  proper  vouchers  for  such  pay-
ments. He  shall  prepare  and  submit  to  the  Committee  on
Finance,  on  the  first  Monday  in  May  and  November  in  every


year,  a  correct  statement  of  the  receipts  and  expenses  of  the  pre-
ceding half  year,  and  of  the  funds  remaining  to  the  credit  of  the
Corporation.  He  shall  deposit  all  monies  received  on  account
and  for  the  use  of  the  "  Americajt  Homceopathic  Publishing  So-
ciety;' in  such  bank  as  may  be  designated  by  the  Committee  on
Finance  to  his  credit  as  "  Treasurer  of  the  America?i  Homoeo-
pathic Fubiishing  Society;'  and  all  checks  drawn  upon  such  bank
shall  be  to  the  order  and  in  the  name  or  names  of  the  person  or
persons  to  whom  the  money  so  drawn  is  to  be  paid.  He  shall
keep  regular  books  of  account  of  all  receipts  and  expenditures,
which  books  shall,  at  all  reasonable  times  be  open  to  the  inspec-
tion of  the  Committee  on  Finance,  or  of  any  member  of  the
Board  of  Directors.

ARTICLE  VI.

The  Committee  on  Publication  shall,  upon  the  presentation
of  manuscript,  examine  its  merits,  recommend  it  for  acceptance
or  rejection,  and  make  such  terms  with  the  author  as  can  be
agreed  upon  ;  they  shall  make  these  terms  with  the  author  under
a  written  contract,  their  recommendation  and  contract  to  be  sub-
mitted to  the  Board  of  Directors  for  approval  and  confirmation.

ARTICLE  VII.

The  Committee  on  Finance  shall  audit  all  accounts  rendered,
and  if  approved,  endorse  them  as  correct  before  they  are  pre-
sented for  payment  to  the  Treasurer.  They  shall  on  the  first
Monday  of  May  and  November  in  every  year,  examine  and  audit
the  accounts  of  the  Treasurer.

ARTICLE  VIIL

Special  Meetings  of  the  Board  of  Directors  shall  be  called  by
the  President  upon  the  request  in  writing,  signed  by  two  or  more
members  of  the  Board  ;  of  which  meetings  notices  shall  be  issued
by  the  Secretary.

ARTICLE  IX.

Amendments  to  these  By  Laws  maybe  made  at  any  regular
meeting  of  the  Board,  provided  notice  of  such  amendment  shall
have  been  given  in  writing  at  a  previous  meeting  of  the  Board.


OFFICERS 1879.


BOARD  OF  DIRECTORS.

DR.  C.  HERING,  Philadelphia.
DR.  W.  P.  WESSELHCEFT,  Boston.
DR.  CHAS.  MOHR,  Philadelphia.

DR.  J.  H.  McClelland,  Pittsburgh.

DR.  C.  B.  KNERR,  Philadelphia.
DR.  S.  LILIENTHAL,  New  York. '
DR.  W.  C.  GOODNO,  Philadelphia.

President,  DR.  CONSTANTINE  HERLNG.
Treasurer,  DR.  W.  C.  GOODNO.
Secretary,  DR.  C.  MOHR.


COMM  ITTEES


ON  PUBLICATION.

DR.  W.  C.  GOODNO,
DR.  C.  B.  KNERR,

DR.  S.  LILIENTHAL,
DR.  W.  P.  WESSELHCEFT,
DR.  C.  MOHR,

DR.  J.  H.  McClelland.

ON FINANCE.

DR.  C.  B.  KNERR,
DR.  C.  MOHR.


AMERICAN

HOMCEOPATHIC PUBLISHING SOCIETY.


'HE  attention  of  physicians  and  the  friends  and
patrons  of  Homceopathy  generally  is  invited  to
the  nature,  scope  and  purposes  of  the  American
Homoeopathic  Publishing  Society.

It  is  a  regularly  organized  corporation,  chart-
ered and  constituted  a  body  corporate  under  the
seal  of  the  Commonwealth  of  Pennsylvania,  and
by  virtue  of  the  provisions  of  a  general  act  of  the  General  As-
sembly of  that  State,  possesses  the  chartered  rights  necessary  for
carrying  on  the  business  of  publishing  and  selling  books.  It
capital  to  the  extent  of  looo  shares  of  $10.00  each,  with  the  pri-
vilege of  increasing  the  capital  stock  by  a  vote  of  the  members
of  the  Society.  Under  the  provisions  of  the  general  act,  stock-
holders are  liable  only  to  the  extent  of  the  par  value  of  the  stock
held.  The  stock  certificates  are  issued  only  upon  paid  up  sub-
scriptions, therefore  there  can  be  no  assessments  made  by  the
Society,  and  there  can  be  no  liability  beyond  the  sum  actually
paid  in  by  each  stockholder.

The  Society  is  limited  only  by  the  bounds  of  Homoeopathic
Medical  Science.  The  doors  are  open  to  all  who  have  manu-
scripts to  offer  for  publication,  on  any  phase  or  branch  of  medi-
cine, or  medical  science  treated  Homceopathically.  Authors  are
invited  to  offer  their  works  or  contemplated  works  to  this  So-
ciety for  publication.

The  Society  aims  first  of  all  to  give  to  the  profession  and
the  public,  thoroughly  sound  and  reliable  works ;  and  secondly,
to  give  to  its  members  the  material  advantage  of  obtaining  med-
ical books  at  the  actual  cost  of  production.

The  working  capital  of  the  Society  is  contributed  by  the
stockholders  who  receive  their  profits  in  the  purchase  of  books
at  cost,  which  is  at  about  50  per  cent,  of  the  ordinary  trade  re-
tail prices. A  holder  of  one  share  of  stock  costing  $10.00,  may


purchase  every  year  ^lo.oo  worth  of  the  Society's  publications
for  about  the  sum  of  $5.00  cash,  and  thus  in  two  years  save  the
price  of  the  stock,  and  his  privilege  continues  as  long  as  the  So-
ciety exists.  It  is  therefore  clearly  to  the  advantage  of  every
purchaser  of  homoeopathic  books  to  become  a  stockholder  in  this
Corporation  to  the  extent  of  at  least  one  share  of  stock.  The
stock  is  transferable,  and  therefore  the  liberal  patrons  of  this
school  of  medicine  can  do  a  good  work  by  subscribing  to  the
stock  of  the  Publishing  Society  and  transferring  their  shares  to
students  of  medicine,  to  graduates  and  to  young  physicians,  who
would  thereby  be  enabled  to  enjoy  the  advantages  of  buying  the
cates to  be  made  out  in  the  name  of  himself  or  his  beneiiciary,  or
can  authorize  any  Homoeopathic  College  to  nominate  one  worthy
of  his  benefaction.

The  Board  of  Directors  have  contracted  with  the  well-
known  publishers,  Messrs.  J.  M.  Stoddart  &  Co.,  of  Philadel-
phia, for  the  sale  of  the  publications  of  the  Society  on  terms
and  conditions  most  advantageous  to  stockholders.  The  Society
by  this  connection,  has  secured  the  facilities  of  an  establishment
thoroughly  organized  and  equipped  for  business,  through  which
it  reaches  the  public  and  distributes  its  publications  to  subscrib-
ers without  loss  of  time  and  at  a  minimum  cost.


ANNOUNCEMENT,


^$=fc^ •

The  announcement  of  the  publication  of  a  work  from  the  pen
of  the  venerable  Dr.  Constantine  Hering,  the  recognized  founder
of  Homoeopathy  in  America,  and  the  ablest  among  the  builders
on  the  foundation  laid  by  Hahnemann,  is  a  notable  event  in  the
progress  of  medical  science.  The  announcement  of  the  appear-
ance of  the  first  volume  of  a  thoroughly  exhaustive  and  compre-
hensive work  by  this  distinguished  author,  comprising  the
Gadding  St/niptOins  for  every  remedy  now  in  use  among
the  best  practitioners,  is  doubtless  the  beginning  of  what,  when
completed,  will  be  the  greatest  achievement  in  the  history  of
medical  literature.

The  American  Homoeopathic  Publishing  Society  has  contracted
with  Dr.  Hering  for  the  publication  of  his  new  work,  entitled  :

GUIDING  SYIWPTOIVJS  OF  OUR  WIATERIA  WIEOICA.

The  work  is  to  be  published  in  ten  volumes  of  about  500  pages
and  Volume  II  is  in  the  hands  of  the  printer.*  The  publishers
expect  to  issue  at  least  two  volumes  a  year  until  the  work  is
completed.

The  work  is  sold  only  by  subscription :  First  to  the  stock-
holders of  the  society  at  an  advance  of  five  per  cent,  on  the  cost
of  manufacture  and  delivery,  viz.:  in  sheets,  $2.50;  bound  in
cloth,  ^2.75;  bound  in  library  leather,  ^3.25;  bound  in  half
holders in  the  society,  at  the  publishers  prices  as  follows :

Bound  in  cloth,  .... $5.00  per  vol.

" library  leather, . .  6.00 '' '•

" " ^  morocco, . . . 7.00 " •'


J.  M,  STODDART  &  CO.,

Publishers  for  the  American  HomcBopnthic  Publishing  Society,

727  Chestnut  Street,  Philadelphia.


*  As  per  specimen  pages  annexed.


©n  Faees  of  Volume  !!■


GUIDING  SYMPTOMS


OF OUR


MATERIA  MEDICA.


ARNICA  MONTANA  (RADIX).

Leopard's  bane.  Compositce.


A.  widely  spread  plant  growing  on  the  high  mountain  plains  of  Ger-
many. One  of  the  oldest  popular  drugs,  called  in  the  German  Wohlverleih,
which  means  bestowing  well-being,  having  nothing  to  do  with  wolves,  as
our  learned  French  colleague  supposed  ;  it  is  also  called  Fallkraiit,  meaning
the  herb  useful  after  a  fall.  Two  hundred  years  ago  Fehr  called  it  panacea
lapsorum.

One  of  the  first  provings  of  Hahnemann  was  made  with  the  Arnica  root.
{Fragmenta  de  viribus  medicamentorum  positivis  sine  in  sano  corpore  humano
observatis,  1805,  pp.  17-24)  containing  117  symptoms  of  Hahnemann's  own
observation ;  quotations,  33 ;  one  of  the  most  wonderful  results  of  his
exploration,  and  all  from  the  root.

In  the  first  volume  of  his  Materia  Medica  Pura,  1811,  pp.  236-248,  his  own
symptoms  increased  to  175;  quotations  from  old  books,  never  considered
of  any  importance  to  real  homoeopathic  practitioners,  to  55.

In  the  second  edition,  1822,  pp.  471-503,  Hahnemann's  symptoms  had  in-
creased to  278,  all  from  the  root,  and  he  was  able  to  add  provings  by  his
students.  He  examined  each  proving  with  the  utmost  care  and  scrupu-
lousness, and  the  symptoms  had  increased  to  314.

In  the  third  edition,  1830,  soon  after,  there  were  in  all  638,  only  46  ad-
ditions.

A  great  many  reports  of  so-called  poisonings  have  been  given  in  the
journals.  It  is  very  probable  that  all  these  were  the  result  of  tincture  made
from  the  flowers,  containing  the  arnica  fly.  Before  the  bud  opens,  an  in-
VOL.  II.— 1.  (1)


^  ARNICA  MONTANA.

sect,  Atherix  maculatus  Meignen,  lays  its  eggs  into  the  torus,  or  receptacle
The  worms  coming  therefrom  live  on  the  seed,  which  does  not  prevent  the
development  of  the  flowers,  but  the  ripening  of  seed. Nearly  all  flowers
in  the  shops  contain  eggs,  worms,  or  the  excrements  and  other  remains  of
the  worms,  or  the  pupas ;  and  all  this  acts  similarly  to  Cantharides

Following  the  example  of  Hahnemann,  we  ought  to  use  nothing  but  the
root.

It  would  be  of  great  importance  to  have  this  insect,  or  its  eggs  or  pupas
proved,  to  enable  us  to  separate  the  symptoms  of  the  flowers  from  those
of  the  insect.  All  tinctures  made  from  the  flowers  are  very  uncertain  pre-
parations and  not  to  be  trusted.

'  Mind. Stupefaction,  loss  of  sight  and  hearing, d  Concussion
of  brain.

■  Comatose,  soporous,  stupid  states. ^Typhus.

I  Lies  as  if  dead, d  Concussion  of  brain  ;  apoplexy,  etc.

I  Coma,  insensibility, d  Congestive  chills,  meningitis,  etc.

I I  Stupor  with  involuntary  discharge  of  feces, d  Typhus.
I  I  Loss  of  consciousness, d  Angina  pectoris.
Unconscious ;  when  spoken  to  answers  correctly,  but  uncon-
sciousness and  delirium  at  once  return.

I  Could  be  aroused  and  answer  intelligently,  but  relapsed  im-

mediately into  stupor.

I I  Forgetful ; what  he  reads  quickly  escapes  his  memory,  even
the  word  he  is  about  speaking, d  Typhus.

I  Absent-minded,  thoughts  wander  from  their  object  and  dwell

on  images  and  fancies.
Mind  clear  like  that  of  a  clairvoyant ;  quiet  countenance,  pale

as  chalk,  thinks  her  death  unavoidable.

■  Thinks  rightly  but  uses  the  wrong  word  for  a  correct  idea.

u  Typhus.

Confusion  of  the  head,  changing  to  pressive  right-sided  head-
ache.

■  Sits  as  if  in  thought,  yet  thinks  of  nothing;  a  sort  of  waking

dream, d  Typhus.
Does  not  think  ;  confused  heaviness  in  forehead.

■  Thinking  tardy. (?  Apoplexy.
Slowness  of  thinking.

Says  there  is  nothing  the  matter  with  him.

■  Muttering  delirium, ^Typhus.

■  Delirium,  low  murmuring.

■  ■Delirium  tremens.

■  Raving  madness,  in  which  the  patient  is  conscious  of  his  con-

dition.
Excessive  inclination  to  hard  and  long  literary  labors.
Indisposed  to  think  ;  after  a  walk  in  the  open  air.

■  She  does  not  speak  a  word;  declines answering  questions

dislikes  sympathy, d  Typhus.  '


ARNICA  MONTANA.  3

I  Sheds  tears  and  makes  exclamations. ^  After  rage.
Prays  quietly  for  her  soul.

Picks  the  bedclothes.

Thoughtless  gaiety  ;  great  frivolity  and  mischievousness.

Depression  of  spirits.

I I  Hopelessness  ;  indifference. ^  After  concussion.

■  Despondency  and  conviction  of  approaching  death. ^Neu-

ralgia.

I  Hypochondriacal  anxiety,  peevishness.

I I  Fears  being struck  by those  coming towards  him; fears
even  the  possibility  of  being  touched, d  Gout.

1 1  Violent  attacks  of  anguish. ^Angina  pectoris.
I  Horror  of  instant  death. ^  With  the  cardiac  distress  in  the
night.

■  Indifference  to  everything,  morose.

■  Naturally  cheerful,  kindly  and  genial,  he  became  downcast,

waspish  and  peevish.

■  Excitable  and  timid. ^Paralysis.

She  is  extremely  morose  and  irritable; Ishe  does  not  speak  a
word.

■  Oversensitive  mood,  peevish,  quarrelsome.

■  Excessive  sensitiveness  of  mind. 6  Prolapsus  uteri.

■  Naturally  very  sensitive,  his  keen  sensitiveness  of  mind  be-

came greatly  exaggerated.
I  I  Excessively  sensitive  mind ;  disposition  to  agreeable  as  well
as  disagreeable  emotions,  without  weakness  or  excessive  sen-
sitiveness of  the  body ;  sometimes  occurring  alternately  or
simultaneously.

■  Susceptibility  to  every  shock,  movement  or  exertion,  and  to

reading  and  reflection, d  Megrim.
I  Sensation  of  being  good  for  nothing.

■  All  occupation  had  to  be  relinquished  for  the  time,  so  intense

were  the  sufferings, d  Attacks  of  headache.

■  Languid, d  Myalgia.

Inability  to  perform  continued  active  work.

■  Easily  frightened;  unexpected  trifles  cause  him  to  start.

■  State  of  mind  most  pitiable. ^Prolapsus  ani.

■  Mental  emotions  exerted  an  influence  in  bringing  on  chronic

attacks  of  headache.

■  Every  excitement  of  mind,  which  is  very  irritable,  aggravates

all  the  symptoms  of  headache, d  Prolapsus  ani.
Ailments  from  fright  or  anger.

■  Suddenly  aroused  by  his  night-bell  and  turning  out  of  bed,

brought  on  the  headache  next  day. d  Chronic  cephalalgia.
^  Sensorium. ■Confusion  of  the  head,  with  decided  pressure  in
the  right  half  of  the  head,  especially  over  the  right  brow.

■  Dizzy  with  sickness  at  stomach,  <  on  rising  or  moving,  >

lying  still.


^


i^S^^^^^^^-SS^iSKSKi^S^^Si^JSSiSiSSSiKSSSSN^^^
