The Guiding Symptoms of Our Materia Medica, Vol. VII
Constantine Hering
The Guiding Symptoms of Our Materia Medica, vol. VII. Philadelphia: Globe, 1883.
Public domain. Transcribed from the Internet Archive copy (https://archive.org/details/guidingsymptomso00heri7).
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

Boston  Medical  Library
in  the  Francis  A.  Countway
Library  of  Medicine  -Boston


COLUMBIAN NATURAL CLASP NO.  10f«

PAT.  1,290,083  PAT.  1,593,048

THE  UNITED  STATES  FHVELCFE  CO. SPRINGFIELD  MASS

33/8  X  6


Digitized  by  the  Internet  Archive

in  2010  with  funding  from

Open  Knowledge  Commons  and  Harvard  Medical  School


THE


GUIDING  SYMPTOMS


OF  OUR


MATERIA  MEDICA


BY


C.  HERING,  M.  D.


VOLUME  YII.


PHILADELPHIA:

PUBLISHED  BY  THE  ESTATE  OF  CONSTANTINE  HEEING,

112  and  114  North  Twelfth  Street.


Copyright,  1888,  by  Theresa  Hering.


Author's  Mark.


Pkess  of  Globe  Printing  House,  PHiLADEiiPHiA.


GUIDING  SYMPTOMS


OF OUR


Materia  Medica.


LACHNANTHES  TINCTORIA.

Red  Root.  Hsemodoracese.

An  herb  growing  in  sandy  stwamps  near  the  coast ;  the  root  red,  fibrous ;  the
leaves  sword-shaped ;  the  stem  hairy ;  flowers  yellow,  woolly.  The  first  specimen
was  sent  in  1852  by  Dr,  Byron,  from  Monticello,  Florida,  to  Hering,  under
whose  direction  it  was  proved  by  Kaue,  Lippe  and  Fincke.  See  Am.  Horn.  Kev.,
vol.  4,  p.  458.

Clinical  Authorities. — Headache,  Lilienthal,  Horn.  Clin.,  vol.  1,  p.  26;
Dryness  of  throat,  Lippe,  Am.  Horn.  Kev.,  vol.  5,  p.  488 ;  Diphtheria,  Hosfield,
Parker,  Org.,  vol.  3,  p.  369  ;  Stiff  neck,  Berridge,  Horn.  Clin.,  vol.  4,  p.  108 ;  Typhoid
pneumonia,  Dufiield,  Am.  Hom.  Kev.,  vol.  4,  p.  489.

^  Mind. While  dozing  through  day,  sees  images.


cheeks,  <  from  1  to  2  a.m. ^Typhoid  pneumonia.
Loquacity,  afterwards  stupid  and  irritable.
Excited  over  a  trifle.

Restless  while  perspiring ;  tosses  about ;  whining.
Great  hilarity  in  evening.

■  Despondency,  bitter  crying  spells. /^Headache.
^Sensorium. Giddy:  with  sensation  of  heat  in chest  and
around  heart,  boiling  bubbling ;  with  icy  coldness  of
forehead.
^  Inner  Head. Tearing :  in  forehead  from  1.  to  r.  side ;  in  r.
temple,  extending  to  cheek ;  in  temples.
voii.  vn. — 1.


LACHNANTHES  TINCTORIA.  2

Pain  in  forehead,  with  general  heat,  alternating  with
crampy  pain  in  chest;  at  last  tearing  in  nose  and
shoulders.

Head  feels  enlarged  and  as  if  split  open  with  a  wedge  from
outside  to  within  ;  body  icy  cold,  skin  moist  and  sticky ;
cannot  get  warm  even  under  a  feather  bed,  face  yellow;
whines  with  pain ;  head  burns  like  fire,  much  thirst.

Vertex  feels  enlarged  and  extended  upward;  tearing  pain.

Headache :  until  10  a.m.  ;  pressing  eyes  outward ;  <
toward  noon,  she  becomes  more  giddy;  in  evening,
pricking  headache.

Continuous  stitch  in  I.  forehead  from  within  to  without,
leaves  after  a  few  minutes  a  pressing  pain,  and  extends
over  whole  forehead,  pressing  from  within  outward.

Congestive  and  neuralgic  headaches;  eyes  much  affected.

■  Violent  pain  in  r.  side  of  head  and  temple;  a  splitting,
bursting  pain,  occasionally  extending  down  to  jaw,  <
moving  head  or  body  ;  disposition  to  keep  eyes  closed  ;
great  despondency  ;  bitter  crying  spells ;  disturbed  by
least  noise ;  cannot  bear  even  walking  of  persons  over
heavy  carpet ;  head  feels  enlarged,  as  if  split  open  with
a  wedge ;  tearing  pains  <  from  vomiting.
*  Outer  Head. Draws  skin  of  forehead  upward,  <  1.  side.

Sensation  as  if  hair  was  standing  on  end,  <  on  occiput.

Scalp  very  painful,  even  to  touch.

Red  pimples  on  forehead,  become  larger  and  suppurate.
®  Sight  and  Eyes. Looking  intensely,  sees  grey  rings.

If  he  looks  at  a  spot  for  some  time,  it  becomes  quite  dark,
also  if  he  reads  any  length  of  time.

When  reading  or  writing,  small  grey  spot,  as  large  as  len-
til, runs  before  1.  eye.

Moving  head  quickly,  sight  becomes  obscure.

Obscuration  of  sight,  as  if  a  cloud  were  before  eyes ;  could
not  see  in  evening ;  >  walking  about ;  <  sitting  down.

I  Eyes  brilliant,  face  red,  pupils  large,  delirium.  ^Pneu-
monia.

Lachrymation  and  burning,  with  sensation  of  dryness.

Compression  of  1.  eyeball,  from  below  upward.

Pressing  as  from  dust  in  eyes,  discharge  of  white  mucus.

Eyes  feel  heavy,  as  if  they  could  not  be  kept  open.

Eyes  feel  cold.

Eyebrows  and  lids  drawn  upward,  looks  with  fixed  eyes.

Twitching  in  upper  eyelids,  <  when  closing  them.
®  Hearing  and  Ears. '  •  Almost  complete  deafness  during
acute  diseases.

Singing  in  r.  ear  when  walking  in  open  air.

Tearing  in  ears.

Crawling  in  r.  ear  while  eating ;  in  1.  ear,  >  boring  with


3  LACHNANTHES  TINCTORIA.

finger,  but  immediately  returning  and feeling  as if
something  had  closed  ear.
Itching  in  1.  ear  and  sore  feeling  in  right.
Sensation  of  coldness  in  external  ear.
^  Smell  and  Nose. Burning  on  r.  side  of  root  of  nose.

Nose  bleeds  profusely,  blood  pale.
delirium,  eyes  brilliant. ^Typhoid  pneumonia.
Face  swollen,  with  redness  and  blueness  under  eyes.
Pale,  sickly,  yellow  countenance  ;  face  and  lips  bluish.
Tearing  in  temples  down  into  cheeks.
Tearing  pressing  in  1.  cheek  toward  eyes.
Sensation  as  if  something  was  crawling  over  face.
®  Lower  Face. Redness,  swelling  and  tension  of  lips.
^^  Teeth  and  Gums. Upper  incisors  and  eye  teeth  feel  loose
and  sore,  <  touching  with  tongue  and  closing  teeth.
Teeth  feel  loose  and  too  long ;  <  in  bed.
Teeth  ache  after  eating  or  drinking  warm  things.
^^  Inner  Mouth. Sensation  as  if  mouth  was  sore  and  thick.

Saliva  of  tough  mucus.
^^  Throat, l Great  dryness  of  throat,  <  on  awaking  during
night,  with  much  coughing.
Roughness  of  throat, with pricking  when  swallowing;
continuously  increasing  dryness  of  throat,  with  sleepless-
ness, followed  by  hoarseness.
Sensation  of  swelling  in  1.  side  of  throat ;  when  he  swal-
lows he  feels  an  itching  in  spot.

■  Sore  throat,  with  short  cough.

■  Diphtheria,  stiffness  of  neck;  head  drawn  to  one  side.
^*  Appetite,  Thirst. Desires,  Aversions. Much  thirst.

Aversion  to  meat.
^^  Hiccough,  Belching,  Nausea  and  Vomiting. Hiccough
in  bed.
Rising of sweetish water, with nausea; qualmishness
about  navel  when  walking  in  open  air.
^^  Scrobiculum  and  Stomach. Full  feeling  in  stomach ;  roll-
ing of  wind.
Beating  in  pit  of  stomach,  as  from  a  pulse,  as  if  a  ham-
mer was  beating  on  an  ulcerated  spot.
^^  Abdomen. Cutting  in  upper  part  of  abdomen  from  1.  to  right.
Twirling  and  twisting  in  upper  part  of  abdomen,  two

inches  above  navel.
Fermentation  and  rumbling ;  rolling  of  wind  in  abdomen,

1.  side,  hears  it  but  does  not  feel  it.
I  Much  flatulency. ^Typhoid  pneumonia.
Sensation  of  heat  through  abdomen,  feels  as  if  bowels
would  be  moved ;  evacuation,  >  head.
'"  Stool  and  Rectum. Frequent  desire  to  evacuate,  without
result.


LACHNANTHES  TINCTORIA.  4

Evacuation,  with  much  flatulency  and  pressing.

Continuous  stitch  in  anus,  morning.
^^  Urinary  Organs. Pressing  on  bladder  when  urinating.

During  night,  drops  flow  from  urethra,  coloring  shirt  red.
^^  Male  Sexual  Organs. Violent  burning  in  1.  half  of  scro-
tum, drawing  toward  r.  side.

Tingling  and  itching  of  scrotum  and  surrounding  parts.

Sweat  and  itching  of  scrotum  and  penis.
^^  Female  Sexual  Organs. Catamenia :  too  early,  blood  vis-
cid, mixed  with  mucus ;  profuse,  bright  red.

During  catamenia,  sensation  of  distension  of  abdomen,  it
feels  as  if  it  were  boiling.
^  Voice  and  Larynx. Trachea  and  Bronchia, i  Hoarse-
ness ;  dry  cough  from  irritation  of  throat,  <  in  bed.

Burning  in  r.  side  of  larynx.
^  Cough. I  Dry  cough  as  from  larynx  ;  sputa  blood-streaked ;
severe  pain  in  chest. ^Typhoid  pneumonia.

Cough  <  in  bed,  also  from  sleeping.
^  Inner  Chest  and  Lungs. Stitches :  like  knives,  in  quick
succession,  in  r.  side  of  chest  below  mamma,  at  rest  and
moving,  in  afternoon  ;  in  1.  side  of  chest.

cheeks,  soreness  over  abdomen,  with  sensitiveness  to
touch ;  pulse  110,  small  and  wiry ;  bowels  costive ;  be-
tween 1  and  2  a.m.  delirium,  at  times  great,  wanted  to
be  dressed  and  go  out ;  tongue  coated  yellowish  brown
and  dry ;  deafness ;  bloody  expectoration ;  much  har-
assed with  flatulency.  ^Typhoid  pneumonia.
^^  Heart,  Pulse  and  Circulation.  Stitches  in  heart,  with
anxiety.

Sensation  of  hea,t,  bubbling  and  boiling  in  chest  and
region  of  heart,  rising  to  head ;  giddy ;  breaks  out  in
perspiration.

Frequent  violent  pulsations  of  heart,  each  beat  double,  one
hard  and  full,  the  other  soft  and  small.

While  lying,  feels  beating  of  heart  in  his  head.

Trembling  of  heart,  with  great  debility.

Pulse:  slow,  irregular;  from  58  to  68;  during  coldness,
74,  some  beats  fast,  some  slow ;  110,  small,  thin,  hard
(pneumonia).
^^  Neck  and  Back. iiStiff'ness,  wry  neck.

Pain  and  stiffness  in  neck,  going  over  whole  head  and
down  nose,  then  as  if  pinching  nostrils  together.

I  iTorticollis ;  neck  stiff",  head  drawn  to  one  side ;  pain  in
nape  as  if  dislocated,  when  turning  neck  or  bending
head  backward. ^Diphtheria,  scarlet  fever,  etc.

■  Right  side  of  neck  stiff",  head  drawn  to  r.  side.

Sensation  as  if  a  piece  of  ice  was  lying  on  back  between
shoulders,  followed  by  a  chill,  with  gooseflesh  all  over.


5  LACHNANTHES  TINCTORIA.

Sensation  between  shoulder  blades  as  if  wet  with  cold  per-
spiration, skin  being  dry  and  cool.

Burning:  on  r.  shoulder  blade;  in  region  of  1.  kidney,
deep,  extending  toward  r.  side;  in  spine,  four  inches
above  small  of  back ;  in  os  sacrum,  4  p.m.
^^  Upper  Limbs.  Tearing :  from  shoulder,  extending  to  fin-
ger joints ;  in  upper  part  of  arm,  beginning  at  elbow
joint,  where  it  pains  most,  extending  into  shoulder ;  in
elbow  joints,  at  times  upward  and  then  downward ;  in
knuckles  of  middle  fingers  of  r.  hand.

Left  index  finger  drawn  crooked.

Thumb  and  index  finger  feels  as  if  sprained.
^  Lower  Limbs. Tearing :  in r.  ischium ;  in  1.  knee,  when
walking ; in  r.  tibia ; in  r.  big  toe,  awakening  from
sleep.

Tingling :  from  knees  to  ankles ;  legs  and  feet,  <  in  heat.

Cramps: in  calves  lying in  bed;  in  feet  during  night.

Burning :  in  feet ;  under  nail  of  1.  toe.
^*  Limbs  in  General. Tearing  pains  in  limbs.

I  Burning  of  palms  of  hands  and  soles  of  feet.
^  Rest% Position. Motion. At  rest :  stitches  in  chest.

Lying :  feels  beating  of  heart  in  head ;  in  bed  cramps  in
calves.

Sitting  down:  obscuration  of  sight  <.

Bending  head  backward  :  torticollis.

Morning:  stitches  in  chest;  attacks  of  coldness  <.

Moving  head  quickly :  sight  becomes  obscure.

Turning  head :  torticollis.

Moving  head  or  body:  pain  <.

Walking :  obscuration  of  sight  >  ;  singing  in  r.  ear ;  tear-
ing in  1.  knee.

Tosses  about:  while  perspiring.
^  Nerves. Sensation  of  great  weakness,  as  from  loss  of  fluids.

Very  restless,  throws  herself  about.
^^  Sleep. Somnolency  during  day,  sees  images.

Sleepiness,  with  yawning,  eyes  feel  so  heavy  she  cannot
keep  them  open.

creasing dryness  of  throat;  without  feeling  weak.

Restless  sleep,  followed  by  sweat.

Feverish,  distressing  dreams  (following  cramp  in  1.  foot
during  night).

Awakens:  2  a.m.,  with  cramp  in  her  breast,  extending
from  r.  to  1. ;  after  awaking  and  stretching,  a  shock,  fol-
lowed by  chilliness  and  gooseflesh  all  over.
^  Time. Morning :  dryness  of  eyes ;  stitch  in  anus ;  sweat.

red  face.


LACHNANTHES  TINCTORIA.  6

Noon :  headache  <.

After  12  p.m.  :  sweat.

In  afternoon :  stitches  in  chest.

2  A.M. :  awakens  with  cramp  in  breast.

During  day :  somnolency.

4  P.M. :  burning  in  os  sacrum.

Evening :  pricking  headache ;  could  not  see.

Night :  dryness  of  throat ;  drops  flow  from  urethra,  color-
ing shirt  red  ;  cramps  in  feet ;  skin  burns  and  itches.
^^  Temperature  and  Weather. Heat :  tingling  in  legs  and
feet  <•

Hot  flat  irons :  >  icy  coldness  of  body.

■  In  bed  :  teeth  feel  loose  and  too  long  ;  cough  <  ;  attack-s

of  coldness.
■  Cannot  get  warm  under  a  feather  bed.

Eating  or  drinking  warm  things:  toothache.

Open  air :  when  walking,  singing  in  r.  ear ;  qualmishness
about  navel.
^  Fever. Continuous  chilliness.

Sensation  as  if  piece  of  ice  was  lying  on  back,  between
shoulders,  then  a  shock,  followed  by  coldness  over  whole
body  with  gooseflesh ;  these  attacks  recur  on  moving  and
pass  off  after  going  to  bed.

Body  icy  cold,  hot  flat  irons  relieve.

Flushes  alternately  with  chilliness.

Feels  hot,  but  chills  run  all  over  her  before  heat  can  de-
velop.

Evening  fever,  <  6  to  12  p.m.;  face  red,  <  upper  part.

Dr}^  heat,  feet  burn ;  restless  tossing;  rumbling  in  abdomen.

Burning  heat,  face  red,  <  on  r.  side;  followed  by  circum-

Feverish,  with  somnolency.

General  heat,  with  sweat  on  forehead.

brilliant  eyes. ^Pneumonia.

Sweat :  with  dizziness,  boiling  and  bubbling  in  chest  and
region  of  heart;  after  12  p.m.,  after  a  restless  sleep;
in  morning;  icy  cold,  principally  on  forehead.

1  I  Skin  cold,  damp  and  clammy.
*^  Attacks,  Periodicity. Alternately :  flushes  and  chilliness.

6  to  12  p.m.  :  fever  <.

For  six  weeks :  dull  toothache  in  second  1.  upper  molar.
^^  Locality  and  Direction.  Right :  tearing  in  temple ;  vio-
lent pain  in  side  of  head  and  temple ;  singing  in  ear ;
crawling  in  ear ;  sore  feeling  in  ear ;  burning  in  side  of
root  of  nose ;  stitches  in  side  of  chest ;  stiff  neck ;  tearing
in  ischium ;  in  tibia ;  in  big  toe ;  burning  heat  <  side


LACHNANTHES  TINCTORIA.

Left :  continuous  stitch  in  forehead ;  draws  skin  of  fore-
head upward,  <  1.  side ;  small  spot  before  eye ;  com-
pression of  eyeball ;  singing  in  ear ;  itching  m  ear ;  tear-
ing pressing  in  cheek  towards  eyes ;  sensation  of  swell-
ing in  side  of  throat ;  rolling  of  wind  in  abdomen  on
side ;  violent  burning  in  half  of  scrotum ;  burning  in
region  of  kidney;  tearing  in  knee;  burning  under  big
toe  nail.
From  r.  to  1. :  cramp  in  breast.
From  1.  to  r. :  tearing  in  forehead ;  cutting  m  upper  part

of  abdomen  ;  burning  in  scrotuni ;  in  kidney.
From  outside  to  within  :  head  as  if  split.
From  within  to  without :  stitches  in  forehead,  pressing.
From  below  upward  :  compression  of  1.  eyeball.
Sensations. Head  as  if  enlarged;  as  if  split  open  with  a
wedge  •  vertex  as  if  enlarged  ;  as  if  hair  was  standing  on
end ; as  if  a  cloud  was before  his  eyes ; pressing  as
from  dust  in  eyes ;  as  if  eyes  could  not  be  kept  open ;
as  if  something  had  closed  ear;  as  if  something  was
crawling  over  face ;  upper  incisors  and  eye  teeth  as  if
loose  and  sore ;  teeth  as  if  too  long ;  as  if  mouth  was
sore  and  thick ;  as  if  a  hammer  was  beating  on  an  ul-
cerated spot  in  stomach  ;  as  if  bowels  would  be  moved  ;
abdomen  feels  as  if  it  was  boiling ;  pam  as  if  pmchipg
nostrils  together ;  nape  as  if  dislocated  ;  as  if  piece  ot  ice
was  lying  on  back  between  shoulders;  as  if  back  between
shoulder  blades  was  wet  with  cold  perspiration  ;  thumb
and  index  finger  as  if  sprained ;  weakness  as  from  loss
of  fluids  ;  skin  as  if  an  eruption  would  appear.

Pain :  in  forehead ;  in  neck  ;  in  nape.

Violent  pain :  in  r.  side  of  head  and  temple.

Severe  pain  in  chest.  , . . i

Tearing:  in  forehead  from  1.  to  r.  side;  m  r.  temple  ex-
tending to  cheek;  in  temples;  in  nose  and  shoulders;
in  vertex  ;  in  ears ;  in  temples  down  into  cheeks ;  trom
shoulder  extending  to  finger  joints;  in  upper  arm  from
elbow  joint  to  shoulder ;  in  elbow  joints ;  m  knuckles
of  middle  fingers  of  r.  hand ;  in  r.  ischium ;  in  1.  knee;
in  r.  tibia ;  in  r.  big  toe ;  in  limbs.

Tearing  pressing:  in  1.  cheek  towards  eyes.

Cutting :  in  upper  part  of  abdomen.

Beating :  in  pit  of  stomach.

Splitting,  bursting  pain  :  down  jaw.

Stitches :  in  side  of  chest ;  in  heart.

Continuous  stitch  :  in  1.  forehead  ;  in  anus.

Neuralgia :  in  head.

Cramps :  in  calves ;  in  feet ;  in  1.  foot.

Crampy  pain :  in  chest.


LACHNANTHES  TINCTORIA.  8

Violent  burning :  in  1.  half  of  scrotum.

Pricking  pain :  in  head  ;  in  throat.

Pressing  pain :  in  forehead.

Soreness :  over  abdomen.

Sore  feeling :  in  r.  ear ;  in  throat.

Burning:  in  head;  in  r.  side  of  root  of  nose;  in  r.  side  of
larynx ;  in  shoulder  blade ;  in  region  of  1.  kidney ;  in
spine ;  in  os  sacrum ;  in  feet ;  under  nail  of  1.  toe ;  in
palms  and  soles ;  in  r.  side  of  face.

Heat :  in  chest.

Tingling :  of  scrotum  and  surrounding  parts  •  from  knees
to  ankles ;  in  legs  and  feet.

Pressing :  on  bladder  when  urinating.

Twirling  and  twisting :  in  upper  part  of  abdomen.

Dull  pains :  in  teeth.

Boiling  bubbling :  around  heart.

Feels  beating  of  heart  in  head.

Trembling :  of  heart.

Full  feeling :  in  stomach.

Tension:  of  lips.

Stiffness :  of  neck.

Crawling:  in  ears.

Twitching :  in  upper  eyelids.

Dryness :  of  throat.

Itching :  in  1.  ear ;  in  spot  in  throat ;  of  scrotum ;  of  penis ;
of  skin.

Sensation  of  coldness  :  external  ear.

Icy  coldness :  of  forehead.
"Tissues. Hemorrhages;  typhoid  pneumonia.
*^  Touch. Passive  Motion. Injuries. Touch:  scalp  very
painful ;  with  tongue  or  closing  teeth,  soreness  of  teeth
<  ;  soreness  over  abdomen.

Boring:  with  finger  in  ear,  crawling  >.

Scratching:  burning  and  itching  of  skin  <.
^®  Skin. Skin  itches  and  burns  all  night,  <  after  scratching.

Red  pimples;  pimples  here  and  there  containing  a  watery
fluid.

Sensation  in  skin  as  if  an  eruption  would  appear.

Skin  cold,  damp  and  clammy.
"  Stages  of  Life, Constitution. Woman ; typhoid  pneu-
monia.

Woman,  set.  37,  married,  nervo-sanguine ;  headache.
^  Relations. Compare :  Act.  rac,  jEthusa,  Agar.,  Bellad.,  Cann.
ind.,  Cicuta,  Crotal,  Gelsem.,  Glonoine,  Gymnocladus,Hyosc.,
Laches.,  Opium,  Platina,  Phosphor.,  Sanguin.,  Stramon.


LACTIC  ACID.


LACTIC  ACID.

Lactic  Acid.  H^  H^O^.

An  acid,  discovered  by  Scheele,  in  sour  milk,  the  result  of  spontaneous  fermen-
tation of  sugar  of  milk  under  the  influence  of  casein.  It  is  also  met  with  in  many
vegetable  products  which  have  turned  sour.

Introduced  by  Reisig,  whose  loth  dilution  was  first  proved  by  Swan.  Subse-
quent provings  by  Fincke  (30th),  Allen,  (pure  acid,  30th  dil.),  and  Swan  (200th).
See  N.  Am.  J.  of  Hom.,  1871,  and  N.  Y,  J.  of  Horn.,  vol.  1,  p.  337.

CiiiNiCAii  Authorities. — Diabetes  melUtus,  Kirkland,  U.  S.  Med.  Inv.,  Aug.,
1875,  p.  166;  (2  cases)  Kitchen,  Eaue's  Rec,  1874,  p.  213;  Cantani,  Primavera,
Eaue's  Rec,  1874,  p.  213;  Morning  sickness  during  pregnancy,  Swan,  Hah.  M.,  vol.
6,  p.  74;  Williamson,  Raue's  Rec,  1872,  p.  12;  Foot  sioeat,  Schmucker,  Raue's
Rec,  1874,  p.  17 ;  Swelling  of  bone,  H.  K.,  vol.  22,  p.  10.

^  Mind. I  I  Great  discouragement. ^Pregnancy.

Averse  to  business  or  what  formerly  was  pleasant  to  do ;

lazy  ;  dislikes  to  read  or  think ;  finds  fault,  is  sarcastic,

exacting.
I  I  Memory  affected;  cannot  remember  a  thing  an  hour

after  it  has  happened.
^  Sensorium. Vertigo :  when turning  head suddenly ; on

stooping.
Sensation  as  if  blood  was  trickling  down  from  front  to

back  part  of  head,  at  8  p.m.
Head  feels  very  large,  confused,  as  if  tossed  on  a  rough

sea ;  nausea  like  seasickness.
Congestion,  as  if  blood  would  burst  out  at  forehead  or

eyes.
Tightness  and  fulness  in  head ;  on  stooping  it  seemed  as

if  blood  would  burst  from  nose.
^  Inner  Head. Dull  pain  in  forehead,  extending  into  eyes;

desire  to  close  eyes.
Sensation  of  fulness  in  forehead,  as  if  brain  was  too  large.
Dull  aching  pain  over  1.  orbital  region,  <  bending  forward.
At  10  A.M.  pain  in  forehead,  over  eyes,  and  fulness  on  top

of  head,  as  if  it  would  burst,  <  afternoon,  and  extended

into  1.  eye.
Pain  in  temples  in  afternoon  and  on  awaking  in  morning,

with  depression  of  spirits.
Sharp,  darting  pain  in  1.  side  of  head,  from  temporal  to

orbital  region.


LACTIC  ACID.  10

I  Pain  in  head  and  back  all  night.

I  I  Severe  pain  in  forehead  and  all  through  head,  with  chill.

Tightness  and  heat  over  head,  particularly  in  forehead.

Congestion of  head,  painless,  with strong pulsation  of
vessels  of  neck.
*  Outer  Head. Head  sore  to  touch.

Fulness  and  tension  over  whole  head,  with  sweat  on  scalp.

Fine  miliary  eruption  on  scalp.

Painful  pimples  on  1.  occipital  protuberance.

Desire  to  have  head  lie  high.
^  Sight  and  Eyes. iHypereesthesia  of  retina,  steady  aching
in  and  behind  eyeball.

Dark  clouds  pass  before  eyes ;  cannot  see  letters  on  black-
board ;  smoky  appearance  of  room.

I  I  Pupils  dilated.

Fulness  as  if  blood  was  forcing  its  way  out  of  eyes ;  feel  as
if  they  would  burst  out  of  head,  <  turning  head.

Could  not  bear  to  shut  eyes,  as  if  cornea  was  sore.

Pain  through  r.  eye,  with  nausea.

Marked  protrusion  of  eyes ;  pupils  dilated ;  feels  tired.

Sharp  pain  in  1.  eye,  <  while  reading,  with  photophobia,
direct  light  painful.

Severe  pain  in  head  above  eyes,  extending  into  eyes.

Tough  mucus  in  inner  canthus  of  each  eye.

Peculiar  twitching  across  r.  upper  lid  and  in  eyeball.

Jerking  of  1.  upper  lid.
^  Hearing  and  Ears. Disturbed  and  troubled  by  noise.

Roaring  in  1.  ear  on  rising  in  afternoon;  singing,  snapping
in  1.  ear.

Pain  from  parotids  into  ear ;  stiff  feeling  in  parotids.
^  Smell  and  Nose, i  Great  sensitiveness  of  smell.

Erysipelatous  redness  of  1.  cheek  and  1.  side  of  nose,  with
small  sore  vesicles  on  nose,  in  morning.

;rNasal  catarrh,  with  copious  thick,  yellow,  mucous  dis-
charge. ^Leucorrhoea.

■  Epistaxis  every  morning;  greenish  yellow  stools,  with
tenesmus.

Sensation  as  if  a  quantity  of  mucus  lodged  in  posterior
nares ;  discharge  of  clear  viscid  mucus  after  hawking,
does  not  >  entirely.

Severe  coryza,  stopped  nose,  sneezing,  thick  mucus  from
head  to  throat,  yellow ;  dead  sweet  taste.

Feeling  as  if  blood  would  spurt  from  nose;  fulness  in  head.
^  Upper  Face, l  l  Congestion  of  blood  to  face  and  head.

Erysipelatous  redness  on  1.  cheek  and  side  of  nose ; small
vesicles  on  nose  in  morning.
"  Taste  and  Tongue, l  Tongue  dry,  parched,  sticky. ^Dia-
betes mellitus.


U  LACTIC  ACID.

I  I  Thick  white  coating  on  tongue.

1  I  Yellow  coating  on  tongue,  with  bad  taste  in  morning.

Sores  on  tongue ;  tongue  raw  and  red.

Taste : fetid  ; metallic  ; sour ;  acrid,  with  nausea ; like
copper ;  peculiar,  on  back  part  of  tongue.
*^  Inner  Mouth. ■  Very  sore  mouth ;  canker  sores.

I  Child  had  been  fretting  forty  days,  cried  on  taking  any
food  into  its  mouth,  which  was  inflamed,  and  tongue
and  lips  studded  with  little  white  blisters  with  a  red  base.

I  I  Mouth  very  dry ;  roof  dr}^,  feels  burnt.

■  Copious  salivation. ^Pregnancy.

I  I  Much  saliva  in  mouth  tasting  salty.
13  Throat. Elongation  of  uvula ; rawness  of  pharynx  from
posterior  nares,  1.  side,  down  to  oesophagus,  with  sensa-
tion of  a  quantity  of  mucus  lodged  in  nares  and  larynx,
causing  hawking,  which  does  not  relieve  entirely.

Dryness  of  posterior  fauces,  with  hawking  of  mucus.

■Great  dryness  of  throat,  with  hoarseness  and  dry  cough.

Accumulation  of  mucus  in  throat,  not  loose,  but  as  if
filling  up;  rawness  in  upper  pharynx.

Hawking  of  thick,  yellow,  tasteless  mucus  from  upper
part  of  pharynx ;  dead  sweet  taste.

Constriction  and  soreness  in  throat,  with  difficulty  in
swallowing  solids.

■Fulness  in  throat,  which  keeps  him  swallowing  frothy
naucus ;  lump  or  fulness  feels  like  a  small  puff  ball ;
not  >  by  swallowing.

Fulness  in  fauces;  burning  in  fauces,  throat  and
oesophagus ;  can  hardly  force  solids  into  oesophagus,
fluids  more  easily.

■  Constricted  feeling  low  down  in  throat,  with  slight  nausea,
I  I  Sensation  of  plug  in  throat.

I  I  Sense  of  constriction  in  throat;  rough  and  dry.
"  Appetite,  Thirst. Desires,  Aversions, i  Voracious  ap-
petite and  great  thirst. ^Diabetes  mellitus.
Apparent  indifference  to  food,  very  little  satisfies.
^^  Eating  and  Drinking. ■Uneasiness  in  stomach  after  food
and  drink. ^Diabetes  mellitus.
Eating  generally  relieves  symptoms.

■  Food  sours;  eructations;  flatus;  indifference  to  food.
■After  eating: nausea,  retching,  waterbrash,  uneasy  in

stomach. ^Diabetes.
Smoking  aggravates  all  symptoms.

■Sensation  as  if  all  food  was  lodged  under  upper  end  of
sternum,  which  oppresses  and  distresses  for  hours.
^^  Hiccough,  Belching,  Nausea  and  Vomiting. Belching,
with  taste  of  ingesta.

■  Waterbrash,  with  continued  profuse  discharge  of  saliva.


LACTIC  ACID.  12

■  Eructations  of  hot,  acrid  fluid,  which  burns  from  stom-

ach to  throat.

■  Nausea:  after  getting  up  in  morning;  like  seasickness,

with  headache ;  with  pain  through  r.  eye ;  with  cough  ;
followed  by  backache ;  after  eating,  copious  saliva  (preg-
nancy) ;  <  from  any  motion ;  constant.

■  Morning  sickness,  particularly  in  pale,  anaemic  women,

who  lose  much  blood  during  menses.
*^  Scrobiculum  and  Stomach. ■  Feeling  of  emptiness  and

sinking  at  stomach, ^Diabetes  mellitus.
Slight  depression  and  constriction  in  cardiac  region,  >

by  bending  chest  forward.
Burning  and  weight  in  stomach  <  by  smoking.
Faintness  in  stomach,  passing  off  leaves  nausea.
^®  Hypochondria. L.  hypocbondrium  sensitive  to  touch,  with

pain  as  from  soreness  behind  lower  end  of  sternum.
^^  Abdomen. Pain  across  bowels  and  lower  r.  side,  11  a.m.
Sharp  pain  in  lower  part  of  1.  side,  lasting  a  short  time.
Dull  pain  in  1.  groin  over  hip  bone.
Bearing  down  pain  in  upper  part  of  abdomen.
Pain  across  lower  abdomen  as  with  menstruation,  which

is  not  the  case.
Jerking  and sharp  cutting in  muscles,  awakes  with  a

scream  at  12  p.m.
I  I  Pain  over  crest  of  1.  ilium,  extending  forward.
^^  Stool  and  Rectum. ■Bowels  very  costive,  stool  once  a

week,  feces  hard,  black. ^Diabetes  mellitus.

■  Greenish  yellow  stools  with  tenesmus. ^Epistaxis.
I  I  Soft,  mushy  stool.

Sharp  pain  across  lower  abdomen  before  stool ;  diarrhoea.

I  I  Aching  pain  in  anus.

^  Urinary  Organs. Distress  and  pain  in  renal  region  ;  urine

high  colored,  clear ;  frequent  pain  in  region  of  kidneys,

I  ■  Urine  in  large  quantities,  passed  frequently. ^Diabetes.

■  Urine  deep  brownish  red,  with  much  reddish  sediment.
Urine  so  copious,  seemed  as  if"  turning  into  urine";  also

with  sore,  stretched  feeling  in  bladder.

■  Urinates  frequently,  day  and  night ;  attempt  to  retain  it

causes  pain.

■  Voracious  appetite;  great  thirst;  frequent  and  profuse

saccharine  urine ;  skin  harsh  and  dry,  no  sweat ;  bowels
very  costive,  stool  once  a  week,  feces  hard,  black;  tongue
dry,  parched,  sticky;  feeling  of  emptiness  and  sinking
at  stomach  ;  debility ;  chilliness,  especially  extremities;
weariness  in  extremities ;  aversion  to  exercise;  uneasi-
ness in  stomach  after  food  and  drink. ^Diabetes.

■  Man,  set.  62,  phlegmatic,  dark  complexion,  dark  hair  and

eyes,  had  dropsy  several  times  ;  great  weakness,  restless


13  LACTIC  ACID.

during  night ;  severe  aching  pains  in  feet  and  legs,  pre-
venting sleep  ;  frequent  voiding  of  foamy,  strong  smell-
ing, dark  urine;  quantity  from  eighteen  to  twenty
pounds  in  twenty -four  hours;  in  morning  urine  con-
tained a  large  amount  of  salt,  in  evening  a  large  excess
of  sugar ;  violent  thirst  day  and  night ;  unable  to  walk
further  than  a  few  rods.  ^Diabetes  mellitus.
^^  Male  Sexual  Organs.  In  the  morning  annoying  erections,
but  loins  ache  too  much  to  attempt  coition.

Dreams  of  sexual  intercourse,  with  erections,  no  emission.

Seminal  emissions  three  successive  nights.
^  Female  Sexual  Organs. ■  Aching  pain  in  region  of  r.
ovary,  <  by  rapid  walking  or  exercise.

Great  heaviness  and  dragging  down  in  lower  abdomen,
as  if  womb  was  down.

Pain  as  if  menstruating;  sitting  with  feet  high  relieves
uterine  soreness.

Menses :  seventeen  days  late ;  scanty ;  in  morning,  pain
across  small  of  back  and  in  lower  part  of  abdomen ;  flow
commenced  11  p.m.,  with  distress  across  lower  part  of
abdomen ;  were  scanty,  pale ;  two  days  too  early,  more
profuse  than  usual ;  great  itching  of  vulva  during
flow.

iLeucorrhoea  :  stains  yellow  as  saffron ;  was  stopped,  nasal
catarrh  ensued.
^*  Pregnancy. Parturition. Lactation. ■  i  During  preg-
nancy : morning sickness ; salivation ; nausea and
vomiting.

I  Morning  sickness  in  pale,  ansemic  women,  who  lose  large

'  quantities  of  blood  during  menses,  which  usually  last
from  five  to  eight  days.

I  Nausea  and  vomiting  of  sour  substances;  sour  taste;  no
desire  for  breakfast,  food  seems  to  come  almost  up  into
mouth  ;  faintness  in  stomach  ;  diarrhoea. ^Pregnancy.

■  Waterbrash  of  hot  sour  fluid ;  hot,  acrid  eructations,
which  burn  from  stomach  to  mouth ;  mouth  full  of
water;  burning  in  stomach;  nausea  >  by  breakfast;
gone  sensation  low  down  in  stomach.  ^Pregnancy.
^'  Voice  and  Larynx.  Trachea  and  Bronchia.  Hoarse,
hard,  dry  cough,  sensation  of  dryness  of  throat,  with
spasmodic,  painful  contractive  sensation.

For  an  hour  and  a  half  after  rising  voice  entirely  without
control,  whispering  and  squeaking  when  expecting  to
speak  loud ;  croaking  and  deep  hoarse  voice.

Dryness  and  burning  of  larynx.

I  Great  dryness,  with  hoarseness  and  dry  cough  ;  dryness
and  rawness  extending  to  larynx ;  rim  of  glottis  partic-
ularly affected.


LACTIC  ACID.  .  14

Spasm  of  glottis,  awaking  from  sleep  and  causing  severe
pain  and  suffocation.

Expectoration  seemed  to  be  secreted  just  inside  of  glottis.

I  Aphonia,  with  dryness  of  glottis.

I  Hoarse,  hard,  dry  cough,  sensation  of  dryness  of  epi-
glottis, with  spasmodic  contractive  sensation.

■  Great  dryness  of  throat,  hoarseness  and  dry  cough.

I  I  Dryness,  scratching  and  burning  in  throat ;  tearing  in
larynx  and  trachea,  with  hoarseness ;  difficult  expecto-
ration of  grey  tasteless  mucus,  or  so  tough  that  air  can
hardly  pass  through  it ;  horrible  dreams  of  abysses,  and
restless  sleep ;  croup  sound  not  heard.  /^Croup.
^^  Respiration. Sawlike  rasping  sound  of  respiration.

Frequent  deep  sighing  inspirations  and  expirations.
^  Cough. Spasmodic  ringing  cough,  from  irritation  in  throat.

I  Hoarse,  hard,  dry  cough;  dry  sensation  of  glottis,  with
spasmodic  contractive  sensation ;  hoarse,  sensitive  to
cold  air.

Cough,  with  nausea,  constricted  feeling in  throat.

Spasmodic,  ringing  cough,  from  hot  eructations,  <  smoking.

I  I  Constant  cough,  <  in  Spring  and  Fall,  with  foot  sweats.

Secretes  large  quantities  of  saliva,  which  in  morning  con-
tains greyish  lumps ;  afterwards  expectoration  yellowish
and  salty.
^  Inner  Chest  and  Lungs.  During  afternoon  sharp  pain
in  back  part  of  1.  breast,  at  6  p.m.  a  similar  pain  in  r.
breast,  sore  to  touch.

Pain  in  back  part  of  1.  breast  during  day,  at  intervals.

At  intervals,  during  morning,  pain  in  back  part  of  r.  breast,
till  11  A.M.,  when  pain  extended  to  axilla,  which'  feels
sore  to  touch.

Pain  as  of  soreness  behind  lower  end  of  sternum.

Severe  cutting  or  sticking  pain  in  upper  third  of  r.  side,  <
from  motion,  >  with  arms  close  to  side.

Rheumatic  pain  in  r.  side  of  neck  and  r.  breast,  <  stoop-
ing head.

Left  side  of  chest  sore  and  painful.

Left  lung  and  back  of  breast  sore  all  day.

Sharp  pain  darted  through  lower  part  of  r.  breast,  1  p.m.,
continuing  at  intervals  through  afternoon.
^^  Heart,  Pulse  and  Circulation. Sharp  pain  around  heart,
causing  palpitation.

Pulse :  90,  feverish  ;  62,  small,  feeble.
^  Neck  and  Back. Stiff  neck,  also  down  between  scapulae
and  across  shoulders.

Pain  in  edge  of  trapezius,  at  occipital  and  clavicular  in-
sertions ;  flabby,  weak  feeling ;  hard  to  raise  head,  can
do  so,  however,  when  erect.


15  LACTIC  ACID.

Pain  in  lower  part  of  back  and  head  all  night ;  pain  to

shoulders,  <  right.
Backache  length  of  spine.

I  Aching  and  sore  pain  across  small  of  back.

Darting  across  r.  side  of  small  of  back,  <  stooping,  pass-
ing away  gradually,
^^  Upper  liimbs. Pain  in  shoulder  on  moving  arm,  with  sore-
ness in  side.

Rheumatic  pains  in  both  shoulders,  running  up  muscles
of  neck  to  mastoid  and  ears.

Slight  rheumatic  pains  in  wrist  joint.

Right  index  finger  swollen,  bright  red  spots,  one  between
first  and  second  and  other  between  second  and  third
joints,  latter  itched  and  burned  like  a  bee  sting,  on
eleventh  day  looked  like  a  blister.
^^  Lower  Limbs.  Sore  to  touch  along  r.  sciatic  nerve  on  get-
ting out  of  bed  ;  pulsating  slightly,  but  constantly.

Rheumatic  pains  in  knee  joint  on  moving  leg.

Pain  in  knee  joints  like  neuralgia,  at  times  extending  to
toes,  with  a  thrill  as  if  foot  had  been  asleep.

Stinging  in  joints  and  weakness  of  knees.

Laming  stitch  in  r.  patella  on  going  down  stairs.

Knees  weak  on  going  down  stairs,  feels  for  another  step
at  bottom,  with  vertigo.

Cramp  in  calf  early  in  morning,  after  rising,  part  feels  sore.

Pain  in  1.  great  toe,  afterwards  pain  in  1.  thigh.

■  Profuse  inoffensive  sweating  of  feet.
^  Limbs  in  GeneraL Articular  rheumatism.

I I  Sweat  acrid  and  profuse;  urine  clear  or  high  colored
and  frequent,  profuse  or  scanty ;  rheumatic  soreness  in
muscles  of  chest,  back  and  extremities ;  rheumatic  in-
flammation of  elbows,  knees  and  small  joints  of  upper
and  lower  extremities,  <  at  night  and  from  motion ;
fever,  with  headache  and  flushes  of  heat.

^  Rest. Position. Motion. Desire  to  have  head  lie  high.

Stooping :  vertigo ;  as  if  blood  would  burst  from  nose  ;
pain  in  side  of  neck  <  ;  pain  in  r.  side  of  small  of  back  <.

Bending  forward :  pain  over  orbital  region  <  ;  constric-
tion in  cardiac  region  >.

Sitting  with  feet  high  :  uterine  soreness  >.

Arms  close  to  side :  cutting  pain  in  side  >.

Can  stand  only  with  difficulty  :  tired.

Hard  to  raise  head :  pain  in  edge  of  trapezius.

Getting  out  of  bed  :  r.  sciatic  nerve  sore.

After  rising  out  of  bed  :  knees  feel  sore.

Going  to  bed  :  itching.

Turning  head  suddenly :  vertigo ;  as  if  eyes  would  burst
out  of  head.


LACTIC  ACID.  16

Motion  :  nausea  <  ;  cutting  pain  in  side  <  ;  of  arm,  pain
in  shoulder  < ;  of  leg,  rheumatic  pain  in  knee  joint ;  in-
flammation of  extremities< ;  during  and  after,very  tired.

Exercise :  aching  in  r.  ovary  <  ;  aversion  to.

Going  down  stairs :  laming  stitch  in  r.  patella ;  knees  weak.

Walking :  rapidly,  aching  in  r.  ovary  <  ;  weakness  and
trembling  of  w^hole  body;  cannot  walk  farther  than  a
few  rods ;  great  weakness.
^  Nerves. Great  weakness ;  trembling  of  whole  body  while
walking.

I  Debility,  weariness  of  limbs,  aversion  to  exercise.  ^Dia-
betes mellitus.

Tired  all  over,  can  stand  only  with  difficulty.

Very  tired  on  waking,  with  aching  of  limbs  as  if  he  had
not  slept.

Spasms  of  different  muscles ;  rigor  of  body.

Tired  as  if  he  had  walked  a  great  distance,  during  and
after  motion  ;  eyes  protrude.

I  I  Intermittent hysteria ; nauseated in morning when

swallowing,  and  gets  <  until  9  a.m.,  when  she  vomits
large  quantities  of  tough  phlegm,  sometimes  had  to  re-
move it  with  finger,  lasting  till  9  p.m.

^^  Sleep. Stupid,  drowsy  all  day,  restless  all  night.
Eestless  all  night,  could  neither  sleep  nor  lie.
Sleepless :  with  vertigo ;  with  backache.

^  Time.  Morning:  pain  in  temples;  redness  of  cheek  and
nose  ;  yellow  coating  on  tongue,  with  bad  taste ;  after
rising,  nausea ;  urine  contained  a  large  amount  of  salt ;
annoying  erections ;  pain  across  small  of  back  and  lower
part  of  abdomen  ;  saliva  contains  greyish  lumps ;  cramp
in  calf;  nauseated.

8  A.M. :  spots  on  legs  brightest.

10  a.m.:  pain  in  forehead,overeyes;  fulness  on  top  of  head.

II  A.M. :  pain  across  bowels.
Noon:  cold  and  chilly.

9  A.M.  till  9  P.M. :  nausea  <,  with  vomiting  of  tough  phlegm.
Day:  1.  lung  and  breast  sore;  stupid  and  drowsy.
Afternoon:  fulness  on  top  of  head  <;  pain  in  temples;

roaring  in  1.  ear;  sharp  pain  in  back  part  of  1.  breast;

sharp  pain  through  lower  part  of  breast,  at  intervals.
From  1  to  4  p.m.  :  fever,  with  severe  headache.
Evening :  urine  contained  large  excess  of  sugar.
6  p.m.:  pain  in  r.  breast;  slight  fever.
8  P.M. :  as  if  blood  was  trickling  down  from  front  to  back

part  of  head.
Night:  pain  in  head  and  back;  restless;  inflammation  of

extremities  < ;  cold.
12  P.M. :  cutting  in  muscles,  awakens  with  a  scream.


17  LACTIC  ACID.

^^  Temperature  and  Weather. Warmth :  burning  on  legs  <.

Going  quickly  from  warm  to  cold,  or  vice  versa :  red,
burning  spots  on  legs  <.

Cold:  burning  on  legs  <;  itching  and  burning  in  1.  half
of  body,  leg,  arm  and  hand.

Cold  all  night,  even  when  well  covered.

Cold  air:  sensitive  to.

Bathing  >  headache.

Shuns  damp  weather.
*^  Fever. Cold  and  chilly  at  noon,  transient.

I  Chilly,  mostly  on  limbs.

Chill :  after  pain  in  small  of  back  and  forehead,  over  eyes.

During  chill :  pain  in  head  extended  all  through  head  and
eyes;  pain  in  back.

Flashes  of  heat.

Slight  fever  at  6  p.m.

Fever,  with  severe  headache,  from  1  to  4  p.m.

Sweat  of  feet  and  hands,  from  noon  till  evening,  every
day.
"  Attacks,  Periodicity. At  intervals :  during  day,  pain  in
1.  breast ;  during  morning,  pain  in  r.  breast  till  11  a.m.,
when  pain  extended  to  axilla.

Every  morning:  epistaxis.

Every  day,  from  noon  till  evening:  sweat  of  feet  and  hands.

Day  and  night :  urinates  frequently  ;  violent  thirst.

Three  successive  nights:  seminal  emissions.

Once  a  week :  stool.

Spring  and  Fall:  cough  <.

For  one  hour  and  a  half  after  rising :  voice  entirely  with-
out control.

For  hours :  distressed  by  sensation  as  if  food  was  lodged
under  upper  end  of  sternum.
^'  Locality  and  Direction.  Right :  pain  through  eye ;  twitch-
ing across  upper  eyelid ;  pain  across  bowels  and  lower
part  of  side ;  aching  in  region  of  ovary ;  pain  in  breast ;
cutting  in  side;  rheumatic  pain  in  side  of  neck  and
breast;  sharp  pain  through  lower  part  of  breast;  pain
in  shoulder ;  darting  across  side  of  small  of  back  ;  index
finger  swollen ;  sore  along  sciatic  nerve ;  laming  stitch
in  patella.

Left :  dull  aching  pain  over  orbital  region ;  fulness  from
head  into  eye ;  sharp  pain  in  side  of  head  ;  painful
pimples  on  occipital  protuberance ;  sharp  pain  in  eye ;
jerking  of  upper  lid  ;  roaring  in  ear ;  singing,  snapping
in  ear ;  erysipelatous  redness  of  cheek  and  side  of  nose ;
rawness  of  pharynx  from  side  of  posterior  nares ;  hypo-
chondrium  sensitive  to  touch  ;  sharp  pain  in  lower  part
of  side;  dull  pain  in  groin;  pain  over  crest  of  ilium;

VOL.  VII. — 2.


LACTIC  ACID.  ■  18

pain  in  back  part  of  breast ;  side  of  chest  sore  and  pain-
ful; lung  and  back  of  breast  sore;  pain  in  great  toe;
pain  in  thigh ;  creeping  and  stinging  in  half  of  body.
^  Sensations.  As  if  blood  was  trickling  down  from  front  to
back  part  of  head ;  head  as  if  too  large ;  as  if  tossed  on
a  rough  sea;  as  if  blood  would  burst  out  at  forehead
and  eyes;  as  if  blood  would  burst  from  nose;  as  if  brain
was  too  large;  as  if  top  of  head  would  burst;  as  if  blood
was  forcing  its  way  out  of  eyes;  as  if  eyes  would  burst
out  of  head;  as  if  cornea  was  sore;  as  if  a  quantity  of
mucus  lodged  in  posterior  nares;  as  if  blood  would  spurt
from  nose;  mouth  as  if  burnt;  lump  in  throat  like  a
small  puff  ball;  as  of  plug  in  throat;  as  if  all  food  taken
was  lodged  under  upper  end  of  sternum;  as  if  turning
into  urine;  as  if  womb  was  down;  pain  as  if  menstruat-
ing; pain  as  of  soreness  behind  sternum;  as  if  foot  had
been  asleep;  tired  as  if  he  had  not  slept  or  had  walked
a  great  distance;  heat  as  if  femur  would  explode.

Pain:  in  forehead  over  eyes;  in  temples;  in  head  and
back;  through  r.  eye;  from  parotids  into  ear;  behind
lower  end  of  sternum;  across  lower  abdomen;  over  crest
of  1.  ilium;  in  region  of  kidneys  ;  across  small  of  back;
in  lower  part  of  abdomen ;  in  back  part  of  1.  breast;  back
part  of  r.  breast,  extending  to  axilla;  in  edge  of  trape-
zius, at  occipital  and  clavicular  insertions  to  shoulders;
in  knee  joints  ;  in  1.  great  toe;  in  thigh.

Severe  pain:  in  forehead  and  through  head ;  in  head,  above
eyes,  into  eyes;  in  glottis.

Tearing :  in  larynx  and  trachea.

Sharp  darting  pain:  in  1.  side  of  head,  from  temporal  to
orbital  region.

Darting :  across  r.  side  of  small  of  back.

Sharp  cutting:  in  muscles ;  in  upper  third  of  r.  side.

Sharp  pain:  in  1.  eye;  in  lower  part  of  1.  side  across  lower
abdomen;  in  back  part  of  1.  breast;  darted  through
lower  part  of  r.  breast ;  around  heart.

Laming  stitch :  in  r.  patella.

Bearing  down  pain  :  in  upper  part  of  abdomen.

Cramp:  in  calf.

Rheumatic  pain:  in  r.  side  of  neck  and  r.  breast;  both
shoulders,  up  muscles  of  neck;  in  wrist  joints;  in  knee
joints.

Rheumatic  soreness:  in  muscles  of  chest,  back  and  ex-
tremities.

Stinging:  in  joints.

Severe  aching  pain:  in  feet;  in  legs.

Aching  pain:  in  anus;  in  loins;  in  region  of  r.  ovary;
length  of  spine ;  across  small  of  back ;  in  limbs.


19  LACTIC  ACID.

Steady  aching:  in  and  behind  eyeball.

Dull  aching  pain:  over  1.  orbital  region.

Dull  pain :  in  forehead  into  eyes ;  in  1.  groin ;  over  hip  bone.

Burning:  in  fauces;  in  storuach;  of  larynx;  in  throat;  of

spots  on  fingers.
Intense  heat:  in  femur.
Heat:  in  head.
Soreness:  of  mouth;  in  throat;  of  1.  side  of  chest;  1.  lung

arfd  back  of  breast  sore  all  day ;  in  side.
Sore,  stretched  feeling:  of  bladder.
Spasmodic,  painful,  contractive  sensation :  in  throat.
Distress :  across  lower  part  of  abdomen.
Uneasiness :  in  stomach.

Creeping  and  stinging:  in  1.  half  of  body,  arm,  hand,  leg.
Gone  sensation:  low  down  in  stomach.
Sinking  feeling:  at  stomach.
Weakness :  of  knees ;  of  whole  body.
Constriction:  in  throat;  in  cardiac  region.
Heaviness  and  dragging  down :  in  lower  abdomen.
Weight:  in  stomach.

Fulness:  in  head;  in  forehead;  in  throat;  in  fauces.
Tightness:  in  head;  in  forehead.
Tension :  over  whole  head.
Stiff  feeling:  in  parotids.
Twitching:  across  r.  upper  lid  and  in  eyeball.
Drjmess: of  tongue; of  posterior  fauces; of  throat; of

larynx ;  of  glottis ;  of  epiglottis.
Great  itching :  of  vulva ;  of  spots  on  fingers ;  in  various

parts.
^  Tissues. I  Swelling  of  bone.

I  Chronic  osteitis;  exostosis,  especially  of  thighs ;  chicken

breast.
■  Articular  rheumatism  ;  dissolves  many  tissues.
I  Kidney  affections ;  croup  ;  diphtheria ;  morning  sickness

of  pregnancy ;  emaciation  ;  rheumatism.
*^  Touch. Passive  Motion. Injuries. Touch :  head  sore ;

hypochondrium  sensitive ;  r. breast  sore ;  axilla  sore ;

along  sciatic  nerve  sore.
Pressure :  spots  on  legs  brightest.
^  Skin. I  Skin  hard  and  dry,  no  sweat. ^Diabetes  mellitus.
Itching:  on  various  parts,  and  redness  on  covered  parts;

on  going  to  bed.
Hivelike  elevations on back; itching and redness on

other  parts.
Several  blotches  bright  red  on  legs,  slight  burning,  no

itching,  > warmth,  <  cold  and  going  quickly  from

warm  to  cold,  or  vice  versa ;  brightest  8  a.m.  and  on

pressure ;  centre  remains  bright  longest.


LACTIC  ACID.  20^

Itching  and  burning  on  going  into  cold  air,  with  creeping
and  stinging  in  1.  half  of  body,  arm,  hand  and  leg.
' I  Skin  harsh,  dry,  no  sweat. ^Diabetes  mellitus.
^  Stages  of  Life,  Constitution. Large  doses  disagreed  with
melancholic,  choleric  constitution,  dark hair  and  eyes.-

lAnsemic,  pale  women.

A  baby,  dark  eyes  and  hair;  epistaxis  every  morning.

Boy,  set.  16,  suffering  six  months  ;  diabetes  mellitus.

Young  woman,  healthy,  brunette,  two months  pregnant,
with  first  child  ;  morning  sickness.

Man,  set.  62,  phlegmatic,  dark complexion,  dark  hair  and
eyes,  has  had  dropsy  several times ;  diabetes  mellitus.
^^  Relations. Antidoted by : Bryon. (relieved sharp pain
upper  third  r.  side,  but  soreness  remained).

Compatible :  meat  diet  in  diabetes  mellitus.

Incompatible:  coffee  increases  symptoms.

Compare :  vegetable  acids  (all  cause  weakness  and  thin-
ning of  the  blood);  Aeon.,  Act.  rac.,Bellad.,  Cauloph.,Ipec.,.
Nux  vom.,  Phos.  ac.  (diabetes),  Pulsat.,  Rhus  tox.,  Psorin.
(great  discouragement).


^1  LACTUCA  VIROSA.

LACTUCA  VIROSA.

Poisonous  Lettuce.  Compositse.

A  i)lant  native  to  Europe ;  bas  a  strong,  disagreeable  smell,  like  tbat  of  opium,
and  a  bitterish,  acrid  taste.

Provings  by  German  provers,  collected  by  Seidel.  See  Jour.  f.  Hom.  Arz-
neien,  vol.  2.

Climicax,  Authorities. — Couyh,  Neidhard,  Raue's  Eec,  1870,  p.  373;
Whooping  cough,  A.  E.,  Euck.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  5,  p.  723 ;  Catarrh  of  chest,  Meyer,
Eiick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  5,  p.  686  ;  Hydrothorax,  Neidhard,  Eaue's  Eec,  1870,  p.  372.

^  Mind. Anguish  and  internal  uneasiness.
Sadness  with  exaggerated  fancies.
Difficulty  of  thinking.
^  Sensorium. Vertigo  with heaviness of  head and lower
limbs,  blackness  before  eyes  and  sensation  as  if  head
was  too  large  and  expanded.
^  Inner  Head. Aching,  pressing  pain  in  forehead ;  sensation
as  if  brain  was  loose.
Painful  spot  near  vertex,  <  on  touching  it.
Heaviness  in  occiput  with  pressure.
Dull  pain  in  whole  head,  early  in  morning.
Trembling  and  pulsation  in  head  during  rest.
Head  is  very  painfully  shattered  by  slight  cough,  so  that
a  whirring  and  pressing  remain  a  long  time  afterward.
Headaches:  with  affections  of  respiratory  organs;  nervous.
^  Sight  and  Eyes. Muscse volitantes; dimsightedness,  as
through  mist  or  gauze.
I  I  Pupils  very  much  dilated.
Biting  in  eyes.
Lids  covered  with  mucus.
^  Upper  Face. Heat  of  face,  w4th  trembling  of  lips,  and  sen-
sation as  if  they  were  swollen.
^  Lower  Face. Twitching  in  lips.
'^^  Taste  and  Tongue. '  i  Tongue  coated  white;  tip  of  tongue

feels  burnt.
^^  Inner  Mouth. Increased  flow  of  acrid  saliva.
13  Throat. Bitter  taste  in  throat,  as  from  bile.

Tenacious  mucus  in  throat  early  in  morning.
*^  Scrobiculum  and  Stomach. 1 1  Tightness  in  pit  of  stomach,
followed  by  true  prtecordial  anxiety.
I  I  Feeling  of  warmth  in  stomach,  accompanied  by  nausea,


22


LACTUCA  VIROSA.  22

rising  into  throat,  and  flat  taste  at  root  of  tongue,  chang-
ing to  icy  coldness  of  stomach  and  throat.
I  I  Pit  of  stomach retracted ; pain  in stomach,  <  from
pressure,  >  by  sitting,  bending,  or  emitting  fetid  flatus.
Icy  coldness  in  stomach  and  oesophagus.
Stitches  in  pylorus.
^^  Hypochondria. Swelling  of  liver  with  pressure,  or  with

tightness  when  pressing  on  it.
^*  Abdomen. Pinching  in  umbilical  region,  <  crossing  legs.
1  I  Fulness  in  abdomen,  especially  r.  side,  impedes  respira-
tion; >  by  discharge  of  flatus.
I  I  Ascites,  with  induration  of  liver,  and  asthma.
^•^  Stool  and  Rectum. Dry,  hard,  knotty,  difficult  stool,  with
burning  at  anus.
Hemorrhoidal  tumors,  with  tenesmus  of  rectum.
^^  Urinary  Organs. Dragging,  pressing  in  region  of  bladder,
i  1  Frequent  micturition  and  increased  secretion  of  urine,

urine  clear  as  water.
Burning  at  orifice  of  urethra.
Male  Sexual  Organs. Swelling  of  lymphatics  on  penis,
painful  erections  during  morning  sleep.
^  Female  Sexual  Organs, i  i  Hypertrophy  of  ovaries  in  a
woman,  a3t.  50,  consequent  upon  an  abortion  twenty-
five  years  previously ;  abdomen  as  large as that  of  a
woman  with  twins  at  ninth  month;  could  get  no  rest
day  or  night,  tumor  causing  pain  by  pressure  in  all
positions;  rectum  contracted,  evacuates  feces  with  great
pain.
I  I  Excessive swelling of abdomen, feet and eyelids.

^Dropsy  of  uterus.
8  Painful  gonorrhoea  in  females.
^^Respiration. Frequent  desire  for  air  and  a  deep  breath;
oppression  of  chest.
I  I  She  feared  to  take  a  deep  breath  on  account  of  tightness
in  lower  part  of  chest ;  there  was  then  felt  a  slight  shock.
Difficult  breathing,  with  stitches  in  1.  lung.
I  Wakes  suddenly  and  must  bounce  out  of  bed  upon  his
feet. ^Suffocation.
^^  Cough. iCough  from  tickling  in  throat;  tightness  in  chest.

I  Dry  cough  in  short  paroxysms,  shaking  chest  and  occiput.
Dry,  suffocative  cough,  with  coldness  in  stomach.
Spasmodic,  dry,  hollow,  racking  cough,  as  if  chest  would

fly  to  pieces.

I I  Incessant  spasmodic  cough,  which  threatens  to  burst
chest;  always  caused  by  peculiar  tickling  in  fauces,
which,  in  turn,  seems  to  be  produced  by  sensation  of
suffocation  in  throat.

I A  woman  past climacteric  years,  tickling  cough,  with


23  LACTUCA  VIBOSA.

oppression  of  middle  and  r.  side  of  chest,  pain  in  poste-
rior part  of  region  of  liver.

I  Whooping  cough,  paroxysms  preceded  b}^  anxiety.

I  Dry,  spasmodic  cough,  from  tickling  in  larynx,  with  dysp-
noea and  oppression  of  chest,  as  if  it  would  burst ;  <
in  morning,  >  sitting  up ;  before  attacks,  great  anxiety.
■^  Inner  Chest  and  Lungs,  i Pinching,  dull,  sticking  pain,
which  becomes  seated  in  upper  part  of  1.  side  of  chest,
with  tightness  of  whole  chest.

Pleuritic  stitches  from  middle  of  sternum  toward  r.  side.

Dull  sticking  from  1.  chest  to  scapula.

Pain  catches  him  in  his  lungs,  back  and  front,  and  across
top  of  sacrum.

■  Several  sharp  stitches  beneath  short  ribs  of  1.  side.

■  Cramping,  pressive  pains  in  various  parts  of  chest.
Feeling  of  coldness  in  chest.

Fulness  in  chest,  as  of  a  heavy  weight;  loosens  clothing.
Cannot  bear  anything to  bear  on  chest,  lest  breathing

should  become  oppressed.
Sensation  as  if  lower  part  of  chest  was  too  tight.

■  Great  oppression  of  chest  at  night,  waking  him from

sleep  and  obliging  him  to  sit  up  with  anxious  sudden-
ness, feels  as  if  he  would  suffocate,  and  suddenly  he
finds  liiinself  on  his  feet.
Congestion  of  blood  to  chest,  with  pressing,  obliging  one
to  breathe  hurriedly.

■  Irritation  to  cough  caused  by  constant  tickling  in  throat,

cough short,  taking away  breath,  patient almost in
despair. ^Catarrh  of  chest.
I  I Hydrothorax with  anasarca; unable  to lie down or
sleep,  could  not  express  ideas  for  want  of  words,  inclined
to  weep;  fluids  choke  him;  violent  palpitation.

^  Heart,  Pulse  and  Circulation. ■Tightness  and  oppression
of  chest  on  waking  from  sleep;  feels  as  if  suffocating,
must  get  out  of  bed. ^Angina  pectoris.
Pulse  slow,  contracted  and  small.

^^  Neck  and  Back, i  i  Pain  as  if  in  spinal  marrow,  extending
through  coccyx. (^Coccygodinia.

^^  Upper  Limbs. Painful  twitching  or  trembling  of  hands.

^^  Lower  Limbs. Sensation  in  legs  as  if  circulation  was  sus-
pended, particularly  when  sitting.
Cold  feet.

^*  Limbs  in  General. Sharp,  cramplike  twitchings  in  neigh-
borhood of  joints.

^  Rest. Position. Motion. Rest:  trembling  and  pulsating
in  head.
Sitting :  pains  in  stomach  > ;  oppression  of  chest  >  ;  as
if  circulation  in  legs  was  suspended.


LACTUCA  VIROSA.  24

Bending:  pains  in  stomach  >.  '

Crossing  legs:  pinching  in  umbiHcal  region  <.
Unable  to  lie  down :  hydrothorax  with  anasarca.
Must  sit  up  in  bed:  oppression  of  chest.
In  all  positions :  painfulness  of  tumor.
^^  Sleep. Irresistible  drowsiness,  in  daytime.

I  I  Sleep  restless  or  lethargic.
^  Time. Morning :  dull  pain  in  whole  head ;  tenacious  mucus
in  throat;  during  sleep,  painful  erections;  oppression
of  chest  <.
Day :  irresistible  drowsiness.
Night :  great  oppression  of  chest.
Day  or  night :  no  rest,  hypertrophy  of  ovaries.
^^  Temperature  and  Weather, Warm  room  :  chilliness.
*"  Fever, l  l  Slight  shivering.

Frequent  coldness  over  back  and  head,  with  heat  in  face.
Chilliness  in  a  warm  room,  with  coldness  of  hands  and  feet.
Dry  heat  of  upper  part  of  body,  with  icy  coldness  of  feet.
Profuse  perspiration,
*^  Locality  and  Direction. Right :  fulness  in  abdomen  < ;
oppression  of  side  of  chest;  stitches  toward  side  from
sternum.
Left:  stitches  in  lung;  pinching  pain  in  upper  part  of
side  of  chest;  dull  sticking  from  chest  to  scapula;  sharp
stitches  beneath  short  ribs.
^^  Sensations. As  if  head  was  too  large  and  expanded ;  as
if  brain  was  loose;  as  if  looking  through  mist  or  gauze;
as  if  lips  were  swollen ;  tip  of  tongue  as  if  burnt ;  as  if
chest  would  fly  to  pieces ;  as  of  a  heavy  weight  in  chest;
as  if  lower  part  of  chest  was  too  tight;  as  if  he  would
suffocate ;  pain  as  if  in  spinal  marrow,  extending  through
coccyx ;  as  if  circulation  in  legs  was  suspended.
Pain :  in  stomach ;  in  posterior  part  of  region  of  liver  ;  in

lungs,  back  and  front,  and  across  top  of  sacrum.
Painful  spot :  near  vertex.

Head  is  very  painfully  shattered  by  slight  cough,  so  that
a  whirring  and  pressure  remain  a  long  time  afterward.
Anxiety :  in  prsecordial  region.
Sharp  stitches :  beneath  short  ribs  of  1.  side.
Stitches :  in  pylorus ;  in  1.  lung ;  from  middle  of  sternum

toward  r.  side.
Pinching :  in  umbilical  region.

Sharp,  cramplike  twitching:  in  neighborhood  of  joints.
Cramping,  pressive  pains :  in  various  parts  of  chest.
Dragging,  pressing  :  in  region  of  bladder.
Pinching,  dull  sticking  pain  :  upper  part  of  1.  chest.
Dull  sticking :  from  1.  chest  to  scapula.
Aching  pressing  pain :  in  forehead.


25  LACTUCA  VIKOSA.

Dull  pain :  in  whole  head.
Painful  twitching  and  trembling :  of  hands.
Biting :  in  eyes.

Burning :  at  anus ;  at  orifice  of  urethra.
Heat :  of  face.

Dry  heat :  of  upper  part  of  body.
Warmth :  in  stomach.
Pressure :  on  occiput.

Heaviness :  of  head  and  lower  limbs ;  of  occiput.
Oppression :  of  chest.

Tightness :  in  pit  of  stomach  ;  of  liver ;  in  lower  chest.
Fulness :  in  abdomen  ;  in  chest.
Tickling :  in  throat ;  in  fauces.
Trembling :  of  lips.
Trembling  and  pulsating :  in  head.
Twitching :  of  lips.

Coldness  :  of  stomach  and  throat ;  in  chest ;  of  feet.
^*  Tissues. Dropsical  swellings  ; hydrothorax  ; ascites,  with

induration  of  liver  and  asthma.
^^  Touch. Passive  Motion. Injuries. Touch :  <  painful

spot  on  vertex.
Cannot  bear  anything  on  chest:  difficulty  of  breathing.
Pressure :  pain  in  stomach  ;  tightness  of  liver ;  j)ain  in

tumor  >.
^"^  Stages  of  Life,  Constitution.  Woman,  past  climaxis;  cough.
A  man,  tet.  22 ;  asthma  with  hydrothorax  (relieved).
Man,  set.  26 ;  phthisical,  after  intermittent,  hydrothorax.
Man,  had  for  years  suff'ered  from  blood dyscrasia  and

affection  of  brain  ;  hydrothorax.
Woman,  a^t.  30  ;  hysterical,  spasmodic  cough.
Woman,  get.  50 ;  hypertrophy  of  ovaries  after  miscarriage

(improved).
Woman,  set.  59  ;  hydrothorax  (relieved).
A  woman,  ^t.  60 ;  hydrothorax.

A  man,  set.  61 ;  asthma  with  general  cedema  after  taking-
cold.
*^  Relations. Compare: Opium (drowsiness),  Laches., Kali

carb.,  Kalijod.  (heart  symptoms).


LAPIS  ALBUS.  26

LAPIS  ALBUS. -

Silico  Fluoride  of  Calcium.

The  name  Lapis  Albus,  or  ivhite  stone,  was  given  by  Grauvogl  to  a  species  of
gneiss  which  he  found  in  the  mineral  springs  of  Gastein,  wliich  flow  over  forma-
tions of  gneiss  into  the  valley  of  the  Achen,  where  goitre  and  cretinism  aboLind.

CiiiNicAL  Authorities  —Goitre  (ten  cases),  Bellows,  Am.  Horn.  Obs.,  1867,
vol.  411  (Grauvogl's  reports  did  not  appear  until  1874) ;  Carcinoma,  Grauvogl,
Hah.  Mo.,  vol.  10,  p.  182.

^  Lower  Face. <  Opening  in  cheek  as  large  as  a  silver  dollar.

^Carcinoma.
^^  Scrobiculum  and  Stomach, i  i  Burning,  shooting,  sting-
ing pains  in  cardiac  region  and  pylorus.
^^  Female  Sexual  Organs. 1 1  Burning,  shooting,  stinging
pains  in  breasts  and  uterus.
I  Uterine  carcinoma  (5  cases).
I  Fluor  albus.
^^  Neck and Back, e  Goitre,  cretinism  and  scrofulous  dis-
eases.
*^  Sensations. Burning,  shooting,  stinging  pains :  in  cardia

and  pylorus ;  in  breasts  and  uterus.
^  Tissues. « Affections  of  glands  and  lymphatics.

■  Scrofulous  affections,  abscesses  and  sores;  enlargement
and  induration  of  glands,  especially  cervical ;  glandular
tumors,  where  no  glands  are  usually  found ;  goitre,  cre-
tinism.
I  I  Lipoma,  sarcoma,  glandular  and  fibrous  tumors;  carci-
noma, as  long  as  ulceration  has  not  set  in,  based  on
scrofulosis.
iScirrhus.

•  Tuberculosis  scrofulosa.
^^  Stages  of  Life,  Constitution. Woman,  set.  50 ;  carcinoma.
*^  Relations. Compare:  Arsen.,  Arsen  jod.,  Badiaga,  Calc.  ost.,
Calc.  jod.,  Conium,  Condur.,  lodum,  Kali  carb.,  Kali  jod.y
Silica,  Spongia.


27  LAUROCEEASUS.


LAUROCERASUS.

Cherry  Laurel.  Bosacese.

An  evergreen  tree  native  to  Persia ;  the  fresli  leaves  are  aromatic  and  taste
like  the  bitter  almond. The  alcoholic  tincture  is  prepared  from  the  leaves.
Proving-s  by  Jorg,  Hartlaub,  I*\enning,  etc.

Clinical  Authorities. — Threatened  apoplexy,  Elwert,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.
1,  p.  92  ;  Attacks  of  unconsciousness,  Billig,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  5,  p.  33;  Cholera
infantum,  Martin,  Trans.  Horn.  Med.  Soc.  Pa.,  1882,  p.  172 ;  Retention  of  urine,
Orth,  B.  J.  H.,  vol.  34,  p.  161 ;  Bysmenorrhvea,  Osborn,  Kane's  Rec,  1871,  p.  157;
Cough,  Hirschel,  Raue's  Rec,  1873,  p.  101 ;  Whooping  cough,  Williamson,  Trans.
Hom.  Med.  Soc.  Pa.,  1873,  p.  96 ;  A.  R.,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  5,  p.  723;  Cardiac
cough,  Hirschel,  B.  J.  H.,  vol.  31,  p.  247  ;  Affection  of  heart,  Martin,  Hom.  Clin.,
vol.  4,  p.  11;  Palpitation  of  heart,  Martin,  Raue's  Rec,  1870,  p.  199;  Spasmodic
pains  about  heart,  Martin,  Raue's  Rec,  1871,  p.  106  ;  Cyanosis,  Guernsey,  Guernsey's
Obs.,  p.  880;  Asphyxia  neonatorum,  Farrington,  Raue's  Rec,  1874,  p.  248;  Heart
cZi'sease,  Martin,  Hom.  Clin.,  voL  1,  p.  119;  (aqua  amygd.  amar.),  Knorre,  Riick.
Kl.  Erf,  vol.  4,  p.  579;  Clonic  convulsions  during  typhoid,  Trinks,  B.  J.  H.,  vol.  29,
p.  319;  Chorea,  Lilienthal,  Hom.  Clin.,  vol.  1,  p  27.

^  Mind. Loss  of  consciousness,  with  loss  of  speech  and  motion.
Insensibility ;  complete  loss  of  sensation.
Dulness  of  senses.

Weakness  of  mind  and  loss  of  memor3^
Inability  to  collect  one's  ideas.

Fear  and  anxiety  about  imaginary  evils; despondency.
^  Sensorium. Vertigo:  with  stupefaction  ;  with  disposition  to

sleep  ;  <  in  open  air.
I  Sudden  bloating  of  face,  vertigo, distortion  of  mouth,

twitching  of  muscles  of  face ;  loss  of  speech,  with  perfect

consciousness. ^Threatened  apoplexy.
I  Coma,  looks  more  like  a  deep,  quiet  sleep. ^Apoplexy.
I  I  Apoplexy,  with  paralysis.
^  Inner  Head, l Coolness  on  forehead  as  from  a  draft  of  air.
Periodical  paroxysms  of  aching  pain  under  frontal  bone.
Boring  headache,  particularly  above  eyelids.
Oppression  on  top  of  head,  as  from  a  weight.
Beating  in  head,  <  stooping.

■  Stupefying  pain  in  whole  head.

■  Pulsation  in  head,  with  heat  or  coldness.

■  Stitches  in  head.


LAUROCERASUS.  28

Headache :  >  after  eating ;  lacerating,  in  evening  in  bed  ;
from  nervous  prostration,  with  dragging  pain,  accompa-
nied by  pain  and  swelling  in  hypochondrium  and  yel-
low spots  on  face.

■  Sensation  of  looseness  of  brain,  as  if  it  were  falling  into

forehead  when  stooping,  without  pain.
I  The  brain  feels  contracted  and  painful.
^  Outer  Head. Sensation  of  coldness  in  forehead  and  vertex,
as  if  a  cold  wind  was  blowing  on  it,  descending  through
neck  to  back ;  <  in  room,  >  in  023en  air.

■  Itching  of  hairy  scalp.

^  Sight  and  Eyes. ■  Obscuration  of  vision;  sensation  of  a
veil  before  eyes.

■  Objects  appear  larger.

I  I  Eyes :  staring,  wide  open ;  lightly  closed ;  distorted.
I  I  Pupils  dilated,  immovable.
^  Hearing  and  Ears. '  l  Hardness  of  hearing.

I  I  Tingling  in  ears  ;  itching.
^  Smell  and  Nose. 1 1  Nose  feels  stopped  up ;  no  air  passes

through.
^  Upper  Face. iFace :  yellow  spots ;  sunken,  with  livid  grey
yellow  complexion  ;  blue,  with  gasping;  bloated  ;  idiotic.

■  Twitching  and  convulsions  of  facial  muscles.

■  Titillation,  as  if  flies  and  spiders  were  crawling  over  skin.
I  I  Eruption  around  mouth.

^  Lower  Face. ■Lockjaw.

"  Taste  and  Tongue. ■Tongue :  dry,  rough  ;  dry  and  white;

cold  or  numb,  as  if  burnt;  1.  side  stiff  and  swollen,  with

loss  of  speech.
^^  Inner  Mouth. ■Foam  at  mouth. ^Epilepsy.

■  Dryness  in  mouth.

^^  Throat. ■Spasmodic  deglutition. ^Chorea.

■  ■Spasmodic  contraction  in  throat  and  oesophagus.

■  ■Drink  rolls  audibly  through  oesophagus  and  intestines.
^*  Appetite, Thirst. Desires, Aversions. "Hunger  after

eating,  with  feeling  of  emptiness.
■Loss  of  appetite,  with  clean  tongue.

■  Disgust  for  food  during  pregnancy.

■  Violent  thirst,  with  dry  mouth.

^^  Hiccough,  Belching,  Nausea  and  Vomiting. ■  Hiccough.

■  Nausea :  on  approaching  a  stove ;  and  vomiting  of  ingesta.

■  Eructations,  tasting  like  bitter  almonds. ^Pregnancy.
I  I  Vomiting  of  food  with  cough.

^^  Scrobiculum  and  Stomach. ■  Violent  pain  in  stomach,
with  loss  of  speech.

■  Burning  or  coldness  in  stomach  and  abdomen.

■  Contractive  feeling  in  region  of  stomach,  and  cutting  in

abdomen.


29  LAUROCERASUS.

^^  Hypochondria, i  Sticking  pains  in  liver,  with  pressure.
iRegion of  liver  distended,  pain  as  from  subcutaneous

ulceration,  or  as  if  abscess  would  burst.
I  I  Indurated  liver ;  atrophic  nutmeg  liver.
^^  Abdomen, l Pinching  about  umbilicus.

I  I  Colicky  pains  in  afternoon,  and  tearing  pains  in  vertex
at  night.

■  Sensation  like  falling  of  a  heavy  lump  from  just  above

umbilicus  to  small  of  back,  produced  by  talking  or  over-
exertion, also  with  spasmodic  pains  in  cardiac  region.
I  Coldness  and  audible  rumbling  in  whole  abdomen.
^^  Stool  and  Rectum.  iDiarrhoeic  stools:  with  tenesmus ;  of
green,  liquid  mucus,  with  suffocative  spells  about  heart,
forcing  her  to  lie  down ;  involuntary.

■  Constipation,  stools  hard,  firm,  passed  with  much  strain-

ing; obstruction,

I  I  Ineffectual  urging  to  stool,  with  emission  of  flatus  only.

I  Green,  watery  stools  ;  drinks  roll  audibly  through  oesoph-
agus and  intestines ;  suppression  or  retention  of  urine  ;
dilated  pupils ;  slow,  feeble  breathing ;  irregular,  imper-
ceptible pulse. ^Cholera  infantum.

■  Frequent,  greenish,  mucous  stools ;  entire  loss  of  appetite,

but  thirsty ;  child  would  not  take  anything  but  water,
which  could  be  heard  gurgling  down  oesophagus  to
stomach  ;  respiration  very  slow  and  weak  ;  pulse  almost
imperceptible ;  extremities  cold  as  death,  with  coldness
of  entire  body. ^Cholera  infantum.

■  Absence  of  vomiting  and  stools;  asphyxia;  coldness  of

body,  pulselessness;  cloudiness  of  brain,  fainting;  tetanic
spasms ;  suppression  or  retention  of  urine ;  sensation  of
constriction  in  throat  when  swallowing. ^Cholera.

■  Complete  paralysis  of  sphincter  ani.

^^  Urinary  Organs. ■  Suppressed  urine. ^Cholera.

■  Retention  of  urine  from  paralysis  of  bladder,  or  urine

is  voided  slowly.

■  Involuntary  urination.

Urine :  pale  yellow ;  thick,  reddish  or  mahogany  colored
sediment,  with  floating  jellylike  flocks.

Pain  in  region  of  stomach  when  urinating.

Burning  in  urethra,  and  pressing  after  urinating.

Itching  in  forepart  of  urethra.

Acrid  urine,  corroding  labia.

■Urinary  difficulties,  with  palpitation  of  heart  and  gasping
for  breath,  coming  on  by  spells.
^^  Male  Sexual  Organs. ■  Gangrene  of  penis.
^^  Female  Sexual  Organs. ■  Menses :  too  early  and  too  pro-
fuse ;  blood  thin ;  with  nightly  tearing  in  vertex.

■  ]\Ienorrhagia,  blood  dark,  in  large  clot's,  during  climaxis.


LAUROCERASUS.  30

■Severe  pain  in  sacral  region,  extending  to  pubis;  frontal
headache,  with  dizziness  and  dimness  of  vision  ;  coldness
of  extremities;  icy  coldness  of  tongue;  great  melan-
choly. //Dysmenorrhoea.

■  Burning  and  stinging  in  and  below  mammse.

^  Pregnancy. Parturition. Lactation, i  Attacks  of  suffo-
cation, with  palpitation  and  a  sort  of  gasping  for  breath ;
must  lie  down  sometimes  to  find  relief. ^'Pregnancy.
I  She  is  conscious  of  a  shock  passing  through  whole  body
before  spasm. ^Puerperal  convulsions.
^^  Voice  and  Larynx. Trachea  and  Bronchia. 1 1  Scraping
in  larynx,  with  increased  secretion  of  mucus ;  hoarse-
ness.
I  I  Spasmodic  constriction  of  trachea.
I  I  Laryngismus  stridulus  ;  heart  affected.
^  Respiration. Breathing :  slow,  feeble,  moaning  or  rattling  ;
almost  imperceptible ;  panting  ;  very  difficult.

■  Dyspnoea,  with  sensation  as  if  lungs  would  not  be  suf-

ficiently expanded,  or  as  if  pressed  against  spine.

■  Spasmodic  oppression  of  chest.

■  Gasping,  suffocating  spells ;  clutches  at  heart ;  palpitation.
^  Cough.  Cough  :  short,  titillating,  nervous,  from  heart  dis-
ease ;  cannot  lie  down ;  whizzing,  with  sensation  as  if
mucous  membranes  were  too  dry ;  <  towards  evening,
from  motion,  stooping,  eating  and  drinking,  or  warmth  ;
with  copious,  jellylike  sputa,  dotted  with  bloody  points.

■Dry,  almost  constant,  titillating  cough ;  throat  and  mouth
feel  as  if  burnt.

■  Cough,  with  whistling  sound.

■  Whooping  cough,  dry,  whistling,  no  sputum;  impending

paralysis  of  lungs.

■  Cough,  with  evening  aggravation,  severe  cramps  in  chest,

and  rapid  sinking  of  vital  forces. ^Whooping  cough.

■  Coughed  continuously  for  several  nights  as  soon  as  he

laid  down. ^Mitral  stenosis.
^^  Inner Chest and Lungs. ■Spasm  of  chest; veins  of
hands  distended.

■  Threatening  paralysis  of  lungs.

■  Pleurisy  in  drunkards  and  melancholic  persons;  at  be-

ginning of  diseases,  if  small  bronchi  are  irritated ;  suffo-
cative cough,  pain  in  pleura  severe  and  localized,
pulse  soft,  but  quick.

■  Coughs  and  spits  a  great  amount  of  phlegm,  sprinkled

over  and  through  with  distinct  clots of  blood. ^Ty-
phoid pneumonia. ^Pulmonary  affections.
^^  Heart,  Pulse  and  Circulation. ■Heart's  action  irregular,
pulse  slow;  palpitation.

■  Stitches  in  region  of  heart.


31  LAUHOCERASUS.

I  Beating,  fluttering  sensation ;  gasps  for  breath ;  dry  cough.

■  Sitting  posture  causes  gasping  for  breath.

I  Pulse  scarcely  perceptible;  cold,  moist  skin ;  convulsions
of  muscles  of  face.

■Spasmodic  pain  in  cardiac  region,  fears  sudden  death ;
sensation  as  if  something  heavy,  like  a  lump  of  lead,  had
fallen  from  pit  of  stomach  to  back,  whenever  she  at-
tempted to  rise  from  a  recumbent  posture.

■  Attacks  of  suffocation,  with  gasping  for  breath;  stitches

in preecordial region; excessive weakness. ^Angina
pectoris.

■  Continual  cough  at  night,  as  soon  as  he  lies  down. ^Mi-

tral stenosis.

■  Pulse  extremely  irregular;  at  times  small  and  slow,  often

imperceptible,  at  others  somewhat  accelerated,  seldom
full  and  hard. ^Apoplexy.

■  ■Cyanosis  neonatorum;  face  blue,  with  gasping.

■  A  little  exercise  produces  gasping  for breath  and in-

creased blueness ;  ends  of  fingers  and  toes  knobby,  and
larger  than  any  portion  of  these  extremities ;  >  when
lying  still. ^Cyanosis.
^  Outer  Chest. ■  Pains  in  external  parts  of  thorax  on  moving.

■  Burning  in  chest  on  taking  an  inspiration.

^^  Neck  and  Back, i  Painful  stiffness  in  1.  side  of  neck,  nape
and  small  of  back.

■  Pressure  in  nape  of  neck,  particularly  in  open  air,  com-

pelling him  to  bend  head  forward.

■  Severe  pain  in  sacral  region,  extending  to  jDubis.

^^  Upper  Limbs. '  '  Pressure  on  r.  shoulder  or  in  shoulder  joint.
I  I  Pains  as  from  lameness,  also  stitches,  in  r.  shoulder.
Pimples  on  r.  upper  arm.
I  I  Stitch  in  both  elbows.
I  I  Pain,  as  if  sprained,  in  r.  wrist  joint.

■  Distension  of  veins  on  hands. ^Heart  disease.

I  1  Rough,  scaly  skin  between  fingers,  with  burning  when
touched  by  water.
^  Lower  Limbs. • '  Pain,  as  if  sprained,  in- 1.  hip  joint.
I  I  Sticking  in  1.  knee.

I  I  The  feet  go  to  sleep  when  crossing  legs  or  sitting.
I  I  Ulcerative  pains  in  lower  part  of  heels.
I  I  Stiffness  of  feet  after  rising  from  a  seat.

■  Cold,  clammy  feet,  up  to  knees. ^Chorea. ^Heart  disease.
^  Limbs  in  General. ■Ends  of  fingers  and  toes  enlarged,

knoblike. ^Heart  disease.

■  Stinging  and  tearing  in  limbs.

■  Painless  paralysis  of  limbs.

^  Rest. Position. Motion. When  lying  down :  coughs  con-
tinuously ;  ends  of  fingers  and  toes  knobby.


LAUROCERASUS.  32

Must  lie  down :  suffocating  spell  about  heart.

Cannot  lie  down :  heart  disease.

When  she  attempts  to  rise  from  a  recumbent  posture,  sen-
sation as  of  a  heavy  lump  falling  from  pit  of  stomach
to  back.

Stooping:  beating  in  head  <  ;  cough  <.

Compelled  to  bend  head  forward:  pressure  in  nape  of  neck.

Sitting  posture :  gasps  for  breath ;  feet  go  to  sleep.

After  rising  from  seat :  stiffness  of  feet.

Crossing  legs :  feet  go  to  sleep.

Motion :  cough  <  ;  causes  pain  in  external  thorax.

A  little  exercise  produces  gasping  for  breath.
^^  Nerves. iWant  of  energy  of  vital  powers  and  want  of  re-
action, especially  in  chest  and  heart  affections.

■  Rapid  sinking  of  forces:  long  lasting  fainting  spells.

■  Clonic  spasms  of  limbs,  with  paralytic  weakness;  no  loss

of  consciousness. ^Typhoid.

■  Much  gasping  for  breath  before,  during,  or  after  spasm,

with  bluish  tint  of  skin;  after  fright;  emaciation. ^Con-
vulsions.

■  Emotional chorea,  fearful contortions  and  jactitations

when  awake ;  restless  sleep ;  gasping  for  breath.

■  Want  of  nervous  reaction;  the  well  chosen  remedy  does

not  act.

■  Chorea,  with  constant  jerks,  cannot  keep  still;  speech  in-

distinct, gets angry  when not understood ; gasping ;
emaciation  ;  after  fright.

■  On  day  of  burial  of  mother,  ten  years  ago,  sudden  loss  of

consciousness,  from  which  he  did  not  recover  for  a  long
time;  since  then,  attacks  more  frequent  and  severe,
finally,  one  or  two  a  week,  one  lasting  as  long  as  nine
hours ;  before  attack,  paleness  of  face;  dropping  of  lower
jaw;  sinking  of  arms  to  side;  wide  open,  staring  eyes;
loss  of  consciousness ;  respiration  suspended ;  pulse
weak,  scarcely  perceptible;  face  pale;  limbs  stiff;  hands
clenched,  thumbs  not  drawn  in ;  eyes  closed ;  mouth
slightly  open,  no  foaming ;  in  beginning  of  attack  grind-
ing teeth ;  after  one  half  hour  to  nine  hours  changes
position  of  limbs  and  stretches,  then,  between  long  inter-
vals, takes  deep  breaths,  opens  eyes,  trembles  all  over
and  complains  of  great  lassitude  and  severe  headache.
■Epilepsy;  tetanus.

■  Apoplexy,  with  paralysis.

■After  feeling  ill  eight  days,  during  which  time  several
attacks  of  vomiting  of  tasteless  water  occurred,  par-
oxsym  sets  in;  great  anxiety,  eyes  turned  up  and
fixed  upon  one  spot,  pupils  dilated,  vanishing  of  sight,
roaring  and  ringing  in  ears,  trembling  and  twitching


33  LAUROCERASUS.

of  muscles  of  face,  distortion  of  face,  rush  of  blood  to
head,  heat  and  redness  of  face,  chattering  teeth,  first
trembliug  of  upper  then  of  lower  limbs,  followed  by
shaking  of  body  as  in  a  severe  chill,  but  with  heat  and
sweat  of  body ;  twitching  and  spasmodic  distortion  of
wholebody  and  extremities;  palpitation  ;  moaning  and
groaning ;  partial  loss  of  consciousness ;  paroxysms  last
several  minutes; during  interval,  confusion of  head,
pain  in  epigastrium,  great  lassitude,  debility,  anxiety
and  restlessness;  occasional  short  slumber  disturbed  by
dreams  of  fire,  startled  awaking,  or  twitching  of  whole
body;  occasionally  delirium,  cries  for  help;  no  fever.
^'^  Sleep. 1  I  Irresistible  sleepiness,  especially  after  dinner  and
in  evening.
_  iSoporous  condition;  deep,  snoring  sleep.
^^  Time. Afternoon  :  colicky  pains ; chill,  coldness  and  shiv-
ering.
After  dinner:  irresistible  sleepiness.
Evening :  headache  >  ;  cough  <  ;  irresistible  sleepiness ;

chill,  coldness  and  shivering.
Night :  tearing  in  vertex ;  when  lying  down,  coughs  con-
tinuously.
^^  Temperature  and  Weather. Open  air :  vertigo  < ;  cold-
ness in  forehead  and  vertex  >  ;  pressure  in  nape  of
neck  <.
In  room  :  coldness  in  forehead  and  vertex  <.
On  approaching  stove :  nausea;  cold.
External  warmth :  does  not  >  coldness.
When  touched  by  water :  burning  between  fingers.
^  Fever. I Chill  and  external  coldness.
■  Cold,  moist  skin;  apoplexy.
I  I  Chill,  coldness  and  shivering  in  afternoon  and  evening,

not  >  by  external  warmth.
iPatient  feels  cold  and  gets  sick  on  approaching  warm  stove.
I  I  Chill,  alternating  with  heat ;  want  of  animal  heat.
I  I  Heat  after  chill,  from  evening  till  midnight.
I  I  Heat  descending  back.

I  I  Sweat:  after  eating; during  and  after  heat,  till  toward
morning.
*'  Attacks,  Periodicity. One  or  two  a  week :  attacks  of  loss
of  consciousness.
Froni  evening  till  midnight:  heat  after  chill.
'^  Locality  and  Direction. Right :  pressure  of  shoulder ;  in
shoulder  joint;  pains  as  from  lameness  in  shoulder;
pimples  on  upper  arm;  pain as  if  sprained  in  wrist
joint.
Left :  painful  stiffness  of  side  of  neck ;  pain  as  if  sprained
m  hip  joint ;  sticking  in  knee.

VOL. VII. — 3.


LAUROCERASUS.  34

^  Sensations.  Coolness  of  forehead  as  from  a  draft  of  air ;  as
of  a  weight  on  top  of  head ;  as  if  brain  was  loose  and
falling  into  forehead  when  stooping ;  as  of  a  veil  before
eyes  ;  nose  as  if  stopped  up  ;  as  if  flies  and  spiders  were
crawling  over  skin ;  tongue  as  if  burnt ;  as  if  abscess  in
region  of  liver  would  burst ;  as  of  a  heavy  lump  falling
from  just  above  umbilicus  to  small  of  back  ;  as  if  lungs
would  not  be  sufficiently  expanded ;  as  if  lungs  pressed
against  spine ;  as  if  mucous  membranes  were  too  dry ;
throat  and  mouth  as  if  burnt ;  pain  as  from  lameness  in
r.  shoulder ;  pain  as  if  sprained  in  r.  wrist  joint.

Pain :  in  hypochondrium ;  as  from  subcutaneous  ulcera-
■  tion  in  region  of  liver ;  in  region  of  stomach  when
urinating ;  in  external  parts  of  thorax ;  as  if  sprained
in  wrist  joint ;  as  from  lameness  ;  in  e]Digastrium.

Painfulness :  of  brain.

Violent  pain  :  in  stomach.

Severe  pain  :  in  head ;  in  sacral  region  to  pubis;  in  pleura.

Tearing  pains :  in  vertex ;  in  limbs.

Cutting :  in  abdomen.

Lacerating  pain :  in  head.

Pinching:  about  umbilicus.

Stitches :  in  head  ;  in  region  of  heart ;  in  2:)r8ecordial  region ;
in  r.  shoulder ;  in  both  elbows.

Sticking  pains :  in  liver ;  in  1.  knee.

Stinging:  in  and  below  mammae;  in  limbs.

Beating,  fluttering  sensation  :  about  heart.

Beating :  in  head.

Boring  pain :  in  head.

Stupefying  pain  :  in  whole  head.

Ulcerative  pain  :  in  lower  part  of  heels.

Dragging  pain :  in  head.

Colicky  pains :  in  abdomen.

Spasms :  of  chest.

Spasmodic  pains :  in  cardiac  region.

Aching  pain :  under  frontal  bone.

Burning :  in  stomach  and  abdomen ;  in  urethra ;  in  and
below  mammae  ;  in  chest ;  between  fingers.

Painful  stiffness :  in  1.  side  of  neck,  nape  and  small  of  back.

Pulsation  :  in  head,  with  heat  or  coldness.

Spasmodic  constriction  :  of  trachea.

Oppression  :  on  top  of  head ;  of  chest.

Pressure :  in  nape  of  neck ;  in  r.  shoulder

Constriction :  of  throat.

Contractive  feeling :  in  region  of  stomach.

Stiffness :  of  feet.

Scraping :  in  larynx.

Tingling :  in  ears.


35  LAUROCERASUS.

Contraction :  of  brain.

Dryness :  of  mouth.

Coldness  :  in  forehead  and  vertex ;  of  extremities ;  of  en-
tire body ;  of  tongue.

Itching :  of  hairy  scalp ;  in  ears ;  in  forepart  of  urethra.
^^  Stages  of  Life,  Constitution. Child,  set.  8  months,  sick
some  time ;  cholera  infantum.

Two  boys,  set.  between  10  and  12 ;  clonic  convulsions  dur-
ing typhoid.

Girl,  a3t.  12,  very  nervous,  continually  twitches  muscles  of
face,  after  fright ;  chorea.

Boy,  set.  13,  had  rheumatism  ;  disease  of  heart.

Three  women,  set.  20 ;  clonic  convulsions  during  typhoid.

Woman,  suffering  five  years;  s^Dasmodic  pains  about  heart.

Man,  set.  36,  medium  height,  suffering  appearance,  com-
pelled to  do  hard  work;  attacks  of  loss  of  consciousness.

Man,  psoric  taint,  suffering  from  cramps,  after  great  fright ;
spasms.

Woman,  set.  50  ;  palpitation  of  heart.

Woman,  set.  59,  unmarried,  one  year  ago  had  apoplexy
cured  by  Hyosc.  and  Bellad.;  threatened  apoplexy.
*^  Relations. Antidoted  by : Camphor,  Coffea,  Ipec,  Opium.

Compatible:  Bellad.,  Phosphor.,  Pulsat.,  Veratr.

Compare:  Bar.  carb.,  Bellad.,  Bryon.,  Calcar.,  Hydr.  ac,
Ipec,  Nux  vom,..  Opium,  Phosphor.,  Pulsat.,  Rhus  tox.,
Sepia,  Sulphur,  Veratr.


LEDUM  PALUSTRE,  36


LEDUM  PALUSTRE.

Marsh  Tea; Wild  Rosemary.  Ericaceas.

A  small  evergreen  shrub,  growing  in  moist,  swampy  grounds  in  Europe  and
America.

Introduced  and  proved  by  Hahnemann  and  his  provers,  supplemented  by  new
symptoms  occurring  after  high  potencies  used  clinically  by  Lippe  and  Berridge.

Clinical  Axjthokities. — Asthenopia  ;  hemorrhage  into  interior  chamber  of  eye  ;
Ptosis  after  injury;  Ecchymosis  of  conjunctiva,  Norton,  Oph.  Therap.,  p.  110;  Bheu-
matk  ophthalmia,  Alb,  Norton's  Oph.  Therap.;  Injuries  to  eye,  Norton's  Oph.  Therap.,
p.  109  ;  Metrorrhagia,  Claude,  Trans.  World's  Hom.  Conv.,  1876,  p.  955 ;  Whitlow,
Smith,  Hom.  Phys.,  vol.  4,  p.  149  ;  Rheumatism  in  hip,  Plange,  B.  J.  H.,  vol.  9,  p.  241 ;
Itching  of  feet,  Williamson,  Trans.  Hom.  Med.  Soc.  Pa.,  1872,  p.  152 ;  Drysdale,  B.  J.
H.,  vol.  29,  p.  166  ;  Synovitis,  Von  Tagen,  Hom.  Clin.,  vol.  1,  p.  29  ;  Bronchial  catarrh,
Kafka,  Kiick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  5,  p.  686 ;  Whooping  cough,  Schron,  Kiick.  Kl.  Erf.,
vol.  3,  p.  81;  (30  cases)  Lembke,  N,  A.  J.  H.,  vol.  11,  p.  317;  Schussle,  Kaue's
Eec,  1870,  p.  185 ;  Hoimoptysis,  Hartman,  Kiick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  3,  p.  217 ;  Hcemop-
tysis  alternating  with  rheumatism,  Stens,  Eaue's  Eec,  1873;  Epileptifoi'm  attacks,
Hughes,  Pharmacodynamics,  p.  500 ;  Epilepsy  after  wound  on  head,  Godfroid,  B.  J.
H.,  vol.  34,  p.  337 ;  Rheumatism,  Fisher,  Times  Eetros.,  vol.  2,  p.  14 ;  Syphilitic
periostitis,  Kent,  MSS. ;  Purpura  hemorrhagica,  Bethmann,  Kiick.  Kl.  Erf,  vol.  4,  p.
204;  Prickly  heat  of  newcomers  in  tropics,  Salzer,  Eaue's  Eec,  1875,  p.  295 ;  Urtica-
ria from  sting  of  instrument.  Smith,  Times  Eetros.,  vol.  l,p.  136;  Suggillations  (2
cases),  Wells,  Hom.  Phys.,  vol.  2,  p.  272 ;  Punctured  ivounds,  Guernsey,  Times  Ee-
tros., vol.  2,  p.  14.

^  Mind. I  Desire  for  solitude.

I  After  nightmare,  fears  to  go  to  sleep,  lest  she  die.

■  Inclined  to  be  out  of  humor  and  angry;  vehement.

■  Discontented  ;  morose;  hates  his  fellow  beings,

^  Sensorium.  ■Vertigo:  as  from  intoxication,  especially
when  walking  in  open  air ;  feels  dull  after  eating  ;  head
inclined  to  fall  backward.

^  Inner  Head.  Headache :  raging,  pulsating ;  causing  dul-
ness,  or  stupefaction  ;  pressing,  with  distress,  when  head
is  covered ;  as  if  something  was  gnawing  in  her  temples,
occiput  and  ears,  with  red,  bloated  looking  face  and
eyes ;  dull,  in  morning,  during  sleep.
A  misstep  causes  a  sensation  of  concussion  in  brain.

■  Head  affected  after  getting  wet.

*  Outer  Head. ■Least  covering  of  head  intolerable.
I  I  Pimples  and  boils  on  forehead. ^Drunkards.


87  LEDUM  PALUSTRE.

I  I  Itching  eruption  scattered  thickly  over  scalp ;  enlarged
cervical  glands.
^  Sight  and  Eyes, i  i  Pupils  dilated.

1  Asthenopia,  with  dull  pain  behind  eyeball,  as  if  it  would
be  forced  out.

I  Hemorrhage  into  anterior  chamber  after  iridectomy.

■  Left  eye  first  affected;  excessive  photophobia,  with  se-

vere pain  upon  attempting  to  open  lids,  pressing  pain
in  head  and  eye,  as  if  it  at  first  was  pressed  asunder,
then  out  of  orbit,  with  great  lachrymation  and  noctur-
nal aggravation ;  severe  burning  on  border  of  lids  and
sticking  in  eyes,  as  from  sand ;  tearing,  drawing  pains
in  neck  to  insertion  of  deltoid  muscle ;  heat  and  chills.
^Rheumatic  ophthalmia.

■  Complete  ptosis,  r.  eye,  from  injury;  ecchymosis  of  lids

and  conjunctiva.

I I  Contusions  or  wounds  of  eye  and  lids,  especially  if  ac-
companied by  extravasation  of  blood.

lEcchymoses  of  conjunctiva,  traumatic  or  spontaneous.
I  Profuse  suppuration  with  discharge  of  fetid  pus.

■  Nightly  agglutination  without  inflammation  or  pain.
I  Burning  on  border  of  lids  and  feeling  of  sand  in  eyes.

I  Lachrymation:  acrid,  making  lower  lids  and  cheeks  sore.
^  Hearing  and  Ears, l  l  Noises  in  ear  as  from  ringing  of  a
bell,  or  from  a  storm  of  wind ;  ringing  and  whizzing.

■  Hardness  of  hearing:  (r.  ear)  as  if  ear  was  obstructed  by

cotton ; after  cutting  hair ;  after  chilling  head ; after
suppression  of  coryza  or  otorrhoea,
I  Rheumatic  otitis.
^  Smell  and  Nose. Long  lasting  nosebleed  ;  afterward  sore
in  upper  part  of  nose,  with  violent  burning  ;  blood  pale.

■  Small  pimples  on  root  of  nose.

®  Upper  Face,  l  Eruption  of  pimples  on  forehead,  as  in
brandy  drinkers,  with  biting  itching  on  chest,  as  from
lice ;  red  blotches  and  nettlerash.

I  Red  tubercles  on  forehead,  stinging  when  touched;  pim-
ples and  blood  boils.

I  Face :  alternately  pale  and  red  ;  bloated.

I  I  Scaly,  dry  herpes  in  face,  burning  in  open  air.

i  I  Large,  rough  exanthema  on  face.

■  Erysipelas  of  face  and  eyes  from  bites  of  insects.

I  Tetterlike,  crusty  eruption  around  nose  and  mouth,  with
itching,  smarting  and  burning.

I  Red,  pimply  eruption  on  face. ^Drunkards.
^  Lower  Face, l  l  Glandular  swelling  under  chin.
^^  Taste  and  Tongue. 1 1  Stinging  on  forepart  of  tongue.

I  I  Bitter  taste  in  mouth.
^^  Inner  Mouth, i  l  Offensive  breath.


LEDUM  PALUSTRE.  38

1  I  Sudden  running  of  waterlike  saliva  from  mouth,  with
colic;  waterbrash.
13  Throat.- I  Sore  throat,  with  fine,  stinging  pain,  <  when  not
swallowing ;  sensation  as  from  a  lump  in  throat.
I  I  Malignant  sore  throat.

I  I  Great  heat  in  throat  when  moving  in  open  air.
^^  Eating  and  Drinking. After  eating :  hurriedly,  contract-
ing pain  in  breast  bone ;  pressure  in  stomach  after  a
small  quantity  of  food ;  feels  dull.
Bad  effects  from  alcoholic  drinks.
^^  Hiccough,  Belching,  Nausea  and  Vomiting, i  Sudden
running  of  water  from  mouth  ;  waterbrash.
I  I  Nausea  and  qualmishness  when  spitting.
^^  Abdomen, i  i  Sensation  of  fulness  in  upper  part  of  abdomen.
I  I  Colic  every  evening.
I  I  Pain  as  if  diarrhoea  would  set  in,  from  umbilicus  to  anus,

with  loss  of  appetite  and  cold  feet.
1  I  Pain  in  loins  after  sitting.
I  I  Ascites.
^°  Stool  and  Rectum, i  l  Diarrhoea,  stool  mixed  with  mucus
and  blood ;  want  of  animal  heat ;  constipation ; stool
mixed  with  blood.
I  I  Sore,  itching,  smarting  humid  spot,  between  anus  and
coccyx.
^'Urinary  Organs. lUrination  frequent; quantity  dimin-
ished or  increased  ;  stream  often  stops  during  flow.
I  I  Enuresis.

■  Burning  in  urethra  after  urinating ;  itching,  redness,  dis-

charge of  pus.
^^  Male  Sexual  Organs, i Inflammatory  swelling  of  penis;
urethra  is  almost  closed.
I  I  Increased  sexual  desire;  nocturnal  emission  bloody.
^^  Female  Sexual  Organs. iFibroustumors,  or  polypi,  with
menorrhagia ;  constant  draining  away  of  blood.
Displacement  of  uterus.

I  Menstruation  too  early  and  too  profuse;  blood  bright

red  ;  absence  of  vital  heat.

■  Profuse  leucorrhoea;  pale  face;  copious  urination,  even

at  night.
^  Pregnancy. Parturition. Lactation. iMilk  leg.

■  During last months  of  pregnancy,  indescribable  pain,

like  gnawing  stiffness,  in  sacrum  and  hip  bone,  down
over  whole  thigh,  <  standing.
^  Voice  and  Larynx. Trachea  and  Bronchia. ■  Tickling
in  larynx,  with  haemoptysis.

I I  Tingling  in  trachea. ^Bronchitis.

■Mouldy  taste  in  mouth  every  time  she  coughs,  causing
great  "nausea,  loss  of  appetite,  and  occasionally  watery
vomiting. ^Bronchitis.


39  LEDUM  PALUSTRE.

'^  Respiration.  ■  Spasmodic,  double  insjoiration,  with  sobbing,
as  after  hard  crying.

I  I  Oppressed,  rapid  and  painful  breathing.

I  I  Suffocative  arrest  of  breathing  and  opisthotonos  previ-
ous to  coughing.

I  I  Oppressive  constriction  of  chest,  <  from  motion  and

walking.
^  Cough. I  I  Hollow,  racking,  spasmodic  cough,  from  tickling
in  larynx ;  loses  breath  before  cough ;  after  cough,  dizzi-
ness, staggering.

I I  Chronic  cough  characterized  by  cold  and  deficiency  of
animal  heat.

■  Spasmodic  cough,  preceding  for  a  few  days  eruption  of

eczema  or  an  attack  of  gout.

■  Child  gets  stiff  before  paroxysm;  bends  himself  back-

ward^ followed  by  expectoration  of  clear,  frothy  blood.
^Whooping  cough.

■  Before  paroxj^sm,  arrest  of  breathing;  during  it,  epistaxis,

shattered  feeling  in  head  and  chest,  rapid  respiration ;
after  it,  staggering,  spasmodic  contraction  of  diaphragm,
sobbing  respiration. ^Pertussis.

■  Expectoration:  after  midnight  and  in  morning;  fetid,

purulent;  bright  red,  foaming  blood.
^  Inner Chest and  Lungs, i  i  Spasmodic  constriction  of
chest  when  walking  and  ascending.

■  Burning  soreness  or  stitches  in  chest; soreness  under

sternum.

■  Haemoptysis:  alternating  with  coxalgia  or  rheumatism;

with  congestion;  with  violent  cough  in  paroxysms,
caused  by  tickling  in  larynx  and  trachea ;  burning  pain
in  some  point  of  chest,  from  which  blood  seems  to  come ;
stagnation  in  liver  and  portal  veins.

■  Bright  red,  profuse  haemoptysis,  with  severe  cough  and

rattling  and  hissing  in  air  passages ;  burning  pain  in
fixed  spot  in  chest.
■Phthisical  symptoms  alternating  with  coxalgia  or  rheu-
matism.

■  Suppuration  of  lungs;  purulent,  greenish  expectoration;

after  neglected  pneumonia.
^  Heart,  Pulse  and  Circulation. '  i  Pushing  or  pressure  in-
ward at  1.  edge  of  sternum ;  palpitation.

■  Pulse:  full  and  rapid;  strong  and  hard;  can  be  felt  on

one  arm  only.
^°  Outer  Chest. l  l  Eruption, like varicella, on chest  and
upper  arms,  with  desquamation.
1  I  Red  spots  and  rash,  with  smarting  itching  on  chest.

■  Pain  and  soreness  on  and  in  breast  bone,  or  below  it.

■  Chest  hurts  when  touched.


LEDUM  PALUSTRE.  40

^'  Neck  and  Back, i  Painful  stiffness  of  back  and  scapula).

■  Painful  stiffness  of  loins  when  rising  from  a  seat.

■  Sticking  in  shoulder  when  lifting  arms.

^^  Upper  Limbs. ■Severe  stitch  in  shoulder  when  raising  arm.

■  Painful  throbbing  in  r.  shoulder.

■  Painful  pressure  in  1.  or  both  shoulder  joints,  <  from

motion.

■  Rheumatic  pain  in  joints  of  arms.

■  Tremor  of  hands  when  seizing  anything  and  when  mov-

ing hands,  as  from  w^eakness  of  old  age.
I  I  Itching  rash  on  wrist  joint;  fine  stinging  in  hands.
Hard  tumor  on  dorsal  side  of  wrist.

■  Gouty  nodosities  on  hand  and  finger  joints;  drawing  pain

from  hands  upward.

■  Perspiration  in  palms  of  hands.

■  Boring  pains  in  first  joints  of  thumbs,  with  feeling  of

stiffness.

■  Periosteum  of  phalanges  painful  on  pressure.

■  Consequences  of  injuries  to  nails,  in  first  stages.

■  After  tearing  off  hang  nail,  whitlow  rapidly  forming  on

palmar  surface  of  r.  index  finger;  intense  throbbing,
swelling,  redness  and  acute  darting  pains.

■  ■Whitlows,  the  result  of  punctured  wounds,  needle  pricks,

splinters,  etc.
^  Lower  Limbs. ■Pressure,  laming,  rheumatic  pain  in  r.  hip
joint,  <  from  motion.

■  Coxalgia  or  rheumatism  alternating  with  haemoptysis.

■  After  being  long  on  feet,  sudden,  violent  pain  in  hip

joint,  with  sensation  as  of  boiling  in  joint;  must  sit
down  and  rest  before  pains  remit  sufficiently  to  allow
him  to  work  on ;  no  swelling,  nor  pain  on  pressure.
I  I  Pressure  in  1.  thigh  towards  posterior  portion ;  seems  as
though  muscles  were  not  in  proper  position,  like  pain
from  a  strain ;  in  every  position,  though  especially  when
walking  or  touched.

■  Affected  limb  cooler  than  remainder  of  body. ^Sciatica.

■  Left  side  more  affected  with  weakness  and  heaviness  of

parts;  pains  followed  by  swelling  of  feet  and  limbs.
^Sciatica.

■  ■Rheumatic  pains  going  from  below  upward,  joints  pale,

swollen,  tense,  hot;  stinging,  drawing  pains;  <  from
warmth  of  bed  and  bedcovering,  motion,  and  in  evening.

■  iRheumatism  and  rheumatic  gout ;  begins  in  lower  limbs

and  ascends;  especially  if  brought  to  a  low  asthenic
condition  by  abuse  of  Colchicum ;  joints  become  the
seat  of  nodosities  and  "gout  stones,"  which  are  painful.

■  Tremor  of  knees  (and  hands)  when  sitting  or  walking.

■  Great  weakness  in  knee  joints,  obliging  him  to  sit  down.


41  LEDUM  PALUSTRE.

■  Tearing  pressure  in  knee  joints,  and  farther  down,  <  on

motion.
I  Cracking  and  creaking  of  knees.

■  Swelling  and  tensive  and  sticking  pain  in  knee,  when

walking.

■  Stiffness  of  knees.

■  Itching  rash  on  inside  of  knees.

■  Pain  in  knees,  as  if  beaten  or  sore.

■  Tremor  of  limb  when  sitting  or  making  an  attempt  to

walk  or  stand ;  pains  seem  to  extend  from  knee  to  hip
joint;  child  wants  knee  rubbed  upwards  from  knee,
during  which  it  lies  quiet  and  satisfied;  stiffness,  swell-
ing and  flexion  of  joint. ^Strumous  synovitis.

■  Acute  traumatic  synovitis,  with  much  effusion  and  feel-

ing of  coldness  in  part;  swelling,  with  tension  and
stitches  in  knees,  with  rheumatic  pains.

■  Pinching,  grasping  pain  in  1.  hamstring,  <  at  night,

night  sweat,  frequent  urination;  drawing  pain  from
upper  part  of  calf  to  popliteal  space,  cannot  lie  on  1.  side.

■  Hot  swelling  of  legs,  with  stinging,  drawing  pain.

■  Swelling  of  legs  extending  above  calves, with  tensive

pain,  especially  in  evening.

■  ■Swelling  of  feet  and  legs  up  to  knees,  purple  and  mot-

tled, pitting  on  pressure,  with  rending  pains  in  perios-
teum; comfortable  only  when  holding  feet  in  ice  water.

■  Great  swelling  of  knee  with  rheumatic  pain ;  comfortable

only  when  applying  cold.

■  Pressure  above  1.  internal  malleolus,  <  from  motion.

■  Pressure  in  bones  of  ankle  and  in  lower  portion  of  1.  leg,

in  morning.

■  Great  heaviness  and  weariness  of  feet.
■Stiff  and  rigid  in  feet  in  morning.

■  ■Gout,  <  in  feet;  gouty  nodosoties  on  joints;  fine  tear-

ing in  toes.

■  Swelling  of  feet:  up  to  knees;  about  ankles,  with  intoler-

able pain  in  ankles  on  stepping.

■  ■Pain  in  ankles,  as  from  a  sprain  or  false  step.

■  ■Intense itching on  top  of  feet and ankles, <  from

scratching  and  warmth  of  bed.

■  Violent  pain  in  joint  of  1.  great  toe,  while  walking  in

morning.

■  Boring  in  first  joint  of  r.  great  toe.

■  ■Ball  of  great  toe  painful,  swollen,  painful  on  stepping,

tendons  stiff.

■  Pains  of  soles  of  feet  and  heels,  as  ifbruised,  when  walking.

■  Pain  running  up  to  thigh  since  stepping  on  a  nail,  ten

years  ago.

■  Burning  and  smarting  in  lower  extremities;  bone  pains.


LEDUM  PALUSTIIE.  42

^^  Limbs  in  General. ■■  Affects  principally  1,  shoulder  and
r.  hip  joint.
llRheumatism  begins  in  lower  limbs  and  ascends.
iPressive  pains  in  knees  and  wrists.
I  I  Limbs  numb  and  fall  asleep.

■  Drawing  pains  in  various  joints  and  parts  of  extremities,

<  after  taking  wine.

I  Paralytic  pain  in  all  joints,  on  moving  body  at  night  in  bed.

I  Gouty,  rheumatic  pains  in  joints,  <  from  motion,  heat
of  bed  and  in  evening.

I  Tense,  hard  swelling  of  affected  joints;  painful,  hard
nodes  and  calcareous  concretions.

iStiffness  of  all  the  joints,  could  only  move  them  after  ap-
plying cold  water.

I  Low,  asthenic  cases  (maltreated  by  large  doses  of  Colchi-
cum);  lancinating,  tearing  pains;  <  by  motion  and
before  midnight,  wdien  joints  feel  so  hot  he  throws  off
all  covering;  oedematous  swelling  of  joint  which  may
feel  cold  to  touch;  affects  chiefly  1.  shoulder  and  r.  hip
joint;  habitual  gout  in  articulations  of  hands  and  feet;
ball  of  great  toe  sore  and  painful;  soles  very  sensitive;
tendons  stiff;  gouty  nodosities  in  joints;  fine  tearing
pains  in  toes. ^Arthritis.

■  Burning  heat  of  hands  and  feet,  evenings.

■  Long  lasting  warm  sweat  of  hands  and  feet.
I  I  Eruption  (eczema)  in  bends  of  extremities.

^  Rest. Position. Motion. Head  inclines  to  fall  backward.

Cannot  lie  on  1.  side:  pain  in  1.  hamstring.

Lifting  arms:  sticking  in  shoulder.

Sitting:  pains  in  loins;  tremor  of  knees;  tremor  of  limbs.

Standing:  pain  over  whole  thigh.

Bends  himself  backwards  before  paroxysm.

Must  sit  down  and  rest:  on  account  of  pains  in  hip  joint;
weakness  of  knee  joints.

In  every  position:  pain  in  thigh.

Motion :  oppressive  constriction  of  chest  < ;  painful  press-
ure in  shoulders  < ;  rheumatic  pain  in  r.  hip  joint  < ;
rheumatic  pains  <  ;  tearing  pressure  in  knee  joints  < ;
pressure  above  1.  internal  malleolus  < ;  lancinating
pains  < ;  eruption  on  covered  parts  <.

From  least  exertion :  sweat  on  forehead.

Moving  body  at  night  in  bed :  paralytic  pain  in  all  joints.

Moving  hands:  tremor.

When  seizing  anything:  tremor  of  hands.

Raising  arm :  stitch  in  shoulder.

Rising  from  a  seat:  painful  stiffness  of  back  and  loins.

Stepping:  pain  in  ankles;  ball  of  great  toe  painful.

Walking: vertigo; oppressive  constriction  of  chest  <;


43  "  LEDUM  PALUSTRE.

pain  in  thigh  <;  tremor  of  knees;  swelling  and  tensive
sticking  pains  in  knee;  pain  in  1.  great  toe;  pain  in
heels  and  soles  of  feet.
When  attempting  to  walk  or  stand :  tremor  of  limb.
Ascending:  spasmodic  constriction  of  chest.
^^  Nerves. lAnxiousness  and  fainting  spells.

I  Three  months  after  wound  on  head  by  falling  on  scissors,
gradual  altering  of  health  from  day  to  day;  sad,  seeking
solitude  and  eating  little;  gradual  emaciation  and  weak-
ness ;  towards  evening  restless  and  agitated ;  then  epi-
leptic attacks,  lasting  several  minutes,  repeated  at  inter-
vals during  night,  which  he  passes  absolutely  without
sleep ;  pale  faced  and  thin,  has  an  air  of  suft'ering  ter-
ror; would  not  even  answer  a  question  addressed  to  him.
iTeta'nus;  peripheral  cases,  traumatic,  parts  become  cold
as  ice,  and  spasms  begin  in  wound.
^^  Sleep. I  Sleepiness,  as  from  intoxication,  during  day.

•  Sleeplessness  at  night,  with  restlessness  and  fantastic  illu-
sions as  soon  as  closing  eyes;  restless  tossing  about;
talking  in  sleep;  moaning  and  groaning.
■  Nightmare,  throat  feels  swollen,  sense  of  suffocation.
1  I  Uneasy  dream;  is  now  in  one,  now  in  another  place,
busy  now  with  one,  now  with  another  subject.
^  Time. Morning:  dull;  expectoration;  pressure  in  bones  of
ankles  and  in  lower  portion  of  leg ;  stiff  and  rigid  in
feet;  pain  in  1.  great  toe.
During  day:  sleepiness.

Evening:  rheumatic  pains  <;  swelling  of  legs  <  ;  gouty
pains  in  joints  < ;  burning  heat  of  hands  and  feet;  rest-
less, agitated.
Night:  eyes  <; copious  urination;  pinching  pain  in  1.
hamstring  <  ;  paralytic  pain  in  all  joints;  sleeplessness;
eruption  <.
Before  midnight:  lancinating  pains  <.
After  midnight:  expectoration.
^^Temperature and  Weather. Open  air:  vertigo;  herpes
on  face  burns;  great  heat  in  throat.
Heat:  eruption  on  covered  parts  <.
Warmth  of  bed:  rheumatic  pains  <;  itching  of  feet  and

ankles  <;  gouty  pains  in  joints  <.
Cold  applications  of  ice  water:  rheumatic  swelling  and

pain  in  knee  and  legs  <.
When  covered:  pressing  in  head  with  distress;  rheumatic

pains  <.
Inclination  to  uncover :  night  sweats.
After  getting  wet:  head  affected.
*"  Fever, l Coldness,  want  of  animal  heat.

I  Chilliness,  thirst,  sensation  as  of  cold  water  pouring  over
parts;  chilliness  morning  and  forenoon.


LEDUM  PALUSTRE.  44

I  Shivering  over  back,  with  heat  of  cheeks,  without  red-
ness; no  thirst;  cold  hands.
I  Chill  with  colic  every  evening.

■  Violent  chills  and  horripilation,  with  cold  limbs.
I  General  coldness,  with  heat  and  redness  of  face.

I  Parts  cold  to  touch,  but  not  subjectively  to  patient.

I  Heat,  no  thirst;  on  awaking,  sweat  with  general  itching.

I  Heat  in  hands  and  feet  in  evening;  veins  of  hands  dis-

tended.

I I  Warmth  of  bed  intolerable,  on  account  of  heat  and
burning  of  limbs.

I  Heat  and  sweat  in  alternation.

■  Long  continued  warm  sweat  on  hands  and  feet.

I  Night  sweats  putrid  or  sour,  with  inclination  to  uncover,
I  I  Sweat,  mostly  on  forehead,  from  least  exertion.

I  Intermittent  fevers  with  rheumatism  or  gout.

^^  Attacks,  Periodicity. Every  evening:  colic;  chill.

Every  night: agglutination  without  pain.

During  night  at  intervals  lasting  several  minutes:  epilep-
tic attacks.
^Locality  and  Direction.  Right:  complete  ptosis;  hard-
ness of  hearing;  painful  throbbing  in  shoulder;  whitlow
on  index  finger;  pressive,  laming,  rheumatic  pain  in
hip  joint;  boring  in  first  joint  of  great  toe.

Left:  eye  first  affected  ;  pressure  inward  at  edge  of  sternum;
painful  pressure  in  shoulder;  pressure  in  thigh ;  weak-
ness and  heaviness  of  parts  < ;  pinching,  grasping  pain
in  hamstring;  cannot  lie  on  side;  pressure  above  inter-
nal malleolus;  pressure  in  bones  of  ankle  and  in  lower
portion  of  leg;  violent  pain  in  joint  of  great  toe.

From  below  upwards:  rheumatic  pains.
^^  Sensations, l  Limbs  and  whole  body  painful,  as  if  bruised
and  beaten.

I I  Pains  sticking,  tearing,  throbbing.

Sensation  of  torpor  of  integuments,  especially  after  sup-
pressed discharge  from  ears,  eyes  and  nose.

As  if  something  was  gnawing  in  her  temples,  occiput  and
ears;  as  if  eyeball  would  be  forced  out;  as  if  eye  was
pressed  asunder,  then  out  of  orbit;  as  if  sand  was
in  eyes;  noises  in  ear  as  from  ringing  of  bell,  or  from
a  wind  storm ;  as  if  ear  was  obstructed  by  cotton  ;  itch-
ing as  from  lice  on  chest;  as  of  a  lump  in  throat;
pain  as  if  diarrhoea  would  set  in ;  as  of  boiling  in  hip
joint;  as  though  muscles  of  thigh  were  not  in  right  po-
sition ;  knees  as  if  beaten  or  sore;  pain  in  ankles  as  from
a  sprain;  heels  as  if  bruised;  as  of  cold  water  pouring
over  parts;  limbs  as  if  beaten  and  bruised.

Pain:  from  umbilicus  to  anus;  in  loins;  in  knees;  from


45  LEDUM  PALUSTRE.

knee  to  hip  joints;  in  ankles;  in  ball  of  great  toe;  of
soles  of  feet;  of  heels;  running  up  to  thigh;  in  bones;
in  abdomen.

Intolerable  pain:  in  ankles.

Severe  pain:  when  attempting  to  open  eyelids.

Violent  pain:  in  joint  of  1.  great  toe.

Sudden,  violent  pain:  in  hip  joint.

Raging,  pulsating  pain :  in  head,  causing  dulness.

Tearing,  drawing  pains:  in  neck  to  insertion  of  deltoid
muscle.

Acute  darting  pains:  in  r.  index  finger.

Lancinating,  tearing  pain:  in  joints.

Fine  tearing :  in  toes.

Severe  stitch:  in  shoulder.

Stitches:  in  chest;  in  knees.

Indescribable  pain,  like  gnawing  stifihess:  in  sacrum  and
hip  bone.

Pinching,  grasping  pain :  in  1.  hamstring.

Colic:  in  abdomen.

Boring  pain:  in  first  joints  of  thumbs;  in  first  joint  of
r.  great  toe.

Drawing  pain:  from  hands  upwards;  from  upper  part  of
calf  to  popliteal  space;  in  legs;  in  various  joints  and
parts  of  extremities.

Tensive  pain :  in  legs  above  calves.

Rheumatic  pain:  in  joints  of  arms;  from  below  upwards;
in  knees.

Gouty,  rheumatic  pain:  in  joints.

Contracting  pain :  in  breast  bone.

Pressing  pain :  in  head  and  eyes.

Pressive  pain :  in  knees  and  wrists.

Sticking:  in  eyes; in  shoulder;  in  knee.

Painful  throbbing:  in  r.  shoulder.

Intense  throbbing :  in  r.  index  finger.

Dull  pain:  behind  eyeball.

Pressure,  laming  rheumatic  pain  :  in  r.  hip  joint.

Paralytic  pain:  in  all  joints.

Painful  pressure:  in  shoulder  joints.

Pressing,  with  distress :  in  head.

Pressure:  in  stomach  ;  in  1.  thigh;  above  1.  internal  mal-
leolus ;  in  bones  of  ankle ;  in  lower  portion  of  leg.

Pushing  or  pressing  inward :  at  1.  edge  of  sternum.

Painful  stiffness :  of  back  and  scapulae ;  of  loins.

Violent  burning :  in  nose.

Severe  burning  :  on  border  of  lids.

Burning  pain :  in  fixed  spot,  chest.

Burning:  on  border  of  lids;  in  herpes  on  face;  of  eruption
around  nose  and  mouth;  in  urethra;  in  lower  ex-
tremities; of  limbs.


LEDUM  PALUSTRE.  46

Burning  soreness :  in  chest.

Biting  itching:  on  chest;  of  eruption  around  nose  and

mouth.
Sore,  itching,  smarting,  humid  spot:  between  anus  and

coccyx.
Stinging:  on  forepart  of  tongue;  in  throat;  in  hands;  in

legs.
Smarting:  in  lower  extremities.
Soreness:  under  sternum.
Great  heat:  in  throat.
Heat:  of  hands  and  feet;  of  face.
Prickling,  dryness :  of  mouth.
Spasmodic  constriction:  of  chest.
Oppressive  constriction :  of  chest.
Fulness:  in  upper  part  of  abdomen.
Clogging  sensation :  in  mouth.
Stiffness:  of  thumbs;  of  knees;  of  feet;  of  tendons  of  great

toe.
Sensation  of  torpor  of  integuments.
Sensation  of  concussion  in  brain,  caused  by  a  misstep.
Tickling:  in  larynx.
Tingling :  in  trachea.

Weakness  and  heaviness :  of  1.  side;  of  knee  joints;  of  feet.
Intense  itching:  on  top  of  feet  and  ankles.
Itching:  of  urethra;  of  rash  on  wrist  joints;  of  rash  on

inside  of  knees ;  of  skin.
Coldness  of  knees.
**  Tissues. II  Emaciation  of  suffering  parts.
Hot,  tense,  hard  swellings.
Acts  especially  on  parts  of  body  where  cellular  tissue  is

wanting,  hence  affects  small  joints.
Subacute  rheumatism.
(Edematous  swelling  of  whole  body.
Dropsy,  with  pain  in  limbs  and  dry  skin ;  ascites.

■  Discoloration  remaining  in  contused  parts  after  pain  and

inflammation  subside.
*^  Touch. Passive  Motion. Injuries, i  Splinters,  external

injuries  cause  panaritium.
I A  misstep  causes  sens'ation  of  concussion  of  brain.
1 1  Sprains  of  ankles  and  feet.

■  I  Punctured  wounds,  produced  by  sharp  pointed  instru-

ments,  as awls, ratbites, nails, etc.; particularly if
wounded  parts  feel  cold  to  touch  and  to  patient.

Touch:  painful  on  chest;  pain  in  thigh  <.

Least  covering  of  head  intolerable.

Wants  knee  rubbed  upward.

Pressure:  periosteum  of  phalanges  painful;  legs  pit.

Pubbed:  urticaria  reddens.


47


47  LEDUM  PALUSTRE.

Scratching:  itching  <.
From  injury:  complete  ptosis  of  r.  eye.
Injury  to  nails :  whitlow.

A  misstep  causes  sensation  of  concussion  in  brain.
After  sting  of  yellow  jacket:  urticaria.
Stepping  on  a  nail,  ten  years  ago :  pains  run  up  r.  thigh.
Wounds,  pricks,  splinters:  cause  whitlows.
Three  months  after  wound  on  head :  gradual  altering  of
health  from  day  to  day.
^  Skin. I  Itching  of  skin.

I  Dry  skin,  want  of  perspiration,  itching  after  perspiration.

■  Purple  spots  over  body,  like  petechise.

I  I  For  several  weeks  gradual  emaciation,  pains  in  abdomen,
diarrhoea,  discharges  of  tough,  black  blood;  bluish  red
spots  on  face  and  body;  mouth  and  tongue  covered
with  blisters  as  large  as  peas,  discharging  dark  fluid
blood;  spots  on  body  greatly  varied  in  size,  smooth,  gen-
erally round  and  dark  red;  great  lassitude,  must  stay  in
bed;  pulse  66;  no  thirst;  anorexia;  chilliness;  vertigo.
^Purpura.

I  I  Erythema  nodosum.

■  Scurfs  on  dry,  small  nodules,  often  renewed.

Small,  round,  red,  insensible  spots  on  inner  side  of  arms,
and  on  abdomen  and  feet.

■  Dry,  violently  itching  herpes,  burning  in  open  air.

■  Bloodboils.

■  Urticaria  white,  but  reddening  when  rubbed; intense

itching,  stinging,  burning. ^After  sting  of  yellow  jacket.

■  Prickly heat  of newcomers in tropics; awakes with

prickling,  dryness  of  mouth,  clogging  sensation  in
throat,  heavy  breathing.
Eruption:  only  on  covered  parts;  like  rot  in  sheep,  on
chest  and  arms,  with  desquamation;  after  a  debauch,
sensation  as  if  lice  were  crawling  over  surface;  <  from
heat,  motion  and  at  night.

■  Eczema  of  drunkards.

I  I  Varicella  on  chest  and  upper  arms.

■  ■Punctured  wounds;  stings  of  insects,  especially  of  mos-
quitoes.

Stages  of  Life,  Constitution. Pale,  delicate  persons.
Complaints  of  persons  who  always  feel  cold  and  chilly.

■  ■Rheumatic, gouty  diathesis; constitutions  abused  by

alcohol.

Child,  set.  3,  pale,  waxen,  strumous  diathesis;  synovitis.

Boy,  eet.  8,  after  injury  to  head  by  falling  on  scissors ;  epi-
lepsy.

Young  man ;  haemoptysis  alternating  with  rheumatism.

Needlewoman,  set.  24,  two  years  married,  healthy  and  ro-
bust; rheumatism.


LEDUM  PALUSTRE— LEPTANDRA.  48

Man,  set.  28,  tall,  lax  fibred;  purpura.

Man,  set.  49;  rheumatic  ophthalmia.

Farmer,  set.  50;  rheumatism  in  hip.

Man,  set.  50,  after  contusion  of  leg;  suggillations.

Woman,  set.  50,  subject  to  bronchial  attacks;  bronchitis.

Woman,  set.  74,  after  injury  to  nose;  discoloration  of  both

cheeks  from  extravasated  blood.
^  Relations. Antidoted  by: Camphor.

It  antidotes :  effects  of  alcohol ;  Apis.,  Oinchon.
Compatible:  Aeon.,  Bellad.,  Bryon.,  Nux  vom.,  Pulsat,  Rhus

tox.,  Sulphur.
Compare: Arnica, Crot.  tig.,  Hamam.  (traumatic  ecchy-

mosis),  Ruta.


LEPTANDRA.

Culverts  Root  Scrophulariacese.

Introduced  by  Hale.  Provings  by  Burt  and  a  student  in  Hahnemann  Med.
College. See  Hale's  New  Remedies. Both  provers  made  use  of  Leptandrin.

Clinical  Authokities. — Sick  headache,  Barlow,  Times  Eetros.,  vol.  2,  p.  14 ;
Bilious  headache,  Hale's  Therap.,  p.  387  ;  Hepatic  disease,  Neidhard,  Warren,  Hale's
Therap.,  p.  375;  Griping  pain  in  intestines,  Williamson,  Trans.  Hom.  Med.  Soc.
Pa.,  1873,  p.  97  ;  Diarrhoea,  Barnes,  Hale's  Therap.,  p.  386  ;  Chronic  diarrhoea  and
dysentery,  Coe,  Burt's  Mat.  Med.,  p.  568 ;  Dysentery,  Hughes,  Pharmacody.,  p.  501 ;
Fry,  Hale's  Therap.,  p.  385,

^  Mind.  I  Gloomy;  desponding;  drowsy.  (^Hepatic  derange-
ment.

^  Inner  Head,  i Constant  dull  frontal  headache;  <  in  tem-
ples, with  aching  in  umbilicus.

I  Sick  headache  with  furred  tongue,  hepatic  derangement.
B Bilious  headache;  constipation,  bitter  taste,  indigestion.

^  Sight  and  Eyes, l  Smarting  and  aching  in  eyes.
^^  Taste  and  Tongue. ■  Tongue  yellow  or  black  down  centre.
^*  Appetite,  Thirst. Desires,  Aversions, i '  Canine  hunger.
^^  Hiccough,  Belching,  Nausea  and  Vomiting, i  Nausea,
with  deathly  faintness  on  rising.

I I  Vomiting  of  bile,  yellow  tongue;  shooting  pains  about
liver,  black  stools.

"  Scrobiculum  and  Stomach.  iWeak,  sinking  sensation  at
pit  of  stomach.


49  LEPTANDRA.

I  Great  distress  in  stomach  and  small  intestines,  with  im-
mediate desire  for  stool.
I  Burning,  aching  in  stomach  and  liver,  <  drinking  water,

■  Dyspepsia  from  disordered  liver  and  stomach,

^^  Hypochondria. BDuII  aching  in  liver,  <  near  gall  bladder,
I  Burning  distress  in  back  part  of  liver  and  in  spine.
8  Periodical  liver  derangement,  occurring every two or

three  months;  yellow  coated  tongue;  constant  nausea,

vomiting  of  bile ;  ■  shooting  or  aching  pains  in  region  of

liver;  loss  of  appetite;  urine  brownish  or  very  dark;

pain  in  transverse  colon ;  giddiness  in  head.
iDeliriousness;  complete  prostration;  heat  and  dryness  of

skin; coldness of  extremities; fetid  and  tarry  stools;

tongue  thickly  coated,  with  a  black  streak  down  centre.

^Hepatic  disease.
IJaundice,  with  clay  colored  stools.
'^  Abdomen, i Constant dull aching  distress in umbilical

region.
I  Sharp,  distressing  pains  between  navel  and  epigastrium.

■  Rumbling  and  distress  in  whole  bowels,  especially  in

hypogastrium,  with  black  stools.

■  Bilious  colic,  or  a  tendency  to  it.

■  Rumbling  and  distress  in  hypogastric  region,  profuse,

black,  fetid  stools,  pains  in  bowels.
^"  Stool  and  Rectum.  ■  Stools :  black,  tarry,  bilious,  undigested,
followed  by  great  distress  in  liver;  mushy,  with  weak
feeling  in  bowels;  greenish,  muddy,  spouting  out  like
water;  profuse,  black,  fetid,  running  a  stream;  profuse,
black,  consistence  of  cream ;  black,  papescent,  tarlike,
fetid,  in  afternoon  and  evening;  first  hard,  black,  lumpy,
afterwards  soft  and  mushy;  watery,  with  large  quanti-
ties of  mucus;  yellowish  green;  clay  colored;  <  morn-
ing, as  soon  as  he  moves ;  from  meat  or  vegetables.

■  Profuse,  watery  stools,  followed  by  severe  cutting  pains

in  small  intestines ;  after  exposure  to  wet,  damp  weather.
Before  stool:  rumbling.
After  stool :  sharp,  cutting  pains  and  distress  in  umbilical

region;  faint,  weak,  hungry;  griping,  but  no  straining.

■  Profuse  dark  brown,  almost  black,  mushy and  highly

offensive  stools;  difficulty  in  retaining  stool,  must  go
immediately;  sharp  pain  preceding  stool,  >  afterwards,
but  increasing  weakness;  usually  went  to  sleep  soon
after  stool;  three  to  four  stools  daily.  ^During  progress
of  post-scarlatinal  follicular  enterocolitis  with  dropsy.

■  For  nearly  three  months,  camp  diarrhoea;  hardly  able  to

stand;  emaciated;  features  haggard  and  jaundiced;
stools,  previously  mixed  with  undigested  food,  now
muco-purulent  and  bloody,  quite  frequent,  with  tenes-

VOL.  VII. — i.


LEPTANDRA.  " 50

mus  and  cutting  pains  low  down  in  bowels;  sense  of
weight  at  stomach  after  cold  water,  cutting  in  bowels
and  disposition  to  stool.

I  The  mucus  discharged  resembles  false  membrane.

I  Diarrhoea:  dependent  on  hepatic  derangement,  or  inflam-
mation of  mucous  membrane;  debility.

I  Chronic  ulceration  of  intestines,  with  hepatic  disorder.

■  Dysentery  or  typhoid  with  black,  tarlike  passages.

■  Dysentery  of  nearly  a  month's  standing,  brought  on  by

sudden  changes  of  climate; dizziness  and  headache
chills,  followed  by  fever;  pain  and  uneasiness  in  bowels
nausea  and  constant  profuse  flow  of  saliva  during  chill
thirst;  unable  to  keep  food  or  any  drink  on  stomach
desire  to  urinate  during  chill;  urine  high  colored  and
passed  in  small  quantities ;  soreness  of  rectum  ;  hemor-
rhoids ;  painful  dragging  and  stinging  pains  in  rectum ;
bowels  bound  and  alternated  every  three  or  four  days
by  diarrhoea,  passages  consisting  of  fecal  matter  resem-
bling raw  or  boiled  beef  after  having  been  pounded
fine,  with  an  admixture  of  mucus  and  an  intolerable
fetid  smell ;  the  desire  to  stool  was  in  morning  and  con-
tinued about  an  hour,  during  which  time  there  were
four  or  five  passages,  followed  by  tenesmus  of  rectum
and  a  feeling  as  if  something  was  passing  out.
I  Constipation ;  piles,  depending  upon  hepatic  derangement.

■  Frequently  bleeding  piles;  constipation  and  distressing

pain  beneath  sacrum.
^  Urinary  Organs. iRed  or  orange  colored  urine,  with  dull

'  aching  in  lumbar  region.
^^  Female  Sexual  Organs, i Menses  suppressed  or  retarded;
liver  affected ;  prickly  heat.

■  Leucorrhoea,  with  ulceration  of  os  uteri;  sometimes  fetid,

with  shreds  of  mucous  lining  it;  irritation  of  bladder
and  rectum  ;  frequent  pain  at  bottom  of  bowels ;  general
languor  and  prostration ;  heat  and  dryness  of  skin.
^^  Heart,  Pulse  and  Circulation. " '  Soreness  in  cardiac  region .

I  I  Pulse  slow  and  full.
^^  Neck  and  Back. Chilly  sensation  on  shoulders  and  down
back.
■Sore,  lame  feeling  in  small  of  back.
^^  Upper  Limbs. ■Pain  in  r.  shoulder  and  arm. ^Hepatic

affections.
^  Rest.  Position. Motion. Rising :  causes  nausea,  faintness.

Hardly  able  to  stand :  from  weakness.
^  Time. Morning:  clay  colored  stools;  desire  to  stool.

Afternoon  and  evening:  black  fetid  stools.
^^  Temperature and Weather. Exposure  to  wet,  damp
weather ;  profuse,  watery  stools,  with  cutting  pains  in
small  intestines.


51  LEPTANDBA.

After  cold  water :  sense  of  weight  in  stomach.

Sudden  changes  of  climate :  dysentery.
^"^  Fever. ■  Chilly  along  spine  and  down  r.  arm.

I  I  Shivering,  or  dry,  hot  skin; stupor; limbs  cold  and
numb ;  tongue  black  down  centre. ^Bilious  fever.

I  Bilious  typhoid  fevers.
*^  Attacks,  Periodicity. In  one  hour :  four  or  five  stools.

Daily :  three  or  four  stools.

Every  three  or  four  days :  bowels  bound,  or  diarrhoea.

For  nearly  a  month :  dysentery.

Every  two  or  three  months :  liver  derangement.

For  nearly  three  months :  camp  diarrhoea.
*^  Locality  and  Direction. Right :  pain  in  shoulder  and  arm ;

chilly  down  arm.
^  Sensations. Feeling  as  if  something  was  passing  out  of
rectum.

Pain :  in  transverse  colon ;  in  bowels;  at  bottom  of  bowels;
in  r.  shoulder  and  arm.

Great  distress :  in  stomach  and  small  intestines ;  in  hypo-
gastric region ;  in  liver.

Sharp  distressing  pains :  between  navel  and  epigastrium.

Distressing  pain :  beneath  sacrum.

Sharp  pain:  in  abdomen.

Shooting  pains :  about  liver.

Cutting  pains :  in  small  intestines;  in  umbilical  region;
low  down  in  bowels.

Painful  dragging  and  stinging :  in  rectum.

Dull  pain  :  in  forehead ;  in  temples.

Aching :  in  umbilicus ;  in  eyes ;  in  stomach ;  in  liver ;  in
lumbar  region.

Dull  aching  distress :  in  umbilical  region.

Griping :  after  stool ;  bilious  colic.

Burning  distress :  in  back  part  of  live!  and  spine.

Burning :  in  stomach ;  in  liver.

Soreness :  of  rectum ;  in  cardiac  region.

Smarting :  in  eyes.

Heat:  of  skin.

Sore  lame  feeling :  in  small  of  back.

Uneasiness :  in  bowels.

Weak  sinking  sensation :  at  pit  of  stomach.

Weight :  at  stomach.

Dryness:  of  skin.

Chilly  sensation :  on  shoulders  and  down  back.
**  Tissues. I  Chronic  abdominal complaints  caused  by  de-
rangement of  portal  system.

■Chronic  congestion  and  other  chronic  disorders  of  liver.

■Chronic  dysentery  and  diarrhoea,  and  other  diseases  of
bowels; when false membranous formations have


LEPTANDRA— LILIUM  TIGRINUM.  5^

occurred  in  small  intestines,  produced  by  gradual  exu-
dation of  plastic  lymph.
Ascites  and  anasarca  from  obstructed  circulation  in  portal
system.
*^  Skin. B  Jaundice.

I  Hot  and  dry  skin. ^Bilious  attacks.
*''  Stages  of  Life,  Constitution. Boy,  set.  6,  during  progress
of  post-scarlatinal  follicular  enterocolitis,  associated  with
general  anasarca ;  diarrhoea.
Woman,  set.  75 ;  hepatic  disease.
*^  Relations. Compare :  Bryon.,  Cinchon.,  Iris  vers.,  Mercur.,,
Podoph.


LILIUM  TIGRINUM.

Tiger  Lily.  Liliacex.

A  native  of  China  and  Japan  cultivated  in  our  gardens ;  flowers  in  July  and'
August.

Introduced  and  carefully  proved  by  W.  E.  Payne,  assisted  by  Dunham,
Lilienthal,  Gallupe  and  Savage.

Original  day  book  of  provings  is  published  in  Trans.  Am.  Inst,  of  Hom.,  1871.

Clinical  Authorities. — Dementia,  Herbert,  A.  H.  O.,  vol.  8,  p.  397  ;  Uterine-
dementia,  Knerr,  MSS. ;  Headache,  Hawkes,  Org.,  vol.  2,  p.  114 ;  Eye  affection,
Woodyatt,  Org.,  vol.  3,  p.  99  ;  Asthenopic  symptoms  (2  cases),  Woodyatt,  Norton's-
Ophth.  Therap.,  p.  110;  Kopyopia  hysterica,  BuiFum,  Norton's  Ophth.  Therap.,
p.  Ill ;  Diarrhoea,  N.  E.  M.  G.,  1873,  p.  221 ;  Eaue's  Eec,  1874,  p.  179 ;  Dysentery,
Pease,  Hom.  Phys.,  vol.  3,  p.  380 ;  Ovarian  pains,  Neidhard,  Allg.  Hom.  Ztg.,.,
vol.  Ill,  p.  77  ;  Ovarian  dropsy,  Farrington,  Raue's  Path.,  p.  743;  Chronic  metritis,.
Wright,  Eaue's  Eec,  1873,  p.  165  ;  Anteversion,  Miller,  Hah.  Med.,  vol.  8,  p.  344 ;
Prolapsus  uteri,  Price,  Eaue's  Eec,  1870,  p.  38 ;  Howell's,  Org.,  vol.  2,  p.  383 ;  San-
ford,  Eaue's  Eec,  1871,  p.  151;  Uterine  displacements,  Price,  Eaue's  Eec,  1871,.
p.  16 ;  Miller,  Eaue's  Eec,  1874,  p.  230  ;  (4  cases)  Boardman,  Eaue's  Eec,  1873,
pp.  168,  167;  Pruritus  vidva^,  Mohr,  Hah.  Med.,  vol.  13,  p.  538;  Delayed  post--
partum  recovery,  Payne,  Hale's  Symptoms,  p.  405;  Eaue's  Eec,  1872,  p.  194;  Func-
tional disturbances  of  heart,  Berridge,  Org.,  vol.  1,  p.  281 ;  Palpitation  of  heart,  Kenyon,
Hah.  Med.,  vol.  5,  p.  147.

^  Mind.  Obtuseness  of  intellect  with  inability  to  find  right
words  in  expressing  thoughts ;  forgets  what  he  is  about
to  say.
Ideas  not  clear,  they  become  more  so  if  he  exerts  his  will;
makes  mistakes  in  writing  and  speaking;  cannot  apply
mind  steadily.


S3  LILIUM  TIGRINUM.

Depression,  dulness  of  intellect  and  thirst  precede  severe
symptoms.

I  Believes  her  disease  to  be  incurable;  that  she  has  some

organic  disease  that  nobody  understands.

I I  Tormented  about  her  salvation. ^Uterine  complaints.
I  Crazy  feeling  on  top  of  head;  wild  feeling  in  head,  with

confusion  of  ideas.
1  Dementia  produced by  business  discouragements and
sexual  excesses.

■  Disposition  to  weep,  with  pain  in  back;  has  to  keep  very

busy  to  repress  sexual  desire.
I  Disposed  to  curse,  to  strike,  to  think  of  obscene  things ;

as  these  mental  states  came,  uterine  irritation  abated.
I  I  Aversion  to  being  alone,  and  yet  no  dread  felt.

■  Loss  of  appetite,  headache,  with  distress  of  head  and  in-

disposition to  labor;  dread  of  business;  indisposition  to
any  exertion  of  mind  or  body.

I  Listless,  inert,  yet  does  not  want  to  sit  still;  restless,  yet

does  not  want  to  walk;  hurried  manner,  desire  to  do
something,  yet  feels  no  ambition;  feeling  as  of  impera-
tive duties  and  utter  inability  to  perform  them ;  sexual
excitement.

I I  Depression  of  spirits:  profound;  can  hardly  keep  from
crying;  disposition  to  weep,  with  nausea  and  pain  in
back ;  aversion  to  food ;  weeps  much  and  is  very  timid ;
indifferent  about  anything  being  done  for  her.

■  Anxiety;  fearful  that  the  symptoms  indicate  an  internal

organic  disease;  very  marked  in  both  male  and  female.
■Apprehensive,  as  from  impending  disease  or  calamity;
fears  insanity;  fears  heart  disease;  fears  she  is  incurable;
often  with  moderate  or  subacute  uterine  or  ovarian  in-
flammation.

■  Doubts  her  salvation;  thinks  she  is  doomed  to  expiate

her  sins  and  those  of  her  family ;  tears  her  hair;  walks
floor  night  and  day;  seeks  to  escape;  consolation  aggra-
vates. ^Uterine  dementia.
"^  Sensorium.  Vertigo,  especially  when  walking;  feeling  as
if  intoxicated ;  staggering  forward;  forgetful;  head  con-
fused and  heavy.
Faint  feeling;  fear  of  falling,  <  in  close  warm  room,  >
in  fresh  air,  though  he  is  then  chilly.

■  Faint  in  a  warm  room  and  when  standing,  with  cold

sweat  on  hands  and  feet. ^Prolapsus  uteri.
^  Inner Head. iDull  frontal  headache;  <  over  1.  eye,  or
alternating  from  side  to  side.

■  Pain  in  forehead. ^Photophobia. ^Blepharitis. ^Astig-

matism.
Blinding  pain  in  forehead,  <  in  evening;  extending  into


LILIUM  TIGRINUM.  54

back  of  head  and  down  neck,  with  strange  muddled
feeling  in  head,  general  weakness  and  desire  to  lie
down ;  stinging  burning  pain  in  forehead,  with  sensa-
tion as  of  rubber  band  stretched  over  it,  with  confusion
of  mind;  >  by  effort  of  will;  pains  in  forehead  and
temples,  with  vertigo,  depression  of  spirits,  bearing  down
pain  in  region  of  womb  and  anus,  strangury  and  in-
effectual urging  to  stool ;  shooting  in  r.  temple  passing
to  1.,  with  a  dull  heavy  sensation  in  whole  front  of  head ;
dim  sight;  pains  in  eyes  extending  to  head;  dull  press-
ive  aching  from  1.  temple  to  occiput;  paroxysmal.

Drawing  hot  pain  through  head  and  eyes,  >  by  frequent
sneezing.

Fulness  of  head,  with  pressure  outward  as  if  contents  would
be  forced  through  every  aperture;  feeling  as  if  blood
would  issue  through  nose  when  blowing  it;  >  by  sup-
porting head  with  hands,  and  at  sunset;  <  when  walk-
ing in  open  air.

Heavy  feeling  in  head,  with  morning  diarrhoea.

Peculiar  pressive  headache  with  tremulousness  and  in-
creased micturition.

Heavy  feeling  in  head,  at  times  slightly  confused,  then
almost  crazed  feeling  in  head,  rushing,  like  some  fluid,
through  head,  generally  from  r.  to  left.

■  Wild  feeling  in  head  as  though  she  would  be  crazy,  with

pain  in  r.  iliac  region.

■  Terrible  tearing,  crazing  headache;  feels  as  if  she  M'ould

lose  her  reason ;  crazy  feeling  seems  to  run  up  back  of
head  and  feels  as  if  whole  head  would  be  torn  to  pieces,
with  great  fulness  pressing  out,  with  confused  feeling;
pain  utterly  unbearable,  makes  her  wish  for  death ;  pain
about  heart,  running  through  to  1.  scapula;  pains  and
weakness  in  limbs;  feels  she  has  heart  disease  and  can-
not recover,  or  that  she  will  lose  her  soul.  ^Headache.
^  Sight  and  Eyes.  I Blurred  vision;  with  heat  in  eyelids
and  eyes;  after  seminal  emissions;  with  prolapsus
uteri;  muscse  volitantes.

iHypermetropia;  presbyopia.

iTurns  head  towards  1.  side  when  reading,  trying  thereby
to  look  with  1.  eye  out  of  r.  glass  of  spectacles,  in  order
to  see  whole  of  letters  like  b,  p,  d,  of  which  he  otherwise
could  see  only  the  straight  part,  but  not  the  curve.

I  So-called  asthenopic  symptoms  probably  dependent  upon
spasm  of  accommodation.

I Kopyopia  hysterica;  burning  and  smarting  of  lids,  ex-
cept in  bright  light;  insufficiency  of  each  internal
rectus  2°;  eyes  always  >  in  open  air;  lachrymation  on
looking  down;  crawling  in  vertex;  stabbing  in  occiput.


55  LILIUM  TIGRINUM.

i  I  Eyes  full  of  water;  face  flushed  and  hot,  pricking  in

skin  of  forehead.
I  I  Eyes  painful,  sensitive  to  light.

■  Intense  pain  in  eyes,  extending  back  into  head ;  dim  sight.
I  Sharp  pains  over  eyes.

■  Burning  feeling  in  eyes  after  reading  or  writing;  eyes

feel  very  weak.
■Any  attempt  to  work  near  causes  redness  of  tarsal  edges
and  hot  sandy  feeling  in  conjunctiva.
®  Hearing  and  Ears. Rushing  sound  in  both  ears.
^  Smell  and  Nose. Frequent  sneezing,  relieving a  severe
burning  headache  and  pain  in  eyes.
Constant  desire  to  pick  nose.
^  Upper  Face. Pain  in  r.  side  of  face,  r.  nostril  stopped.
Heat  and  bloated  feeling  of  face  and  head.
Chilly  feeling  in  face  in  forenoon ;  afternoon  fever,  con-
gestion to  chest; face  and  forehead  flushed and  hot;
pricking  in  forehead.
"  Taste  and  Tongue. 1 1  Taste  of  blood. ^Congestion  to  chest.
13  Throat. I  Hawking  of  mucus,  with  constant  nausea.
^*  Appetite,  Thirst. Desires,  Aversions. iLoss  of  appetite.
Aversion  :  to  bread ;  to  coffee.
Craving for meat; voracious hunger, seemingly  along

spine  and  up  to  occiput,  not  appeased  by  eating.
Thirst:  drinks  much  and  often;  recurring  before  severe
symptoms.
^^  Hiccough,  Belching,  Nausea  and  Vomiting. Nausea  :
constant,  with  sensation  of  a  lump  in  stomach,  moving
at  every  deglutition; when thinking of  coffee; with
morning  diarrhoea;  with  pressure  in  vagina  and  pain  at
top  of  sacrum;  from  uterine  irritation ;  retching,  but  no
vomiting; feels  like  vomiting  when  she touches her
epigastrium.
■Vomiting  from  malposition  of  uterus;  frequent  hawking
of  mucus  from  throat.
^^  Scrobiculum  and  Stomach. Fulness,  disturbed  feeling,
upward  pressure^  after  eating.
Stomach  distended,  with  frequent  eructations  and  escape

of  flatus  per  anum.
Hollow,  empty  sensation  in  stomach  and  bowels.
^®  Abdomen.  ■■Dragging  down  of  whole  abdominal  contents,
extending  even  to  organs  of  chest;  must  support  ab-
domen ;  as  if  whole  contents  were  pushing  down  into  a
funnel;  is  compelled  to  cross  her  legs  for  fear  every-
thing would  be  pressed  out.

■  ■Bearing  down  sensation  in  pelvis  as  though  everything

was  coming  into  world  through  vagina.
■Bloated  abdomen  after  a  meal,  continuing  after  a  diarrhoea.


LILIUM  TIGRINUM.  56

Abdomen  distended,  with  moving  of  flatus,  >  passing
wind  up  or  down.

■  Unusual  distension  of  abdomen.
Abdomen  sensitive  to  pressure  or  jarring.
Abdominal  walls  sore,  previous  to  stool.

Sensation  as  if  diarrhoea  would  come  on,  passing  off  by
urinating.

Bloated  feeling  in  region  of  uterus,  extending  to  hips.

Abdomen  distended  and  sore  after  menses  cease.

Empty  feeling  of  abdomen  and  stomach.

Weak,  tremulous  feeling,  extending  to  anus.

Skin  of  abdomen  feels  stretched  and  stiff.

Tenderness  in  hypogastric  region.
^  Stool  and  Rectum,  l  Morning  diarrhoea,  stools  loose,  bili-
ous; dark,  offensive,  very  urgent,  cannot  wait  a  moment;
stool  preceded  by  griping  pains  or  great  urging,  witli
pressure  on  rectum;  followed  by  smarting,  burning  of
anus.

■  Diarrhoea,  directly  after  dinner,  sudden  and  peremptory;

discharges  copious  and  bilious,  burning  of  rectum  and
anus,  severe  tenesinus,  followed  by  extreme  exhaustion.

■  Stools  frequent,  bloody,  mucous;  always  constant  urging

and  much  backache;  after  stool  a  feeling  as  if  more
would  pass;  wakens  about  3  a.m.;  mouth  dry;  constant
thirst  for  large  quantities  of  water;  longs  to  keep  quiet,
slightest  motion  makes  <  ;  stools  becoming  more  bloody
and  occurring  every  half  hour;  restless,  hurried  feeling,
as  if  she  must  attend  to  some  important  duties,  but
which  she  is  unable  to  perform;  tenderness  over  region
of  1.  ovary,  with  downward  pressure,  as  if  everything
would  come  out  of  vulva,  and  feeling  as  if  she  must
hold  herself  up  in  that  region  when  at  stool;  frequent
desire  to  urinate ;  uterus  prolapsed. ^Dysentery.

■  Stools:  dark  brown,  semi-liquid,  fecal;  copious  bilious;

very  offensive.

■  Bowels  constipated.

■With  every  effort  to  evacuate  bowels,  urine  only  is  dis-
charged ;  sensation  as  if  hard  body  was  pressing  back-
wards, downwards  and  against  rectum  and  anus;  <
standing,  increased  desire  to  go  to  stool.

Before  stool:  peremptory  urging;  constant  bearing  down
with  pressing  in  rectum.

During  stool :  tenesmus  of  bladder  and  rectum.

After  stool:  acrid  smarting  and  burning  in  rectum  and
anus;  severe  tenesmus;  exhaustion.

■  ■Pressure  in  rectum,  with  almost  constant  desire  to  go

to  stool.
I  I  Escape  of  flatus,  with  great  distension  of  stomach  and
frequent  eructations.


57  LILIUM  TIGRINUM.

iHemorrhoids  after  delivery,  sore  to  touch,  itching;  bear-
ing down  at  stool  as  if  all  would  protrude  through  vagina.
^^  Urinary  Organs. 1 1  Continuous  pressure  in  region  of  blad-
der, constant  desire  to  urinate,  with  scanty  discharge;
smarting  in  urethra  and  tenesmus.

I  Frequent  urging,  with  acrid  smarting  after every  dis-

charge; urging  <  toward  morning.
nFrequent  urination  through  day;  with  dull  headache
moving  from  sinciput  to  occiput,  finally  settling  in  1.
temple.

I I  If  desire  is  not  attended  to,  feeling  of  congestion  of  chest.
S Urine:  milky,  scanty;  increased  and  dark;  hot  like  boil-
ing oil;  high  colored  and  scanty.

^^  Male  Sexual  Organs. Sexual  desire  increased.  _ _

•  Lascivious  dreams  and  emissions,  followed  by  irritability,
difficulty  in  fixing  one's  mind,  selecting  wrong  words.
^  Female  Sexual  Organs, a  Sexual  desire  increased ;  obscene.

1 1  Sharp  pain  in  ovarian  region;  burning,  stinging,  cut-
ting, grasping  pain  extends  across  hypogastriurn  ^  to
groin,  down  leg;  bearing  down  when  standing;  sensitive
to  pressure;  ovary  swollen  to  nearly  size  of  child's
head.

I  Dull  pain  in  r.  and  sometimes  in  1.  ovary,  with  offensive
leucorrhoea,  and  great  weakness  during  menstruation.

I  Pains  in  1.  ovary  with  anteversion;  leucorrhcea  like
white  of  egg;  drawing  down  sensation  in  1.  side.

■  Swelling  and  pain,  with  sensation  of  heaviness,  in  1.  ovary.

■  Bearing  down  in  uterine  region,  <  walking,  >  holding

up  abdomen  with  hands  ;  tenderness  of  swollen  1.  ovary;
stinging,  burning  pains  from  ovary  up  into  abdomen
and  down  thigh ;  shooting  pains  from  1.  ovary  across
pubes;  urine  causes  smarting;  prolapsed  and  sensitive
uterus. ^Ovarian  dropsy.

■  Bearing  down  in  uterus,  with  pains  in  1.  ovary  and  1.

mamma.

I  I  Great  distension  of  abdomen;  looks  as  if  about  to  be
confined  (since  confinement);  very  distressing  dull  pains
in  1.  ovary;  constant  aching  in  sacral  region,  extend-
ing into  thighs;  yellow,  mouldy,  blotchy  look  of  skin,
especially  of  face  and  upper  chest;  prolapsus  and  partial
procidentia.

I  Pains  in  small  of  back,  r.  and  1.  ovarian  region,  down
outside  of  thighs;  very  severe  when  menstruation  is  at
its  height,  obliging  patient  to  keep  her  bed;  flow  bright
and  clotted,  intermitting;  between  periods  a  sense  of
weakness  and  dragging,  occasioning  a  movement  as  if
uterus  fell  from  r.  to  1. ;  mouth  of  uterus  to  1.  and  high
up. ^Chronic  metritis.

■Unable  to  move,  fearing  her  womb  would  drop  from  her;


LILIUM  TIGRINUM.  58

great  pelvic  distress  on  sitting  up;  uterus  prolapsed,
with  swelling  and  tumefaction,  os  much  indurated,  hot,
tender  to  touch ;  thinks  her  husband  causes  prolapsus
by  rough  coition. ^Prolapsus.

iFunnel  shaped  pressure,  beginning  in  throat,  and  con-
verging upon  uterus;  sick  headache  every  few  days,
much  <  at  menses;  prolapsus  uteri  of  second  degree,
with  general  laxity  of  ligaments.

lOs  wedged  against  sacrum,  fundus  tilted  toward  pubis;
agonizing  distress  and  pressure  in  rectum;  constant
desire  to  defecate  and  to  urinate;  urine  at  times  scanty;
feels  afraid  to  move  for  fear  everything  will  drop
through;  headache  over  eyes  and  vertex;  menses  irreg-
ular, scanty,  exceedingly  painful;  thinks  no  one  under-
stands her  complaint,  that  it  is  incurable. ^Prolapsus.

■  Fundus  inclined  to  1.  side  of  pelvis;  hernial  sac  in  1.  in-

guinal region  of  size  of  walnut;  great  tenderness  of  os;
uterus  swollen  and  tumefied ;  difficult,  painful  urination
and  stools;  aching,  burning,  pressing  pains;  bowels
torpid;  menses  irregular,  scanty,  painful;  constant  leu-
corrhoea,  mild,  profuse,  staining  linen,  greenish  yellow;
very  stooping  posture;  had  used  supporters,  etc.  ^Ante-
version.

llSevere  neuralgic  pains  in  uterus,  could  not  bear  touch,
not  even  weight  of  bedclothes  or  slightest  jar;  ante-
versioai.

■Great  bearing  down  and  distress  in  pelvic  region;
pressure  upon  both  rectum  and  bladder;  wears  a  T
bandage  "to  hold  herself  together;"  "felt  as  though  she
would  drop  asunder;"  pale,  wretched  looking  counte-
nance; menses  almost  wanting,  except  a  mere  show
every  two  or  three  months;  very  painful;  leucorrhoea,
acrid,  dirty  yellowish  brown  color;  headache;  appetite
poor;  OS  pushed  down  on  pubis;  fundus  against  sacrum.
^Retroversion.

llAnteversion  and  retroversion  of  uterus;  patients  nearly
all  have  constipation.

■  Bearing  down  pains:  particularly  in  walking;  as  though

menstruation  would  come  on ;  as  if  to  have  passage  from
bowels;  low  spirited,  weeping,  apprehensive;  irritable;
opposite  and  contradictory  mental  states;  anorexia;
faint  in  close  room  and  when  standing;  frequent,  scanty,
burning  urine;  pain  in  sacrum;  bloated  feeling  in  ab-
domen; limbs  cold  and  clammy.

■Sensation  as  if  a  hard  body  was  pressing  backwards  and
downwards  upon  rectum  and  ovaries;  >  walking  in
open  air ;  heart  symptoms.

■Bloated  feeling  in  region  of  uterus ;  pelvic  organs  feel
swollen;  aching  apparently  around,  not  in,  uterus.


59  LILIUM  TIGRINUM.

I  Intermittent  sharp  pain  across  lower  bowels.

■  Burning  from  groin  to  groin,  with  morning  stool.
I  Aching  over  pubes,  with  pain  in  knees.

I  Intermittent,  laborlike  pains  in  lower  part  of  back,  with
a  thin,  acrid  excoriating  leucorrhoea,  leaving  a  brown
stain ;  <  afternoon  until  12  p.m.

I  Menses:  scanty,  flow  only  when  moving  about;  dark,
thick,  smelling  like  lochia;  on  second  day  after  time  to
menstruate,  cutting  in  bowels,  limbs  clammy,  followed
by  profuse,  bright  yellow  leucorrhoea,  excoriating  peri-
neum; accelerated,  sometimes  recurring  in  two  weeks,
though  flow  is  scanty;  ceased  to  flow  when  she  ceased
to  walk.

iDysmenorrhoea:  from  dislocations;  sensation  of  constric-
tion from  back  around  hips,  ending  in  pubes.

I  Amenorrhoea :  with  cardiac  distress  or  burning  sting-
ing ovarian  pains;  complicated  with  prolapsus  or  ante-
version.

■  Voluptuous  itching  in  vagina,  with  feeling  of  fulness  of

parts ;  stinging  in  1.  ovarian  region.

■  Leucorrhoea:  thin,  acrid;  leaving  brown  stain  on  linen;

abundant,  excoriating ;  <  afternoon  and  evening.

■  Dry,  mealy  spots,  about  size  of  lentils,  on  mucous  surface

between  labia  majora  and  minora,  causing  intolerable
itching;  awakes  at  night  to  find  herself  scratching  these
spots,  feels  like  tearing  away  flesh,  itching  seems  to  be
so  deep  in,  generally  <  before  menses ;  at  times  watery
discharge  from  1.  nostril,  coming  away  drop  at  a  time
and  looking  like  clear  water;  spot  on  septum  of  1.  nostril
similar  to  eruption  on  vulva ;  partial  prolapsus  of  uterus ;
seems  as  if  everything  would  come  out,  great  desire  to
place  hand  on  vulva  to  keep  parts  up ;  >  from  pressure
of  hand. ^Pruritus  vulvae.

■  Rashlike  eruption  on  genitals;  swelling  of  parts.

■  Cutting  in  1.  mamma  through  to  scapula;  sighing;  short

breath.

■  Cramplike  pain  in  1.  mamma,  shoulder  and  fingers.
^Pregnancy.  Parturition. Lactation, ■  Morning  sickness,

frequent  copious  urination  ;  palpitation.
■Slow  recovery  after  confinement;  lochia  too  long;  must
support  vulva  to  prevent  everything  from  escaping;  <
from  motion  ;  subinvolution ;  lochia  profuse,  excoriat-
ing ;  dragging  pains ;  smarting  in  urethra  after  urina-
tion; fears  an  internal  incurable  disease.

■  Confined  four  weeks  ago ;  has  been  always  troubled  with

severe  constipation;  hemorrhoids  first  week  after  labor,
painful,  sore  to  touch  and  itching ;  profuse,  irritating
leucorrhoea  or  continued  lochia,  with  pain  in  back  and


LILIUM  TIGRINUM.  60

hips ;  pain  and  smarting  in  urethra  after  passing  urine ;
bearing  down  when  at  stool,  as  if- internal  organs  would
pass  out  through  vagina  and  had  to  be  kept  back  by
supporting  vulva  with  hands;  dreads  insanity;  fears
incurable  disease.

^  Respiration.  Breathing  oppressed,  with  oppression  in  lower
part  of  chest,  <  4  a.m.  ;  sighing ;  frequent  desire  to  take
a  long  breath ;  feeling  of  compression  and  weight.
Chest  feels  as  if  too  full  of  blood ;  slight  relief  from  sigh-
ing; oppressive  heat,  must  go  into  open  air;  <  in  close
room ;  with  taste  of  blood,  faint  feeling ;  weak  heart-
beat, blurred  sight,  fear  of  falling.

^  Inner  Chest  and  Lungs, i  Constant  feeling  of  load  or
weight  in  1.  chest ;  smothering  sensation.

■  Dragging,  as  if  all  internal  organs  hung  suspended  from

chest.
Full  feeling  in  chest,  with  distended  abdomen.
Constricted  sensation  in  1.  side  of  chest,  extending  to  r.,

with sharp  pains running up to throat,  clavicle, 1.

axilla  and  scapula ;  >  from  changing  position.
■Sharp  and  quick  pain  in  1.  side  of  chest,  with  fluttering

of  heart.
^^  Heart,  Pulse  and  Circulation, ii  Sensation  as  if  heart

was  grasped  or  squeezed  in  a  vice ;  as  if  blood  had  all

gone  to  heart,  producing  a  feeling  as  if  he  must  bend

double  ;  inability  to  walk  straight.

■  Heart  as  if  violently  grasped,  then  suddenly  released,

alternately.
■Constrictive  pain  about  heart,  through  to  scapula.
■Sensation  as  if  heart  was  overloaded  with  blood  and  it

would  afford  relief  to  bring  up  some.
■Frequent  sensation  as  if  heart  stopped,  followed  by  rush

of  blood  to  heart  and  palpitation.

■  Pain,  dull  pressure  and  fulness,  with  feeling  of  coldness

about  heart,  no  organic  lesion.

■  Dull,  pressing  pain  in  region  of  heart,  nearly  constant,

but  <  by  eating,  no  matter  how  little ;  frequent  palpi-
tation ;  apprehension.

■  Heaviness  in  region  of  heart.

■  Cardiac  irritability,  nervous  palpitation.

■  Palpitation,  <  from  lying  on  either  side.

■  Fluttering: general faint feeling,  hurried and forced

feeling  about  apex,  >  sitting  still;  awakens  her  at  night;
cold  hands  and  feet,  covered  with  cold  sweat;  sharp,
quick  pain  in  1.  chest;  with  irregular  pulse.

■  During  attacks,  which  are  brought  on  by  excitement,

heart  feels  as  if  squeezed,  with  dyspnoea,  groaning  from
pain,  cannot  lie  down;  after  attacks,  weakness,  numb-


61  LILIUM  TIGRINUM.

ness  of  r.  leg  from  toes  to  above  knee,  cold  shivering,
with  chattering  of  teeth,  dryness  of  mouth  and  throat,
and  back  feels  drawn  backwards;  also  trembling  feel-
ing about  heart  on  talking ;  coldness  from  occiput  down
spine ;  feeling  as  if  heart  stopped,  followed  by  rush  of
blood  and  violent  palpitation ;  can  lie  best  on  1.  side ;
lying  on  r.  side  brings  on  palpitation  and  weight  in  1.  ;
fingers  numb  at  times,  especially  r. ;  excitement  brings
on  palpitation. ^Functional  disturbance  of  heart.

Conscious  pulsations  over  whole  body,  and  out  pressing
in  hands  and  arms  as  if  blood  would  burst  through
vessels.
^^  Neck  and  Back.  Dull  pain  in  nape  of  neck,  with  feeling
of  constriction;  glands  on  1.  side  of  neck  swollen  and
painful;  pain  in  neck  and  1.  scapula,  seemingly  from  L
mamma.

I  Pain  in  dorsal  vertebrae,  as  if  back  would  break.

I  Dull,  heavy  pain  and  great  weakness  in  small  of  back.
^Uterine  displacement.

Pain  in  back  and  hips;  dreads  insanity.

I  Dull  pain  across  loins  and  sacrum;  cold  feeling  and
chills.

Sensation  of  pulling  upward  from  tip  of  coccyx.
^^  Upper  Limbs. Dull  pain  in  1.  shoulder.

Drawing  pain  in  1.  shoulder  and  neck ;  stitching  in  L
mamma.

Right  hand  and  arm  stiff  and  painful  during  night,  >
after  8  a.m.

Arms  and  hands  stiff  and  hot,  as  if  parched.

Cold  hands,  cold  perspiration  on  back  of  hands.

Stiffness  of  fingers  almost  like  paralysis ;  difficult  to  guide

pencil;  pricking in fingers and  hands; sensation of

electric  current,  first  in  fingers  of  1.  hand  then  of  r.  hand.

^  Lower  Limbs. Stitching  pains  from  ilium  to  ilium,  or  from

pubes  to  sacrum.

Pain  in  r.  hip  extending  down  thigh.

Boring,  soreness,  stitching,  or  drawing  pain  in  r.  hip  joint.

■Sensation  as  though  cool  wind  was  blowing  on  lower
extremities,  with  smarting  of  r.  leg  more  particularh^ ;
loss  of  appetite,  headache,  dulness  of  head,  indisposition
to  labor ;  grasping  pain  or  heavy  aching  in  knees.

Trembling  of  knees,  abdomen,  back  and  hands.

Dull,  heavy  pain,  from  knees  to  toes,  moving  suddenly
from  place  to  place.

Legs  ache;  cannot  keep  them  still;  <  when  giving  up
control  of  herself,  as  when  trying  to  go  to  sleep.

Burning,  beginning  in  soles  and  palms,  thence  over  body;
<  in  bed,  constant  desire  to  find  a  cool  place.


LILIUM  TIGRINUM.  62

coldness  or  cold  perspiration ;  1,  leg  affected  most.
^*  Limbs  in  General. Burning  in  palms  and  soles..

Limbs  cold,  clammy,  more  when  excited  or  nervous.

Whole  body  feels  bruised  and  sore,  even  pressure  of  cloth-
ing is  painful;  hands  and  feet  as  if  pounded;  soles  sore,
<  when  stooping.
^  Best. Position. Motion. Desire  to  lie  down.

Can  lie  best  on  1.  side.

Lying  on  either  side:  palpitation  <.

Cannot  lie  down:  pain  at  heart.

Sitting  still:  faint  feeling  about  apex.

On  sitting  up :  great  pelvic  distress.

Is  compelled  to  cross  her  legs:  for  fear  everything  would
be  pressed  out.

Standing:  faint;  as  if  hard  body  was  pressing  backwards
and  downwards ;  bearing  down  in  ovaries ;  must  sup-
port abdomen.

Supporting  head  with  hands:  pain  >.

Supporting  abdomen  with  hands:  pain  >.

Unable  to  move:  fearing  her  womb  would  drop  from  her.

Morning:  menses  only  flow;  <  feeling  as  if  everything
would  escape  through  vulva.

Changing  position:  pains  in  shoulder  >.

Inability :  to  walk  straight  from  pain  at  heart.

Walking:  vertigo;  bearing  down  in  uterine  region  <;
flow  ceased  when  she  ceased  walking.

AVhen  stepping:  soles  sore  <.
^^  Nerves. Nervous  system  irritable ;  weak,  trembling,  nervous.

Aimless  hurry  and  motion;  walks  to  and  fro;  cannot  be
amused  by  thinking  or  reading.

Convulsive  contractions  of  almost  all  muscles  of  body,  and
a  feeling  as  if  she  would  be  crazy  if  she  did  not  hold
tightly  upon  herself.
^  Sleep. Sleepy  before  bedtime.

Inability  to  sleep,  <  before  midnight.

Restless  sleep :  wild  feeling  in  head ;  frightful,  laborious
dreams;  everything  seems  too  hot;  seminal  emissions,
dull  headache,  palpitation  ;  mammary  pain.
^  Time. Morning:  diarrhoea;  heavy  feeling  in  head ;  urging
to  urinate.

3  A.M. :  awakes.

4  A.M. :  breathing  oppressed.
After  8  a.m.:  r.  hand  and  arm  >.
Forenoon:  chilly  feeling  in  face.
Through  day:  frequent  urination.

Afternoon:  fever,  congestion  to  chest,  till  12  p.m.;  labor-
like pains  in  back  < ;  leucorrhoea  < ;  great  heat  and  las-
situde.


63  LILIUM  TIGRINUM.

At  sunset:  headache  >.

Evening:  blinding  pain  in  forehead;  leucorrhoea  <.

Night:  awakes,  scratching  spots  on  labia;  arm  and  hand
painful.

Before  midnight:  inability  to  sleep.
^^  Temperature  and  Weather. Open  air :  eyes  always  > ;
oppressed  breathing  >.

In  fresh  air :  chilly,  but  vertigo  >  ;  when  walking  head-
ache >.

In  cool,  open  air:  chilly,  but  >.

Constant  desire  to  find a  cool  place.

In  close  room:  vertigo  <;  oppressed  breathing  <.

In  warm  room  :  faint.
*°  Fever. Chills  run  downwards;  violent beating  of heart;
congestion  to  chest  and  burning  heat  all  over;  constric-
tion about  heart.

I  I  Chills  from  face  downwards ;  chilly  when  in  cool,  open
air,  yet  otherwise  >.

Great  heat  and  lassitude  in  afternoon,  throbbing  all  over.
^^  Attacks,  Periodicity. Every  half  hour:  stools.

On  second  day  after  time  to  menstruate,  cutting  in  bowels.

Every  few  days :  sick  headache.

In  two  weeks:  flow  recurring.

Every  two  or  three  months :  mere  show  of  menstrual  flow.
^  Locality  and  Direction. Right:  shooting  in  temple  pass-
ing to  1.;  pain  in  iliac  region;  pain  in  side  of  face;  nos-
tril stopped  up ;  dull  pain  in  ovary ;  numbness  of  r.  leg ;
fingers  numb.

Left:  frontal  headache  <  over  eye  ;  shooting  in  temple ;
dull  pain  from  temple  to  occiput ;  jDain  from  heart  to
scapula;  turns  head  to  side  when  reading ;  tenderness
over  ■  region  of  ovary ;  pain  in  temple ;  dull  pain  in
ovary;  drawing  down  sensation  in  side;  sensation  of
heaviness  in  ovary ;  shooting  pain  from  ovary  across
pubes ;  pain  in  mamma ;  mouth  of  uterus ;  fundus  in-
clined to  side  of  pelvis;  hernial  sac  in  inguinal  region,
size  of  walnut ;  stinging  in  ovarian  region ;  watery  dis-
charge from  nostril ;  spot  on  septum  of  nostril ;  cramp-
like pain  in  mamma;  feeling  of  load  and  weight  in
chest ;  constricted  feeling  in  side  of  chest;  pain  in  axilla ;
sharp  quick  pain  in  side  of  chest ;  glands  of  neck  swollen
and  painful ;  dull  pain  in  shoulder ;  stitching  in  mamma ;
leg  cold.

From  r.  to  1. :  crazy  feeling  in  head ;  as  if  uterus  fell ;  hand
and  arm  stiff  and  painful ;  pain  in  hip ;  soreness  and
drawing  pain  in  hip  joint ;  smarting  of  leg.

From  1.  to  r.  side  of  chest :  like  electric  current  in  fingers.
*^  Sensations. As  if  intoxicated ;  as  of  rubber  band  stretched


LILIUM  TIGRINUM.  64

over  forehead;  as  if  contents  of  head  would  be  forced
through  every  aperture ;  as  if  blood  would  issue  through
nose  when  blowing  it ;  as  though  she  would  be  crazy
with  pain  in  head;  as  if  whole  head  would  be  torn  to
pieces;  as  of  hunger  along  spine  and  in  occiput;  as  of  a
lump  in  stomach ;  as  if  contents  of  abdomen  were  push-
ing down  into  a  funnel;  as  if  everything  was  coming
into  world  through  vagina;  as  if  diarrhoea  would  come
on;  after  stool,  feeling  as  if  more  would  pass;  as  if
everything  would  come  out  at  vulva;  as  if  she  must  hold
herself  up  in  region  of  vulva  when  at  stool;  as  if  hard
body  was  pressing  backwards  and  downwards  against
rectum  and  anus;  as  if  all  would  protrude  through
vagina;  as  if  uterus  fell  from  r.  to  1.;  felt  as  though  she
would  drop  asunder;  as  though  menstruation  would
come  on;  as  if  to  have  a  passage  from  bowels;  as  if  in-
ternal organs  would  pass  out  through  vagina;  chest  as
if  too  full  of  blood ;  as  if  all  internal  organs  hung  sus-
pended from  chest;  as  if  heart  was  grasped  or  squeezed
in  a  vice;  as  if  blood  had  all  gone  to  heart;  as  if  he
must  bend  double;  heart  as  if  violently  grasped  and
then  suddenly  released ;  as  if  heart  was  overloaded
with  blood;  as  if  heart  stopped;  back  as  if  drawn  back-
wards; as  if  blood  would  burst  through  vessels  of  hands
and  arms;  as  if  back  would  break;  as  of  pulling  up-
ward from  tip  of  coccyx;  arms  and  hands  as  if  parched ;
as  of  electric  current  in  fingers  and  hand;  as  though
cool  wind  was  blowing  on  lower  extremities;  hands  and
feet  as  if  pounded ;  as  if  she  would  be  crazy  if  she  did
not  hold  tightly  upon  herself.

Pain :  in  back ;  in  forehead ;  over  eyes  and  vertex  ;  in  neck ;
in  temples;  in  eyes;  about  heart;  running  through  scap-
ula; in  limbs;  in  r.  side  of  face;  at  top  of  sacrum;  in
1.  ovary ;  in  1.  mamma ;  in  small  of  back,  r.  and  1.  ova-
rian region,  down  outside  of  thighs;  in  sacrum;  in
knees ;  in  urethra ;  about  heart ;  in  1.  scapula ;  in  dorsal
vertebrae ;  in  hip.

Unbearable  pain  :  in  head.

Intense  pain :  in  eyes,  extending  back  into  head.

Terrible,  tearing,  crazy  pain :  in  head.

Crazy  feeling :  on  top  of  head ;  runs  up  back  of  head.

Wild  feeling:  in  head.

Agonizing  distress  and  pressure :  in  rectum.

Distress :  in  pelvic  region.

Blinding  pain:  in  forehead.

Sharp  pain  :  over  eyes ;  in  ovarian  region ;  running  from
chest  to  throat ;  in  1.  side  of  chest.

Stabbing :  in  occiput.


65  LILIUM  TIGRINUM.

Cutting :  in  bowels ; in  1.  mamma,  shoulder  and  fingers.
Stitching :  in  1. mamma ;  from  ilium  to  ilium,  or  from

pubes  to  sacrum.
Boring  soreness,  stitching,  drawing  pain:  in  r.  hip  joint.
Grasping  pain  :  in  knees.
Griping  pain  :  in  abdomen.
Shooting :  in  r.  temple  passing  to  1. ;  from  1.  ovary  across

pubes.
Severe  neuralgic  pains :  in  uterus.
Dragging  pains :  in  female  sexual  organs.
Intermittent  sharp  pain :  across  lower  bowels.
Intermittent  laborlike  pains :  in  lower  part  of  back.
Drawing  pain :  in  1.  shoulder  and  neck.
Drawing,  hot  pain:  through  head  and  eyes.
Very  distressing  dull  pains:  in  1.  ovary.
Dull,  pressing  aching :  from  1.  temple  to  occiput ;  in  region.

of  heart.
Constant  aching :  in  sacral  region  into  thighs.
Aching :  apparently  around  uterus ;  over  pubes.
Dull  pain :  in  forehead  ;  over  1.  eye ;  moving  from  sinci-
put to  occiput;  settling  in  1.  temple;  about  heart;  in
nape  of  neck ;  across  sacrum  and  loins ;  in  1.  shoulder-
Bearing  down  pains :  in  region  of  womb  and  anus ;  in
pelvis ;  in  uterine  region ;  in  uterus ;  in  pelvic  region.
Severe  burning  pain :  in  head.
Burning  stinging,  cutting,  grasping pain:  across  hypo-

gastrium,  to  groin,  down  leg.
Stinging,  burning  pain  :  in  forehead  ;  from  ovary  up  into

abdomen  and  down  thigh.
Stinging:  in  1.  ovarian  region.
Burning,  smarting :  of  lids ;  of  anus.
Smarting :  in  urethra ;  of  r.  leg.

Burning :  in  eyes ;  of  rectum ;  from  groin  to  groin ;  begin-
ning in  soles  and  palms,  thence  over  body.
Hot,  sandy  feeling :  in  conjunctiva.
Hot  pricking:  in  skin  of  forehead.
Heat :  in  eyelids  and  eyes.

Dull,  heavy  sensation  in  whole  front  of  head ;  in  small  of
back ;  pain  from  knees  to  toes,  moving  suddenly  from
place  to  place.
Funnel  shaped  pressure :  beginning  at  throat  and  converg-
ing upon  uterus.
Drawing  down :  of  whole  abdominal  contents ;  in  1.  side.
Pressure :  in  vagina ;  in  rectum  ;  in  region  of  bladder.
Heavy  feeling :  in  head  ;  in  1.  ovary.
Heaviness  :  in  region  of  heart.

Fulness :  of  head,  with  pressure  outward  •  of  stomach ;  about
heart.

VOL.  VII. — 5.


LILIUM  TIGRINUM.  66

Bloated  feeling :  of  face  and  head ;  in  region  of  uterus  to
hips;  in  abdomen.

Stretched,  stiff  feeling :  in  skin  of  abdomen.

Tenesmus :  in  bladder  and  rectum.

Tenderness :  in  hypogastric  region ;  over  region  of  1.  ovary.

Sensitiveness :  of  uterus.

Strange,  muddled  feeling :  in  head.

Smothered  sensation :  in  chest.

Constrictive  pain :  about  heart.

Constriction :  from  back  around  hips ;  in  1.  chest.

Full  feeling :  in  chest ;  in  heart.

Numbness  :  of  r.  leg.

Compression  and  weight :  in  chest.

Trembling:  about  heart;  of  knees,  abdomen,  back  and
hands.

Conscious  pulsations :  over  whole  body  and  out  pressing
in  hands  and  arms.

Weak,  tremulous  feeling :  extending  to  anus.

Fluttering :  of  heart.

Great  weakness :  in  small  of  back.

Hollow,  empty  sensation:  in  bowels  and  stomach;  of  ab-
domen.

Stiffness :  of  r.  hand  and  arm.

Crawling :  in  vertex.

Intolerable  itching:  on  mucous  surface  between  labia
majora  and  minora;  of  hemorrhoids.

Chilly  feeling  :  in  face.

Coldness :  from  occiput  down  spine,  across  sacrum ;  cool
wind  blowing  on  legs.
^  Tissues. Headaches  depending  on  uterine  troubles,  men-
strual irregularities  and  irritable  condition  of  heart.

•Subacute  and  chronic  ovaritis  and  neuralgia  of  ovaries.

■  Prolapsus  uteri,  bearing  down  sensation,  accompanied  by
palpitation  of  heart  and  ovaralgia,  uterine  inflammation,
subacute  endo-cervicitis.

Heart  feels  full  to  bursting,  from  congestion ;  much  flut-
tering ;  reflex  heart  symptoms.
*^  Touch. Passive  Motion. Injuries. Touch:  on  epigas-
trium, makes  her  feel  like  vomiting;  hemorrhoids  sore ;
uterus  tender.

Weight  of  bedclothes :  unbearable  on  sensitive  uterus.

Pressure:  abdomen  sensitive;  ovaries  sensitive;  >  bear-
ing down  in  uterus.

Jarring:  abdomen  sensitive.
*^  Stages  of  Life,  Constitution, Girl,  set. 17; asthenopic
symptoms.

Woman,  set.  30,  single;  chronic  metritis.

Woman,  ^et.  30,  has  one  child,  has  been  much  doctored;
l^rolapsus  uteri.


67  LILIUM  TIGRINUM.

Woman,  set.  31,  one  child  by  former  husband,  six  years
married,  no  children ;  anteversion  of  uterus.

Woman,  set.  31,  married,  light  complexion,  nervous,  easily
affected  by  potentized  drugs,  suffering  twelve  years ;
pruritus  vulvae.

Woman,  set.  35,  ill  for  ten  years;  headache.

Woman,  set.  38,  four  children,  suffering  six  years;  retro-
version.

Man,  dentist,  set.  38,  temperament  nervous,  sensation  of
cold  wind  blowing  upon  extremities.

Woman,  set.  40,  light  hair  and  eyes,  restless,  nervous  tem-
perament, doubts  her  salvation ;  uterine  dementia.

Woman,  set.  45,  married;  kopyopia  hysterica.

Man,  set.  45,  asthenopic  symptoms.

Woman,  set.  48;  teacher,  mother  of  three  children,  stout,
nervous  bilious  temperament,  suffering  many  years;
palpitation  of  heart.

Woman,  subject  to  attacks,  first  coming  on  after  confine-
ment thirteen  years  ago;  functional  disturbance  of  heart.

Woman,  dysentery.
^^  Relations. Antidoted  by :  Helon.  (anteversion) ; Nux  vom.
(colic) ;  Pulsat.

Compare:  Act.  rac,  Agar.,  Bellad.,  Cactus,  Canthar.,  Helon.,
Murex,  Natr.  phos.,  Nux  vom.,  Platina,  Podoph.,  Pulsat.,
Sepia,  Spigel.,  Sulphur,  Tarent.


LITHIUM  CARBONICUM.  6a


LITHIUM  CARBONICUM.

Lithia.  Li^  CO^.

Introduced  and  proved  by  Hering,  assisted  by  Neidhard  and  Geist.  See-
Am.  Horn.  Kev.,  1863,  vol.  3,  p.  485,  1863.

A  proving  of  Gettysburg  water,  containing  lithia,  was  made  by  Swan.  See
H.  Mo.,  1871,  p.  389.

Clinical  Authorities.— TFealwess  of  eyes,  A.  E.,  Eaue's  Eec,  1870,  p.  110;;
Htmiopia,  Dunham,  Norton's  Ophth.  Therap.,  p.  Ill;  Horn.  Clin.,  vol.  1,  p.  25;
Ophthalmia,  Kenyon,  Hale's  Therap.,  p.  413 ;  Disease  of  r.  kidney  and  bladder,  Fan-
ning, Am.  Horn.  Eev.,  Jan.,  1865;  Disease  of  heart,  Neidhard,  Hale's  Therap.,,
p.  414 ;  Gout  with  puffing  and  swelling  of  body  and  limbs.  Org.,  vol.  2,  p.  450 ;  Arthri-
tis, Falk,  Eaue's  Eec,  1871,  p.  174.

^  Mind. Difficulty  in  remembering  names.

■  Disposed  to  weep  about  his  lonesome  condition.
Anxiety,  hopeless  all  night.

^  Inner  Head, i  Heaviness  in  sinciput,  especially  in  frontal
eminence.
I  Pain  and  heaviness  over  brows,  <  towards  evening.
I  I  Headache  like  a  stitch,  superiorly  on  vertex.

■  Early  on  awaking,  headache  in  vertex  and  temples,  with

nausea  after  sudden  cessation  of  menses.
Pains  in  a  small  spot  in  r.  temple;  pain  in  1.  temple.
Heavy  weight  upon  vertex,  with  pressure  upon  1.  temple.
Pressure  in  temples  from  without  inward,  with  a  pressing^

pain  in  middle  of  chest.
Tension  as  if  bound  in  temples,  with  half  vision.

■  Tearing,  sticking  headache  on  r.  side,  <  on  assuming-

erect  position  and  on  motion,  >  during  repose.

■  Headache  ceases  while  eating,  but  returns  and  remains.

until  food  is  again  taken.
Throbbing  headache.
Pressure  in  r.  side  of  forehead.
Headache:  <  when  lying  down;  it  pains  everywhere;  >

when  sitting ;  >  by  going  out.
Looking at anything  makes headache <;  can hardly

keep  eyes  open ;  pain  as  if  sore  from  morning  till  noon.

■  Trembling  and  throbbing  in  head,  pains  in  heart  extend

to  head.
Head  seems  too  large.
Confusion  of  head.


69  LITHIUM  CARBONICUM.

*  Outer  Head. Head  externally  sensitive.

I  I  Milk  crust.
^  Sight and  Eyes, liisthenopia,  with black  motes  before
eyes and sensitiveness of  eyes after  using them  by
candlelight.

llEntire  vanishing  of  r.  half  of  whatever  she  looked  at;
or  if  two  short  words  occurred  in  succession,  that  on  r.
hand  was  invisible;  second  day  of  menses;  pain  over
eyes.

I  After  excessive  use  of  eyes,  with  insufficient  light,  loss
of  use  of  1.  eye;  vision  with  r.  eye  incomplete;  could
only  see  1.  half  of  an  object  until  he  looked  a  second
time  and  more  intently;  a  similar  perversion  had  pre-
ceded loss  of  vision  in  1.  eye.

■Sunlight  blinds  him.

1  I  Eyes  pain:  during  and  after  reading;  as  if  dry;  as  if
little  grains  were  in  them;  as  if  sore.

I  I  Throbbing  and  drawing  deep  in  r.  eye  and  around  it.

I  I  Stitches  in  r.  eye.

■  Scrofulous  inflammation  of  eyes  with  hardening  of  Mei-
bomean  glands.

I  Ophthalmia,  with  redness  of  sclerotica,  muco-purulent
discharge,  sticking  pains  in  eyes,  photophobia  and  sen-
sation as  of  a  veil  before  them.

*  Hearing  and  Ears. 1 1  Earache  1.  side,  from  throat,  with

prosopalgia.
I  I  Pain  behind  1.  ear,  in  bone,  extending  toward  neck.
''  Smell  and  Nose. iNose,  especially  on  r.  side,  somewhat

swollen,  red,  sore,  internally,  shining  crusts  form  in  it;

dry  as  if  inflamed ;  frequent  urinating  at  night.
I  I  Nose  obstructed  above,  <  in  morning  and  forenoon.
I  I  Blows  nose  very  much  in  evening,  much  mucus  remains

behind  in  choanse.
I  I  Dropping  from  nose,  in  open  air.
■Soreness  of  end  of  nose.

*  Upper  Face. '  '  Pain  r.  side  from  root  of  tooth  that  has  been

sawn  off,  extending  to  temple ;  next  day  same  on  1.  side
from  throat  to  ear. ^Prosopalgia.

^  Lower  Face,  i  Glandular  swellings  on  1.  side  of  face,  throat
and  neck,  nearly  all  size  of  a  hen's  egg,  some  hard,  some
suppurating.

^"^  Teeth  and  Gums,  i '  Teeth  feel  numb,  dull  and  loose,  can-
not bite  on  them.

13  Throat, l  l  Sore  throat  in  evening,  r.  side.
I  Sore  throat,  extending  into  ear.

I  I  Solid  lumps  from  choanee  and  fauces,  <  morning  and
forenoon.

^^  Eating  and  Drinking. After  fruit :  diarrhoea.


LITHIUM  CARBONICUM.  70

^^  Hiccough,  Belching,  Nausea  and  Vomiting, n  Acidity

of  stomach.
I  I  Nausea,  with  gnawing  in  stomach,  fulness  in  temples,

headache.
^'^  Scrobiculum  and  Stomach, i Gnawing  in  stomach,  <

before  a  meal,  >  while  eating.
^^  Hypochondria, l  l  Pressure  in  hepatic  region.

■  Violent  pain  in  hepatic  region,  between  ilium  and  ribs.

^Gall  stones.
I  I  Sticking  pain  in  1.  hypochondrium;  pain  in  region  of

spleen.
^^  Abdomen. '  l  Feels  swollen,  as  if  distended  with  wind.
I  I  Violent  pain  across  upper  part  of  abdomen.
I  I  Pain  in  1.  abdominal  ring,  like  a  pressing  from  within

outward.

■  Indurated  inguinal  glands.

I  Syphilitic  bubo  in  1.  groin,  a  longish  swelling,  as  hard
as  a  stone,  uneven,  rugged,  like  a  scirrhus,  at  night
violent  lancinations,  as  if  with  red  hot  needles.

■  Buboes  with  decided  fluctuation.

^  Stool  and  Rectum. ■  Emission  of  much  offensive flatus
on  awaking  from  sleep.

■  Stools:  soft,  light,  yellow  in  morning;  off'ensive  at  night;

stinking  flatus  in  evening;  <  after  fruit  or  chocolate.
Violent,  painful,  dull  stitch  in  perineum  near  anus,  from
above  downward,  from  within  outward.
^^  Urinary  Organs.  ■Soreness  of  bladder,  and  sharp  sticking
pains  in  neck  of  bladder,  on  r.  side,  with  soreness;  fre-
quent urination ;  pains  in  r.  kidney.

■  Flashes  of  pain  in  region  of  bladder,  more  toward  r.,  be-

fore passing  water;  pain  extends  into  spermatic  cord
after  urinating.

■  Tenesmus  vesicae  with  micturition;  evening  while  walking.

■  On  rising  to  urinate,  pressing  in  cardiac  region,  not  ceas-

ing until  aftcF  urinating  ;  morning.

■  Urine:  scanty,  dark  acrid;  pain  when  passed,  emission

difficult;  with  dark,  reddish  brown  deposit;  turbid  with
mucous  deposit;  profuse,  with  uric  acid  deposit.

■  Burning  in  urethra.

■  Frequent  copious  urination  ;  disturbing  sleep.

^  Male  Sexual  Organs. Erection  after  urination  at  night.
Greenish  yellowish  discharge  from  urethra,  thick  and  pro-
fuse, alternating  with  hsematuria.
I  I  Burning  in  urethra.
I  i  Pain  in  r.  side,  in  urethra  and  spermatic  cord,  into

testicle.
■Pain  in  testes,  and  when  sitting,  stitches  in  penis.
^Female  Sexual  Organs. Menses:  late,  scanty;  cease  sud-
denly and  headache  comes  on.


71  LITHIUM  CARBONICUM.

^^  Respiration. lOn  inspiring  air  feels  cold,  even  into  lungs.
^Heart  disease.
Constriction  of  chest  when  walking  in  open  air  after  break-
fast, hawking  of  much  mucus,  seemingly  from  middle
of  sternum.

2''  Cough.  Violent  cough,  in  quick  shocks,  evening  while
lying;  must  rise;  no  sputa;  irritation  to  cough,  starts
at  a  small  spot  posteriori}^  and  inferiorly  in  throat.

^  Inner  Chest  and  Lungs.  '  i  Pressure  in  middle  of  chest
from  within  outward  toward  sides.

^^  Heart,  Pulse  and  Circulation,  ii  Pressing  in  region  of
heart,  on  rising  to  urinate,  >  after  urinating.

■  Throbbing ;  dull  stitch  in  cardiac  region ;  sudden  shocks.
1 1  Rheumatic  soreness  in  cardiac  region,

■  Violent  pain  in  region  of  heart,  as  she  bent  over  bed;

morning  after  rising.
I  Pains  in  heart  before  and  at  time  of  urinating ;  also  before
and  at  time  of  menses.

■  Soreness  about  heart,  <  on  stooping;  pains  in  limbs;

finger  joints  tender  and  painful ;  sleeplessness.

■  After  mental  agitation  of  a  vexatious  character,  to  which

she  is  very  subject,  a  trembling  and  fluttering  of  heart,
distressingly  painful  in  heart  and  as  far  as  between
shoulders ;  extends  upwards  into  head  where  it  is  felt
as  painful  throbbing ;  the  air  on  inspiration  seems  so
cold,  that  it  is  felt  unpleasantly  even  in  lungs.  ^Val-
vular insufficiency.

■  Heart  disease,  with  induration  of  aortic  valves;  "bruit

de  scie,"  followed  by  a  bellows  sound  within  a  small
space  in  region  of  aortic  valves ;  sharp  pains  shooting
through  back,  shoulder  and  arm ;  arm  as  if  paralyzed.
^^  Neck  and  Back.  Sore  feeling  r.  side  near  spine,  on  a  small
spot ;  <  from  pressure ;  morning  on  rising.

■  Feeling  of  prostration  in  sacrum  at  night.

■Stitch  in  sacrum ;  pain  when  standing,  with  confusion  of

head.
^^  Upper  Limbs. Pain  near  point  of  r.  pectoralis  major  on

margin  of  r.  shoulder.
Burning  stitch  in  ball  of  1.  thumb.
Itching,  throbbing,  sensitive  pains  in  all  fingers,  <  second

and  third  of  1.  hand,  as  if  in  bones ;  extends  from  hands

to  finger  ends,  only  during  repose ;  >  on  pressure  when

grasping  and  during  motion.
Left  middle  finger  painful  through  and  through.
Soreness  at  margin  of  nail,  with  redness  and  pain.
^  Lower  Limbs. Pain  in  r.  hip,  later  in  left.

Itching,  burning  pain  in  a  small  spot  on  r.  hip,  then  on

thigh,  then  on  little  toe  ;  all  on  external  aspect  of  limb  ;

also  internally  on  1.  thigh  and  knee.


LITHIUM  CARBONICUM.  72

I  Rheumatic  pains  in  lower  extremities.

Pains  in  and  above  knees,  especially  when  going  up  stairs;
knees  weak.

■Syphilitic,  bluish,  deep  old  ulcer  on  calf  of  leg.

iPainfulness  of  feet,  ankles,  metatarsus  and  toes,  especially
at  border  of  foot  and  soles  as  if  gouty.

I  I  Ankle  joints  pain  when  walking,  first  r.  more,  then  1 ;
frequent  urgent  pains  of  moderate  severity,  of  a  strik-
ing character,  from  within  outward,  ending  in  a  burn-
ing itching  in  a  small  spot.

Rheumatic  pains  in  r.  foot  on  awaking  at  night,  pass  off
on  rising.

Burning  in  great  toe,  especially  around  corns ;  soreness
of  corns  ;  itching  of  sole  of  1.  foot  on  inner  margin.

Pain  in  little  toes.
^  Limbs  in  General,  l Swelling,  tenderness,  sometimes  red-
ness, of  last  joint  of  fingers,  with  general  puffiness  of
body  and  limbs  ;  increase  of  bulk  and  weight ;  clumsi-
ness in  walking  at  night,  and  weariness  in  standing ;
sometimes  intense  itching  of  sides,  feet  and  hands,  at
night,  from  no  apparent  cause,  >  by  very  hot  water.

■  Arthritis.
^^  Rest. Position. Motion. Repose  :  headache  >  ;  itching,
sensitive  pain  in  all  fingers.

Lying  down :  headache  <  ;  violent  cough,  must  rise.

Sitting:  headache  >  ;  stitching  in  penis.

Stooping:  soreness  about  heart  <.

Standing :  pain  in  sacrum  ;  weariness.

On  assuming  an  erect  position:  headache  <.

Motion :  headache  <  ;  itching,  sensitive  pains  in  hands
and  fingers  >.

On  rising :  pressing  in  region  of  heart ;  rheumatic  pains  in
r.  foot  pass  off.

After  rising  in  morning:  as  she  bent  over  bed  violent
pain  in  region  of  heart.

Going  up  stairs :  pains  in  and  above  knees.

"Walking :  tenesmus  vesicae  with  micturition  ;  in  open  air
constriction  of  chest ;  ankle  joints  pain ;  clumsiness  at
night.
^^  Nerves. Prostration  of  whole  body,  especially  knee  joints
and  sacrum.

Paralytic  stiffness  in  all  limbs  and  in  whole  body.
^^  Sleep. I  I  Whole  night  anxiety  and  feeling  of  helplessness ;
restless.

Sleep  disturbed  by:  pains  in  sacrum  and  feet;  urination  ;
offensive  diarrhoea;  tenesmus  vesicse;  erections,  which
subside  on  urinating ;  voluptuous  dreams.
^^  Time. Morning: soft, light, yellow  stools; on rising to


73  LITHIUM  CARBONICUM.

urinate, pressing in cardiac region; violent  pain  in
region  of  heart;  on  rising,  sore  feeling  near  spine,  r.  side.

From  morning  till  noon:  e3"es  pain;  obstructed  nose  <;
solid  lumps  from  choanse  and  fauces  <.

Evening:  pain  and  heaviness  over  brows  <;  blows  nose
very  much;  sore  throat;  flatus;  tenesmus  vesicse;  vio-
lent cough.

Night :  anxiety,  hopelessness ;  urinating ;  violent  lancina-
tions  in  bubo ;  offensive  stools ;  erection  after  urinating;
feeling  of  prostration  in  sacrum;  rheumatic  pain  in  r.
foot;  clumsiness  in  walking ;  itching  of  side  of  feet  and
hands.
^^  Temperature  and  Weather.  Very  hot  water:  itching  of
feet  and  hands  >,

Going  out:  headache  >.

Open  air:  dropping  from  nose;  constriction  of  chest.

On  inspiring  air  feels  cold  even  into  lungs.
^°  Fever. iShudder  starting  from  thorax.

Cold  feet,  soles  < ;  then  sudden  heat  beginning  in  soles
and  extending  over  whole  body.

General  feeling  of  heat  in  body ;  sweat  on  back  of  hands.

Copious  sweat.
^^  Attacks,  Periodicity. Before  and  at  time  of  menses:  pain

in  heart.
^^  Locality  and  Direction.  Right :  pain  in  a  small  spot  in
temple;  headache;  pressure  in  side  of  forehead;  entire
vanishing  of  half  of  whatever  she  looked  at;  vision  in-
complete; throbbing  and  drawing  deep  in  eye;  stitches
in  eye;  nose  swollen,  red,  sore;  pain  from  tooth  to
temple;  sore  throat;  sharp  sticking  pains  in  neck  of
bladder;  pains  in  kidney;  pains  in  side  of  urethra;  sore
feeling  on  side  near  spine ;  pain  near  point  of  pectoralis
major  near  margin  of  shoulder;  pain  in  hip;  itching,
burning  in  a  small  spot  on  hip,  then  on  thigh,  then  on
little  toe;  rheumatic  pain  in  foot.

Left:  pain  in  temple;  pressure  upon  temple;  loss  of  use
of  eye;  earache;  pain  behind  ear;  pain  from  throat  to
ear;  glandular  swelling  on  side  of  face,  throat  and  neck;
sticking  pain  in  hypochondrium;  pain  in  abdominal
ring;  syphilitic  bubo  in  groin;  burning  stitch  in  ball  of
thumb;  itching,  sensitive  pains  <  in  second  and  third
finger  of  hand;  middle  finger  painful;  pain  in  hip;  pain
internally  on  thigh  and  knee;  itching  of  sole  of  foot.

From  within  outward:  pressing  in  abdominal  ring;  stitch
in  perineum  near  anus;  pressing  in  middle  of  chest;
urgent  pains  in  ankle  joints.

From  without  inward:  pressure  in  temples.

From  above  downward :  stitch  in  perineum  near  anus.


LITHIUM  CARBONICUM.  74

^^  Sensations.  As  if  temples  were  bound ;  eyes  as  if  sore ;
head  as  if  too  large ;  eyes  as  if  dry ;  as  if  little  grains
were  in  them;  as  of  a  veil  before  eyes;  nose  as  if  in-
flamed; teeth  as  if  numb,  dull  and  loose;  abdomen
as  if  distended  with  wind;  lancinations  as  if  with  red
hot  needles  in  bubo;  arm  as  if  paralyzed;  pain  as  if  in
bones  of  hand;  border  of  foot  and  soles  as  if  gouty;
whole  body  sore  as  if  beaten.

Pain:  over  brovv^s;  in  vertex  and  temples;  in  a  small  spot
in  r.  temple;  in  1.  temple;  in  heart  to  head  ;  over  eyes;
in  bones ;  behind  1.  ear ;  from  tooth  to  temple,  r.  side ;
from  throat  to  ear,  1.  side ;  in  region  of  spleen ;  in
hepatic  region;  in  1.  abdominal  ring;  in  r.  kidney;  on
r.  side  in  urethra  and  spermatic  cord  into  testicle ;  in
testes;  in  heart;  in  limbs;  in  finger  joints;  in  sacrum;
near  point  of  r.  pectoralis  major  on  margin  of  r.  shoulder;
through  1.  middle  finger;  at  margin  of  finger  nail;  in
hips ;  in  and  above  knees ;  in  feet,  ankles,  metatarsus
and  toes  ;  in  ankle  joints ;  in  little  toes.

Violent  pain :  in  hepatic  region  across  upper  part  of  ab-
domen; in  region  of  heart.

Violent  lancinations :  in  bubo.

Violent,  painful,  dull  stitch :  in  perineum.

Distressingly  painful  trembling,  fluttering :  at  heart  as  far
as  shoulders  and  head  where  it  is  painful  throbbing.

Sharp  shooting  pains :  through  back,  shoulder  and  arm.

Tearing  sticking  headache:  on  r.  side.

Throbbing,  dull  stitch :  in  cardiac  region.

Throbbing  pain  :  in  head  ;  in  r.  eye.

Stitches :  in  r.  eye ;  in  penis ;  in  sacrum.

Burning  stitch  :  in  ball  of  1.  thumb.

Stitchlike  pain  :  in  vertex.

Sticking  pains:  in  eyes;  in  1.  hypochondrium;  in  neck
of  bladder.

Frequent  urgent  pains  of  moderate  severity,  of  a  strik-
ing character :  in  a  small  spot  in  ankle.

Gnawing :  in  stomach.

Drawing  pain :  deep  in  r.  eye  and  around  it.

Rheumatic  pains:  in  lov/er  extremities;  in  r.  foot.

Pressing  pain:  in  middle  of  chest.

Itching,  burning  pain:  in  a  small  spot  in  r.  hip,  then  on
thigh,  then  on  little  toe;  internally  on  1.  thigh  and  knee.

Burning :  in  urethra ;  in  great  toe ;  around  corns.

Aching:  in  ear  from  throat.

Flashes  of  pain:  in  region  of  bladder,  extending  into  sper-
matic cord.

Rheumatic  soreness:  in  cardiac  region.

Soreness:  of  end  of  nose;  of  throat;  of  bladder;  about
heart ;  at  margin  of  finger  nail ;  of  corns.


75  LITHIUM  CAEBONICUM.

Sore  feeling:  r.  side  near  spine.

Tenderness:  of  last  joint  of  fingers.

Anxiety:  all  night.

Itching,  throbbing,  sensitive  pain :  in  all  fingers.

Heat:  in  body.

Pressing:  as  if  with  a  dull  point,  here  and  there,  internally,
as  if  it  were  near  bone,  most  in  1.  side.

Burning  stitch :  from  withiii  outward,  ends  in  itching.

Pressure :  upon  1.  temple ;  in  temples ;  in  r.  side  of  fore-
head ;  in  hepatic  region ;  in  middle  of  chest ;  in  region
of  heart.

Heaviness:  in  sinciput;  over  brows.

Heavy  weight:  upon  vertex.

Fulness :  in  temples.

Constriction :  of  chest.

Weariness :  in  standing.

Feeling  of  prostration  :  in  sacrum  at  night ;  of  whole  body,
especially  knee  joints.

Paralytic  stiffness :  in  all  limbs  and  in  whole  body.

Trembling :  in  head.

Confusion:  of  head.

Itching :  of  sole  of  foot ;  intense  on  sides  of  feet  and  hands.
**  Tissues. I  Scrofulous  diseases,  particularly  swollen  glands.

■  Bruised  spots  from  falls  or  from  being  beaten.

I  Bones,  joints,  muscles,  whole  body  sore  as  if  beaten.

I I  Heart  affections  ;  ossification.
1 1  Arthritis;  gouty  diathesis.

I  Obesity  with  gout ;  dyspnoea.
^  Touch. Passive  Motion. Injuries. Pressure :  sore  feel-
ing near  spine  <  ;  itching  sensitive  pains  in  hands  and
fingers  >.
From  falls  or  from  being  beaten :  bruised  spots.
*^  Skin. Itching  and  burning.

I  Skin  rough  as  a  grater,  harsh,  dry.

■  Barber's itch,  ringworm,  circular furfuraceous  patches

on  skin.

iRough  rash -over  body. ^Secondary  syphilis.

iSkin  of  whole  body  rough  and  dry;  both  cheeks  covered
with  a  thick  crust  like  milk  crust.
*^  Stages  of  Life,  Constitution. Man,  set.  20 ;  from  early
youth  glandular  swellings  of  neck.

Girl,  aet.  26,  brown  hair,  excitable,  thin ;  affection  of  r.
kidney  and  bladder.

Man,  set.  35,  sight  failing  for  more  than  a  year;  hemiopia.

Bookkeeper,  set.  44 ;  hemiopia.

Professional  man  ;  weakness  of  eyes.
•  Woman,  set.  52 ;  gouty  diathesis,  puffing,  swelling  and  itch-
ing of  body  and  limbs.


LITHIUM  CARBONICUM— LOBELIA  CCERULEA. 76

^^  Relations.  Compare:  Amm. phos.,  Benz.  ac,  Berber.,  Calc.  ostr.
and  Lycop.  in  rheumatism  or  gout;  Alumina  in  con-
junctivitis; Gettysburg  Springs  in  p,croiu\ous  joints  ;  Coral
rub.  and  Kali  bich.  in  catarrh  when  inspired  air  feels
cold ;  Sepia  and  Teucrium  in  post-nasal  catarrh  with
chunky  discharges  ;  Aurum,  Conium,  Kalmia,  Ledum.
and  Zincum  in  heart  disease.


LOBELIA  CffiRULEA  (Syphilitica).

Great  Blue  Lobelia.  Lobeliacese.

The  tincture  is  prepared  from  the  fresh  plant  which  grows  in  low  grounds  in
the  United  States.

Introduced  and  proved  by  Jeanes,  assisted  by  Neidhard  and  Williamson.  See
H.  Mo.,  vol.  6,  p.  520.

Clinical  Atjthoeities. — Melancholia,  Jeanes,  Hom. Clin.,  vol.  3,  p.  356 ;
Cough,  Neidhard.

^  Mind. Much  depressed,  tearful,  unhappy.
Bad  effects  from  grief.

■  Constant disposition to cry,  with sadness and dejec-

tion ;  such  weakness  of  brain  that  all  excitement  is  for-
bidden; he  could  neither  sit  alone,  nor  could  he  talk
when  he  had  to  exert  his  mind;  seemed  as  if  he  would
go  wild.

■  Great  depression  of  spirits;  unhappy  state  of  mind,  al-

ways associated  with  pain  about  and  under  (not  below)
short  ribs,  in  back,  on  1.  side,  extending  outward  nearl}?-
to  1.  side;  posterior  aspect  of  region  of  spleen.

^^  Throat.  ■Catarrhal  inflammation  of  posterior  nares  and
fauces.

^^  Hiccough,  Belching,  Nausea  and  Vomiting.  lAcid
eructations  from  5  to  6  p.m.

^  Cough.  'Dry,  hacking  cough  of  four  weeks'  duration,  ex-
tremely troublesome  day  and  night,  and  pain  in  r.  side
about  junction  of  sixth  rib  with  its  cartilage,  of  a  year's
duration;  dryness  of  back  part  of  throat.

^^  Inner  Chest  and  Lungs.  ■  Oppression  in  lower  part  of
chest,  as  if  breath  did  not  reach  there ;  distress  in  region
of  heart,  and  audible  "  knocking"  respiration  (like  sound
of  axe,  chopping  wood) ;  pain  under  short  ribs,  and  dry
couo^h.


77  LOBELIA  CCERULEA.

^^  Neck  and  Back. iiPain  and  aching  in  posterior  aspect  of
region  of  spleen.
I  I A  pain  commencing  at  r.  side  of  small  of  back,  then

going  down  to  os  ischium,  very  sore  to  touch.
I  I  Great  rigidity  of  spine;  least  motion  exceedingly  pain-
ful ;  pain  goes  from  r.  to  1.  side  of  back,  and  shoots  down
legs.
I  Pain  in  eighth  dorsal  vertebra  and  in  back  under  short
ribs;  <  by  movement  and  deep  inspiration.
^  Rest. Position. Motion. Motions : painful  in  spine ;

pain  in  back  and  under  short  ribs.
^  Time. From  5  to  6  p.m.  :  sour  eructations.

Four  weeks'  duration :  dry,  hacking  cough,  day  and  night.
For  a  year:  pain  in  r.  side.
^'^  Locality and Direction. Right: pain in  side; com-
mencing at  side  of  small  of  back,  going  down  to  ischium.
Left:  pain  on  side  of  back.
From  r.  to  1. :  pain  in  back.
^  Sensations. As  if  he  would  go  wild ;  as  if  breath  did  not
reach  lower  part  of  chest.
Pain:  about  and  under  (not  below)  short  ribs,  in  back,  on
1.  side;  in  r.  side,  about  junction  of  sixth  rib  with  its
cartilage;  in  posterior  aspect  of  region  of  spleen;  com-
mencing at  r.  side  of  small  of  back,  going  down  to  os
ischium  ;  in  eighth  dorsal  vertebra.
Shooting  pain :  down  legs.
Distress :  in  region  of  heart.
Dryness:  of  back  part  of  throat.
Oppression :  in  lower  part  of  chest.
Rigidity :  of  spine.
^  Touch. Passive  Motion. Injuries. Touch :  os  ischium

sore.
*^  Stages  of  Life,  Constitution. An  intelligent  and  educated

man ;  melancholia.
^  Relations. Compare  : Pulsat.  in mental depression and
weeping  ; Ranunc.  in  1.  scapular  pains ; Ceanothus  in
splenic  pain.


LOBELIA  INFLATA.  78


LOBELIA  INFLATA.

Indian  Tobacco.  Loheliacese.

Introduced  and  proved  by  Jeanes. See  Trans.  Amer.  Institute  of  Horn.,  vol.  1^
p.  171 ;  also  proved  by  Barallier,  of  Toulon.

Clinical  authorities. — Headache,  Smitb,  MSS. ;  Nausea,  McGeorge,  Eaue's
Eec,  1871,  p.  21;  Vomiting,  Smith,  Horn.  Clin.,  vol.  4,  p.  60;  Cardialgia  (2  cases),
Noack,  MSS. ;  Jeanes,  MSS. ;  Hemorrhoidal  discharge,  Jeanes,  MSS. ;  Bronchitis,
MeyhofFer,  Raue's  Path.,  p.  375 ;  Dyspnoea,  Jeanes,  Horn.  Clin.,  vol.  1,  p.  6  ;  Asthma,
Ker,  B.  J.  H.,  vol.  8,  p.  451 ;  Cutler,  MSS. ;  Asthma,  Schlesier,  N.  A.  J.  H.,  vol.  9,
p.  252 ;  Spasmodic  asthma,  Barton,  MSS. ;  Jeanes,  Horn.  Practice,  1838 ;  Whooping
Cough,  A.  E.,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  5,  p.  723 ;  Pneumonia  intermittens,  Eosenberg,
Eiick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  5,  p.  822 ;  Consumption,  Niesz,  Horn.  Clin.,  vol.  1,  p.  272 ;
Heart  disease,  Schlesier,  N.  A.  J.  H.,  vol.  9,  p.  252 ;  Pain  in  shoulder,  Caspari,  Horn.
Clin.,  vol.  1,  p.  272;  Pain  in  sacj'um.  Smith,  Horn.  Clin.,  vol.  4,  p.  60;  J.^'ue,  Jeanes,
Euck.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  4,  p.  942.

^  Mind. Desponding ;  sobbing  like  a  child.

I  Apprehension  of  death  and  difficulty  of  breathing.
^  Sensorium. Vertigo:  and deathly  nausea;  as  if  starting
from  1.  eye,  with  pain  in  head  and  trembling  agitation
of  body.
^  Inner  Head, i  Headache  with  vertigo.

I  Dull,  heavy  pain  passing  around  forehead,  from  temple
to  temple,  just  above  eyebrows.

I  I  Pressing  outward  in  both  temples.

I  I  Pains  through  head  in  sudden  shocks.

I  Dull,  heavy  pain  in  1.  side  of  head.

iPressive  headache  at  occiput,  1.  side;  <  at  night  and  on
motion.

B Periodical  headache  in  afternoon,  increasing  until  mid-
night, every  third  attack  alternately  more  or  less  violent.

iSick  headache  with  vertigo;  dull  headache,  violent  nau-
sea, vomiting  and  great  prostration.

I  Pain  over  1.  eye,  extending  over  1.  side  of  head  and  neck;
coldness;  >  near  fire;  deathly  sick  feeling  at  stomach
and  all  over;  sudden  pallor  with  profuse  sweat;  faint-
ing when  making  an  effort  to  move ;  cannot  bear  smell
of  tobacco;  tobacco  smoke  brings  on  fainting;  sour
stomach;  sleepiness;  vomiting  of  bile  (vomiting  sel-
dom). ^Gastric  sick  headaches;  headaches  following
intoxication,  with  nervousness  and  trembling.


79  LOBELIA  INFLATA.

'^  Sight  and  Eyes. Hemiopia; pressure  on  upper  half  of

eyeballs.
®  Hearing  and  Ears. Sudden  shutting  up  of  r.  ear,  as  if
stopped  by  a  plug,  at  2  p.m.,  >  boring  with  finger  in  ear.
^  Smell  and  Nose. Nosebleed.

I  I  Tip  of  nose  very  cold.
^  Upper  Face, n  Neuralgia  of  1.  side  of  face  and  temples,
with  retarded  menses.
Flushes  of  heat  or  heat  of  face.

■  Cold  sweat  on  face  with  nausea.

Chilly  feeling  in  1.  cheek,  near  ear,  extending  to  lower  jaw.
I  I  Cyanosis. ^Emphysema.
^°  Teeth  and  Gums. Dull,  pressing  pain  in  last  1.  molar  and

temples.
"  Taste  and  Tongue, l  i  Very  sharp,  disagreeable  taste,  espe-
cially at  tip  of  tongue,  and  in  back  of  throat.
^^  Inner  Mouth. iFlow  of  profuse,  clammy  saliva,  with

nausea.
^^  Throat. Burning  in  throat,  dryness  of  fauces,  spitting  at
intervals.
Tough  mucus  in  fauces,  causing  frequent  hawking.
Dryness  and  pricking  in  throat,  not  >  by  drinking.
iSensation  of  a  lump  in  pit  of  throat,  impeding  deglutition.

■  Sensation  as  if  oesophagus  contracted  from  below  upward.
^*  Appetite, Thirst. Desires, Aversions. "Loss  of  appe-
tite, with  acrid,  burning  taste  in  mouth.

I  Cannot  bear  smell  of  tobacco  or  tobacco  smoke,  although
addicted  to  its  use.

^  Eating  and  Drinking.  After  breakfast :  pressing  outward,
in  both  temples ;  itching  in  1.  canthus.

^^  Hiccough,  Belching,  Nausea  and  Vomiting,  i  Hic-
cough with  profuse  flow  of  saliva ;  in  evening,  followed
by  drowsiness.

■  Frequent  empty  eructations,  flow  of  water  into  mouth.

■  Frequent  gulping  of  a  burning,  sour  fluid.

■  Acidity  in  stomach,  with  contractive  feeling  in  pit  of

stomach;  heartburn.

■  Incessant,  violent  nausea ;  profuse  perspiration ;  copious

vomiting.

■  Nausea:  with  vertigo;  disappearing  very  suddenly;  in

last  stages  of  phthisis;  <  at  night  and  after  sleep;  >
by  a  little  food  or  drink.

■  Nausea  with  rather  cold  sweat  on  head,  especially  on

face,  with  great  but  ineffectual  efforts  to  vomit.

■Vomiting,  with  cold  perspiration  of  face.

I  I  Nausea  and  vomiting  during  pregnancy,  profuse  run-
ning of  water  from  mouth  ;  morning  sickness.

■  ■Chronic  vomiting  in  paroxysms,  with  nausea,  profuse


LOBELIA  INFLATA.  80

sweat,  prostration  of  strength,  good  appetite ;  brickdust
sediment  in  urine.
^^  Scrobiculum  and  Stomach,  i  Sensation  in  stomach :  heat
or  burning;  of  weight;  as  of  a  lump;  as  from  undi-
gested food ;  of  weakness,  extending  through  whole
chest  and  down  to  umbilicus.

1 1  Faintness  or  weakness  at  pit  of  stomach,  from  excessive
use  of  green  tea  or  tobacco.

1 1  Indescribable  feeling  about  stomach,  compounded  of
nausea,  pain,  heat,  oppression  and  excessive  uneasiness.

I  Deathly  sick  feeling  all  over,  especially  at  stomach.

I  Bruised  soreness  from  pit  of  stomach  through  to  back^
after  cramp  in  stomach.

■  Sensation  of  oppression  at  epigastrium,  as  if  stomach  was

too  full ;  <  on  pressure.

■  Dyspepsia,  heartburn  and  running  of  water  from  mouth.
iGastralgia  biliosa;  paroxysm  of  excruciating  pain,  and

feeling  as  of  a  heavy  load  in  stomach.

■Weakness  and  oppression  at  epigastrium,  extending  into
chest;  burning  in  stomach,  a  burning  lump  in  pit  of
throat  impedes  swallowing  and  respiration ;  in  swallow-
ing it  seemed  as  if  at  this  point  something  rose  up  to
meet  food  and  obstruct  its  descent ;  eructation  of  acid
fluid  with  burning ;  vomiting  of  food  after  meals,  espe-
cially after  warm  food ;  had  heartburn  continually ;
urine  high  colored,  copious,  red  sediment;  pain  in  1.

^ lumbar  region. ^Cardialgia.

■  Severe  pressing  feeling  in  epigastrium,  excited  by  certain

kinds  of  food,  and  mental  emotion ;  <  evening  and
night;  after  fright  and  vexation  during  menstrual  pe-
riod, suppression,  alternating  heat  and  cold,  nausea,
bitter  taste,  thirst,  vomiting  of  bile,  severe  pressing  in
epigastrium  after  eating  and  whilst  fasting,  in  evening;
oppression  and  feeling  of  anxiety  in  breast,  pain  in
sacral  region ;  tongue  yellow,  pulse  small,  weak  and
slow.  ^Cardialgia  biliosa.
^^  Hypochondria.  Fulness  and  pressure  in  hypochondria
after  eating.

Pinching  in  abdomen,  near  edge  of  liver.
^^  Abdomen. Pain  in  abdomen,  <  after  eating.

Rumbling  in  bowels  and  passage  of  flatus  downward.

Sudden,  sharp  pain  in  1.  side  of  abdomen.

Abdomen  distended,  shortness  of  breath;  tympanitis.

■  Intussusception  of  bowels;  incarcerated  hernia.

^  Stool  and  Rectum. Stool :  soft,  but  passed  with  great  ex-
ertion ; green,  soft ;  frequent,  loose  during  day,  with
great  obtuseness  of  head.
I  1  Discharge  of  black  blood  after  stool.


81  LOBELIA  INFLATA.

■Copious  hemorrhoidal  discharge,  consequent  debility,  sen-
sation of  tightness  in  epigastrium ;  acidity  of  stomach  ;
oppression  of  chest.
^^  Urinary  Organs. Sticking  pain  in  region  of  r.  kidney.
Urine  increased  or  diminished ;  brown  sediment.
I  Urine  of  a  deep  red  color,  depositing  copious  red  sediment.
^^  Male Sexual Organs. Smarting  of  prepuce ;  aching  in
urethra.
Sensation  of  weight  in  genitals.
^  Female  Sexual  Organs. IMenses  too  early,  too  profuse.
•  Suppressed  menses:  in  consumptive  persons;  with  pain

in  r.  shoulder.
I  Violent  pain  in  sacrum ;  sense  of  great  weight  in  genitals.
^Pregnancy. Parturition.  Lactation, i  Morning  sickness.
iWith  every  uterine  contraction  violent  dj'-spnoea,  which
seems  to  neutralize  labor  pains ;  rigid  os  and  perineum.
^  Voice  and  Larynx. Trachea  and  Bronchia, i  Oppres-
sion felt  in  throat  pit;  spasmodic  asthma.
Sensation  of  fulness  in  trachea,  as  if  from  chest,  causing  a.

few  short  coughs,  followed  by  warmth  in  forehead.
Peculiar  sensation,  between  tickling  and  acrid  feeling,  in
larynx ;  two  short  coughs ;  feehng  of  narrowness.

■  Feeling  as  of  a  lump  or  quantity  of  mucus,  and  pressure

in  larynx.
■Spasmodic croup, with stridulous breathing, ringing
cough,  d3^spncea ;  constrictive  sensation  in  larynx  ;  con-
stant cough  and  great  anguish,  with  fear  of  suffocation.

■  Burning  pricking  in  air  passages.

■  Spasmodic  contraction  of  diaphragm  in  emphysema,  ac-

companied by  pain  in  epigastrium,  tympanitis,  impos-
sibility of  deep  inspiration,  extreme  dyspnoea  and  cya-
nosis. ^Bronchitis.
^  Respiration. ■Sensation  of  a  foreign  body  in  throat,  imped-
ing breathing  and  swallowing.

■  Dyspnoea  and  asthma,  with  sensation  as  of  a  lump  in  pit

of  throat,  immediately  above  sternum.
I  I  Contraction  of  chest,  with  deep  inhalations.
I  I  Want  of  breath,  hysterical.

■  Impossibility of  deep inspiration; extreme dyspnoea.

^Bronchitis.

Short  inhalation  and  long,  deep  exhalation.

Inclination  to  sigh,  or  to  get  a  very  deep  breath  ;  deep  in-
spiration, >  pressive  pain  in  epigastrium.

■  ■Extremely  difficult  breathing  caused  by  a  very  strong

constriction  at  middle  of  chest,  which  impedes  respira-
tory movements.

■  ■Dyspncea  <  by  slightest  exertion,  or  short  exposure  to

cold,  to  an  asthmatic  paroxysm,

YOL.  VII. — 6.


LOBELIA  INFLATA.  82

I  I  Deep  inspiration  relieves  pressive  pain  in  epigastrium.

I  Short  and  slow  inspiration,  with  desire  to  cough.

I  Asthmatic  constriction  of  air  tubes.

I  Asthma:  <  from  exertion,  with  a  disordered  stomach,
especially  a  feeling  of  weakness  in  pit  of  stomach  ;  often
preceded  by  a  prickling  all  over,  even  to  fingers  and
toes ;  paroxysmal,  with  pain  in  chest ;  lump  in  throat
pit ;  weakness  and  oppression  at  epigastrium ;  oppres-
sion at  heart  and  chest.

■Sudden  and  most  urgent  oppression,  pants  and  endeavors
to  cough,  but  is  unable  to,  and  is  threatened  with  suffo-
cation every  moment. ^Nervous  asthma.

I  Every  day  at  noon,  for  three  months,  asthmatic  parox-
ysms of  difficult  breathing,  terminating  in  cough  with-
out expectoration. ^Asthma.

■  Spasmodic  contraction  of  diaphragm  in  emphysema,  ac-

companied by  pain  in  epigastrium,  tympanitis,  impos-
sibility of  deep inspirations,  extreme d^'spnoea, and
cyanosis.
I  Convulsive  asthma  from  pulmonic  irritation  of  efi'used
serum.

■  Dyspnoea,  <  by  exertion,  going  up  or  down  stairs,  ex-

posure to  cold,  and  eating  very  warm  food  ;  pain  in  1.
lumbar  region  of  abdomen  ;  burning  in  stomach  and
throat,  with  dryness  in  latter ;  lump  in  pit  of  throat  im-
peding respiration  and  deglutition ;  weakness  and  op-
pression in  epigastrium ;  gastric  derangement ;  urine  of
a  deep  red,  depositing  a  copious  red  sediment.
^  Cough.  Cough  :  with  vomituritio ;  with  pain  in  stomach,
short,  dry ;  only  a  single  one,  from  a  feeling  of  narrow-
ness in  chest,

■Whooping  cough,  violent  racking  ;  seemingly  from  deep
in  chest,  in  paroxysms  of  long  continuance;  followed
by  expectoration  of  ropy  mucus,  adhering  to  pharynx.

■Spasmodic  cough ;  dyspnoea  so  severe  as  to  cause  fear  of
death ;  sensation  of  fulness  in  chest,  and  burning,  raw
pain  in  epigastrium ;  <  from  motion  ;  particularly  use-
ful in  third  stage,  when  expectoration  ceases,  or  when
relapses  occur ;  also  when  an  inflammatory  condition
of  mucous  membrane  of  larynx,  trachea  and  bronchi
accompany  the  disease. ^Whooping  cough.

■  Cough  with  sneezing,  gaping  and  flatulent  eructations.

^Bronchitis.
^^  Inner  Chest  and  Lungs. Sensation  of  pressure  on  chest;
1.  chest  above  nipple.
■Spasmodic  contraction  of  diaphragm.
I  I  Pain  in  chest,  with  breathing,  while  sitting  after  dinner;
>  when  moving  about.


83  LOBELIA  INFLATA.

I  I  Pain  in  lower  chest,  most  1.  side.

I  I  Burning  feeling  in  chest,  passing  upward.

I  Pneumonia  intermittens,  particularly  in  individuals  who

live  in  malarial  districts,  accompanied  by  affections  of

bronchi  or  heart.
I  Emphysema  with  very  dry  tracheal  and  bronchial  catarrh,
lit  palliated  cough  and  brought  back  menses,  which  had

ceased  for  six  months. ^Consumption,  last  stage.
^^  Heart,  Pulse  and  Circulation, i  Slight,  deep  seated  pain

in  region  of  heart.

■  Sensation  of  weakness  and  pressure  in  epigastrium,  rising

to  heart.

■  Sawing  sound  about  heart,  with  violent  pains,  diarrhoea

and  vomiting.

■  ■Sensation  as  if  heart  would  stand  still ,  a  pain  deep  in,

above  heart.
■Sensation  of  excessive  weakness  at  prsecordium,  extending
upward  into  chest  and  downward  as  far  as  umbilicus.

■  Dyspnoea  and  suffocation  from  every  rapid  movement,

attended  with  vertigo,  threatened  loss  of  consciousness
and  a  peculiar  confusion  of  head. ^Heart  disease.

■  Pulse:  frequent,  but  small,  weak  in  evening;  slower  than

usual.
^°  Outer Chest. Repeated  quivering  in  muscles  of  I.  ribs

towards  spine.
Pressure  on  lower  portion  of  sternum,  1.  side.
Tension  in  1.  chest,  from  nipple  to  armpit.
I  I  Pain  behind  sternum,
■Feeling  as  of  a  band  about  chest,  with  irresistible  desire

to  cough.
^^  Neck  and  Back. Swelling  and  pain  on  1.  side  of  neck.
Rheumatic  pain  between  scapulae.
Dull  pressure  between  shoulder  blades.

■  Violent  pain  in  top  of  r.  shoulder  and  shortly  afterward

in  back,  from  about  first  to  fourth  dorsal  vertebrae.
^Gastralgia  biliosa.

Pain  under  r.  shoulder  blade,  <  when  bending  forward.

After  noon  a  burning  pain  in  back,  as  if  in  posterior  wall
of  stomach.

■Violent  pain  in  sacrum,  with  fever.  ^SupjDression  of
menses.

■Extreme  tenderness  over  sacrum;  she  cannot  bear  even
pressure  of  a  soft  pillow;  cries  out  if  any  attempt  is
made  to  touch  part ;  sits  up  in  bed,  leaning  forward  to
avoid  contact  with  bedclothes ;  after  each  vomiting
spell  breaks  out  all  over  with  sweat,  followed  by  a  sen-
sation as  if  thousands  of  needles  were  piercing  her  skin
from  within  outward.


LOBELIA  INFLATA.  84

^^  Upper  Limbs. Lame  feeling  in  1.  upper  arm.

Rheumatic  pain  in  r.  shoulder  joint,  goes  to  1.  upper  arm.
and  around  elbow  joint.

I  Pain  in  shoulder  of  an  elderly  lady,  who  had  not  men-
struated for  two  years ;  relieved  pain  and  brought  on
menstruation.

Fine  crawling  stitches  inside  of  r.  deltoid.

Pain  in  r.  deltoid,  place  size  of  palm  of  hand  sore  to  touch.

A  sharp  shooting  pain  in  an  old  scar  of  r.  ring  finger.

Sweat  of  palms  of  hands,  back  of  hand  dry  and  cool ;  tips
of  fingers  cold.
^^  Lower  Limbs, b  Inflammatory  rheumatism  of  r.  knee,  with
tearing  pains  in  fibula.

Painful  stiffness  in  knees,  as  after  a  long  march.
^^  Limbs  in  GeneraL Shooting  pain  through whole  body,

into  tips  of  fingers  and  toes.
^^  Rest. Position. Motion. Bending  forward  :  pain  under
r.  shoulder  blade  <.

Motion :  headache  <  ;  pain  in  epigastrium  <.

Slightest  exertion:  dyspnoea  and  asthma  <.

Too  weak  to  stretch  out  her  hand  to  do  anything.

Making  an  afibrt  to  move :  causes  fainting.

Going  up  or  down  stairs:  dyspnoea  <.

From  every  rapid  movement:  dyspnoea  and  suffocation..
36  Jferyeg. Weakness ;  feels  too  weak  to  stretch  out  her  hand
to  do  anything ;  comj)lete  muscular  relaxation.

BFaintness,  with  profuse  sweat;  fainting,  great  pallor.
^"^  Sleep. Gaping,  followed  by  crawling  in  nose  and  sneezing;,
then  gaping  and  belching  of  wind.

Wakened  early  by  very  impressive  dreams ;  arm  ampu-
tated, wounded  by  a  shot,  etc.
^  Time. Morning :  sickness,  of  pregnancy.

Towards  middle  of  day :  shuddering  chill  followed  by  heat
and  sweat,  lasting  until  next  morning.

During  day :  looseness  of  bowels.

At  2  P.M. :  sudden  shutting  up  of  ear.

Afternoon  :  a  burning  pain  in  back.

Evening :  hiccough  with  profuse  flow  of  saliva ;  severe-
pressing  in  epigastrium;  pulse  weak.

Night :  pressive  headache  <  ;  nausea  <  ;  pressing  in  epi-
gastrium.
^^  Temperature  and  Weather. Near  fire:  coldness  >.

After  warm  food  :  vomiting.

Exposure  to  cold  :  dyspnoea  <.
*°  Fever. Shuddering  towards  middle  of  day.

I  Coldness  >  near  fire,  or  from  heat.

I  Chills  down  back,  heat  in  stomach;  general  shivering.

Thirst  before  chill ;  shaking  chill  and  coldness,  <  after
drinking.


85  LOBELIA  INFLATA.

Heat  with  thirst  and  sweat,  particularly  in  face.

iSweat:  with  heat,  or  after  heat  has  lasted  for  some  time;
after  heat  with  sleep;  copious  night  sweat.

I  Intermittent  fever  (quotidian).

I  Fever  and  ague,  with  chill  in  middle  of  day,  followed  by
heat  and  sweat,  which  lasts  until  next  morning.
^^  Attacks,  Periodicity. Every  day  at  noon,  for  three  months :
asthmatic  paroxysms.

Periodical  headache :  in  afternoon,  increasing  until  mid-
night, every  third  attack  alternating  more  or  less  violent.

Quotidian  intermittent.
'^Locality  and  Direction.  Right:  sudden  shutting  up  of
ear ;  sticking  pain  in  region  of  kidney ;  pain  in  shoulder;
violent  pain  in  top  of  shoulder;  pain. under  shoulder
blade ;  rheumatic  pain  in  shoulder  joint,  goes  to  1.  upper
arm ;  fine  crawling  stitches  inside  of  deltoid ;  pain  in
deltoid;  sharp  shooting  pain  in  an  old  scar  of  ring
finger ;  inflammatory  rheumatism  in  knee.

Left:  as  if  nausea  started  from  eye;  dull  pain  side  of
head  ;  pressive  pain  side  of  occiput;  pain  over  eye,  over
side  of  head  and  neck ;  neuralgia  of  side  of  face_  and
temples ;  chilly  feeling  of  cheek  ;  dull,  pressing  pain  in
last  molar;  itching  in  canthus;  pain  in  lumbar  region;
sudden  sharp  pain  in  side  of  abdomen ;  repeated  quiver-
ing in  muscles  of  ribs ;  pressure  on  side  of  lower  por-
tion of  sternum  ;  tension  of  chest;  swelling  and  pain  on
side  of  neck  ;  lame  feeling  in  upper  arm.

From  within  outward  :  as  if  needles  were  piercing  her  skin.

From  below  upward  :  oesophagus  as  if  contracted.
^^  Sensations.  Vertigo,  as  if  starting  from  1.  eye ;  r.  ear  as  if
suddenly  stopped  by  a  plug;  as  of  a  lump  in  pit  of
throat ;  as  if  oesophagus  contracted  from  below  upward ;
as  of  a  lump  in  stomach ;  as  from  undigested  food  in
stomach  ;  as  if  stomach  was  too  full ;  as  of  a  heavy  load
in  stomach  ;  as  if  lump  rose  up  to  meet  food  and  obstruct
its  descent ;  fulness  in  trachea,  as  if  from  chest;  as  of  a
lump  in  larynx ;  as  of  a  foreign  body  in  throat ;  as  if
heart  would  stand  still ;  as  of  a  band  about  chest ;  as  if
thousands  of  needles  were  pricking  her  skin  from  with-
in outward.

Pain :  in  head  ;  through  head  in  sudden  shocks ;  over  1.
eye,  extending  over  1.  side  of  head  and  neck ;  in  1.  lum-
bar region;  in  sacral  region  ;  in  abdomen;  in  r.  shoulder;
in  epigastrium ;  in  chest ;  in  stomach  ;  deep  in  above
heart ;  behind  sternum ;  on  1.  side  of  neck ;  under  r.
shoulder  blade ;  in  r.  deltoid.

Excruciating  pain  :  in  stomach.

Violent  pain:  in  sacrum;  about  heart;  in  top  of  r.  shoulder;
in  back.


LOBELIA  INFLATA.  80

Indescribable  feeling :  compounded  of  nausea,  heat,  pain,

oppression  and  excessive  uneasiness  about  stomach.
Sudden  sharp  pain  :  in  1.  side  of  abdomen.
Sharp  shooting  pain  :  in  an  old  scar  of  r.  ring  finger.
Shooting  pain :  through  whole  body  into  tips  of  fingers

and  toes.
Tearing  pains  :  in  fibula.
Neuralgia :  of  1.  side  of  face  and  temples.
Burning,  raw  pain :  in  epigastrium.
Pinching :  in  abdomen.
Inflammatory  rheumatism  :  of  r.  knee.
Rheumatic  pains :  between  scapulse ;  in  r.  shoulder  joint,

to  upper  arm  and  around  elbow  joint.
Cramp :  in  stomach.
Sticking  pain  :  in  region  of  r.  kidney.
Burning  pain  :  in  back.
Fine,  crawling  stitches :  inside  of  r.  deltoid.
Aching :  in  urethra.

Slight,  deep  seated  pain :  in  region  of  heart.
Dull,  heavy  pain :  passing  around  forehead,  from  temple

to  temple,  just  above  ej^ebrows;  on  1.  side  of  head.
Pressive  pain  :  at  occiput,  1.  side  ;  in  epigastrium.
Dull  pressing  pain :  in  last  1.  molar  and  temples.
Burning :  in  throat ;  in  stomach.
Burning,  pricking:  in  air  passages.
A  burning  lump  :  in  pit  of  throat.
Smarting ;  of  prepuce.

Bruised  soreness:  from  pit  of  stomach  through  to  back.
Extreme  tenderness:  over  sacrum.
Prickling:  in  throat;  all  over.
Prickling  itching :  of  skin  all  over  body.
Peculiar  sensation  between  tickling  and  acrid  feeling:  in

larynx.
Crawling :  in  nose.
Flushes  of  heat :  in  face.
Warmth :  in  forehead.
Severe  pressing  feeling :  in  epigastrium.
Dull  pressure:  between  shoulder  blades.
Pressure :  on  upper  half  of  eyeballs ; in  hypochondria ;

in  larynx;  in  epigastrium;  on  lower  portion  of  sternum.
Painful  stiffness :  in  knees.
Weight:  in  stomach  ;  in  genitals.

Oppression :  at  epigastrium ;  of  chest ;  in  throatpit ;  at  heart.
Pressing  outward :  in  both  temples.
Tightness :  in  epigastrium.
Contractive  feeling :  in  pit  of  stomach.
Tension:  in  chest  from  nipple  to  armpit.^
Fulness:  in  hypochondria;  in  trachea;  in  chest.


gy  LOBELIA  INFLATA.

Feeling  of  anxiety :  in  breast.  ^ -, ^ i-

Constrictive  feeling:  in  larynx;  at  middle  of  chest;  ot
air  tubes.

Feeling  of  narrowness :  in  throat ;  in  chest.

Deadly  sick  feeling :  at  stomach  and  all  over.

Dryness :  of  fauces  ;  in  throat.

Repeated  quivering :  in  muscles  of  ribs  toward  spme.

Peculiar  confusion:  of  head.

Weakness:  extending  through  whole  chest  down  to  um-
bilicus ;  at  pit  of  stomach ;  at  epigastrium,  extendmg
into  chest;  at  preecordium.

Lame  feeling :  in  upper  1.  arm.

Itching :  in  1.  can  thus.

Chilly  feeling :  in  1.  cheek  near  ear,  extendmg  to  lower  jaw.

Coldness :  of  tip  of  nose ;  of  tip  of  fingers.  _
**  Tissues. B  Headache  accompanied  by  irritation  oi  pneumo-

I  Gastric  derangement,  with  extreme  nausea  and  vomiting;
morning sickness; spasmodic asthma; emphysema;
whooping  cough ;  cardiac  disturbance ;  intermittent  fever.
*^  Touch. Passive  Motion. Injuries. Touch :  r.  deltoid  sore.
Sits  up  in  bed,  leaning  forward  to  avoid  contact  with  bed-
clothes on  sacrum.
Pressure :  oppression  at  epigastrium.
Cannot  bear  even  pressure  of  soft  pillow  over  sacrum.
Boring  with  finger :  >  sudden  shutting  up  of  ear.
*^  Skin. Prickling  itching  of  skin  all  over  body.
'^  Stages  of  Life,  Constitution. "Light  hair,  blue  eyes,  fair
complexion ;  inclined  to  be  fleshy.
Child,  £et.  1^,  suffering  three  months ;  asthma.
Servant  girl,  narrow  and  depressed  thorax,  suffering  tor

years;  spasmodic  asthma.
Young  woman,  suffering  many  years ;  cardialgia  simplex.
Servant  maid,  set.  26,  bilious  habit,  suffering  a  long  time ;

cardialgia  biliosa.
Physician,  suffering  for  ten  years ;  asthma.
Man,  set.  35;  gastralgia  biliosa.  _

AVoman,  set.  38,  mother  of  several  children,  suffering  since

childhood;  spasmodic  asthma.  .

Woman,  ffit.  38,  suffering  with  chronic  dyspepsia;  cardialgia.
Man,  set.  45,  fat  and  robust;  hemorrhoidal  discharge.
Man,  set.  49  ;  ague.
*^ Relations. Antidoted  by:  Ipec.

Compare: Arsen.  and  Rosa  damas.  in  hay  fever  or  rose

cold  ;  Digit.,  Tabac.  in  heart  affections ;  Arsen.,  Verat  alb.

in  gastric  troubles; Ipec.  in  spasmodic  asthma; Ant.

tart,  and  Ipec.  in  morning  sickness.

V'Lobelia  is  to  the  bad  effects  from  drunkenness  m  people


LOBELIA  INFLATA— LYCOPODIUM.  88

with  light  hair,  bhie  or  grey  eyes,  florid  complexion,
fat  or  corpulent,  what  Nux  vom.  is  to  people  of  opposite
temperament."


LYCOPODIUM.

Club  Moss.  Lycopodiacese.

A  low  creeping  perennial,  found  in  dry  woods  in  all  parts  of  the  world,  but  is
most  frequent  in  Northern  countries.  The  medicinal  part  is  the  powder,  which  is
collected  in  Germany  and  other  places  in  Europe.  It  is  a  fine,  very  mobile,  pale
yellowish  dust,  free  from  odor  and  taste.  Seen  through  the  microscope  it  appears
round  on  one  side,  while  the  other  forms  a  short  three  sided  pyramid.  When
thrown  into  a  flame  it  burns  suddenly  and  with  a  hissing  noise.  A  trituration  of
the  powder  precedes  the  preparation  of  the  alcoholic  tincture.

Introduced  by  Hahnemann  and  proved  by  himself,  GersdorfF,  Goullon,  Hart-
laub,  Eummel,  Schreter,  Wahle,  Kiickert  (see  Chronische  Krankheiten),  Schelling
(Allg.  Hom.  Ztg.,  vol.  25,  p.  357,  vol.  82,  p.  121),  Seguin  (Hygea,  vol.  19,  p.  11),
Genzke  (Hygea,  vol.  22,  p.  446),  Martin  (a  collection  of  provings,  Vierteljahr-
schrift,  vol.  10,  p.  52),  Huber  (a  collection  of  provings,  Zeit.  d.  Ver.  Hom.  Oestr.,
1857,  vol.  ],  p.  333),  smaller  provings  by  Robinson  and  Epps;  with  higher
potencies  by  Berridge  (N.  A.  J.  Horn.,  1871  and  1873;  also  N.  E.  Med.  Gaz.,
1874).

CiiiNicAi,  Authorities. — Insanity,  Wesselhoeft,  Raue's  Eec,  1871,  p.  48;
Cerebral  paresis,  Berridge,  Org.,  vol.  1,  p.  29 ;  Forgetfulness,  Qi^hme,  Raue's  Rec,
1871,  p.  46;  Chrome  cryinjr.  Miller,  Org.,  vol.  3,  p.  106;  Pain  in  forehead,  Berridge,
Raue's  Rec,  1872,  p.  211 ;  Eczema  capitis,  Knorre,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  4,  p.  245 ;
Amaurosis,  Hilberger,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  5,  p.  147  ;  Hemeralopia  (2  cases),  Allen,
Raue's  Rec,  1873,  p.  72 ;  Dimness  of  lens,  Diez,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  1,  p.  328 ;
Ophthalmia  neonatorum,  GouUon,  B.  J.  H.,  vol.  6,  p.  483 ;  Conjunctivitis,  Goullon,
Riick.  Kl.  Erf,  vol.  1,  p.  253 ;  Polypus  eye,  Gross,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  1,  p.  317  ;
Dulness  of  hearing,  Lobethal,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  1,  p.  366 ;  Otorrhoea,  Lobethal,
Ruck.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  1,  p.  367 ;  Nasal  catarrh,  Fisher,  Org.,  vol.  2,  p.  127 ;  Goullon,
Hahnemann,  Kafka,  Raue's  Rec,  1870,  p.  125 ;  Pain  in  face,  Tietze,  Riick.  Kl.
Erf,  vol.  1,  p.  463 ;  Warts  on  chin,  Zeller,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf,  vol.  4,  p.  310 ;  Odontal-
fjia,  Altschul,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf,  vol.  5,  p.  207  ;  Sivelling  of  gums  and  headache,  Swan,
Raue's  Rec,  1875,  p.  84 ;  Affections  of  mouth,  Rummel,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  2,  p.
1 25 ;  Sore  throat,  Berridge,  Raue's  Rec,  1871,  p.  72,  1875,  p.  85 ;  Ulcerated  throat,
Berridge,  Hom.  Phys.,  vol.  4,  p.  46,  vol.  3,  p.  99;  Inflammation  of  fauces,  Schel-
ling, Riick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  4,  p.  243 ;  Tendency  to  tonsillitis.  Garrison,  H.  M.,  vol.  12,
p.  233;  Tonsillitis  and  Pemphigus,  Eggert,  Raue's  Rec,  1871,  p.  70;  Piice,  Hah.
Mo.,  vol.  12,  p.  129;  Diphtheria,  Price,  Hah.  Mo.,  vol.  12,  p.  129;  Nash,  Hom.
Phys.,  vol.  4,  p.  332;  Blakely,  Stow,  Raue's  Rec,  1870,  p.  151 ;  Parsons,  Trans.
Hom.  Med.  Soc  Pa.,  1882,  p.  197;  Raue's  Rec,  1873,  p.  85;  Mohr,  Hah.  Mo.,
vol.  13,  p.  537 ;  (2  cases) Butler,  Hom.  Phys.,  vol.  2,  p.  465 ;  McGeorge,  Guern-


S9  LYCOPODIUM.

«ey,  Lippe,  OElime's  Therap.  (2  cases),  Wesselhceft,  Eaue's  Rec,  1872,  p.  101;
Schmitt,  Horn.  Phys.,  vol.  6,  p.  252 ;  (5  cases)  Goodno,  Wesselhceft,  Price,  (Ehme's
Therap.;  Bulimia,  Schelling,  Ruck.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  1,  p.  552;  Gastmlgia,  gastritis,
Goullon,  N.  A.  J.  H.,  vol.  8,  p.  278  ;  Cramps  in  stomach,  Haustein,  Raue's  Rec,  1873,
p.  117  ;  Schelling,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  1,  p.  638,  vol.  3,  p.  192 ;  Hartlaub,  Ruck.
Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  1,  p.  637 ;  Cramps  in  stomach  (3  cases),  Goullon,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf.,
vol.  5,  p.  314;  Flatulent  indigestion  (5  cases),  Bayes,  B.  J.  H.,  vol.  3U,  pp.  148-50;
Affection  of  stomach  and  abdomen,  Schelling,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf,  vol.  1,  p.  639 ;  Affection
of  stomach,  Tietze,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  1,  p.  637 ;  Digestive  disturbances  and  tape-
ivorm,  Schelling,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf,  vol.  1,  p.  805 ;  Dyspepsia,  Burt,  Raue's  Rec,  1872,
p.  130;  Hutchinson,  B.  J.  H.,  vol.  25,  p.  500;  Chronic  ulcers  on  leg,  and  dyspepsia,
Terry,  N.  A.  J.  H.,  vol.  25,  p.  307 ;  Inflammation  of  liver,  Kreuss,  Weber,  Riick.
Kl.  Erf,  vol.  1,  p.  678 ;  Goullon,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  5,  p.  335 ;  Affection  of  liver,
Hofrichter,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  5,  pp.  313,  335,  339,  340;  Goullon,  N.  A.  J.  H.,
vol.  8,  p.  278;  Gerstel,  Allg.  Horn.  Zeit.,  vol.  101,  p.  139;  Indurated  pylorus  and
affection  of  liver,  Nunez,  Ruck.  Kl.  Erf,  vol.  5,  p.  313  ;  Pains  in  abdomen,  Schelling,
Riick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  1,  p.  638;  Colic,  Schwarze,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  1,  p.  754;
Schelling,  Ruck.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  1,  p.  753;  (3  cases)  Goullon,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf.,
vol.  5,  p.  365 ;  Renal  colic,  Goullon,  N.  A.  J.  H.,  vol.  8,  p.  278 ;  Riick.  Kl.  Erf.,
vol.  5,  p.  366;  Flatulency,  Knorre,  Ruck.  Kl.  Erf,  vol.  1,  p.  754;  (2  cases)
Bayes,  B.  J.  H.,  vol.  30,  p.  150 ;  Incarcerated  flatulence,  Gallupe,  Org.,  vol.  3,  p.  362;
Flatulency  and  tapeworm,  Schelling,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  1,  p.  805;  Enteritis  in
infants,  Hughes,  Pharmacodynamics,  p.  509 ;  Chronic  duodenitis,  Dunham's  Lee,
vol.  2,  p.  259;  Peritonitis,  Schelling,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf,  vol.  1,  p.  727;  Inguinal
hernia  on  r.  side.  Baker,  Org.,  vol.  1,  p.  481 ;  Jameson,  N.  E.  M.  G.,  vol.  13,  p.  256;
Wells,  Hah.  Mo.,  vol.  12,  p.  224 ;  Schelling,  Goullon,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf,  vol.  5,  p.
381;  Abdominal  complaints,  Kreuss,  Lobethal,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  1,  p.  588;
Abdominal  a/ec<ions,  Schelling,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf ,  vol.  1,  p.  754;  Chronic  diarrhcea,
Elb,  Allg.  Horn.  Zeit.,  vol.  Ill,  p.  163 ;  Diarrhoea  after  suppression  of  skin  eruptions.
Laird,  Hah.  Mo.,  vol.  17,  p.  8;  Dysentery,  Holcombe,  Raue's  Rec,  1872,  p.  145;
Constipation,  Linsley,  Horn.  Clin.,  vol.  1,  p.  44 ;  Hah.,  Tietze,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf,  vol.
1,  p.  816;  Hilberger,  Bernard  and  Strong,  p.  64;  Pope,  Allg.  Horn.  Zeit.,  vol.  107,
p.  190;  Hilberger,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf,  vol.  5,  p.  395;  Chronic  constipation,  Lejin,  B.  J.
H.,  vol.  2,  p.  284;  Diabetes  insipidus,  Mueller,  Raue's  Rec,  1871,  p.  129;  Diabetes,
liaue's  Rec,  1874,  p,  211;  Cystitis,  Chancerel,  Horn.  Phys.,  vol.  2,  p.  53;  Conant,
Raue's  Rec,  1874;  Hcematuria,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  2,  p.  19;  Thatcher,  Org.,  vol.

1,  p.  484 ;  Benal  calculi,  Hochecker,  Allg.  Horn.  Zeit.,  vol.  109,  p.  1 39 ;  Vesical  calculus
nnd  hcematuria,  Hackett,  Raue's  Rec,  1873,  pp.  142-3;  Gravel,  Berridge,  Horn.
Phys.,  vol.  6,  p.  78;  Tietze,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf,  vol.  2,  p.  19;  Affection  of  bladder,  Mar-
tin, Raue's  Rec,  1870,  p.  239;  Strangury,  Goullon,  N.  A.  J.  H.,  vol.  4,  p.  344;  In-
<iontinence  of  urine.  Smith,  Org.,  vol.  2,  p.  320;  (  2  cases)  Lobethal,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf,
vol.  2,  p.  44 ;  Loss  of  sexual  feeling  in  old  men.  Price,  Hah.  Mo.,  vol.  12,  p.  128 ;
Impotence,  Hah.,  Boenninghausen,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf,  vol.  2,  p.  59 ;  Urethral  discharge
and  ulcers  on  penis,  Schelling,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf,  vol.  4,  p.  246;  Chancre,  Price,  Hah.
Mo.,  vol.  12,  p.  130;  Uterine  displacement,  Butler,  Horn.  Phys.,  vol.2,  p.  465;  3Ien-
strual  affections,  Hahnemann,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol  2,  p.  236 ;  Amenorrhxa,  Nichols,
Raue's  Rec,  1872;  p.  179;  Tietze,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf,  vol.  2,  p.  236;  Leucorrhaa,
Hirschel,  Raue's  Rec,  1873,  p.  162 ,  Hahnemann,  Hartmann,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf,  vol.

2,  p.  363;  Disease  of  vagina,  Mueller,  Raue's  Rec,  1873,  p.  153;  Flatus  from  vagina,
Hahnemann,  Kallenbach,  Okie,  Morgan,  Raue's  Rec,  1870,  p.  252;  Tumors  in


LYCOPODIUM.  90

mammce,  Items,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  5,  p.  649 ;  Digestive  disturbances  during  preg-
nancy, Sommer,  Griesslich,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  2,  p.  383 ;  Vomiting  during  preg-
nancy, Kaue's  Eec,  1871,  p.  161 ;  Threatened  abortion,  Schelling,  Kiick.  Kl.  Erf.,
vol.  2,  p.  316 ;  Uterine  heviorrhage  after  abortion  (2  cases),  Schelling,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf.,
vol.  2,  p.  315;  Labor  pains,  Guernsey,  Raue's  Rec,  1871,  p.  163;  Tympanitis  after
confinement,  Duncan,  Raue's  Rec,  1873,  p.  186;  Childbed  fever,  Jackson,  Org.,  vol.
1,  p.  293 ;  Peritonitis  after  confinement,  Knerr,  MSS. ;  Cracking  and  soreness  of  nipples,
Tietze,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  2,  p.  417;  Sore  nipples,  Tietze,  Raue's  Rec,  1872,  p.
195;  Bronchitis  ivith  affections  of  liver,  Goullon,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  3,  p.  96  ;  Dysp-
noea, Herse,  Allg.  Horn.  Ztg.,  vol.  112,  p.  68 ;  Cough,  Wesselhoeft,  Raue's  Rec,
1872,  p.  109 ;  Chronic  cough,  Boyce,  N.  A.  J.  H.,  vol.  3,  p.  87  ;  Riick.  Kl.  Erf,  vol.
5,  p.  686;  Pressure  in  chest,  Landesmann,  Raue's  Rec,  1873,  p.  110;  Pains  in  chest,
Berridge,  Horn.  Phys.,  vol.  4,  p.  291 ;  Tedious  catarrhal  affections  of  chest,  Goullon,
Schelling,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  3,  p.  18 ;  Capillary^  bronchitis.  Packer,  N.  E.  M.  G.,
vol.  13,  p.  254 ;  Pneumonia,  Garrison,  H.  M.,  vol.  12,  p.  233;  Wells,  Hah.  Mo.,
vol.  12,  p.  224;  Bowie,  Times  Retros.,  vol.  3,  p.  31 ;  Pearson,  Raue's  Rec,  1875,
p.  120;  Wilson,  Hom.  Rev.,  vol.  4,  p.  138;  Knerr,  MSS.,  Hartmann,  Mueller,
Riick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  3,  p.  299 ;  Chronic  pneumonia,  bronchitis,  Meyhofler,  Raue's
Rec,  p.  375;  Latent  pneumonia,  Price,  Hah.  Mo.,  vol.  12,  p.  128 ;  Phthisis  florida,
Garrison,  H.  M.,  vol.  12,  p.  233  ;  Consumption,  Lobethal,  Riickert,  Hartlaub,  Gross,
Kreussler,  Schelling,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  3,  pp.  381-3  ;  Lung  affection,  Hom.  Clin.,
vol.  3,  p.  39 ;  Boyce,  Theuerkauf,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  5,  p.  686 ;  Gushing,  N.
E.  M.  G.,  vol.  8,  p.  206  ;  Inflammation  of  diaphragm,  Kreuss,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  1,
p.  726;  Affection  of  heart,  Hendricks,  Allg.  Hom.  Ztg.,  vol.  Ill,  p.  119;  Carotid  an-
eurism, H.nghes,  Raue's  Rec,  1871,  p.  109;  Raue's  P.,  p.  465 ;  Torticollis,  Price,
Hah.  Mo.,  vol.  12,  p.  130  ;  Bronchocele  (3  cases),  Gilchrist's  Surgery,  p.  372  ;  Bar-
rows, Raue's  Rec,  1870,  p.  153 ;  Ulcerations  on  neck.  Gross,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf,  vol.  4,
p.  286 ;  Ulcer  on  shoidder,  Schelling,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf,  vol.  4,  p.  287  ;  Boils  in  axillce,
Knorre,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  4,  p.  183  ;  Affection  of  hand  and  arm,  Schelling,  Riick.
Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  3,  p.  561 ;  Ancesthesia  of  hands,  Hale,  N.  E.  M.  G.,  vol.  3,  p.  32;  Ul-
cers on  leg,  Knorre,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  4,  p.  287  ;  Arnold,  B.  J.  H.,  vol.  2,  p.  279;
Ulcer  on  ankle,  on  foot,  Tietze,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  4,  p.  286 ;  Tearing  in  instep,
Leonard,  Org.,  vol.  3,  p.  356;  Ulcers  on  legs  and  forearm,  Knorre,  Riick.,  Kl.  Erf.,
vol.  4,  p.  287  ;  Trismus,  Schelling,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  4,  p.  580 ;  Jones,  Hom.  Clin.,
vol.  2,  p.  271;  Hysteria,  Haustein,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf,  vol.  5,  p.  611;  Debility,  Lippe,
N.  E.  M.  G.,  vol.  9,  p.  555 ;  Febrile  attacks  (3  cases),  Hesse,  Allg.  Hom.  Ztg.,  vol.
112,  p.  110,  vol.  113,  p.  163;  Intermittent  fever,  Spooner,  Org.,  vol.  1,  p.  222;
Hawkes,  Org.,  vol.  2,  p.  131 ;  (3  cases)  Price,  Times  Retros.,  vol.  3,  pp.  30-1 ;
Price,  Hah.  Mo.,  vol.  12,  p.  132 ;  Ague,  Bernreuter,  Brigham,  Albus,  Intermittent
Fever,  pp.  166  and  167  ;  Quotidian  ague,  Goodno,  Org.,  vol.  3,  p.  371 ;  Epidemic  ague.
Price,  Allen's  Intermittent  Fever,  p.  166 ;  Typhoid  fever,  Rummel,  Lobethal,
Schleicher,  Goullon,  Goebel,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf,  vol.  14,  p.  745 ;  Fever  during  pneu-
monia, Hesse,  Allg.  Hom.  Ztg.,  vol.  Ill,  p.  163;  Fetid  perspiration,  Gorton,  Raue's
Rec,  1874,  p.  296;  Intermittent  rheumatic  jMins,  Laurie,  B.  J.  H.,  vol.  12,  p.  494;
Riick.  Kl.  Erf,  vol.  5,  p.  900;  Rheumatism,  Baxter,  Raue's  Rec,  1875,  p.  201  ;
Berridge,  Raue's  Rec,  1873,  p.  192;  Gaspary,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf,  vol.  3,  p.  519;
Schell,  Tietze,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf,  vol.  3,  pp.  520,  521 ;  Morrison,  Hah.  Mo.,  vol.  10,  p.
222;  Matlock,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf,  vol.  13,  p.  519;  Laurie,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  5,  p.
900;  Chronic  rheumatism,  Mavt'm,  Raue's  Rec,  1870,  p.  277 ;  Chronic  rheumatic
gout,  Wells,  Hom.  Rev.,  vol.  3,  p.  257 ;  Ascites,  Jeanes,  B.  J.  H.,  vol.  34,  p.  710;


91  LYCOPODIUM.

Anasarca,  hydrothorax,  Gauwesky,  Homer,  Bernstein,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  4,  pp.
350-2 ;  Dropsy,  Seguin,  B.  J.  H.,  vol.  2,  p.  284 ;  Schelling,  B.  J.  H.,  vol.  34,  p.  711  ;
Post-scarlatinal  dropsy,  Lorbach,  Kiick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  4,  p.  56  ;  Lithiasis,  Knorre,
Euc'k.  Kl.  Erf,  vol.  2,  p.  19;  Gout^  Tietze,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  3,  p.  521;  Psora,
with  a  complication  of  diseased  states,  Skinner,  Org.,  vol.  1,  p.  160;  Rachitis,  Mar-
wig,  N.  A.  J.H.,  vol.  12,  p.  134;  Syphilis,  Mosaik,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  2,  p.  125;
Hartmann,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  2,  p.  125  ;  Intertrigo,  Seguin,  B.  J.  H.,  vol.  2,  p.  284;
Crnsta  lactea,  Garrison,  H.  M.,  vol.  12,  p.  233;  Herpes,  Sousurans,  Arcularins,
Eaue's  Eec,  1873,  p.  64 ;  Barber's  itch,  Guernsey,  Eaue's  Eec,  1870,  p.  135 ;  Ec-
zema, Attomyr,  Betlimann,  Schelling,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  4,  p.  246 ;  Psoriasis,
Price,  Hah.  Mo.,  vol.  12,  p.  127  ;  Ncevus  maternus,  Clifton,  Hah.  Mo.,  vol.  13,  p.
253;  Condylomata,  Simon,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  2,  p.  125 ;  Scarlatina  (Lycop.  and
Arum  triph.),  Lippe,  Eaue's  Eec,  1872,  p.  251 ;  Verifications  of  unverified  symptoms,
Winans,  Trans.  Hom.  Med.  Soc.  Pa.,  1881,  pp.  158,  159,  160,  161.

*  Mind. I  Unconsciousness,
I  Vanishing  of  thoughts.

I  Weak  memory,  old  people  are  very  forgetful.
I  Uses  wrong  words  for  correct  ideas;  uses  wrong  syllables;

makes  mistakes  in  writing;  spells  words  wrong;  mixes

up  letters  and  syllables,  or  omits  parts  of  words.
She  was  quite  unable  to  write;  having  written  a  letter,  she

could  not  read  it.
I  Cannot  remember  meaning  of  single  letters;  imitates  in

writing  without  knowing  signification.
I  I  Cannot  read,  because  meaning  of  certain  letters  is  not

clear;  makes  mistakes  in  speaking,  because  he  cannot

get  right  words;  when  subject  is  very  important,  words

are  correctly  chosen. ^Indigestion.

■  Thoughts  confused,  unable  to  fix  them;  difficult  to  find

fitting  words.
I  I  Absent  minded;  supposes  to  be  in  two  places  at  a  time.
■Mental  torpor  and  weakness; slow  of  comprehension;

dulness  to  imbecility.
I  I  Fancies  and  delirium.
■Child  desires  to  be  carried.

■  Taciturnity;  desires  to  be  alone.

■  ■Dread :  of  men ;  of  solitude,  irritability  and  melancholy.

■  ■Weeps  all  day,  cannot  calm  herself,  <  from  4  to  8  p.m.

■  ■Sensitive;  even  cries  when  thanked.

■  Her  answers  are  quick,  anxious  and  tremulous;  wander-

ing; imperiousness;  speaks  with  an  air  of  command;
manner  stiff  and  pretentious;  strikes  her  attendant  and
grows  angry;  scolds  much  and  violently  at  imaginary
persons,  or  laughs  and  cries  alternately,  or  is  exceed-
ingly hilarious.

■  Catching  at  flocks.

■  Excessively  merry  and  laughs  at  simplest  things,  again

melancholy  and  low  spirited.


LYCOPODIUM.  92

I  Melancholy :  has  doubts  about  her  salvation;  before  cata-
menia;  in  mild  characters.

■  Desponding,  grieving  mood.

I  iSatiety  of  life,  particularly  mornings  in  bed.
lApprehensiveness,  difficult  breathing;  fearfulness.

■  Easily  frightened  and  starts  up;  feels  frightened  at  every-

thing, even  ringing  of  door  bell.
lAnthropophobia  (in  children);  fear  of  phantoms  in  eve-
ning, with  anguish.

■  Anxious  thoughts,  as  if  about  to  die,  for  which  she  pre-

pares farewell  messages.
I  I  Indifferent,  taciturn ;  insensibility  to  external  impres-
sions.

■  ■Amativeness  or  amorousness.

■  Wantof  selfconfidence;  indecision;  timidity;  resignation.

■  Loss  of  confidence:  in  his  own  vigor; in  physician  and

remedies.

■  ■Sensitive,  irritable  disposition;  peevish  and  cross  on  get-

ting awake;  easily  excited  to  anger;  cannot  endure
slightest  opposition,  and  is  speedily  beside  herself.

■  Obstinate,  defiant,  arbitrary;  seeks  disputes.

■  Very  ill  humored  and  morose,  just  before  menstruation.

■  Discontented  and  impatient.

■  Misanthropic;  flies  even  from  his  own  children.

■  Distrustful,  suspicious and  fault  finding. ^Dyspepsia.

^Chronic  hepatic  congestion. ^Excess  of  lithic  gravel.

■  Haughty,  reproachful  and  overbearing.

■  Parsimonious,  greedy,  avaricious,  malicious  and  pusil-

lanimous.

■  ■Ailments  from  fright,  anger,  mortification,  or  vexation,

with  reserved  displeasure.

■  Nervous  action  weakened;  threatened  softening  of  brain

from  overwork,  or  metastasis  of  ulcers  suddenly  healed.

■  ■Oversensitiveness  to  pain;  patient  is  beside  himself.

^  Sensorium. ■■Impending  cerebral  paralysis;  somnolence;
staring  eyes;  dropped  jaw. ^Cerebro-spinal  meningitis.
■Stupor,  r.  pupil  dilated;  grunting  expirations,  occasional
outcries ;  tympanitis ;  head  bent  back ;  urine  dark ;  con-
stipated; lower  jaw  sunken;  sliding  down  in  bed.

■  Stupefying  headache;  heat  in  temples  and  ears;  mouth

and  lips  dry ;  <  from  4  to  8  p.m.,  rising  up  or  lying  down.

■  Vertigo:  rising  from  seat ;  whilst  drinking;  in  hot  room;

in  morning,  when  and  after  rising  from  bed,  he  reels
back  and  forth;  in  forenoon;  nausea,  seems  as  though
everything  were  turning  round ;  constantly  dreads
falling.

■  Congestion  of  blood  to  head,  especially  in  morning  when

raising  himself  in  bed.


93


LYCOPODIUM.


I  Gets hot, face reddens,  eyes water  and  become  dim.

^Vertigo.
^  Inner  Head. I  Hammering  pain  in  centre  of  forehead.
I  Tearing  in  forehead  or  r.  side  of  head,  extending  down

to  neck,  with  tearing  in  face,  eyes  and  teeth; <  on

rising,  >  lying  down.

■  Burning,  tearing  pain  in  forehead,  day  and  night.
1  I  Much  dull  frontal  headache.

I  I  Headache  above  eyes:  immediately  after  breakfast;  ac-

companying severe  colds.

I I  Pain  in  temples,  as  if  screwed  together;  <  during
menses.

1 1  Stitches  in  temples,  mostly  r.,  from  within  outward.

iSemilateral  headache;  shattered  or  concussed  feeling  at
every  step.

1 1  Pressing  headache  on  vertex;  <  from  4  to  8  p.m.,  from
stooping,  lying  down  and  exerting  mind ;  followed  by
great  weakness.

I  I  Pain  in  upper  part  of  occiput,  followed  by  unconscious-
ness. ^Hydrocephalus.

I  Awakes  with  violent  headache,  throbbing  on  top  of  head.

I I  Throbbing  in  brain,  leaning  head  backward,  during  day.

■  Headache  as  if  bones  of  skull  were  being  driven  asunder,

or  as  if  brain  was  vacillating  to  and  fro,  especially  when
walking,  going  up  stairs,  or  rising  from  stooping.

■  Throbbing  headache:  from  motion;  after  every  parox-

ysm of  coughing.

■  Congestive  headache;  head  seems  as  if  it  would  burst.
I  I  Shaking  in  head  on  stepping  hard.

■  Headache  with  stupefaction.

■  Violent  headache  at  night,  as  if  caused  by  a  wrong  po-

sition.

■  If  she  does  not  eat  during  ravenous  hunger,  she  is  at-

tacked with  headache,  which  disappears  after  eating._

■  ■Headache  <  from  warmth  of  bed,  getting  warm  while

walking,  and  from  mental  exertion,  or  chagrin ;  >  lying
down,  in  open,  cold  air,  and  uncovering  head.

■  Drowsiness,  loud  screams  during  sleep;  sleep  with  half

open  eyes,  throwing  head  from  side  to  side  with  moan-
ing; bad  humor  after  sleep ;  comatose;  emaciation;  pale
face;  flushes  of  heat  in  face;  spasmodic  twitching  of
face;  stiff  neck;  constipation;  complications  with  erup-
tive fevers  and  pneumonia. ^Tubercular  meningitis.

■  Dread  of  sohtude;  active,  irritable  and  melancholy  mind;

stupefying  headache,  pain  extending  down  neck,  with
great  weakness;  acute  hearing,  with  roaring  in  ears;
acute  smell;  tongue  swollen;  bloating  of  abdomen,  with
tension  as  of  a  hoop,  same  in  chest;  much  flatus;  urine


LYCOPODIUM.  94

loaded  with  lithates;  burning  pain  between  shoulders;
numbness  and  twitching  through  body  and  limbs.
^Cerebro-spinal  meningitis.

I  In  delicate  ansemic  children;  heaviness  and  obtuseness

of  head;  stupefaction;  convulsive  motions  of  head,  face,
and  extremities;  hemiopia  or  amblyopia;  coldness  of
face  or  of  whole  body;  indistinct  speech  and  heaviness
of  tongue;  sleepiness;  screaming  out  in  sleep,  delirious
words;  frequently  indicated  after  CWcar.,  when  erethic
symptoms  are  followed  by  deep  coma.  ^Hydrocephalus
acutus.
*  Outer  Head.  '  l  Tearing,  boring  and  scraping  on  external
head  during  night.

I I  Head  drawn  to  r.  side,  or  bent  backward;  spasmodic
shaking  of  head.

I  Head  easily  becomes  cold;  cutting  soreness  of  scalp,
lltching  of  scalp;  dandruff,  smelling  badly.

■  Pityriasis  in  spots  on  scalp;  fair  haired,  strumous  girls.

■  Eruption,  beginning  on  back  of  head ;  crusts  thick,  easily

bleeding,  oozing  a  fetid  moisture  or  emitting  a  mousy
smell;  <  at  night,  after  scratching,  and  from  warmth.
^Crusta  lactea.

■  Eruption  on  head  with  swollen  cervical  glands.

■  Circular  patch  on  vertex  denuded  of  hair;  scalp  puffed

up  by  accumulation  in  subjacent  cellular  tissue  of
bloody,  offensive  pus,  which  discharges  from  time  to
time. ^Herpes  tonsurans.

■Whole  of  occipital  region  and  also  other  parts  of  head
covered  with  a  thick,  loose  and  porous  crust,  bottom  of
which  seemed  full  of  vermin;  severe  itching,  causing
constant  scratching  and  rubbing ;  discharge  of  bloody,
watery,  lymphlike  pus,  so  profuse  that  it  ran  down
neck  and  back,  <  at  night;  glands  of  throat  and  neck
swollen;  extremely  offensive  odor;  face  pale  and  cov-
ered with  small  red  pimples,  points  of  which  contain
pus ;  eruption  behind  ears ;  outer  ear  occasionally  cov-
ered with  thick  crusts;  discharge  of  pus  from  ear.

I  I  Plica  polonica.

■  ■  Hair  falls  off:  after  abdominal  diseases ;  after  parturition ;

burning,  scalding,  itching  of  scalp,  especially  on  getting
warm  from  exercise.

■  ■Hair  becomes  grey  too  early.

^ Sight and Eyes, ■■Photophobia;  evening  light  blinds
him;  in  artificial  light  all  objects  tremble.

■  Eyes  dazed  by  light,  and  painful  as  if  bruised.

■  Floating  black  spots  before  eyes; sparks  in  the  dark;

letters  run  together  or  become  indistinct  while  reading
or  writing,  must  vary  distance  of  page;  as  of  a  veil  and
flickering,  after  siesta;  obscuration  as  from  feathers.


95  LYCOPODIUM.

iHemiopia,  sees  only  1.  half  of  objects.

■Vision  weak,  unable  to  distinguish  small  objects  even  at

a  short distance; seems  as  though  one  was  looking

through  fine  lattice.

I  Sees  everj^hing  dimly,  as  through  a  fog;  can  only  see

rude  outline  of  objects ;  in  walking,  needs  assistance ;
slight  haziness  of  lens,  <  in  r.  eye;  menses  absent.
^After  typhoid.

I I  Night  blindness,  with  black  spots  before  eyes.
iHemeralopia;  obliged  to  stop  work  at  4  p.m.,  because  he

cannot  see  after  that  hour;  attacks  come  suddenly,  with
severe  cutting  pains.

■  Hypermetropic,  double convergent strabismus;  cannot

see  after  7.30  p.m.,  from  February  to  July  each  year  ;  a
fog  seems  to  shut  him  in ;  photophobia  in  daytime  ;
keeps  lids  nearly  closed  ;  conjunctiva  palpebrarum  con-
gested ;  congestion  of  optic  nerve ;  pustules  developed
on  margin  of  1.  cornea  (improved).  ^Retinitis  hemaro-
lopica.

I  Cataract:  with  suppressed  menses;  after  typhus;  with
chronic  dyspepsia.

!  Inflammation  of  cornea,  with  bulging.

■  Staphylomatous  protrusion.

I  Eyes  very  much  sunken,  blue  rings.

I  Eyes  seem  too  large.

llEyes  hot,  dim,  wide  open,  fixed  and  insensible  to  light.

I  Cold  feeling  in  eyes.

■Dryness  of  eyes;  in  evening  and  at  night;  obliged  to

close  lids ;  difficult  to  open,  smarting  in  morning.
iPressive  pain  in  eyes,  as  if  dust  was  in  them.

I  I  Burning  and  itching  in  eyes.

I I  Stitches  and  soreness  in  eyes,  evenings,  when  looking
at  light.

■  Redness  of  eyes  and  pressure  in  them.

■  Much  mucus  in  eyes,  with  smarting  pain.

■  Inflammation  of  eyes,  with  itching  in  both  canthi,  redness

and  swelling  of  lids  of  r.  eye  ;  distressing  pain,  as  if  they
were  dry,  with  nightly  agglutination.

■  Catarrhal  or  scrofulous  ophthalmia;  secretion  thick,  yel-

lowish, green.

■  After  catching  cold  during  an  attack  of  jaundice,  severe

inflammation  of  eyes;  on  fifth  day  copious  discharge  of
pus  from  under  puff'ed  lids;  lids  opened  with  difficulty;
conjunctivae  looked  like  raw  meat ;  cornea  dim,
■Arthritic  catarrh  of  conjunctiva,  with  accumulation  of
white  matter  in  corners.

■  Ophthalmia  neonatorum  during  suppurative  stage.

■  ■Inflammatory  affections  of  eyes,  with  nocturnal  agglu-

tination and  lachrymation  by  day.


LYCOPODIUM.  96

■Smarting  and  burning  of  lids.

1 1  Ulceration  and  redness  of  eyelids;  water  flows  from  eyes,

smarts  and  bites  cheeks.
IB  Granular  eyelids,  dry,  with  smarting.

■  Itching  in  cantlii.

■  ■Pustules  and  styes  on  lids,  more  toward  inner  canthi.

■  Polypus  as  large  as  a  pea,  pedunculated,  growing  from

outer  canthus  of  r.  eye.

■  Lachrymal  fistula.

■Small  red  spots ;  bloody  extravasations  scattered  here  and
there  around  eyes,  in  consequence  of  straining  at  vomit-
ing. 6'Vomiting  during  pregnancy.
"Hearing  and  Ears. ■Oversensitivess  of  hearing;  sensitive
to  musical  sounds  and  noise.

■  ■Roaring,  humming,  whizzing,  rushing  in  ears,  or  sing-

ing as  from  boiling  water ;  hardness  of  hearing.
■Sensation  as  if  hot  blood  rushed  into  ears.

■  ■Impairment  or  loss  of  hearing,  in  connection  with  otor-

rhoea ;  integrity  of  organic  part  of  middle  ear  unaffected ;
patient  scrofulous,  with  swelling  of  glands  of  neck.

■  ■Loss  of  hearing  after  scarlet  fever;  offensive,  bad  looking

discharge  from  ears ;  loss  of  speech,  due  to  his  not  being
able  to  hear  words.

■  I Otorrhoea :  purulent,  ichorous; after  scarlatina; with

impaired  hearing;  after  severe  otitis  interna.
■External  meatus  excoriated  by  offensive  discharge ;  drum-
head destroyed;  cannot  bear  to  be  covered;  after  scarlet
fever,  with  affections  of  parotid  glands,  eruptions  and
abdominal  troubles. ^Otitis  media.

■  Small  ulcers  or  polypi  in  ear.
I  I  Tearing  in  r.  and  1.  meatus.

■  Itching  in  ear  (in  sleep).

■  ■Humid,  suppurating  scurfs  in  and  behind  ears.

■  ■Eczema  of  ears,  with  thick  crusts  and  fissures  in  skin,
''  Smell  and  Nose. lOversensitiveness  of  smell.

■  Frequent  epistaxis;  principally  in  afternoon.

■  Dryness  and  stoppage  of  nose.

■  ■Stopped  catarrh,  cannot  get  breath  at  night.

■  Nose  stopped  up,  especially  at  root;  breathes  with  open

mouth  and  protruding  tongue. ^Diphtheria.
■Stoppage  of  nose,  with  dryness  of  posterior  nares,  fetid
secretion,  hoarseness,  rawness,  and soreness  of  chest;
nightly  tickling  cough,  with  sensation  as  from  sulphur-
vapor  in  throat.

■  ■SnufHes,  child  starts  out  of  sleep  rubbing  its  nose.

■  Fluent  coryza,  with  redness  of  eyes  and  lachryniation,

frequent  flushes  of  heat  and  yawning.

■  ■Violent  coryza,  nose  swollen;  discharge  acrid  ;  excoriat-

ing; posterior  nares  dry.


97  LYCOPODIUM.

I  Long  lasting  coryza,  discharge  purulent.

I I  Violent  catarrh,  with  swelling  of  nose.

■  Catarrh,  with  acrid  discharge  from  nose,  makes  upper

lip  sore.

■  Ichorous  discharge  from  nose,  begins  in  r.  nostril. ^Scar-

latina. ^Diphtheria.
liCatarrh  of  nose  and  frontal  sinuses;  discharge  yellow
and  thick;  frontal  headache;  yellow  complexion.

I  iThick  yellow  discharge,  copious  and  fatty  ;  constipation;

prostration  ;  impotence ;  palpitation. ^Nasal  catarrh.
iScurfor  crusts  in  nose;  nightly  closure  of  nasal  openings
in  dry  coryza.

■  Discharge  of  elastic  plugs  from  nose. ^Catarrh.

■  Very  sensitive  smell;  violent  coryza,  acrid  and  making

upper  lip  sore;  posterior  nares  feel  dry,  and  nostril  is
closed  every  morning  wdth  what  looks  like  inspissated
pus. ^Polypus.

I I  Fanlike  motion  of  alee  nasi. ^Pneumonia.
I  Pimples  sore  and  acrid  on  end  of  nose.

■  Child  wakes  at  night  and  rubs  nose  so  much  and  long-

that  parents  are  frightened;  it  won't  stop  rubbing  its.
nose. ^Catarrh  of  breast.
^  Upper  Face. ■  Copper  colored  eruption  on  forehead.

■  Silly  expression.


cheeks ;  earthy,  yellow,  wdtli  deep  furrows ;  blue  circles;
around  eyes,  blue  lips;  yellowish  grey.
B  ■Flushes  of  heat  in  face ;  burning.

■  Heat  in  face  after  eating,  particularly  in  1.  cheek.

■  Glowing  redness  of  face,  with  a  fine  network  of  capillaries.

■  Great  heat  in  face  without  redness.

■  ■Spasmodic  twitching  of  facial  muscles.
I  I  Tearing  pain  in  bones  of  cheeks.

■  I  Oedema  of  face ;  puffy  and  pale  yellow.

■  ■Eruption  on  face,  humid,  suppurating.

I  I  Red,  bloated  face,  full  of  dark  red  spots,  covered  with
pustules.

■  Gnawing,  biting  pains  in  r.  malar  bone,  extending  into

sound  and  affected  teeth,  with  swelling  of  cheek  and
inability  to  chew;  on  disappearance  of  this  pain  has
pain  in  r.  side  of  face,  r.  temple  and  parietal  bone ;  small
ulcers  in  ear.

■  Eruption  covering  whole  r.  cheek;  thick,  dry  and  scaly,

itching  and  troublesome;  constant  disposition  to  break-
ing out  on  1.  cheek  also. ^Barber's  itch.
®  Lower  Face. ■  Lower  jaw  drops :  during  sleep ;  with  stupor,
in  exhausting  fevers.
I  I  Drawing  or  lacerating  in  lower  jaw.
VOL.  VII. — 7.


LYCOPODIUM.  98

I  Eruption  around  mouth ;  corners  of  mouth  sore.
iSwelling  of  lower  lip.

I  I  Large  ulcer  on  vermilion  border  of  lower  lip. ^Cancer.
I  I  Itching,  papular  eruption  about  chin.

I  Small,  white,  pedunculated warts on chin,  appearing

over  night.

■  Stitches  in  region  of  r.  parotid.

I I  Submaxillary  glands  swollen.

^°  Teeth  and  Gums,  i Teeth :  become  yellow ;  excessively
painful  to  touch;  front  teeth  loose  or  as  if  too  long;
painful  on  chewing.
I  Toothache:  with  swelling  of  cheek;  >  by  heat  of  bed,
warm  drinks  and  warm  applications;  from  slightest
touch  of  teeth  or  from  shock  of  coughing ;  only  at  night;
when  it  ceases  in  morning,  great  excitement  and  un-
easiness, which  keep  her  awake.

■  Violent  stitches  follow  each  other  in  slow  succession  in

hollow  teeth,  ceasing  after  getting  warm  in  bed.

■  Odontalgia  caused  by  carious  teeth ;  dull  pain  <  from  eat-

ing ;  swelling  and  ulceration  of  gums.

■  Constant  throbbing;  teeth  sensitive  and  elongated;  sali-

vation.

ISwelling  between  upper  gums  and  malar  bone,  with
swelling  of  cheek ;  awoke  with  violent  headache,  throb-
bing on  top  of  head.

ISwelling  of  gum  above  front  teeth,  with  swelling  of
upper  lip.

■  Profuse  bleeding  of  gums  when  touched  or  cleaning  teeth.
•  Gumboils;  fistula  dentalis.

"  Taste  and  Tongue. "Taste:  too  acute;  sour ;  bitter ;  fatty ;
mouldy;  cheesy.

■  Bad  taste  in  mouth:  soon  after  eating;  on  awaking  in

morning;  tongue  thick  and  burning,  as  after  much
smoking.

■  Tongue: coated  white; sour  taste; heavy, trembling;

stiff  with  indistinct  speech  and  dryness,  mornings;  red,
dry ;  becomes  black  and  cracked ;  painful  and  swollen
in  places,  hindering  speech;  tubercles;  convulsions  of
tongue ;  gets  involuntarily  between  upper  teeth  and  lip,
and  then  between  under  teeth  and  lip ;  darts  out  and
oscillates  to  and  fro.

■  Tongue distended, giving patient  a silly expression.

^Angina. ^Diphtheria.

■  ■Numerous  blisters  on  tongue;  burning  pain;  vesicles

on  tip  feeling  scalded  and  raw.

■  ■  Ulcers  on  and  under  tongue.

^' Inner  Mouth. ■Mouth  and tongue dry,  without  thirst;
dry  and  bitter  in  morning.


99  LYCOPODIUM.

I  Saliva  dries  on  palate  and  lips,  becoming  tough.
I  Increased  secretion  of  saliva,  tasting  salty.
I  Accumulation  of  water  in  mouth; with  nausea;  with
dyspepsia.

■  Sensitiveness  of  submaxillary  glands;  increased  secretion

of  saliva.
I  Putrid  smell  from  mouth,  especially  in  mornmg  when
awaking.

■  Small  tumors  in  mouth  in  various  places.

■  Gums  and  velum  palati  covered  with  a  lardaceous  coat-

ing. ^Syphilis.
^^  Throat. ■■Feeling  of  contraction  in  throat,  nothnig  goes
down ;  food  and  drink  regurgitate  through  nose.

■  i  Feeling  as  if  a  ball  rose  up  in  throat  from  below.

■  Choking  in  throat  provoking  constant  swallowing._

■  Accumulation  of  mucus  in  throat,  with  inclination  to

swallow.
■Soreness  of  throat,  with  difficult  swallowing.
■Burning  or  pricking  in  throat  and  pharynx.

■  Pain  in  throat,  with  sensation  of  constriction  in  region

of  submaxillary  glands.

■  Difficult  swallowing  of  liquids ;  as  if  entrance  to  pharynx

was  constricted.
■Ulceration  of  tonsils.
■Swelling  and  suppuration  of  tonsils  and  glands.

■  Pain  and  soreness  begins  on  r.  side  of  throat. ^Angina.

^Diphtheria.

■  Inflammation  of  fauces,  deep  seated  stitching  pain,  with

swollen  sensation,  as  if  a  hard  body  lodged  in  back  part
of  throat;  thick,  yellow  and  greenish  yellow  expectora-
tion, firm  and  almost  hard  in  centre,  in  morning.

iSwelUng  of  r.  cervical  glands,  which  disappeared  and  was
followed  by  swelling  in  1.  throat,  with  difficult  swallow-
ing; whitish  ulcer  in  ].  tonsil,  with  soreness  there;
swelling  of  1.  cervical  glands ;  hot  drinks  make  throat
smart ;  <  from  4  p.m. ^Ulcerated  throat.

■Sore  throat  for  six  days,  commencing  on  r.  side;  tongue
much  swollen;  cannot  protrude  it  beyond  teeth,  hinder-
ing swallowing  and  speaking;  pulse  120 ;  skin  hot ;  rest-
less at  night ;  increased  saliva ;  breath  offensive ;  1.  side
of  face  swollen.

■  Soreness  of  throat  commenced  on  r.  side,  extending  to  1.;

whitish  ulcer  on  r.  tonsil ;  sharp  pain  on  swallowing,
especially  warm  drinks ;  pains  as  if  bruised  all  over
limbs;  frontal  headache;  brown  tongue;  pulse  120.
^Ulcerated  throat.

■  Throat  sore  on  r.  side;  sensation  when  swallowing  as  if

head  opened  and  pain  shot  down  into  abdomen ;  when
sitting  up,  pain  shoots  through  head.


LYCOPODIUM.  100

■Swelling  and  suppuration  of  tonsils,  going  from  r.  to  left.
I  Tonsils  covered  with  lardaceous  ulcers. ^Syphilis.

■  Inflammation  and  enlargement  of  tonsil,  over  surface  of

which,  at  about  equal  distances,  are  found  half  a  dozen
or  more  minute  drops  of  pus  beneath  epithelium.  ^Ton-
sillitis.
■Swollen,  congested  tonsils,  with  yellow,  small  patches  .on
each  ;  great  difficulty  to  swallow,  with  pains  on  1.  side,
shifting  to  r.  and  upwards  to  ear;  heat  and  chills  alter-
nating; commencing  to  get  <  at  4  p.m.  ;  pemphigus  on
thumb  of  1.  hand  and  on  third  finger,  with  terrible
burning  pain;  blisters  small,  situated  on  a  highly  in-
flamed surface. ^Tonsillitis  and  pemphigus.

■  I  Chronic  enlargement  of  tonsils.

■  Hawking  of  bloody  mucus,  or  of  hard  greenish  yellow

phlegm;  feeling  as  of  a  hard  body  in  oesophagus.

■  Fauces  brownish  red ;  diphtheritic  patches  spreading  from

r.  tonsil  to  1.,  or  descending  from  nose;  <  from  cold

drinks  and  after  sleep.
I  Diphtheria  <  on  r.  side ;  great  restlessness  (like  Rhus  tox..

restlessness);  membrane  of  pearly  hue,  sometimes  yellow.
iMembrane  r.  tol.;  difficulty  in  breathing ;  fanlike  motion

of  alse  nasi;  speech  indistinct;  soporous  condition  and

indifference to  external  surroundings ; impatient  on

awaking. ^Diphtheria.

■  Commenced  in  nose  and  extended  to  r.  tonsil,  thence  to-

1. ;  r.  tonsil  enormously  swollen,  extending  to  cellular
tissues,  so  that  r.  side  of  neck  was  swollen  clear  out  be-
yond jaw  and  began  to  turn  purple ;  unable  to  lie  on
back  on  account  of  inability  to  breathe ;  awakens  from
short,  restless  naps,  "kicking  and  screaming  and  very
cross;"  breath  horribly  offensive. ^Diphtheria.

iFace  flushed;  pulse  154;  skin  hot  and  dry;  restless;
headache ;  great  aching  in  back  and  limbs ;  pain  in
throat  only  on  drinking  cold  liquids  other  than  water ;
throat  much  congested,  four  or  five  greyish  spots  size  of
hemp  seed  on  r.  tonsil ;  next  day  spot  size  of  ten  cent
piece,  very  angry  looking,  on  1.  tonsil;  strong  diph-
theritic odor  in  room. ^Diphtheria.

■Inflammation  of  tonsils  and  fauces  for  four  days;  much
swelling  and  pain,  amounting  to  spasm  on  swallowing;
white  diphtheritic  patches  on  tonsils;  constant  desire  to
swallow,  accompanied  by  spasm  and  violent  ptiiiging
pain;  rigors;  rapid  pulse;  swelling  and  pain  most
marked  on  r.  side ;  fetor. ^Diphtheria  phlegmonosa.

■  After  scarlatina:  pulse  too  rapid  to  be  counted;  great

aching  of  head,  back  and  limbs;  vomiting  and  flatus;
throat  pains  on  drinking  cold  milk,  but  not  cold  water;


101  LYCOPODIUM.

>  from  warm  drinks ;  deposit  of  greyish  yellow  cover-
ing on  wliole  of  r.  tonsil;  very  dull  and  difficult  to
rouse.  ^Diphtheria.
I  At  9  A.M.  began  to  feel  chilly  and  weak ;  chilliness  not  >
by  heat  of  stove  ;  at  4  p.m.  great  prostration,  throat  sore
and  several  patches  on  r.  tonsil ;  complained  more  of
prostration  and  aching  in  bones;  glands  of  neck  swollen;
tongue  yellow,  more  at  base ;  taste  brassy,  odor  from
mouth  same ;  next  day  diphtheritic  patches  on  r.  ton-
sil had  coalesced  and  several  patches  on  1.  tonsil ;  on
third  day  prostration,  loss  of  appetite,  aching  in  back,
and  legs ;  pain  in  throat  and  ears  much  <,  whole  throat
and  fauces  covered  with  thick,  dirty  yellow  membrane,
breath  offensive;  cannot  swallow  anything  warm;  but
cold  drinks  >  somewhat;  passed  a  bad  night  because
he  could  not  breathe  through  nose ;  symptoms  <  after
4  P.M. ;  had  had  bright  yellow,  thick  and  very  offensive
discharge  from  r.  ear,  which  caused  soreness  of  meatus,
since  childhood. ^Diphtheria  and  chronic  otorrhoea.

■  Diminished  secretion  of  urine;  grinding  of  teeth  during

heavy  stupor,  as  when  fully  awake. ^Diphtheria.
^*  Appetite,  Thirst. Desires,  Aversions, b  i  Excessive  appe-
tite, followed  by  distension ; hunger  remains though
stomach  and  abdomen  are  full  and  tense.
H  Canine  hunger;  the  more  he  eats  the  more  he  craves  ;
head  aches  if  he  does  not  eat.

■  Greyish  yellow  color  of  face;  frequent  yawning ;  belch-

ing, flatulency ;  pain  in  small  of  back  ;  dry  stool ;  stitch-
ing in  knees  and  ankles;  dimness  of  vision;  great  urg-
ing to  urinate,  with  profuse  discharge  of  watery  urine ;
fiuor  albus.  ^Bulimia.
I  ■  Hungry,  but  soon  satisfied,  soon  filled  up  ;  constipation,
vertigo,  belching  of  tasteless  wind.

■  Constant  satiety,  takes  no  food,  says  she  wants  nothing

because  she  is  full ;  the  least  morsel  causes  sensation  of
fulness  up  to  throat.

■  Thirst:  with  dry  lips  and  dry  mouth;  with  disgust  for

drink ;  at  night  drinks  little  but  often.
i  Want  of  thirst.

■  Desire  for :  sweets ;  oysters,  which  disagree.

■  Aversion  to:  coffee;  tobacco  smoke ;  boiled,  warm  food ;

bread  (rye) ;  meat.
^^  Eating  and  Drinking. ■  bLoss  of  appetite  at  first  mouth-
ful ;  weight  at  stomach  after  eating.

■  ■After  eating:  sudden  repletion ;  irresistible  drowsiness

followed  by  weariness ;  pressure  in  stomach ;  pressure
and  tension  in  liver,  sensitive  to  pressure;  bitter  gulp-
ing up  or  spitting  up  of  food ;  palpitation.


LYCOPODIUM.  102

■After  a  meal:  sensation  in  stomach  as  if  fasting,  but  with-
out hunger;  feels  more  nervous  and  weary,  with  quick-
ened pulse.

I  Aggravation  by  cold  drinks  (except  water  in  some  cases);
>  from  warm. ^Angina. 6'Diphtheria.

■  Bad  effects:  from  onions,  bread,  particularly  rye  bread;

from  spirituous  liquors;  from  smoking;  from  drinking
wine.
^^  Hiccough,  Belching,  Nausea  and  Vomiting.  ■  ■  Hiccough.

llEverything  tastes  sour;  sour  eructations;  heartburn,
waterbrash ;  acid  gnaws  stomach.

Belching:  without  relief;  bitter,  particularly  in  morning;
during  day,  with  burning.

iNausea:  constant;  in  pharynx  and  stomach  ;  mornings,
fasting;  in  room,  passing  off  in  open  air;  when  riding
in  a  carriage ;  after  a  meal,  with  accumulation  of  water
in  mouth  ;  after  cold,  not  after  warm  drinks  (in  chills);
qualmishness  before  breakfast; during menstruation.

B Vomiting:  food  and  bile;  coagulated  blood;  sour  sub-
stances; dark  greenish  masses,  after  eating  or  drinking.

I  Greatly  weakened  by  frequent  vomiting;  feels  especially

weak  in  her  knees  and  down  legs  to  joints  of  feet ;  as
soon  as  she  eats,  great  burning  in  tliroat ;  one  hour  after
eating,  nausea,  followed  by  vomiting  with  great  strain-
ing, causing  pain  in  head  and  back;  in  consequence  of
this  straining,  small,  red  spots,  bloody  extravasations,
scattered  here  and  there  around  eyes;  after  bitter  vom-
iting, cramps  in  abdomen ;  wind  in  stomach  and  bow-
els, causing  crampy  sensation  upward  toward  chest;
brandy  brings  on  belching  and  >  cramps;  thirsty,  but
drinking  brings  on  vomiting;  frequent  spells  of  nausea,
as  if  caused  by  wind  in  stomach,  smothering  her  and
making  her  feel  weak;  constipated;  >  in  open  air.
^^  Scrobiculum  arid  Stomach.  "In  epigastrium:  anxiety;
pressure;  constrictive  pains,  >  lying  down;  pain  caused
by  coughing.

I I  Epigastric  region  extremely  sensitive  to  touch  and  tight
clothing.

I  Hard  swelling  in  epigastric  region.

•  Sinking  at  stomach;  sensation  of  fluttering  at  stomach,
which  goes  all  over  body.

I I  Discomfort,  pressure  and  heaviness  in  stomach  after  eat-
ing a  little.

■  Pressure  in  stomach:  after  eating;  in  evening  in  bed;

with  difficult  breathing.

■  Feeling  of  tension  beneath  stomach,  as  if  everything  was

too  tight,  with  sore  sensation  in  chest.

■  Compressive  pain  as  if  stomach  was  pressed  together  from

both  sides.


103  LYCOPODIUM.

1 1  Rumbling  or  sensation  of  churning  in  stomach,

I  Twisting, crawling and emptiness in stomach, with

yawning.
I  Stomach  sensitive  to  pressure.
I  I  Pain  in  stomach  and  region  of  duodenum,  <  by  sitting

bent  over.

■  Constriction  and  cramp  in  stomach,  which  is  much  dis-

tended.

■  Gnawing,  griping,  cutting  pain  in  region  of  stomach.

■  After  eating  and  after  slight  cold,  violent  stomach  pains,

with  chilliness,  fingers  become  waxy  white,  as  if  dead.

■  Griping  and  clutching  in  epigastrium  and  stomach,  ex-

tending beneath  ribs  and  into  back,  constriction  of
oesophagus,  with  nausea,  anxiety,  oppression,  flushes  of
heat  and  weakness  almost  to  fainting,  after  least  amount
of  food ;  pains  so  severe  that  he  rolls  about  on  floor ;  gives
him  shocks  from  stomach  up  to  oesophagus  and  throat,
accompanied  by  throwing  back  of  head;  bloating;  pal-
pitation; yawning;  dry  stool;  great  lassitude;  little  sleep.
■Constant  pressing,  tearing,  burning  pains  in  stomach,
with  almost  daily  sour  vomiting,  or  vomiting  of  slime
or  water;  great  debility;  can  hardly  eat  anything;  con-
stipation ;  white  coated  tongue  with  a  dry  line  down  centre.

■  For  several  years  attacks  of  pain  in  stomach;  burning  in

epigastrium,  extending  up  into  throat;  when  lying,
burning  sensation  up  whole  spine;  after  eating,  pressure
in  region  of  stomach  and  nausea,  sensation  as  if  every-
thing eaten  was  rising  up ;  gagging  with  mucous  dis-
charge; cannot  bear  tight  clothing,  nor  anything  tight
about  abdomen ;  frequent  shuddering ;  biting,  acrid
leucorrhoea.

■  Attacks  of  severe  pain  in  stomach  once  or  twice  daily,

gradually  becoming  more  frequent ;  pains  constricting
or  boring,  extend  into  back,  at  times  burning,  stitching,
>  by  belching,  disappear  entirely  after  raising  a  quan-
tity of  thin,  acrid  fluid;  <  by  lightest  food ;  >  at  night;
constant  dull  pain  in  epigastrium  ;  hunger  with  faint-
ness;  no  appetite;  white  tongue;  constipation  and  flatu-
lency; emaciation  and  general  debility.

■  Gnawing,  twisting  griping  in  epigastrium,  stomach  and

upper  abdomen;  stitching,  tearing  into  stomach,  ex-
tending through  to  back  and  to  shoulders ;  pressure
and  bloating  in  abdomen,  with  oppression  of  breathing,
fearfulness,  sighing  and  anxiety  in  chest ;  hot  flushes
from  abdomen  up  into  chest  and  head,  with  red  shin-
ing face  and  vertigo  ;  flushes  of  heat ;  attacks  begin  with
frequent  yawning,  stretching,  belching  and  great  anxiet}^
followed  by  severe  pain  in  epigastrium  and  in  chest,  as


LYCOPODIUM.  104

if  it  would  burst  or  as  if  (ESO])hagus  was  being  clutched
and  twisted;  during  one  attack,  vomiting  of  mucus  and
retraction  of  head ;  attacks  brought  on  by  physical  ex-
ertion, mental  emotion,  cold,  and  particularly  by  eating;
at  one  time  loss  of  appetite,  at  another  canine  hunger ;
stool  dry ;  cold  hands  and  feet ;  frequent  chilliness ;  rest-
less sleep. ^Gastralgia.

I  Body  emaciated  ;  face  bloated,  pale  yellow ;  isolated  warts
and  pimples;  gnawing,  pressing  and  twisting  in  stom-
ach ;  belching ;  nausea ;  retching ;  anxiety,  with  diffi-
cult respiration;  occasionally  vomiting  of  sour  mucus;
sensation  as  if  steam  was  rising  from  stomach  into  head,
with  roaring  in  ears,  vertigo  and  dulness  of  head,  and
redness  of  face;  abdomen  bloated,  hard  ;  stool  dry,  diffi-
cult; urging  to  urinate,  with  scanty,  burning  discharge;
leucorrhoea;  cough,  with  shortness  of  breath  and  stitches
in  sides  under  short  ribs  and  in  middle  of  chest ;  palpi-
tation ;  skin  rough,  covered  with  pimples ;  in  evening,
chilliness,  shivering,  lassitude,  thirst,  followed  by  heat,
with  headache ;  sleep  disturbed  by  dreams ;  easily  tired;
prostrated;  body  covered  with  nettlerash  and  boils.

1  Every  five  or  six  days  violent  spasms;  pain  like  light-
ning strikes  epigastrium,  spreads  like  rays  over  abdomen,
and  shoots  into  all  passages  of  body ;  after  some  hours
of  intense  agony,  pain  goes  off  suddenly;  violent  pains
in  back,  like  gimlets,  running  into  spine;  pulse  120;
tenderness  along  margin  of  liver  and  at  epigastrium.

iCramps  in  stomach,  of  a  contortional  nature,  >  by  bend-
ing ;  brought  on  by  eating  fruit ;  nausea  and  constant
urging  to  swallow ;  flowing  saliva  and  poor  appetite ;
constipation,  with  drawing  pain  in  abdomen ;  headache
>  when  lying  down  ;  morose  disposition.

•  Severe  spasmodic  pains  at  epigastrium,  coming  on  at  two
or  three  every  morning,  waking  her  and  giving  intense
agony ;  hot  brandy  and  water  >  ;  distension  when  in
pain  as  from  incarcerated  flatus ;  pulse  very  weak ;
tongue  furred ;  tenderness  along  margin  of  liver ;  con-
stipation ;  gouty  diathesis. ^Flatulent  indigestion.

I  Pain  under  ribs  and  all  around  waist,  with  shooting  pains
up  shoulder  blades ;  pain  across  stomach  and  straight
down  on  each  side  of  it,  sometimes  very  severe  across
bowels ;  nausea ;  food  often  vomited,  with  a  sour  and
then  bitter  taste ;  waterbrash :  obstinate  constipation ;
painful  hemorrhoids,  with  great  loss  of  blood  ;  coldness
in  extremities ;  cramp  in  legs  and  thighs;  action  of  kid-
neys undue  and  disturbing  at  night ;  dislike  to  bread  ;
sleepless  on  account  of  pain ;  face  pale,  ash}^  yellow.
^Dyspepsia,


t


105  LYCOPODIUM.

■  Dyspepsia,  with  accumulation  of  gases  and  great  reple-

tion after  taking  a  slight  quantity  of  food;  anorexia;
much  thirst;  burning  in  stomach;  longing  for  cold
articles  of  diet,  like  fruits  and  ice  cream ;  rumbling  of
bowels  at  night,  bloating  and  obstinate  constipation  ;  1,
leg  covered  up  to  knee  with  ulcers  of  different  sizes,  dis-
charging yellowish  watery  matter,  with  an  eczematous
eruption  around  them,  and  oedema  of  ankle;  great  itchi-
ness and  throbbing,  <  at  night,  by  rest  and  hot  appli-
cations; >  walking  about,  cold  water  applications  or
bathing  of  parts. ^Chronic  ulcers  on  leg  and  dyspepsia.

■  For  two  hours  after  eating,  spits  up  food,  not  acid;  a  few

mouthfuls  of  food  seem  to  fill  him  to  throat ;  stomach
bloats  a  great  deal  with  flatus,  which  gives  him  much
distress;  constipated;  dull  frontal  headache.  ^Dyspepsia.
I  Chronic  dyspepsia  in  women  with  sallow  face  and  con-
stipation.

■  Flatulent  indigestion;  sleeplessness;  wakes  after  half  an

hour  with  palpitation;  no  organic  disease;  fear  of  death.

■  Atonic  dyspepsia  in  weakly  subjects;  digestion  proceeds

slowly,  with  flatulence  and  acidity.

■  Indigestion  resulting  from  too  free  use  of  farinaceous,

heavy  and  fermentable  diet.

■  ■Gastralgia  and  chronic  gastritis,  occurring  in  peasants,

who  subsisted  mostly  upon  heavy  bread,  sour  small-beer
and  adulterated  coffee.

■  Derangement  of  stomach  from  pastry.

■  Affection  of  liver  and  induration  of  pylorus,  after  sup-

pression of  herpetic  eruption  on  anus  or  scrotum ;  on
taking  least  food  or  drink,  dark  green  bilious  vomiting;
obstinate  constipation;  thirst;  cannot  lie  on  r.  side;
pressing  pain  in  region  of  liver;  emaciation;  hypochon-
driacal; dry  heat  of  skin;  frequent  fainting.

■  Perforating  ulcer;  <  sitting  bent,  >  walking  about  and

when  warm  in  bed.
I  I  Cancer  of  stomach.

Hypochondria. ■Tension as from  a cord making  dia-
phragmatic attachments ;  cannot  stretch  or  stan d  upright.

. ■Tension:  in  hypochondria,  as  from  a  hoop;  in  region  of
liver.

■  Tensive  aching,  <  bending  body  or  pressure  of  hand.

■  Pressure  in  hepatic  region;  pressive  pain  on  breathing.

■  Cannot  eat  to  satiety  because  it  produces  distressing  feel-

ing in  hepatic  region.
■Pressive  pain  in  r.  hypochondrium,  at  times  took  away
breath,  became  a  sticking.

■  ■Sore,  pressive  pain  as  from  a  blow  in  r.  hypochondriac

region;  <  by  touch.


LYCOPODIUM.  106

I  Region  of  liver  sensitive  to  contact;  sore  aching  as  from

a  shock.

I I  Pain  in  L  hypochondriac  region  in  afternoon.
I  Acute  griping  pains  in  1.  hypochondrium.

I  Pain  in  back  and  r.  side,  from  congestion  of  liver.

■  ■Violent  gall  stone  colic.

■  Sharp  pain  in  dorsal  hepatic  region,  in  r.  shoulder  and

arm;  throbbing  frontal  headache;  feet  and  hands  burn-
ing at  times  and  again  feeling  cold  or  numb;  sleepy
during  day;  sleep  disturbed  at  night;  craves  sugar,
starchy  and  sweet  food ;  hemorrhoids;  constipation ;  had
taken  calomel  in  her  youth,  till  "she  had  to  keep  her
mouth  closed  to  prevent  her  teeth  from  falling  out."
;rCold  and  numb;  no  power  to  raise  arms  or  move  hands;
respiration  imperfectly  accomplished  with  great  effort;
a  peculiar  chill  throughout  whole  body,  soon  followed
by  sharp  gnawing  pain  in  region  of  liver,  as  if  twenty
dogs  with  sharp  teeth  were  gnawing  her;  after  a  while
pains  left  liver  to  migrate  from  place  to  place,  until  they
had  traveled  throughout  body;  succeeded  by  numb-
ness and  sleep,  from  which  she  awoke,  unable  to  move
or  speak.

■  Liver  complaints  after  mortification.

■  Frequent  recurring  attacks  of  severe  pressive  and  occa-

sionally stitching  pains  in  r.  side,  extending  towards
epigastrium,  at  times  swelling;  liver  painful  to  pressure
in  spots ;  tongue  coated ;  bitter  taste ;  stool  scanty  ;  mind
depressed;  face  and  neck  covered  with  brown  spots.

■  Hepatitis:  of  children;  chronic  cases;  with  pneumonia;

after  allopathic  treatment,  particularly  when  mercury
has  been  used.

■  Fatty  degeneration  of  liver,  with  concomitant  nervous

hypersemia.

■  Atrophic  nutmeg  liver;  chronic  form  of  hepatitis;  ab-

scesses.

■  iRumbling  of  wind  in  splenic  flexure  of  colon.

■  Wind  gurgles  under  apex  of  heart  in  1.  hypochondrium;

with  oppressed  breathing.

■  Icterus  with  flatulence; retarded  stool; weariness  and

drowsiness.
I  I  Diaphragmitis.
^^  Abdomen. ■  ■  Sensation  of  something  moving  up  and  down
in  stomach  and  bowels.

■  Spasmodic  contraction  in  abdomen.

■  When  turning  on  r.  side  a  hard  body  seems  to  roll  from

navel  to  that  side. ^Ascites.

■  ■Sensation  as  if  something  heavy  was  lying  on  1.  side  of

abdomen,  not  affecting  breathing,  but  constantly  felt
when  walking,  sitting  and  lying.


107  LYCOPODIUM.

I  Hot  pains  flash  across  bowels.

I  Abdominal  plethora,  with  constipation,  in  elderly  people
of  higher  classes  ;  no  desire  for  stool.

I  I  Pulsation  in  abdomen.

i  I  Abdomen  sensitive  to  pressure;  cannot  bear  weight  of
clothes.

■  Tympanitic  distension:  after  eating;  with  cold  feet.

I I  Bloated  feeling  in  abdomen,  with  actual  distension  in
epigastrium,  after  a  meal.

1 1  Flatulence:  after  eating;  sour  vomiting;  diarrhoea;  be-
fore and  after  stool.

■  Tension  and  drawing  in  all  parts  of  abdomen;  bloating

of  abdomen  ;  pressure  in  prsecordia ;  constipation ;  flatu-
lence. ^Affection  of  solar  plexus.

■  While  walking,  rumbling  and  gurgling  in  abdomen  so

loud  that  it  seemed  as  if  those  behind  him  would  hear  it.
1 1  Great  fermentation  in  abdomen; rumbling,  croaking,

rattling ;  with  colic  and  discharge  of  much  flatus.
1 1  Accumulation  of  flatus,  which becomes incarcerated;

pressure  upward,  with  full  feeling,  also  downward  on

rectum  and  bladder.
I  1  Pressure,  drawing,  griping  in  abdomen.

■  Squeezing  pressure  in  abdomen,  so  severe  one  cannot

walk  erect,  but  must  go  bent  over  or  lie  down  ;  produces
dyspnoea.

■  Tensive,  tearing  and  cutting  pains.

■  Cutting  pains  across  abdomen  from  r.  to  left.

■  Colic,  especially  in  region  of  transverse  colon.

■  ■Colicky  pains  in r.  side  of  abdomen,  extending into

bladder,  with  frequent  urging  to  urinate.

■  Enteralgia  and  colic,  accompanied  by  accumulation  of

gas  in  intestines ;  eructation  and  desire,  but  inability  to
go  to  stool.

■  Flatulent  colic,  bloating  and  constipation,  following  dis-

appearance of  eruption  on  skin.
■Screaming  spells  every  afternoon. ^Colic.

■  Flatulency,  with  protrusion  of  navel  in  infants.

■  Balloonlike  distension  of  abdomen,  making  her  ashamed

to  appear  in  public.

■  Heat  and  congestion  of  chest  and  head,  with  vertigo  and

roaring  in  ears ;  sensation  as  if  heart  hung  by  a  thread,
or  as  if  stomach  would  fall  down,  also  sensation  as  of
drops  of  water  falling  down. ^Flatulent  colic.

■  Obstruction  of  bowels.

■  Enteritis  developed  in  children  by  diet  of  milk  and  fari-

naceous substances.

■  A  sudden  mental  impression,  fearing  she  has  broken  her

two  year  old  boy's  arm  by  lifting  him,  caused  gastro-


LYCOPODIUM.  108

enteritis  during  pregnancy ;  intense  pain,  excessive
flatulence,  <  after  4  p.m.  ;  urine  had  a  red  granular
deposit.

■  Pressure  on  hypochondrium  causes  j^ain  in  epigastrium

and  vice  versa ;  chronic  duodenitis.

I  Chill,  vomiting,  pains  in  abdomen;  stitching  in  1.  side  of

chest  into  abdomen  and  loins ;  stitching  in  shoulders,
in  1.  axilla  and  in  arms ;  abdomen  painful  even  to  touch ;
on  lying  on  1.  side,  sensation  as  if  a  weight  like  a  stone
rolled  over  from  navel  to  loin,  causing  this  position  to
be  unbearable ;  pressure  in  abdomen ;  painful  urging
to  urinate;  small,  weak  pulse;  fever,  thirst;  prostration
of  limbs;  sweat  at  night;  stitching  and  tearing  over
epigastric  region  and  into  abdomen  below  navel ;  tear-
ing pain  about  ribs  and  sides  of  abdomen  into  back ;
anxiety ;  burning  in  stomach  and  umbilical  region ;
rumbling  with  increase  of  pain ;  abdomen  sensitive  to
least  touch,  can  bear  no  covering;  fever,  nausea;  in-
effectual efforts  to  yawn ;  hiccough ;  face  sunken ;  de-
pressed, complaining ;  small,  weak  pulse ;  sleeplessness,
^Peritonitis.

I I  Ascites,  from  liver  affections,  after  abuse  of  alcohol.

I  Quiet  and  introspective;  sad,  sensitive ;  face  earthy,
bloated ;  loss  of  appetite ;  nothing  is  j^alatable ;  food
causes  fulness  and  bloating ;  thirst ;  constant  nausea ;
profuse  accumulation  of  saliva  in  mouth ;  occasionally
sour  vomiting ;  constant  pressure  in  stomach  and  heart-
burn ;  abdomen  large,  feels  full  and  heavy ;  hardness
in  epigastric  region,  extending  on  r.  side  toward  back;
region  of  spleen  swollen  and  painful ;  abdomen  tense,
hard,  but  painless  to  touch,  indistinct  fluctuation ;  gur-
gling and  rumbling  in  abdomen  ;  stool  hard  and  tardy  ;
urine  diminished  ;  shortness  of  breath,  <  from  motion,
must  sit  up  ;  upper  extremities  emaciated,  lower  swollen
up  to  abdomen,  and  pit  upon  pressure:  no  sweat;  sleep
restless. ^Dropsy.

■  iBrown  spots  on  abdomen.

iSkin  of  abdomen  painfully  sensitive.
I  Large  swelling  in  psoas  muscle.
I  Pain  in  groin  when  walking.

■  Swelling  of  inguinal  glands,  which  pains  as  though  sup-

purating.
i  I  Hernia  (r.  side) ;  cural  hernia, females;  lacerating  stitches.

■  Wakes  at  night  cross  and  hungry. ^Inguinal  hernia.

■  Pains  in  region  af  abdominal  ring,  outward  pressing;  old

hernia  protrudes.
^  Stool  and  Rectum. ■■Stools: pale,  putrid;  thin,  brown;
pale,  fecal,  mixed  with  hard  lumps; thin,  yellow,  or


109  LYCOPODIUM.

reddish  yellow  fluid ;  shaggy,  reddish  mucus  (urethral
tenesmus,  dysentery);  green,  stringy,  odorless  mucus
(cholera  infantum).

I  Child  sad  and  listless,  or  nervous,  irritable  and  unman-
ageable. ^Diarrhoea.

I  I  Diarrhoea :  during  pregnancy,  with  earthy  color  of  face.

I  Daily,  four  to  six  painless,  yellow,  watery,  undigested
stools  ;  fetid  odor,  much  flatus ;  abdomen  bloated ;  scalp
sweat  during  sleep ;  cross  and  peevish ;  can  scarcely
wait  for  meal,  but  a  few  mouthfuls  satisfy  her ;  rum-
bling of  flatus,  colicky  pains  late  in  afternoon  and
early  in  evening.  ^Diarrhoea  after  suppression  of  skin
eruptions.

I  Chronic  diarrhoea  of  four  years'  standing,  caused  by
drinking  cold  water ;  daily  between  3  and  4  p.m.,  one
or  two  thin,  slightly  bilious  stools,  preceded  by  severe
abdominal  pains ;  belching  after  eating ;  <  from  cold
articles  of  diet,  beer,  milk,  fruit  and  vegetables.

I  Ineffectual  urging  to  stool;  stool  hard,  difficult,  small
and  incomplete.

I  Desire  for  stool  followed  by  pahiful  constriction  of  rectum
and  anus.

I  iStool  very  hard  and  dry,  almost  impossible  to  evacuate ;
spasmodic  constriction  of  anus  preventing  stool.

I  Each  evacuation  produces  most  terrible  pain  in  rectum
and  sometimes  leaves  him  in  a  state  of  syncope  for  a
quarter  of  an  hour ;  even  when  paroxysms  are  lighter
he  remains  several  hours  unable  to  make  least  move-
ment on  account  of  persistence  of  pains ;  mucous  mem-
brane of  rectum  very  much  injected,  excoriated  in  some
places,  with  considerable  varicosity  of  veins ;  on  care-
fully pushing  finger  into  rectum,  acute  pains  and  spas-
modic constriction  of  sphincter ;  loss  of  appetite  and
bad  humor. ^Chronic  constipation.

■  Narrowing  of  rectum,  which  causes  a  protrusion  during

stool,  developing  hemorrhoids ;  tearing  pain  in  rectum,
arresting  breath ;  hemorrhoids  surrounded  by  itching
eruption,  painful  to  touch ;  great  fatigue  after  stool ;
varices  most  painful  when  sitting ;  obstinate  constipa-
tion.

■  Constipation: of  infants,  restores  contractility  of  intes-

tines ;  in  those  who  are  tormented  with  night  pollutions,
or  addicted  to  masturbation  ;  after  repeated  affections  of
peritoneum,  with  urinary  complications.

■  Before  stool: strong  desire  or  desire  wanting;  flatulent

colic ;  pain  at  anus ;  straining  efforts,  often  followed  by
tenesmus ;  chilliness  in  rectum  ;  colic.

■  During  stool:  biting  and  burning  at  anus;  chilliness;


LYCOPODIUM.  110

colic ;  distressing  pressure  in  rectum  ;  tenesmus ;  pain
in  rectum,  with  ringing  in  ears ;  burning  and  stinging
in  rectum  ;  pain  in  back  as  if  broken  ;  bursting  pain  in
abdomen ;  pain  in  stomach ;  headache ;  discharge  of
blood.
I  Stitching  and  burning  at  stool  even  when  feces  are  not
hard.

■  After  stool  :  sense  of  insufficient  evacuation  (dysenteric

stools),  excessive  and  painful  accumulation  of  flatus ;
contractive  pain  in  perineum  ;  uterine  cramps,  or  lassi-
tude ;  burning  in  rectum ;  tiredness,  particularly  in
thighs  ;  heat  and  pressure  in  thighs  and  head.
I  Rectum  contracts  and  protrudes  during  hard  stool,  with
stitches  in  rectum.

■  Tearing  in  rectum,  so  that  it  arrests  breathing.

■  Cutting  in  rectum  and  stitches  in  bladder.
■Twinging  in  rectum.

■  Continued  burning  pain  in  rectum.

■  Cramps  in  rectum  and  small  of  back,  like  labor  pains.

■  Aching  and  pressure  in  rectum;  <  at  night,  with  bleed-

ing piles.

■  Piles  which  contain  an  immense  amount  of  blood,  more

than  size  of  vein  would  warrant ;  also  piles  which  do
not  mature,  but  which,  from  partial  absorption  of  con-
tents, remain  as  hard,  bluish  lumps.
1  Hemorrhoids :  with  pain  and  itching  at  anus,  and  fre-
quent, profuse  discharge  of  blood ;  swell  and  protrude
and  bleed,  even  when  there  is  no  constipation.

■  Varices  protrude;  painful  when  sitting  and  to  touch.
Itching  and  tension  at  anus  in  evening  in  bed.

■  ■  Great  tendency  to  excoriations  about  anus,  which  bleed

easily ;  itching  and  moist,  tender  eruption.
^^  Urinary  Organs. ■■Aching  in  kidney  <  before  and  >
after  urinating. ^Diabetes  mellitus.

■  Thirst,  drinking  daily  about  twenty -two  tumblerfuls  of

water; flow  of  urine  largely  increased  and  of  a  pale,,
watery  color. ^Diabetes  insipidus.

■  After  catching  cold,  violent  colic;  sensation  as  if  he  was

bound  up  and  would  burst ;  ineffectual  belching  and
retching ;  pain  concentrated  on  r.  side  near  hip,  not  ex-
tending beyond  median  line;  painful  spot  extremely
sensitive  to  touch,  rest  of  abdomen  not  painful  to  press-
ure ;  heavy  sensation  in  bladder,  burning  on  urina-
nation ;  gurgling  in  abdomen  and  noise  as  if  small
bladders  of  air  were  bursting,  followed  by  much  relief
and  finally  copious,  moderately  thin  stool ;  six  days
afterwards,  discharge  of  a  porous  stone  as  large  as  half
bean,  with  much  sand  and  sediment. ^Renal  colic.


Ill  LYCOPODIUM.

I  Stiffness  in  renal  regions,  especially  on  r.  side;  worried
by  noise  or  interruption  in  business;  brings  up  wind
after  eating,  mentally  depressed  and  physically  weak
till  it  comes  up ;  passes  small  quantities  of  fine  red
sand. ^Gravel.

■  Periodical  discharge  of  gravel  and  small  calculi ;  pain  in

1.  kidney  and  ureter.

■  Frequently  compelled  to  rise  at  night  to  urinate;  on  uri-

nating, cutting  pains  in  glans  penis  and  abdomen;
urine  turbid,  loamy,  depositing  a  thick,  mucous  sedi-
ment, occasionally  bloody ;  when  evacuating  bowels,
must  press  very  hard  although  stool  is  not  hard ;  burn-
ing in  palms  of  hands  and  soles  of  feet. ^Gravel.

■  ■Renal  colic,  particularly  in  r.  ureter  to  bladder; red

sand  in  urine.
■Vesical  calculi,  small,  round  and  rough,  with  hsematuria.

■  After  taking  cold,  frequent  desire  to  urinate;  tenesmus

of  neck  of  bladder;  dull  pain  in  hypogastrium  and
loins ;  brick  dust  sediment  in  urine. ^Acute  cystitis.

■  Gums  ulcerate,  teeth  feel  loose  and  ache;  pain  in  bowels

after  eating,  moving  about  as  from  flatus  ;  stool  difficult
to  pass,  with  much  flatus ;  urine  very  hot,  formerly  sedi-
ment, but  since  so  hot,  none ;  pain  in  small  of  back
when  standing. ^Cystitis.

■  ■Turbid,  milky  urine,  with  offensive  purulent  sediment;

dull  pressing  in  region  of  bladder  and  abdomen,  dispo-
sition to  calculi. ^Cystitis.
I  Bearing  down  over  bladder,  frequent  desire  to  urinate  ;
pains  <  lying  down,  especially  at  night ;  >  from  horse-
back riding.

■  Feeling  of  heaviness  in  bladder;  burning  during  mic-

turition.

■  Dull,  pressing  pain  in  region  of  bladder  and  abdomen.
■Stitches  :  in  bladder ;  in  neck  of  bladder.

■  Frequent htematuria; daily deposit  of  large  clots of

blood  in  urine ;  obstinate  constipation ;  almost  total
paralysis  of  feet.

■  Hsernaturia :  I.  kidney  affected  ;  pain  in  back  before  uri-

nating ;  sediment  of  red  sand ;  from  gravel  or  chronic
catarrh ;  discharge  painless.

■  No  urine  secreted.

■  Retention  of  urine,  violent  pain  in  back,  urine  flowing  in

fits  and  starts.

■  Urine  scanty,  with  red  sediment.

BBUrging  to  urinate:  must  wait  long  before  it  will  pass,
or  inability,  with  constant  bearing  down ;  supports  ab-
domen with  hands.

■  In  children  urging  to  pass  water,  with  impossibility  to


LYCOPODIUM.  112

pass  it;  cry  impatiently  and  grasp  abdomen;  red  sand
in  diaper,  or  urine  may  be  pale  and  clear.

■  Pressing  in  perineum  near  anus,  during  and  after  uri-

nating. ^Enlarged  prostate.

■  Frequent  desire  to  urinate,  with  discharge  of  large  quanti-

ties of  pale  urine.

■  Frequent  micturition  during  night,  scanty  and  infrequent

discharges  through  day.

■  Involuntary  micturition.

■  Urine  of strong, pungent  odor,  dribbling away from

bladder  continually  during  each  afternoon  and  evening,
commencing  at  4  p.m. ^Incontinence  of  urine.

■  Long  lasting  incontinence  of  urine  resulting  from  fright

during  coition.

■  Strangury,  urine  scanty,  dark  red  or  albuminous.

■  Urine:  pale,  especially  during  night;  red,  burning;  very

hot ;  foamy ;  high  colored,  turbid ;  dark  and  turbid ;  with
yellow  or  reddish  deposit  of  sand  ;  contains  red  crys-
tals, as  if  mingled  with  brick  dust ;  turbid,  thick,  milky,
depositing  a  thick,  purulent  sediment  of  a  most  nause-
ating smell ;  greasy  pellicle  on  surface.
I  I  Itching  in  urethra  during  and  after  micturition.

■  During  urination :  soreness  or  burning  in  urethra  and

glans ;  jammed  feeling  in  perineum ; cutting  pain  in
abdomen.
■After  urination  :  crawling,  burning  in  urethra  and  blad-
der ;  jerking,  cutting  in  urethra.
^^  Male  Sexual  Organs. ■■Sexual  desire  and  power  dimin-
ished.

■  ■Impotence :  penis  small,  cold  and  relaxed  ;  after  onanism

or  sexual  excesses ;  from  poisoning  with  chlorine.

■  ■Erections  feeble;  falls  asleep  during  an  embrace.

■  Discharge  of  prostatic  juice  without  an  erection.

■  ■Weak  and  imperfect  erections;  excessive  and  exhaust-

ing pollutions  ;  aversion  to  coition,  or  too  easily  excited ;
too  early  escape  of  semen.

■  Loss  of  sexual  feeling:  in  old  men,  or  strong  desire  with-

out being  able  to  have  an  erection ;  after  abuse  of  copaiba
in  gonorrhoea.

■  Aching  of  inner  surface  of  prepuce; yellowish  humor

behind  corona  glandis.

■  Four  white,  pedunculated,  dry  condylomata  on  mucous

surface  of  prepuce,  painless  and  not  sensitive  to  touch  ;
after  use  of  mercury  in  gonorrhoea.

■  Chancre  on  inner  surface  of  prepuce;  phimosis;  three  or

four  condylomatous  chancres  around  anus.

■  Moist  condylomata  on  penis.

■  Enlargement  of  prostate  gland ;  prostatitis.


113  LYCOPODIUM.

I  Chronic  orchitis;  pain  in  perineum  when  sitting;  sore-
ness between  scrotum  and  thigh ;  dropsical  swelling  of
genital  organs.

■  Sticking  itching,  especially  on  scrotum.

I  i  Soreness  between  scrotum  and  thigh  ;  intertrigo.
^Female  Sexual  Organs, i Nymphomania.

■  Cutting  across  hypogastrium,  r.  to  left.

I I  Ovaries  diseased:  inflammation;  neuralgia;  tumors;
dropsy ;  burning  or  boring  stitches,  first  r.  then  left.

1 1  Uterus  diseased  :  inflammation  ;  physometra,  wind  dis-
charged from  vagina ;  cancer ;  dropsy.

■  Menses:  delay  of  first  menses;  profuse,  protracted ;  flow

partly  black,  clotted,  partly  bright  red  or  partly  serum;
with  laborlike  pains  followed  by  swooning ;  four  days
too  early ;  inclined  to  be  late,  with  sadness ;  reappearing
every  six  or  eight  days  ;  suppressed  from  fright.
■Before  menses :  sad,  chilly,  abdomen  bloated ;  melan-
cholia; pain  in  abdomen ;  delirium,  with  weeping;  di-
lated pupils ;  rigors  with  discomfort  and  uneasiness;  cold-
ness and  heaviness  of  feet  and  legs;  flatulent  distension
of  abdomen ;  chill  and  heat  at  night ;  ill  humor  and  dis-
position to  weep  ;  headache  ;  severe  backache ;  swelling
of  feet ;  nausea  and  faintness.

■  During  menses:  pain  in  abdomen  and  loins;  itching  of

vulva; nausea;  acid  in  mouth;  headache;  tiredness,
faintness ;  swelling  of  feet.

■  After  menses:  leucorrhoea;  stitches  in  head.
I  Dy  smenorrhoea.

■Menstrual  irregularities  connected  with  ovarian  enlarge-
ment.

■  Leucorrhoea:  in  starts;  milky;  bloody;  <  before  a  full

moon;  corroding;  sensation  of  pressure  through  vagina
when  stooping.

■  Dryness  of  vagina;  burning  in  vagina  during  coition.
■Metrorrhagia.

■  A  rumbling  begins  in  upper  abdomen  and  descends  to

lower  part,  when  a  flow  of  blood  follows,  and  so  on  suc-
cessively. ^Uterine  hemorrhage.

■  Increased  discharge  of  blood  from  genitals  during  every

passage  of  hard  or  soft  stool.

■  Delay  of  first  menses.

■  Chronic  suppression  of  menses,  from  tuberculosis  or  cancer.

■  Menses  absent  a  year;  has aborted  within  this  time;

small  ulcers  on  os  uteri ;  leucorrhoea  yellow  and  thin  ;
constant  regurgitation  of  food,  sour  and  bitter;  vomit-
ing, with  aching  pain  in  epigastrium  shortly  after  eat-
ing; uses  pills  for  constipation ;  large  goitre,  r.  side,  pain-
less; pains  in  lumbar  region  and  nape  of  neck ;  all  pains
tend  to  r.  side  (goitre  improved).

VOL.  VII.---8.


LYCOPODIUM.  114

■  Sensation  of  pressure  through  vagina  wlien  stooping.

■  Chronic  dryness  of  vagina.

■  Burning  of  vagina  during  and  after  coition.

■  Neuralgia  of  vagina.

■Serous  cysts  in  vagina;  indurations;  fistulse.

■  Itching,  burning,  gnawing  in  vagina.

■  ■Discharge  of  flatus  from  vagina. ^Physometra.

■  Occasional  sliarp  pains  running  around  labia.
■Varices  of  genitals  ;  erectile  tumors ;  polypi.

■  Dry,  pediculated,  painless  condylomata.

■  Inflammation  of  external  genitals.

■  Nipples  sore,  fissured  or  covered  with  scurf;  bleed  easily;

stitches  and  burning.

■  Hard,  burning  nodosities  in  mammse  ;  stitches.
I  I  Milk  in  breasts  without  being  pregnant.

^*  Pregnancy.  Parturition.  Lactation.  ■  During  first
month  of  pregnancy,  great  nausea ;  complete  anorexia ;
swelling  of  veins  of  ankles,  tearing  pain  on  motion.

■  Third  month  of  pregnancy :  tendency  to  accumulation

of  acrid  water  in  stomach,  with  cramps;  constipation.
■During  fifth  month  of  gestation  :  violent  cramplike  pains
in  bladder ;  inclination  to  pass  water,  but  unable  to  do
so ;  distension  of  abdomen  from  incarcerated  flatus.
^Strangury.

■  Foetus  seems  to  be  turning  somersaults  within  womb.

■  Varices  of  pregnant  women,

■  Disposition  to  miscarriage;  moles.

■Long  continued  uterine  hemorrhage,  before  or  after  abor-
tion.

■During  labor  pains  must  keep  in  constant  motion ;  walks
the  room  weeping ;  labor  pains  run  upward ;  >  by
placing  foot  against  a  support  and  pressing  and  relax-
ing alternately,  so  as  to  agitate  whole  body.

I  1  When  lying  in  bed  feels  as  if  she  would  die  from  weak-
ness ;  lower  jaw  drops ;  breathing  slow  and  through
mouth  ;  eyes  half  open  ;  when  walking  is  obliged  to  let
her  hands  hang  down  ;  bones  of  lower  extremities  pain-
ful ;  sudden  weakness  coming  on,  even  when  sitting.
^Labor.

■Spasmodic  contractions  of  cervix,  pains  unbearable,  with
jactitatory  movements  of  body,  "  dancing  up  and  down  "
during  pains. ^Labor  pains.

■Three  days  after  fifth  confinement,  abdomen  enormously
distended;  pulse  small,  not  rapid;  awoke  about  mid-
night from  suffocation,  with  congestive  headache;  head
seemed  as  if  it  would  burst,  nose  bled  a  little ;  feet  cold,
lochia  stopped ;  aphthae  after  every  confinement ;  rapid
labors.


115  LYCOPODIUM.

I  Feels  as  though  hot  balls  dropped  from  each  breast
through  to  back,  rolling  down  back,  along  each  leg  and
dropping  off  heels ;  this  alternated  with  sensation  as  if
balls  of  ice  followed  same  course. ^Childbed  fever,

■  Swelling  of  foot  and  limb;  saphena  vein  swollen  very

large  and  very  tender,  can  be  distinctly  traced  all  the
way  up. ^Phlegmasia  dolens.

I  Child  draws  so  much  blood  from  nipples  that  when  it
vomits  it  seems  to  be  vomiting  blood.

I  Stitches  and  burning  pains  in  nipples  and  discharge  from
them  of  blood  and  water.
^  Voice  and  Larynx.  Trachea  and  Bronchia,  i  Hoarse-
ness :  feeble,  husky  voice ;  dryness  in  windpipe ;  re-
maining after  croup ;  loose  cough  by  day,  suffocating
spells  at  night,

I  I  In  last  stage  of  croup,  loose  cough  in  daytime  and  suf-
focative fits  at  night;  in  general,  suffocative  paroxysms
alternating  with  free  intervals. ^Croup.

I  I  Formication  in  windpipe  at  night.

I  I  Every  evening  constant  tickling  in  throat. ^Chronic

bronchitis.

■  Bronchitis : with  hepatic  disturbances; accompanying

influenza ;  febrile  chill  with  wheezing,  particularly  on
expiration ;  lemon  colored  exiDCctoration ;  pressure  in
stomach  and  liver ;  continual  pain  under  r.  ribs  and  in
epigastrium,  with  yellowish  color  of  face ;  greyish  yel-
low or  dirty  expectoration,  with  stertor  and  stitches  in
chest;  respiration  short  before  and  during  paroxysms
of  coughing ;  as  soon  as  cough  ceases  respiration  is  more
normal;  in  old  people,  with  threatened  paralysis  of
lungs.
^^  Respiration.  1 1  Child  wants  to  yawn,  but  cannot,  this
makes  it  cry.

I I  Shortness  of  breath  :  during  sleep  (lung  affections) ;
from  every  exertion.

■  Oppression  of  breathing:  <  walking  in  open  air,  with

weakness ;  <  from  deep  breathing.
1 1  Difficult  respiration:  as  if  he  had  inhaled  sulphur  fumes;

as  if  chest  was  constricted  by  cramps ;  <  lying  on  back.
I  Whizzing  breathing in  daytime,  with  sensation  of  too

much  mucus  in  chest ;  loud  rattling.
I  Likes  to  go  about  without  any  covering  on  head ;  desire

for  open  air ;  anxiety  during  stormy  weather ;  general

aggravation  at  time  of  menses,  which  have  been  absent

for  six  years ;  depression  of  spirits ;  when  alone,  fearful

despondent,  lachrymose. ^Dyspnoea.
^  Cough. I  I  Irritation  from  deep  breathing,  from  stretching

out  throat  and  empty  swallowing.


LYCOPODIUM.  116

iCough:  hard  and  dry,  day  and  night,  with  painfulness
of  head  and  region  of  stomach ;  from  irritation  in
trachea,  as  from  fumes  of  sulphur  ;  day  and  night,
in  feeble,  emaciated  boys ;  with  difficult  respiration ;,
tight,  affecting  stomach  and  diaphragm,  mostly  before
sunset;  at  night,  with  some  expectoration;  very  over-
powering in  evening  before  going  to  sleep,  as  if  larynx
was  tickled  with  a  feather,  with  scanty  expectoration ;.
with  thick  expectoration ;  loose,  rattling,  expectoration
not  easy,  remains  in  lungs  tenaciously ;  sputa  thick,,
yellowish,  greenish.

llCough  <:  from  4  to  8  p.m.;  on  alternate  days ;  from
exertion ;  from  stretching  arms  out ;  stooping  or  lying
down;  lying  on  (1.)  side ;  from  eating  and  drinking  cold
things;  in  wind  or  in  warm  room.

I  Cough  >  :  lying  on  back  or  sitting  up.

II  With  cough,  shattering  as  from  a  shock  in  temples,  and
at  same  time  in  chest.

I  Cough  dry  and  hoarse,  day  and  night ;  coughs  also  in  his.
sleep,  then  violent  dry  cough  in  morning ;  great  emacia-
tion. ICough  from  bronchial  irritation.

iCough  almost  continual,  night  and  day,  a  deep  short
cough,  with  occasional  expectoration  during  day  of
thick  grey  matter,  in  morning  greenish  and  more  pro-
fuse ;  hoarseness  and  dyspnoea,  constant  desire  to  clear
trachea ;  cannot  lie  on  sides,  especially  1. ;  dulness  in
upper  part  of  1.  lung  and  mucous  rattling  during
respiration  ;  upper  part  of  lung  impervious  to  air,  ex-
cept on  full  inspiration,  when  there  is  a  prolonged
paroxysm  of  coughing ;  irregular  flushes  of  heat,  with
sweat ;  weariness,  limbs  feel  heavy ;  easily  fatigued  and
out  of  breath  ;  mind  cheerful. ^Chronic  cough.

I  After  neglected  pneumonia:  cough,  shortness  of  breath,,
profuse,  thick  greenish  yellow,  salty,  very  offensive'
expectoration  and  rattling  chest.

IS  Sputa :  thick  yellow,  purulent ;  greyish  yellow  or  dirty;,
fetid  pus  or  mucus  streaked  with  blood ;  green  in
morning ;  tasting  salty  ;  bloody ;  small  greenish  yellow
masses  of  mucus ;  pieces  of  granular  mucus ;  tastes  like
old  cheese ;  large  quantities  of  pus.
^  Inner  Chest  and  Lungs,  i  Oppression  of  chest :  with  short-
ness of  breathing ;  <  in  open  air  and  after  eating ;  as
if  too  full ;  with  a  feeling  of  internal  rawness ;  tearing
under  clavicles,  tension.

■Sensation  as  if  lungs  were  full  of  mucus;  whistling
sound  in  trachea  on  inspiration.

■Aching  with  or  without  soreness,  producing  dyspnoea
and  much  mental  depression.


117  LYCOPODIUM.

I  Dull  aching  pain  all  over  lungs,  as  if  they  had  been
overworked,  with  feeling  of  constriction  of  chest  as
from  a  tight  waistcoat.

I  Stitches  in  1.  side  of  chest,  also  during  inspiration,  and
extending  to  back.

■  Cutting  pains  from  1.  scapula  into  chest,  catching  breath;

feels  ver}^  ill  and  exhausted,  intolerable  thirst  at  4  p.m.

■  Feeling  of  continuous  pressure  in  1.  chest.
■Tension  as  of  a  hoop  on  chest.

■  Bolstered  up  in  bed;  face  bluish  white ;  nose  pinched;

eyes  staring ;  great  dyspnoea ;  rattling  and  fine  crepita-
tion in  both  lungs ;  cough,  which  had  been  persistent,
had  ceased ;  mouth  and  throat  filled  with  ropy  mucus ;
loss  of  voice,  tongue  dark  red,  with  an  ulcer  size  of  Lima
bean,  in  centre;  temperature  103.7;  respiration  60;
pulse  145 ;  soreness  all  over ;  eleven  very  offensive  and
watery  stools  during  last  twelve  hours ;  no  appetite ;
little  thirst. ^Broncho-pneumonia.

■  ■Catarrh  on  chest  of  infants;  rattling  on  chest,  w^hich

seems  full  of  mucus.
•Persistent  catarrh :  with  much  general  weakness,  takes
cold  easily ;  cold  air  chills  him  through  and  through ;
copious  expectoration.

■  Dilatation  of  air  tubes;  senile  catarrh.

•  Pneumonia,  r.  side;  extensive  infiltration;  respiration
wanting.

■  Nervous  irritability;  no  heat  of  head  or  redness  of  face;

without  relief;  red,  dry  tongue;  frequent  irritation  to
cough,  with  scanty,  difficult  grey  expectoration  ;  rattling
on  chest ;  dyspnoea,  with  anxious  expression.  ^Pneu-
monia.

■  Lies  on  1.  side,  legs  drawn  up  and  abdominal  muscles

relaxed;  countenance  anxious;  respirations  50  to  60  per
minute ;  skin  burning  hot ;  tongue  coated  brown,  red
at  tip  and  margins ;  nostrils  in  rapid  fanlike  motion ;
answers  quick,  anxious  and  tremulous ;  mind  wander-
ing ;  great  sensitiveness  to  pressure  over  r.  side  of  chest,
particularly  over  liver,  extending  also  over  abdomen ;
pulse  120  to  130 ;  great  thirst ;  cough  frequent  and
hacking,  provoked  by  putting  tongue  far  out ;  expec-
toration streaked  with  blood,  rusty  and  tenacious  ;  ex-
tensive bronchophony,  extending  to  under  r.  shoulder
blade ;  crepitation,  absence  of  vesicular  breathing.
^Pneumonia.

■  Slight  fever,  no  pain;  not  much  cough;  expectoration

scanty,  grey;  extreme  dyspnoea  on  taking  least  exer-
cise; 1.  lung  hepatized  from  apex  to  base.  ^Latent
pneumonia.


LYCOPODIUM.  118

I  Right  side  most  affected,  sounding  as  if  entire  paren-
chyma were  softened;  raises  a  whole  mouthful  of  mucus
at  a  time,  of  light  rusty  color,  stringy  and  easily  separ-
ated ;  fanlike  motion  of  alae  nasi. ^Pneumonia.

I  Cough  <  from  4  to  6  p.m.;  pale  face  and  deep  wrinkles,
but  debility  not  so  great  as  he  fancies ;  when  he  gets  up
and  stirs  about  it  is  not  so  bad  as  he  thinks.  ^Pneu-
monia.

I  Neglected  pneumonia;  especially  with  continuing  hepa-

tization and  purulent  sputum  ;  typhoid  pneumonia.

I I  Pneumonia,  with  raising  of  mouthfuls  of  mucus  at  a
time,  of  a  light  rust  color,  stringy  and  easily  separated.

iMuch  pain  in  lungs ;  severe  hacking  cough  ;  eyes  bright
and  glassy ;  sunken  cheeks ;  fever  fits,  with  bright  red
spots  on  cheeks;  very  restless  at  night;  profuse  night
sweats ;  dull  sound  to  percussion  over  apices  of  lungs  ;
at  4  P.M.  each  day  has  a  fever  fit  and  is  much  worse.
^Pulmonary  disease.

I  After  pneumonia,  threatened  phthisis;  great  debility;
voice  weak,  can  utter  only  a  few  words  at  a  time  ;  can-
not take  a  deep  breath ;  severe  cough  day  and  night,
with  profuse  expectoration ;  hectic  fever  with  clammy
night  sweats.

I  After  typhoid  pneumonia,  threatened  phthisis;  suspicious
cough  profuse  with  expectoration  of  pus ;  burning  heat

I  Chronic  inflammatory  condition  of  anterior  portion  of  1.
lung;  threatened  tuberculosis.

I  Face  pale,  sunken;  severe  hiccough  about  every  half

hour;  much  sneezing;  violent  cough  day  and  night,
with  copious  greenish  white  expectoration,  oppressed
breathing,  must  rest  in  sitting  posture ;  profuse  night
sweats  over  whole  body,  <  at  night,  and  somewhat
offensive  on  chest  and  back. ^Phthisis  pituitosa.

I I  Threatened  paralysis  of  lungs.
llHydrothorax.

I  Chronic  affection  of  diaphragm,  probably  due  to  inflam-

mation.

iSense  of  constriction  from  r.  side  all  around  short  ribs;
cannot  stretch  himself,  or  lie  on  back,  or  stand  up-
right. ^Diaphragmitis.
^  Heart,  Pulse  and  Circulation,  i  Palpitation,  evening,  in
bed  ;  anxious  at  night  on  turning  over  in  bed  ;  <  after
eating,  during  digestion.

■  Heart's  action  muflled  and  indistinct. Albuminuria.

I I  Hy dropericardium.

I  Cramp  and  constriction  in  chest,  cannot  get  breath;
stitches  beneath  short  ribs,  extending  to  small  of  back


119  LYCOPODIUM.

and  shoulders ;  sharp  pains  shooting  into  heart ;  sensa-
tion of  stoppage  of  circulation  at  night,  with  fright  and
then  sweat ;  pulse  quick  and  unsteady.  ^Angina  pec-
toris.

■  Dyspnoea  and  sudden  cyanosis  on  sitting  down ;  hasty

eating  and  drinking;  transient  attacks  of  colic;  two
pappy  stools  in  evening  before  going  to  bed  ;  lies  upon
r.  side,  but  always  finds  himself  upon  back  when  wak-
ing up.  ^Heart  affection.
■Rheumatic  fever,  with  severe  cardiac  complications ;  in-
tense dyspnoea;  dilatation  of  alse  nasi ;  great  flatulence;
epigastric  constriction  ;  profuse  sour  sweats.

■  Typhoid  symptoms;  neck  drawn  towards  r.  side;  trem-

bling palpitation ;  pulsating  tearing  in  region  of  heart ;
stitches  in  1.  side  of  chest. ^Heart  disease.

■  Excitement  of  circulation,  in  evening,  with  restlessness

and  trembling.
I  I  Pulse  unaltered ;  accelerated  only  after  eating  or  in  eve-
ning.

■  Sensation  as  if  circulation  stood  still,  or  ebullitions  of

blood.

■  Acceleration  of  pulse,  with  coldness  of  face  and'  feet.

^Pernicious  intermittents  and  other  diseases.
^^  Outer  Chest. ■Brownish  yellow  spots  on  chest;  liver  spots.
I  I  Tearing  and  tension  under  clavicles,  and  stitch  on  deep
inspiration.

■  Hard  lumj)  in  1.  breast  and  beneath  arm,  with  burning

pain  (after  Laches). ^Cancer.
I  I  Itching  on  chest.
^^  Neck  and  Back. lOne  side  of  neck  stiff  and  swollen.

■  ■Stiffness  of  1.  side  of  neck,  head  drawn  to  1.  side. ^Tor-

ticollis.

■  Tensive  pain  and  stiffness  in  nape  of  neck  and  shoulders.
I  I  Pressure  in  a  small  spot  in  nape  of  neck.

I  I  Darting  in  r.  cervical  muscles  from  below  upward.
I  1  Sensation  in  back  of  neck  as  if  cords  were  breaking.

■  Carotid  aneurism.

■  Bronchocele  on  r.  side,  tense,  smooth,  shining  appearance,

with  feeling  of  constriction  in  tumor,  as  if  held  in  some
unyielding  envelope,  while  not  very  large.

■  After  catching  cold,  swelling  on  neck,  followed  by  suppu-

ration, thereupon  formation  of  callous,  fistulous  open-
ings, from  which  oozed  a  serous  discharge.

■  Large  clusters  of  red  pimples  around  neck,  with  violent

itching.

■  Swelling  of  cervical  glands.

■  ■Burning as from  hot coals between  scapulae, < in

Summer.


LYCOPODIUM.  120

I  Rising  of  warmth  along  spine.

■  Drawing  and  aching  between  scapulae.

I  I  Sticking  pain  in  back,  extending  to  r.  scapula.
I  I  Drawing  sticking  pain  in  back.

I  1  Throbbing  and  pulsating  in  back  ;  chilliness.

I I  Severe  backache  >  by  passing  urine.

I  i  Pain  in  back  and  r.  side,  from  congestion  of  liver.

I  Violent  pain  in  small  of  back  in  morning  on  rising  from

bed,  so  that  she  was  unable  to  move,  during  menses.
I  Pain  in  small  of  back,  while  lying  on  back,  with  great

weariness,  going  down  to  feet ;  violent  while  sitting,  not

allowing  to  straighten  one's  self.

I  I  Stitches  in  back  towards  small  of  back,  when  sitting.

I I  Pain  in  small  of  back  as  if  it  would  break;  with  hard
stool  and  colic  as  if  intestines  would  burst.

I  Pain  in  small  of  back  and  stitches  in  both  hips  and  in  1.

chest  at  night.
I  Pain  and  stiffness  in  small  of  back  (at  night).

■  Stitches  in  small  of  back,  especially  when  rising  from

stooping.
iPain  in  small  of  back,  extending  into  thighs.

■  Pain  in  sacral  region,  <  rising  from  a  seat.

I  I  Sensation  as  if  flesh  was  loose  on  lower  part  of  back.

■  Tearing  in  sacrum,  kidneys  and  back,  especially  near

spine.

■  Lumbago  ii  Bryonia  has  not  sufficiently  relieved  and  pain

is  <  from  slightest  motion.
^^  Upper  Limbs.  ■  Axillary  glands  swollen;  fetid  sweat  in
axillae.
■Boils  in  and  about  axillae ;  scurfy,  itching,  moist  herpetic
eruption ;  pus  continues  to  discharge  from  boils  for  an
unusually  long  time,  they  no  sooner  heal  than  fresh
ones  appear.

■  Rheumatic  tension  in  r.  shoulder  joint.

■Tearing  pains :  in  shoulder  and  elbow  joints  during  rest,
not  in  motion ;  from  neck  to  elbow,  also  in  whole  arm  ;
in  hands,  only  while  in  bed.

I  I  Pain  as  from  bruises  in  scapulae,  shoulders  and  upper
arms,  <  when  at  rest.

■  Twitching  in  arms  and  shoulders.

■  ■  Arms  and  fingers  go  to  sleep  easily ;  numbness  of  hands.

■  Pain  in  bones  of  arms  at  night.

■Weakness  of  arms  when  at  work,  and  conversely  they
feel  powerless,  yet  he  can  work.

■  Great  dryness  of  hands,  especially  of  palms.

I  1  Drawing  pain  in  inner  surface  of  upper  arms ;  extend-
ing over  elbows  along  forearms  and  wrists.
■Pain  as  from  a  sprain  in  r.  wrist  joint.


121  LYCOPODIUM.

I  I  Inflammatory  redness  in  all  finger  joints.  _

I  Finger  joints  much  distorted  and  filled  with  chalk  de-
posits ;  profuse,  ic}^  cold  sweat  of  affected  hands  and  fin-
gers to  extent  of  several  drops  a  minute,  and  this  in  hot-
test day  of  July. ^Chronic  rheumatic  gout.

I  I  Small  boils  on  hands.

I  Inflammation  extending  over  whole  hand;  bluish  red
swelling;  bluish  blisters  filled  with  red  or  yellow  fluid.
^Panaritium. ^Chilblains.

■  Hands  constantly  hot,  which  is  very  troublesome  to  her.
I  Hands  feel  numb,  dull  tingling as  if  they  had  been

asleep ;  sensation  of  heaviness  and  feeling  of  enlarge-
ment of  hands ;  almost  everything,  even  hot  things,  feel
cold  to  touch ;  when  writing  or  driving,  the  pen  or  reins
drop  from  hands  unnoticed ;  no  loss  of  motor  power.
^Anaesthesia  of  hands.
I  1  Warts  on  fingers,  hands  and  arms.

■  Great  dryness  of  skin  of  hands.
I  I  Itching  pimples  on  hands.

I  I  White  scaly  tetter  on  back  of  hand  and  fingers.

■  Psoriasis  palmaris.

■  Stiff'ness  of  fingers  from  arthritic  nodosities.
I  I  Itching  pimples  between  fingers.

■  Felons  with  many  constitutional  symptoms;  panaritium,

with  gastric  affections.

■  Hands  swollen  and  hard;  fingers  swollen  stiff"  and  ex-

tended ;  back  of  hand  dark  red  and  burning  hot,  palm
of  hand  greyish  yellow,  irregularly  swollen,  hard  and
covered  with  small  ulcers;  large,  painful,  hard,  hot
swelling  between  index  and  middle  fingers,  stitches  like
a  thorn  on  touch  ;  face  pale,  greyish  yellow ;  expression
of  eyes  dull ;  somnolent ;  about  1  or  2  p.m.,  coldness  of
feet  extending  over  ankles,  as  if  standing  in  cold  water,
followed  by  chilliness  up  legs,  extending  into  back  ;
heaviness  and  confusion  of  head,  with  vertigo  and
pressing  stitching  pain  in  forehead,  extending  over
whole  head,  particularly  in  vertex  and  occiput,  with
constant  roaring  in  ears ;  in  nape  of  neck  and  shoul-
ders frequent  tearing,  pressing  pains,  with  oppression
and  shortness  of  breath,  particularly  when  lying;  dry
cough;  in  morning,  yellow  expectoration,  in  which
there  are  often  small  particles  like  rice,  or  lumps  as
large  as  a  pea,  pearly  in  color.  ^Rheumatism.
^^  Lower  Limbs. ■  Boils  on  nates.

■Suppurative stage, when wounds are very irritable;

burning  pains. ^Hip  disease.
■  Coxalgia,  with  violent  jerks  of  limbs; child awakens
cross,  or  with  a  scream.


LYCOPODIUM.  122

I  Pains  in  1.  hip  joint  on  motion.
I  I  Pains  as  from  a  sprain  in  hip.

■  Rheumatic  tension  in  1.  hip,

I  Frequent  jerking  of  lower  limbs,  mostly  with  a  groan,

aAvake  or  slumbering.
■Neuralgia  of  extremities.

■  Sciatica: chronic  cases; burning and  stinging pains,

with  complete  intermissions ;  stiffness  and  weakness  of
affected  limbs ;  <  by  rest  and  slightly  >  by  motion ;
painful  muscular  twitchings.

■  Every  four  days:  pain  in  leg  from  hip  to  foot,  causing

limping.

■  Limbs  go  to  sleep  easily.

I  I  Tearing  in  middle  of  r.  thigh.

■  Feeling  of soreness  on inner  surface of  1.  thigh,  with

some  biting  itching,  extending  to  genitals.

■  Smarting  pain,  and  a  feeling  as  if  rubbed  sore,  in  skin  of

thigh,  after  walking.
I  I  Several  brown  spots  on  inner  surface  of  thighs,  close  to

scrotum,  extending  from  inguinal  canal  to  perineum;

next  day  spots  inflamed,  fiery  red,  swollen,  with  violent

burning  pain,  especially  when  touched  and  walking.
■Tightness  during  night  in  old  ulcers  of  lower  parts  of

thighs.

■  Knee: swollen  and  stiff;  swollen  with  sweating ;  white

swelling ;  swelling  with  perspiration.
■Stiffness  in  hollows  of  knees,  as  if  from  a  long  walk,  in
morning  on  rising.

■  On sitting down feels  very  stiff,  particularly  in  knee

joints;  great  tremor  on  standing  awhile;  difficulty  in
passing  water,  has  to  wait  a  long  time  before  urine
flows ;  general  symptoms  <  about  3  p.m.  ^Chronic
rheumatism.

■Severe  drawing  pain  in  front  of  legs,  from  knee  down  to
instep,  attack  coming  on  every  night  when  she  became
warm  in  bed ;  sensation  of  great  heat  in  affected  parts ;
restlessness  preventing  sleep ;  similar  pain  in  forehead
and  occiput ;  >  during  day  ;  probably  caused  by  living
in  a  damp  house. ^Intermittent  rheumatic  pains.

■Tearing  pains;  swelling  and  heat  in  knees  and  ankles,
with  swelling  of  feet  and  tearing  pain  in  1.  heel ;  stiffness
in  knees  and  weakness  of  affected  limbs  ;  <  at  night ;
chilliness  alternating  with  heat;  tongue  furrowed;
sweet  taste ;  no  thirst ;  high  colored  urine ;  stitching
in  r.  hip; pains  <  from  motion. ^Rheumatism.

■  Pain  as  from  contraction  in  calves  when  walking  (cramp),

or  at  night;  cramp  in  toes.

■  ■Oozing  of  water  from  sore  places  in  oedematous  legs.


123  LYCOPODIUM.

I  Old  ulcers  on  legs,  with  nightly  tearing,  burning  and

itching.

I I  Varicose  veins  on  legs.
I  I  Herpes  on  tibia.

I  After  injury  to  ankle,  half  year  ago,  slight  wound  of  skin
near  inner  malleolus,  followed  by  ulceration,  gradually
extending  in  depth  and  circumference  until  whole
ankle  became  affected;  hard  callous  edges;  offensive,
impure,  ichorous  discharge ;  severe  burning  pains  <  at
night  in  bed.

I  Feet  feel  as  if  dead  or  asleep.

I I  One  foot  hot,  the  other  cold,  or  cold  sweaty  feet.

I  Feet  habitually  cold  ;  cold  sweat  makes  them  sore.

I I  Profuse,  fetid  foot  sweat;  burning  of  soles;  feet  sore.
I  iCEdema  of  feet;  oedema  rises  until  ascites  forms.
■Swelling  of  1.  foot,  with  stitches  in  toes  on  stepping.

I  I  Capillary  network  on  dorsum  of  foot.

■  Tearing  pain  through  r.  instep  at  8  p.m.,  usually  lasts  till

midnight.

I I  Swelling  of  soles;  they  pain  when  walking.

■  Fissures  on  heels,  with  oozing  of  water  from  sore  places.

■  Cramp  in  toes.

I  I  Stitches :  in  big  toe  of  r.  foot  (in  evening) ;  in  corns,
with  sore  feeling.

■  Worse  on  beginning  to  walk  (stiffness) ;  >  continuing  to

walk,  child  wants  to  be  carried.
■Since  birth,  soreness  between  thighs,  so  that  he  never  yet
has  attempted  to  walk,  although  four  years  old ;  scro-
fulous in  highest  degree;  never  had  least  desire  to
drink;  between  3  and  4  p.m.,  irritability  of  whole  ner-
vous system,  with  crying  spells  on  account  of  pain  in  1.
ankle,  where  bones  were  softened  and  discharging  a  saf-
fron yellow  water,  with  tendency  to  suppuration  ;  face
covered  with  freckles;  everything  tasted  salty  to  him.
^Rachitis.

■  Tearing  in  1.  foot,  followed  by  swelling,  pain  then  ex-

tending to  thigh  and  finally  into  r.  leg;  sleep  dis-
turbed ;  later  swelling  of  1.  leg,  then  of  r. ;  skin  of  legs
feels  hard,  although  swelling  is  elastic  and  does  not  pit
upon  pressure;  no  redness;  gradually  swelling  ex-
tended up  to  knees ;  severe  tensive  pains  in  tendons  on
motion ;  severe  biting  pains  in  legs  unless  warmly  cov-
ered ;  burning  in  glans  penis  on  urination,  lasting  sev-
eral days,  then  disappearing  and  reappearing  regularly
every  month;  peculiar  sensation  extending  from  r.
shoulder  down  to  elbow  joint,  as  if  arm  was  dead  and
without  sensation.  ^Rheumatism.
^  Limbs  in  General.  ■  ■Numbness  of  limbs,  sensation  as  if
circulation  ceased.


LYCOPODIUM.  124

■  Drawing,  tearing  in  limbs  at  night,  < during  rest  and

on  alternate  days ;  muscles  and  joints  rigid,  painful  with
numbness ;  finger  joints  inflamed ;  also  with  arthritic
nodes ;  swelling  of  dorsa  of  feet ;  rheumatism ;  <  in
wet  weather ;  >  in  warmth.

■  Painful  stififness  of  muscles  and  numb  sensation  in  joints.

■  Stiffness  in  all  joints.

■  Cracking  of  joints  when  stretched.

■  Joint  feels  as  if  encircled  by  band,  or  ring.

■  Pain  in  r.  inner  ankle,  which  spreads  over  foot  and  up  to

knee  and  is  felt  in  1.  leg  as  in  r. ;  ankles  and  knees  stiff,
twitching  pain  on  motion ;  knees  weak  ;  pain  in  chest ;
thirst  every  half  hour  for  cold  water ;  skin  hot ;  pulse
90 ;  knees  and  inner  ankles  swollen  and  tender  to  touch ;
elbows  and  shoulders  stiff;  shooting  downward  in  calves
from  knees  to  ankles,  first  r.  then  1. ^Rheumatism.

■Pain  in  paroxysms,  commencing  in  r.  shoulder  and  arm,
extending  down  r.  side  of  trunk  to  hip,  shoots  across  to
1.  hip  and  down  leg ;  <  on  motion ;  hands  and  feet
generally  cold. ^Rheumatism.

I  I  Erysipelatous  inflammation  of  a  number  of  ulcers  on  1.
leg ;  also  on  r.  leg  and  forearm.

I  I  Flat,  herpetic  looking  ulcers  on  foot;  on  making  slightest
misstep,  severe  pain  in  ankle ;  constant  tensive  pain  in
leg ;  leg  bluish  red,  not  hot  to  touch.

■  Fissures  on  hands  ;  also  on  heels,

■Alternation  of  heat  and  cold  in  rheumatism,  or  gout})
pains  in  limbs.
^  Rest. Position. Motion. Fatigue  and  weakness is  feU
more  during  rest  than during  motion,  yet  averse  to
exercise.

Rest :  eruptions  on  legs  <  ;  tearing  pains  in  shoulder  and
elbow  joints;  in  scapulae,  shoulder  and  upper  arms  <  ;
sciatica  <.

Must  rest  in  sitting  posture  on  account  of  oppression  oi
breathing.

At  ease  in  no  position.

While  in  bed :  tearing  pains  in  upper  limbs.

Lying  down :  headache  <  ;  hammering  in  head  >  ;  head-
ache >  ;  pain  in  epigastrium  >  ;  burning  sensation  up
spine ;  as  if  something  heavy  was  lying  in  1.  side  of  ab-
domen ;  pain  in  bladder  <  ;  cough  < ;  tearing  in  head  > ;
chilliness  in  evening  <  ;  in  bed,  feels  as  if  she  would
die  from  weakness.
'  Lying  on  back :  difficult  respiration  <  ;  cough  >  ;  pain
in  small  of  back  ;  most  comfortable  during  fever  attacks.

Cannot  lie  on  back :  on  account  of  inability  to  breathe  ;
sense  of  constriction.


125  LYCOPODIUM.

Lies  upon  r.  side,  but  always  finds  himself  upon  back,  when
waking  up.

Cannot  lie  on  r.  side :  pressing  pain  in  region  of  liver.

Lying  on  1.  side  :  unbearable  from  feeling  of  weight  in  ab-
domen ; cough  <  ;  with  legs  drawn  up.

Cannot  lie  on  sides,  especially  1. :  cough.

Head  bent  back.

Leaning  head  backward :  throbbing  in  brain.

Throwing  back  of  head :  from  shocks  of  head.

Sitting :  as  if  something  heavy  was  lying  on  1.  side  of  ab-
domen; varices  painful;  pain  in  perineum;  sudden
weakness ;  cough  >  ;  dyspnoea  and  sudden  cyanosis ;
violent  pain  in  small  of  back ;  stitches  in  back ;  feels
very  stiff;  for  a  long  time,  clots  of  leucorrhcea  fall  to
floor.

Sitting  bent  over :  pain  in  stomach  and  region  of  duo-
denum <  ;  perforating  ulcer  (stomach)  <  ;  stitches  in
sides  >.

Must  sit  up :  shortness  of  breath.

Must  bend  and  draw  r.  leg  up  with  her  hands :  on  account
of  severe  pain  in  r.  groin.

Bending :  cramps  in  stomach  >  ;  tensive  aching  in  hypo-
chondria <.

Stooping :  pressing  pain  in  head  <  ;  pressure  through
vagina;  cough  <.

Raising  himself  in  bed  :  congestion  of  blood  to  head.

Rising  up :  headache  <  ;  vertigo ;  violent  pain  in  small
of  back  in  morning.

Rising  from  a  seat:  pain  in  sacral  region  <  ;  impossible,
severe  pain  in  r.  groin.

Rising  from  stooping:  brain  as  if  vacillating  <.

Standing :  causes  tremor.

When  tongue  is  put  out  it  rolls  from  side  to  side.

Stretching  of  throat:  causes  irritation.

Cannot  stretch  or  stand  upright:  tension  in  diaphragm.

Placing  foot  against  support  and  pressing  and  relaxing
alternately  so  as  to  agitate  whole  body :  during  labor
pains.

Stretching  arms  out :  cough  <.

When  stretched  :  joints  crack.

On  turning  over  in  bed  :  palpitation.

Least  exertion :  sweat.

Motion :  throbbing  headache  ;  shortness  of  breath  <  ;  tear-
ing pains  in  ankles  ;  pain  in  1.  hip  joint ;  sciatica  slightly
>  ;  tearing  pain  <  ;  twitching  pain  in  lower  limbs ;  of
r.  leg  eases  pain  in  r.  groin.

Must  keep  in  constant  motion  :  during  labor  pains.

Unable  to  move :  from  violent  pain  in  small  of  back.


LYCOPODIUM.  126

When  he  gets  up  and  stirs  about :  debility  not  so  bad  as
he  thinks.

Stepping :  stitches  in  toes.

At  every  step :  shattered  and  concussed  feeling  in  head.

Stepping  hard :  shaking  in  head.

Walking :  brain  as  if  vacillating  <  ;  eruption  on  legs  >  ;
perforating  ulcer  (stomach)  >  ;  as  if  something  heavy
was  lying  on  1.  side  of  abdomen ;  rumbling  and  gur-
gling in  abdomen ;  pain  in  groin  ;  must  let  her  hands
hang  down  ;  oppression  of  breathing  <  ;  smarting  pain
and  soreness  in  skin  of  thigh ;  spots  on  inner  surface  of
thighs  pain ;  pain  in  calves ;  soles  pain ;  at  first  stiff-
ness <,  after  continuing  >  ;  a  few  steps,  pain  in  groin
ceases.

Cannot  walk  erect,  must  go  bent  over  or  lie  down  :  severe
pressure  in  abdomen.

On  making  slightest  misstep :  severe  pain  in  ankle.

Physical  exertion :  brings  on  attacks  of  pain  in  epigas-
trium;  shortness  of  breath ;  cough  <.

Going  up  stairs:  brain  as  if  vacillating  <.

Rolls  about  on  floor  with  pain.

When  writing  or  driving:  pen  or  reins  drop  from  hands
unnoticed.

Horseback  riding:  bearing  down  over  bladder  >.

Great  aversion  to  exercise.

No  power  to  raise  arms  and  move  hands.
^^  Nerves. Causes  depression  of  nearly  all  functions.

■  Great  tendency  to  start;  feels  frightened  at  everything,

even  ringing  of  door  bell.

■  Involuntary alternate extension and contraction of

muscles.

■  Debility,  felt  most  while  at  rest;  aversion  to  exercise.

■  Numbness  and  twitching  through  body  and  limbs.

■  Fruitless  efforts  to  yawn.

■  Jerking  and  twitching  of  single  limbs  or  whole  body,

sleeping  or  waking;  subsultus  tendinum.

■  Pains  drawing,  tearing  <  at  night;  muscles  and  joints

rigid ;  sensation  of  torpor  in  affected  part.

■Spasms  (epileptic)  with  screaming,  foaming  at  mouth,
unconsciousness,  throwing  arms  about,  cardiac  anguish;
imagines  he  will  die.

■Lassitude;  unrefreshing  sleep;  falls  asleep  too  late  and
awakens  too  early;  sleep  full  of  dreams  which  she  cannot
recollect;  cold  hands  and  feet;  flushes  of  heat;  thirst;
profuse  sour  sweat  in  morning;  fearful,  depressed,  de-
spondent, indifferent,  with  satiety  of  life,  particularly  in
company;  activity  of  mind  impaired;  frequent  stitch-
ing or  tearing  in  forehead,  vertex  or  sides  of  head,  >


127  LYCOPODIUM.

Ijdng  down  and  by  pressure;  falling  out  of  hair;  eyes
appear  too  large;  vision  dim,  sees  as  through  a  veil;
occasional  roaring  in  ears  and  fluent  coryza  ;  sensation
of  dryness  in  nose,  throat  and  mouth;  tongue  coated;
appetite  impaired;  belching;  stitches  in  sides,  >  bend-
ing double ;  stool  hard  every  two  or  three  days ;  menses
regular,  too  profuse. ^Hysteria.

■  Seven  months  pregnant;  carbuncle  on  chin  very  pain-

ful, causing  trismus;  pulse  frequent;  skin  hot,  moist;
teeth  shut  tightly;  head  drawn  to  r.  side.

I  Tetanus.

■  Great  weakness  with  chronic  catarrhs.

I I  Nervous  excitement;  prostration  of  mind  and  body;
nervous  debility.

■  Great  emaciation  and  internal  debility.

■  Excessive  and  frequent  secretion  of  pale  urine,  and  pro-

fuse leucorrhoea,  causing  debility;  discharge  comes
away  in  a  gush,  and  when  she  sits  for  a  long  time,
clots  fall  to  floor;  cannot  rise  from  seat  on  account  of
severe  pain  in  r.  groin;  must  bend  and  draw  up  r.  leg
with  her  hands,  and  after  moving  it  to  and  fro  she  can
rise,  after  walking  a  few  steps  the  pain  ceases.

■  Paralysis.

■  Formication  of  affected  limbs.

^^  Sleep. 'Much  and  frequent  yawning;  fruitless  attempts.

■  Irresistible  sleepiness  after  meals.

■Sleepy  during  day,  wakeful  at  night,  mind  too  active.

■  Lies  long  in  evening  unable  to  go  to  sleep.

■  Child  sleeps  with  half  open  eyes  and  throws  head  from

side  to  side,  with  moaning.

■Sopor  in  typhoid  and  exanthematous  fevers;  impending
paralysis  of  brain.

■Sleep  restless;  at  ease  in  no  position;  cries  out,  starts;
jerking  of  limbs;  unrefreshing;  full  of  phantasies;  wakes
very  often;  quite  wide  awake  at  4  a.m.;  child  groans
in  sleep  or  springs  up  terrified  and  screaming,  and
is  angry  and  cross,  striking,  kicking  and  scratching
everyone  who  approaches;  great  excitement;  starts  up
full  of  anxiety,  wishes  to  cry  out  but  cannot,  as  in
nightmare;  crying,  with  unintelligible  words;  fre-
quently laughs  aloud  in  sleep ;  moaning.

■  Dreams: confused; anxious; vivid,  anxious; frightful,

frequently  awakening  him;  horrid;  of  sickness;  mov-
ing, etc. ;  of  trees  growing  on  fences  without  ground
under  them;  of  people  drowning,  boats  capsizing,  etc.

■  ■  On  awaking :  cross,  kicks,  scolds ; or  awakes  terrified,

as  if  dreaming ;  feels  unrefreshed ;  hungry  when  awak-
ing at  night.


LYCOPODIUM.  128

■  Awakes  as  though  frightened  by  a  bad  dream;  appar-

ently continues  to  dream  after  waking,  cannot  be  paci-
fied, and  cannot  bear  to  be  left  alone;  frequent  jerking
of  limbs,  or  even  whole  body,  whether  awake  or  sleeping.

I  Children  sleep  apparently  soundly,  but  scream  out  sud-
denly in  sleep,  stare  about  and  cannot  easily  be  pacified.

I  Sleep  at  night  very  full  of  dreams,  which  are  fatigu-
ing, with  perspiration  on  waking.

■  Baby  cries  all  day  and  sleeps  all  night.

^  Time.  Morning :  satiety  of  life  <  ;  congestion  of  blood  to
head ;  eyes  smart ;  bad  taste  in  mouth ;  dryness  of
tongue;  putrid  smell  from  mouth;  thick,  yellow  and
greenish  expectoration  ;  bitter  taste ;  nausea ;  violent  dry
cough ;  expectoration  greenish ;  violent  pain  in  small
of  back  ;  on  rising,  stiffness  of  knees ;  sour  sweat ;  chilli-
ness on  awaking ;  early  sweat ;  sweat  over  whole  body.

In  forenoon:  vertigo.

Day :  tearing  pain  in  forehead  ;  throbbing  in  brain  ;  photo-
phobia ;  agglutination  and  lachrymation  ;  belching  with
burning ;  loose  cough ;  whizzing  breathing ;  dry,  hard
cough ;  occasional  expectoration ;  much  sneezing  and
violent  cough ;  pain  in  front  of  legs  >  ;  sleepy ;  cries ;
skin  itches  and  bites.

In  afternoon  :  frequent  epistaxis ;  pain  in  1.  hypochondriac
region;  colicky  pains ;  stitching  headache.

At  3  P.M. :  general  symptoms  <  ;  chilly  in  back.

4  P.M. :  cannot  see  after  that  time ;  ulcerated  sore  throat  < ;
swollen,  congested  sore  throat  <  ;  great  prostration ;
symptoms  of  diphtheria  <  ;  excessive  flatulence  < ;
dribbling  of  urine  from  bladder;  intolerable  thirst;
chill,  lasting  ten  minutes ;  chill,  lasting  two  hours ;  in-
tense heat.

From  4  to  8  p.m.:  weeping  <  ;  stupefying  headache;  press-
ing headache  in  vertex  <  ;  cough  <  ;  chill ;  fever  <  ;
general  aggravation.

From  4.45  to  6.30  p.m.  :  quotidian  ague.

At  5  P.M. :  chilliness  all  over  body ;  chill,  lasting  nearly
all  night.

At  6  P.M. :  chilliness  starting  from  back,  with  stupefying
sleep ;  over  whole  body  ;  tearing  in  limbs ;  no  thirst ;  no
sweat.

At  7  P.M. :  hands  and  feet  icy  cold  ;  one  sided  chill  (left).

At  7.30  P.M. :  cannot  see  after  that  time,  from  February  to
July  each  year.

At  8  P.M. :  tearing  pain  in  r.  instep,  usually  lasts  till  mid-
night.

After  8  p.m.  :  feels  >  but  weak.

At  9  A.M. :  chilly  and  weak.


129  LYCOPODIUM.

Evening :  fear  of  phantoms ;  dryness  of  eyes ;  stitches  and
soreness  of  eyes ;  pressure  in  stomach  ;  chilliness,  lassi-
tude ;  early,  colicky  pains ;  itching  and  tension  at  anus;
cough  very  overpowering ;  palpitation ;  two  pappy
stools ;  excitement  of  circulation,  with  restlessness  and
trembling ;  pulse  accelerated  ;  stitches  in  toes ;  lies  long
unable  to  go  to  sleep  ;  chilliness  <  ;  chill.

Night :  tearing  pain  in  forehead  ;  violent  headache ;  erup-
tion on  scalp  <  ;  blindness ;  dryness  of  eyes  ;  cannot  get
breath ;  rubs  nose ;  toothache ;  restless ;  drinks  little  but
often  ;  pain  in  stomach  >  ;  action  of  kidney's  disturbing
at  night ;  rumbling  in  bowels ;  itching  of  ulcers  <  ;
sleep  disturbed ;  sweat ;  wakes  cross  and  hungry ;  ach-
ing and  pressure  in  rectum  <  ;  frequently  compelled  to
rise  to  urinate ;  pain  in  bladder  <  ;  urine  pale  ;  chill
and  heat ;  suffocating  spells  ;  formication  in  windpipe ;
dry,  hard  cough ;  cough,  with  some  expectoration ;  very
restless ;  profuse  sweats ;  much  sneezing  and  violent
cough ;  anxious  palpitation,  as  if  circulation  stopped ;,
stitches  in  1.  chest ;  pain  and  stiffness  in  small  of  back  ;;
pain  in  bones  of  arms ;  tightness  in  old  ulcers  on  thighs;,
stiffness  in  knees  and  weakness  of  affected  limbs  <  ;
cramp  in  calves  ;  wakeful ;  awakes  hungry ;  sleep  full  of
dreams ;  heat,  with  great  thirst  and  restless  sleep ;
clammy  sweat ;  stitching  headache.

About  midnight :  awoke  from  suffocation  with  congestive
headache.
^^  Temperature  and  Weather, i  "Desire  for  open  air.

In  open  air:  nausea  passes  off;  walking,  oppression  of
breathing  <.

In  open,  cold  air  and  uncovering  head :  headache  >  ;
chilled  through  and  through.

Inclination  to  uncover :  likes  to  go  without  any  covering
on  head.

Warmth :  eruption  on  scalp  <  ;  toothache  >  ;  rheuma-
tism >  ;  makes  skin  itch  and  bite.

Warmth  of  bed :  headache  <  ;  toothache  >  ;  perforating
ulcer  (stomach)  >  ;  pain  on  front  of  legs,  at  night ;  does
not  >  for  two  hours.

Warm  room :  cough  <  ;  cannot  tolerate,  during  febrile
attack  wishes  windows  and  doors  open  day  and  night.

Getting  warm  from  walking :  headache  < ;  itching  of
scalp  <•

Warm  food :  aversion  to.

From  warm  drinks :  pain  in  throat  >  ;  relieve.

Heat:  chilliness  not  >.

In  hot  room  :  vertigo.

Hot  applications :  eruption  on  legs  <.

voii,  vn. — 9.


LYCOPODIUM.  130

Hot  brandy  and  water:  pains  at  epigastrium  >.

Even  hot  things  feel  cold  to  touch.

Cold  articles  of  diet :  diarrhoea  <  ;  cough  <  ;  longing  for.

From  cold  drinks :  diphtheritic  patches  <  ;  pain  in  throat;
nausea  <;  cough  <.

Cold  water  applications :  eruption  on  legs  > .

Drinking  cold  water :  caused  diarrhoea.

Wet  weather:  rheumatism  <.

Stormy  weather:  anxiety.

Windy  weather :  cough  <.

Living  in  damp  house :  intermittent,  rheumatic  pains.

Aggravation  from  moistening  diseased  parts.
^^  Fever. >  Want  of  animal  heat.

I  Chilliness:  day  before  menstruation;  on  awaking  in
morning,  followed  by  great  heat ;  constantly  increasing,
without  heat  or  sweat;  all  over,  at  9  a.m.,  even  heat  from
stove  will  not  warm ;  in  back  at  3  p.m.,  still  <  in  even-
ing after  lying  down,  lasting  a  quarter  of  an  hour,  with
cold  feet,  without  subsequent  heat  or  sweat ;  over  whole
body  at  5  p.m.  ;  at  6  p.m.,  starting  from  back,  with  a  feel-
ing as  if  water  was  spurted  upon  back  ;  at  6  p.m.,  with
stupefying  sleep,  followed  by  uneasy  sleep,  interrupted
by  heavy  dreams ;  at  6  p.m.,  over  whole  body,  with  stu-
pefaction, sleepiness,  tearing  in  limbs,  no  thirst,  no
sweat.

I  Chill:  from  4  to  8  p.m.,  with  numb  hands  and  feet,  icy

cold  at  7  P.M. ;  on  awaking  from  a  dreamy  sleep,  covered
with  sweat ;  afterwards  violent  thirst ;  one  sided  (1.)
at  7  P.M.,  commencing  in  back,  with  numb,  icy  cold
hands  and  feet,  cannot  get  warm  in  bed  for  two  hours,
tearing  in  limbs,  yawning,  nausea  and  inclination  to
vomit;  icy  coldness  as  if  lying  on  ice;  creeping  on  back
in  evening ;  in  evening,  in  bed,  preventing  sleep ;  fol-
lowed by  sweat  without  intervening  heat ;  followed  by
bloated  face  and  hands ;  alternating  with  heat.

I I  Sour  vomiting  between  chill  and  heat.

iHeat :  of  head,  also  after  eating,  and  red  spot  on  1,  cheek;
frequent  flushes  in  face;  in  face,  eyes  and  palms  of
hands;  with  inclination  to  uncover;  with  redness  of  face ;
rising  from  abdomen  to  head,  with  burning  in  cheeks;
flushes  over  whole  body,  mostly  towards  evening ;  with
frequent  drinking  of  small  quantities  at  a  time;  with
constipation  and  increased  micturition ;  at  night,  with
great  thirst  and  restless  sleep;  with  red  cheeks,  alternat-
ing with  chilliness;  hectic  fever,  with  suppuration  of
lungs.

■Sour  vomiting  in  or  during  entire  hot  stage. ^Ague.

B  i  Sweat:  immediately  after  chill,  without  intervening  heat;


131  LYCOPODIUM.

from  least  exertion ;  most  profuse  on  face ;  about  scalp
and  temples;  on  chest  and  trunk;  at  night  or  early  in
morning;  sourish,  acrid;  profuse,  sour  smelling,  on  body,
not  on  legs;  in  morning  over  whole  body,  smelling  of
blood;  cold,  sour,  offensive,  bloody,  or  smelling  like
onions;  clammy  at  night,  with  coldness  of  face;  fetid,
in  axillae  and  of  feet,  with  burning  of  soles,  in  women
suffering  from  chronic  endo-metritis  and  disordered  va-
ginal discharges.

1 1  Thirst  after  sweating  stage.

1  Nausea  and  vomiting,  then  chill,  followed  by  sweat,  with-
out intervening  heat;  or  sour  vomiting  between  chill
and  heat.

I  Febrile  attack  every  afternoon  at  4  o'clock;  head  hot;
room  is  too  warm,  opens  windows  and  doors;  some  thirst;
loss  of  appetite;  constipation;  violent  cough;  since
childbirth  two  weeks  previously.

lAt  4  P.M.  chill,  lasting  about  ten  minutes,  followed  by  in-
tense heat,  with  little  sweat  and  severe  headache  and
pulsating  in  temples ;  heat  lasts  until  afternoon  of  next
day,  and  reappears  in  afternoon  of  third  day;  during
heat  restless,  wants  all  the  windows  and  doors  open;
great  thirst;  tongue  white,  with  red  edges;  at  first  con-
stipated, later  four  to  five  thin  stools  every  day;  three
days  after  parturition.

iSince  second  day  after  parturition,  which  occurred  eleven
weeks  ago,  daily  attacks  of  fever  at  4  p.m.  ;  occasional
chilliness,  generally  dry  heat,  lasts  several  hours  and  is
followed  by  sweat,  which  continues  throughout  whole
night ;  on  making  any  motion  in  bed,  sweat  disappears
and  is  replaced  by  heat;  in  morning,  cold  and  chilly;
moderate  thirst ;  during  fever,  slight  pain  in  occiput ;
cold  feet,  shortness  of  breath,  desire  to  lie  uncovered
upon  back  and  with  head  elevated ;  stool  regular ;
urine  like  turbid  beer.

I  Chill,  5  P.M.,  lasting  nearly  all  night;  headache;  dryness
of  mouth,  without  disposition  to  drink;  very  hot  during
fever;  urine  copious;  no  sweat;  pain  flying  all  through
him; oedematous  swelling  <  about  face  and  hands.

•  Paroxysms  commence  between  4  and  8  p.m.;  sometimes
with  chill,  again  without;  thirsty  or  not;  sleepy;  fever
lasts  till  midnight  or  2  a.m.,  generally  followed  by
sweat. ^Epidemic  intermittent.

■  Quotidian  ague,  from  4.45  to  6.30  p.m.;  half  an  hour  be-
fore chill,  calves  get  cold;  chill  lasts  nineteen  minutes;
headache,  nausea,  light  sensation  about  heart,  sore
stomach,  slight  dyspnoea;  sweat  not  prominent ;  thirsty;
much  belching;  pain  in  1.  hypochondrium  on  taking  a
long  breath ;  urine  very  red.


LYCOPODIUM.  132".

Chill  on  alternate  days,  about  4  p.m.,  lasting  two  hours,,
followed  by  more  or  less  fever  till  bedtime;  chill  and
fever  severe ;  tossing,  anxious,  hot  and  restless ;  heavily
loaded  urine,  pinkish,  half  floating  sediment,  and  a  sub-
stance like  brick  dust;  severe  pain  in  renal  region,,
much  <  if  urine  is  held  after  desire  to  urinate  appears;,
>  by  urination;  belches  much  wind ;  rumbling  of  wind
causes  pain;  prostration. ^Intermittent.


low, salty  expectoration. ^Intermittent.
I  Sour  eructations,  sweet  taste,  vomiting. ^Ague.
I  Face  and  hands  bloated. ^Ague.
I  Ague  coming  on  every  seven  days.
llOld  broken  down  cases  of  malaria;  chill;  sweat  greasy..

■  Sleepy  by  day,  restless,  delirious  sleep  at  night,  with  ter-

rible dreams;  crying  out  and  laughing  in  sleep;  even-
ing chill  followed  by  heat,  and  often  offensive,  sticky
night  sweats ;  anxious,  sad,  lachrymose ;  afraid  to  be
alone;  tearing,  stitching  headache  in  afternoon  and  at
night ;  beginning  paralysis  of  brain ;  oversensitiveness
of  hearing;  roaring  in  ears ;  grinding  of  teeth ;  dryness
of  mouth  without  thirst ;  foul  taste  in  mouth ;  pressure
in  stomach  in  evening  ;  swelling  of  epigastrium ;  bloat-
ing of  abdomen  ;  pulsating  and  pressing  out  sensation
in  abdominal  ring  ;  flatulency.  ^Typhoid.
■Stupefaction,  murmuring  delirium,  stammering  speech;,
using  wrong  words;  yellowish  face;  subsultus  tendi-
num  ;  grasping  at  flocks;  squinting;  trembling;  meteor-
ism;  constipation;  dirty,  sticky  tongue;  loose,  rattling
cough  and  painful  micturition ;  rash  does  not  appear  until
fourteenth  day,  and  patient  sinks  into  an  unconscious-
state,  with  muttering  delirium,  picking  at  bedclothes;,
distended  abdomen  with  great  rumbling  of  flatus ;  con-
stipation; involuntary  urination  or  retention  of  urine;,
if  urine  is  passed  in  bed  it  leaves  reddish,  sandy  deposit.
^Typhoid.

■  Tongue  seems  swollen,  cannot  protrude  it,  or  when  it  is

put  out,  it  rolls  from  side  to  side,  like  a  pendulum;
tongue  dry  and  has  blisters  on  it. ^Typhoid.
■Typhoid  fever;  awakes  from  sleep  peevish;  scolding,  cry-
ing and  bad  behavior.

■  Impending  paralysis  of  brain;  lies  in  stupor;  eyes  do  not

react  to  light  and  have  fishy  look  ;  lower  jaw  dropped;
breathing,  snoring  and  rattling,  mucous  rattle  as  air  goes
in  and  out  of  lungs ;  urine  involuntary  or  suppressed  ;
pulse  intermittent  and  rapid. ^Typhoid.

■  Cold  hands  and  feet,  and  general  want  of  bodily  heat,

<?Typhoid.


133  LYCOPODIUM.

I  Fever  accompanied  by  great  reflex  nervous  irritability ;

alternating  chill  and  heat;  sensorial  irritability  without


red  cheeks,  red,  dry  tongue ;  constipation.
iFever  during  catarrhal  croupous  pneumonia; intense

heat,  4  p.m.  ;  great  restlessness  and  sleeplessness.
II Febrile  attacks  during  tuberculosis;  cannot  tolerate  a

warm  room,  wishes  windows  and  doors  open  day  and

night;  fever  <  4  to  8  p.m.,  restless  until  midnight;  lies

best  when  on  back.
^^  Attacks,  Periodicity. Faintish  at  certain  hours  in  day.
In  slow  succession :  violent  stitches  in  hollow  teeth.
For  quarter  of  an  hour :  syncope  ;  chilliness.
Every  half  hour :  severe  hiccough  ;  thirsty  for  cold  water.
After  half  hour:  wakes  with  palpitation.
One  hour  after  eating :  nausea  and  vomiting.
For  two  hours  after  eating :  spits  up  food.
For  several  hours :  cannot  make  least  movement  on  account

of  persistence  of  pain  in  rectum.
Before  sunset :  tight  respiration.
During  last  twelve  hours :  eleven  stools.
Once  or  twice  daily :  attacks  of  severe  pain  in  stomach.
Daily :  four  to six  painless,  yellow,  watery,  undigested

stools ;  between  8  and  4  p.m.,  one  or  two  thin  stools ;

drinks  twenty-two  tumblerfuls  of  water ;  deposit  of  large

clots  of  blood  in  urine ;  at  4  p.m.  has  a  fever  fit  and  is

much  <  ;  four  or  five  thin  stools.
Every  morning  at  2  or  3 :  severe  pains  at  epigastrium.
Every  afternoon :  screaming  spells;  dribbling  of  urine  from

bladder ;  at  4  o'clock,  febrile  attack ;  4  to  8  p.m.,  general

aggravation.
Every  evening :  dribbling  of  urine  from  bladder ;  constant

tickling  in  throat.
Every  night :  agglutination  of  lids ;  tickling  cough  ;  clos-
ure of  nasal  openings  ;  severe  pain  down  front  of  legs.
On  alternate  days :  cough  <  ;  chill  about  4  p.m.
Since  second  day  after  parturition,  eleven  weeks  ago  :  daily

attacks  of  fever  at  4  p.m.
At  4  p.m.  :  chill ;  heat  lasts  until  afternoon  of  next  day  and

reappears  in  afternoon  of  third  day.
Every  two  or  three  days :  stools  hard.
Three  days  after  fifth  confinement :  abdomen  enormously

distended.
Every  four  days :  pain  in  leg  from  hip  to  foot.
For  four  days  :  inflammation  of  tonsil  and  fauces.
Every  five  or  six  days :  violent  spasms  in  abdomen.
Every  six  or  eight  days :  menses  reappear.
Every  seven  daj's  :  ague  coming  on.


LYCOPODIUM.  134

During  menses :  pain  in  temples ;  nausea.

Before  full  moon  :  leucorrlioea  <.

Each  year  from  February  to  July :  hypermetropic.

In  Summer  :  burning  between  scapulae  <.

For  one  year  :  menses  absent.

For  several  years :  attacks  of  pain  in  stomach.

Four  years :  chronic  diarrhoea.

For  six  years :  menses  absent.
^Locality  and  Direction.  Right:  pupil  dilated;  hammer-
ing pain  in  side  of  head ;  stitches  <  in  temple ;  head
drawn  to  side  ;  eye,  dim  sight  <  ;  redness  and  swelling
of  lids;  polypus  growing  from  outer  canthus  of  eye ;  tear-
ing in  meatus ;  ichorous  discharge  begins  in  nostril ;
pain  in  malar  bones ;  pain  in  side  of  face  and  temple ;
eruption  on  cheek ;  stitches  in  region  of  parotid ;  sore-
ness begins  on  side  of  throat ;  swelling  of  cervical  glands;
diphtheria  <  ;  swelling  of  tonsil,  also  neck ;  greyish
spots  on  tonsil;  deposit  covers  whole  tonsil ;  discharge
from  ear;  cannot  lie  on  side;  pressive  pain  in  hypochon-
drium  ;  pain  in  side ;  pain  in  shoulder  and  arm  ;  when
turning  on  side  a  hard  body  seems  to  roll  from  navel  to
that  side;  colicky  pains  in  side  of  abdomen;  hardness
on  side;  hernia;  pain  concentrated  on  side  near  hip;
stiffness  in  renal  region  <  on  side  ;  renal  colic  in  ureter;
large  goitre  on  side  ;  continued  pain  under  ribs  and  in
epigastrium  ;  pneumonia;  great  sensitiveness  to  pressure
over  side  of  chest;  bronchophony  extending  to  under
shoulder  blade;  sense  of  constriction  from  side  all  around
short  ribs;  neck  drawn  to  side;  darting  in  cervical
muscles;  bronchocele  on  side;  pain  from  back  to  scap-
ula; rheumatic  tension  in  shoulder  joint;  pain  as  from
a  sprain  in  wrist  joint ;  tearing  in  middle  of  thigh ;  stitch-
ing in  hip;  tearing  through  instep;  in  inner  ankle,  ex-
tending over  foot  up  knee ;  pain  in  paroxysms,  first  in
shoulder  and  arm  down  side  of  trunk  to  hip,  then  across
to  1.  hip;  ulcers  on  leg  and  forearm;  severe  pain  in
groin ;  eczema  on  fingers  of  hand ;  moist,  scald  head,
most  on  and  behind  ear.

Left :  sees  only  1.  half  of  object ;  pustules  on  margin  of
cornea;  tearing  in  meatus;  heat  in  cheek  ;  constant  dis-
position to  breaking  out  on  cheek  ;  swelling  of  throat ;
swelling  of  cervical  glands;  side  of  face  swollen;  pains
in  throat;  pemphigus  on  thumb  and  third  finger;  leg
covered  up  to  knee  with  ulcers ;  pain  in  hypochondriac
region;  acute  griping  in  hypochondrium ;  wind  gurgles
in  hypochondrium ;  as  if  something  heavy  was  lying  on
side  of  abdomen;  stitching  in  side  of  chest,  in  axilla;
pain  in  kidney  and  ureter;  kidney  affected;  cannot  lie


135  LYCOPODIUM.

on  side;  dulness  in  upper  part  of  lung;  stitches  on  side
of  chest;  cutting  pains  from  scapula  to  chest;  contin-
uous pressure  in  chest;  lung  hepatized;  chronic  inflam-
matory condition  of  lung;  hard  lump  in  breast;  stiffness
of  side  of  neck;  head  drawn  to  side;  pain  in  hip  joint;
rheumatic  tension  in  hip ;  soreness  on  inner  surface  of
thigh;  tearing  in  heel ;  swelling  of  foot,  with  stitches  in
toes ;  pain  from  r.  ankle  spreads  to  leg ;  ulcers  on  leg ;
chill  on  side;  red  spot  on  cheek.

From  r.  to  1. :  swelling  and  suppuration  of  tonsils  ;  diph-
theritic patches  spread  ;  cutting  pains  across  abdomen ;
cutting  across  hypogastrium  ;  burning  or  boring  stitches
in  ovaries ;  shooting  from  knees  to  ankles ;  pain  in  hips.

From  1.  to  r. :  pains  in  throat.

From  within  outward  :  stitches  in  temples.

From  below  upward  :  darting  in  cervical  muscles.

Upward :  labor  pains  run.
^  Sensations.  Anxious,  as  if  about  to  die ;  as  if  everything
was  turning  around ;  as  though  everything  was  sinking
down  in  bed;  temples  as  if  screwed  together;  as  if  bones
of  skull  were  being  driven  asunder,  or  as  if  brain  was
vacillating  to  and  fro;  head  as  if  it  would  burst;  pain
in  head  as  if  caused  by  wrong  position ;  eyes  as  if  bruised ;
as  of  a  veil  before  eyes;  as  if  looking  through  fine  lat-
tice ;  as  if  looking  through  a  fog ;  eyes  as  if  too  large  ;
as  if  dust  was  in  eyes ;  as  if  eyes  were  dry ;  singing  in
ears  as  from  boiling  water;  as  if  hot  blood  rushed  into
ears ;  as  if  sulphur  vapor  was  in  throat ;  front  teeth  as
if  too  long;  vesicles  on  tip  of  tongue  as  if  scalded  and
raw;  as  if  a  ball  rose  up  in  throat;  as  if  entrance  of
pharynx  was  constricted ;  as  if  a  hard  body  lodged  in
back  part  of  throat;  limbs  as  if  bruised;  as  if  head
opened;  sensation  in  stomach  as  if  fasting;  belching  as
if  caused  by  wind  in  stomach ;  as  if  everything  was  too
tight  on  stomach ;  as  if  stomach  was  pressed  together
from  both  sides;  fingers  as  if  dead;  as  if  everything
eaten  was  rising  up;  as  if  chest  would  burst;  as  if  oesoph-
agus was  being  clutched  and  twisted ;  as  if  steam  was
rising  from  stomach  into  head;  as  if  gimlets  were  run-
ning into  spine;  tension  as  from  a  cord  in  diaphragm;
tension  as  from  a  hoop  in  hypochondria;  soreness  as  if
from  shock  in  region  of  liver;  as  if  twenty  dogs  with
sharp  teeth  were  gnawing  her;  as  if  something  was  mov-
ing up  and  down  in  stomach  and  bowels;  as  if  a  hard
body  rolled  from  navel  to  r.  side ;  as  if  something  heavy
was  lying  on  1.  side  of  abdomen ;  as  if  heart  hung  by  a
thread ;  as  if  stomach  would  fall  down ;  as  of  drops  of
water  falling  down;  pain  as  from  a  blow  in  r.  hypochon-


LYCOPODIUM.  136

driac  region;  sore  aching  in  region  of  liver  as  from  a
shock ;  pain  as  if  suppurating  in  swelling  of  inguinal
gland;  back  as  if  broken;  as  if  abdomen  was  bound  up
and  would  burst;  noise  in  abdomen  as  if  small  bladders
of  air  were  bursting;  teeth  as  if  loose ;  urine  as  if  min-
gled with  brick  dust;  when  lying  in  bed  feels  as  if  she
would  die  from  weakness;  as  if  head  would  burst;  as
though  hot  balls  dropped  from  each  breast  through  to
back,  rolling  down  back,  along  each  leg  and  dropping
off  heels,  this  alternates  with  sensation  as  if  balls  of  ice
followed  same  course;  as  if  he  had  inhaled  sulphur
fumes;  as  if  chest  was  constricted  by  cramps;  as  if  there
was  too  much  mucus  in  chest;  as  if  larynx  was  tickled
with  a  feather;  shattering  as  from  a  shock  in  temples
and  chest;  chest  as  if  too  full;  as  if  lungs  had  been
overworked;  constriction  as  from  a  tight  waistcoat;
tension  as  of  a  hoop  on  chest;  as  if  entire  parenchyma
was  softened ;  as  if  circulation  stood  still ;  as  if  cords  of
back  of 'neck  were  breaking;  as  if  tumor  was  held  in
some  unyielding  envelope;  burning  as  from  hot  coals
between  scapulae;  as  if  small  of  back  would  break;  colic
as  if  intestines  would  burst;  as  if  flesh  was  loose  on  low^er
part  of  back ;  pain  as  from  bruises  in  shoulder,  scapulae
and  upper  arms;  pain  as  from  a  sprain  in  r.  wrist  joint;
as  if  hands  had  been  asleep ;  hands  as  if  enlarged ;  pain
as  from  a  sprain  in  hip;  as  if  skin  of  thigh  was  rubbed
sore;  feet  as  if  dead  or  asleep;  joints  feel  as  if  encircled
by  band  or  ring;  awakes  terrified  as  if  dreaming;  as  if
water  was  spurted  upon  back;  as  if  lying  on  ice;  flesh
as  if  struck  with  a  stick.

Pain:  above  eyes;  in  temples;  in  r.  side  of  face,  r.  temple
and  parietal  bone;  in  teeth;  in  throat;  all  over  limbs;
on  1.  side  of  throat,  shifting  to  r.  and  up  into  ear;  in
tonsils;  in  small  of  back ;  in  stomach  and  region  of  duo-
denum; under  ribs  and  all  around  waist;  across  stom-
ach and  straight  down  both  sides  of  it;  in  1.  hypochon-
driac region  as  if  weight  like  a  stone  rolled  over;  in
groin;  in  region  of  abdominal  ring;  in  anus;  in  rectum;
in  1.  kidney  and  ureter;  in  bowels;  in  perineum;  in  ab-
domen; in  loins;  in  lumbar  region  and  nape  of  neck;
under  r.  ribs  and  in  epigastrium;  in  lungs;  in  small  of
back,  extending  into  thighs;  in  sacral  region;  in  bones
of  arms;  in  1.  hip  joint;  in  leg  from  hip  to  foot;  in  soles;
in  inner  ankle  over  foot,  up  to  knee  and  into  leg;  in
chest;  in  r.  shouldei^  and  arm,  down  r.  side  of  trunk  to
hip,  shoots  across  to  1.  hip  and  down  1.  leg;  flying  all
through  him.

Unbearable  pain:  in  labor.


137  LYCOPODIUM.

Intense  pain:  in  abdomen.

Terrible  pain:  in  rectum.

Violent  pain :  in  head ;  in  stomach ;  in  back.

Severe  pain:  in  stomach;  in  epigastrium;  in  chest;  across
bowels;  in  abdomen;  in  back;  in  ankle;  in  r.  groin;  in
head;  in  renal  region.

Acute  pain :  in  rectum.

Severe  spasmodic  pains:  at  epigastrium.

Severe  cutting  pains:  in  eyes;  across  abdomen.

Acute  griping  pain :  in  1.  hypochondriiim.

Sharp  pain:  in  throat;  in  dorsal  hepatic  region;  in  r,
shoulder  and  arm;  running  around  labia;  shooting  into
heart.

Sharp  gnawing  pain :  in  region  of  liver.

Gnawing,  griping,  cutting  pain :  in  region  of  stomach.

Tensive,  tearing,  cutting  pains:  in  abdomen.

Pulsating  tearing:  in  region  of  heart.

Tearing:  in  forehead;  in  r.  side  of  head  to  neck;  in  face;
in  eyes  and  teeth;  in  r.  and  1.  meatus;  in  bones  of  cheeks;
in  stomach;  over  epigastric  region;  about  ribs  and  sides
of  abdomen  into  back;  in  rectum;  in  ankles;  under
clavicles;  in  sacrum,  kidneys  and  back,  especially  near
spine;  in  shoulder  and  elbow  joints;  from  neck  to  elbow;
in  arm;  in  hands;  in  middle  of  r.  thigh;  in  1.  heel;  in
old  ulcers  on  legs ;  through  r.  instep ;  in  limbs.

Cutting:  in  rectum  and  bladder;  in  glans  penis  and  ab-
domen ;  in  abdomen ;  in  urethra ;  across  hypogastrium ;
from  scapula  into  chest.

Lacerating:  in  lower  jaw.

Shooting  pain:  through  head;  up  shoulder  blades;  in
calves  from  knees  to  ankles.

Stitching,  tearing:  into  stomach  to  back  and  shoulders;  in
forehead,  vertex  or  sides  of  head.

Lacerating  stitches :  in  hernia.

Stitches:  in  temples;  in  head;  in  eyes;  in  region  of  r.
parotid;  over  epigastric  region  and  down  into  abdo-
men ;  in  teeth ;  in  r.  side  toward  epigastrium ;  in  1.  side
of  chest,  extending  into  abdomen  and  loins;  under  short
ribs  and  in  middle  of  chest;  in  rectum;  in  bladder;  in
neck  of  bladder  and  anus;  in  nipples;  in  chest;  in  1.
side  of  chest;  from  under  short  ribs  to  small  of  back  and
shoulders;  in  back  toward  small  of  back;  in  shoulders;
in  1.  axilla;  in  arms;  in  both  hips;  in  knees  and  ankles;
in  toes  ;  in  big  toe  of  r.  foot ;  in  corns.

Deep  seated,  stitching  pain:  in  fauces.

Bursting  pain :  in  abdomen.

Lightninglike  pains :  strike  epigastrium,  spread  like  rays
over  abdomen  and  shoot  into  all  passages  of  body.


LYCOPODIUM.  138

Hot  pains :  flash  across  bowels.

Darting :  in  r.  cervical  muscles  from  below  upward.

Twitching  pain :  in  knees.

Pinching,  pricking  pains:  on  different  parts  of  skin,  some-
times apparently  in  veins.

Hammering  pain:  in  centre  of  forehead.

Throbbing:  on  top  of  head;  in  brain;  in  teeth;  in  erup-
tion around  knees ;  in  forehead  ;  in  back.

Stupefying  pain :  in  head.

Cutting  soreness :  of  scalp.

Burning  or  boring  stitches :  in  ovaries.

Burning  pain:  between  shoulders;  in  blisters  on  tongue;
on  thumb  and  third  finger  of  1.  hand;  in  stomach;  in
rectum;  in  lump  in  1.  breast;  in  lower  limbs;  in  wounds;
in  spots  on  inner  surface  of  thighs ;  in  ankle.

Smarting  pain:  in  eyes;  in  skin  of  thigh.

Stinging  pain:  in  throat;  in  rectum;  in  lower  limbs.

Drawing  sticking  pain :  in  back.

Gnawing  biting  pain:  in  r.  malar  bone  into  sound  and
affected  teeth.

Gnawing,  twisting,  griping:  in  epigastrium,  stomach  and
upper  abdomen.

Griping  and  clutching:  in  epigastrium;  in  stomach.

Laborlike  pains:  in  abdomen.

Gouty  pains  :  in  limbs.

Tensive  pain  :  in  nape  of  neck  and  shoulders ;  in  leg.

Constrictive  pain:  in  epigastrium ;  in  stomach;  of  rectum
and  anus.

Contractive  pain :  in  perineum ;  in  calves.

Compressive  pain  :  in  stomach.

Drawing  pain:  in  forehead  and  occiput;  in  lower  jaw;  in
abdomen;  in  all  parts  of  abdomen;  in  inner  surface  of
upper  arms,  extending  over  elbows  along  forearm  and
wrists;  in  front  of  legs,  from  knee  to  instep;  in  scapulae ;
in  limbs.

Tearing,  boring  and  scraping:  on  external  head.

Colic :  in  region  of  transverse  colon ;  violent  near  r.  hip ;
violent  gall  stone  colic.

Colicky  pains:  in  r.  side  of  abdomen.

Bearing  down :  over  bladder.

Neuralgia :  of  vagina ;  of  extremities.

Gnawing :  in  vagina.

Cramplike  pain  :  in  bladder.

Cramps  :  in  abdomen  ;  in  stomach  ;  in  legs  and  thighs;  in
uterus ;  in  small  of  back ;  in  chest ;  in  toes.

Crampy  sensation  :  upward  towards  chest.

Pressive  pain :  in  eyes ;  in  hepatic  region ;  in  r.  hypochon-
drium ;  in  r.  side.


139  LYCOPODIUM.

Pressing  pain  :  on  vertex ;  in  stomach ;  in  region  of  liver.

Dull,  aching  pain :  all  over  lungs.

Dull  pain :  in  forehead ;  in  teeth  ;  in  epigastrium ;  in  hj^po-
gastrium  and  loins.

Aching :  in  back  and  limbs  ;  of  head ;  in  bones ;  in  legs ;
in  rectum  ;  in  kidneys ;  in  teeth ;  in  epigastrium ;  be-
tween scapulse.

Shattered  or  concussed  feeling :  in  head.

Dull  pressing:  in  region  of  bladder  and  abdomen.

Pressure,  drawing,  griping :  in  abdomen.

Squeezing  pressure :  in  abdomen.

Pressure:  in  eyes;  in  stomach;  in  liver;  in  epigastrium  ;
in  abdomen ;  in  hepatic  region ;  in  prsecordia ;  distress-
ing in  rectum;  in  thighs  and  head;  through  vagina;  in
1.  chest;  in  a  small  spot  in  nape  of  neck.

Rheumatic  tension:  in  r.  shoulder  joint;  in  1.  hip.

Twisting,  crawling  and  emptiness:  in  stomach.

Burning:  in  forehead;  in  eyes;  of  eyelids;  of  face;  in
mouth;  in  throat  and  pharynx;  in  stomach;  in  epi-
gastrium, extending  into  throat;  up  whole  spine  ;  in  feet
and  hands;  in  umbilical  region;  at  anus;  in  rectum;  m
bladder;  in  palms  of  hands  and  soles  of  feet ;  during  mic-
turition, in  urethra;  in  vagina;  in  nipples ;  between  scap-
ulae; in  old  ulcers  on  legs;  in  cheeks.

Burning  heat:  in  palms  of  hands.

Burning,  scalding,  itching:  of  scalp.

Heat:  in  temples;  in  ears;  in  face  ;  of  hands;  in  front  of
legs;  of  head;  in  palms;  of  eyes.

Biting :  at  anus.

Smarting:  of  eyes;  of  lids.

Pricking :  in  throat  and  pharynx.

Sticking :  on  scrotum ;  in  back,  extending  to  scapulae.

Twinging:  in  rectum.

Twitching :  in  arms  and  shoulders,  in  limbs  and  through
body.

Sore  aching :  in  region  of  liver.

Soreness:  of  eyes;  of  chest;  of  corners  of  mouth;  of  throat;
of  1.  tonsil;  of  meatus;  in  urethra;  between  scrotum  and
thighs;  of  nipples;  all  over;  of  feet.

Painful  sensitiveness:  of  skin;  of  abdomen.

Painfulness :  of  bones  of  lower  extremities ;  of  head  and
stomach;  of  carbuncle  on  chin;  of  liver  spots  on  chest
and  arms.

Sore  sensation:  in  chest;  on  inner  surface  of  1.  thigh;  in
corns.

Tenderness:  along  margin  of  liver  and  at  epigastrium.

Sensitiveness :  of  submaxillary  glands.  _

Pressing  out  sensation :  in  abdominal  ring.


LYCOPODIUM.  140

Pressing:  in  perineum,  near  anus.

Constriction:  in  region  of  submaxillary  glands;  in  stom-
ach; of  oesophagus ;  of  anus;  of  sphincter;  from  r.  side
all  around  short  ribs ;  in  chest.

Contraction :  in  throat.

Spasmodic  contraction:  of  abdomen.

Tension:  of  abdomen  ;  in  liver;  beneath  stomach;  mark-
ing diaphragmatic  attachments ;  in  hypochondria;  at
anus;  under  clavicles.

Tightness :  in  old  ulcers  of  lower  part  of  thighs.

Fulness :  of  abdomen  ;  up  to  throat.

Full  feeling :  in  rectum  and  bladder.

Jammed  feeling:  in  perineum.

Bloated  feeling :  in  abdomen.

Heavy  sensation :  in  bladder.

Heaviness :  of  head ;  of  tongue ;  of  stomach ;  of  abdomen ;
in  bladder;  of  limbs;  of  hands.

"Weight :  at  stomach.

Oppression :  of  chest.

Shaking:  in  head.

Fluttering:  at  stomach,  then  all  over  body.

Pulsation:  in  abdomen;  in  back;  in  temples;  in  abdomi-
nal ring.

Jerking:  in  urethra;  in  lower  limbs;  of  single  limbs  or
whole  body.

Sensation  of  churning  :  in  stomach.

Light  sensation :  about  heart.

Anxiety :  in  epigastrium ;  in  chest.

Distressing  feeling :  in  hepatic  region.

Sinking:  at  stomach.

Rising  of  warmth :  along  spine.

Great  weariness :  in  back,  going  down  to  feet.

Weakness :  in  knees,  down  legs  to  joints  of  feet;  of  arms;
of  affected  lower  limb ;  of  knees.

Stiffness:  in  renal  region;  of  1.  side  of  neck;  in  nape  of
neck  and  shoulders ;  in  small  of  back ;  in  affected  lower
limbs;  in  knees;  in  hollow  of  knees;  in  knee  joints ;  pain-
ful in  muscles;  in  all  joints;  of  elbows  and  shoulders.

Numbness:  in  feet  and  hands;  of  limbs;  in  joints;  through
body.

Dryness:  of  mouth;  of  lips;  of  eyes;  of  nose;  of  posterior
nares;  of  tongue;  of  vagina;  in  windpipe;  of  hands,
especially  of  palms;  of  skin  of  hands.

Tickling:  in  throat.

Dull  tingling:  in  hands.

Formication:  in  windpipe;  of  affected  limb.

Itching:  of  scalp ;  of  crust  on  head ;  of  eyes;  ofcanthi;_in
ear;  of  eruption  on  cheek;  of  eruption  on  chin;  eruption


141  •  LYCOPODIUM.

around  knees;  of  eruption  around  hemorrhoids;  of  anus ;

in  urethra;  of  inner  surface  of  prepuce;  on  scrotum; of

vulva; on  chest; of  pimples  on  neck; of  pimples  on

hands;  of  pimples  between  fingers;  of  old  ulcers  on  legs;

of  liver  spots  on  chest  and  arms.
Biting  itching:  from  thighs  to  genitals;  on  head,  back  and

limbs.
Chilliness:  in  rectum.
Cold  feeling:  in  eyes ;  in  extremities;  in  feet  and  hands;  in

face  and  feet.
Icy  coldness :  of  hands  and  feet.
^Tissues. 1 1  Emaciation and  debility  from  loss  of  fluids;

upper  parts  wasted  ;  lower  limbs  swollen. ^Ascites.
I  Atrophy  of  infants.

■  Soft  parts  feel  painful  to  touch  or  pressure.

■  Numbness  of  limbs ;  twitching  through  body.
I  Hemorrhages,  dark  blood.

■  Arthritic  pain  and  stiffness  of  joints.

I  The  pains  are  drawing  in  character  and  seem  to  be  "  be-
tween the  bones  and  skin ;"  pains  <  rainy  or  stormy
weather  and  by  cold ;  >  by  warmth  and  particularly
by  lying  in  bed;  rheumatic  tension  and  tearing  in
joints  of  upper  and  lower  extremities,  so  that  she  can-
not do  anything,  as  if  paralyzed ;  stiffness  of  limbs  and
coldness  of  feet. ^Chronic  rheumatism.

■  Sensation  as  if  void  of  marrow.

■  Osteitis,  tophi,  arthritic  nodes  with  nocturnal  pains.

■  ■Softening  of  bones;  caries.

■  ■  Gouty  lithsemia.

■  General  dropsy,  consequent  upon  disease  of  liver,  enor-

mous swelling  of  scrotum,  redness  and  painful  rawness
between  it  and  thigh;  frequent  painful  urging  to
urinate.

■  ■Ascites: after  scarlet  fever; after  venesections; after

abuse  of  alcohol;  from  liver  affections;  upper  part  of
body  emaciated,  lower  enormously  swollen ;  after  inter-
mittent fever.

I  I  Hydrops  siccus  from  hypertrophy  of  heart.

■  Erectile  tumors  which  have  now  an  increase  and  then  a

decrease  of  amount  of  blood  in  them.

■  Venous  and  arterial  nsevi  materni.

I I  Warm  poultices  aggravate  all  pains ;  boils  returning  peri-
odically; carbuncles  with  burning  stitches  all  around,
with  alternate  chilliness  and  heat  of  body. ^Anthrax.

■Boils  and  furuncles  returning  periodically.

■  Pus  bloody,  corroding  and  putrid;  w^hitish,  milky  ap-

pearance. ^Suppuration.

■  Glandular  swellings.


LYCOPODIUM.  142

■  Chilblains.

iScrofulosis  and  tuberculosis,  cheesy  degeneration  and
dropsical  effusion.

1 1  Deep  seated  progressing  chronic  disease.
^  Touch.  Passive  Motion.  Injuries.  Touch :  teeth  exces-
sively painful;  causes  bleeding  of  gums;  epigastric
region  extremely  sensitive ;  pain  in  r.  hypochondriac
region  <  ;  region  of  liver  sensitive ;  eruption  around
hemorrhoids  painful ;  varices  painful ;  spot  on  abdomen
sensitive ;  condylomata  on  mucous  surface  of  prepuce
not  sensitive;  on  spots  on  inner  surface  of  thigh  causes
pain;  inner  ankles  tender;  all  soft  parts  painful.

Pressure:  stomach  sensitive;  of  hand,  tensive  aching  in
hypochondria  <  ;  abdomen  sensitive;  on  hypchon-
drium  causes  pain  in  epigastrium  and  vice  versa ;
emaciated  lower  extremities  pit;  great  sensitiveness
over  r.  side  of  chest;  tearing  in  head  >  ;  all  soft  parts
painful.

Tight  clothing :  epigastric  region  extremely  sensitive ;
abdomen  very  sensitive.

Weight  of  clothes :  abdomen  sensitive.

When  riding  in  carriage :  nausea.

After  injury  to  ankle,  half  a  year  ago,  slight  wound  of

skin,  followed by  ulceration until whole ankle was

affected.

*^  Skin. ■  Unhealthiness  of  skin ;  dry,  hot,  burning,  itching

when  warm;  humid,  suppurating  or  vesicular  eruptions.

I  Skin  dry  and  hot,  especially  that  of  hands.

■  Exhalations  from  body  smell  like  onions.
■Flesh  in  ridges,  as  if  struck  with  a  stick.

I  I  Biting  and  itching:  on  head,  back  and  limbs,  with  chil-
liness; when  becoming  warm  through  day.

■  ■Pinching and pricking pains on different parts of

skin;  sometimes  apparently  in  veins.

■  Eruption:  first  vesicular,  then  dry;  humid,  suppurating;

full  of  deep  rhagades;  breeding  lice,  itching  violently;
intertrigo,  raw  places  readily  bleeding.

■  Eczema  on  face,  genitals,  legs,  neck  and  fingers  of  r.

hand;  bleeds  easily  and  is  covered  with  thick  crusts,
with  fetid  secretion  beneath.

■  Moist,  scald  head,  most  on  and  behind  r.  ear.

■  Intertrigo  between  thighs  and  labia  forming  fiat,  lard-

like ulcers  with  inflamed  edges.

■  Scaly  furfuraceous  herpes,  yellow  at  base,  and  bleeding  on

face  at  corners  of  mouth.
1  1  Insensible  yellow  brown  shrivelled  herpes.

■  Herpes  on  nape  of  neck,  in  axillae,  on  arms,  thighs  and

calves  of  legs.


143  LYCOPODIUM.

I  Impetigo  after  abuse  of  mercury.

■  Psoriasis  of  hands  and  fingers;  eruption  has  a  furfura-

ceous  look,  sometimes  fissured  and  bleeding.
I  Liver  spots  on  chest  and  arms,  painful  or  itching.

■  Red,  itching  or  burning  spots  of  eruption.
I  Large,  red  spots  on  legs  and  abdomen.

■  Dark,  red  blotches  here  and  there.

■  Eruptions  bleed  easily.
I  I  Freckles.

INecvus  maternus  and  vascular  tumors.

■  Urticaria,  chronic  cases.

■  Large,  jagged,  often  pedunculated  warts  exuding  moist-

ure and  bleeding  readily.

■  Bloodboils;  boils  do  not  mature,  but  remain  blue.

■  ■Lupus;  recent  cases,  shallow  ulceration,  in  pale,  sallow

patients.

■  I  Ulcers :  bleed  and  burn  when  dressed ;  tearing,  shoot-

ing, itching  at  night,  burning  when  touched;  fistulous,
with  hard,  red,  shining  everted  edges  and  inflammatory
swelling  of  aff'ected  parts;  bleeding  easily;  mercurial;
in  gouty  persons ;  phagedenic ;  much  inflamed ;  swol-
len; superficial;  edges  high  or  callous;  impure  centre;
black  gangrenous;  of  ofi'ensive  smell;  thin  ichor;  on
lower  limbs ;  cancerous ;  flat  with  a  bluish  white  base.

■  Child  becomes  drowsy  and  awakens  from  sleep  frightened,

clinging  to  crib,  seems  to  know  no  one ;  soon  drops  to
sleep  again,  only  to  reawaken  with  same  symptoms;
when  rash  suddenly  pales  and  glands  swell  and  face  be-
comes bloated  and  paler  than  natural. ^Scarlatina.

■  ■Secondary  eruption  of  dark  blotches  on  hands,  thighs,

back,  or  face. ^Scarlatina.

■  Colic  during  desquamation. ^Scarlatina.

■  Scarlatina  and  measles,  with  stupefaction  and  sopor.

■  During  desquamative  stage  of  scarlet  fever  sudden  rise

of  temperature,  with  small  weak  pulse ;  hot,  dry  skin ;
great  thirst ;  wilfulness  and  ill  behavior ;  paleness  and
cedema  of  face,  generally  only  on  1.  side  and  in  feet ;
scanty  urine  with  strangury ;  burning  in  urethra  ;  pain
in  region  of  kidneys;  urine  at  first  dark  red  or
bloody,  containing  much  albumen  ;  ascites.

■  Weak, emaciated; staggering gait; body bent; face

cachectic,  sunken  and  covered  with  a  coppery  eruption ;
eyes  dim,  vacant;  voice  hoarse;  fatty  ulcers  in  mouth
and  throat;  looseness  of  teeth  and  bleeding  of  gums  ;
loss  of  appetite;  sleeplessness;  constant  inclination  to
lie  down,  particularly  about  3  or  4  p.m.;  tearing  in
lipbs,  particularly  in  forearms  and  lower  leg,  <  at
night  and  in  damp  weather ;  depression  of  spirits,  tired


LYCOPODIUM.  144

of  life ;  hemorrhoids,  pain  in  back,  stitching  and  itch-
ing in  anus ;  hard  stool. ^Syphilis.

■Secondary,  tettery  eruptions ;  ulcers  in  throat,  of  dark
yellowish  grey  color ;  cough  and  hoarseness  from  similar
affection  in  larynx  ;  coppery  eruption  on  forehead,  and
cachectic  appearance  of  face ;  dry,  pediculated,  painless
condylomata  on  sexual  organs ;  nightly  pains  in  limbs
during  wet  weather;  low  spirited;  desponding;  ner-
vous weakness. ^Syphilis.

B Chancres  with  raised  edges;  indolent  chancres  with  thick,
rounded,  prominent  margins,  granulation  flabby  or  ab-
sent; eruptions  on  glans ;  condylomata;  ulcers  in  mouth.
^Syphilis.

■  Herpetic  eruption  in  mouth,  first  affecting  tonsils  and
then  extending  to  sides  and  under  tip  of  tongue;  affected
parts  look  wrinkled,  like  hands  of  a  woman  who  had
been  washing;  warm  foods  and  tobacco  cause  burning;
much  hoarseness  and  irritation  to  cough,  latter  sound-
ing like  that  of  laryngeal  phthisis.  ^Syphilis.
"  Stages  of  Life,  Constitution.  Suitable  for:  old  women  and
children  ;  persons  of  keen  intellect,  but  feeble  muscular
develojDment ;  upper  part  of  body  wasted,  lower  part
semidropsical ;  lean  and  predisposed  to  lung  and  hepatic
affections ;  herpetic  and  scrofulous  constitutions ;  hypo-
chondriacs subject  to  skin  diseases;  lithic  acid  diathesis,
much  red  sediment  in  urine,  urine  itself  transparent;
sallow  people  with  cold  extremities,  haughty  disposition,
when  sick,  mistrustful,  slow  of  comprehension,  weak
memory  ;  weak  children  with  well  developed  heads  but
puny,  sickl}^  bodies,  irritable,  nervous  and  unmanage-
able when  sick,  after  sleep  cross,  pushing  every  one
away  angrily.

Boy,  set.  6  days,  after,  catching  cold  during  an  attack  of
jaundice;  conjunctivitis.

Girl,  set.  10  months;  eczema  capitas.

Child;  chronic  crying.

Boj?^,  set.  1 ;  polypus  of  eye.

Girl,  set.  2|,  vaccinated  with  humanized  virus  when  one
year  old,  soon  after,  large  sores  all  over  body,  which
yielded  to  powerful  ointments  and  astringents,  suffering
one  year;  diarrhoea.

Girl,  set.  3,  since  early  infancy;  constipation.

Girl,  set.  3  years  and  5  mos.,  suffering  two  weeks;  capillary
bronchitis.

Boy,  set.  4,  chancre;  another,  set.  4;  rachitis.

Girl,  set.  6,  scrofulous;  warts  on  chin.

Girl,  set.  7 ;  eczema  capitis.

Child,  set.  7,  treated  in  vain  with  Chinoidine;  intermittent
fevjr.


145  LYCOPODIUM.

Boy, set. 7, suffering since infancy; inguinal hernia;
another,  set.  7;  diphtheria;  another,  set.  7,  deaf-mute;
otorrhoea.
Girl,  set.  8,  amiable  disposition,  light  hair,  blue  eyes,  slen-
der; ague.
Girl,  set.  8,  fleshy  and  full  faced,  ruddy,  dark  complexioned;

diphtheria.
Girl,  set.  9,  just  recovered  from  scarlatina;  diphtheria.
Girl,  ill  one  week;  ulcerated  throat.
Girl,  set.  10;  diphtheria.
Boy,  set.  11,  weak,  suffering  for  one  year  from  quartan

ague;  dropsy.
Girl,  set.  11,  very  thin,  pale,  strumous  diathesis,  nervous

temperament;  pneumonia.
Girl,  set.  11,  very  nervous  temperament;  diphtheria.
Boy,  set.  12  ;  rheumatism.

Boy,  set.  13,  after  typhoid  pneumonia;  threatened  phthisis.
Boy,  set.  14,  remarkably  feeble  and  lean  and  of  weak  mus-
cular development,  but  of  sensitive  mind  and  excellent
intellect,  mother  died  of  consumption;  cough.
Girl,  set.  15,  has  always  been  delicate,  pleurisy  three  years
ago,  spits  blood,  menses  not  appeared,  father  and  sister
died  of  phthisis;  lung  affection.
Boy,  set.  15,  hypermetropic,  and  double  convergent  stra-
bismus; hemeralopia.
Girl, set. 17, poorly developed, pituitous constitution,,
menses  irregular,  suffering  for  last  year  from  urticaria
and  boils;  affection  of  stomach  and  abdomen.
Boy,  set.  18,  robust;  latent  pneumonia.
Girl,  set.lS,  fair  blonde,  temperament  gentle,  but  vivacious ;

insanity.
Girl,  set.  18,  tall,  slight  figure,  narrow  chest  and  stooping,

family  consumptive;  chronic  cough.
Girl,  set.  18,  brunette,  medium  height;  amenorrhoea.
Girl,  ast.  19,  phthisical  family;  threatened  tuberculosis.
Man,  set.  19,  worked  in  a  brass  foundry;  hemeralopia.
Girl,  set.  20,  teacher;  diphtheritis.
Woman,  set  23,  several months  pregnant,  carbuncle  on

chin;  trismus.
Girl,  set.  23,  weak,  neglected  pneumonia;  chest  affection.
Man,  set.  23,  had  herpetic  eruption  over  body,  which  dis-
appeared of  itself;  ulcers  on  foot.
AVoman,  set.  24,  suffering  four  years;  diarrhoea.
Man,  set  24,  attacks  every  six  weeks;  gravel.
Man,  set.  24,  robust,  at  one  time  had  itch,  two  years  ago
had  fever  with  a  vesicular  eruption,  since  then  in  poor
health ;  threatened  tuberculosis.

VOL.  VII. — 10.


LYCOPODIUM.  146

Woman,  set.  25,  dark  hair  and  skin,  morose,  peevish  dis-
position ;  incontinence  of  urine.

Woman,  set.  26,  delicate,  suffering  two  weeks,-  after  child-
birth; febrile  attacks.

Woman,  set.  26,  disposed  to  cramps  and  hemorrhoids;
peritonitis.

Woman,  set.  26,  sanguine  temperament,  after  getting  wet;
pains  in  abdomen.

Girl,  set.  26,  brunette,  strong,  suffering  several  years;  pains
in  face.

Woman,  set.  27,  single,  bilious  temperament;  cystitis.

Man,  set.  28,  three  years  ago  had  a  herpetic  eruption
which  was  cured  by  baths,  then  a  blow  upon  leg  was
followed  by  bone  swelling  and  suppuration;  phthisis
pituitosa.

Man,  set.  28,  preacher,  after  pneumonia;  threatened
phthisis.

Man,  set.  28,  light  complexioned,  nervous,  sickly  since
childhood,  after  scarlatina  has  been  troubled  with  dis-
charge from  r.  ear  and  partial  deafness ;  diphtheria.

Man,  set.  28;  diphtheria.

A.  D.,  set.  29  ;  suffering  four  days;  diphtheria.

Woman,  set.  29  ;  flatulent  indigestion.

Man,  set.  29,  suffering  four  days;  diphtheritis.

Young  man,  one  year  ago,  gonorrhoea,  for  which  mercury
was  given  until  salivation  was  produced ;  syphilis.

Young  woman,  thin,  brunette,  menses  profuse,  suffering
about  a  year ; affection  of  liver.

Young  woman,  fair  complexion,  sanguine,  lymphatic
temperament; intermittent  rheumatic  pains.

Man,  set.  30,  dark  complexion;  ague.

Woman,  set.  30,  sanguine  temperament,  lively  disposition,
suffering  with  rheumatism,  headache  and  congestions;
hemorrhage  after  abortion.

Man,  set.  30,  suffering  several  months ;  ansesthesia  of  hands.

Woman,  set.  30,  suffering  several  years  with  digestive
troubles  after  typhoid  fever;  hemorrhage  after  abortion.

Woman,  set.  31,  lively,  sanguine  temperament ;  anal  eczema.

Woman,  set.  31,  after  typhoid  fever;  dimness  of  lens.

Woman,  set.  32,  mother  of  three  children,  three  days  after
parturition ;  febrile  attacks.

Woman,  set.  32,  slender,  well  built,  lively  temperament,
married,  but  childless,  menses  regular,  family  affected
with  eczema;  digestive  disturbances  and  tapeworm.

Man,  set.  34,  choleric,  melancholic,  ten  years  ago  had  gon-
orrhoea, no  history  of  syphilis;  discharge  from  urethra,
and  ulcers  on  penis.

Peasant  woman,  set.  35,  delivered  of  twins  after  tedious


147  LYCOPODIUM.

confinement,  but  had  severe  miliary  eruptions  and
many  other  troubles,  making  a  bad  recovery;  dropsy.
Woman,  eet.  35,  with  inherited  tendency  to  stomachal  and
abdominal  affections,  suffering  occasionally  from  men-
strual disturbances;  colic.

Man,  set.  37;  rheumatism;  another,  set.  37,  frequently
tapped;  ascites.

Woman,  set.  37,  tall,  spare,  otherwise  healthy;  bronchocele.

Man,  set.  38,  rheumatism  ten  years  ago ;  chronic  rheumatism.

Man,  set.  38,  ordinary  constitution,  unusual  good  health,
with  exception  of  constipation  which  he  could  only  re-
rnove  with  purgatives,  for  last  three  years  this  constipa-
tion had  increased  to  such  a  degree  "as  to  almost  resist
action  of  purgatives.

Woman,  set.  38,  suffering  several  years;  affection  of
stomach.

Woman,  set.  39,  dj^speptic,  seven  months  pregnant;  uterine
hemorrhage  and  threatened  abortion.

Woman,  set.  39,  suffering  for  eighteen  years ;  uterine  dis-
placement.

Woman;  affection  of  bladder.

Woman,  three  days  after  fifth  confinement; tympanitis.

Woman, ^  feeble  constitution,  phlegmatic  temperament;
tonsillitis  and  pemphigus.

Woman,  pregnant  five  or  six  months;  vomiting.

Woman,  five  days  after  confinement;  sore  nipples.

Woman,  set.  40,  formerly  suffering  from  tearing  pains
throughout  body,  particularly  in  legs; ulcers on  legs.

Man,  set.  40,  thin,  suffering  from  hemorrhoids,  several
months  ago  had  severe  stitches  in  chest  and  fever  for
which  Cinchona  was  given ;  dropsy.

Woman,  set.  40,  mother  of  five  children,  since  second  day
after  parturition,  eleven  weeks  ago,  daily  attacks  of
fever.

Woman,  set.  40,  suffering  a  long  time;  hernia.

Man,  set.  40,  watchmaker,  compelled  to  sit  much ;  affection
of  liver.

Man,  set.  40,  psoric,  after  rheumatic  catarrhal  affection
ran  splinter  into  finger;  affection  of  hand  and  arm.

Woman,  set.  40,  sanguine  temperament,  in  youth  affected
with  glandular  swelling  after  catching  cold;  rheumatism.

Man,  set.  40,  suffering  from  disease  of  liver;  dropsy.

Woman,  set.  40,  formerly  suffering  from  itch,  three  months
pregnant;  digestive  disturbance.

Woman,  set.  40,  twenty-one  years  married,  mother  of  two
children,  the  youngest  eighteen  years,  suffering  sixteen
years;  psora,  with  a  complication  of  diseased  states.

Man,  set.  40,  pneumonia.


LYCOPODIUM.  148

Woman,  set.  40,  suffering  one  year;  amenorrhoea.

Man,  set.  40,  had  been  much  exposed  to  night  air,  which
was  followed  by  copious  blood  spitting,  fever,  pains  in
chest,  suffering  ten  weeks;  pulmonary  disease.

Woman,  set.  42,  suffering  twelve  years ;  hysteria.

Man,  set.  44,  strong  constitution,  phlegmatic  temperament;,
affection  of  liver.

Man,  set.  44,  lawyer,  suffering  six  years; cerebral  paresis.

Man,  set.  44,  ailing  for  two  years;  ulcers  in  legs,  and  dys-
pepsia.

Woman,  set.  46,  mother  of  twelve  children,  suffering
twenty  years  from  open  ulcer  on  foot;  abdominal  affec-
tion.

Woman,  set.  48,  married,  delicate  all  her  life,  suffering
acutely  for  several  years;  indigestion.

Man,  set.  48,  lymphatic  temperament,  light  hair,  grey
eyes,  complexion  fair,  lively  disposition,  good  natured,,
yet  constantly  desponding  if  feeling  unwell,  suffering
five  years;  vesical  calculus  and  hsematuria.

Man,  nervo-bilious  temperament,  suffering  one  year;  dys-
pepsia.

Man,  eruptions  on  face  of  long  standing,  supposed  to  have^
been  contracted  at  the  barber's;  barber's  itch.

Woman,  suffering  several  months;  leucorrhoea.

Woman,  lymphatic; tuberculosis.

Man,  middle  aged;  lithiasis.

Woman,  set.  50,  short  stature,  mother  of  many  children,,
frequently  bled,  addicted  to  liquor;  dropsy.

Woman,  set.  50,  not  menstruated  for  two  years,  after  catch-
ing cold  three  years  ago;  rheumatism.

Man,  set.  50,  thin,  cachectic,  musician;  cramps  in  stomach..

Widow,  set.  50,  suffering  for  years;  flatulency.

Woman,  set.  50,  sallow  complexion,  of  active  habits;  con-
stipation.

Woman,  set.  50,  weak,  cachectic,  formerly  troubled  with
abdominal  complaints  and  itch,  has  not  menstruated  for
five  years;  impairment  of  hearing.

Man,  set.  50,  arthritic,  suffering  from  stiffness  of  joints  and.
eczema;  flatulency  and  tapeworm.

Woman,  set.  50;  rheumatism.

Woman,  set.  50,  married ;  dyspepsia.

Man,  set.  50,  arthritic;  cramps  in  stomach.

Woman,  set.  52;  ulcer  on  back.

Woman,  set.  53,  robust;  after  itch  eruption  on  leg.

Man,  set.  54,  suffering  several  years ;  hernia.

Woman,  set.  56,  unmarried,  small  stature,  stout;  dyspnoea.-

Man,  set.  56,  atra-bilious  temperament;  hsematuria.

Man,  set.  56,  arthritic,  suffering  many  years;  cramps  in
stomach.


149  LYCOPODIUM.

Woman,  eet.  58,  large,  corpulent,  gouty  diathesis;  flatulent
dyspepsia.

Man,  set.  60,  strong,  butcher,  father  and  grandfather  suf-
fered from  calculi ;  renal  colic.

Woman,  set.  60,  sanguine  temperament,  after  slight  injury
to  ankle;  ulcer.

Man,  £et.  60,  strong,  writes  much  :  amaurosis.

Woman,  set.  60,  thin,  lively,  farmer's  wife;  pains  in
stomach.

Man,  set.  60,  brunette,  large,  strong;  rheumatism.

Woman,  set.  60;  flatulent  indigestion.

Man,  set.  60,  from  taking  cold;  acute  cystitis.

Man,  set.  60;  flatulency.

Woman,  set.  64;  debility.

Woman,  set.  65,  since  sixteenth  year,  wdien  menses  ap-
peared, suffered  every  month  from  colic;  since  forty-
ninth  year,  when  cessation  of  menstruation  occurred,
attacks  more  frequent  and  violent;  colic.

Man,  set.  67;  intermittent  fever.

Man,  set.  68,  suffering  two  years;  gravel.

Man,  set.  76,  strong,  corpulent,  plethoric,  highly  fed,  fond
of  wine  and  tobacco,  is  affected  several  times  every  year
with  severe  catarrh,  for  eight  years  has  had  ulcer  on  r.
ala  nasi ;  ulcer  on  leg.

Man,  set.  81;  gout.
^  Relations.  Antidoted  by :  Aeon.,  Camphor,  Caustic,  Chamom.,
Coffea,  Graphit.,  Pulsat.,  coffee.

It  antidotes:  Cinchon.  (yellow  face,  liver  and  spleen  swol-
len, flatulency,  tension  under  short  ribs  <  r.  side,  press-
ure in  stomach  and  constipation).

Compatible :  Bellad.,Bryon.,  ■  Garb.  veg.  (a  dose  every  eighth
day  facilitates  action  of  Lycop),  I B  Gale.  ost.  (predisposi-
tion to  constipation,  hard  stools  evacuated  with  diffi-
culty, or  urging  ineffectual),  Graphit.,  Hyosc,  a  Laches.,
Ledum,  Phosphor.,  ti  Pulsat,  Sepia,  Silica,  Stramon.,
I  Suljjhur,  Verat.

Incompatible :  Coffee.

Complementary  to  Lodum.

Compare :  Arsen.,  Gale,  sulph..  Garb,  an.,  Euphras.,  Hepar.,
Mereur.,  Natr.  mur.,  Nitr.  ac,  Nux  vom.,  Rhus  tox.,  Sabad.
(regularly  <  4  to  8  p.m.).

Unless  undoubtedly  indicated  the  treatment  of  chronic
diseases  should  not  be  commenced  with  Lycop.,  it  is
better  to  give  first  another  antipsoric  remedy.


LYCOPUS  VIRGINICUS.  150

LYCOPUS  VIRGINICUS.

Bugle  Weed.  Labiatse.

This  plant,  sometimes  called  Virginia  Hoarhound,  grows  in  shady  and  wet
places  throughout  the  United  States.  The  tincture  is  prepared  from  the  fresh
plant  in  flower.

Provings  by  Chandler  (Hale's  New  Rem.),  tincture  and  first  dilution,  Mor-
rison (Mon.  Horn.  Eev.,  vol.  16,  p.  737),  tinctui-e  and  200th  dilution,  three  j^rov-
ings ;  produced  considerable  action  upon  the  heart ;  took  sphygmographic  tracings
(Mon.  Horn.  Eev.,  vol.  18,  p.  620).

Clinical  Authorities. — Diabetes,  Gerald,  N.  A.  J.  H.,  vol.  27,  p.  239;
Eay,  Hale's  Therap.,  p.  406  ;  Incipient  phthisis,  Hale,  Hale's  Therap.,  p.  402 ;  Pal-
pitation of  heart,  Chamberlain,  Times  Retros.,  vol.  3.,  p.  31 ;  Heart  disease,  Cum-
mings,  B.  J.  H.,  vol.  34,  p.  388 ;  Exophthalmus,  Morrison,  Hale's  Therap.,  p.  404 ;
Cardiac  irritability,  Hale,  Hale's  Therap.,  pp.  403-4;  Typho-malarial  fever,  Kent,
Hom.  Phys.,  vol.  4,  p.  257;  Verification  of  symptom  179  in  Allen's  Encyclopedia,
Eeed,  Trans.  Hom.  Med.  Soc.  Pa.,  1883,  p.  306.

^  Mind. Increased  mental  and  phj^sical  activity  in  evening.
I  I  Stupid,  with  lack  of  expression  during  menstrual  flow.
I  I  Mind  wanders  from  one  thing  to  another.
I  I  General  wakefulness  and  morbid  vigilance.
Slight  obtusion  of  intellect,  with  dull  aching  through  sin-
ci|)ut;  increased  power  of  concentration.
^  Sensorium. Vertigo  ;  tends  to  stagger  to  right.
^  Inner  Head. Pressure  in  forehead,  <  in  1.  portion.
Dull  aching  in  sinciput,  slight  obtusion  of  intellect.
Aching  in  frontal  eminences,  1.  to  r.,  <  left.
I  I  Pain  in  forehead  and  temple,  >  by  nausea.
I  Headaches :  frontal  then  occipital ;  over  eyes  and  frontal
eminences:  pains  aching,  pressive,  pressing  out,  con-
gestive; often  succeeded  by  labored  heart  and  cardiac
depression;  accompanied  by  intellectual  obtuseness.
^  Sight  and  Eyes. Eyes  feel  weak,  as  if  system  was  over-
fatigued.
Eyes  feel  full  and  heavy;  pressing  outward, with  pressure

in  front  of  head.
Dull  pain  in  1.  supraorbital  region.
Neuralgic  pain  in  r.  supraorbital  region  and  1.  testicle.
BProtrusion  of  eyes,  with  tumultuous  action  of  heart;  ex-
onhthalmic  goitre. ^Morbus  Basedowii.
'''  Teeth  and  Gums. Toothache  in  r.  lower  molars,  then  sub-


151  LYCOPUS  VIRGINICUS.

acute  pain,  first  in  1.  then  in  r.  frontal  eminence,  in  r.

molar,  then  r.  temple,  then  1.  molar,  then  1.  temple,

again  to  r.  molar,  then  to  loins,  with  frontal  oppression.

^^  Throat. Rawness  at  back  of  palate,  r.  side,  extending  to  left.

Burning  in  spot  in  soft  palate,  following  headache.
^^  Hiccough,  Belching,  Nausea  and  Vomiting. Nausea
from  back  of  fauces,  >  by  eructations  that  taste  of  tea
and  drug;  succeeded  by  persistent  giddiness  while  sit-
ting, and  staggering  while  walking.
Nausea  and  faintness.
pression in  region  of  stomach.
I  1  Indigestion,  with  pain  and  distress  in  epigastric  region.
I  1  Gastritis ;  enteritis ;  diarrhoea ;  dysentery.
^^  Hypochondria. Lugging  pain  in  spleen.

Tenderness  in  1.  hypochondrium.
^®  Abdomen. Flatulence  and  rumbling.

I  Aching  in  inguinal  canal,  <  walking,  >  from  upward
pressure;  with  pain  in  testicles;  bearing  down  as  from
hernia.
^^  Stool  and  Rectum.  Severe  colic,  followed  by  profuse  for-
cible diarrhoea;  stools  shining,  dark  brown,  offensive;
tenesmus  with  first  part  of  semi  solid  movements.
Increased  action  of  bowels,  aggravated  by  diarrhoeic  symp-
toms; could  have  a  passage  at  any  time,  but  sphincter
is  under  perfect  control.

■  Diarrhoea  in  jaundice,  from  weakened  heart.

I  Diarrhoea  with  griping  and  rumbling. ^Phthisis.

■  Constipation  lasting  six  or  seven  days,  stools  dry  and
cloglike.

Urinary  Organs.  'Protrusion  of  eyeballs,  cardiac  depression
and  palpitations,  <  ascending,  from  excitement,  deep
inspiration,  or  thinking  of  them;  irregular  and  inter-
mittent pulse,  not  corresponding  to  beat  of  heart;  fron-
tal and  fronto-occipital  headache,  >  by  strong  pressure;
sense  of  constriction  in  larynx ;  cough  with  slight,  pale
expectoration,  wheezing  and  hot  aching  beneath  r.
scapula ;  oppressed  respiration,  with  sighing ;  tremulous
feeling  in  hands ;  erratic  rheumatoid  pains,  <  toward
sunset  and  during  evening.  ^Morbus  Brightii.
I  Drinks  large  quantities  of  water;  passes  nine  to  eleven
quarts  of  urine  a  day;  fearful  thirst,  nothing  but
coldest  water  would  satisfy  ;  very  irritable  unless  spoken
to  very  softly ;  was  not  inclined  to  talk  even  to  her
own  family. ^Diabetes.

■  Diabetes  mellitus ;  gallon  or  more  daily  of  clear  urine,
of  great  density,  containing  sugar ;  great  thirst  and
emaciation.


21


LYCOPUS  VIRGINICUS.  152

Tenderness  in  bladder.

Bladder  feels  distended  when  empty ;  dull  pain  in  1.  lum-
bar region.

I  Profuse  flow  of  limpid,  watery  urine,  especially  when
heart  is  most  irritable.

I  I  Urine  scanty,  thick,  muddy,  oedema  of  feet.

Urine: 1012  to 1021; cloudy; acid; contains mucus,
epithelial cells and minute crystals,  oxalate  of  lime,
spermatozoa.
^^  Male  Sexual  Organs. Neuralgic  pain  in  testicle,  with
supraorbital  pain.

Acute  aching  in  testicle  while  sitting,  1  p.m.,  or  with  occa-
sional darting  pains,  changing  to  r.  then  to  1.,  after
rising.

Acute  pain  in  testes,  from  r.  to  1.,  then  both,  recurring  and
lasting  whole  evening,  with  aching  in  inguinal  canal.

I  Sharp  darting  through  1.  testicle.

■  Relieved  pain  in  testicle,  but  had  no  influence  on  orchitis.
^  Female  Sexual  Organs. 1 1  Menorrhagia  and  metrorrhagia.

I  I  Menses:  intermit  for  ten  or  twelve  days;  last  from  half
hour  to  six  hours.

I  I  Vagina  very  hot,  os  uteri  engorged  and  swollen.

I  I  Puffing  of  parts  on  and  around  pubes  and  vulva,  di-
lated condition  of  vagina.

I  I  When  heart's  action  was  tumultuous,  puffing  (oedema)
of  pubis  was  gone.
^'  Voice  and  Larynx. Trachea  and  Bronchia.  Constriction

in  larynx,  7  p.m.
^^  Respiration.  Oppressed,  with  sighing  breathing,  7  p.m.  ;
wheezing;  dyspnoea,  as  from  bronchial  cold,  accelerated
during  exercise,  especially  when  going  up  stairs.
^^  Cough.  Cough,  with  haemoptysis  and  feeble,  weak  heart
action ;  deep,  violent  in  evening  and  night,  without  wak-
ing; renewed  by  change  to  cold  weather  and  by  cold
winds.

Expectoration  pale,  sweetish,  unpleasant  tasting,  at  times
difficult,  renewed  same  as  cough.

I  I  Cough  and  irritation  of  lungs.
^^  Inner  Chest  and  Lungs. Sense  of  constriction  across  lower
half  of  thorax,  impeding  respiration,  with  subacute  pain;
<  lying  on  r.  side.

■  Cough,  with  haemoptysis,  feeble,  quick,  irregular  action  of

heart. ^Phthisis.

■  Febrile irritation;  quick,  weak  pulse;  occasional  heemop-

tysis;  dyspepsia;  weakness;  deposit  of  tuberculous  mat-
ter in  apex  of  1.  lung;  irritable  action  of  heart,  palpita-
tion occurring  from  least  exercise. ^Incipient  phthisis.
■Pulmonary  disease,  associated  with  looseness  of  bowels.


153  LYCOPUS  VIRGINICUS.

^  Heart,  Pulse  and  Circulation.  Constrictive  sensation  in
cardiac  region,  tenderness :  pulse  weak  and  irregular  in
force.

Acute  darting  pains  in  heart,  with  intermissions  of  pulse
and  heartbeat.

Throbbing  pain:  in  cardia;  pressure  in  forehead  and  eyes.

Sensation  of  pressing  outward  in  cardiac  region.

Oppressed  feeling  in  brain,  followed  by  pain  an  inch  be-
low and  to  outer  side  of  1.  nipple.

Rheumatoid  aching  in  j^riecordial  region  and  at  apex,  fol-
lowed by  pains  in  1.  wrist,  inner  side  of  r.  calf,  and  in
subclavicular  region,  and  again  in  1.  wrist  and  region
of  apex.

■  Cardiac  irritability  with  depressed  force;  pulse  very  fre-

quent, small,  compressible,  and  often  irregular  and  in-
termittent; heart's  impulse  feeble;  patient  generally
nervous,  irritable,  and  his  extremities  cold;  slight  hem-
orrhages from  lungs;  cannot  go  up  stairs  or  v/alk  fast
without  rapid  or  weak  action  of  heart,  or  heavy  op-
pressed action.

■  Cardiac  erethism;  debility  of  heart,  marked  by  the  influ-

ences of  some  smouldering  inflammation,  generally  in
lungs;  heart's  action  quick ;  pulse  quick,  hard,  wir}^  not
easily  compressible  and  not  generally  irregular  or  in-
termittent; local  congestion  and  irritation  of  lungs;
cough;  haemoptysis.

■Cardiac  irritability,  profuse  flow  of  watery,  limpid  urine.

I  I  Palpitation  in  cardiac  hypertrophy,  with  dilatation.

Palpitation  and  cardiac  distress,  <  morning  and  evening,
and  when  thinking  of  it.

1  i  Action  of  heart  tumultuous  and  forcible,  could  be  heard
several  feet  from  bed. ^Exophthalmus.

I  I  It  renders  beat  of  heart  slower,  fuller  and  more  regular.

On  lying  down,cardiacdepression  with  dull,  heavy  beating.

I  I  Palpitation  from  nervous  irritation,  with  plethora.

■  Excessive  flatulence,  which  aggravates  the  palpitations.
Labored  action  of  heart ;  oppression.

Heartbeats  more  distinct  on  r.  of  sternum.

First  sound  replaced  by  a  blowing  sound  of  mitral  regur-
gitation, heard  upwards  in  clavicular  region,  and  par-
ticularly between  scapulae;  second  sound  pointed,  short,
sharp.

Heartbeat  slow  and  weak;  diminished  blood  pressure;
pulse  48,  58,  weak,  compressible.

■  Can  walk  only  a  few  steps  without  having  to  stop  and

rest,  as  he  gets  short  of  breath;  1.  arm,  hand,  leg  and
foot  oedematous  and  painful;  blowing  sound  over  apex
of  heart;  instead  of  natural  systolic  sound,  very  loud


LYCOPUS  VIRGINICUS.  154

sound  over  base  of  heart  during  diastole;  pulse  quick,
weak,  frequent,  about  90  per  minute;  feels  as  though
lungs  were  filled  up;  panting  respiration;  urine  scanty
and  high  colored;  constipation;  little  appetite,  but  quite
thirsty  for  cold  water;  no  sexual  desire  whatever;  sleep
restless,  with  frequent  starting  and  jumping;  sometimes
can  lie  down,  at  other  times  must  sit  with  head  high ;
tongue  flabby,  no  marked  coating;  occasionally  a  sharp
shooting  pain  through  from  sternum  to  1.  shoulder  blade.
^Heart  disease.

iMenses  appear  within  three  or  four  hours  of  same  time
every  month,  with  a  deep  seated  pain,  with  heat  in  oc-
ciput; after  a  few  hours,  pain  in  forehead  and  temples,
faintness  and  nausea  in  stomach,  sensation  of  great
weakness  in  lumbar  region,  general  lassitude  and  de-
bility, especially  in  limbs,  followed  by  torpor  and  heavi-
ness; when  nausea  set  in  occipital  pain  >;  aversion
to  smell  of  food;  protrusion  of  eyes,  wild,  strange  ex-
pression; menses  usually  appear  in  morning  and  flow
until  noon,  then  suddenly  cease,  or  they  would  last  from
half  an  hour  to  six  hours,  intermitting  in  this  manner
for  ten  or  twelve  days ;  during  menses  stupid,  has  lack
of  expression  and  a  vacuity  of  ideas ;  tympanitis,  puff-
ing of  parts  on  and  around  pubis  and  vulva,  dilated
condition  of  vagina  and  bearing  down  sensation  in  rec-
tum; on  examination  vagina  very  hot,  os  uteri  engorged
and  swollen;  these  conditions  and  puffiness  >  by  local
use  of  ice;  constipation,  stools  every  six  or  seven  days,
dry  and  claylike;  when  eyes  seem  protruded,  heart
seemed  to  act  tumultuously  and  forcibly,  and  could  be
heard  several  feet  from  bed;  at  these  times  puffing  of
pubis  < ;  when  heart's  action  was  feeble  and  quiet,  with
quiet  pulse,  puffing  about  genitals  > ;  at  times  pulse
small  and  quiet  and  could  scarcely  be  counted;  urine
scanty,  thick  and  muddy;  oedema  of  feet;  dyspepsia;
all,  or  nearly  all,  above  symptoms  >  after  menses,  or  at
expiration  of  ten  or  twelve  days. ^Exophthalmus.

I  I  Aneurism  of  large  vessels  near  heart.

Pulse:  many  symptoms  increase  and  decrease,  according
to  weakness  or  strength  of  heart's  action.

Pulse  80  (while  standing),  with  intermissions,  cardiac  op-
pression.
^^  Neck  and  Back. Acute  pain  at  seventh  cervical  vertebra.

Slight  rheumatoid  pain  in  1.  suprascapular  muscles.

Congestive  pain  in  nape,  with  severe  continuous  dorsal
and  lumbar  pain,  <  lower  1.  side.

Rheumatoid  pains:  scapular  muscles,  lower  dorsal  re-
gion ;  from  apex  of  heart  by  friction  to  1.  subscapular
region,  then  to  middorsal  and  later  to  apex.


33


155  LYCOPUS  VIRGINICUS.

Severe  continuous  aching  in  lumbar  region.

Sharp  pains  first  in  lumbar  region,  then  in  1.  leg,  extend-
ing up  thigh,  then  in  r.;  feels  weak  as  if  overfatigued.

Severe  aching  down  spine,  <  from  friction,  passing  off
after  rising,  morning.

Flying  pains  in  muscles,  with  persistent  aching  in  loins
and  occiput,  <  on  movement.
^^  Upper  Limbs. Rheumatoid  pains,  forearms  and  wrists,  with
trembling  of  hands.

Hands  unsteady,  making  writing  difficult.
Lower Limbs. Rheumatoid pains knees, legs, thighs,
wandering  to  back,  slight  lameness  and  unsteady  gait.

Left  leg  feels  shorter  than  r.  and  so  sounds  when  walking.

Unsteady  feeling  when  walking.
^*  Limbs  in  General.  Muscular  rheumatoid  pains,  affecting
articulations  and  tendons,  <  by  motion  and  cold  air,
not  >  by  friction,  or  cold  affusion,  or  direct  warmth,  but
>  in  a  warm  room  or  in  bed ;  rheumatic  pains  around
heart;  irregular  and  intermittent  pulse;  <  towards  sun-
set. ^Rheumatism.
^  Rest. Position. Motion. Lying  down :  cardiac  depression.

Lying  on  r.  side:  cons.triction  of  thorax  <.

Sitting:  giddiness;  acute  aching  in  testicle;  head  high,
heart  disease.

While  standing:  pulse  80.

Restless,  change  of  position:  in  spite  of  weakness.

Motion:  rheumatoid  pains  <.

Exercise :  dyspnoea  <  ;  least,  causes  palpitation ;  aching
in  loins  and  occiput  <.

Walking:  staggering;  aching  in  inguinal  canal <;  causes
shortness  of  breath,  is  obliged  to  stop  and  rest;  sounds
as  if  1.  leg  was  shorter  than  r.;  unsteady  feeling;  slight
nausea  and  faintness.

Cannot  go  up  stairs  or  walk  fast:  without  rapid  or  weak
action  of  heart.
^^  Nerves. Weak,  yet  restless  change  of  position.

Restless  activity,  not  withstand  nig  nausea,  giddiness,  etc.

Vital  depression,  hence  mental  depression,  tremulousness.

Faintness:  slight  nausea,  walking  in  open  air;  with  car-
diac depression.
^''  Sleep. Sleep  restless,  full  of  troubled  dreams.

Wakeful  on  retiring,  though  fatigued.
^  Time. Morning : palpitation and cardiac distress < ;
menses  appear  and  flow  till  noon,  then  suddenly  cease;
severe  aching  down  spine,  >  after  rising.

1  P.M. :  acute  aching  in  testicle.

Towards  sunset:  erratic  rheumatoid  pains  <.

7  p.m.:  constriction  in  larynx;  oppressed,  with  sighing
breathing.


LYCOPUS  VIRGINICUS.  156

Evening:  increased  mental  and  physical  activit}^ ;  rheu-
matoid pains  <;  acute  pain  in  testes;  cough  violent;
palpitation  and  cardiac  distress  <.

Night:  cough  violent.
^^  Temperature  and  Weather. Warmth :  direct,  does  not  >
muscular  rheumatoid  pains.

Warm  room  :  >  muscular  rheumatoid  pains.

In  bed:  muscular  rheumatoid  pains  >.

Open  air:  faintness  and  slight  nausea.

Change  to  cold  weather:  renewed  cough.

Cold  air:  muscular  rheumatoid  pains  <.

Cold  winds:  renew  cough.

Coldest  water :  alone  satisfies  thirst.

Ice :  local  use  of,  >  heat  and  puffiness  of  vagina.
^Tever.  l Stupid,  will  not  answer  questions;  is  waxy,  cold;
pulse  very  low,  yet  full  and  large,  soft  and  compressible;
hemorrhage  from  bowels ;  tawny,  expressionless  face ;
veins  full  and  face  bloated;  eyes  expressionless  and
seem  to  project  from  sockets;  fever  not  high;  chokes
and  swallows.  ^Typhoid  malaria.
^^  Attacks,  Periodicity.  Daily :  nine  to  eleven  quarts  of
urine ;  a  gallon  or  more  of  clear  urine.

Every  six  or  seven  days :  dry,  claylike  stools.

For  ten  or  twelve  days :  menses  intermit,  last  from  half
hour  to  six  hours.

Every  month :  menses  appear  within  three  or  four  hours
of  same  time.
^  Locality  and  Direction.  Right :  tends  to  stagger  to  r. ;
neuralgic  pain  in  supraorbital  region ;  toothache  in
lower  molars;  pain  in  temple;  rawness  at  back  of
palate ;  hot  aching  beneath  scapula ;  pain  inner  side  of
calf;  heartbeats  more  distinct  on  side  of  sternum  ;  pain
in  leg ;  urticaria  on  leg.

Left:  pressure  in  forehead  <  ;  aching  in  frontal  eminence
<  ;  dull  pain  in  supraorbital  region  ;  neuralgic  pain
in  testicle;  pain  in  molars  and  temple;  tenderness  in
hypochondrium;  dull  pain  in  lumbar  region;  sharp
darting  through  testicle  ;  deposit  of  tuberculous  matter
in  apex  of  lung ;  pain  near  nipple ;  pain  in  wrist ;  arm,
hand,  leg  and  foot  oedematous  and  painful ;  pain  from
sternum  to  shoulder  blade ;  rheumatoid  pains  in  supra-
scapular muscles ;  pain  <  in  side  of  back  ;  sharp  pain  in
leg;  1.  leg  feels  shorter  than  r. ;  urticaria  on  forearm.

Right  to  1. : rawness  of  palate ; darting  pains  in  testes.

Left  to  r. :  aching  in  frontal  eminence ; pain  in  molars.

Pains  pass  from  1.  to  r.,  usually,  then  they  cease  or  return
to  left.
^  Sensations. Eyes  feel  weak  as  if  system  was  overfatigued ;


157  LYCOPUS  VIRGINICUS.

prickings,  as  if  bitten  by  insects;  as  if  lungs  were
filling  up.

Pain :  in  forehead  and  temples ;  in  epigastric  region ;  in
testicles ;  in  supraorbital  region ;  an  inch  below  and  to
outer  side  of  1.  nipple;  in  1.  wrist;  inner  side  of  r.  calf
and  in  subclavicular  region.

Severe  continuous  pain :  in  dorsal  and  lumbar  region.

Sharp  pain :  in  lumbar  region,  then  in  1.  leg,  extending  up
to  thigh,  then  in  right.

Acute  pain :  in  testes ;  at  seventh  cervical  vertebra.

Subacute  pain :  across  thorax.

Deep  seated  pain :  in  occiput.

Acute,  darting  pains:  in  heart.

Darting  pain :  in  testicles.

Flying  pains:  in  muscles.

Sharp,  shooting  pain :  through  from  sternum  to  1.  shoul-
der blade.

Throbbing  pain:  in  cardia.

Neuralgic  pain :  in  r.  supraorbital  region  and  1.  testicle.

Severe  colic:  in  abdomen.

Severe  aching:  down  spine.

Acute  aching:  in  testicle.

Rheumatoid  aching:  in  praecordial  region  and  at  apex;
in  1.  suprascapular  muscles;  lower  dorsal  region;  from
apex  of  heart  to  1.  subscapular  region,  then  to  mid-
dorsal;  in  forearm  and  wrists;  knees,  legs,  thighs,  then
to  back.

Hot  aching:  beneath  r.  scapula.

Aching:  in  frontal  eminences;  in  r.  lower  molars,  then
temples  and  again  molars;  in  inguinal  canal;  in  loins
and  occiput.

Dull  aching:  through  sinciput.

Rheumatic  pains:  around  heart.


Dull  pain:  in  1.  supraorbital  region;  in  1.  lumbar  region.

Lugging  pain:  in  spleen.

Congestive  pain:  in  nape.

Bearing  down :  as  from  hernia ;  in  rectum.

Burning:  in  spot  in  soft  palate.

Heat:  in  vagina;  in  occiput.

Tenderness:  in  l.hypochondrium;  in  bladder;  in  cardiac
region.

Constriction :  in  larynx ;  across  lower  half  of  thorax.

Constrictive  sensation  :  in  cardiac  region.

Compression:  in  region  of  stomach.

Pressing  outward  :  in  eyes ;  in  cardiac  region.

Pressure :  in  forehead  ;  in  eyes.

Full,  heavy  feeling :  in  eyes.


LYCOPUS  VIRGINICUS.  158

Oppressed  feeling :  in  brain.

Distress :  in  epigastric  region.

Trembling  feeling :  in  hands.

Tumultuous  action  of  heart.

Great  weakness :  in  lumbar  region.

Lassitude :  in  limbs.

Rawness :  at  back  of  palate.

Prickings :  in  skin.
**  Tissues. Rheumatoid  pains ;  erratic,  but  returning  to  orig-
inal location ;  >  from  warmth ;  <  from  cold  air  and
movement.

Flying  pains  in  various  parts.

Lowers  temperature.

Lessens  tonicity  of  bloodvessels,  with  consequent  conges-
tions ;  heart  muscle  weakened.
*^ Touch. Passive  Motion. Injuries. Pressure:  upward,
aching  in  inguinal  canal  >  ;  frontal  headache  >.

Friction :  sends  pain  from  apex  of  heart  to  1.  subscapular
region ; severe  aching  down  spine < ; does not >
muscular  rheumatoid  pain.
^  Skin. Prickings  as  if  bitten  by  insects.

Troublesome  urticaria,  especially  on  1.  forearm  and  r.  leg,
before  retiring.
^'^  Stages  of  Life,  Constitution.  Woman,  set.  33,  teacher,
nervous  temperament,  cheerful,  sprightly,  talkative,  in-
clined to  hysteria,  mother  afflicted  with  cardiac  trouble ;
exophthalmus.

Woman,  mother  of  two  children,  suffering  about  a  year;
diabetes.

Man,  set.  43,  half  breed  Indian  and  Hawaiian,  cook  on
whaling  vessel,  suffering  two  or  three  years ;  heart  dis-
ease.
*®  Relations. Compare:  Cactus,  Digit,  Hydr.  ac.,Iber.,  Lauroc,
Prun.  virg.,  Sanguin.,  Spigel.


159  LYSSIN.

LYSSIN (Hydrophobinum*).
The  saliva  of  a  mad  dog.  A  nosode.

For  historical  review,  see  Bering's  Monograph  (Jv'orth  American  Journal  of
Homoeopathy,  1879).

The  first  saliva  was  obtained  by  Hering  in  August,  1833  (see  North  American
Journal  of  Homoeopathy,  1879),  and  proved  by  himself  in  the  same  year;  by
Schmid,  an  AUentown  student,  in  1835;  by  Behlert  on  a  number  of  pro  vers,  from
1835  to  1838;  by  Kedman  Coxe  on  himself  and  family,  in  1853;  by  Knerr,  with
the  300th  and  600th  of  Jenichen,  on  a  woman  bitten  by  a  dog,  not  rabid  in  1869.

Symptoms  observed  after  bites,  and  those  of  persons  afflicted  with  rabies,
collected  from  reliable  sources,  are  followed  by  a  dash  ( — ).

Clinical  reports  have  as  yet  been  meagre,  owing  to  the  comparatively  recent
publication  of  the  provings.

Clinical  Authorities.— iyssojjAofiia,  Hering,  1843 ;  C.  Lippe,  MSS. ;  Chronic
headache,  cannot  hear  water  run,  Hering,  MSS.;  Dysentery,  cannot  hear  water  run,
Lippe,  MSS. ;  Chronic  camp  diarrhoea,  Hale,  MSS. ;  Convulsions  in  pregnancy  from
hearing  water  poured  out,  Guernsey,  MSS.;  Prolapsus  uteri  of  long  standing  (6  cases),
Cox,  MSS. ;  Vaginismus  ivith  prolapsus,  Cate,  MSS. ;  Puerperal  convulsions,  Guern-
sey, MSS. ;  Leucorrhcea,  Cate,  MSS. ;  Periodical  spasm  of  epiglottis,  Bicking,  MSS. ;
Dogbites,  Hering,  Bute,  Eiick.  Kh  Erf.,  vol.  4,  p.  622;  Eaue,  MSS.;  Wells,  MSS.;
Knerr,  MSS. ;  Malignant  ulcers  after  bite,  Hering,  MSS. ;  Bed  sear  after  bite,  Bute,  MSS.

^  Mind. Loses  consciousness  for  a  moment.

Loss  of  consciousness  sometimes  at  an  early  stage,  but  not

generally  until  a  short  time  before  death.  —
Does  not  see  nor  hear  persons  around  him.  —
■Memory  for  single  words  much  improved.
Strange  sensation  in  head,  with  loss  of  memor3^
Does  not  converse  as  well  as  usual,  but  plays  chess  better;

more  inclined  to  reflect  than  talk;  not  at  all  lively.
Thoughts  of  something  terrible  going  to  happen  come  into

his  mind  against  his  will ;  feels  impelled  to  do  reckless

things,  such  as  throwing  child,  which  he  carries  in  his

arms,  through  the  window,  and  the  like.
Could  not  get  rid  of  the  indescribable  tormenting  feeling

that  something  terrible  was  going  to  happen  to  him.
Fits  of  abstraction,  takes  hold  of  wrong  things,  often  does

*  "  We  follow  the  suggestion  of  Ziemsen,  Encyclopedia,  vol.  3,  p.  472,  and  sub-
stitute Lyssin  for  Hydrophobinum,  as  the  name  hydrophobia,  properly  speaking,
refers  to  an  occasional  symptom,  and  is  not  a  characteristic  of  the  disease  of  which
the  classical  name  is  Ai(;qa.^' — C.  Hering.


LYSSIN.  160

not  know  what  he  wants,  says  wrong  words  which  have
but  a  remote  similarity  of  sound.

They  appreciate  the  formidable  character  of  the  disease
and  speak  frequently  with  a  remarkable  quick  and
sharp  articulation  of  the  impending  fatal  results.  —

During  the  tranquil  intervals,  responded  correctly  to
questions  put  to  him,  recognized  those  around  him,  and
with  a  presentiment  of  impending  death,  begged  them
to  pray  for  him  and  not  to  leave  him  alone.  —

The  majority  of  patients  have  no  adequate  conception  of
real  origin  of  their  malady,  and  affirm  in  decided  terms
that  the  scar  is  of  no  significance  whatever  and  causes
them  no  pain.  —

Most  commonly  the  mental  faculties  are  in  a  superior
state  of  excitement,  shown  by  quick  perception,  amazing
acuteness  of  understanding  and  rapidity  with  which
they  answer  questions.  —

Is  astonished  in  his  dream  at  the  readiness  with  which
he  can  express  himself  in  elegant  Latin.

It  seems  to  her  as  if  two  entirely  different  trains  of  thought
influenced  her  at  the  same  time.

A  certain  confusion,  unsteadiness,  weakness  of  mind.  —

It  is  very  difficult  for  him  to  think,  sometimes  impossible.

Weary  and  incapable  of  mental  exertion;  school  tasks
which  before  had  been  a  pleasure  to  her,  had  to  be  laid
aside.

Range  of  ideas  extremely  limited,  if  left  to  himself  is
occupied  continuously  with  the  same  thing,  bringing
frequently  forward  samxC  ideas  within  a  short  space  of
time  and  always  in  same  manner.

Dulness  and  stupidity;  at  night  restlessness.

During  convulsions,  mental  illusions  and  hallucinations;,
in  intervals  of  consciousness  mental  faculties  are  re-
tained. —

Believe  that  they  are  reduced  to  their  present  wretched
condition  by  the  instrumentality  of  those  about  them.  —

Imagine  that  they  are  being  abused,  and  energetically
defend  themselves  against  attacks  and  insults,  which  in
reality  are  products  of  their  own  fancy.  —

Fancies  he  is  being  blown  at  by  several  persons,  some  of
whom  are  not  present.  —

Raved  about  the  dog  that  had  bitten  her;  imagined  it  to
be  near  her  and  fought  as  if  to  drive  it  away.  —

Thinks  he  is a  dog  or  a  bird,  and  runs  up  and down,,

chirping  and  twittering,  until  he  falls  down  fainting.  —

They  fancy  that  they  see  objects,  animals  and  men  that

are  not  present.  —
Complains  bitterly  that  a  fire  has  been  lighted  and  that


161  LYSSIN.

the  stove  is  smoking,  although  there  is  no  fire;  another

continually  directed  a  window  to  be  closed,  which  was

not  opened.  —
■  Strange  notions  and  apprehensions  during  pregnancy.
Slight  fits  of  delirium  occur  (in  advanced  state);  patients

frequentl}^  forget  their  friends  and  relatives ;  delirium

attended  with  constant  talking.  —
Some  delirium  and  illusions ; fancied  doctors  were  two

young  girls  who  had  come  in  to  see  her.  —
During  night  delirium  <.
Makes  speeches  in  his  delirium;  thinks  he  is  a  man  of

great  authority.  —
Insane  ideas  enter  his  head;  for  instance,  to  throw  a  glass

of  water,  which  he  is  carrying  in  his  hand,  into  some

one's  face,  or  to  stab  his  flesh  with  the  knife  he  is  holdings

and  the  like.
His  mania  takes  a  gloomy  character.  —
iMania  spermatica;  stallions.
Inclined  to  use  insulting  language,  scold  his  friends,  beat

and  abuse  those  near  him.
I  Inclination  to  be  rude  and  abusive,  to  bite  and  strike..

^Diarrhoea.
A  kind  of  savageness  in  his  temper.
A  strong  and  uncontrollable  impulse  to  do  certain  acts;  to-

spring  at  and  to  bite  any  moving  object  that  came  within

reach ;  dog.  —
Is  continually  tempted  to  bite  her  pillow  at  night.  —
Deny,  with  great obstinacy,  that  they have  ever  been

bitten.  —
Incessant  talking  during  night.  —
Speech  labored,  short  and  pathetic.  —
Wrote  to  doctor:  I  am  waiting  with  impatience  that  you

give  me  and  my  young  ones  something  to  eat.  —
After  fainting  spell  he  wrote  on  paper: I  am  forsaken

by  all;  even  the  birds  of  heaven,  they  do  not  look  at

me,  do  not  feed  me  if  hungry;  I  hunger  with  the  young

ones  and  am  thirsty  with  their  she  ones;  my  nest  is

made  out  of  dirt,  not  gotten  by  my  own  exertions,  but

by  driving  them  out  of  their  nests  and  sitting  there

with  the  females  and  the  young.  —
Sang  more  than  usual,  but  involuntarily;  she  did  not  feel

at  all  happy  or  cheerful.
Goes  about  house  all  day  singing,  moves with greater

alacrity  and  precision  than  ordinary.
Sighing:  with  oppressive  breathing;  with  pain  in  heart.
Declares  amid  violent  sobs  that  she  is  suffering  the  tor-
ments of  hell.  —
Lament  with  greatest  anxiety  their  inability  to  relieve

VOL.  VII. — 11.


LYSSIN.  162

thirst  which  afflicts  them,  and  by  various  contrivances
endeavor  eagerly  to  drink.  —

Had  a  good  cry  before  going  to  bed.

Weeps  bitterly  on  account  of  headache.

Before  and  after  as  well  as  during  paroxysms,  shrieks  or
inarticulate  sounds  expressive  of  utmost  despair.  —

During  fits,  snapping  motions  with  jaws,  of  an  involun-
tary and  spasmodic  character.  —

Quiet  patients  spit  into  provided  vessels,  more  excited
ones  discharge  saliva  upon  all  sides.  —

Biting,  snapping,  with  convulsions.  —

Ordered  her  husband  to  go  away,  as  she  wanted  to  bite
him,  and  joining  act  to  threat,  she  bit  herself  in  arm.  —

Pieces  of  carpet  put  into  kennel  for  dog  to  lie  upon  were
torn  up  until  they  became  heaps  of  loose  wool.  —

Desperate  efforts  were  made  to  break  chain;  dog.  —

I  Break  out  of  their  stables  furiously  and  run  or  jump  over
ditches  and  fences. ^Lyssa  of  sheep.

He  cautioned  people  around  him  not  to  inhale  his  exhaled
air,  it  was  spoiled,  stinking  like  rotten  eggs,  worse  than
cholera,  and  could  injure.  —

Does  not  answer  questions.

Disinclination  to  change  position  of  head ;  two  distinct
trains  of  thought  existing  at  one  time  in  her  mind,  the
idea  that  she  is  unable  to  move  her  head  (when  lying
down),  with  the  positive  conviction  that  she  has  only  to
make  up  her  mind  that  she  will  do  it  to  achieve  it.

■Not  afraid  of  dogs,  but  dislikes  to  see  them  because  their
sight  renews  her  fear. ^Lyssophobia.

Cannot  bear  to  hear  others  sing,  or  eat  apples.

■  Exhilarated,  felt  as  if  he  had  received  joyful  intelligence.
Occasionally  exhilarated,  then  again  morose,  both  feelings

going  off  very  readily  upon  conversing.
Pain  in  head  makes  him  very  uneasy.
Feels  depressed  and  very  weak  all  day.
Depressed,  as  if  something  would  happen.
An attack  of  mental depression and indifference  quite

strange  to  him;  feels  as  if  he  could  do  nothing;  if  he

forces  himself  he  lacks  mental  power.
To  such  as  had  continual  apprehension  respecting  their

safety  it  appeared  a  shorter  time  since  bite.  —
Feels  as  if  something  disagreeable  would  happen;  when

thinking  the  matter  over,  the  feeling  passes  off.
He  feels  as  if  he  had  heard unpleasant  news,  or  would

soon  hear  it ;  until  4  p.m.
Felt  as  if  she  was  going  to  get  a  fit;  at  11  p.m.

■  iLyssophobia;  fear  of  becoming  mad.

■  Feels  he  cannot  physically  endure  his  fears  much  longer.


163  LYSSIN.

and  shall  be  compelled  to  go  into  an  insane  asylum.
^Lyssophobia.

I  Mary  M.,  get.  17,  had  been  bitten  several  years  previously
by  a  dog,  and  reading  of  several  cases  of  hydrophobia
as  reported  in  papers,  was  found  in  following  condi-
tion: crouched  in  corner  of  a  sofa,  dark  red  bloated
face,  expression  of  terror  in  face,  eyes  glistening,  con-
junctiva injected  red;  was  brought  into  this  condition
by  endeavoring  to  take  a  drink  of  water,  and  could  not
hear  water  mentioned  without  a  shudder  of  fear,  could
not  swallow,  pulse  very  high,  tongue  dry  and  coated  red ;
Lyssin  2c  one  dose ;  she  was  better  next  day,  but  had
several  slight  attacks  afterwards,  always  induced  by  run-
ning of  water,  but  always  yielding  to  remedy ;  has  not
had  an  attack  in  nearly  a  year.

Felt  as  if  she  was  going  to  die;  as  if  she  was  going  to
sink  away.

She  has  been  unable  to  sleep  a  wink  for  several  nights ;  is
driven  from  bed  by  indescribable  anxiety;  can  but  sit
and  walk,  or  find  momentary  peace  in  prayer.  —

Anxiety  of  mind:  restlessness,  with  great  prostration;
with  pain  in  heart;  with  headache;  fear  of  being  alone.

I A  musician  received  a  bite  from  a  small  pet  dog  in  calf
of  1.  leg  while  walking  through  a  dark  entry;  the  bite
was  very  slight,  scarcely  wounding  skin;  the  animal
was  in  a  healthy  condition  and  remained  so ;  a  pain  in
bitten  place  kept  returning  from  time  to  time  inde-
pendently of  mind  dwelling  on  it,  until  finally  it  grew
to  a  burning  which  extended  through  entire  body,  caus-
ing an  indescribably  strange  sensation  ;  in  night  trem-
bling, and  a  tormenting  fear  that  he  would  have  hydro-
phobia; was  thirsty  and  drank  water  freely;  it  was  two
years  after  the  bite  when  these  and  the  following  symp-
toms appeared :  frequent  spitting  of  saliva  all  through
day,  only  ceasing  awhile  after  taking  strong  tea  in  even-
ing; disturbed  dreams  at  night;  finally  could  not  par-
take of  food  or  drink,  and  complained  of  pricking
stitches  under  tongue;  mental  excitement  now  as  all
his  life,  affects  him  badly;  hot  vapor  relieved  burning
pain  in  bite,  and  Lyssin  2c  (Jenichen)  improved  all
symptoms  rapidly;  in  three  weeks  he  considered  him-
self cured,  and  started  on  a  journey.

Indecision  even  in  small  matters.

nil  humor. ^Headache. ^Diarrhoea.

Fretful,  hypochondriac  mood  in  evening.

Feels  nervous  and  irritable.

Very  cross,  so  much  so  that  his  children  expressed  great
surprise;  he  took  offence  at  veriest  trifles,  scolded  his


LYSSIN.  164

wife  and  children,  felt  wretched,  could  not  concentrate
his  attention  on  anything;  sullen,  does  not  wish  to  see
or  speak  to  any  one.

After  attacks  of  fury,  evinces  great  regret  at  his  behavior,
making  earnest  apologies,  warning  those  about  him  not
to  allow  him  to  bite  them.  —

Implacable  hatred  against  owners  of  dog  that  bit  her,  with
inclination  to  utter  maledictions  which,  by  reason  of
her  careful  bringing  up  and  sobriety  of  her  parents,
shock  her  dreadfully.  —

Hypersensitiveness  of  all  the  senses.

Exalted  state  of  smell,  taste  and  touch,  with  a  feeling  of
anxiety  and  a  fear  of  being  alone.

Everything  affects  him  more  powerfully;  also  tobacco.

He  knew  exactly  where  his  nurses,  his  doctors  and  ac-
quaintances were,  if  at  any  distance  from  him. —

On  a  watch  held  to  scrobiculum  he  sees  the  hour  and
minute  hands.  —

He  says  he  can  see  hands  on  dial  plate  of  church  clock.  —

He  could  hear  what  was  spoken  in  next  room,  and  count-
ing coppers  in  a  room  below  him.  —

He  knows  every  one,  and  answers  questions,  also  is  in
mesmeric  rapport  with  his  physicians.  —

Linen  dipped  in  sugar  water,  put  on  pit  of  stomach,  gives
a  sweet  taste  in  mouth.  —

Copper,  if  in  his  room,  makes  him  restless  and  full
of  pains. —

I  Felt  same  rheumatic  pain  his  brother  complained  of..
^Lyssophobia.

Before  every  spell  of  somnambulism  he  crowed  like  a  cock. —

Very  uneasy;  mental  disquietude,  with  headache.

Driven  incessantly  about  without  any  definite  aim.  —

Restlessness,  driving  him  hither  and  thither,  although
weak  enough  to  lie  down.  —

Restlessness  and  anxiety  at  prsecordia,  frequent  change  of
.posture  and  sighing.  —

■  Restless,  constant  bleating  in  a  hoarse  voice. /?Lyssa

of  sheep.

■  Sometimes  he  could  control  inclination  to  stool  by  a

strong  effort  of  will,  but  effort  caused  much  nervous  irri-
tation. ^Chronic  camp  diarrhoea.

Showing  him  a  bird,  he  got  frightened  and  thought  it
was  a  mouse.  —

Was  much  frightened  during  attack,  and  began  to  pray  ;
her  husband  had  to  sit. up  with  her  and  hold  her  hand;,
did  not  get  entirely  over  attack  until  3  a.m.

She  feels  as  after  night  watching  and  great  anxiety.

Unusually  exhausted.


165  LYSSIN.

"While  reading  and  thinking,  headache.

Worse  while  reading  or  writing;  headache;  aching  in
lower  jaw.

Severe  headache  and  noseache  uj)on  going  to  bed,  after
writing  all  her  symptoms.

■Attacks  of  nervous  headache  become  awful  and  insup-
portable if  he  hears  water  run  out  of  a  hydrant.

Pressing  headache,  <  while  reading  and  thinking.

1 1  When  he  hears  water  poured  out,  or  if  he  hears  it  run,
or  if  he  sees  it,  he  becomes  very  irritable,  nervous ;  it
causes  desire  for  stool  and  other  ailments.

The  mere  sight  of  a  drinking  vessel  containing  water  is
intolerable;  they  turn  away  their  faces,  shriek  out  loud,
beckon  anxiously  with  hands  to  have  the  water  re-
moved, for  voice  and  breath  fail.  —

iMental  emotion  always  makes  him  worse.

Mortifying  news  affects  him  very  much.

A  certain  w^ildness  of  humor.

Disposed  to  get  angry;  flying  into  a  passion.

Every  offence  she  feels  very  much.

Excitability  prevents  sleep.

■  Frequent  gaping  without  being  sleepy,  most  when  he  has
to  listen  to  others.

Thinking  of  fluids  of  any  kind,  even  of  blood,  brings  on
convulsions.  —

The  mere  idea  of  drink,  fluids,  pouring  out  fluids,  may
cause  a  paroxysm.  —

Hypersesthesia,  rerophobia,  current  of  air,  bright  light,
sight  of  any  shining  object,  slightest  touch,  even  conver-
sation in  vicinity  of  patient,  may  throw  him  into  a  most
violent  agitation  and  bring  on  severe  convulsions.  —

The  mere  thought  of  fluids,  of  drinking,  of  swallowing,  or
offer  of  anything  to  drink,  is  sufficient  to  bring  on  con-
vulsions; the  same  effect  is  produced  by  other  sources
of  irritation,  such  as  a  simple  breath  of  air,  the  attempt
to  touch  the  sick,  every  hurried  approach  towards  him,
the  light  of  shining  objects.  —

Even  the  sight  of  water,  or  other  fluid,  or  of  anything  hav-
ing the  least  resemblance  to  it,  such  as  a  looking  glass
or  white  substance,  whereby  an  occasion  will  be  given
for  renewal  of  idea  of  their  former  pain,  occasion  great-
est distress  and  a  return  of  convulsions.  —

Such  as  were  afflicted  with  grief  from  any  cause  were
much  sooner  affected  wdth  the  disease.  —

A  sudden  fright  starts  convulsions.  —

Nose  pains  from  thinking.

Had  no  symptoms  of  disease  for  four  months  until  after
receiving  very  ill  usage.  —


LYSSIK  166

Dread  and  fear  brought  on  symptoms.  —

Outburst  of  passion  or  excesses  of  any  kind  hasten  the
outbreak.  —

Any  sudden  movement  near  a  rabid  dog  is  a  stimulus  to
inflict  the  fatal  bite.
^  Sensorium. l  l  Peculiar  lightness  in  head  ;  lightness  after
nausea.

Singular  sensation  in  vertex,  as  if  he  momentarily  lost
consciousness,  but  only  in  that  place;  or  as  if  a  habit-
ual feeling  had  disappeared  from  there;  it  is  no  fulness,
no  motion,  but  it  causes  a  vacillating  motion  of  head;
in  evening.

II Dizziness:  as  if  something  was  drawing  around  in  a
circle,  and  as  if  she  could  not  hold  her  head  straight;
after  lying  down,  like  a  shock  in  upper  part  of  brain ;
with  inclination  to  fall  to  r.  when  stooping;  towards
evening  in  upper  part  of  head,  as  if  she  would  fall,  while
walking;  frequent  and  transient;  with  dim  sight  while
walking  and  sitting;  and  nausea;  with  cramps  in  ab-
domen; temporarily  >  by  return  of  diarrhoea;  <  by
teaching,  spelling,  or  being  obliged  to  notice  letters;
after  lying  down  in  bed,  shock  in  upper  part  of  brain;
dimness  of  vision  on  rising  from  stooping;  on  rising
from  a  chair,  staggers;  while  sitting;  on  rising,  cannot
walk  straight.

A  slow  vacillation  or  wavering  of  head,  from  something
being  loose  in  upper  part  of  head.

Surging  towards  head  is  felt  inwardly,  deep  in  brain.

Dulness:  of  head;  in  forehead,  more  to  r.  side;  in  middle
of  brain,where  it  surges ;  and  stupidity  at  night,  with  rest-
lessness; amounting  to  pain  in  occiput.

Violent  vertigo  during  morning,  accompanied  by  a  chill
and  an  intolerable  snappish  headache.
^  Inner  Head.  Headache:  with  dizziness,  lasting  all  day;  in
morning,  violent,  with  vertigo  (>  by  Tabac);  over
eyes;  in  temples;  very  severe  in  afternoon;  <  from
writing;  >  by  cold  air;  from  noon  until  evening;  from
3  to  9  P.M.  <  from  writing;  >  by  cold  air;  alternating
with  hot  flushes  in  face;  with  shooting  pain  in  upper
face;  towards  noon,  with  increase  of  saliva;  and  sore
throat  all  day;  <  on  seeing  water  or  hearing  it  run.

Sensation  as  if  a  small  leaden  ball  was  rolling  about  in  brain.

I  Rush  of  blood  to  head:  w^hile  lying  down;  from  chest
upward,  with  toothache;  during  pregnancy;  when  rising.

Throbbing  headache  in  forehead,  vertex  and  occiput,  down
to  neck.

Burning,  surging  towards  head.

Pain  above  1.  eye,  before  going  to  bed.


167  LYSSIK

Pain  in  a  small  spot  above  r.  eyebrow  <  while  writing.
Pressing  inward,  throbbing  or  drawing  above  r.  eye.
Sharp  pain  above  eyebrows,  followed  by  burning  in  lids.
Sharp  pain  above  eyebrows  and  up  nose  five  minutes  after

walking,  with  headache.
Severe  shooting  pains  in  head,  above  eyes  and  temples.
Headache  extending  into  r.  eye.

Aching  in  bones  above  eyes,  particularly  r. ;  <  by  stooping.
A  sensation  in  forehead  as  of  something  moving.
Dull  pain  in  forehead,  with  a  stupid  feeling  afternoon  and

evening.
Pressing  or  burning  pain  in  forehead.
Tearing  from  middle  of  forehead  towards  1.  side.
2  P.M.,  intense  pain  in  head,  extending  back  of  forehead  to

organ  of  firmness;  soon  after  to  whole  top  of  head  and

to  eyes,  lasting  all  day.
Dull heavy  pain  in  forehead  and  sharp pricking  in  1.

temple,  alternating  at  times  with  throbbing  and  jerking.
Pressing in  vertex  and  in  forehead,  particularly  when

stooping  or  moving  head;  afternoon.
Slight  frontal  headache  in  morning  on  waking,  <  after

rising.
Passes  hand  across  forehead.
■  Maddening  outward  pressing  pain  in  forehead ;  he  presses

his  head  against  the  wall.
Pressing  pain  in  forehead  and  top  of  head,  returns  4  p.m.,

seventh  day,  with  uneasiness  of  mind  when  reading  or

thinking.
Continual dull pain  in  forehead,  principally  on  1.  side,

with  stupefaction,  in  afternoon  and  evening.
Throbbing  pain  in  forehead,  vertex  and  occiput,  extending

into  nape  of  neck.
Pressing  in  forehead,  with  slight  sensation  of  heat,  6  p.m.
Headache  at  times  very  severe  in  r.  temple.
Severe  headache  in  both  temples  and  above  eyes,  begin-
ning at  9  a.m.,  so  unbearable  that  he  cries  -bitterly;

violent  jerking  in  limbs.
Violent  headache  from  temple  to  temple.
Tearing  pain:  in  r.  temple;  from  jaw  to  temple.
Occasional  stitches  in  r.  temple.
Sharp  pricking  pain  in  1.  temple,  alternated  with  throbbing

and  punching.
Boring  in  r.  temple  very  short,  5  p.m.  ;  repeats  every  other

day ;  but  on  fourth  day  in  1.  temple,  and  in  morning

when  getting  awake.
I  I  Beating,  throbbing  headache :  most  severe  in  r.  temple

and  above  r.  eye ;  each  bone  feels  shattered  and  sore ;

from  temple  to  temple.


■LYSSIN.  168

iViolent  headache,  most  in  temples  and  forehead,  <  dur-
ing day  and  from  stooping  and  stirring  about.  ^Uterine
disease.

Severe  pressing  pain  in  1.  side  of  head,  occasionally  boring
stitches  from  without  in,  later  pressing  extends  to  1.  side
of  forehead  and  1.  orbit ;  10  p.m.

Dull  weight,  first  on  1.  side  of  head,  then  on  vertex.

Pressing  weight  on  r.  parietal  bone.

Dull  pricking  pain  in  1.  side,  from  head  to  waist.

Left  side  of  head  is  now,  and  has  always  been,  most  severely
affected.

Headache  most  severe  one  and  a  half  inch  above  1.  ear,
in  evening.

Piercing  pain  in  r.  side  of  head,  with  sensation  of  stiffness,
or  as  if  part  would  become  insensible.

Woke  in  morning  with  a  burning,  aching  headache  in  1.
side  of  head  and  down  neck.

In  vertex:  dulness  and  tensive  sensation;  stupefied  feel-
ing ;  vertiginous  shocks  ;  a  peculiar  sensation  ;  pressing
weight ;  pressing  stinging,  r.  side ;  pressing  shooting ;
pressing  beating;  pressing  heaviness,  r.  side ;  strange
pulsation ;  burning  surging  ;  throbbing.

Pressure  in  upper  part  of  head  and  forehead  :  <  stooping
or  moving  head  ;  at  4  p.m.,  while  reading  and  reflecting,
with  mental  restlessness,

I  I  Frequent  pressure  on  vertex,  as  if  a  cast,  which  fitted
top  of  head,  was  pressing  it  down.

Severe  headache,  extending  from  behind  forehead  to  organ
of  firmness,  soon  after  spreading  over  vertex  and  to
eyes,  at  2  p.m.,  lasting  all  day-
Pressing  from  forehead  to  vertex  and  jaws.

Pain  on  top  of  head  and  in  teeth  running  into  each  other.

Painful  pressure,  most  on  upper  part  of  head,  <  when
moving  head;  later  also  in  forehead,  with  considerable
heat  and  prostration.

In  occiput:  painful  dulness;  pressure  in  1.  side;  tearing
and  stinging  as  if  in  bones,  <  after  rising;  aching;
burning;  pain  in  1.  side,  <  during  wet  weather;  dread-
ful pains  running  up  neck  and  down  spine,  <  when
lying  down.

Sharp  pain  across  eyebrows  and  up  nose,  while  walking
out  doors;  exceedingly  fatigued  and  weary  after  a  short
walk.

Intolerable  headache  extending  to  ends  of  nose  and  into
teeth ;  some  pressure  on  head,  and  for  a  moment  a  feel-
ing as  of  an  invisible  hammer  striking  upon  back  of
head  (relieved  by  Tabac).

Frequent  attacks  of  headache,  in  which  head,  nose  and
teeth  appeared  to  be  soldered  together.


169  LYSSIN.

Feeling  of  tension  in  head;  much  pressing  pain  in  head.
Head  feels  as  if  it  would  split  with  severe  pressure  on
vertex.

I  Pain  as  if  head  would  burst. ^Pregnancy.

At  3  P.M. :  headache  very  severe;  dull  heavy  pain  in  head.
■Afternoon,  pain  in  head;  sick  headache.

I I  Headaches  from  bite  of  dogs,  rabid  or  not.

In  rare  cases  serous  effusion  in  opaque  subarachnoid  tissue
and  lateral  ventricle,  and  also  increased  adherence  of
membranes  of  brain  to  convolutions.  —

All  morning  severe  headache  which  makes  him  impatient.

I  At  noon  slight  headache,  lasting  all  day.

Dull  heavy  pain  in  afternoon  in  head.

Painful  rush  of  blood  to  head  after  moving,  turning
around,  or  stooping.

Unbearable  headache  for  three  days  makes  her  snappish,
harsh  and  irritable;  trifles  annoy  her;  lower  jaw  feels
stiff  and  aching,  hands  numb.

Crying  bitterly  during  headache.

A  peculiar  sensation  in  head  all  day,  as  if  something
drew  the  head  towards  shoulders.

Headache  with  nausea  and  sore  pain  in  heart,  in  after-
noon; >  in  cold  air.

Pain  from  mouth  up  through  head  and  down  back  of  neck.

I  I  Burning  aching  from  1.  side  of  occiput  down  neck.

•  Violent  headache  and  backache.

Painful  pressure  on  top  on  moving  head,  with  fever  and
prostration.

Horrible  headache,  accompanied  by  general  weariness.

Headache  in  bones  of  skull.

On  top  of  head,  pressing  heaviness,  same  in  r.  parietal
bone.

Tearing  and  stinging  in  occiput,  as  if  in  bones,  <  after
rising.

Beating  pain  in  forehead,  parietal  bone,  occiput  and  nape
of  neck;  >  in  neck  when  bending  head  backwards.
^  Outer  Head. Irritable  headache,  touching  head  makes  it
ache;  very  sensitive  scalp.

Right  side  of  head  feels  stiff,  as  if  it  would  become  numb.

Numbness  of  1.  side  of  head.

Very  annoying  headache,  more  outside,  near  vertex,  >
by  gentle  scratching,  or  by  rubbing,  but  it  must  be
done  by  hands  of  others,  thus  by  a  kind  of  mesmerizing.

A  darting  from  within  outward  to  scalp,  on  r.  side  of  ver-
tex, followed  by  itching.

Itching  in  locality  of  acquisitiveness.

Small  pustule,  painful  when  touched,  on  1.  frontal  emi-
nence, later  same  on  richt.


LYSSIN.  170

Hair  which  is  usually  dry  has  become  very  oily.

Scalp  feels  contracted  and  pinched.
^  Sight  and  Eyes. Sensitive  to  light.

Left  eye  exceedingly  sensitive  to  light  and  water.

iSight  of  water;  agitation;  renews  idea  of  pain;  causes
convulsions  (pregnancy).

Sparks  before  eyes.

Something  moves  to  and  fro  before  eyes  while  sewing,  but
always  a  little  farther  off  the  point  at  which  she  is  looking.

False  vision,  dulness  of  sight,  together  with  dilatation  of
pupils,  sometimes  actual  blindness.

Great  weakness  in  eyes,  without  pain.

■  Since  five  years  could  not  read  longer  than  a  few  minutes
at  a  time,  when  she  would  see  letters  double  and  would
read  something  else  than  the  right  words ;  had  tried  all
sorts  of  spectacles  without  benefit,  was  often  ashamed
because  she  could  not  sign  her  name  properly.

On  looking  up  eyes  are  very  weak.

Dimness  of  vision :  with  vertigo ;  dizziness  when  walking
and  sitting.

Vision  much  impaired  or  absent ;  lasts  twelve  hours.

Vanishing  of  sight.

I  Could  not  see  or  hear. ^Lyssa.

Drawing,  beating  pain  over  r.  eye,  extending  into  eyes.

Aching  over  eyes,  as  if  in  bone,  <  r.  side  and  stooping.

Pain  over  r.  eye,  pressing  inward.

Pressing  sensation  in  upper  part  of  r.  orbit.

Drawing,  beating  pain  over  eyes  and  into  balls.

Throbbing  over  r.  eye.

At  9  P.M.:  severe  shooting  pains  in  head,  over  eyes  and  in
temples ;  also  very  violent  aching  pain  isiside  of  and  all
over  chest.

Pain  over  1.  eye  previous  to  retiring.

Sharp  pain  across  eyebrows,  afterwards  burning  in  e^^ds.

Pain  in  small  spot  over  r.  eyebrow,  <  writing.

Soreness  in  eyes  and  above  them,  pain  in  forehead.

Pressing  sensation  in  orbits.

Headache  extends  into  r.  eye.

At  9  P.M.  felt  a  curious  stinging  pain  in  1.  eye,  extending
to  forehead,  over  r.  eye,  painful.

Eyes  feel  very  bad,  severe  pain  in  them  and  in  all  his  joints.

Eyes  ached  intensely;  feeling  of  soreness.

Burning  of  eyeballs.

Eye  draws  heat  from  nape  of  neck.

Itching  heat  in  eyes.

If  mental  anxiety  is  great,  pupils  are  in  some  cases  dilated,
while  face  and  conjunctivae  are  injected.

During  period  of  tranquillity,  in  last  stage,  pupils  are  con-
tracted or  of  unequal  size,  eye  fixed,  strabismus.  —


171  LYSSIN.

Pupils  were  a  little  dilated  and  eye  had  a  somewhat  wild

and  restless  appearance.  —
'Eyes  are  wild,  rolling,  staring  and  livid.  —
Disturbed  look,  or  eyes  firm  and  penetrating.  —
Lachrj^mal  glands  evince  increased  activity.  —
Eyes  red  and  cornea  somewhat  inflamed.
Eyes  congested  and  painful.
I  Sore  eyes  and  some  fever  after  a  bite  in  nose.
Dulness  and  inflammation  of  eyes;  dogs.
■Inflamed,  dim,  watery,  staring  eyes,  with  very  much

dilated  pupils,  upper  lid  drawn  up,  and  diminished

sight. ^Lyssa.
Eyes  somewhat  red  and  inflamed  (cornea).
Eyes  bloodshot  and  painful.
Eyes  slightly  red,  and  occasional  stitches  in  r.  temple.

■  Great  inflammation  in  an  eye  from  which  gushes  foamy

pus ;  pustules  around  eye ;  in  morning  lid  puffed  up
like  an  eggshell,  small  pustules  on  one  finger.  ^Dog-
bite.

Eyelids  fly  open  involuntarily.

Pressure  in  1.  side,  shooting  to  eyes  in  evening.

Burning  in  lids.

Eyelids  feel  paralyzed  on  awaking  in  morning,  and  ap-
pear to  be  more  firmly  closed,  as  if  glued  together.

I  I  Swelling  of  eyelids  after  bite  of  dogs. ^In  sheep.

■Extreme  ulceration  of  eye,  lids  closed  and  puffed  up  by
pus. ^In  sheep.
^  Hearing and Ears. Conversation  in  vicinity  of  patient
may  throw  him  into  a  most  violent  agitation.  —

Ringing  of  church  bells  makes  him  anxious,  and  causes  a
sharp  salty  taste,  with  stitches  in  heart.  —

Water  poured  into  a  basin,  with  splashing  noise,  caused
paroxysm  to  be  reproduced,  with  convulsion  and  agita-
tion. —

Sudden  noise  causes  involuntary  startings.

■  ■Hearing  water  poured  out in  next  room  makes  him

very  irritable  and  nervous.

On  crossing  ferry,  soon  after  eating,  noise  which  water
made  caused  unspeakable  torture  in  her  back. —

Convulsions  excited  by  barking  of  dog,  from  great  sensi-
bility ;  any  other  sudden  noise,  shutting  a  door  or  a
blast  of  wind,  produce  the  same.  —

■  During  his  attacks  of  chronic headache,  which  come

after  mental  emotion  or  excessive  mental  exertion  and
last  a  day  or  two,  he  cannot  bear  to  hear  running  water;
if  hydrant  is  allowed  to  run  in  an  adjoining  room,  or
even  if  water  is  poured  into  a  basin,  his  headache  in-
creases to  an  insupportable  degree.


LYSSIN.  172

I  After  the  pain  following  an  evacuation  had  lessened,
and  he  was  sitting  at  open  window,  the  large  street
waterplug  was  opened  to  cleanse  the  streets,  and  as
soon  as  he  noticed  water  running  down  gutter  in  front
of  his  house,  he  was  seized  with  violent  pains  and  had
to  go  at  once  to  the  watercloset. ^Dysentery.

I  If  during  night,  or  in  morning  before  rising,  he  heard
pouring  out  of  water  in  next  room,  he  was  immediately
obliged  to  rise  and  have  an  evacuation.  ^Chronic
camp  diarrhoea.

■  Hearing  water  poured  out  brought  on  convulsions.
^Pregnancy.

Sensation  as  if  blood  rushed  to  r.  ear,  then  a  pressure  as
from  a  dull  knife,  interiorly  and  superiorly.

Sound  as  of  rushing  water  in  1.  ear.  —

Buzzing  in  r.  ear.

Hears  various  noises  in  night.

Temporary  stoppage  of  r.  ear ;  about  two  hours  afterward
while  thinking  upon  it,  ear  commenced  aching;  pain
extends  into  teeth  and  through  head.

Tearing  pain  from  lower  jaw  into  ear.

Rending  pain  in  r.  ear.

Shooting  and  stitches  in  r.  ear,  from  without  in.

In  morning,  pressing  in  forehead  and  drowsiness,  with
stitches  passing  inward  in  both  ears.

Stinging  pressure  behind  ears;  afternoon.

Rush  of  blood  to  r.  ear;  after  it  a  pressure  like  from  a  dull
point.

Pressive  burning  in  r.  external  ear.

Burning  and  heat  in  ear.

Earache  extends  into  teeth.

Tearing  pain  a  few  inches  from  r.  ear.

Pressing  from  nape  of  neck  into  ear.

Above  1.  ear,  headache  most  severe.

Pressing  burning  in  r.  concha,  in  evening.

The  ears  feel  stiff.

Ear  tickles,  after  rubbing  pain.

Itching  in  a  small  spot  in  upper  part  of  both  ears,  disap-
pears after  scratching.
"^  Smell  and  Nose. Strong  odors  may  start  spasms.

During  three  days  her  sense  of  smell,  which  is  always  ex-
tremely acute,  became  painfully  s§,  particularly  in
reference  to  unpleasant  effluvia;  action  of  nostrils  ex-
tremely painful.

The  greatest  sensibility  to  smell  of  tobacco ;  tastes  snuff
while  box  is  one  foot  distant.

Frequent  bleeding  from  nose;  repeatedly  some  clotted
blood  in  nose.


173  LYSSIN.

Tickling  in  nasal  cavity  causes  sneezing.

Itching  in  nose  all  day.

Repeated  sneezing,  which  stops  on  being  interrupted.

Frequent  sneezing,  mostly  early  in  morning  or  late  in
evening,  as  if  a  coryza  would  begin;  also  when  looking
at  something  bright,  and  from  every  little  dust.

Fluid  discharge  from  nose.

Coryza,  with  tickling  in  roof  of  mouth  and  in  front  of  nose
(relieved  by  Phosphor).

Thick  green  mucus  runs  out  of  nose  (horse).

Pain  in  nose.

Sensation  of  stiffness  in  nose,  in  r.  side  of  neck,  and  prin-
cipally in  jaws.

Nose  feels  bruised.

Nose,  r.  neck  and  side  feel  very  stiff,  more  about  jaws.

Nose  extremely  sensitive  to  touch.

Headache  extends  into  nose.

Nose  itches  all  day.
^  Upper  Face. Jawbones  feel  quite  sore.

Both  jaws  feel  stiff;  tingling  in  cheek  bones.

Gnawing  and  crawling  sensation  in  r.  zygoma.

Transitory  drawing  in  1.  side  of  face,  from  cheek  bone
toward  nose,  as  if  in  muscles,  in  evening.

Tearing  in  r.  upper  jaw  extending  into  ear,  same  in  temple.

Shooting  pains  in  upper  jaw  and  violent  headache.

Darting  pains  in  r.  side  of  face.

Burning  neuralgic  pain  down  1.  side  of  face.

A  sensation  moves  about  in  r.  side  of  face  and  goes  across
forehead.

Slight  twitchings  in  face  and  hands.

Quivering  in  face.

Facial  muscles  become  variously  contorted,  countenance
changes  its  aspect  frequently.

Spasmodic  affections  take  place  in  muscles  of  face,  occasion-
ing violent  contortions  and  most  horrid  assemblage  of
features;  in  muscles  moving  lower  jaw,  inducing  invol-
untary gnashing  and  a  grinding  of  teeth,  which  some
have  construed  into  a  desire  of  biting;  during  convul-
sive attack  expression  of  face  indicates  great  anxiety
and  alarm.  —

Disturbed  look  with  dyspnoea. —

Expression  of  face  quite  variable ;  reddening  countenance
often  exhibits  reflections  of  utmost  mental  and  physical
misery,  of  most  horrible  agony.  —

Face  flushed  ;  complained  of  his  head,  said  they  were  run-
ning needles  into  his  brain.  —

Heat  in  r.  side  of  face  and  r.  ear,  followed  by  headache  in
vertex  and  forehead ;  as  soon  as  headache  gets  >,  heat


LYSSIN.  174

returns;  heat  comes  from  within,  and  spreads  from  back
of  neck  to  ear  and  into  eye  and  face,  accompanied  by
constant  pain  in  nape  of  neck,  which  increases  after  heat
and  headache  disappear.

A  feeling  of  heat  and  soreness  in  middle  of  1.  cheek.

Heat  in  face,  with  soreness  of  1.  cheek,  from  thinking.

Heat  in  r.  side  of  face,  and  particularly  in  eye,  where  it
causes  a  tickling ;  returns  after  drinking  coffee.

Face  sweat:  with  sensation  of  heat;  with  flushes.

In  morning  (6  a.m.),  tickling  in  1.  cheek.

Heat  and  redness  of  face.

First  heat  in  r.  side  of  face  and  in  ear,  then  a  quiet  aching
in  front  of  upper  part  of  head ;  this  headache  lessens,  the
heat  increases.

Heat  in  face  in  morning,  with  redness;  at  times  very  deep.

Complexion  pallid  and  cyanotic,  and  expression  stupid.

Flushes  and  headache  alternately.

Pale  face  with  squeamishness  and  nausea.

Face  pale  and  yellowish,  almost  brownish.

■  Appearance  peculiar;  skin  sallow,  pale  or  anaemic;
bloated  all  over,  but  no  "pitting."  ^Chronic  camp
diarrhoea.

Sensation  as  if  she  had  been  bitten  in  1.  side  of  face  near
mouth.

Tickling  on  1.  cheek,  at  6  a.m.

The  scratches  on  cheek  became  red,  thirty- three  days  after
bite,  and  on  following  day  looked  quite  fresh,  as  if  they
had  been  made  only  a  few  hours  before,  but  were  a  little
darker  in  color  than  newly  made  abrasions.  —

Pimple  on  eminence  of  forehead,  painful  to  touch ;  later
one  on  right.

On  1.  cheek  near  nose,  towards  eye,  a  pain,  <  when  touched ;
a  pimple  with  soreness  around.

Painless  hard  nodules  on  cheek,  where  a  pimple  seemed
to  have  appeared ;  on  ninth  day  a  little  scurf  on  it
and  redness ;  if  picked  or  pricked,  a  very  disagreeable
kind  of  pain,  but  not  violent,  is  felt  in  cheek  even  a
distance  from  nodule,  and  here  and  there  deep  in  upper
part  of  jaw ;  gets  bluish  red  and  soft ;  discharges,  after
the  scurf  is  scratched  off,  lymph  and  blood.

Slow  maturing  bluish  pimples  on  face.

I  Pain  in  1.  cheek  near  nose,  from  fifth  to  seventh  day;
followed  by  a  hard,  painless  swelling  of  size  of  a  pea,
turned  redder  on  thirtieth  day,  and  became  covered
with  a  small  scab ;  on  thirty-second  day  it  grew  soft
and  turned  bluish  red,  particularly  around  edges ;  on
puncturing,  a  disagreeable  yet  not  severe  pain  at  some
distance  from  swelling  and  more  inside  of cheek ;  a


175  LYSSIN.

small  quantity  of  blood  and  matter  was  discharged ;  on
fortieth  day  the  place  ceased  to  discharge  and  healed.
^  Lower  Face. The  jawbones  feel  sore ;  aching  in  lower  jaw.

Violent  jerking  pains  in  lower  jaw.

Tearing  in  r,  lower  and  upper  jaw  up  into  ear.

When  reading  or  writing,  felt  a  pain  in  lower  jaw ;  the
longer  she  reads  the  <  it  got.

I  I  Masseter  muscles  not  affected  by  spasms.

During  phrensical  fits,  snapping  motions  are  made  with
jaw  of  an  involuntary  or  spasmodic  character,  bearing
some  resemblance  to  motions  of  biting.  —

Attempted  to  bite  her  fingers  before  death.  —

Biting  snapping  with  convulsions.  —

Jaws  feel  stiff;  crawling  in  zygomatic  arch.

Lower  jaw  stiff  and  painful ;  with  inclination  to  yawn ;
with  headache  ;  imagines  he  cannot  open  mouth.

Jaws  feel  sore  and  stiff;  a  great  disposition  to  press  hand
against  lower  jaw.

Sensation  as  if  she  would  have  mumps.

A  chilling,  biting,  burning  sensation  on  inner  side  of  r.
'  upper  lip,  as  if  a  corroding  acid  had  touched  spot ;  sen-
sation passes  up  and  back,  in  a  lesser  degree,  to  r.  nasal
cavity,  where  it  produces  tickling  and  sneezing;  sub-
sequently increase  of  saliva ;  after  several  hours.

Lips  cracked  on  inside  of  middle  line.

Spasms  with  froth  before  mouth.  —

It  seldom  happens  that  froth  is  observed  around  outside
of  mouth.  —
^^  Teeth  and  Gums, i  Grinding  of  teeth.

Painful  sensation  of  coldness  shoots  into  teeth,  it  passes
from  lower  posterior  part  upward  and  into  jaw.

Teeth  hurt  more  on  r.  side,  it  is  a  kind  of  aching  dulness.

Sensation  in  r.  lower  jaw,  in  bone  as  it  were,  it  shoots  into
root  of  a  decayed  tooth.

Shooting  pain  in  r.  eye  tooth,  preceded  by  burning,  passing
down  oesophagus.

Frequent  shooting  pain  in  teeth;  all  the  teeth  ache.

Aching  in  carious  root  of  a  molar.

■  Toothache  and  other  complaints  during  pregnancy,  with

internal  ebullition  of  blood  from  chest  to  head ;  head

feels  as  if  filled  with  air  to  bursting.
Teeth  very  sensitive;  feel  as  if  on  edge.
Headache  and  earache  extend  into  teeth.
Chilling  painfulness  starts  in  teeth  of  r.  side  behind  and

below  in  bone  of  lower  maxilla  and  passes  upwards.
Neuralgic  pain  in  gums,  principally  in  front.  —

■  Aching  in  swollen  gums  on  r.  side.
Drawing  in  gums,  most  in  front.


LYSSIN.  176

"  Taste  and  Tongue. Food  does  not  have  right  taste.  .
Scrapy  taste,  with  much  saliva.
Bitter  taste  in  morning,  on  awaking.
Salt  victuals  tasted  too  strongly  of  salt,  other  food  seemed

to  lack  salt.
Speech  is  labored,  short  and  pathetic.  —
1  I  Difficult,  incorrect  speech. ^Stricture  of  throat.
•  Impediment  in  his  speech,  would  begin  a  sentence  with

difficulty  after  several  fruitless  attempts;  some  palatal

vowels  he  could  not  pronounce,  others  but  incorrectly.

^Spasms  of  throat.
A  cool  feeling  on  tongue  like  after  peppermint.
Pain  in  root  of  tongue  and  1.  side  of  throat.
Peculiar  pain  at  root  of  tongue  as  if  it  was  swollen.
Tickling,  queer  feeling  in  throat  and  root  of  tongue.
Tongue usually moist and clean; frequently slightly

coated,  more  seldom  dry  and  thickly  coated.
Tongue  coated  with  thin  layer  of  yellowish  white  fur.
Tongue  coated  with  foam.  —
Tongue  dark  red  on  sides,  coated  in  centre.
I  Tongue  large,  pale  and  flabby. ^Chronic  camp  diarrhoea.

■  Pricking  sensation  under  tongue. ^Lyssophobia.
Ranula  returns  periodically,  with  dryness  of  mouth,  <

in  afternoon,  soreness  when  chewing;  with  hemorrhoids
and  constipation.
^^  Inner  Mouth. Feeling  of coldness,  like essence  of  pep-
permint.
Severe  pain  passing  from  mouth  upward  through  head
and  down  into  neck.

■  Constant sensation  of intense dryness  of  mouth  and

throat. ^Chronic  camp  diarrhoea.
Dryness  in  mouth :  in  afternoon ;  with  thirst.
Sore  mouth,  feels  as  if  there  were  lumps  in  it.
Much  tenacious  mucus  in  mouth  and  throat.

■  Tough,  short  frothy  phlegm  in  mouth  (horse).
Frothed  at  mouth,  attempted  to  spit  out  with  much  diffi-
culty (before  death).

Saliva  more  viscid,  constant  spitting,  feeling  of  general

malaise.
Saliva  runs  together  in  mouth,  without  occasion; flows

back  and  is  swallowed.
Saliva  in  back  part  of  mouth  like  after  sugar,  or  when

liquorice  is  swallowed.
Mouth  full  of  saliva,  total  disinclination  to  drink.
Great  flow  of  saliva  and  difficulty  in  swallowing  liquids.
Accumulation  of  foaming  saliva,  with  inflammation  of

throat.
Saliva  more  plentiful,  but  thin  and  of  yellow  color.


177  LYSSIN.

Secretion  of  a  thick  and  frothy  saliva,  but  without  any-
morbid  repulsion  towards  drinks.

Ejected  saliva  is  frothy,  slimy  and  ropy.

Much  tenacious  saliva,  with  sore  throat.

I  Large  quantities  of  tough  saliva  in  mouth,  with  constant
spitting. ^Diarrhoea.

Saliva  is  not  ejected,  but  runs  from  open  mouth.  —

Quantities  of  saliva  are  collected  in  and  about  mouth ;
presents  a  frothy  appearance;  patient  is  constantly  en-
deavoring to  get  rid  of  it  by  wiping  it  with  a  hand-
kerchief, or  spitting  it  out  with  great  force.  —

I  Spits  all  the  time  small  quantities  of  a  frothy  saliva ;

with  pain  in  limbs.

I I  Frequent  spitting. ^Lyssophobia.

I  At  10  A.M.  began  to  spit  a  great  deal,  continuing  all  day

till  supper. ^Lyssophobia.
Dark,  coffee  colored  fluid  oozed  from  mouth  (before  death).
Much  mucus  in  throat  and  nose;  hanging  in  posterior-

nares.
Scraping  sensation  on palate  where  cool  sensation  had.

been,  slight  coughing  does  not  reach  spot,  hemming-

and  hawking  does  occasionally.
Fauces  and  pharynx pervaded  by  an equally  diffused

purplish  scarlet  blush,  no  pain  in  throat,  except  when

patient  attempts  to  swallow.  —
Follicular  enlargement  is  common,  involves  also  pharyn-
geal follicles  and  lymphatic  glands  in  neighborhood  of

jaw; similar swelling upon inner  side  of  epiglottis,

pretty  firm  and  characterized  by  abundance  of  lymph

corpuscles  found  in  gland  substance.  —
Hyperplasia  and  recent  swelling  of  tonsils  and  follicular

glands  of  tongue; flat,  roundish  swellings at  root  of

tongue,  in  middle  of  each  one  of  which  was  seen  dilated

opening  of  a  follicle.  —
Sensation  as  if  uvula  was  too  long;  it  is  slightly  inflamed

but  not  elongated.
Mucous  membrane  of  pharynx  and  epiglottis  of  a  deep

red  color  and  injected;  soft  palate  frequently  reddened

and  swollen.
Entire  mucous  membrance  of  mouth  and  pharynx  was  of

an  equally  distributed  pink  without  any  swelling.
'^  Throat. I  Slight  redness  of  palate  and  throat,  with  spasm

of  oesophagus  and  difiicult  speech.
I  Sore  throat,  as  after  swallowing  red  pepper.
Quite  a  sore  throat,  constrictive  sensation  much  <  when

attempting  to  swallow  liquids,  which  he  could  not  do

without  pain  ;  solids  not  painful.
At  11  A.M. :  soreness  in  throat  till  noon.

VOL.  VII. — 12.


LYSSIN.


Sore  throat:  very  severe;  all  day;  in  forenoon;  >  at
6  P.M. ;  after  supj)er  (7  p.m.)  ;  not  able  to  swallow  with-
out great  pain;  as  if  swelled;  as  if  raw;  aches;  on  r.
side;  with  headache;  with  soreness  in  eyes;  with  in-
creased tenacious  saliva.

Cooling  sensation  in  oesoj^hagus.

Throat  quite  sore,  headache  in  both  temples,  numbness  in
both  arms,  slight  pain  in  lumbar  region  all  day.

Pauces  and  pharynx  as  far  as  one  can  see  are  slightly  in-
flamed, there  is  inclination  to  swallow,  and  increase  of
saliva.

Painful  sore  throat,  throat  much  inflamed,  headache  <,
tenacious  mucus  in  mouth  and  throat;  great  weakness
with  aversion  to  move.

Inflammation  of  throat  with  foamy  saliva.

Violent  spasm  in  throat  as  if  he  would  suffocate,  from
2  P.M.  to  9.30  P.M.

Great  heat  in  throat  and  about  heart.

Sudden  jerks  going  from  oesophagus  to  heart.

1 1  Sore  throat,  constant  desire  to  swallow;  much  saliva  and
feeling  as  if  beaten.

■  Periodical  spasm  of  oesophagus,  continual  painful  inclina-

tion to  swallow  without  being  able  to  swallow  anything;
constriction  is  most  severe  when  taking  water  into
mouth,  if  he  tried  to  swallow  it  forcibly,  he  had  burning
and  stinging  pain  in  throat,  cough  and  retching  which
forced  fluid  from  his  mouth;  difficult  speech.

1  Difficulty  in  swallowing;  particularly  fluids.

Dryness  in  throat  and  difficult  swallowing,  with  slight
erysipelatous  redness  in  pharynx.

Stinging  sensation  when  swallowing.

Sore  throat  at  2  p.m.,  with  difficulty  in  swallowing  fluids;
felt  as  if  epiglottis  was  paralj^zed.

Sore  throat  with  great  inflammation,  could  only  swallow
with  difficulty,  fluids  returned  through  nose.

A  peculiar  sense  of  constriction  in  back  of  throat  at  3  p.m.,
<  at  4  p.m.,  could  not  swallow  without  pain ;  disappeared
at  6  P.M.,  but  returned  at  7  and  lasted  until  bedtime.

Sore  throat  with  constriction,  particularly  when  attempt-
to  swallow  fluids,  which  is  painful.

Terrible  pain  in  throat,  particularly  when  swallowing.  _

Constant  inclination  to  swallow,  or  remove  phlegm  which
seems  to  stick  between  nose  and  throat.

■  Constant desire to swallow, painful and ineffectual.

^Spasm  of  throat. ^Stricture  of  throat.
Some  will  drink  water  without  difficulty.  —
Activity  to  drink  is  restored  before  sudden  death.  — _
Warm  drinks,  milk,  soups  and  wdne  are  often  more  easily

taken  than  water.  —


179  LYSSIN.

Imagines  that  he  cannot  swallow  anything.  —

Difficulty  in  swallowing  can,  at  first,  be  overcome  by  firm
resolution.  —

Declared  he  could  not  swallow  for  something  in  throat
that  interrupted  the  passage.

Swallowing  more  difficult  at  5  p.m.  than  in  morning  (after
Bellad.).

Solid  food  sometimes  consumed  with  great  difficulty.

Absolute  impossibility  to  swallow  anything,  whenever
attempt  is  made,  attacks  of  suffocation  and  spasms  of
respiratory  muscles  as  well  as  of  muscles  of  face,  neck
and  rest  of  body,  with  great  mental  disturbance.  —

After  some  days  patient  equally  abhorred  solids  as  well  as
fluids ;  when  importuned  to  eat,  he  was  thrown  into  con-
vulsions. —

Any  attempt  to  swallow  bread  occasioned  greatest  agony.

Often  hapj)ens  that  they  succeed  in  drinking  after  those
who  were  around  them  have  retired,  or  when  attempt  is
made  with  closed  eyes  and  with  aid  of  a  straw.  —

No  disgust  for  fluids  until  difficulty  in  swallowing  came
on ;  when  fluid  touched  fauces  it  seemed  at  the  peril  of
his  life.  —

At  3  P.M.  felt  a  strange  constrictive  sensation  in  back  part
of  throat,  never  experienced  before,  <  at  4  p.m.,  could
not  swallow  without  great  pain ;  went  off  at  6  p.m.  ;  re-
turned in  an  hour,  lasting  till  10  p.m.

I  When  taking  water  into  mouth,  constriction  was  greatest.
^Spasm  of  throat.

■  Periodical  spasm  of  oesophagus. ^Stricture  of  throat.
Attempt  to  drink  water  starts  convulsions.  —

■  Had  difficulty  in  speaking;  a  connected  sentence  could

only  be  uttered  after  making  several  fruitless  attempts ;
palatic  letters  could  not  be  pronounced  at  all,  or  were
pronounced  wrong. ^QEsophageal  spasms.

At  10  A.M.  felt  a  soreness  and  suffocation  in  back  of  throat.

Violent  spasm  of  throat  at  2  p.m.,  feeling  as  if  he  was  about
to  be  suffocated ;  went  off  at  9  p.m.

A  ball,  as  it  were,  rises  from  stomach  up  to  throat,  seems
to  threaten  suffocation.

Sensation  of  a  lump  in  throat,  with  desire  to  swallow.

A  terrible  pain  in  throat  all  day,  and  great  pain  in  swal-
lowing.

Pain  extended  upwards  from  wounded  arm  towards  throat.

Stitching  sensation  when  swallowing.

Burning  stinging  in  1.  side  of  chest,  with  palpitation  in
afternoon.

■  Burning  stinging  in  throat. ^Stricture  of  oesophagus.

■  Trying  to  swallow  water  forcibly,  it  caused  burning  and


LYSSIN.  180

stinging  in  throat,  besides  cough  and  gagging,  which
forced  out  contents  of  moutli. ^Spasm  of  throat.

Burning  down  oesophagus.

Great  heat  in  throat  and  around  heart.

lA  slight  redness  of  affected  parts. ^Spasm  of  throat.

Intense  and  deep  seated  inflammation  of  mucous  mem-
brane of  mouth,  gums,  tliroat  and  larynx,  with  smart-
ing pains  on  swallowing.

Feels  as  if  he  had  swallowed  a  small  quantity  of  red  pepper.

^*  Appetite,  Thirst. Desires,  Aversions, i Appetite  good,

but  digestion  deficient ;  a  portion  of  nearly  everything

he  ate  passing  bowels  in  an  undigested  state. ^Chronie

camp  diarrhoea.

Voracious  appetite;  swallowed  wheat  without  chewing.

Little  appetite  in  morning;  want  of  appetite,  headache,,
depression.

I  Want  of  appetite. ^Hydrophobia  of  sheep.

■  Could  take  no  nourishment  (with  spitting),  could  not  re-

main at  table. ^Lyssophobia.

Symptoms  of  digestive  organs  extremely  variable;  exces-

' sive  thirst,  vomiting,  constipation.

Thirst  and  disinclination  for  food.

I  Felt  very  thirsty  and  had  no  aversion  to  drink,  on  con-
trary drank  large  quantities  of  water. ^Lyssophobia.

Thirst  much  increased,  complains  of  burning  pains  in
throat.

Thirst  and  desire  to  drink,  but  is  prevented  from  doing  so-
by  spasmodic  constriction  of  throat,  attempts  excite
most  disagreeable  sensations,  even  spasms.

>Had  not  been  drinking  any  water  for  some  time,  only
some  hot  tea. ^Dysentery.

■  Drank  some  strong  tea  at  supper,  after  which  salivation

discontinued  until  8  p.m.,  then  commenced  again. ^Lys-

sophobia.
No  appetite,  except  for  sour  things.
Called  for  burnt  brandy  and  drank  it;  next  day  a  strong

rising  in  his  stomach  and  an  impossibility  to  drink.

■  Excessive  desire  for  salt.

First  days,  smoking  unpleasant;  after  first  week,  a  crazy,
insatiable  desire  to  smoke,  he  does  not  allow  pipe  to  cool.

Picked  up  bits  of  cotton  and  shreds  of  cloth ;  bits  of  chip
and  coal  were  devoured  whenever  getting  near;  any-
thing that  was  within  reach  and  could  be  grasped  by
the  jaws  was  gnawed  away  very  quickly ;  a  dog.

Urine  and  feces  were  frequently  devoured  as  soon  as  they
were  voided;  a  dog.

■  Abnormal  cravings  during  pregnancy.

Aversion  to  water;  imagines  he  cannot  swallow;  says  he-
is  thirsty,  but  cannot  look  at  water  or  hear  it  poured  out..


181  LYSSIN.

I  Aversion  to  water  of  place  he  arrived  at.  —

I  Aversion  to  drinking  water,  but  can  take  small  quantities
of  chocolate. ^Diarrhoea.

Aversion  to  fluids ;  great  sensitiveness  to  every  breath  of
air  and  reflection  of  light.

Since  bite  she  has  a  frightful  aversion  to  water ;  at  first
she  could  wash  herself  by  dint  of  great  selfcontrol,  but
later  not  at  all.

Wine  tasted  poorly  and  affected  him  more  than  usual.

Aversion  to  fat  food and  drink ; there  remains  a  long
greasy  aftertaste,  <  after  mutton.
^^  Eating  and  Drinking. Before  dinner  a  very  strange  sen-
sation, a  strangeness  of  whole  body.

Warm  drinks,  such  as  milk,  soups  and  wine,  are  more
easily  taken  than  water.

Inability  to  take  solid  food,  or  else  it  is  consumed  with
greatest  difficulty.

At  times  ability  to  drink  is  restored  before  death.

After  supper,  7  p.m.,  feels  >,  less  sore  throat,  no  difficulty
in  swallowing.

After  eating:  all  cooling,  burning,  wavelike  sensations
disappear,  also  congestion;  pressing  inward  in  epigas-
trium ;  lasciviousness  with  sexual  excitement ;  lewdness
with  a  sensation  of  weakness  in  parts,  but  inclined  to
an  emission  of  semen;  increased  lassitude  and  drowsi-
ness, slept  an  hour  without  making  it  any  better.

After  meals  very  ill  disposed,  every  noise  irritates  him ;  if
others  eat  apples,  or  hawk,  or  blow  their  noses,  it  brings
him  beside  himself;  passes  away  after  siesta  and  coffee.

After  dinner  and  in  evening:  disinclined  to  think.

After  supper:  pressing  in  spleen.

Nausea  after  eating  eggs  or  fat  food.

After  coffee:  more  frequent  beating  of  pulse;  heat  in  face.

Tobacco  affected  him  more  than  usual.
"  Hiccough,  Belching,  Nausea  and  Vomiting. Squeam-
ish sensation ;  a  want  of  appetite  in  evening,  followed
by  great  lightness  of  head.

Nausea:  with  giddiness,  headache  and  pale  face;  with  pale
face  after  diarrhoea ;  food  does  not  taste  right ;  and  loss
of  appetite  in  evening;  10  to  11  p.m.

Hiccoughing.

Continual  belching  of  wind;  convulsive  eructations.

Belching  in  forenoon ;  sour,  in  afternoon.

■  Gagging  when  he  forcibly  attempts  to  swallow  water,
forces  it  out  of  his  mouth. ^Spasm  of  throat.

Rising  of  bile  into  throat  during  day,  at  same  time  an  un-
usual quantity  of  tenacious  saliva  in  mouth  and  throat.

Nausea  and  vomiting,  after  diarrhoea.


LYSSIN.  182

Vomiting:  of  food;  of  fluid  while  drinking,  followed  by
faintness;  of  what  was  eaten  at  supper,  at  night  in
sleep.

Nausea  and  vomiting  of  a  foamy,  mucous,  dark  colored
substance  resembling  coffee  grounds.
"  Scrobiculum  and  Stomach. Pressure  in  epigastrium  after
eating.

Suffocating  pain  at  pit  of  stomach.

Distress  in  epigastrium  and  prsecordial  region  with
dyspncea.

In  epigastric  region  sensation  half  coldish,  half  burning.

Pain  in  epigastric  region,  deep  in,  as  if  in  or  behind
duodenum.

Aching,  with  coldness  in  stomach.

A  cooling  pain  in  stoniach,  with  here  and  there  a  sharp
and  pointed  pressure.

A  sense  of  motion  in  stomach.

Loud  gurgling  in  1.  side  of  stomach,  becomes  more  con-
tinuous, like  water  from  a  bottle.

A  loud  cooing  noise  in  stomach,  to  1.,  and  after  a  while  re-
peated as  a  quick  croaking.

Great  oppression  in  stomach,  has  to  open  her  clothes.

A  slightly  hot,  quiet,  aching  sensation  below  chest,  some-
times lower  down,  often  in  entire  abdomen,  as  if  in  in-
testines.

Stomach  empty,  or  may  contain  a  dark,  opaque  substance,
frequently  resembling  coffee  grounds;  in  mucous  mem-
brane of  stomach  and  intestines,  decided  injection  of
bloodvessels;  upon  former  frequently  hemorrhagic
erosions.
^^  Hypochondria.  A  pressing  pain:  in  r.  side,  near  last  ribs,
with  breathing;  in  hypochondria,  after  quick  walking.

Shooting  in  r.  side  of  abdomen.

Pain  in  region  of  liver  and  r.  kidney.

Pain  from  within  outward  in  r.  side.

Fatty  degeneration  of  liver.  —

In  uper  part  of  abdomen,  1.  side  (region  of  stomach  and
spleen),  a  continual  gnawing  pressure  in  forenoon.

Aching  from  below  waist  to  feet.

Pain  in  1.  side,  at  8  a.m.

Pressing  pain  in  region  of  spleen  when  walking  fast.

iPainful  throbbing  as  if  an  abscess  was  forming  in  region
of  spleen,  but  very  deep  in,  exact  locality  is  half  way  be-
tween median  line  and  outline  of  1.  side;  it  lasted  eight
days;  with  it  departed  remnant  of  a  similar  affection  in
this  locality,  against  which  eleven  years  of  allopathic
treatment  had  proved  of  no  avail.

Under  mamma  a  hot  sensation,  quietly  aching,  sometimes
same  lower  down  or  in  whole  abdomen,  as  if  in  intestines.


183  LYSSIK

Tearing  from  1.  hypochondriac  region  to  right.
^^  Abdomen. A  rending  pain  across  abdomen  from  1.  to  r.,  in

evening  when  in  bed.
Pain  in  r.  side  of  abdomen  proceeding  from  uterus.
Pain  down  1.  side  of  abdomen.
Pressing  in  abdomen.
A  drawing  in  abdomen  below  navel.
Cramp  in  lower  part  of  abdomen.
Painful  sensation  deep  in  upper  portion  of  abdomen,  as  if

behind  duodenum ;  in  forenoon.
Colicky  pain  in  abdomen;  when  it  subsides,  stinging  in

small  of  back.
Severe  bellyache,  lasting  an  hour,  awoke  from  sleep  at  11.30.
Violent  bellyache.
Sticking:  in  r.  side  of  abdomen,  when  taking  a  breath;  in

abdomen  above  hip;  with  feeling  of  motion  in  lower

part  of  abdomen.
Stitches:  in  r.  side  of  abdomen;  in  belly,  an  inch  from

crista  ilea.
Shooting  in  abdomen.

A  sense  of  motion,  with  slight  stinging  in  middle  of  ab-
domen.
A  burning,  waving  and  surging,  proceeding  from  abdomen,

spreads  through  entire  chest  to  head.
After  cooling  sensation  and  scratching  in  oesophagus  had

subsided,  there  appeared  a  half  cooling,  half  burning

sensation  in  entire  upper  part  of  abdomen.
■  General  soreness  in  whole  of  lower  abdomen.
Distension  of  abdomen ;  every  evening.
Rigidity  of  muscles  of  abdomen.
From  both  loins  a  drawing  downward,  followed  by  cramps

in  lower  abdomen.
Aching :  in  loins ;  into  back ;  down  to  feet.
Dull  })ressing  pain  above  r.  inguinal  region  on  a  defined

place.
Pain  in  r.  groin,  with  some  swelling.
Drawing,  dragging  pain  in  groins;  heavy,  bruised  feeling

in  thighs.
Drawing  from  groins  downward,  then  cramps  in  abdomen,,

accompanied  by  dizziness.
Aching  from  groins  to  feet,  in  evening.
Pain  in  both  groins;  in  r.,  two  small  kernels  under  skin^

very  painful.
Inguinal  glands  very  much  swollen,  they  pain  for  two  hours.
^^  Stool  and  Rectum, i  Tenesmus  during' and  after  stool.

1 1  Dysenteric  stools  with  tenesmus;  renewed  as  soon  as  he

hears  or  sees  water  run.
•  When in morning  some  water was  poured  out from


LYSSIN.  184

pitcher  into  basin,  pain  and  desire  to  stool  returned.
^Dysentery.

■When  he  sees  or  hears  running  water,  violent  pain  and
tenesmus  return;  in  a  case  of  dysentery  in  Summer,  of
six  weeks'  standing,  in  which  stools  were  most  frequent  in
night,  consisted  of  bloody  mucus  and  were  followed  by
pains  in  rectum  and  small  of  back,  which  forced  patient
to  walk  about  in  spite  of  great  weakness;  could  neither
stand  nor  lie  down ;  had  drank  no  water  whole  time,  only
hot  tea  occasionally.

I  Stools  watery  and  profuse,  with  severe  pains  in  lower
bowels;  frequency  of  stools  not  uniform,  some  days  five
or  six,  others  fifteen  or  twenty,  usually  more  frequent  in
morning. ^Chronic  camp  diarrhoea.

Diarrhoea:  with  much  pain,  most  during  day,  eighteen
hours  after  dose,  lasting  twenty-four  hours,  with  pain  in
lower  part  of  bowels;  <  in  morning;  followed  by  nausea
as  if  she  would  have  to  vomit;  attended  with  violent
pains  early  in  morning;  after  stitches  in  side.

■  Chronic  diarrhoea  contracted  in  Southern  camps.

Difficult  passage  of  flatus  as  if  anus  resisted  expulsion.

I  I  Stools  of  bloody  mucus. ^Diarrhoea.

Involuntery  stools.

1  Straining  to  evacuate,  causing  a  violent  pain  in  small  of
back  and  in  rectum,  afterwards  compelling  him  to  walk
about,  although  weak. ^Dysentery.

Bowels  constipated;  stool  very  dark  in  color.

Stool  became  dark  and  thickish  in  appearance,  mingled
with  shreds  of  wool  or  cotton,  bits  of  wood  and  coal  that
had  been  swallowed;  a  dog.

Passage  of  bright  red  blood  from  anus,  with  terrible  burn-
ing and  pricking  in  it  as  from  thorns.

Difficult  stool,  piles  protrude.

Hemorrhoidal  troubles,  passes  blood  from  anus  during
catamenia.

Throbbing  in  anus  externally.

Darting  into  anus  causes  contraction.
^^  Urinary  Organs. Dull  pressure  in  region  of  1.  kidney.

Flying  pains  increase,  seize  urinary  organs;  create  a  diffi-
culty and  heat  in  discharging  urine.

Some  pain  about  neck  of  bladder  in  evening.

A  cooling,  burning,  congested  feeling  in  region  of  bladder,
in  evening.

Profuse  watery  urine,  in  evening.

In  morning  and  evening  urine  is  yellowish  brown,  turbid
and  diminished  in  quantity;  reddish  sediment.

Urine  dark,  brownish,  with  whitish  sediment,  visible  when
urinating  upon  snow.


185  LYSSIN.

Brighter  colored  urine  and  in  larger  quantities,  but  not
more  frequent.

Urine  scanty  or  muddy,  often  of  a  dull,  greenish  yellow
color;  dog.

A  whitish  yellow  sediment  in  urine.

Urine  scanty,  no  albumen;  dark,  cloudy,  frequently  con-
tains sugar,  evidentl}^  the  result  of  lesions  in  medulla
oblongata.  —

I  Urine  too  scanty  and  high  colored.  ^Chronic  camp
diarrhoea.

Urging  to  urinate,  after  a  slight  accumulation.

■  Constant  desire  to  urinate  on  seeing  running  water;  uri-

nates a  little  at  a  time.

Tickling  burning  in  urethra  near  orifice  after  urinating.

After  passing  feces  and  urine  there  is  an  urging  to  urinate
again,  it  moves  slowly  several  times  from  above  down-
ward without  succeeding  in  passing  a  drop.

Prostatic  juice  passes  after  urinating.

Since  fourteenth  day  after  bite  says  she  has  passed  no  water ;
passes  daily  from  time  to  time  a  little  dark  blood  from
uterus,  differing  in  quantity  and  quality  from  men-
strual flow.

If  he  passes  but  a  small  quantity  of  urine  his  sense  of  weak-
ness is  increased ;  weakness  after  urinating  as  if  he  passed
his  strength  awa3\
^^  Male  Sexual  Organs. Inclined  to  lascivious  ideas,  although
there  is  not  much  sexual  desire.

Lasciviousness:  after  eating,  with  feeling  of  weakness  in
parts;  with  erections  in  afternoon.

Erections  with  but  little  desire.

■  Strong  erections,  without  sexual  excitement  or  thoughts,

in  evening  while  undressing  in  a  cold  room.
Sexual  indifference  with  erections,  even  during  act  of  coi-
tion, which  is  perfectly  performed.

■  Increased  sexual  desire. ^Dropsy  of  spine  with  sheep.

^Hydrophobia  of  sheep.
Priapism,  with  frequent  seminal  emissions.

■  Satyriasis  in  a  stallion;  hot  breath  streamed  from  nostrils.
Insufficient  seminal  discharge.

■  Semen  is  discharged  too  late  or  not  at  all  during  coition.
During  a  very  strong  and  warm  embrace  excitement  dimin-
ished at  its  height,  and  there  followed  no  emission.

No  emission  during  coition,  but  afterwards  semen  escaped

unconsciously  in  sleep.
A  seminal  emission  with  dreams,  quite  unusual.
Without  being  preceded  by  an  erection  there  is  a  discharge

of  prostatic  fluid,  smelling  salty  and  musty;  the  glans

penis  is  dry.


LYSSIN.  186

Feeling  of  weakness  around  and  in  sexual  parts.

After  coition,  with  difficult  and  tardy  emission,  there  is  a

sensation  of  emptiness  and  discomfort  in  parts,  lasting

all  of  next  day.
Painful  urging  in  penis,  as  after  excessive  coition,  accom-
panied by  lasciviousness.
Itching  and  burning  on  corona  glandis,  with  tickling  and

discharge  of  greenish  pus,  in  afternoon.
Glans  is  dry  and  sticks  to  foreskin.
Burning  and  tenesmus  as  if  in  prostatic  gland  and  in

urethra;  in  afternoon.
Itching  on  os  pubis,  1.  side,  extending  to  root  of  penis.
Increased  peristaltic  motion  of  scrotum,  all  afternoon  and

evening ;  motion  of  testicles  also  increased.
Scrotum  tightly  drawn  up  for  two  or  three  weeks.
Hanging  down  of  scrotum  on  eighth  day,  while  before  and

after  it  was  contracted.
Painful  sensation  in  testicles.
Pain  in  testicles  on  day  after  an  embrace,  particularly  felt

towards  noon  and  first  afternoon  hours.

■  Hydrocele.

I  Atrophy  of  testicles;  testicles  diminish  in  size,  first  1.,  then

right.

I I  Complaints  resulting  from  abnormal  sexual  desire.

^^  Female  Sexual  Organs. lAphrodisiac  sense  deficient.  ^Pro-
lapsus uteri.
Pain  extending  from  uterus  into  breast  and  r.  side  of  ab-
domen.

■  Insatiable  heat;  with  cows.

Pain  in  1.  ovarian  region,  uneasiness  there.

Bearing  down  in  uterine  region.

Sharp  pain  in  uterus,  shooting  down  to  labia.

Occasional  acute  pain  in  and  below  uterus ;  at  times  a  vio-
lent shooting  pain  in  1.  of  vagina,  extending  upward,
so  severe  as  almost  to  cause  her  to  scream.

;rlncrease  of  uterine  sensitiveness,  conscious  of  having  a
womb.

I  With  a  painful  sensitiveness  of  womb,  slight  degree  of
prolapsus,  so  that  after  any  considerable  physical  effort
there  would  be  a  strong  conviction  that  it  was  prolapsed.

■  Considerable  pain  in  lower  part  of  back,  with  a  soreness

felt  through  pubic  region,  which  was  clearly  proved  to
be  in  neck  of  womb  by  an  increase  of  pain  from  press-
ing finger  on  neck;  principally  at  point  where  finger
came  in  contact  with  womb. ^Subjective  prolapsus.

iWomb  high  up  in  abdomen,  enlarged  in  top  and  fundus.

I  Abrasion  about  os  tincee  (treated  with  caustic),  some  tume-
faction of  cervix  and  walls  of  vagina  remained,  showing
a  low  degree  of  inflammation. ^Prolapsus.


187  LYSSIN.

I  Speculum  showed  os  tincae  of  size  of  a  small  goose  quill,
smooth  and  normal,  except  that  there  was  a  string  of
bloody  mucus  of  size  of  os  hanging  from  it,  so  tough  and
viscid  that  it  was  difficult  to  wipe  it  away  with  a  sponge.
^Subjective  prolapsus.

■  Swelling  of  womb  in  all  its  parts,  extending  somewhat

into  vagina.  ^Prolapsus.
■Bright  redness  of  vaginal  portion  of  womb.  ^Prolapsus,
■After  menses  found  that  prolapsed  uterus,  a  case  consid-
ered incurable,  was  in  its  proper  position,  and  continued
so  after  an  interval  of  two  months,  though  she  has  done
much  to  test  the  cure,  lifting  a  heavy  child  in  and  out
of  bed  at  night,  when  she  w^as  necessarily  without  her
supporter.

■  Prolapsus  uteri  of  seven  years'  standing.

■  Metritis,  prolapsus  or  induration  of  uterus;  in  cows.

A  girl,  £et.  14,  and  another,  set.  21,  took  the  30th  after  their
catamenia  had  ceased  for  three  days,  next  day  it  re-
appeared.

Catamenia  appeared  (after  a  few  globules  of  30th)  two
weeks  before  time,  and  very  copious.

■Menstruation,  with  hemorrhoids,  pulsations  in  anus  and
weakness  of  back.

■  Menses  rather  frequent,  protracted,  dark,  and  at  times

fetid. ^Prolapsus  uteri.

■  During  interval  of  menses  "a  show"  that  seemed  quite

obstinate. ^Prolapsus  uteri.

■  x4.n8emia  in  consequence  of  disturbed  sexual  function.
Continual  discharge  of  offensive  mucus  from  uterus  for

several  months.
White  discharge  like  leucorrhoea,  which  weakened  her ;

never  had  leucorrhoea.
Slimy  leucorrhoea.
■Severe  leucorrhoea,  with  pains  in  back  and  lower  part  of

bowels ;  sore  vagina.

■  ■Sensitiveness  of  vagina  rendering  coition  quite  painful.

^Prolapsus  uteri.

■  Menses  too  profuse,  at  times  a  little  too  frequent. ^Pro-

lapsus.
Discharge  of  blood  from  rectum  during  menses.

■  Weakness  in  back,  wdth  copious  catamenia.

■  Tearing,  followed  by  pressing  downward,  could  not  make

a  hard  step  during  catamenia.
^  Pregnancy.  Parturition.  Lactation.  ■  "During  preg-
nancy: strange  notions,  desires  or  cravings;  rush  of
blood  from  chest  upward;  toothache,  backache  and
other  complaints;  great  sense  of  bearing  down;  intense
pain from inflammation  of os  and  cervix  (formerly


LYSSIN.  188

treated  with  Caustic.) ;  great  soreness  in  lower  part  of
back  and  bowels.

I  All  changes  of  position  that  tilt  or  rotate  to  a  moderate
extent  the  os  uteri  cause  much  pain.  ^During  preg-
nancy.

iSpasms  excited  whenever  she  attempts  to  drink  water,  or
if  she  hears  it  poured  from  one  vessel  into  another;  sight
or  sound  of  water  affects  unpleasantly,  even  though  de-
siring water. ^Puerperal  convulsions.

■  Since  childbirth  more  pain  with  coition  and  a  dislike  to
it. ^Subjective  prolapsus.

■Since  cessation  of  lochia  a  severe  leucorrhoea;  pain  in
back  and  lower  part  of  bowels ;  soreness  of  vagina.

Both  breasts  swollen  when  waking  in  morning,  she  can
hardly  get  up;  three  mornings  in  succession;  same
swelling  of  breasts  at  night  when  opening  her  dress.
^^  Voice  and  Larynx.  Trachea  and  Bronchia.  Voice  al-
tered in  tone;  tones  much  suppressed;  hoarse;  rough;
harsh  and  weak  (last  stage);  shrill,  inarticulate  sounds;
shrill  sounds  of  utmost  despair,  or  occasioned  by  violent
expirations ;  very  shrill  and  piercing  bark,  changing  near
its  termination  into  a  distressing,  continuous  howl  (dogs).

Epiglottis  crisp  and  dry.  —

Inflammation  or  redness  in  superior  part  of  trachea.

I  Pain  next  to  larynx,  on  r.  side,  felt  on  turning  neck  and
on  pressure.
^^  Respiration. The  breath  is  hot ;  sulphurous.  —

I  Hot  breath  streams  from  nostrils.  ^Satyriasis  in  a  stallion.
On  inspiring:  a  cooling  sensation;  stinging  in  1.  side.
Can  scarcely  speak  from  weakness.

Weakness  of  chest ;  tired  from  talking  or  reading.
When  breathing,  stitches  in  r.  side  of  abdomen.
Breathing  accelerated  or  rattling  in  last  stage.  —
Asthmatic  sensation,  air  going  through  larynx  makes  a

kind  of  wheezing.
Sighing  and  groaning  respiration,  may  be  occasioned  by

violent  expiration.
Frequent  sighing  and  sobbing.
A  general  feeling  of  discomfort  in  chest  forces  him  to  deep

breathing  or  to  emit  sighs,  which  alleviate.

I I  Sighing,  with  pain  in  heart.

Now  and  then  he  has  to  take  a  deep  breath,  with coldish

feeling  far  back  and  deep  in  throat,  followed  by  great

relief.
At  9  A.M.  suffocating  feeling  in  chest,  had  to  sigh  several

times,  lasting  till  10|  p.m.,  when  he  fell  asleep.
Breathing  laborious  and  difficult,  quickly  repeated,  and

attended  with  a  constant  and  peculiar  kind  of  hawking,


189  LYSSIN.

in  order  to  expel  breath,  which  has  been  taken  for  an
imitation  of  bark  of  a  dog.

■Dyspnoea:  with  flatulency,  cough  and  rattling  in  chest;
with  sighing,  groaning  respiration  ;  from  cardiac  pain;
<  lying  down.

Constriction  about  breast  and  difficulty  in  breathing  be-
come so  extreme,  that  on  a  blast  of  air  blowing  on  them
they  are  seized  with  greatest  distress,  cover  their  mouths,
seem  ready  to  expire,  as  if  struggling  for  breath.

On  attempting,  at  request,  to  drink  a  little  water;  a  vio-
lent spasm  of  muscles  of  neck  and  throat  came  on,  pre-
ceded by  a  deep  sigh  or  gasp,  as  if  she  might  just  have
plunged  into  cold  water.

Difficult  breathing  and  spasmodic  sensation  in  trachea.

Suffocative  spasm  in  throat.

Convulsive  breathing  and  spasm  in  muscles  of  throat,
either  come  on  together  or  breathing  precedes  throat-
spasms.

The  convulsive  breathings  during  paroxysms  are  very  sim-
ilar to  those  produced  by  a  sudden  cold  water  bath,  and
are  always  combined  with  spasms  in  throat  muscles.

Oppression  in  breathing  before  a  severe  suffocative  attack
occurs,  induced  by  spasmodic  contractions  of  respiratory
muscles,  combined  with  spasmodic,  alarming  constric-
tion of  pharynx.

Breathing  during  paroxysm  gasping,  irregular  and  usu-
ally quite  rapid,  often  with  decided  dyspnoea.
^  Cough, Barking  like  a  dog,  with  a  sort  of  noisy  cough;
headache.

■  Coughing  when  attempting  to  swallow  water  forcibly,
forces  it  out  of  mouth. ^Spasm  of  throat.

B  Cough  and  gagging. /^Stricture  of  throat.
^^  Inner Chest and Lungs. Chest  and  abdomen  feel  ex-
panded; expanding chest seems to invigorate him,
though  usually  it  fatigues.

Pressing  in  chest;  between  tenth  and  eleventh  ribs,  r.  side.

Rheumatic  pain  across  chest  when  drawing  her  breath.

Pain  as  if  in  nerves,  from  side  of  chest  up  to  throat.

Cramplike  pain  and  stitches  in  1.  side,  followed  by  diar-
rhoea and  afterwards  nausea  and  inclination  to  vomit.

Pinching  pain:  at  fourth  rib  on  r.  side.

Stinging  in  lower  part  of  chest.

Stitches  under  1.  mamma,  going  towards  left.

Shooting  between  1.  mamma  and  last  ribs.

Shooting,  flying  pains  through  1.  chest.

Burning  surging  through  chest.

Burning  stinging  in  1.  side  of  chest  when  taking  a  deep
breath.


LYSSIN.  190

Burning  like  heartburn  in  r.  side  of  back,  in  region  where
ribs  end.

Blood  mounts  from  chest  to  head.

Extending  to  chest,  pain  in  uterus.

Great  weakness  in  chest,  particularly  when  walking  and
reading  aloud,  chest  feels  fatigued ;  some  deep  pain  in
1.  side.

Upon  pleura  is  often  seen  a  soaplike  deposit,  as  in  case  of
cholera.

■  Gangrene  of  lungs,  caused  by  pneumonia  and  sexual
excitement. ^Satyriasis  in  a  stallion.
^^  Heart, Pulse and Circulation. Pain  in  1.  chest  on  a
small  spot  in  region  of  heart;  more  backwards  and  to
1.  in  chest.

Dull  pain  in  heart  all  day,  with  a  pinching  pain  about
fourth  rib,  r.  side.

Constant  pain  in  lower  part  of  heart.

A  very  strange  and  unusual  feeling  in  heart,  something
like  bands  compressing  it,  in  middle  of  chest,  and  as  if
needles  were  sticking  in  it,  a  dull  kind  of  stitching  pain,
very  painful,  alarming  and  disagreeable.

Pain  in  heart  entirely  gone,  but  every  two  or  three  hours
has  a  twitch  there.

Painful  shock  or  jerk  from  lower  and  hind  part  of  oesoph-
agus towards  heart  and  front  of  chest.

7  P.M.,  slight,  dull  shooting  pain  in  heart,  lasting  till  he
went  to  sleep  at  10|  p.m.

Considerable  pain  in  heart,  and  a  corresponding  pain  in
r.  side;  a  severe  sticking  and  shooting  pain,  producing
shortness  of  breath  and  sighing.

At  11  A.M.  two  or  three  stitches  of  a  shooting  kind  in
heart,  lasting  a  few  minutes.

Stitches  in  and  around  heart.  —

Pricking  sticking  pain  in  heart.  —

Stinging,  sharp  pain  in  heart.  —

Sticking  pains  at  intervals  in  heart.

Sharp,  shooting  pains  in  region  of  heart,  lasting  four
hours.

At  9  P.M.,  violent  pain  of  a  sticking  character  in  heart  and
to  1.  of  it.

Stitches  in  heart  from  ringing  of  church  bells.

I  Stitches  in  heart,  more  while  walking;  they  would  kill
him  if  they  continued.

■  Heart  had  for  three  months  not  been  free  from  a  sticking,
drawing,  squeezing  pain,  result  of  an  attack  of  rheuma-
tism and  cold,  together  with  a  palpitation  and  difficulty
of  breathing.

Violent  pain  in  heart,  as  if  it  would  burst  or  had  needles
running  into  it.


191  LYSSIN.

Heat  and  burning  in  heart.
Burning  pain  around  heart  and  in  forehead.
Pain  in  heart :  with  headache;  with  sore  throat  and  heavi-
ness in  legs.
Sensation  going  from  heart  through  to  back,  with  sinking.
I  Pain  in  cardiac  region,  to  which  he  is  subject,  is  <  half
an  hour  after,  but  much  >  in  several  days.

While  writing,  a  burning  ebullition  and  gurgling  from
upper  part  of  abdomen  through  chest  and  head,  at  first
followed  by  a  pain  in  ear;  now  a  pressing  stinging  in
inner  upper  vertex  to  r. ;  as  if  a  hot,  wavelike  stream
was  moving  on  and  spreading  outward,  but  not  extend-
ing to  spine  or  limbs.

Heart  palpitated  violently  and  felt  as  if  it  was  coming  up
into  throat;  drank  several  mouthfuls  of  water,  which
relieved.

Palpitation  causes  anxiety.

Feels  beating  of  pulse  through  whole  body,  and  from  time
to  time  like  a  slow  rising  w^ave  through  throat  into  head,
followed  by  a  sensation  of  a  momentary  rush  of  blood.

Pulse:  steady,  but  rather  full  and  hard,  about  ten  beats
above  normal  standard  (80);  slightly  accelerated  and
hard,  being  more  frequently  saiall  than  full;  quick  and
irritable;  160;  becomes  gradually  weaker  and  quicker,
especially  after  paroxysm,  120  to  180 ;  frequently  irreg-
ular, becoming  variable  in  its  rate,  and  this  variation
takes  place  with  great  rapidity ;  unequal,  some  beats
stronger,  some  quickened  ;  weak,  quick,  intermitting ;
very  small,  irregular  and  very  rapid  (last  stage) ;  weak,
quick  and  intermittent  (latter  period);  becomes  con-
stantly more  rapid  and  smaller,  until  at  length  it  is
threadlike,  and  finally  no  longer  can  be  felt.  —
'"  Outer  Chest.  The  clavicles  feel  as  if  they  would  slip  from
their  sockets;  has  to  place  arms  akimbo.

Quivering  about  sternum.

Spasmodic  tearing  pain  under  1.  ribs ;  at  same  time  it  runs
to  anus,  where  it  causes  a  constriction ;  also  at  same
time  a  tearing  between  skin  and  flesh  down  thigh  to  knee.

Pressure:  on  sternum  between  mammae ;  between  last  ribs
on  r.  side.
• Stinging  in  1.  breast  (between  mamma  and  last  ribs).

Chest  as  if  beaten,  in  evening.

Soreness  across  chest,  both  breasts  sw^ollen ;  when  waking
in  raorning  can  hardly  get  up ;  three  mornings  in  suc-
cession.
'^  Neck  and  Back. Constant  pain  in  neck.

Going  to  neck :  pain  from  head  and  from  back.

Pressing  in  neck  and  up  back  of  head.


LYSSIN.  192

From  neck  heat  passes  to  ear  and  face.

Pressure  and  drawing  pain  in  neck.

A  stitch  in  nape  of  neck.

Muscles  of  neck  and  breast,  frequently  entire  muscular

system,  contract  spasmodically.
With  inward  heat,  pains  in  neck,  <  if  headache  is  >,  or

heat  in  r.  side  of  face.
Burning  pain  in  neck.
Throbbing  pain  extending  into  neck.
Neck  feels  stiff;  r.  side  of  neck  stiff;  muscles  felt  stiff  in

morning.
Tearing,  stinging  and  stiffness  in  neck.
Stiff  neck  with  rending  and  shooting.
Pain  in  cicatrix  and  also  some  stiffness  in  muscles  of  neck

and  throat.
Pain  in muscles  of  neck  and  along  cervical  portion  of

spinal  column.
From  nape  of  neck  a  heat  draws  over  r.  ear  into  r.  eye

and  face,  seems  to  pass  from  within  outw^ard.
Neck  feels  stiff,  held  himself  more  erect  than  usual.
All  day  difficulty  in  moving  head.
Stiffness  in  joints  of  neck ;  if  she  allows  her  head  to  hang

awhile,  it  is  difficult  to  raise.
Neck  feels  more  comfortable  when,  in  sneezing,  she  throws

head  back.
Emphysematous  swelling  of  subcutaneous  cellular  tissue

of  lower  part  of  neck  ;  may  extend  along  upper  portion

of  breast  and  into  mediastinum.
Sterno-cleido  mastoid  muscle  on  each  side  stands  out  like

a  thick  cord ;  a  look  of  mingled  anxiety  and  terror  on

countenance.
Head  feels  lopsided  and  as  if  something  was  drawing  it

towards  shoulder.
At  2  P.M.  laid  down,  found  his  head  twisted  to  1.  side ;

under  ordinary  circumstances  would  very  soon  have

changed  position,  but  to  his  surprise  found  it  quite  com-
fortable and  fell  asleep ;  woke  at  4  p.m.,  felt  a  numbness

in  1.  side  of  head,  and  flesh  of  lower  part  of  body  looked

like  gooseflesh.
As  if  head  was  being  drawn  to  shoulders.
Cramplike  pressure  under  r.  shoulder  blade.
Pressing  pain  under  r.  shoulder  blade  and  between  scapulae.
In  back,  near  r.  shoulder  blade,  a  pressing  with  heat,  draws

into  nape  of  neck,  thence  into  muscles  of  1.  upper  arm.
At  2  P.M.,  severe  pain  across  back  between  shoulders  and

waist.
A  pain  or  ache  in  and  between  both shoulders,  as  if  a

heavy  weight  was  there,  lasting  two  hours.


1^^  LYSSIN.

Pressing,  running  from  between  shoulders  to  occiput  and
across  r.  ear,  in  morning.

Below  r.  shoulder  blade  a  pressure ;  not  pressing  from  out
inward  or  >  by  bending  backward.

Pressure  in  back,  five  inches  below  point  of  r.  shoulder,
one  inch  from  spine ;  had  same  sensation  during  each
of  her  pregnancies,  always  on  r.  side,  inward  from  low-
est rib  to  breast  bone.

Stinging:  below  r.  shoulder  blade;  in  cervical  vertebrse.

Severe  backache  all  day,  and  numbness  of  hands.

Spine  aches;  r.  side  of  throat  sore.

I  Backache  and  headache.

Pain  in  back  across  hips,  lasting  all  day.

Pain  in  back  and  both  groins.

Burning  in  back  near  last  ribs,  r.  side,  like  heartburn.

Pressing  m  region  of  kidneys;  dull  pressure  in  region  of  left.

At  4  P.M.  violent  pain  in  r.  kidney,  lasting  an  hour.

Pam  from  4  a.m.  till  evening  in  both  kidneys  and  across
hips,  severe  and  a  little  burning,  >  at  9  p.m.

Back  extremely  sore;  as  if  beaten,  in  evening.
Pains with cutaneous hyperassthesia along vertebral
column.

Could  not  bear  least  touch  along  whole  vertebra;  slightest
touch  produced  an  irritability  akin  to  convulsions.

iSheep  turn  and  wriggle  their  backs  because  they  cannot
bear  heat  of  sun ;  increased  sexual  excitement;  symp-
toms pointing  to  madness;  scratching  their  backs  ap-
pears to  be  agreeable  to  them,  as  they  remain  quiet  and
make  a  peculiar  motion  with  their  mouths,  which  does
not  express  pain.

Going  to  back  from  heart,  sensation  with  sinking.

Want  of  strength  in  back,  must  lean  against  back  of  chair
m  sitting.

Weakness  in  region  of  kidneys,  loins  and  sacrum.

I  Great  weakness  in  back,  as  if  it  would  split  and  fall
apart. ^Lyssophobia.

I A  sore  lameness  in  back,  with  some  degree  of  soreness  in
lower  abdomen. ^Prolapsus  uteri.

Pain  in  lower  part  of  spine  severe.

I  Considerable  pain  in  lower  part  of  back,  with  a  soreness
lelt  through  to  pubic  region ;  pressing  finger  on  neck
increased  it.

Pressing  pain  in  sacrum,  r.  side;  later  it  moves  to  middle
of  back  (repeated  eight  times).

Shooting  through  small  of  back.

■  Disease  peculiar  to  sheep,  termed  the  "  gid  ;"  dropsy  of
spine.  ^  "^

''  Upper  Limbs. Pain  on  top  of  r.  shoulder  joint.

VOL.  vii._13.


LYSSIN.  194

Pain  in  1.  shoulder  joint,  as  if  beaten and paralyzed ;

lameness  in  1.  axilla.
All  day  a  tearing,  then  a  stinging  in  1.  shoulder  joint,  as

if  in  middle  of  bone,  down  arm  and  into  finger ;  and

after  getting  up  from  bed,  for  one  hour  in  r.  arm,  then

all  day  in  left.
1  P.M.,  slight  pain  in  r.  shoulder  joint;  also  in  head.
Has  a  lump  in  r.  axilla.

Rheumatic  pain,  first  in  r.  then  in  1.  shoulder.
Feeling  of  great  weight  on  shoulders  all  day.
Stinging  tearing  pain  in  shoulders,  passing  down  through

bones  of  arm  to  fingers.
Sudden  sharp,  darting  pain,  in  bitten  hand,  extending  up

arm  to  shoulder  and  base  of  brain.
Pain  down  wounded  1.  arm ;  generally  in  afternoon  and

evening,  <  10  o'clock.
Arm  aches  and  is  swollen.
Aching  in  r.  arm  (the  1.  is  bitten) ; feeling  as  if  weather

was  going  to  change.
Slight  twitching  in  r.  arm.
A  sting  in  sore  arm once  in  a  while,  which  makes  her

start  all  over  (dogbite).
Felt  two  shocks  down  wounded  arm  as  from  a  galvanic

battery,  clear  to  finger  ends.
Cramp  in  arms.
The  pain  up  arm  was  followed  by  cramps  and  drawing

in  back  and  limbs  of  bitten  side.
Numbness  in  r.  arm  at  4  p.m.,  lasting  till  bedtime.
At  10|  P.M., soon  after  taking  last  dose,  numbness  in  r.  arm.
Weakness  in  arms.
Right  arm  becomes  so  heavy  and  inactive  that  writing  is

too  great  an  exertion,  and  he  allows  arm  to  drop.
,  After  some  pain  in  arm  (finger  had  a  small  wound  exposed

during  dissection  of  a  mad  dog,  forty  days  ago),  feeling

of  malaise  and  fatigue,  followed  by  death.
In  1.  upper  arm,  about  axilla,  pain  as  if  beaten  and  lame;

the  same  near  elbow,  several minutes  after  in  wrist ;

in  evening.
Her  arm  has  felt  very  sore,  although wound  is  almost

healed.
A  cold  flush  goes  down  arm  as  if  ice  water  was  being

poured  upon  it.
Feels  a  chill  strike  her  r.  arm  when  she  goes  into  open  air.
Burning  pain  down  wounded  arm.
Felt  as  if  fleas  were  running  over  r.  arm.
Arm  itches  all  over;  itching  on  arms  appearing  suddenly.
Pain  in  r.  elbow  as  if  paralyzed,  at  noon  ;  same  at  2  p.m.

in  1.,  >  in  a  horizontal  position  and  when  allowing  fore-
arm to  hang ;  soon  after  in  1.  knee.


195  LYSSIN.

To  right  of  r.  elbow  a  black  and  blue  spot.

Throbbing  pain  in  r.  forearm  on  flexor  side.

Muscles  of  forearm,  as  far  as  hand,  painful  when  pressed,

or  taking  hold  of  anything.
Blueness  in  streaks  down  r.  forearm.

Wrists  have  felt  some  time  as  if  strained ;  <  in  morning.
Lame  feeling  in  wrist.
At  10  P.M.,  straining  pain  in  r.  hand.
Soreness  in  r.  hand.
Quivering  in  hands.

Hand  trembles  so  much  he  can  scarcely  write.
Trembling  of  1.  hand  when  taking  hold  of  anything  or

pressing  with  it;  muscles  hurt  most  on  upper  side  of

forearm  down  to  hand.
Trembling  of  1.  hand.

Right  hand  numb  for  a  long  time,  clumsy,  stiff.
Hands  numb,  with  headache.
Right  hand  swollen.

The  ball  of  r.  hand  hard,  cramped  and  swollen.
After  counting  copper  coin,  violent  pain  in  r.  hand,  be-
tween third  and fourth  metacarpal  phalanx,  in  some

motions  and  on  pressure.
Smarting  in  palm  of  r.  hand.
Intense  pain  in  forefinger  of  1.  hand.
Pain  in  first  joint  of  r.  ring  finger,  as  if  it  was  going  to

gather.
Stiffness  of  fingers  and  hand.
Woke  at  5  p.m.  with stinging  in forepart  of  r.  index

finger,  nail  turned  quite  blue.
^^  Lower  Limbs. nA  pressive  pain  in r. hip  bone,  goes

from  there  to  middle  of  sacral  bone.
Left  hip  aches  in  bone.
Felt  as  if  hip  bones  would  slip  out  of  their  socKets ;  had

to  rest  with  hands  on  hips  to  >  the  feeling.
Something  runs  round  and  round  several  times  in  flesh,

in  region  of  hip,  then  down  leg  to  knee.
Pain  in  thighs,  particularly  in anterior  portion ; as  if

fatigued,  after  going  up  stairs;  <  after  sitting  down.
Along  1.  sciatic  nerve  a  dull  pain,  returning  periodically;

<  when  rising  from  sitting.
Pain  in  anterior  part  of  r.  thigh,  as  from  a  bruise.
Twitching  in  r.  femur,  as  if  some  one  was  pulling  from

below;  not  painful,  comes  and  goes.
Cramps  in  thighs.
Biting  and  itching  on  thighs.
Laming  pain  inside  of  1.  thigh above  knee  joint,  and

extending  into  it.
Tearing  pain  from  middle  of  anterior  portion  of  r.  thigh

to  knee.


LYSSIN.  196

Tearing  in  1.  thigh  to  knee.

Knees  ache;  tearing,  drawing  pain.

Stinging  in  r.  knee.

Knees  tremble  at  every  step.

Laming  pain  in  r.  knee  joint  when  getting  awake  in  night;

next  morning  same  in  1.  knee.
Aching  and  heaviness  in  legs  below  knee.
All  day  a  feeling  of  weight  in  legs  below  knee,  seemed  as

if  there  were  several  pounds  of  lead  in  tibia  of  each  leg.
Numbness  in  r.  leg  below  knee.
Pain  in  all  joints  of  feet,  like  pressure  with  a  dull  pointy

now  here,  now  there.
Pain  in  legs  very  troublesome,  not  able  to  w^alk.
Legs  feel  as  if  he  had  rheumatism.
Pain  going  down  1.  leg.
Twitching  in  legs.
Legs  tired  and  aching;  feel  as  if  beaten,  in  evening;  feel

sore  and  very  heavy.
A  pain  in  legs,  as  if  thighs  were  too  heavy,  went  off  at  night.
Right  leg  falls  asleep ;  after  seven  hours.
After  sitting awhile,  lower  limbs  go  to  sleep ;  prickling

sensation.
Weakness  in  legs  when  going  up  stairs.
I  I  Ulcers  on  legs,  with emaciation  and coldness,  1.  side ;

contraction  of  hamstrings  and  relaxation  of  ligaments.

of  ankle  joint  and  flexors  of  toes.
A  curious  feeling  in  legs,  as  if  calf  was  heavier  than  usuaL
Cramp  in  r.  calf.

Cramp  in  calves  of  legs  at  night  in  bed ;  <  from  stretch-
ing out  limbs.
Calf  of  1.  leg  ached  as  if  it  had  been  cramped, after  waking.,
■  The  pain  in  calf  came  even  wdien  he  was  not  thinking  of

bite  at  all ;  lately  much  <  and  quite  severe. ^Lysso-

phobia.
Sharp,  biting  pain  in  1.  ankle.

Painful  lameness  ink  ankle  joint  in  night  while  lying  in  bed.
Heavy  feeling  in  lower  limbs,  as  if  a  weight  was  attached

to  ankles.
Pain  from  heel  into  thigh.

After  going  to  bed,  intense  pain  in  back  of  r.  heel.
Pain  in  r.  heel  and  in  toes  of  1.  foot.
Balls  of  heels  so  sore  that  it  is  painful  to  walk.
I  Great  swelling  in  heel  of  a  cow  from  dogbite ;  very  restless.
Pain  in  sole  of  r.  foot  extending  to  ankle. ^Lyssophobia.
Severe  pain  in  r.  instep ;  <  after  being  in  bed  during  cata-

menia;  at  times  extremely  painful  to  move  foot;  does-

not pain  much when walking upon side  of  foot;  L

slightly  troubling  at  times.


197  LYSSIN.

Extending  to  feet,  pain  from  groins.

Pain  extends  from  ankle  bone  to  great  toe.

shooting  from  fourtli  toe  to  foot.

Some  pain  in  toe  next  to  little  toe  of  1.  foot ;  shooting  into  foot.

Tearing  in  first  joint  of  1.  little  toe.

Toes  of  both  feet  troublesome,  feel  as  if  nails  were  too  long
and  broken ;  pain  in  small  of  back  and  r.  temple.

Each  dose  he  has  taken  has  made  him  feel  as  if  he  was
getting  corns  on  every  toe,  his  real  corns  felt  remark-
ably well  and  did  not  pain  him  at  all.

Her  corns  have  troubled  her  but  on  one  occasion  since  the
proving;  where  she  felt  as  having  corns,  she  had
twinges.
^* Limbs  in  General.  Pain  like  rheumatism;  shooting  and
stinging  from  knees  down;  stinging  in  palm  of  r.  hand
to  finger  ends,  as  though  she  had  fallen  on  it.

Aching  in  knees  and  shoulders.

Shortly  after  pain  in  shoulder  joint,  afternoon  third  day ;
pain  goes  into  knee  joint  of  same  side.

Feeling  of  pressure  on  shoulders  and  weight  in  legs.

Pains  or  aches  in  all  his  limbs ;  feeling  of  languor  and
extreme  fatigue.

Weight  and  heaviness  of  legs  and  shoulders.

Heaviness  of  limbs.

A  convulsive  trembling  of  limbs  during  attacks.

When_  lying  in  bed,  an  unusual  morbid  contraction  and
tossing  about  of  limbs.

Severe  twitches  in  arms  and  legs,  much  resembling  chorea.

Shaking  or  convulsive  trembling  of  limbs.

He  felt  a  severe,  bruiselike  pain  in  shoulders,  chest,  back,
arms  and  legs.

All_  muscles  feel  bruised  in  morning,  can  neither  sit  nor
lie  down.

Loss  of  power  in  limbs; gait  unsteady,  at  times  some
stifthess  of  hind  legs ;  dog.
^  Rest. Position. Motion. Moved  quite  briskly,  though
feeling  fatigued.

After  moving,  turning,  or  stooping,  feels  as  if  head  would
burst.

Very  little  exertion  wearies  him,  and  he  feels  quite  languid.

All  day  had  a  disposition  to  straighten  herself  up.

Had  to  rest  with  hands  on  hips  to  >  feeling  as  if  hip  bones
would  slip  out  of  their  sockets.

Horizontal  position:  pain  in  elbows  >,  also  when  allow-
ing forearm  to  hang.

Lying  down:  thinks  she  is  unable  to  move  head;  like  a
shock  in  upper  part  of  brain ;  rush  of  blood  to  head ;
pains  up  neck  and  down  spine ;  impossible,  pain  in  rec-
tum and  small  of  back;  dyspnoea:  impossible  in  dysen-
tery; could  not  sleep.


LYSSIN.  198

Lying  in  bed:  contraction  and  tossing  about  of  limbs.

Parts  on  which  he  lies:  burning  heat.

Does  not  wish  to  rise.

Can  neither  sit  nor  lie:  all  muscles  feel  bruised.

Sitting: dizziness;  must  lean  back,  want  of  strength  in

back;  pain  in  thighs  <.
After  sitting  awhile:  lower  limbs  go  to  sleep.
On  rising  from  a  chair:  staggers;  cannot  walk  straight;

dull  pain  along  sciatic  nerve.
When  rising:  rush  of  blood  to  head;  tearing  stinging  in

occiput  <.
Stooping:  inclination  to  fall  to  r. ;  aching  in  bones  above

eyes  <;  pressing  in  vertex  and  forehead;  violent  head-
ache <;  painful  rush  of  blood to  head;  aching  over

eyes  < ;  dizzy  on  r.  side  of  head.
On  rising  from  stooping:  dizziness  and  dimness  of  vision.
Turning  neck:  pain  in  larynx.
Bending  head  backwards:  pain  in  neck  >.
If  she  allows  her  head  to  hang  awhile  it  is  difficult  to  raise.
Throws  head  back :  when  sneezing.
Bending  backwards:  does  not  >  pressure  below  shoulder

blade.
Standing:  pain  in  rectum  and  small  of  back;  impossible,

dysentery.
Standing  still:  on  waking,  head  fixed.
Change  of  position :  disinclination  to  change  position  of

head ;  continual  change  (dog);  that  would  tilt  or  rotate

OS  uteri  would  cause  much  pain.
Stretching  limbs:  cramps  in  calves.
Can  hardly  bend  fingers :  stiffness.
Turning  around  :  painful  rush  of  blood  to  head.
Taking  hold  of  anything :  muscles  of  forearm  painful ;

trembling  of  1.  hand.
Least  motion  :  all  joints  cracked.
Moving:  head  <  pressing  in  vertex  and  forehead.
Aversion  to  move :  great  weakness.
At  every  step :  knees  tremble.
Could  not  make  a  hard  step :  during  catamenia.
Walking:  as  if  she  would  fall;  dizziness,  with  dim  sight;

five  minutes  after,  sharp  pain  above  eyebrows  and  up

nose ;  quickly,  causes  pressing  pain  in  hypochondria  ;

pain  in  region  of  spleen  ;  enforced  by  terrible  pain  in

rectum  and  small  of  back ;  great  weakness  in  chest ;

stitches  in  heart ;  impossible  on  account  of  pain  in  legs ;

painful  on  account  of  soreness  of  heel ;  on  side  of  foot,

instep  not  so  painful.
Going  up  stairs  :  pain  in  thighs ;  weakness  of  legs ;  very

weak.


199  LYSSIN.

After  a  short  walk  :  exceedingly  fatigued  and  weary.

Stirring  about :  violent  headache  < ;  painful  rush  of  blood
to  head.

Swallowing :  difficult,  particularly  fluids ;  stinging  sen-
sation ;  causes  constriction  of  throat ;  causes  terrible  pain ;
bread  causes  greatest  agony;  stitching  sensation.
^^  Nerves.  Until  dinner  time  he  felt  so  strangely  in  his  whole
body  as  never  before,  without  being  able  to  define  the
feeling.

In  all  motions  of  her  body  and  in  her  looks  is  expressed
a  peculiar  erethism.

All  things  affect  him  more,  tobacco  included.

Irritability;  violent  agitations.

I  He  could  neither  lie  down  nor  stand  up  for  any  length
of  time. ^Dysentery.

Great  restlessness,  anxiousness,  distress ;  tossing  about.

In  afternoon  whole  body  trembles,  she  can  scarcely  speak ;
stinging  in  one  of  cervical  vertebrae;  when  stooping
feels  dizzy  on  r.  side.

Afternoon  tremulous  in  whole  body  and  very  weak,  can
hardly  talk.

■  Continual  trembling  sensation  through  whole  body.
^Lyssophobia.

I  The  strange  feeling  changed  during  night  into  a  trem-
bling, and  he  is  full  of  fear. ^Lyssophobia.

Twitchings  of  muscles  throughout  entire  body  (last
stage).  —

Twitching  of  tendons,  with  tendency  to  general  con-
vulsions. —

Severe  nervous  twitches  in  whole  body  all  day.

Felt  quivery  all  over.

If  during  great  restlessness  she  attempts  to  sit  down  and
work,  she  has  alternately  twitching  in  arms  and  legs.

Nervous  twitching,  with  trembling  of  r.  hand.

Starts  now  and  then.

Muscular  contractions  appear  with  various  degrees  of  in-
tensity, from  slightest  convulsion  to  those  of  most  severe
and  clonic  form ;  frequently  tetanic  convulsions.  —

Spasms  of  individual  muscles,  as  well  as  of  muscular
system  in  general,  clonic,  rarely  tetanic.  —

The  spasms  have  the  character  of  reflexed  spasms  ;  their
proximate  causes  are:  attempts  to  swallow ;  speaking;
a  current  of  air;  sight  or  idea  of  fluids;  sight  or  sound
of  running  water;  coming  in  contact  with  another  per-
son ;  a  bright  light ;  sight  of  shining  objects  or  of  some
strange  person  ;  a  loud  noise  or  strong  odors.  —

Sensations  of  convulsive  actions  in  different  parts;  distress
at  epigastrium  ;  heaviness  of  limbs  and  general  prostra-
tion. —


LYSSIN.  200

Exertion  is  frequently  succeeded  by  convulsions.  -^

I  Attacks  returned  every  few  minutes,  for  five  hours,  until
they  were  arrested;  pain  passing  down  spine  to  loins
and  hips,  and  from  thence  to  knees.

Convulsions  conjoined  with  an  exalted  state  of  sense  of
smell,  taste  and  touch.  —

Spasms  of  legs  and  arms,  occasionally  very  severe.  —

Clonic  convulsions;  decided  tetanus  or  trismus  not  ob-
served; opisthotonos  in  rare  cases.

In  quick  succession  violent  epileptic  attacks.  —

Spasms  so  violent  that  four  strong  men  could  hardly  hold
him  and  prevent  him  from  hurting  himself.  —

Every  day  at  9  p.m.,  convulsive  startings.  —

She  struck,  snapped  and  bit  at  everything  and  every
person.  —

Pain  commencing  in  cicatrix  of  bitten  thumb,  producing
slight  spasm,  and  still  greater  disposition  to  snap  and
bite  and  to  grind  teeth,  which  were  entirely  beyond  his
control,  causing  him  to  fall  on  floor.  —

Suddenly  a  severe  pain  in  bitten  thumb,  after  nine  days,
instantly  passing  up  spine  and  thence  into  brain,  pro-
ducing a  violent,  nervous  convulsion  for  a  few  moments,
with  a  disposition  to  snap  and  bite;  passed  off  in  two  or
three  minutes.  —

Convulsions  came  on  and  lasted  for  a  short  time,  then  per-
fectly placid  for  some  time  before  death.  —

I  I  Convulsions  daily;  rolls  head  from  side  to  side;  wink-
ing and  rolling  eyes;  attempts  to  bite  others;  pelvis  and
legs  are  turned  to  one  side  as  far  as  possible.  ^Child,
eet.  2,  after  scarlatina.

Feels  as  she  did  when  she  got  up  from  a  nine  days'  illness ;
feels  so  heavy  and  sore.

Great  debility  and  disinclination  to  move  about,  lasting
till  2  P.M.,  gradually  diminishing.

Feeling  of  malaise  and  debility  at  3  p.m.,  great  disinclina-
tion to  move.

Does  not  wish  to  rise.

Very  soon  a  sensation  of  weakness,  a  kind  of  flabby  lassi-
tude, like  days  after  great  exertion,  or  after  a  fever  or
other  disease.

Great  weakness  and  restlessness,  does  not  know  where
to  turn,  would  prefer  to  lie  down,  but  it  affects  his
breathing.

Such  weakness  that  knees  tremble  at  every  step,  and  she
feels  as  if  she  would  fall.

Weakness:  with  sore  throat;  after  urinating;  of  sexual
organs.

During  exhaustion  more  nimble  and  active.


201  LYSSIN.

Fatigue  and  heaviness  in  legs.

Great  physical  relaxation;  whole  bod}^  feels  fatigued;
tired  all  over.

Felt  irritable,  tired  and  nervous.

With  the  numbness  of  paralytic  symptoms  the  violence
of  all  others  increase.

I  At  times  a  singular  sensation,  a  kind  of  "die  away"  feel-
extend  through  heart  to  back,  ax3companied  with  quiv-
ering around  breast  bones  and  pain  in  nerves,  from  1.
side  of  chest  to  throat  and  1.  jaw;  fluttering  about  heart.

Felt  stiff  and  tired  ;  required  an  effort  to  draw  his  breath.

After  singing,  suddenly  falls  down  as  if  dead,  with  eyes
shut,  face  red,  quick  breathing,  pulse  100.  —

A  stage  of  general  paralysis ;  an  abatement  of  most  dis-
tressing symptoms ;  a  freer  respiration  ;  a  diminution
of  reflex  excitability;  less  impediment  to  deglutition;
a  rapidly  increasing  debility  and  prostration  before
death.  —
^^  Sleep.  _  Inclination  to  yawn,  with  stiffness  of  lower  jaw.

Felt  inclination  to  gape  and  stretch.

Felt  drowsy ;  in  afternoon  ;  irresistable  drowsiness,  9  p.m.

Sleepy  after  a  meal,  slept  one  hour  without  relief

■  Frequent  yawning,  without  sleepiness,  particularly  when

hearing  others  yawn.
Did  not  sleep  more  than  thirty  minutes  until  after  2  a.m.
Insomnia ;  sleepless  in  spite  of  narcotics.  —

■  Passed  most  of  his  nights  sleeplessly,  walking  up  and

down  in  despair. ^Lyssophobia.

Restless  night,  with  stupefaction  in  head.

Sleep  fitful,  position  continually  changed  ;  dog.

Excited,  cannot  sleep.

Felt  as  he  did  some  years  since,  when  sitting  up  with  a
sick  relative  three  nights  out  of  five,  unable  to  sleep
during  day  from  nervous  anxiety.

When  lying  down  could  not  sleep,  eyes  open,  unless  he
purposely  closed  them,  when  they  reopened  involun-
tarily.

Went  to  bed  at  lOJ  p.m.  (as  usual),  could  not  sleep  (a  very
unusual  circumstance) ;  dozed  and  heard  various  noises
till  3  A.M.,  which  caused  him  to  get  out  of  bed  to  ascer-
tain what  they  were ;  started  frequently ;  slept  soundly
from  7  to  8J  a.m.

Went  to  bed  at  10  p.m.  in  great  pain  all  over;  woke  up  at
11|  p.m.  with  very  severe  pain  in  stomach,  lasting  one
hour.

After  10  P.M.,  while  in  bed,  all  symptoms  more  severe.

Had  a  restless  night,  woke  repeatedly  and  felt  tired.


LYSSIN.  202

Woke  several  times  in  night  with  pain  in  wounded  arm.

Starting  in  sleep,  afternoon.

Has  to  scratch  whole  body,  and  has  no  sleep  for  it  all  night.

Became  more  restless  night  before  death.  —

Dreams :  of  influential  persons  to  whom  he  occupies  posi-
tion of  servant  or  subordinate ;  of  a  Latin  debate  with
students  of  law,  astonished  at  facility  and  fluency  with
which  he  spoke  Latin,  it  being  far  greater  than  he  was
capable  of  in  a  waking  state;  of  dogs  all  the  time,  but
they  are  different  dogs  from  the  one  that  bit  her ;  of
fighting,  of  high  places,  of  insane  asylum,  of  churches;
disagreeable,  when  she  falls  asleep,  night  or  day ;  only
in  first  half  hour.

Jumped  up  in  bed.

■  During  night  slept  but  little;  was  disturbed  by  disagree-
able, disconnected  dreams;  felt  strangely.  ^Lysso-
phobia.

On  waking  stands  perfectly  still  for  a  time ;  head  fixed
as  if  gazing  at  some  distant  object;  a  dog.

Sleepiness  when  unable  to  sleep,  and  sleeplessness  when
she  might  otherwise  have  slept;  generally  restless  at
night.

On  waking  is  morose,  inclined  to  be  angry.

Late  getting  awake,  and  difficulty  to  recover  from  sleep.

Slept  from  4  to  6  p.m.,  woke  up  and  felt  dreadfully
nervous;  had  a  great  fear  as  if  something  was  going  to
happen.

In  morning,  after  exciting  dreams,  much  fatigued,  feels
tired  in  sacrum  and  back.

If  inclined  to  sleep,  it  is  short,  disturbed,  with  frightful
dreams,  and  on  awaking  is  apt  to  fall  into  slight  con-
vulsions. ,

On  awaking  from  siesta,  numbness  in  head.
^  Time. 2  a.m.  :  did  not  sleep  more  than  thirty  minutes  until
after.

3  A.M :  became  cold  in  bed  for  one  hour.

Morning :  violent  vertigo,  with  chill  and  headache ;  after
rising,  slight  frontal  headache  <  ;  when  getting  awake,
boring  in  temples ;  woke  with  burning,  aching  headache ;
severe  headache ;  lid  puffed  up  like  an  eggshell ;  on  awak-
ing lids  feel  paralyzed  before  rising ;  on  hearing  water
poured,  obliged  to  have  an  evacuation  ;  pressing  in  fore-
head early;  frequent  sneezing;  (6  a.m.)  tickling  in  1.
cheek  ;  heat  in  face ;  bitter  taste ;  swallowing  less  diffi-
cult; little  appetite;  stools  more  frequent ;  diarrhoea,
with  violent  pains ;  urine  yellowish  brown ;  both  breasts
swollen  ;  muscles  stiff;  pressing  across  r.  ear ;  wrists  as  if
strained  <  ;  pain  in  1.  knee ;  all  muscles  feel  bruised ;
much  fatigued.


203  '  LYSSIN.

8  A.M. :  pain  in  1.  side.

9  A.M. :  severe  headache  begins ;  suffocating  feehng  in  chest

lasting  till  lOJ  p.m.

At  10  A.M. :  began  to  spit  a  great  deal;  soreness  and  con-
striction in  throat.

At  11  A.M. :  soreness  in  throat  till  noon  ;  stitches  in  heart
for  a  few  minutes.

In  forenoon  :  sore  throat ;  belching ;  gnawing  pressure  in
1.  side ;  painful  sensation  in  upper  part  of  abdomen.

Towards  noon :  headache  with  increase  of  saliva ;  pain  in
testicles  <.

At  noon :  shght  headache,  lasting  rest  of  day ;  pain  in  r.
elbow.

Until  dinner  time :  felt  strangely  in  his  whole  body.

After  dinner:  disinclined  to  think;  headache  very  severe ;
pressing  in  epigastrium  ;  sexual  excitement.

Afternoon  :  very  severe  headache ;  dull  pain  in  forehead,
with  stupid  feeling ;  pressing  in  vertex  and  forehead ;
dull  pain  in  forehead;  sick  headache;  dull  heavy  pain
in  head ;  headache,  with  nausea  and  sore  pain  around
heart ;  stinging  pressure  behind  ears ;  ranula,  with  dry-
ness of  mouth  <  ;  stinging  in  chest,  with  palpitation ;
sour  belching ;  erections ;  itching  and  burning  on  corona
glandis;  burning  and  tenesmus  as  if  in  prostatic  gland
and  in  urethra ;  increased  peristaltic  motion  of  scrotum  ;
first  hours  pain  in  testicles  <  ;  pain  in  wounded  1.  arm;
painin  shoulder  joint;  whole  body  trembles;  drowsy;
starting  in  sleep  ;  fever.

1  P.M. :  slight  pain  in  r.  shoulder  joint.

2  P.M. :  intense  pain  in  head ;  sore  throat ;  violent  spasm  of
throat ;  laid  down  and  found  head  twisted  to  l.side,  found
it  quite  comfortable ;  felt  numbness  in  1.  side ;  severe  pain
across  back ;  pain  in  1.  elbow.

3  P.M. :  headache  very  severe ;  peculiar  constriction  in  back

of  throat ;  feeling  of  malaise  and  debility.
Until  4  P.M. :  feels  as  if  he  had  heard  or  would  hear  un-
pleasant news  ;  pressure  on  upper  part  of  head.

4  J>.M. :  constriction  in  throat  <  ;  violent  pain  in  r.  kidney
lasting  one  hour.

5  P.M. :  swallowing  more  difficult ;  woke  with  stinging  in
forepart  of  index  finger.

During  day:  rising  of  bile  into  throat;  diarrhoea,  with
pain  <  ;  unable  to  sleep  from  nervous  anxiety ;  disagree-
able dreams  when  falling  asleep,  only  first  half  hour.

All  day :  felt  depressed  and  weak  ;  spitting  of  saliva;  head-
ache with  dizziness;  sore  throat;  intense  pain  in  head;
violent  headache  <  ;  a  peculiar  sensation  in  head  ;  itch-
ing in  nose;  spitting;  very  severe  sore  throat;  slight


LYSSIN.  204

pain  in  lumbar  region  ;  terrible  pain  in  throat ;  sensation
of  emptiness  and  discomfort  in  sexual  parts  after  coition ;
dull  pain  in  heart ;  difficulty  in  moving  head  ;  severe
backache  and  numbness  of  hands ;  pain  in  back  across
hips  ;  a  tearing  and  stinging  in  1.  shoulder  joint ;  weight
on  shoulders ;  feeling  of  weight  in  legs ;  severe  nervous
twitches  in  whole  body ;  had  to  lie  in  bed,  with  severe
pain  in  all  bones.
•  Evening :  fretful,  hypochondriac  mood ;  vacillating  motion
of  head ;  dull  pain  in  forehead  ;  pain  above  1.  ear ;  shoot-
ing to  eyes  ;  pressive  burning  in  r.  concha;  late,  frequent
sneezing ;  drawing  in  side  of  face;  disinclined  to  think ;
want  of  appetite,  followed  by  great  lightness  of  head ;
when  in  bed,  rending  across  abdomen ;  aching  from
groins  to  feet ;  pain  about  neck  of  bladder ;  cooling,
burning,  congested  feeling  in  region  of  bladder ;  profuse
watery  urine ;  urine  yellowish  brown  ;  strong  erections
without  sexual  excitement  or  thoughts ;  increased  peri-
staltic motion  of  scrotum  ;  chest  as  if  beaten  ;  back  ex-
tremely sore;  pain  in  wounded  1.  arm  ;  pain  in  1.  arm
and  wrist;  legs  tired  and  aching;  late,  less  inclined  to
chilliness.
After  supper :  pressing  in  spleen  ;  lewdness,  with  weakness
of  parts,  but  inclined  to  an  emission.

6  P.M.:  sore  throat  >.

7  P.M. :  sore  throat ;  slight,  dull  shooting  pain  in  heart  till
101  P.M.

8  P.M. :  salivation  recommended.

9  P.M. :  severe  shooting  pain  in  head ;  curious  stinging
pain  in  1.  eye;  spasm  of  throat  >  ;  violent  pain  in  heart;
irresistable  drowsiness ;  a  dripping,  warm  perspiration
from  wrist  to  nails  of  r.  hand.

10  P.M. :  pressing  pain  in  head  ;  pain  in  wounded  1.  arm  <  ;
stinging  pain  in  r.  hand ;  pains  severe  until  that  time.

After  10  P.M.:  while  in  bed  all  symptoms  more  severe.
10.30  P.M. :  numbness  in  r.  arm  ;  went  to  bed,  could  not

sleep  ;  dozed  and  heard  various  noises  till  3  a.m.,  started

frequently.

11  P.M. :  as  if  she  was  going  to  have  a  fit.

11.30  P.M. :  awakes  from  sleep  with  severe  bellyache.

After  going  to  bed :  intense  pain  in  back  of  r.  heel ;  pain
in  heel.

Night :  delirium  <  ;  tempted  to  bite  her  pillow ;  incessant
talking;  disturbed  dreams ;  stupidity  with  restlessness;
on  hearing  water  poured,  obliged  to  have  an  evacuation ;
hears  various  noises ;  vomiting  in  sleep ;  stools  most
frequent ;  swelling  of  breasts ;  laming  pain  in  r.  knee
joint  when  getting  awake ;  pain  in  legs  goes  off";  cramp


205  LYSSIN.

in  calves  of  legs ;  while  lying  in  bed,  laming  pain  in  joint
of  1.  foot;  painful  lameness  in  1.  ankle  joint;  strange
feeling  changed  into  a  trembling,  generally  sleepless ;
walking  up  and  down  in  despair ;  stupefaction  in  head ;
woke  several  times  with  pain  in  wounded  arm ;  sleep-
less on  account  of  scratching  of  whole  body  ;  more  rest-
less ;  disagreeable  dreams ;  itching  quite  severe ;  intoler-
able itching  in  lower  part  of  body  to  feet;  stitches  in
heart ;  pain  in  back  ;  itching  on  lower  half  of  abdomen.
^^  Temperature  and  Weather,  i  Burning  sensation  in  bitten
place  >  by  hot  steam  striking  against  it. ^Lyssophobia.

lUnbearableness  of  heat  of  sun.  ^Dropsy  of  spine  with
sheep.  —

The  damp,  warm  weather  oppressed  him.

Expressed  a  desire  to  go  into  bath ;  after  a  warm  bath  more
irritable  to  external  air,  the  most  distressing  symptom
that  occurs.  —

Great  sensitiveness  to  every  breath  of  air.  —

A  very  gentle  stream  of  air  projected  from  lips  on  to
patient's  forehead,  and  continued  only  for  a  few  seconds,
brought  on  a  violent  spasm.  —

Asked  her  mother  to  beg  him  not  to  breathe  upon  her  face
again,  as  it  distressed  her  so  much  (after  Bellad).  —

Air,  of  agreeable  temperature,  feels  cold  and  disagreeable.

Continually  directs  a  window  to  be  closed  which  is  not
open.

Draft  of  air,  or  opening  or  closing  door,  brings  on  spasms.  —

Extreme  sensibility  to  cold  or  least  variation  in  tempera-
ture of  air.  —

Heat  of  sun  :  cannot  bear  it.

Warm  drinks :  more  easily  taken  than  water.

As  soon  as  he  gets  warm  in  bed :  itching  in  inner  sides  of
thighs  and  knees ;  compelled  to  scratch.

Open  air :  headache  >  ;  feels  a  chill  strike  r.  arm.

Breath  of  air :  sensitive  to.

Blast  of  air :  causes  greatest  distress.

Wet  weather:  aching  in  1.  side  of  head  <.

In  cold  room,  while  undressing :  strong  erections.

Cold  air :  >  headache ;  headache,  with  nausea  and  sore
pain  in  heart  >.
^°  Fever. Paroxysms  of  intense  coldness  with  pain  in  spine.

During  paroxysm,  limbs  cool  and  livid.

Attacks  of  vertigo,  chilliness,  sometimes  chills;  at  least
one  a  day  for  several  days,  not  always  accompanied  by
vertigo,  though  always  accompanying  it.

Late  in  evening  less  inclined  to  chilliness.

Chilly  feeling,  more  down  r.  (bitten)  arm.

Felt  chilly  and  cold  all  over;  shaking.


LYSSIN.  '  206

Became  cold  in  bed  at  3  a.m.,  although  covered  with
four  blankets;  lasted  about  one  hour.

Chills  intermixed  and  followed  by  heat  and  cold  sweat.

A  fever,  sometimes  preceded  by  slight  shiverings,  gener-
ally very  mild.

Face  sweats,  with  flushes.

Temperature  of  body  100  to  104°  Fahrenheit,  seldom  rises
to  105  or  106.  —

Cannot  bear  heat  of  sun.

Fever  in  afternoon.

Slight  fever,  with  flushes  of  heat.

Fever  every  evening,  commencing  at  dusk  and  lasting
until  bedtime  (midnight).

Sensation  of  burning  heat  in  parts  on  which  he  lies.

He  feels  the  pulse's  beat  through  body;  from  time  to
time  there  is  a  surging  through  throat  into  head,  like
a  slow  wave.

Great  fever,  no  chill;  pulse  160;  no  appetite;  thirst,
drinks  cold  water  ver}^  often ;  stupid  and  sleepy.

Feverish  heat,  with  headache.

Sensation  as  if  a  hot  wave,  fine,  like  vapor,  surged  through
body,  taking  an  outward  course,  yet  not  reaching  sur-
face or  extending  into  limbs.

Heat,  with  pressure  in  forehead  and  back.

After  drinking  some  coff'ee,  a  strong  heat  in  r.  side  of  face,
followed  by  aching  in  front  of  upper  part  of  head;  after
this  again  heat  from  nape  of  neck  up  head  over  ears
and  r.  side  of  face ;  with  heat  in  eye  from  within  out-
ward and  tickling  in  ear.

Sensation  of  heat  felt  internall}'  and  externally  through
entire  body,  no  external  warmth,  it  forces  perspiration
out  on  face  as  from  weakness,  and  is  accompanied  by
lassitude  and  aching  in  legs.

At  9  P.M.,  a  dripping,  warm  perspiration  from  whole  r.
hand,  from  wrist  to  nails;  afterwards  hands  and  fingers
stifii",  she  can  hardly  bend  them.  —

Skin  covered  with  a  clammy  sweat  (last  stage).  —

Skin  moist,  even  covered  with  sweat;  during  spells,  limbs
cold  and  livid.

Much  better  after  perspiring.

■  Intermittent  fever.
^^  Attacks,  Periodicity. "  Other  diseases,  when  poison  is  ab-
sorbed, have  their  periods;  the  canine  poison  depends
on  climate  and  constitution  and  difi'erent  periods,  from
first  day  till  nineteen  months."  —

Took  several  drojDS  of  300,  after  having  been  bitten  in  nose;
symptoms  next  day  and  the  following,  and  well  the
third  day,  first  symptoms  returned  on  the  twelfth  day.


207  LYSSIN.

I  First  day  >,  next  day  <  ;  on  third  day  salivation  re-
turned. ^Lyssophobia.
Irregular  fits  of  backache  and  chills,  increasing  steadily.  —
Paroxysm,  combined  with  a  feeling  of  suffocation,  almost

produces  strangulation.
Sudden  convulsions  of  a  paroxysmal  character.  —
■  Periodically  since  two  weeks. ^Spasm  of  throat.
Attacks  every  few  minutes,  for  five  hours :  pain  down  spine

to  loins  and  knees.
Periodical :  ranula ;  sjDasm  of  oesophagus ;  dull  pain  along

1.  sciatic  nerve.
Alternating :  of  heat  and  headache ;  twitches  in  arms  and

legs.
Repeated  eight  times :  pain  from  sacrum  to  middle  of  back.
For  one  hour :  pain  in  r.  arm.
For  two  hours :  pain  in  and  between  both  shoulders ;  pain

in  inguinal  glands.
Every  two  or  three  hours :  has  a  twitch  in  heart.
For  four  hours :  sharp  shooting  pains  in  region  of  heart.
After  seven  hours :  r.  leg  falls  asleep.
From  noon  till  evening :  headache.
From  2  p.m.  to  9.30  p.m.  :  violent  spasm  in  throat.
From  3  to  9  P.M. :  lieadache.

From  4  a.m.  till  evening :  pain  in  kidneys  and  across  hips.
From  4  p.m.  till  bedtime :  feeliug  of  numbness  in  r.  arm.
Daily :  passes  from  time  to  time  a  little  dark  blood  from

uterus.
Every  evening:  distension  of  abdomen;  fever  commenc-
ing at  dusk  and  lasting  until  midnight.
Three  successive  mornings :  soreness  across chest,  both

breasts  swollen.
First  days :  smoking  unpleasant,  after  first  week  a  crazy,

insatiable  desire  to  smoke.
Dsiy  after  embrace :  pain  in  testicles.
Every  other  day  at  5  p.m.  :  boring  in  temples.
During  three  days :  her  sense  of  smell  painfull}^  acute.
Lasted  eight  days :  painful  throbbing  in  region  of  spleen.
After  nine  days :  severe  pain  in  bitten  thumb,  thence  to

brain,  nervous  convulsion  for  a  few  moments,  passes  off

in  two  or  three  minutes.
Forty  days  ago :  small  wound  exposed  during  dissection

of  mad  dog,  feeling  of  malaise  and  fatigue,  followed  by

death.
Two  weeks  before  time  :  catamenia.
For  two  or  three  weeks :  scrotum  tightly  drawn  up.
In  Summer,  of  six  weeks'  standing :  j)ain  and  tenesmus  on

hearing  or  seeing  running  water.
For  several  months :  offensive  mucus  from  uterus.


LYSSIN.  208

For  three  months:  sticking,  drawing,  squeezing  pain  in
heart.

For  seven  years :  prolapsus  uteri.
*^  Locality  and  Direction. Right  then  1.  shoulder:  rheu-
matism.

Right  to  1.:  headache.

Right:  inclination  to  fall  to  side;  dulness  on  side  of  head,
over  eyebrow;  drawing  above  eye;  headache  extending
into  eye ;  headache  very  severe  in  temple ;  tearing  pain
in  temple;  boring  in  temple;  occasional  stitches;  press-
ing weight  on  parietal  bone;  piercing  pain  in  side  of
head ;  pressing  stinging  on  side  of  vertex ;  heaviness  in
vertex;  stiff  feeling  of  side  of  head;  darting  in  vertex;
drawing,  beating  pain  over  eye  ;  aching  over  eye;  pain
over  eye  pressing  inward ;  pressing  sensation  in  upper
part  of  r.  orbit;  throbbing  over  eye;  curious,  stinging
pain  over  eye;  occasional  stitches  in  temple;  as  if  blood
rushed  to  ear;  buzzing  in  ear;  temporary  stoppage  of
ear;  rending  pain  in  ear;  shooting  and  stitches  in  ear;
pressive  burning  in  external  ear;  tearing  pain  a  few
inches  from  ear;  stiffness  in  side  of  neck;  gnawing  and
crawling  sensation  in  zygoma  ;  tearing  in  upper  and
lower  jaw  and  ear;  darting  pains  in  side  of  face;  a
sensation  moves  about  side  of  face  and  across  fore-
head; heat  in  side  of  face  and  ear;  chilling,  biting,
burning  on  inner  side  of  upper  lip  to  nasal  cavity;
teeth  hurt  more  on  side;  sensation  shoots  into  lower
jaw;  chilling  painfulness  in  teeth;  aching  in  gums  on
side;  throat  aches;  pressing  pain  near  last  ribs;  shoot-
ing in  side  of  abdomen;  pain  in  kidney;  pain  from  with-
in outward  in  side ;  pain  in  side*  of  abdomen  from
uterus;  sticking  in  side  of  abdomen;  stitches  in  side  of
abdomen;  above  inguinal  region  pressing  pain;  pain  in
groin ;  in  groin  two  small  kernels  under  skin  ;  pain  in
side  of  abdomen;  pain  in  side  of  larynx;  stitches  in  side
of  abdomen;  pressing  in  chest;  pinching  pain  in  side;
burning  like  heartburn  in  side  of  back  ;  pressing  sting-
ing in  upper  vertex  on  side ;  pressure  between  last  ribs
on  side;  side  of  neck  stiff;  heat  over  ear  into  eyes;  cramp-
like pressure  under  shoulder  blade ;  pressing  pain  under
shoulder  blade ;  pressing,  with  heat  near  shoulder  blade;
pressing  across  ear;  pressure  below  point  of  shoulder;
stinging  below  shoulder  blade;  side  of  throat  sore;  vio-
lent pain  in  kidney;  pressing  pain  in  side  of  sacrum  ;
pain  on  top  of  shoulder  joint ;  slight  pain  in  shoulder
joint;  has  a  lump  in  axilla;  rheumatic  pain  in  shoulder;
aching  in  arm ;  slight  twitching  in  arm ;  numbness  of
arm;  arm  becomes  heavy  and  inactive;  feels  a  chill


209  LYSSIN.

strike  arm ;  as  if  fleas  were  running  over  arm ;  pain  in
elbow  as  if  paral3'zed;  to  r.  of  elbow,  black  and  blue
spot;  throbbing  pain  in  forearm;  blueness  in  streaks
down  forearm ;  stinging  pain  in  hand ;  soreness  in  hand ;
hand  numb;  hand  swollen;  ball  of  hand  cramped  and
swollen;  violent  pain  in  hand;  smarting  in  palm  of
hand ;  pain  in  first  joint  of  ring  finger;  stinging  in  fore-
part of  index  finger,  nail  turned  blue;  pressive  pain  in
hip  bone;  pain  in  anterior  part  of  thigh;  twitching  in
femur  as  if  some  one  was  pulling  from  below;  tearing
pain  from  middle  of  anterior  portion  of  thigh  to  knee;
stinging  in  knee;  laming  pain  in  knee  joint;  numbness
in  knee;  leg  falls  asleep;  cramp  in  calf;  intense  pain
in  back  of  heel ;  pain  in  heel ;  intense  pain  in  heel ;  pain
in  sole,  extending  to  ankle :  severe  pain  in  instep ;  tear-
ing in  first  joint  of  little  toe;  pain  in  temple;  dizzy  on
side  ;  chilly  feeling  more  down  bitten  arm  ;  strong  heat
in  side  of  face ;  itching  in  hand.
Left:  bite  in  calf  of  leg;  pain  above  eye;  tearing  from
middle  of  forehead  toward  side;  sharp  pricking  in
temple;  dull  pain  in  forehead  <  ;  pressing  pain  in  side
of  head,  then  to  side  of  forehead  and  orbit ;  dull  pressure
on  side  of  head  ;  dull  pricking  pain  in  side  from  head
to  waist ;  side  of  head  most  severely  affected  ;  severe  pain
one  and  a  half  inches  above  ear;  burning  aching  from
side  of  occiput  down  neck ;  numbness  of  side  of  head ;:
eye  exceedingly  sensitive  to  light  and  water ;  curious
stinging  pain  in  eye ;  sound  as  of  rushing  waters  in  ear;.
pain  most  severe  above  ear ;  transitory  drawing  in  side
of  face ;  neuralgic  pain  down  side  of  face ;  heat  and  sore-
ness in  middle  of  cheek ;  tickling  in  cheek ;  as  if  she
had  been  bitten  in  cheek  ;  pain  on  cheek  near  nose ;  pain
in  side  of  throat ;  burning  stinging  in  side  of  chest ;
loud  gurgling  in  side  of  stomach  ;  loud  cooing  noise  in
stomach ;  in  region  of  stomach  and  spleen,  gnawing  press-
ure; pain  down  side  of  abdomen;  dull  pressure  in  region
of  kidney  ;  itching  on  side  of  os  pubis ;  pain  in  ovarian
region;  pain  in  side  of  vagina ;  stinging  in  side ;  cramp-
like pain  and  stitches  in  side ;  stitches  under  mamma ;
shooting  between  mamma  and  last  ribs ;  shooting,  fly-
ing pains  through  chest ;  burning  stinging  in  side  ;  pain
deep  in,  in  side,  in  chest;  violent  pain  to  side  of  heart;
spasmodic  pain  under  ribs;  stinging  in  breast;  head
twisted  to  side ;  numbness  in  side  of  head  ;  pressure,  with
heat  into  upper  arm  ;  dull  pressure  in  region  of  kidney  ;
pain  in  shoulder  joint;  lameness  in  axilla;  tearing  and
stinging  in  shoulder  joint ;  rheumatic  pain  in  shoulder ;
pain  down  wounded  arm  ;  in  upper  arm  pain  as  if  beaten
VOL.  \^I. — 14.


LYSSIN.  210

and  lame,  then  in  wrist;  pain  in  elbow  as  if  paralyzed;
trembling  of  hand  ;  intense  pain  in  forefinger ;  hip  aches
in  bone  ;  along  sciatic  nerve  a  dull  pain ;  laming  pain
inside  of  thigh,  above  knee  joint;  tearing  in  thigh  to
knee ;  paralyzed  pain  in  knee ;  laming  pain  in  knee ;
pain  going  down  leg;  coldness  on  side  of  leg ;  calf  of  leg
ached  as  if  it  had  been  cramped ;  sharp  biting  pain  in
ankle ;  laming  pain  in  joint  of  foot ;  painful  lameness
in  ankle  joint ;  pain  in  toes ;  pain  in  instep ;  pain  in
nerves  from  side  of  chest  to  throat  and  jaw ;  itching  in
foot ;  herpes  circinatus  on  leg  below  knee.
From  without  in :  boring  stitches  in  head ;  stitches  in  ear.
From  within  outward :  darting  to  scalp ;  pain  in  r.  side  ;

heat  from  nape  over  ear ;  heat  in  eye.
From  1.  to  r. :  tearing  in  hypochondriac  region ;  rending

across  abdomen  ;  testicles  diminish  in  size.
From  above  downward  :  urging  to  urinate.
Pain  from  wound  goes  upward.
^  Sensations. Most  exquisite  sensibility  prevails  over  whole
body,  particularly  in  organs  of  sense.  —
Local  sensations  of  pain  continue  in  an  increased  degree,

but  are  now  scarcely  heeded.  —
Feels  a  pressure  like  from  a  dull  point.
A  cramplike  tearing  in  1.  hypochondriac  region,  moving
from  there  to  end  of  rectum,  causing  there  a  cramplike
contraction,  and  at  same  time  a  tearing  between  skin
and  muscles,  down  hip  to  knee.
Painful  sensations  here  and  there  in  body,  in  chest,  abdo-
men, or  in  region  of  kidneys.
Sharp  pains  in  place  bitten ;  shooting  in  every  direction
to  neighboring  parts,  frequently  to  stomach,  throat  and
bowels.  —
Stinging  sensation  all  over  her  body,  now  here,  now  there.
A  sensation  of  motion  in  forehead,  also  in  middle  of  ab-
domen, with  slight  stinging  in  stomach,  and  more  or
less  in  all  parts  of  body.  —
Sensation  as  if  she  could  feel  her  blood  running  all  over.
Pricking  inside  of  1.  thigh ;  at  lower  part  of  heart ;  be-
tween shoulders,  and  r.  shoulder.
Felt  as  if  he  had  caught  a  severe  cold,  with  rheumatic
pains  all  over,  very  severe  all  day  until  11  a.m.,  when
it  commenced  to  decline,  and  by  10  p.m.  was  scarcely
perceptible.
As  soon  as  he  arose,  felt  as  if  he  had  been  squeezed  and

stretched.  —
Feels  sore  all  over.

A  sensation  of  burning  heat  in  parts  he  lies  on,  it  feels
as  if  it  was  from  a  hot  stove,  most  in  region  of  kid-
neys, loins  and  sacral  region.


211  .  LYSSIN.

Numbness  occasionally  over  whole  body.

The  local  neuralgia  generally  has  the  peculiarity  of  shoot-
ing out  from  bitten  part  towards  trunk.  —

Burning  pain  in  forehead  and  heart,  and  in  back  of  head
and  neck,  r.  ear  and  1.  arm  and  leg.

Nose  feels  stiff.

Throbbing  most  severe  in  r.  temple.

All  bones  feel  as  if  broken,  has  to  remain  in  bed.

Bruised  feeling,  with  sore  throat.

Pressing  here  and  there  in  chest,  abdomen  and  region  of
kidneys.

■  Drawing  from  neck  to  forehead,  immediately  followed
by  sparks  before  eyes  and  vanishing  of  sight ;  red  face;
involuntary  grinding  of  teeth ;  second  attack ;  the  first
was  felt  in  head  after  washing  in  moraing;  seven  days
after  bite  of  mad  dog  (Bellad.,^^^  three  doses,  Hyosc.  in-
terpolated once  a  day).

As  if  two  entirely  different  trains  of  thought  influenced
her  at  the  same  time;  felt  as  if  he  had  received
joyful  intelligence ;  as  if  something  unpleasant  would
happen;  as  if  he  could  do  nothing;  as  if  she  was  going
to  have  a  fit ;  as  if  she  was  going  to  clie ;  as  if  she  was  going
to  sink  away;  as  if  he  momentarily  lost  consciousness;  as
if  something  was  drawing  around  in  a  circle;  as  if  she
could  not  hold  her  head  straight ;  as  if  she  would  fall;  as
if  a  small  leaden  ball  was  rolling  about  in  brain;  as  if
something  was  moving  in  forehead;  tearing  as  if  in
bones  of  head ;  as  of  an  invisible  hammer  striking  upon
back  of  head;  as  if  head,  nose  and  teeth  were  soldered  to-
gether; as  if  head  would  split ;  as  if  head  would  burst;
as  if  something  drew  head  towards  shoulders ;  as  if  r.
side  of  head  would  become  numb;  bones  of  head  as
if  shattered  and  sore;  as  if  parts  of  head  would  become
insensible;  as  if  a  cast  was  pressing  down  on  vertex;
aching  as  if  in  bones  over  eyes;  eyes  as  if  glued  to-
gether; as  if  blood  rushed  to  r.  ear;  pressure  as  from
a  dull  knife  in  ear;  pressure  as  if  from  a  dull  point
in  r.  ear;  sneezing  as  if  a  coryza  would  begin;  draw-
ing in  face  as  if  in  muscles  ;  as  if  needles  were  run  into
brain;  as  if  she  had  been  bitten  in  1.  side  of  face;
as  if  she  would  have  mumps;  as  if  corroding  acid
had  touched  Hp;  head  feels  as  if  filled  with  air
to  bursting ;  teeth  as  if  on  edge ;  as  if  root  of  tongue
was  swollen,  as  if  there  were  lumps  in  it ;  as  if  uvula
was  too  long ;  throat  as  if  swelled  or  raw ;  as  if  he  would
suffocate  with  violent  spasm  in  throat;  feeling  as  if
beaten ;  as  if  epiglottis  was  paralyzed  ;  as  if  a  ball  rose
from  stomach  into  throat ;  as  if  he  had  swallowed  red


LYSSIN.  212

pepper;  pain  as  if  in  or  behind  duodenum,  aching  as  if
in  intestines ;  as  if  an  abscess  was  forming  in  region  of
spleen  ;  as  if  slie  would  have  to  vomit ;  pricking  as  if
from  thorns  in  anus ;  as  if  he  passed  his  strength  away
when  urinating ;  burning  and  tenesmus  as  if  in  pros-
tate gland  ;  as  if  struggling  for  breath ;  as  if  she  might
just  have  plunged  into  cold  water;  pain  as  if  in  nerves
of  chest ;  as  if  needles  were  sticking  in  heart ;  as  if  heart
would  burst;  as  if  a  hot  wavelike  stream  was  moving
through  abdomen  and  chest;  as  if  it  was  coming  up
into  throat ;  as  if  a  slow  rising  wave  passed  through
throat  into  head ;  as  if  clavicles  would  slip  from  their
sockets;  chest  as  if  beaten;  as  if  heavy  weight  was  in
shoulders;  back  as  if  beaten;  as  if  back  would  split  and
fall  apart;  as  if  shoulder  joint  was  beaten  and  paralyzed ;
pain  in  shoulder  joint  as  if  in  middle  of  bone  down  arm
and  into  finger;  feeling  as  if  weather  was  going  to
change;  pain  as  if  beaten  in  1.  upper  arm;  as  if  ice
water  was  being  poured  upon  arm;  as  if  fleas  w^ere
running  over  r.  arm ;  elbows  as  if  paralyzed  ;  1.  knee
as  if  paralyzed ;  wrists  as  if  strained ;  as  if  first  joint
of  r,  ring  finger  was  going  to  gather;  as  if  hip  bones,
would  slip  out  of  their  sockets;  thighs  as  if  fatigued;,
pain  in  thighs  as  from  a  bruise  ;  as  if  there  were  several
pounds  of  lead  in  tibia  of  each  leg  ;  as  of  pressure  with
a  dull  point  in  joints  of  feet;  as  if  he  had  rheumatism
in  legs ;  as  if  thighs  were  too  heavy  ;  as  if  calf  of  leg
was  lieavier  than  usual  ;  as  if  calf  of  1.  leg  had  been
cramped;  as  if  a  weight  was  attached  to  ankles  ;  as  if
nails  of  toes  were  too  long  and  broken ;  as  if  he  was  get-
ting corns  on  every  toe;  as  if  she  had  fallen  on  her
hand;  as  if  she  would  fall;  falls  down  as  if  dead;  head
fixed  as  if  gazing  at  some  distant  object;  tearing  as  if
in  bone;  as  if  every  bone  had  been  broken  or  violently
beaten.
Pain  :  in  head  ;  in  heart ;  in  nose  ;  in  occiput ;  over  eyes ;
in  temples;  above  1.  eye  ;  in  a  small  spot  above  r.  eye-
brow ;  from  mouth  up  through  head  and  down  back  of
neck;  in  bones  of  skull;  on  top  of  head  and  in  teetli,
running  into  each  other;  in  nape  of  neck  ;  in  1.  cheek,
near  nose ;  in  root  of  tongue  and  1.  side  of  throat ;  in
limbs  ;  in  throat  when  swallowing,  particularly  fluids  ;
from  wounded  arm  into  throat;  in  epigastric  region  ;  in
region  of  liver  and  r.  kidney;  from  within  outward  in
r.  side ;  in  1.  side ;  in  r.  side  of  abdomen  from  uterus ;
down  1.  side  of  abdomen  ;  in  r.  groin  ;  in  two  small  ker-
nels under  skin ;  in  inguinal  glands ;  about  neck  of
bladder ;  in  testicles ;  from  uterus  into  breast  and  r.  side.


^13  LYSSIN.

of  abdomen  ;  in  1.  ovarian  region  ;  in  lower  part  of  back ;
in  back  and  lower  part  of  bowels;  next  to  larynx  on  r.
side ;  in  heart ;  in  side  of  chest  up  to  throat ;  in  uterus  ;
deep  in,  in  1.  side ;  in  1.  chest  on  small  spot  in  region  of
heart ;  in  ear ;  from  head  and  back  to  neck ;  in  cicatrix  ;
in  muscles  of  neck  and  along  cervical  portion  of  spinal
column  ;  in  back  across  hips ;  in  groins  ;  with  cutaneous
hypergesthesia  along  vertebral  column ;  on  top  of  r.
shoulder  joint;  in  1.  shoulder  joint;  down  wounded  1.
arm ;  in  first  joint  of  r.  ring  finger;  in  thighs ;  in  anterior
part  of  r.  thigh;  in  all  joints  of  feet;  in  legs;  going
down  1.  leg ;  from  heel  into  thigh ;  in  r.  heel  and  toes
of  1.  foot ;  in  sole  of  r.  foot  to  ankle ;  from  groins  to  feet ;
from  ankle  bone  to  great  toe ;  in  toe  next  to  little  toe  of
1.  foot;  in  small  of  back  and  r,  temple;  in  shoulder
joint;  passing  down  spine  to  loins  and  hips,  thence  to
knees ;  in  cicatrix  of  bitten  thumb ;  in  nerves  from  1.
side  of  chest  to  throat  and  jaw;  in  spine.

Unspeakable  torture :  in  back.

Unbearable  pain  :  in  head.

Intolerable  pain :  in  head  to  end  of  nose  and  into  teeth.

Maddening,  outward  pressing  pain :  in  forehead.

Intense  pain :  in  head  from  forehead  to  organ  of  firmness,
then  to  top  of  head  and  eyes;  from  inflammation  of  os
and  cervix ;  in  forefinger  of  1.  hand  ;  in  r.  heel.

Terrible  pain  :  in  throat  when  swallowing ;  in  rectum  and
small  of  back.

Dreadful  pains :  up  neck  and  down  spine.

Intolerable,  snappish  headache.

Violent  pain:  in  head  ;  in  back  ;  from  temple  to  temple ;
in  temples  and  forehead ;  in  heart ;  in  r.  kidney ;  in  r.
hand.

Very  severe  pain :  in  head.

Severe  pain :  in  temples  and  above  eyes ;  in  eyes  and  in
all  his  joints ;  from  mouth  upward  through  head  and
down  neck  ;  in  abdomen  ;  in  lower  bowels  ;  across  back,
between  shoulders  and  waist ;  in  back ;  in  both  kidneys
and  across  hips ;  in  r.  instep ;  in  bitten  thumb ;  in  stomach.

Acute  pain :  in  and  below  uterus.

Horrible  pain  :  in  head.

Terrible  burning  and  pricking :  in  anus.

Very  violent  aching  pain  :  in  side  of  and  all  over  chest.

Violent  shooting  pain  :  in  1.  of  vagina.

Severe  shooting  pains :  in  head,  over  eyes  and  in  temples.

Violent  sticking  pain :  in  heart  and  to  1.  of  it.

Severe  bruiselike  pain :  in  shoulders,  chest,  back,  arms  and
legs  ;  in  all  muscles.

Tearing :  from  middle  of  forehead  towards  1.  side ;  in  r.


LYSSIN.  214

temple ;  from  jaw  to  temple ;  a  few  inches  from  r.  ear ;
in  r.  lower  and  upper  jaw  into  ear;  from  1.  hypochon-
driac region  to  r. ;  between  skin  and  flesh  down  thigh
to  knee;  in  1.  shoulder  joint;  from  middle  of  anterior
portion  of  r.  thigh  to  knee ;  in  1.  thigh  to  knee ;  first
joint  of  little  toe.

Rending  pain  :  in  r,  ear;  across  abdomen  from  1.  to  r. ;  in
neck.

Tearing,  drawing  pain :  in  knees.

Tearing,  stinging :  in  occiput.

Spasmodic  tearing  pain :  under  1.  ribs  to  anus.

Shooting  pain :  in  upper  part  of  face ;  to  eyes ;  in  r.  ear ;
in  upper  jaw ;  in  r.  eyetooth  ;  in  teeth  ;  in  r.  side  of  ab-
domen ;  in  abdomen;  between  1.  mamma  and  last  ribs;
in  r.  side;  in  region  of  heart;  in  neck;  through  small
of  back ;  from  fourth  toe  to  foot.

Shooting,  flying  pains :  through  1.  chest.

Flying  pains  :  in  urinary  organs.

Pressing,  shooting :  in  vertex.

Sharp  darting  pain  :  in  bitten  hand ;  up  arm  to  shoulder
and  base  of  brain.

Darting :  from  within  outward  to  scalp ;  on  r.  side  of  ver-
tex ;  in  side  of  face ;  into  anus.

Sticking,  drawing,  squeezing  pain  :  in  heart.

Piercing  pain :  in  r.  side  of  head.

Boring :  in  temples.

Boring  stitches :  in  head.

Stitches:  in  r.  temple;  in  heart;  in  r.  ear;  in  both  ears;
in  r.  side  of  abdomen  ;  in  belly ;  in  1.  side ;  under  1.
mamma  ;  in  nape  of  neck.

Occasional  stitches :  in  r.  temple.

Sharp  pain  :  above  eyebrows  and  up  nose  ;  in  uterus  shoot-
ing to  labia.

Beating  pain :  in  forehead,  parietal  bone,  occiput  and  nape
of  neck  ;  in  r.  temple  and  above  r.  eye.

Pressing  beating :  in  vertex.

Throbbing  pain:  in  head;  in  forehead;  in  vertex;  in
occiput;  in  1.  temple;  in  nape  of  neck;  over  r.  eye;  in
anus;  in  neck;  in  r.  forearm  on  flexor  side.

Painful  throbbing :  in  region  of  spleen.

Pinching :  in  1.  temple.

Pinching  pain :  at  fourth  rib,  r.  side.

Sharp,  biting  pain :  in  1.  ankle.

Severe  pressing  pain  :  in  1.  side  of  head.

Neuralgic  pains :  in  gums.

Constant  pain  :  in  lower  part  of  heart ;  in  neck.

Burning  pain:  in  forehead;  in  1.  side  of  head  and  down
neck;  in  throat;  around  heart;  in  neck;  down  wounded
arm.


215  LYSSIN.

Burning,  neuralgic  pain :  down  1.  side  of  face.

Stinging  pain:  in  throat;  in  Iieart;  in  1.  breast;  in  neck;
below  r.  shoulder  blade;  in  cervical  vertebrae;  in  1.
shoulder  joint;  in  r.  hand ;  in  forepart  of  r.  index  finger;
in  r.  knee;  from  knees  down;  in  palm  of  r.  hand  to
finger  ends ;  in  one  of  cervical  vertebrae.

Suffocating  pain:  at  pit  of  stomach.

Sting:  in  sore  arm.

Pricking  sticking  pain :  in  heart.

Sticking:  in  r.  side  of  abdomen;  in  r.  side.

Stitching  sensation :  when  swallowing.

Chilling,  biting,  burning  sensation:  on  inner  side  of  r.
upper  lip,  passes  up  and  back  to  r.  nasal  cavity.

Stinging  pressure:  behind  ears.

Pressing,  stinging:  r.  side  of  vertex.

Burning,  stinging:  in  throat;  1.  side  of  chest.

Pressive  burning :  in  r.  external  ear.

Stinging  sensation:  in  throat;  in  small  of  back;  in  middle
of  abdomen ;  in  1.  side  of  chest.

Burning:  in  eyelids;  in  vertex;  in  ear;  from  eyetooth
down  oesophagus ;  in  urethra ;  in  r.  side  of  back ;  in  heart;
in  back  near  last  ribs ;  in  both  kidneys  and  across  hips.

Burning  heat :  in  parts  on  which  he  lies.

Burning,  surging :  towards  head  from  abdomen ;  through
chest.

Tickling,  burning :  in  urethra.

Great  heat :  in  throat  and  about  heart.

Inward  heat:  in  neck.

Heat :  in  ear ;  in  r.  side  of  face  and  r.  ear ;  from  back  of
neck,  also  into  eye;  in  middle  of  1.  cheek;  in  face;  in
heart ;  from  neck  to  ear  and  face ;  in  forehead  and  back ;
internally  and  externally  through  entire  body.

Itching,  burning :  on  corona  glandis.

Itching  heat :  in  eyes.

Smarting  pain  :  on  swallowing ;  in  palm  of  r.  hand.

Sharp  pricking :  in  forehead  ;  in  1.  temple.

Biting :  in  various  parts  of  body.

Sore  pains :  in  heart.

Extreme  soreness  :  of  back.

Soreness  :  of  throat ;  in  eyes  and  above  them ;  of  jawbone ;
in  middle  of  1.  cheek;  of  mouth;  in  back  of  throat;  in
whole  of  lower  abdomen;  through  pubic  region;  of
vagina ;  in  lower  part  of  back  ;  across  chest ;  of  r.  side  of
throat ;  in  arm  ;  in  r.  hand  ;  of  balls  of  heels.

Drawing,  beating  pain  :  over  eye.

Drawing,  dragging  pain  :  in  groins.

Rheumatic  pain  :  across  chest ;  first  in  r.,  then  in  1,  shoul-
der ;  from  knees  down.


LYSSIN.  216

Cramplike  pain  :  in  1.  side  of  chest.

Colicky  pain  :  in  abdomen.

Pressing  pain :  in  head  ;  in  forehead  ;  in  r.  side,  near  last
ribs ;  in  hypochondria ;  in  region  of  spleen  ;  under  r.
shoulder  blade  and  between  scapulse;  in  sacrum,  r.  side;
in  r.  hip  bone,  thence  to  sacral  bone.

Cramps :  in  abdomen ;  in  arms ;  in  back  and  limbs  of  bit-
ten side ;  in  calves.

Dull  stitching  pain :  in  heart.

Dull  shooting  pain  :  in  heart.

Dull  pain :  in  forehead ;  in  heart ;  along  1.  sciatic  nerve.

Laming  pain :  on  inner  thigh,  extending  to  knee ;  in  r.
knee  joint,  then  in  1.  knee  ;  in  joint  of  1.  foot.

Curious  stinging  pain :  in  1.  eye  to  forehead,  over  r.  eye.

Dull  pricking  pain :  in  1.  side  from  head  to  waist.

Aching:  in  bones  above  eyes;  in  occiput;  in  jaw;  over
eyes;  aching  of  r.  ear;  in  ear,  extends  to  teeth ;  in  lower
jaw;  in  all  the  teeth;  in  carious  root  of  a  molar;  on  r.
side  of  throat;  in  stomach;  from  below  waist  to  feet;  in
loins,  into  back  down  to  feet;  in  and  between  both
shoulders;  in  spine;  in  back  and  head;  in  arms;  in  1.
hip  bone;  in  knees;  in  legs  below  knee;  in  legs;  in  knees
and  shoulders;  in  all  his  limbs;  in  front  of  ujDper  part
of  head.

Slightly  hot,  quiet  aching  sensation:  below  chest,  often  in
entire  abdomen.

Quiet  aching:  in  front  of  upper  part  of  head.

Aching  dulness:  in  teeth.

Dull  heavy  pain :  in  forehead.

Cooling  pain:  in  stomach.

Chilling  painfulness:  starts  in  teeth  of  r.  side,  behind  and
below  in  bone  of  lower  maxilla  and  passes  upward.

Painful  coldness :  shoots  into  teeth.

Painful  sensation:  deep  in  upper  part  of  abdomen;  in
testicles.

Painful  dulness:  in  occiput.

Painful  desire  to  swallow.

Painful  urging:  in  penis.

Peculiar  pain :  at  root  of  tongue.

Disagreeable  kind  of  pain:  in  cheek  and  deep  in  upper
part  of  jaw.

Slight  pain :  in  lumbar  region ;  in  r.  shoulder  joint;  in  head.

Painful  pressure :  on  upper  part  of  head.

Gnawing  pressure:  in  region  of  stomach  and  spleen.

Cramplike  pressure :  under  r.  shoulder  blade.

Pointed  pressure :  in  stomach.

Dull  pressure:  on  1.  side  of  head  and  on  vertex;  above  r.
inguinal  region;  in  region  of  1.  kidney.


217  LYSSIN.

Pressing:  in  forehead;  from  nape  of  neck  into  ear;  inward
in  epigastrium ;  in  spleen ;  in  abdomen ;  in  chest ;  in
neck  and  up  back  of  head ;  with  heat  in  back  near  r.
shoulder  blade  into  nape  of  neck,  thence  into  muscles  of
1.  upper  arm;  running  from  between  shoulders  to  occi-
put and  across  r.  ear;  in  region  of  kidneys.

Pressure:  in  1.  side  of  occiput;  in  upper  part  of  head  and
forehead;  in  upper  part  of  r.  orbit;  in  1.  side;  in  r.  ear;
on  sternum  between  mammse;  in  neck;  below  r.  shoul-
der blade  ;  in  back,  five  inches  below  point  of  r.  shoul-
der, one  inch  from  spine;  on  shoulders.

Pressing  heaviness :  on  top  of  head  ;  in  r.  parietal  bone ;  in
r.  side  of  head.

Pressing  inward,  throbbing  or  drawing :  above  r.  eye.

Heavy  bruised  sensation :  in  thighs.

Cooling,  burning,  congested  feeling :  in  region  of  bladder.

Bruised  feeling :  in  nose.

Scraping  sensation  :  on  palate.

Sensitiveness:  of  scalp;  of  teeth  ;  of  uterus;  of  vagina.

Drawing :  in  gums ;  in  abdomen  below  navel ;  from  groins
downward ;  in  neck ;  in  back  and  limbs  of  bitten  side.

Gnawing  sensation  :  in  r.  zygoma.

Pinched  feeling :  of  scalp.

Bearino;  down  :  in  uterine  region.

Peculiar  sensation  of  constriction  :  in  back  of  throat.

Peculiar  sensation  :  in  vertex.

Lameness  with  soreness:  in  back;  in  1.  axilla;  in  1.  uj)per
arm  and  near  elbow,  then  in  wrist.

Lame  feeling  :  in  wrist.

Prickling  sensation:  in  lower  limbs.

Pricking  sensation  :  under  tongue.

Painful  lameness :  in  1.  ankle  joint.

Transitory  drawing :  in  1.  side  of  face.

Strange  sensation  :  in  head ;  of  whole  body ;  in  heart.

Curious  feeling :  in  legs.

Discomfort:  in  chest.

Suffocative  spasm  :  in  throat.

Cramped  feeling  :  in  ball  of  r.  hand.

Spasmodic  sensation  :  in  trachea.

Contraction :  of  hamstrings.

Contracted  feeling :  of  scalp.

Constrictive  sensation  :  in  throat ;  about  breast.

Suffocating  feeling:  in  chest.

Surging:  towards  head,  felt  deep  in  brain;  in  vertex.

Expanded  feeling:  of  chest  and  abdomen.

Sense  of  emptiness  and  discomfort:  of  parts  after  coition.

Lightness:  in  head.

"  Die  away  "  feeling :  extends  through  heart  to  back.


LYSSIN.  218

Great  distress:  in  epigastrium  and  prsecordial  regions.

Paralyzed  feeling:  in  eyes.

Stupid  feeling:  in  forehead.

Sinking:  at  heart.

Great  weakness :  with  aversion  to  move ;  in  chest;  in  back.

Weakness:  in  sexual  organs;  of  back;  of  chest;  in  region

of  kidneys,  loins  and  small  of  back;  in  arms;  in  legs.
Dulness:  of  forehead;  of  head  ;  of  vertex.
Fatigued  feeling:  in  chest;  in  wounded  arm.
Tired  feeling :  in  legs.
Tension :  in  head  ;  in  vertex.
Great  oppression  :  in  stomach.
Weight :  on  ankle  bones ;  in  legs.
Feeling  of  weight :  in  legs  below  knees.
Heaviness :  in  legs  ;  in  r.  arm  ;  of  limbs.
Tingling:  in  cheek  bones.
Tickling :  of  ear ;  in  nasal  cavity ;  in  roof  of  mouth  and

in  front  of  nose;  in  1.  cheek;  in  throat  and  root  of

tongue ;  of  corona  glandis.
Uneasiness:  in  1.  ovarian  region.
Stiffness :  of  ears;  of  jaw  ;  of  r.  side  of  head ;  in  nose ;  in  r.

side  of  neck  ;  of  lower  jaw;  of  neck  ;  in  muscles  of  neck

and  throat ;  of  r.  hand  ;  of  fingers  and  hands.
Numbness:  of  1.  side  of  head;  in  both  arms  and  hands;

in  r.  arm  ;  in  r.  leg  below  knee.
Dryness :  of  mouth  ;  of  throat ;  of  glans.
Violent  jerking  :  in  limbs;  in  lower  jaw.
Jerking:  in  1.  temple  ;  from  oesophagus  to  heart.
Shocklike  sensation :  down  wounded  arm  to  finger  ends.
Twitching:  in  r.  femur;  in  legs;  in  arms  and  legs;  of

muscles  through  entire  body;  of  tendous.
Slight  twitchings  :  in  face  and  hands;  in  r.  arm.
Strange  pulsating :  in  vertex.
Pulsations  :  in  anus.
Vacillating:  in  head.
Wavering:  of  head.
Trembling:  of  1. hand; in knees; of  limbs; through

whole  body.
Quivering :  in  face  ;  about  sternum  ;  in  hands  ;  all  over  ;

around  breast  bone.
Fluttering:  about  heart.
Something  runs  round  and  round  several  times  in  flesh,

in  region  of  hip,  then  down  leg  to  knee.
A  sensation  moves  about  r.  side  of  face  and  goes  across

forehead ;  from  heart  to  back.
A  sense  of  motion:  in  stomach;  in  lower  part  of  abdomen;

in  middle  of  abdomen.
Crawling  sensation  :  in  r.  zygoma.


219  LYSSIN.

A  sensation  half  coldish,  half  burning:  in  whole  epigastric
region.

Chilly  feeling:  in  limbs;  down  bitten  arm;  all  over.

Coldish  feeling:  far  back  and  deep  in  throat.

Cool  feeling:  on  tongue;  in  oesophagus.

Coldness:  in  stomach;  in  1.  side;  in  spine.

Intolerable  itching:  in  lower  part  of  body  down  to  feet.

Itching: in  locality  of  acquisitiveness; in  a  small  spot
in  upper  part  of  both  ears;  in  nose;  on  os  pubis,  extend-
ing to  root  of  penis; all  over  arms; in  r.  hand  ; in  r.
foot ;  in  various  parts  of  body.
**  Tissues. Affects  principally  the  nervous  system.  —

Great  blueness  of  veins  and  redness  of  arteries  on  wounded
arm.

Tearing  and  shooting  as  if  in  bone.

Supraorbital  bones  feel  shattered.

Aching  in  bones;  every  bone  seems  bruised  and  sore;  as
if  every  bone  had  been  broken  or  violently  beaten;
never  had  such  pains,  had  to  return  to  bed  and  lie  there
all  day.

All  his  joints  cracked  on  least  motion,  and  pain  was  quite
severe  till  10  p.m.

Lost  flesh,  getting  thinner  all  over.

Quick  tendency  of  bodies  to  putrefaction.  —

■  Chlorosis.
*^  Touch. Passive  Motion. Injuries. He  cannot  bear  to
ride  in  a  carriage,  feels  generally  unwell  during  or
after  it.

When  water  (in  bath)  was  least  ruffled,  so  as  to  touch  a
fresh  surface,  convulsions  were  excited.  —

Faceache  after  puncturing  a  pimple  on  cheek.

A  lacerated  wound  on  r.  cheek,  behind  ramus  of  jaw,  one
and  a  half  inch,  and  three  lines  of  abrasion  on  front  of
same  cheek.  —

Local  sensations  of  pain  in  wound  or  scar  continue  often
after  prodromic  stage,  in  an  increased  degree  in  higher
stage,  but  are  in  last  scarcely  heeded.  —

Peculiar  sensations  are  frequently  experienced  at  seat  of
bite,  or  in  adjacent  parts;  like  a  sensation  of  pricking,
boring  or  burning,  always  proceeding  from  wound.  —

Complained  of  a  pain  in  r.  arm  (bitten  part);  no  inflam-
mation or  enlargement  of  glands  of  axilla  could  be  dis-
covered. —

Tearing  pains  often  proceed  from  wounded  parts,  frequently
attributed  by  patients  to  effects  of  a  cold  and  to  rheu-
matism thereby  induced.  —

Shooting  out  from  bitten  part  towards  trunk,  less  frequently
extending  outward  from  sensorium,  or  in  some  locality
other  than  part  injured.  —


LYSSIN.  220

Wound  in  exceptional  cases  appears  inflamed  and  swollen;

of  a  reddish  or  bluish  hue.  —
Sensation  of  creeping  and  pain  in  scar.  —
Next  morning,  wound  red  around  edges.  —
Great  redness  of  small  bloodvessels  around  wound.  —
Soreness  in  muscles  around  wound,  which  is  now  almost

healed.  —
The  wound  healed  without  irritation  kindly  in  course  of

twelve  or  fourteen  days.  —
Some  are  without  pain  in  bitten  part. —
No  pain,  swelling  or  inflammation  in  lymphatic  glands,

between  bite  and  thorax.  —
The  wounds  heal  kindly  and  are  characterized  by  a  strik-
ing absence  of  inflammatory  reaction.  —
The  subsequent  inflammatory  reaction  (after  caustics)  is

generally  slight,  while  pain  thereby  produced  is  mode-
rated. —
Even  after  application  of  strong  caustics,  wounds  manifest

a  strong  tendency  to  skin  over  without  granulating.  —
Never  saw  a  wound  more  disposed  to  heal;  he  was  abroad

in  five  weeks,  yet  afterwards  affected  by  hydrophobia.  —
The  ready  healing  of  the  wound  made  b}^  the  bite  of  a

rabid  animal  is  similar  to  the  rapid  healing  of  wounds

in  those  affected  with  leprosy.
Touching  scar  is  said  to  produce  peculiar  sensations,  a

shuddering,  feeling  of  anxiety,  and  sighing.  —
Sensation  of  creeping  and  pain  in  scar.  —
I A  bite  of  an  angry  dog  into  r.  thigh  had  not  healed,

turned  into  malignant  ulcers;  surrounding  bluish  red

edges,  raised  and  hard,  bases  badly  suppurating  and

ichorous,  with  redness  and  hardness.
I  Scars  from  a  bite  in  nose  swollen  and  red  for  fifteen

months.
lUlcers  remaining  after  bite  of  evil  disposed  dogs.

■  Pain  on  spot  bitten  became  burning,  and  extended  over

whole  body,  and  he  felt  very  strangely. ^Lyssophobia.

■  Felt  a  continued  pain  in  spot  on  r.  calf  where  he  was

bitten,  but  without  a  lesion. ^Lyssophobia.

■  Wounds  from  bite  of  dogs,  in  sheep.

■  A  cow  bitten  by  a  dog  in  foot  joint  had  a  large  swelling

of  part,  and  animal  got  very  restless.  —

■  Two  puppies,  bitten  by  their  rabid  mother,  did  not  get

mad  after  taking  Lyssin.
It  may  be  a  prophylactic  to  hydrophobia,  but  never  with-
out at  the  same  time  applying  radiate  heat  to  the  part
bitten,  and  frequent  sessions  in  hot  room  of  Turkish
bath;  during  the  attack  remedies  are  to  be  applied
according  to  symptoms.


221  LYSSIK

Slightest  touch :  brings  on  convulsions ;  along  whole  ver-
tebrae causes  irritability  akin  to  convulsions.

Touch:  on  head  makes  it  ache;  small  pustules  on  frontal
eminence;  nose  very  sensitive;  pimple  on  eminence  of
forehead  painful;  pain  on  cheek  <.

Pressure:  on  neck  of  bladder;  causes  <  pain  in  neck;
causes  pain  in  larynx ;  muscles  of  forearm  painful;  vio-
lent pain  in  r.  hand.

Disposition  to  press  hand  against  lower  jaw.

Presses  head  against  wall;  headache.

Rubbing:  headache  >;  causes  ear  to  pain.

Gentle  scratching:  headache  >.

Scratching:  itching  in  both  ears  disappears;  scurf  off
pimple,  discharge  of  lymph  and  blood ;  sheep's  back
makes  them  quiet;  <  biting  and  itching  in  various  parts
of  bod}^ ;  causes  small  red  spots  in  a  circle  on  inner  side
of  thighs.
*^  Skin.  Quick  tendency  of  the  wound  to  heal  (the  same  in
leprosy).

Many  underwent  smallpox  subsequent  to  reception  of  bite,
and  after  their  recovery  died  with  hydrophobia

Biting,  itching  in  various  parts  of  body,  <  by  scratching.

Very  slight  headache  and  biting  itching  all  over  body
and  legs.

Itching  quite  severe  during  night.

Had  to  scratch  frequently,  or  rather  rub.

Through  night  intolerable  itching  in  lower  part  of  body
down  to  feet.

Itching  in  r.  hand,  1.  foot,  and  in  various  parts  of  body.

I  Bluish  discoloration  of  bitten  place  (after  Laches.).

Itching  as  soon  as  he  begins  to  get  warm  in  bed,  particu-
larly on  inner  sides  of  thighs  and  knees ;  after  scratch-
ing there  appeared  small,  red  spots  in  a  circle.

When  in  bed  he  is  compelled  to  scratch ;  cannot  sleep  all
night.

■  Pustules:  on  forehead;  around  inflamed  eye;  on  finger

(after  bite).

■  Malignant  ulcers  from  bite  of  a  dog.
I  Red  scar  from  bite  of  a  dog.

■  Cancerous  sores.

Herpes  circinatus  appeared  on  1.  leg,  below  knee  and  livid

yellow  complexion  gave  way  to  a  healthy  color.
^^  Stages of  Life, Constitution. Persons  have  undergone

diseases (particularly  smallpox) between time  bitten

and  hydrophobia  afterwards.  —
Man,  set,  40,  robust,  otherwise good health; spasm  of

throat.  —
Mary  M.,  set.  32,  full  habit,  healthy,  robust,  bitten  by  a

mad  dog  in  r.  hand ;  treated  recklessly.  —


LYSSIN— MAGNESIA  CARBONICA.  222

Bitten  by  a  mad  dog  in  sixth  year  in  several  places;  be-
came somnambulistic  ten  years  after.

A  woman,  ajt.  36,  white  skin,  blonde,  blue  eyes,  small,
quiet  temper,  not  very  sensitive  to  medicine.  —

Girl,  get.  12,  same  way.  —

JEt.  24,  same  constitution.  —

A  girl,  set.  11 ;  symptoms  after  a  bite.
■^^  Relations. lAntidotes:  Bellad.,  Hyosc,  Stramon.

Compatible:  Nat7'.  mw.  follows  well;  after  Tabac,  in  head-
ache; after  Arg.  nit.,  in  uterine  disease;  after  iStannum,
in  neuralgia

Compare: Canthar.


MAGNESIA  CARBONICA.

Magnesium  Carbonate.  Mg  CO^,  SII2O.

Introduced  by  Hahnemann  and  proved  by  himself,  Sehreter  and  Wahle
(Chronische  Krankheiten,  vol.  4) ;  also  by  Nenning  and  Hartlaub  (Hartlaub  and
Trinks'  Materica  Medica,  vol.  2,  p.  257).

Clinical  Authorities. — Scrofulous  inflammation  of  eyes,  Riickert,  Eiick.  Kl.
Erf.,  vol.  1,  p.  272 ;  Lenticular  cataract,  Payr,  Kane's  Eec,  1870,  p.  107 ;  Neuralgia
facialis,  Kane's  Rec,  1871,  p.  183;  Toothache,  Hahnemann,  Gross,  Lobethal,  Atto-
myr,  Riickert,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  l,p.  4G4;  Odontalgia  rheumatica,  Hirsch,  Raue's
Rec,  1874,  p.  104;  Inordinate  appetite  for  meat,  Curtis,  Hom.  Phys.,  vol.  2,  p.  403;
Pain  in  I.  hypochonclrium,  and  toothache,  C.  Hg.,  MSS. ;  Diarrhoea,  Hartmann,  Wurda,
Riick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  1,  p.  837;  Crowell,  Cin.  Med.  Adv.,  vol.  3,  p.  83;  Infantile
diarrhcea,  Ostrom,  Org.,  vol.  3,  p.  206 ;  Diarrhoea  of  young  children,  Clifton,  Hom.
Rev.,  vol.  21,  p.  423;  Cholera  infantum.  Hale,  Hom.  Clin.,  vol.  3,  p.  22;  Asearides,
Guernsey,  Raue's  Rec,  1870,  p.  221 ;  Menorrhagia,  Dunham,  N.  E.  M.  G.,  vol.  5,
p.  6 ;  Metrorrhagia,  Clifton,  Hom.  Rev,,  vol.  21,  p.  423 ;  Nausea  during  pregnancy,
Schroen,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  2,  p.  383;  Cough,  B.,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.5,  p.  724;
Affection  of  knee,  Berridge,  Hom.  Phys.,  vol.  3,  p.  101 ;  Nervous  affection,  Curtis,
Hom.  Phys.,  vol.  2,  p.  402.

^  Mind. Uneasiness,  with  trembling  of  hands  and  absence  of

mind.
Anxious  and warm through whole  body,  especially  in

head,  while  eating  warm  food.
Anxious,  with  perspiration  all  day.
Trembling,  anguish  and  fear,  as  if  some  accident  would

happen;  all  day,  >  after  going  to  bed.
Sad  mood,  with  indisposition  to  talk;  sad  and  disconsolate.


223  MAGNESIA  CARBONICA.

Much  <  from  talking  or  mental  exertion.

Changeable;  gloomy,  vexed,  ill  humored,  then  talkative.

^  Sensorium, Vertigo:  when  kneeling;  when  standing,  as  if

everything  was  turning  around;  in  evening;  as  if  about

to  faint ; in  morning  after  rising,  with  inclination  to

vomit  and  accumulation  of  water  in  mouth.

Frequent  sudden  falling,  with  consciousness,  when  stand-
ing or  walking.

Heaviness  and  dizziness  in  head;  early  in  morning,  when
rising,  going  off  after  a  walk.
^  Inner  Head. Dulness  of  head  from  mental  exertion.

■  Pressure  and  j)ulsating  in  forehead.

I  Congestion to head: with pressive frontal headache;
especially  when  smoking.

■  Pressing headache from mental exertion and when

among  many  people.
■Violent,  darting  headache,  after  vexation  (1  to  10  p.m.).

■  Lancinating  headache,  early  in  morning,  after  rising.
I  I  Sticking  headache.

■  Heat  in  head  and  hands,  with  redness  of  face,  alternating

with  paleness.
^  Outer  Head. ■Bruised  sensation  of  vertex.

■  Pain  on  top  of  head,  as  if  hair  was  pulled.

■  Dandruff  on  scalp,  itching  during  wet  and  rainy  weather.

■  Falling  off  of  hair,  tetter  on  scalp;  itching  violently  in

rainy  weather.
Hard  nodosity  on  r.  temple.  ,

*  Sight  and  Eyes. ■  Black  spots  or  motes  before  eyes.

■  Burning  of  eyes  and  dimness  of  vision.

■  ■Lenticular  cataract  (occasionally  received  Sulphur).

■  Obscuration  of  cornea.

■  Swelling  of  eyeball.

■  Dryness  of  eyes,  or  profuse  lachrymation.

■  Inflammation  of  eyes,  with  redness,  burning,  stinging  and

obscuration  of  sight,  or  dim  sigh  tedn  ess.

■  Scrofulous  ophthalmia,  with  opacities  on  cornea.

■  Agglutination  of  lids  in  morning,  with  pressure  in  eyes.
^  Hearing  and  Ears. Great  sensitiveness  of  ear  to  noise.

■  Whizzing,  buzzing,  fluttering  in  r.  ear.

■  Hardness  of  hearing  and  ringing  in  ears.

■  Inflammation  of  ears,  with  external  redness  and  sensation

of  great  soreness.
^  Smell  and  Nose. ■Bleeding  from  nose  in  morning,  more
from  r.  side.
■Vesicular  eruption  in  nose,  with  pressing  pain.

■  Dry  coryza  or  obstruction  of  nose,  waking  one  at  night.
^  Upper  Face. iFace:  dirty,  dark  yellow;  frequent  conges-
tion to  head ;  pale,  earthy ;  alternately  red  and  pale.


MAGNESIA  CARBONICA.  224

I  Tension  on  face,  as  if  white  of  egg  had  dried  on  it.

I  Nightly  tearing,  digging  and  boring  in  malar  bone,  in-
supportable during  rest  and  driving  one  from  place  to
place;  swelling  of  malar  bone,  with  pulsating  pain.

■  Obliged  to  run  from  room  to  room  all  night  on  account

of  pain  in  face,  to  hold  painful  side  and  constantly  wag
head; as  soon  as  she  remained  quiet  pains  returned.

iNeuralgia  facialis,  1.  side,  shooting  like  lightning;  <  from
touch,  draft,  change  of  temperature;  cannot  stay  in  bed,,
must  walk  floor.

I  Hard  nodosities,  bloatedness  and  swelling  of  face.
^  Lower  Face. '  i  Herpetic  eruption  around  lower  part  of
mouth.

I  I  Hard  little  nodosities  in  corners  of  mouth.
^"  Teeth  and  Gums, i  Beating  and  stinging  in  teeth  after
eating.

iToothache:  while  riding  in  a  carriage,  <  in  cold;  at
night,  compelling  one  to  rise  and  walk  about,  pain  in-
supportable while  at  rest;  during  pregnancy;  mostly
burning,  tearing,  drawing,  twitching,  or  great  ulcerative
pain,  with  twitching  in  fingers  and  feet;  from  teeth  to
temples,  commencing  only  in  evening  in  bed;  with
swelling  of  gums  and  inflamed  mucous  membrane.

■  Insupportable  tearing  pain  generally  from  a  hollow  tooth,.

passing  through  face  and  into  head  and  affecting  eye;
easily  dazzled;  slightest  draft  of  air  brings  on  pain;  <
from  warmth  of  bed,  must  get  up  and  walk  about;  >
for  a  short  "time  by  a  mouthful  of  cold  water;  ill
humored,  capricious.

IToothache :  at  one  time  in  one,  at  another  in  several  ap-
parently sound  teeth ;  severe  boring  in  r.  side  of  lower
jaw,  with  tearing  pain  through  r.  side  of  face,  extending
to  region  of  temple;  stiffness  of  muscles  of  neck  and
throat;  painful  side  swollen;  pain  slight  during  day,
very  severe  at  night ;  as  soon  as  she  gets  into  bed,  must
get  up  and  walk  about.

iPains  tearing  and  extending  into  1.  temple;  teeth  ex-
tremely sensitive  to  slightest  touch  of  tongue,  feel  too
long ;  increase  of  saliva  ;  <  at  night.  ^Odontalgia  rheu-
matica.

I  Awakens  from  sleep  with  intolerable  pain  ;  burning  in  all
teeth  of  r.  side ;  hot  sensation  in  mouth  ;  burning,  throb-
bing pains,  extending  to  malar  bone  and  to  ear ;  temple
sensitive  to  slightest  touch ;  drawing  out  sensation  in
ear;  several  hollow  teeth  on  r.  side;  pains  begin  in
afternoon,  grow  very  severe  in  evening  on  getting  warm
in  bed  ;  menses  regular.

IToothache of  pregnant women; throbbing pain  with


225  MAGNESIA  CARBONICA.

occasional stitches; ulcerative pain when teeth are

touched.
I  Teeth  feel  too  long.
I  Ailments  from  cutting  wisdom  teeth.

■  Looseness  of  teeth,  with  swelling  of  gums.

■  Slow  eruption  of  teeth  ;  emaciation.
Caries  of  lower  teeth.

I  Burning  vesicles  on  gums,  on  inside  of  cheeks,  tongue,
lips  and  palate,  they  bleed  from  least  contact.
"  Taste  and  Tongue, b  Bitter  or  sour  taste  in  mouth.

I  I  Bitter  taste,  tongue  coated  white;  mouth  and  teeth  full
of  tough,  white  mucus,  going  off  after  rinsing  of  mouth.

■  Frequent,  sudden  stammering  speech.

^^  Inner  Mouth. ■  Dryness  of  mouth,  especially  at  night  and
in  morning.
I  I  Bloody  saliva.
I  iSour  breath.

■  Aphthae.

13  Throat. ■Stinging  in  throat  when  talking  and  swallowing;
much  mucus.
I  I  Burning  in  throat  and  palate,  with  dryness  and  rough-
ness, as  if  scraped  by  an  awn.

■  Frequent  rising  of  mucus  in  throat  (morning),  with  rough-

ness and  dryness  of  fauces.

■  Soft,  fetid  tubercles,  of  color  of  peas,  are  hawked  up.

"  Appetite,  Thirst.  Desires,  Aversions.  ■  Inordinate  appe-
tite for  meat  in  children  of  tuberculous  parentage.

■  Violent  thirst  for  water,  especially  in  evening  aiid  at  night.

■  Desire  for:  meat;  bread;  fruit;  acid  drinks.

■  Aversion:  to  green  food;  rehshes  meat.

^"  Hiccough,  Belching.  Nausea  and  Vomiting.  ■■Heart-
burn ;  belching ;  eructations  sour  or  greasy ;  sour  taste
and  sour  vomiting.

■  Much  loathing,  without  desire  to  vomit.

■  Nausea:  and  vertigo  Mdiile  eating,  followed  by  retching

and  vomiting  of  a  bitter  salt  water ;  while  riding  in  a
carriage.

■  Sour  vomiting  with  colic.

'"  Scrobiculum  and  Stomach.  ■  Feeling  of  emptiness  and
qualmishness  in  stomach; >  after  dinner.

■  Great  amount  of  wind,  which  is  sour  when  eructated.

■  Aching  and  contractive  pain,  with  sour  eructations.

■  Constrictive  pain  in  stomach.

■  Ulcerative  pain  in  stomach,  with  great  sensitiveness  to

pressure.

■  Meteorism  of  stomach  when  it  is  sensitive  to  touch;  no

eructation.

VOL.  VII. — 15.


MAGNESIA  CARBONICA.  226

■Sour  eructations  and  pyrosis  after  cabbage,  potatoes,  and

other  gross  food.
iMilk  is  refused,  or  if  taken,  causes  pain  in  stomach.
I  I  From  indigestion,  disposition  to  furuncles  and  headache;

tongue  coated  dirty  yellow.
^^  Hypochondria, l  Hardness  with  stitches  in  hepatic  region.

■  Insupportable  pain  in  1.  hypochondriac  region  through

to  back;  must  support  spot  with  hand  and  get  up  and
walk  about;  <  lying  down  and  at  night;  sleepless  for
one  week ;  toothache  in  r.  upper  and  lower  jaw,  <  from
cold  water.
''*  Abdomen.  I  i  Pain  over  umbilicus,  when  feeling  that  part.
I  Cutting  about  navel,  >  from  emitting  flatus.

■  Cutting  and  pinching  in  abdomen;  griping  before  stool.

■  Pressing,  spasmodic,  contracting, colicky  pains;  > by

green  stools.
'1  I  Colic,  followed  by  leucorrhoea.
I  Great  heaviness  in  bloated  abdomen.

■  Pressing  towards  pelvis,  as  if  menses  would  come  on,  with

cutting  in  abdomen.

■  Abdomen excessively distended; profuse emission of

flatus,  with  relief

■  Violent  audible  rumbling,  gurgling,  and  moving  back

and  forth,  with  fine  cutting  in  abdomen  all  day.
■Affection  of  1.  abdominal  ring;  inguinal  hernia.
^'^  Stool  and  Rectum.  'Stools:  green,  like  scum  on  a  frog
pond  ;  sour,  frothy ;  with  white,  floating  lumps,  like  tal-
low; bloody,  mucous;  green,  mucous;  greenish  yellow ;
brown,  fluid  ;  green  and  frothy;  of  a  liver  colored  fluid ;
followed  by  tenesmus  and  burning;  of  greenish  water,
with  great  distension  of  abdomen.

■  The  bloody  mucus is  found  mixed  with  green,  watery

stool,  sinking  to  bottom  of  vessel  and  adhering  there;
but  the  watery  stool  occurs  alone.  ^Dysentery.  ^Infan-
tile diarrhoea.

■  Lienteria  of  sucklings  ;  milk  passes  undigested.

■  Diarrhoea,  with violent  cutting  colic and  pressure,  as

many  as  seven  or  eight  times  a  day,  for  eight  days.

■  ■Griping  and  rumbling  in  whole  abdomen,  followed  by

diarrhoea,  thin  and  green,  without  tenesmus.

■  ■Diarrhoea;  preceded  by cutting  colic;  much  wind  in

bowels.
I  I  Green,  watery  diarrhoea  regularly  every  three  weeks.

■  Watery,  yellowish  brown  diarrhoea,  containing  white  pnr-

ticles,  looking  as  if  chopped  up;  vomiting  of  mucus;
extreme  and  rapid  emaciation.
■Stools  off'ensive  and  watery,  containing  floating  masses
of  green  scum;  some  straining,  and  during  stool  child
did  not  wish  to  be  touched. ^Infantile  diarrhoea.


227  xMAGiVESIA  CARBONICA.

llSour  eructations;  whole  child  smells  sour;  great  thirst,
especially  evenings. ^Cholera  infantum.

■  Diarrhoea  of  young  children;  milk  causes  pain  in  stom-

ach, is  rejected,  or  passes  bowels  undigested;  stools
green,  sour  smelling;  colicky  pains.

I  I  Constant,  sour,  rather  whitish,  water}^  diarrhoea.  ^In-
fantile remittent  fever.

I  I  Stool  only  every  second  day.

1  Costive;  frequent,  ineffectual  urging,  with  small  stools,
or  only  flatus;  stitches  in  anus;  stool  hard  as  a  stone;
frequent  effort  to  pass  a  natural  looking  stool ;  stitches
in  anus  and  rectum.

■  Before  stool:  colic;  cutting  and  pinching  in  abdomen;

general  heat;  rumbling;  emission  of  flatus.

■  During  stool:  colic;  urging;  tenesmus.

■  After  stool:  tenesmus;  burning  at  anus.

■  Woke  about  4  a.m.  with  intolerable  pain  in  rectum,  as  if

pierced  with  needles.

■  Ascarides  and  lumbrici.

I  I  Always  <  after  walking  some  distance,  sufferings  being
i^roportionate  to  extent  of  walk; prickings  in  rectum
after  walking. ^Ascarides.
^^  Urinary  Organs. ■Urine:  increased,  pale,  watery  or  green;
with  white  sediment.

■  Involuntary  urination  while  walking  or  rising  from  a  seat.

■  Burning,  smarting  during  urination.

^^  Male  Sexual  Organs.  ■Sexual  desire  diminished;  erec-
tions wanting.

■  Prostatic  fluid  so  easily  discharged  that  even  emission

of  flatus  causes  it.

■  Inguinal  and  scrotal  hernia.

^^  Female  Sexual  Organs.  ■Menses:  late,  scanty;  stop  in
afternoon;  flow  acrid,  dark,  pitchlike;  profuse  and  too
early,  flowing  more  at  night  and  at  first  on  rising,  also
between  uterine  pains;  blood  thick,  dark,  glutinous,
like  pitch,  difficult  to  wash  off".

■  Before  menses:  coryza  and  obstructed  nostrils,  sore  throat,

laborlike  pains,  cutting  colic,  backache,  weakness,  chil-
liness.

■  At  commencement  of  menses,  heavy  headache,  coryza,

pale  face,  drawing  pain  in  sides  and  great  lassitude.

■  During  menses: violent  pains  in  abdomen;  weakness,

chilliness,  headache,  paleness  of  face,  pain  in  small  of
back,  or  spasmodic,  pressing  pain  in  abdomen.

■  ■Menses  flow  more  profusely  during  night,  with  dragging

pains;  >  on  pressing  on  abdomen  and  on  stooping.

■  Menses  lessen  or  cease  to  flow  in  afternoon.

■  Flow  dark,  very  profuse,  but  much  more  profuse  during


MAGNESIA  CARBONICA.  228.

night  and  at  first  rising  than  during  day;  on  rising  in
morning,  contractive  pain  in  abdomen,  and  sharp  up-
ward stitches  in  rectum,  followed  by  discharge  of  coag-
ula  from  vagina.

iMilk  always  causes  distress  in  stomach  and  sour  risings;
subject  to  frequent  diarrhoea. ^Metrorrhagia.

iLeucorrhoea:  acrid,  white,  mucous,  preceded  by  colic;
watery  after  menses;  thin,  scanty,  with  pinching  around
navel;  smarting  in  afternoon,  when  walking  or  sitting.

■  Frequent  itching  of  pudendum.

"*  Pregnancy.  Parturition.  Lactation,  a  b  Toothache  dur-
ing pregnancy,  more  during  night.
iDuring  pregnancy:  constant  nausea,  no  vomiting;  sour
taste.and  sour  vomiting ;  appetite  for  certain  kinds  of
food ;  earthy  color  of  face ;  tendency  to  cry ;  stitches  in.
1.  side  under  short  ribs;  all  symptoms  <  every  third
week  ;  much  roughness,  or  stinging,  or  burning  in  throat,,
with  desire  to  vomit ;  eructations  tasting  of  rotten  eggs.

-^  Voice  and  Larynx. Trachea  and  Bronchia, i Sudden
stammering ;  occasional  aphasia.

"^  Cough. iCough: spasmodic,  at  night; from  tickling  in

larynx ;  sputum,  mornings  and  during  day,  yellow,  thin

or  tough  mucus,  or  dark  blood,  tasting saltish ;  <  in.

evening  until  after  midnight.

I  Fits  of spasmodic cough at night in persons much

troubled  with  ascarides.
I  Expectoration  of  soft  tubercles  big  as  a  pea  and  very
offensive  in  smell.

"^  Inner  Chest  and  Lungs, l Oppression  of  chest,  with  sen-
sation of  constriction.

■  Soreness  in  chest  and  region  of  heart;  stitches.

I  I  Stitch  from  without  inward  in  prsecordial  region.
^'^  Neck  and  Back, l Stiffness  in  neck.

iPain  in  back  and  small  of  back  at  night,  as  if  broken.

iSudden,  violent,  concussive,  tearing,  stitching  pain  in
coccygeal  region  as  if  spine  was  bent  back.
^^  Upper  Limbs. iMuch  pain  in  head' and  r.  shoulder;  she
can  scarcely  raise  r.  arm.

I  Pain  as  from  dislocation  of  shoulder  joint  when  mov-
ing it.

iRheumatic  pain  in  shoulders  (at  night),  with  tingling
down  to  fingers ;  pain  prevents  least  movement.

■  Lameness  of r.  arm,  with pain in shoulder, without

swelling  or  soreness.
Tubercle  on  wrist  pouring  out  clear  water  when  pressed.

■  Chapping  of  skin  of  hands.

Spreading,  corroding,  stinging  vesicles  on  hands  and
fingers.


-229  MAGNESIA  CARBONICA.

I  Red,  inflammator}^  swelling  of  fingers.
I  I  Heat  of  fingers  (in  fever).
'"  Lower  Limbs, i  Restlessness  in  legs.

•  Drawing  pains  in  legs  and  feet.

I  Itching  of  buttocks,  with  red  spots  after  scratching.

I  Pains  around  1.  knee,  like  something  tight;  1.  calf  hard;
hard  swelling  in  hollow  of  knee;  cannot  put  1.  foot  to
ground  when  walking,  but  only  when  standing,  ^ilffec-
tion  of  knee.

■  Painful  swelling  in  bend,  of  knee.

I  Knees  painful  in  walking,  feet  when  lying  in  bed.
I  Cramp  in  calves  (at  night).
I  Burning  spot  on  tibia.
I  I  Oedema  of  feet  up  to  calves.
I  I  Bloodboils  on  lower  legs.
^^  Limbs  in  General, i Rheumatic  pains  in  limbs.

•  Restlessness  in  limbs,  in  evening  after  sitting  long.

^^  Rest. Position. Motion. Rest: during,  pain  in  malar
bone  insupportable ;  pains  insupportable.

Lying  down  :  pain  in  1.  hypochondriac  region  <  ;  external
coldness.

Lying  in  bed  :  feet  painful.

Must  support  back  with  hands  and  get  up  and  walk  about:
pain  in  1.  hypochondriac  regioif.

Head  thrown  back,  or  leg  drawn  up,  1.  leg  perfectly  straight.

Sitting:  smarting  leucorrhoea ;  restlessness  in  limbs ;  sen-
sation of  being  tired.

Kneeling:  vertigo.

Standing:  vertigo;  frequent  sudden  falling,  with  conscious-
ness; epileptic  attacks.

Rising  from  seat:  involuntary  urination.

Can  scarcely  raise  r.  arm :  pain  in  shoulder.

Least  movement  impossible :  pain  from  shoulder  to  fingers.

Motion  :*of  shoulder  joint,  pain  as  from  dislocation.

After  a  walk:  heaviness  and  dizziness  of  head  >.

Walking:  frequent  sudden  falling,  with  consciousness;
pains  <;  prickings  in  rectum;  involuntar}''  urination;
smarting  leucorrhoea ;  cannot  put  1.  foot  to  ground ;  knees
painful;  tires  much.

Must  walk  floor:  neuralgia  facialis.

Driving  from  one  place  to  another:  tearing  pain  in  malar
bone.

Obliged  to  run  from  room  to  room  and  wag  head  all  night
on  account  of  pain  in  face.
^^ Nerves. H Pains:  neuralgic,  lightninglike,  <  1.  side;  in-
supportable during  repose,  must  get  up  and  walk  about.

I  Spasms.

■  Epileptic attacks; while standing  or  walking,  he  fre-

quently falls  down  suddenly,  with  consciousness.


MAGNESIA  CARBONICA.  230

I  Head  thrown  back,  or  leg  drawn  up,  1.  leg  perfectly

straight;  seems  sore  and  cries  about  being  moved;
lumbar  vertebrae  sensitive  to  touch ;  has  no  power  over  1.
leg  and  but  little  strength  in  1.  hand;  will  eat  nothing
but  meat,  nor  drink  anything  but  soup  made  of  meat ;
stools  large,  crumbling,  infrequent. ^Nervous  affection,

I I  Sensation  of  being  tired,  especially  in  feet  and  when  sit-
ting ;  aching,  restless.

I A  short  walk  tires  much.

iFlaccidity,  laxness  of  body.

B I  Disposed  to  neuralgia.
^^  Sleep. iSleepiness  during  day.

■  Sleeplessness,  from  nightly  oppression  in  abdomen.

Restless  sleep  with  frequent  waking.

llUnrefreshing  sleep,  more  tired  in  morning  than  when
lying  down  in  evening.

I  I  Awakes  about  2  to  3  a.m.,  and  cannot  fall  asleep  again.

I  Dreams:  anxious,  with  starts  and  crying  out  in  sleep;  of
dead  persons;  of  fire;  of  thieves.
^^  Time. 2  to  3  a.m.  :  awakes  and  cannot  fall  asleep  again.

4  A.M.:  woke  with  intolerable  pain  in  rectum.

Morning:  after  rising,  vertigo;  heaviness  and  dizziness  in
head;  lancinating  headache;  agglutination  of  lids;  bleed-
ing from  nose;  dryness  of  mouth;  frequent  rising  of
mucus  in  throat.

Morning:  on  rising,  contractive  pain  in  abdomen;  sputum
yellow,  thin,  or  tough  mucus,  or  dark  blood;  more  tired
than  in  evening.

Day:  menstrual  flow  less;  sputum  yellow,  thin  or  tough
mucus,  or  dark  blood;  sleepiness.

All  day:  anxious,  with  perspiration;  trembling,  anguish,
fear;  toothache  slight;  fine  cutting  in  abdomen.

Afternoon:  toothache  begins;  menses  stop;  smarting  leu-
corrhoea;  heat  <.

Evening:  vertigo,  as  if  about  to  faint;  toothache  com-
mences; thirst  for  water;  cough  <  until  after  midnight;
restlessness  in  limbs  after  sitting  long;  external  coldness.

1  to  10  P.M. :  violent,  darting  headache.

Night:  wakened  by  obstruction  of  nose;  toothache  <;  in-
crease of  saliva  <  ;  dryness  of  mouth;  thirst  for  water;
pain  in  1.  hypochondriac  region;  menses  flow  more;
spasmodic  cough;  pain  in  back  and  small  of  back;  rheu-
matic pain  in  shoulders ;  cramps  in  calves.

12  P.M.  till  morning:  sweat,  with  thirst.
^^  Temperature  and  Weather. Eating  warm  food  :  anxious
and  warm  through  whole  body.

Warmth  of  bed:  toothache  <.

Going  to  bed: >  anxiety.


231  MAGNESIA  CARBONICA.

Great  aversion  to  uncovering.

Wet  and  rainy  weather :  itching  of  scalp.

Change  of  temperature :  neuralgia  facialis  <.

Draft:  neuralgia  facialis  <.

Cold  water:  >  toothache  for  a  short  time;  toothache  <.

Cold :  toothache  < .
^•^ Fever. I Chill  and  chilliness:  with external coldness in
evening  and  after  lying  down,  slowly  going  off,  followed
by  heat;  in  bed  as  if  dashed  with  cold  water ;  great
aversion  to  uncovering.

Chill:  running  down  back;  >  by  out  door  exercise.

1 1  Great  internal  heat,  at  night,  restless,  aversion  to  un-
covering.

iHeat:  one  (r.)  sided;  mostly  in  forenoon,  often  with
sweat  on  head.

I  I  Redness,  burning  and  thirst  for  half  an  hour,  often  with
sweat  on  head.

■Sweat:  greasy,  oily,  stains  yellow;  difficult  to  wash  off;
sour,  putrid  smelling.

■  Sweat,  with  thirst,  after  12  p.m.  till  morning.
*^  Attacks,  Periodicity. Seven  or  eight  times  a  day  for  eight
days :  diarrhoea  and  colic.

Nightly :  tearing,  digging  and  boring  in  malar  bone  ;  op-
pression in  abdomen.

Every  second  day :  stool.

For  one  week  :  sleeplessness.

Every  three  weeks :  green  watery  diarrhoea ;  all  symptoms  <.

1  I  All  the  symptoms  aggravated  every  third  week.
*^  Locality  and  Direction.  Right :  hard  nodosity  on  temple ;
bleeding  from  nose  <r.  side;  whizzing,  buzzing,  flutter-
ing in  ear;  severe  boring  in  side  of  lower  jaw ;  tearing
pain  in  side  of  face;  several  hollow  teeth  on  side;  tooth-
ache in  upper  and  lower  jaw;  much  pain  in  shoulder;
lameness  of  arm ;  heat  on  side.

Left:  neuralgia  facialis;  pain  from  teeth  to  temple;  in-
supportable pain  in  hypochondriac  region ;  affection  of
abdominal  ring;  stitches  in  side  under  short  ribs ;  pains
around  knee;  calf  hard;  cannot  put  foot  to  ground;
neuralgic  pains  <  on  side ;  has  no  power  over  leg  and
but  little  strength  in  hand.

From  without  inward  :  stitch  in  prsecordial  region.
^  Sensations.  As  if  everything  was  turning  around ;  as  if
about  to  faint;  as  if  hair  was  pulled  ;  as  if  white  of  egg
had  dried  on  face;  teeth  as  if  too  long;  throat  as  if
scraped  by  an  awn;  as  if  menses  would  come  on;  par-
ticles of  diarrhoea  look  as  if  chopped  up;  as  if  rectum
was  pierced  with  needles;  back  as  if  broken;  as  if  spine
was  bent  back;  shoulder  as  if  dislocated;  as  of  some-
thing tight  around  knee;  as  if  dashed  with  cold  water.


MAGNESIA  CARBONIOA.  232

Pain:  on  top  of  head;  in  face;  over  umbilicus;  in  back';

in  small  of  back;  in  shoulder  joint;  in  shoulder;  around

1.  knee.
Much  pain:  in  head  and  r.  shoulder.
Intolerable  pain :  in  rectum.
Insupportable  pain  :  in  1.  hypochondriac  region,  through

to  back.
Insupportable  tearing  pain :  generally  from  a  hollow  tooth,

through  face  into  head  and  eye.
Violent  pain :  in  abdomen.
Violent,  darting  pain :  in  head.
Lightninglike  shooting:  in  1.  side  of  face.
Lancinating:  in  head.
Cutting :  about  navel ;  in  abdomen.
Pinching,  griping:  in  abdomen.
Tearing,  digging  and  boring:  in  malar  bones.
Violent,  concussive,  tearing,  stitching  pain:  in coccygeal

region.
Burning,  tearing,  drawing,  twitching  or  great  ulcerative

pain  :  in  teeth.
Burning,  throbbing  pains :  in  malar  bone  and  ear.
Beating :  in  teeth.
Pulsating  pain  :  in  malar  bones.
Spasmodic  pain  :  in  abdomen.
Ulcerative  pain  :  in  stomach.
Stitches :  in  anus ;  in  rectum ;  in  1.  side  under  short  ribs ;

in  chest  and  region  of  heart.
Stitch  :  in  prsecordial  region.

Pressing,  spasmodic,  contractive,  colicky pains: in ab-
domen.
Cramp :  in  calves.
Constrictive  pain  :  in  stomach.
Aching  and  contractive  pain  :  in  stomach.
Laborlike  pains :  before  menses.
Dragging  pain :  in  abdomen.
Drawing  pain  :  in  sides;  in  legs  and  feet.
Rheumatic  pain  :  in  shoulders ;  in  limbs.
Pressive  pain  :  in  forehead  ;  in  nose.
Sticking :  in  head.
Burning:  of  eyes;  in  all  teeth  on  r.  side;  in  throat  and

palate;  at  anus;  in  spot  on  tibia.
Burning,  smarting:  during  urination.
Stinging :  of  eyes  ;  in  teeth ;  in  throat.
Great  soreness :  in  ears.

Soreness :  of  throat ;  in  chest  and  region  of  heart.
Bruised  sensation  :  of  vertex.
Heat :  in  head  and  hands.
Pulsating :  in  forehead.


233  MAGNESIA  CARBONICA.

Throbbing  witli  stitches  :  in  teeth.
Twitching:  in  fingers.
Hardness  with  stitches :  in  liepatic  region.
Drawing  out  sensation :  in  ear.
Pressure  :  in  forehead  ;  in  eyes  ;  towards  pelvis.
Tension :  on  face.
Constriction :  of  chest.
Emptiness  and  qualmishness :  in  stomach.
Anxious  feeling :  in  whole  body,  especially  in  head.
Dulness:  of  head.
Heaviness :  in  head  ;  in  abdomen.
Oppression :  of  chest.
Dizziness :  in  head.

Dryness :  of  eyes  ;  of  mouth ;  of  throat ;  of  fauces.
Hot  sensation  :  in  mouth.
Prickings :  in  rectum.
Stiffness :  of  muscles  of  neck  and  throat.
Ringing :  in  ears.

Whizzing,  buzzing,  fluttering  :  in  ear.
Tired  sensation  :  in  feet.
Lameness :  of  r.  arm.
Restlessness :  in  limbs.
Tickling:  in  larynx.
Tingling  :  down  to  fingers.
Violent  itching :  over  whole  body.
Itching:  of  scalp  ;  of  pudendum  ;  of  buttocks.
"  Tissues. •  Weakened  condition  of  muscular  structures ;  flac-
cidity;  laxness;  hernia.
I  Rheumatic  affection  of  groups  of  muscles  and  of  joints.
Engorged  glands;  scrofulosis.

■  Spasmodic  affections  of  stomach  and  intestines,  increased

secretion  from  mucous  membranes,  and  glands  of  stom-
ach and  intestines.

■  Defective  digestion;  emaciation,  swelling  of  glands,  ab-

domen heavy  and  bloated.  ^Atrophy  of  children.
*^  Touch.  Passive  Motion.  Injuries.  Touch :  neuralgia
facialis  <;  teeth  extremely  sensitive  ;  temple  sensitive;
causes  ulcerative  pain  in  teeth  ;  causes  bleeding  of  ves-
icles on  gums,  cheeks,  tongue,  lips  and  palate;  cannot
bear  it  when  at  stool ;  lumbar  vertebne  sensitive.

Hold  painful  side  of  face: obliged  to.

Pressure:  stomach  very  sensitive:  over  umbilicus  causes
pain;  on  abdomen  menstrual  flow  >  ;  on  tubercle  on
wrist  causes  pouring  out  of  water  from  it.

Scratching:  causes  red  spots  on  buttocks;  lessens  itching
of  skin.

Riding  in  a  carriage :  toothache;  nausea.
■^^Skin. iSour  smell  of  whole  body.


MAGNESIA  CARBONICA.  234

I  I  Violent  itching  over  whole  body.

lltching  and  dryness  of  skin;  itching  >  by  scratching.

I  I  Large  stinging  nodosities  under  skin.

I  Painful,  small,  red  herpes,  scaling  off.

■  Spreading  blisters.

■Small  bloodboils  (lower  legs)  with  headache  and  yellow
tongue.
''^Stages  of  Life,  Constitution, n Adapted  to  persons,  es-
pecially children,  of  irritable  disposition,  nervous  tem-
perament; lax  fibre  ;  sour  smell.

Child,  set.  16  mos.,  suffering  three  weeks;  diarrhoea.

Boy,  £et.  4;  ascarides.

Boy,  £et.  8,  dark  complexion,  large  head  and  very  small
limbs;  nervous  affection.

Girl,  £et.  11; scrofulous  inflammation  of  eyes.

Girl,  set.  22;  toothache.

Woman,  set.  24,  blonde,  sanguine  temperament,  excitable;
toothache.

Young  woman,  suffering  four  months;  affection  of  knee.

Woman,  set.  27,  fair  and  stout,  married  six  years,  but
never  pregnant,  menstruation  normal  before  marriage,
irregular  soon  after,  appearing  at  intervals  of  three  or
four  months,  and  continuing  for  twelve  to  sixteen
weeks; menorrhagia.

Man,  set.  32,  good  health,  father  had  been  operated  for
cataract  on  both  eyes  ; lenticular  cataract.
^®  Relations. Antidoted  by :  Arsen.,Chamom.  (neuralgia);  Merc,
sol.,  Nux  vom.,  Pulsat.,  Rheum  (abdominal  troubles).

It  antidotes :  Acet.  acid.
sCompatible: Caustic,  Phosphor.,  Pulsat.,  Sepia,  Sulphur.

Complementary : Chamom.

Compare:  Aloes.,  Ant.  crud.  (headache  from  smoking),  Calc.
ost.,  Coloc.  (cutting,  griping,  >  after  stool),  Graphit.,  Ipec.
(nausea  and  grass  green  stools),  Lycop.,  Nitr.  ac,  Nux
mosch.,  Silica.


235  MAGNESIA  MURIATICA.

MAGNESIA  MURIATICA.

Magnesium  Chloride.  Mg  CI.

Introduced  by  Hahnemann,  proved  by  himself,  Hartlaub  and  Jahr  (Chroni-
sche  Krankheiten),  by  Schreter  (Hartlaub  and  Trinks'  Annalen,  vol.  4,  p.  134)
and  by  Venning  (Hartlaub  and  Trinks'  Ai'zneimittellehre,  vol.  3,  p.  237).

Clinical  Authorities.  —  Headaches,  Clifton,  Horn.  Rev.,  vol.  21,  p.  422;
Cephalalgia,  Stens,  Kane's  Rec,  1874,  p.  258 ;  Tinea  ciliaris,  Cooper,  Eaue's  Rec,
1874,  p.  68 ;  Affection  of  nose,  Knorre,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  1,  p.  397  ;  Ozcena,  Clif-
ton, Hom.  Rev.,  vol.  21,  p.  422;  Gastric  affection,  Kunkel,  Allg.  Hom.  Ztg.,  vol.
106,  p.  156;  Cardialgia,  Kunkel,  Allg.  Hom.  Ztg.,  vol.  106,  p.  157;  Hirschel,
Raue's  Rec,  1870,  p.  207 ;  Affection  of  stomach,  Hofrichter,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  5,
p.  272;  Affections  of  liver,  Hahnemann,  Schwarze,  Lobethal,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf,  vol.  1,
p.  698;  (four  cases)  Clifton,  Hom.  Rev.,  vol.  21,  pp.  531,  532,  533;  Kunkel,  Allg.
Hom.  Ztg.,  vol.  Ill,  p.  10;  Hardness  of  ahclmnen,  Hahnemann,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf,
vol.  1,  p.  698;  Diarrhoea  (four  cases),  Pfander,  Allg.  Hom.  Ztg.,  vol.  108,  p.  45;
Constipation,  Martin,  Trans.  Hom.  Med.  Soc.  Pa.,  1882,  p.  204 ;  Burt,  Raue's  Rec,
1872,  p.  151;  Clarke,  Allg.  Hom.  Ztg.,  vol.  113,  p.  187;  Constipation  of  children,
Clifl^on,  Hom.  Rev.,  vol.  21,  p.  422  ;  Constipation  and  cough,  Lehmann,  Hom.  Clin.,
vol.  3,  p.  107;  Rane's  Rec,  1871,  p.  120;  Straining  at  urination,  Dunham,  Hom.
Clin.,  vol.  1,  p.  164  ;  Nocturnal  emissions,  Clifton,  Hom.  Rev.,  vol.  21,  p.  423 ;  Scir-
rhous induration  of  os  uteri,  Schweikert,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  2,  p.  356  ;  Menstrual
disturbances,  Hartmann,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf,  vol.  2,  p.  287;  LeueorrhKa,  Kunkel,  Allg.
Hom.  Ztg.,  vol.  106,  p.  173;  Nausea  during  pregnancy,  Clifton,  Hom.  Rev.,  vol.  21,
p.  423;  Whooping  cough,  ^c}ivQ&n,'R\ick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  3,  p.  82  ;  B.,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf,
vol.  5,  p.  724;  Palpitation  of  heart,  Hesse,  Allg.  Hom.  Ztg.,  vol.  113,  p.  139.

'  Mind. Disinclined  to  talk,  prefers  solitude.
Tearful,  inclined  to  weep ;  sad  and  homesick.
Anxious  in  room,  >  in  open  air.
Worse  from  mental  exertion.
Excited;  unhappy;  fitful;  emotional.
While  reading,  felt as  if  some  one  was  reading  after  her

and  she  must  read  faster  and  faster.
"  Sensorium. iSensation  of  numbness  in  forehead,  head  feels

dull ;  <  in  morning  when  awaking  and  when  lying;  >

from  exercising  in  open  air  and  wrapping  up  head.
I  Congestion  of  blood  to  head,  with  painful  undulation  and

whizzing,  as  of  boiling  water  on  side  upon  which  one

rests.
iHeaviness  in  head,  reeling,  as  if  one  would  fall.
•  Vertigo:  in  morning,  on  rising;  during  dinner;  going

off  in  open  air.


MAGNESIA  MURIATICA.  236

^  Inner  Head,  n  Every  six  weeks,  pain  in  forehead  and
around  eyes;  feels  as  if  head  would  burst;  must  lie  down;
<  from  motion  and  in  fresh  air ;  >  from  strong  press-
ure and  wrapping  up  head;  anorexia;  bitter  taste;
eructations;  waterbrash;  region  of  stomach  and  liver
sensitive  to  pressure ;  liver  hard  and  enlarged ;  cannot
lie  on  r.  side;  has  stool  only  after  injections;  passes
small,  yellowish  grey  balls ;  bilious  look  to  urine,  with
much  mucus;  tongue  thick  coated,  tip  and  edges  clear;
great  thirst;  no  fever. ^Cephalalgia.

■  Compressive  sensation  in  head,  from  both  sides,  with  a

hot  feeling,  and  with  beating  in  forehead  when  pressing
upon  it.

■  Tearing  and  stitches  in  temples,  with  great  sensitiveness

of  vertex,  as  if  hair  was  raised  by  pulling.

■  Griping,  raging,  in  temples,  with  a  feeling  as  if  he  would

become  dizzy  and  lose  consciousness,  >  on  pressing
head,  in  evening  after  lying  down.

■  Sharp  sticking  and  tearing  in  r.  side  of  head,  extending

to  eye,  which  she  was  obliged  to  press  together.

■  Headache,  >  from  tying  a  bandage  tight  around  head,

or  wrapping  up  head.
*  Outer  Head, i  i  Tendency  of  head  to  sweat.

I  I  Nodosities  on  occiput,  tearing,  painful  to  touch.
^  Sight  and  Eyes. ■When  looking  into  light,  lachrymation

and  burning  of  eyes.

■  Yellow  color  of  scleroticse.

■  Eyes  inflamed,  violent  burning  and  redness  of  scleroticee.
I  I  Nightly  agglutination  of  lids.

■  Tinea  ciliaris, accompanied  by  a  pimply  eruption on

face,  comes  and  goes ;  <  after  supper  and  in  a  warm
room,  and  on  women  before  menses.
^  Hearing  and  Ears. ■  Deafness,  as  if  something  was  lying
before  ear.

■  Pulsation  in  ears.

■  Itching  of  old  herpes  behind  ears.

''Smell  and  Nose. ■Distressing  dryness  of  nose.

1  I  Violent  coryza,  at one  time  stopped,  at  another  fluent,
dulness  of  head  and  complete  loss  of  taste  and  smell.

■  Coryza;  yellow,  fetid  mucus,  or  acrid,  corrosive  water;

nose  obstructed  at  night.

■  Ulceration  of  edges  of  nostrils;  picks  afi'ected  parts;  sweat

about  head  and  feet. ^Ozsena.

■  Rawness  of  inner  surface  of  alse  nasi and of  septum

narium;  yellow  scurfs  in  nose;  watery,  acrid,  mucous
discharge,  corroding  upper  lip ;  obstruction  of  nose ;
sore  pain  and  burning  •<  from  deep  breathing,  sneezing
or  touch; <  in  morning;  face  pale,  yellowish.

■  Redness  and  swelling:  of  nose  or  of  alse.


237  MAGNESIA  MURIATICA.

^  Upper  Face, l Pale,  yellowish,  earthy  complexion;  suffer-
ing, sickly  look.
I  Severe  cramp  pains  in  bones  of  face ;  prosopalgia.

■  Eruptions,  pimples  and  blotches  on  face  and  forehead;

<  nights,  in  warm  room,  and  before  menses.
®  Lower  Face, i Chapped  lips.

■  Large  vesicles  on  margin  of  vermillion  border  of  lower

lip,  itching,  afterwards  burning.
^•^  Teeth  and  Gums. iToothache  almost  insupportable  when
food  touches  teeth.
I  1  Upper  incisors  seem  too  long  and  very  sensitive.

■  Painful  swelling  and  easy  bleeding  of  gums.

■  Slow  dentition,  with  distended  abdomen  and  constipation.
"  Taste  and  Tongue. ■Tongue  feels  burnt,  mouth  scalded.

■  Phagades  on  tongue,  with  violent  burning.

■  Tongue  coated  white  early  in  morning;  or  tip  and  edges

clean,  large,  flabby  and  yellow. ^Induration  of  liver.
^^  Inner  Mouth. ■Whole  inner  mouth  feels  as  if  scalded.

■  Sensation  of  roughness  on  inner  side  of  upper  lip  when

touching  it  with  tongue.

■  Dryness  of  mouth  and  tongue  without  thirst.

■  Accumulation  of  water  in  mouth.

■  Continual  rising  of  white  froth  into  mouth.

13  Throat. ■  Dryness  and  roughness  in  throat,  hoarse  voice.

■  Rising  of  ball  from  stomach  to  throat,  >  by  eructation.

■  Difficult  hawking  of  thick,  tough  (blood  mixed)  mucus.
^*  Appetite, Thirst. Desires, Aversions. ■Hunger,  but

knows  not  for  what;  ravenous,  followed  by  nausea;  in-
clination to  nibble;  desire for  sweets;  for  vegetables;

<  from  salt  things.
Loss  of  appetite.
Violent  thirst  (3  a.m.).

'^  Hiccough,  Belching,  Nausea  and  Vomiting.  "Hiccough:
during  and  after  dinner,  so  severe  as  to  cause  vomiting;
region  of  stomach  painful,  particularly  to  pressure.

■  Regurgitation  while  w^alking.

■  Eructations:  tasting  like  onions ;  like  rotten  eggs ;  relieve

faintness  and  nausea,  at  dinner.
■Waterbrash;  stomach  and  liver  sensitive.
I  I  Water  rises  from  stomach  into  mouth,  with  nausea.

■  Nausea:  in  morning,  after  rising;  with  accumulation  of

water  in  mouth  ;  and  faintness,  succeeded  by  coldness
and  weakness  in  stomach.
'^  Scrobiculum  and  Stomach. ■Weakness,  as  if  emanating
from  stomach.

■  Oppression  and  throbbing  in  pit  of  stomach.

■  ■Children  are  unable  to  digest  milk,  it  causes  pain  in

stomach  and  passes  undigested. ^Dentition.


18


MAGNESIA  MURIATICA.  238

I  Eroding  pain  in  stomach,  going  off  after  eating  and  com-
ing on  again  at  termination  of  digestion;  tongue  clean,
too  red. ^Cardialgia.

She  is  roused  from  sleep  at  one  o'clock  at  night  by  a  pain
in  stomach  as  if  it  was  cut  to  pieces ;  rising  into  throat
of  a  ball,  with  sufibcating  arrest  of  breathing,  and  toss-
ing about  in  bed  and  on  floor  for  two  hours,  at  last  >
by  eructation.

■  Severe  cardialgia;  attacks  vary  in  duration;  pains  press-

ing, disappear  while  eating  and  reappear  about  an  hour
afterwards ;  palpitation,  particularly  when  sitting,  >  by
getting  up  and  walking  about  ;  in  sleeping  must  lie  on
1.  side;  on  awaking  and  for  about  an  hour  after  break-
fast feels  quite  well,  then  cardialgia  sets  in  and  occurs
several  times  during  day  ;  stool  hard  like  sheep  dung;
leucorrhoea  before  menses  ;  menses  fourteen  days  late.

■  Severe  itching  and  burning  in  nose,  lower  part  of  which

is  red  and  sensitive;  daily  attacks  of  headache,  pain  in
forehead,  >  from  motion,  particularly  in  open  air;  hor-
ripilations; loss  of  appetite,  constant  satiety;  fat  food
cannot  be  tolerated;  tongue  coated;  constipation.
Hypochondria.  1 1  Pressing  pain  in  liver,  when  walking  and
touching  it,  <  lying  on  r.  side,  liver  hard  and  enlarged.

■  Can  lie  only  on  back  or  affected  side,  in  any  other  posi-
tion pain  in  liver  <;  after  eating,  pain,  flatulency,  op-
pression of  chest;  dirty,  yellow  tongue;  grey,  hard,  dif-
ficult stool,  every  three  or  four  days;  pulse  small,  weak,
slow;  debility;  apprehensive,  lachrymose.  ^Affection
of  liver.

■  Weight  in  hj^pochondriac  region  ;  cannot  lie  on  1.  side  on
account  of  sensation  as  of  something  dragging  over  to
that  side. ^Affection  of  liver.

■  Hemorrhoids;  much  irritation  about  anus;  stools  knotty
and  slimy;  enlargement  and  tenderness  of  r.  ovary;
dragging  down  pain  from  r.  ovary  to  thigh.  ^Affection
of  liver.

■  Stools  large  and  lumpy,  covered  with  slimy  mucus  of
various  colors,  from  light  yellow  to  green,  and  dark
green  or  leaden ;  appetite  irregular ;  pains  in  epigastric
region  about  an  hour  before  food;  yellowish  hue  of
face ;  abdomen  large ;  bowels  move  once  a  week.
^Affection  of  liver.

■  Chronic  induration  of  liver,  pressive  pain  extending  to
back  and  stomach;  face  dark  yellow;  tongue  dirty,  yel-
lowish; bowels  distended  and  hard,  with  pressure  and
heaviness;  stool  hard,  grey;  urine  turbid;  dyspnoea;
palpitation;  oedema  of  feet  up  to  calves  of  legs;  weak,
emaciated ;  fearful,  easily  frightened. <9Affection  of  liver.


239  MAGNESIA  MURIATICA.

■  Attacks  of  gastralgia every  evening;  tenderness  in  hypo-

gastric region;  anteversion  of  uterus;  enlargement  of
liver;  stools  very  dark,  occurring  once  in  four  days;
heavy  weight  in  r.  hypochondrium,  could  not  rest  on  r.
side. ^Derangement  of  liver.

I  Recurring  attacks  of  indigestion,  biliousness,  constipa-
tion, with  large,  hard  motions  like  balls  and  inability
to  lie  on  r.  side;  catamenia  too  profuse,  often  and  long,
with  excessive  uterine  pains ;  disposed  to  eat  frequently,
on  account  of  gnawing  at  pit  of  stomach,  >  by  small
quantity  of  food,  but  made  <  by  more.  ^Enlargement
and  congestion  (induration)  of  liver.

I  Dull,  aching,  tensive  pain  in  hypochondriac  region,  go-
ing through  to  r.  scapula ;  inability  to  lie  on  r.  side,
doing  so  causes  more  pain ;  dyspnoea ;  irregular  action
of  heart,  sometimes  beating  loudly;  urine  scanty  and
high  colored,  slightly  albuminous;  feet  and  legs  oede-
matous;  epigastric  and  r.  hypochondriac  region  tender
to  touch;  colicky  pains  and  flatulency  in  abdomen;
stools  of  bullet  shaped  masses  every  three  or  four  days;
area  of  liver  dulness  greatly  increased  laterally  and
downward ;  free  edge  of  it  felt  extending  two  and  a
half  inches  below  ribs  and  bulging  outward,  but  feeling
hard. ^Enlargement  and  congestion  of  liver.

I  Hepatic  affections  with  tendency  to  hemorrhages  from
various  organs.

■  Marked  enlargement  of  liver,  accompanied  by  ascites.
^^  Abdomen, l Drawing  pain  in  abdomen  at  night.

■  Tearing  in  abdomen;  tearing  stitches  in  loins.

■  Cramps  in  abdomen.

■  Colic  in  evening,  extending  to  thighs,  followed  by  fluor

albus;  hysteria.

■  Colic  at  1  A.M.,  had  to  lie  crooked; could  not  endure

covering.

■  Chronic,  painful  hardness  of  r.  side  of  abdomen.

■  Distended  abdomen  with  constipation.

■  i\.bdomen  tense,  sore  as  if  bruised,  sensitive  to  touch.
I  I  Rumbling,  cutting,  pinching  in  abdomen.

■  Tingling,  stinging  in  abdominal  muscles.

■  Troubles  from  tapeworm.

^'^  Stool  and  Rectum.  ■  Diarrhoea:  of  mucus  and  blood;  in
evening  and  at  night;  pain  in  stomach;  great  chilli-
ness after  getting  into  bed ;  chronic  looseness.

■Since  parturition,  five  weeks  ago,  diarrhoea,  particularly
in  morning;  chilliness  during  stool;  loss  of  appetite;
rumbling  in  abdomen.

■Stools:  covered  with  mucus  and  blood;  greenish,  papes-
cent;  in  large,  hard  lumps ;  crumbling  at  verge  of  anus;


MAGNESIA  MURIATICA.  240

abdomen  distended;  hard,  knotty,  like  sheep  dung;  in-
sufficient, delayed ;  crumbling  at  verge  of  anus  and  seem
as  if  burnt.

I  I  She  was  obliged  to  hurry  to  stool,  which  was  crumbly
and  as  if  burnt,  with  sticking  pains  in  rectum,  followed
by  burning  in  anus.

I  I A  child,  set.  2,  for  several  months  diarrhoea  and  cough,
finally  constipation,  great  effort  and  pain  to  bring  forth
a  stool,  which  crumbles  to  f)ieces  as  soon  as  it  escapes
rectum.

1  I  Constipation  since  last  confinement, two  years  ago;  stools
large  and  in  hard  lumps;  bowels  movo  about  every
eight  days;  every  few  days  has  much  pain  and  distress
in  hypogastric  region;  pale  and  weak,  otherwise  well.

I  Poor,  puny,  rachitic  children,  with  enlargement  of  abdo-
men ;  liver  unduly  large ;  appetite  irregular,  fond  of
sweets;  stools  small,  hard,  dry,  passed  with  difficulty.
^Constipation.

■  Constipation  of  infants  during  dentition.

I  I  Absence  of  desire  for  stool;  atony  as  with  the  bladder.

I  Much  pressure  to  stool;  passage  scanty  or  only  flatus.
Before  stool:  painful  urging.

During  stool :  painful  urging  and  occasional  discharge  of
mucus;  pressure  wdth  scanty  passage  or  only  flatus;
burning  at  anus  and  pain  as  if  from  excoriation.

After  stool :  burning  at  anus,  shuddering  for  a  short  time.
^^  Urinary  Organs.  l Frequent  desire  to  urinate  day  and
night,  with  scanty  discharge.

I I  Urine  can  only  be  passed  by  bearing  down  with  abdomi-
nal muscles ;  atony  of  bladder.

I  Urine  passed  only  by  drops,  some  always  seem  to  remain.
I  Urine  pale  yellow,  followed  by  burning  in  urethra.

■  Numbness  of  urethra.

^"  Male Sexual Organs. ■  Frequent erections; early in
morning,  with  burning  in  penis.

■  After  an  embrace,  burning  pain  in  back.

■  Nocturnal  involuntary  emissions  with  or  without  dreams ;

scrotum  relaxed  and  loose  and  often  covered  with  per-
spiration; constipation;  indigestion;  biliousness;  itch-
ing at  anus.

■  Itching  on  genitals  and  scrotum,  extending  as  far  as  anus.

■  Scrotum  relaxed.

^^  Female  Sexual  Organs. ■Bearing  down  in  ovarian  region.
I  I  Scirrhous  indurations  of  os  uteri.

■  Uterine  diseases  complicated  with  hysterical  complaints.

■  Uterine  spasms  extend  to  thighs,  followed  by  fluor  albus.

■  Menses : with  great excitement at  every  period ; flow

black,  clotted ; profuse  and  early  or  late,  with  violent


241  MAGNESIA  MURIATICA.

pains,  <  in  back  when  walking and  in  thighs  when
sitting,  pale  face,  debility,  nervous excitement; sup-
pressed.
■Metrorrhagia  <  at  night  in  bed,  causing  hysteria.

■  Menstrual  pains  >  by  having  back  pressed.

■  Leucorrhoea:  watery,  thick,  followed  immediately  by  dis-

charge of  blood;  after  exercise;  with  every  stool;  fol-
lowing uterine  spasm;  followed  by  metrorrhagia;  <  in
morning  after  urinating;  two  weeks  after  menstruation,
lasting  three  or  four  days;  profuse,  continuing  almost
without  intermission.
■Metrorrhagia  of  old  maids,  blood  clotted;  after  abuse  of
mercury.
^  Pregnancy.  Parturition.  Lactation.  ■Nausea  and  vom-
iting during  pregnancy;  hepatic  disorder  previous  to
marriage,  or  uterine  spasms  with  metrorrhagia.

■  Labor  pain,  interrupted  by  hysterical  spasms.

^  Voice  and  Larynx.  Trachea  and  Bronchia.  ■  Hoarse-
ness, with  roughness  and  dryness  of  throat;  in  morn-
ing after  rising,

■  Tingling  in  larynx.

^^  Respiration. ■  Oppressed  breathing,  greater  after  a  meal.

■  Globus  hystericus  and  oppression  of  breath.

^^  Cough.  ■  Dry  cough  evening  and  night,  with  burning  and
soreness  in  chest.

■  Spasmodic  cough  at  night,  with  tickling  in  throat.

■Spasmodic  cough  caused  by  tickling  in  throat;  no  ex-
pectoration in  evening  or  at  night;  during  day,  watery
but  at  the  same  time  tough,  yellowish,  occasionally  pur-
ulent expectoration,  of  fetty  taste  and  offensive  odor
and  at  times  mixed  with  lumps  of  blood;  <  evening
until  midnight,  rest,  sitting,  lying  in  bed,  deep  breath-
ing, air  of  room,  eating,  ascending  steps,  speaking,  fatty
foods  or  fruit. ^Whooping  cough.

■  Bloody  expectoration  brought  on  by  sea  bathing.
^^  Inner  Chest  and  Lungs. ■  Sudden heaviness of chest,
with  oppression  of  breathing,  at  dinner.

■  Tension  and  constriction  of  chest.

I  I  Constrictive  pain  in  chest  and  scapulae.

■  Congestion  of  blood  to  chest  from  bathing  in  sea ;  bloody

expectoration ;  great  weakness.
^^  Heart,  Pulse  and  Circulation. 1 1  Stitches  in  heart,  taking
away  breath.

■  Palpitation  of  heart  and  cardiac  pain  while  sitting,  going

off  on  motion.

■  Pulse  accelerated,  with  ebullitions  while  sitting.
^^  Neck  and  Back. ■Swelling  of  cervical  glands.

■  Pain  as  from  bruises,  above  and  in  small  of  back  and

YOL.  VII. — 16.


MAGNESIA  MURIATICA.  212

both hips,  with  sensitiveness  of  parts  to  touch; also
during  menses.
I  Contractive,  spasmodic  pain  in  small  of  back.

■  Stitches,  tearing  and  burning  in  small  of  back.

^^  Upper  Limbs. ■  Rheumatic  pain  in  shoulder  joint,  extend-
ing down  arm  to  hands; <  from  motion.

■  Tearing  pains  in  shoulders,  arms,  wrists  and  hands.

■  The  arms  "go  to  sleep"  when  awaking  in  morning.

^  Lower  Limbs. ■Sensation  of  great  fatigue  in  legs,  even
while  sitting.
I  I  Heaviness  in  legs.

■  Twitching,  tearing  in  hips.

■  Restlessness  and  tense  feeling  in  thighs,  must  move  legs

for  relief.

■  Pressing  pain  in  knees.

■  Cramps  in  calves  at  night.

I  I  Burning  in  soles,  evenings.

■  Foot  sweat.

^*  Limbs  in  General. ■  Much  weakness  in  limbs. ^Uterus
displaced.

■  Paralytic  drawing  and  tearing  in  limbs.
^'Rest. Position. Motion. Rest:  cough  <.

Lying:  dulness  of  head  <;  griping,  raging  in  temples;

cough  <.
Must  lie  down  :  pain  in  forehead.
Must  lie  crooked:  colic.
Cannot  lie  on  r.  side:  liver  sensitive.
Must  lie  on  1.  side:  palpitation.
Cannot  lie  on  1.  side :  something  (liver)  seems  to  drag  to

that  side.
On  side  upon  which  one  rests:  sensation  as  of  boiling  water.
Can  lie  only  on  back  or  affected  side:  pain  in  liver.
Sitting: palpitation; pains  in  thighs;  cough <;  pulse

accelerated,  with  ebullitions;  great  fatigue  in  legs.
Motion:  headache  <  ;  pain  in  forehead  >  ;  palpitation  >  ;

rheumatic  pain  in  shoulder,  arm  and  hand  <.
Must  move  legs:  restlessness  >.

Exercise  in  open  air:  >  dulness  of  head;  leucorrhoea.
Getting  up  and  walking:  palpitation  >.
Walking:  regurgitation;  pressing  pain  in  liver;  pains  in

back.
Ascending  steps:  cough  <.
Tossing  about  in  bed  and  on  floor  for  two  hours:  pain  in

stomach.
3fi  Nerves. '  'General  sensation  of  soreness,  with  great  sensi-
tiveness to  noise.

■  ■Hysterical  and  spasmodic  complaints;  uterine  troubles.

■  Many  spasms  day  and  night,  sleeplessness; fainting  fits


37


38


243  MAGNESIA  MURIATICA.

at  table, nausea and trembling, > by  eructations.
^Hysteria.

■  Weakness  and  chill,  <  during  hysterical  paroxysm.

■  Great  weakness  from  a  sea  bath.

■  Weakness  of  body  as  if  coming  from  stomach.

■  Fainting  fits  at  dinner,  nausea  and  trembling,  >  by  eruc-

tations.
Sleep, i  Sleepiness  during  day,  with  yawning  and  sluggish-
ness.

■  Goes  to  sleep  late; sleeplessness  on  account  of  nightly

heat,  with  thirst.

■  Restlessness  of  body  as  soon  as  she  closes  eyes;  evening

in  bed.
■Shocks  through  body  at  night,  while  waking.

■Sleep  unrefreshing;  tired  in  morning.

■Anxious,  frightful  dreams,  with  talking  and  crying  out
during  sleep.
Time.  Morning:  dulness  in  head  <;  on  rising  vertigo;
burning  in  nose;  tongue  coated  white;  nausea;  diarrhoea;
frequent  erections ;  leucorrhoea  <  ;  roughness  and  dry-
ness of  throat;  arms  "go  to  sleep;"  is  tired.

1  A.M. :  pain  in  stomach ;  colic.

3  A.M. :  violent  thirst.

Day :  frequent  desire  to  urinate;  expectoration  watery  but
tough;  many  spasms;  sleepiness.

At  dinner:  sudden  heaviness  of  chest,  with  oppression  of
breathing;  fainting  fits.

From  4  to  8  p.m.:  chill  <.

After  supper:  tinea  ciliaris  <.

Evening :  after  lying  down,  pain  in  temples ;  colic  in  even-
ing ;  diarrhcea;  dry  cough;  cough  <  till  midnight;  burn-
ing in  soles;  in  bed,  restlessness  of  body;  heat.

Evening  till  12  p.m.:  heat.

Night:  obstruction  of  nose;  eruption  on  face  and  forehead;
drawing  pain  in  abdomen;  diarrhoea;  frequent  desire
to  urinate;  metrorrhagia  <  in  bed;  dry  cough;  spas-
modic cough  ;  cramps  in  calves ;  many  spasms ;  shocks
through  body.

From  12  p.m.  till  morning :  sweat.
Temperature  and  Weather. Sensitive  to  cold  air.

Great  disposition  to  take  cold.

Warm  wrapping  up  of  head :  >  dulness  of  head ;  >  pain
in  forehead.

Warm  room :  tinea  ciliaris  <  ;  eruption  on  face  and  fore-
head <.

Near  stove :  chill.

In  room :  cough  <.

After  getting  into  bed  :  great  chilliness;  chill  >.


MAGNESIA  MURIATICA.  244

Open  air:  anxious  feeling  >  ;  dulness  >  ;  vertigo  >  ;  head-
ache <  ;  pain  in  forehead  >  ;  chill  >.

Sea  bathing :  bloody  expectoration ;  great  weakness.

Aversion  to  uncovering.
*''  Fever, i Chill :  even  near  stove;  <  from  4  to  8  p.m.;  >  in
open  air  or  in  bed; chill followed  by  heat,  evening,
until  12  P.M.

■  Evening  heat,  thirst;  averse  to  uncovering.

Sweat: on  head  or  feet; with  thirst,  from 12 p.m. till
morning.
*^  Attacks,  Periodicity. One  hour  before  food :  pain  in  epi-
gastric region.

For  one  hour  after  breakfast :  feels  quite  well,  then  car-
dialgia.

Several  times  during  day :  cardialgia.

Daily  :  attacks  of  pain  in  head.

Every  evening :  gastralgia.

Nightly  :  agglutination  of  lids ;  heat,  with  thirst.

Every  three  or  four  days :  difficult  stools.

Once  in  four  days :  stool.

Once  a  week  :  bowels  moved.

Every  eight  days :  bowels  move.

Fourteen  days  late :  menses.

Two  weeks  after  menstruation :  leucorrhoea  for  three  or
four  days.

Since  parturition  five  weeks  ago :  diarrhoea.

Every  six  weeks :  pain  in  forehead  and  around  eyes.
^^  Locality  and  Direction.  Right :  tearing  in  side  of  head  ;
tenderness  of  ovary ;  dragging  pain  from  ovary ;  weight
in  hypochondrium ;  could  not  rest  on  side ;  pain  in
scapula ;  hypochondrium  tender  to  touch ;  painful  hard-
ness of  abdomen.

Left :  must  lie  on  side ;  cannot  lie  on  side.
*^  Sensations. Boring  and  spasmodic,  contractive  pains.

■  General  sensation  of  soreness,  with  great  sensitiveness  to

noises.
Sensation  as  if  some  one  was  reading  after  her  and  she  must
read  faster  and  faster ;  as  if  boiling  water  was  on  side  of
head  ;  as  if  one  would  fall  down ;  as  if  head  would  burst ;
as  if  hair  was  raised  by  pulling ;  as  if  he  would  become
dizzy  and  lose  consciousness ;  as  if  something  was  lying
before  ear;  upper  incisors  as  if  too  long;  tongue  as  if
burnt ;  inner  mouth  as  if  scalded  ;  rising  as  of  a  ball  from
stomach  to  throat ;  as  if  stomach  was  cut  to  pieces ;  as  of
something  dragging  over  to  hypochondriac  region  ;  ab-
domen as  if  bruised  ;  stools  as  if  burnt ;  as  if  from  ex-
coriation ;  pain  as  if  bruised  in  small  of  back  and  hips;
weakness  as  if  coming  from  stomach.


245  MAGNESIA  MURIATICA.

Pain :  in  forehead  and  around  eyes ;  in  stomach  ;  in  liver  ;

in  epigastric  region  ;  in  uterus ;  in  hypogastric  region ;

in  small  of  back  and  both  hips.
Insupportable  pain  :  in  teeth.
Violent  pains :  in  back  and  thighs.
Severe  cardialgia.

Severe  cramp  pains :  in  bones  of  face.
Tearing :  in  temple  ;  in  nodosities  on  occiput ;  in  abdomen ;

in  small  of  back ;  in  shoulders,  arms,  wrists  and  hands;

in  hips.
Sharp  sticking  and  tearing:  in  r.  side  of  head  to  eye.
Tearing  stitches :  in  loins.
Paralytic  drawing  and  tearing :  in  limbs.
Griping,  raging  :  in  temples.
Contractive,  spasmodic  pain :  in  small  of  back.
Beating :  in  forehead.

Stitches :  in  temple ;  in  hea,rt ;  in  small  of  back.
Eroding  pain :  in  stomach.
Sore  pain  :  in  nose.
Cutting,  pinching:  in  abdomen.
Gnawing :  at  pit  of  stomach.
Cramps:  in  abdomen;  in  calves.
Colicky  pains:  in  abdomen.

Violent  burning:  of  rhagades  on  tongue;  of  nose.
Burning  pain  :  in  back.
Drawing  pain:  in  abdomen.
Dragging  down  pain :  from  r.  ovary  to  thigh.
Bearing  down :  in  ovarian  region.
Dull,  aching,  tensive  pain:  in  hypochondriac  region,  going

through  to  r.  scapula.
Stitching  pains :  in  rectum.

Rheumatic  pain :  in  shoulder  joints  to  arm  and  hands.
Pressing  pain :  in  stomach;  in  liver;  to  back  and  stomach;

in  knees.
Constrictive  pain :  in  chest  and  scapulae.
Throbbing:  in  pit  of  stomach.
Painful  undulating  and  whizzing:  in  head.
Painful  hardness :  of  r.  side  of  abdomen.
Painful  swelling :  of  gums.
Tingling,  stinging:  in  abdominal  muscles.
Soreness:  of  abdomen;  inchest;  all  over.
Burning:  of  eyes;  of  nose;  of  vesicles  on  lip;  in  anus;  in
urethra;  in  penis;  in  chest;  in  small  of  back;  in  soles.
Hot  feeling:  in  head.
Rawness :  of  inner  surface  of  alee  nasi.
Irritation :  about  anus.

Tenderness:  of  r.  ovary;  in  hypogastric  region.
Roughness:  on  inner  side  of  upper  lip;  of  throat.


MAGNESIA  MURIATICA.  246

Tickling:  in  throat.

Tingling :  in  larynx.

Dryness:  of  nose  distressing;  ofmouth  and  tongue;  of  tongue.

Sensitiveness :  of  teeth;  of  stomach  and  liver ;  of  lower  part
of  nose.

Compressive  sensation:  in  head.

Tension  and  constriction  :  of  chest.

Oppression  :  in  pit  of  stomach ;  in  chest.

Great  fatigue :  in  legs.

Much  weakness :  in  limbs ;  from  a  sea  bath.

Weakness :  in  stomach.

Pulsation :  in  ears.

Distress :  in  hypogastric  region.

Restlessness  and  tense  feeling :  in  thighs.

Restlessness :  of  body.

Dull  feeling :  in  head.

Numbness :  in  forehead  ;  of  urethra.

Heaviness:  in  head;  in  bowels;  on  chest;  in  legs.

Twitching :  in  hips.

Formication :  over  whole  body.

Itching :  of  old  herpes  behind  ears  ;  of  vesicles  on  lip ;  in
nose  ;  at  anus ;  on  genitals ;  on  scrotum.

Coldness :  in  stomach.
"  Tissues.  Swelling  of  glands;  engorged  glands.
*^  Touch.  Passive  Motion.  Injuries.  Touch:  nodosities  on
occiput  painful ;  burning  in  nose  <  ;  of  food  against
teeth  pain  insupportable ;  of  upper  lip  with  tongue,  sen-
sation of  roughness;  pressing  pain  in  liver;  r.  hypo-
chondrium  tender ;  abdomen  sensitive ;  small  of  back
and  hips  sensitive.

Cannot  endure  covering :  colic.

Pressure :  stomach  and  liver  sensitive ;  causes  beating  in
forehead  ;  pain  in  eye  >  ;  griping,  raging  in  temples;
stomach  painful ;  on  back  >  menstrual  pains.

Strong  pressure:  pain  in  forehead  >.

Tying  tight  bandage  around  head :  headache  >.
*^  Skin.  iBloodboils;  eruption  of  pustules  or  small  red  papillss.

■  Formication  over  whole  body.

*''  Stages  of  Life,  Constitution.  1 1  Especially  suitable  for  dis-
eases of  women ;  spasmodic  and  hysterical  complaints
complicated  with  uterine  diseases.

■  Women  after  suffering  months  or  years  from  attacks  of

indigestion  or  biliousness;  enlargement  and  congestion
of  liver.

■  Children,  especially  during  dentition;  puny,  rachitic.
Boy,  aet.  1;  much  straining  at  urination.

Child,  set.  2,  for  several  months  diarrhoea  and  cough ;  after
diarrhoea  stopped,  constipation  and  cough.


247  MAGNESIA  MURIATICA.

I  Girl,  set.  4,  suffering  two  years;  affection  of  liver.

Young  woman,  set.  17;  cardialgia.

Girl,  set.  18,  after  disappearance  of  an  eruption which

came  every  winter  upon  upper  and  lower  lips ;  affection

of  nose.
Woman,  set.  19,  small,  blonde,  sensitive,  suffering  four  years ;

affection  of  liver.
Girl,  set.  20,  suffering  several  years;  affection  of  stomach.
Young  woman,  set.  20,  ansemic;  chronic  diarrhoea.
Woman,  set.  20,  mother  of  one  child ;  constipation.
Young  woman,  set.  23,  ansemic,  a  week  previousl}^  vomited

about  a  cupful  of  blood  and suffered  thereafter  from

pains  in  stomach  and  anorexia,  removed  by  Ipec.  and

Nux  vom.;  diarrhoea.
Woman,  set.  24,  tall,  strong,  dark  hair,  suffering  five  years;

affection  of  liver.
Young  man,  stout,  healthy  looking;  cardialgia.
Woman,  set.  26,  pale,  weak,  confined  two  years  ago;  con-
stipation.
Woman,  suffering  one  month ;  affection  of  liver.
Woman,  suffering  two  years;  affection  of  liver.
Woman,  set.  35,  previously  strong,  now  somewhat  ansemic,

after  parturition ;  diarrhoea.
Woman,  set.  36,  mother  of  two  children,  during  childhood

had  ague; periodical  attacks  of  pain  in stomach  and

enlargement  of  liver.
Man,  set.  40,  Russian,  strong,  hardened by  much  travel,

after  inflammation  of  liver  ten  years ago ; induration

of  liver.
Man.  set.  48,  sallow,  choleric,  attacks return  every  six

weeks,  suffering  several  years;  cephalalgia.
Woman,  set.  51,  wife  of  gravedigger,  five  years  ago  suffered

from  leucorrhoea,  cured  by  Sepia;  gastric  disturbances.
Woman,  set.  52,  suffering  two  months;  affection  of  liver.
Woman,  set.  58,  had  been  subject  to  repeated  attacks  of

biliousness and disturbance  of  functions  of  liver  for

several  years,  attended  with  dyspepsia  and  constipation ;

enlargement  and  congestion  of  liver.
Woman,  set.  60,  dark  hair,  strong,  suffering  one  and  a  half

years;  palpitation  of  heart.
**  Relations. Antidoted by: Arsen.,  Camphor, ll Chamom.,

Nux  vom.
It  antidotes:  Mercur.  (metrorrhagia).
Compatible:  Bellad.,  Lycop.,  Natr.  mur.,  Pulsat,  Sepia.
Compare: Baryta,  Bryon.,  Cole.  est..  Graphit.,  Kali  carh.,

Nitr.  ac,  Phosphor.,  Sulphur.


MAGNESIA  PHOSPHORICA.  248

MAGNESIA  PHOSPHORICA.

Phosphate  of  Magnesia.  2Mg  0.  P.  O5.  ^^"0+14  H^  0.

Magnesia  Phosphorica  is  one  of  the  most  important  of  the  Twelve  Tissue
Remedies  introduced  by  Schuessler.  It  still  awaits  proving,  but  the  symptoms
obtained  from  clinical  practice,  vouched  for  by  good  authorities,  are  sufficiently
numerous  and  important  to  warrant  us  in  giving  it  a  place  in  the  present  work.
We  print  Hering's  own  arrangement,  with  additions  from  current  literature  to
date,  and  hope  the  drug  will  soon  receive  the  careful  attention  at  the  hands  of
provers  it  deserves.— Eds.

Clinical,  Authorities. — Brain  troubles  in  children  with  convulsive  symptoms,
Morgan,  Trans.  Horn.  Med.  Soc.  Pa.,  1882,  p.  172 ;  Neuralgic  headache,  particu-
larly after  childbirth,  Frantz,  MSS. ;  Facial  neuralgia  (3  cases),  HufF,  Minn.  Med.
Mo.,  vol.  1 ,  No.  9 ;  Wesselhceft,  Plate,  Schuessler's  Tissue  Kemedies,  by  C.  Hg.,  p.
31;  Neuralgia  of  faxie  and  toothache,  Plate,  Eaue's  Rec,  1875,  p.  246;  Prosopalgia,
AUg.  Horn.  Ztg.,  vol.  88,  p.  46 ;  Goullon,  Zeit.  f.  Hom.,  vol.  17 ;  Plate,  Raue's
Rec,  1875,  p.  245;  Tic  douloureux,  Fischer,  Times  Retros.,  vol.1,  p.  23  ;  S.  L.,
Hom.  Obs.,  Aug.,  1875;  Faceache,  Schuessler's  Tissue  Remedies,  by  C.  Hg.,  p.  30;
Ailments  from  optical  defects,  Morgan,  Org.,  vol.  3,  p.  365  ;  Singultus,  Quaglio ;  Spas-
modic hiccough,  Schuessler ;  Persistent  vomiting,  Martin,  Trans.  Hom.  Med.  Soc.  Pa.,

1886,  p.  95  ;  Colic  of  new  born  infants,  Trans.  Hom.  Med.  Soc.  Pa.,  1880,  p.  232  ;
Daily  colic  in  a  child,  Frantz,  MSS.;  Colic  from  standing  in  cold  water,  Koeck,  Allg.
Hom.  Ztg.,  vol.  94,  p.  120  ;  Neuralgia  of  stomach,  Huff,  Minn.  Med.  Mo.,  vol.  1,  No.
9;  Profuse  and  frequent  urination,  Goullon,  Allg.  Plom.  Ztg.,  vol.  109,  p.  181;
Whooping  cough,  Schuessler ;  Intercostal  neuralgia,  Knerr,  MSS. ;  Gressus  gallinaceus,
Nichols,  Hom.  Phys.,  vol.  2,  p.  320 ;  Neuralgia,  Boyce,  Halm.  Mo.,  voL  10,  p.  458 ;
Nervous  ailment,  Schleglmann,  Schuessler's  Tissue  Remedies,  Boericke  &  Dewey,

1887,  p.  73;  Nervous  affection,  Schuessler,  B.  &.  D.,  p.  73;  Infantile  convulsions,
IVTorgan,  Trans.  Hom.  Med.  Soc.  Pa.,  1880,  p.  232;  Spasms,  Schuessler,  Plate,
Raue's  Rec,  1875,  p.  248;  Chorea,  Saeger,  Allg.  Hom.  Ztg.,  vol.  102,  p.  93 ;  Whit-
tier,  Clarke,  Schuessler's  Tissue  Remedies,  B.  &  D.,  p.  114;  Typhoid  fever  with  sin-
gultus, Fearn,  Schuessler's  Tissue  Remedies,  B.  &  D.,  p.  158.


^  Mind. I  I  Laments  all  the  time  about  pain,  with  hiccoughing.
I  I  Has  to  scream  out,  with  cramps  in  abdomen.
1  I  Illusions  of  senses;  sobbing.

iTalking  to  herself  constantly,  or  sitting  still  in  moody
silence,  or  carrying  things  from  one  place  to  another  and
then  back  again,  ^Chorea.
^  Sensoriiua.  ■  Brain  troubles  in  children,  with  unconscious-
ness and  convulsive  symptoms.  ^Cholera  infantum.
^  Inner  Head.  UNeuralgic  or  rheumatic  headaches :  >  from
external application of warmth; very  excruciating,


249  MAGNESIA  PHOSPHORICA.

tendency  to  spasmodic  symptoms; shooting,  stinging,
shifting, intermittent or paroxysmal pains; sparks
before eyes; diplopia;  m  ore in young and strong
persons.
I  Headache  since  two  weeks  at  10  p.m.,  lasts  all  night.

■  Attacks  of  severe  headache,  particularly  after  childbirth,

at  irregular  intervals;  sudden  flashes  of  pain  in  back
part  of  head  and  neck,  spreading  all  over  head,  involv-
ing eyes,  with  sudden  flashes  of  pain  like  lightning
through  head;  >  from  hard  pressure,  rest  and  dark-
ness; frequently  nausea ;  crampy  pains  in  abdomen  and
calves;  occasionally  flying  pains  in  limbs;  drawn  feel-
ing of  eyelids;  after  attacks  dulness  of  head  and  intel-
lect, forgetfulness,  irritability.
^  Sight  and  Eyes, l  Eyes  sensitive  to  light,  photophobia.

iChromatopsia,  spasmodic  vision  of  sparks or rainbow
colors;  diplopia.

I  I  Dulness  of  vision  from  weakness  of  optic  nerve.

I  I  Pupils  contracted.

I  I  Increased  lachrymation.

■  Nystagmus;  strabismus;  spasmodic  squinting;  ptosis.

■  Twitching  or  spasms  of  eyelids.

■  Headache,  vertigo,  etc.,  from  optical  defects.

■  Pain  in  supraorbital  nerve  over  r.  eye,  <  at  11  a.m.;  >  by

external  warm  applications. ^Neuralgia.
^Hearing  and  Ears. ■■Otalgia,  purely  nervous.

I  I  Weakness  of  auditory  nerve  fibres  causing  deafness,
'  Smell  and  Nose, i  i  Loss  or  perversion  of  sense  of  smell.
^  Upper  Face. ■  Face  distorted  from  pain  and  weakness.  ^^Colic.

■  Prosopalgia,  supra  and  infraorbital  nerves  involved ;  pains

shoot  about  like  lightning  along  course  of  nerves,  always
>  from  warmth,  <  on  r.  side  and  when  body  gets  cold;
teeth  sensitive.

■  Tic  douloureux;  pain,  especially  in  supraorbital  branch,

extended  sometimes  to  ramus  mentalisof  maxillaris  in-
ferior; a  touch  at  latter  caused  pain  in  supraorbitalis;
the  slightest  touch  in  any  part  of  affected  nerves  renewed
painful  paroxysm.

■  Boring  over  r.  eye,  spreading  after  a  few  minutes  over

whole  r.  side  of  head  to  lower  jaw,  driving  out  of  bed.

■  Right  side  of  face  and  supraorbital  region  swollen;  severe

crampy,  shooting,  darting  pains;  much  tenderness  over
affected  side;  pains  intermittent  in  character,  and  seem
toaff"ect  different  parts  of  head  and  face  on  different  days;
much  prostration.

■  Neuralgia  on  r.  side  of  face  and  toothache,  changing  loca-

tion frequently,  returning  every  two  or  three  hours,
rushes  about  like  lightning.


MAGNESIA  PIIOSPHORICA.  250

■  Neuralgia  of  face,  commencing  over  r.  eye  and  extending

in  a  few  minutes  over  whole  r.  side  of  face;  must  get  out
of  bed;  towards  ten  o'clock  pain  ceases.

■  Neuralgia  from  exposure  to  a  strong  North  wind;  patient

in  bed,  almost  frantic  with  pain,  flushed  face,  injected
eyes  and  a  high  degree  of  photophobia;  pain  1.  sided,
involving  supramaxillary  portion  of  trigeminus,  lanci-
nating, crampy,  darting  and  shooting,  extorting  cries.

■After  catching  cold  severe  trouble  in  ear,  followed  by
prosopalgia,  on  1.  side,  affecting  lower  maxillary  bone,
also  frontal,  and  involving  whole  of  1.  side  of  head,  back
to  nape  of  neck;  pain  maddening;  high  fever  and  sleep-
lessness.
^  Lower  Face. ■  Convulsive  twitching  of  corners  of  mouth.

I  I  Yawning,  with  excessive  spasmodic  straining  of  lower  jaw.

M Trismus;  lockjaw.
^^  Teeth  and  Gums. ■Toothache:  rheumatic,  neuralgic  and
shooting;  changes  place  rapidly;  teeth  sensitive;  <  after
going  to  bed;  hot  liquids  ease  pain.

■  During  dentition:  spasms  of  children.

"  Taste  and  Tongue. ■Taste  somewhat  bitter,  tongue  slightly
yellow. ^Colic.
■Spasmodic  stammering.

■  Clean  tongue. ^Gastralgia.

13  Throat.  ■  Spasmodic  constriction  of  throat  on  attempting
to  swallow  liquids,  sensation  of  choking.

"Appetite,  Thirst.  Desires,  Aversions,  ii Little  or  no
appetite. ^Faceache. ^Colic. ^Gressus  gallinaceus.

'"  Eating  and  Drinking,  l  l  Sweetened  coffee  lessens  desire
to  stool,  but  has  great  aversion  to  coffee.  ^Pain  in  stomach.

^•^  Hiccough,  Belching,  Nausea  and  Vomiting,  i  Spasmodic
hiccough  of  three  days'  duration  (after  feilure  of  mor-
phine, chloroform,  etc.).

■  Spasmodic  hiccough  day  and  night,  with  retching,  what

came  up  was  coagulated  milk,  bile  and  slime,  with  great
pain,  she  had  to  lament  all  the  time. ^Colic.

■  Obstinate singultus, causing long lasting soreness.

^Typhoid  fever.

■  Eructation  lessens  colic.

■  Immediately  after  eating,  sometimes  while  at  table,  spits

up  what  he  has  eaten;  little  or  no  nausea;  craves  sugar.
^Persistent  vomiting.
^^  Scrobiculum  and  Stomach. ■■Pains  at  pit  of  stomach,
nipping,  griping,  pinching,  with  short  belching  of  wind
giving  no  relief.

■  ■Spasms  or  cramp  in  stomach,  with  clean  tongue,  pain  as

if  a  band  was  tightly  laced  or  drawn  around  body.
■Neuralgia  of  stomach.


251  MAGNESIA  PHOSPHORICA.

^^  Hypochondria,  l  l  Left  lobe  of  liver  enlarged,
^^  Abdomen.  iCramps  in  abdomen;  pains  around  navel  and
above  it  towards  stomach,  from  there  radiating  to  both
sides  towards  back ;  violent  cutting  pains,  so  that  she
has  to  scream  out,  then  shooting  and  violently  contract-
ing; >  by  bending  double  or  by  pressure  with  hand,
external  warmth  and  eructations;  cannot  lie  on  back
stretched  out.

■  Cramps  and  wind  colic,  often  accompanied  by  watery

diarrhoea.

■  Colic:  forcing  patient  to  bend  double,  pain  >  by  fric-

tion, warmth,  or  eructations ;  remittent  gripes,  crampy
pain.  *

■  ■Flatulent  colic  forcing  patient  to  bend  double,  >  from

rubbing, warmth, accompanied  by belching of gas,
which  gives  no  relief.

■  ■Flatulent  colic  of  children  and  the  new  born,  with  draw-

ing up  of  legs;  remittent  colic,  crampy  pain  with  acidity.

■  Daily  attacks  of  colic  in  a  child,  generally  at  3  or  4  p.m.,

lasting  several  hours.
■Pains  spasmodic  in  stomach  or  bowels,  griping,  cutting,
drawing,  so  as  to  bend  body  double,  <  on  slightest  mus-
cular movement;  >  from  warmth,

■  Meteorism,  in  cows.

^  Stool  and  Rectum. J  l  Stools  expelled  with  force.

I  I  Stools  loose,  watery,  with  urging. ^Pain  in  stomach.

■  Watery  diarrhoea,  with  vomiting  and  cramps  in  calves;

choleraic  cramps.
^rDiarrhoea,  with  pinching  colicky  pain  from  navel  to  back ;
stools  every  half  hour;  redness  and  itching  on  feet,  can-
not keep  them  still,  in  evening.

■  Dysentery:  with  crampy pain,  >  by  bending  double,

warmth  or  friction;  with  spasmodic  retention  of  urine.

■  Cholera  caused  by  affection  of  nerves  of  intestinal  canal,

■  Cutting,  darting,  lightninglike  pains  in  hemorrhoids.
I  I  Stool  torpid. ^Faceache. ^Crampy  colic.

^^  Urinary  Organs.  lEvery  three  or  five  minutes  child  passes
a  large  quantity  of  urine ;  great  appetite,  empties  six  or
eight  bottles  every  day,  restless  sleep  at  night.

I  I  Gravel,  windy  pain.

I  Spasm  of  neck  of  bladder;  spasmodic  stricture.

■  ■Nocturnal  enuresis  from  nervous  irritation.

■Vesical  neuralgia  after  use  of  catheter,  sensation  as  if

muscles  did  not  contract.
I  I A  bright,  slimy  discharge  from  urethra  in  an  old  man;

when  urinating,  violent  shooting  and  burning  pains.

■  Urine  clear  like  water. /?Colic.

■  Deficiency  or  excess  of  urinary  phosphates.


MAGNESIA  PHOSPHORICA.  252

^^  Female  Sexual  Organs,  n  Ovarian  neuralgia,  pain  shoot-
ing and  darting  like  lightning;  <  on  r.  side.

■  Menstrual  colic,  pain  during  or  preceding  flow;  vaginis-

mus.

2*  Pregnancy. Parturition. Lactation, i  Spasmodic  labor
pains;  cramp  in  legs. ..
I  I  Puerperal  convulsions.

^^  Voice  and  Larynx.  Trachea  and  Bronchia.  ■  Laryngis-
mus stridulus  or  spasm  of  larynx;  constriction  of  chest;
stiff'ness  of  limbs.

^^  Respiration, l Spasmodic  sobbing  for  three  days.
iiSpasmodic,  nervous  asthma.

^  Cough.  I  Spasmodic  cough :  at  night,  with  difficulty  in  lying
down;  in  paroxysms;  without  expectoration;  ending  in
a  whoop.
■Violent  spasmodic  attacks  of  cough,  recurring  about  ten
times  a  day,  during  which  face  becomes  blue  and  turgid.
^Whooping  cough.
I  I  Persistent  semi-chronic  cough  of  a  pseudo-catarrhal,
nervous  character.

'^  Inner  Chest  and  Lungs,  i Constriction  of  chest  and  throat,
with  spasmodic,  dry,  tickling  cough.

^^  Heart,  Pulse  and  Circulation,  a  Angina  pectoris;  neu-
ralgic spasms.

■  Nervous,  spasmodic  palpitation.

^  Outer  Chest.  ■  Intercostal  neuralgia,  of  a  drawing,  constric-
tive kind ;  spasms  from  cold.

■  An  old  lady  had  terrible  pain  from  back  under  1.  scapula

around  to  front  and  down  to  groin,  constricted  chest  and
affected breathing; paroxysms brought on  by  lying
down,  had  to  sit  upright. ^Intercostal  neuralgia.
^^  Neck and Back. ■  Pains in  nape  of  neck very sharp,
shooting,  boring,  shifting  and  remittent.

■  Shifting  pains  in  back;  intercostal  neuralgia.

■  Acute,  boring,  darting,  neuralgic  pains  in  back.

^^  Upper  Limbs. "Shaking  of  hands,  trembling;  alcoholism.
^*  Lower  Limbs. ■Deficiency  in  locomotive  power,  from  ner-
vous causes.

■  Sciatica,  with  excruciating  spasmodic  pains.

■  Pains  settled  in  r.  leg  from  hip  to  ankle,  <  in  joints;

pain  shifts  its  place,  is  often  lightninglike,  shooting,
intermits,  renders  necessary  a  change  of  position,  and  is
>  by  warmth  of  bed;  patient  is  in  despair;  thinks  he
has  tetanus  and  that  he  must  die;  is  unable  to  leave  bed.

■  Every  night  neuralgia,  now  in  lower  limbs,  in  tibia  or

in  thighs,  now  in  1.,  now  in  r.  side,  mostly  with  spas-
modic muscular  contractions;  during  day  perfectly  well.

■  Cramps  in  calves. ^Intermittent. ^Cholera.

■  Gressus  gallinaceus.


253  MAGNESIA  PHOSPHORICA.

^  Limbs  in  General, l  l  Violent  pains  in  acute  rheumatism
of  joints.

I  Pains  in  limbs,  neuralgic,  rheumatic,  very  vivid,  darting
about,  shifting  and  remittent.

lEvery  night  neuralgia,  now  in  lower  limbs,  in  tibia  or  in
thighs,  now  in  1.,  now  in  r.  side,  mostly  with  spasmodic
muscular  contractions;  during  day  perfectly  well.
^Rest. Position. Motion. Rest: lightninglike  pains  in
head  >.

Lying  down :  causes  pain  from  back  under  scapula.

Difficulty  in  lying  down  :  cough.

Cannot  lie  on  back  stretched  out :  pain  in  abdomen.

Thumbs  drawn  in,  fingers  clenched :  convulsions.

Bending  double:  pain  in  abdomen  >;  crampy  pain  >.

Must  sit  upright:  intercostal  neuralgia.

Must  change  position :  severe  pain  in  limbs.

Motion  :  the  least,  brings  on  pain  in  tic  douloureux ;  trem-
bling of  limbs  <.

Slightest  muscular  movement :  pain  in  abdomen  <.

Changes  place :  neuralgic  pain.

Cannot  keep  feet  still :  itching.

Driving  out  of  bed :  pain  in  face.
^  Nerves. ■  l  Neuralgia  appearing  at  intervals,  >  by  warmth.

I  At  times  pains  in  head,  teeth,  face  and  limbs;  again
cramps  in  stomach,  and  flatulent  colic;  at  other  times
tormenting,  spasmodic  cough,  day  and  night,  together
with  retention  of  urine,  sleeplessness;  different  disorders
every  day;  cannot  leave  bed. ^Nervous  affection.

■After  catching  cold,  pain  in  back;  dorsal  vertebrae  from
third  to  fifth  very  sensitive  to  pressure;  violent  trem-
bling of  r.  foot  and  especially  of  r.  arm,  <  from  motion.
^Nervous  ailment.

I  For  three  days,  spasmodic,  convulsive  sobbing  in  a  man;
lies  in  bed.

■  Spasms,  with  contraction  of  fingers,  and  staring,  open

eyes,  lasting  from  a  quarter  to  a  half  hour;  during  in-
tervals spasmodic  cough.
I  Convulsions,  with  stiffness  of  limbs or  body,  thumbs
drawn  in,  fingers  clenched.

■  After  spasm,  excessive  sensitiveness  to  every  impression

of  senses,  even  to  touch,  and  especially  to  noise;  look  of
suspicion  and  fear;  easily  agitated;  spasm  in  early
morning. ^Infantile  convulsions.

■  Convulsions  and  cramps  during  dentition,  without  fever;

convulsive  symptoms  after  failure  of  Bellad.
■Writer's,  piano  or  violin  player's  cramp.
■Spasms  from  idiopathic  affections  of  motory  nerves.

■  Choleraic  cramps.


MAGNESIA  PHOSPHORICA.  254

■  Spasmodic  muscular  contraction  with  neuralgia.
I  Tonic  spasms,  trismus;  tetanus.

■  Twitching  all  over  body  during  waking  hours,  >  during

sleep;  walked  fairly  well  and  could  feed  herself;  speech
very  defective,  meaning  of  her  utterances  a  matter  of
pure  conjecture;  heart's  action  accelerated,  no  abnormal
sound,  later  a  presystolic  blowing  sound,  as  if  muscular
fibres  of  heart  participated  in  general  spasms;  pupils
symmetrically  dilated ;  scared  expression. ^Chorea.

■  Face  and  upper  part  of  body  affected,  lateral  and  down-

ward jerking  of  mouth,  snapping  of  eyelids,  sudden  for-
ward motion  of  head,  and  other  irregular  movements;
>  during  sleep;  <  at  stool  and  by  emotions. ^Chorea.

I  Chorea,  involuntary  movements  and  contortions  of  limbs,

with  mute,  appealing  look  for  sympathy,
•  Epileptic  fits:  spasm,  stiffness  of  limbs,  clenched  fists  or
teeth;  from  local  irritation  of  nerves,  when  an  overex-
cited, not  depressed  condition  of  nerves  exists;  some-
times result  of  vicious  habits;  muscular  contractions,
twitchings  and  spasms.
■Neuralgic  pains  in  any  part,  darting  or  shooting  along
nerve.

■  Trembling,  involuntary  shaking  of  hands,  limbs  or  head.

■  Palsy,  paralysis  agitans.

^^  Sleep. iSpasmodic  yawning.

■  Insomnia  from  exhaustion  or  lack  of  brain  nutrition.
^  Time. Morning:  spasms,  early.

1 0  A.M. :  pain  in  face  ceases.

II  A.M.:  pain  over  eye  <.

Day  and  night :  spasmodic  hiccough.

Evening :  itching  of  feet ;  headache,  10  p.m.,  lasting  all  night.

Night: restless  sleep;  enuresis; spasmodic cough;  neu-
ralgia.
^^  Temperature  and  Weather. Warmth :  neuralgia  or  rheu-
matism > ;  pain  over  eye  > ;  prosopalgia  > ;  pain  in
abdomen  >  ;  crampy  pain  >.

Hot  liquids :  ease  toothache.

Exposure  to  North  wind  :  neuralgia.

When  body  is  cold  :  prosopalgia  <.

After  washing  and  standing  in  cold  water,  crampy  colic.
*"  Fever. ■Intermittent  fever  with  cramps  in  calves.
*^  Attacks,  Periodicity. Pains  at  intervals,  occurring  in
spells:  colic;  neuralgia.

Every  three  or  four  minutes:  passes  large  quantity  of  urine.

Lasting  from  a  quarter  to  a  half  hour:  spasms.

Every  half  hour:  stools.

Every  two  or  three  hours:  faceache.

Ten  times  a  day :  spasmodic  cough.


255  MAGNESIA  PHOSPHORICA.

Every  day:  attacks  of  colic  from  3  to  4  p.m.,  lasting  several
hours ;  child  takes  six  to  eight  bottles ;  different  disorders.

Every  evening:  for  two  weeks,  at  10  p.m.,  headache.

Every  night:  neuralgia  in  lower  limbs.

For  three  days:  spasmodic  hiccough;  spasmodic  sobbing.

Every  twenty-three  days:  spasms  of  fifteen  to  thirty  min-
utes' duration.
*^  Locality  and  Direction.  Right:  pain  over  eye;  proso-
palgia <  ;  boring  over  eye,  then  to  jaw;  ovarian  neu-
ralgia;  pains  settled  in  leg,  <  in  joints;  trembling  of
foot  and  arm.

Left :  neuralgia  in  face ;  prosopalgia  on  side  of  head  to
nape ;  lobe  of  liver  enlarged  ;  pain  under  scapula.

I  Changing  place  rapidly  :  toothache,  neuralgia.

Now  r.,  now  1. :  neuralgia.

I  iRadiating  pain  :  in  abdomen.
*^  Sensations. Quick,  shooting,  stitching  pains  which  come
at  intervals  and  change  place.

Neuralgic  pains  shooting  like  lightning  or  boring,  often
with  a  feeling  as  if  laced  or  drawn  together,  changing
place  often,  >  by  warmth  or  pressure.

As  if  choking;  as  if  a  band  was  tightly  laced  or  drawn
around  body  ;  as  if  muscles  of  urethra  did  not  contract ;
as  if  muscular  fibres  of  heart  participated  in  general
spasm.

Pain :  in  supraorbital  nerve  over  r.  eye ;  in  stomach ;
around  navel  and  above  it  towards  stomach  and  to  back  ;
in  r.  leg  from  hip  to  ankle;  in  limbs;  in  head,  teeth,
face  and  limbs ;  in  back.

Maddening  pain :  in  whole  1.  side  of  head ;  back  to  nape
of  neck.

Excruciating  pain  :  in  headache ;  neuralgia ;  sciatica.

Terrible  pain :  from  back,  under  1.  scapula  to  front  and
down  to  groin.

Violent  pains:  in  acute  rheumatism  of  joints.

Great  pain :  with  retching.

Violent  cutting:  in  abdomen.

Shooting,  stinging :  in  head.

Violent  shooting  burning  :  in  urethra.

Vivid  darting:  in  limbs.

Acute,  boring,  darting,  neuralgic  pains :  in  any  part  of  back.

Severe  crampy,  shooting,  darting  pains :  in  face ;  in  hemor-
rhoids ;  in  r.  ovary.

Sharp,  shooting,  boring :  in  nape  of  neck.

Violently  contracting  pains :  in  abdomen.

Griping,  cutting,  drawing  pains:  in  bowels.

Lightninglike  pains :  along  course  of  nerves ;  in  face  ;  in
hemorrhoids.


MAGNESIA  PHOSPHORICA.  256

Flying  pains :  in  limbs.

Shifting  pain  :  in  back.

Sudden  flashes  of  pain  :  in  back  part  of  head  and  neck.

Lancinating  pain  :  in  face.

Shooting  pains:  in  teeth;  in  abdomen.

Nipping,  griping  pain  :  at  pit  of  stomach.

Boring :  over  r.  eye  to  lower  jaw.

Pinching :  in  stomach  ;  from  navel  to  back.

Neuralgia:  in  head;  in  r.  side  of  face;  on  1.  side  of  face;
in  teeth  ;  of  stomach  ;  of  r.  ovary  ;  intercostal.

Rheumatic  pain  :  in  head  ;  in  teeth.

Cramps:  in  abdomen;  in  stomach;  in  calves;  in  legs.

Spasmodic  pains:  in  stomach  and  bowels;  labor  pains.

Soreness :  caused  by  singultus.

Constriction:  of  chest.

Drawn  feeling :  of  eyelids.

Dulness :  of  head.

Stiffness :  of  limbs ;  of  body.

Spasmodic  constriction :  of  throat.

Pricking :  all  over  him,  <  about  ankles,  knees  and  elbows.

Itching :  on  feet.
**  Tissues. Nutrition  and  function  remedy  for  the  nerve  tissues.

Bad effects  from  injurious  stimulants  having  acted  on
sound  nerve  tissue.

Nervous  asthma  from  primary  irritation  of  affected  nerves;
spasm  of  glottis;  tetanus;  lockjaw;  cramps  of  calves;
St.  Vitus'  dance ;  convulsions,  etc.
*^  Touch.  Passive  Motion.  Injuries.  Touch:  of  maxillaris
inferior  caused  pain  in  supraorbitalis;  slightest,  in  any
part  of  affected  nerves  <  pains.

Pressure :  with  hand  >  pain  in  abdomen ;  back  very  sen-
sitive.

Hard  pressure:  lightninglike  pain  >.

Friction:  >  pain  in  abdomen.

Scratching:  causes  rash  to  turn  red.
^  Skin.  ;rRash  on  arms,  legs  and  face,  like  insect  bites,  run-
ning together  in  large  patches;  only  red  when  scratched;
feels  a  pricking  all  over  him,  <  about  knees,  ankles  and
elbows.
*^  Stages  of  Life,  Constitution.  More  suitable  for  young
and  very  strong  persons;  teething  children.

Baby,  daily  colic,  generally  3  to  4  p.m.

Child,  set.  10  months;  whooping  cough.

Colored  child,  set.  15  months,  teething;  convulsions.

Child,  teething,  mother  died  of  diabetes;  profuse  and  fre-
quent urination.

Child,  set.  6,  suffering  eight  months;  chorea.

Boy,  set.  10;  persistent  vomiting.


257  MAGNESIA  PHOSPHORICA.

Girl,  set.  13,  since  six  years,  every  two  or  three  days;  spasms.

Girl,  set.  13,  delicate,  slender  growth,  attacks  every  twenty-
three  days,  suffering  six  years ;  spasms.

Woman,  at  20,  weakly,  suffered  much  from  scrofula  dur-
ing childhood ;  nervous  ailment.

Miss  S.,  set.  20,  brunette,  tall  and  slender,  nervo-bilious
temperament,  typographer ;  facial  neuralgia.

Miss  B.,  set.  22,  dark  complexion,  nervous  temperament,
slight  build,  suffering  three  days,  massive  doses  of  Bro-
mide of  Potash  and  Chloral  Hydrate,  without  relief;
facial  neuralgia.

Miss  S.,  set.  24,  dark  complexion,  nervous  temperament,
clerk,  suffering  two  weeks,  morphia  brought  no  relief;
facial  neuralgia.

Woman,  set.  26,  nervous  temperament;  nervous  affection.

Woman,  set.  28,  nervo-bilious  temperament,  fleshy,  healthy;
neuralgic  headache,  particularly  after  childbirth.

Woman,  set.  30,  hectic  appearance ;  facial  neuralgia.

Woman,  set.  31,  suffering  thirteen  years;  chorea.

Woman,  set.  36,  healthy  appearance,  suffering  several
weeks;  faceache.

Woman ;  tic  douloureux.

Woman,  set.  40,  single ;  facial  neuralgia.

Woman,  set.  42,  hectic  appearance ;  catamenia  scanty,  often
omitting;  faceache.

Woman,  set.  60;  colic  after  standing  in  cold  water.

Woman,  set.  60 ;  since  six  years,  neuralgia.

An  old  lady;  intercostal  neuralgia.

Man,  set.  69,  suffering  some  weeks;  pains  in  limbs.

A  little,  lean  man,  set.  70;  since  three  years  a  discharge

from  urethra.

*^  Relations. Compare:  Arsen.  (nightly  neuralgic  pains,  >

from  warmth;  Magn.  phos.  sometimes  acts  better  when

given  in  hot  water) ;  Zincum  (action  on  nervous  system).


VOL,  vn. — 17.


MAGNESIA  SULPHURICA.  258

MAGNESIA  SULPHURICA.

Magnesium  Sulphate;  Epsom  Salts.  Mg  SO 4^  IH^  0.

Proved  by  Nenning  (Hartlaub  and  Trinks'  Annalen,  vol.  4,  p.  466)  and
IJencke  (Neues  Archiv.,  vol.  3,  p.  185).

Clinical  Authorities.— Dtaieifes,  Eaue's  Eec,  1874,  p.  211.

^  Mind. Very  lively,  or  greatly  depressed.

Sad  and  weeping ;  foreboding  anxiety,  as  if  some  accident

would  happen.
Ill  humor,  irritable.
^  Sensorium. Vertigo,  heaviness  of  head;  spontaneous  closing

of  eyes.
^  Inner  Head. iDulness  in  head,  on  rising  in  morning,  dis-
appearing after  an  hour.
Dull  feeling  of  head,  as  if  bandaged  or  screwed  in.
Heaviness  of  head  with  vertigo.
Stitches,  stabbings  in  head.
Boring  in  vertex.

Sensation  in  forehead  on  stooping  as  if  something  would
fall  forward.
^  Sight  and  Eyes. Violent  pains  in  eyes,  especially  r.,  as  if
it  would  start  out  of  socket.
Stinging  in  both  eyes.
Dimness  of  eyes  with  frequent  drowsiness.
Burning  of  eyes,  especially  at  candlelight.
Lachrymation,  with  photophobia.
'  Smell  and  Nose. Bleeding  of  nose  (at  night)  with  dimi-
nution of  headache.
Fluent  coryza,  with  rough  voice,  pain  in  chest  and  fre-
quent flow  of  water  from  nose.
Pain  in  posterior  nares,  as  from  air  pressing  through  with
violence,  when  talking  or  coughing.
^  Upper  Face. Tearing  in  r.  facial  bones  or  in  1.  malar  bone.
^  Lower  Face. Burning  of  lips  in  evening,  with  dryness.
'"  Teeth  and  Gums. Toothache  on  entering  room  from  cold

air,  <  by  contact  of  food,  cold  and  warm  things.
'^  Inner  Mouth. Mouth  and  throat  very  dry,  as  if  numb.
^^  Throat. Stinging  in  fauces,  more  between  than  during  act
of  deglutition.
Frequent  mucus  in  throat,  which  can  neither  be  swal-
lowed nor  hawked  up.


259  MAGNESIA  SULPHURIGA.

'*  Appetite,  Thirst. Desires,  Aversions. Thirst  early  in
morning  on  rising,  going  off  after  breakfast.
Thirst  in  evening,  particularly  during  menses.
''  Hiccough,  Belching,  Nausea"^  and  Vomiting. Rising  of
water  from  stomach,  also  with  loathing  and  nausea.
Vomiting  (in  afternoon)  first  of  ingesta,  then  of  mucus.
■  Frequent  eructations  tasting  like  bad  eggs.
"  Scrobiculum  and  Stomach. Trembling  of  stomach,  with
subsequent  gulping  up  of  water,  sometimes  putrid  taste.
Feeling  of  coldness  in  stomach,  with  inclination  to  vomit.
'^  Hypochondria. Sticking  in  1.  hypochondriac  region,  par-
ticularly when  sitting  or  in  evening.
^^  Abdomen. Distension,  fulness  and  hardness  of  abdomen,
even  after  a  moderate  meal.
Rumbling  in  abdomen,  with  emission  of  flatus.
Itching  of  1.  inguinal  region,  not  removed  by  scratching.
^  Stool  and  Rectum. Stools:  alternate  hard  and  soft;  liquid,
with  tenesmus;  soft,  early  after  rising; diarrhoea,  with
discharge  of  ascarides; soft,  with  burning  at  anus  or
with  subsequent  tenesmus.
Diarrhoea  preceded  by  rumbling  in  abdomen.
^'  Urinary  Organs. Increased  emission  of  clear,  greenish
urine.
Nocturnal  micturition  (involuntary).
■  Diabetes.
^^  Male  Sexual  Organs. Frequent  stinging  about  penis  when
sitting  or  walking.
Erections  without  amorous  fancies  or  sexual  desire.
^Female  Sexual  Organs. Menses:  too  late  ;  too  short;  too
early;  stop  for  two  days,  then  flow  again.
During  menses :  great  heaviness  in  head ;  bruised  pain  in

small  of  back ;  pain  in  groins.
Discharge  of  blood  between  menstrual  periods.
Leucorrhoea:  burning,  particularly  during  motion;  thick,
with  bruised  pain  in  small  of  back  and  thighs;  thick,
profuse  like  menses.
""  Voice  and  Larynx. Trachea and Bronchia. Deep,

hollow  bass  voice  (as  in  catarrh).
'"  Cough. Loose  cough,  with  soreness  in  mouth  and  throat.
Dry  cough:  with  burning  from  larynx  to  pit  of  stomach;
in  evening  in  bed,  during  which  he  falls  asleep.
^  Inner  Chest  and  Lungs. Painful  burning  in  chest  when
coughing,  as  if  a  piece  of  lung  would  come  out.
Oppression  of  chest,  with  burning  in  chest  when  walking.
^^ Burning  in  middle  of  chest;  under  upper  part  of  sternum.
Neck  and  Back. Tension  in  nape  of  neck  and  between
shoulders,  with stitches,  particularly  in morning  on
rising,  with  great  sensitiveness  to  touch,  >  by  walking.
Rheumatic  pain  between  shoulders.


MAGNESIA  SULPHURICA.  260

Bruised  pain  in  small  of  back,  with  pains  in  groins  when

sitting  or  standing,  >  when  walking.
Nightly  pain  in  small  of  back  and  thighs.
^^  Upper  Limbs. Rheumatic  pains  in  1.  elbow  and  wrist  joint.
Trembling  of  hands.

Tingling  in  fingers;  going  off  by  rubbing.
^  Lower  Limbs. Pain  in  thighs  when  walking.
Rheumatic  pain  in  hip,  in  1.  femur.
Cracking  of  tarsal  joint  at  every  step.
^  Limbs  in  General. Rheumatic  pains  in  limbs,  particularly

at  night.
^  Rest. Position. Motion. Cannot  lie  on  back :  pain  in

small  of  back.
Raising  head  in  bed :  vertigo.
Stooping :  sensation  in  forehead  as  if  something  would  fall

forward.
Sitting: sticking  in 1. hypochondriac  region; stinging

about  penis;  pains  in  groins.
Standing :  pains  in  groins.
Motion :  burning  leucorrhoea.
At  every  step :  cracking  of  tarsal  joint.
"Walking:  stinging  about  penis;  burning  and  oppression

of  chest ;  tension  in  nape  of  neck  >  ;  pains  in  groins  >  ;

bruised  pains  in  back  > ;  pain  in  thighs.
^^  Nerves. Great  languor,  with  staggering  gait  or  trembling

of  body.
^^  Sleep. Sleeplessness  from  violent  headache,  colic,  pain  in

small  of  back  which  does  not  allow  him  to  lie  on  back.
Anxious  dreams,  with  starting.
^  Time. Morning,  on  rising: dulness  in  head; thirst;  soft

stools;  stitches  in  nape  of  neck  and  between  shoulders;

chilliness,  with  thirst.  I
All  day:  cold  feet.
Afternoon :  vomiting ;  sweat.
Evening:  burning  of  lips;  thirst;  sticking  in  1.  hj^pochon-

driac  region;  in  bed,  dry  cough;  shuddering  in  back.
9  P.M. :  chill,  violent  headache,  going  off  in  bed ;  till  10  a.m.

chill.
Night:  bleeding  of  nose;  involuntary  micturition;  rheu-
matic pain  in  limbs.
^^  Temperature  and  Weather. From  cold  air  into  room :

toothache.
Cold  or  warm  food :  toothache.
^°  Fever. Shuddering  in  back,  in  evening,  from  below  upwards.
Chilliness:  with  thirst,  early  in  morning  after  waking.
Shaking  chill,  with  violent  headache  in  evening,  9  p.m.,

going  off  in  bed,  succeeded  by  thirst.
Chill  from  9  p.m.  till  10  a.m.,  followed  by  sweat  in  afternoon.


261  MAGNESIA  SULPHURICA.

Alternation  of  heat  and  shuddering,  with  alternate  redness
and  paleness  of  face.

Heat  in  one  part  of  body  and  chill  in  another.

Heat  and  vertigo  on  raising  head  in  bed,  with  sweat  on
forehead  and  redness  in  face.

Heat  of  head,  with  coldness  of  rest  of  body.

Cold  feet  all  day,  although  otherwise  hot.
^^  Attacks,  Periodicity. Nightly  pain  in  small  of  back  and
thighs.

For  two  days :  menses  stop,  then  flow  again.
*^  Locality  and  Direction. Right:  violent  pains  in  eye;  tear-
ing in  facial  bone.

Left:  tearing  in  malar  bone;  sticking  in  1.  hypochondriac
region;  itching  of  inguinal  canal;  rheumatic  pains  in
elbow  and  wrist  joint;  rheumatic  pain  in  femur.

From  below  upwards:  shuddering  in  back.
*^  Sensations.  As  if  some  accident  would  happen;  head  as  if
bandaged  or  screwed  in;  as  if  something  would  fall  for-
ward; as  if  eye  would  start  out  of  socket;  as  if  air  was
pressing  through  posterior  nares ;  mouth  and  throat  as
if  numb ;  as  if  piece  of  lung  would  come  out.

Pain:  in  chest;  in  posterior  nares;  in  teeth;  in  groins;  in
small  of  back  and  thighs.

Violent  pain :  in  head ;  in  eyes.

Tearing:  in  r.  facial  bones  or  in  1.  malar  bone.

Boring;  in  vertex.

Stitches,  stabbing:  in  head.

Stitches :  in  nape  of  neck  and  between  shoulders.

Stinging:  in  both  eyes;  in  fauces;  about  penis.

Sticking:  in  1.  hypochondriac  region.

Painful  burning:  in  chest.

Burning:  of  eyes;  of  lips;  from  larynx  to  pit  of  stomach;
in  middle  of  chest;  under  upper  part  of  sternum;  of
blotches ;  at  anus.

Heat:  of  head;  in  one  part  of  bod}'^,  chill  in  another.

Colic:  in  abdomen.

Soreness:  in  mouth  and  throat.

Bruised  pain :  in  small  of  back ;  in  thighs ;  in  whole  body.

Rheumatic  pain :  between  shoulders ;  in  1.  elbow  and  1.
wrist  joint;  in  hip;  in  1.  femur;  in  limbs.

Tingling:  in  fingers.

Tension:  in  nape  of  neck  and  between  shoulders.

Oppression :  of  chest.

Heaviness:  of  head.

Fulness:  of  abdomen.

Dulness:  in  head.

Dull  feeling:  of  head.

Trembling:  of  stomach  ;  of  hands.


MAGNESIA  SULPHURICA.  262

Dryness:  of  lips;  of  mouth  and  throat.

Itching :  of  1.  inguinal  canal ;  of  blotches.

Shuddering:  in  back.

Violent  itching :  of  tetter  on  arms.

Coldness:  of  stomach ;  of  body ;  of  feet.
*^  Touch. Passive  Motion. Injuries. Touch :  great  sensi-
tiveness of  neck.

Rubbing:  tingling  in  fingers  going  off.

Scratching:  does  not  remove  itching  of  inguinal  canal ;
of  blotches  causes  burning.
^  Skin. Itching  blotches,  either  hard  or  as  from  nettles,  with
burning  after  scratching.

Small  red  tetter  on  arms,  with  violent  itching.
^  Relations. Compare:  Act.  rac.  and  Pulsat.  in  sadness,  weep-
ing, foreboding  anxiety; Ignat.  in  stinging  in  fauces
between  acts  of  deglutition ;  Hepar  in  eructations.


263  •  MANCINELLA.

MANCINELLA.

Hippomane  Mancinella.  Euphorbiaceae.

A  poisonous  tree,  a  native  of  West  Indies,  bearing  a  poisonous  fruit,  some-
what resembling  apples.  The  tincture  is  prepared  from  fresh  leaves,  bark  and
fruit.

Introduced  and  proved  by  Bute.  See  Hering's  compilation,  Allg.  Horn.
Zeit.,  1850.  Also  proved  by  Mure  and  Ackermann.  Toxicological  reports  are
numerous.

Clinical  Authokities. — Affection  of  throat,  Bute,  MSS.;  Post-diphtheritic
affection,  Bute,  Raue's  Rec,  1870,  p.  152;  Affection  of  stomach,  Bute,  MSS.;  Pain  in
I.  hypochondrium,  Bute,  MSS. ;  Rumbling  in  abdomen,  Bute,  MSS. ;  Colic,  Bute,  MSS. ;
Cholera  infantum,  Howard,  MSS. ;  Asthma,  Howard,  MSS. ;  Nervous  affection,  Bute,
Hom.  Clin.,  vol.  1,  p.  283;  vol.  4,  p.  19  ;  Typhoid  fever,  Bute,  MSS.

^  Mind. I  Sudden  vanishiDg  of  thought, forgets from one
moment  to  next  what  she  wishes  to  do.

■  Everything  becomes  irksome.

■  Fear  of  getting  crazy  ;  of  evil  spirits  ;  of  being  taken  by

the  devil.

■  Averse  to  work  and  answering  questions.

I  I  Melancholy,  homesickness;  about  midnight  attacks  of
fear  and  trembling;  afraid  of  evil  spirits,  of  being  taken
hold  of  by  the  devil;  sleeplessness;  pressing  in  cardiac
region,  hard  beats  of  heart,  followed  by  faintishness,with
darkening  before  eyes;  tetters. /^Mental  derangement.

Bashful  and  taciturn;  has  a  timid  look.

Aggravation  from  anger  and  after  eating.
^  Sensorium. Vertigo: stupefying;  with  loss  of  conscious-
ness; in  morning  on  rising  from  bed.

■  Sensation  of  lightness  in  head  while  walking  about  room.
^  Inner  Head. Stitches:  in  temples;  in  head,  with  sleepless-
ness ;  over  1.  eye.

Headache:  with  impatience;  caused  by  candlelight.
Pulsating  pains  in  head  and  neck,  preventing  one  from

writing.
Whole  head  feels  sore,  as  if  bruised  or  as  if  it  had  been

exposed  to  sun.
Heaviness  in  head.

■  Headache,  <  from  warmth  of  stove.

*  Outer  Head. Itching  of  scalp ;  hair  falls  out  after  severe

acute  diseases.
^  Sight  and  Eyes. Blue  circles  around  eyes.


MANCINELLA.  264

Sensation  of  heaviness  and  dryness  of  eyes  and  lids.
Burning:  in  eyes,  headache  from  candlelight;  of  eyelids,
only  when  closing  them.
®  Hearing  and  Ears. Ears  feel  as  if  closed.

Redness  and  heat  of  ears.
^  Smell  and  Nose. Pressure  at  root  of  nose.

Dryness  of  nose.
*  Upper  Face. Face:  swollen;  pale;  pale,  yellow,  bloated.
Heat  rising  to  face,  and  soon  thereafter  painful  itching,
stitching  and  burning,  continuing  all  day,  next  morn-
ing face  swollen;  towards  noon  vesicles,  size  of  small
pinhead  and  filled  with  a  yellow fluid,  next  day  des-
quamation.
^  Lower  Face. Lips  pale ;  pricking  pains  in  lips.
Lower  lip  hangs  down.

Large  number  of  small  vesicles  on  chin,  which  desquamate.
"  Taste  and  Tongue. iVery  bitter  taste  in  mouth.

I  Tongue  coated  white,  except  on  several  sharply  defined

clean  spots.
Burning  on  tongue;  dry.
I  Tongue  coated  white  as  in  aphthae.

■  Taste:  bloody;  <  after  sleeping.

^^  Inner  Mouth, l  l  Unendurable  burning  and  prickling  in
mouth,  not  >  by  cold  water.
I  I  Whole  mouth  and  tongue  covered  with  small  vesicles.

■  Increased  flow  of  saliva;  yellow  saliva;  fetid.
Burning  at  soft  palate  and  roof  of  mouth.
Dryness  of  mouth.

■  Ofifensive  breath,  perceptible  to  herself.
Blister,  size  of  hazelnut,  on  palate.
Inflammation  in  mouth ;  bleeds.

13  Throat. ■  Great  elongation  of  uvula.

Heat  in  pharynx  and  down  oesophagus,  without  thirst.

■  Great  dryness  of  throat;  on  waking.

■  Choking  sensation  rises  in  throat  when  speaking.
Stitches  in  throat.

Sensation  of  constriction  in  throat,  ascending  from  stom-
ach, caused  by  accumulation  of  air,  with  palpitation  of
heart  and  great  sensation  of  weakness,  impeding  speech.

■  Thirst  for  cold  water,  with  inability  to  swallow  on  account

of  a  choking  which  rises  up  from  stomach.
■Angina  following  scarlet  fever,  or  during  epidemic  of  latter.
I  I  Periodical  thrusts  (as  if  electric)  in  upper  part  of  throat,

waking  from  sleep.
■Yellowish  white  ulcers,  with  violent  burning  pain.

■  Great  swelling  and  suppuration  of  tonsils,  with  danger  of

suffocation;  whistling  breathing.

■  Sore  throat  during  scarlet  fever.


265  MANCINELLA.

■  White  yellowish  burning  ulcers  on  tonsils  and  in  throat.

■  Diphtheria  on  1.  side;  ever  since,  pains  all  over  her  body,

mostly  in  chest,  with  a  dry  cough.
I  I  Menses  irregular,  profuse;  heat  in  head,  with  vertigo;  >

w^hen  at  rest;  edges  of  eyelids  burn  when  closing  eyes.

^Post-diphtheritic  affection.
^*  Appetite,  Thirst. Desires,  Aversions, i  Thirst  for  cold

water,  but  is  prevented  from  drinking  by  choking  sen-
sation rising  from  stomach;  with  burning  heat.
Aversion  to  meat  and  bread.

Longing  for  water  and  aversion  to  wine  and  alcoholic  drinks.
'^  Eating  and  Drinking. Can  take  none  but  liquid  food  on

account  of  soreness  of  mouth.
I  Drinking  water,  bloatedness  and  painfulness  of  region  of

stomach  <.
I  After  drinking  w^ater:  colic;  pain  in  abdomen.
^®  Hiccough,  Belching,  Nausea  and  Vomiting,  i Ineffectual

desire  to  eructate  or  gag  with  excessive  nausea.
II Continual  choking  sensation,  rising  from  stomach  like

from  pressure  of  wind,  with  weakness  and  palpitation

of  heart.
I  I  Repeated  green  vomit.
iSour.  greasy  vomit,  with  aversion  to  water; on  vomit

floats  a  white  mass  like  coagulated  fat.
I  I  Vomiting  of  food,  followed  by  severe  colic  and  profuse

diarrhoea.
I  I  Vomiting  relieves  headache.
^^  Scrobiculum  and  Stomach. Burning:  in  stomach  and

throat,  with  nausea;  in  pit  of  stomach.

■  Pit  of  stomach  swollen  and  sensitive  to  pressure.

■  Distension  and  pain  in  region  of  stomach.

■  Bloatedness  and  painfulness  of  region  of  stomach. ^Ner-

vous fever.
■Sensation  as  of  flames  rising  from  stomach.
■Sensation  as  if  stomach  drew  together  in  a  lump  and

then  suddenly  opened.
^^  Hypochondria. •  '  Rumbling  in  1.  side  when  bending  to  right.
I  I  Sudden  sticking  in  1.  hypochondrium.

■  Pain  in  1.  hypochondrium  in  a  spot  as  large  as  a  half

dollar,  compelling  her  to  press  there  with  hand ;  rum-
bling in  1.  side  M-hen  lying  on  r.  side,  also  with  every
respiration ;  no  rumbling  when  lying  on  1.  side.
^^  Abdomen. ■Wandering  pains  in  abdomen.

■  Pains  in  abdomen  through  bowels,  after  drinking  w^ater,

■  Loud  rumbling  in  abdomen.

■  Rumbling  in  abdomen  renewed  by  every  motion and

when  taking  a  deep  inspiration,  with  headache  which  is
much  <  near  warm  stove.


MANCINELLA.  266

I  Colic :  after  drinking  water;  with  diarrhoea  (at  midnight);

with  fainting,  constipation,  alternating  with  diarrhoea.
I  I  Distended  abdomen.

I  I  Sensation  of  soreness,  as  if  bruised,  of  abdominal  walls.
I  I  Eruptions  of  rash  on  abdomen.
^  Stool  and  Rectum, l  l  Fulness  in  rectum,  with a  hollow

feeling  in  stomach.
I  I  Profuse  diarrhoea,  with  colic  and  vertigo.
I  I  Many  bloody  stools,  with  colic,  inclination  to  sleep  and

vertigo.
I  I  Greenish  stools,  without  blood.

I  Diarrhoea:  with  burning  in  abdomen  and  anus;  in  alter-
nation with constipation ; with  cutting  in  abdomen ;

with  much  discharge  of  flatus.
Sudden  desire  to  go  to  stool  (in  morning),  after  stool  ten-
esmus.
I  Bloody  evacuations,  with  colic,  sleepiness  and  giddiness.
Stools:  painful,  black,  fetid,  bloody,  with  tenesmus.
I  During  afternoon,  more  than  twenty  evacuations,  with

pain  in  intestines  as  if  fire  was  there.
I  I  Sensation  of  fulness  in  rectum.
I  I  After  stool:  pulsation  in  anus;  discharge  of  fetid  blood

from  hemorrhoidal  tumors.
I  Frequent  thin,  watery  discharges;  vomiting;  emaciation  ;

great  prostration ; loss  of  appetite ; aversion  to food.

^Cholera  infantum.
I  Constipation.
^^  Urinary  Orgfans. ' '  Tired  feeling  in  region  of  kidneys,  with

inclination  to  rub  parts,  and  with  frequent  stretching

back  of  body.
I  I  Sensation  of  weakness,  as  if  bruised,  in  region  of  kidneys.
Stitches  in  bladder  before  and  at  beginning  of  micturition.
Burning  in  urethra.

I  Urine :  brown  ;  whitish,  clouded  on  standing.
^^  Male  Sexual  Organs, i  l  Increased  sexual  desire.

Itching  on  scrotum.
^^  Female  Sexual  Organs, i  i  Pale  menstrual  flow ;  colic.

Before  menstruation  :  congestion  of  head.
^  Voice  and  Larynx. Trachea  and  Bronchia. ■  Nasal  tone

of  voice.
I  Choking  sensation  rising  up  into  throat,  hindering  speech.
In  larynx :  scraping ;  cutting  as  with  a  knife ;  tension.
^  Bespiration. ■  Whistling  breathing.

■  During  breathing:  rattling  in  1.  chest;  loud  rumbling

in  abdomen ;  severe  pain  in  middle  of  sternum,  <  from
pressure.

■  Asthma,  chronic.

^^  Cough. ■  Frequent  hawking,  with  nausea.


267  MANCINELLA.

.  I  Violent  cough and painful stitches in trachea from
slightest  exertion.
I  Cough :  <  at  night ;  after  drinking.

■  Expectoration  reheves  oppression  of  chest.

^  Inner  Chest  and  Lungs, i  Constriction  of  chest.
I  Oppression  of  chest ;  >  after  expectoration.

■  Rattling  in  1.  chest.

Suffocative  attacks,  with  pulsation  in  chest,  while  cough-
ing, or  as  soon  as  he  begins  to  talk.

Stitches  in  middle  of  sternum.

I  Pain  in  centre  of  sternum,  <  from  pressure  and  from
breathing.
^^  Heart,  Pulse  and  Circulation. Stitches  in  heart  as  from
needles.

■  Palpitation  of  heart:  in  evening,  as  from  eating;  weakness.

■  Pulse:  weak  and  somewhat  accelerated;  80.

^  Outer  Chest. ■Stitches  in  middle  of  sternum;  < from

breathing.
'^  Neck  and  Back. iPainfulstiffnessof  neck,  especially  after
sleep,  could  scarcely  move  neck.
Stitches  in  1.  shoulder  blade  and  1.  breast  at  intervals.
Backache  with  nausea  and  tenesmus.
Soreness  in  region  of  kidneys.

■  Painful  stiffness  of  small  of  back.

■  Tired  sensation  in  region  of  kidneys,  desire  to  rub  part;

much  stretching.

■  Painful  stiffness  of  small  of  back  and  of  finger  joints

which  she  could  scarcely  bend.
^^  Upper  Limbs. Trembling  and  heaviness  of  arms.
When  waking,  hands  feel  as  if  asleep  and  numb.
Trembling  of  hands.
■Painful  stiffness  of  finger  joints.

■  Hands  as  if  too  thick,  "asleep,"  heavy  and  clumsy.

■  Hands  icy  cold.

■  Pain  and  stiffness  of  finger  joints.
Blue  finger  nails.

^  Lower  Limbs. ■  Quivering  and  jerking  in  legs  in  attacks.
Trembling  of  legs.

Sudden,  needlelike  stitches  in  lower  extremities.
Cramps  in  legs  and  feet.
Tingling  in  feet  when  sitting.
■Stitches  under  heel,  from  without  inward.

■  Burning  in  soles  and  dr}'  feeling.

■  Desquamation  of  soles  at  end  of  fever.

■  Large  vesicles,  especially  on  soles.

^  Limbs  in  General. Ucy  coldness  of  hands  and  feet.
^  Rest. Position. Motion. Rest:  heat  in  head  >.
Lying :  head  feels  as  if  lying  on  something  hard.


MANCINELLA.  268

Must  lie  down:  pulse  irregular,  limbs  cold,  great  anxiety;
severe  headache.

Sitting:  tingling  in  feet.

Frequent  stretching  back:  of  body,  tired  feeling  of  region
of  kidneys.

Every  motion  :  renews  rumbling  in  abdomen.

Slightest  exertion :  violent  cough  and  painful  stitches  in
trachea.

Could  scarcely  move  neck :  stiffness.

Walking :  about  room  ;  lightness  in  head.
^  Nerves. Lassitude  and  indescribable  uncomfortable  feeling
in  limbs.

I  Much  stretching,  with  tired  feeling  over  region  of  kidneys.

Must  lie  down,  pulse  irregular,  limbs  cold,  great  anxiety.

•  Prostration  and  trembling  in  limbs.

■  Fainting  with  intestinal  colic.

Convulsions.

I  About  midnight,  attacks  of  fear  and  trembling,  followed
by  feverish  heat;  afraid  of  evil  spirits;  of  being  taken
hold  of  by  the  devil ;  sleeplessness ;  only  somewhat  re-
lieved towards  morning;  fears  she  is  getting  crazy;
anxious  expression  in  face ;  dark  brownish  circles  around
eyes;  throbbing  in  pit  of  stomach;  pressure  in  region
of  heart,  hard  beats  of  heart  followed  by  fainty  feelings,
with  darkening  before  eyes;  pulse  slow  and  soft;  fre-
quent headache ;  desire  for  saltish  food ;  smell  of  onions
before  nose;  menses  one  week  too  early,  with  pains  in
chest;  feet  puffed  up  every  morning;  on  chin,  old,  dark
tetter  with  red  pimples.

I  After  typhoid  fever:  frequent  shooting  pain  like  a  streak
down  r.  arm ;  constant  soreness,  extending  from  region
of  r.  kidney  into  back  and  around  to  liver;  sometimes
extending  down  to  legs  like  rheumatism;  head  feels
heavy,  often  as  if  it  had  been  squeezed  fiat,  sometimes
as  if  hollow;  when  lying,  her  head  feels  as  if  lying  on
something  hard;  pain  over  r.  eye;  feeling  of  weakness
extending  from  forehead  down  into  nose;  appetite
changeable,  sometimes  hungry  without  appetite;  after
eating,  feeling  as  if  hard  pieces  were  lying  in  stomach,
with  some  nausea ;  eating  very  little  makes  her  imme-
diately very  full ;  constant  desire  for  sour  dishes,  parti-
cularly for  indigestible  things  (puddings,  half  baked
bread,  and  the  like);  continual  feeling  of  fulness  in
stomach,  as  if  food  would  come  up  again;  feeling  in  pit
of  stomach  as  of  something  alive;  raw  sensation  extend-
ing down  throat;  speech  often  weak;  palpitation  on
turning  in  bed;  contracting  sensation  in  different  parts,
mostly  of  abdomen ;  pain  in  region  of  bladder  while


269  MANCINELLA.

urinating;  menses  a  few  days  too  late,  sometimes  very
dark,  sometimes  bright,  again  greenish  and  offensive,
with  tearing  pain  in  lower  part  of  abdomen;  much  rest-
lessness; crawling  and  digging  on  different  parts  of
.body;  sometimes  feels  as  light  as  though  she  could  float
or  hover  in  the  air;  mind  much  depressed,  weeps  a  great
deal,  particularly  when  alone;  full  of  fear  of  getting
crazy ;  >  during  evening.  ^Nervous  aff'ection.
^  Sleep. I  Great  sleepiness;  ineffectual  desire  to  yawn.

I  Wakes  as  from  electric  shocks  on  neck  (above  larynx).

I  When  awaking  hands  ''asleep  "  and  heavy,  and  feel  as  if
too  thick.

After sleep: bitter mouth; dryness in throat; could
scarcely  move  neck.
^  Time. Morning:  on  rising,  vertigo;  sudden  desire  to  go  to
stool ;  attacks  of  fear  >.

Towards  noon:  vesicles,  size  of  small  pinhead,  on  face,
next  day  desquamation.

All  day :  painful  itching,  stitching,  burning  in  face.

Afternoon  :  more  than  twenty  evacuations.

Evening:  palpitation  of  heart;  nervous  affection  >.

Night:  cough  <.

Midnight :  attacks  of  fear,  trembling,  diarrhoea  and  colic.
^^  Temperature  and  Weather.  Warmth  of  stove :  headache  <.

Inclination  to  uncover  himself:  burning  heat.

Cold  water :  does  not  >  prickling  and  burning  in  mouth.

Amelioration  from  heat  and  when  lying  down.
*°  Fever. ■  Chill;  icy  cold  hands  and  feet.

■  Flushes  of  heat,  with  sensation  as  if  flames  rose  out  of  re-

gion of  stomach,  on  account  of  which  threw  off  covering.

■  Burning  heat,  with  inclination  to  cover  himself  in  bed;

with  thirst.
Moderate  fever,  severe  headache,  must  lie  down.
Cold  sweat.

Coldness  of  hands  and  feet.
Fever  heat  with  tingling  in  skin  and  desire  to  uncover

one's  self,  with  loss  of  consciousness,  painful  deglutition,

restlessness,  profuse  micturition.

■  Typhoid  fever  with  tympanitis  and  sensitiveness  of  ab-

domen, <  by  drinking  water.
"  Attacks,  Periodicity. Periodical :  thrusts,  as  if  electric,  in
upper  part  of  throat.
Alternate :  diarrhoea  and  constipation.
Every  morning :  feet  puffed  up.
*^  Locality  and  Direction. Right :  frequent  shooting  pain
down  arm ;  soreness  extending  from  kidney  into  back  ;
pain  over  eye.
Left :  stitches  over  eye ;  diphtheria  on  side ;  rumbling  in


MANCINELLA.  270

side  when  bending  to  r. ;  sudden  sticking  in  hypo-
chondrium  ;  pain  in  hypochondrium ;  lying  on  r,  side,
rumbling  in  other;  lying  .on  1.  side  no  rumbling;  rat-
tling in  chest ;  stitches  in  shoulder  blade  and  breast.

From  without  inward :  stitches  under  heel.
*^  Sensations.  As  if  head  was  bruised,  or  as  if  it  had  been
exposed  to  sun ;  ears  feel  as  if  closed  ;  thrusts,  as  if  elec-
tric, in  upper  part  of  throat ;  as  of  flames  rising  from
stomach  ;  as  if  stomach  drew  together  in  a  lump  and
then  suddenly  opened  ;  abdominal  walls  as  if  bruised ;
as  if  fire  was  in  intestines ;  region  of  kidneys  as  if
bruised ;  stitches  in  heart  as  from  needles ;  hands  feel
as  if  asleep  and  numb ;  hands  as  if  too  thick ;  head  as  if
it  had  been  squeezed  flat ;  head  as  if  hollow ;  head  as  if
lying  on  something  hard  ;  after  eating  as  if  hard  pieces
were  lying  in  stomach  ;  as  if  food  would  come  up  again ;
in  pit  of  stomach  as  of  something  alive.

Pain :  in  head ;  all  over  her  body,  <  in  chest ;  in  abdomen;
in  region  of  stomach ;  in  1.  hypochondrium  in  a  spot  as
large  as  a  half  dollar ;  in  intestines ;  in  centre  of  sternum ;
in  chest ;  over  r.  eye ;  in  region  of  bladder.

Severe  pain  :  in  middle  of  sternum.

Tearing  pain :  in  lower  part  of  abdomen.

Shooting  pain  :  down  r.  arm.

Violent  burning  pain:  in  throat.

Cutting :  in  abdomen  ;  in  larynx.

Stitches :  in  temples ;  in  head  ;  over  1.  eye ;  in  throat ;  in
bladder;  painful  in  trachea;  in  1.  shoulder  blade  and  1.
breast ;  under  heel.

Needlelike  stitches  :  in  lower  extremities.

Sticking :  in  various  parts  of  body.

Sudden  sticking :  in  1.  hypochondrium.

Pulsating  pain  :  in  head  and  neck.

Pricking  pains :  in  lips.

Contractions:  in  opposite  directions.

Short,  sharp  stitches :  here  and  there.

Wandering  pains :  in  abdomen.

Severe  colic :  in  abdomen.

Cramps :  in  legs  and  feet.

Aching :  in  back.

Unendurable  burning  and  prickling;  in  mouth.

Painful  itching,  stitching  and  burning :  in  face.

Burning :  in  eyes ;  of  eyelids ;  on  tongue ;  at  soft  palate  and
roof  of  mouth ;  in  ulcers  on  tonsils  and  in  throat ;  in
stomach  and  throat ;  in  pit  of  stomach ;  in  abdomen  and
anus ;  in  urethra ;  in  soles.

Soreness:  of  throat;  of  mouth;  of  abdominal  walls;  in
region  of  kidneys;  from  region  of  kidney  into  back  and
around  to  liver,  sometimes  down  to  legs.


271  MANCINELLA.

Heat :  of  ears ;  rising  to  face ;  in  pharynx  and  down  oesoph-
agus; in  head.

Sore  feeling :  in  whole  head.

Painfulness :  of  region  of  stomach.

Raw  sensation :  extending  down  throat.

Crawling  and  digging:  on  different  parts  of  body.

Painful  stiffness:  of  neck;  of  small  of  back;  of  finger  joints.

Pressure:  at  root  of  nose ;  in  region  of  heart.

Pressing:  in  cardiac  region.

Heaviness:  in  head;  of  eyes  and  lids;  of  arms.

Fulness:  in  rectum;  in  stomach.

Oppression:  of  chest.

Tension :  in  larynx.

Contracting  sensation :  in  different  parts,  mostly  abdomen.

Constriction:  in  throat,  ascending  from  stomach;  of  chest.

Choking  sensation :  rises  in  throat.

Indescribable,  uncomfortable  feeling  :  in  limbs.

Light  feeling  as  though  she  could  float  or  hover  in  air.

Lightness :  in  head.

Hollow  feeling :  in  stomach.

Tired  feeling :  in  region  of  kidne3^s.

Weakness :  of  heart ;  in  region  of  kidneys ;  from  forehead
into  nose.

Dryness :  of  eyes  and  lids ;  of  nose ;  of  tongue ;  of  mouth  ;
of  throat ;  of  soles.

Tingling :  in  feet.

Trembling:  of  hands;  of  legs;  of  limbs.

Pulsation :  in  anus ;  in  chest.

Throbbing  :  in  pit  of  stomach.

Quivering  and  jerking :  in  legs.

Itching :  of  scalp ;  on  scrotum.
^  Icy  coldness :  of  hands ;  of  feet.
^  Tissues. Sequelae  of  scarlatina,  diphtheria,  typhus,  etc.
*^  Touch. Passive  Motion. Injuries. Pressure:  pit  of  stom-
ach sensitive ;  with  hand  compelled  by  pain  in  1.  hypo-
chondrium;  pain  in  middle  of  sternum  <.

Inclination  to  rub  region  of  kidneys :  tired  feeling.
*'  Skin. Pvedness  of  skin  (hands).

iSequelse  of  scarlet  fever.

■Small  vesicles  containing  yellow  serum  desquamate  fol-
lowing day.

■  Favors  rapid  healing  of  wounds.

■  Fungoid  growths,  particularly  if  syphilitic.

''^  Stages  of  Life,  Constitution. Boy,  set.  12,  two  years  pre-
viously had  measles  and  scarlet  fever  in  rapid  succession,
smce  then  has  been  sick,  and  confined  much  to  bed;
affection  of  stomach.
Girl,  set.  13 ;  rumbling  in  abdomen.


MANCINELLA— MANGANUM.  272

Young  woman,  had  diphtheria  onl.  side;  post-diphtheritic
affections.

Woman,  set.  24,  unmarried,  after  typhoid  fever;  nervous
affection.

Mrs.  R.,  set.  31,  dark  hair,  liver  spots  in  face,  mild,  some-
what melancholic  temperament,  disposed  to  homesick-
ness, mother  of  six  children ;  nervous  affection.

Woman,  set.  40 ;  pain  in  1.  hypochondrium.
^  Relations. Compare:  Canthar.  in  erythema  and  vesiculation
of  skin,  and  scarlet  fever; Crot.  tig.,  Yucca  filam.  and
Euphorb.  off.  have  similar  skin  symptoms.


MANGANUM.

Acetate  or  Carbonate  of  Manganese.

Discovered  in  1774,  in  the  year  Priestley  discovered  Oxygen.

Introduced  by  Hahnemann  and  provedby  himself  and  his  provers  (seeChroni-
sche  Krankheiten) ;  also  proved  by  Nenning  (Hartlaub  and  Trinks'  Annalen,
vol.  2,  p.  201).

Clinical  Atjthoeities. — Dysecoia,  Times  Ketros.,  vol.  2,  p.  63 ;  Otalgia,  Bowie,
Trans.  Horn.  Med.  Soc.  Pa.,  1874,  p.  186  ;  Affection  of  ears,  Euck.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol,  1,
p.  367  ;  Affection  of  tongue,  Hansen,  AUg.  Horn.  Ztg.,  vol.  113,  p.  13  ;  Pain  in  bowels,
Berridge,  Hom.  Clin.,  vol.  3,  p.  119;  CoZt'c,  Berridge,  Eaue's  Bee,  1871,  p.  122;
Hoarseness,  affections  of  larynx,  Hahnemann,  Hartmann,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  3,  p.
169 ;  Laryngitis,  Lobethal,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  5,  p.  788 ;  Affection  of  larynx  and
trachea,  Miiller,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  5,  p.  418;  Cough,  Ockford,  Eaue's  Eec,  1875,
p.  114;  Martin,  Trans.  Hom.  Med.  Soc.  Pa.,  1886,  p.  95;  Hcemoptysis,  Farrington,
Org.,  vol.  3,  p.  91 ;  Pneumapostema,  Ockford,  Times  Eetros.,  vol.  1,  p.  68 ;  Affection
of  ankle,  Guernsey,  Trans.  Hom.  Med.  Soc.  Pa.,  1881,  p.  162;  Poda^rra,  Hauptmann,
Eaue's  Eec,  1872,  p.  205  ;  Arthritis  vaga,  Gross,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf,  vol.  3,  p.  523 ;  Pe-
riostitis of  joints,  Hartmann,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  4,  p.  435  ;  Intermittent  fever,  Elb,
Eiick.  Kl.  Erf,  vol.4,  p.  943;  Ancemia,  Madden,  B.  J.  H.,  vol.  8,  p.  195;  Pityriasis,
Cramoisy,  N.  A.  J.  H.,  vol.  7,  p.  235 ;  Psoriasis,  Cramoisy,  N.  A.  J.  H.,  vol.  7,  p.
234 ;  Lichen,  Cramoisy,  N.  A.  J.  H.,  vol.  7,  p.  234.

^  Mind. Constant  whining,  moaning  and  groaning.

Silent,  reserved,  peevish.

Ill  humored,  vexed  over  trifles ;  bitterness,  rancor.

I  Low  spirited,  weeping,  despondent ;  sudden  palpitation.

Not  pleased  with  joyous  music,  but  immediately  affected
by  the  saddest.

■  Everything  she  even  thinks  of  makes  her  fretful.
^  Sensorium. All  the  senses  less  acute.

I  Head  feels  heavy,  it  seems  larger.


273  MANGANUM.

Vertigo  when  sitting  or  standing;  he  is  near  falling  for-
ward; painful  concussion  of  brain  from  shaking  head,
from  walking,  with  aching  in  head,  and  at  same  time
in  epigastrium ;  rush  of  blood  from  nape  of  neck  over
vertex  towards  forehead  during  motion,  with  stupefac-
tion and  confusion  of  senses  while  standing.
^  Inner  Head.  iHead  so  heavy  he  can  scarcely  hold  it  up;
fretful.

■  Contractive  sticking  pain  here  and  there  in  whole  fore-

part of  head,  especially  in  temples,  mostly  in  open  air.

Pressing,  boring  headache  in  temples,  extending  towards
eyes  and  forehead,  going  off  on  bending  forward,  return-
ing on  sitting  up,  or  on  bending  head  backwards.

Stitches  (like  needles)  and  darts  in  1.  side  of  forehead.

Jarring  of  brain,  from  motion  of  head.

Drawing,  stinging  or  tensive  headache  in  open  air,  >  in-
doors.

Headaches  arising  in  room,  >  in  open  air,  or  vice  versa.

Burning,  pressing  headache,  >  in  open  air.
*  Outer  Head. Cold  feeling  at  a  small  spot  on  vertex.

Drawing  cramp  in  muscles,  in  region  of  1.  mastoid  process,
must  incline  head  to  r.  side.
^  Sight  and  Eyes. Short  sighted.

■  Asthenopia,  with  aching  pains  in  eyes  on  looking  at  near

objects,  so  must  close  them;  <  when  looking  at  a  near
light.
1  1  Pupils  very  much  contracted ;  dilated.

■  Burning  in  eyes  and  dimsightedness  during  day.
Pressure  in  eyes  when  reading  by  candlelight.
Burning  heat  and  dryness  of  eyes.

Eyelids  swollen  and  painful  to  touch.
■Agglutination  of  eyes  in  morning.

Eyelids  painful  on  slightest  motion,  and  on  looking  at  a
bright  light  they  become  too  dry,  with  a  feeling  as  on
waking  from  sleep.
^  Hearing:  and  Ears. Whizzing  and  rushing  in  ears.
Croaking  sound  in  r.  ear  when  walking.

■  Deafness  as  if  ears  were  stopped.

■  Dull  hearing:  >  by  blowing  nose;  <  during  cold  and

rainy  weather.

■  Fulness  of  ears,  with  difficult  hearing  and  cracking  when

blowing  nose  or  swallowing.
Sudden  stitch  pain  in  deaf  ear.
Ulcerative  pain  in  ears.

Pains  extend  to  and  concentrate  in  ear  from  other  parts.
■Stitches  in  ear  when  talking,  swallowing,  laughing  and

walking.
VOL.  vn.— 18.


MANGANUM.  274

Frequent  otalgia,  with  tearing  and  stitching,  extending  to
tympanum.

■  External  ear  painful  to  touch;  pain  in  r.  ear  from  teeth;

burning  of  ears  as  if  standing  near  stove;  pain <  in

morning  and  in  open  air;  ear  so  sore  she  cannot  lie  on

that  side. ^Otalgia.
I  Catarrh  of  Eustachian  tube,  with  stitching  pains  and

whizzing  noises  in  ears.
Drawing  cramp  in  muscles  in  region  of  1.  mastoid  process,

he  had  to  incline  his  head  to  r.  side.
^  Smell  and  Nose. iCoryza  dry,  complete  obstruction  of

nostrils;  crampy  pain  at  root  of  nose;  <  in  wet,  cold

weather.
I  At  times  stoppage  of  nose ;  at  times  fluent  coryza.

■  Dryness  and  stoppage  of  nose;  raising  easily  yellowish

or  greenish  lumps  in  morning  from  posterior  nares.
iChrunic  nasal  catarrh; nostrils  much  stuffed  up;  sore

to  touch,  and  <  in  evening;  bloody  discharges.
Painful,  crampy  tearing,  between  root  of  nose  and  ej^ebrow.
^  Upper  Face. liFace  pale,  sunken;  expression  of  suffering.
Twitching stitches from lower  jaw to temples when
laughing.
^  Lower  Face. Cramp  pain  in  upper  and  lower  jaw  after
eating.
Eruptions  and  ulcers  at  corners  of  mouth.
Dry,  parched  lips,  with  shriveled  skin,  without  thirst.
Clear  vesicles  on  upper  lip.
^^  Teeth  and  Gums. Smarting  toothache,  made  insupport-
able when  anything  cold  touches  tooth.
Violent toothache  suddenly  going from one place to
another,  and  up  into  ears.
^'  Taste  and  Tongue. Oily  taste  in  mouth.
Burning  vesicles  on  1.  side  of  tongue.
Nodosities  on  tongue;  warts.

■  After  cicatrization  of  small  superficial  ulcer  on  1.  side  of

tongue,  to  which  lunar  caustic  had  been  applied,  severe
stitching,  burning  pains  along  side  of  1.  tongue  and  in
inner  side  of  corresponding  cheek ;  chewing  impossible ;
burning  pains,  <  in  tongue,  at  night  in  room,  >  in
open  air.

'^  Inner  Mouth. Smell  from  mouth  as  of  clay  or  earth  (early
in  morning  after  rising).
Dryness  of  palate  and  lips.

'^  Throat.  Sore,  as  if  excoriated,  with  cutting  pains,  inde-
pendent of  swallowing ;  palate  and  lips  dry,  <  in  open
air;  when  swallowing,  stitches  in  both  ears;  <  when
coughing,  with  husky  voice;  feet  and  ankles  swollen.
Throat  dry,  scratching,  feeling  as  if  trachea  was  closed  with
a  leaf.


275  MANGANUM.

Cutting  soreness  in  throat  between  acts  of  deglutition.
Chronic  sore  throat.
"  Appetite,  Thirst. Desires,  Aversions. Aversion  to  food
from  a  feeling  of  satiety.
Thirstlessness.
^^  Eating  and  Drinking. While  eating :  pressing  in  stom-
ach and  abdomen,  more  from  cold  food,  especially  in
weakly  females.
After  eating:  cramp  pain  in  jaws;  paia  in  rectum  (after
dinner).
^^  Hiccough,  Belching, Nausea  and  Vomiting. Rising
from  stomach,  like  heartburn.
Nausea  and  vomiting.
^"^  Scrobiculum  and  Stomach. Burning  in  stomach,  extend-
ing to  chest ;  sometimes  with  great  restlessness.
Pressing  soreness  in  epigastrium,
I  I  Much  pain  in  stomach  after  eating;  weakly  people.
Drawing  in  region  of  stomach,  with  sensation  as  if  pit  of

stomach  was  enlarged,  with  nausea.
Gastrodynia  and  pyrosis.
'^  Hypochondria. Pressure  in  hypochondria.
I  I  Jaundice  from  inflammation  of  liver.
I  I  Biliary  calculi.
^®  Abdomen. Warm  contraction,  extending  from  middle  of
abdomen  to  chest,  with  nausea.
I  I  Cutting  in  region  of  navel  when  taking  a  long  inspira-
tion.
Pressing  soreness  in  upper  abdomen  and  pit  of  stomach.

■  Intense  pain  as  if  bowels  were  drawn  together,  beginning

in  stomach,  going  downwards  to  abdomen,  chiefly  on  1.
side;  begins  one  and  a  quarter  hours  after  food,  attains
its  height  in  two  hours ;  >  by  bending  double,  espe-
cially sitting  bent  over  a  fire,  also  by  food  and  eructa-
tions; <  in  a  cold  room  or  cold  weather;  pain  concen-
trates itself  around  and  above  navel ;  lasted  for  more
than  three  weeks.

When  walking,  sensation  as  if  bowels  were  loose  and  shak-
ing about.

Abdomen  distended,  bloated ;  profuse  flatus.
^^  Stool  and  Rectum, i  Passes  much  flatus.

Stools:  loose  and  tenacious;  pappy;  yellow, granular, with
tenesmus  and  constriction  of  anus;  costive;  seldom,  dry,
knotty,  difficult.

■  Constrictive  pain  in  anus  while  sitting.

^'  Urinary  Organs. •  i  Frequent  urging  to  urinate.
Cutting  in  middle  of  urethra  between  micturition.
Urine  profuse ;  sediment  violet,  earthy.
Darting  in  urethra  when  emitting  flatus.


MANGANUM.  276

:  Ptyriasis nigra, or Addison's disease of suprarenal
capsules.
^^  Male  Sexual  Organs. Sexual  weakness,  with  pain  in  sper-
matic cord,  and  urging  to  urinate.

Sensation  of  weakness  in  genitals,  with  burning  and  draw-
ing in  spermatic  cords,  extending  to  glans.

I  I  At  times  burning  dragging  from  vesiculse  seminales  to

glans  penis.

Itching:  on  corona  glandis  ;  interior  of  scrotum,  not  >  by
pinching  and  rubbing.
^^  Female  Sexual  Organs, i Menses: too  early  and  scanty
in  anaemic  subjects;  much  bearing  down  pain;  six  days
too  early,  scanty,  lasting  only  two  days.

Discharge  of  blood  between  periods,  pressing  in  genitals.

USudden  flushes  of  heat  at  climacteric.
^'  Voice  and  Larynx.  Trachea  and  Bronchia,  i  "Hoarse-
ness: with  coryza ;  with  tickling  cough ;  rough  speech  in
early  morning  or  in  open  evening  air;  accompanying
or  lasting  a  long  while  after  an  attack  of  coryza;  of
chronic  laryngeal  affections.

■  Voice  not  clear,  as  from  phlegm,  rough  in  morning.
iRawness  in  larynx;  voice  hoarse;  breath  hot,  burning.

I I  Dull  stitches  on  both  sides  of  larynx,  extending  to  ear
when  swallowing.

llRoughness  and  constriction  of  larynx.

■  Laryngitis,  pains  moderate,  much  accumulation  of  mu-

cus, and  long  continued  hoarseness;  in  singers.

■  Laryngeal  catarrh  in  weak,  anaemic  persons,  or  in  such

as  exhibit  tubercular  deposit  in  lungs;  hoarse  voice  in
morning,  which  becomes  gradually  clear,  after  expulsion
of  lumps  of  consistent  mucus.

■  Tuberculosis  of  larynx.

■  Chronic  disease  of  larynx,  with  Eustachian  deafness.

■  Rawness  in  throat,  with  a  feeling  as  though  trachea  was

closed  by  a  film,  on  hawking.

■  Chronic  affection  of  larynx  and  trachea;  rawness  and

hoarseness;  dry  cough,  <  after  speaking;  expectoration
of  greenish  masses,  or  reddish  mucus;  great  anaemia;
patient  tuberculous.

■Venous  dilatation  in  throat  and  pharynx;  partial  injec-
tion of  ventricular  bands;  hoarse  voice  in  morning,  >
after  clearing  up  lumpy  mpcus.  ^Chronic  catarrhal
laryngitis.
^^  Respiration.  Breath  hot  and  burning,  with  disagreeable
heat  in  chest.

Pain  in  second  1.  rib,  from  talking.

Pains  in  head,  ears,  arms,  stomach,  <  breathing,  talking
or  laughing.


277  MANGANUM.

^  Cough.  Cough :  causes  darting  in  parietal  bones;  dry,  inces-
sant, from  irritation  at  midsternum ;  >  lying  down,
dry  cough  from  loud  reading,  with  painful  dryness,
roughness  and  constriction  of  larynx ;  <  from  talking,
laughing,  walking  and  deep  inspiration.

■  Expectoration  scanty,  lumpy,  yellow,  adhesive,  causing

long  efforts  of  coughing  for  expulsion. ^Bronchitis.

I  Deep  cough  with  expectoration,  ceasing  on  lying  down.

Cough  about  5  p.m.,  continues  almost  incessant  until  lying
down,  which  relieves;  irritation  about  middle  of  ster-
num ;  difficult  expectoration  of  lumps  of  tough  mucus;
in  morning  easy  expectoration  of  yellowish  greenish
lumps,  even  without  coughing.

iSputum:  greenish  or  yellow  lumps; difficult,  of  tough
mucus;  reddish  phlegm  ;  bloody.
^  Inner Chest and Lungs. Disagreeable  heat  in  chest,
breath  hot  and  burning.

Stitches  in  chest  and  sternum,  running  up  and  down.

Beating  in  chest.

Warm  contraction  extending  from  middle  of  abdomen  to
chest,  with  nausea.

Bruised  pain  in  upper  chest  when  stooping,  >  by  raising
head.

■  Pneumapostema,  and  cough.

I  Haemoptysis;  with  stitching  pains  through  r.  lung  and

dry  cough,  always  ceasing  on  lying  down ;  with  much

anaemia  and  palpitation  of  heart.
'^^  Heart, Pulse  and Circulation. « Palpitation  of  heart,

strong,  irregular,  trembling,  without  abnormal  sounds.
Sudden  shocks  at  heart  and  in  1.  side  of  chest  from  above

downward.
Pulse:  very  uneven  and  irregular,  scarcely  perceptible,

sometimes  rapid,  sometimes  slow,  but  constantly  soft

and  weak.
^^  Neck  and  Back. Red,  swollen  streak  on  1.  side  of  neck.
Stiffness  of  nape  of  neck.

Tearing  in  whole  spinal  column,  from  above  downward.
Pain  in  small  of  back  on  bending  backward.
■^^  Upper  Limbs. Pain  as  from  a  sprain  in  shoulder  joint.
Rheumatic  pains  extending  from  shoulders  to  fingers.
Gnawing  and  boring  in  humerus,  as  if  in  marrow  of  bone.

■  Itching  on  outer  surface  of  r.  upper  arm,  just  above  elbow,

>  scratching.
Tension  in  elbow  joint  as  if  too  short.
Herpes  on  forearm.

I  I  Tensive  pain  in  joints  of  arms  and  wrists.
Rhagades  in  bends  of  fingers.
Hands  when  closed  and  stretched  feel  swollen.


MANGANUM.  278

I  Chronic  swelling  and  suppuration  of  little  finger.

Malignant  ulcer  with  blue  border,  following  a  slight  scratch
of  linger  nail.

I  I  Malignant  ulcer  on  finger,  from  a  slight  scratch.
^  Lower  Limbs. Pimples  on  thigh  with  scurf  on  tips.

Tensive,  drawing  stitches  in  thigh.

Twitching  of  muscles  in  legs  from  least  exertion.

I  I  Jerking  sticking  pain  above  knee.

Trembling  and  unsteadiness  of  knees.

Tearing  in  knees.

Bitching  on  knees  and  tibia.

Tension  and  stiffness  in  legs.

•  Voluptuous  itching  on  lower  portion  of  r,  calf;  after
scratching,  a  number  of  deep  seated  pimples  appear,
which  soon  cease  to  itch  after  being  scratched  until  they
bleed;  then  the  place  continues  to  itch  and  burn  for  a
long  time.

■  Inflammation and  swelling of  both  1. malleoli,  with

stitches  in  leg,  extending  up  from  external  malleolus
always  on  walking,  and  at  times  when  not  walking.
^Affection  of  ankle.

■  Excruciating  pains  in  greatly  swollen  big  toe,  1.  side,  ra-

diating upwards; pains  unbearable  at  night; <  by

slightest  touch; must  constantly  change  position;  loss

of  appetite  and  sleep. 6' Podagra.
Rheumatism  in  feet;  cannot  bear  weight  on  heel,
i  Burning  of  soles  of  feet.
Rawness  between  toes.
^*  Limbs  in  General. Drawing  and  tension  in  limbs  as  from

shortening  of  tendons,  especially  on  stretching.
Weakness  and  trembling,  especially  of  joints.
lPx,heumatism  shifts  from  joint  to  joint,  generally  crosswise;

red,  shining  swellings; <  from  touch,  or  motion,  or  at

night.
■Arthritis  vaga;  burning  spots  about  joints;  causing  one

to  moan  and  groan  constantly.

■  Painful periostitis, and inflammation of articulating

extremities  of  bones;  boring  or  gnawing  sensation  in
humerus,  as  if  in  marrow  of  bones;  at  night  pains  are
insupportable;  <  on  touching  parts;  >  in  open  air.

■  Intolerable  pains  in  skin  of  lower  limbs  and  joints.

■  Limbs  very  tender  and  sensitive  to  touch;  part  affected,


pressure. ^Lame  pelvis.
^^  Rest. Position. Motion. Lying  down:  cough  >;  deep

cough  ceases ;  cannot  lie  on  side  of  sore  ear.
Bending  head  backwards:  headache  in  temples  returns.
Must  incline  head  to  r.  side ;  cramp  in  region  of  mastoid

process.


279  MANGANUM.

Raising  head:  bruised  pain  in  chest  >.

Sitting: vertigo; headache  in  temples  <; constrictive

pain  in  anus.
Standing:  vertigo;  stupefaction  and  confusion  of  senses.
Stooping:  bruised  pain  in  upper  ciiest.
Bending  forward:  headache  in  temples  >.
Bending  double:  pain  in  abdomen  >.
Bending  backward :  pain  in  small  of  back.
When  fingers  are  closed  and  stretched,  they  feel  swollen.
Must  constantly  change  position:  pain  in  big  toe.
From  least  exertion  :  twitching  in  muscles  of  legs.
Motion:  rush  of  blood  to  head ;  of  head  causing  jarring  of

brain;  slightest,  eyelids  painful;  swellings  on  joints  <.
Laughing:  stitches  in  ear;  twitching  stitches  from  lower

jaw  to  temples;  pains  in  head,  ears,  arms,  stomach  <;

cough  <.
Talking:  stitches  in  ear;  pain  in  second  1.  rib;  pains  in

ears,  head,  arras,  stomach  <;  cough  <.
Swallowing:  stitches  in  ears; cutting  soreness  in  throat

between.
Chewing :  impossible,  pain  in  tongue.
Stretching:  drawing  and  tension  in  limbs.
Walking:  concussion  of  brain ;  croaking  in  r.  ear;  stitches

in  ear;  sensation  as  if  bowels  were  loose  and  shaking

about;  cough  <;  stitches  in  leg;  children  unable.
36  Nerves. Weakness  and  trembling,  especially  of  joints.

Paralysis  from  decay  of  anterior  portion  of  spinal  cord.
^^  Sleep. I  Much  yawning.

Feels  sleepy  early  in  evening.

I  I  Many  vivid  dreams,  which  are  well  remembered.
^  Time. Morning : agglutination  of  eyes  ; pain  in ear  <  ;

raising  yellowish  greenish  lumps  from  posterior  nares;

early  after  rising,  smell  from  mouth  as  of  clay  or  earth ;

rough  speech  ;  hoarse  voice ;  easy  expectoration.
During  day :  burning  in  eyes  and  dim  sight.
After  dinner  :  pain  in  rectum.
5  P.M. :  cough.

Evening:  chronic  nasal  catarrh  <  ;  early,  feels  sleepy;  chill.
Night :  burning  pain  in  tongue  <  ;  pains  in  big  toe  un-
bearable ;  red,  shining  swellings  on  joints  <  ; pains  in

bones  insupportable ;  sweats ; digging  pains  in  joints  ;

periosteal  inflammation  extremely  painful ; itching  in

papules  on  neck  <.
^^  Temperature  and  Weather. Over  fire :  sitting  bent,  >

pain  in  abdomen.
In  doors :  headache  >  ;  burning  in  tongue  <.
Open  air :  contractive  pain in head <  ; congestion  of

blood  to  head  >  ;  drawing,  stinging,  tensive  headache ;


MANGANUM.  280

burning,  pressing  headache  >  ;  pain  in  ear;  burning
pains  in  tongue  >  ;  dryness  ol  lips  and  palate  <  ;
evening,  rough  speech;  pains  in  bones  >.

Cold  and  rainy  weather :  dull  hearing  < ;  crampy  pain
at  root  of  nose  <.

Cold  :  touching  teeth,  pain  insupportable ; food,  pressing
in  stomach  and  abdomen  <  ;  room,  or  weather,  pain  in
abdomen  <.
**  Fever. Chill  generally  in  evening,  shooting  headache,  icy
cold  hands  and  feet.

Shaking  chill,  with  heat  of  head,  stinging  in  forehead,  con-
tinuing after  chill.

Sudden  flashes  of  heat  in  face,  on  chest  and  over  back.

■  Frequent  rising  of  heat  into  head,  with  thirst.

Sweat  profuse,  with  short,  anxious  breathing.

Night  sweats ;  itching  often  only  on  neck  and  lower  legs.

Incomplete  intermittent,  consisting  of  only  heat  and  sweat,
with  moderate  thirst.

1  Typhus  fever  where  parotid  gland  is  swollen,  and  bones
are  very  sensitive  to  touch.
*^  Attacks,  Periodicity. One  hour  and  a  quarter  after  eating :
pain  in  abdomen  begins  and  attains  its  height  two  hours
after.

Six  days  too  early :  menses,  lasted  only  two  days.

More  than  three  weeks :  pain  in  abdomen.

Between  menses  :  discharge  of  blood.

At  climacteric:  sudden  flushes  of  heat.

Six  weeks  duration :  lichen  circumscriptus ;  four  weeks
later  two  circular  groups  of  rose  colored,  slightly  pointed
papules.
*^  Locality  and  Direction.  Right :  must  incline  head  to  that
side,  cramp  in  1.  mastoid  process ;  croaking  sound  in  ear ;
pain  in  ear ;  stitching  pain  through  lung ;  itching  on
outer  surface  of  upper  arm ;  voluptuous  itching  on  lower
portion  of  calf.

Left:  stitches  and  darts  in  side  of  forehead;  drawing
cramp  in  muscles  in  region  of  mastoid  process ;  burn-
ing vesicles  on  side  of  tongue ;  small  superjficial  ulcer  on
side  of  tongue ;  burning  pain  on  side  of  tongue  and  on
inner  side  of  cheek  ;  intense  pain,  side  of  abdomen  ;  pain
in  second  rib;  sudden  shocks  in  side  of  chest;  red
swollen  streak  on  side  of  neck  ;  inflammation  and  swell-
ing of  both  malleoli;  excruciating  pains  in  big  toe;  small
tubercles  on  buttock;  dark  red,  well  defined  spots  cov-
ered with  small,  loosely  adherent  scales  on  shoulder.

From  above  downward :  sudden  shocks  in  heart  and  chest ;
tearing  in  whole  spinal  column.

Up  and  down :  stitches  in  chest  and  sternum.


281  MANGANUM.

Upwards :  pains  radiate  in  1.  big  toe.

Downwards :  intense  pain  from  stomach  to  abdomen,
*^  Sensations.  Head  as  if  larger ;  feels  as  on  waking  from  sleep ;
as  if  ears  were  stopped ;  throat  as  if  excoriated ;  as  if
trachea  was  closed  with  a  leaf  or  film ;  as  if  pit  of  stomach
was  enlarged ;  as  if  bowels  were  drawn  together ;  as  if
bowels  were  loose  and  shaken  about ;  voice  not  clear,  as
from  phlegm ;  pain  as  from  sprain  in  shoulder  joint ;
boring  as  if  in  marrow  of  bone ;  elbow  joint  as  if  too
short ;  as  if  tendons  were  shortened.

Pains :  extend  to  and  concentrate  in  ear  from  other  parts ;
in  r.  ear  from  teeth;  in  rectum;  in  stomach;  around
and  above  navel ;  in  spermatic  cord  ;  in  larynx ;  in  sec-
ond 1.  rib ;  in  head,  ears,  arms,  stomach ;  in  small  of
back  ;  in  shoulder  joint.

Excruciating  pains :  in  greatly  swollen  big  toe,  1.  side.

Unbearable  pain :  in  big  toe.

Intolerable  pains :  in  skin  of  lower  limbs  and  joints.

Insupportable  pain :  in  teeth  ;  digging,  in  bones.

Intense  pain :  from  stomach  to  abdomen,  <  1.  side.

Violent  pain :  in  teeth,  going  from  one  place  to  another
and  up  into  ears.

Extremely  painful :  periosteal  inflammation.

Tearing:  in  whole  spinal  column  ;  in  knees.

Tearing  and  stitching :  extending  to  tympanum.

Severe  stitching,  burning :  along  side  of  1.  tongue  and  on
inner  side  of  cheek.

Stitching  pain :  in  ears ;  through  r.  lung.

Sudden  stitch  pain :  in  ears.

Tension,  drawing  stitches :  in  thigh.

Cutting  pains :  in  throat ;  in  region  of  navel ;  in  middle
of  urethra.

Cutting  soreness  :  in  throat.

Throbbing :  in  head.

Beating :  in  chest.

Ulcerative  pain :  in  deaf  ear.

Darts :  in  1.  side  of  forehead  ;  in  urethra ;  in  parietal  bones.

Twitching  stitches :  from  lower  jaw  to  temples.

Needlelike  stitches :  in  1.  side  of  forehead.

Stitches :  in  ear ;  in  chest  and  sternum ;  in  leg.

Jerking  sticking  pain  :  above  knee.

Dull  stitches :  on  both  sides  of  larynx  to  ear.

Painful,  crampy,  tearing:  between  root  of  nose  and  eyebrow.

Crampy  pains :  at  root  of  nose ;  in  upper  and  lower  jaw.

Drawing  cramp :  in  muscles  in  region  of  1.  mastoid  process

Gnawing  and  boring :  in  humerus.

Pressing,  boring  headache:  in  temples,  to  eyes  and  fore-
head.


MANGANUM.  282

Contractive  sticking  pain :  in  forepart  of  head,  <  in  temples.

Constrictive  pain:  in  anus.

Aching :  in  head  ;  in  epigastrium ;  in  eyes.

Rheumatic  pains :  from  shoulders  to  fingers ;  in  feet ;  shift
from  joint  to  joint.

Bearing  down  pain :  with  menses.

Drawing,  stinging,  or  tensive  pain :  in  head.

Painful  concussion :  of  brain,  when  walking.

Smarting  pain  :  in  teeth.

Burning  dragging :  from  vesiculse  seminales  to  glans  penis.

Burning  heat :  in  eyes.

Burning,  pressing:  headache.

Tensive  pain :  in  joints  of  arms  and  wrists.

Pressing  soreness:  in  epigastrium ;  in  upper  part  of  ab-
domen and  in  pit  of  stomach.

Bruised  pain  :  in  upper  chest.

Sudden  shocks :  at  heart  and  in  1.  side  of  chest.

Jarring :  of  brain.

Soreness:  of  throat.

Rawness:  in  larynx;  in  throat;  between  toes.

Burning:  in  eyes;  of  ears;  in  vesicles  on  tongue;  pain
in  tongue;  in. stomach  to  chest ;  in  spermatic  cord;  in
lower  portion  of  r.  calf;  of  soles  of  feet;  in  spots  about
joints,  chest,  arms,  hands  and  feet.

Heat:  of  head.

Pressing :  in  genitals ;  in  stomach  and  abdomen.

Drawing :  in  region  of  stomach ;  in  spermatic  cord ;  in
limbs.

Swollen  feeling :  in  hands.

Irritation  :  in  middle  of  sternum.

Pressure;  in  eyes;  in  hypochondria.

Heavy  feeling :  in  head.

Fulness :  of  ears.

Constriction  :  of  anus  ;  of  larynx.

Tension  :  in  elbow  joint ;  in  legs ;  in  limbs.

Twitching :  of  muscles  of  legs.

Disagreeable  heat :  in  chest.

Warm  contraction :  from  middle  of  abdomen  to  chest.

Stiffness :  of  nape  of  neck  ;  in  legs.

Trembling  and  uneasiness :  of  knees;  of  joints.

Weakness :  in  genitals ;  of  joints.

Dryness:  of  eyes;  of  nose;  painful  in  throat.

Voluptuous  itching :  on  lower  portion  of  r.  calf.

Itching :  on  corona  glandis ;  interior  of  scrotum  ;  on  outer
surface  of  r.  upper  arm ;  on  knees  and  tibia ;  on  lower
portion  of  r.  calf;  on  neck  and  lower  legs;  in  hollow
of  knee  and  on  shin ;  on  palms.

Cold  feeling :  at  a  small  spot  on  vertex.


283  MANGANUM.

**  Tissues. lAnsemia ;  laryngeal  phthisis ;  tuberculosis.

I  Chlorosis,  if  gastric  symptoms  and  loss  of  appetite  pre-
dominate.

Every  part  of  body  feels  extremely  sore  when  touched.

Inflammation  of  bones  or  joints,  with  nightly  insupport-
able digging  pains.

Inflammatory  swellings  and  suppuration.

Bones  are  very  sensitive ;  red  spots  on  skin  from  inflam-
mation of  bones ;  ankles  particularly  affected  ;  children
are  unable  to  walk.

Periostial  inflammation  extremely  painful  at  night.

Malignant  ulcers  with  blue  border,  following  slight  injury.
*^  Touch.  Passive  Motion.  Injuries.  Touch :  eyelids  pain-
ful ;  external  ear  painful ;  nostrils  sore ;  pain  in  toe  <  ;
red,  shining  swellings  on  joints  <  ;  pains  in  bones  <  ;
limbs  very  tender  and  sensitive ;  bones  sensitive ;  every
part  of  body  extremely  sore.

Cannot  bear  weight  on  heel ;  rheumatism.

Pressure :  limbs  sensitive.

Scratching :  itching  on  r.  upper  arm  >  ;  makes  deep  seated
pimples  appear  on  r.  calf

Pinching  and  rubbing :  does  not  >  itching  on  interior  of
scrotum.

Slight  scratch :  followed  by  malignant  ulcer.

Slight  injury :  malignant  ulcers  with  blue  border  follow.
^  Skin. I  Itching  here  and  there,  >  from  scratching.

Itching  on  hollow  of  knee  and  on  shin,  <  sweating.

Itching  on  palms,  with  red  spots ;  lips  sore.

Burning  in  small  red  spots,  on  chest,  arms,  hands  and
feet,  accompanying  rheumatism.

Rhagades  in  bends  of  joints,  with  soreness.

Itching  herpes.

Skin  will  not  heal.

Small  vesicles,  or  deep  seated  little  blotches,  after  scratching.

Small  tubercles  on  mammae  and  on  1.  buttock.

Chronic  suppurations  of  skin,  especially  about  joints.

1  I  Pityriasis  rubra  in  a  man,  set.  22,  of  healthy  appearance,
temperate  and  never  had  syphilis;  three  weeks  ago  an
eruption  commenced  of  dark  red,  well  defined  spots,
covered  with  small,  loosely  adherent  scales,  extending
over  thorax  and  1.  shoulder;  the  scales  of  epidermis
exfoliate  in  immense  quantities,  exposing  a  red,  dry
surface.

I  I  Lichen  circumscriptus,  of  six  weeks'  duration,  on  neck
of  a  strong  woman,  set.  44;  commenced  with  itching;
four  weeks  later  two  circular  groups  of  rose  colored,
slightly  pointed  papules,  confluent  at  base  and  without
any  secretion ;  itching  <  by  night  than  by  day,  and
ceasing  after  scratching.


MANGANUM.  284

■  Psoriasis  inveterata  in  a  man  set.  45,  addicted  to  im-
moderate use  of  brandy ;  eight  years  ago  was  cured  of
amaurosis  by  electricity,  and  six  months  later  cutaneous
disease  commenced;  sickly  appearance ;  muscular,  but
thin,  complexion  dark  ;  had  gonorrhoea,  chancres  and
buboes,  and  was  drunk  at  first  consultation ;  eruption
first  appeared  on  elbows,  then  on  knees  and  calves ;  at
the  diseased  points  skin  first  became  thickened,  then
fissures  appeared,  and  finally  white,  shiny,  hard,  ad-
herent scales,  which  were  continually  reproduced;
scarcely  any  itching  and  occasionally  rheumatic  pains.

I  I  Lepra  vulgaris,  psoriasis  and  pityriasis.
^^  Stages  of  Life,  Constitution. Boy,  set.  8 ;  dysecoia.

Girl,  set.  13,  ansemic,  tuberculous  deposits  in  apex  of  both
lungs ;  affection  of  larynx  and  trachea.

Man,  set.  22 ;  pityriasis.

Woman,  suffering  for  more  than  three  weeks;  pain  in
bowels.

Woman,  suffering  three  weeks;  colic.

Woman,  set.  44,  healthy ;  lichen.

Man,  set.  45,  drinker,  had  gonorrhoea,  chancre  and  buboes  ;
psoriasis.

Man,  set.  60,  no  history  of  syphilis,  after  application  of
lunar  caustic  to  small  ulcer  on  tongue  from  which  he
was  suffering  for  three  months  previously ;  pains  in
tongue  and  cheek.

Old  man ;  podagra.
*^  Relations. Antidoted  by :  Coffea,  Merc.  sol.

Compatible :  Pulsat,  Rhus  tox.,  Sulphur.

Compare:  J[mm.  mwr.  (rheumatism);  vlr^'.  mir.  (laryngeal
cough,  tuberculosis).


285  MARUM  VERUM.


MARUM  VERUM (Teucrium).
Cat  Thyme.  Labiatse.

Introduced  by  Stapf,  proved  by  himself,  von  Gersdorf,  Caspari,  Bethmann
and  Hartmann  (Beitrage  zur  Keinen  Arzneimittellehre,  p.  346).

CLrNiCAL  Authorities. — Fibrous  tumor  on  lower  eyelid,  Eggert,  Raue's  Eec,
1871,  p.  214;  Horn.  Clin.,  vol.  4,  p.  43;  Stoppage  of  nose,  Traeger,  B.  J.  H.,  vol.34,
p.  166 ;  Nasal  catarrh,  Williamson,  Eaue's  Eec,  1873,  p.  21 ;  Rhirvitis,  Van  Arts-
dalen,  Trans.  Hom.  Med.  Soc.  Pa.,  1884,  p.  261;  Affection  of  nose,  Teller,  Eiick.
Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  5,  p.  174 ;  Nasal^  polypus,  Mayer,  N.  A.  J.  H.,  vol.  2,  p.  38 ;  Gil-
christ, p.  333;  Epps,  Hom.  Eev.,  vol.  16,  p.  110;  QShme,  Eaue's  Eec,  1871,
p.  65,  Hom.  Clin.,  vol,  3,  p.  81;  McGeorge,  Eaue's  Eec,  1871,  p.  21;  Gal-
lupe,  Eaue's  Eec,  1872,  p.  95;  N.  A.  J.  H.,  vol.  21,  p.  116;  Gross,  Goullon,
Genzke,  Sturm,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  1,  p.  404 ;  Ascaricles,  Eummel,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf.,
vol.  l,p.  810,  Polypi  of  urethral  orifice,  Gross,  Raue's  Eec,  1870,  p.  241  ;  Polypus  of
vagina,  Eoth,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  5,  p.  645 ;  Rheumatism,  B.  F.,  Eaue's  Eec,  1872,
p.  204 ;  Hom.  Clin.,  vol.  4,  p,  62  ;  Psoriasis  dorsalis,  Eichards,  Eaue's  Eec,  1873,
p.  349 ;  Affections  of  children,  Pearson,  Hom.  Clin.,  vol.  3,  p.  53.

^  Mind. Great  mental  excitement  and  loquacity.
Irrisistible  desire  to  sing.
Indolence,  mental  and  physical.
Great  sensitiveness  and  excitability.
Irritable  mood  at  and  after  dinner,  with  pressure  in  forehead.
^  Sensorium. Dulness  and  dizziness.
^  Inner  Head. '  '  Pressing  pain  over  eyes,  <  on  stooping.
I  I  Very  painful  pressure  in  r.  temple,  frequently  alternat-
ing with  same  sensation  in  r.  frontal  eminence  and  in
1.  temple.
*  Outer  Head. Skin  of  forehead  sensitive  to  touch.
^  Sight  and  Eyes. Look  as  after  weeping ;  smarting  in  canthi
and  redness  of  conjunctivae.
Profuse  smarting  tears  in  open  air.
Upper  lids  red  and  puffy.

■  Fibrous  tumor  inside  of  lower  eyelid,  one-third  of  an  inch
in  diameter,  preventing  closing  of  lids ;  blurred  sight ;
no  pain.
^  Hearing  and  Ears.  Hissing  sound  when  passing  hand  over
ear,  when  talking,  or  forcibly  inspiring  through  nose.
Fine  ringing  in  r.  ear  when  blowing  nose,  squeaking  as  if
air  was  forced  through  mucus.


:MARUM  VERUM.  286

Otalgia,  with  lancinating  pain.
Dry  herpes,  with  white  scales,  on  and  behind  ears.
I  I  Tetterlike  roughness  of  ears  ;  behind  or  below  ears.
^  Smell  and  Nose, l  Crawling  in  nose.

I  Violent  crawling  in  r.  nostril,  with  lachrymation  of  r.  eye.
I  iSensation  in  r.  nostril  as  if  it  was  partly  stopped ;  is

obliged  to  blow  nose  and  sneeze,  but  could  not  thereby

remove  obstruction.
I  Both  sides  of  nose  very  much  obstructed  on  reading  aloud,

several  times  during  day,  and  especially  in  evening.
Stinging,  lancinating  pain  in  upper  part  of  nasal  cavity.
I  Tingling  in  nose,  frequent  sneezing  with  or  without  coryza.
Coryza,  with  stoppage  of  nostrils.

■  Repeated  attacks  of  pain  in  forehead,  with  stuffing  up  of

nose,  >  by  a  thick,  dirty  yellow,  offensive  smelling  dis-
charge.

I  Large,  irregular  pieces,  green  scabs,  clinkers,  etc.,  dis-
charged from  nose,  leaving  it  sore ;  foul  breath. ^Ozsena.

I  Nasal  catarrh  of  both  nostrils,  discharge  in  green  masses.

I  Continued  stoppage  of  nose  after  removal  of  polypi.

■After  erysipelas  of  face,  which  extended  to  inner  surface
of  nose,  mucous  membrane  remained  swollen,  completely
occluding  nostrils;  after  fever,  headache,  etc.,  had  been
removed  by  various  remedies,  there  remained  a  painless,
protruding  swelling  of  mucous  membrane  of  1.  nostril.

I  Nasal  polypus.

■  When blowing nose, squeaking  as if  air was forced

through  mucus. ^Nasal  polypus.

■  Polypus,  with  stoppage  of  nose  on  side  he  lies;  large  red

pimples  under  r.  nostril,  near  septum,  sore  and  smart-
ing to  touch.

■  Nasal  polypus  of  one  year's  duration.

■  After  repeated  attacks  of  coryza,  mucous  polypus  of  nose,

greenish  white  in  color,  not  sensitive,  attached  to  upper
turbinated  bone,  and  completely  filling  nasal  cavity  and
causing  occlusion.

■  Large  polypus  of  nose  after  a  severe,  badly  treated  cold.

■  Mucous  polypus  of  pale  red  color,  on  1.  side  and  of  large

size ;  mostly  in  anterior  nares  and  in  plain  sight.

■  Polypus  occupying  entire  r.  nostril,  projecting  slightly.

■  Painful  formication  and  shooting  at  root  of  nose,  in  1.

frontal  sinus. ^Polypus.

■  Mucus  flowed  copiously  from  1.  nostril. ^Polypus.
■Could  not  blow  her  nose  without  acute  pain  and  some

bleeding. ^Polypus.

■  Polypus  enlarges  in  wet  weather.

■  Loss  of  smell  of  twenty  years'  standing.

■Both  nares  filled  with  polypi,  apparently attached  to


287  MARUM  VERUM.

spongy  bones,  of  three  years'  standing ;  breathing  diffi-
cuh,  cannot  close  his  mouth  during  exercise  ;  snores  and
chokes  in  sleep ;  attacks  of  nose  bleed  during  past  few
years  from  slight  causes ;  constant  secretion  of  watery
mucus  from  nose.
I  Fleshy  polypi  hanging  from  both  nares,  <  during  damp
weather ;  entire  obstruction  of  nose  at  times ;  much  dis-
charge of  water  and  mucus  from  nose.
I  For  thirty  years,  nasal  polypi  removed  every  two  or  three
years  by  operative  means  :  nasal  bones  on  1.  side  pressed
asunder;  judging  from  sensations  complained  of  by
patient,  polypus  extended  up  to  ethmoid  bone,  into
choanse  and  into  antrum  of  Highmore ;  after  two  months'
treatment  could  breathe  freely  through  nose,  and  the
sense  of  smell  which  had  been  impaired  for  last  twenty
years  was  restored,  a  small  portion  of  polypus,  however,
remained  high  up  in  nasal  cavity.
^  Upper  Face. Pale  face.

I  I  Frequent  sensation  of  flashes  of  heat,  but  with  paleness.
Burning,  itching  rash  on  forehead  and  upper  part  of  face,
<  in  evening  and  from  warmth.
^  Lower  Face. Deep  furrow  on  either  side  of  under  lip,  with

elevated  edges.
^"  Teeth  and  Gums, l  Violent  tearing  in  roots  and  gums  of

r.  lower  incisors.
"  Taste  and  Tongue. '  i  Biting  as  from  pepper  on  1.,  after-
wards on  r.  side  of  root  of  tongue.
^^  Inner  Mouth. Much  mucus  and  saliva.

After  hawking  up  mucus,  mouldy  taste  in  mouth.
13  Throat. I  I  Tearing  and  scraping  in  fauces,  <  1.  side.

Stinging  or  pressure,  hindering  swallowing.
^*  Appetite, Thirst. Desires, Aversions. '  A  feeling  of

hunger,  prevents  falling  asleep.
^^  Eating  and  Drinking. After  nursing,  jerking  hiccough
and  empty  belching.
After  drinking,  cutting  colic.
^®  Hiccough,  Belching,  Nausea  and  Vomiting, i  Frequent,
very  violent  hiccough.
■Little  children,  emaciated,  jerking  hiccough  after  nurs-
ing, and  belching  without  bringing  anything  up.
Gulping  of  bitter  tasting  food.

Vomits  dark  green  masses ;  hiccough,  with  a  stitch  through
stomach  to  back.
*^  Scrobiculum  and  Stomach. Anxious  oppression  or  empty

feeling  and  rumbling  in  stomach.
^^  Abdomen. Colic,  cutting  pain,  after  drinking.
Dull  pressing,  as  from  incarcerated  flatulence.
^  Stool  and  Kectum. i  '  Very  frequent  emission  of  noiseless,
but  very  warm  flatus,  often  of  a  "  hepatic  "  odor.


MARUM  VERUM.  288

Diarrhoea,  with  crying  and  emaciation  in  children.

■  Crawling  in  rectum  after  stool.

■  Crawling  and  at  times  violent  fine  sticking  in  anus  in

evening  in  bed.
I  I  Swelling,  itching  and  creeping  at  anus  as  from  ascarides.

■  Ascarides,  with  creeping  and  itching  and  nightly  rest-

lessness ;  <  from  warmth  of  bed.
Irritation  produced  by  thread  worms  comes  on  at  regular
periods  every  day,  and  is  followed  by  nightly  restless-
ness and  sleeplessness.
^^  Urinary  Organs, l  l  Increased  discharge  of  watery  urine.
^  Male  Sexual  Organs. Sexual  desire  decreased.

Pressing,  drawing  sensation  from  abdomen  into  cords  and

testicles.
I  I  After  gonorrhoea  eight  years  ago  chronic  inflammation
of  urethra ;  two  years  ago  four  small,  fleshy  excrescences
of  bright  red  color,  and  with  a  moderately  broad  base,
showed  themselves  on  inferior  wall;  with  increase  of
granulations  and  continual  narrowing  of  channel,  urin-
ary tenesmus,  urine  passed  with  difficulty,  with  a  sen-
sation of  heat  and  pain,  also  after  coitus ;  the  largest
was  excised,  the  smaller  ones  twisted,  producing  some
hemorrhage ;  injections  with  Teucrium,  once  a  day  for
a  week,  reached  those  in urethra,  after  which every
vestige  of  excrescence  was  gone.
^Female  Sexual  Organs. ■Smooth,  pedunculated, pear-
shaped polypus  of vagina, protruding three inches
beyond  hymen.
^^  Voice  and  Larynx. Trachea  and  Bronchia. Dryness,
causing  hawking;  hissing  sound  when  inhaling.
Dr3mess  in  trachea.
^^  Respiration. Stitches  in  r.  chest  when  inhaling ;  catarrhal
asthma,  especially  in  the  aged.
Sensation  of  oppression  (without  affecting  breathing).
^  Cough. Dry,  short  cough,  from  tickling  in  upper  part  of

trachea.
^^  Heart,  Pulse  and  Circulation. Pulse  accelerated  towards

evening.
^^  Upper  Limbs. ■  Rheumatic  lameness  of  r.  upper  arm  as  far
as  elbow,  it  sinks  down  on  lifting  it ;  drawing  and  tear-
ing pain  in  whole  arm.
Rheumatic  pain  in  arms,  especially  in  bones  and  joints.
I  I  Sudden  dull,  cutting  pain  transversely  through  muscle

of  r.  forearm,  at  a  distance  of  a  span  from  wrist.
Finger  joints  bend  over  easily.
I  I  Burning  in  finger  tips ;  panaritium.

■  Eruption  on  index  finger  of  r.  hand,  covering  a  surface

about  two  inches  long  and  one  inch  wide,  hard,  hyper-


289  MARUM  VERUM.

trophied  and  covered  with  thick,  whitish  scales.  ^Psori-
asis dorsahs.
^  Lower  Limbs. iPain  as  if  nail  had  grown  into  flesh  of  r.
great  toe.

■  Ingrowing  toenails  (r.  great  toe),  with  ulceration;  >

moving.
^*  Limbs  in  General. Rheumatic  pains  mostly  in  bones  and
joints,  <  evenings,  >  moving.

Limbs  go  to  sleep,  with  tingling,  when  sitting.
^^  Rest. Position. Motion. On  side  he  lies :  stoppage  of  nose.

Sitting :  limbs  go  to  sleep,  with  tingling.

Stooping:  pressing  pain  over  eyes  <.

Moving:  rheumatic  pain  >.

Passing  hand  over  ear :  hissing  sound.

Lifting  arm :  it  sinks  down.

Disinclined  to  physical  exertion.
^"^  Nerves. Nervous,  irritable,  trembling.

Great  sensitiveness  and  excitability ;  pale  face ;  frequent
feeling  of  flushes  of  heat,  without  redness;  nervous  ex-
citability; trembling  sensation  in  whole  body.  ^Ner-
vous affections.

I  I  Very  indolent ;  inclined  to  neither  physical  nor  mental
exertion.

I  I  Slight  nervous  asthenia  of  skin  and  prima  vise.
^^  Sleep. Restless  sleep  ;  also  from  ascarides.

■  Restless  at  night  on  account  of  great  excitement,  with

very  vivid  and  in  part  anxious  dreams,  with  starting  up
till  after  midnight.

I  Sleepless  on  account  of  intense  itching  at  anus,  causing
one  to  toss  and  roll  about  all  night.

I  I  Very  vivid,  mostly  agreeable  dreams.
^^  Time. Morning :  not  refreshed.

At  midday :  sensation  of  general  debility.

Evening :  nose  obstructed  ;  rash  on  forehead  <  ;  sticking
in  anus,  in  bed  ;  towards,  pulse  accelerated  ;  rheumatic
pains  <  ;  increased  heat  and  exaltation.

Night: restless,  with  starting up; till  after  midnight,
tossing  and  rolling  from  intense  itching  at  anus.
^^  Temperature  and  Weather. Desire  to  exercise  in  open
air,  which  does  not  fatigue.

Warmth :  burning  rash  on  forehead  <  ;  ascarides  <.

Open  air :  profuse  smarting  tears.

Wet  weather:  polypus  enlarged ;  fleshy  polypus  <.
^"  Fever. Chill,  after  eating,  which spreads  as  if  from  ab-
domen.

Chilliness  from  want  of  animal  heat,  after  eating  or  talk-
ing about  unpleasant  things.

Increased  heat  and  exaltation  in  evening  with,  great
loquacity.

VOL.  VII — 19.


MARUM  VERUM.  290

*'  Attacks. Periodicity. Several  times  during  day : both
sides  of  nose  very  much  obstructed.
Every  day  at  regular  periods : irritation  produced  by
thread  worms.

Nightly  restlessness.

At  and  after  dinner:  irritable  mood.

One  year's  duration  :  nasal  polypus.

During  past  few  years :  attacks  of  nosebleed.  '

Three  years'  standing  :  nares  filled  with  polypi.

Twenty  years'  standing  :  loss  of  smell.

For  thirty  years :  nasal  polypi  removed  every  two  or  three
years  by  operative  means.
^  Locality  and  Direction.  Right:  very  painful  pressure  in
temple  and  frontal  eminence ;  fine  ringing  in  ear  ;  vio-
lent crawling  in  nostril ;  lachrymation  of  eye ;  as  if
nostril  was  partly  stopped ;  large  red  pimples  under
nostril ;  polypus  occupying  entire  nostril ;  tearing  in
roots  and  gums  of  lower  incisors ;  biting  as  from  pepper
on  side  of  tongue ;  stitches  in  chest ;  rheumatic  lame-
ness ;  cutting  pain  through  forearm  ;  eruption  on  index
finger ;  pain  as  if  nail  had  grown  into  flesh  of  big  toe.

Left :  painful  pressure  in  temple ;  painless,  protruding
swelling  of  mucous  membrane  of  nostril ;  mucous
polypus  on  side  of  nose  ;  painful  formication  and  shoot-
ing in  frontal  sinus;  mucus  flowed  copiously  from
nostril;  nasal  bones  pressed  asunder;  biting  as  from
pepper  on  side  of  tongue ;  tearing  and  scraping  on  side
of  fauces  <.
^  Sensations.  As  if  air  was  forced  through  mucus  in  ear ;  as
if  r.  nostril  was  partly  stopped ;  as  if  nail  had  grown
into  flesh  of  r.  great  toe ;  chill  as  if  from  abdomen ;
sensation  as  from  fleabites.

Pain :  in  forehead.

Acute  pain  :  in  nose.

Violent  tearing :  in  roots  and  gums  of  r.  lower  incisors.

Stinging,  lancinating :  in  upper  part  of  nasal  cavity.

Lancinating:  in  ears.

Tearing  and  scraping :  in  fauces.

Drawing  and  tearing :  in  whole  arm ;  in  bones.

Stitches :  in  r.  chest ;  through  stomach  to  back.

Cutting  colic :  after  meals.

Violent  fine  sticking :  in  anus.

Stinging :  in  throat.

Biting :  on  tongue.

Smarting :  in  canthi.

Burning  itching  :  rash  on  forehead  and  upper  part  of  face.

Painful  formication  and  shooting:  at  root  of  nose,  in  1.
frontal  sinus.

Tingling:  in  nose;  in  limbs.


291  MARUM  VERUM.

Sudden  dull,  cutting  pain :  transversely  through  muscle
of  r.  forearm.

Very  painful  pressure :  in  r.  temple ;  in  r.  frontal  emi-
nence and  in  1.  temple.

Pressing  pain  :  over  eyes.

Rheumatic  pain :  in  arms,  especially  in  bones  and  joints.

Rheumatic  lameness :  of  r.  upper  arm.

Sensation  of  heat  and  pain :  after  coitus.

Burning:  in  finger  tips.

Flushes  of  heat :  in  face.

Tickling :  in  upper  part  of  trachea.

Dryness :  in  larynx ;  in  trachea.

Anxious  oppression  or  empty  feeling  in  stomach.

Oppression :  in  chest.

Pressing,  drawing  sensation: from  abdomen  into  cords
and  testicles.

Dull  pressing :  in  abdomen.

Pressure :  in  forehead  ;  in  throat.

Trembling  sensation:  in  whole  body.

Crawling :  in  nose ;  in  r.  nostril ;  in  rectum ;  in  anus.

Intense  itching :  at  anus.

Itching  and  creeping :  at  anus.
^  Tissues. 1 1  Polypi  of  all  kinds,  particularly  nasal  fibroids.

■  Polypi  in  ear  and  nose,  especially  among  old  and  middle

aged  women.
*^  Touch. Passive  Motion.  Injuries. Touch :  skin  of  fore-
head sensitive ;  pimples  under  nostril  smarting.

■  Injuries  to  head,  concussion  of  brain.

I  I  After  lesions  where  tetanus  might  be  expected.
*^  Skin. Sensation  as  from  fleabites.

Rash,  burning,  itching.
*''  Stages  of  Life,  Constitution. ■  ■Old  persons  and  children.

■  s  Suitable  when  too much  medicine  has  produced an

oversensitive  condition  and  remedies  fail  to  act.
Boy,  set.  11,  after  erysipelas ;  nasal  polypus.
Boy,  set.  11,  for  three  years ;  nasal  polypi.
Girl,  set. 14, nervous temperament,  quickened growth,

slender,  pale  face,  light  hair,  blue  eyes ; tumor  on  1.

lower  lid.
Boy,  set.  15,  nasal  polypi.
Woman,  set.  19,  mother  of  a  scrofulous  child ;  affection  of

nose.
Man,  barber,  thin,  sandy  complexion ;  rheumatism.
Man,  set.  30,  strong  constitution,  gonorrhoea  eight  years

ago ;  urethral  polypi.
Woman,  set.  25 ;  polypus  of  vagina.
Man,  set.  56,  music  teacher,  suff'ering  two  years ;  psoriasis

dorsalis.


MARUM  VERUM— MEDORRHINUM.  292

Man,  set.  59,  for  thirty-one  years  ;  polypus.

Man,  set.  60,  strong,  suffering  thirty  years ;  nasal  polypus.
*^  Relations. Compatible :  Oinclion.,  Pulsat.,  Silica.

Compare:  Cina  (ascarides) ;  Ignat.  (hiccough,  ascarides);
Nux  vom.  (nervous  phenomena);  Kali  hick,  (nasal
catarrh) ;  Phosphor.,  Sanguin.,  Silica  (nasal  polypi) ;,
Valer.  (nervous  phenomena).


MEDORRHINUM.

Gonorrhoeal  Virus.  A  Nosode.

Introduced  by  Swan.

All  the  provings  and  cures  were  made  with  high  potencies.

The  provers  were  Ken  Dell,  Finch,  Swan,  Farrington,  Cleveland,  Higgins
and  others.

Other  authorities,  for  symptoms  clinical  and  pathogenetic,  mentioned  in
Berridge's  MSS.,  prepared  for  Swan's  Materia  Medica,  are  Ren  Dell,  Finch,  Swan,
Norton,  Frost,  Farrington,  Cleveland,  Morgan,  Berridge,  Wildes,  Higgins,  Ostrom,.
Nichols,  Pease,  Sawyer,  Carr,  Biegler,  etc.

Clinical  AuTHOEiTiES. — Neuralgic  headache,  MSS. ;  Ptosis  of  lids,  Swan,  MSS.;
Abscess  of  liver,  MSS. ;  i)iarrAcEa,  MSS. ;  Cholei-a  infantum  (2  cases),  S\^'an,M.SS.;  Noc-
turnal enuresis,  Sawyer,  MSS. ;  Impotence,  Cleveland,  MSS. ;  Gonorrhaa,  ivith  mental
disturbance,  Pease,  MSS. ;  Ulceration  of  neck  of  womb,^^i\&es,M.SS.;  C  hronic  soreness-
ofmammxE,  Higgins,  MSS.  ;  Cough,  Berridge,  Hom.  Phys.,  vol.  5,  p.  149 ;  Incipient  con-
sumption, Farrington,  MSS. ;  Rheumatism,  Biegler,  Org.,  vol.  3,  p.  211  ;  Obstinate  rheu-
matism, Swan,  MSS. ;  Chronic  rheumatism  (not  sycotic),  Wesselhoeft ,  MSS. ;  Gonor-
rhoeal rheumatism,  Nichols,  MSS.;  Sequelce  of  rheumatism.  Biegler,  MSS.;  Shoulder
pains,  Higgins,  MSS.;  Pain  under  I.  scapxda  to  end  of  little  finger,  Ostrom,  MSS.;
Itching  and  hivelike  eruption,  Swan,  MSS.

Symptoms  not  marked  are  pathogenetic;  marked  I  or  |  |  pathogenetic  veri-
fied ;  marked  |  |  purely  clinical.

^  Mind. I  Great  weakness  of  memory.

I  I  Dulness  of  memory  and  desire  to  procrastinate,  because

business  seemed  so  long  lasting,  or  as  if  it  never  could

be  accomplished. ^Gonorrhoea.
■  Entirely  forgot  what  she  had  read,  even  previous  line.
iForgetfulness  of  names,  later  of  words  and  initial  letters.
S Cannot  remember  names;  has  to  ask  name  of  her  most

intimate  friend  ;  forgets  her  own.
Cannot  spell  right ;  wonders  how  the  word  "  how  "  is  spelled.
Reads  a  letter  and  thinks  the  words  look  queer  and  are

spelled  wrong.


293  MEDORRHINUM.

llTime  moves  too  slowly.

■  Dazed  feeling;  a  far  off  sensation,  as  though  things  done

to-day  occurred  a  week  ago.
Momentary  loss  of  thought,  caused  b}^  sensation  of  tight-
ness in  brain.

■  Loses  constantly  the  thread  of  her  talk.

I  I  In  conversation  he  would  occasionally  stop,  and  on  re-
suming make  remark  that  he  could  not  think  what  word
he  wanted  to  use. ^Gonorrhoea.

■Seems  to  herself  to  make  wrong  statements,  because  she
does  not  know  wdiat  to  say  next,  begins  all  right  but
does  not  know  how  to  finish;  weight  on  vertex,  which
seems  to  affect  mind.

■  Great  difficulty  in  stating  her  symptoms,  loses  herself

and  has  to  be  asked  over  again.

Difficulty  in  concentrating  his  thoughts  or  mind  on  ab-
stract subjects.

Could  not  read  or  use  mind  at  all  from  pain  in  head.

Thinks  some  one  is  behind  her,  hears  whispering;  sees
faces  that  peer  at  her  from  behind  bed  and  furniture.

Persons  come  in,  look  at  her,  whisper,  and  say  "come."

■  One  night  saw  large  people  in  room;  large  rats  running;

felt  a  delicate  hand  smoothing  her  head  from  front  to
back.

Is  sure  that  she  is  worse,  knows  she  is  not  going  to  live,
cannot  see  any  improvement,  even  when  it  is  pointed
out;  has  no  fear  of  death,  speaks  calmly  about  it,  and
gives  directions  as  to  the  disposition  of  her  affairs.

■Sensation  as  if  all  life  was  unreal,  like  a  dream.

■  Wild  and  desperate  feeling,  as  of  incipient  insanity.

■  Cannot  speak  without  crying.

Tendency  to  suicide,  gets  up  in  night  and  takes  his  pistol,
but  his  wife  prevents  him.

■  ■Is  in  a  great  hurry;  when  doing  anything  is  in  such  a

hurry  that  she  gets  fatigued.
Strange  exhilaration  of  spirits.
Alternation  of  happiness  and  gloominess.
Spirits  in  the  depths,  weighed  down  with  heavy,  solid

gloom,  >  by  torrents  of  tears.

■  Is  always  anticipating ;  feels  most  matters  sensitively  be-

fore they  occur  and  generally  correctly.

■  Anticipates  death.

■  Dread  of  saying  the  wrong  thing  when  she  has  headache.

■  Everything  startles  her,  news  coming  to  her  seems  to

touch  her  heart  before  she  hears  it.

■  Woke  at  an  early  hour  with  a  frightened  sensation,  as  if

something  dreadful  had  happened;  heavy  weight  and
great  heat  in  head;  could  not  rest  in  bed;  felt  as  if  she
must  do  something  to  rid  her  mind  of  this  torture.


MEDORRHINUM.  294

I  Fear  of  the  dark.

Feeling  as  if  he  had  committed  the  unpardonable  sin  and
was  going  to  hell.

A  word  or  look  of  seeming  harshness  puts  her  in  despond-
ency for  hours.

Feeling  of  desperation;  did  not  care  if  he  went  to  heaven
or  hell.

I  Cross  through  day,  exhilarated  at  night,  wants  to  play.

■  Irritated  at  little  things.
Nerve  trembling,  with  worry.
I  Very  impatient.

Reading  and  writing  make  her  nervous  and  enrage  her.

Great  selfishness.
^  Sensorium.  l Vertigo:  when  stooping;  several  times  during
day  sudden  attacks,  seemingly  in  vertex,  with  danger
of  falling;  things  did  not  seem  to  go  round,  but  there
was  a  sensation  and  fear  of  falling,  only  slightly  >  lying
down;  <  on  movement;  always  woke  with  it;  as  if  in-
toxicated; walks  zigzag;  in  occiput,  extending  to  ver-
tex, with  sensation  of  enlargement  of  occiput.

■  Head  light,  not  exactly  dizzy.

Sensation  of  tightening  in  head,  causing  intense  vertigo.
^  Inner  Head,  l Frontal  headache:  with  nausea;  feeling  of
a  tight  band  across  forehead,  <  leaning  head  forward;
as  if  front  half  of  brain  would  come  through  forehead  ;
as  if  skin  was  drawn  tight;  with  fluent  coryza;  with
pressure  back  of  eyes,  as  if  they  would  be  forced  out;
extending  over  brain  to  neck.

BBrain  seems  weary;  slightest  sound  annoys  and  fatigues
her.

Neuralgia  first  in  1.  temple  and  parietal  bone,  then  in  r.,
next  day  in  1.  eye.

Wakes  with  headache  over  eyes  and  in  temples;  <  from
sunlight.

I  I  Headache  in  r.  temple;  a  good  deal  of  aching  over  1.  eye.
^Nocturnal  enuresis.

I  I  Neuralgic  headache  in  1.  temple  and  around  middle  part
of  cranium,  at  times  terribly  severe,  with  sensation  of
great  weight  and  pressure  in  vertex;  has  lasted  twenty-
four  hours  and  is  gradually  increasing  in  violence.

Pain  in  centre  of  brain;  in  evening  sharp  pain  through
temples;  pains  commence  and  cease  suddenly.

Heat  and  throbbing  in  temporal  region  both  sides.

Brain  exceedingly  tender  and  all  mental  work  irksome.

Pain  in  1.  parietal  bone  when  the  wind  blows  on  it.

Pain  circling  through  head  and  around  crown.
-Terrible  pains  all  through  head  in  every  direction,  with
continuous  and  violent  vomiting,  followed  by  aching  in
sacrum  and  down  back  of  legs  to  feet.


295  MEDORRHINUM.

I  Constant  headache,  <  while  coughing;  light  (through  tne

eyes)  seems  to  hurt  it.
Intense  headache  for  three  days,  with  inflammation  of  eye.
Headache  and  diarrhoea  from  motion  of  cars.
Headache  with  menses.
Dull  headache  in  a  broad  ring  around  head.
Intense  cerebral  suffering,  causing  continual  rubbing  of

head  in  pillow,  rolling  from  side  to  side.
I  Dull  pain  in  cerebellum.

■  Intense  burning  pain  in  head,  <  in  cerebellum.
Tensive  pain  in  1.  side  of  head  as  far  back  as  parietal  emi-
nence and  to  middle  of  crown.

Tensive  pains  in  head  as  if  she  would  go  crazy ;  could  not
read  or  use  mind.

Sensation  as  of  three  points  of  tension  in  head,  in  centre
of  each  hemisphere  and  cerebellum;  as  if  large  cords
were  drawn  to  each  from  every  part  of  lobes  and  cere-
bellum ;  extremely  painful,  caused  a  disposition  to  run
wildly  through  streets  tearing  hair;  seemed  as  if  tensive
pains  would  break,  when  suddenly  they  relaxed  and  a
bubbling  sensation  passed  from  centres  to  circumfer-
ences; when  reached,  the  tensive  pains  began  again.

Sensation  of  tightness  and  contraction,  extending  from
eyes  and  meeting  in  brain ;  extends  down  whole  length
of  spine.

Aching  in  occiput  and  medulla;  pain  sharpen  motion;
drowsy.

Aching  and  exhausted  feeling  in  cerebellum  and  medulla,
with  a  subjective  tenderness  of  spine  from  cerebellum
to  kidneys.

Aching  pain  in  base  of  brain,  with  swelling  of  cords  of  neck.

Burning  glow  in  cerebellum  and  down  spine.

Head  feels  heavy  and  is  drawn  backwards.

Severe  pain  in  back  of  head  as  though  it  had  been  struck ;
pain  spread  over  to  front,  with  severe  neuralgic  pain
in  1.  eye;  headache  lasted  all  night;  eye  bloodshot.

■  Pain  in  back  of  head  and  in  r.  eye.

Simmering  in  head,  does  not  know  whether  it  is  heard  or  felt.
Sensation  as  if  occipital  protuberances  were  enlarged.
'  Outer  Head. Hair  lustreless,  dry  and  crispy.

Dryness  and  electrical  condition  of  hair;  it  will  not  remain
brushed.

■  Intense  itching  of  scalp;  quantities  of  dandruff.

'  Sight  and  Eyes.  When  eyes  were  shut,  felt  as  if  pulling
out  of  head  to  one  side  or  other ;  when  open  all  things
seemed  to  flicker.
A  blur  over  things  ;  numberless  black,  sometimes  brown
spots  dancing  over  her  book ;  sees  objects  double ;
things  look  very  small ;  sees  imaginary  objects.


MEDORRHINUM.  296

I  Feeling  as  if  she  stared  at  everything,  as  if  eyes  pro-
truded.

I  Aching  in  eyeballs,  pressure  and  heat  in  vertex,  a  ten-
dency to  shut  eyes.

I  Neuralgic  pain  in  eyeballs :  when  pressing  eyelids  together ;
<  when  rolling  them.

I  I  Continuous  watering  of  eyes,  great  heat  and  sensation
of  sand  under  lids.

I  Feeling  of  pain  and  irritation,  and  sensation  of  sticks  in
eyes,  lids  and  especially  inner  canthi,  redness  and  dry-
ness of  lids,  congestion  of  sclerotic  and  sensation  of  a
cool  wind  blowing  in  eyes,  especially  inner  canthi.

•  Ptosis  of  outer  end  of  both  upper  lids,  particularly  1.,
requiring  exertion  to  open  them.

■  Swelling  of  upper  lids;  soreness  and  smarting  of  edges.

■  Decided  tendency  to  irritation  of  edges  of  lids.

■  Pulling  pain  in  1.  lower  lid  from  outer  can  thus;  could

see  lid  twitch  between  these  points.
Hardness  of  upper  lid  as  if  it  had  a  cartilage  in  it.
Eyebrows  itch;  brows  and  lashes  fall  off.
Swelling  under  eyes.
*  Hearing  and  Ears. Nearly  total  deafness  of  both  ears,

with  very  little  noise;  had  to  use  a  trumpet.

■  Partial  or  transient  deafness;  pulsation  in  ears.
I  I  Child  hard  of  hearing  for  six  days.

Singular  sensation  of  deafness  from  one  ear  to  the  other,

as  if  a  tube  went  through  head,  while  yet  there  was  an

overacuteness  of  hearing.
Is  sure  he  hears  people  in  conversation,  but  on  carefully

watching,  finds  that  sounds  have  reference  to  arterial

pulsation,  but  where  he  cannot  discover.
When  whistling,  the  sound  in  ears  is  double,  with  peculiar

vibration  as  when  two  persons  whistle  thirds.
Noises  seemingly  in  mastoid  cells,  frying  and  hissing.
Pain  passes  up  Eustachian  tube  and  out  of  both  ears  with

a  tickling  sensation.
After  sleeping  feels  as  though  parchment  was  drawn  over

ear  on  which  she  was  lying.
Sensation  of  a  worm  about  an  inch  long  crawling  in  r.

ear,  and  as  if  it  commenced  boring  in  anterior  wall  of

auditory  canal.
Itching,  aching,  or  boring  pain  in  1.  ear.
Aching  in  cartilage  of  ear  when  lying  on  it  at  night.
Soreness  to  touch  of  r.  concha.
Quick,  darting  pains  in  r.  ear, from  without  inward;  pains

followed  each  other  in  close  succession.
Ringhole  in  1.  ear  sore  and  almost  gathered.
^  Sm€ll  and  Nose. Intense  itching  in  nose,  internally  near

point,  had  to  rub  all  the  time.


10


297  MEDORRHINUM.

Very great burning in both nostrils when breathing
through  them.

Coldness  of  end  of  nose.

Entire  loss  of  smell  for  several  days.

Soreness  of  outer  wing  (inside)  of  1.  nostril.

Nose  constantly  running.

Nasal  catarrh,  with  continual  running  down  throat.

Sensation  of  action  in  bones  of  nose ;  obstruction  at  root
of  nose  as  if  mucous  membrane  was  hypertrophied.

Nose  goes  to  sleep.

llEpistaxis.

Nose  inflamed,  swollen.

Catarrh  of  posterior  nares.

Posterior  nares  obstructed,  >  by  hawking  thick,  greyish
mucus,  followed  by  bloody  mucus.

Heavy  fluent  coryza,  with  hard  headache  all  day  in  frontal
region,  <  10.30  a.m.

Soreness  and  crawling  feeling  as  of  a  centipede  in  1.  nostril
in  morning.
^  Upper  Face, l  i  Great  pallor;  yellowness  of  face,  particularly
around  eyes,  as  if  occurring  from  a  bruise  (greenish
yellow) ;  yellow  band  across  forehead  close  to  hair.

Greenish,  shining  appearance  of  skin.

Blotches  on  face.

Flushes  of  heat  in  face  and  neck.

Fever  blisters  near  corner  of  r.  upper  lip,  small  but  very  sore.

Enormous  fever  sore  on  lower  lip  near  1.  commissure.

Sweat  of  face ;  on  uj)per  lip.

I  I  Neuralgia  of  r.  upper  and  lower  jaws,  extending  to  temple.

TrSwelling  in  region  of  1.  submaxillary  gland,  the  size  of
a  goose  egg;  whiskers  over  tumor  came  out;  softened  in
centre ;  at  times  sharp,  shooting  pains;  on  being  opened
discharged  a  large  quantity  of  thin,  bloody  pus;  was
opened  several  times,  finally  the  aperture  formed  raised
embankment-hke  edges;  the  pus  burrowed  until  arrested
by  clavicle,  where  it  formed  an  enormous  swelling  (>
after  Thuja  3m.);  the  tumors  left  fistulous  openings
which  were  a  long  time  in  healing.  ^Retronasal
catarrh  (benefited).

Face  covered  with  acne ;  dry  herpes ;  freckles.
*  Lower  Face, i  i  Tendency  to  stiff'ness  in  jaws  and  tongue.

I  I  Rigidity  of  muscles  of  face,  especially  of  lower  lip,
drawing  it  up  tight  to  teeth  ;  jaws  stifl;  unable  to  open
them  ;  deglutition  nearly  impossible  ;  throat  filled  with
saliva.

Swelling  of  submaxillary  glands.
Teeth  and  Gums, i  i  Teeth  have serrated edges,  or  are
chalky  and  easily  decay.


MEDORRHINUM.  •  298

Sore  teeth,  particularly  eyeteeth  ;  feel  sore  and  soft.

Yellowness  of  teeth.
I  I  Hard  swelling  on  r.  upper  jaw,  as  if  in  socket  of  a  tooth
gone  since  four  years;  intense  neuralgic  pains  extend-
ing to  whole  head,  causing  sleeplessness; severe  pains
all  over  head,  with  external  heat.
I  1  Pale  gums.
"  Taste  and  Tongue. Taste :  coppery  on  rising ; disagree-
able ; bad  in  morning.

Tongue  coated :  brown  and  thick ;  thickly  in  morning,
with  bad  taste  ;  white  at  base,  the  rest  red  ;  white,  with
papillse  showing  through.

Tongue  blistered.

Small  sores,  pustules  (canker  sores)  on  edge,  tip  and  under
tongue,  very  painful ;  also  inside  lips  and  in  throat.
^^  Inner  Mouth. Foul  breath  in  morning.

Dryness  of  mouth  ;  feels  burnt.

I  I  Very  sore  mouth,  ulcers  on  tongue  and  in  buccal  cavity,
like  blisters.

I  I  Blisters  on  inner  surface  of  lips  and  cheeks,  skin  peel-
ing off  in  patches.

Excitement  of  submaxillary  glands,  pouring  out  saliva
profusely.

Stringy  mucus  comes  out  of  mouth  during  sleep.
13  Throat. Irritation  in  throat  as  if  scraped.

Pharynx  inflamed  and  feels  very  stiff  and  sore.

Great  dryness  of  throat,  with  swollen  glands.

Back  part  of  throat  constantly  filling  with  mucus  from
posterior  nares.

Sore  throat  and  cold  in  head  >  by  salt  water  bathing.

Soreness  of  throat,  hurts  to  swallow.
^*  Appetite. Thirst. Desires. Aversions. '  i  Appetite  in-
creased ;  ravenous  hunger  immediately  after  eating.

Absolute  loss  of  appetite ;  thirst.

Enormously  thirsty ;  even  dreams  that  she  is  drinking.

Insatiate  craving  for  liquor,  when  before  she  hated  it.

I  I  Great  craving  for  salt. ^Abscess  of  liver.

Craving:  for  sweets;  hard,  green  fruit ;  ice;  sour  things;
oranges ;  ale.
^''Belching,  Hiccough,  Nausea  and  Vomiting.  '  i  Hiccough.

Nausea:  with  frontal  headache;  after  drinking  water;
after  dinner ;  always  after  eating  ;  before  eating.

Vomiting  of  thick  mucus  and  bile,  without  nausea.

I  I  Violent  retching  and  vomiting  for  forty-eight  hoars;
first  glairy  mucus,  then  frothy  and  watery,  and  lastly
coffee  grounds ;  accompanied  by  intense  headache,  with
great  despondency  and  sensation  of  impending  death ;
during  paroxysm  was  continually  praying.


299  MEDORRHINUM.

Vomiting  black  bile  without  nausea,  tasting  bitter  and
sour,  with  considerable  mucus.
^^  Scrobiculum  and  Stomach,  i  i  Sensation  in  pit  of  stomach
as  of  a  paper  of  pins  that  seemed  to  force  themselves
through  flesh,  causing  her  to. rise  and  double  up  and
scream ;  pins  seem  to  come  from  each  side.  ^Abscess
of  liver.

A  sick  or  gnawing  feeling,  not  >  by  eating  or  drinking.

Trembling  at  pit  of  stomach.

Sometimes  a  burning  (like  a  flame)  in  pit  of  stomach,  as
if  heart  palpitated  there.

Dull  pain  in  epigastric  region,  deep  in.

Feeling  of  a  lump  in  stomach  after  eating.

Throbbing  in  sides  of  stomach.

Clawing  in  stomach,  <  drawing  up  knees.

I  I  Cramps  in  stomach  as  from  wind.

I  I  Intense  pain  in  stomach  and  upper  abdomen,  with  a
sensation  of  tightness.

Sensation  of  sinking  and  agonizing  sickness  at  stomach,
with  a  desire  to  tear  something  away.
^^  Hypochondria. Terrible  pains  in  liver,  thought  she  would
die,  they  were  so  acute.

I  Bilious  colic  with  frequent  vomiting  and  nausea ;  diar-
rhoeic  stools,  chilliness  and  perspiration  on  face  and  neck.
I  Congestion  of  liver.

■  Grasping  pain  in  liver  and  spleen.
I  Burning  heat  around  to  back,  like  a  coal  of  fire. ^Ab-
scess of  liver.

I  Severe  pain  from  abscess  extending  to  r.  shoulder  and
down  elbow. ^Abscess  of  liver.

I  Throbbing  and  thumping  in  region  of  suprarenal  cap-
sule, seeming  to  come  from  abscess  or  sore  spot  just
below  fifth  rib,  r.  side ;  creeping  chills  in  region  of  r.  kid-
ney, throbbing,  contracting,  drawing  and  relaxing  as  if
caused  by  icy  cold  insects  with  claws.  ^Abscess  of  liver.
Abdomen,  l  Intense  agonizing  pain  in  solar  plexus  ;  surface
cold;  eructations  tasting  of  sulphuretted  hydrogen
and,  after  eating,  of  ingesta  ;  applied  r.  hand  to  pit  of
stomach  and  1.  to  lumbar  region.

Pressure  in  lower  abdomen  as  of  a  heavy  weight.

A  feeling  as  of  a  tumor  in  r.  side  of  abdomen.

Tensive  pain  in  r.  side  of  abdomen,  as  of  a  hard,  bicon-
vex body ;  with  heat  and  gnawing  aching  pain,  con-
tinued a  short  time ;  it  was  between  spine  of  ilium  and
recti  muscles.

Darting  pain  from  centre  of  r.  ovarian  region  to  lower
edge  of  liver.

I  I  Ascites;  abdomen  greatly  distended  ;  palpation  showed
water ;  urine  very  scanty  and  high  colored.


MEDORRHINUM.  300

Beating  as  of  a  pulse  in  abdomen  vertically.

Left  inguinal  glands  sensitive  and  slightly  swollen.

Cutting  in  r.  lower  abdomen  running  into  r.  spermatic
cord  ;  r.  testis  very  tender.
^^  Stool  and  Rectum. Bilious  diarrhoea,  verging  on  dysen-
tery, with  mucous  stools.

Pains  of  most  intense  kind  (threatening  cramps)  in  upper
abdomen  (darting  and  tearing  pains)  coming  on  at  stool ;
stool  diarrhoeic,  thin  and  hot,  but  not  copious ;  after
stool,  profound  weakness  and  mild  cramp  in  1.  calf.

Profuse  bloody  discharges  from  rectum,  sometimes  in
large  clotted  masses,  followed  by  shivering.

I  I  Bhick  stool.

I  I  White  diarrhoea.

Stools  tenacious,  claylike,  sluggish,  cannot  be  forced,  from
a  sensation  of  prolapsus  of  rectum.

Can  onl}^  pass  stool  by  leaning  very  far  back ;  very  pain-
ful, as  if  there  was  a  lump  on  posterior  surface  of  sphinc-
ter ;  so  painful  as  to  cause  tears.

1  Constriction  and  inertia  of  bowels  with  balllike  stools.

I  I  Child,  £et.  15  months,  brought  on  a  pillow  to  clinic,  ap-
parently dead ;  eyes  glassy,  set ;  could  not  find  pulse,
but  felt  heart  beat ;  running  from  anus  greenish  yellow,
thin,  horribly  offensive  stool.

I  I  Baby,  set.  7  months,  after  summer  complaint,  great
emaciation,  diarrhoea  green,  watery,  slimy,  yellow,
curdled,  like  boiled  potatoes  chopped  up  with  greens,
thin,  cream  colored,  watery,  smelling  like  rotten  eggs ;
stools  pass  involuntarily ;  apparently  lifeless,  except  that
it  rotates  head  on  pillow.

I  I  Cholera  infantum  with  opisthotonos,  vomiting  and
watery  diarrhoea ;  profuse  discharge  of  blood  and  pus.

Sharp,  needlelike  pains  in  rectum.

I  I  Painful  attack  of  piles,  not  bleeding,  hot  swelling  on  1.
side  of  anus ;  pin  worms.

Oozing  of  moisture  from  anus,  fetid  like  fish  brine.
Urinary  Organs. Intense  renal  colic ;  severe  pain  in  ureters,
with  sensation  as  of  passage  of  calculus  ;  during  kidney
attack,  great  craving  for  ice.

Dull  pinching  pain  in  region  of  suprarenal  capsules  at
11  A.M. ;  fingers  cold  at  same  time ;  great  pressure  in
bladder,  greater  than  amount  of  urine  warrants;  urine
scanty  and  high  colored.

I  I  Pain  in  renal  region,  profuse  urination  relieves.

I  I  Very  distinct  bubbling  sensation  in  r.  kidney ;  sensation
of  three  bubbles  in  r.  renal  region,  moving  like  bubbling
in  water,  causing  faintness;  deathly  feeling  in  kidneys,
with  great  depression  of  spirits,  similar  to  effect  of  cold


301  MEDORRHINUM.

settling  in  renal  region;  prostration  after  urination,
^Abscess  of  liver.

I  Urine  high  colored.

A  child,  severe  attack  of  cystitis,  with  light  colored  urine
filled  with  mucus ;  extreme  pain  in  urethra  on  urinat-
ing; end  of  penis  inflamed;  analysis  gave  albumen,
phosphates  and  triple  phosphates.

Urine  watery,  colorless.

After  urinating,  great  coldness  and  shivering.

Burning  on  urination,  like  incipient  gonorrhoea.

■Strong  smelling  urine.

I  I  Urine  covered  with  a  thick  greasy  pellicle.

I  I  Nocturnal  urination  entirely  ceased,  the  chamber  empty
in  morning,  a  thing  unknown  for  years.

I  I  Painful  tenesmus  of  bladder  and  bowels  when  urinating.

I  I  Passes  an  enormous  quantity  of  high  colored,  strong
smelling  urine  in  bed  every  night ;  thinks  it  is  in  after-
part  of  night,  as  he  is  always  wet  in  morning ;  overwork
and  too  much  heat,  or  being  in  cold,  aggravates  this
condition.

Debility  after  prolonged  or  complete  urination.

Syncope  after  urination.

Intensely  yellow  urine.

In  urinating  very  slow  stream,  with  sharp,  cutting  pains
transversely  across  root  of  penis;  once  flow  intermitted ;
no  burning;  pains  come  on  just  as  last  drops  are  voided.

I  I  Diabetic  condition;  j)rofuse  and  frequent  urination.
^Male Sexual Organs. Nocturnal emission,  followed by

great  weakness  and  miserable  feeling  all  day.
Emissions  during  sleep: watery,  causing  no  stiff'ness  of
linen ;  transparent,  consistence  of  gum  arable  mucilage,
too  thick  to  pour,  and  voided  with  difficulty;  thick,  with
threads  of  white,  opaque  substance.

I I  Impotence.

I  iGonorrhoeal  flow  thin,  transparent,  mixed  with  opaque,
whitish  mucus,  stains  linen  yellow.

I  I  Intense  and  frequent  erections  day  and  night.

I  I  Pains  along  urethra  while  urinating,  drawing  burning.
^Suppressed  gonorrhoea.

1  I  Gonorrhoea  for  ten  months;  during  eight  months  mostly
suppressed  by  drugs  and  injections;  for  past  two  months
flow  persists,  watery,  transparent,  but  acrid  and  abund-
ant, mixed  with  creamy  liquid,  stains  linen  yellow
brown;  pain  at  end  of  penis  during  urination;  since
third  month  of  infection  had  heavy,  drawing,  wandering
pains  in  r.  arm,  r.  hip  and  1.  calf,  <  in  damp  weather.

llGleety,  gonorrhoeal  discharge  for  twenty  years;  urine
stains  clothes  a  dirty  brown,  discharges  extremely  slow.


MEDORRHINUM.  302

sometimes  it  takes  half  an  hour  to  empty  bladder,  leav-
ing him  in  a  weak  condition;  during  urination,  painful
rectal  tenesmus;  chilliness  when  bladder  is  too  full,  >
by  urination ;  if  he  urinates  after  getting  warm  in  bed,
has  to  urinate  every  hour  rest  of  night;  faint,  indefinite
sense  of  chilliness,  followed  by  frequent  calls  to  urinate,
urine  being  hot,  copious  and  followed  by  spinal  chill
and  incontinence  of  urine  on  getting  cold.

I  I  Burning  in  meatus  during  urination,  and  a  feeling  of
soreness  through  whole  urethra;  also  after  urinating,  a
feeling  as  if  something  more  remained  in  urethra.
^Gonorrhoea.

I  I  Scanty,  yellowish,  gleety  discharge,  of  many  months'
standing,  showing  most  plainly  in  morning,  gumming
up  orifice.

I  I  Profuse,  yellow,  purulent  discharge  from  urethra,  most
copious  in  morning. ^Gonorrhoea.

I  I  Cannot  retain  urine  more  than  an  hour,  after  5  or  6
P.M. ^Chronic  gleet.

I  I  Cannot  retain  urine  through  night. ^Chronic  stricture.

;rChancrelike  ulcer  on  prepuce  (never  had  syphilis  or  gon-
orrhoea) ;  six  months  later  there  came  for  several  months
successive  crops  of  vesicles  on  prepuce,  very  sore  to  touch,
which  soon  opened  at  the  tip,  and  left  a  little  ulcerlike
sore  lasting  a  few  days;  a  round,  clean  cut, sharp  edged
elevation  with  depression,  however  not  filled  with  pus
as  in  genuine  chancre. ^Retronasal  catarrh  (benefited).

Soreness,  swelling  and  dragging  of  testes.
^  Female  Sexual  Organs. ' '  Great  sexual  desire  after  menses
in  a  single  woman.

A  great  deal  of  pain  in  1.  ovary,  with  a  sensation  as  if  a
sac  was  distended  and  if  pressed  would  burst;  sensation
as  if  something  was  pulling  it  down,  causing  it  to  be
sore;  pain  when  walking  passed  to  1.  groin,  as  if  leg
pushed  something,  with  a  great  amount  of  heat.

Left  ovary  seemed  enlarged,  with  intense  heat  and  severe
aching  pain  ;  could  not  bear  pressure,  though  it  seemed
as  if  she  must  press  it;  with  a  burning  heat.

Tense  pains  passing  diagonally  in  r.  ovary,  followed  by  a
bubbling  sensation.

Intense,  excruciating,  neuralgic  pains  in  whole  pelvic  re-
gion, extending  downwards  through  ovarian  region  to
uterus;  cutting  like  knives,  forcing  tears  and  groans.

I  1  Ulceration  of  neck  of  uterus,  which  looked  ragged  and
torn,  inflamed  and  covered  with  stringy  pus;  had  gon-
orrhoea.

Distinct  soreness  and  nervous  pain  in  one  spot  in  lower
part  of  uterus  on  1.  side,  <  walking  or  moving  1.  leg.


303  MEDORRHINUM

Pulling  and  pain  in  sacrum  and  pubic  region,  as  if
menses  were  coming  on.

Profuse  menses;  dark  clotted,  also  bright  blood,  with
faintness  and  some  pain.

I  I  Menses  very  dark ;  stains  difficult  to  wash  out.

Intense  menstrual  colic,  causing  drawing  up  of  knees,  with
terrible,  bearing  down,  laborlike  pains,  with  pressing
of  feet  against  support,  as  in  labor.

A  burning  pain  in  lower  part  of  back  and  hips  during
menses.

I  I  After  very  profuse,  menses,  neuralgia  in  paroxysms  in
head,  with  twitching, and  drawing  in  of  limbs  and  cords
of  neck,  which  were  like  wires;  pain  in  lower  abdomen,
with  profuse,  yellowish  leucorrhoea.

Itching  of  vagina  and  labia,  thinking  of  it  makes  it  worse.

Small  chancres  on  edge  of  r.  labia  (had  no  sexual  inter-
course for  three  years,  never  had  venereal  disease).

Short,  shooting  pains,  passing  outwards,  chiefly  in  breasts.

Breasts  cold  as  ice  to  touch,  especially  nipples  (during
menses),  rest  of  body  warm.

Large  but  not  painful  swelling  of  1.  breast.

Nipples  sore,  sensitive  and  inflamed.

Breasts  and  nipples  very  tender  to  touch,  also  inflamed.

Soreness  of  nipples,  a  gummy  secretion  drying  on  orifice ;
when  picked  off  nipple  bleeds  freely.

Soreness  of  breasts,  very  sensitive  to  touch,  at  nonmen-
strual  periods.

Peculiar  tenderness  of  breasts.
^  Voice  and  Larynx. Trachea  and  Bronchia. Hoarse-
ness, especially  while  reading,  with  occasional  loss  of
voice.

Slight  hoarseness  with  hawking  up  of  mucus.

Choking  caused  bya  weakness  or  spasm  of  epiglottis,  could
not  tell  which;  larynx  stopped  so  that  no  air  could  enter,
only  >  by  lying  on  face  and  protruding  tongue.

At  night  dryness,  soreness  and  choking  very  severe ;  thrust-
ing tongue  in  cheek  brought  on  coughing  and  choking
as  if  epiglottis  was  closed  ;  a  tearing  sensation  as  if  lin-
ing of  larynx  and  pharynx  had  been  torn  off.

B  Dryness  of  glottis,  very  annoying,  with  pain  during  deg-
lutition; great  hoarseness.

During  day  hoarseness,  soreness  and  elongation  of  palate.

Soreness  in  larynx  as  if  ulcerated.

Larynx  feels  sore  when  coughing.

Tenacious  mucus  in  larynx.

Sensation  of  a  lump  in  larynx ;  severe  pain  on  deglutition.

1  I  Bronchial  catarrh  spreading  into  larynx,  swelling  of
tonsils  and  glands  of  throat  extended  also  into  ears,
causing  transient  deafness.


MEDORRHINUM.  304

^•^  Respiration. Desire  to  breathe  deep;  wakes  gasping  for
breath.

Difficulty  in  breathing,  with  momentary  faintness;  very
marked  stuffed  feeling  in  chest  made  her  gasp  for
breath.

Great  oppression  of  breathing  every  afternoon  about  5  p.m.  ;
sense  of  constriction.

Has  to  fill  lungs,  but  no  power  to  eject  air.

Faint  suffocative  sensation  when  sitting  up  in  bed,  as  if
thorax  was  full.

Spasm  of  glottis,  with  clucking  in  throat,  air  expelled  with
difficulty,  but  inhaled  with  ease.

Breath  hot,  feels  so  even  when  breathing  through  nose.

After  a  deep  inspiration  singular  piping  and  croaking  in
bronchia.
^^  Cough. Cough  from  tickling  under  upper  part  of  sternum.

Incessant  dry  cough,  <  at  night;  wakes  just  as  she  is  fall-
ing asleep ;  <  from  sweet  things.

Hacking  cough,  causing  darting  pains  through  scapulae.

Dry,  hacking  cough,  with  a  weak,  sinking  sensation  under
sternum.

Severe  dry  cough,  <  at  night;  sensation  of  a  lump;  dry-
ness and  excoriated  sensation  in  glottis,  with  great
hoarseness  (relieved  by  Ipec).

Terrible,  painful  cough,  as  if  larynx  would  be  torn  to  pieces,
and  as  if  mucous  membrane  was  torn  off,  with  profuse
discharge  of  viscid,  greyish  mucus,  mixed  with  blood.

Cough  deep  and  hollow,  like  coughing  in  a  barrel ;  bron-
chial tubes  appear  to  be  very  much  enlarged  and  cough
spasm  causes  a  flabby  feeling,  as  if  lining  membrane  was
a  loose  fold  of  tissue.

Great  rattling  of  mucus,  which  appears  to  be  low  down  in
chest,  while  cough  does  not  seem  to  reach  there,  but
only  to  throat  pit,  consequently  hard  cough  does  not
reach  phlegm  unless  he  lies  on  his  face,  when  cough
brings  up  a  greyish  yellow,  or  a  pale  greenish  yellow,
gelatinous  mucus  without  taste.

When  lying  on  back  or  either  side  when  coughing,  rat-
tling, wheezing  or  whistling.

Cough  :  with  aching  across  kidneys ;  causes  painful  shock
at  base  of  each  lung;  with  a  peculiar  shrill,  barking
sound,  some  expectoration;  on  entering  a  warm  room;
after  eating.

I  I  Cough,  <  on  lying  down,  >  lying  on  stomach.

I  I  Cough,  <  at  night,  causing  retching.

Hawking  of  tenacious  mucus.

Expectoration  :  yellow  white,  albuminous,  or  little  green,
bitter  balls ;  ropy,  difficult  to  raise ;  as  if  flecked  with
infinitesimal  dark  spots.


305  MEDORRHINUM.

^  Inner  Chest  and  Lungs. Oppression  of  chest :  <  1.  side ;
witii  difficult  breathing  and  a  tendency  to  take  a  long
breath  ;  wakes  gasping  for  breath.
Hoarseness  seems  to  be  in  chest ;  feels  like  an  accumula-
tion in  chest ;  as  if  it  was  painfully  contracted.
Sharp  pain  in  bottom  of  1.  lung.
Darting  pain  through  lung,  which  makes  her  start.
Chest  sore  to  touch,  at  times  burning  extends  over  chest ;
cold  seems  to  increase  it ;  a  piece  of  ice  cools  it  for  an
instant,  then  it  is  hotter;  lung  feels  as  if  beaten  or  bruised.
Feels  as  if  her  breath  was  fanning  a  blistered  sore  in  lung.
Singular  sensation  through  chest,  bounded  by  aline  drawn
across  lower  end  of  sternum  and  another  about  middle;
as  if  there  was  a  cavity  extending  from  side  to  side,
filled  with  burning  air,  which  dilated  in  puffs  in  all
directions  and  could  be  felt  impinging  on  walls  of  cavity.
Heat  like  a  furnace  in  chest,  with  itching  of  ears.
Pain  in  upper  part  of  r.  lung  when  moving  arm.
I  I  Pain  in  r.  shoulder  as  though  it  came  from  1.,  straight

through.
Chest  feels  sore  throughout.

Darting  pain  from  centre  of  r.  lung  to  lower  edge  of  liver.
Cold  pain  in  r.  lung  and  liver  while  coughing.
Very  sharp  stitching  pain  in  bottom  of  r.  lung;  also  over-
surface  of  both  lungs.
Aching  in  back  part  of  1.  lung.
An  old  sore  spot  in  top  of  1.  lung  aroused.
Fatigue  of  1.  lung  after  talking,  as  if  collapsed  or  paralyzed.
Walking  in  sun,  1.  lung  becomes  excessively  hot,  r.  lung

cold.
Pain  in  1.  upper  chest  through  to  shoulders;  cough  aris-
ing from  chest;  incessant,  dry  cough,  <  at  night.
Aching  in  1.  lung  under  scapula,  indescribable  aching  as
if  it  was  drawn  up  in  hand  and  then  let  loose,  <  after
walking;  at  same  time  aching  in  base  of  brain.
Sharp  pain  along  r.  edge  of  sternum,  changing  to  1.  edge,

and  afterwards  into  1.  lung.
Left  lung  very  painful,  feels  drawn  towards  r.  side;  1.  side
of  chest  from  top  of  lung  to  waist  hot  as  fire ;  heart  beat
very  fast  and  felt  hot,  too ;  heat  spread  over  r.  side,  but
was  very  mild,  only  a  warm  feeling,  while  1.  side  was
consuming;  face  pale  grey,  nose  pinched  and  deathlike.
Bottom  of  1.  lung  sore  to  pressure  (slight  urging  to  cough
irom  lower  bronchia) ;  afterwards  slight  pain  in  bottom
of  r.  lung.

I  I  Constricted  sensation  at  bottom  of  both  lungs;  finally

dull,  heavy  pain  at  top  of  1.  lung.
Intense  boring  in  chest,  but  most  below  1.  scapula,  a  place,
VOL.  vn. — 20.


MEDORRHINUM.  306

the  size  of  a  dollar,  on  outer  edge  extremely  sensitive  to
touch ;  pain  from  upper  lung  to  this  spot.

Coughing  gives  great  pain  in  chest,  as  if  it  was  painfully
contracted.

Sore  spot  size  of  silver  dollar  begins  at  top  of  1.  lung  and
like  a  red  hot  bolt  extends  through  to  lower  part  of
back ;  chest  sometimes  feels  as  if  something  had  grown
to  the  sore  spot  in  front  and  was  drawing  back  the  chest;
she  feels  for  a  cavit}^

Pain  in  heart  and  lungs,  especially  at  night.

I  I  Awful  pains,  in  phthisis,  in  middle  lobes.

I I  Incipient  consumption.

^^  Heart,  Pulse  and Circulation. Difficulty  of  breathing
through  oppression  of  heart.

Fluttering  about  heart.

Palpitation  after  slight  exertion.

Heavy  heart  throbbings.

With  heat  in  chest,  heart  felt  very  hot,  beat  very  fast  and
felt  large,  accompanied  by  a  bursting  sensation.

Soreness  in  heart  in  morning  after  having  slept  on  1.  side.

Feeling  of  a  cavity  where  heart  ought  to  be.

Pain  in  heart:  acute,  sharp,  quick;  dull,  quick.

Sharp  pains  around  heart,  passing  thence  to  head ;  pre-
ceded by  nausea.

Sharp  pain  at  apex  of  heart ;  <  on  movement.

Great  pain  in  cardiac  plexus,  extending  to  1.  arm  and
throat ;  pulse  64 ;  next  day  no  pain ;  pulse  100.

Intense  pain  in  heart,  seemed  to  radiate  in  different  parts
of  1.  side  of  chest;  <  from  least  movement.

Pain  from  sore  spot  below  1.  scapula  to  heart,  with  violent
palpitation.

Dull  pain  in  heart,  with  pain  in  1.  arm  and  sensation
as  if  hand  was  swollen.

Burning  in  heart,  went  through  to  back  and  down  into  1.
arm.
^^  Outer  Chest. Pain  and  soreness  through  chest  and  mammae.

Sensation  of  an  abscess  on  1.  chest  between  pectoralis
major  and  minor  where  they  form  anterior  boundary  of
axillary  space,  hard  and  sensitive  to  touch,  drawing
pains  in  every  direction,  <  motion  of  arm ;  great  heat
extending  about  three  inches  from  spot  and  through  to
back  of  shoulder,  no  redness  and  very  slight  swelling.

Great  soreness  to  pressure  of  muscles  of  lower  1.  chest  front
and  back,  soreness  when  moving  of  1.  shoulder  blade.
^^  Neck  and  Back. Drawing  in  cords  of  neck,  causing  desire
to  throw  head  back.

Swelling  of  cords  of  neck,  with  aching  pain  in  base  of  brain.

Spasms  of  neck  muscles,  notably  sterno-mastoid,  drawing
chin  firmly  down  to  breast.


307  MEDORRHINUM.

Sensation  of  an  enlarged  gland  in  r.  side  of  neck  under
upper  part  of  sterno-cleido-mastoid  muscle,  painful  when
moving  head.

Pain  in  nape  and  between  scapulae,  running  to  either  side,
shoulder  and  down  to  lumbar  region.

Contractive  pain  from  superior  angles  of  scapulae,  passing
to  seventh  dorsal  vertebra  and  extending  straight  down
spine  to  ninth  vertebra,  drawing  shoulders  back  tight
as  if  bones  would  be  crushed ;  <  moving  shoulders,
neck  or  arms.

Pain  in  back  between  scapulae.

Intense  burning  heat,  commencing  in  back  of  neck  and
extending  gradually  down  spine,  with  a  contractive
stiffness  extending  into  head  and  seeming  to  thicken
the  scalp.

Pain  under  r.  scapula.

I  Pain  straight  through  from  1.  to  r.  shoulder.

Burning  glow  in  cerebellum  and  down  spine.

Weak,  stiff,  aching  back.

I  Heat  in  medulla  and  spine  for  a  whole  week.

Whole  length  of  backbone  sore  to  touch,  also  ribs  of  1.  side.

Tenderness  of  spinal  column  when  stretching.

Aching  across  and  in  kidneys.

Occasional  creeping  sensation  in  region  of  1.  kidney.

When  she  stoops  cannot  rise  again  without  violent  pain
in  region  of  kidneys.

Pain  in  region  of  1.  kidney,  darting  over  1.  hip,  especiall}^
when  spine  is  pressed  upon.

I  I  Throbbing  and  thumping  in  region  of  r.  suprarenal
capsule  seeming  to  come  from  abscess  or  sore  spot  just
below  fifth  rib,  r.  side,  under  breast;  creeping  chills  in
region  of  r.  kidney,  throbbing,  contracting,  drawing  and
relaxing ;  as  if  caused  by  icy  cold  insects  with  claws.
^Abscess  of  liver.

Lumbar  vertebrae  sensitive  to  touch.

I  I  Pains  in  lumbar  portion  of  spine ;  myalgic ;  induration
of  testes.

Sensation  of  water  dropping  out  of  a  bottle  in lumbar
region  (opposite  third  lumbar  vertebra),  between  pos-
terior and  superior  spine  of  ilium  and  vertebra.
. I  I  Lumbago  caused  by  straining  in  lifting.

Pain  in  back  of  hips,  running  around  and  down  limbs.

Pain  in  sacrum  and  coccyx.
^^  Upper  Limbs, l  Rheumatic  pain  in  top  of  1.  shoulder,  <
from  motion ;  occasional  little  darts  of  pain  if  kept  still.

I  1  Rheumatic  pain  in  r.  shoulder  and  arm.

Rheumatic  pains  in  shoulders,  notably  1.,  also  in  hands,
with  pains  on  closing  them.

Brown,  itching  eruption  on  1.  shoulder.


MEDORRHINUM.  308

I  I  Severe  pain  from  abscess,  extending  to  r.  shoulder  and
down  to  elbow. ^Abscess  of  liver.

I  I  Pain  commencing  under  1.  scapula,  running  down  1.
arm  to  little  finger,  which  pricked  as  if  asleep.

Cold  numbness  on  outer  side  of  arms,  just  below  elbow.

Itching  and  irritation  inside  of  elbow  joints.

Sharp  pain  in  elbow  when  moving  it.

Cracking  of  joints,  especially  elbows.

Left  forearm  and  hand  numb,  unable  to  hold  anything
with  force ;  any  attempt  to  raise  arm  caused  a  sense  of
discomfort  and  irritability.

Pain  in  1.  arm  and  sensation  in  head  as  if  swollen ;  con-
nected with  heart;  numbness  down  1.  arm.

Aching  in  bones  of  arm  after  headache.

Numb  pain  in  1.  arm ;  cannot  even  hold  a  paper  any
length  of  time;  the  veins  become  enlarged;  it  is  very
painful  to  raise  arm.

Trembling  of  arms  and  hands.

Right  arm  cold.

Crampy  pain  in  first  and  second  fingers  of  r.  hand.

In  night,  sensation  of  a  boil  coming  on  back  of  hand,  just
above  metacarpal  phalangeal  joint  of  1.  index  finger ;
sore  to  touch,  with  drawing  pains  from  every  direction  ;
expected  to  find  a  boil  there  in  morning,  but  found  only
a  red  spot,  not  elevated.

Burning  of  hands,  wants  them  fanned  and  uncovered ;
always  cold  hands.

Intense  burning  in  palms ;  burning  and  itching  of  hands,,
first  1.  then  right.

Itching  of  hands  at  roots  of  and  between  fingers,  as  in  itch.

Palms  and  sometimes  feet  burning  hot.

Right  hand  is  cold,  then  left.

Cold  hands,  with  coldness  extending  all  over  body.

Sharp  rheumatic  pains  across  middle  knuckles  of  1.  hand^
also  rheumatism  of  arms  and  legs.

Hot  numbness  of  backs  of  hands.

Back  of  hands  rough.

Small  yellow  spots  on  hands.

Middle  finger  of  1.  hand  swollen  and  cannot  be  bent  with-
out pain ;  cannot  touch  palm  with  it;  top  of  this  finger
painfully  sensitive,  numb  and  dead,  she  cannot  grasp
anything  with  it,  can  hardly  touch  anything.

Hardness  at  base  of  ball  of  little  finger.

Transverse  depression  on  nails  as  if  they  were  bent.

I  I  Consumptive  incurvation  of  nails.
^  Lower  Limbs. Woke  with  a  sharp  pain  over  1.  hip,  pre-
venting stooping,  makes  walking  difficult ;  it  is  like  a
stiff  neck,  but  more  aching.


309  MEDORRHINUM.

Slight  acliing  pains  to  hip  joints  and  knees.

Pains  in  both  legs,  at  times  from  hips  down  to  knees,  at
other  times  in  L;  only  when  walking.

Sensation  of  heaviness,  or  want  of  power  to  move  limbs,
in  walking.

Heaviness  of  legs,  ver}^  difficult  walking  (especially  going
up  or  down  stairs),  legs  are  so  heavy,  feel  like  lead.

Trembling  of  limbs,  legs  give  way.

Lower  limbs  ache  all  night,  preventing  sleep.

Legs  do  not  go  right  in  walking.

Little  dropping  of  r.  leg.

Very  restless  with  the  legs.

Numbness  in  1.  leg  from  knee  to  hip,  feeling  as  if  par-
alyzed.

Longing  to  stretch  legs.

The  pain  seems  to  tighten  the  whole  body,  especially  the
feet  and  thighs.

I  I  Rheumatic  pains  in  muscles  of  legs.

Many  years  since  had  a  leg  amputated  just  above  ankle  ;
after  healing  it  began  to  swell,  end  of  stump  turned
black,  severe  pains  in  muscles  and  bones,  and  ulti-
mately a  pimple  appeared  on  stump,  which  broke  and
discharged  for  some  time;  all  this  has  been  reproduced.

During  a  terrific  thunderstorm,  very  sharp  pains  in  knees
shot  upwards;  pains  <  by  stretching.

Aching  pain  in  legs,  wnth  inability  to  keep  them  still  in
bed,  <  when  giving  up  control  of  himself,  as  when  try-
ing to  sleep  (>  after  Lil.  tigr.).

Weak  kneed  when  getting  up  from  a  chair.

When  walking,  pain  in  1.  knee,  that  caused  it  to  give  way,
letting  her  clown.

Trembling  in  legs  from  knees  down,  1.  leg  trembles  most,
burning  in  feet.

Legs  dead  and  heavy,  throbbing  from  knees  down.

Coldness  of  legs  up  to  knees,  also  of  hands  and  forearms.

Short  pulling  pains  in  knees,  toes,  ankle  joints  and  hands.

Drawing  sensation  under  knees  and  in  ankles.

Contraction  of  muscles  under  1.  knee  and  in  1.  calf.

I  I  Cramps  in  soles  and  calves  at  night.

Cramp  in  1.  calf,  afterwards  in  r.  leg  between  knee  and
thigh.

DKind  of  cramp  in  1.  calf  at  night,  muscles  knotted,  >
stretching;  not  cramp,  but  knotting.

Ankles  turn  easily  when  walking.

I  I  Sudden  intense  pain  in  1.  ankle,  back  of  joint,  on  go-
ing to  bed,  could  not  move  limb  or  body  without
screaming;  could  find  no  position  of  comfort.

I  Burning  of  feet,  wants  them  uncovered  and  fanned.


MEDORRHINUM.  310

Both  feet  somewhat  swollen ;  dropsy  of  feet.

Sore  feeling  under  1.  foot.

CEdema  of  feet  followed'  and  >  by  diarrhoea.

Cold  feet  with  chills  all  over  body.

Small  sharp  pain  in  soles  when  first  stepping  on  them

in  morning,  not  felt  any  other  time.
I  I  Swelling  and  itching in  soles,  itching between toes,

and pulling pains extending up  to  knees; itching,

painful,  papulous eruption  around  waist,  and  hivelike

eruption  wherever  flesh  is  pressed  on.
I  I  Tenderness  of  soles  so  that  he  could  not  stand  on  them

at  all  and  had to  walk  on  his  knees. ^Suppressed

gonorrhoea.
■Soreness  in  ball  of  foot  under  toes.
Great  toe  sore,  r.  one  worst;  pains  shooting  through  toes

when  sitting  still.
Pain,  swelling  and  inflammation  of  r.  great  toe.
I  I  Cold  and  sweaty  feet.
Great  toe  covered  with  scales  like  tetters.

I  I  Old  foot  sweats,  <  during  winter,  for  seven  years.
Corns  very  tender.

^*  Limbs  in  General, i  Almost  entire  loss  of  nervous  force  in
legs  and  arms;  exhausted  by  slightest  effort.

II  Pain  like  rheumatism  along  r.  nape,  whole  r.  side,  r.
hip,  1.  leg  (upper  r.,  lower  1.) ;  pains  drawing,  <  in
dampness;  1.  leg  swollen  near  knee.  ^Gonorrhoeal
rheumatism.

I  I  Stiffness  throughout  body  and  joints.  ^Suppressed
gonorrhcea.

I  I  Deformity  of  finger  joints,  large,  puffy  knuckles,  swell-
ing, stiffness  and  pain  of  both  ankles;  great  tenderness
of  heels  and  balls  of  feet;  the  swellings  of  all  affected
joints  were  puffy  like  wind  galls;  general  condition  <
inland,  >  near  shore.

Numb  sensation  in  1.  arm,  hand  and  leg;  1.  leg  goes  to
sleep.

Eruption  under  and  on  toes  and  on  hands  and  feet.
^Rest. Position. Motion. Rest:  little  darting  pains  in  1.
shoulder.

Lying  down :  vertigo  slightly  >  ;  on  ear,  aching  in  car-
tilage; cough  <.

Lying  on  back  or  either  side  when  coughing :  rattling,
wheezing  or  whistling.

Lying  on  stomach  :  cough  > .

Lying  on  either  side:  contents  of  lower  part  of  chest  and
abdomen  seem  to  press  upon  each  other.

Cannot  lie  on  1.  side  for  any  considerable  length  of  time.

Can  only  sleep  on  back,  with  hands  over  head.


311  MEDORRHINUM.

Sleeps  on  her  knees,  with  face  forced  in  pillow.

Must  lie  on  face  and  protrude  tongue ;  larynx  stopped  so
that  no  air  could  enter.

Could  find  no  position  of  comfort :  intense  pain  in  1.  ankle,
back  of  joint.

Sitting  still:  pains  shooting  through  toes._

Sitting  up  in  bed;  faint  suffocative  sensation.

Stooping :  vertigo ;  cannot  rise  again  without  violent  pain
in  region  of  kidneys;  impossible,  pain  in  hip.

Leaning  head  forward:  tight  band  across  forehead  <.

Desire  to  throw  head  back:  drawing  in  cords  of  neck.

Head  drawn  backwards.

Leaning  body  very  far  back :  can  only  pass  stool.

Drawing  up  knees :  clawing  in  stomach  <  ;  menstrual  colic.

Must  rise  and  double  up :  pain  in  pit  of  stomach.

Thrusting  tongue  in  cheek  :  brought  on  coughing.

Applied  r.  hand  to  pit  of  stomach  and  1.  to  lumbar  region :
intense  agonizing  pain  in  solar  plexus.

Cannot  hold  paper  long:  numb  pain  in  1.  arm.

When  closing  hands :  pain  in  them.

Slight  exertion  :  palpitation ;  exhaustion  ;  heat ;  tendency
to  perspire.

Motion :  vertigo  <  ;  of  1.  leg,  pain  in  uterus  <  ;  of  arm
causes  pain  in  upper  r.  lung;  sharp  pain  at  apex  of
heart  <  ;  least,  pain  in  chest  < ;  of  arm,  pains  in  chest
< ;  soreness  of  1.  shoulder  blade ;  of  head  causes  pain
in  neck ;  of  shoulders,  neck  or  arms,  pain  in  shoulders

<  ;  of  elbow,  sharp  pain.
Getting  up  from  a  chair :  weak  kneed.

Getting  up:  as  if  bones  were  out  of  joint ;  shakes  herself

to  get  them  into  place.
Cannot  keep  still :  restlessness,  >  by  clutching  hands.
Inability  to  keep  legs  still  in  bed :  aching  pain.
Continual  rubbing  of  head  in  pillow,  and  rolling  from  side

to  side:  cerebral  suffering.
Attempt  to  raise  arm  :  discomfort  and  irritability.
When  rolling  eyes:  neuralgic  pains  <.
Could  not  move  limb  or  body  without  screaming :  intense

pain  in  1.  ankle,  back  of  joint.
Stretching :  tenderness  of  spinal  column ;  pains  in  knees

<  ;  cramp  in  calf  <.

When  first  stepping  on  soles :  small  sharp  pains.

Had  to  walk  on  his  knees :  tenderness  of  soles.

Walking:  pain  passed  from  1.  ovary  to  groin;  pain  in
uterus  <  ;  aching  in  1.  lung;  difficult,  pain  in  hip;  pains
from  hips  down  to  knees ;  heaviness  in  limbs ;  legs  do
not  go  right ;  pain  in  1.  knee ;  ankles  turn.

Going  up  and  down  stairs :  difficult,  from  heaviness  of  legs.


MEDORRHINUM.  312

^*  Nerves. Intense  nervous  sensibility,  respecting  touch  of
garment  or  a  lock  of  hair  by  any  one  not  en  rapport.

Starts  at  slightest  sound.

Unusually  active,  going  as  if  on  wings.

Restlessness,  cannot  keep  still,  but  feels  greatly  relieved
by  clutching  hands  very  tight.

i  I  Consumptive  langour ;  great  general  depression  of
vitality.

1  I  Very  tired.

Faintness  early  in  morning  with  no  appetite.

Sensation  as  if  she  would  faint,  followed  by  a  great  heat
down  spine  and  between  shoulders.

Trembling  all  over,  great  nervousness  and  profound  ex-
haustion.

Great  general  subjective  trembling,  even  tongue  felt
trembling.

Sensation  of  creeping  things  throughout  body  continually.

Quivering  sensation,  with  tingling  and  numbness.

Tonic  spasms,  rigid  extension  of  arms  and  legs,  the  hands
everted,  palms  outward,  thumbs  down,  fingers  clawlike.

Epileptiform  spasms  with  foaming  at  mouth,  rigidity  of
body  and  limbs ;  violent  regurgitation  at  heart  with
absence  of  mitral  cluck.

Opisthotonos.

State  of  collapse,  nearly  gone ;  wants  to  be  fanned  all  the
time,  wants  more  air ;  cold  and  pulseless,  with  cold  per-
spiration ;  throws  off  all  covers.

Risus  sardonicus.
^''  Sleep. Sleepy,  yawning,  chilly.

Spasmodic  yawning,  cannot  surpress  it ;  followed  by  spasm
of  glottis.

Asleep,  but  hears  everything,  answers  questions  as  if  she
was  awake. ^Nightmare.

Bites  tip  of  tongue  in  sleep.

Feels  as  if  she  would  have  nightmare.

Sleeps  at  night  on  her  knees,  with  face  forced  in  pillow.

Can  only  sleep  on  back  with  hands  over  head;  if  she  lies
on  either  side,  the  contents  of  lower  part  of  chest  and
abdomen  seem  to  press  upon  each  other  and  cause  dis-
comfort.

When  asleep,  day  or  night,  no  matter  how  short  a  time,
profuse  perspiration  on  face  and  neck.

Sleep  with  wearing  dreams  of  walking;  waking  with  im-
pression that  she  had  slept  for  hours,  although  it  was
only  thirty  minutes.

Such  restless  nights  and  terrible  dreams  of  ghosts  and  dead
people,  she  dreads  night  to  come.

Dreams:  horrid;  painful;  exhausting;  that  she  is  drinking.


313  MEDORRHINUM.

Woke  at  night  and  saw  a  woman  of  pleasant  face,  dressed
in  grey,  standing  by  bedside,  wiping  a  tumbler ;  she
backed  from  me  miles  away,  becoming  very  small.

I  Wakeful;  slept  towards  morning.

Great  restlessness  at  night,  sleepy  but  could  not  sleep.

I  1  Becomes  wide  awake  at  6  p.m.  and  continues  so  till  12,

with  entire  passivity  of  brain  and  cessation  of  thought;

slight  restlessness.
•^  Time. Aggravation  from  daylight  to  sunset ;  always  brighter

in  evening.
Morning:  soreness  and  crawling  in  1.  nostril;  bad  taste;

tongue  thickly  coated ;  foul  breath ; gleety  discharge ;

soreness  of  heart ;  small  sharp  pains  in  soles  when  first

attempting  to  step  on  them  ;  early  faintness.
10  A.M. :  chill,  chattering,  shivering.
10.30  A.M. :  headache  < ;  fever  with  thirst.

II  A.M.:  pain  in  region  of  suprarenal  capsules.
From  10  to  11  a.m.  :  cold  feet  and  legs.

From  10  to  12  a.m.  :  nervous  during  fever,  moving  fingers.

From  10  a.m.  to  1  p.m:  fever  and  malaise  <.

From  10.30  a.m.  to  12.30  p.m.  :  thirst  during  chill.

At  11  a.m.:  chill,  beginning  with  great  coldness  of  fingers
and  toes;  fever,  preceded  by  cold  feet.

At  2  P.M. :  feet  cold  first,  after  chill  excessive  languor.

At  5  P.M. :  chill,  followed  by  fever  and  slight  sweat ;  next
day  same,  but  slighter.

From  midnight  to  3  a.m.  :  fever,  with  nervous  restlessness.

Day  :  frequent  and  intense  erections.

Afternoon :  fever.

After  5  or  6  p.m.  :  cannot  retain  urine  more  than  an  hour.

6  P.M. :  became  wide  awake  until  12  p.m.

Evening:  sharp  pain  through  temples;  itching  <.

Night :  headache ;  aching  in  cartilage  of  ear ;  intense  and
frequent  erections;  cannot  retain  urine;  dryness,  sore-
ness and  choking  very  severe ;  incessant  dry  cough ;
cough  <,  causing  retching;  sensation  of  a  boil  coming
on  back  of  hand ;  aching  in  legs ;  cramp  in  soles  and
calves ;  restless  sleep ;  rapid  pulse ;  sweats.
^^Temperature  and  Weather.  In  sun,  walking:  1.  lung
becomes  very  hot.

Too  much  heat : <  urination  in  bed  at  night.

4.fter  getting  warm  in  bed  :  when  urinating,  must  do  so
every  hour  rest  of  night.

Entering  warm  room  :  cough.

Wants  hands  fanned  and  uncovered.

Wants  to  be  fanned  all  the  time,  wants  more  air,  state  of
collapse ;  hands  and  feet  must  be  fanned.

Sensitive  to  drafts  of  air,  takes  cold  easily.


MEDORRHINUM.  314

When  wind  blows  on  parietal  bone:  pain.

(Salt  water  bathing:  sore  throat  and  cold  in  head  <.

After  getting  wet :  chill,  followed  by  fever  and  slight  sweat.

Damp  weather:  pains  in  limbs  >.

Getting  cold  :  incontinence  of  urine.

Craving  for  ice  :  during  kidney  attack.

Piece  of  ice  cools  chest  for  an  instant,  then  it  is  hotter.

Inland:  chronic  rheumatism  in  joints  <,  >  near  shore.
*"  Fever. Creeping  chills  running  down  back  and  all  over
body  in  a  zigzag  course.

Chills:  up  and  down  back;  several  times  a  day;  10  a.m.,
some  chattering  and  shivering;  at  10.30  a.m.,  fever  with
thirst,  began  in  fingers  and  toes;  from  10.30  to  12.30,
thirst  during  chill,  none  during  fever ;  from  10  to  11
A.M.,  cold  feet  and  legs;  from  10  to  12,  nervous  during
fever,  moving  fingers ;  at  11  a.m.,  beginning  with  great
coldness  of  fingers  and  toes;  at  2  p.m.,  feet  cold  first,  after
chill  excessive  languor ;  at  5  p.m.,  followed  by  fever  and
slight  sweat  (after  getting  wet) ;  repeated  next  day,  but
slighter.

Shivering  chills,  with  boring  pains  in  chest.

Cold  hands,  with  coldness  extending  all  over  body.

Coldness  of  legs  up  to  knee,  also  of  hands  and  forearms.

Flashes  of  heat  alternating  with  chills.

Coldness:  r.  hand,  then  1.;  a  slight  flush  of  heat  succeeded,
then  sensation  of  a  foreign  substance  in  r.  eye,  then  in  left.

Must  be  fanned  all  the  time,  throws  clothes  off,  yet  surface
is  cold;  burning,  mostly  subjective,  of  hands  and  feet,
wants  them  uncovered  and  fanned.

Great  general  internal  heat  after  dinner,  as  if  blood  was
boiling  hot  in  veins,  same  after  slight  exertion.

I  Great  burning  heat  all  over  body,  with  flashes  of  heat  in
face  and  neck.

Fever :  with  or  without  thirst ;  with  gushes  of  perspiration
on  face,  followed  by  languor;  with  nervous  restlessness
from  midnight  to  3  a.m.  ;  at  11  a.m.,  preceded  by  cold
feet;  fell  asleep  during  fever ;  after  fever,  sweat  on  palms,
feet  and  legs;  with  rapid  pulse  at  night;  in  afternoon;
and  malaise  <  from  10  to  1.

Hectic  fever;  every  afternoon.

Great  tendency  to  perspire  on  exertion ; sensitive  to  cold.

1  I  Profuse  sweat  about  neck.

Night  sweats.

I  I  Chills  for  four  months  every  day,  commencing  from  3
to  4  P.M.;  chill  with  headache,  thirst,  nausea,  sometimes
vomiting ;  fever  with  headache,  thirst,  nausea,  princi-
pally on  head  and  neck;  pains  from  waist  downwards;
frequent  urination,  dark  color ;  frequent,  tasteless  eruc-
tations; constipation;  bad  taste  in  mouth  in  morning.


315  MEDORRHINUM.

I  I  Chill  came  first  at  night,  afterwards  at  various  hours;
for  instance,  on  two  consecutive  days  at  2  p.m.,  then  two
days  at  3,  4,  5  and  6  each,  then  at  7  p.m.,  where  it  re->
mained  for  two  weeks;  chill  commenced  in  small  of
back,  running  up  and  down,  lasted  about  an  hour,  and
as  it  ceased,  profuse  and  frequent  urination  appeared
and  continued  during  fever;  congestion  of  chest  simu-
lating pneumonia  during  fever,  causing  great  alarm;
great  renal  distress  during  paroxysm;  thirst  during
fever  for  hot  drinks;  fever  continued  for  six  or  eight
hours;  profuse  sweat  after  fever;  great  nervousness  dur-
ing paroxysm,  was  sure  he  would  die ;  intolerance  of
noise;  irritable.
"  Attacks,  Periodicity. In  close  succession :  pains  in  ear.

Alternately  :  flashes  of  heat  and  chills.

Several  times  during  day:  sudden  attacks  of  vertigo;  chill
up  and  down  back.

Takes  half  hour  to  empty  bladder.

Every  day  for  four  months :  chills  commencing  from  3  to

4  P.M.

Every  afternoon:  hectic  fever;  about  5  p.m.,  oppression  of
breathing.

Nightly:  passes  enormous  quantity  of  urine  in  bed.

Chill  came  first  at  night,  afterwards  at  various  hours ;  on
two  consecutive  days  at  2  p.m.,  then  two  days  at  3,  4,  5,
6  each,  then  7  p.m.,  where  it  remained  for  two  weeks.

For  six  or  eight  hours :  fever.

For  forty-eight  hours  :  violent  retching  and  vomiting.

For  three  nights:  cannot  sleep,  pain  in  carbuncular  boils.

For  several  days;  entire  loss  of  smell.

For  three  days :  intense  headache,  inflammation  of  eyes.

For  six  days :  child  hard  of  hearing.

For  a  whole  week :  heat  in  medulla  and  spine.

Six  months  after  chancrelike  ulcer  on  prepuce  there  came
for  several  months  successive  crops  of  vesicles  on  prepuce.

For  ten  months:  gonorrhoea.

For  seven  years:  <  during  winter,  old  standing  foot  sweats.

For^ twenty  years:  gleety  gonorrhoeal  discharge.
''^Locality  and  Direction.  Right:  neuralgia  in  temple;
in  eye ;  headache  in  temple ;  as  of  a  worm  crawling  in
ear;  soreness  of  concha;  quick,  darting  pains  in  ear;
fever  blisters  near  corner  of  upper  lip;  neuralgia  of
upper  and  lower  jaw;  hard  swelling  in  upper  jaw;  as  of
a  tumor  in  side  of  abdomen;  tensive  pain  in  side  of  ab-
domen; darting  pain  from  centre  of  ovarian  region  to
lower  edge  of  liver ;  cutting  in  lower  abdomen,  running
into  spermatic  cord;  testes  very  tender;  distinct  bub-
bling sensation  in  kidney;  sensation  of  three  bubbles  in


MEDORRHINUM.  316

renal  region ;  heavy,  drawing,  wandering  pains  in  arm
and  hip ;  tense  pain  passing  diagonally  in  ovary;  small
chancres  on  edges  of  labia;  pain  in  upper  part  of  lung ;
pain  in  r.  shoulder  as  though  it  came  from  1. ;  darting
pain  from  centre  of  lung  to  lower  edge  of  liver;  cold  pain
in  lung ;  sharp  stitching  pain  in  bottom  of  lung ;  lung
cold  ; sharp  pain  along  edge  of  sternum ; mild  heat
spreading  over  r.  side;  pain  in  bottom  of  lung;  sensa-
tion of  enlarged  gland  in  side  of  neck ;  pain  under  scap-
ula ;  throbbing  and  thumping  in  region  of  suprarenal
capsule,  seeming to  come  from  just below fifth  rib ;
creeping  chills  in  region  of  kidney ;  rheumatic  pain  in
shoulder  and  arm;  severe  pain  from  abscess  of  liver,
•  extending  to  shoulder  and  down  elbow;  crampy  pain  in
first  and  second  fingers  of  hand ;  dropping  of  leg ;  cramp
in  leg,  between  knee  and  thigh;  soreness  of  great  toe;
pain,  swelling  and  inflammation  of  great  toe ;  pain  like
rheumatism  along  nape,  whole  side,  hip,  upper  leg.
Left:  neuralgia  in  temple  and  eye;  aching  over  eye;  pain
in  parietal  bone;  tensive  pains  in  side  of  head  ;  ptosis  of
outer  end  of  upper  lid;  pulling  pain  in  lower  lid;  itch-
ing, aching  or  boring  pain  in  ear;  ringhole  in  ear  sore;
soreness  of  outer  wing  of  nostril ;  crawling  in  nostril ;
fever  sore  on  lower  lip  near  commissure;  swelling  in
region  of  submaxillary  gland;  mild  cramp  in  calf;  hot
swelling  on  side  of  anus;  heavy,  drawing,  wandering
pains  in  calf;  great  deal  of  pain  in  ovary ;  ovary  seemed
enlarged; soreness  and  nervous pain  in  spot side  of
uterus;  swelling  of  breast;  oppression  <  on  side;  sharp
pain  in  bottom  of  lung ;  aching  in  back  of  lung;  an  old
sore  spot  in  top  of  lung  aroused ;  fatigue  of  lung;  walk-
ing in  sun,  lung  becomes  excessively  hot ;  pain  in  upper
chest;  aching  in  lung  Under  scapula;  sharp  pain  in  edge
of  sternum  and  lung;  lung  very  painful,  feels  drawn
towards  r.  side;  side  of  chest  from  top  of  lung  to  waist
hot  as  fire;  bottom  of  lung  sore  to  pressure;  dull,  heavy
pain  at  top  of  lung ;  intense  boring  below  scapula;  sore
spot  size  of  silver  dollar  begins  at  top  of  lung,  extends
through  to  lower  part  of  back;  after  having  slept  on  side,
soreness  of  heart;  great  pain  in  cardiac  plexus,  extend-
ing to  arm  ;  intense  pain  in  side  of  chest;  pain  from  sore
spot  below  scapula  to  heart;  dull  pain  in  heart,  with
pain  in  arm ;  burning  in  arm ;  sensation  of  an  abscess
in  chest ;  great  soreness  of  muscles  of  lower  chest ;  ribs
sore  to  touch  ;  occasional  creeping  sensation  in  region  of
kidney ; pain  .in  region  of  kidney  darting  over  hip ;
rheumatic  pain  in  top  of  shoulder;  brown,  itching  erup-
tion on  shoulder :  pain  commencing  under  scapula,  run-


317  MEDORRHINUM.

ning  down  arm  to  little  finger ;  forearm  and  hand  numb  ;
pain  in  arm  and  sensation  in  hand  as  if  swollen ;  numb-
ness down  arm  ;  numb  pain  in  arm  ;  sensation  of  a  boil
coming  on  back  of  hand  ;  pains  across  middle  knuckles
of  hand;  middle  finger  swollen;  sharp  pain  over  hip;
numbness  of  leg ;  pain  in  knee  when  walking ;  trem-
bling in  leg ;  contraction  of  muscles  under  knee  and  in
calf;  knotting  of  muscles  in  calf;  sudden  intense  pain
in  ankle,  back  of  joint;  sore  swelling  under  foot;  pains
like  rheumatism  in  lower  leg ;  leg  svv^ollen  near  knee ;
numb  sensation  in  arm,  hand  and  leg ;  leg  goes  to  sleep  ;
itching  sometimes  confined  to  side.

From  without  inward :  pain  in  r.  ear.

First  r.  hand  cold,  then  left.

From  1.  to  r. :  pain  in  shoulders ;  burning  and  itching
of  hands.
*^  Sensations.  Of  falling.;  as  if  intoxicated ;  as  if  occiput  was  •
enlarged;  head  as  if  tightening;  as  of  a  tight  band
across  forehead ;  as  if  front  half  of  brain  would  come
through  forehead ;  as  if  skin  was  drawn  tight ;  as  if  she
would  go  crazy ;  as  of  three  points  of  tension  in  head,
as  if  large  cords  were  drawn  to  each;  as  if  tensive
pains  would  break;  as  if  head  had  been  struck;  as  if
occipital  protuberances  were  enlarged ;  as  if  eyes  were
pulling  out  of  head;  as  if  she  stared  at  everything;  as
if  eyes  protruded;  as  of  sand  under  lids;  as  of  sticks  in
eyes,  lids  and  inner  canthi ;  as  of  a  cool  wind  blowing
in  eyes ;  as  if  upper  lid  had  a  cartilage  in  it;  as  if  a  tube
went  through  head ;  as  if  parchment  was  drawn  over
ear;  as  of  a  worm  crawling  in  r.  ear,  as  if  it  commenced
boring  in  anterior  wall  of  auditory  canal ;  as  if  mucous
membrane  of  nose  was  hypertrophied ;  as  of  a  centipede
crawling  in  I.  nostril;  mouth  as  if  burnt;  throat  as  if
scraped;  as  of  a  paper  of  pins  in  pit  of  stomach  that
seemed  to  force  themselves  through  flesh;  as  if  heart
j^alpitated  in  pit  of  stomach ;  as  of  a  lump  in  stomach;
cramps  in  stomach  as  from  wind ;  sensation  in  liver  as
if  caused  by  icy  cold  insects  with  claws ;  as  of  a  heavy
weight  in  lower  abdomen;  as  ofa  tumor  in  r.  side  of  abdo-
men; pressure  as  of  a  hard,  biconvex  body  in  abdomen  ;
beating  as  of  a  pulse  in  abdomen ;  as  if  there  was  a  large
lump  on  posterior  surface  of  sphincter  ani ;  as  of  passage
of  calculus  in  ureters;  after  urinating,  a  feeling  as  if
something  more  reniained  in  urethra;  as  if  a  sac  was
distended  in  1.  ovary  and  if  pressed  would  burst;  pain  in
1.  groin  as  if  leg  pushed  something ;  1.  ovary  as  if  enlarged ;
as  if  she  must  press  ovary ;  cutting  as  if  with  knives  in
pelvic  region;  pain  as  if  menses  were  coming  on;  chok-


MEDORRHINUM.  818

ing  as  if  epiglottis  was  closed;  as  if  lining  of  larynx  and
pharynx  was  torn  off;  larynx  as  if  ulcerated;  as  of  a
lump  in  larynx;  as  if  thorax  was  too  full;  as  if  larynx
would  be  torn  to  pieces;  as  if  mucous  membrane  was
torn  off;  as  if  bronchial  tubes  were  enlarged;  as  if  lin-
ing membrane  was  a  loose  fold  of  tissue ;  chest  as  if
painfully  contracted;  lung  as  if  beaten  or  bruised;  as
if  her  breath  was  fanning  a  blistered  sore  in  lung;  as
if  there  was  a  cavity  extending  from  side  to  side  in  chest,
filled  with  burning  air,  which  dilated  in  puffs  in  all  di-
rections; pain  in  r.  shoulder  as  though  it  came  from  1.
straight  through  ;  1.  lung  as  if  collapsed  or  paralyzed;
as  if  lung  was  drawn  up  in  hand  and  let  loose ;  1.  lung
as  if  drawn  towards  r.  side;  as  if  something  had  grown
to  sore  spot  in  front  of  chest  and  was  drawing  back;
heart  as  if  large;  as  of  a  cavity  where  heart  ought  to
be;  pain  as  if  radiating  in  different  parts  of  1.  side  of
chest;  as  if  heart  was  swollen ;  as  of  an  abscess  on  1.  chest
between  pectoralis  major  and  minor ;  as  of  an  enlarged
gland  in  r.  sideof  neck,  under  upper  part  of  sterno-cleido-
mastoid ;  pains  in  shoulders  as  if  bones  would  be  crushed ;
as  of  water  dropping  out  of  a  bottle  in  lumbar  re-
gion; pricking  in  1.  little  finger  as  if  asleep;  1.  hand  as
if  swollen;  as  if  a  boil  was  coming  on  back  of  hand;  1.
leg  as  if  paralyzed;  creeping  chills  in  region  of  r.  kidney,
as  if  caused  by  icy  cold  insects  with  claws ;  as  if  she  would
faint;  as  of  creeping  things  throughout  body;  as  if  she
would  have  nightmare;  as  if  contents  of  lower  part  of
chest  and  abdomen  seemed  to  press  upon  each  other;  as
of  a  foreign  substance  in  r.  eye,  then  in  1. ;  as  if  blood
was  boiling  hot  in  veins;  as  if  she  had  taken  a  severe
cold  ;  sore  all  over  as  if  bruised ;  as  if  all  bones  were  out
of  joint.
Pain:  in  forehead;  in  temples;  over  eyes;  in  centre  of
brain;  in  1.  parietal  bone;  circling  through  head  and
around  crown;  in  back  of  head;  in  r.  eye;  in  eyes;  up
Eustachian  tube  and  out  of  both  ears;  in  renal  region  ;
at  end  of  penis;  in  1.  ovary;  in  lower  abdomen;  in  up-
per part  of  r.  lung;  in  r.  shoulder;  in  1.  upper  chest
through  to  shoulders ;  from  upper  lung  to  sore  spot  below
1.  scapula;  in  heart  and  lungs;  in  heart  from  sore  spot
below  1.  scapula  to  heart;  in  1.  arm ;  through  chest  and
mammae ;  in  nape  and  between  scapula,  running  on  to
either  side,  shoulder  and  down  to  lumbar  region  ;  in  back
between  scapulae ;  under  r.  scapula;  straight  through  from
1.  to  r.  shoulder ;  in  region  of  1.  kidney ;  in  lumbar  portion
of  spine ;  in  back  of  hips,  running  around  abdomen  and
down  limbs ;  in  sacrum  and  coccyx ;  commencing  under


319  MEDORRHINUM.

1.  scapula,  running  down  arm  to  little  finger;  in  1.  arm ;
when  bending  middle  finger  of  1.  hand ;  in  both  legs,
from  hips  down  to  knees;  in  1.  knee;  of  r.  great  toe;
from  waist  downwards.

Intolerable  pains :  in  carbuncular  boils.

Intense,  agonizing  pain :  in  solar  plexus.

Terrible  pains :  all  through  head ;  in  liver.

Intense  pain :  in  head,  in  cerebral  region ;  in  stomach  and
upper  abdomen ;  in  abdomen ;  in  heart ;  in  1.  ankle,
back  of  joint.

Awful  pain:  in  middle  lobes.

Violent  pain :  in  region  of  kidneys.

Extreme  pain :  in  urethra.

Intense,  excruciating  neuralgic  pains:  in  pelvic  region.

Intense  neuralgic  pains:  from  teeth  to  head.

Severe  pain :  in  back  of  head ;  all  over  head ;  from  abscess
of  liver  to  r.  shoulder  and  elbow;  in  ureters;  on  deglu-
tition; from  abscess  extending  to  r.  shoulder  and  down
to  elbow ;  in  muscles  and  bones  of  stump  of  amputated

Sharp  pain:  through  temples;  in  occiput;  in  bottom  of  1.
lung;  along  r.  edge  of  sternum,  changing  to  1.  edge  and
then  into  lung ;  around  heart,  thence  to  head ;  at  apex
of  heart;  in  elbow;  over  1.  hip;  in  knees.

Great  pain:  in  chest;  in  cardiac  plexus,  extending  to  1.
arm  and  throat.

Hard  pain :  in  frontal  region.

Tearing  pains:  in  abdomen.

Sharp,  cutting  pain  :  across  root  of  penis.

Sharp,  shooting  pains:  in  swelling  in  region  of  submaxil-
lary glands.

Short,  shooting  pains :  in  breasts.

Acute,  sharp  quick,  or  dull  quick  pain  in  heart.

Quick,  darting  pain:  in  r.  ear.

Darting  pain :  from  centre  of  r.  ovarian  region  to  lower
edge  of  liver;  in  abdomen;  through  scapula;  through
lung,  which  makes  her  start;  from  centre  of  r.  lung  to
lower  edge  of  liver;  over  1.  hip.

Boring  pain :  in  1.  ear ;  intense,  in  chest  and  below  1.  scapula.

Shooting  pains:  through  toes;  about  three  inches  long  in
various  directions  and  all  over  body.

Cutting :  in  r.  lower  abdomen,  running  into  spermatic  cord ;
in  pelvic  region.

Neuralgia  :  in  temples  and  parietal  bone;  in  1.  eye;  around
middle  part  of  cranium;  in  eyeballs;  of  r.  upper  and
lower  jaws  to  temple ;  in  head.

Sharp,  stitching  pain  :  in  bottom  of  r.  lung ;  over  surface
of  both  lungs.


MEDORRHINUM.  320

Sharp,  needlelike  pains  in  rectum.

Terrible,  bearing  down,  laborlike  pains :  during  menses.

Intense  menstrual  and  renal  colic.

Intense  burning  pain  :  in  head.

Grasping  pains :  in  liver  and  spleen.

Contracting  pain  :  from  superior  angles  of  scapulae,  passing

to  seventh  dorsal  vertebra  and  down  same  to  ninth.
Dull,  pinching  pain  :  in  region  of  suprarenal  capsules.
Cramping  pain :  in  first  and  second  fingers  of  r.  hand.
Gnawing,  aching  pain :  in  abdomen.

Short,  pulling  pains :  in  knees,  toes,  ankle  joints  and  hands.
Pulling  pain:  in  1.  lower  lid  from  outer  canthus;  in  sac-
rum and  pubic  region  ;  extending  up  to  knees.
Heavy,  drawing,  wandering  pains :  in  r.  arm,  r.  hip  and

1.  calf.
Drawing  pains :  in  every  direction  of  chest ;  on  back  of

hand,  from  every  direction;  in  limbs.
Rheumatic  pains:  in  top  of  1.  shoulder;  in  r.  shoulder  and

arm;  in  hands;  across  middle  knuckles  of  1.  hand;  of

legs ;  in  muscles  of  legs ;  along  r.  nape,  whole  r.  side,  r.

hip,  1.  leg.
Most  distressing  aching:  in  bones.
Severe  aching  pain:  in  1.  ovary.
Dull,  heavy  pain:  at  top  of  1.  lung.
Dull  pain:  in  broad  ring  around  head;  in  cerebellum;  in

epigastric  region;  in  1.  heart.
Small,  sharp  pain:  in  soles.
Little  darts  of  pain :  in  1.  shoulder.
Cramps:  in  stomach;  in  soles  and  calves;  in  r.  leg  between

knee  and  thigh.
Mild  cramp:  in  1.  calf.

Clawing:  in  stomach;  like  cold  insects  in  r.  kidney.
Gnawing  feeling:  in  stomach.
Painful  shock :  at  base  of  each  lung.
Tensive  pain:  in  1.  side  of  head  as  far  back  as  parietal

eminence  and  to  middle  of  crown ;  in  r.  side  of  abdomen ;

all  over  body  from  head  to  foot.
Tense  pains:  diagonally  in  r.  ovary.
Numb  pain :  in  1.  arm.
Cold  pain:  in  r.  lung  and  liver.
Weak,  stiff  aching:  in  back.
Heavy  throbbings:  at  heart;  all  over  body.
Painful  tenesmus:  of  bladder  and  bowels.
Painful  eruption:  around  waist.
Burning  pain  :  in  lower  part  of  back ;  in  hips.
Smarting:  of  eyelids.
Burning  heat:  from  liver  round  to  back;  in  1.  ovary;  in

back  of  neck  and  down  spine.


321  MEDORRHINUM.

Burning  glow:  in  cerebellum  and  down  spine.

Burning:  in  both  nostrils ;  in  pit  of  stomach;  on  urination;

in  meatus;  over  chest;  in  heart,  through  to  back  and

down  into  1.  arm;  of  hands;  in  palms  of  feet;  in  chest.
Heat:  in  temporal  region;  under  lids;  in  abdomen;  in  1.

ovary;  in  chest;  in  1.  side  of  chest  from  top  of  lung  to

waist ;  of  heart;  from  chest  through  to  back  of  shoulder ;

in  medulla  and  spine;  down  spine  and  between  shoulders.
Flushes  of  heat:  in  face  and  neck.
Soreness:  of  edges  of  eyelids;  of  outer  wing  of  1.  nostril ;  in

1.  nostril;  of  teeth;  of  mouth;  of  pharynx;  of  throat;

through  urethra ;  of  testes  ;  in  one  spot  in  lower  part  of

uterus  ;  of  nipples  ;  of  breasts  ;  of  larynx  ;  in  heart,  chest

and  mammae;  in  ball  of  foot  under  toes;  of  great  toe;

all  over  body.
Excoriated  sensation  :  in  glottis.
Sore  feeling :  throughout  chest ;  under  1.  foot.
Sore  spot:  on  top  of  1.  lung,  size  of  silver  dollar,  begins  at

top  of  1.  lung  and  like  a  red  hot  bolt  extends  through

to  lower  part  of  back.
Slight  pain  :  in  bottom  of  r.  lung.
Pricking  sensation  :  all  over  body.
Tingling :  through  body.

Tenderness:  of  brain;  of  spine,  from  cerebellum  to  kid-
neys ;  of  testes  ;  of  breasts ;  of  spinal  column  ;  of  soles ;

of  heels  and  balls  of  feet.
Hot  numbness  :  of  backs  of  hands.
Simmering:  in  head.
Dragging :  of  testes.

Constricted  sensation  :  at  bottom  of  both  lungs.
Contracting,  drawing  and  relaxing  :  in  region  of  kidneys.
Contraction:  extending  from  eyes  and  meeting  in  brain;

down  whole  length  of  spine;  of  muscles  under  1.  knee

and  in  1.  calf.
Contractive  stiffness :  extending  from  spine  to  head  and

seeming  to  thicken  scalp.
Drawing:  in  cords  of  neck;  under  knees  and  in  ankles.
Discomfort:  in  1.  forearm  and  hand;  in  chest  and  abdomen

from  lying  on  side.
Distress:  in  renal  region.
Bursting  sensation  :  in  heart.
Stiffness :  in  jaws  and  tongue ;  of  pharynx ;  throughout

body  and  joints  of  both  ankles.
Stuffed  feeling :  in  chest.
Suffocative  sensation  :  in  thorax.
Pressure :  back  of  eyes ;  in  vertex ;  in  lower  abdomen ;  in

bladder.
Oppression:  of  chest;  of  heart.

VOL.  VII. — 21.


MEDORRHINUM.  322

Weight :  in  vertex.

Heavy  feeling:  in  head;  in  limbs.

Tightness:  extending  from  eyes  and  meeting  in  brain,
extends  down  whole  length  of  spine;  in  stomach.

Twitching  and  drawing  in :  of  limbs  and  cords  of  neck.

Throbbing  and  thumping :  in  region  of  r.  suprarenal
capsule.

Throbbing:  in  temporal  region;  in  sides  of  stomach;  in
region  of  liver;  from  knees  down.

Pulsation :  in  ears.

Bubbling  sensation:  in  r.  kidney.

Fluttering:  about  heart.

Quivering :  in  body.

Trembling :  at  pit  of  stomach ;  of  limbs ;  in  legs  from  knees
down;  all  over;  of  tongue.

Tickling :  in  ears ;  under  upper  part  of  sternum.

Singular  sensation :  through  chest.

Sensation  of  action :  in  bones  of  nose.

Restlessness :  at  night.

Numbness:  down  1.  arm ;  of  1.  middle  finger;  in  1.  leg  from
knee  to  hip;  in  1.  arm,  hand  and  leg;  through  body.

Lightness:  of  head.

Sinking  and  agonizing  sickness:  at  stomach.

Deathly  feeling:  in  kidneys.

Sinking  sensation :  under  sternum.

Faintness:  early  in  morning.

Weakness:  after  nocturnal  emission.

Fatigue:  of  1.  lung.

Dryness:  of  eyelids;  of  mouth;  of  throat;  of  larynx:  of
glottis.

Creeping  sensation :  in  region  of  1.  kidney.

Itching:  of  scalp;  in  nose;  of  eyebrows;  over  1.  eye;  of
ears;  in  occiput;  in  cerebellum  and  medulla;  in  base
of  brain;  in  eyei)alls  ;  in  1.  ear;  in  cartilage  of  ear;
across  kidneys;  in  sacrum  and  down  back  of  legs  to
feet;  in  back  part  of  1.  lung;  in  1.  lung  under  scapula;
in  bones  of  arm;  in  hip  joints  and  knees;  in  lower
limbs;  of  vagina  and  labia;  of  eruption  on  1.  shoulder;
in  side  of  elbow  joints;  of  hands;  at  roots  of  and  between
fingers;  in  soles;  between  toes;  of  eruption  around
waist;  all  over  bod}^;  of  eruption  on  limbs;  from  knees
up,  on  forearms  and  around  waist.

Chilliness:  when  bladder  is  too  full.

Cold  numbness:  on  outer  side  of  arms,  just  below  elbow.

Coldness:  of  end  of  nose;  of  r.  arm;  extending  all  over
body;  of  legs  up  to  knees;  of  hands  and  forearms;  of
fingers  and  toes.
"  Tissues. Great  heat  and  soreness,  with  enlargement  of  lym-
phatic glands  all  over  body.


323  MEDORRHINUM.

Sensation  as  if  she  had  taken  a  severe  cold,  with  most  dis-
tressing aching  in  bones;  throat  very  sore  and  swollen,
deglutition  of  either  liquids  or  solids  impossible.

There  is  scarcely  a  spot  on  bod}^  from  head  to  foot  but
wdiat  is  full  of  pain,  of  tensive  and  letting  go  character,
accompanied  by  heat;  this  heat  is  a  sensation,  burning-
hot,  but  not  perceived  on  surface  by  touch.

Sore  all  over  as  if  bruised.

The  pains  seem  to  tighten  the  whole  bod}^,  especially  feet
and  thighs.

Feeling  as  if  all  the  bones  were  out  of  joint  in  getting  up;
shakes  herself  to  get  them  into  place.

■  Obstinate  rheumatism.

I  Sequelae  of  acute  articular  rheumatism;  walks  leaning  on
a  cane,  bent  over;  mufHed  in  wraps  to  ears,  looking  like
a  broken  down  man  apparently  soon  to  fall  into  his  grave.

Carbuncular  boils  that  seem  small,  discharge  slowly  and
show  dark  red  streaks;  pains  are  intolerable,  could  not
sleep  for  three  nights.
*^  Touch.  Passive  Motion.  Injuries.  Touch :  soreness  of
r.  concha;  soreness  of  vesicles  on  prepuce;  nipples  and
breasts  very  tender;  chest  sore;  small  spot  below  1.  scap-
ula very  sensitive  ;  chest  sensitive;  whole  length  of  back-
bone, also  ribs  of  1.  side  and  luinbar  vertebrae  sensitive ;
of  garment,  or  lock  of  hair,  nervous  sensibility.

Pressure:  of  eyelids  together  cause  neuralgic  pains  in  eye-
balls ;  on  1.  ovary,  could  not  bear ;  bottom  of  1.  lung-
sore;  on  spine,  pain  in  kidneys  and  hips  <;  on  flesh
causes  hivelike  eruptions.

Rubbing :  intense  itching  in  nose.

Scratching:  red  spots  on  limbs  itch.

Motion  of  cars :  headache  and  diarrhoea.

Straining  when  lifting  causes  lumbago.
*^  Skin. Great  yellowness  of  skin.

Intense  and  incessant  itching,  fugitive,  <  towards  night,
sometimes  confined  to  1.  side.

Itching  all  over  body,  most  on  back,  vagina  and  labia,  and
<  thinking  of  it.

Intense  itching  all  over  body,  would  scratch  till  it  bled,
but  no  relief;  no  visible  eruption.

Pricking  sensation  all  over  body.

Red  spots  itching  when  scratched  and  on  undressing  at
night,  on  limbs,  particularly  from  knees  up,  on  forearms
and  around  waist.

I  1  Copper  colored  spots  (syphilitic)  remaining  after  erup-
tions, turn  yellow  brown  and  detach  in  scales,  leaving
skin  clear  and  free.

Small,  pedunculated  warts,  with  pin  heads  like  small  but-
ton mushrooms  on  various  parts  of  body  and  thighs.


MEDORRHINUM— MELILOTUS.  324

*^  Stages  of  Life,  Constitution. Stunted  in  growth.

Suitable  for  grey  e3^es.

Baby,  set.  7  months,  after  summer  complaint;  diarrhoea.

Child,  set.  15  months;  diarrhoea.

Man,  set.  20,  gonorrhoea  nine  months  ago,  used  injections
eight  months ;  gonorrhoeal  rheumatism.

A  maiden  lady,  no  suspicion  of  sycotic  poisoning,  a  long
line  of  ancestors  had  rheumatism  and  gout;  chronic
rheumatism.

Man,  set.  60;  sequelse  of  rheumatism.

Man,  set.  60,  suffering  six  months;  rheumatism.

Woman,  set.  89 ;  abscess  of  liver.
^^  Relations. Antidote:  Ipec.  for  dry  cough.

Compatible :  Sulphur,  especially  when  stool  drives  out  of
bed.

Compare  :  Picric  ac,  inability  to  walk  right;  Camphor  and
Secale,  collapse,  skin  cold,  yet  throws  off  all  covers ;  Ve~
ratr.,  collapse  with  cold  sweat ;  Syphilinwm,  reverse  ag-
gravation, i.  e.,  from  sunset  to  daylight.


MELILOTUS.

Sweet  Clover.  Leguminosse.

Introduced  and  proved  by  Bowen  in  1852.  He  used  both  the  white  and  yel-
low species,  and  made  a  second  proving  fifteen  years  later  (see  Allen's  Encyclo-
pedia, vol.  6,  p.  176).  More  recent  provings  of  the  white  species  were  made  by
H.  C.  Allen,  assisted  by  Kraft,  Gee,  Waddell,  and  two  students  (see  Medical
Advance,  vol.  20,  p.  322).

Clinical  Authorities. — Religious  melancholy,  Nash,  Med.  Adv.,  vol.  20;,
p.  323 ;  Headache  (several  hundred  cases  cured),  Bowen,  Trans.  Horn.  Med.  Soc.
Pa.,  1872,  p.  108 ;  Cheeseman,  Org.,  vol.  2,  p.  233 ;  Sick  headache,  Willard,  Trans.
Horn.  Med.  Soc.  Pa.,  1871,  p.  188;  Nervous  headache  arid  dysmenorrhcea,  Bowen,
Trans.  Horn.  Med.  Soc.  Pa.,  1872,  p.  108  ;  Epistaxis,  Nash,  Med.  Adv.,  vol.  20,
p.  325;  Belief  from  nosebleed.  Brown,  Org.,  vol.  2,  p.  113;  Bilious  colic  (three  cases-
reported  cured),  Bowen,  Trans.  Horn.  Med.  Soc.  Pa.,  1872,  p.  108  ;  Cramps  in  stomach,.
Bowen,  Trans.  Horn.  Med.  Soc.  Pa.,  1872,  p.  107  ;  Pneumonia,  Waddell,  Med.  Adv.,
vol.  20,  p.  327  ;  Infantile  spasms  (fourteen  cures  reported),  Bowen,  Trans.  Horn.
Med.  Soc.  Pa.,  1872,  p.  105 ;  Spasms  during  dentition,  Bowen,  Raue's  Path,  and
Therap.,  p.  904 ;  Eclampsia,  Bowen,  Trans.  Hom.  Med.  Soc.  Pa.,  1872,  p.  108;
Clinical  extracts  from  Eev.  Hom.  Beige,  June,  1877  ;  Hahn.  Mo.,  vol.  13,  p.  122..

^  Mind. I  Loss  of  memory.
■  Confusion  of  thought.


325  •  MELILOTUS.

I  1  Inability  to  fix  mind;  stupid;  indifferent;  omits  letters

and  words  in  writing.
I  I  Irascible ;  fairly  furious.
I  I  Indolent ;  an  overpowering  stupor.
I  1  Total  inability  to  study.
I  Weeping.

■  Religious  melancholy  of  four  months'  standing;  intensely

red  face.
^  Inner  Head. '  l  Throbbing  frontal  headache,  preceded  by
great  prostration.
I  I  Intense  frontal  headache,  preceded  by  hot,  flushed  face
and  feverish  sensation.

■  Distressing  headache  in  1.  temple,  commencing  at  about

4  P.M.,  >  by  remaining  out  of  school.

■  ■Severe  headache.

■  Almost  delirious  with  headache.

■  A  frightful,  heavy,  oppressive  headache  for  three  days.
I  I  Headache,  <  from  9  to  12  a.m.

Severe  headache,  followed  by  profuse  epistaxis  and  after-
wards by  haemoptysis  of  bright  red  blood  in  consider-
able quantity.

■  Headache  lasting  four  days,  with  oppression of  chest,

severe  stitching  or  cutting  pains  in  womb  and  through
hernia ;  was  confined  to  bed  for  four  days  and  only  >
by  profuse  bleeding  of  nose.

■  ■Sick  headache;  retching,  vomiting,  excessive  pains  in

temples,  sense  of  pressure  over  orbits,  coldness  of  feet
and  hands,  pallor,  loss  of  sight,  or  appearance  of  black
spots  before  eyes.

■  Headache,  with  extreme  nervousness; irritability;  for-

getfulness ;  confusion  of  thoughts ;  palpitation  ;  relaxa-
tion of  bowels ;  >  from  epistaxis.

■  ■Violent  congestion  to  head.

I  I  Headache  so  intense  as  to  cause  purple  redness  of  face
and  bloodshot  eyes,  culminating  in  epistaxis,  which
affords  relief.

■  Young  man,  set.  20,  of  lymphatic  temperament,  subject

to  congestive  headaches  for  several  years  at  intervals  of
one  to  three  months;  more  frequent  in  hot  weather;
during  attack  face  and  head  swell,  become  purple,  with
bloodshot  eyes;  had  frequently  fallen  in  streets,  and
would  wander  around  unconsciously  through  streets  by
day  or  night,  and  was  always  left  weak,  trembling  and
nervous  for  two  or  three  days  after.
*  Sight  and  Eyes,  i  i  Eyelids  very  heavy.
Smell  and  Nose. '  '  Excessive  dryness  of  nose.

■  ■  Profuse  and  frequent  epistaxis,  with  general  relief.

■  Epistaxis  during  a  fever;  one  attack  followed  another,


MELILOTUS.  •  326

once  or  twice  in  twenty-four  hours,  usually  at  night ;  loss
of  blood  alarmingly  great;  every  attack  preceded  by  in-
tense redness,  flushing  of  face  and  throbbing  of  carotids.

^  Upper  Face, l  Great  redness  of  face  and  head,  with  throb-
bing of  carotids.
iVery  red  face  precedes  hemorrhage  from  nose,  luugs  and
uterus.

^'^  Scrobiculum  and  Stomach.  iCramps  in  stomach  every
time  he  gets  his  feet  wet,  or  after  any  unusual  exposure.

^^  Abdomen, i  Bilious  colic.

^°  Stool  and  Rectum. Looseness  of  bowels.

Shooting,  cutting  in  rectum  while  walking,  >  sitting  down.
Heavy  throbbing  and  fulness  in  rectum  from  internal  piles.
Constipation,  difficult,  painful  stool,  constriction  in  rectum,
discharge  of  stringy,  milky  white  mucus.

^  Female  Sexual  Organs,  i  Menstruation  painful  and  diffi-
cult, accompanied  by  nervous  headache  (prolapsus  uteri
and  1.  inguinal  hernia).
I  I  Severe,  sharp,  shooting,  sticking  pains  in  external  geni-
tals (especially  labia),  lasting  only  a  moment,  but  re-
curring frequently  and  very  annoying ;  at  times  so  sharp
as  to  cause  involuntary  starts  ;  with  nausea  and  dull
heavy  pain  in  pelvis  (at  close  of  menses).

^^  Respiration. Difficult  breathing  from  climbing or  rapid
walking.
Could  not  get  air  enough,  felt  as  if  smothering.

^^  Cough.  Cough:  dry,  harsh,  spasmodic,  horribly  distressing,
causing  great  anxiety;  >  by  epistaxis;  >  by  slight
expectoration.

^*  Inner  Chest  and  Lungs. Hsemoptysis ;  blood  bright  red.

■  Both  lungs  greatly  congested;  face  and  eyes  very  red;

nosebleed every few minutes; high fever; constant,

severe, racking cough and very rapid respiration.

^Pneumonia.
Chest  very  sore  and  oppressed,  as  if  garments  were  too  tight.
-^  Heart,  Pulse  and  Circulation. iPalpitation  of  heart.
^^  Neck  and  Back. A  broken sensation in  lumbar  sacral

region,  <  sitting,  >  walking  or  standing,  alternate  with

headache.
^^  Limbs  in  General. Rheumatic  pains  in  joints  on  approach

of  a  rain  storm,  or  in  rainy,  changeable  weather.
^  Rest. Position. Motion. Sitting:  cutting  in  rectum  >  ;

broken  sensation  in  lumbar  sacral  region  <.
Standing:  a  broken  sensation  in  lumbar  sacral  region  >.
Walking :  cutting  in  rectum ;  rapid,  difficult  breathing ;

broken  sensation  in  lumbar  sacral  region  >.
^®  Nerves, l Extreme  nervousness.

■  Infantile  spasms.


327  MELILOTUS.

I  Spasm  during  dentition,  with  great  congestion  of  head.
■  Convulsion  of  nervous  children  during  dentition.
I  Eclampsia.
^'^  Time. 4  p.m.  :  distressing  pain.

Day  or  night: wanders  unconsciously  through  streets;
epistaxis.
^^  Temperature  and  Weather. Approach  of  a  rain  storm  or
in  rainy,  changeable  weather :  rheumatic  pains  in  joints.

After  exposure  or  getting  feet  wet :  cramps  in  stomach.

Hot  weather :  congestive  headache  more  frequent.
^"  Fever. Febris  nervosa  stupida;  deaf  and  dumb;  involun-
tary stools,  mixed  with  blood ;  epistaxis ;  unconscious-
ness ;  loss  of  memory ;  confusion  of  ideas.
*^  Attacks,  Periodicity. Alternate :  broken  sensation,  with
headache.

Every  few  moments :  nosebleed.

Lasting  only  one  moment,  but  recurring  frequently :  sharp
pains  in  external  genitals.

From  9  to  12  a.m.  :  headache  <.

Once  or  twice  in  twenty-four  hours :  epistaxis.

For  two  or  three  days  after  headache :  nervous  and  trem-
bling.

For  three  days  :  oppressive  headache.

Lasting  four  days:  headache.

For  several  years  at  intervals  of  one  to  three  months :  con-
gestive headache.
*^  Locality  and  Direction. Left :  distressing  pain  in  temple ;

inguinal  hernia.
^^  Sensations. As if  smothering ;  as  if  garments were  too
tight  across  chest.

Intense  frontal  headache.

Excessive  pains :  in  temples.

Severe  pain :  in  head.

Distressing  pain :  in  1.  temple.

Stitching  or  cutting  pains :  in  womb  and  through  hernia.

Severe,  sharp,  shooting,  sticking  pains :  in  external  genitals.

Sudden,  sharp, shooting, stinging,  burning, rheumatic
pains :  in  joints.

Shooting,  cutting :  in  rectum.

Frightful,  heavy,  oppressive  pain  :  in  head.

Throbbing  pain  :  in  frontal  region.

Rheumatic  pain :  in  joints.

Cramps :  in  stomach.

Bilious  colic :  in  abdomen.

Dull,  heavy  pain  :  in  pelvis.

Soreness :  of  chest.

Broken  sensation  :  in  lumbar  sacral  region.

Constriction :  in  rectum.


MELILOTUS.  328

Pressure :  over  orbits.

Heavy  feeling :  of  eyelids.

Fulness :  in  rectum.

Oppression :  of  chest.

Throbbing :  of  carotids ;  in  rectum.

Dryness :  of  nose.

Coldness :  of  feet  and  hands.
^'  Tissues. I  Congestion  relieved  by  hemorrhage.

Congestive  or  nervous  headaches ;  engorgements  of  blood-
vessels in  any  part  or  organ ;  spasms,  infantile,  eclamp-
sia and  epilepsy ;  insanity,  to  relieve  brain  from  press-
ure and  irritation.
*^  Stages  of  Life,  Constitution.  Child,  set.  5,  sick  two  days;
pneumonia.

School-girl ;  headache.

Man,  set.  20,  lymphatic  temperament;  congestive  headaches.

Woman,  set.  30,  nervo-bilious  temperament,  suffering  for
years;  nervous  headache  and  dysmenorrhoea.

Woman,  subject  since  childhood  to frequent  attacks  of
nosebleed ;  epistaxis.

Man,  set.  64,  energetic,  suffering  fifteen  years;  cramps  in
stomach,  after  exposure.
*^  Relations.  Compare :  Amyl  nitr.  on  circulation ;  Antim.
crud.  in  epistaxis  after  headache,  but  does  not  >• ;  Bel-
lad.,  Glonoin.  and  Sanguin.  in  congestive  headache,  red
face,  hot  head,  etc.;  Stramon.  in  mental  conditions.


329  MENYANTHES  TEIFOLIATA.


MENYANTHES  TRIFOLIATA.

Buck  Bean ;  BitterUee.  Gentianacese.

A  perennial  which  grows  in  boggy  places,  indigenous  to  America,  Europe
and  Northern  Asia.  It  blossoms  in  May  and  June ;  flowers  rose  colored  or  whitish.
The  tincture  is  made  from  the  fresh  plant  just  coming  into  bloom.

Introduced  by  Hahnemann  and  proved  by  himself  and  his  provers  (Materia
Medica  Pura,  vol.  5,  p.  15).

Clinicai,  Authorities. — Headache,  Dunham,  Eaue's  Eec,  1870,  p.  287 ;
Amaurosis,  Teste,  Hughes'  Pharmacod.,  p.  517  ;  Pain  in  chest  with  nausea,  Hering,
MSS. ;  Affection  of  chest.  Wells,  Trans.  World's  Hom.  Con.,  1876-,  p.  554;  Jerking
of  legs,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  4,  p.  581 ;  Sciatica,  Lilienthal,  Times  Retros.,  vol.  1,
p.  121 ;  Cramps  in  legs.  Org.,  vol.  3,  p.  269 ;  Intermittent  fever,  Charg6,  Trans.
World's  Hom.  Con.,  1876,  p.  418;  Wells,  Trans.  World's  Hom.  Con ,  1876,  p.  554;
Dunham,  Kaue's  Rec.  1870,  p.  314;  Quartan  ague,  Fisher,  Allen's  Int.  Fever,
p.  171 ;  Ague,  Douglas,  Allen's  Int.  Fever,  p.  172.

^  Mind. Taciturn,  reflective;  sad,  weeping;  likes  to  be  alone.

Anxiety  about  heart,  as  if  some  evil  was  going  to  happen.

Indifference  alternating  with  too  great  joy.

Ill  humored,  cross.
^  Inner  Head. '  l  Constant  heaviness  of  head.

Painful  dulness  of  head  after  eating.

1 1  Pressure  in  head  from  above  downward,  >  better  dur-
ing hard  pressure  with  hand.

I  I  Pressive,  stupefying  headache,  mostly  involving  fore-
head, during  rest  and  motion.

I  I  Dull  headache  in  room,  with  difficult  flow  of  ideas;  >

in  open  air.

I I  Compressive  headache  in  vertex  from  both  sides,  on
ascending  steps,  sensation  as  if  a  weight  pressed  upon
brain  with  every  step.

I  I  Stitches  in  1.  side  of  brain  extending  toward  vertex.

I  I  Stitchlike  tearing  in  r.  side  of  forehead  near  temporal
region.

Burning  pain  in  forehead.

I  Pain  in  forehead,  more  severe  in  1.  side,  eye  and  ear,  ex-
tending through  occiput;  much  >  by  pressure  with
hands.

■  Headache  <  lying  down,  by  sleep  and application  of

cold  water.

■  Cold  feeling  of  head,  as  if  cold  wind  was  blowing  on  it.


MENYANTHES  TRIFOLIATA.  330

*  Outer  Head. External  gnawing  on  vertex.

^  Sight  and  Eyes. AVhen  reading  everything  becomes  black

before  eyes.

•  Amaurosis.
Pressing  in  eyes.

Eyelids  feel  stiff  as  from  tonic  spasms.
^  Hearing  and  Ears. Stitches  in  ears.
Feeling  of  coldness  in  ears.
I  I  Cracking  in  ear  when  masticating.
I  I  Otorrhoea,  especially  after  exanthemata.
''  Smell  and  Nose. Tension  in  root  of  nose.

Subjective  nauseating  smell,  as  from  rotten  eggs.
^  Upper  Face. >  Visible,  though  not  painful  twitching  of
facial  muscles,  especially  of  r.  side,  <  during  rest  than
when  walking.
Heat  and  redness  of  face  when  sleeping.
Heat  in  face  with  cold  feet.

Pain  and  cracking  in  articulation  of  jaw  when  masticating.
Pimples  on  face.
"  Taste  and  Tongue. Taste  in  mouth,  bitter  sweet.
'^  Inner  Mouth. Dryness  of  palate  causing  a  stinging  when

swallowing.
^^  Throat. Great  dryness  of  throat  without  thirst.

Paralytic  feeling  on  1.  side  of  throat  when  yawning  and

coughing.
Dryness  and  roughness  in  throat  preventing  deglutition.

•  Sensation  of  coldness  extending  up  oesophagus,  with  great

nausea,  following  pressure  in  stomach.
^^  Hiccough,  Belching,  Nausea  and  Vomiting. 1 1  Empty

eructations.
^^  Scrobiculum  and  Stomach, i Throbbing  in  epigastrium
like  a  pulse.
Continuous  rumbling  in  stomach  as  from  emptiness.
Constriction  in  stomach.

I  I  Weak  stomach,  with  pressing  in  head  and  hard  stools.
^^  Abdomen. Sensation  of  coldness  in  abdomen,  especially
when  pressing  with  hand  on  it,  in  morning  when  rising.
Sensation  of  soreness  of  abdominal  walls.
■  Distension  and  fulness  of  abdomen,  as  if  overloaded  by
food,  all  day,  with  undiminished  appetite,  together  with
a  sensation  as  of  incarcerated  flatus  and  frequent  in-
effectual efforts  to  emit  it;  in  evening  fulness  much  <
by  smoking.
^°  Stool  and  Rectum. Constipation  •  hard  stool,  with  pinch-
ing pain  in  abdomen.
Bleeding  hemorrhoidal  tumors.
^^  Urinary  Organs, i  Frequent  desire  to  urinate,  with  scanty
discharge.


331  MENYANTHES  TRIFOLIATA.

^^  Male Sexual Organs. Increased sexual  desire, without
amorous  fancies  or  erections.

Both  testicles  are  drawn  up,  r.  more  than  left.

Spermatic  cord  painful  to  touch.
^  Voice  and  Larynx. Trachea  and  Bronchia. Rough,
hoarse  voice,  ears  feel  obstructed,  as  if  something  had
been  stretched  across.

Stitch  in  anterior  region  of  larynx,  impeding  deglutition.

Spasmodic  contraction  of  larynx;  effort  to  inspire  causes
cough.
^  Inner  Chest  and  Lungs. '  i  Sharp  pain  through  middle
of  upper  r.  chest to lower part  of  shoulder,  causing
nausea  and  faint  feeling;  can  scarcely  move.

I  I  Pressure  on  both  sides  of  chest,  with  sharp  stitches,  <
on  inspiration.

Constriction  and  stitches  on  both  sides  of  chest.

Stitches  in  (r.  side)  of  chest  <  during  motion  and  when
breathing.

A  man  about  fifty  years  of  age  consulted  me  for  a  trouble
in  his  chest;  great  oppression  of  breathing,  with  violent
and  irregular  action  of  heart,  <  from  slight  exertion;
feet  and  legs  below  knees  habitually  cold,  <  about  8
A.M.,  for  an  hour  or  two,  during  which  time  chest  symp-
toms <.  ^Affection  of  chest.
^^  Heart,  Pulse  and  Circulation,  ii  Anxiety  about  heart,
as  if  some  evil  was  going  to  happen.

Stitches  in  region  of  heart.

Pulse  slow  during  chill,  accelerated  during  heat.
^'  Neck  and  Back. Heaviness  and  stiffness  in  muscles  of
neck  and  throat.

Dull,  boring  stitch  on  1.  shoulder  blade.

I  I  Dull  boring  sticking  in  1.  scapula,  extending  across  spine.

I  I  Extremely  painful  tearing  between  scapulse,  extending
downward,  especially  on  deep  breathing.

■Bruised  pain  in  small  of  back,  <  when  stooping,  also
when  walking.

Pain  in  back,  when  sitting  still,  disappearing  on  touching;
pressure  as  from  a  thumb,  and  tingling  in  it,  which  in-
creases pain,  <  on  stooping,  drawing  upward.
^^  Upper  Limbs, l  '  Muscular  twitches  in  r.  upper  arm.

I  I  Cramplike  pain  in  muscles  of  1.  forearm,,  extending  to
palm  of  hand,  almost  like  paralysis.

TrTingling  from  elbows  into  hands  and  fingers,  at  11  a.m.,
on  walking  in  open  air.

Tension  and  paralytic  tearing  in  arms,  hands  and  fingers.

Spasmodic  stiffness  of  arms,  fingers  involuntarily  clenched.

Painful  jactitation  of  moscles  of  r.  upper  arm  and  little
finger.


MENYANTHES  TRIFOLIATA.  332

^^  Lower  Limbs,  l  Stitching,  contractive  pain  in  region  of
hip  joint;  cramplike  drawing  in  of  anterior  portion  of
thigh  when  sitting;  when  sitting,  thighs  and  legs  are
spasmodically  jerked  upward;  pain  >  by  motion  and
pressure,  <  evening,  during  rest  and  when  lying  down;
after  abuse  of  quinine. ^Sciatica.

Bruised  feeling  of  thighs.

I  Right  thigh  and  leg  are  spasmodically  jerked  upward
while  sitting,  not  when  standing.

I  Legs  constantly  jerked  up  with  cramps,  preventing  sleep.

I  I  Cramplike  pain  in  muscles  of  r.  leg,  extending  from
below  upward,  like  a  paralytic  pain.

iPainful  spasmodic  jerking  of  lower  extremities  in  gouty
persons,  with  calcareous  deposits  in  joints.
^^  Limbs  in  General. Stinging,  pinching  pain  in  limbs.

^Arthritic  afiection.
^^  Rest. Position. Motion. Rest:  pressive,  stupefying  head-
ache; twitching  of  facial  muscles  <  ;  pain  in  thigh  <.

Lying  down :  headache  <  ;  pain  in  thighs  <  ;  sweat  in  bed.

Sitting  still :  pain  in  back ;  cramplike  drawing  in  thigh ;
thigh  and  leg  jerked  upward.

Stooping:  pain  in  small  of  back  <.

Slight  exertion  :  irregular  action  of  heart  <.

Swallowing :  stinging  in  palate.

Masticating:  cracking  in  ear;  pain  and  cracking  in  artic-
ulation of  jaw.

Motion:  pressive,  stupefying  headache;  almost  impossible,
sharp  pains  through  chest;  stitches  inchest  <;  pain
in  thighs  >.

Ascending  steps:  compressive  headache.

AValking:  twitching  of  facial  muscles  > ;  pain  in  small  of
back  <  ;  tingling  from  elbows  into  hands  and  fingers;
great  debility.
36  Herves. Great  debility,  especially  when  walking,  often  with
chilliness.

Painless  twitching  of  muscles  in  different  parts  (face  and
thigh),  principally  when  at  rest.

I  1  Injuries  to  nerves  (teeth  broken  when  pulled,  etc.).
^'^  Sleep. I  I  Vivid  unremembered  dreams.

^  Time. Morning  when  rising:  coldness  in  abdomen.

8  A.M.,  for  an  hour  or  two:  coldness  of  feet  and  legs  <.

II  A.M. :  tingling  from  elbows  into  hands  and  fingers.
All  day:  distension  and  fulness  of  abdomen.
Evening:  fulness  in  abdomen  <  by  smoking;  pain  in

thighs  < ;  general  heat ;  sweat  in  bed.
All  night :  sweat  lasting.
^^  Temperature  and  Weather. Warm  stove :  chill  passes  off.
Open air:"  dull headache  >; tingling from elbows  to
fingers.


333  MENYANTHES  TRIFOLIATA.

In  room:  dull  headache.
Cold  water: headache  <.
^•^  Fever, l  Shivering  on  upper  part  of  body,  with  yawning.
Shuddering  without chill (like from hearing horrible

tales),  only  on  upper  body.
1 1  Coldness  of  abdomen,  especially  on  pressure  with  hand.
1 1  Chilly  sensation  in  abdomen. ^Intermittent,

■  Coldness  of  dorsal  spine,  with  shaking.

General  chill,  which  passes  off  near  warm  stove,  remain-
ing only  on  back.

I  Feet  cold  as  far  up  as  knees,  as  if  they  were  in  cold  water.

I I  Icy  coldness  of  hands  and  feet,  with  warmth  of  rest  of
body.

■  Veins  of  lower  arms  and  hands  distended,  while  feet  are

icy  cold.

■  Chilliness,  especially  of  fingers  and  toes.
Heat  without  thirst.

Hot  face,  with  cold  hands  and  feet.

General  heat  in  evening,  most  severe  on  head,  attended

with  cold  feet.
Sensation  of  heat,  particularly  in  back,  with  intermingling

coldness,  particularly  in  abdomen.
Sweat  in  evening  in  bed  immediately  after  lying  down,

frequently  lasting  whole  night.

I  Intermittent  fever,  with  chilliness  in  abdomen,  lasting

six  days,  when  a  disagreeable  feeling  of  heat  comes  on,
alternating  or  intermingling  with  chilliness,  with  cold
feet  and  legs  and  slow  pulse.

I I  Paroxysm  of  fever  daily  at  9  a.m.;  heat,  thirst,  rest-
lessness and  redness  of  face  and  eyes  lasted  till  3.  p.m.

■  Irregular  intermittent  paroxysm  consists  chiefly  of  a  cold

stage  which  is  incompletely  developed,  hands  or  ends  of
fingers,  and  toes  or  feet,  and  end  of  nose  alone  becom-
ing very  cold.
*^  Attacks,  Periodicity. Alternate:  heat  and  chilliness.

Daily  at  9  a.m.  :  fever.

Lasting  from  9  to  3  p.m.:  heat,  thirst,  restlessness  and  red-
ness of  face  and  eyes.

Lasting  six  days:  intermittent  fever,  with  chilliness.
^  Locality  and  Direction.  Right:  stitchlike  tearing  in  side
of  forehead;  twitching  of  facial  muscles;  testicle  drawn
up;  sharp  pain  through  upper  side  o'f  chest;  stitches  in
chest;  muscular  twitches  in  upper  arm  ;  thigh  and  leg
jerked  upward;  cramplike  pain  in  muscles  of  leg.

Left:  stitches  in  side  of  brain;  pain  in  side  of  forehead;
paralytic  feeling  on  side  of  throat;  dull  boring  stitch  in
shoulder  blade;  dull  boring  sticking  in  scapula;  cramp-
like pain  in  muscles  of  forearm.

From  above  downward :  pressure  in  head.


MENYANTPIES  TRIFOLIATA.  334

*^  Sensations,  As  if  some  evil  was  going  to  happen ;  as  if  a
weight  pressed  upon  brain ;  as  if  cold  wind  was  blow-
ing on  head ;  abdomen  as  if  overloaded  by  food ;  as  of
incarcerated  flatus;  as  if  something  had  been  stretched
across  ears ;  as  if  a  thumb  pressed  on  back ;  as  if  feet
were  in  cold  water.

Pain:  in  forehead;  in  articulation  of  jaw;  in  back.

Sharp  pain:  through  middle  of  upper  r;  chest.

Jerking  and  pinching  pain:  in  outer  parts.

Stitchlike  tearing:  in  r.  side  of  forehead.

Paralytic  tearing:  in  arms,  hands  and  fingers.

External  painful  tearing:  between  scapulae.

Stitching,  contractive  pain:  in  region  of  hip  joint.

Stitches :  in  1.  side  of  brain  ;  in  ears ;  in  anterior  region  of
larynx;  in  chest;  in  both  sides;  in  region  of  heart.

Stinging,  pinching  pain  :  in  limbs.

Stinging:  in  palate.

Burning  pain  :  in  forehead.

Pinching  pain  :  in  abdomen.

Cramplike  pain:  in  muscles  of  1.  forearm;  in  muscles  of
r.  leg.

Cramplike  drawing:  in  anterior  portion  of  thigh.

Dull  boring,  sticking :  in  1.  scapula.

Bruised  pain :  in  small  of  back;  in  thighs.

External  gnawing :  on  vertex.

Painful  spasmodic  jerking:  of  lower  extremities.

Painful  jactitation:  of  muscles  of  arm  and  little  finger.

Muscular  twitches:  in  r.  upper  arm.

Throbbing:  in  epigastrium.

Anxiety :  about  heart.

Compressive  pain :  in  vertex. ^

Pressive,  stupefying  headache.

Dull  pain :  in  head.

Tingling:  in  back;  from  elbows  into  hands  and  fingers.

Soreness:  of  abdominal  walls.

Heat:  of  face;  in  head  ;  in  back.

Paralytic  feeling:  in  1.  side  of  throat.

Spasmodic  stiff'n ess:  of  arms;  fingers.

Stiff  feeling :  in  eyelids;  in  muscles  of  neck  and  throat.

Dryness:  of  palate;  of  throat.

Tension  :  in  root  of  nose ;  in  arms,  hands  and  fingers.

Constriction  :  in  stomach ;  in  both  sides  of  chest.

Pressure :  in  head ;  in  eyes ;  in  stomach  ;  in  both  sides  of
chest ;  in  back.

Heaviness :  of  head ;  in  muscles  of  neck  and  throat.

Fulness:  of  abdomen.

Coldness :  of  abdomen  ;  of  dorsal  spine  ;  of  hands  and  feet ;
of  end  of  nose.


335  MENYANTHES  TRIFOLIATA.

Cold  feeling :  of  head ;  in  ears  ;  extending  up  oesophagus ;
in  abdomen ;  in  feet  and  legs.

Chilly  sensation  :  in  abdomen ;  of  fingers  and  toes.

Shivering :  on  upper  part  of  body.
*^  Touch. Passive  Motion. Injuries. Touch: spermatic
cord  painful;  on  back,  makes  pain  disappear.

Pressure :  pain  in  forehead  > ;  coldness  of  abdomen  >  ;
pain  in  thighs  >.

Hard  pressure:  >  pressure  in  head.

I  I  Injuries  to  nerves.
*^  Stages  of  Life,  Constitution. Child,  a^t.  22  months ;  in-
termittent fever.

Man,  «t.  78 ;  cramps  in  legs.

Man,  set.  about  50;  respiratory  and  heart  trouble.
*^  Relations. Antidote : Camphor.

It  antidotes  chronic  effects  of  Cinchon.  and  Qiiinia.

Compatible :  Capsic,  Lycop.,  Pulsat.,  Rhus  tox.,  which  fol-
low well.

Compare :  Mag.  mur.,  Paris  quad,  and  Pulsat.  in  headaches ;
Carbo  veg.  and  Lycop.  in  gastric  symptoms ;  Laches,  in
chills  and  fever ;  Calc.  ostr.  and  Gelsem.  in  icy  cold  feet
and  legs.


MEPHITIS  PUTORIUS.  336


MEPHITIS  PUTORIUS.

Skunk.  Mustelidae.

The  alcoholic  dilution  is  prepared  from  the  liquid  contained  in  the  glands  of
the  animal.

Introduced  by  Hering ;  symptoms  obtained  from  the  30th  dilution,  and  from
inhaling  the  substance  while  preparing  the  dilutions.  Also  proved,  in  1853,  by
Cowley,  through  Neidhard,  MSS.  (not  contained  in  Allen's  Encyclopedia).

"If  the  facts  collected  since  1851,  which  are  numerous,  do  not  prove  that
Mephitis  will  supersede  all  other  remedies  in  whooping  cough,  it  certainly  may  be
considered  a  valuable  specific.  In  order  to  insure  its  full  success,  it  should  be  exhib-
ited in  the  lower  dilutions,  from  one  to  three,  at  least  in  severe  cases." — Neid-

HARD.

Clinical  Authorities. — Spasm  of  glottis,  Searle,  Eaue's  Path,  and  Therap.,
p.  338 ;  Asthma,  MSS. ;  Oough,  Blake,  Hahn.  Mo.,  vol.  10,  p.  375  ;  Pertussis,  Moore,
N.  E.  M.  G,,  vol.  4,  p.  446 ;  (23  cases),  MSS.,  Neidhard,  N.  A.  J.  H.,  vol.  3,  p.  504 ;
Gushing  (9  cases  out  of  10),  MSS. ;  Knerr  (numerous  cases),  MSS ;  Sleeplessness^
Theobald,  Org.,  vol.  1,  p.  300.

^  Mind. Fancies  so  vivid  they  unfit  for  labor.

Talkative,  as  if  drunk  ;  excited,  with  heat  of  head.
Angry  about  trifles  or  imaginary  things.
1  I  Disinclination  to  work,  with  inclination  to  stretch.
^  Sensorium. Vertigo:  sitting,  stooping,  turning  in  bed.
Numb  and  dull,  with  sensation  as  if  head  became  enlarged^

with  ill  humor  and  nausea.
^  Inner  Head. '  '  Pain  above  eyes ;  violent  pain  in  head,  as

if  a  fulness  was  pressing  upwards.
Fulness  of  forehead  and  front  part  of  head.
Fulness  in  head,  more  on  vertex,  <  from  studying.
Headache  while  riding  in  a  carriage.
Heaviness  in  back  part  of  head,  as  if  fingers  were  pressing

on  it.
Slight  pain  like  pulsation  or  undulation  in  front  part  of

head, 1.  side, >  on  stopping  reading, < on  writing

steadily.
Strange  feeling  in  r.  side  of  cerebellum.
^  Sight  and  Eyes. Inability  to  read  fine  print.

I  I  Letters  become  blurred,  he  is  unable  to  discern  them,

they  run  together.
Weakness  of  sight,  with  headache  and  pain  in  eyes.  _
Pain  in  eyes :  when  turning  them  in  certain  directions ;,

as  from  a  foreign  body ;  as  from  overexertion.


337  MEPHITIS  PUTORIUS.

I  I  Stitches  in  eyes  as  from  needles.
Stinging  and  itching  in  eyes,  evening  and  morning.
Inflammation  of  eyes  and  lids,  especially  r.  side.
■Redness  of  conjunctivse.
Heat  and  burning  of  eyes.

Pressing  on  lids,  with  burning  of  margins  as  if  a  stye
would  form.
^  Hearing  and  Ears. Fetid  discharge  from  ears.

Erysipelas  of  ear,  with  itching,  heat,  redness  and  blisters.
Neuralgic  pain  in  and  about  ears;  deafness.
^  Smell  and  Nose. Dry  nose;  bleeding  from  nose;  swelling.

Fluent  coryza,  cough  and  soreness  in  chest.
^  Upper  Face. Bloated  face.

'"  Teeth  and  Gums. Sudden  jerks  in  roots  of  teeth ;  strum-
ming toothache.
I  I  Pains  in  hollow  back  teeth.
"Taste  and  Tongue. Taste  in  mouth: coppery; as  after
eating  onions.
Want  of  sensation  in  tongue.
^*  Appetite,  Thirst. Desires,  Aversions. Warns  every  dish
very  much  salted.
I  I  No  appetite  in  morning.
^^  Hiccough,  Belching,  Nausea  and  Vomiting. 1 1  Nausea,
with  emptiness  in  stomach  and  sensation  as  if  head  was
distended.
^^  Scrobiculum  and  Stomach. 1 1  Pressure  in  stomach,  with

colic.
^^  Hypochondria. Rheumatic  pain  in  region  of  liver.

Pain  under  short  ribs.
^^  Abdomen. Colic  from  cold,  >  near  warm  stove.
^^  Stool  and  Rectum, i  i  Stool  infrequent  but  thin.
^^  Urinary  Organs. Difficulty  in  urinating,  all  day ;  stream
interrupted.
Frequent  micturition:  with  clear  urine;  with  rheumatic

pain;  with  chill.
Urine  turbid  in  morning,  after  evening  fever.
''^  Male  Sexual  Organs, i  Dwindling  of  testicles  from  mas-
turbation.
Heat  of  genitals  at  night.
Itching  of  scrotum.
^^  Female  Sexual  Organs. Burning  leucorrhoea.

Soreness  of  genitals  and  swelling  of  labia  and  uterus.
^  Voice and Larynx. Trachea and  Bronchia. When
drinking  or  talking,  liability  to  have  something  get  into
larynx.
^^  Respiration. Asthma:  as  from  inhaling  vapor  of  sulphur;
in  sleep ;  of  drunkards.

VOL.  VII. — 22.


MEPHITIS  PUTORIUS.  338

Inhalation difficult, exhalation almost impossible, or

barking.
■Suffocative  feeling,  with  inability  to  exhale;  bloated  face

and  convulsions. ^Spasm  of  glottis.

■  When  drinking  or  talking,  liability  to  get  foreign  sub-

stance into  throat. ^Asthma  thymicum.

■  Asthmatic paroxysm at night on lying down, also

sometimes  waking  him  in  morning;  at  10  p.m.  had  to
sit  up  in  bed,  got  to  sleep  at  12  p.m.,  but  was  wakened  by
paroxysm  exactly  at  daybreak ;  had  to  get  up  and  walk
about,  whereby  a  slight  cough  was  excited,  the  more  he
coughed  the  worse  the  breathing  became,  but  each  cough
brought  up  a  little  transparent  phlegm,  like  white  of
egg,  with  sourish  taste;  urine  turbid  on  standing  a  few
minutes,  of  fetid  smell  and  depositing  brickdust  sedi-
ment ;  sensation  during  paroxysm  as  from  inhaling
fumes  of  sulphur,  and  a  general  oppression  of  front  part
of  chest,  especially  behind  upper  part  of  sternum;  <
from  ice  water,  wine,  horseback  riding.  ^Asthma.
^^  Cough.  Cough:  after  drinking,  talking  or  loud  reading;
with  fluent  coryza  and  soreness  in  chest;  spasmodic,
hollow  or  deep,  with  rawness,  hoarseness  and  pain
through  chest;  with  suffocative  feeling  when  inhaling;
cannot  exhale;  vomits  all  food  some  hours  after  eating;
bloated  face;  convulsions;  <  at  night  and  after  lying
down;  in  morning  it  is  loose,  with  some  expectoration,

■  Whooping  or  any  kind  of  cough  which  is  very  violent,

coming  on  spasmodically,  and  seeming  as  though  each
spell  would  terminate  life.

■  Spells  day  and  night;  child  must  be  raised,  gets  blue  in

face  and  cannot  exhale;  convulsions; fetid  diarrhoea.

I  ■Eight  or  more  paroxysms  of  cough  every  night;  rattling

of  phlegm  during  cough,  with  vomiting  after  eating.

■  ■  After  slight  catarrh,  whooping  cough  ;  during  day  cough

slight,  but  in  night  paroxysm  every  ten  minutes,  with
frequent  vomiting  and  fever.

■  Spasmodic  cough  of  phthisical  girls  (where  Dros.  failed).
.^*  Inner  Chest  and  Lungs. Pains  in  chest  (last  1.  short  rib)

when  touching  it;  when  coughing  and  sneezing.
Strange  feeling  like  that  produced  in  throat  when  taking
the  preparation  is  felt  in  r.  lung  and  hypochondrium,
^'  Neck  and  Back. Stitches  in  spinal  column  during  motion.
Pain  in  back  and  all  limbs,  with  lameness.
Tension  and  pain  in  r.  side  of  neck.
^^  Upper  Limbs. Sensation  in  r.  arm,  over  deltoid  muscles,
similar  to  that  produced  by  substance  on  throat.
Rheumatic  pains  in  arms,  >  on  motion.
Restlessness  in  1.  arm,  with  sensibility.


339  MEPHITIS  PUTORIUS.

Trembling  of  arm  when  leaning  on  it.

Painful  twitching  of  1.  hand.

Feels  impelled  to  stretch  fingers  and  make  them  crack.
^  Lower  Limbs, l  i  Rush  of  blood  to  legs  on  getting  awake
at  night.

I  I  Rheumatic  pains  from  hips  to  feet ;  arthritic  pain  in  heel.

BLegs  restless  as  if  becoming  insensible ;  knees  feel  bruised.

Peculiar  spasmodic  pain  in  1.  foot.

Stitches  in  feet.

Pain  in  big  toe  as  if  being  pinched  off.

I  I  Burning  and  pains  in  corns.
^  Limbs  in  General. Rheumatic  wandering  pains  in  limbs,
with  much  pressure  to  urinate  and  shocks.

Stretching  of  limbs.
^  Rest. Position. Motion. Lying  down :  asthmatic  par-
oxysm; cough  <.

Had  to  sit  up  in  bed :  asthmatic  paroxysm.

Child  must  be  raised:  whooping  cough.

Sitting:  vertigo.

Stooping:  vertigo.

Leaning  on  arm :  trembling  in  it.

Motion:  stitches  in  spinal  column; rheumatic  pains  in
arms  >.

Turning  in  bed :  vertigo.

Stretching  of  limbs.

Had  to  get  up  and  walk  about:  asthmatic  paroxysm.

Disinclination  to  work,  inclination  to  stretch.
^^  Nerves, l  l  Very fine nervous vibrations, causing  great
uneasiness.

Convulsions.

Inclination  to  stretch  one's  self,  with  disinclination  to  do
anything.

Restlessness.

I  I  Lameness,  especially  with  the  pains.
'''Sleep, Frequent  yawning ;  lachrymation.

■  Extremely  sleepy  in  morning,  during  day,  even  in  com-

pany.
Cannot  sleep  whole  night.

■  Sleeplessness from  "fidgets"  in  1.  side,  both  legs  and

arms.
I  I  Nightmare.

I  I  Awakens  in  night  with  congestion  to  legs.
Night  walking,  open  eyes,  angry  gestures; hair  on  head

rises,  cannot  be  made  conscious.
Vivid  dreams  which  he  recollects.
Asthma  during  sleep ;  not  waking ;  continues  after  he  has

waked  up.
^^  Time. Morning:  stinging  and  itching  in  eyes;  no  appetite;


MEPHITIS  PUTORIUS.  340

urine  turbid; asthma  waking  him; cough  loose;  ex-
tremely sleepy;  increased  warmth.

Day:  occasional  spells  of  whooping  cough;  cough  slight.

All  day:  difficulty  in  urinating;  extremely  sleepy.

Evening:  stinging  and  itching  in  eyes;  fever;  chilliness.

Night:  heat  of  genitals;  asthmatic  paroxysm;  cough  <;
spells  of  whooping  cough;  on  getting  awake  rush  of
blood  to  legs;  cannot  sleep.

10  P.M.:  asthmatic  paroxysm; got  to  sleep  at  12  p.m.,  but
was  wakened  by  paroxysm  exactly  at  daybreak.
^^  Temperature  and  Weather. Warm  stove : colic  from
cold  >.

Feels  less  chilly  in  cold  weather;  feels  pleasant  after  ice
cold  washing.

Ice  water:  asthma  <.
*"  Fever. Cold  feeling  predominates ;  evening  chilliness,  with
desire  to  urinate;  colic  as  if  diarrhoea  would  set  in.

I  I  Increased  warmth,  especially  in  morning.
*^  Attacks,  Periodicity. Every  ten  minutes:  paroxysms  of
cough  at  night.

Every  night :  eight  or  more  paroxysms.
*^  Locality,  Direction.  Right:  strange  feeling  in  side  of
cerebellum ;  inflammation  of  eyes  and  lids  < ;  strange
feeling  in  lung;  tension  and  pain  in  side  of  neck;  sen-
sation in  arm  over  deltoid  muscles,  similar  to  that  pro-
duced by  substance  on  throat.

Left:  undulation  in  side  of  front  part  of  head;  pains  under
short  ribs ;  restlessness  in  arm  ;  painful  twitching  of  hand ;
peculiar  spasmodic  pain  in  foot;  "fidgets"  in  side.
^^  Sensations. Strumming  through  body;  anxiety.

Feels  as  if  threads  had  been  drawn  through  head  and
trunk.

Wandering  pains  with  pressure  to  urinate.

Fine  nervous  vibrations  in  bones.

A  kind  of  burning  feeling  as  from  raw  onions,  in  stomach,
nose,  head,  r.  arm,  r.  lung  and  down  oesophagus.

As  if  head  became  enlarged ;  as  if  a  fulness  was  pressing
upwards  in  head ;  as  if  fingers  were  pressing  on  back  of
head;  pain  as  from  a  foreign  body  in  eyes;  as  from
overexertion;  stitches  in  eyes  as  from  needles;  as  if  a
stye  would  form;  as  if  head  was  distended;  as  if  inhal-
ing vapor  of  sulphur;  legs  as  if  becoming  insensible;
as  if  big  toe  was  being  pinched  off;  as  if  diarrhoea
would  set  in.

Pain:  above  eyes;  in  eyes;  in  hollow  back  teeth;  under
short  ribs;  through  chest;  in  back  and  all  limbs;  in
r.  side  of  neck;  in  big  toe*  in  corns.

Violent  pain :  in  head.


341  MEPHITIS  PUTORIUS.

Stitches:  in  ej^esas  from  needles;  in  spinal  column;  in  feet.

Neuralgic  pains:  in  and  about  ears.

Rheumatic  pain:  in  region  of  liver;  when  urinating;  in

arms;  from  hips  to  feet;  wandering,  in  limbs.
Arthritic  pain:  in  heel.
Spasmodic  pain:  in  1.  foot.
Slight  painlike  pulsation  in  front  part  of  head.
Painful  twitching:  of  1.  hand.
Sudden  jerks:  in  roots  of  teeth.
Stinging  and  itching:  in  eyes.
Soreness:  in  chest;  of  genitals.
Burning:  of  eyes;  of  margins  of  eyes;  in  corns.
Heat :  of  eyes ;  of  ears ;  of  genitals.
Pressure:  in  stomach.

Fulness :  of  forehead  and  front  part  of  head ;  in  head.
Heaviness:  in  back  part  of  head.
Tension :  in  r.  side  of  neck.
Pressing:  on  lids.
Lameness:  in  back  and  limbs.
Suffocative  feeling:  in  larynx.
Strange  feeling:  in  r.  side  of  cerebellum;  in  lungs.
Restlessness:  in  1.  arm.
Fidgets:  in  1.  side,  both  legs  and  arms.
Trembling:  of  arm.
Itching:  of  ears;  of  scrotum.
**  Touch. Passive  Motion. Injuries. Touch:  on  last  short

ribs,  pain.
Riding  in  a  carriage:  headache.
Horseback  riding:  asthma  <.
*^  Skin. Pimples  on  thighs,  forehead,  face,  neck  and  nates.
^'  Stages  of  Life,  Constitution. Baby,  aet.  20  mos. ;  pertussis.
Boy,  set.  1 ;  pertussis.
Child,  set.  2;  pertussis.
Boy,  set.  3;  pertussis.
Boy,  set.  4;  pertussis.
Girl,  set.  6;  pertussis.
Boy,  set.  6;  pertussis.
Boy,  set.  6;  pertussis.
Two  children,  set.  8|  and  5J;  pertussis.
Girl,  set.  9;  pertussis. •
Man,  set.  26; bilious  temperament,  while  in army  two

years  previously  had  suffocative  catarrh;  asthma.
^^  Relations. Compare:  in  asthma,  Drosera,  Bumex  and  Stida;

in  pertussis.  Coral,  rubr.  and  Drosera;  in  vertigo,  Carbo

veg.; in  loquacity,  Amanita  (Agaric.)  and  Laches.; in

effects  on  nervous  system  generally.  Castor,  and  Moschus;

in  chorea,  with  fidgety  feet  and  legs.  Act.  rac,  Amm.  carb  ,

Arsen.,  Asaf.,  Aurum,  Sticta  and  Tarent.


MERCURIALIS  PERENNIS.  342

MERCURIALIS  PERENNIS.

Dog  Mercury.  Euphorhiacese.

A  plant  indigenous  to  Europe,  w'here  it  grows  in  shaded,  mountainous  forests,
on  stony,  moist  ground.

The  tincture  is  prepared  from  the  fresh  plant  in  flower.

Introduced  and  carefully  proved,  upon  fifteen  provers,  by  Hesse,  published
in  Stapf's  Archives,  1844,  reprinted  by  Trinks  in  1847,  extracted  by  Possart  in
1851.  Suggestions  were  published  by  Bussell  and  Duncan,  but  not  a  cure  was
heard  of  until  1860,  when  Coxe,  Jr.,  reported  a  case  of  tumor,  MSS.  In  1875
Berridge  reported  cures  of  headaches  corroborating  symptoms  of  Hesse.

Clinical  Authokities. — Headache  (two  cases),  Berridge,  Eaue's  Eec,  1872,
pp.  214,  215;  Hypermmia  of  cmijunctiva ;  Conjunctivitis  trachomatosa  with  pannus  ;
Asthenopia,  Norton's  Ophthal.  Therap.,  p.  113 ;  Tumor  in  epigastrium,  Coxe,  MSS. ;
Intermittent  fever,  Price,  Med.  Inv.,  vol.  2,  p.  322.

^  Sensorium. Head  confused  as  if  inflated.

Near  fainting,  with  dysmenorrhoea ;  dulness  and  stupe-
fying sensation.

Vertigo;  on  going  down  stairs;  after  walking  some  time;
succeeding  headache,  as  if  intoxicated,  and  obliging
her  when  stooping  to  hold  on  to  something  to  prevent
falling ;  towards  1.  when  sitting,  standing  or  even  lying,
feeling  as  if  body  would  fall  to  that  side.
^  Inner  Head,  l  Tension  and  heaviness  of  head,  with  sensa-
tion of  heat.

Heaviness  in  head,  as  if  pressed  down  by  a  weight.

Heat  in  heat:  with  dysmenorrhoea;  with  vertigo.

Tearing  in  1.  temple.

iShooting  in  1.  forehead  and  temple,  <  on  coming  in-
doors ;  only  by  day,  till  last  night,  when  it  prevented
sleep ;  vertigo  on  stooping,  as  if  she  did  not  know  where
she  was ;  the  shooting  goes  obliquely  downwards  and
somewhat  backwards;  vomits  food  as  soon  as  eaten.
^Headache.

I  Aching  in  forehead,  >  by  cold  and  pressure;  aching  in
nape;  numbness  of  occiput  and  vertex;  weakness  of
arms  and  legs,  as  if  she  would  fall  to  1.,  without  vertigo ;
after  a  blow  upon  head. ^Headache.

Violent  headache  and  fainting  weakness,  with  dysmenor-
rhoea.
*  Outer  Head. Burning  on  vertex.


343  MERCURIALIS  PERENNIS.

I  Scalp  feels  tense  and  numb,  is  moved  with  difficulty.
I  I  Numbness  of  occiput  and  vertex  after  a  blow  on  head.
^  Sight  and  Eyes. ■  Dilated  pupils  with  great  sensitiveness
of  eyes  to  light.

■  Blinking  of  eyes,  in  open  air  and  sunlight;  snow  makes

her  blind.
I  Pain  in  eyes  reading  and  writing,  letters  run  together.

■  Dryness  of  eyes.

BHypersemia  of  conjunctiva  after  using  eyes,  with  heavi-
ness of  lids.

■  Conjunctivitis  trachomatosa  with  pannus ;  pannus  slight;

felt  very  sleepy ; lachrymation  and  blurring  of  vision
in  morning.
I  I  Asthenopia ;  sensation  of  dryness  in  eyes  and  heaviness
of  lids ;  sensation  as  of  a  mist  before  eyes  in  morning ;
burning  pain  in  1.  eye,  <  in  evening  and  after  using.

■  Twitching  of  upper  lids,  especially  of  1.  eye.

■  On  waking  at  night  unable  to  open  lids  immediately;

they  seemed  paralyzed  and  could  not  be  opened  until
she  rubbed  them.
■Weakness  of  upper  lids,  so  that  at  times  she  could  not
completely  raise  them.

■  Lids  heavy  and  dry.

■  Watery  eyes.

®  Hearing  and  Ears. Ears  as  if  stopped  up.

Pressing  and  tearing  in  ears ;  earache.
^  Smell  and  Nose. "  Breath  from  nose  first  hot,  then  cold.

Crawling  and  burning  of  nose.
^  Upper  Face. Feeling  of  tension  in  face  and  head.

Face  feels  cold,  later  warm  and  puffed.

Dark  red  cheeks.
®  Lower  Face. Lips  very  dry  and  parched,  with  increased

thirst.
^°  Teeth  and  Gums, i '  Tearing  toothache.
^^  Taste  and  Tongue. Tongue:  feels  paralyzed,  heavy  and
thick ;  numb,  insensible,  as  if  unable  to  taste.

■  Burning  and  smarting  on  tongue.
■Sticking  burning  on  tongue,  as  from  a  blister.

■  Tongue  painful  if  it  touches  palate,  as  if  there  were  blis-

ters on  it.
^^  Inner  Mouth. Great  dryness  of  mouth  ;  want  of  saliva  so

great  that  a  piece  of  sugar  does  not  dissolve.
I  I  Burning  in  mouth  and  tongue.
^^  Throat. Burning  dryness  in  throat.

I  Ulcers  on  palate,  tonsils  and  back  wall  of  pharynx.
^'  Appetite,  Thirst. Desires,  Aversions. Increased  thirst,

with  drv  lips  and  mouth.
'=  Eating  and"  Drinking. While  eating,  great  dryness  in

mouth.


MERCURIALIS  PERENNIS.  844

After  eating:  bread  and  butter,  biting  burning  on  tongue;
increasing  nausea;  vomiting.
^^  Hiccough, Belching,  Nausea  and  Vomiting. Nausea
and  heartburn,  with  bitter  taste.
Belching  relieves  complaints  of  stomach  and  abdomen.
I  Vomits  food  as  soon  as  eaten. ^Headache.
^^  Scrobiculum and  Stomach. Chilly  feeling  in  stomach,
followed  by  warmth  and  sweat.
B Tumor  inside  of  pit  of  stomach,  size  of  hen's  egg,  sen-
sitive to  pressure,  cannot  bear  clothing.
'^  Abdomen. Abdominal  pulsation.

^^  Stool  and  Rectum. Urging  or  burning  in  anus,  with  ach-
ing in  small  of  back.
Crawling  in  anus  and  bearing  down  in  sacrum.
^^  Female  Sexual  Organs. 1 1  Menses  shorter,  with  abdom-
inal cramps ;  too  late.
I  Dysmenorrhoea.
^*  Pregnancy. Parturition. Lactation. Mammae  swollen
and  sore  to  touch,  a  few  days  before  retarded  catamenia.
^^  Respiration. Breathing : difficult, with dysmenorrhoea ;

with  chilliness.
^  Inner  Chest  and  Lungs. Violent  orgasm  and  heat  in

chest,  with  dysmenorrhoea.
^^  Heart,  Pulse  and  Circulation. Confused  undulating  sen-
sation in  cardiac  region,  with  fulness  and  feeling  of
anxiety  in  1.  chest.
Oppressive  contraction  in  cardiac  region.
Peculiarly  undulating  and  throbbing  motion  in  cardiac

region,  in  prsecordia  and  upper  part  of  abdomen.
Remarkable  rolling  and  throbbing,  with  trembling  and

undulating  in  all  bloodvessels,  without  heat.
Repeated  palpitation  of  heart,  with  oppression  after  having

stooped,  or  as  if  heart  was  tightly  laced.
Orgasm  in  region  of  heart.
Pulse  frequent  and  full.
^'  Neck  and  Back, i  Aching  in  nape. ^Headache.

Flashes  of  heat  in  back.
^^  Upper  Limbs. ■  Veins  of  hands  distended. ^Ague.
^'  Lower  Limbs. Painful  ache  in  knees.
^'  Limbs  in  General. Tearing  pains  in  limbs,  with  weariness.
■  Weakness  of  arms  and  legs  as  if  she  would  fall  to  1.,

without  vertigo. ^Headache.
Heaviness  in  limbs,  with  dysmenorrhoea.
^^  Rest Position. Motion. Lying,  sitting  or  standing:
vertigo  towards  left.
Stooping:  must  hold  on  to  something  to  prevent  falling;

oppression  of  heart.
Walking:  vertigo.


345  MERCURIALIS  PERENNIS.

Going  down  stairs :  vertigo.
^^  Nerves. Trembling,  with  dysmenorrhoea.

As  if  she  would  fall,  without  vertigo.
^  Time, i  i  Only  by  day,  for  a  week,  then  all  night  prevent-
ing sleep :  headache.

More  coldness  and  chilliness  in  evening;  heat  <  at  night
and  in  morning.

In  evening  sight  more  affected,  in  morning  eyes.

Morning:  lachrymation  and  blurring  of  vision ;  as  of  a
mist  before  eyes;  perspiration.

Evening:  burning  pain  in  1.  eye;  on  going  to  bed,  chill.

9  P.M.:  chill  in  stomach.

Night:  headache;  on  waking,  unable  to  open  eyes;  heat
with  thirst.

After  midnight:  offensive  perspiration  on  both  sides.
^^Temperature  and  Weather. Indoors: shooting  in  fore-
head and  temple.

In  open  air:  blinking  of  eyes.

Cold:  aching  in  forehead  >.
*"  Fever, l  l  Chill in  stomach  at  9  p.m.,  which  extends  to  r.
arm,  r.  side  of  chest,  abdomen  and  r.  hip,  with  difficulty
of  breathing.

Cold  over  whole  body,  emanating  from  r.  side,  particularly
from  r.  arm  ;  shuddering,  great  debility,  sleepiness.

iGooseflesh  on  cold  r.  arm,  extending  over  whole  body;
after  midnight  offensive  perspiration  on  both  sides,  par-
ticularly on  arms.

I  Cold  over  whole  body,  with  hot  flush  in  face;  must  be
warmly  covered,  then  sleeps  and  perspires.

On  going  to  bed  in  evening,  chill ;  during  night  and  to-
wards morning  heat,  with  intense  thirst ;  perspiration
in  morning.

■  Heat,  with  distended  veins  on  hands.

Heat  in  whole  body,  anxious  sweat  breaks  out  from  time
to  time,  with  dysmenorrhoea.

■  Perspiration  over  whole  body,  from  3  a.m.  till  towards

morning,  after  good  sleep.
I  Chill,  beginning  in  r.  arm  and  r.  side  of  chest  (had  taken
quantities  of  quinine). /^Intermittent  fever.

*'  Attacks,  Periodicity. From  3  a.m.  till  towards  morning :
perspiration  over  whole  body.

^^  Locality  and  Direction.  Right:  chill  from  stomach  to
side  of  chest  and  hip ;  coldness  over  whole  body  emanat-
ing from  side,  particularly  arm ;  gooseflesh ;  chill  be-
ginning in  arm  and  side  of  chest.
Left :  vertigo  towards  that  side ;  tearing  in  temple ;  shoot-
ing in  forehead  and  temple;  burning  pain  in  eye;
twitching  of  upper  lid ;  anxiety  in  chest.


MERCURIALIS  PERENNIS.  346

Obliquely  downwards  and  upwards :  shooting  in  head.
*^  Sensations.  Head  confused  as  if  inflated ;  as  if  intoxicated ;
as  if  body  would  fall  to  1.  side ;  as  if  head  was  pressed
down  by  a  weight ;  as  if  she  did  not  know  where  she
was ;  as  of  a  mist  before  eyes ;  ears  as  if  stopped  up ;
burning  as  from  a  blister  on  tongue ;  as  if  heart  was
tightly  laced.

Pain  :  in  eyes ;  in  ear.

Violent  pain :  in  head.

Tearing :  in  1.  temple ;  in  ears ;  in  teeth  ;  in  limbs.

Shooting :  in  1.  forehead  and  temple.

Aching :  in  forehead  ;  in  nape ;  in  small  of  back;  in  knees.

Cramps :  in  abdomen.

Bearing  down  :  in  sacrum.

Rheumatic  pains :  in  head  and  limbs.

Burning  pain  :  in  1.  eye.

Sticking  burning :  on  tongue.

Biting  burning :  on  tongue.

Smarting :  on  tongue.

Burning :  on  vertex ;  of  nose ;  on  tongue ;  in  mouth  ; in
anus.

Burning  dryness :  in  throat.

Heat :  in  head  ;  in  chest ;  in  hands ;  in  whole  body.

Flashes  of  heat:  in  back.

Painfulness :  of  tongue.

Pressing :  in  ears.

Oppressive  contraction  :  in  cardiac  region.

Twitching :  of  upper  lids.

Remarkable  rolling  and  throbbing,  with  trembling  and
undulating:  in  all  bloodvessels.

Confused,  undulating  sensation  :  in  cardiac  region.

Anxiety:  in  1.  chest.

Tension  :  in  head  ;  in  scalp ;  in  face.

Heaviness:  in  head;  of  lids;  of  tongue;  in  limbs.

Fulness :  in  1.  chest.

Dulness:  in  head.

Stupefying  sensation  :  in  head.

Numbness :  of  occiput  and  vertex ;  in  scalp.

Weakness :  of  arms  and  legs ;  of  upper  lids.

Dryness :  of  eyes ;  of  lips ;  of  mouth.

Crawling :  of  nose ;  in  anus.

Chilly  feeling :  in  stomach.

Cold  feeling :  in  face.
^  Tissues.  Rheumatic  affections,  acute,  subacute  or  chronic,
particularly  when  pericardium  or  heart  are  sympatheti-
cally affected  ;  rheumatic  affection  of  muscular  coats  of
stomach,  of  intestinal  canal  and  bladder;  rheumatic
pains  in  head  and  limbs,  accompanied  by  disturbance


847  MERCURIALIS  PERENNIS.

of  vision  or with  a  melancholic or  hypochondriacal
mood.
^  Touch. Passive  Motion. Injuries. Forehead,  temple
and  upper  part  of  face  and  stomach  sensitive  to  touch.

Touch :  mammae  sore.

Pressure :  aching  in  forehead  >  ;  tumor  in  pit  of  stomach
sensitive.

Rubbing :  made  it  possible  to  open  eyes.

After  a  blow  upon  head  :  headache ;  numbness  of  occiput
and  vertex.
^  Relations. Antidoted  by :  Aeon.,  Bellad.

Compare:  Other  Euphorbiacese  and  \Alum.y  tAyit.  crud.y
I  Asaj.,  I  Bar.  carb.,  I  Berber.,  i  I  Borax,  I  Cannab.,  I  Cap-
sic,  I  I  Caustic,  Cinchona,  tKali  bich.,  iKreos.,  I  \  Laches.,
I  Ledum,  \  Lycop.,  ^Magn.  carb.,  iMagn.  mur.,  HMerc  sol.,
I  Mur.  ac,  \Natr.  mur.,  I  iNitr.  ac,  I  I  Nux  mosch.,  I  Nux  vom.,
I  Oleand.,  I  Opium,  \Phosph.  ac,  \Platina,  \Rhodod.,  \Rhus
tox.,  \  Senega,  \  Sepia,  \Spigel.,  iStramoii.,  W  Sulphur,
I  Sulph.  ac,  I  Tar  ax.,  I  Thuja,  i  Veratr.


MERCURIUS.

Mercurius  Soluhilis  et  Vivus. The  Black  Oxide  and  the  Element.

Mercurius  solubilis  was  introduced  by  Hahnemann  and  proved  upon  himself,
Gross,  Gutmann,  Fr.  Hahnemann,  Hartmann,  Hornburg,  Langhammer,  Eummel
and  Stapf  (Mat.  Med.  Pura),  also  in  a  fragmentary  way  by  Knorre  (Allg.  Horn.
Ztg.,  vol.  6,  p.  35),  Robinson  (Br.  Jour,  of  Horn.,  vol.  24,  p.  516),  Crocker,  reported
by  Berridge  (Med.  Inv.,  N.  S.,  vol.  1,  p.  101).

The  symptoms  of  the  solubilis,  obtained  by  regular  proving,  and  the  effects  of
the  vivus,  gathered  from  toxicological  reports  carefully  sifted  and  clinically  verified,
are  sufficiently  simular  to  be  placed  under  one  arrangement.  Virtually  the  action
of  the  two  remedies  appears  to  be  the  same,  and  they  have  not  always  been  dis-
tinguished in  clinical  reports,  but  in  all  known  instances  the  symptoms  of  the  two
preparations  are  rendered  distinguishable  by  the  letters  s.  and  v.

CtmiCAii  AvTHOUiTj-ES.— Affection  of  mind,  Dulac,  Horn.  Clin.,  vol.  3,  p.  56 ;
Desire  to  kill,  Dulac,  Eaue's  Rec.,  1871,  p.  49,  v. ;  Jousset,  Analytical  Therap.,
vol.  1,  p.  179;  Suicidal  tendency,  Jousset,  Pitet,  Hermel,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  5,
p.  6  ;  Vertigo,  Schelling,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  1,  p.  74;  Affection  of  head,  Haynel,
Horn.  Clin.,  vol.  4,  p.  136;  Headache,  Hrg.,  Black,  Schelling,  Rademacher,
Mschk.,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  1,  p.  179  ;  Apoplexy,  Pommerais,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf,  vol.  5,
p.  29 ;  Inflammation  of  brain,  Hirsch,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf,  vol.  5,  p.  45 ;  Acute  hydro-
cephalus, Hirsch,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf,  vol.  5,  p.  45 ;  Hydrocephalus,  Schwarze,  Riick.
Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  1,  p.  139;  Cephalamatoma  (2  cases),  Miihlenbein,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf.,
vol.  1,  p.  217;  Sutures  of  skull  asunder,  Haynel,  Raue's  Rec,  1872,  p.  65,  s. ;  Ab-
scesses on  head,  Klauber,  Allg.  Horn.  Ztg.,  vol.  112,  p.  148  ;  Amblyopia,  Gross,  Riick.


MERCURIUS.  348

Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  1,  p.  338;  Scotodynia,  Thorer,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  1,  p.  341 ;  Cho-
roiditis, Payr,  Raue's  Eec,  1875,  p.  59;  Iritis,  Thorer,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  1,  p.  302  ;
Hills,  N.  A.  J.  H.,  vol.  23,  p.  334; Keratoiritis,  Payr,  Raue's  Rec,  1870,  p.  107;
Keratitis,  Payr,  Raue's  Rec,  1872,  pp.  70,  72,  s. ; Keratitis  ■pustulosa,  Allen,  Horn.
Clin.,  vol.  3,  p.  73  ;  Inflammation  of  eyes,  Hrg.,  Schreter,  Schelling,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf.,
vol.  1,  p.  236;  Ophthalmia,  Hartmann,  B.  J.  H.,  vol.  6,  p.  490;  Schreter,  B.  J.  H.,
vol.  6,  p.  490 ; Ophthalmia  neonatorum,  Watzke,  B.  J.  H.,  vol.  6,  p.  168 ;  Scrofulous
ophthalmia,  Watzke,  B.  J.  H.,  vol.  6,  p.  493 ;  Hrg.,  Haustein,  L.  T.,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf.,
vol.1,  p.  272; Rheumatic  ophthalmia,  Knorre,  B.  J.  H.,  vol.  6,  p.  493; (3  cases)
Jachimovicz,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  5,  p.  132 ;  Syphilitic  ophthalmia  and  rheumatism,
D'Oliveira,  B.  J.  H.,  vol.  6,  p.  494 ;  Blepharitis,  Norton,  N.  A.  J.  H.,  vol.  23,  p.  352 ;
Loss  of  hearing,  Goullon,  Horn.  Clin.,  vol.  1,  p.  231 ; Otalgia,  otorrhcea,  hardness  of
hearing,  otitis,  Hrg,  Alther,  Schelling, Rentsch,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  1,  p.  368;
Otorrhcea,  Haustein,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  5,  p.  159 ;  Chronic  otitis,  Hendricks,  Allg.
Horn.  Ztg.,  vol.  104,  p.  30  ;  Inflammation  of  I.  ear,  Goullon,  Raue's  Rec,  1870,  p.  117,
s. ;  Affection  of  ears,  Berridge,  Raue's  Rec,  1875,  p.  65,  v. ;  Chambers,  Org.,  vol.  2,
p.  231 ;  Furuncle  in  external  meatus,  Houghton,  Raue's  Rec,  1875,  p.  67 ;  Epistaxis,
Hrg.,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  1,  p.  413;  Coryza,  Hrg.,  Riick,  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  1,  p.  388.
Nasal  catarrh,  Trinks,  Kafka,  Hering,  Bahr,  Raue's  Rec,  1870,  p.  126 ; Ulcers  on
forehead,  Berghaus,  Raue's  Rec,  1874,  p.  10,  v.;  Toothache,  Kreuss,  Hrg.,  Lobeth,
Schelling,  Widenmann,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  1,  p.  466;  Goetze,  Horn.  Clin.,  vol.  3,
p.  80;  Raue's  Rec,  1870,  p.  139,  1871,  p.  67,  s. ;  Affections  of  teeth,  Chase,  Horn.
Clin.,  vol.  1,  p.  70;  Dental  periostitis,  Martin,  Horn.  Clin.,  vol.  1,  p.  159  ;  Glossitis,
Vehseioann, Knorre, Weber, Guinisz, Segin, Riick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  1,  p.  497;
Wurmb  and  Caspari,  Theuerkauf,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  5,  p.  211 ;  Fullgraff,  N.  A.
J.  H.,  vol.  6,  p.  427  ;  Gilchrist,  Surgery,  p.  339  ; Ulcerated  tongue,  Knorre,  Riick.
Kl.  Erf,  vol.  1,  p.  499 ;  Banula,  Thorer,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  1,  p.  501 ;  Inflamma-
tion of  sublingual  gland,  Marechdll,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  4,  p.  386  ;  Stomatitis,  Hirsch,
Raue's  Rec,  1870,  p.  145 ; Ulcers  in  mouth,  etc.,  Hartmann,  Hirsch,  Escallier,  Stern,
Ruck.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  5,  p.  220; B.,  Org.,  vol.  2, p.  115,  s. ; Knorre, Ehrhardt,
Schreter,  Holeczek,  Griesselich,  Nithak,  Riickert,  Ruck.  Kl.  Erf,  vol.  1,  p.  507;
Cancrum  oris,  Gilchrist,  Surgery,  p.  348 ;  Parotitis,  Kreuss,  Knorre,  Hirsch,  A.  R.,
Gross,  Riick. KL  Erf,  vol.  4,  p.  370 ;  Swelling  of  submaxillary gland  (4  cases),
Knorre,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  4,  p.  385  ;  Angina,  Kreuss,  Hrg.,  Maly,  Segin,  Mayer-
hofer,  Knorre,  Trinks,  Miiller,  Kohl,  Ivano,  Holeczek,  Rothhaus,  Hartlaub,  Riick.
Kl.  Erf,  vol.  1,  p.  532  ;  Charge,  Raue's  Rec,  1870,  p.  142 ;  Syphilitic  angina,  Bern-
stein, Riick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  2,  p.  133; Sore  throat,  McClelland,  Raue's  Rec,  1875,
p.  85 ;  Berridge,  Horn.  Phys.,  vol.  3,  p.  135,  V. ;  Diphtheria,  Zwingenberg,  GEhme's
Therap.,  p.  8,  s. ; Goeze,  CEhme's  Tlierap.,  p.  58,  s. ;  Schmitt,  Horn.  Phys.,  vol.  6,
p.  252,  s. ; Pharyngeal  catarrh,  Kafka, Raue's  Rec,  1870,  p.  154,  s. ; Pains  in
liver,  Kafka,  Allg.  Horn.  Ztg.,  vol.  108,  p.  204 ;  Inflammation  of  liver,  Hrg.,  Kreuss,
Schelling,  Trinks,  Ruck.  Kl.  Erf,  vol.  1,  p.  678;  Colic,  Hrg.,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf,  vol.  1,
p.  756  ;  Bilious  colic  in  children,  Cushing,  N.  E.  M.  G.,  vol.  8,  p.  648,  s. ;  Inflamma-
tion of  intestinal  canal,  Trinks,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol,  5,  p.  352 ;  Perityphlitis  (2  cases),
Hofrichter,  Ruck.  Kl.  Erf,  vol.  5,  p.  353 ; Peritonitis,  Muller, Riick.  Kl. Erf.,
vol.  6,  p.  353; Catarrh  of  pancreatic  duct  (after  Bellad.), Buchner,  Raue's Rec,
1874,  p.  209,  s. ;  Ascites,  Stens,  Raue's  Rec,  1870,  p.  226,  s. ;  Lobethal,  Riick.  Kl.
Erf,  vol,  4,  p.  56  ;  Diarrhcea,  Hrg.,  Hartlaub,  Knorre,  Schwarze,  Diez,  Schelling,
Riick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  1,  p.  837;  Hofrichter,  Hartmann,  Miiller,  Huber,  Kafka,
Leadam,  Gerson,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  5,  p.  420; Leadam,  B.  J.  H.,  vol.  12,  p.  81;
J.  C.  R.,  Hom.  Clin.,  vol.  1,  p.  76; Chronic  diarrhoea,  Leadam,  B.  J.  H.,  vol.  12,


349  MERCURIUS.

p.  82 ;  Dysentery,  Dunham,  Kaue's  Kec,  1870,  p.  212,  s. ;  N.  N.,  B.  J,  H.,  vol.  3,
p.  259 ;  Hrg.,  Griessel,  Englehardt,  Seidel,  Gross,  Diez,  T.,  Kiick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  1,
p.  868 ;  Teller,  Huber,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  5,  p.  441 ;  Cholera,  Peterson,  Knoi-re,
Eiick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  1,  p.  950 ;  Croupous  inflammation  of  rectum,  Gerson,  Riick.
Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  5,  p.  422  ;  Prolapsus  of  rectum,  Mschk.,  Kiick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  1,  p.  993  ;
Worm  affections,  Maly,  Hrg.,  Ruck.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  1,  p.  806 ;  Albuminuria,  Dunham,
Lectures,  vol.  2,  p.  219 ;  Dysuria,  Hrg.,  Schelling,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  2,  p.  21 ;
Scematuria,  Mschk.,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  2,  p.  2 1 ;  Oonorrhcea,  Hrg.,  Hartmann,
Seidel,  Attomyr,  Rosenberg,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  2,  p.  86 ;  Englehardt,  Riick.
Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  5,  p.  544 ;  Kunkel,  Allg.  Horn.  Ztg.,  vol.  113,  p.  42  ;  Chancre,  Bandiss,
Bernstein,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  2,  p.  133;  Orchitis,  Gilchrist,  Surgery,  p.  529;
Swelling  of  testicles,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  2,  p.  87  ;  Inflammation  and  induration  of
testicles,  Hartmann,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  2,  p.  208 ;  Herpes  preputialis,  Gilchrist,
Surgery,  p.  533 ;  Ulceration  of  cervix  uteri,  Gorton,  Raue's  Rec,  1871,  p.  152 ;
Horn.  Clin.,  vol.  3,  p.  125;  Excrescence  at  os  uteri,  Meurer,  Raue's  Rec,  1874,
p.  233,  s. ;  Metrorrhagia,  Schelling,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  2,  p.  318  ;  Irregular  men-
struation, Leadam,  B.  J.  H.,  vol.  12,  p.  81  ;  Vaginitis,  Berridge,  Hom.  Phys.,  vol.  3,
p.  135,  v.;  Leueorrhoea,  Hartmann,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf,  vol.  2,  p.  363;  Pruritis  vulvae,
Nash,  Org.,  vol.  2,  p.  220 ;  H.  M.,  Raue's  Rec,  1870,  p.  257,  s. ;  Threatened  abortion,
Weber,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  2,  p.  318 ;  (Edema  of  vulva  during  pregnancy,  Wurzler,
N.  A.  J.  H.,  vol.  2,  p.  232  ;  Mastitis,  Hartmann,  Lobethal,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  2,
p.  418  ;  Poor  quality  of  milk,  Croserio,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  2,  p.  412 ;  Chronic
hoarseness,  Lobethal,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  5,  p.  788  ;  Influenza,  Hartmann,  Rummel,
Croser,  Gross,  Miiller,  Ruck.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  3,  p.  42 ;  Trinks,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  5,
p.  705 ;  Tracheitis,  Bronchitis,  Trinks,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  3,  p.  96 ;  Bronchitis,
Hirschel,  Raue's  Rec,  1873,  p.  101 ;  Schron.,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  3,  p.  169 ;
Cough,  Hirschel,  B.  J.  H.,  vol.  31,  p.  248  ;  Cough  and  catarrh,  Hrg.,  Hartmann,
Schelling,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  3,  p.  19  ;  Whooping  cough,  Hrg.,  Schron.,  Riick.
Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  3,  p.  82 ;  Pneumonia,  Hartmann,  Watzke,  Trinks,  Buchner,
Schelling,  Griessel,  Miiller,  Gross,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  3,  p.  301 ;  Pneumonia,
pleurisy,  Arnold,  Bojanus,  Miiller,  Eidherr,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  5,  p.  822;
Phthisis,  Miiller,  Raue's  Rec,  1871,  p.  102,  s. ;  Loscher,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  3,
p.  385;  Hydrothorax,  Knorre,  Riiok.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  4,  p.  353;  Swelling  of  glands  of
neck,  Huber,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  5,  p.  245 ;  Intertrigo  on  artns,  Leadam,  B.  J.  H.,
vol.  12,  p.  80;  Inflammatory  affection  of  hand,  Kreuss,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  3,  p.  562;
Eczema  of  hands,  Miller,  Hom.  Clin.,  vol.  1,  p.  244 ;  Miller,  Raue's  Rec,  1870,
p.  323,  s.;  Luxation  of  hip  joint,  Hirsch,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  3,  p.  574;  Hip  joint
disease,  Hiller,  N.  A.  J.  H.,  vol.  26,  p.  372 ;  Ulcer  on  leg,  Gilchrist,  Raue's  Rec,
1871,  p.  215,  s.;  Ballard,  Raue's  Rec,  1871,  p.  216,  s. ;  Affection  of  knee,  Hirzel,
Riick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  3,  p.  587 ;  Caries  of  bones  of  foot,  Schiller,  Bechet,  Riick.
Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  4,  p.  435 ;  Typhoid  fever,  Kammerer,  Knorre,  Bojanus,  Schelling,
Hartmann,  Baumgiirtner,  Clesz,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  4,  p.  747  ;  Trinks,  B.  J.  H.,
vol.  29,  p.  321 ;  Yellow  fever,  Taft,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  4,  p.  666 ;  Worm  fever,
Maly,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  4,  p.  670 ;  Night  sweats,  Miiller,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  5,
p.  842 ;  Rheumatism,  Kreuss,  Hrg.,  Rummel,  Lobethal,  Hartmann,  Schelling,  T.,
Riick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  3,  p.  523  ;  Hirsch,  Perutz,  Ruck.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  5,  p.  901 ;
Lorbacher,  Henze,  Allg.  Hom.  Ztg.,  vol.  107,  p.  122  ;  Bernstein,  Hom.  Clin.,
vol.  3,  p.  99;  Hansen,  Allg.  Hom.  Ztg.,  vol.  113,  p.  4;  Gout,  Schelling,  Ruck.
Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  3,  p.  525 ;  Affection  of  periosteum,  Klauber,  Allg.  Hom.  Ztg.,  vol.  112,
p.  148;  Periostitis,  Goeze,  Raue's  Rec,  1870,  p.  282,  s. ;  Affection  of  bones,  Hart-
mann, Jahr,  Schelling,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  4,  p.  435  ;  Anaemia,  Scrofulods,  Hydrops,


MERCURIUS.  350

Huber,  Allg.  Horn.  Ztg.,  vol.  101,  pp.  171-188,  s.;  Scrofulosis,  Lobethal,  Eiick.
Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  4,  p.  409 ;  Syphilis,  Plalinemann,  Hermann,  Trinks,  Jahr,  Knorr,
Bernstein,  Kiimpfer,  Buchner,  Sommer,  Seidel,  Vehsemann,  Bandiss,  Thorer,
Tietze,  Attomyr,  Jilgidi,  Stapf,  Bigel,  Hartlaub,  Schreter,  Kramer,  Eummel,
Wesselhoeft,  Liedbeck,  Hermann,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  2,  pp.  127-143 ;  Bernstein,
Thorer,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  2,  p.  133 ;  Eeil,  Eosenberg,  Mueller,  Meyer,  Gerson,
GoUmann,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  5,  p.  560 ;  Viezekempi,  Eaue's  Eec,  1875,  p.  170,  s.;
Siiss-Hahnemann,  Eaue's  Eec,  1871,  p.  142,  Dunham,  Lectures,  vol.  2,  p.  227;  Second-
ary syphilis,  Arcularius,  Eaue's  Eec,  1872,  p.  171,  s. ;  Dropsy,  Knorre,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf.,
vol.  4.  p.  353 ;  Prurigo,  Martin,  Hah.  Mo.,  vol,  5,  p.  24 ;  Pruritus  cutcmeus  uni-
versalis, Eaue's  Eec,  1872,  p.  258  ;  Hom.  Clin  ,  1871,  p.  100,  s. ;  Icterus,  Hartmann,
Eiick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  1,  p.  700 ;  Erysipelas,  Hartmann,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  4,  p.  145  ;
Vesicular  eruption,  Schelling,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  4,  p.  165 ;  Pustular  eruption,
E.  B.  N.,  Hom,  Clin.,  vol.  4,  p.  82;  Eaue's  Eec,  1872,  p.  257,  s.;  Purpura  hcemor-
rhagica,  Hendricks,  Allg.  Hom.  Ztg.,  vol.  106,  p.  158;  ^cze?)ia,  Weber,  Eaue's  Eec,
1873,  p.  241,  s. ;  Impetigo,  eczema,  scurfy  eruption,  Hartmann,  Knorre,  Elwert,  Bigel,
Kasemann,  Eiick,  Kl.  Erf,,  vol.  4,  p.  249;  Impetigo  calvities,  Arcularius,  Eaue's
Eec,  1872,  p.  65,  s. ;  Zona,  Vehsemann,  Lobethal,  Croserio,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  4,
p.  160;  Scarlatina,  Stow,  Eaue's  Eec,  1871,  p,  205;  Schelling,  Lobethal,  Eiick,
Kl,  Erf.,  vol.  4,  p.  56  ;  Measles,  Bethmann,  Schelling,  Euck.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  4,  p.  97  ;
Wesselhoeft,  Eaue's  Eec,  1870,  p.  319;  Smallpox,  Eussel,  Hartmann,  Eiick.
Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  4,  p.  112;  Stens,  Eaue's  Eec,  1872,  p.  254 ;  Itch,  Hrg.,  Knorre,  Eiick,
Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  4,  p.  212 ;  Antidote  to  Phytolacca  poisoning,  Grassmuck,  Eaue's  Eec,
1875,  p,  17,  s, ;  Affection  from  habitual  use  of  blue  pills,  Berghaus,  Eaue's  Eec,  1874,
p.  10,  V,

^  Mind. I  I  Unconsciousness,

I  >  Memory  weak ;  forgets  everything,

1  I  Loss  of  will  power, v.

8  iSlow  in  answering  questions, v.

I  I  Intellect  very  weak  ;  shows  every  mark  of  imbecility,  v.

I  I  Absentmindedness.

■  Time  seems  to  pass  more  slowly.
I  I  Embarassment.

lObtuseness  of  mental  operations,  with  great  inclination
to  sleep;  heaviness  and  muddledness  of  head.  ^Typhoid.
Ilmbecility  ;  foolish,  mischievous,  disgusting  actions.
I  I  Fancies ;  rarely  delirium.
I  Delirium  and  mental  derangement  of  drunkards, v.

■  Muttering  delirium, v,

■  Believes  he  is  losing  his  reason,  thinks  he  is  dying,  with

illusions  of  fantasy;  sees  water  running  where  there  is
none. s.

I  I  Mania,  with  liver  complaint.

I  I  Great  restlessness  as  if  he  had  committed  a  great  crime;
has  no  desire  for  food,  although  he  relishes  it  when  com-
mencing to  eat;  considers  everybody  his  enemy;  ideas
constantly  crowd  upon  his  mind,  one  constantly  chasing
the  other  away;  great  inclination  when  walking  to  take
people  by  the  nose;  weakness  of  memory  and  intellect;


351  MERCURIUS.

dull  and  stupid  feeling  in  head ;  complains  that  his  head
will  burst. ^Mania.

I  I  Almost  uncontrollable  desire  to  travel  far  away.

I  I  Desire  to  flee,  with  nightly  anxiety  and  apprehension.

I  I  Homesickness,  or  desire  to  travel;  wants  to  go  abroad;
nightly  anxiety  and  perspiration.

I  After  suppression  of  foot  sweat,  whenever  he  sees  an  open
window  or  a  cutting  instrument  breaks  into  a  sweat,
with  great  heat  of  head,  and  is  seized  with  an  almost  un-
controllable desire  to  commit  suicide.

I  Desire  to  kill  the  person  contradicting  her.

iGreat  desire  to  murder  or  commit  suicide,  particularly
during  menstrual  period;  despondency;  involuntary
crying;  great  indifference;  is  fearful  that  she  may  com-
mit some  wrong  and  kill  herself;  something  urges  her
to  kill  her  husband,  of  whom  she  is  very  fond,  and  she
implores  him  to  hide  his  razor.

Continuous  moaning  and  groaning.

I I  Hurried  and  rapid  talking, s.

■  Excited,  lively;  everything  is  done  hastily, v.
I  I  Taciturn  and  indifferent.

I  1  Fear  of  being  alone.

I  Anxiety  and  restless  change  of  place;  ebullitions,  sweat ;

apprehensive,  imaginary  fears;  fears  he  will  lose  his

mind ;  <  evening  and  night.

■  Anxiety  and  apprehension;  did  not  know  what  to  do;  it

seemed  as  though  he  had  committed  a  crime  ;  without
heat ;  also  with  a  feeling  that  he  had  not  control  over
his  senses, s.

I  Anxiety  driving  her  to  suicide ;  thoughts  of  suicide ;  dur-
ing menses  great  anxiety  from  which  she  cannot  free
herself;  desire  for  death;  great  indifference  even  to  those
she  formerly  loved;  crying  almost  involuntary,  with
relief;  hysteria;  hypochondriasis.

Disgust  of  life.

I  I  Much  wretchedness  and  dejection  of  spirits,  with  diar-
rhoea, s.

■  Hysterical  melancholia,  with  inclination  to  murder.

■  Inexpressible  pain  of  soul  and  body,  anxious  restlessness,

as  if  some  evil  impended,  <  at  night,  with  prsecordial
anguish ;  sweat  of  hands  and  heat  of  face ;  disgusted  with
himself,  has  not  courage  to  live ;  constant  suspicion,  con-
sidering everybody  his  enemy. ^Melancholia.

■  Grief,  with  fear  at  night;  disposition  to  quarrel;  com-

plaining of  relations  and  surroundings.
I  1  Amativeness;  amorousness.

■  Morose  and  mistrustful ;  treated  his  associates  almost  in-

sultingly, looked  upon  every  one  as  his  worst  enemy, s.


MERCURIUS.  352

iGreat  restlessness,  must  constantly  change  her  place;  fear,
with  desire  to  escape,  as  if  she  had  committed  some
crime. ^Hysteria.

lA  universal  uneasiness  of  body,  so  that  he  could  not  re-
main one  moment  in  the  same  posture, v.

■  Towards  evening,  an  uneasiness  that  did  not  permit  him

to  remain  in  any  place ;  could  not  remain  sitting  two
minutes;  was  forced  to  change, s.
iNo  rest  in  any  place,  constantly  anxious, s.

■  Extreme  restlessness  all  night,  beginning  about  8  p.m.,

and  lasting  till  morning, s.

■  Bad  effects  from  fright,  leaving  one  in  a  state  of  great

anxiety,  <  at  night.
I  I  Ailments  from  mortification ;  from  insults;  from  egotism.
^  Sensorium. '  '  Sopor ;  coma. v.

iFainting  after  sweetisli  rising  in  throat,  followed  by  sleep.

■  Dull  and  stupid  feeling,  with  dizziness.
■Confusion  of  head,  in  morning  on  waking, s.
■Weakness  in  head  like  a  dulness,  and  as  if  there  was  a

vibration  in  forehead  and  a  turning  about  in  a  circle,  s.

■  Constant  rotary  motion  of  head,  even  when  lying  on  pil-

low. V.

■  Vertigo:  as  if  in  a  swing;  after  stooping;  lying  on  back;

with  headache  and  nausea;  everything  turns  black;  with

nausea,  distracted  thoughts,  momentary  loss  of  vision  ;

cannot  stand  erect, or  even  sit  up  in  bed  for  fear  of

falling.
■Prophylactic  in  apoplexy,  in  lymphatic,  or  leuco-phleg-

matic,  ill  nourished  subjects.
^  Inner  Head. llTension  over  forehead,  as  if  bandaged  o

in  a  hoop;  <  at  night  in  bed;  >  after  rising  or  when

laying  hand  on  it.
■Pressure  in  forehead  and  pain  in  bone  beneath  eyebrow,

even  to  touch, s.

■  Pains  in  forehead,  with  disordered  liver.

■  Pressive  or  tearing  pain  in  1.  temple, s.

■  ■Burning  in  head,  especially  in  1.  temple;  <  at  night

lying  in  bed,  >  sitting  up.

■  Stitches  through  whole  head.

I  I  Tearing,  burning,  stitching,  boring  or  semilateral  tear-
ing down  to  teeth  and  neck,  with  stitches  in  ears.

■  ■Tearing,  drawing  pains  in head  having  their  seat  in

periosteum  and  in  bones  of  face ;  rheumatic  headaches.

■  Headache  as  if  just  beneath  scalp,  as  if  it  were  too  heavy

and  tight  in  brain, s.

■  ■Catarrhal,  rheumatic  or  syphilitic  headaches.
I  I  Violent  headache. ^Yellow  fever.

■Chronic  cephalalgia,  with  suicidal  tendency,  caused  by


353  MERCURIUS.

suppression  of  foot  sweat;  pressing  or  stitching  pains  in

head,  <  in  forehead,  only  during  day.
1 1  Congestion  to  head;  head  feels  as  if  it  would  burst,  with

fulness  of  brain;  as  if  constricted  by  a  band.
II Head  feels  as  if  in  a  vise,  with  nausea;  <  in  open  air,

from  sleeping,  eating  and  drinking;  >  in  room.
I  Head  feels  heavy  and  swollen;  as  if  getting  larger  and

larger.

■  Heaviness  of  head,  vertigo  when  raising  head,  with  nausea

and  vomiting;  child  wants  to  lie  quietly  in  horizontal
position;  somnolence,  indifference,  with  mournful  ex-
pression of  face ;  diminution  of  all  intellectual  faculties;
amblyopia;  weakness  and  paralysis  of  extremities ;  con-
vulsions. ^Hydrocephaloid.

I  Inflammation  of  brain,  with  hooplike  feeling;  burning^
and  pulsation  in  forehead ;  <  at  night,  >  after  riding..

iLies  in  a  dull,  sleepy  condition,  from  which  he  occasion-
ally awakes  without  regaining  complete  consciousness ;;
restless  at  night ;  anxious  dreams;  delirious  talk  ;  face
pale,  distorted;  head  hot;  forehead  moist;  eyes  dim,
pupils  contracted,  conjunctivee  injected;  speech  unin-
telligible on  account  of  dryness  of  tongue;  lips  dry;
temperature  of  skin  elevated;  pulse  114;  urine  thick,,
ammoniacal ;  constipation. ^Inflammation  of  brain, v..

I  Drowsy,  with  restless  throwing  about  and  occasional
waking  with  shrill  cry,  which  is  again  followed  by  dozing
off;  sensitiveness  of  eyes  to  light  is  diminished;  squint-
ing, s. ^Meningitis.

I  Acute  hydrocephalus  after  severe  attack  of  scarlet  fever;
every  quarter  or  half  hour;  terrible  continuous  shriek-
ing for  one  or  two  minutes;  frequently  moves  r.  hand
towards  head,  or  thrusts  hand  into  wide  opened  mouth.
1.  arm  remaining  motionless ;  frequent  chewing  motion
of  mouth;  strabismus;  sopor;  high  fever,  pulse  cannot
be  counted  ;  involuntary  urination, v.

I  For  two  years  indications  of  hydrocephalus;  head  large,
hanging  forward;  anterior  fontanelle  open;  forehead
protruding;  eyes  sunken  ;  pupils  enlarged ;  face  earthy,
oedematous ;  constant  flow  of  saliva ;  teeth  small ;  im-
patient desire  for  food. {Bellad.  and  Phos.  also  used.)

I  Brain  troubles  of  drunkards.

I  Apoplexy,  from  effusion  or  congestion.
■*  Outer  Head- iSutures  open,  large  head ; precocious de-
velopment; restless  sleep; dirty  color  of  face; sour
night  sweat ;  body  bathed  in  sweat. ^Hydrocephalus.

■  All  sutures  pressed  asunder,  not  a  single  border  of  a

bone  touches  its  neighbor ;  even  eyes  appear  unusually
protruded. ^Hydrocephalus.

VOL.  VII. — 23.


MERCURIUS.  854

1 1  Exostoses,  with  feeling  of  soreness  when  touched;  pain
at  night  in  bed.

■  Lacerating,  tearing  and  stinging  in  bones  of  skull.
1 1  Whole  external  head  painful  to  touch, s.

■  Multiple  abscesses  of  head;  rachitic,  anterior  fontanelles

open ;  large  abdomen  ;  fever,  loss  of  appetite,  diarrhoea ;
great  weakness,  cannot  sit  up  despite  pain  caused  by
lying  down.  s.
■Several  days  after  birth,  swelling  over  parietal  bone
near  posterior  fontanelle,  resembling  half  a  goose  egg
in  form  and  size,  fluctuating  upon  pressure  and  circum-

■  ■Scalp:  tense;  contractive,  tearing  pain  from  forehead

to  neck,  with  chilliness;  painful  to  touch,  <  when
scratching,  which  causes  bleeding;  eruption  itching,
dry,  humid,  pustular,  fetid,  with  yellow  crusts;  ery-
sipelas <  on  forehead ;  hair  falls  out,  mostly  on  sides
and  temples ;  sweaty.

■  Fetid,  sour  smelling,  oily  sweat  on  head ; on  forehead  it

is  icy  cold ;  burning  on  skin ;  <  at  night  in  bed  and
after  rising.

■  Moist  eruption  on  scalp  that  eats  away  hair,  with  sensi-

tive pressure,  especially  in  sore  places, s.

■  Small  elevated  scabs  between  hairs  on  scalp, s.

■  On  forehead,  between  eyebrows,  small  patches  of  pustu-

lar eruption,  with  greenish  yellow  scabs. ^Impetigo.

■  Profuse  falling  out  of  hair,  mostly  on  sides  of  head  and

temples, v.
^  Sight  and  Eyes. ■  iWorse  from  heat  and  glare  of  fire ;
also  from  daylight, s.
Optical  illusions :  in  dark  colors ;  in  green  colors  ;  black
points  ; muscse volitantes ; mistiness  ; cloud ; fiery
sparks  ;  letters  seem  to  move.
■Eyes  dim,  lustreless;  bleareyed.

■  For  one  year,  failing  sight;  frequent  temporary  loss  of

vision;  even  when  not  using  eyes  there  are  always  dark
spots  or  a  kind  of  cloud  before  sight,  constant  lachry-
mation  and  aching  pressing  pain  in  eye ;  she  cannot
bear  light  of  fire. ^Amblyopia.

■  Scotoma  of  r.  eye  after  a  fall,  with  dimness  of  vision,

constant  flickering  before  eye  and  floating  black  specks.

■  ■If  she  attempts  to  look  at  anything  cannot  distinctly  rec-

ognize it,  and  then  eyes  are  almost  always  involuntarily
drawn  together;  the  more  she  tries  to  restrain  the  con-
traction, the  less  able  she  is  to  prevent  it ;  is  obliged  to
lie  down  and  close  eyes. s.

■  ■Eyes  forcibly  drawn  together,  as  if  long  deprived  of

sleep, s.


355  MERCUillUS.

1 1  Fog  before  one  or  both  eyes. s.

I  i Dimness  of  vision;  vision  weak. v.

I  Heat  in  eyes  and  lachrymation. s.

I  Burning  in  eyes;  itching, s.

I  I  Pressure  in  eyes. s.

I  I  Eyes  hot,  a  kind  of  dry  heat. s.

I  Heat,  redness  and  pressure  in  both  eyes.  s.

I  Stitches  in  eyes.

■  Choroiditis.

■  Iritis;  syphilitic; pains  around  eyes,  on  forehead  and

temples ;  <  from  touch  ;  throbbing  shooting  pains  in
eye ;  hypopion ;  pains  severe,  tearing,  boring,  cutting,
<  at  night  and  in  damp  weather ;  much  heat  around
eye  and  soreness  of  corresponding  side  of  head ;  great
sensitiveness  to  heat,  cold  and  light ;  acrid  lachryma-
tion ;  pupil  contracted  and  covered  by  thin  bluish  film,
with  great  tendency  to  formation  of  adhesions  to  lens;
iris  discolored,  ciliary  injection.

■  Tearing  pains  in  forehead and  vertex; shooting  from

deep  within  eye ;  <  every  evening  and  night ;  con-
junctiva of  r.  eye  greatly  inflamed  and  swollen;  phleg-
monous inflammation  and  swelling  of  lids  which  are
painful  to  slightest  touch ;  great  photophobia ;  flow  of
hot  tears  from  eye;  white  ring  around  cornea;  iris
brown,  greenish  (blue  in  health) ;  pupil  fixed  ;  iris  in-
flamed and  at  later  stage  became  shaped  like  that  of
ruminating  animals ;  fever ;  sleepless  at  night  on  ac-
count of  pain;  profuse  sweats  without  relief;  every
nightat  12  o'clock,  intolerable  pains  in  eye  almost  ex-
hausting him ;  offensive  odor  from  mouth ;  much  ex-
pectoration of  mucus;  pappy  taste;  tenesmus;  patient
gouty.
I  I  Episcleritis.

■  Splerotic  swollen  and  very  red;  cornea  dim  and  showing

indications  of  beginning  formation  of  pus;  vertigo;
slimy  mouth ;  white  coated  tongue,  yellow  towards  base  ;
loss  of  appetite ;  great  thirst ;  chilliness,  with  heat  and
congestions  to  head;  tendency  to  sweat;  steaming  or
moist  skin ;  transient  stitches  in  body  and  limbs ;  rest-
less and  sleepless  at  night.

■  Cornea  dim,  red,  surrounded  by  puffy  swelling  like  raw

meat ;  burning ;  Hght  dazzles ;  it  seems  to  him  as  if
sparks  of  fire  were  being  emitted  from  eyes ;  stitches
deep  in  eyes  and  in  temples;  eyelids  dry  and  swollen;
1.  eye  <.

■  Ulcers  of  cornea  vascular  and  surrounded  by  greyish

opacity ;  pus  between  corneal  layers ;  onyx.

■  Pustule  on  cornea,  with  photophobia  and  lachrymation;


MERCURIUS.  356

when  eyes  are  well  has  noises  in  ears,  and  when  eyes
are  sore  top  of  head  is  so  sore  she  cannot  comb  her  hair ;
profuse  watery  coryza  excoriating  nose. s.

■  Keratitis  pustulosa; pain  in  eye  day  and  night, con-

junctiva much  congested,  burning  lachrymation ;  ex-
cessive photophobia,  eruptions  around  eye ;  <  at  night ;
bad  breath  in  morning;  wants  to  sleep  by  day  and  can-
not at  night ;  pain  in  bones  at  night ;  sharp  sticking
pains,  <  at  night  after  gaslight, s.

iVesicles  on  margin  of  cornea,  eyes  feel  <  at  night,  watery
eruption  on  face,  hair  falls  out,  nose  swollen  internally,,
cracked  and  unhealthy, s.

1 1  Lachrymation  profuse,  burning  and  excoriating.

llMu'co-purulent  discharges,  thin  and  acrid.

1 1  Lids  are  spasmodically  closed,  thick,  red,  swollen,  excori-
ated, very  sensitive  to  heat,  cold  and  contact.

■  Lachrymation  and  photophobia  (noises  in  ear  disappear

when  eyes  become  sore) ;  top  of  head  so  sore  she  cannot

comb  her  hair. Wveratitis  pustulosa.
1 1  Keratitis  parenchymatosa,  due  to  hereditary  s^^philis.
iKeratoiritis,  with  hypopion,  pain  very  severe  at  night,

eye  feeling  as  if  it  was  a  ball  of  fire,  lachrymation  hot.

■  Inflammation  of  eyes;  cornea  covered  with  scars  from

old  ulcerations;  scleral  vessels  injected,  especially  be-
tween insertion  of  recti  muscles,  where  sclera  is  slightly
bulged  and  thinned,  so  that  dark  color  of  choroid  shines,
through ;  steady  aching,  <  at  night. ^Episcleritis.

■  ■Syphilitic  iritis;  condylomata  in  iris;  hypopion;  con-

traction;  discoloration  and  immobility;  ciliary  injection,,
haziness  of  aqueous ;  pains  of  a  tearing,  boring  char-
acter, chiefly  around  eye,  in  forehead  and  temples,  which
are  sore  to  touch;  throbbing,  shooting,  sticking  pains  in
eye ;  all  <  at  night.
■Retinitis  and  choroiditis,  particularly  if  dependent  upon
syphilis;  retina  very  sensitive  in  glare.

■  Diseases  of  optic  nerve  and  retina,  occurring  in  workers

in  foundries.
■Great  opaqueness,  violent  pain,  dacryorrhoea,  photopho-
bia, swelling  of  lids. ^Keratitis  vasculosa. s.

■  Ophthalmia  neonatorum;  discharge  acrid,  usually  thin,

makes  cheek  sore ;  particularly  if  caused  by  syphilitic
leucorrhoea.

■  Purulent  ophthalmia,  with  copious  discharge  ;  lids  much

swollen,  underneath  much  purulent  matter  which  pours
out  in  quantities  on  opening  eyes. s.

■  Rheumatic,  arthritic,  syphilitic  or  gonorrhoeal  ophthalmia.

■  Lids  swollen;  sensation  of  a  body  causing  dull  pressive

or  cutting  pains  underneath  lids,  with  difficulty  in  mov-


J57  MERCURIUS.

ing  them ;  daylight  or  candlelight  insupportable  and
causes  burning,  gnawing  pains  in  e3'es  which  are  mod-
erately red,  so  that  lids  are  closed  convulsively,  and  can
with  difficulty  be  opened;  lids  agglutinated  with  raw
pain  at  their  edges.
I  Eyelids  swollen;  lids  and  cheeks  covered  with  a  pustular
eruption;  dried  pus  hangs  upon  eyelashes;  greyish
white  spots  upon  cornese;  photophobia,  lies  upon  face;
nose  and  lips  swollen;  copious,  thick,  green,  acrid  dis-
charge from  nose,  excoriating  nose  and  upper  lip,  back
of  hand  and  forearm,  upon  which  child  wiped  its  nose,
corroded ;  glands  of  ears  swollen ;  irritable,  impatient,
disposed  to  cry. ^Scrofulous  inflammation  of  eyes.

■  Chronic  syphilitic  ophthalmia;  vessels  of  conjunctiva  in-

jected and  distended;  pupil  linear  and  contracted,  and
anterior  and  posterior  chambers  of  eyes  appeared  quite
confused;  objects  appear  quite  small  and  indistinct;
feathers  appear  to  come  from  angles  of  eyes  and  hinder
vision;  myopia;  frequent  attacks  of  cramp  in  stomach
in  all  phases  of  the  moon,  and  on  least  atmospheric  vari-
ation or  immediately  after  some  unusual  pleasureable
or  painful  impression;  stiffness  of  maxillary  joint,  and
pain  in  sole  of  foot,  could  with  difficulty  chew  and  could
not  bear  to  walk ;  can  scarcely  keep  in  erect  position,
bone  pains  at  night  preventing  sleep ;  must  be  turned  in
bed  by  means  of  a  sheet.

■  Eyes  inflamed,  with  swollen  inverted  tarsi  and  very  sen-

sitive to  light. V.

■  Pustules  on  conjunctiva.

I  1  Conjunctivitis  pustulosa after  measles;  scrofula,  with
enlarged  cervical  glands.

■  Great  swelling  of  lids,  sensibility  to  touch,  <  before  mid-

night, no  >  from  sweat. ^Blenorrhoea  of  conjunctiva.

■  Chronic  conjunctivitis,  with  a  fine,  rosy  red  injection

around  cornea, v.
I  I  Pressure  in  eyes  as  from  sand.

■  Burning  pains,  lachrymation  acrid,  photophobia,  sensi-

tiveness to  extreme  heat  or  cold  very  marked,  especially
heat  of  "glaring  fire"  and  coldness  of  damp  places
^Granular  conjunctivitis.

■  Pupils  dilated, s.

■  Biting  and  burning  in  eyes,  especially  in  open  air.

I  I  Cutting,  stinging  or  aching  pains  in  eyes,  especially  when
exerting  them.

■  Great  swelling,  redness  and  constriction  of  lids;  they  are

sensitive  to  touch ;  upper  lid  tight  and  red  like  a  stye.

■  Inflammatory  swelling  in  region  of  lachrymal  bone.

■  Eyes  close  forcibly,  whether  sitting,  standing  or  walking.


MEPvCURIUS.  358

I  Lids:  spasmodically  closed;  erysipelatous; sensitive  to

cold,  heat  and  to  touch ;  raw  excoriated ;  burning  as  from
fiery  points.

I I  Blepharitis:  lids  red,  thick  and  swollen,  particularly
upper;  sensitive;  lachrymation  profuse,  burning,  acrid,
making  lids  sore,  red  and  painful ;  <  in  open  air  or  by
constant  application  of  cold  water.

■  Ciliary  blepharitis  caused  from  workingover  fires  or  forges.
I  Inflammation  or  blenorrhoea  of  lachrymal  sac.

I  Cutting  under  lid,  as  from  a  sharp  body.

■  Edges  of  lids  covered  with  scurfs  and  ulcers.

■  Absence  of  cilise  (nadarosis),  nose  sore  and  excoriated;

Meibomian  glands  ulcerated,  with  scurf  on  margins  of
lids.

■  Entropium;  ectropium  ;  affections  of  Meibomian  cysts.
I  I  Styes  on  upper  lids.

I  I  Twitching  of  lids.

■Violent  contraction  of  eyelids,  it  is  difficult  to  open  them.
^  Hearing  and  Ears. Subjective  sounds :  various  kinds  of
ringing;  roaring;  pulsative  roaring ;  buzzing.

■  Deafness:  sounds  vibrate  in  ears;  obstruction  moment-

arily > after swallowing or  blowing  nose; external

meatus  moist;  catarrhal  after  catching  cold  ;  after  otitis.

I  I  Sensation  of  coldness  in  ears  continually. ^Pregnancy.

■  Interstitial  inflammation  and  swelling  of  periosteum.

■Sensation  as  if  r.  ear  was  stufled  up  ;  ringing  in  ear;  en-
larged tonsils,  with  occlusion  of  Eustachian  tubes  and
impaired  hearing.

■  Soreness  and  excoriation  of  inner  ears.

■  Tearing  or  shooting  pain  in  ears.

■  Sticking  and  burning  deep  in  both  ears,  <  in  left. s.

■  ■Ears  inflamed  internally  and  externally,  pain  cramp-

like, sticking  and  as  if  stopped  by  swelling, s.

■  Stinging,  tearing  pains;  purulent  discharge,  green,  offen-

sive; glands  swollen.

■  Inflammation  of  submucous  and  subcutaneous  cellular

tissue,  extending  to  parotid  gland,  which  becomes  swol-
len and  tender;  throbbing  pain,  <  at  night  on  getting
warm  in  bed. ^Otitis.

I  I  Otitis  after  cold;  intolerable  pains  in  whole  head,  but
particularly  in  ears;  boring,  tearing,  stitching,  with  roar-
ing and  rumbling,  particularly  in  L  ear,  which  is  ex-
ternally red,  hot  and  swollen;  pain  so  severe  as  to  cause
fainting;  thirst;  great  restlessness ;  sleeplessness.

I  I  Hardness  of  hearing,  roaring  in  ears,  yellow  discharge.
^Chronic  otitis.

1  1  Watery  discharge  and  hemorrhage  from  ears,  first  1.,
then  r. ;  sides  of  neck  red,  swollen,  tender ;  noises  like


359  MERCURIUS.

bells  ringing,  whistling  or  running  of  trains,  first  1.,  then
r. ;  shooting  from  1.  ear  through  head  to  r.  and  from  1.
ear  to  1.  temple  ;  shooting  >  by  cold,  <  by  warmth ;
discharge  <  by  warmth ;  noises  and  shooting  <  by
lying  on  1.  side;  deaf;  shooting  makes  her  hold  head  and
shudder ;  pulse  150,  feeble ;  pricking  in  ears  before  dis-
charge comes  ;  aching  in  ears,  first  1.,  then  r.,  5.45  p.m.  v.

iSince  an  attack  of  measles,  twenty-two  years  ago,  has
suffered  from  a  profuse,  offensive  smelling  discharge
from  r.  ear,  to  which  within  the  last  few  years  were
associated  hardness  of  hearing  and  ringing  in  ears;
watch  could  not  be  heard  on  r.  side,  upon  1.  side  could  be
heard  only  at  distance  of  one  and  a  half  inches ;  tuning
fork  could  be  heard  only  on  r.  side ;  r.  auditory  canal
occluded  by  soft,  easily  bleeding  polypi;  mucous
membrane  red,  puff'ed,  raw  and  very  sensitive ;  yellow-
ish white,  off'ensive,  muco-purulent  discharge;  polypi
dropped  off"  in  six  days.

Unflammation  of  1.  ear,  with  hardness  of  hearing;  sub-
jective symptoms,  as  though  a  melody  was  ground  upon
an  organ  in  head  and  after  a  few  turns  was  snapped  off";
sensation  of  fulness  in  ear  and  stopped  up  feeling,  as
though  a  wedge  was  driven  in. s.

>  Pain  beneath  ear,  extending  down  jaw. ^Otitis.

■Stitching,  tearing,  pressing,  burning  pains  deep  in  ear,
extending  to  cheek ;  ear  burns  externally,  feels  cold
internally  ;  pinching  and  pressing ;  ear  moist.

■  Purulent  offensive  otorrhoea,  with  itching  in  ears;  vesic-

ular eruption  in  face,  each  vesicle  surrounded  by  a  red
areola ;  itching  nodular  eruption  on  legs.

■  Enlarged  cervical  glands;  frequent  otalgia;  chronic  dis-

charge of  profuse,  yellowish,  very  offensive  pus  from  ear ;
<  at  night;  pain  in  ears  at  night;  eruption  behind
ears. v.

■  Offensive  otorrhoea;  itching  in  ears. ^Syphilis.

■  Matter  flows  from both  ears; in  forepart  of  r.  ear  is  a

sac  of  matter  which,  when  touched,  discharged  through
ear;  pains  in  whole  r.  half  of  head  and  face,  she  was
unable  to  lie  on  that  side. s.

■  ■Bloody  and  offensive  matter  flows  from  r.  ear,  with  tear-

ing pain. s.

■  Thin  earwax  runs  from  both  ears. s.

■  ■Furuncles  or  boils  in  external  meatus.

■  Fungous  excrescences  in  ear. s.

■  Polypi  in  external  meatus,  which  is  inflamed, s.

■  Swelling  of  glands  under  ear;  also  inflammatory.
'Smell  and  Nose. ■Swellingof  nasal  bones;  painful  when

taken  hold  of. s.


MERCURIUS.  360

■  Nosebleed: when  coughing  and during sleep; blood

hangs  in  dark,  coagulated  string;  with  worm  symptoms,
bleeding  occurs  at  night.

■  Coryza,  with  much  sneezing, s.

I  I  Food  and  drink  rise  up  into  choanse.

I I  Coryza:  with  much  sneezing;  fluent,  corrosive;  nostrils
bleeding,  scurfy;  nose  red,  swollen,  shining ;  <  from
damp  weather;  at  night;  from  either  cold  or  warm  air;
not  >  by  sweat ;  smell  from  nose  as  from  an  old  cold ;
inflammatory  redness  inside  of  nose ;  with  itching  and
formation  of  crusts  and  bleeding  on  cleansing  nose ;
chilliness  in  daytime,  obliged  to  lie  down;  copious  sour
smelling  sweat  at  night ;  part  of  mucus  trickles  down
through  posterior  nares  into  throat  and  causes  hawking,
with  catarrhal  inflammation  of  larynx,  trachea,  bronchi
and  eyes;  hoarseness  and  roughness  of  voice;  dry,  rough
cough  from  continual  tickling  in  larynx,  with  or  without
fever;  catarrhal  affection  of  frontal  sinuses  and  High-
morian  cavities,  pressive,  tensive,  tearing  pains  in  fore-
head, cheeks,  upper  teeth  and  ears;  inflammation  of
tonsils  and  fauces;  rheumatic  pains  in  limbs;  feverish;
does  not  like  to  be  alone ;  thirsty  ;  feels  bad  in  a  warm
room  and  cannot  bear  cold  either;  with  chilliness;
epidemic.

I  I  Fulness  and  pulsation  in  head  extending  into  nose;

heat  predominating  over  chilliness. ^Catarrh.

I I  Greenish,  fetid  pus  from  nose;  nasal  bones  swollen.

1 1  Acrid  matter  flows  from  nose,  having  odor  of  old
cheese, s.

■  The  nostrils  are  red,  raw  and  ulcerated. ^Coryza.
Swelling  of  whole or  only  tip  of  nose,  accompanied  by

pain  and  inflammation,  followed  by  cancer ; pus  thin,
ichorous  and  acrid. ^Cancer.
*  Upper  Face. iFace: pale,  yellow,  earthy; red  and  hot
cheeks;  pale  and  sunken;  earthy  colored,  puffy;  sallow;
pale  and  bloated  ; sickly,  pale  ;  swollen  ; pale,  cold  ;
livid;  jaundiced.
•  I  Swelling  of  cheeks  with  toothache.
1 1  Tearing,  lacerating  pains  in  face;  salivation;  from  cold
or  caries  of  teeth.

■  Neuralgia  of  trigeminus  from  taking  cold.
I  I  Swelling  or  breaking  out  of  upper  lip.

■  Yellow,  dirty  scurf,  with  fetid discharge,  itching and

bleeding  when  scratched.

■  ■Pimples  on  face  with  a  bluish  red  halo,  without  itching.
I  I  Forehead red,  presenting  a  number  of  small  orifices,

like  " worm  holes,"  exuding  serous  fluid; margins  of
holes,  which  communicated  with  frontal  bone,  some-


361  MERCURIUS.

what  elevated  ;  pain  in  forehead  when  in  bed,  and  sub-
ject to  severe  headache  up  to  time  when  forehead  was
affected, v.

I  I  Upon  forehead  between  ej^ebrows,  small  patches  of  a
pustular  eruption,  with  greenish  yellow  scabs.  ^Im-
petigo calvities. s.

■Syphilitic  spots  and  pustules  on  face  and  forehead, s.
*  Lower  Face. iTension  in  articulation  of  jaw  on  opening
mouth, s.

■  Tearing  in  lower  jaw  toward  evening, s.

■  Almost  complete  inability  to  move  lower  jaw  or  chew. v.

■  Cannot  separate  jaws. s.

■  Lockjaw  from  glandular  swellings,  with  stinging  pains.
.  ■  Periostitis  of  lower  jaw;  caries;  looseness  of  teeth,  which

are  painful  when  touched  by  tongue,  they  fall  out;
spongy,  easily  bleeding  gums;  stitches  in  teeth;  tooth-
ache <  from  heat.

■  Soft,  red  swelling  of  upper  lip.

■  Lips: painful  when  touched; dry,  cracked,  ulcerated;

black;  burning  pimples  with  yellow  crusts;  greatly
swollen,  puffed  out,  hssured;  thick  brown  crusts,  ex-
tending to  chin;  cannot  open  lips  or  taste  food.

■  iCorners  of  mouth  ulcerated  and  painfully  sore. s.

■  Yellowish  scabs,  especially  around  mouth.

■  ■Mumps:  on  r.  side  ;  pale  swelling; fever  slight  or  ab-

sent; high  degree  of  inflammation  ;  trismus;  in  young
scrofulous  subjects;  suppuration  threatens.

■  ■Inflammation  of  submaxillary  or  sublingual  glands.

^^  Teeth  and  Gums.  ■■  Toothache:  with  swelling  of  gums
and  salivary  glands;  at  night  as  it  disappears  great
chilliness  over  whole  body;  jerking,  especially  at  night;
a  pulselike  jerking  from  teeth  of  lower  jaw  into  ear,
from  upper  jaw  into  head,  with  painfulness  of  gum  from
9  P.M.  on;  from  caries,  or  inflamed  dentine;  returns  in
damp  weather  or  evening  air ;  pains  tearing,  lacerating,
shooting  into  face  and  ears ;  <  from  warmth  of  bed,
from  cold  or  warm  things;  >  from  rubbing  cheek.

■  Toothache  during  day  and  ceasing  at  night,  followed  by

perspiration  and  pains,  return  in  morning  in  parox-
ysms, with  longer  or  shorter  intervals,  alternating  with
giddiness  or  tearing  in  limbs.

■  Frequent  crackling  in  head, as  from  metal  plates;  swell-

ing of  gums;  sensation  as  if  teeth  were  fixed  in  a  mass
of  pap;  burning  and  itching  in  gums;  ptyalism;  chilli-
ness in  evening;  steaming  skin  and  tendency  to  sweat.

■  During  an  epidemic  of  influenza,  toothache  accompanied

by  fever.
■Stitching,  tearing  pains  in  liollow  and  carious  teeth, <  at


MERCURIUS.  362

night;  hard  painful  swelling  of  cheek;  profuse  accu-
mulation of  saliva  in  mouth;  offensive  breath.
■Toothache  commencing  in  a  molar  tooth,  commencing
slowly,  extending  up  to  temple,  getting  gradually  very
violent,  then  ceasing  suddenly,  attacks  repeated  every
few  minutes.

I  Teeth  sore  and  loose,  some  are  too  long. ^Pregnancy.

I I  Feeling  as  if  all  the  teeth  were  loose, s.
I  Teeth  feel  too  long  and  are  sensitive.

I  Teeth  are  loose;  at  last  drop  out. v.

IlLooseness  of  teeth,  especially  of  molars; they  become

denuded  of  the  gum  and  turn  black,  with  nightly  pains

in  teeth,  jaws  and  head. v.

I  All  teeth  except incisors  lost,  at  least  crowns  of  teeth,

leaving  only  roots,  with  very  red  and  very  soft  gums.  v.

llTeeth:  black,  dirty  grey,  carious,  become  loose  in  suc-
cession.

•Severe  throbbing  pain  in  1.  upper  jaw,  <  at  night ;  face
swollen;  tongue  whitish,  moist  and  flabby;  teeth  felt
too  long. V.

iCopious  salivation,  little  blisters  on  tongue,  gums  and
cheeks;  large  ulcers  on  protruding  gums;  salivation
arrested  from  taking  cold,  and  convulsions  occur;  diaper
stained  with  yellowish,  strong  smelling  urine ;  abdomen
hard  and  distended;  stools  slimy,  bloody,  green  and
accompanied  by  tenesmus. ^Dentition, s.

■  iGums  painful  to  touch,  swollen,  receding  from  teeth,

whitish  edges,  bleeding,  with  a  fetid  odor  from  mouth.

■  Pulsating  toothache  <  at  night;  gumboil.
iSwelling  of  gums  every  night, s.

iGums  red,  swollen  and  covered  with  thin,  white  patches,

easily  removed  from  a  nonulcerating  surface, v.
llGum  has  a  bright  red  margin, v.
.  I  Gums  swollen  and  of  a  livid  red  color, v.
llGums  spongy  and  bleeding,  partly  destroyed, v.

■  Gum  atrophies,  especially  on  roots  of  lower  teeth,  leaving

necks  of  teeth  bare. v.
"Taste  and  Tongue. uTaste:  sweetish;  illusive  sensation
as  if  body  was  made  up  of  sweets ;  slimy  ;  salty  on  tongue
and  lips;  of  bad  eggs;  bitter;  putrid; metallic;  flat;
fecal,  putrid.

I I  Bread  tastes  sweet, s.
I  Loss  of  taste.

•  Speech: quick,  stuttering; tremulous; impeded;  diffi-
cult. V.
I  Complete  loss  of  speech.

■  Difficulty  in  speaking  and  masticating, v.

■  I  Speech  difficult :  on  account  of  trembling  of  mouth  and

tongue;  masseter  muscles  contracted.


363  MERCURIUS.

iTongue:  swollen,  flabby ;  takes  imprint  of  teeth  ;  pale;
white;  tremulous;  dry,  hard;  red  and  dry;  red,  with
dark  spots  and  burning ;  moist,  with  intense  thirst.

llTongue  coated:  showing  impress  of  teeth;  thickly;  as
if  covered  with  fur,  especially  in  morning  ;  black ;  moist,
covered  with  mucus;  dirty  yellow,  w^th  foul  breath;
black,  with  red  edge.

I  Tongue  inflamed,  indurated  or  suppurating,  with  pricking
pains.

I  Tongue  not  swollen;  grey  patches  on  edges  and  a  thin
dirty  yellow  coat  on  upper  surface, v.

I  Great  swelling  of  tongue, s.

I  Tongue  very  much  swollen,  painful  and  covered  with  foul
ulcers,  with  constant  oozing  of  blood  as  from  a  spongy
tissue ;  these  ulcers  made  swallowing  very  difficult, v.

I  For  several  days  constant  crying;  child  desires  nothing
but  drinks;  tongue  and  gums  very  red,  swollen  and
covered  with  white  vesicles ;  fever ;  restlessness ;  sleep-
lessness.

I  Pricking  pain  in  tongue,  with  swelling,  pressure  on  tongue
painful.

I  Tongue  as  white  as  chalk.

I  Intense  redness  of  tongue;  severe  pain,  especially  on  side
from  contact  of  teeth ;  profuse  salivation  and  tendency
to  fissures  or  ulceration ;  <  from  least  contact  of  food,
drink  or  even  cold  air ;  cries  and  wrings  hands  in  agony ;
offensive  breath  and  saliva. ^Glossitis.

iRanula.
^^  Inner  Mouth, i  iDry  mouth  and  throat.  '

B  Mouth  and  tongue  moist,  and  plenty  of  saliva,  yet  great
thirst  for  cold  water.

I  Much  slime  collects  in  mouth.

■  ■Salivation:  saliva  fetid  or  tastes  metallic,  coppery;  ten-

acious ;  soapy  and  stringy.

■  Bloody  saliva, v.

■  Salivation  arrested  from  taking  cold,  then  convulsions.
I  I  Profuse  flow  of  saliva,  breath  has  a  mercurial  odor.

^Hysteria.
I  I  Ptyalism,  with  nausea  waking  her  from  sleep,  particu-
larly after  midnight. ^Pregnancy,

■  Mouth  sore  and  studded  with  small  vesicles. ^Scarlatina.
I  1  Salivation  and  scorbutic  gums. ^Crusta  lactea.
■Odor from  mouth: bad,  fetid;  disagreeable,  sw^eetish;

very  offensive,  more  noticed  by  persons  at  distance  than
by  patient  himself.
■Sickly  smell  from  mouth. ^Chronic  diarrhoea.

■  Mucous  membrane  of  mouth  pale,  with  numerous  ero-

sions. V.


MERCURIUS.  364

I  Bluish  color  of  inner  cheeks. ^Scurvy.
I  Internal  swelling  of  upper  lip. s.

I  Mouth  inflamed,  with  burning  aphthous  ulcers;  copious,

fetid,  ropy  saliva;  scorbutic  gums;  large  blisters  in
mouth  ;  whole  mouth  sore.

I I  Aphthae  of  children,  stomacace.

■  Inflammation  in  whole  buccal  cavity. ^Thrush.
iConfluent  thrush,  changing  into  cankers;  ptyalism;  bad

smell  from  mouth  ;  feverishness ;  green,  slimy  stools.

■  Thrush;  constant  crying ;  emaciation;  tongue  as  if  cov-

ered with  thick,  white  fur;  deglutition  difficult;  will  not
nurse;  grass  green  passages  from  bowels;  no  discharge
of  urine  for  thirty-six  hours;  coldness.
■Small  ulcers,  with  lardaceous  base and red inflamed
edges  on  tongue  and  inside  of  lips  and  cheeks.

■  After  catarrhal  or  gastric  fever,  small  round  vesicles  upon

reddened  mucous  membrane  of  mouth,  which  soon  open
and  form  flat  ulcers  with  red  edges  and  white  or  yellow-
ish base.

■  Confluent  ulcers  in  mouth,  with  ptyalism  ;  offensive  odor

from  mouth.

■  Oval  ulcer  on  gum,  nearly  an  inch  in  length,  with  irreg-

ular edges;  ulcer  also  at  corner  of  mouth  ;  small  ulcers
on  mucous  membrane  of  cheek  ;  ptyalism.
■Scorbutic  gums;  saliva  copious,  offensive,  bloody;  ulcers
with  bases  like  lard;  inflammation  of  whole  buccal
cavity  and  ulcers  upon  gums  ;  glands  swollen;  diarrhoea,
with  tenesmus.

■  Diff'use  redness  of  whole  mucous  membrane  of  mouth,

with  profuse  flow  of  saliva,  ^Stomatitis  from  use  of
chewing  gum. s.

■  After  typhoid  fever,  painful  cracks  on  tongue  and  ulcers

on  inner  surface  of  lips  and  cheeks;  blandest  food  causes
intolerable  biting  pains.

■  Ulcers:  appear  on  gums,  tongue,  throat,  inside  of  cheek,

with  salivation;  irregular  in  shape;  undefined  edges;
dirty,  unhealthy  look ;  lardaceous  base,  surrounded  with
a  dark  halo ;  apt  to  run  together ;  the  syphilitic  ulcers
are  circular,  attack  posterior  parts  of  mouth,  have  well-
defined  edges,  surrounded  with  a  coppery  hue,  they  do
not  extend  from  their  primary  seat. v.

■  Syphilitic  ulceration  of  mouth;  ulcers  rapidly  affect  sur-

rounding parts,  tonsils,  larynx  and  pharynx  becoming
aff'ected ;  ulcers  extend  in  depth,  begin  to  suppurate  or
emit  an  offensive  odor;  voice  becomes  hoarse,  child  be-
comes emaciated  and  death  threatens  from  slow  fever.

■  Orifice  of  excretory  duct  of  salivary  gland  between  last

teeth,  swollen,  white,  ulcerated  and  extremely  painful,  s.


365  MERCURIUS.

1 1  Pain,  swelling  and  ulceration  of  salivary  glands, s.
I  Right  sublingual  glands  as  large  as  hazel  nuts,  and  very

hard. v.
iRanula,  r.  side;  had  been  opened  several  times  and  half

a  teacupful  of  fluid  removed,  but  always  returned  five

or  six  days  afterwards.
"  Throat. I  Uvula  elongated,  enlarged,  greatly  swollen.

1  Redness  and  swelling  of  soft  palate,  tonsils  and  whole

oral  cavity.
iSoft  palate  and  especially  uvula  of  a  coppery  red  color;

on  1.  side  a  long,  superficial  ulcer, v.
■Dryness  of  palate,  as  if  caused  by  heat;  constantly  obliged

to  swallow.
I  Difficult  deglutition.

■  Fluids  return  through  nose.

■Sticking  pains  in  tonsils  when  swallowing.

■  Pain  when  swallowing  as  if  a  foreign  body  was  swallowed

down.

■  Burning  in  throat  as  from  hot  vapor  ascending  from

stomach.

■  Great  heat  rises  to  throat, s.

■  Painful  dryness  of  throat,  with  mouth  full  of  saliva;  raw-

ness, roughness  and  burning  in  throat.

■  ■Throat  constantly  dry;  it  hurt  as  if  too  tight  posteriorly;

a  pressure  in  it  if  he  swallowed,  yet  he  was  constantly
obliged  to  swallow,  because  mouth  was  always  full  of
water, s.

■  Pain  in  throat,  as  if  an  apple  core  was  sticking  in  it. s.

■  Stitches  posteriorly  in  throat,  penetrating  ear  when  swal-

lowing, s.

■  Angina:  great  dryness  in  mouth  and  throat;  expectora-

tion of  masses  of  mucus  from  pharynx  and  choanse;
ptyalism;  face  pale  red;  1.  side  swollen;  dry  heat,  with
confusion  of  head ;  burning  skin ;  constant  thirst ;  fre-
quent, strong  pulse;  severe  chill,  with  drawing  in  limbs
and  lassitude;  nauseating  belching;  beating  in  1.  pree-
cordia;  severe  drawing  pain  in  nape  and  down  back;
pain  in  parotid  glands  and  muscles  of  neck,  not  <  by
motion;  fever  <  in  evening;  thick,  white  coat  on
tongue;  stitching  pain  in  throat  when  moving  jaw;
pain  extending  to  ears ;  vertigo  when  rising;  stitches  in  '
occiput,  with  slight  cough;  severe  headache,  particularly
in  1.  temple;  severe  dull  pain  in  occiput;  skin  of  head
and  face  seems  tense;  fauces  of  a  coppery  red  color;
soft  palate  and  tonsils  greatly  swollen,  dark  red  and
pressed  forward;  stinging  pains  from  empty  swallowing
at  night  and  in  cold  air;  <  Spring  and  Fall  and  in  wet,
cold  weather;  epidemic,  young  people  especially  affected;
chronic  or  habitual.


MERCURIUS.  .  366

I  Inflammation  of  throat,  extending  upwards  into  posterior

nares  and  downwards  into  lar3aix ;  increased  secretion
of  acid  saliva.
■Sensation  as  if  food  had  to  pass  over  a  foreign  body;  as
if  there  was  a  burnt  spot  in  pharynx ;  when  not  swal-
lowing painful  tension  and  pressure  in  region  of  pharynx,
<C  from  external  pressure.

I I  Suppuration  of  tonsils,  with  sharp, sticking pain in
fauces  when  swallowing, s.

■  Tonsils  much  enlarged, v.

■  Tonsils  dark  red;  studded  with  ulcers;  stinging  pains  in

fauces;  quinsy  only  after  pus  has  formed  to  hasten
maturing.

■  Ulcer  as  large  as  point  of  knitting  needle  upon  inflamed

tonsils. ^Angina.

■  Slimy  saliva  flowing  in  strings  from  mouth,  of  a  greyish

color;  whitish,  smeary  concretions  upon  tonsils.

■  Mucous  membrane  of  pharynx  swollen  in  spots, v.

■  Trickling  of  mucus back  into  pharynx;  swelling  and

excoriation;  itching  and  bleeding  of  nose;  bad  looking
pimple  on  nose;  unpleasant  odor. ^Pharyngeal  catarrh.

■  Headache;  fever;  vomiting; convulsions;  unconscious-

ness, with  somnolency;  swelling  of  r.  tonsil,  with  some
whitish  grey,  soft  exudate. ^Diphtheria, s.

■  Diphtheritic  membrane commences  in  one  of  arches  of

pharynx  or  in  uvula;  mucous  membrane  of  throat  pur-
plish ;  tongue  dirty  grey,  flabby,  and  takes  imprint  of
teeth ;  ptyalism,  bleeding  of  gums ;  submaxillary  glands
and  parotids  swollen  hard,  trismus;  profuse,  clammy
sweat  at  night;  desire  for  milk. ^Diphtheria, s.

■  Erysipelatous  inflammation  of  throat.

■  Syphilitic  ulcers  in  throat  and  mouth.

■  Syphilitic  ulcers  in  throat  after  local  treatment  of  chancre

upon  genitals.

■  Mucous  patches  in  throat,  swollen  glands,  r.  side,  fever.

■  Slight  redness  of  throat; several  flat  ulcers;  <  in  bad

weather;  tickling  in  throat,  stitches  when  swallowing;
two  small,  flat  ulcers  upon  genitals. ^Syphilis.

■  Angina  faucium,  with  grey  ulceration,  hoarseness,  fetor

of  breath. ^Secondary  syphilis.

■  Lymphatic  glands  of  throat  hard  and  large.

^*  Appetite,  Thirst.  Desires,  Aversions.  ■  Canine  hunger
even  after  eating;  relishes  nothing;  grows  weaker  and
weaker. ^Worms.

■  Complete  loss  of  appetite, s.

■  Much  thirst  day  and  night, s.

■  Thirst  violent,  burning,  especially  for beer  and cold

drinks.


367  MERCURIUS.

■  Great  thirst  for  ice  water,  though  it  makes  cough  worse.

^Bronchitis.

I  Desire :  for  milk ;  for  sweets,  but  they  disagree ;  for  beer ;
for  liquid  food;  for  bread  and  butter, s.

Aversion: to  meat; to  wine  and  brandy; to  coffee;  to
greasy  food ;  to  butter, s.
^*  Eating and Drinking. ■  Worse after drinking ; from
drinking  wine;  from  spirituous  liquors; from  coffee;
from  cold  drinks.

Better:  from  smoking.
^•^  Hiccough, Belching, Nausea  and  Vomiting. ■  i  Fre-
quent hiccough, s.

■  Acrid,  bitter,  putrid  or  rancid  eructations,  <  at  night.
Constant  risings  of  air.

■  Heartburn  all  night. ^Pregnancy.

■  Nausea;  with  vertigo, headache,  obscured vision and

flashes  of  heat;  with  sweet  taste  in  throat;  nausea  in
oesophagus  or  in  stomach.
I  I  Inclination  to  vomit  while  coughing, s.

■  Regurgitation  or  vomiting  of  food;  bitter  vomit.

■  Much  water  collects  in  mouth  at  1  a.m.,  together  with

nausea,  that  wakens  her  and  obliges  her  to  vomit, s.
I  I  Vomiting  bile  and  fo  d.
I  I  Violent  convulsive  vomiting  of  slime  and  bilious  matter.

^Yellow  fever.
"  Scrobiculum  and  Stomach. The  food  weighs  like  a  stone

in  pit  of  stomach  ;  burning  pain.
I  I  Pressure  in  stomach  ;  it  hangs  down  heavily,  even  after

light,  easily  digestible  food.

■  Burning  pain  and  sensitiveness  of  stomach.  ^Yellow  fever.
■Stomach:  burns,  is  swollen  and  sensitive  to  touch;  hard

and  tense;  feels  replete  and  constricted.

■  Peculiar  deathly  faintness  caused  by  pressure  in  epi-

gastrium, s.

■  Weak  digestion,  with  continuous  hunger.
^^Hypochondria.  ■  Pressing  pain  or  stitches  in  liver;  can-
not lie  upon  r.  side;  bitter  taste  in  mouth;  thirst,  with
little  appetite  for  food  ;  constant  chilliness;  yellowness
of  skin  and  whites  of  eyes;  liver  tender  to  touch.
^Hepatitis.

■  Great  distension  of  1.  hypochondrium ; pains  not  very

severe,  mostly  stitching  in  character ;  pain  in  shoulders ;
light  yellow  color  of  skin;  flabby  constitutions.  /^Hepa-
titis.

■  Inflammation  of  pleura  and  liver; severe  vertigo;  face

yellow  or  dark  red ;  great  thirst ;  white  coated  tongue ;
debility;  severe,  obstinate,  short  cough,  with  tenacious,
blood  streaked  or  entirely  bloody  expectoration;  stitch-


MERCURIUS.  368

ing  tearing  pains  under  false  ribs  and  in  hepatic  region  ;
loss  of  appetite ;  offensive,  bitter  taste  in  mouth  ;  yellow,
orange  colored  or  red  urine;  frequent  sweats;  pains  in
limbs.

I  Face  red,  bloated  ;  lips  dry  and  hot ;  tongue  white,  moist ;
sour,  bitter  taste  in  mouth ;  great  thirst ;  forcible  eruc-
tations ;  frequent  vomiting  of  bile  and  water ;  great
tension  of  prsecordium  ;  severe  stitching,  burning  pain
in  whole  convex  portion  of  liver,  extending  to  spine;
<  from  pressure,  sneezing,  coughing,  or  on  taking  deep
inspiration ;  moans  and  throws  herself  about  in  bed ;
liver  greatly  swollen,  hard,  hot  and  projects  from  under
ribs ;  constipation ;  urine  frequent,  burning ;  skin
moderately  warm;  pulse  small,  hard,  contracted.  ^In-
flammation of  liver.

■Region  of  liver:  sensitive;  cannot  lie  on  r.  side;  swol-
len, hard,  from  induration  ;  stinging,  stitching  or  press-
ing pains ;  dull  pain,  with  jaundice.

Iljaundice:  with  violent  rush  of  blood  to  head;  bad
taste ;  tongue  moist  and  furred  yellow ;  soreness  in
hepatic  region ;  from  gall  stones ;  duodenal  catarrh ;  in
the  new  born.

■  Violent  stitches  in  hepatic  region,  on  account  of  which

he  could  not  breathe  nor  eructate, s.
■Worse lying  on  r.  side,  particularly  pain  in  region  of
liver,  or  bruised  feeling  of  intestines.

■  Chronic  atrophy  of  liver,  with  emaciation  and  dessica-

tion  of  body.  v.
^^  Abdomen.  l Abdomen:  greatly  distended;  tympanitic;
painfully  inflated ;  tense,  hard,  swollen  and  sensitive ;
fulness  and  tenderness  across  epigastrium  and  hypo-
chondria ;  painful  to  contact ;  rumbling  sensation ;
pressure  as  from  a  stone ;  pressure  in  r.  side ;  sense  of
emptiness.
I  I  Shaking  sensation  of  bowels  when  walking,  they  feel
relaxed,  as  if  they  had  to  be  held  up.

■  Intestines  feel  bruised  when  he  lies  on  r.  side.
■Sensation  as  if  bowels  fell  to  side  on  which  one  is  lying.

■  Intestines  sore  as  if  pressed,  cannot  sleep  on  r.  side. s.
I  I  Shooting,  diarrhoeic  feeling  in  lower  bowels.

■  Colic:  >  by  a  slimy,  bloody  stool,  with  straining ;_  as

from  a  cold;  occasioned  by  cool  evening  air,  with  diar-
rhoea; from  worms;  lancinating,  boring  and  pressing
pains;  stabbing  in  abdomen  as  from  knives;  passes
off"  in  a  recumbent  position  ;  twisting,  constricting  pains.

I  I  Cutting  stitch  in  lower  abdomen,  from  r.  to  1.,  <  by
walking.

I  I  Stitching,  pressive  pains  in  lower  region  of  abdomen^
1.  side.


369  MERCURIUS.

I  Child  cries  violently  from  severe  pain,  >  by  passing  a

green,  slimy  stool. ^Bilious  colic, s.
I  Peritonitis, with purulent exudation, especially with

typhlitis.

■  Painful,  hard,  hot  and  red  sw^elling  in  ileo-csecal  region

painful  to  touch. ^Typhlitis.

■  Enteritis:  lancinating  pains;  bloody,  slimy  stools;  sweat

without  relief.
I  I  Sore  pain  deep  in  centre  of  pelvis,  severe  dragging  in
loins  and  lumbar region,  bearing down pressure  in
low^er  abdomen  ;  mental  depression.

■  Cutting  pain  in  intestines,  <  when  feces  or  air  passes

through  affected  parts;  slimy,  watery  stools,  often  mixed
with  blood.  ^Inflammation  of  intestinal  mucous  mem-
branes.

■  Painful,  hard,  hot,  movable  swelling,  as  hard  as  a  hen's

egg,  near  r.  ilium,  preventing  extension  of  thigh  ;  con-
stipation ;  dark  urine  ;  miserable,  pale  appearance  ;  loss
of  appetite  ;  moderate  thirst ;  fever, ^Perityphlitis.

■  Hard,  hot,  red  swelling,  as  large  as  a  dollar  and  painful

to  touch,  between  umbilicus  and  anterior  inferior  spine
of  ilium  ;  must  lie  upon  back  with  thigh  flexed  ;  fever ;
flushed  face;  thirst;  anorexia;  red,  dry  tongue ;  con-
stipation ;  red  urine. ^Perityphlitis.

■  Catarrh  of  pancreatic  duct.

■Stitches  in  last  r.  rib  and  in  inguinal  region,  with  tight-
ness of  breath  on  inspiration,  wJiile  walking  in  open
air. s.


ness, not  very  painful,  except  on  pressure  and  long
walking,  s.
■Swelling  of  inguinal  glands  (bubo),  at  first  with  circum-
red,  elevated  and  inflamed ;  could  neither  stand  nor
walk  without  great  pain. s.

■  Inguinal  gland  swollen  or  suppurating.

■  Inguinal  glands  sympathize  with  cancerous  affections.

■  Pressive  boring  pain  in  r.  groin, s.

■  Zona  on  r.  side  and  extending  across  abdomen;  <  at

night  from  warmth  of  bed.

I  i  Abdomen  externally  cold  to  touch.
"'^  Stool  and  Rectum.  ■■  Stools:  dark  green,  bilious,  frothy;
like  stirred  eggs;  brownish;  greenish  brown;  watery
and  colorless;  black;  yellowish;  yellow;  color  of  sul-
phur ;  like  chopped  eggs  ;  greyish  ;  watery,  with  greenish
scum  floating  on  surface  of  water;  whitish,  watery,
reddish,  mucous  ;  green  mucous;  bloody  mucous ;  pea
green ;  green  slimy ; acrid  and  excoriating ;  bloody ;

VOL.  VII. — 24.


MERCUmUS.  370

blood  streaked ;  slimy  and  fecal ;  purulent ;  undigested ;
frequent ;  scanty  ;  corrosive ;  sour  smelling  ;  pitchlike ;
tenacious ;  dark  green  ;  clay  colored  and  offensive ;  clot-
ted blood  mixed  with  feces;  soft,  brownish,  floats  on
water;  whitish  grey.
I  iStools :  tenacious,  or  crumbling ;  small,  knotty  masses ;
small  like  sheep  dung;  pale,  white  stools;  small  pieces,
pale,  with  mucus,  or  streaked  with  blood ;  form  of  a
narrow  ribbon.

■  Before  stool:  frequent desire,  < at  night; ineffectual

straining;  protrusion  of  hemorrhoids,  with  straining
which  causes  pain  as  of  ulceration ;  violent  and  fre-
quent urging;  nausea;  pinching  and  cutting  in  abdo-
men ;  anxiety,  anguish,  trembling  and  sweat,  either
warm  or  cold;  chilliness;  chilliness  mingled  with
flashes  of  heat ;  trembling  of  whole  body.

I  During  stool:  great  straining,  with  scanty  stool,  with
pinching  in  belly;  severe  pains  in  anus;  evacuation  after
a  great  length  of  time;  violent  urging;  nausea  and
vomiting;  eructations;  pinching  and  cutting  colic,  mak-
ing one  bend  double;  burning  at  anus;  chilliness;  hot
sweat  on  forehead;  tenesmus;  screaming  (children  in
dysentery);  chilliness,  ceasing  after  evacuation.

iChilliness  between  stools.

I  After  stool :  great  relief;  cutting  and  pinching  colic ;  raw-

ness, burning  and  itching  of  anus  and  adjacent  parts;
sensation  of  constriction  in  rectum,  causing  faintness;
continued  tenesmus  and  prolapsus  ani;  bleeding  hemor-
rhoids; pains  in  rectum  sometimes  extend  to  back;
violent  tenesmus  and  continued  urging;  "never-get-
done"  feeling;  prolapsus  recti;  rectum  looking  dark
and  bloody;  warm  sweat  on  forehead  becomes  cold  ;  ex-
haustion; rigors;  trembling.
iDiarrhoea,  with  much  wretchedness  and  dejection  of
spirits, s.

I I  Evening  air  causes  colic  and  diarrhoea, s.

I  Morning  diarrhoea  composed  mostly  of  slime  and  fecal
matter,  with  tenesmus  before  and  during  stool, s.

I  Purulent  diarrhoea,  with  chill  between  and  hot  flashes
during  stool.

■  Frequent  vomiting; nausea; diarrhoea; much  crying;

thirst,  great  heat;  trembling  of  hands;  inability  to
stand;  loud  screaming  when  touched;  restless  at  night;
convulsive  motions;  distortion  of  eyes;  twitching  of
muscles  of  face,  arms  and  legs ;  grinding  of  teeth ;  face
red,  hot;  profuse  sweat;  diarrhoeic  discliarges,  every
half  hour,  of  yellow,  green,  frothy  mucus.
IDiarrhoea  of  children,  about  fourth  month  ;  stools  green,


371  MERCURIUS.

often  grass  green ;  watery ;  slimy ;  frothy  ;  like  chopped
eggs;  mixed  with  bloody  mucus;  much  screaming;  cut-
ting in  abdomen ;  emaciation ;  also  in  older  children
when  aphthae  are  present.
I  Long  continued  diarrhoea,  with  a  swelling  size  of  fist  in
region  of  transverse  colon.

■  Diarrhoea  biliosa;  passage  of  quantities  of  bile,  yellow

and  painfully  hot;  face  yellow;  pain  and  tenderness
over  r.  hypochondrium.
I  After  cholera,  when  stools  remain  bloody  and  watery  and
are  accompanied  by  tenesmus  (also  useful  after  Ipec);
when  choleraic  symptoms  are  >  and  partial  reaction
has  set  in,  but  tongue  becomes  thickly  coated  with  mucus.

■  Painless  congestions;  spine  drawn  to  one  side,  tossing

about,  grinding  of  teeth  and  trismus,  as  in  epilepsy;
thumlas  not  clenched;  preceded  by  an  attack  of  diar-
rhoea and  vomiting;  about  every  half  hour  return  of
consciousness,  during  which  he  desires  water,  then
spasms  recur.
■Ineffectual  pressure  to  stool,  with  protruding  hemorrhoids,
which  are  painfully  sore. s.

■  Dysenteric  diarrhoea  in  a  nursing  infant;  passages  often

of  pure  bright  blood,  occasionally  mixed  with  mucus  or
green  choppedlike  stuff;  fever;  refusal  to  take  breast.

■  Green  slim}^  discharges,  with  pinching  and  cutting;  pro-

lapsus of  rectum.

■Fever,  with  violent  griping;  scanty,  bloody,  mucous  dis-
charges, with  much  burning  pain  and  tenesmus;  dry,
coated  tongue ;  loss  of  appetite ;  tearing  in  limbs.  ^Dys-
entery.

■Frightful  pain  in  bowels,  as  if  they  were  cut  in  pieces,
most  violent  when  at  stool ;  great  pressure  at  stool,  as  if
bowels  would  be  forced  out;  discharge  of  a  little  bloody
mucus  after  straining;  increased  desire  to  go  to  stool  at
night;  during  stool  sweat  on  brow,  at  first  warm,  but
soon  becoming  cold  and  clammy;  sleeplessness;  great
prostration ;  evacuations  corrode  anus,  and  cause  pain-
ful burning. ^Autumnal  dysentery.

■Rectum  prolapsed;  looked  dark  and  was  very  painful,
especially  to  touch ;  spurting  of  blood  from  rectum  ;
stools  lumpy,  accompanied  by  pressing  and  crying;  loss
of  appetite;  little  sleep;  irritable  disposition.

■  Croupous  inflammation  of  rectum  after  catching  cold

while  bathing  in  open  air;  croupous  stools  occur  princi-
pally at  night  and  alternate  with  a  pappy  fecal  stool ;
constant  sensation  of  fulness  and  distension  in  rectum,
with  burning  and  pinching  in  lower  part;  every  hour
or  so  discharge  of  a  round,  shreddy  mass,  accompanied


MERCURIUS.  372

by  a  watery,  fecal  discharge,  with  chiHIness  and  heat,,
extending  towards  head;  abdomen  not  painful  to  press-
ure, except  in  a  few  places  where  large  intestine  is  dis-
tended with  gas;  rumbling  and  slight  pinching  pains
in  abdomen;  urine  scanty;  appetite  impaired;  thick,
mucous  coating  on  tongue;  great  prostration.

I  I  Constipation,  stool  tenacious  or  crumbling,  discharged
only  with  violent  straining;  constant  ineffectual  urging^.
<  at  night ;  blood  with  stool, s.

I  Constipation,  or  diarrhoea  of  slime,  bile  or  blood.  ^Yel-
low fever.

■  Discharge  of  mucus  from  rectum.

I  I  Paralysis  of  rectum. ^Meningitis.
I  Burning  pain  in  anus,  with  soft  stools, s.
I  Anus  feels  raw;  chafed, s.

■Large  bleeding  varices,  which  suppurate;  hemorrhage-
g,fter  micturition.

■  ■Discharge  of  thread  and  round  worms; seat  worms;,

tape  worm  (in  alternation  with  Sulphur).

■  Continuous  greediness  for  eating  and  still  becomes  stead-

ily weaker;  fetid  breath;  itching  of  anus;  inflamma-
tion of  vulva,  ^Worm  affections.
^^  Urinary  Organs.  ■Great  soreness  in  region  of  bladder
when  touching  it ;  urine  flows  in  a  thin  stream  or  only
drop  by  drop  ;  contains  mucus,  blood  or  pus.  ^Gonor-
rhoea. ^Cystitis.
I  I  Paralysis  of  bladder. ^Meningitis.

■  Urine  is  passed  involuntarily.

■  ■Frequent  urging  to  urinate,  only  a  little  passes ;  must

hurry,  otherwise  he  cannot  retain  it ;  scanty  discharge
in  feeble  stream;  copious  flow;  was  obliged  to  urinate
at  every  hour,  da}'^  and  night,  with  violent  burning  in
urethra  on  beginning  to  urinate ;  burning  biting  pain,  s.

■  Far  more  urine  passes  than  water  has  been  drunk, s.

■  Urine:  dark  red,  soon  becoming  turbid  and  fetid;  smells

sour  and  pungent ;  looks  as  if  mixed  with  blood,  with
white  flakes  or  as  if  containing  pus;  fleshlike  lumps
of  mucus  ;  thick,  white  sediment  as  if  flour  had  been
stirred  in;  yellowish,  strong  smelling,  staining  diaper;,
scanty,  fiery  red  ;  very  dark.

■  Children  perspire  easily,  urine  hot,  acrid,  sour  smelling.

^Enuresis  nocturna.

■  Hsematuria:  with  violent  and  frequent  urging  to  urinate;

in  typhus,  etc.
■Urine  reddish,  becoming  thick  on  standing,  and  causing
cutting  when  passed, s.

■  Intolerable  burning;  every  few  minutes  urging  to  uri-

nate, followed  by  discharge  of  a  few  drops  of  slimy,,,
burning  urine. ^Dysuria.


373  MERCURIUS.

I  Cutting  and  pinching  in  abdomen,  with  great  urging  to
urinate ;  after  much  exertion  and  great  pain  passes  a
few  drops  of  burning  urine,  accompanied  by  severe  and
constant  tenesmus  ;  bloated  abdomen  ;  belcliing ;  nausea;
retching  and  vomiting ;  sleeplessness ;  <  at  night ;  in
morning,  vertigo,  heaviness  of  head,  thirst,  tearing,  con-
stricting pinching  pains  in  abdomen. ^Dysuria.

I  Diminished  secretion  of  urine,  with  great  desire  to  pass
it ;  urine  saturated  dark  brown,  mixed  with  blood,  with
dirty  white  sediment. ^Nephritis.

•  Albuminuria

■  Hemorrhage  from  urethra,  burning  and  stinging  it.

B  Thick,  greenish  or  yellow  discharge  from  urethra,  <  at
night. ^Gonorrhoea.

I  Painless  discharge  of  blood.

■  Burning  and  scalding  sensation  of  urine  as  from  raw

surfaces, s.

I I  Intense  itching,  <  by  presence  of  urine  remaining  on
parts  after  urinating;  it  has  to  be  washed  off.

^^  Male  Sexual  Organs, i  Total  loss  of  sexual  power, v.

■  Lascivious  excitement,  with  painful  nightly  erections.

■  Pollutions;  sperm  mixed  with  blood  (gonorrhoea);  chilli-

ness; sallow  face;  constipation.

■  After  emission  burning  pain  in  back  and  icy  cold  hands.

^Spermatorrhoea.

■  Feeling  of  coldness  in  testicles,  in  afternoon  and  evening,  s.

■  Testicles  swollen,  hard,  shining.

■  Violent  thirst;  drawing  with  pressure  in  testicles;  draw-

ing in  groin  and  spermatic  cord. ^Orchitis.

■  Inflammation  of  testicles,  consequent upon  an  attack  of

gonorrhoea ;  induration  of  testicles.

■  ■  Burning  in  urethra.

■  Gonorrhoea:  burning  pain; frequent  painful  erections;

discharge  purulent  and  green;  <  at  night;  greenish,
painless;  with  phimosis  or  chancroids;  complicated  with
chancre;  gleet  yellowish  green  and  purulent.

■  Gonorrhoea  of  two  weeks'  standing,  treated  with  injections

of  various  kinds ;  pain  in  1.  testicle  and  along  cord ;  pain-
ful erections ;  not  very  profuse  discharge,  much  nervous-
ness and  anxiety,  <  at  night.

■  Right  testicle  swollen,  hard,  as  large  as  a hen's  egg;

shocks  of  severe  drawing  pain,  extending  from  testicles
up  into  abdomen  and  down  legs  to  feet;  scrotum  red,
shining,  <  r.  side;  itching  in  scrotum;  severe  chill
alternating  with  heat;  pulse  feverish;  vertigo;  general
depression;  tearing  in  head,  <  r.  side. ^Gonorrhoea.

■  Urging  to urinate; intolerable  burning  in  forepart  of

urethra  when  passing  last  few  drops;  hot,  swollen  pre-
puce; green  discharge. ^Gonorrhoea.


MERCURIUS.  ■  374

■  Discharge  greenish,  offensive  odor  from  mouth ;  ptyalism,

gums  swollen,  easily  bleeding,  fever,  heat  alternating

with  horripilations,  <  at  night,  tearing  pains  in  head;

threatened  bubo,  with  drawing  pain  in  inguinal  region;

soft  chancre.  ^Gonorrhoea.
I  Gonorrhoea  of  a  torpid  character  in  course  of  syj^hilis,

with  suppurating  bubo.  s.
I  I  Severe  burning  on  urination;  prepuce  and  glans  greatly

swollen;  discharge  like  thin  milk,  leaving  a  stain  upon

linen ; has taken Copaiba and Cubebs four weeks.

^Gonorrhoea.

■  Swelling  of  prepuce  and inflamed  redness  of  its  inner

surface,  with  painful  sensitiveness, s.

■  Great  swelling  of  prepuce,  as  if  it  was  distended  with  air

or  water  to  a  blister, s.

■Vesicles  on  forepart  and  sides  of  glans  penis;  they  eat
deeply  in  and  spread;  several  small  white  blisters,
which  also  ooze  fluid,  but  soon  disappear.

■Swelling  of  forepart  of  urethra,  with  suppuration  be-
tween glans  and  prepuce  which  is  red,  hot  and  painful
to  touch  and  on  walking;  raging  pain  in  forehead;
rough  itchlike  eruption  on  hands,  especially  in  region
of  first  joint  of  thumb,  more  on  upper  surface,  itching
at  night, s.

■Several  small  red  vesicles  on  end  of  glans  penis,  under
prepuce,  after  four  days  become  ulcers  and  discharge
yellow  white  matter  of  strong  odor,  staining  shirt;
afterwards  large  ulcers  bleed  when  touched,  pain  affects
whole  body ;  they  are  round,  the  margins  everted  like
raw  meat,  and  their  bases  covered  with  a  caseous  coat.  s.

■  Herpes  prseputialis.

■  Blisters  on  glans; burning  of  penis,  eruption  on  pre-

puce, condylomata, s.

■  Pale  red  vesicles,  form  small  ulcers  after  breaking,  on

glans  and  prepuce.

■  A  number  of  small  red  vesicles  behind  glans,  changing

to  ulcers,  which  burst  and  discharge  a  yellowish  white,

stringy,  strong  smelling  matter, s.
■Ulcers  on  glans,  with  cheesy  base;  chancroids.
■Simple,  recently  acquired,  soft  chancres  of  a  superficial

and  regular  form  and  free  secretion  of  thick  pus.

■  Chancre;  enlargement  of  glands; psoriasis  on  nape  of

neck;  nodes  on  tibia,  sensitive  to  pressure. ^'Secondary
syphilis.

■  Swelling  of  lymphatic  vessels  along  penis.

■  Chancre:  primary;  regular  indurated  Hunterian,  with

lardaceous  base ;  small,  with  cheesy  bottom  and  inverted
red  edges;  painful,  bleeding;  yellowish  fetid  discharge,


375  MERCURIUS.

spreading  and  deeply  penetrating  on  glans  and  prepuce ;
red  on  prepuce;  with  phimosis  or  paraphimosis ;  eating
through  frgenum;  round,  deep,  on  glans.

■  Several  small  ulcers  which  bleed  easil}^  so  soon  as  pre-

puce moves,  or  on  handling  parts ; painful  ulcers  on
glans  and  on  both  sides  of  frsenum ; pain  in  inguinal
region  on  walking,  no  redness  of  skin ;  heav}^  pressure
on  inguinal  glands  causes  pain. s. Chancre, s.
1 1  Foreskin  sore  ;  yellowish  pus  in  drops.

■  Rubbing  and  scratching  genitals  at  night  when  in  bed.

■  Children  scratch  and  pull  at  genitals.

1  I  Dry,  fine  vesicular  eruption  on  genitals, s.

■  Sweat  on  genitals,  soreness  between  scrotum  and  thighs.
^^  Female  Sexual  Organs. iProlapsus  uteri  et  vagina;  feels

>  after  coition.

■  Peculiar  weak  feeling  in  abdomen,  as  though  she  had  to

hold  it  up ;  close  above  genitals  sensation  as  if  some-
thing heavy  was  pulling  downward ;  pulling  pain  in
both  thighs,  as  if  muscles  and  tendons  were  too  short.
^Displacement  of  womb.

■  Bleeding  excrescences  on  os  uteri. ^Syphilis.

■  Copious  discharge  from  vagina,  of  muco-purulent  mat-

ter ;  <  after  catamenia,  but  constant ;  system  greatly
exhausted  by  flooding  and  repeated  miscarriages ;  con-
ceived readily  enough,  but  was  certain  to  lose  ovum  at
the  end  of  third  month,  if  not  before;  deep  ulcers  on
OS  and  in  cervix,  with  ragged  edges  which  bleed  freely
when  touched;  vaginal  walls  ulcerated,  prolapsus  uteri
and  vagina ;  sore  pain  deep  in  centre  of  pelvis ;  severe
dragging  in  loins  and  lumbar  regions  ;  bearing  down
pressure  in  lower  abdomen  ;  mental  depression.  ^Ul-
cerated cervix.

■  Stitching,  aching  or  boring  pains  in  uterus,  with  little

heat,  but  frequent  sweats  and  chills ;  moist  tongue,  with
intense  thirst ; <  at  night. ^Metritis.

■  Before  menses  :  dry  heat  and  rush  of  blood  to  head ;  dys-

menorrhoea.

■  During  menses:  anxiety;  red  tongue,  with  dark  spots;

saltish  taste,  sickly  color  of  gums,  teeth  on  edge  ;  breath
of  a  mercurial  odor  and  salivation ;  prolapsus  of  vagina;
pain  in  mammae,  as  if  they  would  ulcerate ;  oedematous
swelling  of  hands,  feet  and  face.

■  Milk  in  breasts  instead  of  menses.

■  Unnatural swelling  of female mammse,  especially  of

nipples,  which  were  harder  than  usual, s.

■  Pressure  in  genitals,  obliging  her  to  urinate  often, s.

■  Menses: blood  light  red,  serous; too  profuse;  too  late

and  scanty ;  suppressed ;  of  short  duration.


MERCURIUS.  376

I  I  Sterility.

I  I  Menses  irregular  for  two  or  three  years,  without  any  as-
signable cause ;  headache,  impaired  vision  and  mem-
ory ;  nervous  trembling,  hands  shake ;  complexion
muddy,  sallow,  greenish  ;  countenance  distrait ;  pulse
feeble ;  increasing  spinal  curvature ;  menstrual  function
ceases  for  three  or  four  months,  then  occurs  sparingly ;
general  anasarca ;  wali5:ing  produces  dyspnoea.

lAmenorrhcea,  with  congestions  and  ebullitions.

■  Metrorrhagia; attacks  of  fainting  following  each  other

in  rapid  succession;  face  cold, covered  with  sweat;  cold
extremities ;  breathing  imperceptible ;  attack  preceded
by  heat,  congestion,  anxiety,  dry  mouth,  belching,
mucous  collection  in  mouth  and  throat,  pressure  and
cutting  from  stomach  to  genitals,  dry  cough,  oppression
in  epigastrium ;  menses  irregular  or  every  two  weeks.

■  Metrorrhagia  in  aged  females;  scorbutic  gums;  salivation.
iLeucorrhoea: smarting,  corroding,  causing  itching  and

biting  in  genitals ;  purulent ;  containing  lumps ;  <  at
night ;  adhesive,  sticky ;  green,  bloody  ;  obliging  to
scratch,  violent  burning  after  scratching;  swelling  of
labia  and  vaginitis ;  flocks,  pus  and  mucus  as  large  as
hazelnuts  ;  syphilitic ;  sensitive  itching  of  labia  ma-
jora ;  swelling  and  sensitiveness  of  lymphatic  vessels  of
nymphse.

■  Burning,  throbbing  and  itching  of  vagina  and  external

genitals,  <  on  1.  side;  numbness  down  1.  leg;  swelling
in  hypogastrium,  abdomen  swelled ;  feels  hard  inter-
nally ;  yellow  discharge  from  vagina ;  on  mucous  surface
of  genitals,  reaching  as  high  up  as  she  could  see,  and
on  external  parts,  especially  near  urethra,  whitish
patches  like  aphthae ;  when  removed,  a  red  raw  surface
is  left,  uneven  to  touch,  with  little  red  elevations;
throbbing  >  by  lying  still ;  burning  <  from  cold  and
washing ;  cannot  go  to  closet  on  account  of  draft  of  air
causing  pain ;  thinking  about  pains  makes  them  <  and
makes  her  want  to  urinate:  contact  of  urine  makes
parts  burn ;  thrill  in  urethra  when  urine  passes ;  menses
delay,  v.  ^Vaginitis.
Hitching  of  genitals,  <  from  contact  of  urine,  it  must  be
washed  off.

■  Phlegmonous  swelling  of  labia. ^Abortion  threatened.

■  Pimples  or  tubercles  on  labia,  more  troublesome  at  night.

■  Indurations  and  inguinal  growths.

■  Parts  have  strong  tendency  to  excoriate,  to  swell  and

become  inflamed ;  sensation  of  rawness  in  parts,  s.
^Spasm  of  vagina.

■  ■Pruritus  vulvte.


^77  MERCUPJUS.

■  Swollen  labia,  with  soreness  of  groins.

2^  Pregnancy. Parturition. Lactation, n  Morning  sick-
ness; profuse  salivation,  wets  pillow  in  sleep.
iCEdema  or  pruritis  of  vulva  during  pregnancy.

■  Threatened  abortion;  frequent  attacks  of  pani  in  small

of  back ;  pressing  pulsation  in  abdomen;  pressure  towards
external  genitals,  which  were  so  swollen  that  sitting  pos-
ture became  difficult;  pressure  at  times  accompanied
by  discharge  of  reddish  mucus  from  genitals.

■  Repeated  miscarriages  at  end  of  third  month,  or  before.
Expels  moles.

I  I  Much  salivation,  constant  drivelling  from  mouth;  con-

vulsions mostly  in  extremities,  s.  ^Puerperal  convul-
sions.

■  Lochial  discharge,  <  at  night,  with  swelling  and  inflam-

mation of  genitals ;  swollen  and  sore  groins.

■  Milk  scanty  or  spoiled,  child  refuses  it;  nipples  raw  and

sore. /^Mastitis.

■  Pain  in  mamma)  at  every  menstrual  period,  as  if  they

would  ulcerate.

■  Mamma)  swollen,  hard,  with  sore,  maddening  pains,  ul-

cerated nipples;  suppuration  of  mamma),  favors  evacu-
ation of  pus.

I I  Cancer  mamma),  sore  pain,  a  sort  of  raw  feeling
Voice  and  Larynx. Trachea  and  Bronchia, i  Hoarse,

rough  voice;  burning,  rawness  and  tickling  in  larynx;
fluent  coryza  and  sore  throat;  <  from  least  current  of
air ;  sweat  without  relief

■  Lack  of  voice,  not  clear,  or  trembling.

■  Chronic  hoarseness;  tendency  to  swetit;  profuse  accumu-

lation of  saliva.

■  Aphonia,  catarrhal  or  syphilitic,  or  occasioned  by  nervous

paralysis.

■  Eyes  full  of  tears;  red  about  wings  of  nose;  much  sneez-

ing; dulness  of  head. /^^Hoarseness.

■  Intense  catarrhal  inflammation  of  throat,  with  mucous

follicles  swollen  to  size  of  hemp  seed.

■  Complete  aphonia  from  straining  voice  when  just  recov-

ered from  a  former  hoarseness;  talked  in  whisper,  every
attempt  to  talk  audibly  sent  blood  to  face  and  tears  to
eyes;  slight  burning  in  region  of  larynx.
■Stiffhess  of  neck,  dry,  racking  cough  and  occasional  ex-
pectoration of  blood. ^Chronic  laryngitis.

■  Laryngo  tracheitis.

■  Roughness,  burning,  sensation  of  soreness  in  throat  and

under  sternum,  hoarseness  and  covered  voice,  cough
dry,  rough,  concussive,  exhausting,  <  at  night;  expec-
toration tough,  watery,  like  saliva,  foul,  with  streaks  of


MERCURIUS.  378

blood; catarrhal headache;  fluent coryza;  diarrhoea;
fever ;  sweating  fails  to  relieve. ^Bronchitis.
■^•^Respiration, ii Fetid  breath, v.

■shortness  of  breath:  suffocation;  on  going  up  stairs  or
walking.

I  Anxious  oppression  and  heavy  breathing,  with  desire  to

take  deep  breath.

I I  Asthma  from  fumes  of  arsenic;  >  from  tobacco  smoke
and  in  cold  air.

I  I  Dyspnoea  ;  sensation  of  spasmodic  contraction  when
coughing  or  sneezing.
^^  Cough.  Cough:  violent  for  several  nights;  dry,  sounds  and
feels  as  if  everything  in  chest  was  dry ;  with  pain  in  chest
and  small  of  back;  dry,  wath  fluent  coryza;  short,  dry,
fatiguing,  caused  by  tickling  beneath  upper  portion  of
chest;  dry,  fatiguing,  racking;  in  two  paroxysms;  par-
ticularly at  night;  inability  to  lie  on  r.  side;  tickling
before  falling  asleep  ;  with  stitching  pains  in  chest ;  in
children;  with  nosebleed  ;  with  vomiting;  as  if  head  and
chest  would  burst;  with  hoarseness;  with  diarrhoea;  not
allowing  him  to  utter  an  audible  word;  spasmodic,  with
retching;  during  sleep;  excited  by  a  sensation  of  tick-
ling or  dryness  in  bronchia;  with  shortness  of  breath
and  ptyalism;  from  tickling  in  larynx  and  upper  part
of  chest;  only  at  night  or  only  by  day;  with  acrid  or
yellowish  mucus,  at  times  mixed  with  coagulated  blood
and  tasting  putrid  or  saltish.

I  I  Constant,  short  and  choking  cough. ^Dropsy  of  uterus.

iDuring  cough:  stitches  in  occiput,  chest,  back  and  scap-
ula; epistaxis;  offensive  breath ;  nausea,  retching,  vomit-
ing ;  secessus.

■  Whooping  cough:  two  paroxysms  in  rapid  succession  at
night,  followed  by  a  long  interval  of  rest ;  vomiting,  with
epistaxis,  blood  at  once  coagulating;  profuse  sweat  at
night;  children  who  were  previously  troubled  with
worms  (complementary  Carb.  veg);  involuntary  grass-
green  diarrhoea  during  paroxysm,  great  prostration
afterwards;  sweat  very  much  at  night  and  bleed  at
nose  and  mouth  with  every  coughing  spell;  either  by
day  or  by  night  only.

iCatarrh:  trachea;  inflammation  running  from  fauces
through  to  finest  bronchi ;  roughness,  burning,  feeling  of
soreness  from  fauces  down ;  hoarseness;  dry  cough,  raw,
concussive,  exhausting;  sputum  ropy,  watery,  spittlelike,
offensive,  bloody ;  headache;  coryza;  diarrhoea;  fever;
nonameliorating  night  sweats.

I  Cough  <  when  lying  on  r.  side. ^Bronchitis.

I  When  coughing  or  sneezing  a  stitch  runs  directly  through
chest  to  back. ^Hepatitis.


379  MERCURIUS.

I  Cough  <  in  night  air,  at  night  when  lying  on  1.  side.

I  Moist,  barking  cough,  with  some  sound  of  moisture  in
air  passages,  but  no  expectoration  ;  cough  ahiiost  con-
vulsive, cannot  be  controlled;  occurring  in  frequent
paroxysms,  particularly  from  9  a.m.  until  5  or  6  p.m.
^Measles.

I  Sputa  bloody,  in  consequence  of  destroj^ed  lung  paren-
chyma. ^Tuberculosis.
^^  Inner  Chest  and  Lungs. iSensation  of  dryness  in  chest.

I  Rush  of  blood  to  chest;  constriction;  soreness,  burning-
extending  to  throat.

I  Sharp  stitches  in  chest, s.

I I  Stitch  in  anterior  and  upper  portion  of  chest,  extending
through  to  back,  only  on  sneezing  or  coughing,  not  when
breathing;  it  constricts  chest, s.

I  I  Acute  pain  striking  forward  through  chest  from  r,
scapula, s.

■  Stitches  in  r.  chest  on  sneezing  and  coughing, s.

■  Stabbing  pain  in  1.  side  under  short  ribs  during  every

inspiration, s.
■Stitches  in  chest  through  from  r.  sca|)ula. (^Pneumonia,
with  bilious  symptoms.

■  For  several  days  before  attack,  bloody  diarrhsea;  cough

oppressive,  constant;  high  fever;  great  prostration;
respiration  short,  anxious,  quick,  with  rattling  on  chest
and  great  oppression  and  sobbing;  restlessness;  skin
moist;  sweat  about  head;  sleeplessness;  trembling  of
limbs;  constant  thirst  and  headache;  quick  pulse.
^Pneumonia.

■Fever;  full,  frequent  pulse;  confusion  of  head  and  ver-
tigo; pain  around  eyes;  dryness  of  nose;  eruption  at
corner  of  mouth  ;  loss  of  taste ;  dr}^  short  cough  caused
by  scratching  sensation  under  manubrium;  much  talk-

-  ing  during  sleep ;  sweat  towards  morning,  particularly
about  head. ^Pneumonia.

■  Asthenic  pneumonia,  with feeling  of  weight  in  lungs,

short  cough  and  expectoration  of  bloody  saliva.

■  Pneumonia  and  bronchitis,  especially  when  there  is  a  dis-

position to  blenorrhoea,  or  there  is  present  profuse  ex-
pectoration of  viscid  bloody  mucus.

■  Bilious  pneumonia,  with  great  tenderness  over  r.  hypo-

chondrium.

■  Infantile  lobular  pneumonia.

■  Emphysema  of  lungs, v.

■  ■  Debilitating  night  and  morning  sweats. ^Tuberculosis.
■Sputa  bloody  in  consequence  of  destroyed  lung  paren-
chyma, s. ^Phthisis.

■Acts  on  lower  part  of  r.  lung;  stitches  through  to  back.


MERCURIUS.  380

I  Suppuration  of  lungs  after  hemorrhages  of  pneumonia.
^^  Heart,  Pulse  and  Circulation, i  Weakness  at  heart  as  if
dying.

I  Awakens  with  trembling  at  heart  and  agitation  as  if
frightened.

I  Aching  pain  at  apex  of  heart  extending  upwards  towards
base ;  cardiac  oppression.

I  Palpitation :  with  fear  ;  <  at  night ;  on  slightest  exer-
tion ;  with  cough  and  bloody  expectoration.

■  Orgasm,  with  trembling  from  slight  exertion.

B Pulse:  full  and  accelerated,  with  erethism,  frequent  at
night,  slower  by  day ;  when  slow  it  is  weak  and  trem-
bling ;  imperceptible,  with  warmth  of  body ;  irregular,
generally  full  and  fast,  with  violent  beating  in  arteries,
at  times  weak,  slow,  tremulous.

I  Pulse  irregular,  quick,  strong  and  intermittent,  or  soft
and  trembling. ^Yellow  fever.
^^  Outer  Chest. Sweating  on  chest  with  old  people,  from  opium.
^^  Neck  and  Back. ■  Rheumatic  stiffness  and  swelling  of  neck.

B Swollen  glands  on  neck  painful  on  sw^allowing.  ^Rheu-
matism .

B  B Glands  inflamed,  swollen,  hard,  with  pressing  pain  and
stitches. V.

Goitre  becomes  softened.

I  I  Bruised  sensation  of  scapulse,  back  and  small  of  back.

1  I  Stinging  pains  in  small  of  back,  wdth  sensation  of
weakness.

I  I  Sticking  in  small  of  back,  on  breathing, s.

B  Violent  pain  in  spine,  <  from  motion. ^Meningitis.

I  i  Stitching  pain  in  small  of  back  and  legs  on  being
touched, s.

I  I  Stitching  pain,  with  unsteadiness  in  back,  knees  and
feet. s.

B  Erysipelatous  inflammation  extending  from  back  like
a  girdle  around  abdomen. dZoiva,.

I  1  Pricking  itching  in  sacrum  when  walking.

B Tearing  pain  in  coccyx,  >  by  pressing  hands  against
abdomen ;  pain  in  sacrum  as  if  one  had  been  lying  on
too  hard  a  couch ;  pricking  itching  in  sacrum  when  walk-
ing. ^Coccygodynia.

B  Acute  inflammation  of  vertebrse.

i  Myelitis ;  paraplegia  of  extremities,  of  bladder  and  anus,

with  tendency  to  twitching  and  shocks ;  severe  spinal

pains  <  from pressure ;  restlessness  and  sleeplessness ;

ansesthesia  of  skin.

^^  Upper  Limbs. ■  Rheumatism  of  shoulders  and  upper  arms.

B Rheumatic  affection  of  capsular  ligament  of  arm  ;  arm  as
if  too  heavy,  as  if  broken  or  beaten ;  <  at  night ;  can-
not tolerate  warmth  of  bed.


381  ^  MERCURTUS.

■  Lacerating  in  shoulder  joints,  arms  and  wrists,  especially

at  night  and  when  moving  part.
I  Red  and  hot  (arthritic)  swelling  from  elbow  to  wrist.
I  I  Burning,  scaly  herpes  on  forearms  and  hands.

■  Twitching  of  arms  and  fingers.

■  ■  Tremor  of  hands,  with  great  weakness, v.

■  Involuntary  trembling  of  hands ;  could  not  carry  a  glass

of  water  to  mouth  without  spilling  it ;  could  take  neither
food  nor  drink,  but  had  to  be  fed  like  a  child, v.

■  Frequent  involuntary  jerking  of  hands  and  fingers  ;  con-

vulsions <  by  every  exertion, v.

■  Eczema  on  1.  hand  gradually  spreads  to  fingers  and  up

to  arm.

■  Eczema  of  hands;  whole  dorsal  surface  of  both  hands

raw,  denuded ;  commenced  with  cracks  on  joints  ;  sting-
ing, burning  pain ;  surroundings  inflame  easily  after
scratching ;  every  Winter  for  a  number  of  years ;  moist
surface  becomes  dry  at  times,  forming  in  yellow  crusts.
■Eruption  like  moist  itch  on  hands,  with  violent  nightly
itching;  painful  stiff'ness  of  r.  wrist  joint;  contraction
of  fingers ;  painful  and  bleeding  rhagades  on  hands ;
swelling  of  finger  joints ;  exfoliation  of  finger  nails.

■  Fingers  of  both  hands  flexed,  especially  thumb,  so  that

it  is  completely  drawn  inward,  as  in  epilepsy;  without
assistance  is  unable  without  great  exertion  to  open
fingers  farther  than  about  two-thirds ;  with  trembling  of
hands, s.

■  Inflammation  of  cellular  tissue  beneath  cutis,  in  sinews,

their  fasciae  and  phalangeal  joints;  pains  not  violent,
more  throbbing  and  shooting;  extremely  sensitive  to
heat  and  cold.  ^Panaritium.
^  Lower  Limbs.  ■Spontaneous  luxation  of  r.  hip  joint ;  severe
stitching  pains,  <  from  motion ;  r.  thigh  a  finger's
breadth  longer  than  left.

■  Tearing  in  hip  joint  and  knee,  <  at  night  or  with  pul-

sating pains;  beginning  suppuration.
■Rheumatic  pains in legs,  with  stinging,  especially  in

hip  joint,  femur  and  knee,  <  at  night ;  aflfected  parts

feel  cold.
I  I  Dropsical  swelling  of  legs ;  cold  sweat  on  feet.
I  I  Painful  swelling  of  metatarsal  bones.

■  When  first  signs  of  disease  manifest  themselves;  sharp

stitches  flashing  periodically  through  joint;  acute  stitches
in  r.  ilium  at  regular  short  intervals,  and  in  anterior
inferior  spinous  process  of  ilium ;  boring  pain  in  r.
glutei  muscles ;  burning  of  nates ;  red  pimple,  with  a
white  tip  on  nates,  painful  and  stinging ;  tearing  pain
in  hip  joint,  in  knee  and  in  femur,  <  during  motion ;.


MERCURIUS.  382

tearing,  drawing  from  heel  to  buttocks,  <  at  night,  with
contraction  and  giving  away  of  knees ;  limbs  feel  stiff
when  walking;  stitches  in  thighs  and  legs  during
motion ;  involuntary  twitching  in  limbs ;  trembling
when  walking,  <  about  knees  and  in  inguinal  region ;
pain  in  r.  thigh  as  if  bruised,  <  after  walking ;  during
nightly  slumber  (without  sleep)  he  feels  a  violent  ten-
sive pain  in  posterior  part  of  1.  thigh  and  in  buttock,
most  violent  between  buttock  and  thigh,  and  extending
as  far  as  bend  of  knee;  >  in  recumbent  position,  by
supporting  thigh ;  cannot  sit  on  posterior  part  on  ac-
count of  pain,  which  is  <  periodically ;  single  pointed
stitches  in  region  of  external  condyle  of  tibia,  not  in
knee ;  spasmodic  drawing  up  of  legs ;  they  remain  con-
tracted all  night.  6'Hip  joint  disease.
I  I  Pain  in  sinews  of  1.  thigh,  which  are  sore  to  touch, s.

I  I  Involuntary  twitching  and  a  kind  of  spasmodic  adduc-

tion of  legs  and  thighs.

I I  Soreness  between  thighs  and  genitals, s.

I  I  Hard,  glandular  swelling  in  upper  part  of  1.  thigh,  sup-
purated, s.
Tumor  on  upper  part  of  1.  thigh, s.
Small  pimples  on  inner  side  of  thighs, s.
Herpes  on  legs  and  thighs, s.
I  Legs  and  thighs  cold  and  clammy  at  night. ^Dysentery.

■  Excessive  weakness  and  giving  away  of  knees  and  legs.  s.
I  I  Sensation  as  if  knee  was  larger.

iGonarthrocace  after  suppressed  itch.
■Weariness  and  uneasiness  in  legs  in  evening, s.
I  Could scarcely  drag her  limbs  because  they  were  so
heavy, s.

■  Tearing  and  stitching  in  lower  limbs,  at  night  and  during

motion,  with  sensation  of  coldness.

■  Pressing  pain  in  periosteum  of  r.  tibia, s.

■  Boring  and  drawing  pain  in  tibia, s.
■Red,  shining,  hard  swelling  on  r.  tibia, s.

■  High  fever  and  swelling  of  leg. ^Periostitis  of  tibia.

■  ■Ulcers  on  legs  which  bleed  easily  and  become  putrid,

spongy  and  bluish.
■After  abuse  of  mercury,  two  large  ulcers  on  leg  below
knee ;  in  paroxysms  of  perhaps  a  minute's  duration,
once  in  ten  or  fifteen  minutes,  lancinating  darting  pain,
forcing  screams ;  these  sores  were  of  two  years'  dura-
tion and  were  preceded  by  others,  similar,  two  or  three
times  healed  by  local  treatment ;  commenced  by  a  pim-
ple, which  being  broken,  formed  into  a  deep  foul  ulcer,
grey  colored,  slough  thin,  ichorous  pus ;  inflamed,  swol-
len, elevated  edges,  with  a  varicose  condition  of  veins


383  MERCURIUS.

in  vicinity ;  <  by  heat  of  bed,  liot  or  cold  applications,
from  pressure,  motion,  evening  until  midnight, s.

I A  woman,  set.  30,  dark  hair  and  complexion ;  about  eight
years  ago  had  a  fall,  spraining  1.  ankle ;  soon  after  an
ulcer  which  continued  to  spread ;  anterior  and  external
surface  of  leg  from  ankle  to  middle  third  of  thigh  one
mass  of  ulceration  ;  spongy  appearance,  with  elevations
and  depressions,  constant  ichorous  discharge ;  constant
pain,  burning,  stinging  and  gnawing,  <  from  least
touch;  whole  limb  felt  heavy  and  weary;  gnawing,
lacerating  pain  in  knee  joint;  walking  and  standing
painful ;  pains  become  unendurable  from  warmth  of
bed ;  enlarged  and  sensitive  inguinal  glands, s.

■Tarsal  bones  of  r.  foot  greatly  swollen ;  acute  pain ;
threatening  suppuration.

I  I  Pain  in  r.  tarsal  joints,  as  if  sprained, s.

■  After  catching  cold  in  a  sudden  shower,  painful  swelling

of  foot,  followed  by  formation  of  abscess,  from  which
was  discharged  a  thin,  watery  secretion,  swelling  in-
creased and  eight  fistulous  openings  formed,  from  which
fragments  of  bone  were  discharged  ;  miserable  appear-,
ance ;  skin  hot  and  burning ;  pulse  feverish ;  loss  of
appetite;  sleeplessness.  ^Caries  of  tarsal  and  metatarsal
bones.

■  After  wearing  boots  for  several  days,  which  he  usually

could  not  wear  on  account  of  swelling  of  tarsal  bones
of  r.  foot,  violent  pain  in  that  part  of  foot,  rapidly  in-
creasing; foot  somewhat  swollen  and  reddened,  could
not  bear  touch  or  motion ;  slight  chill,  with  subsequent
dry  heat  and  full  pulse.

■  (Edematous  swelling  of  foot. ^Peritonitis.
■Swelling  of  backs  of  feet. s.

■  Cold  sweat  on  feet.

I  I  Foot  sweat  scentless.
^^  Limbs  in  General. ■  ■Trembling  of  extremities,  especially
hands.

■  Involuntary  jerking  in  limbs;  twitching  of  arms  and  legs.

■  ■  Weakness  and  weariness  in  limbs ;  bruised  sensation, s.

■  Arms  and  thighs  sore  to  touch,  can  hardly  move  them.

■  Drawing  and  tearing  in  all  the  limbs, s.

■  Rigidity  and  immobility  of  limbs,  though  they  can  easily

be  moved  by  others. ^Paralysis.

■  Painful  stiffness  in  limbs;  use  of  all  lost,  except  r.  arm;

face  livid  ;  no  appetite  ; emaciated ;  in  bed  for  a  year ;
constipated ;  pain  at  night ;  <  from  changes  of  weather.
I  I  Convulsions  mostly  in  extremities.

■  Syphilitis  or  strumous  synovitis,  chronic; tendency  to

complete  destruction  of  joint;  pains  aching  or  stabbing,
<  at  night  and  from  external  warmth.


MERCURIUS.  384

I  Abscess  in  joints.

■  Rheumatic  and  arthritic  pains;  tearing  stinging,  <  at

night  in  warm  bed ;  with  profuse  sweat,  no  relief;
oedema  of  affected  parts,  especially  of  feet  and  ankles;
joints  swollen,  pale  or  slightly  red.

■  Sudden  pain  and  stiffness  of  nape  of  neck  and  of  upper

and  lower  limbs,  probably  brought  on  by  exposure ;  lay
motionless  in  bed,  great  weakness  and  lameness  neces-
sitating assistance  when  any  change  of  position  was  de-
sirable; could  slightly  raise  r.  arm;  face  sunken,  earthy
in  color;  emaciation  of  whole  body;  loss  of  appetite;
sleep  disturbed  by  nightly  pains;  pains  <  in  change
of  weather;  constipation,  with  pains  in  small. of  back.

■  Coldness  of  extremities,  with  cramps. ^Yellow  fever.

^  Rest. Position. Motion. Lying :  rotary  motion  of  head ;

vertigo;  burning  in  head  <.
Lying  still:  throbbing  in  vagina  >.
Recqmbent  position : colic passes off; tensive pain  in

thigh  and  buttock  >.
Obliged  to  lie  down: involuntary  contraction  of  eyes;

chilliness ;  prostration,  with  sick  feeling  of  body  and

mind.
Must  lie  upon  back  with  thigh  flexed :  on  account  of  swell-
ing  between  umbilicus  and  anterior  inferior  spine  of

ilium.
Lying  on  r.  side :  intestines  feel  bruised.
Unable  to  lie  on  r.  side: on  account  of  pain  in  head;

stitches  in  liver;  cough.
Lying  on  1.  side  :  shooting  in  ears  <.
Lay  motionless  in  bed  :  from  pain  and  stiffness  of  nape  of

neck  and  limbs.
Child  wants  to  lie  quietly  in  horizontal  position.
Sitting :  weariness  <.
Sitting  up :  burning  in  head  >  ;  difficult,  on  account  of

swelling  of  external  genitals.
Cannot  sit  up  in  bed  for  fear  of  falling :  great  weakness.
Cannot  sit  on  posterior  part  of  thigh  :  on  account  of  pain.
Must  bend  double :  colic.
By  supporting  thigh  by  laying  something  underneath :

tensive  pain  in  thigh  and  buttock  >.
Cannot  extend  thigh :  on  account  of  swelling  near  r.  ilium.
Standing :  painful  on  account  of  ulcer  on  1.  ankle.
Cannot  stand  erect:  vertigo;  pain  in  soles  of  feet.
Can  neither  stand  nor  walk:  with  great  pain  in  inguinal

glands.
Stooping :  vertigo.
Motion  :  stitching  pain  in  throat ;  violent  pain  in  spine  < ;

lacerating  in  shoulder  joints,  arms  and  wrists  <  ;  pain


385  MERCURIUS.

in  hip  joint  < ;  tearing  in  hip  joint,  knee  and  femur
<  ;  stitches  in  thighs  and  legs ;  ulcers  on  leg  <  ;  of
swollen  r.  foot  unbearable.

Rising :  tension  over  forehead  >  ;  burning  in  skin,  with
sweat  <  ;  vertigo.

Raising  head :  vertigo.

Moves  r.  hand  towards  head  or  thrusts  hands  into  wide
open  mouth,  1.  arm  remaining  motionless.

Frequent  chewing  motion  of  mouth.

Could  with  difficulty  chew :  stiffness  of  maxillary  joints.

Cannot  separate  jaw.

Eating  causes  sweat.

Can  hardly  move  arms  and  thighs.

Slightest  exertion :  palpitation  < ;  orgasm,  with  trembling ;
convulsions  <  ;  weakness,  with  ebullition  and  trem-
bling; hot  flashes;  sweat.

Could  not  bear  to  walk :  pain  in  soles  of  feet.

Walking :  shaking  sensation  of  bowels ;  cutting  stitch  in
abdomen  <  ;  stitches  in  last  r.  rib  ;  swelling  of  inguinal
glands  painful ;  swelling  of  urethra  painful ;  pain  in
inguinal  glands ;  shortness  of  breath  ;  pricking  itching
in  sacrum;  limbs  feel  stiff;  trembling  in  knees  and  in-
guinal region ;  bruised  pain  in  r.  thigh  <  ;  painful  on
account  of  ulcer  on  1.  ankle ;  sweat.

Going  up  stairs :  shortness  of  breath.
^  Nerves, l Great  irritability  of  all  the  organs.  ^Yellow  fever.

■  Involuntary  motions,  which  can  be  momentarily  sup-

pressed by  volition,  or  involuntary  tremors, v.

■  Involuntary  motions  of  head  and  hands, v.

■  Nervousness  and  trembling  of  hands.
. ■Paroxysmal  trembling.

■  General  tremors,  with  stammering  of  speech, v.
I  I  Tremors  always  commencing  in  fingers, v.

■  ■Trembling  of  hands  and  tongue, v.

■  Tremor  of  hands  so  that  he  could  not  lift  anything,  eat

or  write;  marked  tremor  of  neck  and  lower  extremities,  v.
■Jerkings. s.

■  Convulsions:  with  cries;  rigidity,  bloated  abdomen,  itch-

ing of  nose  and  thirst;  <  at  night;  much  salivation;
child  takes  cold  and  salivation  is  arrested;  mostly  in
extremities;  epileptic,  at  night.

■  Great  weakness,  ebullitions  and  trembling  from  exertion.

■  Lassitude;  weakness,  approaching  palsy, v.

■  Weary,  especially  while  sitting,  as  if  all  his  limbs  would

fall  from  him. s.
Weakness,  with  depression  of  spirits, s.

■  ■Very  much  exhausted  after  a  stool, s.

VOL.  VII.— 25,


MERCURIUS.  386

I  Prostration,  with  an  inexpressible  sick  feeling  of  body  and

mind,  obliging  him  to  lie  down. s.
I  I  Frequent  fainting. ^Metrorrhagia.

■  Great  debility. ^Rheumatism. ^Typhoid.

■  Contraction  of  joints.

I  Rheumatic  patients  with  night  sweats,  tearing,  lancinating
pains,  sensation  of  cold  in  affected  parts,  <  at  night ;
great  weakness;  hot  flashes  from  least  exertion ;  pale
face  and  evanescent  redness  on  cheeks. ^Neuralgia.

■  Paralysis  agitans.

■  Paralysis  of  lower  extremities. ^Spinal  meningitis.

■  Limbs  stiff  but  can  be  moved  by  others. ^Paralysis.
I  I  Occasional  jerks  in  paralyzed  parts. ^Meningitis.

^'^ Sleep. ■Great  sleepiness:  during  day,  not  >  by  long  sleep.

■  Sleepless  at  night:  on  account  of  anxiety,  ebullitions  and

congestions;  from  itching;  from  seeing  frightful  faces;
frequent  waking.

■  ■Sweat  during  sleep.

I  I  Falls  asleep  late  ;  wakeful  until  three  in  morning.
I  I  Excessive  restlessness  and  malaise,  with  sleeplessness.

■  ■As  soon  as  he  went  to  bed  in  evening pains recom-

menced and  banished  sleep, s.

■  Just  after  falling  asleep,  pains  become  more  violent, s.

■  Dreams: of  water; thieves;  animals;  shooting;  misfor-

tunes.

■Wakes  with  nervous  trembling,  thumping  of  heart  and
agitation,  as  if  he  had  been  frightened.
^  Time. Towards  morning:  sweat;  heat  and  violent  thirst.

Morning:  on  waking,  confusion  in  head;  bad  breath;
toothache  in  paroxysms ;  tongue  as  if  covered  with
fur;  diarrhoea;  vertigo;  debilitating  sweats ;  when  ris-
ing, chill ;  vesicles  in  various  parts  of  body.

At  1  A.M.:  water  collects  in  mouth.

Day :  pressing  or  stitching  pains  in  head ;  pain  in  eye ;
wants  to  sleep ;  chilliness  ;  toothache ;  much  thirst ;
cough;  pulse  slower,  weak  and  trembling;  sleepiness
by  day.

Afternoon:  feeling  of  coldness  in  testicles.

5.45  P.M. :  aching  in  ears.

Toward  evening :  tearing  in  lower  jaw.

Evening :  chilliness  ;  fever  <  ;  feeling  of  coldness  ;  general
aggravation,  with  heat;  weariness  and  uneasiness  in  legs;
until  midnight  ulcers  on  leg  <  ;  as  soon  as  he  went  to
bed  pains  recommenced  and  banished  sleep ;  after  lying
down,  chill ;  in  bed,  sweat ;  chill ;  intolerable  sticking
itching  here  and  there;  tearing  pains  in  elbows  and
joints.

From  9  p.m.  :  painfulness  of  gum.


387  MERCURIUS.

Day  and  night :  sweat.

Night :  tension  over  forehead  <  ;  pulsating  in  forehead
<  ;  restless ;  pain  in  exostoses ;  burning  of  skin,  with
sweat,  <  in  bed ;  pain  around  eyes  <  ;  pain  in  eye ;
eruption  around  eye  <  ;  cannot  sleep ;  keratitis  pustu-
losa  <  ;  steady  aching  in  eye  <  ;  boring  pains  prevent-
ing sleep ;  throbbing  pain  in  parotid  gland  <  ;  offensive
discharge  from  ear  <  ;  pain  in  ears ;  bleeding  from  nose,
with  worm  symptoms ;  coryza ;  copious,  sour  smelling
sweat ;  throbbing  in  upper  jaw  <  ;  pulsating  toothache
< ;  when  toothache  disappears,  chilliness ;  jerking  in
teeth  <  ;  stinging  pains  in  throat ;  profuse,  clammy
sweat ; much  thirst ;  eructations <  ;  heartburn ;  zona

<  ;  frequent  desire  for  stool  <  ;  restlessness ;  croupous
stools;  ineffectual  urging  to  stool;  sleeplessness  <;
thick  discharge  from  urethra  <  ;  gonorrhoea  <  ;  much
nervousness  and  anxiety ;  heat  alternating  with  horri-
pilations ;  moist  tongue,  with  intense  thirst ;  leucorrhoea

<  ;  tubercles  on  labia  <  ;  profuse  salivation,  wets  pil-
low ;  lochial  discharge  <  ;  exhausting  cough  <  ;  cough
in  two  paroxysms;  profuse  sweat;  cough  <  lying  on  1.
side;  dyspnoea,  with  spasmodic  cough;  debilitating
sweat;  palpitation,  with  fear;  pulse  accelerated,  with
erethism ;  rheumatism  of  arm  <  ;  lacerating  in  shoul-
der joint,  arms  and  wrists  <  ;  tearing  in  hip  joint  and
knee  <  ;  rheumatic  pains  in  lower  limbs  <  ;  tearing
from  heel  to  buttocks  <  ;  pain  in  r.  thigh ;  legs  remain
contracted  ;  legs  and  thighs  cold  and  clammy;  stinging
and  gnawing  in  ulcers  on  1.  ankle  <  ;  pain  in  all  limbs ;
syphilitis  or  strumous  synovitis,  pains  <;  rheumatic
and  arthritic  pains  <  ;  itching  of  nose  and  thirst  <  ;
epileptic  convulsions;  sleepless;  chilliness,  with  frequent
micturition;  boring  pains  in  exostoses;  bone  diseases
painful ;  itching  < .

Before  midnight:  great  swelling  of  lids.

After  midnight:  ptyalism,  with  nausea  <;  heat,  with  vio-
lent thirst  for  cold  drinks.
Temperature  and  Weather.  Open  air :  head  as  if  in  a
vice,  <;  biting  burning  in  eyes  <  ;  blepharitis  <;
stitches  in  last  r.  rib ;  bathing,  causes  croupous  inflam-
mation of  rectum  ;  chilliness.

In  room  :  head  feels  as  if  in  a  vice,  >.

Warmth  :  shooting  in  ear  <  ;  external  pains  <  ;  syphili-
tic or  strumous  synovitis  <.

Warmth  of  bed :  tension  over  forehead  < ;  pain  in  fore-
head < ;  throbbing  pain  in  parotid  gland  <  ;  shooting
from  teeth  into  face  and  ears  <  ;  zona  < ;  cannot  tolerate,
rheumatic  affection  ;  ulcers  on  leg  <  ;  rheumatic  and
arthritic  pains  <  ;  itching  of  whole  body  <.


MERCURIUS.  388

Warmth  of  stove :  does  not  >  chill.

Warm  drink  :  causes  sweat.

In  hot  Summer :  wears  a  heavy  overcoat.

Heat :  eyes  <  ;  eyes  very  sensitive ;  toothache  <  ;  ex-
tremely sensitive.

Least  atmospheric  variation:  attacks  of  cramps  of  stomach;
painful  stiffness  of  all  limbs  <.

Either  cold  or  warm  air :  coryza.

Cold  or  warm  things :  toothache  <.

Hot  or  cold  applications :  ulcers  on  leg  < ;  cancerous
ulcers  pain.

Washing :  throbbing  in  vagina  <  ;  violent  burning  of  skin.

Cold  water:  blepharitis  <.

Damp  weather :  pains  in  eyes  <  ;  coryza  <  ;  toothache
returns.

Coldness  of  damp  places  :  eyes  very  sensitive.

Wet,  cold  weather  :  stinging  pains  in  throat.

Bad  weather:  ulcers  in  throat  <.

Aversion  to  uncover:  heat.

Cold  :  cannot  bear  it ;  eyes  sensitive ;  shooting  in  ear  >  ;
throbbing  in  vagina  <  ;  extremely  sensitive.

Cold  air:  tongue  painful :  stinging  in  throat;  asthma  >  ;
when  undressing,  itching.

Draft  of  air  :  pain  in  vagina ;  hoarseness  <.

Evening  air :  toothache ;  colic ;  diarrhoea.
. Night  air:  cough  <.

Cold  drinks :  great  thirst,  with  heat.

After  catching  cold  in  a  sudden  shower :  painful  swelling
of  foot,  followed  by  abscess.
*"  Fever, l Sensation  of  coldness,  with  tremors,  though  without
diminished  temperature, v.

IB  Chilliness:  on  going  into  open  air:  as  from  cold  water
poured  over  one;  in  abdomen;  while  at  stool;  at  night,
with  frequent  micturition;  between  diarrhoeic  stools;
internal,  with  heat  of  face;  in  daytime,  obliging  to  lie
down;  wore  a  heavy  overcoat  in  hot  Summer.

■  ■Constant  cold  hands  and  feet. s.

■  Chill:  in  morning  when  rising,  but  more  generally  in

evening  after  lying  down,  as  from  cold  water  poured
over  one ;  not  >  by  warmth  of  stove ;  alternating  with
heat  often  only  on  single  parts ;  internal,  with  heat  of
face.

■  Heat:  in  bed,  chill  when  out  of  bed  ;  after  midnight,  with

violent  thirst  for  cold  drinks;  anxious,  with  sensation  of
pressing  together  of  chest,  alternating  with  chill;  with
aversion  to  uncover.

■  ■Sweat:  profuse,  offensive ;  does  not  >,  may  even  <  suf-

fering; on  every  motion, immediately on  drinking


389  MERCURIUS.

something  warm ;  while  walking;  day  and  night,  though
more  at  night;  in  evening  in  bed;  falls  asleep  while
perspiring;  profuse  and  very  debilitating  at  night;  in
morning  ;  towards  morning,  with  thirst  and  palpitation
or  nausea;  from  least  exertion,  even  when  eating;
clammy  and  cold,  driving  out  of  bed;  peculiar,  sour
smelling,  shrivelling  fingers  and  bedewing  feet;  profuse,
cold  on  face  though  rest  of  body  is  dry ;  offensive,  cold,
oily,  clammy  and  burns  skin ;  soaking  through  bed-
clothes; stains  linen  saffron  yellow ;  cannot  be  removed
by  washing;  profuse,  fetid,  tinging  linen  yellow  and
stiffening  it.

1 1  Complaints  increase  during  sweat.

I  Intermittent  fever:  evening  chill;  heat  and  violent  thirst
or  thirst  towards  morning ;  during  sweat,  palpitation
and  nausea;  sweat  fetid  or  sour.

iContinued  or  remittent  fevers,  particularly  when  compli-
cated with  enlargement  or  subacute  inflammation  of
liver.

■  Worm  fever,  with  intestinal  inflammation  and  diarrhoea.

■  Hectic  fever,  especially  of  children.
I  Mucous  fever,  with  prostration.

■  Catarrhal,  rheumatic  fever,  after  catching  cold.

■  Typhoid  fevers,  with  marked  icteroid  or  scorbutic  symp-

toms.

■  Obtuseness  of  mental  operations,  with  great  inclination  to

sleep;  heaviness  and  muddledness  of  head;  thick  and
dirty  coating  of  tongue;  insipid,  pappy,  slimy,  foul  taste,
with  desire  for  refreshing  things;  tliirst,  painful  sensi-
tiveness of  precordial,  hepatic,  umbilical  and  ileo-csecal
region ;  bilious,  slimy  or  watery  diarrhoea,  which,  how-
ever, maybe  absent;  prostration;  sometimes  copious,
debilitating  perspiration;  pale;  sunken  face  and  eyes;
dirty,  yellowish  color  of  face. ^Typhoid  fever

■  Yellow  color  of  skin;  red  eyes  ;  bloodvessels  of  sclerotic

injected ;  eyes  sensitive  to  light ;  paresis  of  one  or  more
limbs;  tongue  moist,  with  thick,  white  coating  or  dry
and  covered  with  brown  mucus;  pulse  irregular  or
quick,  strong  and  intermittent,  or  soft  and  tremulous;
great  disposition  to  sleep,  or  sleepless  from  nervous  irri-
tation;  feeling  of  weakness  and  prostration;  rapid  loss
of  strength ;  vertigo  or  severe  headache;  convulsive  vom-
iting of  slime  and  bilious  matter;  burning  pain  and  sen-
sitiveness of  stomach;  constipation  or  diarrhoea;  evacua-
tions slimy,  bilious  or  bloody;  coldness  of  arms  and  legs,
with  cramps,  irritability  and  sensitiveness  of  all  the
organs;  anxiety  and  restlessness;  weak  memory;  timor-
ous, depressed,  complaining;  delirium. ^Yellow  fever.


MERCURIUS.  390

*'  Attacks,  Periodicity.  Alternates :  tootliache,  with  giddi-
ness and  tearing  in  limbs ;  croupous  and  pappy  fecal
stools;  heat  and  horripilations.

Periodical :  flashes  of  sharp  stitches  through  hip  joint ;  <
pain  in  thigh  and  buttock ;  burning  as  of  fire  in  eruption.

Two  paroxysms  of  cough  in  rapid  succession  at  night,  fol-
lowed by  long  interval  of  rest.

At  regular  short  intervals :  acute  stitches  in  r.  ilium.

Every  few  minutes :  attacks  of  toothache ;  urging  to  urinate.

In  paroxysms  of  perhaps  a  minute's  duration,  once  in  ten
or  fifteen  minutes ;  lancinating,  darting  pain  in  large
ulcers  on  leg.

Every  quarter  or  half  hour:  terrible  continuous  shriek-
ing for  one  or  two  minutes.

Every  half  hour :  diarrhoeic  discharges.

Every  hour:  discharge  of  a  round,  shreddy  mass  from
bowels;  obliged  to  urinate.

Every  night:  pains  deep  in  eye  <  ;  at  12  o'clock,  intoler-
able pain  in  eye;  swelling  of  gums  ;  pains  in  teeth  ;  pain-
ful erections;  violent  itching  of  eruption  on  hands.

From  9  a.m.  until  5  or  6  p.m.  :  frequent  paroxysms  of  cough.

For  a  week  or  ten  days :  redness  of  erythema.

Fourteen  days  after  childbirth :  eruption  of  vesicles  on
neck,  shoulders,  chest  and  abdomen.

Every  two  weeks:  menses.

At  every  menstrual  period :  pain  in  mammae.

In  all  phases  of  moon:  frequent  attacks  of  cramps  in
stomach.

At  third  month  :  repeated  miscarriages.

Spring  and  Fall :  stinging  pains  in  throat.

Every  Winter  for  a  number  of  years :  eczema  of  1.  hand.

For  one  year :  failing  sight.

Two  years'  duration  :  sores.

For  two  years :  indications  of  hydrocephalus.

For  two  or  three  years :  menses  irregular.

Fourteen  years'  duration  :  chronic  otitis.
*^  Locality  and  Direction.  Right:  scotoma  of  eye;  as  if
ear  was  stuffed  up;  offensive  smelling  discharge  from
ear;  could  not  be  heard  on  side ;  auditory  canal  occluded
by  polypi;  in  forepart  of  ear  a  sac  of  matter;  pain  in
whole  half  of  head  and  face  ;  bloody  and  offensive  mat-
ter flows  from  ear ;  mumps  ;  ranula ;  swelling  of  tonsil ;
patches  on  throat;  cannot  lie  on  side;  stitches  in  liver;
great  distension  of  hypochondrium;  pressure  in  side;
lying  on  side,  intestines  feel  bruised ;  painful  swelling
near  ilium  ;  stitches  in  last  rib  ;  pressive  boring  pains
in  groin ;  zona  on  side;  tenderness  over  hypochondrium ;
testicle  swollen,  hard,  as  large  as  hen's  egg;  scrotum  red,


391  MERCURIUS.

shining;  tearing  in  head;  acute  pain  through  chest  to
scapula ;  stitches  in  chest ;  acts  on  lower  part  of  lung ;
tenderness  over  hypochondrium ;  painful  stiffness  of
wrist ;  spontaneous  luxation  of  hip ;  thigh  finger's
breadth  longer  than  1. ;  stitches  in  ilium  ;  boring  in
glutei  muscles;  thigh  as  if  bruised;  pressing  in  perios-
teum of  tibia;  swelling  on  tibia;  tarsal  bones  swollen
as  if  sprained ;  loss  of  use  of  arm  ;  tetters  on  forearm.

Left:  tearing  or  pressive  pain  in  temple;  burning  in
temple;  dryness  and  swelling  of  eyelid;  sticking  and
burning  deep  in  ear;  roaring  and  rumbling  in  ear;
shooting  from  ear  to  temple ;  watch  could  be  heard  only
at  distance  of  one  and  a  half  inches;  inflammation  of  ear
with  deafness;  throbbing  in  upper  jaw;  throat  swollen;
beating  in  praecordia;  headache  in  temple;  stitching
in  side  of  abdomen;  pain  in  testicle;  burning  and  itch-
ing of  vagina;  numbness  down  leg;  cough  <  lying  on
side;  stabbing  under  short  ribs;  eczema  of  hand;  pain
in  thigh  and  buttock;  pain  in  sinews  of  thigh;  glandu-
lar swelling  in  upper  part  of  thigh  ;  tumors  on  upper
part  of  thigh;  sprained  ankle,  then  an  ulcer  appeared  ;
tarsal  bones  of  foot  greatly  swollen ;  eruption  on  arm ;
tettery  spot  on  cheek  bone.

First  1.,  then  r. :  hemorrhage  from  ears ;  ringing,  whist-
ling in  ears;  shooting  in  ears;  aching  in  ears.

From  r.  to  1. :  cutting  stitch  in  lower  abdomen.
^  Sensations.  As  if  there  was  a  vibrating  in  forehead  and  a
turning  about  in  a  circle ;  as  if  in  a  swing ;  forehead  as
if  bandaged  or  in  a  hoop;  pain  as  if  just  beneath  scalp,
as  if  it  was  too  heavy  and  tight  on  brain  ;  as  if  head
would  burst ;  head  as  if  constricted  by  a  band  ;  head  as
if  in  a  vice  ;  head  as  if  getting  larger  and  larger;  eyes
as  if  long  deprived  of  sleep;  as  if  sparks  of  fire  were
being  emitted  from  eyes;  eye  as  if  it  was  a  ball  of  fire ;
as  of  a  body  underneath  lids;  as  if  feathers  came  from
corners  of  eyes;  as  of  sand  in  eyes;  as  of  fiery  points  in
eyes;  as  if  r.  ear  was  stuffed  up;  ears  as  if  stopped  by
swelling;  as  though  a  wedge  was  driven  in  ear;  crack-
ling in  head  as  from  metal  plates ;  as  if  teeth  were  fixed
in  a  mass  of  pap;  as  if  teeth  were  loose  or  too  long;  as
if  foreign  body  was  swallowed  down ;  as  from  hot  vapor
ascending  from  stomach;  throat  as  if  too  tight  posteri-
orly ;  as  if  an  apple  core  was  in  throat;  as  if  food  had  to
pass  over  a  foreign  body;  as  if  there  was  a  burnt  spot;
pressure  in  abdomen  as  from  a  stone;  as  if  bowels  had
to  be  held  up;  as  if  bowels  fell  to  side  on  which  he  lies;
intestines  as  if  pressed;  stabbing  in  abdomen  as  from
knives;  as  if  bowels  were  cut  to  pieces;  as  if  bowels


MERCURIUS.  392

would  be  forced  out;  as  of  something  heavy  pulling
downward  close  above  genitals;  as  if  muscles  and  ten-
dons were  too  short;  as  if  .  mammae  would  ulcerate;  as
if  everything  in  chest  was  dry;  as  if  head  and  chest
would  burst ;  weakness  at  heart  as  if  dying;  agitation  as
if  frightened;  pain  in  sacrum  as  if  one  had  been  lying
on  too  hard  a  couch;  arm  as  if  too  heavy,  as  if  broken
or  beaten;  pain  in  r.  thigh  as  if  bruised  ;  as  if  knee  was
larger;  pain  as  if  sprained  in  tarsal  joints ;  as  if  all  his
limbs  would  fall  from  him  ;  pain  in  bones  as  if  broken;
itching  as  from  fleabites;  burning  as  from  fire  in  eruption.

Pain  :  in  bone  beneath  eyebrow;  in  periosteum  and  bones
of  face;  in  forehead;  around  eyes,  on  forehead  and
temples;  in  sole  of  foot;  around  ear  down  jaw  ;  in  ears;
in  whole  r.  half  of  head  and  face;  of  salivary  glands ;  in
parotid  glands  and  muscles  of  neck;  from  throat  to  ear;
in  shoulders;  in  limbs;  in  region  of  liver;  in  rectum,
sometimes  to  back ;  over  r.  hypochondrjum;  in  1.  tes-
ticle and  along  cord;  in  inguinal  region;  in  mammse;
in  small  of  back:  in  chest;  in  sacrum;  in  r.  thigh;  in
sinews  of  1.  thigh  ;  in  r.  tarsal  joints;  in  bones;  in  bowels.

Frightful  pain:  in  bowels.

Raging  pain  :  in  forehead.

Sore,  maddening  pain  :  in  mammse.

Intolerable  pain :  in  e3^e ;  in  whole  head,  <  in  ears.

Violent  pain:  in  head  ;  in  eyes;  in  spine;  in  foot.

Acute  pain :  striking  forward  through  chest  to  r.  scapula;
in  tarsal  bones  of  1.  foot;  in  impetigo  figurata.

Severe  pain:  in  eyes;  in  tongue;  in  head;  at  anus;  in
spine ;  in  ulcers  in  mouth.

Severe  dull  pain  :  in  occiput.

Tearing  pain:  in  forehead  and  vertex;  in  1.  temple;  from
head  to  teeth  and  neck;  in  eyes;  in  ears;  in  lower  jaw;
in  limbs;  in  head;  in  coccyx;  in  hip  joint  and  knee;
in  femur;  in  lower  limbs.

Tearing,  lacerating,  shooting:  into  face  and  ear.

Tearing,  lacerating:  in  face.

Tearing,  drawing:  in  head;  from  heel  to  buttocks.

Lacerating:  in  shoulder  joints,  arms  and  wrists.

Stabbing:  in  abdomen;  in  1.  side  under  short  ribs.

Lancinating,  darting :  in  ulcers  on  leg;  in  cancerous  ulcers.

Lancinating,  boring,  pressing:  in  abdomen.

Tearing,  constricting,  pinching  :  in  abdomen.

Lacerating,  tearing,  stinging:  in  bones  of  skull.

Gnawing,  lacerating :  in  knee  joint.

Boring,  tearing,  stitching :  in  ears.

Pressive,  tensive  tearing ;  in  forehead,  cheeks,  upper  teeth
and  ears.


393  MERCURIUS.

Boring:  from  head  to  teeth  and  neck;  m  eyes;  prevent-
ing sleep;  in  uterus;  in  r.  glutei  muscles;  in  tibia;  in
exostoses.

Cutting:  in  eyes;  in  intestines;  in  abdomen;  from  stom-
ach to  genitals;  in  abdomen.

Dull,  cutting,  pressive  pain  :  underneath  lids.

Burning,  gnawing:  in  eyes.

Pinching:  in  ear;  in  abdomen.

Pressive  boring:  in  r.  groin.

Violent  beating:  in  arteries;  in  1.  preecordia.

Severe  throbbing  pain:  in  1.  upper  jaw;  otitis  ;  of  vagina.

Throbbing,  shooting:  in  eye.

Pulsating  pains :  in  hip  joint  and  knee.

Violent  stitches:  in  hepatic  region;  in  r.  ilium.

Transient  stitches:  in  body  and  hmbs.

Stitching,  tearing,  pressing,  burning :  deep  in  ear  to  cheek.

Stitching,  tearing:  in  hollow  and  carious  teeth;  under
false  ribs  and  in  hepatic  region.

Single  pointed  stitches:  in  region  of  external  condyle  of  tibia.

Stitches:  through  whole  head;  in  ears;  in  eyes;  deep  in
eyes  and  temples;  in  teeth;  posteriorly  in  throat;  in
occiput;  in  liver;  in  last  r.  rib  and  inguinal  region;  in
back  and  scapula ;  through  chest  to  back  ;  in  anterior
and  upper  portion  of  chest;  in  r.  chest;  in  glands;  flash-
ing periodically  through  hip  joint;  in  thighs  and  legs;
from  head  to  teeth ;  in  r.  hypochondrium ;  in  region  of
liver;  in  uterus ;  in  small  of  back  and  legs;  in  hip  joint,
knees  and  feet;  in  lower  limbs;  in  red  spots  on  small  of
back.

Cutting  stitch:  in  lower  abdomen.

Severe  shooting  pain:  from  deep  within  eye;  in  ears;  from
1.  ear  to  r.;  from  1.  ear  to  1.  temple.

Stinging,  tearing:  in  ears.

Sharp  sticking:  in  eyes;  in  fauces;  deep  in  both  ears;  in
tonsils;  in  small  of  back.

Severe  stitching,  burning:  in  whole  convex  portion  of
liver  to  spine.

Stinging:  in  jaw;  in  throat;  in  fauces;  in  region  of  liver;
in  urethra ;  in  small  of  back ;  in  hip  joint,  femur  and
knee ;  in  pimple  on  nates.

Violent  griping :  in  bowels.

Twisting,  constricting  pains:  in  abdomen.

Violent  tensive  pain :  in  posterior  part  of  1.  thigh  and  in

buttock,  extending  as  far  as  knee.
Cramps:  in  stomach.
Dragging:  in  loins  and  lumbar  region.
Drawing  pain  :  from  testicles  into  abdomen,  down  legs  to
feet ;  in  testicles,  groin  and  spermatic  cord ;  in  inguinal
region;  in  tibia;  in  nape  and  down  back.


MERCURIUS.  394

Pulling  pain:  in  both  thighs.

Aching:  in  eye;  in  ears;  in  teeth;  in  uterus;  at  apex  of
heart.

Pressive  pain:  in  1.  temple;  in  head;  in  liver;  in  glands;
in  periosteum  of  r.  tibia.

Dull  pain :  in  region  of  liver.

Sudden  pain:  in  nape  of  neck  and  upper  and  lower  limbs.

Rheumatic  pains:  in  head;  in  limbs;  in  legs;  of  shoul-
ders and  upper  arms.  ^

Aching,  pressing  pain :  in  eye.

Sore  pain:  deep  in  pelvis;  in  mammae.

Pricking  pain  :  in  ulcers.

Extremely  painful :  orifice  of  excretory  duct  of  salivary
gland.

Raw  pain  :  at  edges  of  lids.

Intolerable  biting  pain  :  on  tongue.

Burning:  in  urethra;  in  genitals;  after  scratching;  from
head  to  teeth  and  neck;  in  eyes;  in  ears;  in  stomach;
in  bowels;  in  back;  in  herpes  zoster,  like  a  girdle  from
back  around  abdomen;  in  head,  <  1.  temple;  in  fore-
head; of  skin  of  forehead;  in  eyes;  in  gums;  in  throat;
in  region  of  larynx ;  of  skin ;  at  anus ;  of  penis ;  of  vagina ;
from  fauces  down ;  in  scaly  herpes ;  of  nates ;  of  tetter  in
bend  of  elbows,  inguinal  region  and  hollow  of  knee.

Burning,  biting:  during  micturition.

Stinging,  burning:  eczema  of  hands.

Biting:  in  eyes;  in  genitals.

Heat:  in  eyes;  around  eyes;  rises  in  throat.

Burning  rawness:  in  larynx.

Burning,  stinging,  gnawing:  in  ulcers  on  leg.

Pricking,  stinging:  in  veins.

Pricking :  in  ears ;  in  tongue.

Bruised  feeling:  in  intestines;  of  scapulae,  back  and  small
of  back.

Soreness:  of  hemorrhoids;  exostoses;  on  sides  of  head;  of
top  of  head ;  of  lids ;  of  nose ;  of  inner  ears ;  of  teeth ;  of
corners  of  mouth ;  of  mouth ;  of  hepatic  region ;  of  intes-
tines; of  hemorrhoids;  in  region  of  bladder;  of  foreskin ;
between  scrotum  and  thighs;  of  groins;  of  nipples*  under
sternum;  from  fauces  down.

Painful  pressure:  in  region  of  pharynx.

Painful  dryness:  in  throat.

Painful  stiffness:  of  r.  wrist  joint.

Painful  tension :  in  knee  and  elbow  joints ;  in  wrists  and
ankles.

Sensitiveness:  of  lymphatic  vessels  of  nymphee.

Tenderness:  across  hypochondria  and  epigastrium  ;  over
r.  hypochondrium.


595  MERCURIUS.

Rawness:  in  throat;  of  anus  and  adjacent  parts;  in  geni-
tals; of  nipples.

Scratching  sensation  :  under  manubrium.

Pulselike  jerking:  from  teeth  to  lower  jaw  into  ear,  from
upper  jaw  into  head.

Throbbing :  in  veins.

Pulsating:  in  forehead;  in  head;  toothache;  in  abdomen.

Twitching :  of  lids;  of  arms  and  fingers;  in  limbs ;  of  arms
and  legs.

Thrill :  in  urethra  when  urine  passes.

Trembling:  of  whole  body;  of  heart;  of  extremities;  of
hands  and  tongue.

Spasmodic  contraction:  when  coughing  or  sneezing.

Pressure:  in  ear;  in  abdomen;  in  head;  in  forehead;  in
eyes  ;  on  tongue ;  in  throat ;  in  stomach  ;  in  epigastrium  ;
in  abdomen  ;  in  genitals ;  from  stomach  to  genitals.

Tension:  over  forehead;  in  articulation  of  jaw;  in  region
of  pharynx  ;  of  praecordium.

Pressing  together :  of  chest.

Constriction :  of  lids ;  of  stomach ;  in  rectum.

Bearing  down  pressure :  in  lower  abdomen.

Drawing:  in  limbs;  with  pressure  in  testicles.

Rheumatic  stiffness :  of  neck.

Fulness:  in  ear;  in  head;  across  epigastrium  and  hypo-
chondria; in  rectum.

Oppression :  in  epigastrium ;  of  chest.

Uneasiness:  in  legs.

Heaviness:  in  head.

Weight :  in  lungs.

Weariness :  in  legs.

Confusion :  in  head.

Shaking  sensation  :  of  bowels.

Rumbling  sensation  :  in  abdomen.

Weakness  :  at  heart.

Weakness  like  a  dulness  :  in  head.

Peculiar  weak  feeling:  in  abdomen.

Tickling :  in  larynx  ;  in  throat ;  beneath  upper  portion  of
chest ;  in  bronchia.

Roughness :  in  throat ;  from  fauces  down.

Dryness:  of  tongue;  of  lips;  of  eyelids;  of  palate;  in
mouth;  in  throat;  in  bronchia;  in  chest.

Numbness:  down  1.  leg.

Intolerable  sticking,  itching:  here  and  there  over  body;
prurigo.

Intense  itching:  by  presence  of  urine  on  parts;  in  erup-
tion on  hands  ;  on  all  parts  of  body.

Terrible  itching  and  burning :  on  various  places.

Voluptuous  itching :  of  tetter  on  r.  forearm.


MERCURIUS.  390

Biting,  itching :  over  abdomen.

Itching,  stitching:  impetigo  flgurata.

Pricking,  itching:  in  sacrum.

Sensitive  itching  :  of  labia  majora.

Itching :  in  eyes  ;  in  ears  ;  in  nodular  eruption  on  legs  ;  in
nose;  in  gums;  of  anus;  in  scrotum;  of  vagina;  of  geni-
tals ;  over  whole  body  ;  of  herpes  zoster.

Coldness:  in  ears;  in  testicles;  in  lower  limbs;  of  arms
and  legs.
"  Tissues. I  Ascites  from  organic  lesions  of  liver;  anasarca
after  scarlatina.

1  (Edema  of  face,-  hands  and  feet,  with  ansemia,

I  Blood  coagulates  easily;  throbbing  or  pricking  stinging

in  veins.
BEpistaxis;  hemorrhages  in  old  women  after  climacteric
period;  hsematuria  in  typhoid  fever;  blonde  hair,  lax
skin  and  muscles;  tongue  and  mouth  moist,  with  thirst;
sweat  of  feet  without  odor;  disposition  earnest,  anxious;
blood  light  colored;  scorbutic  condition  of  gums.
^Hemorrhages.

I I  Bone  pains;  <  at  night;  boring  pains  in  exostoses.

BB Glandular  swellings,  with  or  without  suppuration,  but
especially  if  suppuration  is  profuse.

B Exostoses;  caries;  pains  in  bones  as  if  broken.

B  Abscesses  in  joints.

BRheumatic-catarrhal  inflammations,  with  disposition  to
sweat.

B Rheumatism,  especially  in  cases  of  syphilitic  origin  or
complication,  affecting  joints,  bones,  or  periosteum,
swelling  of  joints,  pale  or  slightly  red,  puffy  or  cedema-
tous;  pains  tearing,  drawing,  shooting,  pressing;  in
bones  as  if  broken  ;  in  joints  as  if  sprained  ;  <  evenings
and  at  night,  and  insupportable  in  heat  of  bed  ;  accom-
panied by  profuse  sweat  (often  sour  or  offensive  smelling)
without  >  paing.

B  Gouty,  shining  red  swellings.

B Gouty  and  rheumatic  pains,  with  sweats  without  relief.

B Excessive  emaciation, v.

BGlandular  swellings  with  or  without  suppuration.

BCold  swellings;  slowly  suppurating  abscesses.

BSuppuration,  especially  if  too  profuse.

B Ulcerations:  very  superficial  and  widespread ;  with  whit-
ish grey  bases,  bleeding  easily  and  exuding  thin  matter;
spreading,  spongy,  readily  bleeding  and  extremely  pain-
ful ;  unequal  elevations  and  depressions  in  floor  of  ulcer;
cancerous,  with  severe  shooting,  lancinating  pain,  not
>  by  either  hot  or  cold  applications ;  fungous,  chan-
crous,  phagedenic,  carious  and  syphilitic.


397  MERCURIUS.

1 1  Chancre;  gonorrhoea;  blenorrhagia  uretheralis  and
vaginalis.

I  1  Erysipelatous  inflamraation,  especially  about  joints.

■  Gangrene  of  lips,  cheeks  and  gums;  inflammation  and
swelling  of  glands  of  neck ;  pains  <  by  hot  or  cold
applications.

I  Breath  and  whole  body  smell  foul.  v.
^  Touch.  Passive  Motion.  Injuries.  Touch :  pain  in
bones;  feeling  of  soreness  ol  exostoses;  external  head
painful ;  scalp  painful ;  pain  around  eyes  <  ;  lids  sen-
sitive ;  gums  painful ;  teeth  painful  to  touch  of  tongue ;
lips  painful ;  stomach  sensitive ;  liver  tender ;  swelling  in
ileo-csecal  region  painful ;  rectum  painful ;  soreness  of
region  of  bladder;  swelling  of  urethra  painful;  causes
bleeding  of  ulcers ;  cannot  bear  it  on  swollen  r.  foot ;
arms  and  thighs  sore  ;  herpes  burning.

Laying  hand  on  forehead;  tension  >.

When  taken  hold  of:  painfulness  of  nasal  bones.

Contact:  of  teeth,  severe  pain  in  teeth;  of  food,  tongue
painful;  abdomen  painful ;  skin  extremely  sensitive  to
clothes;  violent  burning  of  skin.

Heavy  pressure:  in  inguinal  glands  causes  pain.

Pressure :  swelling  over  parietal  bone  fluctuates ;  tongue
painful;  external,  tension  in  pharynx  <  ;  pain  in  liver
<  ;  swelling  of  inguinal  glands  painful ;  nodes  on  tibia
sensitive;  pain  in  spine  <  ;  ulcers  on  leg  <.

Pressing  hand  against  abdomen :  >  pain  in  coccyx.

Rubbing:  toothache  >  ;  of  genitals  at  night  in  bed  ;  vio-
lent burning  of  skin.

Wearing  boot  on  swollen  foot :  caused  violent  pain.

Scratching:  scalp  causes  bleeding;  causes  bleeding  of
yellow  scurf  on  face ;  of  genitals  at  night  in  bed  ;  biting
in  genitals  changes  to  violent  burning ;  eczema  on
hand  inflames  surroundings;  itching  becomes  pleasant;
causes  burning  in  eruption.

Riding:  pulsating  in  forehead  >.

After  fall:  scotoma  of  r.  eye;  sprained  1.  ankle,  then  an
ulcer  appeared.
*^  Skin. BB  Yellow  skin. ^Yellow  fever. ^Icterus.

B  Jaundice,  with  biting  itching  over  abdomen, s.

BSkin  chafed,  sore.

Bitching  over  whole  body,  especially  at  night  in  bed,
when  getting  warm.

Bitching  that  becomes  pleasant  on  scratching, s.

B  Violent  itching  on  all  parts  of  body,  is  obliged  to  scratch
a  great  deal  at  night, s.

Bintolerable  sticking  itching,  here  and  there  over  body,
as  from  fleabites,  in  evening, s.


MERCURIUS.  398

I  I  Intolerable  itching  all  over  body,  assuming  appearance
of  nettlerash.

■  Nocturnal  itching  without  eruption.

I  I  Insensibility  of  skin. ^Meningitis.

I  I  After  use  of  rosin  plaster  on  pit  of  stomach,  terrible
itching  and  burning  in  various  places,  gradually  spread-
ing over  body  ;  <  at  night  in  bed.  s.  ^Pruritus  cuta-
neus  universalis.

I  Erythema,  upon  which  vesicles  form  and  pour  out  a
thin,  clear  fluid ;  vesicles  quickly  broken,  contents  des-
sicate,  redness  remains  for  a  week  or  ten  days. v.

■  Round  spots  shining  through  skin,  of  a  coppery  red  color.

■  Exanthemata  spreading  from  pit  of  stomach  over  ab-

domen and  chest, v.
■Small,  flat,  light  red  blotches  on  sexual  parts,  abdomen,
chest  and  inner  side  of  thighs, v.

■  Red  spots  covered  with  small  vesicles  of  size  of  millet

seed,  filled  with  purulent  lymph,  v.
I  I  Grey  flat  scurf  on  a  swollen  spot.  s.
■Scurfy  eruption  beginning  on  head  and  spreading  over

whole  body.
I  I  Dry,  rashlike,  readily  bleeding  eruption, s.

■  Ulcerated,  incrusted  pimples, s.

I  i  Desquamation  all  over,  especially  from  backs  of  hands
and  from  feet. s.

■Circular  crop  of  miliary  papulse,  raised  and  rough,  bright
scarlet,  irritable,  itching,  scratching  at  night,  rough  spot
on  forehead  at  times ;  face  pale  and  puffy,  frequently
changes  color  ;  after  day  or  two  spot  became  moist  and
much  humor  was  exuded  ;  tongue  rough  like  a  straw-
berry from  papillary  enlargement  and  covered  with  a
white  film;  very  susceptible  to  cold.  ^Intertrigo  of
arms.

■  Eruption commencing upon forearms  and  chest  and

gradually  extending  over  whole  body  (except  face  and
posterior  surface  of  upper  and  lower  extremities) ;  it
begins  as  small,  scattered,  red  spots,  as  large  as  peas,
gradually  enlarging  in  a  circular  form,  run  together
and  become  continuous  ;  color  at  first  light  red,  after-
wards either  scarlet  or  bluish  red,  darker  on  margin
and  lighter  in  centre ;  as  spots  enlarge  skin  in  their
centre  becomes  healthy;  they  are  slightly  elevated,
rough  and  dry,  and  covered  with  small  whitish  scales,
which  are  continuall}^  rubbed  off  by  clothes  and  rede-
velop, so  that  in  evening  clothes  look  as  if  sprinkled
with  meal ;  tetter  <  in  axillae,  bends  of  elbows,  inguinal
regions  and  hollows  of  knees  burning  and  paining  con-
tinually, when  first  making  their  appearance  accom-


399  MERCURIUS.

panied  by  some  fever;  affected  portions  of  skin  swollen,
red  and  extremely  sensitive  to  contact  of  clothes ;  use
of  arms  impeded  ;  sleep  wanting  or  very  restless ;  itch-
ing on  contact  of  cold  air  when  undressing,  disappear-
ing in  warmth  of  bed  ;  violent  burning  after  contact,
rubbing,  w^ashing,  or  taking  wine;  axillary  and  in-
guinal glands  swollen ;  in  some  places,  as  for  example,
in  inguinal  region,  small,  superficial,  moist  ulcers  de-
velop on  tetter,  which  after  some  days  become  covered
with  yellow  scabs  and  heal ;  tearing  pains  in  joints,
especially  elbow^s  and  knees,  in  evening  ;  on  palms  of
hands,  small  transparent  vesicles  without  sensation, s.

I  Eczema,  yellow  crusts  and  inflamed  surroundings  after
scratching,  on  face,  legs  and  bends  of  extremities, s.

I  Moist  eczema  on  forearms  and  legs.

I  Whole  body  with  exception  of  face  covered  with  small,
elevated,  dark  red  spots,  close  to  each  other,  resembling
measles;  on  inner  side  of  arms  and  legs,  and  on  hands
and  feet,  eruption  presents  an  unbroken,  dark  red  sur-
face, in  these  parts  skin  is  also  swollen;  on  flexing  arms
and  when  walking,  painful  tension  in  knee  and  elbow
joints;  same  pain  in  wrists  and  ankles;  vesicles  filled
with  yellow  serum  upon  surface  of  eruption,  near
ankles;  small, thin,  white  scurfs  on  surface  of  eruption;
slight  itching;  painful  burning  <  from  touch,  rubbing,
in  evening  and  during  night. ^Eczema.

I  I  Rash  on  forearm,  measle  shaped,  over  whole  body,  but
particularly  on  chest,  thighs  and  lower  part  of  back. s.

I  Herpes  burning  when  touched,  humid,  with  large  scales
on  edges.

■  Moist  vesicles  surrounded  by  dry  scales,  easily  bleeding.

I  Very  small  transparent  vesicles,  containing  water,  ap-
pear in  various  parts  of  body,  in  morning  before  day-
break, s.

I  I  Itching  pimples  and  watery  vesicles, s.

■Herpetic  spots  and  suppurating  pustules  sometimes  run-
ning together,  forming  dry  and  scaly  spots,  or  crusts
and  acrid  discharges.

■  Herpes  zoster,  burning  pains,  with  gastric  disturbance;

like  a  girdle  from  back  around  abdomen;  much  itch-
ing and  tendency  to  suppurate.
I  I  Red  spots  in  small  of  back  with  stitching  pains;  during
course  of  several  days  more  spots  appeared,  eruption
extending  towards  navel  and  nearly  encircling  body ;
girdle  of  eruption  about  three  fingers  wide,  watery  dis-
charge on  scratching;  periodical  burning  as  of  fire  in
eruption. ^Zona.

■  Fourteen  days  after  childbirth,  eruption  of  vesicles  as


MERCUPJUS.  400

large  as  peas  on  neck,  shoulders,  chest  and  abdomen,
down  as  far  as  umbilicus;  lochia  scanty  ;  pain  in  small
of  back ;  vertigo  ;  great  redness  of  face ;  white  coated
tongue;  offensive  taste  in  mouth;  thirst;  sleeplessness;
great  restlessness;  trembling  of  limbs;  heat  and  chilli-
ness. ^Vesicular  eruption.

■  Excoriations  of  a  tettery  nature  oozing  constantly  and

bleeding  easily  when  scratched.

I  I  Phagadenic  blisters.

I  I  Impetiginous  and  furfuraceous  herpes, s.

I  Itch:  dry,  rashlike,  easily  bleeding;  fat,  especially  in
bends  of  elbows,  some  of  vesicles  become  pustular.

I  I  Itching  eruptions,  burning  after  scratching.

iSkin  dirty  yellow,  rough  and  dry;  scaly,  dry  tetters;
eruptions  of  not  inflamed,  little  red  elevations,  points
of  which  peel  off,  on  1.  arm;  red,  round,  scaly  spots,
one  inch  in  diameter,  on  forearm  and  wrist;  rough,
partly  reddish,  partly  whitish,  tettery  spot  on  1.  cheek
bone;  dry,  elevated,  burning  itching  tetters  on  whole
body,  especially  on  legs,  arms,  wrists  and  hands,  even
between  fingers;  tetter  on  r.  forearm,  which  peels  and
causes  a  voluptuous  itching;  places  which  have  re-
mained free  from  impetigo  mercurialis  turn  rough,  dr}'',
crack  and  peel  off  constantly  in  white,  branlike  scales,
especially  on  scalp,  whiskers  and  eyebrows,  without
attacking  face;  deep  rhagades,  like  cuts,  on  hands  and
fingers,  especially  on  their  inside,  their  basis  looks  raw
and  bloody  and  they  are  very  painful. ^Psoriasis.

■Itching  so  intolerable  it  almost  sets  him  crazy  if  he  gets
a  little  warmer  than  usual  when  at  work;  when  he  first
gets  into  bed,  the  cool  sheets  feel  so  nice  he  goes  right
to  sleep,  but  after  sleeping  about  half  an  hour,  he  is
awakened  by  itching  and  has  to  get  out  of  bed  and
walk  floor  until  sheets  get  cool  again ;  skin  covered
with  crusts  and  papulse. v. ^Prurigo.

■  Stinging  and burning; surroundings inflame after

scratching. ^Impetigo.

■Impetigo  figurata;  considerable  suppuration  under  crusts;
itching,  stitching  and  very  acute  pains;  eruption  has  a
tendency  to  spread.

■Eruption  of  pustules  varying  in  size  from  a  millet  seed
to  a  large  pea  and  filled  with  thick  yellow  matter,  dis-
charges after  two  or  three  days,  making  parts  sore ;  com-
menced on  one  foot,  extending  to  knee,  and  in  running
together  made  one  continuous  sore;  then  eruption  ap-
peared in  like  manner  on  abdomen  and  on  back  of
head;  scattering  pustules  on  hands,  arms  and  all  over
body  ;  child  thin  and  pale ; very  restless ; difficult  to


401  MERCURIUS.

lie  in  any  position  so  that  it  could  sleep,  on  account  of
having  to  lie  on  sores ;  all  symptoms  much  <  by
warmth  of  bed  at  night, s.

■  Suppurating pustules which  either  run  into  one  an-

other, discharging  an  acrid  humor,  or  remain  sore,  be-
come hollow,  afterwards  raised  and  cicatrized ;  pustules
bleed  easil}'-  and  are  painful  to  touch. ^Ecthyma.

■  Diarrhoea with  pain  in  bowels and tenesmus; moist,

barking  cough  without  expectoration;  cough  is  almost
convulsive  and  cannot  be  controlled,  occurring  in  fre-
quent paroxysms,  particularly  from  9  a.m.  till  5  or  6  p.m.
^Measles.

I  Tardy  development  of  eruption;  fever;  bronchitis.
^Measles.

•  During  desquamation  entire  mucous  membrane  of  mouth
covered  with  fiat,  lentil  sized  ulcers  with  lardaceous
base  and  causing  severe  pain  while  eating;  edges  of
forepart  of  tongue  and  gums  also  covered  with  ulcers.
^Measles.

■  Burning  heat;  face  very  red  and  swollen;  thirst;  rest-

lessness ;  fright  and  starting  during  sleep ;  delirium  ;
sensorial  depression  and  sopor;  great  oppression  of
chest ;  short,  quick  respiration ;  anxiety  before  appear-
ance of  eruption ;  eruption  of  slightly  elevated  papillary
red  spots,  as  large  as  a  linseed,  upon  a  reddish  base,,
latter  finally  assuming  a  pale  red  appearance ;  skin  at
one  time  burning  hot,  at  another  moist;  tongue  dry,,
brown  at  tip,  with  elevated  red  papillae ;  cutting  in  ab-
domen, diarrhoea.  ^Scarlatina.
lAnginose  variety;  dirty  yellow  coating  on  tongue,  clean  at
tip ;  foul  breath  ;  itching  and  restlessness  <  by  sweat-
ing; swelling  of  parotid,  submaxillary  and  lymphatic
glands ;  ptyalism,  hawking  and  spitting. (^Scarlatina.

I  I  Varicella;  water  blotches  turn  yellow  and  maturate, s.

I I  Variola:  in  stage  of  maturation  ;  dysenteric  symptoms.
I  I  Erysipelas :  spreading  from  back  around  upon  abdo-
men ;  of  syphilitic  origin  ;  simple  and  phlegmonous.

■  Erysipelas  of  newborn  children  of  syphilitic  or  scrofu-

lous nature  :  a  few  days  after  birth  red  spots  appear  upon
skin,  especially  about  groins,  on  scrotum  and  thighs;
spots  at  first  pale,  graduall}^  assume  a  brighter  red  color,
forming  a  sort  of  intertrigo,  the  discharge  of  which  is
of  an  offensive  odor  and  has  a  tendency  to  become  pur-
ulent ;  finally  bright  red  spots  appear  upon  lower  ab-
domen and  region  of  navel,  gradually  becoming  ery-
sipelatous in  character,  and  as  this  progresses  primary
seat  of  eruption  also  assumes  an  erysipelatous  charac-
ter ;  diarrhoeic,  'fermented  stools  and  considerable  fever.
VOL.  VII. — 26.


MERCURIUS.  402

I  III!  dropsical  patients  rapid  disappearance  of  swelling
and  appearance  of  offensive,  rapidly  decomposing  ulcers
on  thighs, s.

I  Ulcers:  large,  bleeding,  margins  everted  like  raw  meat,
their  bases  covered  with  a  caseous  coat ;  superficial,  flat,
readily  bleeding,  base  lardaceous,  <  from  heat  of  bed
and  hot  or  cold  applications ;  round,  of  an  impure  larda-
ceous surface,  with  inflamed,  elevated,  turned  up  edges
and  pricking  pain;  serpiginous.

llPrimary  and  secondary  syphilis;  round,  coppery  red
spots  shining  through  skin.

I  Boils  after  pus  has  formed.

■  Panaritium  when  inflammation  extends  to  sheaths  of

tendons  and  ligaments  of  joints.

■  Carious  ulcers.

*^  Stages  of  Life,  Constitution.  Suitable  for  light-haired
persons  with  lax  skin  and  muscle.

Often  indicated  with  women  and  children.

Boy,  set.  12  days;  cerebral  hernia;  ophthalmia  neonatorum
and  aphthae.

Child,  set.  14  days,  suffering  eight  days;  thrush.

Child,  set.  4  months ;  scurfy  eruption.

Child,  set.  5  months,  suffering  two  days;  bilious  colic, s.

Child,  set.  1,  thin  and  pale;  pustular  eruption, s.

Two  children,  set.  1 ;  diarrhoea.

Girl,  set.  1^,  had  itch;  otorrhoea  and  eruption  on  face
and  legs.

Boy,  set.  2,  robust;  prolapsus  of  rectum.

Boy,  set.  2 ;  pneumonia.

Girl,  set.  2,  suffering  three  months;  scrofulous  inflam-
mation of  eyes.

Child,  set.  2,  scrofulous,  suffering  for  more  than  a  year ;
inflammation  of  eyes.

Boy,  set.  3,  suffering  two  years;  hydrocephalus.

Child,  set.  3  ;  glossitis.

Boy,  set.  3,  suffering  thirteen  days ;  ulcers  in  mouth.

Girl,  set.  3;  inflammation  of  parotid  gland.

Boy,  a3t.  3|,  suffering  two  weeks;  ulcerated  mouth.

Girl,  set.  4,  often  has  rawness  behind  ears,  glandular
swellings  and  inflammation  of  eyes;  eruption  on  lips.

Girl,  set.  4,  suffering  four  weeks ;  diarrhoea.

Boy,  set.  4;  intertrigo  on  arms.

Boy,  set.  4J,  stout,  but  hydrocephalic  head,  broad  nose,
thick  lips,  had  had  tinea  and  swollen  glands,  and  suf-
fered frequently  from  eyes;  keratoiritis.

Girl,  set.  5,  scrofulous,  after  scarlet  fever;  acute  hydro-
cephalus.

Child,  set.  5,  sickly ;  periostitis  of  tibia, s.


403  MERCURIUS.

Girl,  set.  5,  after  being  ill  four  days ;  typhoid  fever.

Child,  set.  7;  purpura  hemorrhagica.

Girl,  set.  8,  suffering  eight  days;  inflammation  of  eye.

Girl,  set.  8,  has  suffered  from  repeated  attacks;  keratitis
pustulosa.

Girl,  set.  8;  scrofulous  ophthalmia.

Boy,  set.  8;  diphtheria, s.

Girl,  after  catching  cold ;  sore  throat, v.

Girl,  set.  10,  suffering  four  weeks;  luxation  of  hip  joint.

Girl,  set.  12,  strong;  inflammation  of  submaxillary  gland.

Boy,  set.  12; zona.

Girl,  set.  14,  during  an  attack  of  influenza;  typhoid  fever.

Boy,  set.  14,  strong ;  inflammation  of  brain.

Girl,  set.  15 ; inflammation  of  sublinguinal  gland.

Boy,  set.  15,  after  disappearance  of  itch ;  affection  of  knee.

Boy,  set.  15;  ulcers  in  mouth.

Boy,  set.  16,  after  fourteen  days  of  previous  illness;  dysen-
tery.

Girl,  set.  17,  menses  suppressed;  vertigo.

Boy,  set.  17,  caught  after  an  attack  of  pain  in  joints,
accompanied  by  a  vesicular  eruption  on  arms ;  otitis.

Man,  set.  18 ;  chancre.

Girl,  set.  18,  brunette;  ranula.

Girl,  set.  19,  strong,  blonde,  blue  eyes,  delicate  skin ;  rheu-
matic ophthalmia.

Man,  set.  19,  strong,  florid  complexion ;  stomatitis.

Girl,  set.  19,  well  nourished,  plethoric;  dysentery.

Man,  set.  19,  weaver,  phlegmatic,  scrofulous,  had  suffered
from  glandular  swellings  in  r.  axilla;  swelling  of  glands
of  neck.

Man,  set.  20;  ulcers  in  mouth.

Man,  set.  20,  strong;  swelling  of  submaxillary  gland.

Girl,  set.  20;  syphilis.

Woman,  set.  24,  lymphatic  temperament,  after  catching
cold  in  a  shower ;  caries  of  bones  of  foot.

Soldier,  set.  24,  choleric  temperament;  dysentery.

Man,  set.  -24 ;  chancre.

Woman,  set.  24,  unmarried,  gouty  tendency;  gout.

Mrs.  S.,  set.  25,  blonde,  tall  and  thin,  mild  disposition,  has
been  confined  to  bed  most  of  time  with  womb  disease
for  three  years ;  ulceration  of  cervix  uteri.

Man,  set.  25; chancre.

Woman,  set.  26,  unmarried,  suffering  from  tuberculosis ;
morning  sweats.

Man,  set.  27,  four  weeks  ago  had  gonorrhoea,  discharge
after  three  weeks  duration  ceased  of  itself;  swelling  of
testicle.

Man,  set.  27;  chancre.


MERCURIUS.  404

Woman,  set.  27,  unmarried,  subject  every  Autumn  to
attacks  of  angina;  rheumatic  pains.

Woman,  set.  28,  six  months  ago  became  mother  of  second
child;  peritonitis.

Man,  set.  28,  weak,  melancholy  temperament; chancre.

Man,  set.  28,  had  measles  when  six  years  old,  since  which
time  has  been  suffering;  otorrhoea  and  deafness.

Woman,  set.  29,  scrofulous,  suffered formerly  from  erup-

» tions  on  head;  cephalalgia  and  desire  to  commit  suicide.

Woman,  set.  30,  during  childhood  had  an  eruption  on  face
and  since  womanhood  is  subject  to  profuse  and  too  early
menstrual  discharge,  suffering  three  months;  tooth-
'  ache. s.

Man,  set.  30;  chancre.

Man,  set.  30,  sanguine  nervous  temperament,  delicate  com-
plexion and  body,  has  lived  for  some  time  in  Brazil ;
syphilitic  ophthalmia  and  rheumatism.

Woman,  set.  30 ;  irregular  menstruation.

Man,  set.  30,  subject  to  rheumatism  and  gastric  and  inter-
mittent fevers ;  typhoid  fever.

Man,  set.  30 ;  syphilis.

Man,  set.  30,  suffering  three  weeks ;  hsematuria.

Woman,  set.  30,  childless;  dysuria.

Woman,  set.  30,  delicate  constitution,  gentle  disposition,,
for  one  year  has  noticed  a  marked  decrease  of  visual
power,  particularly  of  r.  eye  ;  amblyopia.

Woman,  set.  30,  dark  complexioned,  eight  years  ago  fell
and  sprained  1.  ankle;  ulcer  on  leg. s.

Widow,  set.  32 ;  diarrhoea.

Woman,  set.  33,  syphilitic,  menses  regular ;  desire  to  mur-
der or  commit  suicide.

Man,  set.  34,  has  had  several  attacks ;  gonorrhoea.

Man,  set.  35,  porter ;  glossitis.

Man,  set.  35,  robust,  after  catching  cold ;  rheumatic  fever.

Woman,  set.  36,  suffering  from  affection  of  stomach  ;  met-
rorrhagia.

Woman,  set,  36,  after  external  application  of  mercury ;
stomatitis.

Woman,  set.  36,  no  children,  two  years  ago  had  inflamma-
tory affection  of  chest,  after  nursing  a  cachectic  husband  ;
phthisis.

Woman,  set.  36,  unmarried,  suffering  three  months  from
pain  in  stomach  ;  rheumatism.

Man,  set.  37  ;  chancre.

Woman,  set.  37,  nervous,  suffering  eight  days ;  diarrhoea.

Man,  set.  38 ;  chancre.

Man,  set.  39,  after  suppression  of  foot  sweat ;  desire  to  com-
mit suicide.


405  MERCURIUS.

Woman,  who  had  suffered  previously  from  two  abortions,
Secale  given  during  second  one  because  of  severe  hemor-
rhage, since  which  she  has  been  in  ill  health ;  threatened
abortion.

Woman,  arthritic,  living  in  squalor  and  poverty,  unable  to
nurse  child  on  account  of  pain  in  nipples,  fourteen  days
after  childbirth  ;  vesicular  eruption.

Woman,  after  an  orthodox  course  of  mercury ;  ulcer  on
leg. s.

Woman,  robust,  sanguine  temperament ;  diarrhoea.

Woman,  delicate,  psoric ;  rheumatic  ophthalmia.

Man,  suffering  every  Winter,  for  a  number  of  3^ears ;  eczema
of  hands, s.

Woman,  set.  40,  single ;  vaginitis, v.

Man,  get.  40,  suffering  one  year,  probably  after  catching
cold  ;  pain  and  stiffness  of  limbs.

Man,  £et.  40,  strong ;  perityphlitis.

Woman,  set.  40,  sanguine  choleric  temperament,  ver}'  tall,
after  a  cutting,  cold,  east  wind ;  inflammation  of  liver.

Man,  get.  40,  robust,  suffering  six  days ;  dysentery.

Woman,  set.  40  ;  glossitis.

Man,  £et.  40 ;  rheumatism  of  shoulder.

Man,  set.  40 ;  chancre.

Woman,  set.  40,  brunette,  lively,  choleric  temperament,
previously  suffered  from  similar  eruption  ;  eczema.

Man,  set.  41 ;  muscular  rheumatism.

Man,  set.  48,  scrofulous,  suffering  several  weeks,  after  catch-
ing cold  while  bathing  in  open  air ;  croupous  inflamma-
tion of  rectum.

Woman,  set.  50,  after  habitual  use  of  blue  pills  for  consti-
pation ;  ulcers  on  forehead.

Woman,  set.  50,  suffering  three  months  ;  toothache, s.

Woman,  set.  50,  married  seven  years,  no  children,  nervous
temperament,  had  rheumatism  in  her  youth ;  toothache.

Woman,  set.  50;  rheumatism.

Woman,  set.  50,  subject  to  attacks  of  prosopalgia,  after  ris-
ing from  bed  too  soon  after  attack  of  1.  sided  pneumonia;
pneumonia.

Man,  set.  50,  drunkard  ;  glossitis.

Man,  set.  50;  ulcers  in  mouth.

Strong  man,  set.  50,  subject  to  gouty  pains  in  joints ;  iritis.

Woman,  set.  53,  sick  last  four  years ;  rheumatism.

Man,  set.  54,  strong ;  glossitis.

Woman,  set.  54,  small,  plethoric ;  glossitis.

Man,  set.  55;  dysentery.

Woman,  set.  60,  robust;  typhoid  fever.

Man,  set.  60,  tailor,  eruption  two  years  ago,  first  small,  ele-
vated spots  on  back  of  wrists,  gradually  extending  to
other  portions  of  body;  prurigo, v.


MERCURIUS.  406

Woman,  £et.  67,  subject  to  erysipelatous  inflammations ;
inflammation  of  eye.

Woman,  set.  70,  plethoric  habit,  bilous  diathesis,  subject  to
fluent  hemorrhoids;  bilious  diarrhoea.

Man,  set.  70,  always  good  health,  after  cessation  of  an  hab-
itual expectoration ;  typhoid  fever.

Woman,  set.  70 ;  diarrhcea.
^^  Relations.  Antidoted  by:  Aurum,  Asaf.,  Bellad.,  Carbo  veg.,
Cinchon.,  Dulcam.,  Ferrum,  Gnajac,  l^Hejmr,  lodum,
Kali  chlor.,  Kali  hyd.,  i Laches.,  Mezer.,  iNitr.  ac,  Staphis.,
Stillingia,  ^Sulphur  and,  according  to  Guernsey,  by
Mercur.,  itself  high,  all  symptoms  agreeing.

It  antidotes:  bad  effects  from  sugar;  stings  of  insects ;  ail-
ments from  arsenic  or  copper  vapors ;  Aurum,  Antimov.,
Laches.,  Bellad.,  Opium,  Fhytol.,  Valer.,  Cinchon.,  Dulcam.,
Mezer.

Compatible:  after  Bellad.,  Hejmr,  Laches.,  Sulphur.  Before
Arsen.,  Asaf.,  Bellad.,  Calc.  ostr.,  Cinchon.,  Lycop.,  Nitr.  ac,
Phosphor.,  Pulsat.,  Rhus  tox.,  Sepia,  Sulphur.

Incompatible :  Silic.


.407  MERCURIUS  CORROSIVUS.


MERCURIUS  CORROSIVUS.

Bichloride  of  Mercury ;  Corrosive  Sublimate.  Hg  CL.

Provings  by  Bucliner  upon  himself,  Forstner,  Gerster,  Held,  Xusser  and
Pemerl  (Allg.  Zeit.  fiirHom.,  1849);  Eobinson  (B.  J.  of  Horn.,  vol.  25,  p.  324) ;
Haight  (U.  S.  J.  of  Horn.,  vol.  1,  p.  7) ;  Brewer  (Med.  Inv.,  vol.  7,  p.  160) ;  and
Berridge  (Am.  J.  H.  M.  M.,  vol.  8,  p.  126).

Toxicological  reports  are  numerous;  those  mentioned  by  Hahnemann  in  his
Materica  Medica  Pur  a  are  given  prominence.

Clinical  Authorities. — Scrofulous  ophthalmia  (68  cases),  Bocker,  Biick.
Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  1,  p.  273  ;  Hirsch,  Miiller,  Gerson,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  5,  p.  126 ;
Rheumatic  ophthalmia,  Bocker,  B.  J.  H.,  vol.  6,  p.  495 ;  Syphilitic  iritis,  Norton,
Eaue's  Eec,  1874,  p.  81 ;  Eeil,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  5,  p.  108;  Syndesmitis  exan-
thenuUica,  pustulm- form,  Payr,  Eaue's  Eec,  1870,  p.  105  ;  Phlyctenular  ophthalmia
(5  cases),  Harper,  Times  Eetros.,  vol.  3,  p.  33  ;  Conjunctivitis,  Norton,  Oph.  Therap.,
p.  114;  Blepharitis,  Miiller,  Eaue's  Eec,  1875,  p.  39;  Ophthalmia  tarsi  (Blephari-
tis marginalia),  Von  Tagen,  Eaue's  Eec,  1874,  pp.  70,  71 ;  Scrofulous  ozcena,  Gerson,
Eiick.  Kl.  Erf,  vol.  5,  p.  173 ;  Eruption  on  face,  Snelling,  N.  A.  J.  H.,  vol.  9,
p.  507  ;  Facial  neuralgia-  (4  cases).  Harper,  Times  Eetros.,  vol.  3,  p.  32 ;  Inflam-
matory swelling  of  uvula,  Goullon,  Eaue's  Eec,  1870,  p.  141;  1871,  p.  72;  Sore
throat,  Boole,  Eaue's  Eec,  1870,  p.  143;  Hawkes,  Org.,  vol.  2,  p.  233;  Inflamma-
tion of  fauces,  Dittrich,  Eaue's  Eec,  1874,  p.  107;  Condylomata  and  syphilitic  ulcers
in  throat,  Welsch,  Eaue's  Eec,  1875,  p.  171 ;  Diphtheria,  Hofrichter,  Eiick.  Kl.
Erf,  vol.  5,  p.  245;  Chronic  dyspepsia,  Dudley,  Eaue's  Eec,  1875,  p.  139;  Colic
and  ineffectual  urging  to  stool,  Allg.  Horn.  Ztg.,  vol.  113,  p.  23  ;  Diarrhoea,  Kasemann,
Eiick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  1,  p.  840 ;  Croupous  enteritis,  Gerson,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf,  vol.  5,
p.  421 ;  Dysenteric  stools  during  attack  of  cholera,  Lembke,  Eeubel,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf.,
vol.  1,  p.  950;  Autumnal  dysentery,  Hahnemann,  Mat.  Med.  Pura ;  Drysdale,  B.  J.
H.,  vol.  25,  p.  109 ;  Dysentery,  Goullon,  B.  J.  H.,  vol.  32,  p.  685 ;  Miihlenbein,
Kopp,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  1,  p.  840 ;  Hering,  Hartmann,  Henke,  Diez,  Tietze,
Kidd,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  1,  pp.  873-7  ;  Gauwerky,  Hirsch,  Buck.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  5,
p.  445  ;  Gushing,  Org.,  vol.  1,  p.  222 ;  Taber,  Org.,  vol.  1,  p.  326 ;  Dunham,  Hom.
Eev.,  vol.  3,  p.  169 ;  Crowell,  Gin.  Med.  Adv.,  vol.  3,  p.  84 ;  Buchner,  Eaue's
Eec,  1873,  p.  124 ;  Chronic  constipation,  Ussher,  Bernard  and  Strong,  p.  69 ;
Prolapsus  ani,  Haustein,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf,  vol.  1,  p.  992 ;  Albuminuria,  Peters,  N.  A.
J.  H.,  vol.  4,  p.  219 ;  Hirsch,  Quaglio.  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  5,  p.  523 ;  Schley,  Am.
Hom.  Eev.,  vol.  7,  p.  411 ;  Goodno,  MSS. ;  Post-diphtheritic  albuminuria,  Newton,
Hom.  Eev.,  vol.  14,  p.  411 ;  Balanitis,  Eosenberg,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf,  vol.  2,  p.  88 ;
Gonorrhcea,  Gollman,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf,  vol.  5,  p.  545;  Gilchrist,  Surg.,  p.  540;
Cracked  nipples,  Griesselich,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf,  vol.  2,  p.  418;  Subacute  laryngitis,
Nankvill,  Eaue's  Eec,  1872,  p.  104;  Condylomata  in  larynx,  Welsch,  Eaue's  Eec,
1875,  p.  171;  PMisis  >r/cZo,  Hartmann-  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf,  vol.  3,  p.  386;  Cough,
Hartmann,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf,  vol.  4,  p.  409 ;  Necrosis  metatarsi,  Hornby,  Eaue's  Eec,


MERCUmUS  CORROSIVUS.  408

1870,  p.  282 ;  Paralysis  in  young  children,  Peters,  N.  A.  J.  H.,  vol.  4,  p.  348  ;  Gonor-
rhoeal  rheumatism,  Rosenberg,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  2,  p.  89 ;  Syphilis,  Haustein,
Eiick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  2,  p.  144;  Gerson,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  5,  p.  565;  Chancre,
Schwab,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  2,  p.  144 ;  Indurated  chancre,  Eeil,  Bojanus,  Gerson,
Gollman,  Meyer,  Stern,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  5,  p.  562 ;  Secondary  syphilis,  Lnkens,
Eaue's  Eec,  1872,  p.  162;  Exostoses,  Hofrichter,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  2,  p.  143  ;
Condylomata,  Hedges,  Eaue's  Eec,  1874,  p.  222 ;  Smallpox  (used  as  a  gargle),  Bolle,
Eaue's  Eec,  1872,  p.  254.

^  Mind. I  Greatly  depressed  ;  very  ill  humored.

liStares  at  persons  who  talk  to  him  and  does  not  under-
stand them.
I  I  Weakness  of  intellect.
I  Mind  sluggish,  with  torpid  digestion.
1  I  Anxiety  preventing  sleep.

■  Stupor  and  delirium.

^  Sensorium. ■  Vertigo :  with  coldness,  cold  perspiration ;  with
deafness,  when  stooping.
I  Head  much  affected,  with  coma.
^  Inner  Head, l Violent  headache  in  forehead;  stitches.

I  I  Violent  rush  of  blood  to  head,  with  severe  pain  in  fore-
head and  temples ;  burning  in  cheeks.
I  Pain  in  head,  like  drawing  in  pericranium.

■  Tearing  as  if  in  bone  above  1.  eye,  near  root  of  nose,  and

in  other  parts  of  bone.
I  I  Heaviness  of  head.

■  Syphilitic  tumors  in  brain  ;  vertigo.

*  Outer  Head, n  Profuse  perspiration  on  forehead.
I  I  Swelling  of  head  and  neck.

■  Falling  out  of  hair.

^  Sight  and  Eyes. ■Excessive  photophobia  and  acrid  lach-
rymation.

■  Objects  appear  smaller;  or  double  vision.

■  Pupils  contracted  and  insensible.

■  Eyes  painful.

■  Pain  behind  eyeballs,  as  if  they  would  be  forced  out,

■  Retinitis  hemorrhagica,  or  apoplexia  retinae.

■  Retinitis  albuminurica ; also  with  tearing  at  eyebrow,

bones  tender.

■  Nephritic  retinitis  during  pregnancy;  lids  oedematous,

edges  swollen,  burning,  smarting ;  albumen  in  urine.

■  Cyciitis ;  choroiditis ;  iridocyclitis  or  iridochoroiditis.

■  Episcleritis,  with  much  pain  in  and  around  eye  at  night.
I  I  Severe,  burning,  cramping  pains. ^Syphilitis  iritis.

■  Iritis,  especially  if  syphilitic ;  pains  severe  over  eyes  and

through  them,  through  head  and  in  temples; < at
night.

■  Keratoiritis;  posterior  synechia;  causes  them  to  soften.


409  MERCURIUS  CORROSIVUS.

iHypopion  occurring  in  abscess  of  cornea  or  iritis.
I  iSjnall,  unclean,  red  ulcer  at  edge  of  cornea,  with  much
itching  and  burning.

■  Ulcers  on  cornea  of  scrofulous  children;  ulcer  rapidly

affects  surrounding  parts ;  ichorous  discharge ;  intense
pain  and  photophobia.

iPhlyctenulse,  deep  ulcers  on  cornea;  discharge  ichorous,
acrid,  making  surrounding  parts  sore;  pimples  around
eyes  like  small  boils.

I  1  Cannot  look  up  and  resists  any  attempt  to  open  eyes ;
eyelids  externally  tumid ;  photophobia  intense,  when
eyelids  are  separated,  profuse  lachrymation ;  conjunc-
tival membrane  red  and  injected,  small  ulcers  on  cornea.
^Phlyctenular  ophthalmia

I  I  Photophobia  and  lachrymation ;  conjunctiva  inflamed,
bunches  of  vessels  coming  towards  cornea  and  terminat-
ing in  vesicles.

I  I  Photophobia,  general  injection  of  conjunctiva,  pinkish
zone  around  cornea,  with  small  vesicles  at  its  margin  ;
child  turns  from  light  and  keeps  head  down,  resisting
all  attempts  to  examine.

I  'Eye  is  very  red,  bunches  of  injected  vessels  terminating
in  vesicles ;  constant  escape  of  scalding  tears,  intolerance
of  light,  with  spasmodic  closure  of  orbicularis.

I  Chronic  ulceration  of  cornea.

■  Pustular  form  of  syndesmitis  exanthematica.

I  Ophthalmia  neonatorum,  with  acrid  discharges ;  caused
by  syphilitic  or  gonorrhoeal  leucorrhoea.

■  Scrofulous  inflammation  of  eyes,  erysipelatous  in  charac-

ter, with  great  oedema ;  discharges  thin ;  skin  of  surround-
ing parts  excoriated;  intense  pain;  spasm  of  lids;  <  at
night.
■Numerous,  bright  red,  rather  fine,  injected  bloodvessels,
proceeding  from  larger  trunks  in  conjunctiva  sclerotica,
run  from  conjunctiva  bulbi  over  edge  of  cornea,  in  a  very
slightly  tortuous  course,  and  there  divide  into  numerous
branches,  without  forming  many  anastomoses,  their  dis-
position is  arborescent;  the  finer  vessels,  without  com-
municating much  with  each  other,  gradually  decrease
in  calibre  and  are  lost  imperceptibly  almost  in  centre
of  cornea,  or  in  vicinity  of  small  ulcers  that  are  gene-
rally seated  about  centre  of  cornea.  ^Erithistic  scrofu-
lous ophthalmia.

■  Scrofulous  inflammation  of  eyes,  erethistic  form ;  lids  red,

greatly  swollen  and  spasmodically  closed;  great  photo-
phobia, child  sits  in  a  dark  corner  of  room,  or  covers
eyes  tightly  with  hand  or  walks  about  with  eyes  closed
and  head  sunk  upon  breast; on  attempting  to open


MERCURIUS  CORROSIVUS.  410

eyes  hot  tears  gush  from  them,  causing  redness,  rawness
and  a  pustular  eruption  on  surrounding  parts;  intense
redness  of  conjunctiva,  palpebral  and  bulbar;  on  latter
bundles  of  vessels  run  towards  cornea  and  pass  over
edge  which  looks  dim.

■  Burning  in  eyes.

I  Chronic  catarrhal  conjunctivitis,  tending  towards  tra-
choma, with  redness  and  excoriation  of  lids  and  a  dull
feeling,  with  itching  in  eyes  in  evening.

iBlepharitis  scrofulosa;  margins  of  lids  red  and  raw,  with
crusts  and  ulcers  upon  lids;  tendency  towards  formation
of  ec-  or  entropium.

■  Indurated  lids;  secretion  thin  and  excoriating;  noctur-

nal aggravation.

■  Lids:  oedematous  or  erysipelatous;  red,  excoriated;  edges

swollen,  burning,  smarting;  edges  covered  with  thick
crusts  or  pustules;  spasmodically  closed.

■  Since  childhood,  twenty  years  ago,  after  abuse  of  calomel,

highly  inflamed  lids,  very  much  thickened  and  infil-
trated; cilise  matted  in  bunches  along  upper  and  lower
margins;  profuse  lachrymation  of  a  muco-purulent
nature;  surrounding  integument  excoriated,  presenting
appearance  as  if  burned;  intolerable  burning,  conjunc-
tivae, both  palpebral  and  ocular  portion,  much  injected,
the  former  presenting  a  rough,  granular  appearance;
vision  more  or  less  impaired,  objects  look  dim,  as  if  en-
veloped in  a  halo  or  mist,  eyeballs  feel  tense,  sensitive
to  both  light  and  pressure ;  yearly  attacks.  ^Ophthal-
mia tarsi.

■  Tearing  as  if  in  bone  above  1.  eye,  near  root  of  nose,  and

in  other  parts  of  bone.
*  Hearing  and  Ears. ■  Violent  pulsation  in  ears,  especially
in  left.

■  Inflammation,  with  stitches  in  ear.

■  Discharge  of  fetid  pus  from  ear.

'^  Smell  and  Nose. ■Frequent  nosebleed.

■  Swelling  and  redness  of  nose  ;  frequently  sore  nostrils.

■  ■Excessive  fluent  coryza;  loss  of  smell.

■  Nose  feels  stopped  up,  at  same  time  runs ;  rawness,  smart-

ing in  nostrils.

■  Nose  sore  and  stuffed  up  with  gluey  secretion.

■  Ozsena,  discharge  from  nose  like  glue,  drying  up  in  pos-

terior nares ;  perforation  of  septum.

■  Scrofulous  ozsena;  poorly  nourished  subjects.

^  Upper  Face. ■  Yellow  color  of  face ;  countenance  denoting-
exhaustion  ;  paleness  of  distorted  face.
I  I  Face:  flushed  and  puffy,  or  pale and anxious,  with
pinched  features ;  much  swollen  ;  puffy  and  bright  red.


411  MERCURIUS  CORROSIVUS.

I  Swelling  and  turning  up  of  upper  lip  ;  dark  red.
■  Face  and  cheeks  swollen,  hard,  red,  bloated.
I  (Edematous  swelling  of  face,  paleness;  albuminuria.
I  I  Pain  in  side  of  face,  darting  along  upper  jaw,  gums
and roots  of  teeth; so  intense  as  to  impair general
health  and  to  compel  her  to  remain  in  bed;  face  some-
what swollen  ;  considerable  tenderness  on  pressure  over
superior  maxilla. ^Prosapalgia.
I  I  Severe  pain  in  1.  side  of  face,  darting  along  both  jaws
and  upward  to  temple; pain remits during day,  <
about  9  P.M.
I  I  Severe  pain  in  face  and  side  of  neck,  commencing  at
4  P.M.  and  continuing  all  night  until  daybreak ; pain
gradually  <  until  intolerable,. her  night's  rest  is  com-
pletely destroyed,  has  to  get  out  of  bed  and  walk  about
in  agony ;  pain  shoots  over  face,  is  intense  below  malar
bone  and  zygomatic  arch,  darts  along  gums  and  down
neck  from  ear;  some  swelling  of  face.
I  I  For  three  weeks  almost  constant  pain  in  r.  side  of  face,
affecting  chiefly  upper  and  lower  jaw,  extending  for-
ward to  middle  line ; pain  abates,  never  entirely  sub-
sides, <  from  4  till  10  p.m.,  after  which  it  gradually  >  ;
pulse  80,  weak ;  tongue  coated  with  a  creamy  fur;  breath
very  offensive.
^  Lower  Face. I  Stiffness  of  jaws,  and  soreness.

iLips:  dry,  cracked,  black;  swollen  and incrusted  with

a  dry  secretion  ;  excessively  swollen  and  tender.
I  Lower  lip  considerably  swollen  and  a  small  blister  inside

of  it.
I  Submaxillary  glands  enlarged  ;  tender.
^"  Teeth  and  Gums, i Looseness  of  teeth; they  pain  and
drop  out.
■Sleep  at  night  disturbed  by  toothache  with  anxious  sen-
sation.
llToothache  with  swelling  of  gums.
I  Much  sordes  about  teeth.

I  Gums  red  and  tender,  with  some  swelling  of  glands  be-
neath jaw.
llGums: swollen,  pale and spongy; ulcerated; bleed
easily; covered with false membrane; gangrenous;
purple ;  red  and  detached  from  teeth.
"Taste  and  Tongue. I Taste:  bitter;  slimy;  salty;  putrid
in  morning;  astringent  metallic.
■  Tongue: could  not  be  protruded; red,  with  blackish
coat;  coated,  moist,  edges  red; posteriorly  pale,  dirty
yellow,  rather  thick,  coating  extending  forward  along
sides;  covered  with  a  greyish  white  crust; white  and
so  much  swollen  that  he  could  not  protrude  it ;  white


MERCURIUS  CORROSIVUS.  412

in  forepart,  posteriorly  yellow ;  swollen,  pale  yellow,
protruding  from  lips,  which  are  swollen ;  very  much
swollen  and  extremely  inflamed ;  coated  with  thick
white  mucus,  or  dry  and  red  ;  papillae  elevated,  straw-
berrylike; stiff;  and  lips  whitish,  contracted.
^^  Inner  Mouth.  iSensation  as  if  mouth  was  scalded;  burn-
ing extending  to  stomach.
I  Mouth  dry,  with  unquenchable  thirst.

■  Salivary  glands  very  much  swollen.

uPtyalism,  with  salty  taste;  saliva  bloody,  yellowish,
tough,  acrid.

■  Discharge  of  albuminous  mucus  from  mouth.

■  Soreness  of  mouth  and  fauces.

■  Inflammation  of  mouth  and  gums,  with  constant  dis-

charge of  clear  water.

■  ■Buccal  cavity  and  lips  covered  with  aphthse; on  lips

they  are  surrounded  by  vesicles  which  burn.

■  Mouth  terribly  swollen;  lips  swollen  and  everted ;  ptyal-

ism. 6'Aphthte.

■  Ulcers  (phagadenic)  in  mouth,  throat  or  on  gums,  with

fetid  breath.
I  I  Exudations  on  mucous  membranes,  extending  to  tonsils.
^^  Throat. ■  ■Pillars  of  velum  palati  swollen  and  dark  red.

■  Uvula  swollen,  elongated  and  dark  red.

I  I  Inflammatory  swelling  of  uvula  to  size  of  half  a  finger,
lying  upon  tongue  and  making  swallowing  very  painful
and  difficult.

I  I  In  tonsillary  folds,  on  edges  of  pillars,  soft  greyish  ex-
crescences like  sloughs  or  false  membranes.

■  Tonsils  swollen  and  covered  with  ulcers.

■  Greyish  yellow  ulcers  as  large  as  a  pea  on  1.  tonsil,  sen-

sitive to  touch.

■  Sense  of  dryness  in  fauces.

I  I  Inflammation  of  fauces  from  taking  cold  after  a  bath  ;
uvula  much  enlarged ;  entire  fauces  dark  red,  <  on  r.
side ;  no  swelling  of  tonsils.

■  Swallowing  attended  with  a  violent  spasm  of  glottis.

■  Act  of  swallowing  even  fluids  produces  great  pain.

■  Retching  and  vomiting  on  attempting  to  swallow.

■  Throat  intensely  inflamed,  preventing  swallowing  and

causing  suffocation.

■  ■Burning  in  fauces,  throat  and  oesophagus.

■Raw,  stinging,  smarting  pain  on  swallowing  even  fluids,
which  return  through  nose;  sense  of  smell  and  taste
impaired;  thick  yellow  discharge  from  nostrils;  nasal
voice ;  much  saliva  in  mouth,  sometimes  running  out
at  night;  pains  along  tibia  <  at  night;  uvula  and
nearly  all  of  soft  palate  eaten  away ;  pharynx  and  fau-


413  MERCURIUS  CORROSIVUS.

ces  ulcerated,  covered  with  dirty  looking  pus  and  emit-
ting very  disagreeable  odor. ^Sore  throat.

■  Constriction  in  throat.

I  Throat  enormously  swollen,  threatening  suffocation.

■  Pricking  in  throat  as  from  needles.

I  Pain  in  throat  on  swallowing,  and  beneath  larynx  she
experiences  a  quick  pain  from  outward  pressure.

■  Pharynx  dark  red,  pressure  externally  excites  pain.

■  Exudation  covers  entire  fauces  and  extends  into  nose,

from  which  profuse discharge; rapid destruction  of
parts. ^Diphtheria.

■  Inflammation  of  throat;  on  second  day  diphtheritic  ex-

udation covered  tonsils,  uvula,  velum  palati  and  pos-
terior wall  of  pharynx;  high  fever;  delirium  at  night;
burning  thirst;  deglutition  almost  impossible;  can
hardly  open  mouth ;  salivary  glands  swollen  ;  lips  dry,
brown,  cracked,  bleeding;  discharge  of  offensive  smell-
ing saliva  from  mouth,  occasionally  mixed  with  blood;
very  offensive  smelling  breath ;  offensive  smelling  acrid
discharge  from  stuffed  up  nose;  lachrymation.  ^Diph-
theria.
"Appetite.  Thirst.  Desires.  Aversions.  ■Attacks  of
violent  hunger. ^Cancer  of  stomach.

■  No  appetite.

■  Thirst:  urgent; great;  excessive; extreme; tense;  vio-

lent; unquenchable; insatiable; burning; for cold
water  in  large  quantities.

■  Repugnance  to  hot  food  and  great  desire  for  cold  food.

*^  Hiccough,  Belching,  Nausea  and  Vomiting.  "Spas-
modic and  very  painful  retching.
■Vomiting:  of  green,  bilious  matter;  incessant;  streaks
of  blood  in  matter  vomited;  of  albuminous  matter;  of
tough  or  stringy  mucus;  of  green,  bitter  substances;  of
bile;  of  blood;  like  coffee  grounds  with  coagulated
blood;  of  pus.
■Drink  regurgitates  through  nose.

^^  Scrobiculum  and  Stomach.  ■Distension  and  soreness  of
pit  of  stomach,  not  permitting  least  touch,  even  of
clothing.

■  Burning  gnawing,  darting  pains  in  stomach.

I  I  Cramp  in  stomach  and  vomiting,  after  eating  rye  bread.

■  Distension and soreness  of  epigastrium, cannot bear

clothing  tight  or  even  close  around  waist,  because  it
causes  both  oppression  of  breathing  and  pain;  consti-
pation ;  pain  and  distension  in  colon,  especially  trans-
verse portion.  ^Chronic  dyspepsia.
^^  Hypochondria.  ■Pain  in  liver  and  r.  shoulder,  with  fre-
quent nausea  and  obstinate  chronic  constipation;  jaun-
diced.


MERCURIUS  CORROSIVUS.  414

iStitches:  in  hepatic  region;  as  if  in  middle  of  liver.
^^  Abdomen, l  Abdomen  swollen,  hard  and  sensitive  to  press-
ure, especially  about  umbilicus.

■  Cutting  below  navel.

I  Bloated  abdomen,  very  painful  to  least  touch.

I I  Peculiar  bruised  sensation  in  abdomen,  especially  in
csecal  region  and  following  course  of  transverse  colon ;
painful  to  moderate  pressure,  as  though  bruised.

■  Intolerable  cutting  pains  in  abdomen  and  constant  urg-

ing to  stool,  followed  by  slight  discharge  of  blood  and
mucus;  despondent,  walks  up  and  down.
^"  Stool  and  Rectum,  ll Stools:  hot, scanty,  frequent;  bloody;
slimy;  containing  shreds  of  mucous  membrane;  offen-
sive; yellow,  green,  bilious,  followed  by  slime  and
blood ;  with  tenesmus  and  insupportable  cutting  colicky
pains;  pasty,  dark  green,  blackish,  offensive;  tenacious;
<  in  Fall ; <  after  midnight.

■  Frequent  ineffectual  urging  to  stool,  violent  pain.
1 1  Painful  bloody  discharges  with  vomiting.

■  During  stool:  burning  in  anus.

■  Before,  during  and  after  stool: urging and  tenesmus;

cutting  colic.

■  ■Tenesmus,  persistent,  incessant.

■  After  catching  cold,  lassitude  in  limbs,  pains  in  abdo-

men in  evening,  continuing  throughout  night;  thin,
watery  discharges  of  red  color,  as  if  purely  of  blood;
stools  especially  copious  at  night  and  accompanied  by
pain,  preventing  sleep;  very  slight  fever;  no  thirst;
must  lie  in  bed. ^Diarrhoea.

■  Diarrhoea, with  pain  in abdomen  and  prolapsus  ani;

evacuations  of  mucus  and  undigested  food;  bleeding
from  prolapsed  anus,  blood  escaping  in  drops;  itching
of  skin  with  bleeding  after  scratching;  eruption  of  ves-
icles and  pustules.

■  Croupous  enteritis; severe,  burning,  corrosive  pain  in

tion and  bloody  mucus,  accompanied  by  intolerable
tenesmus.

■  After  Aeon,  when  urging  and  bloody  discharges  continue.

^Dysentery.

■  Very  much  pure  blood  is  passed  with  stool ;  much  tenes-

mus. ^Dysentery.
■Stool  yellow  green;  tenesmus;  vomiting  bile;  cramps  in
calves;  stitches  in  side;  painful  bloody  stool  with  vom-
iting. ^Dysentery.

■  Severe  dysentery  brought  on  by  a  draught  of  foul,  cold

water,  when  much  heated;  straining  almost  continuous,
pain  in  bowels  severe,  evacuations  of  mucus  and  blood


415  MERCURIUS  CORROSIVUS.

every  quarter  of  an  hour; extreme  prostration,  with
clean  tongue  and  some  appetite.
■Very  frequent, small,  bloody,  slimy  discharges,  great
pain,  constant  crying  and  rolling  in  bed. ^Dysentery.

■  Constant  heat  of  skin ;  quick,  rather  small  pulse ;  tongue

dry,  with  yellow  coat ;  thirst  not  excessive ;  abdomen
sore  on  pressure,  somewhat  distended;  constant  unin-
terrupted pressure  to  stool  felt  in  sacral  and  hypogastric
regions;  this  pressure  though  very  distressing  seems
utterly  ineffectual;  stools  of  bloody  slime  in  small
masses;  great  tenesmus  vesicae;  urine  scanty,  hot  and
bloody;  disposition  quiet,  slightly  despondent.  ^Dys-
entery.
I  Cutting  pains  in  rectum  ;  twenty  to  thirty  stools  in  twenty-
four  hours;  greenish  ^^ellow  masses  mixed  with  bloody
mucus;  tenesmus,  with  constricting  pain  and  prolapsus
of  rectum;  tongue  coated  white;  pulse  weak,  quick;
great  emaciation  ;  dry,  parchmentlike  skin.  ^Dysentery.

■  When  discharges  of  cholera  assume  a  dysenteric  charac-

ter and  Phosphor,  fails.

I  I  Constipation  from  pseudo-membranous  inflammation  of
some  portion  of  large  intestines.

I  I  Hemorrhoidal  colic  with  congestion  of  liver  and  ab-
dominal venous  stasis.

■Violent  burning  in  rectum.

I  Oozing  of  corrosive  ichor  from  anus,  excoriating  external
parts.
^^  "Urinary  Organs. ■  i Tenesmus  vesicee  with  intense  burn-
ing in  urethra,  a  discharge  of  mucus  and  blood  with
urine  or  after  it.

■  Tenesmus  of  bladder;  urine  suppressed.

■  Burning  in  orifice  of  urethra.

■  ■  Micturition  frequent;  urine  in  drops  with  much  pain.

■  ■Urine:  scanty  or  increased;  hot;  burning;  bloody;  j)assed

in  drops  with  great  pain;  scanty,  brown,  with  brick
dust  sediment;  pale  and  copious;  containing  filaments,
flocks  or  fleshlike  pieces  of  mucus;  albuminous,  abun-
dantly coagulated  by  heat  as  well  as  by  nitric  acid  ;
under  microscope  presented  granular  fatty  tubuli  in
large  numbers  showing  on  their  surface  epithelial  cells
of  tubuli  uriniferi,  also  in  a  state  of  granular  fatty  de-
generation; no  longer  limpid,  rather  thick,  but  acid  as
before,  sp.  gr.  1016;  containing  fibrin  or  fat  globules.

■  Albuminuria;  after  diphtheria  or  in  Morbus  Brightii;

acute  early  stages,  particularly  if  caused  hy  abuse  of
alcohol,  cold  or  portal  stasis;  bilious  diarrhoea;  collec-
tion of  much  mucus  in  mouth  and  throat.

■  Pinched  and  shrivelled  appearance  of  face;  weariness


MERCURIUS  CORROSIVUS.  416

and  melancholy;  uneasiness  in  lumbar  region;  urine
dark  and  scanty,  looks  as  if  mixed  with  blood,  shows  a
thick  cloud  of  albumen  to  test. ^Albuminuria.
^^  Male  Sexual  Organs, i  i  Violent  erections  during  sleep,

I  I  Fine,  painful  stinging  in  1.  testicle.

I  Penis  and  testes  swollen  enormously.

I  Paraphimosis.

I  Chronic  balanitis;  greasy,  fatty,  offensive  smelling  dis-

charge; several  excoriated  places  on  corona,  repeatedly
healing  and  then  becoming  sore  again.

I I  Gonorrhoea:  greenish,  <  at  night;  burning,  smarting  on
urination;  at  first  thin,  afterwards  thick;  biting  pain
on  urinating;  stitches  extending  back  through  urethra;
suppuration  between  glans  and  prepuce ;  glans  feels  hot,
painful  when  touched;  burning,  itching,  stinging  and
throbbing  in  urethra ;  urine  passes  in  feeble  stream ;  dis-
charge acrid,  excoriating;  mild  ulceration  about  glans,
prepuce  or  within  meatus;  throbbing  in  urethra.

iChancre:  on  inner  surface  of  prseputium  or  on  corona
glandis;  margin  of  soft  chancre  dark  red,  painful  and
easily  bleeding;  neighboring  parts  oedematous,  hot  and
painful;  thin  pus  stains  linen,  like  melted  tallow ;  as-
sumes a  phagedenic  appearance  and  secretes  a  thin  ich-
orous pus ;  ichor  adhering  to  bottom  of  ulcer;  indurated
Hunterian,  with  lardaceous  bottom.
^^  Female  Sexual  Organs.  ■  Fibroid  tumors,  with  profuse,
muco-purulent,  excoriating  leucorrhoea.

I  Aching  pain,  succeeding  pressing  or  touching  os  uteri
during  an  embrace.

■  Abrasion,  ulceration  arising  from  overstimulated,  then

broken  down  glandular  structure. ^Disease  of  uterus.
I  Menses  too  early  and  too  profuse.

■  Leucorrhoea :  pale,  yellow ;  smelling  sweetish ;  tinged  with

blood ;  mucous  discharge  as  thin  as  water.

■  Burning  heat  and  pain  in  genitals.

■  Intense  inflammation  of  vulva.

I  Primary,  phagedenic  syphilitic  ulcers,  with  profuse  and
bad  suppuration.
^*  Pregnancy. Parturition. Lactation, i Nipples crack,

bleed ;  severe  pain  when  attempting  to  nurse.
^  Voice  and  Larynx. Trachea  and  Bronchia. ■  Hoarse-
ness quickly  changing  with  normal  voice.
C Hoarseness  or  aphonia;  burning  and  stinging  in  trachea;
tightness  across  chest.

■  Larynx  and  epiglottis  pain  when  swallowing  food;  pain

<  when  depressing  tongue;  cutting  in  throat  as  from  a
knife.
I  I  Broad condylomata  in  larynx,  nearly  closing  glottis ;
hoarseness  and  dyspnoea  (assisted  by  Nitr.  ac).  /^Syphilis.


417  MERCURIUS  CORROSIVUS.

^'  Respiration.  ■  Respiration  very  difficult;  slow;  interrupted,
sighing;  palpitation.

""  Cough  I  I  Emaciation  with  hectic  fever,  accompanied  by  a
phthisical  condition;  severe,  short  cough,  at  times  with
expectoration  and  gagging;  cough  affects  him  very
much  and  threatens  to  rob  him  of  his  remaining  strength.

I  Coughs  up considerable  amount  of  mucus  tinged  with

blood.
^^  Inner  Chest  and  Lungs, i  Shooting  pains  in  chest.

I I  Frequent  stitches  shoot  through  thorax.

■  Sticking  in  upper  part  of  r.  side  of  chest  deep  internally,

scarcely  <  by  deep  inspiration.

■  Sticking  pain  in  lower  portion  of  r.  side  of  chest.

I  I  Great  oppression  of  chest;  attacks  of  dyspnoea;  difficult,
sobbing,  sighing  respiration;  hoarse  voice;  hollow;
deep  cough  without  expectoration,  owing  to  weakness  of
lungs;  cough  asthmatic,  <  talking,  with  white,  tough,
occasionally  greenish  mucous  expectoration,  <  at  night;
dryness  in  throat  and  trachea,  causing  constant  desire
to  drink ;  transient  stitches  in  various  parts  of  chest ;
attacks  of  heat,  with  increased  pulse,  cold  hands  and
feet  and  profuse  sweat ;  great  irritability  of  mind  and
frequent  changing  mood. ^Phthisis  florida.

I  Haemoptysis.
Heart,  Pulse  and  Circulation. 1 1  Pain  in  prsecordial
region.

■  Heart sounds  dull  and  intermittent;  tremulous  undulat-

ing motion  of  heart ;  prsecordial  anxiety.

■  Palpitation  of  heart  in  sleep.

■  Pulse:  intermittent,  89;  small,  intermittent;  irregular,

intermittent ;  intermittent  and  uneven ;  small,  weak,
intermittent,  sometimes  trembling.

^"  Outer  Chest. ■■Painful  glandular  swellings  about  nipple.

^^  Neck  and  Back.  ■Pains  in  head,  back  and  limbs;  kid-
neys affected,

■  Glands  of  neck  hard  and  swollen.

■  Dorsal  decubitus.

■  iLies  on  back  with  knees  drawn  up;  Pott's  disease.

^^  Upper  Limbs.  •  l  Arm  much  swollen  up  to  shoulder,  red
and  covered  with  vesicles.

I  I  Rheumatic  pains  in  1.  shoulder  and  shoulder  blade.

I  I  Deltoid  muscle  feels  relaxed.
^  Lower  Limbs. ■Lower  extremities  drawn  up  in  bed.

■  Sticking  pains  in  hip  joints  during  rest,  >  in  motion.

■  Stitches  in  r.  hip  joint.

■  Sensation  as  if  legs  had  gone  to  sleep.

■  Muscles  of  thigh  and  calf  feel  relaxed.

■  Cramps  in  calves. ^Dysentery.

vol/.  VII. — 27.


29


MERCURIUS  CORROSIVUS.  418

I  Feet  icy  cold.
^*  Limbs  in  General, i  Rheumatic  pains  after  suppression  of
gonorrhoea!  discharge  by  large  doses  of  Balsam  Copaiba  ;
pains  wandering  from  joint  to  joint,  compelling  him  to
stay  in  bed.

iColdness  in  extremities,  they  look  purple;  small,  spas-
modic, frequent  pulse.

■  Paralysis  of  upper  and  lower  extremities.

^^Rest. Position. Motion. Rest: sti(king  pains  in  hip
joints.

Must  lie  in  bed:  diarrhoea;  rheumatic  pains  in  joints.

Could  not  lie  comfortably  on  either  side.

I  Child  sits  in  dark  corner  of  room  or  covers  eyes  tightly
with  hands  or  walks  about  with  eyes  closed  and  head
sunk  upon  breast. ^Ophthalmia.

Lower  extremities  drawn  up  in  bed. ^Pott's  disease.

Stooping:  vertigo,  with  deafness;  heat.

Standing:  lassitude  in  limbs  and  trembling.

Motion:  pain  in  hip  joints  >;  least,  causes  chilliness.

Swallowing:  painful,  swelling  of  uvula;  causes  retching
and  vomiting;  raw,  smarting,  stinging  pain.

Rising:  coldness.

Must  get  out  of  bed  and  walk  about:  pain  in  face.

Walks  up  and  down  room :  cutting  pains  in  abdomen.
^®  Nerves, l  Convulsive  twitchings  of  muscles  of  face,  arms
and  legs,  and  convulsions  of  limbs; convulsive  con-
tractions.

I  Trembling.

I I  Great  debility.

■  Lassitude  in  limbs  and  trembling  when  standing  up  and

without  moving.
BFaintness,  weakness  and  shuddering.
^'^  Sleep. ■  Somnolence;  frequent  yawning  and  stretching.
B  s  Night  sleepless ;  could  not  lie  comfortably  on  either  side.

■  Sleepless  on  account  of  vertigo  or  anxiety.

■  Starting  up  suddenly  when  trying  to  go  to  sleep.

■  During  .sleep,  violent  hiccough.
^^Time. Toward  morning:  fetid  sweat.

Morning:  taste  putrid.

During  day:  pain  in  face  >.

4  P.M. :  pain  in  face  and  neck  commences,  continues  all

night  until  daybreak.
Evening:  itching  in  eyes;  pain  in  abdomen;  chilliness;

stitches  in  forehead  <.
9  P.M.:  pain  in  face  <.
Night:  pain  in  and  around  eye;  iritis  <;  inflammation

of  eyes;  indurated  lids  <;  sleep  disturbed  by  toothache

and  anxious  sensation;  saliva  running  out;  pains  along


410  MERCURIUS  CORROSIVUS.

tibiee  <;  delirium;  pains  in  abdomen;  stools  copious;
gonorrhoea  <;  expectoration  <;  in  bed  chilliness;  can-
not rest  in  any  place  from  heat  and  anxiety;  profuse
sweat.

After  midnight:  burning  and  tenesmus  of  rectum  and
bladder  after  stool  <.
^^Temperature  and  Weather. Open  air:  chilliness.

Hot  food  :  repugnance.

Cold  water:  thirst,  in  large  quantities;  draught  of  foul,
cold  water,  when  much  heated,  caused  dysentery.

Cold  food  :  desire  for.

Taking  cold  after  a  bath:  inflammation  of  fauces.
^  Fever. iShivering  during  and  after  swallowing.

I  Chilliness:  from  least  movement  and  in  open  air,  gener-
ally with  colic;  in  evening;  especially  on  head,  at  night
in  bed,

iCold  face  and  hands,  with  small,  feeble  pulse;  extremi-
ties cold.

iCold  skin,  with  very  small,  intermittent  pulse.

iSkin  cold,  pale,  covered  or  dripping  with  sweat.

I  Great  heat  of  skin.

■  Unable  to  rest  in  any  place  at  night,  on  account  of  a  feel-

ing of  heat  and  anxiety.

■  External  heat,  with  yellow  skin.

■  Burning,  stinging  heat  in  skin.

I  I  Heat  when  stooping  and  coldness  when  rising.

■  Extremities  clammy  and  cold.

Sweat:  profuse;  at  night  or  fetid  toward  morning;  cold,

often  only  on  forehead,  also  general  with  anxiety.
''^  Attacks,  Periodicity. Every  quarter  of  an  hour:  stool  of

mucus  and  blood.
From  4  till  10  p.m.  :  pain  in  face  <.
In  24  hours:  twenty  to  thirty  stools.
For  three  weeks:  almost  constant  pain  in  r.  side  of  face.
Fall:  dysentery.

Yearly  attacks:  ophthalmia  tarsi.
One  year  after  appearance  of  chancre,  which  disappeared

after  local treatment:  eruptions  of  red  nodules  over

chest  and  upper  abdomen.
''^Locality  and  Direction. Right: pain  in  side  of  face;

fauces  inflamed,  <  on  side;  pain  in  shoulder;  sticking

in  upper  and  lower  part  of  chest;  sticking  in  hip  joint.
Left:  tearing  above  eye ;  violent  pulsation  in  ear;  severe

pain  in  side  of  face;  ulcers  as  large  as  a  pea  on  tonsil;

fine,  painful,  stinging  in  testicle  ;  ulcer  on  inner  surface

of  side  of  prepuce;  rheumatic  pains  in  shoulder  and

shoulder  blade.
From  within  outward:  stitches  in  forehead.


MERCURIUS  CORROSIVUS.  420

*^ Sensations.  Tearing  as  if  in  bone  above  1.  eye;  as  if  eyes
would  be  forced  out;  as  if  mouth  was  scalded;  pricking
as  from  needles  in  throat;  pain  as  if  in  middle  of  liver;
abdomen  as  though  bruised;  cutting  as  from  a  knife  in
throat;  as  if  legs  had  gone  to  sleep;  tibiae  as  if  broken.

Pain:  in  head;  behind  eyeballs;  in  and  around  eye;  in
side  of  face;  in  teeth;  along  tibia;  in  throat;  in  liver
and  r.  shoulder;  in  abdomen;  in  genitals;  in  larynx
and  epiglottis;  in  praecordial  region;  in  head, back  and
limbs;  in  tibiae.

Intense  pain:  in  ulcers  on  cornea;  in  eyes;  below  malar
bone  and  zygomatic  arch.

Violent  pain  in  forehead:  caused  by  ineffectual  urging
to  stool.

Severe  pain:  in  forehead  and  temples,  over  and  through
eyes,  through  head  and  temples;  in  face  and  side  of
neck;  in  bowels;  in  nipples.

Much  pain :  during  micturition.

Constant  pain :  in  r.  side  of  face.

Tearing:  above  1.  eye,  near  root  of  nose  and  in  other  parts
of  bone ;  at  eyebrow.

Insupportable,  cutting,  colicky  pains:  with  stool.

Cutting  pain:  in  throat;  in  abdomen;  below  navel;  in
rectum.

Shooting  pain :  over  face;  inchest.

Darting:  along  upper  jaw;  gums  and  roots  of  teeth;  down
neck  from  ear.

Stitches:  in  forehead;  in  ear;  in  hepatic  region;  in  side;
extending  back  through  urethra ;  shoot  through  thorax;
in  various  parts  of  chest ;  in  r.  hip  joint.

Sticking:  in  upper  part  of  r.  side  of  chest;  in  lower  por-
tion of  r.  side  of  chest ;  in  hip  joints.

Biting  pain :  on  urinating.

Throbbing :  in  urethra.

Severe,  burning,  corrosive  pain:  in  spots  in  abdomen.

Burning,  gnawing,  darting  pains :  in  stomach.

Constricting  pain :  in  rectum.

Aching  pain :  in  womb  during  an  embrace.

Drawing  pain  :  in  perineum.

Rheumatic  pains :  in  1.  shoulder  and  shoulder  blade  ;
from  joint  to  joint.

Aching :  in  teeth.

Cramp  :  in  stomach  ;  in  calves.

Raw,  stinging,  smarting  pain  :  on  swallowing.

Intolerable  burning :  of  lids.

Fine,  painful  stinging :  in  1.  testicle.

Burning:  in  cheeks;  of  eyelids;  of  ulcer  at  edge  of  cor-
nea; in  eyes;  of  mouth,  extending  to  stomach  ;  of  ves-


421  MERCURIUS  CORROSIVUS.

icles  on  lips;  in  fauces;  of  rectum;  in  anus;  in  orifice

of  urethra;  in  genitals;  in  urethra.
Burning,  itching,  stinging  and  throbbing;  in  urethra.
Burning  and  stinging:  in  trachea;  in  skin.
Smarting:  of  eyelid;  in  nostrils.
Soreness:  of  nose;  of  jaws;  of  mouth  and  fauces;  of  pit

of  stomach;  of  epigastrium.
Pricking:  in  throat.
Painfulness :  of  eyes;  of  swallowing  on  account  of  swollen

uvula.
Violent  pulsation  :  in  ears.
Dull  feeling:  in  eyes.

Dryness:  in  fauces;  in  throat  and  trachea.
Great  oppression :  of  chest.
Tightness :  across  chest.
Peculiar  bruised  sensation  :  in  abdomen  ;  in  csecal  region

and  course  of  transverse  colon.
Constriction :  in  throat.
Stiffness:  of  jaws;  of  tongue.
Heaviness :  of  head.

Itching:  of  ulcer  on  edge  of  cornea;  in  eyes;  of  skin.
"Tissues. 1 1  Swelling  of  glands;  buboes.

■  Necrosis  of  upper  jaw.

■  Exostoses  on  shin,  sternum,  ribs.

■  Drawing  in  periosteum,  with  heat  in  head;  inflammation

of  periosteum;  swelling  and  tenseness,  rapid  progress  of
disease. ^Isteo-myelitis.

■  Ulcers  or  chancres  with  thin  pus,  leaving  stains  upon

linen,  as  from  melted  tallow.

■  Morbus  Brightii;  general  anasarca;  face  red  and  swollen,

or  sallow  and  puffed.
*^  Touch. Passive  Motion. Injuries. Touch :  soreness  of

pit  of  stomach  not  permitting  least,  even  of  clothing ;

abdomen very painful ; glans painful ; on  os  uteri

causes  pain ; stitches  in  forehead  <  ;  ulcers  on  tonsil

sensitive.
Pressure: eyeballs sensitive; tenderness over superior

maxilla;  quick  pain  beneath  larynx  ;  pain  in  pharynx  ;

abdomen  sensitive ; painfulness  of  csecal region  and

course  of  transverse  colon ;  on  os  uteri  causing  pains.
Depressing  tongue:  pain  in  larynx  <.
Cannot  bear  tight  or  even  close  clothing  around  waist :

soreness  of  epigastrium.
Scratching:  causes  bleeding  of  skin.
*"  Skin. ■  Burning  and  redness  of  skin,  with  formation  of

small  vesicles.

■  Grey  color  of  nails.

■  Severe  and  stubborn  eczema  of  sweating  parts  of  body,

exposed  to  fumes  of  poison.


MERCURIUS  CORROSIVUS.  422

8 1  Condylomata.

I  Rash  of  secondary  syphilis.

B  Ulcers  which  perforate  or  become  phagedenic.

I  I  Blisters  on  arms  and  abdomen.

I  I  Scorbutic  spots  over  whole  "body,  mingled  with  itchlike
eruptions,  herpes  and  boils.

iOne  year  after  appearance  of  chancre,  which  disappeared
after  local  treatment,  eruptions  of  red  nodules  as  large
as  lentils,  over  chest  and  upper  abdomen ;  stitches  in
forehead  from  within  outward,  <  evening  and  on  touch-
ing hair;  vomiting  after  eating;  swelling  of  tibiae  and
pain  in  them  as  if  broken,  particularly  at  night.  ^Syphilis.

■  Smallpox,  with  intense  inflammation  of  throat,  which  pre-
vents swallowing  and  threatens  suffocation  {-^^  gramme
to  120  grammes  of  water,  used  as  a  gargle).
*^  Stages of  Life, Constitution. Child,  set. 18 months;
phlyctenular  ophthalmia.

Boy,  set.  2J;  scrofulous  ophthalmia.

Boy,  set.  3,  had  eruption  on  head,  cough  and  expectoration ;
prolapsus  ani.

Boy,  set.  3  ;  phlyctenular  ophthalmia.

Child,  set.  4,  suffering  three  weeks  ;  dysentery.

Boy,  set.  4,  scrofulous,  pale,  thin,  suffering  from  chronic
nasal  catarrh ;  diphtheria.

Girl,  ast.  5,  suffering  twenty-two  months;  syndesmitis  ex-
anthematica.

Boy,  set.  9,  had  eczema  and  itch,  suffering  three  days ;
dysentery.

Boy,  set.  9,  after  drinking  cold,  foul  water  while  over-
heated ;  dysentery.

Boy,  set.  9 ;  phlyctenular  ophthalmia.

Girl ;  condylomata  and  syphilitic  ulcers  in  throat.

Girl,  set.  14;  phlyctenular  ophthalmia.

Boy,  pale  and  feeble,  suffering  three  months ;  sore  throat.

Servant  girl,  set.  16,  sanguine  temperament,  slight  build,
suffering  six  days  ;  dysentery.

Young  woman,  set.  20,  nursing  two  months ;  cracked  nipples.

Man,  set.  20,  one  year  ago  had  chancre ;  syphilis.

Girl,  set.  20  ;  subacute  laryngitis.

Man,  set.  24,  had  been  given  calomel  in  large  doses  in  early
childhood  for  sore  eyes,  suffering  eighteen  years;  oph-
thalmia tarsi.

Woman,  set.  25  ;  dysentery.

Woman,  set.  26 ;  phlyctenular  ophthalmia.

Coachman,  had  syphilis  a  number  of  years  ago ;  condylo-
mata in  larynx.

Man,  suffering  six  weeks ;  dysentery.

Man,  athletic  build,  five  days  after  suppression  of  gonor-


423  MERC.  CORROS.— MERCURIUS  CYANATUS.

rhoeal discharge  by  large  doses  of  Balsam Copaiba;
rheumatism.

Officer,  lively,  strong,  black  eyes  and  hair,  had  gonorrhoea
two  years  ago ;  ulcer  on  prepuce.

Woman,  set.  29,  suffering  three  weeks;  facial  neuralgia.

Woman,  set.  29 ;  neuralgia  of  face.

Man,  set.  29,  robust,  suffering  seven  days ;  dysentery.

Man,  set.  30,  suffering  two  days ;  dysentery.

Woman,  set.  30,  weak  constitution,  suffering  two  days ;
dysentery.

Woman,  set.  33  ;  facial  neuralgia.

Woman,  set.  38,  pale,  weak  and  ill  from  continued  suffer-
ing; facial  neuralgia.

Woman,  set.  45,  after  catching  cold ;  diarrhoea,

Man,  set.  55,  suffering  four  years ;  balanitis.

Woman,  set.  00,  dark  complexion,  grey  eyes,  nervo-bilious
temperament ;  albuminuria.
^  Kelations. Antidoted  by  Silica.

Compare:  Canthar.  (throat);  Canthar.  and  Digit,  (gonor-
rhoea) ;  Aurum  and  Kali  hydr.  (syphilitic  iritis) ;  Laches.
(typhoid  peritonitis).


MERCURIUS  CYANATUS.

Cyanide  of  Mercury.  Hg  {CN^.

Of  this  form  of  Mercury  no  regular  proving  has  been  made ;  the  symptoms
are  toxicological  and  clinical.

Clinical  Authorities. — Keratoiritis  syphilitica,  Nunez,  Norton's  Ophth.
Therap. ;  Ulceration  of  tonsils,  Richards,  Raue's  Rec,  1872,  p.  100 ;  Follicular  tonsil-
litis, (2  cases),  Strong,  Trans.  Horn.  Med.  Soc.  Pa.,  1882,  pp.  169,  170;  Diphtheritis
(several  hundred  cases  reported),  Von  Villers,  B.  J.  H.,  vol.  34,  p.  147 ;  Diphtheria,
Kuechler,  Raue's  Rec,  1870,  p.  151;  Beck,  Raue's  Rec,  1873,  p.  8  ;  Roguin,  Raue's
Rec,  1873,  p.  86 ;  Von  Villers,  Raue's  Rec,  1875,  p.  86 ;  Grubenmann,  Raue's  Path,
and  Therap.,  p.  304 ;  Ockford,  Times  Retros.,  vol.  3,  p.  79 ;  Jousset,  B.  J.  H.,  vol.
29,  p.  176;  Trager,  B.  J.  H.,  vol.  34,  p.  169;  Hirsch,  (Ehme's  Therap.,  p.  53;
Richards,  (Ehme's  Therap.,  p.  57  ;  Villers,  (Ehme's  Therap.,  p.  55 ;  Ganz,  (Ehme's
Therap.,  p.  57  ;  (50  cases)  Martin,  Trans.  Hom.  Med.  Soc.  Pa.,  1878,  p.  320;  Burt,
Trans.  Hom.  Med.  Soc.  Pa.,  1878,  p.  321 ;  Allen,  Hom.  Phys.,  vol.  5,  p.  164 ;  Bil-
lig,  Allg.  Hom.  Ztg.,  vol.  110,  pp.  34,  45 ;  Hansen,  Allg.  Hom.  Ztg.,  vol.  113,  p.  37.

^  Mind. I  I  Excessive  ill  humor,  after  eating  a  little  too  much.
^  Sight  and  Eyes. "Keratoiritis  syphilitica;  much  inflam-
mation and  severe  nocturnal  pains.


MERCURIUS  CYANATUS.  424

"*  Teeth  and  Gums.  Gums  swollen  and  covered  with  a  white,
adherent  layer,  under  which  is  found  a  violet  border.

"  Taste  and  Tongue.  Tongue  pale,  with  a  yellowish  streak
on  base ;  swollen,  with  red  edges.

*^  Inner  Mouth.  '  Lips,  tongue  and  inside  of  cheeks  dotted
with  ulcerations  and  covered  with  a  greyish  white  coating.
Inflammation  of  whole  buccal  cavity ;  salivation,  fetid
breath,  great  pain  on  swallowing.

13  Throat.  I  Great  redness  of  fauces,  with  difficulty  of  swal-
lowing.

■  Ulcerations  of  middle  of  palatine  arch,  with inverted

edges,  uneven  and  callous,  whole  palate,  columns  of
velum  and  tonsils  swollen  and  of  a  pale  color;  breath  of
a  repulsive  odor. ^Chronic  laryngitis.

■  Suffering  since  morning  with  severe  sore  throat;  feels

very  weak  ;  pulse  120 ;  skin  hot  and  dry ;  deglutition
painful ;  frequent  pains  darting  from  throat  to  ear  and
head;  tonsils  greatly  inflamed  and  enlarged;  next  day
much  ulcerated ;  ulcers  deep  and  many  of  them  filled
with  greenish  yellow  pus.
■Tonsils  red  and  swollen  ;  r.  tonsil  <  ;  whitish  spots  on
r.  tonsil  and  one  or  two  on  1. ;  sick  at  stomach,  eyes
heavy,  headache. ^Follicular  tonsillitis.

■  Left  tonsil  swollen,  with  a  few  whitish  spots  thereon;

high  fever;  thirst;  headache;  later  both  tonsils  swollen
and  of  a  dusky  red  color. ^Follicular  tonsillitis.

■  A  white,  opaline  layer  forms  on  columns  of  velum  palati

and  tonsils;  on  inside  of  r.  cheek  a  round  ulcer  with
greyish  base,  borders  as  if  cut  out  and  surrounded  by
great  redness.

■  Pseudo-membranous  formation  extends  all  over  fauces

and  down  throat.

■  Diphtheria  maligna,  with  phagedenic  ulceration.

■  Diphtheria;  excessive  deposit  of  a  tough,  whitish  grey

membrane,  often  extends  over  whole  throat  and  even
over  roof  of  mouth  ;  aphthse  on  tongue  and  lips,  with  a
thick,  yellowish  white  scab,  very  painful,  forming  ulcers,
salivation  quite  marked ;  almost  total  loss  of  speech ;
solids  are  swallowed  better  than  liquids,  which  escape
through  nose;  membrane  often  extends  into  nose.
■Great  chilliness,  with  dry  heat  of  skin ;  severe  cutting
pains  when  attempting  to  swallow ;  heaviness  in  head  ;
constricting  pains  between  scapulse ;  prostration  ;  loss  of
appetite ;  thirst ;  restless  sleep ;  anxiety  on  swallowing
on  account  of  pain ;  offensive  odor  from  mouth ;  sub-
maxillary gland  swollen  and  sensitive ;  oedema  of  soft
palate;  white  membrane  on  tonsils;  tongue  dry,  white
in  centre ;  pulse  130,  full ;  delirium  at  night.  ^Diph-
theria.


425  MERCURIUS  CYANATUS.

B  riigli  fever,  with  pains  in  throat,  particularly  when  swal-
lowing; soft  palate  very  red ;  r.  tonsil  swollen;  small
spot  on  r.  tonsil  as  large  as  pea,  covered  with  a  coating
looking  like  a  small  ulcer,  giving  tonsil  an  appearance
as  if  about  to  suppurate  as  in  an  ordinary  case  of  tonsil-
litis; next  day,  however,  submaxillary  glands  became
swollen  and  on  third  day  false  membrane  appeared  on
posterior  wall  of  pharynx,  on  r.  side. ^Diphtheria.

■  Exudate  white,  yellow,  or  any  shade  between ;  adynamic

fever;  collapse  at  commencement  of  disease.  ^Diph-
theria.
•  Entire  mucous  membrane  of  mouth  and  fauces  dark  red
and  considerably  swollen ;  on  1.  side  of  velum  a  deep,
diphtheritic  ulcer,  with  sharp  cut  edges,  surrounded  by
ring  of  exudate ;  on  mucous  membrane  many  very
small  exudate  patches  ;  tip  of  tongue  dark  red  ;  papillse
filiformes  much  swollen ;  middle  and  back  part  of
tongue  covered  with  dirty  yellow  coating ;  swallowing
exceedingly  difficult ;  face  has  an  apathetic,  anxious  ex-
pression ;  on  upper  half  of  body  a  profuse,  viscous  per-
spiration, which  is  cold  on  forehead  and  cheek ;  radial
pulse  on  r.  arm  scarcely  perceptible,  on  1.  threadlike,
140;  extreme  prostration ;  no  appetite. ^Diphtheria.

■  Boy,  get.  4,  lives  in  a  cellar  tenement; one  brother  and

sister  have  just  died  of  diphtheritis;  tonsil,  velum
palati  and  fauces  much  swollen,  dark  red  and  thickly
covered  with  exudate ;  great  difficulty  in  swallowing ;
hoarse  voice ;  rough,  dry  cough,  with  anxiety  ;  skin  hot
and  dry;  pulse  130,  small;  great  weakness,  apathy,
emaciation. ^Diphtheria.

I A  man  in  last  stages  of  consumption  ;  extreme  emaciation
and  weakness,  so  that  he  can  hardly  speak ;  for  last  six
days  diphtheritis;  skin  like  parchment,  dry;  extremi-
ties cool ;  liquid  stools ;  entire  mouth  and  fauces  covered
with  one  mass  of  soft,  greyish  green  exudate,  of  which
some  portions  can  be  easily  removed,  leaving  an  easily
bleeding  surface ;  after  24  hours  swallowing  >  ;  feels
better  and  looks  better ;  mouth  and  fauces  almost  free
from  exudate ;  usual  tuberculous  expectoration,  which
had  stopped  for  several  days,  commenced  again  ;  one  day
later  mouth  and  fauces  perfectly  healthy;  strength
gaining ;  died  of  tuberculosis  ten  days  later.

iGirl,  set.  7,  blonde,  well  built,  never  sick ;  had  been  cough-
ing for  a  week  ;  for  four  days  had  sore  throat,  expecto-
rating, after  violent  efforts,  glairy  mucus ;  for  three  days
suffocative  paroxysms  woke  her  during  night,  with
barking  cough ;  child  sitting  up ;  muscles  of  face  con-
tracted;  face  cyanosed  ;  skin  burning;  eyes  injected  and


MERCUPJUS  CYANATUS.  426

staring;  voice  extinguished;  laryngo-tracheal  whistling;
nasal  cavities  obstructed  by  false  membranes ;  submax-
illary glands  engorged ;  saliva  flows  constantly  from
open  mouth;  tonsils,  velum  palati,  etc.,  covered  with
false  membranes,  has  refused  all  food  for  twenty-four
hours. (Complementary  Hepar  and  Pltosphor.).

iChild  lay  on  its  back,  with  hanging  under  jaw  and  half-
closed  eyes ;  sopor,  but  when  spoken  to  easily  roused ;
mouth  and  fauces  completely  covered  with  whitish  grey
exudate ;  dry  lips  bleed  a  little  on  opening  mouth ;  nose
stopped  up;  swallowing  impossible;  can  utter  only  a
few  croaking  sounds ;  emaciation  and  flabbiness  of  mus-
cles ;  extreme  weakness ;  skin  hot  and  dry ;  pulse  exces-
sively weak  and  so  fast  that  it  cannot  be  counted ;  urine
scant  and  dark,  without  sediment ;  no  stool  for  two  days.
^Diphtheria.

I  Tongue  dark  red  and  almost  black ;  very  offensive  breath ;
saliva  thin  and  fetid;  profuse  epistaxis;  glands  swollen
and  cellular  tissue  of  neck  infiltrated;  excessive  weak-
ness. ^Diphtheria.

•Swelling  of  parotid  glands  and  tonsils;  exudate  has  ap-
pearance of  honey  comb,  dirty  in  color. ^Diphtheria.*
^^  Eating  and  Drinking, i  i  After  eating  too  much,  ill  humor.
"*'  Stool  and  Rectum, l Malignant  or  putrid  dysentery.
^'  Urinary  Organs. iBright's  disease.

^■"' Best. Position. Motion. Attempting  to  swallow:  severe
cutting  pains.

Child  lay  on  its  back,  with  hanging  under  jaw  and  half
closed  eyes.

Cannot  stand  up  from  great  weakness.
^"  Nerves, b  >  Great  weakness,  cannot  stand  up ;  prostration

extreme.
^  Time. Since  morning:  suffering  with  severe  sore  throat.

Night:  delirium;  suffocative  paroxysms  woke  her.
''^Attacks,  Periodicity. Nightly:  pains  in  eyes.

First  day  small  spots  on  r.  tonsil;  second  day  submaxillary
glands  swollen,  on  third  day  false  membrane  appeared.

For  two  days:  no  stool.

For  last  six  days  diphtheritis;  after  twenty-four  hours
swallowing  >,  expectoration  which  had  stopped  com-
menced again ;  one  day  later  mouth  and  fauces  perfectly
healthy.

*  "If  remedy  is  given  in  stage  of  invasion  (of  diphtheria),  i.  e.,  before  exudate
is  deposited,  it  will  not  appear  at  all;  as  a  prophylactic  it  is  equally  efiisctive;
paralysis  and  other  after  diseases  have  not  been  observed  after  use  of  this  drug.
Several  physicians  have  never  seen  any  result  from  it  because  they  gave  the  2d
and  3d  trit.  or  dil.,  which  is  much  too  strong,  or  rather,  not  sufficiently  developed."
— Allg.  Horn.  Ztg.,  vol.  88,  p.  92.


427  MERCURIUS  CYANATUS.

'' Locality  and  Direction. Right:  tonsil  red  and  swollen;
whitish  spot  on  tonsil;  inside  of  cheek  round  ulcer;  false
membrane  on  side;  radial  pulse  scarcely  perceptible.
Left:  one  or  two  spots  on  tonsil;  tonsil  swollen;  on  side  of
velum  a  deep  diphtheritic  ulcer;  threadlike  pulse.
''  Sensations. Border  of  ulcer  as  if  cut  out;  tonsil  looks  as  if
about  to  suppurate.
Pain :  in  head ;  in  throat.
Severe  pains:  in  eyes  at  night.
Great  pain :  on  swallowing.
Cutting  pains:  when  attempting  to  swallow.
Darting  pains:  from  throat  to  ear  and  head.
Soreness :  of  throat.
Constricting  pains:  between  scapulee.
Heaviness:  in  head.
""*  Skin. iSkin  moist  and  cold.

Diphtheritic  scarlatina;  swelling  of  glands  around  throat;
great  redness  of  fauces,  with  difficulty  of  swallowing;
complete  suppression  of  urine;  great  sensation  of  cold-
ness; extreme  prostration  and  frequent  fainting.
'^  Stages  of  Life,  Constitution.  Girl,  a^t  3,  sickly^  scrofu-
lous, of  a  scrofulous  mother  and  an  old  syphilitic  father-
diphtheria.  '

Boy,  ?et.  4,  weak  constitution,  subject  to  catarrhal  affections

of  chest;  diphtheria.
Girl,  a^t.  4,  fair,  rosy  complexion,  blue  eyes;  diphtheria.
Girl,  set.  4;  diphtheria.
Boy,  ast.  4,  lives  in  a  bad  cellar  tenement,  brother  and

sister  died  of  diphtheritis;  diphtheria.
Girl,  set.  7;  diphtheria.

Girl,  set.  7,  blonde,  well  built,  never  sick ;  diphtheria
Boy,  set.  7;  diphtheria.
Girl,  ajt.  9;  follicular  tonsillitis.

Boy,  set.  10,  for  several  years  enlargement  of  tonsils;  diph-
theria.
Boy,  suffering  several  years;  ulceration  of  tonsils.
Girl,  a)t. 11,  had had  several  attacks  of  diphtheria  C?)  •
follicular  tonsillitis.  '

Girl,  set.  12,  large,  strong,  sanguine  temperament,  never

had  convulsions;  diarrhoea.
Girl,  set.  15;  diphtheria.
Woman,  set.  24;  diphtheria.
Woman,  married;  ulceration  of  tonsils.
Man in  last  stages  of  consumption;  diphtheria  (died  of
tuberculosis).
'  Relations. Compare :  Arum  triph.,  Caustic,  Hepar,  Kali  bich.,
Kah  caust,  PhytoL,  Mur.  ac,  Laches.


MERCURIUS  DULCIS.  428


MERCURIUS  DULCIS.

Calomel.  Hg  CI.

Symptoms  toxicological  and  clinical.

Clinicai.  Authorities. —  Ulceration  of  cornea^  Norton,  Opli.  Therap. ;  Phlyc-
tenular conjunctivitis,  Newton,  Kaue's  Eec,  1872,  p.  68  ;  Otorrhoea,  Lobethal,  Riick.
Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  1,  p.  369  ;  Catarrhal  inflammation  of  middle  ear  (93  cases),  Houghton,
Times  Ketros.,  vol.  1,  p.  24;  Angina  tonsillaris,  Hendricks,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  5,
p.  243  ;  Oastromalacia  (3  cases),  Bicking,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  1,  p.  6(j7  ;  Diarrhoea,
Hofrichter,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  o,  p.  421 ;  Kafka,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  5,  p.  422;
Constipation,  Gerson,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  5,  p.  395 ;  Prostatitis,  Gerson,  Eiick.  Kl.
Erf.,  vol.  5,  p.  545 ;  Condylomata,  Syphilis,  Battman,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  5,  p.  562.

*  Sight  and  Eyes.  iGirl,  eet.  6,  light  complexion,  pale  skin,
muscles  soft  and  flabby,  glands  enlarged,  general  strum-
ous diathesis;  a  very  deep  ulcer  on  1.  cornea,  so  nearly
perforated  that  membrane  of  Descemet  has  begun  to
bulge;  small  ulcers  and  pustules  on  border  of  cornea;
pustules  and  maculae  on  r.  cornea;  considerable  redness
and  photophobia. ^Strumous  ophthalmia.

Urido-choroiditis,  especially  if  dependent  upon  scrofulous
diathesis  and  general  cachexia.

I  Inflammations  occurring  in  pale,  flabb}^  scrofulous
subjects.

■  Ciliary  blepharitis  associated  with  phlyctenular  ophthal-

mia, and  accompanied  by  eruption  on  face,  soreness  of
nose  and  swelling  of  upper  lip.
^  Hearing  and  Ears,  l  fiCatarrhal  inflammation  of  middle  ear.
llEustachian  tube  and  mucous  membrane  of  pharynx
affected. ^Otitis  media.

■  Closure  of  Eustachian  tube  ;  deafness  of  advancing  years.

■  Catarrhal  otorrhoea  occurring  in  scrofulous  children,  or

accompanying  scrofulous  inflammation  of  eyes,  occa-
sionally hearing  is  affected.
**  Upper  Face. ■Pallid  as  a  corpse.
^^  Inner  Mouth. ■Inflammation  of  lips  and  tongue.

■  Whole  mouth  filled  with  ulcers.

■  Salivation.

■  Whole  inside  of  mouth,  tongue  and  all  had  a  very  black

appearance,  emitting  a  constant  flow  of  dark,  putrid
saliva,  of  intolerable  fetor.
^^  Throat. ■  Angina  tonsillaris.


429  MERCURIUS  DULCIS.

■  Excessive  ulceration  of  throat.
I  I  Difficulty  of  swallowing.

^^  Hiccough,  Belching,  Nausea  and  Vomiting,  i  Vomiting.

^^  Scrobiculum  and  Stomach,  i  Bloated,  hot,  painful  abdo-
men, particularly  in  region  of  stomach ;  frequent  vom-
iting, vomited  matter  smelling  very  sour;  milk  rejected
almost  immediately,  accompanied  by  much  slime;  every
day  about  twelve  passages  of  greyish  green,  stringy,
chopped  masses;  constant  restlessness ;  crosses  legs  and
draws  them  towards  abdomen;  peculiar  whimpering;
irregular  febrile  attacks  ;  emaciation  ;  greyish  color  of
face,  which  appears  long  and  has  an  old  look;  distortion
of  mouth;  dulness  of  eyes. ^Gastromalacia.

^  Stool  and  Rectum.  iStools:  watery,  greenish ;  black,  with
great  epigastric  oppression,  sinking,  etc.

■  Diarrhoea  of  children;  stools  grass  green,  coppery  green,

like  _  chopped  eggs,  watery,  very  profuse,  excoriating,
causing  soreness  of  anus  ;  abdomen  bloated  ;  liver  en-
larged; skin  pale;  face  bloated  ;  mucous  membrane  of
mouth  pale;  aphthae;  foul  smell  from  mouth;  ptyalism;
glands  of  neck  and  submaxillary  and  inguinal  glands
swollen;  fever  and  thirst.

■  Symptoms  thoroughly  dysenteric.

■  Constant  disposition  to  stool;  small  discharges  consisting

of  mucus  and  blood,  colored  with  bile.

■  Obstinate  constipation.

■  Burning  pain  in  rectum.

^^Male  Sexual  Organs.  "Acute  inflammation  of  prostate
gland,  particularly  after  maltreated  gonorrheal  stricture;
both  lobes  enormously  swollen,  almost  occluding  rec-
tum, with  intolerably  painful  urinary  symptoms;  severe
burning,  pressing  pains;  scanty  urine.

^  Female  Sexual  Organs.  "Broad,  moist,  burning  condylo-
mata around  external  genitals,  perineum  and  anus,  of
extremely  offensive  smell.

"'  Rest.  Position.  Motion.  Crosses  legs  and  draws  them
towards  abdomen :  gastromalacia.

'"'Fever, iilll  defined gastric disturbances  during  second
stage; painful sensibility  of  whole  abdomen; watery
stools,  colorless,  or  as  if  mixed  with  flocculent  matter,
or  like  washings  of  flesh,  occurring  most  often  at  night.  '
^Typhoid  fever.

^^  Attacks,  Periodicity.  Every  day:  about  twelve  passages
of  greyish  green,  stringy,  chopped  masses.

''Locality  and  Direction. Right: pustules  and  maculae
on  cornea.
Left:  a  very  deep  ulcer  on  cornea.

*^  Sensations. Burning  pain :  in  rectum.


MERC.  DULCIS— MERC.  lOD.  FLAV.  430

Burning  and  itching:  in  condylomata  around  anus.
Soreness:  of  nose;  of  anus.
Painfulness:  of  abdomen.
*"  Skin. B  Eruption  over  whole  body  of  round  copper  colored

spots, in centre  of which are dry papules, around

which,  from  centre  to  periphery,  skin  exfoliates;  broad,

moist  condylomata  around  anus,  with  severe  burning

and  itching. ^Syphilis.
"  Stages  of  Life,  Constitution.  Child,  set.  3  mos.;  diarrhoea.
Three  children  set.  ^-1^  years;  gastromalacia.
Girl,  set.  6,  light  complexion,  pale  skin,  muscles  soft  and

flabby,  glands  enlarged  and  general  strumous  diathesis;

ulceration  of  cornea.
M.,  set.  15;  scrofulous  diathesis,  suffers frequently  from

sore  eyes;  phlyctenular  conjunctivitis.
Girl,  set.  19,  fat,  strong;  condylomata.
^*  Relations. Antidoted  by :  Hepar.

Compare:  Sulph.  ac.  in  stringy  stools.


MERCURIUS  lODATUS  FLAVUS.

Protoiodide  of  Mercury.  Hg^  I^  {or  Hg  1).

Provings  by  Lord  (Am.  Provers'  Union  Publ.,  1856)  and  Blakely  (New  Prov-
ings,  Tafel,  1866).

Clinical  Authokities. — Intraocular  affection,  Woodyatt,  Norton's  Oph.
Therap.,  p.  86;  Syndesmitis  memh-anacea,  Payr,  Kane's  Kec,  1870,  p.  104;  Syphi-
litic disease  of  eye,  Norton,  Org.,  vol.  2,  p.  382;  Blepharitis  ciliaris,  Norton,  N.  A.
J.  H.,  vol.  23,  p.  352;  Nasal  catarrh,  Holcombe,  B.  J.  H.,  vol.  34,  p.  387;
Ozcena,  Fisher,  Kane's  Path,  and  Therap.,  p.  228  ;  Toothache,  Fleming,  Times
Ketros.,  vol.  1,  p.  57  ;  Affection  of  lower  lip,  Kent,  Horn.  Phys ,  vol.  4,  p.  130;  Sore
thro'it,  Blakely,  Hah.  Mo.,  vol.  2,  p.  163;  Tonsillitis,  Hoopes,  Org.,  vol.  3,  p.  105;
Blakely,  Hah.  Mo.,  vol.  2,  p.  162;  Diphtheria,  Hirsch,  Lippe,  (Ehme's  Therap.,
p  53 ;  Buho,  Kosenberg,  Kiick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  5,  p.  568 ;  Vomiting  in  pregnancy,
Gushing,  Kane's  Kec.,  1870,  p.  261;  Ooitre,  Blakely,  Hah.  Mo.,  vol.  2,  p.  164;
Pains  in  lower  limbs,  Blakely,  Hah.  Mo.,  vol.  2,  p.  1 63 ;  Chancre,  Keil,  Kosenberg,
Bojanus,  Kiick.  Kl  Erf.,  vol.  5,  p.  568;  Orusta  lactea,  Blakely,  Hah.  Mo.,  vol.  2,
p.  163 ;  Scabies  sicca,  Blakely,  Hah.  Mo.,  vol.  2,  p.  164.

^  Mind. Symptoms  disappear  during  care  and  anxiety;  they
also  retard  action  of  remedy.
Lively,  talkative,  good  natured,  whistles  and  sings  soon
after  great  depression.


431  MERCUPvIUS  lODATUS  FLAVUS.

Disposition  to  destructiveness,  can  scarcely  resist  tempta-
tion to  throw  lamp  through  window.

1  I  Moodiness,  depression  of  spirits.

While  in  bed  imagined  a  man  was  in  his  room,  who  in-
tended to  perforate  his  throat  with  a  gimlet.
^  Sensorium. Dizzy :  when  reading;  when  rising  from  a  chair.
^  Inner  Head, l  '  Dull,  pressing, boring pains over eyes.
^Leucorrhoea.

I  Dull  frontal  headache,  with  pain  at  root  of  nose.

Throbbing  pain  in  forehead  and  temples.

I  I  Throbbing,  bursting  sensation  in  temples.  ^Leucorrhoea.

Shooting  pains  in  temple;  sharp  stitches.

Sharp  pain  in  vertex.

Violent  pain  in  r.  side  of  head  (over  r.  temple).

■  Headache  on  top  of  head,  or  on  r.  side.
Dull,  heavy  aching  at  base  of  brain.

Head  feels  dull  and  compressed,  as  if  a  heavy  weight  was
pressing  it  down  on  pillow.

■  Dull  headache  on  awaking  in  morning.

I  I  Headache  felt  more  when  at  rest,  >  when  mind  or  body
is  actively  engaged.
*  Outer  Head. ■  Stiffness  and  soreness  in  occiput,  also  when
touched,  more  to  1.  and  down  back,  <  when  lying.
Sensation  as  if  skull  was  cracking.

■  Itching  of  scalp.

^  Sight  and  Eyes.  ■  Excessive  photophobia.  ^Ulcers  on  cornea.

Black  motes  before  eyes;  opacities  of  vitreous.

Black  clouds  float  before  eyes  when  lying  on  1.  side.

I  I  Miss  L.,  set  26;  eight  years  ago  noticed  a  heaviness  and
drooping  of  eyelids;  after  two  years  sight  of  1.  eye  im-
perfect, and  when  this  dimness  appeared,  drooping  of
both  eyelids  ceased ;  no  redness,  pain,  or  photophobia,
but  black  spots  and  flashes  of  light ;  a  year  later  r.  eye
was  affected  and  rapidly  grew  <  than  1. ;  finally  sight
failed  entirely;  examination  of  r.  eye:  no  external
redness;  anterior  chamber  shallow;  iris  discolored,
crowded  forward  by  a  swollen  opaque  lens,  to  capsule
of  which  it  was  attached  all  around  margin  of  a  con-
tracted pupil,  not  even  quantitative  sight  existed  ;  left
eye:  anterior  chamber  shallow;  iris  dimmed  and  dis-
colored; pupil  moderately  dilated  and  mobile;  pigment
spots  on  lens  capsule;  vitreous  hazy  throughout;  lying
in  it  near  retina,  three  greenish  blue  spots,  a  little
larger  than  optic  nerve;  probably  hemorrhagic  eff'usions
undergoing  degeneration;  vision  ff;  Snellen  IJ  read
slowly  at  three  inches;  irregular  dilatation  of  pupil
under  Atropine.
■  llmpaired  sight,  with  weakness  of  internal  recti;  aching


MERCURIUS  lODATUS  FLAVUS.  432

over  eyes;  fundus  slightly  hypersemic;  r.  pupil  slightly
larger  than  1. ;  paralysis  of  all  muscles  of  eye  and  lid
supplied  by  third  pair;  diplopia  on  holding  eyes  to  1.
for  some  time,  and  distant  objects  look  blurred  a  little.
^Syphilis.

■  Throbbing,  aching,  nightly  pains.

Severe  pain  and  soreness  of  r.  orbit  on  rising  in  morning,

■Syphilitic  iritis.

iPannus,  all  stages,  but  especially  in  acute  aggravations

after  first,  or  Aconite  stage,  has  passed.
■Trachoma  with  and  without  pannus.

■  Ulcers  occurring  in  course  of  pannus  and  conjunctivitis

granulosa.

■  Large  excavating ulcer  on  upper  part  of  cornea,  with

several  small  ulcers  on  lower  portion ;  generally  exces-
sive photophobia ;  thick  yellow  coating  at  base  of  tongue.

■  Serpiginous  ulceration,  commencing  at  margin  and  ex-

tending over  whole  cornea,  or  a  portion,  especially  upper
part  of  it,  involving  only  superficial  layers.
■Small  pustule  on  1.  eye,  some  pain  in  evening  and  at
night,  no  photophobia  nor  lachrymation,  tongue  coated
yellow  at  base.

■  Large  pustules  on  conjunctiva,  no  pain  during  day  and

only  a  little  at  night,  gums  swollen  and  bleed  easily,
tongue  coated  yellow,  bad  taste  in  mouth.

■  Entire  sclero-corneal  margin  occupied  by  a  slightly  ele-

vated opacity  of  little  width,  and  upon  which  was  sit-
uated a  chain  of  very  minute  vesicles;  peri-corneal  and
subconjunctival  tissue  profusely  injected  with  very  fine
vessels,  through  which  was  also  distributed  a  large
quantity  of  pigment,  forming  a  zone  as  striking  in  ap-
pearance as  the  one  occupying  the  limbus  corneae,  into
which  it  imperceptibly  merged;  opacity  of  cornea  was
sharply  defined.

■Large  excavating  ulcer  on  upper  part  of  cornea,  with
several  small  ulcers  on  lower  portion.

■Syndesmitis  membranacea.

■  Paralysis  of  oculo  motor  nerve,  of  syphilitic  origin.

■  Complete  paralysis  of  all  fibres  of  third  pair  of  nerves

of  r.  eye,  probably  of  sj^philitic  origin.
■Uncomplicated  granular  lids.

■  Blepharitis  ciliaris  of  syphilitic  origin,  abscesses  of  lashes,

lids  red  and  swollen,  eruption  on  scalp  itches,  <  at
night;  discharge  from  nose  excoriating;  upper  lip
swollen ;  tongue  spongy,  with  a  thick,  yellow  coating  at
base;  breath  offensive

®  Hearing  and  Ears. Sudden  sharp  pains  in  ear.

I  I  Throbbing  boring,  from  within  outward,  deep  in  1.  ear.

^  Smell  and  Nose. Pain  at  root  of  nose  (shooting).


433  MERCURIUS  lODATUS  FLAVUS.

I  Right  side  of  septum  and  r.  nostril  very  sore  and  much
swollen.

I A  great  deal  of  mucus  in  nose,  descends  through  poste-
rior nares  into  throat;  hawking;  spots  in  nose  feel  sore;
constant  inclination  to  swallow.

I  I  Discharges  from  nose  and  throat;  scales  of  dried,  offen-
sive pus. ^Leucorrhoea.

I  Dark  redness  of  fauces;  elongation  of  palate;  enlarge-
ment of  tonsils,  sometimes  covered  with  yellowish  or
whitish  patches,  small  in  size ;  collection  of  tough  yel-
low mucus  in  posterior  nares,  which  partially  drops  into
throat,  causing  constant  inclination  to  hawk  and  spit.
dOzseivd.

iTliick  plugs  of  nasal  secretion,  with  severe  frontal  head-
ache, some  fever  and  prostration,  especially  in  old  peo-
ple and  children.

0 Chronic  catarrh  of  posterior  nares.
^  Upper  Face, i  Soreness  of  entire  face,  especially  of  bones
of  face,  with  dull  frontal  headache.

Dull  bruised  pain  in  r.  malar  bone,  radiating  into  fore-
head and  r.  side  of  head,  a  small  spot  pulsates  and
burns  like  fire.

Sharp  stitches  through  head  and  face.

Stinging  in  1.  cheek.
^  Lower  Face.  iSore  on  red  part  of  lower  lip  as  large  as
hickory  nut;  dry  and  covered  with  dry  scab,  hard  as
horn;  it  had  been  several  months  forming  and  was
quite  painful;  submaxillary  gland  enlarged  and  hard;
lymphatics  on  r.  side  of  neck  and  tonsils  enlarged;
several  large  scales  had  been  removed,  and  as  soon  as
one  separated  a  new  one  formed.
^^  Teeth  and  Gums. Teeth  feel  too  long ;  cannot  eat.

Molar  teeth  feel  too  long ;  <  bringing  them  together.

Grinding  and  drawing  pains  in  teeth ;  wants  to  press  them
together.

Stiffness  of  jaws.

B Toothache  after  filling.
"  Taste  and  Tongue.  "Bad  taste  in  mouth.  ^Pustules  on  eyes.

■Thick  yellow  coating  at  base  of  tongue.  ^Ulcer  on  cor-
nea. ^Pustules  on  eyes.

■  Tongue  coated  bright  yellow  at  back,  tip  and  edges  red.

■  Tongue coated yellowish brown. ^Vomiting during

pregnancy.
^^  Inner  Mouth. Mouth,  lips  and  tongue  dry  and  sticky.

Fine  bright  red  eruption  on  roof  of  mouth.
13  Throat. ■  Burning  in  throat.

Throat  dry,  with  frequent  empty  swallowing;  burning
when  swallowing  saliva.

VOL.  VII. — 28.


MERCURIUS  lODATUS  FLAVUS.  434

■  Tonsils,  uvula  and  pharynx  red  and  congested.
I  Pain  and  swelling  of  r.  tonsil.

DSlight  pain  in  r.  tonsil  and sensation  as  if  it  was  swol-
len, with  pain  when  swallowing.

■  Posterior  wall  of  pharynx  red,  irritated  and  inflamed,

dotted  with  patches  of  mucus  and  small  spots  which
look  ulcerated.

■  Constant secretion  of  mucus in  throat,  difficult  to  dis-

lodge and  causing  retching.

■  Mucus  in  throat  in  morning.
■Sensation  of  a  lump  in  throat.

■  Easily  detached  patches  on  inflamed  pharynx  and  fauces;

<  on  r.  tonsil ;  salivary  glands  swollen  ;  fetid  discharge.

■  Sore  throat,  several  ulcerated  spots;  fauces  and  inside  of

throat  "mapped,"  appearing  like  many  islands.

■  Pain  in  r.  side  of  throat,  also  in  r.  ear,  extending  into

throat;  difficult  swallowing;  soreness  in  r.  side  of  face;
tonsils  swollen;  pain  in  r.  ear  on  swallowing.  ^Sore
throat.

■  Tonsils  swollen,  red  and  deeply  ulcerated,  tongue  coated

yellowdsh  white;  very  fretful  and  restless  as  if  from
pain;  refuses  to  eat  or  drink;  cannot  sleep. ^Tonsillitis.

■  Stiffness  of  jaws,  with  inability  to  open  mouth;  altered

voice,  speaks  as  if  she  had  pebbles  in  mouth;  r.  side  of
throat  and  r.  tonsil  inflamed;  soreness  in  r.  ear  and  over
r.  side  of  head  and  face;  enlargement  of  cervical  glands;
sensation  of  lump  in  r.  side  of  throat;  soreness  in  r.  ear,
extending  into  throat;  pain  when  swallowing;  burning;
desire  for  sour  things;  hawking;  tongue  coated  yellow
at  back  part,  clean  at  front;  later  soreness  and  swelling
attacked  1.  ear  and  tonsil. ^Tonsillitis.

■  Great  difficulty  in  swallowing,  with  great  pain  in  throat;

salivary  glands  very  much  swollen  and  painful ;  oflen-
sive  smell  from  mouth  and  fetid  discharge  from  fauces
and  nares;  swelling  of  cervical  glands. ^Diphtheria.

■  Sore  throat,  <  on  r.  side; swallowing  difficult; warm

drinks  cause  much  pain;  tongue  coated  thick  at  back
part ;  looks  as  if  a  piece  of  chamois  skin  covered  posterior
part. ^Diphtheria.

■  Diphtheritic  deposits  begin  on  arches  of  palate;  glands

of  neck  swell  rapidly;  general  condition  of  oedema  of
throat  and  neck. ^Diphtheria.

■  Aphonia;  breathing  very  much  impeded;  nostrils  dilated

with  every  inspiration ;  very  weak  murmur  of  respira-
tion heard  all  over  chest,  sometimes  none  at  all;  fre-
quent violent  spells  of  suffocation. ^Diphtheria.

■  Membrane  <  on  r.  side;  tenacious  mucus in  throat;

sick,  offensive  odor;  <  from  warm  drinks;  thick,  dirty


435  MERCURIUS  lODATUS  FLAVUS.

yellow  coating  at  base  of  tongue;  glands  swollen.  ^Diph-
fheria.

I  Diphtheritic  membrane  yellow,  <  on  r.  side;  great  thirst
for  cold  water,  can  swallow  only  by  little  sips,  as  throat
is  so  full;  considerable  salivation,  which  makes  chin
sore;  nose  obstructed  with  thick,  yellow  scabs  and  mem-
branes, all  <  on  r.  side;  tongue  yellow,  with  tip  and
edges  clean  and  red;  coppery  smell  from  mouth;  must
swallow  from  constant  sensation  of  lump  in  throat;  <
from  empty  deglutition ;  salivary  and  cervical  glands
engorged;  much  painful  hawking  of  stringy  mucus;
fetid  discharge  from  fauces  and  nares;  oedema  of  neck
and  throat;  glandular  derangements;  great  prostration;
high  fever;  urine  scanty  and  high  colored.  ^Diphtheria.
^'  Appetite,  Thirst.  Desires,  Aversions.  Appetite  variable,
disgust  at  seeing  food.

Excessive  thirst;  occasionally  for  acid  drinks.
^•^  Hiccough,  Belching,  Nausea  and  Vomiting, i Nausea:
faintness,  with  dizziness  and  suffocation  about  heart;
sensation  of  disgust  at  sight  of  food.
^^  Scrobiculum  and  Stomach. Weak,  empty  feeling  at  stom-
ach, nausea.

Cutting  pains,  with  nausea  and  inclination  to  vomit.

Burning  at  stomach,  with  pain  as  from  a  blow.
'^  Hypochondria. Stitches  in  region  of  liver,  >  by  pressing
with  hand.

Pain  in  1.  hypochondrium,  witli  dizziness  on  awaking  in
morning.
^^  Abdomen. Hardness  of  abdomen.

Burning  at  umbilicus  as  from  a  hot  coal;  <  when  in-
spiring.

I  I  Great  thirst  for  water  in  evening;  pain  in  liver,  with
dizziness  and  nausea;  pain  proceeds  from  r.  to  left.

I  Faint,  sick  feeling  in  hypogastrium  before  stool.

•Severe  cutting,  cramplike  pains  in  both  hypochondria;
much  <  in  r.,  extending  into  back;  excessive  weariness
in  lower  limbs,  they  scarcely  support  body;  teeth  feel
elongated;  tongue  coated  bright  yellow  in  back  part
and  clean  in  front;  much  thirst;  entire  want  of  appetite;
pains  disappear  and  reappear  at  short  intervals.

a  Indolent  buboes.
"'  Stool  and  Rectum. Cutting,  colicky  pains,  followed  by
diarrhoea  or  discharge  of  fetid  flatus;  stools  thin,  light
brown,  frothy.

Frequent  urging  to  stool.

I  I  Stools  copious,  soft  and  of  a  dark  or  light  yellowish
brown  color.

I  I  Stools  scanty,  hard  and  black.


MERCURIUS  lODATUS  FLAVUS.  436

■  Black  discharges,  with  or  without  blood.

SStools  tough  like  putty,  with  much  straining. »
^^  Urinary  Organs. Urine:  copious,  dark  red,  scanty.
^^  Male  Sexual  Organs. Dreams  that  he  must  urinate,  fol-
lowed by  seminal  emission,  of  which  he  knew  nothing.

Copious  seminal  emissions,  preceded  by  lewd  dreams.

Sharp  shooting  stitches  in  end  of  penis  through  glans.

BHard  chancre.
^^  Female  Sexual  Organs. '  i  Menses  slight  at  onset,  with
pains. ^Leucorrhoea.

B  Copious,  muco-purulent  discharge  from  vagina  the  en-
tire month. ^Leucorrhoea.

B  Yellow  leucorrhoea,  particularly  of  young  girls  or  children.
^*  Pregnancy. Parturition. Lactation. sMorning  sickness.

iConfined  to  bed  one  week;  vomits  everything  she  takes,
also  vomits  a  greenish  yellow,  bitter  liquid,  with  a
burning,  sinking  sensation  at  stomach;  tongue  coated
yellowish  brown ;  bowels  constipated ;  in  a  previous
pregnancy  was  confined  to  her  bed  from  same  for  seven
months.
^  Voice  and  Larynx.  Trachea  and  Bronchia.  «Loss  of
voice;  hoarseness.

iSwelling  as  large  as  hen's  egg;  rawness  and  soreness  of
throat;  difficult  breathing,  wdth  suffocation  at  night;
mucus  in  throat  difficult  to  dislodge ;  cough  <  at  night,
and  arises  from  tickling  in  larynx  and  from  laughing.
^Goitre.
^■^  Cough. Slight  hacking  cough  when  inspiring.

iLoose  rattling  cough,  bronchi  loaded  with  mucus;  spu-
tum copious  and  yellow.
^  Iimer  Chest  and  Lungs. Stitches  through  r.  side  of  chest.

Sharp  pain  in  chest  behind  sternum.

Sensation  in  1.  breast  above  nipple  as  if  wind  was  in  cel-
lular tissue; frequent palpitation,  a single  kick and
jump  (relieved  by  Lycop.).
^^  Heart,  Pulse  and  Circulation. Sharp  pain  about  heart,
taking  away  breath.

Stitching  pain  in  heart.

Sudden  spasmodic  action  of  heart,  as  if  it  had  jumped  out
of  its  place.

Suffocation  about  heart,  with  nausea  and  giddiness.

Pulse  weak,  irregular  and  labored.
^^  Neck  and  Back. Neck  stiff;  soreness  in  occiput,  <  when
lying.

Throbbing  pain  between  shoulders.

Severe  pain  as  if  bruised  over  entire  scapular  region.

Throbbing  pain  on  r.  scapula.

Sharp  pains  in  back.  ,


437  MERCURIUS  lODATUS  FLAVUS.

^^  Upper  Limbs. Lameness  and  stiffness  in  r.  shoulder.

ISharp  pain  in  r.  shoulder,  obliging  him  to  cease  writing.
Soreness  and  lameness  of  1.  shoulder  and  arm  at  night

when  lying  on  1.  side.
Lame  numbness  of  1.  shoulder  and  arm.
Arms  stiff  and  sore,  <  when  moved.
Heavy  feeling  of  r.  arm.
Soreness  and  pain  of  r.  arm ;  <  from  pressure,  rubbing

and  passive  motion.
Rheumatic,  laming  pain  in  r.  arm,  <  from  writing.
Numbness  and  wearied  feeling  in  r,  arm,  <  from  writing.
;rRheumatic  pain  in  1.  arm,  it  is  stiff  and  sore,  <  when

putting  his  coat  on  or  moving  arm ;  <  in  middle  of

day,  >  in  evening,  and  at  night  could  lie  on  that  side.
Arms  and  hands  numb.
Rheumatic  pain  in  r.  hand,  at  night,  in  bed.
^^  Lower  Limbs. Weariness  in  legs,  with dull  pains and

tingling.
Dull  boring  pains  in  legs,  <  at  night.
Heavy  laming  pains  in  calves,  with  pain  in  knee  joint.
■Severe  cramplike  pains  in  lower  limbs,  <  in  r.,  especially

in  thigh,  affecting  also  knees,  feet  and  toes ;  pains  come

on  only when  at rest  and  are always  > by active

motion ;  passive  motion  makes  <  ;  pains  appear  every

night  while  in  bed,  and  in  daytime  when  lying  down.
Pain  in  sole  of  1.  foot  (causing  faintness),  with  feeling  of

faintness  through  whole  body.
Lame  feeling  in  feet.
^*  Limbs  in  -General. Heaviness  of  limbs,  with  laziness  and

drowsiness.
Excessive  tired  feeling  of  all  limbs,  especially  when  lying

on  1.  side,  >  lying  on  r.  side.
■  Soreness,  with  heaviness  of  all  limbs,  with  dull  frontal

headache  and  soreness  of  bones  of  face ;  soreness,  with

lameness  of  hands  and  fingers ;  heaviness  of  whole  body,

with  soreness  as  if  one  had  been  beaten.
^  Rest. Position. Motion. Rest : headache felt  more ;

pains'  in  lower  limbs ;  feels  <.
Lying :  stiffness  and  soreness  in  occiput  < ;  in  daytime,

pains  in  lower  limbs.
Lying  on  r.  side:  tired  feeling  in  all  limbs  >.
Lying  on  1.  side:  black  clouds  before  eyes;  soreness  and

lameness  of  r.  shoulder  and  arm;  tired  feeling  in  all

limbs.
Desire  to  lie  down,  but  feels  <  during  rest.
Motion :  of  arm  causes  stiffness  and  soreness ;  of  1.  arm

pain  <  ;  pains  in  lower  limbs  >.
When  mind  and  body  are  actively  engaged,  headache  >.


MERCURIUS  lODATUS  FLAVUS.  438

Swallowing:  pain  in  r.  ear.

Inability  to  open  mouth:  stiffness  of  jaw.

Writing:  rheumatic,  laming  pain  in  r.  arm  <  ;  numbness
and  wearied  feeling  in  r.  arm  <.

When  rising  from  chair:  dizzy.

Putting  on  his  coat:  pain  in  1.  arm  <.
^  Nerves. Very  tired  feeling,  especially  of  limbs.

Faint  feeling,  <  at  church.

Feels  languid  and  sleepy.
^  Sleep. Sleeplessness  without  restlessness ;  before  1  a.m.

Frightful  dreams;  nightmare.

■  Restless  sleep  from  constant  itching. ^Scabies  sicca.

I  Many  symptoms  appear  at  night  when  in  bed.
^  Time. Before  1  a.m.  :  sleeplessness  without  restlessness.

Morning :  on  waking,  dull  headache;  on  rising,  severe  pain
and  soreness  of  r.  orbit ;  mucus  in  throat ;  pain  in  1.
hypochondrium,  with  dizziness.

Daytime :  pains  in  lower  limbs.

All  day:  pain  in  liver,  with  dizziness.

Middle  of  day:  pain  in  1.  arm  <.

Evening:  pain  in  1.  eye;  great  thirst  for  water;  pain  in  1.
arm  >.

Night:  pain  in  1.  eye;  a  little  pain  in  pustules  on  conjunc-
tiva; eruption  on  scalp,  which  itches  and  is  < ;  difficult
breathing,  with  suffocation  ;  cough  < ;  soreness  and
lameness  of  r.  shoulder  and  arm ;  pain  in  1.  arm  >  ;
in  bed,  rheumatic  pains  in  r.  hand;  dull,  boring  pains
in  legs  <.
^^Temperature  and  Weather. Warm  room:  feels  <.

Warm  drinks:  cause  much  pain.

Many  symptoms  appear  when  in  bed  ;  deep  bone  pains  <  ;
itching,  pricking  all  over  <  ;  intolerable  itching.

Cold  water :  thirst  for.

I  I  Great  susceptibility  to  cold  and  damp  weather.  ^Leu-
corrhoea.

Worse  in  Spring.
^  Fever. Chills,  with  trembling  all  over.
*^  Attacks,  Periodicity. Short  intervals :  pains  in  liver  come
and  go.

Nightly:  pains  in  eyes ;  pains  in  lower  limbs  when  in  bed.

One  week:  confined  to  bed  with  vomiting  of  pregnancy.
^^  Locality  and  Direction.  Right:  violent  pain  in  side  of
head  over  temple;  headache  on  side  of  head  ;  eye,  exter-
nal redness,  anterior  chamber  shallow ;  iris  discolored
and  crowded  forward  ;  severe  pain  and  soreness  of  orbit;
complete  paralysis  of  all  fibres  of  third  pair  of  nerves  of
eye;  side  of  septum  and  nostril  sore  and  swollen;  dull,
bruised  pain  in  malar  bone  and  side  of  head;  lymphat-


439  MERCURIUS  lODATUS  FLAVUS.

ics  on  side  of  neck  and  tonsils  enlarged;  pain  and
swelling  of  tonsil ;  tonsillitis ;  patches  on  tonsil ;  pain  in
side  of  throat  and  ear  ;  soreness  of  side  of  face;  pain  in
ear  on  swallowing;  soreness  in  ear  and  over  side  of  head
and  face;  membrane  <  on  side  of  throat;  nose  ob-
structed, <  on  side;  cramplike  pain  in  hypochon-
drium;  stitches  through  side  of  chest;  throbbing  pain
on  scapula;  lameness  and  stiffness  of  shoulder ;  sharp
pain  in  shoulder ;  heavy  feeling  of  arm ;  soreness  and
pain  of  arm ;  rheumatic,  laming  pain  in  arm ;  numb-
ness and  wearied  feeling  in  arm ;  rheumatic  pain  in  ••
hand;  cramplike  pain  <  in  limb,  especially  thigh.

Left:  stiffness  and  soreness  in  occiput;  lying  on  side,
black  clouds  float  before  eyes ;  eye,  anterior  chamber
shallow;  iris  dimmed  and  discolored;  pigment  spots
on  lens  capsule ;  vitreous,  hazy ;  holding  eyes  to  side,
diplopia;  small  pustule  on  eye  ;  boring  in  ear;  stinging
in  cheek ;  soreness  and  swelling,  ear  and  tonsil ;  pain
in  hypochondrium  ;  sensation  above  nipple  as  if  wind
was  in  cellular  tissue ;  lame  numbness  of  shoulder  and
arm;  rheumatic  pain  in  arm,  it  is  stiff  and  sore;  pain
in  sole  of  foot ;  boring  pains  deep  in  ear.

Right  eye  a  little  larger  than  left.

From  r.  to  1:  pain  in  liver.

From  within  outward :  deep  in  1.  ear ;  throbbing,  boring.
^  Sensations.  As  if  heavy  weight  was  pressing  head  down  on
pillow ;  as  if  skull  was  cracking ;  teeth  as  if  too  long ;
as  if  r.  tonsil  was  swollen  ;  as  of  a  lump  in  throat ;  pain
as  from  a  blow  in  stomach ;  burning  at  umbilicus  as
from  a  hot  coal ;  as  if  wind  was  in  cellular  tissue  above
1.  nipple ;  as  though  heart  had  jumped  out  of  its  place;
pain  as  if  bruised  over  entire  scapular  region ;  soreness
as  if  one  had  been  beaten.

Pain:  at  root  of  nose;  on  top  of  head,  or  on  r.  side;  in  pus-
tule on  1.  eye ;  in  teeth  after  filling;  of  r.  tonsil ;  in  r.  side
of  throat;  in  r.  ear,  extending  into  throat;  in  1.  hj^po-
chondrium ;  of  r.  arm  ;  in  knee  joint;  in  sole  of  1.  foot.

Violent  pain:  in  r.  side  of  head.

Severe  pain:  of  r.  orbit ;  in  forehead  ;  over  entire  scapular
region.

Sharp  pain :  in  vertex ;  in  chest  behind  sternum ;  about
heart ;  in  back  ;  in  r.  shoulder.

Sudden  sharp  pains :  in  ear.

Severe,  cutting,  cramplike  pains:  in  both  hypochondria.

Cutting  pains :  in  stomach.

Cutting,  colicky  pains :  in  abdomen.

Sharp,  shooting  stitches :  in  end  of  penis.

Shooting  pains :  in  temples ;  at  root  of  nose.


MERCUmUS  lODATUS  FLAVUS.  440

Stitches:  in  temples;  through  head  and  face;  in  region
of  liver ;  through  r.  side  of  chest.

Sticking  pains:  r.  temple;  1.  ear;  r.  side  of  chest:  both
scapulae,  along  outer  borders  of  hands  and  little  fingers.

Stitching  pains  :  about  heart.

Throbbing,  boring:  deep  in  1.  ear.

Throbbing,  bursting  sensation  :  in  temples.

Throbbing pains : in forehead and temples ; between
shoulders  ;  on  r.  scapula.

Throbbing,  aching,  nightly  pains:  in  ej'^es.

Cramplike  pains :  in  lower  limbs,  knees,  feet  and  toes.

Grinding,  drawing  pains  :  in  teeth.

Deep  bone  pains  :  <  at  night.

Rheumatic,  laming  pains :  in  r.  arm.

Rheumatic  pain  :  in  1.  arm,  in  r.  arm.

Aching :  over  eyes.

Dull,  pressing,  boring  pains :  over  eyes.

Dull,  boring  pains :  in  legs.

Dull,  bruised  pain  :  in  r.  malar  bone,  radiating  into  fore-
head and  r.  side  of  head.

Dull,  heavy  aching :  at  base  of  brain.

Dull  pain :  in  head  ;  in  legs.

Heavy,  laming  pains :  in  calves.

Pulsating  and  burning:  like  fire  in  a  small  spot  on  face.

Stinging:  in  1.  cheek.

Burning:  in  throat ;  when  swallowing  saliva ;  at  stomach;
at  umbilicus.

Burning,  sinking  sensation  :  at  stomach.

Tingling :  in  legs.

Tickling:  in  larynx.

Soreness:  of  occiput;  of  r.  orbit;  of  r.  side  of  septum  and
nostril ;  of  entire  face ;  of  throat ;  in  r.  ear ;  over  side  of
head  and  face  ;  extending  from  ear  into  throat ;  of  1.  ear
and  1.  tonsil ;  of  1.  shoulder  and  arm ;  of  r.  arm ;  of  1.
arm ;  of  all  limbs ;  of  hands  and  fingers.

Stiffness:  in  occiput;  of  jaws;  of  neck;  of  r.  shoulder;
of  1.  arm.

Heavy  feeling :  of  r.  arm.

Heaviness :  of  eyelids ;  of  limbs ;  of  whole  body.

Suffocation :  about  heart.

Weak,  empty  feeling:  at  stomach.

Numbness  and  wearied  feeling :  in  r.  arm ;  of  arms  and
hands.

Faint,  sick  feeling :  in  hypogastrium.

Excessive  tired  feeling :  in  all  limbs.

Lameness :  of  1.  shoulder  and  arm  ;  in  feet.

Troublesome  itching :  all  over  body.

Itching :  of  scalp ;  of  spots  over  whole  body.


441  MERCURIUS  lODATUS  FLAVUS.

^  Tissues.  Especially  affects  mucous  membranes  covered
with  squamous  epithelium.
I  Deep  bone  pains,  especially  at  night.
I  When  primary  sore  begins  to  granulate,  and  hard,  pea-
like nodules,  resembling  enlarged  glands,  appear  upon
surrounding  parts,  or  when  primary  sore  and  whole
base  upon  which  it  rests  remains  hard. ^Chancre.

■  Hard  cicatrix  after  Hunterian  chancre  has  been  healed.
•  Painless  chancres,  with  great  swelling  of  inguinal  glands,

without  disposition  to  suppurate ;  swelling  of  tonsils ;
affection  of  testicles ;  also  secondary  eruptions.  ^Syphilis.
I  Glands  swollen,  indurated.

■  Scrofulous  diseases  of  glandular  and  lymphatic  system;

diphtheritic  affections  and  secondary  syphilis.
**  Touch. Passive  Motion. Injuries. Touch:  soreness  of
occiput  <.

Pressure :  with  hand,  stitches  in  region  of  liver  >  ;  sore-
ness and  pain  of  r.  arm  <.

Hubbing:  soreness  and  pain  of  r.  arm  <.

Scratching : does  not  >  itching.

Passive  motion :  soreness  and  pain  of  r.  arm  < ;  pains  in
lower  limbs  <.
^  Skin. Troublesome  itching  all  over  body,  not  >  by  scratch-

Persistent  itching  spots  over  whole  body,  following  each

other  in  rapid  succession.
Hard  papulae  over  body.
. Itching,  pricking  all  over,  <  at  night.

Bright  red,  fine  eruption  on  chest  and  abdomen.

■  Excessively  intense  angina;  induration  of  parotid,  cer-

vical glands  and  tonsils;  diphtheritic  affections,  with
excessive  muscular  prostration;  desire  to  lie  down,  but
feels  <  during  rest  and  in  warm  room;  sharp  throbbing,
boring  pains  from  within  outward,  deep  in  1.  ear,  urine
dark  and  copious  (after  Laches.),  when  there  is  loss  of
voice  and  hoarseness. ^Scarlatina.

■  Intolerable  itching  at  night. 6'Crusta  lactea.

*^  Stages  of  Life,  Constitution. Girl,  set.  9  months ;  crusta

lactea.
Child,  set.  2  years;  scabies  sicca.
Girl,  set.  3|; diphtheria  (after  failure  of  Arsen.,  Calcar.,

loduTYi,  Mercur.,  Sulphur).
Girl,  set.  17 ;  goitre.
Girl,  set.  17;  tonsillitis.

Woman,  set.  26,  single;  intraocular  affection.
Man,  set.  35,  attacks usually  appear after exposure to

drafts  of  air  while  perspiring,  suffering  many  years ;  sore

throat.


MERC.  lOD.  FLAVUS— MERC.  lOD.  RUBER.  442

Woman,  set.  38,  tuberculous  family  history ;  affection  of

lower  lip.
Woman,  set.  42,  stout,  fleshy,  many  children;  leucorrhoea.
Woman,  set.  67,  suffering  a  long  time;  pains  in  limbs.
*^  Relations, Antidoted  by:  Hepar;  palpitation  relieved  by

Lycoj).
Compatible:  after  Laches.,  in  scarlatina.


MERCURIUS  lODATOS  RUBER.

Biniodide  of  Mercury.  Hg  Jg*

Introduced  and  proved  by  the  American  Provers'  Union  in  1856,  monograph
revised  by  Hering. Provings  were  made  with  1st  to  30th.

Clinical  Authorities. — Diphtheritic  conjunctivitis,  Von  Tagen  {Arg.  nit.  ex-
ternally), Raue's  Eec,  1874,  p.  75 ;  Nasal  polypus,  Spranger,  B.  J.  H.,  vol.  24,
p.  324 ;  Ulceration  of  tonsils,  Brown,  Org.,  vol.  3,  p.  88  ;  Tubercular  sore  throat,  New-
ton, Eaue's  Eec,  1870,  p.  145 ;  Diphtheria,  Ockford,  Times  Eetros.,  vol.  3,  p.  79 ;
Black,  Euck.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  5,  p.  243;  Bubo,  Cleveland,  Eaue's  Eec,  1871,  p.  141 ;
Gerson,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  5,  p.  546;  Hemorrhoids,  Eggert,  Eaue's  Eec,  1871,
p.  121  ;  Sarcocele,  Hendrichs,  Allg.  Hom.  Ztg.,  vol.  109,  p.  126;  Syphilitic  sarcocele,
Cricca,  Eaue's  Eec,  1871,  p.  143 ;  Aphonia,  McGeorge,  Eaue's  Eec,  1873,  p.  87 ;
Laryngitis,  Macfarlan,  Eaue's  Eec,  1870,  p.  156  ;  Goitre,  Diller,  N.  A.J.  H.,  vol.  7,
p.  245 ;  Swelling  of  bronchial  glands,  Meyhoffer,  Eaue's  Eec,  1871,  p.  91 ;  Pain  of
syphilitic  ulceration,  Preston,  Org.,  vol.  3,  p.  106  ;  Indurated  chancre,  Eeil,  Eiick.
Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  5,  p.  569;  Syphilis,  Trinks,  Ruck.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  2,  p.  156;  Eeil,
Eiick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  5,  p.  569  ;  Secondary  syphilis,  Gerson,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  5,
p.  220 ;  Complications  during  scarlatina,  Liberali,  Hom.  Clin.,  vol.  3,  p.  128.

^  Mind. Low  spirited ;  disposed  to  cry.

Ill  humor  and  bad  taste  in  morning  on  awaking.
Delirium :  with  increased  fever ;  with  ulcers  in  fauces  and
tonsils.
^  Sensorium. i Vertigo:  during  grippe;  things  seem  to  reel

around  her.
^  Inner  Head, l  Sensation  as  if  bound  by  a  tight  cord,  in
frontal  region.
Beating,  throbbing  from  r.  of  sinciput  to  occiput.
■  Vertex  very  hot,  with  slight  pulsation  at  11  p.m.
Pressive  pain  in  1.  brain  from  6  to  8  p.m.
Pressure  over  eyes.
I  I  Pain  in  head  with  heat.


443  MERCURIUS  lODATUS  RUBER.

I  I  Dulness  of  head,  and  slight  pressing  pain  in  1.  side,  like
during  a  coryza;  >  walking  in  open  air.

■  Headache  with  grippe.

I  I  Every  day  some  headache.

■  Headache  <  afternoon  and  evening;  dull,  stolid.

■  Syphilitic  tumors  in  brain.

*  Outer  Head. '  l  Pains  in  bones  of  head,  chiefly  occipital.

I  I  Small  pustules  on  head.
^  Sight  and  Eyes. iPsorophthalmia; trachoma; pannus.

iEyes  inflamed,  burn,  water;  catarrh-;  bright  light  irritates.

■  Eye  got  sore  in  a  single  night,  on  following  day  much

swollen,  lids  could  not  be  turned  out  without  much  pain,
being  very  sensitive  to  touch;  a  stream  of  hot,  acrid
tears,  mixed  with  yellowish  flakes  of  fibrinous  material
gushed  out;  marked  chemosis  of  a  pale  yellowish  color,
presenting  a  succulent  appearance;  marked  infiltration
throughout  entire  conjunctival  surface,  presenting  a
firm  fibrinous  nature;  over  both  palpebral  surfaces  a
thick,  opaque  membrane  had  formed,  which  could  be
detached  in  small  patches  and  shreds;  much  extrava-
sation of  blood  over  entire  ocular  conjunctiva;  cornea
invaded  by  ulceration  at  three  distinct  points,  larger
and  deeper  of  these  being  at  centre,  threatened  to  pene-
trate into  anterior  chamber.  {Arg.  nit.  was  used  exter-
nally.) ^Diphtheritic  conjunctivitis.

■  Old  cases  of  granular  lids  and  pannus.

^Hearing and Ears. Hearing  dull; > evenings; ears
close  for  a  few  moments  at  a  time;  coryza
Earache  in  r.  ear.
Earwax  increased.

■  Itching  in  both  ears,  all  night.

Swelling  of  parotid  and  neighboring  glands.
'Smell  and  Nose. ■Coryza:  with  headache; dull  hearing
>  getting  warm  by  walking;  r.  side  of  nose  hot,  swol-
len; much  sneezing;  with  hoarseness.

■  Whitish  yellow  or  bloody  discharge; affection  of  pos-

terior nares,  with  raw  sensation;  nasal  bones  diseased:

turbinated  bones  swollen.
I  I  Hawks  mucus  from  posterior  nares.
I  I  Swelling;  hot  and  inflamed  state  of  r.  side  of  nose,  with

coryza.

■  In  1.  nostril  a  yellowish  white  tumor,  spongy,  moist,  ex-
• tending  into  orbit  behind  eye,  displacing  it  one  half  its

diameter  to  1.  external  angular  process  of  orbit,  and
protruding  about  one  third  of  an  inch  further  than
normal. ^Nasal  polypus.

■  Crusty  eruption  on  wings  of  nose.

^  Upper  Face. Aching  in  1.  cheek  and  eye.


MERCURIUS  lODATUS  RUBER.  444

I  i  Scabs  on  face,  r.  side.
^  Lower  Face. iiLips  slimy  and  sticky  on  waking.

iLips  stick  together;  headache.

Pain  in  jaws  and  temples.

iSwelling  of  parotid  and  neighboring  glands.

I  Eczema  rubrum  on  chin.
**'  Teeth  and  Gums. l  i  Gums  swollen  ; toothache ; glands
swollen;  boil  in  mouth;  sleepless; alternately melan-
cholic and  cheerful,  in  periodic  spells.
"  Taste and Tongue. Taste; slimy on waking; bitter,
metallic.

iTongue:  dry,  wants  to  wet  mouth;  scalded  feeling,  small
blister  on  point;  furred,  with  grippe;  aphthae.
'^  Inner  Mouth, o  Profuse  flow  of  saliva  and  aching  pains  in
teeth  of  lower  jaw.

Soreness  of  middle  of  inside  of  1.  cheek.

I  I  Mucous  membrane  of  mouth  inflamed,  with  burning.

iMucous  patches  on  lips  and  inner  surface  of  cheeks;
round  spots,  but  slightly  demarcated,  bare  of  epithelium
and  covered  with  a  creamy  exudation ;  discharge  varies
in  character;  spots  very  sensitive,  but  do  not  bleed.
^Secondary  syphilis.

I  Small  nodules  on  mucous  membranes  of  mouth,  pharynx
and  nose,  which  become  round  ulcers,  with  hard  edges
and  lardaceous  base;  slight  pain;  soon  disappear  from
original  place  and  appear  in  another  part;  when  ap-
pearing on  tongue,  lip  or  wing  of  nose  a  distinct  deep
induration  can  be  felt  surrounding  them.
^^  Throat. 'Much  phlegm  in  throat  and  nose.

■  Disposition to  hawk; sensation  of  a lump  in  throat;

hawked  up  a  hard,  greenish  lump,
i Hawks  much;  spits  a  tough,  white  phlegm.

■  Sticking  in  throat.

■  On  waking  throat  sore;  feels  scalded,  <  during  empty

swallowing.

■  Loose  cough,  back  of  throat  and  nose  inflamed,  glands  of

throat  ulcerated ;  enlarged  tonsils,  breathes  with  mouth
open  and  snores  at  night;  expectoration  yellowisli
greenish,  viscid  or  purulent.

■  Pharynx  more  irritable  than  larynx,  with  affection  of

posterior  nares;  great  sensitiveness  to  cold  air.  ^Soru
throat.

■  Follicular  catarrh  of  pharynx;  engorged  tonsils.

■  Painful  swelling  of  tonsils  and  submaxillary  glands.

■  Left  tonsil  swollen;  fauces  dark  red;  diphtheritic  patches;

submaxillary  glands  painfully  engorged.

■  Slight  superficial  ulcers  in  throat  in  patches.

■  Difficult  deglutition,  with  ulcers  in  throat.


445  MERCURIUS  lODATUS  RUBER.

■  Tonsils  suppurating.

I  I  Worse  from  empty  swallowing. ^Diphtheria.
iVelum  long,  seemingly  causing  cough;  1.  tonsil  inflamed.
iPains  in  throat,  tonsils  swollen  and  covered  with  a  slimy,

speckled  coating;  back  part  of  throat  red;  slight  pain
on  swallowing;  prostration;  two  days  later  tonsils,
uvula  and  back  part  of  pharynx  covered  with  a  coat-
ing looking  like  dried  starch.

I I  After  scarlatina  ulcers  on  fauces  and  tonsils.

■  Fauces  and  tonsils  covered  with  fetid  ulcers.

■  Glandular  swellings;  exudation  limited,  transparent  and

easily  detached ;  cases  attending  epidemic  scarlet  fever.
^Diphtheria.

■  Throat  sore,  <  on  1.  side;  swallowing  painful,  both  of

solids  and  fluids;  fauces  deep  red;  tongue  coated  yel-
lowish, thick ;  gums  and  tongue  more  or  less  swollen
and  sensitive. ^Diphtheria.

■  Right  side;  <  from  empty  swallowing;  throat  sensitive

to  touch ;  absence  of  coating  on  base  of  tongue.  ^Diph-
theria.

■  Tubercular  sore  throat.

^*  Appetite,  Thirst. Desires,  Aversions. Desire  to  drink

small  quantities.
Inclination  to  have  food  more  salted.
^^  Eating  and  Drinking. Heartburn  after  dinner.
^^  Hiccough,  Belching,  Nausea  and  Vomiting. 1 1  Loud

and  bitter  belching.

■  Nausea: sore  throat; sinking  at  stomach  and epigas-

trium, with  general  sick  feeling;  while  passing  diar-

rhoeic  stool.
^^  Scrobiculum  and  Stomach. > '  Pain  on  pressure  at  epi-
gastrium.
^^  Hypochondria. Aching  and  full  feeling  in  r.  hypochon-

drium.
Sudden  cutting  pain  in  region  of  liver.
Heavy,  painful  feeling  in  region  of  liver,  pancreas  and

spleen.
Transient  drawing  pain,  followed  by  lame  sensation  in  1.

hypochondrium;  1.  waist  feels  sore  on  bending.
I  I  Enlarged  malarial  spleens  and  livers.
^^  Abdomen. •  i  Distended  abdomen  about  navel,  with  pain

on  pressure.
Colic,  followed  by  stool.
Uneasy,  sore  feeling  all  over  bowels.

■  Subacute  gonorrhoeal  inflammation  of  inguinal  glands;

swelling  pearshaped,  not  very  hard  nor  painful,  pain
only  present  upon  strong  pressure.
^^  Stool  and  Rectum. Stool  copious,  yellow  brown,  some-


MERCURIUS  lODATUS  RUBER.  446

what  water}'-,  and  coated  with  mucus  and  slightly  bloody,
preceded  by  griping  and  colicky  pains;  urging  and
slight  tenesmus  remained  afterwards,

1 1  Inveterate  piles.
^^  Urinary  Organs. iBright's  disease.

Ulcers  in  bladder.

■  Increased  flow  of  urine.

Frequent  desire  to  urinate,  she  cannot  hold  her  urine  for
a  moment.

Urine:  increased  flow;  thick  and  dark  when  passing;  red.
^^  Male  Sexual  Organs.  Sexual  desire,  particularly  on  going
to  sleep ;  nocturnal  emissions.

Sensitiveness  of  r.  testicle  and  cord.

I  Left  side  of  scrotum  for  many  years  slightly  enlarged,
accompanied  by  varicocele;  sudden,  rapid  increase  of
size,  finally  presenting  a  hard,  painless  tumor  19  ctm.
long  and  9  ctm.  in  circumference;  no  hydrocele;  no  in-
flammatory symptoms. ^Sarcocele.

I  I  Sharp  shooting  stitches  in  end  of  penis  through  glans.

■  Threatened  gangrene  of  glans  in  paraphimosis.

■  Hard,  red  swelling  of  front  of  prepuce,  appearing  as  thick

and  hard  as  lead  pencil,  with  hard  chancre  in  centre,
entirely  painless.
I  I  Discharge free and mucoid; patches  of induration

along  urethra. ^Gonorrhoea.
I  Bubo  discharging  for  a  year.
^Female  Sexual  Organs. iLeucorrhoea  of  yellowish  color.

Stony  hardness  of  fibroid  tumor.
^  Voice  and Larynx. Trachea and Bronchia. ■  Com-
plete loss  of  voice. ^Diphtheria.

I  Hoarse  and  husky  shortly  after  getting  a  little  wet  in  an

evening  shower.

■  Patches  of  inflammation  of  a  livid  purplish  hue,  dis-

charge thin  and  offensive. ^Laryngitis.

■  Dark  red  inflammation  and  swelling  of  parts,  with  much

hawking,  coughing  and  purulent  expectoration,  <  in
morning. ^Phthisis  laryngis.

■  Swelling  of  bronchial  glands;  subacute  processes  arising

from  influences  of  cold  or  atmospheric  changes.

■  Goitre  {Iodine  was  used  externally).

^"  Cough. Cough:  from  elongated  uvula; with  sore  throat;
with  a  little  loose,  whitish,  slimy  sputum.

■  Grippe,  with  fever,  headache,  giddiness,  furred  tongue;

sweat  in  bed.

■  Profuse  yellow  sputum.

^  Inner  Chest  and  Lungs. Awoke  from  a  transient  feeling
of  soreness  in  whole  breast.

I I  Constriction  across  chest.


447  MERCURIUS  lODATUS  RUBER.

I  I  Catching  pain  under  r.  breast  oppressing  breathing,
^  Heart,  Pulse  and  Circulation.  Sharp  cutting  pain  in  chest.

I  I  Sticking  pain  in  heart.
^  Outer  Chest. Sticking in muscles  of  ribs,  1.  side,  after

walking  out  during  thawing  weather.
^^  Neck  and  Back, i Swollen  glands  on  neck,  with  tooth-
ache, scarlatina,  etc.
I  Spine  sore  and  painful.
^^  Upper  Limbs. '  l  Rheumatic  pains  in  shoulder  joint.
I  Axillary  glands  suppurate.
Dull,  aching,  strained  sensation  in  middle  of  os  humeri

as  if  about  to  break.
Rheumatic  pains,  soreness,  stiffness  in  1.  arm  <  by  motion.
I  Palm  of  1.  hand  cracked,  horny,  several  oozing  rhagades.
^  Lower  Limbs. '  '  Aching pains  from hips  to  ankles,  as
though  she  had  walked  many  miles,  felt  more  in  bones.
Weakness  of  knee  joints.
I  Pains  from  calves  up  to  sacrum.
Insupportable  pain  and  aching  in  legs towards  evening,

>  on  moving.
I  Pain  of  syphilitic  ulceration  in  front  of  leg.
> Rheumatic  affection  of  feet  after  washing  floor;  violent
tearing  on  soles  and  in  foot  joint ; feet  swollen,  sore  to
touch,  particularly  around  ankles  ; walking  very  diffi-
cult, sometimes  impossible.
^*  Limbs  in  General. Rheumatic  pains  now  here,  now  there,
mostly  muscular;  alternately  in  arms  and hands,  legs
and  feet;  violent  pain  like  otalgia  in  1.  ear.
^  Rest,  Position,  Motion.  Swallowing:  empty,  sore  throat  < ;
pain  in  throat.
Bending:  I.  waist  feels  sore.
Motion:  rheumatic  pains  in  1.  arm  <.
Walking:  very  difficult,  sometimes impossible,  soreness
of  ankles.
^  Nerves, l  l  Epileptic  spasms  increase  two  days  and  are  gone
the  fourth.
Weary,  with  rheumatic  pain  in  forearm;  bruised  feeling.
^'  Sleep. Toothache  on  going  to  sleep.
Insomnia,  with  ulcerated  throat.
Restless  from  12  p.m.  till morning,  with  constriction  in

diaphragm.
Dreams: frightful; of  swimming; gunning;  traveling;

lascivious.
On  awaking:  ill  humor; dull  head; slimy  taste;  throat
sore;  pain  in  chest.
^Time. Morning: on  awaking; ill  humor  and  bad  taste;
coughing  and  purulent  expectoration  <.
After  dinner:  heartburn.


MERCURIUS  lODATUS  RUBER.  448

Afternoon:  headache  <.

Evening:  cheerful;  headache  <;  towards,  insupportable
pain  in  leg.

At  bedtime:  chilly.

11  P.M.:  vertex  very  hot,  with  slight  pulsation.

All  night :  itching  in  both  ears.

At  night:  snoring;  sweats.
^^  Temperature  and  Weather. Open  air:  dulness  of  head  >.

Getting  warm:  by  walking;  dull  hearing  >.

After  walking  in  thawing  weather : sticking  in  muscles
of  ribs,  1.  side.

Getting  wet:  hoarse  and  husky.

After  washing  floor :  rheumatic  affection  of  feet.

Cold  or  atmospheric  variations:  swelling  of  glands,  sub-
acute processes.

Cold  air:  great  sensitiveness  of  pharynx.
*"  Fever. Chilly  at  bedtime.

I  I  Intense  shivering,  followed  by  feverishness.

Chilly,  followed  by  flush  over  face.

I  I  Fever,  with  grippe.

Flush  of  head  and  feeling  of  being  tickled.

■  Sweats  at  night  in  bed;  grippe.

Copious  night  sweats;  hot  sweat.
*^  Attacks,  Periodicity. Alternately:  melancholic  and  cheer-
ful; rheumatic  pains  in  arms  and  hands,  legs  and  feet.

For  a  few  moments  at  a  time :  ears  close.

From  6  to  8  p.m.  :  pressive  pain  in  1.  brain.

From  12  p.m.  till  morning:  restless.

Every  day  :  some  headache.

In  one  night:  eyes  get  sore,  next  day  much  swollen.

Increasing  two  days,  gone  on  fourth  :  epileptic  spasms.

For  a  year :  bubo  discharging.

Of  two  years'  duration  :  ulcers  on  legs.

For  many  years :  1.  side  of  scrotum  enlarged.
*^  Locality  and  Direction.  Right :  beating,  throbbing  from
sinciput  to  occiput ;  earache  ;  side  of  nose  hot,  swollen,
inflamed ;  scabs  on  side  of  face ;  side  of  throat  <  from
swallowing  ;  aching  and  full  feeling  in  hypochondrium  ;
sensitiveness  of  testicles  ;  catching  pain  under  breast.

Left :  pressing  pain  on  side  of  head ;  pressive  pain  in
brain;  tumor  in  nostril,  aching  in  cheek  and  eye;  sore-
ness of  middle  of  cheek ;  tonsil  swollen  and  inflamed ;
sore  throat  <  ;  drawing  pain  and  lame  sensation  in
hypochondrium ;  waist  feels  sore ;  side  of  scrotum  en-
larged ;  sticking  in  muscles  of  ribs ;  rheumatic  pain,
soreness,  stiffness ;  palm  of  hand  cracked,  horny ;  pain
like  otalgia  in  ear.
*^  Sensations. As  if  bound  by  a  tight  cord  in  frontal  region ;


449  MERCURIUS  lODATUS  RUBER.

as  of  a  lump  in  throat;  as  if  os  humeri  was  about  to
break;  as  if  she  had  walked  many  miles;  aching  in
bones  of  leg;  as  if  being  tickled;  mouth  as  if  scalded.
Pain:  in  head;  in  bones  of  head;  in  r.  ear;  in  jaws  and
temples;  in  nodules  on  mucous  membrane  of  mouth;
in  throat;  at  epigastrium ;  about  navel;  in  spine;  from
calves  up  to  sacrum;  of  syphilitic  ulceration  in  front  of
leg;  in  chest.
Insupportable  pain:  in  legs.
Violent  pain :  in  1,  ear.

Sharp,  shooting  stitches :  in  end  of  penis  through  glans.
Violent  tearing :  in  soles  and  foot  joints.
Cutting:  in  chest;  in  region  of  liver.
Beating,  throbbing:  from  r.  of  sinciput  to  occiput.
Sticking:  in  throat;  in  heart;  in  muscles  of  ribs;  1.  side.
Catching  pain:  under  breast.
Rheumatic  pain:  in  shoulder  joint;  in  1.  arm;  now  here,

now  there;  in  forearm.
Transient  drawing:  in  1.  hypochondrium.
Pressive  pain :  in  1.  brain.
Aching:  in  1.  cheek  and  eye;  in  teeth  of  lower  jaw;  in  r.

hypochondrium;  from  hip  to  ankles;  in  legs.
Slight  pressing  pain:  on  1.  side  of  head.
Heavy,  painful  feeling :  in  region  of  liver,  pancreas  and

spleen.
Dull,  aching,  strained  sensation:  in  middle  of  os  humeri.
Burning:  of  mouth.
Soreness:  of  middle  of  1.  cheek;  of  throat;  of  waist;  all

over  bowels;  in  whole  breast;  of  spine;  of  1.  arm.
Raw  sensation :  of  posterior  nares.
Bruised  feeling:  in  forearm.
Sensitiveness:  of  r.  testicle  and  cord.
Pressure :  over  eyes.
Full  feeling  :  at  epigastrium.
Dulness :  of  head.
Slight  pulsation :  in  vertex.
Constriction:  across  chest;  in  diaphragm.
Stiffness  :  of  1.  arm.
Lame  feeling :  in  1.  hypochondrium.
Sinking :  at  stomach.
^  Itching :  in  both  ears.
*^  Tissues. I  Indurated  chancres;  Hunterian  chancre.

■  Chancre  and  bubo,  particularly  indolent.

■  Old  cases  of  syphilis,  particularly  in  persons  of  lax  fibre,
45  m scrofulous,  and  in  those  who  have  taken  much  mercury.

Touch. Passive  Motion. Injuries. Touch :  eyelids  very
sensitive ;  throat  sensitive ;  pustules  sore.

VOL.  VII.— 29.


MERCURIUS  lODATUS  RUBER.  450

Pressure :  pain  at  epigastrium ;  pain  about  navel ;  pain  of
inguinal  glands.
^^  Skin. I  I  Small  fissures  and  cracks.

I  I  Hard  papules  here  and  there.

I  I  Pustules,  inflamed  base,  sore  to  touch,  itching  slightly;
scab  over,  but  pus  oozes.

■Syphilitic  ulcers.

I  I  Freckles,  liver  spots.

I  I  Chilblains.

I  Old  scrofulous  or  syphilitic  ulcers,  spreading.

iSyphilitic  eruption  over  whole  boSy,  with  moist,  offensive
smelling  ulcers  on  legs,  of  two  years'  duration.

1  1  Lupus ;  condylomata.

1  During  course  of  malignant  scarlatina  swelling  of  par-
otid and  neighboring  glands;  fauces  and  tonsils  covered
A^ith  large  fetid  ulcers,  and  fever  increased,  with  delir-
ium, insomnia  and  difficult  deglutition.
*^  Stages  of  Life,  Constitution.  Girl,  set.  16,  thin,  weak ;
diphtheria.

A  servant  girl,  after  washing  floor; rheumatic  affection.

Man,  set.  29 ;  suffering  a  year ;  bubo.

Irish  laborer,  set.  40;  living  in  damp,  ill  ventilated  house,
of  irregular  habits,  occasionally  indulges  in  a  drunk :
diptheritic  conjunctivitis.

Man.  set,  70;  sarcocele.
*^  Relations. Antidoted  by:  Hepar.

Compatible:  after  Bellad.,  in  scarlatina.

Compare :  Badiaga,  Carbo  anim.  and  Nitr.  ac,  in  syphilitic
eruptions ;  Merc,  praoc.  rub.,  which  is  preferable  for  leaden
heaviness  in  occiput  with  otorrhoea.


451  MERCURIUS  SULPHURICUS.

MERCURIUS  SULPHURICUS  (Turpethum).

Sulphate  of  Mercury. Turpeth  Mineral.  Hg  SO^.

Introduced  by  Hering,  proved  by  himself,  3d  trit.  (MSS  ),  Neidliard  (App.
N.  A.  J.  H.,  p.  281),  Eaymond,  Dake  (N.  A.  J.  H.,  vol.  3,  p.  180),  Berridge,
Croker  (N.  Horn.  Eev.,  vol.  14,  p.  108).

Clinical  Authorities. — Hydrothorax,  Lippe,  Miller  (Montreal).

^  Mind. Low  spirited,  with  chilliness  and  yawning.

Ill  humor  after  eating.
^  Sensorium. Giddiness while standing, after headache;
confusion  in  head.
Fulness  in  head,  with  occasional  stitches.
^  Inner  Head. Dull  pain  in  forehead.

Pain  in  head  under  coronal  suture,  on  waking  in  morn-
ing, during  forenoon  confined  to  r.  frontal  region ;  pains
dull,  extending  deep  into  brain,  <  when  exercising.
Sharp  pain  in  r.  parietal  protuberance;  darting  pains  in

other  parts  of  head.
Soreness  all  through  head,  after  breakfast  and  on  moving
about.
*  Outer  Head. Violent  itching  of  hairy  scalp.
^  Sight and  Eyes. Oppression over eyes,  continuing  for
several  hours.
Eyes  <  from  sunlight.
^  Smell and Nose. Sneezing: in sunshine; with fluent
coryza.
Swelling  and  soreness  of  tip  of  nose.
Itching  of  nose.
^  Upper  Face. Pale,  anxious  countenance.

Burning  in  ears  and  face,  after  a  chill.
^  Lower  Face. Swelling  of  parotid  gland.
^°  Teeth  and  Gums. Gums  and  palate  dark  bluish  color;

ulcerated  margins.
^^  Taste  and  Tongue. Taste:  pasty,  insipid;  bad  after  rising;
brassy,  metallic
Tongue: tinged  down  middle  greenish  yellow; furred,
moist,  swollen; covered  with dry  black  fur; coated
heavily white, yellowish at root ; enlarged papillse
stand  up  like  red  points,  with  flat  taste.
Burning,  smarting,  stinging  on  tip  of  tongue  (1.  side  in
evening).


MERCURIUS  SULPHURICUS.  452

■  Soreness  on  tip  of  tongue.
Dryness  of  tongue  and  throat.

^^  Inner  Mouth. Mouth  clammy  and  full  of  mucus  in  morn-
ing.
Dryness  in  mouth  and  fauces.
Burning  sensation  in  mouth  and  throat.
Soreness  in  mouth  and  throat;  salivation.
Tongue  and  inside  of  mouth  red,  inflamed,  feeling  raw.
Lips,  gums,  fauces,  mouth  and  tongue  swollen;  look  dry
and  black.
^^  Throat. In  throat:  pain; sense  of  heat  and  constriction;

burning; scalding.
^^  Hiccough,  Belching,  Nausea,  Vomiting. Constant  sick-
ness; vomiting  of  ingesta.
Violent  yellow  vomiting,  every  ten  minutes.
Vomiting  and  diarrhoea.
'''  Scrobiculnm  and  Stomach. Pain in  epigastrium  and
abdomen;  weight;  stomach  tender  to  pressure.
Stomach  so  irritable  nothing  remains  on  it  an  instant.
Digestion  impeded; after  supper,  distressing feeling  all
night,  that  unless  stomach  was relieved  a  fit  would
ensue ;  vomiting  with  relief.
Acidity  of  stomach.
^^  Abdomen. Coldness  or  burning  in  abdomen.

Awoke  at  1  a.m.  with  severe  pains  along  duodenum  and

down  into  umbilical  region.
Much  griped.
After  drinking  coffee,  pain  in  abdomen  as  if  diarrhoea

,  would  set  in.
Soreness  in  inguinal  glands.
^^  Stool  and  E-ectum. Brown  loose  stools.

, i Stools  loose,  watery,  causing  severe  burning  and  sore-
ness of  anus.

■  Very  profuse  watery  evacuations (relieving dyspnoea).

^Hydrothorax.

Watery  stools  pouring  from  him  and  burning  anus,  like
boiling  water.

Diarrhoea  early  in  morning;  stools  burst  out  in  a  hot
stream  of  yellow  water.

i Violent  purging;  rice  water  motions,  some  yellow.

After  diarrhoeic  stools  sensation  of  fulness  as  from  con-
gestion to  legs,  especially  feet;  they  feel  numb  when
standing.

Hard,  scanty  and  delayed  stools.
^^  Urinary  Organs.  Urine:  increased  in  quantity;  desire
not  as  frequent  as  usual;  great  urging,  with  inability  to
void  usual  quantity,  late  in  afternoon;  scanty  and
scalding,  but  clear ;  dark,  becoming  turbid,  with  a  scum
on  it.


453  MERCURIUS  SULPHURICUS.

^^  Male  Sexual  Organs. Involuntary  emissions  and  lascivi-
ous dreams.
I  I  Gonorrhoea  or  syphilis,  with  intense  congestion  to  parts.
Swelling  of  testicles.
^^  Voice  and  Larynx. Trachea  and  Bronchia. Heat  and
roughness  in  larynx,  hoarseness.

I  1  Increased expectoration of  mucus from larynx and

trachea.
^^  Respiration. Pain  in  chest  prevents  him  from  breathing.

■  Great  dyspnoea;  has  to  sit;  cannot  lie  down;  breathing

quick  and  short. ^Hydrothorax.
Dyspnoea  in  children ;  hydrothorax.
Dyspnoea  and  chest  symptoms,  <  in  afternoon.
Mercurial  fetor  of  breath.
^  Inner  Chest  and  Lungs. Pressure  on  chest.

■  Burning  in  chest.

Pain  in  r.  side  of  chest,  extending  to  scapula,  can  scarcely
breathe,  <  from  4  to  5  p.m.

I I  Hydrothorax;  dyspnoea,  breathing  quick  and  short,
has  to  sit,  cannot  lie  down;  swollen  extremities;  stools
loose,  watery,  causing  severe  burning  and  soreness  of
anus;  burning  in  chest.*

■  Dropsy  of  fihest,  especially  if  occurring  from  heart  or

liver  disease.
^^  Heart,  Pulse  and  Circulation. Pulse:  90,  tremulous;  130,
tremulous  and  irregular;  slow  and  small;  regular,  but
small  and  weak;  reduced,  with  flat  taste.
^^  Upper  Limbs. Stiffness  in  arms.

Violent  beating  in  1.  arm,  commencing  above  elbow  in
course  of  brachial  nerve  and  extending  along  radial
nerve  to  wrist,  followed  by  pain  similiar  to  that  pro-
duced by  a  blow  upon  arm  below  insertion  of  deltoid
muscle;  pain  affected  principally  radial  side  of  fore-
arm, thumb,  index  finger,  at  8.30  a.m.

Numbness  of  forearm  and  hand,  also  of  r.  hand.

Shooting  pains  in  wrists  and  along  metacarpal  bones.

Hands  icy  cold,  with  blue  nails.
^  Lower  Limbs. Pain  and  lameness  of  knees,  noticed  partic-
ularly when  walking.

■  (Edematous  swelling  of  legs.
Ulcers  on  ankles.

Aching  in  calf  of  r.  leg.

Numbness  in  hollow  of  r.  foot.

Foot  sweat,  with  soreness  at  ends  of  nails.

After  four  weeks,  pains  that  remain  are  in  limbs,  espe-

*  "  When  it  acts  well  it  produces  a  profuse,  watery  diarrhoea  with  great  relief
to  patient. It  is  as  important  as  Arsen.  in  hydrothorax.' — Lippe.


MERCURIUS  SQLPHURICUS.  454

cially  legs,  causing  a  weak,  wearied  feeling  and  pain
and  stiffness  in  r.  knee,  especially  when  stepping  down
a  step;  for  a  few  days  a  bloated,  hot  feeling  in  feet,  like
rheumatic  gout,  and  for  two  days  a  slight  swelling  and
painfulness  on  inner  side  of  1.  ankle,  as  if  a  boil  was
likely  to  form  there ;  a  tendency  for  feet  to  become  in-
flamed, as  if  likely  to  become  blistered  by  boots,  when
walking,  it  seems  at  soles,  especially  outer  toes;  it  is
rather  of  a  burning  character;  for  two  days  the  tarso-
metatarsal joint  of  r.  big  toe  seemed  inclined  to  inflame,
as  if  rheumatic  gout  would  set  in.
^*  Limbs  in  General. Tormented  by  pain  and  cramps  in

limbs  at  night.
^^  Rest. Position. Motion. Has  to  sit,  cannot  lie  down :
great  dyspnoea.

Standing  :  giddiness ;  feet  feel  numb.

Stepping  down  a  step :  pain  and  stiffness  in  r.  knee.

Moving  about:  soreness  all  through  head.

Exercising :  pains  extending  deep  into  brain.

Walking :  pain  and  lameness  of  knees.
^  Nerves. Debility,  with  sleepiness.

Sense  of  considerable  weakness.

Uneasiness,  late  in  afternoon.  *

Restlessness.

Pains  all  over,  especially  in  lower  part  of  back  and  limbs.
^^  Sleep. Frequent  yawning.

Restless  night,  with  dreams  and  delirium.

Wakefulness  after  midnight;  dreams.

Dreams:  of  traveling  amid  perplexities;  lascivious;  vivid,
of  fires,  exerting  himself  to  extinguish  them  ;  viewing
a  person  hung  and  another  cut  up,  seeing  blood  and
mangled  remains.

Awakes  with  headache  in  morning.
^  Time. Morning:  pain  in  head  on  waking;  mouth  clammy
and  foul ;  diarrhoea  early.

8.30  A.M. :  violent  pain  in  1.  arm.

During  forenoon :  pain  confined  to  r.  frontal  region.

1  A.M. :  awoke  with  severe  pain  along  duodenum  and  down
into  umbilical  region.

Afternoon :  great  urging,  with  inability  to  void  usual
quantity  of  urine;  dyspnoea  and  chest  symptoms;  un-
easiness, chills.

Evening:  pain  on  side  of  tip  of  tongue.

Night:  distressing  feeling  in  stomach;  pain  and  cramps
in  limbs;  restless,  with  dreams  and  delirium;  excessive
sweat.

After  midnight :  wakefulness  ;  dreams.
*"  Fever. Creeping  chills  ascending  back;  when  they  reached
neck  a  general  shudder  ensued.


455  MERCURIUS  SULPHURICUS.

Chilliness  running  up  back,  with  yawning  and  depression
of  spirits,  followed  by  dull  pain  in  forehead,  burning  in
face  and  ears  and  slight  fever.

Chilliness,  restlessness  and  heaviness  in  upper  part  of  ab-
domen, frequent  yawning  and  diminished  secretion  of
urine  (in  afternoon).

Chills:  with  nausea,  from  10  a.m.  to  2  p.m.;  late  in  after-
noon; from  12  M.  to  1.30  p.m.;  every  other  day.

Skin  cold  and  clammy.

Whole  body  feels  cold  externally.

Icy  coldness  of  hands  and  blueness  of  nails.

Burning  heat  of  face  and  ears  after  a  chill.

Painful  burning  over  whole  body,  especially  in  face,  but
not  on  feet,  with  violent  thirst.

■  Excessive  sweat  at  night.
*^  Attacks,  Periodicity. Every  ten  minutes :  violent  yellow
vomiting.

From  4  to  5  p.m.  :  burning  in  chest,  extending  to  scapula.

From  12  m.  to  1.30  p.m.  :  chills.

From  10  a.m.  to  2  p.m.  :  chills,  with  nausea.

For  several  hours :  oppression  over  eyes.

Every  other  day  :  chills.

For  two  days:  a  slight  swelling  and  painfulness  on  inner
side  of  1.  ankle;  tarso-metatarsal  joint  of  big  toe
seemed  inclined  to  inflame.

For  a  few  days :  a  bloated,  hot  feeling  in  feet.
^  Locality  and  Direction.  Right:  pain  in  frontal  region;
sharp  pain  in  parietal  protuberance;  numbness  of  hand;
aching  in  calf  of  leg  ;  numbness  in  hollow  of  foot ;  pain
and  stiffness  in  knee;  big  toe  as  if  rheumatic  gout
would  set  in.

Left:  side  of  tip  of  tongue  pains;  violent  beating  in  arm;
pain  and  swelling  of  inner  side  of  ankle.
*^  Sensations. Most  pains  feel  as  if  a  dull  stick  pressed  on
parts  and  was  moving  in  diverse  curved  lines,  feels  as
if  this  pain  was  in  bones.

As  if  diarrhoea  would  set  in ;  as  if  stools  were  boiling
water;  as  if  a  boil  was  likely  to  form  on  ankle;  as  if  feet
were  likely  to  become  blistered  by  boots;  as  if  rheumatic
gout  would  set  in  in  foot ;  all  over,  especially  in  lower
part  of  back  and  limbs.

Pain:  in  head  under  coronal  suture;  in  throat;  in  epi-
gastrium and  abdomen  ;  in  chest;  in  1.  arm  ;  in  knees;
in  r.  knee ;  on  inner  side  of  1.  ankle ;  in  limbs.

Severe  pain :  along  duodenum  and  down  into  umbilical
region.

Sharp  pain :  in  r.  parietal  protuberance.

Violent  beating:  in  1.  arm.


MERCURIUS  SULPHURICUS.  456

Darting  pains:  in  parts  of  head.

Shooting  pains:  in  wrists  and  metacarpal  bones.

Occasional  stitches:  in  head.

Aching:  in  calf  of  r.  leg.

Cramps:  in  limbs.

Dull  pain  :  in  forehead.

Painful  burning:  over  whole  body.

Heat:  in  throat;  in  larynx.

Burning,  smarting,  stinging:  on  tip  of  tongue.

Burning:  in  ears  and  face;  of  mouth  and  throat;  in  ab-
domen ;  of  anus ;  in  chest ;  in  feet.

Soreness :  all  through  head  ;  of  tip  of  nose ;  on  tip  of
tongue;  in  mouth  and  throat;  in  inguinal  glands;  of
anus ;  at  end  of  nails.

Raw  feeling:  of  tongue  and  inside  of  mouth.

Distressing  feeling:  in  stomach.

Constriction :  in  throat.

Oppression:  over  eyes.

Dryness:  of  tongue  and  throat;  in  mouth  and  fauces.

Confusion :  in  head.

Fulness:  in  head;  in  feet  and  legs.

Pressure :  on  chest.

Lameness:  of  knees.

Stiffness :  in  arms ;  in  r.  knee.

Numb  feeling:  in  legs  and  feet;  of  forearm  and  hand;
in  hollow  of  r.  foot.

Coldness:  in  abdomen.

Itching:  of  hairy  scalp  ;  of  nose.
**  Tissues. Induration  of  glands.

Rheumatic  pains.
"^  Touch. Passive  Motion. Injuries. Pressure:  stomach

tender.
^^  Skin. Psoriasis ;  lepra.
^^  Kelations. Antidoted  by  Hepar.

Compare:  Sulphur,  with  which  Here,  sulph.  has  many
symptoms  in  common,  more  even  than  with  Cinnab.,
Arsen.  and  Digit,  in  hydrothorax,  especially  occurring
in  heart  or  renal  disease.


457  MEZEREUM.

MEZEREUM.

Daphne  Mezereum;  Spurge  Olive.  Thymelacese.

A  hardy  shrub,  native  of  Great  Britain  and  Northern  countries ;  flowers  early
in  Spring,  sometimes  in  the  snow.  Tlie  fresh  bark  is  gathered  before  the  flowers
appear,  and  from  it  is  prepared  the  alcoholic  tincture.

Introduced  by  Stapf  and  extensively  proved  by  Hahnemann,  Hering,  Franz,
Caspari,  v.  Gersdorff,  Gross,  Hartlaub,  Kiickert,  etc.,  etc.  (See  Chronische  Krank-
heiten.)

Clinicai,  Authorities. — Cephalalgia  periostitica,  Kafka,  B.  J.  H.,  vol.  34,
p.  162  ;  Megrim,  Eeisig,  N.  A.  J.  H.,  vol.  27,  p.  431 ;  Pain  in  bones  of  head,  Hufe-
land,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  4,  p.  436 ;  Growth  upon  forehead,  Kreussler,  Trans.  World's
Horn.  Con  v.,  1876,  vol.  1,  p.  171 ;  Blepharitis,  Norton,  N.  A.  J.  H.,  vol.  23,  p.  353;
Deafness  after  suppressed  eruption,  Dunham,  N.  A.  J.  H.,  vol.  27,  p.  292 ;  Supra-
orbital neuralgia,  Cash,  Allg.  Horn.  Ztg.,  vol.  107,  p.  133;  Prosopalgia,  Okie,  MSS.,
Payr,  Raue's  Rec,  1870,  \^.  291 ;  Bonninghausen,  Both,  Eummel,  Biick.  Kl.  Erf.,
vol.  1,  p.  425 ;  H.  M.,  August,  1881 ;  Luxatio  spontanea  of  mandibula,  Wolf,  N.  A.
J.  H.,  vol.  27,  p.  432 ;  Swelling  of  lip,  Riickert,  N.  A.  J.  H.,  vol.  27,  p.  290  ;  Tooth-
ache, Seidel,  Hg.,  Veith,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  1,  p.  468 ;  (Ehme,  Org.,  vol.  2,  p.  132 ;
Ranula,  Gutmann,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  11,  p.  500;  Syphilitic  sore  throat,  Hirsch,
Eiick.  Kl.  Erf,  vol.  5,  p.  246;  Hofrichter,  N.  A.  J.  H.,  vol.  27,  p.  291 ;  Ruck.  Kl.
Erf.,  vol.  2,  p.  158 ;  Dryness  of  throat,  Pehrson,  MSS. ;  Gastrosis,  Knickerbocker,
Raue's  Rec,  1873,  p.  116;  Gastric  catarrh,  Hofrichter,  N.  A.  J.  H.,  vol.  27,  p.  294;
Carcinoma  ventriculi  (palliative,  2  cases),  Kallenbach,  N.  A.  J.  H.,  vol.  27,  p.  294-5;
Summer  complaint  of  children  (with  Bellad.),  Wesselhoeft,  MSS. ;  Diarrhcea,  Crowell,
Cin.  Med.  Adv.,  vol.  3,  p.  84 ;  Diarrhoea  with  prolapsus  ani,  Bute,  MSS. ;  Catarrhal
affection  of  intestinal  tract,  Gerstel,  N.  A.  J.  H.,  vol.  27,  p.  295 ;  Toothache  and  con-
stipation, Veith,  Bernard  and  Strong's  Therap.,  p.  69;  Constipation,  Martin,  Trans.
Horn.  Med.  Soc.  Pa.,  1880,  p.  240 ;  Shining  particles  in  stool,  Bute,  MSS. ;  Cooper,
Allg.  Hom.  Ztg.,  vol.  103.  p.  127;  Prolapsus  recti,  Hirsch,  N.  A.  J.  H.,  vol.  27,
p.  296 ;  Whooping  cough,  Kreuss,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  3,  p.  82 ;  A.  R.,  N.  A.  J.  H.,
vol.  27,  p.  301 ;  Cough,  Kirsten  (30  cases),  N.  A.  J.  H.,  vol.  27,  p.  301  ;  Burning
on  sternum,  Pehrson,  MSS. ;  Swollen  testicles,  Gerstel,  N.  A.  J.  H.,  vol.  27,  p.  299 ;
Induration  and  swelling  of  testicles,  Hartmann,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf,  vol.  2,  p.  208  ;  Gonor-
rhcea,  Attomyr,  Kimmel,  Hering,  N.  A.  J.  H.,  vol.  27,  p.  298  ;  Gleet,  Hering,  MSS. ;
Attomyr,  Rummel,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  2,  p.  89 ;  Phosphorus  necrosis,  Koch,  MSS. ;
Swelling  of  femur,  Fielitz,  Frank,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf,  vol.  4,  p.  437 ;  Painful  swelling  of
tibicB,  Kirsten,  N.  A.  J.  H.,  vol.  27,  p.  424;  Syphilitic  ulcer  on  leg,  Simon,  Org.,
vol.  1,  p.  323;  Neuralgia,  Pfander,  Allg.  Hom.  Ztg.,  vol.  113,  p.  203  ;  Ague,  Knorre,
Riick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  4,  p.  943 ;  Krause,  N.  A.  J.  H.,  vol.  27,  p.  432 ;  Periostitis,
Theile,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  4,  p.  437 ;  Noack,  N.  A.  J.  H.,  vol.  27,  p.  426 ;  Affec-
tion of  bones,  Hering,  N.  A.  J.  H.,  vol.  27,  p.  427 ;  Pruritus,  Kafka,  N.  A.  J.  H.,
vol.  27,  p.  189 ;  Pruritus  senilis,  Kafka,  Trans.  World's  Hom.  Conv.,  1876,  vol.  1,
p.  169;  Allg.  Hom.  Ztg.,  vol.  91,  p.  140;  B.  J.  H.,  vol.  34,  p.  162;  Liver  spots,


MEZEREUM.  458

Hartlaub,  Trans.  World's  Horn.  Conv.,  1876,  vol.  1,  p.  171;  Exanthema,  Wahle,
Trans.  World's  Horn.  Conv.,  1876,  vol.  1,  p.  170;  Herpetic  eruption,  Schultz,  N.  A.
J.  H.,  vol.  27,  p.  190;  Herpes  crustaceus,  Fielitz,  Trans.  World's  Horn.  Conv.,  1876,
vol.  1,  p.  172  ;  Allg.  Horn.  Ztg.,  vol.  17,  p.  1 ;  Shingles,  Hughes'  Pharmacod.,  p.  555 ;
Tetter,  Schultz,  Trans.  World's  Horn.  Conv.,  1876,  vol.  1,  p.  171  ;  Pain  and  cold-
ness after  zona,  Hendriehs,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  4,  p.  161 ;  Moist,  scabby  eruption,
Stens,  Trans.  World's  Horn.  Conv.,  1876,  vol.  1,  p.  172;  Eczema,  J.  T.  K.,  Horn.
Phys.,  vol.  6,  p.  171 ;  Tinea  capitis,  Lippe,  Org.,  vol.  1,  p.  267;  Pityriasis  capitis,
Cooper,  Raue's  Rec,  1870,  p.  99  ;  Pityriasis  versicolor,  Noack,  Trans.  World's  Horn.
Conv.,  1876,  vol.  1,  p.  170;  Allg.  Horn,  Ztg.,  vol.  14,  p.  168;  Mentayra,  Gerstel,
Elwert,  Trans.  World's  Horn.  Conv.,  1876,  vol.  1,  p.  172 ;  Rupia  prominens,  Noack,
Trans.  World's  Horn.  Conv.,  1876,  vol.  1,  p.  172;  Phayadenic  ulcers,  Hering,  MSS. ;
Ulcer  on  tibia,  Gramm,  G.  E.,  MSS. ;  Scrofulous  idcer,  Eussel,  N.  A.  J.  H.,  vol.  27,
p.  427  ;  Sleeplessness,  Walile,  MSS.  =  Chronic  niyhtly  rheumatism,  Knerr,  MSS.

^  Mind. I  Weak  memory  and  debility. ^Prosopalgia.

I  Unable  to  recollect  what  has  very  recently  occurred;
every  intercurrent  remark  of  others  disturbs  and  con-
fuses his  ideas.

■  Mental  dulness;  weakness  of  reasoning  powers.

■  Irresolute; mind  easily  confused,  unable to recollect;'

thinking  is  difficult.

■  No  rest  when  alone;  wants  to  be  in  company;  ideas  van-

ish while  talking;  unable  to  repeat  what  has  been
learned  by  heart;  looks  through  window  for  hours,  with-
out being  conscious  of  objects  around;  knows  not  what
she  is  about;  forgets  what  she  is  about  to  utter;  looks
ill  humored,  pale,  wretched,  fallen  away;  apprehensive-
ness  at  pit  of  stomach,  as  when  expecting  some  very  un-
pleasant news.

Aversion  to  talk,  it  seems  hard  work  to  utter  one  word.

Hj^pochondriacal  mood,  with  low  spirits  and  weeping.

■  Despairs  of  eternal  salvation.

■  Indifference  to  everything  and  everybody.

■  ■Hypochondriacal  and  despondent,  takes  no  pleasure  in

anything;  everything  seems  to  him  dead  and  nothing
makes  a  vivid  impression  upon  his  mind.

■  Inclined  to  get  angry  with  others  about  trifles;  every-

thing vexes  him,  he  wants  to  say  annoying  and  vexa-
tious things ;  is  soon  sorry  for  it.

■  Thought  is  difficult;  takes  no  interest  while  reading ^^^

listening ;  whatever  happens  affects  him  less  than  usuux;

mental  dulness.
■Very  much  distracted ; is  unable  to  dwell  long  upon

any  subject.
^  Sensorium. ■Head  feels  dull  or  as  if  drunk  ;  >  after  meals

and  by  work.
Giddiness,  with  contracted  pupils  ;  vertigo  and  flickering

before  eyes ;  is  inclined  to  fall  to  1.  side,  with  faintness.


459  MEZEREUM.

Blood  seems  to  leave  extremities  and  make  her  feel  weak

and  giddy,  with  inability  to  speak.
^  Inner  Head, l  Right  sided  megrim.

iPressive  pain  from  within  outward  in  1.  temple.

I  Headache,  extending  from  root  of  nose  into  forehead,  as

if  everything  would  press  asunder;  pain  in  temples  when

touched ;  heat  and  perspiration  on  head,  chilliness  and

coldness  in  rest  of  body,  in  morning,
I  Boring  in  bones  of  occiput.

I  Headache  after  moving  about  and  talking  much,  espe-

cially in  temples  and  side  of  vertex.

I I  Very  violent  headache;  head  painful  to  slightest  touch
(after  a  slight  vexation).

Headache :  with  chilliness ;  <  in  open  air ;  >  by  stoop-
ing ;  of  scrofulous  or  syphilitic  origin ;  produced  by
suppression  of  eczema ;  accompanying  exostoses,  or  noc-
turnal bone  pains,  or  caries  of  jaw ;  with  itching  of
whole  body.

Sensation  as  if  upper  part  of  head  was  pithy.

Pressing  pains  as  if  skull  would  split.

iSyphilitic  affections  of  brain.
*  Outer  Head. BNumb  feeling  in  top  of  head,  or  as  if  top  of
head  was  gone.

I  Pain  in  bones  of  skull,  mostly  <  by  touch.

lAching  pain  in  vertex  and  occiput,  <  at  night  and  >
towards  morning;  while  pain  lasted  she  groaned,  wept
and  sobbed;  very  sensitive  and  irritable;  during  vio-
lence of  pain  cold  shudder  down  back,  hands  cool,
feet  as  if  bruised  ;  simultaneously  with  head  pains  severe
pains  in  bones  of  upper  arm  and  shin  bone;  a  distinct
thickening  of  scalp  could  be  felt  in  painful  parts,  which
were  sensitive  to  touch  ;  pains  <  on  entering  room,  on
sudden  changes  of  weather,  from  cold  winds  and  cold,
damp  air ;  >  when  body  began  to  perspire,  but  if  she
covered  herself  in  order  to  get  into  a  sweat,  pains  were
<  at  once;  when  pains  are  <  has  a  feeling  of  paralysis
in  limbs,  cannot  move  them  well,  they  feel  very  heavy ;
if  she  attempts  motion  pain  is  <.  ^Cephalalgia  peri-
ostitica.

I I  Cranial  bones  pain,  are  swollen  and  sensitive  to  cold  and
contact;  <  from  motion  and  in  evening;  caries;  itch-
ing, burning  of  scalp.

iPains  in  bones  of  head,  so  severe  as  almost  to  cause  faint-
ing ;  skull  bones  in  several  places  elevated  and  symp-
toms seem  to  indicate  that  brain  was  being  pressed  upon
either  by  extravasation  or  an  exostosis. ^Syphilis.

iScalp  numb,  with  drawing  pain,  generally  only  on  one
side.


MEZEREUM.  460

I  Scalp  on  both  sides  of  vertex  painful  to  touch.

■  Burning,  biting,  itching  on  scalp,  <  on  vertex  ;  scratch-

ing changes  locality,  but  increases  itching,  sore  boils

follow,  <  at  night  and  when  lying  down.
iDandruff,  white,  dry;  dry  scurf  on  scalp.
llHead  covered with a  thick,  leatherlike crust,  under

which  thick,  white  pus  collects  here  and  there  and  hair

is  glued  together. ^Tinea  capitis.
■Scabs  on  head  look  chalky,  and  extend  to  eyebrows  and

to  nape  of  neck.

■  Elevated,  white,  chalklike scabs,  with ichor beneath;

breeding  vermin.

■  Moist,  itching  eruption  on  head  and  behind  ears.
Bitching  of  scalp;  pain  in  cranial  bones,  <  at  night,  with

itching  and  burning  in  skin,  <  by  rubbing;  burning  in
skin  of  vertex  and  temples;  itching  in  eyebrows;  burn-
ing, itching  in  nostrils  and  in  side  of  ears ;  pimples  on
scalp. ^Pityriasis  capitis.

■  Eruption  on  scalp,  preceded  by  violent  headache  for  six

months;  scalp  covered  with  scurf,  hair  comes  out  in
handfuls;  hair  of  eyebrows  and  eyelashes  drop  out;
scalp  and  face  itch  violently,  especially  when  she  gets
warm,  and  if  she  attempts  to  wash  anything  steam  from
warm  water  causes  her  nose,  eyes  and  face  to  itch  ;  des-
quamation; she  dare  not  approach  fire  from  intense
itching  caused  by  doing  so;  scurf  comes  off  scalp  when
scratched  "like  fish  scales;"  spots  of  a  similar  nature
come  out  on  thighs,  back  and  chest;  terrible  irritation
in  vagina,  which  has  continued  for  a  year  unaccom-
panied by  any  abnormal  discharge.  ^Pityriasis  capitis.
■A  growth  as  large  as  a  thaler  on  middle  of  forehead,  pro-
jecting about  four  lines;  came  and  went  spontaneously
and  suddenly;  scaly  exfoliation  of  skin.

■  Dry  eruption  on  head,  with  intolerable  itching  as  if  head

was  in  an  ant's  nest. ^Favus.
^  Sight  and  Eyes. Staring  at  one  spot ;  vacant  look.
Inclination  to  wink  or  close  eyes.

■  Dryness  in  eyes  with  pressure  in  them  ;  they  feel  too  large.

■  A  feeling  as  if  eyes  were  drawn  backward  into  head.

■  Eyes  feel  strained.

■  Aching  and  tearing  in  and  around  eye,  especially  in  orbits.

■  Aching,  pressive  pain  about  1.  eye.

■  Lachrymation;  smarting  in  eyes;  must  rub  them.

■  Eyes  hot,  inflamed  on  rising  in  morning;  conjunctiva  of

ball  very  much  injected,  dirty  red,  especially  near  ex-
ternal canthus  ;  1.  eye  < ;  pressive  pain  and  sensation
of  dryness.

■  Rheumatic ophthalmia, and ophthalmia consequent

upon  abuse  of  mercury.


461  MEZEREUM.

I  Annoying  twitching  of  muscles  of  1.  upper  lid.

I  Itching  biting  on  margin  of  lids  and  skin  near  nose.

I  Itching  in  1.  upper  eyelid,  so  violent  at  times  that  she
had  to  cease  her  work;  frequently  after  itching  pressure
appeared  in  outer  angle  of  1.  eye,  but  soon  passed  off;
<  in  evening.

I  Blepharitis  from  birth,  with  tinea  capitis,  which  itches
intensely.

I  Eczema  of  lids  and  head;  thick,  hard  scabs,  from  which
pus  exudes  on  pressure.

I  Ciliary  neuralgia,  especially  after  operations  on  eye.
"^  Hearing  and  Ears. >  Ears  feel  as  if  too  open,  and  as  if  air
was  pouring  into  them,  or  as  if  tympanum  was  exposed
to  cold  air,  with  a  desire  to  bore  with  finger  into  ear.

I  Sensation  as  if  air  was  distending  r.  external  meatus,  and
as  though  roaring  in  ears  would  occur ;  afterwards  in  1.
meatus,  with  a  stopped  sensation  in  ear.

I  Boy,  set.  17,  deaf  from  fourth  year;  when  three  years  old
had  an  eruption  on  head,  which  was  removed  by  pitch
plaster  and  touching  sore  with  nitrate  of  silver  ;  tympa-
num thickened,  of  an  opaque  whiteness,  slightly  convex
only  by  inflation,  it  is  impossible  to  recognize  blood-
vessels; Eustachian  tube  clear;  former  eruption  consisted
of  whitish,  hard,  nearly  horny  incrustations  and  scales,
fissured,  and  through  these  cracks  oozing  of  thick,  yellow,
foul  smelling  pas,  severely  itching,  especially  at  night,  so
that  child  scratched  off  the  crusts.

I  I  Chronic  diffuse  otitis.

■  Itching  behind  ears,  scratching  causes  small  elevations,

when  scratched  off  spots  feel  sore.
I  Oozing  eruption  behind  ears.
^  Smell  and  Nose. 'Sense  of  smell  diminished,  with  dryness
of  nose.

■  Sneezing:  ineffectual;  coryza;  sore  pain  in  chest.

■  Discharge  of  yellow,  thin,  at times  bloody,  water  from

nose,  causing  soreness  and  burning.

■  Fluent  coryza,  soreness  of  and  scabs  in  nose;  soreness

and  burning  of  upper  lip.

■  Constant  excoriation  of  nose.

■  External  margin  of  r.  nostril  inflamed,  swollen  and  painful.

■  Twitching  (visible)  on  root  of  nose.

^  UpDer  Face, sGrey,  earthy  complexion.

I  I  Looks  ill  humored,  pale,  wretched,  fallen  away.

■  Facial  muscles  drawn  tense.

■  Frequent,  troublesome,  muscular  twitching  of  muscles  of

r.  cheek.

■  Orbicularis palpebrarum  spasmodically  contracted;  lach-

rymation ;  nasal  voice;  eruption  on  skin. ^Neuralgia
of  r.  supraorbital  nerve.


MEZEREUM.  462

I  Sudden,  very  violent  pain  in  face  during  sleep,  similar  to
an  old  faceache,  waking  her  up  but  soon  disappearing,
and  not  further  disturbing  sleep.

■  Constant  violent  tearing  in  face  in  morning.

■  Prosopalgia,  r.  side;  teeth  feel  too  long.

I  Constant,  fine  tearing  in  1.  side  of  face,  and  in  teeth  after
morning  walk.

■  Neuralgic  pains  come  quickly  and  leave  parts  numb,  <

from  warmth.

■  Lightninglike  pains  coming  from  r.  infraorbital  foramen

and  extending  to  temples  and  corners  of  mouth;  pains
come  suddenly  while  talking  or  eating;  during  inter-
vals twitching  of  muscles  and  numb  pain.  ^Proso-
palgia.

■  Prosopalgia,  1. side,  from  arcus  superciliaris  into  eye,

cheek  and  teeth,  down  to  neck  and  shoulder;  increased
lachrymal  secretion;  injected  conjunctiva;  great  sensi-
tiveness of  parts  to  touch;  dry  feeling  in  throat;  some
difficulty  in  swallowing;  constant  chilliness  even  in  bed;
weak  memory  and  debility;  <  in  evening  until  mid-
night, with  moaning;  >  from  wrapping  up  head  and
from  quiet  in  a  dark  room;  appetite  poor;  stool  costive ;
menses  regular  but  scanty,  followed  by  irritating  leucor-
rhoea  and  pruritus  vaginae ;  hands  and  feet  cold;  nails
blue;  on  a  small  place  on  top  of  head  a  sensation  of  heat.

■  Cramping,  numbing  pressure;  beginning  in  1.  zygoma

and  spreading  towards  eye,  temple,  ear  and  down  neck
to  shoulder;  at  times  pressive  pain  in  occiput,  sudden
stitches  in  side  and  sensation  as  of  ants  running  over
chest;  <  entering  warm  room  and  after  warm  food;
appeared  first  on  r.  side,  later  on  left. ^Prosopalgia.

■  Boring  in  bones  of  upper  jaw.

■  Intolerable,  nightly,  burning  pains,  in  abscess  of  antrum

of  Highmore;  periosteum  more  afi'ected  than  bones;
dull,  crampy  pain,  referred  to  malar  bone;  anguish,  pale
face,  chilliness  or  cold  sweat.

■  Face  swollen,  burning  pains,  confluent vesicles;  nares

closed;  erysipelas  bullosum.

■  Child  continually  scratches  face,  which  is  covered  with

blood;  face  and  forehead  hot  and  red ;  restlessness ;  irri-
tability; itching  <  at  night;  tears  ofi^  scabs,  leaving
spots  on  which  fat  pustules  form ;  ichor  from  scratched
face  excoriates.

■  Deep,  inflammatory  redness  of  face; eruption  fat  and

moist. ^Impetigo.

■  Boils  on  face.

■  Group  of  vesicles  on  dorsum  of  nose,  itching  excessively

and  discharging  a  pale,  somewhat  cloudy  lymph,  which


463  MEZEREUM.

formed a  yellowish brown acuminated scab, easily
separated  but  reappearing;  scab  attained  size  of  small
bean. ^Rupia  prominens.
^  Lower  Face. '  Luxatio  spontanea  of  mandibula,  with  crack-
ing in  joint  and  movements  of  cond.  max.  inf.

■  Neuralgia  of  inframaxillaris,

■  Severe  pain  in  lower  jaw,  in  region  of  mental  foramen,

as  if  a  hole  was  being  bored,  pain  at  one  time  on  r.  side,
then  on  1.  or  both  sides;  pain  irregular,  coming  day  or
night,  lasting  several  minutes;  runs  along  course  of  infra-
maxillary  nerve;  motion  of  jaw  impeded;  saliva  runs
from  open  mouth;  a  year  ago  contusion  of  1.  zygoma;
hard  palate  insensitive,  as  if  made  of  wood ;  pharynx  red ;
burning  in  throat;  varicose  veins  on  legs;  frequent  ap-
pearance of  round,  red  spots  on  neck;  drawing  in  limbs
while  in  wind. ^Prosopalgia.

■  For  many  years  considerable  swelling  of  upper  lip,  with

indurations  on  inside,  and  discoloration  on  skin  (after
scabies).
Lips : stick  together ; dry ; scaly  externally,  painful  in
evening,  sore,  burning.

■  Ulcers  on  upper  lip  extending  to  nose.

■  Honeylike  scabs  about  mouth.

■  Chin  covered  with  elevated  white  scabs.

■  Red  pustules  on  chin,  painful  when  shaving;  broke  and

formed  a  scab ;  hairy  part  of  face  covered  with  yellowish
brown  scab  quarter  of  an  inch  thick,  from  cracks  in
which  bloody  lymph  exuded,  producing  slight  itching
in  edges;  around  edges  a  dark  red,  moist  areola;  lids
inflamed,  lower  lids  beset  with  crusts  and  somewhat
everted.  ^Mentagra.
A  small  pustule  in  beard,  1.  side  of  chin  ;  also  small  pim-
ples on  chest  at  base  of  hairs.
^'^  Teeth  and  Gums.  ■  iTeeth  feel  dull,  blunt  and  elongated ;
painful  on  biting  on  them  or  from  fresh  air.

■  Toothache:  in  carious  teeth  ;  <  at  night;  when  touched

with  tongue;  >  with  mouth  open  and  drawing  in  air;
boring  and  stinging,  extends  to  malar  bones  and  tem-
ples ;  chilliness.

■  Drawing  pains  in  upper  and  lower  jaw,  1.  side,  alternat-

ing with  boring  in  several  teeth  and  stitches  extending
to  zygoma ;  teeth  feel  dull,  cold  and  too  long ;  w^hole
side  of  head  as  if  cold,  with  sensitive  drawing  pains ;
<  from  motion  or  touch  ;  chilliness  in  evening;- de-
spondent, morose. ^Toothache.

■  Twitching,  grasping,  stitching pains  in hollow  tooth,

and  sensation  as  if  tooth  was  being  lifted  out  of  socket.
^Toothache.


MEZEREUM.  464

iPain  in  r.  eyetooth,  daily  increasing;  feels  as  if  too  long,

<  from  pressure  on  crown  and  outside  on  root.

I  Woman  approaching  years  of  climaxis,  suffering  con-
tinually from  extraordinary  congestions  to  head,  with
burning  redness  of  face,  obstinate  constipation;  menses
always  very  copious  and  too  soon ;  was  attacked  with
fearful  pains  in  four  hollow  teeth,  which  deprived  her
of  all  rest.

I  I  Teeth  decay  suddenly,  on  side,  above  gums;  crown  re-
mains intact;  decaying  roots.

■  Roughness  from  tartar.on  teeth.

"  Taste  and  Tongue, l  i  Thick,  white coating  on  tongue ;
large,  red,  elevated  papillse  ;  middle  fissured.

i  Burning  on  tongue  extending  to  stomach.

•Swelling  under  r.  side  of  tongue,  which  in  the  course  of
two  years  became  as  large  as  a  pigeon's  egg ;  swelling
painless,  red,  bluish  at  apex  as  from  enlarged  blood-
vessels; on  talking  or  chewing  ejects  a  watery  fluid.
^Ranula.
^^  Inner  Mouth.  > Burning:  in  mouth,  extending  to  stomach ;
in  whole  mouth,  sometimes  >  b}'  eating;  of  lips  and
tongue,  as  if  quite  sore.

I  Heat,  scraping,  burning,  peppery  sensation  on  palate
and  in  fauces.

I  I  Saliva  almost  always  increased.

I  I  Breath  smells  like  rotten  cheese.

I  I  Flat  whitish  ulcers  on  inner  side  of  lips  and  corners  of
mouth.

I  Dark  redness  of  fauces ;  burning  drj^ness  even  into  larynx ;

<  every  winter;  syphilis.

^^  Throat, i  a  Burning: in  throat  and  pharynx; in  throat,
dryness  in  fauces,  hacking  cough  ;  anxious  oppression
of  breath,  and  loosening  of  scanty  mucus  on  coughing.
I  Constriction  in  throat  and  stomach.

■  Scraping  and  burning  in  fauces  and  pharynx.
I  Rawness  of  fauces.

I  1  Swelling  and  sensation  of  narrowing  in  throat.

B Constriction  of  pharynx,  food  presses  during  deglutition.

B Dry  feeling  in  throat;  some  difficulty  in  swallowing;
constant  chilliness,  even  in  bed.

BBurning  in  pharynx  and  oesophagus.

BSensation  as  if  posterior  part  of  throat  was  full  of  mucus,

the  same  after  hawking.
.  BSevere  burning  sensation  and  raw  pain  extending  from
pharynx  half  way  down  oesophagus;  deglutition  even
of  fluids  difficult  and  painful ;  on  posterior  pharyngeal
wall  slight  redness  and  a  considerable  number  of  small
ulcers. ^Syphilis.


465  MEZEREUM.

■Syphilitic  sore  throat,  <  by  former  mercurial  treatment,
he  had  to  keep  indoors  during  Fall  and  Winter;  dark
redness  of  faucial  mucous  membrane;  dryness  and
burning  of  fauces,  larynx  and  pharynx,  extending  into
chest,  somewhat  >  by  eating;  voice  hoarse,  not  clear,
failing  during  a  continuous  discourse;  cold  air  causes
pain  in  gums,  but  >  burning;  expectoration  of  much
mucus;  hemorrhoids  with  stitching  pains;  tendency  to
diarrhoea.
"  Appetite,  Thirst.  Desires,  Aversions.  ■  Canine  hunger
noon  and  evening.

I  Desire  for  ham  fat,  coffee,  wine ; beer  tastes  bitter  and
causes  vomiting.

I  Loss  of  appetite.
^^  Hiccough,  Belching,  Nausea  and  Vomiting. 1 1  Frequent,
empty,  tasteless  eructations.

I  Nausea  in  throat  and  stomach  ;  vomit  bitter,  sour ;  slimy ;
oily  or  greasy.
'^  Scrobiculum  and  Stomach. 1 1  Apprehensiveness  at  pit  of
stomach  as  when  expecting  unpleasant  news.

I  Burning  and  uneasiness  in  stomach;  >  by  eating;  canine
hunger  at  noon  and  evening. ^Gastrosis.

■  Burning  in  whole  mouth,  as  from  pepper,  especially  in

afternoon  after  eating;  in  morning  nausea  and  faintness;
slight  thirst;  poor  appetite;  stool  every  third  day;
pressure  in  stomach  and  intestines;  hot  urine.  ^Gastric
catarrh.
I  I  Constant,  severe  pain  and  pressure  in  stomach  even
after  light  foods;  constricting,  pinching  pain  with  much
belching,  lasting  one  to  two  hours  after  eating;  pain
culminates  and  ends  with  retching  and  vomiting  of  all
pulse  small  and  frequent;  chilliness  alternating  with
flushes  of  heat. ^  Ulcer  of  stomach.

■  Induration  of  stomach.

■  Burning,  corroding  pains,  as  if  internal  surface  of  gastric

mucous  membrane  was  raw,  with  sensation  as  if  food
remained  for  a  long  time  undigested  in  stomach  and
caused  pressure;  bloody  vomiting;  great  depression.
^Chronic  gastritis.
I  I  Great  emaciation;  cachexia;  loss  of  appetite;  disgust
for  all  animal  food ;  daily  vomiting  of  chocolate  colored
masses,  with  hot  burning  in  throat:  vomiturition,  with
excessive  anguish  and  uninterrupted  nausea  from
morning  until  night;  all  food  is  immediately  thrown
up;  stool  only  ever}^  eight  or  ten  days;  constant  sleep-
lessness; touch  clearly  reveals  two  tumors  of  size  of  an
orange,  one  in  r.  hypochodrium,  the  other  in  scrobicu-

VOL.  VII. — 30.


MEZEREUM.  466

lum;  the  latter movable and sensitive to pressure
(relieved). ^Carcinoma  ventriculi.
'^Hypochondria. iDuU  pain  in  region  of  spleen;  hardness

and  swelling,  with  pressive  pain.
'^  Abdomen, b  Burning  and  sensation  of  heat  in  abdomen.
I  Stitches  in  1.  side,  in  region  of  short  ribs.
I  Loud  flatulence  in  abdomen,  and  loud  emissions  of  it.
I  I  Rumbling  and  noises  in  abdomen.
I  I  Flatus  constantly  passes,  but  in  a  short  and  interrupted

manner.
iMuch  short,  very  offensive  flatus,  especially  before  stools.
^°  Stool  and  Rectum. "Many  discharges  of  fetid  flatus,  more
before  stool.
I  Stool: watery, soft; brown,  sour, fermented; contains
glistening  bodies;  undigested;  offensive;  <  in  evening
from  suppressed  eruption.

■  Small,  white,  shining  grains  in  brown  feces.

iStools dark brown, hard balls, much but painless

straining.
■Before  stool:  colic; creeping  chills,  languor  and great

sensibility  to  cold  air;  copious  discharge  of  fetid  flatus.

■  During  stool:  prolapsus  recti;  painless  straining;  anus

becomes  painful  and  constricted  about  fallen  rectum ;
difficult  evacuations,  of  consistency  of  thick  broth,  with
pressing  desire.

■  After stool: chill;  constriction with  tenesmus; weak-

ness; sensitiveness  to  cold,  open  air;  painful  tenesmus,
extending  to  perineum  and  urethra  (male);  chill  over
whole  body ;  pain  in  fissure  of  anus.

■  Summer  diarrhoea  of  children  (complementary  Bellad).

■  Chronic  diarrhoea,  with  psoric  anamnesis.

iTw^o  days  after  labor,  when  defecating,  painful  burning
in  rectum,  passing  over  into  a  kind  of  sore ;  tenesmus
after  discharge  of  a  small  quantity  of  pultaceous  feces ;
gradually  these  stools  increased  and  weakened  her
greatly ;  four  weeks  after  labor,  paleness,  general  mal-
aise and  chilliness;  abdomen  tympanitic,  sensitive  to
touch ;  over  whole  abdomen  sensation  of  heat,  with
burning,  cutting,  gurgling  and  borborygmus,  as  when
fluids  pass  from  one  part  of  intestines  to  another;  con-
stant severe  tenesmus,  and  still  she  passes,  notwithstand-
ing the  severity  of  the  pains,  only  small  quantities  of
fluid  or  pultaceous  masses ;  after  stool  prolapsus  recti,
which  is  sore  and  burning  until  constriction  has  passed
away;  general  chilliness  before  and  after  stool,  with
desire  for  acid  drinks ;  no  appetite ;  regurgitation  of
food;  sleep  only  late  at  night;  restless,  throws  herself
about ;  morose  and  irritable.


467  MEZEREUM.

1 1  Constipation.

I  Stools  hard  as  a  stone  and  large;  feel  as  if  they  would
split  anus;  they  come  in  sections;  becomes  very  much
exhausted  and  trembles  with  weakness;  stool  preceded
by  chills  and  followed  by  long  stitches  up  rectum.
^Constipation.

I  Biting  sore  pain  in  anus  on  walking,  and  a  burning  in
rectum.

iMuch  itching  about  anus,  several  times  during  da^^  and
also  in  evening  before  going  to  sleep.
^^  Urinary  Organs, i  Sticking  in  kidney  and  pain  as  if  torn.

■  Frequent  and  copious  discharge  of  pale  urine  in  morning

and  forenoon.

■  Itching  and  sensation  of  soreness  in  urethra  when  uri-

nating, aroused  or  <  by  pressure;  intense  painful  te-
nesmus; tearing  and  drawing  in  anus  and  perineum,
from  which  it  extends  through  whole  urethra.

■  Urine :  diminished ;  becomes  flaky  and  has  red  sediment ;

burning ;  hot,  with  reddish  sediment.

■  After  urinating  a  few  drops  of  blood  are  passed.

■  Hsematuria  preceded  by  crampy  pain  in  bladder.

^^  Male  Sexual  Organs. ■  Violent erections and  increased
sexual  desire.
■Swollen  testicles  after  maltreated  gonorrhoea.
I  I  Painless  swelling  of  scrotum.

■  Heat  and  swelling  of  penis.

I  I  Fine  prickling  stitches  in  penis  and  at  summit  of  glans.

■  Itching  in  glans  penis.

■  Discharge of  watery  mucus; stinging and  titillating

through  whole  urethra  and  perineum;  urethra  sore  to
touch. ^Gonorrhoea. /^Gleet.

■  Gonorrhoea  with  hsematuria.

■  Gleet;  whitish,  painless  discharge,  more  towards  morn-

ing; gouty  pains  through  body.
^^  Female  Sexual  Organs.  ■Menses:  too  frequent;  too  soon,
profuse  and  long  lasting;  scanty,  with  leucorrhoea  and
prosopalgia;  suppressed.
■Uterine  ulcer,  with  smarting,  burning  or  prickling  sen-
sation; discharge  albuminous,  sometimes  tinged  with
blood.

■  Leucorrhoea:  like  white  of  egg;  corroding;  chronic  mal-

ignant.
I  Mucous  discharge  from  vagina  and  urethra.  ^Gonorrhoea.

^*  Pregnancy.  Parturition.  Lactation.  ■  During  preg-
nancy, diarrhoea  with  prolapsus  recti ;  anus  after  stool
contracts  around  prolapsed  rectum,  which  becomes  con-
stricted and  sensitive  to  touch,  painful  like  a  sore.

^^  Voice  and  Larynx.  Trachea  and  Bronchia.  ■  Hoarse-
ness, with  cough  and  rawness  in  chest.


MEZEREUM.  468

I  Voice  failing  or  interrupted.

I  Burning  and  dryness  in  trachea,  with  hoarseness.
"^^  Respiration. Dyspnoea  as  if  from  adhesions  or  contraction
of  lungs.
On  stooping,  chest  feels  too  tight.
Desire  to  take  a  long  breath ;  afraid  of  suffocating.

■  Snoring,  in  children.

^  Cough. ■  Whooping  cough ;  paroxysms  <  in  evening  and
particularly  severe  at  night.
Cough: spasmodic,  caused  by  irritation  from  larynx  to
chest;  sputa  in  morning  of  yellow,  viscid  mucus,  tast-
ing saltish  or  like  an  old  catarrh. ^Whooping  cough.

■  Cough  worse:  evening  until  12  p.m.,  or  day  and  night,

with  tension  over  thorax ;  when  eating  or  drinking  any-
thing hot  must  cough  till  food  is  vomited ;  from  beer.

■  Violent  inclination  to  cough,  in  evening  in  bed,  and  in

morning  lower  in  trachea  than  can  be  reached  by  cough.

■Severe  dry  cough,  <  at  night;  burning  in  throat;  op-
pression; stitching  pains  in  chest  and  great  anguish;
paleness  of  face ;  constant  chilliness  even  in  bed  ;  some-
times cold  sweat,  not  followed  by  heat;  thirst  without
drinking  much  at  once ;  white  coated  tongue ;  loss  of
appetite;  pale  urine;  frequent  small  pulse.

■Yellow,  salty  expectoration  during  day; twitching  of
muscles  of  face.
^  Inner  Chest  and  Lungs. ■Stitches  in  r.  chest,  <  drawing
a  long  breath.

Stitches  in  1.  chest,  beneath  clavicle,  going  and  coming
with  regularity  of  musical  beats,  extending  deep  into
chest,  shortly  after  only  a  simple  aching,  <  by  inspira-
tion, and  returning  some  days  in  succession.

Sticking  pain  from  1.  side  to  back  through  chest,  during
an  inspiration.

Sudden  sharp  stitches  in  evening  near  spinal  marrow,
through  chest,  extending  into  cartilages  of  1.  ribs.

■  Sore,  bruised  sensation  in  chest;  traces  of  blood  in  loosen-

ing expectoration ;  oppression  and  anguish.

■  Cramplike  contraction  over  both  chest  and  back.

■  Constricting  and  contracting  pains  transversely  across

forepart  of  chest.

-^  Heart,  Pulse  and  Circulation.  1 1 Pulse:  full,  hard,  accel-
erated evenings;  at  times  intermittent;  frequent  morn-
ings, slow  evenings.

^^  Outer  Chest, l  i  Sore  burning  on  bone  of  sternum,

■Severe,  constant  shaking  chill,  with  anxiety  and  stitches
in  r.  side,  neuralgic  in  character ;  painful  parts  sensitive
to  pressure. ^Neuralgia.

■  Intercostal  neuralgia,  following  herpes  zoster.


469  MEZEREUM.

Red  spots  like  fleabites  on  chest.
^'  Neck  and  Back. iPain  and  stiffness  of  nape  and  external
cervical  muscles.

■  Stiff  pain  in  r.  side  of  nape  of  neck  and  throat,  mostly

on  motion.

■  Violent  itching  rash  on  nape  of  neck.

■  Rheumatic  pain  in  scapular  muscles  ;  they  feel  tense  and

swollen,  motion  difficult.

■  Rheumatic  pain  in  r.  scapula,  in  morning  after  rising.
Mercurial  cases,  limbs  feel  as  if  shortened ;  pains  darting

like  shocks  of  electricity. ^Disease  of  spine.
^^  Upper  Limbs. iPain  in  r.  shoulder  joint.

■  Pain  in  shoulder  joint  as  if  it  would  be  torn  asunder.

■  Sore  feeling  in  r.  axilla.

■  Dry  tetter,  scabby,  scabs  small,  occurring  especially  in

bend  of  elbows,  with  red  spots  size  of  a  dollar.

■  Eruptions  on  back  of  hands  and  wrists  half  way  up  to

elbow;  itching  <  by  scratching ;  small  burning  vesicles,
drying  down  into  crusts,  itching  and  burning  after
scratching,  and  becoming  moist;  <  from  application
of  water. ^Eczema.

I  I  Right  baud  cold,  1.  warm;  or  both  cold.

I  I  Trembling  of  r.  hand.

■  Burning  vesicles,  surrounded  by  a  red  areola,  on  sides  of

fingers.

■  Paralysis  of  flexors  of  fingers ;  finger  ends  powerless,  can-

not hold  anything.

■  Hands  "go  to  sleep."

^^  Lower  Limbs, l  i  Twitching  pain  from  hip  joint  to  knee.
I  I  Right  hip  joint  feels  sprained  on  walking.
I  I  Pain  in  hip,  leg  is  shortened.
I  I  Pain  in  bones  of  thigh  and  leg.

■  Drawing  pains,  sensation  of  internal  heat  of  limb,  surface

being  cool;  >  in  open  air.
■Since  confinement,  fifteen  years  ago,  ulcer  on  r.  thigh,
wdiich  only  closed  lately,  leaving  a  small  opening  oozing
a  clear  fluid;  excruciating  pains  in  tibia,  <  at  night;
skin  at  ulcerated  part  brown,  dry,  with  bluish  red  spots
around  opening;  slightest  pressure  of  finger  causes
burning  pain,  and  still  she  tried  to  alleviate  the  deep
seated  pains  by  constricting  limb  with  a  handkerchief;
periosteum  swollen;  stepping  on  foot  prevented  by  se-
verity of  pains;  sleepless  at  night  on  account  of  pains
and  cramps  in  calves  of  legs. ^Periostitis.

■  Right  femur  from  knee  to  middle  greatly  swollen; soft

parts  not  affected  ;  periphery  of  affected  leg  2^"  larger,
five  inches  above  knee,  than  sound  one;  about  middle
of  femur  swelling  ceased  and  formed  a  marked  eleva-


MEZEREUM.  470

tion,  where  it  met  the  unaffected  part  of  bone;  tendons
in  popliteal  space  shortened,  so  that  leg  was  flexed  and
it  became  impossible  to  extend  it;  internal  and  external
condyles  swollen,  patella  not  affected;  extreme  pain  at
night  and  on  slightest  touch ;  severe  stitching  pains  in
leg;  loss  of  appetite;  coated  tongue;  thirst;  constipa-
tion; turbid  urine;  small,  quick  pulse;  night  sweats;
sleeplessness;  great  emaciation  ;  despondency.
BAfter  healing  of  axillary  abscess,  large,  irregular,  some-
times confluent,  distinctly  defined,  copper  colored  spots
on  inner  side  of  thighs  extending  to  groin  ;  not  elevated,
not  disposed  to  suppurate,  but  seat  of  distressing  burn-
ing itching,  <  at  menstrual  epoch,  at  which  time  the
spots  assume  a  darker  color,  especially  at  edges;  occa-
sional hemicrania,  stitches  in  spleen,  frequent  chills,
trembling  of  limbs  and  morbidly  fretful.  ^Pityriasis
versicolor.

■  Cracking  in  r.  knee  when  rising  in  morning.
I  I  Acute  jerking  in  1.  knee.

I  I  Pressive  pain  in  r.  tibia.

B  Violent pain in  tibia,  as  if  beaten,  or  as  if  periosteum

was  torn  off,  after  midnight,  disturbing  sleep.
B I  Pain  in  periosteum  of  long  bones,  especially  tibia,  <  at

night  in  bed,  least  touch is  intolerable; <  in  damp

weather. ^Syphilis. ^Rheumatism.

■  Large  syphilitic  ulcer  on  l.leg;  tibia  thickened  through-

out whole  length,  and  periosteum  swollen  around  ulcer;
in  evening,  Avhen  much  fatigued,  slight  oozing  of  serum
at  edges  of  ulcer;  when  thick  crust  was  removed
from  ulcer,  latter  appeared  shallow  and  secreted  a  san-
guineus discharge;  burning  pain,  <  from  heat  of  bed.

I  Ulcer  on  r.  tibia,  three  inches  long,  two  wide,  above  in-
ternal malleolus ;  surrounding  skin  coppery  red,  covered
with  pustules.

iLeg,  from  knee  to  instep,  covered  with  thick,  yellow  scab
from  cracks  of  which  thick,  yellow  matter  oozes  on  press-
ure; scab  falls  off  in  pieces,  leaving  skin  deep  red,  sore,
itching  violently  and  exuding  a  thin,  clear  fluid,  form-
ing a  thin  scab  under  which  pus  again  collects;  skin
around  scabs  dark  red,  tense,  hot,  itching;  foot  swollen,
with  painful  stitches  on  beginning  to  walk;  at  night
intolerable  itching  and  burning  in  eruption ;  foul  odor.
^Herpes  crustaceus.

I  iLegs  and  feet  "go  to  sleep."

■  Violent  nightly  pains  in  bones  of  feet;  rheumatism.
I  I  Stitches  in  toes  of  r.  foot.

I  I  Violent  tearing  in  ball  of  1.  little  toe.
^*  Limbs  in  General. ■  Trembling  of  extremities.


471  MEZEREUM.

I  Pains  in  periosteum  of  long  bones,  especially  tibise,  <  at

night  in  bed;  least  touch  intolerable.
^^  Rest. Position. Motion. Lying  down:  itching  of  scalp<.
Cannot  extend  limb  :  swelling  of  femur  and  shortening  of

tendons.
Stooping :  headache  >  ;  chest  feels  too  tight.
Motion : cranial bones  pain  < ; toothache  < ; pain  in

nape  <;  difficult,  rheumatic  pain  in  scapular  muscles;

paralyzed  feeling  in  limbs  <.
Stepping:  prevented  by  severe  pain  in  limb.
Walking:  biting,  sore pain  in  arms; r.  hip  joint  feels

sprained  ;  stitches  in  foot.
^®  Nerves, 'i  Feeling  of  great  lightness  of  body.

■  General  sick  feeling.
iSubsultus  tendinum.

^^  Sleep. I  I  Yawning,  stretching;  sleepiness  during  day.
I  Great  inclination  to  sleep,  from  debility.

■  Inability  to  sleep.

■Sleep  disturbed  by  violent  pain  in  face.

I  I  Awakens  after  midnight  from  vivid  dreams  and  with
nightmare;  <  on  awaking.
^  Time.  iMorning:  chilliness  and  coldness  in  body;  pain  in
vertex  >;  eyes  inflamed;  tearing  in  face;  after  walk,
tearing  in  teeth  ;  nausea  and  faintness ;  discharge  of  pale
urine ;  gleet  <  ;  sputa  <  ;  inclination  to  cough ;  fre-
quent pulse;  after  rising,  pain  in  scapula;  cracking  in
r.  knee.

From  morning  until  night:  anguish  and  nausea.

Forenoon  :  discharge  of  pale  urine.

Noon :  canine  hunger.

Afternoon:  burning  in  mouth.

After  meals :  dulness  of  head.

During  day :  expectoration  salty ;  yawning,  stretching.

Evening:  pain  in  cranial  bones  <;  itching  in  eye  <;
prosopalgia  <  till  midnight;  lips  painful;  chilliness;
canine  hunger;  diarrhoea  <;  itching  about  anus;
whooping  cough  < ;  cough  <  till  12  p.m.  ;  in  bed  incli-
nation to  cough ;  stitches  near  spinal  marrow;  acceler-
ated or  slow  pulse;  oozing  from  ulcer  on  leg.

Night :  pain  in  vertex  <  ;  itching  of  scalp  <  ;  toothache
< ;  sleep  only  late ;  whooping  cough  <  ;  severe  cough
<  ;  pain  in  tibia  <  ;  sleepless  from  pain  in  limb ;  pain  in
periosteum  of  long  bones  <  ;  after  midnight  awakens
from  vivid  dreams;  rheumatism  <  ;  cystic  osteoma  <  ;
exanthema  burning;  itching  of  eruption  on  finger
joints  <.
^^  Temperature  and  Weather.  Appears  to  be  frequently  in-
dicated in  January  and  February.


MEZEREUM.  472

Heat  of  bed:  burning  pain  in  ulcer  on  leg;  itching  <.
Warmth : itching of  scalp  and  feet < ;  neuralgia <  ;

chills  >.
Drinking  anything  hot :  cough  <.
Warm  food :  cramping  pressure  in  head  <.
Warm  room :  chilliness.
Entering  room :  pains  in  head  <.
Wrapping  up:  head,  pains  >.
When  covered :  to  perspire,  pains  in  head  <.
Open  air :  headache  < ;  teeth  painful ; drawing  pain  of

limbs  >  ;  chilliness  <,
Sudden  changes  of  weather:  pains  in  head  <.
Application  of  water :  eruption  on  hands  and  wrists.
Cold  :  cranial  bones  sensitive ;  drawing  pain  in  scalp  <  ;

causes  pain  in  gums ;  great  sensibility  after  stool.
Cold,  damp  air :  headache  <.
Damp  weather :  rheumatism  <.
Cold  winds:  pains  in  head  <.
While  in  wind :  drawing  in  limbs.
Drawing  in  air:  toothache  >.
*"  Fever, i  i  Sensitiveness  to  cold  air.

I  I  Chill :  from  upper  arms  to  back  and  legs;  as  if  drenched

with  cold  water ;  on  single  parts  as  if  dashed  with  cold

water.
I  I  External  coldness,  great  thirst,  no  desire  for  warmth,  no

dread  of  open  air;  no  subsequent  heat.
I  Chill  even  in  warm  room,  drowsy;  lessened  out  doors;

thirst;  back of  mouth dry,  much  saliva  in  forepart;

cramp  in  chest,  asthmatic  constriction  and  oppression.
I  I  Chill  lessened  by  heat.

■  Burning  of  internal  parts,  with  external  chilliness.

I  I  Hands  and  feet  cold,  nails  blue;  hot  sensation  on  small

spot  on  top  of  head.
I  Heat:  in  bed,  mostly  in  head;  onesided  (1.);  intense  after

chill,  with  sleep.
I  Skin  dripping  with  cold  sweat.
lApyrexia:  headache;  pale  face;  hardness  and  swelling

of  spleen,  with  pressive  pain  in  1.  hypochondrium;  loss

of  appetite;  sensitiveness  to  cold  air.

■  General  weakness;  great  tendency  to  run  into  remittent

or  typhoid. ^Ague.
*'  Attacks,  Periodicity. Alternately :  chilliness  and  flushes

of  heat.
From  one  to  two  hours :  pinching  pain  and  much  belching.
Several  times  during  day :  much  itching  about  anus.
Daily  :  vomiting  of  chocolate  colored  masses.
Nightly :  bone  pains ;  rheumatism.
Every  third  day :  stool.


473  MEZEREUM.

Every  eight  or  ten  days  :  stool.

Menstrual  epoch:  burning  itching  inner  side  of  thigh  <.

Every  Winter:  dark  redness  of  fauces,  with  burning  dry-
ness.
*^  Locality  and  Direction.  Right:  megrim;  as  if  air  dis-
tended external  meatus ;  nostril  inflamed;  twitching  of
muscles  of  cheek ;  neuralgia  of  supraorbital ;  prosopal-
gia; pains  from  infraorbital  foramen;  pain  in  eyetooth;
swelling  under  side  of  tongue;  tumor  in  hypochon-
drium ;  stitches  in  side  of  chest;  stitches  in  side;  stiff
pain  in  side  of  nape  of  neck ;  rheumatic  pains  in
scapula;  pain  in  shoulder  joint;  sore  feeling  in  axilla;
hand  cold ;  trembling  of  hand  ;  hip  joint  feels  sprained ;
ulcer  on  thigh ;  femur  greatly  swollen  ;  cracking  in
knees;  pressive  pain  in  tibia ;  ulcer  on  tibia;  stitches  in
toes.

Left:  inclined  to  fall  to  side ;  pain  in  temple  ;  aching  pain
about  eye;  conjunctiva  injected;  twitching  of  muscles
of  upper  lid  ;  itching  in  upper  eyelid  ;  pressure  in  outer
angle  of  eye ;  as  if  air  was  distending  internal  meatus ;
tearing  in  side  of  face;  prosopalgia;  pressure  beginning
in  zygoma;  small  pustule  on  chin;  drawing  pain  in
upper  and  lower  jaw;  stitches  in  chest;  sticking  pain
from  side  to  back  ;  stitches  into  cartilages  of  ribs  ;  hand
warm  ;  acute  jerking  in  knee ;  large  syphilitic  ulcer  on
leg;  tearing  in  ball  of  little  toe;  one  sided  heat;  press-
ive pain  in  hypochondrium ;  herpetic  eruption  on  foot.

From  above  downward :  nightly  bone  pains.

From  within  outward:  pain  in  1.  temple.

First  r.  then  1.:  prosopalgia;  severe  pains  in  lower  jaw.
*^  Sensations.  Head  feels  as  if  drunk;  as  if  everything  in
head  would  press  asunder ;  as  if  upper  part  of  head
was  pithy;  as  if  skull  would  split;  as  if  top  of  head
was  gone  ;  as  if  bruised ;  as  if  head  was  in  an  ant's  nest ;
eyes  as  if  too  large ;  as  if  eyes  were  drawn  backward
into  head ;  ears  as  if  too  open ;  as  if  air  was  pouring
into  ears;  as  if  tympanum  was  exposed  to  cold  air;  as
if  air  was  distending  r.  external  meatus ;  as  though
roaring  in  ears  would  occur ;  teeth  as  if  too  long ;  as  if
ants  were  running  over  chest ;  as  if  hole  was  being
bored  in  mental  foramen ;  hard  palate  as  if  made  of
wood  ;  whole  side  of  head  as  if  cold  ;  tongue  and  lips
as  if  quite  sore;  throat  as  if  narrowing;  as  if  posterior
part  of  throat  was  full  of  mucus;  burning  as  from  pep-
per in  mouth ;  as  if  internal  surface  of  gastric  mucous
membrane  was  raw ;  as  if  food  remained  a  long  time
undigested  in  stomach ;  stools  as  if  they  would  split
anus ;  pain  in  kidney  as  if  torn ; dyspnoea,  as  if  from


MEZEREUM.  474

adhesions  ;  chest  as  if  too  tight ;  limbs  as  if  shortened  ;
as  if  shoulder  joint  would  be  torn  to  pieces;  tibia  as  if
beaten  ;  as  if  periosteum  was  torn  ;  chill,  as  if  drenched
with  water;  as  if  fire  was  darting  through  muscles;  as
if  joints  would  give  way ;  elevations  like  nettlerash
burn  as  if  bright  coal  lay  upon  them ;  sticking  of  rash
as  from  needles  ;  as  if  millions  of  insects  were  creeping
on  him.

Pain  :  extending  from  root  of  nose  into  forehead  ;  in  bones
of  skull ;  in  gums ;  in  anus ;  in  fissure  of  anus ;  of
nape ;  in  r.  shoulder  joint ;  in  hip ;  in  bones  of  thigh
and  leg;  in  calves  of  legs;  in  periosteum  of  long  bones.

Excruciating  pain :  in  tibiae.

Intolerable  nightly  burning  pains:  in  abscess  of  antrum
of  Highmore.

Very  violent  pain :  in  head ;  in  face ;  in  tibiae ;  in  bones
of  feet.

Extreme  pain  :  in  r.  femur.

Severe  pains  :  in  upper  arm  and  shin  bone ;  in  bones  of
head  ;  in  lower  jaw  ;  in  stomach  ;  in  face ;  in  ball  of  1.
little  toe ;  in  and  around  eye ;  in  anus  and  perineum.

Tearing,  pressing  pain  :  in  humeri  and  tibise.

Fine  tearing:  in  1.  side  of  face  and  in  teeth.

Lightninglike  pains:  coming  from  r.  arm  to  temples  and
corner  of  mouth.

Darting  pains: like  shocks  of  electricity  through  limbs.

Boring  :  in  bones  of  occiput ;  in  bones  of  upper  jaw ;  ex-
tending to  malar  bones  and  temples ; in  several  teeth.

Sharp  stitches :  near  spinal  marrow.

Stitches :  in  side  ;  from  teeth  to  zygoma ;  up  rectum  ;  in
r.  side  of  chest ;  in  1.  chest ;  in  spleen  ;  in  toes  of  r.
foot;  in  hemorrhoids;  in  chest;  in  bony  tumors  of
frontal  and  malar  bones  ;  in  skin  of  vertex  and  temples ;
in  face ;  in  ulcer  on  r.  thigh ;  in  seat  of  zona.

Severe  stitching  pain :  in  leg.

Flying  stitching  pains :  along  long  bones.

Twitching,  grasping,  stitching  pains:  in  hollow  teeth.

Prickling  stitches :  in  penis  and  summit  of  glans.

Drawing  pain  :  in  scalp  ;  in  upper  and  lower  jaw  ;  in  side
of  head  ;  in  lower  limbs.

Sticking:  in  kidney;  from  1.  side  to  back  through  chest

Constricting,  pinching  pain  :  in  stomach.

Painful  constriction,  tearing  and  drawing:  at  anus;  peri-
neum and  through  urethra.

Crampy  pain  :  in  bladder.

Biting:  on  scalp.

Neuralgic  pains :  in  face.

Acute  jerking :  in  1.  knee.


475  MEZEREUM.

Twitching  pain  :  from  hip  joint  to  knee.

Cramps :  in  calves  of  legs ;  in  chest.

Constricting  and  contracting  pains :  across  forepart  of  chest.

Rlieumatic  pains :  in  scapular  muscles ;  in  r.  scapula.

Gouty  pains:  through  body.

Aching  pain :  in  vertex  and  occiput ;  in  and  around  eye.

Aching,  pressive  pain  :  about  1.  eye.

Pressive  pain  : in  1.  temple ;  in  occiput ;  in  r.  tibia ;  in  1.

hypochondrium.
Crainplike  contraction :  over  both  chest  and  back.
Biting  sore  pain :  in  anus.

Raw  pain :  from  pharynx  half  way  down  oesophagus.
Sore  pain  :  in  chest.
Numb  pain :  in  face.

Stiff  pain:  in  r.  side  of  nape  of  neck  and  throat.
Heat,  scraping,  burning,  peppery  sensation: on  palate

and  fauces.
Painful  burning:  in  rectum.
Sore  burning:  on  sternum.
Hot  burning:  in  throat.

Burning:  in  skin  of  vertex  and  temples ;  in  face ;  in  ulcer
on  r.  thigh ;  in  seat  of  zona ;  back  of  hands ;  of  internal
parts;  in  bones  of  thorax ;  of  scalp;  of  skin  of  head ;  of
throat;  of  lips;  on  tongue,  extending  to  stomach;  in
mouth  and  throat;  in  pharynx;  in  fauces;  in  oesopha-
gus ;  in  stomach  ;  in  rectum  ;  in  trachea  ;  in  vesicles.
Burning  darting  sensation  : in  muscles,  like  fire  darting

through  them.
Burning  dryness:  mouth  and  larynx.
Hot  sensation :  on  small  spot  on  top  of  head.
Soreness:  of  nose;  of  upper  lip ;  of  lips ;  in  bones  of  thorax.
Sore  feeling:  in  r.  axilla.

Smarting,  burning,  prickling :  in  uterine  ulcer.
Irritation :  in  vagina.
Smarting:  in  eyes.

Burning  itching:  in  nostrils  and  inside  ears.
Sore,  bruised  sensation :  in  chest.
Sprained  feeling :  in  r.  hip  joint.
Rawness :  of  fauces ;  in  chest.

Dryness :  in  eyes ;  of  nose ;  in  throat ;  in  fauces ;  in  trachea.
Constriction:  in  throat  and  stomach;  of  pharynx;  about

fallen  rectum.
Strained  feeling:  in  eyes.
Drawing:  in  limbs;  in  anus  and  perineum.
Cramping,  numbing pressure: 1.  zygoma,  towards  eye,

temple,  ear  and  down  neck  to  shoulder.
Pressure:  in  eyes;  in  stomach  and  intestines.
Tension :  over  thorax.


MEZEREUM.  476

Stiffness:  of  nape  and  external  cervical  muscles.

Numb  feeling:  in  top  of  head.

Feeling  of  great  lightness :  of  body.

Paralyzed  feeling:  in  limbs.

Uneasiness:  in  stomach.

Apprehensiveness:  at  pit  of  stomach.

Violent  itching:  rash  on  nape  ;  eruption  on  leg  ;  pruritus
senilis;  eczema;  pimples ;_  vesicles  around  ulcers.

Distressing  burning,  itching : in  spots  on  inner  side  of
thighs.

Itching,  biting:  on  margin  of  lids  and  skin  near  nose.

Itching:  of  whole  body;  of  scalp;  efface;  of  skin  of
head;  of  eyebrows;  eyes;  in  1.  upper  eyelid;  tinea  capi-
tis; eruption  of  head  ;  behind  ears;  vesicles  on  dorsum
of  nose;  about  anus;  in  urethra;  in  glans  penis;
vesicles  on  back  of  hands,  arms,  legs,  back  ;  rash  on
arms,  head  and  over  whole  body ;  ulcerative  eruption
on  finger  joints.
"Tissues. Emaciation  of  face;  withering  of  diseased  parts.

Scrofulosis,  with  excoriation  in  throat  and  at  nose.

Soreness  and  burning  in  bones  of  thorax.

I  Bones  feel  distended.

■  Periosteal  rheumatism;  boring,  pressing  pains,  coming

like  lightning,  leaving  parts  numb.
I  Nervous  rheumatism  or  rheumatic  neuralgia,  <  at  night,
with  flying,  stitching  pains  along  long  bones.

■  Periostitis  and  swelling  of  bones,  especially  on  tibia,  with

most  violent  nightly  pains.

■  Swelling  of  bones;  caries;  nightly  bone  pains,  going  from

above  downwards;  stitching  pains  in  bony  tumors  of
frontal  and  malar  bones;  bony  tumors  become  cartilagi-
nous and  soften  from  inside  out,

■  Exostoses;  tophi.

■  ■Bones  inflamed,  swollen,  especially  shafts  of  cylindrical

bones;  after  abuse  of  mercury  and  venereal  disease.

■  Cystic  osteoma,  burning  pains,  swelling;  <  at  night.

■  Joints  feel  bruised,  weary,  as  if  they  would  give  way,
I  I  Engorged  glands.

I  I  Abscesses  of  fibrous  parts  or  of  tendons.
*^  Touch.  Passive  Motion.  Injuries.  Touch  :  on  temples
causes  headache;  slightest,  causes  pain  in  head;  pain
in  bones  of  skull ;  scalp  very  sensitive;  cranial  bones
sensitive ;  sensitiveness  of  eye,  cheek,  teeth ;  with
tongue,  toothache  <  ;  abdomen  sensitive;  urethra  sore;
anus  sensitive;  pain  in  limbs  <;  intolerable  in  rheu-
matic limb ;  itching  <  ;  crusty  eruptions  bleed.
Pressure :  limbs  sensitive ;  pus  exudes  from  scabs  on  eye ;
pain  in  toothache ; tumor  sensitive ; painful  parts  of


477  MEZEREUM.

chest  sensitive ;  causes  burning  pain  around  ulcer ;  on
scab  on  leg,  matter  oozes.

Rubbing:  itching  of  scalp  <.

Scratching:  itching  of  eruption  on  hands  and  wrists  <  ;
burning and  change  of  place  of  itching ; nocturnal
itching  on  arms,  legs,  back  >  ;  pruritus  <.
^  Skin. Roughness  and  scaling  here  and  there;  skin  of  hands
rough  and  dead.

Violent  itching,  <  in  bed,  from  touch;  burning  and
change  of  place  after  scratching.

I  Dry,  burning,  itching  herpetic  eruption  on  both  hands
and  1.  foot ;  skin  peeled  off.

1  Scrofulous  ulcer  of  leg,  with  thickening  of  periosteum
and  a  similar  swelling  on  bone  of  forearm.

I  Skin  wrinkled  and  in  folds;  sleepless  on  account  of  itch-
ing ;  cannot  refrain  from  scratching ;  feeling  as  though
millions  of  insects  were  creeping  on  him,  compelling
him  to  rub  successively  his  arms,  legs,  abdomen  and
throat ;  on  parts  scratched  are  innumerable,  insular,
white  elevations  on  a  red  or  reddish  base,  as  in  nettle-
rash,  which,  when  deeply  scratched,  display  in  centre  a
drop  of  blood,  size  of  pin  head,  and  burn  as  if  a  bright
coal  lay  upon  them;  by  day  itching  is  intolerable  and
there  is  no  visible  trace  of  morbid  alteration  in  skin ;
blood  spots  appear  as  small,  brown  points  on  surface  of
skin;  during  violent  itching  and  burning  complains  of
chilliness,  feeling  cold  along  spinal  column  and  in  ex-
tremities; where  itching  is  most  intense  there  is  a  sen-
sible diminution  of  temperature. ^Pruritus  senilis.

B Nocturnal  itching  on  arms,  legs,  back,  >  by  scratching,
but  immediately  returning  on  some  other  place.

The  usual  liver  spots  on  chest  and  arms  become  very  dark,
with  much  desquamation.

Brownish  miliary  rash  on  chest,  arms  and  thighs.

SRed  itching  rash  on  arms,  head  and  over  whole  body.

I  1  Violent  itching  rash  on  nape  of  neck,  back  and  thighs,
always  <  and  gnawing  after  scratching  and  sticking
as  from  needles.

Bitchlike  eruption,  after  vaccination,  depriving  child  of
sleep.

Scurf  like  fish  scales  on  back,  chest,  thighs  and  scalp.

Scabs  thick,  lamellated,  like  rupia,  bloody  secretion  be-
neath ;  <  on  parts  devoid  of  fat.

B Distressing  exanthema,  burning  at  night,  compelling  to
scratch  until  epidermis  is  removed  and  denuded  part
is  covered  with  a  scab  or  there  is  repeated  exfoliation.

Bl  Eczema  itching  intolerably,  copious  serous  exudation.

B  Herpes  zoster,  with  severe  neuralgic  pains,  itching  after


MEZEREUM.  478

scratching  turns  into  burning,  <  in  bed,  from  touch  ;

vesicles  form  brownish  scab.
■After  zona  (cured  by  Rhus)  there  remained  great  coldness

of  body,  with  burning  pain  in  seat  of  zona.
1 1  Neuralgia  and  burning  after  zona.
1 1  Vesicles  appear  around  ulcers,  itching  violently  and

burning  like  fire;  after  eight  days  these  vesicles  dry  up,

leaving  scabs,  the  tearing  off  of  which  causes  great  pain

and  retards  healing.

■  Large,  irregular,  sometimes  confluent,  distinctly  defined

copper  colored  spots  on  inner  side  of  thighs,  extending  to
groin;  distressing  burning,  itching,  <  at  menstrual
period,  at  which  time  spots  assume  a  darker  color,  espe-
cially at  edges;  occasional  hemicrania,  stitches  in  spleen,
frequent  chills,  trembling  of  limbs;  morbidly  fretful.
^Pityriasis  versicolor.

i  Whole  skin  covered  with  elevated  white  scabs.

I  Ulcerative  eruption  on  finger  joints,  itching  most  at  night.

I  Moist,  scabby  eruption.

■  Crusty  eruptions,  white  scabs,  bleeding  when  touched.
I  I  Vesicular  erysipelas.

■  Ulcers  with  areolae,  sensitive,  easily  bleeding,  painful  at

night;  pus  under  scabs;  burning  vesicles  around  ulcers.

■  ■Ulcers  covered  with  thick,  whitish  yellow  scabs,  under

which  thick,  yellow  pus  collects.

■  Cutaneous  ulcers  form  over  bony  protuberances.

■  Linen  or  charpie  sticks  to  ulcers,  when  it  is  torn  away

they  bleed.

■  ■  Vesicles  appear  around  ulcers,  itch  violently,  burn  like

fire;  fiery  red  areola,  shining  like  fire.
^^  Stages  of  Life,  Constitution. Phlegmatic  temperament;

light  hair;  irresolute.
Child,  £et.  3,  after  vaccination;  itchlike  eruption.
Girl,  set  12;  neuralgia  in  side.
Boy,  9st.  15;  scrofulous  ulcer.
Boy,  set.  17,  healthy,  when  three  years  old  had  an  eruption

which  was  suppressed;  deafness.
Girl,  set.  18,  blonde,  of  sanguine  temperament,  with  scanty,

intermitting  menses,  suffering  two  years;  pityriasis  ver-
sicolor.
Girl,  set.  20,  previously  in  good  health,  after  catching  cold ;

swelling  of  femur.
Man,  set.  22,  sanguine  temperament,  weak  after  catching

cold;  toothache.
Man,  set. 23,  suffering  for  a  whole  year  from  maltreated

gonorrhoea;  swollen  testicles.
Officer,  set.  25,  robust,  healthy;  prosopalgia.
Man,  set.  30,  strong,  had  chancre  on  penis  three  months

ago;  sore  throat.


479  MEZEREUM.

Woman,  set.  32,  after  instrumental  delivery  four  weeks
ago;  tenesmus  and  prolapsus  recti.

Vigorous  countryman,  set.  32;  mentagra.

Man,  set.  34,  sanguine  choleric  temperament,  delicate,
weak  build;  toothache.

Woman,  set.  35;  supraorbital  neuralgia.
' Woman,  set.  36,  suffering  many  years;  herpes  crustaceus.

Nursing  woman ;  constipation.

Laboring  man,  set.  40 ;  herpetic  eruption.

Man,  set.  40 ;  gastric  catarrh.

Woman,  set.  42,  suffering  twenty  years;  eczema.

Man,  set.  43,  nervo-bilious  constitution,  cachectic  habit,
leaden  colored  face,  had  lived  the  life  of  a  tramp  and
had  been  several  times  syphilitic ;  pain  and  swelling  in
tibiae.

Woman,  set.  45,  married,  florid,  has  suffered  with  headache
for  three  months ;  incipient  pityriasis  capitis.

Woman;  prosopalgia.

Man,  abdominal  plethoric  constitution,  dark  skin,  had  had
several  tumors  on  head  removed  several  years  ago,  suf-
fering one  year;  prosopalgia.

Woman,  after  a  drive  in  an  open  carriage  in  which  she
had  been  exposed  to  a  bitter  cold  wind;  cephalalgia
periostitica.

Woman,  set.  48,  eruption  preceded  by  violent  headache  for
six  months,  suffering  two  years ;  pityriasis  capitis.

Woman,  set.  50,  delicate  constitution,  generous,  good  nat-
ured,  subject  to  rapid  changes  of  temperature,  suffering
two  years ; prosopalgia.

Widow,  set.  50,  large,  well  developed,  sanguine  tempera-
ment, since  her  confinement  fifteen  years  ago  suffered
from  an  ulcer ;  periostitis.

Woman,  set.  55 ;  tinea  capitis.

Woman,  set.  60 ;  ulcer  on  tibia.

Woman,  set.  63,  unmarried,  delicate,  with  weak  digestion,
addicted  to  use  of  coarse  snuff,  after  great  fatigue ;  rupia
prominens.

Old  man ;  shingles.

Man,  set.  74,  weak  and  dyspeptic,  a  subject  of  marasmus
senilis;  pruritus  senilis.

Man,  set.  74,  hale  and  hearty  for  his  age ;  pruritus.
*^  Relations. Antidoted  by:  Aeon.,  Bryon.,  Calc.  ost.  (head-
ache), Kalijod.,  Mercur.,  Nux  vom.  (neuralgia).

It  antidotes:  effects  of  spirituous  liquors,  Mercur.,  Niir.  ac,
Phosphor.

Compatible:  Calc.  ost.,  Caustic,  Ignat.,  Lycop.,  Mercur.,
Nux  vom.,  Phosphor.,  Pulsat.

Compare :  Anac,  Guaiac,  Phytol.,  Rhus  tox.


MILLEFOLIUM.  480


MILLEFOLIUM.

Yarrow.  Compositss.

A  plant  known  to  the  ancients,  mentioned  by  Homer  in  the  Iliad,  where
Chiron  instructs  Achilles  in  the  art  of  surgery  ;  it  was  named  by  Linneus,  Achillea
Millefolium.  The  plant  is  common  in  old  fields,  along  fences,  on  borders  of  woods
and  cultivated  grounds,  produces  a  dense  corymb  of  whitish  flowers  of  feeble  aro-
matic odor,  and  the  leaves  have  a  bitterish,  astringent  taste.  The  tincture  is  pre-
pared from  the  fresh  plant.

Introduced  by  Hartlaub ;  provings  by  Nenning  and  Schreter  (Hartlaub  and
Trinks'  Annalen,  vol.  4,  p.  344) ;  later  provings  by  Hering  and  Eaue  (Amerika-
nische  Arzneipriifungen,  Translation  with  additions,  N.  E.  M.  G.,  vol.  9,  1874).

Clinical  Authorities. — Kiickert,  Annalen,  vol.  1,  p.  114;  Gross,  Archives,
15,  3,  25 ;  Goullon,  Archives,  20,  2,  145 ;  Headache,  Kormand,  Roux,  Journ.  de
Med.,  1771 ;  Culic  and  bloody  diarrhoea  during  pregnancy,  Normand ;  Htemcduria,
Wiedemann,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  2,  p.  23 ;  Hcemoptysis,  Lobethal,  Allg.  Hom.  Ztg.,
vol.  13,  p.  356 ;  Gross,  Hirsch,  Riickert,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  3,  p.  219  ;  Keil,  Riick.
Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  5,  p.  805;  Okie,  N.  E.  M.  G.,  vol.  9,  1874;  Jousset,  Allg.  Hom.
Ztg.,  vol.  Ill,  p.  127  ;  Preventive  in post-partum  hemorrhage,  Rev.  Hom.  Beige,  1876,
p.  21 ;  Smcdlpox,  with  pain  in  stomach,  Maumery,  Normand,  Frank's  Mag.,  vol.  1  ;
Infantile  spasms,  Normand  ;  Fever  from  suppressed  itch,  Normand.

^  Mind. Anxious,  with  pain  in  heart.

I  I  Melancholy,  sadness;  weak  memory.

1  I  Much  excited,  with  pains  in  pit  of  stomach.

Irritable;  violent;  aversion  to  work.
^Sensorium. Stupefied,  intoxicated.

Confused,  dull,  especially  evenings,  knows  not  what  he  is
about,  nor  what  he  ought  to  do;  seems  constantly  as  if
he  had  forgotten  something.

Vertigo  when  moving  slowly,  walking,  but  not  when  tak-
ing violent  exercise,  with  nausea  when  stooping.

•  Apoplexy ;  paralysis.
^  Inner  Head. Sensation  as  if  all  blood  ascended  to  head.

Congestion  to  head:  when  stooping  in  evening;  at  night
a  stream  from  chest  to  head,  like  a  gust  of  wind,  with
nosebleed;  from  coffee;  from  portal  system.

Slight  throbbing  in  arteries  of  head  and  face.

Fulness  in  head  after  siesta.

Dull  pain  in  vertex.

Sensation  in  r.  side  of  head  as  if  screwed  together.

Hemicrania.


481  MILLEFOLIUM.

I  I  Violent  headache,  he  strikes  head  against  bedpost  or

wall;  twitching  of  eyelids  and  frontal  muscles.
Occipital  headache,  dull  towards  evening.
Piercing  or  thrusts  in  head,  vertex,  over  eye,  occiput,  side

of  head.
Headache  <:  stooping;  on  awaking.
^  Sight  and  Eyes. Like  a  mist  before  eyes,  not  near,  but  at

a  distance.
■  Nebulous  vision,  weak  sighted,  with  contortion  of  facial

muscles.
Eyes  brilliant.
Inward  piercing,  pressing  in  eyes  to  root  of  nose  and  sides

of  forehead.
Sensation  of  too  much  blood  in  eyes.
I  I  Fistula  lachrymalis;  lachrymation  and  discharge.
Agglutination  of  eyes  in  morning.
®  Hearing  and  Ears. Noise  in  1.  ear  causes  her  to  start  with

fright;  later,  ■when  laughing,  sensation  as  of  cold  air

passing  out.
Sensation  as  if  ears  were  stopped  up,  after  dinner.
Darting  in  1.  ear.
I  Earache.
'^  Smell  and  Nose, n Nosebleed:  congestion  to  chest  and

head;  excessive.
I  I  Stuffed  nose.

Piercing  pain  from  eyes  to  root  of  nose.
^  Upper  Face. Redness  of  face  without  internal  heat.
Sensation  of  heat  as  if  blood  was  rising  to  head.
Tearing :  in  face  to  temples;  from  r.  lower  jaw  to  ear,  then

teeth.
I  I  Contortion  of  face.
^°  Teeth  and  Gums. iToothache:  from  heating  things ;  with

pain  in  jaw;  rheumatic,  with  diseased  gums.
I  1  Gumboil.
"  Taste  and  Tongue. Tongue  swollen  and  coated.
^^  Inner  Mouth. Thirst,  mouth  dry.

I  iStomacace,  ulcerated  gums;  putrid,  sore  mouth.
13  Throat. 1  I  Uvula  relaxed,  also  tonsils;  asthenic  catarrh.
Pough  feeling  in  throat.
Dull,  piercing  pains,  r.,  then  1.  side.
I  I  Ulceration  of  throat ; pain  in  1.  side  of  throat  when

swallowing.
^^  Hiccough,  Belching,  Nausea  and  Vomiting. Hiccough;

empty  eructations.
Nausea,  with  vertigo.
I  I  Retching  and  vomiting.
Vomiting  when  coughing.

VOL.  VII. — 31.


MILLEFOLIUM.  482

"  Scrobiculum  and  Stomach. Painful  gnawing  and dig-
ging in  stomach  as  from  hunger.

Pain  in  stomach  as  if  empty,  mornings  after  waking.

Burning  in  stomach;  <  when  doubling  body,  in  region
of  r.  hypochondrium,  where  it  became  a  drawing,  burn-
ing pain.

Burning  in  stomach  and  abdomen;  extending  to  chest.

I  I  Pains  in  stomach,  in  young,  hysterical,  irregularly
menstruating  girls.

I  I  Great  pain  in  pit  of  stomach ;  excited,  pulse  accelerated
and  constricted,  pustules  collapsing. ^Smallpox.

I  I  Pain  in  stomach  after  confluent  smallpox.

I  I  Cardialgia.

Sensation  of  fulness  in  stomach;  pressure,  like  a  plug.

Cramp  in  stomach,  with  sensation  as  of  a  liquid  moving
from  stomach  to  intestines,  towards  anus.
^^  Hypochondria. Pain  in  region  of  liver; piercing  in  r.
lower  ribs.

I  I  Congestion  to  portal  system.

1  I  Stagnation  in  liver  and  system  of  vena  portse;  sluggish
digestion; want  of  appetite;  flatus;  distension  of  ab-
domen.
^^  Abdomen, i  Bloated  ness.

I  Pain  in  abdomen  from  flatus.

I  I  Griping  and  tearing  in  abdomen,  caused  by  dysentery
and  lientery.

I  I  Wind  colic  in  hysterical  or  hypochondriacal  patients;
colic  during  menstruation.

I  Hemorrhages  from  bowels  in  typhoid  fever,  with  tym-
panitis.

I  I  Incarcerated  hernia.

I  I  Ascites.
^  Stool  and  Rectum. Frequent  emission  of  fetid  flatus.

I  I  Violent  colic  with  bloody  diarrhoea.  ^During  sixth
month  of  pregnancy,  prevailing  dysentery.

I  I  Mucous  diarrhoea.

I  I  Chronic  blenorrhoea  from  atony  of  mucous  membranes;
great  pain.

I  I  Dysentery.

I  I  Bloody  dysentery,  tenesmus;  during  epidemics  of
dysentery.

I  Bloody  flux  after  much  exertion,  lifting,  or  internal  in-
juries.

■  Pains  from  blind  hemorrhoids.

■  Hemorrhoidal  hemorrhages.

■  Profuse  flux  from  condylomata.
I  lAscarides.

^^  Urinary  Organs. iPain  in  region  of  1.  kidney,  followed


483  MILLEFOLIUM-

by  profuse  hsematuria,  lasting  from  five  to  eight  days;

chilliness,  which  obliges  him  to  keep  his  bed.
1  I  Catarrh  of  bladder  from  atony.
I  I  Stone  in  bladder,  with  retention  of  urine;  bloody  urime.

I  I  Puslike  discharge  after  lithotomy.

I I  Urine  bloody ;  blood  forms  a  cake  in  vessel.
I  I  Incontinence  of  urine.

Constant  desire  to  urinate.
I  I  Incontinentia  urinse.
^^  Male  Sexual  Organs. ' '  Want  of  ejaculation  when  co-
habiting.
I  I  Spermatorrhoea.

■  Swollen penis;  discharge of  blood  and  watery  slinsae.

^Gonorrhoea.
I  I  Condylomata;  gleet.
I  I  Swelling  of  penis  and  testicles.
I  Wounds  and  injuries  of  penis.
'■^  Female  Sexual  Organs. i '  Sterility,  with  too profuse

menstruation.
I  I  Dysmenorrhoea in irregularly menstruating youjjg

girls,  pain  in  stomach.

■  Menses  suppressed  with  pain  in  stomach,  or  epileptic

attacks,  or  cough  with  bloody  sputum.
llMenses  excessive,  last  too  long,  with  colic.

I  I  Leucorrhoea  of  children  from  atony.

I I  Uterine  hemorrhages :  after  great  exertion  ;  miscarriage.

■  Hemorrhage  of  bright  red  and  fluid  blood.

■  Menorrhagia  and  metrorrhagia,  with  congestive  head-

ache.
^'  Pregnancy. Parturition. Lactation. 1 1  Sterility  with
too  profuse  menses  or  tendency  to  miscarry.
1  I  During  pregnancy,  cramplike  affections.

■  Painless  or  bleeding  varices  in  pregnant  women.

I  I  Colic  or cramplike affections  in  confinement;  severe
after  pains.

■  Attacks  following  a  hard  delivery.

■  Convulsive  motions  of  all  limbs,  terrible  pains  and  total

suppression  of  lochia ;  third  day  after  confinement.

■  Lochia:  too  copious  ;  suppressed;  violent  fever,  no  milk,

convulsive  twitchings;  great  pain.

■  Painless drainings from uterus, nose or lungs, after

labor,  after  abortion,  or  when  an  abortion  threatens,  if
the  blood  be  bright  red  and  there  are  no  pains  in  joints.

■  Preventive  in  post-partum  hemorrhage.
■Sore  (cracked)  nipples  of  nursing  mothers.

■  No  milk  with  suppressed  lochia  and  fever.

^'  Voice  and  Larynx. Trachea  and  Bronchia. Secretion
of  mucus  in  larynx;  roughness.


MILLEFOLIUM.  484

"*'  Respiration, l  i  Shortness  of  breath.

I  I  Very  difficult  breathiog,  with  tetanic  spasms.
I  I  Asthmatic  affections.
^'^  Cough. I  Cough:  with  frequent  spitting  of  bright  blood;
oppression  of  chest  with  palpitation; in  phthisis; in
suppressed  hemorrhoids;  suppressed  menses.

I  Has  fallen  from  a  height  and  spits  blood  in  consequence.

■  Hemorrhages  from  lungs  from  a  weak  condition  of  vessels.
Bin  phthisic  conditions  with  coughing  of  blood,  or  after

frequent  attacks  of  hemorrhage  of  lungs.

I I  Haemoptysis :  in  incipient  phthisis  (after  Acon.and  Am.);
in  hemorrhoidal  patients;  from  a  rupture  of  blood-
vessel ;  after  injury.

■  Oppression  of  chest; excessive  palpitation.

■  Coughing  blood,  vigorous M^pman  of  48; no  menstrua-

tion for  two  years ;  ebullition  in  chest  every  evening,
<  when  lying  in  bed,  not  at  all  during  day ;  warm
blood  rises  into  her  throat  and  flows  out  of  her  mouth ;
.  then  cough  with  more  light  red,  bloody  expectoration,
half  a  pound  in  all,  accompanied  by  great  prostration.

■  Coughing  blood  every  afternoon  at  4  o'clock.

■  Lung  disease  after  coughing  blood.

■  Repeated  bronchorrhagia,  in  phthisis,  or  after  a  fall.
I  i  Blenorrhoea  of  lungs.

■  Expectoration  of  florid  blood,  without  much  coughing,

sometimes  in  consequence  of  violent  exertions.
^^  Inner  Chest  and  Lungs. Violent  fine  stitch  in  middle  of
1.  scapula  from  without  inward,  during  an  inspiration.
■■Violent  congestion  to chest;  to  head,  with  bleeding  of
nose  and  expectoration  of  bloody  mucus.

■  Inflammation  of  lungs.

■  Oppression  of  chest, frequent blood  spitting ; piercing

pains,  stinging,  bruised  feeling ;  <  under  1.  shoulder
blade ;  bubbles  up  in  chest  as  if  warm  blood  was  ascend-
ing, which  is  raised  without  cough. ^Phthisis.

■Haemoptysis,  with  profuse  flow  of  bright  red  blood,  with-
out fever.

I  I  Phthisis  pituitosa.

I  I  Ulcers  in  lungs ;  vomicae.

i  Injuries  of  lungs.
^'^  Heart,  Pulse  and  Circulation, i  Violent  palpitation  and
spitting  of  blood.

■  Ebullitions  with  haemoptysis.
Anxiousness  with  pain  in  heart.

I  I  Inflammation  with  tearing  and  piercing.
I  I  Pulse  accelerated  and  contracted. ^Smallpox.
^^  Neck  and  Back. I  i  Piercing,  drawing  pain  close  under  1.
.  ; shoulder  blade,  for  a  few  moments  while  sitting. .


485  MILLEFOLIUM.

^^  Upper  Limbs. Fine  piercing  pain  in  1.  scapula,  in  breath-
ing when  standing.

Left  arm  feels  as  if  going  to  sleep ;  pricking  numbness.

Hot  hands.
^  Lower  Limbs, l  l  Violent  pains  on  a  level  with  crest  of  1.
ilium.

Right  tendo-achillis  pains  as  after  a  blow  or  sprain.

First  1.  then  r.  foot  goes  to  sleep ;  disappearing  on  walking.

Hot  feet.
^  Limbs  in  General. Piercing,  drawing,  tearing  pains  in

limbs.
^  Rest. Position. Motion. Lying  down:  nausea  >.

Lying  in  bed:  coughing  blood  <.

Sitting :  piercing  pains  under  1.  shoulder  blade.

Stooping:  nausea;  congestion  to  head;  headache  <.

Doubling  body:  burning  in  stomach  <.

Standing:  fine  piercing  pain  in  1.  scapula.

Moving  slowly:  vertigo.

Walking:  vertigo;  going  to  sleep  of  feet  disappears.

After  lifting:  bloody  flux.

Violent  exercise:  vertigo  >.

After  much  exertion:  bloody  flux;  uterine  hemorrhages;
expectoration  of  florid  blood.
^Nerves, i Hysteria;  hypochondriasis.

I  I  Convulsions :  during  teething ;  after  labor ;  hysterical.

I  Convulsion  and  swoon  of  newborn  child ;  recovers  after
bath,  but  constantly  wails  and  sighs.

I  I  General  convulsions,  with  tetanic  rigidity  of  limbs  and
extremely  difficult  breathing,  in  a  boy  of  14,  after  a
malignant  fever;  two  hours  after  fourth  dose  countless
vesicles  of  size  of  a  pea,  of  a  livid  brown,  rose  all  over
his  body ;  dark  violet  after  seven  hours,  discharging  an
in  supportably  offensive  syruplike  secretion ;  dry  after
four  days,  leaving  scar.

I  I  Epileptic  spasms  after  suppressed  menstruation.

I  1  Tetanus.

I  I  Paralysis  and  contraction  of  limbs.
^^  Sleep. Yawning  without  weariness.

Congestion  from  chest  to  head,  like  a  stream,  while  asleep.

Falls  asleep  late,  unrefreshed  in  morning.
*"  Fever, l  l  Chilliness  with  pains  in  1.  kidney.

I  I  Intermittent  fever:  quartan;  tertian  ;  irregular.

I  I  Fever  from  suppressed  itch  or  suppressed  lochia.

I  I  Scarlet  fever  epidemic,  with  excessive  angina  and  vio-
lent fever.

I  I  Exanthema  of  difficult  development  and  delirium.

Fever  heat  with  thirst.

Heat  in  hands  and  feet.


MILLEFOLIUM.  486

I  I  Hectic  fever  with  haemoptysis.

I  I  Malignant  fever;  with  tetanus.

I  1  Colliquative  sweats.
*^  Attacks,  Periodicity. Two  hours  after  fourth  dose:  count-
less vesicles  appear  over  whole  body,  dark  violet  after
seven  hours;  dry  after  four  days.

Twenty-four  hours  after  confinement :  violent  pain,  fever,
suppressed  lochia,  no  milk.

Every  afternoon  at  4  o'clock :  coughing  blood.

Every  evening:  coughing  blood.

Third  day  after  confinement:  terrible  pains  and  total  sup-
pression of  lochia.

During  sixth  month  of  pregnancy:  violent  colic,  with
bloody  diarrhoea.

For  a  few  years,  every  four  or  six  weeks,  lasting  from  five
to  eight  days:  chilliness,  which  obliges  him  to  keep  his
bed.
*^  Locality  and  Direction.  Right:  sensation  in  side  of  head
as  if  screwed  together;  tearing  from  lower  jaw  to  ear;
drawing,  burning  pain  in  hypochondrium.

Left:  noise  in  ear;  darting  in  ear;  pain  in  side  of  throat
when  swallowing;  pain  in  region  of  kidney;  violent
pains  at  top  of  os  innominata;  violent  fine  stitch  in
middle  of  scapula;  pains  under  shoulder  blade;  pierc-
ing pain  in  scapula;  arm  as  if  going  to  sleep;  pains  on
a  level  with  crest  of  ilium.

First  r.,  then  1.:  dull  piercing  pains  in  side  of  throat;  foot
goes  to  sleep.

From  without  inward :  fine  stitch  in  1.  scapula.
^^  Sensations.  As  if  he  had  forgotten  something ;  as  if  all
blood  ascended  to  head;  r.  side  of  head  as  if  screwed  to-
gether; as  of  too  much  blood  in  eyes;  as  of  cold  air  pass-
ing out  of  ear;  as  if  ears  were  stopped  up;  as  if  blood
was  rising  to  head;  stomach  as  if  empty;  pressure  in
stomach  as  of  a  plug;  as  of  a  liquid  moving  from  stom-
ach to  intestines;  as  if  warm  blood  was  ascending  in
chest;  1.  arm  as  if  going  to  sleep;  pain  in  r.  tendo-
achillis  as  after  a  blow  or  sprain.

Pain:  in  heart;  in  pit  of  stomach;  in  ear;  in  teeth;  in
jaw:  in  1.  side  of  throat;  in  stomach;  in  region  of  liver;
in  abdomen;  from  blind  hemorrhoids;  in  region  of  1.
kidney;  in  r.  tendo-achillis.

Terrible  pains :  after  confinement.

Violent  pain:  in  head.

Violent  pains:  at  top  of  1.  os  innominata;  on  a  level,  with
crest  of  1.  ilium.

Great  pain  :  in  pit  of  stomach.

Tearing:  in  face  to  temples;  from  r.  lower  jaw  to  ear  and
teeth;  in  abdomen.


487  MILLEFOLIUM.

Darting:  in  1.  ear.

Violent  fine  stitch:  in  middle  of  1.  scapula.

Piercing  or  thrusts :  in  head,  vertex,  over  eyes,  occiput,  side

of  head.
Piercing,  drawing,  tearing  pain :  in  limbs.
Piercing  pains,  stinging,  bruised  feeling:  under  1.  shoulder

blade.
Piercing,  pressing:  in  eyes  to  root  of  nose  and  sides  of

forehead.
Dull,  piercing  pains :  r.  then  1.  side  of  throat.
Drawing,  burning:  in  region  of  r.  hypochondrium.
Violent  colic :  with  bloody  diarrhoea.
Painful  gnawing  and  digging:  in  stomach.
Griping :  in  abdomen.
Rheumatic  pain  :  in  teeth.
Dull  pain :  in  vertex.
Burning:  in  stomach;  in  abdomen.
Soreness :  of  nipples.
Pressure :  in  stomach.

Slight  throbbing :  in  arteries  of  head  and  face.
Oppression :  of  chest.

Fulness :  in  head  after  siesta ;  in  stomach.
Pricking  numbness  :  in  1.  arm.
**  Tissues. '  Congestions.

1 1  Hemorrhages of  all kinds, mostly from lungs and

bowels ;  florid ;  of  mechanical  origin ; atonic  constitu-
tions; of  wounds.
I  I  Indolent,  fistulous,  cancerous  and  gangrenous  ulcers.
I  I  Caries  in  sheep  and  horses.
I  Painful  varices  during  pregnancy.
I  Mucous  discharges  from  atony.
I  I  Chlorosis.

Rheumatic  and  arthritic  complaints.
I  I  Sycotic  excrescences.
I  I  Morbus  maculosus  hsemorrhagicus.
I  1  Cancer  and  sores ;  noli  me  tangere.
I  1  Wounds  ;  after  operation  for  stone.
I  I  Bruises ; bleeding  from  wounds  ; removes  coagulated

blood ;  internal  injuries  by  falling.
*^  Touch. Passive  Motion. Injuries, i  Wounds which

bleed  profusely ;  especially  from  a  fall.
I  I  Sprains.

i  Effects  of  overlifting,  overexertion,  or  falling.
Internal  injuries :  bloody  flux.
Wounds  and  injuries  of  penis.
If  one  has  fallen  from  a  height  and  spits  blood.
After  injury :  rupture  of  bloodvessel.
After  a  fall:  repeated  bronchorrhagia.


MILLEFOLIUM— MITCHELLA  REPENS.  488

Injuries:  of  lungs.
*^  Skin. I  I  Numerous  small  itching  vesicles  containing  matter.
I  Countless  vesicles,  size  of  a  pea,  livid  brown,  then  violet,

discharging  offensive  secretion.
I  I  Suppressed  itch,  followed  by  fever.
■  Stomachic  pains  from  suppressed  smallpox.
I  Condylomata,
I  I  Scab  of  sheep.
Stages  of  Life,  Constitution. Coffee  causes  congestion

to  head.
For  the  aged,  atonic ;  for  children  and  women.
Girl,  set.  20,  tuberculous;  hsemoptysis.
Madame  X.,  mother  of six  children,  hemorrhage after

each; prevented  post-partum  hemorrhage  in  seventh

confinement.
Woman,  set.  42  ;  hsemoptysis.
Strong  woman,  set.  48 ;  catamenia  ceased  two  years  ago  ;

hsemoptysis.
Man,  set,  60 ;  suffering  several  years ;  hsematuria.
*^  Relations. It  antidotes :  Arum.  mac.

Incompatible :  coffee,  which  causes  congestion  to  head.
Compare :  Erecht.  in  epistaxis  and  hsemoptysis :  Senec.  aur.

in  hsematuria ;  Hamam.  and  Ipec.  in  hemorrhages.


MITCHELLA  REPENS.

Partridge  Berry.  Ruhicacese.

A  small  trailing  evergreen  (not  to  be  confounded  with  gaultheria),  bearing  a
scarlet  berry ;  common  throughout  the  United  States.

The  tincture  is  prepared  from  the  fresh  plant.

Provings  by  Duncan  (U.  S.  M,  and  S.  J.,  vol.  1,  p.  252)  and  Hale  (New
Eemedies,  2d  ed.,  p.  714).

Clinical,  Authorities. — ^Hale,  Hale's  Sympt. ;  Farrington,  Comp.  Mat.  Med.

^^  Urinary Organs. Increased  quantity  of  urine, specific

gravity  as  high  as  1040,  reaction  acid.
I  I  Urging  to  urinate;  urine  high  colored;  white  sediment.
I  I  Dull  aching  pain  over  region  of  kidneys.
I  I  Swollen  and  irritated  condition  of  urethra  and  neck  of

bladder.

I  I  Catarrh  of  bladder,  especially  in  women.

I I  Dysuria  accompanying  uterine  complaints.


489  MITCHELLA  REPENS— MOSCHUS.

^  Female  Sexual  Organs, i  i  Engorged  uterus;  hemorrhage,
bright  in  color,  associated  with  dysuria.
I  I  Engorgement  of  uterus,  from  lack  of  tone  in  muscular

wall  of  organ.
I  I  Amenorrhcea;  dysmenorrhoea;  menorrhagia.
I  1  Cervix  engorged,  dark  red,  swollen,  associated  with  an

irritation  at  neck  of  bladder,  with  urging  to  urinate.
I  I  Delayed  menstruation.
2i  Pregnancy. Parturition. Lactation, i  '  False labor
pains  in  last  month  of  pregnancy.
Slow,  feeble  and  inefficient  labor  pains.
"  Attacks,  Periodicity. In  last  month  of  pregnancy :  false

labor  pains.
^^  Sensations. Dull  aching  pain  over  region  of  kidneys.
False  labor  pains.

Slow,  feeble  and  inefficient  labor  pains.
*^  Relations.  Compare:  Asclep.in.,  Cauloph.,  Chimaph.,  Cimicif.,
Eupat.  purp.,  Helon.,  Pulsat,  Senec,  Uva  ursi.


MOSCHUS.

Music  Deer.  Moschina.

The  dried  secretion  from  the  musk  sac  of  Moschus  Moschiferous,  a  native  of
Central  Asia.

Provings  by  Hahnemann,  Gross  and  Stapf  (Mat.  Med.  Pura.,  vol.  1,  p.  316).

Clinical  Authorities. — Epistaxis,  Hartmann,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  1,  p,
413;  Inco7itinence  of  urine,  Young,  Hahn.  Mo.,  vol.  6,  p.  172;  Urinary  disorders,
Young,  Hahn.  Mo.,  vol.  6,  p.  172 ;  Impotence  with  diabetes.  Young,  Hahn.  Mo.,  vol.  6,
p.  171;  Croup,  Miiller,  Kafka,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  5,  p.  762;  Spasms  of  larynx,
Kafka,  Euck.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  5,  p.  782 ;  Asthma,  Frank  (2  cases),  N.  A.  J.  H.,
vol.  9,  p.  253 ;  Asthma  Millari,  Miiller,  Kafka,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  5,  p.  782 ;
Threatened  paralysis  of  lungs,  Miiller,  Kiick.  Kl.  Erf,  vol.  4,  p.  753 ;  Palpitation
of  heart,  Boyce,  Hahn.  Mo.,  vol.  10.  p.  459  ;  Hughes,  Pharmacodyn.,  p.  557  ;  Heart
affection  {angina  pectoris),  Moore,  Org.,  vol.  1,  p.  357 ;  Hysteria,  Hartmann,  Ruck.
Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  2,  p.  287 ;  Hughes,  Pharmacodyn.,  p.  557 ;  Convulsions,  Dittrich,
Eaue's  Eec,  1874,  p.  286 ;  Spasms,  Bethmann,  Nenning,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf,  vol.  4,
p.  582;  Typhoid  fever,  Kurz,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf,  vol.  4,  p.  753.

^  Mind. I  I  Great  anxiety  with  palpitation  of  heart;  feeling
of  anxious  expectancy.
I  I  Hypochondriacal  anxiety  and  ill  humor.
■  Scolding;  keeps  it  up  till  her  Hps  turn  blue,  eyes  stare,
and  she  falls  down  fainting.


MOSCHUS.  490

I  Great  dread  of  death,  with  paleness  of  face,  fainting;
talks  only  of  approaching  death.

I  Hypochondriacal  complaints  having  their  origin  in  sex-
ual system.

B  Complains  without  knowing  what  ails  him,  with  anguish,
palpitation,  etc.

I  I  Tearful  vexation  and  peevishness,  with  violent  quarrel-
ling, even  to  most  extreme  malice  and  rage.

I  I  Great  bustling,  during  which  everything  falls  out  of
his  hand  from  weakness.

I  I  Thoughtlessness,  with  foolish  gestures  and  complaints
of  pain.

I  I  Sudden  loss  of  memory,  with  complete  inability  to
collect  his  senses.

I  I  Great  tendency  to  get  frightened,  trembling,  palpitation
of  heart,  and  dread  of  death.
^  Sensorium. Sensation  as  if  she  was  falling  from  a  height,
with  stupefaction.

Sensation  as  if  he  was  turned  about  so  rapidly  that  he
perceives  current  of  air  produced  by  motion.

Vertigo:  as  soon  as  head  is  moved;  on  moving  eyelids,

>  in  open  air;  on  stooping,  going  ofi'on  rising;  accom-
panied by  a  kind  of  loathing;  with  nausea;  vomiting,
desire  for  black  coffee  and  to  lie  down ;  with  staring
eyes  and  sort  of  spasm  in  mouth,  preventing  speech,
though  he  sees  and  hears  everything;  with  sudden
fainting;  with  violent  rush  of  blood  to  head,  >  in  open
air;  with  stupefaction;  congestion  of  blood  to  head;
fits  of  tetanus  and  fainting; dimness  of  sight.

^  Inner  Head. Compressing  headache,  especially  right  over
root  of  nose.
Tension  in  back  part  of  head  and  neck,  with  nausea,  <  in
evening,  when  sitting  in  room  and  when  becoming  cold,

>  in  open  air  and  when getting  warm.

Aching  pain  in  head,  with  coldness  as  from  cold  poultices.

Congestion  of  blood  to  head,  heaviness  of  head.

Headache  with  nausea,  compelling  one  to  lie  down.

Stupefying,  compressing  headache,  mostly  in  forehead,
with  nausea  in  evening,  <  when  moving  head  and  in
room,  >  in  open  air.

■  Hysterical  headache  with  fainting  spasms  and  sense  of
constriction  of  chest,  chilliness  all  over,  inclination  to
involuntary  stools  and  copious  flow  of  colorless  urine;
great  restlessness  of  lower  extremities,  pressive  headache
as  if  from  a  heavy  weight  in  head;  sensation  in  r.
temple  as  if  a  cord  was  frequently  drawn  and  tightened
as  if  to  cut  head  in  two;  pain  as  if  a  nail  was  pressed
in  occiput,  of  which  point  pierces  brain;  <  in  room,  >
in  fresh  air.


491  MOSCHUS.

^  Sight  and  Eyes. Attacks  of  sudden  blindness;  dimness  of
vision.
Eyes  turned  upwards,  fixed  and  glistening.
Pressing,  itching,  biting  in  eyes.
®  Hearing  and  Ears. Rushing  in  ears  as  from  a  strong  wind,
or  as  from  a  wing  of  a  bird.
Detonation  in  ears  (r.)  like  report of  a  cannon,  accom-
panied by  discharge  of  a  few  drops  of  blood.
Hardness  of  hearing  ;  nervous  deafness.
^  Smell  and  Nose. ■  Nosebleed ;  spasmodic  jerking  of  muscles.

Crawling  in  point  of  nose.
^  Upper  Face. Earthy,  pale  complexion.
Pale  face,  with  perspiration.
Redness  of  r.  cheek  without  heat,  with  paleness  of  1.,  which

feels  hot.
Heat  in  face  without  redness,  and  dimness  of  sight.
Tension  in  facial  muscles,  as  if  too  short.
^  Lower  Face. Movement  of  lower  jaw  as  if  chewing.

Peeling  off  of  lips.
^^  Inner Mouth. Mouth and  throat dry  and hot; bitter,

putrid  taste;  great  thirst.
^*  Appetite,  Thirst. Desires,  Aversions. Great  desire  for
beer  or  brandy.
Aversion  to  food ;  the  sight  of  it  makes  her  sick ;  eructa-
tions; vomiting;  pressive,  burning  pains  and  distension
of  stomach.
^^  Eating  and  Drinking. Sits  down  to  her  meals  and  faints
dead  away  from  the  little  extra  amount  of  food  taken
into  stomach.
^^  Hiccough,  Belching,  Nausea  and  Vomiting. Heartburn
with  palpitation.
Eructations  with  hot  saliva  in  mouth.
•Spasmodic  nervous  hiccough,  especially  if  occurring  in

hysterical  subjects.
Nausea  when  thinking  of  food.
Sudden  nausea  as  from  pit  of  stomach ;  umbilicus  being

drawn  in.
Vomiting of  food,  then  subsequent  vomiting  and  more
and  more  vomiting.
,  ^^  Scrobiculum  and  Stomach. Sensation  of  fulness  and  op-
pression in  pit  of  stomach  with  qualmishness,  <  from
eating.
I Hsematemesis ;  becomes  pulseless,  collapsed.
I  Persistent  troubles  of  digestive  functions  in  susceptible
hysterical  subjects,  with  palpitation  of  heart,  dyspnoea
and  prostration ;  is  afraid  to  lie  down  for  fear  of  death.
^^  Abdomen. Excessive  distension  of  abdomen,  with  pinching
pains.


MOSCHUS.  492

Great  tympanitis  in  hysterical  women,  with  fainting.

Incarcerated  flatus.

Sensation  as  if  everything  in  abdomen  was  constricted,

compelling  one  to  move  about,  cannot  do  any  work,  or

remain  quiet  anywhere.
Hysterical,  abdominal  spasms.
"^^  Stool  and  Rectum. Stools  soft,  smell  sweetish.
Involuntary  loose  stools  during  sleep.
Copious,  watery,  nightly  diarrhoea,  with  great  tympanitis.
Stitches  in  anus,  extending  to  bladder.
^^  Urinary  Organs. (  Qrine :  clear  as  water  and  very  copious;

scanty,  thick  like  yeast.
Burning  in  urethra,  with  great  nervous  excitability.
I  Urine  during  day  normal  in  appearance,  but  at  night  dark

red,  very  offensive  and  depositing  a  mucous  sediment  on

standing. ^Incontinence  of  urine.
;rlnsatiable  thirst,  great  emaciation,  constipation,  clammy

mouth,  frequent  discharge  of  large  quantities  of  urine

containing  sugar. ^Impotence.
^^  Male  Sexual  Organs. Violent  sexual  excitement,  with  in-
tolerable titillation  in  genitals.
Erection,  with  desire  to  urinate.
Involuntary  emissions:  painful ;  without  erections.

■  Impotence:  occasioned  by  a  cold,  preceding  diabetes  mel-

litus.
^  Female  Sexual  Organs. Violent  sexual  desire.

Menses: too  early  and  too  profuse,  with  drawing  pain;

with  intolerable  titillation  in  genitals;  great  disposition

to  faint.

I  1  Drawing  and  dragging  towards  genitals;  feeling  as  if

menses  would  appear.

^  Pregnancy. Parturition. Lactation. iShe  complains

much,  but  of  nothing  in  particular. ^Pregnancy.
^^  Voice  and  Larynx. Trachea  and  Bronchia, i Sudden
sensation  in  upper  part  of  larynx  as  if  it  closed  upon
the  breath.
I  Sudden  sensation  of  constriction  in  larynx  and  trachea
as  from  vapors  of  sulphur.

■  Spasmus  glottidis.

■Spasmodic  constriction  of  larynx  and  chest,  especially
when  feeling  cold. ^Asthma.

■  Hysterical  cases,  with  impending  paralysis  of  pneumo-

gastric. ^Asthma  thymicum.

■  Laryngismus  stridulus  in  nervous  women  and  children.

■  Often  useful  in  last  stage  of  croup  when  all  sorts  of  rem-

edies have  been  used  in  vain.
^®  Respiration. ■  Difficult  respiration.

■  Spasm  of  diaphragm.


493  MOSCHUS.

1 1  Asthma  in  hysteric  individuals  and  in  children.

■  Oppression  of  chest  and  suffocative  fits  as  from  vapors  of

sulphur,  commencing  with  desire  to  cough  and  getting
<  until  one  despairs  of  getting  over  paroxysms.  ^Asthma.

iSpasms  of  larynx  during  whooping  cough;  long  crowing
inspiration  as  in  laryngismus  stridulus,  followed  by
several  normal  respirations,  when  crowing  recurred,
accompanied  by  anxiety  and  restlessness.

iSpasms  of  glottis  or  bronchi;  spasmodic  contraction  of
respiratory  organs  threatening  suffocation  during  croup.

•  Sudden  constriction  of  larynx  as  from  fumes  of  sulphur,

accompanied  by  spasmodic  twitching  and  movements  of

arms  and  legs  or  by  tetanic  rigidity  of  body. ^Asthma.

^"^  Cough. I  I  Severe,  dry  cough,  <  in  morning  and  pain  under

1.  breast  on  coughing.

■  Last  stage  when  expectoration  has  nearly  ceased ;  spas-

modic cough,  with  vertigo  and  constriction  of  chest  and
trachea. ^Pertussis.
^  Inner  Chest  and  Lungs. Tightness  of  chest ;  is  obliged  to
take  a  deeper  breath.

Violent  spasms  of  chest,  in  which  it  seems  she  must  almost
die ;  turns  blue  in  face  and  foams  at  mouth.

1 1  Hysterical  spasms  of  chest;  nervous,  suffocative  con-
striction, especially  on  becoming  cold.

I A  kind  of  cramp  in  lung,  beginning  with  an  inclination
to  cough,  gradually  increasing,  making  desperate.

I  I  Gnawing  pain  in  chest,  with  a  sense  of  suffocation.

I  Paralysis  of  lungs,  when  there  is  loud  rattling  of  mucus
and  the  patient  is  restless;  especially  indicated  after
typhoid  fever;  pulse  grows  less  and  less  strong,  and
finally  patient  goes  into  a  syncope.
^^  Heart,  Pulse  and  Circulation,  i  Hysteric  palpitations,  or
when  nervous  or  muscular  energy  of  heart  is  weakened
by  great  mental  exertion,  anxiety  or  emotions.

■  Palpitation  of  heart;  dyspnoea;  prostration;  nervousness;

says  "I  shall  die,  I  know  I  shall  die." ^Dyspnoea.
I  Nervous  palpitation  of  heart,  with  copious,  watery  urine.

■  Sensation  of  trembling  around  heart,  with  constriction

in whole chest, almost suffocation; felt continually
obliged  to  take  a  breath ;  pulse  88,  respiration  oppressed;
arcus  senilis,  not  very  marked. ^Heart  affection.
Pulse:  full  and  accelerated,  with  ebullitions.

■  Great  want  of  blood,  with  weak  pulse  and  fainting.

B  Prostration  followed  by  threatened  collapse. ^Angina.
^^  Outer  Chest. Soreness  of  thorax  under  arms,  when  press-
ing on  it.
^^  Lower  Limbs. Restlessness in  lower extremities,  must
move  them  all  the  time.
Sensation  of  coldness  on  tibia.


MOSCHUS.  494

^*  Limbs  in  General. • '  Aching  pains  in  upper  and  lower

limbs.
^  Best. Position. Motion. Lies stretched out in bed,
motionless,  arms  tightly  held  to  sides,  during  spasms.

Cannot  lie  in  one  position,  parts  on  which  one  lies  feel
sprained.

Desire  to  lie  down.

Must  lie  down :  headache  and  nausea.

Afraid  to  lie  down  for  fear  of  death  from  dyspnoea.

Stooping:  vertigo  >.

Rising:  vertigo  goes  off.

Bends  backwards:  during  spasms.

Motion :  of  head,  vertigo ;  of  eyelids,  vertigo  of  head,  head-
ache and  nausea  <.

Must  move  about :  constriction  of  abdomen ;  limbs  restless.

Inability  to  move  arms  and  legs:  from  pain.
^  Nerves. Inflammatory diseases complicated with great
nervous  hypersesthesia  and  subdelirium; coma  vigil;
subsultus  and  fibrillary  palpitations.

iVerj'-  nervous,  tremulous,  restless.

II Hysteria:  globus  hystericus;  nervous  excitement  of
heart ;  simulating  tetanic  spasms ;  spasms  with  fainting ;
crying  one  moment  and  the  next  bursts  out  in  uncon-
trollable laughter;  coldness  and  faintness ;  insensibility ;
scolding  until  she  falls  unconscious.

I  Complains  of  pain  all  over  body  without  locating  it  in
any  particular  place;  depression  and  ill  feeling  even
unto  fainting;  sudden  rush  of  blood  to  head,  with  star-
ing eyes,  closed  set  jaws,  followed  by  rapid  confused
talking,  deathly  paleness  of  face,  profuse  sweat  about
head. ^Hysteria.

■  Before  attack  constriction  of  throat,  great  restlessness,
oppression  of  chest,  impatience,  and  intolerance  of  bed-
covers; attacks  occur  every  half  or  every  hour  and  last
about  fifteen  minutes,  during  which  she  remains  en-
tirely conscious;  suddenly  becomes  rigid,  distortion  of
eyes,  twitching  of  face,  contraction  of  fingers ;  respira-
tion becomes  suspended,  the  throat  swells,  mouth  is
opened,  head  retracted  and  body  tossed  about  in  her
violent  efforts  to  get  air ;  attacks  end  with  belching  and
twitching  of  various  parts,  followed  by  crawling  sensa-
tion in  arms ;  during  the  attacks  bends  herself  back-
wards and  cries  out  "  now  it  is  over,  how  my  breath  is
gone." ^Spasms.

I  Face  pale  and  anxious;  extraordinary  prostration  and
vertigo;  indescribable  pain  in  limbs  and  entire  inability
to  move  arms  and  legs;  skin  dry;  all  secretions  and
excretions  suppressed  ;  lies  stretched  out  in  bed,  motion-


495  MOSCHUS.

less,  with  arms  tightly  held  to  sides ;  after  several  min-
utes, distortion  of  eyes,  slight  twitchings  around  nose
and  mouth,  head  repeatedly  and  rapidly  drawn  down-
ward and  backward,  alse  nasi  at  one  time  contracted,
then  expanded;  after  a  deep  inspiration  respiration
ceases  for  one  half  to  two  minutes,  then  thorax  is  alter-
nately violently  contracted  and  expanded,  during  which
several  short  and  rapid  respirations  occur  and  pulse
beat  becomes  irregular;  clonic  cramps  in  abdominal
muscles,  recti  abdominus  being  elevated  and  depressed
like  the  motions  of  a  snake ;  all  the  muscular  move-
ments are  in  a  certain  direction,  either  from  above
downward  or  in  opposite  direction ;  finally  similar
convulsive  movements  in  extremities,  fingers  and  toes
first  affected,  then  parts  near  trunk ;  paroxysm  lasts  five
to  six  minutes,  with  consciousness  and  loss  of  sensation ;
epistaxis ;  stitches  in  sides  of  chest ;  severe  retching  ;
involuntary  nodding  of  head ;  neither  pinching,  stick-
ing nor  shaking  makes  the  least  impression  upon  her ;
pulse  65 ;  pupils  dilated,  fixed ;  menses  absent ;  whole
attack  lasts  forty-eight  hours  and  is  followed  by  an  in-
termission of  ten  to  fifteen  minutes.

■  Convulsions:  tetanic  spasms ;  in  consequence  of  albumi-

nuria in  fifth  week  of  an  attack  of  scarlet  fever ;  from
ursemic  poisoning.

■  Paroxysms  set  in  at  night,  or  in  open  air,  with  pulmonary

spasms,  or  succeeded  by  headache. ^Syncope.

■  Purely  neuralgic  pains  or  functional disorders,  arising

from  taking  cold.
^  Sleep. Sleepiness  in  daytime.

Sleeplessness: from  over  excitability; of  hysterical  per-
sons; after  chloraL

Cannot  lie  at  night  in  one  position,  because  the  parts  on
which  one  lies  feel  as  if  dislocated  and  sprained.

Sleep  uneasy,  wakes  every  half  hour  and  throws  off  cov-
ering, feels  too  hot,  yet  does  not  perspire.

Restless  nights,  full  of  dreams  of  strife  and  eff'ort.
^  Time. Morning:  severe  dry  cough  <  ;  clammy  sweat.

Day:  urine  normal;  sleepiness.

Evening:  tension  in  head  <; headache;  with  nausea,
burning  heat.

Night:  urine  dark  red;  syncope  sets  in;  cannot  lie  in  one
position.
^  Temperature  and  Weather. In  bed :  burning  heat.

When  getting  warm:  tension  in  head  >.

When  sitting  in  room  :  tension  in  head  <  ;  headache  and
nausea;  pain  as  if  a  nail  was  pressed  in  occiput  <.

Open  air:  vertigo  >;  tension  in  head  >;  headache,  with


MO^CHUS.  496

nausea ;  pain  as  if  a  nail  was  pressed  in  occiput  > ;
syncope  sets  in.

When  becoming  cold:  tension  in  back  part  of  head  <.

Inclination  to  uncover.
^^  Fever. Sensation  as  if  cold  air  was  blowing  on  him,  espe-
cially on  uncovered  parts.

Chilliness  over  whole  body.

Chill  with  shivering,  spreading  from  scalp  over  body.

I  I  Feeling  of  coldness ;  wants  to  be  near  fire.

External  coldness,  with  internal  heat.

One  cheek  pale  and  hot,  the  other  red  and  cold  ;  one  hand
burning  hot  and  pale,  the  other  cold  and  red.

I  I  Burning  heat  in  face,  with  eruption  of  pimples.

Burning  heat  in  evening,  in  bed,  frequently  on  r.  side,
wdth  restlessness  and  inclination  to  uncover.

Clammy  perspiration  in  morning,  smelling  of  musk.

■  Impending  paralysis  of  lungs,  pulse  becoming  slower
and  slower,  cough  ceases  and  mucus  cannot  be  expec-
torated; in  swallowing  fluids  roll  audibly  down  throat,
and  stool  and  urine  pass  involuntarily.  ^Typhoid  fever.

1  Weak  action  of  heart ;  intermitting  spasms,  during  which
there  may  occur  loss  of  consciousness. ^Typhoid.
*^  Attacks,  Periodicity. Paroxysms  last  five  to  six  minutes.

Alternately:  thorax  violently  contracted and  expanded.

Every  half  hour:  wakes  and  throws  off  covering.

Attacks  of  spasms :  every  half  or  every  hour,  last  about
fifteen  minutes.

Nightly :  copious,  watery  diarrhoea.

Whole  spasm  lasts  forty-eight  hours;  followed  by  inter-
mission of  ten  to  fifteen  minutes.

In  fifth  week  of  an  attack  of  scarlet  fever:  convulsions.
*^  Locality  and  Direction. Right:  sensation  in  temple  as  if
a  cord  were  drawn  and  tightened ;  detonation  in  ear
like  report  of  cannon;  redness  of  cheek  without  heat;
burning  heat  frequently  only  on  side.

Left:  paleness  of  cheek  which  feels  hot;  pain  under  breast;
pimples  on  upper  arm.

From  above  downward,  or  opposite  direction :  all  muscular
movements.
^  Sensations.  As  if  she  was  falling  from  a  height;  as  if  he
was  turned  about  so  rapidly  that  he  perceives  the  cur-
rent of  air  produced  by  the  motion;  coldness  as  if  from
cold  poultices  on  head;  headaclie  as  if  from  a  heavy
weight;  as  if  a  cord  was  frequently  drawn  and  tightened
as  if  to  cut  head  in  two;  as  if  a  nail  was  pressed  in  occi-
put, of  which  point  pierces  brain;  rushing  in  ears  as
from  a  strong  wund  or  as  from  wing  of  a  bird;  facial
muscles  as  if  too  short;  movement  of  lower  jaw  as  if


497  MOSCHUS.

chewing;  nausea  as  if  from  pit  of  stomach;  as  if  every-
thing in  abdomen  was  constricted;  as  if  menses  would
appear;  as  if  lar^mx  suddenly  closed  upon  breath;  con-
striction in  throat  as  from  vapors  of  sulphur;  parts  on
which  one  lies  feel  as  if  dislocated  and  sprained ;  as  if
cold  air  was  blowing  on  him.

Pain:  under  1.  breast;  all  over  body.

Indescribable  pain  :  in  limbs.

Stitches:  in  anus  to  bladder;  in  sides  of  chest.

Pinching  pains:  in  abdomen.

Gnawing  pain:  in  chest.

Cramp:  in  lung;  in  abdominal  muscles.

Aching  pain :  in  head ;  in  upper  and  lower  limbs.

Drawing  pains:  during  menses.

Compressing  pain :  in  head  over  root  of  nose.

Pressive,  burning  pains :  in  stomach.

Burning :  in  urethra.

Soreness:  of  thorax  under  arms.

Heat :  in  face ;  in  throat.

Dryness:  of  throat.

Constriction :  of  chest ;  of  larynx  and  trachea ;  of  throat.

Drawing  and  dragging :  towards  genitals.

Tightness :  of  chest.

Tension :  in  back  part  of  head  and  neck ;  in  facial  muscles.

Heaviness:  of  head.

Fulness :  in  pit  of  stomach.

Oppression  :  in  pit  of  stomach  ;  of  chest.

Restlessness  :  in  lower  extremities.

Trembling:  around  heart.

Crawling :  in  point  of  nose ;  in  arms.

Intolerable  titillation  :  in  genitals.

Pressing,  itching,  biting:  in  eyes.

Coldness  :  in  head  ;  on  tibia.
^  Tissues. Purely  nervous  diseases  ;  hysteria.
^  Touch. Passive  Motion. Injuries. Pressure :  on  thorax,
soreness  under  arms.

Neither  pinching,  sticking  nor  shaking  makes  the  least
impression  upon  her  in  spasm.

Scratching :  causes  bleeding  of  pimples.
*®  Skin. "Coldness  of  skin,  with  much  nervous  trembling  and
frequent  fainting.

I  I  Eruption  of  pimples,  with  burning  heat  in  face.

Pimples  on  dorsum  of  foot,  between  toes,  on  shoulders  and
1.  upper  arm,  bleeding  after  scratching.

Herpes  with  excessive  burning.

Mercurial  and  venereal  herpes.
*^  Stages  of  Life,  Constitution. Suitable  to  spoiled  sensitive
natures  and  hysteric  women.

VOL.  VII. — 32.


MOSCHUS— MORPHINUM  SULPHURICUM.  498

Child,  set.  3 ;  subject  to  attacks  lasting  from  five  to  ten
days;  urinary  disorders.

Boy,  set.  5 ;  pale  but  strong,  during  termination  of  an
attack  of  whooping  cough ;  spasms  of  larynx.

Girl,  set.  13 ;  delicate,  slender,  menses  not  yet  appeared,
had  diarrhoea  for  which  Cham,  and  Rheum  were  given;
spasms.

Girl,  set.  16;  suffering  from  amenorrhoea  and  beginning
chlorosis ;  threatened  paralysis  of  lungs  during  typhoid
fever.

Girl,  set.  17;  w^eak,  menstruated  but  once,  a  year  ago;  dur-
ing her  twelfth  year  had  spasms  resulting  from  fright,
relieved  hy  Ignat.;  spasms  returned  three  days  ago  after
vexation  and  were  accompanied  by  retching  and  vomit-

Man,  set.  40 ;  lawyer,  has  been  dyspeptic ;  incontinence  of
urine.
,  Man,  set.  43;  married;  diabetes  with  impotency.

Woman,  set.  72 ;  heart  affection.

Old  lady;  palpitation  of  heart.
*^  Relations. Antidoted  by  : Camphor,  Coffea.

It  antidotes  :  headache  of  Therid.

Compare :  Ambra,  Asaf.,  Camphor.,  Castor.,  Nux  mosch.  (neu-
ralgic pains  and  functional  disorders  from  taking  cold),
Amman.,  Ignat.,  Magn.  mur.,  Valer.


MORPHINUM  SULPHURICUM.

Sulphate  of  Morphia.  Cn  H^q  N  0^.

No  provings.  Experimental  and  toxicological  effects  are  numerous  (Allen's
Encyclopedia,  vol.  6,  p.  378).

Clinical  Authorities. —  Vomiting,  Hall,  Organon,  vol.  2,  p.  247;  Nervous
spasms,  Young,  Horn.  Phys.,  vol.  5,  p.  166 ;  Thickness  of  speech  in  chorea,  Under-
wood, U.  S.  M.  J.,  1871,  p.  282;  Antidote  to  poisonous  effects  of  atropia  and  Extr.
Bellad.,  E.  K.,  Raue's  Rec,  1870,  p.  90.

^  Sensorium. 1 1  Vertigo.

^  Sight  and  Eyes, i  Double  vision  and  disturbance  of  ac-
commodation, often  accompanied  by  lachrymation.

■  Weakness  of  vision.

I  Sight  impaired  and  feeble.

i  Vision  at  times  seemed  obscured  by  a  fog.


499  MORPHINUM  SULPHURICUM.

I  Conjunctiva  injected.

1 8  The  look  becomes  unsteady.

I I  Paresis  of  recti  interni.

I  I  Diverging  strabismus  of  both  eyes.

■  Slight  ptosis.

"  Taste  and  Tongue,  i Thickening  of  tongue  and  inability
to  talk  distinctly. ^Chorea.

^^  Hiccough,  Belching,  Nausea  and  Vomiting,  i  Vomiting.

^^  Abdomen. Inspiration  accompanied  by  sharp  pain  in  ab-
domen and  along  spine.
Tympanitis.

^  Stool  and  Rectum. 1 1  Diarrhoea.
I  I  Horrid  tenesmus,  straining.

^^  Inner  Chest  and  Lungs.  1 1  Great  jactitation ;  impossibility
of  sleeping  from  dyspnoea  and  extension  of  disease ;
hypersesthesia  of  nerves ;  changing  pulse.  ^Inflamma-
tion of  diaphragm.

^^  Nerves, i  i  Weakness.

1  I  Trembling  before  and during  a  thunder  storm  (occa-
sioned by  the  electrical  state  of  the  atmosphere).

■  After  being  struck  by  lightning;  any  exposure  to  heat

set  her  into  spasms,  nervous,  so  that  she  had  to  go  into
a  cool  place.
^^  Temperature  and  Weather. Any  exposure  to  heat  sets
her  into  spasms,  she  had  to  go  to  a  cool  place :  after
being  struck  by  lightning.
*^  Sensations. Vision  as  if  impaired  by  fog.

Pains so violent  as to threaten convulsions,  or cause

twitching  or  jerking  of  limbs.
Sharp  pain:  in  abdomen  and  along  spine.
Trembling :  before  and  during  thunder  storm.
Itching :  on  face,  neck,  loins  and  genitals.
"  Tissues. ■  Extreme  susceptibility  to  pain ;  pains  so  violent
as  to  threaten  convulsions,  or  cause  twitching  and  jerk-
ing of  limbs. ^Cancer.
*^  Touch. Passive  Motion. Injuries. After  being  struck
by  lightning :  any  exposure  to  heat  sets  her  into  spasms.
*"  Skin. Itching,  particularly  on  face,  neck,  loins  and  genitals.
Conical  blotches  either  red  or  skin  color,  more  easily  ftlt
than  seen.
*^  Stages  of  Life Constitution. Young  lady,  after  being

struck  by  lightning ;  nervous  spasms.
^^  Relations. Antidoted by: Aeon., Atrop"., Bellad., strong
infusion  of  coffee,  Ipec,  the  first  and  last  being  especially
useful  to  remove  secondary  effects.


MUEEX  PURPUREA.  500


MUREX  PURPUREA.

A  Mollusc.  .  Muricidse.

A  sea  snail  found  on  the  coasts  of  the  Mediterranean  and  Adriatic.  The
coloring  matter,  from  which  is  obtained  a  fine  red,  is  contained  in  a  sac  situated
between  the  heart  and  liver.

Provings  by  Petroz  (Eev.  de  la  Mat.  Med.  Horn.,  3,  9, 1841) ;  Hering,  effects
of  200th  dil.  (Am.  Horn.  Rev.,  vol.  4,  p.  406).

Clinicax,  Authorities. — Polyuria,  Hendricks,  Allg.  Horn.  Ztg.,  vol.  111,  p,
62-  Moore,  Hom.  Eev.,  vol.  12,  p.  305;  Ovarian  cyst,  Dunham,  Lectures,  vol.  2,
p.  163;  Prolapsus  uteri  and  -dysmenorrhea,  Martin,  Allg.  Hom.  Ztg.,  vol.  101,  p,
174 ;  Dysmenorrhcea,  Berridge,  Eaue's  Eec,  1875,  p.  181 ;  Uterine  affection  (2  cases),
Hering,  Am.  Hom.  Eev.,  vol.  4,  p.  399 ;  Dunham,  Am.  Hom.  Eev.,  vol.  4,  p.  407 ;
Carcinoma  uteri,  Guernsey's  Obstetrics,  p.  702 ;  Effects  of  an  abortion,  E.  E.  S.,  Hom.
Clin.,  vol.  1,  p.  205.

^  Mind. >  B  Great  depression  of  spirits,  a  sort  of  deep  hypo-
chondria. ^Carcinoma  nteri.
BDeep  sadness  at  approach  of  menses,  all  her  symptoms
gave  her  great  concern;  seemed  to  her  she  was  hope-
lessly ill;  she  gave  up  everything. ^Climaxis.
iShe  is  happier  when  leucorrhoea  is  worse  and  vice  versa.

^Prolapsus  uteri.
Weakness  of  memory  and  difficulty  of  connecting  words.
^  Sensorium. '  l  Inexpressible  anguish  and  frequent  syncope

until  menses  appeared.
^  Inner  Head. Headache  in  morning  on  waking,  going  off
after  rising.
Heaviness  of  head;  confusion.
'  Hearing  and  Ears. Cramp  pains  behind  ears.
'  Smell  and  Nose. Coldness  of  nose  all  day.
^  Upper  Face. Burning  of  r.  cheek  towards  evening,  and  of

1.  cheek  early  in  morning.
'' Scrobiculum and Stomach. n Sinking of stomach;

stomach  seemed  to  be  gone.
"  Hypochondria. Sensation  as  of  creeping  of  a  snake  over

entire  region  of  short  ribs,  1.  side.
^^  Abdomen. 1 1 Painful  weariness  of  loins. /^Uterine  disease.
I  Sensation  of  weight  in  hypogastrium. ^Climaxis.
B Painful  aching  in  whole  hypogastrium;  bearing  down.

^Uterine  disease.
I  I  Enlargement  and  great  sensitiveness  of  bowels,  with
sharp  pain  running  from  groin  to  socket  of  r.  hip.


501  MUREX  PURPUREA.

^"  Stool  and  Rectum. I  Sensation  of  weight,  more  particu-
larly in  rectum. ^Climaxis.
B Heavy  weight  pressing  upon  rectum;  swelling  of  hemor-
rhoids. 6* Uterine  disease.
During  stool:  bloody  leucorrhoea;  discharge  of  pure  blood
by  vulva.
^^  Urinary  Organs. Ii  Urine  smelling like valerian, with
white  sediment  and  discharge  of  mucus  after  urinating.

■  Constant  urging  to  urinate,  with  profuse  light,  clear  dis-

charges, like  water;  specific  gravity  1002;  containing
neither  sugar  nor  albumen;  no  pain  while  urinating;
patient  pale,  thin,  delicate. ^Polyuria.
I  Constant  desire  to  pass  water;  must  rise  often  at  night

to  urinate.
Discharge  of  some  blood  in  urinating.
^^  Female  Sexual  Organs, s  Violent  excitement  in  sexual
organs,  and  excessive  desire  for  an  embrace; excited
by  least  contact  of  parts.

■  Large  cyst,  supposed  to  be  connected  with  1.  ovary,  oc-

cupied space  between  rectum,  uterus  and  vagina,  so  as
to obliterate  posterior  cul  de  sac  and  almost  occlude
vagina; abdomen  somewhat  distended; confined to
her  room  and  bed  for  more  than  a  year.
I A  distinct  feeling  of  the  womb.

■  Feeling  as  if  internal  genitals  were  being  pushed  out,

with  great  nausea  and  faintness.
I  I  Sore pain  as if  wounded  by cutting  instruments  in
uterus.

■  Leucorrhoea,  accompanied  by  improvement  of  mental

depression.

■  ■Sore  pain  of  uterus.

■  ■Acute  pain  in  r.  side  of  uterus,  which  crossed  entire

body  and  extended  upwards  to  1.  breast.

I  I  Violent  stitches  in  1. side  of  uterus,  from  below  up-
wards, in  evening.

I  I  Beating  in  uterus.

I  I  Feeling  of  dryness  and  constriction  of  uterus.

I  I  Tumefaction  of  cervix,  with  several  deep  fissures.

■  After  unusually  violent  exercise  was  suddenly  subjected

to  terrible  mental  excitement;  bearing  down  sensations;
feeling  as  if  internal  organs  were  being  pushed  out,
with  great  nausea  and  faintness,  a  peculiarly  distressed
sinking  sensation  in  epigastrium ;  prolapsus  of  uterus
with  elongation  of  cervix. ^Uterine  affection.

■  Soreness  in  region  of  cervix,  or  a  feeling  as  if  something-

was  pressing  on  a  sore  spot  in  pelvis,  with  pain  in  r.
side  of  uterus  going  into  abdomen  or  thorax,  with
watery, greenish, irritating leucorrhoeal discharge;


MUREX  PURPUREA.  502

dragging  and  relaxation  in  perineum;  pains  in  hips,
loins  and  down  thighs  and  great  suffering  from  ex-
ertion. ^Ulceration  of  os  uteri.

■  A  soft  violet  colored  enlargement  of  neck  of  uterus.

I A  large  excoriation  on  anterior  aspect  of  neck  of  uterus,
was  caused  to  bleed  by  a  slight  touch. ^Climaxis.

■  Dysmenorrhoea  and  symptoms  of  prolapsus  uteri;  pain

and  weakness  in  back ;  downward  pressure  in  uterine
region ;  after  being  a  long  time  on  leet  must  sit  down
and  cross  legs  in  order  to  >  pressure;  yellowish  leu-
corrhoea;  menses  every  two  weeks,  very  scanty  and
lasting  but  two  days,  preceded  by  severe  laborlike
pains,  and  accompanied  by  severe  headache  and  great
painfulness  of  breasts;  weakness  in  stomach;  impaired
appetite;  constipation;  occasionally  hemorrhoids ;  sleep
disturbed,  many  dreams;  great  weakness;  slightest
exertion  tires  her;  poor  complexion;  very  irritable,
during  pain  impatient  at  herself  and  others;  cries  at
times  for  hours;  no  hysteria.

■  Sensation  of  pressure towards  genitals; heavy  weight

pressingupon  rectum ;  swelling  of  hemorrhoids;  greenish
yellow  leucorrhoea,  sometimes  bloody,  and  discharges
of  pure  blood  by  vulva  at  stool ;  thrilling  pains  in
lower  extremities ;  painful  weariness  in  loins  and  in
nates;  very  great  debility,  rendering  walking  very
difficult,  often  impossible,  at  period  of  menses ;  painful
aching  in  whole  hypogastrium,  causing  an  inexpres-
sible anguish  and  frequent  sjmcope,  which  ceased  when
menses  began  to  appear;  menses  excessive,  accompanied
by  spasms  in  abdomen,  with  sharp  lancinations  in
uterus;  several  deep  fissures  in  tumefied  cervix;  body
of  uterus  enlarged  and  much  inclined  forward,  cervix
resting  upon  posterior  wall  of  pelvis. ^Uterine  affection.

■  Carcinoma  uteri; very  great  depression  of  spirits,  a  sort

of  deep  hypochondria.

■  Flow  lasting  ten  to  twelve  days,  became  russet  colored,

finally  serous. ^Climaxis.

■  Interval  of  periods  ten  days. ^Climaxis.

■  ■Menstruation  too  profuse;  hemorrhages.

■  Frequent  profuse  menstruation;  strong  sexual  desire.
1  Profuse  and  too  early  menses.

■  Menses  irregular,  at  the  approach  sadness; very  abun-

dant for  several  days  and  with  great  pain.

■  During  menses  intense  abdominal  pain,  like  something

pressing  on  a  sore  place,  this  continues  first  part  of  per-
iod and  sometimes  returns;  wants  to  die.
B  Watery,  greenish,  or  thick  bloody  discharge.  ^Leucorrhoea.

■  Greenish  yellow  leucorrhoea,  sometimes  bloody.


503  MUREX  PURPUREA.

■  Debility  at  time  of  menses.

Leucorrhoea:  scanty,  greenish,  or  mixed  with  blood;  scanty,
thick,  3^ellow;  <  during  day; none  during  night;  re-
lieves depression.
1 1  Expelling  large  coagula. ^Climaxis.
I  I  Feeling  of  heaviness  in  vagina  during  colic.
I  I  Feeling  of  heaviness  and  enlargement  of  labia  majora.
I  Itching  with  leucorrhoea. ^Climaxis.
2*  Pregnancy. Parturition. Lactation. "In  the  begin-
ning of  pregnancy  sensation  as  if  bones  of  pelvis  were
getting  loose.
I  Leucorrhoea  in  pregnancy.
I  I  Violent  pains,  acute  stitches  in  mammse.
^  Voice  and Larynx. Trachea  and  Bronchia. Altered

voice,  hoarseness.
^^  Respiration.  Wheezing  in  chest  when  breathing,  in  evening.
^''  Cough. I  Cough  during  and  after  measles.
^  Inner  Chest  and  Lungs. Pain  in  chest  as  if  bruised.
Stinging  and  burning  under  1.  short  ribs  towards  spine.
Violent  pain  in  breast,  with  acute  stitches ;  r.  side  chiefly
affected,  <  at  night.
^^  Heart,  Pulse  and  Circulation. Palpitation  of  heart  and
throbbing  of  carotids.
I  I  Pulse  small  and  frequent during  periods. ^Climaxis.
^^  Upper  Limbs. Pain  in  forearm  below  elbow.

Heat  in  hands.
^^  Lower Limbs, l  i  Weakness  in  hip joints. ^Pregnancy.
Pain  (burning  as  if  sore)  in  loins.
Pains  in  hips  and  loins  when  lying  in  bed.
Great  weakness  and  weariness  in  lower  limbs.
Weariness  and  contused  sensation  in  thighs.
I  i  Thrilling  pains  in  lower  limbs ;  weariness  in  nates.
1  I  Intolerable  creeping  pain  in  r.  hip,  kept  him  from  get-
ting ease  in  any  position.
^  Rest. Position. Motion. lA  kind  of  uncertainty  in  walk-
ing, all  joints  weak. ^Pregnancy.

■  Walking  or  standing  for  a  long  time  became  almost  im-

possible. ^Climaxis.
She  was  obliged  to  go  to bed  and  lie there; had  no

strength  left.
Lying  in  bed :  pain  in  hips  and  loins.
Cannot  get  ease  in  any  position :  pain  in  r.  hip.
After  violent  exercise :  bearing  down  sensation.
After  being  a  long  time  on  feet  must  sit  down  and  cross

legs  to  >  pressure  in  uterine  region.
Exertion  :  causes  great  suffering.
Walking :  very  difficult  from  great  debility.
^®  Nerves. Debility  of  entire  muscular  system.


MUREX  PURPUREA.  504

38  Time. In  morning :  on  waking,  headache  >  after  rising ;
early  burning  of  1.  cheek.

All  day :  coldness  of  nose.

Day:  leucorrhoea  <.

Towards  evening:  burning  of  r.  cheek.

Evening:  stitches  in  uterus;  wheezing  in  chest  when
breathing.

Night:  must  rise  often  to  urinate;  no  leucorrhoea;  pain
in  breast  <.
*"  Fever, i  l  A  copious  sweat  covered  body  during  suffering

at  menstrual  period. ^Climaxis.
^^  Attacks,  Periodicity. For  hours:  cries  at  times.

Ten  days :  interval  of  periods.

Ten  to  twelve  days :  flow  lasts.

Every  two  weeks :  menses,  lasting  two  days.

Until  menses  appear:  anguish  and  frequent  syncope.

At  approach  of  menses :  deep  sadness.

During  menses:  great  debility  ;  pulse  small  and  frequent;
a  copious  sweat  covered  body.

Beginning  of  pregnancy :  sensation  as  if  bones  of  pelvis
were  loose.

During  pregnancj'^:  leucorrhoea.

During  and  after  measles:  cough.

For  more  than  a  year :  confined  to  her  bed  and  room.
*^  Locality  and  Direction. Right:  burningof  cheek;  sharp
pain  from  groin  to  socket  of  hip;  acute  pain  in  side  of
uterus ;  pain  <  in  breast ;  intolerable  creeping  pain  in
hip.

Left:  burning of  cheek;  sensation  as  of  creeping  of  a
•  snake  on  side;  large  cyst  connected  with  ovary;  pain
from  uterus  to  breast;  violent  stitches  in  side  of  uterus;
stinging  and  burning  under  short  ribs.

From  below  upwards  :  stitches  in  uterus.
^^  Sensations.  Stomach  as  if  gone;  as  of  creeping  of  a  snake
over  entire  region  of  short  ribs ;  as  if  internal  genitals
were  being  pushed  out;  as  if  wounded  by  cutting  instru-
ments in  uterus;  as  if  something  was  pressing  on  a  sore
spot  in  pelvis;  as  if  bones  of  pelvis  were  getting  loose  ;
pain  in  chest  as  if  bruised;  burning  as  if  sore  in  loins.

Pain :  in  r.  side  of  uterus  going  into  abdomen  or  thorax ;
in  hips,  loins  and  down  thighs;  in  back;  in  chest;  in
forearm  below  elbow;  in  loins;  in  hips  and  loins.

Intolerable  creeping  pain:  in  r.  hip.

Severe  pain:  in  head.

Intense  abdominal  pain :  during  menses.

Violent  pains :  in  mammse.

Sharp  pain  :  running  from  groin  to  socket  of  r.  hip.

Acute  pain:  in  r.  side  of  uterus.


505  MUREX  PURPUREA.

Great  pain  :  during  menses.

Sharp  lancinations :  in  uterus.

Acute  stitches:  in  mammae.

Severe  laborlike  pains :  before  menses.

Thrilling  pain :  in  lower  extremities.

Cramp  pains  :  behind  ears.

Sore  pain  : in  uterus.

Stinging:  under  1.  short  ribs;  towards  spine.

Soreness :  in  region  of  cervix.

Contused  sensation:  in  chest;  in  thighs.

Burning:  of  r.  cheek; of  1.  cheek;  under  1. short  ribs

towards  spine.
Heat :  in  hands.
Beating:  in  uterus.

Painful  aching:  in  hypogastrium,  bearing  down.
Painful  weariness :  of  loins  ;  in  nates.
Throbbing :  in  carotids.
Constriction :  in  uterus.

Pressure:  in  uterine  region;  towards  genital  organs.
Weight:  in  h3'pogastrium  ;  in  rectum.
Heaviness:  of  head  ;  in  vagina;  of  labia  majora.
Distressed  sinking:  in  epigastrium;  of  stomach.
Dryness :  in  uterus.
Confusion :  of  head.
Weakness:  in  back;  in  stomach;  in  hip  joints;  in  lower

limbs.
Itching:  with  leucorrhoea.
Coldness:  of  nose.
^  Tissues. All  joints  weak;  uterine  affections.
*^  Touch. Passive Motion. Injuries. Least  contact  of

parts :  causes  violent  sexual  excitement.
Slightest  touch :  causes  bleeding  of  excoriation  on  neck  of

bladder.
*^  Stages  of  Life,  Constitution. Melancholic  or  sanguine

lymphatic  temperament.
■  Sufferings  during  climacteric  years.
Girl,  Eet.  13,  pale  faced,  thin  and  delicate,  suffering  one

week ;  polyuria.
Girl,  aet.  18,  suffering  one  or  two  years;  dysmenorrhoea.
Woman,  set.  28,  seven  years  ago  had  a  miscarriage,  and

subsequently  prolapsus  uteri  and  ulceration  of  cervix;

uterine  affection.
Woman,  set.  30,  mother  of  two  children,  suffering  seven

years;  prolapsus  uteri  and  dysmenorrhoea.
Woman,  set.  30,  sanguine  lymphatic  temperament,  mother

of  tw^o  children,  was  subject  in  infancy  to  violent  attacks

of  cough,  caused  by  congestion  to  lungs,  the  result  of  a

psoric  taint  (retrocession  of  itch),  these  attacks  ceased


MUREX  PURPUREA— MURIATICUM  ACIDUM. 506

to  appear  about  the  time  of  her  first  pregnancy,  since
when  she  lias  been  suffering;  uterine  affection.

Woman,  set.  30,  suffering  eight  days;  polyuria.

Woman  confined  to  room  and  bed  for  more  than  a  year;
ovarian  cyst.

Woman,  set.  45,  mother  of  several  children  whom  she
nursed,  health  has  always  been  good ;  uterine  affection.
*^  Relations.  Compare :  Sepia,  which  is  very  similar,  but  has
not  the  sexual  erethism  ;  Lil.  tig.  and  Platina  are  simi-
lar in  nymphomania;  Kreos.  has  similar  urinary  symp-
toms.


MURIATICUM  ACIDUM.

Hydrochloric  Acid.  HCl.

Introduced  by  Hahnemann,  proved  by  himself,  Gutmann,  Haynel,  Hartmann,
Langhanmier,  Nenning,  Eummel,  Stapf  andWislicenus  (Chronische  Krankheiten).

Our  arrangement  contains  a  MSS.  proving  by  Hackett,  not  contained  in
Allen's  Encyclopedia.

Clinical  Authorities. — Cancer  of  tongue,  Cooper,  Gilchrist's  Surg.,  p.  162 ;
U.  S.  Med.  and  Surg.  Journ.,  vol.  4,  p.  270;  Stomacace  of  nursing  children,  William-
son, Raue's  Eec,  1872,  p.  7 ;  Diphtheria,  Pemerl,  N.  A.  J.  H.,  vol.  25,  p.  80;  Oas-
trlc  disturbances,  Kurtz,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  5,  p.  273 ;  Diarrhoea,  Berridge,  Eaue's
Eec,  1871,  p.  114;  Passage  of  feces  while  urinating,  Schleyel,  Allg.  Hom.  Ztg.,
vol.  106,  p  165  ;  Hemorrhoids,  Gillet,  Helfrich,  Knorre,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf,  vol.  1,
p.  999 ;  Whooping  cough,  A.  E.,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  5,  p.  726 ;  Use  in  phthisis,
Cott.n,  B.  J.  H.,  vol.  19,  p.  168  ;  Sivelling  on  tendo-achilles,  Eiickert,  Org.,  vol.  3,
p.  268;  Typhoid  fever,  Gross,  Miiller,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf,  vol.  4,  p.  754;  Nash,  Eaue's
Eec,  1875,  p.  281 ;  Trinks,  B.  J.  H.,  vol.  29,  p.  284 ;  Scarlet  fever,  Lorbach,  Lobeth,
Hartmann,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf,  vol.  4,  p.  57  ;  Erysipelas,  Thorer,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf,  vol.  4,
p.  145 ;  Eczema  Solaris,  Neidhard,  Hom.  Times,  1852.

^  Mind. lUnconsciousness;  moaning. ^Typhus.

I  Taciturn,  introverted  and  quiet;  anxious  care  about  future.
■  Irritable,  disposed  to  anger  and  chagrin;  peevishness.
I  Restlessness,  frequent  changing  of  position.
^  Sensorimn. ■  Vertigo:  <  moving  eyes;  slightly  <  walk-
ing, though  this  >  headache;  with  tottering  gait;  with
tearing  in  vertex  and  feeling  as  if  hair  was  drawn  up-
w^ards,  objects  go  around  with  her  in  open  air;  with
nausea,  1  a.m.,  <  lying  on  r.  side  or  back.
^  Inner  Head. '  l  Headache  in  spells  regularly  every  day,


507  MURIATICUM  ACIDUM.

from  9  A.M.  until  1  p.m.  ;  begins  with  soreness  over  1.

eye,  then  in  eyeball  and  1.  half  of  nose,  forehead  and

temple,  to  back  of  head.
Feeling  as  if  brain  was  loose.

Tearing  and  stitches  in  head,  in  periodical  shocks.
I  Headache  as  if  brain  was  torn  or  beaten  to  pieces; <

moving  eyes  or  sitting  up  in  bed ;  >  from  moderate

exercise.

■  Headache  as  if  brain  was  clasped  by  a  hand  and  was

being  twisted  and  torn.
I  I  Tearing  in  r.  parietal  bone.
■Heaviness  in  back  part  of  head,  with  obscure  sight,  <  by

effort  to  see ;  swollen  glands.

■  Steady,  sharp  pain  in  back  part  of  head,  with  a  heavy

feeling,  as  if  occiput  was  filled  with  lead.

■  Headache  <  on  rising  up  in  bed  and  from  moving  eyes;

>  by  moving  body ;  from  walking  in  open  air,  espe-
cially in  cold  wind.
I  I  Distant  talking  causes  headache.
*  Outer  Head. •  i  Feeling  of  deadness  and  numbness  of  fore-
head.

■  Stiff  and  sore  feeling  in  occiput,  <  when  touched,  and

on  1.  side  of  head  and  down  spine,  <  in  lying.

■  Tearing  in  r.  parietal  bone.
I  Heat  in  top  of  head.

■  Feeling  as  if  hair  was  standing  on  end.

^  Sight  and  Eyes. ■Perpendicular  half  sight.

■  Obscured  sight;  pain  in  occiput.

■  Pupils  contracted.

■Sharp,  burning  pain,  extending  from  1.  to  r.  eye,  in  morn-
ing >  by  washing. ^Muscular  asthenopia.

■  Stitches  out  of  eyes.

■  Itching  in  eyes ;  itching  and  smarting  in  canthi.

■  Lids  red,  swollen.

Worse  from  light,  >  from  dark.
^  Hearing  and  Ears. '  i  Overacuteness  of  hearing ;  sensitive
to  noise.

■  Hardness  of  hearing;  loud,  cracking  sounds  during  night;

no  cerumen,  or  dry,  peeling  off  in  scales,  also  dry,  hard
and  of  a  brown  red  color  or  dark,  with  buzzing,  <  r.  ear.

Distant  sounds  (talking)  cause  headache ;  sound  of  voice
unbearable.

I  I  Want  of  feeling  in  internal  meatus.

■  Tingling,  humming,  whizzing  in  ear;  beating  or  knocking.
I  I  Otalgia,  with  pressing  pain.

I  I  Tingling,  creeping,  cold  pain  running  from  ears  up  to
top  of  head,  sharp  boring  in  temporal  regions.
"^  Smell  and  Nose. ■Nosebleed. ^Whooping  cough.


MURIATICUM  ACIDUM.  508

Sore  nostrils,  with  stinging  pain  ;  obstruction  of  nose.

I  I  Frequent  sneezing.

iCoryza:  thin,  acrid,  making  parts  sore;  thick,  yellow

discharge.
B  Discharge  of  thin  pus  from  nose,  excoriating  parts.
I  Nose  stopped  up.
^  Upper Face, i  i  Heat  in  face,  glowing  red  cheeks  when
walking  in  open  air ;  no  thirst.

■  Sudden  red  face  with  coma. ^Scarlatina.

■  Face  suddenly  flushing  or  pale  and  sunken.

iRed,  itching  pimples  on  forehead,  cheeks  and  around
mouth,  whole  face  red ;  every  Summer. (^Eczema  Solaris.
I  Scabs  on  face,  forehead,  temples;  pimples;  freckles.
**  Lower  Face. iLower  jaw  hangs  down, ^Typhus.
I  Pimples  around  mouth  form  a  scurf.

■  Margin  of  lips  raw,  skin  dry  and  cracked.

■  Burning  on  lips.

■  Bloated  lower  lip;  feels  heavy,  burns.

I  I  Pain  below  1.  half  of  low^er  lip,  from  4  p.m.  till  midnight.
^"  Teeth  and  Gums. ■  Toothache:  (pulsating)  from  cold  drinks;
with  earache;  tingling,  >  from  warm  applications.

■  Gums  sw^ollen,  bleeding,  ulcerating. ^Scorbutis.

■  Teeth  rise  from  their  sockets.

■  Long  lasting,  severe  inflammation  of  gums. ^Scarlatina.
"Taste  and  Tongue. ■Everything  tastes  sw^eet;  beer  tastes

like  honey.

■  Taste:  acrid  and  putrid,  like  rotten  eggs,  with  j^tyalism;

in  throat  like  rancid  grease.

■  Tongue:  heavy  as  lead,  hinders  talking;  feels  lame,  sore;

dwindles,  atrophy ;  sore,  bluish  ;  deep  ulcers,  with  black
bases  and  vesicles;  thick,  dark,  almost  whole  mouth
and  fauces  covered  with  a  greyish  white  membrane;
painful  blisters  with  burning.

■  Edges  of  ulcer  and  surrounding  parts  of  a  blue  color.

^Cancer  of  tongue.

■  Tongue  sore  and  bluish;  deep  ulcer  with  black  base  and

inverted  edges;  atrophy  of  tongue  making  him  speak
in  a  thick,  hoarse  voice ;  hard  lump  on  side  of  tongue,
growing  into  a  hard,  deep,  warty  ulcer,  about  size  of  a
bean,  presenting  a  slightly  fissured  appearance  from
above  downwards  and  from  before  backwards,  rather
towards  under  surface  of  1.  side  of  tongue;  no  apparent
discharge  from  it;  but  tongue  is  hard  all  around  it,  so
much  so  that  speaking  and  expectoration  is  very  diffi-
cult. ^Cancer  of  tongue.
^^  Inner  Mouth, i  i  Great  dryness  in  mouth.

■  Redness  of  inside  of  cheeks  and  of  arch  of  palate.

■  Mucous  lining  of  lips  inflamed,  red  and  painful,  stripped


509  MURIATICUM  ACIDUM.

of  epithelium  to  a  considerable  extent  and  dotted  with
whitish  points. ^Stomatitis.
iStomacace of nursing children; patch  on  r.  side  of
tongue  large  and  irregular,  but  very  deep;  fetid  breath.

■  Stomatitis,  with  extreme dryness,  swollen gums,  great

ad3niamia,
I  Foul  breath. ^Scarlatina.

■  Mouth  as  if  glued  up  with  insipid  mucus;  much  saliva.

■  Salivary  glands  tender,  swollen.

■  Mouth  studded  with  ulcers  having  a  black  or  dark  base

and  dipping  deep  in,  tending  to  perforate;  intermittent
pulse;  involuntary  stool  and  urine;  intense  prostration.
^Malignant  scarlatina  or  dijDhtheria.
'^  Throat. ■  Rawness  and  smarting  of  fauces;  burning.

■  Dry  throat,  with  burning  in  chest.

■  Mucous  lining  of  throat  red  and  swollen.

■  Diffused  deep  redness  of  velum  palati  and  throat.

■  (Edema  of  uvula;  tonsils  swollen.

■  Fauces  swollen,  unable  to  swallow,  attempt  producing

violent  spasm  and  choking.

■  All  the  time  pushing  finger  down  throat,  or  keeps  claw-

ing mouth,  as  if  some  obstruction  must  be  pulled  out
of  throat.

■  Greyish  white  deposits  on  mucous  membrane  of  throat,

succeeded  by  ulcers.

■  Well  defined  dead white  patches,  varying  in  size,  over

velum  and  pillars  of  palate,  tonsils  and  posterior  por-
tion of  pharynx,  similar  to  false  membrane  in  diph-
theritic angina.

■  Thin,  excoriating  discharge  from  nose,  intermittent  pulse

and  loss  of  appetite. ^Diphtheria.

■  Gangrenous  angina; internal parts bluish red,  dark;

aphthous  ulcers ;  epithelium  of  tongue  comes  off  in  large
brown  pieces;  fetor  oris. ^Scarlet  fever.

■  During  attack  of  scarlatina,  on  third  day,  tonsils  and

fauces  covered  with  exudate ;  submaxillary  glands  swol-
len as  large  as  pigeon's  eggs;  can  only  hold  head  bent
forward  ;  continual  desire  to  hawk,  with  difficult  expec-
toration of  tougii  mucus;  swallowing  almost  impossible.
^Diphtheritis.

■  Hawks  out  continually  tough,  fetid  phlegm  ;  voice  hoarse,

nasal;  rattling  of  mucus;  submaxillary  glands  swollen
as  large  as  hen's  eggs;  head  bent  forward,  because,  when
holding  it  erect  or  when  lying  down,  phlegm  in  fauces
causes  difficult  breathing  and  choking;  entire  back  part
a  gangrenous  ulcer,  covered  with  tough  mucus,  which
draws  out  in  strings ;  fetor  oris ;  swallowing  of  water  very
difficult,  producing  cough;  pulse  small,  very  fast;  pale,
anxious  face. ^Diphtheria.


MUPJATICUM  ACIDUM.  510

I  Bleeding  from  nose,  blood  dark  and  putrid;  sordes  on
teeth;  sore  and  scabby  condition  of  lips;  putrid  smell
from  mouth ;  great  general  prostration ;  typhoid  con-
dition. ^Diphtheria.

I  Diphtheria  with  not  much  fever,  but  great  prostration.
^*  Appetite,  Thirst.  Desires,  Aversions,  i  Excessive  hunger
and  thirst,  or  no  appetite.

■  Aversion  to  meat.

I  Morbid  longing  for  alcoholic  drinks.
^^  Eating  and  Drinking. After  eating :  is  worse ;  diarrhoea.

Better  after  drinking.
^^  Hiccough,  Belching,  Nausea  and  Vomiting, i  Hiccough
(before  and  after  dinner).

Eructations:  bitter,  putrid.

■  Vomiting,  with  belching,  coughing; involuntary  swal-

lowing ;  gulping  up  of  contents  of  stomach  into  oesoph-
agus, sometimes  going  down  again.
^'^  Scrobiculum and  Stomach, ii  Feeling  of  emptiness  in
epigastric  region,  especially  in  oesophagus,  not  >  by
eating.

■  Empty  sensation  in  stomach  extending  through  whole

abdomen,  no  hunger;  weak  feeling  in  stomach  from
10  A.M.  until  evening.

■  Stomach  will  neither  tolerate  nor  digest  food; gastric

weakness  <  from  about  10  to  11  a.m.

■  Acute  gastric  irritability  often  accompanied  by  biliary

disturbances;  great  thirst,  particularly  after  sour  arti-
cles; bitter,  oftener  sour  taste  in  mouth;  biliary  fever;
bilious  diarrhoea.

■  Habitual difficult digestion; tongue slightly coated

white;  much  belching  and  flatulence;  eructations, offen-
sive ;  thirst;  transient  attacks  of  faintness;  tendency  to
constipation;  confusion  of  head;  drowsiness,  particu-
larly after  dinner;  tendency  to  herpes  furfuraceus;  in
children  tendency  to  aphthae  and  diarrhoea,  evacuations
when  first  passed  presenting  white,  later  greenish  spots,
causing  excoriation  of  anus.
'^  Hypochondria. ■Pressing  and  tension  in  hypochondria.

■  Cirrhosis  of  liver;  drowsiness;  emaciation;  mouth  dry

or aphthous ; stools often watery and involuntary ;
stomach  so  weak  and  irritable  that  no  food  can  be  re-
tained ;  dropsy.
^*  Abdomen. ■Fulness  and  distension  of  abdomen  from  small
quantities  of  food.

■  Rumbling  and  feeling  of  emptiness.

I  I  Colicky  griping  in  abdomen  ;  cramps.

■  Hernia.

^  Stool  and  Rectum. ■  Stool :  difficult,  as  from  inactivity  of


511  MURIATICUM  ACIDUM.

bowels ;  too  thin,  but  round ;  thin,  watery,  invokmtary,
while  urinating ;  greenish,  in  typhoid ;  thin,  watery,
passed  unnoticed  ;  w^atery,  dark  brown,  preceded  by  un-
easy pains  in  abdomen;  discharged  while  urinating;
with  discharge  of  blood.

■  Diarrhoea:  with  much  wind;  <  morning  and  evening;

intolerable  anal  itching,  n6t  >  by  scratching,  smarting
and  burning  in  anus;  <  after  a  meal ;  after  fruit ;  from
drinking  lager  beer ;  during  typhoid  ;  <  after  abuse  of
opium.
I  As  soon  as  he  begins  to  move,  strong  urging,  compelling
haste;  stools  profuse,  dark,  brownish,  green,  gelatinous ;
followed  by  dragging,  heavy  sensation  in  abdomen.

■  Difficult  speech;  moaning  and groaning  in  sleep;  slid-

ing down  in  bed. ^Cholera.

■  Dysentery,  blood  and  slime  separated.

■  Before  stool:  rumbling;  colic.

■During  stool :  smarting  and  cutting  in  anus ;  burning  in
anus ;  colic ;  prolapsus  ani.

■  After  stool :  burning  in  anus ;  intolerable  itching,  tender-

ness and  soreness  of  anus ;  protrusion  of  dark  purplish
varices,  somewhat >  by  application of  warm  water,
much  <  from  bathing  with  cold  water.
■Urging  to  stool  while  urinating,  compelling  him  to  cease
lest  a  fecal  discharge  occur.

■  Prolapsus  ani  while  urinating.
I  I  Itching  in  anus.

■  I  Diarrhoea,  with  protrusion  of  blue  or  dark  purple  hem-

orrhoids, especially  when  occurring  in  feeble  children
suffering  from  gastric  atony,  muscular  debility  and
threatened  marasmus.
■Every  eight  to  fourteen  days,  dispharge  of  bright  blood
from  anus,  with  or  without  stool,  often  so  profuse  as  to
cause  great  weakness ;  is  afraid  to  bend  over ;  stitches
low  down  in  1.  side  and  biting  in  anus ;  menses  regular,
profuse,  last  four  days,  accompanied  by  general  indispo-
sition; headache,  with  congestion  to  head ;  nausea;  cold-
ness of  limbs  and  falling  asleep  of  same  when  sitting
still. ^Hemorrhoids.

■  ■Hemorrhoids:  swollen,  blue  ;  painful  to  touch  ;  appear

suddenly  in  children;  protruding,  reddish  blue,  burning;
too  sore  to  bear  least  touch,  even  sheet  is  uncom-
fortable.

■  Anal  orifice  surrounded  by  a  thick,  round  swelling,  which

is  separated  into  three  unequal  parts,  one  being  as  large
as  a  hen's  egg,  the  other  two  about  as  large  as  nutmegs;
swelling  bluish  red,  hard,  hot,  shining,  very  sensitive
to  touch ;  sore  pain,  itching,  severe  stitches,  paroxysmal,


MUEIATICUM  ACIDUM.  512

making  her  cry  out;  cannot  sit  and  can  turn  around
only  with  great  difficulty. ^Inflamed  hemorrhoids  after
labor.
^^  Urinary  Organs, b  Frequent scanty,  or  frequent  profuse
urination.

■  Passes  large  quantities  of  urine,  accompanied  each  time

by  a  small  stool.
I  iSlow  emission  of  urine;  bladder  weak ;  must  wait  a  long
time;  has  to  press  so  that  anus  protrudes.

■  Urine  involuntary. ^Typhus.
I  Urine:  red;  violet;  milklike.

■  Burning,  cutting  while  urinating;  straining  in  urethra

afterwards.
^^  Male  Sexual  Organs. Umpotency;  penis  relaxed;  desire
weak.
■Watery,  bloody  gleet.
■Scrotum  bluish  red.

■  Itching  of  scrotum,  not  relieved  by  scratching.

■  Margin  of  prepuce  sore.

^  Female Sexual Organs. ■Pressing on genitals as if
menses  would  appear.
■Menses  too  early  and  profuse;  dejection  of  spirits,  silent

as  if  she  would  die;  colic;  sore  piles.
I  I  Pricking  pain  in  vagina.

■  Ulcers  on  genitals,  with  putrid  discharge,  much  sensitive-

ness and  general  weakness.

■  Cannot  bear  least  touch,  not  even  of  sheet  on  genitals.

■  iLeucorrhoea,  with  backache;  sore  anus  from  piles  or

fissures.

24  Pregnancy. Parturition. Lactation. ■  Puerperal  fever.

^  Voice  and  Larynx.  Trachea  and  Bronchia.  ■  Hoarse-
ness: with  sore  feeling  in  chest;  whooping  cough.

^^Respiration.  ■  Breathing  deep,  groaning;  moaning;  deep
sighing.

■  Breathing  seems  to  come  from  stomach.

■Short breath, with rattling after drinking, talking,

coughing.
I  I  Dyspnoea  and  constriction  of  chest. ^Whooping  cough.
I  I  Oppression  across  chest  (evening).
^  Cough. . ■Cough:  rough,  with  rattling  in  chest,  followed  by

cramp  in  stomach;  short  breath;  with  heat  in  face.

■  Whooping  cough:  after  attacks,  audible  rumbling,  gur-

gling down  chest;  excited  by  tickling  in  chest;  in  after-
noon and  evening  without,  in  morning  w^ith  a  slight
dislodgement  of  a  yellow  or  watery  mucus  of  a  fatty
taste,  which  must  be  swallowed;  with  expectoration  of
dark  blood.
^  Inner  Chest  and  Lungs. ■  Stitches  in  chest  and  at  heart,


513  MURIATICUM  ACIDUM.

when  taking  a  long  breath  and  on  violent  motion  ;  burn-
ing stitches.

I  1  Tension  and  pain  on  sternum.

I  I  Bursting  pain  in  chest;  pain  as  if  beaten.

iPleuritis; stupor; playing  with  the  hands; moaning;
sliding  down  in  bed.
^^  Heart,  Pulse  and  Circulation, i  Palpitation  of  heart  felt
in  face.

I  Stitches  in  heart.

I  Pulse :  slow  and  weak,  sometimes  intermitting ;  slow  dur-
ing day,  more  frequent  at  night;  intermits  every  third
beat ;  rapid  and  feeble ;  very  small  and  frequent ;  very
feeble.
^^  Neck  and  Back,  l Pressing  pain  in  back;  as  from  a  sprain,
or  as  if  he  had  stooped  long.

■  Pressing,  drawing,  tired  pain  in  lumbar  region.

I  I  Os  coccyx  pains.  »

I  I  Drawing,  burning  along  back,  beginning  at  coccyx,  as

if  under  skin;  burning  stitch  in  sacrum  causing  one  to

start.
^^  Upper  Limbs. ■  Heaviness  of  arms,  especially  forearms.
I  I  Scabby  eruption  on  back  of  hands  and  fingers.

■  Numbness,  coldness  and  deadness  of  fingers  at  night.
I  I  Swelling  and  burning  of  tips  of  fingers.

I  I  Itching  of  palms.

I  I  Frequent,  drawing  tension  in  elbow  joint.
^  Lower  Limbs, l  Wavering  gait  from  weakness  of  thighs.
I  I  Pain  in  r.  thigh,  with  itching  in  anus.
I  I  CEdematous  swelling  of  lower  limbs,  with  shooting  pain.

■  Lower  limbs  darker  colored.

■  Putrid  ulcers  on  legs,  with  burning  around  them.
■Swelling  on  r.  tenclo-achilles,  about  two  inches  long,  so

painful  that  it  hinders  walking;  pain  as  if  place  was
jammed  in,  with  feeling  of  unusual  heat  therein ;  <
when  sitting,  >  when  lying.

■  Cold  feet.

■  Blue  feet. ^Scarlatina.

■  Chilblains  (alcohol  applied  externally).

■  Swelling  and  burning  of  tips  of  toes.

^*  Limbs  in  General, l  '  Tearing  pains  in  limbs  during  rest,
>  from  motion.

I  I  All  joints  as  if  bruised.

I  I  Pressive  drawing  in  upper  arms  and  knees.
^^  Rest. Position. Motion. Rest:  tearing  pains  in  limbs  <.

Lying :  stiff  feeling  in  head  and  spine  < ;  pain  in  tendo-
achilles  >.

Lying  on  r.  side  or  back:  vertigo  <.

Lies  motionless  in  bed:  typhoid  fever.

VOL.  VII. — 33.


MURIATICUM  ACIDUM.  514

Wants  to  lie  about:  prostration.

Frequent  changing  position.

Erect  position:  tensive  pain  in  head  <.

Is  afraid  to  bend  over:  discharge  of  blood  from  anus.

Can  only  hold  head  bent  forward:  because  when  holding

it  erect  or  when  lying  down  phlegm  in  fauces  causes

difficult  breathing  and  choking  spells.
Sitting  still :  falling  asleep  of  limbs ;  pain  in  tendo-achilles.
Sitting  up  in  bed  :  headache  <.
Cannot  sit  and  can  turn  around  only  with  great  difficulty:

inflamed  hemorrhoids.
As  soon  as  he  sits  down:  his  eyes  close.
Legs  flexed,  feet  drawn  up:  typhoid  fever.
Sliding  down  in  bed:  cholera;  pleuritis;  typhus;  scarlet

fever.
Motion  :  of  eyes,  vertigo  <  ;  of  eyes,  headache  <  ;  causes

strong urging  to  stool ; tearing  pains  >  ;  drowsiness

passes  off.
All  the  time  pushing  finger  down  throat  or  keeps  clawing

mouth.
Moderate  excercise:  headache  >.
Walking:  vertigo  <  ;  pain  in  tendo-achilles  hinders.
Violent  motion  :  stitches  in  chest.
^  Nerves. ■  ■  Prostration.

■  Prostration  and  drowsiness  all  day;  she  wants  to  lie  about.
DB Great  debility:  as  soon  as  he  sits  down  his  eyes  close;

lower  jaw  hangs;  slides  down  in  bed.

■  Muscular  debility  following  use  of  opium  or  soothing

syrups.
I  Paralysis  generally  one  sided.
B  Paralyzed  tongue  and  sphincter  ani.
^^  Sleep. '  I  Drowsiness  during  day,  going  off  as  soon  as  one

moves  about.

■  Sleepless  before  12  p.m.,  delirious  tossing.

I  I  Restless  after  going  to  bed,  groaning,  snoring,  talking  in
sleep.

i  I  Anxious  dreams;  frequent  waking;  <  on  waking.
^  Time. Morning :  burning  pain  in  eye  ;  diarrhoea  < ;  whoop-
ing cough,  with  slight  dislodgement  of  mucus;  chill
wakens  him ;  sweat.

Day :  pulse  slow ;  prostration  and  drowsiness.

Before  and  after  dinner :  hiccough.

After  dinner :  drowsiness.

Afternoon  :  attacks  of  whooping  cough.

Evening :  diarrhoea  <  ;  oppression  across  chest ;  attacks
of  whooping  cough;  chill,  with  coldness  in  back;  cold
sweat  on  feet ;  wants  to  be  uncovered  during  scarlet  fever.

Night:  cracking  sounds  in  ear;  pulse  frequent;  numb-


515  MURIATICUM  ACIDUM.

ness,  coldness  and  deadness  of  fingers  ;  heat,  with  palpi-
tation ;  sweat.

Before  12  P.M. :  sleepless;  sweat.

1  A.M. :  vertigo,  with  nausea.
^^  Temperature  and  Weather. Getting  warm  in  bed :  itch-
ing of  pimples.

Warm  applications :  tingling  in  teeth  >  ;  protrusion  of
varices  >.

Open  air :  objects  go  around  ;  walking,  headache  >  ;  when
walking,  heat  in  face.

Wants  to  uncover :  during  exacerbation  of  fever.

Washing:  burning  pain  in  eyes  >,

Cold  water:  varices  <.

Cold  drinks:  toothache.

Cold  wind:  headache  >.
*"  Fever.  Chill  more  than  heat ;  awakens  him  in  morning;
evening  with  coldness  in  back,  external  warmth  ;  burn-
ing face ;  dry  mouth ;  shivering  all  over,  with  hot
cheeks  and  cold  hands;  and  heat  without  thirst,  rarely
there  is  thirst  in  cold  stage.

■  Extremities  quite  cold.
I  I  Slow  fever.

■  Internal  heat,  wants  to  uncover;  bodily  restlessness,

■  Heat  at  night,  with  palpitation  of  heart.

■  Burning,  mostly  in  palms  and  soles.

Sweat:  during  first  sleep,  until  12  p.m.,  <  on  head  and
back;  night  and  morning.

■  Cold  sweat  on  feet,  evening  in  bed.

■Worse  when  sweating  ;  taciturn  ;  wants  to  uncover.
I  I  Intermittent  fever,  with  periosteal  pains.

■  Fever  assumes  a  low  type; great  prostration; sinking

down  in  bed ;  evidences  of  intestinal  ulceration. ^In-
fantile remittent.

■  ■Typhus:  constant  restlessness  or  stupid  sleep; uncon-

scious; loud  moaning  or  confused  talking;  wishes  to
uncover;  lower  jaw  dropped ;  aphthous  ulcers  in  mouth,
fetid,  sour  smelling  ;  tongue  coated  at  edges,  shrunken,
dry,  like  leather,  paralyzed ;  thin,  offensive  smelling
evacuations ;  involuntary  stools  while  passing  urine ;
rapid,  weak,  rattling  respiration  ;  sliding  down  in  bed ;
urine  dark  but  clear;  bleeding  from  anus;  hemorrhage
of  dark  liquid  blood  ;  mouth  full  of  dark  bluish  ulcers;
pulse  intermits  every  third  beat ;  legs  flexed,  feet  drawn
up;  skin  hot  and  dry.  ^Typhoid  fever.
■*^  Attacks,  Periodicity.  Periodical  shocks:  tearing  and
stitches  in  head.

10  to  11  A.M.:  gastric  weakness  <.

From  10  a.m.  until  evening:  weak  feeling  in  stomach.


MURIATICUM  ACIDUM.  516

From  4  p.m.  till  midnight:  pain  in  lower  lip.

"Every  day:  from  9  a.m.  till  1  p.m.:  headache.

On  third  day  during  attack  of  scarlatina:  tonsils  and
fauces  covered  with  exudate.

Lasting  four  days:  menses.

Every  eight  to  fourteen  days:  discharge  of  bright  blood
from  anus.

Every  Summer:  red  itching  pimples  on  face,  cheeks  and
around  mouth.
^^  Locality  and  Direction. Right:  tearing  in  parietal  bone;
buzzing  <  in  ear;  patch  on  side  of  tongue;  pain  in
thigh;  swelling  on  tendo-achilles.

Left:  soreness  over  eye  and  in  half  of  nose;  sore  feeling
on  side  of  head;  pain  below  half  of  lower  lip;  ulcer
towards  side  of  tongue;  stitches  low  down  in  side.

From  1.  to  r.:  pain  in  eyes.
*^  Sensations. Loss  of  bodily  irritability.

Tearing  and  stitches  through  whole  body.

As  if  hair  was  drawn  upwards ;  as  if  brain  was  loose,  was
torn  or  beaten  to  pieces;  as  if  brain  was  clasped  by  a
hand  and  was  being  twisted  and  torn  ;  as  if  occiput  was
filled  with  lead;  as  if  hair  was  standing  on  end;  mouth
as  if  glued  up  with  insipid  mucus ;  as  if  some  obstruc-
tion must  be  pulled  out  of  throat;  as  if  menses  would
appear;  as  if  she  would  die  ;  pain  in  chest  as  if  beaten ;
pain  in  back  as  from  a  sprain  or  as  if  he  had  stooped
long;  burning  as  if  under  skin  of  coccyx;  as  if  place  was
jammed  in  in  tendo-achilles;  joints  as  if  bruised.

Pain:  in  occiput;  below  1.  half  of  lower  lip;  in  teeth;  in
abdomen;  on  sternum;  in  os  coccyx;  in  r.  thigh;  in
periosteum.

Steady,  sharp  pain :  in  back  part  of  head.

Tearing:  in  vertex;  in  head ;  in  r.  parietal  bone;  in  limbs.

Shooting  pains :  in  lower  limbs.

Stitches:  in  head;  out  of  eyes;  low  down  in  1.  side;  in
chest;  at  heart;  in  anus.

Burning  stitches:  in  chest;  in  sacrum.

Sharp,  burning  pain :  from  1.  to  r.  eye.

Sharp,  boring:  in  temporal  region.

Cutting:  in  anus.

Stinging  pain  :  in  nose.

Bursting  pain  :  in  chest.  •

Pressing  pain:  in  ear;  in  back.

Beating  or  knocking:  in  ear.

Pulsating  pain  :  in  teeth.

Cramp:  in  stomach.

Pricking  pain :  in  vagina.

Sore  pain :  in  anus.


517  MUPvIATICUM  ACIDUM.

Pressing,  tensive  pain  :  in  head.

Painful  drawing:  in  periosteum.

Pressing,  drawing,  tired  pain:  in  lumbar  region;  in  upper

arms  and  knees.
Tingling,  creeping,  cold  pain:  from  ears  to  top  of  head.
Biting:  in  anus.
Burning:  on  lips;  of  blisters  on tongue; of  fauces;  in

chest ;  of  anus;  of  tips  of  fingers;  around  ulcers  on  lower

extremities;  of  tips  of  toes ;  in  palms  and  soles.
Drawing,  burning :  along  back.
Smarting:  of  fauces;  of  anus.
Soreness:  over  1.  eye;  in  eyeball  and  1.  half  of  nose,  temple

to  back  of  head;  in  a  small  spot  on  mucous  membrane

of  palate;  of  anus;  inchest.
Heat:  in  top  of  head;  in  face;  of  whole  body.
Constriction :  of  chest.

Tension:  in  hypochondria;  on  sternum;  in  elbow  joint.
Pressing:  in  hypochondria;  in  genitals.
Feeling  of  emjjtiness :  in  epigastric  region  ;  in  oesophagus;

in  stomach  ;  in  abdomen.
Dragging,  heavy  sensation :  in  abdomen.
Heaviness :  in  back  part  of  head  ;  of  arms.
Deadness and  numbness:  in  forehead;  in  fingers.
Dryness :  in  mouth.
Tickling:  in  chest.
Itching,  smarting :  in  canthi.
Itching :  in  eyes ;  in  canthi ;  of  pimples  on  forehead,  cheeks

and  around  mouth ;  of  anus  ;  of  scrotum  ;  of  palms.
**  Tissues. Ty[)hoid  condition,  scorbutis;  hemorrhages.

Carbuncles  in  scorbutic  individuals,  with  ulcers  on  gums

and  profuse  emission  of  clear  urine.
Painful  drawing  in  periosteum;  intermittent  fever.
Dropsical  swellings.
*^  Touch. Passive  Motion. Injuries. Touch :  sore  feeling

in  occiput  <  ;  hemorrhoids  painful ; swelling  around

anus  very  sensitive;  unbearable  on  genitals;  bloodboils

pricking.
Scratching :  does  not  >  anal  itching ;  itching  of  scrotum

not  >,
•  Eczema  Solaris.
*^  Skin. I  Freckles;  eczema  Solaris.

■  Eruption  of  pimples,  forming  scurfs  on forehead,  outer

ear,  lips,  hands,  or  back  of  fingers; itching  when  get-
ting warm  in  bed.
I  Bloodboils,  pricking  when  touched.
lUlcers: painful,  deep,  putrid;  covered with scurf; on

lower  legs,  with  burning  at  their  circumference.
I  Black  pocks.


MURIATICUM  ACIDUM.  518

■  Erysipelas  ambulans,  which  remains  stationary  after
Bdlad.  and  Rhus;  pressing,  tensive  pain  in  head,  <
when  being  put  in  erect  position.

IB  Scarlatina;  redness  intense  and  rapidly  spreading;
eruption  scanty,  interspersed  with  petechise;  skin  pur-
plish.

■Scarlet  fever;  at,  or  a  few  hours  before  appearance  of
eruption  patient  lies  in  a  stupefied  condition ;  eruption
intensely  red,  rapidly  spreading,  face,  neck  and  whole
body  being  at  once  covered;  great  difficulty  in  swal-
lowing (compatible  Bellad).

iScarlet  fever;  sliding  down  in  bed;  burning  heat  of
whole  body,  with  anxiety  and  constant  desire  to  be
uncovered,  especially  during  exacerbation  of  fever  in
evening;  constant  restlessness  of  whole  body,  except
feet,  great  restlessness  of  arms,  must  constantly  move
them;  pulse  regularly  intermittent;  dark  redness  of
cheeks;  eyes  dull  red;  bluish  color  of  skin;  eruption
scanty,  interspersed  with  many  petechise;  considerable
angina,  with  great  tendency  to  ulceration  of  tonsils
and  neighboring  parts;  groaning,  sobbing  respiration;
putrid  odor  from  mouth ;  discharge  of  acrid  pus  from
nose,  causing  rawness  and  vesication  of  surrounding
parts.
*''  Stages  of  Life,  Constitution, i Black  eyes,  dark  hair.

Girl,  £et.  4,  strong,  healthy;  erysipelas.

Boy,  set,  14,  weak,  poorly  developed;  typhoid  fever.

Boy,  set.  15,  Bellad.  and  Mercur.  had  been  used  for  five
days;  diphtheria.

Young  man,  set.  17,  during  scarlatina;  diphtheritis.

Woman,  set.  30,  brunette,  sufiering  a  long  time;  hemor-
rhoids.

Woman  after  sixth  labor;  hemorrhoids.

Man,  set.  40,  strong;  diphtheria.

Man,  set.  50;  swelling  on  tendo-achilles.

Woman,  set.  60,  unmarried,  cachectic,  has  an  eruption  on
lower  limbs;  tj'phoid  fever.

Man,  set.  65,  corpulent,  plethoric,  indulging  in  much  food
and  drink,  suffering  from  chronic  bronchial  catarrh,
complicated  by  slight  emphysema  which  Dulcam.  re-
moved ;  passage  of  feces  while  urinating.
*^  Relations.  Antidoted  by :  Carbonates  of  soda,  potassa,  lime,
magnesia,  and  sapo  medicinalis  in  poisoning  by  large
doses;  small  doses  by  Camphor,  Bryon.

It  antidotes:  Opium.  Cures  the  muscular  weakness  fol-
lowing excessive  use  of  opium.

Compatible:  after  Bellad.,  Bryon.,  Mercur.,  Rhus  tox.


519  MYGALE.


MYGALE.

A  large  black  Cuban  Spider.  Mygale  Lasiodora  Cubano.

Introduced  and  proved  by  Houard,  J.  G.  (Hah.  Mo.,  1869,  vol.  5,  p.  8).

Tincture  prepared  by  putting  live  insect  into  alcohol.

Clinical  Authorities.— CAorcZee,  Williamson,  Farr.  Clin.  Mat.  Med.,  p.  72;
Gonorrhcea,  Houard,  Hah.  Mo.,  vol.  5,  p.  8 ;  Chorea  (2  cases),  Houard,  A.  J.  H.
M.  M.,  vol.  1,  pp.  65-6;  Hah.  Mo.,  vol.  5,  p.  10;  Hah.  Mo.,  vol.  10,  p.  331 ;  Pres-
ton, Hah.  Mo.,  vol.  8,  p.  375 ;  Spooner,  Eaue's  Eec,  1873,  p!  206.

^  Mind. I  Low  spirited  and  depressed.

^  Inner  Head, l  Frontal  headache. ^Chorea. <? Vertigo.

I  Dull  pain  in  forehead.
*  Outer  Head. iHead  often  jerked  to  one  side,  usually  to

right.
^  Sight  and  Eyes. Nausea  with dimness  of  sight; weak-
ness; palpitation.
^  Upper  Face. >  Constant  twitching  of  muscles  of  face.
^^  Teeth  and  Gums, i  Grating  of  teeth  at  night.
^^  Hiccough,  Belching,  Nausea  and  Vomiting. 1 1  Nausea,

with  palpitation.
^^  Urinary  Organs. Urine:  increased;  stinging  in  urethra;

burning  hot,  scalding.
^^  Male  Sexual  Organs. iChordee.
I  Protracted  gonorrhoea.
I  Chancres  (syphilis).
^^  Voice  and  Larynx. Trachea  and  Bronchia. lAn  effort

to  talk  is  made,  and  words  are  jerked  out.
^^  Lower Limbs. ll  Intense redness in streaks following
course  of  lymphatics,  from  calf  upward  to  body,  with
great  anxiety,  twitching  of  limbs.
^*  Limbs  in  General. ■  Twitching  and  jerking  of  muscles
of  one  arm  and  leg,  usually  right.
■  Convulsive,  uncontrollable  movements  of  arms  and  legs.
^  Rest. Position. Motion. Sitting:  lower  extremities  in
constant  motion.
Throwing  his  head  backwards  and  then  forwards:  chorea.
Cannot  keep  her  hands  for  a  minute  in  same  position.
Could  with  much  difficulty  carry  hands  to  mouth,  and
in  attempting  to  do  this  occasionally  hand  would  be
thrown  over  head  or  to  side  of  face.
Inability  to  walk  and  stand:  twitching  of  muscles.


MYGALE.  520

Walking:  drags  her  legs;  pain  in  knees.

Driving  her  out  of  bed:  chorea.
^^  Nerves. Tremulousness  in  evening;  great  prostration.

I  Convulsive,  uncontrollable  movements  of  back,  arms
and  legs.

iTwitching  of  muscles  and  shrugging  of  shoulders,  re-
turning every  day;  child  could  not  stand;  jerking  up
of  lower  limbs,  complete  inability  to  walk  or  stand ;
acute  aching  in  r.  ear,  every  night  between  midnight
and  morning,  driving  her  out  of  bed;  constant  motion
of  hands  and  arms. ^Chorea.

■Constant  contortions  of  face;  throwing  his  head  back-
wards and  then  forwards  with  a  jerk;  could  with  much
difficulty  carry  hands  to  mouth,  and  in  attempting  to
do  this  occasionally  hand  would  be  thrown  over  head
or  to  side  of  face ;  frequent  feeling  of  oppression  and
difficult  breathing;  restless  at  night  during  sleep;  has
become  thin  and  emaciated. ^Chorea.

■  Twitches  of  muscles  of  face  and  of  upper  extremities;

puts  out  her  tongue  with  great  difficulty;  convulsive
movements  of  shoulders,  keeps  her  hands  in  constant
motion;  gait  unsteady;  mouth  and  eyes  open  and  shut
in  rapid  succession,  over  which  she  has  no  control;  it
is  with  difficulty  that  she  can  carry  anything  to  mouth ;
lower  extremities  constantly  in  motion  while  sitting;
drags  her  legs  when  walking. ^Chorea.

■  Constantly  jerking  head  to  r.  side,  occasionally  drops

head  on  shoulder,  sometimes  twists  his  head  around  to
r.  side;  twitching  in  muscles  of  back  and  arms;  pain
in  knees  when  walking;  when  attempting  to  control
these  involuntary  motions  respiratory  muscles  are  af-
fected to  such  an  extent  that  he  cannot  get  his  breath
until  he  takes  a  deep  inspiration. ^Chorea.

■  Chorea; arms  and limbs in constant motion; facial

muscles  distorted,  could  not  help  herself;  headache;
vertigo;  grating  of  teeth  at  night;  quiet  during  sleep;
<  in  morning.

■  Cannot  keep  her  hands  for  a  minute  in  same  position;

twitches  of  muscles  of  face;  constant  restlessness;  inor-
dinately sensitive,  so  much  so  that  she  could  not  be
persuaded  to  reply  to  questions.

'^^  Sleep. Restless  sleep  with  ridiculous  dreams.

''  Time. Morning:  chorea  <.

Evening:  tremulousness;  prostration.
Night :  grating  of  teeth ;  restless.

""^  Fever.  Severe  chill,  followed  by  fever,  with  trembling  of
whole  body,  excessive  thirst,  face  flushed,  pulse  130,
tongue  dry  and  brow^n,  difficult  breathing,  despondency,
fear  of  death,  delirium.


521  MYGALE— MYOSOTIS.

"Attacks,  Periodicity. Every day:  twitching  of  muscles
and  shrugging  of  shoulders.
Between  midnight  and  morning:  chorea.
''Locality and Direction. Eight: head  jerked  to  side;
twitching  of  muscles  of  arm  and  leg ;  acute  aching  in  ear!
Sensations. Pain :  in  forehead ;  in  knees.
Acute  aching:  in  r.  ear.
Stinging:  in  urethra.
Dull  pain:  in  forehead.
*^  Stages  of  Life,  Constitution. Boy,  eet.  8,  suffering  three
years;  chorea.
Boy,  set.  9,  light  complexion ;  chorea.
Girl,  aet.  12,  suffering  for  four  years;  chorea.
Girl,  £et.  13;  chorea.
Girl,  a;t.  15;  chorea.
''  Relations. Compare :  Act.  rac,  Agaric,  Apis,  Bellad.,  Doryph,
Hyosc,  Tar  ant.


MYOSOTIS.

Forget-me-not.  Bomginacex.

No  provings.

CJ.INICAI.  Authorities.— Cou(/;i,  Fisher,  Times  Retros.,  1875,  p.  25;  Chronic
bronchitis,  Frank,  Eaue's  Eec.,  1875,  p.  116;  Affection  of  luncjs.  Funk,  Kaue's  Eec,
1875,  p.  116.

''  Voice  and  Larynx. Trachea  and  Bronchia, i  Chronic
bronchitis;  patient  nearly  in  a  dying  condition.
SBronchorrhoea.

^^  Cough.  I  Obstinate  old  coughs  with  profuse  muco-purulent
expectoration;  gagging  or  vomiting  during  cough,  <
while  or  immediately  after  eating ;  expectoration  most
profuse  in  morning ;  pain  in  1.  side  (lower  lung)  not
<  by  lying  m  any  position,  but  painful  while  coughing
and  sensitive  to  percussion.
■  After  typhus,  progressive  emaciation  with  severe  couo-h
sometimes  dry  and  again  with  scanty  expectoration;'
profuse  sweats  day  and  night;  eyes  and  cheeks  sunken-
nose  pointed  and  whitish.

''Inner  Chest  and Lungs, i Copious  sputa, emaciation,

night  sweat.
^  Time. Morning:  expectoration  most  profuse.
Day  and  night:  profuse  sweats.


MYOSOTIS— MYRICA  CERIFERA.  522

*'^  Locality  and  Direction. Left:  pain  in  side  (lower  lung).
*^  Sensations. Pain  in  1.  side  (lower  lung).
*^  Stages  of  Life, Constitution. W.  D.,  a^t. 26; chronic
bronchitis.
W.  K.,  set.  15,  after  typhus;  affection  of  lungs.
*^  Relations. Compare :  iStannum  in  lung  disease.


MYRICA  CERIFERA.

Wax  Myrtle.  Myricacese.

A  shrub  from  three  to  ten  feet  high.  It  grows  in  sandy  soil  along  the  sea
and  shores  of  our  northern  lakes,  and  has  a  spicy  odor.  The  tincture  is  prepared
from  the  fresh  bark  of  the  root.

Provings  by  Chase,  CoUis,  Wesselhoeft  C,  Krebs,  Linnel  (Trans.  Horn.  Med.
Soc.  Mass.,  1864,  vol.  2,  p.  397),  Walker  (Hale's  New  Rem.,  2d  ed.,  p.  728),  Sharp
(M.  Horn.  Rev.,  vol.  20,  p.  749).

Clinical  Authorities. — Affection  of  pharynx,  Preston,  Hom.  Phys.,  vol.  4,
p.  158 ;  Hepatic  derangement,  Bowie,  Hah.  Mo.,  vol.  12,  p.  362 ;  Jaundice,  Simpson,
Hah.  Mo.,  1886,  p.  824.

^  Mind. I  I  Great  despondency  ;  terribly  depressed ;  irritable.
Pleasant  exhilaration,  succeeded  by  depression  and  press-
ure about  head.
Deficient  concentrativeness ;  dull,  drowsy  state.
^  Sensorium. Vertigo : with  dulness  and  drowsiness ;  with
rush  of  blood  to  head  and  face  on  stooping ;  with  nausea.
^  Inner  Head. Awakes  with  pains  in  forehead,  temples  and
small  of  back.
■  Dull,  heavy  feeling  over  and  in  eyes;  drowsiness;  jaundice.
I  I  Dull,  heavy  aching  in  forehead  and  temples  on  waking

in  morning,
i  I  Headache,  with  pain  and  stiffness  in  nape  of  neck.
Empty  feeling  in  head.
^  Sight  and  Eyes. lEyes  congested  and  yellow.

Eyes  and  sclerotic  have  a  dirty,  dingy,  yellowish  hue,  lids

abnormally  red.
Eyes  feel  dull  and  heavy ;  also  on  waking.
Eyes  burn  and  tire  easily  when  he  reads ;  lids  heavy.
Smarting  in  eyes,  with  feeling  as  of  sand  in  them,  difficulty
of  closing  lids.
^Hearing  and  Ears. Ringing  in  ears,  with  slight  vertigo;
also  with  pressure  about  head.
Ringing  in  1.  ear.


523  MYRICA  CERIFERA.

'  Smell  and  Nose. Severe  coryza  in  morning.

I  Fetid  and  bloody  ozsena.
^Tipper  Face, l Face  yellow,  jaundiced.

Fulness  with  heat  and  throbbing,  especially  after  being
out  in  open  air.
'"Teeth  and  Gums. I Tender,  spongy  and  bleeding  gums.
''  Taste  and  Tongue. iTaste:  bad,  foul,  he  cannot  eat  be-
cause of  it;  bitter;  nauseous.
Tongue  coated  a  dirty  yellow.

I  Thick,  yellowish,  dark,  dry  and  crusty  coating  on  tongue,
rendering  it  almost  immovable.
'^  Inner  Mouth. ■  Mouth  dry;  thirst,  water  >  partially  and
temporarily.

■  Adhesive coating over buccal membrane; dry, scaly

crusts  on  roof  of  mouth,  that  water  scarcely  moistens
or  dissolves.

■  Aphthae;  follicular  stomatitis.
^^  Throat. ■Ulceration  of  fauces.

■  Catarrh  of  throat  and  posterior  nares.

■  Aphthous  tonsillitis.

■  Stringy  mucus  detached  with  difficulty;  offensive,  tena-

cious in  nose  and  throat.

■  Pharynx  dry,  sore  as  if  it  would  crack,  impeding,  finally

obstructing  deglutition.
■Slimy,  glutinous, frothy  mucus  in  pharynx,  gargling
scarcely  detaches  it;  causes  disgusting  taste,  preventing
eating.

"  Appetite,  Thirst. Desires,  Aversions. 1 1  Hunger,  yet
full  feeling  as  after  a  hearty  meal.
Loss  of  appetite,  loathing  of  food.

'^  Scrobiculum  and  Stomach.  ■Indescribable  feeling  of  dis-
tress in  epigastric  region ;  fulness  and  pressure ;  weak,
sinking  feeling.

*^  HypDchondria.  "Dull  pain  in  r.  side,  immediately  below
ribs;  thick  yellowish  white  coating  on  tongue,  no  appe-
tite, desire  for  acids,  unrefreshing  sleep.  ^Hepatic  de-
rangement.

■  Dragging  pain  in  back;  miserable  feeling  all  over;  dull

pain  in  hepatic  region ; no  appetite ;  loathing  of  food  ;
sleeplessness. /^Hepatic  derangement.

■  Very  despondent;  dull,  heavy  headache,  <  in  morning;

yellowness  of  sclerotica,  with  redness  of  eyelids;  tongue
coated  dirty  yellowish,  as  if  smeared  with  mud ;  taste
bitter;  offensive  breath  ;  no  appetite ;  yellowness  of  skin ;
dark  colored  urine,likeale  ;  feels  very  weak  and  drowsy;
with  much  soreness  and  aching,-  <  in  lower  limbs.
■Sallow  complexion  ;  tongue  thickly  coated  ;  breath  offen-
sive ;  tenacious,  thick,  nauseous  secretion  in  mouth ;  no


MYRICA  CERIFERA.  524

appetite;  stools  pale;  urine  dark;  extreme  lassitude;
great  sleepiness  during  day  ;  abdominal  pain  and  tender-
ness, <  in  hepatic  region. 6'Jaundice.
I  Jaundice: fulness  of  hepatic  region  and of  upper  ab-
domen ;  drowsiness,  debility  ;  stools  mushy,  clay  colored.
^^  Abdomen, i  i  Weak,  faint  feeling  as  if  diarrhoea  would  ensue.
Griping  pains,  rumbling,  urging  to  stool,  passing  only
flatus.
^°  Stool  and  Rectum. Passes  ver}'  offensive  flatus.

Stools:  loose,  mushy,  with  tenesmus  and  cramplike  sensa-
tion in  umbilical  region; light  yellow;  mushy,  clay
colored  (jaundice).
iLoose,  light  colored  stool,  growing  lighter  daily,  until  it

became  ash  colored  and  destitute  of  bile.
I  Chronic  diarrhoea;  diarrhoea  of  consumptives.
^^  Urinary Organs. lUrine: high colored,  saturated  with
coloring  matter of  bile;  beer colored,  w'ith  yellowish
froth;  pinkish  brown  sediment;  dark  and  turbid.
^^  Male  Sexual  Organs, l Chronic  gonorrhoea.
^^  Female  Sexual  Organs. iLeucorrhoea  excoriating,  fetid,

thick  and  yellowish,  of  several  j^ears'  duration.
^^  Voice  and  Larynx. Trachea  and  Bronchia, i Chronic

bronchitis.
^^  Cough. I  Cough  :  tickling  at  night  on  lying  down;  profuse
expectoration; <  by  talking;  chronic,  with  profuse  ex-
pectoration and  much  irritation  of  throat.
^^  Heart,  Pulse  and  Circulation. Pulse :  impulse  increased,

but  60 ;  feeble,  irregular; slow.
^^  Neck  and  Back, i  iPain  in  back  of  neck.

Dull,  aching  dragging  on  w^alking;  lassitude,  headache.
^^  Rest. Position. Motion. Lying  down:  cough.
Stooping :  rush  of  blood  to  head  and  face.
Cannot  move  tongue  :  thick  coating.
^^  Nerves. Slight  nervous  excitement  and restlessness fol-
lowed by  a  sick,  debilitated  sensation  that  is  most  char-
acteristic.
Weak  and  drowsy ;  muscular  soreness  and  aching  in  limbs.
■  Great  debility. ^Jaundice.
^^  Sleep. Drowsiness,  vertigo,  semi-stupor.

Restless,  or  sleeps  soundly  until  towards  morning;  gener-
ally awakes  feeling  <.
Waking  wath  dull  frontal  headache.
Drowsiness  with  and  after  headache.
^  Time. Morning: dull aching  in forehead  and  temples;
severe  coryza.
During  day :  great  sleepiness.
Night:  tickling  cough.
^^Temperature  and  Weather. Open  air:  heat  and  throb-
bing in  face ;  causes  chilliness.


525  MYRICA  CERIFERA.

^*'  Fever. Chilliness  on  going  out  of  doors,  slight  aching  in
lumbar  region.

Excited,  feverish  feeling,  alternating  with  chilliness;  warm
sensation  along  spine,  then  chill  and  gentle  sweat.

Face  hot  and  flushed.

I  Night  sweats. ^Phthisis.
*'  Attacks,  Periodicity. For  several  years :  leucorrhoea.
^^  Locality  and  Direction. Right :  dull  pain  in  side.

Left :  ringing  in  ear.
*^  Sensations. As  of  sand  in  eyes ;  pharynx  as  if  it  would
crack ;  full  feeling,  as  if  after  a  hearty  meal ;  tongue  as
if  smeared  with  mud  ;  as  if  diarrhoea  would  ensue ;  itch-
ing as  from  fleabites.

Pains :  in  forehead,  temples  and  small  of  back ;  in  nape  of
neck  ;  in  hepatic  region.

Soreness  :  of  pharynx ;  of  muscles.

Griping  pains  :  in  abdomen.

Cramplike  sensation  :  in  umbilical  region.

Smarting :  of  eyes.

Burning :  of  eyes.

Aching :  of  muscles  ;  in  limbs ;  in  lumbar  region.

Dragging  pains :  in  back.

Dull,  heavy  aching :  in  forehead  and  temples.

Dull  pain :  in  r.  side ;  in  hepatic  region.

Pressure :  about  head  ;  in  stomach.

Dull,  heavy  feeling :  over  and  in  eyes.

Tenderness :  of  hepatic  region.

Fulness:  in  stomach; of  hepatic  region.

Warm  sensation :  along  spine.

Indescribable  feeling  of  distress :  in  epigastric  region.

Empty  feeling  :  in  head.

Weak,  sinking  feeling :  in  stomach.

Stiffness :  in  nape  of  neck.

Dryness :  of  pharynx.

Itching :  of  skin.
**  Tissues. Catarrh  of  mucous  membranes ;  mouth,  pharynx,
bile  ducts,  etc.

Muscular  lameness,  lassitude,  depressed  spirits.

Low  states,  with  or  without  jaundice;  debility;  viscous
state  of  mucus,  scanty,  tenacious,  crust  forming  secretions
on  tongue  and  in  mouth  and  pharynx.

Granulated  eyelids  and  throat.

Ulcerated  mouth  and  throat.

Diphtheria :  thick,  vitiated  mucous  secretions,  difficult  to
detach.

Chronic,  offensive,  irritating  leucorrhoea;  profuse  catarrhal
discharges  of  long  standing  generally.
*^  Skin. Yellow,  jaundiced  appearance ;  itching  as  from  flea-
bites.


MYRICA  CERIFERA— MYRTUS  COMMUNIS.  626

I  Yellowness  of  skin  of  whole  body.

"  Stages  of  Life,  Constitution.  Stout  person,  set.  50 ;  jaundice.

Man,  aet.  70;  tall,  robustly  developed;  affection  of  pharynx.

■^^  Relations. Compare: Asar. can., Acid,  benz.,  Berb.  vulg.,

Bromine,  Chimaph., Corn,  circ,  Chelid.,  Cubeba,  Digits

Eryng.  aquat,  Eupat.  arom.,  Hydr.  can.,  Hepar  sulph.,  Kali

bich.,  Laches.,  Merc,  iod.,  Fodoph.,  Spongia.


MYRTUS  COMMUNIS.

Myrtle.  Myrtacese.

A  cultivated  shrub  or  small  tree  native  to  countries  bordering  on  the  Medi-
terranean. It  is  mentioned  by  Hippocrates,  Galen,  Dioscorides,  the  Arabians  and
other  ancient  writers  (see  article  by  Hering,  Hah.  Mo.,  vol.  7,  p.  62,  1871).

No  provings.

Clinic Ai,  Authorities. — Cough  and  coryza,  Wahle,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  5,
p.  842;  Pain  in  I.  chest,  Landesmann,  Raue's  Eec,  1873,  p.  110;  Stitches  in  chest,
Wahle,  Euck.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  5,  p.  842  ;  Use  in  tuberculosis,  Payne,  W.  E.,  Hah.
Mo.,  vol.  6,  p.  355;  Catarrhal  fevers,  Hering,  N.  A.  J.  H.,  vol.  1,  p.  74.

13  Throat. ■  Dryness  in  throat;  pains  in  throat  and  chest,  with

expectoration  of  blood.
^  Cough. 'Dry,  hollow  cough,  from  tickling  in  upper  anterior
lobes  of  lungs;  <  in  morning,  >  in  evening;  great  las-
situde in  afternoon.

I  Cough  with  tickling  in  chest.

1  Cough,  coryza  and  catarrhal  fever,  setting  in  with  every
atmospheric  change.

■Catarrhal  fevers,  with  pain  in  elbow  and  knee  joints,  with
dry,  hollow  cough,  caused  by  a  tickling  in  upper  and
front  part  of  lungs,  especially  in  morning,  >  in  evening,
accompanied  by  lassitude  in  afternoon.
^  Inner  Chest  and  Lungs.  iPain  in  chest;  cough,  with
tightness  on  breast.

I  Acute  pain  in  chest;  pressing  pain  in  chest.

I  Pain  in  upper  part  of  1.  chest  through  to  shoulder,  <  tak-
ing a  deep  breath  and  making  a  strong  motion.

iStitching  pain  in  1.  chest;  from  upper  portion  straight
through  to  1.  shoulder  blade,  <  from  breathing,  yawn-
ing and  coughing. ^Tuberculosis.

Burning  pain  in  1.  chest,  wdth  throbbing,  aching,  tickling.

■Throbbing  ache  and  stitching  pain  in  1.  infraclavicular


527  MYRTUS  COMMUNIS.

region,  extending  thence  through  to  1.  shoulder  blade,

<  on  deep  inspiration  ;  sensation  of  burning  in  1,  breast.

^Tuberculosis.
I  1  Haemoptysis  in  tuberculous  subjects; acute  pains  in

superior  portions  of  1.  chest,  radiating  backwards  to  point

of  scapula  of  sound  side.
I  Hepatization  of  1.  lung.
I  I  Useful  in  phthisis,  particularly  if  caused  by  maltreated

syphilis.
^Time. Morning:  cough  <  ;  tickling  in  upper  part  of  lung.
Afternoon:  great  lassitude.
Evening:  cough  >  ;  tickling  in  lung  >.
^^  Temperature  and  Weather. Every  atmospheric  change :

cough,  coryza  and  catarrhal  fevers.
*^  Locality and  Direction. Left: stitching  pain  in  chest

through  to  shoulder  blade  ;  burning  pain  in  chest ;  pain

in  infraclavicular  region  ;  burning  in  breast,  acute  pains

in  superior  portion  of  chest; hepatization  of  lung.
*^  Sensations. Pain :  in  throat  and  chest ;  in  elbow  and  knee

joint;  in  upper  part  of  1.  chest  to  shoulder.
Acute  pain  :  in  chest ;  in  superior  portion  of  1.  chest.
Stitching  pain :  in  1.  chest ;  in  1.  infraclavicular  region.
Pressing  pain :  in  chest.
Burning  pain  :  in  1.  chest.

Tickling:  in  upper  anterior  lobes  of  lungs;  in  chest.
Dryness :  in  throat.
Tightness :  on  breast.
*^  Stages  of  Life,  Constitution. Young  man,  tuberculous ;

coryza,  cough,  etc.
A  nun  who  had  been  homoeopathically  cured  of  phthisis

brought  on  by  long  continued  use  of  Quinine  for  ague,

from  which  she  had  suffered  for  five  years ;  pain  in  1.  chest.
^^  Relations. Compare:  Bryon.,  Phosphor.,  Pix,  Therid.  and

Sulphur  in  stitches  through  upper  left  chest.


NAJA  TRIPUDIANS.  528

NAJA  TRIPUDIANS.

Cobra  Poison.  Elapidfe.

The  Cobra  di  Capello  is  the  hooded  snake  of  Hindostan  usually  employed
by  the  snake  charmers  of  India.

Provings  by  Stokes  (Br.  Jour,  of  Hom.,  vol.  11,  p.  25, 1853),  Russell  (Br.  Jour,
of  Hom.,  vol.  11,  p.  593) ;  other  authorities,  Du  Chaillu,  Fayrer,  etc.,  have  reported
symptoms  of  the  bite  (Allen's  Encyclopedia,  vol.  6,  p.  447).

Clinical  Authorities. — Effects  of  grief ,  Stokes,  B.J.  H.,  vol.  11,  p.  598;
Neuralgia  in  head,  Colton,  Raue's  Rec,  1874,  p.  258;  A.  H.  O.,  vol.  10,  p.  574;
Headache,  Russell,  B.  J.  H.,  vol.  13,  p.  310;  Chronic  headaches,  Russell,  B.  J.  H.,
vol.  12,  p.  214 ;  Cerebrospinal  meningitis,  Cummings,  MSS. ;  Pains  in  temples,
cardiac  and  ovarian  regions,  Danforth,  Hom.  Phys.,  vol.  2,  p.  51  ;  Congestion  of
conjunctiva,  Stokes,  B.  J.  H.,  vol.  11,  p.  598 ;  Acute  pharyngo-laryngitis,  Russel,
B.  J.  H.,  vol.  12,  p.  213;  Dyspepsia,  Stokes,  B.  J.  PI.,  vol.  11,  p.  598;  Irritability
of  heart  (2  cases),  Russell,  B.  J.  H.,  vol.  12,  p.  372;  Angina  pectoris,  Bradshaw,
AUg.  Hom.  Ztg.,  vol.  107,  p.  134 ;  Affection  of  heart,  Hansen,  Allg.  Hom.  Ztg.,  vol.
113,  p.  84 ; Organic  disease  of  heart,  Russell,  B.  J.  H.,  vol.  12,  p.  54.

^  Mind. I  1  Easily  excited.

I  Great  depression  of  spirits,  with  temporo-frontal  head-
ache, spinal  pain  and  palpitation  of  heart.

I  I  Melancholy ;  began  to  form  images  of  possible  wrongs
and  misfortunes  over  which  the  mind  broods;  very
wretched  at  times.

I  I  Suicidal  insanity,  broods  constantly  over  imaginary
troubles;  sleep  full  of  frightful  dreams,  and  wakes  with
dull  pain  in  head  and  fluttering  of  heart;  uneasy  dry-
ness of  fauces ;  grasping  of  throat,  with  sensation  of
choking  and  lividity  of  face. ^Melancholia.

Paroxysms,  twice  a  day,  of  delirium,  incessant  talking,
seeing  visions,  imagines  she  is  in  a  terrible  rainstorm,
complains  of  being  so  cold,  and  that  the  carriage  has
turned  over  and  hurt  her  head.  ^Cerebro-spinal  men-
ingitis.

■  Dragging  and  anxiety  at  prsecordia,  occurring  in  great
grief;  also  smarting  pains  in  back  from  same  cause.
^  Inner  Head. Heaviness  of  eyes,  with  dryness  of  throat.

I  Temporo-frontal  headache,  depression  of  spirits;  spinal
pain;  palpitation  of  heart.

I  I  Congestive  headache  dependent  upon  organic  disease
of  heart.

Waking  with  dull  pain  in  head,  attended  by  fluttering  of
heart.

Weight  and  pressure  at  vertex,  with  cold  feet  and  flushes
of  face.


529  NAJA  TRIPUDIANS.

I  Pain  in  head,  ringing  in  ears,  palpitation,  small,  quick,
nervous  pulse;  constipation;  abdomen  large;  urine
scanty  and  sedimentitious. ^Nervous  headache.

■  Neuralgic  pain  in  head,  preceded  or  followed  by  nausea

or  vomiting;  pain  severe  in  1.  orbital  region,  extended
back  to  occiput;  aching  around  orbit,  increased  to
throbbing,  and  thence  it  was  drawing  in  character  to
back  of  head;  from  overeating,  mental  or  physical
exertion.

■Since  cessation  of  catamenia  eight  years  ago,  subject  to
agonizing  pain  in  head,  depriving  her  of  sense  and  mem-
ory; pain  comes  on  at  noon ;  pain  in  upper  part  of  back,
and  flushes  of  face;  has  not  been  more  than  two  or  three
days  free  from  an  attack  for  some  years;  sleep  profound;
pulse  regular  and  small.  -

■Awakes  with  headache  ever}^  morning;  dull,  heavy  con-
striction across  forehead;  eyes  sunken  and  dark;  in-
capacity for  much  exertion  of  mind  or  body;  headache
sometimes  wears  off,  at  other  times  continues  all  day ;
constant  relaxed  sore  throat,  dryness  of  fauces,  hoarse-
ness; very  susceptible  to  cold;  frequent  emissions.
^Chronic  headache.

I  I  Dull  shoots  up  occiput; tired  feeling  in  cervical  and
dorsal  vertebrae,  with  peculiar  burning  of  exhaustion ;
spinal  irritation.
^  Sight  and  Eyes, l  i  Eyes  fixed  and  staring.

i  I  Passive  congestion  of  palpebral  conjunctiva;  lids  look
bluish  and  are  glued  together  in  morning.
^  Upper  Face. '  i  Livid  face.
^  Lower  Face, • '  Foaming  at  mouth.
^^  Inner  Mouth. '  '  Great  dryness  of  mouth,
13  T]i]«oat. I  I  Pressure  and  gagging  in  throat.

■  Constriction  and  dryness  of  throat.

■  Grasping  at  throat,  with  sense  of  choking.

■  QEsophagismus  or  spasmodic  stricture  of  oesophagus.
■Soreness  and  pricking  in  1.  side  of  throat.

■  Pharyngo-laryngeal  inflammation,  with  dark  red  color

of  fauces  and  spasmodic,  irritable  cough.
■After  catching  cold,  pain  in  throat  and  frequent  tendency
to  short  cough;  three  days  later,  heat  of  skin,  quick,
full  pulse,  flushed  face;  tongue  white,  moist  and  large;
r.  tonsil  swollen,  with  sharp  pain  in  it,  as  from  needles ;
short,  hard  cough,  <  at  night ;  pain  up  r.  side  of  neck ;
finally  incessant  cough;  considerable  heat  of  skin;
fauces  red ;  larynx  tender  to  touch,  with  inclination  to
cough  when  pressure  was  made  there ;  tonsils  swollen.
^  A  cute  pharyngo-laryngitis.

■  Diphtheria  in  cases  just  like  Laches,  when  larynx  is  in-
voL.  VII. — 34.


NAJA  TRIPUDIANS.  530

vaded ;  patient  grasps  at  throat,  with  sensation  of  chok-
ing, fauces  dark  red,  fetid  breath,  short,  hoarse  cough,
with  raw  feeling  in  upper  part  of  trachea.

■  Diphtheria  with  impending  paralysis  of  heart; patient

blue ;  awakens  from  sleep  gasping ;  pulse  intermittent

and  thready.
^^  Scrobiculum  and  Stomach. 1 1  Dyspepsia  with  foul  white

or  .yellowish  white  tongue;  rawness  of  throat;  soreness

of  stomach  or  pressive  pain.
^^  Stool  and  Rectum. Il Diarrhoea;  white,  slimy,  greenish
•  stools.

I  I  Constipation ;  difficult,  painful  evacuations.
^^  Urinary  Organs. '  '  Urine  yellow,  loaded  with  mucus.
^  Female  Sexual  Organs. iCrampy  pains  in  1.  ovary  with

severe  palpitation.

■  Ovarian  congestive  neuralgia,  with  violent  palpitation.
I  iTliin,  whitish  leucorrhoea  in  afternoon.

^  Voice  and  Larynx. Trachea  and  Bronchia, i  Constric-
tive irritation  of  larynx,  giving  rise  to  coughing.
Spasmodic  croup ;  clogging  up  of  larynx  and  trachea  with

thick  mucus,  which  is  hawked  up  with  difficulty.
Sensation  of  rawness  in  larynx  and  trachea,  or  as  if  there
was  a  hair  in it,  causing  constant  tickling,  coughing
and  hoarseness ;  finally  some  expectoration  of  tenacious
mucus; breathing laborious; gasping  for  breath  for
several  hours.
I  i Diphtheria  invading  larynx; impending  paralysis  of
heart.
^^Respiration, i Dyspnoea and prostration. ^Organic dis-
ease of  heart.
^^  Cough. I  Short,  hoarse  cough,  with  rawness  in  larynx  and
upper  part  of  trachea.
I  Irritating,  sympathetic  cough,  attending  organic  disease

of  heart.
I  I  Cough  of  laryngeal  and  pulmonary  phthisis.
^  Inner  Chest  and  Lungs, i  i  Asthmatic  constriction  of  chest

for  half  an  hour,  ending  in  mucous  expectoration.
^^  Heart,  Pulse  and  Circulation.  1 1  Feeling  of  depression
and  lowness  about  heart.
I  Fluttering  of  heart,  with  headache;  pulse  regular  in
rhythm,  but  irregular  in  force;  acute  pain  and  sense  of
oppression  in  chest  as  though  a  hot  iron  had  been  run
into  it  and  a  hundredweight  put  upon  it ;  cannot  lie  a
moment  on  1.  side,  but  great  relief  of  pain  and  breath-
ing on  lying  on  r.  side.

■  Chronic  nervous  palpitation ;  palpitation  after  preaching.

■  ■Inability  to  speak,  with  choking,  nervous,  chronic  pal-

pitation; chronic  hypertrophy  and  valvular  disease  of


631  HAJA  TRIPUDIANS.

heart;  considerable  pain  after  riding  in  a  carriage,  ex-
tending to  1.  scapula ;  pain  not  affected  by  inspiration.
^Angina  pectoris.

■  Attacks  of  severe  stitching  pains  in  region  of  heart,  dur-

ing which  respirations  almost  cease  and  death  seems
impending.  6* Angina  pectoris.
■Severe  pains  in  1.  temple,  cardiac  and  1.  ovarian  regions;
great  mental  depression;  aversion  to  talking;  sensation
as  if  heart  and  ovary  were  drawn  up  together;  a  sense
of  contraction  or  drawing  together  between  the  organs,

■  Pressing  pain  in  vertex  as  from  a  weight;  shortness  of

breath;  palpitation  of  heart,  <  walking  and  lying  on
side ;  constrictive  sensation  in  cardiac  region,  as  if  heart
was  screwed  together;  great  anxiety;  loss  of  appetite;
stool  normal;  slight  enlargement  of  heart;  first  sound
followed  by  a  grating,  second  sound  accentuated ;  pulse
irregular,  weak ;  pains  about  heart  extending  to  nape
of  neck,  1.  shoulder  and  arm,  with  anxiety  and  fear  of
death;  attacks  occur  frequently  during  night;  pains
accompanied  by  dry  cough,  particularly  emanating  from
trachea.

■Irritating,  sympathetic  cough  in  acute  stage  of  rheumatic
carditis,  and  afterwards  organic  changes  in  valves,  giv-
ing rise  to  tumultuous  action  of  heart,  violent,  sudden
throbbing,  attended  with  endocardial  murmur  and  in-
creased size  of  organs.

■Simple  hypertrophy  of  heart.

■  For  restoration  of  heart  damaged  by  acute  inflammation

and  for  assuaging  sufferings  of  chronic  hypertrophy  and
valvular  disease.

■  Valvular  disease,  with  loud  regurgitative  sounds;  pulse

60,  with  general  anasarca.

■  Deficient  nervous  influence  of  par  vagum;  dilatation  and

fatty  degeneration  of  heart.

■  Threatening  paralysis  of  heart. ^Diphtheria.

^^  Neck  and  Back,  i Cough,  laryngismus  and  even  spas-
modic stricture  of  oesophagus,  result  of  spinal  irritation
affecting  the  nucha.

■  Pain  in  back,  <  in  evening.

■  Spinal  irritation.

^' Limbs  in  General,  l  i Sudden  prostration  of  strength  in
limbs.

■  Limbs  swollen  double  natural  size. ^Organic  disease  of

heart.
^■^  Rest. Position. Motion. Lying  on  side:  palpitation  <.
Lying  on  r.  side:  great  relief  of  pain  and  breathing.
Cannot  lie  a  moment  upon  1.  side:  pain  in  chest.
Physical  exertion :  neuralgic  pain  in  head.


NAJA  TRIPUDIANS.  532

Walking:  palpitation  <,
^  Time. Morning :  eyelids  glued  together.
Noon:  pain  comes  on.
All  day:  headache  sometimes  lasts.
Afternoon :  leucorrhoea.
Evening:  pain  in  back  <.

Night :  cough  <  ;  attacks  of  pain  about  heart  frequent.
^^Temperature  and  Weather. Cold:  very  susceptible.
*^  Attacks,  Periodicity. For  half  an  hour:  asthmati  ccon-

striction  of  chest.
For  several  hours :  gasping  for  breath.
Every  morning:  awakes  with  headache.
For  some  years  has  not  been  free  from  an  attack  of  pain

in  head  for  more  than  two  or  three  days.
*^  Locality and Direction. Right: tonsil  sw^oUen,  with

pain ;  pain  in  side  of  neck.
Left:  severe  pain  in  orbital  region;  soreness  and  pricking

in  side  of  throat;  crampy  pains  in  ovary;  cannot  lie

upon  side;  pain  from  heart  to  scapula;  severe  pain  in

temple  and  ovarian  regions.
^  Sensations. Pain  as  from  needles  in  tonsil ;  as  if  there  was

a  hair  in  larynx;  as  though  a  hot  iron  had  been  run

into  it;  as  if  heart  and  ovary  were  drawn  up  together;

pain  as  from  a  weight  in  vertex;  as  if  heart  was  screwed

together.
Pain:  in  head;  in  spine;  in  upper  part  of  back;  in  throat;

in  r.  side  of  neck;  in  heart;  about  heart to  nape  of

neck;  1.  shoulder  and  arm.
Agonizing  pain:  in  head.
Acute  pain:  in  chest.
Severe  pain:  in  1.  orbital  region;  in  1.  temple,  cardiac  and

ovarian  regions.
Sharp  pain:  in  r.  tonsil.
Severe  stitching  pains :  in  region  of  heart.
Neuralgic  pain :  in  head ;  in  ovary.
Crampy  pains:  in  1.  ovary.
Aching:  around  orbit,  increased  to  throbbing,  and  thence

it  was  drawing  in  character  to  back  of  head.
Dull  shoots:  up  occiput.
Pressive  pain :  of  stomach ;  in  vertex.
Smarting  pain :  in  back.
Dull  pain :  in  head.
Peculiar  burning :  of  exhaustion.
Soreness:  in  1.  side  of  throat;  of  stomach.
Pricking:  on  1.  side  of  throat.
Raw  feeling: in  upper  part of  trachea;  of  throat; in

larynx.
Depression  and  lowness:  about  heart.


533  NAJA  TRIPUDIANS.

Dragging  and  anxiety:  at  praecordia.

Tired  feeling:  in  cervical  and  dorsal  vertebrae.

Pressure:  in  throat.

Weight  and  pressure:  at  vertex.

Heaviness:  over  eyes.

Dull,  heavy  constriction:  across  forehead.

Constrictive  sensation:  in  cardiac  region.

Choking  sensation.

Uneasy  dryness : of  fauces.

Dryness  :  of  throat ;  of  fauces ;  of  mouth.
**  Tissues. Acts  primarily  upon  nervous  system,  especially
upon  respiratory  nerves,  the  pneumogastric  and  glosso-
pharyngeal.
*' Touch. Passive Motion. Injuries. Touch: larynx
tender.

Riding  in  a  carriage :  considerable  pain  in  heart.
*''  Stages  of  Life,  Constitution. Woman,  set.  20 ;  cerebro-
spinal meningitis.

Miss,  set.  26,  fair,  florid,  nervous,  sanguine;  angina.

Man,  set.  27,  dark,  bilious  temperament ;  chronic  headaches.

Man,  set.  32,  baker,  eight  j^ears  ago  suffered  from  obstinate
articular  rheumatism,  six  years  ago  had  syphilis;  affec-
tion of  heart.

Woman,  set.  32,  feeble,  nervous,  suffering  several  years;
neuralgia  in  head.

Woman,  set.  85,  mother  of  four  children,  has  frequently
aborted,  brother  and  sister  died  of  consumption,  she
herself  having  been  homoeopathically  cured  of  the  dis-
ease, a  slight  dyspnoea  only  remaining;  angina  pectoris.

Woman,  set.  50,  suffering  about  a  year ;  irritability  of  heart.

Woman,  set.  56,  catamenia  ceased  eight  years  ago,  since
then  suffering ;  headaches.

Woman,  set.  60;  headache.
^  Relations. Compare :  Arsen.,  Cactus,  Crotal,  Iberis,  Laches.,
Mygale,  Sumbul,  Spigel.


NATRUM  ARSENICATUM.  534


NATRUM  ARSENICATUM.

Sodium  Arseniate.  Na^As0^12Il20.

The  arsenious  acid  becomes,  during  the  process  of  preparation,  converted  into
arsenic  acid.

Introduced  by  Gourbeyre,  who  made  proving  with  6th  trit.  (L'Art  Med,,  vol.
17,  p.  440,  1863) ;  more  extensive  provings  were  made  by  members  of  the  Horn.
Mat.  Med.  Club  of  Allegheny  Co.,  Pa.,  Buffum,  30th  and  3d  dec. ;  Chapman,  30th
and  12th ;  Crawford,  30th  ;  King,  30th,  15th  and  tincture ;  Martin,  30th,  loth  and
6th ;  Miller,  30th  and  15th ;  Ramage,  tincture ;  Shannon,  tincture ;  Thomson,
tincture  (Hah.  Mo.,  1876) ;  four  provings  (Hah.  Mo.,  vol.  13,  p.  599).

Clinical  Avtuorities.— Conjunctivitis,  King,  Hah.  Mo.,  vol.  13,  p.  603;
Granular  lids,  Thompson,  Hah.  Mo.,  vol.  13,  p.  601 ;  Affection  of  throat,  Thomson,
Hah.  Mo.,  vol.  13,  p.  601  ;  Biphtheria,  Shannon,  Hah.  Mo.,  vol.  13,  p.  604 ;  Hcema-
temesis,  Hseseler,  Eaue's  Kec,  1872,  p.  137 ;  Miner's  asthma,  Hseseler,  Eaue's  Eec,
1872,  p.  308;  Tuberculosis,  Gatchell,  Hseseler,  Eaue's  Eec,  1872,  p.  118;  Catarrh,
King,  Hah.  Mo.,  vol.  13,  p.  603 ;  Catarrhal  affections,  Eamage,  Hah.  Mo.,  vol.  13,
p.  606.

^  Mind. Nervous  restlessness ;  as  if  something  was  impending.

Cannot  concentrate  mind ;  dull,  listless ;  forgetful.
^  Sensorium. Confused  feeling ;  head  heavy,  dull.

Feeling  of  heat  and  fulness  in  whole  head.
^  Inner  Head. Occasional  shooting  pains  above  r.  eye.

(Severe,  sharp  headache  in  forehead  above  eyes ;  <  above

r.  eye.
Boring  headache  in  temples  from  without  inward,  <  r.

side  and  extending  to  left,  with  nausea.
Head  feels  hot,  on  placing  hands  on  forehead  it  seems  cold.
Pain  in  r.  temple.

Dull  pain  over  orbits,  reaching  into  temporal  region.
Dull  aching  in  frontal  region  on  awaking  in  morning;

severe  during  day ;  indisposed  to  study  or  speak.
Aching  across  brow,  over  orbits  and  in  eyeballs.
Fulness  in  forehead,  with  throbbing  in  top  of  head.
Vacant  feeling  in  whole  head,  cannot  concentrate  mind

on  anything.
Feeling  of  heat  and  fulness  in  whole  head.
Feeling  of  pressure  over  each  side  of  posterior  inferior  part

of  occiput  as  from  a  photographer's  head  rest.
Every  motion  jars  the  head.
Headache < from  heat,  pressure and  tobacco smoke,

stooping.


535  NATRUM  ARSENICATUM.

^  Sight  and  Eyes.  Vision  weakened  from  his  condition  of
health  ;  objects  blur  when  he  looks  at  them  a  short  time ;
eyes  sensitive  to  light.

Eyes  soon  tire  and  pain  when  he  reads  or  writes.

Feels  as  if  lids  must  be  closed  to  protect  weak  eyes.

Eyes  smart  as  from  wood  smoke ;  smarting  and  lachryma-
tion  on  going  into  open  air.

Bloodvessels  of  balls  and  lids  much  congested,  whole  or-
bital region  swollen.

CEdema  of  orbital  region,  especially  of  supraorbital.

Congestion  of  conjunctiva  from  least  exposure  to  cold  or
wind  ;  conjunctiva  dry,  painful.

■  Conjunctivitis  after  fever  has  subsided  and  when  case

tends  to  become  chronic ;  eyes  are  weak ;  symptoms  <
in  morning,  as  is  often  the  case  when  eyes  are  subjected
to  night  work.

■  Chronic  conjunctivitis,  membrane  injected,  small  rugse

running  over  it,  whole  eye  dry  and  painful,  all  symp-
toms <  in  morning ;  granular  lids  from  chronic  inflam-
mation of  edges  of  lids,  with  agglutination.
Lids  disposed  to  close ;  cannot  open  them  as  wide  as  usual.

■  Inner  surface  of  (lower)  lids  granular.

■  Lids  agglutinated  on  awaking,  morning ;  edges  chroni-

cally inflamed.
Aching  through  and  over  brows  and  orbits  and  in  temples
on  awaking.

■  Eye  symptoms  <  in  morning.

'  Smell  and  Nose. Smell  defective  or  lost.

■  Feels  stuffed  up,  nose  and  chest.

■  Nose  constantly  stopped  up,  <  at  night  and  in  morning;

must  breathe  with  mouth  open  at  night.

■  Nasal  discharge  yellow,  tough  ;  hawks  it  or  drops  from

posterior  nares.

■  Pieces  of  hardened,  bluish  mucus  flow  from  nose,  after

which  mucous  membrane  feels  raw.

■  Dry  crust  in  nose,  when  removed  blood  flows.

Nasal  mucous  membrane  thickened,  can  inhale  air,  but
difficult  to  exhale.

■  Compressive  pain  at  root  of  nose  and  in  forehead  ;  catarrh.
■Dull,  supraorbital  headache;  feeling  of  fulness  of  head

and  face ;  eyes  heavy  and  at  times  soreness  of  ej'^eballs ;
burning  of  eyes  and  more  or  less  congestion  of  conjunc-
tiva ;  watery  discharge  from  one  or  both  nostrils,  or
stoppage  of  nose ;  dryness  of  fauces ;  dry  cough  ;  <  in
morning.  ^Catarrh.
■Pain  in  forehead  and  root  of  nose ;  dry,  bloody  crusts  in
nose;  dropping  of  tough  mucus  from  posterior  nares;
hawking  up  of  mucus  from  larynx,  <  from  dust,  smoke


NATRUM  ARSENICATUM.  536

and  cold ;  fauces  feel  dry  on  inspiration  and  deglutition.
^Chronic  naso-pharyngeal  catarrh.

*  Upper  Face. '  '  Face  flushed  and  hot ;  feels  puffed.

Malar  bones  feel  large  as  if  swollen.

iFace  swollen,  oedematous,  more  in orbital region, <

mornings  on  awaking.
■  Puffing  of  face  about  eyes,  glabella  and  forehead.

*  Lower  Face. Comers  of  mouth fissured  ;  also  indurated.

Muscles  of  mastication  stiff;  painful  to  move  jaw.
"  Taste  and  Tongue. Tongue  furred,  coated  yellow ;  deep
red,  corrugated,  anterior  part  fissured ;  large,  moist,  fis-
sured, flabby.
*^  Throat. Hawking of tough, gelatinous, greyish yellow
mucus  from  throat  and posterior  nares.

Uvula,  tonsils  and  pharynx  thickened ;  surface  irregular,
swollen,  purplish  red,  covered  with  a  yellowish  grey
mucus,  which  is  hawked  out.

iThroat  oedematous  and  of  a  purple  color;  tonsils  and
fauces  much  pitted  ;  at  bottom  of  pits  portions  of  diph-
theritic formation;  yellow  coated  tongue;  no  appetite;
some  obstruction  of  posterior  nares ;  nasal  sound  of
voice;  surface  of  body  cool  and  covered  with  cold,
clammy  sweat;  feet  cold  ;  oppression  about  heart,  espe-
cially on  least  exertion  ;  pulse  feeble,  quick  and  inter-
mittent ;  wishes  to  be  let  alone  ;  mind  without  hope.
^Diphtheria.

Fauces  dry  on  swallowing  and  on  inspiration,  <  a.m.  and
after  a  cold ;  pharynx  looks  red  and  glossy.

iTonsils,  fauces  and  pharynx  purplish  and  oedematous,
patched  with  yellow  mucus. ^Diphtheria.

lAfter  an  attack  of  acute  tonsillitis,  which  occurred  three
months  previously,  throat  remained  very  much  swollen;
whole  of  fauces  and  upper  part  of  pharynx  swollen  and
of  a  dark  red  hue  ;  tonsils  greatly  enlarged;  uvula  elon-
gated; parts  covered  with  a  dirty  looking  mucus;  con-
stant dry  sensation  as  if  something  lodged  in  throat;  at
times  feeling  as  if  a  pin  was  sticking  in  throat;  at
others  a  feeling  as  of  a  lump,  always  <  in  morning.

I  Dark  purplish  hue  of  throat,  great  swelling  and  great
prostration,  but  not  much  pain  ;  uvula  hangs  down  like
a  sac  of  water. ^Diphtheria.
"  Appetite,  Thirst.  Desires,  Aversions. Appetite  excessive.

Drinks  often,  but  little  at  a  time;  very thirsty,  but  <
drinking.
^^  Hiccough,  Belching,  Nausea  and  Vomiting. Belching
and  sour  eructations.

Nausea  <  from  cold  drinks  of  water;  vomits  large  quan-
tities of  sour  water,  <  after  eating.


537  NATRUM  ARSENICATUM.

^^  Scrobiculum  and  Stomach.  Sinking  sensation  in  epigas-
trium, with  dull  feeling  in  supraorbital  and  frontal  re-
gions.

Extreme  tenderness  in  epigastric  region.

Epigastrium  tender,  <  just  below  ensiform.

Stomach  feels  sore,  warm  things  cause  a  sensation  of  burn-
ing and  can  be  felt  entering  stomach ;  moderate  dinner
lies  heavy;  feeling  of  fulness.

iHsematemesis.
'^  Abdomen. Pain  from  time  to  time,  shifting  through  bowels;
<  by  escape  of  gas  or  passage  of  feces.

Gas  forms  rapidl}^,  <  only  when  bowels  move,  colic  from
flatus  and  before  stool.
^"  Stool  and  Rectum.  Stool :  thin,  soft,  dark,  followed  by
burning  at  anus;  yellowish,  watery;  copious,  painless;
hurries  him  out  of  bed  in  morning,  preceoed  by  colic,
relieved  after;  weak  and  nervous,  hands  tremble.

Alternate  relaxation  and  constipation.
^^  Urinary  Organs. Dull  aching  in  kidneys.

Sore  feeling  in  region  of  bladder,  <  urinating.

Urine:  copious,  frequent,  clear;  heat  precipitates  phos-
phates; contains  a  few  epithelial  scales,  a  cast,  fat
globules.
^  Female  Sexual  Organs.  Dull  cutting  along  Poupart's  liga-
ments, followed  by  sickening  sensation  in  1.  testicle  as
from  a  blow,  testicle  very  sensitive  while  pain  lasts.
^  Voice  and  Larynx.  Trachea  and  Bronchia.  Mucus
scanty,  dark,  slate  colored  and  detached  with  difficulty.

Roughness  causing  hemming,  with  spasmodic  cough.

During  morning  irritation  in  bronchi,  with  slight  cough.
^''Respiration, l Lungs  feel  as  though  smoke  had  been  in-
haled.

Respiratory  sound  very  indistinct,  especially  in  lower  lobes ;
percussion  normal.

■  Miner's  asthma  produced  by  inhalation  of  coal  dust;
pneumonia  and  consumption.
^  Cough. Teasing  dry  cough  through  day.

I  Dry  cough,  with  feeling  of  tightness  and  oppression  in
middle  and  upper  third  of  chest.

Dry,  hacking  cough  from  an  uneasy  feeling  and  soreness
beneath  cartilages  to  right  of  fourth  and  fifth  ribs,  <
from  exertion.
^  Inner  Chest  and  Lungs. Lungs  feel  full  and  clogged,  <
behind  sternum  and  from  larynx  to  epigastrium.

Feeling  of  fulness,  oppression  and  soreness,  <  during  ex-
ertion and  on  full  inspiration.

Sharp,  quick  pain  below  seventh  rib,  anteriorly.

Supraclavicular  regions  sore  on  pressure.


NATRUM  ARSENICATUM.  538

iDry  cough,  with  an  oppressed  feeling  of  chest;  short,  dry
cough  without  expectoration;  lungs  feel  as  though  smoke
had  been  inhaled;  nose  dry  and  obstructed;  patient
feels  stuffed  up.- ^Catarrhal  affection.

I  Woman  confined  to  bed  with  advanced  tuberculosis,
hectic,  few  night  sweats,  amphoric  respiration,  emacia-
tion, pulse  128,  respirations  40,  cough  racking,  expecto-
ration greenish  and  profuse;  mental  symptoms  of  bluest
remorse.

■  Haemoptysis.

^  Heart,  Pulse  and  Circulation. Can  feel  heart  beat  through
chest  distinctly.

■  Oppression  about  heart  on  least  exertion. ^Diphtheria.
Sounds  heard  through  nearly  every  part  of  chest.

Pulse :  irregular,  variable  in  volume,  slower  than  usual.
^^  Neck  and  Back. Neck  stiff  and  sore.

Severe  pain  between  scapulae ;  he  inclines  forward  for  re-
lief;  <  from  inspiration,  it  passes  gradually  around  in
front  to  ninth  and  tenth  ribs.

Soreness  at  lower  cervical  vertebrae  down  to  joints  of  and
under  both  scapulae.
^^  Upper  Limbs. Neuralgic  pains  from  axilla  to  little  finger.

Kheumatic  aching  in  r.  arm,  <  in  shoulder  and  wrist.

Light,  flying  pains  in  fingers,  palms  and  forearm.
^  Lower  Limbs. Lower  limbs  feel  heavy;  weary  feeling  from
ilium  down  outer  side  of  thighs  to  knees,  as  from  too
much  exertion;  bruised  feeling  along  1.  crural  nerve,  <
from  continued  motion.

Aching  anteriorly  down  legs,  until  restless,  uneasy  feeling
is  produced.

Pains  shooting  from  acetabulum  to  knee,  <  moving  about.

Pain,  cramp-like,  at  junction  of  heads  of  gastrocnemius
muscle,  extending  downwards.

Cramp  in  plantar  surface  of  r.  foot.
^  Limbs  in  General. Neuralgic  pains  recur  frequently.

Joints  feel  stiff;  pains  erratic,  <  in  joints  and  on  1.  side.
^^  Rest. Position. Motion. Inclines forward  for relief:
from  severe  pain  between  scapulae.

Cannot  sit  still  without  great  effort;  restless.

Stooping:  headache  <.

Motion:  jars  head;  of  jaw,  painful;  continued,  bruised
feeling  along  1.  crural  nerve  < ;  pains  from  acetabulum
to  knee  <.

Least  exertion :  oppression  about  heart;  soreness  beneath
cartilages,  r.  of  fourth  and  fifth  rib,  < ;  feeling  of  ful-
ness, oppression  and  soreness  <.
^  Nerves. Restless,  nervous,  cannot  sit  still  without  great
effort.


539  '  NATRUM  ARSENICATUM.

Feels  tired  all  over;  desire  to  remain  quiet.
^^  Sleep. Drowsy,  heavy.

Restless  sleep,  when  aroused  awakes  nervously  as  in  af-
fright.
^  Time.  Morning:  dull  aching  in  frontal  region;  eye  symp-
toms <;  lids  agglutinated ;  nose  stopped  up;  dry  cough
<;  face  swollen,  oedematous;  fauces  dry;  throat  symp-
toms < ;  stools  hurry  him  out  of  bed.

Day:  severe  pain  in  frontal  region;  teasing  dry  cough.

Night:  nose  stopped  up,  must  breathe  with  mouth  open;
chilly.
*^  Temperature  and  Weather. Heat:  headache  <.

Disposed  to  wrap  up,  or  get  near  fire.

Warm  from  exercise:  itching  of  eruption  <.

Warm  things :  cause  a  sensation  of  burning  in  stomach.

Open  air :  smarting  and  lachrymation  of  eyes.

Cold  drinks:  nausea  <.

Cold: congestion of conjunctiva from least exposure;
hawking  up  of  mucus  < ;  sensitive  to  air.

Wind:  congestion  of  conjunctiva  from  least  exposure.
^  Fever. Chilly,  disposed  to  wrap  up  or  get  near  lire.

Chilly  at  night,  then  burning  dry  heat,  skin  hot  and  dry.

llSurface  cool,  covered  with  cold,  clammy  sweat. ^Diph-
theria.

•  Intermittent  fever.
*^  Locality and Direction. Right: shooting  above  eye;,
headache  < above  eye;  pain  in  temple;  fourth and
fifth  ribs,  soreness  beneath  cartilages  ;  rheumatic  aching
in  arm;  cramp  in  plantar  surface  of  foot.

Left:  sickening  sensation  in  testicle;  bruised  feeling  along
crural  nerve;  pains  in  limbs  <  on  side.

Pains  show  preference  for  1.  leg.

From  without  inward:  boring  pains  in  temples.
^Sensations.  As  if  something  was  impending;  as  if  lids
must  be  closed  to  protect  weak  eyes;  eyes  smart  as  if
from  wood  smoke;  malar  bones  as  if  swollen;  as  if
something  lodged  in  throat;  as  if  a  pin  was  sticking  m
throat;  as  of  a  lump  in  throat;  sickening  sensation  as
from  a  blow  in  1.  testicle ;  as  though  smoke  had  been
inhaled  into  lungs ;  awakes  nervously  as  in  affright.  _

Pain:  in  r. temple;  in forehead and root of  nose; in
bowels;  in  joints;  on  1.  side.

Severe,  sharp  pain  :  in  forehead.

Severe  pain  :  between  scapulae.

Sharp,  quick  pain  :  below  seventh  rib.

Shooting  pains :  above  r.  eye ;  from  acetabulum  to  knee.

Boring  pain :  in  temples.

Neuralgic  pains :  from  axilla  to  little  finger.


NATRUM  ARSENICATUM.  540

Light,  flying  pains:  in  fingers,  palms  and  forearms.

Rheumatic  aching :  in  r.  arm.

Compressive  pain  :  at  root  of  nose  and  in  forehead.

Cramp :  in  plantar  surface  of  r.  foot.

Cramplike  pain:  at  junction  of  heads  of  gastrocnemius
muscle.

Aching :  anteriorly  down  legs.

Dull  cutting:  along  Poupart's  ligaments.

Dull  aching :  in  frontal  region ;  over  orbits  and  in  eye-
balls ;  in  kidneys.

Throbbing :  in  top  of  head.

Smarting:  of  eyes.

Burning:  of  eyes;  at  anus.

Soreness :  of  eyeballs  ;  of  stomach ;  in  region  of  bladder ;
beneath  cartilages ;  of  neck  ;  at  lower  cervical  vertebrae.

Raw  feeling :  of  mucous  membrane  of  nose.

Tenderness :  in  epigastric  region.

Bruised  feeling :  along  1.  crural  nerve.

Irritation :  in  bronchi.

Heat:  in  whole  head.

Clogged  feeling:  in  lungs.

Pressure :  over  each  side  of  occiput.

Heavy  feeling :  in  lower  limbs.

Oppression  :  about  heart ;  in  chest.

Tightness :  in  chest.

Fulness :  in  whole  head ;  in  forehead ;  of  face;  in  stomach ;
in  lungs.

Weary  feeling :  from  ilium  down  outer  side  of  thighs  to
knees.

Dull  feeling :  in  supraorbital  and  frontal  regions.

Sinking  sensation :  in  epigastrium.

Vacant  feeling :  in  whole  head.

Dryness :  of  eyes ;  of  fauces.
**  Tissues. Marked  emaciation  after  previous  embonpoint.

Mucous  membrane  affected;  sensitive  to  cold  air,  dust,
etc.,  they  give  him  cold  or  aggravate  existing  cough,
etc.;  symptoms  of  subacute  gastritis,  chronic  diarrhoea,
nasal  catarrh,  etc.

■  Catarrhal  troubles  of  nasal  mucous  membrane,  fauces,
trachea  and  bronchi.

Oedema.
*^  Touch. Passive Motion. Injuries. Pressure :  headache

<  ;  supraclavicular  region  sore.
^  Skin. Squamous  eruption,  scales  thin,  white  and  when  re-
moved leave  skin  slightly  reddened;  if  scales  remain
they  cause  itching;  <  when  warm  from  exercise.
"^  Stages  of  Life,  Constitution. Woman^set.  26;  multipara;
tuberculosis.


541  NATR.  ARS.— NATRUM  CARBONICUM.

Woman,  set.  30,  married,  dark  complexion,  black  hair  and
eyes,  nervous  temperament,  scrofulous  habit ;  diphtheria.

Mrs.  M.,  subject  to  attacks  of  acute  tonsillitis;  affection  of
throat.
*^  Relations.  Compare :  Amen.,  Kali  carb.  in  oedematous
swelling  about  eyes  and  face;  Apis  in  diphtheria  with
saclike  swelling  of  uvula;  Arum  triph.  in  diphtheria;
Kali  bich.  and  Natr.  mur.  in  nasal  or  faucial  catarrh
with  sensation  of  an  irritating  hair;  Lycop.  in  stuffy
catarrh.


NATRUM  CARBONICUM.

Sodium  Carbonate.  NA^  CO^,  IOH2  0.

Introduced  by  Hahnemann  and  proved  by  himself,  Gross,  Hering,  Lang-
hammer,  etc.  (Materia  Medica  Pura,  vol.  3,  p.  290).

Clinical  Authorities.— -E;^ec/s  of  overstudy,  Hering,  Hah.  Mo.,  vol.  10,
p.  457;  Pain  in  head,  Berridge,  Raue's  Rec,  1875,  p.  208;  Loss  of  hearing,  Berridge,
Raue's  Rec,  1875,  p.  79 ;  Hah.  Mo.,  vol.  10,  p.  108 ;  Coryza,  Hills,  Raue's  Rec,
1873,  p.  81;  Hirsch,  Horn.  Clin.,  vol.  1,  p.  257;  Nasal  catarrh,  Blakely,  Raue's
Rec,  1870,  p.  131;  Toothache,  Plainfield,  Horn.  Phys.,  vol.  2,  p.  318;  Affection  of
chest,  Morgan,  Horn.  Clin.,  vol.  4,  p.  99 ;  Raue's  Rec,  1872,  p.  110;  Goitre,  Wolffin,
Desguidis,  Trans.  Horn.  Med.  Soc.  Pa.,  1883,  p.  210;  Suppression  of  sweat  and
chronic  coryza,  Hirsch,  Horn.  Clin.,  vol.  1,  p.  258;  Albuminuria,  Knerr,  MSS. ;
Effects  of  exposure  to  sun,  Martin,  Trans.  Horn.  Med.  Soc.  Pa.,  1880,  p.  242 ;  Anosmia,
Morgan,  Hom.  Clin.,  vol.  3,  p.  48 ;  Scrofulous  affectiom,  Hartmann,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf.,
vol.  4,  p.  409 ;  Affection  of  skin,  Hering,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  4,  p.  222.

^  Mind. ■  1  Inability  to  think  or  to  perform  any  mental  labor ;
head  feels  stupefied  if  he  tries  to  exert  himself.

■  Memory  gradually  failing;  inaptitude  for  meditation  or

hard  work ;  difficulty  of  conception  or  combining  ideas
when  listening  or  reading;  figures  and  diagrams  were
void  of  expression  to  him  and  seemed  enveloped  in  mist.
^Effects  of  overstudy.

■  Difficulty  in  grasping  and  connecting  thoughts  when

reading  or  listening.

■  Aversion  to  mankind  and  society; estrangement  from

individuals  and  society,  even  from  her  husband  and
family.

■  ■Sadness;  depression  of  spirits;  hypochondriacal  mood.

■  ■Intolerable  melancholy  and  apprehension;  she  is  wholly

occupied  with  sad  thoughts.


NATRUM  CARBONICUM.  542

Irritable,  excitable  mood.
Avarice;  maliciousness.

■  Restlessness,  with  attacks  of  anxiety,  especially  during  a

thunderstorm ;  <  from  music.

■  Anxiety;  trembling  and  sweat  during  pains.

I  In  evening  restlessness  of  body,  unless  he  exerts  himself
mentally.

I  Affected  by  playing  on  piano  a  short  time,  with  painful
anxiety  of  chest,  trembling  of  body  and  weariness;  must
lie  down.

Constant  fear  and  forebodings.

I  I  Great  timidity.

I  lln difference.
^  Sensorium. i Vertigo:  from  mental  exertion ;  when  work-
ing in  sun; <  from  rest,  >  on  exercise  in  open  air;
from  exposure  to  sun;  from  drinking  wine.

iDulness  of  head  when  at  rest  or  when  in  sun.

I  iDulness  in  occiput,  as  from  pressure,  in  morning.
^  Inner  Head. iHead  feels  too  large.

■  Tension  in  head,  as  if  forehead  would  burst.

■  Frontal  headache  when  suddenly  turning  head.

I  I  Shooting  pain  in  1.  frontal  eminence  to  1.  lower  occiput.

■  Stitches  in  head  and  out  of  eyes.

I  I  Pulsating  headache  in  vertex  every  morning.

I  I  Tearing  pain  in  forehead,  at  certain  hours  of  day.

I  I  Stupefying, pressing headache in forehead, nausea,

eructations  and  dimness  of  sight  in  evening;  <  in  room.
I  I  Stitching,  tearing,  throbbing  in  forehead,  temples  and

vertex,  with  vertigo, melancholy and  great  physical

prostration.
I  I  Pain  in  1.  frontal  eminence  to  1.  lower  occiput.

■  ■Headache  from  slightest  mental  exertion.

I  I  Painful  sense  of  emptiness  in  occiput,  with  weakness

and  hoarseness  of  voice.
1  i  Pain  from  occiput  to  vertex.
I  I  Drawing  and  tension  in  r.  side  of  occiput  as  if  head

would  be  drawn  back,
I  I  Long  continued  pressure  in  r.  side  of  occiput.
I  I  Dull  pressure  from  occiput  to  nape,  with  drawing  pain,

at  last  extending  to  forehead.
I  !  Headache  at  noon,  <  low  down  in  occiput.
I  I  Headache  and  tension  in  nape  before  menses.

■  Headache:  from  sun;  from  working  under  gaslight.
*  Outer  Head. ■  Pains  in  head  at  certain  hours  of  day.

I  I  Falling  out  of  hair.
I  I  An  almost  painless  boil  on  occiput.
^  Sight  and  Eyes. ■Dim  eyes;  has  to  wipe  them  constantly.

■  Black  spots  floating  before  vision  while  writing.
■Sensation  as  of  feathers  before  eyes.


543  ■  NATRUM  CARBONICUM.

■  Dazzling  flashes  before  eyes  on  awaking.

I  I  Flashes  and  streaks  of  light  before  closed  eyes  at  night.

■  Cannot  read  small  print.
I  I  Ulceration  of  cornea.

■Small  corneal  ulcers  or  phlyctenules,  with  great  photo-
phobia and  stinging  pains,  particularly  in  scrofulous
children.

Needlelike  stitches  in  both  eyes  after  dinner.

■Stitches  in  eyes  from  within  outward.

■  Dermoid  swelling  of  conjunctiva.

■  Inflammation  of  eyelids,  with  photophobia.
Dry  eyes.

■  Heaviness  of  upper  lids;  could  hardly  open  them;  they

close  involuntarily.
I  I  Agglutination  of  eyes  in  morning;  lachrymation  dur-
ing forenoon.
^Hearing  and  Ears. ■Oversensitiveness  of  hearing;  sensi-
tive to  noise.

■  Hard  hearing,  as  if  ears  were  closed  up.

■  Loss  of  hearing  of  r.  ear  for  seven  or  eight  months ;  sounds

seem  to  come  from  1.  side  when  they  really  come  from
right;  at  times  singing  in  r.  ear,  or  a  noise  like  a  bubble
bursting  in  ear;  fulness  in  r.  ear  when  eating;  on  swal-
lowing feeling  as  if  something  moved  in  ear.

■  Hardness  of  hearing  and  roaring  in  1.  ear,  with  caries  of

1.  molar  teeth;  pain  in  1.  side  of  face;  stiffness  of  neck
and  1.  shoulder;  pain  in  small  of  back  and  1.  leg,  <
from  motion,  >  in  rest;  menses  irregular  and  scanty;
all  <  before  menses. ^Chronic  otitis  media.

■  Otalgia  with  sharp  piercing  stitches  in  ears.

^  Smell  and  Nose. ■Loss  of  smell  and  taste,  with  coryza.
I  I  Violent  sneezing,  with  rush  of  blood  to  head.

■  Coryza with discharge of thin mucus and frequent

sneezing.

■  Coryza: fluent; violent  sneezing;  very profuse; <  at

night,  when  nose  is  obstructed ;  <  from  least  draft  of
air  or  change  of  clothing;  on  alternate  days;  >  after
sweat.
■Troublesome  stoppage  of  nose  every  night. ^Chronic
catarrh.

■  Stoppage  of  nose  with  hard,  ofl'ensive  pieces  from

nostril.

■  ■Much  nasal  mucus  passes  through  mouth.

■  Yellow  ofiensive  discharge  from  nose.
■Thick  green  mucus  blown  from  nose.

■Thick  yellow  greenish,  musty  smelling  discharge,  ceas-
ing to  flow  frequently  after  a  meal,  with  stoppage  of
nose. ^Cor3^za.


NATRUM  CARBONIC UM.  544

I  Hard  fetid  clots  from  one  nostril.

iCoryza  with  discharge  of  copious,  thick,  mucous  masses
during  day,  and  obstruction  of  nose  at  night;  speech
has  a  disagreeable  nasal  twang;  resistent  swelling  of
middle  lobe  of  thj^roid  gland;  pale  face  and  dark
streaks  under  eyes;  menses  scanty  and  postponing.

■  After  getting  a  thorough  wetting,  skin  which  formerly

perspired  easily  became  dry;  also  sufi'ered  from  a
coryza,  with  profuse  discharge  and  a  disagreeable  in-
fluence on  her  voice.

■  Ozsena;  bad  smell  of  nasal  secretion.

■  Nostrils  ulcerated  high  up.

■  Bleeding  of  nose.

■  Humid,  herpetic  eruptions  and  ulcers  on  nose,  around

mouth  and  on  lips.

■  Peeling off  of  dorsum  and tip  of  nose,  painful  when

touched.

■  Red  nose  with  white  pimples  on  it.

I  I  Squeaking  sensation  at  root  of  nose.

■  Inflammation  of  external  nose.

^  Upper  Face. ■  ■  Pale face  with  blue rings  around eyes^
swollen  eyelids.

■  Face  puffy. ^Albuminuria.

■  Burning  heat  and  redness  of  face,  cheeks  swollen.

I  I  Pains in bones  of face. ^Chronic naso-pharyngeal

catarrh.
I  I  Much  eruption  on  nose  and  mouth.

■  Yellow  blotches  on  forehead  and  upper  lip.
I  I  Freckles  on  face.

I  I  White  pimples  on  red  nose.
^  Lower  Face. iSwelling  of  upper  lip.

■  Lips  swollen  and  tettery ;  burning  rhagades  on  lower  lip.
I  I  Humid  eruption  or  ulcers  around  nose  and  mouth.

■  Pimples  on  face  and  lips.
■Swelling  of  submaxillary  glands.

^^  Teeth  and  Gums. ■Digging,  boring  toothache,  especially
during  or  after  eating  sweetmeats  or  fruit.

■  Sensitiveness  of  teeth,  especially  lower.

■Nightly  pressing  toothache,  with  swelling  of  lower  lips

and  of  gums.
■Toothache:  in  lower  jaw;  <  when  eating;  <  from  sweet

things;  >  by  smoking.
"Taste and Tongue. ■  Taste: bitter  or  metallic; sour,

thickly  coated  tongue ;  of  blood  ;  of  pus  in  throat.

■  Dry  tongue  and  dislike  to  talk.

■  Tongue  not  facile;  speech  difficult.

■  Stuttering  on  account  of  heaviness  of  tongue.

■  Burning  about  tip  of  tongue,  as  if  it  was  cracked.


545  NATRUM  CARBONICUM.

■  Pimples  on  tip  of  tongue.

^^  Inner  Mouth, i  Saliva  generally  increased.

■  Constant  dryness  of  mouth  and  lips,  which  she  was  con-

stantly obliged  to  lick,  as  if  caused  by  heat  of  breath.
I  Dry  mouth  and  throat,  with  inclination  to  drink.

■  Slight  redness  of  mucous  membrane  of  mouth  and  fauces,

with  rawness  and  scraping ;  desire  to  hawk  and  hem  ;
mucus  collects  at  night  and  is  hawked  up  in  morning.

■  Redness  and  soreness  of  mouth,  with  flat,  painful  blisters ;

increased  appetite;  great  thirst  for  cold  water,  but  <
after  drinking  it ;  yellow  stools  discharged  with  a  gush  ;
frequent  urination  of  dark,  sour  smelling  urine.  ^Sto-
matitis.

■  Flat  ulcers  and  blisters  inside  of  mouth,  burning  and

painful  when  touched.
^^  Throat. iThroat  and  oesophagus  feel  rough,  scraped,  dry.

■  ■  Accumulation  of  mucus  in  throat  and  posterior  nares.

■  ■Violent  hawking up  of  thick  mucus  that  constantly

collects.

■  Throat  painful  when  swallowing  and  gaping,
I  iGlanduhir  swellings  in  throat.

^*  Appetite,  Thirst.  Desires,  Aversions. ■Incessant  hunger.

■  Increased  and  ravenous  hunger  in  forenoon,  from  sen-

sation of  emptiness  in  stomach.

■  Thirst: in  afternoon; incessant; great  desire  for  cold

water  a  few  hours  after  dinner.

■  ■Aversion  to  milk  and  diarrhoea  from  it.

^*  Eating  and  Drinking,  i After  eating:  hypochondriacal;
weak  digestion  ;  pressure  in  stomach  ;  eructations  ;  dis-
tress and  tenderness,  with  palpitation  (may  also  follow
abuse  of  soda  crackers).

■  Indigestion  especially  marked  after  vegetable  diet,  par-

ticularly starchy  foods.

■  Bad  effects  of  a  cold  drink  while  overheated.

■  ■  After  milk,  diarrhoea.

^^  Hiccough,  Belching,  Nausea  and  Vomiting. 1 1  Fre-
quent hiccough.
Eructations  frequent;  empty;  sour;  in  afternoon.

■  \Vaterbrash.

■  Violent  retching  in  morning,  without  actual  vomiting.

■  Nausea  and  retching,  with  pain  and  soreness  in  stomach ;

<  from  touch ;  >  from  eating.

■  Continuous  qualmishness  and  nausea.

■  Vomiting  of  bile,  bitter.

^^  Scrobiculum  and  Stomach. ■  Gnawing  and  pressure  in
stomach,  with  distension  and  "gone,"  weak  feeling  about
10  or  11  A.M.,  >  from  eating.
■Stomach  weak  and  easily  disordered.

VOL.  VII— 35.


NATRUM  CARBONICUM.  546

■  Heaviness  and  pressure  in  stomach;  nausea;  frequent

hiccough.

■  Violent  pressure  in  stomach  after  dinner  and  breakfast.

■  Pit  of  stomacli  sensitive  to  touch  and  when  talking.
I  Cramp  in  stomach,  pressing,  drawing,  cutting  pain.

■  Depressed  and  exceedingly  irritable,  particularly  after

dinner;  hypochondriasis;  >  as  food  passes  out  of
stomach  into  duodenum  and  down  into  bowels ;  averse
to  society,  even  to  his  own  family ;  indigestion,  <  after
vegetable  diet,  particularly  starchy  foods ;  sour  eructa-
tions; waterbrash;  retching  in  morning;  spasmodic
contraction  of  oesophagus  and  stomach,  with  little  or
nothing  coming  to  mouth ;  copious  salivation ;  abdo-
men hard  and  swollen,  especially  after  eating ;  accumu-
lation of  flatus,  fetid  when  passed ;  griping  colic  just
after  a  meal ;  stool  difficult  to  expel,  though  not  hard.
^Indigestion.
^^  Hypochondria.  '  '  Violent,  sharp  stitches  in  r.  hypochon-
driac region,  followed  by  griping  in  lower  abdomen.

iStitches  in  1. hypochondrium ; <  after  drinking  very
cold  water.

iStitches  in  hepatic  and  splenic  regions. ^Chronic  hepa-
titis.

I  I  Violent  stitches  in  region  of  spleen.
^^  Abdomen. I Colic  with  constriction  around  stomach  ;  con-
traction of  navel,  hardness  of  integuments  of  abdomen.

■  Hard,  bloated,  swollen  abdomen.

■  Accumulation  of  flatus;  loud  rumbling;  swellings  here

and  there  as  from  incarcerated  wind.

■  Flatus  changing  place  and  causing  pain.

■  Distension  of  abdomen,  especially  after  eating.

■  Griping  in  abdomen  like  colic,  immediately  after  eating.
■Pressure  in  lower  abdomen,  extending  to  genitals,  as  if

everything  in abdomen would fall out  and  menses
come.

■  Itchlike  eruption  on  lower  part  of  abdomen.

■  Swelling  (generally  painful)  of  glands  of  groin  and  axilla.
^  Stool  and  Rectum.  "  ■Passes  much  sour  smelling  or  fetid

flatus ;  feces  escape.
■Stools:  yellow;  soft  or  watery,  with  violent,  sudden
urging  and  tenesmus;  watery,  yellow,  discharged  with
gush  ;  <  from  milk  or  after  eating  and  from  taking  cold  ;
spotted  with  blood  ;  sour  smelling ;  yellow,  with  burn-
ing and  tenesmus ;  frequent,  ineffectual  urging,  alter-
nately with  liquid  stools  ;  soft,  preceded  by  colic.

■  Discharge  of  blood  during  stool.

■Yellow  substance,  like  pulp  of  an  orange,  in  stool;  cli-
macteric period.


547  NATRUM  CARBONICUM.

I  Difficult  evacuation  of  stool  that  was  not  hard;  was
obliged  to  make  great  effort  before  it  could  be  discharged.

Ilnsufficient  stool,  with  tenesmus,  followed  by  burning  in
eyes  and  urethra;  great  sexual  excitement.  ^Consti-
pation.

I  I  Constipation,  alternating  with  soft  and  liquid  stools.

■  Before  stool:  cutting;  strong  urging;  severe  colic  with

rumbling  in  abdomen.
During  stool :  tenesmus  ;  burning  and  cutting  in  anus  and

rectum ;  sexual  excitement.
1  After  stool;  pain  in  rectum.
I  I  Itching  in  anus.

■  Tapeworm  with  stool;  itching  creeping  in  anus.
^^  Urinary  Organs. Pressure  in  region  of  bladder.

■  Frequent  desire  to  urinate,  discharge  scanty  or  copious.

■  Nocturnal,  involuntar}'  micturition.

■Urine:  dark  yellow,  fetid,  sour,  or  like  horse's  urine;
deposits  a  mucous  sediment  like  well  water,  when  she
must  go  often,  pain  mostly  in  r.  leg  as  if  veins  were
bruised.

■  ■Burning  in  urethra  during  and  after  micturition.

^  Male  Sexual  Organs. ■  Increased  sexual  desire  ;  priapism.

■  Nocturnal  erections  and  pollutions,  or  emissions  without

erections.

■  Incomplete  coition,  short  erection,  speedy  emission.

■  Chronic  hypertrophy  of  prostate,  small  and  painless,

only  detected  by  physical  examination  suggested  by
discharge  of  prostatic  fluid  at  stool  and  when  urinating.

■  Straining  and  tenesmus,  with  a  voluptuous  sensation  in

genitals.

■  Prostatorrhoea  after  urinating  and  after  difficult  stool.

■  Inflammation,  swelling  and  easy  excoriation  of  prepuce

and  glans  penis.

■  Soreness  between  scrotum  and  thighs.

■  Heaviness  and  drawing  in  testicles;  testicles  feel  bruised.
^^  Female  Sexual  Organs. ■Pressure  in  hypogastrium  as  if

everything  would  come  out;  indurated  cervix  and  ill
shaped  os.
■Bearing  down  as  if  everything  would  come  out;  melan-
choly; oversensitive  to  music ;  backache;  heaviness,  <
sitting,  >  moving;  bruised  pain  over  back  at  night,
tension,  boring  from  tip  of  1.  scapula  through;  skin  dry,
rough.

■  Passive  congestion  of  uterus,  causing  pulsation  there  dur-

ing and  after  coitus,  due  to  extra  influx  of  blood  caused
by  sexual  erethism.

■  Pressure  as  if  uterus  would  protrude.
■Motion  as  from  foetus  in  uterus.


NATRUM  CARBONICUM.  548

I  Moles  in  uterus.

■  Menses:  too  early  and  long  lasting;  preceded  by  drawing

in  nape  of  neck  and  headache;  with  tearing  headache,
distended  abdomen  in  morning,  >  by  diarrhoea;  ner-
vous, cannot  bear  music;  <  in  a  thunderstorm.

■Metrorrhagia.

•  Deficient  menstruation  in  adult  females.

I  Dysmenorrhcea ;  sterility.

■  Congenital defective  growth  of  anterior  vaginal  wall,

with  ill  shaped  os.

■  Discharge  of  mucus  from  vagina  after  an  embrace,  caus-

ing sterility.

■  Profuse  leucorrhoea,  after  frequent  attacks  of  colic,  with

writhing  about  umbilicus.

■  Leucorrhoea,  with  frequent  copious  urination.

■  Leucorrhoea  thick,  yellow,  putrid,  ceasing  after  urinating.
^  Pregnancy. Parturition. Lactation. Expels  moles,  pre-
vents false  conception.

■  Labor  pains  weak  or  accompanied  by  anguish  and  sweat,

wath  desire  to  be  rubbed.

^^  Voice  and  Larynx.  Trachea  and  Bronchia.  ■Hoarse-
ness, with  roughness  of  chest,  coryza,  chilliness  and
scraping,  painful  cough.

^  Respiration.  ■Dyspnoea  and  shortness  of  breath  from  ten-
sion of  chest.

^^  Cough.  ■Cough:  dry,  with  stopped  catarrh;  violent,  dry,
<  when  entering  a  warm  room;  short,  with  rattling
in  chest;  with  rumbling,  incarcerated  flatus;  wdtli  salty,
purulent,  greenish  sputa.

^^  Inner  Chest  and  Lungs. ■Pressing  stitches  in  chest.

I  I  Burning  soreness  in  r.  mid  chest ;  loose  cough,  no
sputum;  coldness  between  scapulae,  seems  unable  to  give
any  exact  voluntary  statement;  pain  in  r.  rhomboid
muscle  when  sewing  or  exercising,  and  in  damp
weather;  moves  to  opposite  side  sometimes.

^  Heart,  Pulse  and  Circulation. ■  Painful  cracking  in  region
of  heart.
■Violent,  anxious  palpitation  of  heart  when  ascending  and

at  night  when  lying  on  1.  side.
■Burning  and  distress  along  spine,  with  palpitation ;  thinks
he  has  heart  disease.

■  Palpitation:  woke  her  at  night,  while  lying  on  1.  side;  on

going  up  stairs ;  prevents  lying  on  side.

■  Pulse  excited  at  night,  with  ebullitions.

^°  Outer  Chest. Chilliness  in  one  (1.)  side  of  thorax.
^^  Neck  and  Back. ■Cervical  glands  swollen.

■  Goitre  pressing  pain; round,  hard swelling  on  upper

r.  part  of  gland.


549  NATRUM  CARBONICUM.

■  Stiffness  of  neck.

■  Cracking  of  cervical  vertebrae  on  moving  head.
Rigidity  and  drawing  between  scapulae  in  open  air,  or  in

back,  extending  as  far  as  anus,  in  paroxysms  and  termi-
nating in  a  stitch  w^hen  sitting  or  lying.
Stitch  in  back,  sometimes  as  far  as  1.  side  of  chest,  evening
and  night.

■  Backache;  violent  after  walking.

■  Stitches  in  small  of  back  while  sitting.

■  Tingling  (formication)  in  back.
I  I  Pustules  on  small  of  back.

32  Upper  Limbs. ■Rheumatic  pain  of  shoulder,  arms and
elbows,  with  weakness  of  arms.

■  Pressing  pain  on  shoulders.

■  Has  to  stretch  arms,  with  anxiety.

■  Twitches  and  twitching  sensation  in  arms  and  fingers  on

taking  hold  of  anything.
I  I  Drawing  pain  in  elbow.
I  I  Warts  on  arms  and  backs  of  hands;  painful  to  touch.

■  Cutting  pain  in  hands.

■  Trembling  of  hands,  morning.

■  Contraction  of  fingers.

■  Swelling  of  hands  in  afternoon.

•  Eczema,  skin  of  dorsa  of  hands  rough,  dry  and  chapped.

■  Jerking  sensation  in  finger  joints.

■  White  bullae,  with  red  areola  on  index  finger.

■  Panaritium.

^  Lower  Limbs. ■  Tearing  and  bruised  pain  in  r.  hip. ^Dys-
menorrhoea.

■  Jerkings  in  lower  extremities  and  in  parts  of  lower  body.

■  Unsteadiness  while  walking,  stumbling,  slipping.

■  Lower  extremities  feel  very  heavy  and  bruised.

■  Heaviness  of  legs  and  feet,  with  tension  in  them  while

sitting  or  walking.
■Creeping,  stinging  in  muscles  of  thighs  and  beneath  epi-
gastrium.

■  Blotches  (as  in  lepra)  on  legs.

■  Hollow  of  knee  painful  on  motion.

■  Tension  in  bend  of  knee;  muscles  shortened.

■  Cramp  of  calves.

I  I  When  walking  in  open  air  sensation  as  if  a  knife  pierced
calf  of  leg  and  as  though  blood  trickled  down  it.

■  Lower  legs  swollen,  inflamed,  red  and  covered  with  ulcers.

■  ■Easy  dislocation  and  spraining  of  ankle;  ankle  is  so

weak  that  it  gives  way;  foot  bends  under.

■  Cutting  pain  and  cramps  in  feet.

■  Very  cold  feet.

■  Burning  in  feet,  especially  soles,  while  walking.


NATRUM  CARBONICUM.  550

■  Swelling  of  feet  and  soles  of  feet,  with  stinging  in  them

when  walking  or  stepping  on  them.

■  Soreness  of  feet,  particularly  of  soles.

iStitches  as  with  needles  in  sole  of  r.  foot;  sole  swollen.

■  Throbbing  and  crawling  in  heels.

■  Ulcer  on  heel  from  spreading  blisters.

■  Black,  ulcerated  pustules  on  heel.

■  Blisters  on  points  of  toes,  as  if  scalded.

■  Smarting  and  soreness  between  toes;  excoriation.

■  Swelling,  tearing  and  soreness  in  (big)  toes,  no  sleep.
I  I  Red  spot  on  big  toe,  as  if  contused,

I  I  Violent  stitches  in  a  corn.

■  Boring,  drawing  and  stinging  in  corns.

■  ■Cold  feet.

■  Pressing  pain  in  dorsa  of  feet.

^*  Limbs  in  General. ■  Great  weakness  of  lower  extremities
and  heaviness  of  arms.

■  Cutting  pains  in  hands  and  feet.

■  Vesicular  places  of  tips of  all  fingers  and toes,  as  if

scalded,  extending  around  nails  as  if  they  would  come  off.
^  Rest.  Position.  Motion.  Rest:  vertigo  <  ;  dulness  of  head.
Lying:  on  1.  side,  palpitation;  stitch  in  back  to  anus.
Must  lie  down  :  weariness.

Sitting :  backache,  heaviness  <  ;  stitch  in  back  to  anus.
Sewing:  pain  in  r.  rhomboid  muscle.
Most  symptoms  appear  while  sitting  and  go  off  on  motion,

pressing  and  rubbing.
Moving: backache  and  heaviness  >;  of  head,  cracking-

of  cervical  vertebrae; hollow  of  knee  painful; causes

profuse  sweat.
Suddenly  turning  head  :  frontal  headache.
On  taking  hold  of  anything:  twitches  in  arms  and  fingers.
Has  to  stretch  arms :  with  anxiety.
When  ascending:  anxious  palpitation.
On  stepping  :  foot  bends.
Walking :  violent  backache ; unsteadiness ; heaviness  of

legs  and  feet  with  tension ;  as  if  knife  pierced calf  of

leg;  burning  in  feet;  swelling  of  feet  with  stinging.
Exercising:  pain  in  r.  rhomboid  muscle; causes  great

debility.
2^  Nerves. ■  Great  debility  from  any  exertion ;  unsteady  walk,

any  little  obstruction  on  pavement  causes  him  to  fall,  or

falls  without  apparent  cause.

■  Is  ready  to  drop  after  a  short  walk.

■  Exhaustion  from  mental  effort.

■  Great  prostration  and  heaviness  of  whole  body.

■  Great  lassitude  and  vertigo  from  effects  of  exposure  to  sun.
I  I  Uneasiness.


551  NATRUM  CARBONICUM.

I  Twitching  in  muscles  and  limbs.

I  Contractions  of  muscles,  hands,  bends  of  knees,  neck,  etc.
1  Hysteria.
^^  Sleep. I  Sleepiness:  in  morning;  during  day,  with  yawning.
I  Falls  asleep  late  at  night.
I  Awakes  too  early  in  morning.

■  During  sleep:  starts,  twitches;  vivid  dreams,  violent  erec-

tions and  sexual  excitement;  restless,  with  ebullitions,
palpitation  and  nightmare.

■  Dreams:  anxious;  confused;  pleasant;  amorous.

^  Time.  Morning:  dulness  in  occiput;  agglutination  of  eyes  ;
mucus  hawked  up ;  violent  retching ;  distended  ab-
domen ;  trembling  of  hands ;  sleepiness ;  awakes  too
early ;  shivering  for  one  hour ;  sudden  chilliness  not
followed  by  heat;  bloating  of  whole  body.

About  10  or  11  A.M. :  weak  feeling  in  stomach.

During  forenoon :  lachrymation ;  ravenous  hunger ;  chilli-
ness <.

During  day:  coryza;  sleepiness;  feeling  of  coldness  in
lower  extremities;  cold  and  chilly.

Noon :  headache.

Afternoon :  thirst ;  frequent  eructations ;  swelling  of
hands;  bloating  of  whole  body  <.

After  dinner :  needlelike  stitches  in  both  eyes.

Evening :  restlessness  of  body  ;  headache  in  forehead  with
nausea,  eructations  and  dimness  of  sight;  stitch  in
back.

Night:  flashes  and  streaks  of  light  before  closed  eyes;
coryza  <  ;  mucus  collects  in  throat;  bruised  pain  over
back  ;  palpitation ;  pulse  excited  ;  stitch  in  back ;  falls
asleep  late.
^^  Temperature  and  "Weather.  Sequelee  of  exposure  to  heat
of  sun  •  inability  to  think ;  head  feels  stupefied  and
aches  when  in  sun ;  dazzling  flashes  or  black  spots  be-
fore eyes;  dimness  of  sight;  palpitation;  trembhng  of
hands ;  debility  from  least  exertion  ;  restless,  unrefresh-
ing  sleep ;  profuse  sweat  from  least  exertion.

■  Great  debility  caused  by  heat  of  summer.

■  Chronic  effects  of  sunstroke; may  have  been  overcome

by  heat  years  ago,  and  now,  with  return  of  hot  weather,
suffers  from  headaches.

Open  air :  exercise,  vertigo  >  ;  rigidity  and  drawing  be-
tween scapulse  ;  when  walking,  as  if  knife  pierced  calf
of  leg.

In  room:  headache  <;  cough  <.

In  sun :  vertigo  ;  dulness  in  head ;  exposure  to,  causes
vertigo  and  great  lassitude.

Draft  of  air:  coryza  <.


NATRUM  CARBONICUM.  552

Averse  to  uncovering.

Damp  weather:  pain  in  r.  rhomboid  muscle.

Change  of  clothing :  coryza  <.

After  getting  a  thorough wetting: skin perfectly  dry,

formerly  perspired  easily,  and  chronic  coryza.
Cold  water : great  thirst  for  it,  but  <  after  drinking  it ;

stitches  in  1.  hypochondrium.
Bad  eiTects  of  a  cold  drink  while  overheated.
*°  Fever. I  l  Chilliness  and  shivering  for  one  hour  in  morning.
I  I  Sudden  chilliness,  not  followed  by  heat  in  morning.

■  Feeling  of  coldness  in  lower  extremities  even  during  day,

■  Continued  chill  in  1.  side.

I  Cold  hands  and  feet,  with  hot  head.
iCold  and  chilly  all  day,  <  in  forenoon;  hands  and  feet
cold,  head  hot,  or  hands  and  feet  hot,  with  cold  cheeks.

■  Evening  chilliness,  dulness  of  head;  then  heat  and  sleep.

■  Heat,  with  general  sweat.

■  Flushes  of  heat  from  (nose)  down  back ;  irritability ;  averse

to  uncovering.

■  Heat  of  face.

■Sweat  profuse  from  every  exertion  ;  anxiety.

■  Burning  sweat  on  forehead  where  hat  presses.

■  Night  sweat,  alternating  with  dry  skin.

■  Morning  sweat.

■  Cold,  anxious  sweat.

^'  Attacks,  Periodicity. At  certain  hours  of  day : tearing
pain  in  forehead  returns.

Alternately  :  ineflectual  urgings  and  liquid  stools ;  consti-
pation and  liquid  stools ;  night  sweat  and  dry  skin.

Alternate  days:  coryza  <.

Worse  during  full  moon.

Every  morning  :  pulsating  headache  in  vertex.

Every  night:  troublesome  stoppage  of  nose;  pressing
toothache ;  involuntary  micturition.

Before  menses :  chronic  otitis  media.

For  seven  or  eight  months :  loss  of  hearing  in  r.  ear.
■*^  Locality  and  Direction.  Right :  drawing  and  tension
in  r.  side  of  occiput ;  long  continued  pressure  in  side  of
occiput;  loss  of  hearing;  singing  in  ear;  fulness  in
ear;  as  if  something  moved  in  ear;  violent  sharp
stitches  in  hypochondriac  region  ;  pain  in  leg  ;  burning
soreness  in  chest;  pain  in  rhomboid  muscle;  hard
swelling  on  upper  part  of  gland  ;  tearing  and  bruised
pain  in  hip.

Left :  shooting  pain  in  frontal  eminence  to  lower  occiput ;
sounds  seem  to  come  from  1.  side  when  they  really  come
from  r. ;  roaring  in  ear;  caries  of  molar  teeth;  pain  in
side  of  face; stiffness  of  shoulder; stitches  in  hypo-


553  NATRUM  CARBONICUM.

chondrium ;  boring  from  tip  of  scapula ;  chilliness  in
side  of  thorax  ;  stitch  in  back  as  far  as  side;  stitches  in
sole  of  foot ;  chill  in  side.

Particularly  upper  r.,  lower  1.  side.

From  within  outward :  stitches  in  eyes.
*^  Sensations.  Head  as  if  too  large ;  as  if  forehead  would
burst ;  as  if  head  w^ould  be  drawn  back ;  as  of  feathers
before  eyes;  as  if  ears  were  closed  up;  as  of  a  bubble
bursting  in  ear ;  on  swallowing,  feeling  as  if  something
moved  in  r.  ear ;  as  if  tip  of  tongue  was  cracked  ;  dry-
ness of  mouth  as  if  caused  by  heat  of  breath  ;  swellings
as  if  from  incarcerated  wind ;  as  if  veins  of  r.  leg  were
bruised;  pressure  in  hypogastrium  as  if  everything
would  come  out ;  as  if  uterus  would  protrude  ;  motion
as  from  a  foetus  in  uterus ;  as  if  a  knife  pierced  calf  of
leg  and  as  though  blood  trickled  down  it;  stitches  as
of  needles  in  sole  of  r.  foot ;  blisters  on  points  of  toes,
as  if  scalded ;  red  spot  on  big  toe  as  if  contused ;  as  if
nails  would  come  off;  itching  as  from  fleas.

Pain:  in  forehead ;  in  1.  frontal  eminence  to  lower  occiput ;
from  occiput  to  vertex;  in  1.  side  of  face;  in  small  of
back  and  1.  leg;  in  bones  of  face;  in  stomach;  in  rec-
tum ;  in  r.  rhomboid  muscle ;  in  back.

Stupefying  pain:  in  forehead.

Stitching,  tearing,  throbbing :  in  forehead,  temples,  vertex.

Tearing  pain  :  in  forehead  ;  in  r.  hip  ;  in  big  toes.

Shooting  pain:  in  1.  frontal  eminence  to  1  lower  occiput;
in  vesicles.

Violent  sharp  stitches :  in  r.  hypochondriac  region ;  in
region  of  spleen  ;  in  a  corn.

Sharp  piercing  stitches  : in  ears.

Needlelike  stitches:  in  both  eyes.

Pressing  stitches:  in  chest.

Stitches:  in  head  and  out  of  eyes;  in  1.  hypochondrium;
in  hepatic  and  splenic  region;  in  back;  in  small  of
back  ;  in  sole  of  r.  foot.

Cutting:  in  stomach;  in  anus;  in  rectum;  in  hands;  in  feet.

Pulsating  pain :  in  vertex.

Digging,  boring:  toothache.

Boring  :  from  tip  of  1.  scapula.

Boring,  drawing  stinging :  in  corns.

Stinging :  in  eye.

Pressing,  drawing,  cutting :  in  stomach.

Griping :  in  stomach  ;  in  lower  abdomen.

Writhing:  about  umbilicus.

Cramp :  in  stomach ;  of  calves ;  in  feet.

Rheumatic  pain :  of  shoulder,  arms  and  elbows.

Pressing  pain :  in  forehead ;  in  teeth ;  in  goitre ;  in
stomach ;  on  shoulders ;  in  dorsa  of  feet.


NATRUM  CARBONICUM.  554

Drawing  pain :  from  occiput  to  nape ;  in  stomach ;  in  elbow.

Bruised  pain  :  over  back ;  in  r.  hip.

Smarting :  between  toes.

Burning  soreness :  in  r.  mid  chest.

Burning :  about  tip  of  tongue ;  of  blisters  in  mouth  ;  of

eyes  and  urethra ;  in  anus; in rectum; along  spine;

in  feet.
Soreness:  of  mouth;  in  stomach; between  scrotum  and

thighs;  of  feet,  <  soles;  between  toes;  in  big  toes.
Stinging :  in  feet.
Creeping,  stinging: in  muscles  of  thighs  and  beneath

epigastrium.
Throbbing  and  crawling:  in  heels.
Tingling:  in  back.
Painful  cracking:  in  region  of  heart.
Painful  sense  of  emptiness :  in  occiput.
Burning  heat  :  of  face.

Bruised,  heavy  feeling:  in  lower  extremities.
Drawing:  in  r.  side  of  occiput;  in  testicles  ;  in  nape  of  neck.
Violent  pressure:  in  stomach.
Long  continued  pressure:  in  r.  side  of  occiput.
Dull  pressure: from  occiput  to  nape; in  stomach; in

region  of  bladder ;  in  hypogastrium.
Tension:  in  head;  in  r.  side  of  occiput;  in  nape;  in  legs

and  feet ;  in  bend  of  knees.
Heaviness: of  upper  lids; of  tongue; in  stomach; in

testicles;  of  legs  and  feet;  of  arms;  of  whole  body.
Fulness :  in  r.  ear.
Constriction:  around  stomach.
Stiffness:  of  neck  and  1.  shoulder.
Obstruction :  in  head.
Dryness:  of  mouth  and  lips;  of  throat.
Squeaking  sensation  :  at  root  of  nose.
Voluptuous  sensation  :  in  genitals.
Gone,  weak  feeling:  in  stomach.
Twitching  sensation :  in  arms  and  fingers.
Jerking:  in  finger  joints ;  in  lower  extremities  and  in  parts

of  lower  body.
Itching:  in  anus;  over  whole  body ;  in  vesicles.
**  Tissues. I  Emaciation,  with  pale  face,  dilated  pupils;  dark

urine.
■  Bloating  of  whole  body  mornings,  >  in  afternoon.
I  Pallid  anaemia,  with  great  debility,  with  watery  or  milky

whiteness  of  skin,  when  disease  is  due  to  an  original

inertia  and  phlegmatic  state.
I  Putrid  leucorrhoea,  uterine  troubles;  vitality  below  par.
■Subacute,  inflammatory  irritation  of  whole  alimentary

mucous  membrane,  from  mouth  to  anus.


555  NATRUM  CARBONICUM.

I  Swelling  and  induration  of  glands;  scrofulosis.

"^  Touch. Passive  Motion. Injuries. Generally  >  from
touch,  pressing  or  rubbing  parts  gently.

Cutting  pain,  burning  and  stinging  in  wounded  parts.

Touch :  peeling  off  of  dorsum  and  tip  of  nose  painful ;
ulcers  and  blisters  painful ;  soreness  in  stomach  <  ;  pit
of  stomach  sensitive;  warts  on  arms  and  backs  of  hands

Desire  to  be  rubbed  :  during  labor  pains.

Where  hat  presses:  burning  sweat  on  forehead.

Easily  sprained ;  disposition  to  be  sprained  by  any  exer-
tion ;  old  sprains.
*®  Skin. I  Itching  over  whole  body  as  from  fleas.

■Sensation  of  formication.

iSkin  of  whole  body  becomes  dry,  rough  and  cracked  in
places.

■  Red  vesicles  filled  with  fluid  in  bend  of  elbow,  in  fold

between  genitals  and  thigh  and  on  chin.

I I  Vesicles,  with  shooting  pains  and  itching.

■  Spreading  and  suppurating  herpes.

I  Herpes:  iris;  circinatus;  suppurating.

■  Yellow  rings  like  remains  of  herpes.

■  Itchlike  eruption  on  lower  part  of  abdomen.
■Light  brown  spots  (freckles)  on  face.

■  Warts:  ulcerate;  sensitive  to  touch.

■Ulcers,  with  swelling  and  inflammatory  redness  of  affected
parts;  burning,  pricking  and  pulsating;  pus  corroding,
acrid,  putrid  and  yellow.

■Rose  colored  blotches  in  leprous  patients.

■Spots  and  tubercles  all  over  face,  arms,  thighs  and  legs,
which  ulcerate;  leprosy.

I  I  Elephantiasis  grsecorum.

Amelioration  by  gently  pressing  parts  or  rubbing.
*^  Stages  of  Life,  Constitution. Leuco-phlegmatic  constitu-
tions, with  aversion  to  open  air  and  dislike  to  exercise,
physical  or  mental.

Boy,  set.  15;  goitre.

Girl,  set.  16,  lymphatic  habit;  coryza.

Man,  set.  27,  private  secretary ;  goitre.

Woman,  set.  40,  large,  leuco-phlegmatic;  affection  of  chest.

Woman,  music  teacher,  suffering from  chronic coryza,
after  getting  wet ;  suppression  of  sweat.
^^  Relations Antidoted  by:  Camphor,  Spir.  niir.  dul.

It  antidotes : Cinchona.

Compatible : Calc.  ostr.,  Nux  vom.,  Pulsat,  ■  tSepia,  Sulphur.

Compare :  Natr.  sulph.,  which  is  preferable  for  yeastlike
vomiting,  with  pallid,  dirty  and  broad  tongue ;  Arsen.,
Carbo  veg.,  Lycop.,  3Iercur.,  Natr.  mur.,  Phosphor.,  Silic.


NATRUM  MUEIATICUM.  556


NATRUM  fflURIATICDM.

Common  Salt.  Na  CI.

Introduced  by  Hahnemann,  proved  by  himself,  Foissac,  Kohl,  Eummel,
Schreter  and  Nenning  (Chronische  Krankheiten),  by  the  Austrian  provers,
Arneth,  Boehm,  Froelich,  Hampe,  A.  and  W.  Huber,  Reisinger,  Reiss,  Wachtel,
Wagner,  Watzke,  Weinke,  Wiirstl,  Wurmb,  Zlatarovich  (Oest.  Zeit.  fur  Horn.,
vol.  4),  Farrington  (Am.  J.  H.  M.  M.,  vol.  4,  p.  102),  Berridge  (N.  A.  J.  Horn.,
1871,  p.  58,  1873,  p.  503)  and  Robinson  (Br.  Jour.  Horn.,  vol.  25,  p.  325).

The  provings  were  made  with  dilutions  ranging  from  the  1st  to  the  30th.

Clinical  Authorities.— ^ecte  of  grief,  Dulac,  Hom.  Clin.,  vol.  3,  p.  56 ;
Raue's  Rec,  1871,  p.  51 ;  Fear  of  robbers,  Ehrmann,  Allg.  Hom.  Ztg  ,  vol.  113,  p.  24 ;
Fright  in  pregnancy,  Miller,  Raue's  Rec,  1873,  p.  176  ;  Delirium  tremens,  Schuessler,
New  Treatment  of  Disease,  p.  122 ;  Mania,  Dulac,  Hom.  Clin.,  vol.  3,  p.  129  ;  Brain
exhaustion.  Laird,  Hah.  Mo.,  vol.  17,  p.  200;  Hemicrania,  Miller,  N.  A.  J.  H.,  vol.
27,  p.  60;  Periodical  sick  headache,  Gallupe,  Raue's  Rec,  1875,  p.  244;  Intermittent
cephalalgia.  Stow,  Raue's  Rec,  1875,  p.  244 ;  Headache  (5  cases),  Riickert,  Ruck,
Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  1,  p.  181;  Ockford,  Organon,  vol.  1,  p.  468;  Morgan,  Hom.  Clin.,
vol.  4,  p.  84;  Berridge,  Hom.  Phys.,  vol.  6,  p.  211 ;  Perkins,  Organon,  vol.  2,  p.
113 ;  Sick  headache,  Morgan,  Hom.  Clin.,  vol.  4,  p.  138 ;  Headache  and  horrible
dreams,  Lewis,  Hom.  Clin.,  vol  4,  p.  147 ;  Chronic  headache  and  scar  on  nech,  Ber-
ridge, Hom.  Clin.,  vol.  4,  p.  46 ;  Pain  in  r.  eye.  Headache,  Chamberlain,  Raue's
Rec,  1874,  p.  67  ;  Perpendicular  half  sight,  Raue's  Rec,  1875,  p.  6 ;  Asthenopia,  Allen,
Raue's  Rec,  1871,  p.  63;  Allen,  Raue's  Rec,  1875,  p.  62;  Keratitis, 'i:forton,  Raue's
Rec,  1875,  p.  51 ;  Chronic  conjunctivitis,  Koeck,  Hom.  Times,  1877,  p.  59  ;  Ophthal-
mia, Tiilff,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf,  vol.  5,  p,  127  ;  Scrofulous  ophthalmia  (Wildegg  waters),
Robert,  B.  J.  H.,  vol.  6,  p.  501 ;  Inflammation  of  eyes,  Lorbach,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf.,
vol.  1,  p.  288;  Koeck,  Schuessler's  New  Treatment  of  Disease,  p.  97  ;  Affection  of
eyes  (3  cases),  Woodyatt,  Organon,  vol.  2,  p.  238;  Boynton,  Allen,  Buffum,  Nor-
ton's Oph.  Therap.,  p.  127;  Blepharitis,  Norton,  N.  A.  J.  H.,  vol.  23,  p.  353;  Fis-
swes  in  canthi  and  diarrhoaa,  Berridge,  Hom.  Phys.,  vol.  6,  p.  43  ;  Lachrymal  fistula,
Gross,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  1,  p.  2i6;  Stenosis  of  lachrymal  duct,  Burnett,  Hom.
Phys ,  vol.  2,  p.  51 ;  Corijza  and  cough.  Parsons,  T.  A.  J.  H.,  1883,  p.  180 ;  Conjza,
Kafka,  Raue's  Rec,  1870,  p.  126;  Coryza  and  bronchitis,  with  asthenopia.  Miller,
N.  A.  J.  H.,  vol.  27,  p.  64;  Gold  in  head,  Brewster,  Hom.  Phys.,  vol.  3,  p.  85;
Nasal  catarrh,  Hom.  Phys.,  vol.  3,  p.  85 ;  Affections  of  external  nose,  Rosenberg,
Riick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  5,  p.  173;  Facicd  neuralgia,  Heinigke,  Raue's  Rec,  1871,  p.
184 ;  Stomatitis,  Hirsch,  Ruck.  Kl.  Erf,  vol.  5,  p.  221 ;  Stomacace,  Ehrhart,  Weigel,
Riick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  1,  p.  509;  Stenosis  of  oesophagus,  Hirsch,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf,  vol.
5,  p.  247 ;  Affection  of  throat,  Guernsey,  Hom.  Phys.,  vol.  7,  p.  125 ;  Morbid  desire
for  salt,  Hawley,  Hom.  Phys.,  vol.  3,  p.  85 ;  Singultus,  Burnett,  Schuessler's  Tis-
sue Rem.,  Boericke  and  Dewey,  p.  158  ;  Cardialgia,  Hirsch,  B.  J.  H.,  vd.  25,  p.  279 ;
i)!/spepsia.  Miller,  N.  A.  J.H,  vol.  27,  p.  61 ;  Chronic  dyspepsia,  Hart,  Raue's  Rec,


557  NATRUM  MURIATICUM.

1875,  p.  141 ;  Stomax;h  trouble,  ivith  emaciation,  Pritchard,  Horn.  Phys.,  vol.  6,  p.  104*
Hcdmateviesis,  Maas,  K:;ietchmar,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol  1,  p.  570;  Pain  in  liver,  Rey-
nolds, Raue's  Rec,  1870,  p.  227;  Bilious  colic,  Fisher,  Boericke  and  Dewey's
Schuessler's  Tissue  Rem.,  p.  116 ;  Constipation,  Fleming,  Trans.  Horn.  Med.  Soc.,Pa.,
1887,  p.  20;  Constipation,  Gross,  Bernard  and  Strong,  p.  72;  Hrg.,  Hahnemann,
Eiick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  1,  p.  816;  Cholera,  Kurtz,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  1,  p.  952;
Incontinence  of  urine,  Maylaender,  B.  J.  H.,  vol.  33,  p.  555 ;  W.  M.  J.,  Hom.  Phys ,
vol.  6,  p.  232 ;  Dysuria,  Hawley,  Hom.  Phys.,  vol.  3,  p.  86 ;  Hannataria,  Friese,
Raue's  Rec,  1872, p.  166  ;  Gonorrhoea,  Hrg.,  Lingen,  iStapf,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf,  vol.

2,  p.  89 ;  Gleet,  Hahnemann,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf,  vol.  2,  p.  90 ;  Berridge,  Hom.  Clin.,
vol.  4,  p.  118;  Bysmenorrhosa,  Bilding,  Raue's  Rec,  1870,  p.  254;  Hah.  Mo.,  vol.

3,  p.  323 ;  Delayed  menstruation,  Wells,  Hom.  Phys.,  vol.  3,  p.  86  ;  Suppression  of
menses,  Brewster,  Hom.  Phys.,  vol.  3,  p.  86 ;  Leucorrhcea,  Maylaender,  B.  J.  H.,
vol.  33,  p.  555 ;  Parsons,  T.  A,  J.  H.,  1882,  p.  180 ;  Shafer,  Raue's  Rec,  1870,
p.  247  ;  Rapp,  Hom.  Times,  1875,  p.  99 ;  Hartmann,  Molin,  Knorre,  Stupf,  Ruck.
Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  2,  p.  363 ;  Vomiting  of  pregnancy  (2  cases).  Billing,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf.,
vol.  5,  p.  652;  Hoarseness,  Chaffee,  Raue's  Rec,  1874,  p.  113;  Hah.  Mo.,  vol.  8,  p.
341;  Dyspnoea,  Kunkel,  Allg.  Hom.  Ztg.,  vol.  106,  p.  173;  Cough,  Martin,
Hom.  Clin.,  vol.  2,  p.  215;  Whooping  cough,  Burnett,  Hah.  Mo.,  vol.  18,  p.  311;
Pain  in  chest,  Foote,  Gregg's  Reper.,  p.  81 ;  Affection  of  chest,  Schmidt,  Riick.
Kl.  Ei-f,  vol.  5,  p.  823;  Cardiac  weakness,  Cameron,  Hom.  Rev.,  vol  17,  p.
239;  Heart  disease,  Siegrist,  Raue's  Rec,  1875,  p.  127;  Schoedler,  Hom.  Times,
1875,  p.  70 ;  Lippe,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf,  vol.  5,  p.  860 ;  Basedoids  disease,  Hofrichter,
Raue's  Rec,  1870,  p.  Ill ;  Spinal  irritation,  Raue's  Rec,  1871,  p.  169  ;  Hom.  Clin.,
vol.  3,  p.  70 ;  Burr,  Raue's  Rec,  1 872,  p.  197 ;  Coxalgia,  Gilchrist,  Gilch.  Surg ,  p.  283 ;
Ganglion  in  sheath  of  tendon  of  hand,  Kunkel,  Allg.  Hom.  Ztg.,  vol.  112,  p.  28 ;  Warts
m  palms  of  hands,  Gee,  Hom.  Phys.,  vol.  6,  p.  230  ;  Paresis  of  legs,  Hartmann,  Riick.
Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  4,  p.  489 ;  Varicose  ideef  of  leg  (solution  of  salt  in  water),  Stens,  Hom.
Times,  1875,  p.  140;  Neuralgia  and  bronchitis,  Berridge,  Hom.  Clin.,  vol.  3,  p.  4;
Tonic  spasms,  Raue's  Rec,  1871,  p.  186;  Cataleptic  spasms  (Ischler  Soole),  Goetz,
Riick.  Kl.  Erf,  vol,  4.  p.  609 ;  Chorea,  Schwarze,  Ruck.  Kl.  Erf,  vol.  4,  p.  512 ;
Hart,  Schuessler's  Tissue  Remedies,  Boericke  and  Dewey,  p.  114;  Epilepsy,  GrifFen,
Hom.  Times,  1875,  p.  65;  Sleeplessness,  Burnett,  Schuessler's  Tissue  Remedies,
Boericke  and  Dewey,  p.  197 ;  Intermittent  fever,  ague.  Miller,  Hah.  Mo.,  vol.  7,  p.
404;  Boyce,  Hah.  Mo.,  vol.  10,  p.  458 ;  Terry,  N.  A.  J.  H.,  vol.  25,  p.  312 ;  Clau-
sen, Organon,  vol.  2,  p.  76;  Perkins,  Organon,  vol.  2,  p.  113;  Hawkes,  Organon,
vol.  2,  p.  132  ;  Brigham,  Organon,  vol.  2,  p.  133;  Sarchet,  Organon,  vol.  2,  p.  135,
Hawley,  Gwynn,  Organon,  vol.  3,  p.  94  ;  Hoffmann,  Organon,  vol.  3,  p.  Ill ;  Bird,
Organon,  vol.  3,  p.  361 ;  Ingersoll  and  Goodno  (3  cases),  p.  370-1  ;  Hallock,  Hom.
Times,  1875 ;  p.  124;  Linsley,  Hom.  Clin.,  vol.  1,  p.  44;  Hoyne,  Hom.  Clin.,  vol.
2,  p.  251 ;  Ring,  Hom.  Clin.,  vol.  2,  p.  262 ;  Morgan,  Hom.  Clin.,  vol.  4,  p.  78 ;
Griggs,  Miller,  Raue's  Rec,  1872,  p.  236,  238 ;  Burt,  Von  Tagen,  Payne,  Spencer,
Raue's  Rec,  1872,  p.  245;  Sarchet,  Miller,  Stens,  Raue's  Rec,  1873,  p.  214;  De-
chere,  Morrison,  Raue's  Rec,  1874,  p.  279;  Stowe,  Raue's  Rec,  1875,  p.  275;
Thomas,  B.  J.  H.,  vol.  16,  p.  327 ;  Escalier,  Luchs,  Wolf,  Hartlaub,  K.  in  L.,
Lembke,  Schmidt,  Gauwerky,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  4,  pp.  944-52 ;  Stowe,  Payne,
Miller,  Brigham,  Allen,  Hawkes,  Pearson,  Burnett,  Allen's  Int.  Fever,  p.  181  ;
Lippe,  Hom.  Phys.,  vol.  2,  p.  45;  Millspaugh,  Hom.  Phys.,  vol.  2,  p.  89;  Wells,
Brewster,  Swift,  Hussey,  Claussen,  Baldwin,  Hawley,  Marks,  Seward,  Wallace,
Jennings,  Hom.  Phys.,  vol.  3,  pp.  84-7  ;  Effects  of  exposure  to  marshy  surroundings.


NATRUM  MURIATICUM.  558

Boyce,  Horn.  Pliys.,  vol.  3,  p.  85 ;  Suppressed  ague,  Hall,  Horn.  Phys ,  vol.  4,  p.
185  ;  Quinine  cachexia,  Hussey,  Horn.  Phys.,  vol.  3,  p.  86  ;  Chlorosis,  Kummel,  R'iick.
Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  2,  p.  275 ;  Mueller,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  5,  p.  605 ;  Hoflfendahl,
Mueller,  N.  A.  J.  H.,  vol.  7,  p.  171  ;  Atrophy  of  infants,  Farrington,  T,  H.  M.  S.,
Pa.,  vol.  2,  p.  243 ;  Marasmus,  Williams,  Eaue's  Rec,  1874,  p.  188 ;  Weakness  of
muscles,  Kunkel,  Allg.  Horn.  Ztg.,  vol.  112,  p.  195 ;  Catarrhal  affections.  Miller,  N.  A.
J.  H.,  vol.  27,  p.  60 ;  Scarlatinal  dropsy,  Pratt,  N.  A.  J.  H.,  May,  1883  ;  Dropsy,  Cohn,
Schuessler's  New  Treatment  of  Disease,  p.  90 ;  Acne  faciei,  Hirsch,  Raue's  Rec,
1872,  p.  96;  Tetter,  Stens,  Raue's  Rec.,  1873,  p.  249 ;  Berridge,  Raue's  Rec,  1875,
p.  292  ;  Herpes  facialis,  Raue's  Rec,  1873,  p.  82 ;  Herpes  cireinatus,  Berridge,  Hah,
Mo.,  vol.  10,  p.  79;  Scarlet  fever,  Dudley,  Hom.  Times,  1875,  p.  131  ;  Bite  of  insects,
Schuessler's  New  Treatment  of  Disease,  p.  122;  Mercurial  salivation,  Schuessler's
New  Treatment  of  Disease,  p.  116;  Abuse  of  opium,  Mueller,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.
5,  p.  273.

^  Mind. Weakness  or  loss  of  memory  ;  remembers  nothing

of  yesterday.
■Absent  minded  or distracted  while  talking;  does not

know what he ought to say ;  awkward  in  talking ;

easily  makes  mistakes.
I  Awkward;  hasty;  drops  things  from  nervous  weakness.
iDulness;  difficulty  of  thinking.
I  Haunted  with  thoughts  that  something  unpleasant  will

happen.
I  Tries  to  recollect  past  disagreeable  occurrences  for  the

purpose  of  thinking  on  them  and  indulging  the  grief

which  it  causes.
I  He  concluded  from  the  look  of  everyone,  that  he  was

pitied  on  account  of  his  misfortune,  and  he  wept.

■  Delirium,  with  starting  of  body,  picking  at  bedclothes,

wandering  and  muttering.

■  Delirium  tremens.

■  Mania,  especially  when  accompanied  by  paralytic  debility.
I  I  After  becoming  thoroughly  wet,  severe  headache  with

maniacal  paroxysms,  during  which  he  uttered  the  most
atrocious  blasphemies,  swore  against  God  and  the  ele-
ments, and  after  raging  for  awhile  became  exhausted,
and  had  to  keep  his  bed  from  great  debility ;  dryness  of
tongue;  unquenchable  thirst;  pulse  irregular  and  in-
termittent.

■  No  desire  to  work,  mental  or  physical.

■  Taciturnity;  offended  at  every  word  ;  avoids  company;

hates  persons  because  they  have  offended  him  ;  spleen.

■  Likes  to  be  alone.

■  Whenever  alone  she  wished  to  cry,  she  did  not  know  why.

■  ■Very  much  inclined  to  weep  and  to  be  excited.

■  Laughed  so  immoderately  at something  not  ludicrous

that  she  could  not  be  quieted,  and  tears  came  into  her
eyes,  so  that  she  looked  as  though  she  had  been  weeping.


559  NATRUM  MURIATICUM.

1 1  Hurriedness,  with  anxiety  and  fluttering  at  heart.
I  I  Hastiness  and  impatience. ^Chlorosis.

I  1  Attacks  of  great  cheerfuhiess  and  merry  disposition,

witli  great  inclination  to  laugh,  sing  and  dance,
iGloomy  thoughts,  recalls insults long since suffered;
likes  to  dwell  upon  past  unpleasant  occurrences.

I I  Depression  of  spirits.

I  I  Prevailing  depression  of  mind,  with  spells  of  irritable-

ness  and  crossness. ^Addison's  disease.

■  Lachrymose  depression,  <  from  being  spoken  to;  con-

cern about  the  future.

I I  Sad  and  weeping  mood  without  cause.

1 1  Sad  and  weeping;  consolation  aggravates,  a  fluttering

of  heart  follows  ;  intermittent  pulse.
■Very  sad,  gloomy  and  foreboding. ^Dysmenorrhoea.

■  Excessive  sadness  during  menses,  with  palpitation  and

morning  headache.

■  Alternately sad  and  excessively  merry;  hysteria.

■  Melancholic  depression  and  sad  apprehension,  disheart-

ened all  day  without  definite  cause;  palpitation.

■  Hypochondriacal  mood,  with  constipation.

■  Apprehension,  feels  as  if  something  was  going  to  happen.

■  Brain  fag,  with  sleeplessness,  gloomy  forebodings,  exhaus-

tion after  talking,  embarrassment  of  brain.

■  A  pregnant  woman  saw  a  man  who had  a  disfiguring

nasal  cancer ;  this  haunted  her,  and  she  was  sure  her
child  would  be  marked ;  she  was  melancholy,  avoided
society,  wept  continually.

■  Fear  of  loss  of  reason.

■  Despairing,  hopeless  feeling  about  the  future.

■  ■Hypochondriacal;  tired  of  life.

■  Joyless,  indifferent,  taciturn.

■  Weak  will.

■  Great  irritability  ;  child  irritable  and  cross  when  spoken

to ;  crying  from  slightest  cause.

■  Very  ill  humored  in  morning.

■  Quarrelsome  fretfulness,  gets  into  a  passion  about  trifles;

passionate  vehemence.

■  Hateful  and  vindictive  natures.

■  When  trying  to  comfort  him  he  gets  into  a  violent  rage.

■  Anthropophobia.

■  Fearfulness  ;  very  easily  startled.

■  Bad  effects  from  anger.

■  Consequences  of  fright,  anger,  vexation,  mortification,  or

reserved  displeasure.

I  I  After  a  fright,  chorea.

I I  After  violent  fits  of  passion,  paralysis.
"^  Sensorium. ■  Weariness  in  head.


NATRUM  MURIATICUM.  560

■  Empty  feeling  in  head,  with  anguish.

I  I  Weak,  faint  feeling  in  head  and  chest  walking  in  sun.
llDulness:  of  head,  as  if  too  heavy;  in  morning  or  fore-
noon ;  after  thinking.

I  Feeling  of  heaviness  ni  head,  as  if  it  would  fall  forward,

increasing  with  headache  across  forehead.

I I  Vertigo:  great  dulness  of  head,  with  flickering  before
eyes ;  objects  turn  around,  tendency  to  fall  forward ;
after  shooting  in  head,  as  if  she  would  fall  to  left ;  when
rising  from  bed  in  morning ;  periodical,  with  nausea,
eructations,  colic  and  trembling  limbs;  nausea  and
headache ;  as  if  a  cold  wind  was  blowing  through  head ;
with  feeling  of  fainting;  when  rising,  >  lying  down
awhile;  congestive,  from  suppressed  hemorrhoidal  flow  ;
in  pregnancy  ;  from  spirituous  liquors,  tea,  coffee,  to-
bacco, opium ;  from  straining  eyes  or  close  study ;  on
walking ;  when  standing  near  a  window.

^  Inner  Head. ■  Pressure:  in  frontal  region  ;  dragging.

■  Weight  in  forehead,  pressing  in,  <  bending  head  down,

>  from  pressure.

■  Dull  pressure  in  forehead  with  confusion.

■  Pressive  pain  in  forehead  and  eyeballs  so  violent  that

lids  can  only  be  raised  with  exertion  and  pain ,  he
could  no  longer  read.

■  ■When coughing  it  seems  as  though  forehead  would

burst.

■  Headache:  in  forehead;  during  and  after  sneezing;  as

from  a  blow,  <  from  laughing;  on  waking  in  morning,
throbbing  and  weight;  face  flushed;  every  other  day,
from  10  A.M.  to  about  3  p.  m.

■  Pressive,  throbbing  headache,  especially  in  1.  frontal  re-

gion, all  day.

■  Throbbing  and  tension  in  forehead.

■  Beating  and  pulsation  in  head,  mostly  in  forehead,  with

nausea  and  vomiting,  <  in  morning  and  when  moving;

>  lying  with  head  high ;  >  by  perspiration.

■  Pains  in  and  over  r.  eye,  going  off"  with  sun  ;  cannot  bear

light  of  any  kind.

■  Rheumatic  tearing  from  root  of  nose  to  forehead  ;  nausea,

vomiting  ;  vanishing  of  sight.

■  Tearing,  stitching  headache,  compelling  one  to  lie  down.

■  Stitches  over  eyes  ;  in  head;  fine,  through  head  ;  extend-

ing to  neck  and  chest.

■  ■Headache  as  if  head  would  burst.

■  Beating  and  throbbing  in  head  on  motion  of  body.

1  ■Throbbing  as  from  little  hammers  ;  awakens  with  head-
ache every  morning ;  <  from  reading  or  talking.

■  Rush  of  blood  to  head ;  head  feels  heavy.


561  NATRUM  MURIATICUM.

I  Heat  in  head,  with  redness  of  face,  nausea  and  vomiting.

■  Violent  jerks  and  shocks  in  head.

■  Pressing  headache  from  both  sides,  as  if  in  a  vice.

■  Headache  immediately  after  waking  in  morning,  lasting

till  towards  noon.
I  Headache  from  sunrise  till  sunset,  <  at  midday ;  r.  eye
congested  ;  <  from  light.

■  Dull  headache,  almost  constantly.

I  I  Dull,  heavy  headache,  with  profusion  of  tears,  drowsi-
ness and  unrefreshing  sleep.

■  Headaches  with  constipation,  from  torpor  and  dryness  of

a  portion of  intestinal  mucous  tract,  when  tongue  is
clean  or  covered  with  bubbles  of  frothy  saliva.

■  Head  ache,  with  red  face,  nausea  and  vomiting,  before,

during  and  after  catamenia.

■  Headache  of  schoolgirls;  during  menses  with  burning

on  vertex.

■  Pain  like  a  nail  driven  into  1.  side  of  head.  /^Intermittent

■  Hemicrania:  with  sour  vomiting  and  eructations;  sudden

bloating  of  and  rumbling  in  abdomen,  nausea,  loss  of
consciousness  and  twitching  of  limbs.

■  Sick  headache  from  morning  till  noon.

■  Right  sided  headache,  comes  on  at  10  a.m.,  with  dizziness

and  dull  heavy  pains,  glimmering  before  eyes,  fainting
and  smking  at  epigastrium,  slight  fever  and  thirst ;  >
m  open  air  and  while  perspiring;  sore  nostrils.

■  Headache,  with  vomiting  of  transparent  phlegm  or  water.

■  Headache  ceases  on  one  side  of  head;  continues  more

violent  on  other.

■  Left  sided  clavus.

■  Headache  beginning  with  a  blinding  of  eyes.

I  I  Pain  like  a  rope  around  head,  drawing  tighter  and
tighter;  after  walking  awhile  feels  as  if  stepping  on  air

I  I  Sick  headache  whenever  she  eats  rich  food;  attacks  com-
mence m  morning,  with  zig-zag  dazzling  in  eyes,  like
lightning,  lasting  half  an  hour  and  ushering  in  throb-
bing headache  in  forehead  and  vertex,  with  nausea;  can
hardly  hold  her  eyes  open;  cold  feet;  creeping  chilli-
ness all  over;  sometimes  vomits  sour  water  or  bile*
somewhat  >  going  to  bed  in  a  dark  room;  attacks
usually  last  twenty-four  hours,

■Severe  headache,  maniacal  paroxysms,  blasphemous-
weak;  tongue  dry;  very  thirsty;  intermittent  pulse;
caused  by  getting  wet.

■  Burning  on  vertex.

■  ■Heaviness  in  back  part  of  head;  draws  eyes  together.

■  Heat  and  throbbing  in  occiput.
■Stitches  as  with  knives  in  occiput.
VOL.  VII.— 36.


NATRUM  MURIATICUM.  562

■  Headache  coming  on  in  early  morning  or  at  10  a.m.,  after

suppressed  ague.
I  Headache  <  in  morning  on  waking,  moving  head  or

eyes,  mental  exertion,  warmth;  >  from  sitting  still  or

lying  down  and  from  sweat.
I  Chronic  effects  after  injury  to  head.
■Sunstroke.

■  Increased  quantity  of  water  in  brain  in  acute  diseases

(typhus,  scarlet  fever,  smallpox),  manifested  by  sopor,
convulsions,  etc.

*  Outer  Head. ■Head  involuntarily  nods  forward;  weakness.

■  Cold  sensation  on  vertex ;  scalp  sensitive;  spasm  of  eyelids.

■  Scalp  feels constricted;  <  talking  and  in  open  air;  >

sitting  or  lying.

■  Liability  to  take  cold  in  head.

■  ■Violent  itching  on  head  and  nape  of  neck.

■Hair  falls  out  if  touched;  mostly  on  forepart  of  head,
temples  and  beard ;  scalp  very  sensitive;  face  oily,  shiny,
as  if  greasy.

■  Itching  eruption, impetigo,  <  on  boundaries  of  hairy

scalp,  especially  about  nape  of  neck  and  behind  ears;
eruption  glutinous,  thin,  gummy  scabs ;  skin  sore  and  red.

■  Light  crusts  form  on  back  of  head  and  neck,  along  border

of  hair,  which  are  irregular  and  resemble  peach  gum.
•Scabs  on  head  and  in  axillae;  eczema  raw,  oozing  a  cor-
roding fluid  destroying  hair.

■  Humid  eruption,  gluey  discharge,  matting  hair.

■  White  scurf  on  scalp;  dandruff;  alternating  with  catarrh

and  loss  of  smell.

■  Chronic  eruption  over  whole  head  had  eaten  off  hair,  sur-

face raw  as  if  scalped.

■  From  a  blow  on  forehead  bone  was  exposed  and  a  small

piece  exfoliated ;  three  months  after  wakes  each  morn-
ing with  headache,  which  lasts  till  10  a.m.,  when  scalp
begins  to  sweat  and  headache  passes  away ;  when  he  lies
down  at  night  head  begins  to  ache;  hears  a  ringing  and
roaring  noise  till  he  falls  asleep,  starts  from  sleep  fright-
ened, having  dreamed  of  robbers,  fire,  murder  or  other
horrible  things.

■  After  blow  upon  1.  parietal  bone  there  remained  a  sensi-

tive spot  over  seat  of  injury,  least  touch  upon  this  spot
caused  trembling  over  whole  body ;  pains  day  and  night,
with  twitching  of  limbs.
I  I  Jerking  of  head,  in  chorea.

*  Sight  and  Eyes. ■■Fiery,  zig-zag  appearance  around  all

objects;  black  spots  and  streaks  of  light;  sudden  dark-
ness, everything  turns  black.

■  Vision  double,  or  sees  only  one  half  (perpendicular)  of  an

object.


563  NATRUM  MURIATICUM.

■  Unsteadiness  of  vision;  objects  become  confused.

I  Dim  sight,  as  if  looking  through  gauze  or  feathers;  ob-

jects seem  covered  with  a  thin  veil.

■  Frequent  obscuration  of  sight,  especially  when  stooping,

walking,  reading,  writing.

I I  Amaurosis,  from  debilitating  nervous  losses.
1 1  Eyes  give  out  in  reading  or  writing.

■  Amblyopia  and  amaurosis;  pupils  contracted,  dependent

on  menstrual  disorders  in  chlorosis.

1 1  Asthenopia,  particularly  muscular;  drawing,  stiff  sen-
sation in  muscles  of  eyes  when  moving  them ;  letters
and  stitches  in  sewing  run  together;  aching  in  eyes
when  looking  intently;  often  caused  by  general  muscu-
lar weakness,  spinal  irritation  and  overuse  of  eyes,  or
reflex  irritation  from  uterus.

I  Retinal  images  are  retained  too  long.

llHyperaesthesia  of  retina,  lachrymation  and  burning  in
morning;  conjunctival  injection;  on  looking  at  a  bright
light,  great  photophobia,  severe  sticking  in  temples,  on
reading,  objects  seem  to  swim  before  sight;  chlorosis.

■  Iritis;  pupil  contracted ;  iris  discolored;  violent  stitches

in  temples  on  looking  into  light  or  when  light  is  changed.

■  Ulcerations  of  cornea,  after  cauterizing  with  nitrate  of

silver,  with  dread  of  light,  so  that  child  lies  with  head
buried  in  pillow ;  lids  swollen,  bleed  on  opening,  much
lachrymation  and  eruption  on  face  and  lips;  sharp,
piercing  pain  above  r.  eye  on  looking  down,  with  throb-
bing headache,  <  in  evening.

■  Blepharitis,  ulcers  on  cornea  when  there  is  smarting,

burning;  feehng  of  sand  in  eyes,  mornings;  acrid,  ex-
coriating tears;  photophobia  marked,  with  spasmodic
closure  of  lids.

■  Keratitis  pustulosa,  with  granular  lids.
■Scrofulous  ulcers  on  cornea,  with  photophobia.
■Blisters  on  cornea,  white  spots;  acts  especially  on  corpus

vitreum.

■  Ciliary  neuralgia;  pain  in  and  above  eye  (especially  r),

coming  on  and  going  off  with  sun;  eye  congested,"^sore
and  painful  when  moved  ;  can  bear  neither  natural  nor
artificial  light;  pam  from  lamplight;  could  not  hurt
more  if  eye  was  pulled  from  socket ;  discouraged ;  craves
salt.

■  Sharp  pain  over  r.  eye  on  looking  down,  with  throbbing

headache;  <  in  evening.

■  Neuralgic  pains  in  eyes,  periodical,  with  flow  of  tears  and

reddened  conjunctiva.
I  I  Eyes  itch  and  burn  like  chilblains;  must  wipe  them
often  and  pull  at  lashes.


NATRUM  MURIATICUM.  564

I  Divergent  strabismus  since  childhood  in  a  patient,  aet.  20;

following  inflammatory  rheumatism ;  after  Ehus  tox.  eyes
parallel  for  one  day,  then  squint,  came  on  from  fatigue;
more  marked  in  hot  weather  and  <  in  winter.

II  Weakness  of  internal  recti  muscles.

1 1  Redness  of  whites  of  eyes,  with  lachrymation.

HRedness  and  inflammation  of  white  of  eye,  with  a  feel-
ing as  if  balls  were  too  large  and  compressed.

Ilnflammation  of  eyes,  lachrymation  in  every  slight  wind.

iLids  were  very  much  swollen,  dark,  purplish,  canthi
cracked ;  conjunctiva  swollen,  chemosed,  protruding,
small  points  on  upper  part  of  cornea  and  profuse,  muco-
purulent discharge.

liScrofulous  ophthalmia,  after  abuse  of  nitrate  of  silver.

■  Follicular  conjunctivitis; follicular  formations  chronic

and  chiefly  confined  to  oculo-palpebral  folds;  also  when
case  is  complicated  with  some  trachoma.

I  Conjunctivitis,  with  white  mucous  secretions  and  acrid
lachrymation.

I  Sensitiveness  of  eyes ;  after  using  they  smart,  itch  andburn.

I  Sticking  in  r.  eye.

I I  Sensation  as  if  sand  was  in  eyes,  in  morning.
I  Pain  as  from  a  foreign  body  in  eyes.

■  Burning  in  eyes,  with  increased  secretion  of  mucus;  lids

agglutinated  in  morning;  great  sensitiveness  to  lamp-
light.

■  Violent  burning  in  eyes  in  evening.

■  ■Pressure  in  eyes  on  looking  intently  at  anything.

■  Dark  veil  passes  before  eyes  from  r.  to  1.  every  morning

at  10  A.M.

■  Eyes  too  large.

■  Dermoid  swellings  of  conjunctiva.

■  Lachrymation  :  in  open  air;  biting,  in  morning;  appear-

ing daily  at  a  regular  time;  acrid,  making  canthi  red
and  sore;  with  eruption  of  small  vesicles  causing  scald-
ing; skin  of  face  about  eye  glossy  and.  shining;  tears
stream  down  face  whenever  he  coughs;  with  obstruction
of  tear  duct,  <  after  use  of  nitrate  of  silver.
I  I  Irritability  of  margins  of  lids  and  their  conjunctiva.

■  Catarrhal  affection  of  margins  of  lids;  lids  red,  with  burn-

ing, especially  in  evening  while  reading,  they  secreted
mucus  and  were  agglutinated  in  morning  on  waking
and  covered  with  thick  scabs.

■  Borders  and  corners  of  eyelids  raw  and  ulcerated.

■  Excessively  sore,  red,  disgusting  eyelids;  lids  look  like

raw  beef.
I  Ilnflammation  of  lids  after  measles;  lids  thick  and  red;
thick  discharge;  <  in  evening;  chill  at  11  a.m.,  followed
by  fever  and  great  thirst.


565  NATRUM  MURIATICUM.

I  Old  cases  of  granular  lids,  with  or  without  pannus,  espe-

cially if  they  have  been  treated  with  caustics.
iLids  heavy  when  using  them.

I I  Spasmodic  closing  of  eyelids.
I  Eyes  close  with  headache.

■  Entropion  from  caustic  treatment  of  granular  lids.

■  Dermoid  tumor  on  edge  of  lid.

■Stricture  of  lachr^anal  duct,  fistula  and  blenorrhoea  of
lachrymal  sac.

I  I  Catarrhal  stenosis  of  lachrymal  duct  in  a  baby ;  eye  con-
stantly watering.

■  Fissure  in  external  canthi,  first  1.,  then  r.,  with  dragging

pains,  craving  salt;  subsequently  fissure  in  1.  external
canthus,  with  pain  as  if  it  was  being  torn  open.
■Stye  in  corner  of  eye;  stye  on  r.  side.

■  Glutinous  substance  collects  in  external  canthi.

■  Itching  in  eyes  and  canthi.

■  ■Itching  eruption  in  eyebrows.

■  Morbus  Basedowii,  palpitation ;  short  breath  on  least  ex-

ertion.
^  Hearing  and  Ears. ■  Buzzing,  humming,  roaring  or  ring-
ing in  ears.

■  Hardness  of  hearing.

I  I  Deafness  from  swelling  of  tympanitic  cavity,  with  watery
conditions  of  tongue.

■  Catarrh  of  tympanitic  cavity  and  Eustachian  tube;  non-

suppurating.

■  Drawing  and  stitching  pains  from  ear  down  to  neck  and

shoulder,  or  from  teeth  up  to  ear.

■  Throbbing  and  beating  in  ears;  ears  red  from  congestion;

otorrhoea.

■  Painful  cracking  in  ear  when  masticating.

■  Pulsation  and  beating;  or  stitches  in  ear.

■  Discharge  of  pus  from  ear.

■  Swelling,  burning  and  heat  of  ears.

■  Chronic  catarrhal  otitis,  with  acrid  discharges.

■  ■Itching  behind  ears.

''  Smell  and  Nose. ■  ■  Loss  of  smell  and  taste,  especially
with  catarrh.

■  Feeling  of  dryness  in  nose;  stoppage.

■  Dry  coryza  or  dry  nasal  catarrh.

■  Easily  takes  cold  in  head  ;  is  constantly  obliged  to  wrap

it  up;  if  he  allows  it  to  be  uncovered  during  day  has
stoppage  of  nose  at  night.

■  Coryza  fluent,  alternately  with  stoppage;  posterior  nares

dry,  with  hawking  in  morning;  spasms  of  sneezing  each'
morning,  or  ineffectual  attempts.

■  Great  swelling  of  mucous  membrane  in  upper  portion  of


NATRUM  MURIATICUM.  566

nose,  with  difficulty  of  breathing  through  nose,  and  speak-
ing through  nose;  loss  of  smell. ^Coryza.

I  1  Excessive  fluent  coryza,  with  loss  of  smell  and  taste.

I I  Catarrh,  secretion  clear  mucus,  transparent  like  white
of  egg.

■Severe  coryza,  consisting  of  clear  white  discharge  so  pro-
fuse that  it  was  necessary  to  lay  a  towel  under  nose;
awoke  every  morning  with  a  headache,  and  after  rising
discharge  from  nose  continued  with  violent  and  fre-
quent sneezing;  loss  of  taste  and  smell;  troublesome
cough  from  tickling  in  throat  pit.

■  Squirming  in  nostril  as  of  a  small  worm. ^Hay  asthma.
I  Hay  fever;  watery  discharge  from  eyes  and  nose.

I  Colds  causing  vesicular  eruptions  with  watery  contents,
which  burst  and  leave  thin  scurfs  or  crusts ;  scurf  and
scabs  in  nose.

■  Cold  in  head;  lips  and  alse  nasi  thickly  set  with  fever

blisters.

■  Influenza,  watery  running  at  nose,  great  sleepiness.

■  Thick  mucus,  with  loss  of  smell  and  taste;  membrafie

thickened. ^Catarrh.

I  I  Burning  pains  in  nasal  bones,  especially  at  roof  of  nose
and  in  malar  region.

I  1  Redness,  heat  and  swelling  of  1.  side  of  nose,  with  sore
pain,  especially  on  blowing  nose.

I  I  Burning  in  nose,  internal  soreness;  nasal  wings  full  of
pimples.

I  I  Loss  of  sensibility,  feeling  of  deadness  on  inner  part  of
nose.

I  I  Many  small,  burning  pimples  under  septum,  with  sen-
sation as  if  acrid  water  flowed  from  nose.

■  ■Chronic  naso-pharyngeal  catarrh.

■  Continual  lachrymation  from  obstruction  of  nasal  duct;

roaring  and  buzzing  in  ears  and  head,  with  inability  to
work,  read  or  think ;  loss  of  smell  and  taste. ^Ozsena.

■  Chronic  catarrh  of  anaemic  patients.

■  Nasal  catarrh  accompanied  by  excessive  use  of  salt.
■Nosebleed  when  stooping,  or  when  coughing  at  night.

■  In  place  of  chill  profuse  nosebleeding. ^Intermittent.
I  I  Much  clotted  blood  is  blown  from  nose.

■  Nose  sore,  interior  of  wings  swollen  ;  scabs  in  nose.
■"Left  sided  inflammation  and  swelling  of  nose;  painful

to  touch.

■  Exfoliation  of  skin  on  dorsum  of  nose;  redness  of  nose

with  pimples,  vesicles  and  painful  nodules.

■  Nose  on  one  side  feels  numb.

"  Upper  Face. ■Face:  very  pale ;  wan  ;  pasty ;  livid  ;  swollen ;
sallow  ;  leaden ;  shines  as  if  greasy ; yellow  ;  earthy ;


567  NATRUM  MURIATICUM.

yellowish,  with  leucorrhcBa ;  pale  or  bloated,  in  diph-
theria ;  blue,  oedema  of  lungs.

I  Earthy,  yellow  color  of  face;  brown  spots  on  back  of
hands. ^Addison's  disease.

I  Redness  of  1.  cheek ;  heat  in  face.

I  Cheek  bones  pain  as  if  bruised,  when  chewing.

I I  Prosopalgia  :  recurring  periodically,  especially  after
checked  ague;  with  constipation;  tongue  showing  a
clear,  mucous  slime  and  little  frothy  bubbles  at  edge;
with  vomiting  of  clear  phlegm  or  water;  after  quinine;
pains  produce  paralytic  symptoms,

■  Neuralgia  of  ophthalmic  branch  of  trigeminus  on  1.  side ;

blepharospasm,  photophobia,  contracted  pupil,  red  con-
junctiva, increased  lachrymation,  restless  sleep ;  regu-
larly at  7  A.M.,  increasing  till  noon,  and  then  decreas-
ing, never  leaving  entirely.

■  Facial  supraorbital  neuralgia,  going  from  r.  to  1.,  with

bronchitis  from  eating  salt.

■  Pain  in  malar  bones,  <  when  chewing;  falling  off  of

whiskers.
I  I  On  each  side  of  upper  forehead  below  hair,  a  round,
slightly  scabby  patch,  with  red  areola,  with  itching.

■  Pustular  eruption  on  forehead.

■  Itching  eruption  on  face. ^Crusta  lactea. ^Barber's  itch.

■  Pimples  on  face. ^Acne  faciei.
I  I  Ulcer  on  1.  cheek.

I  I  Sweating  while  eating.
■Mumps  with  profuse  flow  of  saliva.
I  I  Suppuration  of  parotid  after  typhus.
^  Lower  Face, i Small  vesicles  about  mouth,  forming  a  kind
of  tetter  ;  hydroa,  "  cold  sores."

■  Blisters  like  pearls  around  mouth. ^Intermittent.

■  Lips  and  corners  of  mouth  ulcerated  and  cracked.

■  Lips  dry  and  cracked,  with  rhagades  or  bleeding  scabs;

humid  sores  in  commissures.

■  ■Upper  lip  swollen.

■  Eruption  with  smarting  pain  on  red  of  lips.

■  Lips  tingle  and  feel  numb.

■  Small  vesicles  on  upper  lip,  below  septum  of  nose,  which

burn,  become  confluent  and  covered  with  a  scab,  which
falls  off  after  several  days  and  leaves  a  red  spot  lasting
two  weeks.

■  Deep,  painful  fissure  in  middle  of  upper  lip.

■  Swelling  of  lower  lip  and  tip  of  tongue,  with  violent

burning  on  it ;  wakes  him  at  night.

■  ■Great  swelling  and  some  burning  of  lower  lip,  followed

by  appearance  of  a  large  vesicle,  which  next  day  formed
a  scab  and  desquamated.


NATRUM  MURIATICUM.  568

Crack  in  middle  of  lower  lip.

I  I  Severe  drawing  pain  in  lower  jaw,  painful  to  touch

■  Eruptions  and  ulcers  on  chin.

■  Itching,  humid  eruption  on  chin;  angry  looking.
I  Hair  of  beard  falls  out  profusely.  ^Barber's  itch,
■Sycosis;  whiskers  fall  out  with  much  itching,  vesicles

with  watery  contents.

■  Submaxillar}^  glands  swollen.

'"  Teeth  and  Gums.  ■  ■Teeth  sensitive  to  air  or  touch ;  molars
pain  when  chewing.

■  Pain,  drawing,  tearing  from  teeth  to  ears  and  throat,  after

eating  and  at  night; cheek  swollen.

■  Toothache:  pressure;  teeth  too  long,  loose,  dull;  swollen

cheek;  burning,  boring,  beating;  at  night,  belbie  and
after  midnight;  every  other  day;  Spring  and  Summer;
<  from  drawing  in  air,  from  cold  drinking,  in  cold,
from  warm  food,  after  chewing,  after  eating,  beginning
of  catamenia,  from  touch  and  pressure.

■  Pain  in  malar  bones,  <  when  chewing.

I  I  Toothache  with  involuntary  flow  of  tears  or  salivation.

■  Decayed  teeth  feel  loose,  burn,  sting  and  pulsate.
■Teething,  with  dribbling  of  saliva.

I  I  Loose  teeth.

■  ■Gums: sensitive to warm  and  cold things; swollen,

bleed  easily;  aphthae;  putrid;  burning,  smarting  when
eating;  inflamed,  with  swelling  of  cheek;  scorbutis.

■  Difficulty  of  talking,  as  if  organs  of  speech  were  weak.

■  Ulcer  on  gum;  painful  day  and  night.

■A  bluish  red  swelling  of  a  spongy  nature  on  gums  be-
tween lower  incisors,  commencing  on  1.  side,  extending
to  r.,  bled  often,  blood  had  a  saltish  taste.

■  Epulis.

■  Fistula  dentalis.

"  Taste  and  Tongue.  ■Taste:  bad,  in  morning;  bitter;  all
food  tastes  bitter;  bitter,  with  clean  tongue  in  old
women;  sour;  salty  on  lips;  salty,  dry  tongue,  loss  of
appetite,  thirstlessness;  water  tastes  putrid;  putrid  or
sour,  while  fasting.

■  i Loss  of  taste. ^Catarrh.

■  ■Food  and  drink  have  no  taste.

■  ■Tongue  heavy,  difficult  speech;  children  are  slow  in

learning  to  talk.

■  One  side  of  tongue  numb  and  stiff".

P Dryness  of  tongue:  in  diphtheria;  in  fever;  with  con-
stant thirst  or  without  any.

■  ■Complains  much  of  dryness  of  tongue,  which  is  not

very  dry.

■  Sensation  of  a  hair  on  tongue.


569  NATRUM  MURIATICUM.

I  Burning  at  tip  of  tongue.

I  Dry,  white  tongue  in  apyrexia. /^Intermittent.

I I  Tongue  coated,  with  red  insular  patches.

■  Mapped tongue: with  diphtheria; with amenorrhoea ;

looks  like  ringw^orm  on  sides.
I  Ringworm  on  r.  side  of  tongue.
I  Tongue has  a clean,  shiny  appearance,  or  bubbles of

frothy  saliva  along  its  sides.

I  Tongue  moist  and  clean  anteriorly,  back  part  coated  with

light  colored  mucus.

■  Tongue  broad,  pallid,  puffy,  with  a  pasty  coat.

I I  Blisters  on  tongue;  vesicles  on  tip.

■  Herpes  on  tongue,  from  sea  bathing.

I  I  Sore,  ulcerated  tongue;  superficial  ulcers.

I  I  Swelling  under  tongue,  with  a  stinging  pain;  ranula.

■  Numbness  of  lips  from  paralysis  of  trifacial  nerves  and

numbness  of  one  side  of  tongue  from  paralysis  of  glosso-
pharyngeal nerve.
^^  Inner  Mouth. ■Mouth,  lips  and  tongue  dry.

■  Mouth  feels  dry,  but  is  not.

■  Blood  blisters  on  inside  of  upper  lip.

■  Sore  places  in  mouth  very  sensitive,  even  to  liquids.
■Vesicles  and  ulcers  in  mouth  and  on  tongue,  smarting

and  burning  when  touched  by  food,  stomacace.

■  Aphthae  on  tongue,  gums  and  cheeks,  with  great  burn-

ing and  impeded  speech.

■  Saliva:  profuse,  watery;  salty;  bloody;  constant  spitting.
■Salivation :  with  thrush,  mumps  or  toothache ;  after  use

of  mercury;  in  smallpox  ;  obstinate.

■  Ranula;  chronic  inflammation  of  salivary  glands.

'^  Throat. ■Throat  feels  very  dry,  yet  constantly  hawks  trans-
parent mucus.

■  Hawking  of  salty  tasting  mucus.

■  Sensation  of  splinter  sticking  in  throat.

■  ■  Feeling  as  of  a  plug  in  throat,  with  chronic  sore  throat.

■Sensation  as  of  a  plug  in  throat,  also  when  not  swallow-
ing, with  rawness  and  burning  pain  and  an  anxious
sensation  as  if  throat  would  be  closed.

■  Sensation  of  swelling  or  lump  in  throat  which  could  not

be  swallowed,  yet  required  constant  effort  to  do  so ;  empty
deglutition  troubled  her  more  than  swallowing  either
food  or  drink,  yet  food  seemed  to  lodge  in  throat  and
then  felt  as  if  passing  over  a  sore  spot;  prostration  from
loss  of  sleep;  lips  covered  with  hydroa;  above  condition
brought  about  by  application  of  nitrate  of  silver  for
ulceration  of  womb,  with  profuse  discharge,  latter  com-
plaint returning  after  Natr.  mur.

■  Uvula  elongated ;  muscles  so  weak  "  food  goes  down  wrong-

way  ; "  post-diphtheritic  paralysis.


NATRUM  MURIATICUM.  570

■  Great  difficulty  in  swallowing,  only  fluids  can  be  taken;

solids  reach  a  certain  point  and  then  are  violently
ejected  with  fearful  gagging  and  suffocation ;  frequent
hawking  of  mucus  in  morning;  obstinate  constipation,
stool  every  five  or  six  days.  ^Stenosis.
■Swelling,  with  sensation  of  constriction  and  stitches  in
throat.

■  Mucous  membrane  looks  glazed,  but  is  not  granulated.

■  Hypertrophy  of  tonsils.

■  Sore  throat,  with  transparent  mucus  covering  tonsils.

I  I  Irritation  to  cough  seated  in  epigastrium,  <  mornings;
severe  paroxysms  on  going  to  bed,  with  nausea  and
vomiting ;  tired  sensation  in  hypochondria.  ^Pharyn-
gitis.

■  ■Follicular  inflammation  of  pharynx; after  swabbing

with  nitrate  of  silver.

■  Chronic  inflammatory condition of  throat in  tobacco

smokers,  particularly  in  those  smoking  many  cigars;
mucous  membrane  of  mouth  and  pharynx  pale,  dark  red,
connective  tissue  infiltrated,  small  burning  ulcers.

■  Putrid  ulcerated  patches  in  throat  and  on  gums ;  scorbutus.

■  Face  puffy  and  pale;  heavy  drowsiness;  watery  stools;

flow  of  saliva,  or  vomiting  of  watery  fluid;  dryness  of
tongue ;  stertorous  breathing ;  swelling  of  submaxillary
glands  and  lymphatics  ;  map  tongue;  Jburning  in  throat,
after  application  of  caustics,  especially  nitrate  of  silver.
^Diphtheria.

■  Post-diphtheritic  paralysis,  food  goes  down  wrong  way;

only  liquids  can  be  swallowed.
"  Appetite,  Thirst.  Desires,  Aversions. ■  Excessive  hunger,
with  fulness  and  satiety  after  small  amount  of  food.

■  Excessive  hunger;  canine  hunger,  especially  for  supper,

with  weak  body  and  depressed  mind.

■  Great  desire  to  eat,  almost  amounting  to  ravenous  hunger

towards  noon;  after  eating,  great  weariness  and  sleepiness.

■  Loss  of  appetite,  aversion  to  eating.

■  iThirst:  constant,  without  desire  to  drink ;  great  in  even-

ing; fever  and  apyrexia;  violent,  with  dry,  sticky
mouth;  <  in  evening;  copious  drinking;  violent,  un-
quenchable.

■  Great  longing: for  bitter  things,  beer;  for  farinaceous

food;  for  sour  things;  for  salt,  oysters,  fish,  milk.

■  Aversion:  to  meat;  to  bread;  to  coffee.

■  Complete  loss  of  desire  for  smoking,  to  which  he  was

accustomed.
^^  Eating  and  Drinking. ■  Feels  better  on  an  empty  stom-
ach; <  after  breakfast;  feverish.

■  While  eating,  sweat  on  face.


571  NATRUM  MURIATICUM.

I  After  eating:  empt}'  eructations,  nausea,  acidity  in  mouth,
sleepiness,  heartburn,  palpitation;  epigastric  pressure
and  heat  radiating  upward  to  chest.

I  Bad  effects  from  acid  food,  bread,  fat  and  wine.
^®  Hiccough,  Belching,  Nausea  and  Vomiting, i  i  Violent
hiccough.

■  Singultus  of  ten  years'  standing,  brought  on  by  abuse  of

quinine  and  renewed  after  every  dose.

I  Eructations:  incomplete;  empty  after  eating;  sour;  sev-

eral hours  after  eating;  offensive  after  fatty  foods  and
milk;  during  pregnancy.

I I  Acid  eructations  and  malaise  after  eating.

I  Heartburn:  after  eating;  with  palpitation  in  pregnancy.
I  I  Sweet  rising  from  stomach  at  menstrual  nisus.

■  Waterbrash:  water  coming  up  into  throat,  not  acid;  like

limpid  mucus,  profuse,  constant  in  pregnancy.

■  Gulping  up  of  sour  water,  with  headache.

■  Nausea:  in  morning;  after  eating;  continuous,  with  thirst

and  profuse  waterbrash;  immediately  after  eating,  with
heaviness  of  head  and  bitter  eructations;  after  drinking;
felt  in  stomach ;  in  pregnancy.

■  Belching  and  vomiting  of  food. ^Ague.

■  Vomiting:  food;  first  food,  later  bile,  oppression  of  stom-

ach; watery,  stringy,  transparent  mucus;  acid,  sour
fluids,  not  food;  watery  fluids,  in  diphtheria;  with  head-
ache; bitter,  bilious,  like  that  of  pregnant  women;  bile,
between  chill  and  heat;  curdled  masses  and  acid  fluids,
clayey  substances;  dark  substances  like  coffee  grounds;

I  I  After  grief,  severe  pains  in  abdomen;  nausea;  anxiety;
trembling  of  whole  body;  severe  cramps,  Avith  vomit-
ing of  much  dark,  coagulated  blood ;  discharge  of  black
blood  from  anus ;  pale,  yellow  color  of  skin ;  emaciation.
^Hsematemesis.

I  1 A  merchant,  who  had  crossed  the  ocean  seventeen  times,
seasick  each  time,  had  his  throat  maltreated  with  nitrate
of  silver,  for  which  he  received  Natr.  mur.  with  benefit,
and  crossed  the  ocean  next  voyage  without  being  seasick.
"  Scrobiculum  and  Stomach.  Un  epigastrium:  faintness
and  sinking;  goneness;  clawing;  jerks;  throbbing  after
eating;  pressure,  sensitive  to  touch  ;  burning  in  parox-
ysms; bruised  feeling  when  pressed,  with  swelling  ;  swol-
len, ulcerative  pain  to  touch.

■  Red  spots  on  pit  of  stomach.

■  In  stomach  :  great  weakness  by  spells ;  pressure  and  dis-

tension; pressure  early  in  morning;  pressure,  with
nausea  and  rapid  sinking  of  strength ;  heaviness  and
fulness ;  sensation  as  if  a  foreign  body  was  sticking  in
cardiac  orifice  and  behind  sternum ;  burning  extending


NATRUM  MURIATICUM.  572

upward ;  sensation  of  coldness ;  constricting,  stitching,
burning  pains  one  or  two  hours  after  eating ;  cramps.
iStomachache,  with  great  accumulation  of  saliva  in  mouth,

■  Slight  pressure  of  clothing  is  painful.
I  Cramp,  >  from  tightening  clothes.

■  Indigestion,  with  vomiting  of  clear,  frothy  water  and

stringy  saliva,  or  with  pain  and  salivation.
^^  Hypochondria. iDull,  heavy  aching  and  distension  about
liver  after  eating,  lessening  as  digestion  advances.
I  In  hepatic  region:  violent  pressive  pain;  stitches;  tension.
I  Liver  inflamed,  swollen  ;  skin  yellow,  earthy.

■  Severe  pain  in  r.  side  for  several  years,  could  give  no

idea  of  character  of  pain,  "  but  must  have  relief;"  aver-
sion to  bread. ^Pain  in  liver.

■  Bending  to  left  causes  stiffness  in  liver.

■  Jaundice,  with  drowsiness.

■  Liver  disease  causes  dropsy.

■  Distension  in  r.  hypochondrium,  with  dull,  heavy  ach-

ing pain  in  same  region,  coming  on  two  or  three  hours
after  eating  and  partly  relieved  as  digestion  is  com-
pleted. ^Dyspepsia.

I  I  Much  pain  and  soreness  in  1.  hypochondrium,  going
through  to  lower  border  of  r.  scapula,  <  lying  on  1.  side.

I  I  Pain  in  hypochondria  and  abdomen.  ^Addison's  dis-
ease.

■  Stitches  and  pressure  in  region  of  spleen;  spleen  swollen.

■  Liver  and  spleen  swollen,  skin  earthy,  sallow,  infiltrated.

^Intermittent.
^^  Abdomen. ■  Abdomen  swollen;  rumbling  and  incarcera-
tion of  flatus ;  fermentation  ;  loud  gurgling.

I  I  Pressure  in  upper  abdomen.

I  I  Cutting,  griping,  with  rumbling  in  abdomen.

I  1  After  a  stool  griping  colic,  as  in  diarrhoea,  without  result.

I  I  Pinching  pain  in  r.  side  of  abdomen.

I  I  Pressive  pain  :  running  from  navel  to  pelvis;  in  1.  side
of  abdomen.

■  Cramping  pains  in  lower  abdomen  during  menses.

■  Colic,  with  nausea,  >  by  emission  of  flatus.

I  I  Bilious  colic  presenting  belching  of  Carbo  veg.  and  pains

of  Diosc.  and  Coloc.
1  I  Flatulent  or  laborlike  colic.

■  Burning  in  intestines.

■  When  walking  abdominal  viscera  feel  as  if  loose,  dragging.

■  Continuous  severe  pain  in  abdomen,  frequently  with  affec-

tion of  ovaries,  especially  of  r.  one;  pale  face;  difficult
digestion.
■Sensation  of  pressure  from  navel  downwards,  with  leaden
heaviness  across  bladder  and  pelvis ;  constipation.


573  NATRUM  MURIATICUM.

iSensation  as  of  a  weight  hanging  across  pelvis  and  blad-
der, <  during  motion  and  compelling  patient  to  bend
forward  when  seated.

■  When  coughing,  pain  in  abdominal  ring,  extending  into

testicles,  as  if  spermatic  cords  would be  torn  to  pieces.

■  Tightness  of  skin  across  abdomen  from  hip  to  hip,  must

loosen  clothes.

■  Abdomen  sunken.

■  Discharge  from  naval  yellowish,  of  peculiar  odor,  after

suppressed  gonorrhoea.

■  Gastro-duodenal  catarrh  causing  jaundice.

^^  Stool  and  Rectum,  i  Wants  to  pass  wind,  but  does  not
know  whether  flatus  or  feces  will  escape.
■Stool:  frequent;  watery,  discharged  with  a  gush;  in-
voluntary; excoriating;  frothy;  black,  watery ;  green-
ish, watery ;  greyish  ;  transparent,  glassy,  slimy,  like
white  of  an  egg,  without  feces ;  bloody  ;  profuse ;  gush-
ing ;  corrosive ;  involuntary ;  alternating  with  consti-
pation.

■  Watery diarrhoea, with colic; incessant thirst, with

nausea;  emaciation  beginning  at  or  principally  on  neck;
abdomen  bloated. ^Cholera  infantum.

■  Vomiting  and  diarrhoea,  <  during  day;  great  thirst;

general  emaciation,  most  conspicuous  around  neck,
which  appears  thin  and  shrunken. ^Summer  complaint.

■  ■Diarrhoea: chronic, watery; with fever, dry mouth,

thirst;  involuntary;  painless;  <  as  soon  as  he  moves
about;  much  fetid  flatus;  tendency  to  hangnails;  ex-
coriating; green,  bloody,  watery  or  brownish,  mostly
during  day;  with  infarcted  scybala  ;  <  after  farina-
ceous food;  <  morning  till  afternoon.
I  I  Chronic  intestinal  catarrh; greenish,  bloody,  watery.

■  Chronic  diarrhoea  <  in  morning  after  getting  up  and

moving  about  and  after  farinaceous  food;  profuse  emis-
sion of  flatus,  mostly  fetid;  patient  suffers  much  from
inflammation  and  suppuration  around  nails.

■  Digestive  disturbances  and  tendency  to  diarrhoea  after

abuse  of  opium.

■  Chronic  diarrhoea  of  children.

■  Sporadic  cholera,  stools  white,  watery,  like  whey,  with  a

dry  tongue;  no  thirst;  vomiting  and  cramps.

■  Cholera  in  drunkards  (a  teaspoonful  of  salt  in  a  glass  of

water).

■  Alternate  constipation  and  papescent  stool.

■  Irregular stools,  sometimes  two  or three a  day,  then

constipation.
I  I  Hard,  difficult and  painful stool,  followed  by  liquid
stool,  pain  lasting  a  long  time  afterwards. ^Pregnancy.


NATRUM  MURIATICUM.  574

I  Chronic  soft  stools.

I  Frequent  ineffectual  desire  for  stool.

I I  Constipation:  obstinate  retention  of  stool ;  stools  irregu-
lar, hard,  unsatisfactory;  on  alternate  days;  stool  hard,
dry,  crumbling;  during  menses;  stool  in  large  masses;
stool  like  sheep's  dung;  from  inactivity  of  rectum;  anus
contracted  or  torn,  bleeding,  smarting,  burning  after-
wards; stitches  in  rectum,  causing  hypochondriasis  or
ill  humor;  great  torpor  without  pain;  from  want  of
moisture,  dryness  of  mucous  linings,  with  watery  secre-
tions in  other  parts ;  difficult  expulsion,  fissuring  anus,
with  flow  of  blood,  leaving  a  sensation  of  much  sore-
ness; with  uterine  displacement;  hemorrhoidal;  in
Addison's  disease.

■  Before stool: rumbling in abdomen; frequent desire

without  result;  inactivity  of  rectum  and  no  desire;
burning  in  rectum;  pressure  upon  bladder  and  rectum;
contraction  in  urethra  and  rectum ;  cutting  abdominal
pain;  soreness  in  hypogastrium.

■  During  stool:  pulsation,  contraction  and  lancinating  pain

at anus as from ulceration; tenesmus; hemorrhage
from rectum; scratching and burning in rectum;'
laborlike abdominal pains, > by pressure; succus
prostaticus.

■  After  stool :  burning,  tearing,  itching  about  anus;  pinch-

ing abdominal  pain  and  ineffectual  straining;  stupe-
faction, nausea,  vertigo;  burning  and  smarting  in  anus
and  rectum  ;  ripping  up  sensation  in  anus;  tenesmus;
fissures  with  bleeding  and  smarting,  burning  pains;
hemorrhoids  with  stinging  pains  and  soreness  at  anus;
prolapsus  ani;  weakness.
■Sensation  as  if  a  foreign  substance,  or  very  rough  hard
feces  were  lying  in  rectum ;  with  constant  looseness  of
bowels.

■  Dryness  and  smarting  of  rectum  and  anus.
■Smarting  and  pulsation  in  rectum;  stitches.

■  Itching  stitches  in  rectum,  in  evening  in  bed.

■  Protrusion  of  rectum;  prolapsus  ani.

■  Hemorrhoids: with protruding rectum and much

smarting; with stinging  pains;  moisture oozes from
anus;  herpetic  eruption  about  anus.
■Soreness  at  anus  and  around  it  when  walking.

■  ■Seat  worms.

■  Lessens  disposition  to  have  worms.

■  Herpes  around  anus.

^^  Urinary  Organs. ■Tension  and  heat  in renal  region.
^Addison's  disease. ^Morbus  Brightii. ^Diabetes.
■Stitches  in  bladder;  burning  during  urination.


575  NATHUM  MURIATICUM.

1 1  Increased  desire  to  urinate,  light  watery  urine.

■  Violent  desire  to  urinate,  and  inability  to  retain  urine.
I  Urination  every  hour  at  night.

■  Polyuria,  especially  if  accompanied  with  waterbrash  and

emaciation;  also  in  diabetes.

■  ■Involuntary  escape  of  urine  while  walking,  coughing

or  sneezing.

■  Incontinence  of  urine: whenever he sat  down urine

came  away,  day  and  night,  necessitating  very  frequent
change  of  clothing  and  bedclothes;  continual  craving
for  salt.

■  Has  to  wait  long  for  urine  to  pass,  especially  if  others

are  near  by.

■  Urine:  pale,  clear;  turbid  and dark;  dark,  like  coffee;

brickdust  sediment ;  alkaline,  with  red  sediment ;  con-  •
taining  mucus ;  bloody.

■  Ha3maturia  from scurvy; cutting and burning after

urination.

■  Excessively  painful  urination;  morbid  appetite  for  salt.

■  Before  urination :  contraction  in  urethra  and  rectum.

■  During  urination:  stitches  in  bladder,  smarting,  burn-

ing and  cutting  in  urethra ;  pressing  in  hypogastrium ;
smarting  and  soreness  in  vulva.

■  After  urination :  burning  and  cutting  in  urethra;  spas-

modic contraction in  abdomen ; discharge of thin,
glutinous  substance.
'^  Male  Sexual  Organs. ■Excessive irritability of  sexual
organs  and  fancy  with  physical  weakness.
■Sexual  desire,  with  frequent  erections  and  pollutions.

■  Seminal emissions: every night; soon after coition;

followed  by  chilliness  and  lassitude,  with  increased
sexual  desire.

■  Embrace  weakens;  coldness  of  joints.

■  Genital  organs  smell  badly  and  strongly.

■  Feeling  of  weakness  in  sexual organs;  sexual  instinct

dormant,  with  retarded  emission  during  an  embrace.

■  After  sexual  excesses,  physical  weakness,  even  paralysis;

emission  of  prostatic  fluid  without  erection  when  think-
ing of  sexual  things.

■  Erection  in  morning  without  sexual  excitement.

■  Impotence;  spermatorrhoea;  poor  digestion ;  spinal  irri-

tation,

■  Discharge  of  prostatic  fluid.

■  Urethra  painfully  sore  to  pressure.

■  A  thin  liquid  is  discharged  from  urethra ;  causes  itching

and  burning.

■  Yellow,  purulent  discharge  from  urethr^,  makes  spots  on

linen  like  gonorrhoea;  no  pain  when  urinating;  some
tension  in  inguinal  glands,  which  are  not  swollen.


NATRUM  MURIATICUM.  57G

I  Gonorrhoea  resulting  from  acrid  leucorrhoea  or  menstrual
discharge  ;  yellow,  black  discharge.

■  Gonorrhoea,  especially  when  chronic ;  discharge  usually

clear;  sometimes  yellowish,;  cutting  in  urethra  after
urination.

B I  Gleetlike  discharge  of  clear  mucus;  transparent,  watery
slime;  after  injection  of  nitrate  of  silver.

Iltching  and  crawling  sensation  at  corona  glandis.

I  Iltching  and  stinging  on  glans  penis  and  on  scrotum.

I  I  Prepuce  retracted  behind  glans.

I  Aching  in  testicles;  orchitis;  after  suppression  of  gon-
orrhoea or  mumps.

iScrotum  relaxed,  flabby;  buttocks  emaciated  in  infants.

■  Most  violent  itching  on  scrotum,  disturbing  sleep  at  night.
Iltching,  soreness  and  moist  herpes  between  scrotum  and

thighs.

I  Puslike  smegma  on  glans.
•Scrotal  oedema;  hydrocele.

I I  Loss  of  hair  from  pubes.

^'Female  Sexual  Organs, i Diminished  sexual  desire.

■  Averse  to  coitus;  painful,  from  dryness  of  vagina  ;  burn-

ing, smarting  during  coitus;  ansemic  women  with  dry
mouth  and  dry  skin,

■  After  embrace  feels  easy  and  light  hearted  at  first,  later

ill  humored.

■  ■Sterility  ;  menses  too  early  and  too  profuse,  or  too  late

and  scanty.

■  ■Every  morning  pressing  and  pushing  towards  genitals,

must  sit  down  to  prevent  prolapsus.

■  ■Prolapsus  uteri,  with  aching  in  lumbar  region,  >  lying

on  back;  cutting  in  urethra  after  micturition.

■  Uterine  cramps,  with  burning  and  cutting  in  groins.

I  I  Pain  in  uterus  or  r.  ovarian  region,  extending  down
thighs,  from  reading  or  writing.

■  Uterus painful,  collum uteri thickened,  swollen,  with

ulcers  on  os.
I  I  Glassy  phlegm  from uterus,  obstinate  constipation ;  a
string  felt  between  uterus  and  sacrum  in  hind  part  of
fornix,  exceedingly  sensitive  to  touch.

■  ■Menses: too  early; seven  days  too  soon ;  too  profuse;

of  too  long  duration;  too  late  and  too  long;  delaying;
too  late  and  scanty;  more  at  night;  scanty  a  day  or
two,  then  copious ;  thin,  watery,  pale ;  scanty  and  de-
laying, with  anaemia  and  chilliness.
■Delayed  menses  cause  bloody  saliva,  heat  in  face,  heavy
abdomen.

■  ■Delaying  catamenia  in  young  girls.

I  I  Scanty  catamenia  with  endocarditis.


577  NATRUM  MURIATICUM.

■  Suppressed menstruation from putting feet in cold

water,  followed  by  general  debility,  headache,  back-
ache, etc.

I  Chlorosis  of  long  standing,  nervous  palpitation  in  ca-
chectic persons.

iDysmenorrhoea,  with  convulsions  (salt  sitz  bath).

•  Before  menses:  anxious,  sad ;  irritable,  qualmish ;  nau-
sea, sweetish  eructations  in  morning ;  headache ;  eyes
heavy ;  palpitation  ;  disposition  to  faint ;  expectoration
of  bloody  saliva;  burning,  cutting  tearing  ;  sore  burn-
ing in  vagina;  leucorrhoea;  contraction  in  hypogas-
trium ;  stitches  from  loins  into  uterus  ;  lassitude  and
trembling ;  twitching  of  eyelids ;  pressing  headache ;
scraping  faceache ;  toothache.

■  During  menses:  sadness;  headache;  colic; palpitation.

■  After  menses: headache;  congestion  of  head; itching

vulva;  dryness  of  vagina  and  aversion  to  coition;  leu-
corrhoea; milky  urine;  colic;  diarrhoea;  difficult  re-
spiration, palpitation,  accelerated  pulse,  dulness,  sting-
ing and  cutting  in  head,  paleness;  twitching  before
falling  asleep.

■  Leucorrhoea:  very  profuse;  with  excessive  debility  ;  acrid,

greenish;  in  morning,  transparent,  watery;  with  yellow
complexion;  greenish,  particularly  after  walking ;  with
headache:  preceded  by  colic  and  bearing  down;  pro-
ducing itching  of  pudendum;  at  night;  with  smarting
pain;  glassy,  with  constipation;  lasting  only  a  few  hours;
yellow,  before  catamenia;  excoriating,  tetterlike;  scald-
ing, irritating,  causing  itching  and  falling  off  of  hair  on
pubes;  corroding,  transparent  mucus.

■  Gleet:  with  clear  discharge;  green,  intensely  itching.

■  Dryness,  or  coolness  and  paleness  of  vagina.

■  Burning  and  soreness  of  vagina  after  urinating.

■  Vulvitis,  with  falling  off  of  hair.

■  Itching  of  external  parts,  with  falling  off  of  hair.
I  I  Pimj)les  on  mons  veneris.

*  Pregnancy.  Parturition.  Lactation.  "Nausea  and  vom-
iting during  pregnancy  ;  morning  sickness,  with  vomit-
ing of  frothy,  watery  phlegm.

■  Frequent  and  severe  attacks  of  vomiting,  first  of  food,

then  mucus,  and  finally  blood;  <  in  morning;  during
latter  half  of  pregnancy.

■  During pregnancy: dysuria; albuminuria,  faint,  gone

feeling  at  pit  of  stomach ;  hunger  without  appetite ;  fond
of  salt  and  salted  food ;  congestion  to  chest,  palpitation ;
hemorrhoids;  cough;  escape  of  urine.

■  ■  Labor  progresses  slowly,  pains  feeble,  seemingly  from

sad  feelings  and  forebodings.
VOL.  VII.— 37.


NATRUM  MURIATICUM.  -  578

I  I  Puerperal  convulsions.

■  Losing  hair  in  childbed  or  during  period  of  lactation.

I  Child: refuses  breast,  has  flabby  scrotum,  chills;  con-
stant fever,  nursing  sore  mouth.
"^  Voice  and  Larynx. Trachea  and  Bronchia, i  Faint,
weak  voice,  exhausting  from  talking;  like  a  weakness
of  organs  of  speech  coming  from  hypochondria.

llChild  is  slow  in  learning  to  talk,  on  account  of  imper-
fect development  of  muscles  of  tongue  and  larynx.

I  Hoarseness:  in  morning,  with  much  mucus  in  throat;
throat  sore,  dryness  in  larynx;  unable  to  talk  or  sing;
feels  as  if  one  had  to  swallow  over  a  lump ;  throat  has
been  pencilled  with  nitrate  of  silver ;  pain  on  both  sides
of  larynx,  mostly  r.  side.

nil  effects  of  long  speaking.

I  I  Scraping  in  larynx,  with  rough  voice ;  violent  hoarse-
ness, <  early  in  morning ;  rough,  short,  hacking  cough,
making  child  breathless;  soreness  in  larynx  and  trachea
when  coughing ;  oppression  of  chest,  with  burning  in
hands. ^Croup.

■  Dry  catarrh  of  larynx  and  trachea;  cough  dry,  tickling,

or  with  yellow  or  bloody  sputa;  voice  hoarse;  breathing
anxious,  oppressed.

■  Soreness  and  feeling  of  dryness  in  larynx  and  trachea.

■  ■Accumulation of transparent mucus in larynx in

morning.

■  Acute  or  chronic  inflammation  of  windpipe,  with  clear,

water}^  frothy  phlegm,  loose and  rattling,  sometimes
raised  with  difficulty.

■  Chronic  bronchial  catarrh  of  anaemic  persons.

^®  Respiration.  ■■  Breathing:  anxious,  oppressed,  wheezing ;
short,  on  walking  fast;  >  in  open  air  and  when  exer-
cising arms;  difficult,  on  ascending  steps;  oppressed
and  anxious,  with  chlorosis.

■  Dyspnoea  from  manual  labor ;  emphysema.

■  Attacks  of  suff'ocation.

I  I  Pains  generally  take  away  breath  and  almost  paralyze.

■  Asthma,  with  profuse,  frothy,  or  watery  mucus.

■  Breath  hot.

I  I  Offensive  breath.
"Cough.  ■  Cough:  excited  by  empty  deglutition  ;  caused  by
tickling  in  throat  or  pit  of  stomach ;  with  hawking  of
mucus,  especially  in  morning ;  sequel  to  intermittent ;
tickling,  while  walking  and  on  deep  inspiration  ;  vom-
iting of  food  ;  sputum  in  morning  of  yellow  or  blood-
streaked  mucus,  with  bursting  pain  in  forehead  and
shocks  or  beating  as  of  hammers ;  with  involuntary
urination;  with  stitches  in  liver;  tears  stream down


579  NATRUM  MURIATICUM.

cheeks ;  hacking ;  short,  obstinate ;  dry,  with  rattling
in  chest;  with  long  uvula,  <  lying;  with  loss  of
breath,  day  and  night;  with  vomiting  of  food  ;  cutting,
tearing  in  chest ;  bursting  pain  in  head  ;  spasmodic,
with  escape  of  urine ;  with  palpitation  ;  every  morning,
with  phlegm  tinged  with  blood ;  in  evening  after  lying
down  ;  spasmodic,  suffocative  at  night  in  bed  ;  when  sit-
ting erect.

■  Spasmodic cough, with serous, frothy expectoration.

^(Edema  of  lungs.

I  Cough  <  :  from  rapid  motion ;  exertion  or  manual  labor;
deep  inspiration ;  evening  in  bed ;  on  becoming  warm
in  bed  ;  empty  swallowing,  drinking ;  from  sour  food ;
air  of  the  room.

iDuring  cough :  pain  in  head,  throat,  trachea,  chest,  testi-
cle, spermatic  cord ;  cutting  and  stinging  in  chest ;
catching  of  breath ;  retching,  vomiting  of  food  ;  shocks
in  hypogastrium ;  shocks  and  bursting  pain  in  head  ;
discharge  of  leucorrhoea.

■  Whooping  cough,  excited  by  tickling  in  throat  and  in

epigastrium  ;  in  evening  without,  in  morning  with  ex-
pectoration of  yellow  mucus,  often  streaked  with  blood,
generally  with  a  flat  taste,  sometimes  sourish,  more
rarely  saltish.

■  Whooping  cough,  with  watering  from  eyes;  tears  stream

down  face  whenever  he  coughs.

■  Whooping  cough  at  seasons  of  intermittent  fever.

■  Moist  rales  are  heard  and  patient  cannot  cough  up  mucus.

■  Chronic  cough  of  tuberculous  subjects.

■  ■Catarrh,  with  clear,  transparent  mucus.

■  Expectoration:  of  bloody  mucus;  white,  salty  mucus;

in clots  most  in  morning ; flat  or  sourish ; early in
morning.
^^  Inner  Chest  and  Lungs. ■Oppression  of  chest;  as  if  con-
stricted, or  lungs  were  too  tight,  burning  hands ;  while
at  work.

■  Sensation  and  pain  in  chest  as  from  tension.
■Sore  pain  or  bruised  feeling  in  chest.

I  I  Severe  pain  in  r.  side  for  several  years.

■  Lungs  feel  raw  and  sore  from  continual  coughing.

■  ■Pain  like  a  cutting  cramp  through  1.  chest  to  scapula.
I  I  Tearing,  stitching  pain  from  1.  upper  region  of  chest  to

shoulder  joint;  after  suppressed  facial  neuralgia.

■  iStitches  in  chest  and  sides,  especially  on  deep  inspira-

tion and  when  coughing.
■Stitches  under  1.  ribs.
I  I  Single  stitches  along  sternum.

■  Pinching  in  diaphragm  on  stooping.


NATRUM  MURIATICUM.  580

I  I  Pains  in  chest  in  upper  middle  part,  going  through  to
r.  shoulder  after  eating,  <  from  talking.

■Rattling  in  chest.

I  Inflammation  of  lungs,  with  much  rattling;  phlegm
clear,  serous  and  frothy,  coughed  up  with  difficulty.

I  Pleurisy  when  serous  exudation  has  taken  place.

I  Acute  oedema  of  lungs,  wants  air;  spasmodic  cough;
face  blue.
^  Heart,  Pulse  and  Circulation,  i  Sensation  of  violent  con-
striction in  heart,  with  intermitting  pulse  and  feeling
of  oppression  in  lower  portion  of  chest,  as  if  lungs  had
no  room  to  expand.

■  Severe  pressure  below  heart  in  evening  in  bed.

I  I  Stitches  in  region  of  heart,  after  reading  aloud.

I  Cold  feeling  about  heart,  especially  when  exerting  mind.

I I  Fluttering  of  heart  :  with  a  weak  faint  feeling,  <  lying
down ;  long  standing  chlorosis ;  torpid  skin  and  sup-
pressed menses.

■  Irregular  intermission  of  beating  of  heart  and  of  pulse;

<  lying  on  1.  side.

■  Irregular  beat  of  heart,  at  one  time  slow,  then  again

quick,  especially  from  slightest  motion.

■  Palpitation:  with  anxiety  and  sadness;  in  ansemic  con-

ditions; from  slightest  movement;  while  standing;
without  anxious  thoughts,  even  for  hours ;  on  going  up
stairs ;  with  hysteria ;  on  falling  asleep  and  on  getting
awake  ;  lying  on  1.  side ;  with  morning  headache ;  when
moving  or  exerting  one's  self,
I  I  Increased  impulse  of  heart,  the  beats  strong,  but  clear.

■  ■The  heart's  pulsations  shake  the  body;  aching  as  if  a

pressure  came  from  abdomen  and  compressed  heart.

■  Beating  of  pulse  in  whole  body,  even  during  rest;  often

felt  in  epigastrium.
Pulse :  at  one  time  rapid  and  weak,  at  another  full  and
slow; rapid and intermittent; irregular and inter-
mittent; intermits  every  third  beat.

■  Frequent  palpitations  during  movement;  flickering  be-

fore eyes ;  crawling  sensation  all  over  body,  beginning
at  feet  and  gradually  ascending ;  sensation  as  from
pressure  upon  a  nerve  (getting  asleep) ;  severe  pressure
below  heart  in  evening  in  bed  ;  sensation  of  weakness,
exhaustion  and  heaviness.  ^Affection  of  heart.
■Valvular  disease ;  chronic  forms,  with  weak,  faint  feeling,
must  lie  down;  fluttering  heart,  <  lying  on  1.  side;
cold  feeling  about  heart  from  mental  exertion ;  <  from
least  motion.

■  Eccentric  dilatation  of  heart  with  systolic  bellows'  sound;

difficulty  of  breathing,  even  when keeping  quiet,  on


581  NATRUM  MURIATICUM.

standing,  walking,  with  trembling  of  hands  and  feet.
^Morbus  Brightii.

■  Hypertrophy  of  heart.

•  Overworked  heart,  but  primary  organ  affected  is  spleen.
I  Heart  disease  causing  dropsy.

■  Every  motion  excites  the  circulation.

^^  Neck  and  Back, i Stitches  in  neck  and  back  of  head.
I  Painful  stiffness  of  neck.

llThroat and  neck emaciate  rapidly. ^Summer  com-
plaint. ^Atrophy.

■  Cervical  glands  enlarged,  sore  when  coughing;  scabs  in

axillae.

■  Goitre  with  chronic  sore  throat.

■  Impetigo  on  boundaries  of  hair,  on  nape  of  neck; itch-

ing tetter.
■Spine  oversensitive  to  touch  or  pressure; tension and

drawing; pains  >  lying  on  something  hard; weak,

nervous ;  fluttering  of  heart.
■Sensation  of  weight  in  back  and  shoulders,  with  dyspnoea,

■  Pain  in back,  after  prolonged  stooping,  as  if  bruised,

mostly  while  straightening.

■  ■Beaten,  bruised,  lame  feeling  in back,  with  stitches;

cutting,  pulsating  fe'eling.

■  Sharp  drawing  in  back  and  through  hips.

■  Pains  in  back  at  night.

■  Severe  backache,  >  from  pressure  and  lying  on  back.

■  Tiredness  in  back.

■  Feeling  of  coldness  in  back.

■  Weakness  early,  on  rising,  like  paralysis,  in  small  of  back,

sometimes  also  near  abdomen.

■  Paralytic  pain  in  small  of  back,  as  if  beaten  ;  in  morn-

ing on  rising.

■  ■Pain  in  small  of  back,  as  if  broken.

I  I  Sharp  stitches  transversely  through  small  of  back,  close
above  hips.

■  Pain  in  region  of  kidneys  in  apyrexia. ^Intermittent,

■  Feeling  in  sacral  region  as  if  beaten.

■  Pain  in  back  is  >  by  lying  on  something  hard.

■  Spinal  irritation;  sensitiveness  between  vertebrae ;  partial

paralysis  from  weakness  of  spine  ;  especially  from  grief,
anger,  sexual  excesses,  etc. ;  >  lying  flat  on  back  with
firm  pressure.
"^  Upper  Limbs. ■Sensation  of  lameness  and  of  a  sprain  in
shoulder  joint.

■  Weakness,  heaviness  and  sinking  down  of  arms.
I  I  Arm  almost  lost  its  power  after  a  fit  of  anger.

I  I  Bruised  or  burrowing  pain  in  upper  arm.

■  Cramp  in  arms,  hands,  fingers  and  thumb.


NATRUM  MURIATICUM.  582

iRound  herpetic  spots  on  arms.
I  I  Small  red  vesicles  on  arms.

■  Whitish  itching  hives  on  arms  and  hands,  becoming  red

after  rubbing,  with  violent  itching.

■  Involuntary  movements  of  hands.

■  Trembling  of  hands  when  writing.

■  Numbness  of  arms  and  hands  >  from  rubbing.
■Stitches  in  wrist  joint.

I  I  Stitches  in  muscles  and  joints  of  hands  and  fingers.
I  I  Swelling  of  r.  hand.

■  Hands  burn  or  are  sw^eaty.

■  ■Skin  of  hands,  especially about nails,  dry,  cracked ;

hangnails.

■  Warts  in  palms  of  hands.
I  I  Brown  spots  on  hands.

I  I  Finger  joints  move  with  difficulty.

1  I  Blistering  festers  on  fingers,  containing  watery  fluids
(often  caused  by  arsenical  wall  paper).

■  Panaritium  starts  from  a  hangnail

^  Lower  Limbs. iPain  in  hip  as  if  sprained,  with  stitches.
I  I  Stitches  in  r.  hip  joint.

■  Coxalgia,  first  stage,  emaciation  not  great,  but  thighs  and

neck  particularly  atrophied.

■Sciatica,  chronic  cases,  with  painful  contraction  of  ham-
strings; intermittent;  abuse  of  quinine.

I  I  Drawing  pain  in  r.  thigh,  extending  to  knee.

■Sensation  as  if  limb  had  gone  to  sleep.

■  Twitching  of  muscles  of  thighs.

■  Trembling  of  lower  extremities  from  weakness,  on  rising

from  sitting,  >  on  continued  walking.

■  Involuntary  jerkings  of  legs,  fidgets  or  jerks  in  sleep.

■  Paresis  of  lower  limbs  after  sexual  excesses  or  onanism  ;

after  grief  or  violent  outbursts  of  passion.

■  ■Painful  tension  in  bends  of  limbs.

I  I  Drawing  pain  in  knees  while  sitting.

I  I  Pain  as  if  knees  and  ankles  were  sprained.

■  Stitches  in  1.  knee.

■  Gnawing  pain  in  knee, < at  night;  tightness,  cannot

move  it.

■  Weakness  in  knees  and  calves.  •

■  Chronic  sw^elling  of  knee,  particularly  if  scrofulous.

■  ■  Housemaid's  knee,  enlargement  of  bursee.

■  Herpes  in  bend  of  knee.

■  Restless  in  legs,  must  move  them  constantly.

■  Great  heaviness  of  legs  and  feet.

■  Legs  feel  as  if  paralyzed,  especially  the  ankles.

■  Legs  hurt  after  least  exertion;  tarsal  joints  feel  bruised.

■  Drawing  pain  in  lower  limbs.


583  NATRUM  MURIATICUM.

I  Cramps  in  lower  legs  and  calves ;  tension  while  walking.

I  I  Swelling  of  lower  extremities,  from  middle  of  leg  down-

ward, with  a  feeling  as  though  feet  were  filled  with  lead,
in  evening.

■  Varicose  ulcer  of  leg,  of  six  years'  standing,  covering

nearly  entire  surface  of  anterior  and  inner  leg,  and  ex-
tending on  to  foot ;  borders  not  raised  ;  ulcer  n^ot  deep
nor  callous ;  bottom  of  ulcer  of  a  dirty  greenish  yellow
color,  covered  more  or  less  with  yellow  serum  ;  much
itching  at  night  in  bed ;  heaviness  and  stiffness  in  both
legs ;  symptoms  <  in  wet  weather  (salt  bath).

I I  Children  do  not  learn  to  walk.
I  Ankles  weak  and  turn  easily.

iLame  feeling  of  ankle  joint,  while  sitting  or  walking.

■  Urticaria  about  joints,  particularly  about  ankles.

1  Uneasiness  of  feet,  so  that  she  was  constantly  obliged  to
move  them  ;  <  while  walking.

■  Great  heaviness  of  feet.

I  I  Sensation  in  tarsal  joint  as  if  bruised,  when  walking  and

when  touching  it.
I  Cramplike  stitching  pain  in  feet.
■Swelling  of  feet.

■  Burning  of  feet  or  great  coldness.
■Suppressed  foot  sweat.

■  Veins  of  feet  distended.

■  Feet  emaciated.

I  I  Herpes  on  ankles.

■  Big  toe  red,  with  tearing  and  "stinging  on  walking  or-,

standing.

■  Soreness  of  toes  or  between  toes.

■  Cracks  between  toes,  with  violent  itching.

■  Corns:  stitching,  boring,  stinging  pains.

■  Periodical  attacks  of  gout.

^*  Limbs  in  General. ■  Restlessness  in  limbs;  they  have  to
be  moved  constantly.

■  Weakness  of  arms,  heaviness ;  also  of  knees  and  feet.

■  Pressing,  drawing  in  limbs.

■  On  motion  all  muscles  are  painful,  especially  those  of

thighs  and  upper  arms,  as  if  flesh  was  loose.

■  Limbs  feel  weak  and  as  if  bruised,  <  in  morning  after

rising.

■  Sensation  as  if  limbs  had  gone  to  sleep.

■  Tingling  in  limbs,  especially  in  tips  of  fingers  and  toes.

■  Cramps  in  arms,  hands  and  calves.

■Sensation  of  coldness  in  joints,  a  feeling  as  if  water  was
trickling  over  them  in  open  air.

■  Stiff*ness,  rigidity  of  a  paralytic  nature.

■  Shortening  contraction  of  muscles.


NATRUM  MURIATICUM.  584

■  Stiffness  and  arthritic  swellings.
Rheumatism;  chronic,  of  joints.

■Cracking  of  joints  on  moving  them;  stiffness;  arthritic

swellings.
Swelling  of  r.  hand ;  also  of  feet.

■  Coldness  of  hands  and  feet.

■  Eruption  in  bends  of  knees  and  elbows.

^^  Rest.  Position.  Motion.  During  rest:  beating  of  pulse
through  whole  body;  eccentric  dilatation  of  heart;  weak.

Position  in  bed :  showed  intense  debility.

Lying  down :  vertigo  > ;  headache  > ;  constriction  of
scalp  >  ;  at  night  head  begins  to  ache ;  cough  <  ;  flut-
tering of  heart  <.

Lying  with  head  high :  beating  in  head  >.

Lying  with  head  buried  in  pillow:  ulceration  of  cornea.

Lying  on  1.  side :  pain  from  1.  hypochondrium  to  r.  scapula ;
irregular  beating  of  heart  and  pulse  <.

Cannot  lie  on  r.  side:  pain  under  ribs.

Lying  on  back:  aching  in  lumbar  region  > ;  backache  >.

Must  lie  down:  weak,  faint  feeling,  with  valvular  diseases.

Compelling  one  to  lie  down:  tearing  headache.

Bending  head  down:  weight  in  forehead  <.

Sitting  still:  headache  >  ;  constriction  of  scalp  >;  erect,
cough;  pinching  in  diaphragm.

When  he  sat  down :  urine  came  away.

Must  sit  down :  to  prevent  prolapsus.

Must  bend  forward  when  seated:  weight  across  pelvis.

When  standing:  palpitation ;  eccentric  dilatation  of  heart;
tearing  and  stinging  in  big  toe;  weariness.

When  standing  near  a  window:  vertigo.

Stooping:  fj-equent  obscuration  of  sight;  nosebleed;  pro-
longed, causes  bruised  pains  in  back.

Disinclination  to  move  and  walk:  lassitude.

Moving:  beating  in  head  <;  causes  beating  and  throb-
bing of  head ;  eyes,  feeling  of  stiffness  in  muscles ;  eye
sore  and  painful;  sensation  of  weight  across  pelvis  <;
diarrhoea  <  ;  rapidly,  cough  < ;  slight,  irregular  heart
beat;  slightly,  palpitation,  finger  joints  with  difficulty ;
all  muscles  painful;  joints  crack;  leg  causes  great  pain;
head,  twitching  headache.

Least  exertion:  short  breath;  cough  <;  palpitation;
great  weakness;  tendency  to  sweating.

Ever3r motion:  excites  circulation.

After  violent  exercise :  nettlerash.

Exercising  arms:  breathing  >.

Rising:  vertigo  <.

Walking:  vertigo;  after  a  while  as  though  stepping  on
air;  frequent  obscuration  of  sight;  soreness  about  anus;


585  NATRUM  MURIATICUM.

involuntary  escape  of  urine ;  leucorrhoea  <  ;  breathing
<,  cough,  tickling;  eccentric  dilatation  of  heart;  tearing
and  stinging  in  big  toe;  tendency  to  sweating.

Going  up  stairs:  palpitations;  twitching;  headache.

Cannot  stretch  1.  leg,  must  walk  with  a  hitch.

Must  move  limbs  constantly:  restlessness.

Manual  labor:  dyspnoea;  cough  <.

While  at  work  :  oppression  of  chest.

When  writing :  trembling  of  hands.

Laughing:  headache  <.

Chewing:  pain  in  malar  bones.
^^  Nerves, i Restlessness  with  chilliness;  limbs  have  to  be
moved  constantly.

I  Twitching  in  muscles  and  limbs;  frequent  starts  of  up-
per part  of  body.

■  Muscles  of  back  and  extremities  stretched,  whilst  wrists

and  joints  of  feet  are  flexed,  every  morning  at  8  o'clock,
lasting  until  11;  loss  of  appetite;  palpitation  of  heart
and  loss  of  breath  from  least  exertion ;  hydrsemic  con-
stitution. ^Intermitting  tonic  spasms.

■  Hysterical  spasms  which  in  course  of  time  developed  into

severe  convulsions  and  finally  into  cataleptic  attacks,
which  often  lasted  for  hours;  attacks  begin  with  head-
ache and  painful  tension  in  spine,  followed  by  loss  of
consciousness;  usually  once  a  week.
I  I  Spasms:  with  full  consciousness;  chronic  and  hysteri-
cal; come  on  at  full  moon;  from  water  on  brain;  in
feverish  diseases.

■  Lethargic  state,  jerking  or  starting  of  limbs,  excessive

drowsiness,  stupor,  eyes  half  open.

■  During  attacks  almost  inconceivable  motions  of  arms,

head  and  legs,  often  distorting  whole  body,  and  jump-
ing about  room  regardless  of  furniture,  so  that  he  often
injures  himself;  often  jumps  as  high  as  afoot  and  a
"half  from  floor;  all  these  movements  are  extremely
rapid,  and  are  accompanied  by  most  curious  distortions
of  face;  attacks  last  from  four  to  fifteen  minutes  and  are
followed  by  prostration  and  sleep;  occur  from  four  to
six  times  a  day,  and  at  times  are  absent  for  several
days;  <  during  full  moon  and  when  vexed. ^Chorea.

■  Chorea  for  two  years,  caused  by  fright;  pale, delicate,

auEemic;  drinks  much  water;  feverish;  white  tongue;
.sore  mouth.

■  Jerkings  of  r.  side  and  head.

■  Epileptic  attacks  between  9  and  10  a.  m.  for  three  years;

usually  preceded  for  a  few  days  by  twitching  of  arms
and  legs;  aversion  to  bread.

■  Epilepsy  with  consciousness.


NATRUM  MURIATICUM.  586

■  Trembling:  of  whole  body;  in  nerves  at  night.

■  Tobacco  smoking  causes  sweat  and  trembling.

■  Pains  make  tears  come  into  eyes.

■  Neuralgic  pains  recurring  at  certain  times,  with  flow  of

saliva  or  tears.

■  ■Easily  fatigued; lassitude  after  rising;  disinclination

to  move  and  walk,  with  great  heaviness  and  indolence ;
limbs  feel  weak  and  as  if  bruised.

■  Weakness  of  whole  body ;  feet  heavy,  weary  while  stand-

ing; painful  sensitiveness  of  skin  to  slightest touch,

mostly  on  loins.
■Awkward;  hasty;  drops  things  from  nervous  weakness.
I  I  Great  prostration  from  carrying  of  heavy  child  and

losing  sleep.
■Great debility; excessive thirst; great inclination to

weep. ^Hysteria.

■  Feels  so  weak  that  he  declines  to  move,  feels  weak  when

at  rest  {Arsen.,  feels  weak  on  attempting  to  move).

■  ■Great weakness and relaxation of  all physical  and

mental  powers,  from  exertion  or  after  long  talking.

■  Prostration,  knows  that  he  is  weak  and  does  not  want  to

move.

■  Hysterical  debility;  weakest  in  morning  in  bed.

■  Debility  resulting  from  loss  of  fluids,  particularly  after

onanism.
I  I  Sensation  of  numbness  in  suffering  parts.

■  ■Paralysis:  from  intermittents ;  from  sexual  excesses  or

other  nervous  exhaustion;  from  diphtheria;  from  anger
or  emotions ;  from  pains ;  of  flexors.

■  Threatened  collapse  with  intermitting  pulse  and  great

thirst. ^Shock  of  injury.

■  Useful  for  congenital  malformation  caused  by  contrac-

tions of  muscles  (externally  with  friction).

■  Takes  cold  easily.

^^  Sleep. ■  Frequent yawning and stretching ; aversion to
motion  ;  sleepy,  but  cannot  sleep.

■  Sleepy  by  day,  sleepless  at  night.

■  Drowsiness  with  inability  to  sleep.

■Sopor: from  water  in  brain; in  diphtheria;  in  acute
diseases ;  in  smallpox.

■  On  falling  asleep  twitching  in  limbs  and  electric  shocks

through  whole  body.
I  I  Talking  in  sleep,  and  restless  nights.
I  I  Very  anxious  dreams,  with  weeping  in  sleep.
I  I  Much  too  vivid  dreams;  visions  in  sleep.
■Wakefulness  for  hours,  or  difficult  falling  asleep  after

awaking.

■  ■Dreams:  anxious;  vivid,  like  a  living  reality;  frightful;


587  NATRUM  MURIATICUM.

of  robbers  in  the  house  and  will  not  believe  the  con-
trary until  search  is  made;  about  which  she  is  busy
for  a  long  time  after  waking;  of  burning  thirst;  during
siesta.

■Starts  and  talks  in  sleep,  tosses  about.

1 1  Somnambulism  ;  rising  and  sitting  about  room.

■Sleeplessness :  from  nervous  restlessness,  with  desire  to
sleep ;  restlessness  especially  marked  in  legs  ;  awakes
agitated ;  unrefreshed ;  with  great  nervous  irritability
and, coldness  in  extremities ;  coldness  is  subjective ;  a
kind  of  struggle  between  sleep  and  wakefulness ;  tor-
menting; after  gnawing  grief ;  from  depressing  events.

■  Awakens  often:  with  pain  causing  dyspnoea  and  one
sided  paralysis ;  with  fright,  violent  headache,  sweat,
erethism,  throbbing  of  arteries,  thirst,  desire  to  urinate.

■Unrefreshed  in  morning.
^  Time.  Morning:  headache;  dulness  of  head;  when  rising
from  bed,  vertigo;  beating  and  pulsating  in  head  <;
headache  after  waking  and  lasting  till  towards  noon;
sick  headache,  lachrymation  and  burning  in  eyes;  feel-
ing of  sand  in  eyes;  biting  lachrymation ;  agglutination
of  eyelids;  hawking;  bad  taste;  irritation  to  cough;
nausea;  early  pressure  in  stomach;  chronic  diarrhcea
<;  erections;  sweetish  eructations;  leucorrhoea;  vomit-
ing <;  hoarseness;  accumulation  of  transparent  mucus
in  larynx ;  sputum  of  yellow  or  blood  streaked  mucus,
with  burning  pain  in  forehead;  cough  with  expectora-
tion;  expectoration  in  clots;  expectoration  early;  pal-
pitation with  headache;  early  on  rising  weakness  in
back;  after  rising  limbs  feel  weak;  weakest  in  bed ;  un-
refreshed from  sleep;  sweat;  profuse  epistaxis.

10  A.M.:  right  sided  headache.

Forenoon:  dulness  of  head;  horripilations.

Towards  noon:  ravenous  hunger.

Afternoon:  heat;  indescribable  pain  in  knees;  chill.

All  day:  depressed,  sad,  disheartened;  pressing,  throbbing
headache.

During  day:  vomiting  and  diarrhoea;  brownish  diarrhoea;
sweat.

Evening:  pain  above  r.  eye  <  ;  violent  burning  in  eves;
catarrhal  affection  of  limbs  < ;  great  thirst  >  ;  in  "bed
itching  stitches  in  rectum;  cough  after  lying  down;
cough  without  expectoration;  severe  pressure  below
heart;  icy  coldness  of  feet  <.

Day  and  night:  ulcer  on  gum  painful;  incontinence  of
urine;  cough  with  loss  of  breath.

Night:  coughing  causes  nosebleed ;  wakened  with  burning
on  tip  of  tongue;  toothache;  itching  on  scrotum  disturbs


NATRUM  MURIATICUM.  588

sleep;  menses  more;  leucorrlioea;  in  bed  suffocative
cough;  pains  in  back;  trembling  in  nerves;  talking  in
sleep  and  restless;  profuse  sweat;  fever  nearly  all  night.

Before  and  after  midnight:  toothache.
^^  Temperature  and  Weather. Great  inclination  for  open
air  and  washing  in  cold  water.

Heat  of  stove  unbearable.

Worse  in  heat  of  sun  (feel  exhausted);  ailments  <  at  sea-
side ;  <  in  summer.

Open  air:  right  sided  headache  >;  constriction  of  scalp
<;  lachrymation  ;  teeth  sensitive;  breathing  >;  as  if
water  was  trickling  over  joints.

Desire  for  air:  oedema  of  lungs.

Air  of  room :  cough  <.

Sultry  air:  sensitive,  but  not  to  drafts.

Drawing  in  air:  toothache  <.

Likes  to  be  covered  up,  though  no  relief  is  experienced
from  it.

When  becoming  warm  in  bed:  cough.

From  warm  food:  toothache  <.

Warmth:  headache  <;  gums  sensitive.

In  hot  weather :  squint  more  marked.

In  sun:  walking,  faint,  weak  feeling  in  head  and  chest.

Uncovering  head  during  day  causes  stoppage  of  nose  at
night.

In  every  slight  wind:  inflammation  of  ej^es.

Cold  water:  putting  feet  in,  suppressed  menstruation.

Cold  drinking:  toothache  <.

Cold :  toothache  <  ;  gums  sensitive ;  sensitive.

In  winter:  squint  <.

Getting  wet:  causes  severe  headache.
*"  Fever, i  l  Horripilations,  especially  in  forenoon. ^Amenia.

■  Constant  chilliness  and  want  of  animal  heat.

I  Frequent  internal  chilliness.

iChill  predominates,  mostly  internal;  hands  and  feet  cold.

I  I  Coldness  in  joints ;  a  feeling  as  if  water  was  trickling
over  them.

I  I  Chilliness  over  whole  body,  with  heat  in  forehead,
pressure  in  region  of  root  of  nose  and  violent  thirst.

I  Chilliness,  with  frequent  yawning.

I I  Chill :  with  thirst,  drinking  often  and  much  at  a  time;
with  languor,  yawning,  severe  headache,  great  dyspnoea ;
stupefaction  or  unconsciousness ;  face  cyanotic ;  from
morning  until  noon ;  fever  blisters  around  mouth  ;  in
nursing  children;  10  toll  a.m.,  beginning  in  feet  or
small  of  back;  blue  nails;  thirst;  bursting  headache;
nausea  and  vomiting ;  debility ;  pale  face ;  tearing-
pains  in  bones ;  chattering  of  teeth ;  internal  as  from


589  NATRUM  MURIATICUM.

want  of  animal  heat;  icy  coldness  of  hands  and  feet,
principally  in  evening.
1 1  Fever:  with  violent  headache;  much  heat  in  face;
great  thirst,  drinks  much  and  often ;  excessive  weak-
ness ;  with  nausea  and  vomiting ;  stitches  in  head ;
unconsciousness ;  blindness,  blurred  sight ;  faintish-
ness ;  aversion  to  uncover;  without  chill,  10  to  11  a.  m.

■  Flushes  of  heat  with  violent  headache;  chilliness  over

back  and  sweat  in  axillae  and  soles  of  feet.
I  Sweat:  with  aversion  to  uncover;  in  hands;  in  axillae

and  soles  of  feet ;  sour,  weakening ;  relieving  headache

and  other  pains,  though  it  weakens ;  profuse  at  night ;

in  morning;  during  day;  from  exertion  ;  while  walking.
I  I  Tendency to sweating, and sensitiveness to cold  or

sultry  air,  not  to  drafts. ^Amenia.

■  Violent  chill,  with  thirst,  every  fourth  afternoon;  blue-

ness  of  lips  and  nails,  spasmodic  tightness  of  breathing ;
one  hour  after,  heat,  lasting  until  night ;  sweat  after
midnight;  during  apyrexia,  pressure  in  region  of  liver,
sometimes  alternating  with  pain  in  spleen ;  laborlike
drawing  in  abdomen,  in  intestinal  canal ;  sensation  of
pressure  in  chest ;  weakness  and  appearance  as  if  worn
out. ^Ague.

iChill  every  other  day  at  10  a.m.,  continuing  one  and  a
half  hours  with  severe  shaking ;  heat  all  afternoon ;
profuse  and  offensive  sweat  all  night ;  severe  aching  in
knees  and  legs,  during  chills ;  during  heat  much  thirst,
terrible  headache  and  delirium  ;  complete  relief  during
sweat. ^Ague.

iFebris  intermittens  quartana,  since  two  years ;  paroxyms
violent,  with  great  thirst;  probable  cause  suppressed
itch ;  eight  days  after  Natr.  mur.*^^  a  fine  vesicular
eruption  appeared  between  fingers,  which  itched  very
much,  and  chills  and  fever  disappeared.

B Chill  begins  in  hands  and  feet,  with  no  shaking,  becomes
general ;  likes  to  be  covered  up,  though  no  relief  is  ex-
perienced from  it ;  before  chill,  dull  headache,  <  dur-
ing chill ;  no  thirst;  chill  begins  generally  about  5.30
P.M.  and  last  half  an  hour;  paleness;  heat  felt  first  in
face;  headache  very  severe  in  forehead;  restless;  dry
lips;  bitter  taste;  belching  up  of  tasteless,  inodorous
gas;  urine  high  colored,  smarts  and  burns  urethra;  great
thirst;  fever  lasts  nearly  all  night;  face  flushed;  eyes
reddened;  sweat  not  profuse ;  apyrexia;  constant  thirst;
anorexia;  painless  diarrhoea;  constant  dull  headache;
hypochondriac  mood. ^Tertian  ague.

■  Quotidian,  from  1  to  3  p.m.  ;  before  attack,  tearing  cough,

oppression on chest, numbness  of  fingers and toes.


NATRUM  MURIATICUM.  590

trembling  of  limbs;  during  chill,  nausea,  sometimes
vomiting,  passes  much  red  urine;  during  heat,  thirst,
delirium,  at  times  stupor,  pain  in  head;  during  sweat;
some  thirst,  pain  in  head ;  delirium  during  apyrexia,
depression,  bitter  taste,  craves  fruit. ^'Ague.

I  I  Complains  first  of  intense  itching  over  entire  body,
lasting  from  twelve  to  fifteen  hours,  followed  by  par-
oxysm ;  skin  looking  like  gooseflesh  ;  chill  accompanied
by  tremendous  shuddering;  hydroa  on  lips. ^Ague.

I  Hard  chill  at  11  a.m.,  lasting  until  1  p.m.;  headache  dur-
ing fever;  little  sweat;  sallow  complexion;  no  appetite;
food  tastes  bitter ;  swelling  in  r.  hypochondriac  region.

Iln  early  life  suffered  severely  from  ague  and  had  taken
much  Quinine ;  every  Spring  and  Autumn  has  symp-
toms of  chill  and  fever ;  after  exposure  to  malarial  influ-
ences suffered  first  from  a  diminished  appetite,  followed
by  frequently  returning  watery,  but  painless  diarrhoea;
several  weeks  after  felt  very  cold  on  retiring,  and  was
awakened  about  2  a.m.  by  a  very  heavy  chill  which
made  her  teeth  chatter;  she  had  to  rise,  feeling  nausea
and  a  desire  to  have  a  stool ;  after  a  very  profuse,  watery
evacuation  was  overcome  by  weakness  and  fell  to  the
floor ;  chattered  and  shook  all  over  from  chill,  became
stiff  and  icy  cold  to  touch,  and  in  an  unconscious  state
was  carried"^  to  bed  ;  heat  was  applied  ;  when  conscious-
ness returned  was  totally  blind,  not  being  able  to  see
with  the  strongest  gaslight;  about  4  a.m.  fever  set  in
and  she  fell  into  a  doze,  breathing  being  very  much
oppressed;  next  morning  great  prostration,  complained
that  the  external  and  icy  coldness  was  not  to  be  com-
pared with  the  icy  coldness  she  had  felt  about  the  heart;
slight  headache  and  backache;  no  perspiration  after
slight  fever  heat ;  pulse  weak  and  irregular,  small  and
less  than  50;  dry  mouth,  but  no  thirst;  aversion  to
food ;  her  position  in  bed  showed  intense  debility,  of
which  she  complained  bitterly. ^Ague.

■  Continual  stitches  in  hepatic  region  during  apyrexia;
urine  red  and  muddy,  with  sandy  deposit. ^Ague.

iPain  in  r.  side  under  ribs;  cannot  lie  on  r.  side;  calves
very  painful  to  touch,  hard  and  stiff;  1.  leg  semiflexed,
cannot  stretch  it,  must  walk  with  a  stick,  hobbling  gait,
great  pain  from  motion;  urine  muddy  and  red;  skin
tawny;  conjunctiva  yellow.  Mgue  suppressed  by
Cinchona.

I  After  suffering  one  and  a  half  years  with  ague,  for  which
much  Quinine  had  been  taken,  body  bent  and  ema-
ciated, eyes  sunken,  yellowish,  earthy  color  of  face,
entire  loss  of  interest  in  work  and  life  generally,  de-


591  NATRUM  MURIATICUM.

spondent,  anxious,  wishes  himself  rid  of  his  miserable
existence,  slinks  about  like  a  ghost;  attacks  at  times
quotidian,  at  times  quartan,  latterly  of  an  anteponing
tertian  type ;  chill  lasts  two  to  three  hours,  accompanied
by  great  thirst;  heat  with  great  thirst  and  severe  tear-
ing in  head,  lasting  about  as  long  as  chill  and  followed
by  profuse  sweat ;  during  apyrexia  loss  of  taste,  ano-
rexia, thirst.

■  Obstinate,  anteponing,  tertian  ague;  thirst  during  chill;

during  fever  and  apyrexia  severe  twitching  headache
on  moving  head  or  ascending  steps;  profuse  epistaxis
in  morning.

I  Chill  and  heat  in  alternation,  at  various  times  of  day,
without  sweat. ^Ague.

I  Headache  and  vertigo  with  gauze  before  eyes  and  feeling
as  though  some  displacement  in  head  had  taken  place,
and  he  felt  moidered  and  homesick;  face  haggard;
chills  excessive;  perspired  copiously  when  not  in  chill.

I  Very  hard  chill  at  11  a.m.,  with  great  thirst  which  con-
tinued through  all  the  stages;  during  fever  violent
headache  and  sensation  as  if  eyes  were  filled  with  sharp
salt;  temperature  1 05-6 ;  tongue  white,  taste  bitter  when
taking  food,  salty  when  not;  water  tasted  bad  ;  no  appe-
tite. ^Ague.

I  Chill  at  9  or  10  a.m.,  lasting  an  hour;  then  fever  three
hours;  intense  headache;  a  sort  of  paralysis  of  limbs,
he  would  lie  as  if  dead;  thirst  during  chill;  fever  sub-
sided with  moderate  sweat. ^Tertian  ague.

■  Indescribable  pain  in  knees  in  afternoon,  followed next

day  by  chill,  also  in  afternoon;  pain  in  head;  >  by
sweat;  quinine  cachexia.  ^Ague.
I  Boy  after  living  in  a  neighborhood  where  there  were
many  lots  filled  with  water,  became  sallow,  anaemic,
suffered  from  boils  and  running  sores  and  he  seemed
not  likely  to  live.

■  Chronic cases with great enlargement  of spleen and

liver;  great  hydrsemia  and  weakness;  constipation  and
loss  of  appetite. ^Ague.

■  Intermittent  after  abuse  of  quinine,  living  in  damp  re-

gions, or  newly  turned  ground.

■  Paralysis  after  intermittent  fevers.

■  Prodroma: patient dreads chill; languor; headache;

thirst.

■  Apyrexia:  stitches  about  liver  and  spleen;  great  languor ;

emaciation;  sallow  complexion;  urine  muddy,  with  red
sandy  sediment ;  loss  of  appetite;  fever  blisters ;  sexual
desire  diminished  or  lost;  drawing  in  limbs,  etc.

■  Scarlet fever,  with drov/siness,  twitching,  vomiting  of

watery  fluids.


NATRUM  MURIATICUM.  592

I  Rheumatic  fever,  with  chilliness.

I  Hay  fever,  with  watery  discharges  from  eyes  and  nose.

1  Typhus fever  when stupor and chilliness  are  great;

twitchings;  watery  vomiting ;  after  typhus  suppuration

of  parotis.
■  Typhus versatilis; gastric symptoms; on  getting  up

sinks  down  to  floor ;  unquenchable  thirst,  dry  tongue ;

water  tastes  spoiled  ; nausea from drinking; uncon-
sciousness.
*^  Attacks,  Periodicity. Periodical : vertigo with  nausea ;

pains  in  eyes;  prosopalgia;  attacks  of  gout;  attacks  of

neuralgic  pains.
Alternately:  stool  and  constipation;  pressure  in  region  of

liver  and  pain  in  spleen ;  chill  and  heat.
Lasting  four  to  fifteen  minutes:  attacks  of  chorea.
For  half  an  hour  :  dazzling  like  lightning  in  eyes.
One  hour  after  chill :  heat  lasting  until  night.
Lasting  an  hour:  chill.
Every  hour  at  night :  urination.
Two  to  three  hours:  heat  lasts;  chill  lasts.
Lasting  three  hours:  fever.
Several hours after eating: eructations; burning in

stomach  ;  distension  in  r.  hypochondrium.
Four  or  six  times  a  day,  or  absent  for  several  days:  attacks

of  chorea.
Several  times  a  day:  chill  and  heat.
For  hours:  palpitation.
At  7  A.M.  regularly: neuralgia  of  ophthalmic  branch  of

trigeminus.
9  or  10  A.M.:  chill.

Between  9  and  10  a.m.,  for  three  years:  epileptic  attacks.
From  10  to  11  a.m.:  chill;  fever  without  chill.
At  11  A.M. :  chill.

11  A.M. :  hard  chill  lasting  until  1  p.m.
Every  night:  seminal  emissions.

Every  morning:  awakes  with  headache;  at  10  a.m.  dark
veil  passes  before  eyes;  spasms  of  sneezing;  pressing
and  pushing towards genitals; cough with phlegm

tinged  with  blood.
Every  morning  at  8  o'clock,  lasting  until  11 : muscles  of

back  and  extremities  stretched,  while  wrists  and  joints

of  feet  are  flexed.
After  midnight : sweat.

From  morning  till  noon :  sick  headache;  diarrhoea  <  ;  chill.
From  1  to  3  p.m.  :  quotidian.

2  A.M. :  awakened  by  very  heavy  chill.
4  AM. :  fever  set  in.

5.30  P.M. :  chill  begins  and  lasts  half  an  hour.


593  NATRUM  MURIATICUM.

Daily :  at  regular  time,  lachrymation  ;  two  or  three  stools.

Lasting  twenty-four  hours :  attacks  of  sick  headache.

Going  off  with  sun :  pains  in  and  over  r.  eye.

Coming  on  and  going  off  with  sun :  neuralgia  in  r.  eye.

From  sunrise  till  sunset,  <  at  midday :  headache.

From  twelve  to  fifteen  hours :  intense  itching.

Day  after  pain  in  knees :  chill.

Every  other  day  from  10  a.m.  to  3  p.m.  :  headache ;  tooth-
ache ;  constipation.

Every  other  day  from  10  a.m.  for  one  and  a  half  hours:
chill  with  severe  shaking.

For  a  day  or  two :  menses  scanty,  then  copious.

Every  fourth  afternoon :  violent  chill.

Every  five  or  six  days :  stool.

Seven  days  too  soon :  menses.

Once  a  week  :  hysterical  spasms  which  last  for  hours.

During  latter  half  of  pregnancy  :  vomiting.

At  full  moon  :  spasms.

Spring  and  Summer:  toothache.

Every  Spring  and  Autumn  :  has  symptoms  of  chill  and
fever.

One  and  a  half  years :  suffered  with  ague.

For  several  years  :  severe  pain  in  r.  side.

For  two  years  :  febris  intermittens  quartana.

Ten  years'  standing :  singultus.
*'  Locality  and  Direction.  Right :  pains  in  and  over  eye ;
eye  congested  ;  headache  on  side ;  piercing  pain  above
eye;  sticking  in  eye  ;  stye  on  side;  ringworm  on  side
of  tongue;  severe  pain  in  side;  distension  in  hypo-
gastrium;  pain  from  1.  hypochondrium  to  scapula;
pinching  pain  in  side  of  abdomen ;  affection  of  ovary
with  pain  in  abdomen ;  pain  in  ovarian  region  ;  pain  in
throat  <  side;  pain  from  middle  chest  to  shoulder;
swelling  of  hand ;  jerking  of  side  and  head ;  swelling
in  hypochondriac  region ;  cannot  lie  on  side.

Left :  as  if  she  would  fall  towards ;  pain  in  frontal  region ;
pain  like  a  nail  driven  into  side  of  head ;  clavus  on
side ;  fissure  in  external  canthi ;  swelling  of  side  of  nose ;
redness  of  cheek ;  neuralgia  of  ophthalmic  branch  of
trigeminus;  ulcer  on  cheek;  bending  towards  side
causes  stiffness  in  liver ;  pain  and  soreness  in  hypo-
chondrium; lying  on  side  pain  goes  to  r.  scapula;
pressive  pain  in  side  of  abdomen  ;  pain  like  a  cutting
cramp  through  chest;  tearing  stitching  pain  from
upper  region  of  chest  to  shoulder  joint ;  stitches  under
ribs ;  leg  semiflexed.

From  r.  to  1. :  dark  veil  passes  before  eyes  ;  facial  supra-
orbital neuralgia.

VOL.  VII. — 38.


NATRUM  MURIATICUM.  594

From  1.  to  r. :  swelling  on  gums.

First  1.  then  r. :  fissure  in  external  canthi.
*^  Sensations.  As  if  something  was  going  to  happen ;  head  as
if  too  heavy  ;  head  as  if  it  would  fall  forward;  as  if  she
would  fall  to  1.;  as  if  a  cold  wind  was  blowing  through
head ;  when  coughing  seems  as  though  forehead  would
burst;  as  if  head  would  burst;  throbbing  in  head  as
from  little  hammers;  head  as  if  in  a  vice;  as  if  a  nail
was  driven  into  1.  side  of  head  ;  pain  like  a  rope  around

.  head  drawing  tighter  and  tighter;  after  walking  feels  as
if  stepping  on  air ;  dazzling  like  lightning  before  eyes ;
as  if  knives  were  in  occiput;  face  shiny  as  if  greasy;
surface  of  head  raw  as  if  scalded ;  as  if  looking  through
gauze  or  feathers;  as  of  sand  in  eyes ;  as  if  eyeballs  were
too  large ;  as  if  foreign  body  was  in  eyes ;  as  if  it  was
being  torn  open;  as  if  a  small  worm  was  squirming  in
nostril;  as  if  acrid  matter  flowed  from  nose;  face  shines
as  if  greasy  ;  cheek  bones  pain  as  if  bruised ;  as  of  a  hair
on  tongue;  as  if  a  splinter  was  in  throat;  as  of  a  plug
in  throat;  as  if  everything  in  throat  would  be  closed;
as  of  a  swelling  or  lump  in  throat,  as  if  passing  over  a
sore  spot ;  difficulty  of  talking  as  if  organs  of  speech
were  weak ;  as  if  a  foreign  body  was  sticking  in  cardiac
orifice  and  behind  sternum  ;  when  walking,  abdominal
viscera  feel  as  if  loose,  dragging ;  as  of  a  weight  hanging
across  pelvis  and  bladder;  pain  as  if  spermatic  cord
would  be  torn  to  pieces ;  as  of  a  foreign  substance  or  ver}--
rough,  hard  feces  lying  in  rectum;  as  if  there  was  a
string  between  uterus  and  sacrum  in  hind  part  of  for-
nix; as  if  one  had  to  swallow  over  a  lump;  beating  as
of  hammers  in  head ;  chest  as  if  constricted  or  as  if  lungs
were  too  tight;  pain  in  chest  as  from  tension  ;  as  if  lungs
had  not  room  to  expand;  as  if  a  pressure  came  from  ab-
domen and  compressed ;  as  from  pressure  upon  a  nerve ;
back  as  if  bruised ;  back  as  if  beaten ;  back  as  if  broken ;
sacral  region  as  if  beaten ;  as  of  a  sprain  in  shoulder
joint;  hip  as  if  sprained;  as  if  limb  had  gone  to  sleep;
as  if  knees  and  ankles  were  sprained ;  legs  as  if  para-
lyzed ;  as  if  feet  were  filled  with  lead;  tarsal  joints  as  if
bruised  ;  as  if  muscles  of  thighs  and  arms  were  loose;  as
if  water  was  trickling  over  joints;  weakness  as  if  worn
out;  as  if  some  displacement  in  head  had  taken  place;
as  if  eyes  were  filled  with  sharp  salt.

Pain :  across  forehead ;  in  and  over  r.  eye ;  on  r.  side  of
head;  in  malar  bones;  in  stomach;  in  liver;  in  hypo-
chondria and  abdomen  ;  in  abdominal  ring  to  testicles ;
after  stool;  in  uterus;  in  r.  ovarian  region;  on  both
sides  of  larynx,  mostly  r.  side;  during  cough  in  head,


595  NATRUM  MURIATICUM.

throat,  trachea,  chest,  testicle,  spermatic  cord ;  like  a
cutting  cramp  through  1.  chest  to  scapula;  in  back;  in
region  of  kidneys ;  in  hip ;  in  knees  and  ankles ;  in
spleen ;  in  r.  side  under  ribs ;  in  old  scars ;  muscles  as
if  torn  from  bones.

Terrible  pain  :  in  head.

Violent  pain  :  in  head.

Indescribable  pain :  in  knees.

Severe  pain :  in  head ;  in  abdomen  ;  in  r.  side ;  in  back  ;
in  forehead.

Sharp  pain:  over  r.  eye.

Much  pain :  in  1.  hypochondrium.

Lancinating  pain :  at  anus.

Severe  tearing  :  in  head.

Tearing:  about  anus;  in  chest;  in  big  toe;  in  bones.

Tearing,  stitching  pain :  from  1.  upper  region  of  chest  to
shoulder  joint.

Tearing,  stitching  pain  :  in  head.

Sharp,  piercing  pain :  above  r.  eye.

Bursting  pain  :  in  forehead.

Shooting :  in  head  ;  in  skin.

Cutting:  in  head;  in  abdomen;  in  urethra-  in  groins;  in
chest.

Cutting,  pulsating  feeling:  in  back.

Neuralgic  pains:  in  eyes.

Violent  stitches :  in  temples.

Sharp  stitches :  transversely  through  small  of  back.

Stitches:  over  eyes;  in  head  ;  to  neck  and  chest;  in  occi-
put; in  ear;  in  throat;  in  stomach;  in  hepatic  region;
in  region  of  spleen;  in  rectum;  in  bladder;  from  loin
into  uterus ;  in  liver ;  in  chest  and  side  under  1.  ribs ;
single,  along  sternum  ;  in  region  of  heart ;  in  neck  and
back  part  of  head ;  in  back  ;  in  wrist  joints  ;  in  muscles
and  joints  of  hands  and  fingers;  in  hip;  in  r.  hipvjoint;
in  1.  knee.

Itching  stitches :  in  rectum.

Stitching,  boring,  stinging  pains :  in  corns.

Drawing  and  stitching  pains :  from  ear  down  to  neck  and
shoulder;  from  teeth  up  to  ear.

Severe  sticking  :  in  temples.

Sticking :  in  r.  eye.

Laborlike  abdominal  pains:  during  stool;  in  intestinal
canal.

Pinching  pain :  in  r.  side  of  abdomen ;  in  diaphragm.

Gnawing  pain  :  in  knee.

Clawing:  in  epigastrium.

Griping:  in  abdomen.

Severe  cramps :  in  abdomen.


NATRUM  MQRIATICUM.  596

Cramp :  in  arms,  hands,  fingers  and  thumb ;  in  lower  legs

and  calves.
Cramplike  stitching  pain :  in  feet.
Cramping  pain  :  in  lower  abdomen.
Severe  aching :  in  knees  and  legs.
Rheumatic  tearing :  from  root  of  nose  to  forehead.
Violent  pressive  pain  :  in  hepatic  region.
Pressive,  throbbing  pain  :  in  forehead.
Pressive  pain :  in  forehead  and  eyeballs  ;  on  both  sides  of

head  ;  from  navel  to  pelvis  ;  in  1.  side  of  abdomen.
Dull,  heavy  pain:  in  head;  about  liver;  in  r.  hypochon-

drium.
Paralytic  pain ;  in  small  of  back.
Aching :  in  eyes ;  in  testicles ;  in  lumbar  region ;  in  back  ;

in  head  ;  in  teeth.
Drawing  pain :  in  r.  thigh  to  knee ;  in  knees ;  in  lower

limbs.
Severe  drawing  pain :  in  lower  jaw.
Sharp  drawing :  in  back  and  through  hips.
Pressing,  drawing :  in  limbs.
Dragging :  in  forehead.

Painful  tension :  in  bends  of  limbs ;  in  spine.
Painful  contraction  :  of  hamstrings.
Painful  stiffness :  of  neck.
Ripping  up  sensation :  in  anus.
Beaten,  bruised,  lame  feeling :  in  back.
Bruised  or  burrowing  pain :  in  upper  arm.
Bruised  feeling :  in  epigastrium  ;  in  chest ;  in  tarsal  joints.
Scraping  pain  :  in  face ;  in  larynx.
' Smarting  pain  :  on  red  of  lips.
Sore  pain  :  on  1.  side  of  nose.

Burning  pains:  in  nasal  bones;  in  throat;  in  stomach.
Smarting,  burning :  in  eyes ;  of  gums ;  in  anus ;  during

coitus ;  on  edges  of  mucous  surfaces.
Violent  burning :  in  eyes ;  on  tip  of  tongue.
Burning:  on  vertex;  in  eyes;  of  ears;  in  nose;  of  lower

lip,  in  throat;  in  epigastrium;  in  stomach;  in  intes-
tines ;  in  anus ;  in  urethra ;  in  groins ;  in  vagina ;  in

hands ;  of  feet.
Burning,  boring,  beating :  in  teeth.
Smarting:  in  rectum  and  anus;  in  urethra;  in  vulva;  of

hemorrhoids.
Stinging :  in  teeth  ;  in  tongue ;  in  hemorrhoids ;  on  glans

penis  and  on  scrotum  ;  in  head ;  in  chest ;  in  big  toe  ;

in  skin  ;  of  rash  all  over.
Biting :  in  eyes.
Soreness :  of  nostrils ;  of  tongue  ;  in  1.  hypochondrium ;

in  hypogastrium ;  in  vulva;  between  scrotum  and  thighs;


597  NATRUM  MURIATICUM.

of  vagina ;  in  larynx  and  trachea ;  of  toes  and  between
toes.

Heat :  in  head ;  in  occiput ;  in  face ;  in  forehead.

Sensitiveness : between  vertebrae.
'  Tingling :  in  limbs.

Violent  jerks  and  shocks :  in  head.

Jerks  :  in  epigastrium.

Jerkings :  of  r.  side  and  head.

Twitching :  of  muscles  and  limbs ;  of  arms  and  legs.

Beating :  in  head  ;  in  ears.

Throbbing:  in  forehead ;  in  occiput;  in  ears;  in  epigastrium.

Pulsation  :  in  head  ;  in  ear ;  in  teeth;  in  rectum.

Severe  pressure  :  below  heart.

Pressure :  in  frontal  region  ;  in  region  of  root  of  nose ;  in
epigastrium  ;  in  stomach  ;  in  region  of  spleen ;  in  upper
abdomen ;  from  navel  downwards ;  in  region  of  liver ;
in  chest.

Pressing,  pushing :  towards  genitals.

Violent  constriction  :  in  heart.

Contraction :  in  hypogastrium.

Constricted  feeling ;  of  scalp :  in  throat ;  in  stomach.

Drawing,  stiff  sensation :  in  muscles ;  of  eyes.

Drawing:  in  spine.

Tension :  in  forehead  ;  in  hepatic  region ;  in  renal  region;
in  inguinal  glands ;  in  spine ;  in  lower  legs.

Stiffness :  in  liver ;  in  legs ;  of  joints.

Lameness:  in  shoulder  joint.

Lame  feeling :  of  ankle  joint.

Weight :  in  forehead  ;  in  back  and  shoulders.

Heaviness :  in  head  ;  in  stomach  ;  across  bladder  and  pel-
vis ;  of  eyes ;  of  arms ;  of  legs  and  feet ;  of  feet.

Oppression  :  of  stomach  ;  of  chest.

Fulness:  at  stomach.

Painful  cracking :  in  ear.

Distension :  of  stomach ;  about  liver;  in  r.  hypochondrium.

Uneasiness :  of  feet.

Restlessness :  in  legs  ;  in  limbs.

Numb  feeling :  of  one  side  of  nose ;  of  lips ;  of  one  side  of
tongue ;  of  arms  and  hands ;  of  fingers  and  toes.

Scratching:  in  rectum.

Dryness :  of  nose ;  of  tongue ;  of  throat ;  in  larynx ;  of
anus ;  of  vagina ;  of  mouth ;  of  skin.

Dulness:  in  head.

Fluttering :  of  heart.

Great  weakness :  in  stomach.

Great  prostration.

Great  debility.

Sinking  down  :  of  arms.


NATRUM  MURTATICUM.  598

Weak,  faint  feeling :  in  head  and  chest ;  in  heart.
Weakness :  in  male  sexual  organs ;  of  arms ;  in  knees  and

calves ;  of  feet ;  of  whole  body.
Tired  sensation  :  in  back.
Weariness :  in  head.
Empty  feeling :  in  head.
Fainting :  at  epigastrium.
Sinking :  at  epigastrium.
Goneness :  in  epigastrium.
Faint,  gone  feeling :  at  pit  of  stomach.
Intense  itching :  over  whole  body.
Violent  itching :  on  head  and  nape  of  neck ;  on  scrotum  ;

of  cracks  between  toes  ;  of  nettlerash.
Gnawing,  itching :  of  skin.
Itching  :  eruption  on  boundaries  of  heavy  scalp ;  in  eyes;

in  canthi ;  behind  ears  ;  of  herpes ;  of  eruption  on  face ;

on  face;  about  anus;  at  corona  glandis;  on  glans  penis

and  on  scrotum  ;  between  scrotum  and  thighs ;  of  vulva;

of  pudendum  ;  on  pubes ;  of  liver ;  on  arms  and  hands ;

of  ulcer  on  leg  ;  of  eruption  between  fingers ;  of  skin.
Crawling:  at  corona  glandis;  all  over  body.
Tickling:  in  throat  pit;  in  throat  or  pit  of  stomach;  in

epigastrium.
Icy  coldness :  about  heart.
Coldness  :  of  feet ;  in  joints.
Cold  sensation ;  on  vertex ;  in  stomach  ;  about  heart ;  in

back.
Coolness :  of  vagina.

Chilliness  :  over  whole  body  ;  over  back.
**  Tissues. 1 1  Loses  flesh  while  living  well.

I B General  emaciation,  most  conspicuous  about  neck,  which

is  very  thin  and  shrunken.

■  Emaciation,  anaemia,  weariness  and  complete  prostration

of  vital  forces.

■  Infantile  marasmus  from  defective  nourishment.

■  Chlorosis  with  dirty,  flaccid,  torpid  skin.

■  Anaemia,  particularly  if  provoked  by  loss  of  fluids;  in

women from menstrual disease,  in  men  from  loss  of
semen.

■  Deterioration  of  blood,  of  a  scorbutic  nature.

■  Cachexia  from  ague  plus  Quinine.

■  Hemorrhages  bright  red  or  dark  red,  thin  and  watery,

not  coagulated.
■Tendency  to  take  cold.

■  Wounds  become  painful,  suppurate;  pain  in  old  scars.

■  Muscles  as  if  torn  from  bones.

■  Rheumatic  affections,  with  shortening  of  tendons.
■Stiff'ness  of  joints ;  they  crack  on  moving  them.


599  NATRUM  MURIATICUM.

Acts  upon  cartilage,  mucous  follicles  and  glands,  salivary
and  mesenteric  glands.

■  Tendency  to  dryness  or  to  erosions  of  mucous  membrane;

secretion  acrid,  scanty;  smarting,  burning  at  edges  of
mucous  surfaces.

■  Catarrhs  of  all  mucous  membranes,  with  secretions  of

transparent,  watery,  coarse,  frothy  mucus;  white  mucus
full  of  bubbles,  color  of  white  of  egg  or  like  boiled  starch.

■  Watery  vomiting,  increased  aqueousness  of  any  part  of

body,  hydrocephalus;  serous  effusions.

■  Anasarca, accumulation of  serum in areolar tissues;

puffiness.

■  Dropsy:  after  scarlatina;  caused  by  heart,  liver  or  kid-

ney complaints.

■  Collection  of  serum  in  joints  and  in  closed  sacs;  hydrocele.

■  Chronic  swelling  of  lymphatic  and  sebaceous  glands.

■  Chronic  inflammation  of  salivary  glands,  excess  of  saliva.

■  Gonorrhoea  last  stage;  gleet.

■  Fistulous,  phagadenic  ulcers.

■  Varices.

^^  Touch.  Passive  Motion.  Injuries.  Touch :  on  hair
causes  it  to  fall  out ;  on  sensitive  spot  on  1.  parietal  bone,
after  blow,  causes  trembling  of  whole  body ;  swelling  of
nose  painful  to  touch;  lower  jaw  painful ;  teeth  sensitive;
of  food  and  ulcers  in  mouth  causes  smarting  and  burn-
ing; toothache  <;  epigastrium  sensitive;  a  string  felt
between  uterus  and  scrotum,  exceedingly  sensitive;
spine  oversensitive ;  sensitiveness  of  skin ;  calves  very
painful.

Pressure :  weight  in  forehead  < ;  toothache  <  ;  causes
bruised  feeling  in  epigastrium ;  slightest  of  clothing
painful,  of  clothes  >  cramps;  laborlike  abdominal  pains
>  ;  urethra  painfully  sore ;  spine  oversensitive ;  >  back-
ache.

Must  loosen  clothing :  tightness  of  skin  across  abdomen
from  hip  to  hip.

Lying  on  something  hard  :  >  pains  in  spine.

Rubbing :  hives  on  arms  and  hands  become  red  ;  >  numb-
ness of  arms  and  hands.

After  injury:  to  head;  chronic  effects;  three  months  after
a  blow  on  head,  headache;  after  blow  on  1.  parietal  bone,
there  remained  a  sensitive  spot  over  seat  of  injury.
*^  Skin.  Skin:  yellowish  color,  delicate;  dirty  looking,  dry,
withered;  irritable;  itching,  pricking,  stinging;  gnaw-
ing, itching,  shooting.

I  I  Crawling  sensation  all  over  body,  beginning  at  feet  and
gradually  ascending.

■  Great  rawness  and  soreness  of  skin ;  smarting ;  intertrigo.


NATRUM  MURIATICUM.  600

■  Vesicles,  with  watery  contents,  burst  and  leave  a  thin

scurf.
llHerpes:  about  mouth  and  on  arms  and  thighs;  humid
on  scrotum  and  thighs;  during  fevers ;  in  bends  of  elbows
and  knees;  moist  oozing.

■  Herpes  circinatus;  pemphigus,  blisters  starting  up  on

burning  spots,  with  clear,  watery  contents;  watery  blebs.
■Shingles  or  herpes  zoster.

■  Rupia,  blisters,  not  pustular.

■  ■White  scales  on  scalp;  dandruff.

■  ■Nettlerash :  over  whole  body;  large  red  blotches,  with

violent  itching ;  after  violent  exercise;  chronic  urticaria.
I  I  Red  spots  as  large  as  head  of  pin  over  whole  body,  pre-
ceded by  sensation  of  heat  in  face.

■  Miliary  eruption  all  over.

■  Rash  on  legs  and  in  groups  all  over.

■  Stinging  rash  over  whole  body.
I  I  Acne  punctata.

■  Comedones.

■  Eczema,  raw  and  inflamed;  scurfy  and  discharging  a

corrosive  fluid,  which  eats  hair;  <  in  edges  of  hair,  on
genitals  and  legs.

■  ■Tetter  in  bends  of  joints,  oozing  of  an  acrid  fluid;  crusts

with  deep  cracks, scaly  eruptions  on  flexor  surfaces;  scabs
on  head  and  in  axillae.

■  Eczema  from  eating  too  much  salt.

■  Suffused  redness,  but  no  rash;  tongue  resembling  burned

appearance,  produced  by  continual  use  of  salt. ^Scarlet
fever.

■  Superficial  ulcers; red, angry  looking,  smarting, sur-

rounded by  vesicles,  no  suppuration.

■  Dermoid  swellings.

■  Fungus  hsematodes.

I  I  Measles,  with  excessive  secretion  of  tears  or  saliva.

■  Smallpox,  with  salivary  flow,  confluence  of  pustules  and

drowsiness.

■  Boils,  small;  bloodboils.

■  Warts  in  palms  of  hands.

■  Corns.

■  Scars  become  painful  and  redden.

■  Effects  of  insect  bites;  stings  of  bees,  mosquitoes.
Stages  of  Life,  Constitution, "Salt  eaters  seldom  have

male  issue." — Old  book.
Adapted  to  cachectic  persons  and  to  those  who  have  lost

animal  fluids;  quinine  cachexia.
Suits old  people,  teething children, anaemic, chlorotic

people  with  catarrhal  troubles,  and  tuberculous  subjects

of  scrofulous  habit.


601  NATRUM  MURIATICUM.

Baby,  a  few  months  old ;  catarrhal  stenosis  of  lachrymal
duct.

iBo}^,  set.  11  months;  marasmus.

Girl,  set.  8,  dark  hair  and  eyes ;  incontinence  of  urine.

Child,  set.  4;  scarlatinal  dropsy.

Girl,  set.  6 ;  fear  of  robbers  at  night.

Child,  set.  6 ;  ague.

Child,  set.  7,  suffering  two  years;  chorea.

Girl,  set.  8,  brown  hair,  blue  eyes ;  ague.

Girl,  set.  9,  after  easy  recovery  from  diphtheria  and  scarla-
tina ;  dropsy.

Boy,  set.  10,  weak,  small,  irritable,  after  being  frightened
by  dog  two  years  ago ;  chorea.

Boy,  set.  10,  ill  four  months ;  quartan  ague.

Boy,  set.  12,  living  in  paludal  district;  ague.

Boy,  set.  13,  scrofulous  habits,  much  behind  in  corporeal
and  mental  development,  fat  and  lazy;  scrofulous  oph-
thalmia.

Boy,  set.  14,  suffering  two  months;  tertian  ague.

Girl,  set.  14,  scrofulous ;  hypertrophy  of  tonsils.

Girl,  set.  16,  small,  scrofulous,  pale,  formerly  suffering  from
eczema,  menses  not  yet  appeared;  leucorrhoea.

Boy,  set.  16,  suffering  ten  days;  quotidian  ague.

Boy,  set.  16  ;  tertian  ague.

Girl,  set.  17,  suffering  three  weeks ;  hoarseness.

Girl,  set.  18,  blonde,  suffering  three  months  ;  ague.

Girl,  set.  19,  suffering  eight  weeks ;  double  quartan  ague.

Man,  set.  20,  after  getting  thoroughly  wet ;  mania.

Patient,  set.  20,  after  an  attack  of  inflammatory  rheuma-
tism during  childhood ;  strabismus.

Young  lady,  set.  20,  salivated  by  abuse  of  calomel  while
sick  during  previous  summer.

Man,  set.  20,  soldier,  became  sick  while  on  march ;  affec-
tion of  chest.

Girl,  set.  20,  suffering  ten  weeks,  attacks  at  first  tertian,
now  quotidian ;  ague.

Man,  set.  20,  slender,  blonde,  troubled  with  pimples ;  ague.

Man,  set.  21,  weak,  two  years  ago  suffered  from  cough,  with
hsemoptysis ;  tertian  ague.

Girl,  set.  22,  sick  four  weeks ;  ague.

Mrs.  A.,  set.  23  ;  chronic  headache.

Man,  set.  23,  suffering  one  and  a  half  years,  rubbing  and
electricity  without  benefit ;  weakness  of  arms.

Woman,  set.  24,  slender,  short,  blonde ;  dysmenorrhoea.

Man,  set.  24 ;  tertian  ague.

Farmer,  set.  24 ;  ague.

Man,  set.  24,  strong,  small,  blonde ;  ague.

Girl,  set.  24 ;  tertian  ague.


NATRUM  MURIATICUM.  602

Woman,  £et.  25,  suffering  five  weeks ;  quartan  ague.
Workman,  set.  25,  Italian,  dark  complexion,  previously

robust ;  ague.
Man,  set.  25,  blonde  ;  tertian  ague.
Man,  set.  28,  bookkeeper ;  asthenopia.
Man,  set.  28,  small,  slim,  dark  hair,  suffering  nine  months  ;

ague.
Two  men,  set.  28  ;  ague.
Man,  set.  29,  suffering  several  years ;  rheumatic,  catarrhal

inflammation  of  eyes.
Seaman,  set.  29 ;  suppressed  ague.
Man,  set.  30,  nervo-sanguine,  light  complexion,  blue  eyes,

auburn  hair,  previously  remarkably  robust,  after  severe

and long continued mental application; brain ex-
haustion.
Man,  set.  30,  suffering  from  progressive  locomotor  ataxy ;

headache.
Woman,  set.  30,  delicate  build,  sad  and  melancholic  dis-
position ;  headaches.
Woman,  set.  30 ;  chronic  leucorrhoea.
Two  women,  set.  30 ;  ague.
Woman,  set.  32,  without  children,  melancholic  disposition,

irritable  temperament ;  headache.
Mrs.  P.,  set.  32,  mother  of  two children, ulceration of

womb  treated  locally  by  nitrate  of  silver ;  sore  throat.
Woman,  set.  32,  delicate,  irritable,  chlorosis;  spasms.
Woman,  set.  34,  several  years  ago  had  tapeworm  removed

by  heroic  treatment,  since  then  suffering  headache.
Man,  set.  34,  robust,  suffering  three  weeks,  chill  at  first

every  third  day,  now  daily ;  ague.
Man,  set.  34 ;  tertian  ague.
Woman,  set.  35,  well  built,  during  sixth  pregnancy;  severe

vomiting.
Man,  set.  35,  short,  shining  black  hair ;  ague.
Man,  set.  35,  medical  student,  strong  and  well;  ague.
Woman,  set.  36,  sick  three  months;  ague.
Mrs.  D.,  set.  40,  after  suppressed  ague;  inflammation  of

eyes.
Mrs.  C,  set.  40;  perpendicular  half  sight.
Man,  set.  40,  for  last  three  years  has  had  thick  itching

eruption  on  upper  lip,  taken  much  Quinine;  ague.
Man,  set.  40,  seaman;  ague.
Man,  set.  40,  sick  three  weeks;  ague.
Physician,  set.  49; coryza  and bronchitis, complicated

with  muscular  asthenopia,
Man,  set.  50,  corpulent,  healthy;  lachrymal  fistula.
Man,  set.  50,.  weak,  addicted  to  drink,  suffering  a  long

time  with  abdominal  troubles;  hsematemesis.


603  NATRUM  MURIATICUM.

Mrs.  C,  set.  50,  in  earl}^  life  suffered  severely  from  ague,
and  still  more  from  enormous  doses  of  Quinine.

Quinine  which  had  been  administered  year  after  year,
every  Spring  and  Autumn,  has  sj^mptoms  of  chill  and
fever,  after  exposure  to  malarial  influences  ;  ague.

Man,  set.  50,  bilious  temperament,  hard  working  farmer,
living  in  an  aguish  locality;  ague.

Mrs.  C,  set.  51,  suffering  for  nineteen  years ;  constipation.

Man,  set.  54,  several  weeks  previously  inflammation  of ,
oesophagus;  stenosis.

Mrs.  W.,  set.  60,  suffering  three  months;  sleeplessness.

Man,  set.  60;  tertian  ague.

Woman,  set.  65  ;  tertian  ague.

Man,  set.  65,  six  years  ago  had  ague  sixteen  months  in  spite
of  Quinine,  now  suffering  five  months ;  ague.

Woman,  set.  70,  has  worn  a  green  shade  over  eyes  for  many
years ;  inflammation  of  eyes.

Man,  set.  72  ;  chronic  conjunctivitis.

Girl,  hydrsemic  constitution  ;  intermitting  tonic  spasms.

Young  woman,  after  labor  had  necrosis  of  tibia,  suffering
thirteen  years ;  headache.

Man,  suffering  over  three  months,  treated  heroically  seven
weeks  by  crude  doses  of  Cinchona ;  ague.

Woman,  tall,  dark  hair,  eyes  and  complexion,  suffering
thirty  years ;  hemicrania.

Woman,  tall,  thin,  brunette ;  vomiting  during  pregnancy.

Patient  suffering  from  bronchitis  cured  by  Conium ;  epi-
lepsy.

Mrs.  P.,  seamstress ;  sick  headache.

Elderly  lady,  teacher,  after  loss  of  daughter ;  excessive  grief.

Old  woman,  from  her  j^outh  up ;  hemicrania.
*^  Relations. Antidoted by: Nitr. spir. dulc, il Phosphor.
(especially  abuse  of  salt  in  food),  Arsen.  (bad  effects  of
sea  bathing).

It  antidotes :  nitrate  of  silver,  in  all  cases  wdiere  this  agent
has  been  used  for  cauterization  ;  quinine,  when  diseases
continue  intermittent  and  patients  suffer  from  headache,
are  constipated  and  have  disturbed  sleep ; bee  stings.

Compatible:  llSepia;  after  Kali  mur.  in  articular  and
chronic  rheumatism,  itch,  shingles  and  other  eruptions,
exudations, glandular  swellings,  deafness,  aphthse,  gonor-
rhoea with  orchitis;  after  Kali  phos.  in  deafness,  sup-
puration of  parotid,  oedema  of  lungs,  hemorrhages ;
after  Kali  sulph.  in  catarrh  of  chest  with  rattling ;  after
Natr.  sulph.  in  bitter  taste,  gastro-enteric  diseases,  erup-
tions ;  after  Calc.  phos.  in  glandular  swellings,  chronic
rheumatism  of  joints,  hygroma  of  patella,  catarrhs  in
scrofulous  subjects,  hydrocele;  aRer  Ferr.  phos.  in  per-
tussis, headache  of  young  girls  during  menses.


NATRUM  MURIATICUM.  604

Complementary :  Apis  mel.

Compare :  Alumina,  Graphit.  in  dryness  of  mucous  mem-
branes ;  Ledum  in  stings  of  insects ;  Ambra  gris.  in
ranula;  Caustic,  Phosphor.,  Pulsat.,  Staphis.  in  escape  of
urine  when  coughing;  Hepar  in  sensitiveness  to  cold
air.
