The Guiding Symptoms of Our Materia Medica, Vol. II
Constantine Hering
The Guiding Symptoms of Our Materia Medica, vol. II. Philadelphia: Globe, 1879.
Public domain. Transcribed from the Internet Archive copy (https://archive.org/details/guidingsymptomso00heri2).
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

w^


m


'•^^i


>•'"


Digitized  by  the  Internet  Archive

in  2010  with  funding  from

Open  Knowledge  Commons  and  Harvard  Medical  School


THE


GUIDING  SYMPTOMS


OF  OUR


MATERIA  MEDICA


BY


C.  HERING,  M.  D.


VOLUME  II.


PHILADELPHIA:

THE  AMEEICAN  HOMCEOPATHIC  PUBLISHING  SOCIETY.

J.  m:.  stodd^^rt  &  CO.
1880.


Copyright,  1880,  by  Constantine  Hering.


GUIDING  SYMPTOMS


OF OUR


MATERIA  MEDICA.


ARNICA  MONTANA  (RADIX).

Leopard's  bane.  Compositce.

A  widely  spread  plant  growing  on  the  high  mountain  plains  of  Ger-
many. One  of  the  oldest  popular  drugs,  called  in  the  German  Wohlverleih,
which  means  bestowing  well-being,  having  nothing  to  do  with  wolves,  as
our  learned  French  colleague  supposed ;  it  is  also  called  Fallkraut,  meaning
the  herb  useful  after  a  fall.  Two  hundred  years  ago  Fehr  called  it  panacea
lapsorum.

One  of  the  first  provings  of  Hahnemann  was  made  with  the  Arnica  root.
(Fragmenta  de  viribus  medicamentorum  positivis  sine  in  sano  corpore  humano
observatis,  1805,  pp.  17-24)  containing  117  symptoms  of  Hahnemann's  own
observation ;  quotations,  33 ;  one  of  the  most  wonderful  results  of  his
exploration,  and  all  from  the  root.

In  the  first  volume  of  his  Materia  Medica  Pura,  1811,  pp.  236-248,  his  own
symptoms  increased  to  175 ;  quotations  from  old  books,  never  considered
of  any  importance  to  real  homoeopathic  practitioners,  to  55.

In  the  second  edition,  1822,  pp.  471-503,  Hahnemann's  symptoms  had  in-
creased to  278,  all  from  the  root,  and  he  was  able  to  add  provings  by  his
students.  He  examined  each  prover  with  the  utmost  care  and  scrupu-
lousness, and  the  symptoms  had  increased  to  314.

In  the  third  edition,  1830,  soon  after,  there  were  in  all  638,  only  46  ad-
ditions.

A  great  many  reports  of  so-called  poisonings  have  been  given  in  the
journals.  It  is  very  probable  that  all  these  were  the  result  of  tincture  made
from  the  flowers,  containing  the  arnica  fly.  Before  the  bud  opens,  an  in-
VOL.  II. — 1.  (1)


ARNICA  MONTANA.  2

sect,  Atherix  maculatus  Meignen,  lays  its  eggs  into  the  torus,  or  receptacle.
The  worms  coming  therefrom  live  on  the  seed,  which  does  not  prevent  the
development  of  the  flower,  but  the  ripening  of  seed.  Nearly  all  flowers
in  the  shops  contain  eggs,  worms,  or  the  excrements  and  other  remains  of
the  worms,  or  the  pupas;  and  all  this  acts  similarly  to  Cantharides.

Following  the  example  of  Hahnemann,  we  ought  to  use  nothing  but  the
root.

It  would  be  of  great  importance  to  have  this  insect,  or  its  eggs  or  pupas
proved,  to  enable  us  to  separate  the  symptoms  of  the  flower  from  those
of  the  insect.  All  tinctures  made  from  the  flowers  are  very  uncertain  pre-
parations and  not  to  be  trusted.

^  Mind. Stupefaction,  loss  of  sight  and  liearing. d  Concussion
of  brain.
I  Comatose,  soporous,  stupid  states. ^Typhus.
I  Lies  as  if  dead, d  Concussion  of  brain  ;  apoplexy,  etc.

I  Coma,  insensibility. ^Congestive  chills,  meningitis,  etc.

I I  Stupor  with  involuntary  discharge  of  feces. ^Typhus.

I  I  Loss  of  consciousness, d  Angina  pectoris.
Unconscious ;  when  spoken  to  answers  correctly,  but  uncon-
sciousness and  delirium  at  once  return.

■  Could  be  aroused  and  answer  intelligently,  but  relapsed  im-

mediately into  stupor.

I I  Forgetful ; what  he  reads  quickly  escapes  his  memory,  even
the  word  he  is  about  speaking. 6  Typhus.

■  Absent-minded,  thoughts  wander  from  their  object  and  dwell

on  images  and  fancies.
Mind  clear  like  that  of  a  clairvoyant ;  quiet  countenance,  pale
as  chalk,  thinks  her  death  unavoidable.

■  Thinks  rightly  but  uses  the  wrong  word  for  a  correct  idea.

6  Typhus.
Confusion  of  the  head,  changing  to  pressive  right-sided  head-
ache.

■  Sits  as  if  in  thought,  yet  thinks  of  nothing;  a  sort  of  waking

dream. 6  Typhus.
Does  not  think  ;  confused  heaviness  in  forehead.

■  Thinking  tardy, d  Apoplexy.
Slowness  of  thinking.

■  ■Says  there  is  nothing  the  matter  with  him. d  Putrid  fever.

■  Muttering  delirium. ^Typhus.

■  Delirium,  low  murmuring.

■  ■Delirium  tremens.

■  Raving  madness,  in  which  the  patient  is  conscious  of  his  con-

dition.
Excessive  inclination  to  hard  and  long  literary  labors.
Indisposed  to  think ;  after  a  walk  in  the  open  air.

■  She  does  not  speak  a  word;  declines answering  questions,

dislikes  sympathy, d  Typhus.


3  ARNICA  MONTANA.

B  Sheds  tears  and  makes  exclamations. ^  After  rage.

Prays  quietly  for  her  soul.

Picks  the  bedclothes.

Thoughtless  gaiety  ;  great  frivolity  and  mischievousness.

Depression  of  spirits.

1 1  Hopelessness  ;  indifference. ^  After  concussion.

■  Despondency  and  conviction  of  approaching  death. ^Neu-

ralgia.

I  Hypochondriacal  anxiety,  peevishness.

I I  Fears  being  struck  by  those  coming  towards  him;  fears
even  the  possibility  of  being  touched. 6  Gout.

1 1  Violent  attacks  of  anguish. ^Angina  pectoris.
I  Horror  of  instant  death. ^  With  the  cardiac  distress  in  the
night.

■  Indifference  to  everything,  morose.

■  Naturally  cheerful,  kindly  and  genial,  he  became  downcast,

waspish  and  peevish.

■  Excitable  and  timid. ^Paralysis.

She  is  extremely  morose  and  irritable;  Ishe  does  not  speak  a
word.

■  Oversensitive  mood,  peevish,  quarrelsome.

■  Excessive  sensitiveness  of  mind. 6  Prolapsus  uteri.
//Naturally  very  sensitive,  his  keen  sensitiveness  of  mind  be-
came greatly  exaggerated.

I  1  Excessively  sensitive  mind ;  disposition  to  agreeable  as  well
as  disagreeable  emotions,  without  weakness  or  excessive  sen-
sitiveness of  the  body ;  sometimes  occurring  alternately  or
simultaneously.

■  Susceptibility  to  every  shock,  movement  or  exertion,  and  to

reading  and  reflection. 6  Megrim.
I  Sensation  of  being  good  for  nothing.

■  All  occupation  had  to  be  relinquished  for  the  time,  so  intense

were  the  sufferings, d  Attacks  of  headache.

■  Languid. 6  Myalgia.

Inability  to  perform  continued  active  work.

■  Easily  frightened;  unexpected  trifles  cause  him  to  start.

■  State  of  mind  most  pitiable. ^Prolapsus  ani.

■  Mental  emotions  exerted  an  influence  in  bringing  on  chronic

attacks  of  headache.

■  Every  excitement  of  mind,  which  is  very  irritable,  aggravates

all  the  symptoms  of  headache. 6  Prolapsus  ani.
Ailments  from  fright  or  anger.

■  Suddenly  aroused  by  his  night-bell  and  turning  out  of  bed,

brought  on  the  headache  next  day. d  Chronic  cephalalgia.
*  Sensorium. ■  Confusion  of  the  head,  with  decided  pressure  in
the  right  half  of  the  head,  especially  over  the  right  brow.

■  Dizzy  with  sickness  at  stomach,  <  on  rising  or  moving;  >

when  lying  still.


ARNICA  MONTANA.  4

I  Giddiness  and  incapacity  for  all  exertion,  with  the  headache.

d  Prolapsus  ani.

I I  Vertigo  when  shutting  eyes.

I  1  Vertigo  in  forehead  when  walking,  or  raising  and  moving
the  head, d  Angina  pectoris.

Vertigo  from  a  too  copious  meal,  nausea,  obscuration  of  sight.

I  Vertigo  when  assuming  an  erect  position. ^Apoplexy.

I  Vertigo,  it  is  almost  imperceptible  when  sitting  and  bending
the  head,  but  when  righting  or  moving  the  head  she  feels  as
if  everything  turned  with  her.

I  Vertigo. ^Paralysis.

Heaviness  and  confusion  of  the  head.

I  I  Vertigo  with  nausea,  when  moving  and  rising ;  >>  lying'
^  Inner  Head. Aching,  darting  and  pressing  most  in  forehead ;
<  from  motion.

Aching  in  forehead  commencing  in  morning,  gradually  extends
through  temples  to  occiput ; <  afternoon.

I  Dull  pain  in  forehead ;  pain  in  back  and  limbs, d  Dysentery.

Pressive  pain  in  forehead  when  walking,  ascending  stairs,  re-
flecting or  reading.

Pains  over  one  eye,  with  compression  in  forehead  and  greenish
vomiting.

Pressive  pain  in  the  forehead  <  near  the  warm  stove,  as  if
the  brain  were  rolled  up  in  a  lump.

Rapid  stitches  in  left  frontal  eminence  accompanied  by  the  sen-
sation as  if  an  extravasation  of  blood  had  taken  place.

Stitches  in  forehead.

Coldness  in  the  forehead  changing  to  a  heat  or  sometimes  a
darting  pain ; <  from  shocks,  motion,  etc.

Pressure  over  eyes  extending  to  temples.

iThe  fullness  was  followed  in  about  an  hour  by  a  slight  pain
in  forehead,  gradually  increasing,  extending  to  temples  and
occiput,  reaching  its  height  toward  evening,  d  Chronic
cephalalgia.

Pressure  over  eyes  extending  toward  temples,  with  sensation
as  if  the  integuments  of  the  forehead  were  spasmodically
contracted.

■  Sticking  pain  in  temples  and  forehead.

Headache  in  the  left  temple  returning  from  time  to  time ;  fine
pricking  and  tearing.

■  Headache  as  from  a  nail  thrust  into  the  temple,  with  general

sweat  about  12  p.m.,  followed  by  faintness.
Pressing  shooting  in  both  temples,  from  without  inwards.

I  Occasional  attacks  of  very  painful  headaches,  which  are  either

beating  or  pressing  and  in  one  or  the  other  temple, d  Pro-
lapsus ani.

I I  Pressive  headache  as  if  the  head  were  being  distended  from
within  outward ;  the  pain  seems to  arise  from  something


ARNICA  MONTANA.

soft  in  the  vertex,  with  drawing  in  the  vertex  and  occiput,

and  tearing  towards  the  temples.
Heaviness  in  middle  of  brain.
Pressure  and  confusion  of  the  head.
Feels  like  a  heavy  weight  in  head.

■  Feeling  of  weight  in  the  head  and  on  making  any  exertion,

sensation  as  if  a  liquid  was  fluctuating  in  the  brain,  on  the

day  following  an  attack, d  Chronic  cephalalgia.
I  Feeling  at  upper  part  of  head  as  though  the  brain  was  sore

and  tender.
lOversensitiveness  of  the  whole  brain,  or  in  diflFerent  parts  of  it.

d  Megrim.

■  Burning  in  the  brain,  with  natural  heat  of  the  body,  night

and  morning ;  worse  from  motion,  better  at  rest.

Congestive  and  gastric  headaches.

Bad  effects  from  falls  or  blows  on  the  head.

llMechanical  injuries;  especially  with  stupor  from  concus-
sion ;  fractures  of  the  skull,  or  even  compression  (apply  ex-
ternally warm  cloths  saturated  with  dilute  tincture  from  the
root ;  give  also  internally).

■  Headache  >  from  motion  on  the  pillow. ^Pneumonia.

■  Early  in  the  morning  he  durst  not  set  about  reading,  nor

working  on  first  getting  out  of  bed  without  incurring  an
attack, d  Megrim.

Headache :  violent  on  waking ;  in  the  morning,  stupifying ;
from  3  to  8  p.m.,  pressive ;  on  walking  in  open  air,  press-
ing ;  with  cough,  stitch  in  forehead  ;  on  moving  head,  stitches
in  head ;  on  rising  or  sitting  up  in  bed ;  on  reading  or  re-
flecting, pressure  in  forehead ;  on  stooping ;  on  walking,
pressure  in  forehead ;  on  walking  up  stairs,  pressing  in  fore-
head.

Headache  with  vertigo.

■  Pain  as  if  a  knife  were  drawn  through  the  head  transversely

from  the  left  side ;  this  is  immediately  followed  by  internal
coldness  of  the  head,  which  causes  the  hair  to  stand  on  end.

■  Brain  affected, d  Diarrhoea  and  dysentery.

Violent  headache  on  waking  in  the  morning,  which  reached
such  a  point  at  8  A.M.  that  while  walking  in  open  air  he  fell
from  dizziness ;  disappeared  at  10  a.m.

■  ■Meningitis  after  mechanical  or  traumatic  injuries,  such  as

concussions,  bruises,  falling,  concussion  of  brain,  etc.,  when
suspecting  exudation  of  blood,  fibrine  or  pus.  In  such  cases
we  find  great  sopor  and  partial  paralysis  of  the  tongue,  the
oculomotors,  the  iris  or  the  limbs.

■  ■Meningitis  after  lesion  or  concussion,  provided  there  is  no

complete  want  of  reaction.

■  Meningitis  granulosa  with  the  characteristic  inclination  to

vomit.


ARNICA  MONTANA.  6

I  Serous  or  bloody  exudation. ^Meningitis  infantum.

I  Apoplexy,  loss  of  consciousness,  with  involuntary  evacuations

from  bowels  and  bladder,  paralysis  (left  sided) ;  pulse  full,

strong ;  stertor ;  sighing,  muttering.
llApoplexia  sanguinea.
I  No  headache. ^  Apoplexia  sanguinea.
*  Outer  Head. ■  iHead  feels  too  large.

SCold  sensation  in  a  small  spot  on  the  forehead  as  if  some  one

touched  him  with  a  cold  thumb.
Unbearable  feeling  as  from  ice  on  top  of  head  ;  after  breakfast.

■  Burning  or  hot  spots  on  top  of  head, d  Prolapsus  ani.

I  Head  hot,  rest  of  body  cool. ^Iritis. ^  Prolapsus  uteri.

Pain  in  occiput  as  if  hair  was  pulled  out  or  as  from  severe  elec-
tric shocks.

I A  pressure  in  the  forehead  as  if  these  parts  were  crushed  by
a  violent  concussion ;  this  feeling  extends  over  the  face  into
both  cheek-bones.

I  Better  by  lying  low  with  the  head. 6  Iritis.

I  Boring  head  deep  in  pillows. 6  Meningitis  infantum.

I  I  Pressive  headache  over  the  eyes  extending  toward  the  tem-
ples, with  sensation  as  if  integuments  of  forehead  were  spas-
modically contracted.

■  Carries  the  head  forward  or  to  the  right. ^  After  injury  to

left  eye.

Recurring  boils  on  scalp.
'^  Sight  and  Eyes. B Photophobia. ^Apoplexy.

I  Early  in  the  morning  fullness  of  head,  soon  followed  by  flick-
ering before  the  eyes,  which  was  increased  by  reading  or
writing.  ^Headache  occurring  once  or  twice  a  week  for
twelve  years.

Diplopia  after  injuring  the  eye.

If  she  attempts  to  read  the  eyes  pain  and  the  print  seems  to
dance  in  a  fog  and  vanish,  so  she  must  rub  the  eyes.

Muscse  volitantes.

■  Cork  from  a  bottle  struck  right  eye  seventeen  days  before,

eye  swollen  for  four  days  ;  sees  through  a  mist,  pupil  moder-
ately dilated  and  immovable  without  a  trace  of  exudation.

■  All  turns  black  before  the  eyes. ^Meningitis  infantum.
Loss  of  sight  after  a  violent  blow.

•  Darkness  before  the  eye  and  loss  of  vision  with  the  headache.
6  Prolapsus  ani.

■  Feeling  of  great  weight  and  heaviness  in  the  eyes,  with  in-

tense headache.
Pressive  pinching  pain  in  the  inner  half  of  the  right  eyeball,

gradually  ceasing  on  motion  in  the  open  air.
I  I  Drawing  pain  in  r.  eye.
I  I  Stitches  in  the  eyes.


ARNICA  MONTANA.

■  Shooting  tearing  pains  in  both  eyes  and  surrounding  parts;

<  in  bed  and  by  warmth, d  Ophthalmia.
I  1  Burning  in  the  eyes.
I  Insufficiency  of  the  superior  oblique  muscle  of  the  left  eye.

■  Traumatic  muscular  paralysis in  a  robust  man  twenty-five

years  old.

■  Double  vision  and  vertigo  on  looking  downward,  carries  his

head  somewhat  forward  and  turned  to  the  right, d  Trau-
matic muscular  paralysis.

■  All high  objects  appear  to  lean  forward  and  about  to  fall

upon  him. d  Traumatic  muscular  paralysis.
Pupils  first  contracted,  twenty-four  hours  later  dilated.

■  Contraction  of  pupils  with  cloudiness  of  head.

■  Dilated  pupils,  with  sensitiveness  to  light.

I  I  Right  eye  projects  from  head  and  looks  larger  than  the  left.
Eyes  protrude,  staring,  denoting  anguish.
I  I  Eyes  sunken.

■  Eyes  dull,  expression  stupid. ^Typhus.

■  Congestion  to  eyes;  balls  blood-shot.

■  Eyes  very  red. ^Pneumonia.

■  Eyeball  resembled  a  piece  of  raw  flesh.

■  Conjunctiva much reddened; photophobia. ^Rheumatic

fever.

■  ■Inflammation  of  eyes,  with  suggillations  after  mechanical

injuries.

■  Subconjunctival  ecchymosis,  resulting  from  whooping-cough

or  from  injuries.
Rheumatic  iritis,  marked  by  much  lachrymation,  photophobia
and  redness,  with  shooting  and  tearing  pains  in  and  around
the  eye  ; <  at  night  and  by  warmth.

■  ■Retinal  hemorrhage;  expedites  absorption  of  clots.
I  I  Amblyopia  after  a  blow  on  the  head.

■  Relaxed  condition  of  blood-vessels  and  too  fluid  condition  of

blood  predisposing  to  hemorrhages. 6  Whooping-cough.

■  Traumatic  ulceration,  with  much  hemorrhage  into  the  anterior

chamber.

■  Lachrymation,  shooting  and  tearing  pains  in  both  eyes  and  in

the  surrounding  parts ; <  in  bed  and  by  warmth.

■  Considerable  lachrymation. d  Ophthalmia.
I  I  Sharp  fine  stitches  in  the  inner  canthi.

I  I  Itching  in  the  canthi.

■  Severe  ciliary  neuralgia;  head  hot,  body  cool. ^Iritis.

I  Sensation  of  oppression  and  drooping  in  eyelids  as  if  they

could  not  be  raised.
Difficult  and  painful  motion  of  eyelids,  they  are  swollen,  and

balls  feel  as  if  excoriated ;  eyes  and  lids  red ; <  closing,

>>  opening  the  eyes.


ARNICA  MONTANA.  8

I  (Edema  of  dry,  hot,  inflamed  lids,  with  much  subconjunctival

suggillation. 6  Iritis.
Margin  of  upper  lids  painful  when  lids  are  moved,  as  if  they

were  dry  and  slightly  sore.
llA  variety  of  eye  troubles  resulting  from  blows  and  various

injuries ; sometimes  applied  locally  (tincture  diluted  with

water)  and  sometimes  given  internally.

■  Bruised  iris  after  cataract  operations.

■  Traumatic  mydriasis.

Traumatic  ulceration,  with  much  hemorrhage  into  the  anterior

chamber.
I  Dull  pain  over  eyes  even  when  not  using  them.  ^Asthenopia.
I  I  On  the  left  orbital  ridge  very  painful, intermitting dull

pressure.
I  I  Cramp-like  pressive  pricking  under  the  left  eye  on  the  nasal

bone,  extending  over  the  eyeball.
®  Hearing  and  Ears. Great  sensitiveness  to  loud  sounds,  with

pain  in  ears.
I  Noises  in  the  ear  caused  by  rush  of  blood  to  the  head ;  with

great  sensitiveness  to  sound.

■  Buzzing  and  humming  before  the  ears  with  difficult  hearing.

6  Meningitis  infantum ;  sequel.
llHard  hearing  from  concussions.

■  Deafness  after  typhus.

Rushing  in  ears  with  deafness  of  r.,  and  stitches  through  1.  ear.
Pain  internally  in  cartilage  of  1.  ear,  as  if  the  parts  had  been
bruised  or  contused.

■  Bruised  pain  in  ears,  stitches  in  and  behind  ears;  ears  very

dry.
Feeling  of  heat  externally  in  left  ear  and  cheek.

■  Suppurating  otitis  with  stupor.

■  After  suppuration  of  internal  ears, d  Typhus.
Discharge  of  blood  from  the  ear.

■  Swelling  of  parotid  gland. ^Measles.
^  Smell  and  Nose. ■  Swelling  of  the  nose.

■  Sneezes  twenty  or  thirty  times  with  a  violent  slinging  motion

of  the  head,  until  sinking  on  the  bed  exhausted  ;  hardly  hav-
ing recovered  his  breath  another  attack  follows.
I  I  Nose  pains  from  above  down  as  after  a  violent  fall  on  it.

■  ■Epistaxis.

■  ■Nosebleed: preceded by  tingling; ■copious after every

exertion; ■■from  mechanical  causes; ■after  washing  the
face; ■■whooping-cough;  ■■typhus;  ■blowing  nose.

■  Ulcerated  nostrils.

Nose  cold  but  internally  hot ;  or  with  dry  heat  of  the  face.

■  End  of  nose  cold. ^Pneumonia.
Pain  in  glabella,  over  the  root  of  nose.


I  ARNICA  MONTANA.

■Discharge  of  several  drops  of  thin  blood  from  nose  on  first
blowing  it  in  morning.

■  Frequent  blowing  of  nose  viith.  traces  of  blood.

^  Face. ■Right  cheek  hanging,  mouth  drawn  to  the  left  side.
d  Apoplexy.

■  When  breathing,  cheek  blown  up,  expanded. ^Apoplexy.
Countenance  much  sunken.

■  Face  rather  pale  and  a  sense  of  chilliness  rather  than  of  heat.

d  Chronic  headache.

■  Pale,  sunken  ;  sallow. 6  Cholera  infantum.

■  Complexion  earthy,  looks  unhealthy. /?  Diarrhoea.

Dry  heat  in  face  toward  evening,  extending  as  far  as  behind
ears,  without  any  thirst,  nose  being  quite  cold.

■  Redness  and  burning  in  one  cheek,  otherwise  cool  or  at  any

rate  not  hot.

■  Face  deep  red,  almost  as  red  as  mahogany, d  Typhus.

■  Face  hot  and  red,  with  cold  legs. 6  Meningitis  infantum.

■  Face  and  forehead  hot. 6  Apoplexy.

■  The  puffed  cheeks  are  highly  reddened. ^Apoplexy. ^
Swollen  cheeks,  with  throbbing  and  stinging  pain.

Red  swelling  of  right  cheek,  with  throbbing  and  pinching  pain  ;
swollen  lips  and  great  heat  in  the  head,  with  cold  body.
^  Lower  Part  of  Face. Lips  burn ;  are  swollen  and  cracked.

■  Lower  lip  trembles, d  Typhus.

Bruised  pain  in  (right)  articulation  of  jaw,  from  motion,  early

in  morning.
Lower  jaw  hanging.

I  I  Burning  heat  in  lips  with  moderate  warmth  of  the  body.
Pimples  on  upper  lip.
Chapped  lips.

Swollen  lips  with  heat  in  head.
^o  Teeth  and  Gums. ■  ■Toothache  after  operation,  plugging,  etc.
Excruciating  pains,  cutting,  tearing  in  all  teeth  of  right  upper

jaw,  radiating  to  ear ;  worse  from  external  warmth  or  from

inhaling  fresh  air.
Tooth  feels  as  if  forced  out  of  its  socket ;  throbbing  toothache.

■  Gums  sore,  swollen. ^Teething  children.

■  Beating  and  tingling  in  the  gums, d  Toothache.
Toothache  as  if  the  teeth  had  been  bitten  out,  sprained,  were

wabbling,  throbbing ;  the  teeth  feel  as  if  they  were  pressed
out  by  the  blood  rushing  toward  them ;  they  are  then  more
painful  when  touched.
Toothache  and  swelling  of  the  gums  on  the  left  upper  jaw.
"  Taste,  Speech,  Tongue. Taste :  putrid ;  of  rotten  eggs ;  bitter.

■  Dry  tongue  and  disinclination  to  talk. ^Typhus.

■  Dry  almost  black  tongue. ^Typhus.

■  Tongue  coated  yellow  with  bitter  taste.

■  In  morning  taste  of  rotten  eggs.  '


ARNICA  MONTANA.  10

Biting  sensation  on  the  tongue,  with  soreness,  burning,  and

stinging  in  the  back  part  of  the  throat.
Violent  burning  from  the  fauces  through  the  oesophagus  to  the

stomach.
I  Tongue:  coated  white; 8  dry,  with  a  brown  streak  down  the

middle, d  Typhus.
Tongue  dry  or  yellow-coated. 6  Dyspepsia.
B  Tongue  coated  white,  with  a  good  appetite  and  good  taste.
^^  Inner  Mouth. Il Putrid  smell  from  mouth. ^Typhus,
i  I  Saliva  diminished.

■  Spits  sometimes  a  little  blood. ^Typhus.
I  Mouth  dry,  with  much  thirst.

I  I  Burning  scraping  in  mouth  and  oesophagus  ;  increased  saliva.
^^  Palate  and  Throat. Stinging  in  back  of  throat  between  acts

of  deglutition.
I  Chronic  pains  in  fauces  and  larynx,  worse  for  a  long time

after  an  animated  talk.
Burning  in  the  throat  when  swallowing.
Pain  in  fauces  as  if something  hard  or  rough  were  lodged

there ;  afternoon,  lying  down.
I  I  Scraping  burning  from  throat  to  stomach,  which  became  a

troublesome  pressure  in  stomach.
Swallowing  almost  always  improves.
I  I  Swallowing  is  prevented  by  a  sort  of  nausea  as  if  the  food

would  not  go  down.

^*  Appetite,  Thirst,  Desires,  Aversions, i  Appetite  disturbed,

eating  increases  the  pain, d  Chronic  attacks  of  headache.

■  Appetite  lessened. ^Diarrhoea. ^Myalgia.

Loss  of  appetite  and  sourness  of  stomach  of  brandy  drinkers,
and  creates  a  disgust  for  brandy.

■  Total  want  of  appetite  for  ten  days,  loathing  the  very  sight  of

food.
Aversion  :  to  meat ;  broth  ;  milk  ;  smoking  tobacco ;  brandy.
I  I  Thirst  for  cold  water,  without  fever. See  40.
Thirst  without  any  external  heat,  the  pupils  being  little  capable

of  dilatation.

■  Constant  desire  for  drinks,  but  knows  not  for  what,  as  all

drinks  are  offensive, d  Diarrhoea.
Longing  for  vinegar  or  sour  things  ;  for  alcoholic  drinks.
^^  Eating  and  Drinking. ■After  eating,  distress  in  epigastrium.

■  Vomiting  of  food,  obstinate  constipation  and  restless,  sleepless

nights, d  Concussion.

During  dinner,  one  cheek  hot.

After  eating :  feels  worse ;  distress  in  epigastrium  (after  a
blow) ;  repletion,  and  colic-like  pressure  in  several  places  in
abdomen  and  sides  ;  fullness  in  pit  of  stomach  ;  pressure  on
a  little  spot ;  migraine ;  toothache  ;  indolent  feeling  in  legs.


-^l  ARNICA  MONTANA.

After  too  copious  a  meal  vertigo  with  nausea,  obscuration  of

sight.
After  drinking:  chill  increased; I  vomits;  drinks  much,  and

then  vomits.
''  Nausea  and  Vomiting, i Hiccough, d  Meningitis.

1 1  Eructations:  frequent;  empty;  bitter.

I  Putrid  eructations ^  Uterine  prolapsus. ^Diarrhoea.

Eructations  like  rotten  eggs  in  the  morning.

I  Belches  after  coughing.

Extreme  nausea.

I  Nausea  in  epigastrium, d  Uterine  prolapsus.

1  I  Nausea,  burning  scratching  in  the  throat ;  general  relaxation
during  forenoon.

■  Empty  retching,  ineffectual  efforts  to  vomit.

Retching  at  night ;  vomiting  however  does  not  come  on ;  in
the  pit  of  the  stomach  there  is  a  weight  as  of  a  lump.

Vomits :  the  least  food  taken ;  bitter,  yellow  bile ;  coagulated
blood.
- 1 1  Vomiting  of  dark  red  coagula,  mouth  bitter ;  general  sore-
ness, d  After  injuries.  .
^^  Scrobiculum  and  Stomacll. ■  Stomach  distended  with  wind  ;
pressure  on  prsecordia,  oppression  of  chest.

Pain  in  stomach  as  if  its  coats  were  spasmodically  drawn  to-
gether ;  >  by  eating.  i • ■  i.  ^

Spasmodic  contraction  of  stomach  causes  a  general  pam.  Out
mostly  in  posterior  wall,  with  a  sensation  as  if  wall  of  sto-
mach would  be  forcibly  pressed  toward  spine,  and  as  if  spine
would  be  made  painful  from  that  place  downward.
Pinching  and  pressure  in  stomach,  extended  through  bowels  as
a  constriction,  with  much  movement.

■  Pinching,  spasmodic  griping  in  stomach.
Heaviness  and  pressure  in  the  stomach.

■  Pressive  cutting  pains  in  epigastrium,  with  nausea  and  retch-

ing, d  After  blows  on  stomach.
Soreness  in  stomach  with  putrid  eructations,  like  rotten  eggs.

■  Feeling  of  repletion in stomach  with  loathing. ^Angina

pectoris.
Sensation  of  hunger  in  the  stomach.
I  I  Aching  or  burning  distress  in  pit  of  stomach,  epigastrium

distended  ;  feels  worse  from  pressure  ; ■  Ifoul  belching.
I  I  Easy  and  rapid  transfer  of  cerebral  irritation  to  the  stomach,

ending  in  nausea,  retching  and  vomiting. 6  Megrim.
1  I  Much  mucus  in  throat  and  stomach.

■  ■Dyspepsia. ^  Prolapsus  ani.

1^  Hypochondria. Severe  pressure  at  epigastrium.

Pressive  cutting  pains  in  epigastrium,  with  nausea  and  retching.

■  Sensible  to  pressure  in  region  of  liver. 6  Stupor.^

■  Stitches  in  region  of  liver ;  painful  when  turning  in  bed.


ARNICA  MONTANA.  12

Pressure:  in  region  of  liver;  like  a  stone,  both  during  inspira-
tion and  expiration ;  felt  lying  on  the  left  side.

Pressing  in  region  of  left  ribs  below  the  heart,  daj  and  night.

I  Pain  and  fullness  in  right  hypochondrium  from  a  blow.

I  Stitches  in  splenic  region,  with  soreness  on  pressure.
d  Splenitis,  in  intermittent  fevers.

I  I  Stitches  under  false  ribs,  left  side,  interrupting  breathing
when  standing.
^^  Abdomen, Sharp  thrusts  through  abdomen  from  one  side  to
the  other.

Pain  around  navel  when  moving.

I  Dull,  heavy  pain  in  left  hypogastrium,  followed  in  a  few  hours
by  a  copious  discharge, d  Dysentery.

■  Seized  in  the  middle  of  the  night  with  violent  cutting  and

burning  pains  in  hypogastrium,  mostly  left ;  pains  intermit-
ting, ceasing  after  15  to  20  minutes, d  Dysentery.

Colic  resembling  dysentery,  a  kind  of  grinding  deep  in  the
hypogastrium,  within  the  hips  on  both  sides,  accompanied
by  nausea  and  slumber.

Intermittent  tearing  in  left  half  of  pubic  eminence.

Colic  with  strangury.

Swashing  in  abdomen  as  of  water.

I  I  Pains  in  abdomen  and  headache, d  Angina  pectoris.

Right  side  of  abdomen  hard,  swollen,  with  pain  as  if  cutting
into  a  wound  when  touched.

lAbdomen  bloated, d  Diarrhoea.

I  Hard  swelling  of  right  side  of  abdomen,  with  severe  pain
when  touched ;  >  by  escape  of  flatus.

■  Tympanitic  distension  of  abdomen,  frequent  urging  to  stool.
^°  Rectum  and  Stool. '  '  Constricting  cramps in  rectum  while

standing.
I  I  Painful  pressure  in  rectum.

■  Ineffectual  urging  to  stool.

■  Frequent  urging  to  stool,  with  severe  pressure  at  the  anus.

d  Dysentery.

■  Tenesmus  with  severe  pains. ^Dysentery.

■  Inclination  to  evacuate  bowels  recurring  every  four  or  five

hours,  the  tenesmus  being  severe  during  stool, d  Dysentery.
Sensation  of  rumbling  in  the  rectum  for  three  days,  not  attended
by  the  usual  stools.

■  lOifensive  flatus  ;  smelling  like  rotten  eggs.

■  Frequent  small  stools. ^Dysentery.

Frequent  stool ;  after  every  stool  is  obliged  to  lie  down.
Nightly  diarrhoea,  with  pressive  colic,  as  if  from  flatulence.
Diarrhoeic  stool  with  some  cutting  in  intestines.
Frequent  small  stools  consisting  only  of  mucus.
Diarrhoeic  stools  yellowish  or  sometimes  bloody.

■  Diarrhoea,  stools  resembling  brown  yeast.


-^3  ARNICA  MONTANA.

I  1  Painless  stools  of  undigested  food.

■  Involuntary  discharge  of  feces  during  stupor,  f/ iyphus.
6  Meningitis  infantum  (in  later  stages).

I I  Stool  involuntary  during  sleep  (also  urine).  ^Fevers.
^Apoplexy,  etc. ,i  i v

Stools  :  of  undigested  food ;  bloody  ;  purulent ;  bloody,  slimy
mucous,  with  urging  and  violent  bellyache ;  dark,  bloody
mucous,  with  sore,  bruised  feeling  in  abdomen ;  brown,  fer-
mented (like  yeast);  averse  to  food;  fetid  breath;  very
offensive,  papescent,  at  times  involuntary ;  involuntary  dur-
ing sleep  ;  frequent,  small,  mucous  ;  fluid,  foamy,  terribly
offensive,  acrid.  .  v n

Tenesmus  followed  by  a  copious  thin  or  pap-like  sourish-smell-
ing stool,  giving  great  relief.  _

I  I  Urging  to  stool  every  half  hour,  nothing  but  slime  being

iFrequent,  fluid,  frothy,  acrid,  very  fetid  stools,  with  much
flatulence ;  girl,  set.  2i.

■  Scanty,  slimy,  dark  colored,  bloody  stools. ^Dysentery.

I  Dark,  bloody  mucous  stools,  with  sore,  bruised  feeling  m
abdomen. ^Dysentery.

■  Excessive  pain  and  discharges  of  pure  blood  and  mucus.

6  Dysentery.

■  Copious  discharges  of  dark,  venous  blood,  amounting  in  quan-

tity at  a  time  to  about  a  quart,  came  on  at  intervals  of  about
four  hours,  greatly  relieving  pain  in  abdomen  for  an  hour
or  two. ^Dysentery.

■  ■  Dysentery  with  ischuria,  or  tenesmus  of  neck  of  bladder  with

fruitless  urging.

■  ■Most  marked  indication  is  the  long  intervals  between  the

stools,  namely  from  four  to  six.  hours. 6  Dysentery.

■  Stool  tardy. ^Apoplexy.

■  Obstinate  constipation  after  a  blow  on  epigastrium.

■  Constipation. (9  Pneumonia. ^Paralysis.
Before  stool :  abdomen  distended.

During  stool:  rumbling  and  pressure  in  abdomen; ■  urging,

tenesmus,  passing  only  slime  and  mucus.
With  slimy  stools :  bruised  pain  in  the  back.
After  stool : 1  1  must  lie  down.

■  Pain  in  the  anus  as  if  it  were  bruised, d  Dysentery.

■  Pressive  pains  in  anus  and  rectum,  mostly  in  anus. dDjs-

enterv.  ,  , ,

■  After  "suffering  much  from  hemorrhoids  a  very  troublesome

and  painful  prolapsus  of  anus  lasting  four  months.

■  After  walking  five  or  ten  minutes  the  prolapsus  protrudes  and

hinders  him  from  going  any  further,  forces  him  to  return
home  without  delay.


ARNICA  MONTANA.  14

I  During  the  headaches  the  rectum  does  not  fall  down  and  vice
versa, d  Prolapsus  ani.

I A  man  after  suifering  from  hemorrhoids  in  a  weakened  and  re-
laxed state.  6  Prolapsus  ani,
^^  Urinary  Organs.  I  Chill  followed  by  nephritic  pains,  nausea
and  vomiting,  without  relief;  the  vomiting  produces  excru-
ciating pain  in  epigastrium,  extending  to  right  hypochon-
drium  and  down  to  the  groin, d  Nephritis.

I  Piercing  pains  as  from  knives  plunged  into  the  kidneys;

chilly,  inclined  to  vomit.

■  Agonizing  pains  in  back  and  hips  as  from  passing  calculi.

d  Renal  colic.

■  Traumatic  inflammation  of  the  bladder.
IlBladder  affections  after  mechanical  injuries.
Bladder  feels  overfilled,  ineffectual  urging.
Tenesmus  of  bladder ;  urine  drops  involuntary.
IB  Tenesmus  from  spasms  of  neck  of  bladder.
Infants  scream  from  pain  in  bladder.

I I  Constant  urging  while  urine  passes  involuntary  in  drops.
1 1  Frequent  attempts  to  urinate.

I II  Has  to  wait  a  long  time  for  urine  to  pass.
1 1  Retention  of  urine  from  exertion.
1 1  Ischuria  with  dysentery.
Spasmodic  ischuria  with  hot  hoofs,  excrement  in  small  balls

(horses).
1 1  Involuntary  urination  at  night  during  sleep. ^Apoplexy.

d  Typhus,  etc.

I  Involuntary  urination  when  running.

I I  Involuntary  urination  at  night  with  a  red  sediment. 6  Par-
ralysis.

Increases  the  watery  constituents  of  the  urine.
Frequent  pale  urine.
I  Extensive  diuresis. ^Meningitis.

I  Urine in small quantity, staining napkin yellow-brown."
d  Cholera  infantum.

I  Urine  of  a  very  dark  brown  color.

I I  Urine  brown  with  lateritious  sediment.

I  Brown  clear  urine  which  immediately  becomes  whitish  and

turbid.
I  Urine  dark  brown,  scanty;  brick-dust  sediment.
I  Urine  red. ^  Liver  complaint.
I  Brick-dust  sediment  in  urine. ^Prolapsus  uteri.
I  Scanty  red  urine  very  offensive.
Urine  scanty,  infrequent ;  sometimes  frequent  urging.
I  Urine difficult, scanty,  dark,  with thick brown  sediment.

d  Nephritis.
I  Bloody  urine.
llHsematuria  from  mechanical  causes.


-^^  ARNICA  MONTANA.

1 1  Urine  thick,  with  much  pus  and  some  blood-globules,  but  no
tubes. ^Nephritis.

1 1  Urine  very  acid,  with  increase  of  specific  gravity.

Before  urination  :  agonizing  pains  in  back  and  hips  ;  pressure
in  bladder.  .

During  urination: burning pain along  perineum and dis-
charge of  pus  from  urethra. 6  After  a  fall  on  perineum.

At  the'end  of  urination  :  cutting  in  orifice  of  urethra.

After  urination :  stitches.
"  Male  Sexual  Organs. Violent  sexual  desire,  continued  erec-
tions (weak  old  man).

Violent  continued  erections  often  waking.

Feeling  of  weakness,  relaxed  testicles,  as  after  an  emission ;
early  in  bed.

Emission  of  semen  (day  or  night)  during  an  affectionate  caress.

Testes  indurated,  swollen  and  tender.

Spermatic  cords  painfully  swollen,  stitches  in  abdomen.

I  Hydrocele  caused  by  a  bruise.

llPenis  and  testicles  swollen  purple-red;  after  injuries.
Erysipelas  of  scrotum  extending  to  the  anus.

I I  Phymosis  from  friction  ;  parts  bruised  and  much  swollen.

"  Female  Sexual  Organs. ■  Pains  like  from  spraining  in  ovarian
region  (groin)  obliging  her  to  walk  bent, d  Ovarian  diseases.

■  Metrorrhagia  after  coition. ^Prolapsus  uteri.

I  Bruised  sore  feeling  remains  after  a  hurt  in  abdomen,  cannot

walk  erect. 6  Prolapsus  uteri.  _

I I  Prolapsus  uteri  caused  by  a  concussion  leaving  a  sore,  bruised
feeling  in  uterine  region,  which  prevents  her  from  walking
erect.

1  Ulcers  of  uterus  with  a  tendency  to  bleed.
Menses  generally  too  soon  ;  nausea  in  epigastrium.

■  Menses  too  frequent  and  profuse, d  Prolapsus  uteri.

■  Bloody  discharge  between  the  menstrual  periods. ^Prolap-

sus uteri.

■  Blood  bright  red  with  mixed  clots. 6  Prolapsus  uteri.

■  Uterine  hemorrhage.

Labia  painfully  swollen.  .

24  Pregnancy. iPain  between  crest  of  r.  ilium  and  sacrum  during
pregnancy.

■  It  feels  as  if  the  foetus  were  lying  crosswise.

■  ■Threatened  abortion  from  falls,  shocks,  etc.;  nervous,  ex-

cited ;  feels  bruised.
Labor-pains:  violent,  yet  they  do  but  little  good; weak,  or

ceasing,  wants  to  change  position  often ;  feels  bruised.
■Metrorrhagia  after  coition, d  During  pregnancy.

■  Constant  dribbling  of  urine  after  labor.

■  ■  Soreness  of  parts  after  labor ;  prevents  hemorrhage.


ARNICA  MONTANA.  16

I  Hemorrhages  bright  red  or  mixed  with  clots ;  head  hot,  body

cool.
I  After-pains  violent;  return  while  suckling.
Ruptured  perineum  (applied  externally).
Prophylactic  against  pyaemia  in  childbed  fever.

I  Swelling  of  mammae  from  contusions.

Mastitis  from  bruises  ;  erysipelatous  inflammation.

■  After  an  abscess  in  l;i  mamma,  the  r.  became  hard  and  tender,

the  1.  being  opened  instead  of  cured  by  inward  medicine;  the
r.  became  swollen  and  red,  pitted  on  pressure,  the  horrible
cut  with  the  knife  brought  no  matter ;  three  days  later  the
lancet  was  plunged  in  again,  pus  and  blood  came,  but  not
freely ;  toward  night  breast  got  painful,  middle  of  night  tre-
mendously swollen.  Finally  the  cut  closed,  but  left  an
angry  bright  redness  of  surrounding  skin,  which  changed  to
a  malignant  purple  hue,  the  woman  became  greatly  exhausted
and  shivered.  Arnica  lotion  relieved  at  once,  and  very  soon
there  followed  a  healthy  discharge  from  the  abscess.

I I  Sore  nipples.

■  Child  is  breathless,  bruised ;  or  the  mother  has  had  a  long,

painful  labor. 6  Asphyxia  neonatorum.
Nipples  of  child  swollen  and  tender,  Ohamom.  ;  after  pinching

by  nurses,  Arnica.
*®  Larynx  to  Bronchia. ■  Voice  deep  ;  or  low,  muttering.

Hoarseness  from  overusing  the  voice  ;  also  early  in  morning.
Raw,  scraped  sensation  along  trachea  and  bronchi.

■  Tickling  sensation  in  trachea.

When  lying  down,  crackling  sensation  in  trachea ;  evening.

■  Hoarseness of  preachers and military officers, from long

preaching  and  commanding,  also  of  conductors  from  calling
out  the  railway  stations.
1  In  throat,  sound  of  a  subdued  whistle.

■  Cough  is  difficult,  most  in  lying  position, d  Apoplexia.
*®  Respiration. ■Breath  fetid,  short,  panting.

Worse  on  inspiration  ;  better  expiration. See  28.

■  Inspiration  quick,  expiration  slow.

■  Quick  inspirations  and  expirations.

I  I  Short,  panting  breathing. ^Angina  pectoris.
Oppression  of  chest,  with  anguish  and  heat  in  head.

■  Anxiousness  and  dyspnoea;  when  getting  awake.
Dyspnoea,  head  hot,  face  red,  body  cool.

■  Dyspnoea  from  a  blow  on  the  epigastrium.

Asthma,  with  inclination  to  move  about;  sleepless,  before  mid-
night; looks  as  if  dying.

■  ■Asthma  from  fatty  degeneration  of  heart.
Suffocative  oppression  of  chest.
Children  when  angry  lose  their  breath.

2^  Cough. Dry,  short,  hacking  cough.


17  ARNICA  MONTANA.

I  Cough  produced  by  itching  irritation  in  upper  part  of  larynx,

during  siesta.
I  Constant  insupportable  tickling  in  larynx  and  trachea,  causing

cough  day  and  night, d  Pneumonia.
Tickling  in  lower  part  of  trachea,  and  dry,  hacking  cough,

most  at  night.
Dry  cough,  with  tickling  in  the  chest.

■  Constant  dry  cough,  which  shakes  the  whole  frame.

■  Child  weak,  fretful,  has  a  frequent  short  cough, d  Diarrhoea.
Cough  after  screaming  or  crying.

I  Cough excited  by  cries in children  when accompanied  by

anger  and  tossing  about.
After  gaping  he  coughs.

■  Cough  after  measles.
Cough  at  night  during  sleep.

■  Paroxysms  of  cough at night during sleep,  not  awaking.

d  Heart  disease.

■  ■Hooping  cough:  ■  ■  child  cries  before  the  paroxysm  as  though

in  fear  of  the  soreness  it  will  cause ;  cough  causes  blood-shot
eyes,  nosebleed ;  expectoration  of  foaming  blood,  or  clots  of
blood.

■  Sputa  loosened  with  difficulty.

■  Spitting  of  frothy  phlegm  with  water, d  Pneumonia.

■  Expectoration: offensive, green, purulent, blood-streaked;

■  when  loosened  must  be  swallowed;  day  and  evening  scanty,
difficult  expectoration  of  transparent,  glairy  slime,  mixed
with  black  dots,  or  bloody, d  Bronchitis.

■  Sputa  mixed  with  blood.

■  Severe  haemoptysis  in  a  phthisical patient; blood  darkish,

semi-fluid,  and  expelled  after  a  hacking  cough.

■  ■Hemorrhage  after mechanical injuries; slight  spitting  of

black,  thick,  viscid  blood,  or  bright  red,  frothy  blood,  mixed
with  mucus  and  coagula.

■  ■Haemoptysis.

During  cough:  scratching  in  throat,  tickling  in  trachea;  ■  raw-
ness, stitches  in  chest;  ■  asthma;  catching  of  breath;  con-
gestions and heat; bruised feeling in ribs; ■vomiting;

■  pressure  and  stinging  in  head;  prickling  on  the  head.
Cough,  with  stitching  in  the  sides  of  the  chest.

Cough  producing  a  feeling  in  the  ribs  as  if  all  of  them  were
bruised.
2^  Inner  Chest  and  Lungs. Great  tightness  of  chest,  with  diffi-
cult breathing.
Pressive  pain  in  (right)  chest,  at  a  small  spot,  not  increased  by
motion,  touch  or  inspiration.

■  Oppression  of  chest,  with  anguish. ^Angina  pectoris.

I  Sensation  of  an  oppressive  weight  at  upper  part  of  chest,  with
a  feeling  of  constriction  in  throat.

VOL.  II. — 2.


ARNICA  MONTANA.  18

I  Pains  in  right  side  of  chest,  dependent  on  over-exertion  of

right  arm. d  Myalgia.
I  Aching  pains  in  chest.

I  Dull  aching  pain  in  1.  chest. ^Pneumonia.
Chest  sore  when  coughing,  sputa  blood  streaked  ; cannot  raise

the  loosened  mucus.

■  Burning  or  rawness  in  the  chest.

His  chest  feels  affected,  raw  ;  his  sputa  are  sometimes  tinged
with  blood,  especially  when  walking.

I  Stitches  in  chest  (left),  worse  from  a  dry  cough; < from

motion  ; >  from  external  pressure.
•  Violent  stitches  in  middle  of  left  chest.
B Stitches  in  1.  chest  near  sternum,  during  a  deep  inhalation.

6  Angina  pectoris.

■  Stitching  pain  in  one  side  of  chest,  with  a  short  cough,  which

creates  the  pain.
IB  Pleurisy  after  mechanical  injuries;  must  continually  change
position,  bed  feels  so  hard.

I I  Pneumothorax  from  external  injuries.

I  Pneumonia  after  whooping  cough,  especially  where  there  is

much  soreness  on  coughing.
I  Chest  sore  when  coughing,  sputa  blood  streaked  ;  cannot  raise

the  loosened  mucus, d  Pneumonia, d  Pertussis.
fiAll  the  joints  of  the  bones  and  cartilages  of  the  chest  feel

painful,  as  if  they  were  sprained,  bruised;  during  motion  and

breathing.

^^  Heart,  Pulse  and  Circulation. sPain  from  liver  up  through

left  chest  and  down  left  arm ;  veins  on  hand  swollen,  purplish ;
sudden  pain,  as  if  heart  were  squeezed,  or,  as  if  it  got  a
shock, d  Angina  pectoris.

■  Region  of  base  of  heart  feels  as  if  bruised.
11"  Strain  of  the  heart,"  from  violent  running.

■  Irritable  cardiac  action. ^Myalgia.

■  ■Fatty  degeneration  of  heart.
i  Great  cardiac  distress.

■  Stitches  in  cardiac  region.

■  Painful  pricking  in  the  region  of  the  heart.

■  Stitches in heart from left to right, with fainting fits.

6  Angina  pectoris.
Heavy  breathing ;  stitches,  burning  ;  palpitation.
Congestion  to  the  head  and  chest,  with  sensation of  heat  in

these  parts,  and  coldness  of  the  rest  of  the  body.

■  Palpitation  after  almost  any  exertion; goes  off  by  rest.

■  Beating  of  heart,  more  like  a  quivering, d  Angina  pectoris.

■  Motion  of  heart  first  very  rapid,  then  suddenly  slow. ^Angina

pectoris.

■  Pulse  not  full  or  rapid,  temperature  not  increased. 6  Chronic

attacks  of  headache.


19  ARNICA  MONTANA.

■  Pulse  72,  less  frequent  and  weaker  than  usual. ^Apoplexy.

■  Full,  hard  slow  pulse, d  Typhus.

Pulse  :  accelerated,  full  hard  ; sometimes  quicker  than  beat  of

heart;  intermittent,  feeble,  hurried,  irregular;  fluttering.
1 1  Pulse,  in  rest,  below  60,  after  moving,  above  120.  d  Nephritis.
When  the  pulse  grows  slow,  it  is  weak.

■  Very  low,  weak,  rapid  pulse, d  Typhus.

I  Faintness,  feeble,  hurried  variable  pulse  and  irregular  rythm
of  heart,  horror  of  instant  death, d  With  the  cardiac  dis-
tress in  the  night.
^*'  Outer  Chest. ■  ■  Articulations  and  cartilaginous  connections  of
chest  feel  as  if  beaten,  when  moving,  breathing,  or  coughing.

I  Violent  stitches  in  middle  of  left  chest.

I  Pain  through  thorax,  stitches  with  cough,  which  increased  the
pain.

I  I  Pressive  pain  in  right  chest,  at  a  small  spot  which  remains
unaltered  either  by  motion,  contact,  or  breathing.

Pains  in  intercostal  muscles.

I  Pains  in  left  side  of  chest,  at  insertion  of  greater  and  lesser
pectorals ;  had  to  lift  heavy  weights  with  the  left  hand.
d  Myalgia.

■  Severe  pain  in  left  side  of  chest  and  abdomen  ;  pain  was  not

only  along  the  insertion  of  the  pectorals,  especially  their
lower  portion,  but  also  along  the  digitations  of  the  external
oblique  abdominis  and  serratus  magnus,  from  working  in  a
constrained  position.

Red  sweat  on  the  chest.
^^  Neck  and  Back. Weakness  of  cervical  muscles  ;  they  do  not
support  the  head  steadily.

I  Violent  spinal  pain,  as  from  sudden  rising  after  long  stooping.

Her  head  feels  so  heavy,  and  is  so  movable  from  weak,  cervi-
cal muscles,  that  it  inclines  easily  to  all  sides.

■  Great  sensibility  of  cervical  vertebrae  to  pressure, d  Conges-

tive chills.
Great  soreness  of  the  back.
I  I  Fullness  and  pressure  in  lumbar  region.
I  Sensation  of  a  great  weight  across  the  lower  part  of  loins,  and

feeling  of  being  drawn  in,  as  if  a  cord  was  tightly  drawn

across.
Tingling  in  the  back.
Spine  pains,  as  if  not  capable  of  carrying  the  body.

■  Pain  in  region  of  lumbar  vertebrae. ^Nephritis.

Small  of  back  pains  ;  stitches  when  coughing,  breathing  deeply,

or  walking.
I  I  Right  scapula  and  small  of  the  back  painful,  as  if  beaten.
A  peculiar  painful  sensation  extending  down  back,  as  comes

sometimes  from  continued  stooping  in  hard  work,  in  rising

from  bed  in  morning.


ARNICA  MONTANA.  20

Pressive  pain  between  scapulae,  which  seemed  to  extend  from

posterior  wall  of  stomach.
Pain  in  right  scapula  toward  the  back,  as  after  a  violent  blow

or  fall.
The  small  of  the  back  is  painful,  as  if  it  had  been  beaten.
Bruised  feeling  in  whole  body,  especially  in  region  of  dorsal

and  cervical  vertebrae, and  great  weakness  of  muscles  of

neck,  pain  as  of  a  bruise,  and  compression  of  chest.
^^  Upper  Limbs. I  l  Violent  twitching  pain  from  shoulder-joint  to

middle  finger.
Anterior  surface  of  arms  feels  bruised.
I  Arms  feel  weary,  as  if  bruised  by  blows  ;  he  was unable  to

bend  his  fingers  inward.
I  Cannot  lift  right  arm. ^Apoplexy.

■  Sensation  as  if  joints  of  arms  and  wrists  were  sprained.
iPains  in  arms  and  hands,  as  if  knocked  against  something

hard.
Forearm  and  hand  much  swollen  and  red,  surface  covered  with

vesicles.
I  I  Slight  cracking  and  sensation  of  dislocation  in  right  wrist

when  moving  the  hand.
Left  wrist  powerless ;  feels  as  if  he  could  not  use  the  arm.
Tearing,  twitching,  drawing  pain  during  rest  on  ulnar  side  of

dorsum  of  right  hand.
I  I  Sharp  drawing  in  outer  half  of  back  of  right  hand.
I  I  Veins  of  hand  distended,  with  full,  strong  pulse. See  29.
Erysipelatous  inflammation,  left  hand  dark  blue,  and  covered

with  large  and  small  vesicles,  which  gave  skin  the  appear-
ance of  a  rhinoceros  hide.
Drawing  in  right  thumb.

Acute  bruised  pain  in  the  balls  of  the  thumbs.
I  I  Cramps  in  fingers  of  left  hand, d  Angina  pectoris.
lEnds  of  fingers  cold. ^Pneumonia.
Violent  twitching  pain,  extending  to  the  middle  finger.
Pressive  pain  in  the  joints  of  the  right  ring  and  little  fingers.
Tearing  in  tips  of  the  left  ring  and  little  finger.
Drawing  pain  in  skin  of  dorsum  of  1.  little  finger.
Itching  pimple  between  thumb  and  index  finger  ;  when  touched,

a  fine  stinging  pain,  as  if  a  splinter  were  in  it.
^^  Lower  Limbs. Abscess  of  psoas  muscle.

■  Drawing  pressive  pains  in  left  hip-joint,  thigh  being  extended,

when  sitting.

I  Hips  pain  as  if  sprained.

I  Boring,  tearing  pains  shifting  from  right  hip-joint  to  various
parts  ;  worse  at  night,  cannot  find  an  easy  position  ;  bear-
able during  day,  and  during  motion, d  After  a  sprain.

■  Formication ;  lame  feeling;  must  often  change  position,  bed


21  ARNICA  MONTANA.

or  chair  seems  so  hard, d  After  exertion,  long  marches,  etc.

d  Sciatica.
Pain  in  thighs  when  walking,  as  from  a  blow,  or  contusion.
Thighs  livid,  with  blue  yellow  marks,  as  if  black  and  blue.
I  Blue  spots  appeared  on  the  thighs,  which  felt  as  if  bruised

when touched ; these spots were more numerous after

mental  emotion  or  exertion.

■  Carbuncle  on  the  thigh.

Large  open  inflamed  carbuncle,  red ;  on  inner  side  of  1.  thigh.

I  I  Knee-joints suddenly bend when standing, feet numb,

insensible.
Prick  in  the  knee  when  touched.

■  Complains  of  a  feeling  as  if  the  knee  were  dislocated,  and  of

a  paralytic  weakness  of  the  whole  limb. ^  After  an  injury.

I I  Hygroma  patellae.
White  swelling  of  knee.

Intense  burning  at  a  small  spot  on  outside  of  left  tibia.
I  Pain  in  calf  of  r.  leg,  as  from  a  blow,  with  lassitude  of  legs.
I  The  right  lower  limb  cannot  be  used  as  usual. ^Apoplexy.
Tingling  in  the  legs.

■  Arthritic  pains  in  foot,  worse  toward  evening;  fears  passers

by  may  strike  it;  big' toe-joint  red,  feels  sprained.

■  Arthritic  pain  in  foot,  with  a  little  fever  toward  evening.
Tearing  pain  in  r.  external  malleolus,  and  on  dorsum  of  foot.
Drawing  in  outer  half  of  back  of  left  foot.

Want  of  power  in  ankles  and  feeling  of  a  heavy  weight  in  each

instep.
Tarsal-joint  pains  as  if  sprained.
Violent  burning  in  feet.

■  Feet  feel  tired  or  inflamed  after  a  walk.

■  Hot  erysipelatous  inflammation  and  painfulness  of  foot.

■  ■A  splinter  ran  deep  into  the  sole  months  ago,  producing  a

great  deal  of  proud  flesh,  came  out  after  inner  and  outer  use.

When  walking,  on  raising  1.  foot,  and  bending  1.  ankle,  crawl-
ling  in  outer  half  of  1.  sole,  as  if  the  nerve  were  pulled.

Tearing  in  left  little  toe.

■  Corns  (pare  them  and  apply  externally).

■  Young  lady  subject  to  headache  and  neuralgia;  when  head-

ache got  better,  the  same  pain  would  come  on  in  some  small
spot  on  lower  extremities.
^^  Limbs  in  General. Heaviness  in  the  limbs.

■  ■Paralytic  pain  in  all  joints  during  motion,  as  if  bruised.

■  Limbs  as  if  bruised  at  rest  or  in  motion;  painful  concussion

from  jolting  of  carriage  or  stepping  firmly.

■  Soreness  in  limbs. ^Meningitis.

■  Limbs  ache  as  if  beaten. ^  Intermittents.

■  Tearing,  with  soreness,  numbness,  swelling,  or  tingling.

^®  Motion. Rest. Position. Motion :  dizziness  and  sick  sto-


ARNICA  MONTANA.  22

mach  <  ;  aching  and  pains  in  forehead  <  ;  burning  in
brain  ■<  ;  pains  in  chest  <C  ;  pulse  120 ;  paralytic  pains  in
all  joints  <  ;  bruised  feeling  of  limbs;  chills  <.

I  In  walking,  feeble,  as  if  suddenly  blighted  with  old  age.

Walking  :  in  open  air  relieves  pinching  in  right  eyeball ;  pres-
sure in  forehead ;  when  running,  urine  involuntary ;  small
of  back  pains  ;  thighs  pain  as  from  a  blow  ;  crawling  outer
half  left  sole ;  vertigo ;  prolapsus  ani ;  cannot  think  after
walk  in  open  air.

Walks  bent:  prolapsus  uteri.

Running :  involuntary  urination.

Rising  :  dizziness  and  sick  stomach  ■<.

Sitting  :  pain  in  left  hip-joint.

■  Undisturbed  horizontal  posture  alleviated some, and  a  few

hours  of  sleep  made  it  to  disappear,  d  Chronic  attacks  of
headache.

Ascending :  pressive  pain  in  forehead.

Standing  :  cramps  in  rectum.

Must  lie  down  :  after  stools  ;  from  weakness.

Lying :  dizziness  and  sick  stomach  >  ;  on  left  side,  pain  in  re-
gion of  liver ;  stinging  in  skin ;  feels  hot,  etc. ;  must  lie
stretched  out  on  back;  must  lie  down  after  stool ;  pain  in
fauces  as  from  something  rough ;  relieves  vertigo ;  must  lie
stretched  out  on  back,  megrim ;  with  head  low,  iritis  is
better.

Better  when  lying  on  the  side  or  on  the  back.

At  rest :  burning  in  brain  >  ;  pain  in  eyes  <  ;  pulse  60 ;
limbs  feel  bruised.

Turning  in  bed  :  liver  painful.

IB  Complaints  from  exertion:  hoarse,  overusing  the  voice;  pal-
pitation; formication,  lame;  paralysis;  bruised  feeling;  sci-
atica ;  weary,  faint ;  retained  urine ;  nose  bleed.

■  Every  exertion  :  walking,  stooping,  talking,  increases  the  pain

to  an  almost  insufferable  extent, d  Chronic  attacks  of  head-
ache.
Inclination  for  motion :  asthma,  etc.,  boring  pains,  better.

■  Better  with  the  head  low  or  in  a  horizontal  position;  worse

rising  from  a  seat  or  assuming  an  erect  position.
Complaints  when  overhurried :  urine  involuntary  when run-
ning, etc.
36  JJerveg, Twitching  of  the  muscles.

■  ■Head  feels  hot  to  him,  body  feels  chilly  and  cold,  between

frequent  attacks  of  violent  convulsions. ^  After  Aeon.

■  Tired  feeling,  as  after  hard  work  or  as  if  beaten, d  Intermit-

tent.
General  weakness.

■  Great  weakness. ^Apoplexy.


23  ARNICA  MONTANA.

■  Great  weakness  followed  by  fearful  exhaustion  and  shivering,

after  the  repeated  useless  lancing  of  abscesses  of  mammae.
I  Weary,  bruised,  sore,  great  weakness,  must  lie  down,  yet  bed
feels  too  hard.

■  Weakness,  weariness, sensation as of  being  bruised;  these

symptoms  oblige  him  to  lie  down.
iMuch  reduced  by  the  long  continuance  of  intermittent.
General  relaxation  during  the  forenoon,  Avith  nausea.
General  fatigue,  lassitude  and  sleepiness.
I  Went  to  bed  languid  and  exhausted.
Lassitude  and  sluggishness  of  the  whole  body  ;  scarcely  able  to

stand.
I  Loss  of  strength  and  of  all  sense  of  health.
Great  sinking  of  strength.

■  Great  prostration. /?  Typhus.

■  ■General  sinking  of  strength;  he  can  scarcely  move  a  limb.

d  Typhus.

■  Paralysis  depending  on  extravasation  of  blood  in  the  brain.
Paralysis  :  generally  painful ;  left-sided  (after  apoplexy) ;  par-
tial, from  concussion  of  the  spine  or  brain.

^^  Sleep. '  I  Frequent  yawning  in  evening,  without  sleepiness.

■  [Sleepiness  ;  too  sleepy  early  in  the  evening.

■  Languor,  drowsiness, d  Cholera  infantum.

■  Drowsy  state. ^Meningitis  infantum.

■  ■While  answering,  falls  into  a  deep sleep  before  finishing.

d  Typhus.

■  Somnolence.

Is  often  kept  awake  until  2  to  3  a.m.  from  heat,  restlessness
and  constant  desire  to  change  position ;  or  from  prickling
stinging  biting,  now  here  now  there  on  the  body.

Sleep  restless,  frequently  waked  by  dreams.

■  Restless  sleep, t' Apoplexy.

■  Sleep  at  night  restless  and  interrupted, d  Diarrhoea.
Unrefreshing  sleep,  loud  blowing  breathing.

Lies  preferably  with  head  low  or  horizontally.

■  Sleepless  all  night,  has  to  lay  the  limb  now  here  now  there,

but  no  relief. 6  Caries.

■  Passes  many  nights  sleepless. ^Prolapsus  ani.

■  Cannot  fall  asleep,  and  while  lying  awake  fantastical  visions.
During  sleep  ■loud  talking,  whimpering,  loud  blowing  in  and

expirations  ;  feces  and  urine  pass  involuntarily  ;  head  jerked
backwards.

■  Loud  crying  out  in  sleep, d  Meningitis  infantum.
Involuntary  expulsion  of  faeces  while  asleep.

I  Sleep  was  much  disturbed.

On  falling  asleep  :  starts  as  in  fright ;  is  aroused  by  heat.

■  Frequent  starting  in  sleep, d  Meningitis  infantum.


ARNICA  MONTANA.  24

■  Falling  asleep,  lying  on  one  side,  he  has  pleasant  dreams,  but

awakes  with  a  violent  pain  in  the  shoulder-joint  and  arms  ;
hands  fall  asleep.

■  Falling  asleep  while  lying  on  back  ;  awful  dreams  of  robbers

and  murderers,  and  of  being  buried  alive,  suffocation,  etc.
I  Dreams:  vivid;  frightful,  of  graves, black  dogs,  struck by

lightning,  etc ;  unrefreshing,  anxious,  with  talking,  d  Typhus.
iMany  vivid  dreams. ^Meningitis  infantum.
1  I  Dreams  repeat ;  had  the  very  same  often  before.
1  Awoke  six  or  seven  times,  each  time  from  dreaming  that  he

was  dying,  his  bed  surrounded  by  friends,  to  take  their  last

leave.
iWhen  getting  awake,  they  stare  and  look  about  anxiously,

with  small  pupils, d  Meningitis  infantum.
I  On  waking  in  the  morning,  paralyzed  on  r.  side.
I  Worse  after  along  sleep,  or  on  awaking.

lEarly  after  getting  up,  he  dare  not  at  once  read  or  work  men-
tally, without  getting  a  spell, d  Megrim.
38  Time. Night : retching  ; urine,  stool  involuntary  ;  coughs  in

sleep  ;  boring,  tearing,  right  hip-joint.
Night : violent,  cutting  pains  in  hypogastrium ; involuntary

urination  ;  cough  with  heart  disease.
12  P.M.  :  sweat,  with  headache.
Early  morning  :  fullness  in  head. See  5. Great  thirst ;  dry

heat.
Morning:  nose  bleeds  on  blowing;  taste  of  rotten  eggs.
Forenoon: I  I  nausea;  chilly.
Noon :  one  cheek  warm  during  dinner.
Afternoon:  pain  in  fauces  as  of  something  hard,  rough.
Day  and  evening  :  expectoration  scanty.
Towards  evening :  headache  •<  ;  arthritic  pains  <C.
Evening:  dry  heat  of  face;  crackling  in  trachea;  sleepy  too

early.
Evening  until  midnight :  cough.
Night  and  morning :  burning  in  brain.
Day  and  night :  cough.
^'  Temperature  and  Weather. Inclination  for  open  air ;  better

m  open  air.
I  Sudden  cooling  after  overheating,  followed  by  a  consumptive

cough.
Wants  his  cold  feet  covered.

■  Worse  in  damp,  cold  weather. ^Paralysis.

■  Temperature  changeable,  one  time  cold,  and  another  warm.

d  Diarrhoea.
I  All  the  while  a  longing  to  be  in  the  free  open  country  air.

■  All  summer  and  autumn. ^Dysentery.

■Washing  the  whole  body  with  cold  water  is  the  only  thing
that  gives  relief  for  the  time, d  Prolapsus  ani.


25  ARNICA  MONTANA.


40


Chilly  when  uncovering.
Fever, si  Frequent  violent  attacks  of  chills. ^Nephritis.
B Chilly  morning  or  forenoon;  before  chill,  yawning,  thirst  for

large  quantities  of  water  ;  drawing  in  periosteum.
Chill  most  in  evening,  with  much  thirst  already  before  the  chill.
Chill  after  every  sleep.
Chill  felt  worse  in  pit  of  stomach.
Chill  one-sided ;  chill  on  side  lain  on.
During  chill,  thirst,  head  and  face  hot.

■  Violent  chill,  lasting  six  hours,  succeeded  by  fever  for  eight

hours,  both  returning  every  day  towards  evening.  0  Dysen-
tery,
a  Shivering  over  whole  body  and  head,  at  same  time  heat  in
head  and  redness  and  heat  in  face,  accompanied  by  a  cool-
ness of  the  hands  and  a  feeling  as  of  the  hips,  back  and
anterior  surface  of  arms  being  bruised.

■  Chilly  internally,  with  external  heat.

1 1  Chilly,  with  heat  and  redness  of  one  cheek.

1 1  Head  feels  hot  to  him,  body  chilly  and  cold; >  between

frequent  attacks  of  convulsions.
I  Upper  part  of  body  warm,  lower  part  cold. 6  Paralysis.
BHead  and  breast  warm,  abdomen  and  limbs  cold. 6  Cholera

infantum.
Heat  of  upper  part  of  body,  coldness  of  lower.
I  Head  alone,  or  face  alone  hot,  body  cold.
I  Great  internal  heat;  hands  and  feet  being  cold.
I  Dry, general heat after waking; early morning, violent

thirst ; uncovering  makes him chilly  ; chilly  even  when

moving  in  bed.
I  Dry  heat  over  the  whole  body  after  waking  early  in  morning.
I  Heat,  with  indifference,  stupor,  drinks  less. ^Typhus.
- B Flushes  of  heat,  with  thirst. ^Typhus.
Continuous  heat,  with  such  weakness  that  when  attempting  to

sit  up  he  faints.
Sweat :  sour  or  offensive ;  sometimes  cold,
i  Offensive  odor  of  the  moist  skin  ;  breath  putrid. 6  Typhus.
Worse  when  sweating ;  sweat  partial  on  front  of  body ;  aver-
sion to  uncover.
1  General  sweat  about  midnight,  followed  by  faintness. d  With

headache.
BThe  exhalations  smell  sour;  nightly  sour  sweat.
BAll  three  stages,  rigor,  heat  and  sweat  well  marked,
i  Thirst  great  before  and  during  the  chill,  less  during  the  heat

and with the sweat almost gone. ^Intermittent after

quinine.
BB  Malaria  intermittens.
B  During  apyrexia  in  intermittent  fever,  headache,  yellow  face,

bitter  taste,  aversion  to  meat.


ARNICA  MONTANA.  26

BB  Traumatic  fevers.

B Hectic  fever,  emaciation. 6  After  a  blow  on  stomach.

B Typhus  or  dysentery  with  little  pain  in  abdomen.

BB  Typhoid  conditions.

BB  Putrid  fevers.
*^  Attacks. Worse  during  the  increase  of  the  moon.

B Periodical  attacks  of  megrim.

B  Spasms  of  cough.

BBHeat  in  oft  repeated  short  attacks.

Periodically  repeated  rheumatic  pleurisy.
^^  Locality  and Direction. '  '  Unilateral commencement of
pains, d  Megrim.

Right :  pressure  in  half  of  head,  especially  over  brow ;  head-
ache; carries  head  to  r.  after,  injury  to  left  eye;  drawing
pain  in  eye ;  eye  projects  from  head ;  pressive  pain  inner
half  r.  eyeball ;  rushing  in  ears,  deaf  in  r.  ;  cheek  red,
swollen  ;  jaw  pains  ;  cutting  in  teeth  right  upper  jaw  ;  pain
and  fullness  in  hypochondrium ;  r.  side  of  abdomen  hard,
swollen ;  pains  in  side  of  chest  from  excessive  use  of  right
arm  ;  scapula  painful ;  sharp  drawing  back  of  hand ;  wrist
as  if  dislocated ;  pressive  pain  joints  of  ring  and  little
fingers  ;  pains  shift  from  hip ;  calf  pains  as  from  a  blow  ;
malleolus  pains.

Left:  pain  in  head;  stitches  in  frontal  eminence;  pain  as  if
knife  were  drawn  through  head  transversely ;  pricking
under  eye ;  stitches  in  ear ;  cartilage  as  if  bruised ;  ear
and  cheek  hot ;  pressure  in  liver,  lying  on  left  side ;  j)ress-
ure  ribs  below  heart ;  stitches  under  ribs  ;  dull  heavy  pain
in  hypogastrium ;  pain  from  liver  to  left  chest  and  down
left  arm  ;  aching  in  side  of  chest ;  stitches  middle  1.  chest ;
1.  scapula  to  middle  finger ;  pain  in  abdomen ;  drawing
pressive  pain  in  hip-joint ;  hand  dark  blue  ;  wrist  powerless  ;
paralysis  ;  cramps  in  fingers ;  drawing  in  skin  of  little
finger  ;  hip  ;  tibia  burns  ;  foot ;  little  toe  ;  crawling  in  sole  ;
epigastrium  to  r.  hypochondrium.

Left  to  right :  abscess  of  mammae ;  stitches  in  cardiac  region  ;
pain  as  if  a  knife  were  drawn  through  the  head.

Within  outward  :  pressive  headache.
"  Sensations.  Peculiar  sensation  as  if :  the  brain  were  rolled  up
in  a  lump  ;  head  were  being  distended,  or  it  feels  too  large ;
an  extravasation  of  blood  had  taken  place,  in  forehead;
integuments  of  forehead  were  spasmodically  contracted ;  as
from  a  nail  thrust  into  the  temple ;  a  knife  was  drawn
through  head  transversely  from  1.  side ;  forehead  and  cheek-
bones were  crushed ;  hair  was  pulled  out,  in  occiput ;  teeth
were  forced  or  pressed  out;  coats  of  stomach  were  spas-
modically drawn  together ;  squeezed  together,  cardiac  pain  ;


27  ARNICA  MONTANA.

a  cord  was  tightly  drawn  across  lower  part  of  loins ;  foetus

were  lying  crosswise.
Stitches  :  rapid,  in  1.  frontal  eminence ; in  forehead ;  in  eyes  ;

in inner canthi ; through  1.  ear ; in region of  liver ; in

splenic  region  ;  through  abdomen  ;  in  urethra;  in  abdomen;

in  chest ;  in  cardiac  region  ;  in  small  of  back.
Cutting :  in teeth  ; in epigastrium  ; in hypegastrium  ; like

knives  through  kidneys  ;  in  orifice  of  urethra.
Shooting :  in  and  around  eyes.
Sticking  pain  :  in  temples  and  forehead.
Stinging :  in  throat.

Pricking :  and  tearing  in  forehead ;  in  knee.
Darting :  in  forehead.

Splinter  pain :  in  pimple  between  thumb  and  index  finger.
Tearing  :  towards  temples ;  in  and  around  eyes  ;  in  teeth  ;  in

1.  half  of  pubic  eminence ; in  r.  hand  ; in  r.  hip-joint ; in

r.  foot ;  in  1.  little  toe  ;  in  finger  tips  ;  in  limbs.
Drawing :  in  vertex  and  occiput ;  in  r.  eye ;  in  r.  hand ;  in  1.

hip-joint;  in  1.  foot;  in  r.  thumb;  on  back  of  1.  little  finger.
Biting  sensation  :  on  tongue.
Burning  :  in  brain ; in  eyes ; in  cheek ; in  lips ;  in  throat ;

from fauces to stomach; in stomach; in hypogastrium ;

along  perineum;  in  chest;  in  cardiac  region;  on  outside  of

1.  tibia;  in  feet.
Scraping  burning :  in  mouth  and  oesophagus.
Raw  scraped  sensation  :  in  trachea  and  bronchi.
Soreness  :  in  upper  part  of  head  and  brain  ; in  back  part  of

throat ;  in  stomach  ;  of  chest ; of  back  ;  in  limbs.
Aching :  in  forehead  ;  through  temples  to  0'3ciput ;  in  stomach  ;

of  chest.
Pressure : in r. half  of  head  over  brow  ; in forehead ; in

eyeball ; in  stomach  ; on  prsecordia  ; at epigastrium ; in

anus  and  rectum  ;  in  bladder ;  in  r.  chest,  at  a  small  spot ;

in  lumbar  region  ; between  scapulae ; in  1. hip-joint ; in

finger  joints.
Pressing  shooting  in  temples.
Pinching :  in  eyeball ; in  stomach.
Grinding  :  deep  in  hypogastrium.
Boring :  from  r.  hip-joint  to  various  parts.
Sprained  sensation  in  teeth  ;  in  groin  ;  in  joints  of  bones  and

cartilages  of  chest ;  in  joints  of  arms  ;  in  hips  ;  in  big  toe  ;

in  tarsal  joints.
Sensation  of  dislocation ;  in  r.  wrist ;  in  knee.
Bruised  feeling :  in  and  behind  ears  ;  in  nose  ;  in  articulation

of  r.  jaw  ;  in  abdomen  ;  in  anus  ;  in  joints  of  chest ;  base

of  heart ;  in  r.  scapula  and  small  of  back  ;  in  whole  back  ;

in  thighs,  in  arms ;  in  balls  of  thumbs  ;  in  lower  limbs.


ARNICA  MONTANA.  28

Twitching  pain :  from  shoulder-joint  to  middle  finger ;  in
dorsum  of  r.  hand  ;  in  middle  finger.

Cramp-like,  pressive  pricking  in  1.  eye  and  nasal  bone.

Dull  pain  :  in  forehead  ;  back  and  limbs ;  over  eyes  ;  in  1.
hypogastrium.

Undefined  pain  :  over  root  of  nose  ;  around  navel ;  in  abdo-
men ;  between  crest  of  r.  ileum  and  sacrum ;  in  r,  side  of
chest;  intercostal  muscles;  in  lumbar  vertebrae  in  calf  of  r.
leg. _

Throbbing :  stinging  or  pinching  in  swollen  cheek  ;  toothache.

Fluctuating  sensation  in  brain  ;  in  abdomen.

Constriction  in  throat ;  constricting  cramps  in  rectum.

Electric  shocks  in  occiput.

Heaviness  :  of  the  head  ;  in  middle  of  brain  ;  in  eyes  ;  like  a
weight  at  upper  chest ;  in  insteps  ;  in  limbs.

Heat :  in  forehead  ;  of  head ;  in  1.  ear  and  cheek.

Coldness  :  in  forehead ;  in  head,  after  knife-like  pain ;  as  if  -
touched  with  a  cold  thumb  on  forehead ;  like  ice  on  top  of
head  ;  of  nose.

Crawling,  as  if  nerve  were  pulled,  in  sole  of  1.  foot.

Tingling :  in  nose ;  in  gums  ;  in  back  ;  in  lower  limbs.

Tickling  in  trachea.

Itching  in  canthi ;  all  over.
^*  Tissues. 1 1  Concussions  and  contusions.

I  Bleeding  of  internal  and  external  parts.

I  Venous  enlargements,  varicose  tumors  on  the  lower  limbs.
d  Dysentery.

BB  Burrowing  pus,  not  painful.

BB Prevents  suppuration.

Prevents  formation  of  pus  by  withdrawing  water  from  the
serum  ;  the  watery  contents  of  urine  increase  without  in-
creased drinking. Grauvogl.

Exudations  in  brain  and  spine.

Dropsy  of  internal  parts.

B  BHyperinosis  is  rather  a  contra-indication  for  Arnie.

Muscles  rigid.

BBSepticsemia  ;  tendency  to  typhoid  forms.

BB  Myalgia;  particularly  after  overexertion.

I  IJactication  of  tendons.

Painful  sensitiveness  of  all  the  joints  and  of  the  skin,  on  mak-
ing the  slightest  motion.

BB  Gout  and  rheumatism.

B Bones  (periosteum)  ache. ^Intermittent.

B Paralysis  of  sphincters. ^Typhus.

B  B  Inflammation  of  skin  and  cellular  tissue ;  tender  on  pressure.

BEmaciation. ^  Hectic  fever. ^  Subacute  pneumonia.
^^  Touch. Passive  Motion. Injuries, b  Better  from  gentle
pressure, d  Iritis.


29  ARNICA  MONTANA.

Painfulness  of  the  limbs  to  touch.

llEverythin'g  on  which  he  lies  seems  too  hard.

< Bed-sores;  especially  sacral  region  and  hips. /?  Typhus.

I  Worse  after  riding;  sick  stomach  from  car  or  carriage  riding.

After  over-lifting,  attacks  of  violent  sneezing. See  7.

i  I  Sprains,  with  much  swelling,  bluish  redness,  intense  soreness.

I  Ixlfter  bruises  with  blunt  instruments, d  Iritis.

II  Concussions  ;  falls; mechanical  injuries.
1 1  Contusions  without  laceration.
Friction :  phymosis.

listings  of  bees  or  wasps;  splinters.

1 1  Compound  fractures,  and  their  profuse  suppuration.

Pressure  :  aching  in  epigastrium  <;  ;  liver  sensitive  ;  spleen
sore  ;  stitches  in  chest  >.

llMechanical  injuries:  concussion  of  brain  while  there  are
unconsciousness,  pallor,  or  drowsiness;  weak,  intermitting
pulse ;  cold  surface,  and  other  indications  of  depressed
vitality  from  shock  ;  threatened  abortion  ;  ovarian  troubles  ;
orchitis  ;  mastitis,  etc.,  etc.
^®  Skin. Intense  pricking  or  itching  on  the  entire  body.

I  Skin  hot  and  dry. ^Pneumonia,

■  Hot,  red,  oedematous  skin.
Petechige,  ecchymoses.

I  Hot,  hard,  shining  swelling,  from  insect  sting.
I  Red  spots  first  on  limbs,  then  upon  the  trunk.
I  Bed-sores;  especially  sacral  region  and  hips.
I  Erythema  nodosum.

I  Phlegmonous  erysipelas.

■  Erysipelatous  inflammation,  left  hand  dark  blue.
Eruption  like  pin-heads,  with  redness  of  the  skin.
Irritable  and  slightly  vesicular  eruption.

Numerous  small  semi-transparent  vesicles  with  red  bases,  on
some  parts  confluent,  great  and  excessive  irritation  from
itching.  The  course  of  the  eruption  was :  first  heat  and
great  itching  of  the  skin,  then  redness,  then  vesicles,  increas-
ing in  size,  with  intolerable  itching ;  slight  desquamation,
followed  with  some  redness  of  skin ;  where  irritation  had
been  worst  the  skin  remained  for  some  time  hard,  leathery.

I I  Many  small  boils  painful,  one  after  another;  extremely  sore.
I  Carbuncle.

I  Varicose  ulcers: torpid; dirty, bluish  bottom;  no  pus,  but
watery,  fetid  secretion,  half  transparent  crusts,  like  thick
glue,  fetid  ;  painful  ulcers.
*^  Stages  of  Life,  Constitution. Dark  hair,  rigid  muscle.

Hydrogenoid  constitution  of  Grauvogl.

I  I  Light  complexion,  sandy  hair,  sanguine, d  Whooping-cough.

I  Nervous,  cannot  stand  pain, d  Prolapsus  uteri.


ARNICA  MONTANA.  30

■  Especially  suitable  to  those  who  remain  long  impressed  by

even  slight  mechanical  injuries.

■  Nervous  women,  sanguine  plethoric  persons,  with  red  face.

d  Prolapsus  uteri.

■  In  cases  of  sanguine  plethoric  people  with  lively  expression,

very  red  face,  disposed  to  cerebral  congestion. 6  Prolapsus
uteri.

Full-blooded,  strong,  old  people.

Strong  man,  much  dosed  with  quinia.

A  lymphatic  man  leading  a  sedentary  life,  made  a  kind  of  opo-
deldoc of  arnica  and  soon  got  many  and  alarming  symptoms,
lasting  fully  a  month.

Girl,  set.  2|-,  cured  by  the  tincture,  of  diarrhoea  of  several  weeks
standing.

Man,  set.  25,  bilious  temperament.

A  woman,  set.  35,  nervous  temperament,  dysentery.

Man,  set.  57,  short,  thick,  apoplectic  habit,  dark  red  face,  ac-
customed to  spirituous  drinks, d  Paralysis  of  r.  side.

A  robust  man,  set.  50,  inflammation  of  eye  after  a  cold.

Man,  set.  67,  acute  stitches  in  ears  followed  by  stupor,  after  an
unusully  cold  bath.
**  Relationship. Antidotes  to  massive  doses  : Camp]io7\  Ipec.

■  After  Cinclion.  low,  given  for  the  chills. ^Nephritis.
Antidotes  to  potencies:  Aeon.,  Arsen.,  Oinchon.,  Ignat ,  Ipec.
Arnie. antidotes: Amm. carh,, Cinclion., Oicut., Ferrum,

Ignat.,  Ipec,  Seneg.
It  follows  well  after: II  Aeon.,  Ipec, Veratr.  ;  after  Apis,  in

hydrocephalus.
After  it  follow  well :  Aeon.,  Arsen.,  Bryan.,  Ipec,  Rhus  tox.,

Sulph.  ac

■  Headache  is  most  quickly  and  certainly  removed  by  a  cup  of

coffee, d  Prolapsus  ani.
Arnic  is  indicated  in  ailments  from  spirituous  liquors  or  from

charcoal  vapors.
Arsen.  aided  Arnic  in  dysentery  with  varicose  veins.

■  ■Complementary  to  Aeon.

Alternated  successfully  in  cases  where  the  change  of  symptoms

indicate  it,  with  Aeon,  and  Rhus  tox.
Injurious  after  the  bite  of  a  dog  or  any  rabid  or  angry  animal.
Wine  increases  the  unpleasant  effects  of  Arnic
Hyper,  is  preferable  in  spinal  concussions.
Cognates:  Aeon.;  Amm.  carh.; Oroton  (swashing  in  abdo-
men) ; Arsen.  ; Baptis.  ; Bellad.  ; Bryon.  ; Ohamom.  ;

China; Fuphras.  (injuries  to  eye); Oalend. ; Feirum. ;

Hepar.  ; Hyper.  ; Ramam.  ; Ipec.  ;  Mercur.  ; Pulsat.  ;

Ran.  seel,  (pains  in  intercostal  muscles) ;  Rhus  tox.  ;  Ruta  ;

iStaphis.  ;  iSilic  ;  Symphyt.  ;  Sulphur  (traumatic  pleurisy)  ;

Sulph.  ac. ; Veratr.


31  ARSENICUM.

ARSENICUM  ALBUM.

The  white  oxide  of  metallic  arsenic.  As^^  O3.


One  of  the  oldest  of  Hahnemann's  provings,  but  not  published  in  the
Fragmenta,  nor  in  the  first  volume  of  his  Materia  Medica.  The  reasons
for  this  omission  he  gives  in  1816,  in  the  second  volume.  The  ignorant,
maltreated,  easily  frightened  people,  seeing  the  great  effects  of  small  doses,
cried  him  out  a  "  poison  doctor."  The  first  edition  oi  Arsenicum  contained
294  of  his  own,  and  368  from  other  sources;  some  from  his  disciples,  Stapf,
and  Hornburg;  the  rest  quotations  from  various  authors,  on  which,  how-
ever, he  never  placed  much  value.

In  1824,  in  the  second  edition  of  his  Materia  Medica,  his  own  symptoms
had  increased  to  431,  and  the  symptoms  of  others  to  516;  Stapf,  23 ;  Horn-
burg, 15;  Langhammer  (one  of  the  best  provings  we  have  of  this  remedy)
58  ;  Frederic  Hahnemann,  13  ;  Baehr,  11 ;  Meyer,  6 ;  the  rest  are  quotations
from  the  old  school ;  total,  947.

In  1833,  in  the  third  edition  of  his  Materia  Medica,  we  have  a  much  im-
proved edition,  although  containing  some  symptoms  from  Fowler's  solu-
tion, in  all,  comprising  1068  symptoms.

In  1839,  as  an  appendix  to  the  second  edition  of  his  Chronic  Diseases,
Hahnemann  gives  us  a  fourth  and  last  revision,  with  many  more  internal
improvements  and  abridgements,  including  a  proving  by  Nenning,  in  all
1231  symptoms.  The  administration  of  Arsenicum  is  more  often  disappoint-
ing than  that  of  any  other  drug,  the  cause  of  which  lies  in  the  too  numer-
ous collections  of  poisonings,  and  the  lack  of  symptoms  produced  by  higher
potencies.  This  view  is  corroborated  by  the  collection  of  the  Sulphur
symptoms  were  the  relation  is  the  reverse.

^  Mind. I  Loss  of  consciousness. ^Vertigo. ^Typhus. ^  Heart

disease, d  Yellow  fever.
Loss  of  consciousness,  and  falling  before  the  epileptic  attack.
She  lay  upon  the  bed  in  a  state  of  unconsciousness,  muttering,

eyes  fixed,  cold  sweat  on  forehead,  trembling  all  over,  pulse

small,  hard,  and  very  rapid.
I  Stupor,  broken  by  anxious  moaning, d  Child  with  gastritis

mucosa.
I  Loss  of  memory. ^Yellow  fever.
Thoughts  crowd  upon  him  ;  he  is  too  weak  to  keep  them  off  or

to  hold  on  to  one  idea.
When  alone,  he  falls  to  thinking  about  disease  and  other  things,

which  he  can  scarcely  keep  out  of  his  mind.
Grloomy  forebodings  while  lying  in  bed,  in  evening,  fears  some-
thing may  have  happened  to  his  relatives.


ARSENICUM.  32

B  Thoughts  of  death  and  the  incurability  of  his  complaint.
6  Cancerous  inoculation.

Fixed  idea  that  he  and  his  family  will  die  of  starvation.

Dullness  and  weakness  in  head,  cannot  think,  and  is  irritable ;
as  if  he  had  a  bad  cold,  or  had  lost  sleep.

I  Mental  derangements  with  satiety  of  life  in  drunkards.

Imbecility.

Stupidity,  with  loss  of  hearing,  and  almost  total  blindness.

B Thinks  he  must  die. ^Megrim.

B Tormenting  hallucination,  as  if  there  was  one  by  his  side  who
did  all  that  he  was  doing,  eating,  washing,  etc.  d  Diabetes
mellitus.

He  sees  all  kind  of  vermin  on  his  bed,  throws  handsful  of  them
away,  and  tries  to  escape  from  them.

He  imagines  that  he  sees  burglars  in  his  room,  and  listens
under  the  bed ;  he  is  bathed  in  cold  sweat.

Periodically  returning  fancies.

Talks  wildly,  with  open  eyes,  and  is  not  conscious  of  being
flighty.

B Delirium. ^  Yellow  fever. ^Typhus.

Bin  her  delirium  she  thinks  she  is  well, d  Girl  set.  7.

B  Delirium,  with  great  prostration.

B  Delirium  during  heat,  unconsciousness,  mania,  wants  to  be
held ;  with  a  tearing  headache. 6  Intermittent.

Mania ;  headache ;  terrible  anxiety,  noise  in  his  ears  as  of
many  bells ;  sees  a  man  who  has  hung  himself  beckoning
to  him  to  cut  him  loose ;  on  failing  to  accomplish  this,  he
attempts  to  hang  himself;  being  prevented,  he  falls  into  de-
spair, and  becomes  so  restless  he  can  scarcely  be  kept  in  bed,
loses  speech,  with  full  consciousness,  tries  to  write,  but  can
make  only  unintelligible  characters ;  he  trembles,  weeps,  his
forehead  is  covered  with  anxious  sweat,  finally  kneels  down
and  lifts  his  hands  in  supplication.

Rage  ;  had  to  be  chained.

Her  desires  are  greater  than  her  need ;  she  eats  and  drinks
more  than  is  good  for  her,  and  walks  farther  than  she
ought  to.

B Suicidal  mania.

A  barber  felt  an  inclination  to  cut  his  customer's  throats.

Talking  and  quarrelling  in  sleep.

Great  loquacity  while  awake  and  asleep.

77  If  people  came  to  see  him,  he  did  all  the  talking,  d  Can-
cerous inoculation.

He  wept  and  whined,  but  spoke  little.

Hysterical  crying,  instead  of  fear.

B  Whimpering  and  gnashing  teeth.

BLoud  moaning,  groaning,  and  weeping, d  During  catamenia.


33  ARSENICUM.

Pitiful  complaining,  with  great  anxiety  and  restlessness,  witli

disagreeable  sensation  in  abdomen,  and  dyspnoea.
Piercing,  pitiful  moaning,  interrupted  by  fainting  spells.

■  Lamentations,  despair  of  life. ^  Colic.

■  Screaming  with  the  pains, d  Headache.

Loud  screaming ;  says  it  is  something  within  him  that  screams.

■  Picking  of  the  bedclothes. ^Typhus.

Fear  drives  him  out  of  bed ;  he  hides  in  a  closet.

Runs  about  the  house  at  night,  looking  for  thieves.

I  Hasty  in  all  its  motions;  grasps  the  tumbler  or  anything  it

wants  eagerly, d  Eclampsia.
Says  little,  but  complains  of  fear.
Aversion  to  all  occupation.

Placid  mood  ;  remained  the  same  no  matter  what  happened.
Averse  to  meeting  acquaintances,  because  he  imagines  having

formerly  offended  them,  though  he  knows  not  how.

■  Tranquillity  of  soul. ^  In  a  man  afflicted  with  melancholy.
At  first,  great  tranquillity  and  cheerfulness,  followed  in  half

an  hour  by  terrible  restlessness  and  anxiety  ;  t.
Inclined  to  cheerfulness  and  activity.
Feels  uncomfortable  and  takes  pleasure  in  nothing.
Hypersensitive,  delicate  mood  ;  sad  and  given  to  weeping ;  the

least  thing  troubles  her.

■  Her  mind  is  depressed,  sad. d  Relapse  of  intermittent.
Sad  and  gloomy,  with  restless  tossing.

■  Melancholy,  sadness  after  dinner. ^Headache.

■  Melancholy  after  mental  over  exertion.

■  Melancholy ;  after  financial  losses  ;  cannot  be  consoled  ;  thinks

he  will  have  to  die,  with  his  family,  from  starvation  ;  sleep-
less nights ;  walks  about,  wringing  his  hands,  with  moaning
and  groaning.

■  Deep  seated  melancholic  affection  ; ceased  after  tetter-like

ulcers  appeared  on  lower  limbs.

■  Periodical  attacks  of  melancholy  only  at  twilight ;  sometimes

at  night, d  Woman  set.  65.
Religious  melancholy  ;  hopelessness,  despair.

■  Fear  of  being  left  alone, d  After  vexation, d  Dysmenorrhoea.

■  ■Dread  of  death  when  alone,  or  on  going  to  bed.

■  ■Fear  of  death. ^  After  vexation, d Cholera  asiatica.

■  ■Anxiety  and  restlessness,  worse  after  midnight.
Hypochondriacal  anxiety,  which  seems  to  originate  in  the  upper

part  of  the  chest ;  restlessness,  no  palpitation.
Anxiety  and  impatience.

■  ■Excessive anxiety. ^Headache. Hsematemesis. Colic.

Intussusception. (Edema  pulmonum.  Hydrothorax.  Measles.

■  ■  iVttacks  of  anxiety  at  night  driving  out  of  bed. d  Mania.

■  Great  anxiety,  must  jump  out  of  bed. ^Ascites.

VOL.  II.— 3.


ARSENICUM.  34

■  Frequent attacks  of  anxiety,  worse  at  night; fears  death.

6  Influenza, d  Diarrhoea.

1 1  Anxiety  and  restlessness.  ^  Chill  of  intermittent.  He-
patitis.

1 1  Anxiety  and  restlessness  with  the  pains;  fainting  from  the
pain, d  Gastralgia.

■  Great  anguish,  tossing  about. ^  Colic. ^Pneumonia. ^Em-

physema, d  Intermittent.
Precordial  anxiety,  feels  constricted.

■  Anxiety  like  that  of  one  who  has  committed  murder;  driven

from  place  to  place ;  avoids  meeting  persons,  thinking  that
he  has  oifended  them., d  Mania.

■  Terrible  anxiety,  flushing  up;  restless  glance,  no  rest  by  day

nor  night ;  inclination  to  commit  suicide, d  Mania.

■  ■Great  fear,  restlessness,  trembling,  cold  sweat,  prostration.

■  ■Great  anxiety,  with  constriction  of  chest  and  dyspnoea.

■  ■Great  anguish  and  restlessness. ^  Stricture  of  oesophagus.

d  Gastralgia. d  Hsematemesis. d  Colicodynia.

■  Indescribable anguish,  restlessness. ^Metritis. ^Pericar-

ditis, d  Cholera  Asiatica.

■  Anxiety,  with  nausea  and  gnawing  in  scrobiculum. 6  Chill.

■  Great  despondency, d  Scurvy.

■  The  pains  seem  intolerable,  drive  one  to  despair  and  frenzy.

d  Headache.

■  Great  indifference. ^Yellow  fever. ^Typhus.

■  Apathy;  if  roused  by  loud  calling,  they  open  the  eyes  with

difficulty  and  stare  at  you.  d  Typhus.
Cheerfulness,  alternating  with  ill  humor.
Indecision ;  the  merest  trifle  alters  his  resolve.

■  Irritable,  despondent  and  anxious;  cardiac  anxiety,  with  in-

supportable pain, d  Intermittent.

■  Irritable  mood,  alternating  with  despondency. ^Icterus.
Touchiness.

Disposed  to  discuss  the  faults  of  others.

■  Disposed  to  quarrel. 0  Hemorrhoids.

■  Very  cross  and  despondent, d  Chronic  intestinal  catarrh.
Dissatisfied  and  angry  with  himself  all  day  ;  thinks  he  has  not

accomplished  enough,  and  reproaches  himself  bitterly.
The  child  is  irritable,  whining  and  restless  ;  wants  to  be  carried.
Irritability,  with  dull,  confused  feeling  in  head.
Irritability,  with  flushes  of  heat  and  chilliness  when  talking  or

moving.

■  Irritable,  discouraged,  restless  ;  vexed  about  trifles.

Vexed  and  dissatisfied  with  everything  ;  the  least  noise  or  light

annoys  her,  she  is  so  sensitive  to  external  impressions.
The  least  thing  offends  him,  and  moves  him  to  anger.

■  ■Vexation,  with  anxiety,  restlessness  and  chilliness.


35  ARSENICUM.

She  became  furious  when  something  to  eat  was  oiFered  her
while  complaining  of  loss  of  appetite.

Obstinacy,  avarice,  inclined  to  malice  and  satire.

1 1  Restlessness,  cannot  rest  anywhere,  moves  from  place  to
place ;  wants  to  go  from  one  bed  to  another.

Inward  restlessness,  with  dullness  in  head  and  stupor ;  with
aphasia ;  with  backache.

Restlessness  and  moaning,  with  sleeplessness;  anxious  rest-
lessness, with  weak,  irregular  pulse,  limbs  cold  on  the  sur-
face ;  inward  heat.

Great  restlessness,  alternating  with  drowsiness.

I  Anxious  restlessness  and  nausea.

I  After  a  fit  of  passion, d  Nosebleed,  asthma,  cough.

I  After  great  care  and  grief, d  Colic  in  pregnancy.

The  pains  are  aggravated  by  other  peoples'  talking.

lAs  a  consequence  of  fright,  inclination  to  commit  suicide.
'  Sensorium. Great  weight  in  head,  most  in  forehead.

I  Heaviness  in  head,  with  humming  in  ears;  goes  off  in  open
air,  but  returns  on  entering  room.

■  Whirling  vertigo,  heaviness  of  the  head. ^Dropsy.
Vertigo  and  buzzing  before  the  ears, d  Bright's  disease.

■  Vertigo,  when  shutting  eyes,  as  if  he  would  fall,  when  walk-

ing over  an  open  space.
I  Vertigo,  reels  when  walking, d  Headache.
I  Vertigo  :  preceding  an  attack  of  epilepsy  ;  before  the  chill  in

intermittent.
Sensation  as  if  brain  moved  and  beat  against  skull,  during

motion.

■  Roaring  in  head. ^Haematemesis.

■  Head  feels  confused  whenever  it  is  moved. 6  Paraplegia.

■  Confused  and  stunned,  after  epileptic  attack.

■  Great  confusion  of  the  head.

Weakness  of  the  head,  also  from  pain,  with  qualmishness  and

weak  feeling  in  pit  of  stomach.
Sense  of  unusual  lightness.
*  Inner  Head. '  Heaviness  in  forehead.

■  Severe  exhausting  pain  over  left  eye;  >  from  warm  applica-

tions, or  wrapping  head  up  warm.

■  Intense  frontal  headache,  with  vertigo.

■  Drawing  pressive  pain  in  right  side  of  forehead.

■  Throbbing  frontal  headache  over  root  of  nose, d  Ozsena.

■  Pain  as  if  bruised  or  sore,  over  nose  and  in  forehead,  rubbing

relieves  temporarily.
Throbbing  in  forehead,  with  nausea.

■  Intermitting,  tearing,  burning,  boring  pain  in  right  supra-

orbital region,  extending  over  eye  and  into  upper  teeth,  not
allowing  a  moment's  rest ;  >  by  walking  about.


ARSENICUM^  36

■  Periodical  headache,  above  left  eyebrow  and  temple,  and  last-

ing twelve  hours,  followed  by  vomiting  of  a  yellow,  bitter  or
tenacious  mass.
I  Tensive,  pressing  pain  spreading  from  forehead  and  temples
to  occiput  and  nape  of  neck ;  comes  in  violent  attacks,  as  if
head  would  burst.

■  Violent  periodical  headache,  boring  in  a  small  spot  in  temple.

iHemicrania  :  feels  like  a  hot  wire  thrust  through  ramifica-
tions of  fifth  pair  of  nerves  ;  must  move  head  and  feet ;  al-
ternating with  colic  or  liver  complaint.

■  Periodical  semi-lateral  throbbing,  with  nausea,  buzzing  in  ears

and  vomiting;  worse  after  eating,  morning,  evening,  or  nights
in  bed,  with  weeping  and  moaning;  sometimes  it  becomes
maddening.

■  Beating or  pressing  as from  a  load  on brain  ; < rising

up in  bed, from  motion  ; > temporarily by cold  wash-
ing ;  improved  by  walking  in  open  air.
Dizzy  headache  on  top  of  head.

■  The  pain  in  head  and  face  is  especially  severe  on  left  side;

cannot  lean  or  rest  on  that  side ;  vomits  bile  ;  stomach  re-
mains irritable.
Headache  in  occiput.

■  Pressive  pain  in  occiput,  between  the  epileptic  attacks.

■  Violent  pressing  headache;  stretching ;  cold  sensation  in  back  ;

great  weariness,  after  an  hour's  heat,  with  restlessness  and
anxiousness. 6  Intermittent.

■  Pressure  in  forehead  during  chill. ^Intermittent.

■  Occipital headache, of a pricking character. d  Retinitis

albuminurica.

■  Dull,  heavy,  or  throbbing  pain  in  head. 6  Yellow  fever.

■  Tearing  in  brain,  as  if  torn  to  pieces.

■  Neuralgia  in  brain,  as  if  cats  were  tearing  it  to  pieces. 6  Can-

cerous inoculation.

■  Sensation  of  wabbling  or  swashing  in  brain.

■  Internal  headache  ;  worse  from  light  and  noise.  /

■  Neuralgic  headache,  with  restlessness; has  to  move  head,

even  feet  up  or  down  to  get  relief.

■  Periodical  headache,  cannot  move  or  fix  his  attention.

■  Stunning  headache,  periodical,  because  incapable  of  all  move-

ment or  attention  to  any  subject ;  could  only  rest  his  head
on  a  table,  and  bear  it  the  best  he  could.

■  Constant  severe  headache,  with  vomiting,  when  raising  head.

■  When  moving  the  head  while  walking,  the  brain  seems to

strike  the  skull.

■  Heat  or  stitches  in  head  when  coughing.
Heaviness  of  head  is  relieved  by  going  into  open  air.

■  Megrim, with  deep  seated biliary  derangements; vertigo,

nausea,  retching,  and  vomiting  of  bile.


37  ARSENICUM.

Headache,  with  irritation  of  ovaries  and  uterus.
iParoxysm  of  excessively  painful  hemicrania,  with  great  weak-
ness and  ice-cold  feeling  in  scalp,  followed  by  itching.

■  Periodical  headache,  begins  at 7  A. M.,  reaches  its  climax

at  11,  and  begins  to  decrease  at  2  P.  M.,  followed  by  extreme
prostration.

■  Headache  before  chill, d  Intermittent.

■  Towards  end  of  chill,  stinging,  pressing  and  drawing  in  fore-

head, extending  to  eyes ;  <  by  opening  eyes  and  motion.
d  Intermittent.

■  Headache  during  heat,  burning,  pressing  outward  tearing,

throbbing,  stinging  in  forehead, d  Intermittent.

■  Headache  after  the  fever,  pain  in  sacrum  during.
Rarely  apoplexy  ;  sometimes  apoplexia  serosa.

■  Chronic  hydrocephalus,  with  great  emaciation,  shrivelled  skin ;

nightly  restlessness  and  dyspepsia.
*  Outer  Head. "He  walked  with  the  head  thrown  back, d  Sup-
pressed catarrh.

■  Great  sensitiveness  of  head  to  open  air ;  wraps  head  up  warmly.

■  Can  scarcely  bear  the  hair  to  be  touched,  scalp  so  sensitive.

■  ■Hot  head,  sensitive  hair,  cannot  bear  having  it  touched.

d  Headache, d  Suppressed  catarrh, d  Horizontal  half-sight.

■  Head  and  face,  swollen  like  the  whole  body, d  Anasarca.

■  (Edema  of  head,  face,  eyes,  neck  and  chest,  having  a  natural

color.
Hard  swelling  on  the  frontal  eminences,  resembling  a  nut;
worse  in  evening.

■  Erysipelatous  burning  and  swelling  of  head,  with  great  weak-

ness and  coldness  ; <  at  night.

■  Head  sensitive  to  air. d  Hemicrania.

Worse from uncovering the  head; > from wrapping it

up  warmly.
Burning  itching  on  head,  in  evening,  when  undressing,  and

growing  cold.
Chronic  eczema  of  face  and  scalp,  spreading  from  ear,  with  a

fine  vesicle  drying  down  into  bran-like  scales.
I  Scalp  covered  with  dry  scales,  scabs,  or  crusts ;  sometimes

extending  down  to  the  forehead,  ears,  or  neck.

■  Head  sore,  with  an  itching,  moist  eruption,  which  forms  a  dry

scurf, d  Scrofulous  ophthalmia.

■  ■Scabs  on  the  hairy  scalp.

■  ■Chronic  eruptions,  with  pustules  and  vesicles  filled  with  pus.

d  Tinea.

■  Burning,  biting  boils  or  pustules  on  scalp,  sensitive  to  touch

and  cold.
I  I  Losing  the  hair  on  front  part  of  head.

■  Falling  out  of  hair;  also  in  circular  patches,  which  become

rough  and  dirty.


ARSENICUM.  38

■  Eruptions  destroy  the  roots  of  hair. ^  Tinea.

'  Sight  and  Eyes. ■  Sensitive  to  light;  especially  to  sunlight.

I  I  Snow  dazzles  the  eyes  and  makes  them  water.

I I  Photophobia. ^Ophthalmia, or  scrofulous  catarrhal  oph-
thalmia.

I  Shuts  her  eyes,  as  if  she  could  not  keep  them  open.

■  Flickering  before  the  eyes.

■  ■Everything  appears  green. Compare  Phosphorus.

■  Horizontal  half-sight;  only  objects  in  the -lowest  part  of  the

field  of  vision  could  be  seen, d  Suppressed  catarrh.
When  closing  the  eyes,  oftener  <  than  >.
Worse  when  looking  up  or  straining  the  eyes.

■  Weakness  of  sight ;  dim  sight.

■  Vision  reduced  in  1.  eye  to  counting  fingers  at  two  feet,  r.

vision  1^^. d  Retinitis  albuminurica.

■  ■  Sees  as  through  a  white  gauze.

■  Has  to  lift  the  head  somcAvhat,  if  she  wants  to  look  at  any-

thing, because  she  can  only  see  things  below  the  axis  of  the
eye,  and  that  not  very  clear ;  anything  above  the  axis  she
cannot  see  at  all ;  it  is  like  a  gray  board, d  Scotodia.

■  Dim  vision,  with  headache. 6  Suppressed  catarrh.

■  Sight  is  cloudy. ^Albuminuria.

■  Constant  lateral  motion  of  the  balls, d  Amaurosis,  after  sup-

pressed eruption.
1  I  Pupils  contracted  or  dilated.
Wild  staring  look.

■  Eyes  staring,  glistening. ^Typhus.

■  Eyes  sunken  or  protruding.

■  Twitching  in  the  eyes,  as  if  they  were  drawing  into  the  head,

with burning heat, hot lachrymation and photophobia.
6  Scrofulous  ophthalmia.
A  bluish  circle  around  the  cornea.

■  Yellowness  of  the  sclerotica. ^Yellow  fever.

■  The  eyes  feel  as  if  they  had  no  room  in  the  orbit, d  Scrofu-

lous ophthalmia.

■  Pulsative  throbbing  in  the  eyes,  at  every  pulsation  a  stitch  ;

after  midnight.

■  Pressing  and  beating  like  a  small  pulse  is  felt  in  and  around

the  eyeball  as  frequent  as  one  hundred  in  a  minute ;  a  tor-
menting sensation, d  Ophthalmia.

■  Painful  throbbing  and  beating  in  the  middle  of  the  left  supra-

orbital region  in  a  small  spot.

■  Throbbing,  pulsating  in  the  eyeball  and  around  the  orbit,

with general restlessness and prostration. 6  Scrofulous
ophthalmia.
Sub-orbital pain on the left side,  with prickings,  as  with
needles,  sometimes  quite  severe.


39  ARSENICUM.

■  Stinging  pain  when  trying  to  open  the  lids, d  Ophthalmia

scrofulosa.

■  Violent  pain  in  the  eyes;  reaches  its  height  in  the  night.

d  Ophthalmia.
•  Paroxysms  of  most  intense  pains  in  the  eyes. ^Horizontal
half-sight.

■  Various  neuralgic  pains  in  eyes, d  Scrofulous  ophthalmia.

■  Heat  in  eyes,  and  burning  in  chest,  with  dyspnoea. ^Cho-

roiditis, alternating  with  bronchial  catarrh.

■  ■Burning  pains  over  orbit,  worse  at  night,  with  profuse  acrid

lachrymation. d  Kerato-iritis.

■  I  Violent  burning  in  eyes. 6  Ophthalmia  scrofulosa. d  Con-

junctivitis.

■  Burning  and  swelling  of  the  eyes.

I  Burning  pain  in  eye,  -<  at  night,  after  midnight,  d  Iritis
rheumatica.

■  Burning,  watering  and  sticking  together  of  lids  at  night ;

dimness  of  vision. 6  Dropsy.

■  Burning  pains  in  the  eye  and  upper  part  of  orbit,  <<  at  night,

and  accompanied  by  copious  secretion  of  tears,  d  Keratitis
punctata.

■  ■Severe  burning  in  eyes;  burning  tears,  corroding  as  they

flow, d  Ophthalmia  scrofulosa.

■  Pain  in  right  eyeball,  particularly  during  motion.

Pain  deep  in  eye,  with  violent  pain  when  moving ;  profuse
fluent  coryza,  with  stoppage  of  nose ;  ulceration  high  up  in
nose,  with  discharge  of  fetid,  bitter  tasting  ichor  ;  ulcers  all
over  face,  with  blue  and  green  spots  and  streaks  ;  bluish
sickly  color  of  face  and  dissatisfied  expression.

■  Opens  the  eye  well  in  the  cool  open  air,  but  cannot  in  the

house,  even  in  a  dark  room, d  Scrofulous  ophthalmia.
Arse.nic  cases  are  generally  relieved  by  warm  applications  ;
they  are  very  frequently  periodic  in  their  occurrence,  com-
mencing every  fall, and  often  changing  from  one  eye  to
the  other.

■  Iris  discolored,  reacting  sluggishly, d  Keratitis  punctata.
Progressive choroiditis disseminata, which alternated with

bronchial  catarrh  ;  when  the  eyes  were  better,  the  chest
was  worse,  and  vice  versa.

■  Syphilitic  iritis.

■  Parenchymatous  keratitis,  with  excessive  photophobia;  lies

in  bed  with  the  face  buried  in  the  pillows,  hot  scalding  lach-
rymation causes  an  eczematous  eruption  ;  paroxysmal  pains  ;
child  fretful  and  obstinate  (compare  Rhus.)

■  Kerato-iritis,  with  burning  pains  in  and  over  the  eyes,  pro-

fuse, acrid  lachrymation.

■  Sclerotica  deep  red,  with  great  photophobia. ^Ophthalmia.


ARSENICUM.  40

■  Vascular  elevations  on  the  cornea,  resulting  from  ulceration,

aggravated  by  opening  and  closing  the  eyes,  with  violent
burning  pains  every  afternoon.

I  Ulceration  of  the  cornea  recurring  first  in  one  eye,  then  in

the  other, d  Scrofulous  ophthalmia.

I I  Ophthalmia,  with  ulcers  on  cornea  before  and  during  the
catamenia.

1 1  Ulcer  on  the  outer  side  of  the  cornea,  with  elevated  edges,
pain  like  the  pricking  of  needles,  excoriation  of  the  external
canthus,  burning  and  sticking  pains.

■  Violent  inflammation  of  eyes  and  ulcers  on  the  cornea. 6  In-

fluenza.

■  Ulcers  of  the  cornea,  with  chronic  trachoma  and  blepharitis,

after  suppression  of  itching  on  scalp.

■  Cornea  had  become  dim  and  dotted  with  small  white  scars

from  old  ulcers, d  Scrofulous  ophthalmia.

■  Cornea  degenerated. ^  Ophthalmia  scrofulosa.

■  ■Inflammation  of  eyes  and  lids.

■  ■Ophthalmia  of  children,  when  the  skin  is  rough,  dry  and

dirty  looking ;  intense  pain  from  the  least  ray  of  light,  with
profuse  lachrymation.

■  When  the  eyes  are  better,  the  feet  are  swollen. 6  Scrofulous

ophthalmia.

■  Ophthalmia  beginning  at  5  A.  M.,  increasing  until  noon,  de-

creasing until  10  p.  M.

■  ■Conjunctiva  looks  like  a  piece  of  raw  beef.

■  Bluish-red  inflamed  conjunctiva  and swollen  lids. ^Oph-

thalmia.

■  Conjunctiva  injected,  capillaries  congested,  forming  an  eleva-

tion around  cornea;  red,  granulated,  in  some  places  bluish-
red. 0  Ophthalmia  scrofulosa.

■  Conjunctivitis,  appearing  periodically  every  afternoon,  towards

4  o'clock.

■  Conjunctiva not hyperaemic,  but  with oedematous  swelling

of  its  outer  segment, d  Keratitis  punctata.

■  Lachrymation.

■  Acrid  tears  gush  from  the  eyes, d  Scrofulous  ophthalmia.

■  Pterygium,  with  dryness  of  lids.

■  Posterior  synechise,  some exudation into the  pupil, white

punctate  spots  on  the  membrane  of  Descemet. d  Keratitis
punctata.

■  Trembling  of  upper  eyelid,  with  lachrymation. d  Conjunc-

tivitis.

■  Lids  spasmodically  closed. ^Ophthalmia  scrofulosa.

■  ■Eyelids  oedematous  and  spasmodically  closed.

■  ■Soreness  of  internal  surface  of  lids,  which  are  swollen  ex-

ternally and  spasmodically  closed,  so  that  opening  the  eyes
causes  intense  burning  sticking  pain.


41  ARSENICUM.

1 1  Edges  of  lids  painful  during  motion,  as  if  dry  and  rubbing
on  the  ball.

Pain  in  margin  of  eyelids,  on  moving  them,  as  if  they  were  dry
and  rubbed  against  the  balls,  both  in  open  air  and  in  room.

llBurning  in  margins  of  lids;  in  the  evening  a  feeling  as  of
sand  in  the  eyes,  obliging  him  to  rub  them.

BLids  were  very  sore  on  inner  margins.  ^Scrofulous  oph-
thalmia.

1 1  Brilliant,  red  inner  margin  of  lids,  and  dryness  of  their
inner  surface. 6  Trachoma.

1 1  Lids  inflamed  only  on  internal  surface;  they  are  painful,
dry  and  rub  against  the  ball ;  they  burn  and  can  scarcely  be
opened, d  Chronic  granulated  lids.

llExtreme  redness  of  inner  surface  of  eyelids,  with  an  uneasy
sensation  rather  than  pain,  often  obliging  one  to  rub  the
eyes.

1 1  Ulcerations  on  inner  surface  of  eyelids.  ^Ophthalmia
scrofulosa.

iCEdema  of  eyelids. ^  Bright's  disease.

llEyelids  swollen  and  oedematous,  first  upper  then  lower  (this
swelling  is  mostly  non-inflammatory  and  painless) ;  the  oede-
matous lids  are  firmly  and  spasmodically  closed,  and  look  as
if  distended  with  air.*

■  Agglutination  of  lids. ^Typhus.

lEyes  sunken  in  their  sockets,  closed  eyelids  gummed.  ^Febris
nervosa  putrida.

I  She  had  no  lashes  left. 6  Scrofulous  ophthalmia.

I  Lids  hanging  down. ^Typhoid.

Complaints  predominate  on  lower  eyelids.

I  Tearing  pains  around  the  eyes  on  looking  at  the  light.
d  Scrofulous  ophthalmia.

Eruption  around  the  eyes.

I  Red  circles  around  eyes  and  at  root  of  nose, d  Paraplegia.

iBluish  around  eyes  and  mouth. ^Summer  complaint.

I  Puffed  around  the  eyes. ^Neuralgia  of  trigeminus.

I  (Edema  around  the  eyes,  with  heat  and  paleness.  ^Bright's
disease.

Swelling  under  the  eyes.

I  Eyes  sunken. ^  Cholera  Asiatica. ^  Yellow  fever.

I  Eyes  sunken  in  their  sockets ;  half-closed  in  slumber,  partly
watered,  fixed,  dull  and  blue  rings  around  them.  6  Gas-
tritis mucosa  in  a  child.

*  "The  oedema  of  the  lids,  especially  the  lower  one,  is  not  at  all
lik<  the  puffiness  of  Apis  or  Rhus,  nor  is  it  dependent  upon  infiltration  of
the  connective  tissue  as  it  may  be  in  Rhus,  but  is  associated  with  the  gen-
eral cacheftic  Arsenic  conditions."


ARSENICUM.  42

I  Eyes  dull,  sunken,  blue  circles  around  them  ; face  earthy

pale.  I

I  Eyes  dull  and  sunken,  with  dark  rings  around  them, d  Yellow

fever.
I  Eyes  dull,  sunken  and  watery. ^Typhus.
®  Hearing  and  Ears. Complaints  of  inner  ear  predominate.
I  Unusual  sensitiveness  to  sound.

■  Ringing  in  the  ears.

■  Roaring  in  the  ears,  with  each  paroxysm  of  pain.

iWith  the  attacks  and  during  apyrexia,  buzzing  and  singing
in  ears, d  Intermittent.

■  Humming  in  ears  ; >>  open  air ; <^  in  warm  room.
Humming  in  ears,  with  hard  hearing,  as  if  ears  were  stopped.
Hardness  of  hearing,  cannot  hear  the  human  voice. (Compare

PJiosph).

■  Hard  hearing. ^Typhus.

■  Stitching  tearing  from  left  meatus  auditorious  outwards,  more

in  the  evening.

■  Her  left  ear  runs  matter.

■  Profuse,  ichorous,  cadaverous  smelling  discharge  from ear.

d  Otorrhoea.

■  Yellow  discharge  from  right  ear,  with  dryness  of  nose  ;  hear-

ing not  weakened.

■  Rash  and  heat  about  ears.

■  Malignant  swelling  of  parotid  glands  in  scarlet  fever,  when  re-

missions occur  in  which  patient  is  better,  but  soon  the  spell
of  great  prostration  return.

■  ■Parotitis,  with  intense  headache;  or  remitting  pains  ;  sup-

purating, d  Scarlatina.

■  Mumps,  especiall}^  with  metastasis  to  the  testicles.^

^  Smell  and  Nose. ■  ■  Cannot  bear  the  smell  or  sight  of  food.

■  Stuffed  cold,  with  loss  of  smell. ^Dropsy.

■  Offensive  smell  before  the  nose.

Smells  of  pitch  and  sulphur  alternately,  before  the  nose.
I  I  Dryness  of  nasal  cavity.

■  Nosebleed  after  a  fit  of  passion.
Nosebleed,  with  coryza,  after  vomiting.

■  ■Distressing  stoppage  at  the  bridge  of  the  nose.

■  ■Stoppage  of  nose,  alternating  with  fluent  coryza.

■  Nose  seems  to  be  stopped  up,  and  still  it  runs. 6  Coryza.

■  B  Cold  in  the  head,  catarrh ;  from  being  chilled  while  over-

heated and  perspiring.

■  ■Fluent  coryza,  with  frequent  sneezing;  with  hoarseness  and

sleeplessness  ;  with  swollen  nose.

■  ■  Watery  discharge  causes  burning  and  smarting  at  nostrils,  as

if  sore.

■  Discharge  of  burning  mucus  from  right  nostril.

■  ■Thick,  yellow,  nasal  discharge,  with  burning  and  throbbing.


43  ARSENICUM.

I  Burning  in  the  nose, d  Coryza.

■  Burning,  excoriating,  watery  discharge,  with  a  feeling  of  nose

being  stopped  up. d  Coryza.
I  Profuse,  burning,  corroding  discharge,  with  great  lassitude.
6  Influenza.

■  Acrid  running  from  nose,  corroding  the  upper  lip,  causing  a

scurf, d  Coryza.
I  Scabs  in  nostrils,  which,  when  torn  away,  leave  the  nostrils
raw  and  bloody  until  other  scabs  are  formed ;  worse  in  cold,
better  in  moderate  weather; cannot  breathe  through  the
nostrils  when  asleep.

■  Mortification  of  the  mucous  membrane  of  the  nasal  cavities.

d  Sequel  of  measles.

■  Nose  pointed. ^Cholera  Asiatica. ^  Yellow  fever.

■  Nose  cold  and  pointed ; nostrils  red  and  open. 6  Gastritis

mucosa,  in  a  child.

■  From  each  corner  of  nose,  a  deep  wrinkle  down  the  side  of  the

mouth  towards  the  chin. 0  Child  with gastritis  mucosa.
6  Typhus  abdominalis.

■  Nostrils  dry. ^  Pygemia.

Nose  swollen,  burns  ;  coppery  red,  desire  for  liquors.

■  ■Knotty  swelling  of  the  nose.

■  Cancer  of  the  nose.

■  Nostrils, corners  of  mouth and anus red and  excoriated.

d  Scrofula.

■  Ulcer  on  right  ala  nasi,  burning,  stinging,  painful,  forming

a  thick,  hard  crust,  which  came  ofi"  and  left  a  bleeding  mat-
tery surface,  soon  followed  by  another  crust. 6  Cancer.
'Face. ■Face  animated  and  congested. ^Paraplegia.

■  ■Drawing  and  stinging  in  face,  here  and  there.
Changed  expression  of  face.

■  Anxious  expression  of  face. ^Eclampsia.

Anxiety  and  great  suffering  depicted  on  face. 6  Typhus.

■  Appearance  in  face  of  great  dejection. ^  Bright's  disease.
Expression  anxious,  but  not  wild  ;  distressed;  of  sufi"ering;  of

mental  agony  ;  surly ;  wild ;  hippocratic  ;  sunken.
Appearance  very  pale ;  yellow,  waxy  ;  gray  ;  earthy ;  livid ;
bluish ;  flushed  ;  red  and  swollen  ;  distorted  features.

■  The  face  expresses  deep  inward  suflfering.

■  Eyes  deep  sunk  in,  blue  circles  around  them. 6  Scrofula,  with

a  child  set.  IJ.

■  Face  distorted,  pale,  livid,  old. 6  Gastritis  mucosa.

■  Stupid  expression  of  countenance. ^Yellow  fever.

■  Face  distorted,  sunken,  anxious,  hippocratic. ^Typhus. .

■  ■Peculiarly  distorted  face. ^Typhus.

■  Face  pale  and  distorted. 6  Neuralgia  of  trigeminus.

■  Face  pale,  cold,  distorted. 6 Cholera  asiatica.

■  Face  pale,  sallow,  distorted,  anxious, d  Colic  in  pregnancy.


ARSENICUM.  44

I  She  lies  in  bed  after  vomiting  blood,  face  distorted,  pale,  cold
extremities,  threadlike  pulse, d  Ilgematemesis.

■  Painfully  distorted  features,  bluish  lips, d  Painful  diarrhoea.

■  Face  cadaverous  and  distorted. ^  Colic. ^Intussusception.
I  Hollow,  pale,  cadaverous  face,  with  distorted  features, d  Acute

rheumatism  of  the  joints.
I  Pale, sunken,  earthy, ashen, sallow,  bloated countenance.
d  Intermittent.

I  Deathly  pale,  collapsed  face, d  Hsematemesis.

I I  Cachectic  appearance. ^Intermittent.

BFace  pale,  earthy,  sallow,  sunken,  bloated  during  apyrexia.
d  Intermittent.

■  Ilippocratic  face. ^  Heart  disease. ^Typhus.

■  Sunken  old  face,  blue  rings  around  the  eyes, d  Scrofula.

■  Face  sunken,  expressing  great  anguish. ^Dysentery.
I  Old  look  in  the  face, d  Chronic  intestinal  catarrh.

I  Young  children  have  faces  like  old  men. ^  After  abuse  of
opium.

■  Face  cold. ^Cystitis.

I  Face  and  body  covered  with cold,  viscous  sweat. ^  Heart
disease.

■  Coldness,  with  pale,  miserable,  earthy  face,  blue  lips. 6  In-

termittent.
I  Pale,  cold  face,  covered  with  cold  sweat. ^Asthma.

■  Cold  sweat  on  forehead, d  Haematemesis.

■  Face  covered  with  cold  sweat. ^Emphysema.

■  Face  oedematous  in  the  afternoon, d  Bright's  disease.

■  Bloated  face, d  Measles.

Bloated  face  covered  with  cold  sweat,  after  hives.  '

I  BCEdematous  swelling  of  face, d  Intermittent.

I  Pale  face. ^Pneumonia. ^  Summer  complaint.

I  Pale,  waxy  face,  intense  thirst  during  and  after  chill,  satisfied

by  a  swallow  of  cold  water,  which  was  vomited  as  soon  as

swallowed, d  Intermittent.
I  Cold,  distressing  yellowish  face, d  Hsematemesis.
I  Pale,  yellowish  face, d  Ovaritis.
I  Face  yellowish  and  livid. ^Yellow  fever.

■  Greenish,  yellow  color  of  the  face.

■  Gray,  yellowish  color  of  face, d  Ulcer  in  stomach.

■  Complexion  greenish. ^Ascites.

■  Face  cyanotic. ^Emphysema.

■  Face  pale,  earthy. ^  Gastralgia. ^Measles.

■  Complexion  pale,  earthy. ^Ascites.

■  Face  grayish  yellow,  somewhat  puffed.

■  Miserable  appearance,  puifed  up  face,  gray  yellowish. ^Re-

lapse of  intermittent,  after  quinia.

■  Grayish  yellow  face,  weariness,  weakness,  relaxed  muscles,

pulse  soft, small,  frequent,  no appetite,  yellowish furred


45  ARSENICUM.

tongue,  bitter  mouth,  frequent drinking,  sometimes  colic ;
stools  diarrhoeic. d  Intermittent.
I  Unusual  redness  of  face.

■  Flushed  face. ^Pericarditis.

I  Fine  eruption  on  face. 6  Ophthalmia  scrofulosa.

I  On  the  forehead  a  thick  black  crust,  beneath  it  an  ulcer  with

bluish  dirty  base,  and  upturned  edges,  exuding  dirty,  offen-
sive, corroding  ichor.

I I  Wartlike  ulcer  on  the  cheek.

Itching  of  the  face,  so  violent  that  he  would  like  to  scratch
the  parts  sore  ;  phagedenic  ulcer  on  the  lip  ;  swelling  of  the
upper  lip,  sometimes  preceded  by  burning  and  stinging,  itch-
ing, as  from  red  hot  needles.

1 1  Cancerous  ulcers  on  the  face;  scabbing;  burning  pain.

■  Twitching  of  facial  muscles.

■  Tearing  in  left  half  of  face.

1 1  Burning,  stinging  pains,  as  from  red  hot  needles.
iPimples  and  vesicles,  with  acrid  discharge  itching,  burning;
worse  at  night,  in  cold  air,  better  from  warmth.

I  Black  dots  (acne  punctata)  in  face  or  on  forehead,  skin  dry

and  dirty  looking.

I I  Swelling  of  face,  especially  beloAv  eyelids.

llCrusta  lactea,  dry  and  scaly,  with  diarrhoea  of  light-colored
stools.

■  Nostrils  and  corners  of  the  mouth  red  and  excoriated.

^  Lower  Part  of  Face. ■  Severe  pains  along  the  right  inferior
maxillary  nerve.

■  Mouth drawn  downward,  the bluish upper  lip  drawn  up.

6  Child,  gastritis  mucosa.

■  Eruption  about  mouth. ^  Herpes  labialis.

■  Slight  eruption  around  mouth;  fever-blisters  (hydroa);  cor-

ners of  the  mouth  filled  with  tough  mucus. 6  Intermittent.

■  Swelling  of  glands  of  lower  jaw,  with  pain,  as  from  contusion.

■  Submaxillary  glands  swollen  and  sensitive. ^Noma. d  Diph-

theria.

Complaints  predominate  on  upper  lip.

Contractive  quivering  or  jerking  on  one  side  of  upper  lip,  es-
pecially when  falling  asleep ;  mouth  drawn  down,  upper  lip
drawn  up.

■  ■Brown  streak  through  the  vermilion  border  of  lower  lip  as

if  burnt.

■  Bluish,  blackish,  or  dry  lips.

■  Lips  cyanotic. ^Scrofula.

■  Lips  covered  with  brown  slime. ^Typhus.

■  Lips  brown  or  black. ^Yellow  fever.

■  Lips  dry. ^Pyaemia.


ARSENICUM.  46

I  Lips  parched  and  dry.

I  Constantly  licking  the  dry,  cracked  lips,  with  great  burning

heat  of  whole  body.
iLips  dry  and  cracked, d  Typhus.

■  Constant  licking  of  the  dry,  cracked  lips, d Eclampsia.

I  Lips  are  pale,  cracked,  swollen  and  crusty  during  apyrexia.

d  Intermittent.

I I  Sore  lips  and  ulcers  in  mouth.
IB  Eruptions  on  the  lips.

1 1  Cancer  of  lips.

I  On  the  left  under  lip,  a  place  the  size  of  a  bean,  which  is
swollen,  inflamed,  dark  red,  with  raised  papillae,  bleeding
from  the  slightest  cause,  with  burning,  stinging  and  draw-
ing pain, d  Cancer.

I  Painful  nodules  externally  on  the  upper  lip  ;  on  the  inner  side
a  discolored ulcer  the  size  of  a  bean,  with  raised  edges.

I  Cancerous  sore  on  left  upper  lip,  destruction  of  tissue  as  far
up  as  the  zygomatic  bone.
'"  Teeth  and  Gums. I  Painless  throbbing  in  roots  of  teeth.

Numb  sensation  of  the  teeth.

I  Teeth  seem  longer,  become  loose,  and  are  sensitive  to  pres-
sure and  to  cold  water.

I  Pain  in  some  of  the  teeth,  as  if  loose  and  would  fall  out,  pain
not  increased  by  chewing.

■  Bites  the  tumbler  when  drinking.

■  Grinding  of  the  teeth  while  asleep.

■  Grinding  of  teeth. ^Typhus.

■  Toothache. ^  Dysmenorrhoea.
Teeth  are  loose  and  elongated.

Toothache  so  severe  as  to  drive  to  madness ;  he  becomes
enraged.

■  Aching  in  first  lower-bicuspid,  excited  by  the  cold  weather,

relieved  by  pressing  teeth  together ;  the  pain  causes  irrita-
bility of  temper,  and  aversion  to  the  sound  of  others  talking,
which  makes  it  worse  ;  nerve  of  tooth  is  exposed.

■  Jerking  toothache,  extending  to  temple,  relieved  or  removed

by  sitting  up  in  bed ;  better,  striking  his  head.

■  ■Toothache  relieved  by  heat  of  stove.

Teeth  become  rapidly  carious,  with  unbearable  pain.

■  When  teeth  are  drawn,  dark,  blackish  blood  squirts  out.
Jerking  and  burning  tears  in  gums.

■  Gums  and  teeth  covered  with  brown  or  black  slime, d  Typhus.

■  ■Swollen,  bleeding  gums,  painful  to  touch. 6  Scurvy.

■  ■Nightly  restlessness,  diarrhoea,  with undigested  food  and

emaciation, d  Dentition. See  47.
"  Taste,  Speech,  Tongue. Taste,  l  l  woody,  dry;  I  I  unpleasant;
■  sweetish  in  throat ; ■sour; ■metallic; ■■bitter; ■■putrid
early  in  the  morning.


47  ARSENICUM.

I  Sweet  taste  in  the  morning, d  Interval  of  attacks  of  epilepsy.

I  Bitter  taste  in  mouth. 6  Bright's  disease.

I  Foul  taste,  offensive  breath. ^Intermittent.

iFood  tastes  too  salty; I  not  salty  enough; linsipid;  sour;

I  beer  tastes  flat ; I  food  leaves  a  bitter  taste.
I  Water  tastes  badly;  bitter, d  Relapse  of  intermittent.
I  Loss  of  tasLe. ^  Apyrexia  of  intermittent.

■  Dry  tongue,  and  dislike  to  talk.

■  Trembling  tongue;  diflicult  articulation,  tongue  heavy,  as  if

paralyzed. 0  Typhus.
I  Trembling,  dry,  bright  red  tongue, d  Dropsy.
I  Speech unintelligible,  lisping, stammering,  as though the

tongue  were  too  heavy. 6  Typhus.
I  Tongue  stiff,  like  a  piece  of  wood, d  Typhus.

■  Loss  of  power  of  speech.

■  Tongue  pale,  mouth  cool,  much  thirst. ^Anasarca.

■  Tongue  icy  cold  ;  dry  mouth  and  tongue,  frequently  with  vio-

lent thirst.

■  Tongue  insensible  as  if  burnt.

■  Tongue  large,  dry,  yellowish, d  Retinitis  albuminurica.

■  ■Violent  burning  on  tongue.

■  ■Swelling  about  root  of  tongue,  externally  and  interna%.

■  Tongue  and  lips  parched  and  cracked,  with  black  and  sticky

coating, d  Typhus.

■  Dry  tongue,  lips  and  nostrils. ^Diabetes.

■  Lips,  tongue  and  nostrils  dry,  with  vomiting. ^Pyaemia.

■  Tongue  dry. ^Ascites.

■  ■Dry  tongue,  and  morbidly  red,  with  papillae  considerably

raised  at  the  tip.

■  Tongue  red,  dry,  and  cracked. ^Typhus.

■  Tongue  like  a  piece  of  red  leather,  so  thick  that  it  is  bent

when  protruded ;  great  thirst,  d  Old  woman  with  intermittent.

■  ■Edge  of  tongue  red  and  takes  imprint  of  teeth.

■  ■Tongue  as  white  as  chalk ;  as  if  painted  white.

■  Tongue  white  and  dry; tongue furred,  whitish ; somewhat

moist. 6  Relapse  of  intermittent.

■  Tongue  white,  or  brown  and  bluish. 6  Dysentery.

■  Tongue  furred  yellowish,  taste  bitter. 6  Intermittent.

■  ■Lead-colored  tongue.

■  Furred  tongue,  bitter  taste. 6  Dropsy.

■  Tongue  somewhat  dry,  furred  thickly  white,  d  Bright's  disease.
Coating: ■sides  furred,  with  red  streak  down  the  middle  and

redness  of  tip; ■or  thickly  furred,  edges  red ; ■■whitish;
■  yellowish-white; ■■brown.

■  Tongue  white  and  dry,  or  coated  yellowish,  during  apyrexia.

d  Intermittent.

■  Tongue  brown  or  black. ^  Yellow  fever.

■  Tongue  dry,  brown  or  black. 6  Cholera  Asiatica.


ARSENICUM.  48

I  Tongue  black,  smooth  as  if  varnished ;  or  dry,  hard,  blistered,

blackish  brown, d  Typhus.
iBluish  ulcers  on  tongue.

I I  Gangrene  of  tongue;  spots  on  tongue,  burning  like  fire.

'^  Inner  Mouth. BiBad  odor  from  mouth. ^Scurvy. ^Typhus.

■  Burning  in  mouth,  pharynx  and  oesophagus.

■  ■Dryness  of  mouth,  Avith  violent  thirst.

■  Desire  for  cold  water  but  fears  to  take  it. 6  Colicodynia.

■  Dryness  of  mouth  and  tongue. 6  With  headache.

■  Much  saliva;  must  spit  often.

■  Saliva  abundant,  tough,  fetid,  bloody.
I  Saliva  decreased.

■  ■Aphthae  in  the  mouth;  they  become  livid  or  bluish;  with

profound  weakness.

■  Thrush  in  mouth  and  fauces. ^Measles. ^Tuberculosis.

■  ■Painful  blisters  in  mouth  and  on  tongue.

■  ■Malignant  ulceration  of  mouth.

■  Thrush  in  adults  with  burning,  prostration,  and  very  great

restlessness. 6  Diphtheria.

■  The  cavity  of  his  mouth  was  as  dry  as  the  outer  skin,  and  to

such  a  degree,  that  in  spite  of  all  his  efforts,  he  could  not
moisten  the  least  bit  of  bread. ^Diabetes  mellitus.

■  Ulcer  on  inner  cheek,  irregular,  jagged  edges,  and  spongy  base.

■  ■Ulcers extending  from throat  to roof  of  mouth; tongue

white ; nose watering ; cervical  glands  swollen, d  Diph-
theria.

■  Stomacace.

■  Gangrenous  sore  mouth  with  children,  mucous  membrane  dis-

colored, some  places  blue  others  pale,  covered  with  tough
mucus  which  lies  in  brown  crusts  on  lips,  confluent,  discol-
ored, very  painful  ulcers  are  formed.  6  Stomacace.
'^  Palate  and  Throat.  'Places  the  size  of  a  penny,  nearly  ob-
long, in  fauces,  red  as  if  the  mucous  membrane  had  become
denuded ;  vesicles  the  size  of  a  pin's  head,  filled  with  clear
fluid,  which  disappeared  next  day,  leaving  dirty  red  spots ;
next  to  the  afiected  places  new  eruption  appears,  d  Angina
herpetica.

■  Dryness,  soreness,  scraping  and  burning  in  fauces  and  throat.

■  Tonsils  inflamed,  swollen  and  burning  like  fire.  ^Angina.
I  I  Sensation  as  if  a  hair  had  lodged  in  the  throat,  d  Diphtheria.
I  I  Sensation  as  if  a  ball  of  mucus  had  lodged  in throat,  with

taste  of  blood.
I  Accumulation  of  greyish  or  greenish  mucus.
Nausea  in  throat.

■  Stinging  in  oesophagus,  as  from  a  splinter,  soon  violent  tear-

ing (schrlinden)  merging  into  heat  and  burning, d  Angina
herpetica.
Throat  very  sore  and  painful.


49  ARSENICUM.

llCEsophagitis.

I  Fauces  and  tongue  very  much  swollen.

iPain  in  swallowing,  great thirst, anxiety  and restlessness.
d  Angina  herpetica.

I  Sore  throat,  when  swallowing,  as  from  an  internal  swelling;

burning  pain.

■  Sensation  of  constriction  of  throat.

I I  Burning"  when  swallowing; food  goes  down to  region of
larynx,  when  it  is  ejected, d  CEsophagitis.

■  Everything  swallowed  seems  to  lodge  in  the  oesophagus.

■  Swallowing  very  difficult  and  painful.

■  Exacerbation  in  evening,  violent  constriction  of  oesophagus.

d  Angina  herpetica.

■  Spasmodic  constriction  of  oesophagus,  as  if  a  ball  came  up  in

the  throat. 0  Hgematemesis.

■  Burning  pain  in  throat,  difficult  swallowing.  ^Bright's  disease.

■  Paralytic  condition  of  pharynx  and  oesophagus;  drinks  roll

audibly  into  the  stomach, d  Typhus.

■  Malignant  sore  throat, d  Scarlatina.

■  ■Diphtheritic  membrane  is  dry  looking  and  wrinkled ;  ady-

namic fever,  restlessness,  prostration,  burning  thirst ;  fetid
breath ;  even  gangrene ;  somnolence ;  occasionally  starts
out  of  bed. d  Diphtheria.

■  ■Gangrenous  sore  throat.

^*  Appetite,  Thirst.  Desires,  Aversions.  ■Feeling  of  hun-
ger and  emptiness,  she  has  to  eat  a  few  pieces  of  bread  while
feeling  cold. ^Intermittent.

■  Appetite  increased,  but  most  frequently  loss  of  appetite.

■  Very  little  appetite. ^Intermittent.

■  Thirst,  but  afraid  to  drink, d  Colic.

Irresistible  longing  for water  frequently  disturbing  sleep at

night,  undiminished  next  morning.
No  thirst  or  appetite ;  or,  Bloss  of  appetite  with  increased  thirst.

■  No  thirst  during  the  chilliness,  during  the  heat  frequent,  but

does  not  drink  much, d  Intermittent.

■  ■Burning  thirst,  without  especial  desire  to  drink.

■  Thirst  without  inclination  to  drink. 6  Colic  in  pregnancy.
Dryness  and  thirst, d  Stricture  of  oesophagus.

■  I  Great  thirst, d  Chronic  intestinal  catarrh, d  Haemateme-

sis. d  Hepatitis, d  Intestinal  catarrh, d  Small-pox.

■  Thirst  and  dryness  of  mouth,  with  peculiar  thick  white  saliva.

■  He  complains  of  thirst  in  a  hoarse  voice, d  Heart  disease.

■  ■Thirst,  unquenchable  by  drinking.

■  Excessive  thirst  for  cold  water;  small  quantities  even  are  im-

mediately thrown  up. d  Cholera  Asiatica.

■  ■The  most  thirst  during  the  sweat, d  Intermittent.
Unusual  thirst ;  heat  in  mouth  rose  to  such  a  degree  that  he


ARSENICUM.  50

had  to  drink  water  the  whole  evening  uninterruptedly,  with-
out being  able  in  the  least  to  allay  the  thirst.

I  Tortured  by  a  terrible  thirst,  with  a  high  degree  of  emacia-
tion and  loss  of  strength, d  Diabetes  mellitus.

IB  Frequent  unquenchable  thirst.  ^Cholera.  ^Marasmus.
d  Typhus, d  Diabetes,  etc.

B Excessive  thirst,  drinking  does  not  refresh.

BB Great  thirst,  but  water  molests  the  stomach.  *  ^Dropsy,  etc.

BB  Drinks  often,  but  little  at  a  time.  /9  Headache.  Scurvy.
Retinitis  albuminurica.  Diphtheria.  Gastritis.  Peritoni-
tis. Ascites.  Dysentery.  Ovaritis.  Ovarian  dropsy.  Me-
tritis. Pneumonia.  ELydrothorax.  Coxalgia.  Typhus.
Eclampsia. Measles. Carbuncle.

BWants  very  cold  water,  which  she  drinks  in  small  quantities,
all  other  drinks  she  swallows  in  masses,  d  Summer  com-
plaint.

B  Appetite  for  bread,  particularly  rye  bread.

B  B  Thirst  for  acid  drinks ;  desire  for  sour  things, d  Intermittent.

B  Desire  for  something  refreshing,  strengthening,  stimulating,
after  the  attack,  as  wine,  coffee,  etc. d  Intermittent.

Desire:  for  warm  food;  for  beer;  for  brandy;  for  coffee;  milk;
lard ;  fruits  and  vegetables.

Aversion:  to  sweets;  farinaceous  food;  gruel;  meat;  fatty
things;  butter;  meats;  Bfood,  loathes  even  the  thought  of  it.
^^  Eating  and  Drinking.  Better  on  an  empty  stomach;  <  after
breakfast.

B Eating  without  appetite,  causes  an  unpleasant  sensation  of
discomfort, d  During  apyrexia  of  intermittent.

B Appetite  variable. ^Retinitis  albuminurica.

B  Satisfying  appetite,  causes  heat  and  nausea.  6  During  apy-
rexia of  intermittent.

B  Worse  from  eating. 6  Gastralgia.

B  After  eating,  bitter  taste. ^Apyrexia  of  intermittent.

Sense  of  fullness  immediately  after  a  reasonable  quantity  of
food.

BBPain  in  stomach  or  abdomen  while  eating  or  immediately
after ;  can  take  no  more  food  at  the  time.

B  After  every  meal,  pressing  in  stomach,  gagging  and  vomiting.
d  Scirrhus  uteri.

B  After  eating  heavy  food,  burning  in  stomach  and  bowels.
6  Intervals  of  epileptic  attacks.

B Nausea,  gagging,  vomiting,  mostly  two  hours  after  the  meal,
even  the  lightest  kind  of  food.

B  After  taking  nourishment,  rumbling  in  abdomen,  soon  fol-
lowed by  painless  stools,  smelling  like  carrion, d  Scrofula.

B  After  eating,  a  stool.

B  Bitter  taste  in  mouth  after  eating  and  drinking.

BWorse  after  eating  and  drinking. ^  Colic. ^  Ulcer  in  stomach.


51  ARSENICUM.

Better  from  warm  diet.

Coldness  of  the  stomach  from  eating  fruit.

ISEating  the  least  increases  the  chill. ^Intermittent.

■  Violent  rigor,  after  eating something  when cold. ^Inter-

mittent.

I  Hasty  drinking.

Better  from  swallowing  some  hot  water.  6  Diphtheria,  d  Chol-
era Asiatica.

iViolent  retching  and  vomiting  of  small  quantities  of  mucus.
6  Gastromalacia.

I I  Every  drink,  be  it  ever  so  small,  is  followed  by  an  evacuation.
I  After  drinking,  if  done  without  thirst,  cough.

I  I  Chilliness  and  shivering  after  drinking. (See  Veratr.).

I I  Desire  for  cold  water,  but  afraid  to  drink,  because  it  makes
the  pain  worse, d  Colicodynia.

1 1  Cannot  drink  cold  water,  though  he  desires  it;  it  causes  pain,
or  lies  in  the  stomach  as  a  cold  mass  or  foreign  substance
for  a  long  time,  and  is  very  distressing.

Worse  from  cold  drink;  from  cold  diet  in  general;  >  from
warm.

1 1  After  ice-water  or  ice-cream. ^  Gastralgia. ^Gastritis.

I  After  chilling  the  stomach  by  taking  cold  substances.  ^In-
testinal catarrh.

I Gastro-intestinal  symptoms  worse:  after  ice  ;  ice-cream;  ice-
water;  vinegar;  sour  beer;  tobacco  (chewing);  alcoholic
drinks ;  bad  sausages ;  cheese ;  fruits.

Pain  in  stomach  relieved  by  sweet  milk.

Worse  from  milk.

I  I  Fat  food  disagrees,  and  so  does  wine;  the  smallest  quantity
increases  the  pain  in  stomach.

I  After  alcoholic  drinks. 0  Gastritis.

I I  Bad  effect  from  inordinate  use  of  spirituous  liquors.  6  Deli-
rium tremens. ^Vomiting. ^Diarrhoea. ^Hemorrhages.

1  After  vinegar  or  sour  beer. 6  Gastritis.
Better  from  drinking  coifee.
lAfter  chewing  tobacco. ^Gastritis.
I  After  rotten  cheese,  or  mouldy  English  cheese. 6  Colic.
lAfter  spoiled  sausages. 6  Colic.
^*  Hiccough,  Belching,  Nausea and  Vomiting, ii  Hic-
cough at  the  hour  when  the  fever  ought  to  have  come.
I  Abortive  eructations.
iWaterbrash.

I  Belching. ^Intermittent.
Belching  of  fetid  gases.

■  Constant  nausea. ^  Hsematemesis.
Frequent  nausea,  with  sweetish  taste  of  the  mouth.
BiNausea  and  complete  loss  of  appetite.

■Excessive  nausea  and  vomiting  on  rising  in  bed. 6  Gastritis.


ARSENICUM.  52

I  Nausea,  with  heat  and  ebullitions, d  Hgematemesis.
I  Nausea,  and  must  lie  down.

I  Long  lasting  nausea,  with  faintness,  tremor;  heat  all  over  and

shuddering.

I I  Nausea  and  vomiting. ^Dysentery. ^  In  pregnancy,  etc.
Nausea  and  sometimes  vomiting,  at  11  A.M.  and  3  P.M.

■  Nausea,  retching  and  vomiting  of  bile,  with  headache.

■  Fruitless  retching.

I  Retching. ^Hgematemesis.

I  Vomiting  and  retching, d  Typhus.

■  Vomiting. ^  Colic. ^Measles. ^Peritonitis.
Improved  quite  as  often  as  aggravated  by  vomiting ;  likewise

after  passing  urine.

I I  Vomiting  immediately  after  eating. ^  Gastralgia.
1 1  Vomiting  immediately  after  eating  or  drinking.

■  Sometimes  <  after  drinking. ^Yellow  fever.

■  Vomiting  after  every  swallow  of  water. ^Dropsy  after  scar-

latina.

■  Vomiting  of  all  he  takes, d  Cancer  of  stomach.

Yomit: bitter, green-yellow  lic[uid ; ingesta; brown,  turbid
matter;  streaked  with  blood;  of  blood;  black,  serous  liquid.

■  ■Violent  vomiting  of  food  and  gastric  fluids.

■  Sour  acrid  vomiting, d  Gastralgia.

■  Vomiting  of  clear  water  at  all  times  of  the  day. d  Colic.

■  Vomiting  of  mucus  and  bile. 6  Colic.

■  Vomiting  of  blood,  with  fainting  before  and  after. ^Hgema-

temesis.

■  ■Vomiting  of  brownish  matter,  with  violent  colic.
'■Vomits  a  tar-like  substance,  then  clots  of  blood. ^Hgemate-
mesis.

■  Black  vomit. ^Yellow  fever, d  Scirrhus  or  ulcus  ventriculi.

6  Hepatitis.

■  Cannot  retain  food,  vomiting  of  blackish  masses,  with  sudden

prostration.

■  Vomiting  every  night  of  what  has  been  eaten  during  the  day.

■  ■Frequent  vomiting,  with  apprehension  of  death.
After  vomiting,  nosebleed.

■  Violent  burning  in  stomach  and  bowels;  <  after  throwing  up.

6  Cholera  Asiatica.

■  Vomiting  of  slime  or  bile,  with  violent  gagging;  burning  in

throat  when  swallowing,  like  fire, d  Colic.

■  Vomit  and  stool  at  the  same  time.

■  Slimy,  watery  vomiting,  with  the  diarrhoea;  child. ^-Gas-

tritis mucosa.
^^  Stomach, Anxious  feeling  in  the  praBcordia.
Better  from  loosening  the  clothes.

■  ■Pain  in  epigastrium  and  stomach,  principally  burning,  vio-

lent, like  red-hot  coals,  also  violent  and  pressing  hard ;  spas-


53  ARSENICUM.

modic  contraction  and  constriction ;  stitches  or  fine  stinging
in  stomach  and  epigastrium. 6  Gastralgia. 6  Gastritis.
llEpigastrium  is  sensitive to slightest  touch. ^Gastralgia.
d  Gastritis.

I  Epigastric  and  umbilical  regions  sensitive  to  touch.

■  Epigastrium  distended  and  hard.

I I  Great  anxiety  about  the  epigastric  region.

■  Crawling  sensation  in  stomach, d  Hsematemesis.

I  Cramp  in  the  stomach  at  2  a.m.

I I  Weight  in  the  stomach  as  of  a  stone.
Violent  contraction  of  stomach.

■  Bloating  of  pit  of  stomach, d  Chill  of  intermittent.
1 1  Pressure  in  stomach.

■  Pressure  as  of  a  weight  and  trembling in pit  of  stomach.

d  Dropsy.

■  Great  pressure  in  pit  of  stomach. ^Yellow  fever.

■  Fullness  in  pit  of  stomach  with  the  heat. ^Intermittent.

■  Pain  in  pit  of  stomach  arresting  breathing.

■  Fullness  in  pit  of  stomach. ^Relapse  of  intermittent.

■  Pain  in  pit  of  stomach, d  Chill  of  intermittent.

■  Stomach  tender  to  pressure.

■  Pit  of  stomach  sensitive  to  the  slightest  touch, d  Gastralgia.

■  In  evening  while  sitting,  drawing  pain  from  pit  of  stomach

around  lower  border  of  left  ribs,  as  if  something  was  torn
loose.

■  Each  time  he  yawns  presses  his  hand  on  pit  of  stomach,  be-

cause it  then  feels  as  if  being  torn  out. d  Paraplegia.

■  Terrible  sensation  of  sickness,  weakness  and  anxiety  in  the

region  of  stomach. ^  Hgematemesis.
Gnawing  in  pit  of  stomach.

■  Violent  tearing,  boring  pain  and  cramp,  in  stomach  and  in-

testines.

■  Lancinating  in  stomach,  sometimes  into  chest,  or  only  at  night.

■  Heartburn;  severe  aching  in  stomach  and  epigastrium  ex-

tending to  middle  of  chest ;  burning,  as  if  stomach  and  oeso-
phagus were  being  made  raw  by  an  acrid  corroding  sub-
stance ;  several  attacks  a  day,  with  indescribable  nausea  and
weakness,  to  fainting. 6  Gastric  complaints.

■  Constant  painful  burning  in  region  of  the  stomach. ^Inter-

mittent.

■  Burning  in  stomach  like  glowing  coals, d  Gastralgia.

■  Burning  pain  in  stomach, d  Cancer  of  stomach. 6  Ulcers  in

stomach. 0  Hsematemesis. 6  Intermittent.

■  Burning  in  stomach;  sensitive  to  pressure. ^Typhus.

■  Burning  in  stomach  with  constriction  in  abdomen. ^Melan-

choly.

■  ■Burning  in  region  of  the  pylorus. 6  Scirrhus.

■  ■Intense  heat  and  burning  in  stomach  and  pit  of  stomach.


ARSENICUM.  54

A  cold  and  heavy  feeling  in  stomach,  chilliness  and  a  hot  fever
at  the  same  time.

1 1  Subacute  gastritis;  the  least  food  distresses  or  is  at  once
vomited.

1 1  Acute  gastritis,  painfkl  vomiting  of  grass-green  solids  or
fluids,  or  after  drinking.

llHsematemesis ;  often  with  black  stools;  stitches  in  the
spleen,  cold  sweat  on  the  forehead ;  burning  in  the  stomach,
thready  pulse,  moaning,  etc. See  16.

1 1  Induration  in  the  stomach. I  Scirrhus.
^^  Hypochondria. iPain  begins  with  stitches  in  right  side  under
ribs,  or  spreads  from  left  hypochondriac  region  over  whole
abdomen,  up  into  the  oesophagus  and  to  back  and  shoulder-
blade, d  Gastralgia. 6  Gastritis.

■  Sensitiveness  of  distended  epigastrium, and  lower  abdomen

which  is  tense,  drawn  in,  painful,  and  twitches  when  pressed
over  the  coecal  region  ;  meteorism. d  Typhus.

■  Tension  in  right  hypochondriac  region  with  pressing  pain  in

liver  which  is  perceptibly  enlarged. 6  Hepatitis.

■  Pressure  and  tension  in right  hypochondrium. ^  Relapse  of

intermittent.

■  Burning  or  stitching  pain  in  epigastrium  and  region  of  liver.

d  Yellow  fever.

■  ■Painful  bloatedness  in  right  hypochondrium,  with  burning

pain, d  Hepatitis.

■  Pain  in  region  of  liver,  increased  on  pressure.

■  Stitches  in  right  hypochondrium,  extending  to  region  of  sto-

mach ;  ending  as  violent  pressure  over  whole  abdomen.

■  Painful  bloatedness  in  r.  hypochondrium  with  violent  burning

pain, d  Hepatitis.

■  ■Induration  of  liver.

■  Liver  could  be  felt  and  hurts  when  touched. 6  Relapse  of  in-

termittent.
Gall  stones  with  cholera-like  symptoms. (OincJiona.)

■  Jaundice: after intermittent fevers, especially abuse of

quinine ;  after  mercury.

■  Tension  and  pressure  in  left  hypochondrium. ^  Heat  of  in-

termittent.

■  Hypochondriac  region  swollen  ;  ><  left, d  Apyrexia  of  inter-

mittent.

■  Both  hypochondria  sore  to  the  touch. ^Bright's  disease.

■  Tensive,  pressive  pain  in  spleen.

■  Drawing,  stitching  pain  under  left  hypochondrium;  burning

in  the  stomach  followed  by  vomiting  of  blood.

■  Stitches  in  spleen  precede  the  vomiting  of  blood  which  is  partly

coagulated,  partly  fluid,  and  dark, d  Hsematemesis.

■  Induration  and  enlargement  of  spleen.

■  Liver  and  spleen  swollen. ^Dropsy. ^Intermittent.


55  ARSENICUM.

■  Soreness  to  touch  in  region  of  spleen. 6  Quotidian.

I  Tension  and  pressing  pains  in  spleen  with  the  heat, d  Inter-
mittent.
I  Dull  pain  in  left  hypochondrium. 0  Intermittent.
I  The  spleen  expanded,  tumefied. ^Intermittent.
^^  Abdomen. Coldness  and  chilliness  in  the  abdomen.
I  I  Tension  in  the  abdomen.
iCrampy  pains  in  bowels. ^Yellow  fever.
Writhing  or  twisting  sensation  in  abdomen.
I  Pains  about  navel,  aggravated  by  lying  on  back.

■  Violent  bellyache  day  and  night  with  but  short  remissions;

constipation, d  Colic.
I  Cutting  pains  in  abdomen, d  Before  intermittent.

■  Terrible  cutting  bellyache  with  frequent  thin  evacuations,  faint-

ing and  cold  sweat. 6  Diarrhoea.

■  ■Violent  pains  in  abdomen,  with  great  anguish,  has  no  rest

anywhere,  rolls  about  on  floor  and  despairs  of  life.

■  ■Periodical  colic.

■  After  a  chill  half  an  hour  violent  squeezing  and  constricting

pain  in  umbilical  region,  twists  and  squirms  in  bed. d  Colic.
Comp.  20,  16.
Wind-colic  better  when  lying  down,  and  growing  warm  in  bed.

■  Verminous  colic  ;  the  upper  lip  is  drawn  up. 6  Horses.

I  Tearing  in  abdomen  with  icy  coldness  of  hands  and  feet,  and
cold  sweat  on  face.

■  Violent  tearing  and  cutting  in  upper  part  of  abdomen,  the  lower

part  distended,  soft,  but  painful  to  the  touch, d  Diarrhoea.

■  ■Deep  heavy  pain  in  abdomen,  felt  as  if  his  intestines  were

tied  up,  with  burning, d  Colicodynia.

■  ■Burning  in  intestines.

■  Burning pain in abdomen, d  Chronic intestinal catarrh.

d  Peritonitis.

■  ■Burning  lancinations  in abdomen,  with great  restlessness,

tossing  and  turning. 6  Peritonitis.

■  Violent  burning,  pinching,  constricting  pain  in  stomach  and

both  sides  of  abdomen  drawing  to  the  navel,  with  oppression
of  chest,  in  repeated  attacks,  every  half  hour.  6  Colic  in
pregnancy.

■  Violent  burning  in  abdomen  and  scrobiculum. d  Dysentery.

■  Burning  in  bowels  ;  sensitive  to  pressure. 6  Typhus.

■  Peritonitis,  when  there  is  sudden  sinking  of  strength,  anxiety,

cold  sweat.

■  Intussusception  with  pains  in  abdomen,  increased  by  motion;

sensitive  to  pressure.
^  Abdomen  drawn  in. ^  Colic.

■  Rumbling  in  bowels.

Rumbling  in  bowels,  severe  pains  with  diarrhoea  and  inclina-
tion to  vomit.


ARSEN[CUM.  56

I  Bloated  abdomen. ^  Haematemesis. ^Dysentery. ^During

apyrexia  of  intermittent.

I I  Abdomen  distended  and  painful, d  Gastritis  mucosa.

■  Abdomen  much  distended,  sore  aching  pain  on  touching  it.

6  Albuminuria.

■  Abdomen  sensitive  and  tympanitic. ^Dysentery.

■  Abdomen distended, particularly the left hypochondrium,

which  is  hard  and  painful  to  touch, d  Intermittent.

■  Abdomen hard and distended;  palpation reveals  indurated

mesenteric  glands, d  Scrofula. See  44.

■  Sensation  as  if  the  abdomen  would  burst  before  stool.

■  Meteorism  of  abdomen  without  pain,  everywhere  tympanitic

sound, d  Grastric  complaints, d  Gastromalacia.

■  Meteoristic  distension  of  abdomen. ^Typhus.

■  ■Ascites: from  heart,  hepatic  or  spleen  diseases,  also  post-

scarlatinal ;  from  Morbus  Brightii ;  faint  from  the  least  mo-
tion ;  suffocative  spells  at  night ;  anguish,  thirst,  etc.
Pain  in  right  side  of  abdomen,  near  lumbar  region,  spreading
through  abdomen  to  right  groin  and  same  side  of  scrotum.

■  ■Ulcer  above  the  navel.

■  ■Painful  swelling  of  inguinal  glands.

■  Groins  :  contractive  pain  in  left ;  as  if  sprained  in  right,  when

stooping ;  digging,  burning  like  a  boil ;  stitches.

■  Chafed  about,  the  groins,  extending  to  genitals.
Stitches  from  the  abdomen  down  into  vagina.

^^  Stool,  etc. ■  Painful  spasmodic  protrusion  of  the  rectum.
Rectum  remains  protruded  after  hemorrhages  from  rectum.
Rough  pricking  sensation  in  rectum,  as  if  she  was  passing  sand.
Evacuation  of  a  lump  resembling tallow,  with tendinous  sub-
stances.
Fetid  flatus.

■  Constipation  with  pain  in  bowels.

■  i Constipation  of  bowels. ^  Colic. ^Typhus.

■  Diarrhoea  alternating  with  scybalous  stools  of  a  whitish  clay

color. ^Bright's  disease.

■  B  Bilious  dysentery,  with  great  exhaustion  after  every  exertion  ;

great  distress  and  restlessness,  worse  after  midnight.

■  Black  stools. ^  Hsematemesis. ^Hepatitis.

■  Stool  soft,  insufficient. 6  Relapse  of  intermittent.

■  Fluid  feces  mixed  with  blood,  chocolate  color,  more  about  mid-

night, d  Dysentery.

■  Evacuation of  dark blood preceded by  violent  screaming.

d  Dysentery.

Watery,  stinking  stools,  mixed  with  bloody  mucus  or  undi-
gested food.

Stools  containing  more  or  less  pus,  sometimes  fluid  fecal  matter,
nearly  always  fluid  or  coagulated  blood ;  penetrating,  rotten,
sweetish  smell.


57  ARSENICUM.

I  Offensive  diarrhoea. ^Scurvy.

■  Diarrhoea  copious,  smell  of  rotten  eggs, d  Child's  gastritis

mucosa.
iBrownish,  slimy,  cadaverous-smelling  stools, d  Gastromalacia.

■  Discharge  from  bowels  of  a  fetid  foul  smell. ^Intestinal  ca-

tarrh, d  Dysentery.

■  Evacuations  have  a  rotten  smell,  are  involuntary  with  great

prostration, d  Dysentery.
I  Stools  frequent,  watery,  blackish-brown  ;  ichorous  :  clay  like ;
tinged  with  blood;  offensive;  puslike  mucus;  penetrating
odor, d  Typhus.

■  Thin,  rotten-smelling  or  bloody  stools  and  involuntary  pas-

sages, d  Typhus.

■  Small,  diarrhoeic,  offensive  stools, d  Intermittent.

■  Diarrhoea, d  Colic, d  Typhus, d  Measles.

■  Diarrhoea  painful  or  painless. ^Intestinal  catarrh.

■  Diarrhoea  painless,  involuntary. ^  Yellow  fever. ^Typhus.

■  Diarrhoea  very  prostrating, often  involuntary. ^Influenza.

■  Diarrhoea  worse  in  the  middle  of  the  night, d  Coxalgia.

■  ■Diarrhoea  worse  after  midnight  and  after  eating,  with  great

prostration.

■  Stools  slimy,  papescent,  brownish, worse  in  the night  and

towards  morning, d  Diarrhoea.
Diarrhoea  with  cutting  pain,  violent  thirst,  coldness  of  body  and
cold  sweat  on  the  face,  the  attacks  are  worse  from  motion.

■  Violent  burning  in  umbilical  region,  before  and  during  loose

stools,  which  consist  of  mucus ;  great  thirst  for  cold  water,
profuse  sweat,  anxiety,  tossing  about, d  Fall  diarrhoea.

■  Emaciation, old  face,  profuse greenish  muddy  evacuations,

with  swollen  feet, d  Diarrhoea  of  children.

■  Stools  brown  and  watery  ;  yellow  skin  ;  wasted  to  a  skeleton  ;

abdomen  tympanitic,  old  face, d  Diarrhoea  during  dentition.

■  Slimy  undigested  passages. ^Scrofula.

Diarrhoea:  ■■slimy,  green  mucus;  of  pieces  of  mucus,  with
tenesmus,  and  cutting  pain  in  anus ;  stools  small  with  tenes-
mus ;  first  dark  green  faeces,  afterwards  dark  green  mucus ;
■  black  mucus,  with  persistent  vomiting;  ■black,  acrid
and  putrid;  ■yellow,  with  tenesmus  and  burning  pain  ;  ■like
dirty  water  ;  ■of  blood  and  water.

■  Diarrhoea,  with  stools  containing  undigested  food,  with  emaci-

ation and  loss  of  strength.
Almost  constant  diarrhoea,  with  much  intestinal  rumbling.

■  ■Involuntary  stools  and  urine.

■  ■Diarrhoea  after  chilling  the stomach  by  taking  cold sub-

stances, particularly  ice  cream.

■  ■Cholera  infantum,  simultaneous  vomiting  and  purging,  great

exhaustion ;  vomiting  and purging  aggravated  by  food  and
water.


ARSENICUM.  58

1 1  Purging,  with  extreme  coldness  of  the  extremities.

1 1  Diarrhoea  worse  after  midnight,  also  in  morning  after  rising.

■  Diarrhoea  after  eating;  violent  with  frequent  discharges  ;  with

straining  ;  with  colic  ;  with  vomiting,  or  with  great  weakness.
Diarrhoea  more  frequent  than  constipation.
Diarrhoea  most  frequently  painless.

IS  Burning  evacuations  from  the  bowels  with  violent  colic.
Sensation  before  stool  as  if  the  abdomen  would  burst.
Twisting  in  the  abdomen  before  every  stool.
Diarrhoea  following  burns. Comp.  45.

■  Before  stool,  torturing  sensation  as  though  the  abdomen  were

being  constricted. 6  Dysentery.
Before  stool :  chilliness,  anxiety,  fainting,  cutting  in  abdomen  ;

vomiting ;  thirst.
Coldness  in  back  before  every  evacuation.
During  stool :  chilliness,  nausea,  vomiting,  backache,  straining

and  burning  in  anus  and  rectum.

■  Diarrhoea  with  tenesmus, d  Yellow  fever.

■  Tenesmus  with  burning  in  anus  and  rectum. ^Dysentery.

■  Stool  irregular,  mostly  diarrhoeic  with  burning  in  the  anus.

d  Intervals  of  epileptic  attacks.

■  A  feeling  of  contraction  in  the  rectum  during  stool. ^Dys-

entery.

■  Tenesmus  and  burning  of  the  anus  and  rectum  during  stool;

also  burning  after,  with  trembling.

■  Discharges  burning. ^Intestinal  catarrh.

■  Burning  in  the  anus  with  small  evacuations  of  mucus  and  con-

tinual eructation, d  Diarrhoea.
After  stool :  cessation  of  acute abdominal  pains ;  distension,
straining  about  the  navel ;  burning  in  rectum ;  oppression,
eructations,  weakness  with  trembling  and  faintness,  with  de-
sire to  lie  down  ;  palpitation,  perspiration.

■  Unbearable  tenesmus  with  burning  pains, d  Hemorrhoids  of

bladder.

■  Thin,  lumpy  stools,  of  all  colors,  excoriating  anus, d  Chronic

intestinal  catarrh.

■  Fissures  of  anus, d  Hemorrhoids.

■  Burning  and  stinging tumors  in anus,  the  size  of  a  walnut,

preventing  sitting  down, d  Hemorrhoids.

■  Anus  red  and  sore;  the  evacuations  excoriate.

■  Burning  in  anus  like  fire.

■  ■Hemorrhoids: with  stitching  pain  when  walking  or  sitting,

not  when  at  stool ;  with  burning  pain,  relieved  by  heat ;  with
bleeding  and  protrusion.

■  Hemorrhoids  painful,  swollen,  with  tenesmus,  burning,  parti-

cularly at  night,  preventing  sleep.

■  i Haemorrhages  from the  bowels  dark,  oflFensive. ^Typhus

abdominalis.


59  ARSENICUM.

^^  Urinary  Organs, l  Stitches  in  the  renal  region  when  breath-
ing or  sneezing. •  d  Morbus  Brightii.

■  Abscesses  in  the  kidneys.

■  Scarlatina  begins  with  urtemic  symptoms.

lUrsemia,  anguish,  with  thoughts  of  murder,  especially  in
drunkards.

I  Uremia,  with  vomiting,  colic,  spells  of  suffocation,  d  Emphy-
sema, d  Heart  disease.

I  Acute cystitis,  with high  fever and  restlessness; face and

limbs  become  cold ;  violent  burning  in  the  bladder ; great
thirst.

■  Chronic  cystitis,  with  retained  urine;  what  passes  is  turbid

and  purulent.

I I  Paralysis  of  bladder.

■  Symptoms  of  paralysis  of  bladder. ^  Hgematuria.

■  Bladder  greatly  distended  and  paralyzed. 6  Chronic  cystitis.

■  Atony  of  the  bladder  in  old  persons.
Tearing  deep  in  the  urethra.

■  ■Atony  of  the  bladder,  no  desire  to  urinate,  and  no  power  to

do  so  ;  seems  to  have  lost  all  control  over  the  power  to  emit;
especially  after  parturition.

■  ■Suppression  of  urine, d  Cholera  Asiatica.
I  ■Difficult  urination.

■  Retention  of  urine, d  Typhus, d  After  parturition.

■  Inability  to  void  the  urine, d  Chronic  cystitis.

■  Great  desire,  but  passes  no  urine.

■  ■Involuntary  micturition. 6  Typhus.

■  ■Urine scanty, passed  with  difficulty,  burning during dis-

charge, d  Strangury.
■Wetting  the  bed.

Involuntary  dribbling  of  urine,  day  and  night.
Urine  scanty,  with  diarrhoea,  or  hot  stage  of  fever,  or  frequent

and  copious  during  chill.

■  Scanty  secretion  of  urine. ^  Hgematuria.

■  Urine  scanty,  turbid. ^  Apyrexia  of  intermittent.

■  Urine  thick  and  scanty, d  Albuminuria.

■  Scanty  urine,  with  brick- dust  deposit. ^  Hydrothorax  acutus.

■  ■Urination  after  the  sweat,  brown,  soon  turbid,  but  without

sediment. ^Intermittent.

■  Urine  very  scanty  ;  very  much  sediment. ^Anasarca.

■  Fetid  urine. /9  Dysentery.

■  Urine  like  thick  beer;  rotten  smell, d  Typhus.

■  Urine  dark,  like  dung-water;  nitric  acid  precipitates  albumen.

d  Dropsy  after  scarlatina.

■  Urine  turbid,  mixed  with  pus  and  blood, d  Cystitis.

■  Bloody  urine, d  Hsematuria. d  Haemorrhoids  of  bladder.

■  Urine cloudy,  high  colored,  scanty,  pale,  albuminous. ^Pneu-

monia.


ARSENICUM.  60

1 1  Albumen in the urine. ^  Bright's Disease. ^Scarlet

fever.
1 1  Well  marked  albuminuria;  epithelium,  fatty  degeneration  or

atrophy  of  the  Bellinian  tubes,  tufts  and  capsule  of  Muller.

d  Morbus  Brightii.
Sugar  in  the  urine.

I  Urine profuse, pale and clear as water. ^Intermittent,

d  Rheumatism.

I I  Urination  frequent  during  the  cold  stage, d  Intermittent.

■  Frequent  urging,  with  profuse  discharge.

Urine: Idark  brown; Idark  yellow; Iturbid; Isediment  of
^  red  sand; 1 1  mixed  with  pus  and  blood  ;  greenish.

■  Burning  pain  in  urinary  organs, d  Haematuria.

■  Burning  pain,  especially  at  the  commencement  of  urinating.

d  Cystitis.
During  urination, burning  in urethra ; constriction in left

groin.
After  urination,  feeling  of  weakness  in  upper  part  of  abdomen.
^^  Male  Sexual  Organs. Sexual  desire  increased.
Involuntary  seminal  emissions.
Sexual  power  lost.
Emission  during  diarrhoeic  stool.
Prickling  in  the  side  of  the  glans.

■  Burning  in  glans  penis  during  micturition. ^Intervals  of  at-

tacks of  epilepsy.

■  Glans  blue-red,  swollen  and  cracked.

Excessively  painful  inflammation  and  swelling  of  the  genitals,

increasing  almost  to  gangrene.
Erysipelatous  inflammation  of  the  scrotum.

■  ■Scrotum  oedematous.

■  Rawness  of  scrotum,  with  a  bluish  look. ^Little  children.

■  Hydrocele  (scrofulous  infants).

■  Inflammation and swelling of  genital organs,  threatening

gangrene.

■  Serpiginous  ulcers  on  the  genitals.

■  Chancres  (after  mercury)  with  too  florid  granulations,  mar-

gins of  the  ulcers  hard  and  bleeding  at  the  least  touch,  with
a  thin,  ofi'ensive  discharge.

■  ■Phagedenic  chancres,  livid  hue,  with  intense  burning;  even

sloughing.

■  Constitutional  syphilis,  with  indescribable  feeling  of  weak-

ness, or  with  dropsy  and  malignant  ulcerations.

■  Bubo  when  assuming  a  gangrenous  aspect.

I  I  Cramp-like  cutting  colic,  darting  through  abdominal  ring

and  perineum  ;  testes  swollen  ;  epididymitis.
Inguinal  glands  painful,  swollen  and  indurated.

■  Intertrigo  of  children,  particularly  in  the  groins  and  extend-

ing to  the  scrotum.


61  ARSENICUM.

^^  Female  Sexual  Organs.  Increased  sexual  desire,  with  invol-
untary discharge  of  mucus.

1 1  Burning  or  tensive  pain  in  the  ovary.

llPressive  stitching  pains  in  region  of  right  ovary.

1 1  Drawing,  stitching  pain  from  region  of  ovary  into  thigh,
which  feels  numb  and  lame ;  worse  from  motion,  bending,  or
sitting  bent.


feverishness,  sallow  complexion,  emaciation ;  instead  of
menses,  a  thin,  whitish,  offensive  discharge.  6  Ovaritis
caused  by  a  kick.

■  Burning  pain  in  region  of  ovaries, d  Ovarian  dropsy.
Intense  burning  or  tensive  pain  in  ovary,  with  great  restless-
ness, some  relief  being  afforded  by  constantly  moving  feet.

Tumors  painful  (burning,  lancinating)  or  painless.

I  Ovarian  tumor,  with  pain  in  leg,  cannot  keep  foot  still.

■  Ovarian  tumor  on  right  side,  filling  entire  abdominal  cavity,

could  not  stoop  to  dress  her  feet.
llBurning throbbing, lancinating pain in uterine region.
d  Scirrhus.

■  Burning pain in uterine region. ^Metritis. ^Uterine

cancers.

■  Violent  burning  pain  in  genitals,  with  hard,  nodulous  swelling

of  uterus,  os  uteri  swollen  like  a  pad,  hard,  extremely  sen-
sitive ;  shooting  stinging  paius  to  the  upper  part  of  abdo-
men ;  burning  thirst  and  dryness  of  mouth  and  throat ;
worse  from  every  motion. 6  Scirrhus  uteri.

■  Polypus  on  the  cervix  uteri.
Catamenia  too  profuse  and  of  long  duration.

■  I  Catamenia  too  early  and  too  profuse.

■  Menses  too  often  and  venous. ^Retinitis  albuminurica.
Exhausting  monorrhagia.

■  ■Menorrhagia  in  feeble  females,  cachectic,  affected  with  rheu-

matism, disorganization  of  the  uterus,  or  ovaries,  in  eruptive
fevers,  and  when  aphthae  break  out,  indicating  a  low  state  of
the  system.

■  ■  Hemorrhage,  with  lancinating  burning  pains.

■  Sudden  profuse  discharge  of  dark  blood.

■  Painful  menstruation  ;  external  warmth  relieves.

During  menstruation,  stitches  in  rectum,  extending  into  anus
and  vulva  ;  stinging,  cutting  pain,  extending  from  epigas-
trium into  hypogastrium,  sides  of  abdomen  and  back  ;  tooth-
ache.

After  menstruation  :  discharge  of  bloody  slime,  or  stinking
watery  discharge  from  vagina  and  anus.

■  Suppressed  menstruation. ^  Hemoptysis. ^Intermittent.

■  Absence  of  menses  for  a  long  time,  in  women  of  pale,  wax-


ARSENICUM.  62

like  complexion,  who  are  greatly  debilitated;  least  exertion

causes  great  fatigue  ;  restless  sleep,  with  fatiguing  dreams.
1 1  Thin,  whitish,  offensive  discharge  instead of  the menses.

d  Ovaritis.
ULeucorrhoea  acrid,  corroding,  thick  and  yellow,  dropping  out

while  standing  and  emitting  flatulence.

I  Acrid,  corroding,  burning  discharges;  watery;  light  or  dark

colored,  often  very  offensive. 6  Uterine  cancer.

■  Stitches  from  the  abdomen  down  into  the  vagina.

I I  Dryness  of  vagina, d  Scirrhus  uteri.

BLancinations  from  rectum  to  anus  and  pudenda. ^Dysmen-

orrhoea.
1 1  Inflammation  and  spelling  of  the  genitals.
Itching  of  the  genital  organs.
^*  Pregnancy. '  Morning  sickness  during  pregnancy,  with  spells

of  faintness ;  retching, with empty  stomach, preceded  by

burning  in  stomach  and. oesophagus.

■  Violent  motion  of  the  child  and  colic, d  Pregnancy.

■  ■Metritis  in  childbed,  with  signs  of  dissolution  of  blood.

■  Ascites  in  consequence  of  puerperal  peritonitis.

■  Promotes  the  expulsion  of  moles.

■  After  parturition,  atony  of  the  bladder.
Burning  pains  in  mammae  ;  relief  from  motion.

■  ■Cancer  of  the  breast,  burning  pain;  external  warmth  re-

lieves.
^®  Voice  and  Larynx.  Trachea  and  Bronchia.  ■  Voice  hoarse.
d  Cholera  Asiatica. 6  Typhus. 0  Heart  disease.

■  Voice  weak,  scarcely  audible, d  Colic  in  pregnancy.
Aphonia. See  36.

■  Voice  low,  trembling,  rough,  hoarse,  coarse,  crowing  or  squeak-

ing, d  Typhus.
Voice  :  trembling ;  weak  ;  unequal,  now  strong  and  again  weak ;
hoarse  ;  rough  ;  hollow  ;  loss  of  voice.

■  Spasm  of  the  glottis.

■  Larynx  constricted  during  cough.

d  Feeling  of  dryness,  with  burning  in  the  larynx  and  trachea.
d  Laryngeal  phthisis.

■  ■Sensation  as  if  one  were  inhaling  dust.
Bronchitis,  with  difficult  secretion  of  mucus.

■  Larynx  sensitive  to  pressure  ;  hoarse  by  day  ;  suffocative  spells

at  night, d  Croup.

■  Influenza  in  children  ;  sudden  onset,  much  prostration,  child

looks  as  though  it  had  been  sick  a  week ;  violent  sneezing,
with  blood-tinged  discharge.

■  ■Sudden  catarrh,  threatening  suffocation  at  night.

■  Croupous  inflammation  of  larynx,  which  is  sensitive  to  press-

ure ;  hoarseness  by  day,  dyspnoea  and  suffocative  attacks  at
night, d  Croup.


63  ARSENICUM.

I  Croup,  with  coryza;  stoppage,  cannot  breathe  through  nose;

worse  at  night,  with  restlessness.

I I  Simulating  membranous  croup;  caused  by  checked  or  non-
appearing  eruption,  especially  hives  or  urticaria.

■  Gangrenous  croup.

^^  Respiration Frequent  inclination  to  sigh  with  a  childish  cry-
ing mood.
Putrid  exhalations.

I  Noiseless,  hardly  audible  breathing. ^  Heart  disease.
Whistling  expiration.

I I  Wheezing  respiration,  with  cough  and  frothy  expectoration.

■  Rattling  breathing. ^Typhus.

Deep,  quick  inspiration,  and  difficult,  interrupted  expiration.

■  Breathing  quick,  short,  loud  rattling. ^Bright's  disease.

■  Respiration  short  and  anxious.

■  Breathing  short  and  anxious, d  Typhus.

■  Oppression  and  short  breathing, d  During  heat  after  inter-

mittent.
Panting  breathing.

■  Groans  and  moans  in  breathing, d  Hsematemesis.

■  The  breathing  becomes  more  and  more  weak,  until,  finally,

she  is  only  able  to  breathe  and  talk  very  low  by  inclining
the  chest  forward.
Sensation  as  if  inhaling;  dust.

■  Talking  aggravates  the  symptoms. ^Intermittent.

■  Laughing  causes  difficulty  in  breathing.

Every  little  excitement  gives  her  a  hysterical  asthma.

■  Want  of  breath;  he  complains  in  a  hoarse  voice. ^ Heart

disease.

■  ■Loss  of  breath  immediately  on  lying  down,  in  the  evening,

with  whistling  and  constriction  in  the  trachea.

■  After  going  to  bed,  tightness  on  the  chest,  whistling  expira-

tion. 6  Asthma.

■  Turning  in  bed,  takes  away  his  breath. ^Hydrothorax.

■  Breath  oppressed  and  pulse  irregular. ^Retinitis  albuminu-

rica.

■  When  walking  in  the  open  air,  suffijcative  sensation  forcing

him  to  cough.
Arrest  of  breathing  with  cough.

■  Difficult  inhalation  with  constant  anxiousness  and  short  crow-

ing cough. ■  Anasarca.

■  Breathing  anxious,  hurried,  labored,  snoring,  rattling, d  Ty-

phus, d  Yellow  fever.

■  Respiration  oppressed,  anxious,  short.

Burning  or  feeling  as  if  excoriated  and  raw  in  chest.

■  Constriction  of  the  chest,  with  anguish;  worse  when  moving.

■  ■Air  passages  seem  constricted,  cannot  breathe  fully.
In  cold  air,  want  of  breath.


ARSENICUM.  64

Windy  weather  increases  dyspnoea  even  with  the  well  protected
and  while  in  a  warm  room.

1 1  Oppression  increased:  by  stormy  weather  and  heavy  air;
walking  quickly  ;  ascending  ;  warm  and  tight  clothing ;  but
especially  from  changes  of  warmth  and  cold.

I  After  suppressed  coryza :  panting  breathing,  gasping  for  air  ;
sensation  as  if  there  was  dust  in  the  air,  worse  about  mid-
night and  from  motion,  with  groaning  and  restless  tossing.
6  Asthma.

Grasping  for  breath,  feels  as  if  she  would  smother.

I  On  lying  down  at  night,  feels  an  oppression  of  chest,  breath-
ing became  short,  is  obliged  to  sit  up  in  bed ;  worse  after
midnight ;  drinking  coffee  or  sugar  with  water  relieves  some-
what ;  symptoms  worse  on  going  up  stairs,  gets  out  of  breath.
d  Asthma.

II Breathing  asthmatic:  must  incline  chest  forward;  must
spring  out  of  bed  at  night,  especially  about  12  p.m.

I  Cramp  in  chest  (asthma)  as  soon  as  he  lies  down  to  sleep,  as
if  too  narrow,  expiration  whistling ;  the  throat  and  chest  as
if  bound  together,  so  that  he  had  to  sit  up,  bending  forward,
from  which  he  got  some  relief;  gradually  the  breathing
became  more  and  more  difficult  and  the  expiration  difficult
and  fine  in  tone,  like  the  highest  falsetto ;  feels  anxious  to
despair  and  anxious  sweat  all  over ;  this  degree  of  violence
lasted  three  or  four  hours  and  only  abated  after  midnight.

I  Patient  unable  to  lie  down;  on  attempting  to  do  so,  such
difficulty  of  breathing  that  she  nearly  died  of  strangulation.
d  Dropsy.

Asthma  when  fatigued,  as  from  anguish.

■  Violent  attack  of  asthma  in  consequence  of  a  cold  in  mid-

summer.

I  Asthma  from  suppressed  itch.

illn  asthma  of  old  people,  who  have  occasional  attacks  of
morning  diarrhoea,  rheumatism,  scanty  secretion  of  urine,
and  too  violent  impulse  of  heart  sound.

I I  Asthma  about  2  a.m.

Great  dyspnoea  and  pain  in  lower  chest,  on  full  inspiration.
Dyspnoea  when  vexed.

I  a  Dyspnoea  increased  after  coughing,  with  sensation  of  con-
traction of  chest  or  stomach. ^Asthma.

■  Considerable  dyspnoea. ^Bronchitis. ^Tuberculosis. ^  Hy-

drothorax. d  Scarlatina, d  Post-scarlatinal  dropsy, d  Para-
plegia.

■  Dyspnoea  worse  from  motion,  cannot  lie  on  back  or  sides,  has

to  sit  bent  forward,  the  lower  extremities  are  cold  and  oede-
matous. d  Dropsy  after  scarlatina.

■  I  Great  dyspnoea ;  face  cyanotic  and  covered  with  cold  sweat ;

great  anxiety, d  Emphysema.


65  ARSENICUM.

Arrest  of  breathing  and  suffocative  apprehension,  sometimes
with  weakness  and  excessive  debility,  or  at  night.

■  Suffocative  spells  in  evening,  after  lying  down. ^Asthma.

I  When  lying  down  at  night,  however  carefully,  sense  of  suffo-
cation, d  Hydrothorax.

I  Suffocating  spells,  most  at  night, ^Ascites.

Suffocating  oppression  at  night  in  bed;  also,  with  weakness.

Has  to  sit  up  ;  when  lying  on  the  back,  suffocative  attacks.
d  Asthma.

When  coughing  or  immediately  after,  feels  contracted  and  as
if  suffocating,  labors  with  great  diflSculty  to  re-establish  free
respiration.

I  Paroxysms  of  suffocation, d  Whooping-cough.

Suffocative  attacks,  with  palpitation,  in  the  night.
"  Cough. B Oppression  and  spasms  in  chest,  with  having  cough.
d  Chill  in  intermittent.

I  Deep,  dry,  unceasing  cough.

■  Severe,  spasmodic  cough. ^Dropsy  after  scarlatina.
I  Dry  cough. ^Typhus.

I  Dry  cough,  short  and  hacking,  with  sense  of  excoriation  in
chest,  or  soreness  from  pit  of  stomach  upwards,  with  short,
difficult  breathing.

■  Cough  after  every  mental  emotion;  coughing  spells  are  pre-

ceded by  great  anxiety  and  restlessness;  vomiting  of  food
and  drink  as  soon  as  taken,  the  vomiting  brings  on  the  cough.
d  Whooping-cough.

■  ■  Cough  excited  by  smoky  sensation,  or  as  of  vapors  of  sulphur

in  larynx,  or  by  constant  titillation  in  larynx.

Cough,  without  expectoration,  especially  after  drinking  or  eat-
ing ;  when  lying  down  ;  during  a  walk  in  cold  air.

Cough  after  drinking,  from  continuous  irritation  or  tickling  in
bronchi.

Cough  during  motion,  with  want  of  breath.

■  Cough  when  going  into  cold,  open  air.

■  Night  cough ;  must  sit  up  as  soon  as  cough  commences.

■  Croup-like  cough,  with  suffocating  spells,  worse  after  mid-

night, d  After  suppressed  hives.
Cough  in  the  morning.

■  Clear-ringing,  crowing,  or  whistling  whooping-cough,  excited

by  a  burning  tickling  in  trachea  and  in  throat-pit,  as  if  from
vapor  of  sulphur,  at  night  without  expectoration,  in  daytime
with  expectoration  of  mucus,  scanty  and  generally  frothy,  or
in  lumps,  of  various  taste  and  color  (bitter,  putrid,  purulent,
saltish,  offensive,  gray,  yellow),  sometimes  mixed  with  florid
blood  ;  returning  periodically  with  increasing  violence.

■  ■Whooping-cough,  with  cholera  infantum.

■  ■Whooping-cough,  with  arrest  of  breathing,  tough  mucus  in

VOL.  II. — 5.


ARSENICUM.  66

chest ; sputa  of  frothy  mucus  in  lumps ;  asthmatic  symp-
toms ; debility  ;  cold  surface.

llDuring  whooping-cough,  palpitation  of  the  heart;  cough  re-
turns periodically  with  increasing  violence  ;  child  whines  and
cries.

I  Cough  preceded  by  jerking  in  hips,  which  seemed  to  excite
the  cough.

I  Cough  awakens  him;  as  if  he  would  be  suffocated;  throat
swelled.

iWhen  coughing,  soreness  in  chest  and  pain  as  if  something
was  digging  into  throat  from  before  backward.

During  cough  :  catching  of  breath ;  soreness  in  chest,  stitches
in  sides  or  in  epigastrium  ;  heat  of  head  ;  collection  of  water
in  mouth.

Cough,  with  arrest  of  breathing ;  with  tough  mucus  in  chest ;
with  expectoration  of  frothy  mucus  in  lumps,  or  tasting  salty,
in  daytime  ;  without  expectoration  at  night.

B  A  heavy  feeling  and  aching  in  chest,  after  coughing,  d  Bright's
disease.

Cough  most  frequently  with  expectoration,  which  generally  ap-
pears only  during  the  day.

1  Cough  worse  at  night,  and  whenever  he  lies  on  his  back  ex-
pectoration is  profuse,  white,  frothy,  sometimes  thick  and
yellow ;  attack  of  coughing  followed  by  sweat  and  great
weakness. 6  Bronchitis.

Expectoration  difficult ;  scanty  and  frothy ;  or,  consisting  of
tenacious  mucus,  which  is  lodged  in  chest.

Expectoration:  B I  frothy  saliva;  Bthick  yellow;  B  gray,  green,
bitter; S salty; BB mucus,  streaked  with  blood.

B  Tenacious  mucus,  hard  to  get  up,  rattling  in  chest,  old  peo-
ple, d  Pulmonary  catarrh.

B  Frequently  recurring  cough,  with  expectoration  of  blood-
streaked  mucus;  retching  and  vomiting  of  food  and  drink;
this  cough  frequently  interrupts  the  few  moments  of  sleep
she  can  get  by  laying  her  head  on  a  table  before  her.
6  Dropsy.

B  B  Cough,  with  bloody  sputa.  **

B  Hacking  cough  every  morning,  with  expectoration  of  bright
red  fluid  blood,  with  burning  in  left  chest, d  Haemoptysis.

BHsemoptysis  at  night,  with  burning  heat  over  whole  body.

B  Foaming  bright  red  blood  bursts  forth  in  a  stream,  with  slight
hawking ;  ebullition  and  burning  and  fullness  in  chest.
6  Haemoptysis.

B  B  Haemoptysis  after  loss  of  blood  ;  burning  heat  all  over,  espe-
cially with  pain  between scapulae ;  in drunkards,  or  from
suppressed  menses.
^^  Lungs. B  Feels  as  if  she  had  a  load  in  upper  part  of  both  lungs.

B  Tightness  of  chest,  as  if  bound  with  a  hoop.


67  ARSENICUM.

I  Constriction  of  chest,  with  great  anxiety  and  restlessness,
evenings  ;  burning,  or  feeling  as  if  excoriated  and  raw.

I  Constriction  of  chest,  with  anguish  and  oppressive  anxiety  at

pit  of  stomach.

I I  Constriction  of  chest,  when  going  up  hill.

I  Great oppression and constriction of chest. ^Cholera

Asiatica.

■  Constriction  of  chest, d  Chill  of  intermittent.

■  Burning  and  heat  in  chest. ^Pneumonia.

I I  Burning  in  chest  and  stomach. 6  Haemoptysis.

I  Pain  in  chest, with cough and restless sleep. I  Bright's

disease.

■  Chilliness  in  chest,  evenings.

■  Great  heat  in  chest,  extending  below  the  diaphragm.

I I  Catarrh  on  chest,  great  suffocation;  child,  tosses  about  in
agony.

Wheezing  at  chest,  with  bruised  pain  between  shoulders.
I  Loud  sibilant  rales  over  every  part  of  chest. ^Bronchitis.

I  Stitches  :  in  upper  right  chest ; lin  left  chest  only  during  in-

spiration ; lin  sternum,  from  below  up,  when  coughing.

I I  Acute,  sharp,  fixed  or  darting  pain  in  apex  and  through  up-
per third  of  right  lung.

I  Pleuritic  effusion,  great  dyspnoea  from  slightest  motion;  can
lie  only  on  affected  side ;  tongue  thickly  coated  dirty  yellow  ;
feet  swollen, d  Ascites.

I  Chronic  pleurisy  (in  sheep) ;  dark  and  offensive  expectoration  ;

great  weakness  on  attempting  to  move  or  sit  up. d  Pneu-
monia.

I I  Pneumonia  from  taking  cold  during  a  fatiguing  journey.

■  Pneumonia,  with  dark,  offensive  sputa;  great  weakness,  not

felt  until  attempts  are  made  to  move  or  sit  up.
I  Burning  and  heat  in  chest;  pale  face ;  cold  extremities  ;  anx-
ious tossing, d  Pneumonia.

■  Posterior  lobes  of  both  lungs  affected. ^Pneumonia.

■  Chronic pneumonia,  with purulent sputa; especially  with

asthma.

■  Asthmatic  attacks  accompanying  emphysema.

■  ■Hydrothorax.

■  ■  Gangrene  of  lungs,  with  green,  ichorous  sputa.

■  Impending  paralysis  of  lungs;  rattling  in  windpipe.
^^  Heart. Cramp  in  the  heart.

■  ■  Heart-beats  are  irritable.

Sounds  of  the  heart, especially  the "choc"  rather  violent;
not  agreeing  with  the  pulse.

■  Palpitation  as  from  a  distance. /9  Anasarca.

■  Trembling,  irregular  motion  of  heart. ^  Heart  disease.

■  Intermitting  b.eats  of  heart;  somewhat  irregular  and  intermit-


ARSENICUM.  68

ting  pulse,  accompanied  by  a  whistling  sound,  d  Heart  dis-
ease.

Palpitation  of  heart,  violent  excessive,  with  great  anguish,  es-
pecially at  night.

1 1  Palpitation  of  heart,  with  anguish  ;  cannot  lie  on  back  ;  worse
by  going  up  stairs.

Violent  palpitation,  most  in  the  night,  visible  and  audible.

IB  Palpitation  of  the  heart  and  tremulous  weakness  after  stool;
must  lie  down.

■  Severe  paroxysms  of  palpitation  or  attacks  of  syncope  during

endocarditis.

■  Tumultuous  action  of  heart,  alternating  with  feeble,  irregular

beating, d  Hydropericardium.

■  Palpitation. ^Paraplegia. ^Dysentery. ^  Hydrothorax.

d  Heat  of  intermittent, d  Measles.

■  Heart  disease  with  emaciation.

■  Palpitation  after  suppressed  herpes  or  foot  sweat.

■  ■Angina  pectoris  ;  sudden  tightness  above  the  heart ;  agoniz-

ing praecordial  pain ;  pains  into  the  neck  and  occiput;  anx-
iety, oppression  ;  breathing  difficult,  fainting  spells ;  least
motion  makes  him  lose  his  breath ;  sits  bent  forward  or  with
head  thrown  back  ;  worse  at  night,  especially  from  1  to  5  a.m.

■  ■Rheumatism  affecting  the  heart,  with  great  prostration,  cold,

sticky  sweat ;  great  anxiety  and  oppression  ;  burning  about
the  heart ;  pulse  small,  rapid  and  feeble.

■  ■Valvular  disease  with  intermittent  pulse,  dyspnoea,  anasarca,

complains  more  towards  evening,  or  at  night,  on  going  up
stairs,  after  deep  inspirations,  or  getting  angry.

■  Right  ventricle  hypertrophied. (?  Retinitis  albuminurica.

■  Fatty  degeneration  of  the  heart.

■  I  Hydropericardium  with  great  irritability,  anguish  and  rest-

lessness ;  especially  in  ur8emia,  etc.

■  ■Idiopathic  heart  disease.

■  Pulse  very  frequent  in  morning  but  slower  at  night. ^Inter-

mittent.

■  120-130  beats  of  pulse  in  the  minute, d  Hsematemesis.

■  Pulsation  through  the  whole  body. 6  Heat  of  intermittent.

■  Quite  small  pulse. ■  Scarlatina.

■  Very  quick  pulse. 6  Hepatitis.

■  Frequent,  quick,  small  pulse, d  Measles.

■  Frequent,  weak  pulse. ^Dysentery.

■  Pulse: accelerated; quick and small; quick and  weak;

small  and  weak  ;  irregular  ;  trembling  ;  imperceptible.

■  Small,  rapid  pulse. ^Dropsy.

Pulse  very  much  accelerated,  small,  and  weak ;  sometimes  in-
termitting.

■  Pulse  small,  soft,  frequent. ^Relapse  of  intermittent.

■  Pulse  frequent,  small,  trembling. ^Typhus.


69  ARSENICUM.

I  Pulse  too  small  and  frequent,  with  oedematous  limbs. /?  Dys-
entery.
I  Quick,  trembling,  thread-like  pulse. 6  Hsematemesis.
I  Pulse  small  and  undulating. 0  Anasarca.

I  Pulse  hardly  to  be  felt,  so  frequent. 6  Dysentery.

I I  Pulse  scarcely  perceptible,  and  quick,  trembling. 6  Gastritis
mucosa.

Pulse  sometimes  imperceptible; I  thread-like.

I  Pulse  hardly  to  be  felt,  with  cold  limbs. 0  Colic.

I  Nothing to be felt but a  trembling  motion of  the  pulse.

d  Dropsy.
I  Pulse  irregular,  frequent,  small,  trembling. ^Yellow  fever.
Pulse  sometimes  supphressed,  with  strong  beat  of  the  heart.
^^  Outer  Chest. Il  Stitches  and  pressing  in  sternum.

■  Distension  of  the  chest. ^Whooping-cough.
Burning  and  itching  in  chest.

Sore  raw  feelinjg  of  chest,  from  stomach  upward.
Chilliness  or  coldness  in  chest.
Heat,  burning,  itching  in  chest.
Yellow  spots  on  chest.
^^  Neck. Back. Stiffness  of  the  neck.
I  Nape  stiff,  as  if  bruised  or  sprained.
Neuralgic  pains  on  left  side  of  neck.
Blueness  of  external  throat  from  distension  of  veins.
Colorless,  smarting  eruptions  on  neck,  shoulders  and  sides.
Cervical  glands  enlarged,  felt  like  a  series  of  hard  nodules  under

the  skin.
I  The  pressing pain  becomes  burning  and  shooting;  pain  in

sacrum  as  if  broken,  anxiety,  restlessness,  rush  of  blood,  most

to  the  head. 6  Metritis.
Drawing  pains : Ibetween  scapulae,  necessitating  lying  down ;

I  from  small  of  back  to  the  shoulders.
I  Backache  after  hard  work. ^Rheumatism.

■  Insupportable  backache  towards  evening  and  on  rising  from  a

seat. 6  Rheumatism.
I  Cold  creeps  on  the  back,  evening  and  night.
lA  sense  of  warm  air  streaming  up  the  spine  into  the  head.

6  Precedes  epileptic  attacks.

■  Burning  in  the  spine. ^  In  epileptic  attacks.

■  ■Burning  in  the  back.

■  Burning  pain  in  back  while  lying  quietly  upon  it. 6  Ovaritis.

■  Greatly  exhausted  from  sexual  excesses  ;  pulling  and  tearing

in  back  and  legs ;  formication  along  the  spine ;  flesh  pale,
soft,  bloated.

■  Paralysis  of  lower  third  of  spinal  cord.

■  Spinal  affection  with  gressus  gallinaceus. 6  Paralysis.

■  Small  of  back  as  if  broken. ^Hemorrhoids.

■  Bruised  pain  in  small  of  back,  with  sensation  of  weakness.


ARSENICUM.  70

IlLoss  of  strength  in  small  of  back.

I  Stiffness  in  spinal  column,  beginning  in  region  of  os  coccygis.
I  Ulceration  of  sacrum  after  typhoid.
^^  Upper  Limbs. Violent tearing and  jerking  pains in right

shoulder-joint  and  shoulder,  extending  to  arm,  elbow-joint,

and  forearm. ^Rheumatism.
Soreness  in  the  axilla.

Rheumatic  pains  from  elbow  up  to  shoulder,  worse  at  night.
Pain  in  the  arm  of  the  side  on  which  one  rests,  at  night.
Drawing  and  lacerating  in  the  arms,  particularly  at  night.
Complaints  predominant  on  upper  arm.
Peculiar  neuralgia  in  left  arm  suddenly  after  meals.
Violent  neuralgia  of  left  arm  followed  by  lame  feeling.
Upper  limbs  weak  ;  flexors  of  fingers  retracted.
I  Paralytic  feeling  in  upper  limbs, d  Pericarditis.
Painful  lubercles  on  the  arm.

I  Swelling  of  the  arm,  with  putrid  smelling,  black  blisters.

I I  Drawing  and  tearing  from  elbow  up  into  axilla,  at  night.
Violent  rheumatic  pains  in  right  elbow.

Small  reddish  spot  on  left  elbow-joint,  soon  forming  a  blister,
becoming  in  a  few  hours  as  large  as  a  hazel-nut  and  turning
black ;  similar  blisters  appear  on  right  elbow  and  next  day
on  left  leg.

I  Hands  and  lower  half  of  forearm  dark  and  livid,  as  in  malig-
nant cholera.

I  Swelling  on  the  forearm,  size  of  a  goose  egg,  after  becoming
inflamed  all  around,  dropped  off. 6  Cancerous  inoculation.

■  Trembling  of  hands.

Sensation  of  swelling  and  fullness  in  palms  of  hands  at  night.

■  Fistulous  opening  in  palm  of  hand  discharging  ichorous  pus,

pain  and  sensitiveness  great. 6  From  a  felon.
I  Tingling  in  fingers. /?  Pericarditis.
I  Hands  can  be  extended  but  not  the  fingers.

I  Burning  and  shooting  in  a  finger  connected  with  case  produced

by  a  wart  having  been  pulled  out.

■  Soreness  between  the  fingers.

■  Drawing,  jerking  and  tearing  from  tips  of  fingers  into  shoulder.

I I  Vesicles  filled  with  blood  on  tips  of  fingers;  ulcers  and  scabs
under  nails.

llBurning  ulcers  on  tips  of  fingers.

i  Indurations  in  the  soft  parts  between  the  metacarpus  of  thumb
and  index  finger,  and  some  along  the  forearm  between  the
radialis  and  supinator  longus,  size  of  a  common  bean,  d  Can-
cerous inoculation.

iSpongeous  excrescence  on  the  thumb,  size  of  a  raspberry,  very
painful,  the  slightest  touch  increases  the  pain  very  much.
d  Cancerous  inoculation.

I  Under  the  nail  of  the  thumb  a  very  sensitive,  radiating  pain,


71  ARSENICUM.

a  few  days  after  operating  on  a  cancerous  mamma,  the  thumb
nail  being  cut  too  close.

Nails  discolored ;  at  first  red,  then  black ;  later  replaced  by
new  nails,  thin  and  transparent,

I  Blue  nails, d  Chill  of  intermittent.
^  Lower  Limbs. ■  Drawing,  stitching  pain,  from  region  of  ovary
into  the  thigh,  which  feels  numb  and  lame ;  worse  from  mo-
tion, d  Ovaritis.

Horses:  hip-shot  from  inflammation  of  kidneys,  standing
crooked,  legs  drawn  together.

I  Pain  back  of  great  trochanter,  extending  down  thigh,  posteri-
orly, then  toward  knee ;  anteriorly,  embracing  patella,  down
tibia  to  ankle ;  pain  relieved  somewhat  by  flexion  of  knee.

I  Deep  drawing  boiling  sensation ;  hopeless,  pale,  emaciated ;

dyspnoea  or  fainting  spells  from  slightest  exertion, d  Sciatica.

■  Neuralgia  in  hip,  with  severe  burning,  tearing  and  drawing

pain,  not  allowing  the  afi"ected  p;irt  a  moment's  rest.
6  Sciatica.

■  Sciatica  brought  on  by  staying  in  damp,  cold  cellar.

I I  Tearing  and  shooting  in  hip,  thigh  and  groin.

■  Twitching  in  the  hips. ^Whooping-cough.

■  Violent  drawing,  tearing  pain  in  hips  and  left  foot.

■  Cramp  in  thighs,  calves  and  toes  in  the  evening,  in  bed  ;  fol-

lowed by  lassitude.
Complaints  predominate  on  inner  side  of  thigh.
Intolerable  itching  of  thighs.

■  Buttocks  sore  to  touch.

■  Spells  of  violent  pain  on  posterior  surface  of  thigh,  calves  and

heels ;  worse  from  every  attempt  to  walk,  relief  from  bend-
ing the  knee  and  hip-joints  (flexing,  etc.,  in  the  abdomen).
6  Rheumatism.

■  Gressus  gallinaceus.

■  ■Pain  in  the  knee-joint,  as  if  beaten.

■  Swelling  and  pain  of  knees.

■  Cracking  of  knees  when  walking.

■  Stiffness  and  immobility  of  knees  and  feet, d  Scirrhus.
The  knees  feel  as  if  bandaged.

■  Periodical  elastic  swelling  of  knee,  can  bear  moderate  pressure

without  increasing  the  pain ;  pain  in  the  knee  very  severe,
extending  to  hip  and  ankle-joint, as  of  scraping  over  the
long  bones, d  Rheumatism.
I  I  Stiffness  of  knees  and  feet,  alternating  with  tearing  pains.

■  Itching  herpes  in  bends  of  knees, d  Scabies.

■  ■Itching  tetters  in  hollow  of  knee. .
Complaints  predominant  in  hollow  of  knee.

■  Coldness,  especially  of  knees  and  feet.
Knees  cold,  head  and  ears  hot.

■  Tearing  in  the  tibia.


ARSENICUM.  72

Complaints  predominant  in  calf  of  leg.

I  Cramp  in  calves.

I  Cramp  and  drawing  in  the  muscles  of  the  calves, d  Colic.

I  Frequent  cramp  in  the  calves, d  Intervals  of  epileptic  attacks.

I I  Uneasiness  in  lower  limbs,  cannot  lie  still  at  night,  has  to
change  position  of  feet  constantly  or  walk  about  to  get  relief.

I  Sensation  as  if  lower  limbs  would  break  down,  on  going  up
stairs.

B I  Weariness  in  the  feet.

Bi  Weakness  of  feet,  numbness.

Paralysis  of  the  legs  predominant.

Numbness,  stiffness  and  insensibility  of  feet,  with  occasional
swelling  and  great  pain.

B  Drawing  pain  in  legs  when  resting  feet  upon  the  floor,  while
sitting.

bDuII  aching  pain  in  right  leg  below  the  knee,  somewhat  in-
creased by  walking,  but  especially  ■<  at  night  after  becom-
ing warm  in  bed  ;  oval  prominence  on  tibia  about  four  inches
below  knee,  hard  and  immovable  and  very  sensitive  to  touch,
with  slight  redness ;  later,  similar  pain  and  tenderness  on
outer  surface  of  right  ulna.

BPain  in  lower  limbs, d  Intermittent.

B  White  swelling  of  limb,  with  intermittent  fever  and  weakening
diarrhoea, d  Phlegmasia  alba  dolens.

B  Swelling  of  lower  limbs,  with  violent  pain.

(Edematous  swelling  of  left  leg.

BCEdema  of  the  legs, d  Gonarthrocace.

B  Swelling  of  feet. ^  Bright's  disease.

BFeet  oedematous,  swollen,  ice-cold  and  numb, d  Heart  disease.

BFeet  oedematous. ^Apyrexia  of  intermittent.

B Extremities  oedematous. ^Albuminuria.

B  Instep  oedematous,  leg  and  thighs  very  much  swollen,  the  skin
erysipelatous, d  Pyaemia.

BB  Swelling  of  feet,  oedematous  ;  great  exhaustion.

Hard  blue-red  swelling  of  feet.

B  Swelling  of  feet,  hard,  burning,  shining,  with  red  spots  or
blue-black  blisters.

Hot  and  shining  swelling  of  the  feet.

B  Horses:  swelling  of  fore-feet ;  predominating  ailments  of  hoof
or  cleft  of  hoof.

B  Distension  of  veins  of  feet. ^Varices.

Hight  limb  swollen  and  full  of  suppurating  pimples,  with  an
unbearable  itching.

B After  suppressed  foot- sweat. ^Palpitation  of  heel.

Intolerable  itching  of  feet.

Itching- swelling  of  the  feet.

BBOld  ulcers  on  lower  limbs,  with  burning  and  lancinating
pains.


73  ARSENICUM.

llOld  ulcers  on  legs,  with  burning  and  stinging.

I  Pain  in  an  ulcerated  leg  so  violent  that  it  Avaked  her  up  at  ftur

o'clock,  and  prevented  her  from  sleeping  after  4  a.m.
Ulcer  on  foot  surrounded  by  a  gangrenous  crust.
I  After  opening  an  abscess  on  left  heel, edges  of  the  wound

mortified, d  Periostitis  of  os  calcis.

■  Tearing  in  the  heels.

Loss  of  power  of  toes  ;  the  walking  is  performed  with  the  soles.
I  Stitches  which  cause  her  to  shudder,  from  the  little  left  toe  to
the  great  toe.

■  Violent  tearing,  drawing  pain  from  ankle  bones  down  over

heel  to  sole  of  foot,  only  ameliorated  when  the  leg  is  flexed

on  the  abdomen, d  Rheumatism.
Cold  feeling  in  soles  of  feet.

Soles  feel  as  if  made  of  wood  and  do  not  feel  the  ground.
I  Festering  sores  or  ulcers  on  the  soles  of  the  feet  and  toes.
Blisters  on  bottom  of  feet,  at  night  discharging  a  light  yellow

fetid  water.
I  Rending  pain  in  the  soles.

B I  Spreading  blisters  form  ulcers  on  soles  and  toes,
i  I  Sore  pain  on  balls  of  toes,  while  walking,  as  if  chafed.
I  Toes  drawn  downwards.
Crumbling,  misshaped  toe-nails.
^*  Limbs  in General. Il Heaviness  of  limbs. ^Intermittent.

■  Neuralgia  of  the  extremities.

I  Painful  feeling  of  fatigue,  penetrating  to  the  marrow  in  the
bones  of  the  limbs. 6  Rheumatism.

■  Gouty  and  rheumatic  pains,  drawing  and  lacerating,  particu-

larly in  limbs,  with  inability  to lie  on afi"ected  part,  and

diminution  of  pains  when  moving  it.
I  Aching  in  all  the  limbs, d  Bright's  disease.
Neuralgic  pains  in  forearms  and  legs,  increase  and  decrease

gradually ;  worse  from  cold  air  or  cold  water.
Pa  n  in  the  limbs,  jumping  from  place  to  place.
IB  Restlessness  of  limbs  during  whooping-cough.
IIA  general  lack  of  will-power  in  upper  and  lower  limbs;

numbness,  or  sensation  of  heaviness.
IB  Trembling  of  the  limbs. ^In  drunkards.
B  Twitching ;  trembling  ;  violent  starting  while  falling  asleep.
BB Excessive  weakness  and  exhaustion  of  limbs  oblige  him  to

lie  down.
Contraction  of  limbs  from  paralysis  of  extensors.
Hands  and  feet  as  if  mummified ;  skin  hangs  in  folds.
B  Stiff,  lame  limbs, d  Yellow  fever.

Hands  and  feet  swollen,  burning  pain,  but  feel  cold  to  touch.
B Limbs  cold. ^Cystitis. ^Pneumonia.
I  Cold  hands  and  feet,  with  occasionally  cold  feeling  all  over.

d  Colycodynia.


ARSENICUM.  74

^°  Position,  etc.  llFrom  climbing  mountains  or  other  muscular
exertions :  want  of  breath,  prostration,  sleeplessness  and
other  ailments.

Cannot  remain  in  same  position.

Lying  in  bed  :  gloomy  forebodings  ; asthma.

Lying  on  back  :  pains  about  navel  <  ;  burning  pain  in  back.

Lying  down  :  must,  on  account  of  weakness  ;  pains  worse.

Sitting  up  in  bed :  toothache  better.

Must  sit  up  in  bed  :  asthma.

Sitting :  stitching  in  hemorrhoids.

Sitting  bent :  ovarian  pains  worse.

Half-sitting  posture:  sleeps  in  that  way.

Motion:  flushes  and  chilliness  with  irritability;  sensation  of
brain  beating  against  skull ;  head  confused  in  paraplegia ;
headache  <C  ;  eyes  more  painful ;  ovarian  pains  <C  '■>  con-
striction of  chest  ■<  ;  >>  gouty  and  rheumatic  pains  in
limbs  ;  causes  fainting ; <  heat.

Walking :  reels  with  headache  ;  relieves  pain  in  supra-orbital
region  and  teeth,  3  ;  headache  <  ;  stitches  in  hemorrhoids  ;
cough  in  open  air ;  causes  fainting ;  in  open  air,  shuddering.

Ascending  :  asthma  <  ;  constriction  of  chest ;  aggravates  val-
vular troubles.

Must  move  :  head  and  feet  in  hemicrania  ;  cannot  lie  still.

Bending  over :  ovarian__  pains  worse.

Rising  up  in  bed :  beating  in  head  <C ;  excessive  nausea  and
vomiting.

Turning  in  bed  :  breathless.
^  Nerves. '  l  Cannot  rest  in  any  place ;  changing  his  position  con-
tinually ;  wants  to  go  from  one  bed  to  another,  and  lies  now
here,  and  now  there.

I  Restless,  constantly  moving  head  and  limbs.

lit  was  impossible  for  her  to  remain  in  the  same  position,  and
with  the  slightest  change  of  position  of  the  affected  limb,  she
had  to  scream. ^  Acute  rheumatism.

I  During  the  spells,  restless ;  moves  head  and  limbs  to  and  fro,
and  imagines  that  he  gets  some  relief  from  so  doing,  d  Mi-
graine.

I  Tossing  about  from  side  to  side, d  Summer  complaint.

I  Great  restlessness,  cannot  remain  seated,  runs  around,  creeps

on  hands  and  feet, d  Cystitis.

I I  Great  restlessness  with  fear  and  anxiety.

I  Restless,  fretful,  dread  of  death. ^Headache.

■  Great  restlessness  and  anxiety,  constant  moving  of  head  and

limbs,  whilst  the  trunk  lies  still ;  on  account  of  too  great
weakness, d  Typhus.

■  Anxious  restlessness. ^Gastritis. ^Peritonitis. ^Ovarian

dropsy. 6  Uterine  cancer, d  Panaritium, d  Scarlatina.

■  Great  restlessness  with  much  thirst. ^Iritis  rheumatica.


75  ARSENICUM.

I  Great  restlessness  and  exhaustion. ^Prosopalgia.

Great  restlessness  after  suppressed  hives.

I  Great  restlessness.  ^Neuralgia  of  trigeminus.  ^Scurvy.
d  Cancer  of  stomach.  6  Dysentery.  6  Cystitis.  6  Ovari-
tis, d  Dysmenorrhoea.  d  (Edema  pulmonum.  6  Asthma.
d  Chronic  intestinal  catarrh.  d  Coxalgia.  d  Eclampsia.
d  Measles. 6  Small-pox. d  Carbuncle. 6  Herpes.

■  Restlessness  and  anxiety, d  During  heat  of  intermittent.

■  General  discomfort. /?  Before  intermittent.

■  Trembling. ^  Hgematemesis. ^Chlorosis.

■  Trembling  of  the  limbs. ^Dysentery. ^Typhus. ^In

drunkards. 6  With  cough.

■  Subsultus  tendinum.

■  Jerks  in  the  body  when  falling  asleep,  like  electric  shocks.

■  After  grief,  clonic  spasms;  face  and  limbs  were  convulsed,  he

uttered  a  roar  involuntarily  while  conscious,  d  A  man,  get.  65.

■  Clonic  or  tonic  spasms  in  different  places, d  Cholera  Asiatica.

■  Spasms preceded by burning heat of  the whole body.

d  Eclampsia.
Hysterical  spasms,  followed  by  exhaustion.

■  Before  the  spasm,  drawing  in  the  limbs,  longing  to  lie  down;

when  they  come  on,  sudden  jerk  through  the  body  or  icy
coldness  from  head  down  the  back ;  loss  of  consciousness,
stretches  and  writhes,  and  then  draws  the  limbs  together ;
abdomen  rises  and  falls  rapidly  with  rumbling;  at  times
distortion  of  the  facial  muscles, d  Tetanus.

■  Epileptic  convulsions  preceded  by  a  sensation  of  warm  air

streaming  up  the  spine  into  the  head,  vertigo,  loss  of  con-
sciousness and  falling  down.

■  Convulsions  with  opisthotonos;  foam  at  the  mouth.

■  Convulsions. ^  With  whooping-cough.

■  Epileptic  attacks  (often er  Calcarea  arsenica).

■  Tetanus.

Stiffness  and  immobility  of  all  the  joints.

■  Inability  to  make  any  movement, d  Typhus.
Feels  extremely  tired  all  over.

■  Thinks  himself  strong  until  he  attempts  to  rise. ^Typhoid.

■  Weary,  averse  to  all  bodily  effort;  weariness  increases  so  that

he  cannot  sleep.

■  ■Exhaustion  from  slightest  exertion,  must  lie  down. See  44.

■  Great  exhaustion. ^Dysentery. ^Uterine cancer. ^Tu-

berculosis, d  Gonarthrocace.  d  Ascites, d  Scirrhus  mammae.
d  Hsematemesis.
The  child  is  very  weak  ;  the  slightest  effort  seems  to  exhaust  it,
such  as  vomiting,  etc.

■  Weakness,  obliging  him  to  lie  down,  he  feels  stronger  when

doing  so.


ARSENICUM.  76

■  Great weakness  and restlessness. ^Haemorrhoids. ^Hae-

moptysis.

■  Great  weariness  and  weakness, d  Intermittent.
I  Pains  very  debilitating, d  Toothache.

I  Excessive  debility. ^Scurvy. ^Carbuncle. ^Chlorosis.

■  Great debility and fainting. ^Rheumatism. ^Carbuncle.
Debility  from  overworking.

I I  Rapid  and  complete  prostration.

■  Prostration,  vertigo,  singing  in  ears,  deafness. ^Typhus.

■  ■Extreme prostration. ^Migraine. ^Cancer of stomach.

^Chronic intestinal catarrh. ^Asthma. ^Pneumonia.
6  Tuberculosis, d  Paralysis, d  Typhus, d  Scarlatina.

■  Extreme  prostration  and  rapid  emaciation, d  Typhus, d  In-

termittent.

■  Aphasia ;  left  arm  and  foot  paralyzed. 6  After  apoplectic  con-

dition with  great  prostration.

■  ■Great  prostration,  with  waxy  paleness  and  coldness  of  skin.
Relaxation  of  the  muscles.

Prostration  in  his  feet.

■  Soon  prostrated  by  the  illness, d  Gastritis.

■  Sudden  prostration. ^  Intestinal  catarrh. ^  Cholera  Asiatica.
Excessive  prostration  ;  general  rapid  sinking  of  strength.

■  Great sinking of strength. ^  Apyrexia of intermittent.

6  Measles, d  Small-pox.

■  Sudden  sinking  of  strength. ^Latter  stage  of  peritonitis.

d  Metritis.

■  ■Very  rapid  sinking  of  strength. ^Intermittent. ■Yellow

fever.

■  ■Sudden  sinking  of  strength  ;  cold  sweat,  fear  of  death.

■  Sliding  down  in  bed. ^Typhus.

■  ■Frequent  fainting.
Violent  deep  fainting  fits.

■  ■Faint,  anxious  and  weak,  early  in  the  morning.
Fainting  with  vertigo  and  swelling  of  the  face.

■  ■Fainting. ^ Hsematemesis. ^  Gastralgia. ^Intermittent.

6  Dysentery, d  Chlorosis.

■  Sometimes  shortly  after  the  paroxysm  fainting  spells,  espe-

cially if  she  has  an  urging  for  stool, d  Relapsed  intermittent.

■  Fainting  from  motion,  from  walking  about,  from  coughing  or

speaking. 6  Hsematemesis.

■  Slight  attacks  of  fainting-like  weakness  with  constriction  of

chest. ^  Acute  rheumatism  of  joints.

■  Fainting  attacks  with  exhaustion. /?  Typhus.

■  ■Fainting  from  weakness,  with  scarcely  perceptible  pulse.
Electro-muscular  contractility  diminished.

Want  of  bodily  irritability.
Paraplegia.


37


77 •  ARSENICUM.

I  Complete*  paraplegia,  skin  of  legs  cold,  soft,  flaccid;  the
slightest  spontaneous  motion  is  impossible.

Cannot  talk,  left  arm  and  foot  lame  after  an  apoplectic  con-
dition with  great  prostration.

I  Paraplegia;  skin  of  legs  cold,  flaccid;  great  prostration.

I  Paralysis :  with  gressus  gallinaceus,  also  from  lead  poisoning;
after  neuralgia ;  of  the  limbs  which  were  oedematous  before  ;
particularly  of  the  extensors ;  with  atrophy  of  the  muscles  ;
generally  of  both  sides ;  especially  of  lower  extremities ;
more  frequent  than  apoplexy.
Sleep. Yawning  and  stretching.

■  Frequent  spasmodic  yawning. ^Paraplegia.

I  Every  two  or  three  seconds  she  has  to  gape. Girl,  set.  7.

6  Summer  complaint.
Inability  to  go  to  bed.
Jerking  of  the  limbs  when  falling  asleep  ;  sometimes  excited  by

pains  felt  in  distant  parts.
Frequent  attacks  of  somnolence  in  the  daytime  while  sitting.
I  Half  slumber  broken  by  moaning  and  grating  teeth, d  Typhus.

■  Drowsiness  interrupted  by  uneasy  dreams  and  great  anxiety.
Slumber  and  slight  delirium.

I  From  midnight  till  morning  light  slumber,  disturbed  by  fre-
quent waking  with  a  burning  or  sore  pain  in  the  chest.
&  Asthma.

I  When  the  chill  lessens  falls  into  a  deep  sleep  ;  gets  awake  after
the  heat  has  lasted  a  while, d  Intermittent.

I  Sopor  from  which  she  often  awakes,  but  only  for  a  short  time.
d  Typhus.

I  Sopor  in  the  evening.

Sleep  full  of  tiresome  dreams  ;  unrefreshing.

■  Dreams  :  full  of  care,  sorrow  and  fear ;  about  thunder-storms  ;

of  fire;  of  black  water  and  darkness;  I  of  death  and  dead
persons  ;  misfortunes ;  embarrassments  and  vexations.

i Talks  in  his  sleep,  divulged  a  secret  which  otherwise  would
not  have  passed  his  lips, d  Cancerous  inoculation.

I  Trembling  in  sleep  ;  grasping  at  the  head, d  Typhus.

Grasping  at  flocks.

At  night  sleep,  alternating  with  raving  and  different  visions.

I  Only  half  asleep,  constantly  disturbed  with  moaning  and  grat-
ing of  the  teeth.

I  iFrequent  startings  in  and  from  sleep.

I  Jumps  out  of  bed.

Worse  during  sleep.

I  Pains  are  felt  most  at  night,  during  sleep  or  after  lying  down.

Fatigue  seemingly  increased  by  sleep.

■  Restless,  anxious,  <  at  night. ^Rheumatism.

1  Sleep  restless,  disturbed  by  frightful  dreams. ^Intermittent.


ARSENICUM.  • 78

I  Restless  nights,  weak,  fatigued,  grayish-yellow  complexion;

no  appetite, d  Intermittent.

I I  Worse  at  night, d  Colic, d  Pericarditis, d  Carbuncle,  etc.
I  Pains  <  at  night, d  Scirrhus  uteri.

■  Complains  of  pains  and  restlessness  at  night. ^Scrofulous

ophthalmia.

I  Itching  and  burning  worse  at  night. 6  Crusta  lactea.

I  Nightly  burning  pain  like  fire  with  great  restlessness, d  Scir-
rhus mammae.

I  Nightly  burning  or  a  terrible  itching. 6  Eczema.

■  Severe  burning  pain  ■<  at  night, d  Herpes.

■  Burning  as  if  hot  water  was  flowing  through  the  blood-vessels,

with  anxious  heat  and  restlessness,  and  with  desire  to  uncover.
Sleep  anxious,  unquiet,
Sleep  in  a  half-sitting  posture.

■  ■If  getting  awake  at  night,  difficulty  to  fall  asleep  again.

■  Sometimes  awakened  with  horrible  anxiety,  palpitation,  and

restlessness,  fear  of  death.

■  Awakens  from  restless  sleep  with anxiety  and  palpitation,

after  improvement  has  commenced, d  Intermittent.

■  Wakens  from  sleep  after  the  heat  with  singing  and  buzzing

in  the  ears,  and  very  little  sweat, d  Intermittent.

■  ■Awakened  by  pains  ; ■  especially  about  midnight.

■  Worse  about  midnight. ^Diphtheria. ^Peritonitis. ^In-

testinal catarrh,  d  Chronic  catarrh  of  bowels.  6  Metritis.
d  Dysraenorrhoea.  d  Uterine  cancer,  d  Panaritium.  6  Sci-
atica, d  Measles,  d  (Edema  pulmonalis.  d  Typhus,  d  Gas-
tralgia.

■  ■Sleep  disturbed  after  3  a.m.  ;  she  gets  up  in  a  fright.

■  The evening aggravation continues until after midnight.

d  Acute  rheumatism.

■  ■Awoke  about  3  a.m.,  feeling  burning  hot  internally  though

cool  externally  to  the  touch ;  then  came  a  heavy  lumbar
backache,  with  heaviness  and  distress  in  stomach, d  Oph-
thalmia.
Sleepless  until  3  a.m.

■  ■Great  restlessness  during  sleep ;  constant  tossing  and  turn-

ing;  ■  everything  seems  to  worry.

■  ■Sleeplessness,  with  restlessness  and  moaning.
Nightly  restlessness,  with  great  anguish  about  the  heart.

■  ■Sleepless  from  anguish,  restless,  tossing  about,  <  after  mid-

night.

■  Sleepless,  pulse  100,  delirious  at  night,  unquenchable  thirst

and  loss  of  appetite, d  Pyaemia.
Sleepless  nights  with  coryza.

■  Sleeplessness. ^  Gonarthrocace.

■  Sleepless, and towards  morning a slumber with frightful

dreams. ^Bright's  disease.


79  ARSENICUM.

■  Sleeplessness <  night  before  an  attack. ^Apyrexia  in  in-

termittent.

■  Sleeplessness. ^  Ulcer  on  the  heel;  periostitis  of  os  calcis.

1 1  From  climbing  mountains  or  other  muscular  exertions:  want
of  breath,  prostration,  cannot  sleep,  and  other  ailments.

Nightly  sweats.

1  After  the  sleep  and  the  end  of  the  heat,  great  desire  for  some-

thing refreshing ; she  wants  wine  with water, coffee, etc.
d  Relapsed  intermittent.

■  After  sleep,  great  weariness. ^Intermittent.

■  After  sleep,  feels  as  if  had  not  slept  enough  :  eyes  are  weary ;

cannot  get  cut  of  bed.
^^  Time. Evening :  periodical  throbbing  in  head ;  swollen  frontal
eminences <  ;  otalgia  <  ;  loss of  breath ;  constriction  of
chest  and  anxiety  ;  chilliness  in  chest ;  cramp  in  legs  ;  sopor ;
crawling.

2  P.M.:  headache  begins  to  lessen.

3  P.M.:  chill.

10  P.M.:  ophthalmia  decreased.

12  P.M.:  springs  out  of  bed  with  asthma.

After  midnight :  restlessness  and  anxiety  <  ;  ophthalmia  <  ;

diarrhoea <  ;  asthma >  ;  coldness of  extremities  worse ;

■  heat  with  anxiety.
Night :  periodical  throbbing  in  head ;  pains  of  erysipelas  <  ;

pulsating  stitches  in  eyes ;  pains  in  and  over  eyes  reach  their

acme;  diarrhoea  <;  hemorrhoids  more  painful;  croup  <;

cough  <  ;  no  expectoration ;  haemoptysis ;  palpitation  <  ;

valvular  troubles  are  aggravated ;  rheumatic  pains  in  a.rm

<  ;  cannot  lie  still ;  pains  < ;  restlessness  <  ;  itching  and

burning  <  ;  chilliness  ;  heat.
Day  and  night :  colic.
Midnight  till  morning :  restless  slumber.
2  A.M. :  cramp  in  stomach  ;  asthma;  fever  and  sweat.

I  to  5  A.M.:  angina  pectoris.
Until  3  A.M.:  sleepless.

About  3  A.M.:  awaked  by  fever  and  backache.

After  3  a.m.:  sleep  disturbed.

After  4  a.m.:  no  sleep  from  pain  in  ulcerated  leg.

Morning : periodical  throbbing  in  head ; putrid  sweet  taste ;

diarrhoea ; hacking cough ; faint, anxious, weak, sweat ;

rigor  with  cramp  in  chest.
5  A.M.:  ophthalmia  begins.
7  A.M.:  headache  begins.
10  to  11  A.M.:  chill.

II  A.M.:  headache  reaches  climax.

Forenoon  :  coldness  ;  fever  attacks  mostly  begin.

Noon  :  ophthalmia  at  acme  ;  paroxysm  of  fever.

Afternoon  chill  towards  4  o'clock :  conjunctivitis  periodical.


ARSENICUM.  80

Daytime  :  expectoration  ;  chill,  sweat  at  night.
^®  Temperature  and  Weather. Changes  of  warmth  and  cold  :
oppressed  breathing.

Cold  washing :  beating  in  head  better.

Cold  damp  cellars  :  induce  attacks  of  sciatica  and  asthma..

Cold  weather :  sore  nose  <  ;  excites  toothache.

Stormy  weather  :  oppressed  breathing.

Cold  water :  makes  teeth  sensitive.

Sea  bathing  :  induces  many  cotaplaints.

Open  air :  headache  <  ;  ophthalipia  >  ;  humming  in  ears  >  ;
suffocative  cough  when  walking.

Uncovering :  head  worse.

Warm  wraps  :  head  better.

Warm  applications  :  generally  relieve  ophthalmia.

Warm  clothing  :  oppressed  breathing  worse.

Warm  room  :  humming  in  ears  worse.

Heat : relieves  hemorrhoids.

Hot  stove  :  relieves  toothache.
^°  Chill. Fever. Sweat. 'The  paroxysm  begins  with  stretch-
ing, gaping,  unpleasant  feeling,  greater  weariness  and  slight
crawls  over  the  back  after  drinking, d  Intermittent.

I  Gaping,  stretching,  awkward  feeling  and  great  weariness,  has
to  lie  down,  before  the  paroxysm, d  Relapse  of  intermittent.

■  Every  morning  stretching  of  limbs,  gaping,  emptiness  in  head,

thirst,  and  after  drinking  immediately  chilliness  and  crawling.
d  Quotidian  intermittent.

■  Before  the  chill,  fainting,  cutting  in  abdomen  like  knives,

empty  eructations  with  pain  in  stomach,  begins  with  anxiety  ;
frequent  vomiting  of  yellowish  bitter  water  ;  vomiting  of  food
with  constant  nausea ;  vomiting  of  bile  and  mucus  with  great
straining ;  when  the  chill  passes  off  they  fall  into  a  deep
sleep, d  Intermittent.

■  Coldness, gaping, headache, and greater weakness; soon

after  rigor  with  headache, d  Intermittent.

■  Attacks  begin  with  vertigo,  great  prostration,  gradually  in-

creasing heat,  ending  in  long-lasting  sweat. 6  Intermittent.
Nursing  children  have  no  distinct  chill ;  must  be  covered  ;  very

thirsty.
Internal  coldness,  the  skin  not  feeling  cold.

■  Skin  cool. ^Ascites.

■  Cold  dry  skin. ^Dysentery.

■  Coldness  over  the  entire  body. ^  Hsematemesis.

■  Coldness  of  body  with  much  thirst, d  Typhus.

■  Coldness  of  body. 6  Yellow  fever.
Coldness  of  the  limbs.

■  While  sitting,  or  in  bed,  feet  are  cold. ^Intermittent.
Coldness  of  the  extremities  ;  worse  after  midnight.
Sensation  of  coldness  in  the  ulcers.


81  ARSENICUM.

I  Coldness  of  whole  body,  pale,  sunken  face,  very  sickly  appear-

ance, lips  pale,  rigor,  pains  in  limbs,  contraction  of  chest,
breathing  impeded,  restless,  trembling, d  Quotidian.

■  Coldness  at  night,  stretching,  headache,  and  pain  in  the  right

eyeball,  troublesome  when  moving  the  eye. d  Intermittent.

I I  Concomitants  of  the  cold  state:  colic  and  loose  stool,  nausea,
head  benumbed,  unconsciousness,  tearing  in  the  lower  limbs,
drawing  in  all  the  limbs,  as  if  beaten  in  the  thighs,  cramps
in  chest,  diflBcult  breathing,  stretching  of  limbs,  desire  to  uri-
nate and  frequent  urination,  hunger, d  Intermittent.

Il^yith  the  shivering  and  coldness  appear  pains  or  other  com-
plaints, d  Intermittent.

1 1  Crawling  in  the  evening  with  stretching  of  limbs  and  anxious
restlessness.

Shuddering:  particularly  after  drinking,  with  chilliness;  after
dinner  ;  1 1  when  walking  in  the  open  air ;  at  the  beginning  of
the  fever  before  the  chill.

I  Feels  chilly  and  hovers  near  the  stove. ^Migraine.

■  Congestive  chills.

I I  Chill  gradually  increasing  to  shaking  rigor.

Violent  chill  with  shaking ;  every  afternoon  at  3  o'clock,  or  in

the  evening.
iChill  without  thirst  at  10  or  11 a.m.,  shaking  chill  felt  as

though  was  running  down  his  back,  blue  surface,  shrunken

skin, d  Intermittent.
Night  chilliness,  only  on  the  face  and  feet.
Chill  as  from  cold  water  trickling  down  the  back.
Chill  on  lower  part  of  body.
1 1  Coldness  and  chill  renewed  after  drinking  and  after  eating.

6  Intermittent.

■  Drinking  increases  the  chill  and  causes  vomiting. ^Inter-

mittent.
Chill  lessens  after  eating ;  more  hunger  than  thirst.
Chill  lessened  after  rising  from  bed.
Chill  increased  out  doors.

■  Clonic  spasms  during  chill.

■  ■Blue  nails  and  lips  during  chill.

■  Amelioration  of  the  pains  after  the  chill. ^Intermittent.
During  the  chill  and  heat  many  of  the  concomitant  symptoms

become  aggravated.

■  Chill  and  no  thirst,  10  a.m.;  skin  shrunken;  lips  and  nails  blue.

■  ■During  the  chills  generally  no  thirst. ^Intermittent. See

Thirst.

■  Soon  after  the  prodromic  coldness  of  body,  blue  nails,  chill  in

back,  rigor,  inner  trembling,  with  violent  pains  in  back  and
sacrum,  contraction  of  chest,  diflScult  breathing  and  empti-
ness in  head, d  Relapse  of  intermittent.

■  Forenoon  coldness,  morbid  appearance,  blue  lips,  violent  head-

VOL.  II. — 6.


ARSENICUM.  82

ache,  rigor,  shaking  of  teeth,  contraction  of  the  chgst.  6  In-
termittent.

1  As  soon  as  the  rigor  is  abating,  she  gets  an  irresistible  hunger,
she  has  to  eat  something,  notwithstanding  that  she  knows  it
renews  the  chill, d  Relapse  of  intermittent.

I  Often  rigor  with  gooseflesh. ^Dropsy.

I  Cold  as  ice.

Undefined  development  of  chill  and  heat;  either  simultane-
ously, or  in  alternation.

Chilly  and  feverish,  mostly  towards  sundown.

I  Heat  mixed  up  with  chill. 6  Intermittent.

iFrequent  chilliness  alternates  with  heat. ^Rheumatism.

I  Internal  chill,  with  external  heat  and  red  cheeks.

■  Burning  heat  internally,  with  a  cold  external  surface, d  Scar-

latina.

I  Cold  inside  and  burning  hot  outside. ^Intermittent.

I I  Chill  without  thirst  followed  by  heat  with  much  thirst  and
no  sweat ;  or  sweat  comes  hours  afterwards,  whereupon  ail-
ments all  increase ;  liver  and  spleen  are  swollen. 6  Dropsy.

BOne  hour  after  the  chill  heat  all  over,  burning,  dry,  very  fre-
quent drinking, d  Intermittent.

Intermittent  begins  with  chill  or  thirst,  followed  by  heat  sooner
or  later,  with  much  thirst  and  no  sweat,  or  sweat  at  a  later
hour,  whereupon  all  the  earlier  ailments  are  increased.

I  After  coldness  at  night  for  two  hours,  dry  heat,  mouth  dry,
thirst ;  restless,  anxious,  throbbing  and  beating  through  the
whole  body  ;  sleepless. 6  Intermittent.

IB  Chill  without  thirst  followed  by  heat  with  much  thirst  and
no  sweat,  or  sweat  at  a  later  hour,  whereupon  all  earlier  ail
ments  increase;  liver  and  spleen  are  swollen,  even  dropsical
symptoms  present  themselves, d  Intermittent.

■  Intermitting  chills,  fever  and  sweat. ^Tuberculosis.

I  Heat  following  the  chill  is  dry,  unbearable,  lasts  three  or  four
hours,  with  painful  tension  and  pressure  in  both  hypochon-
dria ;  fullness  in  epigastrium  ;  pressing  pain  in  forehead ;
restlessness,  anxiety  and  thirst, d  Relapse  of  intermittent.

B  After  the  coldness,  heat,  with  burning  in  whole  body,  it  runs
hot  through  all  the  veins ;  anxiety,  restlessness,  great  weari-
ness ;  thirst,  and  desire  for  acids;  pain  in  left  hypochon-
drium. d  Quotidian  intermittent.

BBWith  the  chill,  forehead  hot,  heat  in  face  and  cold  hands.
d  Intermittent.

Cold  feet  and  hot  hands.

Coldness  of  the  knees,  with  heat  of  the  head  and  ears.

B External  coldness,  with  cold,  clammy  sweat.  ^Whooping-
cough.

BB  General  coldness,  with  parchment-like  dryness  of  the  skin,
or  with  profuse,  cold,  clammy  perspiration.


83  ARSENICUM.

During  the  day  chill,  at  night  sweat.

Cold  or  sweat  on  the  diseased  part.

I  Cold, dry skin, alternating  with  cold  sweat. ^Dysentery.

See  Sweat.
Dry,  burning  heat.

■  Persistent  burning  heat  of  skin. ^Measles. ^Hepatitis.

I  Great  burning. 6  Carbuncle.

I I  Heat  predominates,  lasts  from  two  to  four  hours,  violent
burning,  almost  unbearable,  glowing  heat  all  over,  d  Inter-
mittent.

1 1  Internal  burning  heat,

I  Complains  of  violent  internal  heat  and  thirst  while  vomiting.

I  Heat  at  night,  as  if  hot  water  was  poured  over  one.

■  Sensation  as  if  the  blood  in  the  arteries  was  boiling-hot.
Internal  burning,  dry  heat ;  inclination  to  uncover.

■  ■In  fevers,  patient  desires  to  be  kept  covered;  drinks  little

and  often ;  cold  water  disagrees,  produces  chilliness,  pain,
instant  vomiting.
1^^  Burning  heat,  with  unquenchable  thirst.

■  Burning  heat,  with  frequent  unquenchable  thirst. ^Inter-

mittent.

■  Burning  fever,  great  thirst,  drinking  little  but  often  ;  marked
.  prostration  ;  dry,  parched  tongue, d  Intermittent.

Thirst  only  during  the  hot  stage,  drinks  often  a  little.

Dry  heat  evening  and  night,  with  thirst  and  frequent  drinking

of  but  a  small  quantity  at  a  time.
Heat,  with  desire  for  drink,  but  no  thirst.

■  ■Heat  intense,  burning,  with  delirium  and  unconsciousness.

■  Feeling  of  heat,  with  anxiety  after  12  p.m.
Internal  heat,  burning,  dry,  with  anxiousness  at  night.

■  Heat  and  restless  anxiety. ^Icterus.

■  Heat  increases  gradually,  with  restlessness,  anxiety  and  ten-

sion, with  pressure  in  the  spleen, d  Intermittent.
Great  heat  and  restlessness,  with  nosebleed.
Heat  at  night  without  thirst  and  without  sweat.
Heat  increased  by  motion,  talking,  coughing,  when  walking ;

lessened  by  coffee.

■  Internal  heat,  Avith  burning  in  the  veins, d  Whooping-cough.
Heat  increased  by  motion.

■  Heat  increasing  gradually,  with  restlessness,  anxiety,  pain  in

spleen ;  fullness  in  pit  of  stomach  ;  thirst  for  some  drinks.
6  Intermittent.

■  Heat,  with  abatement  of  headache;  restless;  thirsty;  great

weariness  and  sleep, d  Intermittent.

■  After  the  heat  commences,  the  pains  and  other  complaints  hav-

ing commenced  with  the  cold  state,  lessen,  or  are  replaced  by
new  symptoms, d  Intermittent.

■  During  the  heat :  anxiety,  restlessness ;  burning  intolerable ;


ARSENICUM.  84

thirst,  especially  for  warm  drinks  ;  tension  about  the  spleen  ;
nosebleed.

1 1  Concomitants  of  the  heat :  restlessness,  anxiousness  ;  coming
from  the  scrobiculum  ;  throbbing  and  pulsating  in  the  whole
body ;  delirious  ;  painful  tension  in  the  hypochondriacal  re-
gions, most  in  the  left ;  gnawing  and  burning  in  region  of
stomach ;  pain  in  the  bones,  small  of  the  back,  forehead  ;
nausea,  difficulty  of  breathing ;  skin  dry  and  burning ;
thirst,  dry  mouth,  with  frequent  drinking,  but  not  much,
sometimes  a  great  desire  for  acids  and  acidulated  drinks.
6  Intermittent.

1 1  At  the  end  of  the  heat,  often  nausea,  vomiting,  especially
after  drinking  ;  weariness  and  sleep. 6  Intermittent.

I  After  heat  lessened,  great  drowsiness  and  sweat  in  sleep.
d  Quotidian  intermittent.

I  She  feels  very  much  exhausted  after  the  heat,  and  finally  falls
asleep, d  Relapse  of  intermittent.

After  the  fever,  attack  of  headache.

I  Fever  and  sweat  every  afternoon.

Heat  at  night,  with  sweat  of  the  face  and  feet.

llFever  at  2  a.m.;  sweat  in  the  face  and  on  the  feet,  and  ten-
sion in  the  hypochondria  and  epigastrium,  producing  anxiety
and  colicky  pains.

First  heat,  then  sweat.

Sweat  at  the  end  of  the  fever,  with  cessation  of  all  previous
symptoms.

I  iThe  sweat  comes  some  time  after  the  heat,  or  not  at  all.
d  Intermittent.

Sweat  staining  brownish,  yellow.

Sweat  cold,  clammy,  smelling  sour,  or  offensive ;  with  exhaus-
tion.

BCold,  clammy  sweat.  ^Peritonitis.  ^Typhus.  ^Yellow
fever. 0  Cholera  Asiatica.

I  Cold  sweat. ^Cystitis. ^Summer-complaint. ^Dysentery.

d  Pericarditis. 6  Apyrexia  intermittent. 6  Scarlatina.
Sweat,  with  aversion  to  uncover.

I I  Sweating  on  going  to  sleep  ; Igoes  off  after  sleeping  a  little.
Nightly  sweats.

I  Sweat  in  the  morning,  after  nightly  heat.

I  Profuse  morning  sweat,  which  does  not  relieve.  6  Rheumatism
of  knee.

Sweat  abating  after  sleep.

I  Sweat  periodical.

Sweats  too  easily,  or  while  sitting,  while  eating,  and  after  eat-
ing or  drinking.

Sweat  lessened  by  motion.

I  Sweat  not  appearing  at  all. d  Intermittent.


85  ARSENICUM.

I  Sweat  not  before  night,  and  scanty,  often  only  in  face  and

on  the  chest,  of  short  duration, d  Relapsed  intermittent.
Sweat  on  back  parts,  occiput,  neck,  etc.

I I  Profuse  sweat  about  the  knees,  at  night.
Sweat  on  lower  part  of  body.

I  All  symptoms  of  first  stages  >  during  the  sweat.  ^Inter-
mittent.

I  Only  free  from  pain  during  the  sweat, d  Rheumatism.

I I  Sweat  does  not  appecr  during  the  heat,  but  later,  combined
with  thirst,  often  also  buzzing  of  ears,  heaviness  of  head;
vertigo  and  trembling, d  Intermittent.

Concomitants  of  the  sweat :  anxiety  ;  talkativeness  ;  face  pale
or  red ;  nausea,  bitter  vomit :  unquenchable  thirst ;  nose
running  ;  fingers  like  dead  ;  swelling  of  feet.

Sleep  after  sweat.

Cold  perspiration,  with  great  prostration.

I  Cough  ends  with  sweat. ^Whooping-cough.

Cold  and  clammy  sweat,  with  great  exhaustion  from  the  least
effort.

Sweat  weakening,  even  to  fainting.

I  Paroxysms  irregular,  most  daily,' in  the  morning,  sometimes
omitting  a  day  or  two.

I  Attacks  begin  mostly  in  the  forenoon. ^Intermittent.

I  In  the  morning,  rigor,  with  cramp  in  the  chest;  later,  dry,
burning  hot  skin ;  pulse  small,  weak,  frequent ;  complains
of  headache ;  dry  mouth  and  lips ;  incessant  drinking,  but
little  at  the  time;  great  desire  for  sour  things  ;  restless  and
moaning;  heat  lasted  three  hours ;  evening  after  the  fever;
great  weakness  and  soreness  in  limbs ;  no  sweat,  but  frequent
drinking, d  Intermittent.

I  The  third day,  in the  forenoon,  coldness,  pale  face,  rigor,

trembling,-  restlessness  and  crying,  followed  by  heat,  with
sleep  and  moaning;  finally  a  little  sweat  and  frequent  drink-
ing, d  A  boy  with  Intermittent.

I I  Paroxysm  coming  on  about  12  noon,  or  1  o'clock  p.m.  d  In-
termittent.

1 1  With  the  various  stages  of  the  fever  always  appear  other
symptoms. 6  Intermittent.

1 1  After  the  paroxysm  :  weakness,  fullness  in  upper  abdomen  ;
less  appetite;  desire  for  something  refreshing,  or  wine  or
coifee  ;  slow,  insufficient  stool, d  Intermittent.

■  Evening  after  the  paroxysm,  indisposed,  cross;  several  diar-

rhoeic  stools. 6  A  boy  with  Intermittent.

■  After  the  paroxysm,  great  weariness  and  weakness,  no  appe-

tite ;  constant  desire  for  acids,  or  something  refreshing.
d  Quotidian.

■  Icterus  after  intermittent.

■  ■Never  clear  of  symptoms  during  apyrexia. ^Intermittent.


ARSENICUM.  86

1 1  Quotidian  and  other  intermittent  fevers.
Chill  in  the  afternoon,  followed  by  dry  evening  heat,  and  later
sweat.

■  Quotidian,  tertian  and  quartan  fevers,  with  indistinct  chilli-

ness and  heat,  with  great  restlessness  and  thirst,  or  else  with-
out thirst  during  the  chilliness  and  heat,

■  Intermittens  incompleta ;  chill  intermixed  with  heat,  or  heat

and  chilliness  follow  each  other  in  rapid  succession.

I  Absence  of  either  chill  or  heat  or  sweat, d  Intermittent.

I I  Intermittent  relapsing  after  quinine.

1 1  Fevers  which  are  intermittent  and  tend  towards  a  typhoid
state.

1 1  Typhoid  fever  :  slow,  protracted  cases,  with  mild  delirium;
loss  of  consciousness ;  great  anxiety ;  erethism,  even  with
the  greatest  prostration ;  hippocratic  face ;  cheeks  burning
staring  or  sunken,  or  closed  with  sticky  matter ;  lips  dry,
cracked,  even  black ;  mouth  lined  with  a  brown  or  black
slime  ;  great  thirst,  but  drinking  little  at  a  time  ;  fluids  roll
audibly  into  the  stomach ;  stools  watery,  foul,  often  involun-
tary (see  48) ;  oppression ;  dry  cough,  fetid  breath ;  white,
miliary  eruption ;  petechise ;  blood  oozes  from  the  dry  lips
and  from  the  anus ;  skin  hot,  dry,  parchment-like ;  or  cov-
ered with  cold,  clammy  sweat;  cadaverous  odor  from  the
body  ;  weakness  so  great,  he  slides  down  in  bed ;  lower  jaw
drops.

■  Putrid  fever.

I  Yellow  fever;  black  vomit;  indifl"erence,  stupid  expression;

delirium,  etc.

I I  Irritative  fever;  hectic;  marked  emaciation;  hot,  dry  skin
by  day,  sweating  at  night;  exceedingly  irritable  both  in
mind  and  body.

I  Hectic  fever. ^  Gonarthrocace.

■  Typhoid  symptoms. ^Scarlatina.

■  Asthenic  cases  of  small-pox.

*^  Attacks. iTypus  tertianus  anteponens.

■  ■Periodical  complaints;  return  of  complaints  when  the  year

comes  round.
*^  Sides.  Right :  pain  in  eyeball ;  otorrhoea ;  burning  mucus  from
nostril ;  pain  in  hypochondrium ;  pains  in  abdomen  and
groin;  pains  in  ovary;  stitches  in  upper  chest;  ventricle
hypertrophied ;  tearing  and  jerking  in  shoulder;  rheumatic
pains  in  elbow ;  leg  swollen  and  covered  with  suppurating
pimples.
Left :  pain  in  head  and  face  ;  pains  in  supra-  and  infra-orbital
regions ;  otorrhoea ;  cancerous  sore  on  upper  lip  ;  drawing
around  lower  border  of  ribs  ;  drawing,  stitching  under  hypo-
chondrium ;  contractive pain in groin ;  burning in  chest ;


87  ARSENICUM.

stitches  in  chest  during  inspiration  ;  neuralgia  in  1.  arm  ;
reddish  spot  on  elbow  joint;  blisters  on  leg;  paralysis  of
arm  and  foot;  joints  of  hand  deformed;  abscess  in  heel.

From  below  up :  stitches  in  sternum  ; warm  air  streaming  up
spine.
*^  Sensations. As  if  brain  moved  and  beat  against  skull.

Like  a  hot  wire  thrust  through  ramifications  of  fifth  pair  of
nerves.

As  of  sand  in  eyes.

As  from  red  hot  needles  :  in  swollen  upper  lip.

As  if  elongated  and  loose  :  the  teeth.

As  if  something  were  torn  loose :  in  1.  hypochondrium  ;  in  pit  of
stomach,  when  yawning.

As  if  intestines  were  tied  up  (colic).

As  if  abdomen  would  burst :  before  stool.

As  if  inhaling  dust.

As  if  something  was  digging  into  throat  from  before  backward.

As  if  she  had  a  load  in  upper  part  of  both  lungs.

As  if  lower  limbs  would  break  down :  on  going  up  stairs.

A  sense  of  warm  air  streaming  up  spine.

As  if  broken  :  small  of  back.

As  if  bandaged  :  knees.

As  of  scraping  over  long  bones  in  leg. d  Rheumatism.

As  if  made  of  wood  :  soles  of  feet.

Painful feeling of  fatigue penetrating  to marrow, in  limbs.

Like  cold  water  running  down  back.

It  runs  hot  through  all  the  veins. 6  Heat  of  intermittent.

Undefined  pain  :  in  eyes  ;  in  eyelids ;  in  epigastrium,  stomach
and  abdomen  ;  about  navel ;  in  r.  side  of  abdomen  spreading
to  r.  groin  and  scrotum  ;  between  scapulae ;  in  arm  lain  on ;
in  knees ;  in  lower  limbs  ;  in  spleen  ;  in  gangrenous  ulcers.

Agonizing  pain :  from  prgecordial  region  into  neck  and  occiput.

Lancinating  :  in  stomach  ;  in  chest ;  and  burning  in  abdomen  ;
in  uterine  region,  from  rectum  to  anus  and  pudenda ;  in  old
ulcers  on  legs;  in  inflammatory  swellings;  in  scirrhus.

Cutting  :  like  knives,  in  abdomen.

Lacerating  :  in  arms  ;  in  lower  limbs.

Darting :  through  upper  r.  lung.

Piercing  pain  :  in  muscles.

Boring :  in  r.  supraorbital region,  over  eye  into  teeth  ;  in  a

small  spot  in  temple  ;  in  stomach  and  intestines.
Stitches  :  in  head;  from  1.  meatus  auditorius  outward ;  in  epigas-
trium and  stomach ;  in  spleen  ;  in  r.  hypochonder ;  in  region
of  liver;  in  1.  hypochonder;  from  abdomen  into  vagina ;  in
hemorrhoids ;  in  renal  region ;  in  rectum ;  in  sides ;  in  upper
r.  chest ;  in  1.  chest ;  in  sternum  ;  stitches  from  ovary  into
thigh.
Sticking  :  in  ulcer  on  cornea  ;  in  lids.


ARSENICUM.  88

Stinging :  in  forehead  to  eyes ;  in  eyelids ;  in  ulcer  on  r.  ala
nasi ;  in  fac© ;  in  upper  lip  ;  in  oesophagus ;  in  stomach  and
epigastrium  ;  in  hemorrhoids  ;  in  old  ulcers  on  legs.

Pricking :  occipital  headache ;  suborbital,  1.  side ;  in  ulcer  on
cornea ;  in  rectum  ;  in  glans  penis.

Shooting  :  in  finger,  after  removal  of  wart ;  in  hip.

Tearing  pain  :  in  r.  supraorbital  region ;  over  eye  into  teeth  ;
in  brain,  as  if  torn  to  pieces ;  around  the  eyes ;  from  left
meatus  auditorius  outward ;  in  1.  half  of  face ;  in  stomach
and  intestines ;  in  abdomen ;  in  urethra ;  and  pulling  in
back  and  legs  ;  and  jerking  in  r.  shoulder  and  joint  and  down
arm  ;  from  elbow  into  axilla  ;  from  tips  of  fingers  into  shoul-
der ;  in  hip  ;  in  1.  foot ;  in  knees  and  feet ;  in  tibia ;  in
heels ;  in  joints.

Rending :  in  soles  of  feet ;  in  muscles.

Drawing:  in  face;  from  pit  of  stomach  around  lower  border  of
1.  ribs  ;  under  1.  hypochondrium  ;  in  legs  ;  between  scapulae  ;
from  small  of  back  to  shoulders  ;  in  arms ;  from  elbow  into
axilla ;  from  tips  of  fingers  into  shoulder ;  from  ovary  into
thigh;  sciatica;  in  hip  ;  in  1.  foot;  in  limbs  ;  in  joints.

Drawing  stitching :  from  region  of  r.  ovary  into  thigh.

Drawing  pressing  :  in  r.  side  of  forehead  ;  from  forehead  to  eyes.

Burning :  in  r.  supraorbital  region ;  over  eye  into  teeth ;  in
forehead ;  erysipelatous  in  head ;  and  itching  on  head ;  in
eyes;  over  orbit;  in  ulcer  on  cornea;  on  eyelids;  at  nos-
trils ;  in  nose ;  in  ulcer  in  r.  ala  nasi ;  of  cheeks ;  in  upper
lip ;  in  cancerous  ulcers  on  face ;  pimples  and  vesicles  on
'  face  ;  in  gums  ;  on  tongue ;  in  mouth  ;  in  throat ;  in  epigas-
trium ;  in  stomach  ;  in  bowels  ;  in  region  of  pylorus ;  in  re-
gion of  liver ;  in  intestines  ;  in  hemorrhoids  ;  in  bladder ;  in
urethra ;  in  glans  penis ;  in  ovaries  ;  uterine  region ;  in
genitals ;  in  mammae ;  in  cancer  of  the  breast ;  in  larynx
and  trachea;  in  chest;  in  1.  chest;  about  the  heart;  in
spine  ;  in  back  ;  in  finger ;  in  ulcers  on  finger-tips  ;  in  hip  ;
in  old  ulcers  on  legs ;  in  veins ;  in  skin  ;  in  joints ;  in  in-
flammatory swellings;  in  ulcers  ;  in  scirrhus  ;  anthrax.

Smarting : eruptions  on  neck,  shoulders  and  sides.

Soreness  :  in  chest ;  in  axilla  ;  between  fingers  ;  in  balls  of  toes.

Raw  feeling  :  in  chest.

Pressing :  as  from  a  load  on  brain  ;  in  forehead  ;  in  occiput ;
in  forehead  to  eyes ;  in  epigastrium  and  stomach ;  in  both
hypochonders ;  in  sternum.

Tensive  pressing  pain :  from  forehead  and  temples  to  occiput
and  nape  of  neck.

Pressive  stitching  in  r.  ovarian  region.

Jerking:  toothache;  in  gums;  from  tips  of  fingers  into  shoul-
der ;  through  entire  body  ;  of  limbs,  on  falling  asleep.

Pinching  :  in  stomach  and  abdomen.


89  ARSENICUM.

Gnawing  :  in  pit  of  stomach.

Corrodins  :  in  stomach  and  intestines.

Boiling  :  in  leg  (sciatica).

Writhing  or  twisting  :  in  abdomen.

Cramp:  in  stomach;  in  intestines;  in  bowels;  in  chest;  in
heart ;  in  thighs,  calves  and  toes.

Constriction  :  of  throat ;  of  oesophagus  ;  of  stomach  ;  in  abdo-
men ;  in  umbilical  region  ;  in  1.  groin  ;  of  the  chest.

Neuralgic  pain :  in  eyes  ;  on  1.  side  of  neck ;  in  1.  arm  ;  in
hip  ;  iA  forearms  and  legs.

Rheumatic  pains  :  from  elbow  up  to  shoulder ;  in  r.  elbow  ;  in
limbs.

Gouty  pains :  in  limbs.

Sprained  feeling  :  in  neck.

Bruised  feeling :  over  nose  and  in  forehead ;  in  swollen  sub-
maxillary glands  ;  in  small  of  back  ;  between  shoulders ;  in
neck  ;  in  knee-joint  and  thighs  as  if  beaten.

Aching :  in  first  lower  bicuspid ;  in  stomach  and  epigastrium,
extending  into  chest ;  in  chest  after  coughing ;  dull,  in  r.  leg
below  knee ;  in  all  the  limbs.

Tension  :  in  both  hypochonders  ;  in  abdomen  ;  in  ovary  ;  about
the  spleen  ;  in  epigastrium.

Tightness  :  of chest ;  above  heart.
' Fullness  :  in  pit  of  stomach  ;  after  eating  ;  in  chest ;  in  palms  ;
in  upper  abdomen.

Heaviness  :  in  head  ;  in  stomach  ;  in  chest ; of  limbs.

Weight :  in  head,  forehead  ;  as  of  stone  in  stomach.

Throbbing  :  over  root  of  nose  ;  in  forehead  ;  pain  in  head ;  in
eyeball  and  around  orbit ;  in  roots  of  teeth  ;  in  uterine  re-
gion;  in  whole  body  (heat  of  intermittent).

Twitching :  in  eyes  ;  of  facial  muscles  ;  in  hips.

Trembling:  in  pit  of  stomach.

Wabbling  or  swashing  in  brain.

Crawling :  in  stomach.

Tingling:  in  fingers.

Formication :  along  spine.

Numbness  :  of  teeth  ;  of  feet ;  of  thigh.

Weakness  :  in  head ;  in  pit  of  stomach.

Weariness :  in  feet.

Exhausting  pain  :  over  1.  eye.

Uneasiness  :  in  lower  limbs.

Paralytic  feeling :  in  upper  limbs.

Stunning  sensation :  headache.

Heat :  in  head ;  in  eyes ;  in  oesophagus ;  in  stomach  and  epi-
gastrium ;  over  whole  body  ; in  chest.

Coldness  :  ice  cold  feeling  in  scalp  ;  in  stomach  ;  in  abdomen  ;
in  chest ;  in  soles  of  feet ;  internally  ;  in  ulcers.

Itching :  in  scalp ;  on  head ;  of  the  face ;  in  upper  lip ;  pim-


ARSENICUM.  90

pies  and  vesicles  on  face ;  of  genitals  ;  in  chest ;  of  thighs  ;
of  feet ;  of  skin.
**  Tissues. Hemorrhages  bright  red  or  black,  fluid  ;  blood  coagu-
lates slowly  or  not  at  all.

I  After  great  losses  of  blood  from  uterus, d  Metritis.

I  After  venesection  or  loss  of  blood  otherwise, d  Haemoptysis.

Anaemia.

Chlorosis  with  trembling,  frequent  fainting,  extreme  debility.

Pyaemia.

I  Septic  changes  in  the  blood,  exanthemata,  ecchy  moses,  petechiae,
decubitus, d  Typhus.

B  Inflammation  all  around  the  indurations  on  the  forearms,  and
the  spongeous  excrescence  on  the  tip  of  the  thumb,  d  Can-
cerous inoculation.

■  Burning  in  skin  and  veins. ^Haemorrhoids.

■  Burning  in  the  veins. ^Metritis.

■  Phlebitis  with  typhoid  symptoms.
Inflammatory  swellings  with  burning  pains.
Distended  veins  of  the  feet.

■  ■Varices  burn  like  fire,  particularly  at  night.

■  Thrombosis.

■  Violent  pains  in  region  of  groins,  thrombosis  of  the  great  veins

of  that  region, d  Pyaemia.

■  ■Chronic  inflammation  of  serous  membranes,  with  copious,

serous  efi"usion.
Cold  swelling  of  the  glands.
Scrofulous  affections  ;  indurated  glands,  etc.
Scrofulous  inflammation.
Diseases  of  mucous  membranes.
Acrid  secretions.

■  Inflammation  of  periosteum ;  tearing  in  the  bones;  diseases  of

the  bones.

■  Tearing,  burning  pain  in limbs,  particularly  in  the  joints,

with  pale  swelling  of  the  affected  parts,  preventing  sleep.
d  Rheumatism.

■  Tearing,  drawing  pains  in  all  the  joints  of  the  left  side,  with

swelling;  the  joints  of  the  fingers  and  left  hand  deformed,

contracted,  immovable. 6  Rheumatism.
Rending,  piercing  pain  in  the  muscles.
Muscles  and  skin  rigid.

■  Muscles  relaxed. ^Relapse  of  intermittent.
Elastic  swellings.

■  ■Inflammatory  swellings,  with  burning,  lancinating  pains.

■  Face,  abdomen,  and  all  the  limbs,  especially  the  legs  are  drop-

sically  swelled.

■  ■Ascites.

■  Dropsy  in  various  parts,  albumen  in  urine, d  Bright's  disease.
Dropsy  with  unquenchable  thirst.


91  ARSENICUM.

iPost  scarlatinal  dropsy, d  Ascites.

Dropsy  ^^"ith  turbid  urine.

I  Dropsical  swelling  all  over. ^Ovarian  dropsy.

I  Dropsical  affections. 6  Scarlatina.

■  General  anasarca,  ascites  and  hydrothorax,  with  albuminuria.

■  General  anasarca,  with  wax-like  skin  and  great  debility.

I I  General  anasarca  ;  skin  pale,  waxy  or  earth-colored ;  great
thirst, d  Albuminuria.

■  Anasarca  followed  by  oily,  sweetish  smelling  sweat.

I  lEmaciation.

I I  Rapid  emaciation,  great  loss  of  flesh,  with  cold  sweat;  de-
bility.

lEmaciation  and  withering  of  affected  parts.

■  Great  emaciation,  clay-colored  face,  blue  margins  around  eyes,

great  weakness  of  all  the  limbs,  want  of  disposition  to  do
anything,  and  constant  inclination  to  rest ;  diarrhoea ;  some-
times dry,  hacking  cough  and  night  sweats,  d  Atrophy  of
children.

■  Rapid  emaciation  ;  atrophy  of  the  feet  and  finger  tips.

■  Emaciation  in  children,  with  indigestion  and  diarrhoea,  worse

in  forenoon  and  after  midnight;  small,  yellow,  watery,  offen-
sive stools,  with  thirst  for  small  quantities  of  water ;  after-
ward dry,  hacking  cough  and  night  sweats  setting  in.

■  Emaciation, d  Cancer  of  stomach. 6  Chronic  intestinal  ca-

tarrh. ^Ovaritis.  ^  Scirrhus mammae.  ^  Coxalgia.  ^  Gon-
arthrocace. d  Typhus.

■  Emaciation,  with  want  of  appetite,  or  rather  aversion  to  food.

d  Horses.
Atrophy  of  children ;  marasmus;  consumption,

■  A  spongy  excrescence  on  the  thumb,  gets  larger  and  larger,

and  the  pain  more  violent,  so  that  it  finally  radiates  to  the
head, d  Cancerous  inoculation.

■  ■Ulceration  constantly  extending  in  breadth.

Superficial  ulcer,  penetrating  daily  deeper,  increasing  in  cir-
cumference, edges  more  and  more  everted.

■  ■Acrid,  burning,  corroding  discharges,  often  extremely  offen-

sive.

■  ■Ulcers  burn  like  fire; pain  even during  sleep; copious,

bloody  pus  or  ichor  ;  bases  blue,  black,  or  lardaceous  ;  proud
flesh  ;  better  from  heat.

■  Ulcers  spread  in  circumference  rather  than  in  depth.

■  Ulcers  with  deficient  pus  ;  with  thin  scurf  and  slight  bleeding

when  bandaged.

■  Modifies  the  lancinating,  burning  pains;  or,  in  ulceration,  the

offensive  excoriating  discharges, d  Scirrhus.
Retards  decomposition  (in  those  fatally  poisoned).

■  ■Anthrax,  burning  like  fire:  cold,  blue  skin, dry  as  parch-

ment, peeling  off  in  large  scales.


ARSENICUM.  92

1 1  Sphacelus  :  parts  look  black,  and  burn  like  fire  ;  fetid  smell.
llGangrena  senilis  sicca,  with  coldness,  desire  for  more  cover-
ing ;  better  from  Warmth.
Gangrene  :  better  from  heat ;  (worse  from  heat : Secale).

■  Gangrenous  ulcers  half  an  inch  broad, causing  insufferable

pains,  surrounded  and  partially  covered  with  a  gangrenous
crust. 6  Periostitis  of  os  calcis.
*®  Touch. Passive  Motion,  etc. Touch  :  scalp  sensitive  ;  sto-
mach sensitive  ;  splenic  region  sore  ;  abdomen  painful.

Cannot  lie  on  affected  part :  gout  and  rheumatism.

Rubbing  :  relieves  sore  pain  in  forehead.

Striking  head  :  relieves  toothache.

Desires  to  be  covered  : during  fever.

Desires  to  be  uncovered  :  during  sweat.

Child  relieved  when  carried  about  quickly.

1 1  Poisoning  from  decayed  or  morbid  animal  matter,  by  inocu-
lation, inhalation,  or  swallowing.

I  iDissectino;  wounds.

■  After  opening  an  abscess  on  the  heel,  the  edges  of  the  wound

mortified. 6  Periostitis  of  os  calcis.

■  After  a  bite  into  the  arm  by  a  furious  cat,  pain  ran  up  to  the

shoulder  ;  delirium  ; dry  burning  fever  heat ;  inclination  to
vomit.

■  After  a  violent  kick  from  a  cow  against  the  r.  ovary :  aching

shooting  down  into  thigh  ;  limb  feels  numb  and  lame  ; >>  in
rest  and  at  night ;  <<  from  motion ; ■<  sitting  bent  or  stoop-
ing ;  burning  pain,  fever,  waxy  face ; emaciation ;  in  place
of  catamenia,  then  offensive  ichor.
^®  Skin. Oversensitiveness  of  skin.

■  Burning  and  itching, d  Scabies.

■  Burning-itching,  parts  painful  after  scratching.
Itching  aggravated  by  scratching.

■  Itching  of  the  skin,  and  if  scratched  a  sore,  burning  sensa-

tion is  left. ^Eczema.

■  Itching  of  skin  after  suppressed  eruption, d  Amaurosis.

■  Skin  pungent,  hot  and  dry. d  Typhus.  •
In  sickness  without  fever,  dryness  of  skin.

■  ■Parchment-like  dryness  of  skin.
Skin  dry,  shrivelled,  wrinkled.
Skin  rough,  dry  and  dirty  looking.
Coldness  and  blueness  of  the  skin.

■  Child  emaciated  to  a  skeleton  ;  skin  white,  dry,  and  like  parch-

ment, d  Scrofula.

■  ■Skin  dry  and  scaly.

■  Disease  began  as  a  red  spot,  spread  somewhat  like  ring-worm  ;

covered  with  silvery  scales ;  scalp  covered  with  a  thick  crust.
d  A  sort  of  lepra.


93  ARSENICUM.

I  Bran-like,  dry,  scaly  eruptions,  with  itching  and  burning;
the  latter  increased  by  scratching,  and  followed  by  bleeding.

■  Eruption  like  fish  scales.
Skin  peels  off  in  large  scales.

Scales  continually  falling  off,  destroying  the  hair.
I  Dry,  scaly  eruption,  sometimes  with  a  fetid,  purulent  secre-
tion. ^Eczema.
I  Skin  pale. ^  Apyrexia  of  intermittent.

I  Wax-like,  dirty  white  skin. ^Intermittent.

I I  Skin  very  white  and  pasty-looking,  later  yellow,  scaly.
lYellow  skin, d  Typhus.

I  1  Dark  brown  color  of  the  whole  body.

Brownish-white  spots  on  the  skin.

lit  suits  patients  with  liver  spots,  whose  skins  have  a  brown,

muddy,  unwashed  appearance  on  parts  covered  by  the  clothes.
I  Blue  spots,  particularly  on  the  abdomen,  genitals,  and  whites

of  the  eyes.
I  Skin  wrinkled,  dry,  cold,  blue. ^Cholera  Asiatica.
Dark  blisters  on  fingers  or  toes,  burning  like  fire ;  spreading,

havino;  dark  edges.

I  Very  painful  black  eruption.

I I  Black  vesicles  causing  burning  pain.
Red,  scorbutic-looking  eruption.

lEruption  resembling  red  petechia,  from  the  size  of  a  flea-bite

to  that  of  a  lentil.
I  On  many  places  blood- filled  blisters, d  Hemorrhoids.
iPetechise,  miliary  eruption,  or  nettle-rash, d  Dysentery.
I  Petechia,  intermixed  with  scarlatina.
I  Black  ecchymoses  under  the  skin  in  various  places;  swollen

gums, d  Morbus  maculosus.

■  Petechia. ^Typhus.

I  White,  miliary  eruption. ^Typhus.

I I  White  rash. ^Febris  puerperalis.

I  Eczema; sore  burning. ^  After  scarlatina.

I  Roseola  spots  on  chest  and  abdomen. ^Typhus.

I  Acne  simplex.

I  Furuncles.  ,
Eruptions  most  frequently  dry.

Fine  itching  eruption,  like  sand.

Eruption  caused  by  unsuitable  food,  salt  fish,  salt  meat.

I I  Measles,  persistent  burning  skin  ;  rash  too  soon,  or  leaves
suddenly ;  face  pale,  earthy,  or  bloated ;  thrush  in  the
mouth ;  black  measles,  with  sudden  sinking  of  strength  and
nervous  restlessness.

II  Attacks  like  croup  appearing  instead  of  the  usual  eruption  of

hives  or  nettle-rash.
I  Urticaria,  with  much  burning  and  restlessness;  also  after  its

recession. See  Croup.


ARSENICUM.  94

■  Erysipelas;  also  around  the  joints.

1 1  Scarlatina,  eruption  delays,  or  suddenly  pales,  becomes  livid,
or  intermixed  with  petechise  ;  malignant  sore  throat;  dropsy;
or  eruption  well  out,  but  with  disproportionate  weakness,
mild  delirium,  vomiting,  etc.

1 1  Post-scarlatinal  dropsy ;  waxy  skin;  morbus  Brightii.

Vesicular  eruptions  ;  itch-like  pimples.

■  Inveterate  cases  of  scabies.

Vesicles  filled  with  blood  on  the  tips  of  the  fingers ;  ulcers,

with  crusts  under  the  nails.
I  On  the  trunk  and  limbs  blisters  filled  with  extravasated  blood.

d  Hemorrhoids.

I  Pimples  and  vesicles. ^  Crusta  lactea.
Large  pale-red  pustules,  most  painful  at  night.

I I  Pimples  burning  violently,  causing  almost  unendurable  an-
guish.

Acuminated,  whitish  pimples,  filled  with  watery  fluid,  commenc-
ing with  itching  and  burning,  especially  on  the  abdomen  and
hands,  and  between  the  fingers.

■  Pustular  eruptions. ^Scabies.

Small  pustules,  itch-like  elevations  break  and  exude  a  corrod-
ing fluid,  which  forms  eating  ulcers.

Red  pustules,  changing  to  ichorous,  crusty,  burning  and  spread-
ing ulcers.

1 1  Variola,  asthenic  cases;  pustules  sink,  areolae  grow  livid,
also  in  hgemorrhagic  and  septic  forms.

■  Psoriasis  guttata.
iTettery,  crustaceous  eruption.

1 1  Herpetic  eruption,  itching  and  burning.

■  Herpes,  with  vesicles,  and  violent  burning,  especially  at  night ;

coverings  like  fisn-scales. d  Ichthyosis.
Suppurating  herpes,  with  burning  pains.

■  Delaying  eruption. ■  Scarlatina.

■  When  scarlet  rash  leaves  surface  and  goes  to  lungs  and  heart,

ominous  palpitation  with  stitches  in  epigastrium.

■  Eruption  suddenly  growing  pale,  livid. 6  Scarlatina.

■  Toa  early  and  sudden  disappearance  of  the  rash. ^Measles.

■  Pustules  sink  in,  and  their  areolae  grow  livid. ^Small-pox.
Acute  eruptions  disappear  suddenly  with  rapid  prostration.

■  After  suppressed  measles  or  scarlatina. ^Pericarditis.

■  After  suppressed  herpes  circinatus. ^Palpitation  of  heart.
Eruption  on  all  parts  of  the  body  except  the  face  and  hands ;

began  as  a  small  rose  colored  spot,  spread  rapidly,  somewhat
after  the  fashion  of  a  ring-worm,  and  was  soon  covered  with
silvery  scales  which  would  sometimes  rub  off  and  be  replaced
again.  The  scalp  was  covered  with  a  thick  crust ;  no  sensa-
tion except  when  an  oily  substance  was  applied,  when  there
was  a  slight  itching. There  were  an  hundred  or  more  of


95  ARSENICUM.

these  patches,  ranging  from  the  size  of  a  pea  to  that  of  a  sil-
ver dollar, d  Lepra  ;  child,  ?et.  7.

Burning  ulcers.

I  The  burning  in  the  ulcer  compels  scratching  and  rubbing,
which  make  it  worse.

I  The  surface  of  the  whole  ulcer  burns  and  is  very  sensitive.
6  Cancerous  ulcer.

Painful  sensitiveness  of  old  ulcer.

Flat  ulcers  with  a  bluish-white  base.

I  Ulcers:  cancer-like,  particularly  painful  in  the  morning,  with
burning  in  and  at  the  margin  ;  with  elevated  edges ;  with
thin,  bloody  pus ;  with  fetid  ichor  and  proud  flesh.

I  Ulcers  even  with  the  surface,  with  copious  discharge  of  a  car-
rion-like odor.

I  Flat  ulcers  with  copious  discharge

lUlcers  on  the  legs,  also  old  ulcers  with  burning  and  stitching.

■  Ulcers  with  raised  callous  edges;  with  red,  shining  halo;  with

fetid,  watery  discharge  or  proud  flesh.

■  Ulcers,  hard  on  the edges, stinging,  burning,  spongy ;  with

proud  flesh  ;  turning  black;  flat ;  pus  thin,  ichorous  (cancers.)

■  Ulcer,  with  high  edges;  discharges  black,  coagulated  blood.
Ulcer  on  leg  covered  with  gray  crust  and  surrounded  with  an

inflamed  border ;  burning  and  painful.
Ulcers  with  thin  scurf  on  the  surface  and  easily  bleeding  when

dressed.
Ulcers  with  fetid  ichor  and  proud  flesh  which  soon  become

putrid,  blue  and  green.
Small,  ichorous  ulcers  over  the  whole  body  painfully  sensitive.

■  Surface  of  ulcers  unclean,  blackish,  stinking,  exuding  acrid

ichor;  thick  edges  covered  with  pustules,  hard,  border  in-
flamed, 6  Ulcers  on  legs.

■  ■Ulcers  discharging  thick,  greenish,  offensive  ichor,  violent

itching  and  burning  worse  at  night,  better  from  warmth,
worse  from  cold  air.

■  Discharge  of  fetid  pus. ^  Gonarthrocace.

■  Cadaverous  smell  scents  the  room, d  Typhus.
Phagedenic  ulcerations,  constantly  extending  in  breadth.

■  ■Gangrene.

■  ■Sphacelus.

■  ■Cancerous  ulcers.

■  ■Carbuncle.

■  Anthrax  burning  like  fire.

■  ■Reddish  bluish  spots  becoming  gangrenous, d  Carbuncle.

■  Gangrenous  vesicles  on  the  serous  swelling.

■  Gangrenous  aspect  of  sores.

■  Panaritium  assuming  a  gangrenous  aspect.

■  Serpiginous  ulcers.


ARSENICUM.  96

■  Gangrenous  condition  of  the  mucous  membrane  of  the  nasal

cavities. ^  Sequel  of  measles.

■  Gangrenous  sores;  the  affected  part  is  hot,  violent  pain,  in-

flammation around  the  sore;  around  the  vesicles  the  part  is
painful,  stinging,  tearing ;  a  vesicle  size  of  a  filbert  turned
black.

■  Painful  gangrenous  sores  after  an  abscess  on  the  left  heel  was

opened.
Old  scars  burn.

■  Warts.

^^  Stages  of  Life,  Constitution. Hydrogenoid  constitution.

■  i  Young,  ansemic  people. ^  Scrofulous  constitution.
Tubercular  syphilitic  skin  diseases.

■  Woman  ^t.  85,  some  years  dating  from  the  suppression  of  an

eruption  on  the  scalp,  scaly  and  very  itchy.  6  Trachoma
with  blepharitis.

■  Malarious  air. ^Intermittent.

■  A  boy,  set.  3,  after  being  out  of  humor  for  several  days,  inclined

to  sleep,  loss  of  appetite  and  loose  stools. 6  Intermittent.

■  Girl,  set.  15,  exceedingly  weak  and  exhausted  from  the  first,

has  to  lie  down  all  the  time, d  Intermittent.

■  Girl,  aet.  18,  strongly  built. ^Tertian  intermittent.

A  young  woman  of  sanguine  temperament  suffered  with  a  ter-
tian intermittent,  had  to  swallow  quinine  and  still  the  fever
returned.

A  multipara ;  nervous  constitution,^  melancholic  temperament,
after  maltreatment  by  Chin,  sulph.  Relapses  from  the  Fall
1851,  to  March  17,  1852.

■  Man, aet. 40, lean, cachectic;  drinking  spirituous liquors.

d  Quotidian  for  a  week.

■  Man,  get.  40,  strong,  large. /9  After  catarrh,  intermittent.

^^  Relationship.  Antidotes  to  poisonous  doses :  milk,  albumen,
etc.,  should  be  given  at  first  to  envelope  the  poison  until  the
antidote  or  emetic  can  be  obtained.  Induce  vomiting  by
emetics  of  mustard,  sulphate  of  zinc,  or  sulphate  of  copper,
etc.,  but  avoid  tartar  emetic,  and  other  substances  which
strongly  irritate  the  mucous  membrane  of  the  stomach.  Lime-
water  is  useful  by  diminishing  the  solubility  of  the  arsenious
acid.  Demulcent  drinks  in  large  quantities  are  useful.  To
counteract  that  portion  of  the  arsenic  not  expelled  from  the
stomach,  freshly  prepared /grnc  hydrate  or  magnesia  should
be  given  in  large  quantities.  Castor  oil  is  best  purga-
tive to  expel  arsenous  acid  from  the  intestines.

Chemical  antidotes,  such  as  :  animal  charcoal,  hydrated  perox-
ide of  iron,  magnesia,  and  lime-water,  may  prove  useful.

Opium  is  of  service  as  a  dynamical  antidote.  If  stomach  re-
jects it,  administer  in  the  form  of  clysters.


97  ARSENICUM.

Use  brandy  and  stimulants  when  there  is  much  depression  and
collapse.

If  urine  is  suppressed  give  large  quantities  of  water  containing
sweet  spirits  of  nitre.

Antidotes  to  potencies  of  arsenic  :  Camphor.,  Cmchon.,  Chin,
sulph.,  Ferrum,  Grraphit.,  Hepar,  Iodine,  Ipec,  Nux.  vom.,
Samhue.,  Tahac, Verat7\

Arsenic  antidotes:  Oarh.  veg.,  Cinchon.,  Ferrum,  Cfraphit.,
IIepar,Iodum,  Ipec,  Laches.,  Mercur.,  Nux  vom.,  Sambuc,
Tahac,  Veratr.

Arsenic  has  been  found  useful  in  ailments  from :  chewing  to-
bacco, alcoholism,  sea-bathing,  sausage  poisoning,  dissection
wounds,  anthrax  poison,  Strychnia,  Phosphor.,  Digit.,
Plumbum,  Iodine,  Cinchon.,  Ijpec,  Carh.  veg.,  Graphit.,
Laches,  and  Veratr.

Arsenic  has  cured  after  failure  of:  Agar.,  (oscillation  of  eye-
balls) ;  after  Bellad.,  Chamom.,  Cicut.  and  Calomel  (in  in-
oculation during  operation  for  scirrhus  of  mamma).

Arsenic  has  proved  of  use  after : Morphia  in  scirrhus  uteri.

Arsenic  IS  suitable  after:  Aeon.,  Arnic,  Bellad.,  Cinchon.,
China,  Ipec,  Laches.,  Veratr.

Remedies  useful  after  Arsenic:  Aran,  diad.,  Nux  vom.,
lodum,  I  Sulphur,  (^  retinitis  albuminurica,  scrofulous  oph-
thalmia, amaurosis,  etc.).

Complements :  All.  sat.,  Carh.  veg.,  Phosphor.

Arsen.  alb.  is  most  similar  to  Arsen.  met.

Compare  with:  J[(?o?i.  (arterial  excitement,  angina  pectoris,  etc.);
Apoc.  (dropsy  from  heart  disease) ;  Arg.  nitr.  (diarrhoea,
dysentery);  Bellad.,  Bismuth,  (hasty  drinking,  vomiting) ;
Calc.  carb.  (delirium  tremens) ;  Cann.  ind.  (delirium) ;  Carh.
veg.  (asthma,  collapse) ;  Cinchon.  (debility,  sallow  face,  etc.) ;
Ferrum  (dropsy  after  abuse  of  quinine,  but  mucous  mem-
brane is  pale) ;  Hyosc.  (suppression  of  urine) ;  Ipec.  (sick
stomach,  vomiting,  asthma,  etc.);  Kreosot.  (vomiting);
Laches,  (gangrene,  erysipelas,  etc.) ;  Lycop.  (cough,  etc.) ;
Nux  vom.  (alcoholism) ;  Phosphor,  (fatty  degeneration,  de-
bility, etc.);  Pulsat.  (gastralgia,  etc.,  from  ice-cream,  cake,
"etc.);  Rhus  tox.  (typhoid);  Silic.  (suppressed  foot-sweat);
Tabac.  (deathly  nausea,  cold  sweat) ; Veratr.  (oesophagitis).


VOL.  11.-7.


ARSENICUM  HTDROGENISATUM.  98

ARSENICUM  HYDROGENISATUM.

Arsenetted  hydrogen.  AsHs.

We  had  no  provings  of  this  very  important  combination  until  1847,  when
C.Hg  prepared  and  proved  it.  What  is  given  in  Allen's  Encyclopaedia  are
accidental  poisonings,  which  mostly  prove  fatal.  The  only  clinical  ex-
periments have  been  made  by  Doctor  Drysdale,  in  ]849,  in  the  treatment
of  Asiatic  cholera.  Laboring  under  the  mistake  that  Arsenicum  was  a  spe-
cific in  Cholera  Asiatica,  and  supposing  to  get  something  more  powerful
in  the  arsenetted  hydrogen,  he  altogether  overlooked  that,  notwithstand-
ing its  sudden  action,  it  would  not  correspond  to  subacute  ailments,  on
account  of  the  very  slow  development  of  its  symptoms.  Nearly  all  per-
sons poisoned  even  by  small  doses  died  in  the  second  week.  The  only
one  that  recovered,  suffered  for  seven  weeks.  The  only  real  cure  on  record
is  the  one  published  by  F.  W.  Payne,  in  the  New  England  Medical  Gazette.

The  similarity  of  some  cases  of  Asiatic  Cholera  with  the  symptoms  of
the  common  arsenic  is,  according  to  Hahnemann's  advice  to  Stapf,  in
1813,  regarding  Niix  vom.  and  Ignat.,  too  great. They  are  no  antidotes.

The  authorities  quoted  in  Allen's  Encyclopaedia  are:  1.  Gehlen,  Buch-
ner  Tox.,  1827  ;  2,  R.  Schindler,  Grsefe  and  Walther  Journal,  Vol.  XXVI,  No.
4,  p.  626 ;  3,  Eisenmenger,  Zeit.fur  Horn.  Kl.,  No.  1,  p.  103 ;  4,  O'Reilly,  Duh-
Uh  Journal,  1842;  5,  Ollivier,  Gaz.  d.  Hop.,  1863,  to  which  we  add  the  case
of  J.  E.  Bullock,  died  on  12th  day,  at  Dr.  Beard's,  (Gmelin,  Chemie  II,  p.
C90),  and  the  reports  of  Dr.  Richardson,  in  Calcutta,  and  some  remarks  of
Berzelius,  Bennecke  and  others.

Provers  are  marked,  C.Hg.,  Hm.,  N.N.,  F.K.,  Rh.,  Ea.  In  this  instance
we  depart  from  our  usual  rule  of  omitting  the  names  of  the  provers  from
the  arrangement  of  symptoms  (which  would  swell  the  book  to  too  large  a
size)  on  account  of  the  provings  of  Arsenicum  hydrogenisatum  not  having
been  published.

The  —  signifies  that  the  symptom  is  mentioned  somewhere  else.

^  Mind. Almost  unconscious. — R.Sch.

He  lost  his  memory  on  the  evening  of  the  6th  day. — Br.

He  afterwards  can  hardly  remember  the  transient  pains ;  1st

d.— C.Hg.
His  mental  powers  are  unimpaired  from  the  first. — Br.
Great  exaltation  of  mind  ;  it  made  him  talk  incessantly. — R.

Sch,
lExcited;  wants  to  talk  constantly. ^  Yellow  fever.
Loud  complaining  about  unbearable  pains  in  spine. —
Impeded  in  talking,  he  answers  very  slow. —
Disinclined  to  work. — Eisenmenger.
His  occupation  is  disgusting  to  him. — F.K.


99  ARSENICUM  HYDROGENISATUM.

Lazy  and  shirks  his  work. — C.Hg.

Full  of  care  and  fear  about  his  complaint  when  he  gets  awake
at  night.— F.K.

Afraid  of  being  alone,  he  thinks  he  will  die. — F.K,

The  fear  of  dying  is  gone  on  the  3d  day,  notwithstanding  all
around  him  have  doubts  of  his  recovery. — R.Sch.

Anxiety,  he  believes  his  death  is  near,  and  despairs  of  being
better  (during  the  vomiting),  more  courage  afterwards,  till
the  next  vomiting  turn  (6  hours). — R.Sch.

Anxiety,  with  constriction  of  chest. — Chemists.

Anxiety,  restlessness  and  great  prostration  of  strength. — Robe-
son.

Anxious  feeling  before  the  chill. —

Indifferent  on  hearing  the  most  important  news ;  discouraged,
changeable,  his  mental  activity  much  impaired  all  week. —

Soporous and  apathic ; conjunctiva  injected ;  urine  red  and

scanty; 3d. — O'Reilly.
He  is  vexed,  impatient,  anxious  about  his  complaint  and  full

of  fears.— F.K.
When  thinking  about  his  headache  he  feels  it  least ;  1st  day. —

Thinking  of  water  irritates  him,  as  if  he  would  have  to  vomit;
it  nauseates  him. —
*  Sensorium. Vertigo,  with  oppression  of  chest. — Grmelin.

Vertigo,  violent,  on  going  up  stairs,  so  that  he  staggered
against  the  sides  of  the  stairs ;  was  not  noticed  on  going
down  stairs,  or  on  a  level  floor; 3  hours. — R.Sch.

Vertigo  and  general  weakness. — O'Reilly.

Immediately  after  the  second  inhalation,  vertigo  with  faintness,
followed  by  shuddering  and  a  passage  from  the  bowels  and  a
painless  discharge  of  two  ounces  of  blood  from  the  urethra.
—Br.

Vertigo  with  nausea  and  vomiting. —

A  swimming  sensation  in  head  and  whole  body. — F.K.

Vertigo  with  headache. —

A  giddy  oscillation  with  pressure  in  the  frontal  sinuses. —

Head  dull  and  benumbed,  with  pressure  in  forehead. —

Heaviness  of  head. — F.K.

During  the  night  a  pressing,  stupefying  sensation  in  head,  like
from  a  load,  with  a  tearing  sensation ;  sleeplessness  all  night ;
applied  cold  bandages  without  effect ;  pain  lessened  towards
morning. — R.Sch.

■  Stupefying  feeling  in  head,  as  of  a  load  there. — F.W.Payne.

Above  the  forehead  to  the  right,  a  giddy  sensation,  with  an  in-
ner twitching,  like  a  painful  quivering  of  muscles ;  soon  af-
ter, the  same  feeling  in  upper  and  lower  jaw,  going  down  in
a  straight  line  ;  later,  the  same  in  right  shoulder. — C.Hg.


ARSENICUM  HYDROGENISATUM.  100

^  Inner  Head. Pressure  in  right  frontal  sinus,  like  with  the  point

of  a  little  finger ;  later,  the  same  on  the  left.
Pressure  above  the  eyebrows,  with  numbness,  in  the  afternoon.

— F.K.
Violent  pressive  frontal  headache,  worse  at-night,  and  with  such

excessive  weakness,  that  he  was  obliged  to  lie  in bed  for

several  hours  after  eating ; 1st  and  2d  days. — Eisenmenger.
Violent  headache  in  forehead. — Ollivier.
Pressure  in  right  temple,  with  flabbiness  in  stomach  ;  after  two

or  three  minutes  the  same  sensation  in  left  temple. —
Now  and  then  a  headache  in  two  streaks,  from  behind  to  front,

would  be  unbearable  if  continuing  ; >■  when  thinking  about

it.— C.Hg.
Transient  pains  in  the  head. —
Head  and  toothache,  <C  in  warmth. — C.Hg,
Pain  in  right  forehead  and  head. — C.Hg.
Pain  in  occiput,  <C  on  the  right  and  when  coughing. —
Headache  in  upper  and  back  part  of  head  when  coughing. —
Toward  evening  headache  on  right  side,  extending  down  into

the  throat  near  larynx. — F.K.
Pain  in  forehead  with  the  chill. —
Headache  increased  during  the  chill. — Eisenmenger.
Violent  pain  in  forehead  and  in  sacrum. — Ollivier.
Pain  in  head  and  epigastrium,  followed  by  vomiting  of  food. —

Ollivier.
After  10  P.M.  headache  increasing,  face  more  red  ;  conjunctiva

injected; pulse  strong;  speech  impeded, answers  slow. —

Ollivier.
Dura  mater  unchanged,  arachnoidea  a  little  injected,  and  below

it  air-bubbles  ;  in  the  substance  of  the  brain  bloodless  spots  ;

no  water  in  the  cavities. — Br.
*  Outer  Head. All  the  hair  on  the  "deadened"  parts become

snowy  white,  and  the  white  brows  formed  a  strange  contrast

to  the  dark  brown  face. — R.Sch.
®  Sight  and  Eyes. When  falling  asleep  and  again  when  waking

up  at  night,  a  blue  light  before  the  right  eye. — F.K.
Like  a  thread  floating  down  before  the  right  eye  ;  later,  a  dim-
ness.— F.K.
Eyes  yellow,  deeply  sunken,  with  broad  blue  circles. — Sch.
Eyes  sunken,  lustreless  ;  conjunctiva  bulbi  red. — Eisenmenger.
Conjunctiva  reddened;  with  the  chill;  in  the  evening;  again

on  the  3d  day. —
Heaviness  of  the  lids,  have  to  be  lifted  up  with  the  fingers. —

Rh.
A  deadened  feeling  in  region  of  eyebrows,  the  brows  turn  snow

white,  forming  a  strange  contrast  with  the  dark  colored  face.

—R.Sch.


101  ARSENICUM  HYDROGENISATUM.

^  Smell  and  Nose. Tickling  up  in  the  nose,  right  side,  causes
sneezing. See  15.

Indescribable  sensation  up  in  the  nose. — N.N.

Unpleasant  crawling  in  the  nose  causes  sneezing. — R.Sch.

Violent  sneezing,  and  such  coldness  of  nose  that  it  must  be
wrapped  up  in  warm  cloths. — R.Sch.

Nose  as  if  deadened. — R.Sch.

Nose  feels  as  if  dried  up. — F.K.

Bloody  mucus  comes  from  the  nose. — F.K.

Nose  somewhat  sore,  with  the  chill. —

Nose  and  lips  somewhat  excoriated. — Eisenmenger.
"  Face. The  yellow  eyes  deep  sunken,  with  broad  blue  circles.

Painfully  distorted  features. — Sch.

The  face,  which  changed  within  a  few  hours  to  dark  brown,
was  on  the  5th  day  still  dark  yellow,  and  the  features  dis-
torted as  from  great  inward  suffering. —

The  face  copper-colored,  or  dark  red,  the  body  greenish-yellow.
—Br.

Yellowish  face  at  beginning  of  chill. —

Face  pale,  lips  discolored,  can  hardly  walk  ;  in  3  hours. — Olli-
vier.

Face  earthy,  dull,  stupid  features ;  skin  dry ;  pulse  107  ;  vio-
lent thirst,  with  a  dry  tongue ;  2d  day. — Ollivier.

Changed,  sick  face,  sunken,  cheeks  yellowish ;  5th  to  7th  day.
—F.K.

Looks  disturbed  and  pale. — C.Hg.

iThe  face  looks  old,  and  bears  an  expression  of  pain. — F.W.
Payne.

In  the  face  chilly  feeling,  followed  by  a  glow. —

Heat  in  the  face. — Bennecke.

Face  red  in  the  evening. —

Sweat  in  large  drops  on  face  and  whole  head. —

Face  oedematous ;  5th  till  7th  day ;  worse  in  the  evening. —
Br.

iFace  greatly  changed. ^Yellow  fever.

■  Countenance  wears  an  expression  of  extreme  anxiety, d  Col-
lapse of  cholera.
^  Lower  Part  of  Face. In  upper  and  lower  jaw  a  very  painful
twitching ;  pain  going  from  above  downward  in  a  straight
line.— C.Hg.

Pain  in  maxillary  joints,  when  first  opening  the  mouth,  when
pressed  with  the  finger,  when  putting  the  tongue  out.- -F.K.

Lips  colorless. — Ollivier.

Upper  lip  sore,  with  the  chill. —

Lips  and  tongue  fuliginous,  furred  ; 5th  day. — Ollivier.
^°  Teeth  and  Gums. Toothache  <  in  warmth. —

I  Sore  bleeding  gums  around  the  remaining  root  of  the  right
upper  incisor. — C.Hg.


ARSENICUM  HYDROGENISATUM.  102

^^  Taste, Speech, Tongue. Taste bitter. — Eisenmenger and
O'Reilly.

Bitter  taste  in  mouth  after  4  hours  vomiting,  with  great  pros-
tration.— Br.

All  sweet  things  taste  too  sweet.— ^F.K.

A  peculiar  indescribable  taste  in  mouth. — C.Hg.

Very  unpleasant  sticky  after-taste,  lasting  for  hours  after  eat-
ing, the  whole  week. — C.Hg.

A  contracting  sensation  of  numbness,  like  a  cold  feeling,  in
half  the  tongue  in  front,  right  side,  with  running  together  of
saliva  in  the  mouth ;  weakness  in  abdomen  and  pinching ;
1st  day. — C.Hg.

Pricking  on  tip  of  tongue  and  tickling  in  nose,  upper  part,  right
side,  inducing  sneezing;  1st  day,  evening. — C.Hg.

Tongue  slimy,  evenings. —

Tongue  yellow. — Eisenmenger.

Yellowish,  furred  tongue,  with  the  chill. —

Tongue:  bluish-white,  thinly  covered  ;  slimy  taste,  no  appetite  ;
later,  grayish-white,  worse  on  back  part  of  tongue ;  still
later,  tongue  white  and  soft. — F.K.

Tongue  fuliginous,  furred. See  9.

Tongue  somewhat  enlarged,  on  the  right  a  deep  irregular  ulcer ;
next  day  a  second  nodular  swelling  of  a  darker  color  coming
to  a  point. — Br.

Tongue  dry,  with  violent  thirst.
^^  Inner  Mouth. Mouth  hot  and  dry,  with  very  little  thirst ;  dur-
ing the  heat.

Running  together  of  saliva  in  mouth. See  11.
^^  Palate  and  Throat. Burning  and  constriction  in  throat,  fol-
lowed by  irritability  of  stomach. — Robertson.
^*  Appetite,  Thirst,  Desires,  Aversions. Less  appetite  on  ac-
count of  slimy  taste  in  mouth  ;  eats  without  relish. — F.K.

No  appetite  in  the  evening,  tongue  slimy. —

Very  little  appetite  the  whole  second  week. —

Appetite  very  poor. — Eisenmenger.

iLoss  of  appetite. — F.W.Payne.

Hunger  the  first  evening. — C.Hg.

Violent  thirst  in  3  hours. — Ollivier.

Violent  thirst  and  a  dry  tongue. —

Much  thirst  the  2d  day,  drank  oatmeal  gruel,  milk  and  slimy
drinks  in  large  quantities. — Sch.

Great  thirst  the  5th  day,  less  the  next  following  night. — Br.

Thirst  with  the  afternoon  fever.

Very  little  thirst  with  the  fever  heat.

More  sensitive  to  tobacco  ;  1st  day. — C.Hg.

Smoking  without  relish  ; 8th  day. — F.K.
^^  Eating  and  Drinking. After  eating,  frontal  headache. —


103  ARSENICUM  HYDROGENISATUM.

A  few  hours  after  dinner  he  had  to  lie  down  in  bed  on  account
of  headache  and  weakness. —

■  Constant  retching  and  vomiting  after  taking  the  least  thing  to

eat  or  drink. ^Yellow  fever.
^®  Hiccough,  Belching,  Nausea  and  Vomiting. Belching,
with  the  taste  of  the  food  eaten ;  a  slimy  tongue  and  no  ap-
petite evenings  ;  smoking  tasteless. — F.K.

Eruptions. — Eisenmenger.

Spasmodic  eructations  of  enormous  quantities  of  tasteless  gas
from\tomach,  without  relief  of  pain  in  abdomen,  that  causes
him  to  moan  for  six  hours. — Sch.

■  Uninterrupted  belching  up,  spasmodically,  of  a  large  quantity

of  tasteless  air,  with  great  pain  in  abdomen, d  Yellow  fever.

During  spasmodic  eructations  without  any  interruption,  an  in-
credible large  quantity  of  tasteless  air  is  expelled  from  stom-
ach without  relieving  the  pain  in  abdomen.  —  El. Sch.

Hiccough  following  the  eructations;  Sd'day. — R.Sch.

Annoying  hiccough  the  1st  night,  returning  3d  day. — Br.

Tormenting  hiccough,  with  an  oversensitive  epigastrium. — Br.

1  Very  troublesome  and  annoying  hiccough, d  Yellow  fever.

Nausea. — Berzelius.

Nausea  and  vomiting,  with  vertigo  and  constriction  of  chest. —

■  Nausea. ^  Yellow  fever.

Complains  about  nausea  and  fullness  in  epigastrium  ;  6th  day.

—Br.
Incessant  retching  and  vomiting. — Gehlen.
Retching  and  vomiting  even  after  a  single  swallow,  even  a  little

water  is  followed  by  a  return  of  the  most  painful  retching

and  vomiting. — Gehlen.
Vomits  everything  taken  into  the  stomach. — Gehlen. '
Violent vomiting, could not retain the slightest thing. —

O'Reilly. Ollivier.
Vomiting  of  green,  bitter  mucus  with  the  colic. — Sch,

■  Vomiting  of  mucous,  yellow,  green  and  bitter  fluid, d  Yellow

fever.

Copious  green  vomiting,  commencing  in  evening  of  1st  day  and
lasting  all  night ;  every  hour  between  the  time  a  soporous
state  ;  on  the  2d  day  greenish  vomiting  every  two  hours,
lessening  the  3d  and  4th  day. — Br.

Vomits  large  masses. — Br.

Before  midnight  twice  vomiting,  with  bellyache  and  the  great-
est anxiety. — R.Sch.

Vomiting  with  the  pain  in  the  loins. — Br.
^^  Scrobiculum  and  Stomach. Irritability  of  stomach,  vomit-
ing liquid,  first  bilious  and  afterwards  coffee-colored,  "with  a
burning  pain. — Robertson.

With  pressure  in  stomach :  very  little  appetite ;  bitter  taste ;
belching ;  nausea  and  obstinate  constipation. — Eisenmenger.


ARSENICUM  HYDROGENISATUM.  104

With  the  dead  feeling  in  the  limbs  five  hours  after  inhalation,
violent  cutting  pain  in  region  of  stomach  and  below  it,  it
compels  him  to  moan  constantly. — R.Sch.

A  weary  feeling  in  stomach,  with  pressure  in  temples. —

Stomach  empty,  two  inflamed  spots  in  the  large  curvature,
where  the  mucous  membrane  could  very  easily  be  peeled  off.
Post  mortem. — Br.

Pain  in  epigastrium  and  vomiting  of  food, —

Very  sensitive  epigastrium  and  tormenting  hiccough  ;  2d  day.
—Br.

Pressure  in  epigastric  region  during  chill. — Eisenmenger,

Pressure  of  hand  causes  dull  pain  in  epigastrium. — O'Reilly.

Pains  in  epigastrium. — Ollivier.
^^  Hypochondria. Liver  painful  to  pressure ;  after  three  or  four
hours — Ollivier.

Liver  was  congested,  without  alteration  of  the  cells. — Ollivier.

Liver  deep  indigo  blue,  not  enlarged,  gall  bladder  full  to  burst-
ing.— Br.

Softening  of  the  spleen. — Ollivier.
^^  Abdomen,  Loins  and  Groins. A  slight  pressure  in  abdomen ;
5th  day. — R.Sch.

Pressing  pain  below  the  diaphragm,  on  the  left  side  of  abdo-
men ;  1st  day. — C.Hg.

Violent  cutting  in  region  of  navel,  at  intervals. — R.Sch.

Colic  with  vomiting,  before  midnight.

Pains  in  various  parts  of  abdomen,  worse  left  side,  followed  by
great  weakness,  most  in  lower  limbs;  1st  day. — C.Hg.

Sensation  of  weakness  in  abdomen  and  pinching  stitches.

An  undecided,  but  exceedingly  unpleasant  sensation,  as  from  a
stone  lying  in  abdomen,  as  if  all  had  changed  into  a  stone ;
he  begged  for  a  laxative,  but  neither  injections  nor  repeated
stools  (after  Magn.  sulph.)  made  any  change,  belching  did  not
relieve. — Sch.

Glowing  heat  in  abdomen,  with  cold  limbs. — Sch.

Burning  pain  through  the  whole  alimentary  canal. — Robertson.

I  Abdomen  burning,  outside;  cold  feet. ^Yellow  fever.

A  gurgling  noise  in  left  side  of  abdomen  from  incarcerated
flatus,  causing  colicky  pain,  threatening  to  become  severe ;
he  has  to  lie  on  the  belly,  or  bent  together,  and  wants  to  be
well  covered;  very  sensitive  to  the  cold;  morning,  3  a.m.;
2d  day. —C.Hg.

Distension  of  abdomen  during  chills. — Eisenmenger.

Gaseous  distension  of  abdomen. Post  mortem. — ^Br.

Integuments  of  abdomen  look  greenish,  most  on  the  sides. — Br.

Violent  itching  below  the  last  rib  on  the  extreme  left ;  3d  day.
-C.Hg
^^  Rectum  and  Stool. Weak  sensation,  as  if  relaxed,  and  as  if


105  ARSENICUM  HYDROGENISATUM.

diarrhoea  followed,  the  whole  would  fall  out;  evening,  1st

day. — C.Hg.
Urging  as  to  diarrhoea ;  noon,  2d  day. — C.Hg.
Less  wind  passed  after  urination  in  the  morning ;  2d  day. — C.

Hg.
Copious  passage  of  wind  and  looseness  ;  after  Magn.  sulpli.  did

not  relieve. — Sch.
Several  openings  the  4th  day. — Sch.
Soft  stool  at  4  P.M.;  2d  day. — C.Hg.
Frequent  bilious  stools. — Br.

The  usual  morning  stool  is  omitted  and  appears  in  the  after-
noon ;  the  same  6th,  7th  and  8th  day. — F.K.
Two  copious,  offensive  stools,  5  p.m.,  followed  by  a  painless

evacuation of  half  a  pound of  red  urine, containing  real

blood  corpuscles  ; 1st  day.' — Ollivier.
The  first  morning  stool  on  the  10th  day,  full  of  holes  like

lava.— F.K.
*Obstinate  constipation. — Eisenmenger.

■  Constipation,  with  a  feeling  of  heaviness  and  stiffness,  like  a

weight  in  abdomen. — F.W.Payne.

Constipation,  with  fever. — Robertson.

Stool,  with  vertigo,  weakness  and  crawling. — Br.

Thumping,  knocking  pains  in  region  of  perineum,  near  the  anus;
forenoon,  2d  day. — C.Hg.

Frequent  flying  pains  in  perineum,  to  the  anus,  or,  upwards  in
the  anterior  wall  of  rectum  ;  1st  week. — C.Hg.
^^  Urinary  Organs.  Unpleasant  sensation  of  pressure  in  region
of  kidneys,  rapidly  increasing,  extending  over  the  back  to
between  the  shoulders,  not  violent  until  night ;  it  continued
without  interruption,  and  increasing,  with  urging  to  urinate ;
the  urine  is  dark-red,  and  a  thick  coagulum  of  pure  blood
is  formed ;  next  day  the  color  the  same,  but  no  coagulum,
pain  in  kidneys  equally  violent ;  the  3d  day  the  pain  less
violent ;  color  more  bright,  still  bloody ;  the  same  the  4th
day  ;  on  the  6th  day  without  bloody  color. — R.Sch.

■  Pressure  in  the  kidneys,  extending  to  shoulder-blades,  with

pain  in  region  of  kidneys  during  desire  to  urinate,  d  Yellow
fever.

Kidneys  enlarged,  with  very  marked  injection,  most  in  the  tu-
bular substance  ;  the  cells  of  both  substances  granulated. —
Ollivier.

Kidneys  deep  indigo -blue  through  the  whole  substance,  the
left  enlarged  similar  to  the  spleen,  the  right  smaller. — Br.

Scanty,  foaming  urine  in  the  morning,  depositing  a  sediment ;
2d  day.— C.Hg.

*  Called  "  obstinate"  by  the  Old  School,  which  is  transferring  a  quality  of
their  own  mind  to  the  colon.


ARSENICUM  HYDROGENISATUM.  106

From  1st  to  8th  day  less  urine ;  on  the  9th  more,  but  brown,

with  a  suspended  cloud. — F.K.
No  urination  2d  day. — Ollivier.
The  urine  is  suppressed ;  from  4 p.m. no  urine  till  the  next

morning;  1st  day. — C.Hg.
No  urine  1st  night ;  very  little  next  night ;  3d  to  6th  day. — Br.
Very  small  quantities  of  urine,  deposits  some  blood ;  6th  day.
Bladder  empty,  no  change. — Br.
Urine  very  dark,  orange-colored  ;  5th  day. — F.K.
Inky  urine ;  on  boiling  and  adding  Nitric  acid  a  reddish-brown

coagulum  resembling  that  which  we  obtain  from  boiling  blood,

is  deposited. — J.Vogel.
Urine  not  so  frequent,  but  more  profuse  evening ;  6th  day. — F.K.
During  the  night  no  urine ;,  in  the  morning  dark,  reddish-brown,

with  red  gelatinous  and  bluish-red  sediment ;  8th  day. — F.K.
Afternoon,  dark  urine,  with  a  rose-colored  deposit  on  the  walls

of  the  chamber ;  9th  day. —  F.K.
Urine  like  porter,  with  a  cloudy  deposit;  10th  day. — F.K.
Urine  darker  on  the  13th  day. — F.K.
Urine  red,  scanty  ; 3d  day.
Urine  dark,  reddish-black  ;  formed  a  thick  clot  of  blood  in  the

vessel. — Sch.
Soon  a  painless  discharge  of  two  ounces  of  blood  through  the

urethra;  repeated  with  the  shuddering. — Br.
Hsematuria ; passed  two  ounces  of  blood  through  urethra. —

O'Reilly.
Four  tablespoonfulls  of  blood  from  the  urethra ;  2d  day. — Br.
Four  pints  of  bloody  urine,  containing  arsenic. — Robertson.
Discharge  of  inky  urine. — Bennecke.

I  Urine  dark,  blackish-red,  with  pure  blood. ^  Yellow  fever.
■  Discharge  at  times  of  large  quantities  of  pale  urine. — F.W.

Payne.
^^  Male  Sexual  Organs. Sexual  irritation  on  the  glans  penis,

almost  irresistible  with  the  morning  erection  ; 2d  day ;  it

continues  after  rising  and  passing  water ;  all  first  week. —

Deep  in  pelvis  when  crouching  down,  an  unbearable  sensation
of  numbness,  with  a  waving  as  if  it  would  break,  then  a  hor-
rible feeling,  but  of  short  duration;  ibrenoon,  11th  day. — C.

A  pain  in  symphysis  pubis,  no  redness  there,  but  it  is  exceed-
ingly sensitive  to  the  touch,  also  when  coughing  or  bending
forward;  16th  day. — F.K.

Violent  pricking  pain  on  a  small  spot  over  the  right  groin,  of-
ten repeated,  like  a  throbbing; 1st  day. —  C.Hg.

Unbearable  pain  in  both  groins,  exactly  where  the  spermatic
cords  emerge,  as  if  everything  would  fall  or  slip  out  there ;
exceedingly  sensitive  in standing ; > when sitting ;  still


107  ARSENICUM  HYDROGEOTSATUM.

more  when  pressing  on  it  with  both  hands  ;  afternoon,  10th
day ;  the  same  feeling  returns  on  the  12th  day  at  2  p.m. —
C.Hg.

Pain  in  the  left  side  of  penis; 1st  day. — C.Hg.

In  the  3d  week  the  whole  foreskin  and  glans  is  covered  with
little  blisters  containing  pus  ;  they  burst  and  form  very  small
round  flat  ulcers ;  alone  on  the  outer  surface  of  the  foreskin
he  counted  sixty-five,  they  healed  after  ten  to  twelve  days. —
R.Sch.*
^'  Voice  and  Larynx.  Squeaking  voice ;  immediately  after  in-
halation.— Br.

Whispering  voice. — O'Reilly.

The  voice  remains  whispering  and  gets  very  weak  in  the  even-
ing.— Br.

Voice  has  lost  its  timbre,  sounds  as  if  broken,  but  not  hoarse  ;
5th  day.— F.K.

Pain  near  the  larynx  when  speaking,  right  side;  8th  day. — F.K.

A  drawing  sensation  from  head  toward  larynx,  right  side.

With  a  slight  hemming  or  hawking  he  raises  with  great  ease  a
soft,  round  and  smooth  lump  of  phlegm  the  size  of  a  filbert,
when  awaking  at  3  A.M.;  2d  day. — C-Hg.

I  His  customary  hawking  up  of  phlegm  ceases ;  6th  day. — F.K.
^^  Respiration. Ammoniacal  odor  of  the  breath  ;  5th  to  7th  day.
— Br.

Rapid  breathing.

Constriction  of  chest :  with  the  nausea ;  with  the  chill.

Want  of  breath  ;  gasping  for  air.

Breathing  relieved  after  Sinapism  and  Amm.  aeet.;  after  three
or  four  hours. — Ollivier.

Oppression  of  chest  during  chill. — Eisenmenger;
"  Cough. In  the  forenoon  frequent  coughing,  with  a  pain  in  the
perineum  ;  3d  day. — F.K.

When  he  coughs  in  the  evening  headache  in  upper  and  back
part  of  head;  6th  day. — F.K.

A  little  cough  very  often,  without  inner  irritation,  as  from  a
pressure  over  the  chest ;  after  eating  ice  cream,  at  first  better
(also  the  whole  chest),  but  afterwards  worse  ;  6th  day. — F.K.

Cough  increases  from  9  to  10  a.m.,  most  while  conversing  in
the  room  ;  7th  day. — F.K.

In  the  evening  the  cough  comes  now  from  the  depths  of  the
chest,  is  looser;  sputa  relieved; 7th  day. — F.K.

Cough  comes  from  the  front  upper  part  of  chest ;  9th  day. — F.K.

Sweats  when  coughing;  11th  day. — F.K.

A  sensation  as  if  the  whole  thorax  was  laced  tightly,  with  rapid
breathing,  without  cough  or  rattling  of  phlegm  ;  after  three
hours. — Ollivier.

*  Was  the  j'oung  man  syphilitic  ? Ars.  met.  brings  out  dormant  syphilis.
—C.Hg.


ARSENICUM  HYDROGENISATUM.  108

^^  Inner  Chest  and  Lungs.  Pressure  in  region  above  the  breast-
bone, all  across,  on  the  4th  day  ;  worse  on  5th. — F.K.

A  painful  pressure  in  upper  part  of  chest,  where  it  commences
to  become  sore  to  pressure,  disappears  when  perspiring;
7th  day.— F.K.

Pressure  over  whole  chest,  with  great  anxiety ;  7  th  day  ;  the
pressure  is  lessened  by  gaping ;  9th  day. — F.K.

Pain  in  chest  is  gone  in  the  morning,  returns  towards  11  A.M.;
11th  day.— F.K.

Pressure  over  the  chest  produces  a  slight  cough. —

Pain  across  chest,  like  a  beating  deep  in  right  side,  near  the
middle,  drawing  towards  the  left. — R.H.

A  glowing  sensation  in  chest  after  the  chilly  feeling. —

Back  part  of  lungs  are  congested;  2d  day. — Ollivier.

Lungs  collapsed,  containing  very  little  air,  otherwise  normal.
—Br.

In  the  cavities  of  the  pleura  two  pints  of  reddish-brown,  odor-
less fluid. — Br.

^^  Heart,  Pulse  and  Circulation. A  cutting  pain  near  the  last

left  ribs.
A  knocking,  thumping  pain  in  heart,  deep  in  chest,  extends

towards  the  right  side ;  forenoon,  2d  day. — C.Hg.
Palpitation  ; 7th  day. — Br.
Heart  pale,  relaxed,  empty  of  blood  ;  only  a  little  fluid  in  the

pericardium . — Br.
Pulse  small  and  rapid. — Eisenmenger.
Pulse  90,  weak.— O'Reilly.

Fever  with  a  full,  hard,  frequent  pulse. — Robertson.
Pulse  strong  and  frequent. —
Pulse  107  ;  2d  day.—
I  Pulse  frequent. ^Yellow  fever.
Pulse  90  in  the  morning,  128  at  10  o'clock,  very  small  and

soft;  7th  day.— F.K.
After  meals  the  pulse  is  more  full  and  more  frequent ;  7th  day.

—F.K.
Pulse  intermits  when  awaking  in  the  night,  with  anxiety  and

thoughts  of  death  ;  7th  day. — F.K.
Pulse  60  in  the  morning,  and  irregular ;  in  the  forenoon  52  ;

8th  day.— F.K.
In  the  evening  pulse  56,  the  same  after  eating ;  later  60,  and

tensive,  as  if  turned  or  twisted ;  some  beats  retarded  for

more  than  a  second,  followed  by  a  few  quicker  beats ;  8th

day.— F.K.
Pulse  64,  every  other  beat  stronger, like  the  pendulum  of  a

clock  placed  obliquely  ;  8th  day. — F.K.
Pulse  64,  limping  in  the  morning  of  9th  day  ;  at  noon,  112,

limping  till  1  P.M.,  and  softer; 3  p.m.,  limping  again  and

intermitting;  changing  from  quicker  to  slower. — F.K.


109  ARSENICUM  HYDROGENISATUM.

Pulse  76  in  the  morning;  at  11  a.m.,  84  to  88;  11th  day. —
F.K.

Pulse  more  frequent  after  the  meal  at  noon ;  14th  day. — F.K.

Pulse  very  frequent  and  small  with  the  chill. —

Pulse  110  after  Siniapism  and  Ammon.  acet. — Ollivier.

Pulse  90,  but  weak,  after  four  hours ;  small,  92,  lessened
temperature  of  skin  next  day  ;  80,  strong,  with  sensitive
epigastrium,  2d  day ;  76,  and  painless  epigastrium ;  later,
same  day  ;  76,  Sd  day ;  80,  5th  day ;  same,  6th  day ;  102
in  the  morning,  7th  day  ;  76  at  noon  ;  later,  80  ;  death  next
morning. — Br.

The  breathing  very  frequent,  and  the  pulse  imperceptible  be-
fore death. —

Pulse  imperceptible  after  increased  respiration ;  becoming  un-
conscious ;  evening  5th  day,  death. — Ollivier.

Complete  cessation  of  pulse. — R.Sch.

I  Pulse  quite  imperceptible, d  Collapse  in  cholera.
^^  Outer Chest. Rheumatic pains  over  the  breast-bone  lessen
when  perspiring  ;  2d  day. — F.K.

Pain  in  middle  of  sternum  ;  <  when  he  walks  about ;  10th  day.
—F.K.

Pain  in  chest,  in  the  bones  and  intercostal  muscles ;  at  the  same
time  pain  in  arm.

Want  of  breath,  and  gasping  for  air. — Ea.

In  left  side  of  chest,  near  the  nipple,  as  if  raw  and  sore,  with
the  pressive  pain ;  4th  day. — F.K.

The  pain  in  chest  is  concentrated  in  the  left  side,  above  the
nipple;  9th  day. — F.K.

A  pressure  over  the  chest,  a  few  inches  below  the  upper  end  of
breast-bone,  with  a  pressure  on  the  breast-bone ;  6th  day. —
F.K.

Sore,  raw  feeling  over  the  whole  chest;  8th  day. — F.K.

Chest  hurts  when  coughing,  breathing,  and  when  pressed ;  8th
day.— F.K.

A  crawling,  as  if  warm  drops  were  running  over  the  chest,
stopped  by  pressing  with  the  finger;  11th  day. — F.K.
^^  Neck  and  Back, Tearing  pain  in  neck  during  chill. — Eisen-
menger.

Feverish  in  the  neck,  forenoon ;  13th  day. — F.K.

Stiffness  in  the  neck  and  between  the  shoulders,  begins  in  the
morning ;  >  when  going  out  or  moving  about ;  7th  and  8th
day. — C.Hg.

aPain  as  if  something  was  sticking  below  the  right  shoulder-
blade  ;  increased  at  first,  and  disappeared  after  three  hours
sleep. — C.Hg.

Backache  like  on  the  first  days,  returned  towards  evening  on
the  7th  day,  not  so  violent,  but  much  harder  to  bear;  in-
creased next  evening  and  in  the  night,  causing  loud  lamenta-


ARSENICUM  HYDROGENISATUM.  110

tions ;  sitting  relieves  it  a  little,  but  he  is  too  weak  to  sit
long  ;  relieved  towards  evening  of  9tli  day  by  application
of  cloths  dipped  in  warm  milk. — R.Sch.

Crawlino;  over  the  shoulders  and  back. —

A  glow  in  the  back  after  chilliness. —

Shuddering  over  single  parts  of  back. —

Pain  in  region  of  kidneys  became  exceedingly  severe,  with  urg-
ing to  urinate. — Sch.

An  unpleasant  pressive  feeling  in  region  of  kidney,  which
rapidly  increased  and  spread  up  the  back  to  between  shoul-
ders ;  after  four  hours. — Sch.

Pressure  between  the  shoulders. — R.Sch.

Very  violent  pain  in  lumbar  region. — Ollivier.  '

Slight  pain  in  lumbar  region. — O'Reilly.

Some  pains  in  the  loins  when  the  "falling  asleep"  of  the  limbs
passed  away. — Br.

Pain  in  loins  with  vomiting. — Br.

Behind  and  above  the  right  hip,  on  a  small  spot  near  the  spine,
a  very  great  pain  ;  increased  in  walking ;  has  to  sit  down. —
C.Hg.

Backache  in  small  of  back,  as  after  having  taken  cold ;  even-
ing, 2d  day.— F.K.

Violent  pains  in  sacrum,  after  three  hours.

A  dull  pain  on  upper  part  of  sacrum,  on  a  place  the  size  of  a
hand,  interferes  for  one  or  two  minutes  with  his  breathing  ;
it  swells  and  feels  as  if  something  was  filled  up ;  with  in-
creased pain  ;  8th  day. — F.K.
^^  Upper  Limbs.  Sore  aching  spot  on  the  right  acromion ;  8th
day.— F.K

Pain  from  the  tip  of  shoulder  down  towards  the  point  of  elbow ;
9th  day.— F.K.

Painful  twitching  in  the  shoulders.

A  warm,  almost  burning  cut,  like  with  a  small  knife,  in  right
upper  arm,  from  near  the  shoulder  down  towards  the  elbow  ;
soon  after  inhalation. — F.K.

Flying  stitches  in  the  arms. — R.Sch.

Tearing  pain  and  stitches  in  upper  limbs,  during  chill. — Eisen-
menger.

In  the  elbows  and  upper  arms  the  same  pain  as  in  the  knee. —
R.Sch.

Earning  pain  in  both  elbows,  more  in  the  right ;  9th  day. — F.K.

Pains  in  elbows  and  upper  arms ;  in  five  hours. — Sch.

Feeling  of  deadness  of  hands  extending  to  middle  of  forearms.
—R.Sch.

Arms  and  hands  very  tired,  as  if  burning.

Flying  pains  in  right  hand  and  fingers ;  2d  day. — C.Hg.

Swollen  veins  on  the  hands;  7th  day. — F.K.


Ill  ARSENICUM  HYDROGENISATUM.

Middle  finger,  left  and  inner  side,  and  second  joint  red  and
swollen  ;  the  14tli  day  ;  gone  the  15th  day. — F.K.

Itching  on  the  first  joint  of  the  left  middle  finger,  inner  side,
on  a  small  spot,  where  a  very  small  blister  is ;  after  the  1st
week. — CHg.
^^  Lower  Limbs. Slight  thumping  pain  on  a  small  spot  behind
the  right  hip-bone. — CHg.

Pimple  on  the  nates,  impedes  walking; 15th  day. — F.K.

Quivering  in  left  thigh,  inner  side,  towards  the  front,  in  a  short
line,  evening,  till  night ;  9th  day ;  again  on  the  10th  day,
in  the  afternoon. — F.K.

Pain  on  inner  side  of  both  thighs,  most  right  side,  whence  it
extends  to  near  the  anus ;  12th  day. — F.K.

Pain  on  inner  side  of  both  thighs,  mostly  towards  the  os  pelvis :
15th  day.— F.K.

Violent  itching  on  left  thigh,  on  the  inner  side,  a  few  inches
above  the  knee  ; 7th  day. — CHg.

After  getting  up,  when  placing  his  legs  higher  than  the  body,  a
violent  pain  above  the  left  knee ;  soreness  in  the  muscles  or
tendons,  under  the  skin ;  gets  better  when  moving  about ;
evening,  1st  day ;  the  next  day  it  still  pains,  but  more  be-
low the  knee,  with  a  lame  feeling  when  kneeling ;  his  limbs
break  down  when  going  up  stairs;  noon,  2d  day. — CHg.

Above  the  right  patella  a  pain  on  pressure,  also  in  the  bend  of
the  knee ;  increases  after  lying  still  a  good  while ;  evening.
16th  day.— F.K.  ^

On  getting  up  and  beginning  to  move,  after  lying  especially
in  a  somewhat  fatiguing  position,  a  pain  in  left  I: nee,  as  if  it
was  inwardly  crushed,  but  not  in  the  bones ;  it  increases  to
a  kind  of  burning,  and  only  disappears  after  continuing  to
move  ;  8th  to  10th  day. — C.Hg.

Rheumatic,  gouty,  tearing  pain  in  knee-joints. — R.Sch.

Pains  in  the  knees  during  the  chill. — R.Sch.

Pain  in  hollow  of  left  knee,  when  rising  from  a  seat,  and  in  the
beginning  of  walking  ; 3d  day. — F.K.

Sensation  in  bend  of  left  knee  as  if  beaten ;  a  cold  and  burn-
ing pain ;  <  on  beginning  to  move,  especially  after  lying ;
the  whole  1st  week. — CHg.

In  the  bones  of  the  leg  below  the  right  knee,  a  throbbing  pain,
drawing  downwards. —

Pains  in  lower  limbs,  especially  right  side,  lasting  two  hours.
— Br.

Flying  stitches  in  lower  limbs. — R.Sch.

Pain  in  lower  limbs,  more  in  the  right. — O'Reilly.

Flying,  cutting  pains  in  left  leg,  from  the  shin  to  the  ankle ;
at  same  time  on  the  last  left  ribs;  2d  day — CHg.

Pain  in  left  leg,  after  sitting  ;  <  going  down  stairs,  with  break-
ing down  of  the  knees  ;  2d  day. — CHg.


ARSENICUM  HYDROGENISATUM.  112

Lower  limbs  become  rigid  later  than  the  arms. — Br.

Feet  get  numb,  as  if  dead,  up  to  the  knees. — R.Sch.

Weakness,  most  in  the  lower  limbs. — Z.

Left  foot  hurts  again  when  ri^'ing,  most  towards  the  external
margin  ;  12th  day. — F.K.

Feet,  usually  colder  than  the  rest  of  the  body,  are  now  warmer  ;
3d  day.— F.K.

Sweat  all  over,  but  not  on  the  right  foot. — F.K.

Pain  in  right  heel. —

Flying  pains  in  the  feet. —

Pain  in  left  foot-joint  when  walking ; 3d  day. — F.K.

The  left  foot-joint  he  cannot  move,  even  when  lying  in  bed;
«th  day.— F.K.

Can  not  move  the  foot,  and  is  unable  to  get  up  ;  9th  day. — F.K.

Great  pain  in  left  foot,  from  one  ankle-bone  to  the  other,  pass-
ing across  above  the  joint,  worst  on  a  small  spot  of  the  dor-
sum of  the  foot ;  a  red-yellow  streak  on  the  top  of  the  foot,
near  the  toes ;  from  the  fourth  to  the  second  toe ;  the  pain
is  awful,  turns  him  pale ;  most  painful  in  the  moving  of  the
foot-joint ;  1st  day. — F.K.

A  red  streak  on  the  ankle-joint,  where  the  pain  was  day  be-
fore ;  11th  day.— F.K.

In  left  foot,  most  on  the  sole,  pains  prevent  stepping  on  it ;
worse  in  motion,  less  in  bed;  pains  in  the  middle,  as  if  con-
tracted lengthways ;  when  stepping  on  it  a  painful  stretch  ;
3d  day  ;  much  worse  the  4th. — F.K.

Pain  in  left  sole  prevents  walking  in  the  forenoon  ;  less  in  the
afternoon ;  <<  in  the  evening,  especially  after  rising  from  a
seat;  all  the  pains  in  sole,  heel,  and  the  whole  foot,  extend
upwards;  6th  day. — F.K.

Pains  in  left  sole,  foot  and  knee,  increase  in  the  evening ;  6th
day. — F.K.

Pain  from  the  sole  towards  the  middle  toe ;  very  much  worse
when  the  first  toe-joints  are  bent ;  8th  day. — F.K.

Tickling  in  hollow  of  left  foot;  10th  day. — F.K.

Pain  on  pressure  of  balls  of  toes,  sore  and  thrilling,  most  ball
of  middle  toe ;  the  pain  extends  along  all  the  toes  ;  8th  day.
—F.K.

With  every  attempt  to  step  on  the  feet  all  the  toes  hurt,  as  if
in  the  tendons,  up  to  the  foot-joint ;  8th  day. — F.K.

The  once  chilblained  ball  of  the  right  big  toe  gets  more  pain-
ful ;  16th  day.— F.K.

Thumping  pain  in  right  big  toe  increasing  in  warmth. — C.Hg.

The  left  middle  toe  is  exceedingly  painful  when  touched,  most
underneath,  on  the  ball  and  in  the  first  joint,  and  from  there
to  the  big  toe  and  inside  the  ankle ; 8th  day. — F.K.

Sensation  as  if  a  splinter  lodged  under  the  nail  of  the  left  mid-
dle toe;  9th  to  10th  day.— F.K.


113  ARSENICUM  HYDROGENISATUM.

^*  Limbs  in  General.  Soon  after  inhalation  pain  in  lower  limbs,
most  right  side,  with  a  numbness,  jfirst  in  upper  limbs,  then
in  the  lower,  followed  by  a  crawling  sensation,  for  two  hours.
—Br.

Very  sensitive,  gouty,  tearing  pains  iu  upper  arms,  elbows  and
knee-joints. — Br.

Throbbing  pains  in  bones  of  left  upper  arm,  extending  down-
wards, three  and  five  times  every  hour;  the  same  in  the  bones
of  the  right  lower  limb  below  the  knee ;  also  extending  down-
wards.— Br. C.Hg.

Stitches  in  arms  and  feet. — R.Sch.

Weakness  in  limbs. — Bennecke.

Arms  get  cold  and  stiff  first,  then  lower  limbs. — Br.

Coldness  of  limbs. — R.Sch. Ollivier.

I  Coldness  of  limbs. — F.W.Payne.

Unpleasant  crawling  in  hands  and  feet,  and  flying  stitches  in
upper  and  lower  limbs  ;  7th  day. — R.Sch.
^^  Rest. Position. Motion. Tired  in  hands  and  arms,  after
moderate  exertion  (carrying  a  child),  they  burn  from  weak-
ness; 1st  day. — C.Hg.

Very  little  inclined  to  do  any  work. — Eisenmenger.

Difficult  walking. —

Walking  up  stairs,  vertigo. —

Motion  difficult. — Ollivier.

While  walking,  chilly. —

All  pains  increase  during  motion ;  in  rest  they  also  first  in-
crease, but  get  better  afterwards. — F.K.

Weak  even  when  sitting. — C.Hg.

Such  a  yeakness  that  he  cannot  sit ;  on  the  3d  day  able  to  do
a  few  steps ;  still  very  weak  7th  day ;  somewhat  better  10th
day  and  following.^ — R.Sch.

Getting  up  he  feels  so  weak  and  chilly  that  he  is  obliged  to  lie
down  again  ;  evening,  8th  day. — F.K.

Such  a  sensation  of  weakness  with  the  headache  and  vertigo,
that  he  has  to  lie  down ; 3d  day. —

Colic  better  lying  on  belly,  or  better  frofli  bending  together. —
^®  Nerves. Restlessness  and  anxiety. — Robertson.

The  greatest  bodily  restlessness ;  5th  day. — Br.

Prostration  with  anxiety;  vertigo,  nausea,  and  troublesome
costiveness. — Berzelius.

Suddenly  after  the  inhalation  he  feels  himself  poisoned ;  an  in-
describable exhaustion  and  nausea  overwhelms  him ;  hardly
able  to  take  the  few  steps  to  reach  the  next  room  ;  incessant
retching  and  vomiting  followed,  he  could  not  take  any  medi-
cine, gruel  or  soup,  nor  a  swallow  of  water  without  a  painful
return  of  retching  and  vomiting ;  even  thinking  of  water  ex-
cited the  vomiting ;  death  on  the  9th  day. — Gehlen.

Sensation  of  deadness  from  hands  upwards  to  the  middle  of

VOL.  II, — 8.


ARSENICUM  HYDROGENTSATUM.  114

forearm,  and  the  feet  to  the  knees,  then  the  nose  and  the  re-
gion of  eyebrows,  with  cessation  of  pulse ;  every  sign  of  life
ceased  in  these  parts,  but  the  ability  to  move  them  re-
mained;  after  five  hours. — R.Sch.

Heat  in  the  face ;  weakness  in  all  the  limbs  ;  disposed  to  faint
and  tremble,  soon  passirjg  oif,  but  leaving  a  sensation  of
weakness  and  exhaustion ;  immediately  after  inhalation. —
Vogel.

The  whole  nervous  system  was  immediately  affected,  and  ulti-
mately his  lungs ;  died  in  ten  days. — Bullock  ;  by  Beard.

Disposed  to  fainting. — Bennecke.

Faintness  with  vertigo,  followed  by  shuddering. — Br.

Great  fatigue  and  weakness. — Eisenmenger.

Sudden  indescribable  weakness  and  nausea. — Gehlen,

Very  great  weakness,  and  bitter  taste  in  mouth. — Br.

continual  vomiting. — Br.

Great  weakness,  most  in  the  lower  limbs. —

Unusual  weakness  in  the  evening,  as  weak  as  a  rag,  ready  to
drop  ;  1st  day. — C  Hg.

Weakness  and  crawls. — Br.

Weariness  and  exhaustion  with  the  chill. —

Arms  become  torpid  and  stiff  first,  afterwards  the  lower  limbs,
with  crawling  sensation,  lasting  two  hours,  soon  after  inhala-
tion.^Br.

Now  and  then  a  very  peculiar  weakness,  and  during  it  all  pains
cease  ;  1st  and  following  days. — C.Hg.

Weakness  without  any  pain  ;  2d  day. — Br.

After  dinner  weakness  and  no  pains  all  afternoon  ^nd  evening  ;
2d  day.— C.Hg.

He  feels  as  if  he  was  recovering  from  a  very  long  sickness,  a
pleasant  sensation;  11th  day. — F.K.

■  Great  prostration  and  general  malaise. — F.W.Payne.
^^  Sleep. Gaping  and  unpleasant  feeling  with  the  chilliness. —

So  drowsy  that  he  can  hardly  open  his  eyes. — Rh.

Drowsiness  from  5th  to  7th  day. —

Sopor  between  the  attacks  of  vomiting. — Br.

Very  pleasant,  poetical  dreams. — C.Hg.

Dreams  as  if  he  was  praying  in  a  public  meeting,  with  great
applause; 7th  day. — F.K.

Dreams  towards  morning  from  people  going  and  arriving;
7th  day.— F.K.

Moaning  in  sleep  ;  16th  day. — F.K.

Sleep  interrupted  by  headache. — R.Sch.

Slightest  noise  interrupts  his  sleep. — R.Sch.

Disturbed  by  wind  colic  towards  morning. —

Suddenly  awakened  by  two  strong  concussive  shocks  after  mic'-
night;  7th  day. — F.K.


115  ARSENICUM  HYDROGENISATUM.

Frequent  starting  while  falling  asleep. —

As  soon  as  lie  falls  asleep  he  perspires;  15th  day. — F.K.

Restless  night,  from  5th  to  6th  day. — Br.

Restless  sleep,  till  after  midnight. —

Wakens  every  hour,  always  before  the  clock  strikes;  from  9th

to  10th  day.— F.K.
For  a  long  while  he  cannot  get  to  sleep;  he  feels  as  if  he  had

to  move  about ;  6th  day. — F.K.
Sleeplessness. — Sch. R.Sch.
I  Total  sleeplessness. ^Yellow  fever.

■  Sleeplessness. — F.W.Payne. (A  chronic  case. See  47.)

^'  Time.  Worse  at  night :  frontal  headache ;  pain  in  lower  limbs. —
After  midnight:  sleep  easy. —

Getting  awake  in  the  morning,  weak  and  depressed. —
On  awaking :  weak,  etc. —

Weak  and  prostrated  on  waking. — Eisenmenger.
Tired  and  depressed  when  waking  in  the  morning. —
Very  exhausted  :  morning  in  bed  ; 8th  day. — F.K.
At  noon  and  midnight  he  always  feels  the  worst;  10th  day.

—F.K.
Afternoon,  3  o'clock  :  headaches  increase  chills  and  fever  every

day ;  chill. —
His  feeling  unwell  increases  steadily  afternoon  ;  -Ith  day. — F.K.
Dying  commences  :  4  o'clock  p.m.,  six  times  24  hours  after

inhalation. — Br.
Evening,  5  o'clock  :  offensive  stools. —
Evening  :  headache ;  vomiting ;  less  warmth  of  skin.
All  pain  is  gone  out  of  the  right  foot  in  the  evening ; 8th  day

—F.K.
^^  Temperature  and  Weather, After  drinking  cold  water ;

later,  after  warm  drinks,  he  could  bring  on  a  copious  sweat.

—R.Sch.
Warmth  lessens,  cold  increases  the  symptoms. — F.K.
If  not  covered  in  the  evening  he  feels  chilly ; 8th  day. — F.K.
Undressing,  10  p.m.,  chill  violent. —

Coming  in  a  cool  room  he  feels  very  chilly ;  3d  day. — F.K.
Very  sensitive  to  the  cold. —
After  moving  in  open  air  always  worse. —
After  walking  in  open  air,  very  unwell. — Eisenmenger.
During  a  walk  in  open  air,  chilly. — Eisenmenger.
Before  a  thunder-storm,  many  old  pains  appear  again. — F.K.
Sensitive  to  cold  weather. —

Damp  air  increases  his  malaise  very  much.— Eisenmenger.
Damp  air  always  aggravates. —

■  General  chilliness  on  slight  exposure,  or  change  of  tempera-

ture.— F.W.Payne.
*°  Chill. Fever. Sweat. Temperature  diminished. — O'Reilly.
Chill.— O'Reilly.


ARSENICUM  HYDROGENISATUM.  116

After  faintiness,  giddiness  and  shuddering. — Br.

Chilliness  over  the  whole  body ;  after  four  hours. — Sch.

Chilliness  became  very  violent  on  undressing,  at  10  P.M.;  after
five  hours. — Sch.

Cold  limbs  with  heat  in  abdomen. — R.Sch.

Nose  cold,  had  to  wrap  it  in  hot  cloths. — R.Sch.

Chilly  while  walking. — Eisenmenger.

With  the  attempt  at  rising  he  feels  chilly,  from  weakness ;  8th
day.— F.K.

Attacks  of  shuddering  or  creeps  in  the  evening,  short,  violent
and  only  on  parts  of  the  back  ;  the  1st  day. — C.Hg,

Evening  frequent  creeps,  with  coldness  running  down  the
body ;  glowing  heat  about  the  chest,  back  and  face ;  later,
general  sweat,  only  not  on  the  right  foot,  continues  all  night,
large  drops  run  over  his  face  and  down  the  head ;  with  it
the  pulse  limping;  8th  day. — F.K.

During  chill :  headache  ;  pressure  in  epigastric  region  ;  disten-
sion of  abdomen;  oppression  of  chest;  tearing  in  neck;  tear-
ing in  upper  limbs. —

With  the  pressing  pain  from  region  of  kidneys  up  to  region  be-
tween shoulders,  a  chill  over  the  whole  body,  with  gouty
tearing  pains  in  the  knee-joints  and  cold  limbs ;  four  hours
after  inhalation  ;  half  an  hour  later,  when  undressing,  the
chill  was  more  violent  than  any  he  ever  had ;  pains  in  the
knees,  upper  arms  and  elbows,  increasing  to  great  violence
after  the  chill;  five  hours  after  inhalation. — R.Sch.

Severe  chill  on  the  3d  day,  3  p.m.,  time  when  headache  was
usually  worse,  beginning  with  yawning,  discomfort,  anxiety
and  chilliness,  accompanied  by  oppression  of  chest,  pain  in
neck,  drawing  in  upper  limbs ;  increased  frontal  headache  ;
after  a  two  hours  chill:  moderate  heat,  lasting  till  8  P.M.,
with  a  hot,  dry  mouth,  but  little  thirst ;  after  the  heat :  very
slight  sweat,  during  which  he  falls  asleep  ;  at  first  frequent
startings,  during  the  unrefreshing  sleep  ;  after  midnight  quiet.
— Eisenmenger.

In  the  afternoon,  3  o'clock,  when  the  headache  had  been  the
worst,  on  1st  and  2d  day,  on  the  3d  day  he  has  gaping,  ma-
laise, anxiety  and  chilliness,  gradually  growing  into  strong
chill  with  constriction  of  chest,  pain  in  the  neck,  drawing  in
upper  limbs,  and  pain  in  forehead;  after  the  chill  had  lasted
two  hours  a  moderate  heat  followed,  lasting  until  8  P.M.;
mouth  hot  and  dry ;  moderate  thirst ;  after  the  heat  some
sweat ;  he  falls  asleep,  but  starts  often  ;  after  midnight  quiet
sleep,  but  on  waking,  weary,  and  as  if  beaten ;  3d  day. —
Eisenmenger.

After  the  great  chill  and  the  fever  on  3d  day,  only  chilly  on
the  4th,  and  on  the  5th  strong  again,  till  on  the  3d  and
henceforth,  every  afternoon  at  3  o'clock. —


117  ARSENICUM  HYDROGENISATUM.

With  the  beginning  of  the  chill  at  3  p.m.:  sallow,  yellowish
face;  eyes  sunken,  listless,  the  conjunctiva  reddened;  nose
and  upper  lip  excoriated  ;  tongue  furred,  yellow  ;  pulse  fre-
quent and  small,  at  the  same  time  increased  headache ;  con-
striction of  chest ;  tearing  pain  in  nape  of  neck  and  upper
limbs  ;  pressure  in  region  of  tonsils  ;  distension  of  abdomen  ;
great  weariness  and  weakness. —

Evening,  5  o'clock  :  fever-heat;  half-past  seven  o'clock  :  sweat,
followed  by  sleep  ;  7th  day. — Eisenmenger.

A  slight  fever  paroxysm  on  the  2d  day. — Eisenmenger.

A  paroxysm  of  fever  on  the  5th  day  more  severe  than  on  the
3d,  after  which  it  returned  every  day.  Cured  by  Nux
vom.;  renewed  on  a  subsequent  occasion  on  inhaling  the  same
gas. — Eisenmenger.

Fever  commenced  at  12  noon :  pulse  up  to  90 ;  did  not  affect
the  head ;  thirst  in  the  afternoon ;  sensitive  to  the  cold
weather;  after  supper  the  pulse  rose  from  90  to  120  ;  6th
day.— F.K.

After  writing  awhile  flying  heat  up  towards  the  head ;  pulse
about  120 ;  every  50  to  60  beats  one  omits,  gradually  oftener,
in  the  evening  every  5th  to  6th  beat,  sometimes  every  3d ;
7th  day. — F.K.

In  the  morning  when  attempting  to  step  down,  heat ;  in  the
evening  cold  feeling  ;  10th  day. — F.K.

Slight  fever,  with  great  weakness ; 5th  day. — Br.

Glowing  heat  in  abdomen  and  cold  limbs  all  night,  with  pain
in  kidneys  and  urinating  blood. — R.Sch.

I  Much  heat  and  burning  in  different  parts  of  the  body,  particu-
larly over  the  renal  region. — F.W.Payne.

General  warm  sweat  after  midnight,  with  a  soft  pulse,  80  to
the  minute,  omitting  3,  4  times ;  7th  day. — F.K.

Attacks  of  night  sweat ;  from  7th  to  8th  day ;  continually  in
the  morning  hours. — F.K.

Night-sweats  ;  13th  day. — F.K.

Night-sweat  in  short  attacks  ;  5th  day. — F.K.

General  warm  sweat  in  the  night,  in  large  drops. —

Sweat  relieves  deadness  in  the  limbs. —

■  Surface  of  body  bedewed  with  moisture,  with  the  unnatural
warm  feel  of  such  cases, d  Collapse  of  cholera.
*^  Attacks. In  attacks,  as  if  beaten  all  over;  7th  day. — F.K.

On  the  7th  and  8th  day  a  renewed  appearance  of  many  former
symptoms  and  new  symptoms,  and  a  higher  development  of
the  morbid  medical  affection. —

Pains  return  ;  typical  headache ;  after  a  slight  improvement  on
the  4th  day,  worse  on  the  5th,  when  urination  completely
ceased. — Ollivier.

I  Typhus  tertianus  postponens. —

Death  on  the  9th  day. — Gehlen. Bullock.


ARSENICUM  HYDROGENISATUM.  118

*^  Sensations. As  if  all  had  changed  to  stone  in  abdomen.

As  if  something  would  break  in  pelvis.

As  if  something  was  sticking  below  right  shoulder-blade.

Pain  in  back,  as  after  having  taken  cold.

A  pain  in  left  knee,  as  if  inwardly  crushed.

As  if  beaten  ;  in  bend  of  left  knee.

As  if  a  splinter  had  lodged  under  toe-nail.

Cutting:  in  region  of  stomach  and  below  it;  in  region  of  na-
vel ;  near  last  left  ribs  ;  burning  in  right  upper  arm  ;  in  left
leg.

Stitches  :  In  arms  and  feet.

Stitches  :  flying  through  limbs.

Pricking  :  on  top  of  tongue  ;  in  right  groin.

Burning  :  in  throat ;  in  stomach ;  through  whole  alimentary
canal ;  outside  of  abdomen  ;  in  left  knee ;  in  bend  of  left
knee.

Pinching :  in  abdomen.

Colicky  pain  :  in  left  side  of  abdomen.

Tearing :  in  head ;  in  neck  ;  in  upper  limbs ;  in  knee-joints.

Drawing:  from  head  toward  larynx,  right  side.

Aching :  spot  on  right  acromion.

Rawness :  in  left  chest ;  over  whole  chest.

Pressure :  in  frontal  sinuses ;  in  forehead ;  above  the  eye-
brows ;  in  temples ;  in  stomach ;  in  epigastric  region  ;  in
abdomen ;  below  diaphragm ;  on  left  side  of  abdomen ;  in
region  of  kidneys ;  between  the  shoulders ;  above  breast-
bone ;  in  upper  chest ;  over  whole  chest ;  in  left  chest.

Beating :  in  right  chest.

Thumping:  in  perineum ;  pain  in  heart;  on  a  small  spot  behind
right  hip-bone  ;  in  right  big  toe.

Throbbing  pain  :  below  right  knee  ;  in  bones  of  left  upper  arm.

Thrilling  sore  pain  in  balls  of  toes  when  pressed.

Flying  pains :  in  perineum  ;  upwards,  in  rectum  ;  in  arms,
hands  and  fingers  ;  in  feet.

Rheumatic  pain  :  over  breast-bone ;  in  knee-joints.

Laming  pain  :  in  elbows.

Cold  pain  :  in  bend  of  left  knee.

Undefined  pain :  in  head ;  in  right  forehead  and  head ;  in  oc-
ciput; in  upper  and  back  part  of  head,  wheji  coughing;  in
maxillary  joints  ;  in  loins  ;  in  epigastrium  ;  in  various  parts
of  abdomen  ;  in  symphysis  pubis  ;  in  groins  ;  in  left  side  of
penis ;  near  larynx,  when  speaking ;  in  perineum,  when
coughing  ;  in  middle  of  sternum ;  in  intercostal  muscles  and
bones  of  chest ;  in  lumbar  region ;  in  loins  ;  behind  and
above  right  hip ;  in  sacrum,  from  top  of  shoulder  to  point  of
elbow;  in  elbows  and  arms;  on  inner  side  of  thighs;  in
knees;  in  hollow  of  left  knee  ;  in  lower  limbs  ;  in  right  heel;
in  left  foot-joint;  in  sole  of  left  foot.


119  ARSENICUM  HYDROGENISATUM.

Heaviness  : in  abdomen,  like  a  weight.
Flabbiness  :  in  stomach.
Quivering  :  in  left  thigh.

Twitching,  or  painful  quivering :  in  right  side  of  head,  above
forehead ;  also  in  upper  and  lower  jaw  and  and  right  shoul-
der ;  in  shoulders,  painful.
Contracting  sensation  :  in  tongue ;  in  sole  of  foot,  painful.
Constriction  :  in  throat ; of  chest.
Irritation  :  on  glans  penis.

Tickling :  in  nose,  right  side  ;  in  hollow  of  left  foot.
Crawling :  in  nose ;  as  if  warm  drops  were  running  over  the
chest;  over  shoulders  and  back;  in  limbs;  in  hands  and
feet.
Itching :  below  last  rib  on  extreme  left ;  on  first  joint  of  left

middle  finger,  around  a  blister ;  on  left  thigh.
Heat : in  face ;  in  mouth ;  in  abdomen ;  in  chest ;  in  back ;

over  renal  region.
Shuddering  :  over  parts  of  back.
Chilly  feeling  :  in  face.
Coldness :  in  tongue.
Feeling  of  deadness  :  in  nose  ;  region  of  eyebrows  ;  in  limbs  ;

in  feet.
Weariness  :  in  stomach.

Weakness :  in  abdomen ;  in  rectum,  as  if  relaxed ;  in  limbs.
Stifi"ness  :  in  neck  ;  between  shoulders.

Numbness: in  head; above  eyebrows; half  the  tongue, in
front,  right  side ;  deep  in  pelvis  ;  in  limbs.
**  Tissues. Cracking  of  the  joints  when  moving,  even  the  knees
and  elbows  ;  Itith  day. — F.K.
The  habitus  increases  ^larkedly  within  a  few  hours. —
(Edema  increases  at  noon  ;  7th  day. — Br.
General  anasarca. Post  mortem. — Br.
■  Collapse  in  Cholera  Asiatica.
*^  Touch. Passive  Motions. Pressure :  <  dull  pain  in  epi-
gastrium.—
External  pressure  hurts  in  region  of  liver ;  32d  day. —
*^  Skin. Skin  dry  ;  pulse  107.—
Yellow  skin. — Br.

Skin  bronze-colored ;  5th  day. — Ollivier.
Skin  became  dark-brown. — Sch.
I  Dark-brown  skin  all  over. ^  Yellow  fever.
iDark-brown,  sallow  look  of  the  skin. — F.W.Payne.
Itching  on  the  last  ribs,  left  side. —
Itching  on  the  middle  finger. —
Itching  on  the  left  thigh  above  the  knee. —
A  vesicator  put  on  the  pit  of  stomach,  made  a  blister  filled
with  dark-red  blood;  5th  day. — R.Sch.


ARSENICUM  HYDROGENISATUM.  120

All  the  hair  over  the  "deadened"  parts  become  snowy  white,

brows  form  a  strange  contrast  to  the  dark-brown  face. — Sch.
"  Stages  of  Life,  Constitution. Mrs.  A.,  set.  67,  well  and

hearty  before,  suffered  the  whole  Fall  and  Winter ;  well  in

seven  days. — F.W.Payne.
^^  Relationship. Sinapism  relieves  breathing.
Amm.  acet. :  breathing  relieved.
Antidotes  :  Nux  vom.  (fever).
Compare : Carh.  veg.  (yellow  fever  and  cholera).
Caustic,  was  given  to  F.K.
Drinks  containing  sulphuretted  hydrogen  appear  to  relieve  most.

^Berzelius.
Turpentine  should  be  tried.


121  ARSENICUM  lODATUM.

ARSENICUM  IdDATUM.

Iodide  of  Arsenic.  Asl^.


In  1872,  H.  Nankinwell,  residing  at  the  seashore  where  patients  came  to
be  improved  by  the  air,  gave  the  report  of  cures  of  phthisical  cases.  In
most  all  cases  cod  liver  oil  was  given  daily.

Introduced  by  friends  of  the  lower,  it  has  been  given  most  in  the  third
decimal  and  always  repeated.


^  Mind. Studying  occasions  headache.

^  Seusorium. Dullness  of  the  head,  with  dull  pain  in  left  malar
bone  and  occasional  slight  frontal  headache,  the  entire  morn-
ing-
^  Inner  Head. Severe  frontal  headache,  with  dullness  of  entire
head  during  forenoon,  with  stiffness  and  soreness  of  left  side
of  neck,  worse  when  moving  head.
Pain  in  the  right  temple,  several  times.
Headache  all  over  the  head,  11.30  a.m.
Unpleasant  feeling  in  head,  like  a  bad  cold ; 3d  day. — B.
Woke  in  morning  with  a  bad  headache,  lasting  all  day ;  dull,
heavy,  with  pressing  from  within  outwards,  worse  on  motion,
stooping  or  studying ;  24th  day. — B.
*  Outer  Head. Head  seemed  enormously  large  and  heavy,  with
pain. — B.
I  Head  covered  with  an  inflammatory  scaly  eruption, d  Psori-
asis of  child.
"  Sight  and  Eyes. Weakness of  eyes, with  burning  pain ;  a
feeling  as  if  lachrymation  would  set  in ;  in  two  hours. — B.

I  Smarting  about  eyes;  secretion  of  meibomian  glands. ^Ooryza.
"  Hearing  and  Ears. An  exceedingly  sharp  pain  in  forehead

and  in  both  ears,  especially  the  left,  when  riding  in  a  sharp
cold  wind,  at  1  p.m.;  after  three  hours.
'  Smell  and  Nose. Nose  quite  dry  ;  4th  day. — B.

■  Frequent  sneezing, d  Phthisis,

■  Severe  coryza  with catarrhal  tendency;  pungent irritation

about  nose  and  eyes,  and  an  irritating,  watery  secretion.

I I  Chronic  nasal  catarrh.

^  Face. I  Complexion  sallow. ^Phthisis.

I  Peaked cadaverous face, with  a  purple,  livid  hue  of  skin.

d  Cholera  infantum.
^"  Teeth  and  Gums. Intermittent  pain  in  first  right  upper  molar

tooth. — Bl.
^^  Taste,  Speech,  Tongue. Tongue  slightly  furred, d  Phthisis.


ARSENICUM  lODATUM.  122

^*  Palate  and  Throat. B  Enlargement  and  inflamnaation  of  ton-
sils and  posterior  part  of  uvula, d  Coryza.
Has  been  of  use  in  diphtheria.
^*  Appetite,  Thirst,  Desires,  Aversions. No  appetite, ate
nothing  all  day  ;  3d  day. — B.
I  Great  thirst.

B Intense  thirst,  with  uncontrollable  desire  for  cold  water,  Avhich

would  be  almost  immediately  ejected. 6  Cholera  infantum.

^®  Hiccough,  Belching,  Nausea  and  Vomiting,  i  Distressing

nausea  and  vomiting, d  Cholera  infantum.
^^  Scrobiculum  and  Stomach. Considerable  pain  in  stomach,
^afternoons,  with  raising  of  wind  and  a  greasy  fluid  similar  to
that  after  eating  pork  ; 3d  day. — B.
Pain  and  pyrosis  became  unbearable. — B.
Pains  in  stomach  <  on  rising  after  sitting ; od  day. — B.

■  Subacute  gastritis.

^*  Hypchondria.  i  Spleen  enlarged,  fills  about  one- fourth  of  the
abdominal  cavity  ;  for  two  years,  after  intermittent  and  qui-
nine.— Kitchen.
"  Abdomen,  Loins  and  Groins.  Severe  cutting  pains  in  ab-
domen as  if  he  would  have  a  stool ;  he  had  no  stool,  but  large
quantities  of  wind  escaped  ;  these  pains  are  partially  relieved
by  an  escape  of  flatus  and  by  the  application  of  warmth  to
the  abdomen  ;  after  8J  hours

Sharp,  cutting  pain  in  abdomen  which  warned  him  to  go  to
stool ;  the  pains  became  excruciating,  embracing  the  entire
abdomen  and  obliging  him  to  bend  almost  double ;  after  a
great  deal  of  straining  he  passed  a  large,  soft  stool  which  af-
forded some  relief,  at  9  p.m.;  after  eleven  hours.

I  I  The  abdomen  is  hard  and  distended  with  flatus,  which  is  con-
stantly discharged.

I  Tabes  mesenterica.
^^  Rectum  and  Stool.  Escape  of  flatus  relieves  ;  pains  in  abdomen.

Bellyache  better  after  stools.

Stool  in  the  evening  soft  and  mushy,  with  considerable  strain-
ing, very  dark,  almost  black  ;  2d  day. — B.

On  rising  in  the  morning  great  urging  to  stool,  but  stool  was
scanty,  small  in  size,  as  though  anus  was  contracted ;  stool
mushy,  occasional  scybala,  small-sized,  peculiar  black,  at-
tended with  straining  as  in  dysentery ; 3d  day. — B.

Diarrhoea  not  at  all  at  night,  but  the  urging  commenced  on  be-
ginning to  move  about  in  the  morning.

I  Diarrhoea  in  dysentery.

■  Almost  constant  watery  discharges, distressing nausea and

vomiting.
I  Almost  constant  copious  watery  diarrhoea,  d  Cholera  infantum.

■  Cholera  infantum,  even  in  articulo  mortis.

Continual  aching  in  anus,  with  a  seeming  inability  to  keep  the


123  ARSENICUM  lODATUM.

sphincter  closed ;  amounts  to  real  dysenteric  straining  at
stool ;  3d  day. — B.

^^  Urinary  Organs.  I  Diseases  of  urino-genital  organs,  especially
in  the  female,  with  scrofulous  taint.

"  Male  Sexual  Organs. >  Secondary  syphilis.

^*  Female  Sexual  Organs. iCatamenia  regular. ^Phthisis.

^*  Pregnancy  and  Parturition.  iLump  in  mamma,  with  re-
tracted nipples,  tumor  sensitive  to  touch  and  painful.

"  Voice  and  Larynx.  Trachea  and  Bronchia.  >  General
wheezing  on  first  lying  down,  d  Phthisis.
After  moving  about  a  short  time  in  the  morning  he  hawked  up
quantities  of  thick  mucus  mixed  with  clotted  blood,  seemed
to  come  from  the  head,  relieved  the  pain  very  much ;  4th
day.— B.

^®  Kespiration.  Breathing  too  rapid,  even  when  at  rest,  increas-
ing in  rapidity  on  exertion,  soon  becoming  an  audible  wheez-
ing, d  Phthisis.

■  General  feeble  respiration, d  Hsemorrhagic  phthisis.
I  Occasional  asthmatic  attacks. ^Phthisis.

I  Asthmatic  sensations  at  night,  must  sit  up  to  breathe,  d  Phthisis.
BForced  inspiration  induced  crepitation,  posteriorly,  right  lung.

d  Phthisis.
"  Cough. I  Frequent,  short,  suppressed  cough,  often  loose,  with

mucopurulent  expectoration, d  Phthisis.
I  I  Slight  hacking  cough  with  stoppage  of  nostrils. — B.

■  Frequent  cough,  with  muco-purulent  and  occasionally  stringy

expectoration ; •<  on  exertion  and  at  night, d  Phthisis.
I A  violent  cough  for  years,  with  inability  to  bring  up  the  sputum,
it  excites- vomiting. — Pehrson.

■  Expectoration  heavy  during  night  and  morning. ^Phthisis.

■  Cough  and  expectoration. ^Hsemorrhagic  phthisis.

■  Respiration  harsh  and  jerky  in  left  apex. ^Phthisis.

■  Rales  and  crepitation  before  and  after  catamenia. 6  Phthisis.
^^  Inner Chest and Lungs. ■Lungs pale, rather flabby.

d  Haemorrhagic  phthisis.

■  Feeble  respiration,  with  plenty  of  dry  rales  over  anterior  sur-

face  of  right  lung  and  upper  part  of  its  posterior  surface.
d  Phthisis.

■  Dull spot beneath left clavicle and coarse crepitation.

d  Haemorrhagic  phthisis.

■  Flattening  and  decreased  mobility  beneath  left  clavicle,  with

dullness  on  percussion ;  coarse  crepitation  on  the  same  spot,
while  dry  ronchi  and  prolonged  expiration  was  obtained
elsewhere, d  Phthisis.

■  Left  half  of  chest  flattened  and  motionless  and  percussion  as

dull  as  a  board  from  apex  to  below  axillary  border  of  pector-
alis  major  in  front  and  to  middle  of  scapula  behind, d  Phthisis.

■  Below  border  of  pectoralis  major  and  around  posteriorly  to


ARSENICUM  lODATUM.  124

back  of  lung,  dullness  and  coarse  crepitation. 6  Hsemor-
rhagic  phthisis.

I  Crepitation  and  bronchial  noise  in  the  right  supra  scapular  re-
gion; after  Sulphur  for  weeks  increase  of  the  dullness  in
the  infra- clavicular  region ;  more  intense  and  extending.
d  Phthisis.

I  Immobility  of  right  chest,  with  dullness  in  front  and  behind
upper  portion  of  lung,  increasing  to  absolute  dullness  posteri-
orly beneath  the  scapula, d  Phthisis.

I  Coarse  crepitations,  posteriorly  about  centre  of  lung;  at  the
base  bronchial  respiration, d  Phthisis.

■  Marked  dullness  on right  base  posteriorly,  shading  off  into
normal  resonance  about  middle  of  scapula;  coarse  crepitation
audible  over  all  the  duller  portion  of  lung, d  Phthisis.
'''Heart,  Pulse  and  Circulation. "Pulse  weak, 84  to  92.
d  Phthisis.

I  Pulse  hard,  fallen  from  about  80  to  64,  woman  set.  40.
d  Phthisis.

I  Pulse  very  frequent. ^Mammary  tumor.
^'  Neck  and  Back, Soreness  of  the  back,  especially  of  the  back
of  the  neck,  as  if  he  had  been  beaten.

Burning  heat  in  lumbar  region,  as  if  the  clothes  were  on  fire.
— Blakely.
^^  Tipper  Limbs.  Itching  of  the  back  of  the  left  hand,  followed
by  stinging  itching  of  the  back  of  the  right  hand ;  after  2\
hours.
^^  Lower  Limbs.  Peculiar  chilliness  on  posterior  surface  of  left
thigh,  followed  by  formication  and  weight  in  left  foot,  the
latter  extending  later  up  left  leg;  afterwards  extended  to
right  foot ;  partially  relieved  by  walking — Bl.

I  Cold  limbs.

Dull,  heavy  soreness  of  calf  of  left  leg,  11  a.m.;  after  one  hour.

Tired,  weary  feeling  in  calves  of  both  legs  while  kneeling  — Bl.

A  very  severe,  laming  pain  in  calf  of  left  leg,  afterwards  em-
bracing the  entire  leg,  disappearing  during  active  motion,  re-
turning when  at  rest.

Formicating  pricking  on  extreme  left  ankle,  followed  by  the
same  on  inner  side  of  right  ankle. — Bl.

Unpleasant,  slightly  painful  formication  on  external  border  of
left  foot,  followed  by  a  burning  pain  on  left  instep. — Bl.
^*  Limbs  in  General.  Sharp  pain  in  upper  third  of  right  humerus,
while  writing,  lasting  ten  minutes,  suddenly  shifting  to  the
metacarpal  bones  remaining  some  time,  then  felt  in  left  femur ;
rheumatic,  as  if  in  the  shaft  of  the  bone. — B.

Heaviness  of  the  limbs  with  weariness  of  the  whole  body.

I  Cold  limbs.
^^  Rest. Position. Motion. Rest :  pain  in  leg  worse.

Lying  down  :  wheezing. See  25.


125  ARSENICUM  lODATUM.

Motion  :  headache  <  ;  pain  in  leg  >  ;  hawking  of  thick  mucus.

Exertion  :  cough  <C  ; dyspnoea.

Walking  :  soon  causes  fatigue.

Stooping :  headache  worse.

Kneeling :  tired  feeling  in  calves.

Rising  after  sitting :  pains  in  stomach.

Ascending :  dyspnoea.

Must  bend  double :  with  pain  in  abdomen.

Must  sit  up  :  difficult  breathing  in  phthisis  pulmonalis,
3^  Nerves. I  Great  vital  prostration.

I  Paralysis.
^^  Sleep. Constant  yawning ;  he  gets  sleepy  much  earlier  than
usual.

Pain  in  head  preventing  sleep ;  4th  day. — B.

I  I  Night  restless,  slept  little;  3d  day. — B.

^^  Time. Morning :  dullness  and  pain  in  head  ;  stool  on  rising ;
expectoration  heavy ;  felt  as  if  had  taken  cold.

II  A.M. :  soreness  of  left  leg.

1  P.M. :  pains  in  forehead  and  ears.

Evening:  soft,  mushy  stool.

9  P.M.  :  stool  with  relief.

Night :  asthmatic ;  cough  <  ; expectoration  heavy ; restless  ;

sweat.
2^  Temperature  and  "Weather. Warmth  :  applied  to  abdomen

relieves  pains  ;  chilliness  of  left  thigh  better.
Sharp,  cold  wind :  pains  in  forehead  and  ears.
I  Unable to take exercise  in any  weather, d  Hemorrhagic

phthisis.
*"  Chill. Fever. Sweat. Some  fever,  pulse  80, strong ; 8d

day.— B.
1  Slight  night-sweats. ^Phthisis.
*^  Locality  and  Direction. Right : pain in  temple  ;  pain  in

ear ;  pain  in  upper  molar  tooth ;  dry  rales  over  lung ;  pain

in  humerus.
Left:  dull  pain  in  malar  bone;  side  of  neck  sore;  pain  in  ear;

apex  of  lung  affected  ;  posterior  part  of  thigh  chilly  ;  weight

in  foot ;  calf  of  leg  sore.
Left  to  right :  itching  on  hands  ;  formication  and  pains  in  legs.
Upper  right,  lower  left :  pain  in  limbs.
Within  outward : pressing  in  head.
*'  Sensations. As  if  head  was  enormously  large.
As  though  he  had  taken  cold.
Cutting :  in  abdomen.
Sharp  pain  :  in  forehead  ;  in  both  ears  ;  in  upper  right  humerus.

in  metacarpal  bones  ;  in  left  femur.
Burning  :  of  eyes  ;  in  lumbar  region.
Smarting :  about  eyes.
Soreness  :  left  side  of  neck.


ARSENICUM  lODATUM.  126

Soreness :  of  back  and  neck,  as  if  beaten ;  of  calf  of  left  leg.

Aching :  in  anus.

Dull  pain  :  in  left  malar.

Rheumatic  pain  :  in  humerus  and  left  femur.

Laming  pain  :  in  calf  of  left  leg.

Intermittent  pain  :  in  first  right  upper  molar.

Undefined  pain :  in  right  temple ;  in  stomach  ;  in  head,  pre-
venting sleep.

Formicating,  pricking :  on  left  ankle,  and  inner  side  of  right
ankle.

Formication  :  on  left  foot  and  instep.

Irritation  :  about  nose  and  eyes.

Itching :  of  back  of  left  hand,  and  stinging  of  back  of  right
hand ;  on  various  parts  of  body,  most  on  back.

Heaviness :  of  limbs.

Tired,  weary  feeling :  in  calves  of  legs.

Stiffness  :  left  side  of  neck.
^*  Tissues. I  Morbid  cellular  irritation  in  lungs.

■  Rapid  emaciation.

■  Great  emaciation  and  prostration, d  Cholera  infantum.

■  Considerable  emaciation  and  wasted  mammse. ^  Tumor in

mamma.
*^  Motion. Riding :  pains  in  forehead  and  ears.
*"  Skin. Persistent  itching  on  various  parts  of  body,  most  of  back.

— Bl.

■  Chronic  skin  affections.

■  Psoriasis,  the  inflamed,  and  scaly  eruption  almost  covered  the

child.
^"^  Stages  of  Life,  Constitution. "Well  fleshed  man,  set.  25,  af-
ter haemoptysis. ^Phthisis.

■  ■Strumous  or  psoric  diathesis  in conjunction with arsenic

symptoms.

■  Psoriasis  of  a  child,  set.  4  months.

■  Woman,  set.  40  ;  pulse  fell  from  about  80  to  64. ^Phthisis.
^^  Relationship. Bryon.  relieved  pain  and  pyrosis.
Useful  after  Sulphur  in  phthisis  pulmonalis.
Useful  after  Conium  in  sensitive  lump  in  mamma.


12T  ARSENICUM  METALLICUM.

ARSENICUM  METALLICUM.

Metallic  arsenic.  As.


The  pure  metal  was  prepared  by  Dr.Buchheim,  now  Professor  in  Giessen,
in  1845,  in  the  laboratory  of  Professor  Lehmann.  It  retained  all  its  metal-
lic lustre  when  it  was  triturated,  in  1847,  in  a  new,  well  cleaned,  dry  mor-
tar, during  dry  weather.  The  same  triturations  came  into  the  hands  of
Bcericke  &  Tafel.  To  give  to  our  school  a  vote  in  the  dispute,  if  metallic
arsenic  had  any  action  or  none,  it  was  introduced  by  CHg,  proved  under
the  care  of  A.  Lippe,  and  published  in  the  New  York  Monthly,  in  1851.  The
provers  were:  Doctors  Duffield,  Stevenson,  and  Coxe,  jun.,  besides  many
more;  among  whom  should  be  mentioned  in  particular,  Tetherbridge.


^  Mind. Weakness  of  memory,  especially  in  retaining  what  he  has
read.

Has  to  read  everything  two  or  three  times  before  he  compre-
hends it.

Dullness,  too  much  exertion  to  think.

Fearful  visions  of  spectres  in  bright  daylight ;  she  sees  threaten-
ing people  after  her,  and  screams  horribly  ;  is  in  greatest  dis-
tress even  when  her  mother  is  with  her;  after  30".  Girl,
get.  12. d  During  recovery  from  typhus.

Feels  as  if  she  had  to  run  away,  far  away,  and  as  if  she  would
hardly  touch  the  ground.

She  would  very  much  like  to  die,  or  fall  asleep,  never  to  awaken.

So  lazy  that  she  would  rather  sit  up  than  have  the  trouble  of
going  to  bed.

Sad,  with  tearful  eyes,  but  she  cannot  weep  ;  even  during  most
painful  events.

Depression  with  exhaustion,  feels  much  depressed  and  vexed,
wants  to  be  alone ;  followed  by  pain  in  heart.

Moody,  does  not  wish  to  see  anybody.

Afraid  she  will  be  poisoned.

She  feels  a  glow  over  the  left  brow,  as  often  as  she  thinks  about
it,  most  forenoon,  less  afternoon.
^  Sensorium. As  if  whiskey  fumes  had  gone  to  head.

Heavy,  dull  feeling  in  forehead,  above  frontal  sinuses,  in  the
morning.

Fullness  :  when  awaking  at  night ;  with  the  coryza.

As  if  brain  were  too  large  and  it  would  burst.
^  Inner  Head. Pain  in  left  side,  extending  to  ear  and  eye,  with
nausea.

Headache  worse  when  laughing.


ARSENICUM  METALLICUM.  128

Headache  from  9  a.m.  to  2  p  m.,  with  diminished  pulse.

Pain  in  left  half  of  head,  extending  to  eyes,  nose  and  ears,  with
nausea  and  throbbing  in  the  whole  body.

Headache  over  eyes,  with  chilliness  extending  to  occiput,  neck,
and  into  the  chest.

As  if  water  was  gushing  forward,  when  stooping.

Headache  worse  when  writing  and  thinking.
*  Outer  Head. Itching  only  allayed  by  pinching  skin,  in  fore-
head.

Scalp  feels  sore  even  when  pulling  a  single  hair.

I  Falling  off  of  hair, d  Tertiary  syphilis. — Lippe.

I  1  As  if  the  head  were  swollen  on  waking  in  the  night  or  morn-
ing, as  if  he  could  not  get  his  hat  on  the  head.

Numbness  on  right  occiput,  later  on  left  vertex  ;  evening.

Numbness  from  the  nose  to  forehead,  and  in  a  streak  along  the
vertex  backwards,  more  to  the  left.
^  Sight  and  Eyes. Heaviness  in  eyes.

Eyes  pain,  cannot  read  much.

Upper  lid  sore  and  feels  swollen.

Lids  slightly  inflamed  and  swollen,  more  with  coryza.

Eyes  reddened  with  coryza.

In  region  of  brows  numbness,  extending  to  nose.

Glowing  sensation  on  a  small  spot  over  left  brow.

Sight  weak,  gas-light  troubles  him,  cannot  look  into  bright
light.

Eyes  hurt,  cannot  read  in  the  morning.

Eyes  hurt  in  afternoon  and  evening ; <<  after  sewing.

I  Her  weak  eyes  improve  two  weeks  after,  so  that  she  can  use
them,  and  even  bear  exertion  she  could  not  bear  last  four
years.

Eyes  pain  as  from  walking  in  the  wind.

Headache  extends  to  the  eye ;  pains  from  the  facial  bones,  or
go  from  the  eye  to  back  part  of  ear.

I  I  Lids  cannot  be  opened  as  wide  as  usual.

I  I  Eyes  much  swollen,  or  slightly  reddened  for  two  days ;  run-
ning of  tears,  sometimes  hot  and  corroding ;  dark  circles  un-
der the  eyes ;  coryza.

■  Pterygium,  with  enlarged  blood  vessel,  right  eye;  after  Nux
and  Sjngel.  had  failed.
®  Hearing  and  Ears. Pain  into  ears  from  side  of  head  and  facial

bones  ;  numbness  below  the  ears.
^  SmeH  and  Nose. Coryza  and  hoarseness  returned  in  two  weeks
with  heat  in  face,  lasting  three  days,  and  ending  in  angina
of  fauces  ;  BeUad.*°  helped.

On  rising  in  the  morning  he  feels  as  if  he  would  get  a  violent
coryza ;  nose  stopped  up ;  eyes  burn ;  hoarse ;  gone  in  the
evening.


129  ARSENICUM  METALLICUM.

Coryza  with  hot  face,  itching  and  hoarseness;  returns  the  21st

day.
Coryza ;  burning  hot  water  runs  from  nose,  excoriating  the
edges  of  nostrils  ;  with  the  greatest  prostration.

Violent  coryza ;  reddened  eyes ;  running  of  tears,  and  of  wa-
ter from  nose,  excoriating,  11  a.m.;  after  four  hours  nose
stopped  ;  eyes  inflamed  without  discharging  tears ;  head  very
full  and  as  if  tied  up  ;  8  p.m.  :  nose  begins  to  run  again,  with
violent  sneezing ;  throat  aches ;  breathing  difficult,  till  11
P.M.;  at  4  A.M. :  wakens  with  the  same  coryza,  still  worse;
sensation  as  if  head  and  face  were  swollen  ;  some  sore  throat.

Ooryza  lessened  after  eyes  were  inflamed ;  nose  swollen  for
several  hours,  lessened  suddenly,  but  feels  as  if  beaten  all
over.

Coryza  with  running  of  tears  ;  sneezing  and  difficult  breathing,
increases  2d  day  ;  discharge,  thick,  yellow ;  eyes  swollen  and
puffed  up ;  feels  as  if  head  had  suddenly  become  too  large,
lasts  for  days,  then  ceasing  slowly ;  watery  discharge  hot  or
warm  several  times  a  day,  causes  biting  and  stinging;  sud-
denly a  burning  as  if  scalded.

Pain  in  nose  from  headache  ;  pains  in  left  side  in  the  evening ;
pains  from  the  cheek-bones,  with  it  a  fine  streaming  like
warm  air  on  the  left  side.

Violent  itching  in  tip  of  nose,  1  p.m.;  evening,  more  to  the
left.
^  Face. Face  bloated,  red  and  hot,  with  coryza.

Itching  burning,  with  swelling,  skin  feels  tense,  relieved  by
bathing  with  cold  water ;  later,  followed  by  peeling  off"  in
small  scales.

(Edematous  swelling  on  forehead  and  face,  with  itchino-.

Itching  burning,  stinging,  with  swelling  on  face,  most  on  right
forehead,  <C  at  night,  >-  by  cold  washing.

Sensation  as  if  the  skin  were  immovable,  tense  and  stretched
tightly  over  the  bones.

The  itching  not  relieved  by  scratching,  only  by  pressing  and
squeezing.

A  few  pimples  in  face,  gradually  more,  until  within  three
months  he  has  more  than  a  dozen,  with  it  he  feels  better
than  before  in  every  way.

Pain  in  cheek-bones,  when  touched  it  shoots  into  right  eye,  into
the  nose  and  below  the  ear.

Swelling  of  cheeks.

Itching  and  burning  of  lower  half  of  face  around  lower  jaws,  as
if  an  eruption  would  break  out.
^  Lower  Part  of  Face. Pain  in  lower  jaw  on  right  side  down
into  throat  and  neck.

Stiff"ness  in  lower  jaws  when  biting.

Twitching  in  left  lower  jaw.

VOL.  II. — 9.


ARSENICUM  METALLICUM.  130

Painless  swelling  of  lips  and  right  cheek,  very  disfiguring,  last-
ing 36  hours,  followed  by  a  much  lowered  pulse.

Lips  dry  and  hot.
^^  Teeth  and  Gums. Gums  swollen  and  sore.

Gums  swollen  and  feel  as  if  scalded,  with  water  running  to-
gether in  mouth.

Gums  swollen,  pain  when  touched,  as if  sore,  with  the  outer
lips  dry  and  hot,  first  day  the  right,  then  the  left  side.
^^  Tongue. '  l  Coating  on  tongue  white,  mucous.

BB  Tongue  bears  imprint  of  teeth.
^^  Inner  Mouth. Dry  mouth,  with  white  slimy,  furred  tongue.

I  1  Mouth  sore.

Accumulation  of  water  in  mouth.

A  small  white  ulcer,  size  of  point  of  finger  inside  of  left  lower
lip,  with  a  pale  halo,  very  painful.

On  right  and  left  under  lip  a  sore  inside,  hurts  when  touched
with  the  tongue,  also  the  whole  inner  edge  of  lower  lip  hurts,
next  day  the  same  on  left  lip.
^^  Palate  and  Throat. Throat  sore,  more  frequently  with  coryza.

Violently  inflamed  throat,  with  pain  when  swallowing,  worse
right  side  ;  after  a  coryza. Cured  by  Bellad.

Ulcer  deep  in  throat,  right  side, painful in swallowing, in-
creases for  several  days,  is  worse  in  forenoon  ;  2d  to  9th  day.

B  Angina,  with  much  heat  in  throat,  and  several  little  ulcers,
several  weeks  after  the  ulcer  of  the  gland  had  been  healed  by
Natr.  curb.;  after  Jod.^'^  it  healed.
^*  Appetite,  Thirst,  Desires,  Aversions. Diminished  appetite ;
3d  day.

No  appetite  for  weeks,  not  until  after  3d  or  4th  month ;  his
actual  appetite  and  strength  returned.

Great  desire  for  brandy  or  alcoholic  drinks,  most  in  the  fore-
noon, with  a  lady  who  never  used  them.

Aversion  to  wines  and  alcoholic  drinks  for  several  months,  with
a  man  who  had  not  objected  to  them.

Aggravation  after  drinking  a  small  quantity  of  brandy, for
which  he  had  not  the  slightest  desire.
^®  Belching,  Nausea. Hot  eructations  as  of  bile,  with  throbbing
through  whole  body,  at  noon.

Nausea  toward  morning.

Nausea  with  the  headache,  in  the  morning.
^"^  Stomach. Pressure  in  region  of  stomach,  first  mucus,  then  bile ;

later  empty  retching  and  cutting  in  belly ;  the  3d  night,
^^  Hypochondria. Sore  pain  in  region  of  liver,  goes  through  all
the  way  to  shoulder  and  spine.

Stitch  from  region  of  liver  towards  the  breast  bone.

Itching  on  a  small  spot,  size  of  point  of  finger,  one  inch  above
the  navel,  as  if  in  the  liver.

Pain  in  region  of  spleen  down  to  the  groin,  evening.


131  ARSENICUM  METALLICUM.

Pain  in  breast  extends  to  region  of  spleen.
^^  Abdomen. Bloated  abdomen.

When  getting  awake  bellyache,  tormenting,  cutting,  shooting,

followed  by  a  burning,  watery  stool  and  cessation  of  pain.
Tension  and  sensation  of  swelling,  with  heaviness  in  head  and

threatened  vertigo.
Pulsation  in  the  navel.

Pulsation  in  abdomen  extending  to  1.  groin  and  down  to  knee.
Colic  with  retching  after  vomiting  at  night.
I  I  Red  rash  on  abdomen  in  the  night,  the  following  night  red

smooth  spots.
Painful  swelling  in  right  groin  ; <  on  extending  the  leg,  pain

goes  up  to  hip,  lasting  a  long  time ;  on  the  same  place  he

had  a  suppurating  bubo  24  years  ago.
^^  Rectum,  and  Stool. After awaking at 6 A.M.,  distressing,

lancinating,  griping  pains  in  bowels,  followed  by  an  acrid,

burning,  watery  stool,  and  relief  of  the  pain, but  leaving

much  debility ;  falls  asleep  sitting ;  no  appetite  ;  pulse  60,

much  fuller  than  usual.
Constipated  after  two  weeks.
Some  of  the  patients  who  received  it  had  two  weeks  after  some

exceedingly  painful  piles.
Varices  bleed  a  little.
Varices  right  side  of  anus  painful  after  stool,  not  bleeding,  a

few  days  later  only  sore;  disappear  the  4th  day,  after  some

bleeding.*
Itching  in  anus,  gets  sore  after  rubbing,  intolerable  during  the

afternoon, extending  to  perineum  and  scrotum,  obliged  to

scratch  violently ;  the  sore  feeling  is  lessened  by  very  hot

water,  not  by  cold  washing.
Intense  itching  at  anus,  followed  by  crawling  on  the  end  of

the  back,  mornings.
^^  Urinary  Organs. Urine  hot  in  the  evening.

Red,  sandy  sediment  in  urine.
^^  Male  Sexual  Organs. Pain  in  groins, in  the  morning  the

right,  evening  the  left.
Pain  when  awaking  in  left  groin,  extending  to  the  thigh.
Pain  from  region  of  spleen  to  the  groin.
Pulsation  in  the  groin.
Itching  in  groin  and  down  to  knee.
In right  groin  painful  swelling,  pain  extending  to  the  hip ;

<;  when  stretching  the  leg,  >■  walking  ; <C  in  sitting ;  leg

falls  asleep ;  had  a  bubo  on  the  same  spot.
A  numbness  extends  trom  hip-joint  to  the  pubic  region.
Itching  on  glans  ;  prepuce  swollen.

*  If  piles  disappear  after  bleeding,  it  is  a  pathological  symptom  ;  if  they
bleed  after  disappearance,  it  is  therapeutical.


ARSENICUM  METALLICUM.  132

Swelling  of  the  prepuce,  with  slight  burning,  lasting  half  a  day
and  extending  to  a  circumference  three  times  greater ;  the
3d  week.

Sore  place  on  corona  glandis,  right  side,  from  where  a  chancre
had  been  driven  20  years  ago,  by  mercurial  ointment ;  now
thin,  watery  fluid  is  discharged,  causing  thg  most  violent
itching,  increasing  the  sore  place  ;  2d  week  ;  in  the  3d  week
a  similar  excoriation  on  left  side  of  corona  glandis,  with
swelling  of  prepuce  and  itching  on  the  edges  ;  three  weeks
after  its  appearance,  Mercur.^",  without  effecting  a  change ;
in  four  weeks,  Natr.  carh?"^  followed  by  improvement ;
nearly  well  in  five  days ;  persuaded  among  friends  to  take  a
little  brandy  and  water,  it  got  worse  and  remained  so  for
three  days ;  after  Natr.  carh^'^  it  disappeared.

iChagicres  with  1 1 burning  pain. — Lippe.

Offensive  sweat  on  genitals  for  some  weeks'.

Itching  on  scrotum  lasting  for  weeks.
^^  Female  Sexual  Organs. With  the  appearance  of  the  monthly
the  pulse  usually  became  less  frequent.

Heat  in  uterus  and  vagina ;  burning  when  touched.

1 8  Monthly  before  the  time,  lasting  longer  than  usual.

Catamenia  appeared  at  7  a.m.,  darker,  more  fluid  and  more
copious.

On  the  sixth  day  passed  large  lumps  of  blood-colored  mucus.

1 1  Catamenia  too  early  and  too  scanty. — Lippe.

I  Pain  in  uterus  and  vagina  during  the  monthly.

■  Able  to  sew  during  her  monthly,  which  she  never  could  do
before.
24  Pregnancy. Slight  stitches  in  right  mamma,  under  the  shoul-
der-blade ;  later,  in  the  left.

Pain  in  left  mamma,  behind  the  nipple  ;  later,  stitch  about  an
inch  behind  the  nipple,  thence  extending  down  to  the  region
of  hip.

Itching  on  the  mammae.
2*  Voice  and  Larynx. I  l  Hoarseness,  with  coryza.
^^  Respiration. Hot  breath.

Violent  difficulties  in  breathing,  with  sneezing;  coryza;  run-
ning of  tears  ;  he  had  to  lie  higher  with  his  head  ;  increas-
ing from  3  P.M.  till  in  the  night.

Breathing  became  painful  and  asthmatic,  and  lasted  three  days
and  then  somewhat  less  four  more ;  very  bad  before  break-
fast ; >•  after  the  8th  day.

As  if  a  heavy  load  was  lying  on  the  chest  all  night ;  dreams
of  danger  on  the  water.*
^^  Inner  Chest  and  Lungs. Pain  in  right  side  of  chest  near  nip-

*  Such  dreams  always  indicate  lung  or  heart  symptoms..


133  ARSENICUM  METALLICUM.

pie,  extending  downwards  and  upwards ;  after  30  minutes  in
left  side,  and  going  to  neck  ;  later,  again  right  side.

At  10  A.M.  pain  in  chest  near  the  nipple,  shooting  about  and
down  into  region  of  spleen ;  when  at  the  worst  it  is  near  the
apex  of  the  heart,  with  more  frequent  pulse.

Chilliness  extending  into  chest.

Chilliness  in  chest,  with  the  headache.
^^  Heart,  Pulse  and  Circulation. Slight  pains  in  region  of
heart.

After  mental  disturbances,  pain  in  region  of  heart.

A  stitch  in  the  heart.

A  single  cutting  pain  through  the  heart,  at  4  p.m.

Pulsation  under  the  sternum.

I  Could  lie  only  on  left  side. ^Disease  of  heart.
Pulse  64  in  the  morning ;  4th  day.

Pulse  continues  to  rise  in  mornings,  and  to  fall  in  the  evenings,
for  30  days  longer,  without  taking  any  more  of  the  medicine.

I I  Pulse  accelerated  in  the  morning  (similar  to Sulphur).
Pulse  116  in  the  morning,  and  unequal.

^^  Outer  Chest. Pain  in  muscles  of  left  chest.

On  left  side  of  chest  small  blisters  filled  with  blood,  which  can
be  pressed  out  without  pain.

Dull  pain  in  left  pectoralis  extending  to  muscles  of  the  shoul-
der and  to  the  point  of  the  shoulder-blade,  and  through  the
lower  inner  part  of  the  arm  down  to  elbow  ;  >>  by  striking
on  it,  throwing  arm  back  and  lifting  the  shoulder.
^^  Neck.  Back.  Numbness  and  sensation  of  lameness  in  right
lumbar  region,  from  vertebras  to  crest  of  ilium  and  inner  side
of  thigh  down  to  the  knee.

Lumbago ;  fears  walking  might  increase  it,  but  ceases  wiien
walking;.

Pain  from  chest  extending  into  neck.

Pain  from  region  of  liver  to  back  and  shoulder.

Pain  back  of  right  shoulder,  morning.

Pain  in  spine  between  shoulders,  sore  to  the  touch  and  burning.

Stitch  behind  the  shoulder-blades.

I  I  Chilliness  in  the  neck,  I  with  headache.

Sensation  when  lifting  the  head  as  if  it  was  drawn  down  into
the  cushion,  morning.

Weakness  of  the  neck.

Itching  in  front  of  throat.

I  I  Itching  in  the  neck,  I  with  coryza.

Crawling  on  the  back.

Feels  as  if  a  furuncle  would  form  ; 9th  day.
^^  Upper  Limbs. Pain  in  shoulders  and  arms.

Pain  in  right  arm  above  elbow,  mornings  ;  later,  stitches  on  the
outside  of  left  arm  above  elbow.


ARSENICUM  METALLICUM.  134

After  carrying  a  child,  sharp  pain  in  right  arm  below  elbow,  as
if  wrenched;  after  resting,  as  if  beaten  ;  for  days.

Arras  and  hands  feel  heavy,  as  if  it  required  more  exertion  to
lift  them.

Sore  feeling  in  left  arm  below  elbow,  goes  through  the  hand  to
thumb.

Pain  in  right  forearm  below  elbow,  goes  through  hand  into  lit-
tle ring  finger  and  is  worse  in  middle  joint  of  the  middle
finger.

Cracking  of  all  the  finger-joints,  more  when  closing  hands.

Cold  hands  during  the  day,  at  other  times  inwardly  hot,  or  cold
hands  with  hot  body.

Dry  heat  in  palms  of  hands.

I  I  Insensibility  in  forearm  and  hands.

Hands  and  fingers  feel  swollen,  cannot  close  hands.

Hands  feel  stiff,  as  if  they  could  not  be  closed.

Itching  on  the  olecranon.

I A  scab  on  first  joint  of  left  third  finger,  when  torn  off  leaving
a  liver-colored  spot,  a  new  scab  soon  forming ;  of  20  years
standing.
^^  Lower  Limbs. Sensation  of  lameness  in  right  hip-joint.

i  I  Pulsation  in  right  hip-joint  •<  morning,  ^  evening.

Pulsation  from  the  heel  up  to  the  hips.

Sensation  of  lameness  and  numbness  in  right  hip-joint,  deep  in,
extending  to  symphysis  pubis  and  on  inner  side  of  thigh
down  to  the  knee.

Pulsation  in  right  anterior  tibial  artery,  at  the  superior  end  of
its  inferior  third.

Sensation  of  dryness  in  right  knee-joint.

Feet  burning  hot,  feel  as  if  bloated,  next  day  the  same,  with-
out the  least  moisture.

Feet,  usually  icy  cold,  have  become  warm,  and  sweat  much.

Feet  burning,  more  at  night,  has  to  hold  them  out  of  bed,  can-
not bear  the  least  cover  on  them  ;  recurs  two  weeks  after.

From  lying  on  right  side,  the  right  hip  painfully  fatigued,  as
if  he  had  been  lying  on  a  board.

Lameness  in  right  hip-joint  and  down  the  thigh,  worse  after
rising  from  a  seat ;  gets  better  while  continuing  to  walk.

When  bathing  pain  in  left  hip  so  bad  that  she  cannot  lift  the
limb  ;  pains  from  hip  to  heel.
^*  Limbs  in  General. Feet,  hands  and  fingers  feel  as  if  swollen

and  stiff.
^°  Rest. Position. Motion. Sitting  :  pain  in  groin  < ;  falls
asleep.

Lying  head  high  :  coryza  better.

Lying  left  side  :  heart  disease  better.

Stretching  leg :  pain  in  groin  worse.

Walking  :  pain  in  groin  >> ;  lumbago  > ;  hip  better.


135  ARSENICUM  METALLICUM.

Striking :  pain  left  pectoralis  better.

Stooping :  sensation  of  water  gusliing  forward  in  head.

Carrying  a  child  :  pain  r.  arm  as  if  wrenched.

Rising  from  seat:  hip-joint  worse.
^^  Nerves. Debility,  weariness,  general  prostration  of  strength.
^^  Sleep. After  an  unusually  sound  sleep  at  night,  irrisistible  incli-
nation to  sleep  in  the  day  time  and  early  in  the  evening.

Great  drowsiness  in  morning,  after  rising,  having  had  a  sound
sleep.

Feels  as  if  he  should  fall  asleep  while  walking  in  the  street ;
sleepy  from  11  A.M.  till  evening.

On  sitting  down  he  falls  asleep  ;  after  diarrhoea.

Stupor  in  the  morning,  notwithstanding  a  good  sleep  all  night ;
more  sleepy  in  afternoon  and  evening.

Very  sleepy,  but  cannot  fall  asleep.

During  sleep  a  sensation  as  if  he  would  have  a  headache  when
awaking  in  the  morning.

Dreams  of  danger,  especially,  of  danger  on  the  water,  with  burn-
ing of  hands  and  feet. See  26.

On  awaking  in  the  morning, sensation as if  the  head  were
swollen.
^^  Time. Morning :  dullness  in  forehead ;  nose  stopped  up  ;  nau-
sea; pain  in  r.  groin;  pulse  rises;  pain  in- arm;  throbbing
through  body  ;  hip-joint  <  ;  pain  back  of  shoulder.

4am.:  coryza  loose.

6  A.M. :  pains  in  bowels  and  diarrhoea.

7  a.m.:  catamenia  appeared.
9  A.M.  to  2  P.M. :  headache.
11  A.M. :  excoriating  coryza.

Forenoon  :  glow  over  brow  <  ;  desire  for  alcoholic  drinks  ;  sore

throat  worse.
Noon :  hot  eructations.
1  P.M. :  violent  itching  tip  of  nose.
Afternoon  :  glow  over  brow  better.
4  P.M. :  cutting  pain  in  cardiac  region.

8  P.M. :  violent  sneezing,  with  running  of  nose.

Evening :  coryza  gone ;  urine  hot ;  pain  in  1.  groin ;  pain  in

head.
8  to  11  P.M.:  pulse  falls;  breathing  difficult.
Night :  fullness,  with  coryza ;  red  rash  on  abdomen  ;  itching
of  feet  worse.
^^  Temperature  and  "Weather. Hot  washing :  itching  in  anus
better.
Burning  feet :  holding  out  of  bed  >• ;  from  least  cover  worse.
Cold  bathing  :  relieves  itching  in  face.
^^  Chill. Fever. S.weat. Chilliness  on  occiput,  neck  and  chest.
Cold  hands  and  hot  body,  forenoon.
Burning  on  hands  and  feet  during  sleep  at  night.


ARSENICUM  METALLICUM.  136

I  I  Throbbing  through  the  whole  body,  mornings,  most  in  hip-
joint,  under  breast-bone  and  in  the  navel.
^^  Attacks. Symptoms  recur  every  two  weeks.

Coryza  returns  21st  day.

Attacks  come  suddenly  and  end  slowly,  or  vieeverna.  6  Coryza.
*^  Locality  and  Direction.  Right :  pterygium  ;  pain  in  lower
jaw  ;  throat  <  ;  liver  sore ;  painful  varices  side  of  anus ;
painful  swelling  in  groin  ;  corona  glandis  sore ;  stitches  in
mamma;  numbness  and  lameness  in  lumbar  region;  pain
back  of  shoulder ;  pain  in  arm  ;  hip-joint  lame ;  pulsation
in  hip-joint.

Right  to  left :  swollen  gums  ;  soreness  of  under  lip.

Left :  glow  over  brow  ;  pain  in  inner  head ;  pulsation  in  abdo-
men ;  stitch  in  mamma;  pain  in  heart  region;  twitching  in
lower  jaw;  ulcer  on  lower  lip.

Above  downwards  :  pain  in  head;  splenic  pain;  pain  in  mamma;
pain  in  hip.

Below  upwards :  pulsation  in  heel.

Diagonally :  stitch  pain  from  liver.
*^  Sensations. As  if  brain  were  too  large.

As  if  water  was  gushing  forward  in  head.

As  if  swollen  :  the  head,  eyelid,  hands  and  fingers.

As  if  skin  were  immovably  tense.

Cutting  :  in  abdomen  ;  through  heart.

Lancinating  :  in  bowels. \

Shooting :  in  abdomen.

Stitches  :  from  liver  to  sternum  ;  in  r.  mamma ;  under  shoul-
derblade ;  in  1.  mamma  about  an  inch  behind  nipple ;  in
heart;  behind  the  shoulder-blade;  in  1.  arm.

Stinging :  in  face.

Burning :  in  face ;  in  abdomen ;  in  rectum ;  of  the  prepuce ;
in  chancres  ;  in  uterus  and  vagina  ;  of  feet.

Scalded  feeling :  of  gums.

Sore  pain :  in  region  of  liver.

Soreness:  of  scalp;  of  upper  lid;  in  1.  arm.

Pressure:  in  region  of  stomach.

As  if  wrenched:  right  arm.

Throbbing :  in  body,  with  headache ;  ^n  groin ;  under  the
sternum;  in  r.  hip-joint;  from  heel  up  to  hips.

Twitching:  in  1.  lower  law.

Undefined  pain  :  in  1.  side  of  head,  to  ear  and  eye ;  in  eyes  ;
in  facial  bones;  in  ears;  in  r.  lower  jaw  down  into  throat
and  neck  ;  in  region  of  spleen  to  groin  ;  in  breast  to  spleen  ;
in  swelling  in  groin  ;  in  groins  ;  in  1.  mamma;  in  r.  side  of
chest  near  nipple ;  in  region  of  heart ;  in  muscles  of  1.  chest ;
in  spine  between  shoulders ;  in  shoulders ;  in  r.  arm  above
elbow  ;  in  1.  hip.

Heaviness :  in  eyes ;  in  arms  and  hands.


137  ARSENICUM  METALLICUM.

Lameness  :  in  r.  hip-joint.

Numbness  :  on  r.  occiput ;  on  1.  vertex  ;  from  nose  to  forehead,
and  over  vertex ;  in  region  of  eyebrows  ;  below  ears  ;  from
hip-joint  to  pubic  region ;  in  r.  lumbar  region.

Crawlino; :  on  end  of  back.

Glowing : on  a  small  spot  over  1.  brow.

Dryness  :  in  r.  knee-joint.

Itching:  on  forehead;  on  tip  of  nose ;  in  face;  an  inch  above
navel ;  in  anus,  perineum  and  scrotum  ;  in  groin  and  down
to  knee ;  on  glans  penis  ;  on  the  mammge  ;  in  front  of  throat ;
in  neck  ;  in  olecranon.
**  Tissues. Emaciation :  for  weeks.

In  two  weeks  lost  half  a  pound ;  another  in  the  same  time  one
pound.

Lost  within  a  week  3,  4  pounds,  a  girl,  set.  10.
*®  Touch. Passive  Motion. Injuries. Touch :  heat  in  uterus
and  vagina  <C  ',  pain  from  cheek-bones  into  r.  eye.

Pinching  :  itching  allayed. See  4.

Pulling  hair :  scalp  sore.

Rubbing  :  itching  in  anus  worse.

Pressing  or  squeezing  :  itching  better.

Scratching :  itching  worse.
*®  Skin. Itching :  now  here,  then  there,  has  to  pinch  the  spot.

Itching :  with  swelling  in  face,  on  head,  neck  and  mamma ;
on  forearm  ;  later,  on  ankles  of  both  feet.

Skin  peels  off  in  small  scales.

Bluish-red  eruption  on  abdomen  ;  rash,  and  red  smooth  spots.

Red  spots  over  the  whole  body. Cured  by  JSfatr.  carh.

Small  furuncles  in  the  face  for  three  months.

Small  red  pimples  over  the  whole  body,  without  much  itching,
appear after 3, 4 months,  and  last  several  weeks. Sec-
ondary syphilis.
^^  Relationship. Most  similar  to  its  near  relative :  Arsen.  alb.

Useful  in  pterygium  after  failure  of  Nux  vom.  and  Spigel.

Bellad.  relieved  angina  faucium.

Compare:  lodium^  Mercur.,  and  JVatr.  carh.  in  syphilis;  l^ux
vom.  (drowsy  after  sound  sleep) ;  Hhus  tox.  (pain  in  back,
hips,  etc.) ;  Sulphur  (pulse).


ARSENICUM  SULPHURATUM  FLAYUM.  188

ARSENICUM  SULPHURATUM  FLAVUM.

Orpiment.  AsS^.

Hahnemann  published  in  his  Materia  Medica  a  single  short  proving,  by
Langhammer;  one  of  the  most  truthworthy  provers.  Some  reports  of  ef-
fects by  the  OLl  School  physicians  are  given  in  Allen's  Encyclopaedia,  I,
556;  also  a  symptom  observed  by  Hencke.

^  Mind. Intense  and  torturing  anxiety  and  apprehension  ;  great-
est apprehension  after  a  swoon.
Mind  clearer  than  previously.
^  Sensorium. When  walking  he  felt  as  if  dancing  up  and  down,
as  if  he  must  fly.
Great  weakness  in  the  head.
Vanishing  of  thought. See  9.
^  Inner  Head. Throbbing  stitches  in  the  right  frontal  region.
Headache  in  middle  of  forehead,  drawing  and  stinging.
Pain  deep  in,  in  left  forehead,  situated  back  of  inner  corner  of
eye  and  higher  than  the  eyebrow ;  it  extends  towards  the
left  and  deeper  in,  like  a  curve  or  drawn  bow-string.
After  drinking  beer  pain  above  the  occiput  in  both  sides  ;  vio-
lent pressure  in  two  places,  right  and  left  side  symmetrical.
Nausea,  with neuralgic  pains  about  the head,  when  rising ;

>  while  lying  down.
Headache,  nausea  and  vomiting  of  a  whitish  fluid  ;  extremities

covered  with  cold  sweat.
1  Serous  apoplexy.
*  Outer  Head. External  needle-like  stitches  in  right  frontal  re-
gion.
Tearing  pain  from  parietal  to  frontal  region.
On  stroking  the  hair  on  occiput,  a  tensive  feeling  behind  the
right  ear,  as  if  something  stuck  there  and  pressed  it  forward.
^  Sight  and  Eyes. Grum  in  the  canthi.

®  Hearing  and  Ears. Tensive  feeling  behind  right  ear  on  strok-
ing the  hair.
^  Face. Forehead  cold.
^^  Teeth  and  Gums. Teeth  pain  as  if  loose,  when  chewing  the

food.
"  Taste,  Speech,  Tongue. Taste  bitter.

Tongue : furred, yellow-white ; stiff", immovable ; swollen ;
later  dry,  with  disgust  for  all  nourishment.
^^  Inner  Mouth. Mouth  and  throat  dry.

Pustules  or  herpetic  ulcers,  of  a  phagadenic  character.


139  ARSENICUM  SULPHUEATUM  FLAVUM.


^^  Appetite. Loss  of  appetite.

^^  Nausea  and  Vomiting. Nausea  at  noon  after  a  meal ;  and
vomiting,  witli  pain  in  the  stomach  and  abdomen ;  diarrhoea
and  thirst.
Violent,  persistent  vomiting.
After  vomiting  oifensive  bile,  was  relieved.
^^  Stomach. Cramp  in  stomach,  with  fainting,  colic, vomiting,
diarrhoea, d  Gangrene  of  the  bowels.
Burning  and  gnawing  in  stomach,  with  vomiting  and  diarrhoea.
Indigestion.
^^  Abdomen. Violent  griping,  with  convulsions.

Violent  colic,  as  from  a  cold,  morning  on  awaking.
Abdomen  puffed ;  blue  spots  in  fundus  of  stomach  ;  reddish-
brown  erosions.
End  of  ileum  more  inflamed  than  the  duodenum.
Sensation  as  if  diarrhoea  would  set  in. See  9.
^^  Rectum  and  Stool. Stools  like  water,  green  and  slimy,  and
terribly  offensive.
Diarrhoea  daily  at  8  a.m.  and  several  times  during  the  day,  but

not  at  night.
Diarrhoea  with  colic  and  backache  and  tenesmus.
^^  Male  Sexual  Organs. Gonorrhoea,  with  terrible  pains ;  dis-
charge copious,  yellow, constant; burning  day  and  night,
along  the  entire  urethra,  with  restlessness.
Seminal  emissions. See  37.
2^  Voice  and  Larynx. I  Laryngeal  phthisis. ^In  a  drunkard.
^  Respiration. Respiration  difficult.

B Indescribably  unpleasant  feeling,  with  oppression  ;  everything
feels  too  tight, worse  about  the  hypochondria;  ending  in
sweat.
^^  Cough. Cough  from  tickling  in  throat ;  with  pain  in  left  side  ;
soreness  on  chest ;  with  heat  in  left  chest  and  face,  circum-
Cough  with  soreness  in  chest  and  between  shoulders.
Catarrhal  cough  with  pains  in  chest  and  rattling.
^^  Inner  Chest  and  Lungs. Lungs  overfilled  with  blood.

Needle-like  stitches  from  within  out  in  right  side  of  chest.
^^  Heart,  Pulse  and  Circulation.  Yellow  serum  in  pericardium.
Pulse:  frequent, hard,  then small and  thready;  slow,  sup-
pressed, quick,  and  scarcely  perceptible.
^^  Neck  and  Back. Backache  confining  him  to  bed;  (with  caries
of  the  sternum  and  cough. Sulphur  partly  cured  the  caries,
Psorin.  the  cough,  and  Arsen.  sulj>h.  the  backache  and  re-
maining caries).
Pain  in  lumbar  vertebrae  when  moving.
^^  Upper  Limbs. Eruption  on  outer  side  of  left  wrist ;  also  on  in-
ner side, after  Sulphur. {Sulphur  did  not  cure,  Arsen.
sulph.  did).


ARSENICUM  SULPHURATUM  FLAVUM.  140

^^  Lower  Limbs. Pain  in  left  knee,  with  chronic  asthma.

Knees  pain,  and  totter.

Pain  above  the  left  ankle-bone.

Feet  burn.
^*  Limbs  in  General. Severe  pain,  now  in  the  toes,  now  in  the

shoulders  ;  now  here,  now  there,  ending  with  sweat.
^^  Rest. Position. Motion. Children  are  slow  in  learning  to
walk.

Worse  when  rising: neuralgic  pains  about  head.

Better  lying  down  : neuralgia  in  head.

When  moving :  pain  in  lumbar  vertebrae.
^®  Nerves. General  debility.

Nerves  severely  affected.

Annoying  twitching  of  thirty  years'  duration.

Spasms,  colic,  vomiting,  diarrhoea,  heat  and  thirst  next  day.

Faints  after  a  convulsion.

General  feeling  of  lameness,  staggering,  trembling  ;  all  strength
is  gone.

I  Limbs  paralyzed;  has  itch  and  dropsy.
^^  Sleep. Starting  in  sleep,  also  in  falling  asleep  ;  as  if  he  would
fall  out  of  bed.

Restless  at  night,  excited ;  dreams  with  seminal  emissions.
^^  Time. At  8  a.m.  :  daily  diarrhoea.

At  noon  :  nausea  after  a  meal,  etc. See  16.
^^  Temperature  and  Weather. Relieved  by  steam  or  hot  water.
*"  Fever. Chronic  intermittent  fever,  worse  every  afternoon  and
evening ; terrible  heat  at  night.

Hectic  without  thirst.
*^  Sensations. Pain  in  teeth  as  if  loose.

Everything  feels  too  tight  about  the  hypochondria.

Needle-like  stitches  :  in  r.  frontal  region.

Throbbing  stitches  :  in  r.  frontal  region.

Terrible  pains  :  with  gonorrhoea.

Tearing  pain :  from  parietal  to  frontal  region.

Drawing :  and  stinging  in  middle  of  forehead.

Griping :  in  abdomen.

Burning :  in  stomach  ;  along  entire  urethra  ;  in  feet.

Neuralgic  pain  :  about  head.

Soreness  :  on  chest ;  between  shoulders.

Pressure :  above  occiput,  r.  and  1.  side.

Gnawing :  in  stomach.

Cramp :  in  stomach.

Tensive  feeling  :  behind  r.  ear.

Undefined  pain  :  deep  in  1.  forehead  ;  in  stomach  and  abdomen  :
in  1.  side  with  cough;  in  shoulders;  in  1.  knee;  above  1.
ankle-bone ;  in  toes.

Tickling :  in  throat,  causing  cough.

Heat :  in  1.  chest  and  face.


141  ARSENICUM  SULPHURATUM  FLAVUM.

^*  Tissues. I  Pain  in  the  joints. ^Rheumatism.

Emaciated  children.
*^  Skin. Icterus.

Chafing  about  the  genitals  and  behind  the  ears,  in  children.

Skin  scaly,  blackish.

Skin  itching,  dry,  cracked;  rhagades ;  itch.
^^  Stages  of  Life,  Constitution. ■  Case  of  caries  of  sternum
with  cough  and  backache  of  15  years'  standing. See  31.

I A  drunkard  with  phthisis  laryngea.
*^  Relationship. Similar  to Calc. carb.:  (children  are  slow  in
learning  to  walk).


ARSENICUM  SULPHURATUM  RUBRUM.  142

ARSENICUM  SULPHURATUM  RUBRUM.

Realgar.  As^S^-

Introduced  and  proved  by  Dr. Neidhard  and  his  class  in  1852  ;  also
proved  by  Patrick  McHamara,  Raymond,  Howard,  Preston  and  others.

^  Mind.  Had  an  effect  on  his  mind  in  making  him  crosser,  and
also  to  act  with  more  energy  ;  4th  day.

*  Sensorium. Increased  heat  of  the  head  and  face,  with  a  feel-

ing of  fullness,  and  heavy,  dull  sensation  in  head.

Falls  in  a  deep  swoon,  with  swelling  of  the  face  ;  from  inhala-
tion.
^  Inner  Head. Waking  often  with  a  dull  pain  in  forehead  over
eyes,  extending  over  top  of  head  nearly  to  organ  of  self-
esteem.

Heavy  pain  in  forehead.

After  three  hours  a  general  malaise,  pain  across  the  forehead,
and  chilly  pain,  lasted  till  he  went  to  bed ;  left  him  in  the
night  durirjg  sleep.

Severe  continued  pain  extending  deep  into  brain  in  r.  frontal
region,  also  to  r.  ear  ;  very  much  <  by  stooping  and  exer-
cise;  >  by  application  of  cold;  5  p.m.

Dull  pain  in  r.  frontal  region,  which  increased  in  severity,  and
became  a  sharp  throbbing  and  shooting  pain,  extending  to
occiput  on  r.  side; <  by  motion  and  stooping ;  4  p.m.

Headache  similar  to  that  of  2d  day,  with  the  addition  that  the
pains  were  in  the  whole  frontal  region,  but  most  severe  in
the  right.

Pain  commencing  in  back  of  head  below  philoprogenitiveness,
and  extending  thence  around  the  sides  of  the  head ;  some-
times dull  and  sometimes  sharp  ;  7  till  11  a.m.

*  Outer  Head. Heat  of  the  head  and  face.

®  Hearing  and  Ears.  Sensation  of  fullness  and  pressing  out-
wards in  r.  ear.

Snapping  sound  in  ear  corresponding  to  pulsation  of  temporal
artery.

Scarlet  redness  and  burning  of  upper  half  of  1.  ear,  with  ting-
ling similar  to  that  produced  by  a  frost  bite.

The  ear  feels  hot  to  the  touch  to  himself  and  others.

A  very  unpleasant,  quick  beating,  extending  deep  into  1.  ear,
with  pain  and  scarlet  redness  and  heat  of  upper  half  of  ear  ;
ear  feels  full,  with  pressing  outwards.


143  ARSENICUM  SULPHURATUM  RUBRUM.

^  Smell  and  Nose. Sneezing  occasionally,  with  a  thin  white  dis-
charge from  both  nostrils.

Sensation  as  if  corjza  was  about  to  set  in ;  sneezed  several
times  during  day,  with  tingling  in  r.  nostril.

Free  discharge  from  nostrils,  thin  and  white.
"  Face. Has  a  better  expression  of  countenance  than  before  ;  used
to  look  dull,  but  now  looks  brighter.

Sensible  pulsation  of  arteries  of  r.  side  of  face  and  head.
"  Tongue. Bitter  taste  in  mouth  on  waking.
^^  Inner  Mouth. Mucous  membrane  of  mouth  and  throat  much
inflamed  ;  also  lips  and  1.  side  of  tongue ;  1.  eje  (conjunctiva)
much  inflamed  and  puff"ed  out.
^^  Palate  and  Throat. Inflammation  of  throat  with  deep  red-
ness, occasional  pains  and  a  raw  feeling.

Enlargement  of  r.  tonsil.

At  times  intolerable  itching  in  throat,  inducing  a  short,  dry,
expulsive  cough.
"  Appetite,  Thirst,  Desires,  Aversions. No  inclination  for
supper.

Excessive  thirst,  continued  for  three  days.

During  this  day  and  the  next  had  very  little  appetite,  and  at
times  rather  an  aversion  to  food,  otherwise  well.
^^  Eating  and  Drinking. An  hour  after  breakfast,  fullness  and
weight  at  pit  of  stomach,  low  spirited,  and  no  disposition  to
talk  all  day.

Ate  but  little  at  dinner  time ;  disagreeable  feeling  in  stomach
till  8  P.M.,  Avhen  a  burning  sensation  set  in,  which  increased
rapidly,  and  from  10  o'clock  till  9  in  the  morning  was  so  in-
tense as  to  deprive  him  almost  of  his  breath  ;  relief  in  no  po-
sition ;  feet  and  hands  cold;  trembling  of  the  whole  body ;
twitching  and  jerking  of  lower  extremities;  anxiety,  fear  of
death ;  stomach  felt  as  if  he  had  coals  of  fire  in  it ;  pain  ex-
tended from  cardiac  extremity  to  1.  hypochondriac  region ;
cold  drinks  increased  the  burning  in  stomach ;  pulse  de-
pressed and  thread-like  ;  face  pale  and  livid  ;  could  not  bear
least  pressure  on  region  of  stomach.

Sharp  cutting  pains  in  1.  abdominal  region  after  each  meal ;
aggravated  when  walking,  relieved  by  firm  pressure  with
hand  upon  the  aff"ected  part.

After  meals  indisposed  for  mental  or  physical  exertion.
^®  Nausea. Nausea  in  the  afternoon.

^^  Scrobiculum  and  Stomach. Heavy  sensation  and  gnawing
in  region  of  stomach.

Dull,  heavy  pain,  extending  from  pit  of  stomach  to  back,  with
a  sensation  of  a  weight  in  stomach.

Very  weak,  much  soreness  over  whole  extent  of  stomach.

In  evening,  on  returning  home,  felt  symptoms  of  derangement


ARSENICUM  SULPHURATUM  RUBRUM.  144

of  stomach; great  weakness  and  trembling  all over; had
walked  rather  more  than  usual  during  the  day.

^^  Hypochondria.  Large  bluish  spots  over  epigastric  region,  ab-
domen and  thighs.

^^  Abdomen. During  afternoon  dull  pains  in  bowels,  with  feeling
of  fullness  extending  across  into  the  hypogastric  region.
Most  violent  colic  with  terrible  vomiting.
In  the  smaller  intestines  round  ulcers  with  blackish  fundus.

^*'  Kectum  and  Stool. A  loose,  small  evacuation  during  day  at
an  unusual  hour ;  another  one  in  evening.
Had  a  discharge  from  rectum  of  pure  bile ;  urine  saffron-color.
■  Diarrhoea  of  two  months'  standing;  yellow,  mushy  stools  in
the  morning  early,  after  getting  up,  and  in  the  evening  be-
fore going  to  bed ;  a  kind  of  tenesmus  in  anus  is  constant.

^^  Male  Sexual  Organs.  Slight  drawing  pain  for  a  short  time  in
1.  spermatic  cord.

2^  Voice  and  Larynx.  Hoarseness,  with  accumulation  of  tough,
tenacious  mucus  in  throat.

^^  Inner  Chest  and  Lungs.  Awakes  at  5  a.m.  with  a  sharp
cutting  pain,  commencing  between  the  cartilages  of  the  fifth
and  sixth  ribs,  extending  inwards  and  upwards  deep  into
the  chest ;  the  pain  was  so  sharp  that  it  did  not  admit  of  the
slightest  motion;  was  obliged  to  suspend  respiration  as  much
as  possible.

^^  Heart,  Pulse  and  Circulation.  Occasional  sharp  pains,
which  appear  to  affect  the  base  of  the  heart,  impeding  respi-
ration.

^^  Neck  and  Back.  After  rising  in  the  morning,  a  heavy,  press-
ing pain,  extending  from  the  point  of  the  os  coccygis  to  the
anus ;  soreness  of  the  os  coccygis  ;  the  pain  in  the  anus  is
increased  by  efforts  to  evacuate  the  bowels  and  when  passing
water ;  bearing  down  would  produce  a  heavy,  sickening  sen-
sation.

^^  Upper  Limbs. Rheumatism  from  r.  shoulder  down  the  arm,  as
if  in  the  bone ;  paralysis  for  three  days.
Pain  in  bones  of  1.  upper  arm,  more  towards  morning,  when  he

wakes  up.
Coldness  of  the  hands.

Slight  numbness  of  forearms  and  hands,  with  heaviness  ;  drop-
ped things.

^*  Lower  Limbs.  Considerable  pain  in  r.  hip,  with  lameness  in
leg.
Severe  pain  affecting  the  inferior  third  of  the  tibia  of  the  left
leg ;  commences  at  the  lower  point  of  the  malleolus  internus,
and  extends  upwards  in  the  shaft  of  the  bone ;  momentarily
relieved  by  changing  the  position  of  the  foot  and  by  friction
with  the  hand.


145  ARSENICUM  SULPHURATUM  RUBRUM.

Numbness  and  prickling  affecting  inner  side  of  calf  of  r.  leg,
the  heel,  outer  side  of  foot  and  little  toe.

Violent  itching  of  third  toe  of  1.  foot,  producing  occasional
spasms  of  muscles  of  the  foot  and  leg.

About  1  P.M.  the  thighs  and  legs  itched;  worse  after  scratch-
ing.; seemed  to  leave  in  about  two  hours,  and  about  5  o'clock
the  anterior  muscles  of  thighs  felt  sore  in  descending  the
stairs ;  about  9  o'clock  legs  and  thighs  commenced  to  itch
again.
^^  Rest. Position, Motion. Rest :  pain  in  chest  better.

Walking  :  pain  in  abdomen  worse.

Motion  :  pain  in  chest  worse.

Motion  and  friction  :  pain  in  tibia  better.

Stooping  and  exercise :  pain  in  frontal  region  worse.
36  Jferves. Convulsions,  with  abdomen  puffed  up ;  offensive,  bili-
ous diarrhoea,  slimy  vomit ;  death  in  4  to  6  days ;  a  child.

General  heaviness  of  the  whole  body,  sleeps  longer,  and  is  more
difficult  to  rouse.
^^  Sleep. Did  not  sleep  so  sound  as  usual,  very  restless,  with  many
dreams.

Was  very  sleepy  before  taking  the  medicine,  but  afterwards  felt
no  desire  to  sleep,  was  very  restless  through  the  night,  wak-
ing up  often  with  a  dull  pain  in  head.

All  the  symptoms  develop  more  in  the  night ;  very  vivid  dreams
all  night.
^^  Time. Morning  :  diarrhoea ;  bone  pains  in  arm.

5  A.M. :  pain  between  fifth  and  sixth  ribs.

7  to  11  A.M. :  pain  in  head.
Afternoon  :  pain  in  bowels.

1  P.M. :  thighs  and  legs  itched.

5  P.M. :  pain  frontal  region ;  thighs  sore.

Evening :  stomach  weak ;  unusual  stool.

8  P.M. :  disagreeable  feeling  in  stomach.

9  P.M. :  thighs  itch.

10  P.M.  to  9  A.M. :  stomach  burning  intensely.
Night :  pain  in  head  ;  dreams  ;  all  symptoms.

^^  Temperature  and  Weather, Cold  :  pain  frontal  region  better.
*"  Chill, Fever. Sweat. Towards night felt  very  cold  and
chilly,  even  before  hot  stove,  lasted  for  three  or  four  hours.
Heat  and  thirst ;  loss  of  appetite ;  frequent  vomiting  ;  a  child.
^^  Locality  and  Direction. Right :  pain  frontal  region ; full-
ness in  ear ;  tingling  in  ear ; pulsation  in  arteries ;  tonsil
enlarged ;  rheumatism  in  shoulder ;  pain  in  hip ;  numbness
in  leg ;  throbbing  and  shooting  in  head.
Left :  ear  painful ;  eye  inflamed ;  pain  in  spermatic  cord  ;  bone-
pains  in  arms;  pain  in  tibia;  third  toe  itches.
Above  downwards  :  rheumatism  in  shoulder.
Below  upwards  :  pain  in  chest ;  pain  in  tibia.

VOL.  II. — 10.


ARSENICUM  SULPHURATUM  RUBRUM.  146

*^  Sensations. As  if  he  had  coals  of  fire  in  stomach.

Cutting :  in  1.  abdominal  region ;  between  cartilages  of  fifth
and  sixth  ribs.

Shooting ;  in  r.  side  of  head.

Sharp  pain  : at  base  of  heart.

Pressing  pain  :  from  point  of  os  coccygis  to  anus.

Drawing :  in  1.  spermatic  cord.

Gnawing:  in  region  of  stomach.

Throbbing :  in  r.  side  of  head.

Burning :  of  ear ;  in  stomach.

Soreness  :  of  os  coccygis  ;  of  anterior  muscles  of  thighs.

Raw  feeling  :  in  throat.

Rheumatic  pain  :  in  r.  arm.

Heavy  pain  :  in  forehead ;  in  stomach  ;  from  point  of  os  coccy-
gis to  anus.

Dull  pain  :  in  forehead,  over  eyes,  to  top  of  head  ;  in  r.  frontal
region  ;  from  pit  of  stomach  to  back  ;  in  bowels.

Undefined  pain  :  across  forehead ;  deep  into  brain  ;  in  back  of
head  ;  in  bones  of  1.  arm  ;  inferior  third  of  1.  tibia.

Fullness  :  in  head  ;  in  r.  ear  ;  at  pit  of  stomach.

Heaviness :  in  stomach.

Tingling  :  in  ear ;  in  r.  nostril.

Numbness:  of  forearms  and  hands;  in  r.  calf;  in  foot.

Heat :  of  head ;  in  face  ;  in  ear.

Itching :  in  throat ;  of  third  toe  of  1.  foot ;  of  thighs  and  legs.
**  Tissues.  All  the  joints  remain  immovable  after  the  recovery
from  the  poison.

Rheumatic  symptoms  first  24  hours  after  taking  the  medicine
in  the  morning.

*^  Touch. Passive  Motion. Injuries. Touch :  ear  feels  hot.
Pressure :  stomach  worse.
Firm  pressure  :  pains  in  abdomen  better.
Scratching :  itching  thigh  worse.
*^  Stages  of  Life,  Constitution. Young  man, set. 18 ;  head-
ache in  forehead  and  back  of  head,  with  vertigo  and  empty
feeling  in  region  of  heart.


14T  ARTEMISIA  VULGARIS.

ARTEMISIA  VULGARIS.

Wormioood.  Compositce.


A  popular  drug  already  known  to  the  Greeks  and  Romans,  in  later  times
much  given  in  epilepsy  and  spasms  of  children.  The  late  Dr.  Metcalf  pub-
lished in  1853,  in  the  North  American  Journal  of  Homoeopathy,  Vol.  Ill,  p.  74,
a  very  valuable  collection  of  cases  cured  by  the  Old  School,  defending  at
the  same  time  the  use  of  drugs  (pro  tem.)  before  proving.  It  was  also  re-
commended and  given  in  our  School  before  provings  had  been  made,  by
Frederick  Miller,  now  in  Montreal,  and  his  cures  were  subsequently  cor-
roborated. Only  the  corroborated  symptoms  are  marked  I.

What  Noak  had  collected  and  Allen  translated,  are  observations  of  Allo-
pathists,  on  the  sick  only,  but  as  they  are  very  useful,  they  have  been
added,  and  marked  -.

Tincture  of  the  fibrillse  of  the  root  has  been  used.


^  Mind. Complete  unconsciousne^'s. d  Hydrocephalus.
Insensible  for  two  hours. 6  Epilepsy.
I  Stupor  following  the  convulsions, d  Child,  ?et.  4.

■  Mental  powers  become  gradually  extinct, d  Epilepsy.
Delirium, d  Hydrocephalus.

Hallucinations  during  the  lucid  intervals  ;  manifests  fear  and
horror.

I  Gets  up  every  night  and  does  her  daily  work  as  a  house  ser-
vant, with  closed  eyes,  lies  down  again  and  cannot  remember
anything  next  morning. 6  Somnambulism.

■  Inclination  to  steal. ^Boy,  with  epilepsy.
Sudden  whining, d  Before  eclampsia.

■  Piercing  shriek,  turns  the  eyes,  with  violent  clonic  spasms  of

all  the  limbs, d  Child  with  eclampsia.
I  I  Picking  of  bed  covers,  making  a  fold  of  the  skin  on  the  back
of  her  mother's  hand,  saying  that  it  will  not  come  off,  wants
a  knife  to  cut  it  off. d  Hydrocephalus.

■  Peevish  and  inclined  to  weep. 6  Chorea.

Very  much  vexed,  irritable,  depressed  during  the  day  before  an
attack  at  night, d  Epilepsy.

■  Moroseness. ^Epilepsy.

■  Morose  and  tearful. ^Chorea.

Excitability  all  day  before  an  attack  at  night, d  Epilepsy.
After  a  sudden  fright, d  Epilepsy.

■  Fright  and  other  emotions  are  followed  by  epilepsy.
Weakminded  with  epileptic  fits.


ARTEMISIA  VULGARIS.  148

I  Attacks  brought  on  particularly  by  bodily  exertion  or  by  al-
luding to  the  disease. 6  Catalepsy.
^  Sensorium. Great  heaviness  in  the  head  on  moving  it.

Stupor  ;  after  convulsions. 0  Hydrocephalus. See  3.

Insensibility  after  the  fit. d  Epilepsy.

Vertigo  caused  by  colored  window  glass,  but  not  by  white  light.

Epileptic  vertigo.
^  Inner  Head. Sharp,  shooting  pain  through  the  head, d  Hydro-
cephalus.

Great  heaviness  and  pressure, d  Hydrocephalus.

Great  heaviness  in  the  head,  morning. ^Nocturnal  epilepsy.

■  Hydrocephalus  acutus  ;  second  stage.

Great  congestion  of  cerebro-spinal  vessels  of  the  meninges.
Extreme  hyperaemia  of  medulla  oblongata,  spine  and  meninges.
*  Outer  Head. Heaviness  of  head, d  Hydrocephalus.
Cannot  hold  the  head  up  after  the  spasms.
Head  drawn  backwards  by  spasmodic  twitchings.

■  Head bent backwards and sidewards. ^Hydrocephalic

spasms.

Very  copious  sweat  on  the  occiput  during  recovery. 6  Hydro-
cephalus.
^  Sight and Eyes. I  Colored light, as light falling through
stained  glass  windows,  naakes  head  dizzy ;  white  light  does
not.  ,

I  Letters  run  together  while  studying  or  reading.

Sees  double ;  eyes  fatigue  from  study,  sight  dims.

Staring  at  the  ceiling. 6  Hydrocephalus.

I  Staring  straight  forward  with  immovable  eyes, d  Catalepsy.

Staring  eyes  with  dilated  pupils, d  Hydrocephalus.

I  Left  pupil  dilated  more  than  the  right. 6  Epilepsy.

I  Eyes  turned  upwards,  half  open. 6  Hydrocephalus.

■  Turning  up  his  eyes,  only  a  trace  of  cornea  to  be  seen  ;  before

the  spasms. ^  A  child.
Turning  the  eyes  ;  iris  out  of  sight. 6  Eclampsia.

■  Tears  run  from  the  eyes  during  the  attack. 6  Catalepsy.

■  Eyes  streamed  water. 0  Catalepsy.

^  Face. ■Twitchings  in  the  face,  the  only  neuralgic  movements.
6  Catalepsy.

■  Mouth  drawn  to  the  left  side, d  Epilepsy.
Face  pale,  looks  oldish. 6  Hydrocephalus.

^  Lower  Part  of  Face. ■Lower  jaw  pressed  forwards. ^Hy-
drocephalus.
Mouth  cannot  be  opened  except  with  great  difficulty. 6  Hy-
drocephalus.
Chewing  motion  of  gums  ;  grinding  teeth. 6  Hydrocephalus.
^^  Teeth  and  Gums. ■Grinding  of  teeth,  froth  at  the  mouth,  the
thumbs  drawn  into  the  fist,  eyes  half  open,  drawn  upwards.
6  Hydrocephalic  spasms.


149  ARTEMISIA  VULGARIS.

^^  Taste, Speech, Tongue. Tongue bitten in the morning.
d  Epilepsy.
Tongue  dry. d  Hydrocephalus.
I  Bites  the  tongue  in  the  spasms.

I  Considerable  laceration  of  the  tongue. ^Epilepsy.

Speech  unintelligible — can  utter  but  single  words,  and  these
only  with  great  exertion, d  Chorea.
^^  Month. I  Froth  at  the  mouth. ^  Spasm. ^Chorea. ^Hydro-
cephalus.
^^  Palate  and  Throat. Hunger,  but  cannot  get  the  food  down.
Swallowing  difficult. 6  Chorea. 6  Cynanche  cellularis.

■  Swallowing  diflScult ;  food  escapes  from  the  mouth. ^Chorea.
^^  Nausea  and  Vomiting. Nausea  and  vomiting.

^^  stomach. Cramp  in  stomach.

^^  Abdomen, l Occasionally  slight  colicky  pain. ^Chorea.

I I  Violent  cramps  in  abdomen  ;  irregular,  insufficient  catamenia.
^Epilepsy.

Abdomen  sunk  in. 6  Hydrocephalus.
Abdomen  swollen, d  Hydrocephalus.

•  Worms.

^"  Rectum  and  Stool. Greenish  diarrhoea. 6  Hydrocephalus.

Passes  feces  and  urine  with  the  spasm,
^^  Urinary Organs, tt  On  the  morning  after  the  second  dose  in-
creased urination  of  yellow unsedimentary urine. 6  Epi-
lepsy.
I  Urine  increased,  yellowish. ^Epilepsy.
Since  midnight,  several  times,  a  thick,  turbid  urine ;  dark  red,
yellow, d  Hydrocephalus.

■  Obstinate  strangury  of  a  child.

^^  Male  Sexual  Organs. iNightly  pollutions. ^  Youth,  «t.  16.

Seminal  ejaculations  with  the  spasms.
^^  Female  Sexual  Organs, tt  Prolapsus  uteri.

7T  Violent  contractions  of  the  uterus  ;  labor  pains.

TT  Rupture  of  uterus.

71  Metrorrhagia.

:  Spasmodic  affection  during  catamenia.

•  Suppressed  menstruation,

■  Irregular  or  deficient  menstruation  with  epileptic  convulsions.
Suppressed  menses  or  amenorrhoea. ^Epilepsy,

■  Nervous  chlorosis  with  a  very  dry  skin,

^*  Pregnancy  and  Parturition, tt  Miscarriage,
Violent  contractions  of  the  pregnant  uterus,

■  Retained  afterbirth.

Spasms  in  childbed  from  fright,
71  Increase  of  lochial  discharge,
j  Lochial  discharge  interrupted,

■  Eclampsia  of  sucklings,

^®  Respiration. I Rattling  breathing  with  the  spasms.


ARTEMISIA  VULGARIS.  150

■  Breathing  checked  ;  suddenly  a  deep  inhalation  ends  the  attack.

6  Catalepsy.
^^  Cough, A  half  dry,  painless  cough,  disturbing  sleep. 6  After

recovery  from  hydrocephalus.
^^  Lungs. Audible  rattling  in  chest. ^Eclampsia.
^'  Heart. I Palpitation. 6  Hysteria.

Small  ecchymoses  on  endocardium  and  pericardium.
^^  Upper  Limbs. Trembling hands, spasmodically affected are
lifted  and  put  near  the  head, d  Hydrocephalus.
Hydrocephalic  spasms.
Clenched  thumbs.
3^  Lower  Limbs, ll  Overfatigue  and  weakness  of  the  feet  after

long  walks,  or  after  long  illness.
^*  Limbs  in  General. Spasms  of  hands  and  feet.

Tormenting  stretching  of  the  limbs.
^'  Rest. Position. Motion. >Has  to  sit  but  cannot  without
support,  or  she  would  be  thrown  from  the  chair, d  Chorea.
Exertion  :  attacks  ■<  ;  overfatigue.
Motion  :  heaviness  in  head.
^  Nerves, tt  Sensation  of  the  nervous  system.

I  In  a  very  nervous  state;  constantly  picking  with  fingers.
d  Epilepsy.

I  Very  much  exhausted,  obliged  to  sit  down  after  the  attack.

6  Catalepsy.
Dogs  for  a  while  motionless,  remain  standing  half  unconscious,
head  and  tail  lowered.

■  Paroxysms  followed  by  a  perfect  though  short  soporous  state.
71  Spasmodic twitchings, most in cervical muscles, drawing

head  upward  and  backward,  later  extending  also  to  shoulders
and  back.

I I  Chorea. See  35.

1 1  Spasms  and  convulsions.

I  Spasms  lasting  ten  minutes  or  longer,  ending  in  perfect  relax-
ation resembling  paralysis,  followed  by  a  sound  sleep  of  half
an  hour  or  more.

•  Hysterical  fits.

Convulsions,  preventing  falling  asleep,  more  r.  side.  6  Hydro-
cephalus.

■  Right  side  convulsed,  left  paralyzed, d  Hydrocephalus.
Urine  and  feces  pass  involuntarily  during  the  spasms.
Tetanus  in  periodical  attacks  with  pain  in  the  whole  chest  and

increased  trismus.
Falling  to  the  ground  with  trismus,  tonic  spasms  of  one  side  of
body,  followed  by  clonic  spasms.

■  Remaining  in  the  same  position,  she  stares  straight  before  her

with  fixed  eyes, d  Catalepsy.
Catalepsy  since  a  great  fright  with  anxiety  and  fear,  in  a  man,
get.  25 ;  the  attacks  return  after  each  vexation.


151  ARTEMISIA  VULGARIS.

I  All  the  limbs  in  a  violent  clonic  spasm  lasting  about  ten  min-

utes, leaving  a  paralytic  relaxation. 6  Eclampsia.
Exhaustion  and  sleep  after  eclampsia.
Clonic  spasms  of  hands  and  feet. 6  Eclampsia.

II  Eclampsia  of  sucklings  or  teething  children.

■  Epileptic  spasms  of  children.

t:  Increase  of  epileptic  paroxysms.

I  Epilepsy;  often  repeated  attacks;  the  day  before  the  attacks

excitable, irritable ; deep sleep after it ; later, oflFensive

sweat. 6  Epilepsy.

■  Suddenly  seized  with  an  electric  shock,  making  him  insensible

for  two  hours ;  foaming  at  the  mouth,  which  was  drawn  to
.  the  left  side ;  has  considerable  laceration  of  the  tongue  after
the  fit,  and  left  side  numb  for  two  days. 6  Epilepsy.

■  Epileptic  convulsions  mostly  in  the  morning,  at  intervals  of  2

or  4  months. Child  set.  4  years.

■  Nocturnal  epilepsy  with  a  man,  get.  42.

■  Frequent  nocturnal  epileptic  paroxysms  after  suffering  great

grief.

■  Epileptic  attacks  in  childbed  after  a  fright.

■  ■Epileptic  spasms  after  cooling  off  while  overheated  from

dancing.
Epileptic  attacks  consequent  upon  a  drunken  tumble  into  the
water.

■  ■Epilepsy  with  menstrual  disturbances.

■  Convulsions  in  the  day  time,  consequent  upon  fever  and  diar-

rhoea.

■  ■Epileptic  attacks,  several  every  day.

I  I  Epileptic  attacks  follow  each  other  so  soon  that  the  sick  do

not  come  to  a  full  and  clear  consciousness.
:  Epilepsy  with  imbecility.
Epileptic  vertigo.
:  Epilepsy  with  congestion  to  the  head.

■  Convulsions every  10  or  15 minutes, bending  head  back-

wards and  sidewards. 6  Hydrocephalus.
Nocturnal  epilepsy  with  violent  trismus,  injuring  teeth.
During  epileptic  attacks  violent  sweat  of  an  offensive  odor.
^^  Sleep. Long and deep sleep after the attack. ^Epilepsy.
d  Eclampsia.

■  Sopor. ^Hydrocephalus.

Dreams  of  snow  and  strange  people  in  the  room, d  Hydroce-
phalus.

■  No  muscular  motions  at  night. 6  Chorea.
Somnambulism,  gets  up  at  night  and  resumes  her  daily  work.

See  1.
^^  Time. Morning  :  heaviness  in  head ;  tongue  bitter  ;  increased
urination ; epilepsy.
Towards  noon  :  epilepsy  recurs.


ARTEMISIA  VULGARIS.  152

During  day  :  irritable ;  excitable ;  convulsions.

Towards  evening :  fainting  fit.  ♦

Night :  pollutions  ;  epilepsy  ;  walks  in  sleep.

After  midnight :  turbid  urine.
'^  Temperature  and  Weather. After  a  fall  in  the  water,  while

drunk, d  Epilepsy.
*°  Fever. Chilly ; generally unwell and  drawing  in the  limbs
before  an  attack, d  Convulsions.

Body  cold. 6  Hydrocephalus.

Warm  sweat all  over, most on occiput;  after the  remedy.

I  I  Febris  nervosa  stupida. 6  Hydrocephalus.
Sweat  is  a  sign  of  relief, d  Epilepsy.

71  Strong  sweat,  with  a  specific  bad  odor,  cadaverous  or  gar-
licky, d  Ague.
"Attacks. I  Fits  every  five  weeks,  menses  regular. ^Epilepsy.

II  Often  repeated  attacks. ^Epilepsy.

■  Attacks  of  three  to  five  minutes  duration,  twice  within  half

an  hour, d  Catalepsy.

Attacks  recur :  at  night ;  every  five  weeks.
*^  Locality  and  Direction. ! Right  side  convulsed,  left  paral-
yzed, d  Hydrocephalus.

Right  side  somewhat  lame  since  birth,  still  convulsions  on  both
sides  with  a  boy,  set.  18  months.

Left :  pupil  dilated  ;  mouth  drawn  ;  side  numb.

Forwards  :  lower  jaw  protrudes.

Upwards :  eyes  turn.

Backward  and  sideways  :  head  bends.
*^  Sensations. Shooting  :  through  head.

Drawing :  in  limbs.

Electric  shock  :  in  epilepsy.

Heaviness :  in  the  head.
**  Tissues. Extreme  hypersemia  of  medulla  oblongata.

■  Congestion  of  brain  and  spine. See  Convulsions.

Small  ecchymoses  found  on  the  pericardium  and  endocardium.
*^  Injuries. B Epilepsy  from a  blow on  the  head, commencing

three  years  after.
'*®  Skin. TT  Large  scrofulous  blotch  after  the  recovery  of  hydro-
cephalic spasms.
*^  Stages  of  Life,  Constitution. Strong,  full-blooded,  well-fed
children,  during  dentition. ^Eclampsia.
Boy,  get.  14  weeks,  15  attacks  in  24  hours. 6  Eclampsia.
A  child,  set.  6  months;  after  the  mother  had  suffered  much
from  grief  during  pregnancy ;  from  4  to  6  paroxysms  a  day
for  2  months. 6  Eclampsia.
llBoy,  set.  18  months  ;  skull  injured  during  birth  ;  frightened

by  bite  of  a  dog. d  Croup  and  convulsions.
I A  weakly,  miserable  boy,  set.  2,  emaciated  after  typhus  with


153  ARTEMISIA  VULGARIS.

diarrhoea,  loss  of  consciousness and constant  boring  with
occiput  in  the  cushions, d  Hydrocephalic  spasms.

Girl,  set.  10,  delicate,  irritable. 6  Chorea. (9  Scrofula.

Boy,  set.  12,  after  ascarides  had  been  removed, d  Chorea.

A  stout,  active,  healthy  boy,  aet.  13,  suffering  for  three  years
from  epilepsy,  after  a  box  on  the  ear,  having  for  six  months
from  6  to  18  paroxysms  a  day,  besides  3  to  5  at  night.

Robust  girl,  set.  10,  has  not  menstruated ;  suffered  since  18
months  with  somnambulisnl.

Girl,  aged  16  ;  attacked  during  her  development ;  occur  every
48  hours  ;  cured  by  a  single  dose, d  Epilepsy.

Girl,  set.  16,  3  or  4  epileptic  attacks  within  a  week,  with  irreg-
ular catamenia  or  after  the  menses.

Girl,  set.  17,  for  4  months  3  to  4  fits  every  day. ^Epilepsy.

A  girl,  set.  17,  since  5  years  affected  with  epileptic  attacks.

Girl,  set.  18,  strong,  well  developed,  plethoric. ^Epilepsy.

Man,  set.  20,  since  2  years. 6  Epilepsy.

Man,  set.  20,  after  fright  an  epileptic  paroxysm,  later  from
taking  cold,  recurring  every  3,  4  weeks,  towards  noon,
finally  every  other  day,  between  9  and  10  a.m.

Girl,  set.  27,  fits  since  12  years  without  an  aura;  menses  regu-
lar, d  Epilepsy.

Weakly,  hysteric  women, d  Menorrhagia.

Woman,  set.  28,  slender,  weakly  constitution,  dry  skin,  after
hearing  frightful  news,  had  two  attacks  of  from  3  to  5  min-
utes duration  in  half  an  hour. 6  Catalepsy.

Man,  set.  29,  periodically  epileptic  for  four  years.

Man,  £et.  32,  strong,  powerful,  fresh  appearance  and  choleric
temperament,  epileptic  attacks  when  he  got  angry.

A  somewhat  imbecile  man,  set.  36,  attacked  from  childhood
twice  a  week,  sometimes  oftener ;  first  reduced  to  one  a
month,  and  by  a  stronger  dose  entirely  removed.  ^Epi-
lepsy.

Woman,  set.  41,  after  changing  an  active  for  a  sedentary  life,
attended  by  grief  and  menstrual  irregularities,  first  hysterical
difficulties,  succeeded  by  convulsions  passing  into  true  epi-
lepsy.

Man,  set.  42,  for  a  year  and  a  half  nocturnal  epilepsy,  recurring
at  intervals  from  2  to  3  months.

Man,  get.  45,  lank,  choleric,  frequent  attacks  of  catalepsy,  six
or  more  a  day,  aggravated  by  passion.

A  healthy  man,  set.  60,  suffering  for  years  great  care  and  grief,
was  attacked  by  fainting  fit  generally  towards  evening  and
finally  decided  epilepsy  since  18  months.
*^  Relationship. Acts  better  given  with  wine  than  with  water.

Nearest  relation:  Absinth.,  Ahrot.

More  distant : Cina,  Tanac,  Chamom.,  Arnic,  31illef.

Compare  with  : Caustic,  Pulsat.,  JRuta,  Secale,  Stramon.


A^UM  DRACONTIUM.  154

In  alternation  : Stramon.,  Pulsat ,  Aurum.

After  Aeon.,  Bellad.,  Bryon.,  Helleh.,  Cina  ;  on  the  5th  day.
d  Hydrocephalus  acutus.

After  lodiitm,  acting  well. 6  Epilepsy.

Caustic,  in  epilepsy  after  Artemisia.

Similar  to:  Absinth,  (family  relation) ;  Oiciit.  (staring,  jerk-
ing head,  etc.) ;  Cina{ejes);  ^J)^'s  (hydrocephalus) ;  Melleh.
(hydrocephalus) ;  Bufo  (irritable  before  epileptic  attack) ;
Caustic.  Chamom.


ARUM  DRACONTIUM.

Green  Dragon.  Aracece.


Proved  by  Dr.  C.  P.  Hart,  of  Wyoming,  Ohio.  Published  in  the  Am.
Horn.  Observer,  1875 ;  afterwards  by  E.  M.  Hale,  in  United  States  Medical  In-
vestigator, Vol.  IX.,  No.  3,  p.  103.  Also  by  Dr.  M.  McFarlan.  The  re-
markable cure  of  Asthma  Millari  was  communicated  by  Dr.  F.  F.  Frantz,
of  Lancaster.


^  Mind. Great  languor  and  depression  of  spirits,  with  asthma  at

night.
^  Inner  Head. Head  feels  heavy  and  aches  slightly  in  occipital
and  r.  parietal  regions ;  next  morning  dull,  heavy  aching  in
head  and  chest,  with  asthma  at  night.

Had  one  of  the  characteristic  pains  in  the  1.  side  of  head ;  be-
gan in  1. occipital  region,  gradually subsided, reappeared
successively  in  1.  temporal  and  1.  frontal  regions.
®  Sight  and  Eyes. Aching  pain  over  1.  eye,  pain  transient ;  con-
junctiva highly  injected.

Eyelids  dry,  stiff,  and  slightly  agglutinated  at  their  edges,
which  burn  and  smart.

Heat,  dryness  and  smarting  of  lids  ; 3  p.m.
®  Hearing  and  Ears. Shooting  pains  in  r.  ear  at  8  a.m.,  half  an
hour  after  breakfast,  transient,  but  frequent,  leaving  a  I  I  feel-
ing of  fullness  and  slight aching  in  middle ear ;  next  day
changed  to  1.  ear.

Feeling  of  warmth  and  fullness  in  ears,  one  or  other  side,  sel-
dom in  both  at  once ;  swallowing  renews  it  temporarily.

Aching  pain  behind  r.  ear.

I  I  Shooting  pains  in  r.  ear,  sometimes  very  severe  ;  deep  shoot-
ing frequently,  and  for  ten,  fifteen  minutes,  only  occasionally
in  left.


155  ARUM  DRACONTIUM.

Mucus  in  1.  eustachian  tube. See  13.
A  pressure  below  the  ears,  behind  lower  jaws.
^  Smell  and  Nose. I  Sneezing. ^Asthma  Millari.

Eruption  of  pimples  ;  lichen.
^  Face. Slight  aching  in  r.  malar  region  ;  next  morning,  9  a.m.

Flushing  of  hands  and  face.
^^  Taste, Speech, Tongue. Aphthous ulcer on the tongue ;
next  day  mouth  and  throat  become  very  sore.
Bad  taste  in  mouth  in  the  morning.

Tongue  and  mouth  coated  with  a  foul,  slimy  mucus,  having  a
putrid  taste.
^^  Inner  Mouth. I  l  Peculiar,  acrid  sensation  in  mouth  and  throat.

Bad  taste  in  the  mouth.
"  Palate  and  Throat. Swallowing  develops  a  slight  soreness  in
muscles of  throat and renews  temporarily the  feeling  of
warmth  and  fullness  in  the  ears,  sometimes  in  one  sometimes
in  another.
Disposition  to  swallow,  arising  from  an  excess  of  mucus  ;  with-
out the  unpleasant,  acrid  sensation  as  expected.
A  slight  uneasiness  in  throat,  and  disposition  to  cough.
Accumulation  of  mucus  in  the  throat.
Dry  soreness,  most  when  swallowing.

■  Dryness  and  smarting  in throat,  rawness  and  fullness,  not

painful,  but  annoying,  attracting  constant  attention.
I  Hawking.

■  Continual  disposition  to  clear  the  throat  by  swallowing  and

coughing.

I  Throat  raw  and  tender.

1  I  Constant rawness  of  the  throat ;  constant coughing, with
mucus  in  the  morning.

Rawness  of  throat  and  purulent  sputa.

Throat  feels  somewhat  raw,  and  there  is  a  rattling  of  mucus.

Rawness  in  throat  present  on  retiring,  but  disappeared  when
asthmatic  attacks  began.

Soreness  of  throat,  with  loose  cough  ;  closely  simulating  a  mild
attack  of  catarrhal  angina,  soreness  most  when  swallowing.

1  I A  feeling  of  dryness  and  smarting,  kind  of  rawness,  with  a
sense  of  fullness,  not  really  painful,  but  suflBciently  annoying,
it  attracts  constant  attention,  and  produces  a  continual  dis-
position to  clear  the  throat  by  swallowing,  coughing  or  hawk-
ing.
^®  Belching. Eructation  of  flatus  tasting  of  the  drug.
^"^  Stomach. Sinking  feeling  in  pit  of  stomach.
^^  Abdomen. Pain  in  bowels  from  incarceration  of  flatus.

Rumbling  in  abdomen.
^**  Rectum  and  Stool. Escape  of  flatus  from  stomach  and  bowels.

Copious,  semi-liquid  stool,  with  much  flatus.

Bilious  passages,  attended  with  aching  in  abdomen  and  burn-


ARUM  DRACONTIUM.  156

ing  in  rectum  ;  borborygmus  and  escape  of  much  flatus  from
bowels.
^^  Urine. Irresistible  desire  to  pass  urine,  which  is  diminished  in
quantity,  very  highly  colored,  and  has  a  burning  or  smarting
effect  on  urethra.

Frequent,  copious  emissions  of  limpid  urine;  2d  day.

Inclination  to  urinate  every  hour  or  so  during  the  day.

Urine  increased  to  four  or  five  times  the  normal  amount.

Tenderness  and  slight  smarting  or  burning  of  orifice  of  urethra,
especially  during  micturition.
^^  Male  Sexual  Organs. Great  diminution,  mostly  an  entire  ab-
sence of  sexual  desire.

I  I  Penis  flaccid  and  relaxed.

Fine  shooting  pains  in  course  of  1.  spermatic  cord.

B  Chronic  pruritus  scroti  of  twelve  years  standing.
^^  Voice  and  Larynx, Hoarseness  on  awaking  in  morning.

■  Hoarseness;  expectorates  thick  mucus.

Rattling  of  mucus  in  larynx  at  every  full  expiration,  which

disappears  in  moving.
Excess  of  mucus in  larynx  (see  13);  increased I  I  soreness  of

larynx  and  great  disposition  to  cough.
Rattling  of  mucus  in  larynx  during  expectoration,  ceasing  on

rising,  except  expiration  are  prolonged  by  voluntary  effort.
Very  much  annoyed  by  the  gravity  and  persistence  of  laryngeal

symptoms ;  its  influence  is  deep-seated  and  permanent  on  the

larynx.
I  As  if  larynx  were  partly  obstructed. ^Asthma  Millari.  ^^
^®  Respiration. About  midnight  great  oppression  of  breathing,

soon  passing  off,  leaving  considerable  rattling  of  mucus  in

larynx  and  upper  part  of  trachea.
1  1  Paroxysms  of  dyspnoea,  sometimes  with  much  aching  in  chest,

I  always  with  much  mucus  in  larynx  and  trachea.
I  I  Awakes  about  midnight  with  great  oppression  of  breathing,

a  kind  of  asthmatic  attack,  soon  passing  off.
1  I  Paroxysms  of  dyspnoea  occurring  sometimes,  with  much  ach-
ing in  chest,  and  always  with  considerable  secretion  of  mucus

in  larynx  and  trachea.
1  I  Violent  asthmatic  attack  at  night;  after  a  full  dose  on  the

19th  day,  lighter  each  preceding  night  for  a  week.

■  Asthmatic  attacks  at  night,  from  a  cold,  which  had  resisted

Colchic.  and  Ant.  tart.

1  Oppressed  asthmatic  breathing,  as  if  larynx  were  partly  ob-
structed, d  Asthma  Millari.

I  At  midnight  suddenly  seized  with  labored  breathing,  followed
in  15  or  20  minutes  by  croup-like  cough  ;  coughs  until  ex-
hausted (about  3  minutes),  then  violent  inspirations  and  no
expirations  until  lungs  are  expanded  to  their  fullest  extent ;
when  breathing  ceases,  feces  would  be  expelled, cold  sweat


157  ARUM  DRACONTIUM.

breaks  out  all  over  body  ;  this  breathless  condition  lasts  from
1  to  12  minutes,  and  is  followed  by  an  interval  of  from  half
10  three  quarters  of  an  hour,  in  which  there  is  considerable
rattling  of  mucus  in  larynx  and  some  in  lungs  ;  three  or  four
attacks  up  to  2  or  3  a.m.  6  Asthma  Millari.
^^  Cough, Disposition  to  cough. See  13.

Loose  cough,  with  dry  soreness  of  throat,  like  catarrh;  for  a
week  troubled  with  an  annoying  cough  and  rattling  of  mu-
cus ;  worse  at  night  lying  down.

I  I  Expectoration  thick,  heavy,  yellowish-white,  with  continua-
tion of  a  violent  cough.

i  I  Annoying  cough,  with  rattling  in  larynx.

Cough  from  laryngeal  irritation,  worse  at  night  and  when  lying
down.

iCroupy  cough,  with  hoarseness  and  rawness  of  throat,  during
an  epidemic  influenza.

I  Hoarse, croupy  cough,  with  sore  throat, rattling  laryngeal
respiration,  and  considerable  swelling  of  the air  passages,
threatening  suffocation  ;  child  set.  3.
^^  Heart,  Pulse  and  Circulation. Pulse  80,  full,  hard,  some-
what jerking,  which  soon  becomes  small  and  irregular.

Artery  seems  to  roll  under  the  finger,  requiring  considerable
pressure  in  order  to  be  correctly  counted.

Pulse  becomes  feeble  after  a  large  dose;  3d  day,  84,  small,
somewhat  irregular.

Heart  beats,  so  violently  as  to  shake  the  walls  of  the  chest  (after
5  minutes).

With  increased  heart's  action  aching  in  prascordial  region  and
down  the  1.  arm  ;  flushing  of  hands  and  face.

Slight  aching  pain  in  preecordial  region  and  down  1.  arm.
^^  Neck  and  Back. Shooting  pains  in  1.  anterior  inferior  trian-
gle of  neck,  near  clavicle.

Aching  along  the  spine,  most  between  shoulder-blades  and  in
lumbar  region.

Great  weakness  across  the  loins  ;  feeling  of  extreme  prostration
continuing  to  increase,  had  to  retire  early.
^"  Upper  Limbs. Tingling,  or  slight  stinging  sensation  in  fingers,
as  when  circulation  is  impeded.

Fine  tingling  sensation  all  over  the  r.  hand,  which  is  warmer
and  redder  than  the  1.,  and  appears  somewhat  swollen.

Aching  pain  in  1.  forearm,  1.  hand,  and  r.  humerus;  r.  hand
remains  red  and  swollen.

Shooting  and  aching  pains  in  1.  brachial  plexus  of  nerves.

Sharp,  shooting  pains  at  the  styloid  process  of  r,  ulna.
^^  Lower  Limbs. Tingling,  or  slight  stinging  sensation  in  toes,
as  when  circulation  is  impeded.

Shooting  pain  down  the  r.  thigh.

Burning  of  the  soles  of  the  feet ;  3  p.m.,  2d  day.


ARUM  DRACONTIUM.  158

^*  Limbs  in  General. Fine  picking  or  tingling  sensation  in  feet
and  hands,  beginning  in  r.  foot,  afterwards  attacking  in  regu-
lar succession  r.  hand,  1.  foot  and  1.  hand.
Aching  pain  along  outer  aspect  of  1.  foot,  immediately  followed
by  a  similar  pain  in  the  corresponding  part  of  1.  hand.

^^  Rest. Position. Motion. Ikying  down  :  cough  worse.
Swallowing :  fullness  in  ears ;  soreness  in  throat  worse.

^®  Nerves. Feeling  of  extreme  prostration.

^^  Sleep. Awakes  about  midnight  with  asthma.

^^  Time- Morning  :  dull  headache  ;  bad  taste ;  coughing ;  hoarse-
ness ;  rattling  of  mucus  better.

8  A.M. :  pains  in  ears.

9  A.M.  :  face  and  hands  flush.

3  P.M.  : eyelids  smart;  feet  burn.
Night :  asthma  ;  cough  worse.
Midnight :  breathing  oppressed  ;  asthma.
*^  Chill. Fever. Sweat. Heat  in  palms  of  hands.

Burning  of  soles  of  feet.
*^  Attacks. Attacks  at  intervals  of  a  week  or  ten  days,  as  many
as  three  or  four  between  12  and  2  a.m.;  at  one  time  attacks
every  night  for  six  weeks, d  Asthma  Millari.
^^  Locality  and  Direction. Right :  parietal  headache  ;  pain  in
ear  ;  ache  in  malar  region  ;  tingling  in  hand  ;  hand  swollen
and  red  ;  pain  in  thigh.
Left :  pain  in  head  ;  pain  in  ear ;  mucus  in  eustachian  tube ;
pain  in  spermatic  cord ;  aching in arms ;  pains in neck ;
tingling  in  hand;  aching  in  foot  and  hand.
*^  Sensations. Shooting ;  in  r.  ear  ;  in  spermatic  cord ;  in  neck,
near  clavicle  ;  down  r.  thigh.
Burning  :  of  eyelids  ;  in  rectum  ;  in  urethra ;  of  soles  of  feet.
Smarting  :  of  lids  ;  in  throat ;  of  orifice  of  urethra.
Acrid  sensation  :  in  mouth  and  throat.
Rawness :  in  throat.
Heavy  aching :  in  head  and  chest.

Aching  :  over  1.  eye  ;  in  middle  ear  ;  behind  r.  ear  ;  in  r.  ma-
lar region;  in  abdomen;  in  chest;  along  the  spine;  in  foot
and  head.
Dull  pain  :  in  head  and  chest.
Pressure  :  below  ears.

Fullness  :  in  middle  ear  ;  in  ears  ;  in  throat.
Undefined  pain  :  across  forehead.
Tingling  :  in  fingers  ;  in  feet  and  hands.
Dryness  :  in  throat.
^®  Skin. Urticaria  and  other  eruptions,  probably  neurotic. Com-
pare Calad.
*''  Stages  of  Life,  Constitution. 'Boy,  set.  4  years  and  9  months.
d  Asthma  Millari.


159  ARUM  MACULATUM.

^^  Relationship. lAqua  chlor.  relieved  the  spasms  of  glottis,  but
prolonged  the  attacks. ^Asthma  Millari.
Useful  after  Colchic.  and  Ant.  tart,  in  asthma.
Compare  : Calad.  in  skin  affections.


ARUM  MACULATUM.

Cuchoopint.  Aracece.

A  small  proving  of  this  first  of  the  family  of  Aracese  was  made  by  C.Hg.
in  1822,  on  three  provers,  very  good  observers.  It  was  printed  in  1833,  in
the  Archives  13,  1,  p.  169,  and  reprinted  with  some  toxicological  symptoms
by  Noak,  in  1843.  The  latter  are  given  nearly  complete  in  Allen's  Encydo-
psedia.  Some  noteworthy  reports  of  the  old  school  are  here  added,  because
they  fully  agree  with  the  observations  of  our  school.

^  Mind. Anxiety  and  fear.

Melancholy,  depressed,  hypochondriacal,  taciturn.
^  Sensor  ium. Vertigo.
^  Inner  Head. Slight  pressure  in  1.  temple.
Megrim.
Pain  in  1.  temple  and  forehead  to  occiput,  with  stiffness  of  the

hands.
Headache  with  dyspepsia.
®  Sight  and  Eyes- Aching  in  1.  eye,  which  is  inflamed.
®  Hearing  and  Ears. Pressure  below  the  ears  back  of  the  lower

jaw.
^  Smell  and  Nose. Violent  irritation  of  the  nose  and  eyes.
Pain  in  1.  side  of  nose.
\  Nasal  polypus.
^^  Teeth  and  Gums. Gums  bleed  readily, d  Scorbutis.
"  Taste,  Speech,  Tongue. Tongue  swollen  and  its  papillae  in-
jected and  raised.
The  tongue  is  so  much  swollen  that  it  fills  up  the  whole  buccal
cavity  and  makes  deglutition  impossible.
I  I  Stitching  and  burning  on  tongue  several  hours.
Sensation  as  of  a  slight  excoriation  of  the  tongue.
Intense  pricking,  stinging  pain  upon  the  tongue  and  mucous
membrane  of  lips  and  throat,  with  a  flow  of  saliva,  which
seemed  to  relieve  the  pain  a  little ;  pain  as  if  a  hundred  lit-
tle needles  had  been  run  into  tongue  and  lips.
Pains  on  tongue  and  lips  were  increased  by  pressure  with  the
teeth.


ARUM  MACULATUM.  160

Stinging  and  burning  on  the  surface  of  tongue,  lasting  several

hours.
Lancinations  in  tongue  as  from  pin  pricks.
Aphasia.

Swelling  of  the  tongue  and  throat  in  scarlatina.
^^  Inner  Mouth. Burning  pains  in  mouth  and  lips.
Mucous  membrane  of  lips  and  throat  inflamed.
Caustic  effect  all  over  lips  and  mouth,  as  far  as  one  could  see.
I  I  Stinging  in  the  mouth  as  with  a  hundred  needles.
Salivation. See  11.
^^  Palate  and  Throat. Stinging pain in tongue, throat and
oesophagus.
Tickling  in  throat  becomes  a  violent  burning.
Pressure  in  throat,  which  provokes  swallowing, it  seems  too
narrow ;  swallowing  is  difficult,  as  if  there  were  a  swelling
on  the  1.  side  above  the  larynx.
Swallowing  difficult,  as  if  the  "palate  was  down."
Throat  so  swollen  that  a  probe  could  not  be  introduced  into  the

oesophagus.
Pain  on  pressing  with  the  finger  on  the  1.  side  of  throat,  near
trachea,  below  larynx,  from  that  it  rose  into  the  throat,  first
like  a  pressure  from  without  inward,  in  the  back  part  of  the
palate  above  the  larynx,  provokes  swallowing,  which  is  diffi-
cult, afterwards  it  feels  too  narrow.
Burning,  constricting  pain  in  throat.
^*  Appetite,  Thirst. Loss  of  appetite.

Considerable  thirst.
^^  Eating  and  Drinking. After  eating :  taciturn,  sleepy,  eyes

close  readily ; emptiness.
^^  Nausea  and  Vomiting. Vomiting  for  several  hours.

I  I  Vomiting  of  blood.
^^  Scrobiculum  and  Stomach. Cardialgia  ;  gastralgia.
Pain  in  stomach  on  pressing  it.
Burning,  constricting  pain  in  stomach.
•  Dyspepsia.
^^  Abdomen,  Loins  and  Groins. Emptiness  in  abdomen,  as  af-
ter vomiting,  mornings  after  eating.
Oppression  in  abdomen  as  in  great  anxiety  and  fear,  without

palpitation,  afterwards  ascending  to  chest.
Painful  pressure  on  a  spot  in  abdomen,  between  navel  and  groin,
especially  when  standing  or  lying  on  the  side  or  back,  most
when  expanding  the  chest,  or  stretching  the  abdominal  mus-
cles ;  painful  to  external  pressure.
Intense  colic,  with  anxiety,  felt  in  abdomen. Compare  Arsen.
^^  Rectum  and  Stool. Diarrhoea.
Ascarides.
Prolapsus  ani.
Urinary  Organs. Emission  of  blood  from  urethra.


161  ARUM  MACULATUM.

Increased  secretion  of  urine.

The  urine  is  watery,  light- colored,  smelling  almost  like  burnt
horn,  with  a  cloud  in  the  middle  after  standing.
^^  Female  Sexual  Organs. Profuse  menstrual  flow.
^^  Voice  and  Larynx. Trachea  and  Bronchia. Constric-
tion and  burning  in  larynx.
■  Hoarseness.
I  i  Blood-spitting.

Tickling  in  throat  becoming  a  most  violent  burning.
Pressure  on  the  throat,  1. side, under  the  larynx,  near  the
trachea,  is  painful.
^®  ^Respiration. Hot  breath  and  oppression  of  the  chest.

[  Asthma.
^'^  Cough. After  a  long  paroxysm  of  cough,  he  raises  mucus  tra-
versed with  yellow  threads.
•  Chronic  catarrh.
^^  Inner  Chest  and  Lungs. From  abdomen  ascending  to  chest
felt  an  oppression  over  the  whole  chest,  with  hot  breath,  then
rose  into  throat. See  13.
:  Catarrh  ;  phthisis  ;  asthma.
^^  Neck  and  Back. •  Struma ;  goitre.

^^  Rest. Position. Motion. Standing or  lying :  expanding
chest  or stretching  abdominal muscles ;  pain in  abdomen
worse.
^^  Nerves. Hon-ible  convulsions,  with  swelling  of  the  tongue  un-
til it  fills  the  mouth,  death  in  12  to  1(3  hours  (children  chew-
ing the  leaves).
Great  general  lassitude.
Prostrate,  unable  to  speak,  raises  hands  to  its  mouth,  uttering

at  intervals  a  sharp  cry,  and  starting  up  as  if  suffocating.
Profound  torpor  followed  by  febrile  reaction.
^  Sleep. Sleepiness  almost  uncontrollable,  especially  an  hour  af-
ter dinner.
I  1  During  sleep  face  red.
^*  Time. Morning :  emptiness  in  stomach.

*'^  Chill. Fever. Sweat. Generally  causes  slight  warmth,  first
above  stomach,  afterwards  in  remote  parts.
Excites  sweat,  even  in  the  aged.
*^  Attacks- Attacks  of  pain  irregular  and  intermitting.
*^  Locality  and  Direction. Without  inward :  pressure  in  throat.
Below  upward :  oppression  in  abdomen.

Left :  pain  in  temple  and  forehead ;  aching  in  eye ;  pain  side
of  nose ;  pain  side  of  throat.
*^  Sensations. Lancinations  :  in  tongue.
Stitching :  in  tongue.

Stinging  :  on  tongue ;  in  lips ;  in  throat ;  in  mouth,  as  of  nee-
dles ;  in  oesophagus.
Pricking :  in  tongue  ;  lips  and  throat.

VOL.  II. — 11.


ARUM  MACULATUM.  162

Aching  :  in  1.  eye.

Burning :  on  tongue  ;  in  mouth  and  lips  ;  in  throat ;  in  stom-
ach :  in  larynx.
Pressure :  in  1.  temple ;  below  ears ;  in  throat ; in  abdomen

between  navel  and  groin.
Constriction  :  in  throat ;  in  stomach  ;  in  lungs.
Emptiness  :  in  stomach.
Undefined  pain :  in  1.  temple  and  forehead  to  occiput ;  in  1.

side  of  nose ;  in  1.  side  of  throat ;  in  stomach.
Excoriated  feeling  :  of  tongue.
Tickling : in  throat.
^*  Tissues. Inflammation  and  ulceration  of  mucous  membranes.
^^  Contact,  Injuries,  etc. Pressing :  pain  in  stomach  <  ;  pain

in  abdomen  worse ;  pain  in  throat.
*^  Skin. Redness  and  erosions  of  the  skin,  also  blisters.

\  Eczema  solare.
^^  Relationship. Antidotes  :  sweet  oil ;  milk  ;  butter. Gums  re-
lieve pungent  effect  in  mouth.


163  ARUM  TRIPHYLLUM.

ARUM  TRIPHYLLUM.

Indian  Turnip.  Aracece.

Introduced  by  C.Hg.,  in  1856  {News,  No.  9,  page  66),  after  it  had  been  ap-
plied, according  to  the  reports  of  a  lay-practitioner,  John  Minz,  Canton,
0.  (published  by  Daniel  Shiel,  see  News),  in  desperate  cases  of  scarlatina.
It  was  characterized  in  a  masterly  way  by  Lippe,  in  1852,  in  Am.  Review,
Vol.  3,  page  28.  All  his  characteristics  have  been  corroborated  in  many
cases  ever  since,  now  twenty-seven  years.

It  had  been  proved  by  Dr.  Jeanes,  in  1844,  long  before  it  came  into  use,
and  in  1867,  one  of  the  best  theses  was  handed  to  the  Homoeopathic  College
of  Pennsylvania,  by  G.  E.  Graram,  which  was  partly  printed  in  the  Hahne-
mannian  Monthly.

For  two  years  Dr.  Gramm  had  made  provings  on  himself  and  a
woman;  besides  confirming  the  formerly  known  effects  of  the  drug,  he
very  much  widened  its  range  of  usefulness.

The  chemical  caution  regarding  the  volatility  of  a  so-called  acrid  princi-
ple is  useless  to  us.

The  first  time,  the  Arum  triphyllum  was  given  by  an  old  woman,  in  a
valley  of  Pennsylvania,  when  it  cured  one  of  the  worst  forms  of  scarlet
fever  it  was  given  in  the  form  of  powder  from  the  dried  bulb.  Dr.  C.Hg.
applied,  in  his  first  cases  of  malignant  scarlatina,  in  a  damp  cellar,  in
Cherry  street,  the  alcoholic  tincture  made  from  the  dried  bulb,  and  Dr.
Lippe,  who  has  given  us  all  the  characteristics,  used  only  potencies  in  al-
cohol, mostly  the  higher.


^  Mind. I  Unconscious  of  what  he  is  doing  or  what  is  said  to  hirn.

Forgetful.

Absence  of  mind  ;  giddy.

1 1  Great  delirium. ^Scarlatina. ^Typhus.

■  During  delirium,  boring  in  the  nose;  picking  at  one  spot,  or
at  the  dry  lips, d  Typhoid.

Wakeful,  restless,  screaming ;  delirium  part  of  the  time.

I  Mania.

Apathy. See  40.

Irritable  disposition.
^  Sensorium.' I  Complains  of  dizziness  on  being  raised, d  Scarla-
tina.

I  1  Giddiness.

I  Dizziness  and  fullness,  with  absence  of  mind.

Light  headed,  sleepy.

I  I  Dull,  heavy  head,  morning.
^  Inner  Head, l  Violent  headache.


ARUM  TRIPHYLLUM.  164

I  I  Dull  headache,  upper  part  feels  cold  as  if  open  and  without

covering.
Headache,  I  I  pressing  on  right  or  both  sides  ;  worse  from  hot

coffee; >■  after  dinner,  and  after  breakfast.
Tearing  in  right  forehead,  I  I  temple  and  ear,  down  to  maxillary

bone.
Stitches  over  left  eye.

Sudden  shooting  over  left  eye  and  occiput ;  repeating.
Tearing,  darting,  or  stitches  in  temples.
Boring  in  r.  side,  morning  on  getting  awake.

*  Outer  Head. Twitching  on  the  middle  of  forehead.

Twitching  and  fluttering  of  the  muscular  fibres.

Pain  and  soreness  of  scalp  to  touch  on  the  crown  of  the  head.

iHead  burning  hot. 6  Scarlatina.

I  Tinea  capitis.

*  Sight  and  Eyes. I  Aversion  to  light.

Dimness  of  sight,  as  if  a  veil  were  drawn  before  the  eyes,  with-
out pain  or  giddiness,  spectacles  do  not  assist  vision.
Upper  eyelids  heavy,  with  headache.
Eyes  feel  as  after  shedding  many  tears.
I  I  Eyes  heavy  ;  sleepy.

I  I  Smarting  of  eyes.

Tension  in  lower  lids  as  if  swollen.

I I  Quivering  of  left  upper  lid.

Water  in  the  eyes  all  day,  most  at  outer  canthi,  edges  of  lids

swollen.
I  Catarrh  of  the  lachrymal  sac,  with  desire  to  bore  into  the  side

of  the  nose.
Stitches  over  left  eye.

On  turning  eyes  upward,  shooting  in  occiput,  mornings.
^  Ears. Burning  and  tearing  in  left  ear.

I  Left  parotid  gland  sore  to  the  touch. 6  Scarlatina.
'Smell and Nose. llNose stopped up, <  left side, must

breathe  through  the  mouth,  ■<  mornings.

I I  Sneezing; <  at  night.

I  Nose  moist,  but  obstructed.

Discharge  in  the  morning  streaked  with  blood ;  during  the  day

yellow  thick  mucus.
IB  Fluent  coryza,  acrid.

■  Corrosive  yellow  nasal  discharge,  nostrils  raw. ^Diphtheria.
M  Acrid  ichorous  discharge,  excoriating  inside  of  nose,  the  alse

and  upper  lips, d  Scarlatina.

I I  Drink  passes  up  through  the  nose.

10  Nose  feels  stopped  up in spite  of  the  watery  discharge.
d  Scarlatina.

1 1  He  can  only  breathe  with  mouth  open. ^Scarlatina.

1 1  Nose  stopped,  with  or  without  profuse  yellow  discharge.


165  ARUM  TRIPHYLLUM.

I  Sneezing  as  from  taking  cold,  with  repeated  chills  over  the

whole  body,  beginning  in  vertex  ;  afternoon.

I I  Nostrils  sore,  worse  left;  nose,  lips  and  face  chapped,  as
from  a  cold  wind.

1 1  Constant  picking  at  the  nose  until  it  bleeds.

I  Desire  to  bore  into  the  side  of  the  nose,  d  Catarrh  of  lachry-
mal sac.

Much  sneezing  at  night  with  constriction  of  throat.

Great  heat  in  the  face  and  head  afternoons,  with  fluent  coryza.

Discharge  tough,  yellowish,  with  swelling  of  soft  palate  and
pressure.

I  Could  hardly  talk  on  account  of  the  phlegm  in  back  part  of

nose ;  hawking  diflScult.
®  Face. Face  swollen  and  red.

i  I  Heat  in  the  face,  afternoons  ;  with  coryza.

I I  Swollen,  bloated  face. ^Scarlatina.

BLeffc  face  feels  chapped,  as  if  he  had  walked  in  the  cold  wind.
^  Lower  Part  of  Face. iPain  in  joint  of  left  inferior  maxilla,
as  if  sprained,  when  swallowing.
II  Lips  as  if  scalded,  mornings.

I  Lips  chapped,  as  after  exposure  to  cold  wind.

I I  Lips  burning,  swollen,  cracked  and  bleeding.

1 1  Picks  lips  until  they  bleed,  corners  of  mouth  sore,  cracked

and  bleeding, d  Scarlatina.
1 1  Children  will often pick  and  bore into the  raw  surfaces,

though  doing  so  gives  great  pain,  and  they  scream  with  it,

but  keep  up  the  boring, d  Scarlatina.

I  Lips  very  sore  and  swollen,  skin  peeling  off. ^Diphtheria.

I I  Appearance  of  raw,  bloody  surfaces,  on  lips,  buccal  cavity,
nose,  etc.,  with  great  itching, d  Scarlatina.

1 1  Swelling  of  the  sub-maxillary  and  parotid  glands,  left  worst.

6  Scarlatina.
^^  Teeth. Toothache  in  hollow  teeth ;  left  side,  lower  jaw ;  toward

evening.
^^  Taste, Speech,  Tongue. I  Tongue  sore,  red,  papillae  swollen

and  elevated. 6  Scarlatina.
I  Tongue  cracked,  burning,  painful.
I  Pain  on  left  margin  of  tongue.
I  I  Root  of  tongue  and  palate  feel  raw.
Round  spots  on  tongue  as  if  scalded.
Tip  of  tongue  sore,  with  round  sore  spots.
Smarting  on  the  tongue  and  fauces,
li  Tongue  cracked  and  bleeding.
Dryness  and  stiffness  across  the  tongue  immediately  anterior  to

and  on  a  line  with  anterior  arch  of  the  palate,  with  astringent

feeling  as  strong  as  after  eating  persimmons.
Tongue  red,  papillae  rough,  dry  in  centre.
(Strawberry  tongue.


ARUM  TRIPHYLLUM.  166

^^  Inner  Mouth. Putrid  odor  from  the  mouth. 6  Diphtheritis.

I  Mouth  felt  so  sore  inside  that  he  was  unwilling  to  drink.

6  Scarlatina.

I I  Excessive  salivation;  saliva  acrid. ^Scarlatina.

IB  The  mouth  burns  and  is  sore  that  they  refuse  to  drink,
and  cry  when  anything  is  offered,  d  Scarlatina,  d  Diph-
theria.

1 1  Buccal  cavity  raw  and  bleeding..

I  I  Scanty  but  constant  discharge  of  tough  mucus  from  the  mouth
with  burning  in  the  throat.

Mouth  very  dry,  lips  chapped.

I  I  Mouth  dry,  feels  as  if  it  would  crack,  has  to  get  up  at  night
to  drink.

I  I  Mouth,  lips  and  soft  palate  sore  and  burning,  in  the  morning.

I I  Great  sore  feeling  in  mouth, d  Scarlatina.

I  i  Cavity  of  mouth  covered  with  diphtheritic  deposit  and  ulcers.
d  Kphtheritis.
^^  Palate  and  Throat. (Sensation  of  swelling  on  the  soft  palate,
when swallowing;  with  discharge  of  nasal  mucus,  in the
morning.

■  Soreness,  burning,  and  pains  in  palate ;  worse  when  eating  or

drinking.
Tonsils  much  swollen.

Sore  throat  with  much  phlegm  from  nose  through  choanse.
The  swelling  in  throat  extends  towards  the  nose.

■  Fauces  and  nares  ulcerated  with  a  corroding  acrid  secretion.
I  As  if  tied  together  in  throat,  as  if  too  narrow.

I  I  Constriction  in  throat  (with  sneezing).

Cannot  chew  nor  swallow.

IB  Refuses  food  and  drink  on  account  of  soreness  of  throat.

6  Scarlatina.
The  sore  throat  (after  7th  day)  returns ;  12th  day  taken  with  a

stifi"  neck.
I  I  Constant  scratching  and  burning  in  throat,  with  desire  to

swallow.
I  I  Desire  to  swallow  with  stitching  in  throat,  which  is  painful

to  pressure.
I  I  Difficult  deglutition.
B  Stinging  burning  sensation  in  throat.
Great  burning  and  rawness  in  throat.
Burning  in  pharynx  and  glottis  with  soreness  in  chest.
A  sensation  of  something  hot  in  throat,  more  particularly  dur-
ing inspiration.
1  I  Burning  pain  in  throat  and  in  root  of  tongue,  with  dryness.
B  Burning  in  the  throat,  in  the  morning  while  in  bed,  >  after

rising.
iBurning  and  dryness  in  the  throat,  before  midnight;  after

midnight  and  toward  morning,  much  mucus  in  the  throat.


167  ARUM  TRIPHYLLUM.

which  goes  deeper  and  deeper  down  by  swallowing,  and  is
perceived  no  more  in  the  morning  after  rising.

I  I  Tenacious  mucus,  with  tickling  cough.
M  Putrid  sore  throat.

I I  Throat  and  tongue  very  sore,  burning  pains,  putrid  ulcers  in
throat, d  Scarlatina.

I  Throat  livid,  studded  with  deep  angry  looking  ulcers  having

a  fetid  discharge. 6  Scarlatina.
Aphthous  sore  throat.

I I  Swelling  of  glands  on  throat  and  neck.

I  Sore  throat  goes  from  right  to  left;  neck  stiff;  left  parotid

sore.
I  I  Considerable  swelling  of  submaxillary  glands  left  side.
"Appetite. Thirst. Il  Children  lose  their  appetite,  don't  want
to  play,  lose  flesh,  have  headache  and  scanty  urine.
No  appetite.

Desire  to  drink  a  little  at  a  time.
^^  Eating  and  Drinking. Palate  sore. See  13.

Worse  drinking  coffee,  headache  (see  3). "Worse  drinking  or

eating,  (see  13).
Headache  better  after  breakfast  or  dinner.
Eructations  of  ingesta  after  dinner.
^^  Nausea. Nausea ;  qualmish  ;  giddy.
^^  Stomach. Cramps  in  stomach.

^^  Hypochondria. Pain  in  region  of  liver,  first  anteriorly  then
posteriorly.
Pain  under  the  left  short  ribs.
^®  Abdomen. Rolling  in  abdomen  with  frequent  painful  urging
to  stool,  mornings.
Rumbling  in  the  bowels  ;  flatulency.
Slight  cutting  pains,  worse  about  noon.

■  Between  abdomen  and  legs  sore,  moist  places;  same  on  os

coccygis. d  Scarlatina.
^^  Rectum  and  Stool. Painful  urging,  with  rumbling,  compelling
to  rise  from  bed ;  tenesmus  towards  evening.
Stool : I  I  watery, dark  brown,  with  eructation  of  food ;  soft
and  painless,  thin,  yellow,  in  the  morning ;  soft,  with  tenes-
mus ; at night,  during  sleep,; each  succeeding discharge
more  watery.
1  1  Diarrhoea  till  noon,  like  mustard.

■  Diarrhoea  dark-yellow,  fluid. ^  Typhoid  fever. See  40.
Watery  brown  stool  at  noon.

From  3  to  8  a.m.,  watery  brown  discharge,  often  with  tenes-
mus, sometimes  with  belching  of  food.

■  Burning  in  the  anus.

I  I  Great  soreness  between  abdomen,  genitals  and  thighs,  on  and
below  OS  coccygis.

■  Between  the  abdomen  and  legs  sore  moist  places.


ARUM  TRIPHYLLUM.  168

^^  Urinary  Organs. I  l  Frequent  discharge  of  pale  urine.
I  Urine  very  abundant  and  pale, d  Scarlatina.

■  Urine  scanty  or  suppressed.

■  Very  scanty  secretion  of  urine,  sometimes  passing  none  for  a

whole  day.* d  Scarlatina.
Itching  at  the  mouth  of  the  urethra.
^^  Male  Sexual  Organs. Tearing  pain  in  right  testicle,  some-
times extending  to  abdomen,  from  noon  till  evening,  repeat-
edly ;  comes  suddenly  and  disappears  suddenly.
Smarting  at  end  of  penis.
^^  Female  Sexual  Organs. '  '  Cutting  pain  in  either  ovary.
Menstrual  blood  darker.
Menses  checked  for  two  months,  returned.
^*  Pregnancy  and  Parturition. Soreness  and  pain  as  if  bruised
. in  the  left  mamma.

Lumps  deep  in  left  mamma,  with  aching  pains.
Convulsions  during  dentition ;  right  side  lame ;  with  quivering
of  left  upper  eyelid.
2^  Larynx  to  Bronchia. ■  Voice  hoarse. 6  Scarlatina.
I  I  Great  hoarseness, d  Scarlatina.
To  talk  is  an  exertion.

■  ■Voice  hoarse ;  also  from  over  exertion  of  the  voice  in  speak-

ing or  singing.

■  B Voice  uncertain,  uncontrollable,  changing  continually;  now

deep,  hollow,  then  scarcely  audible,  and  again  high,  shrieking.

■  ■  Clergymen's  sore  throat ;  hoarseness,  worse  from  talking.
Voice  hoarse,  deep,  or  weak.

■  Loss  of  voice  :  after  exposure  to  N.W.  wind.
I  I  Burning  of  glottis,  or  pharynx.

Must  hawk,  in  the  morning :  hoarseness  more  before  talking,
better  afterwards.

■  Constant  pain  in  larynx. 6  Scarlatina.

I  1  In  the  region  of  larynx  considerable  internal  swelling  of

throat.
Internal  swelling  of  trachea,  first  right  then  left  side.

■  ■Accumulation  of  mucus  in  trachea.
Mucus  in  trachea  when  coughing.

;rHawked  up  a  good  deal,  of  mucus, d  Scarlatina.

:  Croup.

Inflammation  of  larynx  and  pharynx.
^®  Respiration, i  Asthma.

Asthmatic  breathing,  with  chronic  catarrh.
^^  Cough, Head  and  breast  feel  obstructed,  full  of  mucus,  with-
out spitting.

Frequent  coughing,  with  much  mucus  and  much  spitting.

*  As  soon  as  urine  increases  after  it  is  given  in  scarlatina,  the  patient
gets  better. — Dr.  L.


169  ARUM  TRIPHYLLUM.

Burning  pain  in  lungs  when  coughing.

Tickling  cough  from  mucus  in  trachea ;  at  night  after  lying

down,  with  inability  to  sleep  and  hoarseness.
I  1  Distressing,  hacking  cough,  I  after  getting  awake.
I  I  Expectoration  of  much  mucus.
I  Whooping  cough.
^^  Inner  Chest  and  Lungs, i '  Burning  in  lungs  when  coughing,

extending  to  pit  of  stomach.
Raw  feeling  in  chest.

I  I  Lungs  feel  sore.

Soreness  in  left  lung  and  upper  arm,  with  pressing  in  forehead.

Stitches  in  right  lung  and  under  r.  shoulder-blade.

Head  and  breast  feel  obstructed  by  mucus.

Sensation  of  fullness  in  thorax  and  soreness  in  left  lung  and

upper  arm.
Pain  in  right  side  of  chest  near  axilla,  below  and  anteriorly.

I I  Pain  through  the  left  lung,  about  the  base  of  the  heart.
•  Consumption.

^^  Pulse, Pulse  more  frequent.

I  Pulse  140,  hard  and  full, d  Scarlatina.
^^  Outer  Chest. Pain  in  1.  side  of  chest  below  left  nipple.
^^  Neck  and  Back. I  l  Stiff  neck  ; l  with  intolerable  pressing
headache.
Pain  in  region  of  atlas  and  dentoid  vertebra,  extending  to  r.

side.
I  Sore,  moist  places  on  the  os  coccygis.
■  Glands  of  neck  and  throat  swollen, d  Scarlatina.
^^  Upper  Limbs. Pressing  in  r.  shoulder  and  between  the  blades.

Hands  stiff  and  swollen.
^*  Lower  Limbs. Pain  in  right  hip  under  the  trochanter.
Heaviness  mostly  in  lower  limbs ;  pain  over  the  hips.
Cramps  in  right  leg  on  getting  awake  mornings.
Stinging,  pricking  or  bruised  pain  in  soles.
Pain  in  middle  of  left  tibia,  (where  there  has  been  a  discolored

spot  on  the  skin  for  years).
In  1.  foot  painful  sensation  of  dislocation,  can  hardly  walk,  most
under  the  ball  of  big  toe ;  later  same  pain  above  the  knee  ;
in  front  of  thigh.
Tickling  itching  in  the  centre  of  right  sole.
Feet  hurt  her  so  that  she  cannot  stand ;  pain  even  when  draw-
ing on  the  stockings ;  hurts  her  so  that  it  makes  her  sick  at
the  stomach.
^*  Limbs  in  General. Heaviness  in  all  the  limbs,  most  in  lower.
^^  Rest. Position.  Motion. On  falling  asleep  :  starts  smothering.
Standing:  feet  worse.
Lying  down  :  cough  worse.
On  being  raised  :  dizziness.
After  rising  from  bed :  burning  in  throat  > .


ARUM  TRIPHYLLUM.  170

^®  Nerves, l  Very  great  restlessness,  child  crying  and  throwing  it-
self into  all  sorts  of  positions. 0  Diphtheritis.
Lassitude  and  low  spirits.
Right  side  lame  during  dentition.
Very  nervous.

■  Greatest  weakness  or  exhaustion. ^Typhus.

I  Spasms  of  arms  and  hands  ;  thumbs  drawn  in.
^^  Sleep. Drowsiness  immediately  after  sun-down.

I  Child  drowsy  and  stupid  ;  dark,  livid  eruption, d  Scarlatina.

I  I  Yawning  in  afternoon,  I  with  stretching  and  sleepiness. See

40.
Sleepy,  yawning  and  sneezing  at  11  A.M.;  headache  worse,  eyes

heavy.
Fell  asleep  sitting  in  a  chair  soon  after  supper.

I I  Sleeplessness  from  soreness  of  mouth  and  throat,  or  from
itching  of  the  skin.

Nervous  at  night,  cannot  sleep.

Restless  at  night,  with  heavy  head,  lassitude;  low  spirits.
Nightmare.

I  On  falling  asleep  feels  as  if  she  would  smother,  starts  as  if
frightened.

I  Bad  night;  very  delirious  5th  day  of  scarlet  fever.

■  Restless  tossing  about  in  bed,  desire  to  escape.

Before  midnight  burning  in  throat ;  after  midnight  mucus  in
throat  and  loose  bowels.

At  night :  head  <  ;  sneezing ;  pain  in  throat ;  cold  running
over  back  ;  flushes  of  heat.

When  getting  awake :  burning  on  r.  side  of  head  ;  <  coughing.
^^  Time.  Morning:  3  to  8  a.m.,  diarrhoea;  head  dull;  boring  in
head  ;  nose  stopped ;  discharge  from  nose  ;  lips  feel  scalded  ;
mouth  sore  and  burning ;  mucus  from  posterior  nares ;
throat  >  ;  urging  to  stool ;  hawking ;  'cramp  in  leg ;  burn-
ing side  of  head.

II  A.M.  :  sleepiness;  sneezing;  headache  <  ;  eyes  heavy.
Noon  :  cutting  pains  worse ; watery  stool. .

During  day :  eyes  water ;  thick  mucus  from  nose.

Afternoon : sneezing and chills ; heat in face and head ;

coryza  ;  pain  in  testicle ;  sleepiness.
4  to  9  A.M. :  Flashes  of  heat;  burning  face.
Toward  evening :  toothache ;  tenesmus.
After  sundown : drowsiness.

Night :  sneezing  ;  throat  constricted ;  thirst ;  tenesmus  ;  cough
-<  ;  nervous  ;  restless  ;  head  <  ;  coldness  ;  flashes  of  heat.
Before  midnight:  dry  throat  burns.
After  midnight :  mucus  in  throat ;  loose  bowels.
^  Temperature  and  Weather. Hot  cofi"ee :  headache  worse.
***  Chill. Fever. Sweat. Repeated  chills,  spreading  from  ver-
tex, with  sneezing  as  after  taking  cold,  afternoons.


171  ARUM  TRIPHYLLUM.

Chills  running  over  the  body  after  much  yawning,  the  same

hour  on  two  days.
Cold  running  over  the  body  at  night.
Dry,  feverish  heat  of  skin.
Flushes  of  heat,  with  burning  face,  4  to  9  p.m.
Flushes  at  night.

I  Fever  heat  very  intense, d  Scarlatina.

I I  Typhoid  forms  of  fever;  Ipicking  ends  of  fingers  and  the
dry  lips  till  they  bleed;  1 1  boring  nose;  I  restless  tossing
about  the  bed,  wants  to  escape ;  I  I  unconscious  of  what  he  is
doing  or  of  what  is  said  to  him ;  I  I  urine  suppressed ;
I  I  great  weakness  (last  stages  probably  with  uraemia)

I  Child  falls  into  a  typhoid  condition,  with  apathy. ^Scarla-
tina.
*^  Attacks. Pains  come  and  go  suddenly.

Much  yawning,  and  cold  running  over  the  body,  at  the  same
hour  as  the  day  before.
*^  Locality  and  Direction.  Right :  headache  ;  tearing  in  fore-
head ;  pain  in  testicle ;  side  lame ;  stitches  in  lung;  pain  side
of  chest ;  pressing  in  shoulder ;  pain  in  hip  ;  cramps  in  leg  ;
itching  on  sole.

Right  to  left :  sore  throat;  swelling  of  trachea.

Left :  stitches  over  eye ;  quivering  of  eyelid ;  burning  in  ear  ;
parotid  sore  ;  nostril  stopped  and  sore ;  pain  in  inferior  max-
illary joint;  swelling  submaxillary  glands;  toothache;  pain
margin  of  tongue ;  pain  under  short  ribs ;  soreness  and
lumps  in  mamma ;  pain  and  soreness  in  lung  and  arm  ;  pain
above  knee ;  in  tibia  and  in  foot.

Above  downward :  tearing  in  forehead.

Below  upward  :  swelling  in  throat.

Before  backward  :  pain  in  liver.
*^  Sensations. Upper  part  of  head  feels  cold,  as  if  open.

As  if  soft  palate  were  swelling.

As  if  tied  together  in  throat.

As  if  dislocated  :  in  1.  foot ;  above  the  knee.

Cutting  in  abdomen  ;  in  ovaries.

Boring  :  in  r.  side  of  head.

Stitches :  over  1.  eye ;  in  temples  ;  in  throat,  in  r.  lung  ;  under
r.  shoulder-blade.

Stinging :  in  throat ;  in  soles.

Shooting :  over  1.  eye  and  in  occiput.

Pricking :  in  soles.

Scalded  feeling :  in  spots  on  tongue.

Burning :  in  ear ;  lips ;  of  tongue ;  in  palate ;  in  throat ;  in
pharynx  ;  in  glottis  ;  on  root  of  tongue ;  in  anus  ;  in  lungs  ;
in  upper  arm.

Smarting  :  on  tongue ;  in  fauces  ;  at  end  of  penis.


ARUM  TRIPHYLLUM.  172

Soreness  :  of  scalp ;  of  tongue  ;  of  mouth  ;  in  palate  ;  in  chest ;
of  1.  parotid;  in  1.  mamma;  of  lungs.

Rawness :  in  throat ;  in  chest.

Scratching :  in  throat.

Tearing :  in  r.  forehead,  temple  and  ear,  to  maxillary  bone ;  in
temples  ;  in  r.  testicle.

Aching :  in  1.  mamma.

Pressing :  on  sides  of  head ;  in  forehead ;  in  r.  shoulder  and
between  blades.

Bruised  pain :  in  1,  mamma ;  in  soles.

Sprained  feeling :  in  1.  maxillary  joint.

Cramp  :  in  stomach  ;  in  r.  leg.

Constriction :  of  throat.

Tension  :  in  eyelids.

Undefined  pain:  in  palate;  in  region  of  liver  ;  under  ribs;  in
larynx;  in  r.  side  of  chest:  through  1.  lung;  at  base  of
heart;  below  1.  nipple;  in  region  of  atlas  and  den toid  ver-
tebra ;  in  r.  hip  ;  over  the  hips  ;  in  1.  tibia ;  in  feet.

Quivering:  of  1.  upper  lid.

Fullness :  in  thorax.

Heaviness  :  in  all  the  limbs.

Heat :  in  face  and  head ;  in  throat.

Dryness :  in  throat.

Itching  :  at  mouth  of  urethra  ;  in  centre  of  r.  sole ;  eruptions.
*''  Touch. Passive  Motion. Injuries. Touch  :  scalp  sore ;
parotid  sore.

Pressure :  throat  painful.

Picking :  nose,  lips  and  fingers  bleed.

Swallowing :  pain  in  inferior  maxilla  ■<  ;  sensation  of  swelling
on  soft  palate.

Drinking :  mouth  burns  <<  ;  pains  in  palate  worse.

Eating  :  pains  in  palate  worse.

Overexertion  of  voice  :  hoarseness.

Talking :  hoarseness  <<  ;  hoarseness  better.

Coughing :  burning  in  lungs  ;  burning  in  head.

Drawing  on  stockings  :  feet  pain.
^®  Skin. Hitching  with  desquamation,  following  a  scarlet  rash.

BBEruption  all  over  the  body,  with  much  itching  and  restless-
ness. 6  Scarlatina.

■  Exanthema  like  scarlet  rash  ;  skin  peels  off  afterwards.

BB Desquamation  a  second  or  third  time,  in  large  flakes, in

scarlatina.
I  I  Little  round,  red,  hard  pimples  all  over  the  body,  legs,  arms
and  face.

B Eruption  more  in  patches  than  uniform, d  Scarlatina.

B  B  Scarlatina,  when  the  characteristic  symptoms  of  nose,  mouth
and  throat  (see  7,  12,  13)  are  present;  fever  very  intense;
I  in  one  case  rawness  down  the  inner  side  of  either  thigh.


173  ARUM  TRIPHYLLUM.

I  Appearance  of  petechige. ^Scarlatina.
*^  Stages  of  Life,  Constitution. 1 1  Clergymen,  orators,  singers,
actors, auctioneers ; even  the  highest  potencies,  one  drop,
have  restored  the  voice  in  a  few  hours.

Boy,  get.  6. ^Scarlatina;  after  Bellad.,  Ant;  tart.,  Sulphur
and  Lyeop.  were  of  little  use.
^^  Relationship. This  remedy  should  not  be  given  low  or  re-
peated often,  as  bad  eflFects  often  follow. — Dr.  L.

Antidotes :  buttermilk ;  Lac.  ac;  Acet.  ac;  Puhat.

Family  relations:  Arum  dr aeon.;  Arum  mac; Calad.

Compare :  Ailant.  (in  scarlatina,  depressing,  stupid,  drowsy
sleep  ;  Amm.  carh.  (acrid  discharge  from  nose,  in  scarlatina,
but  right  parotid  more  decidedly  affected,  and  drowsiness  is
marked) ;  Amm.  mur.  (in  scarlatina,  discharge  from  nose
thicker,  making  the  nose  sore  inside,  nose  being  stuifed  up
only  at  night  or  only  on  one  side) ;  Argent,  nitr.  (tongue  in
scarlatina  has  erect,  prominent  papillse ;  feels  sore,  tip  red
and  very  painful ;  painful  and  red  blotches  on  left  side  of
tongue) ;  Arsen.  (excoriating  discharge  from  nose,  blueness
of  rash,  restless  after  midnight) ;  Canthar.;  Oapsic.  (throat) ;
Castor,  (discharge  from  nose  in  scarlatina  is  watery  and
acrid,  but  associated  with  a  violent,  tearing  pain  at  the  root
of  nose) ;  Caustic,  (hoarseness) ;  Cepa  (nasal  discharge) ;
Crocus  (elevated  papillae,  but  tongue  white) ;  Hepar  (hoarse-
ness) ;  Ilydr.  ac;  lodium  ;  Kali  hydr.  (discharge  from  nose
in  scarlatina  very  similar,  but  the  soreness  of  mouth  differs
in  that  tongue  and  mouth  are  ulcerated,  with  soreness  but
no  salivation ;  food  and  drink  are  refused  on  account  of  the
great  pain  caused  by  the  ulcerated  condition ;  after  abuse  of
■Mereur.,  frequently  recurring  attacks  of  fluent  coryza,  with
burning  in  nose  and  sensation  of  a  ligature,  preventing  the
passage  of  air) ;  Laches.;  Lycop.  (similar  discharge  from
nose  in  scarlatina ;  concomitant  symptoms  are  headache,
with  much  thirst  at  night,  burning  blisters  on  tip  of
tongue,  breathing  injured  by  stuffed  nose  discharging
burning  ichor,  child  cross  on  awaking) ;  Mercur.  (exces-
sive salivation ;  Mezer.  (discharge  from  nose  in  scar-
latina, slightly  streaked  or  tinged  with  blood;  Mur.  ac,
Nitr.  ac  (similar  discharge  from  nose  in  scarlatina  ;  sting-
ing, pricking  ulcers  in  throat,  almost  always  accompan-
ied by  cough,  with  hoarseness) ;  Phytol.,  Sanguin.,  Silic
(discharge  from  nose  in  scarlatina  similar,  but  nose  bleeds
readily  from  soreness) ;  Sulphur.

Useful  after ;  Hepar  and  Nitr.  ac  in  hoarse,  dry,  croupy  cough,
and  in  scarlatina,  etc.;  after  Caustic,  and  Hepar  in  hoarse-
ness in  morning,  and  deafness  ;  after  Seneg.-  in  soreness  and
redness  of  throat.

Incompatible: Calad.,  which  is  too  similar.


ARUNDO  MAURITANICA.  174

ARUNDO  MAURITANICA.

An  Italian  Grass.  Tincture  of  the  root  sprouts.


Proved  and  introduced  by  Doctor  F.  Patti,  Chagon  a  Due  de  Sorentino;
published  in  J.  de  la  S.  Gall.,  Vol.  VII,  p.  345,  in  1856.  Clinical  observations
from  B.  Dadea,  Compendia  Materia  Medica  Para,  Vol.  I,  p.  282,  1874.

^  Mind. Lascivious  ideas.

Laughs  easily,  a  stupid  hilarity.

Anxiety  diminished  in  open  air.

Anxiety  from  accumulation  of  mucus  in  bronchi.

Dullness  of  mind  and  indifference  to  painful  sensations.

Absence  of  ideas.
^  Sensorium. Vertigo  on  getting  out  of  bed.
^  Inner  Head- Deep-seated  pain  towards  frontal  lobes  and  sides.

Paiiitui  undulation  in  frontal  region.

Burning  pain  in  interior  head ;  pain  and  heat  in  forehead.

Pain  in  r.  temple  to  top  of  head,  makes  sleepy.

Sudden  formicating  pains  through  temples.

Formication  and  stupefying  pain  on  top  of  head,  going  down  to
neck.

Deep-seated  pains  in  sides  of  head.

Pain  toward  and  in  occiput.

■  Cephalalgia;  hysterical.

*  Outer  Head. Formication  and  pricking  in  forehead ;  itching

on  different  parts.
Pustules  with red areola, suppurate and form crusts,  with

children.
Pricking  in  1.  temple  and  on  top  of  head.
Roots  of  hairs  painful.
I  I  Hair  falls  off  entirely  in  children.
Scurf  on  the  head.

*  Sight  and  Eyes, l  '  Inflammation  of  eyes,  in  children.

JBlepharitis.

Light  intolerable,  at  noon  and  evenings.

Luminous  objects  flutter.

Undulating,  luminous  openings  appear  wherever  he  looks.

Dim  vision,  things  veiled.

Cannot  look  upwards.

When  looking  steadily,  pricking  in  orbit.

Pupils  dilated.

Pricking  pain  in  vault  of  orbit ;  gets  heavy  and  sleepy.

Pricking,  itching  and  burning  in  eyes,  the  1.  worse.


175  ARUNDO  MAURITANICA.

Itching  of  conjunctiva;  burning  pain  in  sclerotica.

Excrescence  on  sclerotica.

Lids  jacticate,  are  heavy,  red  and  burning,  itch,  swollen.

Lachrymation.

Intolerable  itching  in  brow  and  1.  eye.

Sudden  burning  in  orbit.

Burning,  pricking,  (1.),  formication.

I  Catarrhal,  rheumatic,  or  scrofulous  ophthalmia.
^  Hearing  and  Ears. Noise  in  ears,  sound  as  of  little  bells.

Pain  at  base  of  outer  ear  (1.).

Formication  in  1.  external  ear.

While  children  complain  they  keep  fingers  in  ears.

Pain  burning,  and  intolerable  itching  in  the  canals.

Burning,  itching  in  auditory  canals  coincide  with  pain  in  sub-
lingual glands.

I  I  The  inflammation  of  ears  commences  with  shooting  pains,
begins  in  the  concha,  extends  to  external  meatus ;  finally,
with  itching  a  discharge  of  blood.

Hemorrhage  of  bright  red  blood  (1.).

■  Purulent  discharge  from  ears.
^  Smell  and  Nose. Loss  of  smell.

Pain  at  root  of  nose.

Itching,  burning,  dryness  of  Schneiderean  membrane.

Burning  in  inner  walls  of  nose.

Itching  in  nose ;  sneezing.

When  sneezing  stitches  in  loins.

iCoryza,  with  snuffling.

I  I  In  the  beginning  water  runs  from  the  nose,  later  green  mu-
cus and  thick,  white,  slimy  masses ;  with  sneezing,  pieces  of
indurated  greenish  mucus.

Putrid  nasal  mucus.

Ulcer  beneath  the  reddened  nose.
^  Face. Pallor.

Weight  on  1.  side  of  face.

Pain  in  masseter  muscles.

Itching,  pricking  all  over ;  formication  ;  with  pain  in  1.  half  of
face.

Pain  and  burning  in  r.  cheek.

Erysipelas  on  r.  cheek.
®  Lower  Part  of  Face. Pricking  on  point  of  chin.
^^  Teeth  and  Gums. Gums  red,  sensitive,  swollen,  bleeding.
"  Taste,  Speech,  Tongue. Food  insipid.

Sweetish  taste  in  mouth.

Water  has  a  bad  taste.

Bitter  mouth  on  waking  mornings.

Pain  in  sublingual  glands. See  6.
^^  Inner  Mouth. Mouth  excoriated  in  children.

I  Stomacace.


ARUNDO  MAURITANICA.  176

Salivation.
^^  Palate  and  Throat. Burning,  itching  and  irritation  of  palate.
Eruption  of  red  points  on  palate  in  children.
Burning  and  redness  in  oesophagus.
Globus  hystericus.

Stoppage  of  air  (from  stomach  ?)  in  oesophagus.
Obstruction  prevents  swallowing.
Burning  and  pain  on  swallowing.

^*  Appetite,  Thirst,  Desires,  Aversions. Longing  for  acids,

acid  food.
Want  of  appetite.
Constant  thirst  I  I  in  children  ; 1  after  w^aking  in  the  morning.

^®  Hiccough,  Belching,  Nausea  and  Vomiting. Desire  to

belch,  but  cannot.

Empty  belching.

Hiccough.

Attacks  of  very  painful  nausea.

Nausea  getting  up  in  the  morning.

Vomiting  of  frothy,  viscid  matter  after  cough. See  27.
^^  Scrobiculum  and  Stomach. Coldness  in  stomach.

Acute  pain  in  pit  of  stomach  ;  on  pressure  pain.

Pain  all  around  epigastrium,  pricking  through  it.

Gastralgia.
^^  Hypochondria. Pain  in  liver.

ir'ricking  in  spleen.
^^  Abdomen,  Loins  and  Groins. Acute  pain  at  umbilicus.

Pain  in  colon,  r.  and  1.;  pricking  in  it.

Wandering  pains  through  bowels.

Movements  in  bowels  as  if  caused  by  a  living  thing;  as  of  a
worm  crawling  on  r.  side.

Noise  in  bowels ;  borborygmus.  ^

Abundant  flatulence.

Bowels  painful  when  pressed  by  hand.

Pain throughout  hypogastrium ;  burning and  pricking after
coughing.

Pain  at  pubic  region.

Stitches  in  groin.

Pricking  and  burning  heat.

Pain,  burning  and  formication  in  loins.

Stitches  in  loins  ;  stitches  when  sneezing.

Pricking  pains  in  loins,  corresponds  to  like  pains  in pit  of
stomach.
^^  Rectum  and  Stools. I  Intestinal  catarrh.

I  I  The  stools  at  first  hard,  soon  become  loose.
■  Constant  diarrhoea  of  nursing  children.

I I  Serious  diarrhoea  with  teething  children.
Liquid  diarrhoea  in  children,  with  red  blood.
Blood  streaked  ;  loose  stools.


177  ARUNDO  MAURITANICA.

Diarrhoea  with  bearing  down.

Greenish  diarrhoea.

Hard,  greenish  stools.

Constipation.

Descent  of  hemorrhoids  before  the  stool.

Stools  followed  by  burning  at  anus.

Burning  piles.

Pricking  in  anus.

Hemorrhoids,  with  prolapsus  recti.
2^  Urinary  Organs. Nephritic  pains.

Pricking  in  bladder.

Red  urine  with  sandy  sediment.

Urine  deposits  a  great  deal  of  red  sand. Compare  :  Lycop.

After  urinating,  weight ;  burning,  itching  in  urethra.
^^  Male  Sexual  Organs. Sexual  desire ;  lascivious  ideas ;  fre-
quent erections.

Pain  in  spermatic  .cords  after  coition.

Difficult  breathing  during  coition.
2^  Female  Sexual  Organs. ■  Uterine  catarrh.

Violent  desire  for  coition,  or  aversion  to  it.

Pricking  pain  in  uterus.

Pain  in  uterus  with  meteorism  before  catamenia.

Menses  too  early  and  very  profuse.

Long-lasting  menses.

Hemorrhage  of  black,  clotted  blood.

Leucorrhoea.

Pricking  pains  in  the  vulva.

Heat,  with  formication  beginning  at  the  loins,  rising  to  shoul-
ders, and  extending  to  hands..

Pain  starting  from  1.  side  of  jaw,  running  along  1.  eyebrow,
thence  extending  to  shoulders  and  loins,  finally  settling  on
pubis,  burning  there  like  fire.

Pains  in  the  loins,  with  a  cough.

Pain  in  loins  before  first  menstruation.

Painful  constriction  of  pubis  and  loins,  prevents  walking.

Pain  beginning  in  kidneys,  passing  on  to  lumbar  region  and  ex-
tending to  the  pubis.

Burning  pain  from  kidneys  passing  through  left  ileum  to  the
pubis.
"  Pregnancy  and  Parturition. Excessive  secretion  of  milk,
causes  pain  in  1.  breast.

Burning  and  pain  in  nipples.

Prickings  under  the  1.  breast.

■  Teething  children. See  20.
^^  Voice  and  Larynx.  Larynx  obstructed  after  coughing. See  27.

Morning  hoarseness.

Loss  of  voice  in  an  instant.

Bronchial  catarrh.

VOL.  II. — 12.


ARUNDO  MAURITANICA.  178


26


Respiration. Whistling,  etc.,  in  the  bronchi  when  breathing*

Short,  difficult  breathing ;  also  during  coition,  or  on  walking
going  up  stairs.

Suflfocative  paroxysm.

Attacks  of  dyspnoea,  with  profuse  sweat.
"  Cough. 1  Catarrhal  cough.

Sputa  in  the  beginning  bluish,  then  white,  and  so  alternately.

After  expectorating,  bruised  feeling  in  pit  of  throat.

Rattling  during  the  cough.

After  cough,  burning  in  hypogastrium.

After  coughing,  larynx  obstructed,  prevents  wind  and  sputa
from  coming  up,  causing  afterwards  vomiting  of  frothy,  vis-
cid matter.

Cough  at  noon,  midday  and  evenings.

Dry  cough  evenings,  with  pains  in  pit  of  stomach,  with  viscid
vomiting  ;  followed  by  burning  at  pit  of  throat.

Expectoration  difficult,  early  mornings.

Sputa  whitish  ;  round,  ash-colored  clots.
^^  Inner  Chest  and  Lungs. Accumulation  of  mucus  in  the  bron-
chi causes  anxiety.

Pain  in  chest ;  pricking  in  chest ;  under  clavicles.

Formication  in  chest.

Pain  in  r.  side,  towards  midnight.
^^  Heart,  Pulse  and  Circulation. 1 1  Pulse  rises  to  90,  later
lessening.

Abnormal  movements  of  heart ;  oppression  of  it.

Pricking  in  the  arteries.
^^  Neck  and  Back. Startings  in  the  neck  ;  formicating  pain  on
1.  side  of  it.

Feeling.as  of  a  worm  crawling  on  the  neck.

Acute  pain  under  1.  scapula.

Lumbago.
^^  Upper  Limbs. Pain  in  the  scapulae.

Pricking  in  axilla.

Weakness  of  arms,  acute  pain  ;  formication.

Coldness  in  shoulders,  in  both  arms ;  heat  and  heaviness  in  1.
arm.

Burning  pain  passing  from  arm  to  wrist,  from  there  to  fore-
finger, and  then  to  thumb.

Burning  pain  in  elbows.

Pain  beginning  in  elbow,  ending  in  ring  finger.

Pain  in  r.  wrist,  and  burning  heat  in  one  or  the  other.

Burning,  jerking  pain  in  r.  wrist.

Formicative  pain,  with  heaviness  in  1.  wrist.

Stiffness  pf  hands.

Oedema  of  hands,  especially  in  children.

Burning  pain  in  both  hands,  as  if  plunged  in  boiling  water.

Formication  in  hands.


179  ARUNDO  MAURITANICA.

Pain  in  fingers ;  in  the  metacarpal  joints  and  first  phalanges.

Burning  pain  in  r.  thumb.

Pricking  in  finger  tips.
^^  Lower  Limbs. Towards  midday  attack  of  pain  extends  to  loins,
knee  and  foot.

I  1  CEdema  of  the  lower  limbs.

General  redness  of  legs  owing  to  an  eruption  of  very  small
points,  with  violent  itching.

Burning  pain  from  hip  to  heel,  like  sciatica.

Weakness  of  thighs  and  legs.

Burning  stitches  in  thigh.

Swelling  of  knees.

Weakness  of  knees.

Pain  in  knees,  afternoons.

Burning  pain  in  knees.

Cramps  in  knees,  often  with  a  sensation  of  heat.

Stitches  in  knees.

Pain  in  1.  calf,  most  when  standing  up  or  when  walking.

Cramps  in  legs.

Burning  pain  in  heels  ;  pricking  in  heels.

Qlidema  of  feet  in  children.

(Edema  of  feet  and  ankles,  worse  on  movement.

Copious  and  offensive  sweat  of  the  feet.

Burning  and  swelling  of  soles,  as  after  a  long  journey.

Beating  and  burning  heat  in  soles.

Burning  stitches  in  toes.
^*  Limbs  in  General, i  i  (Edema  of  limbs.

Pain  in  limbs  as  if  tightly  bandaged.

Formicating  pains  rising  from  loins  to  shoulders  and  settling
on  1.  clavicle.
^^  Rest. Position. Motion. When walking and going up
stairs,  difficult  breathing.

When  standing,  pain  in  1.  calf.
^®  Nerves. Twitchings  and  inclination  to  yawn.

Hysteria.
^^  Sleep, Sleepiness  in  daytime.

Sleeps  by  day ;  sleepless  at  night.

Sleepiness,  with  burning  in  eyes.

Sleeplessness  and  weeping  at  night,  in  children ;  excessive  heat.

On  waking,  bitter  mouth ;  after  waking,  thirst.

Getting  up  in  the  morning,  vertigo.

On  waking,  nausea,  hoarseness.
^^  Time. Towards  noon  :  attack  of  pain.

At  noon  :  shunning  of  light;  cough.

Most  eff"ects  from  noon  till  evening.

Afternoon  :  pain  in  knees.

Evening  :  shunning  light ;  cough  ;  dry  cough,  etc.

Morning :  easy  expectoration.


ARUNDO  MAURITANICA.  180

Before  midnight,  quotidian ;  toward  midnight,  pain  in  r.  side
of  chest.

^^  Temperature  and  Weather. Desire  for  open  air  with  the

cough.
^°  Chill. Fever. Sweat. Quotidian  fever  before  midnight.
Fever  preceded  by  coldness,  with  thirst.
Feverish  paroxysm,  with  burning  pain  and  formication  all  over

the  body.
Febrile  paroxysm,  with  nausea,  coldness,  thirst,  pain  in  bow-
els and  salivation.
Excessive  heat  at  night ;  nightly  fever.
A  sensation  of  burning  heat,  together  with  numerous  prickings,

rises  from  the  loins,  passes  over  shoulders  and  then  invades

the  middle  of  head  and  face,  in  women.
Heat  with  formication,  beginning  in  loins,  rising  to  face,  where

it  is  preceded  by  perspiration,  in  women.
Constant  sensation  of  heat ;  is  burnt  in  the  sun  and  frozen  in

the  shade.
Alternate  heat  and  coldness  on  diiferent  parts  of  body.
Fever  always  with  thirst.

Tendency  to  sweat ;  motion  causes  profuse  sweat.
Fever  ends  Avith  sweat,  most  on  shoulders  and  chest,  sometimes

with  vertigo.

*^  Locality  and  Direction. Acts  most  on  the  lel't  side.

^^  Sensations. As  of  an  insect  crawling  over  body.
As  of  a  worm  crawling  :  in  abdomen  ;  on  the  neck.
Pain  in  limbs  as  if  bandaged  tightly.
Acute  pain  :  in  pit  of  stomach  ;  at  umbilicus.
Stitches  :  in  loins  ;  in  thigh  ;  in  knees  ;  in  toes.
Shooting  :  in  ears.
Burning : in  head ; in  eyes ; of  lids ;  in  orbit ;  in  auditory

canals  ;  in  nose  ;  in  r.  cheek  ;  of  palate ;  in  oesophagus  ;  in

hypogastrium ;  piles ;  in  urethra ;  from  kidneys  through  to

pubis ; in  nipples ; in  arms  and  hands ;  in elbows ;  in  r.

wrist ;  in  r.  thumb  ;  from  hip  to  heel ;  in  thigh  ;  in  knees  ;

in  heels ;  of  soles  ;  in  toes.
Pricking :  in  1.  temple ;  in  vertex  ;  in  orbit ;  in  eyes  ;  in  face ;

on  point  of  chin  ;  through  epigastrium  ;  in  spleen  ;  in  colon  ;

in  hypogastrium  ;  in  loins  ;  in  anus  ;  in  bladder ;  in  uterus  ;

in  vulva ;  under  1.  breast ;  in  chest ;  in  arteries ;  in  finger

tips.
Wandering  pain  :  through  bowels.
Painful  undulation  :  in  frontal  region.
Constriction :  of  pubis  and  loins.
Cramp  :  in  knees  ;  in  legs.
Formicating :  through  temples  ;  on  top  of  head  ;  in  forehead  ;

in  1.  eye ;  in  1.  ear ;  from  loins  to  shoulders ;  in  chest ;  in

arms ;  in  hands  :  on  1.  clavicle.


181  ARUNDO  MAURITANICA.

Undefined  pain  :  frontal  lobes  and  sides  of  brain  ;  in  forehead ;
in  r.  temple  to  top  of  head ;  in  occiput ;  at  base  of  ear ;  at
root  of  nose;  in  masseter  muscles;  in  sublingual  glands;
around  epigastrium  ;  in  liver;  in  colon;  in '  hypogastrium  ;
at  pubic  region  ;  in  kidneys  ;  in  spermatic  cords ;  in  loins  ;
in  nipples ;  in  chest ;  in  arms  and  hands ;  in  knees ;  in  1.
calf.

Coldness :  in  stomach.

Itching: on head;  in eyes;  of  lids ;  in  brow;  in  auditory;
in  nose ;  in  face ;  of  palate  ;  in  urethra ;  eruptions.
■*^  Tissues. Mucous  membranes  of  eyes,  ears,  nose,  palate,  etc.

I  Acute  and  chronic  catarrhs.

Pains  and  prickings  in  the  glands.
^®  Skin. Feeling  as  of  an  insect  crawling  over  loins,  shoulders,  and
sometimes  the  entire  surface  of  body.

Redness  of  skin,  like  a  birth-mark.

Skin  in  children  turns  blue  at  the  height  of  fever.

Eruptions  resembling  itch  on  breast,  in  children,  and  also  be-
hind the  ears.

Itching  papular  eruption  in  children.

Erysipelas  on  various  parts  of  body.

Itching  miliary  eruption  on  loins.

Pustules  like  of  scabies,  with  intolerable  itching,  discharge
when  opened  by  friction  a  watery  fluid.

Suppurating  pimples  on  chest  and  arms.
^^  Stages of  Life, Constitution. l  Diseases of  women and

children.
*^  Relationship. No  graminese  are  known  by  their  morbid  in-
fluence, except  some  poisoning  symptoms  of  Lolium.

Ananth.  has  been  proved  by  Houat,  but  we  have  no  trustworthy
cures.  Saccli.  off.  is  well  known  by  provings  and  cures,
but  has  no  similarity  with  any  tincture  of  roots.

The  disjunctive  similars  are  principally  Sulphur,  Calc.  ost.,
and  Lycop.,  one  of  the  principal  family  in  our  armamentarium.


ASAFCETIDA.  182

ASAF(ETIDA.

Assafetida.  Umhelliferce.

Introduced  and.  proved  by  Franz,  in  1822.  See  Stapf  s  Archives,  Vol.  I,
No.  3,  p.  187 ;  326  symptoms  from  Hahnemann,  Stapf,  Gross  and  Gutmann.
In  1829,  Jorg's  were  added  by  Hartlaub  (1833).  In  1839  one  symptom  of
Jahn,  not  of  Trinks,  who  never  has  proved.  In  1868,  a  full  proving  of
Lembke,  with  the  substance.  Translated  by  Lilienthal,  and  published  in
the  New  York  Quarterly,  page  475,  1869,  with  remarks.  The  last  proving
of  E.  W.  Berridge,  Organon.  Vol.  II,  is  of  great  importance.

^  Mind. Consciousness  unaffected. 6  Chorea.

Fits  of  joy  with  bursts  of  laughter, d  Hysteria.

Excitement  of  mind. See  29.

Unsteady  and  fickl©,  cannot  persevere  in  anything ;  wants  now

one  thing,  then  another ;  walks  hither  and  thither.
Anxious  sadness  and  apprehensions  of  dying.
Apprehension  seemingly  arising  from  the  abdomen.
Apprehension. See  29.
With  the  heart  symptoms,  fear  of  death.
Fears  paralysis  or  softening  of  brain.
Dislike  for  solitude.
Constant  change  of  mind;  fits  of  grief,  of  joy ;  laughter  or

anxious  sadness.
Depression.
Fits  of  low  spirits  with  heart  symptoms ;  low-spirited  between

the  heart  attacks.
Ill-humor,  irritable  mood,  and  yet  indifferent  to  everything.
I  Ill-humor,  irritable  mood, dislike  to  work, d  Caries  of  the

bones.
Hypochondriac  and  hysteric  restlessness  and  anxiety.
If  he  thinks  of  having  taken  the  drug,  it  brings  on  the  faint-

ness.
^  Scnsorium.. '  l  Very  sensitive  and  excitable  ;  all  perception  of

the  senses  lessened  but  not  consciousness.
Oversensitiveness,  either  physical  or  mental.
Fainting  during  the  heigh th  of  the  paroxysm  of  colic.
Stupefying  tension  in  head,  mostly  left  side;  worse  afternoon

or  evening ;  sitting  bent  forward  ;  after  going  to  bed  ;  better

sitting  up.
Vertigo  with  violent  pressing  in  the  head,  vanishing  of  sight  in

evening  and  afterwards  cold  sweat  on  forehead  and  limbs ;

colic ;  flatulence ;  portal  congestion.


183  ASAFCETIDA.

Unconsciousness  ;  with  bellyache. See  19.
^  Inner Head. Pain  in  left  side  of  head  extending  to  eyes,
changing  into  intermitting,  severe  pain  and  slight  fullness  of
the  brain.
I A  sudden  pain  in  left  temple,  like  an  inward-pressing  pointed

plug.
Inner  semilateral  headache,  oftener  on  the  left  side.
iPressive  pain  in  forehead  and  1.  side  of  head  from  within  out-
ward.
Dull  pain  and  fullness  in  1.  side  of  head,  with  bleeding  from  1.

nostril,  heart  beating  slowly.
Fullness  and  throbbing  in  head,  heart  beats  feebly,  with  appre-
hension.
Fullness  of  head  when  riding  in  a  carriage.
Pressure  in  sides  of  head  or  temples,  like  from  a  dull  stick,  bet-
ter from  touch.
Fullness  of  the  head,  changing  gradually  into  aching  and  press-
ing pain,  as  if  the  whole  brain  was  compressed  ;  with  dizzi-
ness, increased  heat  of  the  skin  and  some  quickness  of  the
pulse.
Awoke  with  fullness  of  the  head,  which  gradually  changed  to
periodically  recurring  pains,  lasting,  more  or  less,  into  the
next  night.
Drawing,  wave-like  pressure  through  the  left  half  of  the  fore-
head, ending  in  dull  pressure  on  the  frontal  eminence.
Flying  stitch  from  within  outward,  in  forehead,  temples  and

sides  of  head.
Jerking  through  the  head.

■  Single,  sudden,  and  deep-penetrating  stitches  under  the  left
frontal  eminence,  like  shocks  followed  by  some  sensitiveness.
Pain  as  if  a  nail  or  plug  was  driven  into  the  brain.
Crampy  pain  in  forehead  above  eyebrows.
The  brain  seems  tense.

I  I  Rush  of  blood  to  head,  and  warmth  of  the  face.
I  I  Congestive  headache.
Sensation  of  swashing  in  head  as  of  water,  and  gurgling  behind

upper  part  of  frontal  bone.
I  I  All  the  headaches  are  worse  toward  evening ;  in  the  room,
while  at  rest,  sitting  or  lying ;  better  when  rising  or  moving
about  in  the  open  air.
Reading  and  writing  makes  her  worse.
The  pains  in  the  head  cease,  or  change  from  touch.
I  iNervous  headache  of  hysterical  or  scrofulous  people.
Cold  sensation  in  head.
*  Outer  Head. iPain  in the  right  parietal,  as  from  a  deeply
penetrating  plug.
The  pains  in  the  head  cease  or  are  changed  from  external  touch.
Cold  sweat  on  forehead.


ASAFCETIDA.  184

*  Sight  and  Eyes. Dimness  of  sight ;  letters  become  darker  on

writing  ; disappear  after  blinking.
Mist  before  the  eyes.
Muscse  volitantes.

Sight  worn  from  reading  or  writing.
I  Boring  pain  above  the  eyebrows;  burning,  especially  at  night.

6  Iritis,  kerato-iritis,  retinitis,  of  syphilitic  origin.
Dull  pressure  at  the  external  border  of  the  left  orbit.
Troublesome  dryness  of  the  eyes.
Burning  in  the  eyes  ;  stitches  ;  dryness.
Periodic  burning  in  the  eyes  and  pressing  together  of  the  lids

as  if  overcome  with  sleep.

■  Burning  in  eyeballs ;  in  the  left  as  from  within  outward.

I  Sharp  pain  extending  through  the  eye  into  the  head,  upon

touching.
BiNocturnal,  throbbing  pains  in  and  around  the  eye  and  head.

6  Syphilitic  iritis,  abuse  of  mercury.

■  Deep  seated  inflammation  of  the  eyeball,  attended  by  ciliary

pains. 6  Iritis,  kerato-iritis,  irido-choroiditis  and  retinitis,
especially  if  of  syphilitic  origin.
llExtensive  superficial  ulceration  of  the  cornea,  with  burning,
sticking  or  pressing  pains,  from  within  outwards ;  rest  and
«  pressure  relieve  ;  also  better  in  the  open  air ;  the  numbness

around  the  eye.
Itching  in  the  right  eye.

■  Periodic  burning  in  the  eyes  and  pressing  together  of  the  lids,

as  if  overcome  with  sleep.
®  Hearing  and  Ears. The  faintness  is  brought  on  by  noise,  or
being  in  crowded  streets.
Hardness  of  hearing,  with  discharge  of  pus  from  the  ears.
I  I  Hardness  of  hearing,  with  thin,  purulent  discharge  of  an  ex-
tremely offensive  odor, d  After  scarlatina,  or  abuse  of  mer-
cury.

■  Otorrhoea  with  off"ensive  discharge  and  diseased  bones.

^  Smell  and  Nose. IB Offensive  discharge  from  the  nose;  stench

from  the  nose. 6  After  mercury  or  in  scrofula.
Unpainful  tension  over  the  bones  of  the  nose,  with  feeling  of

numbness.
Swelling  and  inflammation  aff"ecting  the  bones,  with  a  feeling

as  if  nose  would  burst.
Pressure  in  the  nose,  especially  the  right  wing,  as  if  it  would

burst.
Feeling  as  if  nose  were  stopped  up  high  up,  so  that  he  cannot

breathe  through  it,  with  fullness  of  head,  when  riding  in  a

carriage.
Fluent  coryza.

■  I  Discharge  of  very  offensive  matter  from  the  nose ;  with  caries,

of  the  bones, d  Ozsena.


185  ASAF(ETIDA.

A  little  pimple  on  the  tip  of  the  nose.
^  Face. Flushes  and  heat  of  the  face,  of  one  cheek  after  eating.
Small  tubercles  in  the  cheeks.

I  Numbness  of  the  bones  of  the  face  ;  painless  tension  in  various

places.
®  Lower  Part  of  Face. Drawing  pains  in  caries  of  lower  max-
illa, with  salivation;  after  abuse  of  mercury.

I I  Swelling  of  lower  lip.

Lips  puffed  up,  lower  lip  and  left  corner  of  mouth  most.
Numb  pressure  on  the  chin.
^^  Teeth and Gums. I  Grinding  of  teeth;  starting  at  night;
transient  griping  pains  in  region  of  navel. 6  Chorea.
Bluntness  of  the  teeth.
Severe  drawing  in  lower  incisors.
Soreness  of  gums.
"  Taste,  Speech,  Tongue. Greasy,  rancid  taste  in  the  mouth
and  of  the  phlegm  hawked  up,

■  Speech  unintelligible;  tongue  white,  swollen. ^Chorea.

^^  Inner  Mouth. Sensation  of  dryness  in  mouth  and  throat,  even

when  moist,  without  thirst.
Saliva  predominantly  decreased, except  in  mercurial caries,

when  acrid  salivation  exists.
Burning  in  the  mouth.

I  Constantly  chewing  and  working  frothy  slime  out  of  mouth,

with  swollen  tongue, d  Chorea.
^^  Palate  and  Throat. >  Sensation  as  if  the  peristaltic  motion  were
reversed  and  the oesophagus were  being drawn from the
stomach  up  towards  the  throat.
Sensation  of  pressure,  as  if  a  body  or  lump  were  ascending  in
the  throat,  has  to  swallow  frequently.

■  Burning,  followed  by  soreness,  in  fauces  and  pharynx.
Darting  stitches,  from  chest  upward  towards  oesophagus.
Tender  feeling  in  throat,  worse  when  swallowing.

I I  Sensation  of  a  ball  rising  in  throat,  causes  difficulty  in
breathing. 6  Hysteria.

Hysterical  spasms  affecting  the  oesophagus.

I  In  the  evening  a  hysterical  rising  in  the  throat,  as  of  a  ball  or
large  body  ascended  from  the  stomach  to  the  oesophagus,  or
even  pharynx,  obliging  him  repeatedly  to  attempt  to  swallow
it. 6  Globus  hystericus.

■  Dryness  and  burning  in  oesophagus.

"  Appetite,  Thirst,  Desires,  Aversions.  Ravenous  hunger,
with  pain  in  upper  abdomen,  as  from  a  cold,  and  as  if  diar-
rhoea would  set  in.

Hunger  with  desire  for  strong,  cooling  food.

Desire  for  wine.

■  Great  disgust  for  all  food, d  Chorea.
Beer  tastes  slimy,  aversion  to  it.


ASAFCETIDA.  186

^°  Eating  and  Drinking,  l  Great  dejection  with  epigastric  pres-
sure after  eating ;  hypochondriacal.
I  After  eating:  heat  in  face,  with  anguish;  pressure  in  stom-
ach ;  stitches  about  lower  ribs ;  tension  in  abdomen  ;  wind-
ing and  twisting  in  bowels ;  great  difficulty  in  breathing  ;
febrile  state.

■  After  drinking:  diarrhoea;  heaviness  and  cold  feeling  in  the

intestines.
After  meals  flatulent  distension  of  abdomen.

I  After  eating  anything  sour  griping  pains  in  region  of  navel.

6  Chorea.
^^  Nausea  and  Vomiting, l  a  Eructations  :  smelling  like  garlic  ;
tasting  rancid,  sharp,  or  putrid  ;  smelling  like  feces ;  tasting
like  carrion.

I I  Flatus  passing  upwards,  none  down.

I  Hiccough -like  contractions  of  the  diaphragm. 6  Chorea.

^^  Scrobiculum  and Stomach. » Pressing, cutting, stitching
pain  in  spells,  not  regular ;  full  of  wind ;  pressing  upwards
(never  down) ;  gulping  up  rancid  fluid ;  constipation. 0  Gas-
tralgia.
B Dyspepsia,  with  much  pulsation  in  pit  of  stomach.

■  Pulsation  in  pit  of  stomach,  perceptible  to  sight  and  touch.
Sensation  of  fullness  in  stomach.

I"  Gone,"  empty  feeling  in  pit  of  stomach,  not  a  pain,  but  "  it
hurts  there;"  pulsations  after  eating;  worse  at  about  11
o'clock  A.M.;  faint  feeling. ^Hysteria.

Cardialgia.

SMeteorism  of  stomach  when  feeling  of  tension  is  great  and
eructating  is  difficult.

Increased  warmth  and  aching  in  the  stomach,  toward  the  left
side,  not  all  on  the  right,  but  more  up  into  the  oesophagus,
like  the  globus  hystericus.
^®  Hypochondria.  In  the  morning  sensation  in  epigastric  region
and  in  whole  abdomen,  as  if  it  were  beaten,  with  sense  of
fullness  in  the  former,  and  eructations.

Stitches  in  right  hypochondrium,  towards  the  diaphragm.

Pressure  from  the  interior  of  the  liver  to  the  chest,  after  din-
ner, with  labored  breathing  and  violent  pulsations.

Violent  pressure  in  the  scrobiculum,  towards  the  liver,  while
sitting.

Stitches  as  if  in  the  diaphragm,  r.  side.

I I  Heat  in  spleen  and  abdomen.

^®  Abdomen,  Loins  and  Groins. B  Gastric  and  abdominal  suf-
ferings, accompanied  by  pulsations  in  epigastrium.
Heat  in  abdomen.
Pressure  in  abdomen.

Griping  (into  a  ball)  pain  below  the  navel  when  standing.
Intermittent  griping  in  upper  abdomen.


187  ASAFCETIDA.

Pain  in  upper  abdomen,  as  from  taking  cold,  and  as  if  diarrhoea
would  ensue,  with  a  kind  of  ravenous  hunger.

Bellyache,  as  if  the  intestines  were  torn  or  cut ;  places  in  the
side  sore,  as  if  raw,  with  it  feeling  as  of  something  rising
from  chest  to  throat ;  pressure  relieves.

Gripings,  with  flatulence.

I  Wind  colic,  with  abdominal  pulsations;  very  painful  disten-

sion of  abdomen,  rumbling ;  relieved  by  passing  wind.

Pinching  colic  and  escape  of  wind.

Flatulent  colic  and  diarrhoea  ;  distension  of  abdomen.

Colic,  with  distension  and  a  "  rising  up  feeling,"  as  if  the  peris-
taltic action  were  reversed  ;  >  from  external  pressure ;  causes
fainting. See  13.

■  Abdomen  soft,  distended. ^Chorea.

In  the  flanks  a  pressive  pain  or  drawing  in  the  abdominal  mus-
cles.
Sensation  in  the  epigastric  region  and  abdomen  in  the  morning,
as  if  beaten.
^"  Rectum  and  Stool. Painful  diarrhoea.

I I  Watery,  liquid  stools  of  the  most  disgusting  smell;  pains  in
the  abdomen  and  discharge  of  fetid  flatus.

1 1  Watery  stools  of  disgusting  odor;  discharge  profuse  and
greenish.

I  Blackish-brown,  papescent,  off'ensive  stools,  which  relieve.

Stool  profuse,  thick,  papescent,  brown,  and  very  oifensive.

Only  slime  passes,  no  fgeces.

Obstinate  constipation,  with  abdominal  and  hemorrhoidal
cramps,  with  tenesmus  and  distended  abdomen.

I  Pain  in  the  perineum,  as  from  something  dull  pressing  out.
^^  Urinary  Organs. Soreness  in  the  kidneys.

I! Urine  warm  and  of  a  pungent,  ammoniacal  smell.

Spasm  in  the  bladder  during  and  after  urination.
^^  Male  Sexual  Organs. Genitals  irritated.

Faintness  is  worse  after  seminal  emissions.

Urging  towards  the  genitals ;  aching  of  the  testicles,  worse  from
touch  and  after  motion.

Needle-like  stitches  on  the  penis.

Drawing  in  the  glans,  more  during  the  afternoon.

Outward  pressure  in  the  perineum.
^^  Female  Sexual  Organs. OExcited  sexual  desire, ^Nympho-
mania in  a  plethoric  woman.

■  Bearing  down  in  genitals,  worse  when  riding  in  a  carriage.

I  Uterine  ulcer,  sensitive  and  painful,  with  ofi"ensive  discharge.
I  Menses  too  early,  too  scanty,  and  last  but  a  short  time.
1  Labor-like  pains  in  the  uterine  region,  with  cutting  and  bear-
ing down.
iLeucorrhoea  profuse,  greenish,  thin  and  ofi"ensive.

■  Swelling  and  inflammation  of  genitals.


ASAFCETIDA.  188

^*  Pregnancy  and  Parturition.  Miscarriages.
Is  said  to  kill  the  foetus  and  dries  up  the  milk.
I  Mammae  turgid  with  milk,  like  in  the  ninth  month  ;  without

being  pregnant.
flDeficient  of  milk,  with  oversensitiveness.
//Labor-like  pains  ;  cutting,  bearing  down,  intermitting.
Milk  increased  or  diminished.
Restores  the  wasted  and  drying  up  "  breast  of  milk."

■  Ten  days  after  delivery  milk  diminished;  the  14th  day  only

a  few  drops  could  be  squeezed  out  with  difficulty  ;  after  5  drops
of  tincture,  copious  milk,  but  offensive  to  the  child  ;  3d  cen-
tesimal answered  as  well.

■  Milk  had  disappeared  within  three  weeks  of  her  delivery;  six

confinements.
2^  Voice  and  Larynx. Voice  weaker, hoarse,  changed,  some-
times cough.

I  Spasm  of  the  glottis,  alternating  with  contraction  of  the  fin-

gers and  toes, d  Hysteria.
^^  Respiration. Difficult  breathing. See  13.
Difficult  breathing,  from  abdominal  disease.
Feeling  of  suffocation  in  throat  on  taking  a  full  inspiration.
Constriction  of  chest,  extending  to  the  throat, with hurried

breathing.
Asthmatic  complaints  of  scrofulous  persons.

I I  Asthmatic  feeling  in  the  trachea,  dry  cough;  spasmodic
dyspnoea  as  if  the  lungs  could  not  be  sufficiently  expanded.

■  Oppression  of  the  chest  increasing  to  agony,  cannot  breathe,

restless  moving  about.

■  Oppression  of  the  chest,  with  hurried  breathing;  contracted,

small  pulse;  or,  frequent  pulse;  asthma  after  too  hearty  a
meal ;  too  great  exertion.

Oppression  of  breathing  ;  pain  temporarily  relieved  by  eructa-
tions.

When  faint,  if  he  breathes  deeper,  heart  beats  fuller,  and  faint-
ness  decreases  ;  if  he  holds  breath  heart  becomes  very  feeble.

■  Asthmatic  attacks  at  least  one  a  day  all  her  life,  brought  on

by  every  bodily  exertion,  coition,  especially  by  every  satis-
fying meal.

Frequent  breathing,  rattling ;  restless  tossing  before  attack,
anxious  with  it.

Sitting  up  relieves  suffocative  feeling.
2^  Cough. ■Obstinate,  titillating  cough,  <  at  night  with  grown
persons.

Cough  predominantly  dry  ;  expectoration  infrequent,  during
day.

Irritation  to  dry  cough  ;  attacks  at  night.

Cough  on  gaping.

I  1  Whooping-cough,  even  of  sucklings,  sounding  like  croup ;


189  ASAFOETIDA.

rattling  breathing,  anxious  and  restless,  chest  and  abdomen
hot,  urine  pale.
I  I  Hoarse  ringing  short  cough,  excited  by  tickling  in  the  tra-
chea, with  asthmatic  feeling  therein  ;  spasmodic  contraction
of  the  thorax  and  accumulation  of  stringy  mucus-
Cough  in  the  afternoon.
I  I  Cough,  with  cessation  of  the  sputa.
Sputa  have  a  greasy  taste.

Cough,  Avith  accumulation  of  stringy  mucus  in  the  trachea.
^^  Inner Chest  and  Lungs. Pressure on  the  sternum,  when
stooping,  writing  ;  going  off  by  deep  breathing.

■  Pressure  and  burning  under  the  sternum  ;  frequent  disposition

to  cough.

■  Compression  of  chest,  as  from  a  heavy  weight. See  26.
Pressing  stitches  in  chest.

Pressure  on  the  chest,  with  a  constriction  in  the  throat.

■  Oppressive  aching  feeling  in  the  chest;  better  from  expector-

ating mucus.
I  Pressive  pain  in  the  right  side  of  chest,  from  within  outward.

■  Pressure  in  the  left  intercostal  muscles,  from  within  outward,

which  is  Avorse  during  inspiration  and  expectoration.

■  Stitches  in  chest  from  within  outwards. ^Whooping  cough.

■  Burning  in  chest,  runs  through  both  arms  and  through  lower

limbs  down  into  the  toes.

■  Single  violent  stitches  from  within  outwards,  at  short  inter-

vals ;  renewed  when  chest  is  touched, d  Pleuropneumonia.
Shooting  from  just  below  1.  nipple  tlirough  to  back  on  walking.
Spasmodic  constriction  of  the  thorax  with  the  cough.
Spasmodic  constriction,  as  if  lungs  could  not  properly  expand,

respiration  normal.
Spasmodic  contractions  of  chest,  with  slow,  small,  contracted,

irregular  pulse.
Throbbing  in  the  chest.

■  Dropsy  of  chest;  relieved  the  oppression  in 6, 12,  or  36

hours  ; 3d  every  2  or  4  hours.
Discomfort  of  thorax  from  want  of  distention  of  lungs.
^^  Heart,  Pulse  and  Circulation. Increased  action  of  heart  on
the  slightest  excitement.

■  Palpitation,  with  faintness,  rush  of  blood  to  head,  flushing  of

face,  anxiety  and  slow  breathing,  from  excitement, d  Irri-
table heart.
Violent  palpitation  of  heart  and  excitement  of  mind.

■  Acute  rheumatic  heart  disease,  with  tightness  across  the  chest.

6  Hydrothorax.
Continual  pain  about  region  of  heart.
At  times  heart  feels  bound  together  tightly,  as  if  it  could  not

beat ;  afterwards  only  on  exertion  or  walking.


ASAFCETIDA.  190

Congestion  towards  the  heart ;  feeling  of  fullness ;  small  pulse ;

followed  by  loose  stool.
I  Slight  palpitation  of  the  heart,  more  like  a tremor,  several

times  when  sitting.
llNervous  palpitation,  with  small  pulse;  from  overexertion  or

suppression  of  discharges  (in  women).

■  Pressure  in  region  of  heart,  as  if  the  heart  was  too  full  and

expanded ;  pulse  small.

Feeling  as  if  the  heart  would  burst ;  quick  breathing  and  ap-
prehension ;  has  to  walk  in  the  open  air.

Feeling  as  if  heart  were  swollen,  preventing  a  deep  inspiration.

Palpitation  like  a  tremor  while  sitting.

The  beating  of  the  heart  small,  quick,  irregular.

Heart  sometimes  beats  very  feebly.

Sometimes  heart  beats  short  and  quick,  at  other  times  he  feels
as  if  there  was  no  action  of  it.

Heart's  action  is  quickened  by  a  deep  inspiration.

At  night,  when  lying  on  back,  palpitation  and  suffocative  feel-
ing, as  if  heart  would  burst,  he  must  sit  up,  which  relieves
him.

Heart  symptoms  and  faintness  worse  after  seminal  emission.

■  Pulse  small,  spasmodically  contracted,  rather  quick,  d  Chorea.
I  I  Small,  infrequent  pulse,  with  violent  action  of  the  heart  and

no  disturbance  of  respiration  indicating  nervous  weakness  of
the  organ.
iPulse  small,  rapid,  irregular. See  28.

■  Pulse  accelerated,  but  unequal,  small. ^Asthma,  congestion

to  heart,  etc.
^^  Outer  Chest.  Sensation  as  if  one  pressed  very  sharply  with

the  point  of  the  finger  on  the  xiphoid  cartilage ;  also  when
swallowing.
^^  Neck  and  Back. iFine,  burning  stitches  in  and  behind  the
right  scapula,  extending  towards  the  ribs.

Drawitig  downwards,  in  left  side  of  neck,  on  motion.

Stitches  in  muscles  of  back.

Dull  pains,  or  drawing  and  cutting  below  scapulae.

Burning  along  vertebrae,  to  the  left.

Aching  inwardly,  along  last  dorsal  and  first  lumbar  vertebrae.

Boring  sticking  in  1.  loin,  from  within  outward,  going  off  dur-
ing an  inspiration.

Lancinations  from  r.  loin  towards  ribs.

Sticking,  with  pressure  in  region  of  r.  ribs  towards  the  spine.

I  Cannot  work  on  account  of  the  backache.

Stitches  along  the  sacrum  down  to  the  anus.

Pain  in  sacrum  while  sitting.

Crawls  run  over  the  back,  in  the  afternoon.
^^  Upper  Limbs. Twitching  in  left  upper  arm-joint,  extending  in-
ward.


191  ASAF(ETIDA.

Fine  stitch  in  the  elbows.

Quivering  in  shoulder-joint ;  in  deltoid  muscle.
Stitches  and  jerking  in  upper  arm.

Drawing  pain  along  the  upper  arm  down  to  elbow,  a  fine  stitch
in  elbow.

■  Child always missed  laying  hold  of anything  she  wished.

d  Chorea.

Frequent  muscular  jactitation  in  arms  and  hands.

Tearing  in  forearm  down  to  tips  of  fingers.

When  moving  fingers,  pain  in  forearm.

Tearing  stitches  followed  by  burning  in  right  forearm.

Scraping  sensation  on  styloid  process  of  ulna.

Cramp-like,  sensitive  twitching  in  metacarpal  bone  of  left
thumb.

I  I  Whitlow,  violent  nightly  pains,  threatened  necrosis.

Pain  as  if  beaten  in  the  bones  of  the  wrist.

lAching,  drawing  in  wrist-joints. ^Syphilis.
^^  Lower  Limbs. I  Carious  ulcer on the  tibia, extremely sore
around,  discharge  offensive;  skin  adheres  to  the  bone.

Muscular  twitching  in  legs  and  feet.

I  Child,  get.  9,  could  not  walk, d  Chorea.

Caries  of  tibia.

The  apparently  healthy  portion  of  the  tibia  lying  beneath  the
peculiar  carious  ulcer  became  again  sensitive  and  painful  to
the  slightest  touch,  or  even  the  approach  of  the  finger,  so
also  to  the  removal  of  the  charpie,  and  at  night  almost  un-
endurable.

■  Swelling  around  the  ankle-joint,  cannot  use  the  foot.
Burning  in  the  roots  of  the  toe  nails,  prevents  sleep.

■  Psoitis  if  suppuration  seems  impending;  also  if  pelvic  bones

are  involved.
Lassitude  of  the  lower  limbs.

Quivering  of  portions  of  the  muscles  on  the  thighs.
Occasional  tingling  in  legs  after  much  walking.
Twitching  on  the  inner  side  of  the  right  knee-joint.
Swelling  and  caries  of  bones  of  feet.
Sticking  sensation  on  ball  of  great  toe  when  putting  foot  to  the

ground.

■  Pain  as  if  a  splinter  of  bone  was  sticking  in  the  right  fibula,

just  above  outer  malleolus, d  After  a  sprain.

■  Cold  swelling  around  the  ankles.

■  A  sensitive  throbbing  in  the  left  great  toe  from  time  to  time.
Stitches  and  pulsation  in  the  big  toe.

■  Painful  throbbing  in  the  tip  of  the  great  toe.
Heat  in  the  toes.

^*  Limbs  in  General. ■Constant  convulsive  tremor  of  limbs,
could  be  relieved  by  the  hands  of  another  person, d  Chorea.

■  Twitching  of  muscles  of  arms  and  legs.


ASAFCETIDA.  192

I  Pains  mostly  on  flexor  sides  of  limbs.
Pains  in  inside  of  joints  and  limbs.

^^  Rest. Position. Motion. Rest :  Headaches  <  ;  eyes >  ;

<  in  bed.
Sitting  up :  tension  in  head  >  ;  pressure  in  scrobiculum  <  ;

suffocative  feeling  >  ;  palpitation  <  ;  pains  in  sacrum  worse.
Standing :  griping  below  navel ;  weakness.
Stooping:  pressure  on  sternum.
Lying  : weakness.

Putting  foot  to  ground :  sticking  in  great  toe.
Moving  fingers :  pain  in  forearm  worse.
Motion :  headache  >  ;  asthma  worse.
Overexertion :  palpitation  worse.
Swallowing:  tenderness  in  throat  worse.
After  motion  :  aching  in  testicles.
Gaping :  cough  worse.

Deep  breathing :  pressure  in  sternum  better.
Expectorating  mucus  :  aching  in  chest  better.
Inspiration  :  pain  in  intercostal  muscles  worse.
Walking  :  shooting  from  nipple  to  back.
Excitement :  palpitation  worse.
36  JJerves. Nervousness.

Hypersensitiveness;  when  nervous  system  predominates  over

the  arterial.

I I  Hysteria,  with  much  trouble  about  throat  or  oesophagus ;
well  marked  globus  hystericus  ;  spasm  of  the  lungs,  etc.

Hysteria,  hysteralgia;  hypersensitiveness;  every  excitement
that  brings  on  an  attack  causes  globus  hystericus.

■  Twitching  and  jerking  of  muscles.

1 1  Nervous  affections  after  suppressed  discharges.

■  Epileptiform  convulsions  caused  by  worms.
I  Chorea.

Fainting  with  the  colic.

I  I  Clumsiness  of  the  body  ;  feeling  of  rigor.

Feeling  of  general  heaviness ;  weak  when  standing  or  lying ;
dry  mouth.

At  times  slight  inclination  to  faint,  accompanied  by  great  ap-
prehension.

Faintness,  with  quick  pulse.

Attacks  of  faintness,  followed  by  fluttering  of  heart.

Attacks  of  faintness,  with  anxiety,  as  if  he  would  die,  and  with
one  attack  desire  for  suicide.

With  one  attack  of  faintness  there  was  shaking  of  limbs  and  as
if  the  bowels  shook.

With  the  faintness,  shivering  and  very  feeble  action  of  heart.

Faintness  on  beginning  to  eat,  especially  at  dinner,  with  full
and  frequent  beating  of  heart.


193  ASAFCETIDA.

With  the  faintness,  alternate  heat  and  chill ;  sweat  on  small  of

back  and  trembling.
Faintness  worse  day  after  a  seminal  emission.
^^  Sleep. Inclined  to  sleep,  much  against  his  habit.
Drowsy  with  the  sweat.
Sleepy  in  the  evening  ;  weariness.

■  Sleeplessness  after  midnight. [Oonium  before  midnight).
I  1  About  midnight  violent  pains  through  left  half  of  body,  from

top  to  toe.

I  Pain  in  the  ulcer  at  night,  almost  unendurable.

Woke  in  night  with  distension  of  stomach,  pain  across  chest
and  feeble  heart.

Worse  in  bed  and  after  sleep  ;  better  after  getting  out  of  bed.
^^  Time.  Morning :  abdomen  feels  beaten  ;  fullness  and  eructa-
tions;  tearings  in  joints;  chest  oppressed.

8.30  to  9  A.M. :  chills,  with  heat  efface.

II  A.M. :  faint  feeling  <  ;  goneness  in  stomach.
During  day  :  expectoration  worse.

Afternoon : tension in head  <  ; drawing in glans penis ;

cough ;  shivering  over  back  ;  heat  in  toes.
Betvfeen  3  and  4  p.m.  :  coldness  and  trembling,  with  stitches

in  head.
Evening :  vanishing  of  sight ;  headache  <  ; hysteria ; pains

often  better.
Evening  till  2  A.M. :  neuralgia.
Night : pain  in  eyes  ■< ;  cough << ; palpitation ; ulcer <C ;

pain  across  chest ;  bone  pains.
Midnight :  pain  1.  half  of  body.
After  midnight :  sleeplessness.

''  Temperature  and  Weather. In  the  room :  all  headaches

worse.

Open  air :  headache  >  ;  eye  >  ;  heart  >  ;  desires  to  be  in
open  air.

Could  not  remain  in-doors,  must  walk  about  in  the  open  air.

In  warm  feather  beds :  lower  limbs  ache  more.
*"  Fever. Chills  run  over  the  body  from  time  to  time.

Sense  of  rigor.

Crawls  run  over  the  back,  in  the  afternoon.

Chill,  coldness  and  dryness  of  the  skin.

Every  day,  between  3  and  4  p.m.,  coldness  and  trembling,  with
unbearable  stitches  in  the  head.

One-sided  heat.

Heat  in  the  toes  ;  afternoon.

With  heat  of  the  face ;  cold  hands  and  feet,  and  chills  of  the
back  from  8.30  to  9  a.m.

With  the  faintness  sweat  on  small  of  back,  hot  and  cold  alter-
nately and  trembling.

Want  of  thirst,  particularly  heat  without  thirst.

VOL.  II. — 13.


ASAFGETIDA.  194

Heat  in  the  face,  after  dinner,  with  anxiety  and  sleepiness ;

without  thirst.
Occasionally  cold,  moist  skin.
Sweat  wanting  ;  only  occasionally  cold,  moist  skin  ;  cold  sweat

on  the  limbs  ;  vertigo.
Sweat  with  drowsiness.
Shiverings, most over back, afternoon ;  heat  in  face, with

anxiety  and  sleepiness,  but  without  thirst,
*^  Attacks. Pains  intermit  at  regular  intervals.
Intermitting  pinching  pains  in  ulcers.

Crushing  pain  regularly  worse  from  evening  till  2  A.M. 6  Neu-
ralgia after  amputation.
Every  day  between  3  and  4  p.m.  : coldness  and  trembling,  with

unbearable  stitches  in  head.
^^  Locality  and  Direction. Right :  pain  in  parietal ;  itching  in

eye ;  pressure  in  wing  of  nose ;  stitches  in  hypochondriura  ;

stitches  in  diaphragm  ;  pain  side  of  chest ;  stitches  behind

scapula ;  pain  in  fibula.
Left :  pain  and  tension  in  head  ;  sudden  pain  in  temple  ;  bleed-
ing from  nostril ;  pressure  in  orbit ;  corner  of  mouth  puffed ;

pressure in intercostal muscles ; shooting below nipple ;

drawing  side  of  neck  ;  burning  along  vertebrae ;  twitching

upper  arm-joint;  cramp-like  twitching  in  thumb  ;  throbbing

in  great  toe;  pain  in  half  of  body.
Above  downward  :  burning  in  chest ;  tearing  in  fore-arm.
Within  outward  :  burning  in  eyeballs;  pain  in  chest;  pressure

in  intercostal  muscles.
Below  upwards  :  oesophagus  seeming  drawn  upward ;  darting

stitches  in  chest ;  globus  hystericus  ;  flatus  passes  ;  pressure

in  liver.
Before  backward  :  shooting  from  nipple.
Reverse  action  of  involuntary  muscles  ;  a  sort  of  anti-peristaltic

motion,
"  Sensations. Sharp  pain  through  eye  into  head.
As  if  a  nail  or  plug  were  driven  into  the  brain.
Like  from  a  dull  stick,  pressure  in  temples.
Sudden  pain,  inward -pressing,  like  pointed  plug  in  1,  temple.
Sudden  deep  penetrating  stitches  like  shocks  under  1.  frontal

eminence.
Drawing  wavelike  pressure  through  1.  forehead.
Gurgling  sensation  in  head.
Sensation  of  water  swashing  in  the  head.
As  if  nose  would  burst.
Tender  feeling  in  throat.

As  if  a  ball  or  lump  were  ascending  in  throat.
"Gone  feeling"  in  epigastrium.
As  if  beaten:  in  epigastric  region  and  abdomen.
Pain  as  from  a  cold  in  upper  abdomen.


195  ASAF(ETIDA.

Winding  and  twisting  in  bowels.

As  if  peristaltic  motion  were  reversed.

Griping:  in  region  of  navel.

Labor-like  pain  :.  in  uterus.

As  if  the  heart  would  burst.

Flying  stitches :  in  forehead,  temples  and  sides  of  head.

Stitches :  under  1. frontal  eminence ; in  eyes ; darting  from

chest  to  oesophagus ;  about  lower  ribs  ;  in  stomach ; in  r.

hypochondrium  ;  in  diaphragm  ;  on  the  penis  ;  in  chest ;  in

big  toe.
'Cutting :  in  stomach  ;  in  uterus.
Jerking :  through  head.
Boring :  above  eyebrows.
Shooting :  below  1.  nipple  through  to  back.
Sticking :  in  eyes.
Burning :  above  eyebrows  ;  in  eyes  ;  in  mouth  ;  in  fauces  and

pharynx  ;  in  oesophagus  ;  under  sternum ;  in  chest.
Drawing :  in  caries  of  lower  maxilla ;  in  lower  incisors  ;  in  ab-
dominal muscles  ;  in  glans  penis.
Pressing  :  in  head ;  in  forehead  and  1.  head ;  in  temples ;  on

frontal  eminence ;  external  border  of  1.  orbit ;  in  eyes ;  in

nose  ;  on  chin ;  in  epigastrium  ;  in  stomach ;  from  liver  to

chest ;  in  abdomen  ;  in  perineum  ;  in  sternum  ;  in  region  of

heart.
Pressing  together  of  lids  as  if  overcome  with  sleep.
Bearing  down  :  in  genitals.
Constriction  :  of  chest :  of  throat ;  about  heart.
Cramp :  in  forehead.
Soreness :  in  kidneys.
Aching :  of  testicles.
Dull  pain :  in  1.  side  of  head.
Undefined  pain :  in  1.  side  of  head  to  eyes ;  about  heart ;  in

joints  and  limbs  ;  in  ulcers.
Tension  :  in  head  ;  of  the  brain ;  over  nasal  bones ;  in  various

places  in  face ;  in  abdomen.
Throbbing :  in  head  ;  in  and  around  eye ;  in  pit  of  stomach ;

in  chest ;  in  big  toe.
Fullness  :  in  head ;  in  stomach ;  about  heart.
Heaviness  :  in  intestines.

Numbness :  over  nasal  bones  ;  of  bones  of  face  ;  on  chin.
Heat :  of  the  face ;  increased  warmth  in  stomach  ;  in  spleen  ;

in  abdomen  ;  in  toes.
Dryness  :  of  the  eyes ;  in  mouth  and  throat ;  in  oesophagus.
Coldness :  in  head  ;  in  intestines  (see  15) ;  crawls  over  back  ;

of  the  skin.
Tickling :  in  trachea.
Itching:  in  r.  eye.
**  Tissues. Dark-red,  hot  swellings.


ASAFCETIDA.  '  196

Arthritic  and  cold  swellings.

■  Venous  pulsations  ;  congestion  of  the  portal  vein  ;  congestive

fullness  about  the  heart  and  chest,  with  asthma;  heat  efface
and  ears,  after  eating;  pressure  on  the  chest,  etc.,  copious
discharges;  all  signs  of  fullness  of  the  venous  system.
I  I  Dropsy,  ascites,  from  abdominal  venous  stasis.

■  Obesity;  seldom  of  use  in  bone  diseases  unless  the  body  is

heavy,  bloated.
I  I  Scraping  sensation  on  the  bones  ;  whole  body  puffed.

■  Caries  in  the  scrofulous,  and  after  abuse  of  mercury.

■  Glands  hard,  swollen,  hot  and  throbbing,  with  shooting,  jerk-

ing pains ;  scrofulous  complaints.
Neuralgia  of  the  stump,  after  amputation  of  thigh.

■  Osteitis,  caries,  bluish  redness  and  swelling  of  the  parts.
Ulcers,  with  bluish  edges,  hard,  painful  to  the  slightest  touch ;

thin,  very  offensive  pus.
Interstitial  distension  of  bones.

■  Soft  enlargement  of  bones,  also  curvature.
Softening  of  bones.

I  I  Nightly  bone  pains  in  syphilis.
Painful  osteitis.

■  Bones  threatened  by  syphilis. ^Iritis.

■  Caries  of  bones  ;  adhesion  of  skin  in  caries.

■  Scrofulous  caries  of  bones,  even  necrosis.

■  Ulcers  with  fetid,  ichorous,  bloody,  serous  pus;  with  bluish,

partly  raised  edges,  painful  to  the  slightest  touch.

■  Ulcers  deep,  flat,  fistulous,  affecting  the  bone.

*^  Touch.  Passive  Motion.  Injuries.  Touch :  pain  in  head
>  ;  pains  extend  through  eye  into  head ;  aching  of  testicle  ;
ulcers  extremely  sensitive ;  pains  cease  or  change  place.

Pressure : eye  >  ;  colic  improved

Most  extreme  sensitiveness  in  the  vicinity  of  the  carious  ulcer
of  the  tibia,  of  the  superficial  skin-sores,  and  also  of  the  ul-
cer itself;  the  patient  cries  out  if  the  finger  touched  a  place
distant  from  the  ulcer ;  removal  of  charpie  causes  most  se-
vere pain.

Better  from  rubbing.

Scratching :  itching  better.

Riding  in  carriage :  fullness  in  head  <  ;  drawing  side  of  neck
■<  ;  bearing  down  in  genitals  worse.

Injuries  suppurate.

Cold  gangrene.

Wounds  appear  bright  red,  raw,  covered  with  crust  of  tenacious
lymph.

After  amputation  :  neuralgia  of  stump.

Ulceration  from  burns  or  scalds,  or  other  causes,  with  great
sensitiveness  to  suffering;  child  screams  on  seeing  dressings


197  ASAF(ETIDA.

prepared,  dreads  and  shrinks  from  the  approach  of  any  one
likely  to  touch  the  sore.
*®  Skin. Dark  red,  hot  swellings.

Itching, pricking, burning of the skin ; itching >> by

scratching.
Skin  puffed  up,  inflamed.

■  Sphacelus.

Flat  eruptions,  painful.

I  Ulcers  with  extreme  sensitiveness  ;  patient  flinches  from  even
the  softest  dressing ;  or  from  the  near  approach  of  any  one.

I  Ulcers  with  high,  hard,  bluish  edges,  sensitive  to  touch,  easily
bleeding;  pus  profuse,  greenish,  thin,  off"ensive,  even  ichor-
ous. See  44.

■  Shooting  pain  around  the  ulcer.

■  Ulcers  grow  black.

I  I  Old  scars  break  open  and  turn  black.

Ulcers  penetrating  to  the  bones,  discharging  thin,  fetid  ichor.
Ulcers  or  sores  looking  raw,  bloody  or  dark ;  or  discharge  co-
piously.
Quivering  in  the  skin.
^^  Stages  of  Life,  Constitution. Nervous  women, subject  to
hysteria.

■  Phlegmatic  temperament.

I  I  Scrofulous,  bloated,  clumsy  children. See  44.

■  Venous,  hemorrhoidal  constitutions. See  44.

■  ■Nervous  people. See  36.

Very  weak  or  delicate  persons  suffering  from  very  great  sensi-
tiveness.

■  Syphilitic  patients  who  have  taken  much  mercury.

■  Girl,  get.  9,  chorea.

■  Woman,  set.  21,  in  the  sixth  week  after  first  confinement  not

milk  enough,  after  the  third  could  nurse  full  nine  months.

■  A  multipara,  set.  34  ;  milk  had  disappeared  tenth  day  in  seven

confinements.
*^  Relationship. Antidotes to Asaf. : tPulsat., I  1  Caustic,
I  I  Camplior.,  I  1  Cinchon.,  iMercur.,  I  I  Valer.

Useful  in  ailments  from  \Pulsat.,  or  from  abuse  of  iMercur.
in  syphilis,  and  from  effects  of  alcoholism.

Similar  to :  Arg.  nitr.  (better  open  air);  Aurum  met.  (bone
diseases,  iritis,  etc.);  Castor.,  Cinehon.,  Caustic,  Crot.  tig.
(pertussis) ;  Hepar  (sensitiveness  around  ulcers  ;  faints  from
pains) ;  Ignat.  (hysteria) ;  Mercur.  (syphilis) ;  Mosch.  (hys-
teria, spasms  of  lungs,  fainting,  etc.);  Phosphor,  (pertussis);
Pulsat.,  Thuya, Valer.

Family  relations  : Ammon.,  Cicut.,  Conium,  etc.

Frequently  indicated  after  Pulsat.  and  Thuya.


ASARUM  EUKOPAE0M.  198

ASARUM  EUROPAEUM.

Haselivurtz.  AristolocMacece.


Introduced  and  proved  in  1S77  b}"  Hahnemann  (14)  and  his  pupils  (254).
The  second  edition  appeared  in  1825  (16  and  254).  It  was  physiologically
arranged  by  A.  G.  Schneider  in  1853.  The  root  alone  is  better  than  the
whole  plant.


^  Mind. Gradual  vanishing  of  thought,  as  when  falling  asleep.
Stupid  feeling  in  the  head,  has  no  desire  to  do  anything.
B Imagines  he  is  hovering  in  the  air  like  a  spirit,  when  walking

in  the  open  air.
Great  merriness,  alternating  with  occasional  momentary  quiet

or  gloominess.
Tearful  sadness  and  anxiety.
Melancholic  irritability.
Nervous  irritability  and  exaltation. See  24.
BCold  "shivers"  from  any  emotion.
^  Sensorium. Confusion  of  the  head  less  perceptible  when  walk-
ing than  when sitting,  with  pressure  in  the  eyes  as  with  a

dull  point  from  within  outward,  especially  below  the  right

eyelid.
During  the  retching  all  the  symptoms  increase,  only  the  stupid

feeling  in  the  head  decreases.
Sensation  of  lightness  in  the  limbs;  when  she  walks  she  thinks

she  is  gliding  through  the  air.
I  Vertigo,  with  anxiety, d  Cholerine.
Early  in  the  morning,  when  rising,  dizziness  and  drowsiness  of

the  head,  with  headache  in  the  left  side  of  the  forehead.
Stupid  feeling  in  the  head,  has  no  desire  to  do  anything.
^  Inner  Head. Aching  pain  in  forehead,  with  muddled  state  of

the  mind.
Aching  in  the  temples,  especially  the  left.
Violent  pressure  in  the  forehead,  downwards  upon  the  eyes.
Frontal  headache,  with  nausea.
Tearing,  pressive  pain  in  left  temple.
Pain,  as  from  contraction  in  forehead,  temples,  and  behind  the

ears,  with  watering  and  burning  of  the  eyes,  worse  in  the

afternoon  (5  p.m.),  relieved  when  sitting,  and  by  washing,

but  not  by  wiping.
Dull  headache  in  left  temple, afterwards  below the parietal

bones,  lastly  in  the  occiput.


199  ASARUM  EUROPAEUM.

Pressive  headache  :  above  the  root  of  the  nose ;  in  the  temples,

particularly  the  left.
Pressure  over  greater  part  of  brain,  from  without  inwards.
Drawing  headache,  as  if  the  temple  would  be drawn in (at

noon) ;  ameliorated  in  the  open  air  and  when  lying  down.

■  Intense,  compressive  headache  in  the  left  temple,  and  behind

the  ears ;  more  violent  when  walking  or  shaking  the  head  ;

better  when  sitting.
Tearing,  pulsating  pain  in  the  forehead,  excited  by  stooping.
Throbbing  headache  in  the  morning,  early,  when  rising.

■  Headache,  with  pain  in  both  eyes,  and  nausea.

*  Outer  Head. iPain  externally  on  sides  of  head. ^Headache.
Itching,  beginning  with  fine  stitches,  below  left  temple.

■  Sensation  of  coldness  at  a  small  spot  on  left  side  of  head,

above  the  ear.
Tension  of  the  whole  scalp,  making  the  hair  feel  painful,

■  Hair  does  not  bear  combing.

®  Sight  and  Eyes. Obscuration  of  sight.

When  reading,  sensation  in  eyes  as  if  they  would  be  pressed
asunder.

■  Cannot  read  with  left  eye,  aggravated  by  bright  light.
Asthenopia,  accompanied  by  congestive  headaches ; eyes <

morning  and  evening,  when  out-doors  in  the  heat  and  sun-
light ; >  in  the  middle  of  the  day  and  by  bathing  them  in
cold  water.
The  cold  air  is  pleasant  to  the  eyes ;  sunshine,  light  and  wind
are  intolerable.

■  Jerking  pains  in  eyes,  with  vomiting  and  hysteria. ^  After

operation  on  the  eye.

Pressure  in  1.  eye. See  2.

Staring  eyes.

Painful  feeling  of  dryness  in  the  eye. ,

\  Thickening  of  the  cornea.

B  Sharp  pain  over  left  eye,  with  running  of  tears  and  sensitive-
ness of  sight.

Injected  conjunctivae,  with  stinging  in  the  canthi.

Left  upper  eyelid  is  somewhat  swollen ;  the  eye  cannot  endure
much  reading.

Inflamed  eyes,  blear-eyedness.

Watering  and  burning  of  the  eyes.
^  Hearing  and  Ears. ISOversensitiveness  of  nerves,  scratching
of  linen  or  silk  is  insupportable.

Dull  roaring  in  left  ear  like  a  distant  tornado  ;  in  right  distinct
singing;.

Diminished  hearing  of  left  ear.

Sensation  as  if  a  skin  was  stretched  over  right  external ear,
with  tensive  pressure  within ;  worse  in  the  cold.


ASARUM  EUROPAEUM.  200

I B  Sensation  as  if  the  ears  were  closed  or  plugged  up  with  some

foreign  substance.
IB  Deafness  in  one  or  both  ears, d  Catarrh.
B  Pressure  and  tension  in  region  of  orifice  of  meatus  externus

with  many  symptoms. "
Right  auricle  hot  to  the  touch.
^  Smell  and  Nose. Sharp  aching  above  the  roots  of  the  nose.
B  Some  cory  za  and  sneezing,  with  sensation  as  if  ears  were  closed

or  plugged  up  with  some  foreign  substance,  with  deafness.
Discharge  of  bloody  mucus  from  the  nose ;  streak  of  pure  blood.
Dry  coryza ;  the  left  nostril  is  stopped  up.
Tickling  in  the  nose,  causing,  after  unsuccessful  efforts,  a  sneeze,

and  discharge  of  clear  fluid.
Violent  sneezing.
^  Face. Warmth  of  cheeks.

Fine  stinging  on  right  cheek  ;  burning  stinging  pain  in  the  left.
^  Lower  Part  of  Face. Dryness  of  inner  side  of  lower  lip.

Cutting  pain,  with  cramp  at  articulation  of  lower  jaw.
^^  Teeth  and  Gums. Teeth  of  left  side  feel  as  if  hollow.
Cold  feeling  in  upper  incisors  as  from  a  cold  breath.
Smarting  sensation  in  the  gums.
"  Taste,  Speech,  Tongue. BiMost  disgusting  taste  in  mouth,
at  first  sour,  later  bitter, d  Cholerine.
Bread  tastes  bitter.
Tobacco  tastes  bitter  when  smoking.
Burning  sensation  across  the  tongue.
Biting  on  the  tongue.

Tongue  clean,  with  cholera-like  symptoms.
B Tongue  somewhat  whitish  and  thickly  furred. ^Cholerine.
^^  Inner  Mouth. Mucus  in  mouth,  of  a  sweetish,  insipid  taste.
Accumulation  of  much  water  in  the  mouth,  with  nausea.
Cold,  watery  saliva  accumulates  in  the  mouth.
BStomacace.
"  Palate  and  Throat. Dryness  in  throat,  with  stitches.
Scraping  in  throat.

Tough  mucus  in  throat ;  is  unable  to  raise  it,  or  hawk  it  loose.
Swallowing  difficult,  as  from  swelling  of  the  glands  of  throat.
Accumulation  of  tough  phlegm  in  throat.
"  Appetite,  Thirst,  Desires,  Aversions. Early  morning  hun-
ger.
BBWant  of  appetite,  even  nauseated  by  food. 6  Cholerine.
Loathing  of  food  without  any  gastric  derangement.
1 B  Unconquerable  longing  for  alcohol.
^^  Eating  and  Drinking. After  dinner:  great  lassitude.

When  drinking :  chilliness.
^^  Hiccough,  Belching,  Wausea  and  Vomiting. Hiccough.
Imperfect  eructations  reaching  only  to  upper  part  of  chest.
BB Frequent  empty  eructations. ^Cholerine.


201  ASARUM  EUROPAEUM.

Putrid  eructations.

Heartburn,  with  sour  belching,  setting  the  teeth  on  edge.

Nausea  with  shuddering.

Nausea,  with  disinclination  to  attend  to  business ;  laziness  and

sensation  as  if  without  a  head.
1 1  Attacks of nausea; worse after eating; tongue clean.

d  Cholerine.
llNausea  and  vomituritio. 6  Cholerine.
Violent,  empty  retching,  which increases all the  symptoms,

only  relieving  the  head.
Vomiting  :  of  only  a  small  quantity  of  greenish,  somewhat  sour

fluid ;  with  great  straining,  and  sensation  about  the  ears  as

if  the  head  would  split.
iVomiting  of  whitish  or  greenish  phlegm, d  Cholerine.
Vomiting  of  bile  and  mucus  streaked  with  blood.
■  Vomiting,  with  great  anguish, under  violent  exertion,  with

chilliness.
Vomiting,  with  diarrhoea  and  violent  colic.
After  vomiting,  relief  of  the  head  symptoms.
"  Scrobiculum  and  Stomach. Il  Pressing,  digging  and  feeling

of  discomfort  in  pit  of  stomach. 6  Cholerine.
Pressure  in  the  stomach,  scrobiculum  and  abdomen.
Sensation  of  constriction  in  the  region  of  the  diaphragm.
1 1  Horrible  sensation  at  the  epigastrium  when  getting  awake  in

the  morning. 6  With  drunkards.
^^  Hypochondria. Aching  in  the  spleen.
^^  Abdomen,  Loins  and  Groins. >  Oppression around navel,

three  or  four  hours  after  each  meal,  lasting  one  hour.
Cutting  bellyache,  with  vomiting.

Pinching  pain  in  left  side  of  abdomen  extending  to  back.
I  Pain  in  the  region  of  the  descending  colon  with  discharges  of

stringy  mucus.
Cutting  pain  in  upper  abdomen,  better  by  passing  flatus.
Violent  colic  and  vomiting.
Rumbling  and  gurgling  in  the  abdomen.
iWorras.
^^  Rectum  and  Stool. Stools  whitish-gray,  or  ash -colored, on

the  top  like  bloody  mucus.
BlA  long  yellow  twisted  string  of  inodorous  mucus  in  three  or

four  stools,  with  pain  in  abdomen.
iDiarrhoea,  passes  shaggy  masses  of  mucus,  inodorous  and  full

of  ascarides.
Diarrhoea  of  tenacious  mucus.
An  hour  and  a  half  after  stool  he  has  another  pressing  desire,

with  cutting  in  the  abdomen  and  rectum  before  and  during

stool,  which  is  softer  than  the  former.
lYellowish-brownish  diarrhoea, d  Cholerine.
iLientery;  watery  stools  after  a  meal,  very  weakening.


ASARUM  EUROPAEUM.  ■  202

B I  Scanty,  yellow,  mucous  stool.

Diarrhoea  in  chilly,  nervous  persons ;  from  debility ;  during
hectic  or  slow  fever.

■  Before  stool,  cutting  in  the  abdomen  and  sharp  stitches  in  the

rectum,  from  above  downwards.

During  stool,  discharge  of  thick,  black  blood.

Prolapsus  ani  during  stool.

After  stool,  pressing  and  straining,  and  discharge  of  white,  vis-
cid, bloody  mucus.

iCostiveness. ^Headache.

Passes  thick,  black,  blood  with  the  stool.

Prolapsus  ani  with  the  stool.
^^  Urinary  Organs. Constant  desire  to  urinate.

Pressure  on  the  bladder  during  and  after  the  emission  of  urine.
^^  Male  Sexual  Organs. !  Impotence.

Violent  pain  in  left  groin,  darting  through  urethra  to  glans,  in
which  a  violent  smarting,  contracted  pain  remains  for  a  long
time.
2*  Female  Sexual  Organs. Menstrual  colic.

Catamenia  too  early  and  long-lasting,  blood  black.

■  Headache  often  appears  before  and  after  the  catamenia.

B  At  the  appearance  of  the  menses  violent  pain  in  small  of  back,
which  scarcely  permits  her  to  breathe.

B  Tenacious  yellow  leucorrhoea.

BVaginal  fistula.
^*  Pregnancy  and  Parturition. Excessive  sickness  during  the
first  months  of  pregnancy,  stomach  rejecting  everything.

BB Nausea  and  vomiting  of  the  pregnant.

Threatened  abortion  from  excessive  sensibility  of  the  nerves ;
even  imagining  something  unpleasant  causes  thrills  to  pass
through  her,  momentarily  arresting  thought.

B  BLong  yellow  twisted  string  of  inodorous  mucus  (see  20),  with
pain  in  belly  occurring  from  two  to  four  months  after  con-
finement.
^^  Larynx, Stitches  and  constriction  in  the  larynx.
^^  Kespiration. Breath  very  short  (night).

Whistling  breathing  at  the  beginning  of  coughing.

Short,  jerking  breathing  on  account  of  stitches  and  constriction
of 'the  larynx.

Dull  stitches  in  both  lungs  during  inspiration.
^^  Cough. Frequent  cough  on  account  of  mucus  in  the  chest;  mucus
rises  into  the  throat,  causing  diflBcult  breathing,  and  finally
cough,  with  expectoration.

Inhalation  causes  irritation  to  cough,  in  the  throat.

B  Constant  short,  hacking  cough  of  consumptives.

Cough  relieves  the  constriction  of  larynx.
28  Inner  Chest  and  Lungs. Stitches  in  right  or  both  lungs  dur-
ing inhalation.


203  ASARUM  EUROPAEUM.

Sharp  pressure  in  region  of  last  ribs,  as  with  the  back  of  a

knife.
Pain  around  both  lungs,  as  if  they  were  constricted  by  a  thin

wire.
Pain  in  the  sides.
^^  Heart,  Pulse  and  Circulation. Pulse :  quick  and  strong ;

full  and  accelerated.
The  arterial  beat  is  felt  through  the  whole  body.
^^  Outer  Chest. Burning  sensation, right  chest, more  external

than  internal.
^^  Neck  and  Back. Stiff  neck,  with  thirst,  early  in  the  morning.
Dull  stitches  under  the  scapulse.
Laming  pain  as  if  bruised  in  one  of  the  cervical  muscles,  when

moving  the  head.
Sensation  in  the  muscles  of  the  neck  as  from  a  tight  cravat,  or

as  if  pressed  upon  by  a  dull  edge.
Sore  pain  along  the  inner  border  of  the  right  scapula.
Burning  pain,  with  stitches  in  small  of  back,  while  sitting.
Tearing  pain  from  crest  of  one  ilium  to  the  other.
Bruised  pain  in  the  back.

■  Violent  pain  in  small  of  back,  she  can  hardly  breathe  ;  begin-
ning of  menses.
^^  Upper  Limbs. Sweat  in  axillas  smelling  sour.

violent  stitcli  in  both  shoulders  during  motion  or  rest.
Contractive  tensive  pain  in  deltoid  muscle,  when  laying  the

hand  on  the  table,  and  while  it  lies  there.
Drawing  laming  pain  in  left  wrist.
Sudden  drawing  burning  pain  from  wrist  through  thumb  and

index  finger.
^^  Lower  Limbs. •  Chronic  sciatica.
Dull  pressure  in  right  hip.
Drawing  tensive  pain  in  head  of  left  femur.
Severe  pain  in  hip-joint  and  middle  of  thigh  when  stepping ;

the  foot  feels  as  if  paralyzed,  he  cannot  step  properly  thereon.
Severe  rheumatic  tearing  stitches  in  the  knees,  during  motion

and  at  rest.
Lassitude  in  the  knees.

Drawing  in  the  hamstrings  when  lying  in  bed ;  in  the  knee.
Gurgling  sensation  in  the  patella.
Bruised  feeling  in  left  tibia.
Stitches  in  ankles  and  soles.
The  little  toes  pain  as  if  frozen.
^*  Limbs  in  General. ■  Lightness  of  all  the  limbs  ;  he  does  not

perceive  that  he  has  a  body.
Occasional  darting  and  tearing  pains  in  upper  and  lower  limbs-
Rheumatism  worse  in  dry,  cold  weather.
^®  Rest. Position. Motion. Sitting  : confusion  of  head  <  ;


ASARUM  EUROPAEUM.  204

pain  in  head  >>  ;  pain  in  small  of  back  ;  headache ;  nausea
and  weakness  worse.

Lying  :  headache  >- ;  drawing  in  knees  and  ham  strings  ;  weak-
ness and  nausea  ^  ;  heat  of  face  and  palms.

Rest :  stitch  in  shoulders ;  stitches  in  knees.

Motion  :  stitch  in  shoulders  ;  stitches  in  knees.

Walking  :  confusion  of  head  >  ;  headache  worse.

Shaking  head  :  headache  worse.

Moving  head  :  pain  in  cervical  muscles.

Stooping  :  pain  in  forehead.
36  Nerves. Excessive  sensibility  of  all  the  nerves. See  24.

Great  nervous  irritation.

■  Hysteria.

llExcessive  sensibility  of  all  the  nerves  when  merely  thinking
(and  this  he  must  continually)  that  some  one  might  with  the
finger-tip  or  nail  scratch  even  lightly  on  linen  or  similar
material ;  a  most  disagreeable  sensation  thrills  through  him,
arresting  momentarily  all  his  thoughts  and  actions.

Great  lassitude.

Great  faintness  and  constant  yawning.

General  weary  feeling.

So  weak  and  nauseated  toward  evening,  that  when  he  rises  to
sitting  posture  he  feels  as  if  he  would  instantly  sink  down
and  die ;  he  must  lie  in  bed.

So  weak  he  staggers,  unless  his  mind  is  on  his  walking.
^^  Sleep. Evening  in  bed,  agitation  in  the  blood,  prevents  sleep  for
two  hours.

After  lying  down  in  the  evening,  sweat.

Condition  of  mind  as  if  just  falling  asleep;  gradual  vanishing
of  ideas.

Frequent  yawning.

Great  drowsiness  by  day.

Restless  sleep.

Short  breath  at  night.

Nightly  vexatious  dreams  about  humiliations.
^^  Time. Morning:  dizziness  and  drowsiness;  headache  on  rising ;
eyes <  ; hunger ; horrible sensation in epigastrium on
awaking ;  stiff  neck.

Forenoon  :  chilly,  cold  feeling  worse.

Mid-day  :  eyes  better.

During  day  :  drowsiness.

5  P.M. :  pain  in  head  worse.

Towards  evening  :  weakness  and  nausea  worse.

Evening  :  eyes  <  ;  heat  of  face  and  palms  ;  cutaneous  diseases
worse.

Kight :  shortness  of  breathing.
^^  Temperature  and  Weather. Dry,  cold  weather: rheuma-
tism worse.


205  ASARUM  EUROPAEUM.

Open  air :  headache  >  ;  chilly,  cold  feeling  worse.
In  heat,  sunlight  and  wind: eyes  worse.
Cold  water  :  eyes  better.
Cold  air :  eyes  >  ;  ears  worse.

Hottest  weather :  cold  hands,  feet,  abdomen  or  knees,  not  better.
Covering,  or  warm  room  :  cold  feeling  no  better.
Washing  :  pain  in  head  better.
Damp  weather  :  symptoms  improve.
*"  Chill. Fever. Sweat. Chills  during  the  day,  without  thirst.
iNervous  chilliness,  single  parts  get  icy  cold, d  Cholera  season.
I  Cold  hands,  feet,  knees  or  abdomen  ;  even  the  hottest  weather

does  not  relieve ;  timid,  nervous  persons.
Chill  and  cold  feeling  in  forenoon,  after  eating  or  drinking,  and

in  open  air,  generally  with  heat  of  head.
I  Great  want  of  vital  heat;  feels  cold  continually.
I  Cold  feeling,  not  relieved  by  covering,  or  warmth  of  room.
Heat  in  the  evening,  after  lying  down,  particularly  in  face  and

palms  of  hands.
Alternate  flushes  of  burning  heat  and  coldness.
Sweat  increased  at  night,  of  sour  smell ;  most  profuse  in  axillae.
Sweats  easily,  particularly  on  upper  part  of  body.
I  I  Slow  fevers,  no  reaction  from  spinal  enervation.
I  Typhus.
*^  Locality and Direction. Right : pressure below eyelid ;
singing  in  ear;  sensation  of  skin stretched over external
ear;  pressure  within  ear;  stinging in cheek;  stitches in
lungs ;  burning  in  chest ;  pain  border  of  scapula ;  pressure
in  hip.
Left :  side  of  forehead  and  temple  ache ;  coldness  side  of  head ;
pressure  in  eye ;  upper  eyelid  swollen  ;  roaring  in  ear ;  ear
deaf;  nostril  stopped; stinging  pain in cheek;  teeth feel
hollow  ;  pain  side  of  abdomen  ;  pain  in  groin  ;  pain  head  of
femur ;  bruised  feeling  in  tibia.
Above  downward  :  pressure  in  forehead ;  cutting  in  abdomen.
Within  outward  :  pressure  in  eyes.
Without  inwards  :  pressure  over  brain.
Before  backward  :  pain  in  abdomen.
^^  Sensations. Lightness  in  limbs,  as  if  gliding  through  the  air.
As  if  a  skin  were  stretched  over  r.  ear.
As  if  ears  were  plugged.
As  if  pressed  asunder :  in  eyes.
As  if  constricted  by  a  thin  wire  :  both  lungs.
Sensation  as  from  a  tight  cravat  in  muscles  of  neck.
Horrible  sensation  at  epigastrium.
As  if  frozen  :  in  little  toe.

Cutting :  articulation  of  lower  jaw  ;  bellyache ;  in  upper  abdo-
men ;  in  rectum.


ASARUM  BUROPAEUM.  206

Tearing :  in  1.  temple ;  from  crest  of  one  ilium  to  the  other ;

in  knees  ;  through  limbs.
Darting:  through  urethra;  through  limbs.
Dull  stitches  :  in  lungs  ;  under  scapulae.
Fine  stitches  :  below  1.  temple.
Stitches  :  in  throat ;  in  rectum  ;  in  larynx  ;  in  small  of  back  ;

in  shoulders  ;  in  knees  ;  in  ankles  ;  in  soles.
Stinging :  in  canthi ;  on  r.  cheek ;  and  burning  in  1.  cheek.
Burning : of  eyes ; across  tongue ;  in  r.  chest ;  in  small  of

back.
Biting :  on  tongue.
Smarting :  in  gums.

Pinching  :  in  1.  side  of  abdomen  to  back.
Compressive  pain  :  in  1.  temple;  behind  ears.
Drawing :  in  temple ; in 1. wrist ;  through thumb to  index

finger ;  in  head  of  1.  femur ;  in  hamstrings.
Sore  pain  :  along  inner  border  of  r.  scapula.
Smarting :  in  glans  penis.
Scraping :  in  throat.

Aching :  in  forehead  ;  in  temples  ;  above  root  of  nose.
Rheumatic  pain  :  in  knees.

Bruised  pain  : in  cervical  muscle ;  in  back  ;  in  1.  tibia.
Sharp  pain  :  over  1.  eye.
Pressure :  in  1.  eye ;  in  eyes  as  with  a  dull  point  from  within

outward ;  in  forehead  upon  the  eyes ;  above  root  of  nose ;

over  brain  ;  in  pit  of  stomach  and  abdomen  ;  in  rectum ;  on

bladder ;  in  region  of  last  ribs  ;  in  r.  hip.
Throbbing :  headache.
Jerking :  in  eyes.

Cramp:  at  articulation  of  lower  jaw.
Contractive  pain :  in  forehead,  temples,  and  behind  ears ;  in

glans  penis  ;  in  deltoid  muscle.
Constriction  :  in  region  of  diaphragm  ;  in  larynx.
Tension :  of  scalp.
Tensive  pressure  :  in  ear.

Undefined  pain  :  in  eyes  ;  on  sides  of  head ;  in  region  of  des-
cending colon  :  in  small  of  back  ;  in  sides.
Gurgling :  in  patella.
Paralyzed  feeling  :  in  foot.
Oppression  :  around  navel.
Coldness  :  above  1.  ear  ;  in  upper  incisors.
Itching  :  below  1.  temple.
Tickling :  in  no«e.
Dryness  :  in  eye  ;  in  throat.
**  Tissues. Irritability  of  the  nerves.

^^  Touch. Passive  Motion. Injuries. Touch :  auricle  hot.
I  After  operation  on  the  eye:  jerking  pain.


I

207  ASARUM  EUROP.— ASCLEPIAS  SYRIACA.

*"  Skin. Discharge  of  bloody  and  slimy  matter  from  ulcers.

\  Jaundice.
^^  Stages  of  Life,  Constitution. iPlethoric  young  woman  suffered
for  years  from  headaches.

Nervous  temperament,  excitable  or  melancholic  mood.

I  Nervous,  anxious  people. ^During  cholera  season.

I I  Drunkards;  popular  in  Russia.

*^  Relationship. Antidotes  to  Asa7'. : Camphor,  vinegar,  vege-
table acids.
Followed  by  :  Bismuth.

Compare  :  Aeon.,  Aloes  (stringy  stools) ;  Camphor  (cholerine) ;
Cuprum,  Hep>ar,  Ipec.  (cholerine) ;  Mercur.  (stringy  stools) ;
Nux  vom.,  Phosphor.,  Podoph.  (stringy  stools);  Pulsat.
(stringy  stools) ;  Sepia,  Stramon.,  Sulph.  ac. (stringy  stools);
Tabac.  (cholerine) ; Veratr.  (cholerine).


ASCLEPIAS  SYRIACA.

Milk  or  Silkiveed.  Asclepiadaeece.

The  oldest  and  best  proving  was  made  by  Jeanes;  later  proved  by  Cler-
borne  and  Pattee.

Preparation  :  tincture  of  root.

^  Sensorium. Vertigo,  dullness  and  stupidity,  with  headache.

Dullness  with  the  pain  in  1.  side  of  head.  *

^  Inner  Head. Violent  headache  between  the  eyes ;  a  sense  of

constriction  across  the  forehead.
A  feeling  as  if  some  sharp  instrument  was  thrust  through  from

one  temple  to  the  other,  with  feeble  pulse  and  cool  skin  ;  also

vomiting.
■Nervous  headaches,  which  are  attended  by  dry  skin  and  scanty

urine,  cool  skin  and  feeble  pulse,  and  followed  by  sweating

or  profuse  urination.
Congestive  headache,  from  suppression  of  sweat  or  urine,  and

fever.
When  the  drug  did  not  cause  sweating  or  profuse  urination,  it

caused  violent  headache,  with  vertigo,  quick,  full  pulse,  and

nausea.
■  Rheumatic  headaches.

Disordered  feeling,  with  slight  pain  in  1.  side  of  head.
At  times  severe  pain  for  several  hours  in  whole  of  1.  head.
®  Ears. Shooting  pain  in  1.  ear.


ASCLEPIAS  SYRIACA.  .  -  208

®  Face. Appeared  dull  and  stupid.
^^  Teeth. Pain  in  the  carious  teeth.
"  Tongue. Tongue  coated  with  a  white  fur.
13  Throat. Burning  and  tickling  in  the  fauces  with  nausea  and

headache.
"  Appetite. Oreat  appetite  even  a  few  hours  after  a  meal.

Increased  appetite,  notwithstanding  the  vomiting  and  headache,
with  constipation.
^^  Belching,  Nausea  and  Vomiting. 1 1  Excessive  nausea,  with
violent  headache.
A  striking,  well-marked  belching  of  the  food  with  its  proper

taste  (similar  to  Ant.  crud).
Severe  and  long  continued  vomiting,  leaving  behind  a  sensa-
tion of  rawness  in  the  stomach  and  a  slight  pain.
After  vomiting :  headache  (see  3) ;  relaxed  feeling ;  frequent,
feeble  pulse.
^^  Stomach. Uneasiness  and  slight  pain  in  stomach  with  diuresis
and  inclination  to  stool.
Rawness  in  stomach  after  vomiting. See  16.
Heat  of  stomach  and  abdomen.
;  Indigestion.
^^  Hypochondria. Increased  secretion  of  bile.

\  Hepatic  derangements.
^^  Abdomen. Rumbling  in  the  bowels,  apparently  in  the  superior
flexure  of  colon,  as  if  diarrhoea  would  set  in.
Pain  and  soreness  in  abdomen,  with  or  without  distension.
Stitching  and  aching  pain  in  1.  lumbar  region  of  abdomen.
Considerable  rumbling  in  all  parts  of  abdomen,  as  before  diar-
rhoea.
\  Peritonitis.

\  Flatulence  and  flatulent  colic.
^"  Rectum  and  Stool. '  l  Inclination  to  evacuate  the  bowels,  with
nausea  and  diuresis.
\  Diarrhoea.

I  Dysentery,  during  the  febrile  stage.
Diarrhoea  with  persistent  nausea  and  vomiting.
Copious  evacuation,  in  evening,  soft,  brown,  with  slight  colic.
Soft  yellow  stool  at  noon,  with  increase  of  appetite.
Diarrhoea  with  excoriation  of  anus.

■  Constipation  ;  pain  in  r.  side,  lower  limbs,  and  loss  of  appetite.
See  14.
^^  Urinary  Organs. Enormous  increase  of  urine.
Pale  colored  urine  with  lighter  specific  gravity. .
I  I  Increase  of  solid  matter  in  urine.
Scanty  urine  with  headache.
Profuse  urine  after  headache.
Burning  in  urethra  when  urinating.
^^  Male  Sexual  Organs. Tickling  sensation  at  the  end  of  penis.


209  ASCLEPIAS  SYRIACA.

Pressing  and  pain  in  groins  and  at  the  abdominal  ring,  more  in
1.  side.
^'  Female  Sexual  Organs. Dysmenorrhoea  with  diuresis.

■  Suppression  of  menses  during  dropsy.

;rlntermitting,  bearing  down,  labor-like  pains, d  Dropsy.
^^  Larynx. 1 1  Increase  of  the  bronchial  secretions.

Severe  bronchial  irritation  with  burning  and  tickling  in  fauces.

I  Influenza;  catarrhal  fevers ;  bronchitis.

I  Hay  sickness.
^®  Breathing. •  Asthma.
^^  Cough. :  Whooping-cough.
^*  Lungs. Pain  in  1.  side  of  chest  on  deep  inspiration.

\  Catarrh. I  Pleurisy. •  Pneumonia, \  Consumption.
^^  Heart. Pulse. Action  of  heart  increased.

Pulse  lowered  from 98  to  67 first  day;  63  third  day;  60,
fourth,  fifth  and  sixth  days.

Pulse  feeble  after  vomiting.
^^  Neck. Back. iPain  about the  lowest  dorsal  vertebra,  cut-
ting and  aching.

Chilliness  in  back,  when  the  pain  there  began  to  abate.
^^  Upper  Limbs. Pains,  with  feeling  of  heaviness  in  upper  limbs.
^^  Lower  Limbs. Boring  pain  in  1.  tibia.
^*  Limbs  in  General, i Pains  in  limbs.
^®  Nerves. •  Hysteria.

^^  Sleep. Drowsiness  ;  slept  rather  hard  during  the  night.
^*  Time. Morning :  headache  on  awaking.

Noon  :  Soft  yellow  stool.
^^  Fever. Coldness  of  skin  on  surface,  with  feeble  pulse,  and  pecu-
liar headache  (see  3) ;  after  vomiting.

Skin  moist.

Profuse  sweat.

•  Fevers  of  different  types.
^^  Sides. Right :  pain  in  side.

Left :  pain  side  of  head  ;  shooting  in  ear ;  pain  lumbar  region  ;
pain  in  groin  ;  pain  side  of  chest ;  boring  pain  in  tibia.
■*^  Sensations. As  if  a  sharp  instrument  were  thrust  from  temple
to  temple.

Boring  :  in  1.  tibia.

Cutting:  about  lowest  dorsal  vertebrse.

Stitching :  in  1.  lumbar  region  of  abdomen.

Shooting  :  in  1.  ear.

Burning:  in  fauces.

Rawness :  in  stomach.

Soreness :  in  abdomen.

Aching :  in  1.  lumbar  region  of  abdomen ;  about  lowest  dorsal
vertebrae.

Pressing :  in  groins,  and  abdominal  ring.

Heaviness :  in  upper  limbs.

VOL.  II. — 14.


ASCLEPIAS  SYRIACA  AND  TUBEROSA.  210

Constriction :  across  forehead.

Undefined pain : in 1. side of  head ; in  carious teeth ;  in
stomach  ;  in  abdomen  ;  in  1.  chest.
"  Tissues. iHas  especial  influence  on  nervous  tissues.

I  Dropsy  after  scarlatina  with  nephritis.

iHeadache  from  checked  sweat,  or  retention  of  effete  matters;
dropsy  from  the  same  causes  or  diseases  of  kidneys.

I  Dropsy  from  heart  disease. See  24.

I  Uraemia ; urine after profuse  discharges  is  scanty  or  sup-
pressed.

I  Acute  rheumatism,  confined  to  the  large  joints,  with  much
pain  and  swelling.

I  Chronic  rheumatism.
^^  Skin. I  Eruptions.
*^  Relationship. Cognates  :  Act.  rac,  Bryon.,  Colchic.

Side  relations :  Asclep.  tuber,  and  Asclep.  vincet.  (particularly
useful  in  diabetes  mellitus).


ASCLEPiAS  TUBEROSA.

Pleurisy  Root.  Asclepiadacece.


An  old  popular  drug,  proved  by  M.  A.  Savory,  and  published  in  the
French  journals,  1858  ;  from  them,  1860,  into  German  ;  from  there  translated
by  Dr.  M.  J.  Rhees,  in  the  June  and  July,  number  of  the  Am.  Horn.  Review;
same  year,  1859,  translated  by  Marcy;  altogether  condemned  by  Hale.
Later  proved  by  Th.  Nicol,  see  Hale,  N.  R.,  2d  ed.,  p.  121.  The  symp-
toms taken  from  him  are  marked  N.


^  Mind. Excessive  dejection.

Weakness  of  memory.

Difficulty  in  thinking  collectedly.

Towards  evening  unusual  elevation  of  spirits. N.

At  9  P.M.  the  cheerful  mood  changed,  and  without  any  cause
he  became  fretful  and  peevish. N.

Languid  and  dull  all  day  both  in  body  and  mind. N.
'  Sensorium. Feeling  of  drunkenness  with  weakness  of  sight,
after  smoking  a  very  little.

Swimming  of  the  head,  with  dullness  behind  forehead. N.

Head  feels  dull  and  gloomy,  9  a.m. N.


-11  ASCLEPIAS  TUBEROSA.

^  Inner  Head. Pain  in  forehead  with  a  feeling  of  heaviness  in

the  side,  continuing  all  day.
Headache  is  present  almost  daily,  generally  most  severe  early

in  the  morning.
Headache  in  the  morning  while  rising,  with  weakness,  so  that

he  must  he  down  again,  continued  all  day  and  night,  relieved

somewhat  by  a  warm  foot-bath.

■  Arthritic  cephalalgia.

■  Gastric  cephalalgia.

Dull  aching  headache  in  forehead  and  vertex,  <  bv  motion >
lying  down. N.  ' j  ^  ^

Headache  presses  deep  on  base  of  skull. N.

■  Pain  in  forehead  from  coughing.

*  Outer  Head. Pricking  as  if  with  nails  in  head  and  same  time
m  other  parts.

Pain  in  scalp,  1.  side  of  occiput,  like  touching  a  pustule,  contin-
umg  one  day.

Falling  out  of  hair.
"  Sight  and  Eyes. Transitory  pain  behind  1.  eyeball.

Broad,  dark  spots  before  eyes,  with  very  slow  pulse,  bb.

Itching  in  the  canthi  and  lids  of  r.  eye.

Inflammation  of  conjunctiva ;  for  many  days.

Pain  in  eyes  by  gaslight.

Eyes  look  languid  and  fatigued.

Feeling  as  if  sand  were  in  the  eyes.  ■  -

Lower  lids  painful  as  if  ulcerated.
'  Smell  and  Nose. Itching  in  the  nose  and  face.

Pustules  on  the  nostrils.

Stinging  in  the  nose  as  from  a  flea.

At  first  dry,  then  fluent  coryza  during  the  first  few  days,  with
much  sneezing  subsequently.

■  Snufiles  of  children.

■  Fluent  coryza  with  much  sneezing.  ''
Blowing  of  blood  from  one  nostril.

^  Face. Yellowness  of  face.

Hippocratic  face  after  a  violent  diarrhoea,  on  15th  day.
®  Lower  Part  of  Face. Many  vesicles  on  the  lips.
Itching  of  lips.

Lips  inflamed  and  covered  with  herpetic  vesicles.
"  Teeth  and  Gums. Yellow  coating  on  teeth.
Pain  in  r.  inferior  molars.

Gums  very  pale  and  almost  yellow ;  bleed  easily  and  repeatedly.
^^  Tongue. Putrid  taste.  j  i'  j

Yellow  tough  coating  on  tongue.
"  Mouth. Taste  of  blood  in  the  mouth.

"  Throat. Transitory  constriction  and  stinging  in  throat,  extend-
ing to  larynx.
Pain  and  soreness  in  throat.


ASCLEPIAS  TUBEROSA.  212

"Appetite, Aversions. Deficient appetite, especially in the
morning.

Insatiable  hunger.

I  Sensitive  to  tobacco.
^^  Hiccough,  Belching,  Nausea  and  Vomiting. Eructa-
tions :  frequently  after  taking  the  drug,  continuing  all  day  ;
with  the  odor  of  the  drug.

Nausea  in  the  morning,  when  rising.

Nausea  and  efforts  to  vomit.

Vomiting,  purging  and  great  prostration.

Nausea  with  constipation  ;  bilious  vomiting.

I  Bilious  vomiting,  with  or  without  diarrhoea ;  but  with  pains  in
limbs,  cramp  in  feet,  etc.
*^  Scrobiculum  and  Stomach. Burning  in  stomach ;  after  25
minutes.

Pains  in  stomach  ;  nervous,  even  amounting  to  violent  gastral-
gia ;  also  cramp-like.

Sensation  as  if  the  stomach  would  burst,  while  laughing ;  pains
in  stomach  continue  42  days.

Pressing  pain  in  stomach  with  rumbling  in  bowels,  5  P.M. N.

Thoracic  pains,  easier ;  still  felt  in  region  of  diaphragm  and  on
motion. N.

Disagreeable  feeling  of  weight  at  stomach,  appetite  deficient. N.

Flying  pains  in  stomach.
^*  Hypchondria. Burning  in  r.  hypochondriac  region  and  sto-
mach, with  the  pain  in  intestines.

Throbbing  in  1.  hypochondriac  region.

Violent  pain  in,  hypogastrium,  as  if  ulcerated,  with  tenderness
to  pressure.

Fullness  and  pains  in  r.  side,  with  flying  pain  in  stomach  and
feeling  as  if  something  would  pass  the  bowels,  with  slight
nausea.
^'  Abdomen. ■  Soft,  fetid  stool,  preceded  by  rumbling,  followed
by  urging  to  stool.

Stool  like  white  of  eggs.

Pain  in  intestines,  after  20  minutes.

Much  flatulence,  smelling  like  the  drug,  with  colic-like  pains.

Flatulence  with  a  sensation  when  walking  as  if  the  belly  would
drop.

Colic :  while  going  up  stairs ;  while  walking ;  after  eating ;
most  violent  at  night  after  1  o'clock,  and  also  in  the  morn-
ing ;  during  each  stool.

■  Subacute  mucous  enteritis.

I  Acute  soreness  with  sharp  griping  pains  in  lower  abdomen
after  Sulphur.

I  Soreness  and  pain  in  peritoneal  lining  of  lower  abdomen  over
the  bladder,  not  in  it  nor  urethra  nor  rectum  (after  Sulphui').


213  ASCLEPIAS  TUBEROSA.

Rumbling  and  uneasiness  in  bowels,  with  feeling  of  heat  in
umbilical  region. N.

Pressing  pain  in  bowels  and  emission  of  fetid  wind,  4  p.m. N.

Awoke  3  A.M.  by  rumbling  in  bowels^  with  sharp  cutting
pains ;  felt  tranquil  and  calm,  though  the  pain  was  very  se-
vere. N.

On  awaking  6  a.m.  rumbling  in  bowels  with  soreness  of  peri-
toneum ;  a  dull  pain  on  pressure. N.
^"Rectum  and  Stool. Soft  and  fetid  stool  11  a.m.;  5  p.m.
another,  very  unusual. N.

■  Dysentery;  chiefly  catarrhal  and  autumnal.
11  P.M.  urging  to  stool.

Fluid,  painful  stool  of  very  strong  smell.

Stool  of  green  color  and  smelling  like  spoiled  eggs,  followed  bj
pain  in  anus.

Painful,  copious  stool  with  violent  colic  and  a  sensation  as  if
the  bowels  would  come  out ;  half  an  hour  afterwards  a  very
small  but  excessively  painful  stool ;  at  night,  1  o'clock ;  at
2  o'clock  the  same  but  with  increased  pain.

In  the  morning,  11  o'clock,  another  stool,  almost  black,
with  many  ascarides  and  yellow  spots  like  fat,  with  a  feeling
as  if  a  stream  of  fire  passed  through  abdomen.

Constipation  after  diarrhoea.

In  the  afternoon  a  stool  of  intense  yellow  color,  with  green  and
yellow  flakes.

In  the  evening  a  stool  exactly  like  the  white  of  an  egg.

Feces  enveloped  in  froth.

I  1  Tenesmus.

B  Bowels  so  irritable  that  he  had  5,  6  stools  a  day  (after  Sul-
phur).

■  Flatulence  with  pains  in  abdomen  and  frequent  stools.

■  Pain  came  on  with  great  violence  about  2  or  3  a.m.,  with  sud-

den discharge  from  the  bowels,  followed  by  5,  6  during  the
day  (after  Sulphur).
':  Winter  diarrhoea.

■  Bilious  and  painful  diarrhoea.

■  Catarrhal diarrhoea in children or  in  warm  weather  when

nights  are  cold  and  damp.
*^  Urine. Urine  red  to  saturation  (first  12  days).
Urine  looks  as  if  mixed  with  blood  :  17tli  day.
After  standing  a  short  time:  small,  dark  red,  almost  black

points  size  of  pin's  head  rise  to  the  surface,  and  much  mucus

is  deposited  on  the  bottom  of  the  vessel.
Urine  riemains  more  red  than  normal  during  the  whole  of  the

proving.
Painful  stitches  in  the  urethra,  repeatedly.  •
Frequent  passing  of  clear  urine.

■  Urine  rather  scanty  and  high  colored, d  Subacute  pericarditis.


ASCLEPIAS  TUBEROSA.  214

**  Male  Sexual  Organs.  Ulcerous  excoriations  on  the  glans,  re-
sembling chancre ;  with  a  pus-like  secretion,  disappearing  in
a  few  days,  from  washing  with  urine.

Copious  sweat  of  genitals.

Erections  without  lust,  particularly  mornings.

Painful  stitches  in  penis.

•  Syphilis;  constitutional  syphilis.
**  Female  Sexual  Organs. •  Menorrhagia. N.

Profuse  menstruation,  with  violent  pressing  down  pain.
*^  Larynx. Pain  in  the  larynx.

Sensation  of  constriction  of  larynx.

■  Capillary  bronchitis  in  children.
1 1  Bronchitis  acute  and  chronic.

'^  Breathing. Respiratory  murmur  and  distress  in  r.  lung.

I  Relieves  breathing  of  pleuritic  patients. N.

The  breath  smells  like  pepper.

Necessity  to  inspire  hurriedly ;  followed  by  a  sensation  of  op-
pression.

Want  of  breath,  like  asthma,  often  very  great,  particularly
after  eating  and  after  smoking  a  little.

I  Humid  asthma;  dyspnoea  in  bronchial  affections.

Singing  or  loud  speaking  aggravates  thoracic  pain. N.

■  Respiration  painful,  especially  at  base  of  left  lung.

^  Cough. Dry  hard  cough,  worse  at  night  and  morning.

Cough  dry  and  hacking,  though  a  little  mucus  is  raised  with

great  effort.
Sputa  frothy  or  yellow.

J  It  promotes  expectoration  when  suppressed. N.
I  Hoarse,  croupy  cough,  tightness  of  breathing  and  fever  with

hot  but  moist  skin.
Dry  cough  with  constriction  of  throat. N.
Cough  continues  dry  and  harsh,  and  coughing  causes  pain  in

forehead  and  abdomen.

■  Catarrhal  cough,  hard,  spasmodic,  from  irritation  of  larynx  or

bronchia.
^*  Inner  Chest  and  Lungs. Warm  feeling  in  chest.
Soreness  in  lower  part  of  chest.
Pain  in  the  r.  lung.
■Pleurisy  (similar  to  Bryon.).

■  Pleurisy,  child,  set.  12,  with  much  cutting  pain  in  1.  side  dur-
'  ing  inspiration  ;  some  dyspnoea,  fever  and  hacking  cough.

Feeling  of  warmth  in  chest,  with  dull  pain  at  the  base  of  both
lungs,  with  feeling  of  tightness. N.

I  I  Sharp  pains  shooting  from  1.  nipple  downward,  with  stiffness
of  1.  side  of  neck. N.

\  It  relieves  dyspnoea  and  pain  in  the  chest. N.

Pains  in  chest  kept  increasing,  during  the  evening,  making  res-
piration painful,  especially  at  base  of  1.  lung,  which  is  dull


215  ASCLEPIAS  TUBEROSA.

on  percussion,  while  the  cough  is  dry  and  spasmodic. Pain
increased  and  cough  worse  when  awake,  at  4  a.m. N.

■  Pain  moved  up  from  bowels  to  behind  the  sternum,  becoming

more  sharp and cutting, < drawing  a  long  breath and

from  motion  of  hands,  as  in  triturating,  4  p  m. N.
I  Pain  in  lungs  relieved  by  bending  forward. N.
A feeling of  weariness  had been  less during  the pain in

lungs. N.
Pain  returns  on  coughing  or  drawing  a  deep  breath,  very  acute

on  r.  side.
Stitches  in  1.  side,  shooting  over  to  the  r.  and  up  to  1.  shoulder.
I  I  Acute  pleuritic  pain  in  r.  side,  with  dry,  hacking  cough,  and

scanty  mucous  expectoration.

■  Subacute  pneumonia  of  a  catarrhal  origin.

■  Influenza,  with  pleuritic  or  neuralgic  pains.
Pleuritic  pain  and  colic.

Chest  feels  weak  and  sore,  without  cough,  though  no  pain  is

felt  on  drawing  a  long  breath. N.
"  Heart. Pulse. I  l  Pain  like  the  pricking  of  a  needle  in  region

of  heart.
I  I  Contracting  pain  in  heart.
I  I  Pain  beneath  left  nipple  with  palpitation  of  heart, pulse

rising.

■  Acute  rheumatic  pericarditis.

■  Hard,  heavy,  forcible  beating  of  heart,  with  dyspnoea.
Pulse  at  first  55 ;  afterwards  70 ;  on  the  8th  day,  92.
Pulse  thready  at  65,  during  diarrhoea.

Pulse  from  64  to  88,  and  small  (after  1  hour). N.

Pain  beneath  left  nipple  returned  with  palpitation  of  heart.  N.

The  pain,  which  is  quick,  darting,  and  more  acute  than  at  first,
shoots  over  to  the  r.  side ;  at  noon  shooting  up  to  left  shoul-
der, which  was  painful  in  motion. N.

■  Subacute  pericarditis;  slight  dyspnoea  aside  from  painful  res-

piration ;  acute  pain  in  chest  felt  on  inspiration,  movement
of  arms,  stooping  forward  or  lying  on  left  side ;  pain  was  lo-
cated at  point  where  apex  of  heart  strikes  parietes  of  chest,
but  it  would  occasionally  shoot  back  under  the  scapula ;  an
indescribable  uneasiness  in  shoulder  and  arm  ;  pressure  on
intercostal  spaces  caused  some  pain,  especially  over  the  re-
gion of  the  heart.

^^  Outer  Chest. I  l  Tenderness  on pressure  over  the  regipn of
heart.
I  I  The  spaces  between  the  ribs  close  to  the  sternum  are  tender
on  pressure,  and  the  pain,  which  is  quick,  darting,  and  more
acute  than  at  first,  shoots  over  to  the  right  side.

■  Sharp  pains  shooting  from  left  nipple  downward,  with  stifihess

of  left  side  of  neck.


ASCLEPIAS  TUBEEOSA.  216

^*  Neck and  Back. Stinging, transitory  stitches  between  the
shoulder  blades.
Itching  and  red  blotches  on  the  back.
Pain  in  the  loins  like  lumbago.
^^  Upper  Limbs. Pock-like  pustules  on  the  arms.

Pain  in  1.  shoulder  and  soon  afterwards  in  the  right,  like  rheu-
matism.
Pains  shooting  from  1.  chest  into  1.  shoulder.
Pain  in  bones  of  1.  arm.

Rheumatic  pains  in  forearm  down  to  the  fingers.
Numbness  of  r.  hand.
Violent  itching  in  hand  and  fingers.
Sharp  shooting  pains  in  r.  shoulder,  9  A.M. N.
^  Lower  Limbs. Pain  in  hips  like  coxalgia.

Rending  pains  in  knees  and  up  to  hips,  especially  while  walk-
ing, and  also  in  the  morning  when  rising.
Ankle  feels  as  if  sprained.
Drawing  pains  in  thighs.
Pains  in  bones  of  1.  ankle.
Drawing  in  the  soles  and  toes.
Pain  as  from  corns,  bedcover  seems  too  heavy.
Violent  itching  on  the  legs,  particularly  the  knees.
I  I  Itching  of  thighs  and  nates,  but  no  eruption. N.
A  red  inflamed  spot  on  upper  part  of  r.  thigh,  size  of  a  dollar,
painful  and  itching,  leaving  after  several  days  a  dark  stain.
Aching  pains  in  knees  and  drawing  pains  in  thighs,  and  more
languid  than  on  preceding  day. N.
^'^  Rest. Position. Motion. Lying : headache > ; pain in
chest  <  ;  weakness  in  bed.
Bending  forward :  pain  in  lungs  >  ;  pain  in  chest  worse.
Motion :  headache  <  ;  thoracic  pains  worse.
Motion  of  hands  :  pain  behind  sternum  worse.
Walking :  pain  in  thighs  and  legs  <  ;  sensation  as  if  he  were
bent  forward  and  toward  the  left  side  ; I  soreness  of  abdomen
prevents.
^®  Nerves. •  Hysteria. N.

Excessive  weakness,  morning  in  bed.
Walking  seems  impossible.

Quivering  and  twitching  of  muscles  in  different  parts.
Sensation  of  weakness  after  smoking  a  little  while,  walking  in
the  morning,  before  and  after  rising,  particularly  in  the  legs.
I  Unfit  for  business  from  pain  in  bowels,  and  frequent  stools

(after  Sulphur).
Languor  and  disinclination  for  work. N.
Felt  precisely  as  if  recovering  from  a  long  and  severe  sickness.  N.
"  Sleep. Difiicult  and  late  sleep  at  night,  with  great  sleepiness  in
the  morning  and  during  the  day,  >  in  open  air.
Restless  and  sleepless  at  night.


217  ASCLEPIAS  TUBEROSA.

Confused  and  anxious  dreams.

Uneasy  sleep  during  first  part  of  night,  with  frightful  dreams,

awaking  him  at  3  a.m.
Slept  all  night,  but  gloomy,  frightful  dreams. N.
Slept  all  night  till  5  a.m.,  awaking  by  frightful  dreams  which
had  haunted  him  all  night. N.
*^  Time. 1  a.m.,  2  a.m.  :  painful  stool.

3  A.M.:  violent  pain  ;  awakened  by  dreams.
4am.:  cough  worse.

5  A.M.:  awakened  by  dreams.

Morning :  headache  ■<  ;  deficient  appetite ;  nausea  on  rising  ;

erections ;  cough  ;  pains  in  thighs  on  rising ;  weakness.
9  A.M.:  head  feels  dull  and  gloomy;  pains  in  r.  shoulder.
11  A.M.:  soft  fetid  stools.
All  day  :  languid  and  dull ;  pain  in  forehead.
Afternoon :  fever.

4  P.M.:  pain  behind  sternum  worse.

5  P.M.:  pain  in  stomach  ;  rumbling  in  bowels  ;  diarrhoeic  stools.
Evening  :  stool  like  white  of  egg.

Towards  evening  :  unusual  elevation  of  spirits.
9  P.M.:  Became  fretful  and  peevish.
11  P.M.:  urging  to  stool. •

Night :  cough  <;  ;  sweats  ;  restlessness  and  sleeplessness.
^^  Temperature  and  Weather. Open  air:  sleepiness  better.
In  winter :  diarrhoea  worse.
Cool  damp  nights  of  warm  weather :  diarrhoea  worse.

■  Catarrhal  complaints  from  cold  and  damp  weather.
*^  Chill. Fever. Sweat. Chill  towards  noon.

Chilly  with  cold  feet,  though  the  room  was  warm. N.

Fever  in  afternoon.

Feverish ;  first  day.

Warmth  of  the  skin. N.

Hot,  moist  skin.

I  iHigh  fever  with  hot  sweat.

■  Night  sweats  and  emaciation, d  Scrofulosis.

■  Rheumatic  and  catarrhal  fever.  »

■  Bilious  marsh  fever  on  rice  plantations.

*^  Locality  and  Direction.  Right :  itching  eyelids  and  qanthi ;
pain  in  inferior  molars  ;  burning  in  hypochondrium  ;  pain  in
lungs ;  pain  shoots  to  side ;  pain  in  shoulder ;  numbness  of
hand  ;  inflamed  spot  on  thigh.

Left :  pain  in  scalp  ;  pain  behind  eyeball ;  throbbing  in  hypo-
chondrium ;  pain  in  base  of  lungs ;  pain  in  nipple ;  side  of
neck  stiiF;  stitches  in  side  and  shoulder;  bone  pains  in  arm  ;
pain  in  ankle  bones.

Above  downwards  :  pain  in  nipple  ;  pain  in-  forearm.

Pains  almost  constantly  occur  in  one  arm,  and  at  same  time  in
opposite  leg  (similar  to  Agar.,  in  Apelt's  proving).


ASCLEPIAS  TUBEROSA.  218

*'  Sensations. As  if  sand  were  in  the  ejes.

As  if  a  stream  of  fire  passed  through  abdomen.

As  if  the  bowels  would  protrude.

Pain  like  touching  a  pustule  in  scalp.

Pain  as  if  ulcerated  :  in  hypogastrium.

As  if  stomach  would  burst.

Disagreeable  feeling  of  weight :  at  stomach.

Sharp  pain :  shooting  from  1.  nipple  downward.

Pleuritic  pain  :  in  chest.

Stitches :  in  urethra ;  in  penis ;  in  1.  side,  shooting  to  r.  side
and  to  1.  shoulder ;  between  scapulae,  with  muscular  and  ar-
ticular rheumatism.

Pricking :  as  if  with  nails  in  head  and  other  parts ;  like  a
needle  in  cardiac  region.

Stinging  :  in  nose,  as  from  a  flea  ;  in  throat.

Cutting:  in  1.  side  (pleurisy) ;  behind  sternum.

Darting  pain  :  in  chest.

Rending  pain  :  in  l^nees  and  hips.

Shooting :  in  chest ;  in  shoulders.

Flying  pains  :  in  stomach.

Burning :  in  stomach  ;  in  r.  hypochondriac  region  and  stomach.

Soreness  :  in  throat ;  in  lower  part  of  chest.

Aching  pains  :  in  knees  ;  in  bones.

Dull  aching:  in  forehead  and  vertex.

Dull  pain  :  at  base  of  lungs.

Pressing:  in  stomach.

Pressing  down  pain  :  during  catamenia.

Drawing  pain  :  in  thighs  ;  in  soles  and  toes.

Throbbing  :  in  1.  hypochondriac  region.

Contracting  pain  :  in  heart.

Constriction  :  in  throat ;  of  larynx.

Cramp :  in  stomach.

Tightness :  in  chest.
.  Rheumatic  pains : in  shoulders  ; in forearm to fingers  ;  in
joints ;  in  limbs.

Sprained  feeling :  in  ankle.

Undefined  pain  :  in  forehead ;  in  eyes  ;  in  molars ;  in  throat ;
in  stomach;  in  chest;  in  diaphragm;  in  intestines ;  in
anus ;  in  larynx ;  in  r.  lung ;  under  1.  nipple ;  in  loins  ;  in
bones  of  1.  arm  ;  in  bones  of  1.  ankle.

Transitory  pain  :  behind  1.  eyeball ;  stitches  between  scapulae.

Fullness  :  in  r.  side.

Stiffness  :  1.  side  of  neck.

Numbness  :  of  r.  hand.

Warm  feeling :  in  chest.

Itching :  in  canthi  and  base  of  r.  eye  ;  in  nose ;  in  face ;  of
lips  ;  on  back  ;  in  hand  and  fingers ;  on  legs  and  knees  ;  on
thighs  and  nates.


46


219  ASCLEPIAS  TUBEROSA.

Weakness  :  particularly  in  legs.
**  Tissues. iScrofulosis.

Rheumatic  pains  in  joints.

Aching  in  bones  and  rheumatic  pains  in  limbs,  most  in  joints ;
almost  always  upper  1.  and  lower  r.  or  the  opposite.

Great  emaciation.

I  Muscular  and  articular  rheumatism,  with  stitching  pains,  dark
red  urine  and  hot  perspiring  skin.
*^  Touch. Passive  Motion. Injuries. Pressure : pain  in
hypogastrium  <  ;  pain  in  intercostal  spaces  near  sternum.

Riding  in  carriage  impossible  on  account  of  pain  in  abdomen.
Skin. Pimples,  vesicles  or  pustules  began  to  appear  15th  day,
and  spread  all  over,  most  on  arms,  legs  and  face,  are  very
painful  and  itch  excessively,  continuing  more  than  8  days.
*^  Stages  and  States. French  prover,  set.  32,  nervous  tempera-
ment, took  two  drops  of  the  tincture.

Man,  get.  34,  strong  and  muscular,  sanguine  temperament,  fair
hair,  grey  eyes ;  his  provings  marked  N.
"  Relationship. Side relations :  Asdep. striae, and Asdej).
vincet..

Veratr.  relieved  the  pains  with  stool  at  night.

Very  sensitive  to  tobacco.

The  tincture  (5  drops)  relieved  when  Sulphur^^  had  aggravated,
in  a  case  of  chronic  intestinal  disease.

Duration  of  action  42  days,  some  symptoms  appeared  as  late  as
the  60th  day.

Compare  :  Agar.  muse,  (pains  appear  in  right  arm  and  left  leg,
or  left  arm  an<i  right  leg,  see  42) ;  Bryon.  (pleurisy,  pneu-
monia).


ASIMINA  TRILOBA.  220


ASIMINA  TRILOBA.

f
Paw  Paw,  or  Custard  Apple. '  Anonacece.

A  valuable  proving  of  the  late  Dr.  George  Bute  on  himself,  his  daughter,
and  his  15  year  old  grandson,  from  1864  to  1868  ;  afterwards  also  proved  b}"^
E.  H.  Eisenbrey  in  1869-70,  in  the  1st,  2d  and  4th  centesimal  potencies.
Bute  used  alcoholic  extracts  from  all  parts  of  the  plant,  ripe  and  unripe
fruit,  the  green  leaves,  the  bark,  and  the  root.  The  tree  grew  in  his  gar-
den. Dr.  Eisenbrey  proved  the  same  preparation.

H.  W.  Taylor  communicated  in  Cincinnati  Medical  Advance,  1878,  a  kind
of  poisoning  of  five  children  after  eating  freely  of  the  fruit.  The  symptoms
are  marked  t.


^  Mind. Did  not  care  to  hold  conversation  with  any  one,  even  his
best  friends  ;  with  aching  in  lung.
Could  not  dismiss  from  his  mind  what  occurred  through  the
day  previous  ;  at  night. See  37.
^  Inner  Head. Frontal  headache,  with  pain  in  the  chest.
Frontal  headache,  with  nausea,,  t.

Did  not  rest  well  the  night  previous,  arose  with an  unusual
headache  in  left  temporal  region,  involving  the  eye,  with  an
occasional  sharp  pain  over  it,  increased  by  a  single  cough.
On  morning  of  4th  day  headache  increased  ;  felt  uncomfortable
all  day  ;  stomach  felt  increased  in  size ;  insufficiency  of  stool ;
inactivity  of  the  bowels  and  rectum.
Headache,  with  chill,  nausea  and  belching.
''  Smell  and  Nose. I  Discharge  from  the  nose  altered  in  charac-
ter from  yellow,  thick,  and  at  times,  especially  in  the  morn-
ing, hard,  flakey,  dark-gray  consistency,  at  times  offensive,
to  a  natural  mucous  secretion.
^  Face. Face  turns  blue,  with  spasmodic  interruption  of  breath-
ing. See  26.
^^  Inner  Mouth. Corroding  sensation  in  mouth.

I  Aphthse  of  children.
"  Palate  and  Throat. Soreness  of  throat ;  t.

Fauces  red,  swollen  ;  tonsils  and  submaxillary  glands  enlarged
next  day  ;  t.
"  Thirst,  Desires. Thirst,  with  heat ;  drinks  much ;  desire  for

ice-cold  things.
"  Eating  and  Drinking. Soon  after  eating,  a  loose  stool.
^^  Nausea,  Vomiting  and  Belching. Nausea  and  belching.
Constant  belching.
Vomiting.


221  ASIMINA  TRILOBA.

^^  Scrobiculum  and  Stomach. Stomach  felt  increased  in  size,
with  headache.
Soreness  on  pressure  in  region  of  stomach.
^^  Hypochondria. Exercised  a  good  deal  through  the  day  ;  ex-
perienced a  pain  in  the  left  hypochondrium,  and  a  soreness
in  region  of  stomach  on  pressure.
^^  Abdomen,  Loins  and  Groins. Soreness  in  abdomen  on  pres-
sure ;  slight  pain  resembling  colic.
Colic.

Sensation  of  distension  by  wind.
Rumbling  and  pain.
^^  Rectum  and  Stool. Insufficiency  of  stool ;  inactivity  of  bow-
els and  rectum. See  3.
Diarrhoea  after  eating.

Rumbling  pain  in  abdomen,  with  desire  for  stool,  which  re-
sulted in  the  passage  of  a  soft  pappy  insufficient  stool ;  in
the  evening.
» Soreness  of  anus  when  wiping  it.

Sudden  urging  to  stool,  with  a  sensation  as  if  a  stick  the  thick-
ness of  a  thumb,  passed  down  the  rectum  ;  followed  by  a
sudden  diarrhoeical  stool,  repeating  every  10, 15  minutes,  with
chilliness,  drowsiness,  and  a  weak  voice.
Diarrhoea  of  yellowish  discharges  next  day  ;  t.
Diarrhoea  lasting  more  than  four  weeks  ;  t.
All  the  children  had  diarrhoea  a  long  time  after  other  symp-
toms had  disappeared ;  t.
^^  Urinary  Organs. Urine  clear  as  water.
•  Diuretic.

Urging  to  urinate,  and  burning  when  urinating.
^'  Voice  and  Larynx. Weak  voice. See  20.
Quite  hoarse  in  the  morning.

1 1  Hoarseness,  requiring  much  effort  to  talk,  and  seeming  as
though  the  mucous  membrane  was  thickened  and  the  organs
slow  to  respond  to  the  effort  of  speech.
Throat  not  very  sore,  not  so  much  so  as  the  hoarseness  seemed
to  indicate  ;  slight  cough,  which  is  dry.
"  Respiration. Talking  difficult. See  25.

I  Cramp  in  the  chest  lasting  three  hours,  with  blueness  of  face.
^^  Cough. A  single  cough  increased  the  pain  over  the  eye.

A  slight,  dry  cough.
^*  Inner  Chest  and  Lungs. Dull,  aching  pain  in  upper  left  lung ;

headache  continuing.
^^  Outer  Chest. Lower  end  of  sternum  sore  on  pressure.
^^  Neck  and  Back. Chill  over  the  whole  back.

All  children  had  scarlet  eruption  on  neck  and  upper  limbs ;  t.
*^  Upper  Limbs. Pain  in  left  shoulder,  seeming  to  involve  the

pectoral  muscles.
^^  Lower  Limbs. Sharp  pain  in  left  hip-joint,  lasting  about  half


ASIMINA  TRILOBA.  222

an  hour,  11|  a.m.,  returned  half-past  1  p.m.;  in  the  evening

other  pains  in  the  joint  more  mild  than  the  former,  lasting

but  a  short  time.
Eruption  in  front,  below  the  knee,  like  nettles ;  itching  when

uncovering.
Carbuncle  on  anterior  aspect  of  1.  thigh ;  suppuration  lasting

two  weeks ;  t.
^^  Sleep. Fever,  heat  with  sleepiness. See  40.

Did  not  rest  well  night  previous,  kept  turning  and  moving  all

night;  could  not  dismiss  from  his  mind  what  had  occurred

through  the  day.
Got  up  feeling  unrefreshed ;  headache  no  better ;  quite  hoarse  ;

pain  in  left  shoulder. See  32.
Drowsiness  and  sleeplessness  alternating.
^^  Time. Morning : headache <  ; hard discharge from nose ;

hoarseness  ;  languid  and  pale.
11.30  A.M.  and  1.30  p.m.  :  pain  in  left  hip-joint.
Evening  :  diarrhoeic  stool ;  pain  in  left  hip-joint  slight.
^^  Temperature  and  Weather. Uncovering  knee  :  itching  worse.
Open  air  :  exercise  in  open  air  is  followed  by  relief  of  headache.
*'  Chill. Fever. Sweat. Chill. See  3  and  31.
Chilliness. See  20.
Heat  with  thirst.
Fever  heat :  with  desire  for  something  icy  cold ;  with  drowsiness  ;

with  much  thirst.
Chill  over  the  back.
*^  Locality  and  Direction. Aching  in  chest  more  on  left  than

on  right  side.
Left :  headache  temporal  region  ;  pain  in  hypochondrium  ;  pain

in  upper  lung  ;  pain  in  shoulder  ;  pain  in  hip-joint ;  carbun-
cle on  thigh.
Left  to  right : eruptions  appeared  in  provers  first  left then

right.
*^  Sensations. As  of  a  stick  in  rectum.

Sharp  pain  :  over  1.  eye ;  in  1.  hip-joint.
Corroding :  in  mouth.

Soreness  :  in  throat ;  in  stomach  ;  in  abdomen  ;  of  anus.
Dull  aching  :  in  upper  1.  lung.
Cramp  :  in  chest.

Undefined  pain :  in  chest;  in  1.  hypochondrium ;  in  1.  shoulder.
*'*  Touch. Passive Motion. Injuries. Pressure : soreness

in  epigastrium  and  abdomen ;  lower  end  of  sternum  sore.
Wiping :  anus  sore.
*®  Skin. Itching  red  pimples.

Pustules  like  small-pox,  with  a  red  halo, itching, and  after

scratching  forming  thick  crusts,  lasting  from six  to eight

weeks ;  t.
Itching  when  undressing  in  the  evening.


223  ASIM.  TR.— ASPAR.

Abscesses  ripening.

Eruption  first  on  left  then  on  right  side.

Nettle-rash.

10  P.M. :  violent  fever;  had  vomited,  and  was  covered  with  a
bright  scarlet  eruption  ;  pulse  130,  full  and  steady ;  tempera-
ture 105 ;  t.

General  desquamation  followed ;  t.
*^  Relationship. Collateral  relations : the  Anonacese,  of  which
the  Asim.  fr.  is  the  only  one  proved,  although  a  very  impor-
tant family.

Compare  :  lllic.  anis.  (colic) ;  Liriodendron.

The  skin  of  the  fruit  and  the  seeds  are  fetid,  somewhat  similar
to  Stramon.


ASPARAGUS  OFFICINALIS.

Asparagus.  Liliacecp..

Introduced  and  proved  in  1840  by  Buchner,  who  proved  the  sprouts;
later  others  made  provings.  Jeanes  proved  the  root.  The  strongest  effect
must  be  obtained  from  the  berries,  and  still  more  from  the  seed.  Many-
symptoms  may  be  added  by  practitioners  if  they  meet  with  cases  in  which
asparagus  disagrees.

^  Mind. Cheerfulness ;  serenity  of  mind  ;  the  5th  day.
A  peculiar  anxiety,  with  palpitation  and  ill  humor.
Fretful  and  peevish,  disturbed  by  trifles  ;  constant  anxiety  and
apprehension.
"^  Sensorium. Vertigo  :  slight  in  the  afternoon ;  in  the  forehead ;
with  staggering.
Confusion  of  the  head.
Dullness  of  the  head.
'  Inner  Head. Dizziness  in  forehead,  afterwards  aching  in  tem-
ples, especially  the  left.
Aching  in  forehead,  with  confusion.
Pressing  pains  in  both  temples,  worse  from  pressure.
Heaviness,  pressure  in  forehead,  the  pain  presses  towards  the
eyes.
^  Sight  and  Eyes. Increased  acuteness  of  vision.
Stitches  and  tickling  in  the  eyes.
Aching  of  the  brain  near  the  eyes.
Pains  in  the  eyeballs.
Drawing  pain  over  eyebrows  all  across.


ASPARAGUS  OFFICINALIS.  224

^  Smell  and  Nose. I  l  Frequent  sneezing ; after  smelling the
tincture.

Corjza,  with  slight  dryness  and  swelling  inside,  then  impeded
entrance  of  air ;  gets  violent  with  frequent  discharge  of  a
thin  white  fluid  from  1.  nostril ;  irritation  to  sneeze,  and  fre-
quent sneezing.

Later  with  the  catarrh  a  pressing  pain  from  root  of  nose  to  fore-
head;  next  day,  at  9  a.m.,  dry  coryza  ;  later  running  ;  want
of  smell ;  violent  sneezing ;  the  3d  day  discharge  of  mucus
from  the  r.  nostril.
"  Face. Increased  heat  of  the  face.

Burning  of  the  cheeks.

■  Countenance  pale,  wax- like  and  hloated.

■  General  expression  of  anxiety  and  distress. See  29.

^^  Teeth  and  Gums. Painless  cavity ;  exfoliation  of  a  carious
molar.

■  Relieved  toothache.

*^  Taste, Tongue. Taste : sweetish, insipid ; coppery ; bitter-
sweetish  on  the  tongue.
Smarting  feeling  on  the  tongue.
^^  Inner Mouth. Saliva  increased  ; sweetish,  as  if  mixed  with

blood;  diminished;  later  more  copious.
'^  Palate  and  Throat. Almost  constant  hawking,  with  a  rough
feeling  in  the  throat.
Copious  discharge  of  tenacious  mucus  from  the  throat.

■  Deglutition  difficult. ^Hydrophobia.

■  Burning  in  the  throat.

"  Appetite,  Thirst. Increased  thirst.

Feeble  appetite.
*  Eating and Drinking. After  breakfast : cough remitted ;
pain  in  chest.
After  eating  :  palpitation. See  29.
Fullness  and  oppression  after  eating  or  drinking.

^^  Belching,  Nausea  and  Vomiting. Belching  of  wind.

Nausea  5  a.m.,  on  awaking;  vomited  the  food  taken  the  even-
ing before,  with  bile  and  much  mucus,  followed  by  a  bilious
diarrhoea;  after  15  minutes  another  attack  of  difficult  vomit-

Retching  bringing  tears  into  the  eyes,  when  attempting  to  cough.

Nausea  after  each  exertion.
^''  Scrobiculum  and  Stomach. Pain  in  region  of  cardiac  end  of

stomach,  extending  thence  to  left  shoulder.
^^  Abdomen,  Loins  and  Groins. Sense  of  fullness  in  abdomen.

Griping  in  region  of  navel,  which  is  painful  when  touched.

Drawing  pains  in  both  groins.
^^  Rectum  and  Stool. Discharge  of  much  wind.

Insufficient  stool  in  afternoon,  notwithstanding  a  regular  stool
in  morning.


225  ASPARAGUS  OFFICINALIS.

Feces  bilious  after  vomiting. See  16.

Bilious  diarrhoea,  with  colic.

A  peculiar  urging,  with  difficult,  hard  fecal  discharge ;  haemor-
rhoids bleed  much  more.

Burning  and  soreness  at  the  anus.
"  Urinary  Organs. •  Nephritis.

Nephritic  colic.

Urging  to  urinate ;  evening  1st  day.

Urging  to  urinate ;  urine  of  a  tolerably  strong  odor.

Frequent  scanty  discharge  preceded  by  a  sensation  as  if
something  was  sticking  in  the  urethra,  with  slight  burning.

I  I  Frequent  urination,  with  fine  stinging  in  the  meatus,  followed
by  stitches  out  of  the  urethra.

I  Urine  scanty,  straw-colored  and  offensive.

Cutting  and  burning  in  urethra.

Strangury.

Burning  in  urethra  6  A.M. ;  8th  day,

After  urination  burning  in  the  urethra,  with  sensation  as  if
some  was  still  passing.

■  Increased  urine,  beer-brown,  without  sediment.
•  Diabetes.

I  When  urinating,  particularly  when  voiding  the  last  drops,
rheumatic,  constricting  pain  in  cardiac  region,  forcing  him
to  cry  out ;  turns  blue  in  the  face, d  Dropsy  of  chest.

Urine  :  straw-colored,  becoming  turbid  and  full  of  motes,  which
settle  as  a  whit«  flocculent  sediment.

Urine  of  a  peculiar  odor.

Urine  of  unpleasant  odor ;  2d  day. — N.

Urging  to  urinate;  urine  strong  smelling.

Urine  smells  like  cats'  urine.

Urine  bloody.

The  urine  deposits  a  greasy  sediment  on  the  sides  of  the  vessel.

Reddish  deposit  on  the  sides  of  the  vessel.

iLithiasis.

I  Gravel  passing  in  small  quantities  with  urination.
"^"^  Male  Sexual  Organs. Sexual  excitement.

Stitching  on  the  r.  side  of  the  glans  penis.

Swelling  of  the  penis,  with  erection  and  urging  to  urinate.
^^  Female  Sexual  Organs. Promotes  the  flow  of  the  menses.

The  flow  continued  a  day  longer  than  usual.

■  Relieved  prurigo  pudendi  in  women,  aet.  40.

25  Voice  and  Larynx. Continual  hawking  and  hemming,  with
sensation  of  roughness  in  throat.
Talks  in  a  nasal  voice  during  coryza.
^®  Respiration. Difficulty  of  breathing  when  moving  or  going  up
stairs.
At  night  he  was  obliged  to  sit  up  in  bed  to  relieve  his  breathing.

VOL.  II. — 15.


ASPARAGUS  OFFICINALIS.  226

■  Great  oppression;  breathing  rapid,  difficult,  increased  after
being  in  bed  some  time.

Breathing: I  rapid,  labored,  sighing  ; I  I  difficult  when  moving
or  ascending  ;  difficult  at  night,  must  sit  up  in  bed.
^"^  Cough. Hawking  and  inclination  to  cough  ;  mucus  not  readily
loosened,  paroxysms  of  cough,  which  brought  it  up.

Tickling  and  inclination  to  cough,  but  expectoration  was  diffi-
cult.

Cough,  with  inclination  to  vomit.

Cough  distressing,  with  fullness  of  the  chest  and  copious  mu-
cous sputum.

Cough  in  paroxysms  from  mucus,  which  is  not  easily  detached.

Cough  remitted  one  hour  after  breakfast.

Less  inclined  to  hawk  and  cough ;  5th  day ; ■< rising  from
deep  in  the  throat.

Spitting  blood.
^^  Inner  Chest  and  Lungs. Stitches,  especially  about  the  left
scapula,  when  inspiring.

Pains  relieved  by  throwing  the  chest  forward  and  head  back-
ward.

iHydrothorax ; often  with  heart  disease  or  gouty  diathesis
of  old  people.

I  Unusual  fullness  of  the  chest.

Constriction  of  the  chest ;  tension,  increased  by  a  deep  breath.

Chest  feels  as  if  hollow,  with  external  heaviness.

Sudden  darting  through  the  right  side  of  the  chest.

Stitching  pains  in  the  region  of  chest.

^®  Heart,  Pulse  and  Circulation, Slight  sensation  of  stitching
in  the  region  of  the  heart  after  eating.

■  Heart's  throb  visible,  especially  at  night; ■very  strong  and

extended  over  an  unnaturally  large  area ;  throbbing  carotids;
murmurs.
Palpitation : I  I  while  sitting, the  leaves  of  the  book  in  his
hands  tremble ; I  I  with  anxious  restlessness,  increased  by
motion  or  ascending; ■with  oppression  of  the  chest.

■  Heart's  action  weak  ;  pulse  feeble. See  32.

I  I  Heart's  stroke  two-fold,  irregular,  quickened.

Pulse  accelerated  when  sitting; ■slow,  weak; ■irregular  and

feeble.
'^  Neck  and  Back. Rheumatic  pains  between  the  scapulae.
Fifth  and  sixth  vertebrae  pain.
Pains  in  loins  at  the  beginning  of  the  false  vertebrae ;  4  p.m.,

5th  day.
Pain  at  the  acromion  process  of  the  left  scapula,  also  under  the

clavicle  and  down  the arm,  with  exceeding  feebleness  of

pulse.
Sensation  when  sitting  as  if  something  were  darting  through

small  of  back  toward  sacral  vertebrae.


227  ASPARAGUS  OFFICINALIS.

^^  Upper  Limbs. Rheumatic  pains  in  the  region  of  the  r.  axilla.

Pain  in  region  of  the  shoulder  on  touching  it.

1  I  Pains  on  the  tip  of  the  left  shoulder. See  48.

I  Pain  at  the  acromion  process  of  the  left  scapula,  under  the
clavicle  and  down  the  left  a,rm  ;  pulse  feeble.
^^  Lower  Limbs. The  right  leg  and  foot  are  the  weakest.

On  awaking  and  stretching  cramps  in  the  left  calf,  better  from
rubbing.

While  walking,  pain  as  from  dislocation  in  the  neck  of  the  right
thighbone. See  45.

Muscles  in  the  middle  of  the  thigh  feel  bruised,  worse  ascend-
ing, sore  pain  on  touching  it.

Drawing  in  the  left  toe,  which  had  years  ago  been  cut  with  an
axe.
^'  Rest. Position. Motion. Sitting :  breathing  >  ;  pulse  ac-
celerated.

Throwing  chest  forward  and  head  backward  :  pains  better.

Coughing :  retching  and  lachrymation.

Exertion :  nausea  worse.

When  urinating :  pain  in  cardiac  region.

Moving or ascending : difficult respiration ; palpitation in-
creased ;  pain  in  thigh  muscles.

Inspiration  :  stitches  about  left  scapula.

Stretching :  cramp  in  calf.

Walking :  pain  neck  of  right  femur.

■  Motion  aggravates  most  pains.

Compelled  to  throw  chest  forward  and  head  backward  to  find
relief  of  pains  in  loins  and  elsewhere.
'®  Nerves. I  Great  languor  and  disinclination  to  physical  or  men-
tal exertion.

Very  much  prostrated,  pulse  irregular. See  48.
^^  Sleep. Sleepiness  and  yawning.

Sleep  uneasy  and  disturbed  by  oppressed  breathing.
'^  Time. 5  a.m.  :  nausea  on  awaking.

6  A.M. :  burning  in  urethra.

9  A.M. :  dry  coryza.

Afternoon  :  slight  vertigo  ;  insufficient  stool.

3  P.M. :  some  fever ;  weak  and  drowsy.

4  P.M. :  pains  in  loins.
Evening  :  urging  to  urinate.

Night :  orthopnoea ;  heart  beats  visibly.
*°  Chill. Fever. Sweat. Slight  chilliness  with  some  sleepiness.
Slight  fever  ;  weak  ;  drowsy.
Increased  warmth.

■  Suppression  of  sweat.

*^  Locality  and  Direction.  Right :  mucus  from  nostril ;  stitch-
ing side  of  glans  penis  ;  darting  through  side  of  chest ;  pains
in  axilla ;  leg  and  foot  weak ;  pain  neck  of  femur.


ASPARAGUS  OFFICINALIS.  228

Left :  ache  in  temple ;  thin  discharge  from  nostril ;  pain  car-
diac end  of  stomach ;  pain  in  shoulder ;  stitches  about
scapula ;  pain  tip  of  shoulder  (acromion  process),  under  cla-
vicle, and  down  arm  ;  cramp  in  calf;  drawing  in  toe.

Symptoms  go  from  right  to  left.

Below  upwards :  pain  from  root  of  nose ;  pain  cardiac  end  of
stomach.

Above  downwards  :  pain  in  left  shoulder.
*^  Sensations. As  if  something  was  sticking  in  urethra.

As  if  urine  was  still  passing  after  urination.

Chest  feels  hollow.

Cutting :  in  urethra.

Darting :  through  r.  side  of  chest ;  through  small  of  back  to-
ward sacrum.

Stitches :  in  eyes.

Stitches:  out  of  urethra;  in  glans  penis;  about  1.  scapula;
through  chest ;  in  cardiac  region.

Stinging :  in  meatus.

Burning :  of  cheeks ;  in  throat ;  at  anus ;  in  urethra.

Smarting :  on  tongue.

Soreness :  at  anus.

Aching :  in  temples  ;  in  forehead ;  of  brain.

Pressure :  in  temples  ;  in  forehead ;  towards  eyes  from  fore-
head; from  root  of  nose  to  forehead.

Drawing  pain  :  over  eyebrows ;  in  groins ;  in  1.  toe.

Rheumatic  pain  :  in  cardiac  region  when  urinating.

Rheumatic  pain  ;  between  scapulae  ;  in  r.  axilla.

Dislocating  pain  :  in  neck  of  r.  femur.

Bruised  feeling :  in  muscles  of  thigh.

Constricting  pain  :  in  cardiac  region.

Constriction :  of  chest.

Cramps  :  in  1.  calf.

Undefined  pain  :  in  eyeballs ;  in  chest ;  in  cardiac  end  of  sto-
mach to  1.  shoulder;  at  acromion  process  of  1.  scapula;  un-
der clavicle  and  down  arm.

Roughness :  in  throat.

Fullness :  in  abdomen.

Heaviness :  in  forehead.

Heat :  of  face.

Tickling :  in  eyes.
**  Tissues. ;  Grout.

I  Dropsies. See  Hydrothorax,  28.

I  Anasarca.

**  Touch. Passive  Motion. Injuries. Touch :  umbilical  re-
gion painful ;  pain  in  shoulder ;  pain  in  thigh  muscles.
Pressure :  pain  in  temples  worse.
Rubbing  :  cramp  in  calf  better.
:  Soothes  the  pain  occurring  in  a  dislocated  limb.


229  ASPAR.— ASTAC.  FLUV.

iNumbness  of  the  bitten  part,  extending  over  the  whole  arm.

6  Hydrophobia.
I  Constant  desire  to  be  carried  about  in  the  arms.
^^  Stages  of  Life,  Constitution. Man,  set. 74,  after  Digit.

d  Dropsy  of  chest.
*^  Relationship. Antidote : Aeon, (prostration, feeble pulse,

pain  in  shoulder) ;  Apis.
Is  antidotal  to  Coffea.
Side  relations  : Convallaria  maj.,  Medeola  virg.,  Trillium  cer.,

Sarsap.
Compare:  Arnic.^  Aurum  mur., Oannab., Digit, (dropsy);

/Spigel.


ASTACUS  FLUVIATILIS.

Crawfish.  Crustacece.

Frequently  made  use  of  in  olden  times.

Tincture  from  the  whole  animal  prepared  by  C.Hg.  in  1825,  still  had  a
fishy  smell  in  1867,  and  produced  symptoms.
Fully  proved  and  introduced  by  Buchner,  in  1842.

^  Mind. Melancholic  mood.

Apprehensiveness  with  anxiety  in  chest.

Slight  delirium,  with  nettle  rash.
^  Sensorium. Giddiness.

1  I  Dullness  in  head.
^  Inner  Head. Pressing  and  throbbing  on  small  spots,  particu-
larly in  the  right  temple.

Pressing  dullness  in  frontal  region.

Headache  with  pressure  toward  the  eyes.

Stinging  pain  in  temples.

Pressing  stinging  pain  extends  towards  occiput,  but  most  in  right
temple  and  about  ear.

Excessive  pain  caused  by  the  violent  spasmodic  sneezing.
*  Outer  Head. On  head,  neck  and  chest  inflammation,  with  red
spots  filled  with  serum,  gone  after  a  sweat.

I A  thick,  crusty  eruption  on  the  scalp,  with  enlarged  lymphatic
glands.
'  Sight  and  Eyes. He  sees  colored  spots  when  reading.

Dimness  of  vision.

Dilated  pupils.


ASTACUS  FLUVIATILIS.  230

Motion  of  eyes  is  painful.

It  pains  him  to  turn  his  eyes  ;  giddy  ;  nervous ;  crawls  all  over

his  body.
Lachrymation.

Pressure  in  upper  part  of  right  eye.
Conjunctival  vessels  injected.
Yellow  conjunctiva.
®  Ears. Sensation  as  if  a  foreign  body  obstructed  passage  of  r.  ear,
causing  slight  deafness.
Heat  and  redness  of  the  ears.

Outward-pressing  and  stinging,  particularly  in  right  ear.
^  Nose. Sneezing,  with  yawning  and  belching.
Nosebleed  relieving  the  attacks.
Slight  coryza.
^  Face. At  intervals  darting  like  lightning  from  temple  to  cheek.
Burning  heat  in  face.
1 1  Face  glowing  and  red  with  fever.
■  Erysipelas  with  nettle  rash.
^°  Teeth  and  Gums. Dull,  drawing  toothache,  returning  at  in-
tervals.
At  intervals  pain  as  if  the  tooth  were  being  torn  out.
Toothache  in  the  whole  r.  lower  jaw,  with  cold  feeling  in  an
eyetooth.
"  Tongue. Pressing  pain  in  tongue  and  pharynx.

Sweetish  pappy  taste  after  the  cough.
^^  Inner  Mouth. ■  ■  Canker  spots ;  scorbutus.
^'  Palate. A  fishy  taste  in  the  roof  of  the  mouth,  later  farther  back

and  lower  down  ;  after  smelling  tincture.
"  Eating. After  eating :  colicky  pain  below  the  navel,  he  has  to

bend  double.
^®  Nausea and Vomiting. Fishy  taste, followed by  nausea,
spreading  through  the  chest.
Nausea  with  vomiting.
Empty  eructations.
"  Stomach. '  '  Fullness  and  pressure  in  stomach ; burning  in

epigastrium, d  Gastric  and  bilious  troubles.
^^  Hypochondria. Very  severe  pain  in  region  of  duodenum.

Inflammation  of  liver  followed  by  jaundice;  hepatic region

painful  on  pressure.
Pressure  in  region  of  spleen.
^^  Abdomen. Colicky  pain  with  tenesmus  and  prostration ; re-
lieved by  sitting,  <  when  walking.
Colicky  pain  around  umbilicus  with  distension.
^^  Stool, i  Stools  the  color  of  pipe-clay  ;  pain  in  the  liver.
■  Diarrhoea  with  vomiting  and  colicky  pain.
Soft  mucous  stool  with  scraping  in  rectum.
"  Urinary  Organs. iPain  in  kidneys;  stinging  in  the  night;
<C.  when  inhaling.


231  ASTACUS  FLUVIATILIS.

Fishy  smelling  urine.

Tearing  stitching  pain  in  region  of  right  kidney ;  drawing  in
the  ureter.

Pressing  in  bladder  and  heavy  feeling.

Urging,  scanty  discharge,  burning  during  and  after  urination ;
reddish  sediment.

Pale  urine  with  acid  reaction,  containing  a  large  quantity  of
albumen.
^^  Male  Sexual  Organs. Restless  sleep  from  strong  sexual  ex-
citement.

Averse  to  coition ;  diminished  sexual  power ;  scrotum  relaxed.
24  Pregnancy. Uaundice  of  little  children.
^®  Larynx  and  Trachea. Tickling  in  chink  of  glottis  or  deeper,
exciting  cough ;  tenacious  mucus  in  larynx  and  trachea.

Roughness  and  scraping  in  throat,  necessitating  hawking.
^®  Breathing. Dyspnoea  with  anxiety  and  rattling  of  mucus.

Pressure  and  oppressed  breathing  in  bronchia.
^^  Cough. Cough  from  tickling  in  larynx,  worse  during  day.

Sweetish  expectoration.

Cough  did  not  molest  him  while  walking,  in  the  evening,  but
returned  as  soon  as  he  sat  down.

Frequent  coughing  without  expectoration  in  the  forenoon.

Cough  worse in the  afternoon ;  chest  painful ;  expectoration
of  salivary  and  white  mucus.

Light  yellow  expectoration.
2^  Inner  Chest  and  Lungs. Congestion  of  the  lungs  with  dysp-
noea and  blood  spitting.

Pricking  under  left  nipple.
^'  Pulse. Pulse  50  in  the  morning,  later  80.
^°  Outer  Chest. Pressure  on  the  whole  sternum.
^^  Neck  and  Back. A  pain  below  the  right  shoulder  in  front.

Itching  in  nape  of  neck  with  flushed  face.

II  Swelling  of  cervical  glands  with  children  and  old  people.

Jerking  under  1.  kidney.
^^  Tipper  Limhs. Pressure  and  tension  in  axillae  and  deltoid  mus-
cles.

Trembling  in  the  arms  when  leaning  on  them.

Rheumatic  pain  in  1.  arm.

Lassitude  in  the  arms,  they  pain  when  touched.

Pressure  and  heaviness  in  the  bends  of  the  elbows-
Jerking  and  drawing  in  1.  forearm.

Chilliness  and  trembling  of  the  arms.

Transitory  tearing  and  stinging  pain  in  1.  thumb,  in  the  morning.
^^  Lower  Limbs. Burning  on  anterior  surface  of  left  thigh.

Slight  tension  from  knee  down  to  foot.
^®  Rest. Position. Motion. Sitting :  colic  >  ;  cough  worse.

Walking  :  colic  <  ;  cough  better.


ASTACUS  FLUVIATILIS.  232

^^  Nerves. Lassitude  and  weariness,  trembling  and  fatigue.

I  Paralysis.

^^  Sleep. Restless  sleep,  anxious  or  lewd  dreams,  skin  hot,  wakes

in  perspiration,  particularly  on  lower  part  of  body.
^^  Time. Morning :  pain  in  thumb.

Forenoon :  cough  dry.

During  day  :  cough  <.

Afternoon:  cough  <.

Evening  :  chill  over  body.

Night :  stinging  in  kidney.
^^  Temperature and Weather. Temperature increased in
evening.

Sensitive  to  air,  no  matter  how  great  the  feeling  of  heat.

I I  Inward  chilliness,  and  sensitiveness  to  air.  Worse  from  un-
covering.

^  Fever. Nervous  crawls  all  over  body.

Chills,  confusion  of  the  head,  face  red,  swollen ;  eyelids  tume-
fied ;  great  prostration  and  slight  delirium.

1 1  Violent  fever  with  headache,  glowing  red  face,  inward  chilli-
ness and  sensitiveness  to  air.

Chill  over  whole  body,  particularly  sensible  in  the  arm  pits ;
in  the  evening.

■  Increase  of  temperature  in  the  evening  and  slight  excitement
of  the  sensorium. d  Sopor.

I  After  overheating  from  exertion  and  taking  cold,  the  first
stage  of  a  typhoid  fever  treated  with  Rhus  and  Bryon.,  got
much  worse,  with  nausea-like  fainting,  fever  heat,  glowing
face,  inner  chilliness  and  sensitiveness  to  the  air ;  after  un-
covering greater  long-lasting  chill.
^^  Locality  and  Direction.  Right :  pain  in  temple ;  pressure
in  eye ;  obstruction  and  stinging  in  ear ;  toothache  lower
jaw  ;  pain  below  shoulder.

Left:  Pricking  under  nipple;  jerking  under  kidney ;  pain  in
arm  ;  in  thumb  ;  burning  in  thigh.
*^  Sensations. As  of  a  foreign  body  in  ear.

As  if  teeth  were  being  torn  out.

Darting :  like  lightning  from  temple  to  cheek.

Jerking :  under  1.  kidney  ;  in  1.  forearm.
' Stitching  and  tearing:  in  r,  kidneys.

Stinging :  in  temples ;  in  ears ;  in  kidneys ;  in  1.  thumb.

Pricking :  under  1.  nipple.

Burning :  during  urination  ;  on  thigh.

Scraping :  in  rectum  ;  in  throat.

Pressing :  on  small  spots  in  head ;  dullness,  in  frontal  region  ;
toward  eyes ;  stinging  towards  occiput,  in  r.  temple,  and
about  ear ;  in  upper  part  of  r.  eye ;  outward,  in  ears ;  in
tongue  and  pharynx ;  in  stomach ;  in  spleen ;  in  bladder ;


233  ASTACUS  FLUVIATILIS.

in  bronchia ;  on  sternum  ;  in  axillee  and  deltoid  muscles  ;  in

bends  of  elbows.
Drawing :  in  ureter ;  in  1.  forearm. •
Dull  drawing  :  in  teeth.
Rheumatic  pain  :  in  1.  arm.
Colicky  pain :  around  umbilicus.
Undefined  pain :  in  head  from  sneezing ;  in  r.  duodenum ;  in

kidneys;  in  chest;  below  r.  shoulder.
Throbbing :  in  head.
Fullness :  in  stomach.
Heaviness  :  in  bladder  ;  in  bends  of  elbows.
Tension  :  from  knee  to  foot.
Crawls :  over  body.

Itching :  in  nape  of  neck  ;  on  various  parts.
Tickling  in  larynx.
Heat  of  ears  :  in  face.
Coldness :  in  eye-tooth.
"Tissues. I  Tumors,  if  not  too  old.

■  Gout  of  drinking  people.
^^  Touch. Passive  Motion. Pressure :  hepatic  region  painful ;

pain  in  region  of  duodenum.
Passive  motion  :  eyes  painful.
*^  Skin. A  violent  attack  of  an  eruption  like  nettle-rash.
Itching  on  various  parts  of  body.

I  I  Nettle-rash  over  the  whole  body.

I I  Nettle-rash  with  liver  complaint.

I  Erysipelas,  with  fever,  headache  and  increased  sweat.
Crusta  lactea. See  4.
Jaundice  of  children.
*^  Relationship. Antidote :  Aeon.

Compare : Apis (urinary symptoms, stinging pains, etc.) ;
Rhus  tox.  (urticaria).


ASTERIAS  RUBENS.  284

ASTERIAS  RUBENS.

Star-fish.  Radiata.


Used  by  Hippocrates,  and  others,  in  uterine  diseases.  See  Aldrovandi,
Frankf.  edition,  1623,  p.  298.

Brauns  had  given  it  homoeopathically  since  1835.  Petroz  proved  and  in-
troduced it,  by  publishing  his  provings,  on  seven  persons,  and  cured  cases  in
the  Journ.  de  la  Soc.  Gallicane,  in  1850-51.  It  vv^as  translated  into  English
in  1852,  by  Metcalf,  and  into  German  by  Briickner.  A  valuable  proving
was  made  in  1853,  by  Dr.  Giinther,  of  a  tincture  of  the  sea-star,  caught  in
Newport,  and  prepared  by  the  late  Dr.  Geist,  of  Boston ;  other  provings  we
have  by  Berridge,  in  London,  and  Macfarlan,  in  Philadelphia.  Douglas
has  given  characteristics.  It  has  not  been  used  often,  but  in  cases  of  the
highest  importance.


^  Mind. >  Loss  of  consciousness. ^Epilepsy.

I  Does  not  lose  consciousness  but  has  hallucinations — as  if  away

from  home  in  the  midst  of  strangers ; hears  voices  to  which

he  replies, d  Epilepsy.
1  I  Unwilling  to  work,  to  think  ;  is  indifferent ;  dull  headache ;

insensible,  does  not  know  if  he  has  taken  his  dinner ;  returns

in  the  morning  on  getting  up,  the  9th  day.
Unusual  gaiety  in  the  evening.
Sadness,  desire  to  weep.
Melancholy  alternating  with  cerebral  excitement,  inclined  to

give  herself  up  to  mental  or  bodily  work.
Fear  of  apoplexy,  followed  by  fever. See  40.

■  Feeling  of  extreme  anxiety  from  noon  to  3  p.m.

I  I  It  seems  as  if  some  misfortune  was  impending,  as  if  bad  news

was  about  to  arrive — tears  afford  relief. 6  Hysteria.
Erotic  thoughts.

■  Became  very  impatient. ^Precursor  of  apoplexy.
Ill-humored  and  disposed  to  weep.

■  Easily  excited  by  any  emotion,  especially  by  contradiction.

d  Epilepsy.
Irritability,  anger,  necessity  of  quarreling  with  somebody —

from  noon  to  2  p.m.
Irritable,  the  slightest  cause  moves  her  to  tears.
With  mental  exertions,  a  restless,  tired  sensation  in  the  upper

brain,  like  that  in  limbs  after  muscular  exertion.
Fear  of  fainting  with  sensation  of  a  fullness  in  chest.
After  mental  exertions,  brain  agitated.
Nervous  agitation,  with  erotic  thoughts  and  sexual  desire.


235  ASTERIAS  RUBENS.

^  Sensorium. Confusion. See  37.

Head  heavy,  with  throbbing.

I  Vertigo:  transitory;  when  walking,  with  insensibility  of
lower  limbs.

I  Sudden  attacks  of  vertigo  like  shocks  in  the  head,  d  Precur-
sor of  apoplexy.

Throbbing  in  the  head ;  when  ascending  or  walking.

Determination  of  blood  to  the  head ;  sensation  of  fullness,  heat ;
it  feels  as  if  it  would  split.

Feels  a  tumult  in  the  brain,  restless,  distressed.

Heaviness  of  the  head,  heat,  throbbings,  redness  of  the  face.

I  I  Wakes  at  night  with  sensation  as  if  the  brain  was  shaken  by

electric  shocks ;  head  seems  empty,  almost  deprived  of  con-
sciousness ;  thinks  he  is  attacked  by  apoplexy,  lasts  several
minutes ;  when  he  recovers  his  consciousness,  pulse  hard.
■  Since  2  years  he  lost  consciousness  with  the  attacks. ^Epi-
lepsy.
^  Inner  Head. iHeat  of  the  head,  as  if  surrounded  by  hot  air.

I I  Sanguineous  congestion  to  the  brain.  ^Precursor  of
apoplexy.

Awakes  at  night  in  distress  as  from  electric  shocks  in  the

brain ;  head  feels  as  if  bursting ; apprehended  apoplexy ;

when  he  came  to  himself  pulse  was  hard,  very  quick,  and  the

right  parotid  throbbing  violently,
I  Cerebral  congestions,  accompanied  by  obstinate  constipation.
The  headache  disappears  suddenly  toward  noon,  then  the  ideas

are  clear.
I A  violent  pressure  upon  the  anterior  lobes  of  the  brain,  extend-
ing even  beneath  the  eyes ;  one  day  so  severe  that  while

seated  at  the  table  she  fell  forward,  and  remained  unconscious

for  some  minutes, d  Epilepsy.
Pressive  pain  in  right  side  of  occiput,  making  it  diflBcult  to  walk.
Boring  pain  above  left  eye,  coming  and  going  suddenly,  and

producing  contraction  of  eyebrows ;  while  this  pain  lasts  she

seems  to  look  through  a  mist.
Acute  transitory  lancinations  in  forehead  and  temples,  also  in

occiput.
Sudden  pain  on  right  side  of  head.
Pain  in  vertex  as  if  skull  would  break.
I  Dull  occipital  headache  for  a  half  hour  came  suddenly  one

and  a  half  hours  after  breakfast,  and  went  suddenly.
Dull  occipital  headache  one  hour  after  breakfast,  lasting  all  day.
*  Outer  Head. iHead  burning, d  Precursor  of  apoplexy.
During  severe  pains  the  whole  scalp  feels  sore.
Pains  in  the  bones  of  sinciput.
71 A  pimple  upon  sinciput,  spreading  and  changing  into  an  ulcer,

having  all  characteristics  of  the  sycotic  ulcer  of  Celsus ;  a

second  behind  the  r.  ear. See  6.


ASTERIAS  RUBENS.  236

*  Sight  and  Eyes. Light  fatigues  the  eyes.

Cannot  bear  the  light.

■  Gradually  lost  his  sight ;  by  the  excessive  contractility  of  the

irides,  pupils  were  completely  closed. 6  Precursor  of  apo-
plexy.

Heat  and  redness  of  eyes,  tired  in  looking  upward.

Pain  in  eyes  from  within  outward.

Eyes  as  if  drawn  back  or  sunken  in.

■  Violent  pressure  upon  anterior  lobes  of  brain,  extending  be-

neath the  eyes, d  Epilepsy.

Frequent  blinking  or  twitching  of  the  lids,  edges  of  the  lids  are
reddened.
®  Hearing  and  Ears. Violent  reports  in  the  ears.

Dullness  of  hearing  more  marked  on  right  side ;  noise  of  rush-
ing water  in  the  ears.

Lancinating  pain  in  meatus,  perceived  for  some  seconds,  is  con-
centrated in  the  occiput  and  ceases.

TrAfter  sycotic  ulcer  on  forehead,  a  second  formed  behind  the
right  ear,  and  a  group  on  lower  lip.
^  Smell  and  Nose. Twitches  in  brain  when  blowing  the  nose ;
during  first  half  of  night.

Nosebleed  mornings  on  getting  awake.

Sneezing  and  coryza  on  awaking  in  the  morning.

Pimples  on  side  of  nose  and  chin.

*  Face. Face  flushed  and  swollen.

■  Face  red,  pulse  hard,  compressed,  frequent. ^Precursor  of

apoplexy.

■  Redness  of  the  face. ^Threatened  apoplexy.
Alternate  crawling  and  flushes  in  face  with  colic.

■  Pallor  of  the  face. (?  Epilepsy.

■  Earthy  appearance  of  face. 6  Cancer  mammae.
Sudden  fall  with  a  livid  color  of  the  face.
Pimples  side  of  the  chin.

Upon  the  sinciput  a  pimple  spreading  and  changing  into  an

ulcer,  like  a  sycotic.
Stupid  look,  also  stupid  expression  in  the  attitude.

■  Her  face  was  pale  and  her  jaws  set  while  unconscious, d  Epi-

lepsy.
'  Lower  Part  of  Face. Neuralgia  opposite  left  molar  teeth,  lower
jaw;  sharp  piercing  pain,  like  a  needle.

Pimples  on  side  of  nose  and  chin.

71  A.  group  of  pimples  becoming  ulcers,  formed  on  lower  lip,  re-
mained dry  and  hard  and  exceedingly  painful.
"  Taste,  Speech,  Tongue. Loss  of  taste.

Embarrassment  of  the  tongue,  dislike  to  speak.

Talking  difficult;  very  much  saliva  in  the  mouth.

Swelling  of  the  tongue  and  shooting  pains  in  it,  drawing  or
stretching.


237  ASTERIAS  RUBENS.

^^  Mouth. Saliva  more  abundant.

^^  Palate  and  Throat. Heat  and  dryness  in  the  throat.
Dull  pain  extending  whole  length  of  oesophagus.
Throat  sore  with  constriction  in  the  morning  on  awaking.
^*  Appetite,  Thirst. Desires,  Aversions. Capricious  appe-
tite, desires  highly  seasoned  dishes,  strong  cheese,  liquors,
coffee,  tea,  etc.
I  Want  of  appetite,  no  taste, d  Scirrhus.
Aversion  to  meat.
Desire  for  cold  drinks.
^®  Eating  and  Drinking. ■  At the  commencement  of  the  last
meal  of  the  day,  falls  forward  unconscious, d  Epilepsy.
Dull  headache  in  occiput  after  breakfast ;  came  and  went  sud-
denly.
After  eating :  general  malaise  >■ ;  flatulence.
^^  Nausea  and  Vomiting. Frequent  forcible  eructations  in  the
morning.
Nausea.
^^  Stomach. Pain  below  the  breast  bone.
Dull  or  contracting  pain  in  scrobiculum.
Constriction  in  prsecordial  region.
Dull  pain  in  muscles  of  prsecordial  region.
^*  Hypochondria. I Great  debility  with  distress  in  epigastrium.

d  Epilepsy.
^^  Abdomen. Dull  pain,  in  paroxysms,  in  right  side  of  abdomen
near  the  navel.
Violent  colic,  with  shivering,  alternating  with  flushes  of  heat

in  face.
Flatulence  after  every  meal,  wind  cannot  be  expelled  either  up-
ward or  downward.
Alternate  swelling  and  decrease  of  abdomen  during  the  24  hours.
Stagnated  wind.

Sensation  of  tearing  and  drawing  (zerren)  in  the  abdominal
walls.

■  Sensation  of  pressure  on  the  lower  abdommal  organs  impeding

locomotion, d  Uterine  displacement.
^"  Rectum  and  Stool. Several  soft  stools  during  the  day.
Stool  liquid,  brown,  gushing  out  in  a  violent  jet.
Colic  followed  by  diarrhoea.
Ineffectual  urging.
Difficult,  consistent  stool.
Constipation,  fruitless  desire  to  go  to  stool.
Heat  in  the  rectum.

■  Obstinate  constipation ;  12  to  15  days  elapsed  without  an  evac-

uation, which  consisted,  when  it  occurred,  of  very  hard,
round  substances  about  the  size  of  an  olive. 6  Scirrhus.
Hgemorrhoidal  flux.
^^  Urinary  Organs. Heat  in  the  urethra,  while  urinating.


ASTERIAS  RUBENS.  238

Copious,  clear  urine,  and  frequent  urination.

Thick,  viscid  urine.
"  Male  Sexual  Organs. Frequent  erections  during  sleep  and  in

the  morning.
^^  Female  Sexual  Organs. Excitement  of  the  venereal  appetite
in  the  morning  in  bed,  about  4  p.m.;  not  removed  by  coitus,
annoys,  makes  her  ill-humored  and  disposed  to  weep.

Sexual  desire  increased,  worse  mornings  in  bed.

Venereal  desires,  erotic  thoughts,  nervous  agitation  and  distress
produced  by  importunate  venereal  craving  resembling  an  irre-
sistible power,  giving  rise  to  ideas  of  violence,  despair,  etc.

Menses  delayed  8  days ;  colic  and  other  sufferings  cease  with
the  flow,  which  is  more  abundant  than  usual.

I  Menses  are  apt  to  delay, d  Hysteralgia.

Moisture  in  the  vagina,  unusual  but  pleasant.

■  General  feeling  of  distress  in  the  womb  as  though  something

were  passing  out. d  Hysteralgia. d  Displaced  uterus.
I  Jerking  in  the  uterus, d  Hysteralgia.
Sensation  of  pressure  in  the  lower  organs  of  the  abdomen,

walking  is  troublesome.
Severe  general  pain  over  the  womb  as  if  something  protruded

behind  it.
Sensation  in  the  womb,  as  if  something  was  pushing.
2*  Pregnancy  and  Parturition. Dull  aching  neuralgic  pain  in

mammae.
Lancinating  pain  in  the  mammary  tumor.

■  Lancinating  or  acute  smarting  pains,  entirely  deprived  her  of

rest,  especially  at  night, d  Scirrhus.

■  Drawing  pain  in  the  breast. 6  Cancer.

■  Left  breast  feels  drawn  in. d  Cancer.

■  Around  the  nipple,  which  was  sunk  into  a  cavity,  skin  smooth

and  adherent ;  upon  one  point  a  violet  spot,  having  fungus
hsematodes. d  Cancer  of  mammae.

■  Ulceration  and  swelling  in  left  breast;  sharp  stitching  pain

going  through  to  back.

■  Breasts  swollen,  distended  as  before  the  menses. ^Cancer.

■  Induration  of  left  mamma,  size  of  head  of  infant;  insensible,

hard  and  angular, d  Cancer  mammae.

■  Right  breast  beginning  to  manifest  symptoms  of  scirrhus.

■  A  scirrhus  tumor  forms  in  r.  mamma,  adhering  by  its  entire

base  to  the  thoracic  walls. 6  Scirrhus.

■  A  livid  red  spot  appeared  upon  one  point  of  the  tumor,  broke

and  gave  exit  to  a  discharge;  gradually  invaded  the  whole
breast,  eight  inches  in  circumference,  discharging  very  fetid
ichor ;  edges  pale,  elevated,  mamillary,  hard,  everted ;  bot-
tom covered  with  reddish  granulations, d  Scirrhus.

^'  Larynx. A  rough  sensation  in  the  larynx  exciting  cough.

^^  Respiration. Short  breath  with  pain  in  chest  when  inhaling ;


239  ASTERIAS  RUBENS.

feeling  in  all  the  limbs  as  if  beaten,  most  in  arms,  4  p.m.,
when  walking  out-doors.

Constriction  in  r.  side  of  chest.
^^  Cough. Cough  with  expectoration,  morning  in  bed.

Easy  hawking  of  greyish-black  phlegm  during  the  forenoon.
"'  Inner  Chest  and  Lungs, l  Drawing  pain  towards  the  internal
part  of  chest  from  before  backwards,  extending  under  left
nipple  into  whole  internal  part  of  arm  to  extremity  of  little
finger.

The  entire  left  chest  painful,  motion  aggravates  the  pain.

Lancinating  pain  in  anterior  inferior  portion  of  chest  to  right
and  left  of  sternum,  diminished  by  carrying  upper  part  of
body  and  shoulders  backwards.

Feeling  of  fullness  in  chest  with  a  fear  of  fainting.

Undulating  throbbings  in  chest  at  night,  causing  anxiety.

Stretching  the  upper  part  straight  as  drawing  shoulders  back
lessens  the  stitches  in  chest.
^^  Heart,  Pulse  and  Circulation. Palpitation  strong  and  fre-
quent; leaping.

Heart-beats  dull,  prolonged ;  seems  as  if  heart  had  ceased  to
beat.

Anxiety  in  heart,  night  and  morning.

Palpitation  extending  to  the  epigastrium,  with  sensation  of  con-
striction.

1  Pulse  hard,  compressed  and  frequent. ^Apoplexy.

On  recovering  consciousness,  pulse  is  hard  and  much  accele-
rated. See  7.

Small  frequent  pulse.

Pulse  75,  next  day  weak  and  only  68.

I  Hard,  frequent  and  contracted  pulse.

Violent  beating  of  the  right  carotid  artery ;  the  cerebral  symp-
toms come  on  in  the  morning,  go  off  during  the  day  and
come  on  again  at  evening;  he  wakes  at  night  in  great  con-
fusion, as  if  the  brain  were  shaken  with  electric  shocks  ;  vio-
lent reports  in  the  ears;  dull  pain,  apparently  along  the
oesophagus.
^^  Outer  Chest. Violent  itching  spot  upon  the  chest.

I  Whole  left  side  of  chest  is  painful;  motion  <  the  pain.

Pain  in  upper  chest,  >>  throwing  chest  back.

I  I  Drawing  pain  towards  internal  part  of  chest,  from  before
backwards,  extending  under  left  nipple  into  whole  internal
part  of  arm  to  extremity  of  little  finger.

Slight  eruption  between  the  breasts.

A  rash  and  furfuraceous  eruption  on  the  chest  between  the
mammae.

I  Sternal  integument  swollen  and  painful. ^  Scirrhus.
^^  Neck  and  Back. Drawing  pain  in  the  back ;  in  the  sacrum.


ASTERIAS  RUBENS.  240

■  Scrofulous  ulcer  on  1.  part  of  neck,  extending  from  border  of

hair  to  clavicle,  edges  hard  and  elevated.
^^  Upper  Limbs. I  Axillary  glands  swollen,  hard  and  knotted.

6  Scirrhus.
Itching  in  the  r.  axilla.
Feeling  as  if  beaten  in  arms. See  26.
Pain  in  right  shoulder.

I  I  Painful  drawing  in  the  muscles  of  r.  upper  arm.
Red  circular  spot,  size  of  a  franc,  on  the  left  olecranon,  becomes

covered  with  a  dry,  furfuraceous,  friable  coat,  which  falls  off

in  two  days ;  a  similar  but  smaller  spot  on  anterior  surface

of  same  arm.
Coldness  in  the  left  arm,  as  if  cold  wind  was  blowing  on  it.
Stinging  pain  in  1.  elbow.
Restlessness  in  the  limbs,  especially  in  the  bends  of  the  arms ;

it  is  scarcely  endurable  to  have  the  arm  covered.
Numbness  and  stiffness  of  hands  with  cold  arms.
Numbness  of  left  hand  extending  into  the  arm  ;  coldness  of  arm.
Pain  extending  from  the  thumb-joint  to  the  shoulder.
Pain  in  flexor  tendons  of  the  left  thumb.
Severe  itching  around  the  left  thumb  nail.

■  Drawing  pain  toward  the  inner  portion  of  the  chest  from  be-

fore backward  ;  under  the  left  breast  this  pain  extends  under

the  whole  inner  portion  of  the  arm  to  the  end  of  the  little

finger.
Pricking  in  the  muscle  of  1.  upper  arm.
Drawing  pain  in  1.  arm  near  elbow.
Drawing  pain  in  bone  of  r.  upper  arm  down  to  the  elbow  joint,

most  violent  in  the  lowest  part.
Drawing  pain  in  r.  wrist,  afternoon.
Drawing  and  strumming  in  arms.
^^  Lower  Limbs. Pain  in  left  knee.
Crampy  pain  above  1.  knee.
Drawing  in  r.  knee  and  below  the  left.
Drawing  in  the  outer  muscles  of  1.  calf.
Drawing  in  bone  of  1.  tibia,  scraping  on  the  bone.
Cracking  in  the  left  knee-joint.
Itching  below  the  1.  knee,  evening  in  bed.
Itching  on  r.  tibia.
Pain  in  the  bone,  above  the  1.  ankle.
Violent  shooting  on  a  small  spot  on  the  lower  leg,  sore  from

scratching  a  few  days  after.
Drawing  pain  in  outer  side  of  left  thigh.
Sensation  of  drawing  in  right  hip,  as  if  the  leg  was  too  long

and  drawn  downwards.
Burning  lancinations  in  great  trochanter  and  left  coxo-femoral

joint,  extending  like  lightning  into  the  outer  side  of  bend  of

knee  and  into  buttocks.


241  ' ASTERIAS  RUBENS.

Dull  pain  in  left  coxo-femoral  joint  in  the  morning.

Deep  lancination  in  anterior  part  of  the  thigh.

Pain  in  1.  hip  in  the  evening.

Violent  pain  in  left  thigh  a  few  inches  above  the  knee.

Extremely  unpleasant  itching  on  upper  and  lower  leg ;  worse
at  6  P.M.  and  in  open  air.

Tormenting  itching  on  thighs  and  legs,  increases  at  6  p.m.  in
the  open  air.

Insensibility  of  lower  limbs  with  the  vertigo.

Painfully  tired  feeling  in  lower  limbs.

I  During  the  day  annoyed  by  permanent  contractions  of  mus-
cles of  lower  limbs ;  during  the  night  great  agitation  and
little  sleep, d  Precursor  of  apoplexy.

Pain  in  ankles.

Pain  like  podagra  in  metatarsal  joint  of  left  big  toe,  with  red-
ness and  heat.

Lessened  sensibility  in  the  limbs,  mostly  in  the  lower.

Restlessness  in  lower  limbs. See  39.

Weakness  in  standing. See  35.

Crawling  like  ants  on  lower  limbs.

Pains  in  left  great  toe  and  joints  of  the  feet.

Lancinating  pain  in  the  toes,  especially  the  left  great  toe  with
redness  of  the  skin,  great  heat  and  sensibility ;  cannot  en-
dure ordinary  covering ;  increased  after  sunset  and  in  the
warm  room  ;  cold  air  and  cold  water  assuage  the  pain,  the
heat  of  the  bed  renews  it,  although  it  ceases  before  midnight.

Pain  in  left  foot  concentrated  at  ball  of  great  toe,  <  by  motion.

Ankles  pain,  most  in  left,  later  in  the  r.  in  walking.

Painful  drawing  in  muscles  of  1.  ankle.

Cracking  in  the  1.  ankle.

In  the  metatarsal  joint  of  the  1.  big  toe  gouty  pain  all  day,  red
and  hot ;  cannot  walk  at  all.

Shooting  pain  in  the  instep  of  r.  foot.

Painful  stretching  in  the  soles.

Drawing  in  the  soles  and  toes.

Sensitiveness  of  1.  sole  and  toes.

Burning  heat  in  the  feet.

Tickling  on  I.  foot  near  the  root  of  toes,  8  a.m.

Shooting  in  1.  big  toe  and  all  the  other  toes,  with  great  heat
and  sensitiveness ;  cannot  bear  the  usual  covering ;  <  after
sunset,  in-doors,  skin  reddened  in  the  warmth  of  bed,  cold  and
cold  water  relieves ;  several  evenings  ceasing  at  night.

Violent  pain  in  1.  toes  and  root  of  toes.

Violent  cramp  in  1.  toes,  later  in  the  right.

Violent  pain  in  the  corn  of  1.  toe.
^*  Limbs  in  General. ■  With  the  attacks  convulsive  motions  ot.
the  limbs. 0  Epilepsy.

Uneasiness  in  the  limbs ; <  covered  or  in  the  warm  room.

VOL.  II. — 16.


ASTERIAS  RUBENS.  242

I  Pains  in  the  limbs.

I  Laming  pains  in  whole  r.  side  at  night.

Feeling  in  the  limbs  as  if  beaten,  most  in  arms,  with  short

breath  and  pains  when  breathing.
Pains  in  1.  arm  and  1.  knee,  in  the  evening  in  bed.
Drawing  pains  in  r.  arm  or  hand  and  on  dorsum  of  1.  foot.
Stitches  in  1.  wrist  and  at  same  time  in  1.  calf.
With  the  pain  in  the  r.  hip,  pain  of  the  whole  1.  side  up  to

shoulder-blade.
I  1  Starting  in  upper  and  lower  limbs,  continuing  several  days.
^'  Rest. Position. Motion. Standing :  weakness  worse.
Throwing  chest  backward :  pain  in  upper  chest  better.
Motion :  pain  in  1.  chest  < ;  pain  in  ball  of  toe  worse.
Walking :  vertigo  with  insensibility  of  lower  limbs  ;  r.  ankle

pains  ;  pressure  in  uterus.
Walking  or  ascending  :  throbbing  in  head  worse.
BGait  unsteady ;  muscles  refuse  to  obey  the  efforts  of  the  will.
^®  Nerves. Startings  in  upper  and  lower  limbs  for  days,  with  hot

skin,  <  after  supper.
I  1  General  malaise  ;  lassitude ;  feels  better  after  eating.
I  Convulsive  motions  of  the  limbs  during  unconsciousness.

■  Twitching  over  the  whole  body  four  or  five  days  before  the  at-

tack, d  Epilepsy.
I  Weak  and  pale, d  Epilepsy.

■  Sadden  falling ;  livid  face,  convulsive  motion  of  the  jaws,  froth

at  the  mouth,  shocks  in  the  limbs,  loss  of  consciousness.
d  Epilepsy.

■  Convulsive movements of  the  jaws, froth at the mouth.

6  Epilepsy.

■  After  attacks  great  debility  with  a  sense  of  distress  in  epigas-

trium, d  Epilepsy.

■  Convulsive  attacks,  after  pressing  pain  in  forepart of  head

and  over  the  eyes,  with  falling  forward,  loss  of  consciousness,
trismus,  pale  face,  convulsive  motions  of  the  limbs.
After  attacks  prostration  and  anxiety  in  upper  part  of  abdomen.

■  Epilepsy.

■  Lameness  of  limbs.

^^  Sleep. Disposition  to  sleep  after  reading  a  moment.

Is  late  falling  asleep  and  late  getting  up.

Agitated  sleep,  tossing  about.

Many  dreams  about  persons  and  events ;  images  vivid  and  life-
like.

I  I  Awakes  in  the  night  with  great  distress  and  confusion ;  it
seems  to  him  as  if  brain  were  shaken  by  electric  shocks.

■Nocturnal  lancinating  pain  in  the  tumor, d  Cancer  mammae.

■  During  the  night  great  agitation  and  little  sleep. 6  Precursor

of  apoplexy.
Anxiousness  at  night  from  a  waving  throbbing  in  chest.


243  ASTERIAS  RUBENS.

Sleep  quiet  but  not  refreshing.

Very  vivid  dreams  of  people  whom  she  sees  and  hears,  as  if  she
was  awake ;  not  unpleasant.

I  Cannot  sleep  from  pain  in  the  mammary  cancer.

Early  in  bed. See  25.
^^  Time. 8  a.m.:  tickling  in  foot.

Morning :  headache  on  rising ;  epistaxis  on  getting  awake ;
coryza  and  sneezing ;  sore  throat  on  awaking  ;  eructations  :
pain  in  side  of  abdomen  ;  erections  ;  sexual  desire  increased
in  female ;  cough  ;  anxiety  in  heart ;  cerebral  symptoms  oc-
cur ;  pain  left  coxo-femoral  joint.

Forenoon  :  hawking  grayish-black  phlegm.

Toward  noon  :  headache  suddenly  disappears.

Noon  to  2  P.M  :  anger.

Noon  to  3  P.M.:  anxiety.

All  day  :  dull  occipital  headache.

During  day  :  several  soft  stools  ;  cerebral  symptoms  disappear ;
annoyed  by  permanent  contractions  of  muscles  of  lower  limbs.

Afternoon  :  pain  in  wrist.

4  P.M.:  excitement  female  venereal  appetite;  limbs  feel  as  if
beaten.

6  P.M.:  stitching  in  leg  worse.

Toward  evening :  fever,  hot  skin — followed  by  chilliness.

Evening :  unusual  gayety ;  cerebral  symptoms  recur,  itching
below  1.  knee  in  bed ;  pain  left  hip.

Before  midnight :  pain  in  toes  ceases.

Night :  (sensation  as  if  brain  were  shaken  by  electric  shock ;
pains  deprive  her  of  rest ;  throbbing  in  chest ;  anxiety  in
heart ;  great  agitation  and  little  sleep ;  pain  in  whole  r.  side ;
awakens  in  distress  and  confusion ;  lancinating  in  tumor ;
fear  of  apoplexy.

^'  Temperature  and  Weather. Heat  of  head  as  if  surrounded

by  hot  air.
Coldness  1.  arm  as  if  cold  wind  were  blowing  on  it.
Cold  air  and  washing :  pain  in  toes  better.
Open  air:  itching  on  leg  ■<  ;  pressuie  on  vertex  better.
Covering:  heat  of  bed:  in  room  :  pain  in  toes  <  ;  uneasiness

in  limbs  worse.
Great  desire  to  wash  in  cold  water.
I  Complaints  worse  in  cold  damp  weather.
*"  Fever. Great  coldness  after  supper.

Shivering  with  somnolence,  followed  by  hot  skin  and  restless

night.
Chill  and  a  heat  in  the  face  in  alternation  with  colic.
Heat  followed  by  coldness.

Violent  heat  in  the  head,  then  over  the  whole  body.
I  I  Increased  general  heat.
After  nightly  fear  of  apoplexy,  recovers  consciousness. See  2.


ASTERIAS  RUBENS.  244

Hard  pulse  (see  29) ;  the  febrile  state  continues  to  the  end  of

the  next  day.
Increased  warmth  of  body  during  the  whole  proving.
Towards  evening  fever  with  hot  skin,  followed  by  chilliness.
Shivering,  and  heat  and  cold  in  alternation.
"  Attacks. Dull  occipital  headache  half  hour ;  came  on  suddenly
one  and  a  half  hours  after  breakfast ;  went  off  suddenly.
■  Attacks  gradually  lessened  to  shorter  intervals. ^Epilepsy.
*^  Locality  and  Direction. Right :  pain  side  of  head  ;  pimple
behind  ear ;  dullness  of  hearing  in  ear ;  scirrhus  of  mamma ;
constriction  side  of  chest ;  violent  beating  carotid  artery ;
itching  in  axilla ;  pain  in  shoulder ;  drawing  in  muscles  of
upper  arm ;  pain  in  bones  of  arm  ;  pain  in  wrist ;  drawing
in  knee ;  itching  on  tibia ;  drawing  in  hip ;  pain  on  instep
of  foot ;  pain  in  whole  side.
Left:  boring  pain  above  eye;  neuralgia  opposite  molar  teeth ;
breast  feels  drawn  in ;  ulceration,  swelling  and  induration  of
mamma ;  chest  painful ;  ulcer  side  of  neck  ;  spot  on  olecra-
non ;  coldness  in arm ; stinging in elbow ; numbness  in
hand;  pain  flexor  tendons  of  thumb;  itching  around  thumb
nail ;  pain  in  arm  ;  pain  in  knee ;  cramp  above  knee  ;  draw-
ing outer  muscle  of  calf ;  drawing  in  tibia ;  cracking  in  knee
joint ; itching below knee ; pain in bone above ankle ;
drawing  outer  side  of  thigh ;  pain  in  hip;  pain  in  thigh;
pain  in  ball  of  great  toe  ;  pain  in  ankle ;  sensitiveness  of  sole
and  toes  ;  tickling  in  foot ;  pain  in  corn  of  toe.
Above  downward :  pain  in  arm  ;  violent  heat  in  head.
Below  upward:  pain  in  thumb-joint;  pain  whole  1.  side.
Within  outward :  pain  in  eyes.
Before-backward :  stitch-pain  in  1.  breast.
*^  Sensations. As  if  brain  was  shaken  by  electric  shocks.
As  if  head  would  split.
As  if  skull  would  break,  pain  in  vertex.
Empty  feeling  in  head.
Eyes  as  if  drawn  back.

As  if  leg  was  too  long  and  drawn  downwards.
Feeling  in  limbs  as  if  beaten.

Lancinating:  in  forehead,  temples  and  occiput;  in  auditory
meatus ;  in  mammary  tumor ;  in  chest ;  deep, in  anterior
part  of  thigh  ;  in  toes.
Burning  lancinations :  in  great  trochanter  and  1.  coxo-femoral

joint.
Stitches  in  tongue ;  through  breast  to  back ;  in  1.  wrist  and

calf.
Pricking:  in  upper  arm.
Stinging  :  in  1.  elbow.
Pain  like  needles  in  lower  jaw.


245  '  ASTERIAS  RUBENS.

Shooting :  in  tongue ;  on  a  small  spot  on  lower  leg ;  r.  instep  ;

in  1.  big  toe  and  other  toes.
Tearing  :  in  abdominal  walls  ;  in  r.  side.
Drawing :  in  tongue ;  in  abdominal  walls ;  in  breast ;  in  chest ;

in  back ;  in  muscles  of  upper  arm ;  in  r.  wrist ;  in  r.  knee

and  below  the  left;  in  outer  muscle  of  1.  calf;  in  outer  side

of  1.  thigh  ;  in  r.  hip  ;  in  1.  ankle  ;  in  soles  and  toes.
Pressure :  upon  anterior  lobes  of  brain  ;  in  r.  side  of  occiput ;

on  lower  abdominal  organs.
Boring :  above  1.  eye.
Burning :  in  head ;  in  feet.
Smarting  :  in  scirrhus  of  breast.
Soreness :  of  scalp.

Crampy  pain  :  above  1.  knee  ;  in  1.  toes.
Constriction :  in  throat ;  in  prgecordial  region ; in  r.  side  of

chest.
Contracting  pain  :  in  scrobiculum.
Painful  stretching :  in  soles.
Scraping  :  on  1.  tibia.
Neuralgic  pain :  in  mammae.
Gouty  pain  :  in  big  toe.
Sudden  pain :  r.  side  of  head.
Dull pain :  in occiput ; in oesophagus ;  in scrobiculum ;  in

muscles  of  prsecordial  region ;  in  r.  side  of  abdomen ;  in

mammae;  in  1.  coxo-fem  oral  joint.
Undefined  pain :  in  bones  of  sinciput ;  below  the  breast-bone ;

in  chest ;  in  r.  shoulder ;  in  thumb  ;  in  1.  hip  ;  in  1.  thigh  ;

in  1.  knee ;  above  1.  ankle ;  in  1.  great  toe  and  joints  of  feet ;

in  root  of  toes  ;  in  corn  of  1.  toe ;  in  limbs.
Heaviness :  of  head.
Dullness :  in  the  head ;  in  chest.
Throbbing  :  in  head ;  in  chest.
Twitches :  in  brain.
Roughness :  in  larynx.
Crawling :  in  face ;  on  lower  limbs.
Strumming :  in  arms.
Tickling  :  on  1.  foot  near  toes.
Numbness :  of  hands.
Itching ;  upon  chest ;  in  r.  axilla ;  around  thumb  nail ;  below

1.  knee ;  on  r.  tibia ;  on  thighs  and  legs.
Dryness :  in  throat.
Heat :  in  the  head ;  in  eyes  ;  in  throat ;  in  rectum  ;  in  urethra ;

in  feet.
Coldness :  in  1.  arm.
^®  Skin. Itching  spots.

Furfuraceous  eruption  between  mammae  and  oh  left  olecranon.
Chronic  cutaneous  affections  and  old  ulcers  with  stinking  ichor.


ASTERIAS  RUBENS.  246

Eruption  on  thighs  and  insteps  of  small  itching  vesicles  which
tear  easily  and  form  superficial  ulcers.

I  Scrofulous  ulcer  left  side  of  throat. See  31.

I  Itch.

I  Tetters.

I  Sensitive  edges,  fetid  discharge, d  Cancer  mammae.

I  Dry,  harsh  skin,  earthy  appearance, d  Cancer  mammae.

Eruption  of  small  blisters  on  thighs  and  legs,  itching  on  ankles,
changing  to  small  burning  ulcers,  spreading  but  remaining
superficial.

I  Skin  destitute  of  pliability  and  elasticity. ^  Ulcer  on  neck.
*''  Stages  of  Life,  Constitution. iSycosis!^

Flabby,  lymphatic  constitution.

■  Plethoric  man. d  Epilepsy.

I  Girl,  set.  22,  delicate,  lymphatic  and  very  irritable  tempera-
ment. 6  Epilepsy.

I  Woman,  set.  48,  flabby,  lymphatic  constitution,  for  several
years  a  scrofulous  ulcer. See  31.

I  Man,  set.  56,  plethoric  constitution,  sedentary  since  8  years.
6  Epilepsy.

I A  woman,  set.  56,  dry  constitution. ^  Scirrhus  in  breast.

I  Woman,  set.  60,  strong  constitution.  ^Induration  of  1.
mamma.

I A  man,  set.  74,  nervous,  sanguine  constitution,  suffering  hard-
ships of  war  as  an  oflScer,  particularly  during  the  campaign
in  Egypt, d  Threatened  apoplexy.  •

^*  Relationship. Antidotes  to  Ast.  rub.:  Plumbum  and  Zincum.

Side  relations  :  Murex.,  Sepia.

Compare:  Orot  tig.,  Gfrat.,  Q-ummi gut.,  Jatrop.,  Thuya  (all
similar  in  diarrhoea) ;  Bellad.  (pains  come^and  go  suddenly) ;
Lilium  tig.  (sexual  desire  increased  in  women).

Useful  after:  Bellad.,  Oarbo  an.,  Conium,  and  Silie.  (in  scir-
rhus  of  mamma) ;  Sulphur,  Bellad.,  Colo,  carb.,  (in  epi-
lepsy).

Incompatibles  :  coffee  and  Nux  vom.

Ipecac,  relieved  after  Nux  vom.  aggravated.


247  ATROPINUM.

ATROPINUM.

A  tr  opine .  C-^^  H^  3  -^^  3  •

Discovered  in  1833  as  being  the  alkaloid  in  the  berries,  leaves  and  root  of
Atropa  Belladonna ;  it  was  at  first  used  in  the  homoeopathic  school  by
such  as  wanted  something  stronger,  and  proved  years  after.  As  it  is,  we
have  to  regard  all  the  symptoms,  provings,  poisonings  and  cures,  as  very
uncertain.  See  Fehling's  Dictionary,  Vol.  I,  1871,  p  902.  The  only  trust-
worthy preparation  is  the  Atropinum  sulphuricum.  This  may  have  been  the
drug  used  in  many  cases,  in  which  it  was  not  considered  worth  while  to
add  the  name  of  the  mineral  acid.


^  Seusorium. Vertigo  on  rising  in  the  morning.

Furious  delirium  at  night.
^  Inner  Head. Fine  drawing,  very  sensitive  stitches  across  fore-
head and  temples,  recurring  every  few  minutes,  lasting  some
seconds.
I  Dull  pain  in  temples,  at  intervals,  and  transitory.
I  Very  sensible  sticking  in  1.  temporal region on  waking  in
morning,  extending  into  ear  and  eye  ;  >  moving  in  open  air.
Sensation  as  if  head  was  screwed  up  ;  <C  walking  ; ■<  towards
11  A.M.; >■  towards  evening.

■  Sticking  pains  in  back  of  skull,  and  over  eyes  : <C  from  every

motion  and  on  stepping.

■  Severe  headache,  beginning  in  occiput,  passing  over  r.  side,

locating  over  eyes  and  in  the  balls,  followed  by  an  epileptic

attack,  with  unconsciousness.
Headache,  with  flushing  of  face  and  head,  with  rush  of  blood

>  to  the  head.
Periodical  headache,  coming  on  suddenly,  increasing  rapidly,

until  intensely  severe,  making  blind  and  delirious.

■  Headache  of  epileptics.

Sudden  pain  soon  making  her  blind  and  delirious,  lasting  three
hours  ;  no  nausea  and  vomiting ;  no  flushing  of  face ;  pain
deep  in  brain  ;  dreads  attacks.

Slender  married  woman,  set.  32,  nervous  temperament ;  head-
ache once  a  month,  not  with  catamenia.
"  Sight  and  Eyes. ■Sharp  neuralgic  pains  in  and  about  eyes.

Eyelids  felt  heavy  and  difficult  to  keep  open.

Sharp  pain  under  right  eye,  with  slight  pain  in  temples.

Neuralgic  pains,  commencing  under  left  orbit,  and  running
back  to  ear,  lasting  perhaps  ten  minutes  at  a  time,  and  then
disappearing  for  fifteen  or  twenty.


ATROPINUM.  248

I  Opaqueness; violent pain; dacryorrhoea  ; photophobia;

swelling  of  lids. 0  Keratitis.
Dimness  of  vision,  with  dilated  pupils.
I A  bad  incised  wound  of  cornea,  with  protruding  iris. 6  Atrop.

externally  and  Arnie.  internally ;  cured  in  seven  days.
iBlepharospasmus and irritability of  eye; Hwith corneal

ulcers.
I  Conjunctivitis,  with  lachrymation.
Erysipelatous  inflammation  of  the  conjunctiva  and  lids.
Amblyopia  ;  diplopia,  and  chromopsia.
Iritis,  if  exudation  has  taken  place,  and  the  inflammation  is

violent,  to  prevent  adhesion.
Used  for  the  purpose  of  lessening  the  intra-ocular  blood  pres-
sure in  inflammatory  diseases  of  the  internal  structures  of
the  eyeball,  and  also  in  inflammations  of  the  cornea  and  even
conjunctiva.
^^  Inner  Mouth, Mouth  and  throat  dry.
^^  Palate  and  Throat. Dark,  red,  dusky  hues  of  throat.

Difficult  swallowing  from  great  dryness.
^^  Scrobiculum  and  Stomach.  In  aff"ections  of  diaphragm  Atrop.

stands  between  Bellad.  and  Stramon.
^'  Abdomen. I  Frenzy,  with  distressing  abdominal  pain,  occasion-
ally leaves  her ;  pulse  quick ;  tongue  dry  ;  skin  hot,  but
sweating, d  Peritonitis.
^°  Rectum  and  Stool. ■  Catarrhal  dysentery.
^'  Urinary  Organs. Congestive  states  of  kidneys  and  liver,  with
disturbance of  r. heart ;  neuralgia of  head ;  nausea and
vomiting ; soporous  condition, d  Bright's  disease.
^^  Female  Sexual  Organs. Ovarian  neuralgia,  with  headache,

or  epilepsy.
^*  Pregnancy. I  Puerperal  convulsions. ^  Albumenuria.
^^  Neck  and  Back. I Locomotor  ataxia.

^*  Limbs  in  General. iFrom sleeping  in  a  damp  bed,  acute
rheumatism ;  pain  in  all  his  limbs,  which  are  swollen  and
red  ;  no  sleep  ;  general  feverish  and  profuse  sweat.
'^  Rest. Position. Motion. Moving :  sticking in 1. temple
better.
Stepping  :  sticking  in  back  of  skull  worse.
Walking :  sensation  as  if  head  were  screwed  up  worse.
3®  Nerves. Muscular  spasms  in  different  parts  of  the  body.

I  Tetanus.
*^  Time. Morning :  vertigo  on  rising ;  sticking  in  1.  temple on
awaking.
Sensation  as  if  head  were  screwed  up,  worse  11  A.M. ;  better

towards  evening.
Night :  furious  delirium.
^^  Temperature  and  Weather. Open  air :  sticking  in  temple
better.


249  ■ ATROPINUM  AND  ATROP.  SULPH.

*^  Locality  and  Direction. Hight :  occipital  headache  passes  to
side  ;  pain  under  eye  ;  disturbance  of  r.  heart.
Left:  sticking  in  temple;  neuralgic  pains  commence  under  or-
bit and  extend  to  ear.
*^  Sensations. As  if  heart  was  screwed  up.
Stitches  :  across  forehead  and  temples.
Sticking  pain  :  in  1.  temporal  region ;  in  back  of  skull ;  over

eyes.
Sharp  pain  :  under  r.  eye.
Neuralgic  pains  :  in  and  about  eyes  ;  under  1.  orbit  to  ear ;  in

head.
Dull  pain  :  in  temples.
Heaviness : of  eyelids.
**  Tissues. Influences cerebro-spinal centres, involving head,
throat  and  eyes.
Vessels  increase  in  volume,  not  in  tone.
^'  Stages  of  Life,  Constitution. Nervous,  but  not  hysterical

temperaments.
*^  Relationship. Very  similar  to  Bellad.

When  Bellad.  fails,  give  Atrop.,  both  affect  right  side  most.
Antidotes : Opium,  Physostigma.

In  Opium  poisoning,  has  been  found  useful  when  applied  hypo-
dermically.


ATROPINUM  SULPHURICUM.

Alkaloid  from  Atropa  Belladonna.  O-^rjH^^NO^,


Is  most  commonly  used  or  abused  by  ophthalmologists  to  dilate  the  pu-
pil. See  Sickel,  British  Quarterly,  1868,  Vol.  XXVI,  p.  672,  and  Norton,  in
New  York  /.  J/.,  Vol.  I,  p.  365, 1873.  Hence  seventy  symptoms  are  marked
TT,  such  being  observed  on  patients.  A  good  proving  by  Kafka  may  be
found  in  British  Quarterly,  Vol.  XV,  p.  238.


^  Mind. I  Unconsciousness. ^  Puerperal  eclampsia. ^Epilepsy.
;rAppears  profoundly  intoxicated.
TiComplete  unconsciousness  of  all  preceding  events.
TrMind  confused,  commenced  a  sentence  and  forgot  what  she

wished  to  say.
Trincoherent  in  observations,  while  thoroughly  wakeful.
n-She  insisted  repeatedly  that  her  blood  did  not  circulate,  and
that  her  feet  must  be  put  into  warm  water  or  she  should  die.


ATROPINUM  SULPHURICUM.  250

Slight  delirium  ;  picking  and  other  motions  of  hands  and  fin-
gers in  the  air,  as  if  they  came  in  contact  with  real  objects.
;rAll  day  wakeful  and  partially  delirious.
;rDelirium  alternating  with  stupor.
I  Spectral  illusions.

;rHallucinations  of  hearing  and  vision.
TrFrenzied  with  excitement  and  frantic  in  her  appeals.
TrLaughed  in  an  idiotic  manner.
Muttering  and  smiling.

■  Rambling  speech.

■  Mirthful  humor.

I  Sad  and  morose,  preferring  solitude  and  a  dark  room  to  soci-
ety of  friends, d  Epilepsy.
■  I  Great  fear  and  anxiety. ^  Diseased  pancreas.

;rBegan  to  quarrel  incoherently  with  his  supporters.

Exaltation  of  brain  and  spine,  followed  by  prostration.

Violent  stitches  in  base  of  brain,  above  the  eyes  and  in  temples.

Languor  of  body  and  mind,  rendering  incapable  of  active  bodily
or  mental  exertion.
^  Sensorium. Giddiness, heaviness and  drowsiness, or  actual
somnolency.

;rSense  of  giddiness,  figures  on  the  carpet  would  at  times  ap-
pear double.

TrHead  dull  and  confused.
^  Inner  Head. Aching  pain  in  forehead  for  two  hours.

A  slight  feeling  of  pressure  under  the  parietal  bones.

I  Headache  and  great  weakness, d  Diseased  pancreas.

I  Head  attacked  after  puerperal  epilepsy.

■  Meningitis,  cerebri tis  of  tuberculous  cases;  diseases  of  cerebral

membranes  and  hydrocephalus  acutus.
®  Sight  and  Eyes. ;rEverything  appears  large  and  with  a  red
halo.

;rDuring  the  evening  the  eyes  of  an  attending  lady  seemed  to
her  very  large,  and  she  could  not  avoid  looking  at  them.

Motes  before  eyes.

;rThrough  the  night  several  times  a  vision  of  great  numbers  of
white  flies  on  the  door,  which  was  white ;  she  requested  that
they  would  be  brushed  ofi";  the  flies  were  not  moving  and
rather  smaller  than  the  common  house  fly ;  continued  on
closing  the  eyes  until  noon  of  the  following  day.

;rAnnoyed  by  the  appearance  of  a  large  black  bug,  with  veri-
table legs,  a  few  inches  below  a  black  door  knob.

;rThe  next  following  morning,  imagining  she  saw  a  worm,  a
"thousand- legged  worm"  on  her  carpet,  she  sprang  out  of
bed,  and  was  found  trying  to  find  it ;  failing  in  this  she  would
look  in  another  place  and  see  it  again  ;  this  illusion  kept  her
busy  before  fully  satisfied  of  the  fallacy ;  the  color  of  the


251  ATROPINUM  SULPHURICUM.

•worm  was  brown,  the  same  as  the  predominant  color  in  the
carpet.

;rThe  large  figures  on  the  carpet  appeared  to  her  constantly  and
successively  rising  up  to  her  face.

;rPerpendicular  diplopia,  the  apparent  object  below  the  real  one.

Dimness  of  vision  remains,  unable  to  thread  a  needle  or  even
to  read.

;rVipion  was  much  impaired.

TrShe  could  scarcely  see  at  all  with  1.  eye,  very  little  with  the
r.,  which  was  intolerant  of  light,  and  seemed  to  throw  out
streams  of  light.

Pupils  unchanged  for  two  weeks.

;z-Right  pupil  contracted,  left  five  times  increased  in  size  (after
dropping  it  in  this  eye) ;  only  a  slight  trace  of  iris  visible.

TrPupils  on  side  of  injection  greatly  enlarged.

Increasing  dilatation  of  pupils ;  pupils  after  two  hours  reach
the  maximum  of  dilatation.

TrPupils  enormously  dilated,  irides  hardly  visible,  very  refrac-
tory when  any  attempt  was  made  to  examine  them  closely.

Dilatation  of  pupil  from  paralysis  of  the  oculomotor  nerve,  or
from  any  other  cause,  is  often  aggravated  by  it.

Pupils  not  unusually  dilated,  but  perfectly  immovable.

The  usual  very  large  doses  are  dangerous  when  there  are  any
suspicions  of  glaucoma,  such  as  dilated  pupil,  severe  pain,
sudden  increase  of  presbyopia,  etc.

I  Iritis,  except  with  too  great  intensity  of  inflammation,  after
nitrate  of  silver  or  cold  applied  to  the  eye ;  as  soon  as  there
is  any  sign  of  exudation,  or  if  pain  becomes  very  severe,  and
has  not  been  controlled  by  remedies,  commence  it  immedi-
ately and  increase  dose  until  it  dilates  pupil  sufficiently.

■  Prolapsus  of  iris  after  hurts  of  cornea;  if  horizontal  position,

shutting  lids  and  sudden  opening  in  bright  light  is  not  suffi-
cient.

Left  to  himself  he  did  not  drop  into  coma,  as  those  who  have
taken  opium,  but  would  occasionally  open  his  eyes  with  a
vacant,  amaurotic  expression,  and  turn  his  head  from  side
to  side.

iDeep  ulcers  in  centre  of  cornea,  which  may  perforate;  to  pre-
vent iris  from  being  drawn  into  the  opening

lEvil  results  of  conjunctivitis,  keratitis,  chromopsia,  amaurosis.

;rLooking  into  a  mirror  she  observed  a  strange  appearance  of
her  eyes,  as  though  they  projected  from  their  sockets.

■  Rolling  eyes. ^Puerperal  eclampsia.

TrEyelids  felt  heavy  and  difficult  to  keep  open,  and  yet  no  in-
clination to  sleep.

■  Pain  in  and  over  eyes, d  Before  epilepsy.
■  Supraorbital  and  orbital  neuralgia.

®  Hearing  and  Ears. Ringing  in  ears.


ATROPINUM  SULPHURICUM.  252

TrMorbidly  sensitive  to  sounds  and  objects ; I  I  with  symptoms
akin  to  early  stages  of  meningitis.
'  Smell  and  Nose. Occasional  dryness  of  Schneiderean  and  con-
junctival mucous  membranes.
®  Face. Sensitiveness  of  the  side  usually  affected,  with  some  swell-
ing ;  some  stages  painful  two  days  after.
;rFace  hot  and  very  red.
I  Deep  red  distorted  face. ^Puerperal  eclampsia.

■  Suffering appearance,  without great  paleness. ^Diseased

pancreas.

Paleness  of  face.

I  Deathly  pallor. ^Gastric  disturbance.
®  Lower  Part  of  Face. Parched  lips.

TrShort  but  intense  pains  in  one  or  the  other  lower  jaws,  and
return  of  the  usual  prosopalgia ;  after  three  days.

1  Bloody  foam  at  the  mouth. 6  Puerperal  eclampsia.
'"  Teeth  and  Gums. I  Gnashing  of  teeth. ^  Puerperal  eclampsia.

;rTeeth  ceased  to  ache  in  two  hours.
"  Taste,  Speech,  Tongue. ^rPappy  taste.

I  Taste  bad,  without  any  peculiar  character,  d  Pancreatic  dis-
ease.

;rDifficult  articulation.

;rThe  tongue  seems  partially  paralyzed,  articulation  indistinct,
rapid  and  chattering.

Could  not  speak  a  word  for  dryness  in  mouth ;  tongue  nearly
adherent  to  roof  of  mouth.

Complete  dryness  of  tongue,  roof  of  mouth  and  soft  palate,  ex-
tending more  or  less  down  the  pharynx  and  larynx.

■  Tongue  hard,  parched  and  cracked, d  Typhus.
Tongue  becomes  covered  with  white  fur ;  after  two  hours.
TrFurred  tongue ;  3d  day.

■  His  tongue  was  thickly  coated.

I  Tongue  a  little  loaded. ^Pancreatic  disease.
^^  Inner  Mouth. TrGreat  dryness  of  mouth.

Dryness  of  mouth  after  two  hours  suddenly  gives  way  to  a  vis-
cid, acrid  secretion  of  a  peculiar  and  very  highly  offensive
odor.

Mouth  becomes  foul  and  clammy  ;  after  two  hours.

A  gradually  increasing  feeling  of  dryness  of  mouth  and  throat,
increasing  during  one  hour  so  that  he  could  not  speak  a  word ;
after  two  hours.
^'  Palate  and  Throat.  TrFeeling  in  mouth  and  throat  was  such
she  thought  she  "could  not  swallow,"  and  when  impressed
with  the  necessity  of  so  doing  she  drank  with  avidity  the
warm  water  offered,  though  at  first  it  seemed  quite  difficult.

TrRefuses  obstinately  to  swallow  anything  or  to  answer  ques-
tions in  any  way  than  by  a  grunt.


253  ATROPINUM  SULPHURICUM.

Swallowing  appeared  to  give  pain,  manifested  by  grimaces  and
increased  spasms  of  facial  muscles.

Difficulty  of  deglutition from dryness extending down the
pharynx.

TrTook  fluid  food  well  next  morning.

TrCould  swallow  soup,  but  no  solids;  thickened  gruel  would  not
go  down.

I  Throat  dark-red. ^Epilepsy.
^*  Appetite,  Thirst,  Desires,  Aversions, i  Appetite  often  con-
siderable, sometimes  absent,  with  vomiting  of  ingesta.

;rDevouring  ravenously  a  large  slice  of  dry  bread ;  at  5  A.M.

I  Appetite  very  small,  although  now  and  then  hunger  is  felt.
d  Diseased  pancreas.

I  Thirst  after  vomiting.
^'  Eating  and  Drinking. Compelled  to  take  a  glass  of  water ;
dryness  and  general  feeling  of  illness  left.

■  Appetite  is  good,  but  as  soon  as  she  has  eaten,  nausea  super-

venes, with  pressure  at  the  stomach,  constant  retching  and
empty  eructations,  followed  by  an  emptying  of  the  contents
of  stomach.

■  Whenever  he  took  breakfast  he  was  seized  with  vomiting  in

the  afternoon. 6  Diseased  pancreas.

■  Immediately  after  eating  he  was  usually  seized  with  weight

and  pain  at  the  epigastrium,  with  frequent  sour  eructations,
retching,  followed  soon  by  vomiting  of  ingesta,  which  with-
out admixture  of  blood,  or  any  other  foreign  material,  was
so  acid  as  to  set  his  teeth  on  edge.

■  After  each  meal  pressure  and  pinching  in  stomach,  retching,

soon  followed  by  vomiting  of  the  food  taken  ;  if  the  stomach
has  emptied  itself,  mostly  free  from  pain.

^^  Hiccough,  Belching,  Nausea  and  Vomiting. Nausea  and

retching  with  the  uneasiness  of  stomach,  which  increased  to
a  pressing,  sticking,  contractive  pain  and  continual  belching.

■  Throws  up  all  she  takes, d  Gastric  disorder.

■  Vomited  all  he  took,  whether  solids  or  fluids,  sweet  or  salt,  lit-

tle or  much.

■  The  matter  vomited  is  not  acrid,  but  is  merely  the  food  she

has  just  taken.
;rRelieved  of  her  distress  after  vomiting,  produced  by  copious
draughts  of  warm  water.

■  The  vomiting  was  seldom  attended  with  nausea,  it  came  after

a  short  exacerbation  of  pain  quite  suddenly,  often  extremely
violent,  never  followed  by  retching ;  pain  lessened  afterwards.
d  Diseased  pancreas.

■  Vomiting,  appears  sometimes  in  the  evening  between  6  and  7  ;

then  in  the  night  between  11  and  1  o'clock ;  regularly  five,
six  hours  after  a  full  meal, d  Diseased  pancreas.


ATROPINUM  SULPHURICUM.  254

lEating  no  dinner  he  remained  without  vomiting  until  the  even-
ing, d  Diseased  pancreas.

■  Vomiting  consisted  of  a  red  liquid,  like  washings  of  meat,  in

which  food  appeared  when  a  meal  had  been  taken  five  hours
before, d  Diseased  pancreas.
I  Once  the  substance  vomited  was  mixed  with  blood. ^Dis-
eased pancreas.
^'  Scrobiculum  and  Stomach. Fluttering  sensation  in  cardiac
region.
Uneasy  sensation  in  stomach,  with  frequent  empty  eructations,
affording  no  relief.

■  Region  of  stomach  is  very  sensitive  to  pressure;  no  organic

change  discoverable.

I  In  region  immediately  below  the  stomach,  to  the  left,  pains
d  Diseased  pancreas.

I  Deep  pressure  on  region  below  stomach,  to  the  left,  is  very
painful,  but  no  swelling  to  be  felt, d  Diseased  pancreas.

I  In  region  of  pylorus,  close  to  the  umbilicus,  towards  the  r.
side,  a  tumor  nearly  the  size  of  a  fist,  yielding  some  resist-
ance, very  sensitive  to  the  touch,  moveable,  easily  pushed
aside,  and  yielding  a  dull  sound  on  percussion,  d  Gastric
disorder.
^^  Hypochondria.  TiGreat  distress  in  epigastrium,  seemed  inde-
scribable.
^^  Abdomen.  Abdomen  swollen,  tense,  tympanitic,  upon  firm
pressure  signs  of  suffering.

I  Neuralgia  of  peritoneum,  of  long  standing;  as  an  ointment.
^"  Rectum  and  Stool. ^rSlight  action  of  bowels,  next  day.

;z-Bowels  worse  on  the  second  day  in  the  evening ;  stool  pappy,
painless,  usual  color.

^Diarrhoea,  alternating  with  confined  bowels.  6  Diseased  pan-
creas.

I  Bowels  relieved  once  in  two,  three  days. ^Gastric  disorder.

;tA  firm,  thick  stool  next  night.

;rDuring  stool,  felt  badly,  weak,  terribly  nervous,  with  general
sweat.
^^  Urinary  Organs. TrCompelled to urinate every  ten, fifteen
minutes,  without  pain,  at  night  between  10  and  1  o'clock  ;
quantity  profuse  and  almost  colorless.

Involuntary,  but  scanty  discharge  of  urine.

I  Urine  normal,  with  gastric  disorder.

;rPassed  very  little  urine,  next  day.

Inability  to  pass  his  water;  a  day  after  in  drops  and  with  diffi-
culty ;  2  weeks.

TrPartial  paralysis  of  bladder,  requiring  the  use  of  the  catheter.

No  water  passed  since  evening  preceding;  bladder  not  dis-
tended.


255  ATROPINUM  SULPHURICUM.

llChronic  albumenuria.
^^  Female  Sexual  Organs, i  Ovarian  neuralgia.
I  Pains  in  ovary  extort  screams. ^Epilepsy.

■  Severe  cutting  or  drawing  pains  in  1.  ovary,  screams,  has  to

bend. 6  Puerperal  epilepsy. '
I  Pain  in  1.  ovary,  which  was  swollen  and  tender  during  menses.

d  Epilepsy.
iMenses  light  in  color  and  scanty, d  Epilepsy.

■  Severe  headache  previous  to  menses,  beginning  in  occiput,

passing  over  r.  side  of  head,  locating  in  or  over  the  eyes,  in-
creases until  an  attack  of  epilepsy  sets  in.
"  Pregnancy  and  Parturition.  ■  Mother  of  seven  children,  in
each  pregnancy  about  3d  month :  severe  cutting  or  drawing
pain  in  1.  ovary,  extorting  screams,  caused  to  bend  to  that
side ;  afterwards  head  attacked  and  epileptic  convulsions  fol-
low ;  these  attacks  are  more  frequent  and  severe  until  a  day
or  two  before  labor,  almost  continuous. ^Epilepsy.

■  After-pains  after  normal  birth  of  a  primipara  ;  violent  convul-

sions; unconsciousness; deep-red distorted face; rolling
eyes;  gnashing  of  teeth ;  bloody  foam  before the mouth;
bending  in  of  thumbs  ;  throwing  about  the  limbs ;  on  remis-
sion stretching  of  body  and  deep  sopor.
"^^  Voice  and  Larynx. Voice  husky  from  dryness,  extending  to
larynx.
Dryness  of  larynx  often  induces  dry  cough  and  difficult  deglu-
tition.
^^  Respiration. Breathing  remains  tranquil.
No  stertorous  breathing.
Occasionally  heaving  a  deep  sigh.
;rSensation  of  choking.
"  Cough. ■  Cough  following  epilepsy,  occurring  at  the  catamenia.
^^  Heart,  Pulse. ■Failure  of  heart's  action  from  chloroform  or
other  cardiac  paralyzers.
A  slight  throbbing  or  heaving  sensation  in  the  carotids.
Acceleration  of  pulse  from  20  to  70,  with  a  slight  increase  in
its  volume,  and  a  considerable  increase  in  force  of  cardiac
and  arterial  contraction,
y ■Pulse  80  to  88,  with  gastric  disorder.

TrPulse  108  morning  after  second  night,  while  perfectly  rational.
TrPulse  very  quick,  but  of  good  volume.

^rPulse  accelerated  to  120,  with  increased  tone  but  diminished
volume.

■  Pulse  60,  irregular,  intermittent,  weak.

■  Very  weak  pulse.

Pulse  is  observed  to  fall  before  moisture  returns  to  the  mouth,
resuming  its  ordinary  rate.

■  Pulse  small,  constricted,  120. ^Peritonitis.


ATROPINUM  SULPHURICUM.  256

^^  Neck  and  Back. ■  Constant  burning  pains  in  back,  under  the
sternum,  and  in  region  of  stomach, d  Gastric  disorder.

lA  large  portion  of  spine  so  sensitive  that  she  cried  out  on
pressure,  turned  pale,  and  was  seized  with  nausea,  belching
and  retching.

I  Painful  affections  from  spinal  irritation.
^^  Upper  Limbs. Could  not  hold  a  vessel  of  fluid  in  his  hands  nor
carry  it  to  his  mouth ;  2  weeks  after,

I  Gouty  aff"ection  of  the  r.  wrist,  with  stiffness  and  want  of  feel-
ing of  the  fingers.

;rHands  cold  ;  after  two  hours.

■  Bending  in  of  thumbs, d  Puerperal  eclampsia.

^*  Lower  Limbs. TrContinual  dragging  of  legs  when  assisted,  or
rather,  held  up,  in  walking.
;rSays  her  "limbs  feel  like  sticks,"  and  thought  she  could  not
use  them  to  walk  across  the  room  to  the  sofa,  but  with  aid  she
did  so  with  considerable  difficulty.

■  (Edema  of  legs. ^  Albumenuria.

^*  Limbs  in  General. ■  Hands  and  feet  cold  and  covered  with
cold  sweat. 6  Peritonitis.

■  Upper  and  lower  limbs  always  cold, d  Gastric  disorder.
;rNumbness  and  heaviness  in  her  limbs  so  great  that  she  feared

the  result  of  going  to  sleep  lest  she  should  never  awaken.
^'  Rest. Position. Motion. Bending  :  pain  in  1.  ovary  better.
TrEven  when  supported,  could  not  move  a  step,  feet  being  too
heavy,  and  feeling  no  bottom.
36  Jferyes. Trinvoluntary  movements  of  hands  towards  head.
TrConvulsive  trembling  of  muscles  of  upper  limbs.

■  Throwing  about  the  limbs. ^Puerperal  eclampsia.
Different  parts  affected  with  spasms.

TrSubsultus  tendinum.

Spasms  increased  when  disturbed ;  left  to  himself  they  came
every  two,  three  minutes.

■  Convulsions  after  meningitis  spinalis  cured  by  Bellad.',  re-

maining stiff"ness  of  lower  limbs  cured  by  Nux  vom.

■  Epilepsy  from  ovarian  irritation.

■  Some  forms  ot  epilepsy  and  chorea.

;rMalaise  and  staggers,  lasting  more  than  eight  hours.

Staggering,  or  complete  inability  to  walk.

;rGreat  helplessness,  amounting  to  partial  paralysis  of  arms  and

legs.
;rCould  not  rise,  felt  no  bottom  under  his  feet,  staggered  against

the  mirror.

■  Syncope  from  asthma  or  shock.

^^  Sleep. Frequently  a  prolonged  yawn  when  sitting  still  in  a  dull
apathetic,  or  drowsy  condition.
;rRestless  night,  with  little  sleep.
TrBroken  sleep.


257  ATROPINUM  SULPHURICUM.

■Nights  restless,  only  sleep  towards  morning.  ^Diseased
pancreas.

■  Sleep  was  much  disturbed  on  account  of  frequent  gastric  pains,

which  often  occurred 'Avith  great  violence  each  night,  especi-
ally when  turning  in  bed.

TrAt  times  during  the  night,  when  nearly  lost  in  sleep,  she  would
suddenly  start  as  if  frightened.

Slept  pretty  well.

Could  not  be  aroused  at  6  a.m.

Drowsiness,  or  somnolency,  with  a  tendency  to  quiet  dreams
and  delirium.

jrSomnolency,  with  nervous  startings.

Comatose,  with  clonic  spasms  of  biceps  flexor  cubiti,  and  mus-
cles of  jaw;  limbs  cold.

■  Deep  sopor  after, d  Puerperal  eclampsia.

After  vigorous  efforts  to  arouse  him,  signs  of  consciousness.
^^  Time. Toward  morning :  sleep.

6  A.M.:  could  not  be  aroused.

Morning :  illusion  of  thousand-legged  worm  on  her  carpet ;
pulse  108.

During  day  :  slight  action  of  bowels.

All  day  :  wakeful  and  delirious  ;  passed  but  little  urine.

Between  6  and  7  p.m.:  vomiting.

Evening:  the  eyes  of  another  lady  seems  to  her  very  large,
and  she  could  not  avoid  looking  at  them  ;  diarrhoeic  stool.

Night :  saw  numberless  white  flies  on  a  white  floor ;  thick
stool ;  restlessness  ;  gastric  pains  ;  suddeij  starting  when  fall-
ing asleep.

Between  10  p.m.  and  1  a.m.:  profuse,  frequent  urination.

Between  11  p.m.  and  1  a.m.:  vomiting.
^'  Temperature  and  Weather. TrFeels  faint  and  greatly  in  need

of  fresh  air.
***■  Chill. Fever. Sweat. Slight  elevation  of  temperature  of
the  surface,  rarely  exceeding  one  degree,  still  slighter  of  in-
ternal body.

A  general  diffusion  of  warmth  throughout  the  cutaneous  surface.

TrDry,  hot  skin  ;  3d  day.

Slight  sweat.

1  Typhoid  and  septic  fevers.
*^  Locality  and  Direction. Right :  eye  intolerent  of  light ;  pu-
pil contracted ;  tumor  in  side  near  pyloric  region  ;  ache  side
of  head  ;  gouty  affection  of  wrist.

Left : impaired  vision  of  eye ;  pupil  five  times  increased  in .
size ;  unendurable  pains  in  region  below  stomach  to  side ;  .
pain  in  ovary.
"  Sensations. Pinching  :  in  stomach.

Burning  :  in  back  ;  under  sternum  ;  in  region  of  stomach.

Aching :  in  forehead.

VOL.  II, — 17.


ATROPINUM  SULPHURICUM.  258

Pressure  :  under  parietal  bones ;  at  stomach.

Fluttering :  in  cardiac  region.

Numbness :  in  limbs.

Undefined  pain  :  in  and  over  eyes.'
"  Tissues. iHypersesthesia  of  some  nervous  branch  of  ophthal-
mic, auditory,  olfactory,  vagus  and  plexus  Solaris,  of  the
uterus  and  sphincter  of  bladder.

■  Rheumatic  fever.

I  During  the  last  weeks,  remarkable  wasting, d  Diseased  pan-
creas.

■  Much  emaciated,  from  a  gastric  disorder.
I  Collapse  of  cholera.

*^  Touch. Passive  Motion. Injuries. Deep  pressure :  pain

below  stomach  <  ;  abdomen  worse.
Touch :  tumor  in  pyloric  region  sensitive.
*''  Stages  of  Life,  Constitution. Miss,  set.  24,  since  5  years,

headache  before  menses ;  ending  with  epilepsy.
I  Blonde,  slightly  built  woman,  set.  25,  had  three  children;  since

5  years. 6  Gastric  disorder.
Unmarried  woman,  set.  30.
Intelligent  married  woman,  set.  40,  medium  size,  nervo-sanguine

temperament,  good  health ;  poisoned  from  using  for  toothache ;

marked  tz.
Unmarried  woman,  set.  40,  for  six  years  vomiting  after  eating.
^^  Relationship. Antidote  to  Muscarine,  or  poisoning  by  mush-
rooms, especially  dyspnoea.
Antidote  to  mpconate  of  morphia,  or  any  other  salt  of  opium,

especially  where  the  heart's  action  is  greatly  diminished.
Atrop.  sulph.  is  to  be preferred  in  cases  in  which  Bellad.

does  not  act  effectually  and  permanently.
;rFor  hours  he  was  kept  constantly  on  the  move,  and  strong

galvanic  currents  passed  along  the  nape  of  neck  every  fifteen

minutes,  irritating  him  in  a  great  degree.


259  AURANTIUM.

AURANTIUM.

Citrus  vulgaris.  Aurantiaeece.

^  Mind. Great excitement ; motions  quick,  brusque, and  per-
formed with  uncontrollable  zeal.
^  Sensorium. Feels  drunken  and  giddy.
^  Inner  Head, iHemicrania;  right  side.

Pressing  headache,  now  over  the  whole  head,  now  on  one  part,
and  the  forehead.
*  Outer  Head. Promotes  the  growth  of  hair.
®  Eyes. Weakness  of  sight.
^  Ears. Noises  in  the  ears  as  from  bells  ringing.
^  Face. Aggravated  periodical  erysipelas.

Faceache  sometimes  changes  into  transient  but  frequently  re-
peated epileptic  like  convulsions  of  the  face.

Neuralgia  in  the  face,  shooting,  gnawing  pains,  most  in  the
temples,  especially  r.  side.
^^  Teeth. I  l  Constant  toothache.

Teeth  become  carious.

Teeth  wear  off.
"  Tongue. Tongue  furred  thickly,  brown.

13  Throat. Something  seems  to  rise  in  the  throat  and  choke  her.
'*  Appetite. Thirst. No  appetite.

Great  thirst,  drinking  little  at  a  time.
^^  Nausea  and  Vomiting. Nausea  and  vomiting.

Smell  of  oranges  always  makes  her  sick.
^^  Stomach. Aching  and  heaviness  in  region  of  stomach ; with

belching  and  thirst.
^^  Hypochondria. Left  side  distended.
^^  Stool. Constipation.
^^  Urine. I  '  Pains  in  kidneys  and  bladder.
^^  Female  Sexual  Organs. iToo  copious  menses.

1 1  Painful  menstruation  (tincture  of  seed  of  lemons).
^^  Breathing. Oppression  of  the  chest.

Sensation  in  the  upper  part  of  breast  bone  as  if  suffocating.

Constriction  in  the  throat.

■  Pleurodynia.
^^  Heart. I  l  Palpitation.
'^  Upper  Limbs. Pressure  upon  the  shoulders.

Small  blisters  over  the  whole  arms,  especially  on  the  hands  and
between  the  fingers.

General  itching  but  much  oftener  only  on  the  upper  limbs,  with
redness  and  swelling  of  the  hands.


#


AURANTIUM.  260

Spasmodic  pains  in  the  hands.
''  Lower  Limbs. ■  Sciatica.
'*  Limbs  in  General. ■  Painful  joints.
I  Trembling  of  limbs.
I  Cold  limbs  when  travelling.

Stretching  and  drawing  in  limbs ;  has  to  stretch  and  rub  the
hands.
^®  Nerves. Trembling  all  over.
■  Lameness.
Restlessness,  fidgety.
1  I  Half-sided  epileptiform  convulsions,  especially  of  face  and

shoulders.
The  whole  muscular  system  is  in  a  state  of  irritation,  cannot
keep  in  an  erect  position,
'^  Sleep. Constant  irresistible  gaping.
Sleep  very  restless,  full  of  dreams.

Sudden  starting,  burning  heat,  tossing  about  in  bed  and  sleep-
lessness.
*"  Fever. Oranges  are  said  to  render  gastric  fevers  milder,  even

when  of  a  typhoid  form.
^  Locality  and  Direction. Right :  hemicrania ;  neuralgia  in
temple.
Left:  hypochondrium  distended.
*'  Sensations. As  if  something  rose  in  throat.
Shooting :  in  face  and  temples.
Gnawing :  faceache.
Drawing :  in  limbs.
Aching :  in  region  of  stomach.
Pressing :  headache ; upon  shoulders.
Suifocating  sensation  :  in  upper  part  of  breast-bone.
Constriction :  in  throat.
Spasmodic  pains  :  in  hands.

Undefined  pain  :  in  kidneys  and  bladder ;  in  joints.
Heaviness  :  in  region  of  stomach.
Itching :  on  upper  limbs.
*®  Skin. Dusky  dry  skin.

Red  spots  appear  on  different  parts  of  the  body.
Children  eating  plenty  of  oranges  peeled  by  themselves,  get  an
eruption  and  other  symptoms  very  similar  to  scarlatina.
"  Stages  and  States. ■  Diseases  of  old  men,  especially  with  cold-
ness and  chilliness.
**  Relationship. An  orange  eaten  before  breakfast  is  said  to  de-
stroy the  desire  for  alcoholic  drinks  in  drunkards.


^y


261  AURUM  METALLICUM.

AURUM  METALLICUM.

Gold.  Au.,  the  element.


Gold,  the  common  metal,  proved  and  introduced  by  Hahnemann  in  1818,
in  Materia  Medica,  Vol.  IV  (95  and  138) ;  2d  ed.,  1825  (151  and  201) ;  in  Chro-
nic Diseases,  2d  edition,  1835,  404  symptoms.  The  last  proving  was  made  by  J.
C.  Burnett,  in  1879.  No  preparation  ought  to  be  used  except  such  as  has
been  made  from  the  precipitate,

^  Mind. Active  memory.

I  Weak memory. ^Puerperal mania. ^Neuralgia of  face.

Loss  of  memory. .

I  Absence  of  mind,  forgetfulness. d  Ozsena.

Mental  dullness.

Feels  stupid. See  35.

Inability  to  reflect.

I  She  thinks  she  feels  depression  of  spirits  in  the  chest. 6  In-

duration of  uterus.

II  Looks  on  the  dark  side,  weeps,  prays,  thinks  she  is  not  fit
for  this  world,  longs  for  death,  strong  inclination  to  commit
suicide;  desperate,  desires  to  jump  from  a  height,  d  Prolap-
sus or  induration  of  uterus, d  Pregnancy.

Imagines  he  is  neglectful  and  deserves  reproach  in  consequence.
Imagines  he  cannot  succeed  in  anything,  and  he  does  everything

wrong ;  he  is  in  disunion  with  himself.
Imagines  to  see  obstacles  in  his  way  everywhere,  occasioned

partly  by  contrary  fate,  partly  by  himself;  makes  him  feel

desponding.
He  imagines  he  is  not  fit  for  this  world  and  longs  for  death,

thinking  of  death  gives  him  intense  joy.
I  He  imagines  he  has  lost  the  affection  of  his  friends ;  this  makes

him  sad  even  to  tears.
Delirium.
I  Inclined  to  be  delirious. 6  Headache.

■  Violent,  gay,  loquacious  delirium,  with  exaltation  of  strength.

d  Typhus.
Insanity  more  frequent  than  imbecility.

■  Suicidal mania  or  melancholia,  tedium vitae, with genital

symptoms.
I  Religious  mania ;  prays  all  the  time.
Desire  to  be  active,  to  move  about.
Thoughts  of  suicide,  with  feeling  of  desperation,  which  inclines

one  to  jump  from  a  height;  to  throw  himself  down  in  bed


AURUM  METALLIC  CJM.  262

violently  ;  to  dash  himself  down  into  a  chair, d  Induration,

prolapse,  or  other  disordered  condition  of  the  uterus,  and  in

pregnancy.
Longing  for  death.
I  Mind constantly turns toward  suicide. ^Prolapsus uteri.

d  Childbed. 6  Amennorrhoea.

■  Disposition  to  commit  suicide,  d  Chronic  hepatitis.  6  Headache.

■  Hysterical  mood,  laughing  one  minute  and  crying  the  next.

■  Constant  complaining. ^Adiposis.
Inclined  to  weep.

■  Weeping  and  praying, d  Melancholy.

■  She  howls  and  screams  and  imagines  herself  irretrievably  lost.

■  Sudden  screaming  from  earache, d  Ozsena.

Uneasy,  hurried,  desire  for  mental  and  bodily  activity ;  cannot
do  things  fast  enough.

Taciturnity.

Desire  for  solitude.

Mood  changing,  cheerful  or  despondent ;  irritable ;  no  uncon-
sciousness.

■  Remarkable  changeability  of  mind,  now  impulsive,  rash,  now

very  merry,  now sad, anxious  longing  to  die,  soon  after
laughing  loud. 6  Hysteria.
,  Lachrymose  mood, d  Heart  disease.

■  Very  sad,  could  cry  all  the  time. 6  Hemiopia.
Melancholy,  disposed  to  weep ;  imagines  he  is  unfit  for  this

world,  that  he  never  can  succeed.

■  ■Melancholy,  feels  hateful  and  quarrelsome;  anxious  palpita-

tion and  desire  to  commit  suicide.

■  Great  depression  of  spirits,  accompanied  by  sterility.

■  Great  depression  of  spirits, d  Old  age.

■  Melancholic  mood,  disposed  to  shun  people;  if  meeting  some

one  it  gives  him  a  nervous  trembling  and  has  to  weep.

■  All  the  time  a  dark,  hopeless  mood,  frequently  anxiety  and

despair ;  life  is  a  burden  to  him.

■  ■Terrible  melancholy  after  abuse  of  mercury  ;  patient  pining

away  on  account  of  bodily  and  mental  anxiety.

■  Is  very  unhappy ;  continued  thought  of  suicide, d  Puerperal

mania.

■  ■Hopelessness.

■  Hopeless  and  despondent. 6  Headache.

■  Hypochondriasis,  with  longing  for  death.

A  kind  of  hypochondriacal  drunkenness ;  the  head  feels  full  of
compressed  air,  especially  toward  the  nape  of  the  neck.

Apprehensiveness,  full  of  fear ;  a  mere  noise  at  the  door  makes
him  anxious.

■  Fearfulness,  a  longing  for  death, d  Hypersemia  of  brain.
Dread  of  men.

■  Anxiety  and  dread. ^Valvular  heart  disease.


263  AURUM  METALLICUM.

I  Anguish  of  mind  and  great  grief, d  Headache.
Excessive  anguish  even  to  self  destruction.

Great  anguish  increasing  unto  self-destruction,  with  spasmodic

contraction  of  the  abdomen.
Frequent  attacks  of  anguish  about  the  heart,  with  trembling

fearfulness.
Excessive  anguish  with  palpitation  of  the  heart,  weariness  in

all  the  limbs  and  sleepiness.

■  Great  anguish  coming  from  the  prsecordial  region,  and  driving

him  from  place  to  place,  so  that  he  can  remain  nowhere.

d  Palpitation.
Despondency.
Despair  of  self  and  others.

I I  Weary  of  life;  especially  in  the  evening,  with  longing  for
death.

■  Disappointed  love  with  weeping  and  inclination  to  commit  sui-

cide.

I  Has  no  confidence  in  herself,  thinks  others  have  none;  this
makes  her  unhappy.

Sensitiveness  of  disposition.

Extreme  disposition  to  be  oifended;  he  was  extremely  affected
and  provoked  by  the  least  circumstance  which  had  the  ap-
pearance of  hurting  his  feelings.

Choleric  and  quarrelsome.

■  Disposed  to  grumble  and  quarrel. 6  Headache.

I  Quarrelsome  disposition  when  displeased,  d  Prolapsus  uteri.
d  Amenorrhoea.

■  Alternately  peevish  and  cheerful.

■  Whining  mood. ^Obesity.

■  Peevish  and vehement,  the least  contradiction excites his

wrath ;  he  trembles  when  he  cannot  satisfy  his  anger.

■  Suffers  constant  vexation  and  torment, d  Jaundice.
Becomes  angry  at  absent  persons  while  thinking  of  them.'
Chagrin,  violent  anger  and  vehemence.

■  Vehement  and  disposed  to  fly  into  a  passion, d  Headache.
Contradiction  excites  wrath.

Distrust.

I  Very  sensitive,  easily  frightened,  especially  when  falling  asleep.

d  Hysteria.
Prostration  of  soul  and  body.
Better  from  entertainment.
Worse  from  mental  exertion.

■  ■Mental  labor  fatigues  ;  headache  from  least  mental  exertion.
Feels  weary  and  exhausted  from  performing  mental  labor.

■  Worse  after  emotion. ^Palpitation.

■  ■Ailments  from  grief,  disappointed  love.

Ailments  from  fright,  anger,  contradiction,  mortification,  or
vexation  with  dread,  fear,  reserved  displeasure,  or  vehemence.


AURUM  METALLICUM.  264

I  Pain  makes  her  desperate  so  that  she  would  like  to  jump  out
of  the  window,  or  dash  herself  down, d  Parturition.
^  Sensorium. ■  l  Vertigo. 6  Syphilis.

I  Head  giddy,  full,  hot. ^Melancholy.

Vertigo  :  I  when  stooping,  as  if  turning  in  a  circle ;  goes  off  on
rising  ;  las  if  drunk,  when  walking  in  the  open  air ;  feels  as
if  he  would  fall  to  left  side ;  must  lie  down,  even  then  for
some  time  it  returns  on  the  slightest  motion.

I  Feels  stupid,  a  dazed  feeling  in  the  head, d  Chronic  hepatitis.
^  Inner  Head. ■  Congestion  of  blood  to  head.

I  Rushes  of  blood  to  head  with  violent  palpitation,  great  anxiety
and  fainting.

Uncomfortable  feeling  in  forehead.

■  Violent  pain  in  left  forehead  and  eye. ^Melancholy.
Pressure  in  1.  temple,  <  on  being  touched.

■  Severe  frontal  headache. 6  Corjza.
Heat  of  head  with  cold  hands  and  feet.

Rush  of  blood  to  head  with  tumult  and  waving  of  the  head.
I  I  Tearing  headache  deep  in  brain,  in  forehead,  temples  and
vertex,  abating  in  open  air.

■  Rush  of  blood  to  head ;  sparks  before  eyes,  and  glossy,  bloated

face ;  worse  from  mental  exertion.

■  Bruised  pain,  especially  early  in  morning  or  during  mental

labor,  ideas  become  confused ;  roaring  in  head.
Megrim,  stitching  burning  pains,  beating  in  one  side  of  fore-
head ;  nausea,  even  bilious  vomiting.

■  Fine  tearing  from  right  side  of  occiput  through  brain  to  fore-

head ;  worse  during  motion.

One-sided  boring,  severe  throbbing ;  begins  on  awaking  morn-
ings.

Tearing  in  head,  teeth  and  ears ;  worse  left  side,  d  Heart  dis-
ease.

Headache  as  from  incipient  cold.

Sensation  as  if  a  current  of  air  was  rushing  through  the  head,
if  not  kept  warm.
*  Outer  Head. Pricking  as  from  pins  in  forehead  externally.

Boring  in  1.  side  of  frontal  bone.

Pressive  pains  in  1.  temple  externally.

Pains  in  bones  of  head  on  lying  down,  affecting  vital  energy.

Pains  in  bones  of  skull,  morning  in  bed.

■  Syphilitic  exostoses  on  skull.

■  Skull  bones  painful,  as  if  broken  ;  worse  lying  down.
Severe,  constant  burning  heat  on  top  of  head.

■  Exostoses  on  skull ;  boring  pains;  worse  from  touch.
Caries  of  mastoid  process,

■  Tinea  capitis.

Eruption  of  small  white  pimples  all  over  the  hairy  scalp,  with
heat  and  itching.


265  AURUM  METALLICUM.

■  Portions  of  frontal  bone  had  exfoliated, d  Syphilis  with  mer-

curialization.
II  Falling  out  of  hair,  especially  in  syphilis.
'  Sight  and  Eyes- l Photophobia, profuse scalding tears on
opening  eyes ;  eyes  very  sensitive  to  touch.

■  Photophobia  ;  lids  cannot  be  even  forcibly  opened.
I  Weak  sight  and  eyes.

■Vision gro"'  ^^^^^  Aurunf°  ■^,  and  in  eight  weeks more,

■g^^. d  Tumor  in  eye.
■By  gas-light,  a  number  of  bright,  floating  specks  and  dots  are

seen.

■  Eyes  better  by  moonlight,  and  after  active  muscular  exercise.

■  Objects  seem  smaller  and  more  distant, d  Hemiopia.

■  Sees  a  little  better  on  looking  intensely  and  steadily  on  an

object,  though  he  sees  no  trace  of  the  upper  half  of  an  object.

■  Large  letters  cannot  be  distinguished,  seems  only  something

blank  upon  a  white  ground.

■  Yellow,  crescent-shaped  bodies  floating  obliquely  upwards  in

the  field  of  vision.
Fiery  sparks  before  eyes ;  optical  illusions  in  bright  colors.

■  Everything  looks  blue.

■  Color  of  the  optic  nerve-entrances  of  a  greenish  hue,  except

round  the  periphery,  which  was  yellowish-white,  with  a  slight
trace  of  pigmentary  deposit  on  lower  outer  edge  of  optic  disc
in  left  eye.

■  Fog  or  smoke  before  his  eyes,  to  this,  at  a  later  period,  black

spots  were  added,  and  for  the  last  few  weeks  he  can  only  see
upper  half  of  objects,  their  lower  half  seems  to  be  covered  by
a  black  veil. 6  Hemiopia.

■  Black  spots  floating  before  eyes, d  Hemiopia.

■  Tension  in  eyes ;  sees  things  double  or  mixed  up.

■  Objects  as  if  divided  horizontally  ;  sees  only  half  of  an  object,

other  half  as  if  covered  with  a  dark  body.

■  In  upper  dark  section  of  field  of  vision  occasional  showers  of

bright,  star-like  bodies,  the  lower  half  looks  lighter,  and  he
can  distinguish  color,  light  or  dark.

■  Hemiopia  of  1.  eye;  2"  cured.

■  Could  not  see  the  upper  half  of  a  room  or  any  large  object,

though  the  lower  half  was  clear,  with  the  left  eye.
I  1  Hemiopia  from  straining  the  eyes.

■  Strong  pressure  from  within  outward  and  from  above  down-

ward in  both  eyeballs,  accompanied  by  dull,  heavy  aching
deep  in  both  globes.

■  Pressing  in  eyes  as  from  acrid  dust, d  Hysteria.
Cutting  pain  through  eyes.

Pains  in  eyes  >  by  blowing  the  nose.

I  On  using  the  eyes,  sensation  of  violent  heat  in  them.

■  Central  portion  of  retinal  vessels  strongly  pulsating.


AURUM  METALLICUM.  266

iChorio-retinitis  chronica,  with  an  accumulation  of  fluid  beneath
the  retina,  which  settled  to  the  lower  portion  of  1.  eye,
causing  a  large  detachment  of  retina, d  Hemiopia.

■  Large  black  subchoroidal  tumor  behind  the  lens  in  the  fundus,

growing  from  the  inner  side.

Iris  blackish-brown  mixed  with  blood-red,  in  place  of  the  pu-
pil, and  encroaching  upon  the  iris  a  nodular  new  growth  of
a  mixed  black  and  red  color,  filling  the  whole  anterior  cham-
ber, without,  however,  displacing  the  cornea,  on  which
formed  a  vesicle  discharging  fluid ;  the  sclerotica  sprinkled
with  blackish  spots ;  the  conjunctiva  pale-red  and  swollen ;
slight  lachrymation ;  pressing  and  slight  burning  in  and
about  the  eye;  later  drawing  in  the  surrounding  bones.
d  Melanotic  tumor.

I  Vitreous  hazy  from  infiltration. ^Hemiopia.

■  Anterior  chamber  contracted.

■  Protruding  eyes. ^Headache.

■  Staring,  dreary  look. /?  Melancholy.

■  On  pressure  eyeball  more  tense  and  firm  than  usual.
Interstitial  keratitis  and  kerato-iritis,  even  in  atonic  cases,  with

infiltrated  cornea  and  fine  interstitial  vascularity.

■  ■Cornea opaque; leukoma; gray  or  yellow spots, always

marked  by  a  network  of  enlarged  blood-vessels  around ;  after
keratitis,  syphilitic  or  scrofulous  cases.

■  Iritis  marked  by  much  pain  around  the  eye,  which  seems  to

be  deep  in  the  bone,  extends  from  without  inward,  and  is

aggravated  by  touch, d  Mercuric-syphilis.
Pupils  generally  contracted.
Amaurosis.

■  Pupils  irregularly  dilated;  cornea  dull, with  loss  of  usual

lustre.

■  Macula  cornese.

■  Red  sclerotica;  burning,  stitching,  drawing  and  itching  at  in-

ner canthus.

■  ■Scrofulous  ophthalmia,  with  great  photophobia.

■  Twitching  in  upper  lid. ^Hemiopia.

■  Pains  of  a  burning  or  dull  character,  compelling  one  to  close

the  lids ; ><  in  the  morning  and  >  by  the  application of
cold  water, d  Trachoma.
1  I  Eyelids  red,  suppurating;  stinging,  pricking,  itching;  ag-
glutination in  morning ;  cilia  fall  out. d  Mercurio-syphilis.

■  Pannus,  with  ulceration  of  the  cornea ; pains  from  without

in  ;  worse  from  pressure.

■  Large  bony  tumor  on  left  eye,  with  boring,  aching  pains,

worse  at  night.
Little  blisters  turning  into  crusts  on  edges  of  lids,  with  some
trichiasis.

■  Bones  around  the  eye  feel  bruised.


267  AURUM  METALLICUM.

I  Styes  on  eyelids.
^  Hearing  and  Ears. iHummiDg,  buzzing  and  rushing  in  ears.
d  Hysteria.

I  Roaring  in  ears. 6  Cerebral  hypersemia.

I I  Oversensitive  to  noises  ;  but  music  relieves.

I  I  Annoying  dryness  in  ears  and  nose,  with  diflBcult  hearing.

I I  Caries  of  the  mastoid  process  ;  obstinate  otorrhoea ;  burning,
pricking,  itching ;  boring  pain  behind  left  ear.

■  Congestion  to  the  ears.

1 1  Fetid  otorrhoea;  especially  with  caries  of  the  ossicula.  ^Af-
ter scarlatina.
I  Parotids  swollen,  painful  to  touch,  as  if  pressed  or  contused.
'  Smell  and  Nose. Nosebleed.

■  Excessively  foetid  discharge  from  nose, d  Ozsena.

■  Scrofulous  and  syphilitic  affections  of  bones  of  nose  and  face.

■  Caries  of  bones  of  nose  and  palate.

■  Complaints  caused  by  strong  odors.

■  Sensitive  smell;  everything  smells  too  strong.

■  Putrid  smell  when  blowing  the  nose.

■  Want  of  smell.
Pain  in  nasal  bones.

■  Boring  pain  in  nasal  bones, d  Ozaena.

■  ■Nasal  catarrh,  with  melancholy,  or  even  suicidal  mood.

■  ■Ulcerated, agglutinated, painful nostrils, cannot breathe

through  the  nose.

■  ■Crusts  in  the  nose, d  Ozaena.

■Nose  feels  obstructed,  as  in  dry  coryza,  yet  air  passes  through
freely.

■  ■  Ozaena,  excessively  fetid  discharge ;  severe  frontal  headache.

d  Scrofula, d  Mercurio-syphilis.

■  Coryza,  thick  discharge,  like  white  of  egg ;  frequent  sneezing.

■  ■Caries  of  nasal  bones;  right  nasal  bone  and  adjoining  parts

of  upper  jaw  painful  to  touch.
■Nose  sunken  in. d  Caries  of  nose.

■  Boring  in  left  side  of  nasal  bone,  toward  maxilla.

■  Burning,  itching,  stitching,  smarting;  feeling  of  soreness  in

nose,  especially  when  touched.

■  Mucous  discharge  from  posterior  nares  in  morning.

■  Brown-red  spots  on  the  nose;  nostrils  chapped.

■  Yellow,  thick  discharge  from  the  nose,  or  dry,  firm  pieces  are

blown  out,  always  of  an  offensive  odor.

■  Tip  of  nose  "knobby,"  red.

■  ■Nose  red,  swollen, d  Scrofula. 6  Abuse  of  mercury.

■  Swelling  of  the  nose,  like  erysipelas.

Swelling  of  the  nose  in  the  room,  after  walking  in  the  open  air.
Eruptions  on  the  nose.

■  Cancer  of  nose.

^  Face. ■Puffy  under  eyes. ^Endocarditis.


AURUM  METALLICUM.  268

In  the  groove  between  nose  and  cheek  a  cutaneous  lump  of  the
size  of  a  split  pea,  which  irritates,  gets  picked,  scabs  over,
and  persists.

■  Anxious  expression  of  face. ^Endocarditis.
Feels  ill,  and  looks  pale.

Heat  only  in  face.

■  Face  pale. ^Valvular  disease  of  the  heart.

■  Blue  about  nose  and  lips, d  Typhus.

■  Face  cyanotic. ^Asthma.

I  Face  glowing  red. ^Headache.

iFace  bloated,  glossy;  worse  from  mental  exertion.

■  Swelling  of  one  cheek,  with  drawing  and  tearing  in  upper  and

lower  jaws  ;  teeth  feel  too  long ;  swelling  of  both  cheeks.

■  Erysipelas  of  face.

■  Acute  cutting,  stinging  and  tearing,  now  in  nerves  of  left  side

of  head,  now  of  teeth,  coming  and  going,  preventing  sleep.

■  ■Inflammation  of  bones  of  face;  caries,  with  tearing,  boring

and  burning  stitches.
■Violent  boring  in  right  zygomatic  process  when  walking.

■  Fine  pimples  on  the  face. ^Prolapsus  uteri.

■  Lichens  on  the  face.

■  Red  eruption  on  forehead  and  nose,  often  peeling.
Fine  pimples  on  the  face,  their  tips  are  filled  with  pus.

■  Corona  veneris. ^Syphilis  with  mercurialization.
'  Lower  Face. Tensive  pain  in  lower  jaw.

■  Dull,  pressive  pain,  either  with  or  without  swallowing,  in  a

gland  below  the  angle  of  lower  jaw.

■  Painful  swelling  of  submaxillary  glands.

■  Trismus. ^Typhus.

■  Lips  bluish. ^Endocarditis.

*"  Teeth,  and  Gums.  ■Toothache  caused  by  drawing  air  into
mouth  ;  when  chewing,  suddenly  a  painful  dullness  in  one  of
the  upper  molar  teeth.

■  Toothache  from  congestion  to  the  head.

■  Carious  teeth. ^Faceache.

■  ■Toothache  at  night. ^  Heart  disease.

■  Violent  tearing  toothache,  affects  the  heart.

I  I  Gums  swollen,  darker  red,  sore  when  touched  or  when  eat-
ing ;  gums  bleed  easily.
"  Taste,  Speech,  Tongue. Metallic taste in mouth ; tongue
slightly  coated  with  brownish  fur.
Milky  taste.

■  Loss  of  taste. ^Melancholy.

■  Flabby  taste  with  clear  tongue. 6  Hysteria.

■  Bitter  taste  in  mouth,  with  sensation  of  dryness.

■  Foul  taste  of  even  the  water.

■  Putrid  trste  in  mouth,  as  of  spoiled  game,  between  meals.

■  Loss  of  taste;  tongue  hard  as  leather  and  immovable.


269  AURUM  METALLICUM.

Tongue  swollen  with  scirrhus-like  hardness ;  after  biting  the

tongue  in  sleep.
I  Tongue  trembling  and  dry. ^Typhus.
I  Tongue  dry  and  coated. ^Endocarditis.
I  Tongue  coated  at  the  back. ^Pining  boys.
Ulcers  on  the  tongue.
^^  Inner  Mouth, l  ■  Fouri)reath. 6  Girls  at  puberty.
Fetor  of  breath  like  old  cheese.
I  In  the  morning  offensive  breath,  reddish  tongue,  and  copious

salivation, d  Melancholy.
Saliva  copious,  sweetish.
Aphthae  on  the  tongue  and  in  the  mouth.
"Palate and Throat. I Caries of  palate. ^ After  abuse  of

mercury. 6  Syphilis.
I  Red,  swollen  and  ulcerated  tonsils;  difficult  deglutition.
iBoring  in  the  hard  palate ;  caries  of  roof,  palate  and  nose.

d  Abuse  of  mercury, d  Syphilis.

■  Stinging  soreness  in  throat  only  during  deglutition.
Difficult  raising  of  phlegm.

I  Dull,  pressive  pain,  with  or  without  swallowing,  in  a  gland

below  the  angle  of  jaw,

I I  Syphilitic  ulcers  in  palate  and  throat.

"  Appetite,  Thirst,  Desires,  Aversions. Violent  hunger  and

thirst.

■  Hunger,  immoderate;  relishes  his  meal,  but  hunger  not  ap-

peased.
Immoderate  appetite  and  thirst,  with  qualmishness  in  stomach.
Desire  for  milk  and  coffee.

I  Desire  for  alcoholic  drinks,  which  are  easily  borne,  d  Typhus.
Loss  of  appetite.
I  Want  of  appetite. ^Jaundice.
Aversion  to  food,  especially  meat.

■  Appetite  poor. ^  Hemiopia.

■  No  appetite  for  plain  food, d  Pining  boys.

"  Eating  and  Drinking.  After  dinner :  discomfort  in  abdomen ;
sleep.

After  eating :  colic ;  inclined  to  vomit ;  pressure  in  hypochon-
dria ;  sense  of  suffocation.

Worse  after  drinking ;  after  wine.

Worse  when  hungry ;  pain  at  the  stomach,  etc.

Colic  even  after  the  simplest  food.

Drowsy  after  dinner.

^®  Belching  and  Nausea. ■  Sour  belching.

Eructations  of  gas  relieve  attacks  of  palpitation.

Nausea  from  mental  labor.
*''  Scrobiculum  and  Stomach. Burning  sensation  at  stomach,
with  hot  risings.

■Pressure  in  region  of  stomach  at  noon.


AURUM  METALLICUM.  270

iPressure  to  the  left  of  the  scrobiculum,  below  the  cartilages
of  the  upper  false  ribs ;  worse  during  expiration.

Swelling  of  pit  of  stomach  and  hypochondrium,  with  stinging
pain  when  touching  the  parts.
^^Hypochondria. Swelling  of  the  liver  consecutive  to  cardiac
hypertrophy.

■  Burning  heat  and  cutting  in  right  hypochondrium.
Jaundice,  with  pain  in  liver  and  pit  of  stomach  ;  greenish-brown

urine  ;  bad  breath  and  putrid  taste.

■  Chronic  hepatitis,  with  aversion  to  life;  suicidal  mood ;  averse

to  exercise,  feels  stupid.

■  Painful  accumulation  of  gas  below  the  left  ribs,  causing  stitch-

ing pains.
Pressure  in  the  hypochondria,  as  from  flatulence ;  worse  after
food  or  drink,  and  motion.

"  Abdomen,  Loins  and  Groins. Distended  abdomen.

Nightly  flatulent  colic.

■  Ascites: from  disturbances  of  abdominal  organs;  with  al-

buminuria ;  with  melancholy.

■  Abdomen  pufied  up. ^Hysteria.

Colic,  frequent  discharge  of  wind.  ' '

■  Tabes  mesenterica.

Spasmodic  contraction  of  abdomen,  with  great  anguish;  in-
clined to  suicide. See  Heart,  29.

■  ■Inguinal  hernia;  also  with  children.

Heaviness  in  abdomen,  with  icy  cold  hands  and  feet.

Intolerable  itching  in  r.  groin  in  its  inner  third,  could  not  re-
sist scratching ;  later  inspection  showed  a  wheal,  tender  from
the  violent  rubbing ;  even  after  the  wheal  is  gone,  the  part
remains  tender.

2°  Rectum  and  Stool. 1 1  Proctostasis.
Copious  stool.

■  Passes  fetid  flatus.

■  Stools:  offensive,  painful;  grayish,  ashy;  off'ensive  in  preg-

nancy.
■Nightly  diarrhoea,  with  burning  in  rectum.

■  Hard, knotty  or  large stools; constipation, worse during

menses,  with  prolapsus  uteri.
Piles  with  rectal  catarrh;  costive;  external  piles  bleed  during

stool.
Constipation  ;  stool  very  large  in  size  and  very  hard  or  knotty.

■  Obstinate  constipation, d  Jaundice. .

■  Looseness  and  costiveness  in  alternation. 6  Melancholy.

^^  Urinary  Organs. For  many  days  great  morbid  activity  of
uropoetic  system.

■  Urination  frequent  with  painful  retention. 6  Prolapsus  uteri.

■  Albumenuria  consecutive  to  heart-disease.


271  AURUM  METALLICUM.

I  I  Kidneys  hyperaemic,  with  pressure  around  the  waist  and  in-
crease of  urine  ;  consecutive  to  cardiac  hypertrophy.

Passes  more  urine  than  corresponds  to  the  quantity  of  water
drunk.

Constant  urging  to  urinate.

I  Urine  scanty,  greenish-brown. ^Jaundice.

I  Urine  clear,  gold  colored, d  Dropsy.

I  Turbid,  like  buttermilk ;  much  mucous  sediment.

B  Urine  ammoniacal,  decomposes  rapidly,  smells  like  the  otor-
rhoea.

I  Ischuria  and  constipation,  worse  during  menses.  6  Prolapsus
uteri.

Suppression  of  urine.

Painful  retention  of  urine  with  pressure  in  bladder.

■  Frequent  painful  retention  of  urine.

■  Urethritis.

Renal  secretion  much  less  in  quantity.
iHaematuria.
^^  Male  Sexual  Organs. ■  Testes  mere  pendent  shreds. ^Pin-
ing boys.
I  Chronic  induration  of  testicles.
I  Testes  indurated  ;  also  after  abuse  of  mercury.
Testes  a  little  swelled  and  hard.

■  Frequent  nightly  emissions.  ^Melancholy.  ^Neuralgia  of  face.

■  Onanism. ^  Faceache. ^Melancholy.

■  Nightly  erections  without  emission ;  or  nightly  erections  and

pollutions,  without  subsequent  weakness.

■  Discharge  of  prostatic  fluid  from  a  relaxed  penis ;  settled  me-

lancholy, with  suicidal  mania.
Sensation  as  if  a  knife  was  drawn  through  the  swollen  testicle.

■  Right  testicle  swollen ;  pressive  pains  when  touched  or  rubbed ;

pressure  and  tension  as  from  a  bruise.
Itching  of  the  scrotum.

■  Ulcers  on  the  scrotum,  after  gonorrhoea.

■  Cutting  and  stinging  in  the  perineum.

■  Inguinal  glands  suppurate. ^  Mercurio-syphilis.

■  Hydrocele. 6  Child  eet.  6  months.

■  Chancres.

■  Hunterian  chancres.

■  ■Secondary  syphilis;  also  infantile;  especially  after  abuse  of

mercury  (and  probably  of  potash).
Affections  of  the  prepuce.

■  Balanitis.

Condylomata  around  the  anus;  around  the  corona  glandis.

■  Sarcocele.
■Epididymitis.

■  Orchitis.
I  Syphilis.


AURUM  METALLICUM. '  272

"  Female  Sexual  Organs. ■  >  Sterility  after  depression  of  spirits.
I  Ovarian  affections  connected  with  syphilis.

■  Induration  of  uterus. ^Prolapsus  uteri.

I  Menses  delayed,  especially  the  first. ^Prolapsus  uteri.

■  Menses  too  late  and  scanty. ^Prolapsus  uteri.

II Amenorrhoea  with  great  melancholy;  her  mind  constantly
inclines  to  suicide, d  Prolapsus  uteri.

■  Bruised,  shooting  or  drawing  pain  in  uterus. ^Prolapsus.

■  Drawing  pain  at  the  pubes. d  Prolapsus  uteri.
Right  inguinal  region  sore  to  touch  ;  uterus  affected.

■  Os  uteri  swollen,  hardened.

■  Prolapsus  and  induration  of  uterus.

■  I Uterus  prolapsed  and  indurated;  bruised  pain,  with  shooting

or  drawing ;  heaviness  in  abdomen ;  after  lifting  a  heavy
load  ;  worse  at  menstrual  period.

I  1  Menses  regular,  but  with  headache  and  burning  on  the  ver-
tex ;  uterus  indurated.

Menses  too  late,  scanty ;  preceded  by  swelling  of  axillary
glands  ;  accompanied  by  colic,  prolapse  of  the  rectum.

Constant  oozing  from  the  vulva.

Thick  white  leucorrhoea ;  burning  smarting  of  the  vulva ;  labia
majora  red,  swollen.

■  Leucorrhoea  profuse  and  corroding,  yellow, d  Prolapsus  uteri.

■  Leucorrhoea  thick  white. ^Prolapsus  uteri.

■  Prolapsus:  with  backache,  worse  during  menses ;  with  heat  of

vagina; ■from  reaching  high  ; ■from  straining; I  Iwith  in-
duration of  uterus  and  bruised,  shooting  or  drawing  pains.
"  Pregnancy  and  Parturition. During  pregnancy  : suicidal
melancholia;  jaundice.
Suppressed  milk.

■  Palpitation  following  metrorrhagia  after  a  mole  or  in  childbed,

after  overexertion.

■  Labor  pains  make  her  desperate,  she  would  like  to  jump  from

the  window  or  dash  herself  down ;  often  with  congestion  to

head  and  chest  and  palpitation.
^'  Larynx. Voice :  nasal ;  husky,  as  if  he  had  a  cold.

Phlegm  deep  in  larynx,  not  easily  hawked  up.
^®  Respiration. >  Morning  asthma ; face  cyanotic ;  light  haired

persons ;  worse  after  mercury,  in  wet  weather  and  in  warm

air.

■  Marked  dyspnoea,  anxiety  at  the  heart;  stenocardia.

■  Excessive  dyspnoea,  with  difficult  breathing  at  night.

■  Cardiac  difficulty  of  breathing, d  Old  age.

■  Dyspnoea:  with  dull  stitches  in  chest  when  inspiring;  can-

not be  relieved  in  any  position ;  takes  deep  breaths,  from
besoin  de  respirer. d  Heart  disease.

■  Asthma  from  congestion  to  chest;  great  oppression  at  night

and  when  walking  in  open  air ;  suffocative  fits,  with  spas-


273  AURUM  METALLICUM.

modic  constriction  of  chest; face  bluish-red;  palpitation;
falls  down  unconscious.

B  Want  of  breath, d  Valvular  disease  of  the  heart.

I  Difficult  breathing, d  Jaundice.

I  I  Loses  her  breath,  better  from  belching  or  walking,  d  Hys-
teria.

Suffocative  fits  and  constriction  of  chest.

When  laughing  difficulty  in  breathing.

I  Propped  up  in  bed  and  breathing  very  hurriedly, d  Endocar-
ditis.
^^  Cough. B  Cough  for  want  of  breath  at  night.

Cough  Avith  tough  yellow  sputum  on  awaking  in  the  morning.

Dry,  spasmodic,  nervous  cough,  peculiar  to  females ;  periodi-
cally, every  night  from  sunset  to  sunrise.

Expectoration  infrequent,  morning  and  evening.

I  Moist  rales  all  over  chest  with  cough. ^Endocarditis'.
^^  Inner  Chest  and  Lungs. G-reat  tightness  of  chest.

Violent  rush  of  blood  to  chest.
iHypersemia  of  the  lungs.

■  Shooting  through  the  back  when  breathing. ^Facial  neu-

ralgia.

Shooting  pains  in  chest  after  attacks  of  palpitation.

Dull  stitches  in  both  sides  of  the  chest,  with  heat  in  chest  and
dyspnoea  ;  increased  by  inspiration.

Persistent  dry  catarrh  on  the  chest,  early  in  morning,  on  wak-
ing; with  great  difficulty  he  raises  a  little  phlegm,  and  this
only  after  rising  from  bed.

Oppression  of  the  chest  with  the  faceache.

■  Extreme  tightness  of  chest  with  difficult  breathing.

I I  Great  weight  on  chest,  especially  a  heavyweight  on  the
sternum. 6  Angina  pectoris.

^^  Heart,  Pulse  and  Circulation.  Frequent  attacks  of  anguish
about  the  heart,  with  tremulous  fearfulness ;  great  anguish
increasing  to  self-destruction,  with  spasmodic  contraction  of
the  abdomen ;  uneasiness  and  hurried  desire  for  bodily  and
mental  activity  ;  he  cannot  do  anything  fast  enough,  and
does  not  succeed,in  satisfying  himself;  is  constantly  impelled
to  be  in  motion,  and  is  sorry  for  his  inactivity ;  he  imagines
he  is  neglecting  something  and  deserves  reproaches  in  conse-
quence.

I  I  Violent  heart-stroke  not  synchronous  with  the  pulse.

Sensation  as  if  the  heart  was  turning  around.

Constriction  of  the  chest  with  a  painful  spasmodic  sensation  of
the  heart ;  pulse  remits.

iPains  wander  from  joint  to  joint,  and  finally  become  fixed  in
the  heart ;  must  sit  upright ;  feels  as  though  heart  ceased
and  then  suddenly  gave  one  hard  thump.

Pain  in  region  of  heart,  extending  down  left  arm  to  fingers.

VOL.  II: — 18.


AURUM  METALLICUM.  274

Pain  in  the  heart  and  palpitation  of  the  heart ;  jumping  feeling

of  the  heart  and  violent  palpitation  by  motion.
I  Angina  pectoris.

I  Action  of  heart  floundering, d  Endocarditis.

I I  Violent  palpitation,  anxiety  and  congestion  of  blood  to  the
head  and  chest. 6  After  uterine  hemorrhage.

■  Palpitation,  with  great  agony.

When  riding  or  walking,  palpitation  compels  him  to  stop.

B I  Violent  beating  of  heart  after  exertion.

Between  the  attacks  of  palpitation,  feeling  as  of  a  bladder  hang-
ing in  the  left  chest ;  must  often  take  a  deep  breath.

B  Attacks  of  oppression  at  the  heart  at  night,  with  palpitation
and  great  debility, d  Old  age.

BLoud  endocardial  bruits. ^Endocarditis.

B  B  Fatty  degeneration  of  heart.

B  Violent  orgasm  of  the  blood  as  if  it  was  boiling.

B  Congestions  to  head  and  chest,  with  anxious  palpitation.

B  Visible  beating  of  carotids  and  of  temporal  arteries, d  Heart
affections  in  old  age.

Palpitation,  with  irregular,  intermittent  pulse ;  short  breathing.

BBPulse  small,  but  accelerated;  small,  feeble,  rapid;  irregular.

B  Pulse  quick,  full,  corresponding  to  the  beat  of  heart,  and  omit-
ing  before  the  single  strong  beat, d  Heart  disease.

B  Pulse  rapid,  compressible  and  intermittent, d  Endocarditis.

B  Weak  pulse. ^  Old  age.

BWeak  heart.

B  Sensation  as  if  the  heart  stood  still.
^  Outer  Chest.  A  wart,  size  of  a  split  horse-bean  since  proving
Cundurango,  several  years  since,  is  beginning  to  lap  over  and
to  catch  things  and  seems  flatter ;  in  the  sixth  week  flatter
and  much  smaller ;  on  the  80th  day,  nearly  gone ;  in  the
twelfth  week  increases  again.
^^  Neck  and  Back. B  Enormous  goitre  disappeared  long  after.

B  Swollen  cervical  glands, d  Scrofulous  ophthalmia.

Tension  in  the  neck,  as  if  muscles  were  too  short,  even  at  rest ;
mostly  when  stooping.

B  Spine  disease,  with  gressus  gallinaceus.

Pain  in  small  of  back  as  from  fatigue.

Tendons  of  muscles  so  painfully  stiff,  that  the  thigh  cannot
be  raised ;  thigh  feels  paralyzed.

I  Stinging  pains  in  small  of  back, d  Jaundice.

Pain  at  lower  part  of  spine.
^^  Upper  Limbs. '  '  Arms  start, d  Hysteria.

1  I  Boring  in  left  shoulder.

B  Inflammatory  swelling  of  axillary  glands.

Difficult  movement  of  arms  ;  they  feel  fatigued ;  forearms  feel
heavy.

1  1  Severe  bone  pains  in  right  elbow.


275  AURUM  METALLICUM.

I  I  Boring  in  the  right  forearm.
Cramp-like  tearing  in  bones  of  both  wrists.
I  Palms  itch.

■  Herpes  of  palms.

I  I  Boring  in  finger-joints.

I  Bones of hands swelled; almost immovable and tender.

d  Endocarditis.
I  Large  bursa-like  swelling on the wrists for  a  long time.

6  Hemiopia.
I  Flesh  of  hands  puffy. ^Endocarditis.
Finger-nails  turning  blue.

^^  Lower  Limbs, i  Coxalgia.

■  Retraction  of  the  lower  limbs, d  Typhus.

All  the  blood  appeared  to  rush  from  her  head  into  her  lower
limbs  ;  they  feel  paralyzed  ;  she  has  to  sit  down.

Tottering  of  the  knees ;  stiffness,  paralytic  feeling ;  they  pain
as  if  firmly  bandaged,  when  sitting.

Right  knee  becomes  weak  from  walking ;  drawing  when  walk-
ing or  setting  foot  on  floor.

■  Weakness  in  limbs,  most  in  hollow  of  knees, d  Neuralgia.
Small  blotches  on  the  leg  and  below  the  knee,  when  slightly

rubbed,  they  are  changed  to  thick  nodosities  under  the  skin.

■  Nodes  on  legs, d  Syphilis  with  mercurialization.

■  Caries  in  bones  of  lower  extremities.
Boring  in  tibiae,  ankles  and  dorsa  of  feet.

■  Swelling  of  legs  and  feet,  when  getting  up  in  the  morning ;

better  after  walking.
I  I  Toes  red.
Itching  on  the  soles.

■  Slight  dropsy  effect. ^Endocarditis.

■  Swollen  feet, d  Valvular  disease  of  heart.

Weary  pains  in  r.  tarsal  bones,  shooting  up  towards  knee,  early

morning  in  bed.
^*  Limbs  in  General. ■  Limbs  go  to  sleep  ;  numb,  insensible  on

awaking;  more  while  lying  than  when  moving.
Paralytic  drawing  in  limbs  in  the  morning,  when  awaking ;

also  on  getting  cold.
I  I  Has  to  seize  hold  of  the  left  arm  during  attacks  of  palpitation.

■  Swelling  of  the  periosteum  of  the  forearm  and  thigh  bones.

I  I  Pain  as  from  bruises  in  head  and  limbs,  early  in  bed ;  mostly

at  rest ;  passes  off  after  rising.
Sensations  in  joints  and  muscles  like  after  unwonted  exercise.

■  Limbs  swelled  and  painful,  joints  almost  as  firmly  locked  as  if

anchylosed,  cannot  move  hand  or  foot  for  pain,  from  this
swelled  and  inflamed  state  of  joints, d  Endocarditis.
^^  Rest. Position. Motion. ■■  Inclined  to  be  active.

Lying  down  :  bones  of  skull  painful ;  limbs  feel  numb.

Must  lie  down :  vertigo.


AURUM  METALLICUM.  276

In  dyspnoea  no  position  relieves.

Sitting  :  knees  pain  as  if  firmly  bandaged.

Must  sit  down  :  paralytic  symptoms. See  33.

Must  sit  erect :  heart  disease.

Rising  :  vertigo  goes  off;  raises  only  a  little  phlegm,  28  ;  pain
in  head  and  limbs  goes  off.

Stooping: vertigo,  as  if  turning  in  a  circle;  tension  in  neck.

Walking  :  vertigo,  as  if  drunk  ;  headache  worse  ;  boring  in  zy-
goma ;  asthma  worse  ;  breathing  in  hysteria  better  ;  palpita-
tion so  bad  must  stop  ;  right  knee  weak  ;  relieves  swelling  of
feet.

Motion:  vertigo,  2 ;  headache  worse;  pressure  in  hypochon-
drium  worse ;  compelled  to  move,  29 ;  relieves  numbness  in
limbs.

Exertion  :  beating  of  heart.

I  From  over- exertion  during  confinement. ^Palpitation.
'  Wants  to  jump  out  of  window  :  during  labor.

TrExercise,  even  fatigue,  aids  the  action.
**  Nerves. Increased  bodily  and  mental  activity,  followed  by  pros-
tration and  melancholy.

I  Hysterical  symptoms,  cold  hands  and  feet, d  Prolapsus  uteri.

■  Increased  bodily  irritability.

I I  Hypochondriasis  and  hysteria.

In  the  morning  completely  exhausted,  as  if  he  had  not  slept.

iTremulous  agitation,  as  in  joyous  hope.

I  Hysterical  spasms ;  alternate  laughter  and  crying.

When  thinking  of  a  motion,  he  makes  small  motions  without

knowing  it ;  when  speaking  he  smiles  involuntarily.
Sensation  of  internal  emptiness  and  weakness  of  whole  body.
I  Great  nervous  weakness.
B  Great  debility, d  Heart  affection  in  old  age.

■  Convulsive  movements  of  face  and  limbs, d  Typhus.

■  Alternate  convulsions  and  stupor, d  Typhus.

■  Wavering,  uncertain  walk. ^Melancholy.

^^  Sleep. Feels  fagged  in  the  evening,  yet  not  able  to  sleep.

Looks  and  feels  ill,  and  although  weary,  no  inclination  for  either

rest  or  sleep.
Very  wakeful,  well  up  to  work ;  great  mental  activity.

■  Continuing sleeplessness ;  if  he  falls  asleep erotic  dreams,

erection  and  emission. 6  Melancholy.
Frightful  dreams.
Narcosis  with  uraemia.

■  Sobs  aloud  during  sleep  ;  frightful  dreams  about  thieves,  with

loud  screams.

■  Awake  all  night,  no  pain;  no  lassitude  or  sleepiness  in  the

morning.

■  Sleep  disturbed  by  sexual  excitement, d  Hysteria.

■  ■  Sleeplessness, d  Headache.


277  AURUM  METALLICUM.

Sleepless  after  midnight.

1 1  Awakened  by  bone  pains,  suffering  so  great  he  despairs,  does

not  want  to  live.
Bruised  feeling ;  mornings  in  bed.
Sleep  does  not  refresh.

Two  successive  nights  dreamed  a  great  deal  of  death.
Early  in  the  morning  in  bed  weary  pains  in  r.  tarsal  bones.
Bad  nights,  dreaming  of  the  dead  and  of  corpses.
Dreams  towards  morning.

I  Sleep  restless  and  full  of  anxious  dreams. 6  Hemiopia.
^^  Time. B At  night:  colic  and  passing  wind. ^Melancholy.
■  Nocturnal  bone  pains.
Night :  boring,  aching  in  left  eye  worse ;  toothache ;  diarrhoea ;

difficult  breathing ;  cough  from  want  of  breath ;  feeling  of

lump in  throat;  constantly  awake; cold  hands  and  feet;

IB  bone  pains.
After  3  a.m.:  delirious  talk.
Morning: headache; confusion of head early, on rising;

eyes worse ; mucous discharge  in  posterior  nares  worse ;

cheeks  swell ;  eyelids  adhere  ;  asthma  ;  cough  on  awaking ;

expectoration; catarrh on chest; swelling of  legs and

feet ;  paralytic  drawing  in  limbs ;  exhausted,  as if  he  had

not  slept;  no  lassitude,  though  he  did  not  sleep  through

night ;  bruised  feeling  in  bed  ;  sweat.
Noon  :  pressure  in  epigastrium.
Remission  during  day  and  evening,  until  12  p.m.
Evening: expectoration; satiety of  life  at  6  p.m.; testicle

swells ; chill.
Evening  till  midnight:  violent  itching,  46.
Evening  and  morning  :  expectoration.
B Always  worse  as  day  progresses,  and  better  in  the  morning.

d  Hemiopia.
Sunset  to  sunrise  :  cough  worse.
^^  Temperature  and  Weather. In  the  room  :  swelling  of  nose ;

stinging,  burning  pains  better.
In  bed  :  shivering,  legs  cold.
Warm  air:  asthma  worse.
Air :  aggravates  toothache.
B Desire  for  open  air. ^Adiposis.
Open  air :  vertigo,  as  if  drunk ;  swelling  of  nose ;  aggravates

asthma, and stinging and burning pains ; ameliorates

headache.
Averse  to  uncover.

Getting  cold  :  paralytic  drawing  in  limbs.
Cold  water :  ameliorates  pain  in  eyes.
Wet  weather :  aggravates  asthma.
Very  sensitive  to  cold :  over  the  whole  body.
B Generally  better  growing  warm. ^Headache.


AURUM  METALLICUM.  278

Many  symptoms  disappear  after  -washing.
^^  Chill. Fever. Sweat. Chill  predominating.

Chill  and  coldness  of  hands  and  feet,  also  in  bed,  often  lasting

all  night.
General  shivering,  evenings  in  bed.
Coldness  of  whole  body  with  blue  nails  and  nausea.
Cold  hands  and  feet;  sometimes  lasting  all  night;  want  of

thirst.
Chill  lessened  after  getting  out  of  bed ;  shivering  in  bed ;  legs

cold  as  far  as  the  knees.
The  severer  the  pains,  the  colder  she  becomes.
Heat  only  in  the  face ; aversion  to  uncovering ; cold  hands

and  feet.
Heat  most  in  face,  alternating  with  chill.

■  Sweat  early  in  the  morning;  mostly  on  and  around  genitals.

d  Melancholy.

■  Profuse  perspiration. ^Endocarditis.

^^  Attacks. lEvery  day  several  paroxysms.  ^Palpitation  of  heart.
Paroxysm of  palpitation  every  2,  3  weeks,  coming  on  when

sleeping,  walking  or  riding,  lasting  half  hour.
Pains  come  and  go :  neuralgia  of  head.
Every  night,  from  sunset  to  sunrise :  dry,  nervous  cough.
*^  Locality  and  Direction. Right :  pain  in  side  of  occiput ;
caries  of  nasal  bones  ;  upper  jaw  painful ;  boring  in  zygoma  ;
cutting  and  heat  in  hypochondrium ; testicle  swollen ;  in-
guinal region  sore;  boring  in  forearm;  bone  pains  in  elbow.

Left :  tearing  in  head,  teeth  and  ears ;  boring  tumor  on  eye ;
boring  behind  ear ;  boring  in  nasal  bone ;  neuralgia  of  head  ;
pressure  in  scrobiculum  ;  gas  accumulates  under  ribs  ;  sen-
sation of  a  bladder  hanging  in  chest ;  boring  in  shoulder ;
seizes  arm  during  palpitation.

Without  inward  :  pains  in  eyes.

Pains  wander  from  joint  to  joint.

Rending  pain  upwards.

Pain  pressing  inwards.

Pain  from  within  outward,  in  eye  diseases.

Left  side  worse,  with  nasal  catarrh.
*^  Sensations. Oversensitive  to  all  pain.

Pains  drive  to  despair,  does  not  want  to  live.

Susceptible  to  all  sorts  of  pains;  on  thinking  of  them,  he  im-
agines he  already  feels  them.

As  if  a  current  of  air  was  rushing  through  head.

Teeth  feel  too  long.

As  if  the  heart  was  turning  around.

As  of  a  bladder  hanging  in  left  chest. See  29.

As  if  firmly  bandaged :  knees.

Violent  pain  :  in  1.  forehead  and  eye.

Boring::  hemicrania ;  behind  1.  ear;  in  nasal  bones;  in  bones


279  AURUM  METALLICUM.

of  face ;  in  hard  palate ;  in  1.  shoulder ;  in  r.  forearm ;'  in
finger-joints.

Cutting :  through  eyes  ;  neuralgia  in  face  and  head ;  in  r.
hypochonder ;  through  swollen  testicle  ;  in  perineum.

Stitching :  megrim  ;  in  nose  ;  below  1.  ribs.

Stitches :  in  chest.

Shooting :  in  uterus ;  through  chest ;  towards  knee  from  tar-
sal bones.

Pricking :  in  eyelids ;  in  mastoid  process.

Stinging :  in  eyelids ;  neuralgia  in  face  and  head ;  in  throat ;
in  swelling  of  epigastrium ;  in  perineum ;  in  small  of  back.

Smarting :  in  nose ;  of  vulva.

Soreness  :  in  nose  ;  in  throat.

Burning:  megrim;  in  eyelids;  in  mastoid  process;  in  nose ;
at  stomach ;  in  r.  hypochonder ;  in  rectum  ;  on  vertex ;  of
vulva.

Drawing :  around  the  eyes  ;  in  jaws  ;  in  uterus  ;  at  pubes  ;  in
r.  knee.

Tearing :  from  side  of  head  through  brain  ;  deep  in  brain  ;  in
forehead,  temples  and  vertex ;  in  teeth  and  ears  ;  in  jaws  ;
neuralgia  in  face  and  head  ;  toothache.

Cramp-like  tearing  :  in  bones  of  wrists.

Pressure :  in  1.  temple  ;  in  eyeballs  ;  in  submaxillary  glands  ;
in  region  of  stomach  ;  to  left  of  scrobiculum ;  in  the  hypo-
chondria ;  in  bladder ;  in  r.  testicle.

Aching:  dull,  heavy,  in  eyeball.

Bruised  pain  :  in  head ;  in  r.  testicle  ;  in  uterus  ;  in  limbs.

Weary  pains :  in  r.  tarsal  bones.

Undefined  pain  :  in  nasal  bones;  in  liver  and  pit  of  stomach.

Undefined  :  at  lower  part  of  spine ;  in  r.  elbow.

Beating :  in  forehead.

Uncomfortable  feeling  :  in  forehead.

Tension  :  in  eyes  ;  in  lower  jaw  ;  in  r.  testicle ;  in  neck.

Constriction :  of  chest.

Spasmodic  sensation  :  about  heart.

Twitching:  in  upper  lid.

Paralytic  feeling  :  in  lower  limbs  ;  in  knees.

Heaviness  :  in  abdomen  ;  in  forearm.

Numbness  :  of  limbs.

Dryness  :  in  ears  and  nose ;  in  mouth.

Heat :  in  eyes  ;  in  chest.

Itching  :  in  eyelids  ;  in  mastoid  process ;  in  nose ;  in  r.  groin  ;
of  the  scrotum  ;  of  palms  ;  of  soles.
^^  Tissues. Rheumatism  appears  on  back,  sacrum,  hands  and  feet,
after  the  heat  is  relieved.

i  Boring  pains,  mostly  in  the  bones.

Ci'ampy  tearing  pain  in  phalangeal  bones  and  joints.
B  Arthritic  deposits.


AURUM  METALLICUM.  280

Bone  pains  at  night.

I  Osteitis ;  caries.

Ulcers  after  abuse  of  mercury,  which  attack  the  bones.

B  Erethism  or  vascular  fullness  characterizes  nearly  all  com-
plaints ;  thus  ruddy  with  scrofula ;  vascular  leukoma ;  con-
gestive asthma ;  ebullitions ;  erections,  congested  kidneys
and  liver — all  from  hypertrophied, heart.

I  Violent  orgasm  ;  plethora.

Cancerous  ulcers.

External  parts  become  black.

iDropsy;  ascites;  albumenuria  and  heart  affections ;  (urine  is
clear  and  gold  colored.)

SI  Exostoses  of  the  skull  and  other  bones.

I B  Boring  in  bones  ;  B  caries  especially  after  mercury  ;  B I  pains
drive  to  despair.

B  Corpulency  ;  fat  about  the  heart ;  especially  if  nervous  irrita-
bility is  present.

I  Glands  painfully  swollen;  scrofula,  ruddy  complexion.

B  Adenitis.

Emaciation  ;  secondary  syphilis  ;  also  in  melancholia.

Rheumatism,  erratic;  attacking  the  heart.

B  Indurations.

Scrofula.

B  Arthrocace  scrofulosis.
^^  Touch, Passive Motion. iDJuries. Has to  seize  and
grasp  the  1.  arm  tightly  during  the  attack  of  palpitation.

Touch :  aggravates  boring  pains  in  skull,  pains  in  eyes,
pains  in  swollen  parotids,  soreness  of  nasal  bones  and  upper
jaw,  soreness  of  gums,  pains  in  testicles,  soreness  in  in-
guinal region.

Rubbing :  causes  blotches  on  leg  to  feel  like  thick  nodosities.

Pressure:  aggravates  eye  symptoms.

Riding:  produces  palpitation.

Lifting:  causes  prolapse  of  uterus.

B After  a  fall:  swelling  in  groin.
*^  Skin. B  Jaundice  with  greenish-brown  urine  and  costiveness  for
twelve  days.

I  Skin  dark  yellow. ^Jaundice.

B  Patches  of  a  brown  hue  and  some  like  albugo, d  Old  age.

TrViolent  itching,  first  in  soles  of  feet  and  then  over  the  whole
body,  from  evening  till  midnight.

Fine  papular  eruption  on  face.

BDeep  ulcers,  affecting  bones;  after  abuse  of  mercury.

Small  and  large  blotches,  stinging  burning,  feeling  like  hard
knots,  of  a  dirty  yellow  color;  less  in-doors  than  in  open  air.

Indurations  under  the  skin  on  the  leg,  over  the  heel  and  behind
the  knee,  itching  violently.

BAVarts,  scrofulous,  syphilitic,  mercurial.


281  AURUM  METALLICUM.

*^  Stages  of  Life,  Constitution.  Sanguine  people,  with  black
hair  and  dark  eyes,  lively,  restless,  anxious  disposition ;  dis-
posed to  feel  anxious  about  the  future.

Headache  of  people  with  black  hair,  dark,  olive-brown  com-
plexion ;  disposed  to  constipation  ;  sad,  gloomy,  taciturn.

I B  Constitutions  broken  down  by  the  combined  influence  of
syphilis  and  mercury.

I  Had  syphilis  ten  years  ago. d  Hemiopia.

I  Low-spirited,  lifeless  boys,  their  memories  bad,  lacking  alto-
gether in  boyisli  go. See  testes,  22.

Carbo-nitrogenoid  constitution.

■  Females:  nervous  cough  ;  hysteria.

I  Girls  at  puberty.

I I  Pining  boys. See  22.

1 1  Often  indicated  with  old  people :  weak  vision  ;  corpulency,
etc.

I  Scrofula ;  light  haired ;  sanguine  temperament ;  ruddy  com-
plexion.

I  i  Syphilitic  and  mercurial  patients.

I I  Old  age.

■  Man,  set.  34,  troubled  with  headache  and  hgemorrhoidal  com-

plaints, now  tired  of  life.

I  Man,  ^t.  35,  sanguine,  nervous,  strong;  after  a  gonorrhoea.
.  d  Melancholy.

I  Woman,  set.  55,  after  third  week  of  rheumatic  fever.  6  Endo-
carditis.

I  Woman,  set.  70,  oppression  of  heart.

BMan,  get.  85,  oppression  of  heart.

I  Man,  set.  63,  florid  complexion,  sanguine  temperament.
6  Melanosis  of  eye.
*^  Relationship.  Similar  to:  Amm.  earh.  (chest,  heart);  Arg.
met.,  Arg.  nitr.,  Arsen.,  Asaf.  (pains  about  eyes  ;  but  Asaf.
has  relief  from  pressure ;  caries  from  mercury) ;  Bellad.,
Capsic.  (caries  of  mastoid ;  corpulency ;  Calc.  ostr.  (leuco-
phlegmatic,  corpulent ;  gold  has  more  oversensitiveness  and
erethism);  Cale.  j^hosj^h.,  Coccul.{emj)tj  feel'mg);  Cmchon.,
Coffea  (hyper  excitation) ;  Cuprum  (asthma ;  Digit,  (heart ;
inclined  to  activity) ;  Ferrum  (hyperemia) ;  Glonoine  (hyper-
gemia  of  lung  from  heart) ;  Hepar,  lodum,  Kali  hiclir.  (deep
ulcers,  scrofulous  ophthalmia,  ozsena,  secondary  syphilis) ;
Kali  carh.,  Kali  liydr.  (secondary  syphilis;  mercurial  affec-
tions of  bones  and  periosteum)  ;  Kalihrom.  (anguish  at  heart
and  desire  to  move  about) ;  Laches.,  Lycop.,  Mereur.,  Nitr.
ac,  Nux  vom.  (hernia,  prolapsed  uterus)  ;  Pallad.  (uterine
symptoms);  Platina  (uterine  symptoms);  Pulsat.,  Spigel.,
Sol.  nigr.,  Silic,  iSepia,  Sulphur,  Tarantul.  (heart  as  if
turned  around ;  hysteria) ;  Thuya  (condylomata,  22) ;  Ver.
vir.  (heart).


AURUM  MET.  AND  MUR.  282

After  Kali  hiehr.  had  been  given  in  vain,  Aur.fol.  cured  ozgena,

and  caries  of  nasal  bones.
I  Man,  set.  52,  whiskey  drinker, d  Decrease  of  vision.
S After  daily  use  of  whiskey,  and  not  abstaining  from  its  use,

got  well, d  Hemiopia.
Antidotes to Aurum : Bellad., Cinchon., CoccuL, Coffea,

Cuprum,  Mercur.,  Pulsat.,  Spigel.,  Sol.  nigr.
Aurum  antidotes  :  Mercur.,  Spigel.
Aur.  met.,  2d  trituration,  from  July  16th  to  21st,  twice  a  day ;

subsequently, once  in  four  days  for  sixteen days;  cured

melanosis  of  eye,  after  Thuya,  Carh.  an.,  Oonium,  Bellad.

and  Arsen.  had  failed.
1  Antidote  to  ill  effects  of  mercury.
I  After  having taken large quantities of  iodide of  potash.

6  Hemiopia.


AURUM  fflURIATlCUM.

Auric  chloride.  AuCl^.


Hahnemann  had,  in  his  Materia  Medica,  1818,  published  some  symptoms
obtained  before  the  trituration  was  preferred.  Dr.  Molin  published  in  the
French  journals,  1845,  after  a  good  proving  of  Aurum  met.,  tlie  first  useful
proving;  he  was  followed  by  Buchner  and  others,  contained,  with  the  ex-
ception of  Prasoberera,  in  Allen,  Vol.  II,  1875.


^  Mind.  I  Functions  of  mind  in  best  order  and  clear  in  his  views,
except  with  regard  to  his  health  or  disease ;  he  imagines  he
has  all  possible  diseases, d  Angina  pectoris.

B  If  left  alone  he  thinks  about  nothing  but  his  ailments,  and  gets
more  and  more  out  of  humor ;  desires  company,  d  Angina
pectoris.

B  Inclined  to  suicide  ;  frequent  weeping ;  aversion  to  occupation.

■  Laziness. ^  Albumenuria.

I  Great  depression  of  mind. ^Dropsy.
Everything  is  disagreeable,  dreary,  even  nature  around.
I  I  Sadness,  as  when  homesick  ; I  sad,  as  though  a  great  misfor-
tune impended.

■  Melancholic  mood. ^  Ozsena  syphilitica.

■  Profound  melancholy. 6  Dropsy.
Great  anxiety,  with  palpitation.

Loss  of  energy  ;  diminished  virility  ;  unrefreshing  sleep.


283  AURUM  MURIATICUM.

SFull  of  wliims  and  notions.
Irritable  without  cause ;  tired  of  life.

■  Insurmountable mental or bodily restlessness;  he has to

spend  hours  in  the  street  and  in  the  open  air.  6  Angina
pectoris.

■  Thinking  about  his  disease  brings  on  palpitation. ^Angina

pectoris.
I  After  fright  or  vexation,  palpitation,  which  he  can  feel  and
hear, d  Angina  pectoris.

■  Ailments  from  violent  chagrin.

^  Sensorium. Vertigo,  as  if  he  was  walking  in  the  air.

■  Dullness  of  head, d  Albumenuria.

^  Inner  Head. ■Dull  frontal  headache.
Drawing  headache  in  forehead.

■  Drawing  in  left  half  of  head.

■  Constant  burning  in  whole  head;  worse  on  left  side.
Burning  with  stinging  in  occiput.

;rSometimes  a  penetrating  pain  from  forehead  down  to  nose.
Throbbing,  with  heavy  dreams  ;  throbbing  in  left  temple  after

rising  ;  relieved  by  application  of  cold  water.
Congestion  to  the  head  increasing  to  delirium.
*  Outer  Head. Burning  in  the  forehead.

■  Head  hot;  limbs  cool. ^Albumenuria.

Drawing,  tearing  in  bones  of  skull  from  time  to  time ;  head

feels  insensible.
Pressure  on  brain,  along  sagittal  suture.
Cool  sensation  on  vertex.
Tickling  itching  on  the  forehead.
TiHair,  eyebrows  and  beard  fall  out.
^  Sight  and  Eyes. Sudden  blindness  in  childbed.

■  Amaurosis.

Cannot  accomodate  his  eyes  quickly  for  near  or  far  objects.

Complete  blindness,  occurring  suddenly  after  scarlet  fever,  with
cold  sweat;  rapid,  scarcely  perceptible  pulse;  respiration
rapid  and  unequal ;  abdomen  burning  hot ;  extremities  cold
and  covered  with  sweat ;  pupils  do  not  react  to  light.

Evening,  candle-light,  letters  disappear ;  paper  white,  as  if  not
printed  upon.

Neuralgic  pain  in  1.  eye.

Feeling  as  if  eyes  were  drawn  deep  into  the  head.

■  Sclerotica  red,  with  sensation  of  burning  heat  and  prickling.

■  ■  Keratitis  parenchymatosa ;  cornea  very  opaque,  traversed  by

a  dense  mass  of  blood-vessels  in  the  cornea,  proper  (or  not),
and  tending  towards  staphyloma,  ciliary  injection,  some  pho-
tophobia, and  no  vision.

■  Acute  ophthalmia, d  Caries  of  the  nasal  bones.
Burning,  pricking  itching  and  tickling  in  the  eyes  and  lids.
Lachrymation.


AURUM  MURIATICUM.  284

Difficulty  in  keeping  eyes  shut.
Lids  agglutinated  in  the  morning.
I  Chronic  inflammation  of  edges  of  eyelids.
B Fistula  lachrymalis.
*  Hearing  and  Ears, i Buzzing  in  left  ear  and  sensitiveness.
Ringing  and  roaring  in  ears,  followed  by  deafness,  with  sensa^

tion  as  if  the  ears  were  wide  and  hollow  inside,  so  could  not

hear  distinctly.
I  Music  relieves.

B  Ears  reddened. ^  Angina  pectoris.
Scurf  behind  the  ears.

Burning  and  itching  behind  the  ears,  particularly  at  night.
^  Smell  and  Nose. B  Pressing  pain  in  the  nose.
Burning  and  itching  in  the  nose.
BBIows  blood  from  the  nose.
Crawling  in  the  cavities, as  if  a coryza  was  breaking  out ;

stinging  itching  on  small  places  ;  r.  to  1.
B  Coryza.

B  Snuffles  of  a  baby.

B  Bad-smelling,  watery  discharge,  irritating  the  upper  lip.
B Discharge  from  nose  containing  some  blood  at  times,  d  Dropsy.
Yellow-greenish  discharge,  not  offensive,  after  10  days.
B  B  Ozsena  scrofulosa,  with  unbearable  odor.
B  Sudden  running  of  pus  from  the  nose. ^  Ozsena  syphilitica.
SNostrils  stuffed  up  with  hard  crusts, d  Syphilitic  ozsena.
BRed  swelling  of  left  side  of  nose  ;  nasal  cavity  ulcerated  deep

in,  with  dry,  yellowish  scurf  and  sense  of  obstruction,  al-
though enough  air  passes.
Nasal  bones  sensitive ;  also  upper  middle  of  sinciput.
Burning  and  itching  pain  in  upper  part  of  nose,  externally.
Redness  and  swelling  of  nose.

B Hardness  around  the  corners  of  the  nose  and  lips, d  Ozaena.
BDeep  cracks  in  the  alas  nasi ;  in  old  cases  of  ozsena.
BLupus  attacking  the  alae  nasi.
B  Infants  nose  dented  in.
^  Face. B  Red  face, d  Angina  pectoris.
BPale  face  with  single  red  spots.

BFacepale;  limbs  cold  ;  sudden  blindness. ^  In  child-bed.
I  I  Burning  in  face  at  times,  mostly  after  shaving,  with  a  dark

redness  of  the  cheeks.
On  different  parts  of  the  face  digging,  gnawing,  stitching  pain.
Itching,  as  from  the  tickling  of  a  feather  on  various  parts  of

the  face.
BAcne  rosacea.
Caries  of  the  upper  jaw-bone  after  typhoid  fever;  pain  in  bones

and  teeth.
B  Infant  with  ancient  appearance.


285  AURUM  MURIATICUM.

^  Lower  Part  of  Face. I  Caries  of  lower  jaw  since  scarlatina  in
second  year  of  her  age ;  set.  18.

■  Exostosis  of  r.  cheek-bone  disappeared  in  two  months  after

the  treatment.
;rTrembling  of  lower  jaw  and  threatened  with  trismus.
Watery,  offensive  moisture  inflaming  the  upper  lip.
Indurations  in  the  lips.
Burning  like  pepper  on  the  lips.
Pustule  on  the  lip.
I  Lips  swollen,  they  burn  and  itch.
I  Cancerous  ulcers  on  the  lips.
I  Lips  deep  red. d  Angina  pectoris.
Painful  swelling  of  the  submaxillary  glands.
^^  Teeth  and  Gums, i  Loose  teeth.

Jerking  pain  in  the  teeth.
Front  teeth  sensitive ;  metallic  taste.
TrGreat  tenderness  of  gums  and  slight  salivation.
Gums  inflamed  or  white,  blueish  ;  painful  in  spots,  even  ulcer-
ated.
I  Dental  fistula.
"  Taste,  Speech,  Tongue. Metallic  taste.
Flat,  bad  taste  in  the  mouth.
I  Taste  entirely  lost. ^Cancer.

■  Tongue  as  hard  as  leather,  hardly  moveable.

;rTongue became  stiff  and prevented  articulation  of  certain
words, d  Cancer.

■  Induration  remaining  after  glossitis.
Redness,  dryness,  and  excoriation  of  the  tongue.
Yellow,  furred  tongue.

Warts  on  the  tongue.

;rTongue  ulcerated  in  various  places.

■  Cancer  on  the  tongue.

^^  Inner  Mouth. Dry  mouth.

Inflammation  of  the  mouth.

Burning  itching  and  biting  in  mouth.

Saliva  increased,  frequent  desire  to  swallow ;  metallic  taste.

TrMouth  filled  with  aphthae.
^^  Palate  and  Throat. Fauces  red,  pain  in  throat.

■  Mucus  in  morning  passes  from  head  to  throat, d  Ozsena.

■  Inflammation  with  hoarseness.

■  Suppurating  ulcer  on  tonsils  with  loss  of  substance.
Scraping  and  pricking  in  throat.

Painful  redness  of  the  fauces  and  pharynx.
Dryness  in  the  throat ;  difficult  deglutition.
Frequent  desire  to  swallow ;  feeling  of  a  plug  in  throat ;  metal-
lic taste ;  increased  saliva.
"  Appetite,  Thirst,  Desires,  Aversions. Appetite  increased
or  lost.


AURUM  MURIATICUM.  286

Thirst.

Sweetened  coffee  disgusts  him.
^'  Eating^  and.  Drinking. After  eating  :  nausea ;  distension  and
fullness  of  stomach  ;  frequent  yawning.

After  breakfast :  nausea  leaves.

Slow  digestion.

I  Diarrhoea  after  eating.

Worse  from  coffee,  tea,  wine.
^^  Belching,  Nausea  and  Vomiting. Belching  and  nausea ;
risings  have  a  putrid  taste.

Nausea  fasting,  better  after  breakfast.

B  Vomiting  of  a  green  fluid, d  Albumenuria.

Vomiting  of  some  white  frothy  matter  (dogs).
"  Scrobiculum  and  Stomach. Pressure  in  scrobiculum.

Sensation  of  fullness  in  stomach.

B  Burning,  cutting,  stitching  in  stomach. 6  Cardialgia.

Painful  drawing  in  pit  to  the  middle  of  sternum ;  as  if  a  hard
body  was  pressed  into  cavity  ;  worse  stooping,  eating,  drink-
ing; paroxysmal.

Slow  digestion.

B  Cramps  in  stomach.

Increased  warmth  in  stomach.

B  Inflammation  of  stomach.

Mucous  membrane  of  stomach  ulcerated ;  in  dogs.
^^  Hypochondria. Burning  in  r.  hypochondrium,  with  heat  and
pricking  in  abdomen.

Constant  sensation  of  tension  in  r.  hypochondrium.

B Induration  of  the  liver  with  dropsy.

Pressure  in  the  hypochondria.

B  Burning  in  right  hypochondrium  ;  constant  disagreeable  feel-
ing ;  hepatic  hypersemia  and  swelling, d  Ascites.

B Spleen  enlarged. ^Albumenuria.

Stitches  in  1.  hypochondrium,  as  after  running.
'"  Abdomen,  Loins  and Groins. Abdomen  distended ; con-
strictive colic  obliges  her  to  double  up  ;  only  goes  off  in  bed.

Redness,  heat,  itching  and  biting  at  the  umbilicus.

Dull  bellyache.

BPain  in  bowels, d  Albumenuria.

Tympanitis.

B  Distension  of  single  places  in  the  abdomen.

Drawing  pain  in  abdomen.

Straining,  tensive  pain,  as  if  laced.

B  Ascites. ^  Liver  affections. ^Albumenuria.

Tension  in  the  loins.

B  Stiffness  in  region  of  the  groins.

Eruption  of  small  red  nodules  above  the  pubes.

Abdomen  sensitive  to  touch.

;rConsiderable  swelling  of  inguinal  glands.


287  AURUM  MURIATICUM.

^^  Rectum  and  Stool. Frequent  fluid  stools.

Diarrhoea :  worse  at  night ;  after  eating ;  with  pain  in  bowels.

Stools :  grayish-white,  yellow,  watery.

I  Diarrhoea. ^  Albumenuria.

Obstinate  costiveness.

iHsemorrhoidal  tumors  ;  blood  discharged  during  stool.

Condylomata  at  the  anus.

I  1  Excrescences  near  anus,  with  an  abundant  serous  discharge.

I  Anal  and  intercrural  excoriation  in  a  baby.

■  Numerous  circumanal  condylomata,  with  a  scrofulous,  syphi-

litic baby.
IlFistula  in  ano  of  five  months  standing,  with  a  young  man,
set.  21,  bilious,  sanguine  temperament.
^^  Urinary  Organs. I  Scanty  urine. 6  Anasarca.
Urine  turbid,  with  a  red  lateritious  sediment.

■  Frequent  urging  to  urinate  ;  worse  at  night, d  Albumenuria.

■  Incontinence  of  urine;  worse  at  night. ^  Old  man, after

dropsy.
I  I  Burning  on  urinating ;  urine  feels  as  if  too  hot ;  tenesmus

vesicoe.
I  Urine  turbid. 6  Dropsy.

■  Increased  discharge  of  urine;  urine  has  a  peculiar  odor  and

sediment.
If  the  bladder  is  filled  in  the  morning,  he  has  strong  erections
but  no  sexual  desire.

■  Pressing  around  the  waist ;  increased  urine ;  renal  hyperaemia.

d  Heart  disease, d  Morbus  Brightii.

■  Pains  in  region  of  kidneys  ;  urine  pale,  clear. ^Albumenuria

in  pregnancy.
Heat,  tickling  and  burning  in  urethra.
;rSuppressed  urethral  discharges  are  re-established.

■  ■Syphilitic  gonorrhoea.

^^  Male  Sexual  Organs. Diminished  virility ;  melancholy.
Increased  sexual  desire.
Exhausting  erections ;  hypergemia.
Testicles  swollen,  tense  ;  drawing  along  the  cords.
Gleet;  worse  mornings.
Warts  on  the  prepuce.

■  Chancre-like  ulcers.

■  Condylomata  on  prepuce,  anus  and  tongue.
Flat  ulcers  on  the  scrotum  secreting  a  fetid  ichor.
TrChancres  secrete  an  abundance  of  laudable  pus ;  buboes  be-
come vast  hearths  of  suppuration.

■  ■  Chancres  on  the  prepuce  and  scrotum.

■  ■Bubo  in  1.  groin.

TrExcrescences  extending  from  the  glans  up  to  os  sacrum.

■  Excrescences  on  scrotum, d  Fistula  in  ano.
"  Female  Sexual  Organs. :  Sterility.


AURUM  MURIATICUM.  288

I  Painful  induration  of  the  mouth  of  uterus.

■  Metritis.

Menses  too  early  and  profuse ;  blood  acrid,  makes  her  sore.

Before  menses  :  leucorrhoea ;  red  pustules  on  the  labia.

I  Catamenia  suppressed, d  Dropsy.

;rAmenorrhoea.

B Leucorrhoea,  light-yellow,  especially  mornings;  uterus  pro-
lapsed, indurated ;  chronic  metritis,  with  malposition  and  dis-
charge.

I  Pudenda  oversensitive.

■  Burning,  itching  of  vulva.

I  Heat  and  itching  in  vagina.

Vaginitis.

iGonorrhoeal  discharge  and  swelling  of  both  groins.
24  Pregnancy  and  Parturition. During  pregnancy  and  after
childbed: dropsical  symptoms.

Infiltration  of  cellular  tissue  of  legs  in  childbed. See  33.
^'  Voice  and  Larynx. Trachea  and  Bronchia.  Voice  rough

or  screeching.
Speaking  is  difficult.
I  I  Hoarseness,  with  violent  fever  and  pleuritic  symptoms.

■  Hoarseness,  with  inflammation  of  throat.
I  Chronic  irritation  of  the  air  passages.

^®  Respiration. Pressure  on  the  chest  impedes  breathing ;  worse
standing.
I  I  Anxious  contraction  of  chest.
I  I  Long-lasting  asthmatic  symptoms.
Oppression  as  soon  as  the  clothes  are  fastened.

■  Anxious  abdominal  respiration;  labored  breathing. ^Ana-

sarca.

Difficult  breathing  from  stagnation  of  blood ;  heart  beats  in-
creased, too  strong.

Suffocation  at  night.

Oppression  compelling  deep  breathing,  which  relieves.
^"^  Cough. Short,  dry  cough  in  paroxysms,  especially  at  night,  fol-
lowed by  heat  in  throat.

Frequent  hard  cough,  with  white  sputa  mingled  with  threads
of  blood.

Frequent,  loud-sounding  cough.

Frequent  night  cough.

Loose  cough,  with  thick  yellow  expectoration.
^^  Inner  Chest  and  Lungs. ■  Pressure  under  sternum ;  palpi-
tation increases  with  every  step,  as  if  the  chest  would  burst.
6  Hypersemia  from  stenocardia.

■  Pulmonary  catarrh.

I  I  Stitches  under  the  ribs  and  other  signs  of  pleurisy.
Inflammatory  symptoms  of  lungs.


289  ,  AURUM  MURIATICUM.

I  Pains  in  left  side  of  chest,  as  in  pleurisy  ;  they  change  place

and  sometimes  leave.
^^  Heart,  Pulse  and  Circulation. Sore  aching  in  cardiac  re-
gion ;  burning,  pricking.
Drawing  and  cutting  in  cardiac  region.
Pressure  in  region  of  heart,  with  gnawing  in  abdomen.
Awakened  by  a  sticking,  boring  at  the  point  where  impulse  of

apex  is  felt;  feels  as  if  he  could  not  have  endured  it  longer;

deep  breathing  does  not  alter  it ;  hand  toressed  lightly  does  ;

immediately  afterwards  lancinating  streaming  pain,  thence

to  1.  hypochondrium.
Stitches  directly  above  the  heart.
Peculiar  sensation  of  heaviness  and  rigidity  in  the  heart,  with

sudden  arrest  of  breathing.

I  Cardiac  anguish. ^Endocarditis.

I I  Angina  pectoris  (next  to  Arnic.  indispensable).

■  Endocarditis  rheumatica.

I  Heart  disease  accompanying  carious  affections  of  the  bones.
I  Beating  of  heart  causes  anxiety  and  sleeplessness,  cannot  rest

until  heart  is  quiet, d  Angina  pectoris.
Percussion  all  along  the  heart  dull, d  Stenocardia.
I  Heart-beats  irregular,  with  severe constriction  of  the  chest;

^Rheumatism,  after  disappearance  of  swelling  of  joints.
Palpitation  :  with  anxiety  ;  worse  from  every  mental  emotion.
Heart  contracts  more  strongly;  first  sound  increased.
I  Heart-beats  sharp  and  metallic,  but  no  other  abnormal  sound.

^Angina  pectoris.

■  Violent,  irregular  palpitation,  with  great  oppression  of  heart.

d  Endocarditis.
Throbbing  in  the  carotid  and  temporal  arteries.

■  Pulse  large. ^  Angina  pectoris.

■  Pulse  small  and  frequent. ^Dropsy.

■  Heart's  beat  weak  ;  apex  felt  indistinctly, d  Stenocardia.

■  Weak  pulse  and  feeble  heart. ^Dropsy.

^^  Neck  and  Back. iHard  swelling  had  twisted  the  neck  to  the
r.  shoulder, d  After  scarlatina  ;  2".

Dull  drawing  in  the  neck  while  sittino;.

Tension  in  dorsal  vertebrie.

Burning,  pricking,  cutting  and  stiffness  in  back.

Very  severe  backache.
^^  Upper  Limbs. Drawing  in  shoulders ;  worse  in  bed.

Disagreeable  sensation  in  shoulders  and  arms.

I  I  Tearing  in  1.  shoulder ;  in  r.  arm,  from  elbow  to  tip  of  little
finger.

Burning,  lancinating  in  arms  and  forearms.

Involuntary  concussive  shocks  in  arms.

■  Spasmodic  motion  of  arms.

VOL.  II. — 19.


AURUM  MURIATICUM.  290

Swelling  in  wrist,  no  pain,  if  left  alone ;  tensive  only  when
bending  hand  back  ;  stitches  on  seizing  anything.

Trembling  of  hands  in  the  morning.

Stiffness  of  arms  and  finger-joints.

Tearing  pain  in  middle  finger  after  a  meal.

;rPainful  swelling  of  r.  hand, d  Endocarditis.

Burning  and  itching  of  hands.

The  hands  can  be  closed  with  less  facility.
^^  Lower  Limbs. Blood-boils  on  the  nates  and  thighs.

Stiffness  in  the  thighs  and  legs.

Heat,  pricking  and  stinging  in  the  knees.

Knees  painlully  swollen  ;  worse  stretching  leg.

B Exostoses,  with  bone-pain  in  both  shin-bones.  ^Secondary
syphilis.

I  Right  tibia,  anterior  aspect  of  bone  denuded  and  black  nearly
its  entire  length,  surrounding  soft  parts  inflamed  and  swol-
len ;  with  a  boy,  get.  12,  exfoliating  and  healing  within  six
months, d  Necrosis.

■  Legs  swollen  and  very  tender  along  the  inside  of  tibia.
iLeft  leg  oedematously  swollen.

■  Infiltration  of  cellular  tissue  of  legs; great tension, pain.

d  Childbed.
Deep-seated,  tensive  pain  in  dorsum  of  left  foot ;  worse  from
motion,  during evening  and night,  disturbing  sleep ;  also
from  warmth.
A  doughy,  sharply  defined,  semicircular  swelling  on  dorsum  of

left  foot,  extremely  sensitive  to  touch.
I  Deep-seated,  troublesome  pain  in  left  foot. ^  After  typhoid

fever.
B  Periostitis  of  left  foot.  ^  After  typhus.  ^  After  mechanical  in-
jury-
Burning  in  the  feet.

Swelling  of  the  feet.

Cutting  pain  in  the  toes  when  walking.

B Redness  and  swelling  of  toes,  with  burning  and  stinging ;  can-
not put  the  feet  down.
^*  Limbs  in  General. Drawing,  tearing,  especially  in  the  ex-
tremities.

B  Limbs  cold,  covered  with  sweat. 6  After  scarlatina.
^^  Rest. Position. Motion. Lying : cannot lie on back.
d  Anasarca.

Must  lie  doubled  up  :  in  colic.

Sitting :  drawing  in  the  neck.

Standing  :  pressure  on  chest  impeding  breathing  worse.

Stooping :  pains  in  sternum  worse.

Stretching  leg :  swollen  knee  worse.

Rising :  throbbing  1.  temple  worse.

Motion :  pain  1.  foot  <  ;  impossible  in  dropsy.


291  AURUM  MURIATICUM.

Walking  :  pain  in  toes.

I  Ascending  a  hill  or  stairs  causes  palpitation  and  dyspnoea.
d  Stenocardia.

B  Great  restlessness  :  changes  his position  every  moment ;  his
friends  call  him  "the  quicksilver  man." ^Neurosis  cordis.
'^  Nerves. TrGreat  nervous  irritation.

Greatest  exhaustion,  mostly  in  the  limbs.

Frequent  startings. 6  Dropsy.

Restlessness  with  the  palpitation.

Weakness,  fever,  and  the  most  violent  symptoms,  as  if  poisoned,
after  trituration  in  water,  by  the  teaspoonful,  for  syphilitic
ulcers  in  throat.

Nervous  aifections,  with  disgust  of  life ;  insomnia  and  melan-
choly.
^"^  Sleep. Yawning  after  eating.

I  1  Sleepy  by  day  even  at  work.

I  I  Comatose  sleep, d  Albumenuria.

■  Sleepless:  from  excitement;  from  palpitation.
Wakes  with  a  start.

Dreams  :  with  sadness  ;  tormenting.
^*  Time. Morning :  eyelids  agglutinated ;  mucus  passed  from  head
to  throat;  erection  if  bladder  is  full;  gleet  <  ;  leucorrhoea
■<  ;  trembling  of  hands.
Day  :  sleepiness  even  while  at  work.
Evening :  pain  in  1.  foot  worse.

Night :  burning  and  itching  behind  ears  ;  diarrhoea ;  urging  to
urinate ;  incontinence  of  urine  <  ;  suffocation ;  dry  cough
<  ;  pain  in  foot ;  swelling  of  tissue  worse.
2^  Temperature  and  Weather. Cold  washing:  throbbing  in

1.  temple  better.
Wet  cold  winter  :  improves.
Warmth  :  pain  in  1.  foot  worse.

Cannot  bear  warmth  of  bed-clothes,  throws  off  the  covers.
^^  Chill. Fever. Sweat. Slight  chilliness  over  the  body.
I  I  Violent  chill  and  fever.

I  Hectic fever: dropsy; after  scarlatina; secondary  syphilis.
Copious,  oflFensive-smelling  sweat.
Sweat  increased.

■  Copious,  cold  sweat, d  After  scarlatina.
Promotes  the  sweat  in  small-pox.

"  Attacks. At  times  very  much  prostrated.

In  paroxysms  :  drawing  in  stomach ;  short  cough.
*^  Locality  and  Direction.  Right :  exostosis  of  cheek  bone  dis-
appeared ;  tension  and  burning  in  hypochondrium ;  neck
twisted  to  shoulder  by  hard  swelling ;  tearing  in  arm  ;  pain-
ful swelling  of  hand  ;  tibia  denuded  and  black.
Left :  drawing  in  half  of  head ;  burning  in  side  of  head ;  throb-
bing in  temple ;  neuralgia  of  eye  ;  buzzing  in  ear ;  red  swell-


AURUM  MURIATICUM.  292

ing  side  of  nose  ;  stitches  in  hypochondrium  ;  bubo  in  groin  ;

pains  side  of  chest ;  tearing  in  shoulder ;  pain  dorsum  of  foot,
R.  to  L.:  stinging  itching  on  small  places.
Above  downward  :  pain  in  forehead  ;  pain  in  elbow.
Diagonally  :  pain  from  apex  of  heart.
*^  Sensations. As  if  eyes  were  drawn  deep  into  head.
As  if  the  ears  were  wide  and  hollow  inside.
Feeling  of  a  plug  in  throat.
As  if  a  hard  body  was  pressed  into  epigastrium.
Disagreeable  sensation  in  shoulders  and  arms.
Boring :  in  cardiac  region.
Cutting :  in  cardiac  region  ;  in  back  ;  in  toes.
Lancinating:  from  cardiac  region  to  1.  hypochonder ;  in  arms.
Stitching : in face ; in stomach  ;  in 1.  hypochonder ; under

ribs  ;  above  the  heart ;  in  wrist.
Pleuritic  pains  :  in  chest.

Stinging :  in  occiput ;  in  nose  ;  in  knees  ;  in  toes.
Pricking  :  in  cardiac  region  ;  in  back  ;  in  knees.
Prickling  :  in  eyes  ;  in  throat.
Burning  :  in  head ;  in  occiput ;  in  forehead  ;  in  eyes  ;  behind

ears;  in  nose;  in  face;  on  lips ;  in  mouth ;  in  stomach ;  in

r. hypochonder ;  on urinating ;  in urethra ;  of  vulva ;  in

cardiac  region  ;  in  back  ;  in  arms  ;  in  feet ;  in  toes.
Biting  :  in  mouth  ;  at  umbilicus.
Tearing :  in  bones  of  skull ;  in  1.  shoulder ;  in  r.  arm  ;  from

elbow  to  tip  of  little  finger  ;  in  middle  finger ;  in  extremities.
Digging :  in  face.
Jerking  pain  :  in  teeth.
Gnawing :  in  face.
Scraping :  in  throat.
Drawing :  in  1.  half  of  head ;  in  bones  of  skull ;  epigastrium  to

sternum ;  in  abdomen  ; along  spermatic  cords ; in  cardiac

region  ;  in  neck  ;  in  shoulders  ;  in  extremities.
Pressure:  on  brain;  in  nose;  in  scrobiculum ;  around  waist;

on  chest ;  under  sternum  ;  in  cardiac  region.
Aching :  in  cardiac  region.
Penetrating  pain  :  from  forehead  to  nose.
Undefined  pain  :  in  throat ;  in  bowels  ;  in  kidneys  ;  in  1.  foot:
Throbbing :  in  1.  temple.
Concussive  shocks :  in  arms.
Constrictive  colic.
Cramps :  in  stomach.
Contraction :  of  chest.
Tension  :  in  loins  ;  in  vertebrge  ;  in  legs.
Straining,  tensive  pain,  as  if  laced  :  in  abdomen.
Stiffness :  in  groins.
Rigidity  :  in  cardiac  region.
Crawling :  in  nasal  cavities.


293  AURUM  MURIATICUM.

Tickling  :  itching  on  forehead  ;  in  eyes  ;  on  face ;  in  urethra.

Itching  :  in  eyes  ;  behind  ears  ;  in  nose ;  on  face ;  of  lips ;  in
mouth ;  at  umbilicus  ;  of  vulva ;  in  vagina.

Fullness:  in  stomach.

Heaviness:  in  cardiac  region.

Heat :  at  umbilicus  ;  in  urethra ;  in  vagina ;  in  knees.

Coldness :  on  vertex.

Dryness :  in  throat.
**  Tissues. IBHypersemia  from  over-action  of  the  heart ;  conse-
quent congestion  of  liver,  kidneys,  genitals.

B  Violent  rheumatic  fever,  with  painful  swelling  of  joints  ;  leav-
ing the  joints  and  attacking  the  heart.

llDropsies: from heart-disease; from liver-affections;  with
albumenuria ;  after  scarlatina  ;  with  intermittent  fever.

■  Swellings  characterized  by  heat,  hardness,  tension,  etc.;  sen-

sitiveness to  touch  ;  worse  at  night,  disturbing  sleep.
Emaciation,  especially  in  syphilis.

■  Indurations. See  Nose,  Lips,  Teeth,  Uterus,  etc.

■  Cancerous  glands.

■  ■Bones: periosteum affected; exostoses; caries,  especially

after  abuse  of  mercury  ;  syphilitic  caries.

■  Caries  of  the  joints,  with  gnawing,  boring  deep  in.

■  Ascites.

TiMorbid  secretions  are  at  once  re-established.
*"  Touch. Passive  Motion. Injuries. Touch  :  abdomen  sensi-
tive; swellings  sensitive.
Light  pressure:  pain  at  apex  of  heart  better.
Tight  clothing  :  oppression  of  breathing  worse.
Stepping  :  palpitation  worse.
Cannot  put  foot  to  ground :  toes  red,  swollen.
After  mechanical  injury  :  periostitis  of  foot.

■  Cured  ascites  even  after  three  successive  tappings.
*^  Skin. ■  Eczema.

■  Skin  dry  and  shrunken. ^Dropsy. ^Albumenuria.
Small  red  itching  elevations,  leaving  spots  after  they  disappear.
Whole  body  covered  with  ulcers  and  scurf,  with  hectic  fever.

d  Secondary  syphilis.
TrEruptions  of  pimples  ;  crops  of  pustules  all  over  the  body.
*^  Stages  of  Life,  Constitution. Lymphatic,  scrofulous  consti-
tution, with  dropsy  after  scarlatina  and  albumenuria.

■  Girl,  aet.  12,  with  hypertrophy  of  heart,  with  dilatation  and

insufficiency  of  the  valves, d  Hydrops.

■  Woman, ^t. 24, lymphatic constitution, scrofulous habit.

d  Hydrops.

■  Man,  set.  32,  sanguine,  robust, d  Secondary  syphilis.

■  Woman,  set.  40,  after  rheumatism  and  endocarditis,  fatty  de-

generation. 6  Stenocardia.


AURUM  MURIATICUM.  294

BA  man,  set,  57,  well-preserved,  lively  temperament,  had
gonorrhoea. 6  Angina  pectoris.

I  After  syphilis,  maltreated  by  mercury. ^  Osteocopus.

■  Mercurial  affections.

;rSymptoms  whose  suppression  had  caused  serious  mischief,  re-
appear.

I A  stout  young  man,  subject  to  rheumatic  attacks.  ^Endo-
carditis.
^  Relationship.  Gold  salts  and  mercury  salts  both  loosen  the
cohesion  of  the  organic  tissue.  Both  stimulate  the  absorb-
ent, secreting  and  excreting  functions  of  skin,  kidneys  and
salivary  glands.  Employed  for  a  longer  period  they  initiate
a  peculiar  metamorphosis  of  plastic  life.  They  differ  from
the  mercurials  in  stimulating  more  the  activity  of  heart  and
blood-vessels,  but  not  fluidily  organic  tissue  so  powerfully  as
dry  mercury.

Similar  to :  Aeon.,  Amm.  cm-b.  (hypersemia  of  chest  from
heart-disease) ;  Arg.  met.,  Arg.  nitr.,  Arsen.  (dropsy,  albu-
menuria,  heart) ;  Bellad.,  Cinnah.  (syphilis) ;  Ferruvi,  Crlo-
noine  (intermediate  remedy  in  neurosis  cordis) ;  Lycop.,
Mercur.,  Nitr.  ae.,  Phosphor.,  Platin.,  Silic,  Sulphur.

Incompatible :  sulphur  springs.

Antidotes:  Bellad.,  Cinnah.,  Mercur.


295  AURUM  MURIATICUM  NATR.ONATUM.

AURUM  MURIATICUM  NATRONATUM.

CUoro-aurate  of  Soda.  NaCl,  AuOl^,  2ff^0.

A  double  salt  like  the  alum  and  tart.  emet. Not  proved,  but  used  at  ran-
dom ;  preferred  by  the  old  school.

^  Mind. ^His  disposition  is  much  brighter, d  Mercurio-syphilis.
Feeling  of  unrest  and  impatience.

I  After  vexation. ^Jaundice.

^  Sensorium. Continual  humming  in  head,  with  beating  of  caro-
tids (see  29),  almost  causing  delirium.

^  Inner  Head, l  Violent  pains  on  whole  left  side  of  head,  mostly
over  the  eye. d  Mercurio-syphilitic  affections.
lEvery  morning  pressure  over  eyes,  pains  in  forehead,  dullness
in  head,  lasting  until  afternoon  ;  better  in  the  evening  ;  nasal
discharge  bloody,  fetid,  ichorous.

*  Outer  Head, i  Hair  falls  out.

"  Sight  and  Eyes. >  Amaurosis.

■  Chronic  ophthalmia ;  malignant,  cancerous  ;  at  the  same  time,
nose  scurfy.

I I  Scrofulous  ophthalmia.
lYellow  albuginea. ^Jaundice.

I  Swelling  above  1.  eye. ^Mercurio-syphilis.
^  Nose. 1  Destruction  of  the  nasal  bones, d  Ozaena.

I  Nasal  discharge  bloody,  ichorous,  fetid.

I I  Ulcers  in  the  nose.

I  Nose  swollen,  hard,  shining  (scrofula) ;  if  he  takes  cold,  ery-
sipelas sets  in.
Scurfy,  oozing  tetter  on  the  nose.

I  Deep-spreading  syphilitic  ulcer  of  skin. 6  Affection  of  nasal
bones.
®  Face. lUlcers  in  the  cavities  of  the  upper  jaw.

I  Complexion  pale;  embonpoint  nearly  lost.
®  Lower  Part  of  Face. Periosteal  indurations  ;  after  a  cellulitis
on  lower  jaw.
Ulcer  in  the  right  corner  of  the  mouth.
B  Opening  mouth  difficult, d  After  cynanche  cellularis.
^^  Teeth. I  Teeth  look  dirty,  get  loose  and  gums  recede  ;  caries  of

the  jaw. ^Mercurio-syphilis.
^^  Tongue. Tongue  furred  ;  bitter  taste. .
I  Tongue  white, d  Jaundice.
Warts  on  the  tongue.


AURUM  MURIATICUM  NATRONATUM.  296

^^  Mouth. 1  Fetid odor from  the mouth. ^  Mercurio-syphilis.

6  Leucorrhoea.
13  Throat. Small  blisters  on  fauces  with  swelling  and  inflammation
ot  the  fauces.
I  Two  small  ulcers  on  the  right  tonsil. ^  Mercurio-syphilis.
'^Appetite, B  No  appetite, f^  Jaundice.

^^Hypochondria. BPressure  in  right  hypochondria. ^Jaundice.
^^  Abdomen. ■  Dropsy  without  fever  but  threatening  suffocation.

EB  Ascites.
^°  Stool. B  Feces  like  whitish  clay. ^Jaundice.

1  I  Stools  harder.
2^  Urine. B Diuresis. ^Dropsy.
;rSuppression  of  urine.
i Urine  dark. ^Jaundice.
Urine  gets  turbid ;  more  profuse  than  usual.
B  Morbus  Brightii.
^^  Male  Sexual  Organs. B  Chancre,  on  internal  surface  of  pre-
puce.
BBubo  in  the  fold  of  groin.

I  Ulcers  on the  foreskin ;  warts  around  them ;  ulcers  on the
glans  eating  deeply.
^^  Female  Sexual  Organs. B  Enormous  distension  of  an  ovary.
Induration  of  one  part  and  softening  of  another  part  of  the

uterus,
i  Ulcers  with  induration  of  the  uterus.
Neoplasmata  in  the  abdomen.
I  I  Ovarian  enlargement ;  even  dropsy.
Leucorrhoea  corroding  the  parts.
B Pustules  on  the  genitals. ^Leucorrhoea.
^^  Pregnancy. I  l  Abortion  from  uterine  indurations.

Given  to  syphilitic  mothers  to  prevent  the  disease  in  her  ofl-

spring.
SScirrhus  of  uterus.
B  Carcinoma  mammae  et  uteri.
^^  Heart,  Pulse. ;rBeating  of  carotid  and  temporal  arteries  visible
to  the  eye; the  violence  of  this  beating  became  extremely
annoying,  and  so  violent  was  it  that  nothing  could  calm  it;
the  disquiet  caused  by  it  put  the  sufferer  into  constant  terror
almost  to  delirium.
^^  Neck  and  Back. S  Pustular  eruption  on  the  back. 6  Leucor-
rhoea.
^*  Limbs  in  General. B  B  Old  cases  of  rheumatism  or  gouty  pains,
^^  Time. Morning:  pressure  over  eyes ;  pains  in  forehead;  dull-
ness in  head.
Evening  :  headache  better.
^^Temperature  and  Weather. BFrom  October  until  Spring :
violent headache ; four  years  in succession, d  Mercurio-
syphilis.


297  AURUM  MURIATICUM  NATRONATUM.

TzDrj,  warm  weather,  favors  its  action.
Cold,  wet  weather,  causes  inconveniences.
^^  Chill. Fever. Sweat. ;7Unusual  heat  and  malaise.

I  Violent  fever, forcing  him to keep  his  bed,  urine copious.

6  Ascites.
B  Sweats  only  on  right  side,  left  (affected)  side  of  head  remains

dry. 6  Mercurio-syphilitic  affections.

■  ■Excessive  perspiration.
;rSuppression  of  perspiration.

*^  Locality  and  Direction, Right :  ulcer  on  corner  of  mouth  ;

ulcers  on  tonsil ;  pressure  in  hypochondrium  ;  sweats  only

on  side  of  head.
Left :  pains  side  of  head  ;  swelling  above  eye  ;  affected  side  of

head  does  not  sweat.
**  Tissues. >  Dropsy  from  induration  of  abdominal  organs.

■  Scrofula.

I  Chronic  suppuration  of  glands  and  bones.

■  ■Indurations.

■  Ascites.

■  ■Caries.

*®  Skin. Trintolerable  itching  all  over  the  body  ;  soon  followed  by
an  eruption  of  tubercles  (little  lumps),  several  of  which  being
covered  with  dark  looking  scabs.
The  little  lumps  increased  and  became  as  hard  as  horn ;  a  be-
ginning gutta  Serena  was  soon  added.

■  Yellow  skin. ^Jaundice.

■  Deep-spreading  syphilitic  ulcers  of  the  skin.

*'  Stages  of  Life, Constitution. Carbo-nitrogenoid constitu-
tions.

B  B  Mercurio-syphilitic  constitutions.

Irritable,  sanguine,  bilious  persons  are  more  obnoxious  to  its
effects  than  phlegmatic.
**  Relationship.  Similar  to  :  Aurum  and  Aur.  mur.  (chemically);
Arg.  nitr.,  Arsen.,  Badiag.^  Bryon.  (ascites);  Cist,  can.,
Conium  (indurations);  GfrapJdt.,  Ifepar,  loduni,  Kalihichr.,
Kali  liydr.  (mercurio-syphilis) ;  Lycop.  (ascites) ;  Ifercur.
vivus  et  suljjhur  (ascites) ;  Merc.  jod.  (caries,  syphilis,
glandular  enlargements,  etc.) ;  Nitr.  ac,  Phosphor.,  PJiosph.
ac,  jSulphur,  Thuya  (warts).

Incompatible  :  coffee  and  alcohol.


BADIAGA.  298

BADIAGA.

Spongilla  fluviatilis.  Fresh  Water  S-ponge.


Hahnemann,  after  having  received  this  popular  drug  from  Russia,  used
it  and  made  some  observations  with  it,  but  tliey  have  been  withheld
from  our  School  by  the  widow.  In  1834  it  was  triturated  by  Dr.  C.Hg,  after
1835  some  mention  made  in  our  journals;  in  1865  well  proved  by  Dr.  Ly-
man Bedford,  and  finally  published  by  dig,  in  the  Hahnemannian  Monthly,
Vol.  II,  page  121,  1866.


^  Mind. B  After  pleasurable  emotions,  palpitation  of  heart.
B  Mind  generally  clear,  active  in  spite  of  the  headache.
Mistakes  the  days.
^  Sensorium. Dull,  dizzy  feeling.

^  Inner Head. B Headache from 2 until 7 P.M.;  with slight
aching  in  posterior  portion  of  both  eyeballs  and  in  temples ;
<;  on  moving  eyes, d  Whooping  cough.
Frontal  headache ; <  in  temples,  extends  to  back  of  left  eye-
ball ;  •<  moving  the  eyes.
Severe  headache  on  top  of  head ; >>  at  night  I  I  after  sleeping

and  in  morning ;  returning  violently  after  breakfast.
B  B  Headache  with  inflamed  eyes.

*  Outer  Head. '  l  Excess  of  dandruff ;  scalp  sore  to  touch  ;  with

tetter- like  eruption  on  forehead,  and  dizzy  feeling during
forenoon.
1  I  Itching  on  scalp,  with  much  dandruff  like  tetter ;  dryness  of
hair.

*  Sight  and  Eyes. B  Headache  with  aching  in  posterior  parts  of

eyeballs,  worse  on  turning  eyes. 6  Pertussis.

■  Eyeballs  tender; felt  even  when  closing  lids  firmly. ^Per-
tussis.

I  I  First  r.  eye  afterwards  left  inflamed,  during  afternoon.

B Scrofulous ophthalmia; hardening of meibomian glands.
d  Headache.

B  B  Severe  intermittent  pain  in  posterior  portion  of  right  eyeball ;
afternoon  next  day,  left.

B Margin  of  lids  bluish-purple;  blue  under  the  eyes. ^Per-
tussis.

I  Twitching  of  1.  eyelid.
®  Ears. B  Slight  shocks  in  ears  as  of  distant  artillery  ;  afternoon

and  evening. 6  Pertussis.
^  Nose. 1  I  Sneezing,  fluent  coryza,  stoppage  at  times.


299  BADIAGA.

I  Sneezing  with  coryza,  fluent,  or  thick  and  yellow ;  worst  left

nostril, d  Pertussis.
Coryza  and  cough.
Itching  of  left  wing  of  nose.
^  Face. I  Redness  of  face. ^Catarrh.

iFace  pale,  ashy  or  leaden. ^Pertussis.
I  I  Left  cheek  and  malar  bone  sore  to  touch.
Maxillary  joint  stifl".
^"  Teeth. Drawing  in  a  decayed  back  tooth.
^^  Taste. Bad  taste  in  the  mouth,  evening.

^^  Mouth. I  Mouth  and  breath  hot,  feverish,  with  thirst  for  large
quantities  of  water  at  a  time. ^Pertussis.
Mouth  and  tongue  feel  scalded.
^2  Palate  and  Throat. I  l  Hawks  up  masses  of  gluey, bloody
mucus  from  throat,  which  is  inflamed  and  sore ;  worse  swal-
lowing solids.
I  Tonsils  red,  inflamed ;  worse  swallowing  solids.
"  Appetite,  Thirst. Appetite  good ;  thirst  lessened ;  tongue  as
if  scalded.
Appetite  diminished ;  costive  ;  urine  high-colored.
Thirst  for  large  quantities  of  water.
^^  Eating  and  Drinking. After  breakfast :  headache.
^^  Stomach, a  Pressure  in  pit  of  stomach,  nausea  and  rumbling.
d  Forerunner  of  Cholera  Asiatica.
Severe  lancinating  in  pit  of  stomach,  8  a.m.;  extends  to  verte-
brge,  right  scapula,  and  at  times  to  right  side,  resulting  there
in  a  pleuritic  pain.
^*  Hypochondria. Lancinating  pain  with  a  bounding  movement

in  region  of  liver.
^^  Abdomen. S  Indurated  inguinal  glands.

I  Syphilitic  bubo.
2*'  Rectum  and  Stool. ■  Catarrh  of  the  bowels.
Constipation.
I  Haemorrhoids.
^^  Urinary  Organs. Sharp  pain  in  right  kidney ;  afternoon.
Urine  high-colored,  reddish.

Severe, sharp lancinating pain, in  and  near  the  orifice of
the  urethra.
2^  Male  Sexual  Organs. B  Chancres  suppressed  by  cautery  or
mercurial  ointment  leaving  elevated,  discolored cicatrices;
general  cachectic  appearance  and  rhagades  here  and  there.
I  Syphilitic  bubo,  left  groin,  hard,  unequal  like  scirrhus ;  vio-
lent burning  stitche«  during  the  night.
I  Buboes  from  diff"erent  causes;  shooting  pains,  if  suppuration
has  not  begun,  curable  by  tincture  in  3  days ;  if  fluctuation
is  detected,  6  drops  daily  in  water  will  cause  absorption.
I  Syphilis  of  infants,  whole  con  volutes  of  hard  glandular  swell-
ings, buboes.


BADIAGA.  300

^*  Pregnancy. ■  Carcinoma  mammae.

^^  Larynx  to  Bronchia. B  I  Catarrhal  affections  of  the  throat.

^^Respiration. I  With  spasmodic  cough,  strangling,  face  turning

dark. I  Catarrh.
While  lying  in  bed  on  right  side,  just  becoming  unconscious  by

sleep,  severe  oppressive  suffocative  attacks  from  suspended

respiration ;  quick  effort  to  prevent  suffocation  by  changing

position.
Breath  hot  and  feverish.
^^  Cough. S  Occasional severe paroxysms of spasmodic cough,

ejecting  viscid  mucus from the  bronchial tubes which at

times  comes  flying  forcibly  out  of  the  mouth ;  more  during

the  afternoon  and  evening ;  caused  by  tickling  in  the  larynx

as  if  sugar  was  dissolving ;  better  in  a  warm  room.
I  I  Cough  causes  sneezing ;  profuse  coryza.
Whooping-cough; all the symptoms worse afternoon and

evening.
Cough  loose  mornings,  tight  afternoon  and  evening.
Spasmodic  cough ;  during  each  attack,  he  presses  his  hands  to

his  head.
^^  Inner  Chest  and  Lungs. Pain  in  upper  part  of  right  chest.
Severe,  sharp  lancinating  pain  in  right  supraclavicular  region

in  or  near  subclavian  artery.
I  Sharp,  lancinating  pains  in  chest,  worse  from  motion  and  deep

inspiration, with soreness of  chest ; worse afternoon and

evening. 6  Pertussis.
Severe  stitches  in  sides,  especially  the  right,  from  7th  to  8th

rib  ;  worse  from  least  motion.
Lungs  feel  as  if  sinking  down.

■  Pneumonia  typhosa.

"  Heart,  Pulse  and  Circulation.  I  Tremulous,  vibrating  pal-
pitation upon  slightest  emotion  of  the  mind,  d  Pertussis.
6  Heart  disease,  etc.

Lying  on  right  side,  heart  is  heard  and  felt  to  pulsate  from
chest  up  to  neck.

At  midnight,  while  in  bed,  vibrating  palpitation  of  heart  for  a
few  minutes ;  after  which,  Avhile  lying  on  right  side,  sensa-
tion as  if  the  lower  lobe  of  left  lung  was  settling  down  3  or
4  inches,  or  being  collapsed ;  relieved  by  changing  position.
'^  Neck  and  Back. Neck  very  stiff,  worse  flexing  head.

Soreness,  lameness  with  stitches  in  nape ;  worse  bending  head
back  and  forward.

Severe  lancinating  and  stitches  below  scapulae,  much  worse
from  throwing  shoulders  back  and  chest  forward,  or  from  any
contortion  of  the  body.

■  Glandular  swellings  on  1.  side  efface,  throat  and  neck,  nearly

as  large  as  a  hen's  egg ;  some  hard,  some  suppurating.
Severe  pain  in  or  near  the  head  of  r.  scapula.


301  BADIAGA.

Painful  drawing  near  spine  to  the  left,  downward  from  shoulder
blade.

Pain  in  front  of  upper  part  of  r.  shoulder,  afterward  in  the  left
shoulder  and  arms.

Severe  lancinating  pains  and  stitches  in  posterior  r.  side  below
scapula,  much  worse  from  throwing  shoulders  back  and  chest
forward,  or  any  contortions  of  body ;  pain  extorting  at  times
a  moan  or  shriek.

Pain  in  small  of  back,  hips  and  lower  limbs.
^^  Upper  Limbs. Pain  in  front  of  upper  part  of  right  shoulder,
afterwards  in  left  shoulder  and  arm.

In  scapula  pain  fi'om  pit  of  stomach.

Palms  hot  and  dry.
^^  Lower  Limbs. Pain  in  hips.

Intermitting  pain  in  muscles  of  lower  posterior  third  part  of
leg,  with  a  sore,  clumsy,  contracted,  bruised  feeling  of  ante-
rior muscles  of  lower  third,  worse  flexing  the  foot  and  going
up  stairs,  when  the  toes  tend  to  drop  down  ;  must  step  higher
with  right  foot ;  better  remaining  quiet  at  home.

Next  day  posterior  parts  not  felt,  but  anterior  of  same  leg
worse ;  muscles  sore  as  if  beaten,  and  a  contracted  feeling,
numb  while  sitting  or  lying.

I  Chilblains.

■  Lessened,  hard  cellular  swelling  of  both  legs.

■  Hurts  of  horses'  hoofs;  bad  ulcers  on  horses'  feet.

Sharp  stinging- in  posterior  of  right  heel;  worse  from  least
pressure.

Checked  foot-sweat  (externally).

I  Toes  bend  while  walking  as  if  the  extensors  were  paralyzed.
^*  Rest. Position. Motion. Rest : pain in muscles of  leg
better.

Lying  in  bed  :  palpitation  ;  suffocation  when  lying  on  right  side.

Throwing  shoulders  back  and  chest  forward :  pains  below
scapulae  worse.

Sitting :  palpitation  ;  stitches  in  neck.

Sitting  or  lying :  legs  numb,  soon  feel  sore,  must  change  posi-
tion.

Flexing  head  :  stiff  neck  worse.

Changing  position  :  suffocative  attack  >  ;  palpitation  better.

Motion :  eyes  and  head  <  ;  pains  in  chest  worse.

Walking: toes  bend  as  if  extensors  were  paralyzed.
^"^  Sleep. Restless  at  night ; I  1  must  frequently  change  position,
body  feels  so  sore.

Awoke  with  frightful  dreams  and  severe  crampy  pains  in  the
metatarsal  bones  of  both  feet ;  3  to  4  a.m.

After  sleep,  head  better.
^^  Time. 3  to  4  a.m.:  cramps  in  feet.

Morning :  headache  on  vertex  >  ;  cough  loose.


BADIAGA.  302

8  A.M.:  pain  in  pit  of  stomach.

Forenoon :  dizziness.

2  to  7  P.M.:  headache.

Afternoon  :  eyes  inflamed  ;  shocks  in  ears  as  of  distant  artillery ;

pain  in  kidney ;  spasmodic  cough  <  ;  cough  tight ;  pains

in  chest  worse.
Evening : shocks in ears ;  had taste in mouth ;  spasmodic

cough  <C  ;  cough  tight ;  pains  in  chest  worse.
Night :  headache  on  vertex  >> ;  restlessness.
Midnight :  palpitation  of  heart.

^^  Temperature  and  Weather. Warm  room :  whooping-cough
better.

i  S  Sensitive  to  cold,  especially  cold  air.

1 1  Worse  in  stormy  weather.

B  Chilblains.
*^  Fever. Heat  in  forehead.

I  Fever  and  thirst. ^Catarrh.

Feverish,  hot  breath  and  mouth.

Stitches  in  bubo  hot.

Palms  dry,  hot.

Foot-sweat  checked.
*^  Locality  and  Direction. Right :  pain  in  eyeball ;  pleuritic
pain  in  side ;  pain  in  kidney ;  suflfocation  while  lying  on
side ;  pain  in  upper  chest ;  pain  in  supraclavicular  region ;
pain  in  head  of  scapula;  stinging  of  heel.

Left :  headache  extends  to  back  of  eyeball ;  twitching  of  eye-
lid ;  coryza  1.  nostril  ■<  ;  itching  wing  of  nose ;  cheek  and
malar  bone  sore ;  bubo  in  groin  ;  glandular  swellings  on  side
of  face  and  neck  ;  pain  in  shoulder  and  arm.

R.  to  L.:  eyes  inflamed;  pain  in  shoulder;  pleuritic  pains;
pain  in  knees.

Above-downwards  :  drawing  in  spine.

Posterior  muscles  of  right  leg  one  day,  next  day  anterior.
*^  Sensations. Lungs  feel  as  if  sinking  down.

Sharp  pain  :  in  r.  kidney  ;  near  orifice  of  urethra.
* Lancinating :  in  pit  of  stomach  ;  in  region  of  liver :  near  ori-
fice of  urethra ;  in  r.  supraclavicular  region  ;  in  chest ;  be-
low scapulae  ;  below  r.  scapula.

Stitches  :  violent  burning,  in  bubo  ;  in  sides  ;  in  nape ;  below
scapulae  ;  below  r.  scapula.

Pleuritic  pain  :  in  r.  side.

Shooting  :  in  buboes.

Stinging  :  in  r.  heel.

Soreness  :  of  chest ;  in  nape ;  of  thigh  muscles.

Aching  :  in  posterior  portion  of  eyeballs  and  in  temples.

Scalded  feeling  :  of  mouth  aud  tongue.

Drawing  :  in  decayed  molar ;  near  spine  from  1.  shoulder-blade.

Pressure  :  in  pit  of  stomach.


303  BADIAGA.

Bruised  feeling  :  of  thigh  muscles.

Crampy  pains  :  in  feet.

Lameness :  in  nape.

Undefined  pain  :  in  upper  r.  chest ;  in  front  of  upper  r.  shoul-
der ;  in  1.  shoulder  and  arms  ;  in  small  of  back  ;  in  hips  and
lower  limbs.

Tickling :  in  larynx.

Itching :  of  1.  wing  of  nose ;  on  scalp.
^*  Tissues. ' '  Chronic  rheumatism.

Catarrhal  trouble.

I  Adenitis.

I B  Scrofulosis.

I I  Glands  enlarged,  indurated.  ^Scrofula.  ^Syphilitic  buboes.

■  Induration  of  the  cellular  tissue.

*^  Touch. Passive  Motion. Injuries. Touch :  scalp  sore ;
malar  bones  sore; I  skin  sore.
Least  pressure  :  stinging  in  heel  worse.
Swallowing  solids  :  sore  throat  <  ;  tonsils  worse.
Moving  eyes :  aching  in  eyeballs  worse.

■  I Lesions,  pains  and  sugillations  after  concussion  or  contusion.
*^  Skin. Itching  on  scalp.

Skin  sore  to  touch.

■  Elevated  and  discolored  cicatrices.
I  Rhagades  here  and  there.

I  Brown  and  blue  spots  in  the  skin  after  concussions.
Causes  checked  eruptions  to  re-appear  (externally  applied).
*^  Stages  of  Life,  Constitution. General  cachectic  appearance.

■  Scrofulous  constitutions.

I  I  Fat  children. ^Whooping-cough.
*^  Relationship. Side  relation  :  Spongia.

Cured  a  syphilitic  bubo  of  left  groin  after  Sulphur,  Carh.  an.,

Clemat.,  Silic,  lodium  and  Arsen.  had  failed.
Compare :  Seneg.  (cough  caused  by  sneezing,  the  opposite  of

13) ;  Spongia  (cough,  with  much  sneezing).
Similar  to  : Calc.  sulph.  (indurations) ; Oarb.  an.  (indurations,

buboes) ; Cist. can. (scrofula) ; Clemat., Hepar, lodum,

Kali  hydr..  Laches.,  Mercur.,  Merc,  jod.,  Nitr.  ac,  Silic,

Sulphur.
Complementary  to  :  Sulphur,  lodum  and  Mercur.
Laches,  follows  well.


BAPTISIA  TINCTORIA.  304

BAPTISIA  TINCTORIA.

Wild  Indigo.  -  Leguminoscp..


An  old  Indian  drug,  first  used  by  the  eclectics  until  introduced  into  our
school  by  N.  L.  Thompson  in  1857.  The  first  useful  proving  was  given  by
J.  S.  Douglas  and  others,  followed  by  Hadley,  Burt,  Harpel  and  Schenck,
in  1871;  by  Wallace,  in  1873;  C.  Wesselhoeft,  in  1875.  The  most  impor-
tant symptoms  from  practice  have  been  given  us  by  Dr.  J.  B.  Bell.

^  Mind. B Unconsciousness. ^Typhus.

11  Stupor;  falls  asleep  while  being  spoken  to,  or  answering;
heavy  sleep  until  aroused ;  awakes  only  to  again  fall  asleep
in  the  midst  of  his  answer,  which  he  vainly  endeavors  to
finish, d  Typhus.

1 1  Confusion  of  ideas ;  confused  as  if  drunk.

■  Cannot  confine  his  mind ;  a  sort  of  wild,  w^andering  feeling.
1 1  She  cannot  go  to  sleep,  because  she  cannot  get  herself  to-
gether, d  Orchitis.

I  iFeels  scattered  about,  and  tosses  about  to  get  the  pieces  to-
gether, d  Typhus.

I  He  thinks  his  legs  are  holding  a  conversation  with  each  other ;

a  man,  set.  60. d  Gout.
Mind  wanders  as  soon  as  the  eyes  are  closed.

I I  Delirium,  especially  at  night,  or  constant,  low;  stupor.
d  Typhus.

■  Delirium  and  incoherent  talking. ^Typhus.

I  Delirious  stupor  or  fierce  delirium. ^Typhus.

I  Low  muttering. ^Typhus.

I I  Indisposed  to  think,  want  of  power;  mind  seems  weak.

1 1  Aversion  to  mental  exertion.  6  Spasmodic  stricture  of  oeso-
phagus.

Perfect  indifierence,  don't  care  to  do  anything;  inability  to
fix  the  mind  on  anything.

■  Hopeless  of  recovery,  and  certain  of  death. ^Typhus.

■  Mentally  restless,  but  too  lifeless  to  move.

■  Restless  and  delirious  for  three  weeks. ^Typhus.

■  Want  of  mental  force, d  Typhus.

Worse  when  thinking  of  pains  in  various  parts  of  body.
^  Sensorium. ■  Vertigo  and  weak  feeling  of  entire  system,  espe-
cially of  lower  limbs  and  knees.
Dizzy  when  stooping.
Vertigo  with  paralysis  of  the  eyelids.

■  Giddiness  and  severe  nausea, d  Typhus.


305  BAPTISIA  TINCTORIA.

Head  feels  heavy,  as  if  he  could  not  sit  up.
I  Dull,  heavy  sensation  in  head  with  drowsiness ;  unfit  for  men-
tal labor.
I  Frequent  fainting;  tongue  dry,  brown,  in  the  morning.
^  Inner  Head. I  Peculiar  feeling  in  head,  which  is  never  felt
except  during  fever,  excitement  of  brain,  such  as  precedes
delirium.

Head  feels  heavy  as  if  he  could  not  sit  up,  day  and  night,
causing  a  wild  feeling ;  worse  from  noise.

Dull,  stupefying  headache  with  fullness ;  sensation  as  if  a  band
were  around  the  forehead  ;  confusion  of  ideas  ;  stupor;  dull,
heavy  looking  eyes,  besotted  expression ;  feel  as  if  had  been
drunk  and  were  just  recovering  from  its  effects;  general  de-
bility and  nervous  prostration.
I  I  Head  feels  large  and  heavy,  with  numb  feeling  of  the  head
and  face ;  stitches  or  shocks  in  various  parts  of  head.

Dull,  heavy,  pressive  headache.

A  dull,  heavy  feeling  in  head,  especially  forehead  and  malar
bones ;  ears  feel  hot,  yet  cold  to  touch  ;  head  feels  swollen  ;
giddiness,  as  if  had  taken  liquor,  worse  when  walking.

Dull,  heavy  feeling  in  the  head  with  general  languor;  eyes
pain  while  reading  by  gas-light ;  2d  day.

Dull,  heavy,  full  feeling  in  forehead  with  slight  frontal  head-
ache, with  sensation  as  if  temples  were  pressed  by  thumbs ;
1st  day.

Pain  in  forehead  over  left  eye  in  region  of  supra-orbital  fora-
men ;  darts  of  pain  in  different  parts  of  body  ;  2d  day.

Slight  frontal  headache  after  having  been  up  a  while ;  forehead
hot ;  4th  day.

I  Frontal  headache,  weighty. ^Typhus.

Dull,  heavy  headache,  better  from  pressure  on  the  nasal  bones
and  worse  from  mental  labor.

Fullness  of  the  head,  with  fluctuation  when  walking.

Frontal  headache :  I  with  pressure  at  root  of  nose ;  with  feel-
ing of  fullness  and  tightness  of  the  whole  head.

Pressive  pain  in  forehead  as  if  it  would  be  pressed  in,  with
sharp  pains  in  both  temples ;  much  worse  from  motion.

I  Sharp  darts  of  pain  in  supra-orbital  nerve  at  foramen.

Dull  pain  in  anterior  lobes  of  brain  and  right  frontal  sinus ;
afternoon.

Severe  pain  passing  from  insertion  of  r.  sterno-mastoid  muscle
through  head  into  orbit,  causing  a  dull,  heavy  feeling  in
head,  especially  the  forehead,  relieved  by  pressing  below  the
mastoid  process.

Beating  headache  in  forehead,  with  soreness  in  back  of  head,
immediately  below  occipital  protuberance,  followed  by  hot
stitches  in  temples.

VOL.  II.— 20.


BAPTISIA  TINCTORIA.  306

Frequent  pain  in  right  temple ;  sharp  pains  by  spells  in  both

temples.
Heavy  pain  at  base  of  brain,  with  lameness  and  drawing  in

cervical  muscles.
Fullness  in  head  with  pain  behind  right  ear ;  better  having

lain  quiet  for  a  short  time.
Headache  and  pain  behind  right  ear,  >  after  dinner ;  1st  day.
Severe  pain  in  occiput  with  dull,  stupid  feeling  all  over  head ;

sharp  pain  over  the  eyes.
Dull  feeling  in  occiput,  with  pain  and  fullness  of  the  vessels.
Throbbing  in  head,  over  the  eyes,  with  weakness  in  the  limbs

on  going  up  stairs.

I  Dull  bruised  ache  in  the  head. 6  Typhus.

I I  Dull,  bruised  feeling  in  occiput, d  Diphtheria.

Soreness  as  if  in  the  brain,  frontal  region,  with  pain,  heat,  ver-
tigo; worse  on  stooping.
*  Outer  Head. Top  of  head  feels  as  if  it  would  fly  off.

Great  tightness  of  the  forehead.

Scalp  feels  sore.

Sensation  as  if  head  was  swelling  (slowly  growing  larger  and
larger),  with  pain  at  insertion  of  sterno-cleido-mastoid  mus-
cle, accompanied  by  a  sensation  as  if  the  head  was  swollen
behind  the  ear,  right  side.

I  Dull,  bruised  ache  in  the  head. 6  Typhus.

Several  sharp  thrusts  of  pain  in  head  over  r.  eye.

Fullness  of  external  vessels  of  head  and  face.

Neck  feels  so  tired,  she  can't  hold  her  head  easy  in  any  position.
^  Sight  and  Eyes. I  l  Cannot  bear  light ;  eyes  burn,  but  do  not
water, d  Chronic  sore  eyes.

Eyes  weak.

I  Occasionally  delirium  with  confusion  of  sight. ^Diphtheria.

Feeling  as  if  eyes  would  be  pressed  into  head;  I  eyeballs  feel
sore  with  great  confusion  of  sight ;  cannot  place  anything,
until  after  looking  at  it  a  few  seconds ;  everything  appears
to  move.

Severe  pain  in  eyes  while  reading,  compelled  to  stop.

Severe  pain  in  left  eye,  worse  from  pressing  on  crown  of  head,
with  dull  headache.

lEyes  dull, d  Typhus.

Left  eye  for  a  moment  feels  very  weak,  followed  by  stitches  in
upper  eyelid.

Stitches  in  right  eye ;  also  in  left  as  from  needles.

Sharp  pain  over  right  eye,  then  over  left.
- 1  Weight  over  the  eyes, d  Typhus.

Bloated  feeling  of  eyes,  glistening ;  disposition  to  have  them
half  closed.

Eyes  feel  swollen,  slight  lachrymation  with  burning.

I  I  Eyeballs  feel  sore ;  sore  and  lame  on  moving  them.


307  BAPTISIA  TINCTORIA.

Soreness  in  front  of  head  when  moving  eyes  or  turning  them

upwards.
Vessels  congested,  eyes  look  red,  inflamed.
Eyes  still  injected  with  burning  pain  in  them,  causing  running

of  the  right  nostril ;  worse  from  reading  and  from  the  light

of  the  candle.
Eyes  in  the  morning  still  injected  and  pain,  and  contain  thick,

yellow  pus,  which  cause  them  to  burn ;  worse  while  reading.

I  Chronic  sore  eyes.

Partial  paralysis  of  lids ;  diflBculty  in  keeping  them  open.
Pain  in  region  of  supra-orbital  nerve,  >•  from  pressure.
Pain  in  orbital  plate  of  superior  maxillary  bone  (left  eye),  re-
lieved by  pressure.
®  Hearing  and  Ears. I  Dull  hearing. /?  Typhus.
Roaring  in  ears  with  mental  confusion.

I I  Delirium  with  almost  complete  deafness. ^Diphtheria.
Ears  feel  hot  and  barn,  yet  cold  to  touch.

Right  ear  sore  and  neck  tired.

■  Soreness  in  right  ear,  running  down  the  neck.

Pain  below  left  ear,  midway  between  mastoid  process  and  angle

of  lower  jaw.
Slight  pain  in  left  parotid  gland.
^  Smell  and  Nose. Soreness  extends  to  posterior  nares.
Severe  drawing  pains  along  the  nose.
Right  nostril  stopped  up.
Nose  stopped  up  as  if  had  taken  a  bad  cold ;  when  sneezing

and  blowing  nose,  slight  bleeding  from  left  nostril  of  bright

red  blood  (thick) ;  2d  day.
Thick  mucus  from  nose.

■  Dull  pain  at  root  of  nose, d  Catarrh.
Sneezing  and  feeling  as  after  taking  cold.
Crampy  sensation  at  root  of  nose.

Unpleasant  sensation  at  root  of  nose  (especially  the  left),  as  if
water  had  passed  through  posterior  nares  while  drinking;
1st  day.

I  Epistaxis  and  oozing  of  dark  blood  from  the  nose  for  two  or
three  days, d  Typhus.

I I  Sensation  of  great  fullness,  oedematous  swelling  of  the
affected  parts,  especially  in  choanse. 6  Diphtheria.

^  Face. B Looked  ill  for  two  weeks. ^Typhus.

■  Anxious,  frightened  look. 6  Cough-

I  Yellowish  cheeks;  central  deep  flush. ^Typhus.

Face : I  sallow  ; I  ■  dark red, with a besotted expression ;

1 1  flushed,  dusky  ; I  hot  und  perceptibly  flushed.
Burning,  prickling  of  left  side  of  face  and  head.
I  Burning  heat  in  face  with  flushed  cheeks. ^Diphtheria.
Cheeks  burn.
1  Cheeks  flushed,  dark  violet. ^  Cough.


BAPTISIA  TINCTORIA.  308

I  Heat  all  over,  most  in  face, d  Typhus.
I  Critical  sweat  on  forehead  and  face, d  Typhus.
Face  and  whole  head  feel  numb.
Muscles  of  jaw  rigid.
®  Lower  Jaw. ■  Pain  in  articulation  of  lower  jaw. ^Typhus.
I  Jaw  dropped. ^Typhus.

■  Cracked  lips,  with  bleeding  and  ulceration  of  the  bowels.

d  Typhus.

Pain  in  region  of  right  mastoid  process.
^^  Teeth  and  Gums, '  Teeth  and  gums  sore ;  by  pressing  with
finger,  large  quantities  of  blood  ooze  out.

I  iSordes  on  teeth  and  lips  ;  tongue  ulcerated, d  Typhus.
"  Taste,  Speech,  Tongue. Taste :  flat,  bitter.

Filthy  taste  with  flow  of  saliva.

I  Foul  or  bitter  nauseous  taste  in  the  mouth, d  Typhus.

I  Tongue  feels  swollen,  thick,  making  talking  diflicult.

Slight  heat  or  burning  at  root  of  tongue.

■  Tongue  red  and  dry  in  middle, d  Typhus.

Tongue  feels  dry  on  rubbing  against  the  roof  of  mouth  ;  smarts,

feels  burned.
I  The  roof  of  tongue  is  swollen  and  feels  numb. ^Diphtheria.
I  Tongue  of  a  dark  hue. 6  Cough.

■  Dry,  parched,  thickly  coated  tongue. ^Typhus.
I  Tongue  dry,  brown  down  the  centre, d  Typhus.

I  Tongue  covered  with  a  thick,  brown  crust. 6  Typhus.

I  Tongue  baked  down  the  centre. 6  Typhus.

I  Tongue  at  first  white  with  red  papillae  here  and  there,  fol-
lowed by  a  yellow-brown  coating  in  centre,  edges  being  red,
shining.

I  Tongue  coated  white,  yellow  or  yellowish  brown,  and  feels  as
if  burned  or  scalded, 6  Diphtheria.

■  Tongue  yellowish  white,  deeply  furred. ^Typhus.
I  Tongue  yellow  along  the  centre.

I  Foul  tongue. ^Typhus.

Tongue  feels  as  though  it  had  been  scraped,  and  sensation  ex-
tending to  the  fauces.
Tongue  cracked  down  the  centre.
1  Cracked,  sore,  ulcerated  tongue. ^Typhus.
"  Inner  Mouth. I  Stomatitis  materna;  breath  fetid;  feeble  state.
I  Fetid  odor;  also  after  mercury.

■  Mouth  and  tongue  very  dry. d  In  fevers.
Filthy  taste,  with  flow  of  saliva.

Saliva  rather  abundant,  somewhat  viscid,  tasting  flat.
Copious  saliva :  followed  by  sore  throat,  scraping,  burning ;

slight  pain  in  right  lung.
Copious  flow  of  saliva  ;  ulcers  in  the  mouth.
iCancrum  oris,  copious  saliva;  gums  loose,  flabby,  dark-red,

or  purple ;  fetid.


309  BAPTISIA  TINCTORIA.

1 1  Aphthae. ^Typhus.
I  Sore  mouth  of  sucklings  and  consumptives.
I  Canker  sores  in  mouth.

I  Ulcerations  extending  from  mouth,  through  alimentary  canal,
with  watery  discharges  from  the  bowels.

I  Putrid  ulceration  of  the  buccal  cavity,  with  salivation;  well

developed  ulcers,  slight  pain.
^^  Palate and Throat. ■  ■  Pain and soreness of  the fauces.
d  Diphtheria.
Hot  feeling  in  the  fauces,  passing  up  into  ears ;  sensation  as  if
had  eaten  pepper.

I I  Fauces  dark-red;  dark,  putrid  ulcers;  tonsils  and  parotids
swollen  ;  unusual  absence  of  pain,  d  Diphtheria.  6  Putrid
sore  throat,  etc. d  Typhus, d  Variola.

Scraping  and  burning,  raw  sensation  in  pharynx ;  much  viscid
mucus ;  copious  flow  of  saliva ;  ulcers  in  the  mouth.

Dry  scraping  in  the  throat  when  swallowing ;  tongue  coated
white,  especially  at  root ;  fetid  perspiration  of  body,  and  es-
pecially hands;  eyes  much  injected;  face  and  ears  hot
and  very  red ;  absence  of  thirst ;  heaviness  in  chest,  with
dull  pain  in  region  of  spleen.

Burning  and  heat  in  fauces,  as  from  heart-burn,  extending  into
the  ears  ;  worse  from  belching,  which  causes  the  pain  to  ex-
tend into  the  chest,  and  there  producing  a  weak  feeling.

I  Tonsils  and  soft  palate  swollen,  with  constant  inclination  to

swallow,  1 1  not  accompanied  by  pain. ^Diphtheria.
Stitches  in  right  tonsil.

I I  Tonsils  and  soft  palate  very  red,  but  not  painful.
Pricking  in  upper  part  of  pharynx  ;  raw  sensation.

■  Tickling  in  throat  provoking  cough;  uvula  elongated.
I  Sore  throat.

I  I  Throat  sore ;  averse  to  open  air.

Mucus  abundant  and  viscid,  can  neither  be  swallowed  nor  ex-
pectorated.

I  Mucus  rattles  in  throat, d  Typhus.

I I  (Esophagus  feels  as  if  constricted  from  above  down  to  stom  •
ach  ;  can  only  swallow  water.

■  Constrictive  feeling causing  frequent  eiforts  at  deglutition;

■  throat  sore,  feels  contracted.
I  I  Throat  feels  swollen,  full ;  tonsils  and  soft  palate  congested  ;
frequent  inclination  to  swallow,  causing  pain  in  root  of  tongue.

■  Spits  out  liquids  put  in,  mouth, d  Typhus.

■  ■Can  swallow  liquids  only; the  least  solid  food  gags.

I  Children  cannot  swallow  solid  food  ;  the  smallest  solid  sub-
'  stance  causes  gagging,  thus  they  cannot  use  anything  but

milk ;  sometimes  thin,  watery,  offensive  passages  day  and

night. (Compare  Silicea).

■  Unable  to  swallow, d  Typhus.


BAPTISIA  TINCTORIA.  310

■  Paralysis  of  organs  of  deglutition, d  Typhus.

"Appetite,  Thirst,  Desires,  Aversions. iLoss  of  appetite.

d  Typhus.
I  Averse  to  nourishment  and  stimulants. 6  Typhus.

■  Constant  desire  for  water,  with  nausea  and  want  of  appetite.

d  Typhus.
Spitting  out  of  liquids  put  into  her  mouth.

■  Great  thirst. ^Typhus.

■  A  good  deal  of  thirst. 6  Typhus.

^®  Eating  and  Drinking. All  symptoms  worse  from  beer.

After  breakfast,  dull  feeling.
^®  Hiccough,  Belching,  Nausea  and  Vomiting. Nausea,
with  inclination  to  vomit,  relieved  for  a  short  time  by  eruc-
tations. '

I  1  Feels  as  if  she  wants  to  raise  a  great  deal.

Pressure  at  stomach,  belching  of  large  quantities  of  wind.

Nausea  with  eructations,  followed  by  painful  vomiting.

Feeling  as  if  he  would  vomit,  but  no  nausea,  with  severe  shoot-
ing in  left  kidney  and  to  left  of  umbilicus.

■  Retching  and  vomiting. ^Typhoid  fever.
Feeling  as  if  it  would  be  a  relief  to  vomit.

"  Scrobiculum  and  Stomach.  At  night  frequent  pain  in  epi-
gastric region ;  ■<  from  turning  over,  which  he  had  to  do
all  the  time.

Full  feeling  in  stomach.

Heavy  gnawing  in  stomach; 3d  day.

Burning  heat  in  stomach  rising  up  towards  throat ;  2d  day.

■  Sinking,  "gone"  feeling  at  stomach,  fainting;  tongue  brown

in  morning, d  Dyspepsia  after  typhus.

Constant  burning  distress  in  epigastrium,  severe  colicky  pains
in  umbilical,  and  especially  hypogastric  region  ;  rumbling  in
bowels  ;  desire  to  vomit,  but  without  nausea.

Cramp  in  stomach  ;  evening.

Severe  pain  every  few  minutes  in  cardiac  region  of  stomach.

Sinking  feeling  in  stomach,  with  shoulder  pains.

■  Sinking  sensation  in  stomach. /?  Typhus.

Pains  in  stomach ;  feeling  there  as  of  a  hard  substance.
^*  Hypochondria. Sensation  of  weight  and  oppression  in  prge-
cordial  region,  with  a  feeling  of  unsatisfied  breathing  ;  after-
noon.

Pull  pain  at  pit  of  stomach,  with  constriction  of  diaphragm.

I  I  Constant  pain  in  stomach  and  liver ;  worse  walking ;  hot
sensation;  heavy  aching  "in  stomach  and  liver.

Pain  in  region  of  liver  on  going  up  stairs.

■  Pain  in  liver,  from  right  lateral  ligament  to  gall-bladder;  can

scarcely  walk,  it  so  augments  pain  in  gall-bladder.

■  Must  stir  about,  yet  motion  is  painful ;  pain  over  gall-bladder.
I  I  Constant  aching  distress  in  stomach  and  umbilical  region,


311  BAPTISIA  TINCTORIA.

■with  great  deal  of  pain  in  region  of  gall-bladder ;  pain  ex"
tends  to  the  spine.

Pain  in  region  of  spleen,  with  darts  of  pain  in  body,  especially
in  carpus,  metacarpus  and  phalanges ;  2d  day.
^^  Abdomen,  Loins  and  Groins. Severe  colicky  pains  in  um-
bilical and  hypochondriac  regions,  recurring  every  few  sec-
onds ;  rumbling  desire  for  stool.

I  Pain  in  abdomen,  with  diarrhoea, d  Typhus.

Griping  pain  in  bowels  while  at  stool.

I  I  Distress,  dull  pain  in  umbilical  region.

Distended  abdomen  ;  fullness  ;  flatulence,  rumbling,  feels  as  if

vomiting  would  relieve ;  mushy  stools.
Sharp,  shooting  pains  in  bowels,  with  constant  pain  in  hypo-

chondric  region.
Dull  aching,  distress  in  bowels.

I I  Right  iliac  region  sensitive, d  Typhus.

1 1  Abdominal  muscles  sore  on  pressure,  with  acute  intermitting
pain, d  Typhus.

1 1  Abdominal  tenderness,  with  flatulency  ;  10th  day.  d  Typhus.

Cutting  in  bowels,  relieved  for  a  short  time  by  passage  of  flatus,
which  causes  burning  at  anus.

Pain  in  abdomen  on  pressure,  with  dull  aching  in  lumbar  re-
gion on  going  to  bed.

Sharp  rheumatic  stitches  in  right  groin,  lasting  but  a  little
while,  but  after  a  short  interval  returning  as  before.

Severe  pain  in  left  groin ;  worse  from  walking,  better  from
rest,  but  returning  again  on  motion.

Glands  of  left  groin  swollen  ;  painful  on  walking.
^"Rectum and Stool. I Diarrhoea,  with  pain  and  soreness  in
bowels, d  Typhus.

I  Soft,  papescent  stool,  with  large  quantities  of  mucus.
Stools  of  pure  blood,  or  bloody  mucus.

II  Fetid,  exhausting  diarrhoea,  causing  excoriation.

Thin,  watery,  offensive  diarrhoea  day  and  night ;  child  can
swallow  nothing  but  milk ;  smallest  quantity  of  solid  food
gags.

■  Aphthous  diarrhoea.

I  Involuntary  diarrhoea ;  9th  to  11th  day. d  Typhus.

■  Evacuation  light-yellow  or  brown,  thin  and  watery, d  Typhus.
Stools  soft,  papescent,  with  large  quantities  of  mucus.

I  Dark-brown  mucous  and  bloody  stools,  with  typhoid  tendency  ;

brown  tongue,  etc.
Stools: I  dark,  thin,  fecal,  offensive.
I  Fetid  stools. ^Typhus.

■  Dysentery:  rigors,  pains  in  limbs  and  small  of  back ;  stools

small,  all  blood,  not  very  dark,  but  thick ;  tenesmus ;  great
prostration,  brown  tongue,  low  fever ;  in  the  Autumn,  or  in
hot  weather.


BAPTISIA  TmCTORIA.  312

I  Colicky  pains  before  stool. 6  Dysentery  in  old  people.

Stool  very  small  and  difficult  to  pass,  it  resembles  sheep  dung ;
pain  in  bowels  after  stool ;  2d  day.

Constipation ;  stool  very  small,  passed  only  by  very  great  strain-
ing and  urging ; 3d  day.

Stool  like  sheep  dung,  dry  and  crumbling  ;  pain  before  stool,
weakness  after  stool.

■  Constipation  and  diarrhoea;  stools  dark  and  blood-streaked.

d  Diphtheria.

Before  stool :  severe  colic,  more  in  hypogastrium.

During  stool :  tenesmus  ;  colic.

After  stool :  tenesmus  ;  relief  of  colic.

Constipation  ;  hemorrhoids  in  afternoon.

I  Stricture  from  piles.
^^  Urinary  Organs. Stitches  in  region  of  right  kidney.

Shooting  pains  in  region  of  left  kidney.

Urine :  scanty,  dark-red.

Burning  when  urinating.

Passage  of  light-green  urine.

I  Urine  very  highly  colored  and  scanty, d  Typhus.

I B  Urine  alkaline,  fetid, d  Typhus.

Passes  water  often  with  a  great  deal  of  fiery  pain,  water  is
clear,  scum  on  it  in  variegated  colors ;  red  sand  is  passed
with  the  urine,  and  is  seen  at  once  on  the  bottom  of  the
vessel.

Increased  secretion  of  urine  at  night.
^^  Male  Sexual  Organs. Dull  drawing  in  right  groin  and  testi-
cle, also  in  legs  and  knee-joints.

■  Orchitis  ;  cannot  sleep  because  he  feels  as  if  his  body  was  scat-

tered about  the  bed.
Pressing  pain  in  left  testicle,  as  if  it  had  been  squeezed,  lasting

but  a  short  time.
Cramps  in  testes,  as  if  they  had  been  squeezed.
^^  Female  Sexual  Organs. Menses  too  early  and  too  profuse.
24  Pregnancy. Excites  abortion.

■  Threatened  abortion. ^Typhus.

■  Lochia  acrid,  fetid  ;  great  prostration.

■  Puerperal  fever,  with  typhoid  symptoms.

■  ■Stomatitis  materna.

"  Voice  and  Larynx. Trachea  and  Bronchia. Hoarseness
or  aphonia.

■  Aphonia. ^Diphtheria.

Larynx  very  sore  to  touch,  painful  swallowing  or  speaking.
Hoarseness,  must  use  great  eifort  to  be  understood.
Swelling  of  the  epiglottis,  mornings.

Increased  secretion  from  bronchial  tubes  and  fauces,  with  ex-
pectoration of  mucus.
As  if  she  wanted  to  raise  a  great  deal.


813  BAPTISIA  TINCTORIA.

"Respiration. I  Fetid  breath. ^Typhus.

Asthmatic  oppression  of  chest,  with  frequent  yawning ;  <  from
motion ;  ^  after  rest.

Snoring  respiration.

Oppressed  breathing,  6  p.m.,  with  cough;  right  lung  sore;
sneezing.

I  Awoke  with  great  difficulty  of  breathing;  lungs  felt  tight,
compressed ;  I  I  could  not  get  a  full  breath  ;  must  open  win-
dow and  get  his  face  to  the  fresh  air ;  burning  heat  of  the
skin;  dry  tongue;  accelerated  pulse;  peculiar  feeling  of
brain.

I  On  lying  down  difficult  breathing,  but  no  constriction  of  chest,
must  rise ;  afraid  to  go  to  sleep,  fears  nightmare  and  suifo-
cation  ;  arises  from  want  of  power  in  the  lungs,  not  constric-
tion.

I  Dyspnoea,  with  a  tight  cough.

Stitches  in  sternum  on  inhalation.
"  Cough. Tickling  in  throat  provoking  cough ;  uvula  elongated.
^^  Inner  Chest  and  Lungs. Tightness  of  chest ;  constriction.

Pain  in  right  lung ;  less  pain  in  the  left,  with  soreness.

Pain  through  left  chest.

Sharp  pains  when  taking  a  long  breath.

Dull,  oppressive  pain  in  \  chest  at  origin  of  serratus  magnus ;
worse  on  inspiration  and  motion  ;  pains  in  metacarpal  bones.
="'  Heart,  Pulse  and  Circulation. Throbbing  of  heart  so  as  to
be  distinctly  heard.

Compass  and  frequency  of  heart's  pulsations  seem  increased ;
pulsations  seem  to  fill  the  chest.

Pulse  at  first  accelerated,  afterwards  slow  and  faint.

Pulse  70 ;  rises  about  2  p.m.  to  100.

I  Pulse  100—125,  hard  in  the  evening, d  Typhus.

Pulse  slow,  round,  full.

I  Pulse  110,  variable,  weak,  thready, d  Typhus.

Pulse  slow  and  weak.

I  Pulse  small  and  quickened. 6  Typhus.

I  Pulse  100  and  feeble, d  Typhus.

iPulse  120  and  thready.

I  Pulse  120,  small  and  weak, d  Cough.

I I  Pulse  accelerated  or  slower  than  in  health. ^Diphtheria.
^^  Outer  Chest. Sharp  pain  in  centre  of  sternum.

Dull  stitches  in  left  nipple.

Dull  heavy  pains  in  region  of  origin  of  pectoralis  minor,  last-
ing about  ten  minutes,  followed  by  a  bruised  feeling.
^^  Neck  and  Back. I  l  Neck  so  tired  she  cannot  hold  her  head
easy  in  any  position ;  sore  down  the  neck.
Cervical  muscles  stiif,  lame.
Pain  under  right  scapula ;  better  on  motion.
Back  and  hips  very  stiff,  ache  severely.


BAPTISIA  TINCTORIA.  314

I  iDull  lumbar  backache,  worse  walking.

Dull  sacral  pain,  compounded  of  a  feeling  as  from  pressure  and
fatigue,  from  long  stooping ;  soon  extends  around  hips  and
down  the  right  leg.

■  Feels  as  if  lying  on  a  board ;  changes  position  often,  bed  feels
so  hard;  worst  part  is  region  of  sacrum. 6  Typhus.

Rheumatic  pains  in  muscles  of  back,  followed  by  a  burning
sensation.

Pain  in  right  subscapular  muscle ;  worse  on  motion  of  arm ;
better  from  pressing  the  part  against  something  hard  ;  3d  day.

Pain  under  right  scapula  ;  better  on  motion.

I  Pain  in  the  sacrum, d  Typhus.
^^  Upper  Limbs. Severe  pain  in  left  shoulder-joint,  causing  a  dis-
agreeable, sickening  feeling  at  stomach  ;  also  darts  of  pains
in  various  parts  of  body ; worse during rest and when
thinking  of  them.

Pain  in  left  shoulder,  extending  down  the  arm.

Feels  sore  and  stiif  about  shoulders  and  chest.

Pain  in  right  elbow,  causing  a  weakness  in  arm  and  hand,
scarcely  able  to  hold  the  pencil  while  noting  this  symptom.

Rheumatic  thrusts  in  left  ulna  (lower  part),  with  pain  in  differ-
ent parts  of  body  ;  worse  at  rest.

Severe  rheumatic  stitches  in  metacarpal  bone  of  left  index  fin-
gor,  lasting  several  minutes.

Rheumatic  stitches  in  1.  radius,  lasting  but  a  little  while.

Numbness  of  left  hand  and  forearm,  with  prickling ;  worse  from
movement ;  sharp  darting  pains  through  fingers.

Hands  feel  large,  tremulous.

Rheumatic  pains  in  1.  wrist  and  stitches  in  r.  eye.

Tearing  pains  in  carpal  bones  of  r.  hand,  lasting  but  a  short
time,  followed  by  several  sharp  pains  in  phalanges  of  1.  hand.

A  sharp  dart  of  pain  in  first  phalanx  while  writing.

Pain  running  up  and  down  the  bones  of  left  forearm; 3d  day.

Tearing  pain  in  palm  of  left  hand,  and  also  darts  in  various
parts  of  the  body  ;  2d  day.

Terrible  rheumatic  pains  in  metacarpal  bones  of  left  hand,  last-
ing but  a  few  moments,  though  very  severe  ;  also  pain  in  left
knee  and  shoulder  ;  1st  day.

Tearing  pain  in  right  metacarpus  ;  2d  day.

Rheumatic  pain  in  metacarpal  bone  and  phalanges  of  left
thumb  (long,  severe  thrusts),  lasting  several  minutes,  every
thrust  causes  a  momentary  sickness  at  pit  of  stomach  ;  1st  day.

Sharp  stitches  under  the  left  thumb-nail,  lasting  but  a  few  mo-
ments, bnt  returning  in  a  short  time  as  before ;  2d  day.

Rheumatic  pain  in  phalanges  of  middle  finger  right  hand,  and
also  in  right  shoulder -joint ;  1st  day.

Pain  in  metacarpal  bone  of  right  little  finger ;  1st  day.


315  BAPTISIA  TINCTORIA.

^  Lower  Limbs. Lower  limbs  feel  weak  and  vascillating  when
walking.

Soreness  in  anterior  of  thighs  ;  worse  after  sitting  awhile.

Drawing  in  hips  and  calves.

Several  rheumatic  stitches  in  outer  ham-string.

Severe  pain  in  left  knee  (outer  side),  running  down  into  fibula.

Rheumatic  pain  in  left  knee-joint.

Dull  pain  in  right  patella  and  right  tarsal  bones.

Cramp  in  calves  whenever  he  moves  them.

Pains  in  lower  part  of  left  ulna  and  tarsus.

I  1  Left  foot  numb,  prickling.

I  I  Burning  of  top  of  right  foot,  from  toes  to  the  back  of  foot.

Rheumatic  pain  on  inner  side  of  right  os  calcis ; 1st  day.

Tearing  pains  in  os  calcis  of  right  foot,  lasting  about  half  a
minute  ;  1st  day.

Rheumatic  pains  in  phalanges  ofr.  great  toe;  1st  day.

Pain  in  first  phalanx  of  r.  great  toe,  as  if  the  hair  on  it  were
steadily  and  continually  pulled  ;  worse  at  rest,  better  on  mo-
tion ;  after  moving  a  little  while  the  toe  feels  hot,  and  then
the  pain  leaves,  but  when  at  rest  heat  leaves,  and  pains  re-
turn,
^*  Limbs  in  General.  Rheumatic  pain  in  r.  (lower  part)  ulna,
also  in  muscles  on  posterior  part  of  r.  thigh  and  metacarpal
bones  ofr.  index-finger.

Rheumatic  pain  in  right  shin-bone,  also  in  bones  of  left  wrist
and  hand ;  1st  day.

Aching  in  limbs.

Drawing  in  arms  and  legs.

Rheumatic  pains  in  left  elbow  and  knee,  and  also  right  ankle
and  heel ;  1st  day.

Rheumatic  stitches  in  right  subscapular  muscle,  with  pains  in
different  parts  of  body,  especially  in  metacarpal  bones  and
phalanges,  lasting  but  a  few  moments  ;  the  pains  in  the  hand
seem  to  be  deep  in  the  bones ;  1st  day.

Aches  from  his  finger-ends  to  his  toes.
^^  Rest' Position. Motion. Lying quiet : pain  behind  ear
better.

Rest :  pain  1.  groin  >  ;  asthma  >- ;  darts  of  pain  through  body
<<  ;  pain  in  1.  ulna  <C  ',  pain  in  great  toe  worse.

After  sitting :  soreness  in  thighs.

Lying  down  :  difficult  breathing.

Motion  :  pain  in  forehead  <1 ;  eyeballs  sore ;  asthma  ■<  ;  pain
in  1.  chest  <  ;  pain  under  r.  scapula  > ;  cramp  in  calves ;
pain  in  r.  great  toe  better.

Ascending :  limbs  weak  ;  pain  in  liver.

Descending  :  arms  and  calves  feel  sore.

On  rising :  faintness.

Turning  over :  pains  in  epigastrium  worse.


BAPTISIA  TINCTORIA.  316

Stooping  :  dizziness  ;  soreness  anterior  brain  worse.

Walking : fluctuation in  head ;  pain in stomach and  liver ;

pain  1.  groin  <  ;  lumbar  backache  <  ;  lower  limbs  weak.
"Nerves. ■  Restlessness. ^Typhus.

I  Morbid  irritability  of  the  nervous  system,  preventing  sleep.

d  Typhus.

■  Restless,  uneasy,  could  confine  himself  to  nothing  ;  wanted  to

be  moving  from  place  to  place,  evening, d  Typhus.
Dull,  heavy  feeling  in  whole  body,  with  indifference  to  every-
thing.

■  General  malaise  for  several  days, d  Typhus.

■  General  weak  feeling,  but  especially  of  lower  limbs.

[ ■Feels  weak,  tremulous,  as  if  recovering  from  sickness,  and  yet
incapable  of  vigorous  mental  or  physical  exertion.

■  Entire  system  feels  weak,  especially  lower  limbs,  knees  weak  ;

vertigo.

A  weak,  languid  feeling  in  body  (especially  the  arms,  and  ex-
tending into  hands  and  fingers),  scarcely  able  to  hold  the
pencil  while  writing,  causing  one  to  feel  as  limber  as  an  old
dish-rag ;  perfect  indifference ;  no  desire  to  do  anything.

Feel  weak  and  languid,  sore  and  bruised,  especially  the  arms
and  calves  of  the  legs  feel  sore  on  going  down  stairs.

Feel  weak  and  exhausted  after  a  little  labor,  soon  becoming
tired.

Feels  weak,  tremulous,  as  after  severe  sickness.

■  Faintness  on  rising. ^Typhus.

■  ■Great  languor;  wants  to  lie  down.

Lassitude  and  weakness  of  whole  body,  with  indifference ;  3d
day.

■  Great  prostration  and  restlessness. 6  Cough.

■  Prostration  and  trembling, d  Typhus.

■  Prostration, ^Diphtheria.

■  Disagreeable  prostration,  with  soreness  of  muscles.  ^Typhus.
Great  prostration  of  strength,  as  during  convalescence  from

some  severe  sickness, when  treated  by  strong  drugs  and
medicine ;  1st  day.
Indescribable  sick  feeling  all  over.

■  Slides  down  in  bed;  feels  as  if  sinking  away, d  Typhus.

■  Lay  in  semi-conscious  condition  when  she  appeared dying.

^Typhus.

I  I  Paralysis  of  whole  1.  side;  1.  hand  and  arm  numb,  power-
less.
^''  Sleep. B Excessive  drowsiness.

Feels  very  drowsy,  can  hardly  keep  awake ;  3d  day.

Drowsiness,  can  only  keep  awake  by  a  great  effort ;  pains  in
body  still  continue  ;  1st  day.

■  ■Drowsy,  stupid,  tired  feeling; disposition  to  half  close  eyes.
Feels  dull  and  sleepy:  with  slight  headache ;  3d  day.


317  BAPTISIA  TINCTORIA.

Feels  sleepy  and  drowsy  ;  laid  down  to  doze,  but  soon  the  lower
limbs  suddenly  start  as  if  had  been  frightened.

Feels  drowsy ;  while  sitting  on  a  chair  and  lying  with  head
on  arms,  and  arms  on  table  (dozing,  yet  conscious),  had
a  sensation  as  if  some  person  touched  him  very  gently  in
both  sides  ;  followed  by  a  want  of  power  to  sit  up,  made  sev-
eral efforts  to  do  so,  but  was  perfectly  helpless;  in  a  short
time  had  a  similar  attack  of  about  the  same  duration,  but
more  severe ;  felt  weak  for  some  time  afterwards,

1 1  Delirious  stupor;  falls  asleep  while  answering  a  question  or
while  being  talked  to.

I  Lies  semi-comatose,  looks  as  if  dying. ^Typhus.

I  Slept  well  until  about  3  a.m.,  then  restless  until  morning,
tossing  about.

I  Restless;  does  not  sleep  quietly.

■  Restless  sleep. ^Typhus.

Sleep  restless,  frequent  wakings  ;  3d  day.

I  Wants  to  get  up  and  yet  does  not  want  to. d  Typhus.

■  Sleepless,  with  wandering  of  mind. ^Typhus.

■  Delirious  disturbance  at  night,  varying  from  a  mere  uneasi-

ness and  inability  to  sleep  to  delirium  proper. 6  Typhus.

■  I  Cannot  sleep  ;  head  or  body  feels  scattered  about  the  bed ;

tosses  about  to  get  the  pieces  together, d  Typhus  and  other
diseases.

■  Wants  to  get  out  of  bed. 6  Typhus.

■  Restless,  with  frightful  dreams. ^Typhus.

Sleep  restless  and  troubled  with  dreams,  but  inability  to  re-
member what  had  been  dreamed,  and  weariness,  as  if  had
not  slept  enough  ;  2d  day.

Sleep  restless,  troubled  by  vivid  dreams,  and  also  frequent
wakings ;  2d  day.

Sleep  last  night  restless,  tossing  about,  troubled  with  continual
dreams,  they  continuing  up  to  moment  of  awaking,  yet  un-
able to  tell,  or  even  to  remember  what  had  been  dreaming  of;
3d  day.

Sleep  very  restless,  dreams  ;  heavy  gnawing  at  stomach ;  pains
in  the  hands  ;  4th  day.

1  Nightmare.

■  Sleeplessness. ^Typhus.

Worse  on  awaking :  difficult  breathing ;  parts  rested  on  feel

very  painful ;  flashes  of  heat.
2^  Time. 3  a.m.:  restless,  tossing ;  flashes  of  heat.

Morning:  tongue  brown  and  dry  ;  pain  and  injection  of  eye;

swelling  of  epiglottis  ;  chilly  sitting  by  fire.
All  day :  chilliness.
Afternoon :  pain  in  anterior  brain ;  weight  and  oppression  in

praecordial  region ;  hemorrhoids  <  ;  fever  increases.

2  P.M.:  pulse  rises  from  70  to  100.


BAPTISIA  TINCTORIA.  318

6  P.M.:  oppressed  breathing.

Evening :  cramp  in  stomach  ;  pulse  hard  ;  chilly.

Night :  delirium  ;  increased  secretion  of  urine ;  fever ;  heat,
burning  in  legs  prevents  sleep.
^'  Temperature  and  Weather.  Autumn  or  hot  weather :  dysen-
tery worse.

1 1  Great  aversion  to  open  air.  d  Spasmodic  stricture  of  oesoph-
agus.

■  Chilled  by  standing  in  cold  wind;  fever  returned,  with  rapid

prostration. 6  Typhus.
"  Chill. Fever. Sweat. ■  Shivering. 6  Typhus.

■  Shivering  preceded  by  a  sense  of  weakness, d  Typhus.
1 1  Chilly  all  day ;  whole  body  feels  sore.

I  Chilly  on  going  into  the  open  air ;  chills  over  the  back  and
lower  limbs  ;  evening.

Chilly  over  the  back  while  sitting  by  a  fire ;  forenoon.

I  Chilliness  alternated  with  heat, d  Typhus.

I  Chilliness  of  lower  limbs  and  back,  with  fever  at  night.
6  Diphtheria.

I  Chill  followed  by  fever,  with  severe  aching  in  muscular  por-
tion of  body, d  Typhus.

I  Whole  surface  hot  and  dry,  with  occasional  chills,  mostly  up
and  down  the  back.

Extremities  feel  hot,  except  the  feet,  which  are  cold.

Flashes  of  heat  from  small  of  back  in  all  directions ;  dull,
heavy  aching,  great  prostration.

On  awaking  at  3  a.m.,  flashes  of  heat,  feeling  as  if  sweat  would
break  out.

I  Gentle  flashes  of  heat  over  the  whole  body.

I  Fever  set  in  with  headache, d  Typhus.

■  General  fever  and  malaise.

D  Heat  of  the  face,  flashes  over  the  face.

■  Burning,  pungent  heat  over  whole  body,  especially  in  face.

d  Typhus.
Heat  at  night ;  burning  in  legs  preventing  sleep.

■  Heat  of  the  skin, d  Typhus.

Uncomfortable  burning  all  over  surface,  especially  face  ;  had  to
move  to  a  cool  part  of  the  bed,  and  finally  to  rise  and  open
a  window  and  wash  his  face  and  hands.

Gentle  flushes  of  heat  over  the  whole  body,  followed  by  a  slight
perspiration.

■  Frequent  sweats. 6  Typhus.

■  Causes  sweat  to  break  out  and  relieves  ;  critical  sweat  on  fore-

head and  face, d  Typhus.

■  Fetid  sweat.

Chills,  fever  and  sweat  every  other  afternoon.
Fever  cases,  with  peculiar  delirium ;  dullness  of  intellect  and
abdominal  tenderness.


319  BAPTISIA  TINCTORIA.

■  Sensation  as  if  there  was  a  second  self  outside  of  the  patient.

d  Typhus.
I  Fever,  delirium,  headache,  pain  in  back  and  limbs;  (compare
Rhus). 6  Typhus.

■  General  fever  and  malaise. ^Typhus.
I  Aspect  of  low  fever. ^Typhus.

I  Determination  of  blood  to  the  surface  and  profuse  sweating.
d  Typhus.

I  Early  stages  :  white  tongue,  red  edges  ;  or  brown,  or  yellow-
brown  down  centre;  bitter  or  flat  taste;  cannot  digest  food;
stools  frequent,  yellow ;  gurgling  and  slight  sensitiveness  of
right  iliac  region  ;  pulse  high ;  fever  tends  to  increase ;  parts
rested  on  are  sore. 6  Typhus.

I  Typhus  and  typhoid  fever,  with  a  tendency  to  putrescence.

I  Fever  originating  from  confinement  on  shipboard,  without
good  care  or  foo^.

I  iBeginning  of  typhus,  when  the  so-called  nervous  symptoms

predominate.

I I  Cerebral  forms,  especially  with  excessive  drowsiness,  deli-
rium, confusion  of  ideas,  stupefying  headache  ;  restless  sleep,
head  feels  scattered  about ;  frightful  dreams  ;  great  debility
and  nervous  prostration,  with  erethism,  etc.

1 1  Typhoid  and  cerebral  forms  of  fever :  delirium,  drowsiness,
confusion,  gives  slow  answer  or  falls  asleep  attempting  a  re-
ply ;  erethism ;  tries  to  escape  from  bed ;  sleepless  because
she  cannot  get  herself  together ;  head  feels  scattered,  and
she  tosses  about  to  get  the  pieces  together ;  sensation  of  a
second  self  outside  of  the  patient ;  indifferent ;  low  delirium,
stupor ;  sordes  on  the  teeth ;  face  dark,  besotted-looking ;
hearing  dull ;  epistaxis ;  involuntary,  scanty  stool  ;  difiicult
breathing ;  fever  increases  each  afternoon.
*^  Locality  and  Direction. Right :  pain  in  temple ;  pain  be-
hind ear ;  pain  over  ear ;  stitches  in  eye  ;  running  from  nos-
tril ;  ear  sore ;  nostril  stopped ;  pain  in  mastoid  process
pain in lung ; stitches in tonsil ;  iliac region sensitive
stitches  in  groin  ;  stitches  in  kidney ;  pain  under  scapula
pain  down  leg  ;  pain  in  elbow  ;  pain  in  eye ;  pains  in  hand
pain  in  shoulder-joint ;  pain  in  little  finger ;  pain  in  patella
burning  top  of  foot ;  pain  in  os  calcis ;  pain  in  great  toe.
Left :  pain  over  eye  ;  pain  in  eye  ;  eye  weak  ;  stitches  in  eyes  ;
pain  in  orbit ;  pain  below  ear ;  pain  in  parotid  gland;  bleed-
ing from  nostril ;  burning  side  of  face  and  head  ;  shooting  in
kidney  ;  pain  in  groin  ;  pain  in  testicle ;  pain  through  chest ;
stitches  in  nipple;  pain  in  shoulder-joint;  pain in ulna;
stitches  in  radius  ;  numbness  of  hand  and  forearm ;  pain  in
waist ;  pain  bones  of  forearm  ;  pains  in  hand;  pain  in  knee
and  shoulder ;  pain  in  thumb ;  stitches  under  thumb-nail ;
foot  numb ;  paralysis  of  whole  side.


BAPTISIA  TINCTORIA-  320

Above  downward:  pain  in  shoulder.

Below  upward  :  heat  in  stomach.
*^  Sensations. As  if  there  was  a  second  self.

As  if  scattered  about.

As  of  a  band  around  forehead.

As  if  temples  were  pressed  by  thumbs.

As  if  top  of  head  would  fly  off.

As  if  water  had  passed  through  posterior  nares.

As  of  a  hard  substance  in  stomach.

As  if  lying  on  a  board. 6  Typhus.

As  if  hair  on  first  phalanx  of  r.  great  toe  was  pulled.

Peculiar  feeling  of  brain.

Sharp  pain  :  in  temples  ;  in  bowels  ;  in  1.  groin  ;  in  chest ;  in
sternum ;  in  1.  knee.

Sharp  thrusts :  over  r.  eye ;  in  1.  ulna ;  in  1.  thumb.

Darting :  in  body ;  in  carpus,  metacarpus  and  phalanges.

Cutting :  in  bowels.

Hot  stitches  :  in  temples.

Stitches :  in  head ;  in  upper  eyelid ;  in  r.  eye ;  in  left,  like
needles ;  in  r.  tonsil ;  in  r.  groin ;  in  r.  kidney ;  in  ster-
num ;  in  1  nipple ;  in  metacarpal  bone  of  1.  index  finger ;  in
1.  radius ;  under  1.  thumbnail ;  in  outer  hamstring ;  in  r.
subscapularis  muscle.

Shooting :  in  bowels  ;  in  1.  kidney.

Pricking :  in  pharynx.

Prickling :  of  1.  side  of  face  and  head ;  in  1.  hand  and  forearm  ;
of  1.  foot.

Tearing :  in  r.  metacarpus ;  in  r.  os  calcis.

Drawing :  in  cervical  muscles ;  along  nose ;  in  r.  groin  and
testicle;  in  legs  and  knee-joints;  in  hips  and  calves;  in
arms  and  legs.

Fiery  pain  :  when  urinating.

Burning :  of  eyes ;  of  1.  side  of  face  and  head ;  of  cheeks ;  at
root  of  tongue  ;  in  throat ;  in  fauces  ;  in  stomach  ;  at  anus  ;
when  urinating ;  in  muscles  of  back  ;  dorsum  of  r.  foot ;  in
legs  ;  all  over  skin.

Soreness :  in  back  of  head ;  as  if  in  the  brain ;  of  eyeballs  ;  in
front  of  head ;  of  r.  ear  ;  from  nose  to  nares ;  of  teeth  and
gums ;  of  fauces ;  of  abdominal  muscles ;  of  larynx ;  of  r.
lung;  down  the  neck;  about  shoulders  and  chest;  in  an-
terior of  thighs.

Pressure  :  in  forehead ;  at  stomach  ;  in  1.  testicle.

Aching :  in  stomach  and  liver ;  in  bowels ;  in  lumbar  region  ;
of  back  and  hips ;  in  limbs ;  from  finger-ends  to  toes.

Bruised  ache :  in  head ;  in  occiput ;  in  pectoralis  minor.
Squeezed  pain  :  in  1.  testicle.

Rheumatic  pain  :  in  back  ;  in  1.  wrist ;  in  1.  thumb  ;  in  r  mid-
dle finger  and  shoulder-joint;  in  1.  knee;  on  inner  side  of


321  BAPTISIA  TINCTORIA.

r.  OS  calcis ;  in  r.  ulna ;  in  muscles  of  posterior  part  of  r.
thigh ;  in  metacarpal  bone  of  r.  index-finger ;  in  r.  shin-
bone  ;  in  bones  of  1.  wrist  and  hand ;  in  1.  elbow ;  in  r.  an-
kle and  heel.

Cramp :  at  root  of  nose ;  in  stomach  ;  in  testes  ;  in  calves.

Colicky  pains :  in  umbilical  and  hypogastric  region.

Griping :  in  bowels.

Scraped  feeling :  on  tongue ;  in  throat.

Gnawing :  in  stomach.

Dull  pain  :  in  anterior  lobes  of  brain  and  frontal  sinus ;  at  root
of  nose ;  in  spleen  ;  at  pit  of  stomach ;  in  umbilical  region  ;
in  1.  chest ;  in  sacrum ;  in  r.  patella  and  tarsal  bones.

Undefined  pain  :  over  1.  eye;  below  1.  ear;  in  1.  parotid;  in  r.
mastoid  process;  in  articulation  of  jaw;  in  r.  lung;  in  root
of  tongue ;  in  epigastric  region  ;  in  cardiac  region  of  stom-
ach ;  in  liver ;  in  gall-bladder  ;  in  spleen ;  in  abdomen  ;  in
r.  lung ;  through  1.  chest ;  under  r.  scapula ;  in  sacrum  ;  in '
1.  shoulder,  down  arm ;  in  r.  elbow ;  in  metacarpal  bone  of
r.  little  finger ;  in  lower  part  of  1.  ulna  and  tarsus.

Throbbing :  in  head ;  over  eyes.

Beating :  in  forehead.

Fullness  :  of  head ;  in  stomach.

Heaviness  :  of  head ;  over  eyes ;  in  chest ;  in  whole  body.

Weight :  in  prsecordial  region.

Oppression  :  in  prsecordial  region.

Tightness :  of  head.

Constricted  feeling :  in  oesophagus  ;  of  diaphragm ;  of  lungs.

Bloated  feeling :  of  eyes.

Swollen  feeling  :  of  head  ;  of  tongue.

Large  feeling :  of  head  and  hands.

Tired  feeling :  in  neck.

Weak  feeling :  general ;  in  chest.

Weakness  :  in  arms  and  hands  ;  of  lower  limbs ;  in  knees.

"Gone"  feeling:  at  stomach.

Shocks :  in  head.

Numbness  :  of  hand ;  of  face ;  of  tongue ;  of  1.  hand  and  fore-
arm ;  of  1.  foot.

Tickling :  in  throat.

Heat :  in  ears  ;  in  forehead ;  in  face ;  in  fauces  ;  in  stomach  ;
in  liver ;  of  the  skin.

Dryness  :  of  the  skin.
"  Tissues. 1 1  Prostration,  with  disposition  of  fluids  to  decompose.

Stiffness  of  all  the  joints,  as  though  strained ;  rheumatic  pains
and  soreness  all  over  the  body.

11  Discharges  and  exhalations  fetid;  breath,  stools,  urine,
sweat,  ulcers.

1 1  Ulceration  of  mucous  membranes,  especially  that  of  the
mouth ;  also  with  tendency  to  putrescence.

VOL.  II. — 21.


BAPTISIA  TINCTORIA.  322

■  Enlarged  glands.

■  Diseases  of  mucous  membranes.

■  Derangements  of  the  mucous  surfaces,  generally  with  vomit-

ing and  purging.
^^  Touch. Passive  Motion. Injuries. Touch  :  larynx  sore.
Pressure  :  abdominal  muscles  sore  ;  headache  >  ;  pain  in  mas-
toid region  >> ;  pain  region  of  supraorbital  nerve  >  ;  pain
1.  orbit  better.
Pressing  on  crown  of  head :  pain  1.  eye  worse.
*^  Skin. Burning  all  over  skin,  worse  in  face.

Livid  spots  over  body  and  limbs,  not  elevated,  of  irregular
shape,  size  of  a  pea  up  to  bean,  without  any  sensation.

■  Rose-colored  spots  on  9th  day. 6  Typhus.
Eruption  like  measles  or  urticaria.

■  Pimples  thick  on  palatine  arch, tonsils  and  uvula;  breath

fetid ;  salivation ;  prostration, d  Variola.

■  Foul,  gangrenous,  eating  syphilitic  sores.

■  Small-pox  confluent,  tardy  eruption.

■  ■Gangrenous  sores,  aphthae,  sore  nipples  (locally).

^^  Stages  of  Life,  Constitution. Lymphatic  temperament.

Children :  offensive  diarrhoea.

Old  people :  dysentery.

Girl,  set.  7,  after  being  physicked,  etc.,  for  a  cough,  with  great
prostration,  etc.

Old  woman,  set.  79,  with  oedema.
**  Relationship.  Cognates:  lArnic,  tArsen.,  Brt/on.,  Gelsem.
(especially  in  the  malaise,  nervousness,  flushed  face  or  drowsi-
ness, and  muscular  soreness  in  early  stages) ;  Hyosc,  Kali
chlor..  Laches.,  Mur.  ac,  Nitr.  ac,  (in  typhoids) ;  Nux
vom.,  Opium,  Rhus  tox.

When  Arsen.  has  been  given  in  typhus  improperly.

Silic,  like  Baptis.,  has  ability  to  swallow  only  liquids,  (like
milk),  but,  unlike  the  latter,  it  has  also  aversion  to  the  milk.
See  13.

■  Terebinth,  and  Nitr.  ac.  acted  well  after  Baptis. d  Typhus.
Hamam. speedily checked copious, repeated epistaxis.

d  Typhus.


828  BARYTA  CARBONICA.

BARYTA  CARBONICA.

Barium  Carbonate.  Ba  Co  3.


In  1824  Stapf  published  in  his  Archives,  Vol.  Ill,  No.  3,  p.  183,  the  Baryta
ocetica,  proved  by  himself  and  his  friends  Gross,  Hartmann,  Hartlaub  Sen.,
Adams  and  Riickert  Sen.  There  were  two  hundred  and  fifty-four  symp-
toms, and  some  additional  observations  and  collections  of  Hahnemann
on  Baryta  muriatica.  Very  few  cures  have  since  been  published,  notwith-
standing the  masterly  analysis  of  Stapf  in  his  preface.

In  1828,  in  the  first  edition  of  "  Chronic  Diseases,"  Vol.  II,  p.  32,  appeared
provings  of  Baryta  carbonica,  the  symptoms  numbering  one  hundred  and
eight,  which  were  united  with  the  former  of  acetica,  making  in  all  two
hundred  and  eighty-six.  In  the  second  edition,  in  1835,  with  the  addition
of  a  second  proving  of  Hartlaub  and  the  numerous  provings  made  on  a
houseful  of  girls,  by  Nenning,  and  one  proving  of  Eummel,  the  number  of
symptoms  increased  to  six  hundred  and  eighteen.  Neither  Gross  nor
Eiickert  made  a  proving  of  the  carbonica,  the  symptoms  got  in  by  mistake
of  those  who  made  the  arrangement ;  also  Dr.  Neumann's  valuable  ob-
servations., which  were  made  after  prescribing  large  doses  of  Baryta  muri-
atica for  two  schoolboys,  and  corroborated  by  repetition.  They  found  their
way  even  into  Jahr's  manuals,  and  all  the  repertories,  from  where  they
have  to  be  stricken.

As  we  have  to  deal  here  principally  with  the  cured  symptoms,  and  only
very  few  with  Baryta  acetica  have  been  mentioned,  Hahnemann's  example
is  followed,  and  both  acetica  and  carbonica  united,  the  former  marked  — .

This  united  collection  will  show  that,  great  as  the  difference  is  from  the
muriatica,  there  is  hardly  any  between  the  two  others,  and  certainly  none
in  the  symptoms  cured.


^  Mind. I  Want  of  clear  consciousness. ^  Old  age.

Feels  stupefied ;  as  if  benumbed ;  brain  seems  to  move  to  and
fro  as  if  loose,  when  moving  the  body.

I  Weak  memory.

■  Memory  deficient;  child  cannot  be  taught,  for  it  cannot  re-
member ;  is  inattentive.

Forgets  what  was  just  said,  just  done,  or  what  he  was  going  to
do  or  get.

Forgetful ;  in  the  middle  of  a  speech  the  most  familiar  words
fail  him.

— I  As  if  absent;  absent-mindedness. ^Apoplexy.

— I  Has  no  clear  perception. ^Apoplexy.


BARYTA  CARBONICA.  324

1 1  Great  mental and bodilj  weakness; childishness. ^  Old

people.
I  Idiocy.

Imagines  he  walks  on  his  knees.
Walking  in  the  street  she  imagines  men  are  laughing  at  her,

criticising  to  disadvantage ;  this  makes  her  so  fearful  that

she  dares  not  look  up  or  at  anybody,  and  she  sweats  over  the

whole  body.
Delirium,  with  frightful  figures  and  images  before  the  eyes.

■  Talkative  mania;  <  during  catamenia;  yellow  complexion ;

white-coated  tongue, with  red  edges,  little  ulcers  on  the
tongue ;  nausea  without  being  able  to  vomit ;  fine  skin  be-
coming easily  denuded, d  Young  girls.
I  Mania ;  talks  much  and  confusedly ;  wants  to  go  out  of  the
house, d  During  pregnancy.

■  Inclined  to  make  fruitless  exertions  of  memory;  tries  to  re-

collect past  events.
Loquacity.

■  Groaning  and  murmuring, d  Old  age.

■  Childish  and  thoughtless  behaviour. ^  Old  people. ^Apo-

plexy.

■  Averse  to  strangers  and  company.
Laziness,  averse  to  bodily  or  mental  labor,

■  Child  does  not  want  to  play,  but  sits  in  the  corner  doing

nothing.
Weeping  mood.

Sadness,  dejection  of  spirits;  grief  over  trifles.
Hopelessness ;  distrust.
Anxious  about  the  most  trivial  affairs.
She  is  suddenly  overwhelmed  with  an  evil  apprehension ;  she

imagines,  for  instance,  that  a  beloved  friend  has  suddenly

fallen  sick,  and  is  dying.

■  Solicitude :  about  his  future ;  about  domestic  affairs.

■  A  peculiar  dread  of  men.
Fearful,  easily  startled.

Nervous  anxiety,  restlessness,  desire  to  escape.

Irresolute,  constantly  changing  his  mind.

The  highest  degree  of  irresoluteness ;  she  proposes  a  little  jour-
ney, but  as  soon  as  she  makes  preparation,  she  changes  her
mind ;  she  wavers  between  opposite  resolutions ;  all  self-
confidence  has  disappeared ;  great  fearfulness  and  cowardice.

Loss  of  self-confidence;  desponding;  pusillanimous.

■  Whining  mood.

Sudden  ebullitions  of  anger,  but  coupled  with  cowardice.
Very  easily  frightened ;  a  little  noise  in  the  street  seems to

her  like  cries  of  fire ;  it  frightened  her  so  that  all  her  limbs

trembled.


325  BARYTA  CARBONICA.

I  Dull  pain  in  the  bumps  of  firmness  and  concentrativeness,  with
corresponding  symptoms  of  the  mind.

■  Thinking  of  one's  complaints  makes  them  worse.
Worse  in  company  ;  better  when  alone.

^  Seusorium. Oversensitiveness  of  all  the  senses.

At  night,  in  bed,  everything  rocks  within  him,  as  in  a  ship.
When  she  raises  herself  it  seems  as  if  her  head  would  be  turned
inside  out.

I  Sensation  as  if  the  brain  was  loose ;  seems  to  move  to  and  fro

on  motion  of  the  body  ;  feels  stupefied,  as  if  benumbed.
— I  He  has  not  his  full  consciousness;  is  childish  and  stupid.

d  Apoplexy.
Vertigo  :  with  nausea ;  from  stooping ;  when  lifting  the  arms

up ;  old  people.
'  luuer  Head. Headache  in evening ;  every  noise, especially

male  voices,  affect  the  brain  painfully.
iHeadache  just  above  the  eyes.

■  Pressure  on  forehead  and  over  eyes ;  after  Bismuth  failed.

I I  Pressure  in  brain  under  vertex,  towards  occiput,  on  waking,
with  stiffness  of  neck.

iPressive  sticking  in  vertex,  which  extends  through  the  whole

head,  whenever  he  stands  in  the  sun.
Pricking  headache  near  the  warm  stove.
Headache,  as  if  the  head  were  compressed  in  a  vice.
Pressive  pain,  as  if  the  skull  would  split.
Headache  oppressive,  close  above  the  eyes  and  root  of  nose.
Distending  pain  in  the  head  and  nose.
Pulsation  in  temples.
Headache  <  in  open  air.
I  Megrim.

I  Pain  in  head,  with  heat  of  skin, d  Quinsy.
The  pain  from  the  head  extends  to  nape  of  neck.
Headache,  tension  in  occiput,  toward  nape  of  neck.

I  I  Heaviness  in  occiput,  with  drowsiness  and  rheumatic  pains.
Rush  of  blood  to  the  head ;  blood  seems  as  if  it  could  not  cir-
culate.

I I  Apoplexy;  with  old  people.

IHeadache  of  aged  people,  who  are  childish;  sensorium  not

clear ;  loss  of  speech  ;  trembling  of  the  limbs,  of  drunkards.
lApoplexia  serosa.
Stitches  in  sides  of  head,  after  dinner ;  in  the  head,  in  a  warm

room  ;  pressure  in  the  vertex  walking  in  the  sun.
Headache  in  persons  who  are  mentally  and  physically  dwarfish.
*  Outer  Head. Hairy  scalp,  and  especially  temples  and  forehead,

feel  as  if  something  was  very  lightly  drawn  over  the  parts,

with  a  sensation  of  coldness  in  face.

■  Numbness  in  skin  of  forehead  to  root  of  nose.


BARYTA  CARBONICA.  326

I  I  Right  side  of  head  feels  burning  hot,  but  is  really  cold  to

touch.
I  Head  sensitive  to  cold ;  disposed  to  catch  cold  when  washing

the  head.
The  scalp  is  very  sensitive  to  touch,  especially  on  the  side  on

which  he  lies,  with  sensation  of  suggillation,  worse  from

scratching.
Crawling  over  the  scalp,  as  from  ants,  in  spots.
— Very  disagreeable  formication  and  pricking  under  the  skin

of  head  and  face.
iCrusta  lactea,  dry  scurf; 1 1  moist  crusts;  itching;  burning;

causes  the  hair  to  fall  out ;  cervical  glands  hard,  swollen.
Dry  or  humid  scurf  on  the  head.

—  BFrom  the  whole  head  a  copious  discharge,  with  swelling  of
cervical  glands  ;  girl,  set.  11. d  Tinea  capitis.

I  Dry  tinea,  after  scarlatina.
•  Eruptions  on  head.

■  Impetigo  larvalis.

■  Encysted  tumors  on  the  scalp.

Sensation  as  if  the  hair  stood  on  end,  with  chilliness.

I I  Falling  off  of  hair;  baldness,  especially  on  the  crown.
I  Baldness  with  young  people.

'  Sight  and  Eyes. Il Light  dazzles  and  hurts  the  eyes;  fiery

sparks  before  the  eyes  in  the  dark.
Better  in  the  dark  :  sensitiveness  of  head.
Optical  illusions,  generally  in  bright  colors.
Double  vision.

Cannot  bear  to  look  at  one  object  for  any  length  of  time.
Sees  everything  as  in  a  fog  when  closing  the  eyes  and  pressing

the  balls.
Weakness  of  eyes  ;  <  evening  in  candle-light ;  during  the  day

a  cloud  before  1.  eye ;  by  candle-light  a  glimmer.
Sensation  of  a  gauze  before  eyes  in  morning  after  a  meal.
I  Flying  webs  and  black  spots  before  the  eyes.
I  Dimsigh ted,  cannot  read.

■  Weakness  of  sight  with  old  age.

■  Morbus  Basedowii.

■  Cataract.

Burning  and  pressing  in  eyes,  if  he  looks  attentively  at  any-
thing.

Pressure  deep  in  eyes ;  worse  looking  fixedly,  or  upwards  and
sideways ;  better  looking  downwards.

■  Quick  succession  of  dilatation  and  contraction  of  pupils ; ■  pu-

pil irregular.

—  ■  Immovable  pupils. ^Apoplexy. ^  Old  age.

Opaque  cornea ;  inflammation  of  eyes,  with  sensation  of  dry-
ness ;  shuns  the  light.

■  Pannus.


327  BARYTA  CARBONICA.

■  Ulceration  of  cornea. ^Scrofulous  ophthalmia.
Eyes  look  sleepy  all  day.

lEyes  dull,  somewhat  reddened. ^  Old  age. ^Apoplexy.
Redness  in  white  of  eye  and  a  white  pimple  near  cornea.
Inflammation  of  eyes,  with  sensation  of  dryness.
Redness  of  the  conjunctiva,  with  swollen  lids.
Subacute  ophthalmia,  with  feeling  of  sand  in  eyes.
I  I  Scrofulous  inflammation,  with  phlyctenulse  and  ulcers  on  the
cornea; Iglands  swollen.

■  Eyeballs  and  lids  inflamed,  with  photophobia.
I  Lids  agglutinated.

Itching  in  eyes.

Sties  in  the  inner  corner  of  left  eye.

Tarsal  tumors.

■  Weight  over  the  eyes. ^Typhus.

®  Hearing  and  Ears. ■  Buzzing  and  ringing  in  the  ears.

■  Sounds  in  eUr, echoes, cracklings, reports,  reverberations.

■  Roaring  in  right  ear  like  the  sea,  at  each  inspiration.

■  Cracking  in  ear  when  sneezing,  swallowing,  or  walking  fast.

■  Diflicult  hearing.

■  Drawing  pain  in  ears  ;  a  kind  of  twinging  earache.

■  Violent  throbbing  in  1.  ear. d  Toothache.

■  Tearing,  with  boring  and  drawing  in  bones  in  front  of  right

ear.

■  Itching  in  the  ears.

■  ■Eruption  on  and  behind  the  ears.

■  Scrofulous  ear  diseases.

■  Knotty  swellings  behind  the  ears.
Small  flat  tubercles  behind  the  ears.

■  Glandular  swelling  and  eruption  behind  the  ears. ^Scrofu-

lous ophthalmia.

■  Scabs  behind  the  ears.
Eruption  on  lobes.

■  ■Parotitis  after  scarlatina.

^  Smell  and  Nose. Smell  extremely  sensitive.

■  She  smells  pine  smoke. ^  After  pneumonia.

Frequent  nosebleed,  especially  with  scrofulous,  florid  people.

I  I  Nosebleed  before  catamenia.

Tormenting  dryness  in  nose.

Sneezing  causing  concussive  pain  in  brain.

■  Fluent  coryza.

Secretion  of  thick,  yellow  mucus  from  nose.
Blood  and  mucus  are  blown  from  the  nose.

■  Coryza  <  mornings  ;  nose  and  upper  lip  swollen,  nostrils  red-

dened, sore,  crusty ;  the  secretion  of  an  unpleasant  odor ;
(like  Calcar.  and  Grraphit.).

■  ■Coryza:  nose  and  upper  lip  swollen;  children  with  large

abdomen.


BARYTA  CARBONICA.  328

Catarrh  affecting  posterior  nares,  especially  if  the  patient  be
troubled  with  frequent  epistaxis.

■  Formation  of  scabs  in  posterior  nares  and  behind  the  base  of

the  uvula.
I  I  Complaints  on  external  nose.
Inflammation  of  the  edges.

Tip  and  edges  of  nose  are  painful ;  pimples  on  alas  nasi.
I  Scurfs  under  the  nose.
®  Face. I  Tension  as  from  a  cobweb  over  the  face,  temples  and  scalp.
Sense  of  tension  of  the  whole  face,  as  if  white  of  egg  had  dried

on  it,  with  loathing  and  diarrhoea.
— Cadaverous  pallor.

— Pale  face ;  drawn  features  ;  eyebrows  rather  drooping.^
I  I  Pale,  puffy  face.

Emaciation,  with  bloated  face  ;  swelled  abdomen.
Sensation  as  if  the  face  were  swollen.
I  I  Left  cheek  swollen  also  behind  the  ear,  with  pain  in  temple.

d  Toothache.
I  Redness  of  face. ^Quinsy.
Dark  redness  of  the  face,  with  congestion.

6  Old  age.
Face  red  in  the  evening.
Face  very  red  ;  lips  purple.

■  Inflammatory  prosopalgia.

■  Rough,  dry  place  on  right  cheek..

■  Herpes  faciei.

■  Eruptions  on  the  face.

®  Lower  Part  of  Face. ■After  eating,  so  tired,  she  cannot  raise
the  hands  ;  too  weak  to  masticate.

■  Pain  in  the  articulation  when  closing  the  jaw. 6  Sore  throat.

■  Jaw  could  not  be  depressed  sufiiciently  to  examine  the  throat.

d  Quinsy.
— ■Mouth  drawn  to  one  side. ^Apoplexy.
Tension  in  lower  jaw  extends  as  far  as  the  os  hyoides.
Lips  dark-red.

I  I  Swelling  of  the  upper  lip,  with  burning  pain  ;  coryza.
Lips  and  gums  dry,  not  relieved  by  drinking.

■  ■Painful  swelling  of  submaxillary  glands,  with  induration.

d  After  scarlatina.
^"  Teeth  and  Gums. Involuntary  chattering  of  teeth.

Drawing,  jerking,  throbbing  toothache;  right  teeth  feel  tense.

■  Single  jerks  in  teeth.

Grumbling  in  a  decayed  tooth  during  the  day.

■  Toothache:  worse  thinking  about  it;  disappearing  when  the

mind  is  diverted.
I  I  Burning  stitches  in  a  hollow  tooth  when  touched  by  warm
food  ;  left  side.


329  BARYTA  CARBONICA.

I  Burning  stitches  in  carious  teeth  if  touched  by  something

warm.
I  I  Toothache  in  decayed  teeth  before  the  menses.

■  Toothache,  with  great  disposition  to  take  cold.

I  Pain  in  carious  teeth  always  after  taking  cold,  with  a  pale
swelling  of  gums,  swollen  cheek,  pain  extending  to  nose,  eyes,
and  temple  ;  violent  throbbing  in  ears  ;  worse  at  night.

Gums  swollen  around  a  hollow  tooth.

Grums  bleed,  are  swollen,  pale-red,  with  a  dark-red  border.

I  Gums  hurt  when  touched.

I  Fistula  den  talis  ;  abscesses  at  the  roots.

^^  Taste, Speech, Tongue. Taste: delicate; bitter; detesta-
ble ;  styptic.
Utterance  imperfect.

I I  Paralysis  of  tongue. ^  Old  people.

■  Speechless;  tongue  paralyzed. ^Apoplexy.

I  Tongue  paralyzed,  cannot  talk,  but  seems  to  be  conscious.

d  Apoplexy.
I  Dryness  of  the  tongue  early  in  the  morning,  with  sensation

of  swelling  of  the  throat.
— Cold  tongue,  somewhat  black.
I  I  Tongue  coated  as  if  fuzzy.

■  Hardness  on  middle  of  tongue,  burning  when  touched  ;  burn-

ing sense  of  excoriation  at  the  tip ;  fissure  on  left  border,

feeling  excoriated.
Acuminated  vesicles  on  middle  of  tongue.
Tongue  cracked,  feels  very  sore.

■  Vesicles  on  the  middle,  tip,  or  under  the  tongue.
Burning  blisters  on  tip  of  tongue  of  long  duration.
Pain  on  side  of  tongue,  as  from  blisters.

^^  Inner  Mouth. The  buccal  cavity  feels  numb.

■  I  Dryness  of  mouth  early  after  rising.

■  Hawking  mucus  ;  water  runs  from  mouth  all  day  ;  sleeps  but

an  hour,  then  lies  awake  until  an hour  before  morning.
d  Hypochondriasis.

■  Much  troubled  with  tough  phlegm ;  the  mouth  becomes  dry

with  a  kind  of  thirst.
I  1  Saliva  runs  out  of  mouth  while  asleep,  at  daybreak.

■  Profuse  salivation, d  Quinsy.

■  ■Salivation;  inability  to  swallow ;  suffocation;  throat  suppu-

rating ;  fever, d  Angina  tonsillaris.
Intolerable  stench  from  the  mouth,  unnoticed  by  himself.

■  Whole  mouth  filled  with  vesicles,  especially  inside  of  cheeks.
^^  Palate  and  Throat. ■  Scabs  behind  uvula  and  posterior  nares.

■  Sensation  in  pharynx  as  if  a  fine  leaf  lay  before  the  posterior

nares  ;  morning,  after  waking.

■  Morning:  viscid  phlegm  in  fauces. ^Tonsillitis.


BARYTA  CARBONICA.  330

1 1  Inflammation  of  cellular  membranes  of  fauces  and  tonsils,
with  fever ;  difficult  swallowing  and  speaking, d  Quinsy.

I  Throat  is  pale  instead  of  having  the  bright  redness  of  Bellad.;

submaxillary  parotid  glands  are  swollen  and  tender ;  breath
is putrid ; child scrofulous and dwarfish. 6  Scarlatina.
d  Diphtheritis.
Stitches  in  right  tonsil.

I I  Inflamed  and  enlarged  tonsils.

■  Tonsils  inflamed,  with  small-pox  or  scarlatina,  especially  if

Mercur.  and  Bellad.  prove  insufficient.
1 1  Acute  tonsillitis.

■  Suppurating  tonsils.

■  Sore  throat  and  swollen  tonsils  with  ptyalism ;  gave  speedy

relief  when  the  symptoms  went  from  right  to  left.

■  Angina  tonsillaris.

■  Swelling  of  parotids,  tonsils  and  submaxillary  glands,  with

much  saliva, d  Disease  in  throat, d  Skin  diseases.

■  ■Liability  to  tonsillitis:  after  every  slight  cold,  or  suppressed

foot-sweat.

■  ■Disposition  to  acute  tonsillitis,  with  suppuration.

■  Chronic  angina,  with  great  disposition  to  return.

■  ■  Chronic  induration  of  tonsils  ;  sensation  as  of  a  plug  in  the

throat ;  worse  after  swallowing  solids.

■  ■  Tonsils  tend  to  suppurate,  especially  the  right ;  palate  swol-

len ;  dark-brown  urine  ;  sleeplessness.

■  Tonsils  both  hypertrophic  and  indurated,  livid,  and  full  of  vari-

cose veins.

■  Angina  after  taking  cold,  even  phlegmonous.
Worse  when  swallowing  food  or  saliva.

■  On  swallowing,  sensation  as  if  the  food  had  to  force  itself  over

a  sore  spot.

■  Sensation  in  oesophagus  as  if  a  morsel  of  food  had  lodged  there.

■  ■Smarting  in  throat  when  swallowing; worse  from empty

swallowing ;  throat  sore  to  touch.
Stinging  when  swallowing  saliva  and  during  empty  deglutition.

■  Pressing  stinging  pain  on  swallowing, d  Skin  disease.
Attacks  of  choking  in  throat  after  dinner,  when sitting  and

writing,  with  a  sensation  as  if  the  thyroid  was  pressed  in ;
impeding  breathing.

■  Unable  to  swallow;  liquids  taken  in  the  mouth  were  ejected

through  the  nostrils, d  Quinsy.

■  ■Inability  to  swallow  anything  but  liquids, d  Spasmodic  stric-

ture of  oesophagus.

■  Constant  difficulty  in  swallowing;  worse  after  much  talking.

d  Tonsillitis.

■  QEsophageal  spasm,  in  old  people;  can  only  swallow  liquids.

"  Appetite,  Thirst. Desires,  Aversions. (Hungry  but  can-


331  BARYTA  CARBONICA.

not  eat ;  or,  feels  as  though  she  needed  food  but  did  not

want  it.
Grenerally  loss  of  appetite.
Aversion  to  :  fruit,  especially  plums  ;  sweets.
I  Sudden  disgust  for  food  while  at  meals.
I  Constant  thirst, d  Quinsy.

Thirst,  with  dryness  of  the  mouth,  not  relieved  by  drink.
Thirst,  particularly  during  chill.
^^  Eating  and  Drinking. Is  hungry  and  cannot  eat,  is  sleepy

and  cannot  sleep.
Too  weak  to  chew,  too  lazy  to  eat.
1  I  After  eating  so  tired  that  she  cannot  raise  the  hands ;  she  is

too  weak  to  masticate.
While  eating  :  sudden  nausea ; I  I  painful  writhing  while  food

descends,  as  if  it  were  passing  sore  places.
Sweat  increased  while  eating.

■  Weakness  in  stomach  disappears.

■  Pressure  like  a  stone  in  stomach  after  eating  bread ;  repletion

after  a  little  food.
Predominantly  worse  after  meals,  particularly  after  a  satisfying
meal.

■  ■Stomach  aches  also  after  eating.

Weakness  of  digestion  after  eating,  pressing  in  stomach;  and
pain  in  the  hard,  swollen  abdomen.

■  After  meals:  indolence;  heat  and  uneasiness; faintishness ;

■  belching;  urging  to  stool;  pressure  on  the  bladder ;  anx-
iety in  lumbar  region  ; I  I  pain  in  the  hard,  swollen  abdomen.

■  Cough  from  eating  warm  food.
Better  from  cold  diet.

^^  Hiccough,  Belching,  Nausea  and  Vomiting. — Nausea.
Sudden  nausea  while  at  meals.

■  Long  lasting  nausea.

Nausea,  palpitation  and  anxiety  in  early  morning.
Morning  sickness  and  vomiting.
Eructations  after  meals.

Eructations :  las  if  air  were  forcing  its  way  through  the  sto-
mach, causing  a  feeling  of  soreness.

■  Sour  eructations.

Eructations  ;  a  lump  moving  up  and  down.

■  ■Waterbrash.

■  Water  suddenly  runs  together  in  the  mouth.
— Retching.

— Nausea  followed  by  sudden  and  very  copious  vomiting  of  bile
and  a  brownish  substance  (consisting  no  doubt  of  the  choco-
late taken  that  morning),  after  ten  hours.

— Vomiting  almost  regularly  every  hour  for  24  hours.

— Severe  attacks  of  very  copious  vomiting.

Vomiting  fluid,  water  and  chalk,  followed  by  prostration.


BARYTA  CARBONICA.  332

"  Scrobiculum  and  Stomach. ■  Sensitiveness  of  pit  of  stomach  ;
on  stepping  hard,  he  feels  every  step  painfully  in  it.
I  Stomach  aches  when  touching  the  epigastrium.

■  Sensation  of  soreness  in  the  stomach  ;  even  when  at  rest.
I  Stomach  painful  when  fasting  and  after  eating.

■  Pressing  in  stomach,  also  after  eating.

■  Pressure  as  from  a  stone;  better  from  eructations.

■  Cramp  in  stomach,  spreading  up  into  the  throat,  followed  by

eructations  which  relieve, d  Cardialgia.
Sensation  of  soreness  of  the  stomach ;  while  eating,  it  feels  as
if  the  food  had  to  force  itself  through.

■  Gastralgia.

Pain  in  stomach  as  if  it  were  too  full  and  tense.
Sense  of  tension  and  heaviness  in  pit  of  stomach  ;  as  from  flat-
ulence and  palpitation.

■  Marked  hardness  in  region  of  stomach.

It  seems  as  if  the  stomach  were  hanging  relaxed.
Dyspepsia  with  soreness  in  stomach.

■  Softening  of  stomach  in  scrofulosis.

^'  Hypochondria. Aching  at  a  small  spot  in  right  hypochondrium,
when  drawing  a  deep  breath,  or  from  pressure.

— Sensation  as  of  a  ball  in  the  liver.

— Swollen  feeling  and  coldness  in  region  of  liver.
^"  Abdomen. Feeling  of  soreness  around  the  belly,  commencing
in  the  back.

Pains  in  abdomen,  about  and  below  navel,  which  extends  down-
wards into  the  thigh,  with  violent  pain  on  1.  side,  extending
forward  from  point  of  hip  ;  pain  in  region  of  r.  groin ;
after  three  days.

■  On  turning  in  bed,  it  seems  as  if  intestines  fell  from  one  side

to  the  other.
— Rumbling  in  bowels  ;  borborygmus.
Throbbing  here  and  there  in  abdomen.

■  ■Abdomen  hard,  tense, d  Scrofulous  children.

■  Mesenteric  glands  could  be  felt  swollen  and  hard,  with  a  big

belly  ;  abdominal  muscles  sore  to  touch.

■  Tabes  mesenterica.

I  I  Distension  and  fullness  above  the  pubes,  as  if  the  parts  would
burst,  when  lying  on  the  back.

■  Abdomen  sensitive  to  touch.
Pain  in  the  hard,  swollen  abdomen.

Weakness  of  digestion  after  eating ;  pressing  in  stomach.
Tension  and  sensitiveness  of  abdominal  walls.
^°  Rectum  and  Stool. Ineifectual  urging  to  stool.

Sudden  irresistible  urging  to  stool,  with  painful  soreness  in

lumbar  region,  followed  by  frequent  diarrhoeic  stools.
Frequent  small  stools,  with  feeling  of  great  relief
— Diarrhoea.


333  BARYTA  CARBONICA.

Diarrhoea,  with  pains  in  small  of  back.
Diarrhoea  at  night,  with  hsemorrhoidal  pains.
Diarrhoea  towards  morning,  preceded  by  pain in abdomen ;
later  in  the  day  suddenly  yellow  stool,  with  mucus  and  blood.
— Involuntary  stools.

— Semi-liquid  stool  after  two  hours,  followed  by  constipation.
I  Stool  hard  and  insufficient.

■  Difficult,  knotty  stool.

I  Scanty,  hard  or  lumpy  stool,  expelled  with  difficulty.

I  Constipation, d  Cardialgia. d  Old  age.

Frequent  passage  of  blood,  with  distended  abdomen.

I  Light-colored  stools,  sometimes  mixed  with  blood.

Before  stool :  colic.

During  stool :  burning  in  anus  and  rectum.

After  stool :  burning  in  anus ;  moisture  exuding  from  piles ;

eructations.
Passage  of  round  worms.
Small  pin-worms  pass  with  the  stool ;  in  an  adult.

■  Crawling  in  rectum. ^  Ascarides.

I  Inflammation  of  subcutaneous  cellular  tissue  on  1.  side  of  anus,
extending  2,  3  inches  over  1.  buttock  and  forward  along  per-
ineum, having  a  softening,  surrounded  by  a  hard,  burning,
tender  and  painful  area.

■  Burning  and  soreness  around  the  anus,  as  if  excoriated.
Anus  sore  and  humid.

Haemorrhoids  protrude,  not  only  with  the  stools,  but  also  with

urination.
llHaemorrhoidal  affections.
^'  Urinary  Organs. I  Irritation  of  the  bladder,  greatest  at  night

when  in  bed.
I  Great  desire  to  urinate ;  cannot  retain  the  urine.
I  Constant  urging,  and  frequent  emissions  of  urine  ;  every  other

day.
I  Urging  to  make  water,  and  frequent  urination.

■  Frequent  micturition. ^  Old  age.
Urine  frequent  and  copious.

— ■  Makes  water  frequently;  no  stool. ^Apoplexy.
— When  appetite  improved  and  thirst  lessened,  the  urinary  se-
cretions became  very  considerable.
Passes  much  urine  at  night.
— Clear  and  abundant  urine.
Urine  clear  on  passing  soon  becomes  cloudy.

■  Dark-brown  urine. ^Tonsillitis.
On  urinating,  burning  in  urethra.
Before  urination  :  urgent  desire  to  urinate.
During  urination  :  burning  in  urethra.

After  urination  :  renewed  straining,  with  dribbling  of  urine.

■  Urine  scanty.


BARYTA  CARBONICA.  334

— Almost  complete  incontinence  of  urine  and  feces.
"^"^  Male  Sexual  Organs. ■  l  Diminished  sexual  desire  and  ability.
1 1  Impotence.

1 1  Relaxed  penis  and  premature  emission.
Emission  in  an  old  man,  followed  by  feeling  of  dryness  in  the
■whole  body.

■  Excessive  nightly  emissions.

Emission  in  a  man,  set.  30,  who  never  had  the  like.
InsuflScient  discharge  of  semen.

■  Erections  only  in  the  morning  before  rising.

■  Erections  while  riding. ^Impotence.

■  i  Hypertrophied  prostate.

■  Increased  purulent  gleet.

■  Gleet,  yellowish  before  urination;  pain  in  fossa  navicularis

when  pressing  it  and  when  beginning  to  urinate.

■  Small  retracted  testicles,  with  pulsation  between  the  shoul-

ders, d  Impotence.

■  Chronic  induration  of  testicles.
Jerking  in  the  glans.

Numbness  of  the  genitals  for  several  minutes.

Soreness  and  moist  excoriation  between  the  scrotum  and  thighs.

Sweat  about  the  scrotum.
"^^  Female  Sexual  Organs. Catamenia  scanty  and  of  long  dura-
tion.

Menses  scanty,  last  only  one  day.

Before  menses :  toothache ;  swelling  of  cheeks  and  gums  ;  pain
in  abdomen  and  back ;  leucorrhoea ;  swelling  of  glands ;
heaviness  of  feet.

■  Toothache;  swelling  of  the  limbs.

During  menses :  toothache ;  weight  over  the  pubes ;  bruised
pain  in  small  of  back ;  colic  in  every  position.

■  Amenorrhoea  ;  menostasia  and  chlorosis,  especially  of  scrofu-

lous girls.

Tearing  in  the  vulva,  or  in  the  affected  parts,  so  violent  at  in-
tervals that  she  would  like  to  scream.

Bloody,  mucous  leucorrhoea,  with  anxious  palpitation  of  heart,
pain  in  back ;  uneasiness  and  weakness  even  unto  fainting.

■  Leucorrhoea  immediately  before  menses.

"  Voice  and  Larynx. Trachea  and  Bronchia. ■■Feeling

in  larynx  as  if  inspiring  smoke  or  pitch.

■  Hoarseness  and  loss  of  voice  from  tough  mucus  in  larynx  and

trachea.
■Voice  imperfect,  aphonia ;  from  tough  mucus  in  fauces  and
larynx, d  Old  people.

■  Voice  husky,  rough, d  Tonsillitis.
— Voice  extinct.

■  Hoarseness,  with  night-cough.  ,

■  Catarrh  of  trachea.


335  BARYTA  CARBONICA.

Spasmodic  cough  (like  whooping-cough)  from  roughness  and

tickling  in  throat  and  pit  of  stomach.
^®  Respiration. I Putrid  breath. 6  Skin  disease.

Short  breath  from  fullness  in  chest,  when  ascending  a  height ;

stitches  in  chest  on  inspiring.
— Respiration  gradually  more  and  more  embarrassed.
— Respiration  imperfect  and  very  frequent;  respiratory  sound

almost  inaudible.
I  Sensation  as  if  lungs  were  full  of  smoke, d  After  pneumonia.
Oppression :  with  anguish  ;  in  evening,  must  loosen  her  dress  ;

with  backache ;  with  dry  cough.
— Inability  to  cough,  to  expectorate,  to  articulate  words  of  more

than  two  syllables  (owing  to  failure  in  expiration)  or  to  lift

the  head  from  the  pillow.
— Asthma.
I  Asthma  senile  (after  Ant.  tart.).

I  Suffocative  breathing,  especially  on  lying  down. 6  Chronic

enlargement  of  tonsils  ;  with  a  boy,  set.  6.

I I  Suffocative  catarrh  of  old  people,  with  impending  paralysis
of  lungs.

^^  Cough.  Spasmodic  cough,  excited  by  tickling  and  roughness  in
throat  and  epigastrium ;  worse :  evening  until  midnight ;
lying  on  left  side ;  active  motion,  ascending,  stooping ;  in
cold  air ;  II  from  thinking  of  it ;  eating ;  after  getting  the
feet  cold.

Cough  in  presence  of  strangers.

1 1  Night-cough,  with  asthmatic  breathing.

I  Cough  excited  by  irritation,  felt  in  the  cardiac  region.

Cough,  particularly  in  evening,  till  midnight.

Nightly  cough,  chest  full  of  phlegm.

Cough  and  coryza.

Cough,  with  purulent  expectoration.

Expectoration  predominant,  particularly  in  evening.

I  Chronic  cough  in  scrofulous  children,  with  swollen  glands  and

1 1  enlarged  tonsils  ;  worse  after  slight  cold.

I I  Mucous  catarrh.

I  Cough  and  shortness  of  breath,  with  old,  phlegmatic  persons;
feels  a  tightness  in  throat  and  on  chest,  the  phlegm  loose  and
tight  by  turns ;  >  in  morning,  when  rising,  but  as  soon  as
he  comes  into  the  room  down  stairs,  he  gets  a  severe  attack,
and  has  to  go  into  the  open  air ;  >  after  breakfast ;  cough
and  rattling  <  when  lying,  except  when  lying  on  belly,
which  relieves ;  has  to  sit  up  frequently  in  the  night ;  <  in
damp  weather,  and  after  drinking  cold  water.
^'  Inner  Chest  and  Lungs.  ■  Sensation  as  if  lungs  were  full  of
smoke ;  she  smells  pine  smoke, d  After  pneumonia.

Sensation  of  soreness  in  chest,  when  coughing.

Vomiting  from  coughing.


BARYTA  CARBONICA.  336

I  Chest  full  of  phlegm.

I  Heaviness  in  chest;  <  when  lying, d  Cardialgia.

Sensation,  as  if  something  had  dropped  down  in  chest.

■  Pneumonia,  with  most  violent  pains  in  chest,  and  flushed

cheeks ;  in  two  cases,  right  side,  in  one,  left.
Suffocative  catarrh  and  paralysis  of  lungs  in  old  people.
^^ Heart,  Pulse  and  Circulation, ii Palpitation;  feels  the

heart  beat.
— Dull,  deep  sounds  of  the  heart.
Violent,  long  lasting  palpitation.
1  Palpitation  when  lying  on  left  side,  with  soreness  in  region  of

heart ;  great  anxiety ;  renewed  by  thinking  about  it.
I  Orgasm  of  blood,  with  anxiety ;  congestion  to  the  face,  with

dark  redness.

■  Palpitation  felt  in  head,  with  throbbing  pain  in  temples,  when

getting  up  and  walking.

■  Palpitation  of  chlorotic  or  hysteric  girls.
Pulse  firm  and  hard.

■  Pulsegenerally  accelerated,  but  weak.  ^Apoplexy.  ^  Old  age.
— Pulse  ]  25-130,  very  small  and  frequent.

■  Full,  accelerated  pulse,  with  heat  of  skin, d  Quinsy.

— Pulse  remained  pretty  regular,  but  notably  slackened,  56  in-
stead of  70  ;  in  similar  cases  has  been  observed  to  fall  to  25.

— Marked,  but  very  short-lasting,  irregularity  of  pulse,  on  one
occasion.
^^  Outer  Chest. ■  Chest  sensitive  to  pressure, d  Cardialgia.

Burning  stinging  and  itching  in  moist,  pustular  eruption  on
chest.

■  Nodes  in  the  breast,  painful  to  pressure,  sometimes  stitches;

with  a  fat  old  man.
— Eruption  of  acne  pimples  on  chest,  which  disappear  in  a
few  days.
^^  Neck  and  Back. ■Stinging  pains  in  neck.

— Fine  stitches  in  neck,  followed  by  suppurating  pimples.

■  Tension  in  neck  and  scapulae ;  pain  in  loins  in  cold  air.

■  Cramp  in  neck  and  left  side  of  throat.

■  Stiffness  in  nape  of  neck.

Swelling  on  nape  of  neck,  which,  little  by  little,  spreads  over
the  whole  head ;  with  redness  and  pain  of  the  skin,  as  from
ulceration  ;  accompanied  by  considerable  swelling  of  glands
in  this  region.

■  Swelling  of  cellular  tissue of  neck;  glands swollen;  much

pain  in  ears  and  head, d  Scarlatina.

■  ■  Swelling  of  glands  in  nape  of  neck  and  occiput.

I  Chronic  inflammation  of  cervical  glands,  right  side ;  had  been
very  obstinate  and  resisted  other  treatment.

■  Swelling  and  induration  of  glands,  especially  cervical,  even

after  suppuration  had  commenced.


337  BARYTA  CARBONICA.

llFatty  tumors,  especially  about  the  neck.

I  Sarcoma  in  neck,  with  burning.

Throbbing  in  back,  when  at  rest  and  from  emotions.

Burning  in  the  back.

I  Rheumatic  irritation  of  spine.

In  the  morning  on  rising,  pain  between  the  shoulders,  so  that
he  is  quite  stiff  therefrom  and  cannot  turn ;  afterwards  they
extend  into  nape  of  neck  and  1.  shoulder,  where  they  are
very  violent,  thence  into  vertex  and  across  pectoral  muscles
into  1.  nipple.

Beating  and  pulsation  in  back.

Want  of  mobility  in  dorsal  spine ;  when  sitting  long  it  feels  as
if  it  would  fall  in.

■  Stiffness  in  back,  can  hardly  rise  from  a  chair. ^Chronic

gout.
— Spine  disease  with  tinea  capitis.

■  Painful  soreness  in  the  lumbar  region,  followed  by  frequent

diarrhoeic  stools.

■  Pain  in  lumbar  region  of  spine,  followed  by  apoplexy  and

paralysis.

Pain  in  lower  vertebrge,  with  pain  in  chest.

I  ■  Pain  in  small  of  back, d  Diarrhoea.

Painful  drawing  in  small  of  back,  as  if  a  heavy  body  were  mov-
ing downwards.

Tensive  pain  in  small  of  back  ;  <  in  evening ;  he  can  neither
rise  nor  bend  backwards.

Stiffness  in  small  of  back,  in  evening,  especially  while  sitting,
which  allows  neither  to  rise  nor  to  bend  backwards.

■  Itching  on  small  of  back  and  between  the  nates  ;  must  scratch

it  raw.
^^  Upper  Limbs. ■  A  large  glandular  swelling  in  r.  axilla;  lately
very  tender,  painful,  hard  and  red.

■  Encysted  tumor  in  arm-pit.

■  ■Pains  in  arms,  with  hard,  swollen  axillary  glands.

■  Pain  in  deltoid  muscle  when  raising  the  arm.

■  I  When  lying  on  the  arm  it  goes  to  sleep.

■  Right  arm  cannot  be  moved. ^Apoplexy.

— Heaviness  of  left  arm,  it  is  moved  with  difficulty  ;  the  shoul-
der alone  seems  to  act ;  the  hand  and  forearm  are  paralyzed ;
after  seven  hours.

Tension  in  small  places  of  the  arms.

■  Blood-boils  on  upper  arm.
Veins  and  hands  distended.

■  Hot  hands;  frequently  dips  them  into  cold  water.
Skin  of  hands  dry  and  rough.

■  Cold  hands  with  blue  spots. ^  Old  age.

■  Fingers  numb,  as  if  asleep.

Skin  of  tips  of  fingers  chapped,  peels  off.
VOL.  II. — 22.


BARYTA  CARBONICA.  338

I  Panaritium,  with  nightly  throbbing  and  ulceration,  from  a
splinter.

I  Warts.

^^  Lower  Limbs. iFrom  1.  foot,  internal  stitches  through  whole
thigh  into  testes,  hinders  walking.
Said  she  had  pains  in  thigh  during  sleep.

■  Tearing  from  above  downwards  in  right  buttock,  periodically

increasing  and  decreasing.

■  Dragging  the  thighs,  particularly  when  going  up  stairs,  on  ac-

count of  paralyzed  feeling  in  middle  of  thigh.
Excessive  bruised  feeling  in  thighs.
Severe  itching  on  thighs.
Sudden  attacks  of  momentary  pain  of  r.  knee,  as  if  the  parts

were  being  ripped  with  a  knife,  making  the  leg  feel  lame.

I I  Sudden  sharp  pain  running  through  the  knee,  force  them  to
sit  down,  laming  the  knee  ;  after  hard  work  ;  most  with  girls.

I  In  kneeling  down,  violent  shooting  in  knee,  and  soon  after  a
peculiar  tension  in  r.  patella,  could  not  walk  well.

I  Knees  totter. ^Apoplexy.

Burning  soreness  in  bend  of  knees.

Pain  in  knees  and  legs.

Cramp  in  calves.

Coldness  of  right  foot  and  tension  in  calf  during  a  walk  in  open
air.

Drawing  and  tearing  pain  in  legs.

■  Drawing  pain  down  the  entire  left  leg.

Pains  in  legs  at  night,  as  after  excessive  walking  or  dancing.
Tension  as  if  tendons  were  too  short ;  >>  lying  down  ; <  when
standing.

■  Tremor  offset  while  standing,  must  hold  on  to  something  to

steady  himself, d  Apoplexy. 6  Sclerotis.
— Giving  way  of  r.  leg,  then  of  left;  after  eight  hours.

■  Paralysis  of  flexors  of  feet,  with  tension  in  tendons.

■  Lameness  of  spavined  horses.

■  Ulcer  on  feet.

Pimples  on  feet,  which  spread.

Soles  feel  bruised,  at  night,  keeping  one  awake ;  better  after

rising  and  walking.
Tearing  and  stitching  in  left  big  toe,  with  vexation.

■  Painful  lymphatic  swelling  on  ball  of  big  toe.
Corns,  burning  and  stinging.

■  ■  Fetid  foot-sweat.

■  ■  Foot  sweat,  toes  and  soles  get  sore ;  odor  offensive ;  (after

Silie.).

■  ■Checked  foot-sweat.

■  After  suppression  of  a  fetid  foot-sweat  by  a  cold  foot-bath,  an-

gina tonsillaris ;  (after  Bellad.  and  Mercur.  had  no  effect).
^*  Limbs  in  General. Stitches  in  joints,  they  feel  relaxed.


339  BARYTA  CARBONICA.

Tearing  in  limbs,  with  chilliness.
^'  Rest. Position. Motion. Rest :  throbbing  in  back.
Sitting  :  pain  in  small  of  back.
Standing :  cough  <^  ;  tension,  as  if  tendons  were  too  short  <i ;

tremor  of  feet.
Lying :  heaviness  in  chest  <  ;  tension,  as  if  tendons  were  too

short  better.
Lying  on  left  side :  cough  <^  ;  palpitation  worse.
Lying  on  belly :  cough  better.
Stooping :  cough  <  ;  vertigo.
Raising  arm  :  pain  in  deltoid.
Moving  body :  brain  seems  to  move  to  and  fro.
Active  motion  :  cough  worse.
Walking :  palpitation  felt  in  head.
Ascending :  short  breath.
^®  Nerves. Nervousness ;  excessive  irritation  of  all  nerves.
iTwitches  and  jerks  of  body  during  the  day.
I  At  8  A.M.  sudden  attack,  as  if  the  circulation  had  stopped,

and  tingling  in  the  whole  body,  extending  to  the  tongue  and

finger-tips,  with  anxiety ;  lasted  fifteen  minutes,  followed  by

prostration.
— Indescribable  malaise ;  after  3,  4  hours.
I  I  Weary,  with  sleepy  eyes  during  the  whole  day.

■  Heaviness  of  the  whole  body.

I  The  upper  half  of  body  feels  numb  and  stifi".

•  General  weakness  of  nerves  and  body.

— Increased  weakness,  could  scarcely  put  out  his  left  arm  to
ring  the  bell.

I  Loss  of  strength.

— Alarming  debility ;  after  2  hours.

— General  debility;  after  3  or  4  hours.

— After  the  first  vomiting,  the  muscular  relaxation  affected  the
posterior  muscles  of  trunk  ;  he  was  too  prostrated  to  remain
in  his  arm-chair,  and  had  to  go  to  bed.

— The  muscular  relaxation  lasted  24  hours,  then  gradually  but
quite  rapidly  diminished,  following  the  same  course  as  when
it  came  on  ;  in  less  than  20  hours  after  the  first  slight  move-
ments of  feet  and  hands,  he  was  able  to  hold  himself  in  a
chair  and  sit  up  in  bed,  and  could  soon  take  a  few  steps  on
the  floor  of  his  room.

■  Constantly  weak  and  weary,  wishes  to  lean  on  something,  to

sit  or  lie  down,  and  still  feels  weak  and  weary.
I  Too  weak  even  to  chew  her  food.
I  Great  weakness,  can  hardly  sit  up  in  bed ;  if  attempted,  the

pulse  immediately  becomes  quick  and  somewhat  hard,  after

a  while  imperceptible.
I  Great  weakness  of  mind  and  body  of  old  men.
— The  general  system  remained  feeble  for  more  than  a  month ;


BARYTA  CARBONICA.  340

the  discoloration  of  the  tissues  and  emaciation  lasted  still
longer,  and  sleep  did  not  become  sound  and  refreshing  until
until  eight  or  ten  weeks  had  elapsed.

I  Lameness  after  rheumatism.

I  Lameness  after  suppressing  foot-sweat.

Prostration,  cannot  stand,  the  knees  give  way.

— Lies  on  his  back  in  bed ;  deprived  of  voluntary  motion.

■  General  paralysis  of  old  people;  loss  of  memory;  childish-

ness ;  trembling  of  the  limbs, d  After  apoplexy.
Paralysis  and  palsy  of  aged  persons.
I  Paralysis  after  apoplexy.

— The  paralysis  extends  rapidly  from  above  downwards.
Paralysis  aifecting  first  the  abdominal  muscles,  next  those  which

have  their  insertions  in  the  chest,  then  those  of  the  neck,  and

lastly  the  sphincters  of  bladder  and  rectum.
— Death  in  about  twelve  hours after  taking  the  poison,  with

undisturbed  intellect  and  without  having  stirred  from  his

supine  posture.
^  Sleep. I  Great  drowsiness  during  the  day.
Sleepiness  day  and  night.
Sleepy  and  cannot  sleep ;  hungry  and  cannot  eat.

—  I  Coma. ^Apoplexy.
I  Sopor. 6  Old  age.

■  Sleeplessness.  ^Tonsillitis.  ^  Old  people.  ^Hypochondriasis.

■  ■  Awakens  often  at  night ;  feels  too  hot ;  soles  feel  bruised.

■  Sleep  full  of  internal  uneasiness.

—  ■  Wants  to  sleep  all  the  time,  but  in  his  sleep  an  inward  rest-
lessness ;  moaning  and  muttering, d  Apoplexy.

■  Talking  in  sleep  ;  old  men.

■  Delirious  and  flighty  when  asleep.

I  I  Ravings  of  the  fancy  at  night  and  stupefaction.

Faint  feeling  at  night,  she  had  to  vomit.

I  I  Twitching  of  muscles  of  the  whole  body  during  sleep.

■  Restless  the  whole  night  on  account  of  internal  heat;  a  child.

■  ■Night-sweat.

Complains  of  pain  in  thigh  during  sleep.

■  During  sleep  lies  on  the  side.

On  awaking,  pressure  in  limbs ;  tired,  weary  limbs.

Feels  heavy,  bruised,  stupid  after  a  siesta.
38  Time^ Daybreak  :  saliva  runs  out  of  mouth,  while  asleep.

Morning :  erections  before  rising ;  coryza  <C ;  dryness  of
tongue  ;  sensation  in  pharynx  as  if  a  fine  leaf  lay  before  the
posterior  nares  after  waking;  viscid  phlegm  in  fauces;  nau-
sea, palpitation  and  anxiety  •<  ;  sickness ;  cough  <C  on
arising ;  pain  between  scapulae.

8  A.M.:  sudden  attack,  as  if  circulation  had  stopped.

All  day  :  eyes  look  sleepy  ;  weariness  ;  water  runs  from  mouth.


341  BARYTA  CARBONICA.

During  day:  grumbling  in  decayed  tooth;  twitches  and  jerks
of  body  ;  great  drowsiness  ;  sleepiness  ;  flushes  of  heat.

Evening :  headache  ;  face  red ;  oppression,  must  loosen  dr^s  ;
expectoration  prominent ;  pain  in  small  of  back  <  ;  chill
alternately  with  heat.

Evening  until  midnight :  spasmodic  cough.

Night :  in  bed  everything  rocks  within  him,  as  in  a  ship  ;  tooth-
ache <;  diarrhoea;  irritation  of  bladder;  passing  much
urine ;  seminal  emissions ;  cough  <  ;  throbbing  in  panari-
tium ;  pain  in  legs ;  sleepiness ;  awakens  often ;  fanciful
ravings  and  stupefaction ;  faint  feeling,  she  had  to  vomit ;
restlessness  ;  sweats  ;  chill  alternating  with  heat ;  flushes  of
heat ;  intolerable  tingling  over  body.
^'  Temperature  and  Weather.  Cold  air :  cough  <  ;  pain  in
loins ;  head  sensitive.

Cold  food  :  generally  better.

Cold  washing :  disposed  to  catch  cold.

Open  air :  headache  <  ;  tension  in  calf.

Damp  weather :  cough  worse.

In  sun  :  pain  on  vertex.

Near  warm  stove  :  headache  worse.

Warm  food  :  cough  worse.

'"Chill. Fever. Sweat. Chilliness.

Tearing  in  the  limbs,  with  chilliness.

Local  chill  on  upper  part  of  body.

I  I  Chill  from  face  or  pit  of  stomach  down  the  body  ;  or  begin-
ning in  the  feet.

Often  as  if  cold  water  was  poured  over  one ;  better  from  ex-
ternal warmth  ;  thirst  during  chill.

I  Chill  generally  one  (left)  sided.

Chilliness  relieved  by  external  heat.

Chill  increased  by  exercise ;  lessened  in  warm  room.

First  chill,  then  heat.

I  Chill  alternating  with  heat;  evening  and  night.

Cold  hands  and  feet,  with  hot  cheeks.

Flushes  of  heat,  more  at  night,  with  great  restlessness.

1  Frequent  flushes  during  the  day;  nightly  attacks,  with  great
anxiety  and  restlessness.

I  Heat  toward  evening,  with  little  thirst;  violent  pulsation  ex-
ternally into  the  head ;  on  rising,  vertigo,  even  to  falling ;
heat  the  whole  night,  with  disturbed  sleep ;  next  day  violent
thirst ;  pours  down  whole  glasses  of  water ;  has  a  very  thick
white  coating  on  tongue.

Hot  hands,  often  plunges  them  into  cold  water.

I  Sweat  increased  in  the  presence  of  strangers.

Heat  of  single  outer  parts.

I  Anxious  sweat.

I I  Ofiensive  sweat  of  one  (mostly  left)  side.


BARYTA  CARBONICA.  342

I  Sweat  increased  by  eating.

■  Sweat  returning  every  other  evening.

I  Consumptive  fever.
*^  Attacks. Returning  at  4  p.m.:  pressure  in  bones  of  occiput.

Every  other  day.

Every  other  evening.

Increasing  and  decreasing  periodically.
^^  Locality  and  Direction.  Right :  roaring  in  ear ;  rough,  dry
place  on  cheek ;  teeth  feel  tense ;  stitches  in  tonsil ;  tonsil
tends  to  suppurate ;  pain  in  groin  ;  pneumonia  ;  chronic  in-
flammation of  cervical  glands  ;  glandular  swelling  in  axilla ;
arm  cannot  be  moved ;  tearing  in  buttock  ;  pain  in  knee ;
tension  in  patella ;  coldness  of  foot ;  leg  gives  way.

Left :  cloud  before  eye  ;  styes  on  eyelid ;  throbbing  in  ear  ;  in-
flammation of  subcutaneous  tissue  over  buttock  ;  lying  on
side,  cough  <^ ;  pneumonia ;  cramp  in  side  of  throat ;  pain
in  shoulder ;  pain  in  nipple ;  heaviness  of  arm ;  stitches  in
foot ;  pain  down  leg  ;  leg  gives  way ;  stitching  in  great  toe  ;
offensive  sweat  of  side.

R.  to  L.:  sore  throat  symptoms  move.

Above  downward :  tearing  in  r.  buttock  ;  pain  in  leg.

Below  upward :  stitches  in  1.  foot.
^  Sensations. As  if  head  would  be  turned  inside  out.

As  if  the  brain  was  loose.

As  if  head  were  compressed  in  a  vice.

As  if  skull  would  split.

As  if  blood  could  not  circulate.

As  if  something  was  drawn  over  scalp  tightly.

As  if  hair  stood  on  end.

As  if  white  of  egg  had  dried  on  face.

As  if  the  face  were  swollen.

As  if  the  throat  were  swelling.

As  from  blisters  on  side  of  tongue.

As  if  a  fine  leaf  lay  before  posterior  nares.

As  of  a  plug  in  throat.

As  if  food  had  to  force  itself  over  sore  spot  in  oesophagus.

As  if  thyroid  was  pressed  in.

As  if  intestines  fell  from  one  side  to  other,  in  turning  in  bed.

As  if  lungs  were  full  of  smoke.

As  if  something  had  dropped  down  in  chest.

As  if  spine  would  fall  in.

As  if  ripped  with  a  knife,  r.  knee.

As  if  cold  water  was  poured  over  one.

Boring:  in  front  of  r.  ear.

Stitches :  in  side  of  head ;  burning  in  hollow  tooth  ;  in  r.  ton-
sil ;  in  nodes  in  breast ;  in  neck  ;  through  thigh  into  testes  ;
in  1.  big  toe  ;  in  joints.

Stinging  :  in  throat ;  eruption  on  chest ;  in  neck  :  in  corns.


343  BARYTA  CARBONICA.

Pricking  : headache  ;  head  and  face ;  in  skin.

Pressive  sticking :  in  vertex.

Shooting :  in  knee.

Jerking :  toothache  ;  in  glans  penis.

Tearing  :  in  front  of  r.  ear  ;  in  r.  buttock  ;  in  legs  ;  in  1.  big
toe  ;  in  limbs ;  in  long  bones.

Drawing  :  in  ears,  and  twinging  toothache ;  in  small  of  back  ;
in  legs.

Burning  :  in  eyes ;  in  upper  lip ;  stitches  in  hollow  teeth ;  of
tongue  and  tip  ;  in  anus  ;  in  urethra ;  eruption  on  chest ;  in
back  ;  in  bend  of  knees  ;  in  corns.

Smarting:  in  throat.

Distending  pain  :  in  head  and  nose.

Grumbling :  in  decayed  tooth.

Pressure :  on  forehead  ;  over  eyes  ;  in  brain  ;  under  vertex  ;  in
vertex;  in  eyes;  in  throat;  in  stomach;  on  bladder;  in
limbs.

Aching :  in  r.  hypochonder.

Soreness  :  in  stomach  ;  around  belly ;  in  lumbar  region  ;  around
anus ;  in  chest ;  bend  of  knees.

Throbbing :  toothache ;  in  ears  ;  in  temples ;  in  back ;  in
panaritium.

Bruised  pain  :  in  small  of  back ;  in  thighs.

Dull  pain :  in  bumps  of  firmness  and  concentrativeness.

Oppressive  headache :  above  eyes  and  root  of  nose.

Cramp  :  in  stomach  ;  in  neck  and  throat ;  in  calves.

Tension :  in  occiput ;  over  face,  temple  and  scalp  ;  in  lower
jaw;  in  teeth;  in  stomach;  of  abdomen;  in  neck  and  scap-
ula ;  in  small  of  back  ;  in  small  places  in  arms ;  in  r.  patella ;
in  r.  calf;  in  legs  ;  in  long  bones ;  in  skin.

Undefined  pain  :  in  head  ;  in  abdomen  ;  in  small  of  back  ;  be-
tween shoulders;  in  lower  vertebrse  and  chest;  in  arms;  in
deltoid  muscle  ;  in  thigh  ;  in  knees  and  legs.

Heaviness  :  in  occiput ;  of  feet ;  in  chest ;  of  1.  arm.

Weight :  over  eyes  ;  over  pubes.

Tingling :  over  whole  body.

Crawling:  over  scalp  ;  on  face;  fti  rectum.  ,

Paralyzed  feeling  :  in  thigh.

Numbness  :  in  skin  of  forehead  to  root  of  nose ;  of  genitals  ;  of
fingers.

Tickling :  in  throat.

Itching :  in  eyes ;  in  ears ;  eruption  on  chest ;  on  small  of
back  ;  between  nates  ;  on  thighs.

Dryness  :  of  eyes  ;  in  nose.

Coldness  :  in  face ;  of  tongue ;  of  r.  foot.
*'  Tissues. I  Dwarfish,  defective  mental  and  physical  growth.

Many  of  the  symptoms  suggest  sclerosis  of  brain  and  spine,  es-
pecially in  children  and  the  aged. Compare  Baryt.  mur.


BARYTA  CARBONICA.  344

Swelling  on  nape  of  neck,  which,  little  by  little  spreads  over
the  whole,  with  redness  and  pain  of  the  skin,  as  from
ulceration,  accompanied  with  considerable  swelling  of  glands
in  this  region  for  several  days.

1 1  Swelling  and  induration  of  glands.

Fistulous  ulcers  in  glands ;  mostly  glands  of  neck ;  feeling  of
tension.

Adenitis.

1 1  Incipient  suppuration  in  glands  (axillary),  and  in  cellular  tis-
sues in  any  part  of  body.

1 1  Glandular  sequelae  of  scarlatina.

iScrophulosis.

Tension  and  shortening  of  muscles.

Tearing  and  tension  in  long  bones ;  boring  in  the  bones.

— Tubular  bones.

— Joints.

Dropsy  after  scarlatina.

Emaciation,  with  bloated  face,  swelled  abdomen,  and  difficult
learning  in  children.

I  Great  emaciation  in  scrofulosis  and  skin  diseases.

I  Atrophy,  great  weakness;  face  red  and  abdomen bloated;

glands  swollen  ;  difficulty  in  learning  to  walk.

I I  Atrophia  scrofulosis  (next  Calc.  ostr.).
1 1  Marasmus  senilis.

I  Induration  of  tissues.

iSteatoma.

1  Sarcoma,  with  burning.

B I  Fatty  tumors.

I  i  Encysted  tumors.

■  Lupoid  (tuberculoid)  and  cystic  tumors.

I I  Cystic  growths,  particularly  on  the  skull.

**  Touch. Passive  Motion. Injuries. Touch :  scalp  sensi-
tive ;  gums  hurt ;  tongue  burns  ;  throat  sore  ;  abdomen  sore.

Touching  epigastrium  :  stomach  aches.

Pressure  :  chest  sensitive ;  nodes  in  breast  sensitive.

Small  wounds  ulcerate  and  get  very  sore.
*®  Skin. U  Skin  diseases.  *"

Tension  in  skin.

Skin  hot  and  dry.

— Skin  cool  and  rather  moist;  or  covered  with  profuse  sweat.

Itching,  pricking,  burning,  here  and  there ;  not  relieved  by
scratching  or  rubbing.

Scratching  causes  pricking  ;  pimples.

Intolerable  tingling  over  the  whole  body,  especially  in  back,
hips,  legs,  malleoli,  dorsa  of  the  feet  and  fingers,  waking
him  at  night,  and  forcing  him  to  scratch  continually.

Itching,  aggravated  by  scratching.

I  Itching  of  skin,  eruption  invisible.


345  BARYTA  CARBONICA.

Dry  exanthemata.
I  Scarlatina  miliaris.

I  Ring-worms.

I I  Soreness  and  humid  skin.

A  small  wound,  as  from  a  splinter,  throbs  and  ulcerates.

Pimples  on  the  feet  suppurate  and  spread  like  ulcers.

Red,  excoriated,  moist,  burning  places  between  scrotum  and

thigh.
Skin  does  not  heal  readily.
Ulcers,  with  scanty  discharge.

Soreness  and  moistening  between  scrotum  and  thighs.
Panaritia.
1 1  Warts.
*''  Stages  of  Life,  Constitution. I  Hysteric  persons,  and  such

as  incline  to  taking  cold.
1 1  Suitable  sometimes  for  affections  of  first  childhood,  but  more

particularly  for  old  age,  with  mental  or  physical  weakness.
Ills  especially  suitable  for  dwarfish  women.
1 1  Complaints  of  dwarfish  children,  those  who  do  not  grow.
I  Girl,  set.  7,  after  crusta  lactea,  scurfs  on  throat.

I  Girl,  aet.  13,  little  developed,  scrofulous,  frequent  tonsillitis,

each  time  suppurating.

I I  Scrofulous  children  ;  dwarfish  ;  mind  and  body  weak  ;  scurfs
on  head,  ears,  nose ;  eyes  inflamed,  opaque  cornea ;  colic ;
abdomen  swollen  ;  face  puffed  ;  general  emaciation.

llPersons  subject  to  quinsy;  especially  those  who  suffer  from

inflammation  of  the  throat  and  swelling  of  tonsils  after  the

least  cold.
iWomen  in  climacteric  years,  menses  always  scanty, d  Cardi-

algia.
I  Especially  adapted  to  diseases  of  old  men.
I  Drunkards'  complaints;  from  taking  cold  after  overheating,

with  distorted  mouth; tongue  paralyzed; aphonia; clear

consciousness  ;  motion  of  arms  impaired.
— I  An  old  drunkard,  after  a  cold. ^Apoplectic.
I  Old  people  weakened  from  bleeding. ^Apoplexy.
iMan,  set.  84. d  Apoplexy.

I  Old  people,  after  having  been  feeble  and  tottering  for  a  long

while, d  Apoplexy, d  Paralysis.
—  1 1  Old  cachectic  people  of  scrofulous  habit,  especially  when
they  suffer  with  gouty  complaints.

I I  Old  people,  especially  when  fat.

*^  Relationship. The  symptoms  marked  —  are  from  Bar.  ae.
Antidotes :  Aitt.  tart.,  Bellad.,  Qam'phor,  Dulcam.,  Mercur.,

Zincum.
Useful  after :  Scilla  (pneumonia  notha) ;  after  Arsen.  (scrofula).
Frequently  useful  before  or  after  Sulphur.
Incompatible : Calc.  ostr.  (scrofulosis).


BARYTA  CARB.  AND  MUR.  346

Similar  to :  Alum.,  Ant.  tart,  (paralysis  of  lungs) ;  Bellad.,
Calo.  ostr.  (scrofulosis,  coryza,  etc.);  Calc.  jod.  (large  ton-
sils) ;  Caustic,  (paretic  symptoms)  ;  Ohamom.,  Cinchon.,
Conium,  (old  people) ;  Dulcam.  (tendency  to  catch  cold) ;
Fluor,  ac.  (old  people) ;  lodum  (glands) ;  Laches..,  Lycop.
(tonsils);  Magn.  carh.,  Mercur.  (colds,  glands,  diarrhoea)';
Natr.  carh..,  Phosphor.,  Pulsat.,  Sepia  (ring-worms) ;  Silic.
(glands,  foot-sweat,  etc.) ;  Sulphur,  Tellur.


BARYTA  MURIATICA.

Chloride  of  Barium.  BaClA^IH^O.

Proved  by  Hahnemann,  and  published  by  Stapf,  in  1824,  in  the  Archives
with  the  symptoms  of  the  acetica.  In  J836,  for  the  first  time,  separately
published  in  the  AUentown  Correspondenz  Blait,  and  in  the  English  transla-
tion of  Jahr,  page  84,  1838 ;  later  by  Jahr  in  his  German  Manuals,  and  by
Noak,  Handbuch,  Vol.  I,  page  202,  1843  ;  last  in  Allen's  Encydojiedia,  Vol.  II,
page  65, 1875.

^  Mind. The  locality  around  him  seems  transformed.

Children  are  inattentive-  when  studying,  sit  in  corners  and  give
confused  answers.

I  Idiocy.

Blln  every  form  of  mania,  as  soon  as  the  sexual  desire  is  in-
creased.

Children  do  not  desire  to  play.

Dejection  and  dread  of  men.

Sense  of  oppressive  anxiety,  accompanied  by  the  illusory  no-
tion that  he  is  walking  on  his  knees,  without  legs.

II  Great  anxiety,  with  pressure  in  stomach,  nausea  and  retch-
ing ;  has  to  bend  double.

j  Attacks  of  anxiety  and  want  of  breath,  so  that  he  rolls  on  the

ground.
■  Appears  like  an  epileptic,  with  full  consciousness. ^Indura-
tion of  pancreas.
During  an  attack  of  fear,  she  says  in  a  weak,  husky  voice,  she

must  die ;  t.
Despondent  and  anxious.
^  Sensorium. Is  easily  startled.
I  I  Vertigo  ;  things  turn  around.
Head  so  heavy  that  he  cannot  keep  up.
*  Inner  Head. Headache,  with  angina.


347  BARYTA  MURIATICA.

Headache  with  the  vomiting.
*  Outer  Head. 1 1  Tinea  capitis  extending  to  sides  and  posterior
portion  of  neck.
I  Tinea,  with  abundant  discharge  of  pus.
Itchlike  eruption  on  scalp  and  neck.
I  The  whole  scalp  covered  by  a  thick,  offensive  crust.

I  Head  covered  with  a  thick,  fetid  scurf, d  Scrofulous  ulcers.
®  Eyes. ■  Shuns  light,  child  lies  all  the  time  on  its  face, d  Scrofu-
lous ulcers.

Pupils  dilated  and  immovable.
Albuginea  injected.

I I  Eyeballs  much  inflamed, d  Scrofulous  ulcers.
Eyes  stiff,  cannot  move  them.

I  Lids  on  both  eyes  swollen  and  inflamed. 6  Scrofulous  ulcers.

I I  Ophthalmia  scrofulosis.

■  Staphyloma  spuriura  with  a  boy,  set.  9,  on  inner  edge  of  left

cornea.
I  Hernia  tunicae  humoris  aquei.
®  Ears. Deaf,  with  vomiting ;  headache ;  burning  in  stomach  and
convulsions.

■  Ears  pain. ^Angina.

Earache  r.  side ;  worse  lying  on  painful  side ;  better  sipping

cold  water.
I  Catarrh  of  ears.

■  Discharge  from  both  ears  of  an  odor  like  rotten  cheese.
lOtorrhoea  after  frequent  otitis.

■  Postscarlatinal  otorrhoea.

■  Profuse  purulent  otorrhoea  of  five  years'  standing.

■  Otorrhoea  on  both  sides, offensive  discharge, d  Glandular

swelling.

■  Abscess  behind  both  ears,  discharging  ofi"ensive  pus. d  Scro-

fulous ulcers.

■  Parotis  on  r.  side  swollen,  with  a  swelling  of  the  submaxillary

and  cervical  glands.

■  Both  parotids,  most  r.  side,  swell  after  scarlatina.

■  Parotis  swollen  hard,  not  very  painful,  but  extending  to  the

edge  of  lower  maxilla.
^  Smell  and  Nose. Sneezing  in  sleep,  four, five  times  before
midnight,  not  wakening  ;  a  boy.

■  Catarrh  of  nose.
Coryza,  with  fever  heat.

Broad,  red  nodule  on  side  of  point  of  nose  ;  biting,  tickling  sore-
ness, and  with  fine  stitches  in  it  when  touched.
®  Face. Bed  face,  with  fever  heat.

Tension  in  whole  face,  with  nausea  and  diarrhoea.
Drawing  and  spasmodic  contraction  of  facial  muscles.
^  Lower  Face. ■  ■Enlarged,  indurated  and  painful,  submaxillary
fflands. d  Otorrhoea.


BARYTA  MURIATICA.  348

^''  Teeth. After  fine  stitching  a  pulselike  jerking  and  throbbing
toothache ;  worse  after  midnight ;  worse  after  sleep  ;  is  com-
pelled to  sit  up  in  bed.
Looseness  of  teeth,  with  salivation.
"  Taste,  Speech,  Tongue. Putrid  taste  in  mouth,  even  the  food
has  a  putrid  taste ;  tongue  and  mouth  dry.
I  Tongue  furred. 6  Glandular  swelling.
I  Tongue  covered  with  mucus.
^^  Inner  Mouth. Stench  from  mouth,  like  after  mercury.
I  Great  salivation. ^Angina.
I  Saliva  runs  with  every  paroxysm  out  of  the  mouth  in  large

quantities, d  Induration  of  pancreas.
TrSalivation,  with  looseness  of  teeth,  swelling  of  salivary  glands

and  palate,  odor  like  from  mercurialism.
Swelling  of  salivary  glands.
^^  Palate  and  Throat. Palate  swollen. See  12.

■  a  Elongation of  uvula, with hyper8emia  and blennorrhoea.

6  Angina  tonsillaris.
I  Inner  throat  hypersemic  and  blennorrhoeic.
I  Varicose  veins  in  throat.
Pharynx  and  oesophagus  inflamed ;  t.
Difficult  swallowing.

I  Catarrh extends  over  tonsils,  epiglottis,  glottis,  into  tubes.

6  Angina  tonsillaris.

I I  Angina  tonsillaris,  with  suppuration,  after  every  cold;  with
variola  or  varioloid.

■  Severe  pain  in  right  side  of  throat  and  ear;  saliva  ran  in

large  quantities  from  mouth;  fauces,  especially  on  right  side,
of  a  deep  red  color ;  tonsils  but  little  swollen. ^Angina.

I  In  a  girl,  both  tonsils  enlarged;  chills  and  heat  alternately

with  general  malaise,  headache,  thirst,  etc.;  pulse  120  ;  de-
glutition painful  on  right  side,  extending  to  ear ;  tonsil  red.
d  Chronic  hypertrophy  of  tonsils.

I I  Disposition  to  tonsillitis,  with  suppuration  each  time  after
taking  cold.

1 1  Chronic  scrofulous  enlargement  and  induration  of  tonsils.
"  Appetite,  Thirst,  Desires,  Aversions. >  Increased  appetite.

■  Appetite  diminished. ^  Glandular  swelling.

I  Desire  for  dry  wheat  bread. 6  Glandular  swelling.
Much  thirst,  with  a  dry  tongue.

■  Thirst;  chill  and  fever  alternately. ^Angina.

^®  Hiccough,  Belching,  Wausea  and  Vomiting. Nausea  and
sickness.
Retching.

■Nausea,  with  vomiting  and  violent  colic, d  Hydrops.
Nausea,  retching  ;  slimy,  watery  vomiting ;  t.
■Nausea,  vomiting,  with  worms  and  colic, d  After  scarlatina.
Hsematemesis.


349  BARYTA  MURIATICA.

;r Vomiting  every  morning  after  taking  it.

Violent  vomiting  and  purging,  with  anxiety.

During  six  hours  he  vomits  small quantities of  a  disgusting
matter,  looking  and  tasting  bad.
^^  Scrobiculum  and  Stomach. Oversensitiveness of  stomach.

Stomach  feels  heavy ;  a  pressure  in  stomach,  most  after  eating
solid  food.

Cramps  in  stomach.

I B  Great  indigestion.

Warm  sensation  rises  up  to  chest  and  head.

Ilnflammation  of  stomach.

The  fundus  inflamed  and  several  ecchymoses ;  t.

The  mucous  membrane  blue-red,  with  red  spots  in  the  muscu-
lar coat ;  t.

External  coat  of  stomach  dark-brown,  and  inflamed.

I  Below  the  stomach  to  left  side  a  hardness,  from  which  the
paroxysms  of  want  of  breath  originate,  d  Induration  of  pan-
creas.

I  Considerable  hardness  in  region  of  stomach.

Cardia, pylorus, duodenum inflamed,  dark-red,  highly con-
gested ;  t.
^*  Hypochondria. Liver  and  spleen  full  of  thick  black  blood ;
the  gall-bladder  filled  with  pale-yellow,  watery  bile ;  t.

I  Tumefaction  of  liver.

^^  Abdomen,  Loins  and  Groins. Colic ;  burning  pains.

I  Pain  in  region  of  navel ;  worse  in  morning ;  dry  cough  ;  great

appetite  ;  slime-covered  tongue, d  Ascarides.
Borborygmus. .

■  Distressing  throbbing  in  a  tumor  inside  of  abdomen. ^Ab-

dominal aneurism.

■  Abdomen  much  swollen. ^Scrofulous  ulcers.

■  Abdomen  distended. ^Glandular  swelling.
Swelling  and  induration  of  abdominal  glands.

■  Swelling  of  abdomen  and  lower  limbs. ^  After  scarlatina.

■  Abdomen  distended  and  hard, d  Scrofulous  glandulosa.
Ecchymoses  in  colon  ;  t.

Omenta  reddened ;  t.
Inguinal  glands  swollen  and  painful.
Fetid,  ichorous  ulcers  in  inguinal  region.
I  Worm  diseases.
^^  Rectum  and  Stool. ■Obstinate  constipation.
Stool  covered  with  mucug".

■  Stools  of  a  jelly-like  appearance,  with  blood,  and  no  pain  at

all,  discharges  every  15  or  20  minutes, d  Dysentery.

■  Bloody,  mucous  stools,  without  much  pain,  several  times  a  day;

child. 6  Dysentery.
Chronic,  painless  diarrhoea,  yellow,  slimy  stools ;  vomiting  and
exhaustion.


BARYTA  MURIATICA. '  350

I  Colic  and  several  stools;  boy,  set.  9.

Stools  green  and  chopped.

iThin,  watery,  very  fetid  stools. ^Scrofulous  ulcers.

Bleeding  from  the  intestinal  canal.

Paralysis  of  sphincter  ani.

I  Stool  only  after  injections,  excrement  white  and  hard  as  stones.
d  Scrofulous  glands.

;rPassage  of  ascarides  and  slime.
^^  Urinary  Organs. ■  Cystitis.

Frequent  urination.

TrContinual  violent  urging  to  urinate ;  sometimes  involuntarily.

I  Urine  yellowish,  of  a  very  offensive  odor.  6  Glandular  swelling.

TrFrequent  urination,  whitish  sediment.

I  Urine  yellowish,  of  great  stench. ^Scrofulous  glands.
^^  Male  Sexual  Organs. I  Sexual  desire. See  1.

;rNightly  pollutions.

■  Gonorrhoea  and  gleet.

iHypertrophied  testicle  after  suppressed  gonorrhoea.

■  Testicles  increased  in  size,  hard  and  painful  stitches,  for  nine

years.

I  Swelling  of  testicles  and  scrotum,  painless. ^  After  a  contu-
sion while  riding  on  horseback.

I  Buboes  after  suppressed  gonorrhoea.
^^  Female  Sexual  Organs, i  Sterility.

iLeucorrhoea.

■  Induration,  tumor,  or  atrophy  of  ovaries.

■  Nymphomania.
Squeezing  pains  in  the  pelvis.

^°  Voice  and  Larynx. Weak,  husky  voice.

^^  Breathing. ■  ■  Attacks  of  anxious  dyspnoea ;  rolls  on  the  floor,

several  attacks  a  day,  also  in  the  night, d  Epilepsy,  with

full  consciousness.
Dyspnoea  and  oppression.

■  Has  to  sit  up,  head  bent  forward ;  slime  and  saliva  runs  from

the  mouth,  without  cough. 6  Induration  of  pancreas.
"  Cough. ■Dry  cough.

■  ■  Chronic  cough  of  scrofulous  children.

^^  Inner  Chest  and  Lungs. Inward  heat  in  upper  chest.

■  iBlennorrhoea  of  lungs  with  scrofula.

■  Phthisis scrofulosa, with herpetic eruption and  indurated

testicle.
^^  Heart,  Pulse  and  Circulation. Palpitation.

■  Pulse  120. ^Angina.

■  Abdominal  aneurism.

^^  Neck  and  Back. Myelitis.

■  Beginning  struma;  child,  set. 6  months,  breathing  with  a

rattle.


351  BARYTA  MURIATICA.

I  The  whole  neck  and  throat  full  of  hard  glandular  swellings,
size  of  eggs.

I  lEnlargement  and  induration  of  cervical  glands.  6  Otorrhoea.

I  Submaxillary  and  cervical  glands  swollen  to  the  size  of  pigeon
eggs,  two  like  chicken  eggs,  very  hard,  and  painful  on  slight
pressure, d  Swelling  of  parotis.

I  Two  cervical  glands  swollen  and  fluctuating.  ^Swelling  of
parotids.

lYertebrse  7  and  8  are  protruding,  forming  a  hump.  6  Glandu-
lar swelling,  scrofula.

I  Tinea  from  scalp  to  neck.
^^  Upper  Limbs. Painless  jerking  in  arms,  principally  at  night.

irruption  like  millet  seed  on  hands.
^^  Lower  Limbs. Tension  in  the  thighs.

Emaciation  of  thighs.

I  When  kneeling,  a  violent  stitch,  followed  by  a  peculiar  tension
in  r.  patella,  making  it  diflScult  to  walk.  6  Hemorrhagic  ex-
travasation of  knee.

■  Tension  and  increased  warmth  in  the  knee. ^Swelling  of

knee.
Fine  stinging  in  and  around  the  swollen  knee.
I A  globular  swelling  on  tip  of  r.  knee,  increasing  quickly  but

without  much  pain. 6  Hemorrhagic  swelling  of  knee.
I A  round,  sharply  defined  swelling,  size  of  a  goose  egg,  of  a

dark  color  and  clearly  fluctuating,  surrounded  by  bluish-red

spots,  not  disappearing  on  pressure,  with  a  greenish -yellow

halo, d  Hemorrhagic  extravasation.

■  Hemorrhagic  extravasation  in  the  bursa  patellae.
I  After  checking  foot-sweat. ^Tonsillitis.

I  Feet  swollen, d  Glandular  swelling.

Cramps  in  the  toes.
^*  Limbs  in  General. Trembling  of  the  limbs.

Convulsive  jerkings  of  hands  and  feet.

I  Paralysis  of  upper  and  lower  limbs.

Swelling  of  hands  and  feet.
^^  Rest. Position. Motion. Lying  on  painful  side :  earache
worse.

Has  to  sit  up,  head  bent  forward :  breathing  >.  d  Induration
of  pancreas.

When  kneeling  :  violent  stitch  in  r.  patella.

■  Neither  motion  nor  pressure  is  painful, d  Gonitis.
'*  Nerves. Convulsive  tremor  and  twitches.

Convulsions,  accompanied  by  shocks  which  shake  the  whole

body.
Periodical  attacks  of  convulsions,  with  excessive  jactitation  of

limbs.
Heaviness  and  prostration,  must  lie  down.
Prostration,  can  scarcely  move  a  limb.


BARYTA  MURIATICA.  352

Paralysis.

■  Paralysis  of  left  side,  with  aphasia.
General  muscular  weakness,

■  General  malaise. ^Angina.
Paintings.

^^  Sleep. Sneezing  in  sleep  not  wakening.

After  sleep  toothache  worse.
^*  Time. Morning :  pain  in  region  of  navel  worse.

Day  :  attacks  of  dyspnoea ;  dry  heat.

Evening :  chill,  with  thirst.

Night:  pollutions;  dyspnoea;  painless  jerking  in  arms.

Before  midnight :  sneezing  in  sleep.

After  midnight :  toothache.

^^  Temperature  and  "Weather. Sipping  cold  water :  earache

better.

■  Spring  and  Fall  attacks  of  angina  tonsillaris.

^'^  Chill.  Fever.  Sweat.  Pever :  thirst ;  loss  of  appetite ;  dry
mouth  and  tongue ;  dysphagia ;  frequent,  full  pulse  ;  flushed
face ;  prostration  generally  lasting  seven  days,  occasionally
accompanied  by  catarrh  of  the  eye,  ear  or  nose,  or  inflamma-
tory action  of  skin.

Chill  with  thirst  in  .evening ;  loss  of  appetite  and  vomiting.

Dry  heat  all  day  ;  pulse  excitable  ;  head  aff"ected.

During  fever  increased  suppuration  of  ulcers  with  boys,  and
enlargement  of  swollen  cervical  glands  with  girls.

Heat,  with  coryza.

;rAll  day  dry  heat ;  pulse  irritated ;  head  afiected.

Discoloring  sweat.

Cold  sweat.

■  Tertian  intermittent.

■  Chills  with  heat,  alternately  with  angina  tonsillaris.

*^  Locality  and  Direction.  Right :  earache ;  parotids  ;  pain
side  of  throat  and  ear  ;  fauces  of  side  deep  red  color ;  deglu-
tition painful  on  side ;  stitch  in  patella ;  globular  swelling
tip  of  knee.

Left :  staphyloma  on  inner  edge  of  cornea ;  below  stomach  to
side  a  hardness  from  which  the  paroxysms  of  want  of  breath
originate  ;  paralysis  of  side.

Below  upwards :  burning.
*^  Sensations. Stitches :  in  nodule  on  nose ;  in  teeth ;  in  testi-
cles ;  in  r.  patella.

Stinging  :  in  and  around  knee.

Jerking :  in  teeth  ;  in  arms.

Drawing :  in  facial  muscles.

Biting:  in  nodule  on  nose ;  in  skin.

Burning :  in  stomach.

Pressure :  in  stomach.

Soreness:  in  nodule  on  nose.


353  BARYTA  MURIATICA.

Cramps :  in  stomach ;  in  toes.

Undefined  pain  :  in  ears  ;  in  r.  side  of  throat  and  ear.
Throbbing:  toothache.

Tension  :  in  face  ;  in  thigh  ;  in  r.  patella ;  in  knee.
Tickling :  in  nodule  on  nose.
Warmth  :  rises  to  chest  and  head.
**  Tissues. Increased  irritability  of  the  nerves.

I  Varicose  veins. ^Angina  tonsillaris.
llAfiection  of  lymphatic  vessels  and  glands  in  scrofula.

■  Hydrops  after  scarlatina.

I I  Painful  glandular  swellings  and  indurations  of  scrofulous
people.

lAdenitis.

I  Catarrhal  affections.

■  Pale  and  emaciated, d  Dysentery.

■  Emaciation, d  Swelling  of  cervical  glands.

*^  Touch. Passive  Motion. Injuries. Pressure :  submaxil-
lary and  cervical  glands  <  ;  no  effect  on  swollen  knee.
I  Swelling  of  testicle  and  scrotum  from  bruising,  caused  by  rid-
ing horseback.
Touch  :  stitches  in  nodule  side  of  nose.
*^  Skin. Biting  sensation  in  skin.
Spasmodic  contraction  of  skin.
I  Skin  not  reddened,  not  warmer  than  usual. ^  Swelling  of

parotis.
Inflammation  of  the  skin.
I  Itch-like  pimples  on  head,  nape  of  neck,  abdomen  and  thighs.

■  Yellowish,  scaly  eruptions.

■  Herpes  on  various  parts. ^Hypertrophy  of  testicle.

■  Herpes  favinosus  all  over  the  body,  the  face  excepted.

■  Tetters.

■  ■Scrofulous  eruptions.

Fetid  ichorous  ulcers  in  inguinal  region.

■  Whole  body  covered  with  ulcers. 6  Scrofula.

■  Complaints  after  scarlet  fever.

*^  Stages  of  Life. Constitution. ■■  Scrofulous  children. See
13,  27,  31.

■  Child,  set. 18 months, d  Dysentery after humid  tetter.

See  20.

■  Girl,  set.  18  months, d  Scrofulous  ulcers.

■  Boy, get. 2, scrofulous, emaciated. ^Indurated cervical

glands.

■  Boy,  get.  4,  three  weeks  after  scarlatina, d  Swelling  of  paro-

tis.
■Blonde,  blue-eyed  girl. 6  Earache.

■  Scrofulous  child,  get.  10,  since  five  years.otorrhoea  and  glandu-

lar swellings,  cured  by  one  dose  daily  for  two  weeks.

■  Grirl,  gpt.  39. d  Hemorrhagic  extravasation  of  the  knee.
VOL.  II. — 23.


BARYTA  MUR.— BELLADONNA.  354

I  Man,  get.  50,  strong  constitution,  inclined  to  catarrhal  affec-
tions, and  great  disposition  to  angina  tonsillaris.

I  Woman,  aet.  53,  small,  weakly,  poorly  fed. 6  Parotid  swelling.

I  Woman,  get.  65,  after  five  months  absolute  rest  and  strict  diet
having  been  useless,  l  grain  in  distilled  water,  three  times
daily,  for  several  weeks, d  Abdominal  aneurism.
*^  Relationship. Absinthe  antidotes  the  vomiting.

Useful  after  Arnic.  in  extravasations  of  blood.

Similar  to  Conium  in  indurations  of  abdominal  glands.


BELLADONNA.

Deadly  Nightshade.  Solanacece.


One  of  the  first  of  all  medicines  Hahnemann  experimented  with,  and
the  one  which  led  him  in  1800  to  the  discovery,  greater  than  any  other
ever  made  in  the  domain  of  science,  that  the  life  altering  influence  of  drugs
and  poisons  is  not  like  the  chemical  or  physical,  depending  on  the  masses,
but  solely  on  the  surface.  This  has  now  been  mathematically  proved  and
I  we  have  a  full  right  to  laugh  at  the  stupid  stubborn  who  doubt  it.  In
1805,  Fragm.  de  vin.  med.  posit,  Hahnemann  published  of  his  own  observa-
tions 103  numbers,  of  others  312';  in  1811  Reine  Arzneimiitellehre,  Vol.  I,
as  the  first;  of  his  own  observations  176,  of  others  474 ;  in  1829  E.  Ami.,
Vol.  I,  second  edition,  his  own  380,  of  others  and  his  disciples,  Hornburg,
E.  Kummer,  Herrmann,  E.  Stapf,  W.  Gross,  F.  Hartmann,  C.  F.  Lang-
hammer,  Riickert,  J.  E.  A.  Baehr,  H.  Lehmann,  A.  F.  Mochel,  1042  symp-
toms ;  in  all  1422  numbers ;  in  1830  the  third  and  last  edition,  Hahnemann
had  three  more  provers,  and  in  all  1440  numbers,  many  had  been  contracted
and  several  numbers  united  into  one ;  in  1875  Allen  has  included,  besides
the  85  authorities  of  Hahnemann,  in  all  241,  and  gives  without  any  concen-
tration, 2544  symptoms  without  a  cured  one.  By  the  aid  of  at  least  1455
cured  symptoms  we  have  been  enabled  to  shorten  the  whole  catalogue  to
somewhat  less  than  4000.  The  next  following  theme  will  be  the  separation
of  the  symptoms  obtained  from  berries,  leaves  and  root,  as  far  as  it  can  be
done.


^  Mind. The patient is conscious but  tormented by terrible
anxiety.
Loss  of  consciousness.
Stupefaction,  with  congestion  to the  head,  pupils  enlarged;

delirium.
■  Memory  lively ;  remembers  things  long  gone  by.


355  BELLADONNA.

■  Memory  imprired;  forgets  in  a  moment  what  he  was  about

to  do.
I  Absent-minded  and  forgetful.
Likes  to  brood  in  silence,  supreme  indifference,  nothing  makes

an  impression.

■  Paroxysm  of  cerebral  exaltation  with  abundance  of  ideas  and

images,  generally  fantastic  and  incoherent.
Mental  confusion.

Confusion  of  head,  aggravated  by  movement.
I  Her  mind  was  disordered  so  that  speech  did  not  correspond

to  thought,  nor  thought  to  sense,  nor  sense  to  the  objects

present.
Merry  craziness; while  laughing  or  singing  she  constantly

touches  things  around  her.

■  Timorous  insanity;  he  is  afraid  of  an  imaginary  black  dog;

of  the  gallows,  etc.

■  Insanity: they  stripped  themselves  and  clad  only  in  their

shirts,  ran  out  into  the  streets  in  broad  day-light,  gestic-
ulating, dancing,  laughing  and  uttering  and  doing  many
absurd  things.

n  Became  crazy ;  got  one  leg  over  the  window  to  kill  himself,
had  to  be  tied  down ;  died  next  day;  within  10  hours,  two
doses, d  Consumption.

Imbecility.

Fantastic  illusions  (when  closing  the  eyes.)

■  When  closing  the  eyes,  though  not  asleep,  the  patient  sees

fierce,  wicked  looking  large  animals  with  horns  and  bushy
heads;  the  room  seemed  to  be  full  of  strange  men  passing
in  and  out,  who  would  snatch  at  her  as  they  passed,  which
would  frighten  her  very  much,  she  thought  the  men  wanted
to  take  her  away  from  home ;  she  then  saw  children  sitting
on  low  benches  in  rows  as  in  a  school-room.
Hallucinations,  and  illusions  of  the  senses.

■  ■Imagines  he  sees  ghosts,  hideous  faces  and  various  insects.

■  ■Fear  of  imaginary  things,  wants  to  run  away  from  them.
Frightful  visions;  she  wishes  to  hide  herself.

He  is  afraid  of  an  extraordinary  black  dog,  the  gallows,  etc.;
he  sees  ghosts  and  insects;  gets  vexed  easily,  and  then
weeps;  he  tears  things  around  him,  bites  and  strikes,  and
when  restrained,  spits  at  those  around  him,  strikes  himself,
curses,  and  uses  horrible  words.  (These  symptoms  of  rage
much  resemble  those  of  Stramon.  and  Hyosc.)

Fixed  ideas,  thinks  he  is  riding  on  an  ox,  uses  a  stick  for  a
gun,  growling  and  barking  like  a  dog.

■  ■Delirium.

■  Lethargy  and  delirium,  with  pain  in  the  head, d  On  the  dis-

appearance of  the  tumor.
Delirious  moaning,  flushed  face,  hot  head.


BELLADONNA.  356

1 1  Delirium  and  heat.

I  Rambling  delirium.

Delirium,  with  frightful  figures  and  images  before  the  eyes.
Delirium  ;  is  afraid  of  imaginary  things  ;  sees  monsters.
Delirious  talk  of  dogs  as  if  they  swarmed  about  him.
Furious  delirium.

I I  Violent  delirium; broke  into  fits  of  laughter,  then  gnashed
the  teeth ;  disposed  to  bite  and  strike  those  around.

■  Delirium  ; the  boy  jumped  out  of  bed,  talked  a  great  deal,

was  lively  and  often  laughed ;  consciousness  was  entirely
gone ; he  did  not  recognize  his  parents.

■  In  the  evening  he  was  seized  with  such  violent  delirium  that

it  required  three  men  to  confine  him;  his  face  was  livid;  his
eyes  injected  and  protruding,  the  pupils  strongly  dilated;
the  carotid  arteries  pulsating  most  violently ;  a  full,  hard
pulse,  with  loss  of  power  to  swallow.

■  Delirium,  either  continuous  or  recurring  in  paroxysms,  mirth-

ful at  first,  but  subsequently  changing  to  frenzy.

■  Excited  and  delirious,  with  violent  motions  of  the  arms  and

legs,  increasing  to  a  raging  delirium.

■  Furious  delirium  all  night  with  pleasant  hallucinations,  fol-

lowed by  great  prostration,  and  mental  confusion.

■  Bites  at  his  attendants  and  himself,  screams  furiously, d  A

boy  aged  3.
Mania,  with  desire  to  bite,  strike  and  run  away.

■  Highest  degree  of  mania,  complete  restlessness  ;  he  jumps  on

chairs,  tables  and  stove.

■  The  paroxysms  of  madness  were  occasionally  interrupted  by

loud  laughing  and  grinding  of  the  teeth ;  the  head  was  hot,
the  face  red,  the  look  wild  and  staring ;  pulse  small  and
very  frequent;  pupils  dilated;  the  arteries  of  the  head  and
neck  visibly  palpitating,  pulse  hard  and  frequent.

■  Mania,  at  one  time  merry,  again  would  spit  and  bite  at  those

around.

■  Epilepsy  and  mania  furibunda.

■  ■Rage,  madness,  disposition  to  bite,  to  spit,  to  strike  and  to

tear  things.

■  Fury,  with  grinding  of  the  teeth  and  convulsions.

■  Fury; they  pulled  at  the  hair  of  the  bystanders.

■  Such  fury  (with  burning  heat  of  body,  and  open,  staring  and

immovable  eyes)  that  she  had  to  be  held  constantly,  lest  she
should  attack  some  one ;  and  when  thus  held  so  that  she
could  not  move,  she  spat  continuously  at  those  around  her.

■  ■Desire  to  escape  or  hide  herself.

■  ■Jumping  out  of  bed,  with  fear,  trying  to  run  away  and  hide.
She  rather  desires  death  than  fears  it.

■  She  sought  continually  to  spring  out  of  bed.


357  BELLADONNA.

I  Inclination  to  bite  those  around  him  and  to  tear  everything

about  him  in  pieces.
She  "wishes  to  strike,  bite  and  quarrel.
I  Weary  of  life,  with  desire  to  drown  herself.
Desires  light,  but  shuns  company.
Loquacity.

■  Speech  rapid  and  hasty; they  often  utter  inarticulate,  con-

fused sounds.
Great  loquacity,  foolish  talk,  laughs  without  any  cause.
Talkative,  then  again  mute.

■  Delirious,  obscene  talking.

■  Garrulity; he  constantly  uses  foolish  and  absurd  language,

at  which  he  often  laughs  aloud ;  when  addressed  he  turns
toward  the  speaker,  but  does  not  answer  correspondingly.

■  She  talks  like  a  maniac,  with  staring,  protruded  eyes.
Loud laughter,  wild  abandon, singing,  whistling, lascivious

conversation.

■  Changes  from  quiet  to  gay  and  merry  mood  in  which  trills

and  sings  ditties ;  great thirst,  violent  motion  of  the  arms.

■  ■Moaning.

■  Much  moaning,  distress,  a  sudden  crying  out. ^Retention

of  urine.
Weeping  and  screaming,  made  worse  by  gentle  comforting.

■  She  was  violently  delirious,  screamed  and  wept  aloud,  and

was  unmanageable,  suffered  the  greatest  anxiety  and  despaired
of  recovery.

The  child  cries  out  suddenly,  and  after  a  while  it  ceases  cry-
ing as  suddenly  as  it  began,  and  appears  as  if  nothing  had
been  the  matter.

Crying  and  howling  of  children,  as  from  rage.

■  ■Instead  of  eating,  bit  the  wooden  spoon  in  two,  gnawed  the

plate,  and  growled  and  barked  like  a  dog.

■  The  boy  was  quite  beside  himself,  struck  at  his  mother,  bit

her,  made  terrible  grimaces  and  contortions  of  the  limbs,  did
not  remain  a  moment  in  one  place.

■  She  attempted  to  bite  and  strike  her  attendants,  broke  into

fits  of  laughter,  and  gnashed  her  teeth ;  the  head  was  hot,
the  face  red,  the  looks  wild  and  fierce.

■  She  tears  her  night-dress  and  bed-clothes.

Picking  at  bed-clothes  as  if  looking  for  something  lost,  with

confused  muttering.
In  his  delirium  he  picked  at  the  bed-clothes,  and  threw  them

ofi",  and  sought  continually  to  spring  out  of  bed.
Foolish,  ludicrous  antics  and  gestures ;  they  touch  everything

within  their  reach ;  foolish  laughing,  excessive  sensibility.
Became  wantonly merry, ran  from  the  house, and  exposed

their  nakedness.
They  behaved  like  drunken  people.


BELLADONNA.  358

Both  children  played  with  each  other  at  hide  and  seek,  calling
each  other  in  their  sleep.

I  When  put  into  bed,  he  sprang  out  again  in  delirium,  talked
constantly,  laughed  out,  and  exhibited  complete  loss  of  con-
sciousness ;  did  not  know  his  own  parents ;  this  lasted  the
whole  night.

iThe  boy  ran  around  the  room  laughing  immoderately,  desired
neither  food  nor  drink  ;  a  piece  of  bread,  which  he  took  to
be  a  stone,  he  threw  far  from  him  ;  his  delirium  was  always
merry,  he  became  totally  unconscious ;  pulse  very  slow,  full ;
pupils  widely  dilated,  not  sensitive  to  light,  abdomen  some-
what distended.

Dancing,  running  and  creeping  about  in  shirt.

The  child  became  flushed,  wanted  to  escape,  struck  at  people,
became  delirious  and  restless.

I  She  turns  about  in  her  bed  in  a  perfect  rage.

I  In  his  delirium  he  threw  himself  down  from  a  height.
Nearly  all  the  symptoms  lead  to  violence  of  action;  the  patient

must  do  everything  violently ;  she  wishes  those  around  her

to  kill  her.
Sensation  of  floating  or  gliding  along,  as  if  in  a  boat ;  as  if  the

body,  or  a  part  of  it  were  greatly  enlarged.
B  (Aversion  to  noise  and  company.
Aversion  to  all  mental  occupation  ;  indolence.
Hands  constantly  in  motion,  trying  to  catch  things  in  the  air.

I I  She  will  sit  and  break  pins  into  pieces,  half  a  day  at  a  time.
She  feels  of  those  around  her;  at  times  she  seats  herself;  at

times  she  acts  as  if  she  were  washing,  or  as  if  she  counted
money,  or  as  if  she  were  drinking ;  she  mutters  as  if  asleep  ;
she  talks  like  a  maniac,  with  staring,  protruded  eyes ;  talks
about  dogs  that  swarm  around  her  ;  converses  with  a  late
sister  in  a  church-yard ;  beautiful  images  present  themselves
to  her  as  if  by  a  charm.

Disinclination  to  talk,  or  very  fast  talking.

Very  mirthful  mood,  singing  and  whistling  ;  frequent  laughter.

Depression,  or  too  great  hilarity.

Sadness  and  dejection ;  patients  are  indifferent  to  everything,
seek  solitude,  and  desire  rest.

Melancholy  ;  hypochondriasis  ;  hopelessness.

She  is  very  despondent.

Tremulous  despondency.

Great  distress,  with  inquietude.

Despair.

I  Hysteria,  with  melancholic  mood.

Became  fearful  when  some  one  approached  him  in  the  street,
and  when  they  had  passed,  he  insisted  on  it  that  he  had
stabbed  them.

I  Starts  in  affright  at  the  approach  of  others.


359  BELLADONNA.

1 1  Fear  of  imaginary  things,  wants  to  run  away  from  them.

Cardiac  anxiety,  with  anguish  and  restlessness.

Anxiety  and  fear  of  imaginary  objects  and  hallucinations,
ghosts,  soldiers  which  come  to  take  them  away,  black  anim-
als, rats,  dogs,  wolves,  etc.

Anxiety,  restlessness,  nausea  and  pain  in  the  back,  with  wind-
colic.

■  Anxiety,  anguish,  trembling,  constant  restlessness.

iBy  day  great  anxiety  ;  she  has  no  peace  anywhere  ;  it  seemed

to  her  as  if  she  must  fly  away.
Anxious  and  confused,  fears  she  is  about  to  die.
Tremulous,  anxious,  nervous.
Anxious  and  timorous.

Nervous  anxiety,  restlessness,  desire  to  escape.
Anxiety,  followed  by  sweat.
Intolerable  anguish  during  the  time  she  is  free  from  rage,  with

desire  to  die.
Loss  of  courage.

I  1  Weary  of  life,  with  desire  to  drown  herself.
Very  sensitive,  irritable  mood.

■  Very  excitable  mood,  easily  brought  to  tears.
Weeping,  irritable  mood.

iFretfulness  ;  nothing  seemed  right  to  him  ;  was  vexed  with

himself.
Weeping  and  vexation  about  trifles,  with  headache  and  pressure

in  the  forehead,  and  great  dryness  of  mouth.
Morose  and  serious.

I  Anger,  proceeding  even  to  paroxysms  of  convulsive  rage.
1  Quarrelsome,  during  exuberant  mirth.
Quarrelsomeness,  cannot  be  quieted,  with  disposition  to  violent

rage.
Great  inquietude,  goes  from  place  to  place.
Great  restlessness  and  indescribable  anxiety,  cannot  sit  or  lie

long  in  any  position  ;  they  seek  to  fly.
Mania :  with  intense  craving  for  snuff";  voracious  appetite,  they

swallow  everything  in  their  reach ;  generally  constipated ;

wild,  unsteady  look,  eyes  brilliant,  face  flushed,  breathing

anxious,  irregular;  sexual  excitement,  inclined  to  masturbate ;

sleepless  and  restless.
Stupefying  headache.
^  Sensorium. All  the  senses  more  acute.

I  Great  irritability  and  impressionableness  of  the  senses  ;  he

tastes  and  smells  everything  more  acutely ; the sense of

taste,  of  sight,  and  of  hearing  is  keener,  and  the  mind  is

more  easily  moved,  and  the  thoughts  more  active.
Great  irritability  of  the  senses.

■  Excessive  nervous  excitability,  with  exalted  sensibility  of  all

the  organs  ;  the  least  noise,  the  least  light  is  annoying.


BELLADONNA.  360

His  senses  deceive  him.

I  Cloudiness  or  dullness  as  if  drunken.

Feeling  of  drunkenness,  with  reeling.

Bewildered  feeling  in  the  head.

Painful  dullness  of  the  head.

Dullness  and  dazed  feeling,  made  worse  by  moving  the  head,

still  more  by  walking.
The  whole  head  is  muddled.
Weariness  of  the  head.

I  I  Heaviness  of  head,  seems  about  to  fall  asleep.
B I  Blood  mounts  to  the  head,  which  becomes  heavy  as  if  giddy,
i  Weight  in  head  as  if  he  would  fall.
Dizziness,  with  sensation  as  if  a  board  were  before  her  forehead,

falling  to  the  left  or  backwards.
BVertigo,  it  appears  to  him  as  if  objects  around  him  swayed

to  and  fro.
Vertigo,  as  if  she  were  being  rocked.
When  in  the  act  of  lying  down,  it  seems  as  if  the  bed  was

bouncing  the  patient  up  and  down.
Vertigo,  as  if  everything  turned  around  in  a  circle.

I  Vertigo  increased  on  every  movement  of  the  body. .

I I  Vertigo  when  stooping,  or  when  rising  after  stooping.

II  Vertigo,  mostly  at  night  on  turning  over  in  bed,  or  when

getting  up  in  the  morning,  also  when  walking,  and  on  every

change  of  position.
Giddiness,  with  falling  and  loss  of  consciousness.
Throbbing  in  the  head,  buzzing  in  the  ears,  dimness  of  vision,

flushed  face,  anxiety  and  nausea,  even  vomiting.
■  Vertigo  with  rush  of  blood  to  the  head,  roaring  in  the  ears,

and  slight  mistiness  of  vision.
BVertigo  with  dimness  of  vision,  vanishing  of  sight  or  flickering

before  the  eyes.
BVertigo  with  perceptible  pulsations  in  the  head,  dilated  pupils,

with  nausea.
Vertigo  with  tired  feeling  before  and  after  the  attack.
BVertigo,  then  headache,  then  falling.
^  Inner  Head. Frontal  headache.

iPressive  headache,  especially  in  the  forehead.

B  Headache  as  if  a  stone  were  pressing  the  forehead,  relieved

by  laying  the  head  down,  and  stooping,  with  dilated  pupils,

and  whining  ill  humor  after  trifles.
I  Painful  pressure  in  the  head,  especially  in  lower  part  of  fore-
head,  directly  above  the  nose,  intolerable  on  stooping  or

reading.
B  Sensation  as  if  the  brain  were  pressed  to  the  forehead,  which

disappeared  directly  on  bending  the  head  backward.
BPain  in  stooping  forward,  as  if  everything  would  issue  at  the

forehead.


361  BELLADONNA.

I  Headache  as  if  the  brain  would  be  pressed  out,  in  the  fore-
head, just  above  the  orbits,  which  prevents  the  ejes  being
opened,  and  obliges  him  to  lie  down.

I  Tensive  pressure  in  right  side  of  forehead.

Pressive  frontal  headache  so  severe,  when  walking,  that  the
eyes  were  drawn  shut ;  better  when  sitting,  ceases  when  lying
down,  worse  rising  again  or  going  into  open  air.

■  Severe  shooting  in  right  frontal  eminence,  <  from  bending

forwards,  >•  by  pressure.

Pain  ameliorated  by  strong  pressure  on  forehead.

Frequently  obliged  to  stand  still  in  walking,  from  violence  of
pam  in  forehead ;  at  every  step  it  seemed  as  if  brain  rose
and  fell  in  forehead ; >  by  strong  pressure  on  forehead.

I  Boring  pain  under  right  frontal  eminence,  early  in  morning

soon  after  waking.
Aching  in  forehead,  during  motion  it  increases  so  much  as  to

cause  the  eyes  to  be  closed.
Violent  frontal  headache  with  heat  and  redness  of  face  and

throbbing  carotids  ;  occasionally  nausea.

■  Soreness  in  sinciput,  stiffness  in  occiput.

Headache  above  the  orbits,  as  if  the  brain  was  compressed,  so
that  he  was  obliged  to  close  his  eyes.

She  is  very  much  troubled  with 'throbbing  headache,  particu-
larly over  the  eyes.

One-sided  pressure,  or  tensive  pain  moving  from  the  temple
or  forehead  to  the  orbit,  spreading  from  there  to  the  entire
half  of  the  brain,  made  worse  by  motion  of  the  head  and  eyes
from  rays  of  light  and  from  the  slightest  noise.

I I  Pain  in  head  and  eyeballs,  eyes  felt  as  if  starting  from  their
sockets.

■  Violent  headache,  chiefly  in  orbital  region,  with  redness  of

the  eyes  and  face.
Headache  aggravated  by  moving  the  eyes,  by  looking  down  and

reading.
BA  drawing  down  in  temples  and  in  right  orbit.
I  Half-sided  headache  extending  into  orbits  and  bones  of  the

nose,  with  a  pressing,  bursting,  wave-like  sensation.

■  Fullness  and  pressure  at  temples  and  forehead,  with  pain,  mak-

ing him  restless  and  uneasy.
■Violent  shooting  pain  in  right  temple.
The  pains  are  tearing,  drawing, begin  in  the  right  temple,

spread  over  the  orbit  to  the  right  cheek,  and  are  aggravated

by  the  slightest  motion.

■  Pressive  pain  in  right  temporal  region,  which  on  supporting

the  head  with  the  hand  increases  to  a  sense  of  bursting  and
extends  into  the  right  frontal  eminence. ■

■  Dull  shooting  in  left  temple,  from  in  out.

■  ■Stabbing,  as  with  a  knife,  from  one  temple  to  the  other.


BELLADONNA.  362

■  Sharp  cutting  pain  in  right  side  of  head,  from  frontal  to  occi-

pital region,  becoming  general,  and  at  last  setting  in  left
parietal  bone.

I  Boring,  tearing,  cutting,  shooting  pains  in  various  parts  of
head,  generally  worse  on  right  side  and  in  forehead,  less  in
occiput.

Dull  pressive  pain  on  one  or  other  side  of  head.

Violent  throbbing  in  brain,  from  behind  forward  and  toward
both  sides  ;  the  throbbing  ends  on  surface  in  painful  shoot-
ings.

Tensive  pressure  in  left  vertex  and  in  forehead.

Tearing  pain  in  right  vertex.

■  Three  violent  stabs  through  head  from  forehead  to  occiput,

whereupon  all  previous  headache  suddenly  disappears.

■  Sensation  of  heaviness  in  head,  with  pressure  in  occiput,  or

pressing  sensation  in  brain  towards  temples,  with  dimness  of
vision  and  dullness  of  hearing.

■  Incessant,  dull,  pressive  pain  on  one  or  the  other  side  of  head.

■  Pressure  in  head,  now  here,  now  there,  which  occupies  each

time  large  areas.

■  Violent  pressing  in  whole  head,  from  within  outward,  as  if  it

would  burst.
Continuous  and  forcible  -distension  of  the  whole  brain ;  head-
ache close  above  the  orbits,  as  though  the  brain  were
pressed  out ;  the  eyes  remain  forcibly  closed,  on  account  of
the  pain,  the  pupils  being  contracted  to  the  highest  degree,
and  the  voice  scarcely  audible.

■  Headache,  as  if  the  sutures  of  the  skull  were  being  torn  open,

and  as  if  a  lever  were  being  applied,  whereby  the  head  was
forced  asunder.

■  Incessant  drawing  and  expansive  pain  in  head,  as  if  something

in  it  rocked  and  swayed  in  a  jerking  manner.

■  Headache  in  vertex,  a  kind  of  twisting,  sometimes  also  dig-

ging, sometimes tearing, becomes much more  violent  on

external  pressure ;  the  skull  seemed  to  be  quite  thin,  as  if  it

could  be  pressed  through.
Stitches  and  tearing  in  the  head.
Boring, tearing, cutting,  shooting  pains  in  various  parts  of

head,  generally  worse  on  right  side  and  in  forehead,  less  in

occiput.

■  Stabbing  through  the  head,  as  if  with  a  double-edged  knife,  in

evening.

■  Stabbings  in  right  side  of  head,  as  if  with  a  two-edged  knife,

which  next  are  felt  in  front  of  head,  then  in  vertex,  then  in
occiput,  so  that  she  cannot  lie  on  either  side.

Swashing  in  head  as  if  full  of  water.

Sensation  as  if  the  brain  was  shaken  in  the  skull.

■  Feeling  in  brain  like  the  swashing  of  water.


363  BELLADONNA.

I  Gouty  headache,  most  half-sided ;  flying  stitches,  felt  very

deep,  sometimes  commencing  like  a  blow  on  a  part  of  the
head,  passing  over  into  a  long  and  very  painful  stitch,  draw-
ing through  whole  half  of  head  and  lasting  some  minutes,
often  with  loss  of  consciousness.

I I  Pains  come  on  suddenly,  last  indefinitely,  but  cease  suddenly.
I  Hysterical  headache.

Hemicrania;  migraine.

iVery  intense  headache.

I  Headache  makes  him  first  blind,  then  unconscious.

■  Headache  increases  at  night,  makes  him  crazy,  he  has  to  run

up  and  down  and  often  falls.

■  Attacks of  headache,  accompanied  by  pain  in  small  of  back ;

cold  feet;  difficulty  in  swallowing;  nausea  and  vomiting;

frequent  urination ;  oppression  of  chest ;  stifi'  neck ;  irrita-
ble mood,  and  tired  feeling  in  the  limbs.
Headache,  with  desire  for  lemonade.
Headache,  with  sleepiness,  but  cannot  sleep.
The  pains  in  head  are  aggravated  by  noise,  light,  motion,  when

moving  the  eyes,  by  shocks,  contact,  the  least  jar,  from  least

exertion,  and  in  open  air.
I  Headache  from  heat  of  sun.
Headache  >  during  menses,  from  pressure,  tight  bandaging

and  wrapping  up,  but  <  from  warmth.
I  In  open  air  the  sensation  of  bursting  in  head  is  very  violent,

and  he  is  afraid  to  cough  on  account  of  the  increase  of  pain.

■  Pressure  deep  in  brain  over  whole  head, during  and  after

walking  in  open  air.
Jerking  headache, extremely  violent  on  walking quickly, or
ascending  stairs  rapidly;  at  every  step  a  jolt  as  if  a  weight
were  in  the  occiput.

■  He  was  frequently  obliged  to  stand  still  in  walking,  from  the

violence  of  the  pain  in  forehead ;  at  every  step  it  recurred,
as  though  the  brain  rose  and  fell  in  the  forehead ;  the  pain
was  ameliorated  by  pressing  strongly  on  the  part.

Head  >  from  looking  up  and  bending  the  head  back.

The  pain  decreased  by  strongly  pressing  the  parts.

■  I  Headache  worse  when  leaning  forward,  better  when  bending

backwards.

■  ■Headache  with  dizziness,  aggravated  by  stooping.
Pressure  deep  in  brain,  over  the  whole  head,  after  stooping.
After  waking,  throbbing  in  head.

Headache  generally  comes  in  the  morning  after  a  restless  night.

Headache  from  abuse  of  cofiee,  from  overheating,  and  from  cold.

Congestion  to  the  brain.

Fullness  and  heaviness  of  the  head.

There  is  a  general  tendency  of  blood  to  the  head,  with  redness


BELLADONNA.  '  364

of  eyes  and  face,  which  is  still  more  developed  in  the  spas-
modic attacks.

1 1  Rush  of  blood  to  the  head ;  pulsation  of  cerebral  arteries  and
a  throbbing  in  interior  of  head.

SThe  feeling  in  the  head  was  that  of  violent  congestion,  a  full,
tense  and  throbbing  state  of  the  cerebral  vessels,  incidentally
the  same  sensation  as  would  be  produced  by  a  ligature  thrown
round  the  neck  and  impeding  the  return  of  the  venous  circu-
lation.

Congestion  to  the  head  ;  dry  heat ;  red  face ;  sleeplessness,  or
soporous  condition,  with  starting,  or  crying  out.

1 1  Congestion  to  the  head,  with  delirium, d  Typhus.

B  Strong  rush  of  blood  to  the  head,  with  beating  in  the  temples
and  burning  in  eyes.

8  Congestion  of  blood  to  the  head,  with  danger  of  apoplexy.

Cold  sensation  in  brain  at  middle  of  forehead.

Much  heat  in  head.

Annoying  pulsation  of  arteries  of  brain  when  lying.

Strong  pulsation  of  blood-vessels  of  forehead,  and  pain  as  if
the  bones  were  lifted  up.

Pulsating  headache,  with  pressure  at  vertex.

1 1  Inflammation  of  the  base  of  brain  and  medulla  from  expo-
sure to  the  sun  after  having  the  hair  cut.

1 1  Meningitis  and  encephalitis,  first  stage :  throbbing  carotids ;
hot  head  ;  flushed  face ;  glistening  eyes  ;  nausea ;  thirst ;
scanty  urine ;  no  stool ;  sudden  starting ;  dry  heat ;  frequent
full  pulse ;  drowsiness  ;  boring  the  head  into  the  pillow,  etc.

BEncephalaemia; Ihypergemia  from  active  congestion.

I  Hydrocephalus  acutus,  with  boring  the  head  into  pillows.

I I  Apoplexy;  flushed,  hot,  bloated  face;  dilated  pupils;  a
fixed,  threatening  look  ;  nausea ;  staggering ;  drowsiness ;
stertorous  breathing  during  sleep ;  grinding  the  teeth ;  on
waking  throbbing  in  the  head  ;  the  prodroma  are  tired  feel-
ing in  the  limbs,  lethargy  and  aversion  to  occupation,  weak
memory,  stifiness  of  the  tongue,  etc.

•  Suitable  for  plethoric  individuals  disposed  to  phlegmonous  in-
flammations ;  or  for  lymphatic,  scrofulous  persons,  liable  to
glandular  swellings.
*  Outer  Head. Gnawing  at  frontal  eminences.

Sensation  as  if  the  skull  was  as  thin  as  paper.

As  if  the  skull  was  transparent.

B  Drawing  pains  in  frontal  bone  and  in  nape  of  neck,  both  when
at  rest  and  during  motion.

B  Headache  with  not  only  visible  but  audible  pulsation.

BHead  hot ;  feet  cold  ;  rolls  head. 6  Cholera  infantum.

Hot  head,  sensitive  to  touch.

Convulsive  shaking  and  bending  backwards  of  the  head.

IB  Boring  of  head  into  the  pillow.


365  BELLADONNA.

Numbness  in  the  temples.

Contractive  pain  in  the  scalp.

Painful  swelling  and  redness  of  the  head.

Crampy  pain  in  frontal  eminence, extending  to  zygoma  and

lower  jaw.
I  Great  swelling  of  head  with  redness  over  the  whole  body.

I  Head  swollen  to  double  its  size.

Sensation,  externally,  as  if  the  muscles  of  forehead  and  eyes
were  contracted.

I I  Takes  cold  in  every  draft  of  air,  especially  when  uncovering
the  head ;  complaints  from  cutting  the  hair.

iHead  externally  so  sensitive,  that  the  least  contact,  even  the

pressure  of  the  hair,  gives  pain.
I  Inclination  to  lean  the  head  against  something  cold  and  hard.
Headache  mitigated  if  the  hair  hangs  loosely,  aggravated  if

it  is  "put  up."
The  hair,  which  had  been  electric,  ceased  to  be  so.
Children  tear  their  hair.
'  Sight  and  Eyes. Flightiness  as  soon  as  the  eyes  are  closed.

■  Visions  on  closing  the  eyes.

I  On  closing  the  eyes  for  sleep  a  sudden  shock  runs  through  the

body  from  below  up.
Looking  at  shining  or  glistening  objects  aggravates.
Pressive  pain  deep  in  ball  when  she  closes  eyes ;  feeling  as  if

eyes  protruded.
Oversensitiveness  of  sight.

■  Sensitiveness  of  the  eyes,  she  cannot  bear  light.

I I  Intolerance  of  light.

Convulsive  movements  of  eyeball  in  light,  with  terrible  pressive
pain  extending  through  whole  head ;  >  in  a  dark  room.

Inclined  to  remain  in  a  dark  room.

1 1  Photophobia;  worse  from  artificial  light.

Desire  for  light.

Halo  around  light,  particolored,  red  predominating ;  at  times
light  seems  broken  into  rays.

I  Chromopsia.

Everything  he  looks  at  seems  red.

I I  Flickering  before  the  eyes;  sparks,  or  dimness  of  vision.

I  Bright  sparks  before  the  eyes.

I I  Flashes  of  light  before  the  eyes.
Far-sightedness.

Every  object  in  the  room,  both  real  and  spectral,  had  a  double
or  at  least  a  dim  outline,  owing  to  the  extreme  dilatation  of
the  pupils.

The  page  appears  covered  with  letters  in  great  confusion.

■  Objects  appear:  double,  and  seem  to  revolve  and  run  back-

wards ;  upside  down  or  crooked.
iTriplopia;  sees  a  second  dim  representation  of  the  object  on


BELLADONNA.  366

each  side  of  it ;  from  candle  proceed  rays  of  same  color  as
the  flame,  and  outside  the  rays  there  is  a  variegated  halo,
inner  circle  being  green,  middle  red,  and  outer  white ;  when
walking  he  also  sees  a  round  black  ball  hovering,  a  little
larger  than  a  pea ;  all  this  he  sees  before  his  left  eye.

I  When  reading  lines  appear  crooked.

She  sees  things  wrong  side  up  {Stramon.  produces  an  oblique
appearance  of  all  objects).

■  Cannot  look  upwards.

Weakness  of  the  sight  from  doing  fine  work.
Vanishing  of  sight  on  sitting  up  in  bed.
Partial  blindness,  cannot  read  anything  printed.
Vision  obscured  as  from  a  white  vapor.

I I  Dimness  of  vision,  or  actual  blindness.

Amblyopia  caused  by  stoppage  of  menses;  veil  before  sight;

diplopia ;  chromopsia ;  dilated  pupils  and  stitching  in  right

eye.
Irides  insensible  to  light.
I  Blindness  following  severe  congestive  headaches  after  scarlet

fever.
Recognizes  his  friends  through  the  sense  of  hearing,  not  by

sight.
(While  the  window  shutters  are  open  he  says  they  are  closed,

for  he  cannot  see  with  open  eyes, d  Hepatitis.

■  Amaurosis.

I  Complete  amaurosis  caused  by  a  severe  nervous  fever,  or  from
the  large  amount  of  quinine  given  at  that  time;  pupils
widely  dilated.

I  Amaurosis  from  a  cold,  with  much  vertigo  ;  pressing  pain  and
feeling  of  fullness  in  eyeballs ;  black  spots  before  eyes ;  in-
creased pain  by  candlelight,  and  much  congestion  of  vessels.

■  Amaurosis  of  four  years  duration,  occurring  after  suppression

of  rash  in  scarlatina ;  only  a  perception  of  light  remained  ;
pupils  dilated.

■  Apoplexy  of  retina,  with  suppression  of  menstruation,  occur-

ring in  a  girl,  set.  18  ;  she  was  subject  to  cerebral  congestions,
sudden  heat  of  head,  vertigo,  burning  and  throbbing  frontal
pain,  noises  in  ears  and  illusions  oif  vision,  while  rest  of  body
was  cold ;  headaches  increased ;  pulsation  of  parotids  became
more  severe  ;  photopsia  and  then  sudden  blindness.

She  has  a  wild  look,  a  stunned  appearance.

Restless,  unsteady  look,  vacant  gaze,  at  times  the  eyes  sparkle ;
face  is  flushed ;  anxious,  irregular  breathing.

The  eyes  are  dim,  faint,  without  lustre.

■  Had  a  staring,  threatening,  wild,  wandering  look.
Staring,  glassy  eyes.

■  Half  opened,  protruded,  staring  eyes.

■  The  lids  wide  open ;  eyes  shining  and  protruding.


367  BELLADONNA.

Eyes  red,  protruding,  staring  and  brilliant.

I  The  eyes  are  very  animated,  with  fully  dilated  pupils.

Pain  over  eyes.

Pressive  pain  over  right  eye.

Deep-seated,  dull  pain  in  back  of  eye.

I  Pain  in  head  and  eyeballs,  which  felt  as  if  starting  from  their

sockets.

The  pain  begins  in  the  orbit,  alternately  spreads  to  the  fore-
head and  skin  of  the  face.

Pain  in  orbits ;  often  feels  as  if  the  eyes  had  been  torn  out,
sometimes  as  if  pressed  into  the  head.

I I  Orbital  neuralgias,  especially  of  the  infra-orbital  nerve,  with
red  face,  hot  hands.

I  Ciliary  neuralgia  appearing  and  disappearing  suddenly ;  pho-

tophobia; congestion.

Violent  pain  deep  in  eyes  aggravated  by  movement,  but  par-
ticularly by  light.

Transient,  fine,  stinging  pain  in  the  eyes.

■  Shooting  in  eyes,  from  within  outwards.
Violent  aching  pains  in  eyes,  from  without  inwards.
Pain  and  burning  in  eyes.

Feeling  of  heat  in  eyes  ;  seems  as  if  surrounded  by  a  hot  vapor.

Burning,  itching  and  smarting  in  eyes.

Severe  pains  of  glaucoma ;  (glaucomatous  eyes  are  exceedingly

sensitive  to  the  action  of  Bellad.).
Mydriasis,  resulting  from  nervous  headache.

I I  Pupils  dilated.

Pupils  dilated  and  immovable ;  sclerotica  bluish ;  livid,  lead-
colored  spots  on  eyelids  ;  deathly  pallor  of  face.

■  Protruded  eyes  with  dilated  pupils.
1 1  Contracted  pupils.

■  Choroiditis,  especially  the  disseminate  form.

In  chronic  keratitis,  when  suddenly  eye  becomes  intensely  con-
gested, with  heat,  pains,  photophobia;  pains  often  sharp,
shooting  through  the  ball  to  the  back  of  head.

Ulcers  or  maculae  on  the  cornea ;  thickening  of  the  cornea.

Particularly  useful  in  diseases  of  the  fundus ;  hypersesthesia
of  retina.

■  The  optic  disc  greatly  deepened  in  tint,  and  the  retinal  arter-

ies and  veins  much  enlarged,  the  veins  most  markedly.

■  Optic  neuritis,  veins  large,  flashes  of  light  before  eye  and

pains  in  head.
In  h^persemia  of  optic  nerve  and  retina,  especially  indicated,  if
dependent  upon  cerebral  congestion  and  accompanied  by  ach-
ing pain  in  eye,  aggravated  by  any  light.

■  ■Inflammation  of  optic  nerve  and  retina.

■  Retinitis  in  a  young  lady  (subject  to  congestive  headaches,

always  worse  in  the  afternoon) ;  retina  very  hazy  and  cede-


BELLADONNA.  368

matous,  appearing  as  if  covered  with  a  bluish-gray  film,  out-
lines of  disk  ill  defined,  vessels  large  and  tortuous.

Rheumatic  iritis  in  early  stages.

The  eyes  are  congested,  look  very  red ;  cannot  bear  the  light ;
opening  only  when  in  a  dark  place.

■  Catarrhal  ophthalmia.

Ophthalmia  suddenly  appearing ;  worse  right  eye ;  intense
photophobia.

Scrofulous  ophthalmia,  cannot  bear  artificial  light.

Strumous  ophthalmia,  with  abundant  flow  of  hot  tears.

Inflammation  of  eyes ;  with  redness  and  swelling  of  lids,  also
of  new-born  infants ;  of  gouty  or  scrofulous  persons,  after
catching  cold.

Given  in  cases  of  chronic  ophthalmia  caused  the  eyes  to  burn,
and  a  feeling in  cheek-bones  as  if  scalded.

Conjunctivitis  (especially  catarrhal,  in  early  stages)  with  dry-
ness of  eyes,  thickened  red  lids,  and  burning  pains  in  eye.

Conjunctiva  covered  with  red  vessels;  shooting  pains;  eyes
water.

I  In  chronic  forms  of  hyperaemia,  if  a  red  conjunctival  line  is
very  marked  along  the  line  of  fissure  of  lids.

iTunica  conjunctivae  highly  injected;  the  whole  eye  promi-
nent and  preternaturally  brilliant.

■  I  Strabismus,  due  to  spasmodic  action  of  muscles,  or  when  re-

sulting from  brain  affections.
Spasmodic  motion  of  eyes.

■  Spasms  of  eyes  distorting  them.

I  The  eyes  are  in  constant  motion,  the  pupils  extremely  dilated.
The  eyeballs  turn  convulsively  in  a  circle.

■  The  eyes  become  distorted,  with  redness  and  swelling  of  the

face.
I  I  Swelling  and  suppurative inflammation of  left  caruncula
lachrymalis.

■  Dryness  of  the  eyes.

■  Feeling  of  burning  dryness  in  both  eyes.
Feeling  of  sand  in  eyes.

■Eye  dry,  motion  attended  with  a  sense  of  dryness  and  stiffness ;
surface  of  the  ball  became  quite  dry,  causing  a  very  disagree-
able sensation,  not  relieved  by  winking  or  continued  closing
of  eyes.

Burning  dryness  of  eyes ;  the  water  flowing  from  eyes  is  hot,
or  smarting ;  double  vision.

Lachrymation,  with  great  photophobia.

Burning  tears.

Lachrymation  on  side  affected  by  headache.

■  Yellowness  of  sclerotica.
Dull,  heavy,  aching  pain  in  lids.
Heaviness  of  lids.


369  BELLADONNA.

Eyes  wide  open.

Nictation  of  the  eyelids.

Trembling  and  quivering  of  right  upper  eyelid.

Itching  and  burning  of  the  lids.

Bleeding  from  the  lids.

I  Lids  swollen,  red,  like  erysipelas.

Lids  puffy,  red  and  congested.

Lids  feel  sore,  red,  congested  and  swollen.

In  blepharitis,  if  lids  are  painful  and  swollen  like  erysipelas.

Itching  stitches  in  the  inner  canthus  only  temporarily  relieved

by  scratching.
Inflammatory  swelling  of  lower  lid  near  inner  canthus,  with

throbbing  pains.
I  In  the  morning  lids  are  completely  agglutinated.

■  Scrofulous  inflammation  of  the  lids.
Everted  lids.

Acute  aggravations  of  various  chronic  diseases,  as  in  granular
lids,  when  after  taking  cold,  eyes  become  sensitive  to  air  and
light,  with  dryness  and  a  gritty  feeling.
*  Hearing  and  Ears. (Extreme  sensibility  of  hearing.

Very  sensitive  to  noises  ;  easily  startled.

Earache  worse  from  the  least  noise.

Cannot  bear  noise  or  bright  light.

■  Roaring,  ringing,  or  noises  in  ears.

■  Roaring,  tingling,  humming  and  murmuring  in  ears.
Roaring  in  ears  ;  vertigo  and  dull  colic.

Fancied  noise  awakens ;  slight  delirium  on  waking.
Deafness  as  if  a  skin  were  drawn  over  the  ears.
Hardness  ot  hearing,  owing  to  having  taken  cold.

■  I  They  lose  their  hearing, d  Typhus.

■  Tearing  in  internal  and  external  ear,  in  a  downward  direction.
Stitches  in  ears.

Shooting  in  internal  ear,  with  hardness  of  hearing  on  same  side.
Pinching  in  ears,  first  right,  then  left.
Earache,  with  boring  and  screwing  in  ears.

■  Acute  thrusts  in  internal  ear,  with  pinching  like  earache.

■  Soreness  extending  from  throat  to  ears.

Lacerating  from  above  downwards  in  external  and  internal  ear.

■  Tearing  in  right  external  ear  and  whole  right  side  of  face,.

downwards.

The  violent,  tearing  pain  spreads  from  external  ear  both  back-
wards and  forwards  to  whole  side  of  face.

Sharp  pains  in  and  about  ears,  sometimes  excited  by  chewing,.

■  ■Otalgia.

■  Acute  inflammation  of  ears.

■  ■Otitis  interna;  child  screams  in  sleep;  delirium  ;  rolling  of

head ;  threatens  extension  to  meninges.

■  Otorrhoea.

VOL.  II. — 24.


BELLADONNA.  370

llnflammatory  swelling  of  ears,  and  also  of  parotids.

I  (Swelling  of  right  parotid  gland,  with  erysipelatous  bright
redness  and  violent  shooting  pains.

Inflammatory  swelling  of  parotid  gland.

Violent  shootings  in  right  parotid,  extending  into  external  ear,
where  it  becomes  cramp-like  and  then  disappears  ;  it  returns
again  the  following  day,  also  at  the  same  hour.

Inflammation  of  glands  about  the  ears,  with  tearing  and  stitches.
^  Smell  and  Nose. Oversensitiveness  to  smell.

Extreme  sensibility  of  smell;  odor  of  tobacco  and  soot  are  in-
tolerable.

B  Smell  now  acute,  at  another  time  dull, d  Coryza.

Loss  of  smell.

I  Smell  in  nose  as  from  herring-brine  or  sour  beer. ^Coryza.

Putrid  smell  from  nose.

Cramp  at  root  of  nose.

I  Nosebleed:  with  congestion  to  head;  in  children  at  night.

I  Very  frequent  epistaxis,  with  pulsative  pains  in  head,  espec-
cially  at  night  when  in  bed  and  on  waking  in  the  morning.

Bleeding  of  nose ;  distended  abdomen ;  the  throat  frequently
becomes  sore ;  eyes  are  often  inflamed ;  bloated  face  ;  no  good
sleep,  hears  all  that  is  going  on  at  night.

Discharge  of  mucus,  mixed  with  blood,  from  nose.

■  Frequent  sneezing.

B Frequent  dry  sneezing,  with  tickling,  especially  in  left  nostril.

Spasmodic  sneezing,  with  cough,  of  children.

B  Sensation  of  dryness  of  Schneiderian  membrane.

Dryness  of  nose,  with  dull  frontal  headache.

Coryza ;  one  side  of  nose  stopped  up,

B  Dryness  of  the  nose  and  lips,  the  latter  very  red.

Nasal  voice  ;  from  stoppage.

I  1  Coryza,  with  off'ensive  smell  in  nose,  as  of  herring-pickle,
especially  when  blowing  nose.

B  B  Suppressed  catarrh,  maddening  headache.

Inflammatory  swelling  and  redness  of  internal  and  external
nose:

Pain  as  if  bruised,  when  touching  the  nose.

Sudden  redness  of  tip  of  nose,  with  burning  sensation.

BTip  of  nose  red,  swollen  and  shining.

Tip  of  nose  is  red  and  hot,  particularly  in  warm  weather.

Nostrils  and  corners  of  lips  ulcerated,  without  pain  or  itching.

Pustules  break  out  on  cheek  and  nose,  which  rapidly  fill  with
pus,  become  covered  with  a  crust.
*  Face.  B  Cutting,  tearing  pain,  mostly  right  side,  shooting  from
side  of  face  up  to  temple,  into  ear,  and  down  to  nape  of  neck ;
worse  from  touch  and  motion;  hard  pressure  sometimes  re-
lieves.


371  BELLADONNA.

■  Neuralgic  pains  commencing  under  left  orbit  and  running

back  to  ear.
Violent  shooting  in  right  maxillary  joint, extending  to  ear;
when  chewing.

■  Prosopalgia;  tic  doulereux;  Fothergill's  faceache.
Extraordinary  mobility  of  facial  muscles,  especially  on  left  side.
Twitching  of  facial  muscles.

I  Convulsive  movement  of  the  facial  muscles,  with  distortion  of

the  mouth.

I I  Spasm  of  facial  muscles ;  risus  sardonicus  ;  continual  wink-
ing and  trembling  of  eyelids,  alternating  with  cramps  of  the
hands  and  feet.

I  The  muscles  of  his  face,  jaws  and  limbs,  were  agitated  by  con-
vulsive twitchings.

Convulsive  play  of  facial  muscles,  with  grinding  of  teeth.

Numbness  of  face.

Paleness  and  coldness  of  the  face,  with  shivering ;  fixed  or  con-
vulsive eyes ;  foam  at  the  mouth ;  involuntary  escape  of
feces  and  urine.

Great  paleness  of  face ;  much  moaning  and  grinding  of  teeth.

An  extreme  paleness  of  face  is  instantaneously  changed  to  red-
ness, with  cold  cheeks  and  hot  forehead ;  sweat  only  in  face.

Paleness  of  face,  sometimes  suddenly  alternating  with  red.

Face  pale  and  sunken ;  the  features  express  restlessness  and
anxiety,  are  often  deeply  furrowed  by  grief,  or  pale  and  dulL

I  I  Sensation  of  burning  heat  in  whole  face,  without  redness

of  cheeks  ;  or  with  marked  thirst ;  body  warm  ;  feet  cold.
Sensation  of  heat  in  face,  mostly  without  flushed  cheeks,  and
no  thirst ;  very  often  cold  feet.

I I  Red  face.

Face  animated  and  flushed.

The  face  was  very  red,  with  a  staring,  anxious  look.

Hot  head  ;  flushed  face  ;  wild,  staring  look ;  frequent  pulse  ;
mucous  membrane  of  mouth  dry  ;  tardy  stool ;  suppressed
urination.

Pains  that  cause  redness  of  face  and  eyes ;  throbbing  of  caro-
tids and  in  the  head.

Glowing  redness  of  face,  with  violent,  inexpressible  headache.

I B  Violent  neuralgia ;  sometimes  originating  in  the  r.  temple
and  spreading  over  the  orbit  to  r.  cheek  ;  <  from  the  slight-
est motion ;  sometimes  pain  radiates  from  the  orbit  to  the
forehead,  and  over  the  skin  of  the  face ;  sometimes  afi"ecting
the  ears  and  teeth, d  Prosopalgia.

Dark-red  face.

Scarlet  spots  in  face.

I  Mottled  redness  of  face.
Bluish-red,  bloated  face.

I I  Red  face,  with  burning  heat.  ^


BELLADONNA.  372

Very  red  face,  with  general  warmth  and  great  restlessness.

Flushed  face  and  injected  eyeballs.

Very  red  and  hot  face,  with  dilated  pupils  and  hot  head ;  with

throbbing  of  carotids  and  injection  of  scleroticse.
Great  thirst,  without  sweat.

I  Face  red  and  hot,  and  face,  neck  and  chest  much  swollen.
Tumefaction  and  redness  of  face  and  lips.

Swelling  of  cheeks,  with  burning  pains  ;  also  of  one  side  of  face.

I I  Erysipelas  of  face,  the  parts  being  red,  hot  and  hard.
Scraping  itching  of  forehead.

*  Lower  Part  of  Face. Tearing  pain  in  the  jaws.

Stitching  and  tightness  in  the  maxillary  articulations.
Sensation  as  if  lower  jaw  was  drawn  backwards.

■  Shooting  and  tension  of  lower  jaw,  in  the  direction  of  the  ears.

■  Shootings  extending  from  superior  maxilla  into  internal  ear.

■  Pressing  below  right  zygoma.

■  Tearing  and  drawing  behind  right  zygoma.
Inflammation  and  swelling  of  submaxillary  and  cervical  glands.
External  throat  below  angle  of  lower  jaw  very  painful  to  touch.

■  She  clenched  her  teeth  together  so  that  great  force  could  not

open  them,  with  startings  in  all  the  limbs,  and  chilliness.

■  The  lower  jaw  is  pressed  convulsively  against  the  upper,  with

a  red  face  and  a  peculiar  staring  look.

■  Convulsive  closing  of  jaws,  and  contraction  of  muscles  of  face

and  extremities  ;  next  day  increase  of  convulsive  movements,
with  redness  of  face  and  profuse  perspiration ;  great  rigidity
down  the  spine.

■  The  jaws  are  closed  convulsively,  and  very  diflicult  to  open.

d  Trismus.
The  mouth  is  half  open  or  spasmodically  closed  in  consequence

of  lockjaw.
Trembling  of  the  upper  lip.

■  Thick,  swollen  upper  lip. ^Scrofula.
Pustules,  or  abscess  on  upper  lip.

Lips  :  especially  the  upper  one,  crack  in  the  middle ;  dry  and

parched.
Lips  dark-red.
Swelling  of  the  lips.
Pustules  at  borders  of  lips,  with  smarting  pains.

■  Dry,  burning,  swollen  and  hardened  lips.
Raw  feeling  at  corners  of  mouth.

Eruptions  at  corners  of  mouth  painful  when  touched.
*®  Teeth  and  Gums. Sensation  as  if  her  teeth  would  be  forced
out  of  her  head.
The  teeth  feel  elongated.
Digging  toothache.
Teeth  feel  "on  edge."
Lacerating  toothache ;  worse  in  evening.


373  BELLADONNA.

Dull  drawing  in  upper  row,  right  side,  all  night.

Painful  jerkings  in  nerves  of  the  fangs  of  one  or  more  teeth.

Sore  pain  in  teeth  from  admission  of  open  air.

I  Toothache  some  minutes  after  eating,  not  during;  increases
gradually  to  high  degree  and  as  gradually  diminishes.

Toothache  :  tearing,  drawing  and  stinging,  in  spells  ;  <C  even-
ing till  night ;  sometimes  renewed  in  morning  on  awaking ;
<  from  touching  the  teeth,  chewing,  and  from  cold  air;  >
from  pressure  and  pricking  the  gums  until  blood  comes.

Toothache,  with  red,  hot  face  and  throbbing  in  head.

Toothache  with  otalgia.

Rheumatic  toothache,  particularly  in  females,  especially  when
pregnant.

I  Throbbing  in  the  teeth, d  Pregnancy.

The  pain  seems  to  start  from  teeth  and  returns  to  them.
Barking  and  growling,  with  gnashing  of  teeth.

I I  Grinding  of  teeth.

Grinding  of  teeth,  with  moaning ;  great  dryness  of  mouth  re-
lieved for  a  short  time  by  rinsing  with  cold  water.

Grinding  of  teeth,  with  foam  at  mouth.

Extremely  troublesome  itching  of  gums,  with  pain  in  throat.

Vesicle  in  gum  below  one  of  the  front  teeth,  with  pain  as  if  burnt.

Gums  pain  as  if  ulcerated.

Extremely  painful  swelling  of  gums  on  right  side.

I  Bleeding  of  gums.
*^  Taste,  Speech,  Tongue. Taste  :  salty  ;  sour ;  bitter ;  pappy ;
offensive ;  putrid  when  eating  or  drinking.

Bread  tastes  sour.

Putrid  taste  rising  out  of  throat ;  also  when  eating  or  drinking,
although  food  and  drink  have  the  proper  taste.

Putrid,  disagreeable  taste  in  mouth,  with  a  clean  tongue.

Insipid  taste  ;  or  loss  of  taste.

Hasty  speech  ;  often  inarticulate,  confused  sounds.

I  Stammering  speech.

Inarticulate  speech  from  hindered  mobility  of  the  tongue.
Tongue  dry  and  dislike  to  talk.

I I  Loss  of  speech, d  Typhus.

SB  Paralytic  weakness  of  organs  of  speech.
Smacking  with  the  tongue.

■  Trembling  of  the  tongue  when  protruded.
Feeling  of  coldness  and  dryness  of  forepart  of  tongue.

■  Dryness  of  the  tongue  and  throat  becoming  so  great  as  to  in-

terfere with  speech.
Hot  tongue.
B  Tongue  dry,  cracked,  and  difficult  to  move.

■  Tongue  parched  ;  rattling  in  the  mouth  like  a  chip.
Inflammatory  swelling  of  the  tongue.


BELLADONNA.  374

Tongue : inflamed  and  much swollen ; papillae  of  deep  red
color ;  tip  and  edges  light  red.

■  The  papillae  on  the  tongue  are  of  a  deep  red  color,  inflamed

and  much  swollen  [Tart,  emet,  produces  red  tongue  with

raised  papillae).
1 1  The  tongue  hung  dry  out  of  the  child's  mouth,  and  was

swollen  thick ;  it  was  scarcely  possible  to  get  some  drops  of

milk  into  the  mouth.
The  tongue  is  painful,  especially  to  the  touch ;  it  is  red,  hot

and  dry,  with  red  edges  and  white  in  the  middle.
iRed  streak  in  middle  of  tongue,  wide  and  broader  towards  the

point.
I  Tongue :  white  centre  with  red  edges  ;  or  two  white  stripes ;

covered  with  white  clammy  fur,  which  can  be  pulled  off  in

strings ;  dry  and  furred ;  covered  with  much  tenacious,  yel-
lowish-white mucus.
Feeling  in  tip  of  tongue  as  if  a  vesicle  was  on  it,  with  burning

pain  when  touched.
Cracked  tongue,  coated  white,  with  salivation.
Two  white  streaks  along  the  tongue.
"  Inner  Mouth. Foul  odor  from  the  mouth.

Peculiar  odor  from  the  mouth,  with  but  slightly  coated  tongue.
Mouth  feels  hot.

■  Burning  in  the  mouth.

■  Dry,  burning  mouth,  with  great  thirst.

Paralytic  weakness  of  the  internal  parts  of  the  mouth.
Hemorrhage  from  the  mouth  and  nose.

■  The  lips,  mucous  membrane  of  the  mouth,  fauces  and  nose,

very  hot  and  dry.
Dry  mouth  and  lips.

■  Dryness  of  mouth,  with  thirst.

■  ■  Mouth  feels  scalded.

■  Dryness  of  whole  inner  lining  of  cheek,  the  tongue,  which

looks  as  if  burnt,  the  roof  of  the  mouth  and  pharynx.

Red,  inflammatory  swelling  of  inner  mouth  and  soft  palate.

Lips,  tongue  and  throat  dry,  with  constricted  feeling  in  mouth.

A  good  deal  of  tenacious  mucus  in  mouth.

Slimy  mouth  in  morning,  when  awaking,  with  pressing  head-
ache.

■  Thick  white  mucus  collects  in  mouth  and  throat,  with  con-

stant inclination  to  hawk  and  swallow.
Saliva thickened, tenacious, brownish,  white, clings  to  the

tongue  like  glue.
Salivation  ; <  when  lying  down.
Salivation  succeeding  the  dryness  of  mouth.
Increased  flow  of  saliva.
*'  Palate and  Throat. Dryness of  roof  of  mouth,  fauces  and

throat.


375  BELLADONNA.

B  Troublesome  continued  dryness  of  mouth,  lips  and  throat,
with  a  violent  longing  for  drink,  but  not  satisfied  by  it.

Great  dryness  of  mouth  and  throat ;  desires  drink  but  cannot
swallow.

Desire  to  swallow  saliva,  which  is  painful.

About  the  fauces  the  sensation  of  dryness  was  most  distressing  ;
it  induced  a  constant  attempt  at  deglutition,  and  finally  ex-
cited suffocative  spasms  of  the  fauces  and  glottis  ;  renewed
at  every  attempt  to  swallow.

Dryness  of  the  fauces,  causing  excessive  difficulty  of  swallow-
ing ;  and  alteration  of  the  voice.

■  Sensation  of  heat  and  dryness  in  mouth  and  pharynx,  extend-
ing to  stomach  ;  the  epigastric  region  was  painful  and  swol-
len, with  constant  thirst.

B  Dryness,  burning  and  scraping  in  mouth  and  throat.

Catarrhal  inflammation  of  palate.

Rawness  and  soreness  of  palate.

Painful  narrowing  and  contraction  of  the  gullet.

B  Dryness  of  mouth  and  pharynx,  with  sense  of  constriction  of
throat.

The  tongue  and  palate  dark -red;  she  complains  of  dryness  of
throat  and  of  difficult  swallowing.

Inflammation  of  the  throat  and  fauces,

Redness  and  swelling  of  the  uvula  and  soft  palate.

Burning  sensation  in  the  fauces.

BThe  mucous  membrane,  from  the  posterior  third  of  the  palate,
as  far  down  as  could  be  seen,  was  of  a  deep  crimson  color,
and  the  tonsils  were  much  enlarged.

B  Angina  faucium,  catarrhalis;  erysipelatosa ;  tonsillaris,  etc.

B  Amygdalitis.

Inflammation  ;  also  swelling  and  suppuration  of  the  tonsils.

B  fi  Tonsillitis  ;  worse  right  side  ;  parts  bright  red  ;  worse  swal-
lowing liquids.

The  fauces,  uvula  and  tonsils  are  scarlet  and  shiny.

Fine  tearing  on  inner  surface  of  angle  of  left  lower  jaw,  in  and
behind  left  tonsil,  unaffected  by  contact ;  worse  when  swal-
lowing.

Sensation  of  foreign  body  in  oesophagus.

Sensation  as  of  a  lump,  which  cannot  be  removed.

BFine  tearing  on  inner  surface  of  corner  of  left  lower  jaw;  in
left  tonsil,  and  behind  latter ;  unaffected  by  contact ;  the
tearing  is  more  violent  during  deglutition.

B  Sensation  of  heat,  burning  and  dryness  in  the  throat.

BViolent  burning  in  throat  (the  mouth  at  the  same  time  being
moist),  which  is  not  at  all  relieved  by  drinking,  but  is  by  a
little  sugar,  though  only  for  a  moment.

B  Constant  pressing  and  burning  in  throat. ^Quinsy.


BELLADONNA.  376

I  Felt  great  soreness  in  throat,  which  looked  very  red  about
the  tonsils  and  palate ;  the  soreness  extended  to  ears.

I  Throat:  feels  raw  and  sore;  looks  very  red  and  shining.

Inflammation  of  the  throat  and  back  part  of  the  mouth.

I  Sensation  as  if  a  large  tumor  was  growing  in  the  throat  and
stopped  it  up.

Sore  throat ;  fauces  and  pharynx  deep  red  ;  soft  palate  and  ton-
sils swollen  ;  swallowing  painful,  particularly  fluids  ;  speech
thick  ;  feels  like  a  lump  in  throat,  which  induces  hawking ;
the  throat  swollen  outside  and  sensitive  to  touch.

Lump  in  throat.

Violent,  lancinating  pain  in  throat  when  swallowing  or  breath-
ing.

I  Sore  throat ;  shootings  in  pharynx,  and  pain  as  from  an  in-
ternal swelling,  only  felt  during  deglutition,  and  upon  turn-
ing the  head  around  ;  likewise  when  feeling  side  of  neck,  but
not  when  at  rest  or  in  speaking.

I  Sore  throat,  which  increases  every  hour;  heat;  scraping;
narrowing,  and  feeling  of  soreness.

I  As  soon  as  the  throat  began  to  feel  sore,  there  was  great  ex-

pectoration of  light  mucus.
Sore  throat :  fauces  and  pharynx  deep  red ;  soft  palate  and

tonsils swollen ; swallowing painful, particularly fluids ;

speech  thick ;  feels  like  a  lump  in  throat, which  induces

hawking ;  the  throat  swollen  outside  and  sensitive  to  touch.
Painful  contraction  and  narrowing  of  upper  part  of  throat.
Constriction  of  throat,  with  choking  sensation.

■  Contraction  pf  the  oesophagus,  lasting  a  short  time,  but  fre-

quently recurring ;  more  during  deglutition  than  between,
and  followed  each  time  by  a  scraping  sensation  in  region  of
epiglottis,  as  if  the  latter  were  raw  and  sore.

II  Spasmodic  constriction  of  throat.

1 1  Spasms  in  oesophagus. 6  Typhus.

I  Only  with  difiiculty  and  by  constantly  taking  liquids  is  he

able  to  swallow  solid  food.
B  Constant  urging  and  desire  to  swallow  ;  seemed  as  if  he  would

choke  if  he  did  not  swallow.

■  During  deglutition,  feeling  in  throat  as  if  it  were  too  narrow,

or  drawn  together,  as  if  nothing  would  pass  properly.
Difficulty  in  swallowing  ;  severe  coughing  spells,  causing  much

redness  of  face  ;  moaning  and  drowsiness.
When  swallowing,  experiences  a  sensation  in  throat  as  though

the  parts  were  too  narrow,  contracted,  as  if  nothing  would

go  down.
I  On attempting  to  pour  down  liquid, tetanic  closure  of  the

mouth,  and  regurgitation  of  the  liquid.
Impeded  deglutition,  or  entire  inability  to  swallow  even  liquids,

which  return  by  the  nose.


377  BELLADONNA.

I  He  swallows  water  with  the  greatest  difficulty,  and  can  only

get  the  smallest  quantity  of  it  down.
I  I  Chokes  easily  ;  things  go  down  the  wrong  way.
I  Aversion  to  all  fluids,  so  that  she  behaves  frightfully  at  the

sio'ht  of  them  ;  the  forcible  administration  of  fluid  medicine

makes  her  furious.
Constant  desire  for  empty  swallowing,  which  causes  pain  in

larynx.
I  When  swallowing,  a  pressing,  urging  pain. 6  Angina.

■  Swallowing  saliva  or  empty  is  the  most  painful 6  Angina.

I  Has  to  swallow,  which  is  very  painful;  he  has  to  bend  head
forward  and  lift  up  the  knee, d  Angina.

I A  violent  shooting  pain  in  throat  on  swallowing  or  breathing.

I  Rapidly  forming  aphthous  ulcers  on  tonsils;  intense  conges-
tion ;  throbbing  of  the  carotids.

I  Throat  is  painful  to  touch  on  r.  side,  especially  towards  ear,
where  it  stings, d  Angina,

I  I  Right  hand  clutches  at  the  throat. ^Epilepsy.

Pressive  pain  externally  when  bending  the  head  backwards  and
when  touching  the  parts.

I I  Cervical  glands  inflame  suddenly.

^*  Appetite,  Thirst,  Desires,  Aversions.  If  children  in  hy-
drocephaloid  cry  until  they  get  something  to  eat,  it  is  well
indicated.

Complete  loss  of  appetite.

Aversion  to  food,  particularly  meat.

I  Anxious  seeking  for  drink.

Great  thirst.

Violent  thirst  at  noon.

I  Excessive  thirst  for  cold  water. 6  Angina.

I  Desire  for  lemons  and  lemonade,  which  prove  beneficial.

Desire  for  warm  drinks.

Great  thirst  in  evening,  with  watery  taste ;  all  drinks  are  loath-
some.

Absence  of  thirst.

Aversion  to  every  kind  of  liquid  ;  she  demeans  herself  like  a
fury  when  seeing  it.

Violent  burning,  suffocative,  unquenchable  thirst,  with  inability
to  swallow  the  least  drop,  or  with  great  aversion  to  drinks.

I  Thirst  for  water  changed  into  thirst  for  beer.

Repugnance  to  beer,  acids,  cofl"ee,  camphor.

Desire  for tobacco and undigestible things; swallows food
greedily.
^^  Eating  and  Drinking. I  Hasty  drinking,  with  trembling.

After  eating  :  putrid  taste  in  mouth.

Pressure  in  stomach  after  eating.

Taking  drink  or  nourishment  excites  vomiting.

■  At  first  he  pushed  away  a  glass  of  sugared  water,  when  on  be-


BELLADONNA.  378

ing  coaxed  he  attempted  to  drink  it,  only  a  few  drops  passed
down,  the  rest  was  forced  out  of  the  mouth  by  spasmodic
contraction  of  the  muscles  of  deglutition.

After  drinking  beer,  internal  heat.

Wine  aggravates  dyspnoea.

Vomiting  after  eating  or  drinking,
^^  Hiccough,  Belching,  Nausea  and  Vomiting, b  Attacks
of  violent  hiccough. ^Hepatitis.

Crying  on  account  of  pain  from  the  hiccough.

Hiccoughing  eructations ;  spasm  composed  partly  of  eructation,
partly  of  hiccough.

Half  suppressed,  incomplete  eructations.

Bitter,  frequent  eructations,  with  want  of  appetite  and  giddi-
ness.

Gulping  of  food,  with  pressing  in  stomach.

Nausea,  with  loathing  of  food.

Nausea  in  the  throat  and  stomach.

Nausea  and  bitter  eructations.

Ineffectual  efforts  to  vomit  about  midnight,  with  cold  sweat.

Nausea,  retching  and  vomiting.

Unsuccessful  inclination  to  vomit ;  empty  retching.

Sick  and  fainty  ;  vomits  everything.

I  Can't  keep  any  food  on  stomach;  can't  hold  his  head  up ;
makes  water  freely  ;  exceedingly  cross,  ill-tempered  ;  drowsy,
but  can't  get  sound  sleep ;  bowels  constipated  very  much ;
stools  dark  and  hard ;  tongue  coated  white ;  uneasy,  rest-
less ;  rouses  up  and  screams  ;  starts  and  screams  as  if  fright-
ened.

Can  keep  nothing  down  ;  pale  ;  weak.

Frequent  nausea  ;  spasmodic  vomiting.

Vomiting  :  of  mucus  ;  of  bile  and  mucus,  or  undigested  food ;
watery,  sour,  bloody  mucus.

I  Vomits  bloody  phlegm  and  improves. ^Angina.

BVomit  watery,  slimy,  bilious  fluid. 6  Hepatic  affections.
^^  Scrobiculum  and  Stomach. Painless  throbbing  and  beating
at  pit  of  stomach.

Tensive  pressing  pain  in  pit  of  stomach,  particularly  after  eat-
ing.

Painful  pressure  in  pit  of  stomach  only  when  walking;  com-
pels him  to  walk  slowly.
I  Violent  shooting,  cutting  pain  in  pit  of  stomach,  forcing  one

to  bend  the  body  backward  and  to  hold  one's  breath.
I  At  night  periodical  pains  at  pit  of  stomach,  with  tremor.

■  Burning  in  the  stomach.

■  Excruciating  pains  about  pit  of  stomach.
Feeling  of  emptiness  in  stomach.

■  Spasm  in  stomach  like  cramp.

Chronic  spasm  of  stomach,  always  occurring  during  a  meal ;


379  BELLADONNA.

colic,  as  if  a  spot  in  abdomen  were  seized  with  nails  ;  a  grip-
ing, clutching,  seizing  with  talons  (see  Ipec).

I  Fullness  and  oppression  in  stomach ;  cannot  lie  still.  ^He-
patitis.

I  Cardialgia  ;  gastralgia.

I  Hard  pressure  in  stomach  after  eating  ;  violent  stomachache,

lasting  a  short  time.

II  Pain  in  stomach  extending  through  to  spine,  between  shoul-
ders.

Pains  in  stomach  and  abdomen  worse  when  walking,  and  from
a  jar;  in  stomach  or  abdomen  as  if  clutched  by  a  hand.

Gnawing,  pressing,  crampy,  drawing,  and  wrenching  pain  in
stomach,  compels  patient  to  bend  backwards:  worse  after
drinking.

Shooting  pains  in  stomach.

Cutting  pain  in  stomach  ;  worse  from  motion  or  pressure.

I  Region  of  stomach  sensitive  to  touch.

Haematemesis ;  ringing  in  ears ;  red  cheeks  ;  feeling  of  full-
ness and  warmth  in  stomach.

H  Gastritis.

Distension  of  epigastrium,  with  tensive  pain  in  stomach.
^^  Hypochondria. Pain  in  liver.

Acute  and  chronic  hepatitis.

I  Region  of  liver  painful  and  sore  to  touch.  ^Congestion  of
liver.

I  Acute  pain  in  region  of  liver ;  worse  lying  on  right  side ;
pains  go  to  shoulder  and  neck ;  can  tolerate  no  pressure  or
jar ;  pit  of  stomach  bloated.

■  Severe  pressure  in  r.  hypochonder  on  a  small  spot  near  and
above  umbilicus;  •<  from  motion,  and  very  sensitive  to
touch, d  Hepatitis.

I  The  pain  in  hepatic  region  gets  rapidly  worse ;  spreads  to  back
and  kidneys ;  causes  retching  and  vomiting  of  bile ;  has  to
bend  double. 6  Hepatitis.

B  B  Colic  from  gall-stones  ;  liver  hard. ^Jaundice.

Pain  as  if  the  hypochondria  were  being  pressed  out,  when  press-
ing on  the  epigastrium.
"  Abdomen,  Loins  and Groins. During  the  pain,  the  trans-
verse colon  protrudes  like  a  pad,  all  the  way  across  abdomen.

B Colic;  spasmodic  tension  from  chest  to  deep  in  abdomen.

Colic,  as  if  a  spot  in  the  abdomen  were  seized  with  the  nails  ;
a  griping,  clutching,  clawing.

Sudden  violent,  stinging,  cutting  or  pinching  pain,  proceeding
from  one  place  in  the  abdomen  and  spreading  over  the  larger
portion  of  it.

Loud  rumbling  and  pinching  in  belly  ;  wind-colic.

Violent  cutting  pressure  in  hypogastrium,  now  here,  now  there.


BELLADONNA.  380

Pincliing  colic  ;  flatulent  colic  lessened  by  stooping  forward

and  by  pressing  on  the  part.
I  Clawing  around  the  navel ;  better  from  pressure.
Infantile  colic  ;  the  patient  bends  backwards,  and  pains  appear

and  leave  suddenly.

I  Pains  in  abdomen  cause  violent  screaming. ^Children  with

dysentery.

I I  Pains,  particularly  in  abdomen  and  pelvis,  come  on  suddenly,
continue  violently  a  longer  or  shorter  time,  and  disappear  as
suddenly  as  they  came.

I  Children  relieve  their  bellyache  by  lying  flat  on  their  bellies
across  a  chair.

Constriction  of  abdomen  around  the  navel,  as  if  a  ball  or  lump
would  form.

Contractive  dragging  in  region  of  the  navel,  especially  about
noon  and  in  the  afternoon.

Constricting,  pinching  pains  under  the  navel,  coming  suddenly,
the  patient  has  to  bend  double.

Ilnthe  hypogastrium,  immediately  below  the  umbilicus,  a  feel-
ing as  though  the  intestines  pressed  outward,  chiefly  in
standing.

I  Along  with  the  sensation  of  distension  of  abdomen,  constric-
tive pain  below  the  umbilicus,  which  comes  in  jerks  and
forces  one  to  lean  forward  bent  double.

Cramp-like,  constrictive  pain  in  lower  intestines.

Pressure  in  the  abdomen  as  from  a  stone  (in  the  evening),  with
pains  in  the  loins.

In  the  morning,  immediately  after  getting  out  of  bed,  a  violent,
tensive,  pressing  pain  in  whole  of  hypogastrium,  but  especi-
ally in  region  of  os  pubis  ;  it  appears  as  if  the  hypogastrium
(rarely  the  epigastrium)  was  spasmodically  constricted,  some-
times as  if  it  were  distended  (although  not  really  so) ;  pains
which  gradually  increase  and  gradually  decrease.

■  Squeezing,  constrictive  pain  in  lowermost  intestines,  alter-
nately with  dull  shoots  or  jerks  in  the  direction  of  perineum.

Burning,  pressive  and  pinching  pain  in  abdomen,  obliging  him
to  bend  double.

1  Feeling  of  heat  in  abdomen,  as  from  a  hot  iron.

Heat  in  bejly  (with  anxiety),  in  chest,  and  in  face,  with  ob-
struction of  the  nose.

Pain  in  abdomen,  as  if  raw  and  sore.

I  Long  lasting  painfulness  of  the  whole  abdomen,  as  if  it  were
all  sore  and  raw.

I  Peritonitis.

B  Tumefaction  of  abdomen,  which  was  very  tender  to  the  touch.

Constipation  and  weak  pulse.

Painfulness  of  the  abdomen  to  contact.


381  BELLADONNA.

Tenderness  even  to  slight  pressure,  especially  over  the  ovarian

region.
Sensitiveness  of  the  abdomen  to  the  slightest  touch.

■  Tenderness  of  abdomen  is  aggravated  by  the  least  jar,  even  of

the  bed  or  chair  upon  which  she  sits  ;  she  is  obliged,  in  walk-
ing, to  step  with  great  care,  for  fear  of  a  jar.

I  Great  pain  in  right  ileocoecal  region,  cannot  bear  the  slightest
touch,  not  even  the  bed  cover.

The  abdomen  is  tympanitic  and  extremely  sensitive.

Abdomen  contracted.

Distended,  but  neither  hard  nor  painful  abdomen.

I  Abdomen  distended,  hot. d  Cholera  infantum.

•  Much  bearing  down  pain  ; <  in  morning.

Feeling  as  if  a  hard  body  pressed  from  within  outwards,  at  right
inguinal  ring  ;  the  part  not  feeling  hard  to  the  touch  ;  while
sitting  with  body  bent  forwards.

Fine  shooting  in  left  groin.

Violent  twitching  of  the  abdominal  muscles.

■  Incarcerated  hernia.
Itching  on  the  abdomen.

^^  Rectum  and  StOoL Contractive  pain  in  rectum.
Straining  and  colic.

■  Frequent  urging  to  stool  without  result,  or  with  a  very  scanty

and  hard  evacuation.
Urging  to  stool,  which  is  thinner  than  usual,  but  passes  in  pro-
per quantity.

■  From  10  p.m.  till  2  a.m.  violent  tenesmus,  with  passage  of

blood  and  slime,  the  rest  of  the  time  thin  but  formed  stools.

■  Frequent  urging  to  stool,  sometimes  ineffectual  and  with  tenes-

mus.

■  Straining  to  stool ;  the  evacuation  is  undoubtedly  diarrhoeic,

but  very  little  is  voided,  and  immediately  after  follows  much
increased  straining.

■  Urging  to  stool,  which  is  more  fluid  than  usual,  but  passed  in

proper  quantity.

■  Frequent  thin  stools,  with  tenesmus.
Dysentery.

■  Slimy  and  bloody  diarrhoeic  stools.

Stools  of  thin,  green  mucus  ;  bloody  mucus  ;  great  tenesmus  ;

shuddering.
Papescent  stool  mixed  with  mucus.
Diarrhoea,  with  bearing  down  pain  in  uterus.

■  Diarrhoea  <  from  motion  (compare  Rheum  and Crot.  tigl.).
Asiatic  cholera.

Involuntary  evacuations ;  temporary  paralysis  of  the  sphincter

ani.
Involuntary  discharge  of  feces  and  urine ;  violent  startings ;

flushed  face.


BELLADONNA.  382

Escape  of  feces  when  passing  wind.

Stools  :  thin,  green  mucus  ;  frequent,  thin  ;  bloody  mucus  with
tenesmus;  containing  lumps  like  chalk  ;  clay-colored;  chalky-
white,  with  granular,  slimy  mucus ;  smell  sour.
Retarded  stool.

Digestion  torpid  ;  stools  scanty.
Sense  of  constipation.
Obstinate  constipation.
Before  stool :  constriction  in  rectum  ;  sore  aching  in  upper

part  of  abdomen  ;  perspiration  ;  heat  in  abdomen  ;  colic.
During  stool :  shuddering ;  nausea  and  pressing  pain  in  stom-

ache  ;  pressure  on  the  genitals.
Diarrhoea,  with  pressure  on  the  bladder.
With  stool  passage  of  urine.
The  diarrhoeic  stool  is  followed  by  frequent  urging,  no  more

stool  being  passed.
After  stool :  tenesmus.

I A  sort  of  tenesmus,  a  constant  pressing  and  urging  toward
the  anus  and  genitals,  alternating  with  painful  contractions
of  the  anus.
Pressing  in  rectum  toward  the  anus.
B  B  Spasmodic  constriction  of  sphincter  ani. d  Dysentery.
B  Bleeding  piles  ;  back  pains  as  if  breaking.
B Mucous  membrane  of  anus  seems  swollen  and  pressed  out.
Prolapsus  ani.

Voluptuous  tickling  in  lower  parts  of  rectum  and  anus.
Violent  itching,  at  the  same  time  constrictive  sensation  in  anus.
"  Urinary  Organs. Stinging,  burning  pain,  from  region  of  kid-
neys down  into  bladder.
B  Nephritis.
B  Spasmodic,  crampy  straining  along  ureter,  during  passage  of

calculus, d  Nephritic  colic.
Sensation  of  turning  and  twisting  in  bladder,  as  from  a  large

worm,  without  desire  to  micturate.
Tenesmus  of  bladder,  without  inflammation.
BDull  pressing  in  vesical  region  during  night.
Vesical  region  very  sensitive  to  pressure  or  jar.
It  is  indicated  in  irritation  (not  inflammation)  of  the  bladder,

with  strangury  and  white  epithelium  in  the  urine.
Shooting  in  bladder  when  moving.
B  Tenesmus  of  the  bladder.
BVery  frequent  desire  to  urinate,  even  if  only  a  few  drops  had

accumulated.
B  Frequent  desire  to  urinate,  but  the  urine  voided  in  remarka-
bly small  quantities,  although  of  a  natural  color.
B  Diminished  urine.

BWhen  passing  water  feces  escape  (compare  Rhus.).
Frequent  and  copious  emission  of  urine.


383  BELLADONNA.

Urine  either  suppressed  or  profuse,  light  and  clear.

Urine :  bright  yellow  and  clear ;  frequent,  copious,  pale  and
watery  ;  first  clear,  becomes  turbid  on  standing ;  blood-red,
dark  and  scanty,  sometimes  as  yellow  as  gold.

When  the  urine  is  heated,  almost  invariably  deposits  a  cloud  of
phosphates.

Urine  red  and  scanty.

Dark,  even  bloody  urine ;  scanty,  and  passed  with  difficulty.

Urine  deep-red,  with  light  sediment.

Urine  dark  and  increased.

I  The  urine  becomes  turbid,  like  yeast,  with  a  reddish  sediment.

Urine  scanty,  brownish-red  and  cloudy.

Yellow,  turbid  urine.

I  Urine  looks  as  if  mixed  with  black  dust,  or  streaks  ;  strongly
acid. ^After  scarlatina.

Suppression  of  stool  and  urine.

Retention  of  urine,  which  only  passes  drop  by  drop.

Much  difficulty  in  passing  a  small  quantity  of  urine,  it  flows  in
a  very  feeble  stream  or  in  drops.

Post-partum  retention  of  urine.

Involuntary  urination.

Involuntary  emission  of  urine ;  temporary  paralysis  of  the  neck
of  bladder.^

Involuntary  emission  of  urine  when  standing.

Constant  dribbling  of  urine,  clear  as  water,  and  odorless.

iThe  urine  escaped  from  him  during  a  deep  sleep  in  daytime.

ilEnuresis  nocturna  of  children.

Enuresis,  with  profuse  perspiration.

I  Wets  the  bed;  restless,  starts  in  sleep.  ^Scrofulous  children.
d  Chorea.

Between  the  acts  of  urination,  dull  shooting  in  urethra,  behind
the  glans,  especially  during  movement.

During  urination :  burning  ;  drawing  in  spermatic  cord.

After  urination  :  itching ;  smarting  pain  in  outer  edge  of  pre-
puce worse.
^^  Male  Sexual  Organs. Increased  sexual  desire,  with  great  in-
clination to  masturbation.

Sexual  desire  decreased.

Nocturnal  emission  of  semen,  during  relaxation  of  the  penis.

Inflammation  of  the  prostate  gland.

■  Inflammation  of  testicles.

Drawing  pain  in  one  of  the  testicles  and  spermatic  cord,  as  if
the  testicle  was  drawing  up  into  the  abdomen.

Violent  stitches  in  testicles,  which  are  drawn  up.

Tearing  upwards,  in  left  spermatic  cord,  evening  in  bed.

Soft  painless  tumor  on  glans.

Violent  pressing  and  urging  towards  genitals,  as  if  everything


BELLADONNA.  384

would  fall  out  there ;  worse  sitting  bent, and  in  walking;

better  standing,  and  sitting  erect.
Weakness  and  relaxation  of  genitals.
Sweating  of  genital  organs.
^^  Female  Sexual  Organs. Nymphomania. See  24.
Ovarian  neuralgia.
Lancinating  pain  in  ovary.
I  Right  ovary:  much  enlarged ;  stitching,  throbbing  pains  in

region  of  hard  swollen  ovary ;  pains  come  and  go  suddenly.
I  Burning  in  ovarian  region.
I  Affections  of  the  r.  ovary.
I  Pain  in  ovaries  with  appearance  of  menses.
Pains  in  pelvic  region,  which  come  on  suddenly  and  cease  as

suddenly.

■  Drawing  pains  in  pelvic  region.
Uterine  congestion.

Congestion  of  the  womb,  and  sensation  as  if  it  would  fall  out.
I  Acute  metritis.

■  Burning,  pressure,  uneasiness  and  weight  in  uterine  region.
Clutching  or  clawing  pains,  or  transient  stitches  in  uterine  re-
gion ;  parts  sensitive,  cannot  bear  least  jar.

■  Enlargement  of  uterus,  and  periodically  spasmodic  bearing-

down,  colic-like  pains  in  uterus,  discharging  black,  pitch-like
ichor.

■  Fullness  and  bearing-down  in  parts, cannot  stand  without

complaining ;  the  sacrum  is  very  painfully  affected  at  irregu-
lar times  ;  a  discharge  of  bloody  ichor. 6  Beginning  of  uter-
ine cancer.
Spasmodic  contractions  of  neck  of  uterus,  which  is  hot,  dry
and  tender.

■  Prolapsus  uteri.

■  Prolapsus,  with  bearing- down  pains,  as  if  everything  would

issue  from  the  vulva ;  relieved  by  standing ;  especially  felt
in  the  morning.

■  Prolapsus,  with  indurations.

■  Prolapsus  in climacteric  years ; parts  congested ;  burning,

stinging,  tension,  fullness  and  bearing-down  ;  in  the  loins  and
sacrum  drawing,  cutting,  pressing,  cramp-like  pains ;  with
nervous,  irritable  women.

■  Menses  too  early  and  too  profuse.

Menses  of  thick,  decomposed,  dark-red  blood.

■  Menses  retarded  and  too  pale.

■  Menstrual  blood  bright  red,  or  black  and  clotted.

■  Menses  hot.

■  Menses  offensive.

Before  menses : colic ;  cramp of  stomach ;  loss of  appetite,

tiredness ;  clouded  vision.
During  menses  :  bearing  down  towards  genitals  ;  pain  in  back


385  BELLADONNA.

and  limbs  ;  heat  of  head,  anxiety ;  disturbance  of  the  mind  ;

chills,  thirst ;  perspiration  of  the  chest  at  night.
After  menses  :  cramps  of  the  stomach.
Painful  menstruation,  with  rush  of  blood  to  the  head.
I  Dysmenorrhoea, with spasmodic contraction  of  uterus  and

terrible  bearing-down  pains  ; <C  in  the  morning.
1  Dysmenorrhoea,  with  pains  in  limbs  and  back.
I  Dysmenorrhoea  in  women  of  full  habit.
Amenorrhoea,  with  congestion  to  the  head. .
I  Flow  of  blood  between  the  periods.

■  Metrorrhagia.

Hemorrhage  from  the  womb,  with  contracting  pain  in  the  lower
part  of  the  abdomen  ;  <<  from  every  motion,

I  Profuse  discharge  of  hot,  bright  red  blood;  sometimes  dark,
clotted,  and  of  bad  smell.

More  or  less  discharge  of  blood  from  the  vulva,  sometimes  feel-
ing very  hot.

Profuse  discharge  of  bright-red,  hot  blood,  with  pressing  or
forcing,  as  if  all  would  escape  the  vulva,  or  pain  in  the  back
as  if  it  would  break  ;  sometimes  there  is  congestion  to  the
head,  with  throbbing  of  the  carotids.

I  Fluor  albus  of  white  mucus,  with  or  without  colic.
Leucorrhoea  with  colic ;  the  pains  come  suddenly  and  finally

cease  as  suddenly  as  they  came.
llBearing-down  pains  with  leucorrhoea.

■  Induration  of  the  uterus; with crampy pains and  bearing

down ;  with  clawing  and  cutting  pains.

I I  Pressure  downwards,  as  if  all  the  contents  of  abdomen  would
issue  through  the  vulva;  worse  mornings.

At  every  step  violent  shootings  in  genital  region,  as  if  in  inter-
nal sexual  organs.

In  the  morning  a  pressing,  as  if  everything  would  be  forced
out  towards  the  organs  of  generation,  with  distension  of  ab-
domen ;  after  pressing,  the  abdomen  contracted,  and  that
was  followed  by  a  discharge  of  white  mucus  from  the  vagina.

■  Pressing  and  urging  towards  the  genitals  aggravated  by  sit-

ting  bent  and  walking ; relieved  by  standing  and  sitting
erect.

■  Sense  of  heaviness  and  of  fullness,  and  bearing  down  in  parts.

■  Throbbing  about  the  parts,  and  sense  of  weight.

■  Stitches  in  vagina,  with  sensation  of  great  heat  and  dryness.

■  Female  parts  are  sensitive, can  bear  neither  touch  nor  the

least  jar.

The  parts  have  a  scarlet-red  appearance.

Inflammation  of  external  genitals.
2*  Pregnancy  and  Parturition. ■Suitable  for  women,  and  par-
ticularly during  pregnancy.

VOL.  II. — 25.


BELLADONNA.  386

During  pregnancy :  mental  derangement ;  toothache ;  spasms
and  convulsions  ;  spasmodic  hacking  cough  ;  fainting.

Labor-like  pains  deep  in  the  pelvis,  radiating  to  the  back  and
loins.

B  Promotes  the  expulsion  of  moles,  etc.

Labor  pains  :  deficient ;  cease,  have  only  periodical  slight  pres-
sure on  sacrum  ;  amniotic  fluid  gone,  yet  os  still  spasmo-
dically contracted.

■  False  spasmodic  labor-pains;  labor  slow  and  tedious.

lOld  maids  in  first  delivery,  muscles  rigid.

I  The  woman,  in  labor,  lies  quiet,  without  pains;  has  only  an
occasional  pain  in  occiput.

I  The  parturient  woman  makes  wry  faces,  on  account  of  a  peri-
odical pressure  in  sacrum.

Drawing  pains  from  the  small  of  back  to  thighs.

Ilf  during  powerful  labor  the  os  tincae  is  not  widened  corres-
pondingly, or  seems  to  be  spasmodically  contracted.

IB  Constriction  of  lower  part  of  uterus.

BAfter  the  body  was  born,  but  the  head  spasmodically  held  in-
side of  uterus,  (five  drops  of  tincture  loosened  the  constric-
tion in  20  minutes,  and  head  was  expelled;  followed  by  a
violent  bleeding,  cured  by  Secale).

BB Appears  as  if  stunned;  semi-conscious  with  loss  of  speech;
convulsive  movements  in  limbs  and  muscles  of  face ;  paraly-
sis of  right  side  of  tongue,  foam  at  mouth  ;  renewal  of  fits  at
every  pain, d  Puerperal  convulsions.

I  Cramps  in  the  legs  during  labor,  necessitating  instrumental
delivery  in  nine  confinements ;  she  became  enraged,  wanted
to  tear  everything  within  her  reach,  tried  to  escape ;  Bellad.^'^
quieted  her  and  produced  natural  delivery.

BAfter  a  mole  birth  :  occasional  chill ;  constant  thirst;  moan-
ing ;  blowing  respiration  ;  wild  look  ;  rage  ;  wild  laughter  ;
feels  as  if  a  rope  was  tied  around  the  hypochondria ;  sides
painful  to  pressure  ;  short  stomach  cough  causing  retching
and  raising  of  sour  slime;  pressure  in  forehead.

B Lying-in  women  :  milk  fever ;  deficiency  of  milk,  or  too  great
a  flow ;  puerperal  fever,  particularly  after  a  violent  emotion,
or  after  suppression  of  milk.

B Mania  puerperalis.

I  Retained  placenta,  with  profuse  flow  of  hot  blood,  which
speedily  coagulates ;  the  placenta  may  be  spasmodically  re-
tained.

B  Hemorrhage  after  confinement,  or  after  miscarriage.

B  Puerperal  peritonitis  (at  the  onset),  a  hot  steam  seems  to  issue
from  the  body  of  the  patient.

B  Great  sensitiveness  of  the  abdomen  after  delivery.

BYery  acute  after-pains.

B  Prolapsus  after  parturition.


387  BELLADONNA.

■  Lochia  too  weak  and  insufficient,  or  suppressed.

■  Lochia  offensive,  feeling  hot  to  the  parts.

I  Consequences  of  taking  cold  during  confinement.

■  Phlegmasia  alba  dolens.

The  breasts  become  filled  with  milk  (in  a  female  who  is  not
pregnant),  the  milk  running  out.

■  Too  copious  flow  of  milk.

■  Inflammation  of  breasts,  in  streaks  or  rays,  diverging  from  the

centre  to  the circumference, d  Moles, tubercles, wheals,

warts,  etc.,  with  a  like  characteristic.
Swelling  and  induration  of  the  breasts.
Swollen,  painful  mammae.
Nodular  swelling  of  the  breasts ;  the  skin  of  the  breast  is  hot

and  inflamed,  the  pain  is  stinging  and  throbbing.
Rose-colored,  radiating  inflammation  and  swelling  of  the  breasts,

with  stinging,  tearing  pains.

■  Erysipelatous  swelling  of  the  breasts.

■  Erysipelatous  inflammation  of  the  breasts,  particularly  from

weaning.

■  Ophthalmia;  spasms;  sleeplessness  and  crying  of  new-born

infants  ;  troubles  from  teething.

■  Heat  and  redness  of  the  gums  during  dentition.

■  Difficult  dentition;  convulsions,  etc.

■  Complaints  during  dentition  and  puberty.

^'  Voice  and  Larynx. Trachea  and  Bronchia. Hoarse  out-
cries.

■  Hoarseness,  which  is  especially  violent  when  crying.

■  Hoarseness  ;  rough  voice.

■  Hoarse,  rough  voice,  with  dryness  in  throat,  the  seat  of  which

she  accurately  located  in  the  larynx  ;  she  had  to  cough  fre-
quently and  swallow  often ;  when  swallowing  she  complained
of  a  pain  in  the  larynx.

■  Voice  hoarse  and  weak.

The  voice  is  altered,  hoarse,  rough,  weak  and  wheezing.

■  Sudden  attacks  of  hoarseness  ;  feeble  voice  ;  dry  cough,  often

with  spells  of  suffocation, d  Chronic  laryngitis.
Speaking  is  very  difficult  to  him ;  speaks  in  a  piping  tone.

■  Cannot  speak  but  with  great  exertion,  very  gentle  and  low.

d  Angina.

■  Now  and  then  while  speaking,  the  voice,  which  had  been  weak,

becomes  suddenly  loud  and  clear.
Voice  weakened  even  to  complete  aphonia.

■  Aphonia,  or  confused  sounds  uttered  with  pain.
Dryness  of  larynx.

■  The  dryness  extends  into  larynx,  rendering  the  voice  husky,

and  often  inducing  dry  cough.

■  Painful  dryness  in  the  larynx,  yet  with  an  unconquerable

aversion  to  all  drinks.


BELLADONNA.  388

Great  sensitiveness  to  the  slightest  pressure  in  the  lower  por-
tion of  larynx.
•  Sensation  as  if  some  one  constricted  his  larynx.

■  Sensation  as  if  the  larynx  was  inflamed  and  swollen,  with

snoring  breathing  and  danger  of  suffocation.

Pain  in  larynx  when  talking.

Great  painfulness  of  upper  part  of  windpipe,  with  danger  of
suffocation  when  touching  or  turning  the  throat ;  when  cough-
ing, talking,  or  taking  breath.

Spasmodic  constriction  of  the  throat.

■  I Croup-like  spasms  in  larynx,  in  attacks;  fauces  red.
1 1  Spasms  of  the  glottis.

1 1  All  the  symptoms  of  membranous  croup,  but  the  usual  re-
medies are  of  no  avail,  and  the  case  is  characterized  by  sin-
gle attacks ;  hollow  cough,  with  strangulation  and  putting
hands  to  larynx,  evidently  a  spasmodic  constriction.

I  Acute  catai'rhal  laryngitis.

I  Chronic  laryngitis,  with  spasmodic  dry  cough.

Noise  and  rattling  in  the  bronchial  tubes.
^®  Respiration. Short  breath.

■  Shortness  of  breath  after  drinking  coffee  in  afternoon.

■  Respiration  rapid  and  somewhat  oppressed.
Short,  hurried,  anxious  breathing.
Breathing  heavy  and  stertorous.

Rattling  breathing  with  cough.

■  Quick,  short,  irregular  breathing,  alternates  with  slow,  gen-

tle, at  times  almost  imperceptible  breathing ;  in  a  child.
Difficult  respiration.

■  Breath  hot;  respiration  difficult.

Asthmatic  paroxysm  in  afternoon  and  evening,  with  sensation
of  dust  in  lungs.

■  Asthmatic  complaints,  with  suffocative  spells.
Attacks  of  dyspnoea  at  night.

Asthma  in  hot,  damp  weather ;  worse  after  sleep.

■  Oppression  of  the  chest.

Dyspnoea  after  rising  in  the  morning ; >>  in  the  open  air.
Danger  of  suffocation  when  swallowing,  or  when  turning,  or

touching  the  neck.
"  Cough. Dry  cough : from  dryness  of  larynx ;  from  tickling

itching  in  back  part  of  top  of  larynx, evening  after  lying

down  in  bed ;  from  sensation  of  a  foreign  body  in  larynx.
Dry  cough  day  and  night,  with  tickling  in  throat,  or  with

headache  and  redness  of  face.
■Very  dry,  tearing  cough  at  night.

■  ■Cough  accompanied  by  a  red  injected  throat.

■  Dry  and  short  cough.

■  Violent  scraping  in  larynx  exciting  a  dry  cough.

Violent  dry  cough,  as  if  a  foreign  body  had  got  inside  throat.


389  BELLADONNA.

Sensation  as  if  something  was  in  pit  of  stomach,  which  excites

cough.
Dry  spasmodic  cough  with  retching,  especially  after  midnight.
I  Dry  cough,  whereby  the  throat  is  scraped.
Dry  spasmodic  cough,  with  dull  pain  in  head.

■  Tickling  and  burning  in  larynx,  with  violent  paroxysms  of

cough.

The  cough  is  spasmodic,  rough,  hollow,  hacking,  caused  by  a
sensation  of  constriction  of  larynx  ;  worse  from  motion  and
talking,  or  when  the  child  cries ;  when  awaking  from  sleep ;
concomitants:  congestion  to  head;  aversion  to  light;  rat-
tling in  chest ;  skin  dry  ;  generally  irritable  in  the  beginning.

iBarking  cough  waking  suddenly  11  P.M.;  face  fiery  red  ;  cry-
ing with  cough. 6  Croup.

Barking  cough.

I  Short  dry  cough  ;  spasmodic,  or  else  hollow  and  hoarse  cough.

Whooping-cough  with  sneezing.

■  Whooping  cough ;  the  cough  comes  in  short  paroxysms;  <<

evening  and  night  most  violent  just  after  midnight;  <  from
every  movement  or  touch,  especially  at  the  larynx  and  throat;
<  from  talking  or  crying ;  <C  from  a  deep  inspiration,  and
when  awaking ;  suitable  at  the  beginning,  or  when  cerebral
inflammation  intervenes.

■  Whooping-cough,  with  injected  capillaries.

Cough,  with  bloody  mucous  expectoration  in  the  morning;
bloody  taste  in  mouth.

Frequent  attacks  of  cough  about  11  p.m.

Night  cough  :  wakes  from  sleep.

The  slightest  movement  in  bed  at  night  renews  the  cough.

Nocturnal  cough,  mostly  dry,  with  tearing  in  the  chest,  or  with
cold  in  the  head  and  stitches  in  the  breastbone.

Violent  cough  about  noon,  with  expectoration  of  much  tena-
cious mucus.

Attacks  of  cough  worse  in  the  afternoon  and  evening  until  mid-
night.

■  Cough  commences  in  evening  (about  10  o'clock),  and  occurs

every  quarter  of  an  hour  or  oftener,  in  three  or  four  fits  at  a
time.
Attack  of  coughing,  as  if  one  had  inhaled  dust;  wakens  at
night ;  mucous  expectoration.

■  Cough  caused  by  fine  dust  in  the  air.
Catarrhal  cough,  with  rattling  in  the  chest.

The  mucous  rales  are  large  and  crepitous  ;  hoarse  cough ;  much
moaning ;  moaning  at  every  breath.

■  Child  begins  to  cry  immediately  before  the  cough  comes  on.

(Compare  Hepar  and  Bryon.).

■  The  cough  produces  such  congestion  as  to  cause  the  sclerotic

to  appear  as  one  gore  of  blood. ^Whooping-cough.


BELLADONNA.  390

Cough  causing  congestion  of  face  and  great  redness  of  the  eyes.

■  Attacks  of  cough  ending  with  sneezing.

■  Violent  cough  during  sleep,  with  grinding  of  the  teeth.
I  Cough,  with  a  bloody  taste  in  the  mouth.

Cough  causes  scraping  in  throat,  or  pain  in  stomach  and  incli-
nation to  vomit.

Cough  causes  pain  in  pit  of  stomach,  "seems  to  strike  there."

Pain  in  sternum  from  coughing.

Expectoration  of  bloody  mucus.

Pain  in  nape  of  neck  when  coughing.

During  cough  :  pain  in  sternum ;  constriction  of  throat ;  stitches
in  chest  or  uterine  region  ;  pains  in  head,  abdomen,  hips  or
legs  ;  reversed  action  of  stomach  ;  vomiting  of  mucus  ;  bloody
taste  in  mouth ;  bleeding  from  ear  or  nose ;  heat  of  face  ;
redness  or  blueness  of  face  ;  pressure  in  epigastrium  ;  stiffen.-
ing  of  the  body ;  convulsions.

Catarrh  or  cough,  with  coryza.

Coughing  fit,  with  subsequent  heat ;  with  asthma  ;  from  rush
of  blood  to  the  chest.
^^  Inner Chest  and  Lungs. I  Tightness, oppression,  or  con-
striction of  chest.

Constriction  across  chest,  as  if  pressed  inwards  from  both  sides.

Exceeding  weight  and  oppression  of  whole  chest.

■  Painful  pressure  in  chest  extending  into  the  back.
Pressive  pain  in  chest,  with  shortness  of  breath,  and  at  same

time  between  the  shoulders,  when  walking  or  sitting.
Pressure  in  right  chest,  causes  anxiety.
Pressure  in  chest,  affecting  the  heart.
Rush  of  blood  to  chest.
Stitches  in  apex  of  right  lung. (Compare  Arsen.).

■  Burning  in  right  chest.

Stitches  in  chest ;  with  desire  to  cough,  or  particularly  when
coughing  or  yawning.

In  pneumonia :  young  persons,  fall  habit ;  temperature  and
fever  high ;  face  flushed ;  eyes  congested ;  great  nervous-
ness ;  sleeplessness ;  delirium,  or  threatened  convulsions,
with  tickling,  dry  cough.
^^  Heart,  Pulse  and  Circulation.  Violent  palpitation,  reverber-
ating in  the  head.

Tremor  of  the  heart,  with  anguish  and  an  aching  pain.

Gurgling  at  the  heart,  a  kind  of  palpitation  when  going  up
stairs.

Pressure  in  cardiac  region,  which  arrests  the  breathing  and
causes  a  sense  of  anxiety.

Throbbing  in  the  carotid  arteries.

■  A  beating  of  the  arteries  of  the  head  and  of  all  parts  of  the

body,  in  the  morning  on  waking.

■  i  Congestion  of  blood  to  various  parts,  to  head,  chest,  uterus.


391  BELLADONNA.

■  Vascular  excitement :  throbbing  of  the  carotids ;  flushed  face ;

red  eyes  ;  and  full,  bounding  pulse.

■  Plethora;  hemorrhages.

I  Pulse  much  increased  in  force  and  frequency.

iFull,  frequent  pulse,  increased  by  two  beats.

Pulse :  accelerated,  frequently  full,  hard  and  tense ;  large,  full
and  slow ;  at  times  small  and  soft ;  slow,  thready,  irregular.
^"  Outer  Chest. Heat  in  sternum.

Corroding,  gnawing  pain  beneath  the  cartilages  of  last  ribs,
right  side.

I  Heat,  swelling  and  hardness  of  the  mammae. 6  Mastitis.

I  The  eruption  begins  on  throat  and  chest, d  Scarlatina.
^^  Neck  and  Back. Painful  swelling  and  stiifness  of  neck  and
nape  of  neck.

Swelling  of  glands  in  nape  of  neck,  with  cloudiness  of  head.

I  Inflammation  and  swelling  of  glands  of  neck  and  of  back  part
of  throat.

I  In  coughing,  a  violent  pressing  pain  in  nape  of  neck,  as  if  it
would  break.

Pressive  pain  externally  in  neck,  when  bending  the  head  back-
wards, and  when  touching  the  part.

■  Distension  and  perceptible  throbbing  of  the  vessels  of  the  neck.
Sour-smelling  sweat  only  on  the  neck.

Drawing  pressure  between  right  scapula  and  spinal  column.
Pressive  pain  under  left  scapula,  more  toward  outer  side.
Shooting  and  gnawing  pain  in  spinal  column.

■  ■Gnawing  in  the  spine,  with  cough.

Stabbing,  as  if  with  a  knife,  from  without  inwards,  in  vertebrae.
Drawing,  burning  and  throbbing  pain  in  spine.

■  Myelitis.  ''
Rheumatic  pain  in  the  back.

■  I  Backache,  as  if  the  back  would  break.

Feeling  in  back  as  if  it  would  break,  hindering  motion.
Soreness  of  last  dorsal  and  first  lumbar  vertebras.
Cramp-like  sensation  in  left  lumbar  region.

■  Curvature  of  the  lumbar  vertebrae.
Bearing  down  on  to  sacrum.

^^  Upper  Limbs. Swelling  of  axillary  glands.

Shooting,  or  stitching  pressure  on  top  of  left  shoulder.
Lacerating,  with  pressure  in  shoulder,  darting  suddenly  along

arm  ;  particularly  painful  at  night.
Twitching  of  the  arms.
Paralytic  drawing  pressure,  with  weakness  in  right  upper  arm

and  forearm.
Paralytic  tearing  pressure  in  anterior  surface  of  left  upper  arm.
A  sense  of  stretching  and  twisting  in  upper  extremities.
Drawing  pain  on  inner  side  of  left  upper  arm.
Laming,  drawing  pressure,  and  tearing  in  arms,  with  weakness.


BELLADONNA.  392

Paralytic  pressure  in  left  upper  arm,  with  paralytic  feeling  and

weakness  of  whole  left  arm.
Heaviness  and  paralytic  feeling  in  upper  limbs.
Violent  stabbing,  as  with  a  blunt  knife,  below  head  of  humerus,

from  within  out.
Tearing  pain  in  humerus.
Bruised  pain  in  upper  arm.
Sharp  shooting  externally  in  left  elbow-joint.
Cutting  pain  in  interior  of  left  elbow-joint  when  walking.
Cutting  tearing  in  lower  muscles  of  both  forearms.
Painful  jerking ;  spasms  and  convulsions  of  arms  and  hands.
Swelling,  also  scarlet  redness  of  arms  and  hands.
1  I  Peculiar  cutting  pains  commencing  in  wrist,  shooting  to  el-
bow and  above,  always  from  periphery  to  centre.
Not  able  to  turn  the  hand  easily  and  freely  on  its  axis  (as  when

dropping  from  a  glass), turns  only  by  jerks;  as  from  want

of  synovial  fluid  in  wrist-joint;  painless.
Spasmodic  closing  of  the  fingers.
Numbness  and  prickling  in  the  hands.
Hands  swollen  and  dry,  drops  things.
Paralytic  tearing  in  the  middle  joint  of  right  index  finger.
Painful  drawing  in  posterior  joint  of  left  middle  finger,  as  if  in

the  periosteum.
^^  Lower  Limbs. Hip-gout,  with  burning  stinging,  most  violent

at  night  and  by  contact.
I  Hip-joint  disease,  first  stage:  sharp  pains,  worse  at  night;

screams  out  in  sleep.
Stiffness  of  the  hip-joint.
Cramp  pain  in  gluteal  muscles,  with  tension  on  bending  the

body  forward.
Cutting  stitches  in  outer  muscles  of  right  thigh,  just  above  the

knee,  only  when  sitting.
Pain  in  thighs  and  legs,  as  if  beaten  and  as  if  carious ;  fine

shooting  and  gnawing  along  bones,  with  violent  tearing  in

joints  ;  the  pain  rises  gradually  from  the  ankle  to  the  hips,

necessitates,  while  sitting,  constant  motion  and  shifting  of

the  feet ;  is  milder  when  walking.
Cramp  pain  in  both  knee  joints,  particularly  about  the  patellae;

she  could  not  walk  up  stairs.
Cramp-like  pain  in  right  knee  near  the  patella,  towards  the

outer  side,  when  sitting.
Burning  stinging  in  knee-joint;  worse  at  night.
Sensation  in  joints  of  lower  limbs,  particularly  knees, as  if

they  would  give  way, especially  when  walking,  and  more

marked  when  going  down  hill.
Dull  tearing  in  the  legs.
Heaviness  and  lameness  of  the  legs  and  feet.


393  BELLADONNA.

Tearing  pressure  in  middle  of  inside  of  leg,  uninfluenced  by

motion  or  contact.
Tremulous  heaviness  of  legs.
Lower  extremities  cold  and  semi-rigid.
Paralysis  of  the  lower  extremities,  together  with  the  neck  of

the  bladder  and  the  sphincter  ani.
iLarge  blood  boil  on  thigh,  discharging  yellow,  thick,  bloody

pus.
Pain  as  if  bruised  in  the  heel,  when  treading  thereon.
Pain  in  metatarsal  bones,  as  if  dislocated.
Tension  in  right  tarsal -joint  while  walking  in  open  air.
Cold  feet.

Boring,  digging,  or  shooting  pains  in  soles.
Tension  in  sole  of  right  foot  near  the  heel,  changing  into  a

tensive  pressure ;  pressing  upon  the  parts  relieves  for  some

time.
^*  Limbs  in  General. 'He slowly  moves  the  extremities  up-
ward, trembling,  then  with  greater  force  he  throws  them

downward.
iTwitchings  of  limbs.

■  Convulsive  movements  of  the  limbs.

Convulsive  twitching,  twisting  and  turning  of  the  extremities.
Pressure,  burning,  stinging  or  tingling  in  the  limbs.

■  Heaviness  of  the  hands  and  feet.
Heaviness  and  tired  feeling  in  the  limbs.
Hands  and  feet  become  very  cold.
Lassitude  of  the  limbs.

Loss  of  CO- ordination  of  muscles  of  both  upper  and  lower  limbs,
very  like  the  heaviness  and  helplessness  of  movement  observed
in  first  stage  of  progressive  paralysis  of  the  insane.
^'  Rest. Position. Motion. Rest :  drawing  pains  in  head  and
neck.

■  ■Disinclination  and  aversion  to  work  or  motion.

■  Restlessness  ;  he  was  obliged  constantly  to  move  the  body  to

and  fro,  especially  the  hands  and  feet.

■  Cannot  stay  long  in  any  position,  at  one  time  lies,  at  another

sits,  again  stands,  in  all  of  which  he  constantly  changes  his

position.
Lying  down :  headache  >■,  or  ceases ;  salivation <  ;  cough

worse.
Lying  on  r.  side  :  pain  in  liver  worse.
Must  lie  down  :  with  supraorbital  headache.
Bending  head  back :  pressure  of  brain  forward  >  ;  headache

better.
Sitting  erect :  pressing  toward  genitals  >  ;  pain  in  chest.
Sitting :  headache  >  ;  cutting  stitches  in  muscles  of  thigh.
Sitting  bent  forward  :  feeling  as  if  a  hard  body  pressed  from  r.


BELLADONNA.  394

inguinal  ring ; pressing  towards  genitals  as  if  everything
would  fall  out ;  cramp  in  r.  knee.

Stooping  forward  :  flatulent  colic  better.

Bending  forward :  pain  in  gluteal  muscles.

Bending  backward :  colic  of  infants.

Bending  head  backward :  superficial  pain  in  neck.

Lying  flat  on  belly  across  chair  :  colic  of  children  better.

Standing :  intestines  seem  to  press  outward  below  umbilicus ;
pressing  towards  genitals  better.

Sitting  up  :  can  only  sleep.

Slides  down  in  bed  :  in  typhoid.

I  Could  only  lie  on  the  painful  side. ^Angina.

Every  jar,  turning  or  movement  of  the  body  increases  the  pain,
the  patient  therefore  lies  immovably  on  his  back.

Motion  :  confusion  of  head  <  ;  vertigo  <  ;  aching  forehead
<C  ;  drawing  in  nape  of  neck  ;  pain  side  of  face  <  ;  pres-
sure in  r.  hypochondrium<^ ;  diarrhoea  <C ;  shooting  in
bladder  ;  metrorrhagia  <<  ;  cough  worse.

Act  of  lying  down  :  bed  seems  to  rock.

1  When  rising  from  a  seat  he  staggers,  cannot  use  the  cars ;  in
leaving  he  would  fall  against  the  wheels  ;  headache  worse.

Walking :  uncertain,  hasty,  precipitate  walking  ;  dullness  and
confusion  of  head  <  ;  vertigo  •<  ;  frontal  headache  <C  ;  il-
lusion of  sight ;  pain  in  pit  of  stomach ;  pressing  toward
genitals  as  if  everything  would  fall  out  ■<  ;  pain  in  chest ;
pain  in  1.  elbow-joint ;  tension  in  tarsal  joint ;  pain  in  ankles
to  hips  <  ;  sensation  as  if  knees  would  give  way.

Stooping :  vertigo  <  ;  headache  >  or  <  ;  sensation  as  if
brain  would  issue  from  forehead ;  shooting  in  head  worse.

i  Cannot  bear  stooping.

Ascending  stairs  :  palpitation.

Turning  in  bed  :  vertigo  worse.

Must  bend  double  :  from  pain  in  hepatic  region.

Anxiety  prevents  remaining  long  in  one  position.
^^  Nerves. Spasms  :  from  laughing  or  crying.

I  Hysteria:  headache  predominates;  with  spasmodic  symp-
toms in  chest,  abdomen  and  limbs  ;  predominating  symptoms
of  the  genital  organs.

Great  restlessness,  the  body  is  thrown  to  one  side  then  to  the
other ;  sometimes  the  chest,  at  other  times  the  abdomen  is
elevated.

Great  restlessness,  with  sudden  startings.

Irritability.

Great  irritability  and  sleeplessness.

iBodily  inquietude;  he  was  constantly  obliged  to  move  the
whole  body  to  and  fro,  and  especially  the  hands  and  feet ;  he
cannot  stay  long  in  any  position,  now  he  lies,  now  he  sits,


395  BELLADONNA.

now  he  stands,  so  that  he  is  always  changing  his  posture  in

one  way  or  another.
He  walked  round  and  round  in  a  circle.
Twitching  of  the  extremities.
iTwitchings  more  in arms and face; difficult articulation;

throws  head  back,  rolling  the  head, d  Chorea.
iSubsultus  tendinum.
Easily  startled  ;  sudden  starting.
Starting  on  falling  asleep  ;  the  feet  are  jerked  upwards  and  the

head  forwards.
iHe  starts  as  if  in  affright,  and  wakes  when  he  is  just  falling

asleep.
She  started  as  in  affright  in  otherwise  quiet  sleep,  feeling  as  if

she  were  falling  deep  down,  which  caused  her  to  shudder

violently.
I  On  closing  the  eyes  a  sudden  inward  shock  passing  upwards

and  preventing  sleep. 6  Sunstroke,  from  exposure  of  nape

of  neck.

■  Spasmodic  motion  of  body,  generally  backwards. ^Chorea.

■  Throws  body  forward  and  backwards,  while  lying,  like  con-

stant change  from  emprosthotonos  to  opisthotonos,  d  Chorea.
Fear  of  apparitions,  with  convulsive  motion  of  the  limbs,  or

twitching  of  single  muscles.
Muscles  efface,  jaws  and  limbs,  agitated  by  convulsive  twitch-

ings.

■  Spasmodic  diseases.

■  ■Eclampsia  with  children;  convulsions.

■  Convulsions  commence  in  arm. ^Epilepsy.

■  Convulsive  momentary  extension  of  the  limbs  on  awaking  out

of  sleep.
Convulsions  come  suddenly.

■  Repeated  convulsions  and  horrible  spasms,  especially  of  the

flexor  muscles.

■  Violent  convulsions  ;  distortion  of  the  limbs  and  eyes.
Convulsions  followed  by  sound  sleep.

Renewal  of  the  fits  at  every  pain  ;  more  or  less  tossing  between
the  spasms,  or  deep  sleep,  with  grimaces  or  starts  and  cries,
with  fearful  visions.

Spasms,  startings  and  convulsions  of  the  limbs ;  after  a  fit  of
chagrin ;  renewed  by  the  least  contact ;  with  screams  and
loss  of  consciousness  ;  with  delirium  ;  with  extension  of  the
limbs,  or  violent  distortion  of  the  muscles.

She  has  the  appearance  of  being  stunned ;  a  semi-consciousness
and  loss  of  speech  ;  convulsive  movements  in  limbs  and  mus-
cles of  face  ;  paralysis  of  right  side  of  tongue ;  difficult  de-
glutition ;  dilated  pupils  ;  red  or  livid  countenance.

Attacks  similar  to  epilepsy.

■  Epileptic  convulsions.


BELLADONNA.  396

Epilepsy,  with  violent  congestion  to  the  head,  with  the  attacks

or  at  other  times.
■  Epileptic  convulsions,  followed  by  an  apoplectic  condition.
Epilepsy :  patient  clutches  wildly  at  the  throat ;  the  eyes  roll

back  in  their  sockets,  he  froths  at  the  mouth ;  brought  on

by  fright.
Clonic  and  tonic  spasms.
(From  her  3d  to  her  9th  year,  every  three  months  a  spasmodic

attack  ;  face  red,  with  snapping  jerks  of  lower  jaw  and  biting

her  tongue ;  lying  on  her  back.  '

Clenched  the  teeth  with  such  force  that  they  could  not  be

opened.
I  Tetanus  and  trismus.
I  Became  unconscious  while  working  in  hot  sun;  jaws  fixed;

head  hot ;  feet  cold, d  Tetanus.
Contortions  of  the  extremities,  with  great  prostration.
Paroxysms  of  stiffness,  and  immobility  of  all  the  limbs,  or  of

single  limbs  only.
Stiffness  of  whole  body.
Great  prostration.

.  I  After  prostration  by  sunstroke. ^Epilepsy.
Great  general  debility.
All  her  strength  goes  in  an  instant.
Limbs relaxed;  red swollen  face;  dilated  pupils;  paralysis

and  puffiness  of  the  upper  lids ;  stertorous  breathing ;  weak

but  rapid  heart-beat ;  difficult  swallowing.
Trembling  in  all  the  limbs.
General  tremor,  with  anxiety.
Weakness,  and  tottering  gait.

Paralytic  weakness  of  all  the  muscles,  especially  of  feet.
I  Spasm  of  one  and  paralysis  of  other  side.
Fainting  fits,  sometimes  resembling  lethargy.
^^  Sleep. Frequent  yawning.

I  When  yawning  he  has  to  cough. ^Hepatitis.

Toward  evening  drowsiness,  with  yawning.

Great  drowsiness  and  somnolency.

The  child  is  very  drowsy,  half  sleeping  and  half  waking.

Sleep  prevented  by  anxiety.

He  can  only  sleep  sitting  up.

I  Great  inclination  to  sleep.

I I  Sleepy,  yet  cannot  sleep.

Quite  profound  somnolency,  with  subsultus  tendinum ; pale,

cold  hands,  and  hard,  small,  rapid  pulse.
Soporous  after  the  spasms.

Somnolence;  stupor;  lethargy;  deep  sleep  with  snoring.
I  Comatose  condition,  with  rattling  in  throat ;  very  red  face.
She  does  not  sleep  well ;  she  lies  half  sleeping  and  half  waking.


397  ,  BELLADONNA.

Erequent  waking  in  the  night,  with  great  restlessness,  anxiety

and  tossing  about  in  bed.
Anxiety  and  apparitions  prevent  sleep ;  burning  heat,  thirst,

with  dijfficult  deglutition  ;  restless  tossing  about,  even  twitch-

■  ing-

I  Went  to  bed  after  11  o'clock  ;  sleepless  from  2  to  5  ;  laughed,

and  said  she  saw  laughing  masks.
During  sleep :  singing and loud talking ;  moaning ;  tossing

about ;  screaming ;  starts.
lUneasy  sleep  before  midnight;  the  child  tosses  about,  kicks

and  quarrels  in  its  sleep.

■  She  wakes  in  the  night  full  of  fright  and  fear;  it  appeared  to

her  as  if  there  was  something  under  the  bed  which  made  a

noise  ;  she  felt  dry  heat  on  awaking.
lAt  night  the  boys  became  restless,  spoke  irrationally,  and

could  with  difficulty  be  kept  in  bed.
I  Great  restlessness,  the  boy  wished  to  escape,  and  had  to  be

kept  on  his  couch  by  force,  at  the  same  time  he  developed  a

vigor  and  strength  beyond  his  age.
Moaning  and  starting  in  sleep  ;  head  hot.
Awakens  from  sleep  and  looks  frightened,  with  staring  eyes.

■  Children  sleep  with  half  open  eyes.

He  does  not  sleep  well,  and  "hears  all  that  is  going  on."

■  Restlessness  at  night;  grinding  of  the  teeth,  and  now  and^

then  convulsions.
Deep,  sound  sleep,  full  of  dreams.
Vivid  dreams,  but  could  not  remember  them.
Sleep  is  broken  by  disagreeable  dreams.

■  Restless  sleep,  with  anxious  and  frightful  dreams.

■  He  is  frequently  awakened  out  of  sleep  by  fearful  dreams  and

convulsions.
Anxious dreams : about murder ;  street  robbers ;  of  danger
from  fire  ;  of  swimming.

■  Sleep  restless,  disturbed  by  dreams;  irrational  talking.

Sleep  much  disturbed  by  frightful  dreams ;  complains  of  in-
tense pains  in  the  head,  and  says  that  it  feels  enormously
large ;  great  intolerance  of  light  and  noise ;  at  noon  very
delirious,  and  would  insist  that  there  were  horrid  monsters
all  over  the  room  staring  at  her.

■Very  restless  sleep.

■  Restless  tossing  about  in  bed.

■  ■Starts  as  in  affright,  during  and  from  sleep.

■  As  soon  as  he  closes  his  eyes  for  sleep,  shocks  run  from  below

up  and  startle  him ;  it  torments  him  with  each  beat  of  the
pulse  ;  great  longing  for  sleep, d  Sunstroke  from  exposing
the  nape  of  the  neck.
Stertorous  breathing.

■  Feet  ice-cold;  can  scarcely  be  warmed.


BELLADONNA.  398

■  Sleeplessness.

When  awaking  from  sleep  exceedingly  irritable  and  inclined  to
weep.

In  the  morning  feels  as  if  had  not  slept  enough.

Sleeps  much,  yet  not  refreshed.
^■®  Time. 2  to  5  a.m.:  sleeplessness.

Morning:  boring  pain  in  r.  frontal  eminence;  eyelids  aggluti-
nated ;  nosebleed ;  toothache  renewed  ;  mouth  slimy ;  pain
in  hypogastrium  <C  ',  bearing-down  pains  <C  ;  dysmenorrhoea
<C  ;  dyspnoea ;  general  beating  of  arteries  on  awaking ;  fe-
ver with  thirst.

10  A.M.  to  2  P.M.:  violent  tenesmus;  dysenteric  stools.

Noon  :  violent  thirst ;  contractive  dragging  in  region  of  navel ;
violent  cough ;  delirium ;  coldness  ;  weakness ;  heat ;  sweat.

Day :  dry  cough  ;  several  attacks  of  fever ;  frequent  chilliness ;
sweat  during  sleep.

Afternoon  :  contractive  dragging  in  region  of  navel ;  shortness
of  breath  after  drinking  coffee ;  asthma ;  attacks  of  cough
■<  ;  fever ;  heat  without  thirst.

Usually  worse  after  three  in  the  afternoon,  and  again  after
midnight.

Towards  evening :  drowsiness,  with  yawning.

Evening  :  stabbing  through  head  ;  toothache  <C  ;  great  thirst ;
pressure  in  abdomen  as  from  a  stone ;  tearing  upwards  in  1.
spermatic  cord ;  asthma ;  cough  ■<  ;  whooping-cough  <C  ',
chill ;  sweat ;  fever  violently  aggravated.

10  P.M.:  cough  commenced.

11  P.M.:  barking  cough  awakens  suddenly.

Night :  headache  -< ;  nosebleed  of  children ;  hears  all  "  that
is  going  on;"  toothache  ■<  ;  pains  in  stomach;  enuresis;
seminal  emissions ;  dyspnoea ;  dry  cough ;  darting  pressure
in  shoulder  <  ;  pains  in  hip-joint  <  ;  burning  stinging  in
knee-joint  <  ;  awakens  full  of  fear  and  fright ;  restlessness  ;
child  vomits  ;  typhoid  fever  always  <  ;  fever.

Before  midnight :  uneasy  sleep.

Midnight :  ineffectual  efforts  to  vomit,  with  cold  sweat.

After  midnight :  dry  cough,  with  retching ; whooping-cough
most  violent.
3'  Temperature  and  Weather, ■  ■  Takes  cold  from  having  the
hair  cut.

■  Worse  in  sudden  changes,  from  warm  to  cold.

■  Better  wrapped  up  warmly  in  the  room.
Spring :  boils,  etc.

Sunstroke.

■  ■Liability  to  take  cold,  with  great  sensitiveness  to  drafts  of

air,  especially  when  uncovering  the  head.

■  ■After  riding  in  a  cold  wind  swelling  of  tonsils,  preventing

deglutition.


399  '  BELLADONNA.

Open  air :  frontal  headache  <  ;  pressure  deep  in  brain  <  ;
eyes  sensitive;  dyspnoea  >• ;  tension  tarsal  joint.

Cold  air :  toothache  worse.

Draft :  takes  cold  easily.

Sun  :  headache  ;  inflammation  at  base  of  brain,  after  hair  cut ;
unconsciousness  from  working  in  the  hot  sun.

Hot,  damp  weather :  asthma  worse.

Warm  weather:  nose  red  and  hot.
*"  Chill. Fever. Sweat. She  is  occasionally  chilly.

Shivering  running  down  the  back.

iFeels  very  chilly,  wants  the  warmth  of  a  stove. ^Angina.

I  Cool  hands  and  forehead,  with  much  thirst,  but  no  fever.

Shuddering,  or  violent  chill  in  back,  epigastrium,  or  arms.

Chill,  and  heat  alternating.

I  At  noon  :  coldness,  with  marbled  skin  and  blue  lips  ;  so  weak
that  he  falls  at  the  same  time ;  afterward  heat  with  glowing
red  face  and  burning  ears ;  soon  afterward  at  the  same  time
sweat  on  the  head  in  drops.

Chill  in  the  evening,  mostly  on  arms,  with  heat  of  head.

Internal  chill,  with  external  burning  heat.

!  Several  attacks  of  fever  in  one  day,  during  which  the  hot
stage  followed  the  cold,  within  a  few  minutes  to  half  an  hour
after,  always  without  thirst  in  either  stage,  and  mostly  with
confusion  of  the  head.

I  Heat  of  forehead,  with  cold  cheeks.

Frequent  chilliness  during  day,  though  well  protected  and  even
feverish  ;  sight  is  dim  from  the  intensity  of  fever ;  the  sur-
face of  the  body  imparts  a  burning  sensation  to  the  hand  of
the  physician  ;  pulse  has  a  full  double  beat.

iMilk-fever,  with  coldness  of  the  nose,  finger-tips  and  feet;
at  night  fever,  restlessness,  vomiting  and  frequent  stools.

■  Violent  chills; thirst; bitter  vomiting; throbbing  in  fore-

head ;  weeping ;  stiff  neck  ;  pain  in  epigastrium  ;  heat,  thirst
and  sweat.

■  I  Coldness  of  the  limbs,  with  heat  of  head.

■  Temperature  of  the  head  very  much  increased,  of  the  rest  of

the  body  diminished.
Internal  heat,  with  anxiety  and  restlessness.
Heat  of  head,  with  redness  of  face,  and  delirium.
During  the  hot  stage :  delirium  ;  redness  and  pufliness  of  the

face,  and  great  thirst.
Heat;  violent  burning,  internal  or  external;  dry,  principally

of  the  head  and  face.

■  Head  hot;  face  red;  eyes  protruding;  pupils  dilated;  look

staring.
I  The  skin  hot,  dry,  scarlet,  especially  intense  on  the  face  and

ears.
I  Child  cries,  refuses  to  eat,  vomits  at  night ;  fever  in  morning,


BELLADONNA.  400

■with  thirst ;  red  face  ;  little  blisters  on  inner  lips  ;  forehead

•  burning  hot  and  painful ;  pulse  rapid  and  soft;  when  taking
a  deep  inspiration  or  when  retching,  feels  pain  in  middle  of
sternum  ;  frequent  clenching  of  the  fingers.  6  A  child  dis-
posed to  convulsions.

I  Excessive  heat ;  distended  veins  ;  insatiable  thirst,  with  anxi-
ety and  trembling.

Flying  heat.

I  Great  heat ;  distension  of  the  superficial  veins  of  the  body  and
insatiable  thirst.

I  Typhus:  lies  motionless  ;  moans;  trembling,  twitching  of  the
lips,  head  and  limbs ;  slides  down  in  bed ;  becomes  restless  ;
screams,  and  says  he  cannot  bear  it;  sometimes  he  com-
plains, sometimes  he  refuses  to  answer ;  pulse  ygyj  small,
thready  ;  hot  head  ;  thirst.

I  Typhoid  fever:  the  nights  are  always  worse;  at  first  he  lies
quiet,  but  moans  often  ;  trembling,  twitching  of  lips,  of  head
and  limbs  ;  slides  down  in  bed ;  gets  restless  now  and  then,
or  screams  and  says  he  cannot  bear  it ;  sometimes  he  com-
plains, sometimes  he  refuses  to  answer;  pulse  very  small,
thready,  and  irregular;  a  strong  throbbing  pulse  in  head;
in  attacks,  heat  on  head,  with  thirst ;  ears  cold  and  white  ;
face  pale;  throat  so  dry  that  it  hurts  when  he  drinks;  he
has  the  hands  always  on  the  sexual  parts;  complains  either  of
pain  in  urinating  or  that  the  urine  passed  too  slowly.

I  Colic,  with  distension  of  abdomen;  vomits  breakfast,  has  not
the  least  appetite,  but  great  thirst ;  tongue  whitish,  furred ;
aversion  to  sweets;  no  stool;  burning  heat  of  body,  with  a
very  frequent  pulse ;  face  either  very  pale  or  very  red ;  pu-
pils dilated; prostrated  and  ill-humored. ^  Worm  fever.

Dry  heat  and  throbbing.

■  Violent  heat.

■  Temperature  of  skin  increased ;  face  red;  pulse  accelerated,

senseless  talking,  and  tottering  almost  as  if  drunk.

■  B Inflammatory,  catarrhal,  rheumatic,  milk,  puerperal  and  ty-

phoid fevers,  with  furious  delirium  and  loss  of  consciousness.

■  Bellyache,  with  vomiting  of  all  food  and  some  large  worms;

violent  thirst ;  skin  hot  and  dry  ;  pulse  quick  ;  violent  burn-
ing headache ;  restless  and  talking  in  the  night ;  great  pros-
tration ;  a  boy. d  Worm  fever.

■  Heat  predominating; I  I  averse  to  uncovering.

■  Burning  heat  within  and  without ;  body  burning-hot  like  fire.

■  Burning  heat  over  the  whole body;  skin universally  red;

pulse  full,  quick,  and  extremely  frequent.

■  Burning  heat  of  the  body,  with  extreme  distension  of  the  su-

perficial blood-vessels,  and  furious  delirium.
Fever  in  the  afternoon  and  night.


401  BELLADONNA.

■  Temperature  of  the  skin  very  much  raised;  skin  scarlet.

I  The  child  has  fever,  with  transient  perspiration  ;  thirst ;  nau-
sea ;  desire  for  this  and  that,  things  which  it  refuses  when
oifered ;  says  everything  is  bitter  :  complains  of  sore  throat ;
has  ineflFectual  urging  to  stool ;  is  very  sensitive,  and  cries
at  the  leabt  provocation.

I  Continuous  dry  burning  heat,  with  sweat  only  on  the  head.

Pains  in  liver  with  violent  vomiting ;  fever  heat ;  sleep  followed
by  thirst  and  sweat. 0  Hepatitis.

I  In  the  afternoon,  heat  without  thirst;  in  the  evening,  sweat;
cough  <<  during  fever ;  hungry,  but  cannot  eat ;  talks  in
sleep  and  grinds  the  teeth. 6  Blood  boil  on  thigh.

I  Sensation  of  heat  with  actual  heat  in  the  whole  body,  but  par-
ticularly in  the  face,  which  was  red  and  covered  with  sweat,
with  confusion  of  the  head.

llFever  heat,  now  and  then  sweat,  they  often  ask  for  drink,
but  do  not  take  much  ;  pulse  full  and  frequent.  6  After  abuse
of  Sulphur  in  itch.

Sweat  on  covered  parts.

Sweat  with  or  immediately  after  the  heat,  mostly  in  face.

Sweat  staining  the  clothing  and  of  empyreumatic  smell.

Sweat  during  sleep,  day  or  night.

Sweat  ascending  from  feet  to  head.

Entire  want  of  sweat.

I  I  General  sweat  suddenly  occurring  and  quickly  disappearing.

Sweat  staining  brownish-yellow.

Cold  sweat  on  extremities.

General  sweat,  excepting  on  the  head.

Copious  sweat.
"  Attacks. Pains  come  on  suddenly,  and  after  a  shorter  or  longer
duration,  cease  suddenly.

Sudden  attacks  of  violent  cramp-like  pain  in  one  side  of  chest,
or  of  abdomen,  or  loin,  or  one  elbow,  especially  during  sleep,
causing  one  to  bend  the  painful  part.

llMost  all  pains  in  short  attacks.

Periodical  nervous  headache.
*^  Locality  and  Direction.  Right :  pressure  in  forehead ;
shooting  in  frontal  eminence  and  temple  ;  drawing  pain  in
temple  and  orbit ;  stabbing  side  of  head ;  quivering  of  upper
eyelid  ;  tearing  in  ear  and  side  of  face ;  swelling  of  parotid ;
shooting  in  maxillary  joint;  pressing  below  zygoma  ;  tooth-
ache upper  row  of  side ;  painful  swelling  of  gums  of  side ;
tonsillitis  of  side  ;  hand  clutches  throat  in  epilepsy ;  pain  in
liver,  <<  lying  on  side ;  pain  in  hypochondrium  ;  pain  in  ileo-
coecal  region ;  feeling  as  if  a  hard  body  pressed  from  ingui-
nal ring ;  ovary  enlarged  ;  paralysis  side  of  tongue  ;  stitches
in  apex  of  lung ;  burning  in  chest ;  drawing  pressure  between
scapula  and  spine  ;  paralytic  weakness  of  arm  and  forearm  ;

VOL.  II.— 26.


BELLADONNA.  402

paralytic  tearing  in  index-finger ;  tension  in  tarsal  joint ;
tension  in  sole  of  foot ;  cutting  stitches  in  thigh  when  sitting  ;
cramp  in  knee.

R.  to  1.:  cutting  from  r.  occipital  bone  to  1.  parietal  bone;
pinching  in  ears.

Side  to  side  :  stabbing  in  head.

Left :  shooting  in  temple ;  triplopia ;  tickling  in  nostril ;  pains
under  orbit ;  mobility  of  facial  muscles  of  side  :  tearing  in  ton-
sil ;  fine  shooting  in  groin  ;  tearing  in  spermatic  cord  in  even-
ing in  bed ;  pressive  pain  under  scapula ;  cramp  in  lumbar  re-
gion ;  shooting  or  stitching  top  of  shoulder ;  paralytic  weak-
ness of  arm  ;  pain  inner  side  of  upper  arm  ;  sharp  shooting
in  elbow-joint ;  painful  drawing  in  middle  finger.

Above  downward :  tearing  in  ear  and  right  side  of  face  ;  ten-
sion in  chest ;  pressing  toward  genitals  as  if  everything
would  fall  out.

Below  upward  :  shock  through  body  on  closing  the  eyes  ;  tear-
ing in  1.  spermatic  cord ;  pains  in  ankles.

Without  inwards  :  stabbing  as  with  a  knife  in  vertebrae.

Within  outward : shooting  in  1, temple ;  pressure  in  head ;
shooting  in  eyes ;  feeling  as  if  a  hard  body  pressed  from  r.
inguinal  ring  ;  stabbing  below  head  of  humerus.
*^  Sensations. As  if  a  board  were  before  forehead.

As  if  objects  around  him  swayed.

As  if  she  were  being  rocked.

As  if  the  bed  was  bouncing  the  patient  up  and  down.

As  if  everything  turned  in  a  circle.

As  if  brain  were  pressed  to  the  forehead.

As  if  everything  would  issue  at  forehead  when  stooping.

As  if  brain  rose  and  fell  in  forehead  at  every  step.

As  if  brain  was  compressed ;  headache  above  orbits.

As  if  brain  was  shaken.

As  if  eyes  were  starting  from  their  sockets.

As  if  sutures  of  skull  were  being  torn  open.

As  if  a  lever  were  being  applied  to  force  the  head  asunder.

As  if  something  rocked  and  swayed  in  a  jerking  manner  in
head.

As  if  skull  were  thin  and  could  be  pressed  through.

At  every  step  a  jolt,  as  if  a  weight  were  in  occiput.

As  if  blood  was  as  thin  as  paper,  as  if  it  were  transparent.

As  if  muscles  of  forehead  and  eyes  were  contracted.

A  sudden  shock  running  through  body  from  below  up.  See  5
and  87.

As  if  the  eyes  had  been  torn  out  or  pressed  into  the  head.

As  if  eyes  were  surrounded  by  a  hot  vapor.

Feeling  of  sand  in  eyes.

As  if  teeth  would  be  forced  out  of  head.

T  eeth  feel  elongated  and  on  edge.


403  BELLADONNA.

As  of  a  vesicle  on  tip  of  tongue.

As  of  a  foreign  body  in  oesophagus.

As  if  a  tumor  stopped  up  throat.

As  if  something  were  in  pit  of  stomach,  exciting  cough.

As  if  a  spot  in  abdomen  were  seized  with  nails ;  griping,  clutch-

As  if  hypochondria  were  being  pressed  out.

As  if  a  ball  or  lump  would  form  in  abdomen.

As  though  intestines  pressed  outward,  below  umbilicus.

As  if  a  hard  body  pressed  from  within  outwards  at  r.  inguinal
ring.

As  if  mucous  membrane  of  anus  were  swollen  and  pressed  out.

As  from  a  large  worm  twisting  in  bladder.

As  if  the  testicle  was  drawing  up  into  abdomen.

As  if  womb  would  fall  out.

As  if  back  would  break.

As  if  knees  would  give  way.

As  of  a  foreign  body  in  larynx.

As  if  a  mouse  were  creeping  about  in  the  muscles.

Lancinating :  in  throat ;  in  ovary.

Thrusts  :  in  internal  ear.

Cutting:  in  r.  side  of  head,  from  frontal  to  occipital  region;
in  parietal  bone  ;  in  various  parts  of  head  ;  in  side  of  face  to
temple,  ear  and  neck ;  in  pit  of  stomach ;  in  stomach ;  in
abdomen  ;  in  uterus  ;  in  loins  and  sacrum  ;  in  1.  elbow-joint ;
tearing  in  lower  muscles  of  both  forearms ;  from  wrist  to  el-
bow ;  stitches  in  outer  muscles  of  r.  thigh.

Stabbing :  from  temple  to  temple ;  from  forehead  to  occiput ;
through  head,  as  with  a  double-edged  knife  ;  in  forehead,
vertex  and  occiput;  1.  lower  jaw;  in  vertebrae;  below  head
of  humerus.

Stitches  :  in  head ;  flying  through  head ;  itching  stitches  in
inner  canthus  ;  in  ears  ;  in  maxillary  articulations  ;  in  testi-
cles ;  in  ovary ;  in  uterine  region ;  in  vagina ;  stitching
pressure  on  top  of  1.  shoulder ;  in  apex  of  r.  lung.

Shooting :  in  r.  frontal  eminence  ;  in  r.  temple ;  dull  in  1.  tem-
ple ;  in  various  parts  of  head ;  in  eyes ;  in  internal  ear ;  in
r.  parotid  ;  from  side  of  face  to  temple,  ear  and  neck  ;  in  r.
maxillary  joint ;  in  lower  jaw;  from  sup.  maxilla  into  in-
ternal ear ;  in  pharynx ;  in  throat ;  in  pit  of  stomach ;  in
stomach  ;  in  1.  groin  ;  in  bladder ;  in  urethra ;  behind  glans  ;
in  genital  region ;  in  spinal  column ;  externally  in  1.  elbow-
joint;  insoles;  along  bones.

Stinging :  in  eyes ;  toothache ;  in  abdomen ;  from  kidneys  to
bladder ;  in  uterine  region ;  in  nodules  in  breast ;  in  hip ;
in  knee-joint.

Prickling:  in  hands.


BELLADONNA.  404

Lacerating :  in  external  and  internal  ears ;  toothache ;  in
shoulder.

Tearing  :  from  r.  temple  over  orbit  to  r.  cheek ;  in  various
parts  of  head  ;  in  r.  vertex  ;  in  vertex  ;  in  head  ;  in  internal
and  external  ears ;  in  r.  side  of  face ;  from  side  of  face  to
temple,  ear  and  neck;  in  jaws;  behind  r.  zygoma;  tooth-
ache ;  inner  surface  of  angle ;  in  1.  spermatic  cord ;  in  in-
flamed breasts  ;  in  arms ;  in  humerus ;  in  joints  ;  in  legs ;
pressure  in  inside  of  middle  of  leg  ;  cough  at  night.

Paralytic  tearing: in  middle  joint  of  r.  index-finger.

Jerking:  headache;  in  teeth;  in  abdomen;  in  direction  of
perineum  from  lower  intestines  ;  of  arms  and  hands.

Boring :  under  r.  frontal  eminence  ;  in  various  parts  of  head  ;
in  ears  ;  in  soles.

Pinching  :  in  ears  ;  in  abdomen  ;  under  navel.

Gnawing :  at  frontal  eminences  ;  in  stomach ;  beneath  carti-
lages of  last  ribs  ;  in  spinal  column  ;  along  bones.

Clawing :  around  navel ;  in  uterine  region.

Screwing :  in  ears.

Stretching  :  in  upper  extremities.

Twisting  :  in  vertex  ;  in  upper  extremities.

Turning  and  twisting  :  in  bladder.

Digging  :  in  vertex  ;  toothache  ;  in  soles.

Drawing :  down  in  temples  and  r.  orbit ;  from  r.  temple  over
orbit  to  r.  cheek ;  incessant,  in  head ;  in  frontal  bone ;  in
nape  of  neck ;  behind  r.  zygoma  ;  in  upper  teeth ;  tooth-
ache ;  in  spermatic  cord ;  in  one  of  the  testicles  and  sper-
matic cord ;  in  pelvic  region ;  in  loins  and  sacrum  ;  pressure
between  r.  scapula  and  spinal  column  ;  in  spine  ;  from  small
of  back  to  thighs;  inner  1.  upper  arm  ;  in  joint  of  1.  middle
finger.

Burning :  in  eyes :  of  eyelids  ;  in  tip  of  nose ;  heat,  in  face  ;
in  swollen  cheek  ;  of  lips ;  in  mouth  ;  in  fauces ;  in  stom-
ach ;  in  abdomen  ;  in  larynx ;  in  r.  chest ;  from  kidneys
into  bladder ;  in  spermatic  cord  ;  in  ovarian  region  ;  in  uter-
ine region  ;  in  spine  ;  in  hip  ;  in  knee-joint.

Smarting  :  in  eyes  ;  in  pustules  on  upper  lip  ;  in  prepuce.

Corroding :  beneath  cartilages  of  last  r.  ribs.

Scalded  feeling  :  in  cheek-bones  ;  in  mouth.

Burnt  feeling  :  in  vesicle  on  gum.

Pressure  :  in  forehead  ;  as  if  a  stone  were  pressing  forehead  ;  >
in  lower  part  of  forehead ;  above  nose ;  hemicrania ;  in  r.
temporal  region ;  in  occiput ;  in  brain  towards  temples,  oc-
cupying large  areas  in  head  ;  at  vertex  ;  in  eyeball ;  over  r.
eye ;  below  r.  zygoma ;  in  throat ;  in  chest ;  in  stomach ;
painless ;  in  r.  hypochonder  ;  in  abdomen  ;  in  hypogastrium ;
in  region  of  os  pubis  ;  towards  anus  and  genitals;  in  vesical


405  BELLADONNA.

region ;  in  uterine  region ;  through  vulva ;  in  loins  and
groins  ;  in  cardiac  region ;  in  nape  of  neck ;  under  1.  scap-
ula ;  in  shoulder  ;  in  1.  upper arm.

Bearing  down :  in  abdomen ;  in  uterus ;  on  to  sacrum ;  with
leucorrhoea.

Labor-like  pains :  deep  in  pelvis,  to  back  and  loins.

Tensive  pressure :  in  r.  side  of  forehead ;  from  temple  to  or-
bit;  hemicrania;  in  1.  vertex  and  forehead;  in  pit  of  stom-
ach.

Aching :  in  forehead ;  in  eyes ;  in  lids ;  in  upper  part  of  ab-
domen.

Soreness :  in  sinciput ;  of  eyelids ;  from  throat  to  ears  ;  in
teeth;  of  palate;  in  throat;  in  abdomen  ;  of  last  dorsal  and
first  lumbar  vertebrae.

Raw  feeling :  of  corners  of  mouth ;  of  palate ;  in  throat ;  in
abdomen.

Scraping  :  in  throat ;  in  region  of  epiglottis  ;  in  larynx.

Scraping-itching:  of  forehead.

Bruised  pain  :  in  nose  ;  in  upper  arm  ;  in  heel.

Beaten  feeling:  in  thighs  and  legs.

Squeezing ;  in  lowermost  intestines.

Wave-like  sensation :  hemicrania.

Distension  :  of  whole  brain.

Bursting  :  hemicrania ;  in  r.  temporal  region.

Expansive  pain  :  in  head.

Dislocated  feeling  :  in  metatarsal  bones.

Constricted  feeling  :  in  mouth  ;  of  gullet ;  of  throat ;  of  abdo-
men, around  navel ;  under  navel ;  in  lower  intestines ;  in
rectum  ;  in  larynx  ;  in  chest.

Contractive  pain  :  in  scalp  ;  in  lower  abdomen  ;  in  rectum  ;  of
anus.

Contractive  dragging  :  in  region  of  navel.

Crampy  pain  :  in  frontal  eminence  to  zygoma  and  lower  jaw  ;  in
r.  external  ear ;  at  root  of  nose ;  in  stomach  ;  in  abdomen
and  lower  intestines ;  in  uterus ;  in  loins  and  groins ;  in  1.
lumbar  region;  in  gluteal  muscles;  in  knee-joints;  in  r.
knee.

Cramps:  of  hands  and  feet;  in  stomach  along  ureter  ;  in  legs,
during  labor.

Twitching  :  of  facial  muscles ;  of  arms  ;  of  abdominal  muscles.

Quivering  :  of  r.  upper  eyelid.

Trembling  :  of  r.  upper  eyelid  ;  of  upper  lip  ;  of  tongue.

Swashing :  in  head.

Gritty  feeling  :  in  eyelids.

Tension:  in  lower  jaw  ;  spasmodic,  from  chest  into  abdomen  ;
in  uterine  region ;  in  r.  tarsal  joint;  in  sole  of  r.  foot;  in
gluteal  muscles.

Tightness  :  in  maxillary  articulations.


BELLADONNA.  •  406

Throbbing : in head ;  violent  in  brain ;  in  teeth  ;  at  pit  of

stomach  ;  in  ovary ;  in carotids ;  in spine ;  in nodules  in

breast.
Fullness :  at  temples  and  forehead ;  in stomach ;  in  uterine

region.
Empty  feeling:  in  stomach.
Rheumatic  :  toothache  ;  pain  in  back.

Neuralgic  pain  :  in  infraorbital  nerve  ;  beneath  1.  orbit  to  ear.
Ulcerated  feeling  :  in  gums.
Dull  pain  :  in  back  of  eye.
Lameness  :  of  legs  and  feet.
Paralytic  feeling :  in  upper  arms.
Tired  feeling  :  before  and  after  vertigo.
Undefined  pain:  over  eyes ;  in  orbits;  in  stomach  through  to

spine ;  in  liver ;  in  r.  ileo  coecal  region.
Heaviness :  in  head ;  in  uterine  region  ;  in  upper  limbs ;  of

legs  and  feet.
Stifi"ness  :  in  occiput ;  of  neck  ;  of  hip-joint.
Weakness  :  of  1.  upper  arm.
Numbness  :  in  temples  ;  of  face  ;  in  hands.
Tickling :  in  1.  nostril ;  voluptuous  in  lower  parts  of  rectum

and  anus ;  in  throat.
Itching :  in  eyes  ;  of  eyelids ;  itching  stitches  in  inner  canthus ;

of  gums  ;  on  abdomen  ;  in  back  part  of  top  of  larynx.
Heat :  in  face  ;  in  throat ;  in  abdomen  ;  in  chest ;  in  sternum  ;

of  the  mammae  ;  in  vagina.
Coldness  :  in  brain,  at  middle  of  forehead ;  of  face ;  of  forepart

of  tongue.
Dryness  :  burning  in  both  eyes  ;  of  lids  ;  of  Schneiderian  mem-
brane ;  of  tongue ;  in  mouth  ;  about  fauces ;  in  pharynx ;

in  throat ;  in  larynx ;  in  vagina.
**  Tissues. Suits  persons  with  largely  developed  brains.

I  Acts  on  circular  fibres  of  blood-vessels;  on  sphincters,  as  in

spasm  of  OS  uteri,  etc.
Inflammation  of  serous  and  mucous  membranes.
Pains  along  the  periosteum.
Red  shining  swelling  of  the  joints.

■  Phlegmonous  inflammation.

I I  Engorgement  of  glands  ;  acute  swelling.
Inflammation  of  the  lymphatic  vessels  and  glands  in  children.
Glandular  swellings,  painful  or  suppurating.

Swelling  of  the  salivary  and  cervical  glands.
Inflammation  of  internal  organs,  with  disposition  to  suppurate.
The  inflammation  is  of  an  erysipelatous  kind,  it  runs  in  radii  as
it  extends  to  the  adjacent  parts.

■  Induration  after  inflammation.

■  Scirrhous  indurations.

■  Varices.


407  '  BELLADONNA.

I  Scrofulous  and  rickety  complaints.

I  Rheumatic  and  gouty  complaints,  with  inflammation  and  swell-
ing.

I  Atrophy  and  wasting  of  scrofulous  subjects.  ^Marasmus  of
children.

I  Gangrene.

I I  Rachitis,  mostly  when  abdomen  is  puffed  up  tense  and
hard ;  the  child  shakes  and  withers ;  pale  all  over,  with
flushes  ;  pupils  not  very  sensitive.

"  Touch.  Passive  Motion.  Injuries.  Tenderness  of  abdomen
is  aggravated  by  the  least  jar,  even  of  the  bed  or  chair  upon
which  she  sits ;  she  is  obliged  in  walking  to  step  with  great
care,  for  fear  of  a  jar.

Pressure  :  headache  >>  ;  shooting  pains  in  forehead  >  ;  vertex
headache  <C  ;  pain  side  of  head  >> ;  toothache  >  ;  wants  to
lean  head  against  something  hard  and  cold  ;  pressure  on  epi-
gastrium causes  pain  as  if  hypochondria  were  being  pressed
out ;  flatulent  colic  >  ;  clawing  around  navel  >  ;  ovarian
region  tender  ;  vesical  region  sensitive  ;  lower  part  of  larynx
sensitive ;  tension  in  sole  of  r.  foot  better.

Touch :  outer  head  sensitive ;  nose  feels  bruised  ;  pain  r.  side
of  face  < ;  toothache  ■<  ;  throat  sensitive ;  r.  hypochon-
drium  sensitive ;  abdomen  tender  ;  pain  r.  ileo  coecal  region
<  ;  danger  of  suff"ocation  from  touching  larynx  ;  pain  in  hip-
joint  <  ;  skin  sensitive;  pit  of  stomach  sensitive.

Spasm  renewed  by  least  contact  (especially  in  hydrophobia).

Painful  sensitiveness  of  the  skin  to  all  contact.
*®  Skin. Painful  sensitiveness  of  skin  to  contact.

Heat  over  whole  body,  with  bluish  redness  of  whole  surface.

I  Skin  imparts  a  burning  sensation  to  the  examining  hand.

Heat,  redness  and  dryness  of  the  skin.

Red,  hot  swelling  of  affected  parts.

Tense  skin.

Skin  alternately  red  and  pale.

Great  redness  of  the  parts,  redness  extending  in  radii.

Universal  redness  of  skin,  with  or  without  rash.

Skin  scarlet,  smooth  and  shining.

Red,  scaly  eruption  on  lower  part  of  body,  as  far  as  abdomen.

Inflamed  red  patches  of  the  skin,  and  irregularly  shaped  scar-
let spots  over  the  body.

■  Redness  of  the  whole  body,  with  quick  pulse.

■  Erythema  of  the  skin,

I  Urticaria  during  profuse  menstruation.

■  Urticaria:  over  the  whole  body, most  on  inner  side  of  the

limbs,  none  on  the  face ;  sometimes  resembling  mosquito
bites  ;  itches  most  mornings  and  evenings  ;  scratching  feels
pleasant ;  at  times  glowing  heat,  with  sweat,  then  again
dullness  and  shivering over  the  back ; <!  after  drinking


BELLADONNA.  408

cold  water ;  sensation  as  if  the  brain  was  shaken ;  when
yawning,  coughing  or  sneezing,  pain  runs  from  the  nose  up-
wards and  inwards,  as  if  the  head  would  be  torn  off.

Erysipelatous  inflammation  with  swelling.

Phlegmonous  erysipelas  ;  bright  red  and  radiating.

Vesicular  erysipelas  (when  fever  is  violent).

Intense  erysipelatous  fever,  accompanied  by  inflamed  swell-
ings, passing  even  into  gangrene.

Measles.

■  Eruptions  like  roseola and scarlet fever, with  fever,  sore

throat,  cough,  headache,  etc.

Eruption  resembling  measles ;  scarlet  spots,  and  scarlet  red-
ness on  various  parts,  sometimes  with  hot  swelling  of  the
parts.

I  Red  spots  with  small  vesicles  becoming  confluent,  showing
darker  and  redder  spots,  getting  white  from  pressure  with  the
finger  ;  fever  heat  with  thirst ;  frequent,  small  pulse ;  quick,
short  breathing ;  sensation  of  weakness  in  chest,  and  a  pain
which  does  not  permit  lying  down  ;  bodily  restlessness  ;
trembling ;  sleeplessness ;  much  saliva ;  crampy,  shooting
pain  below  the  pit  of  stomach ;  the  pit  is  very  sensitive  to
touch  ;  several  days  no  stool.

I  The  face,  upper  extremities  and  trunk,  exhibited  a  difi"use
scarlet  efflorescence,  studded  with  innumerable  papillae,  very
closely  resembling  the  rash  of  scarlet  fever  ;  eruption  termi-
nated abruptly  at  wrists  and  flexors  of  thighs,  rest  of  body
retaining  the  natural  color ;  skin  was  hot  and  dry.

Uniform,  smooth,  shining,  scarlet  redness  of  skin,  with  dry-
ness, heat,  itching,  burning,  and  bloatedness  of  the  parts,
especially  face,  neck,  chest,  abdomen  and  hands.

I A  scarlet  redness  suddenly  spread  over  the  body,  especially
face  and  limbs,  with  which  appeared  heat  and  exaltation
of  all  the  faculties,  still  without  thirst.

Scarlet  redness  of  skin,  especially  face,  with  great  cerebral  ac-
tion ;  red,  swollen  face,  with  staring  eyes ;  erysipelas  of
face  (with  Grraphit.,  Laches,  and  Hhus  tox.).

■  Scarlet  redness  of  skin  efface  and  neck,  followed  the  second

day  by  peeling  off"  of  the  cuticle.

■  Redness,  like  scarlatina,  of  entire  surface  of  body,  with  a  white

circle  around  mouth  and  nose,  and  great  dryness  in  throat.

■  Scarlet rash over the whole body ; eruption resembling

measles  ;  purple  rash ;  small  pox  when  the  brain  is  affected.

■  ■In  the  true  Sydenham  scarlet  fever,  where  the  eruption  is

perfectly  smooth  and  truly  scarlet.
Blood  boils  on  various  places.

■  An  infant,  after  suppressed  itch,  nightly  fever  without  thirst ;

pale  lips  and  face ;  offensive  smelling  stools  ;  restlessness.


409  BELLADONNA.

1 1  Ulcer  on  left  cheek,  with  bloody  ichor  and  a  discolored  fun-
dus and  raised  edges.

1 1  Ulcers  if  suppuration  is  interrupted  and  pains  follow.

Scrofulous  and  mercurial  ulcers,  also  cancerous.

Blood  boils  after  abuse  of  Sulphur,  with  fever.

Eed  streaks,  like  radii,  extend  from  the  scirrhous  induration
or  ulcer.

Pustules  on  nape  of  neck,  arms  and  back.

Jaundice  after  abuse  of  Peruvian  bark  or  mercury  ;  in  compli-
cation with  stones  in  gall-bladder.

Vesicular  eruptions,  with  scurf,  whitish  border  and  swelling.

Crawling  itching  over  the  whole  body,  fugitive,  now  here  again
there.

I  Snake  bite,  when  given  at  once,  before  difficult  breathing  sets
in.

*''  Stages  of  Life,  Constitution. I  Bilious,  lymphatic  tempera-
ment.

I  Girl,  get.  10,  light  hair  and  complexion,  blue  eyes. ^Epilep-
tic convulsions.
'  I A  man,  set.  27,  healthy,  never  had  vertigo;  after  cutting  the
hair  and  exposing  nape  of  neck  to  a  tropical  sun,  sunstroke.
*^  Relationship. Antidotes  to  Bellad :  effects  of  large  doses  by
vegetable  acids  ;  infusion  of  galls,  or  green  tea ; Opium  (?),
\  Ooffea,  Hyosc;  effects  of  small  doses  by  Camphor,  Coffea,

Bepar,  Byose.,  Opium,  Pulsat.,  Sahad.  (salivation),  vinum.

Bellad.  antidotes:  Aeon.,  Arum  triph.,  Atrop.,  Cinchon.,
Cuprum,  Ferrum,  HyoBc,  Jahorand.,  Mercur.,  Opium,
Platin.,  Plumbum  ;  sausage  poisoning  ; 1 1  oil  of  turpentine.

Frequently  useful  after:  Arsen.,  Chamom  ,  Bepar,  Laches.,
Mereur.,  Phosphor,  Nitr.  ac.

Bellad.  cured  spasms  of  chest  after  Cuprum.

After  Bellad  :  Cinchon.,  Chamom.,  Conium,  Dulcam.,  Bepar,
Byosc,  Laches.,  Rhus,  Seneg.,  jStramon.,  Valer.,  Veratr.,
are  frequently  indicated.

Has  cured  constipation  after  failure  of  Opium,  Nux  vom.,
Bryon.  and  Alumina.

After  Bellad.,  if  there  is  a  strong  craving  for  lemon  juice,  it
may  be  allowed,  hastening  convalescence.

Similar  to:  Aeon.,  J-^co/ioT  (merry  craziness) ;  Arsen.  (pains
of  cancer,  etc.);  Bryon.,  Calc.  ostr.,  Chamom.,  Cieut.,
Coffea,  Cuprum,  Eupat.  purp.  (diuresis  and  vesical  irrita-
tion, but  Bupat.  has  more  hyperaemia  and  vesical  inflamma-
tion) ;  G-elsem.,  Bepar,  Byosc.,  Laches.,  Mercur.,  Nux
vom..  Opium,  Pulsat.,  Rhus  tox.,  Stramon.  (rage),  Tereh.,
Veratr.

Complementary : Calc.  ost.

Incompatible :  vinegar  (headache),  Dulcam.  (?).


BENZOIC  ACID.  410


BENZOIC  ACID.

Benzoic  acid. -•  CqH^,  CO,  OS.


Proved  since  1838,  and  used  in  many  cases  by  Dr.  Jeanes ;  arranged  and
published  by  him  with  the  additional  proving  of  Dr.  Lingen  (1844),  in
Transactions  of  American  Institute,  1846,  Vol.  I,  page  13  to  25,  Chapmann
published  some  cures  in  1849  in  the  British  Quarterly,  Vol.  VII,  page  390,
without  giving  credit  to  Jeanes.  C.  Hering  received  a  proving  of  Dr.  Nus-
ser  in  1845,  and  published  a  translation  of  Jeanes'  report  in  his  A  merikanische
Arzneiprufungen,  adding  all  the  cures  known  at  the  time  and  the  proving  of
Petroz  from  1847.  This  received  the  honor  of  republication  in  the  famous
Lehrbuch  of  Grauvogl,  who  was  in  our  medical  school  what  Schopenhauer
was  in  the  philosophical  school  of  Kant,  *


^  Mind. Confused  head.

Omits  words  while  writing.

Cannot  get  rid  of  an  idea.

Activity  of  mind  while  at  work,  followed  by  anxiety.

Ilnclined  to  dwell  on  unpleasant  things  ;  if  he  saw  any  one  de-
formed it  made  him  shudder.

Sadness,

I  Anxiety;  while  sweating.

Child  cross,  wants  to  be  nursed  in  the  arms.

After  mental  emotions  headache.
^  Seusorium. Vertigo,  fearful  of  falling  sideways,  usually  in  the
afternoon.

Confusion  of  head.

Sensation  as  if  there  was  air  in  the  head.

Tired  feeling  in  head,  as  from  night  watching.
^  Inner  Head. While  sitting,  pressure  on  the  whole  lower  part
of  head  and  whole  spine, as  if  they  were  pressed  like  an
elastic  body,  so  that  he  stretched  himself  involuntarily  and
bent  forward;  anxiety.

■  Pain  and  heat  in  region  of  the  so-called  organs  of  reverence
and  firmness.

Hammering  pain  in  temples,  has  to  lie  down.

Pressure  on  vertex  extending  to  spine,  with  anxiety.

Tearing  pain  in  vertex.

I  Fearful  pain  in  occiput  or  cerebellum,  which  had  confined  the
young  man  to  bed  for  three  weeks.


411  BENZOIC  ACID.

Cold  feeling  in  head.

Shaking  in  head.

Rheumatic  pains  in  head.

Head  symptoms  worse :  from  mental  emotions  ;  exposure  to  a
draft  of  air ;  uncovering  of  head  ;  in  the  morning  on  awak-
ing ;  in  rest ;  return  periodically.

With  head  symptoms  depression,  lassitude  and  loss  of  appetite.
*  Outer  Head. Formication  in  forehead.

Rheumatic  pain  on  outside  of  head.

Inner  pain  and  bruised  feeling  inside  of  head.

Cold  sweat  on  the  head.
®  Sight  and  Eyes. Burning  heat  in  eyes  and  lids.

Throbbing  in  eyeballs.

Worse  reading  by  artificial  light ;  walking  in  the  open  air.

Distress  in  eyes,  as  from  want  of  sleep.

Irritates  the  conjunctiva,  causes  pressive  feeling  in  bulbus.
^  Hearing  and  Ears. Sensation  in  ears  like  a  sound  of  con-
fused voices,  most  when  swallowing  or  walking  in  open  air.

Throbbing  and  hissing  in  ears  synchronous  with  beats  of  heart.
' Swelling  behind  ears,  which  seems  to  reach  to  periosteum.
'  Smell  and  Nose. Seems  to  smell  dust,  cabbage,  or  something
stinking.

Sense  of  smell  diminished.

Pain  in  nasal  bones.

Pressure  on  root  of  nose.

Epistaxis,

Sneezing  :  with  lightness  of  the  head,  excitement ;  with  hoarse-
ness ;  morning.

A  cold  in  head  readly  occurs  from  exposure  to  cold,  and  is  re-
newed every  day.

Sensitiveness  of  nose.

Redness  in  the  corners  of  nose.
^  Face. Sense  of  pressure,  as  if  the  face  had  gone  to  sleep.

Tension  in  one  side  of  face.

Numb  feeling  in  face.

Burning  heat  of  face  ;  or  of  one  side.

Symptoms  relieved  by  external  heat,  by  pressure,  or  friction.

Cold  sweat  on  face.


I  Copper-colored  spots  on  face.

I  Face  red,  with  little  blisters.
^  Lower  Face. Trembling  of  lips.

Involuntarily  biting  the  lower  lip  at  dinner.

Itching  on  chin.
^^  Teeth  and  Gums, i  Toothache.

^^  Taste,  Speech,  Tongue. Taste  :  of  blood  ;  bitter  ;  with  eruc-
tations and  pressure  at  the  stomach ;  on  drinking  cofiee  or


BENZOIC  ACID.  412

milk ;  food  salty ;  flat,  soapy  after  drinking  water ;  bread

smoky  ;  after-taste  of  the  food.
Tongue  of  a  slight  bluish  color.
Velvety  coating  on  tongue,  with  high-colored,  strong  smelling

urine.
Tongue  coated  with  white  mucus  ;  morning.
Soreness  of  back  part  of  tongue,  felt  most  while  swallowing.

■  Glossitis.

Tongue  is  spongy  on  surface,  with  deep  cracks,  and  with  spread-
ing ulcers.

■  Extensive  ulcerations  of  tongue,  with  deeply  chapped  or  fun-

goid surfaces.
^^  Inner  Mouth. An  ulcerated  tumor  on  left  side  of  mouth,  upon
the  soft  commissure  of  the  jaws,  behind  last  molar.
Slightly  acid  mucus.
Heat  around  the  mouth.
'^  Palate  and  Throat. Swallowing  difficult,  incomplete ; with
noise  in  ears  ;  with  soreness  on  back  of  tongue.
Sensation  of  swelling,  or  of  constriction  of  throat.
Mouth  and  throat  symptoms  relieved  by  eating.
Heat  in  oesophagus,  as  from  acid  eructations.
1 1  Angina  faucium  and  tonsillaris  with  characteristic  high  col-
ored, strong  urine.
Collection  of  mucus  in  throat.
Thyroid  gland  feels  swollen.
^*  Appetite, Thirst. Appetite in evening ; lost in morning ;
nausea.
Thirst  with  sleepiness  ;  evening.
"  Eating  and  Drinking. The  throat  symptoms  are  relieved  by
eating.
Sweat  while  eating.
'®  Nausea  and  Vomiting. Loathing  sickness  at  stomach,  pain
and  discomfort ;  with  gagging.
Vomiting  of  a  salty  or  bitter  substance.
Nausea : with  gagging ; with  disturbance  about  head ; with

loathing ;  with  constant  malaise.
Vomiting:  of  a  salty  substance;  bitter.
^'  Scrobiculum  and  Stomach. iWeak  digestion.
Burning  or  warmth ;  pressure  on  stomach.
Gastric  symptoms  increased  when  walking,  especially  ascend-
ing.
Sensation,  as  of  a  lump  in  pit  of  throat,  as  if  some  food  had

lodged  there.
Sensation  of  heat  in  stomach.
^^  Hypochondria. Sense  of  weakness  in  prsecordia.

In region  of  liver  constant  fine  stitching  midway in upper

portion  thereof,  not  increased  by  pressure.
■  Obstruction  of  the  liver.


413  •  BENZOIC  ACID.

Pain  below  the  left  short  ribs.
^^  Abdomen,  Loins  and  Groins. Heat  through  the  abdomen.

Cutting  about  the  navel ;  relieved  by  stool.

Pressure  of  clothing  makes  him  feel  wearied.

Tearing  bellyache.

Tensive  pains  in  loins  and  groins.
^^  Rectum  and  Stool. Stitching  in  the  rectum.

Urging  to  stool,  with  ineffectual  straining.

Sensation  of  constriction  at  lower  end  of  rectum.

Horripilations,  or  chilliness  before  the  stool.

I  Stools:  copious,  watery,  grayish-white,  like  dirty  soap-suds;

excessively  oflFensive,  scenting  the  whole  house  ;  of  a  strong,
pungent  smell,  like  that  of  the  urine ;  putrid,  bloody ;
frothy ;  insufficient.

I I  White,  stinking,  liquid  stools, d  Diarrhoea  of  children.
iWatery,  light-colored,  very  offensive  stools  (in  children),  with

unusually  strong-smelling  urine.

I  Fetid,  watery,  white  stools,  very  copious  and  exhausting,  in

infants,  the  urine  being  of  a  deep  red  color.

I I  Diarrhoea  of  children,  the  discharge  is  copious,  watery,  clear-
colored,  very  fetid;  the  urine  at  the  same  time  is  uncom-
monly deep  red,  and  urinous  odor  very  strong.

Diarrhoea  profuse,  watery,  running  through  the  diaper ;  stools

frequent  and  very  offensive  ;  urine  somewhat  strong.
Formication  at  anus.

■  Slightly  elevated,  wart-like,  round  surfaces  around  the  anus,

varying  from  a  half  to  one-and-a-half  inches  in  diameter ;
with  smarting  soreness;  urine  strong-scented  and  high-col-
ored ;  after  using  copaiva  for  chancre.
^^  Urinary  Organs.  I Sore  pain  in  back;  burning  in  left  kid-
ney, with  drawing  when  stooping;  dull  pain  in  kidneys,
loins  stiff;  right  knee  swollen.
I  Kidney  pains,  which  penetrate  the  chest  on  taking  a  deep
breath. 6  Nephritis.

■  Nephritic  colic;  urine  deep  red,  of  a  strong  odor.

■  Irritability  of  the  bladder: with  muco-purulent  discharges^

enlarged  prostate; with concretions  of  urate  of  ammonia;
calculus.
Pains  in  the  bladder.

■  Dysuria  senilis,  when  the  gravel  is  trifling  and  the  irritable

state  of  bladder  and  pains  are  induced  by  other  causes.

■  Too  frequent  desire  to  evacuate  the  bladder,  urine  appearing

normal.
Profuse  urine,  very  debilitating.
Urine  diminished ;  thick  ;  bloody.

■  ■Urine  dark,  the  urinous odor  highly intensified. ^  Sore

throats ;  diarrhoea ;  menstrual  derangements  ;  hypochondri-


BENZOIC ACID.  414

asis ;  rheumatism ;  nephritic  colic ;  after  gonorrhoea,  gleet,
or  syphilis  ;  prolapsus  uteri.

I  Brown  urine,  smells  sour,  scalding  in  passing.

I I  Renders  the  urine  acid  ;  hippuric  acid.

Urine  of  aromatic  odor  and  saline  taste,  highly  colored,  some-
times color  of  brandy  ;  the  urinous  odor  exceedingly  strong  ;
urine  of  specific  gravity,  of  a  very  deep  red  color,  and  de-
positing no  sediment.

White  flocculent  sediment  immediately  after  voiding  urine,
composed  of  phosphate  and  carbonate  of  lime,  without  uric
acid  ;  pale,  languid  ;  weak  loins.

IIA  granular  kind  of  mucus  mixed  with  phosphates  in  the
sediment ;  urine  dark,  reddish-brown  ;  acid  reaction,  or  very
offensive ;  fleeting  pains  in  bladder,  not  when  urinating,  but
at  other  times,  d  Vesical  catarrh,  from  suppressed  gonor-
rhoea, calculi,  or  gout.

■  Morbid  condition of  urine,  as  in  persons  with  calculous  or

gouty  diathesis.

I  Urine  contains  mucus  and  pus. ^  Enlargement  of  prostate.

I I  Enuresis  nocturna  of  children.

I  Urine  with  concretions  of  urate  of  ammonia.

■  Enuresis  from  infancy,  girl,  set.  15.

■  Sensibility  of  bladder  with  muco-purulent  discharge. ^En-

largement of  prostate.

■  ■Urine highly  colored, sometimes  of  the  color  of  French

brandy,  the  urinous  odor  exceedingly  strong.

■  Urine  of  a  greater  specific  gravity  ;  if  passed  in  the  same  ves-
.  sel  it  retains  its  place  below  the  healthy  urine,  without  ad-
mixture, and  though  of  a  very  deep  red  color,  deposits  no
sediment.

■  Hot,  scalding  urine,  deep  red,  of  strong  odor,  causing  so  much

suffering  in  its  passage  that  this  was  performed  but  once  a  day.

■  ■Dark,  or  highly  colored,  offensive  urine,  after  suppressed

syphilis  or  gonorrhoea.

■  Fetid  urine,  with  prolapsus  uteri.

■  Urine  clearer  after  one  dose  and  soon  free  from  mucous  de-

posits.

■  Excess  of  uric  acid.

■  Enuresis  nocturna  of  children  where  Nitrum  failed.

■  Urine  of  a  very  repulsive  odor ;  changeable  color ;  brownish,

cloudy  ; of  an  alkaline  reaction ; effervescing  with  hydro-
chloric acid ;  white,  flocculent  sediment  soon  after  its  pas-
sage, phosphate  and  carbonate  of  lime,  without  uric  acid.
d  A  pale,  languid  patient,  with  weakness  in  loins.
The  urinary  odor  is  very  strongly  ammoniacal.

■  Urine  dark-brown,  of  a  putrid,  cadaverous  smell.

^^  Male  Sexual  Organs. Pain  in  genitals ;  pressure  ;  raw  pain  ;
splitting  pains.


415  BENZOIC  ACID.

I  Gleet ;  urine  offensive.

I  Gonorrhoea  suppressed  (by  copaiva) ;  with  offensive  urine.
Smarting  of  the  frgenum  praeputii.
Itching  in  the  sulcus,  behind  corona  glandis.
A  thrilling,  almost  painful  sensation  of  1.  side  of  glans,  ending
in  a  sensation  of  tickling  and  itching.
^'  Female  Sexual  Organs. Menstruation  too  early  or  retarded.
Weakness  after  the  menses.

I  Amenorrhoea.

I I  Prolapsus  uteri  with  fetid  urine.

"  Pregnancy  and  Parturition, i  Gastric  derangements  when
ascending  a  height, d  Pregnant  women.
Retention  of  urine  with  infants.

■  Lochia  last  too  long.

2®  Voice  and  Larynx. Slight  hoarseness  in  the  morning ;  sneez-
ing.
^®  Respiration. Difficulty  of  breathing  on  awaking.

■  Asthma  with  inflammatory  rheumatic  complaints.

■  Mucous  oppression  of  the  lungs.

"  Cough. Cough :  after  a  slight  cold  ;  excited  by  inspiration  ;  pro-
duced by  something  acrid  or  dry  in  chest.

■  Dry,  constant,  hacking  cough.  ^  After  suppressed  gonorrhoea.
Dry, tormenting cough; great weakness; sweat;  comatose

state.

■  ■  Cough  followed  by  expectoration  of  green  mucus.
Copious  secretion  of  mucus  in  the  bronchi.

^^  Inner  Chest  and  Lungs. Painful  trembling  in  the  chest.
Morbid  agitation  in  the  chest.
Morbid  restlessness  in  the  chest.
Pressure  on  the  ribs.
Sensation  in  chest  of  swelling ;  of  roughness  ;  painful  starting ;

cutting.
Pains  often  change  their  place  suddenly,  causing  a  dry  cough,

and  asthma.
Stitching  in  r.  side  of  chest.

Stitches  in  the  chest,  especially  on  breathing  deeply ;  evening.
Pain  about  third  rib,  right  side,  midway  between  sternum  and

side,  increased  by  breathing.
Pain  in  left  side,  about  sixth  rib,  increased  by  deep  inspiration

and  bending  to  either  side.

■  Asthenic  pneumonia  of  a  young  man ;  after  strength  had  sunk

daily ;  difficulty  of  breathing  increased  every  hour  to  a  fear-
ful degree.

■  Pneumonia,  asthenic  form.

■  I  Great  weakness  ;  difficult  breathing,  increasing  every  hour.

■  Promotes  expectoration.

■  Mucous  oppression  of  lungs.

■  Catarrhal  diseases  of  lungs,  coughs  and  asthmatic  attacks.


BENZOIC  ACID.  416

ft

I  In  the  ast  period  of  simple  pneumonia,  when  great  weakness
prevails.

■  Typhoid  pneumonia.

^^  Heart,  Pulse  and  Circulation,  i Pains  change  place  inces-
santly, but  are  most  constant  about  the  heart.

Pains  in  region  of  heart.

Undulating,  or  intermittent  beats  of  heart.

Palpitation  of  heart,  with  trembling.

Palpitation  while  sitting ;  worse  after  drinking ;  at  night.

Awakens  after  midnight  with  violent  palpitation  and  hard  beat-
ing of  temporal  arteries.

Awakens  with  oppression  of  breathing ;  with  palpitation  of  the
heart  (after  midnight) ;  with  heat  and  hard  pulse.

I  Awakens  after  midnight  with  violent  pulsations  of  the  heart
and  temporal  arteries,  110  per  minute ;  internal  but  no  ex-
ternal heat;  cannot  go  to  sleep.

■  Palpitation  worse  at  night,  lying;  at  times  tearing  rheumatic

pains  in  the  extremities,  relieving  the  heart.

■  Gout,  or  rheumatism,  aifecting  the  heart.

Pulse  accelerated  ;  full ;  slower  and  weaker ;  intermittent.

■  Hard,  frequent  pulse  ;  fever  heat ;  sweat.
^^  Outer  Chest. Sternum  sensitive  to  touch.

Pressure  of  clothing  on  the  chest  is  annoying.

Burning  in  nipples.

Sensation  of  swelling  in  mammary  glands ; also  in  thyroid

gland.
^^  Neck  and  Back. Stiffness  of  neck  only  on  one  side.
Pressure  in  nape  of  neck.
Violent  itching  in  nape  of  neck.
Deep  penetrating  pain  in  posterior  part  of  the  left  side,  at  about

the  sixth  rib.
Pain  right  side  of  back  between  tenth  dorsal  vertebra  and  side.
I  I  Dull  pain  in  region  of  kidneys ;  stiffness  in  the  loins.
Trembling  in  the  lumbar  region.

■  Myelitis.

Sense  of  coldness  at  sacrum.
'^  Upper  Limbs. Sensation  of  swelling  under  axillae.

I  I  Tearing  pains,  apparently  in  the  bones  of  upper  limbs.

Cold  hands,  with  head  symptoms.

Paralytic  pain  of  fingers.

I  I  Fingers  swollen  ;  tearing  and  fine  stitching  pains  in  various

parts  of  the  limbs.
Eruption  of  red  spots  on  fingers.

■  Gouty  deposits  in  both  wrists,  between  the  metacarpal  bones  ;

swelling  of  elbow-joints.
Itching  in  palm  of  right  hand ;  slight,  but  deep  tearing  in  up-
per part  of  metacarpal  joints  of  little  and  ring  fingers.  ^Gout.


417  BENZOIC  ACID.

I  Panaritium.
^^  Lower  Limbs. Lassitude  in  lower  limbs.

Sensation  as  if  lower  limbs  were  tightly  bandaged.

Tearing  pain  in  anterior  surface  of  thigh.

Pain  in  left  hip,  knee  and  toes  ;  thence  into  muscles  of  calf,  and

then  in  knee ;  after  it  has  left  these  parts,  it  appears  in  right

thigh  and  ankle.
I  Swelling  of  right  knee;  ulcerative  pain  in  whole  leg;  with

pains  in  kidneys.
Pain  in  right  knee ;  then  in  the  left.
Cracking,  or  sense  of  dryness  in  knee-joints.
Drawing  pain  in  knees  after  drinking  wine.
Cold  feet  and  cold  foot-sweat.
Pain  in  right,  later  in  left  tendo  achillis.
Severe  pain  in  left  tendo  achillis,  close  to  the  os  calcis,  when

supporting  a  slight  part  of  weight  of  body  while  walking.
■  Tearing  and  stitches,  especially  in  metatarsal-joints  of  right

great  toe. 6  Gout.
llDuring  the  night  gout  commences  in  right  great  toe;  his

gout  going  from  left  to  right.
Stitch  passing  upwards  through  the  right  great  toe,  followed

by  burning,  which  increases  to  a  stitch  ;  afterwards  it  ap-
pears in  the  left  great  toe,  from  which  it  vanishes  with  a

thrill.
Numbness  in  toes.

iPain  in  large  joints  of  big  toe,  with  tumefaction  and  redness.
'' Limbs  in  General, si  Gouty  concretions.

Nodes  on  joints  of  upper  and  lower  limbs,  cracking  and  knick-

ing  on  motion.
Tearing,  fine  stitches  in  various  parts  of  limbs.
I  Syphilitic  rheumatism.
Pain  from  right  hand  to  left  arm  down  into  elbow,  and  thence

to  region  of  heart ;  later  in  right  thigh  and  ankle.
I  In  both  wrists,  between  metacarpal  bones,  abundant gouty

deposits  with  swelling  of  elbow-joints  ;  ankles  also  not  free.
^'  Rest. Position. Motion. Rest :  head  symptoms  worse.
Sitting :  palpitation  worse.

Bending  to  either  side :  pain  1.  side  about  sixth  rib  worse.
Lying:  palpitation  ■<  ;  toothache  worse.
Turning  in  bed  : symptoms  worse.
Stooping: drawing  1.  kidney.
Walking :  throbbing  in  eyeballs  <  ;  confused  sound  of  voices

in  ear  <  ;  gastric  symptoms  <  ;  pain  in  1.  tendo  achillis;

sweat.
Moving: cracking  of  joints.
Motion  after  long  sitting:  symptoms  worse.  •
Ascending  :  gastric  symptoms  worse.
?®  Nerves. Trembling:  with  palpitation  of  heart ;  in  loins.


BENZOIC  ACID.  418

BB  Weariness,  lassitude.

B Extreme  weakness;  sweat  and  comatose  condition.

B  Hysteria.
^^  Sleep. Sleepiness,  with  dullness  of  the  head.

B  Awakens:  with  difficulty  of  breathing;  with  palpitation.

Starting  up  from  sleep.

Pulsation  of  temporal  arteries  from  falling  asleep  again.

He  wakes  every  morning  about  two  o'clock,  from  strong  inter-
nal heat  and  a  hard,  bounding,  but  not  quickened  pulse.
33  Time. 2  a.m.:  awakened  by  strong  internal  heat.

Morning:  head  symptoms  <  ;  sneezing  and  hoarseness;  white
tongue ;  appetite  lost ;  sweat  in  bed.

Afternoon  :  vertigo.

Evening:  appetite  >  ;  thirst  with  sleepiness  ;  stitches  in  chest.

Night :  enuresis  ;  palpitation  ;  gout  in  r.  great  toe.

After midnight : awakens with palpitation ; oppression of
breathing.
^'  Temperature  and  Weather. Open  air  :  throbbing  in  eye-
balls <C  ;  sound  of  confused  voices  in  ears  worse.

Draft  of  air  :  head  symptoms  <,  especially  when  uncovering
head.

Exposure  to  cold  : "cold"  in  head.

External  heat :  symptoms  better.
^^  Chill. Fever. Sweat. Cold  hands  ;  feet ;  back ;  knees,  as
from  cold  wind.

Coldness  with  feeling  of  heat.

Coldness,  then  heat  and  sweat.

Sense  of  heat  in  oesophagus  ;  stomach  ;  belly.

Heat :  with  sweat ;  with  cold  in  head ;  with  nightly  palpitation.

Awakens  every  morning  at  2  o  clock,  with  violent  internal
heat,  and  hard,  beating  pulse,  compelling  him  to  lie  on  back,
because  the  beating  of  the  temporal  arteries  causes  a  hum-
ming in  ears,  and  prevents  him  from  going  to  sleep.

Sweat:  while  eating;  while  walking;  morning  in  bed,  espe-
cially in  face  ;  with  anxiety.

Cold  sweat :  on  head ;  on  face ;  on  feet.

Sweat  with  itching.

Sweat  with  aromatic  odor.

Skin  pale,  cool,  with  sweat,  weakness,  coma.
■*'  Attacks.  Head  symptoms  return  periodically.
^^  Locality  and  Direction.  Right :  knee  swollen  ;  stitches  side
of  chest ;  pain  about  third  rib  of  side  ;  pain  side  of  back,  be-
tween tenth  dorsal  vertebra  and  side ;  itching  in  palm  of
hand  ;  pain  in  knee;  tearing  and  stitches  in  great  toe;  gout
in  toe.

R.  to  L.:  pain  in  r.,  later  in  1.  tendo  achillis  ;  pain  from  r.
hand  to  1.  arm,  later  in  r.  thigh  and  ankles  ;  pain  in  r.  knee,
thence  1.  knee.


419  BENZOIC  ACID.

BL.  to  R.:  pain  in  1.  hip,  knee  and  toes,  appears  in  r.  thigli  and
ankle ;  gout.

Left :  ulcerated  tumor  side  of  mouth  ;  pain  below  short  ribs  ;
burning  in  kidney  ;  thrilling  pain  side  of  glans  ;  pain  in  side,
about  sixth  rib ;  pain  in  hip,  knee  and  toes ;  pain  in  tendo
achillis.

1  i  Symptoms  in  the  sick  go  from  r.  to  1.  mostly,  and  from  be-
low upwards,  especially  in  rheumatism  and  gout.
*^  Sousations. As  if  there  was  air  in  the  head.

As  from  want  of  sleep  in  eyes.

As  of  confused  voices  in  ears.

As  of  a  lump  in  throat-pit.

As  if  lower  limbs  were  tightly  bandaged.

Screwing  painS:

Cutting  :  about  the  navel ;  in  chest.

Stitching:  in  rectum  ;  in  r.  side  of  chest;  in  r.  great  toe.

Fine  stitching:  in  hepatic  region  ;  in  various  parts  of  limbs.

Tearing :  in  vertex  ;  bellyache ;  in  bones  of  upper  limbs ;  in
various  parts  of  limbs  ;  in  upper  part  of  metacarpal  joints  of
little  and  ring  fingers  ;  in  anterior  surface  of  thigh ;  in  r.
great  toe.

Drawing  ;  in  1.  kidney  ;  in  knees.

Splitting :  in  male  genitals.

Burning  :  in  1.  kidney  ;  in  nipples.

Scalding:  of  urine  in  passing.

Smarting:  of  fraenum  prseputii.

Soreness  :  of  back  part  of  tongue ;  in  back.

Raw  pain  :  in  male  genitals.

Pressure:  on  lower  part  of  head;  on  spine;  in  eyeball;  on
root  of  nose;  in  stomach  ;  in  male  genitals  ;  on  ribs  ;  in  nape
of  neck.

Bruised  feeling  :  inside  of  head.

Rheumatic  pain :  in  head  ;  on  outside  of  head  ;  in  extremities.

Ulcerative  pain  :  in  whole  leg.

Paralytic  pain:  of  fingers.

Fearful  pain :  in  occiput  or  cerebellum.

Fleeting  pains  :  in  bladder.

Painful  trembling :  in  chest.

Thrilling:  1.  side  of  jaws;  in  great  toes.

Dull  pain  :  in  kidneys.

Undefined  pain  :  in  region  of  reverence  and  firmness  ;  in  nasal
bones  ;  below  1.  short  ribs  ;  in  bladder ;  in  genitals  ;  about
third  rib,  r.  side  ;  about  sixth  rib,  1.  side  ;  in  cardiac  region  ;
in  back;  in  1.  hip,  knee  and  toes;  in  r.  thigh  and  ankle;
in  1.  and  r.  tendo  achillis.

Coldness  :  in  head  ;  at  sacrum.

Throbbing  :  in  eyeballs  ;  in  ear?).

Hammering :  in  temples.


BENZOIC  ACID.  420

Swelling :  in  throat ;  in  chest ;  in  mammary  glands  ;  in  thy-
roid gland ;  under  axillae.

Painful  starting :  in  chest.

Stiffness  :  one  side  of  neck  ;  in  loins.

Tension  :  in  one  side  of  face  ;  in  loins  and  groins.

Constriction  :  or  swelling  of  throat ;  at  lower  end  of  rectum.

Trembling  :  in  lumbar  region  ;  in  loins.

Tired  feeling:  in  head.

Formication  :  in  forehead.

Numbness  :  in  face ;  in  toes.

Roughness  :  in  chest.

Weakness  :  in  prgecordia ;  after  menses.

Heat :  in  region  of  reverence  and  firmness  ;  around  the  mouth  ;
through  abdomen  ;  internal,  on  awaking ;  in  oesophagus  ;  in
stomach  ;  in  belly.

Burning  heat :  in  eyes  and  lids  ;  of  face  ;  in  stomach.

Itching :  on  chin  ;  in  sulcus,  behind  corona  glandis  ;  in  1.  side
of  glans  penis ;  in  nape  of  neck  ;  in  palm  of  r.  hand ;  with
sweat.

Tickling :  in  1.  side  of  glans  penis.

Dryness :  in  knee-joints.
**  Tissues. IB  Mucous  states.

H Gouty  diathesis;  arthritis;  arthritis  vaga.

Affects  all  the  joints,  particularly  the  knee,  swelling  it.

I  Gout  with  arthritic  nodosities.

■  Syphilitic  rheumatism.
Emaciation.

"  Touch.  Passive  Motion.  Injuries. Touch  :  sternum  sensi-
tive.
Pressure  :  symptoms  >  ;  of  clothing  about  chest  and  abdomen

annoys.
Friction :  symptoms  better.
*^  Skin. Itching  on  various  parts,  yielding  a  rather  agreeable  sen-
sation on  being  scratched,  but  leaving  a  burning.
Sweat  with  itching.

■  Syphilitic  spots  and  marks.
I  Ulcers.

■  Slightly  elevated  round  surfaces  of  a wart-like  appearance,

and  of  circular  form,  varying  in  diameter  from  half  an  inch
to  1^  inches  ;  at  places  running  into  each  other  ;  nearly  cov-
ered both  sides  and  the  bottom  of  the  sulcus  ani,  and  caused
much  smarting  and  soreness  of  the  part ;  with  strong-scented
and  highly  colored  urine;  I  after  abuse  of  copaiva.
*^  Stages  of  Life,  Constitution. Gouty  diathesis.

I  Rheumatic  diathesis  in  syphilitic  or  gonorrhoeal  patients.

■  Woman,  set.  38,  considered  herself  in  dissolution  with  uterine

complaints.
*^  Relationship. Useful  in  gout  after  ColoJdc.  fails.


421  BENZOIC  ACID— BERBERIS.

Useful  after  abuse  of  Copaiv.  in  1 1  suppression  of  gonorrhoea;
or  for  warts  around  the  anus,  appearing  after  Copaiv.  has
been  used  for  chancre.

■  Useful  in  enuresis  after  failure  oi  Nitrum.

Has  been  used  for  dysuria  senilis  from  enlarged  prostate,  in
conjunction  with  Copaiv.

It  has  been  reported  of  Natr.  he7iz.  as  having  cured  many  appa-
rently hopeless  cases  of  consumption  in  Vienna.

Similar  to  : Copaiv.,  Ferrum,  Zincum.

Incompatible :  wine,  Avhich  aggravates  pains  in  kidneys,  draw-
ing in  knees,  etc.  (compare  Zincum).


BERBERIS.

Barlerry.  Berheraeece.


Proved  with  groat  assiduity  by  Dr.  Hesse,  and  published  in  the  journal  for
Materia  Medica  in  1834 ;  translated  and  added  in  extracts  to  the  Allentown
editions  of  Jahr's  Manual,  hence  frequently  used  in  the  United  States.  In
3843  Noak  published  a  much  better  extract,  no  cures  followed  this.  In
1854  Dr.  J.  H.  Weber  in  Allg.  Horn.  Zeitung  analyzed  its  symptoms.  In
1879  H.  V.  Miller  published  cases  in  Lilienthal's  Quarterly ;  these  were
translated  into  German  and  printed  in  the  Allg.  Horn.  Zeiiung,  July,  1879.


^  Mind. Defective  recollection  and  weak  memory.

Terrifying  apparitions  in  the  twilight.

Mental  labor,  requiring  close  thinking,  very  difficult ;  the  least
interruption  breaks  the  chain  of  thoughts.

Melancholy,  inclination  to  weep.

Indifference,  apathy.

Indifference  and  pensiveness,  with  disinclination  to  speak.

Anxious  and  fearful.

Anxiousness  while  sitting,  standing,  or  moving.

Fretful  humor,  with  weariness  of  life.
^  Sensorium.  ■ >  Vertigo  and  dizziness  in  the  head.

Vertigo:  with  danger  of  falling;  when  stooping  and  when
rising ;  struggling  with  the  arms  when  rising ;  with  dizzi-
ness, faintness,  pressure  in  the  forehead,  succeeded  by  chills.

B  Dullness  and  heaviness  in  head.

Tensive  pain,  also  with  pressure  in  temples  and  forehead.

Feeling  of  drunkenness,  dizziness,  vacuity,  confusion,  I  heavi-
ness in  head,  especially  in  front,  with  pressure  in  sinciput,  at-


BERBERIS.  422

tended  with  alternating  chillinefs  and  heat  from  morning

till  afternoon,  succeeded  by  a  nasal  flux  and  sneezing,  as  if

catarrh  would  arise,  but  which  does  not  appear.
^  Inner  Head. Dullness  of  head  like  from  coryza.

Heaviness  in  head,  when  stooping,  as  if  the  brain  would  fall

forward,  with  a  sensation  of  bubbling,  as  if  all  would  pro-
lapse from  forehead.
Pressure  from within  outward,  particularly  in  forehead,  but

also  in  temples  and  occiput.
Tensive  pain,  also  with  pressure  in  temples  and  forehead,  or

with  dullness  of  whole  head.
Pressing,  straining,  bursting  headache,  especially  in  sinciput,

chiefly  in  morning,  increased  by  stooping,  relieved  in  open

air;  with  weariness  and  exhaustion.
Tearing  in  forehead  and  orbits.

Shooting,  wringing,  rending  stitches  above  forehead  and  temples.
Rending  in  different  parts,  particularly  in  temples  and  occiput,

arising  from  neck  or  extending  to  it;  from  edge  of  orbit

towards  nose  or  upwards  to  forehead,  or  into  orbits.
I  Tearing  pain  in  whole  head,  now  here,  now  there,  in  forehead

and  temples.
Stitches  in  forehead.

Sudden  stitches  from  the  eyes  to  forehead.
Darting  and  shooting  pains  in  head,  often  changing  their  locality.
■  A  peculiar  cold  sensation  in  right  temple.
Heat  in  head  after  dinner,  or  in  the  afternoon,  and  from  exertion.
I A  puffy  sensation  in  whole  head.
I A  feeling  in  head  as  if  it  were  becoming  larger.
Fullness  in  head  with  sensation  as  if  the  head  were  enlarged.
Headache  aggravated by  movement  or  stooping,  relieved  in

open  air.
Headache : accompanied by hepatic, or rheumatic  arthritic

complaints ;  or  with aff"ections  of  the  urinary  organs ; or

with  menstrual  derangements.
*  Outer  Head. In  skin  of  head  and  face  a  tension  as  if  it  were

bloated,  or  covered  with  a  cap,  or  benumbed,  with  difficulty

to  move  it.
Tension  of  scalp  and  skin,  as  if  swollen.
Itching,  with  burning  and  stitches  on  scalp  and  face,  more  on

the  occiput,  especially  in  the  evening,  and  changing  its  place

after  scratching.
Hot  temples  and  cold  cheeks.
Biting,  gnawing  on  scalp  and  face.
Burning,  pricking  along  the  edge  of  hair  on  head.
Single  pimples  on  scalp  and  face,  more  on  occiput,  forehead

and  temples.
^  Sight  and  Eyes. Shuns  the  light.


423  BERBERIS.

Illusions ;  in  the  twilight  objects  appear  twice  as  large  as
natural.

Dim  sight,  all  objects  looking  dark,  as  if  through  a  veil,  run-
ning together,  with  itching  around  eyes  and  in  face,  preceded
by  incipient  catarrh,  succeeded  by  itching  on  legs.

Pressure  in  eyes.

Tearing  in  1.  eye ;  also  in  lids.

Tearing  in  the  forehead  and  orbits.

Tearing  near  orbits  with  lachrymation  ;  eyes  and  nose  moist.

Painfulness  of  eyes.

Sudden  shooting;  arising  from  forehead  and  temples,  or  ex-
tending to  them.

I  Violent  shooting  pains  through  eyes  into  brain,  or  from  tem-
ples to  eyes;  sometimes  into  arms,  or  from  knee  to  eye.
6  After  operation  for  strabismus.

Biting,  burning,  or  itching  sensation  in  eyes.

Dryness  of  eyes,  with  burning  and  redness  of  the  conjunctiva.

Irritation  in  eyes,  as  if  from  sand,  heat  and  burning,  with  a
cloudy  appearance.

Conjunctivitis,  with  inflamed  lachrymal  caruncle.

Cold  feeling  in  eye,  like  from  a  cool  wind,  with  lachrymation
when  closing  eyes.

Coldness  of  eyes.

Eye  symptoms  <  out-doors,  <  moving  eyes.

Quivering  of  the  eyelids  when  reading  by  candle-light.

Sensation  of  sand  between  lids;  dryness  of  internal  canthus
and  sensation  as  of  a  foreign  body  there.

Sticky  feeling  and  white  scum  on  dry  eyelids,  morning.

Itching,  burning  and  smarting  in  lids,  or  in  canthi,  frequently
only  on  small  spots.

Red  spot  on  left  eyelid,  feels  like  a  mosquito  bite,  but  swelling
nearly  closes  the  eye;  next  day  other  spots  on  face,  behind
the  ear,  and  on  neck;  third  day  on  chin  and  nose,  with
itching  and  burning;  in  evening  covered  with  small  vesicles,
oozing  watery  fluid.

Itching  in  canthi,  eyebrows,  and  eyelids.

Inflammation  of  lachrymal  caruncles.

Dryness  in  internal  canthus.

Tearing,  especially  in  lids.
^  Hearing  and  Ears. Beating,  and  fluttering  noise  in  ear.

Stopped  up  feeling  in  ear,  with  pressure.

Throbbing  and  roaring  in  ears.

Drawing,  pressure,  urging  with  stitches  in  ears.

Stitches  in  the  ear.

Tearing  and  stitching  in  ears,  through  the  membrana  tympani,
as  if  a  nail  were  thrust  through,  or  like  from  the  sting  of  an
insect.

I  Shooting  behind  r.  ear  in  attacks,  <  every  evening.


BERBERIS.  424

Outward  piercing  in  ear,  as  if  with  a  sharp  pointed  instrument.

Tearing,  alternately  in  ear  and  other  parts  of  body.

Alternating  heat  and  coldness  on  external  ear.

Pimples  in  front  of  ear.

Pimples;  nodosities,  size  of  hemp  seed,  on  auricle,  painful  to
touch.

Tumor  behind  ear,  size  of  a  hazel-nut.
^  Smell  and  Nose, Crawling,  smarting,  or  itching  in  nose

Titillating  irritation  to  sneeze.

From  the  left  nostril  a  few  drops  of  clear  blood.

I  iDrjfness  of  nose. ^Epistaxis.

Dry  nose,  succeeded  by  a  chronic  catarrh  with  an  offensive
discharge.

iThe  nose  and  eyes  moist,  with  sneezing,  as  if  catarrh  were
commencing.

Indication  of  catarrh,  succeeded  by  violent  ophthalmic  com-
plaints.

During  flowing  catarrh,  oppression  on  chest,  particularly  at
night.

Catarrh  of  the  nose,  lasting  for  months,  with  catarrh  of  the
antra  Highmori  and  frontal  cavities,  with  moderate  secre-
tion of  a  yellowish  or  greenish  mucus,  more  copious  in
morning,  and  having  a  pungent  smell  or  taste.

Chronic  coryza  on  left  side,  extending  to  Highmorian  cavity.

I  Purulent  yellow  or  greenish  discharge. 6  Coryza.

I  I  Obstinate  catarrh  of  left  nostril,  with  secretion,  first  of  yellow
water,  later  purulent  white,  yellow  or  green  mucus;  empy-
reumatic  smell  and  taste,  particularly  in  morning.

Pricking  in  point  of  nose.
^  Face. Tearing  and  stitches  in  cheek  and  jaw  bones.

Squeezing,  rending  and  stinging  pain  in  facial  bones,  and  in
upper  and  lower  jaw,  as  if  from  a  blow,  extending  to  temples.

1  Pains  extending  into  Highmorian  cavity;  1.  side. ^Coryza.

Dark  red,  painful  spot  on  right  cheek.

Greenish  face,  with  blue  rings  and  the  pink  eyes.

For  a  long  time  has  a  fatigued,  worn-out  expression  of  coun-
tenance.

llPale,  earthy  complexion,  with  sunken  cheeks  and  hollow,
blue  encircled  eyes. 6  Fistula  in  ano.

Chilly  feeling  on  cheek.

Sensation  of  chilliness,  succeeded  by  deep  red  spots  on  the
cheek,  attended  with  heat  extending  over  face  in  afternoon.

Heat  and  redness  in  face.

Heat  and  burning  of  face  with  red  cheeks.

Dark  red  spot  on  cheek,  after  a  chilly  feeling,  then  spreading
over  whole  face.

Burning  and  itching  on  the  cheeks.

Cold  shivering  sweats  on  face.


425  BERBERIS.

Sensation  as  if  cold  drops  were  spurted  into  face  when  going

into  open  air.
Tension  of  scalp  and  skin  of  face,  as  if  swollen.
Bright  red,  inflamed  pimples  on  cheeks  and  lips,  ulcerated  in

centres.
^  Lower  Part  of  Face. Dingy  red,  bluish  spot  on  inner  side  of

lower  lip.
Lips  bluish  on  inside.

Formication  in  upper  lip,  around  mouth  and  chin.
Burning,  itching,  crawling  and  quivering  in  the  lips.
Lips  dry,  viscid,  peeling  off,  with  thin  scabs.
Dryness  of  lips,  with  scaling  and  formation  of  thin  brown  scurf

on  edges.
Pea-shaped  vesicles  on  lower  lip.
^^  Teeth  and  Gums. Scraping,  gnawing  pain  in  the  teeth.
The  teeth  as  if  too  long,  sensitive  to  touch  and  to  air.
Tearing  in  left  upper  molar.
Piercing  pain  in  hollow  teeth  of  lower  jaw.
Teeth  as  if  too  large. Compare  Niccol.
Stitches  in  teeth;  they  feel  too  long  or  dull.
Pain  as  if  gums  were  torn,  or  tooth  pulled  out.
Dingy  red  edge  of  gums ;  small  white  nodules  on  gums.
1  I  Gums  bleed  easily.
Ulcer  at  an  upper  molar  or  incisor.
Sore  gums  during  dentition.
Suppurating  ulcers  above  incisors  and  molars.
"  Taste,  Speech,  Tongue. Taste:  of  blood;  bitter;  sour.
Tongue  smarts  when  touched.
I  Slimy  furred  tongue, d  Hemorrhoids.
Painful  white  blisters  on  tip  of  tongue.
^^  Inner  Mouth. Offensive  metallic  odor  from  mouth.

Mouth  and  fauces  dry  and  sticky,  especially  in  morning,  re-
lieved after  eating.
The  mouth  and  fauces  dry  and  viscid,  especially  in  morning,

with  a  white  tongue  and  frothy  saliva; >-  after  eating.
I  Saliva  sticky,  like  soapsuds.
I  Sticky,  frothy  saliva,  like  cotton.
Ugly  bluish-red  spots  in  mouth.
The  under  lip  on  the  internal  surface  bluish-red.
On  the  internal  surface  of  the  cheeks  and  lips,  red,  painful,

deeply  suppurating  pimples  and  watery  pustules  of  the  size

of  a  pea.
I  Aphthae.
^^  Palate  and  Throat. Increased  redness  of  palate  and  tonsils  ;

tonsils  pain  when speaking  or  swallowing; stitching  like

from  an  awn  in  throat.
Sensation  of  a  plug  in  side  of  throat,  with  dryness,  roughness

and  scraping ;  severe  pain  from  empty  deglutition.


BERBERIS.  426

Inflammation  of  tonsils  and  pharynx,  with  swelling  and  fiery
redness,  and  a  sensation  as  if  a  lump  were  lodged  in  side  of
throat;  expectoration  of  a  quantity  of  thick,  yellow,  jelly-
like mucus ;  white,  sticky  tongue ;  viscid  saliva  resembling
soap-suds.

Empty  swallowing  hurts  in  throat.

A  sensation  of  stiffness  in  throat,  in  some  cases  only  on  one
side  as  if  there  were  varicose  veins. Compare  Pulsat.

Scratching  in  throat,  which  compels  hawking,  especially  in
morning.

Scratchino;  and  burning  as  if  from  sand  in  throat.

Pain  in  1.  tonsil,  as  if  a  husk  were  sticking  there,  particularly
when  speaking  and  swallowing ;  the  interior  of  the  throat
red,  the  exterior  very  sensitive  to  touch  and  motion.

Sensation  as  of  a  lump  in  throat.
^^  Appetite,  Thirst,  Desires,  Aversions, i  Great  thirst,  al-
ternatino;  with  aversion  to  all  kinds  of  drinks, d  Jaundice.

Thirst,  with  dryness  of  mouth.

Great  thirst,  alternating  with  aversion  to  drink.

Appetite  either  increased  or  decreased.

I  Want  of  appetite. 6  Hemorrhoids.

Increased  appetite.

I  Canine  hunger,  alternating  with  loathing  of  food. 6  Jaundice.
^®  Eating  and  Drinking. Nausea  before  breakfast,  gone  after  it.

Before  dinner  chilliness.

Heat  in  the  head,  after  dinner  and  from  exertion.

After  eating  solids,  belching  for  hours,  and  soreness,  continu-
ing the  whole  night.

Worse  after  spirituous  drinks.

Mouth and fauces dry  and sticky, especially in morning ;
relieved  after  eating.
^^  Hiccough,  Belching,  Nausea  and  Vomiting. Hiccough.

Frequent  eructations,  alternating  with  yawning.

Bitter  eructations.

After  eating  solids,  belching  for  hours,  and  soreness  continuing
the  whole  night.

Eructation  and  gaping,  abating  the  complaints  and  pains.

lEructations  without  bad  taste,  or  smell.

■  Frequent  belching. ^Hemorrhoids.

■  Bilious  eructations.

■  Violent  heart-burn.

Nausea:  before  breakfast;  after  dinner.
Nausea  in  the  morning.
Vomiting  of  the  meals.
^''  Scrobiculum  and  Stomach. Very  slow  digestion.

■  Pressure  in  stomach. /?  Hemorrhoids.

Pressure  in  stomach,  as  if  it  would  burst,  also  stinging  and
burnino;.


427  BERBERIS.

Chilliness  in  region  of  stomach,  ceasing  after  vomiting.
iViolent  stinging,  burning,  peculiar  pain  in  stomach,  similar

to  heart-burn  but  much  worse,  also  extending  upward  into

the  oesophagus.
Pit  of  stomach  puffed  up.
^*  Hypochondria, l  Diseases  of  the  liver.
Pressure,  also  stitching  in  region  of  liver.

■  In  hypochondriac  region,  near  the  border  of  the  false  ribs,

about  three  inches  from  the  linea  alba,  violent  sticking  pains
for  a  quarter  of  an  hour,  increased  by  pressure,  extending
across  into  the  region  of  the  stomach.

B Sticking,  pressive  pain  in  region  of  liver,  increased  by  pres-
sure, corresponding  to  the  region  of  the  gall-bladder,  on  a
small  spot,  coming  on  spasmodically.

Shooting,  pressing  in  region  of  gall-bladder  after  two  hours;
often  later,  even  on  the  forty-sixth  day.

1 1  Colic  from  gallstones.

iBilious  colic,  followed  by  jaundice.

lAt  a  point  about  midway  between  right  ant.  sup.  spinous
process  and  umbilicus,  a  sudden,  sharp,  severe  pain,  often
extending  towards  the  groin,  sometimes  extending  upwards  to
r.  hypochondrium,  exceedingly  severe,  lasting  3  to  12  seconds,
coming  frequently,  induced  by  exercise,  e.  g.  walking,  and
more  frequent  and  more  Hevere  the  greater  the  amount  of
exercise;  the  day  before  the  prescription  was  made,  he  had
had  thirty  or  forty  attacks,  having  walked  and  stood  a  great
deal.

■  Violent  stabbing  pain  in  region  of  the  liver  took  his  breath,

had  to  bend  over.

■  Sharp, pinching  pains in  liver, which come  suddenly  and

with  great  severity;  at  times  caused  him  to  hold  his  breath,
to  bend  over,  and  to  get  red  in  the  face;  pink  sediment  in
urine;  feces  black,  or  very  dark,  very  adhesive  to  the  com-
mode; frequent  urging  to  urinate;  feces  scanty,  requiring
an  effort  to  expel.
Drawing-tearing  in  1.  hypochondrium,  with  sensation  during
inspiration,  as  if  something  were  torn  loose.

■  Pressure  in  left  hypochondrium,  backwards,  drawing  down-

wards.

■  Contracting,  forcing  sensation  in  1.  abdomen,  upper  part,  worse

in  left  hypochondrium  towards  navel.
Tearing,  drawing,  stinging  and  jerking  in  left  hypochondrium.
;rCramp-like  contraction  in  splenic  region.
TT Violent  burning,  like  heart-burn,  in  1.  hypochondrium,  extend-
ing upward  into  the  oesophagus.
"  Abdomen,  Loins  and  Groins. Rumbling  in  bowels.

■  Constant  troublesome  bloatedness  of  abdomen,  with  occasional

forcible  and  noisy  discharges  of  flatus, d  Jaundice.


BERBERIS.  428

Pain  in  colon  descendens.

Colic-like  pains,  especially  about  navel.

I  Pain  in  region  about  three  inches  to  the  side  of  the  navel,

corresponding  to  a  place  in  front  of  the  kidneys,  and  rather

to  the  sides,  mostly  sticking,  often  extending  to  the  lumbar

region  or  to  groins,  liver,  spleen,  or  stomach.
Burning  pain  in  or  under  the  skin  of  the  abdomen.
Shooting  pains  in  epigastrium,  particularly  left  side,  increased

by inspiration, motion,  or touching, attended  with short

breath  and  distension  of  the  abdomen.
Periodical  pressure  from  inside  outwards,  in  left  side,  near  navel.
Pain  on  a  small  spot  in  left  side.
Compression  and  contraction  in  sides  of  abdomen,  particularly

in  the  left  one.
Biliary  colic,  followed  by  jaundice.
Whirling  in  stomach  and  abdomen.
Visceral  motions,  like  efforts  to  stool.
Wandering,  tearing,  stinging  pain  in  abdominal  muscles.
Stitching  tearing  or  burning  in  skin  of  the  abdomen,  mostly

about  navel.
Turgid  veins.

Old  yellow  spots  around  the  navel  peeling  off.
Pressure  and  tension  in  groins,  as  if  a  hernia  would  develop;

especially  when  walking  and  standing.
Itching,  or  pressure  in  region  of  inguinal  glands,  with  pain

from  touch  as  if  they  would  swell.
In  the  inguinal  region  a  pressing,  squeezing  tension,  stinging

and  cutting,  extending  towards  the  thighs,  or  proceeding

from  the  hips  to  the  inguinal  region  and  thighs.
I  Burning,  smarting  pain  in  right  inguinal  fold,  with  tension

on  motion.
I  In  the  right  inguinal  region  near  the  abdominal  ring,  some

varicose  veins.
^"  Rectum  and  Stool. Frequent  ineffectual  urging  to  stools.
I  Constant  feeling  as  though  she  must  go"  to  stool.
I  Looseness,  with  viscous  slime. ^Hemorrhoids.
Watery  evacuations.
;rPainful  diarrhoea  with  rumbling;  a  sensation  of  burning  and

pain  in  descending  colon;  it  burns down  and  out  at  the

anus ;  never  at  night.
Easy,  soft,  copious  evacuation,  like  diarrhoea.
8  Several  copious,  thick  mushy  stools.
iDiarrhoea;  mushlike  yellowish  discharges,  with  rumbling  and

passing  of  wind;  squeamishness,  much  thirst;  heat  in  face,

and  dullness  of  head;  afterwards  in  the  evening,  increased

appetite.
Large,  pappy,  free  stools,  mostly  with  tenesmus  before  and

after.


429  BERBERIS.

Scanty,  thin-formed  stool,  hard  or  soft.

I  Clay-colored  stools  ;  occasional  pain  in  big  toe  and  leg,  up  to
shoulder ;  sometimes  pain  in  bladder ;  urine  scalds.

■  Changing  stool,  irregular,  costive  or  loose. 6  Hemorrhoids.
Small,  indurated,  intermitting  stool.

Hard  stool,  like  sheep's  dung,  passed  only  after  much  straining.

■  Constipation.

■  Intense  pain  before  and  with  stool,  as  from  constriction  in

rectum,  preventing  passage  of  feces.

■  Burning,  stitching  pain  during,  before,  and  after  stool.

■  A  long  continued  sensation  after  stool,  as  if  one  had  just  been

to  stool,  or  as  if  one  had  just  recovered  from  a  pain  in  the
anus.

■  Painful  pressure  in  perineum  ;  stitches  in  perineum,  extending

deep  into  (1.  side)  pelvis. ^Fistula  in  ano.

■  Smarting  pain  in  the  anus.

Soreness  in  anus,  with  burning ;  pain  when  touched,  and  great

sensitiveness  when  sitting.
Burning,  stinging  pain  in  anus,  before,  during,  and  after  stool.

■  Tearing  extending  around  anus.
Bearing  down  in  anus  and  in  sacrum.

In  anus  pressure,  and  tenderness  after  evacuation,  fullness,
rasping  and  stinging,  burning,  itching,  crawling  and  throb-
bing.

■  Herpes  around  anus.

Copious  discharge  of  black  blood  per  anum  after  increased

exercise.
Hemorrhoids,  with  itching  or  burning,  particularly  after  stool,

which  frequently  is  hard  and  covered  with  blood.
Large  hemorrhoidal  tumors  with  itching  and  burning.

■  Fistula  in  ano,  with  itching  there;  short  cough  and  chest

complaints.

■  Fistula  since  two  or  three  months,  with  a  troublesome  short

cough  and  morbid  appearance;  after  Berh.  18  cent.,  cough
ceased  in  48  hours,  fistula  improved  for  two  weeks ;  then  a
biliary  colic  which  he  bad  not  had  for  three  years,  but  fre-
quently before  {Coloc);  fistula  improving;  furuncle  ap-
peared for  several  weeks ;  a  kind  of  tetter  on  the  edge  of
anus  remained.

■  ■Fistula  recti  when  attended  with  bilious  symptoms.
A  crust  formed  about  anus.

^^  Urinary  Organs.  In  the  lumbar  and  renal  region  a  pressing
straining,  shooting  or  bruising  pain,  extending  to  the  thighs,
with  stiffness,  numbness  and  sensation  of  warmth,  which
prevents  raising  the  body  and  rising  up.

■  Pressive  or  tensive  pain  in  region  of  loins  and  kidneys,  some-

times on  one  side,  sometimes  on  both  or  frequently  across
small  of  back,  at  times  extending  downward  into  posterior


BERBERIS.  430

portion  of  pelvis,  of  thighs,  and  even  to  calves  with  a  feeling
of  stiffness  and  lameness,  or  swelling  of  the  back  and  lower
extremities.

B  Sticking  or  sticking-pressing  pain,  at  times  slight,  at  times
very  sensitive,  in  one  or  the  other  lumbar  region,  now  in  a
small  spot  which  is  a  simple  sticking,  now  in  a  larger  place,
when  it  is  chiefly  pressing,  either  exactly  in  the  region  of
the  kidneys,  or  at  times  extending  above  or  below,  but  espe-
cially outward,  so  that  it  extends  around  side  of  abdomen  in
front  or  to  region  of  hips,  sometimes  also  in  the  spine  and
extending  down  to  the  small  of  back,  and  the  region  of  blad-
der and  groins,  sometimes  fine,  sometimes  dull;  the  sticking
sometimes  extends  from  the  region  of  kidneys  straight  for-
ward into  abdomen,  and  at  times  with  a  numb,  paralyzed,
bruised  sensation,  frequently  returning  and  lasting  a  long
time.

Tearing  pain  in  region  of  both  kidneys  soon  after  rising  in
morning,  which  extends  sideways  and  forward,  both  upward
and  downward,  so  that  the  whole  region  of  back  between  pel-
vis and  thorax  is  affected.

Tearing,  or  tearing-sticking  pain  in  region  of  loins  and  kidneys,
usually  worse  on  one  side,  frequently  at  same  time  in  small
of  back,  as  if  the  region  was  crushed  or  bruised,  with  a  feel-
ing of  stiffness,  so  that  it  was  difficult  for  her  to  rise  from  sit-
ting, so  that  hands  must  assist  rising;  sometimes  also  in-
volving hip,  nates,  upper  and  posterior  portion  of  extremi-
ties ;  at  times  also  with  a  sensation  of  numbness.

I  I  Pressive  or  tensive  pains  in  region  of  loins  and  kidneys,  with
a  feeling  of  stiffness  and  lameness,  or  swelling,  in  back  and
lower  limbs  [Kali  carh.  without  stiffness  and  lameness).

■  Tearing  pulsating  pain  in  right  kidney.

;rSharp  pain  in  right  kidney,  near  the  spine,  from  there  down-
wards into  bladder.

Lancinating  or  tearing-pulsative  pains  in  region  of  kidneys ;
worse  when  stooping  and  rising  again,  sitting  or  lying  ;  bet-
ter when  standing.

Cutting  pain  from  left  kidney  into  bladder,  urethra,  and  in
penis.

Stitches  from  kidneys  to  bladder  and  urethra.

Stinging,  burning,  gnawing  pain  on  a  small  spot  near  the  kid-
neys, increased  by  pressing  hard  upon,  and  moving  fre-
quently downwards  or  forwards.

Stitching  or  tearing  in  renal  region  and  adjoining  parts,  with
numbness  and  soreness,  increased  by  hard  external  pressure.

I A  sticking- digging,  or  digging-tearing  pain  in  one  or  other
kidney  regions,  as  if  it  were  suppurating ;  aggravated  by
deep  pressure.

Some  stitches  in  one  or  other  lumbar  regions,  especially  in  re-


431  BERBERIS.

gion  of  kidneys,  at  times  fine,  at  times  dull,  at  times  as  if  a
nail  were  sticking  in,  and  so  violent  and  sudden  that  it  stops
the  breath  ;  from  outward  within.

■  Burning  and  soreness  in  region  of  kidneys.

■  Burning  stitches,  single  or  several  in  succession,  in  region  of

loins  and  kidneys.

BMuch  pain,  soreness  and  tenderness  in  back,  in  region  of  kid-
neys, d  Rheumatism  of  knee.

Symptoms  in  region  of  kidneys  worse  in  stooping  and  getting
up ;  more  while  sitting  or  lying  than  in  standing.

Pain,  weakness  and  trembling  in  region  of  kidneys  after  riding.

■  Sensitiveness  in  region  of  kidneys  so  great that  any  jarring

motion,  riding  in  a  wagon,  jumping  from  it,  was  intolerable.
d  Rheumatism.  .

I  After  kidney  complaints  a  foul,  bitter  taste,  rush  of  blood  to
throat ;  great  appetite,  hasty  eating  ;  urine  has  reddish  sedi-
ment.

Frequently  recurring,  crampy,  contractive  pain,  or  aching  pain,
in  bladder,  when  the  bladder  is  full  or  empty.

■  Great  urging,  with  pain  in neck  of  bladder,  with  burning,

scanty  urine.
Pressure  and  contraction  in  vesical  region  when  pressed  upon,
with  burning  in  urethra.

■  Cutting,  constrictive  pain  in  bladder.

■  Violent,  cutting,  tensive  pain, deeply  seated  in  left  side  of

bladder,  at  last  becoming  a  sticking,  obliquely  in  the  female
urethra,  as  if  in  its  orifice,  lasting  a  few  minutes.

■  Painful  cuttings  in  left  side  of  region  of  bladder  extend  into

urethra,  coming  from  left  kidney  along  the  course  of  the
ureter.
Violent  sticking  pains  in  bladder,  extending  from  kidneys  into
urethra,  with  urging  to  urinate.

■  Drawing  sticking  pain  in  one  or  the  other  side  of  bladder,  ex-

tending down  into  the  female  urethra,  often  arising  in  lum-
bar region  and  extending  along  the  course  of  the  ureters.

■  Burning  pain  in  bladder,  sometimes  when  it  is  full,  sometimes

when  empty,  soon  after  urinating,  several  times ;  frequently
also  in  morning  before  urinating  for  the  first  time.

■  Pain  in  bladder  when  moving.

Cutting  or  burning  in  urethra ;  worse  when  not  urinating ;  fre-
quently more  on  one  side.
A  stitch  from  within  outward  in  left  side  of  female  urethra.
Stitches  in  urethra,  extending  into  bladder.

■  Most  violent  burning  and  shooting  in  orifice  of  urethra,  after

climaxis,  ?et.  50.

Urine  smells  like  coffee.

Urine:  increased  and  clear,  with  smnll  slimy  sediment,  at  be-
ginning and  during  exacerbation  of  complaints.


BERBERIS.  432

Greenish  turbid  urine,  depositing  mucus.

I  Pale  yellow  urine,  either  with  a  slight  transparent,  gelatinous
sediment,  which  is  not  deposited,  or  a  turbid,  flocculent,  clay-
like, copious  mucous  sediment,  mixed  with  a  white  or  whitish-
gray,  and  later  a  reddish,  mealy  sediment.

iUrine  bright  yellow,  with  profuse  mucous  sediment.

Urine  dark,  bright  yellow,  or  red,  with  sediment.

B  Inflammatory  red  urine.

I  Blood  red  urine,  which  speedily  becomes  turbid  and  deposits
a  thick  mucous  and  bright  red,  mealy  sediment,  slowly  be-
coming clear,  but  always  retaining  its  bright  red  color,  with
violent  pains  in  kidneys.

I  Urine  dark,  turbid  with  copious  sediment. ^Jaundice.

I  Urine  contains  a  clear  mucous  sediment.

Much  mucus,  tough  and  in  threads.

Urine  lessened,  and  with  copious,  slimy  sediment,  when  com-
plaints abate.

Urine  has  a  transparent,  jelly-like  sediment.

Copious,  slimy  sediment,  with  a  white,  gray,  reddish  furfura-
ceous  sediment,  and  yellowish-red  crystals.

Passes  small  calculi.

Frequent  urging  to  urinate.

In  derangements  of  urinary  or  genital  apparatus,  with  aggra-
vation from  slight  fatigue,  getting  worse  as  fatigue  increases.

Movement  brings  on  or  increases  the  urinary  difliculties.

Constant  urging,  with  pain  in  neck  of  bladder,  mostly  burning
and  scanty  discharge.

I  Urine  very  slow  to  flow,  with  much  pain  and  pressure  in
region  of  bladder  in  front, d  Rheumatism  in  knee.

The  urine  warmer,  and  attended  with  pain  in  lumbar  and  renal
region.

I  I  Urinary  symptoms  are  improved  by  rest.

During  urination,  burning  in  urethra,  with  pressure  on  the
bladder.

Pain  in  hips  while  urinating.

I  After  urinating,  a  sensation  in  the  bladder,  as  if  one  must  go
again  soon,  or  as  if  some  urine  remained  behind.

After  urination,  burning  in  urethra  or  bladder;  pressure  in  the
bladder;  cutting,  burning  and  stitches  in  the  urethra.

Violent  urging  after  urinating,  particularly  in  morning.

BWith  the  symptoms  in  the  urinary  organs,  pain  in  loins  and
hips.
^^  Male  Sexual  Organs. Suppressed  sexual  desire.

Depressed  sexual  function  with  men  too  short,  ejaculate  too
soon;  with  women,  excitement  too  late,  with  cutting,  shoot-
ing pain.

Straining  during  and  after  ejaculation  of  semen.

Great  prostration  in  the  sexual  parts  after  coition.


433  BERBERIS.

During  coition,  too  weak  and  too  short  thrill;  ejection  too  soon
and  imperfect.

Weakness  and  insensibility  of  the  male  parts.

Sensation  of  weakness  and  unexcitabilitj  in  the  parts,  espe-
cially after  urinating.

Stinging,  crawling,  itching  and  throbbing  in  genitals.

Pain  in  genitals,  increased  by  motion.

■  Burning  in  the  urethra.

■  Smarting, burning pains in spermatic cord, with several

stitches,  now  on  one,  now  on  the  other  side.

Dragging  or  lancinating  pains  in  spermatic  cord,  extending
into  testicles.

In  the  spermatic  cord  straining,  burning,  with  stitching,  draw-
ing and  pressure,  extending  to  the  testicles.

iSoft,  pulpy  swelling  of  the  left  spermatic  cord,  especially  in
the  lower  portions,  several  times  when  walking,  with  at  times
drawing,  burning,  smarting,  or  tearing  pains;  at  times  also
when  sitting,  with  pain  extending  down  into  the  testicles,
especially  the  epididymis.

■  Most  excruciating  pain  extends  along  the  urethra  into  bladder,

into  testicle,  which  is  drawn  upon  the  aifected  side.

■  Drawing  pain  in  the  spermatic  cord  of  the  right,  frequently

of  the  left  side,  extending  down  into  the  testicles,  or  up  into
the  abdominal  ring.

■  Neuralgia  and  inflammation  of  spermatic  cord,  testicles  and

epididymis.
Drawing  from  right  or  left  testicle  to  spermatic  cord.
Constricting  pain  in  testicles,  with  contraction  and  retraction

of  the  scrotum.
Testicles  drawn  up.
Sensation  of  coldness  in  the  testicles.
A  cutting-stinging,  straining,  burning,  crawling  and  pressing

in  the  testicles.

■  Penis  hard  and  contracted  all  along  the  upper  part,  bending  it

upwards, d  With  an  old  man.
A  hard  string  along  the  upper  part  of  penis.

■  Burning  at  the  very  point  of  the  penis  within the  canal.

d  Kidney  disease.
Stinging  in  the  penis  and  the  glans.
Rasping-burning,  particularly  on  left  side,  also  on  the  glans

and  the  prepuce.
Coldness  and  numb  feeling  in  the  prepuce  and  glans.
Cold  feeling  in  the  prepuce  and  scrotum.
Scrotum  shrunken,  cold,  with  pressure  in  testicles.
Itching  on  scrotum.

Soreness,  especially  on  left  side  of  scrotum.-
"  Female  Sexual  Organs. Suppressed  sexual  desire  with  long
VOL.  II. — 28.


BERBERIS.  434

delayed  thrill,  and  frequently  cutting  and  stitching  in  parts
during  coition.

I  Complete  want  of  pleasurable  sensation  during  coition,  d  Ova-
rian disease.

Discharge  too  late  and  painful.

Coition  is  painful.

After  coition,  weakness  of  the  parts.

Menses :  scanty,  of  black  drops  or  filthy  slime ;  too  scanty
and  painful  with  pain  in  small  of  back ;  consisting  of  gray
mucus  or  brown  blood ;  fetid  lumps ;  too  slight,  of  watery
blood,  or  gray  mucus  ;  too  short.

Catamenia  every  three  weeks.

The  menses  at  the  proper  time,  but  too  small  in  quantity,  too
short,  resembling  somewhat  the  washings  of  flesh.

Suppressed  menstruation.

Uterine  symptoms  are  at  first  intensified  then  relieved  by  ex-
ertion.

For  some  days  previous  to  catamenia,  violent  tearing  in  limbs,
with  severe  pain  in  back.

At  the  beginning  of  menstruation,  violent  pain  in  kidneys.

The  menstruation  attended  in  the  first  days  with  pressure  to-
wards the  parts,  stitches,  rasping  in  the  vagina,  burning  and
-soreness  in  the  anus.

The  menses  succeeded  by  excessive  lassitude  and  vehement
shooting  headache.

Pain  during  catamenia  is  often  in  the  kidneys  or  down  the
thighs  and  calves  of  the  legs,  again  in  the  head  and  some-
times all  over  the  body.

•  Painful  menstruation.

During  the  menses:  pain  in  back ;  pressure  and  tension  in  upper
arm  and  shoulders,  extending  to  the  neck;  vehement  tearing
through  whole  body,  particularly  left  side;  pain  in  kidneys;
stitches  in  breast;  vehement  pressing  headache;  painful  dis-
tended abdomen ;  exhaustion,  faintness,  shivering,  very
jaded  countenance,  irksomeness  and  weariness  of  life.

After  the  menses  :  great  lassitude  with  tearing  and  stitching
in  the  head ;  pain  in  small  of  back  and  loins ;  pressure  in
the  mammse,  especially  at  the  nipple  with  sensation  as  if  the
mamma  were  swollen  ;  stitches  in  the  left  mamma.

Acrid  leucorrhoea,  very  prostrating.

■  Sticking  pains  in  female  urethra,  beginning  in  the  bladder.
I  Burning  pain  in  female  urethra  during  and  after  urinating.
I  Burning  in  urethra,  along  the  whole  length  of  it.

The  pains  in  the  external  genitals  increased  by  motion.

■  Violent  sticking  on  left  side  of  the  abdomen,  two  fingers'

breadth  from  the  navel,  extending  in  long  stitches  into  the
left  side  of  the  vagina;  smarting  pain  in  the  vagina;  burn-
ing, violent  pain  and  soreness  in  the  anus.


435  BERBERIS.

Shooting-stinging  from  the  perineum  deep  into  the  female
parts.

■  Sensation  of  burning  and  soreness  in  the  vagina,  frequently
very  sensitive,  especially  in  the  anterior  portion,  even  ex-
tending to  the  labia.

Vagina  painful  to  touch.

Vulva  itching  and  burning; <<  walking  or  sitting,  >  lying.

Sudden  lancinating  in  vagina,  causing  her  to  start,  with  sore-
ness of  the  wall  of  the  vagina  to  the  touch,  ■<  walking.

Stitches  from  inside  outwards,  with  tenderness  of  the  vagina.

I  I  Intensely  painful  vagina ;  burning,  sore,  as  if  excoriated.

Vagina  reddened;  uterus  sunken.

During  climaxis,  burning  in  urethra.
^*  Pregnancy. Sore  gums  during  dentition.
^'  Voice  and  Larynx. Hoarseness,  with  pain  or  inflammation  of
tonsils.

Tearing  in  throat,  upwards,  particularly  left  side,  with  stiffness.
^®  Respiration. Oppression,  with  fluent  coryza,  mostly  at  night.

Stitches  affecting  respiration.

With  inhalation,  stitching  between  shoulders,  from  back  through
chest.

Shortness  of  breath  when  going  up  stairs.

Obstruction  of  breath  when  raising  the  arm.

Breathing  increases  colic.

Sensation  during  inspiration  as  if  something  were  torn  loose.
^'^  Cough. Tormenting,  dry,  short  cough,  with  stitches  in  chest.
^*  Inner  Chest  and  Lungs. Stitches  in  and  around  clavicle,
also  pulsation  and  burning.

Pressure  behind  left  nipple.

Rawness  and  soreness  in  chest,  like  during  a  catarrh.

Stitches  in  chest ;  increased  by  deep  inspiration,  with  short,
dry  cough.

Cutting  contraction  in  chest,  to  abdomen,  compels  to  bend  over.

Stitches  in  chest  (left  side).

Stitches  in  anterior  and  middle  of  breast,  particularly  when
deeply  inspiring,  attended  with  a  dry,  hacking  cough.

Drawing-tearing  occasioned  by  stretching  the  arm.

Tearing  in  chest,  particularly  in  left  side,  towards  shoulders
and  back.

Shooting  pain  deep  in  front  of  middle  chest.

Sticking  pain,  or  sticking  pain  with  pressure  in  chest.

Violent,  sudden,  incisive,  contractive  pain,  in  front  part  of
chest,  extending  down  to  abdomen,  obliging  him  to  bend
double.

Lancinations  from  lower  dorsal  vertebrae  through  chest,  arrest-
ing breathing.

Deep  seated,  acute,  lancinating  pain  in  either  iliac  bone,  ex
tending  obliquely  inward  and  downward  toward  small  of  back.


BERBERIS.  436

with  bubbling  stitches  darting  into  the  part  to  a  considerable

depth.
^^  Heart,  Pulse  and  Circulation. Painful  dragging-sticking

in  region  of  heart,  outward  and  downward.
Very  painful  contracting  urging-shooting  in  region  of  heart,

working  from  in  out,  and  up  down  ;  next  day  palpitation.
Squeezing  and  stinging  about  the  heart.
Stitches  about  the  heart.
Frequent  palpitation.
Slow,  weak  pulse.

IB  Pulse  slow  and  weak,  or  full,  hard  and  rapid.
*"  Outer  Chest. Stitching,  pulsating,  pressing,  or  tensive  pains  in

muscles  of  chest.
Corrosive  feeling  in  skin  of  chest.
Itching returns after scratching,  with smarting  stitches  or

burning.
Pimples  on  the  chest  and  scapulae.
Stitches  in  gland  pectoral  and  its  vicinity.
Pressure  behind  the  left  nipple.
^'  Neck  and  Back. Sudden  stitch  darting  from  side  of  neck  into

upper  arm.
Tension  in  neck.

Tearing  in  throat  upward,  particularly  in  left  side,  with  stiff-
ness.
Stiffness  in  neck  half-sided,  with  a  sensation  of  inward  swelling.
Pain  as  if  bruised  or  swollen,  from  right  scapula  to  shoulder-
joint.
Tearing  in  and  between  the  scapulae.
Tearing  between shoulders, extending  to  occiput ;  increased

when  lifting.
Tearing  between  shoulders  ;  also  between  shoulders  and  spine,

with  oppression  of  chest;  in  point  of  shoulder-blade,  from

shoulders  to  loins.
Drawing  in  shoulders  ;  stitches  between  shoulders,  particularly

when breathing,  below left shoulder ;  from  back  through

breast,  interrupting  breathing.
Tearing  in  the  spine.
Stitches  in  the  spine.

Tearing,  pressing ;  burning  and  tension  in  back.
Pressure  in  back,  as  if  bones  would  be  pressed  asunder,  with

heaviness, numbness, vibration  and  warmth, disappearing

after  expulsion  of  wind.
Squeezing  in  the  back  with  efforts  to  stool.
I  Great  soreness  and  pain  through  entire  back  from  sacrum  to

shoulders,  greatly  increased  whenever  patient  performed  any

labor, d  Fistula  in  ano.
In  the  back  as  if  beaten,  disabled  and  stiff.


437  BERBERIS.

Backache,  worse  while  sitting  or  lying,  mostly  in  morning,
when  awaking.

Sticking  pain,  or  sticking  with  pressure  frequently  recurring,  and
long  continued  in  one  or  the  other  lumbar  region,  at  times
in  kidneys,  at  others  a  little  above  and  below,  extending  out-
ward and  forward  inside  of  abdomen,  or  region  of  hip,  or
dorsal  spine,  or  small  of  back,  into  region  of  bladder  or  groin,
or  from  kidneys  straight  into  abdomen,  with  numbness  and
lameness,  as  if  bruised.

Painful  pressure  and  tension  in  lumbar  and  renal  region,  some-
times with  sensation  of  numbness,  puffiness,  warmth,  stiff-
ness and  lameness,  extending  at  times  into  lower  limbs.

■  Tearing  pain  in  posterior  portion  of  iliac  crest,  usually  only  to
one  side,  extending  downward  into  gluteal  muscles,  or  into
bones.

I  Deep-seated,  sensitive  sticking  pain  in  ilium  of  one  or  the
other  side,  an  inch  to  an  inch  and  a  half  from  the  spine,  ex-
tending obliquely  inward  toward  sacrum.

I  If  she  stooped  the  lower  part  of  the  back  felt  stiff,  and  it  was
with  difficulty  that  she  could  stand  up,  on  account  of  that
painful  stiffness ;  this  tearing  was  noticed  even  when  sitting,
more  severe  when  standing;  was  relieved  in  the  afternoon.

I A  feeling  of  warmth  in  lower  part  of  back,  and  in  small  of
back,  as  if  lumbar  region  were  asleep,  extending  down  into
sacrum,  hips,  and  posterior  portion  of  thighs.

I  Pressive- tensive,  or  pressing  sensation  in  sacrum  ;  deep,  inter-
nal when  severe,  with  a  feeling  as  if  bones  would  be  forced
asunder  ;  worse  when  sitting  and  lying.

I  Violent  pain  in  sacrum, d  Hemorrhoids.
Constant  pulsating  stitches  in  sacrum.

Bruised  pain,  with  stiffness  in  small  of'back ;  rises  from  a  seat

with  difficulty.
Numbness  in  small  of  back.

I I  Pain  in  small  of  back  ;  worse  when  sitting  and  lying  in  the
morning,  when  awaking, d  During  menstruation.

^^  Upper  Limbs.  Sudden  stitch  darting  from  side  of  neck  into
upper  arm.

Tearing  in  the  shoulder.

Vehement,  intense  pains  on  point  and  outside  of  shoulder-blade,
towards  shoulder-joint,  and  extending  to  elbow ;  with  a  sen-
sation as  if  beaten.

In  the  shoulder-joint  pains  as  if  from  straining;  in  motion,  in-
creased by  pressing  upon.

Stretching,  tearing,  stinging,  throbbing  pains  in  shoulders.

Sensation  of  heaviness  in  the  axilla.

Itching,  smarting  and  burning  in  the  axilla:

Gurgling  feeling  in  shoulder,  with  sensation  as  if  something
alive  in  joint,  especially  about  midnight.


BERBERIS.  438

A  rheumatic,  paralytic-like  pain  in  right  shoulder,  and  some
stitches  over  left  eye.

In  upper  arm  drawing,  stinging,  tearing  on  an  isolated  spot.

Sudden  stitches,  jerking,  tearing  into  the  bones  of  upper  arm.

Violent  pain  in  sinew  of  biceps,  after  lifting  something,  ex-
tended upwards  and  downwards,  when  moving  the  arm.

Throbbing  in  the  arm.

Stitches  in  left  upper  arm.

Arms  pain  as  if  bruised ;  feel  weak  and  lame.

Gurgling  feeling  in  muscles  of  right  upper  arm.

Heaviness  and  lameness  of  the  arms.

Pressure  and  heaviness  in  arm,  which  sinks  down.

Numbness  and  disabledness  on  external  side  of  arm  ;  increased
when  the  arm  hangs  down.

Cold  arms.

Soreness,  with  burning  and  painfulness  to  touch  of  skin  about
arms  when  sitting.

Blotches  like  nettle-rash  on  upper  arm,  scaling  off.

Lymphatic  swelling  in  flexors  of  arm,  with  petechia-like  spots,
and  burning.

Dingy  red  marbled  spots  on  arms,  with  bruised  pain.

Pimple  on  point  of  each  elbow,  much  inflamed  after  rubbing.

In  the  elbow-joint  drawing,  tension,  tearing,  stinging  or  burning.

Tearing  from  elbow-joint  into  ulna  and  hand,  with  heaviness
and  infirmity.

iPetechige,  small  and  red,  with  white  spots  on  forearm  and
backs'  of  hands.

Pressing  pains  in  the  inner  side  of  forearm.

Lymphatic  swelling  of  flexors  of  left  forearm,  with  spots  like
petechige.

Tearing  along  the 'radius.

Stitches  along  the  ulna.

Pressure  in  wrist,  as  if  after  spraining  or  straining.

In  back  of  hand  a  pressing  shooting,  with  vibration  and  sensa-
tion of  heaviness.

Burning  pains  in  hands  increased  by  friction.

Pain  in  the  wrist  after  exertion  with  the  hand.

Sensation  as  if  drops  of  cold  water  were  sprinkled  on  the  back
of  the  hand  on  going  into  open  air.

Tearing  along  the  metacarpal  bones.

Tearing,  violent  stitches  towards  the  metacarpus.

Tearing  on  back  of  fingers,  chiefly  in  joints,  frequently  with
stifi"ness,  heaviness  and  swelling  of  joints  ;  increased  by  raov-
ing  and  touching.

Burning  stitches  in  the  fingers.

Vibrating  pain  in  fingers.

Stitches  extending  to  the  points  of  fingers.

Tearing  in  the  points  of  fingers.


439  BERBERIS

Redness  of  the  points  and  back  of  fingers,  with  itching ;  after
chilblains.

Pain  under  the  nails,  with  tenderness  to  touch.

Small  warts  on  the  balls  of  hand,  and  on  middle  finger.

Small,  flat,  semi-transparent  pimples,  or  rudimentary  warts  on
fingers.
^^  Lower  Limbs. B  Pain  in  hips. ^  Kidney  disease.

Drawing-stretching  pain  in  thigh,  as  if  it  were  too  short.

Tearing-shooting  pains  in  thighs.

Throbbing  in  thigh.

Stitches  from  outside  inward  in  thighs.

Stitches  at  intervals  in  sitting  or  while  walking,  either  through,
across  thighs,  or  from  hip  down  to  foot.

A  peculiar,  spongy  sensation,  as  if  feeling  were  lost  in  1.  thigh,
from  hip  to  knee ;  cupping  brought  no  blood  ;  has  to  limp
in  walking  on  account  of  the  pain  in  left  thigh.

Sensation  of  icy  coldness  on  small  spots  of  thigh.

Burning  in  thigh,  mostly  before  catamenia.

Touch  is  painful  even  through  her  dresses,  with  burning  of
thigh.

Pain  in  thighs,  worse  from  changes  of  weather,  mostly  before
heavy  wind.

Varices,  from  groins  down  the  thighs.

Spasm  in  knee,  extending  to  calf  and  thigh,  when  firmly  lean-
ing upon.

Spasm,  with  vibration  and  heaviness  in  knee.

Burning,  stinging,  tearing,  pressing,  increased  by  stretching
feg.

Stinging  in  joint  of  knee,  particularly  on  inner  side,  when
walking.

Tension  in  bend  of  knee,  as  if  tendons  were  too  short.

Tired,  bruised  and  lame  feeling  in  knee.

B  Sensation  in  knees  as  if  palsied,  weary  and  beaten,  after  walk-
ing, and  when  arising  from  the  seat.

BLeft  knee  twice  the  size  of  the  other,  very  stiff,  sore  and
painful, d  Rheumatism.

Swollen  veins  in  bend  of  knee.

Tearing,  stinging,  spasm  and  tension  in  calf  of  leg,  during  and
after  motion,  attended  with  vibration,  heaviness,  stifi"ness  and
numbness.

Cramp  in  calf  of  leg.

Tearing  pain  in  tibia.

Tearing  and  stinging  in  shin  and  tendo  achillis.

In  shinbone  straining  pressure,  with  vibration.

Lower  limbs  pain  as  if  beaten,  with  heaviness ;  can  scarcely
rise  from  the  seat.

Twitching,  as  from  something  alive  in  legs.

Wasting  of  the  lower  limbs.


BERBERIS.  440

Sensation  as  if  sprained  in  muscles  and  bones  of  lower  limbs.

Itching  and  swelling  of  legs,  preceded  by  chill  and  heat.

I  Great  swelling,  pain  and  stiffness,  could  not  raise  foot  high

enough  to  walk  on  rough  ground,  would  catch  his  toe  and

fall, d  Rheumatism  of  knee.
Pain  when  raising  the  foot,  preventing  flexion.
Above  external  ankle  a  violent  pain  in  bones  and  sinews  when

touched.
In  the  ankle-joint  tearing  upwards  and  downwards.
Pressure  in  inner  ankle  and  tearing  towards  the  heel.
Tearing  in  ankles,  particularly  the  left.
Sensation  of  coldness  on  the  ankle-joint.
Rending  and  pricking  on  the  forepart  of  ankle-joint.
In  external  ankles  tearing  and  shooting,  extending  to  little  toe

and  preventing  motion.
Lymphatic  swelling  of  tendo  achillis  of  left  leg,  with  an  ugly  red

spot.
Lymphatic  swelling  of  tendo  achillis  and  heels ; often  tension,

drawing,  rending, during or after standing or walking;

stitches  in  walking  or  sitting,  pain  as  if  overstrained.
Swelling  burns,  itches,  skin  peels  off;  pain  when  lifting  the

foot ;  heavy  and  sore  when  stretching.
In heels tearing and  stinging,  deep  into  bone,  when  walking

and  stepping  on.
Heels  pain  as  if  ulcerated,  when  standing.
Pain  when  stretching  the  foot.
Tingling  in  foot,  as  if  after  freezing.
Sudden  stitches  in  feet,  causing  hobbling.
Stitches  from  inside  outwards  in  feet,  when  travelling  in  a  car-
riage.
Vehement  stinging  when  stepping  on  the  foot,  terminating  in

numbness.
Violent  stitches  from  outwards,  or  from  below  upwards  in  foot.
Piercing,  burning,  or  pricking  pain  in  foot.
Tearing,  attended  with  stitches  and  burning  in  foot.
Rending  upwards  and  drawing  forwards  in  foot.
Stitches  ;  burning ;  itching ;  smarting ;  pain  and  cold  feeling  in

feet,  like  as  if  frozen.
Soreness  ;  burning  ;  pricking  and  itching  on  foot.
Itching  and  burning  stitches  in  foot.

Pain,  like  a  festering  under  skin  of  feet,  after  long  standing.
Pains,  with  swelling  of  the  sinews  in  foot.
Rending,  burning  and  itching  on  dorsum  of  left  foot ; <  by

scratching.
Stitches  between  metatarsal  bones,  like  from  a  nail,  when  stand-
ing.
Pain  in  the  metatarsus,  as  if  sprained  and  swollen.
The  sinews  of  the  sole  of  foot  as  if  contracted.


441  BERBERIS.

Rending,  crawling  and  sensation  of  warmth  in  sole  of  foot.

Tearing  in  balls  of  feet,  with  pain  when  stepping  on  them.

Stitches  extending  to  big  toe.

Stitches  in  the  ball  of  big  toe;  in  joints  of  toes.

At  every  step  stinging  in  the  big  toe.

In  the  tip  of  big  toe  a  pain,  as  from  a  blow.

Single  jerks  in  toes,  particularly  in  joints.

On  the  back  of  foot  rending  in  all  directions,  terminating  in
the  points  of  toes.

Stitches  in  the  points  of  toes,  chiefly  outwards.

Burning-crawling ;  itching ;  vibration  and  sensation  of
warmth  in  toes.

Burning,  pricking  or  soreness  in  toes,  with  redness,  as  after
slight  freezing ;  tight  shoes  are  intolerable.

Violent  piin,  as  if  the  toe  would  suppurate.
^*  Limbs  in  General. Tearing,  stitching,  or  throbbing  and  tear-
ing in  the  limbs.
^' Rest. Position. Motion. Bending over: compelled by
cutting  contraction  in  chest  to  abdomen;  pain  in  hepatic  re-
gion better.

Sitting  :  anxiety ;  anus  very  sensitive ;  pain  in  renal  region

<  ;  pain  in  1.  spermatic  cord  ;  vulvar  itching  and  burning

<  ;  backache  <  ;  skin  of  arms  painful  to  touch  <  ;  stitches
in  thighs ;  stitches  in  tendo  achillis  and  heels.

Rising  from  a  seat :  sensation  in  knees  as  if  palsied.

Standing :  anxiety ;  pain  in  groins  <  ;  pain  in  renal  region
>> ;  pain  1.  spermatic  cord ;  painful  swelling  of  tendo  achil-
lis and  heels ;  stitches  between  metatarsal  bones.

Lying:  pain  in  renal  region  <  ;  vulvar  burning  and  itching
>■  ;  backache  ■<  ;  crawls.

Arm  hanging  down:  numbness  worse.

Raising  arm  :  obstruction  in  breathing.

Raising  foot :  pain  preventing  flexion.

Exertion:  heat  in  head;  pain  in  wrist;  uterine  symptoms  at
first  ■<,  then  >  ;  inclination  to  sweat.

Walking :  pain  between  anterior  superior  spine  of  ileum  and
umbilicus  <  ;  pains  in  groins  ■<  ;  vulvar  itching  and  burn-
ing ■<  ;  pain  in  vagina  <  ;  stitches  in  thighs;  stinging  in
knee-joint ;  painful  swelling  of  tendo  achillis  and  heels ;  great
weakness.

Ascending  :  shortness  of  breath.

Motion :  anxiety  ;  headache  <C  ;  pain  in  epigastrium  <C  ;  pain
in  r.  inguinal  region  <  ;  pain  in  bladder  ;  urinary  difficulties
-<  ;  pain  in  genitals  <  ;  pain  in  finger-joints ;  eye  symp-
toms <C  ;  pain  in  calf

Stooping  or  rising  :  vertigo;  heaviness  in  head ;  headache  <C  ;
pains  in  renal  region  worse.


BERBERIS.  442

36  Serves. Lame  feeling  all  over,  with  warm  feeling  in  lower  part
of  back  or  sacrum.

■  General  relaxation,  not  inclined  to  do  anything.

Great  weakness,  like  fainting,  while  walking  and  after  a  walk,
with  perspiration  and  heat  on  upper  part  of  body  ;  cold,
pale,  sunken  face  and  oppression  of  breathing.

Lamed  all  over  with  warm  feeling  in  lower  part  of  back  and
sacrum.

Painty  feeling,  with  weakness  and  giddiness.

Faintness,  with  giddiiless  or  agitation  of  the  blood,  perspira-
tion and  heat  of  upper  half  of  body,  coldness  and  sallowness
of  face,  and  oppression  on  chest.

Lassitude,  disabdity  and  soreness,  increased  by  pressure;  fre-
quently connected  with  stiffness,  heaviness,  vibration,  numb-
ness and  torpor,  also  with  a  sensation  as  if  swollen.

Exhaustion  so  as  to  cause  trembling  and  knocking  together  of
the  knees.
^^  Sleep. Gaping  and  eructation.

Great  sleepiness  during  the  day  and  after  dinner.

Sleepiness  by  day  ;  feels  tired,  must  lie  down.

Sleepiness  early  in  the  evening.

When  going  to  bed,  fainty.

When  lying  down,  crawls.

In  bed,  anxious  feeling.

Slumber  with  phantasma.

Anxious  dreams.

Restless,  dreamful  sleep,  with  frequent  waking  and  congestion
of  blood  to  the  head.

During  night  awakened  by  violent  thirst,  profuse  sweat,  or
itching-burning  stitches.

Getting  awake  at  night,  with  excitement,  congestion  and  tension
in  head.

Difficult  awaking  in  morning,  succeeded  by  pains  in  head  and
back,  exhaustion  and  Avant  of  recollection.

Sleep  unrefreshing.

Mind  and  body  relaxed  after  sleep.

Frequent  eructations,  alternating  with  yawning.
38  Time.  Morning :  headache  <  ;  sticky,  dry  eyelids  ;  catarrh
more  copious ;  empyreumatic  smell  and  taste ;  mouth  and
fauces  dry,  sticky  and  viscid;  scratching  in  throat;  nau-
sea; tearing  pain  in  kidneys  ;  burning  pain  in  bladder;  vio-
lent urging  after  urinating ;  backache  < ;  difficulty  in  get-
ting awake  ;  chill,  with  cold  feet.

11  A.M  :  coldness  of  body;  heat  of  face.

Morning  until  afternoon  :  alternating  chilliness  and  heat.

During  day  :  great  sleepiness;

Afternoon :  heat  in  head ;  heat  extends  over  face ;  backache
>> ;  heat.


443  BERBERIS.

Twilight:  terrifying  apparitions  ;  objects  appear  twice  as  large
as  natural.

Evening  :  itching  on  scalp  and  face ;  eyelid  covered  with  vesi-
cles, oozing  fluid  ;  shooting  behind  ear  <  ;  increased  appe-
tite ;  sleepiness  early  ;  chill  succeeded  by  heat  and  anxiety  ;
sweat.

Night :  oppressed  respiration,  w^ith  coryza  <  ;  belching  and
soreness  after  eating  solids  ;  awakened  by  violent  thirst,  pro-
fuse sweat  or  burning  stitches  ;  awakens  with  excitement ;
sweat ;  heat.

Midnight :  gurgling  feeling  in  shoulder,  with  sensation  as  of
something  alive  in  the  joint.
^^  Temperature  and  Weather. Air :  teeth  sensitive.

Open  air :  headache  > ;  sensation  as  if  cold  drops  were
spurted  into  face ;  sensation  as  if  drops  of  cold  water  Avere
sprinkled  on  back  of  hand.

Out-doors  :  eye  symptoms  worse.

Change  of  weather,  mostly  before  heavy  wind  :  pain  in  thighs.
*"  Chill. Fever. Sweat. Sensation of coldness on isolated
spots,  as  if  from  cold  metal,  cold  substances,  or  as  if  cold
drops  were  sprinkled.

Running  cold,  and  crawls  in  the  skin.

With  the  chill  pressure  and  dullness  of  head.

Chill  before  dinner,  with  icy  cold  feet;  dry,  viscous  mouth,
without  thirst.

Suffering  parts  chilly,  in  region  of  kidneys;  accompanied  by
gooseflesh.

Chilliness  in  region  of  stomach,  ceasing  after  thirst.

Heat  in  face,  extending  over  whole  body,  which  is  cool,  without
thirst.

Chill  as  if  in  the  bones,  with  warmth  of  skin.

Chills  in  back  and  backs  of  arms,  as  from  cold  water,  evening
before  going  to  bed,  afterwards  warm.

Chills  in  back,  extending  to  hips,  as  if  produced  by  an  icy  cold
wet  handkerchief;  in  twenty  minutes,  succeeded  by  warmth;
after  a  second  attack  swelling  of  the  tendo  achillis.

Shaking  chills  succeeded  by  heat.

Chill  followed  by  heat  with  or  without  thirst.

Chill  from  the  face  and  arms  to  the  back  and  breast,  succeeded
by  heat,  with  anxiety  and  oppression  of  chest,  especially
forenoon  and  evening.

Short  crawl  and  shudder  from  up  down  through  back  and  chest,
followed  by  heat.

Chill  in  forenoon  with  cold  feet,  heat  in  the  afternoon  and
sweating  evening  or  night.

Coldness  of  body,  with  heat  of  face,  commencing  at  11  A.M.;
heat  and  inclination  to  sweat  at  night.


BERBERIS.  444

Chill  either  on  back  or  on  arms  and  legs,  followed  by  burning
heat,  increasing  in  the  night.

Cold  feeling  in  the  eye,  like  from  a  cool  wind,  with  lachryma-
tion  when  closing  the  eyes.

Chilliness,  with  hot  face,  followed  by  heat  with  perspiration ;
or  I  burning  heat  in  the  afternoon,  increasing  during  the
night.

In  morning,  chilliness  with  cold  feet,  pressing  headache,  as  if
a  catarrh  would  arise,  heat  in  the  head ;  in  the  afternoon,
general  warmth  and  inclination  to  perspire.

Transient  sensation  of  warmth  at  different  places.

Fever  heat  in  the  afternoon.

Heat  in  hands  and  head  in  the  afternoon.

With  the  heat  anxiety,  oppression  of  chest,  shooting  in  the
head,  thirst  and  often  sore  throat.

Inclination  to  sweat  with  the  least  exercise.

i Typhoid  and  putrid  fevers.

I  Ao;ue  with  enlargement  of  spleen  or  pains  in  region  of  spleen.
*^  Locality  and  Direction.  Right :  cold  sensation  in  temple ;
stitching  behind  ear;  dark  red,  painful  spot  on  cheek;  pain
at  point  between  anterior  superior  spine  of  ileum  and  umbili-
cus to  hypochondrium  ;  pain  and  varicose  veins  in  inguinal
region ;  pain  in  kidney ;  pain  from  scapula  to  shoulder-
joint  ;  paralytic  pain  in  shoulder  ;  gurgling  feeling  in  mus-
cles of  upper  arm.

Left :  tearing  in  eye ;  red  spot  on  eyelid ;  chronic  catarrh  of
nostril ;  pains  in  Highmorian  cavity  of  side;  tearing  in  up-
per molar  ;  pain  in  tonsil ;  pressure  in  hypochondrium  ;
shooting  in  side  of  epigastrium  ;  pain  in  perineeum  extends
deep  into  side  of  pelvis;  cutting  pain  in  kidney;  pain  side
of  bladder  ;  stitch  side  of  female  urethra ;  swelling  sper-
matic cord ;  rasping-burning  side  of  penis  ;  soreness  side  of
scrotum  ;  tearing  through  whole  side  of  body  ;  violent  stick-
ing side  of  abdomen  ;  pain  in  side  of  vagina  ;  tearing  in  side
of  throat;  pressure  behind  nipple  ;  stitches  in  side  of  chest ;
paralytic  pain  in  eye;  stitches  in  upper  arm;  pain  and
spongy  sensation  as  if  feeling  were  lost  in  thigh  ;  tearing  in
ankles  ;  itching  on  dorsum  of  foot.

Above  downward  :  pain  in  spermatic  cord  ;  pain  in  colon  ;  pain
in  abdomen  ;  pain  in  chest ;  pain  in  cardiac  region ;  pain  in
shoulders  ;  pain  in  elbows ;  stitches  in  hips.

Below  upward  :  tearing  in  throat ;  tearing  between  shoulders ;
pain  in  sacrum  ;  stitches  in  foot.

Behind  forward  :  stitching  between  shoulders.
.  Within  outward  :  pressure  in  forehead  ;  stitch  in  1.  side  female
urethra  ;  stitches  in  vagina ;  pain  in  1.  side  near  navel ;  pain
in  cardiac  region.


445  BERBERIS.

Without  inward  :  stitches  in  lumbar  region  ;  stitches  in  thighs  ;
stitches  in  foot.
*^  Sensations. As  if  brain  would  fall  forward.

As  if  head  were  becomino;  larger.

As  if  a  cap  covered  head  and  face.

As  of  sand  in  eyes.

As  of  a  foreign  body  in  internal  canthus.

As  if  a  nail  were  thrust  through  membrana  tympani,  or  like
sting  of  an  insect.

As  if  cold  drops  were  spurted  into  face  and  on  back  of  hand.

As  if  the  teeth  were  too  long  or  too  large.

As  if  gums  were  torn.

As  from  an  arm  in  throat  (stitching).

As  of  a  plug  inside  of  throat.

As  of  sand  in  throat.

As  of  a  husk  sticking  in  1.  tonsil.

As  if  something  were  torn  loose  in  1.  hypochondrium.

As  if  one  had  just  been  to  stool,  in  anus.

As  if  a  nail  were  sticking  in  lumbar  region.

As  of  something  alive  in  shoulder-joint ;  in  legs.

Lancinating :  in  region  of  kidneys ;  in  vagina ;  from  lower
dorsal  vertebra  through  chest.

Darting  :  in  head.

Stabbing  :  in  region  of  liver.

Stitches  :  above  forehead  and  temples ;  in  forehead  ;  from  eyes
to  forehead;  in  scalp  and  face;  in  ears;  in  cheek  and  jaAV
bones  ;  in  teeth  ;  in  region  of  liver  ;  in  skin  of  abdomen  ;  in
rectum  ;  in  perineum  ;  from  kidneys  to  bladder  and  urethra ;
in  urethra ;  in  thighs ;  in  spermatic  cord ;  in  female  parts
during  coition ;  In  vagina ;  between  shoulders ;  through
chest;  in  and  around  clavicle;  about  heart;  in  muscles  of
chest ;  from  neck  into  arm ;  between  shoulders ;  from  back
through  breast ;  in  spine;  in  sacrum;  into  bones  of  upper
arm  ;  in  1.  upper  arm  ;  along  ulna ;  toward  metacarpus  ;  to
points  of  fingers  ;  in  tendo  achillis  ;  in  feet ;  between  meta-
tarsal bones  ;  to  big  toe ;  in  ball  of  big  toe.

Burning  stitches  :  in  loins  and  kidneys  ;  in  foot ;  in  fingers.

Piercing :  in  ear  ;  in  hollow  tooth  ;  in  foot.

Sticking:  in  lumbar  region;  in  female  urethra;  in  1.  side  of
abdomen  ;  in  chest ;  in  back  ;  in  ilium.

Sticking-digging :  in  region  of  kidneys.

Sticking-pressing  :  in  lumbar  region.

Pricking :  on  edge  of  hair ;  in  point  of  nose ;  on  forepart  of
ankle-joint ;  in  toes.

Stinging:  in  facial  bones  ;  in  stomach;  in  1,  hypochondrium;  in
abdominal  muscles;  in  inguinal  region;  in  anus;  in  leg;  in
knee-joint;  in  calf  of  leg;  in  shin  and  tendo  achillis; in


BERBERIS.  446

testicles;  in  penis  and  glans ;  about  heart;  in  shoulders;  in
upper  arm;  in  elbow-joint;  in  heels;  in  feet;  in  big  toe.

Shooting:  in  head;  in  eyes;  through  eyes  into  brain;  from
temples  to  eyes;  behind  r.  ear;  in  region  of  gall-bladder;
in  epigastrium;  in  lumbar  and  renal  region;  in  orifice  of
urethra;  in  thigh  ;  in  chest ;  in  region  of  heart.

Shooting-stinging  :  from  perineum  into  female  parts.

Eending  :  on  forepart  of  ankle-joint;  in  tendo  achillis ;  on
dorsum  of  1.  foot;  in  sole  of  foot;  in  temples  and  occiput;
in  orbits  ;  in  facial  bones.

Cutting :  in  inguinal  region ;  from  1.  kidney  into  bladder,
urethra,  and  penis  ;  in  bladder ;  in  testicles  ;  in  female  parts
during  coition  ;  in  chest.

Tearing:  in  forehead  and  orbits;  in  temples;  in  1.  eye;  in
lids;  in  ears;  in  cheek  and  jaw  bones;  in  1.  upper  molar;
in  1.  hypochondrium ;  in  abdominal  muscles ;  in  skin  of  ab-
domen ;  around  anus ;  in  region  of  kidneys ;  in  r.  kidney;
in  thigh  ;  in  leg  ;  in  calf  of  leg  ;  in  tibia  ;  in  tendo  achillis  ;
in  throat ;  in  chest ;  in  and  between  scapulae  ;  in  spine  ;  in
back  ;  in  shoulders  ;  in  upper  arm ;  in  iliac  crest ;  into  bones
of  upper  arm  ;  in  elbow-joint ;  from  elbow-joint  into  ulna  and
hand ;  along  radius ;  along  metacarpal  bones ;  on  back  of
fingers ;  in  points  of  fingers ;  in  ankle-joint ;  in  external
ankles  to  little  toe;  in  heels;  in  foot;  in  balls  of  feet.

Tearing-pulsating  :  in  region  of  kidneys.

Tearing-sticking  :  in  loins  and  kidneys.

Pressure :  in  forehead  ;  in  temples ;  in  sinciput ;  in  eyes  ;  in
ears ;  in  stomach  ;  in  region  of  liver ;  in  region  of  gall-
bladder; in  1.  hypochondrium;  in  groins ;  in  perineum  ;  in
anus ;  in  lumbar  and  renal  region ;  in  leg ;  in  spermatic
cord  ;  in  testicles ;  behind  1.  nipple  ;  in  muscles  of  chest ;  in
back ;  in  sacrum ;  in  anus ;  in  inner  side  of  forearm ;  in
wrist ;  in  ankle.

Pressing-shooting  :  in  back  of  hand.

Drawing :  in  ears  ;  in  1.  hypochondrium  ;  in  spermatic  cord  ;
in  shoulders  ;  in  upper  arm  ;  in  elbow-joint ;  in  tendo  achilis.

Drrgging-sticking :  in  cardiac  region.

Drawing-sticking:  in  bladder.

Drawing-tearing  :  in  1.  hypochondrium.

Drawing-stretching  :  in  thigh.

Jerking  :  in  1.  hypochondrium ;  into  bones  of  upper  arm ;  in
toes.

Gnawing:  on  scalp  and  face;  in  teeth.

Pinching:  in  liver.

Digging-tearing  :  in  region  of  kidneys.

Biting:  on  scalp  and  face ;  in  eyes.

Burning:  on  scalp  and  face;  along  edge  of  hair  ;  in  eyes  ;  of
conjunctiva ;  of  lids  ;  of  face  ;  on  cheeks  ;  in  lips  ;  in  throat ;


447  BERBERIS.

in  stomach ;  in  1.  hypochondrium  ;  in  skin  of  abdomen  ;  in
descending  colon  ;  in  rectum  ;  in  anus  ;  hemorrhoids  ;  in  re-
gion of  kidneys ;  in  urethra ;  in  bladder ;  in  orifice  of
urethra ;  in  thigh  ;  in  leg  ;  in  spermatic  cord;  in  testicles  ;
of  glans  and  prepuce  ;  in  female  urethra ;  in  vagina ;  in  skin
of  chest;  in  back  ;  in  axilla;  of  skin  about  arms;  in  elbow-
joint;  in  hands;  in  foot;  on  dorsum  of  1.  foot;  in  toes.

Smarting:  on  lids;  in  canthi ;  in  nose;  in  anus;  on  chest;
in  axilla.

Corrosive  feeling:  in  skin  of  chest.

Rawness  :  in  chest.

Soreness  :  in  anus  ;  in  region  of  kidneys ;  in  1.  side  of  scro-
tum ;  through  entire  back  ;  about  skin  of  arms  ;  in  toes.

Aching :  in  bladder.

Sharp  pain:  in  r.  kidney.

Gurgling  :  in  shoulder  ;  in  muscles  of  r.  upper  arm.

Colic-like  pains  :  about  navel.

Bearing  down  :  in  anus  and  sacrum.

Tensive  pain  :  in  temples  and  forehead  ;  in  region  of  loins  and
kidneys;  in  bladder;  in  muscles  of  chest.

Scraping  :  in  teeth  ;  in  throat.

Scratching :  in  throat.

Rasping :  in  anus  ;  in  glans  and  prepuce ;  in  vagina.

Contracted  feeling :  of  sole  of  foot.

Contraction  :  in  1.  abdomen  ;  in  splenic  region ;  in  sides  of
abdomen ;  in  region  of  bladder ;  of  scrotum  ;  in  chest ;  in
region  of  heart.

Constriction:  in  rectum ;  pain  in  bladder;  in  testicles.

Cramp  :  in  calf  of  leg.

Crampy  pain  :  in  bladder.

Rheumatic  pain  :  in  r.  shoulder.

Bursting :  headache.

Stretching  pain  :  in  shoulders.

Straining :  headache ;  in  lumbar  and  renal  region ;  in  sexual
organs  during  ejaculation  ;  in  spermatic  cord  ;  in  testicles  ;
shoulder  joint  pains  as  from  straining.

Straining-pressure  :  in  shin-bone.

Sprained  feeling :  in  wrist ;  in  muscles  and  bones  of  lower
limbs  ;  in  metatarsus.

Bruised  feeling :  in  lumbar  and  renal  region  ;  in  knee ;  from
r.  scapula  to  shoulder-joint;  in  small  of  back  ;  in  arms.

Beaten  feeling:  in  back;  in  shoulder-blade,  joint,  and  elbow;
in  lower  limbs  ;  in  tip  of  big  toe.

Crushed  feeling:  in  region  of  loins  and  kidneys.

Squeezing  :  in  facial  bones  ;  in  inguinal  region  ;  about  heart ;
in  back.

Ulcerative  pain  :  in  heels  ;  under  skin  of  feet ;  in  toes.


BERBERIS.  '  448

Heaviness ;  in  head ;  in  calf  of  leg ;  in  back  ;  in axilla ;  of

arms;  in  back  of  hand;  in  lower  limbs.
Fullness  :  in  head ;  in  anup.
Throbbing  :  in  ears  ;  in  anus ;  in  thigh  ;  in  muscles  of  chest ;

pains  in  shoulders  ;  in  arm.
Tension  :  in  skin  of  head and  face  ;  in  groins ;  in  bend of

knee;  in  calf  of  leg;  in  neck ;  in  back;  in  elbow-joint;  in

tendo  achillis.
Puffy  sensation  :  in  head.

Stiffness:  in  throat;  in  back  ;  in  calf  of  leg;  in  neck.
Tingling :  in  foot.

Whirling:  in  stomach  and  abdomen.
Crawling:  in  nose;  in  lips;  in  anus;  in  testicles;  in  sole  of

foot;  in  toes.
Formication:  in  upper  lip;  around  mouth  and  chin.
Vibration:  in  calf  of  leg;  in  back;  in  back  of  hand;  in  fin-
gers, painful;  in  toes.
Numbness:  in  lumbar  region; in  calf  of  leg;  in  prepuce  and

glans;  in  back;  in  sacrum,  hips  and  thighs;  on  external  side

of  arm ;  in  feet.
Paralyzed  feeling:  in  region  of  kidneys;  in  knees;  painful  in

r.  shoulder;  in  arms.
Heat:  in  head;  of  ears;  in  face;  in  back;  in  sole  of  foot;  in

toes.
Coldness: in  r.  temple; in  eyes; of  ears; in  stomach;  "^on

small  spots  of  thigh;  in  testicles;  of  prepuce  and  glans;  of

scrotum;  on  ankle-joint;  in  feet.
Itching :  on  scalp  and  face ;  in  eyes ;  of  lids ;  in  canthi ;  in

eyebrows;  in  nose;  on  cheeks;  in  lips;  in  region  of  inguinal

glands;  in  anus;  hemorrhoids;  on  scrotum  ;  in  vagina;  on

chest;  in  axilla  of  legs;  in  feet;  on  dorsum  of  1.  foot;  in  toes.
Dryness: of  eyes;  in  internal  can  thus;  of  lips;  in  throat.
"  Tissues. In muscles: tension, shooting, tearing, pulsating,

gurgling;  sensation  as  of  something  alive.
Rheumatic  and  gouty  complaints,  with  diseases  of  the  urinary

organs.
I  I  Muscular  rheumatism  in  chest,  lumbar  region,  and  upper

and  lower  limbs.
Hepatic,  arthritic,  and  rheumatic  affections,  particularly  with

urinary,  hemorrhoidal  or  menstrual  complaints.
Distension  of  joints.
Bone  pains.

Scraping  upon  the  bones.
Cold  feeling  at  the  bones.
Varicose  veins  on  many  places.
Swollen  varices.
Lymphatic  swellings.
Acts  most  on  eyes,  liver,  anus,  kidneys,  uterus  and  skin.


449  BERBERIS.

Disorders  of  the  uropoetic  viscera.
*^  Touch.  Passive  Motion.  Injuries.  Touch :  pimples  pain-
ful; tongue  smarts;  teeth  sensitive  ;  pain  in  epigastrium  <  ;
pain  in  inguinal  glands  <  ;  pain  in  anus  ;  skin  of  arms  pain-
ful;  tearing  in  finger-joints;  nails  sensitive;  pains  in  thighs
<  ;  violent  pain  above  external  ankle.

Friction  :  burning  pains  in  hands  <  ;  rasping  and  pricking  in
skin  worse.

Pressure :  pain  in  liver  <  ;  pain  in  renal  region  <  ;  pain  in
vesical  region  ;  pain  in  shoulder-joint.

Lifting  :  tearing  between  shoulders  to  occiput  worse.

Jar  of  riding  or  jumping:  pain  in  renal  region  worse.

Riding  in  carriage  causes  pain  in  foot.

After  riding : faintness.

Scratching  :  itching  on  dorsum  of  1.  foot  <  ;  itching  of  scalp
changes  place.

Closing  eyes :  cold  feeling  as  from  cool  wind,  with  lachryma-
tion.

I  After  riding  much  pain  and  great  sense  of  weakness  and
trembling  in  region  of  kidneys, taking  a  long  time  to  get
over,  sometimes  days. ^Rheumatism  of  knees.
*®  Skin. Jaundice,  with  pale,  tough  feces;  or  with  profuse,  acrid,
watery  diarrhoea.

I  Old  yellow  spots  around  the  navel  peeling  off.

In  the  skin  much  itching,  biting,  pricking  and  burning,  with
minute  stitches,  sometimes  with  increased  sensation  of
warmth  and  with  eruption.

Rasping  and  pricking  in  skin,  increased  by  friction,  and  fre-
quently succeeded  by  a  red  spot.

Burning,  smarting,  stitching  or  corrosive  itching,  which  pro-
vokes scratching,  though  it  soon  returns  at  the  same  or  some
other  place.

I  Red  spot  on  left  eyelid,  feels  like  a  mosquito  bite,  but  swelling
nearly  closes  the  eye;  next  day  other  spots  on  face,  behind
the  ear,  on  neck ;  third  day  on  chin  and  nose,  with  itching;
and  burning;  in  evening  covered  with  small  vesicles,  oozing,
watery  fluid.

Red  marbled  spots:  with  corrosive  or  bruised  pain;  like  pete.--
chia,  with  itching  and  burning.

Specks  resembling  nettle-rash  and  patches  on  shoulders,  arms-
and  hands.

Efl&orescence,  especially  on  border  of  hairy  part  of  head,  on.
upper  part  of  trunk  and  extremities.

Pimples,  usually  isolated,  sometimes  in  groups.

Single,  red  pimples  burning,  itching,  leaving  brownl  iver  spots.

Red  pustules,  with  burning,  itching  and  stitching;  sensitive  to
pressure;  changing  into  brown  spots.

I  Furuncles. ^  Fistula  in  ano.

VOL.  II. — 29.


BERBERIS— BISMUTHUM.  450

I  Herpes  around  the  anus.

Itching  or  pressure  in  the  region  of  the  inguinal  glands,  with
pain  from  touch  as  if  they  would  swell.

Tumor  behind  the  ear,  size  of  a  hazelnut.

Clusters  of  red  pimples,  with  red  areola  and  small  tips,  con-
taining pus;  changing  to  brown  spots.
*^  Stages  of  Life,  Constitution. Especially  suited  where  the
renal  or  vesical  symptoms  are  prominent.

Bilious  diathesis.

■  Male,  set.  34. For  years  indigestion  from  chronic  gastritis,

reduced  in  weight,  pale,  discouraged;  after  improvement  by
Lycop. 6  Rheumatism  of  knee.

■  An  old  woman,  set,  70 ;  heartburn  of  thirty  years  standing.
^^Relationship. Antidotes to Berberis : Camphor., Bellad.

(cerebral  and  febrile  symptoms).

Berberis  antidotes  :  Aeon.

Compare:  Aloes,  Ant.  tart.,  Arsen.,  Calc.  ostr.,  Cale. pJiosph.,
Carb.  veg.,  Qhamom.,  Cinclion.,  Lycop.,  Natr.  mur.,  Nitr.
ac.,  Nux  vom.,  Pulsat.,  Rheum.

Lycop.,  an  occasional  dose,  aided  Berber,  in  curing,  d  Rheu-
matism of  knee.

Useful  after  Arnic,  Bryon.,  Kali  bichr.,  Rhus  tox.,  and
Sulphur  in  rheumatism.


BISMUTHUM.

Hydrated  oxide  of  Bismuth.  Bi^O^OH^-

Hahnemann  proved  with  his  students  and  published  the  result  in  1827,
what  he  supposed  to  be  pure  wismuth  oxide,  but  what  now  is  known  as
the  basic  bismuthi  subnitras,  or  magisterium  bismuthi.  The  synaptoms
(4,  and  97)  reappeared  in  the  second  edition,  in  1807  (11,  and  97).

Allen's  Encyclopaedia,  Vol.  II,  gives  also  the  collection  of  Wibmer,  partly
of  the  acid  bismuthum  nitricum  as  magisterium.  As  here  are  principally
to  be  given  the  cured  symptoms,  which  are  from  Hahnemann's  prepara-
tions, we  omit  the  other.  Women  are  often  poisoned  with  the  oxide,  used
as  a  cosmetic.

^  Mind. Unconsciousness.

Stupefaction  ;  dullness  ;  mist  before  the  eyes.
Dullness  ;  heaviness  of  head.

■  Delirium. ^  With  gangrene,  or  internal  ulceration.
I  Delirium  tremens.


451  BISMUTHUM.

Desire  for  company  ;  the  child  holds  on  to  its  mother's  hand  for

company.
Solitude  is  unbearable.
I  i  Anguish ;  at  times  he  sits,  then  walks,  then  lies  down,  never

long  in  one  place.
Apathy,  with  peevish  dissatisfaction.
Unstable  minded ;  begins  now  this,  again  that,  holds  but  short

time  to  any  one  thing.
Ill-humor  :  he  is  morose  and  discontented  with  his  condition,

and  complains  about  it.
^  Sensorium. Dullness ;  heaviness  of  head.
Confusion  of  the  head.
Vertigo  ;  sensation  as  if  anterior  half  of  brain  were  turning  in

a  circle.
Violent  vertigo,  with  pressing  pain  in  forehead ;  redness  of  the

conjunctivae;  dimness  of  vision;  tinnitus;  pressing  pain  in

stomach  and  spasmodic  pulse.
Dullness  in  head,  with  heat  and  small,  tense,  accelerated  pulse.
Dizziness  in  the  morning  after  a  restless  night.
^  Inner  Head. Pressing  pain  in  forehead;  vertigo  from  violent

exercise.
Sensation  of  weight  in  forehead,  temples  and  occiput.
Pressure  and  sensation  of  heaviness  in  forehead,  at  times  also

in  occiput ;  pressure  on  eyeballs  ; <  after  lying  down  and

during  rest ; >  from  motion  and  touch.

■  Violent,  pressive,  heavy  pain  in  forehead.

I  Continual  pressure  in  forehead,  over  the  eyes.

Dull,  pressive  pain  in  head,  now  here,  now  there.

Pressure  and  sensation  of  heaviness  in  occiput,  more  violent  on
motion.

Dull  cutting  pain  in  brain,  begins  above  right  orbit  and  ex-
tends to  occiput.

■  Headache  extending  into  root  of  nose.

Alternate  contraction  and  distension  in  forehead,  eyes  and  nose.
Frequent  inflammatory  headache,  with  fever.

■  Headache  returning  in  the  winter  season.

■  Incipient  hydrocephalus.

Boring  headache,  from  within  outward,  in  forehead,  orbits  and
root  of  nose,  extending  down  the  nose ;  <<  afternoon  and  af-
ter eating; >■  from  motion,  cold  drinks  and  bathing.

Headache  alternating  with,  or  attended  by  gastralgia.

Concomitants  of  headache:  apathetic,  sullen,  dissatisfied,  com-
plaining mood  ;  earthy  pale  face :  blue  rings  around  eyes ;
great  thirst  for  cold  drinks  in  evening  ;  nausea  and  pressure
in  stomach  after  eating  ;  ineffectual  urging  to  stool  in  even-
ing ;  boring  and  burning  in  chest  and  back  ;  great  drowsi-
ness in  forenoon  ;  flushes  of  heat  over  head  and  chest ;  pros-
tration.


BISMUTHUM.  452

*  Outer  Head. Heavy  pressure,  like  a  weight  in  forehead  and

occiput ; •<  during  motion.

*  Sight  and  Eyes. A  fog  before  the  eyes,  with  stupefaction.

Pressure  in  right  eyeball,  from  before  backwards  and  from  be-
low upwards.
Thickened  mucus  in  both  canthi.

Redness  of  conjunctiva,  with  dim  vision,  vertigo,  and  tinnitus.
®  Hearing  and  Ears. Pressure  and  drawing  in  left  external

meatus.
^  Smell  and  Nose. Nosebleed,  dark  blood.

Pressive  heaviness  at  root  of  nose.
^  Face. Pale,  cold  face  ;  earthy  complexion  ;  blue  borders  around
eyes ;  features  changed,  as  if  he  had  been  very  sick.
1  Pressure  in  region  of  malar  bones  ;  better  running  about  and

holding  cold  water  in  mouth. ^Prosopalgia.
;rTremor  of  muscles  of  face  and  limbs.
^^  Teeth  and  Gums, l  Toothache  relieved  by  taking  cold  water

in  the  mouth ;  gets  worse  when  the  water  becomes  warm.
^^  Taste,  Speech,  Tongue. Taste :  sweetish,  sour,  or  metallic
on  the  back  part  of  tongue.
Red  tongue.

1  I  In  the  evening  white-coated  tongue,  without  heat  or  thirst.
^^  Inner  Mouth. Inflammation  of  the  mouth,  with  whitish  excori-
ations and  fissures.
Slight  salivation,  with  marked  tumefaction  of  the  inner  surface

of  cheek,  left  gum  and  side  of  tongue.
Copious  secretion  of  brown,  thick,  metallic-tasting  saliva.

■  Pyrosis.

^^  Palate  and  Throat. Inflammation  of  the  pharyngeal  cavity.
Burning  in  throat.
Difiicult  swallowing.
Inflammation of  throat  awaking  at  night  and  paining  very

much,  with  short  cough  and  retching.
Phagedenic  ulceration  of  the  uvula,  with  burning  and  tearing;

diflicult  swallowing  of  fluids,  which  return  through  the  nose.

*  Thirst. Desire  for  cold  drinks  in  the  evening.

Intolerable  thirst.
^^  Eating  and  Drinking. Nausea  after  eating  and  pressure  in
stomach.

B I  Cold  water  relieves.

I  Water  is  vomited  as  soon  as  it  reaches  the  stomach. 6  Sum-
mer diarrhoea. 6  Gastralgia.

■  Pressure  like  a  load  in  stomach  after  eating. ^Gastralgia.
^^  Hiccough,  Belching,  Nausea  and  Vomiting. Hiccough.

■  Violent  eructations,  sometimes  fetid  and  cadaverous-smelling.

6  Gastralgia.

■  Nausea  in  stomach  ;  he  feels  as  if  he  would  vomit,  especially

violent  after  eating.


453  BISMUTHUM.

Nausea,  witli  gulping  up  of  bile.
Violent  retching,  followed  by  fearful  vomiting.
Nausea  after  every  meal.

Vomiting  (of  bile),  with  oppressive  anxiety  ;  small  pulse ;  ver-
tigo and  prostration.
Vomiting  and  diarrhoea.

■  Vomiting  of  all  fluids  as  soon  as  taken. ^During  dentition.

d  Summer  complaint.

Vomiting,  with  retching ;  disgusting  taste  in  mouth ;  pain  in
throat  when  swallowing ;  inflammation  of  pharyngeal  cavity  ;
diarrhoea,  with  small  pulse,  cold  extremities,  and  cramps  in
hands  and  feet.

•  Vomiting  of  bile  without  effort, d  Gastritis.

Vomits  a  brownish  fluid.

1 1  Vomits:  only  at  intervals  of  days  when  food  has  filled  the
stomach;  then  vomits  enormous  quantities,  lasting  all  day;
vomits  all  fluids. 6  Cancer  of  stomach.

IB  Vomiting,  convulsive  gagging  and  inexpressible  pain  in
stomach, d  After  operations  on  the  abdomen.

I  Vomiting  and  purging,  (or  vomiting  alone)  with  great  pros-
tration ;  warm  surface  :  flatulency  ;  white  tongue  ;  cadaver-
ous-smelling stools  ;  patient  desires  company.
^^  Scrobiculum.  and  Stomach. Pressure  in  stomach,  especially
after  a  meal.

I  Distressing  pressure  and  burning  in  region  of  stomach.

■  Pressure  in  region  of  stomach  and  empty  eructations.

II  Pressure  as  from  a  load  in  one  spot. 6  Gastralgia.

I  Spells  of  cardialgia,  with  which  the  abdominal  muscles  are
spasmodically  contracted ;  retching  to  vomit ;  dyspnoea ;
trembling  of  limbs  and  convulsions  ;  the  pain  is  so  violent  as
to  induce  fainting.

■  Burning, stinging, crampy  pains  ;  stomach  hangs  down  to

the  crest  of  ilium ;  hard  lumps  between  the  navel  and  edges
of  lower  ribs,  right  side. 6  Cancerous  affections.

■  ■Crampy,  spasmodic  pains  in  stomach;  burning,  alternating

with  pressure ;  pressure  in  spine,  must  bend  backwards.

■  Gastralgia  nervosa.

■  Burning  in  stomach. 6  Inflammation  of  the  stomach.

■  Uncomfortable  feeling  in  stomach.

■  Intense malaise in stomach, with  burning;  red or white

tongue ;  restlessness  ;  prostration, d  After  blood-letting.

■  ■Gastric  irritation,  with  pyrosis.

■  Gastromalacia.

^^  Abdomen,  Loins  and  Groins. Pain  in  umbilical  region.

Pinching- pressure, now  here,  now  there,  in  lower  abdomen,

with  rumbling  and  grumbling,  and  a  sensation  as  if  he  must

go  to  stool.
TrColic.


BISMUTHUM.  454

Abdomen  painful  to  touch.

■  Abdomen  bloated  in  ridges;  rumbling  of  wind  along  colon,

passed  rarely,  but  then  relieves,  d  Cancerous  affections.
Fearfully  distended  abdomen.
Flatulence ;  frequent  passing  of  wind.
^^  Rectum  and  Stool, Ineffectual  urging  to  stool  in evening ;

rumbling,  pressure  and  pinching  in  abdomen.
Frequent  passage  of  flatus.
Watery  diarrhoea.

■  Stools:  papescent,  foul ;  watery,  cadaverous-smelling.

■  Summer  complaint  of  children  when fluids  are  vomited  as

soon  as  they  are  taken.

■  Cholera,  when  vomiting  predominates.
Bilious  evacuations,  with  colic.
TrDiarrhoea  or  constipation.

■  Painless  discharge  of  blood  from  rectum  in  large  quantities.
^^  Urinary  Organs. ■  Frequent  and  copious  micturition  ;  urine  is

watery.
Suppression  or  retention  of  urine.
Male Sexual Organs. Seminal emissions, with lascivious
dreams.

■  Nightly  pollutions  without  erections.

■  Gonorrhoea.

^^  Female  Sexual  Organs. Menstrual  blood  dark,  pitchy.
"  Respiration. Dyspnoea.

TrAnxiety  and  extraordinary  oppression.
^•^  Cough. Sputa  dark,  bloody,  or  blood-streaked.
*^  Inner  Chest  and  Lungs. ■Pain  in  chest  and  back,  with
burning  and  boring.

■  Pinching-pressive pain in  region of  diaphragm, extending

transversely  through  chest  when  Avalking.

■  Boring  pain  in  r.  chest  anteriorly,  near  7th  rib.  ^Pregnancy.
Boring  and  burning  in  the  chest;  backache.

Flushes  of  heat  in  the  chest  and  head.
;rIntolerable  heat  on  the  chest.
^^  Heart,  Pulse  and  Circulation. ■  Violent  beating  of  the
heart. 6  Endocarditis  with  gastritis.
Pulse : contracted,  somewhat  spasmodic,  and  at  times  small
and  intermittent ;  sinking.
^  Outer  Chest. Fine  stitches  in  centre  of  sternum,  not  affected

by  breathing.
^^  Neck  and  Back. Tensive  pressure  on  right  side  of  neck  near
cervical  vertebrae,  in  motion  and  at  rest.
Pain  in  left  side  of  the  back,  as  after  stooping  too  long.
^^  Upper  Limbs. Paralytic  weariness  and  weakness  in  right  arm.
Laming-tearing  pressure  of  right  forearm  ;  more  toward  outer
side,  at  times  more  in  the  upper  part ;  passes  off  by  motion
and  touch.


455  BISMUTHUM.

Tearing  in  metacarpal  bones  of  right  fore  and  middle  fingers.
Fine  tearing  in  finger-tips  of  right  hand, particularly  under

the  nails.
Arms  bluish,  lame,  weak.
Tearing  and  pressure  in  right  shoulder.

Lameness  and  pressure  of  right  arm,  especially  in  carpal  bones.
Hands  feel  weak,  as  if  he  could  not  hold  the  pen.
^'  Lower  Limbs. Bluish  thighs.

Tearing  pain  below  external  malleolus  of  right  foot,  terminat-
ing at  tendo  achillis.
Tearing  :  in  the  toes  ;  in  the  heels,  more  left.
Corrosive  itching  near  tibia  and  backs  of  both  feet  near  joints,

which  becomes  much  worse  on  scratching  ;  is obliged to

scratch  himself  till  it  bleeds.
^*  Limbs in General. Screwing, boring, tearing-pressure in

bones  of  hands  and  feet.
Hands  and  feet  contracted  spasmodically.
Blue  color  of  the  forearm  and  thighs.
Marked  dryness  of  the  palms  of  hands  and  soles  of  feet.
^®  Rest. Position. Motion. Sitting  :  pain  1.  side  of  back.
Lying  down  and  during  rest :  headache  worse.
Must  bend  backward  from  pressure  in  spine.
Running  about :  pain  molar  teeth  better.
Motion  :  headache  > ;  headache  <  ;  lame  forearm  >  ;  most

symptoms  disappear.
Violent  exercise :  vertigo.
Walking :  pain  in  region  of  diaphragm  extends  transversely

through  chest.
^^  Nerves. Restless,  moving  about ;  anxiety.

All  muscles  of  body,  particularly  those  of  legs,  from  toes  to

thighs,  spasmodically  contracted.
TrConstant  tremor.

Great  debility  ;  languor;  prostration.
^^  Sleep. In  morning,  a  few  hours  after  rising,  an  excessive  sleepi-
ness ;  but  after  eating  he  was  unable  to  take  his  accustomed

nap  for  several  days.
Drowsy  while  working.

Frequent  waking  at  night :  as  from  fright ;  as  from  tire.
Restless  sleep ; lascivious,  vivid dreams, sometimes  without,

more  frequently  with  seminal  emission.
Starts  in  sleep  ;  thinks  that  he  is  fiilling ;  awakes  in  a  fright.
Sleep  unrefreshing.
^■^  Time. Morning  :  dizziness  ;  great  drowsiness  ;  flushes  of  heat

after  rising.
Afternoon :  headache  worse.
Evening :  great  thirst  for  cold  drinks ;  ineffectual  urging  to

stool;  white  tongue  without  thirst.


BISMUTHUM.  456

Night: inflammation  of  throat  awakens; pollutions  without
erections  ;  awakens  frequently.
^^  Temperature  and  Weather. Cold drinks  and  bathing :
headache  better.

Holding  cold  water  in  mouth :  toothache  bettei:.

When  water  in  mouth  becomes  warm :  toothache  worse.

Cold  water  :  relieves  faceache.

Summer  complaints.

Headaches  return  in  winter.
*^  Chin. Fever. Sweat. Chilliness.

Chills  intermittent,  periodical.

Chill,  with  deathly  coldness  of  the  whole  body.

Flushes  of  heat  over  whole  body,  mostly  on  head  and  chest,
after  rising  in  the  morning.

External  dry,  burning  heat.

Heat  in  entire  body,  with  accelerated,  contracted  pulse;  tem-
perature not  increased ;  no  perspiration  ;  coated  tongue;
vertigo;  pressure  in  forehead  and  reddened  conjunctiva.

Disagreeable  heat  in  chest;  vertigo;  drowsiness;  vomiting;
diarrhoea,  or  constipation.
*^  Locality  and  Direction.  Right :  headache  above  orbit ;  pres-
sure in  eyeball ;  hard  lumps  between  navel  and  edges  of
lower  ribs  of  side ;  pain  in  chest  near  7th  rib  ;  pressure  side
of  neck  ;  weakness  of  arm  ;  lameness  of  forearm  ;  tearing  in
metacarpal  bones  of  fore  and  middle  fingers ;  fine  tearing  in
finger-tips  ;  tearing-pressure  in  shoulder ;  tearing  in  foot.

Left:  Pressure  and  drawing  in  meatus  auditorius  externus;
tumefaction  of  gum  and  side  of  tongue  ;  pain  side  of  back  ;
tearmg  in  heel.

Within  outward  :  frontal  headache.

Before  backward  :  pressure  in  r.  eyeball.

Below  upward :  pressure  in  r.  eyeball.
*^  Sensations. As  if  anterior  half  of  brain  were  turning  in  a  circle.

Cutting :  in  brain.

Stitches :  in  sternum.

Stinging :  in  stomach.

Boring :  in  forehead,  orbits  and  root  of  nose ;  in  chest  and
back  ;  in  r.  chest ;  in  bones  of  hands  and  feet.

Screwing :  in  bones  of  hands  and  feet.

Pinching :  in  abdomen.

Drawing :  in  1.  external  meatus.

Tearing :  in  uvula ;  in  metacarpal  bones  of  r.  fore  and  middle
fingers  ;  in  finger-tips  ;  in  r.  shoulder  ;  below  external  malle-
olus of  r.  foot ;  in  toes ;  in  heels.

Burning  :  in  throat ;  in  uvula  ;  in  stomach  ;  in  chest  and  back.

Pressing  :  in  forehead  ;  in  stomach  ;  in  head,  here  and  there ;
in  r.  eyeball;  in  1.  external  meatus;  in  malar  bones;  in
spine ;  in  abdomen ;  in  r.  shoulder ;  of  r.  arm.


457  BISMUTHUM.

Laming-tearing  pressure :  of  r.  forearm.

Tensive  pressure  :  on  r.  side  of  neck.

Pinching-pressure  :  in  lower  abdomen  ;  in  region  of  diaphragm.

Crampy  pains  :  in  stomach.

Undefined  pains  :  in  umbilical  region  ;  in  chest  and  back.

Contraction  :  in  forehead ;  eyes  and  nose.

Distension :  in  forehead,  eyes  and  nose.

Heaviness  :  of  head ;  weight  in  forehead,  temple  and  occiput ;

at  root  of  nose.
Itching  :  corrosive  near  tibia  and  bones  of  both  feet  near  joints.
Paralytic  sensation  :  in  r.  arm.
^*  Tissues. Tearing  and  pressing  in  bones  of  hands  and  feet.
Gastric  affections.

Has  been  given  in  cancer  of  stomach.
Ansemia.

Spasmodic  affections  of  the  muscles  of  face  and  extremities.
*^  Touch.  Passive  Motion.  Injuries. Touch :  headache  >  ;

abdomen  painful ;  lameness  r.  forearm  better.
*^  Skin. Itch-like  eruption  ;  aneemia.
Dry  gangrene;  delirium.

Ulcers  gangrenous,  bluish  ;  or  dried,  parchment-like.
Corrosive  itching  on  side  of  tibia. See  33.
^^Relationship. Antidotes  to  Bismuth: Cale.  ostr., Capsie.,

Coffee,  JVux  vom.
Bismuth  is  isomorphic  with  Ant.  crud.,  Arsen.,  Phosphor.
Compare : Ant. crud. (vomiting, white tongue, gastritis) ;

t Arsen.  (anxiety,  gastritis,  cancer,  gangrene,  vomiting,  etc.);

llBellad. (gastralgia, cancer, flatus "in ridges," etc.);

WBryon. (toothache, gastritis); Calc. ostr., Capsie,

Cinchon.,  Ignat.,  Kali  carh.,  Kreosot.  (cancer, vomiting,

cholera infantum) ; Laches, (sore throat, sleep, ulcers) ;

Lycop.,  Mercur.,  Nux  vom.  (gastralgia,  urging  to  stool) ;

Phosphor,  (vomiting, gastralgia) ; Plumbum  (abdomen  in

ridges,  gastralgia,  better  bending  backward, heart-disease,

etc.);  Pulsat.,  Rhus  tax.  (effect  of  motion);  Sepia,  iSilic,

Staphis.
Useful  after  Evonymus. d  Headache.


BORAX.  458

BORAX.

Sodium  UUrate.  2BO^NaB^O^10H^O.

The  i3rst  proving  was  made  by  our  very  industrious  Schreter,  a  master  in
observing,  and  published  in  Hartlaub's  Annalen,  1832,  Vol.  Ill,  p.  309;  his
87  symptoms  have  been  corroborated  throughout.

In  1835  Hahnemann,  in  his  Chronic  Diseases,  2d  edition,  Vol.  II  p.,  280,
added  342  to  the  above,  31  of  his  own.

In  1857  Bonninghausen  called  attention  to  the  characteristics,  and  another
proving  was  published  in  the  Austrian  journal  by  Anton  Fischer.

^  Mind. Alternate  laughing  and  weeping.

I  Idles  through  the  afternoon,  does  not  really  get  at  work;

changes  from  one  work  to  another,  from  one  room  to  another ;
without  keeping  to  any  object.

I I  The  child  becomes  anxious  when  dancing  ;  if  one  rocks  it  in
the  arms  it  has  an  anxious  expression  of  the  face  during  the
downward  motion.

8  B  Very  anxious  on  riding  rapidly  down  hill,  contrary  to  his
custom  he  feels  as  though  it  would  take  away  his  breath.

IB  Anxious  feeling  during  downward  motion  or  rocking.
d  Diarrhoea.

1 1  Dread  of  downward  motion.

■  Great  anxiety  and  sleepiness  ;  anxiety  increased  until  11  p.m.

I  Fretful,  ill-humored,  indolent  and  discontented  before  the  easy
stool,  in  the  afternoon ;  after  it,  lively,  contented,  and  look-
ing cheerfully  into  the  future.

Irritability  and  crying  of  children.

Easily  startled  by  unusual  sounds;  at  a  distant  shot,  an  anxious
cry  ;  hawking,  sneezing,  etc.

B Fright;  he  starts  in  all  his  limbs  on  hearing  an  anxious  cry.

Heading  and  writing  aggravate  the  headache.

When  writing  in  the  morning,  flickering  before  the  eyes.

While  engaged  in  thinking  at  his  work,  strong  nausea,  with
trembling  of  whole  body  and  weakness  in  the  knees.
^  Sensorium. First,  heaviness  of  head ;  later,  light,  clear  head.

Vertigo  and  fullness  in  head  on  descending  a  mountain  or  stairs.

Vertigo :  with  tendency  to  fall  to  the  left  side ;  vertigo  when
driving  down  hill.

I  I  Giddy  all  the  time.
^  Inner  Head. Pain  across  his  forehead  for  three  days, with
giddiness,  then  it  passed  to  top  of  his  head.

Pressive  headache  in  forehead.


459  BORAX.

Headache  in  forehead  with  stinging  in  left  ear,  changing  at
times  to  the  right.

Throbbing  headache  in  both  temples,  or  in  occiput.

Twitching  pain  in  forehead,  with  nausea  and  tearing  in  eyeballs.

Tearing  ;  also  stitches  in  the  vertex.

Aching  in  whole  head,  with  nausea,  inclination  to  vomit,  and
trembling  in  whole  body,  at  10  A.M.

Fleeting  stitches  in  1.  side  of  head,  in  vertex,  and  later  in  fe-
male sexual  parts,  followed  by  voluptuous,  disgusting  dreams.

Headache,  with  dullness  of  the  entire  head ;  stinging  in  1.  ear.

;rFatal  basilar  meningitis,  with  constant  sopor,  from  which  the
child,  get.  13  months,  could  not  be  roused.
^  Outer  Head. Tearing  from  parietal  bone  to  forehead.

Headache  in  occiput  throbbing  as  if  something  would  suppu-
rate ;  shuddering  over  the  whole  body,  lasting  all  night  and
the  following  day.

Hot  head  of  infants,  with  heat  of  mouth  and  palms.

I  Hot  head  and  chilliness.

I  Hot  head. ^Diarrhoea.

Sensitiveness  of  external  head  to  cold  and  change  of  weather.

Hair  becomes  entangled  at  the  tips  and  sticks  together,  cannot-
be  separated ;  if  these  bunches  are  cut  off  they  form  again ;
the  hair  may  split.

I  I  The  hair  is  rough  and  frowsy,  can't  be  combed  smooth  ;  gets
into  all  kinds  of  snarls.
®  Sight  and  Eyes. Worse  from  light,  particularly  candle-light.

Sensitiveness  of  eyes  to  candle-light,  evenings.

Flickering  before  eyes  in  morning,  when  writing,  so  that  he
does  not  see  distinctly  ;  there  seem  to  be  bright  moving
waves,  now  from  right  to  left,  again  from  above  downwards.

Obscuration  of  sight  in  left  eye.

Pain  above  the  eyes.

Tearing  in  eyeballs,  with  twitching  pain  in  forehead  and  nausea.

Several  stitches  in  succession,  in  left  eye.

Sensation  of  a  foreign  body  in  eye.

Burning  of  eyes  and  contraction  as  soon  as  spectacles  are  put  on.

■  Rheumatic  ophthalmia.
Swelling  of  Meibomean  glands.

Inflammation  of  eyes  at  canthi,  with  irregularity  of  the  lashes  ;

nightly  agglutination.
I  The  lashes  turn  inward  toward  eye  and  inflame  it,  especially

at  outer  canthus,  where  the  margins  of  lids  are  very  sore.
I  I  Margin  of  lids  affected  ;  eyelashes  loaded  with  a  dry,  gummy

exudation,  stick  together  in  the  morning.

■  Lower  eyelids  entirely  inverted.

■  Granulated  lids.

■  Entropion.

■  Difficult  opening  of  the  lids.


BORAX.  460

*  Hearing  and  Ears. iVery  sensitive  to  the  slightest  noise,  as
the  rumpling  of  paper,  fall  of  a  door  latch,  etc. 6  Diarrhoea.

Dull  drumming  in  1.  ear,  sounding  as  if  over  subterranean
vault.

Ringing,  piping,  crackling,  or  roaring  in  ears,  more  in  left.

Deafness,  with  tinnitus  and  discharge  from  ear.

Difficult  hearing  in  the  left  ear.

Smacking,  and  sensation  as  if  the  ear  opened  and  closed,  while
it  contained  a  thick  paste.

Stinging  in  left  ear.

Inflamed  and  hot  swelling  of  both  ears.

Discharge  of  pus  from  both  ears.

I  Left  ear  particularly  affected.
'  Smell  and  Nose. Bleeding  from  the  nose,  morning.

Sneezing  and  fluent  coryza.

S  Sneezing  causes  severe  stitch  in  right  side  of  chest.

Fluent  coryza,  with  much  crawling  in  the  nose.

Discharge  of  much  greenish,  thick  mucus  from  the  nose.

I  Dry  crusts  in  the  nose,  re-form  if  removed.

I  Nostrils  inflamed  and  crusty,  tip  of  nose  shining  red.

Red  and  shining  swelling  of  the  nose,  with  throbbing  and  ten-
sive sensation.

I  Red  noses  of  young  women.

I  Painful  pressing  from  above  downwards,  through  the  right
nostril,  as  if  all  the  brain  would  be  forced  out ;  <  lying ;
sleepless  night  from  suffocating  dryness.

■  Stoppage  of  r.  nostril,  with  constant  inclination  to  blow  the

nose.
In  upper  and  forepart  of  left  nostril,  toward  tip  of  nose,  a
small  boil,  with  sore  pain  and  swelling  of  tip  of  nose.

■  Stoppage  of  nose,  first  r.  then  left,  with  lachrymation.
^  Face. Anxious  face  during  downward  motion.

Sensation  on  right  side  of  face,  by  the  mouth,  as  if  cobwebs

laid  there.
Sickly,  pale,  earthy  color  of  the  face.

■  The  face  of  the  infant  looks  pale,  suffering,  earthy.

■  Pale,  clay-colored  face. ^Diarrhoea.

Swelling,  heat  and  redness  of  face,  with  tearing  pain  in  malar

bone.
One-sided  hard  swelling  of  face.

■  Erysipelas  in  face  and  on  lower  limbs. ^During  pregnancy.

d  While  nursing.
■Erysipelas  in  face,  usually  1.  side,  insupportably  painful  when

moving  the  muscles  in  laughing.
®  Lower  Part  of  Face. Burning  of  upper  lip  beneath  1.  nostril,

in  morning.
Transient  burning  in  nether  lip,  in  evening.
Sensation  as  if  a  bug  were  crawling  over  the  under  lip,  at  4  a.m.


461  BORAX.

Red  inflamed  swelling,  as  large  as  a  pea,  on  lower  lip,  with

burning  soreness  when  touched.
Crawling,  like  insects,  on  the  lips.

■  Children  have  small  vesicles  around  the  mouth,  on  the  fore-

head, fingers  and  hands,  which  burst  and  spread.

■  Herpetic  eruption  about  the  mouth.

^^  Teeth  and  Gums. Neuralgic  toothache.

Dull  griping  in  a  hollow  tooth  in  wet  weather.

Fine  stinging  in  all  the  teeth,  intermitting,  mostly  in  1.  lower
decaying  molar,  with  stinging  in  1.  ear  and  frontal  headache;
in  evening.

Inflamed  large  swelling  on  outer  side  of  gum,  which  pains
severely  (gum  boil),  with  dull  pain  in  a  hollow  tooth  ;  swell-
ing of  cheek  and  whole  left  side  of  face,  as  far  as  below  the
eye,  where  there  is  formed  a  watery  blister.

Dark  redness  in  lower  portion  of  gums  beneath  the  roots  of  the
teeth  along  the  lower  jaw ;  and  toothache  as  if  the  teeth
were  too  long.

I  Redness  of  gums  above  roots  of  teeth  in  front  of  upper  jaw.

"  Taste,  Speech,  Tongue. Taste:  flat  and  insipid;  bitter;  food
and  even  saliva  taste  bitter.
Food  has  no  taste.
Cramp,  numbness  and  stiffness  in  tongue,  impeding  respiration.

I I  Aphthae  in  mouth  and  on  the  tongue.

I  Red  blisters  on  tongue,  as  if  the  surface  was  eroded;  they

pain  from  every  motion  of  the  tongue,  or  if  anything  salt  or
spiced  touches  them.

I I  Aphthae  on  the  tongue  and  inside  of  cheek,  bleeding  when
eating, d  Diarrhoea.

IBAphthfe  are  so  tender  that  they  prevent  child  from  nursing.
^^  Inner  Mouth. The  mucous  membrane  of  forepart  of  palate  is
shrivelled,  as  if  burnt,  pains  especially  when  chewing.

■  Mouth  very  hot. ^Diarrhoea.

■  Aphthse,  with  dry  heat  in  mouth,  great  thirst  and  vomiting

after  drinking.

■  Salivation  with  difficult  dentition.

■  Rapidly  forming  ulcers  in  mouth  ;  gangrenous.

■  Buccal  mucous  membrane  highly  reddened  and  covered  with

cheesy  aphthae.

■  lAphthge  with  salivation.

■  ■  Aphtha  :  in  the  mouth  ;  on  inner  surface  of  cheek,  bleeding

easily  ;  with  great  heat  and  dryness  of  mouth  ;  with  cracked
tongue ;  with  salivation.

■  Aphthae  of  old  people,  after  partaking  of  sour  or  salty  food.
^*  Palate  and  Throat. Worse  Avhen  swallowing.

Palate  wrinkled ;  child  cries  frequently,  when  nursing.
Roughness  and  burning  in  throat.


BORAX.  462

I  Tough  whitish  mucus  in  throat,  which  is  loosened  only  after

great  exertion.
I  The  mucous  membrane  of  the  palate  in  front  seems  burnt

and  shrivelled,  and  is  especially  painful  when  chewing.
Scratching  in  throat,  with  pressure  in  chest  and  cough.

■  Syphilitic  ulcers  in  fauces.

"  Thirst,  Desires,  Aversions.  ■  Thirst;  vomiting  after  drink-
ing. 0  Child  with  aphthae.

■  Desire  for  acids  ;  for  sour  drinks, d  Diarrhoea.
No  desire  for  his  smoking  tobacco.

■  Loss  of  appetite. ^Diarrhoea.

^^  Eating  and  Drinking.  After  eating  apples  with  mutton,  full-
ness in  stomach,  with  peevishness  and  ill-humor,  also  fullness
in  head.

■  After  eating  pears,  especially  morning  or  forenoon,  pressure  in

pit  of  stomach,  which  disappears  on  walking. 6  Diarrhoea.
Worse  from  wine,  particularly  chest  symptoms.
Wine  increased  pain  in  r.  chest  and  inguinal  region.
Renewal  of  symptoms  on  taking  vinegar,  particularly  stitch  in

chest.
Hiccough  :  after  eating ;  also  of  infants.

■  After  every  meal,  flatulent  distention. ^Diarrhoea.

■  After  eating,  which  he  relishes,  great  distension,  discomfort,

sick  feeling  and  ill-humor.

After  eating  :  desire  for  stool ;  diarrhoea.

After  breakfast :  diarrhoea.

After  smoking  tobacco,  sensation  as  if  diarrhoea  would  set  in.

Smoking  tobacco  relieves  toothache.
^^  Nausea  and  Vomiting. The  pains  are  accompanied  by  violent
and  frequent  eructations.

Nausea  :  in  morning ;  immediately  after  waking,  with  inclina-
tion to  vomit;  after  drinking  water,  mucous  and  bitter  vomit.

Vomiting  food  and  mucus.

Constant  vomiting.

■  Vomiting  of  sour  slime,  after  chocolate. 6  Diarrhoea.

^'^  Scrobiculum  and  Stomach. Nausea  proceeding  from  stom-
ach with  pain  in  sternum,  from  3  p.m.  until  evening.
Constricting  pain  in  region  of  stomach,  beginning  daily  at  4
A.M.  and  lasting  until  noon.

■  Pain  in  region  of  stomach  after  lifting;  pain  extends  to  the

small  of  back  and  there  becomes  a  stitching ;  so  severe  that
during  the  night  she  cannot  turn  without  pain ;  better  in  the
morning.

■  Stomach  cough,  with  pain  extending  into  region  of  spleen;

want  of  appetite  with  indigestion.
^^  Hypochondria. Pain  in  region  of  diaphragm  after  lifting  a
light  weight ;  the  pain  extended  to  the  spine,-  where  it  be-


463  BORAX.

came  stinging;  patient  could not turn all  night  without

pain  ; >  in  the  morning.
Pressure  in  right  and  left  hypochondrium.
Cutting  in  right  hypochondrium,  extending  downwards  across

the  bowels,  followed  by  diarrhoea ;  evacuation  sudden.
':  Scirrhus  of  liver  and  spleen.
Cutting  in  left  hypochondrium  on  walking  rapidly,  as  if  a  hard,

sharp,  movable  piece  were  there,  with  sensation  in  abdomen

as  if  hard  pieces  were  in  it,  and  these  were  in  motion.
^^  Abdomen,  Loins  and  Groins.  Flatulent  distention  after  every

meal.
Pain  in  abdomen,  as  if  diarrhoea  would  set  in.

■  Pinching  in  the  abdomen. ^Diarrhoea.
Stinging  in  abdomen,  evening  in  bed.
Stitching  and  pressing  pain  in  groin.

;  Mesenteric  glands  hardened  and  swollen.

Belly  soft,  flabby  and  sunken.
^^  Rectum  and  Stool. Much  discharge  of  flatus.

Urging  to  stool  in  morning ;  the  passage  at  first  formed,  then
loose,  with  burning  in  anus.

Painless  diarrhoea,  with  constant  vomiting.

Diarrhoea  six  times,  from  morning  till  2  P.M.,  without  pain.

Frequent,  very  easy  stool  every  day.

Stools :  frequent,  soft,  light  yellow,  slimy,  with  faintness  and
weariness ;  green  or  brown,  diarrhoeic ;  painless,  at  first
frothy,  thin  and  *brown ;  latgr  cadaverous-smelling,  contain-
ing bits  of  yellow  feces ;  colorless  or  slimy  ;  green,  preceded
by  crying  (infant).

Painless  stools,  containing  undigested  food.

;rObstinate  green  discoloration  of  stool.

iGrreenish  stools,  day  and  night,  with  pitiful  crying.  ^  Child
with  aphthae.

■  Summer  complaint  of  children  mostly  under  a  year  old,  twenty

or  thirty  passages  a  day ;  occasionally  vomiting ;  abdomen
soft  and  wilted :  stools  brown,  watery,  containing  small  yel-
low lumps  and  smelling  cadaverously ;  apathetic,  refusing
nourishment ;  emaciated  to  a  skeleton  ;  soporous  sleep.

71  After  cholera  infantum,  thrush.

Constipation  ;  stool  like  sheep-dung.

I  Stool,  the  thickness  of  a  quill,  became  easy  and  an  inch  in
diameter. 6  Stricture  of  rectum.

Before  stool :  mental  indisposition ;  indolence ;  urging.

■  Burning  in  rectum  during  stool.

■  Cheerful,  contented  mood  after  stool.
Several  successive  stitches  in  rectum,  evenings.
Itching  in  anus,  evening.

■  Chronic  mucous  hemorrhoids.

■  Stool  before  making  water.


BORAX.  464

^^  Urinary  Organs.  Violent,  urgent  desire  to  urinate,  can  scarcely
hold  the  urine.
At  night  must  rise  several  times  to  urinate.
Desire  to  urinate,  without  being  able  to  pass  a  drop.

I  The  infant  urinates  nearly  every  ten  or  twelve  minutes,  and

screams  before  the  urine  passes.
Before  urinating,  burning.

I I  Worse  before  urination.

B  Frequent  urination,  preceded  by  cries. 6  Diarrhoea.

Retention  of  urine  in  evening.

I  Hot  urine  in  the  infant.

I  The  orifice  of  the  urethra  pains  as  if  sore  after  urinating.

•  Pungent  smell  of  the  urine.

Smarting  in  the  urethra  after  urinating.
^^  Male  Sexual  Organs. Indifference  to  coition.

Impotence.

I  Gonorrhoea.

I  Chancres  studding  the  prepuce.
^^  Female  Sexual  Organs. Sexual  desire  too  weak.

TrEngorgement  of  uterus,  with  bearing  down  pains.

Menses  too  early,  too  profuse,  and  attended  with  colic  and
nausea.

I  At  time  of  menses,  pain  in  groins  like  stitching  and  pressing.

Before  menses  :  oppression  ;  catching  of  breath  ;  rushing  sound
in  ears  ;  stitch-pain  in  right  pectoral  region ;  pain  from  pit
of  stomach  to  small  of  back.

Menses  four  days  too  soon  and  very  profuse,  with  griping  in
abdomen ;  nausea  and  pain  in  stomach,  extending  into  small
of  back.

Too  profuse  menses,  and  she  is  very  nervous,  starts  at  the  least
noise,  and  dreads  a  downward  motion,  like  going  down  stairs,
or  the  downward  motion  of  a  swing  or  rocking-chair.

During  menses  :  throbbing  in  head  and  rushing  in  ears  ;  nau-
sea ;  pinching  and  griping  in  abdomen  ;  pain  extending  from
stomach  into  back  ;  bearing  down  and  stinging  in  groin  ;
lancinating  pain  in  groin  ;  tired;  sweat  after  midnight.

After  menses :  pressing  in  region  of  liver,  extending  into  right
shoulder-blade;  cramp-like  pain  in  stomach  and  back,  and
vomiting  afterwards.

iLeucorrhoea  like  the  white  of  egg,  with  sensation  as  if  warm
water  were  flowing  down.

iLeucorrhoea  thick  as  paste  and  white  for  five  days.

;rProfuse,  clear,  glutinous,  albuminous  leucorrhoea  relieving  all
other  genital  symptoms.

IB  White  albuminous  or  starchy  leucorrhoea.

IB  Acrid  leucorrhoea,  appearing  for  two  weeks,  between  the
catamenia,  with  swelling  of  the  labia  and  inflamed  and  dis-
charging Duvernis  glands.


465  BORAX.

iLeucorrhoea  -white  as  mucus,  witliout  any  other  ailment,  a

fortniglit  after  the  menses.
Stinging  and  distended  feeling  in  clitoris.
;rProlapsus  by  increased  heat  of  vagina.
24  Pregnancy  and  Parturition, i  Sterility.

During  pregnancy,  swelling,  itching  and  burning  of  the  vagina,

with  a  discharge  like  gonorrhoea.
False  or  spasmodic  labor-pains.

Labor-pains  accompanied  by  violent  and  frequent  eructations.
I  Labor-pains  spasmodic,  more  in  stomach  than  in  uterus.
1  Labor-pains  dart  upwards,  head  of  child  goes  back.
Griping  and  sometimes  stitches  in  left  mamma,  and  when  the

child  has  nursed  she  is  obliged  to  compress  the  breast  with

the  hand,  because  it  aches  on  account  of  being  empty.

■  Disagreeable  sensation  of  emptiness  in  mammae  after  suckling

the  child.
I  Contractive  pains  in  left  breast  when  the  child  nurses  the  right..

■  Aphthous  nipples.
iGalactorrhoea ;  milk  coagulating.

Milk  is  too  thick  and  tastes  badly ;  often  curdles  soon  after  it

has  been  drawn.
I  Milk  too  copious  or  too  thick.
I  The  infant's  palate  was  wrinkled,  and  it  cried  frequently  when.

nursing, d  Diarrhoea.
I  The  child  at  the  breast  sleeps  more  than  usual,  but  wakes^

frequently.
llAphthge  so  tender  that  they  prevent  child  of  nursing.
Colic  of  infants;  they  scream  out  if  laid  down,  or  show  signs-

of  vertigo  when  carried  down  stairs.

■  Loathing  of  the  breasts  in  infants, d  Diarrhoea.
Green  stool  in  the  infant  preceded  by  crying.

■  The  infant  becomes  pale,  nearly  earth-colored;  the  previously

firm  flesh  becomes  soft  and  flabby  ;  he  cries  a  great  deall;  re-
fuses the  breast,  and  frequently  screams  out  anxiously  in  his^
sleep.

■  Child  throws  up  its  hands  when  an  attempt  is  made  to  put  it

down.
"Larynx. Tearing  in  larynx  extending  to  chest,  exciting  cough.
^®  Respiration. Anxious  feeling  in  chest  in  the  evening  in  bed.
Shortness  of  breath  after  ascending  steps,  so  that  he cannot

speak  a  word ;  later  when  he  speaks  he  has  a  stitch  in  right

side  of  chest ;  also  on  running  or  on  any  exertion  of  the

body,  which  hurts  him.

■  Tension  in  chest,  with  inclination  to  deep  breathing  ;  similar

to  Calcar.

■  Pressure  in  lower  1.  lateral  region  of  chest,  increased  by  ex-

ertion or  a  long  breath.

■  Every  three  or  five  minutes  he  is  obliged  to  take  a  quick  deep

VOL.  II. — 30.


BORAX.  466

breath,  which  is  every  time  followed  by  a  stitch  in  right  side
of  chest,  with  a  subdued,  painful  sigh,  and  slow  expiration.

Respiration  difficult.

I  Arrest  of  breath  when  lying  in  bed  ;  he  is  obliged  to  jump  up
and  catch  for  breath  every  time  he  has  a  stitch  in  right  side
of  chest.

When  taking  a  deep  breath,  sensation  in  the  hypochondrium  as
if  something  pulled  from  the  region  of  spleen  into  chest,
which  sinks  back  again  during  exhalation  ;  sometimes  press-
ure and  burning  in  the  part.

When  taking  a  deep  breath  stinging  pressure  in  sternum;
drawing  stitch  in  r.  chest;  stinging  in  chest;  stitches  into
1.  side  of  chest,  as  with  a  knife.

■  When  yawning,  coughing  and  breathing  deeply, stitches  in

chest  and  pain  in  r.  inguinal  region.
When  coughing  or  sneezing :  roughness  in  throat  pit  and
drawing-stinging.
^^  Cough.  Dry  cachectic  cough,  especially  in  morning  when  rising
and  evening  when  lying  down ;  with  stitching  pain  in  right
chest  and  right  flank,  relieved  by  pressure ;  washing  the
chest  with  cold  water  affords  the  most  relief;  after  drinking
wine  the  pains  are  aggravated.

■  Violent  cough,  with  pain  through  r.  chest,  has  to  press  the

chest  with  both  hands ;  the  cough  is  dry,  occasionally  raises
small  white  or  yellow  lumps, d  Phthisis.

I  With  every  paroxysm  of  cough  sticking  in  right  side  of  chest,
in  region  of  nipple,  in  evening.

I  When  coughing,  is  obliged  to  press  right  side  of  chest  and  flank
with  hand,  whereby  pains  are  tolerable.

Cough  with  mucous  expectoration  during  the  day  ;  •<  in  morn-
ing ;  pain  in  hepatic  region.

■  Hacking  and  violent  cough,  with  slight  expectoration  of  a

mouldy  taste  and  of  the  same  smell,  from  the  chest,  with

every  paroxysm  of  cough.
Musty  expectoration,  with  pain  through  the  chest  to  the  back.
Cough,  with  expectoration  of  white  mucus  streaked  with  blood.
Cough  after  cold  bathing.

Stinging  in  r.  breast  near  the  nipple,  with  each  cough.
^^  Inner  Chest  and  Lungs. Tightness  in  chest.

Pressing  in  chest,  with  scratching  in  throat  and  cough.
Stitches  in  chest  when  yawning,  coughing  or  breathing  deeply.
Stitches  in  right  side  of  chest  in  region  of  nipple,  with  every

paroxysm  of  cough.
Knife-like  stitches  in  1.  chest  with  every  inhalation.

■  Pleurisy.

■  Stitches  between  ribs  of  right  side,  so  that  he  cannot  lie  on

that  side  on  account  of  the  pain,  with  sensitive  drawing  and
obstruction  of  breathing,  so  that  he  has  to  catch  for  breath ;


467  BORAX.

if  he  lies  upon  the  painful  side  the  pains  immediately  awaken
him  from  sleep.

■  B Pleuritic  pain  in  r.  pectoral  region  ;  the  patient  cannot  move

or  breathe  without  a  stitch.
During  cough :  stitches  in  chest  and  lumbar  region,  lessened

by  pressure;  mouldy  taste  in  throat.
Sudden  stitching  from  within  outwards  in  r.  side  of  chest,  on

raising  arms.
Stitching  pains  in  r.  lung,  but  mostly  drawing  stitches.

■  Stitching  or  darting  pain  from  without  inward  through  upper

r.  lung,  posterior  to  second  rib.
Fine  prickings,  extending  from  back  into  chest,  evenings.
^^  Heart,  Pulse  and  Circulation. >  Cyanosis  of  infants  from

birth.
Circulation  irregular; face  bluish,  especially  around mouth,

nose  and  eyes,  with  blue  look  of  finger-ends  and  feet ;  with

attacks,  during  which  the  child  became  prostrate  and  as  if

suffocating.
Sensation  as  if  heart  were  on  r.  side  and  were  being  squeezed.
Pulse  somewhat  accelerated.
^°  Outer  Chest. Stitches  between  ribs  of  right  side ; cannot  lie

upon  that  side  on  account  of  the  pain,  with  sensitive  draw-
ing and  obstruction  of  breathing,  has  to  catch  for  breath  ;  if

during  sleep  he  lies  on  the  painful  side,  the  pains  awake  him

immediately.
Aching  in  pectoralis  major,  as  from  lying  on  a  hard  mattress  ;

painful  to  touch.
Soreness  over  front  of  chest  and  in  middle  of  sternum  to  its  end.
Little  pricking  pains  all  over  chest,  with  difEculty  of  breathing

and  cough.
^^  Neck  and  Back. Rheumatic  drawing  pains  in  nape  of  neck,

extending  to  left  shoulder  and  then  into  scapula ;  evening

when  walking  in  open  air.
Soreness  of  both  sides  of  neck.
Pain  in  back  :  when  walking  ;  like  from  pressure,  when  sitting

or  stooping.
Backache  extending  into  the  feet.
^^  Upper  Limbs. Pressure  in  shoulders.

JJrawing  and  tearing  pain  in  and  between  shoulders,  so  that  he

cannot  stoop.
Burning  pain  on  upper  arm,  a  hand's  breadth  around  whole  arm.
Tearing  and  breaking  sensation  in  right  wrist.
Stinging  in  palm  of  hand;  the  whole  hand  numb  to  above  wrist.
I  Bran-like  herpes  on  hands  and  arms.
Burning,  heat  and  redness  of  fingers  during  slight  cold,  as  if

frost-bitten.
Throbbing  pain  in  tip  of  thumb,  day  and  night,  frequently

waking  from  sleep,  at  night.


BORAX.  468

I  Hot  palms. ^Diarrhoea.

'^  Lower  Limbs. Burning  pain  on  left  thigh,  a  hand's  breadth

around  the  whole  limb.
Transient  tearing  pain  in  middle  of  r.  femur,  extending  up  and

down.
Weak  feeling  in  feet  when  ascending  steps.
Great  prostration  and  lassitude,  with  weakness  in  lower  limbs.
Pain  in  the  calves.
Erysipelatous  inflammation  and  swelling  of  left  leg  and  foot,

after  violent  dancing,  with  tearing,  tension  and  burning  in

it ;  increased  burning  pain  when  touched ;  on  pressure  the

redness  disappears  for  a  moment.
Stitches  in  soles.

Burning,  heat  and  redness  of  toes  during  slight  cold,  as  if  frost-
bitten.
Pain  in  the  heel  as  if  sore  from  walking.
ID  Sensation  as  if  warm water  were running down thighs.

6  Leucorrhoea.
^^  Limbs  in  General. iPhagedenic  ulcers  on  the  joints  of  fingers

and  toes. Compare  Sepia.
^®  Rest. Position. Motion. Lying :  pressure  in  nostril  <  ;

arrest  of  breath  ;  cannot  lie  on  right  side. See  28.
Downward  motion  : child  anxious  ; women dread it  during

menses.
Dancing :  anxious  ;  inflamed  left  leg.
Motion  :  stitches  in  chest  worse.
Exertion  :  pressure  in  1.  chest.
Restless,  cannot  sit  or  lie  long  in  one  place. .
36  Jferves. Twitching.

Trembling  in  the  whole  body,  especially  in  hands,  with  nausea

and  weakness  of  knees.
Weakness,  especially  in  abdomen  and  limbs.
She  is  very  nervous  ;  she  does  not  sleep  well.
B  Debility. 6  Diarrhoea.
^^  Sleep. When  yawning  :  stitches  in  chest.
Sleeps  more  than  usual.
Lascivious  dreams  ;  she  dreams  of  coition.
Disturbed,  restless  sleep,  with  ebullitions.
Sweat  increased  during  sleep.
Child  cries  out  during  sleep,  as  if  frightened.
■  A  child,  set.  5,  turns  about,  cries  the  whole  night,  till  four  in

the  morning,  and  in  morning  is  in  a  whining  mood ;  the

infant  frequently  cries  out  in  its  sleep,  and  anxiously  grasps

its  mother,  as  if  it  had  been  frightened  by  a  dream.
•  She  wakes  uncommonly  early,  at  3  o'clock, she  cannot  fall

asleep  again  for  two  hours  on  account  of  heat  of  whole  body,

especially  in  head,  with  sweat  on  thighs.

I I  Children may be  sleeping  quietly, and awake  suddenly.


469  BORAX.

screaming  and  holding  on  to  the  sides  of  cradle  without  any
apparent  cause  for  so  doing.

■  Starting  from  sleep with anxious  screams,  throwing  hands

about,  seizing  things,  or  clinging  to  the  mother,  d  Diarrhoea.
^*  Time. Morning :  pain  in  stomach  >  ;  child  is  in  a  whining

mood.
3  A.M.:  awakens  with  heat  of  whole  body.
Afternoon :  idles  the  time  away ;  fretful,  discontented ;  stool.
Evening  ;  stitches  in  chest ;  stool.
11  P.M.:  anxiety  increases  till  then.
Night :  pain  in  stomach  <C  ;  child  cries  out.
Day  and  night :  greenish  stools.
^^  Temperature and  weather. Warm  weather : symptoms

worse.
Cold :  head  sensitive.
Damp  cold  weather  :  generally  worse.
Change  of  weather  :  head  sensitive.
Wet  weather :  toothache.
Open  air :  rheumatism  in  neck  and  shoulder.
Washing  with  cold  water:  cough  better  when  chest  is  washed.
1  Inclination  to  uncover  with  the  fever  heat ;  sometimes  shuns  it.
*°  Chill. Fever. Sweat. Chill  and  chilliness  mostly  during

sleep.
Chill  predominating,  especially  in  afternoon  and  evening.
Chill  and  heat  alternating.
Chill  from  uncovering.
Chill  passing  downward.

Thirst  not  constant ;  is  generally  wanting  during  the  chill.
Flushes  of  heat,  morning  and  evening.
Hot  head,  mouth  and  palms,  of  infant.
Heat  or  sweat,  with  inclination  to  uncover.
Sweat  during  the  morning  sleep.
*^  Locality  and  Direction. Right :  stitches  side  of  chest  when

sneezing ;  pressure through nostril ; stoppage of  nostril ;

stitches  in  chest ;  pain  in  inguinal  region  when  yawning,

coughing,  etc.
Right  to  left :  stoppage  of  nostril.

Left :  ear  especially  affected ;  erysipelas  of  side  of  face ;  con-
tractive pain  in  breast  when  child  nurses  the  right ;  pressure

in  chest.

■  Upper  right  lower  left.

Above  downward :  pressing  through  right  nostril.
Without  inward:  stitches  in  chest.
^^  Sensations. As  of  a  foreign  body  in  eye.
As  if  the  ear  opened  and  closed.

As  if  all  the  brain  would  be  forced  out  through  r.  nostril.
As  of  cobwebs  :  in  r.  side  of  face ;  on  hands.
As  if  hard  pieces  were  in  abdomen.


BORAX.  470

As  if  diarrhoea  would  set  in.

As  if  something  pulled  from  the  spleen  into  chest.

As  if  heart  were  on  r.  side  and  squeezed.

As  if  warm  water  were  running  down  thighs.

Cutting:  in  hypochondria.

Stitches :  in  vertex  ;  fleeting,  in 1. side of  head ;  in female

sexual  parts  ;  in  1.  eye  ;  in  r.  side  of  chest ;  in  small  of  back  ;

in  groin  ;  in  rectum  ;  in  1.  mamma ;  in  soles.
Drawing-stitch  :  in  r.  chest.
Stinging :  in  1.  ear ;  in  teeth ;  in  abdomen  ;  in  sternum ;  in

chest ;  in  r.  breast,  near  nipple  ;  in  palm  of  hand.
Pricking  :  from  back  into  chest ;  all  over  chest.
Tearing :  in  eyeballs ;  in  vertex ;  from  parietal  bone  to  fore-
head; in  molar  ;  in  larynx  ;  between  shoulders  ;  in  r.  wrist;

in  middle  of  r.  femur  ;  in  1.  leg  and  foot.
Twitching:  in  forehead.
Pinching :  in  abdomen.

Griping  :  in  a  hollow  tooth  ;  in  abdomen  ;  in  1.  mamma.
Drawing :  between  shoulders.
Rheumatic drawing:  in nape of  neck;  to  I.  shoulder,  into

scapulae.
Pressing :  in  forehead  ;  downwards  through  r.  nostril ;  in  chest ;

in  hypochondria  ;  in  groin  ;  in  1.  chest ;  in  sternum.
Breaking  :  in  r.  wrist.
Burning  :  of  eyes  ;  of  upper  lip  ;  in  nether  lip;  in  swelling  on

lower  lip ;  in  throat ;  in anus ;  in rectum ;  of  vagina ;  of

fingers;  on  1.  thigh;  in  1.  leg;  of  toes.
Smarting:  in  urethra.
Soreness :  of  tip  of  nose ;  over  front  of  chest ;  in  middle  of

sternum  ;  both  sides  of  neck  ;  in  heel.
Aching:  in  whole  head  ;  in  pectoralis  major.
Contractive  pains  :  in  1.  breast.
Constricting  pain  :  in  region  of  stomach.
Cramp :  in  tongue.
Dull  pain  :  in  hollow  tooth.
Undefined  pain  :  across  forehead ;  above  eye's  ;  in  swelling  on

gum  ;  in  r.  chest ;  in  inguinal  region  ;  in  region  of  stomach  ;

in  spleen  ;  in  diaphragm  ;  in  calves.
Roughness  :  in  throat ;  in  throat-pit.
Scratching :  in  throat.
Fullness  :  in  head  ;  in  stomach.
Emptiness :  in  mammae.
Throbbing :  headache  in  temples ;  in  occiput ;  in  swelling  of

nose ;  in  tip  of  thumb.
Tension:  in  chest;  in  1.  leg.
Stifl"ness :  in  tongue.
Contraction  :  of  eyes.
Numbness  :  in  tongue  ;  of  hand.


471  BORAX.

Crawling:  over  under-lip ;  on  lips.

Heat :  of  mouth ; palms  of  hands ; of  fingers  ;  of  palms  ;  of

toes.
Shuddering  :  over  whole  body.
Weakness  :  in  feet ;  in  lower  limbs.

Itching:  in  rectum;  of  vagina;  on  back  of  finger-joints.
Dryness:  of  mouth.
"  Tissues. Sensorium  afi'ected  by  downward  motion.
Aphthous  affection  of  the  buccal  mucous  membrane.
Parts  which  are  usually  red,  turn  white.

■  Emaciation  ;  flabby  muscles, d  Diarrhoea.

The  anxious  feeling  on  downward  motion  is  the  chief  distinction
between  Borax  and  Bellad.
"'  Touch. Passive  Motion. Injuries. Riding  down  hill :
anxious ;  vertigo.
Rocking :  anxious.
Touch  :  swelling  on  lip  burns  and  feels  sore ;  burning  in  lower

limbs  worse.
Pressure  :  chest  pains  relieved.
Lifting  :  pain  in  stomach.
"  Skin. Sensation  as  if  a  cobweb  were  lying  upon  the  skin  of  face
or  hands.
Severe  itching  on  back  of  finger-joints  :  must  scratch  them  vio-
lently.
Red  papulous  eruption  on  cheeks  and  around  chin.
Herpetic  eruption  on  nates.
Furfuraceous  peeling  off  of  epidermis.
Skin  getting  callous.
I  Skin  pale  or  livid. ^Diarrhoea.
I  Wilted,  wrinkled  skin, d  Children  with  aphthae.
Liver  spots.

Unhealthiness  of  the  skin  ;  slight  injuries  suppurate.
Old  wounds  and  ulcers  are  inclined  to  reopen  and  suppurate.
Dingy,  unhealthy  skin,  which  ulcerates  easily  on  being  injured.
Ulcer  in  left  axilla.
Phagedenic  ulcers  and  boils.

Ulcerated  places  on  the  feet  from  rubbing  of  the  shoe  or  boot.
*''  Stages  of  Life,  Constitution. Light  hair ;  skin  and  muscles
lax.

■  B Period  of  dentition  and  infancy. ^Aphthae. ^Diarrhoea.
*^  Relationship. Antidotes  to  Borax: Ohamom.,  Cofea.

Compare :  I  ■  Oalc.  ostr.,  JVux  vom.,  I  Bryon.,  Lycof.^  Mercur.,
Pulsat.,  Rhus  tox.,  Sepia,  Silicea,  Sulphur,  I  \Arsen.,
Bellad.,  Grraphit.,  Ignat.,  Kali  hichr.,  and  PhospJior.

Similar  to  ;  Amm.  carh.  and  Magn.  mur.  (stoppage  of  r.  nos-
tril) ; Calc.  ostr.  (inclination  to  breathe  deeply).

Incompatibles :  Acet.  ac,  vinegar,  wine.


BOVISTA.  472

BOVISTA.

Puffhall.  Fungi.


Hartlaub,  Sen.,  proved  in  1S28  the  spores  of  this  fungus,  following  the
example  of  Hahnemann,  with  Lycop.  He  pubhshed  it  in  1831  as  an  anti-
psoric  ;  640  symptoms.  It  belongs  to  the  most  important  remedies  for  the
treatment  of  chronic  diseases.  Aegidi's  case  of  urticaria,  Knerr's  transla-
tion of  which  was  published  in  the  May  number  of  the  North  Amer.  Journal,
1880,  is  a  model  cure  and  the  symptoms  are  decidedly  corroborative,  par-
ticularly those  of  the  mind. The  symptoms  are  included  in  our  collection.

^  Mind. I  Absence  of  mind  and  difficulty  in  fixing  his  attention.
d  Urticaria.
Misapplies  words  in  speaking  or  writing.

■  Awkwardness,  whicli  makes  him  drop  things  from  his  hands.

6  Urticaria.
1  I  Slowness  of  understanding  and  comprehension ; does not
hear  well.

■  Vacant,  thoughtless  staring. ^Urticaria.

1  1  Sad,  depressed  and  desponding  when  alone.
Doleful ;  restless  ;  distressed.

■  Sensitiveness; great irritability; takes everything amiss.

6  Urticaria.
I  I  Moroseness  ;  ill-humor ;  aversion  to  all  things. 0  Urticaria.
I  Quarrelsome  and  contentious. 6  Urticaria.

■  Weak  memory.

^  Sensorium. Absence  of  mind,  abstraction.
Mental  dullness.

Stupefying  giddiness,  with  vanishing  of  senses.
Stares  vacantly  into  space.

Vertigo  early  in  morning,  falls  over  to  one  side,  loses  his  senses
for  awhile.

■  Sudden  attacks  of  vertigo  and  feeling of  stupidity in  head

while  standing  ;  she  loses  consciousness  for  a  moment ;  pre-
ceding and  following  a  headache  in  the  morning.
^  Inner  Head. Great  sensitiveness.

■  ■  Sensation  as  if  head  were  much  enlarged ;  headache,  deep  in.
Head  seems  bruised  inside.

Beating  in  head  as  if  there  were  an  abscess  there,  attended
with  a  sensation  of  wild  confusion  ;  the  beating  is  excited  by
cold  air,  particularly  early  in  morning,  or  only  in  right  side.

Stupefying  pain,  particularly  in  forehead  and  vertex.

Pressing  pains  in  head.


473  BOVISTA.

Pressure  from  side  to  side.

Headache :  right  side  in  morning,  left,  evening ;  at  night ;  at
3  A.M.;  worse  on  raising  the  head,  with  increased  secretion
of  urine  ; <  from  sitting  up  ; <  from  pressure.

Pains  in  head  pressing  inward ;  pains  from  side  to  side  press-
ing outward.

Dull  headache  with  weariness.

Distensive  pain  in  head.

Pain  in  occiput,  as  if  a  wedge  would  be  pressed  in.

Lacerating  pain  in  sinciput  and  forehead.

On  awaking  the  head  aches,  as  from  too  much  sleep.
^  Outer  Head. '  Sensation  as  if  the  head  were  enlarging.

Scalp  tender  to  touch.

Sore  spots  on  head.

Beating  in  a  small  spot  on  left  side  ;  itching  in  hairy  scalp,
particularly  on  getting  warm  in  bed,  obliging  one  to  scratch
until  the  parts  bleed,  but  not  relieved  by  scratching,  particu-
larly early  in  the  morning.

Itching  over  whole  scalp,  extending  to  neck,  especially  if  he
became  warm,  so  that  he  was  obliged  to  scratch  the  forehead,
which  was  not  relieved  by  scratching.

Pimples  or  reddish  vesicles  on  hairy  scalp  with  itching ;  painful
blister  on  temple  ;  itching,  suppurating  blister  on  forehead  ;
objects  seem  too  near  the  eye.

Falling  off  of  the  hair.
^  Sight  and  Eyes. I  Blindness  of  right  eye  from  paralysis  of  op-
tic nerve.

Objects  appear  too  near.

Perpendicular  half-sight.

Pressure  in  the  orbits,  in  the  bones.

Staring  at  one  point.

Eyes  dim,  without  lustre.

■  Inflammation  of  eyelids,  with  nightly  agglutination. ^Urti-

caria.
®  Hearing  and  Ears. Hearing  indistinct,  misunderstands  much

that  is  spoken.
Itching  in  ears  relieved  by  boring  with  finger  in  ear.
Discharge  of  fetid  pus  from  ears.
Boil  in  right  ear,  with  pain  when  swallowing.
Thick  oozing  scurfs  on  ears.
^  SmeU  and  Nose. Every  time  the  nose  is  blown,  drops  of  blood

issue  from  it.
I A  few  drops  of  blood  from  nose  every  time  on  sneezing.

■  Bleeding  of  the  nose  in  the  morning.
Nosebleed  during  morning  sleep,  with  vertigo.
Watery  coryza,  with  dizziness.

Stoppage  of  the  nose  with  fluent  coryza.
Nose  stopped  up,  cannot  breathe.


BOVISTA.  474

Soreness and  redness of  septum  narium ;  scurfs  and  crusts

about  the  nostrils  ;  scurfy  pustules  under  the  nose,
®  Face. I  The  face  is  very  pale  in  morning  on  rising.

Marked  alternation  of  color  efface,  now  very  red  then  pale.
Cheeks  hot,  feel  as  if  they  would  burst.
1  Convulsive  motions  of  facial  muscles. ^Before  asthma.
Pale  swelling  of  cheek  after  toothache.
Eruption  on  face  and  cheeks.
^  Lower  Face. BPale  swelling  of  upper  lip. 6  After  toothache.
Stitching  like  from  a  needle  or  splinter,  in  lips.
Chapped  or  blistered  lips.
Corners  of  mouth  sore,  broken  out,
BLips  cracked,  in  some  places  crusty. ^Urticaria.
^^  Teeth  and  Gums. Tearing  in lower  jaw anterior  to ears  ;

glands  under  jaw  swollen  and  throbbing.
Violent  drawing-aching  in carious  teeth ; > in air and in

warmth  ; <^  in  evening.
After  toothache,  pale,  swollen  cheeks.
Violent  drawing  pain  in  hollow  back  teeth  of  lower  jaw  for  two

evenings  in  succession  in  bed.

■  Scorbutic  gums  ;  bleed  easily. ^Urticaria.

^^  Taste,  Speech,  Tongue. Taste  :  putrid ;  bitter.

Stammering,  stuttering  speech.

1  Cutting  pain  in  tongue,  like  with  a  knife. 6  Before  asthma.

Sores  or  ulcers  on  edge  of  tongue,
^^  Inner  Mouth. Sensation,  as  if  inner  mouth  were  numb  (pithy)
and  crisp  early  in  morning  on  waking,  sometimes  with  dry-
ness of  mouth  and  bitter,  slimy  taste.

Putrid  smell  from  mouth.

Increased  flow  of  saliva.

Great  dryness  of  mouth,  as  if  sand  were  in  it ;  burning  in  tip
of  tongue  and  numbness  of  posterior  portion  early  in  morn-
ing on  waking;  deep  ulcers  in  right  border  of  tongue,  pain-
ful like  a  sore;  stuttering,  especially  when  reading,  with  in-
ability to  pronounce  several  words  rapidly.
^^  Palate  and  Throat. Burning  in  throat.

Sore  throat,  with  scratching  and  burning  in  oesophagus.

Great  dryness  in  throat ;  when  awaking  in  morning, tongue
feels  almost  like  wood.

I  Stitching  in  throat, d  Before  asthma.
^^  Appetite,  Thirst. Desires,  Aversions. No  appetite  for
breakfast,  relish  for  other  meals.

■  Little  appetite. 6  Urticaria.
Hunger,  even  after  meals.
Longing  for  cold  drink.

No  appetite  for  cooked  food,  desire  for  bread  only.

Loss  of  thirst.

Desire :  for  brandy ;  for  wine ;  for  milk.


475  BOVISTA.

Worse  from :  spirituous  liquors,  -wine,  cold  food  ; >  from  hot
victuals.
^^  Eating  and  Drinking. I  Better  after  breakfast, d  Diarrhoea.

Hiccough  before  and  after  eating.

While  eating :  stitches  through  chest ;  tired ;  sleepy  ;  crawls
or  flushes.

After  eating  :  stitches  in  chest ;  tired ;  sleepy ;  colic ;  amelio-
ration of  gagging  ;  cutting  in  belly.
^®  Hiccough,  Belching,  Nausea  and  Vomiting. Hiccough-
ing; before  and  after  dinner.

Frequent  empty  eructations.

Nausea,  with  shivering  all  forenoon.

iNausea  in  the  morning. 6  Diarrhoea.

I  Vomits  a  watery  fluid ;  nausea  relieved  by  eating  breakfast.

6  Morning  sickness.
^^  Scrobiculum  and  Stomach. Pressure  and  fullness  in  pit  of
stomach  ;  tension  in  temples  ;  mental  anguish.
Cold  feeling  in  stomach,  as  if  a  lump  of  ice  were  lodged  there,
with  pain,  mostly  mornings.

I I  Intolerance  of  tight  clothing  around  the  waist.

^^  Hypochondria. Stitches  in  region  of  last  rib,  either  side.
^^  Abdomen. Cutting  pains  around  navel.
Griping ;  worse  when  at  rest.
Stitches  in  abdomen.
Cutting  colic,  with  coldness,  teeth  chattering,  limbs  tremble ;

worse  after  stool.
Colic,  with  bright  red  urine ;  relieved  by  eating.
Abdomen  :  bloated  ;  puff"ed  up  at  single  spots.
Bloatedness of  the abdomen ; with softness, flatulency,  or

rumbling ;  with  constipation.
Abdomen  tender,  most  in  the  mornings.
Coldness  moving  about  in  abdomen.

BDistension  of  abdomen,  with  rumbling,  shifting  of  flatulence
and  emission  of  much  flatus. ^Diarrhoea.

I  Colic,  which  causes  the  patient  to  double  over;  sometimes

voiding  red  urine  (not  in  Coloc),  and  relief  by  eating  (not  in
Coloc).

^^  Rectum  and  Stool. Stinking  flatus.

■  Disposition  to  diarrhoea,  frequent  attacks,  each  evacuation  be-
ing followed  by  tenesmus, d  Urticaria.
Diarrhoea  before  and  during  menses.
Fruitless  urging  to  stool.
Diarrhoea  with  cutting  pains.

I I  Stools  first  hard  and  difficult ;  last  thin,  even  watery.  6  Af-
fections of  the  prostate  gland.

I  Stool  at  first  hard,  the  last  part  thin,  with  pain  in  abdomen.
After  stool  tenesmus  and  burning  at  anus.
Itching  in  rectum,  as  from  worms.


BOVISTA.  476

Darting  from  perineum  to  rectum  and  genitals.

Itching  on  tip  of  os  coccjgis,  has  to  scratch  the  parts  raw  and

sore.
I  Stools:  liquid,  yellow,  fecal.
Morning  diarrhoea,  with  urging  pain.

■  Before  stool :  urging;  colic. ^Diarrhoea.

■  During  stool:  twisting  pain  in  abdomen. ^Diarrhoea.

■  After  stool:  languid;  tenesmus;  burning  at  anus.  ^Diarrhoea.
After  stool :  burning  and  itching  in  anus,  as  if  worms  were

crawling.
^^  Urinary  Organs. Frequent  desire  to  urinate,  even  immedi-
ately after  urination,  with  emission  of  a  few  drops.
Urine :  bright  red ;  yellow-green ;  becomes  turbid  ;  bright  yel-
low, with  slowly  forming  cloud;  turbid,  like  loam  water,  with
violet  sediment.

■  ■Diabetes  mellitus.

Stinging-itching  burning  in  the  urethra;  orifice  inflamed,  feels

glued  up.
Hard  node  in  the  urethra.

■  Gleet.

^"^  Male  Sexual  Organs. Seminal  emissions.
After  coition,  reeling  and  confusion  in  head.
Complaints  from  sexual  excess.
"  Female  Sexual  Organs. Voluptuous  sensation  in  genitals.
Burning  in  genitals.

Menses :  four  days  too  soon  and  more  profuse  than  usual ;
every  two  weeks  much  dark  and  clotted  blood  ;  too  late  and
scanty  ;  only  at  night,  or  only  in  morning ;  during  intervals
occasional  show  of  blood.

■  Ovarian  cyst,  tapped  twice  within  a  few  months.

■  Every  few  days  a  show  between  the  menses.

■  The  menses  flow  most  profusely  in  morning,  but  scanty  dur-

ing day  and  night.
After  midnight  painful  urging  toward  genitals,  with  great  heavi-
ness in  small  of  back,  which  was  somewhat  relieved  the  next
day  with  discharge  of  menstrual  blood.

■  Diarrhoea  frequently  before  and  during  menstruation.
Before  catamenia :  spasm  in  the  chest;  painful  bearing  down

in  genitals ;  diarrhoea.
Before,  during  and  after  menses  :  pain  as  if  bruised,  and  weary
in  loins,  belly  and  thighs,  impeding  going  up  stairs.

■  iLeucorrhoea  a  few  days  before or a few days after the

monthly ;  while  walking  like  white of  eggs ;  yellow-green,
■  acrid,  Bcorrosive,  leaving  green  spots  in  the  clothes;  thick,
slimy,  tough.
Soreness  between  the  labia  and  thighs.
24  Pregnancy. ■  Jaundice  of  new-born  children.
Voice  and  Larynx. Hoarseness  in  morning.


47T  .  BOVISTA.

Roughness  in  throat,  mornings,  with  catarrhal  speech.
Scratching  sensation  in  larynx,  with  viscid  phlegm.
^^  Respiration. Shortness  of  breath  from  every  exertion  with  the

hands.
Oppression  of  chest,  desires  to  loosen  the  clothes.
Spasmodic  laughing  and  crying, with  asthma,  face  dark  red.
^'^  Cough, Evening,  loose ;  morning,  dry.
Dry  cough  from  tickling  in  throat.
Cough  from  tickling  in  chest,  mornings,  after  coming  into  the

room  from  cold  air.
I  Cough,  with  so  viscid  an  expectoration  that  it  can  scarcely  be

discharged.
^*  Inner  Chest  and  Lungs. Stitches  in  various  localities  of  chest.

Stitches  in  1.  side,  extending  through  to  back,
^^  Heart,  Pulse  and  Circulation.  Ebullitions,  with  much  thirst.
Palpitation:  with  tremor  of  hands  ;  restlessness;  vertigo;  chilli-
ness ;  sick  headache  ;  profuse  catamenia.
Visible  palpitation,  after  going  up  stairs ;  a,s  if  the  heart  was

working  in  water ;  after  over-exertion.
Pulse  accelerated.
^^  Outer  Chest. Burning  in  outer  chest.
^^  Neck  and  Back. Stitches  in  neck.
Stiffness  of  neck  in  morning.
Backache,  with  stiffness  after  stooping.
Shooting  and  other  pains  between  shoulders,  along  borders  of

the  scapulge;  has  to  "straighten  up"  to  be  relieved.
Intolerable  itching  at  tip  of  os  coccygis;  must  scratch  until  the

parts  become  raw  and  sore.
^^  Upper  Limbs. Sweat  in  arm-pits,  smelling  like  onions.
Tension  in  shoulder-joint,  cannot  write.
Stitching,  boring  and  tearing  pains  in  upper  limbs.
Joints  of  arms  and  hands  feel  disabled  and  wrenched.
Itching  on  the  arms.
■  Affections  of  the  wrist-joints.
Sharp  stitches  in  right  external  malleolus.
Tremor  of  hands,  with palpitation of  heart and  oppressive

anxiety.
I  Great  weariness  in  the  hands  and  feet  the  whole  day.

I  She  has  no  power  in  hands,  especially  in  right, and  almost

allowed  the  slightest  objects  to  fall  from  weakness.

I I  Hygroma  on  hand.
Moist  tetter  on  back  of  hand.

The  skin  of  fingers  becomes  unusually  dented  by  the  instru-
ments with  which  she  was  working.
iThe  hands  are  covered  with  small,  dry,  reddish  pimples,  which

gradually  disappear  after  a  few  days.
Runaround,  or  whitlow  on  fingers.
^'  Lower  Limbs. Sensation  of  soreness  in  hip-joints.


BOYISTA.  478

Limbs  "go  to  sleep,"  cannot  stand  on  them.

Stitching  pains  in  knees.

Muscles  of  calves  feel  too  short;  cramp  in  morning.

CEdematous  swelling  of  (right)  foot  even  years  after  a  sprain.

Violent  stitching  in  outer  malleolus  of  right  foot,  with  painful-
ness  of  the  inner.

I  Cramp  in  leg.

BEruption  on  both  feet  of  small,  red,  rash-like  pimples,  with  an
itching- burning  pain,  with  which  the  feet  are  covered,  as  far
as  half  way  up  the  calves,  lasting  two  days  ;  scratching  does
not  affect  them.
^*  Limbs  in  GeneraL Great  weakness  of  the  joints.

Sensation:  as  if  beaten;  lame,  aching;  tearing;  tension;
stitches.

■  Rheumatic  paresis  and  marked  muscular  atrophy  of  the  af-
fected leg. 6  Urticaria.
^®  Rest. Position. Motion. Rest :  griping  worse.

Sitting  up  :  headache  worse.

Must  straighten  up  to  relieve  pains  between  scapulae.

Colic  causes  patient  to  double  up.

While  stooping :  head  dull  and  heavy  ;  stitches  in  belly.

After  stooping :  backache  and  stiffness ;  vertigo  worse.

Exertion  with  hands  :  shortness  of  breath.

Walking :  leucorrhoea  like  white  of  eggs.
^®  Nerves. Rheumatic  lameness.

General  languor  and  enervation,  particularly  in  joints.

Drops  things  from  the  hands,  as  from  weakness.

Hysteria,  with  abdominal  symptoms.
^^  Sleep. Great  sleepiness  early  in  evening.

Spasmodic  gaping  before  asthma ;  morning  sweat  in  bed.

Great  drowsiness  in  afternoon  and  early  in  evening.

I  Night  rest  disturbed  by  burning  and  itching  of  nettle-rash.

Restless  sleep,  with  many  anxious,  frightful  dreams.

On  awaking,  head  aches  as  from  too  much  sleep;  on  rising,
face  pale.
^^  Time. 3  a.m.:  headache.

5  to  6  A.M.:  sweat.

Early  morning  : Bl  stools.

Morning :  vertigo  ;  rightsided  headache ;  itching  of  scalp  <  ;
nosebleed ;  face  pale ;  sensation  as  if  mouth  were  numb ;
tongue  feels  like  wood  ;  nausea ;  cold  feeling  in  stomach ;
abdomen  tender ;  menses  most  profuse  ;  hoarseness  ;  rough-
ness in  throat ;  dry  cough ;  stiffness  of  neck ;  cramp  in
calves  ;  sweat  in  bed.

Forenoon  :  nausea  and  shivering.

During  day:  menses  scanty.

Whole  day  :  weariness  of  hands  and  feet.

Afternoon  :  drowsiness ;  alternate  shuddering  and  flying  heat.


479  BOVISTA.

Evening:  leftsided  headache;  toothache  ■< ;  cough  loose;
great  sleepiness;  chilliness; llstools.

7  P.M.:  chill  with  thirst.

Night : headache  ; menses scanty  ;  rest  disturbed  by  nettle-
rash  ;  agglutination  of  eyes  ; Istools.
''  Temperature  and  Weather. Cold  air :  beating  in  head
worse.

Air :  toothache  better.

Warmth  of  bed  :  itching  of  scalp  <  ;  toothache  better.

Hot  weather :  red,  scabby  eruption  appears  on  thighs  and
bends  of  knees,  and  again  with  the  full  moon.

Hot  food  :  symptoms  better.

Cold  food  :  symptoms  worse.

Coming  in  room  from  cold  air  :  cough  worse.

Very  sensitive  to  drafts.
*"  Chin. Fever. Sweat. Chill predominating, even near a
warm  stove,  morning  and  evening,  and  even  at  night;  gener-
ally with  thirst.

Chill  with  the  pains.

Shivering  in  evening,  spreading  from  the  back  ;  drawing  pains
in  bowels.

I  Chills  :  immediately  after  going  to  bed  at  night,  commencing
in  back  ;  every  evening  at  7  p.m.  with  thirst,  followed  by
drawing  pains  in  abdomen, d  Intermittent.

Alternate  shuddering  and  flying  heat,  most  in  afternoon,  with
burning  thirst,  more  with  the  shuddering.

Heat,  with  thirst,  anxiety,  restlessness;  oppression  of  chest.

Fever-heat  during  sleep.

Sweat  every  morning,  5-6  a.m.,  most  profuse  on  the  chest.

Sweat  in  axilla  smells  like  onions.

Chilliness  whole  evening.
*^  Attacks. Full  moon :  red,  scabby  eruption  appears  on  thighs

and  bends  of  knees  ;  also  in  hot  weather.
^^  Locality  and  Direction. Right :  beating  in  head  ;  morning
headache  ;  boil  in  ear ;  deep  ulcers on  border  of  tongue ;
stitches  in  external  malleolus ;  no  power  in  hand ;  oedema-
tous  swelling  of  foot.

Left:  evening  headache  ;  beating  in  a  small  spot  in  side;  pain
in  side  ;  swelling  in  groin.

Right  to  left:  headaches,  right  in  a.m.,  left  in  P.M.
^^  Sensations. As  if  head  were  enlarged.

As  if  sand  were  in  mouth.

As  if  a  lump  of  ice  were  lodged  in  stomach.

Lacerating  :  in  forehead ;  in  sinciput.

Cutting :  in  tongue  ;  around  navel ;  in  abdomen ;  with  diar-
rhoea.

Darting :  from  perineum  to  rectum  and  genitals.

Stitching :  in  lips  ;  in  throat ;  through  chest ;  in  region  of  last


BOVISTA.  480

ribs  ;  in  abdomen  ;  in  chest ;  in  1.  side  through  to  back  ;  in

neck  ;  in  upper  limbs ;  in  r.  external  malleolus  ;  in  knees ;

in  outer  malleolus  ;  in  limbs.
Shooting :  between  shoulders.
Boring :  in  upper  limbs.

Tearing:  in  lower  jaw;  in  upper  limbs ;  in  limbs.
Twisting :  in  abdomen.
Griping :  in  abdomen.

Wrenched  feeling  :  in  joints  of  arms  and  hands.
Bruised  feeling :  in  head.
Beaten  feeling :  in  limbs.
Pressing :  in  head :  from  temple  to  temple ;  in  orbits ;  in  pit

of  stomach.
Distensive  pain  :  in  head.
Wedge  pain  :  in  occiput.
Drawing  :  in  lower  molars ;  in  bowels.
Drawing-aching :  in  carious  teeth.
Burning  :  in  tip  of  tongue  ;  in  throat ;  in  oesophagus  ;  at  anus ;

in  outer  chest ;  nettle-rash.
Soreness  :  in  hip-joints  ;  between  labia  and  thighs.
Cramp  :  in  calves ;  in  leg.
Scratching:  in  larynx;  in  oesophagus.
Roughness :  in  throat.

Throbbing :  in  head,  as  of  an  abscess  ;  in  submaxillary  glands.
Fullness  :  in  pit  of  stomach.
Heaviness :  in  arms  and  hands.
Tension:  in  temples;  in  shoulder-joint ;  in  muscles  of  calf;  in

limbs.
Stiffness  :  of  neck  ;  of  back.
Crawling :  in  anus.
Tickling :  in  throat ;  in  chest.

Numbness  :  in  mouth  ;  of  posterior  portion  of  tongue.
Weariness  :  in  hands  and  feet.
Coldness  :  in  stomach  ;  moving  about  in  abdomen.
Itching :  over  scalp ;  in  ears ;  in  rectum ;  on  tip  of  os  coccy-

gis  ;  in  anus  ;  on  the  arms ;  nettle-rash.
Dryness :  in  throat.
**  Tissues. The  phlegm  from  the  nose,  bronchia,  vagina,  is  very

tough,  tenacious ;  also  the  pus  from  ulcers.
1  (Weakness  of  all  joints.

As  if  the  muscles  were  too  short  in  lower  limbs.
Tettery  constitutions,  eruptions  moist  or  dry.
*"  Touch. Passive  Motion. Injuries. Touch:  scalp  tender.
Scratching  :  docs  not  relieve  itching  of  scalp  ;  causes  soreness

of  OS  coccygis  ;  itching  continues.
Pressure :  headache  worse.
Boring  in  the  ear  with  finger ;  itching  better.
Raising  head :  headache  worse.


481  BOVISTA.

Exertions  with  hands  :  shortness  of  breath.

Overexertion  :  palpitation.

Unusually  deep  impression  on  finger  from  using  blunt  instru-
ments (as  scissors  or  knife).

Sensitiveness  to  touch,  pressure  with  hand  is  painful.

Cannot  bear  clothing.

In  bleeding  gums  after  extraction  of  tooth,  apply  pieces  of  the
fungus  to  the  cavity ;  two  or  three  applications  will  cure  the
worst  case  of  hemorrhage ;  for  any  other  kind  of  wound,  a
piece  large  enough  to  cover  the  wound,  held  firmly  on,  or
bandaged  on,  will  arrest  the  flow  of  blood  ;  in  epistaxis,  hold
a  good-sized  piece  of  the  fungus  close  to  the  nostrils,  and  di-
rect the  patient  to  inhale  with  all  possible  force  the  fumes
arising  from  it  under  pressure  of  the  hand.
*®  Skin.  I  Urticaria  covering  nearly  the  whole  body  ;  some  blotches
nearly  two  inches  in  diameter,  caused  by  tar.

Rash,  pimples,  with  burning-itching.

I  Warts  and  corns,  with  shooting  pains.

Itching  on  getting  warm,  continues  after  scratching.

Red  scabby  eruption  on  thighs  and  bends  of  knees,  appears
with  hot  weather  and  with  full  moon.

Moist  or  dry  herpes.

Tetter  on  back  of  hand ;  after  bright  red  pimples,  rough,  dark
red,  moist  spots.

■  Urticaria,  with  rheumatic  lameness;  disposition  to  diarrhoea,
each  evacuation  being  followed  by  tenesmus  ;  scorbutic  gums  ;
inflammation  of  eyes  and  nightly  agglutination  ;  morning
sweat  in  bed,  together  with  ill-humor,  moroseness,  irritability,
sensitiveness,  great  excitability ;  takes  everything  amiss ;
aversion  to  all  things  ;  quarrelsome  and  contentious  ;  stares
vacantly  into  space;  awkwardness,  which  makes  him  drop
things  ;  absence  of  mind  and  difficulty  in  fixing  his  attention.

Intolerable  itching  at  tip  of  os  coccygis ;  he  must  scratch  till
the  parts  become  raw  and  sore.
*^  Stages  of  Life,  Constitution.  Woman,  set.  36,  married ;
after  inflammation  of  the  bowels,  a  swelling  in  1.  groin  ;
tapped  a  pint  of  fluid  from  ovarian  cyst;  after  some  time
again,  five,  six  pints  ;  after  some  time  a  third  tapping  was
considered  necessary,  but  Bovista^  cured.  6  Unilocular
ovarian  cyst.

Old  maids  ;  palpitation.

Children :  stammering.
*^  Relationship. Antidote  to  5omto; CampJwr.

Bovista  antidotes  bad  eff'ects  of  tar,  externally  applied.

Useful  when  Rhus  tox  fails  in  urticaria.

Alumina  followed  well  in  rheumatic  pains  after  asthma.

Calc.  ostr.,  Rhus  tox.  and  Sepia  follow  Bovista  with  good'
effect.

VOL.  II.— 31.


BOVISTA— BRACHYGLOTTIS  REPENS.  482

Suffocation  from  carbon  vapors.

The  smoke  from  burning  Bovista  acts  more  on  bees  than  other

smoke. (How  would  smoke  of  Rlius  tox.  act  on  bees  ?)
Compare: iiCale.  ostr.,  MJius  tox.,  jSejna, I  Phosphor.,  Pul-

sat.,  Staphis.,  Sulphur., Veratr.,  II Bellad.,  Bryon.,  Carh.

veg., Caustic,  Kali  carh.,  Lycop.,  Mercur.,  ISlatr. mur.,

Silica,  Spigel.,  Strontian, Valer.
Incompatible:  coffee.


BRACHYGLOTTIS  REPENS.

Puha  puJca.  Eupatoriacece.

Pkoving  by  Dr.  L.  C.  Fischer.


A  shrub  growing  in  the  northern  Island  of  New  Zealand,  attaining  even
the  size  of  a  tree,  to  twenty  feet  in  height,  bearing  large,  broad,  indented,
glossy  leaves.  The  under  surface  thickly  covered  with  white,  downy  lay-
ers. The  flower  is  large,  iianging  in  clusters  of  very  minute,  sweet-scentt'd
blossoms. The  Maories  use  the  leaves  externally  over  old  sores  and  ulcers.

Horses,  after  eating  the  leaves  of  the  young  shrubs,  seem  to  lose  all  power
over  the  hind  legs  and  spine,  and  appear  to  be  paralyzed.

Tincture  prepared  from  the  green  leaves  and  flowers.

^  Mind. Irritable  mood.

^  Sensorium. Confusion  in  the  head  and  pain  in  the  forehead.

Giddiness  and  flushed  face.
^  Inner  Head. Pain  in  forehead. See  2.

Pressure  in  forehead  ;  1st  d.

Transitory,  sudden  throbs  1.  side  of  head  after  one  hour ;  2d  d.

Pressive  pain  in  1.  side  of  forehead.

Throbbing  left  temple.

Headache,  pressive  and  throbbing  in  forehead.

Headache  concentrated  about  left  eye.

Pain  over  the  left  eye.

Pain  over  right  eye.

Feeling  of  tightness  in  forehead  and  temple.

Weight  on  top  of  head.

Headache  extending  from  temple  to  temple.

Severe  throbbing  pain  around  right  ear,  and  passing  from  ear
to  eyes,  and  then  to  neck.

A  violent  headache  lasting  four  hours  and  commencing  again


483  BRACHYGLOTTIS  REPENS.

at  night,  preventing  sleep,  leaving  in  morning  a  bruised  feel-
ing- .

Throbbing  pain  in  the  head.

Bruised  pain  in  left  temple.

Darting  pain  in  right  side  of  head.

Heaviness  over  head.

Headache  and  faceache,  becomes  very  severe  and  prevents  sleep
during  the  night.
*  Outer  Head. A  cold  sensation  and  tightness  about  the  scalp.

Increasing  desire  to  bend  the  head.

Soreness  all  over  the  head  and  stiffness  in  the  neck.
®  Sight  and  Eyes. Dimness  of  sight  and  pressure  on  forehead.

Pain  over  left  eye.

Soreness  around  eyes,  as  if  bruised.
^  Hearing  and  Ears. Tingling  in  ears.

Pain  in  the  ears.

Itching  and  pricking  in  ears.

Throbbing  about  r.  ear,  from  ear  to  eyes  and  then  to  neck.
'  Smell  and  Nose. Irritation  in  nostrils  and  repeated  sneezing.

Irritation  in  left  nostril  and  feeling  as  if  the  air  is  too  sharp.

Itching  in  nose.

Itching  and  burning  in  nostrils.

Soreness  of  nostrils  exteriorly.
^  Face. Faceache  left  side,  as  if  the  submaxillary  glands  were  af-
fected, extending  to  the  upper  part  of  the  face.

Itching  in  the  face.

Soreness,  zygomatic  process  right  side  of  face.

The  headache  and  faceache  become  very  intense,  and  prevent
sleep  during  the  night.

Soreness  in  the  zygomatic  process,  left  side.

Sudden  lancinating  pain  in  right  side  of  face.

Chilliness  and  heat  in  face.

Slight  twitches  in  left  side  of  face.

Appearance  of  general  illness.

Flushed  face. See  2.

Faceache  with  headache. See  3.

Severe  pain  and  tightness  of  the  skin  over  the  forehead.

Twitching  in  left  side  efface.
^  Lower  Part  of  Face. Severe  pain  in  left  submaxillary  region.

Painless  soreness  in  sterno-mastoid  process.

Since  about  a  week  a  soreness  has  been  felt  on  the  corners  of
the  mouth,  which  now  relieves  itself  by  swelling  of  the  lips.
^^  Teeth  and  Gums. Toothache,  right  side,  extending  to  ears.
^'  Taste,  Speech,  Tongue. Soreness  of  tongue.

Pricking  and  numbness  in  tongue.

Pain  and  numbness  of  tongue.
^^  Inner  Mouth. Heat  in  the  mouth.
^'  Palate  and  Throat. Slight  soreness  in  the  throat.


BRACHYGLOTTIS  REPENS.  484

Scraping  sensation  in  throat.

Soreness  and  rawness  in  throat.

Dryness  and  rawness  in  throat.

Pain  in  throat  increased  by  swallowing.

Sharp,  cutting  pain  in  throat.

Dryness  in  throat  with  slight  cutting  pain.

Dryness  of  the  throat  and  lips.

The  throat  symptoms  seem  to  be  nervous, and not  resulting
from  the  mucous  membranes ;  the  same  may  be  said  of  the
nose  and  ear  symptoms.
^*  Appetite. Loss  of  appetite.

^®  Nausea  and  Vomiting. Evening,  nausea  and  eructation  of
the  taste  of  the  ingesta.

Eructation  ;  fluttering  in  the  stomach.
^'  Scrobieulum  and  Stomach. Soon  after  taking  the  dose,  pain,
soreness  in  the  stomach.

Fluttering  in  the  stomach.

Nauseating  sensation  in  stomach.

Evening,  after  tea,  soreness ;  throbbing  in  stomach  and  bow-
els, right  side.

Fullness  and  pain  in  the  stomach.

Pain  in  right  side  of  back  and  stomach  while  breathing.
"  Hypochondria. Pain,  right  side.

Isolated  throbbing  pains  in  right  side,  back.

Acute  throbbing  in  right  hypochondriac  region.
"  Abdomen,  Loins  and  Groins. Isolated  throbbing  in  1.  groin.

Almost  constant  pain  in  groins  and  weariness  in  lower  limbs.

Pain  in  left  groin.

Acute  pain  in  groin.

Fluttering  sensation  in  abdomen.

Severe  pain  across  the  loins.

Pain  in  the  bowels.

Dull  pain  in  the  bowels.
^^  Rectum  and  Stool. Evacuation  of  dry  faeces,  with  sore,  con-
strictive pain  in  anus  ;  evening.

Ineffectual  urging  for  stool.

The  action  of  the  bowels  has  become  more  and  more  consti-
pated and  painful ;  faeces  like  balls  and  knotty.

Colic  and  desire  for  stool.

Diarrhoeic  stools  in  the  evening.

Tendency  to  diarrhoea.
^^  Urinary  Organs. Pressure  and  soreness  in  neck  of  bladder.

By  passing  urine,  pain  in  bladder  and  soreness  in  urethra ;
feeling  as  if  urine  could  not  be  retained.

Urine  abundant ;  specific  gravity,  0.8 ;  full  of  mucous  filaments
under  microscope,  consisting  of  mucous  corpuscles  and  epi-
thelium.


485  BRACHYGLOTTIS  REPENS.

Inclination  and  urgent  desire  to  pass  urine ;  12i  ounces ;  spe-
cific gravity  .04;  reaction  acid.

Irritation  in  bladder.

Soreness  in  region  of  kidneys.

Passed  a  large  quantity  of  pale  colored  urine.

Urgency  in  passing  urine ;  pain  in  neck  of  bladder ;  a  large
quantity  of  pale  colored  urine  voided  ;  specific  gravity,  .0.8  ;
boiling  and  nitric  acid  test  prove  albumen.

llBright's  disease.

Since  the  evacuation,  pressure  and  acute  pain  in  bladder  and
urethra,  with  stinging  in  penis.

Pressure  in  neck  of  bladder  by  voiding  urine  in  the  evening,  as
formerly ;  the  quantity  is  much  less  and  dark  in  color ;  spe-
cific gravity,  24  ;  long  threads  again  floating  in  it.

Stinging  pain  in  urethra.

Passed  a  large  quantity  of  dark  colored  urine,  containing  long
threads,  which,  when  examined  microscopically,  proved  less
mucous  but  mere  transparent  waxy  casts.

The  urine  voided  was  examined  with  the  microscope,  and  con-
sists of  a  mass  of  epithelial  cells,  adhering  to  each  other
(phosphates,  oxalate  of  lime) ;  (the  quantity  of  urine  voided
in  twenty-four  hours  was  48  ounces  ;  specific  gravity,  24).

Passed  soon  a  large  quantity  of  urine,  with  constant  desire  and
feeling  as  if  the  bladder  was  not  emptied.

Soon  after  taking  the  dose,  gnawing  pain  in  region  of  kidneys.

Desire  for  micturition  during  day  ;  urine  dark ;  specific  gravity,
23 ;  acid  reaction.

Urinary  secretion  painful  in  bladder  and  urethra,  and  distinct
in  penis.

Passed  43  ounces  of  urine  in  twenty-four  hours,  dark  color ;
specific  gravity,  34  ;  mucous  cells  and  triple  phosphates.

Passed  about  56  ounces  of  urine  in  twenty-four  hours ;  specific
gravity,  20 ;  full  of  white  mucous  sediment,  more  than  any
previously  passed,  containing  epithelium,  triple  phosphates
and  mucous  casts  from  the  kidneys.

Passing  urine  preceded  by  pain  in  the  bowels.

After  the  passing  of  urine,  the  pain  in  shoulder  was  much
increased,  and  changed  from  a  sharp  cutting  to  a  throbbing
pain.

Pain  in  knee  followed  by  passing  a  large  quantity  of  urine.  _

By  urinating,  pain  in  bladder  and  soreness  in  urethra,  feeling
as  if  urine  could  not  be  retained.
2^  Male  Sexual  Organs. Soreness  in  groins,  as  if  in  spermatic
cords,  and  a  thrilling  sensation  through  penis  and  testes.

Throbbing in penis and desire  to  pass  urine;  pressure  in
bladder.
^^  Respiration. Oppression  of  breathing,  as  if  pectoral  muscles
were  contracting,  and  a  stretching  would  give  relief;  which


BRACHYGLOTTIS  REPENS.  486

sensation  seems  to  be  also  in  dorsal  muscles  and  right  shoul-
der-blade.
Oppressive  breathing  ;  sighing  gives  relief.
^^  Inner  Chest  and  Lungs. Pressure  in  chest  (oesophagus  ?).
Pain  in  right  side  of  chest,  affected  by  breathing.
Pain  flying  about  the  chest.
^^  Heart,  Pulse  and  Circulation. Pain  in  left  side  of  chest,

region  of  heart.

Shooting  in  pectoral  muscles  in  region  of  heart.

Shooting  pain  in  intercostal  muscles,  region  of  heart.
^^  Outer  Chest. Throbbing  in  sternum,  and  pain  in  pectoral  mus-
cles.
^^  Neck  and  Back. Pain  in  back.

Soreness  in  shoulders  and  neck.

Weariness  and  weakness  in  back,  from  coccyx  upwards,  and
dull  pain  in  region  of  kidneys.

Pain  in  neck  by  moving  head  from  one  side  to  other ;  soreness
in  region  of  attachments  of  sterno  mastoid  muscles.

Pain  in  back  and  weakness  in  extremities.

Soreness  in  lower  part  of  spine,  from  which  he  was  free,  is  re-
turning with  great  violence  and  intensity  ;  it  is  almost  trace-
able to  the  sciatic  nerve.

Uneasiness  in  back,  and  prostration  all  the  day.

Stiffness  in  the  neck.

Aching  in  lumbar  region.

Soreness  in  first  dorsal  vertebrae  to  touch.

Eeeling  as  if  whole  back  would  contract  backward,  and  muscles
of  neck  were  affected.

Sudden  pain  about  the  fourth  and  fifth  dorsal  vertebras,  ex-
tending to  right  side  of  chest  and  shoulders.

Pain  in  neck,  prominently  affecting  upper  part  of  trapeze  mus-
cle and  extending  to  shoulders.

Pain  in  neck  by  pressing  on  forehead.

Cutting  pain  in  neck.

Stiffness  in  neck  and  soreness  all  over  the  head.

Coldness  in  the  back.

Cutting  pain  under  left  shoulder.

Isolated  throbbing  right  side  of  back.
^^  Upper  Limbs. Feebleness  in  the  arms.

Isolated  sore  throbs  in  r.  arm  and  axilla.

Pain  in  left  elbow.

Painful  throbbing  about  shoulder  and  collarbone.

Weariness  in  the  arms.

Soreness  in  fingers  and  thumb  ;  weakness  in  hands  in  writing.

Soreness  in  right  wrist,  extending  upwards  to  elbow,  as  if  trace-
able in  flexor  carpi  ulnaris  muscle.

Throbbing  and  shooting  pain  in  wrist.

Weakness  and  soreness  in  biceps.


487  BRACHYGLOTTIS  REPENS.

Isolated  throbbing  or  sbooting  in  the  arms.

Cracking  in  joints  of  left  arm.

Prostration  and  weakness  in  right  arm  by  writing.

Throbbing  as  formerly  in  the  arms.

Weakness  and  prostration  in  arms  and  wrists.

Pain  under  right  axilla,  extending  to  pectoral  muscles.

Sensation  of  pain  running  along  left  upper  arm,  becoming  sta-
tionary.

Painful  soreness  under  the  arms.

Soreness  and  pain  in  left  wrist.

Cracking  in  left  shoulder ;  this  has  never  been  experienced  be-
fore.

Great  fatigue  in  arms.

Pain  of  great  intensity  in  deltoid  of  left  arm.

Pain  under  right  axilla.

Severe  cramp  in  thumb,  bringing  it  down  to  the  palm  of  hand.

Cramp  in  fingers,  thumb  and  wrist,  by  writing.

Severe  cutting  pain  in  left  shoulder.

Cramp  and  pain  in  little  finger.

Bruised  pain,  commencing  at  shoulder  and  extending  down  to
wrist ;  pain  in  wrist  and  arm  is  getting  worse ;  pain  in  arm
prevents  sleep.

Feebleness  in  the  arms.

Prostration  and  weakness  in  right  arm  by  writing.
^'  Lower  Limbs. Transitory,  short,  sudden  pains  in  thighs.

Great  weakness  in  legs  and  prostration.

Throbbing  sore  pain  in  legs.

Weakness  in  lower  extremities  by  walking.

Great  prostration  in  legs,  and  soreness  in  lower  part  of  spine ;
the  weakness  and  pain  is  more  perceptible  in  left  than  in  right
thigh.

Sharp  throbbings  or  shooting  in  knees,  and  contractions,  cramp-
like, in  muscles  of  the  thighs.

Weakness  in  lower  extremities  increasing,  extending  from  hip
to  knees.

Pain  in  knees  ;  sore  throbbings.

Pain  in  lower  part  of  legs.

Cracking  in  joints  of  lower  extremities  by  walking.

Painful  itching-burning  by  walking,  under  big  toes,  and  itch-
ing in  sole  of  right  foot.

Soreness  on  soles  offset.

Rheumatic  moving-aching  in  left  knee,  very  intense.

Cramp  in  both  legs,  extending  from  thighs  to  knees.

Contraction  of  right  leg.

Cramps  in  front  of  left  leg,  above  knee.

Isolated  sudden  throbbing  in  left  groin.

Pain  in  thighs  by  walking.

Transitory,  short,  sudden  pain  in  thighs.


BRACIIYGLOTTIS  REPENS.  488

Almost  constant  pain  in  groins,  with  weariness  in  limbs.

Sharp  throbbing  and  shooting  in  veins,  immediately  after  tak-
ing the  dose.

Cramp-like  contractions  in  muscles  of  thigh.

Cold  feet.
^*  Limbs  in  General. Weariness  and  weakness  in  limbs.
^' Rest. Position. Motion. Walking:  weakness  of  lower  ex-
tremities ;  cracking  in  joints  of  lower  extremities ;  painful
itching-burning  in  thighs.
^®  Nerves. Great  lassitude  and  prostration.

Heaviness  and  sleepiness.
^^  Sleep. A  very  restless  and  sleepless  night  was  passed.

Very  sleepy  during  day,  and  constant  yawning  all  day.

Great  inclination  to  sleep.

Restless  sleep  during  the  night.

After  waking  could  not  fall  asleep  again;  confused  dreams.

Eull  of  dreams.

Talking  in  sleep.

Headache  preventing  sleep  ;  with  faceache.
^^  Time. Morning : bruised  feeling  in head ; throbbing  in  left
groin.

During  day:  desire  for  micturition;  prostration;  sleepiness
and  yawning.

Evening :  soreness  of  stomach  and  bowels  ;  sore  pain  in  anus ;
diarrhoeic  stools  ;  pressure  neck  of  bladder.

Night :  headache  prevents  sleep  ;  restless  and  sleepless.
'"  Chill. Fever. Sweat. Cold  and  chilly.

Chilly ;  pulse  50.

Shivering  and  chilliness  immediately  after  taking  the  dose.

Rigor  and  chills  all  over  the  frame.

Hands  and  feet  cold.

The  rigors  and  chills  are  nervous.
*^  Locality  and  Direction.  Right:  pain  over  eye;  pain  around
ear ;  pain  side  of  head ;  soreness  zygomatic  process ;  lanci-
nating pain  in  side  of  face;  toothache  of  side;  throbbing  in
stomach  and  bowels  of  side;  pain  side  of  stomach  and  back  ;
pain  in  hypochondrium  ;  contracting  sensation  in  scapula ;
pain  side  of  chest  and  shoulder ;  sore  throbs  in  arm  and  ax-
illa;  soreness  in  wrist;  weakness  of  arm;  contracting  pain
in  leg ;  itching  on  sole  of  foot.

Left :  throbbing  in  temple  ;  headache  about  eye ;  pain  in  tem-
ple ;  pain  over  eye ;  irritation  in  nostril ;  faceache  of  side :
soreness  zygomatic  process ;  twitches  side  of  face ;  pain  in
submaxillary  region;  throbbing  in  groin  ;  pain  side  of  chest ;
cutting  pain  in  shoulder;  pain  in  elbow  ;  cracking  in  joints
of  arm ;  pain  along  upper  arm  ;  sore  pain  in  wrist ;  cracking
in  shoulder;  pain  in  deltoid;  weakness  <  in  thigh ;  aching
in  knee ;  cramps  in  front  of  thigh.


489  BRACHYGLOTTIS  REPENS.

Above  downward  :  bruised  pain  in  shoulder ;  weakness  in  hip  ;
cramp  in  hip.

Below  upward  :  weakness  in  coccyx ;  soreness  in  wrist.
^^  Sensations. As  if  back  would  contract  backward.

Cutting:  in  throat;  under  1.  shoulder;  in  1.  shoulder.

Darting:  in  r.  side  of  head.

Lancinating :  in  r.  side  of  face.

Stinging  :  in  penis  ;  in  urethra.

Pricking :  in  ears  ;  in  tongue.

Shooting :  in  pectoral  muscles,  region  of  heart ;  in  intercostal
muscles;  in  wrist;  in  arms;  in  knees.

Gnawing:  in  region  of  kidneys.

Scraping:  in  throat.

Pressing:  in  1.  side  of  forehead;  in  forehead;  in  neck  of  blad-
der ;  in  chest.

Bruised  :  headache ;  in  1.  temple ;  around  eyes  ;  from  shoulder
to  wrist.

Soreness:  overhead;  around  eyes;  in  zygomatic  process;  of
corners  of  mouth ;  of  tongue ;  in  throat ;  in  stomach  ;  in
anus ;  in  neck  of  bladder ;  in  urethra  ;  in  region  of  kidneys  ;
in  groins  ;  in  shoulders  and  neck  ;  in  lower  spine;  in  fingers;
in  wrists  ;  in  biceps  ;  in  soles  of  feet.

Burning :  in  nostrils.

Itching-burning  :  under  big  toes.

Aching  :  in  lumbar  region ;  in  1.  knee.

Rawness:  in  throat.

Cramp  :  in  throat ;  in  fingers  ;  in  wrist ;  in  thigh-muscles  ;  in
legs._

Constrictive  pain  :  in  anus  ;  in  pectoral  muscles.

Undefined  pain  :  in  forehead ;  over  1.  eye ;  over  r.  eye ;  in
ears  ;  in  1.  submaxillary  region  ;  in  tongue  ;  in  stomach  ;  in
back  ;  in  1.  groin  ;  across  loins  ;  in  bowels  ;  in  neck  of  blad-
der; in  side  of  chest ;  in  neck  ;  in  1.  elbow  ;  in  legs.

Thrilling :  through  penis  and  testes.

Fluttering  :  in  stomach  ;  in  abdomen.

Throbbing:  in  1.  side  of  head;  in  1.  temple;  around  r.  ear;  in
stomach ;  in  r.  side,  back  ;  in  1.  groin  ;  in  penis ;  in  r.  arm
and  in  sternum ;  about  shoulder  and  axilla ;  in  collarbone ;
in  wrist ;  in  arms  ;  in  legs ;  in  knees.

Fullness  :  in  stomach.

Heaviness :  over  head.

Weight :  on  top  of  head.

Cracking:  1.  shoulder,  arm  and  lower  limbs.

Stiffness :  in  neck.

Tightness:  in  forehead  and  temple ;  about  scalp.

Twitching:  in  1.  side  efface.

Weariness  :  in  lower  limbs  ;  in  back  ;  in  arms.

Numbness :  of  tongue.


BRACHYGLOTTIS  REPENS.  490

Tingling :  in  ears.

Coldness :  about  scalp  ;  in  back.

Heat :  in  mouth.

Itching:  in  ears;  in  nose;  in  nostrils;  in  face;  in  sole  of  r.
foot;  of  skin.

Dryness  :  in  throat ;  of  lips.
**  Tissues. Loss  of  flesh  since  commencement  of  proving.

While  at  first  the  pains  had  a  nervous  character,  they  are  now
decidedly  muscular  and  lasting  longer.

Seems  at  first  to  attack  the  nervous  system.

It  appears  as  if  the  whole  nervous  system  was  influenced ;  the
filaments  and  membranous  nerves  first  perceptibly,  but  the
larger  branches  and  roots  were  unmistakably  affected — which
is  proved  by  the  intensity  and  constant  pain  in  the  back,
acting  upon  the  motor  nerves  as  well  as  the  nerves  of  secre-
tion, but  the  medulla  oblongata  appears  not  to  be  so  immedi-
ately acted  upon,  as  there  are  no  spasms  and  contractions,
and  no  cerebral  disturbances,  and  only  later  in  the  provings,
muscular  sensation  of  continuous  contraction  appears  to  take
place.

The  seventh  pair,  facial  and  auditory,  seem  to  participate — ex-
tending in  their  ramification  to  the  inferior  dental  and  auric
branches,  principally  left  side.

The  sciatic  and  crural  nerves,  as  well  as  the  saphenic,  seem
most  and  directly  influenced,  while  in  the  upper  extremity
the  ramification  of  the  brachial  and  radial  nerves  are  more
influenced.

The  muscles  seem  to  be  affected  secondarily  after  longer  prov-
ing; the  power  of  contraction  and  action  becomes  more  in-
fluenced after  the  proving  has  been  carried  on  some  time,
and  which  depends  also  on  the  intensity  of  the  dose.
*'  Touch.  Passive  Motion.  Injuries.  Touch :  soreness  in
first  dorsal  vertebra.

Pressure  on  forehead:  pain  in  neck.

Moving  head  from  one  side  to  another :  pain  in  neck.
*^  Skin. Itching  of  skin.

**  Relationship. Compare  :  Arnic,  Calend.,  Senecio,  and  other
eupatoriacese.

Similar  to :  Apis  (soreness,  stinging  in  urethra) ;  Arnie.
(bruised,  sore  feeling) ;  Bovist.  (albuminuria) ;  Helonias  (al-
buminuria) ;  Merc.  cor.  (albuminuria,  urging  to  urinate  and
defecate) ;  Nux  vom.  (urging  to  urinate  and  defecate) ;  Opium
(faeces  like  balls) ;  Plumbum  (fgeces  like  balls,  painful  mictu-
rition, albuminuria).


491  BEOMIUM.

BROMIUM. .

Bromine.  The  element.


Proved  by  C.Hg.,  in  1838,  and  later;  a  carefully  made  collection,  number-
ing five  hundred  and  ten  symptoms,  obtained  with  the  use  of  high  and  low
doses  from  fourteen  provers,  four  of  them  being  females,  and  containing
nearly  all  the  characteristics  which  have  hitherto  led  to  innumerable  cures,
was  published  in  the  Archives  in  1846.  It  was  proved  later  by  Lembke  in
lower  and  by  Berridge  in  higher  potencies,  the  result  being  confirmatory.

^  Mind. Quick  comprehension.

In  evening,  when  alone,  felt  as  if  he  would  see  something  if  he
should  turn  around  ;  as  if  some  one  were  back  of  him.

Expects  to  see  something  jump  around  the  floor.

Desire  for  mental  labor,  preceded  by  aversion  to  his  own  pro-
fession.

Crying  and  lamentations,  with  hoarse  voice.

■  Aversion  to  any  kind  of  work,  even  reading;  takes  no  inter-

est in  household  duties.
Cheerful  mood,  no  desire  for  mental  labor.
1 1  She  does  not  feel  as  she  generally  does,  but  can't  tell  why.
Depression  and  melancholy.

■  Great  depression  of  spirits, d  Scirrhus  mammoe.

I  Very  much  depressed  and  inconsolable, d  Cancer  of  mamma.

Low-spirited  and  out  of  humor.

iVery  low-spirited,  with  pain  in  left  iliac  region.

I  Sad,  discouraged. ^  Swelling  of  testicle.

I  She  is  not  like  herself;  despondent,  sits  alone  in  her  room

without  doing  anything;  looks  constantly  in  one  direction

without  saying  anything.

■  Violent  coughing  spells,  with  anxiety. 6  Croup.

^  Sensorium. Sensation  deep  in  brain,  as  if  vertigo  would  come

on,  or  as  if  he  would  lose  his  consciousness.
Vertigo:  with  tendency  to  fall  backwards;  if  he  puts  his  foot

on  a  bridge ;  from  sight  of  running  water.
Vertigo  in  damp  weather.
Vertigo  with  nausea  and  nosebleed.
^  Inner  Head. Pain  over  the  left  eye.

Headache; heaviness  in  forehead  in  heat  of  sun,  passes  ofl"

when  in  shade.
Pressure  in  left  temple.
Left-sided  headache.
Headache  all  week,  hammering  in  temples  and  top  of  head.


BROMIUM.  492

1 1  Headache  deep  in  crown  of  head,  with  palpitation.
Headache  after  drinking  milk.
*  Outer  Head. Pains  in  bones  of  head,  fore  and  back  part ;  to-
wards evening  in  damp  weather.

I  Scalp  tender;  covered  with  an  eruption,  with  dirty  looking

and  offensive  smelling  discharge, d  Eczema.
Crawling  beneath  skin  of  occiput.

■  Malignant  scald  head.

^  Sight  and  Eyes. Flashes  of  light.
Sensitiveness  to  bright  light.

A  gray  point  before  right  eye,  moving  up  and  down  with  move-
ment of  the  eye.
Dilatation  of  pupils.
Darting  through  1.  eye.

■  Throbbing  stitches  in  left  upper  lid,  extending  to  brow,  fore-

head and  left  temple ; ■<  by  external  pressure,  motion  and

stooping;  relieved  by  rest.;  pain  unfits  him  for  work.
iLachrymation  of  r.  eye,  with  swelling  of  lachrymal  gland.

d  Fistula  lachrymalis.
Protruding  eyes.
^  Hearing  and  Ears. Noise  in  ears,  like  a  distant  rushing.
Ringing  in  right  ear.
Stitches  in  ear.
Throbbing  and  burning  in  ears,  may  be  succeeded  by  burning

through  whole  body.
Discharge  from  ears.

I I  Parotids,  mostly  the  left,  affected, d  After  scarlatina.

1 1  Swelling  and  hardness  of  left  parotid  gland,  the  swelling  feel-
ing warm  to  the  touch, d  Sequel  to  scarlatina.

1 1  Suppuration  of  left  parotid,  edges  of  the  opening  smooth  ;
discharge  watery  and  excoriating ;  swelling  remaining  hard
and  unyielding, d  After  scarlatina.
^  Smell  and  Nose. iFan-like,  motion  of  nostrils.

Tickling-smarting,  as  from  cobwebs,  especially  on  moving  the
nose  ;  this  sensation  is  in  the  face  particularly  below  the  nose.

Nosebleed,  with  relief  of  the  chest  and  eye  symptoms.

I  Bleeding  of  nose,  relieving  the  chest.

Frequent  violent  sneezing.

Inhalation  causes  sneezing.

I  Fluent  coryza,  with  frequent  violent  sneezing ;  corrosive  sore-
ness under  nose  and  on  the  margins  of  the  nose.

Fluent  coryza  with  scabby  nostrils.

Severe  coryza,  right  nostril  stopped  up  and  sore  throughout ;
later  the  left.

■  Yearly  cold,  with  sore  nostril  and  difficult  breathing.

■  Fluent  coryza,  in  which  the  right  nostril  is  more  affected  and

more  stopped.


493  BROMIUM.

I  Long-continued,  obstinate  coryza,  with  soreness  beneath  nose
and  on  margin  of  nose ;  also  catarrh  in  the  fauces.

Headache  extends  to  r.  nostril.

I  The  whole  nose  is  sore,  and  the  wings  of  nose  swollen;  a  scurf
forms  in  it,  with  pain  and  bleeding  on  wiping  it.
^  Face. I  Cancerous  ulcer  between  r.  eye  and  ear,  of  size  of  palm
of  a  child's  hand.

Sensation  as  of  spider  web  on  face.

Face  :  pale,  or  red,  or  alternating.

I  Face  of  a  bluish  tinge,  turning  purplish  at  each  effort  to  cough.

d  Croup.

I I  Gray,  earthy  color  of  face  ;  oldish  appearance, d  Cancer  of
mamma.

I  Face  ashy-gray. ^Diphtheria.

I  Cheeks  sunken. ^Diphtheria.

Heat  in  cheeks ;  first  in  right,  later  in  left.

I  Heat  of  face  and  head, d  Spasm  of  glottis.

iPale,  collapsed  face. ^  Croup.
®  Lower  Part  of  Face. Shooting  pain  on  Vermillion  border  of
upper  lip; afterwards  yellow spots, which open  and  dis-
charge a  yellow  fluid.

Boring  pain  going  to  right,  or  on  right  side  of  lower  jaw.

I  I  Slight  swelling  of  articulation  of  left  jaw,  with  cracking  in

it  when  chewing;  swelling  and  hardness  of  left  parotid,
which  is  warm  to  touch ;  rosy-red  swelling  of  tonsils  and
difficult  swallowing ;  tension  and  pressure  when  swallowing
and  when  not ;  the  pain  in  throat  is  especially  increased
when  swallowing  fluids  ;  hawking  up  mucus.
iLeft  submaxillary  gland  swollen  to  size  of  a  small  hen's  egg,
hard,  not  sore  to  pressure;  neighboring  glands  more  or  less
similarly  aff'ected.

I I  Stony,  hard  swelling  of  glands,  especially  on  lower  jaw  and
throat.

^®  Teeth  and  Gums. Decayed  teeth  sensitive  to  cold  water.

Gums  pain  in  morning.

Swelling  and  induration  of  gums.
"  Taste, Speech, Tongue. Taste  : sweetish  ; salty  ; bitter  ;
sour ;  acrid.

Water  tastes  salty  in  morning,  fasting.

Dry  sensation  on  tongue.

Burning  on  under  surface  of  tongue.

Stinging  in  tip  of  tongue.
*^  Inner  Mouth. iFoetor  oris. ^Diphtheria.

■  Sensation  of  dryness  and  burning  in  mouth, d  Nasal  catarrh.
I  Mouth  dry  and  parched. ^Eczema.

■  Salivation  increases  and  exudation  decreases. ^Diphtheria.
Ptyalism  ;  much  frothy  mucus  in  mouth.

Heat  in  mouth  and  oesophagus.


BROMIUM.  494

Burning  sensation  in  mouth,  oesophagus  and  stomach.

Aphthae,  with  affection  of  the  eyes.
"  Palate  and  Throat. I  Dryness  in  throat, d  Croup.

B Scraping  in  throat,  and  a  rough,  deep  voice,  continued  for  an
hour.

Burning  from  mouth  to  stomach.

Worse  when  swallowing  drink ;  less  frequently  when  swallow-
ing food  or  saliva.

Swallowing  especially  painful  to  the  right  side  of  the  fauces,
which  is  dark  red  and  dry.

Elongation  of  the  uvula.

B  Swelling  of  mucous  membrane  of  fauces  and  pharynx.

■  Small  follicles  in  the  posterior  fauces;  the  inflammation  ex-
tending to  the  larynx,  causing  a  titillating  cough.

Unpleasant  puckered  sensation  in  the  fauces,  followed  by  burn-
ing and  soreness.

Lump  in  throat.

I  Tonsils  swollen,  inflamed;  constant  pain  in  throat,  swallow-
ing diflicult,  of  fluids  worse  than  solids, d  After  measles.

Inflammation  of  the  fauces,  with  reticulated  redness  and  de-
nuded patches.

Diphtheria,  commencing  apparently  in  the  larynx  and  extend-
ing upwards.

B  Malignant  forms  of  diphtheria.

B  BDiphtheritis  of  larynx,  or  croup.*

B  After  all  other  symptoms  have  passed  off,  great  weakness  and
lassitude, d  Diphtheria.

Bin  cases  where  the  membrane  forms  back  almost  over  the
larynx,  Bromium  removed  husky  tone  of  voice  in  a  few  hours.
d  Diphtheria. •

B  Preferred  for  the  left  side  of  throat. BDiphtheritis.

B  Stiffness  of  neck  with  diphtheritis.

^*  Appetite,  Thirst,  Desires,  Aversions. Thirst  seems  to

be  wanting.

BDesire  for  acids. B  Diarrhoea.

Desire  for  acids,  which  aggravate  the  symptoms  and  cause  diar-
rhoea.


*  With  apparent  great  sagacity  one  of  our  best  authors  says:  '•  Bromine
could  not  be  a  remedy  in  diphtheria  and  also  in  croup,  as  diphtheritis  and
croup  are  two  diseases  entirely  different  in  their  nature  and  character;  a
chief  croup  remedy  cannot  at  the  same  time  be  a  great  diphtheritis  remedy,
because  a  drug  has  not  only  to  cover  the  symptoms,  but  must  likewise  cor-
respond to  the  character  of  the  disease."

He  quotes  Belladonna:  "do  we  give  Bellad.  for  headache  in  the  full-
blooded  and  robust  and  also  in  the  bloodless  and  feeble?"  We  answer,  yes,
we  do,  frequently.  Every  fully  proved  drug  has  produced  such  "  opposite"
states  and  also  cured  them,  if  only  the  other  symptoms,  particularly  the
characteristics  correspond  to  the  case.  We  have  nothing  to  do  with  the
disease,  only  with  the  sick  and  the  characteristics  of  each  case. — C.Hg.


495  BROMIUM.

■  Aversion  to  tlie  customary  tobacco  smoking;  it  causes  nau-

sea and  vertigo. ^Diarrhoea.

Aversion  to  drinking  cold  water.
^^  Eating  and  Drinking. H  After  eating,  nausea  and  pains  in
stomach  better. 6  Diarrhoea.

I  Contractive  spasm  of  stomach  passing  off  after  eating,  d  Diar-
rhoea.

I  Gastric  symptoms  better  from  black  coffee. 6  Diarrhoea.

Headache  after  drinking  milk.

I  After  a  meal,  diarrhoea.  '

Worse  from  cold  diet.

I  After  acids:  diarrhoea;  cough  worse.

I  After  eating  oysters,  diarrhoea.

Worse  from  tobacco  smoke,  cough.
^^  Hiccough,  Belching,  Nausea  and  Vomiting. Hiccough
and  nausea.

Eructations:  empty;  tasteless;  tasting  like  foul  eggs;  with
vomiting  of  mucus.

Nausea  and  retching,  better  after  eating.

B  Nausea. ^Diarrhoea.

Vomiting  of  bloody  mucus.
^^  Scrobiculum  and  Stomach. lEmptiness  in  stomach.  (?  Diar-
rhoea.

Feeling  of  emptiness  in  stomach ;  better  after  eating,  for  which,
however,  he  had  no  longing.

I  Feeling  of  heaviness  in  stomach, d  Inflammation  of  stomach.

Contractive  cramp  in  stomach  at  11.30  A  M.,  ceases  after  eating.

■  Pressure  in  stomach,  like  from  a  stone. ^Emphysema.
Pain  in  stomach  increased  by  pressure.

Hypochondria. Pain  in  region  of  liver.

Stitches  in  hypochondria ;  also  from  right  to  left.
Stitches  shooting  from  the  liver  toward  the  navel.
Sensation  as  of  a  ball  in  left  hypochondrium.

■  Enlargement  and  induration  of  the  spleen,  d  After  maltreated
gonorrhoea.

Abdomen,  Loins  and  Groins. Griping  and  colicky  pains.

■  Off  and  on  a  very  strong  pain  and  sore  feeling  in  lower  left
part  of  abdomen, d  Mental  derangement.

■  ■Periodically  much  pain  in  left  hypochondriac  and  iliac  re-
gions; pain  is  violent,  as  if  there  were  sore  spots  inside.
d  Mental  derangement.

Pains  in  abdomen  and  small  of  back  ;  passage  of  much  flatus.

■  Tympanitic  distension  of  abdomen,  and  passage  of  much  wind,

■  Flatulence. ^Eczema.
Painless  swelling  of  right  inguinal  glands.
Pain  in  left  inguinal  canal,  especially  on  walking,  pressure

and  coughing.
Eruption  on  perineum. See  axillae.


18


19


BROMIUM.  496

2"  Rectum  and  Stool. ■  Croup  of  colon.

1 1  Black,  fecal  stools.

Yellow,  green  or  blackish  diarrhoea.

Stools :  bright  yellow,  preceded  by  cutting  and  rumbling  in

abdomen; light yellow, slimy mucus;  painless, odorless,

like  scrapings  from  intestines.

■  Diarrhoea  after  every  meal  ceases,  but  returns  after  oysters.
Diarrhoea  :  after  every  meal  ;  at  night.

Constipation  :  stool  hard,  tough,  brown  and  glistening  ;  breaks

to  pieces  like  sheep  dung.
Before  stool :  rumbling  and  cutting  pain  in  abdomen.
During  stool:  much  flatus;  painful  hemorrhoids; pressing  in

stomach  and  abdomen.
iBlind,  painful  hemorrhoids  during  and  after  stool ; <  from

cold  or  warm  water ; > from  wetting  with  saliva.

I  Blind,  intensely  painful  varices,  with  black,  diarrhoeic  stools.

I I  Varices  <  from  application  of  cold  and  warm  water,  d  Diar-
rhoea.

^^  Urinary  Organs. Continued  desire  to urinate,  with tickling
sensation  in  tip  of  urethra.

Frequent  urination.

I  High  colored  urine. ^Eczema.

Urine:  scanty  and  dark;  turbid,  and  deposits  a  whitish  sedi-
ment adhering  to  the  vessel ;  leaves  a  red  coating  on  vessel ;
contains  large  flakes  of  white  mucus,  like  jelly.

Dribbling  of  urine,  with  burning  after  urinating.
'^  Male  Sexual  Organs. Increased  sexual  desire.

Nightly  emissions.

Coldness  of  left  testicle.

Hard,  painless  swelling  of  left  testicle,  painful  when  driving.

■  Swelling  of  testicle,  remaining  after  gonorrhoea  three  months

ago,  size  of  a  hen's  egg,  oval  round,  somewhat  hard,  not
very  sensitive  to  pressure,  smooth  ;  pains  most  when  driv-
ing; Brom.^  in  water,  three  times  daily,  helped  in  three
weeks,  while  working  as  a  coachman.

Swelling  and  induration  of  left  testicle,  with  sore  pain,  or  sen-
sation of  coldness.

I  Swelling  of  scrotum. ^Chronic  gonorrhoea.

Stitches  in  glans  and  sides,  of  penis.
"  Female  Sexual  Organs. ■  Continual  dull  pain  in  region  of  1.
ovary;  mild  fluor  albus  ;  no  thrill  in  coition  ;  childless  after
eight  years  marriage;  strong  woman,  set.  30;  conception  in
three  months.

I  Considerable  pain  in  back  and  ovarian  region,  d  Mental  de-
rangement.

I  Constant,  dull,  boring  pain  in  ovary, d  Dropsy.

Hard  swelling  in  ovarian  region.

■  Swelling  and  hardness  of  1.  ovary.


497  BROMIUM.

Swelling  of  ovarian  region  before  and  during  menses.
I  Uterus  descends  about  two  inches, d  Mental  derangement.
Menses  too  early  and  too  profuse ;  bright  red  blood ;  passive
flow  with  much  exhaustion; Imembranous  shreds  may  pass.
Headache  on  appearance  of  menses.

■  Fullness  in  head  and  chest,  with  difiicult  respiration  a  few  days

before  catamenia.

I  Indescribable,  queer,  ill-feeling  all  over,  which  makes  her  low-
spirited,  a  few  days  before  catamenia.

Violent,  contractive  spasm  before  or  during  menses,  lasting
hours  ;  leaving  abdomen  sore.

Before  menses:  stitches  in  abdomen;  backache;  feeling  of
weakness  and  want  of  appetite.

■  During  menses  :  pain  in  abdomen  and  small  of  back  ;  abdomi-

nal cramps,  with  subsequent  soreness  in  abdomen ;  frontal
pain,  with  feeling  as  if  the  eyes  would  drop  out  while  stooping.

■  Suppression  of  menses. 6  Scirrhus  mammae.

■  ■Loud  emission  of  flatus  from  the  vagina. ^  Dysmenorrhoea.
Vagina  painful,  as  if  sore.

■  Much  itching  in  vagina. ^Mental  derangement.

"  Pregnancy  and  Parturition. ■Stitch-pains  from  mamm^  to
axillse,  cannot  bear  pressure, d  Scirrhus.

■  Hard,  uneven  tumor  in  right  mamma,  firmly  adherent  to  its

surroundings,  with  lancinating  pains  ;  worse  from  least  press-
ure and  at  night.

■  Cancer  mamm«, open, with swelling of  axillary glands;

stitclies  and  burning  in  indurated  parts ;  in  alternation  with
Oonium.

"  Voice  and  Larynx. Trachea  and  Bronchia. Wailing  and
crying  in  a  hoarse  tone.

■  Hoarseness.

■  ■  Chronic  hoarseness.

I  After  overheating,  hoarse  for  six  weeks  ;  morning,  aphonic,  un-
til after  long  coughing,  with  a  whistling  sound,  some  phlegm
comes  up. d  Cold  after  overheating.

■  Husky  tone  of  voice. ^Diphtheria.

Voice:  husky;  hoarse,  cannot  speak  clearly,  loss  of  voice;
weak  and  soft,  with  raw  scraped  feeling  in  throat.

■  Hoarseness  several  days;  rough,  dry  cough  ;  pain  in  larynx  ;

in  sleep  difiicult  (snoring)  breathing ;  jumping  up  for  want  of
breath  while  eating  and  drinking;  inhalation  with  a  rushing
sound, d  Croup.

■  Hoarseness; larynx painful;  barking, dry cough; a long

drawn  out,  buzzing  inhalation  ;  hot,  moist  skin.°<y  Croup.

■  Hoarseness; aphonia; snoring inhalation; no cough; re-

lapse, with  barking  cough;  rattling;-  sufi'oeation ;  cold
sweat, d  Croup.

■  Voice  hardly  audible, d  Croup.
VOL.  II.— 32.


BROMIUM.  498

Hoarseness,  aphonia  ;  worse  in  the  evening,

I  Spasm  of  glottis.  -<^

■  Stenosis  of  glottis.

■  Laryngitis;  tracheitis.

I  On  swallowing  saliva  a  stitch  in  posterior  portion  of  larynx,
with  a  feeling;  of  contraction.

I  Tickling  in  larynx,  with  irritation  to  cough;  constrictive  sen-
sation deep  in  throat  and  dry  cough.

■  Constriction  in  larynx.

■  Sticking  constriction  in  larynx.

Sensation  of  smoothness  and  emptiness,  at  a  small  spot  in
larynx.

■  Scraping  and  rawness  in  larynx,  provoking  cough.

■  Scraping  in  larynx  provoking  dry  cough  in  evening.

■  Cold  sensation  in  larynx,  with  cold  feeling  when  inspiring,

after  breakfast ;  better  after  shaving.

■  ■Sensation  of  coldness  in  larynx.
Soreness  in  larynx  and  roughness  in  throat.

■  Constant  sore  pain  in  larynx, d  Cold  after  overheating.
Larynx  painful  to  touch.

■  Beginning  in  larynx,  coming  upwards,  "with  hoarse  and  croupy

cough  ;  low  pulse. 6  Diphtheria.

■  First  bronchia,  then  larynx  ;  slow  cases  of  croup  ;  large  tubes

have  been  coughed  up. d  Croup.

■  Sensation  as  if  air  passages  were  full  of  smoke. 6  Catarrh.
Anxiety,  as  from  a  foreign  body  in  wind-pipe.

Contracted  sensation  internally,  in  trachea,  or  feeling  as  if  the
pit  of  throat  were  pressed  against  the  trachea.

■  ■  Rattling  of  mucus  in  larynx  on  coughing;  cough  having  a

croupy  sound, d  Diphtheria.

■  Rattling  of  mucus  without  choking. ^Emphysema.
Tickling  in  trachea  on  inspiring,  which  causes  a  cough.

■  Bronchia  much  irritated, d  Croup.

■  ■When  the  disease  commences  in  larynx  and  comes  up  into

fauces,  and  in  some  cases  in  which  it  runs  down  into  larynx,
and  produces  a  croupy  cough,  with  much  rattling  of  mucus.
6  Diphtheria.

■  I No  choking  in  the  cough  as  there  is  in  JTepar. d  Croup.

■  ■Much  rattling  in-  larynx  during  breathing,  still  more  when

coughing ;  danger  of  suffocation  from  too  much  phlegm  in
larynx  {Tart.  em.  has  rattling  lower  down  in  chest), d  Croup.

■  Inspiration very difficult,  larynx  drawn down;  thorax  not

moving;  respiration  frequent;  rattling;  sawing;  voice  not
audible. Q  Croup.

■  Cough  hoarse,  crowing,  suffocative  ;  breathing  sawing,  whist-

ling ;  face  red,  hot ;  large  drops  on  forehead ;  <  bending
over ;  scrofulous  girl,  get.  5. d  Croup.

■  Croup:  spasms  of  larynx;  suffocative  cough ;  hoarse,  whistling.


499  BROMIUM.

croupy  sound,  with  great  effort ;  rattling,  wheezing ;  gasp-
ing, impeded  respiration ;  heat  of  face  ;  formation  of  a  false
membrane  in  larynx  to  trachea;  much  rattling  in  larynx
when  coughing.

■  Membranous  formation  in  larynx  and  trachea, d  Croup.

■  Membrane  forming  back  almost  over  larynx, d  Diphtheria.

■  I  Croupous  inflammation  formed  by  the  exuberent  growth  of

fungi, d  Diphtheria.
*^  Respiration. Sensation of  constriction impedes  respiration,
with  dry,  tickling  cough.
Oppression  of  chest,  with  palpitation.

■  Oppression  of  breath  immediately  after  taking  it,  with  deep

inspiration,  together  with  a  sensation  as  if  he  did  not  get
enough  air  into  the  chest,  on  account  of  which  he  elevates
the  thorax  and  inspires  forcibly.

■  Breathing  frequent,  rattling,  sawing. 6  Croup.

■  Deep,  forcible  inspiration  is  necessary,  from  time  to  time.

■  Inspiration  very  difiicult;  larynx  is  drawn  down;  thorax  im-

movable, d  Croup.
Worse  from  a  deep  inspiration  :  cough.
Difficult  breathing ;  must  sit  up  in  bed  at  night.

■  Difficulty  of  breathing  ;  cannot  inspire  deep  enough.

■  Sensation  as  if  the  air-passages  were  full  of  smoke.
Gasping  for  breath,  with  wheezing  and  rattling  in  larynx,  and

spasmodic  closure  of  glottis.

■  Grasping  and  snuffing  for  breath,  with  wheezing  and  rattling

in  larynx, d  Spasm  of  glottis.

■  ■Constriction  in  chest,  with  some  difficulty  of  breathing;  no

cough. 6  Mental  derangement.

■  An  asthma  in  a  girl,  set.  16,  had  remained  for  ten  years  after

measles,  so  that  she  was  never  able  to  walk  rapidly  nor
ascend  steps  without  being  very  much  exhausted,  disappeared
after  five  doses  of  five  globules  of  the  30th,  which  she  took
for  proving.

■  Tightness  of  chest. ^Asthma.

■  Asthma  <  at  night.

■  ■Asthma  of  sailors,  as  soon  as  they  "go  ashore."
Respiration,  with  dry  sound.

Attacks  of  sufibcation  as  if  from  vapor  of  sulphur.
Great  dyspnoea.
^^  Cough, i Rough,  barking, croup-like  cough,  with  suffocative
feeling  like  sulphur  smoke  ;  breathing  painful ;  gasping  for
air ;  convulsions  ;  great  weakness. 6  Whooping-cough.

■  Whooping-cough,  with  croupish  hoarseness  of  the  cough.

■  ■Symptoms  of  croup  during  whooping-cough.

■  Much  fatiguing  cough,  with  scanty,  difficult  loosened  sputa  of

white,  whitish-yellow  or  yellow  phlegm ;  later  also  several
times  pure,  dark,  coagulated  blood,  d  Cold  after  overheating.


BROMIUM.  600

Barking  cough  ;  tickling  in  throat.

Cough  night  and  day,  sounds  loose,  but  no  expectoration ;  ag-
gravation from  exercise  and  on  entering  a  warm  room.

Dry,  spasmodic,  wheezing  cough,  with  rattling  breathing.

I  Difficult,  whistling  cough,  with  hoarseness, d  Croup,

I  Cough  gets  much  worse  from  dust  or  cold  air.  d  Cold  after
overheating.

Cough  excited  by  :  tickling  in  larynx  ;  scraping  and  rawness  in
larynx; I  deep  inspiration  ;  violent  motion.

B Cough,  with  sudden  paroxysms  of  suffocation  on  swallowing;
respiration  very  short ;  obliged  to  catch  for  breath.

I  Cough,  with  excruciating  pain  and  anxiety;  purulent,  some-
times bloody  expectoration ;  pulse  120 ;  respiration  30 ;
temperature  100. ^Phthisis.

I  I  Sputa  not  frequent.

During  cough  :  feeling  like  sulphurous  vapor  in  throat;  whist-
ling inspiration ;  sore  pain  in  chest ;  dullness  and  pressing
headache  ;  watering  and  contraction  of  the  eyes.

Sweat  after  the  paroxysm  of  cough.

■  Catarrhal  cough.

*^  Inner  Chest  and  Lungs. Sensation  of  constriction  impedes

respiration,  with  dry,  tickling  cough.
Stitches  in  upper  part  of  chest.
I  Stitches  in  chest ;  inflammation  of  lungs,  right  side, d  Croup.

d  Diphtheria.
I  Affections  begin  with  bronchi  and  ascend  to  larynx.
Sensation  of  weakness  and  exhaustion  in  chest.
Pressure  in  upper  part  of  chest.
Sharp  stitches  in  right  side  of  chest,  especially  when  walking

rapidly.
Sticking  pain  in  1.  side  of  chest  towards  arm.

■  Cutting  pains  running  upwards. ^Phthisis.
Right  lung  most  affected.

Paralytic  drawing  pain  through  left  chest,  toward  scapula  and
into  left  arm.

I  Hepatization  of  lower  lobes. ^Pneumonia.

I  After  much  cough  with  loose,  bluish,  granular  expectoration,
attacks  of  dyspnosa  for  several  days,  breathing  difficult,
laborious,  short;  cough  becomes  dry;  in  region  of  stomach,
pressure  and  tension;  breathing  noisy;  skin  bluish,  espe-
cially on  hands;  asthma  forces  her  to  sit  up  in  the  night;
sensation  of  being  beaten  all  over.  ^Emphysema.
^^  Heart,  Pulse  and  Circulation,  i  Anxious  feeling  about  the
heart, d  Mental  derangement.

Violent  palpitation  of  heart;  she  cannot  lie  on  right  side,

■  Unbearable,  violent  cutting,  left  side  under  last  ribs,  from
below  upwards,  as  if  it  would  kill  her;  old  woman.  /?  Ossi-
fication of  valves.


501  BROMIUM.

■Violent  cardiac  pain  and  palpitation,  with  headache  deep  in
under  crown  of  head  ;  lameness  of  left  arm.

Violent  palpitation  of  heart  in  evening,  so  that  she  cannot  lie
on  left  side.

I  Cutting  pains  running  upwards, d  Heart  disease.

I  Pulse  very  soft. ^Diphtheria.

Accelerated  pulse.

I  Pulse  small,  weak,  not  countable, d  Croup.
^^  Outer  Chest. Tearing  in  left  clavicle.

Pressure  below  left  clavicle.

Pressure  in  sternum.
^^  Neck  and  Back. Forcing  pain  in  temples  and  neck,  obliged
to  press  the  neck  to  obtain  relief. 6  Eczema.

Stiffness  of  neck.

The  left  side  of  neck  is  stiff  and  painful.

I A  goitre  already  increased  to  size  of  a  hen's  egg,  with  a  girl,
set.  14,  who  had  menstruated  one  year,  blonde,  lively  tem-
perament, delicate  constitution,  disappeared  within  16  weeks;
30th  in  water,  twice  a  day.

I  An  obstinate  goitre,  not  changed  by  lodum  in  substance,  dis-
appeared after  Brom.  30th,  in  water,  twice  daily  for  three
months.

■  Glands  of  neck  much  swollen, d  Eczema.

■  Two  encysted  tumors  on  both  sides  of  neck.

Aching  pain  at  inner  border  of  left  scapula  up  to  neck,  on
moving  left  arm  or  sitting-leaning  to  the  left.

Boring  in  spinous  processes  of  different  vertebrae.

Wandering,  pressive  pain  in  the  dorsal  muscles  below  the
scapulae.

Tearing  in  right  lumbar  and  dorsal  muscles,  increased  by  mov-
ing these  parts.

Sore  pain  in  small  of  back,  unchanged  by  motion.
^^  Upper  Limbs. Severe,  rheumatic, dull,  constrictive  pain  in
right  shoulder  and  thence  into  the  arm,  while  walking  in
open  air.

Stitches  in  right  shoulder,  axilla  or  elbow.

Great  restlessness  and  jactitation  of  the  arms.

Left  arm  feels  paralyzed.

Weakness  of  the  arms.

Tearing  in  arms,  especially  in  hands  and  fingers.

Icy  cold  forearms  or  only  cold  hands.

■  Eruption  on  the  r.  elbow. ^Eczema.

■  ■Icy  cold  forearms. ^Diarrhoea.

■  Hands  cold  and  moist.

■  Cold  hands. (9  Diarrhoea.
Boils  on  the  arms.

TiProfuse,  moist  eruption  in  armpits  and  perineum. 6  Eczema.


BROMIUM.  502

!  I  Drawing  pain  through  1.  breast  into  1.  arm.
^^  Lower  Limbs. Pain  in  left  knee  and  hip.
Pressive  bone  pain  in  left  leg.
Weakness  of  left  leg.
Paralytic  sensation  in  right  leg.
Pain  in  both  knee-joints.
Pressive  pain  in  right  knee,  like  in  the  bone.
Boring  pains  in  one,  or  both  tibse.
When  stepping,  violent  pain  in  middle  of  ball  of  left  foot,  as  if

one  had  stepped  on  a  hard  body,  with  paralyzed  sensation  in

knee-joint,  and  somewhat  in  the  hip.
Pressure  and  pains  in  feet  and  toes.
^*  Limbs  in  General. Great  stiffness  in  all  the  limbs  at  11  a.m.,

better  in  the  afternoon.
Pains  in  the  limbs,  alternating  with  chilliness  and  heat.
Lameness  in  all  joints,  left  side.
^^  Rest. Position. Motion. Rest :  throbbing  in  head  better.
Can  lie  on  neither  side :  palpitation.
Sitting  up  :  asthma  better.

Sitting  leaning  toward  the  left :  ache  in  scapula.
Bending  over  :  breathing  worse.
Stooping  :  throbbing  in  head  worse.
Moving  left  arm  :  ache  in  1.  scapula.

Motion  :  throbbing  in  head  •<  ;  tearing  in  'r,  lumbar  and  dor-
sal muscles  worse.
Walking :  pain  in  1.  inguinal  region  <  ;  stitches  in  chest  <  ;

pain  in  shoulder.
Exercise  :  cough  <<  ;  sweat.
Stepping :  pain  in  ball  of  1.  foot.
^®  Nerves. S Nervousness. ^Eczema.
Convulsions.
Great  weakness.
Tremulousness  all over; great languor  and  debility, worse

after  breakfast.
1 1  Great  weakness  and  lassitude  after  all  the  symptoms  have

passed  off. ^Diphtheria.
I  Much  prostration, d  Croup.

■  Fainting. ^Diphtheria.

■  Subject  to  hysterical  attacks,  with  fits. ^Mental  derange-

ment.
^^  Sleep. Yawning  and  sleepiness.

■  Continued  yawning  with  respiratory  troubles;  child  yawns

frequently  and  is  drowsy, d  Croup.

■  Very  much  inclined  to  sleep.
Irresistible  drowsiness  while  reading.

Dreams : vivid ; of  ascending  a height ; climbing  a  steep ;

journeyings  ;  quarrels  ;  dying  ;  coffins  and  funerals.
Jumping  up,  out  of  sleep,  with  whistling  breathing.


503  BROMIUM.

Starts  from  sleep  witli  cough ;  drink  relieves  it.

Awakes  unrefreshed,  seems  impossible  to  rise.
^^  Time. Morning:  pain  in  gums ;  water  tastes  salty ;  sweat  in  bed.

11  A.M.:  great  stiffness  of  all  the  limbs.

11.30  A.M.:  cramp  in  stomach.

Day :  cough  worse.

Afternoon  :  stiffness  of  limbs  better.

Towards  evening :  pain  in  bones  of  head.

Evening :  when  alone,  felt  as  if  he  would  see  something  if  he
should  turn  around ;  hoarseness  < ;  aphonia  <  ;  scraping
in  larynx  causes  dry  cough ;  palpitation  worse.

Night :  agglutination  of  eyelids ;  diarrhoea  ;  seminal  emissions  ;
mammary  tumor  <  ;  must  sit  up  in  bed  from  difficult  breath-
ing ;  asthma  <  ;  cough ;  asthma  forces  her  to  sit  up.

Day  and  night :  cough.

Symptoms  aggravated  first  part  of  night,  are  ameliorated  after
midnight.
^^  Temperature  and  Weather. Heat  of  sun  :  heaviness  in  sinci-
put.

Open  air  :  pain  in  r.  shoulder.

Cold  air :  cough  worse.

Cold  water :  decayed  teeth  sensitive.

Cold  diet :  symptoms  worse.

Cold  or  warm  washing :  blind  piles  worse.

Wetting  with  saliva :  blind  piles  better.

Entering  warm  room  :  cough  worse.

Damp  weather :  pain  in  bones  of  head.

I  Desire  for  open  air.

"  On  shore  :"  sailors  suffer  with  asthma.
*"  Chill. Fever. Sweat. Chill  on  alternate  days,  with  cold  feet.

Chill  every  other  day,  with  shaking,  yawning  and  stretching.

Hands  cold  and  moist.

Chilliness  with  shuddering.

Violent  shivering  with  yawning  and  stretching ;  head  confused ;
drawing  in  the  left  tibia  down  to  the  ankle,  whereby  the  foot
becomes  quite  cold ;  this  is  repeated  every  other  day,  as  a
chilliness  with  cold  feet.

I  Skin  cool,  covered  with  viscous  sweat, d  Croup.

Internal  burning  heat,  like  between  the  skin  and  flesh.

Sweat  on  the  palms.

Sweat  from  the  least  exertion  or  exercise.
*^  Attacks.  I  Periodical  pains.  ^  Scirrh us  mammae.
*^  Locality  and  Direction.  Right :  gray  point  before  eye ;
lachrymation  of  eye ;  ringing  in  ear ;  nostril  stopped  up ;
headache  extends  to  nostril ;  cancerous  ulcer  between  eye
and  ear  ;  heat  of  cheek  first ;  boring  pain  going  to  or  on  side
of  lower  jaw;  swallowing  painful  side  of  fauces;  swelling  of
inguinal  glands  ;  tumor  in  mamma ;  inflammation  of  lung ;


BROMIUM.  504

stitches  in  side  of  chest ;  cannot  lie  on  side  ;  tearing  in  lum-
bar and  dorsal  muscles ;  pain  in  shoulder ;  stitches  in  shoul-
der, axilla  or  elbow  ;  eruption  on  elbow  ;  paralytic  sensation
of  leg ;  pain  in  knee.

R.  to  1.:  stitches  in  hypochondria.

Left :  pain  in  iliac  region  ;  pain  over  eye  ;  pressure  in  temple  ;
headache  of  side ;  darting  through  eye ;  stitches  in  upper
eyelid  ;  swelling  and  suppuration  of  parotid  ;  nostril  stopped
up;  swelling  articulation  of  jaw;  swelling  of  submaxillary
gland ;  diphtheria  <  side  of  throat ;  sensation  of  a  ball  in
hypochondrium ;  pain  in  lower  part  of  abdomen ;  pain  in
inguinal  canal ;  coldness  of  testicle ;  swelling  of  testicle ;
pain  and  hard  swelling  of  ovary ;  stitches  in  side  of  chest ;
paralytic  drawing  pain  through  chest  towards  scapula,  and
into  arm ;  cannot  lie  on  side  from  palpitation ;  lameness  of
arm  ;  tearing  of  clavicle  ;  side  of  neck  stiff  and  painful ;  arm
feels  paralyzed ;  drawing  pain  through  breast  into  arm  ;  pain
in  knee  and  hip  ;  pain  and  weakness  in  leg ;  pain  in  ball  of
foot ;  lameness  of  all  joints  of  side  ;  drawing  in  tibia.

L.  to  r.:  scirrhus  of  mammae.

Below  upward  :  diphtheria  extends  from  larynx.
^^  Sensations. As  from  cobwebs  on  face.

As  of  a  ball  in  1.  hypochondrium.

As  if  air-passages  were  full  of  smoke.

As  if  he  did  not  get  air  enough  into  chest.

Cutting  :  in  chest ;  in  cardiac  region.

Darting :  through  1.  eye.

Lancinating  :  in  mammary  tumor.

Stitches  :  in  1.  upper  lid,  throbbing,  to  forehead  and  1.  temple  ;
in  ear  ;  in  hypochondria ;  from  liver  towards  navel ;  in  glans
and  side  of  penis ;  in  abdomen  ;  from  mammae  to  axillae  ;  in
indurated  parts  ;  in  larynx  ;  in  chest ;  in  r.  shoulder,  axilla
and  elbow  ;  in  skin.

Shooting  :  in  upper  lip.

Prickling :  in  skin.

Stinging :  in  tip  of  tongue.

Boring:  lower  jaw;  in  ovary;  in  vertebrae ;  in  tibia.

Tearing :  in  1.  clavicle ;  in  r.  lumbar  and  dorsal  muscles  ;  in
arms.

Drawing:  through  1.  breast  into  arm.

Paralytic  drawing :  through  1.  chest  to  scapula  and  arm.

Forcing  pain  :  in  temples  and  neck.

Pressure:  in  forehead;  in  1.  temple;  in  stomach;  in  upper
chest ;  below  1.  clavicle  ;  in  sternum  ;  in  dorsal  muscles  ;  in
bones  of  1.  leg ;  in  feet  and  toes.

Burning:  in  ears;  through  whole  body;  under  tongue;  in
mouth,  oesophagus  and  stomach ;  in  fauces ;  in  indurated
parts.


505  BROMIUM.

Scraping:  in  throat ;  in  larynx.

Soreness  :  about  nose  ;  in  fauces  ;  in  lower  abdomen  ;  in  testi-
cle ;  in  larynx  ;  in  small  of  back.
Rawness :  in  larynx.
Tickling-smarting: in  face.
Puckered  sensation  :  in  fauces.
Contraction :  in  trachea.

Constriction  :  in  larynx  ;  in  chest ;  in  r.  shoulder.
Griping :  in  abdomen.

Cramp  :  of  colon  ;  in  abdomen  ;  during  menses.
Rheumatic  pain  :  in  r.  shoulder  and  arm.
Dull  pain  :  in  1.  ovary.
Undefined  pain:  over  1.  eye;  in  bones  of  head;  in  region  of

liver ;  in  abdomen  and  small  of  back  ;  in  1.  inguinal  canal ;

in  1.  knee  and  hip ;  in  knee-joints ;  in  r.  knee.
Throbbing :  in  ears.
Fullness  :  in  head  and  chest.
Emptiness  :  in  stomach  ;  in  larynx.
Heaviness:  in  occiput;  in  stomach.
Smoothness :  in  larynx.
StiiFness  :  of  neck ;  in  limbs.
Crawling :  in  occiput.

Tickling :  in  tip  of  urethra ;  in  larynx ;  in  trachea ;  in  skin.
Paralyzed  feeling  :  in  1.  arm  ;  in  r.  leg.
Weakness :  in  chest.
Coldness:  of  1.  testicle  ;  in  larynx.
Heat :  in  mouth  and  oesophagus.
Itching :  in  vagina ;  in  skin.
^Dryness:  on  tongue ;  in  mouth  ;  in  throat.
^*  Tissues. I  Suppuration  of  1.  parotid  gland,  edges  of  opening

smooth,  ulcer  unhealthy,  discharge  watery  and  excoriating  ;

swelling  remaining  hard  and  unyielding. 6  After  scarlatina.

I  Tonsils  swollen  after  measles.

■  Tuberculosis.

I I  Scrofulous  swelling  of  glands,  several  already  in  suppura-
tion ;  in  water  twice  daily.

lEnlargment  of  thyroid,  in  children  with  light  hair,  blue  eyes
and  fair  skin.

1 1  Swelling  and  induration  of  glands  (thyroid,  testes,  submaxil-
lary, parotid).

Affections  of  glands,  principally  without  suppuration.

Swelling  and  hardness,  even  ulceration,  of  1.  parotid  gland.

■  Emaciation. <?  Cancer  of  mammae.

*^  Touch.  Passive  Motion.  Injuries. Touch  :  larynx  painful.
Pressure :  throbbing  in  head  <  ;  pain  in  stomach  <  ; pain  1.
inguinal  canal  <  ;  mammary  tumor  <  ;  pain  in  neck  better.
Scratching :  lessens  itching.
Shaving  :  cold  sensation  in  larynx  better.


BROMIUM.  '  506

Driving  in  carriage  :  left  testicle  painful.

Riding  horseback  gives  general  relief.
*^  Skin. Tickling,  itching,  prickling  and  stitches  in  skin,  at  va-
rious places.

Pimples  and  pustules.

Boils  on  the  arms  and  in  the  face.
*^  Stages  of  Life,  Constitution. I Blue  eyes;  light  hair;  fair
skin. 6  Struma, d  Croup.

One  case  of  cough  with  black  hair  and  eyes,  dark  complexion,
small  and  spare.

Acts  better,  though  not  exclusively  on  persons  with  light  hair
and  blue  eyes.

Increased  embonpoint.

■  Children  with  thin,  white,  delicate  skins,  and  very  light  hair

and  eyebrows, d  Croup, d  Diphtheria.
1 1  Blonde,  red-cheeked,  scrofulous  girls.

■  Scrofulous  boy,  set.  10,  given  up;  5th  day  of  croup.

■  Woman,  aet.  25,  scrofulous,  not  married,  menstruated  regu-

larly. 6  Mental  derangement.

■  Woman,  set.  27,  married  four  years  and  no  children;  dark

complexion  and  very  lively  temperament. 6  Mental  derange-
ment.

■Woman,  set.  35,  losing  too  much  blood  every  month ;  had  no
children.
^*  Relationship. Antidoted  by  : Camphor,  lAmm.  carb.,  Magn.
carb.,  Opium.

Compare :  Apis,  Arg.  nitr.,  Arsen.,  Bellad.,  Borax  (sterility);

Caustic, iChlorum, Cinchon., Conium, Coffea, Cina,

Cuprum,  Fluor,  ac, iHepar, llodum, Laches., Lycop.,

Mercur.,  Phosphor.,  Rhus  tox.,  Sepia,  iSpongia,  Sulphur,

Tart.  em.

The  celebrated  springs  of  Kreuznach  owe  their  anti-scrofu-
lous action  to  Bromium,  as  well  as  the  lodum  contained
therein.

Bromium  has  been  useful  in  croup  after  failure  of  ledum,
Phosphor.,  Spongia,  especially  in  relapses,  after  lodum.

Cured  goitre  after  failure  of  lodum.

In  all  diseases  the  choice  between  Bromium  and  lodum  may  be
decided  by  the  former  curing  in  the  blue  eyed,  the  latter  in
the  black-eyed.

Compatibles :  Arg.  nitr.  (generally  after  Bromium,  not  before
it) ;  Kali  carb.  (emphysema).


m^^^^


COUNT  WAY LIBRARY OF MEDICINE

RX

601

Hi|2

v,2

;?.4RE BOOKS  DEPARTMENT
