The Guiding Symptoms of Our Materia Medica, Vol. V
Constantine Hering
The Guiding Symptoms of Our Materia Medica, vol. V. Philadelphia: Globe, 1881.
Public domain. Transcribed from the Internet Archive copy (https://archive.org/details/guidingsymptomso00heri5).
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

Digitized  by  the  Internet  Archive

in  2010  with  funding  from

Open  Knowledge  Commons  and  Harvard  Medical  School


THE


GUIDING  SYMPTOMS


OF  OUR


MATERIA  MEDIOA


C.  HERING,  M.  D.


VOLUME  Y.


PHILADELPHIA:
PUBLISHED  BY  THE  ESTATE  OF  CONSTANTINE  HERING,

112  and  114  North  Twelfth  Street.


Copyright,  1887,  hy  Theresa  Hering.


Author's  Mark.


Press  of  Globe  Printino  House,  Philadelphia.


PREFACE.


AFTER  unavoidable  delays,  Volume  V  of  The  Guid-
ing Symptoms  is  presented  to  the  medical  pro-
fession, published  by  the  heirs  of  Constantine  Hering.

The  American  Homoeopathic  Publishing  Society,
which  had  contracted  to  publish  the  complete  work,
through  lack  of  business  facilities,  was  compelled  to
relinquish  the  pleasant  task  after  the  publication  of
the  fourth  volume,  but  has  made  provision  for  the  com-
pletion of  the  work  by  the  Hering  heirs,  the  editorship
remaining  the  same.

The  editors  take  pleasure  in  acknowledging  the
clerical  labors  of  Drs.  Rudolph  Bauer  and  Edwin  H.
Kistler,  who  have  worked  assiduously  on  the  present
volume,  and  who  have  been  induced  to  continue  their
aid  so  as  to  insure  the  rapid  completion  of  the  remain-
ing volumes.

C.  G.  Raue,

C.  B.  Knere,  y  Editors.

C. MOHR,


GUIDING  SYMPTOMS


OP OUR


MATERIA  MEDICA.


CUNDURANGO.

Condorplant.  Asdepiadacese.

The  bark  of  a  climbing  plant  or  shrub,  found  growing  in  a  high  altitude  in
Ecuador,  South  America. Provings  by  J.  C.  Burnett  and  J.  P.  Dinsmore.

The  tincture  is  prepared  from  the  dried  bark,  finely  powdered.

Clinical  Axjthokities. — Headache,  etc.,  Dinsmore,  Hah.  Mo.,  v.  8,  p.  67 ;
Cancer  on  I.  side  of  nose,  on  eyelid,  Friedreich,  B.  J.  H.,  vol.  33,  p.  188;  Eruption  on
face,  Burnett,  B.  J.  H.,  v.  33,  p.  408 ;  Oracks  in  angles  of  mouth,  Burnett,  B.  J.  H.,
V.  33,  p.  407 ;  Organon,  v.  3,  p.  88 ;  Carcinomatous  ulcer  of  lip,  CI.  Miiller,  B.  J.  H.,
V.  30,  p.  639 ;  Fistulous  ulcer  on  chin  (greatly  benefited),  Farrington,  Hom.  Clin.,
V.  4,  p.  127 ;  Cancer  of  breast,  face,  nose,  Humphreys,  J.  T.  Smith,  N.  E.  M.  G.,  v.  6,
p.  536;  Disease  of  stomach,  Fischer,  B.  J.  H.,  v.  33,  p.  551 ;  Cancer  of  stomach,  Ssen-
ger,  N.  A.  J.  H.,  v.  26,  p.  132;  Friederich,  N.  A.  J.  H.,  v.  22,  p.  555;  Bhagades
at  anus,  Burnett,  B.  J.  H.,  v.  33,  p.  407 ;  Incontinence  of  urine,  Burnett,  B.  J.  H.,
V.  33,  p.  408;  Carcinomatous  ulcer  on  thorax  (2  cases),  CI.  Miiller,  B.  J.  H.,  v.  30,
p.  647 ;  Tumor  in  breast,  Burnett,  Organon,  v.  3,  p.  88 ;  Scirrhus  of  r.  breast  (much
improved).  Miller,  Hah.  Mo.,  v.  11,  p.  353.


^  Mind. Feels  miserable.

^  Sensorium. Great  dizziness  on  stooping,  or  turning  head.
^  Inner  Head. Sensation  as  if  forehead  was  very  broad  and
high.
Dull  feeling  in  forehead.
Slight  heaviness  in  1.  half  of  forehead,  while  r.  half  is

clear;  sensation  as  if  1.  half  were  higher  than  r.  half.
I  Violent  pain  in  1.  temple.

iSharp;  cutting  pain  in  1.  temple,  and  through  ball  of  h
eye.

VOL.  V. — 1.


CUNDURANGO.  2

A^iolent  pain  in  1.  temple,  spreading  over  upper  part  of
brain  to  r.  side  of  head;  as  if  upper  part  of  skull  was
being  pulled  up,  with  one-half  of  brain.
*  Outer  Head. Large  pimple  on  scalp.

^  Sight  and  Eyes.  In  evening,  objects  before  r.  eye  resem-
bling black  serpents,  jumping  in  all  directions;  could
not  see  from  1.  eye,  seemed  to  be  looking  through  a
dense  fog.

Appearance  before  eye  like  two  black  horns,  with  large
black  balls  on  upper  ends,  and  a  mound  of  crystals
between  them,  their  tops  tapering  off,  and  tipped  with
black.

On  awaking  in  morning,  pear-shaped  obstruction  before
eye,  with  large  end  up ;  looking  towards  light,  it  ap-
peared red,  on  looking  from  light,  it  appeared  purple.

As  of  curled  hair  before  r.  eye,  and  a  blur  before  1.  eye,
causing  letters  to  run  together.

Retina  very  much  congested.

iSuperficial  ulceration  of  cornea,  with  varying  amount  of
redness,  photophobia  and  pain,  accompanied  by  sores
or  cracking  of  corners  of  mouth.

I  Flat  epithelial  cancer  (ulcus  rodens)  about  as  large  as  a

farthing  on  lower  eyelid.
"^  Smell  and  Nose. Slight  pressive  or  full  feeling  on  bridge
of  nose.
Profuse  discharge  of  glairy  mucus  from  nostrils,  alternat-
ing with  a  sensation  of  great  dryness  of  Schneiderian
membrane.
iFlat  epithelial  cancer  about  size  of  bean  on  1.  side  of  nose.
^Tipper Face, i Eruption  on face,  arising  from  angles  of
mouth;  anatomical  character  of  eruption  obscured  by
dirt,  saliva  and  scabs.
•  1  I  Carcinoma  of  lip,  an  unclean  and  sinuous  ulcer,  about
size  of  a  dime,  with  surrounding  hardness  and  swelling;
burning  pains ;  lip  inverted  ;  emaciation.
^  Lower  Face. I  Painful  crack  in  r.  corner  of  mouth.
iSores  or  cracking  of  corners  of  mouth.
iDeep  cracks  in  corners  of  mouth,  warty  growths  occupy-
ing the  edges,  one  as  large  as  split  pea,  and  the  other  as
large  as  a  three  penny  piece,  both  flat  and  exuding  a
dirty  juice;  tongue  very  tender.

I I  Ulcer  on  chin,  r.  side,  perforating  to  gums,  so  that  fluids
taken  in  the  mouth,  run  out  through  the  opening;  pain
in  "the  leaders"  down  the  throat;  lumps  on  chin;
bleeding.

"  Taste  and  Tongue. Slight  pain  in  1.  half  of  tongue.

Small,  painful  pustule  on  r.  side  of  tip  of  tongue,  on  upper
surface  towards  edge.


3  CUNDURANGO.

i  Cancer  of  tongue.

12  Throat. Aching  in  throat  extending  to  stomach,  with  great
burning  in  stomach.
Persistent  sore  throat.

Sore  throat  with  burning  and  aching,  and  a  husky  feel-
ing, which  causes  a  dry  hacking  cough.

^^  Hiccough,  Belching,  Nausea,  Vomiting,  i  Vomits  every-
thing eaten ;  hard  lumps  in  1.  hypochondrium  and  epi-
gastrium ;  constant  burning  pain  ;  great  emaciation.

^^  Scrobiculum  and  Stomach,  i  i  Loss  of  appetite,  epigastric
pressure,  especially  after  meals,  sometimes  so  severe  as
to  radiate  towards  1.  shoulder,  stitching  pains  in  1.  epi-
gastrium, dyspepsia,  <  by  use  of  vegetables,  with  vom-
iting of  a  clear,  watery,  acid  fluid ;  anaemia  and  emacia-
tion, cachectic  features,  dry,  scaly  skin ;  between  processus
xiphoideus  and  umbilicus,  especially  towards  left,  hard,
knobby,  confluent  tumors,  sensitive  to  least  pressure,
percussion-sound  dull  over  tumors,  clear  and  tympan-
itic over  other  parts  of  abdomen ;  r.  lobe  of  liver  smooth,
painless,  can  be  felt  reaching  over  arch  of  ribs ;  1.  lobe
cannot  be  separated  from  tumors;  1.  fossa  supraclavicu-
laris  fllled  by  a  conglomeration  of  swollen,  hard,  but
painless  lymphatic  glands;  constipation.  ^Carcinoma
ventriculi  with  co-affection  of  epigastric  and  supraclavic-
ular lymphatic  glands.
■Severe  pains  in  stomach ;  vomiting  of  coffee-ground
masses ;  hard,  knobby,  large  swelling  in  pyloric  region ;
complete  loss  of  appetite;  emaciation  and  cachectic
look. ^Cancer  of  stomach.

^^  Hypochondria. Pain  in  r.  hypochondrium.

^•^  Stool  and  Rectum. iRhagades  at  anus; terrible  pains
when  bowels  are  moved ;  cracks  at  angles  of  mouth.
Painful  foul-smelling  flatus,
i  I  Constipation. ^Carcinoma  ventriculi.

^^  Urinary  Organs.  ■  Incontinence  of  urine ;  cracks  in  cor-
ners of  mouth  ;  pustules  on  face. ^Incipient  paralysis.

^^  Heart,  Pulse  and  Circulation. Constrictive  pain  at  heart.
On  rising  in  morning,  sharp,  distinct  pain  in  heart,  fol-
lowed by  passage  of  flatus.

^^  Outer  Chest,  i  Ulcer  on  false  ribs,  as  large  as  hand,  carci-
nomatous in  appearance,  with  high,  uneven  edges,  and
deep,  small  islets  of  half  destroyed  cellular  tissue  and
muscular  fibre  as  base ;  ichorous,  acrid  secretion ;  severe
pain.
On  r.  wall  of  thorax,  especially  around  nipple,  several
swellings,  in  size  from  a  pigeon's  to  a  hen's  egg,  two  of
which  had  suppurated  and  formed  uneven,  discolored,
fetid  ulcers,  with  elevated  borders,  the  nipple  itself  lay


CUNDURANGO.  4

upon  a  hard  and  painful  swelling ;  axillary  glands
swollen  ;  whole  body  emaciated  and  cachectic.
iCrack  in  1.  angle  of  mouth,  surrounded  by  warty  excres-
cences, the  whole  being  covered  with  a  nasty  secretion
(probably  epithelioma),  accompanying  a  very  hard,  often
very  painful,  tumor  in  1.  breast  (probably  cancer).
Scirrhus  of  r.  breast;  whole  breast,  skin  and  axillary
glands  involved;  tumor  very  hard,  incompressible,
knobby,  immovable,  with  severe  lancinating  pains ;
nipple  retracted ;  skin  purple  in  spots  and  wrinkled  ;
patient  emaciated  and  cachectic;  ulceration,  with  fetid,
sanious  discharge,  and  much  sloughing.

^^  Neck  and  Back. Dull,  heavy,  continuous  pain  in  1.  scapula.
Dull  pain  across  small  of  back.

^^  Upper  Limbs. iPain  in  1.  shoulder,  and  through  side,  with
burning  under  scapula.
Tingling  in  fingers  of  1.  hand  while  writing.

^  Lower  Limbs. Rhagades  on  hips  and  in  bends  of  knees,
discharging  an  ichorous  fluid,  irritating  the  surround-
ing j^arts.
Pimples  on  thighs.

^*  Limbs  in  General. Soreness  all  over  body,  like  rheuma-
tism, <  through  1.  shoulder  and  under  1.  scapula.

^^  Rest,  Position,  Motion. Turning  head :  dizziness.
Stooping:  dizziness.

^  Time. Morning:  on  awaking,  pear-shaped  obstruction  be-
fore eyes;  on  rising,  sharp,  distinct  pain  at  heart.
Evening:  objects  before  r.  eye  resembling  serpents.

**^  Fever. Vertigo  and  painful  oppression  of  head,  red  face,
violent  pain  in  small  of  back,  with  nausea  and  fever.

^  Locality  and  Direction.  Left :  slight  heaviness  in  half  of
forehead ;  half  of  forehead  feels  higher  than  r. ;  pain  in
temple;  pain  in  eye;  cancer  on  side  of  nose;  pain  in
half  of  tongue ;  hard  lumps  in  hypochondrium  ;  pain
radiates  to  shoulder;  pain  in  epigastrium  ;  lobe  of  liver
attached  to  tumors;  fossa  supraclavicularis,  indurated
lymphatic  glands ;  crack  in  angle  of  mouth ;  tumor
in  breast;  dull,  heavy  pain  in  scapula;  pain  in  shoul-
ders; tingling  in  fingers  while  writing;  pimples  side
of  nose.
Right:  objects  before  eye  resembling  serpents;  as  of
curled  hair  before  eye;  painful  crack  in  corner  of
mouth  ;  ulcer  on  side  of  chin ;  painful  pustule  side  of
tip  of  tongue ;  pain  in  hypochondrium  ;  swellings  on
side  of  thorax ;  scirrhus  of  breast;  pustules  side  of  nose
on  cheek.

*^  Sensations. As  if  forehead  was  very  broad  and  high ;  as
if  1.  half  of  forehead  were  higher  than  r.  half;  as  if


5  CUNDURANGO.

upper  part  of  skull  was  being  pulled  up  with  one-half

of  brain.
Pain :  in  1.  half  of  tongue ;  in  r.  hypochondrium  ;  in  tu-
mor ; in  1.  shoulder ;  through  side  ;  in  leaders  down

throat.
Terrible  pains :  when  bowels  are  moved.
Violent  pain :  in  1.  temple ;  spreading  from  1.  temple  over

upper  part  of  brain  to  r.  side  of  head  ;  in  small  of  back.
Severe  pain :  in  stomach  ;  in  outer  chest.
Lancinating  pain :  in  tumor.
Cutting  pain:  in  1.  temple;  through  ball  of  1.  eye.
Sharp,  distinct  pain  :  at  heart.
Stitching  pain:  in  1.  epigastrium.
Stinging  pain :  in  epithelioma.
Burning  pain:  of  lip; in  stomach;  in  epigastrium;  in

epithelioma.
Aching :  in  throat,  extending  to  stomach.
Constrictive  pain :  at  heart.
Burning :  under  scapula.
Tingling:  in  fingers  of  1.  hand.
Painful  oppression :  of  head.
Soreness:  all  over  body.
Heavy  pain :  in  1.  scapula.
Dull  pain:  in  1.  scapula;  across  small  of  back.
Pressure :  in  epigastrium  radiates  towards  1.  shoulder
Pressive  feeling :  on  bridge  of  nose.
Dull  feeling :  in  forehead.
Heaviness :  in  forehead.
**  Tissues. Increases  the  growth  of  granulations  and  hastens

the  cicatrization  of  ulcers.
Open  cancer,  and  cancerous  ulcers;  it  effectually  moderates

the  severity  of  the  pains ; it  does  not  act  so  well  on

scirrhous  and  indurated  parts.
^^  Touch,  Passive  Motion,  Injuries. Slight  pressure :  tumors

on  abdomen  sensitive  to.
^^  Skin. Erythematous  blotches  on  face  and  body.

Eczema,*^  especially  when  rhagades  are  present,  oozing  out

a  fetid  fluid  ;  cachectic  or  syphilitic  dyscrasia.
Pimples: on  tip  of  nose,  1.  side  of  nose;  on  chest; on

thighs.
Pustules :  between  eyebrows ;  on  r.  side  of  nose ;  on  border

of  tip  of  tongue;  on  r.  cheek;  on  abdomen.
■  Indolent  ulcers, with  hard  callous  edges,  fetid  sanious

smell.
I  I  Old  indolent  ulcers,  appearing  cancerous.
I  Old,  obstinate,  foul,  ichorous,  ulcers.
Varicose ulcers,  with  granulating hypertrophy,  with  a

syphilitic  dyscrasia ;  also  some  improvement  in  lupus.


CUNDURANGO.  &•

Scirrhus  and  open  carcinoma ;  open  epithelioma ;  sting-
ing, burning  pains.

Pustular  eruption  ;  erj^sipelas  ;  salt  rlieum  ;  rhagades  dis-
charging an  ichorous  fluid,  irritating  the  surrounding
parts  ;  scrofulosis,  small-pox ;  syphilis ;  teleangiectasis.
''^  Stages  of  Life,  Constitution,  i  Cachectic  state  of  system,,
ordinary  wounds  and  ulcers  tend  to  take  on  a  bad  ap-
pearance.

Scrofulous  girl,  get.  3J,  probably  suffering  from  iodism ;.
eruption  on  face.

Man,  pet.  42 ;  carcinomatous  ulcer  on  thorax.

Miss  W.,  set.  42 ;  rhagades  at  anus.

Nurse,  set.  45 ;  cracks  in  corners  of  mouth.

Man,  set.  48 ;  cancer  of  stomach.

"Woman,  set.  50,  another,  set.  80 ;  epithelial  cancer.

J.  S.,  set.  54 ;  carcinoma  of  stomach.

Woman,  set.  65,  ill  for  years  ;  disease  of  stomach.

Mrs.  N.,  set.  65;  incipient  paralysis,  incontinence  of  urine,,
cracks  in  angles  of  mouth.

Woman,  set.  50 ;  cancer  on  1.  side  of  nose.

Woman,  set.  80;  cancer  on  eyelid.
*^  Relations.  Compare:  Ant.  tart,  (pimples  and  pustular
eruptions) ;  Aruia  iriph.  (corner  of  mouth  cracked,  sore
throat) ;  Baptis.  (sore  throat,  open  cancers  with  very
offensive  discharges);  Arsen.,  Conium,  Hydrast.,  PhytoL,
Trif.  prat.,  Kreos.  (cancer,  especially  of  the  mammary
gland) ;  Hydrast.  (rodent  ulcer,  lupus,  carcinoma  ven-
triculi);  Thuja  (epithelial  cancer,  fissures  at  muco-cuta-
neous  outlets) ;  Silic.  (fistulous  ulcers).


7  CUPRUM  ACETICUM.

CUPRUM  ACETICUM.

Acetate  of  copper;  verdigris.  Cu  2O2  H^  O.y,-  H^  0.

The  symptoms  are  principally  toxicological  and  clinical.  See  Cuprum  metal-
licum.

Clinical  AutHoeities. — Hallucinations,  Mossa,  Eaue's  Eec,  1875,  p.  29;
Effects  of  over-study,  Schmid,  B.  J.  H.,  vol.  1,  p.  241 ;  Dementia,  Schmid,  Eiick,  Kl.
Erf.,  vol.  1,  p.  23;  Mania  from  suppression  of  menses,  Kissel,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.
5,  p.  4;  Mania  after  labor,  Schmid,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  1,  p.  23;  Irritation  of  brain.
Gross,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  5,  p,  41;  Apoplexia  nervosa,  Schmid,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf.,
vol.  1,  p.  91 ;  Paralysis  of  I.  nervm  abducentis,  Heinigke,  Norton's  Opth.  Therap.,
p.  76  ;  Facial  neuralgia,  Mossa,  Raue's  Rec,  1875,  p.  245  ;  Tonsillitis,  Kissel,  Riick.
Kl.  Erf,  vol.  5,  p.  238;  Obstinate  vomiting,  Dudgeon,  Times  Retrospect,  1877,  p.
23;  Urcemic  vomiting,  Koeck,  Hah.  Mo.,  vol.,  12,  p.  638;  Diarrhoea  after  suppres-
sion of  eczema,  Drummond,  B.  J.  H.,  vol.  31 ,  p.  401 ;  Summer  diarrhoea,  Drummond,
B.  J.  H.,  vol.  31,  p.  414;  Cholera,  J.  C.  Morgan,  Bering's  Monograph;  Cholera
paralytica,  Quaglio,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  5,  p.  474  ;  Tape  worm  (60  cases  reported),
Kissel,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf,  vol.  5,  p.  387;  Croup  (12  cases  reported),  Kissel,  Riick.  Kl.
Erf.,  vol.  5,  p.  755 ;  Spasmodic  whooping  cough.  Bellows,  Hom.  Obs.,  vol.  6,  p.  142;
Whooping  cough,  Neidhard,  B.  J.  H.,  vol.  12,  p.  437 ;  Angina  pectoris,  Bayes,
Raue's  Rec,  1872,  p.  127  ;  Paralysis  of  nervus  ulnaris,  Heinigke,  Raue's  Rec,  1870,
p.  304;  Paralysis  of  I.  Ze(7,  Heinigke,  Raue's  Rec,  1870,  p.  304;  Measles,  Miller,
Raue's  Rec,  1873,  p.  222;  Scarlatina,  Gardiner,  Hering's  Monograph;  Spotted
fever  with  clonic  spasms,  Neidhard,  Hering's  Monograph ;  Chorea,  Drummond,
B.  J.  H.,  vol.  31,  p.  413.

Mind.  Memory  weak ;  brain  functions  in  general  decreased ;
must  frequently  think  long  before  he  finds  the  right  ex-
pression; temperature  low;  hands  always  cold;  in  win-
ter, hands  become  bluish-black.

■  Great  absence  of  mind;  tendency  to  start;  eyes  sunken,
staring,  as  if  riveted  in  sockets;  cold  sweat;  spasmodic
distortion  of  face. ^Irritation  of  brain.

I  I  Loud  speaking  arouses  them  from  their  fancies,  they  are
obliged,  however,  to  think  a  long  time  before  they  can
answer.

I  Fixed  idea  that  he  sees  persons  connected  with  the  law
who  are  about  to  seize  him,  causing  great  anxiety,  and
making  him  cry  like  a  child;  at  times  sees  thieves  in
the  room,  spirits,  and  various  other  immaterial  objects;
others  are  misrepresented  or  cannot  be  expressed  by
him;  great  despondency  and  anxiety;  seems  in  despair;


CUPRUM  ACETICUM.  8

attacks  of  unconsciousness ;  pulse  weak ;  skin  cool  and
covered  with  a  cold  sweat.
I  Hallucinations  of  all  kinds  of  figures  and  grimaces,  es-
pecially in  evening  when  going  to  bed  and  shutting
eyes;  at  one  time  saw  these  appearances  also  through
day,  and  heard  them  talk;  headache;  glimmering  be-
fore eyes;  whizzing  and  drumming  in  ears;  chronic
bronchial  catarrh;  frequent  vertigo  while  walking  on
street.

■  Delirium.

■Attacks  of  mania,  with  full,  rapid,  hard  pulse,  inflamed
eyes,  wild  look,  and  disconnected  talking,  ending  with
sweat.

I  I  Crying  like  a  child.

■  Awoke  suddenly  from  sleep  and  ran  about  room  crying,

scolding  and  screaming,  and  wished  to  escape;  thinks
she  is  about  to  die  and  desires  to  see  the  pastor;  pain  in
head;  pulse  small,  soft,  100;  has  not  menstruated  for
several  months.

■  Unexpectedly  jumps  out  of  bed,  it  requiring  at  times

great  force  to  retain  her;  eyes  staring,  look  vacantly
fixed  upon  some  object;  temperature  slightly  elevated
in  head,  and  lessened  in  extremities.  ^Mania  after
labor.

■  Great  anxiety  ;  tossing  about  bed.

■Attacks  of  anxiety  ;  cannot  control  herself;  cries,  is  in
despair  ;  coldness  of  the  body,  very  slightly  affected  by
external  heat.

■Slightest  exertion  brings  on  profuse  and  exhausting  per-
spiration ;  no  appetite;  pulse  weak,  accelerated,  irregu-
lar ;  skin  moist ;  feet  cold ;  at  times  a  feeling  of  anxiety
which  cannot  be  resisted  ;  giddiness  in  head,  with  in-
ternal pain,  sometimes  causing  insensibility ;  sleep  rest-
less and  unrefreshing,  with  distracted  and  annoying
dreams  ;  diarrhoea  ;  rapid  decline  of  strength.  ^Effects
of  over-study.

■Afraid  of  falling  ;  holds  on  to  his  nurse's  hair,  hugs  up
to  her,  afraid  of  being  injured,  would  not  stay  in  bed.
^Scarlatina.

■  Afraid  of  everyone  who  approaches  him,  shrinking  away

from  them. ^Scarlatina.

■  Feared  bedclothes  or  house  would  catch  fire. ^Scarlatina.
I  I  Fear  of  death. ^Cholera.

■  Restless,  cross  and  full  of  fear ;  respiration,  sobbing,  short

and  anxious ;  face  pale  and  bloated  ;  when  drinking,
child  bites  into  glass  or  spoon ;  strength  gradually  sink-
ing. /^Irritation  of  brain,  due  to  dentition.

■  Disconnected  delirious  talking;  talks  all  the  time.


9  CUPRUM  ACETICUM.

^  Sensorium, l  Vertigo,  marked  and  persistent,  with  stupe-
faction.
I  I  Great  confusion  and  heaviness  of  head.

^  Inner  Head,  l  Agonizing  headache  at  distinct  intervals
like  paroxj'sms,  lancinating  pains,  sometimes  in  fore-
head, sometimes  in  top  of  head,  sometimes  in  temples  or
occiput,  <  from  slightest  pressure.
I  Inflammation  of  brain  ;  prostration,  breathing  short  and
anxious,  face  puffed  and  pale ;  when  drinking  child  bit
on  the  glass  or  spoon.

^  Sight  and  Eyes. Eyes  staring,  fixed,  sunken.

■  After  riding  several  hours  in  railroad  car,  sudden  in-

distinct and  double  vision. ^Paralysis  of  1,  nervus  ab-

ducentis.
I  I  Insufficiency  of  external  recti  muscles.
*  Upper  Face. Distorted,  pale,  deathly  face.

I  Face  puffed  and  pale. ^Inflammation  of  brain.
D  Flushed  features,  face  cyanotic. ^Cholera.

■  Facial  neuralgia,  behind  r.  ear,  in  cheekbone  and  upper

jaw,  <  morning,  none  at  night;  pain  <  from  mental
emotions;  pain  in  upper  and  Towner  extremities,  tingling
in  fingers,  jerks  and  drawing  in  limbs ;  pain  in  face,  >
by  chewing  and  external  pressure;  feeling  of  coldness
in  head ;  pain  >  from  wrapping  parts  up  warmly ;
when  there  is  no  pain  she  cannot  bear  warm  things
around  head  ;  brain  is  void  and  absent,  mental  activity
much  impaired;  inclined  to  gape  and  cry;  appetite
poor;  sleeps  well  lying  on  affected  side.

*^  Throat. I  Inflammation  of  tonsils,  or  wdien  they  are  en-
larged will  favor  suppuration  and  cause  rapid  healing.

^^  Eating  and Drinking. iWhen  drinking  child  bites  at
glass  or  spoon. ^Inflammation  of  brain.

^^  Hiccough,  Belching,  Nausea  and  Vomiting,  i  Rice-
watery  vomiting  and  purging.  ^Cholera.
I  Ineffectual  attempts  at  vomiting,  with  distressing  feeling
of  constriction  in  course  of  oesophagus,  and  across  chest,
in  direction  of  diaphragm.
I  I  Vomiting  with  burning  nausea  rising  from  stomach  to
throat.

■  Nausea  and  vomiting  of  greenish  liquid,  or  yellowish-

green  vomiting.

■  Violent  vomiting  of  greenish  water,  coming  on  suddenly

and  attended  by  copious  greenish  diarrhoea  and  violent

pain  in  bowels.
■Very  frequent  vomiting,  usually  after  drinking.
■About  every  ten  days  has  an  attack  of  vomiting,  preceded

by  headache  in  forehead,  heat  of  head,  and  soreness  or

pain  in  eyes ;  attacks  come  on  when  awaking  in  morn-


CUPRUM  ACETICUM.  10

ing,  and  consist  only  of  frothy  saliva ;  <  from  slightest
movement,  >  lying  still ;  attacks  last  one  or  two  days,
during  which  time  he  can  take  no  solid  food  and  scarcely
any  liquid ;  during  intervals  of  attacks,  tenderness  of
epigastrium  to  pressure,  creeping  or  fluttering  sensation
between  shoulders  and  at  back  of  neck.

■  Constant  fruitless  attempts  at  vomiting,  after  which,
nearly  unconscious,  he  fell  back  into  bed;  at  first,
vomiting  of  food  followed  by  vomiting  of  murky  water
mixed  with  green  slimy  strings;  every  swallow  of
water  or  food  sets  him  vomiting ;  no  appetite ;  excessive
thirst,  burning  pain  in  stomach,  great  lassitude.  ^Ur£e-
mic  vomiting.
^'  Scrobiculum  and  Stomach.  1 1  Violent  griping  and  press-
ure in  stomach,  followed  by  vomiting.

1 1  Violent  pains  and  cramps  in  stomach  and  bowels.
^^  Abdomen, i Severe  griping  and  colicky  pains  in  stomach
and  bowels.

I  I  Retracted  abdomen.
^^  Stool  and  Rectum,  i Great  irritability  of  stomach,  every
kind  of  nourishment  being  rejected  ;  continual  desire  to
vomit  with  most  distressing  retching ;  bowels  irritable ;
frequent,  small,  papescent  stools,  often  mixed  with  mu-
cus and  blood;  nervous  depression;  fretting,  despond-
ent. ^ After  suppression  of  eczema.

I  Black  stools,  copious,  painful,  bloody,  with  tenesmus,  and
weakness.

iRice-watery  purging;  inelastic  cold  skin. ^Cholera.

1  Sudden  severe  constricting  pains  in  abdomen,  with
nausea,  profuse,  spurting  diarrhoea,  and  cramps  in
muscles  of  legs;  lies  in  an  apathetic  condition;  twitch-
ings;  groaning;  clonic  spasm  of  muscles  of  leg;  diffi-
cult respiration;  cyanosis;  is  conscious,  but  desires-
nothing  but  water  to  quench  the  burning  thirst;  eyes
.  dim,  fixed,  retracted,  and  surrounded  by  dark  circles ;
face  sunken  and  cold ;  tongue,  breath,  hands  and  feet
icy  cold;  voice  hollow,  feeble;  impulse  beat  of  heart
extremely  weak,  radial  pulse  lost;  stool  less  frequent,
ashy  gray,  with  grayish  flakes;  forcible  vomiting;  urine
suppressed. ^Cholera  paralytica.

•  Severe  cases  of  summer  diarrhoea,  with  griping  pains  and
cramps  of  extremities.

iDiarrhf^a  with  irregular  pulse,  twitchings,  starlings,  and
jerks  in  limbs,  subsultus  tendinum,  and  fainting.

■  Summer  complaint  of  children,  with  brain  affections,
1  I  Constipation.

■  Tape  worm.

^'  Urinary  Organs, i  Suppression  of  urine.


11  CUPRUM  ACETICUM.

^®  Respiration. ■  i Difficult  respiration.

I  Breathing  short  and  anxious. ^Inflammation  of  brain.

iSuffocative  loss  of  breath,

I  Chest  spasmodically constricted,  impeding respiration,.

and  increasing  her  anxiety.
^  Cough. I  Frequent,  violent,  dry  cough,  with  tearing  pain

in  head ;  cough  followed  by  violent  pulsation  of  heart,

lasting  several  minutes ;  anxiety  and  pressure  in  chesty

<  sitting;  cough  comes  on  at  night  between  11  and  1.
iRedness  efface;  blueness  around  mouth  and  lips  during

attack; rapid, wheezing respiration, with groaning;

rattling  of  phlegmj  starting  in  sleep ;  great  fretfulness;

distinct  whoop  after  each  paroxysm  of  cough,  and  crying.

^Whooping  cough.

■  Whooping  cough; when  spasmodic  condition becomes

manifest.
1  Whooping  cough,  in  most  obstinate  cases,  particularly
where  there  is  a  chronic  cough,  and  a  tendency  to  con-
sumption of  lungs.
^^  Heart,  Pulse  and  Circulation. ■  Deathly  feeling  behind
ensiform  cartilage. ^Cholera.

■  Frequent  attacks  of  angina  pectoris,  coming  on  when

exerting  herself,  or  when  excited.

^^  Upper  Limbs,  l  Numbness  and  lameness  of  1.  hand,  espe-
cially of  fingers  as  far  as  they  are  supplied  with  th&
nervus  ulnaris.

^  Lower  Limbs. 1 1  Cramps  in  lower  extremities,  especially  in
calves.
I  Cramps  of  legs,  particularly  in  old  people.

■  Dragging  of  1.  foot  in  walking;  numbness  and  lameness

in  sole  of  1.  foot  gradually  extending  up  to  knee ;  walk-
ing and  standing  very  difficult;  no  noticeable  atrophy,
but  skin,  subcutaneous  tissues,  muscles  and  ligaments
considerably  relaxed ;  sense  of  feeling  much  decreased ;
.  constant  cold  foot,  scarcely  changed  by  application  of
hot  bricks;  at  times  dull  pain  from  hip  down  to  knee.
^*  Limbs  in  General,  l  Violent  drawing  and  tension  in  limbs,
with  frequent  shuddering  and  chilliness,  though  skin  is
not  cold.

■  Periodic,  spasmodic,  painful  contraction  of  fingers  and

toes,  frequently  so  severe  that  fingers  could  scarcely  be
extended  by  any  force.

■  Cramps in extremities,  and convulsive movements  of

limbs.

■  Coldness  and  severe  cramp  in  extremities.

■  Coldness  of  extremities.

^^  Rest,  Position,  Motion. Lying  down :  chorea  >.
Sitting  :  anxiety  and  pressure  of  chest  <.


36


CUPRUM  ACETICUM.  12

Change  of  posture :  frequent.

Chewing:  facial  neuralgia  >.

Motion:  chorea  <.

Walking :  dragging  of  1.  foot.

Throwing  body  about :  great  restlessness.
Nerves,  i Affects  specifically  spinal  cord;  congestion  of
brain,  with  convulsive  motions  of  extremities ;  cannot
hold  head  up;  eyes  dim,  lustreless,  sunken,  with  blue
rings;  sad,  depressed  features;  dry  mouth,  great  thirst
for  cooling  drinks ;  nausea,  vomiting ;  torpid  stool ;  nerv-
ous trembling,  with  very  great  acuteness  and  sensitive-
ness of  senses ;  clonic  spasms  beginning  at  periphery ;
deep  sleej)  or  coma;  paralysis  of  all  muscles  of  back  up
to  neck. ^Meningitis  cerebro-spinalis.

■  Convulsions  before  eruption  breaks  out,  or  when  eruption
suddenly  disappears,  with  tendency  to  metastasis  to
brain  ;  quick,  small,  irregular  pulse ;  low  temperature ;
sopor;  rolling  of  eyes;  facial  distortion,  and  also  of  all
flexor  muscles ;  great  restlessness,  throwing  body  about ;
spasmodic  action  of  heart;  vomiting;  cold  face,  blue
lips,  coldness  all  over; <  from  contact. ^Scarlatina.

■  Metastasis  during  an  attack  of  catarrhal  or  exanthemic
fever;  stage  of  exudation;  delirium,  with  loud  screaming,
precede  the  sopor;  convulsions  begin  at  periphery  and
extend  upwards ;  great  stiffness  of  neck,  with  remark-
able paleness  of  skin ;  pressure  in  prsecordial  region  and
sunken  abdomen ;  great  irregularity  of  pulse,  sinking
sometimes  far  below  normal;  trismus;  tetanus;  cramps;
grinding  of  teeth;  inability  to  hold  up  head;  bloodshot
eyes;  insatiable  thirst;  cold  hands  and  feet.  ^Hydro-
cephalus acutus.

■  Convulsions  coming  on  in  lower  extremities,  or  in  fingers
or  toes,  with  much  throwing  about  of  limbs,  frothing  at
mouth,  and  choking  in  throat;  spasms  preceded  by
violent  vomiting  of  mucus.

■  Convulsions;  limbs  and  body  stiff,  jaws  clenched.

■  Consciousness  lost;  face  distorted  with  convulsions;
mouth  drawn  to  one  side;  tongue  partially  paralyzed
and  awry;  speech  impeded  or  completely  lost;  one  ex-
tremity, generally  an  arm,  moved  with  greater  difficulty
than  the  other. ^'Apoplexia  nervosa.

■  Periodical  chorea;  irregular  movements  commencing  in
fingers  or  toes,  or  in  one  arm,  and  spreading  all  over
body;  twitchings  often  confined  to  one  side;  terrible
contortions  and  awkward  movements,  accompanied  by
laughter,  grimaces,  exaltation  and  ecstacies ;  melancholy
and  dread  of  society;  attacks  often  painful;  cramps  in
calves;  inability  to  speak,  or  only  imperfectly ;  sudden


13  CUPRUM  ACETICUM.

piercing  cries ;  distortion  of  mouth  and  eyes ;  at  times
risus  sardonicus ;  <  after  fright,  and  from  motion  ;  >
lying  down.
^'^  Sleep. On  falling  asleep  begins  to  talk,  scold,  scream,  turn

and  twist;  when  awakened  is  rational.
^^  Time. Morning :  facial  neuralgia  <  ;  attack  of  vomiting
on  awaking.

Night:  cough  comes  on  between  11  and  1.
^^  Temperature  and  Weather. Warmly  wrapped : facial
neuralgia  >.

Hot  bricks :  do  not  >  cold  feet.

*"  Fever. sMeasles  with  bronchitis; delirium,  wants to  go

home; expectoration only during night; on falling

asleep,  begins  to  talk,  scold,  turn,  twist  and  screams  ;  on

being  aroused,  perfectly  rational ;  tongue  and  mouth  red.

■  Spotted  fever  with  clonic  spasms.
"  Attacks,  Periodicity. Sudden  :  attacks  of  vomiting  ;  dis-
appearance of  eruptions.

At  times:  dull  pain  from  hip  to  knee ;  risus  sardonicus.

Lasting  several  minutes :  cough  and  violent  pulsation  of
heart.

Frequent:  vomiting; violent  cough; attacks  of  angina
pectoris;  change  of  posture.

Paroxysm :  of  cough.

Periodic :  contraction  of  fingers  and  toes  ;  chorea.

Distinct  intervals :  agonizing  headache.

Every  ten  days :  attack  of  vomiting.
*^  Locality_  and  Direction. Left :  paralysis  of  nervus  abdu-
centis;  numbness  and  lameness  of  hand;  dragging  of
foot  in  walking ;  numbness  and  lameness  of  sole  of  foot.

Right:  neuralgia  behind  ear.
^^  Sensations. Pain  :  in  upper  and  lower  extremities ;  in  eyes.

Agonizing:  headache.

Lancinating  pains :  in  forehead  ;  in  top  of  head  ;  in  tem-
ples ;  in  occiput.

Tearing  pain  :  in  head.

Violent  pain  :  in  bowels ;  in  stomach.

Griping :  in  stomach  ;  in  bowels.

Colicky  pains  :  in  stomach  ;  in  bowels.

Cramps :  in  stomach ;  in  bowels ;  in  muscles  of  legs ;  of
extremities;  in  calves.

Spasms :  clonic,  of  muscles  of  legs.

Neuralgia :  behind  r.  ear ;  in  cheekbone  ;  in  upper  jaw.

Constricting  pain :  in  abdomen.

Contraction:  painful  spasmodic  of  fingers;  of  fingers  and
toes.

Burning  pain  :  in  stomach.

Deathly  feeling :  behind  ensiform  cartilage.


•CUPRUM  ACETICUM.  14

Dull  pain :  from  hip  to  knee.

Soreness :  in  e.yes.

Distressing  feeling  of  constriction :  in  oesophagus ;  across
chest  in  direction  of  diaphragm.

Drawing :  in  limbs.

Tension :  in  limbs.

Jerks :  in  limbs.

Pressure :  in  stomach.

Numbness :  of  1.  hand ;  of  fingers ;  of  sole  of  1.  foot ;  ex-
tending to  knee.

Lameness:  of  1.  hand;  of  sole  of  1.  foot ;  extending  to  knee.

Heaviness:  of  head.

Tingling :  in  fingers.

Creeping  sensation :  between  shoulders ;  at  back  of  neck.

Coldness :  of  extremities ;  of  head.
*^  Touch,  Passive  Motion,  Injuries. Pressure : slightest,
headache  <  ;  pain  in  face  > .

After  riding  in  railroad  car :  sudden  indistinct  and  double
vision.
^  Skin. iSurface  of  body  cyanotic  in  a  high  degree. ^Cholera.

I  Acute  exanthemata  when  checked  in  stage  of  eruption,
or  suddenly  disappear  in  stage  of  florescence;  pulse
quick,  small,  weak,  irregular;  temperature  of  skin
greatly  reduced ;  skin  chilly  and  covered  with  perspira-
tion ;  affections  of  nervous  system  present,  as  convulsive
movements  of  various  parts  of  body,  distortion  of  eyes,
face,  mouth,  head,  etc.;  spasmodic  affections  of  chest;
sometimes  eclampsia;  great  restlessness,  frequent  change
of  posture,  sopor,  or  delirium.

■Scarlatina,  miliary  rash,  measles,  smallpox,  purpura,
erysipelas  of  face,  disappear  suddenly  and  are  follow^ed
by  symptoms  threatening  paralysis  of  brain.

Leprous  eruption,  consisting  of  spots,  without  itching.

■  Inelastic  cold  skin. ^Cholera.
*^  Stages  of  Life,  Constitution. Carbo-nitrogenoid  constitu-
tion.

Child,  set.  22  months;  whooping  cough.

Girl,  set.  3J  years ;  irritation  of  brain.

Boy,  set.  9  years ;  scarlatina.

Girl,  set.  19,  robust ;  cholera.

Girl,  set.  23  ;  mania.

Man,  £et.  29 ; paralysis  of  nervus  abducentis.

A  young  soldier  in  Louisiana ;  cholera.

Woman,  set.  30,  married,  no  children;  diarrhoea  after
suppression  of  eczema.

Woman,  set.  32,  a  year  ago  had  intermittent  fever,  for  which
she  took  quinine,  after  this  chlorosis,  for  which  she  took
iron;  facial  neuralgia.


15  CUPRUM  ACETICUM.

Man,  set.  40  ;  paralysis  of  1.  leg.

Man,  set.  50,  suffering  from  renal  troubles ;  ursemic  vomit-
ing.

Man,  set.  60 ;  hallucinations.

Ann  H.,  set.  63  ;  angina  pectoris.

Man,  set.  64;  obstinate  vomiting.

Case  of  spotted  fever,  with  clonic  spasms.
^^  Relations. Antidoted  by:  sugar,  or  white  of  egg  mixed
with  milk,  given  freely. Dynamic  antidotes :  iBellad.,
Cinchon.,  Conium,  Cicuta,  Dulcam.,  ttHepar,  Ipec,  Mercur.,
I  Nux  yom.

Compatible:  after  Act.  rac,  Agaric,  Stramon.,  in  choreic
affections.

Complementary :  Calc.  ostr.

Compare:  metallic  copper  and  other  salts;  Calc.  ostr.,
Gelsem.  (overworked  brain) ;  Cicuta,  and  Solonacese  (men-
tal symptoms);  Bellad.  (inflammation  of  brain);  Silic.
(pains  about  head  better  from  wrapping  up  warmly);
Nuxvom.,  Phosphor,  (vomiting,  diarrhoea);  Coloc.  (colic);
Camphor.,  Secale,  Veratr.  (cholera,  cramps);  Ant.  tart.,
Arnic,  JBryon.,  Cina,  Ipec.  (whooping  cough);  Apis,
Zincum  (hydrocephalus,  or  convulsions  from  suppressed
exanthems);  Plumbum  {parsiljsis);  Cina  {chorea) ;  Pulsat.
(malarial  neuralgia,  after  Quinine  and  Iron);  Arsen.
(suppression  of  urine,  uraemia).


CUPRUM  ARSENICOSUM.  16

CUPRUM  ARSENICOSUM.

Arsenite  of  Copper;  ScheeWs  Green.  Cu  H  As  O3.

Provings,  by  Blakely  (Hah.  Mo.,  vol.  3,  p.  571),  assisted  by  Smedley,  Boyce
and  Foster,  and  toxicological  reports,  contained  in  Encyclopaedia,  vol.  4,  p.  23.

The  pure  arsenite  of  copper  is  prepared  by  trituration.

Clixicax,  Authorities. —  Vomiting,  South,  Eaue's  Rec,  1875,  p.  136;  Lilien-
thal,  Allg.  Horn.  Ztg.,  vol.  106,  p.  207;  Pains  in  bowels,  (2  cases)  Marsden,  Raue's
Eec,  1874,  p.  203 ;  Neuralgic  pains  in  bowels,  Hale,  Hale's  Therap.,  p.  44 ;  Diar-
rhoea, Marsden,  Raue's  Eec,  1874,  p.  188,  Farrington,  Allg.  Horn.  Ztg.,  Bd.  103,
p.  102;  Choleraic  diarrhcEa,  Holcombe,  Raue's  Rec,  1874,  p.  197;  Pain  in  ovary,
Marsden,  Raue's  Rec,  1874,  p.  228;  Spasmodic  uterine  pains,  Marsden,  Raue's  Rec.
1874,  p.  239;  Vomiting  during  pregnancy,  Marsden,  Raue's  Rec,  1874,  p.  239;  Car-
diac chorea,  Hale,  Hale's  Therap.,  p.  44.

^  Mind. A  kind  of  intoxication.

1  I  Confusion  of  ideas.

I  Intense  anguish  of  mind  and  body.
"  Sensorium. l  i  Vertigo,  confusion  of  ideas,  and  headache
between  temples.

Dulness  and  fuhiess  of  head.

Fulness  in  head;  brain  seems  to  expand  and  press  against
frontal  bone.

Cerebro-spinal  irritation ;  staggering  gait.
^  Inner  Head. Very  severe  headache  all  over  forehead,  but
especially  in  temples.

Dull  pain  in  forehead,  but  most  severe  in  r.  temple.

Headache  spreads  over  entire  forehead,  and  finally  settles
in  r.  side  of  forehead  and  over  temporal  bone,  and  be-
comes dull  and  throbbing.

Throbbing  in  r.  temple.

Soreness  of  r.  temple  when  pressed  against  pillow.

iSharp  pain  in  temples,  <  in  left.

Persistent  boring  pain  in  small  spot  above  1.  superior  or-
bital arch,  with  soreness  to  touch.

Severe  sharp  pain  in  superior  arch  of  r.  orbital  bone.

Pain  seems  to  meet  in  centre  of  forehead  and  pass  down
the  nose.

Headache,  particularly  in  forehead,  but  entire  head  feels
as  if  bruised,  <  from  motion,  >  from  rest.

■  Headache  between  the  temples.

Dull,  heavy  pain  in  head ;  bones  of  face  very  sore.


17  CUPRUM  ARSENICOSUM.

I  I  Dulness  and  soreness  of  head  in  morning,  after  waking.
Dull,  heav}'^  aching  in  back  part  of  head.
Dull  soreness  in  r.  occipital  bone,  <  from  pressure.
*  Outer  Head. Soreness  of  bones  of  1.  side  of  head  and  face>

Itching  of  scalp.
^  Sight  and  Eyes. Dark  specks  before  eyes ;  eyes  very  sen-^
sitive.
Sparks  before  eyes.

Dimness  of  eyes,  with  profuse  lachrymation.
^  Hearing  and  Ears. Boring  pain  in  r.  ear;  sharp  pain  in.
temples,  <  in  1. ;  pain  in  lumbar  region,  and  in  anterior-
portion  of  r.  thigh;  chilly  feeling  over  entire  body;  skin
sensitive  to  contact  of  clothing,  which  produces  a  chilly
sensation.
Dull  soreness  in  r.  internal  ear.
^  Smell  and  Nose. Irritability  of  mucous  membrane  of  nose
with  fluid  discharge;  abundant  salivation.
Bones  of  nose  very  sore,  especially  on  pressure.
^  Upper  Face. Face:  pale;  anxious;  sunken;  oedematous.
Violent  twitching  and  jerking  of  facial  muscles  of  1.  side,

between  eye  and  corner  of  mouth.
Soreness  of  bones  of  face.

Intermittent,  throbbing,  shooting  pains  in  upper  jaw.
^  Lower  Face. Intermittent  and  throbbing  pain  in  r.  half  of
inferior  maxillary  bone.
Lips  bluish.
^"  Teeth  and  Gums. Shooting  pain  in  upper  molars  of  1.  side,
extending  upward  into  superior  maxillary  bone.
Twitches  of  pain  in  r.  upper  and  1.  lower  posterior  molars,

more  protracted  in  former,  but  more  acute  in  latter.
Tenderness  of  gums.
^^  Taste  and  Tongue. Taste:  bitter;  metallic.

Tongue:  coated  white; brownish-white;  tremulous,  cov-
ered with  mucus;  cool.
Back  part  of  tongue  thickl}^  coated.
^^  Inner  Mouth. Bad  breath.

13  TJiroat. Burning  along  oesophagus  from  stomach  to  mouth.

burning  her  throat  and  bowels.
Soreness  of  throat.
^*  Appetite,  Thirst. No  appetite.

■  Intense  thirst.
^^  Eating  and  Drinking. Child  refuses  to  take  anything,

probably  from  inability  to  swallow.
^^  Hiccough,  Belching,  Nausea  and  Vomiting. Much  eruc-
tation of  wind.
Nausea:  constant,  violent;  on  awaking,  with  bitter  taste;
with  headache  between  temples;  with  lameness  of  back;
with  unsteadiness  of  head,  <  after  study.
VOL.  v.— 2.


CUPRUM  ARSENICOSUM.  18

I  I  Nausea,  with  burning  pain  in  stomach  and  bowels;
palpitation  of  heart  with  trembling  of  limbs ;  headache,
particularly  in  forehead,  but  whole  head  feels  bruised;
jerking  in  limbs.

Suddenly  seized  with  violent  sickness,  and  vomiting  of  a
light  green  substance,  like  bile  diluted  with  water.

I  For  five  days,  persistent  vomiting  of  watery  greenish
fluid,  accompanied  by  chills  and  thirst  for  cold  water;
<  eating  or  drinking.

Violent  vomiting.
^''  Scrobiculum  and  Stomach. Great  sensitiveness  of  epigas-
tric region  to  slightest  touch.

I  Dull  aching  pain  over  epigastric  and  r.  hypochondriac
regions,  with  nausea  and  paroxysmal  vomiting;  vomit-
ing frequently  a  glairy  froth.

Empty,  vacant  feeling  in  stomach.

1  Burning  in  stomach.

Stomach  sore  as  if  bruised.

Cutting  pain  in  stomach  while  eating.

I  I  Cramps  in  stomach  and  bowels,  followed  by  tonsillitis.
'■"^  Abdomen. Whole abdomen meteoric, very painful to
touch,  but  especially  over  region  of  liver.

Pains  in  abdomen  like  those  of  flatulent  colic.

Humbling  in  bowels;  sharp,  quick  pains  in  lower  bowels.

iSharp,  cutting  pains  in  abdomen,  afterwards  subsiding
into  a  dull  soreness,  followed  by  an  unpleasant  warmth
in  abdomen,  and  a  severe  burning  in  stomach.

■  Severe  burning,  cramping  pains  in  abdomen.
iViolent  colic; frequent  vomiting,  with purging; cold

sweats;  intense  thirst.

S Spasmodic  and  neuralgic  pains  in  bowels,  accompanied
by  screams,  and  cramps  in  fingers  and  toes;  great  de-
bility and  threatened  collapse.

iCrampy  pains  in  lower  bowels,  accompanied  by  extreme
vesical  and  rectal  tenesmus;  micturition  frequent,  caus-
ing great  suffering.

■  Attacks  of  excruciating  pains  in  bowels,  occurring  every

two  or  three  weeks.
Pains  in  hypogastrium.
Squeezed  his  abdomen  with  both  hands.
^'^  Stool  and  Rectum, i  Vomiting  and  purging,  with  cramps

and  collapse.
iPain  in  sacral  region,  with  frequent  urging  to  urinate;

rectal  tenesmus,  with  mucous  discharges,  so  constant  as

to  require  a  cloth  to  receive  them  as  they  flowed  from

the  bowel. 6'Diarrhcea.
I  Chronic,  slimy  diarrhoea,  during  summer,  with  cramps

in  abdomen; tenesmus  recti  et  vesicae; frequent  and

painful  urination ;  pain  in  sacral  region.


19  CUPRUM  ARSENICOSUM.

I  Choleraic  diarrhoea  during  summer;  also  useful  in  dis-
turbed state  of  bowels  during  convalescence.
I  I  Asiatic  cholera,  with  cramps  in  hands  and  feet.
^^  Urinary  Organs. Dark  red  urine;  burning  pain  during
and  after  urination.
Strong-smelling  urine;  urine  has  the  odor  of  garlic.
^^  Male  Sexual  Organs. White,  purulent  discharge  from
urethra ;  soreness  of  penis,  with  pain  in  prostate  gland ;
tingling  and  burning  in  urethra.
Perspiration  of  scrotum,  which  is  constantly  moist  and

damp.
Boils  frequently  forming  on  scrotum.
^^  Female  Sexual Organs. "About close of catamenia,
w^orked  out  of  doors  during  a  moist,  drizzly  day;  dur-
ing night  agonizing  pain  in  lower  abdominal  region;
tender  spot  over  1.  ovary;  tongue  heavily  coated  white.
^*  Pregnancy,  Parturition, i  Constant  nausea,  rejects  every-
thing; so  weak  can  hardly  sit  up;  very  nervous;  pulse
quick  and  feeble;  spasmodic  uterine  pain;  at  one  time
tenesmus and dysenteric stools. ^Vomiting during
pregnancy.
■  Spasmodic  uterine  pains  during  pregnancy,  with  general
debility.
^^  Voice  and  Larynx. Difficulty  of  speech.
^^  Inner  Chest  and  Lungs. Oppression  of  chest,  as  if  con-
stricted.
Sense  of  weight  on  chest  and  difficult  breathing.
Soreness  of  a  small  spot  in  1.  scapula,  extending  into  1.
lung,  followed  by  dull  sticking  pain  in  1.  chest,  between
sixth  and  seventh  ribs,  <  on  deep  inspiration;  weak,
numb  feeling  in  1.  chest,  1.  side  of  back,  1.  shoulder  and
arm.
Dull  soreness  in  r.  side  of  chest,  with  dull  pains  in  back;
<  from  deep  inspirations.
Heart,  Pulse  and  Circulation. Sudden  debility,  with  dull
pain  in  heart,  and  sensation  of  oppression ;  1.  chest  feels
too  small ;  long  involuntary  inspirations ;  empty  feeling
in  stomach,  with  vertigo,  confusion  of  ideas,  and  head-
ache between  temples.
Palpitation  of  heart,  with  trembling  of  limbs.
B  Aberrations  in  rhythm of  heart's  action;  at  one _  time
beats  are  very  irregular  and  feeble,  at  another  violent
and  irregular;  attacks  appear  in  paroxysms,  with  inter-
missions, during  which  nothing  abnormal  in  action  of
heart  can  be  detected. ^Cardiac  chorea.
Pulsation  of  heart  moving  wall  of  chest  up  and  down.
I  I  Angina  pectoris.
Pulse:  frequent;  small,  rapid,  very  irritable;  very  feeble.


29


CUPRUM  ARSENICOSUM.  20

^^  Neck  and  Back. Soreness  of  glands  of  neck,  with  stiffness
of  neck ;  pain  <  on  moving  head.

Severe  pain  under  lower  angle  of  1.  scapula,  <  from  mo-
tion or  breathing;  cannot  take  full  breath.

I  Stiffness  and  lameness  of  back,  <  from  motion,  >  dur-
ing rest;  returns  after  sitting  awhile.

I  Lameness  of  lumbar  region.

Pain  in  r.  lumbar  region,  and  in  anterior  portion of  r.
thigh.
^^  Tipper  Limbs. Numb,  weak  feeling  in  1.  shoulder  and  arm.

Peculiar  numb  feeling  in  1.  arm  and  hand,  with  pain  in
internal  surface  of  arm,  and  tingling  of  palm  of  hand
and  of  fingers,  <  on  motion.

Constantly  moving  arms  up  and  down  and  from  side  to
side,  with  trembling  of  fingers,
^^  Lower  Limbs. Limbs  ache  while  walking;  gait  unsteady;
increasing  debility.

Pain  in  anterior  porion  of  r.  thigh,
^  Limbs  in  General Left  arm  feels  numb  and  powerless,
and  soon  a  similar  sensation  in  1,  leg.

Spasms  in  extremities.

I  Extremities  very  cold.

I  Pustular  tumors  on  wrists  and  ankles,  and  excessive  sensi-
tiveness and  irritability  of  skin.

Itching  of  arms  and  legs.
^^  Rest,  Position,  Motion. Rest:  >  headache;  >  lameness
and  stiffness  of  back.

Motion:  <  headache;  soreness  and  stiffness  of  neck  <  on
moving  head ;  >  stiffness  and  lameness  of  back ;  tin-
gling of  hand  and  fingers  <.

Rolling  about  floor:  with  intense  pain  in  throat  and
bowels.

Walking :  limbs  ache.
^^  Nerves, l  General  debility,  want  of  energy,  indisposition  to
do  anything.

■  Feeling  of  weakness  and  extreme  prostration.

Very  restless;  nervous.

I  I  Chorea;  syncope;  spasms;  severe  convulsions.

I I  Epilepsy; death-like  syncope.

^''  Sleep. Sleep  disturbed  and  unrefreshing.

Persistent  sleeplessness.
^  Time. Morning:  soreness  of  head  after  waking.
^^  Temperature  and  Weather. Moist,  drizzly  day : agon-
izing pain  in  lower  abdominal  region.
'^  Fever, i  Chilly  feeling  over  entire  body.

Creeping  sensation  produced  by  contact  of  clothing.

Cold  and  drowsy;  skin  cold.

Covered  with  a  cold,  clammy  perspiration.


21  CUPRUM  ARSENICOSUM.

*^  Attacks,  Periodicity. Frequent :  vomiting  of  glairy  froth ;
micturition.

Attacks :  of  irregular  and  feeble,  or  irregular  and  violent
beats  of  heart.

Intermittent :  pain  in  r.  half  of  inferior  maxillary  bone.

For  five  days :  persistent  vomiting.

Every  two  or  three  weeks :  attacks  of  excruciating  pain  in
bowels.

During  summer:  chronic  diarrhoea;  choleraic  diarrhoea.
^  Locality  and  Direction.  Left :  sharp  pain  in  temple ;
boring  pain  in  small  spot  above  1.  superior  orbital  arch ;
soreness  of  bones  of  face  and  side  of  head;  twitching  of
muscles  of  side  of  face;  pain  in  upper  molars;  pain  in
lower  posterior  molars;  tender  spot  over  ovary;  sore-
ness of  small  spot  in  scapula,  extending  to  lung;  dull,
sticking  pain  in  chest;  numb  feeling  in  chest,  side  of
back,  shoulder  and  arm ;  chest  feels  too  small ;  pain
under  lower  angle  of  scapula ;  numb  feeling  in  shoulder
and  arm;  numb  feeling  in  hand;  pain  in  arm;  tingling
of  palm  of  hand ;  tingling  of  fingers ;  numb  feeling
in  leg.

Right:  pain  in  temple;  side  of  forehead;  soreness  of
temple  ;  pain  in  superior  arch  of  orbital  bone ;  pain  in
ear ;  pain  in  anterior  portion  of  thigh  ;  soreness  in  in-
ternal ear ;  pain  in  half  of  inferior  maxillary  bone ;  pain
in  upjDcr  posterior  molars ;  pain  in  hypochondriac  re-
gion; soreness  in  side  of  chest;  pain  in  lumbar  region;
pain  in  anterior  portion  of  thigh.
*^  Sensations.  As  if  brain  expanded  and  pressed  against
frontal  bone;  sense  of  w^eight  on  chest;  1.  chest  feels
too  small.

Pain :  between  temples ;  seems  to  meet  in  centre  of  fore-
head and  pass  down  nose ;  in  lumbar  region  ;  in  ante-
rior portion  of  r.  thigh  ;  in  abdomen  as  of  colic ;  in  hypo-
gastrium ;  in  sacral  region  ;  in  internal  surface  of  arm.

Agonizing  pain  :  in  lower  abdomen.

Excruciating  pain :  in  bowels.

Violent  colic:  in  abdomen.

Sharp  pains:  in  temples;  in  superior  arch  of  r.  orbital
bone ;  in  lower  bowels.

Severe  pain:  all  over  forehead;  in  temples;  under  lower
angle  of  1.  scapula.

Cutting  pain:  in  stomach;  in  abdomen.

Cramping  pains :  in  bowels.

Cramps:  in  stomach  ;  in  bowels;  in  fingers  and  toes.

Constricted  feeling :  of  chest.

Shooting  pains :  in  upper  jaw ;  in  upper  molars  of  1.  side,
extending  into  superior  maxillary  bone.


CUPRUM  ARSENICOSUM.  22

Neuralgic  pain  :  in  abdomen.

Throbbing  pain  :  r.  side  of  forehead  ;  over  temporal  bone;

'  in  r.  temple;  in  upper  jaw;  in  r.  half  of  inferior  max-
illary bone.

Twitches  of  pain  :  in  r.  upper  and  1.  lower  posterior  molars.

Sticking  pain  :  in  1.  chest.

Boring  pain  :  persistent  above  1.  superior  orbital  arch  ;  in
r.  ear.

Burning :  along  oesophagus  from  stomach  to  mouth  ;  in
bowels ;  in  urethra.

Bruised  feeling :  in  head;  in  stomach.

Dull  pain :  in  forehead  ;  in  r.  temple ;  in  back  part  of
head;  over  epigastric  and  r.  hypochondriac  regions;  in
1.  chest,  between  sixth  and  seventh  ribs  ;  in  back ;  in
heart.

Soreness:  of  r.  temple;  of  bones  of  face  ;  of  head  ;  in  r.
occipital  bone  ;  of  bones  of  1.  side  of  head  and  face ;  in
r.  internal  ear ;  of  bones  of  nose;  of  throat;  in  abdomen ;
of  penis;  of  small  spot  in  1.  scapula,  extending  into  L
lung;  in  r.  side  of  chest;  of  glands  of  neck.

Tingling  :  in  urethra ;  of  palm  of  hand ;  of  fingers.

Numb  feeling:  in  1.  chest;  in  1.  side  of  back  ;  in  1.  shoul-
der and  arm  ;  in  1.  hand  ;  in  1.  leg.

Stiffness:  of  neck  ;  of  back.

Lameness  of  head ;  of  back ;  of  lumbar  region.

Trembling :  of  limbs.

Dulness:  of  head.

Fulness :  of  head.

Creeping  sensation  :  over  body.

Itching :  of  arms  and  legs.

Chilly  feeling  :  all  over  body.
^  Touch,  Passive  Motion,  Injuries. Contact  of  clothing  :
skin  sensitive  to.

Touch:  great  sensitiveness  in  epigastric  region;  abdomen
sensitive  to ;  over  region  of  liver,  sensitive  to.

Pressing  against  pillow  :  soreness  of  r.  temple.

Pressure: <  dull  soreness  in  r.  occipital bone;  soreness
of  bones  of  nose  <.
^^Skin. Skin  sensitive  to  contact  of  clothing,  which  produce
chilly  creeping  sensation.

Severe  itching  of  skin.

Pustular  tumors  on  wrists  and  ankles,  and  excessive  sen-
sitiveness and  irritability  of  skin.

Vesicular  and  pustular  eruptions,  sometimes  followed  by
very  painful  ulcers,  and  finally  by  erythematous  swell-
ings.
^  Stages  of  Life,  Constitution. Miss  M.,  oBt.  20;  pain  in  L
ovary.


23  CUPRUM  METALLICUM.

Young  married  woman,  with  one  child;  diarrhoea.

Mrs.  M.,  has  three  young  children,  second  month  of  ges-
tation; vomiting.

Mrs.  W.,  set.  30 ;  vomiting.
"^  Relations. See  under  Arsen.  (Vol.  II,  p.  96)  for  suitable
antidotes in cases of  poisoning. Compare: Arsen.,

, Cuprum;  and  other  arsenical  and  copper  preparations.
-  Aeon.,  Act.  rac.  (angina  pectoris,  numbness  of  left  side
of  body and powerlessness  of  left arm) ; Merc.  corr.
(diarrhoea  and  rectal  tenesmus).


CUPRUM  METALLICUM.

Copper.  Cu.

A  substance  little  known  as  a  remedy  before  Hahnemann,  although  used  by
Medijeval  physicians,  alter  its  introduction  by  Hohenheim  (called  Paracelsus)  in
the  sixteenth  century,  and  later  (1845)  in  an  empiric  way  by  the  Eademacherian
School,  in  which  it  ranked  as  a  polychrest.

A  comprehensive  monograph,  including  the  provings  and  observations  of
Hahnemann  and  his  provers,  Bonninghausen,  Stapf,  Kiickert,  etc.,  with  results  of
poisoning  and  curative  symptoms,  was  published  by  C.  Hering.  In  it  the  effects
of  the  metal  and  the  acetate  are  conjoined,  on  account  of  their  similarity,  but  sep-
arated here,  for  the  sake  of  individuality. See  Cuprum  acetleum.

Clinical  Authokities. — Cerebral  meningitis,  A.  E.  Small,  Eaue's  Kec,  1872,
p.  62 ;  Delirium  during  scarlatina,  Gardiner,  C.  Hg.,  M.  M. ;  Mania,  Freytag,  C.  Hg.,
M.  M.;  Neuralgia  in  head,  W.  A.  Barrows,  Eaue's  Eec,  1870,  p.  285;  Catarrh  of
frontal  sinus,  A.  Korndorfer,  Hom.  Clin.,  v.  4,  p.  128 ;  Hamatemesis  during  Yellow
fever,  Kiistner,  Euck.  Kl.  Erf.,  v.  4,  p.  665 ;  Cardialgia,  Lembke,  N.  A.  J.  H.,  v.  4,
p.  341;  Gastric  disturbances,  Lembke,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf.,  v.  5,  p.  309;  //ius,  Gau-
werky,  Eiick.  KL  Erf.,  v.  1,  p.  776;  Cholera,^.  T.  Temple,  Hom.  Clin.,  v.  ],p.
100;  Henke,  Euck.  Kl.  Erf.,  v.  5,  p.  474;  Asiatic  Cholera,  Hahnemann,  Lembke,
Gerstl,  and  others,  Euck.  Kl.  Erf.  vol.  1,  p.  938-42;  After-pains  (6  cases)  Kallen-
bach,  Eeisig,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf.,  v.  2,  p.  393;  Laryngeal  spasm,  Pearson,  B.  J.  H.,  v.
23,  p.  G75;  Dyspnoea,  Gross,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf.,  v.  3,  p.  188;  Asthma  Milluri  (2  ca.«es),
Eiick.  Kl.  Erf,  v.  5,  p.  779 ;  Asthma,  afterfright,'\\.  Gross,  Analyt.  Therap.,v.  1 ,  p.  200 ;
Asthma,  Oehme,  Ruck.  Kl.  Erf.,  v.  5,  p.  798;  Kunkel,  Allg.  Hom.  Ztg.,  v.  103,  p.
99;  Suffocative  cough,  Kiisemann,  Gross,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf.,  v.  3,  p.  11 ;  Whooping
cough,  Neumann,  Bosch,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf.,  v.  3,  p.  71 ;  Meyer,  B.  J.  H.,  v.  14,  p.  43;
Spinal  irritation  (2  cases),  Hirsch,  Allg.  Hom.  Ztg.,  v.  102,  p.  130;  Hysteria,  E.  M.
Hale,  Hom.  Clin.,  v.  ],  p.  197 ;  Chorea  minor,  K.  Eochlitz,  B.  J.  H.,  v.  30,  p.  711 ;
Chorea,  Gross,  Horner,  Euck.  Kl.  Erf.,  v.  4,  p.  608;  W.  E.  Childs,  Eaue's  Eec,
1874,  p.  262;  -Spasms,  Payr,  Eaue's  Eec,  1870,  p.  294;  Wurmb,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf.,
V.  4,  p.  559 ;  Epilepsy,  Hirsch,  Eaue's  Eec,  1873,  p.  208  ;  (12  cases)  Schwarze,


CUPRUM  METALLICUM.  24

Gross,  Battmann,  etc.,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf.,  v.  4,  p.  555-61 ;  Weigel,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf.,  v.
4,  p.  555 ;  Bojanus,  Eaue's  Eec,  1874,  p.  268 ;  Sleeplessness,  Lembke,  Analytical
Therap.,  v.  1,  p.  264;  Measles,  with  pneuvwnic  symptoms,  J.  T.  Temple,  Horn.  Clin.,
V.  1,  p.  100;  Ringworm  on  elbow,  C.  Hg.,  MSS.

^  Mind. I  Marked  lessening  of  memory. ^Scarlatina.

Weakness  of  memory,  as  well  as  cerebral  functions  in
general;  in  speaking  he  frequently  has  to  think  for  the
right  word.

Delirium,  even  paralysis  of  brain,  with  symptoms  of  col-
lapse.

Incoherent  delirious  talk.

iDelirium:  afraid  of  every  one  who  approached  him,
shrinking  away  from  them;  tries  to  escape;  in  evening
and  in  the  dark.

Craziness;  attacks  with  savage  malice,  with  proud  bear-
ing, at  times  interrupted  by  clonic  spasms.

Attacks  of  rage,  wants  to  bite  the  bystanders.

Mania  characterized  b}^  a  wild  look  and  fear;  tries  to
escape.

■  Attacked  suddenly  with  convulsions,  with  biting;  after

attack,  malicious  disposition  towards  nurse,  biting,  and
striking  and  doing  everything  to  annoy  her,  passed  her
excrements  on  floor.
•  Mania  with  biting,  beating,  and  tearing  things  to  pieces;
insane  foolish  gestures  of  imitation  and  mimicry;  full
of  insane  spiteful  tricks,  illusions  of  imagination,  does
not  recognize  his  own  family;  unhappy,  apprehensive,
anxious,  and  despairing;  prsecordial  anguish,  pale,  mis-
erable look,  general  chilliness,  not  >  by  heat;  attacks
end  in  sweat.

■  Bellows  like  a  calf  during  delirium;  periodical  uttering

of  shrill  screams.

■  Whining,  tremulous  voice  and  manner.

■  Convulsive  laughter.

■  Laughing; grimaces;  exaltation  and  ecstacies; melan-

choly and  dread  of  society. ^Periodical  chorea.
■Violent  weeping,  anxiety,  ludicrous  gesticulations,  and

desire  to  hide  one's  self. ^Chorea.
■Shuns  everyone; cannot  be  induced  to  go  among  people

in  evening; very  restless  at  night. ^Asthma.

■  Alternation of gaiety and depression, before attack.

^Whooping  cough.

■  Unconquerable  sadness,  constant  restlessness,  as  if  some

misfortune  were  approaching; fears  he  will  lose his
reason.
■Sadness  while  walking  in  open  air,  must  stand  still  or
sit  down.


•25  CUPRUM  METALLICUM.

I  The  child  is  afraid  of  strangers,  while  teething.

lAfraid  of  and  shrinking  away  from  everyone  who  ap-
proaches him;  afraid  of  falling;  clinging  tightly  to
nurse;  won't  stay  in  bed,  but  in  lap;  conscious,  knows
people;  tongue  darting  forth  and  back  with  great  rapid-
ity, like  a  snake's.  ^Catarrhal  or  exanthematic  fevers;
scarlet  fever  without  eruption ;  during  dentition.

I  I  Unusual  quickness  and  briskness  in  erroneous  ideas,  one
following  the  other  quickly,  all  of  an  anxious  character ;
a  staring  look  fixed  on  objects;  pulse  quick,  unequal;
profuse  weakening  sweat;  timid,  bashful  woman,  eighth
day  after  confinement.

■  Paroxysms  of  anxiety;  full  of  fears.

I  Attacks  preceded  by  great  anxiety. ^Whooping  cough.

■  Attacks  of  deathly  anxiety  without  heat.

■  Loss  of  spirits;  anxiety;  fits  of  anguish  and  fear  of  death.

■  Restless  tossing  about  and  constant  restlessness.

■  Irritable  and  changeable,  at  times  gentle  and  sensitive,

at  others  very  contrary. ^Chorea.

■  Changeable  mood;  children  cross  and  irritable,  or  indif-

ferent and  dull,  in  brain  affections.

■  ■Mental and bodily  exhaustion,  from overexertion  of

mind  or  loss  of  sleep;  pulse  feeble,  somewhat  frequent,
unequal;  skin  moist,  feet  generally  cold;  attacks  of  un-
conquerable anxiety;  head  giddy  and  internally  pain-
ful, feels  as  if  he  would  lose  his  senses;  sleep  full  of
dreams,  restless,  unrefreshing.

■  Restless  tossing  about.

'^  Sensorium. Deep sopor,  with twitching and  jerking  of
limbs.

■  Total  loss  of  consciousness. ^Spasms.

■  Vertigo:  on  looking  up,  with  dimness  of  sight,  as  though

a  veil  were  before  eyes ;  violent  and  long  lasting,  >  by
an  evacuation  of  bowels;  with  stupor; reeling; head
giddy,  cannot  sit  up  in  bed;  with  weariness.
■Vertigo  of  old  people  and  slight  apoplectic  attacks.

■  While  sitting,  suddenly  places  head  upon  pillow  of  sofa,

gently  shakes  head  from  side  to  side,  about  sixty  times
to  the  minute;  eyes  closed;  expression  of  face  pleasant;
twitching  of  eyelids  with  spasmodic  rolling  of  eyeballs.
^Epilepsy.
■Vomiting  of  watery  substance  from  stomach,  colic  and
spasms;  heat  in  forehead;  intense  thirst;  cold  w^ater
temporarily  prevents  vomiting,  but  not  a  distressing
hiccough  that  seemed  certain  to  end  in  a  convulsion,
after  which  child  lay  in  a  comatose  state  for  twenty-
four  hours;  heat  of  head  is  great,  and  while  child  was
in  a  deep  sopor,  there  were  twitching  and  jerking  of


CUPRUM  METALLICUM.  26

limbs, coldness of hands, and blueness of fingers.
^Cerebral  meningitis.
^  Inner  Head. sPain  in  head,  which  feels  hollow.

I  Violent  pain  in  forehead,  <  over  1.  eye;  sensation  of
pressure  over  1.  eye  and  root  of  nose;  nose  seems  stuffed
up,  yet  there  is  a  discharge  of  coryza ;  loss  of  smell,  taste
imperfect;  heaviness  of  head  as  if  brain  would  press
out  of  forehead,  with  violent,  almost  unbearable  head-
ache, <  in  1.  side  and  from  motion,  >  when  lying
down;  she  thinks  an  abscess  is  forming  in  brain,  and
pain  will  set  her  crazy. ^Catarrh  of  frontal  sinus.

Violent  agonizing  headache,  at  distinct  intervals,  in  parox-
ysms, lancinating  pains,  sometimes  in  forehead,  some-
times in  temple  or  occiput,  <  by  slightest  pressure.

Headache  below  os  frontis,  feels  as  if  head  would  be  torn
asunder.

^rPainful  tearing  in  foi'epart  of  head,  with  a  sensation  of
pressing  outwards;  great  clulness  and  stupidity;  <  when
touched.

I  Stitches  in  temples,  with  redness  of  eyes.

•  Bruised  pain  in  brain,  and  in  orbit  on  turning  eye.

■  Crawling  sensation  in  vertex.

iStra'nge  tingling  pain  in  vertex;  menses  omitting.

I I  Violent  dull  headache  over  glabella.

I  Violent  continuous  headache,  increased  periodically,  with

sensation  as  if  cold  water  was  poured  on  head;  cold
hands  and  feet  when  headache  subsides.

iChronic  headache  beginning  in  afternoon  and  continuing
into  night;  pain  in  region  of  1.  parietal  bone,  extend-
ing down  neck  and  arms,  and  across  chest,  with  spas-
modic drawings,  amounting  almost  to  convulsions;
vertigo;  nausea;  chilliness,  and  frequent  desire  to
urinate.

iDulness  and  heaviness  of  head,  with  increasing  anxiety.

I I  Congestion  to  brain,  with  convulsive  motions  of  extrem-
ities and  of  muscles  of  face;  eyes  turned  up,  fixed;  half-
closed  lids;  pupils  unaltered,  insensible;  skin  flabby  and
cool;  pulse  small,  and  could  not  be  counted;  slow,  heavy
inspiration;  quick,  moaning  expiration.

I  Brain  affections  of  children,  with  catarrhal  fever,  difficult

dentition,  or  exanthematic  diseases;  they  cannot  hold

head  up.
I  After  meningitis,  extreme weakness, want  of  appetite,

fever  in  evening,  sweat  in  morning,  pulse  thread-like,

skin  flabby,  cold  and  moist.
lApoplexia  nervosa; loss  of  consciousness;  distortion  of

mouth  and  face,  tongue  partially  paralyzed  and  curved

to  one  side;  unable  to  speak;  paralysis  of  one  or  other

of  limbs.


27  CUPRUM  METALLICUM.

Exacerbation  in  brain  affections,  evenings,

■  Headache  after  epileptic  attacks.

I  Paralysis  of  brain  with  symptoms  of  collapse.

■  Metastasis  to  brain  from  other  organs.

^  Outer  Head. Crawling  sensation  on  top  of  head,  as  of  some-
thing moving  there.

■  Tossing  about  of  head.

■  Convulsions  of  head;  head  moves  from  side  to  side,  is

drawn  to  one  side,  or  falls  forward;  <  or  renewed  by
contact, ^Hydrocephalus.

■  Children  cannot  hold  the  head  up, ^Brain  affections.

^Whooping  cough.
I  I  Purplish-red  swelling  of  head;  face  purple  red,  and  lips
blue; convulsions and twitches in limbs; < when
touched,  which  causes  the  swelling  to  pain.
^  Sight  and  Eyes. Eyes:  dim;  fixed  and  staring;  protruding,
glistening; turned upward; lustreless; sunken, with
blue  rings;  feel  so  weak  that  they  close.
Immobility  of  pupils.

■  Pressing  pain  in  ej^es.

■  Bruised  pain  in  orbits  when  moving  eyes.
I  I  Violent  itching  in  eyes  toward  evening.

I  Eyes  red,  inflamed. ^Epilepsy.

■  Eyeballs  red,  move  like  a  pendulum  from  side  to  side,

■  Quick  rotation  of  balls,  with  lids  closed;  severe  pain  in

eye-balls  during  attacks,

■  Frequent  twitching  of  lids  of  1.  eye,  blepharospasm  and

photophobia. ^Asthma.

■  Inflammation: of  periosteum  and  cellular  tissue  in  or-

bita;  of  lachrymal  glands;  spots  on  cornea.
^  Hearing  and  Ears. ■Distant  drumming  in  ear,  upon  which
he  is  lying,  in  morning,  disappears  on  rising.

■  Difficult  hearing.

■  Boring  in  and  behind  ears,  pressing  pain  in  front.
Itching  in  ear.

■Swelling  of  meatus  externus.
^  Smell  and  Nose, i  Loss  of  smell.

I  I  Sensation  of  great  congestion  of  blood  to  nose.

■Affection  of  frontal  sinuses,  with  pain  in  forehead,  <  over
1.  eye  and  root  of  nose,  <  from  motion,  >  when  lying;
nose  feels  stuffed,  yet  sometimes  discharges  yellow  and
again  watery  matter;  smell  gone;  taste  imperfect.

■Nosebleed;  sometimes  on  right  side  only. (^Pneumonia.

■  Copious  fluent  coryza.

■  Stoppage  of  nose.

*  Upper Face. Expression:  sad,  depressed;  of  suffering;  of
prostration;  full  of  anguish.
■Spasmodic  distortion  of  face;  rolling  of  eyes. ^Epilepsy.


CUPRUM  METALLICUM.  28

■  Face:  very  red,  eyelids  closed  and  balls  constantly  rotat-

ing; pale;  grayish,  dirty;  sunken,  pinched;  icy  cold.

I  Face  red,  puffed,  covered  with  hot  sweat. ^Asthma.

I I  Face  and  lips  blue.

I  Erysipelas  of  face  disappears  suddenly.
^ Lower  Face, i Distortion  of  mouth,  and  of  eyes;  at  times
risus  sardonicus. ^Periodical  chorea.

I  Mouth  firmly  closed;  spasmodic  contraction  of  jaw,
BLips  blue.

I I  Froth  from  mouth.

^"  Teeth  and  Gums, i Rending  pain  from  teeth  to  temples.
I  Difficult  dentition,  with  convulsions.
I  Gums  ulcerated.
I  Trismus. ^Cholera  asiatica.
*^  Taste  and  Tongue, l  i  Taste:  sweet,  or  sweetish  mefallic,

coppery;  bitter.
I  Sudden  metallic-sour  taste  in  mouth,  with  flow  of  saliva,

before  outbreak. ^Spasms.
All  food  tasts  like  clear  water.

Tongue  darting  forth  and  back  with  great  rapidity.
I  Paralysis  of  tongue,  stuttering,  imperfect  speech.
Tongue:  red; dry  and  rough,  papillae  enlarged; coated

w^hite,  yellowish  or  brown;  trembling. ^Chorea.
Tip  of  tongue  cold.
iChronic  glossitis.
^^  Inner  Mouth, i Dry  mouth. ^Brain  affections.

I  Induration  of  salivary  gland,  with  or  without  fistula.

■  Profuse  salivation;  mercurial.

iSaliva:  sweet,  stringy;  frothy,  with  cough.
^^  Throat, i Palate  red,  fauces  and  tonsils  inflamed.

I  Dull,  piercing  pain  in  1.  tonsil,  <  by  external  touch.

■  Feeling  of  constriction,  and  acute  pain  in  throat.

■  Sensation  as  if  constricted  on  swallowing.

■  Spasms  of  throat,  preventing  speech.
Burning  in  throat  and  dryness,  with  thirst.
Singultus  and  spasm  of  oesophagus.

■  Gurgling  noise  of  drink  passing  down  oesophagus.

"  Appetite,  Thirst,  Desires,  Aversions. ■Loss  of  appetite.

■  Great  thirst  for  cooling  drink;  a  swallow  of  cold  water  >

cough  and  vomiting.
Desire  for  warm  food  and  drinks;  eats  hastily.
^■^  Eating  and  Drinking. ■Gurgling  noise  of  drink  passing
down  oesophagus.

■  A  swallow  of  cold  water  >  cough,  or  vomiting.

■  Milk  bring?  on  water-brash.

^^  Hiccough,  Belching,  Nausea  and  Vomiting. Hiccough:
precedes  vomiting  and  spasms;  begins  attack  of  asthma.

■  Constant  eructations;  rumbling  in  abdomen.


29  CUPRUM  METALLICUM.

Nausea:  ascending  from  stomach  into  throat;  excessive;

repeated  but  useless  efforts  at  vomiting ;  retching  and

throwing  up  of  phlegm.
I  Nausea  and  vomiting  after  taking  cold.
I  Nausea,  vomiting  and  cramps  during  catamenia,  or  cata-

menia  omitting.
I  Nausea,  vomiting  and  torpid  stool,  with  brain  affections.
I  Severe  retching  with  the  stool. ^Dysentery.  _
Vomiting  of  water  containing  flakes,  with  violent colic

and  cramps.
Vomiting:  in  gushes  of  whey-like  fluid;  frothy  mucus;

bilious;  green;  forcible;  >  by  drinking  cold  water.
I  Vomiting  of  blood. ^Yellow  fever.
I  Vomiting  with  the  cough;  with  convulsions.
I  Spasms  preceded  by  violent  vomiting  of  mucus.
I  Periodical  attacks  of  vomiting.
^^  Scrobiculum  and  Stomach. "  Burning  in  epigastric  region.
I  I  Sensitiveness  of  epigastrium;  it  is  sore  to  touch;  clothes

feel  uncomfortable.
I  Deathly  feeling  of  constriction  beneath  sternum; with

pain  behind  ensiform  cartilage. ^Cholera.

■  Pressure  in  pit  of  stomach,  <  from  touch  or  pressure.

I  Nausea,  pressure  in  stomach,  distress  in  chest,  trembling
of  heart,  arms  and  legs,  with  feeling  of  prostration.
^Cardialgia.

I  Sensation  as  of  a  round  ball  going  to  and  fro  under  ribs,
with  various  sounds,  <  from  fluid  food;  >  from  tight
clothing  or  bandage  around  abdomen,  and  lying  quiet.

I  Sensation  as  though  something  bitter  were  in  stomach.
Gnawing  and  corroding  sensation  in  stomach.

II  Violent  pressure  at  stomach,  with  contractive  pains  at
intervals.

I  I  Excessive  tormenting  pains  in  stomach  and  epigastric

region.
Cramps  in  stomach  and  chest,  cramps  extending  upward,

with  violent  diarrhoea.

■  Spasms  of  stomach.

1  I  Bluish  color  of  pit  of  stomach  and  chest  during  spell.
^Epilepsy.
^^Hypochondria, il Drawing  pain  from  1.  hypochondrium
to  hip.
I  Cirrhosis  of  liver ;  hepatitis  syphilitica.
^^  Abdomen. ■  Pressure  in  abdomen  as  from  a  stone ;  <  from
contact.

■  Pressure at stomach,  nausea,  eructations,  rumbling  in

abdomen,  sensation  as  of  a  round  ball  going  to  and  fro
under  ribs,  with  various  sounds;  <  from  fluid  food,
>  by  tight  clothing  or  bandage  around  abdomen;  sleep-
lessness; >  from  lying  quiet.


•CUPRUM  METALLICUM.  30

1 1  Abdomen  tense,  or  contracted,  hot,  and  tender  to  touch.
I  Big  belly,  of  children.

■  Cutting  pains  in umbilical  region,  as  if  a  knife were

thrust  through  to  back,  with  piercing  screams.
I  I  Cutting  i:)ains  below  navel,  abdomen  painful  on  touch,
with  diarrhoea.

I  Violent colicky,  cutting, drawing pains  in abdomen;

abdomen  drawn  in; colic  not  increased by  pressure;
great  anxiety.

II  Violent  intermittent  colic.

■  Cramps  in  abdomen. ^Epilepsy.

■  Violent  spasms  in  abdomen  and  upper  and  lower  limbs,

with  piercing,  distressing  screams.

■  Intussusception  of  bowels,  with  singultus,  violent  colic,

stercoraceous  vomiting  and  great  agony.
Ulcers  in  intestines,  with  corroding,  stinging  pain.

■  ■Spasmodic  movements  of  abdominal  muscles.

■  Inguinal  gland  swollen.

^°  Stool  and  Rectum.  Stools:  watery,  with  flakes;  bloody;
black;  watery;  green;  gray,  with  flocculent  matter  in
cholera,  also  masses  of  whey-like  fluid;  frequent;  not
very  copious;  in  pernicious  intermittents ;  suppressed
with  general  heat.

■  Painful  green  stools,  with  violent  cutting  and  tenesmus.

■  Involuntary  thin  stool. ^Eclampsia  during  dentition.

■  Diarrhoea: violent; profuse  squirting  out; with  much

wind  passing;  with  cramps.
■Summer  complaint  of  children,  with  brain  affections.

■  Cholera morbus; cold  perspiration,  pulse  120,  frequent

retching,  occasional  vomiting  of  a  substance  resembling
coffee  grounds,  and  frequent  stools.

■  Chronic  diarrhoea,  especially  in  cachectic  persons.

■  ■Cholera  asiatica,  spasmodic  stage;  violent  spasms,  pecu-

liar contractions  of  fingers  and  toes;  painful  pressure  in
scrobiculum,  <  by  touch;  audible  gurgling  noise  of
drink  passing  down;  contraction  of  chest  before  vom-
iting.

■  Much  cramping  of  muscles,  or  cramps  appearing  after

vomiting  has  ceased,  in  place  of  it;  icy  coldness,  pulse-
lessness. ^Cholera  asiatica.

■  From  the  beginning  drawing  and tension  in  muscles,

slight  convulsive  starts,  or  later  more  continued  cramps,
particularly  in  calves. ^Cholera  asiatica.
■Spasmodic  cramp  with  coldness,  anxiety,  thirst,  gagging
and  diarrhoea. ^Cholera  asiatica.

■  Frequent  vomiting  and  stools  of  copious  masses  of  whey-

like fluids,  with  continuous  pains  in  stomach  and  ab-
domen; constant  cramps  with convulsive motions  ol


31  CUPRUM  METALLICUM.

lower  limbs;  eyes  sunken,  face  small,  nose  pointed,
dark  blue  color  of  face,  blue  all  over  body,  tongue  cold,
aphonia;  heart-beat  weak,  pulse  scarcely  perceptible.
^Cholera  asiatica.

iPainful  twitching  and  slight  playing  motions  of  muscles;
trismus;  painful  contraction  of  chest;  painful  cramps  of
calves ;  painful  convulsions  of  fingers  and  toes ;  difficult,
painful  vomiting;  pressure  in  pit  of  stomach,  <  from
touch;  constant  restlessness;  fear  of  death;  light  de-
lirium. ^Cholera  asiatica.

iDeathly  anxiety  without  heat,  restless  tossing;  staring,
sunken  eyes;  pale  bluish  face,  features  changed  and
anxious;  hands  cold,  cold  sweat;  violent  thirst,  hic-
cough, nausea  in  whole  abdomen,  but  most  in  pit  of
stomach  rising  up  into  throat;  continuous,  violent  vom-
iting >  by  drinking  cold  water;  aphonia,  difficult
breathing ;  drawing,  spasmodic  or  digging  pain  in  calves.
^Cholera  asiatica.

■In  second  stage:  cramps,  cold  sweats,  hoarseness,  blue
lips  and  nails,  thirst,  no  urine,  cold  limbs,  weak  pulse,
face  and  tongue  cold,  skin  dough-hke,  in  folds.  ^Cholera.

Iln^third  stage:  discharges  of  whitish  fluid,  thirst  violent-
sudden  cries  with  violent  clonic  spasms  of  lower  limbs
on  lying  down;  fingers  stiff  and  drawn  crooked,  eyes
sunken,  with  dark  or  livid  circles;  skin  blue,  slate-
colored,  and  inelastic;  pulse  imperceptible. ^Cholera.

■  Constipation,  alternating  with  diarrhoea.

B Thread-worms;  round  worms;  tape-worms.
^^  Urinary  Organs. Ineffectual  desire  to  urinate,  with  diar-
rhoea. ^Pregnancy.

I  Frequent  desire  to  urinate. ^Neuralgia  in  head.

I  Must  urinate  during  night.

I  Profuse  discharge  of  a  clear,  watery  urine  during  or  after
spell. ^Epilepsy.

I  Urine:  acid;  straw-colored,  turbid  after  standing;  a  red-
dish, thin  sediment  adheres  to  vessel;  dark  red,  turbid,
with  yellowish  sediment;  viscous,  offensive;  bloody;
scanty  or  suppressed.

I  Great  and  slowly  progressing  emaciation;  suppurating
tuberculosis  of  lungs,  and  evident  signs  of  depression  of
brain;  very  great  thirst;  increased  hunger;  sweetish
taste  of  mouth;  increased  urination,  especially  at  night;
dry,  very  infrequent  stool;  decrease  of  sexual  desire.
^Diabetes.

B  Scanty  urine  in  brain  affections.

B  Ursemic  convulsions.
^  Male  Sexual  Organs, b  Great  nervousness  in  young  men,
who  are  prematurely  old  and  have  cramps  in  calves  of
legs  and  feet  on  attemi:)ting  coition.


CUPRUM  METALLICUM.  32^

iSecondary  gonorrhoea;  discharge  variable  as  to  quan-
tity ;  orifice  of  urethra  sticking  together.
^  Female  Sexual  Organs. ■  Before  menses:  spasmodic  dysp-
noea; convulsions;  violent  palpitation.

Menstruation  too  late;  protracted.

■  Before  or  during  menses,  or  after  suppression,  violent

unbearable  cramps  in  abdomen,  extending  up  into
chest,  causing  nausea,  vomiting;  sometimes  convulsions
of  limbs  and  piercing  shrieks.

■  Frequent  epileptic  spasms  during  menstruation.

■  Menses  not  appearing  after  suppression  of  foot-sweat.

■  Torpid  chlorosis.

^*  Pregnancy,  Parturition,  Lactation.  ■  Violent  and  dis-
tressing cramps  in  uterine  region,  in  pit  of  stomach,,
fingers  and  toes,  or  violent  general  spasms  during
pregnancy.
■Spasms  during  parturition,  with  violent  vomiting;  opis-
thotonos, or  spreading  of  limbs  and  opening  mouth.

■  Clonic  spasms  during  pregnancy  or  parturition,  when

attack  commences  in  one  part,  as  in  fingers  or  toes,  or
in  a  limb,  and  gradually  spreads  all  over  body;  great
restlessness  between  the  attacks.

During  lying-in-time:  sour-smelling  sweat;  miliary  erup-
tion; anxiety;  easily  frightened;  heaviness  of  head;
soreness  of  abdomen  to  pressure;  burning  in  small  of
back;  numbness  of  arms.  Spasms  commence  with
cramps  in  fingers  and  toes;  hands  and  feet  turned  out-
ward.

Violent  spasmodic  labor  pains  appearing  at  irregular
intervals,  often  with  violent  cramps  in  lower  extremi-
ties, or  cramps  may  be  confined  to  fingers  and  toes;
great  restlessness  between  the  pains.

■  ■Most  distressing  after-pains,  particularly  in  women  who

have  borne  many  children.

■  Cramping  after-pains  often  produce  cramp  in  extremities.

■  Swelling  and  induration  of  mammae.

^  Voice,  Larynx,  Trachea,  Bronchia.  Speechlessness  con-
tinues after  consciousness  is  restored,  aiter  hysterical,,
epileptic,  or  other  convulsions;  reflex  aphonia  from
cerebral  or  other  sympathetic  causes;  spasmodic  cough,
or  dyspnoea,  due  to  spasm  of  larynx,  diaphragm,  or  in-
tercostal muscles,  with  cyanotic  state  of  lips,  nails,  etc.

Spasm  of  glottis,  preventing  speech.

I  I  Intermittent  aphonia  in  a  professional  singer.

I  I  Continued  hoarseness,  so  that  he  cannot  speak  a  word,,
with  desire  to  lie  down.

■  Hoarseness  as  soon  as  he  breathes  dry  cold  air.
Hoarse  crying,  like  a  child.


33  CUPRUM  METALLICUM.

I  Contraction  of  larynx  with  cough.

■  Head  thrown  far  back  on  pillow; mouth  wide  open;,

cheeks  dark  red,  almost  purple;  eyes  partly  closed;
trachea  hard  as  a  bone  and  nearly  even  with  chin;
breathing  crowing  and  very  difficult;  hands  and  feet
cramped  and  rigid  but  not  cold ;  every  effort  to  swallow
increases  the  spasms  of  glottis.  ^Laryngeal  spasm,
i  Croup,  numerous  cases.
^^Respiration.  Sighing;  rolling  from  one  side  to  another;:
at  intervals  trying  to  take  a  deep  inspiration.

■  Respirations  deep  and  snoring,  twelve  to  a  minute.
I  Respiration  hurried  and  noisy. ^Spasms.

iVery  rapid  respiration,  with  rattling  in  bronchi,  as  if

they  were  full  of  mucus.
lAVhistling  breathing,  with  whooping  cough.
I  Quick  rattling  breathing,  with  cough.

■  Between  attacks  of  whooping  cough,  rattling  on  chest.

■  Constant  spasmodic  jerking  motion  of  diaphragm,  mak-

ing breathing  short;  muscles  of  chest  and  abdomen  in
constant  motion,  as  after  running  fast;  talks  like  one
out  of  breath, <  from  motion;  >  on  lying  down.

■  Difficult,  labored  respiration;  much  rattling  of  mucus.

■  Dyspnoea;  short, superficial, quick  respirations, < by

coughing,  laughing,  bending  upper  part  of  body  back-
ward, walking  quickly,  or  inhaling  acrid  vapors.  _
■When  trying  to  take  a  deep  breath,  cough  with  whistling
breathing; dyspnoea  in spasmodic fits,  almost  suffo-
cating. t'Asthma.

■  Dyspnoea  so  intense,  that  he  cannot  bear  a  handkerchief

before  face.

■  Spasmodic  dyspnoea  after  fright  or  vexation.

■  Asthma  Millari;  violent  attacks,  without  any  cough,  in

children.

■  Violent  asthmatic  attacks  come  on  suddenly,  and  cease

suddenly;  during  attacks,  great  dyspnoea,  patient  sit-
ting in  a  bent  position;  loud  wheezing  respiration;
cannot  speak  above  a  whisper;  dark  red  face;  eyes  red
and  protruding;  trembling  of  limbs;  profuse  sweat;
attacks  particularly  <  by  long  continued  walking
against  the  wind.

■  Quick,  anxious respiration; contraction  of  muscles  in

hypochondriac  region  during  inspiration;  rattling  of
mucus  deep  in  chest;  great  restlessness,  throwing  her-
self about  in  bed;  face  blue;  eyes  wide  open;  larynx
drawn  upward;  presses  hands  violently  against  bed;
visible  cramps  of  respiratory  muscles;  predominant  ab-
dominal respiration;  difficult,  hollow,  hoarse  cough,
sometimes  with  a  whistling  or  metalhc  ringing  sound;

VOL.  v.— 3.


CUPRUM  METALLICUM.  34

hands  cold;  cold  sweat  on  forehead;  spasmodic,  small,
and  very  frequent  pulse ;  attacks  followed  by  great  pros-
tration. ^Asthma  Millari.
■Beginning  paralysis  of  lungs;  indicated  by  sudden  diffi-
culty of  breathing,  followed  by  great  prostration.
^  Cough. 1 1  Cough  with  interrupted,  almost  suppressed  res-
piration.
I  Cough  increases  dyspnoea.

I  Dry,  suffocating  cough,  with  gagging,  <  at  night,  not

permitting  sleep.

I I  Cough  in  children;  threatening  to  suffocate.

I  With  every  paroxysm  of  cough,  child  coughs  itself  into

a  fit;  appears  as  if  it  w^ere  dead.
iCough,  with  regular  inhalation,  but  sighing  exhalation.
I  Cough,  <  at  night,  with  sensation  of  great  dryness  in

pit  of  stomach.
I  Sound  when  coughing  as  if  cough  re-echoed  in  stomach.
•  Fatiguing  cough  with  blowing  of  blood  from  nose.

■  Trembling  after  coughing.

i  Metastatic  cough,  with  the  characteristic  sound  of  croup.
Nervous  and  spasmodic  cough.

■  Dry  cough  with  measles.

i  Difficult  expectoration,  with  cough.

■  Blood  in  coughing  is  dark,  mixed  with  phlegm.

■  Cough dry  in evening,  slight  expectoration  morning;

phlegm  mixed  with  dark  blood,  of  putrid  taste  and  smell.

■  Cough  after  sea  wind.

■  Cough: <  by  inhaling  cold  air;  taking  deep  breath;

laughing;  after  eating  solid  food;  when  bending  back-
ward; on  coming  from  cold  air  into  warm  room.

■  ■Cough  >  by  drinking  cold  water.

■  Before  the  attacks,  great  anxiety;  attacks  promoted  by

eating  solid  food;  they  vomit  particularly  solid  food.
^Whooping  cough.

■  Three  attacks  in  quick  succession,  most  at  night,  with

loss  of  breath. ^Whooping  cough.

■  Paroxysm  excited by  phlegm  in  larynx,  or  a  feeling  of

cramp  in  pharynx. ^Whooping  cough.

■  Whooping  cough,  in  long  attacks,  uninterrupted  until

breath  is  gone.

■  Attacks  severe,  with  entire  loss  of  breath,  slight  twitch-

ings,  rigidity;  do  not  recover  for  some  time;  between
attacks,  perceptible  rattling  of  mucus  in  chest.  ^Whoop-
ing cough.

■  Whooping  cough  in  most  malignant  form,  >  by  swal-

lowing cold  water.
.■Children  get  stiff,  breathing  ceases,  spasmodic  twitch-
ings,  after  awhile  consciousness  returns,  they  vomit,  and
recover  but  slowly. ^Whooping  cough.


"35  CUPRUM  METALLIC  UM.

I  Child  has  a  complete  cataleptic  spasm  with  each  parox-
ysm of  whooping  cough.

I  Stadium  nervosum  of  pertussis,  each  attack  ending  in
convulsions.

I  Putrid  phlegm. ^Whooping  cough.

I  Pertussis,  when  vomiting  follows  each  paroxysm  of
coughing.

■  Convulsive  throwing up of  tough,  gelatinous mucus,

during paroxysms; afterwards constant rattling on
chest;  convulsions  of  flexor  muscles. ^Pertussis.
^^  Inner  Chest  and Lungs, a  Spasmodic constriction of
chest,  obstructing breathing and preventing speech;
after  fright  or  anger.

■  Spasmodic  contraction  of  chest:  after  drinking;  before

vomiting,  in  cholera  Asiatica;  with  inclination  to  uri-
nate; with  cough.
I  Nausea,  pressure  on  stomach,  and  anxious  contraction  of

chest;  trembling  at  heart;  trembling  of  arms  and  feet;

can't  walk; great  weakness;  changed  expression  and

paleness  of  face.
I  Pain  behind  ensiform  cartilage,  with  a  deathly  feeling;

attacks  of  dyspnoea  unto  suffocation,  cold  face,  blue  lips,

coldness  all  over.

■  Shooting  pains  in  sides  of  chest,  must  cry  out.

■  Feeling  of  a  rush  of  blood  to  the  chest.

Violent  palpitation  of  heart,  and  slow,  small,  weak  pulse.
^Paralysis  after  cholera,  apoplexy,  etc.

Rattling  of  mucus,  deep  in  chest.  Msthma  Millari.
■Lobular  pneumonia,  when  formation  of  abscess  threatens;
beginning  paralysis  of  lungs,  indicated  by  a  sudden
difficulty  of  breathing,  followed  by  great  prostration;
complication  with  whooping  cough;  face  earthy,  dirty,
bluish;  roof  of  mouth  red;  sweat  sour-smelling;  diar-
rhoea.

■  Epidemic  pneumonia;  after  a  few  days'  dry  coughing  or

a  diarrhoea,  either  stitches,  mostly  in  left  side  of  chest,
or  a  pressure  behind  sternum,  or  neither,  but  bronchitic
symptoms  by  auscultation,  with  headache,  fever  or  great
prostration;  cannot  take  a  deep  breath,  the  shooting
pain  prevents  it;  in  some  cases  dyspnoea,  sudden  feeling
of  suff'ocation,  has  to  sit  up,  with  a  pale,  collapsed  face.
^  Heart. ■  Anxious  feeling  about  heart.

■  Boring  pain  in  region  of  heart;  stitches  below  it.

■  Palpitation  and  spasms  of  heart.

■  Disturbed  innervation  of  heart;  nervous  palpitation  with

blueness  of  face,  dyspnoea;  sudden  death  impending.
■Attacks  when  excited  or  when  exciting  herself;  deathly
feeling  with  pain  behind  ensiform  cartilage;  cold  face,


CUPRUM  METALLICUM.  36

blue  lips,  coldness  all  over;  sudden  attack  of  dyspnoea

unto  suffocation. ^Angina  pectoris.
I  Nausea,  pressure  in  stomach,  anxious  oppression  of  chest,

trembling  of  heart;  also  trembling  in  hands  and  feet,

so  that  she  cannot  walk;  great  lassitude;  paleness  of

face  with  altered  expression; constipation; disturbed

mind and sleep; great  nervousness. ^Affection of
«  heart.

I  Angina  pectoris,  attacks  coming  on  from  excitement  and

exertion ;  slow  pulse.
Pulse  generally  small,  almost  imperceptible,  weak and

very  slow;  less  frequently  full,  hard,  and  accelerated.
I  Pulse  very  changeable;  thready,  tense;  small,  hard  and

moderately  frecjuent;  irritable  in  brain  affections.
iPulse  thready,  tense,  100  per  minute. ^Measles,  with

pneumonic  symptoms.
I  Pulse  quick,  small. ^Scarlatina.
I  I A  strong  pulse  and  a  wild  look.
^*^  Outer  Chest, i Chest  and  epigastric  region  become  blue.

^Epilepsy.
^^  Neck  and  Back, i Throbbing  carotids. ^Spasms.
iGlands  of  neck  indurated.

■  Paralysis  of  muscles  of  back  up  to  neck;  also  of  the

limbs;  lower  limbs  oedematous,  but  retain  sensibility.

iHypersesthesia  and  great  sensitiveness  of  spinal  column
from  sixth  cervical  vertebra  to  small  of  back,  slightest
touch  intolerable;  tearing,  jerking  pains  in  limbs.

Broad  stitches  as  with  a  knife,  under  1.  scapula,  near  spi-
nal column,  independent  of  breathing.

Lancination  in  small  of  back  in  a  transverse  direction.

Burning  and  tearing  in  small  of  back.

Stiff,  lame  feeling  in  back  and  lumbar  region.

Backache,  top  of  sacrum; griping  and  spasm  about  region
of  heart;  head  troubles  him  a  great  deal.
^^  Upper  Limbs, i  Anchylosis  of  shoulder-joint.

I  After  overwork  and  mental  anxiety,  twitching  in  fingers,
extending  into  hands,  arms  and  body,  to  diaphragm ;
upper  portion  of  body  and  arms  affected  by  a  remittent
convulsive  shaking;  flushed  face,  hot  head;  alternate
laughing  and  crying,  ending  in  profuse  sweat;  parox-
ysms excited  by  laughing,  talking,  or  any  exciting  emo-
tion; at  no  time  did  the  convulsive  shaking  or  trem-
bling extend  below  waist.

I. Jerking  of  arms  and  hands.

■  Left  arm  convulsively  jerked  as  by  an  electric  shock.

■  Drawing  pains  in  both  arms. ^Headache.

■  Drawing  sensation  in  1.  arm,  arm  drawn  involuntarily

close to  body; formication and tearing  in r. hand.
^Epilepsy.


37  CUPRUM  METALLICUM.

iSensation  in  r.  arm  and  forearm,  as  of  constriction  of
different  parts,  and  of  great  increase  in  size,  it  seeming
to  him  at  times  to  be  larger  than  his  whole  body,  and
its  motions  not  fully  under  control  of  will.

I  Numbness  and  lameness  of  arms  and  hands.

Inflammation  of  lymphatic  vessels  from  hand  to  shoulder,
with  swelling  of  hand.

■  Tetter  in  bend  of  elbow,  with  yellow  scabs;  itching  vio-

lently, particularly  in  evening.
■Frequent  falling  asleep  of  the  hands,  oppression  of  chest,
and  palpitation. ^Spinal  irritation.

■  Can  hold  nothing  in  hand,  the  objects  fall  to  the  ground.

■  Clutches  air  with  hands,  unable  to  speak  or  swallow.

^Asthma.
Long-lasting  trembling  and  shaking  of  r.  hand.

■  Coldness  of  hands,  and  bluish  appearance  of  fingers.

■  Twitching  in  hands  and  fingers.

■  Stitching,  rending  or  drawing  pains  in  upper  timbs.

■  Stiffened  and  inflamed  hands  and  fingers.

■  Pain  in  middle  finger  as  if  pricked  with  a  needle,  fol-

lowed the  next  day  by  jerking  of  finger,  which  soon
extended  to  all  the  fingers,  to  first  one  arm  then  the
other,  and  finally,  ere  eight  weeks  elapsed,  there  was
not  a  muscle  in  body  which  did  not  occasionally  jerk
involuntarily. /^Chorea  minor.

■  Fingers  as  if  dead. ^Cholera.

■  Little  vesicles  on  tips  of  fingers,  oozing  watery  fluid.

■  Ringworm  on  point  of  r.  elbow,  and  crusts  in  bend  of  left.
^^  Lower  Limbs. ■  Paralysis  of  lower  limbs. ^Psoas  abscess.

■  Violent  cramps  in  legs  and  feet

■  Twitching  in  lower  limbs,  drawing  them  backward.

■  Lameness  of  lower  limbs,  with  contraction  of  muscles.

■  Great  weakness  of  legs,  knees  give  way.

■  Weakness  of  knees,  with  painful  drawing  when  walking

and  standing,  which  is  very  difficult,  knees  give  way.

■  Frequent  involuntary  doubling  up  of  knees  in  walking,

bringing  him  to  the  ground;  with  whining,  tremulous

voice  and  manner.
Weakness  in  knee-joint,  pain  as  if  broken.
I  ■Spasms  and  cramps  in  calves.

■  Drawing  and  digging  pain  in  calf.

■  Muscles  of  calf  contracted  in  knots;  convulsive  twitch-

ing of  fingers  and  toes;  cramping,  colicky  pains;  no
vomiting  or  diarrhoea. ^Cholera.

■  Cramp  in  leg,  from  ankle  up  into  calf

■  Painful  heaviness  in  ankle.

■  Child  draws  feet  spasmodically  upwards  and  backwards

upon  nates. 6'Convulsions.


CUPRUM  METALLICUM.  SS-

I  Icy  coldness  of  feet,  or  burning  in  soles ;  suppressed  foot-
sweat,  or  sweating  of  feet.
^*  Limbs  in  General.  ■  Severe  cramps  in  muscles  of  extremi-
ties, making  her  cry  out  with  pain;  flexors  strongly
contracted,  she  imagines  every  moment  the  joints  will
break ;  limbs  hot  and  very  sensitive  to  touch.

I  Cramps  in  limbs,  fingers  and  toes.

•  Weakness  and  weariness  of  limbs.

I  Coldness  of  limbs  and  hands,  bluish  appearance  of
fingers;  low  temperature,  prostration.

I  Contraction  of  joints,  particularly  knees.

■Twitching  and  jerking  of  arms  and  legs. ^Spasms.

t:  Itching  and  tearing  in  limbs,  and  muscles  of  back,  can
hardly  bear  it.

I  Tingling  in  extremities;  twitching  and  jerking  of  limbs.

■  Peculiar  contractions  of  fingers  and  toes. 6'Cholera.

■  Convulsions  beginning  with  cramps  in  lower  extremi-

ties, and  drawing  in  of  fingers  and  toes,  throwing  about
of  limbs,  frothing  at  mouth,  and  choking  in  throat.

■  Lameness,  dragging  of  1.  leg;  twitching  of  1.  arm;  im-

perfect speech,  tongue  trembling;  inability  to  grasp  and
hold  anything.  ^Chorea.
^  Rest.  Position.  Motion.  Lying:  headache  >;  drum-
ming in  ear  upon  which  he  lies;  pain  in  forehead  >;
sensation  as  of  a  ball  going  to  and  fro  under  ribs  >  ;
spasmodic  jerking  of  diaphragm  >;  twitchings  >.

Sitting:  sadness  while  walking  compels;  sudden  attack  of
epilepsy.

Standing:  sadness  wdiile  w^alking  compels  quiet;  painful
drawing  in  knees.

Sitting  in  bent  position:  during  asthmatic  attack.

Motion:  headache  <;  pain  in  forehead  <  ;  spasmodic
jerking  of  diaphragm  < ;  twitching  in  arms  and  upper
part  of  body  brought  on.

On  opening  eyes:  eyeballs  move  about.

On  moving  eyes:  pain  in  orbit.

Looking  up:  vertigo,  with  dimness  of  sight.

Lying  down:  sudden  cries,  clonic  spasms  of  lower  limbs.

Sitting  up:  giddiness  of  head  while  in  bed,  prevents;  sud-
den suffocation  compels.

Rising:  drumming  in  ear  >.

Bending  backward:  dyspnoea  <;  cough  <.

Walking:  sadness  while;  dyspnoea  <  by  quick;  asthma
<;  painful  drawing  in  knees;  involuntary  doubling
up  of  knees.

Exertion:  angina  pectoris  coming  on.
^  Nerves. ■Senses  less  acute,  in  cholera.

■Restless  tossing  about  and  constant  uneasiness.


39  CUPRUM  METALLICUM.

I  Nervous  trembling,  with  very  great  acuteness  and  sensi-
tiveness of  all  the  senses.
■Weariness  of  long  duration.

■  Great  weakness  of  muscles  and  relaxation  of  body.

I  Great prostration, with nervous excitability,  constant

restlessness  driving  out  of  bed.
I  Twitching,  jerking  or  starting  during  sleep.
iStarting,  grinding  of  teeth,  in  brain  affections.
■Twitching  of  limbs,  followed  by  unconsciousness.
iTwitchings  and  jerkings,  which  commence  in  fingers;

spasms  often  affect  only  one  side,  are  painful,  spread

over  whole  body. ^Chorea.

■  Periodical  chorea,  muscular  contortions,  with  laughter,

grimaces,  exaltation  and  ecstasies;  irregular  movements
commencing  in  fingers  and  toes;  twitchings,  often  con-
fined to  one  side;  >  when  lying.

■  Involuntary  motions  of  1.  arm  and  leg  resulting  from

fright,  and  finally  developing  into  chorea,  so  that  she  is
unable  to  keep  "^limbs  cjuiet  while  awake;  control  of
tongue  lost,  and  for  a  long  time  speech  absent.

■  St.  Vitus'  dance  in  a  girl  of  7  years,  after  seeing  a  child

in  convulsions;  attack  begins  with  shooting  and  burning
in  1.  arm;  arm  convulsed,  tossed  about,  so  that  whole
body  has  to  follow;  horrible  distortion  of  eyes  and  face;
neck  drawn  to  r.  shoulder;  face  red,  sweating;  fever  and
thirst;  ends  with  making  fun — creeping  under  table —
irritable,  changing  from  a  mild,  sentimental  mood  to
most  stubborn  obstinacy.

■  Chorea,  or  other  clonic  spasms,  during  pregnancy,  when

attacks  commence  in  one  part — the  fingers,  or  a  limb —
and  gradually  extend  until  the  whole  frame  is  involved.

■  Face  deathly; lips  cyanotic;  breathing  only  as  it  were

by  voluntary  efforts;  rolling  alternately  each  time  the
chest  heaved,  from  r.  side  to  back,  from  back  to  r.  side
again;  pulse  thready,  tense,  120  per  minute.

Spasmodic  affections  in  general;  whooping  cough  where
attacks  run  into  catalepsy;  epilepsy;  spasms,  particu-
larly which  begin  in  fingers  and  toes,  then  spread  all
over  body;  clonic  spasms.

Spasms  preceded  by  violent  vomiting  of  mucus;  after
spasm  child  screams,  turns  and  twists  until  another
occurs;  all  troubles  seem  inclined  to  be  translated  to
brain,  threatening  that  organ  with  paralysis  or  dropsy.

■  ■Spasms with  blue face and  thumbs clenched across

palms  of  hands.
I  I  Spasms come on  in paroxysms, grouped  with  other
symptoms which always  appear with these parox-
ysms. ^Chorea.


CUPRUM  METALLICUM.  40

■  Before  outbreak,  she  feels  a  sudden  metallic-sour  taste  in

mouth,  with  flow  of  saliva;  dulness  and  heaviness  of
head,  and  an  increasing  anxiety  which  drives  her  to
bed;  face  grows  red;  carotids  pulsate;  reddened  bulbi
become  distorted;  throat  and  chest  feel  constricted;  she
cannot  speak;  respiration  hurried  and  noisy,  arms  and
legs  jerk;  especially  1.  arm  is  convulsively  jerked  as  by
an  electric  shock;  total  loss  of  consciousness;  spell  lasts
from  twenty  to  twenty -five  minutes;  body  breaks  out  in
sweat  of  an  unpleasant  odor;  urine  flows  involuntarily;
gradually  pulse  grows  slower,  and  moaning  child  falls
into  a  comatose  sleep,  from  which  she  awakes  with  dul-
ness of  head,  slow  remembrance,  and  excessive  prostra-
tion ;  spasms  every  fourteen  days.  t'Spasms  from  fright
after  operation.

1 1  Spasms  after  vexation  or  fright.

■Stiffness  of  whole  body;  sometimes  body  bent  forward.

■  Spasms  from  metastasis  from  other  organs  to  brain.

■  Tonic  spasms,  throwing  patient  about bed  with  such

violence,  as  to  require  several  ])ersons  to  hold  her,  some-
times body  is  bent  backward  like  a  bow;  unconscious-
ness; constant  trickling  of  saliva  from  mouth;  consti-
pation; frequent  scanty,  turbid  urine.

■  In  anaemic  conditions;  shrill  cries  during  attack;  drowsy

and  stupid  condition  during  intervals,  with  nausea  and
vomiting  of  slime;  bloated  abdomen,  with  involuntary,
thin  discharges  from  bowels;  also  when  child  loses  its
breath  from  crying,  and  draws  its  feet  spasmodically
upwards  and  backwards  upon  nates.  ^Convulsions  of
children.
General  convulsions,  with  continued  vomiting  and  violent
colic,  ursemic  eclampsia  with  loquacious  delirium,  fol-
lowed by  apathy,  tongue  and  breath  cold;  face  distorted,
often  red;  eyes  projecting,  staring;  long,  shrill  screams;
finally  exhaustion,  sweat,  torpor,  and  cessation  of  con-
vulsions.

■  Eclampsia  of  children,  during  dentition;  violent  spasms,

similar  to  epilepsy;  red  face;  head  and  face  puffed  up;
shrill  shrieks  before  attack;  nausea,  violent  retching
with  vomiting  of  mucus;  lethargy;  twisting,  turning,
screaming;  belly  distended  and  hard;  involuntary  thin
stools;  sometimes  convulsive  twitching  of  limbs,  fol-
lowed by  senselessness.

■  Child  lies  on  belly  and  spasmodically  thrusts  breech  up.

■  Convulsions  with  biting.

Epilepjtic  convulsions:  trembling,  tottering  and  falling
unconscious,  without  a  scream;  preceded  by  drawing  in
1.  arm;  aura  epileptica;  followed  by  headache;  during
sleep  at  night;  each  new  moon.


41  CUPRUM  METALLICUM.

I  She  becomes  suddenly  pale;  loses  consciousness;  muscles
efface  and  limbs  jerk;  at  last  whole  body  becomes  stiff;
falls  down  sometimes ;  two  or  three  attacks  every  week
^Epilepsy.

1  Epileptiform  convulsions;  he  trembled,  staggered,  and
fell  down  unconscious,  without  crying.

Before  attack:  nausea,  retching  and  throwing  up  of
phlegm,  bloated  abdomen,  drawing  sensation  in  1.  arm,
arm  is  drawn  involuntarily  close  to  body,  formication
and  tearing  in  r.  hand,  shuddering,  goose-flesh,  palpi-
tation of  heart,  or  sudden  shriek  and  falling  down,
without  any  premonitory  signs.

During  attack:  fingers  become  dead;  involuntary  dis-
charge of  urine;  bluish  color  of  pit  of  stomach  and  chest;
chest  and  head  covered  with  perspiration.

After  attack:  w^eeping;  headache;  profuse  discharge  of
clear,  watery  urine ;  long  trembling  and  shaking  of  r.
hand;  sleep.

During  intervals:  anxiety;  tendency  to  be  frightened;
burning  in  chest  and  abdomen,  with  chilliness  of  re-
mainder of  body ;  burning  and  tearing  in  small  of  back;
numbness  of  arms.

lln  clearly  idiopathic  cases  of  epilepsy,  w-ith  no  organic
lesions;  <  about  new  moon;  after  mental  excitement;
fright.

1  Nocturnal  epilepsy,  or  when  the  fits  return  at  regular  in-
tervals (menses),  beginning  with  a  sudden  scream ;  un-
consciousness; loss  of  sensibility  and  throwing  the  body
upwards  and  forwards;  coldness  of  hands  and  feet;
lividity  of  face;  clinching  the  thumbs;  suffocative
paroxysms;  frequent  emission  of  urine;  turbid  urine;
piercing,  violent  screaming;  difficult  comprehension  or
stupor;  convulsions  of  children  during  dentition  or  from
retrocession  of  exanthemata.

i Epileptic  attacks  in  consequence  of  getting  wet;  drew
herself  up  in  bed  like  a  ball,  began  to  scream  at  slightest
touch,  or  distorted  her  face  as  if  from  pain,  and  tried
in  every  way  to  prevent  feeling  the  pulse.

I  One  or  two  days  after  cessation  of  menses,  during  night,
unconsciousness,  moaning,  rattling  in  throat,  frothing
at  the  mouth,  clinching  of  thumbs,  with  cramps  in
abdomen,  loss  of  appetite,  and  yellowish-white  coating
of  tongue. ^Epilepsy  after  falling  upon  head.

;;rOpisthotonic  spasms,  body  arched,  resting  on  occiput  and
heels.

■  Tetanus,  with  bending  head  back,  and  escape  of  urine.

Rigidity  of  limbs  and  trunk;  jaws  closed,  with  loss  of
consciousness,  redness  of  eyes,  ptyalism  and  frequent
micturition.


CUPRUM  METALLICUM.  42;

Nervous  apoplexy,  with  convulsions,  distortions  of  face,
and  palsy  of  speech.  Atrophy  of  paralyzed  parts,  with
paralysis  of  motor  nerve^,  while  sensation  is  normal;
paralysis  of  tongue;  choreic  movement.

I  After  apoplexy,  when  there  is  congestion  in  chest,  strong
palpitation  of  heart,  or  slow,  weak  and  small  pulse;
eyelids  keep  closed  and  twitch;  when  opening  eyes,
eyeballs  move  about;  paralysis  after  cholera  and  t^^phus;
paralysis  commencing  at  periphery,  and  progressing
towards  centre.

Paralysis  of  tongue,  stuttering,  deficient  speech ;  the  par-
alyzed limbs  grow  thinner,  but  preserve  sensation ;  fre-
quently complicated  with  unyielding  contractions  or
chorea  like  contractions.

■  Paralysis,  could  only  turn  head  and  neck;  feet  insensible,,
bladder  and  rectum  paralyzed.
^^  Sleep. I  Frequent  yawning. ^Diarrhoea.

I  Sleepy,  without  being  able  to  sleep.

I  Sleeplessness;  tossing  about.

Sleep  heavy,  even  to  comatose  state.

Comatose  sleep  after  vomiting.

During  sleep:  constant  grumbling  in  abdomen  ;  jerking.

Sleep  full  of  dreams.
^^  Time. In  morning:  sweat;  drumming  in  ear;  slight  ex-
pectoration with  cough.

In  evening:  delirium;  cannot  be  induced  to  go  among
people;  fever;  exacerbation  in  brain  affections;  itching
in  eyes;  cough  dry;  tetter  in  bend  of  elbow  with  violent
itching  <.

Night:  restless;  increased  urination ;  cough  <; three  at-
tacks of  whooping  cough  in  C|uick  succession;  epileptic
convulsions  during  sleep.
^^  Temperature  and  Weather. Heat:  chilliness  not  >  ;  desire
for  warm  drinks  and  food.

Cold  air:  hoarseness;  cough  <  by  inhaling.

Cold  water:  prevents  vomiting;  great  thirst  for;  cough
and  vomiting  >  by  a  swallow;  cough  >  by  drinking;.
whooping  cough  >.

From  cold  air  into  warm  room:  cough  <.

Wind:  asthma  <  by  long  continued  walking  against;
cough  after  sea  wind;  cough  <  by  north  wind;  cough
<  by  land  wind.

Getting  wet: epileptic  attacks.
*'••  Fever. Shaking  chill,  with  icy  coldness,  and  severe  cramps
in  extremities,  and  cold,  clammy  sweat.

Intense  coldness  and  blueness  of  surface,  Avith  long  con-
tinued, general  cold  sweat  and  great  prostration.

I  Chilliness  before  the  coughing  attack. ^Whooping  cough.


43  CUPRUM  METALLICUM..

Chill  over  whole  body,  most  severe  on  extremities.
Chill  after  every  attack  of  indisposition.
Icy  coldness  of  the  whole  body.

Skin:  moist  and  cool,  particularly  extremities;  dry,  burn-
ing hot;  warm,  dry  and  withered.

■  Feverish  sensation,  as  if  cold  wind  was  blowing  out  from

the  skin. ^Diarrhoea.
I  Cold  shuddering  with  flushes  of  heat. ^Brain  affections.

■  Either  slight  heat  or  burning. ^Brain  affections.
Flushes  of  heat.

Fever,  with  thirst,  frequent  pulse  and  heat.

■Skin,  in  beginning,  dry,  burning  hot;  later,  moderately
warm,  dry  and  withered,  or  moist  and  cool,  particularly
on  extremities. ^Pneumonia.

Typhus,  without  high  fever,  but  excessive  w^eakness ;  dis-
solution of  blood;  nosebleed  and  petechia) ;  great  pros-
tration, with  nervous  excitability;  restless  tossing  about ;
eyes  dim,  lustreless;  difficult  hearing;  paralysis  of  heart.

■  Yellow  fever; attack  of  vomiting,  mostly  vomiting of

blood.

■  Burning  in  the  soles  of  the  feet.

■  During  spell,  chest  and  head  covered  wdth  perspiration;

during  interval,  burning  in  chest  and  abdomen,  with

chilliness  of  rest  of  body. ^Epilepsy.
Debilitating,  exhausting  internal  heat.
Cold  sweat  at  night.

■  Cold  sweat  on  forehead. ^Cough.

■  Sweat,  sour-smelling. ^Convulsions.
Many  attacks  end  in  sweat.

■  Foot-sweat; also  suppressed  foot-sweat.

^^ Attacks,  Periodicity.  Sudden:  convulsions;  cries  with
clonic  spasms  of  lower  limbs;  asthmatic  attacks ;  feeling
of  suffocation;  metallic-sour  taste  in  mouth;  paleness;
sinking  of  swelling  in  erysipelas  of  scalp.

Constant:  restlessness;  rotating  of  eyeballs;  eructations;
cramps  with  convulsive  motions  of  lower  limbs;  rattling
on  chest;  spasmodic  jerking  of  diaphragm;  motion  of
muscles  of  chest  and  abdomen;  trickling  of  saliva  from
mouth;  grumbling  in  abdomen  during  sleep.

Continuous:  pains  in  stomach  and  abdomen;  violent  vom-
iting; hoarseness.

Intermittent: colic;  aphonia.

Paroxysmal : headache.

Periodical:  uttering  of  shrill  screams;  chorea;  headache;;
attacks  of  vomiting.

Every  fifteen,  thirty,  or  sixty  minutes:  convulsions  after
confinement.

Every  fourteen  days:  spasms.


CUPRUM  METALLICUM.  44

Two  or  three  times  a  week :  epileptic  attacks.

From  twenty  to  twenty-five  minutes: attack  of  spasms.

Beginning  in  afternoon  and  continuing  into  night:  chronic
headache.

For  twenty-four  hours:  coma.

New  moon:  epileptic  convulsions.

Chronic:  headache;  glossitis;  diarrhoea.
'^Locality  and  Direction.  Right:  bleeding  from  side  of
nose;  formication  and  tearing  in  hand;  sense  of  con-
striction in  arm  and  forearm  and  of  great  increase  in
size;  trembling  and  shaking  of  hand;  neck  drawn  to
shoulder.

Left:  pain  over  eye;  pressure  over  eye;  headache  <  in
side;  pain  in  region  of  parietal  bone;  extending  down
neck  and  arms  and  across  chest;  twitching  of  lids  of  eye;
pain  in  tonsil ;  drawing  pain  from  hypochondrium  to  hip ;
stitches  in  side  of  chest;  broad  stitches  under  scapula;
convulsive  jerking  of  arm ;  drawing  in  arm,  arm  drawn
close  to  body;  lameness  and  dragging  of  leg;  twitching
of  arm;  involuntary  motions  of  arm  and  leg;  shooting
and  burning  inarm;  drawing  inarm  before  epileptic
convulsion;  blisters  on  foot.
^  Sensations.  As  if  some  misfortune  was  approaching ;  as  of
a  veil  before  eyes;  as  if  an  abscess  were  forming  in
brain;  as  if  he  would  lose  his  senses;  as  if  nose  was
stuffed  up ;  as  if  brain  would  press  out  of  forehead ;  as
if  head  would  be  torn  asunder ;  as  if  cold  water  was
poured  on  head;  as  of  something  moving  on  top  of
head;  as  of  congestion  of  blood  to  nose;  as  if  throat
was  constricted  on  swallowing;  as  of  a  round  ball  going
to  and  fro  under  ribs;  as  though  something  bitter  were
in  the  stomach;  as  of  a  stone  in  abdomen;  as  if  a  knife
were  thrust  from  umbilical  region  through  to  back;  as
of  great  dryness  in  pit  of  stomach ;  as  of  rush  of  blood
to  chest ;  as  if  he  would  suffocate ;  as  of  constriction  in
r.  arm  and  forearm  and  of  great  increase  in  size;  as  if
r.  arm  and  forearm  were  larger  than  whole  body,  and
not  under  control  of  will;  as  if  middle  finger  were
pricked  with  a  needle;  as  if  knee-joint  was  broken;  as
if  cold  wind  was  blowing  out  from  skin;  as  if  bones
w^ould  break.

Pain:  in  head;  in  forehead,  <  over  1.  eye;  in  region  of
1.  parietal  bone,  extending  down  neck  and  arms,  and
across  chest;  in  eyeballs;  acute,  in  throat ;  behind  ensi-
form  cartilage;  tormenting,  in  stomach  and  epigastric
region ;  spasmodic  in  calves ;  behind  ensiform  cartilage,
with  deathly  feeling  ;  in  middle  finger  ;  in  bones.

Agonizing :  headache.


45  CUPRUM  METALLICUM.

Anguish:  prsecordial.

Cutting :  in  umbilical  region  ;  below  navel ;  in  abdomen ;
with  stool.

Rending  pain :  from  teeth  to  temples ;  in  upper  limbs.

Tearing:  in  forepart  of  head  ;  in  limbs;  in  small  of  back;
in  r.  hand  ;  in  limbs  and  muscles  of  back.

Boring  pain  :  in  and  behind  ears  ;  in  region  of  heart.

Piercing  pain  :  in  1.  tonsil.

Shooting  pain :  in  sides  of  chest ;  preventing  breathing ;
in  1.  arm.

Lancinating:  in  forehead,  temples  or  occiput;  in  small
of  back.

Stitches:  in  temples;  <  in  1.  side  of  chest ;  below  heart;
broad,  as  with  a  knife,  under  1.  scapula.

Stitching :  in  upper  limbs.

Stinging  pain :  with  intestinal  ulcers.

Jerking  pains:  in  limbs;  in  ulcers.

Digging  pain :  in  calves.

Drawing  pain :  from  1.  hypochondrium  to  hip ;  in  abdo-
men;  in  calves;  in  arms;  in  1.  arm  ;  in  knees.

Constriction:  in  throat;  deathly  beneath  sternum;  in
throat  and  chest.

Contractive  pain  in  stomach ;  in  chest.

Cramping :  after-pains;  feeling  in  pharynx  exciting  cough..

Griping: about  region  of  heart.

Colicky  pain :  in  abdomen.

Gnawing:  in  stomach.

Corroding:  sensation,  in  stomach;  pain,  with  intestinal
ulcers.

Bruised  pain :  in  brain,  and  in  orbit  on  turning  eye.

Burning:  in  throat;  in  epigastric  region;  in  small  of
back;  in  soles;  in  1.  arm;  in  chest  and  abdomen;  in
sacrum.

Shocks:  in  sacrum.

Pressing : pain  in  eyes ;  in  front  of  ears.

Pressure:  over  1.  eyes  and  root  of  nose;  outward,  in  fore-
part of  head ;  in  pit  of  stomach ;  in  stomach ;  in  ab-
domen ;  painful,  in  scrobiculum ;  on  stomach ;  behind
sternum.

Oppression: of  chest.

Aching :  top  of  sacrum.

Dull  pain :  in  1.  tonsil,

Dulness: of  head.

Distress: in  chest.

Anxious  feeling  :  about  heart.

Numbness:  of  arms;  of  hands.

Tingling:  pain  in  vertex;  in  extremities.

Formication :  in  r.  hand.


CUPRUM  METALLICUM.  46

Crawling  :  in  vertex ;  on  top  of  head.

Heaviness:  of  head;  painful,  in  ankle.

Lame  feeling :  in  back  and  lumbar  region ;  in  arms  and
hands.

Hollow  feeling :  in  head.

Itching :  in  eyes ;  in  ear ;  tetter  in  bend  of  elbow ;  in
limbs  and  muscles  of  back ;  of  skin ;  with  eruption  of
blisters.
^^  Tissues.  Acts  prominently  upon  alimentary  canal,  pro-
ducing symptoms  of  gastro-intestinal  inflammation,
colic,  diarrhcea,  vomiting,  etc.  Secondarily,  it  affects
profoundly  the  nerve  centres,  giving  rise  to  spasmodic
affections,  cramps,  convulsions  and  paralysis.  The
chief  characteristic  of  the  drug  is  that  its  symptoms  are
disposed  to  appear  periodically  and  in  groups.

I  Hsematemesis. ^Yellow  fever.

Muscles  are  knotted  and  remain  so.

I  Emaciation.

Pain  in  bones,  as  if  they  would  break,

■  Promotes  suppuration  in  swellings.
I  Inflammation  of  the  cellular  tissue.

■  Caries.

iGangrena  senilis  of  foot  in  a  man.
^^  Touch,  Passive  Motion,  Injuries.  Touch:  headache  <
from;  convulsions  of  head  <  or  renewed  by;  swelling
on  head  painful  to;  pain  in  1.  tonsil  <;  epigastrium
sore  to ;  pressure  in  pit  of  stomach  < ;  of  clothing  over
epigastrium  uncomfortable;  pressure  in  abdomen  <;
abdomen  tender  to ;  abdomen  painful  on ;  pressure  in
scrobiculum  <;  spinal  column  from  sixth  cervical
vertebra  to  small  of  back  intolerable  to  slightest;
screams  at  slightest.

Pressure:  headache  <  from  slightest;  pressure  in  pit  of
stomach  <; of  tight  clothing  or  bandage  around  ab-
domen >; colic  not  <  by;  abdomen  sore  to.
^^  Skin. I  I  Skin  over-sensitive,  particularly  in  the  region  of  the
stomach  and  fourth  and  fifth  dorsal  vertebra.

I  Skin:  inelastic; dough-like;  cold.

■  Unbearable  itching,  without  eruption.
Prurigo,  in  children.

Rash  on  chest  and  hands.

■  Rash,  on  the  third  day  after  confinement;  copious,  sour

sweat;  anxiety;  starting  at  everything;  head  heavy;
pressure  in  stomach;  abdomen  sore  on  pressure;  great
thirst;  shocks  and  burning  in  sacrum;  numbness  of
arms;  convulsions  every  15,  30,  or  60  minutes.

■  Measles;  brings  out  the  eruption,  ameliorating  the  dry

cough  quickly.


47  CUPRUM  METALLICUM.

Spots  on  arms.

I  Repercussion  of  eruption,  witli  convulsions,  vomiting  or
gagging;  pale  face  and  twitching  of  limbs.

Watery  vesicles  on  tips  of  fingers.

■  Tetters:  sj)reading,  oozing;  in  the  bend  of  the  elbow,
forming  yellowish  scabs.

;rMany  red  points,  with  minute  blisters;  much  itching,
mostly  during  the  day;  on  the  left  foot,  blisters  filled
with  matter;  in  cases  of  leprosy.

I  I  Sudden  sinking  of  the  swelling  changing  into  a  bluish
color;  violent  brain  symj)toms.  ^Erysipelas  of  scalp
and  face.

Blackness  of  outer  parts ;  cyanosis  or  morbus  coeruleus.

Eruptions  resembling  lepra,  dry  itch,  measles  and  scarla-
tina.

Herpes,  with  yellow  scales.

Hard  inflamed  ulcers,  with  jerking  pain;  sensitive  ulcers,
with  redness  around  edges ;  pus  scanty  and  corroding.

I  Old  ulcers.

Lepra  vulgaris.

Inflammation  of  lymphatic  vessels  from  hand  to  shoulder,
with  violent  swelling  of  the  hand.
""  States  of  Life,  Constitution, a  Light  hair.

Corresponds  to  the  carbo-nitrogenoid  constitution  of  Grau-
vogl.

Girl,  set.  9  months,  weak;  asthma  jNLllari.

A  very  delicate  child,  about  one  vear  old;  asthma
Millari.

Child,  set.  2 ;  cerebral  meningitis.

Boy,  set.  4,  very  irritable  and  easily  angered,  father  health}^
and  robust,  with  inclination  to  asthma,  of  which  the
grandfather  of  boy  suffers  severely;  asthma.

Boy,  set.  10,  small,  weak,  pale,  blonde  complexion;  epi-
lepsy.

Boy,  set.  10,  delicate,  sensitive,  excitable,  of  earnest  dis-
position, easily  excited  to  nausea;  cholera.

Boy,  set.  10;  epilepsy.

Girl,  set.  10,  for  two  years;  spasms  from  fright,  after  opera-
tion for  harelip.

Girl,  set.  10,  since  five  years;  epilepsy.

Girl,  set.  11;  cram]js.

A  young  soldier;  knees  giving  way.

A  young  soldier;  spasms  after  measles,  with  pneumonic
symptoms.

Girl,  set.  13;  ileus.

Girl,  set.  14,  otherwise  healthy,  not  menstruated,  has  suf-
fered for  three  years ;  epilepsy.

'Girl,  set.  16;  epilepsy.


CUPRUM  METALLICUM.  48

Girl,  set. 18,  delicate,  with dark  hair,  brown  eyes,  and
pleasant  expression  of  face;  spinal  irritation.

Girl,  set.  19,  healthy;  menses  scanty,  but  regular;  spasms.

Miss  A.,  set.  20;  laryngeal  spasms.

Girl,  set.  20,  blonde;  epilepsy.

Young  lady,  before  attack,  courses  suddenly  suppressed
by  getting  wet;  chorea  minor.

Girl,  set.  23,  robust,  suffering  for  five  years;  epilepsy.

Lady,  about  to  be  married,  became  very  nervous  from
overwork  and  mental  anxiety ;  hysteria.

Woman,  set.  24,  stout,  after  parturition;  convulsions.

Woman,  married  7  years,  childless;  disposition  to  fainting.

Young  soldier  on  Mississippi;  measles  and  pneumonic
symptoms.

Large,  strong  farmer;  asthma.

Woman,  set.  83,  rather  delicate  and  nervous;  dyspnoea.

Lady,  set.  43,  tall,  spare,  delicate  and  nervous,  had  suffered
for  a  long  time;  neuralgia  of  head.

Man,  set.  47,  small,  lively  disposition;  epilepsy.

Woman,  set.  48,  weak;  cramps.
^®  Relations.  Antidoted  by:  Sugar  or  white-of-egg  mixed
with  milk,  and  given  freely.  Hepar,  or  potash  soap,
may  be  used  after  poisoning  from  food  prepared  in  cop-
per utensils.  Aggravations  of  Guprwn  are  lessened  by
smelling  alcoholic  solution  of  Camphor.  Dynamic  anti-
dotes: tBellad  ,  Chamom.,  Cinchona,  Conium,  Cicuta,  Dul-
cam.,  I  i Hepar,  Ipec  ,  Mercur.,  iNux  voni.

It  antidotes: Aurum,  Mercur.,  Opium.

Compatible:  After  Act.  rac.  Agaric,  Stramon.,  in  chronic
affections;  Calc.  ostr.,  Cavstic.  and  Nitrum  act  well  after
Cuprum  in  epilepsy;  Arsen.  follows  well  in  cholera  and
other  affections;  Veratr.  follows  well  in  whooping  cough
and  cholera.

Complementary: Calc.  ostr.

Compare:  Copper  preparations  generally;  Calc.  ostr.,  Gel-
fem.  (overworked  brain);  Cicuta,  and  Solanacese  (mental
symptoms);  Bellad.  (inflammation  of  brain);  Silic.  (pains
about  head  better  from  wrapping  up  warmly);  Nuxvom.,
Phosphor,  (vomiting,  diarrhoea);  Coloc.  (colic);  Camphor,
Secale,  Veratr.  (cholera,  cramps);  Arnic,  Ant.  tart.,  Bryon.,.
Cina,  Ipec.  (whooping  cough);  Apis,  Zincum  (hydro-
cephalus, or  convulsions  from  suppressed  exanthems);
Plumbum  (paralysis);  Cina  (chorea);  Pulsat.  (malarial
neuralgia  after  Quinine  and  Iron);  Arseii.  (suppression
of  urine,  ursemia).


49  CUPRUM  SULFUEICUM.

CUPRUM  SULFURICUM.

Sulphate  of  Copper.  Cu  SO^^H.2  0,

The  pure  sulphate  of  copper  is  prepared  by  trituration.

Fragmentary  proving  by  Berridge.

Observation  of  a  case  of  poisoning  by  Cup.  sulpli.  made  by  Guerard,  Allg.
Horn.  Ztg.,  V.  36,  p.  14.

Clinical  Authorities. — Baldness,  Kissel,  Frank's  Mag.,  v.  4,  p.  137  ;  Syph-
ilis, 50  cases,  Martin  and  Oberlin,  Gaz.  Med.  de  Paris,  April  10,  1880 ;  Inveterate
itch,  Bayes.

^  Mind. Anxiety,  or  great  apathy. •

Remarkable  disturbance  of  mind; every  utterance  dis-
torted.
^  Sensorium. All  senses  vanish.

Vertigo,  with  prostration  of  strength,  and  dim  sight.
^  Inner  Head. Violent  pain  in  forehead,  with  severe  tensive
pain  at  root  of  nose.
After  rising  from  bed,  pain  like  a  tight,  narrow  band  all
round  head  (on  a  level  with  upper  part  of  forehead)  and
feeling  as  if  top  of  head  would  come  off;  <  laughing
or  stooping; >  by  cold  wind;  desire  to  be  quiet.
Shooting  inwards  in  temples  at  short  intervals,  the  left
being  first  affected,  >  by  pressing  temples  with  hands;
irritability  of  temper.
Crawling,  dull  sensation  in  vertex,  as  if  going  to  sleep,

with  a  pressing-down  sensation,  and  stupefaction.
Throbbing  and  roaring  in  head.
Severe  headache,  in  morning.
*  Outer  Head. •  Bald  spot  over  r.  parietal  bone,  not  depend-
ing upon  any  discoverable  cause.
^  Sight  and  Eyes. Eyes  stiff  and  dim.
Eyes  moving  to  and  fro.
Icteric  color  of  conjunctivae.
Twitching  of  closed  lids.

I  Trachoma;  granular  lids;  catarrhal  and  purulent  con-
junctivitis.
^  Upper  Face. ;  Face  pale:  emaciated,  eyes  sunken;  puffy,

red,  covered  with  great  drops  of  sweat.
^  Lower  Face. Lips  pale,  bluish,  at  corners  and  internal

edges.
'"  Teeth  and  Gums. Greenish  tint  along  free  borders  of  gums.


CUPRUM  SULFURICUM.  50

^^  Taste  and  Tongue. Taste:  sweetish;  bitter;  coppery;  me-
tallic on  waking.
Tongue:  white  furred ;  coated,  bluish,  cold;  swollen,  stiff,

as  if  paralyzed.
Tongue  small,  white,  rough.
^^  Inner Mouth. Burning in mouth and oesophagus in
morning.
Sharp  biting  heat  in  mouth  and  throat.
Ulcer  in  the  mouth,  after  fever.
13  Throat. Tensive  pain  in  mouth,  pharynx,  root  of  nose,  and
stomach.
Choking  and  contracting  sensation  in  pharynx.
Throat  painful  and  as  if  burnt.
"  Appetite,  Thirst,  Desires,  Aversions. Loss  of  appetite.
Great  thirst;  want  of  thirst  with  sweat.
Thirst  with  sweat  and  oppression  of  chest.
^^  Hiccough,  Belching,  Nausea  and  Vomiting. Hiccough.
■  Excessive  nausea;  qualmish  nausea.
iVomiting  forcible,  returning  from  time  to  time.
Vomiting:  of  greenish-brown  mucus;  of  a  bluish  matter.
Nausea ;  vomiting  <  after  5  a.m.
^^  Scrobiculum  and  Stomach, i  i  Pressure  in  pit  of  stomach.
Distension  and  fulness  of  stomach  rather  than  pain.
Burning  in  stomach.

Violent  pain  in  stomach  followed  by  faintness.
'^  Hypochondria. Tearing  pains  in  hypochondria,  on  inspi-
ration, painful  on  touch  as  if  bruised.
I  I  Liver  enlarged.
"  Abdomen. Pain  in  epigastrium,  sensitive  to  pressure.

Abdomen  swollen,  tender,  and  painful;  flat  and  painful;

drawn  in.
Constant  cutting,  burning  pain  in  bowels.
Enteritis.
^  Stool  and  Rectum. Urging  to  stool.

I  I  Four  pultaceous,  greenish-yellow  stools.
Vomiting,  soon  followed  by  paleness  and  cold  sweat;  se-
vere efforts  at  stool,  alternating  with  vomiting,  frequent
attacks  of  unconsciousness,  copious  stools.
Diarrhoea  of  children,
i  Chronic  diarrhoea  with  ulceration.
^^  Urinary  Organs, No  stool  nor  passage  of  urine  for  twelve
hours.
Urine  scanty  and  bloody.
^  Female  Sexual  Organs. TrProfuse  catamenia  with  violent
pains;  induced  three  successive  times  by  bathing  frosted
feet  in  the  solution.
^^  Voice,  Larynx,  Trachea,  Bronchia. Voice  husky  or  veiled.
^"'Respiration. Rapid  sobbing  respiration; breathing  short
and  labored.


51  CUPRUM  SULFURICUM.

Respirations  anxious  and  frequent ;  48-50  per  minute.
Anxious  and  interrupted  breathing.
^''  Cough. I  I  Hacking  cough  impeding  respiration.

iCroupy  cough  with  very  tenacious  mucus.
^^  Inner  Chest  and  Lungs. Anxiety  and  oppression  in  chest.
Pressive  pain  in  chest.

Painful  contraction  of  chest,  <  after  drinking.
Tearing  pains  behind  sternum,  extending  over  several

parts  of  chest.

Haemoptysis.

^^  Heart,  Pulse  and  Circulation. Feeling  as  of  a  throbbing

lump in heart internally, beating of heart  seemed

louder;  lasted  five  minutes,  and  went  away  gradually.

Sounds  of  heart  w^eak  and  limited ;  slight  friction-sound

at  base.
Pulse:  small,  soft,  or  hard;  quick  and  small;  full  and  hard.
^^  Neck  and  Back. Uneasiness  between  shoulders.

Collection  of  wind  pressing  against  back;  stiffness  and
pain  on  moving.
^^  Lower  Limbs. Dull  aching  soreness  in  middle  of  tibia,
when  walking;  >  at  rest;  tenderness  on  pressure.
Formication  in  legs.
Great  coldness  of  feet.
^*  Limbs  in  General. Extremities  cold,  nails  cyanotic.
^^  Rest,  Position,  Motion. Rest :  >  pain  in  tibia.
Desire  to  be  quiet:  with  headache.
Stooping:  as  if  top  of  head  would  come  off.
After  rising  from  bed :  pain  as  of  tight  band  around  head ;

as  if  top  of  head  would  come  off.
Inspiration: tearing  pain  in  hypochondria.
Laughing: as  if  top  of  head  would  come  off.
Moving :  pain  in  back.
Walking :  dull  aching  pain  in  tibia.
^^  Nerves. Restless,  throws  himself  about  in  bed.

Restlessness  at  night;  twitchings;  trembling  in  the  limbs;

copious  stools.
Frequent  subsultus  tendinum.
Lassitude,  debility.
^^  Sleep. Drowsiness, frequently  interrupted  by  abdominal

pains.
^^  Time. Morning:  headache;  burning  in  mouth  and  oesoph-
agus.
After  5  a.m.,  vomiting.
5  P.M.:  pains  <  with  restlessness.
Night: restlessness.
^^  Temperature  and  Weather. Fire :  sat  near  to  >  shivering.

Cold  wind:  >  head.
"*"  Fever. Coldness  beginning  in  small  of  back,  going  all  over


CUPRUM  SULFURICUM.  52

body,  then  suddenly  going  into  legs,  first  1.,  then  1.,  with
shivering  so  that  she  sat  near  fire  for  a  few  minutes.

Skin  cold;  shivering.

Internal,  debilitating,  exhausting  heat.

Flashes  of  heat,  with  burning  of  soles.

Heat  beginning  on  dorsa  of  feet,  first  1.  then  r.,  then  extend-
ing up  anterior  part  of  legs  as  far  as  knees;  lasted  thirty
minutes,  then  went  off,  leaving  a  sensation  as  if  needles
were  pricking  the  parts  for  five  minutes.

Chilliness,  shuddering,  heat  and  sweat  rapidly  following
each  other.

Cold  sweat  on  forehead  and  extremities.

Copious  sweat,  without  thirst.
^^  Attacks,  Periodicity. Lasting  five  minutes:  palpitation;
pricking  in  feet  and  legs.

Lasting  thirty  minutes:  heat  of  feet  and  legs.

Three  successive  times:  profuse  catamenia,  induced  by
bathing  feet  in  solution.

Rapidly  following  each  other:  stages  of  fever.

Frequent:  subsultus  tendinum.

At  short  intervals:  shooting  in  temples.

From  time  to  time:  vomiting.

Chronic: diarrhoea.
^  Locality  and  Direction. Left:  shooting  in  temple.

Left  to  right:  coldness  in  legs;  heat  on  feet  and  shins.

Right:  bald  spot  on  parietal  bone.

Inward:  shooting  in  temples.
*^  Sensations.  As  of  a  tight  narrow  band  round  head ;  as  if
top  of  head  would  come  off;  as  of  going  to  sleep  in  ver-
tex; as  if  paralyzed,  tongue;  as  if  burnt,  throat;  as  if
bruised,  hypochondria;  as  of  a  throbbing  lump  in  heart;
as  if  needles  were  pricking  on  feet  and  legs.

Pain:  violent  in  forehead;  violent  in  stomach;  in  epi-
gastrium; in  abdomen;  in  back.

Tearing :  in  hypochondria ;  behind  sternum.

Shooting: in  temples.

Cutting:  in  bowels.

Pricking :  as  of  needles  on  feet  and  legs.

Burning:  in  mouth  and  oesophagus;  in  stomach;  in  bow-
els ;  of  soles.

Dull  aching :  in  tibia.

Pressure :  in  pit  of  stom^ach ;  in  chest.

Pressing  down  :  in  vertex.

Soreness:  in  tibia.

Tensive  pain:  at  root  of  nose ;  in  mouth;  in  pharynx  ;  in
stomach.

Contraction :  in  pharynx  ;  of  chest.

Choking :  in  pharynx.


53  CUPRUM  SULFURICUM.

Twitching :  of  closed  lids.

Throbbing :  in  head.

Roaring:  in  head.

Dull  sensation :  in  vertex.

Uneasiness:  between  shoulders.

Formication:  in  legs.

Crawling: in  vertex.

Itching: nodules  on  shoulders ;  on  skin.

Heat:  sharp  biting,  mouth  and  throat;  on  dorsa  of  feet,
up  anterior  part  of  legs  to  knees.

Coldness:  of  tongue;  of  feet;  in  small  of  back;  in  legs;
of  skin.
^  Tissues. :  Destroys  flabby  granulations  and  exerts  a  power-
ful excitant  influence;  its  solution  acts  more  feebly,  and
is  sometimes  employed  as  a  dressing  for  indolent  ulcers.

':  Fifty  patients,  who  showed  various  manifestations  of
syphilis,  were  cured  by  the  copper  sulphate;  the  copper
salt  proved  more  efficacious  and  required  less  time  for
its  beneficial  action  than  did  the  mercury  salts;  in  a
case  of  very  grave  syphilis,  where  mercury  had  proved
useless,  copper  effected  a  rapid  and  complete  cure.
*^  Touch,  Passive  Motion,  Injuries.  Toucli :  hypochondria
painful.

Pressure :  epigastrium  sensitive ;  tenderness  in  tibia.

Pressing  temples :  >  shooting.
^^  Skin. Skin  pale;  icteric.

Itching  nodules  on  shoulders.

Considerable  itchiness;  a  kind  of  dry  itch.
^^  Stages  of  Life,  Constitution. Man,  set.  38,  strong,  healthy,

had  thick,  shining,  black  hair;  baldness.
^^  Relations. Antidoted  by :  milk,  eggs ;  pure  yellow  prussiate
of  potash.

Compare: Kali  bichr.  in  croupy  cough,  with  tenacious
mucous  expectoration  ;  Mercur.  in  syphilis.


CURARA.  54


CURARA.


A  powerful  poison  used  by  the  South  American  Indians  upon  their  arrows.
Supposed  to  have  been  first  introduced  into  Europe  by  Sir  Walter  Kaleigh,  in
1595,  who  became  acquainted  with  it  in  Guiana.

"Authorities  differ  as  to  the  composition  of  this  poison.  Probably  several
totally  different  kinds  of  poison  are  designated  by  the  same  name.  According  to
M.  Goudot,  who  learned  the  mode  of  preparation  from  an  Indian  tribe,  it  is  made
by  adding  to  the  concentrated  juice  of  a  creeping  plant  called  Curari,  the  poison
obtained  from  the  virus  bags  of  some  of  the  most  venomous  serpents.  Another
author  and  traveller,  M.  de  Castellnau,  who  witnessed  the  preparation  of  the  poison
by  another  tribe,  says  that  it  is  composed  of  the  inspissated  juice  of  the  Cocculus
toxicoferus,  and  of  a  new  species  of  Strychnos.  Further  observations  will  doubt-
less show  that  there  is  a  great  difference  in  the  effects  of  different  specimens  of
curara  poison.  M.  Eoulin  asserts  that  the  poison  is  obtained  from  a  species  of
toad  by  half  roasting  the  animal  over  a  slow  fire,  when  tlie  venom  exudes  from
the  pores  of  its  skin  and  is  carefully  collected  on  small  wooden  knives  and  pre-
served in  small  earthenware  vessels.

The  curara  poison,  which  lias  found  its  way  to  Europe,  is  usually  a  brownish-
black,  resinous  looking  substance,  something  like  the  extract  of  liquorice.  It
seems  to  keep  well  for  an  indefinite  length  of  time.  A  heat  of  212°  does  not  seem
to  destroy  its  power.  The  active  principle  is  soluble  in  all  animal  fluids  whether
acid  or  alkaline.  The  aqueous  and  alcoholic  solutions  are  of  a  fine  red  color,  the
former  the  darkest.  A  peculiar  substance  called  Curarine  has  been  obtained  from
it."— Bernard,  B.  J.  H.,  vol.  16.

Fragmentary  proving  of  the  oOOth  by  McFarland.

Proving  in  the  Xouvelles  Donnees,  par  L.  T.  Houat,  translated  by  S.  Lilien-
thal,  H.  M.,  Vol.  4,  pp.  137  and  177.

Clinical,  Authorities. — Ptosis,  Freeman,  Hom.  Kev.,  v.  9,  p.  511 ;  Ozcena,.
Hardenstein,  Hom.  Clinics,  v.  4,  p.  100 ;  Facial  and  buccal  paralysis,  Freeman,,
Hom.  Rev.,  v.  9,  p.  561 ;  Paralytic  failure  of  power  to  swallow,  Freeman,  Hom.
Rev.,  v.  9,  p.  562;  Schirrhous  ulcer  of  os  uteri,  Hardenstein,  Horn.  Clinics,  v.  4,.
p.  104;  Vaginitis,  Hardenstein,  Hom.  Clinics,  v.  4,  p.  102;  Debility  and  cough
of  phthisis,  Freeman,  Hom.  Rev.,  v.  9,  p.  564;  Paralysis  of  deltoid.  Freeman,
Hom.  Rev.,  v.  9,  p.  562;  Nervous  debility,  T.  F.  Allen,  Organon,  v.  3,  p.  108;
Paralysis,  Freeman,  Hom.  Rev.,  v.  9,  p.  562;  General  motor  paralysis.  Freeman,.
Hom.  Rev.,  v.  9,  p.  562;  Epilepsy  (nine  cases)  in  conjunction  with  Acid  mur.,
Kunze,  Hah.  Mo.,  v.  12,  p.  405  ;  Epilepsy  (five  cases)  cured  by  injections,  Benedict,
B.  J.  H.,  V.  24,  p.  684;  Lyssa  humana,  Zeitsch.  f.  Med.,  52,  1875.

^  Mind. I  Indecision,  no  longer  wishes  to  think  and  act  for
herself. ^Nervous  debility.


55  CURARA.

I  Very  much  depressed  about  herself,  desire  only  to  shut
herself  up  away  from  people. ^Nervous  debility.

■  Despairing. ^Ulcer  of  os  uteri.
I  Hydrophobia.

^  Sensorium.  Instant  giddiness;  falling  down  in  a  swoon  or
fainting  while  standing  or  walking.

^  Inner  Head.  Nervous  headache;  lancinating,  piercing
pains  all  over  head,  forcing  him  to  lie  down  and  stretch
himself;  head  drawn  backward,  with  stiffness  of  neck;
painful  oscillation  of  brain,  as  if  it  were  full  of  fluid ;
neuralgic  pains,  starting  in  front  and  radiating  to  neck
and  face;  violent  blows  in  region  of  cerebellum.

■  Sharp  sticking  pains  over  r.  eye,  extending  backwards

over  r.  side  of  head. ^Nervous  debility.
Head  beats  like  a  hammer,  with  vomiting  of  bile.
■Vertical  and  frontal  headache. ^Paralysis.

■  Occasional  rush  of  blood  to  head. ^Nervous  debility.
Congestion of  blood to head, with  pulsative  vibrative

pains  and  loss  of  consciousness.
*  Outer  Head. ilHead  drawn  backward,  with  stiffness  of

neck,  swinging  and  trembling  of  hands. ^Headache.
^  Sight  and  Eyes. lEyes  haggard,  sunken.  ^Nervous  debilty.

■  Black  spots  before  vision  (patient  quite  myopic),  espe-

cially <  from  reading. ^Nervous  debility.

■  Ptosis  on  r.  side.

^  Hearing  and  Ears. Different  noises  in  ears,  as  of  whistling,
or  crying  of  animals.
Unbearable  earache;  loses  consciousness.
Lancinating  nervous  pains,  starting  from  ears,  and  reach-
ing down  to  legs,  obliged  to  lie  down.
Internal  otitis,  driving  one  crazy;  purulent  discharge.
^  Smell  and  Nose. ■  Ozsena,  with  fetid  lumps  of  pus,  of  six

years  standing.
^  Upper  Face. iDull,  anxious  expression,  with  clay-colored
skin. ^Ulcer  of  os  uteri.
Redness  of  face,  head  beats  like  a  hammer,  after  fever.

■  Aching  of  r.  side  of  face. ^Paralysis.

■  Facial  and  buccal  paralysis;  in  some  cases  with  difficulty

in  swallowing.
^  Lower  Face. Blueness  of  lips,  body  purple,  with  fever.
"  Taste  and  Tongue.  Tongue  deep  red,  cracked  and  bleeding.

■  Tongue  and  mouth  drawn  to  r.  side. ^Paralysis.
^^  Inner  Mouth. '  i  Dry  mouth. ^Diabetes.

^^  Throat. Paralytic  failure  of  power  to  swallow.

"  Appetite,  Thirst. ■Appetite  variable. ^Paralysis.

Thirst  and  great  hunger  with  the  fever.

I  1  Great  thirst,  especially  evenings  and  at  night. /^Diabetes.
'^  Eating  and  Drinking. Amelioration  after  first  mouthful
of  food.


CURARA.  66

^^  Hiccough,  Belching,  Nausea  and  Vomiting. ■  Hiccough
frequent  and  annoying. ^Nervous  debility.
I  Nausea  in  morning. ^Nervous  debility. ^Paralysis.
I  Gastric troubles, nausea after eating,  or  in morning.
Dry,  spasmodic  cough  provokes  vomiting.
Vomits  green  bile  all  night,  nasty  taste;  bad  feeling  in
stomach;  so  weak,  cannot  stand  on  her  feet.
^^  Scrobiculum  and  Stomach, i Rheumatic  pain  in  pit  of
stomach, at  times quite sharp, followed by  nausea.
I  I  Shooting  in  stomach. ^Diabetes.

■  Digestive  functions  entirely  prostrate,  cannot  bear  any-

thing on  stomach,  pyrosis,  pain  and  distension  after
eating  ever  so  little;  can  eat  only  cornmeal  mush  and
drink  coffee. ^Ulcer  of  os  uteri.

^^  Abdomen. ■  Wearing  ache  from  throat  to  1.  hip. ^Paralysis.

^°  Stool  and  Rectum, l  Diarrhoea,  with  constant  urging,  fetid,
thin,  mush-like  feces,  excessive  pain  in  hsemorrhoidal
tumors. ^Ulcer  of  os  uteri.
Extreme  watery  diarrhoea.

^^  Urinary  Organs. Clear  and  frequent  urine,  with  digging,
crampy  pains  in  kidneys; shooting  in  stomach;  dry
mouth;  great  thirst,  especially  evenings  and  at  night;
sugar  in  urine,  with  great  emaciation.
Diabetes,  acute  cases.

^  Female  Sexual  Organs,  i  Ulcer  of  os  uteri,  funnel-shaped,
upper  diameter  one  inch;  whole  neck  of  womb  of  a
horny-like  character,  dark  red,  purplish,  gnawed  as  if
from  mice  all  over  surface  of  ulcer;  two  small  opaque
pustules  of  size  of  pea  on  inner  edge,  containing  in
middle  a  translucent  bloody  fluid.  Ichorous  discharge,
corroding,  fetid;  indurations  of  abdominal  parietes
towards  inguinal  and  ovarian  regions,  excessively
painful  to  touch.  Vaginal  corrugations  tumefied,  red-
dish, inflamed;  very  sensitive  hsemorrhoidal  fissures  and
swelling  of  rectum  and  anus.  General  appearance  of
scirrhous  cachexia.  Digestive  functions  entirely  pros-
trate. Diarrhoea  with  constant  urging.  Excessive  pain
in  hsemorrhoidal  tumors;  bearing  down  of  womb,
pains  and  shocks,  sharp  shooting  stitches;  quivering  in
womb;  burning  in  womb  and  all  around  it;  dull,
anxious  expression;  aching  in  all  the  limbs  and  body;
rigors  at  2  a.m.,  no  more  sleep;  some  fever;  seldom
moisture,  except  under  arms;  despairing.
Ulcerations  on  os  uteri;  smarting  in  vulva  and  thighs;
shooting  and  digging  pains  in  womb.

■  Indolence,  does  not  like  to  work  or  move  about;  night

sweats;  repugnance  to  sexual  intercourse. ^Vaginitis.
Menses  very  capricious,  either  too  soon  or  too  late.


57  CURARA.

During  menses  colic,  headache,  pains  in  kidneys,  general
malaise  and  hypochondriasis.

Scanty,  thick,  purulent,  foul  smelling  leucorrhoea,  in  clots.
^  Voice,  Larynx,  Trachea,  Bronchia. '  i  Frequent  hoarse-
ness;  suflFocating  attacks,  with  sensation  as  if  larynx
were  stopped  up. ^Cough.

I  1  Burning  and  shooting  in  larynx ;  hoarseness  which  oc-
casions almost  complete  loss  of  voice. ^Cough.

Sensation  of  roughness  and  dryness  in  whole  course  of
respiratory  passages.
^  Respiration, l  Shortness  of  breath. ^Nervous  debility.

1  I  Respiration  difficult,  stitching  pains  in  r.  side. ^Cough.

D  Dyspnoea  from  weakness  of  respiratory  motor  nerves,  as
in  phthisis  and  emphysema.
^  Cough. I  Short,  hacking  cough,  no  expectoration,  always
dry,  with  soreness  of  walls  of  chest,  <  in  damp  weather,
or  laughing. ^Nervous  debility.

Cough,  dry,  spasmodic,  shakes  whole  body,  provokes
vomiting,  and  is  often  followed  by  fainting.

1  Chronic  cough,  always  troublesome  in  morning.  ^Ner-
vous debility.

Cough  <  by  breathing  cold  air,  laughing,  moving  and
eating.

I  Cough  with  white  gelatinous  expectoration. ^Paralysis.

I  Debility  and  cough,  with  free  gray  expectoration,  in
phthisical  patient.

Expectoration  yellow,  gray,  greenish,  bordering  upon
black.

Expectoration  of  red  blood,  often  without  cough.
■^  Inner  Chest  and  Lungs, i  i  Burning  heat  in  chest  with
sensation  of  distension. ^Cough.

■  Severe  pains  in  lungs,  especially  1.;  sharp  piercing  pain
through  chest,  always  much  <  in  damp  weather;  short-
ness of  breath;  chronic  cough. ^Nervous  debility.
^^  Heart,  Pulse  and  Circulation, i  i  Pra^cordial  anguish,  with

palpitation  and  stinging  pains  in  heart. ^Cough.
^^  Outer  Chest. I Great  soreness  of  chest,  can  hardly  bear

pressure  of  stethoscope. ^Nervous  debility.
^^  Neck  and  Back. iDull,  tired  ache  in  shoulders  and  across
back; numb,  tired  pains  up  and  down  spine  and  in
head. ^Nervous  debility.

I  Pain  in  loins. Paralysis.
^^  Upper  Limbs. •  Complete  paralysis  of  r.  deltoid  muscle;
no  pain ;  after  an  apoplectic  attack.

iPain  and  numbness  on  1.  side  of  chest  and  1.  arm;  tongue
and  mouth  both  drawn  to  r.  side ;  both  eyes  and  both  ears
fairly  good;  grasp  of  1.  hand  fair;  vertical  and  frontal
headache;  r.  face  aches  at  times;  fear  of  falling  forward


CURAEA.  58

on  rising;  nausea  in  morning;  appetite  variable;  per-
spires with  every  exertion;  pain  in  loins;  prolapse  of
uterus  for  several  years;  wearing  ache  from  throat  to  1.
hip;  cough  with  white  gelatinous  expectoration.
I  Arms  and  fingers  weak,  as  after  a  long  illness;  arms
become  numb,  and  as  if  sprained  or  broken  at  elbows;
this  pain  extends  to  shoulders  and  across  back,  a  dull
tired  ache;  feeling  as  if  heavy  weights  were  hanging  to
arms;  same  pains  up  and  down  spine  and  in  head,
numb  tired  pains;  similar  pains  in  knees;  desire  to
stretch  elbows,  but  muscles  of  arm  are  sore;  feeling
along  arm  as  if  it  had  been  burnt;  pains  much  <  in
damp  weather. ^Nervous  debility.

■  Leaden  heaviness  in  arms,  with  increasing  difficulty  in

playing  piano. ^Nervous  debility.
I  In  evenings,  arms  and  hands  swollen,  more  painful  and
heavy. ^Nervous  debility.

■  Great  weakness  especially  of  wrists  and  hands. ^Ner-

vous debility.
^^  Lower  Limbs. Legs  tremble  and  give  way  in  walking.
Sciatica,  with  great  stiffness.

■  Corns. ^Nervous  debility.

^*  Limbs  in  GeneraL ■Aching  in  all  the  limbs  and  body.
^Ulcer  of  OS  uteri.

Paralysis  of  extremities  with  burning  heat  and  chills.
^^  Rest. Position. Motion. Lying: in bed  <  aching  in
feet  and  back.

Lie  down  and  stretch :  pain  in  head  forcing  him  to.

Always  desires  to  put  her  feet  out  of  bed.

Cannot  stand  :  so  weak.

Standing:  fainting.

Laughing:  cough,  soreness  of  chest  <.

Rising:  fear  of  falling  forward.

Stretch  :  desire  to  stretch  elbows.

Moving:  cough  <  ;  crampy  pains.

Does  not  like  to  move.

Motion :  perspires.

On  least  movement:  crampy  pains  in  hips.

Walking:  fainting  while  walking ;  legs  give  way.
^^  Nerves. ■  Nervous  debility.

■  Debility  of  the  aged,  great  failure  of  strength;  no  cough,

pain,  or  disordered  digestion.

■  After  being  bitten  by  a  dog  suspected  to  be  rabid,  muscu-

lar restlessness,  spasms,  hydrophobia,  and  photophobia,,
and  instead  of  the  anguish  she  was  in  good  humor ;
(cured  by  injections,  which  were  followed  by  symptoms  of
paralysis,  from  which  patient  liad  not  entirely  recovered
even  after  a  few  months).


59  CURARA.

Great  weakness  and  prostration,  burning  in  hips,  and
crampy  pains  on  least  movement.

i  Frequent  epileptic  fits  with  convulsions,  loss  of  conscious-
ness, lasting  from  a  quarter  to  half  an  hour,  followed  by
somnolence  of  many  hours,  or  even  mental  disturbance
for  two  days.

jFor  four  years  fits  of  "petit  mal,"  and  for  the  last  five
months,  seven  fits  of  complete  epilepsy  of  great  intensity.

i  Two  brothers,  suffering  from  a  disease  intermediate  be-
tween raging  mania,  chorea  major,  and  epilepsy,  had
fits  twice  a  day,  of  one  to  three  hours,  in  which  partial
loss  of  consciousness  and  delirium  were present, but

.  generally  with  retention  of  consciousness,  involuntary
movements,  springing,  pirouetting,  creeping,  scratching
on  the  floor,  etc.,  between  which  intervened  paralytic
symptoms,  numbness,  aphonia ;  besides  these  fits,  there
was  general  weakness,  especially  in  morning.

I  Pure  paralysis;  nervous  debility,  from  loss  of  fluids,  or
exhausting  illness.

■  Double  facial  and  right  lateral  paralysis  (in  consequence

of  repeated  epileptic  attacks),  swallowing  and  articula-
tion also  afl'ected.
Instant  giddiness ;  paralysis  of  the  lower  extremities  and
in  fact  everywhere.

■  Considerable  general  motor  paralysis,  no  pain.
I  I  Paralysis  from  mechanical  injury.

i  Traumatic  tetanus.
Progressive  locomotor  ataxyia.
^^  Sleep. ■  Nights  restless,  always  desires  to  put  feet  out  of
bed,  especially  towards  morning.

1  I  Cannot  sleep "^late  enough  to  obtain  a  good  night's  rest;

dreams  of  fire  and  of  the  business  of  the  day;  <  from
lying  long  in  bed,  must  get  up  as  her  feet  and  back  ache..
^Nervous  debility.
38  Time. 2  a.m.  :  rigors.

Morning:  nausea;  cough  troublesome;  heat  >;  general
weakness.

2  or  3  P.M.:  fever  continuing  into  night;  4  p.m.,  fever.
In  evenings :  arms  and  hands  swollen  ;  great  thirst.

At  night:  restless;  great  thirst;  heat  «< ;  cold  and  bloody

sweat.
All  night : vomits  green  bile.
'^  Temperature  and  Weather. Aggravation  by dampness,,

damp  weather,  change  of  weather,  or  cold  wind.
Open  air:  heat  <.
Cold  air: cough  <  by  breathing.
Damp  weather :  cough  and  soreness  of  chest  < ;  soreness-

and  pains  in  arms  <.


CURARA.  60

^^  Fever. Sensation  of  shivering,  starting  from  stomach  and

spreading  over  whole  body.
Chill: without  thirst; commencing on abdomen and

spreading  all  over.
I  Rigors  at  night,  about  2  o'clock;  no  more  sleep;  some

fever;  seldom  moisture,  except  under  arms. ^Ulcer  of

OS  uteri.
Burning  heat  accompanied  by  partial  and  transient  chills,

incoherent  speech,  and  often  by  paralysis  of  extremities.
Pernicious  fever,  with  constant  chilliness.
Incoherent  speech,  with  burning  heat  and  chills.
Yawning  and  stretching,  hot  head  and  hands,  convulsive

paroxysms  and  fainting.
Burning  in  hips,  great  weakness  and  prostration,  crampy

pains  on  least  movement.
Lips  get  blue,  and  body  purple,  with  fever;  after  fever

(every  day  at  4  p.m.),  gets  very  red  in  face,  and  head

beats  like  a  hammer.
Daily  fever,  commencing  at  2  or  3  p.m.,  and  continuing

well  into  night.
Fever  with  thirst  and  great  hunger.

Heat:  with  thirst;  especially  in  head,  on  back  and  legs.
Heat  <  at  night  or  in  open  air,  less  in  morning.
I  Perspires  with  every  exertion. ^Paralysis.
I  Sweat  cold  and  bloody,  especially  at  night.
■^^  Attacks,  Periodicity. Attacks:  suffocating.

Apoplectic  attack  followed  by  paralysis  of  r.  deltoid.

Acute  spasmodic  affections.

Instant: giddiness  and  falling.

Frequent:  annoying  hiccough;  clear  urine;  hoarseness;

epileptic  fits  with  convulsions.
Occasional  rush  of  blood  to  head.
At  times:  r.  face  aches;  quite  sharp  rheumatic  pains  in

pit  of  stomach.
Quarter  to  half  hour :  duration  of  epileptic  fits.
One  to  three  hours :  duration  of  fits.
Many  hours:  somnolence  following  epileptic  fits.
Twice  a  day :  fits.

Two  days :  mental  disturbance  after  epileptic  fits.
In  five  months: seven  fits  of  complete  epilepsy.
Several  years : prolapse  of  uterus.
Four  years:  fits  of  "petit  mal."
Six  vears:  ozsena.
^'Locality  and  Direction. Left:  ache  from  throat  to  hip;

pains  in  king  ;  numbness  and  pain  side  of  chest  and  arm.
Right:  sharp  sticking  pains  over  eye,  extending  backwards

over  side  of  head;  ptosis;  aching  side  of  face;  tongue

and  mouth  drawn;  stitching  pains  in  side;  paralysis;

complete  paralysis  of  deltoid  muscle.


43


61  CURARA.

Both  sides:  facial  paralysis.

From  ears  reaching  to  leg:  lancinating  nervous  pains.

Radiating  to  neck  and  face :  neuralgic  pains.

Spreading  from  abdomen :  chilliness.
Sensations.  As  if  brain  were  full  of  fluid ;  noise  in  ears
as  of  whistling  or  crying  animals;  as  if  larynx  were
stopped  up ;  as  if  broken  or  sprained  at  elbows,  extend-
ing to  shoulders  and  across  back;  as  if  weights  were
hanging  to  arms,  spine  and  head ;  feeling  along  arm  as
if  it  had  been  burnt.

Pain :  in  ears;  1.  side  of  chest  and  arm  ;  in  loins;  in  he-
morrhoidal tumors.

Anguish :  in  prsecordial  region.  _

Driving  one  crazy :  internal  otitis.

Lancinating :  all  over  head ;  ears  to  legs.

Piercing:  all  over  head;  in  chest.

Sharp  sticking:  in  r.  eye.

Sharp  shooting  stitches  :^  in  womb.

Shooting  :  in  stomach ;  in  larynx.

Severe,  pain:  in  lungs.

Sharp  pain :  in  chest.

Blows:  violent  in  region  of  cerebellum.

Pulsative  pain :  in  head.

Beating:  in  head,  like  hammer.

Stitching :  in  r.  side.

Stinging:  in  heart.

Smarting :  vulva  and  thighs.

Crampy  pains  :  in  kidneys ;  in  hips.

Rheumatic  pains :  in  pit  of  stomach.

Digging  pains:  in  kidneys  ;  in  womb.

Nervous  pains :  ears  to  legs.

Aching:  in  limbs  and  body.

Dull  tired  ache:  in  shoulders  and  back;  in  knees.

Wearing  ache:  from  throat  to  1.  hip.

Soreness:  walls  of  chest;  muscles  of  arms.

Burning:  in  larynx;  in  womb;  in  limbs; in  chest;  in
hips.

Heat :  in  head  ;  in  chest ;  in  back  ;  on  legs ;  in  limbs.

Dryness :  in  respiratory  passages.

Roughness :  in  respiratory  passages.

Distension :  in  chest,  with  burning  heat.

Bearing  down :  of  womb.

Weakness :  especially  of  wrists  and  hands.

Heaviness :  in  arms.

Numbness :  of  arms.

Numb  tired  pains :  up  and  down  spine  and  in  head.

Swinging,  trembling :  of  hands.
Quivering :  in  womb.


•CURARA.  62

V^ibrative  feeling :  in  head.

Oscillation  :  of  brain,  painful.

Shocks :  in  womb.

Shivering :  starting  from  stomach,  spreading  over  whole
body.
^  Tissues. Acute  spasmodic  affections  of  a  very  severe  char-
acter; tetanus.

Paralyzes  motor  portion  of  nervous  system  from  periphery
towards  centre.

Paralyzes  vaso-motor  as  well  as  musculo-motor  nerves.
^^  Touch,  Passive  Motion,  Injuries. Touch :  induration  on
abdomen  painful.

Pressure :  can  hardly  bear  stethoscope.

After  being  bitten  by  dog :  muscular  restlessness,  spasms,
hydrophobia ;  photophobia.

Mechanical  injury :  paralysis.
*^  Skin. Body  blue  and  yet  fever.

Eczema.
^^  Stages  of  Life,  Constitution. In  older,  scrofulous  children.

Boy,  set.  12,  and  another,  set.  16,  also  two  brothers,  set.  re-
spectively, 12  and  10;  epilepsy.

Anna  M.,  set.  20,  married  3  months,  pregnant  in  seventh
month;  vaginitis.

Stone  cutter,  set.  20,  for  nine  years;  epileptic  fits.

Girl,  set.  24,  eighty  days  after  being  bitten  by  a  dog  sus-
pected to  be  rabid,  lyssa  humana  (injections  0.2  grammes
in  7  doses  during  five  hours).

Lady,  graduate  of  Conservatory  of  Stuttgart,  where  she
practised  excessively;  nervous  debility.

Laundress,  set.  30;  paralysis  of  r.  deltoid  after  an  apoplectic
attack.

Mrs.  Van  N.,  set.  30,  three  children,  blond,  blue  eyes;
ulcer  of  OS  uteri.

Woman,  set.  35,  had  phthisis  for  many  years;  debility  and
cough,  with  expectoration.

Mrs.  J.,  suffering  from  scanty  menstruation,  pains  in  os
uteri,  watery,  starchy  leucorrhoea;  ozsena.
*^  Relations.  Antidoted  by:  Artificial  respiration.  Bromine
and  Chlorine  destroy  the  poisonous  effects.  Tobacco
or  salt,  applied  topically,  neutralize  effects  of  Curara
wounds.

It  antidotes:  Strychnia,  but  Chloral  is  better.  Probably
antidotal  to  Lyssin.

Compatible:  after  Arnica  in  paralysis  from  injury;  after
Bellad.  in  paralysis  after  apoplexy ;  Baryt.  curb,  is  often
indicated  after  Curara  in  nervous  debility  of  the  aged.

Compare:  Nux  vom.;  Aranea  in  fevers,  <  from  damp  or
wet  weather;  Ferrum  in  hammering  pains  in  head.


63  CYCLAMEN  EUROP^EUM.

CYCLAMEN  EUROP>EUM.

Sow-bread.  Primulacex.


A  plant  indigenous  in  the  south  of  Europe.  The  tincture  is  made  from  the
fresh  root  gathered  in  Autumn.

"The  Cyclamen  Europseum,  or  Sow-bread,  was  extensively  used  in  medicine  by
the  ancients.  Their  descriptions  of  its  properties  are  vague  enough,  but  it  is  re-
which  ascription  Avas  not  physiologically  verified  until  the  most  recent  provings.

It  used  to  be  considered  that  the  root  of  Cyclamen,  ajiplied  externally,
hastened  difficult  labors,  and  assuaged  the  pains.  Also,  that  to  touch  Cyclamen,
or  take  it  internally,  would  produce  abortion,  or  bring  on  premature  labor."

The  remedy  was  introduced  into  our  Materia  Medica  by  Hahnemann,  and
proved  by  members  of  the  Austrian  Society  of  Homoeopathic  Physicians  at
Vienna.

Clinical  Authorities. — Mental  derangement  at  climacteric,  Merryman,  Med.
Inv.,  vol.  4  (n.  s.),  p.  576;  Headache,  Marenzeller,  Kiick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  5,  p.  84;
Diplopia  (2  cases),  Eidherr,  Hom.  Eev.,  vol.  2,  p.  26,  Wurmb,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf.,
vol.  5,  p.  150;  Strahismm,  Eidherr,  Hom,  Eev.,  vol.  2,  p.  224;  Hirsch,  Eiick.  Kl.
Erf.,  vol.  5,  p.  141;  Coryza,  Malaise,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  1,  p.  .387;  Toothache,
Hartmann,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  1,  p.  460 ;  Burning  in  oesophagus  and  pain  in  stom-
ach, Gerstel,  B.  J.  H.,  vol.  36,  p.  101 ;  Pain  in  scrobiculum  cordis  with  vomiting,
Strupp,  B.  J.  H.,  vol.  36,  p.  369;  Enteralgia  (3  cases),  Strupp,B.  J.  H.,  vol.  24,
p.  172;  (2  cases).  Times  Eetrospect,  1876,  p.  9;  Dysmenorrh(xa,  Eidheri-,  Eiick.
Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  6,  p.  600;  Menorrhagia,  H.  King,  Eaue's  Eec,  1874,  p.  233;  *S'mjo-
pression  of  menses,  Eidherr,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  5,  p.  600 ;  Suppression  of  menses
after  dancing,  Walter,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  5,  p.  589 ;  Amenia,  Eidherr,  Eiick.  Kl.
Erf.,  vol.  5,  p.  589;  Disturbed  menstruation  with  chlorotic  condition  (6  cases),  Eidherr,
Eiick.  Kl.  Erf,  vol.  5,  p.  599;  Chlorosis,  Eidherr,  B.  J.  H.,  vol.  19,  144;  Eiick.
Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  5,  p.  601.

^  Mind. Consciousness  almost  extinct.

Very  active  memory,  which  alternates  with  weak  memory.

Mental  labor  impossible  on  account  of  dullness  or  stupe-
faction.

Absorbed  in  deep  thought,  seeks  solitude,  thinks  about  his
future.

Confusion  of  head ;  questions  answered  incoherently.

iLoss  of  former  cheerfulness;  love  of  solitude;  aversion  to
work  and  to  open  air;  sensation  as  if  room  was  too
small,  with  reluctance  to  going  into  open  air ;  solitude
and  weeping  give  relief. ^Suppression  of  menses.

I  Disinclined  to  work,  w^ith  weakness.


CYCLAMEN  EUROPiEUM.  •  64

Taciturn,  depressed,  out  of  humor.

Joyful  feeling  with  trembling ;  exuberant  spirits.

Joyous  feeling,  alternating  with  irritability.

Serene  humor  changes  suddenly  into  seriousness  or  peev-
ishness.

Great  sadness,  as  if  he  had  committed  a  bad  action  or  not
done  his  duty.

Great  sadiiess  and  peevishness;  menses  suppressed,  or
scanty  and  painful.

Melancholy ;  inclined  to  tears,  and  silent  grief.

I  Vertigo,  with  pain  in  head  and  nausea;  vomits  nearly
every  day,  and  often  all  the  food  taken,  with  slime  and
bile;  greatly  reduced,  can  scarcely  walk  across  floor ^
pains  in  head  continuous,  but  very  much  worse  at  times;
<  in  r.  temple;  but  extend  all  over  head;  mind  so
affected  as  to  make  her  indifferent  to  what  transpired
her  own  case;  finally  consciousness  almost  extinct;
questions  answered  incoherently ;  feces  and  urine  pass
involuntarily  and  unconsciously.  ^Mental  derangement
at  climacteric  period.

I  On  awaking,  weariness,  clammy  mouth  and  irritable  mood.

nil  humor;  disposition  to  weep  ;  fear  of  death,  or  an  illu-
sion of  being  deserted  or  persecuted  by  every  one.

Anxiety,  with  nausea,  at  night.

Ill  humor,  after  vomiting.

nil  humored,  morose  mood;  could  easily  take  offence  at
every  trifle.

Obstinate,  irritable,  fault-finding  disposition.

Solitude  and  weeping  give  relief.

Ailments  from  inward  grief  and  terrors  of  conscience.
"  Sensorium. Insensibility;  rush  of  blood  with  anxiety;  im-
paired sight  and  diminished  intellectual  powers.

■  Attacks  of  faintness,  cloudiness  or  obscuration  of  sight.
Sensation  as  if  brain  were  moving  within  cranium,  or  as

it  does  when  riding  in  a  wagon  with  closed  eyes.

I  Feels  as  if  brain  was  in  motion  when  leaning  against

something.
Vertigo  with  dyspepsia  when  lying  down,  >  by  motion,
in  nervous  subjects.

I I  Vertigo:  objects  turn  in  a  circle,  or  about  her,  or  make
a  see-saw  motion;  when  walking  in  open  air;  >  in  a
room  and  when  sitting;  with  dimness  before  eyes.

■  Confusion  of  head,  with  obscuration  of  vision.

I  Dizzy,  fulness  and  heat  of  head;  congestion  of  blood.

iDuliiess  of  all  the  senses.
^  Inner  Head. I Pressing  pain  in  forehead,  vertigo,  and  fre-
quently unconsciousness,  with chilliness over whole
body. ^Dysmenorrhcea.


65  CYCLAMEN  EUROPIUM.

Pains  violent,  pressing,  darting,  stitching,  boring,  chiefly
in  forehead,  temples  and  vertex,  accompanied  by  sad-
ness and  melancholy ;  chilliness  and  nausea ;  obstinate,
irritable,  fault  finding  disposition.

I  Pain  in  forehead  towards  evening,  with  vertigo.

■  Violent  frontal  headache.
■Stinging  pain  in  forehead  and  temples.
Stitches  in  temples ;  in  forehead  when  stooping.
■Stitching,  darting  or  boring  pains  in  temples.
Stitches  in  head  disappear  by  touch  ;  some  complaints  <C

when  lying  on  back  or  on  painful  side.
Pains  one  sided,  generally  1.  temple.

■  Headache  on  rising  and  again  in  evening;  <  1.  side,  in-

creasing till  patient  vomits,  then  >;  <  by  motion  and
open  air. ^Climaxis.
I  I  Vertigo,  with  pain  in  head  and  nausea ;  pains  contin-
uous, but  very  much  worse  at  times ;  <  in  r.  temple,
but  extend  all  over  head. ^Mental  derangement.

■  Slight  pressure  in  vertex,  as  if  brain  was  enveloped  in  a

cloth,  which  would  deprive  him  of  his  senses.

■  Oppressive  stupefaction  of  whole  head,  with  obscuration

of  vision ;  it  seems  as  though  a  fog  were  before  sight,
and  as  though  eyes  were  about  to  close.

■  Headache  with  obscuration  of  vision;  pale  complexion,

rings  around  eyes,  depraved  appetite,  enfeebled  diges-
tion and  menstrual  irregularities. ^Anaemia.

■  ■Headache  with  flickering  before  eyes  on  rising  in  morn-

ing.

■  Sensation as if  brain  wobbled about  while walking;

menses  suppressed  or  scanty ;  patient  chlorotic.
Attacks  of  heat  and  throbbing  in  head.

■  Rush  of  blood  to  head  with  anxiety  and  confusion ;  obscu-

ration of  vision;  dizziness;  general  coldness,  after  dinner.

■  Periodical  congestion  to  head,  with  paleness  of  face.
Headache  <  in  evening  or  in  morning  when  rising ;  >  by

applications  of  cold  water.
Gastric  headache.
*  Outer  Head. ■  Tearing  pressing,  externally  in  head.

■  Fine,  sharp,  formicating stinging  on scalp, changing

place  when  scratching ;  <  evenings,  at  rest ;  >  walking
about.

■  Papulous  eruption  on  scalp.

■  Head  feels  bound.

^  Sight  and  Eyes. lEyes  sunken  and  dim,  have  a  weary
look,  and  are  surrounded  by  blue  rings.

■  ■Dimness  of  vision  and  spots  before  eyes,  especially  on

waking;  dim  vision  with  headache.

■  Fog  before  eyes,  was  obliged  to  stop  knitting  in  afternoon.

VOL.  V. — 5.


CYCLAMEN  EUROPiEUM.  66

Sight:  as  if  looking  through  dark  blue  glass;  like  mist
before  eyes;  figures  cannot  be  clearly  distinguished.

■  Dimness  of  sight,  with  fiery  sparks  before  eyes.

1 1  Flickering  before  eyes,  as  of  various  colors,  glittering
needles,  visions  of  smoke  or  fog.

■  Burning  in  eyes  and  flickering  of  light  on  attempting  to

read  in  evening  in  bed.

■  Vision  of  colors  before  eyes,  now  yellow  and  again  green,

or  fiery  specks  and  sparks;  halo  around  light.

■  Muscse  volitantes.

■  Diplopia;  especially  if  dependent  on  convergent  squint,

arising  from  helminthiasis,  convulsions,  falls,  etc.
1  1  Dilated  pupils;  or  contracted  and  dilated  alternately.
1  (Amblyopia  after  suppression  of  an  eruption;  has  never

menstruated,  though  has  much  headache  and  vertigo

at  time  menses  ought  to  appear.
I  I  Hemiopia,  only  1.  half  of  object  is  visible.

■  Heat  in  eyes.

Strabismus;  after  convulsions,  or  measles.

I  ■  Convergent  strabismus.

iLeft  eye  drawn  toward  inner  canthus.

I  Lids  slightly  oedematous. ^Dysmenorrhoea.

J  Swelling  of  upper  eyelids.

■■Dryness  and  pressure  in  lids,  as  if  swollen,  with  violent

formicating  stitches  therein,  and  in  eyeball.
Itching  of  eyelids.
®  Hearing  and  Ears. ■  Roaring,  humming  or  ringing  in  ears.

■  Dulness  of  hearing,  as  if  cotton  was  in  ear  or  something

lying  before  (right)  ear.

■  Drawing  pain  in  r.  internal  ear;  hearing  impaired.

■  Itching  of  ears,  with  increase  of  cerumen.

^  Smell  and  Nose. ■Sense  of  smell  diminished. ^Chronic
coryza.

■  Dryness  of  nose,  or  fluent  coryza  (morning).

■  Frequent  sneezing,  with  profuse  discharge  from  nose,  and

loss  of  smell  and  taste;  various  nervous  symptoms  of
head  and  ears  present;  itching  in  ears. ^Coryza.
Catarrh  with  excessive  sneezing  and  rheumatic  pains  in
head  and  ears.

■  Pressing  pain  over  nasal  bones. ^Coryza.

^  Upper  Face. Pale  face,  eyes  sunken,  with  blue  rings ;  great
weakness;  anaemic  women.
Red  face  with  headache.

■  Contraction  of  forehead.

■  Pimples  soon  filling  with  whitish-yellow  lymph  and  then

shrivelling.
Facial  eruptions  af  children.
®  Lower  Face. Itching  on  lower  jaw.


-67  CYCLAMEN  EUROPIUM.

Sensation  of  numbness  of  upper  lip  or  as  of  an  induration.
Dry  lips,  without  thirst.
^^  Teeth  and  Gums. iGums  and  lips  pale. ^Dysmenorrhoea.

■  Tearing,  stitching,  boring  in  teeth  (more  right).

I  Dull  jerking,  especially  at  night,  in  arthritic  patients.
^^  Taste  and  Tongue. Taste:  flat;  offensive;  jDutrid;  fatty;
bitter.

I  Food  tastes  flat,  or  is  almost  tasteless.
H  Salty  taste  of  all  food.

Tongue  coated  yellowish-white;  white.

Fine  stitches  on  tongue.

Tip  of  tongue  red,  with  small  burning  blister  thereon,

impeding  speech  and  chewing;  saliva  increased.
Burning  on  tip  of  tongue  (evening).
^^  Inner  Mouth, l  Accumulation  of  watery  saliva  in  mouth,

pasty  taste.

I I  Saliva  has  a  salty  taste,  which  is  communicated  to  all
the  food  eaten.

Viscid  mucus  in  mouth.

Heightened  redness  of  mouth.
'^^  Throat. Dryness  of  palate  evenings,  with  thirst  and  hunger.

Tonsils  and  palate  are  shrivelled  and  white.

Scraping  and  dryness  in  pharynx,  suffocative  cough.

Dryness  in  throat.

Sensation  of  painful  constriction  in  throat.

Burning  and  scraping  in  throat.

Nausea  in  throat.
^*  Appetite,  Thirst. Desires,  Aversions, i Entire  loss  of
appetite.

■  After  eating  but  little,  aversion  to  food,  with  nausea  in

throat.
1 1  No  thirst  all  day,  but  it  occurs  in  evening  as  face  and
hands  become  warm,

■  Thirst  during  night. ^Intermittent,
■Thirstlessness.

Desire  for  lemonade.

■  Aversion:  to  bread  and  butter;  to  beer;  to  fatty  things;

to  ordinary  food,  and  desire  for  inedible  things.

■  Constant  disgust  for  meat;  craving  for  sardines;  frequent

vomiting  in  morning. ^Dysmenorrhoea.
^^  Eating  and Drinking. ■  Feeling  of  satiety  after  a  few
mouthfuls of  food,  the  rest becomes repugnant  and
nauseates  him;  nausea  felt  in  throat  and  palate.

■  Complete  loss  of  appetite,  on  taking  a  little  beef-tea  or  a

cup  of  tea,  indescribable  pain  in  scrobiculum  cordis,
which  seldom  went  off  until  she  threw  up  what  she  had
taken ;  melancholy,  could  not  engage  in  any  occupation.
After  eating:  nausea;  sleepiness;  hiccough,  rumbling  in
bowels.


CYCLAMEN  EUROPIUM.  68

1 1  Pork  disagrees.

Aggravation  after  coffee.
^^  Hiccough,  Belching,  Nausea,  Vomiting, i  Violent  hic-
cough.

I  While  eating,  and.  for  some  time  afterwards,  hiccough
or  hiccough-like  eructations,  particularly  in  pregnant
women.

■  Eructations:  with  oppressive  sensation  in  stomach;  fre-

quent, sometimes  sour  tasting;  of  food;  of  a  fatty  taste.

■  Qualmish  nausea  after  dinner  and  supper,  and  an  un-

easiness and  qualmishness  in  epigastric  region,  as  after

eating  too  much  fat.
I  Nausea:  after  eating  or  drinking,  except  from  lemonade.
Nausea  and  fulness  in  chest,  with  unusual  hunger.
I  Nausea  and  accumulation  of  water  in  mouth.
I  Vomiting:  of  watery  mucus ;  of  food;  of  greenish  fluid;

of  blood.

■  Vomiting  in  morning. ^Dysmenorrhoea.

■  Every  day,  vomiting  of  foocl  with  slime  and  bile. ^Men-

tal derangement.
Vomiting  of  mucus  followed  by  sleep.
^^  Scrobiculum  and  Stomach. Uneasiness  in  stomach,  with
eructations,  nausea  and  hiccough.

■  Burning  in  oesophagus,  and  aching  pains  in  stomach,

extending  through  to  back,  coming  on  when  at  rest,

>  by  motion.

Fulness  and  jDressure  in  pit  of  stomach,  as  if  he  had  eaten

too  much.
Stitches  in  stomach.
^^  Hypochondria. Stitches  in  region  of  liver.

Ball-like  distension  in  bowels,  on  r.  side  below  liver.
^^  Abdomen. Digestion  retarded.

I  I  Tearing,  piercing,  through  and  through  stitches  in  upper

abdomen  beneath  stomach,  on  moving  about.
Hypogastrium  sensitive  to  pressure.

■  Full  feeling  and  distension  of  abdomen.

■  Intestines  painful  to  touch.

Abdomen  sensitive  to  pressure  and  motion.

Pain  and  uneasiness  in  bowels  in  evening,  with  nausea;

>  by  motion.

I  I  Discomfort  and  nausea  in  lower  abdomen.

■  Constant  gnawing  pain  in  bowels;  all  food  caused  great

discomfort  and  swelling,  with  frequent  eructations;
debility,  consequent  upon  lack  of  nourishment;  stools
infrequent  and  hard,  expelled  with  great  effort.  ^En-
teralgia.

■  Painful  restlessness  in  bed;  must  get  up  and  walk  about

for  relief;  gurgling  in  intestines  combined  with  malaise;
always  >  by  moving  about. ^Enteralgia.


69  CYCLAMEN  EUROPIUM.

Painful  gurgling  in  intestines  every  night,  with  general
malaise,  >  abstaining  from  food  after  noon  and  from
walking  about;  gnawing  pains  in  the  abdomen  at  7  p.m.,
extending  thence  over  whole  body,  >  from  walking  till
tired ;  pale,  herpetic  face  and  red  nose.

I  I  Rumbling  of  flatus.

I  Stitches  in  umbilical  region.

iStitches,  or  pinching  in  abdomen;  cramp-like  pains.

I  Running  and  crawling  in  bowels,  as  of  something  alive.

■  Paroxysms  of  colic  coming  on  during  night,  especially

after  late  supper;  >  by  getting  up  and  walking  about.
I  In  left  inguinal  canal :  stitches ;  itching.
^^  Stool and Rectum. Urging to  stool ; watery  diarrhoea ;

stool  expelled  forcibly.
Stool :  odorless,  brownish-yellow,  mixed  with  some  mucus.
Watery,  papescent  stool,  with  vomiting  at  night.

■  Diarrhoea  renewed  after  every  cup  of  coffee.

■  Diarrhoea  of  chlorotic  women  subject  to  sick  headaches

and  menstrual  irregularities.
Mucous  diarrhoea;  in  evening.

■  Constipation. ^Menstrual  irregularities.

■  Frequent  passage  of  hard  stool  (hard  lumps).
Before  stool:  nausea;  pinching  colic;  urging.

During  stool:  straining  and  burning  in  anus;  colic;  palpi-
tation; tenesmus.

After  stool:  ineffectual  straining;  pinching  in  abdomen,
dulness  and  forgetfulness.

■  Heat  in  rectum,  with  swelling  of  hemorrhoidal  veins.

■  Pressure  in  rectum  or  anus;  tenesmus.

I  I  Drawing  pressive  pain  in  and  about  anus  and  perineum,
as  if  a  spot  was  suppurating ;  when  walking  or  sitting.

■  Hemorrhoidal  flow.

^^  Urinary  Organs. Frequent  micturition,  with  pressure  on
bladder  and  rectum.

■  Urine  profuse,  watery  and  frequent.

■  Frequent  urination  or  fruitless  desire  to  urinate.
Frequent  copious  emission  of  whitish  urine.

■  Frequent  urging,  with  scanty  discharge;  also  seldom  and

scanty.

■  Urine  dark  red,  containing  much  fiocculent  matter;  acid;

iridescent  cuticle.
Stitches  in  urethra  with  desire  to  urinate,  followed  by  a

sudden  discharge  of  dark  red-yellow  urine.
Pricking  at  end  of  urethra  while  urinating.
^^  Male  Sexual  Organs. Sexual  desire  diminished.
Erections  at  night,  without  exciting  dreams.
Stitches  in  urethra.
Phymosis.


CYCLAMEN  EUROPIUM.  70

Prepuce  and  corona  glandis  feel  sore,  from  slight  rubbing.

■  Prostatic  troubles,  with  stitches  and  pressure,  urging  to
stool  and  micturition.
^  Female  Sexual  Organs, i Menses :  too  profuse  and  frequent;,
too  early,  black  and  clotted;  membranous.

Abdomen  bloated  and  swollen  before  menses,  with  labor-
like pains;  flow  when  established,  black  and  clotted.

1 1  Menstruation  too  early,  with  some  relief  of  melancholy
mood  and  heaviness  of  feet.

I  Labor-like,  constricting  pains  commencing  in  small  of
back  and  running  down  each  side  of  abdomen  to  pubes;
attacks  every  few  minutes,  during  which  time  no  dis-
charge occurs;  after  the  attacks,  blood  more  watery ;
vertigo ;  headache ;  after  cessation  of  menses,  great  sore-
ness in  abdomen. ^Dysmenorrhoea.

iMenses  troublesome  for  two  months;  flow  had  continued
all  through  each  month;  discharge  pale  and  watery,.
at  first  dark  and  clotted;  general  appearance  somewhat
exsanguined;  mouth,  tongue  and  lips  pale;  she  always
felt  best  when  moving  about;  flow  almost  ceased  as
long  as  she  was  moving  about  at  work,  but  as  soon  as
she  sat  down  quietly  in  the  evening,  the  flow  reappeared
and  continued  after  she  w^ent  to  bed.

•  Menorrhagia,  with  stupefaction  of  head  and  vision  ob-
scured, as  from  a  fog.

IMenses  suppressed  or  scanty,  and  painful;  dread  of  fresh
air ;  vertigo ;  headache ;  swollen  eyelids ;  pale  face,  lips
and  gums;  loss  of  appetite;  no  thirst;  constipation;
palpitation;  constant  chilliness;  disinclination  to  move
and  to  work ;  constant  drowsiness ;  wants  to  be  alone^
and  weeping  does  her  no  good.

I  No  appearance  of  menses  for  2|  months,  loss  of  former
cheerfulness;  love  of  solitude;  ofl'ended  at  every  trifle;
aversion  to  work;  sleeps  late  in  morning;  face,  lips  and
gums  pale;  lids  swollen;  tumultuous  action  of  heart;
great  lassitude;  great  anxiety;  sensation  as  if  room  was
too  small,  with  reluctance  to  going  into  open  air;  solitude
and  weeping  relieve ;  in  morning  frequent  pressing  pain
in  forehead,  with  vertigo; appetite  poor;  stool  tardy.

■  In  a  young  woman  of  thirty  who  has  never  menstruated^

every  3  to  4  weeks  rush  of  blood  to  head,  headache^

pressing  vertigo;  heaviness,  frequent  trembling  of  lower

limbs,  and  pressure  towards  vulva.
llScanty  or  suppressed  menstruation  with  headache  and

vertigo. ^Chlorosis.
■Suppression  of  menses  after  excessive  dancing  or  being

overheated.

■  Menstrual  irregularities,  attended  by  megrim  and  blind-

ness.


71  CYCLAMEN  EUROP.EUM.

iLeucorrhoea  in  blonde,  leucophlegmatic  subjects,  with
retarded  or  scanty  menstruation  ;  chlorosis  and  auEemia,
fits  of  fainting  and  constant  chilliness  of  whole  body.

Before  menses:  melancholy;  straining  and  warmth  in  ab-
domen with  sleeplessness.

During  menses  :  improvement  in  temper  and  of  the  heavi-
ness of  the  feet;  labor-like  pains  in  back  and  abdomen;
headache ;  vertigo ;  darkness  before  eyes.

After  menses :  swelling  of  mammse,  with  secretion  like  milk.
^*  Pregnancy,  Parturition,  Lactation, i  Hiccough  during
pregnancy.

I  Loathing  and  nausea  in  mouth  and  throat.

I  Complaints  after  weaning.
^  Voice,  Larynx,  Trachea,  Bronchia. <  Voice  weak  when
reading  aloud.

I  Tickling  in  larynx  at  night,  with  violent  cough.

I  Much  scraping  in  larynx,  pain  in  fauces  with  violent  and
thick  expectoration  at  night.
^^  Respiration, l  Oppression  of  chest,  with  impeded  breathing.

Breathing  accelerated.
""  Cough. I  Violent  cough,  with  tickling  in  larynx  at  night.

■  Violent  cough  at  night,  with  much  scraping  in  larynx,

pain  in  fauces,  and  thick  mucus.
iSuffocative  cough,  caused  by scraping  and  dryness  in

trachea.
I  Cough  which  was  usually  most  violent  during  sleep,  was

never  caused  by  talking,  or  walking,  even  against  a  cold

wind.
^^  Inner  Chest  and  Lungs, i Pressure  in  middle  of  sternum.
Sensation  of  great  weakness  in  chest,  as  if  there  was  not

strength  enough  to  breathe.
Stitches  in  1.  side  of  chest,  later  in  r.  side.
Stitch  about  apex  of  heart.
Tearing  stitches,  with  oppression  and  shortness  of  breath,

during  motion  and  rest.
^^  Heart,  Pulse  and  Circulation, i  Buzzing  in  region  of

heart. ^Chlorosis.

■  Palpitation,  with  a  murmur;  severe  headache  and  vertigo,

great  indolence. ^Chlorosis.

■  Tumultuous  action  of  heart; great  lassitude;  frequent

palpitation. ^Suppression  of  menses.

■  Sensation  as  of  something  alive,  running  in  heart.

■  Stitches  about  apex  of  heart.

Pulse :  double  beat,  very  rapid ;  scarcely  perceptible.

■  Chlorosis,  with paleness  of  skin  and  mucous  surfaces;

clamminess  of  skin,  flabbiness  of  muscles,  great  lassitude,
severe  headache  and  vertigo ;  palpitation  and  venous
murmurs.


CYCLAMEN  EUROPIUM.  72

I  Chlorosis from  checked menstruation,  witli headache,

dizziness  and  obscuration  of  sight.
^  Outer  Chest. Pressure  in  middle  of  sternum.
Contractive  sensation  of  chest.
Sensation  as  if  air  streamed  from  nipples.
Mammse  swollen ;  tension  and  stitches  therein ;  hard  an.d

painful ;  discharge  of  milky  fluid,  staining  the  linen.
^^  Neck  and  Back. Stiffness  of  neck,  with  laming  pain.
Drawing  rheumatic  pain  in  left  side  of  neck.
Twinges  up  back  >  by  drawing  the  shoulders  backwards,

<  by  the  reverse.
Deep  penetrating  dull  stitches  in  region  of  r.  kidney,  <

during  inhalation.
Pain  in  small  of  back,  ceases  when  rising  from  a  seat.
^^  Upper Limbs, l Tearing terminating in a stitch, over

scapulae,  with  laming  pain  in  arms.
I  I  Itching  on  shoulder  and  in  axilla.
I  I  Laming  hard  pressure  in  r.  arm,  as  if  in  periosteum

and  deep  seated  muscles;  extending  to  fingers,  impedes

writing.

■  Bruised  pain  above  elbow-joint,  outside;  <  from  motion

of  arm  and  touch.
Tearing  pain  in  elbow  and  wrist-joints.
I  I  Painful  drawings  in  inner  surface  of  ulna  and  in  wrist.
I  Feels  as  if  she  must  let  fall  that  which  is  in  hands.
Cramp-like  slow  contraction  of  r.  thumb  and  index  finger,

tips  approach  each  other  and  can  only  be  extended  by

force.
Numbness  in  r.  hand.

Fine  prickling  between  fingers,  ceasing  after  scratching.
Red  blisters,  preceded  by  severe  itching  on  ring  and  little

fingers,  1.  hand.
Distension  of  veins  on  dorsum  of  hand.

■  Writer's  spasm,  cannot  open  thumb  and  index-finger.

^  Lower  Limbs, l Rheumatic  drawing  in  1.  gluteus  maximus

near  spine,  while  sitting; ceases  when  standing.

I  I  Cramp-like  pain  on  r.  thigh  above  popliteal  space.

■  Drawing  pain  in  flexors  of  leg,  seeming  to  start  from

hollow  of  knee  and  draw  to  tips  of  toes.
Itching  on  r.  calf,  with  swelling  of  bloodvessels.
I  I  Pain  in  bottom  of  foot,  as  if  sprained,  more  at  heel.

■  Burning  sore  pain  in  heels,  when  walking  in  open  air;

also  when  standing  or  sitting.
After  walking,  toes  feel  dead.
Sensation  in  1.  foot  as  if  sprained.
Feet  and  toes  frost-bitten,  looking  red.
^  Limbs  in General. Hypersesthesia  of  extremities,  with

hysterical  vertigo.


Y3  CYCLAMEN  EUROPIUM.

Slight  tremor  in  all  the  joints.

Limbs  feel  as  if  their  mobility  were  impaired.

I  Muscles  have  a  doughy  feeling  and  are  powerless.  ^Chlo-
rosis.

Drawing  and  pressure  in  muscles  and  bones.

Pressing,  drawing  in  periosteum  where  skin  covers  bones.
^  Rest. Position. Motion. Pest : headache  <  ; burning
in  oesophagus  <  ;  pain  in  stomach  <  ;  tearing  stitches
in  chest ;  aggravation  of  pains ;  great  desire  for.

During  inhalation  :  stitches  in  r.  kidney.

Lying  down :  vertigo ;  dyspepsia ;  on  back  or  painful
side  <.

Rising:  headache;  flickering  before  eyes;  from  a  seat,
pain  in  small  of  back  >.

Sitting:  in  a  room,  vertigo  >  ;  drawing  pain  in  anus  and
perineum;  flow  <  during  menstruation;  rheumatic
drawing  in  gluteus  maximus  ;  pain  in  heel.

Drawing  shoulders  forward  :  twinges  up  back  <.

Drawing  shoulders  backward:  twinges  up  back  >.

Stooping:  stitches  in  forehead.

Standing:  rheumatic  drawing  in  gluteus  maximus  ceases;
pain  in  heel.

Walking :  vertigo ;  feeling  as  if  brain  wobbled  ;  headache
>  ;  painful  restlessness  >  ;  gurgling  in  intestines  >  ;
pain  in  abdomen  >  ;  drawing  pain  in  anus  and  peri-
neum ;  pain  in  heel ;  after  walking,  toes  feel  dead.

Fatigue :  from  slightest  cause ;  can  scarcely  walk  across
floor;  aversion  to  move  a  single  limb.

Motion:  vertigo  <;  headache  <;  burning  in  oesophagus
> ;  aching  pain  in  stomach  >  ;  stitches  in  abdomen ;.
pain  in  bowels  >  ;  gurgling  in  intestines  > ;  during
menstruation  >  ;  stitches  in  chest;  bruised  pain  above
elbow-joints  <  ;  weakness  >;  aversion  to  move.

Dancing:  suppressed  menses.
^^  Nerves. Hysterical  vertigo  with  general  nervous  erethism.

Hypersesthesia  of  cutaneous  nerves  of  extremities.

■  Extremely  restless  and  uneasy  at  night.

Weakness  in  evening,  with  ill  humor  and  sleepiness ;  >

when  moving  about.
■Weakness,  relaxation  and  prostration  of  whole  body.
•  Weakness,  paleness  of  face,  eyes  sunken,  pulse  108.

■  Great  lassitude of  body,  particularly  of  knees,  though

spirits  may  be  good.

■  Fatigue  from  slight  cause. ^Chlorosis.

■  Enervation  of  whole  body,  burdensome  to  move  even  a

limb.
^^  Sleep. ■  Frequent  yawning.

■  Great  inclination  to  slumber,  mornings.


CYCLAMEN  EUROPIUM.  74

Sleepiness  and  chilliness.

I  Snoring,  deep  sleep,  or  sleep  disturbed  by  anxious  dreams.

I  Great  restlessness,  sleep  unrefreshing  and  disturbed  by-
frightful  dreams. ^Dysmenorrhoea.

iMiglit  restless,  interrupted  by  dreams.

Falts  asleep  late  and  awakens  early,  with  feeling  of  great
lassitude  and  weakness.

■  Restless  sleep,  dreams  of  money.

■  Nightmare  soon  after  falling  asleep.

iSle'ep  disturbed,  and  toward  morning  full  of  dreams;
also  a  pollution.

■  Dreams:  lascivious;  frightening;  vivid.

■  Early  awaking,  yet  so  tired  and  sleepy,  cannot  arise.

^^  Time. Towards  morning:  sleep  full  of  dreams;  pollution.
Morning : headache ; flickering  before  eyes  ;  dryness  of

nose ;"  fluent  coryza; vomiting; sleeps  late; pressing

pain  in  forehead ;  vertigo  ;  chill.
Towards  evening:  pain  in  forehead.
7  P.M. :  gnawing  pains  in  abdomen.
Evening :  headache  <  ;  burning  in  eyes ;  burning  on  tip-

of  tongue;  dryness  of  palate ;  thirst;  hunger;  pain  and

uneasiness  in  bowels ;  diarrhoea ;  during  menstruation

flow  <;  weakness;  chill.
Night:  anxiety;  nausea;  jerking  in  teeth;  thirst;  painful

gurgling in intestines; vomiting; colic; erections;:

tickling  in  larynx ;  violent  cough  ;  scraping  in  larynx  ;

pain  in  fauces;  expectoration;  restless;  uneasy;  sweat;

pricking  of  skin  <  ;  itching  <.
After  falling  asleep :  nightmare.
^^  Temperature  and  Weather. Open  air:  dread  of;  vertigo;.

headache  <  ;  pain  in  heel ;  increase  of  symptoms ;  >

in-doors.
Overheated  :  suppressed  menses.
Cold  air:  sensitiveness.
Cold  w^ater: > headache;  > from  moistening  diseased

parts  and  from  bathing.
Clothing: does  not  >  chilliness.

■  Chilblains.

*"  Fever. iChilliness all over body,  not relieved by any
amount  of  clothing.

■  Chilliness  with irregularities  in  menstrual  function,  in

chlorotic  conditions.
Chill  forenoon  or  evening.
With  evening  chill,  great  sensitiveness  to  cold  air  and

uncovering,  chill  predominates.
Heat  principally  of  face,  but  without  thirst,  succeeds  chill;,

hands  continue  cold  a  long  time.
Heat  and  chill  alternately.


75  CYCLAMEN  EUROPIUM.

Sensation  of  heat  through  whole  body,  particularly  in
face  and  on  hands.

Heat  of  various  parts  with  swelling  of  veins  of  hands.

Heat  of  various  parts,  but  not  of  face.

General  heat  after  eating.

Sweat  at  night  during  sleep,  moderate,  of  offensive  odor.

Sweat  sometimes  only  on  lower  part  of  body.
*^  Attacks,  Periodicity. Attacks :  heat ;  throbbing  in  head.

Frequently:  unconsciousness;  sneezing;  vomiting;  sour
taste  of  food ;  eructations ;  passage  of  hard  stools ;
micturition;  copious  emission  of  whitish  urine;  urging
with  scanty  discharge  of  urine  ;  trembling  of  lower
limbs;  palpitation  during  menses  ;  yawning.

Every  few  minutes :  attacks  of  labor-like  pains.

Nearly  every  day :  vomiting.

Every  three  or  four  weeks :  rush  of  blood  to  head ;  head-
ache ;  pressing  vertigo.

"Worse  during  full  moon.

Two  months  and  a  half:  no  appearance  of  menses.

Ten  months :  suppression  of  menses.
*^  Locality  and  Direction.  Left :  pain  in  temple ;  side  of
head  <  ;  eye  drawn  toward  inner  canthus ;  half  of  ob-
ject visible ;  stitches  and  itching  in  inguinal  canal ;
stitches  in  side  of  chest ;  rheumatic  pain  in  side  of  neck ;
red  blisters  and  itching  on  fingers;  rheumatic  drawing
in  gluteus  maximus;  foot  feels  sprained.

Right:  headache  <  in  temple;  dulness  of  hearing;  draw-
ing pain  in  ear;  pain  in  teeth;  distension  below  liver;
stitches  in  side;  stitches  in  kidney;  laming  pressure  in
arm ;  cramp-like  slow  contraction  of  thumb  and  index-
finger;  numbness  in  hand;  writer's  spasm  ;  cramp-like
pain  in  thigh;  itching  on  calf; <  side  of  head.

Lower  part  of  body :  sweat.

Changing  locality:  itching  after  scratching.
^Sensations.  Sensation  of  fulness  in  internal  parts;  sore  and
bruised  pain  in  external  parts ;  as  if  room  was  too  small ;
as  if  brain  were  moving  within  cranium,  or  as  it  does
when  riding  in  a  wagon  with  closed  eyes;  as  if  brain
was  in  motion  when  leaning  against  something;  as  if
brain  was  enveloped  in  a  cloth,  which  would  deprive
him  of  his  senses;  as  though  fog  were  before  sight  and
as  though  eyes  were  about  to  close;  as  if  brain  wobbled
about  while  walking;  as  if  looking  through  dark  blue
glass,  like  mist  before  eyes;  eyelids  as  if  swollen;  dul-
ness of  hearing,  as  if  cotton  was  in  ear  or  something
lying  before  ear;  as  of  an  induration  on  upper  lip;
qualmishness  as  after  eating  too  much  fat;  as  if  he  had
eaten  too  much ; crawling  as  of  something  alive  in


CYCLAMEN  EUROP.EUM.  76

bowels ;  as  if  a  spot  was  suppurating ;  as  if  room  was
too  small ;  as  if  there  was  not  strength  enough  to  breathe;
as  of  something  alive  running  in  heart;  as  if  air  streamed
from  nipples ;  as  if  she  must  let  fall  that  which  is  in
hands ;  as  if  sprained  in  foot ;  limbs  feel  as  if  their
mobility  were  impaired.

Pain  :  in  head,  with  nausea ;  in  forehead ;  one-sided ;  1.
temple;  in  bowels;  in  fauces;  in  small  of  back;  in  bot-
tom of  foot.

Indescribable  pain  :  in  scrobiculum  cordis.

Violent  pain  :  in  forehead,  temple  and  vertex.

Tearing :  externally  in  head  ;  in  teeth  ;  in  abdomen ;  over
scapulas;  elbow;  in  wrist-joint.

Piercing:  in  upper  abdomen.

Stitches:  in  temples;  in  eyes;  in  eyeballs;  in  inguinal
canal ;  in  chest ;  about  apex  of  heart ;  in  r.  side  ;  in
mammse ;  penetrating,  deep  and  dull  in  kidney.

Stitching  pains:  in  forehead;  in  temples;  in  vertex ;  in
teeth;  on  tongue;  in  stomach;  in  region  of  liver;  in
abdomen;  in  umbilical  region  ;  in  urethra.

Darting  pain  :  in  forehead  ;  in  temples ;  in  vertex.

Stinging  pain:  in  forehead  and  temples.

Pricking  :  at  end  of  urethra  ;  between  fingers.

Sticking :  in  scalp.

Gnawing  pain :  in  bowels ;  in  abdomen,  thence  all  over
body.

Boring  pains  :  in  temples ;  in  teeth.

Pinching :  in  abdomen.

Cramp-like  pains :  in  abdomen ;  in  thumb ;  in  index-
finger  ;  on  thigh.

Twinges :  up  back.

Labor-like  pains :  in  abdomen ;  commencing  in  small  of
back  and  running  down  each  side  of  abdomen  to  pubes.

Drawing  pain  :  in  r.  internal  ear ;  in  and  about  anus  and
perineum;  in  1.  side  of  neck;  in  ulna;  in  wrist;  in  1.
gluteus  maximus;  in  flexors  of  legs;  muscles;  in  bones;
in  periosteum.

Rheumatic  pains:  in  head  and  ears;  in  1.  side  of  neck;
drawing  in  1.  gluteus  maximus.

Aching  pains:  in  stomach,  extending  through  to  back.

Formicating:  on  scalp.

Throbbing:  in  head.

Bruised  pain:  above  elbow-joint.
^^  Tissues. Acts upon the cerebro-spinal  system, affecting
sensorium,  eyes,  gastrointestinal  canal,  and  more  esj^e-
cially  the  female  sexual  organs.

Pressive,  drawing  or  tearing  pains  at  parts  where  bones
lie  near  surface.


77  CYCLAMEN  EUROPIUM.

^^  Skin. Itching,  leaving  a  numb  sensation.

Itching,  pricking,  <  at  night,  in  bed ;  >  by  scratching,
but  re-appearing  at  once  at  another  place.

Pressing,  drawing  pains,  where  the  skin  covers  bones.

Papulous,  scurfy  or  pricking  eruptions.

Bright  red  spots,  like  burns,  on  thighs.

Painless  eruptions.

Scars  from  varicelli,  which  have  nearly  disappeared,  be-
come dark  red,  and  the  forehead  is  covered  with  similar
spots.
*'^  Stages  of  Life,  Constitution. Phlegmatic  temperament.

Suitable  for  blonde  leuco-phlegmatic  subjects  with  chlo-
rotic  condition;  disinclination  for  any  kind  of  labor,
easily  fatigued ;  special  senses  enfeebled  or  with  func-
tions suspended.

Patient  pale,  chlorotic,  with  disturbed  menstrual  function,
accompanied  by  vertigo  and  headache.

Girl,  £et.  3,  lively  disposition ;  strabismus.

Hebrew,  set.  16,  of  lively  disposition ;  suppression  of  mensem.

Young  lady,  set.  18;  pain  in  scrobiculum  cordis,  and
vomiting.

Girl,  set.  18,  menstruation  not  yet  established,  poorly  de-
veloped; headache.

Girl,  set.  20,  blonde,  menstruating  since  16th  year,  at  17
had  chlorosis,  since  which  time  menses  have  been  very
scanty,  although  regular;  headache,  palpitation.

A  woman,  set.  30;  amblyopia.

Young  woman,  set.  24,  blonde,  pale,  delicate  skin,  men-
struating since  19th  year ;  two  years  ago  was  drenched
(by  rain)  during  menstruation,  whereupon  menses  ceased
to  appear  for  10  months,  at  11th  month,  after  use  of
household  remedies,  menses  appeared;  dysmenorrhoea.

Girl,  set.  28,  blonde,  chlorotic;  non-appearance  of  menses
for  ten  months.

Man,  set.  35,  suffering  for  years ;  different  mineral  waters
taken,  on  advice  of  allopathic  physicians,  with  no  bene-
fit; enteralgia.

Man,  set.  40;  enteralgia.

Coachman,  set.  40,  strong  and  hearty;  diplopia.

Mrs. ,  set.  44,  of  rather  large  frame,  has  in  former

years  had  good  health  and  has  always  worked  hard ;
excessive  menstruation.

Mrs.  B.,  set.  51,  strong,  healthy  Irish  woman;  mental  de-
rangement during  climacteric.

Woman,  set.  60,  after  ten  years'  unsuccessful  use  of  various
remedies;  coryza;  malaise.

Weakly  old  man,  with  pale,  herpetic  face  and  red  nose;
enteralgia.


CYCLAMEN  EUROP.EUM.  78

^'^  Relations. Antidoted  by :  Camphor,  Coffea,  Pulsat.

Compare:  Pulsat,  which  is  its  nearest  analogue;  Ferrum
and  Cinchona  are  similar  in  chlorosis ;  Crocus  and  Thuja
like  it,  have  sensation  as  of  something  alive  in  abdomen ;
Ammon.  mur.  similar  in  menses,  <  at  night;  Cocc.  cact,
has  leucorrhoea,  <  sitting,  >  walking;  Cyclam.  menses,
<  sitting,  >  walking;  Rhustox.  is  similar  in  enteralgia;
Gelsem.  and  Senega  in  diplopia;  Arnica  in  effects  of  falls;
Baryt.  carh.,  Calc.  ost.,  Canthar,  in  chills  and  fever.


CYPRIPEDIUM.

Xady's  Slipper.  Orchidacex.

The  yellow  lady's  slipper,  Cypripedium  pubescens,  grows  wild  in  abundance
in  woods  that  are  moist  throughout  the  United  States.  The  tincture  is  prepared
from  the  fresh  root  gathered  in  Autumn.  It  has  been  used  by  the  Old  School  as
a  substitute  for  Valerian.

A  fragmentary  proving  of  the  Tincture  of  Cypripedium  humile,  by  Jacob
Kummer,  in  MSS.,  is  added ;  the  symptoms  are  marked .

Clinicai.  Authorities.— ilfentoZ  despondency,  spermatorrhoea ;  Delirium  tre-
mens, mild  attacks;  Debility  and  Sleeplessness,  Mitchell,  Eaue's  Eec,  1875,  p.  256;
JSleeplessness,  Moore,  M.  I.,  vol.  6,  p.  342.

^  Mind. I  Irascibility  and fitfulness;  hysterical symptoms;
sleeplessness ;  agitation.
I  I  Profound  indifference  to  everything,  even  to  his  studies,

duties,  and  common  courtesies  of  life.
1  I  Mental  despondency. ^Spermatorrhoea.
I  I  Delirium  tremens,  mild  attacks.
■^  Sensorium. — Vertigo,  had  to  sit  down,  followed  by  heaviness

and  dragging  of  1.  foot.
*  Eyes. Stye  on  r.  lower  lid.
^^  Stomach. Dyspepsia,  the result  of  mental overexertion,

anxiety,  or  grief.
^^  Male  Sexual  Organs. ■  Spermatorrhoea,  with  great  nervous

prostration  and  dejection  of  spirits.
^^  Female Sexual Organs. Amenorrhoea, with hysteria;
great  nervous  debility  and  despondency.
Irritability  of  vagina;  hysterical  symptoms,  sleeplessness
and  agitation.
-'^  Neck,  Back. A  small  blood  boil  on  1.  side  of  neck.


79  CYPRIPEDIUM.

^  Lower  Limbs. <  Twitching  of  limbs,  sleeplessness  and  rest-
lessness.
— Severe  pain  in  r.  foot,  along  inner  margin,  an  hour

later,  very  severe  in  front  part  of  left.
—Acute  stitches  in  under  part  of  toes  in  r.  foot.
— Dragging  of  1.  foot,  following  vertigo.
^^  Nerves. Sleepless from nervous exhaustion, especially
where  system  has  been  debilitated  by  long  sickness,
especially  from  uterine  complaints.
■  Nervous  debility,  with  sleeplessness  of  nervo-bilious  tem-
peraments.
I  I  Jactitation  and  trembling  in  typhoid  fevers.
I  I  Hysterical  complaints.
I  I  Chorea  and  reflex  epilepsy.

Convulsions  of  children,  premonitory  stage,  when  there  is
morbid  irritability  of  brain,  in  consequence  of  which
child  is  very  excitable,  laughs  and  plays  at  unwonted
hours;  is  very  wakeful,  and  laughs  even  in  sleep.
Epilepsy  from  reflex  nervous  irritation,  from  exhaustion
of  nerve  forces,  from  irritability  of  brain  in  children.
^  Sleep. I  Sleeplessness:  with  desire  to  talk,  or  with  constant
crowding  of  pleasant  ideas;  with  restlessness  of  body;
twitching  of  limbs;  after  miscarriage,  for  several  nights
in  succession.
^  Time. Night: child  laughs  and  plays.
*^  Attacks,  Periodicity. Mild  attacks:  delirium  tremens.

Several  nights:  restlessness  of  body;  twitching  of  limbs.
^^  Locality  and  Direction. Left:  blood  boil  on  side  of  neck ;
heaviness  of  foot;  dragging  of  foot;  severe  pain  in  foot.
Right:  stye  on  lower  eyelid ;  pain  in  foot;  stitches  in  toes.
^^  Sensations. Severe  pain :  in  r.  foot.
Stitches:  in  toes.
Twitching :  of  limbs.
Irritability:  of  vagina;  of  brain.
Heaviness :  of  1.  foot.
^  Tissues. I  I  Disorders  of  gray  nerve  matter  from mental
overexertion,  or  reflex  nervous  excitement.
I  1  Incipient cerebral disorder, when child is sleepless,

laughs  and  plays  in  night.
I  I  Functional  irritation  of  brain,  especially  in  very  young
children  from  teething,  or  intestinal  irritation.
"  Stages  and  States. Lady  teacher  in  seminary,  after  mis-
carriage; sleeplessness.
^^  Relations. Compare:  Ambra  gris.,  Coca,  Coffea,  Jgnat.,  Kali
hrom., PauUinia, Thea, Scutellaria, Valerian, Zincum.
May  be  useful  after  failure  of  Opium  in  hysteria,  chorea,
nervous  headache,  neuralgia,  hypochondriasis.


DAPHNE  ODORA.  80

DAPHNE  ODORA.

Daphne  Indica  (Sweet  scented  Spurge  laurel).  Thymolacese.


This  remedy,  not  to  be  confounded  -with  Daphne  mezereum,  another  species
from  the  same  natural  order  (see  Mezereum),  was  introduced  by  Dr.  G.  Bute,
whose  symptoms,  pathogenetic  and  clinical,  were  first  published  in  the  Correspon-
denz-Blatt,  the  journal  of  the  AUentown  Academ}^,  in  1837.

This  evergreen  is  a  native  of  the  West  Indies  and  China  (not  India),  while
the  Daphne  mezereum  grows  in  Great  Britain.

The  tincture  is  prepared  from  the  fresh  bark.

^  Mind. I  Despondency.

A^ery  peevish,  absent-minded,  he  walks  about  tlie  room,

cannot  make  up  his  mind  to  anything.
I  Timorous  and  trembling,  with  pain  about  heart.
Fearfulness.

■  Agitation.

Any  effort  at  thinking  causes  pain  or  soreness  in  brain.
^  Sensorium. Vertigo.

^  Inner  Head. Sensation  as  if  external  portion  of  brain  was
inflamed  and  beating  painfully  against  skull.

■  Feeling  of  fulness  in  head,  as  if  head  would  burst.

I  Pain  in  head  on  rising  in  bed,  as  if  head  would  burst.

Sensation  as  if  head  was  separated  from  body.

Head  feels  as  if  screwed  together,  from  below  upward,  as

if  chin  and  vertex  were  in  a  vise,  with  great  heat  in  head.
Head  feels  as  if  too  thick,  with  dull  sticking  in  1.  temple.
•  Painful  pulsation  in  temples,  with  soreness  when  touched.
Violent  pain  in  1.  temple.

I  Pain  in  temples  extending  to  back  part  of  eyes.
Sharp  momentary  pains  in  1.  side  of  head  and  under  1.

scapula.
Pain  in  vertex,  extending  toward  forehead.
I  Heat  in  head,  especially  in  vertex.
I  Pain  from  nape  of  neck  to  forehead.
Pain  in  back  part  of  head.
*  Outer  Head. Soreness  on  pressure  with  painful  throbbing

of  temples.
Pain  and  burning  on  vertex.
I  Heat  on  back  part  of  vertex.
iXodular  swellings  on  bones  of  head  about  vertex,  soft  as

if  containing  water;  pain  <  at  night  preventing  sleep;

<  from  touch.


81  DAPHNE  ODORA.

I  Hard  swelling  of  whole  1.  side  of  upper  portion  of  head^
as  if  in  the  bone,  with  numbness  and  sharp,  transitory,,
shooting  pains.

Itching  on  scalp.
^  Eyes. I  Sensation  as  if  a  membrane  extended  across  eye.

Black  spots  float  before  eyes.

■  Weakness  of  eyes;  while  reading,  the  letters  fade  and  ap-

pear as  a  black  line.

■  Diplopia.

I  Contraction  of  pupils.

Eyes  dim and  watery,  weak,  inflamed,  without  lustre;

filled  with  tears.
Glassy  appearance  of  eyes.
Pain  in  eyes;  sensation  as  if  they  were  forcibly  pressed

out,  or  were  too  large.
Severe  pains  in  eyeball,  with  great  nervous  excitement,  in

evening.

■  Scratching  in  eyes.
Pain  above  r.  eye.
Itching  in  1.  eye.

Indescribable  sensation  about  eyes  and  lids;  the  latter  feel
heavy  next  morning  and  have  a  dry  appearance.
^  Ears. Roaring  and  humming  in  ears.

Burning  about  ears  and  on  vertex,  with  constant  inclina-
tion to  yawn.
^  Nose. Nostrils  scurfy,  with  some  heat.
^  Face. Heat  and  burning  of  cheeks,  extending  to  ears  and
hands.
Sensation  of  swelling ;  rigidity  and  tension  in  articulation
of  jaw.
^  Lower  Face. Sensation  of  tension  and  swelling  in  region  of
maxillary  joint,  with  severe  burning  in  skin.
Stiffness  of  maxillary  joint  on  chewing.
^^  Teeth. Pulsation  in  roots  of  teeth ;  in  gums.
Tearing,  gnawing  pain  in  all  the  teeth.
Toothache:  with  chilliness;  with  tendency  to  sweat;  with

erections;  after  coitus;  with  or  without  salivation.
Pressure  upon  swollen  gums  causes  crackling,  as  if  a  col-
lection of  air  had  formed  there.
"  Tongue. > Dryness  of  tongue  as  if  burnt;  after  sleep.
1  Foul-smelling  tongue.
Tongue  coated  on  one  side.
^^  Mouth. Ptyalism ;  saliva  hot.

Salivation  wdth  toothache.
^^  Throat. Inflammation  of  throat  and  suppuration  of  tonsils.
^*  Desires,  Aversions. Loss  of  appetite,  moderate  thirst.

Great  desire  for  tobacco.
^^  After  Meals, l  After  each  meal  burning  in  stomach  and.

VOL.  V. — 6.


DAPHNE  ODORA.  82

sensation  of  soreness,  with  much  belching  of  wind,  the
pain  often  extends  through  1,  hypochondriac  region  and
around  to  back;  frequent  cramps  in  stomach.

Nausea  and  vomiting  after  breakfast;  vomiting  with
cough.

Pressure  in  stomach  after  drinking.

■  Gouty  pains,  <  by  drinking  of  alcohol.
^^  Belching, l  Pyrosis  and  sour  vomiting.

^'^  Stomach. Burning  and  soreness  in  stomach.

iSensation  of  fulness  and  heaving  in  pit  of  stomach.

Pit  of  stomach  as  if  contracted.

Qualmishness  in  stomach.

Gastralgia.
^^  Hypochondria. Sensation as if something smooth was
gliding  from  r.  to  1.  h3^pochondrium,  lying  on  back.

Pain  under  1.  floating  ribs.

Sudden  stitch  in  region  of  spleen.
^^  Abdomen. Arthritic  pains,  which  suddenly  wander  from
extremities  to  abdomen.

Colic  with  chilliness.

Trembling  in  abdominal  muscles.

Painfulness  of  1.  groin.
^'^  Stool. I  Stool  scant,  at  termination  bloody.

I  Constipation.
'^^  Urine. Cutting  pains  in  kidneys.

Soreness  of  urethra;  at  beginning  of  micturition.

Frequent  desire  to  urinate  with  forcible  passage  of  large,
clear  stream.

■  Frequent  and  copious  micturition.

■  Frequent  urination  at  night.

iThe  urine  is  turbid,  thick,  yellowish,  contains  pus.
Hed  sediment  of  urine,  which  adheres  to  sides  of  vessel.

■  Fetid  smell  of  urine,  like  rotten  eggs.
Urging  to  urinate,  with  mucous  discharge.

^^  Male  Sexual  Organs. ■  Discharge  of  prostatic  fluid  after
urination,  <  by  smoking.
Sweating  of  scrotum.

■  Disorders  resulting  from  suppression  of  gonorrhoea.
^  Larynx. Feeble  voice.

^•^  Breathing. Offensive  breath.

Suffocating  feeling  with  throat  complaints.
^^  Cough. ■  Cough  from  tickling  in  throat,  with  yellow,  often
frothy,  blood-streaked  expectoration, accompanied by
retching  and vomiting; coughs  until  he  sinks  down
completely  exhausted ;  causes  sleeplessness  at  night.
Cough,  with  pain  in  sternum.
Copious,  thin,  slimy  expectoration.
^^  Heart,  Pulse. Stitches  in  heart  and  cardiac  region  going
through  to  back.


83  DAPHNE  ODORA.

I  Palpitation  and  fluttering;  cannot  lie  on  1.  side;  pains
about  heart.

Timorous  and  trembling,  with  pain  about  the  heart.

Pulse:  quick, frequent; accelerated, often  100  or  more;

very  slow.

^^  Outer  Chest. Pain  in  pectoral  muscles.

^^  Neck. Back. At  night  sensation  as  if  cervical  glands  were

greatly  swollen,  and  arteries  distended  with  blood;  a

suffocative  feeling,  as  if  head  were  separated  from  body.

Soreness  in  1.  side  of  throat  on  pressure.

Screwing  pain  from  ear  to  shoulder.

Beating  in  nape  of  neck,  with  painfulness  to  touch.

Pain  in  nape  of  neck,  with  headache.

Sharp  pain  under  1.  scapula.

Pain  and  downward  drawing  in  spinal  cord,  <  stooping
or  bending.

Burning  and  itching  down  back.

Cold  feeling  on  buttocks.
'^  Upper  Limbs. Lightning-like  pain  in  r.  shoulder.

Small  vesicles  on  hands  and  arms  itching  violently.

Burning  of  hands.

Sudden  violent  painful  boring  in  bones  of  fingers.

Gouty  pains  flying  about  in  hands.

Sticking-tearing  pain  in  throat  and  fingers  of  r.  hand.
^^  Lower  Limbs. Itching  of  legs  every  evening;  they  are  cov-
ered with  a  red  rash.

Sharp  pain  down  r.  hip,  spreading  towards  back,  and  last-
ing about  ten  minutes.

Screwing  pain  in  r.  hip,  and  from  hip  to  knee.

Rheumatic  pain  in  muscles  of  1.  thigh,  just  above  knee,  as
after  catching  cold,  <  walking.

Dull  pain  in  thighs.

Pain  in  thighs  and  knees.

Sensation  of  coldness  of  knees ;  cold  knees,  cold  feet.

After  pain  leaves  foot  it  is  insensible  to  touch,  and  feels
very  large.

Toes  and  forepart  of  foot  extremely  cold.

Sensation  as  of  a  bruised  pain  in  1.  toes.

Empty  feeling  in  big  toe.

iBairof  r.  great  toe  swollen  and  very  painful;  the  pain
suddenly  shoots  into  the  body,  to  region  of  heart,  or  some
other  part  of  body.
^  Limbs.  Gout-like,  pinching  pain  on  back  of  1.  hand,  mostly
on  side  of  little  finger;  after  five  minutes  the  pain  darted
to  outer  side  of  r.  hand,  and  so  for  several  hours  alter-
nately went  from  hand  to  hand,  after  lasting  4-5  min-
utes; the  pain  then  suddenly  changed  to  ball  of  1.  great
toe,  soon  passed  to  back  of  toe,  from  thence  to  back  of  r.


DAPHNE  ODORA.  84

great  toe,  and  then  back  again  to  1. ;  after  passing  from
one  foot  to  the  other  several  times,  it  went  to  the  mus-
cles of  r.  arm,  just  above  elbow,  thence  to  inner  side  of
1.  thigh,  just  above  knee,  and  from  there  to  abdomen,
below  prsecordial  region.

Sticking-shooting  pains,  first  in  one,  then  in  other  arm,
which  seem  to  go  into  hands  and  feet,  where  they  end
suddenly  with  a  slight  electric  shock;  when  he  thinks
they  have  passed  by,  he  suddenly  feels  same  pain  in  1.
foot,  which,  however,  remains  in  no  one  place  for  any
length  of  time;  in  the  great  toe  (in  which  he  formerly
had  gouty  pains),  sensation  as  if  there  were  an  emptiness,
then  lightning-like,  shooting  pains  in  1.  great  toe,  in
balls  of  toe  and  soles  of  feet;  the  same  in  r.  foot,  but  less
severe;  the  1.  foot,  after  pains  have  become  very  vio-
lent, is  quite  insensible  to  touch,  and  feels  as  large  as
whole  body.

Stiffness  of  limbs.

I  I  Great  weakness,  a  bruised  feeling  in  limbs.
^^  Motion. Rest. As  soon  as  he  lies  down :  gouty  pains.

Lying  down :  <  backache.

Rising:  pain  in  head.

Stooping  or  bending :  <  pain  in  spinal  cord.

AValks :  about  room.

Walking :  rheumatic  pain  in  thigh  <  ;  coughs  until  he
sinks  down  completely  exhausted.
^^  Nerves. Great  lassitude  and  weakness,  limbs  feel  bruised.

Great  restlessness,  with  nervous  headache;  sharp  pains
sweep  over  whole  body,  appear  at  times  to  rest  in  the
joints,  the  same  were  felt  in  cardiac  region  causing  trem-
bling and  fearfulness.

Great  nervous  excitability  with  the  pains  in  eyes.
^^  Sleep. I  Entire  sleeplessness:  from  pains  in  bone-swellings;
from  cough.

Great  drowsiness,  but  complains  of  being  unable  to  sleep.

■Restlessness,  unrefreshing  sleep.

Starting  on  falling  asleep,  with  chilliness  and  clammy
sweat.

I  Dreams:  of  black  cats;  of  a  vicious  black  cat  seizing  him
by  the  hand;  of  fire.
'^  Time- Morning :  eyes  feel  heavy ;  lids  feel  heavy.

Evening:  pain  in  eyeballs;  itching  of  legs;  red  rash  in
spots  on  legs;  pains  <.

Night :  pains  <  ;  nodular  swellings  on  bones  of  head  <  ;
sleeplessness ;  sensation  as  if  cervical  glands  were  greatly
swollen ;  as  if  arteries  were  distended  with  blood ;  ex-
ostoses with  stitching,  pressing  dull  pain  <.
^^  Temperature  and  Weather. Cold  air :  wandering  gout  <.

Warmth  of  bed:  pains  <.


85  DAPHNE  ODORA.

^^  Fever. Toothache,  with  attacks  of  chilliness  and  sweat.

Violent  shaking  chill,  lasting  12  hours,  followed  by  heat
of  moderate  duration,  as  in  typhoid,  with  clammy  sweat
over  whole  body,  followed  by  some  thirst  and  complete
loss  of  appetite.

Glowing  sensation  in  cheeks,  followed  by  burning,  extend-
ing to  ears  and  vertex,  hands  and  tips  of  fingers.

Stretching  and  yawning,  with  chilliness.

Heat  and  sweat  at  short  intervals.

Tendency  to  sweat.

Viscid  perspiration,  sometimes  having  a  j^utrid  smell.

Gastric  nervous  fever.
*^  Attacks,  Periodicity. iSudden  lightning-like  dull  jerk-
ings  in  different  parts  of  the  body.

Erratic  stitches.

Attacks :  of  chilliness.

Frequent :  cramps  in  stomach ;  desire  to  urinate ;  urina-
tion at  night.

Short  intervals :  heat  and  sweat.

10  minutes :  pain  in  r.  hip.

12  hours  :  chill  lasts.

I  Feels  worse  while  the  moon  is  on  the  wane.
^  Locality  and  Direction.  Left :  sticking  in  temple ;  hard
swelling  side  of  upper  portion  of  head;  itching  in  eye;
burning  pain  in  hypochondriac  region ;  pain  under
floating  ribs;  painfulness  of  groin;  cannot  lie  on  side;
heart  symptoms  <  lying  on  side;  soreness  of  throat;
sharp  pain  under  scapula ;  rheumatic  pains  in  thigh ;
bruised  pain  in  toes;  gouty  pain  on  back  of  hand;  gouty
pain  on  side  of  little  finger ;  pain  in  ball  of  great  toe ;
shooting  pain  in  foot ;  after  pain  ceases,  foot  is  insensi-
ble to  touch ;  foot  feels  as  large  as  whole  body.

Right :  pain  above  eyes ;  pain  in  shoulder ;  tearing  pain
in  fingers ;  pain  down  hip ;  great  toe  swollen ;  pain  in
great  toe ;  pain  in  arm.

From  right  to  left:  sensation  as  if  something  smooth  was
gliding  from  r.  to  1.  hypochondrium.

One  side:  tongue  coated.

From  below  upward :  head  feels  screwed.

Extremities  to  abdomen  :  arthritic  pains  suddenly  wander.

Changing  locality:  pains  in  limbs.
^^  Sensations.  As  if  external  portion  of  brain  was  inflamed
and  beating  painfully  against  skull ;  as  if  head  would
burst;  as  if  there  was  not  enough  room  in  head;  as  if
head  were  separated  from  body ;  as  if  head  were  screwed
together ;  as  if  chin  and  vertex  were  in  a  vise ;  head
feels  as  if  too  thick ;  as  if  a  membrane  extended  across


DAPHNE  ODORA.  86

eye  ;  as  if  eyes  were  forcibly  pressed  out ;  as  if  eyes  were
too  large ;  as  if  face  were  swollen ;  pressure  upon  swol-
len gums  causes  crackling  as  if  collection  of  air  had
formed  there  ;  tongue  as  if  burnt;  pit  of  stomach  as  if
contracted ;  as  if  something  smooth  was  gliding  from
r.  to  1.  hypochondrium ;  as  if  cervical  glands  were  greatly
swollen  ;  as  if  arteries  were  distended  with  blood ;  as  if
there  were  an  emptiness  in  foot ;  foot  feels  as  large  as
whole  body.

Pain:  about  heart;  in  brain;  in  head;  in  temples,  extend-
ing to  back  part  of  eyes;  in  vertex;  from  nape  of  neck
to  forehead;  in  back  part  of  head;  in  eyes;  in  eyeballs;
above  eyes ;  in  teeth ;  through  1.  hypochondriac  region
and  around  to  back;  under  1.  floating  ribs;  in  1.  groin;
in  sternum;  in  pectoral  muscles:  in  nape  of  neck;  in
spinal  cord;  in  knees;  in  thighs;  in  r.  great  toe;  pain
suddenly  goes  into  body  to  region  of  heart  or  some  other
part  of  body ;  in  bone  swellings ;  in  teeth.

Indescribable  feeling :  about  eyes  and  lids.

A^iolent  pain :  in  1.  temple.

Cutting  jDain :  in  kidneys.

Tearing  pain :  in  teeth ;  in  throat ;  in  fingers.

Bursting :  headache.

Sharp  momentary  pain:  in  side  of  head;  under  scapula;
down  hip  to  back.

Shooting  pains :  in  head  ;  arms;  hands;  feet;  1.  great  toe.

Stitch:  in  region  of  spleen;  in  heart;  in  cardiac  region^
through  to  back.

Lightning-like  pain :  in  r.  shoulder ;  in  1.  great  toe ;  soles
of  feet.

Pinching  pain :  in  back  of  1.  hand ;  in  little  finger ;  in
r.  hand.

Gnawing  pain :  in  all  the  teeth.

Screwing  pain :  from  ear  to  shoulder ;  in  hij)  to  knee.

Boring  pain :  in  bones  of  fingers.

Gouty  pains:  in  hands;  on  back  of  1.  hand;  toes;  arms;
thigh;  knee;  abdomen; from  extremities  to  abdomen.

Rheumatic  pains:  in  thigh.

Burning:  on  vertex;  about  ears;  cheeks;  in  skin  of  jaw;
in  stomach  ;  down  back ;  of  hands.

Soreness :  of  brain ;  in  temples ;  of  stomach  ;  of  urethra ;
1.  side  of  throat.

Heat:  in  head;  in  vertex.

Dull  sticking:  in  1.  temple;  in  throat;  in  fingers.

Dull  pain  :  in  thighs.

Throbbing  painful :  in  temples ;  in  roots  of  teeth;  in  gums.

Beating :  in  nape  of  neck.

Bruised  feeling:  in  limbs;  in  1.  foot.


87  DAPHNE  ODORA.

Pressure :  in  stomach.
Heavy  feeling :  in  eyelids.
Fulness :  in  head  ;  in  pit  of  stomach.
Drawing  down :  in  spinal  cord.
Tension  :  in  region  of  maxillary  joint.
Roaring :  in  ears.
Humming:  in  ears.
Cold  feeling :  on  buttocks.
Scratching :  in  eyes.
Tickling:  in  throat.

Itching:  on  scalp;  in  1.  eye;  down  back  ;  of  legs.
**  Tissues. Erratic  stitches  in  muscles.

I  Rheumatic  and  arthritic  pains,  especially  after  suppressed

gonorrhcea.
Wandering  gout,  <  from  cold  air.
I  Rheumatic  and  gouty  affections  in  muscles  and  bones.
•  Exostoses  with  stitching,  pressing,  or  dull  pain,  especially
<  at  night.
*^  Touch. Passive  Motion. Touch : pain <  in  bones  of
head ;  painful ness  in  nape  of  neck  ;  foot  insensible  to,
after  pain  ceases.
Pressure:  on  temple,  soreness  ;  on  gums  causes  crackling;
soreness  of  1.  side  of  throat.
*^  Skin. Clammy  skin.

Red  rash  in  spots  on  legs,  in  evening.
Leprosy  (Daphne  oleoides).
*^  Stages  and  States. iMercurio-syphilitic  affections.
■*®  Relations. Antidoted  by :  Bryon.,  Digit.,  Rhus  tox.,  Silica,
Sepia,  and  Zincwni.
It  antidotes:  pains  of  Chrom.  acid,  and  Mercurius.
Compare:  ilfezer.  its  side  relation ;  Aurum  and  Mercur.in
bone  affections;  Staphis.  in  mercurio-syphilitic affections;
Thuja  in  results  of  suppressed  gonorrhoea;  Benz.  ac.  in
fetid  urine; Jambos in  desire  for tobacco; Pulsat. in
erratic  pains ; Veratr.  in  electric-like  pains.


DIADEMA  ARANEA.  88

DIADEMA  ARANEA.

The  Cross  Spider.  Arachnida.

A  large  spider  found  in  Europe  and  America,  its  body  ovoid,  a  longitudinal
line  on  back,  of  yellow  and  white  points,  intersected  by  three  similar  lines.  Used
as  a  remedy  by  Wm.  Gross  as  early  as  1833,  and  mentioned  in  the  older  homoeo-
pathic M'orks,  but  not  proved  until  later  by  Grauvogl,  see  his  Text  Book,  2d  edi-
tion, 1866,  and  Allen's  Encyclopedia,  vol.  4.

The  symptoms  are  mainly  based  on  clinical  experience.

The  tincture  is  prepared  by  maceration  of  the  insect  in  alcohol.

Clinical  Authorities. — Headache,  Grauvogl,  p.  43;  (2  cases),  Hencke,
Eiick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  5,  p.  70;  Chronic  headache,  Gva.uvogl ;  Toothache,  GraxiYogl;
Colic,  Howard,  Hom.  Clinics,  vol.  4,  p.  86;  Spasmodic  pains  in  stomach  and  irregular
menstruation,  Nunez,  Horn.  Clinics,  vol.  4,  p.  115;  Cramps  in  stomach,  Nunez,
Raue's  Eec,  1875,  p.  142;  Enlarged  spleen.,  Grauvogl;  Abdominal  pains,  Nunez,
Hom.  Clinics,  vol.  4,  p.  Ill ;  Intermittent  diarrhaa,  Nunez,  Eaue's  Eec,  1872,  p.  137;
Sensation  as  if  hands  and  arms  were  swollen,  Chapman,  Hales'  Therap.,  p.  43 ;  Spasms,
Nunez,  Eaue's  Eec,  1872,  p.  222;  Catalepsy,  Grauvogl;  Intermittent  fever,  Hering,
Husmann,  Jofire,  MSS. ;  Violent  chill,  Heinigke,  Allen's  Int.  Fevers,  p.  18  ;  Quotid-
ian chill,  Grauvogl.

^  Mind. Dejected,  pale  face;  dark circles  under  eyes;  mel-
ancholy, will  not  leave  the  bed.

I  I  Deep  melancholy. ^Dysmenorrhoea.

I  Morose  and  despondent,  longing  for  death.  ^Intermittent.
^  Sensorium. "Vertigo  before  headache; when  sitting  up;
must  lie  down;  with  weakness  before  eyes.

Confusion  of  head;  after  eating;  with  relaxation  (lassi-
tude).

Dulness  and  pressure  in  head,  >  when  pillowing  head.
^  Inner  Head. Confusion  of  head; with  lassitude;  after  eat-
ing; evening,  when  studying,  with  pressive  pains,  as  if
on  iDones  of  r.  temple ;  while  resting  head  on  hand.

I  Headache  and  confusion  of  head,  both  >  by  smoking
and  by  going  into  open  air.

Long-lasting  confusion  of  head,  with  pressing  pain  in  fore-
head and  temples,  >  by  pressure  of  hand,  >  in  even-
ing, after  eating.

Headache  in  forehead,  >  by  smoking.

Heat  in  forehead  and  eyes.

Headache,  with  burning  in  eyes  and  heat  in  head.

■  Pressing  in  temples;  vertigo  on  rising  from  a  recumbent
position;  head  and  hands  feel  swollen.


S9  DIADEMA  ARANEA.

Continued  headache  spreading  from  forehead  on  vertex
and  occiput,  only  at  times  <  on  top  of  head ;  cannot
receive  company  because  talking  or  listening  produces
vomiting;  she  must  lie  quietly  in  bed  for  three  or  four
days.

I  Chronic  headache,  preceded  by  flickering  before  eyes  and
vertigo,  which  forces  her  to  lie  down ;  headache  attended
with  dulness,  cannot  think  well,  great  heat  in  forehead
and  face,  weariness,  loss  of  strength;  lasts  one  day.

Headache  coming  on  at  regular  hours;  <  by  speaking,  or
when  others  speak ;  >  by  less  smoking,  or  going  out  into
open  air.

iStitching  and  shooting  pains  in  head  with  chill.  ^Inter-
mittent.

I  Nervous  headache;  periodical.
"*  Outer  Head, l  Unpleasant  sensation  as  if  head  and  hands
were  greatly  swollen. ^Headache.

Dulness  of  head:  w4th  tightness;  after  a  meal;  during
evening  studies ;  with  pressure  on  right  temporal  bone,
upper  part  of  forehead,  >  on  leaning  head.

Drawing  in  head  to  lower  jaw.
^  Sight  and  Eyes, l  Glimmering  and  glittering  before  eyes
when  reading  or  writing,  which  <  headache.

Flickering  before  eyes ;  precedes  attack  of  headache.

Thick  mist  before  eyes;  so  tired  she  thought  she  would  drop.

Disagreeable  trembling  in  eyes;  reading,  writing,  <  head-
ache, with  heat  in  eyes  and  forehead.

iBurning  in  eyes,  with  heat  in  face  and  headache,

I  I  Stinging  in  eyes  after  the  heat. ^Intermittent.

B Shooting  in  eyes. ^Intermittent.

■  Large  black  circles  under  eyes. ^Dysmenorrhoea.

"  Hearing  and  Ears. Pinching  pressure  in  r.  ear  and  parotid
gland,  shifting  to  r.  side,  from  up-down,
i  I  Affection  of  ears  in  dogs;  they  shake  their  heads  until
the  ears  are  bloody.
''  Smell  and  Nose. Coryza  with  thirst;  tertian  coryza.

Epistaxis.
^  Upper  Face, l Dejected  countenance  and  pale  face;  dark
circles  under  eyes ; lips  blanched ;  dull  expression  of
eyes; confusion  of  head; deep  melancholy;  malaise,
with  constant  desire  to  lie  down. /!^Spasmodic  pains  in
stomach.
I  Face  pale  and  sunken. ^Dysmenorrhoea.
I  Cheeks  feel  as  if  swollen. (/Toothache.
I  Heat  in  forehead  and  face. ^Headache.

■  Burning  heat  in  face,  forehead  and  eyes,  with  headache.
^  Lower  Face. iLips  colorless. ^Dysmenorrhoea.

■^"^  Teeth  and  Gums, i Right  lower incisors feel  cold and


DIADEMA  ARANEA.  9a

are  sensitive,  especially  on  drawing  in  air;  returns  each
day  at  same  hour.

I  Pinching,  pressing  pain  in  upper  incisors,  regularly  from
9  A.M.  to  7  P.M.;  leaving  a  sensitiveness  and  cold  feeling
on  drawing  in  air;  sensation  as  if  gum  or  cheek  were
swollen.

iSudden  violent  pains  in  teeth  of  upper  and  lower  jaw  at
night,  immediately  after  lying  down.

Toothache  >  by  smoking  tobacco;  <  by  humidity,  at
night,  and  after  lying  down.
"  Taste  and  Tongue. Taste:  bitter,  >  by  smoking;  nause-
ous, bitter,  with  coated  tongue ;  unpleasant  after  milk.

iTip  of  tongue  slightly  red. dAgiie.
"  Throat. Stitches  in  palate  and  larynx.
^*  Appetite,  Thirst,  Desires,  Aversions, i  Anorexia. ^Inter-
mittent.

Thirst  during  fever  and  with  all  other  symptoms.
^^  Eating and  Drinking. After  eating :  confusion  of  head,
with  lassitude.

After  eating  a  few  spoonfuls  of  soup,  a  crawling  sensation
over  W'hole  body.

lAt  dinner,  after  first  spoonful  of  soup,  violent  spasmodic-
bellyache  with  anxiety;  oppression  of  chest  and  repeated
gaping. ^Dysmenorrhoea.

iShe  had  no  appetite  and  was  afraid  to  eat,  as  it  increased
the  complaints  in  the  night.

After  milk,  unpleasant  taste.
^'^  Hiccough,  Belching,  Nausea  and  Vomiting. Vomits
everything;  has  passed  no  urine  in  two  days;  backache,
preventing  sleep.

lYomiting  after  chill  and  after  heat. ^Intermittent.
^^  Scrobiculum and Stomach, i Cutting  in stomach,  and
spasmodic  pain,  with  vomiting before chill. ^Inter-
mittent.

■  Burning  in  stomach  during  chill. ^Ague.

lAfter  eating  a  very  little  food,  violent  convulsive  pains
in  stomach,  nausea,  oppression  of  chest  and  repeated
gaping.

iCramps  in  stomach,  commencing  during  a  meal,  with
great  anxiety,  pressure  in  chest,  and  frequent  yawning;
spasm  at  first  confined  to  stomach,  gradually  becomes
general,  with  trembling  of  whole  body,  spasmodic
motions,  and  desire  to  keep  constantly  moving  when
sitting.
^'  Hypochondria, i Epigastrium  painful  to  pressure. 6 Ague.

iSwelling  of  spleen,  after  checked  intermittent  fever  with
quinine;  <  in  damp  weather  and  exposure  to  damp,
walls.


91  DIADEMA  ARANEA.

■  Enlarged  spleen,  in  man  subject  to  ague,  constantly
chilly,  <  when  it  rained.
^'Abdomen.  Sensation  of  heaviness  and  fulness  in  lower
bowels  as  if  a  stone  was  lying  there,  with  an  unpleasant
feeling  of  faintness  in  pit  of ^ stomach;  gnawing  and
griping  in  abdomen;  returns  daily  at  the  same  hour.

Abdominal  complaints  with  shuddering,  towards  evening ;
sensation  of  heaviness,  snapping  in  belly,  with  unpleas-
ant sc|ueamishness  in  pit  of  stomach.

I  Colic,  griping  pains,  sensation  of  heaviness  in  lower  ab-
domen and  feeling  of  faintness  in  epigastrium.

I  Colic  recurs  daily  at  same  hour,  with  feeling  as  if  arms
and  legs  were  asleep.

I  Every  morning  about  4  o'clock  severe  abdominal  pains
with  loud  borborygmi,  followed  by  two  or  three  small
liquid  stools,  with  sensation  of  numbness  in  upper  and
lower  extremities,  after  that  sleeps  quietly  until  about
8  A.M.,  but  feels  tired  and  used  up  all  day ;  no  appetite,
and  fear  of  eating  on  account  of  pains  during  digestion.
^Colic  after  a  cold.

Intermitting  colic ;  flatulency.

Violent  pain  in  abdomen  with  great  rumbling.

Flatulency,  with  heaviness  in  thighs,  each  day  at  same
hour.
^°  Stool  and  Rectum. Bowels  which  were  bound  4  or  5  days,
move  daily.

Diarrhoea,  stools  occur  with  great  violence.

1  Diarrhoea,  stools  thin  fluid,  with  pain  in  abdomen,  >  by
rubbing  with  hand ;  stool  passed  only  partly  with  strain-
ing, and  a  half  hour  later,  fermentation  in  abdomen.

I  Pain  in  bowels  and  diarrhoea  regularly  every  morning
at  2  o'clock,  with  colicky  pains  and  great  rumbling  in
belly. ^Diarrhoea.

I  Diarrhoea,  arms  and  legs  feel  as  if  asleep.
^^  Urinary  Organs. Waits  long  to  urinate ;  no  energy ;  sore
on  either  side  of  bladder.

Awakens  with  desire  to  urinate,  but  nothing  passes ;  no
burning  or  urging,  but  sometimes  severe  pain  from
perineum  to  glans  penis.

Constant  desire  to  pass  water,  but  cannot;  fearful  pain
along  urethra  from  glans.

Urine  dark  colored.
^"'  Male  Sexual  Organs. Produced  a  boil  on  1.  side  of  penis,

near  pubes.
^^  Female  Sexual  Organs. Metrorrhagia;  bright  red.

Dysmenorrhoea ;  spasms  commencing  in  stomach.

I  Menses  8  days  too  early,  too  long  lasting  and  too  copious.

■  Courses  irregular;  either  too  late  or  too  early;  face  pale


DIADEMA  ARANEA.  92

and  sunken;  dark  circles  under  eyes;  dull  expression
of  eyes;  bloodless  lips;  melancholy  features;  general
debility  with  constant  desire  to  lie  in  bed ;  sensation  of
formication  all  over  body ;  about  noon,  after  eating  only
a  few  spoonfuls  of  soup,  violent  convulsive  pains  in
stomach,  with  anxiety,  nausea,  oppression  of  chest,  and
constant  yawning.  Spasmodic  affection  of  stomach
soon  spreads  all  over  body,  with  trembling,  so  that  she
could  not  remain  quiet  in  an}^  position;  confusion  of
mind;  pains  return  with  less  intensity  on  going  to  bed
and  when  rising  in  morning.

Irregular  menstruation;  too  often;  too  profuse,  with  colic
three  times  every  day.

Menses  omit  four  weeks,  then  copious  and  red.

Slimy  mucus  from  vagina;  viscous  leucorrhoea.
^^  Respiration, i  Chest  feels  constantly  so  oppressed  that  a
walk  across  his  room  puts  him  out  of  breath. ^Enlarged
spleen.

■  Respiration  very  short,  raised  the  r.  side  of  thorax  only,
30  in  minute,  could  he  heard  at  the  very  apex  of  the
lung  only.
^^  Cough. Cough  with  bloody  sputa.

I  Cough. ^Intermittent.
^^  Inner  Chest  and  Lungs, i  Oppression  of  chest,  nausea  and
gaping,  with  convulsive  pains  in  stomach  after  eating.

Expectoration  bloody;  haemoptysis  among  subjects  weak
and  ansemic  through  privation  of  all  kinds,  and  dys-
peptics.

Violent  hemorrhages  from  lungs.
^  Heart,  Pulse  and  Circulation. iThe  heart  was  pressed  to
the  right,  beat  feebly,  98  in  a  minute. t'Enlargement
of  spleen.
^^  Neck and Back. Excruciating neuralgia along spinal
nerves.

Jerking  in  back  and  1.  arm  with  vertigo,  blackness  before
eyes  and  falling  down.

Back  so  painful  she  cannot  sleej);  passes  no  urine.

I  I  Pain  in  back  before  and  after  chill.  ^Intermittent  fever.
"^  Upper  Limbs,  l  Every  night  for  several  years,  distressing
sensation  as  if  hands  and  arms  were  enormously  swol-
len, in  very  nervous  woman;  apprehension  so  strong
that  she  often  struck  a  light  to  ascertain  whether  it  M^as
so  or  not.

Forearms  and  hands  so  heavy  that  he  imagines  he  cannot
lift  them.

Pains  in  bones,  dull,  digging  in  all  parts  of  body,  more
in  humerus,  forearm  and  fingers.

iRing  and  little  fingers  of  both  hands  feel  as  if  they  had
gone  to  sleep;  formication.


93  DIADEMA  ARANEA.

Fibrillar  twitching  in  muscles  of  1.  upper  arm.

Quivering,  twitching  in  muscles  of  1.  upper  arm,  afternoon.
^^  Lower  Limlss. Heavy  feeling  in  thighs,  they  can  hardly
be  carried forward;  confusion of  head;  heaviness in
abdomen.

iStitches  through  knee  with  the  chill,  coming  and  going
suddenly. ^Ague.

Feet  feel  heavy,  with  weariness.

I  Boring  in  r.  os  calcis  when  first  moving  foot;  disappears
from  continued  motion.

I  Ulcer  on  1.  heel.

I  Caries  or  gangrene ;  pains  <  and  >  periodically.
^*  Limbs  in  General, i  Arms  and  legs  feel  as  if  asleep. ^Diar-
rhoea.

At  times  dull,  digging  bone-pains.

Early  in  morning  and  at  intervals  during  day,  dull
digging  pains  in  r.  humerus,  radius,  ulna  and  til3ia.

iPafns  in  limbs,  great  inward  soreness  with  chill;  pain
from  r.  side  up  into  shoulder-blade.  ^Intermittent
fever.
^  Rest.  Position.  Motion.  Lying  down:  desire  to  lie  down ;
vertigo  >;  dullness  and  pressure  in  head  >;  toothache
<;  pain  in  stomach  >;  aversion  to  leaving  bed;  must
lie  down;  lies  as  if  dead.

Rising  from  recumbent  position,  vertigo;  pain  in  stom-
ach >.

Rests  head  on  hand :  confusion  in  head.

Leaning  head :  >  pressure  in  forehead.

Shaking  head :  in  dogs  till  ears  are  bloody.

Walking  across  room ;  puts  him  out  of  breath.

Moving:  desire  to  keep  constantly  moving  when  sitting;
first  moving  foot  <  boring  in  r.  os  calcis,  >  from  con-
tinued motion;  obliged  to  move  on  her  feet  during  colic.
^^  Nerves, l  Great  exhaustion,  lassitude. ^Intermittent  fever.

I  Weary  and  thirsty.

Weariness,  with  headache;  with  heavy  arms  and  feet;  thirst.

I I  Languor  and  lassitude.

I  Must  lie  down ;  weak  as  if  dead,  after  heat. ^Intermittent.

iFeels  as  if  she  would  drop.

Numb  feeling  in  periphery  of  ulnar  nerve,  also  in  ring
and  small  finger  of  both  hands.

Trembling,  lameness,  spasm ;  subsultus  tendinum.

I  I  Menses  irregular,  too  often  and  too  profuse,  with  colic
three  times  every  day ;  melancholy ;  will  not  leave  bed ;
creeping  as  of  ants  all  over  body ;  about  noon  with  first
spoonful  of  soup,  cramp  pains  in  abdomen ;  great  anguish
in  chest  and  yawning;  soon  afterwards  general  spasms.

■Spasms  in  abdomen  changing  into  general  convulsions


DIADEMA  ARANEA.  94

of  whole  body,  during  which  she  was  obliged  to  move
to  and  fro  on  her  feet  continuouslj^,  while  the  pain  in
belly  continued  and  her  consciousness  was  slightly  de-
pressed. ^Dysmenorrhoea.

■  Catalepsy;  periodical  headache;  <  from  damp  weather,

or  the  use  of  baths;  constantly  chilly,  cold  hands  and

feet,  even  in  a  warm  room.
"^^  Sleep. I  Sleeplessness. ^Intermittent.

I  I  As  soon  as  she  lies  down  at  night,  a  sudden  violent  pain

in  all  the  teeth,  lasting  one  hour.
I  Sleep  unquiet,  with  frequent  awaking.
■Sleep  restless;  on  awaking,  hands  and  forearms  feel  as  if

greatly  swollen  and  as  strong  and  large  again  as  natural;

they  feel  so  heavy  he  imagines  he  can  hardly  lift  them.

■  Deep  sleep  during  heat. ^Intermittent  fever.

■  Frightful  dreams,  screams  out  and  cannot  sleep  again.
^  Time. Early  morning:  dull  pain  in  r.  arm.

Noon :  violent  convulsive  pains  in  stomach.

All  day:  tired  feeling.

9  A.M.  to  7  P.M :  pain  in  upper  incisors ;  9  a.m.  chill.

Evening:  confusion  of  head; pressing  pain  in  head  >;

abdominal  complaints  >;  heat.
Night:  pain  in  teeth;  complaints  <.
"^^  Temperature  and  Weather. Summer:  bones  feel  like  ice.
Open  air:  headache  >;  confusion  in  head  >.
Warm  room:  cold  hands  and  feet.
Chill  not  >  by  external  warmth.
Fever :  from  sleeping  on  cold  floor.
Drawing  in  air :  incisors  sensitive.
Damp  air  and  rain:  swelling  of  spleen  <;  headache  <;

chilly  as  if  bones  were  of  ice;  all  symptoms  <.
Damp  walls: <  swelling  of  spleen.
On  the  water: return  of  chills.
Rough  weather:  chills  return.
Rainy  weather:  spleen  trouble  <.
Cold  weather: symptoms  <.

■  Worse  from  bathing.

■  ■Cannot  tolerate  damp  or  wet  weather,  or  damp  habita-

tions, even  being  on  the  water.
^°  Fever. ■Before  chill:  cutting  cramp  in  stomach;  backache.

■  Cold  all  the  time,  cannot  get  warm ;  chilly  as  if  bones  were

made  of  ice,  even  during  summer; <  during  rain.

■  ■Chill  returns  daily at  same  hour  or  every  other  day

with  sleeplessness,  but  neither  heat  nor  sweat.

■  Chill  returns  after  each  cold  or  in  rough  weather.

■  Constant  chilliness  from  being  on  the  water.

■  Chilly  day  and  night. ^Enlargement  of  spleen.

■  Felt  stiff  in  limbs,  tired  and  sick;  chill  began  at  7  a.m.


^5  DIADEMA  ARANEA.

and  lasted  till  precisely  8  in  morning,  every  day  at  same
hour,  without  heat  or  sweat,  with  cough,  loss  of  appetite
sleeplessness,  and  great  exhaustion.
iSudden  violent  attacks of  chills at  9  a.m.,  in  March.

■  During  chill:  stinging  in  head;  stitches  in  knees.

I  Chill,  no  heat;  SAveat  with  thirst;  headache;  hemor-
rages  from  uterus  or  lungs.

I  Chill  at  regular  hours;  thirst  during  attack.

The  paroxysm  often  unattended  by  either  heat  or  sweat,
consisting  only  of  coldness,  which  is  persistent  and
severe,  and  not  >  by  anything ;  it  is  usually  without
thirst  in  any  stage;  if  any,  usually  during  the  heat.

Quotidian  fevers  of  paludaf  origin  ;  chill  occurs  precisely
at  same  hour  daily;  lasting  chill,  either  without  any
heat  or  sweat,  or  with  little  or  short  heat,  not  followed
by  sweat;  great  lassitude  and  disinclination  to  work;
liver  and  especially  spleen  enlarged;  urine  dark  colored;
after  a  while  ascites,  loss  of  strength,  lassitude,  irrita-
bility, or  more  often  apathy;  great  thirst  during  chill.

I  Fever  coming  twice  a  day;  at  sunrise,  and  about  5  p.m.
Chill  lasts  from  an  hour  and  a  half  to  three  hours.
Before  chill:  cramp-like  pain  in  stomach  and  vomiting.
During chill: stinging and shooting pains in head;

stitches  through  knees,  coming and  going  suddenly;

pain  in  limbs  and  great  soreness ;  pain  going  from  r.

side  into  r.  shoulder-blade;  burning  in  stomach.
After  chill:  vomiting.
Heat  lasts  two  hours.
Before  heat:  vomiting.
During  heat:  headache,  but  not  so  violent  as  during  chill,

with  great  drowsiness.
After  heat:  vomiting  and  great  prostration;  lies  as  if  dead;

stinging  in  eves.

I I  No  sweat.

I  Chill,  preceded  by  stretching  and  yawning.
Backache  before  and  after  chill.

Very  little  heat  and  no  sweat.
Poor  appetite  and  great  weakness.

■  Emaciation,  yellow  skin,  malaise,  moroseness,  anorexia,

epigastrium painful  to  pressure,  slight  redness  of  tip
of  tongue,  despondent,  longs  for  death. ^Intermittent.
llChill  and  other  symptoms  are  <  every  other  day,  at
precisely  same  hour.

I I  Great  regularity  of  paroxysm.

■Violent  shaking  chill,  lasting  uninterruptedly  for  24
hours,  without  being  followed  by  heat  or  sweat,  or  any-
thing else.

■  ■Continuing  chill,  not  alleviated  by  external  warmth.


DIADEMA  ARANEA.  96

I  Fever  from  sleeping  on  a  cold  floor. ^Intermittent.
Heat  in  evening,  with  heaviness  in  hypogastrium,  as  from

a  stone;  qualmishness;  rumbling;  thighs  heavy;  can

scarely  drag  limbs  along.
I  Sweat  absent;  or  sweat  without  thirst.
^^  Attacks,  Periodicity.  Coming  and  going  suddenly:  stitches

through  knees.
Attacks  of  chills:  7  to  8  a.m.;  at  9  a.m.
At  times :  headache  on  top  of  head ;  dull  digging  bone-
pains.
At  intervals :  dull  digging  pains  in  r.  humerus,  radius

and  ulna.
Repeated :  gaping.
Frequent:  awakening.
Periodical:  nervous  headache.
Regular hours: headache; sensitiveness of  r. incisors;

gnawing  and  griping  in  abdomen;  flatulency;  chills.
Three  times  every  day :  colic.
Twice  a  day:  fever  at  sunrise  and  5  p.m.
Ever}^  morning  4  a.m.,  severe  abdominal  pains; 2  a.m.,

diarrhoea ;  colicky  pains ;  rumbling  ;  chill  at  7  a.m.  until

8  A.M. ;  chill  at  9  a.m.  lasting  one  hour,  followed  by  heat

lasting  two  hours.
Daily  :  movement  of  bowels  which  were  bound  for  four  or

five  days;  chill  at  same  hour.
Every  night  for  several  years :  sensation  as  if  hands  and

arm  were  swollen ;  chilly.
Every  other  day :  at  same  hour,  chill ;  attacks  of  pain  in

ulcerated  foot.
One  hour  to  three  hours :  chill  lasts.
One  hour:  toothache  lasts.
Two  hours:  heat  lasts.

Afternoon :  twitcliing  in  muscles  of  1.  upper  arm.
One  day:  headache  lasts.
Two  days:  no  urine.

Three  or  four  days:  headache  >  by  lying  in  bed.
In  midsummer:  chilly  day  and  night.
^  Locality  and  Direction. Left :  boil  on  side  of  penis ;  jerk-
ing in  arm  ;  twitching  in  muscles  of  upper  arm;  ulcer

on  heel.
Right:  pinching  pressure  in  ear  shifting  to  side;  lower

incisors  feel  cold  ;  respiration  raises  side  of  thorax  only;

heart  pressed  to  r.  side;  boring  in  os  calcis; digging

pain  in  humerus,  radius  and  ulna;  pain  from  side  up

into  shoulder-blade.
From  up  down :  pinching  pressure  from  ear  to  side.
^  Sensation. As  if  in  bone  of  temple,  headache;  as  if  head

and  hands  were  greatly  swollen  ;  cheeks  and  gums  as  if


97  DIADEMA  ARANEA.

swollen ;  as  if  a  stone  was  lying  in  lower  bowels ;  as  if

arms  and legs  were  asleep; as  if  arms  were  greatly

swollen ; as  if  he  could  not  lift  forearms  and  hands ;;

ring  and  little  fingers  feel  as  if  they  had  gone  to  sleep ;

feels  as  if  she  would  drop ;  hands  and  forearms  feel  as

strong  and  large  again  as  natural ;  as  if  bones  were  made

of  ice.
Pain:  in  bowels;  in  back; in  bones;  in  limbs;  from  r.

side  up  into  shoulder-blade;  in  joints.
Excruciating  neuralgia :  along  spinal  nerves.
Fearful  pain: along  urethra  from  glans.
Sudden  violent  pain:  of  teeth  in  upper  and  lower  jaw;  in.

abdomen.
Severe  pain : in  abdomen ;  from  perineum  to  glans  penis...
Cutting: in  stomach.
Anguish : in  chest.
Shooting  pain :  in  head ;  in  eyes.
Stitching  pains:  in  head.

Stitches: in  palate;  in  larynx;  through  knee.
Cramps: in  stomach.
Gnawing: in  abdomen.
Griping: in  abdomen.
Boring :  in  r.  os  calcis.

Spasmodic  pains:  in  stomach  ;  in  whole  body;  in  abdomen.
Convulsive  pain :  in  stomach.

Burning: inej^es;  in  face  ;  in  forehead  ;  in  stomach.
Ache:  in  head,  spreading  from  forehead  to  vertex  and

occiput; in  back.
Pinching  pressure:  in  r.  ear;  in  parotid  gland;  in  r.  side;

in  upper  incisors.
Pressive  pain :  in  head ;  in  forehead  ;  in  temples.
Pressure :  in  head ;  in  temples ;  on  r.  temporal  bone ;  in

chest.
Stinging :  in  eyes ;  in  head.
Soreness :  either  side  of  bladder ;  in  limbs.
Digging:  in  all  parts  of  body;  in  humerus;  in  forearms;

in  fingers;  in  limbs;  r.  humerus;  radius;  in  ulna;  in

tibia.
Sensitiveness :  of  incisors.
Distressing  sensation :  in  hands  and  arms.
Confusion:  of  head.
Oppression :  of  chest.
Drawing:  in  head  to  lower  jaw.
Tightness:  in  head.
Heaviness:  in  lower  bowels;  in  thighs;  in  forearms;  in

hands;  in  feet.
Dulness:  in  head;  in  all  parts  of  body;  humerus;  fore-
arms ;  fingers.

VOL.  V. — 7.


DIADEMA  ARANEA.  98

Faintness :  in  pit  of  stomach ;  in  epigastrium.

Jerking :  in  back  and  1.  arm.

Twitching:  in  muscles  of  1.  upper  arm.

Stiff  feeling:  in  limbs.

Crawling  sensation :  over  whole  body.

Formication:  all  over  body.

Snapping: in  belly.

Heat:  in  forehead;  in  eyes;  in  head;  in  face.

Fulness:  in  lower  bowels.

Weariness :  in  head ;  in  feet.

Tired  feeling.

Numbness:  in  extremities;  in  periphery  of  ulnar  nerve;
in  ring  finger;  in  little  finger.

Cold  feeling:  of  r.  lower  incisors;  in  upper  incisors.
**  Tissues. Hemorrhages;  hemorrhagic  disposition;  bleeders;
bleedings  from  all  the  orifices  of  body.

Scorbutic  dyscrasia.

Pains  in  bones  and  joints.

Dull  digging  bone-pains.

■  Emaciation. ^Intermittent.

Insufficient  calorification,  great  sensibility  to  cold;  symp-
toms <  by  damp  or  cold  weather,  as  well  as  by  cold  or
ivarm  baths.
"^^  Toncli,  Passive  Motion,  Injuries. Pressure:  >  headache;
painful  in  epigastrium.

Rubbing:  pain  in  abdomen  >.

Wounds  which  bleed.
*^  Skin, i  Yellow  skin. ^Intermittent  fever.

Eruption  of  pimples,  nodes  and  tubercles ;  ulcers  on  heel.
'*'' Stages  of  Life,  Constitution. Anaemia  from  privations;
with  hsemojDtysis.

Hydrogenoid  constitution,  when  attacks  come  at  regular
hours.

1 1  Suitable  to  those  who  cannot  live  in  damp  places  or  on
the  water;  ague  dyscrasia,  dyspeptics.

Miss  L.,  who  formerly  lived  in  a  miasmatic  locality,  has
had  repeated  attacks  of  intermittent  fever  during  last
year,  which  were  always  suppressed  by  quinine;  the
attacks  returned  after  each  cold,  or  in  rough  weather.

Mrs.  G.,  a3t.  22,  lymphatic  temperament  and  weakly  con-
stitution, large  blue  eyes;  spasmodic  pains  in  stomach
and  irregularity  in  menstrual  function.

Woman,  a^t.  22;  spasms.

I A  man,  set.  23,  pupil  at  the  School  of  Fine  Arts,  lived  in
a  damj^  house  close  to  the  water;  enormously  enlarged
spleen  after  suppressing  chill  with  frequent  20  gr.  doses
of  quinine.

E.  Manson,  set.  24,  athletic  build,  courier,  followed  a  course


"99  DIADEMA  ARANEA.

of  allopathic  treatment  for  two  months  at  home,  and
subsequently  in  a  Paris  hospital,  without  least  benefit;
intermittent  fever.

Mrs.  P.,  suffering  with  chronic  liver  complaint,  was  taken
suddenly  with  violent  chills  at  9  a.m.  on  21st  of  March.

A  lady,  set.  40,  slender,  erethistic,  hydrsemic  constitution,
after  taking  cold  ;  chills.

Teamster,  a^t.  43,  6  feet  2  inches  in  height,  and  well  de-
veloped, never  sick  before,  slept  on  some  straw  on  bar-
room floor,  on  a  winter  night;  quotidian  chill.

Mrs.  G.  M.,  set.  48,  sanguine  temperament,  strong  con-
stitution, copiously  menstruating,  mother  of  nine  chil-
dren, has  always  enjoyed  good  health ;  in  consequence
of  catching  cold,  abdominal  pains.

Woman,  set  50,  unmarried,  graceful,  nervous ;  headache.

Woman,  set.  54,  intermittent  fever  every  fall,  which  was
suppressed  by  quinine;  the  fever  returned  this  time  in
spring;  she  tried  allopathy  for  three  weeks  without  any
relief
^^  Relations.  Antidoted  by  smoking  tobacco ;  relieves  head-
ache.

It  antidotes  : Cinchona,  Mercur.

Compatible :  after  Ipec,  Niix  vom.,  Rhus  tox.,  and  Sambuc,
in  intermittent  fevers ;  after  Silica,  Calc.  ostr.,  and  Arsen.,
in  caries  of  os  calcis  (Grauvogl's  case) ;  with  Nux  vom.
in  pneumonia.

Compare:  Arnica,  Arsen.,  Cedron,  Cinchona,  Dulcam..,  Lycop.,
Mercur.,  Mygale,  Nux  vom.,  Pulsat.,  Rhus  tox.,  Tarantula,
Theridion.


DIGITALIS  PURPUREA.  100

DIGITALIS  PURPUREA.

Foxglove.  Scrophulariacese.

Digitalis  is  cultivated  in  gardens,  and  is  found  wild  throughout  Europe,
where  it  prefers  siliceous  soil,  generally  avoiding  limestone  districts.  This  fact
was  mentioned  by  Wm.  Lewis,  as  early  as  1768,  in  his  Materia  Medica,  where  he
remarks:  "It  is  observable  of  this  plant  that  it  grows  only  on  gravelly  soils;
rarely  or  never  on  those  where  there  are  strata  of  calcareous  earths  or  stones
underneath."

This  drug  was  extensively  proved  by  Hahnemann  and  his  provers  (See  Chro-
nische  Krankheiten,  v.  3),  as  well  as  by  later  provers.  Toxicological  reports  and
effects  on  the  sick  are  numerous,  but,  as  usual  in  our  arrangement,  symptoms
veriiied  by  cures  are  given  the  preference.

The  symptoms  of  Digitaline  and  Digitoxinum,  active  principles  of  Digitalis,
are  so  similar,  that  a  separate  classification  is  not  attempted;  of  the  latter  we  have
a  fragmentary  proving  by  Kopfe,  see  Allen's  Encyclopedia,  v.  4,  p.  121,  and  the
former  was  proved  by  Baehr  (see  Baehr's  llonograph),  whose  symptoms  are  in-
cluded, with  others  from  general  experiment  and  poisonings,  in  Allen's  arrange-
ment. Encyclopedia,  v.  4,  p.  75

The  tincture  is  prepared  from  the  fresh  leaves  of  the  uncultivated  jjlant.

Clinical  Authorities. — Delirium  tremens,  Kurtz,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf,  v.  5,
p.  63;  66  cases  reported  cured,  B.  J.  H.,  v.  2,  p.  139;  Crashing  sensation  in  head,
Dudgeon,  Eaue's  Eec,  1870,  p.  97;  Cerebrospinal  meningitis,  Adams,  Eaue's  Eec,
1870,  p.  96;  Hydrocephalus  acutus,  Battmann,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf.,  v.  5,  p.  42;  Gastric
disturbances,  Schmid,  B.  J.  H.,  v.  5,  p.  267;  Gage,  Organon,  v.  1,  p.  324;  Ascites,
Wolf,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf,  v.  4,  p.  344 ;  Strangulated  hernia,  3  cases,  Frank,  Allg.  Horn.
Ztg.,  V.  16,  p.  353;  Diarrhoea,  Eockwith,  Hom.  Clin.,  v.  4,  p.  65,  also  Eaue's  Eec,
1872,  p.  138;  Pollutions,  6  cases,  Polle,  Hom.  Clin.,  v.  3,  p.  36;  Results  of  frequent
pollutions,  2  cases  (Digitaline),  Biihr,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf,  v.  5,  p.  531;  Spermatorrhoea
and  results  of  Onanism,  Biihr,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf,  v.  o,  p.  531 ;  Hydrocele,  Trinks,  Alt-
miiller,  Cretin,  B.  J.  H,  v.  14,  p.  170;  Preston,  Med.  Inv.,  v.  6,  p.  33;  Emansio
mensium,  Bicking,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf,  v.  2,  p.  230;  Metrorrhagia  (Digitaline),  Biihr,
Euck.  Kl.  Erf,  v.  5,  p.  624;  Asthma,  Biihr,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf,  v.  5,  p.  798;  Whoop-
ing cough,  Deventer,  Aegidi,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf,  v.  5,  p.  717;  Heart  symptoms.  Hale,
Am.  Hom.  Obs.,  v.  7,  p.  531 ;  Angina  pectoris,  Ball,  N.  A.  J.  H.,  v.  5,  p.  373 ;  Bahr,
Eiick.  Kl.  Erf,  v.  5,  p.  852;  Pericarditis,  Biihr,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf.,  v.  5,  p.  853;  Palpita-
tion of  heart,  Nankivell,  Analytical  Therap.,  v.  1,  p.  216;  2  cases,  Biihr,  Eiick.  Kl.
Erf,  V.  5,  p.  854 ;  Endocarditis,  Bilh  r,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf,  v.  5,  p.  853 ;  Functional  disorders
of  the  heart,  with  palpitation,  2  cases,  Black,  B.  J.  H.,  v.  4,  p.  277  ;  Hypertrophy  of  heart,

XoTE.— "  Digitalis  is  not,  at  least  in  our  day,  and  in  this  country,  a  polychrest ;
not  a  remedy  applicable  every  day  and  in  a  majority  of  cases ;  but  it  is  an  indis-
pensable remedy  in  very  serious  cases,  in  which  all  the  polychrests  we  have  would
leave  us  in  the  lurch." C.  Hering.


101  DIGITALIS  PURPUREA.

Teller,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf.,  v.  2,  p.  855 ;  Affection  of  tricuspid  valves,  with  oedema,  Schron,
Eiick.  Kl.  Erf.,  v.  3,  p.  444 ;  Heart  disease  and  congestion  of  blood  to  lung,  Sterling,  B.  J.
H.,  V.  22,  p.  316 ;  Fatty  degeneration  of  heart,  2  cases,  Bonninger,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf.,  v.  5,
p.  856 ;  Cardiac  dropsy,  Chalmers,  Eaue's  Eec.,  1870,  p.  1 97 ;  Cyanosis,  Scliiiler,  B.  J.
H.,  V.  4,  p.  277  ;  Morbus  cceruli,  Scliiiler,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf.,  v.  3,  p.  444 ;  Intermittent  fever,
Kreussler,  Allg.  Horn.  Ztg.,  v.  9,  p.  187 ;  Post-scarlatinal  dropsy,  Berridge,  Organon,
V.  1,  p.  438;  Lobethal,  Euck.  Kl.  Erf.,  v.  4,  p.  49;  Newton,  Eaue's  Eec,  1871,  p.
208;  Trinks,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf.,  v.  4,  p.  344;  Icterus  in  elderly  children  during  cholera
epidemic  of  1831,  Knorre,  Allg.  Horn.  Ztg.,  v.  5,  p.  161 ;  Icterus,  Lobetlial,  Eiick.
Kl.  Erf.,  V.  1,  p.  694;  Jaundice  and  cramps  during  cholera  epidemic,  Knorre,  Eiick.
Kl.  Erf.,  V.  1,  p.  694.

^  Mind. B  Weakness  of  memory.

I  Thinking  difficult,  forgets  everything  immediately.
iDulness  of  head  like  from  inebriation,  with  increased
mental  activity.

■  Delirium  tremens;  in  cases  which  come  on  slowly  with

gradually  increasing  pain  in  pit  of  stomach,  continuous
nausea,  thirst,  palpitation  of  heart,  headache,  vertigo,
and  paleness  of  face.

■Paroxysmal  mania  with  rage,  attended  by  high  degree
of  delirium,  indigestion  and  melancholy,  followed  by
headache.

\  Epileptic  mania ;  given  at  beginning  of  excitation,  fre-
quently cuts  short  attack.

Lascivious  fancies  day  and  night.

■  Wants  to  be  alone;  indisposed  to  speak;  inclination  to

lassitude.

■  Tearfulness,  low  spirits.

■  Profound  melancholy,  <  by  music,  with  frequent  sigh-

ing and  weeping,  which  bring  relief;  gloomy,  morose,
ill-humor,  great  fear  of  future;  insane  obstinacy  and
disobedience,  with  desire  to  escape.

■  Melancholic, despondent,  and constantly tortured by

fear  of  death  or  loss  of  reason. ^Tertian  intermittent.

■  Desponding  and  irresolute.

■  ■  Great  anxiet}^,  like  from  troubled  conscience.
Gloomy,  peevish,  and  distrustful.

^Sensorium.  iSopor;  unconsciousness;  pupils  dilated,  in-
sensible to  light;  blindness;  one-half  of  face  convulsed;
pulse  very  slow,  often  hard,  with  a  corresponding  power-
ful stroke  of  heart,  sometimes  intermittent  and  small;
breathing  heavy,  slow  and  deep;  sleep  with  frequent
startings,  and  dreams  of  falling;  general  convulsions.

■  ■Fainting,  with  slow,  irregular  pulse;  cold  sweat;  death-

like appearance  of  countenance.
I  I  General  weakness,  with  fainting  fits.

■  Weak  action  of  heart,  so  that  it  is  unable  to  stimulate


DIGITALIS  PURPUREA.  102

sufficiently  the  brain,  which  feels  fatigued  and  weak;
severe  vertigo.

■  Vertigo,  with anxious sensation as though faintness

would  occur  while  standing  or  leaning  against  a  chair.
I  Vertigo:  on  rising  from  sitting,  and  noticeable  weakness
of  limbs  when  walking  or riding; with trembling;,
with  very  slow  pulse.

■  Constant  dizziness  of  head  and  ringing  in  ears. ^Angina.

■  Confusion  of  head.

Dulness  of  head,  with  limited  power  of  thinking.

■  Every  night  on  going  to  sleep  he  is  suddenly  awakened

with  a  start  by  a  loud  metallic  crash  in  head; occurs
several  times  before  he  can  fall  into  quiet  sleep.
^  Inner  Head. ■  Throbbing  headache  in  forehead,  or  at  bot-
tom of  orbits.

■Pressure:  in  forehead  when  exerting  mind; in  parox-
ysms, at  times  in  temples,  at  times  in  whole  head.

Stitches:  in  forehead,  extending  into  nose,  especially  after
drinking  something  cold ;  in  temples  (evening  and  night).

■  Head  heavy,  confused,  as  if  full.

■  Headache,  pressure  and  weight,  as  if  caused  by  conges-

tion of  blood  to  head.
Headache  like  waves  beating  from  side,  <  by  lying  down,,

blood  rushes  in,  bubbles  and  swashes,  but  is  not  hot.
Drawing  in  sides  of  head  which  makes  one  feel  giddy.
Brain  feels  loose.
Sensation  as  if  something fell  forward  in  head,  when

stooping.
■Sudden  cracking  noise  in  head  during  mid-day  nap,

with  frightened  starting  up.

■  Wakened  from  sleep  in  fright  by  a  crash  in  head  as  if

brain  were  made  of  fine  glass,  and  shattered  at  a  blow.

■  Report  in  head,  like  the  firing  of  a  pistol.
Sensation  of  itching  in  head  (inside,  one-sided).
Violent,  lancinating  headache,  especially  in  occiput  and

vertex.

■  Sudden  and sharp crying  with  clutching  of  hair  or

nurse's  face,  squinting  of  eyes  and  desire  to  get  head
back  as  far  as  possible;  can  take  no  nourishment  with-
out vomiting;  frequent  distressing  and  exceedingly
offensive  stool ;  abdomen  flat  and  shaped  like  a  boat;
extremities  cold,  and  if  not  constantly  wrapped  up,  cold-
ness extends  to  trunk.  ^Cerebro-spinal  meningitis.
'Face  pale;  eyes  sunken,  dim;  pupils  very  much  dilated;
vision  entirely  gone;  lids  closed,  at  rare  intervals  half-
opened;  hearing  impaired;  lachrymation  and  discharge
of  thick  mucus  from  1.  eye;  sudden  sharp  cries  with
much  tossing  about,  <  at  night;  skin  hot  and  dry;  in-


103  DIGITALIS  PURPUREA.

voluntary  urination;  entire  absence  of  stool;  pulse
quick,  jerking,  intermittent;  tongue  brown,  dry  towards
base;  lips  and  teeth  covered  with  brown  sordes.  ^Hy-
drocephalus acutus.

Sensation  as  if  waves  of  water  were  beating  on  skull ;  <
while  standing,  talking,  shaking  head,  and  bending
head  backward;  >  when  lying  down  or  bending  head
forward.

I  Hydrocephalus  with  scanty  urine;  head  falls  back  from
weak  neck;  squints;  pulls  hair;  slow,  weak  pulse;
cold  surface  and  cold  sweat;  bores  head  into  pillow;
peculiar  sharp  cry;  vomits  easily,  especially  on  taking
anything  into  stomach.

Apoplexia  nervosa,  or  serosa;  apoplexy  oftener  than  par-
alysis.
*  Outer  Head. iHead  constantl}'  falls  backward  while  sitting
or  walking,  as  if  anterior  cervical  muscles  were  par-
alyzed and  powerless. ^Hydrocephalus.
^  Sight  and  Eyes. Dimsightedness.

Painless  obscuration  of  lens;  cataract.

Amaurotic  blindness  for  three  days.

■  Objects  appear  paler  and  have  a  greenish  look;  green,

red,  or  yellow;  hemiopia,  as  if  upper  part  of  field  of
vision  were  covered  by  a  dark  cloud,  evenings  while
walking.
In  morning  on  waking  all  objects  appear  to  him  covered
with  snow;  faces  appear  deadly  pale;  a  sort  of  twink-
ling light  composed  of  red,  green  and  yellow.

■  Optical  illusions  in  bright  or  prismatic  colors;  sees  hairs
before  his  eyes,  or  dark  bodies,  like  flies.

Both  eyes  incline  to  turn  to  left,  when  turning  them  to
right  they  feel  jDainful,  and  he  sees  all  things  double  or
threefold.

■  Diplopia.

■  Pupils  dilated  and  insensible.

■  Pupils  not  very  active;  generally  contracted.

I  I  Detachment  of  retina; wavering,  everything  appears

green  or  yellow.
■Superficial inflammation of  eye and its  appendages;

blepharoadenitis.

■  Catarrhal  inflammation  of  eye  after  disappearance  of

coryza;  conjunctiva  red,  lids  swollen,  great  photopho-
bia, constant  lachrymation,  <  in  light,  or  cold  air,
copious  secretion  of  purulent  mucus  accumulating  in
canthi  during  night,  burning  in  eyes,  feeling  of  sand
in  them  and  stitches  darting  through,  with  stoppage
and  dryness  of  nose.
■Meibomian  glands  inflamed.


DIGITALIS  PURPUREA.  104

Lachrymation <  in  a  room; eyes  are  dim,  hot,  con-
gested, with  pressive  pain;  mucus  in  canthi.

I  Lid  margins  slightly  swollen  and  pale  red;  inside  of  lids
yellowish-red;  burning  of  lid  margin;  photophobia;
lachrymation  and  mucous  discharge.

iBlueness  of  eyelids.

I  Yellowish  redness  of  conjunctiva  palpebrarum.

•  Agglutination  of  lids  in  morning.

B Chronic  inflammation  of  conjunctiva.

Worse  when  looking  into  distance.

Burning  pain  in  r.  eyebrow.
^  Hearing  and  Ears, i  Noise  before  ears  like  boiling  water.

BHissing  before  ears,  with  hardness  of  hearing.

BSuddden  crashing  noise  in  head,  on  falling  asleep,
awaking  with  a  frightened  start.

I  I  Single  stitches  behind  ears.

I  I  Painful  swelling  of  parotid  gland  and  behind  ear.
'^  Smell  and  Nose. BSmell  of  food  excites  violent  nausea,
with  clean  tongue,  thirst  for  water,  without  any  fever.

Pain  above  root  of  nose.

Coryza:  with  hoarseness;  dry  oftener  than  fluent.

B  Nosebleed.
^  Upper  Face. B  Expression  of  face  remarkably  sickly.

BB Face  pale;  of  death-like  appearance;  bluish-red.

BPale  face;  bluish  hue  under  pale  skin;  blue  lips  and
eyelids.

BCold  blue  skin. ^Gastritis.

B  Bloating  and  paleness  of  face.

B  Yellow  color  of  face  and  conjunctiva.

I  1  Convulsions  on  left  side  of  face.

I  I  Black  pores  in  skin,  suppurate  and  ulcerate.
^  Lower  Face. BLips  dry,  parched.
^^  Teeth  and  Gums, i  l  Horrid  toothache  in  a  hollow  tooth,

lasting  three  days.
^^  Taste  and  Tongue. Taste:  flat,  slimy;  sweetish,  with  con-
stant ptyalism ;  bread  tastes  bitter.

B  Bitter  taste. ^Icterus.

B Clean  tongue  with  nausea  from  smelling  food.

B Tongue  covered  with  white  slime;  nausea,  even  after
vomiting. ^Icterus.

I  I  Tongue  coated  white.

BBlueness  of  tongue;  swelling;  ulcer.
^^  Inner  Mouth. Mouth  and  throat  sore;  scraped  feeling.

BProfuse  flow  of  frothy  saliva;  nocturnal  flow  of  saliva.

Violent  fetid  ptyalism; ptyalism  during  nervous  fever.

B Fetid  or  sweetish  ptyalism  with  soreness  of  mouth,  gums
and  tongue;  aphthae;  stomatitis.
*^  Throat. Choking  when  he  tries  to  swallow,  spasm  of  glot-
tis, diarrhoea  and  thirst.


105  DIGITALIS  PURPUREA.

Stinging  in  throat  between  acts  of  swallowing.
"  Appetite,  Thirst. Desires,  Aversions. 1 1  Loss  of ap-
petite.

I  I  No  appetite,  tongue  clean,  stomach  empty

llThirst;  continuous,  with  dry  lips.

Desire  for  sour  drinks  and  bitter  food;  for  beer.
'^^  Eating  and  Drinking. Better  on  an  empty  stomach ;  <
after  breakfast.

Worse:  after  meals;  from  cold  diet;  after  drinking;  from
spirituous  liquors.
^^  Hiccough,  Belching,  Nausea  and  Vomiting. 1 1  Nausea :
deathly,  as  if  she  would  die ;  continuous,  and  not  >  by
vomiting;  with  anguish  and  great  despondency'.

I  Smell  of  food  excites  violent  nausea  and  gagging,  with
clean  tongue,  thirst  for  water,  and  absence  of  fever.

I  Nausea,  disposition  to  vomit,  with  frequent  empty  retch-
ing. ^Icterus.

I  Nausea  early  on  rising;  bitter  taste  in  mouth;  thirst;
slimy  vomiting;  diarrhoeic  stool,  and  great  debility.

I  Persistent  nausea  even  after  vomiting.

I  I  Vomiting:  in  morning;  of  food;  of  bile;  of  mucus.

Nausea  and  vomiting  of  food  as  soon  as  he  eats.

Nausea;  convulsive  efforts  to  vomit.

If  she  expectorates,  she  has  to  vomit  what  she  has  eaten.

Gulping  of  an  acrid  or  tasteless  fluid.

Appetite  for  food,  but  as  .soon  as  he  eats  he  commences  to
spit  it  U|)  by  mouthfuls,  "sourer  than  any  vinegar;"
after  stomach  was  emptied,  terrible  pain  and  uneasi-
ness for  one  or  two  hours;  bowels  not  costive;  slow
pulse.

A^omiting  sometimes  accompanied  by  external  heat,  min-
gled  with chills,  and followed  by  j^erspiration  with
chilliness.
^^  Scrobiculum  and  Stomach, b  Sense  of  extreme  anxiety,
referred  to  epigastrium.

■  Extreme  sensitiveness  in  epigastric  region,  producing
frequent  deep  sighs.

llFaintness  or  sinking  at  stomach,  as  if  he  would  die,
with  deathly  nausea  and  vomiting.

BSoreness  and  bloatedness  of  pit  of  stomach

I  I  Stitches  in  pit  of  stomach,  extending  to  sides  and  back.

I  Burning  in  stomach,  extending  up  oesophagus.

I  I  Pains  in  stomach.

I  Want  of  appetite;  discomfort  after  eating  even  a  small
quantity  of  light  food;  distension  and  tenderness  of
region  of  stomach;  gradual  decline  of  strength  and
natural  heat  of  body;  restless,  unrefreshing  sleep;  men-
tal depression;  intense  jaundice;  disgust  for  food,  fre-


DIGITALIS  PURPUREA  106

quent  nausea,  retching  and  even  vomiting  of  small
quantities  of  tasteless  watery  fluid ;  bowels  confined ;
urine  scanty  and  dark;  great  prostration  of  strength
and  coldness  of  body;  melancholy,  disposed  to  cry.

■  Gastric  catarrh,  with  sensation  of  extreme  lassitude.

■  Dyspepsia,  with  slow  pulse, or quick,  trembling  and

weak  pulse.
Weakness  (sinking)  at  stomach,  feels  as  if  dying.
^^  Hypochondria, i  Tenderness  and  pressure  in  prsecordium

and  region  of  liver. ^Icterus.
1 1  Soreness  and  hardness  in  region  of  liver.
B Sensitiveness  to  pressure  in  region  of  liver.

■  Enlarged  liver  from  organic  heart  disease.
^^  Abdomen. ■  ■  Fulness  of  abdomen.

■  Distension  of  abdomen. ^Ascites. ^Icterus.

■  Cutting  and  contractive  pain  in  abdomen.
Colic,  with  nausea  and  vomiting.

■  Dropsy,  with  dull  percussion  as  high  as  third  intercostal

space,  commenced  in  feet.
I  Incarcerated  hernia;  caused  a  relaxation  of  abdominal
ring.
^^  Stool  and  Rectum. ■Constipation;  stools  gray,  clay-like.

■  Frequent,  distressing  and  exceedingly  offensive  stools;

bowels  perfectly  flat  and  shaped  like  a  boat.  ^Cerebro-
spinal meningitis.

■  Frequent  desire  to  evacuate  bowels,  accompanying  urg-

ing to  urinate;  very  small,  soft  stools,  without  relief.

■  Every  other  day  at  same  hour,  early  in  morning,  cold-

ness, slight  chills,  followed  instantly  by  exhaustive,
watery,  grayish-colored  stools,  changing  towards  brown
and  curdled,  resembling  coffee  settlings;  no  synchronism
between  radial  artery  and  heart,  or  between  the  larger
arteries  themselves;  pulse  slow  and  intermitting;  cold,
profuse,  thin  perspiration  all  over  body;  chest  and
bowel  symptoms  seem  to  alternate,  cough  of  one  fit  of
sickness  followed  by  diarrhoea  in  next,  and  vice  versa.
^Dropsy.

■  Violent  diarrhoea  of  watery,  ash-gray  stools,  with  cutting

and  tearing  pains,  and  sensation  of  sinking  in  stomach
as  if  one  would  die.
Diarrhoea  accompanied  by  violent  beating  of  heart,  not
rapid,  but  too  violent.

■  Diarrhoea:  watery;  consisting  of  feces  and  mucus.
Stools:  ash-colorecl,  or  very  light;  delayed,  chalky ;  very

light,  almost  white;  yellowish-white  fecal;  involuntary.

■  AVhite  evacuations,  with  bilious  vomiting,  jaundice  and

sinking  in  stomach.

■  Stool  in  evening,  passing  great  quantities  of  thread  worms.


107  DIGITALIS  PURPUREA.

Before  stool:  cutting  or  tearing  colic;  chilliness;  fainting;:

vomiting.
During  stool:  cutting  pain  in  abdomen.
After  stool:  renewed  desire;  urging  in  rectum ;  faintness.
^^  Urinary Organs. iNephritis after desquamation, with

anasarca  and  oedema  of  lungs. ^Scarlatina.
iThrobbing  pain  in  region  of  neck  of  bladder,  during

straining  efforts  to  pass  water.

■  Pressure  on  bladder,  wdth  sensation  as  if  it  were  too  full,

continuing  after  micturition.
Contractive  pain  in bladder during  micturition; urine

more  easily  retained  in  recumbent  posture.
I  Micturition difficult,  as  though  there were almost  no

urine  in  bladder,  and  yet,  great  urging  to  urinate;  after

micturition,  pressure  in  bladder  and  burning  in  urethra.

for  half  an  hour.
Inflammation  of  bladder  (neck  of  bladder).

■  Fruitless  effort  to  urinate.

■  Constant  urging  to  urinate,  with  scanty  discharge.

■  Difficult  micturition,  as  if  urethra  w^ere  constricted.

■  Feeling  of  fulness,  continuing  after  urination.

■  Increased  desire  to  urinate  after  a  few  drops  have  passed,,

causing  patient  to  walk  about  in  distress,  although
motion  increases  desire;  frequent  desire  to  defecate  at
same  time;  very  small  soft  stools  passed  without  relief.

■  Constant  urging  to  urinate  at  night.

■  Profuse  and  frequent  emission  of  clear  pale  urine.
■After  profuse  discharge  of  urine  there  follows  retention

with  nausea,  vomiting  and  diarrhoea.
Alternation  of  diminished  secretion  of  urine,  with  copious
secretion  of  watery  urine;  enuresis,  vomiting  and  diar-
rhoea.

■  Urine:  thick,  turbid,  yellowish-browm,  blackish,  acrid.

■  Brick-dust  sediment  in  urine.

■  Continual  desire  to  urinate;  each  time  only  a  few  drops

are  emitted ;  urine  dark  brown,  hot  and  burning.
I  I  Dribbling  discharge  of  urine. ^Enlarged  prostate.
Heavy  specific  gravity  of  urine.

■  ■Dropsy  with  suppression  of  urine.

■  Ursemic poisoning with  drow^siness, insensibility  and

frightful  convulsions. ^Contracted  kidney.

■  Bright's  disease;  general  nervous  prostration;  effusions

from  weakness  of  vessels,  and  diminished  force  of  circu-
lation; jaundice  and easy  vomiting;  slow  and  inter-
mittent pulse.
^^  Male  Sexual  Organs. ■  Amorous  desires  without  ability  to
perform  coitus.

■  Great irritability and  weakness  of  genitals; after  an.


DIGITALIS  PURPUREA.  108

emission  a  sensation  in  urethra  as  if  something  were
running  out  of  it;  frequent  palpitation  and  trembling
of  limbs ;  in  conversation  with  strangers  he  commences
to  stammer  and  becomes  embarrassed.  ^Prostatic
troubles.

■  Great  irritability  of  genital  organs;  frequent,  debilitating

pollutions;  muscular  power  diminished;  memory  im-
paired; appetite  lost;  constipation;  palpitation  of  heart;
even  delirium  and  convulsions;  oppressed  respiration;
restless  sleep;  pain  in  prsecordial  region;  flushes  of
heat;  w^eak  pulse.

■  Spermatorrhoea;  irritation  of  sexual  organs,  with  painful

erections,  night  and  day;  pollutions  always  accom-
panied by  lewd  dreams  and  subsequent  pains  in  penis;
violent  beating  of  heart  at  least  movement;  despondency
and  fear  of  future.

■  Senile hypertrophy of j^rostate; cardiac symptoms

marked.

■  ■Nightly  emissions,  with  great  weakness  of  genitals.

■  Excessive  pollutions  in  consequence  of  onanism;  pollu-

tions at  night,  three  or  four  times  every  week;  prostra-
tion and  ill-humor  on  following  day;  patient  wasted.

■  After  coitus,  nightly  pollutions  for  8-12  nights.

■  From  excessive  indulgence  in  coitus  and  life  of  debauch-

ery, great  debility,  impaired  digestion,  foul  taste  in
mouth;  complete  loss  of  appetite;  palpitation  of  heart,
transient  flushes  of  heat,  fainting,  ringing  and  roaring
in  ears,  dyspnoea  at  night,  severe  pain  in  prsecordial
region  with  febrile  disturbance;  pollutions  day  and
night.

■  In  consequence  of  onanism,  pain  in  chest,  palj)itation  of

heart,  headache,  disinclination  to  work,  impairment  of
memory,  weakness  of  legs.
■Several pollutions  during  night; great  prostration  of
strength;  appetite  completely  lost;  pain  in  back;  sleep
disturbed  by  nightmare. ^Spermatorrhoea.

■  ■  Gonorrhoea.

■  Balanitis,  f)hymosis,  with  great  burning  on  urinating;

dropsy  of  prepuce.

■  Dropsical  swelling  of  genitals.

Contusive  pain  in  right  testicle;  testicles  swollen.
I  I  Hydrocele;  the  scrotum  looks  like  a  bladder  filled  with
water.

■  Hydrocele;  1.  side  most  affected;  jjulse  very  slow.
^"Female  Sexual  Organs. ■  Lascivious  state  of  fancy  day

and  niglit;  remarkably  slow  pulse;  stools  of  a  very
light  color. ^yNymphomania.

■  Dropsy  of  uterus;  heart  sympathizes  very  much;  pulse

accelerated  or  intermittent;  light-colored  stools.


109  DIGITALIS  PURPUREA.

I  Menorrhagia.

I  Labor-like  pains  in  abdomen  and  back,  before  menses.
Catamenia  scanty  and  too  late.

I I  Suppressed  menses  with  cough  and  vicarious  menstrua-
tion from  lungs.

■  For  several  years  menses  irregular,  being  half  normal

then  again  very  profuse,  persisting  sometimes  for  weeks
as  a  hemorrhage;  anorexia,  bad  taste  in  mouth,  ex-
treme thirst,  debility,  emaciation ;  face  wax}'-,  pale,  yel-
lowish and  expressive  of  greatest  anxiety  and  suffering;
respiration  quick,  oppressed,  voice  scarcely  audible,
speech  very  fatiguing;  pulse  very  quick  and  scarcely
perceptible;  greatest  lassitude;  constant  icy  coldness
despite  warm  coverings  and  high  temperature  of  room;
urine  diminished;  stools  watery,  diarrhoeic;  severe  in-
definable pains  through  whole  body;  constant  restless-
ness; fear  of  death;  oedema,  marked  ascites,  enormous
swelling  of  labia  so  that  bladder  can  scarcely  be  evac-
uated; strong  pulsations  of  jugular  veins,  loud  venous
murmurs,  marked  organic  changes  present  in  heart.
iFace  dark  red,  merging  into  a  bluish  color;  veins  about
eyes,  ears,  lips  and  tongue  distended;  hands  blue  and
swollen  as  if  frozen;  warmth  of  skin  diminished,  chilli-
ness; pulse  small,  feeble,  60-70;  a  cut  or  wound  is  fol-
lowed by  an  extremely  sluggish  escape  of  dark,  thick
blood;  head  heavy,  dull,  confused,  with  frequent  throb-
bing, pressing  pain  in  forehead,  which  can  only  be  >
by  lying  quietly  on  back;  dry,  tickling  cough  in  chest;
spasmodic  constriction  in  chest  with  dyspnoea,  slow  and
labored  breathing,  constant  yawning  ancl  violent  pulsa-
tions of  heart,  particularly  at  night,  when  the  great
anxiety  and  fear  of  suffocation  drive  her  out  of  bed;
appetite  diminished;  nausea,  occasionally  vomiting  in
morning;  pressing  cramps  and  sensation  as  of  a  weight
attached  to  stomach;  stools  irregular,  sometimes  hard,
at  other  times  diarrhoeic;  frequent  urging  to  urinate;
profuse,  acrid  leucorrhoea;  no  menstrual  molimina;
tearing  in  limbs;  great  weakness;  paralytic  sensation
in  thighs;  feet  and  ankles  swollen.  ^Emansio  men-
sium.
I  Leucorrhoea.
'^  Voice  and  Larynx.  Trachea  and  Bronchia,  i  Hoarse-
ness early  in  morning.

■  Frequent  painless  hoarseness.
Hurried,  abrupt  speech.

Voice  hoarse  or  screeching,  rarely  failing.

■  Choking  when  trying  to  swallow  (spasm  of  glottis).

^^  Respiration. 1 1  Respiration  irregular,  and performed  by
frequent  deep  sighs.


DIGITALIS  PURPUREA.  110

I  Constant  desire  to  take  a  very  deep  breath,  but  on  at-
tempting to  do  so,  it  seemed  as  though  chest  could  be
only  half-filled,  or  as  though  some  impediment  existed
deep  in  chest;  dry  cough  on  deep  inspiration.

■  Respiration  difficult,  slow  and  deep.

iResjDiration  slow,  asthmatic;  paroxysm  early  in  morning,

especially  in  cold  weather.
I  I  Opjpressed  breathing  when  walking  and  in  a  recumbent

position.

■  Distressing  dyspnoea.

■  Respiratory  murmur  feeble,

■  When  she  goes  to  sleep  the  breath  fades  away  and  seems

to  be  gone,  then  she  wakes  up  with  a  gasp  to  catch
it;  legs  oedomatous,  especially  the  left.
J  Fear  of  suffocation  at  night  with  desire  for  open air.

■  Between  10  and  12  a.m.,  and  4  and  6  p.m.,  sudden  op-

pression of  respiration  and  sensation  as  if  walls  of  chest
were  being  constricted;  great  anxiety  and  restlessness;
no  heat;  at  times  when  paroxysm  is  at  its  height,  sensa-
tion as  if  sternum  were  torn  to  pieces;  quiet  horizontal
position  finally  brings  relief. ^Asthma.

■  Could  only  breathe  in  gasjDs,  each  one  seeming  as  though

it  would  be  the  last;  must  sit  up. ^Dropsy.

■  Asthma,  with  much  rattling  mucus  in  lungs.

■  Painful  asthma,  worse  when  walking.

■  Asthma,  particularly  if  dependent  upon  heart  disease.

■  Inflammation  of  serous  membranes,  especially  pleurisy,

resulting  in  anaemia;  vomiturition  or  vomiting;  op-
pression in  centre  of  chest;  difficult  breathing;  pulse
in  beginning  suppressed,  quick;  nails  blue;  face
pinched  and  cold;  in  spite  of  anaemia  patient  cannot
bear  a  high  temperature,  even  during  reaction;  pre-
fers to  sit  rather  than  lie  down.  ^Diaphragmitis.
""  Cough,  ■Hollow,  deep,  spasmodic  cough,  excited  by  rough-
ness and  scratching  in  roof  of  mouth  and  in  trachea ;
morning  without,  evening  with  scanty,  yellow,  jelly-
like mucus,  expectorated  with  difficulty.

■  Cough <  about  midnight  and  toward  morning;  from

getting  heated;  from  eating;  from  drinking  cold  fluids;
talking  or  walking  in  open  air.
Expectoration  like  boiled  starch;  great  prostration  after
cough.

■  Cough  caused  by  talking,  walking,  drinking  anything

cold,  bending  the  body  forward,  or  after  eating.

■  Cough,  with  profuse  loose  purulent  sputa.

During  cough:  contracting  pain  in  chest;  asthma;  tensive
pressure  in  arm  and  shoulder;  vomiting;  heat;  per-
spiration.


Ill  DIGITALIS  PURPUREA.

I  Expectoration  of  sweetish  taste;  sometimes  with  a  little
dark  blood.

iTenacious  mucus  in  throat,  detached  by  coughing.

■  Peculiar  cough  and  strangulation,  which  seemed  almost
to  choke  her;  paroxysm  lasted  an  hour  or  more,  and
resulted  in  expectoration  of  a  liver-colored  mass  of
sputa ;  attacks  repeat  themselves  frequently,  and  usually
come  before  catamenia,  with  pains  in  chest,  difficulty
of  using  arms,  pain  in  hepatic  region  and  through  back,
extending  to  knees;  pain  in  scapular  region  and  r.  hand,
with  paralytic  sensations;  cough  at  night,  choking  and
spasmodic,  compelling  her  to  jump  out  of  bed,  with  at-
tacks of  choking,  and  a  valvular  constriction  in  throat
before  discharging  sputa;  expectoration  of  a  solid,
bloody  mass  of  mucus,  which,  when  discharged,  affords
immediate  relief;  occasionally  leucorrhoea  before  cata-
menia, also  nasal  hemorrhage;  changes  of  weather
bring  on  attack,  followed  by  expectoration  of  tough,
ropy  mucus  at  night;  cough  at  times  like  whooping
cough;  sore  throat  and  soreness  of  oesophagus;  great
difficulty  in  detaching  mucus;  oftentimes  presenting  a
rusty,  black  and  clot-like  appearance.  ^Vicarious  men-
struation.

I  Whooping  cough  with  persistent  fever,  which  causes  pa-
tient to  be  in  a  state  of  constant  nervous  excitement,
skin  being  hot  and  dry ;  expectoration  bloody ;  scraping
sensation  extending  to  larynx,  and  feeling  of  constric-
tion in  chest  and  throat.
^^  Inner  Chest  and  Lungs. Trembling  in  chest.

iGreat  weakness  in  chest,  can't  bear  to  talk.

■  Heaviness  and  dyspnoea  in  chest.

B Suffocative  painful  constriction  of  chest,  as  if  internal
parts  were  grown  together.

Sensation  of  soreness  in  chest.

iHsemoptysis:  before  menstruation  with  pain  in  chest,
back  and  thighs;  from  obstruction  of  pulmonary  circu-
lation in  consequence  of  heart  disease  and  tuberculosis;
engorged  veins  about  head,  pale,  livid  complexion,
coldness  of  skin  with  cold  sweats,  irregular  pulse  and
palpitation  of  heart.

■  ■Passive  congestion  of  lungs,  depending  on  a  weakened,

dilated  heart.

■  Peculiar,  seemingly  rheumatic  pains  and  catarrhal  affec-

tions of  lungs,  with  serous  exudation.

■  Sudden  severe  attack  of  asthma  during  night;  patient

propped  up  in  bed,  afraid  to  move  or  speak;  severe
pain  across  front  of  chest;  frequent  retching,  at  times
so  severe  as,  with  the  painfully  laborious  breathing,  to


DIGITALIS  PURPUREA.  112

threaten  almost  instant  death ;  pulse  almost  impercep-
tible; cardiac  action  so  tumultuous  as  to  render  it  diffi-
cult to  distinguish  between  first  and  second  sounds;
both  sounds  sharper  than  natural;  no  cardiac  mur-
murs; face  bedewed  with  cold  sweat;  feet  and  legs  cold;
comparative  dulness  over  lower  half  of  r.  side  of  lung;
bronchial  breathing  in  upper  half  of  lung;  respiratory
sounds  in  lower  half  heard  only  on  attempting  to  take
a  deep  inspiration;  extensive  congestion  present,  and
clearly  traceable  to  impeded  circulation;  cough  with
haemoptysis;  all  food  refused  or  rejected ;  urine  scanty,
not  albuminous;  legs  oedematous;  ascites.

■Chronic  catarrhs  in  tubercular  patients,  in  phthisical  sub-
jects, and  particularly  in  phthisis  florida;  shortness  of
breath,  anxiety  and  oppression  of  chest,  with  pressing
pains  in  chest;  cannot  sit  in  a  stooping  posture;  dry
cough,  or  scanty  expectoration  containing  small  par-
ticles of  hard,  yellow  phlegm;  also  bloody  expectora-
tion with  stitching  pains  in  chest;  abnormalities  in
heart's  action;  >  in  open  air.

■Senile  pneumonia;  broncho-pneumonia,  with  paralysis  of
pneumogastric;  moist  rales  all  over  chest,  yet  cough
dry,  fatiguing,  and  unsatisfactory;  small  thready  pulse;
sometimes  purple  expectoration;  surface  (especially
face  and  extremities)  blue  and  cold ;  intense  weakness
and  prostration;  lungs  feel  constricted  and  tied  up  in
bundles.

■  Emphysema,  in  complication  with  heart  disease,  feels

>  w^hile  lying  j)erfectly  quiet  in  horizontal  position;
paroxysms  early  in  morning,  especially  in  cold  w^eather;
<  when  walking.

■  Pleuritis,  serous  form; especially  in  a  rheumatic  case,

accompanied  by  Bright's  disease  from  hypersemia  of
kidneys.
iHydrothorax.
^^  Heart,  Pulse  and  Circulation, i  Dull  uneasiness  in  various
parts  of  region  of  heart,  with  sensation  of  weakness  in
forearm.

■  Abnormal  action  of  heart;  a  sense  of  oppression,  with

tendency  to  fainting;  feeble  or  spasmodic  pulse,  with
anguish;  oppression  of  chest;  pain  extending  to  head
and  1.  arm.

■  Constant  pain  or  anguish  in  region  of  heart,  with  more

or  less  palpitation,  at  times  pain  and  palpitation  greatly
aggravated,  <  from  exercise  of  body  and  mental  emo-
tion; but  at  times  sufferings  were  greatly  <  without
any  apparent  cause,  while  sitting  perfectly  at  rest;
paroxysms  accompanied  by  sinking  sensation,  face  pur-


113  DIGITALIS  PURPUREA.

pie;  syncope,  believes  she  is  dying;  constant  dizziness
of  head  and  ringing  in  ears;  sharp  pain  in  1.  shoulder
and  1.  arm,  tingling  in  arm  and  fingers;  creeping  all
over  skin;  sometimes  paroxysms  come  on  at  night,
when  it  seems  as  if  she  were  suffocating,  wakes  up  in.
great  anguish;  terrifying  dreams.

■  Pressing  constrictive  heartbeats,  with  anxiety  and  spas-

modic pain  in  sternum  and  between  ribs.

■  Strong  pulsations  of  heart,  with  an  indistinct  and  muffled

sound  of  heart;  hurried  respiration. ^Rheumatism.

Metallic  sounding  heart-beat.

Violent,  audible  palpitation  of  heart,  with  anxiety  and
contractive  pains  under  sternum.

1 1  Violent  but  not  very  rapid  beating  of  heart.

I  Rapid,  bounding,  intermittent  beating  of  heart;  vertigo
when  walking  or  rising;  pulse  90,  intermittent;  sleep-
lessness, and  feeling  of  great  anxiety  at  night.

llSuddenly  violent  beating  ofheart,  with  disturbed  rhythm;
a  feeling  of  impending  death,  with  terror  and  anxiety,
slightest  motion  increases  anxiety  and  palpitation.

■  Palpitation  of  heart,  with  great  depression  of  mind  and

constant  fear  of  losing  her  reason;  anxious,  self-re-
proachful; attacks  short  and  not  very  severe,  but
anxiety.

■  Palpitation  of  heart  originating  in  grief;  pain  in  1.  chest

and  arm;  enlargement  of  heart.

■  Increased  activity  ofheart,  with  slow  pulse.

■  Heart-beats strong from  twelve  to twenty  times,  and

then  very  weak  for  four  or  five  times.

■  ■Sudden  sensation  as  though  heart  stood  still,  with  great

anxiety,  and  necessity  for  holding  breath.

■  Three  or  four  rapid  small  beats  followed  by  several  slow,

strong  and  full  beats.

■  Fluttering  at  heart  after  sudden  and  energetic  motions,

especially  of  arms  in  an  upward  direction,  or  lying  on  1.
side.

■  ■Heart  has  lost  its  force;  its  beats  are  more  frequent  and

intermittent,  sometimes  irregular.

■  Beating  of  heart  smaller  and  less  energetic,  or  scarcely

perceptible.

■  Breathlessness  with  cough;  heart's  action  irregular  and

weak,  no  cardiac  murmurs  or  other  signs  of  structural
change.

■The  least  muscular  exertion  renders  the  heart's  action
labored  and  intermittent.

The  heart  is  so  weakened  that  fatal  syncope  has  been  pro-
duced by  patient  changing  his  position,  or  being  raised,
to  an  upright  posture.

VOL.  V. — 8.


DIGITALIS  PURPUREA.  114

1 1  Enfeebled  heart  without  valvular  complications.

I  Muscular  angina,  with  flabby  dilatation  of  heart.

■  Drawing  tearing  pains  in  1.  side  of  chest  and  1.  border  of
. sternum,  extending  to  nape  of  neck  and  shoulder;  great

anxiety  and  fear  of  death ;  slow  pulse.  ^Angina.
iSudden  attack  of  angina  pectoris  brought  on  by  careless,
quick  movements,  particularly  of  arms  in  an  upward
direction,  or  traceable  to  no  particular  cause;  inexpress-
ible anxiety,  with  fainting;  for  a  moment  heart  seem.15^
to  stand  still,  and  then  several  rapid  and  violent  pulsa-
tions occur,  with  sensation  as  if  heart  had  torn  itself
loose  and  were  swaying  to  and  fro  by  a  thin  thread;
these  sensations  are  repeated  at  irregular  intervals,  and
attack  finally  ends  in  prostration  which  almost  amounts
to  unconsciousness;  no  organic  lesion.

■  Heart's  action  more  vigorous  than  pulse;  deathly  anguish

felt  in  pit  of  stomach;  vertigo  and  fainting;  pulse  feeble,
irregular,  slow. ^Angina  jiectoris.

J  Frequent  attacks  of  unconsciousness;  pulse  full,  strong,
but  beating  only  28  to  the  minute;  no  apoplectic  symp-
toms present. ^Hypertrophy  of  heart.

Dilatation  of  ventricle  due  to  valvular  lesions,  with
palpitation.

■  ■Cardiac  dropsy  and  great  anasarca;  extremities  cold  and

blue;  sinking  feeling  at  heart.
.■Great  difficulty  in  breathing,  at  times  approaching
orthopnoea,  with  short,  dry,  tickling  cough;  frequent
fainting  fits;  great  anasarca,  legs,  penis  and  scrotum
particularly  swollen;  feet  cold  and  dark;  legs  and
thighs  pit  deeply  on  pressure;  tongue  white  and  moist;
urine  scanty;  pulse  cannot  be  felt;  heart's  action  very
weak  and  irregular,  the  usual  sounds  inaudible;  dis-
tressing sinking  feeling  in  cardiac  region;  face  pale  and
.anxious;  lips  livid;  can  scarcely  speak;  no  appetite;
great  thirst;  respiratory  sounds  feeble. ^Cardiac  dropsy.

II  Rheumatic  endocarditis,  rhythm  of  heart  irregular,
symptoms  of  hydrothorax  present,  urine  deposits  a  brick-
dust  sediment.

■  Rushing,  blowing  regurgitant  murmurs  synchronous  with

impulse  beat  of  heart;  every  four  weeks  after  menstrua-
tion oedematous  swelling  of  face  and  lower  extremities,
with  almost  complete  apnoea,  least  motion  threatening
suffocation  and  causing  face  to  become  blue  and  yellow;
great  anxiety  and  suffering;  urine  scanty,  dark  and
turbid;  pulse  weak,  intermittent  and  very  quick,  so
that  it  cannot  be  counted;  compelled  to  lie  with  head
high;  can  scarcely  speak;  sleeplessness;  stools  infre-
quent; on  percussion,  area  of  heart  dulness  increased;
pulsation  almost  inaudible.


115  DIGITALIS  PURPUREA.

iRheumatism  of  heart  with  irregular  pulse.

I  Pneumonia  senilis,  heart's  action  failing;  passive  hyper-

Eemia  of  brain,  passive  congestions  of  lungs,  depending

upon  a  weakened,  dilated  heart.

I  I  Pulse  at  first  slow,  afterwards  quicker  and  proportion-

ately weaker.

I I  Thready,  slow  and  intermittent  pulse.
1 1  Pulse  very  slow  and  weak.

1 1  Irregular,  small  pulse.

Pulse  very  slow,  often  hard,  with  a  correspondent  powerful
stroke  of  heart,  sometimes  intermittent  and  small;  re-
spiration heavy,  slow  and  deep;  sleeps  with  frequent
startings  and  dreams  of  falling.

While  moving  about,  pulse  is  accelerated,  and  soon  sinks
down  again  to  its  accustomed  slowness  when  at  rest.

I  I  Slightest  motion  immediately  makes  pulse  more  rapid;
on  rising  from  reclining  into  sitting  posture,  pulse  be-
came in  a  moment  jerky  and  very  much  smaller  and
weaker.

I  No  synchronism  between  radial  artery  and  heart,  nor
synchronous  pulsation  between  larger  arteries  (crural,
carotid  and  radial)  themselves;  pulse  low  and  inter-
mitting. ^Diarrhoea.

Ebullition  in  chest  and  audible  palpitation.

■  Venous,  passive  congestion,  with  pale  or  livid  color  of

face;  coldness  of  skin;  swelling  and  painfulness  of  feet;
all  in  consequence  of  cardiac  anomalies.

■  Cyanosis  from  non-closure  of  foramen  ovale;  >  symptoms.

■  Child  can  hardly  be  turned  or  its  position  changed  with-

out causing  fainting,  or  nearly  so,  and  almost  always
causing  vomiting;  eyelids,  lips,  tongue  and  nails  be-
come very  blue ;  pulse  unequal,  or  very  slow. ^Cyanosis.

■  Distended  veins  on  eyes,  ears,  lips  and  tongue;  dark  red,

bluish  color  of  face;  irregular  action  of  heart;  at  puberty.
^^  Outer  Chest. Dull,  clawing  stitches  along  lower  border  of

ribs,  below  r.  axilla.
^^  Neck  and  Back. Tearing  sharp  stitches,  aching  and  cut-
ting pains  in  nape  of  neck.
Drawing  Avith  pressure  in  nape  of  neck.
Stiffness  in  nape  and  side  of  neck.
Lacerating,  and  sharp  stitches  in  small  of  back.
^^  Upper  Limbs, l  Sharp  pain  in  1.  shoulder  and  arm,  tin-
gling in  arm  and  fingers. ^Angina  pectoris.

■  ■Heaviness  or  paralytic  weakness  of  1.  arm.

■  Swelling  of  r.  hand  and  fingers,  with  scanty  high-colored

urine. ^Post-scarlatinal  dropsy.

■  ■The  fingers  "go  to  sleep"  frequently  and  easily.
^^  Lower  Limbs. Pain  in  hip-joint.


116  DIGITALIS  PURPUREA.

I  Paralytic  feeling  in  limbs.
Weakness  and  lassitude  of  lower  extremities.
'  I  Staggering.

•  Lassitude  in  legs  and  knees.

Tightness  in  bends  of  knees ;  swelling  of  knee,  with  sting-
ing pain.
a  Infiltration  of  lower  extremities.

I  Swelling  and  painfulness  of  feet.

Swelling  of  feet  during  day,  diminished  at  night.
^*  Limbs  in  GeneraL iPains  in  chest;  difficulty  of  using
arms;  pain  in  hepatic  region,  and  through  back,  and
extending  to  knees;  pain  in  scapular  region  and  r.  hand,
with  paralytic  sensations. ^Vicarious  menstruation.

Neuralgic  pains  after  scarlet  fever.

Prickling  pain  in  muscles  of  upper  and  lower  extremities.

I I  Coldness  of  limbs.

Elastic  swelling  of  legs,  and  then  of  hands  and  arms.

Coldness  of  hands  and  feet.
^  Rest. Position. Motion. Sitting:  head  constantly  falls
backward ;  dyspnoea  > ;  pain  in  region  of  heart  and
palpitation  at  times  greatly  <.

Lying:  headache  <;  sensation  as  if  waves  of  water  were
beating  on  skull  > ;  urine  more  easily  retained ;  asth-
matic attacks  > ;  palpitation  < .

Lying  on  back:  pains  in  forehead  only  >;  prefers  to  lie
on  back  with  head  low,  or  is  compelled  to  lie  with  head
high.

Recumbent  posture :  oppressed  breathing;  emphysema  >.

Standing:  vertigo,  with  anxious  sensation;  sensation  as  if
waves  of  water  were  beating  on  skull  <.

Leaning:  vertigo,  with  anxious  sensation.

Change  of  position: fatal  syncope.

Motion:  violent  beating  of  heart;  palpitation  and  anxiety
<;  fluttering  of  heart  after  sudden  and  energetic;  suf-
focation threatened;  pulse  accelerated ;  cyanosis  < ;  mo-
tion brings  on  angina  pectoris.

Stooping:  as  if  something  fell  forward  in  head;  cannot  sit.

Bending  head  forward:  sensation  as  if  waves  of  water
were  beating  on  skull  >.

Bending  head  back:  sensation  as  if  waves  of  water  were
beating  on  skull  <.

Shaking  head :  sensation  as  if  waves  of  water  were  beat-
ing on  skull  <.

Bending  body  forward :  causes  cough.

On  rising  from  sitting:  vertigo  and  weakness  of  limbs.

On  rising  from  reclining  posture:  pulse  becomes  jerky,
smaller  and  weaker.

Walking:  vertigo;  head  constantly  falls  backward;  as  if


117  DIGITALIS  PURPUREA.

upper  part  of  field  of  vision  were  covered  by  a  dark
cloud  in  evening;  desire  to  urinate  and  defecate  com-
pels walking;  desire  to  urinate  and  defecate  <;  op-
pressed breathing;  painful  asthma  <;  cough  <;  em-
physematous attacks  <.

Exercise:  pain  in  region  of  heart  and  palpitation  <.

Moving  arms  in  upward  direction:  fluttering  of  heart;
angina  pectoris  brought  on  by.

Riding:  vertigo.
^^  Nerves. ■  Restlessness  and  great  nervous  weakness.

I  Lassitude,  mental  and  bodily.
Faintness  and  debility,  with  perspiration.

Attacks  of  great  debility,  especially  after  breakfast  and
dinner.

I I  Faintness ;  exhaustion ;  extreme  prostration.

I  I  Convulsions,  with  retraction  of  head,  syncope,  and  col-
lapse of  vital  powers. ^Spotted  fever.

Epilepsy  caused  by  onanism.

Shock:  very  slow  pulse;  faintness  and  weakness  with
sweat;  bluish  paleness;  inactivity  of  pupil ;  opticalillu-
sions.

I  I  Syncope.

^  Sleep. I  Lethargy,  great  sleepiness.

Feeling  of  great  emptiness  of  stomach,  frequently  previous

to  falling  asleep.
Uneasy  sleep  at  night,  on  account  of  constant  desire  to
urinate;  nervous  persons.

■  Frequent  waking  at  night  in  fright,  by  dreams  of  falling

from  a  height  or  into  water.

I I  Frequent  startled  awaking,  at  night.

■  Frequent  awaking,  as  from  anxiety,  and  as  if  it  were

time  to  rise.

■  Sleep  uneasy  and  unrefreshing.

■  Prefers  to  lie  on  back  with  head  low.

^  Time.  Morning:  on  waking,  all  objects  appear  as  if  covered
with  snow,  faces  appear  pale;  twinkling  light  before
eyes;  agglutination  of  hds;  nausea  on  rising;  vomiting;
diarrhoea;  hoarseness  early;  asthmatic  paroxysm  early;
dry  cough;  paroxysms  in  emphysema  early.

During  day:  swelling  of  feet.

Mid-day:  sudden  cracking  noise  in  head  during  nap.

Between  10  and  12  a.m.,  and  4  and  6  p.m.:  asthma.

Evening:  stitches  in  temples;  as  if  upper  part  of  field
of  vision  were  covered  by  a  dark  cloud;  stool  and  pass-
age of  worms;  cough  with  expectoration.

At  night:  suddenly  awakened  by  crash  in  head;  stitches
in  temples;  symptoms  in  hydrocephalus  acutus  <;_  ac-
cumulation of  purulent  mucus  in  eye;  flow  of  saliva;


DIGITALIS  PURPUREA.  llg

constant  urging  to  urinate;  pollutions;  dyspnoea;  j^awn-
ing,  and  violent  pulsations  of  heart  < ;  anxiety  and
fear  of  suffocation  drive  her  out  of  bed ;  expectoration
of  tough,  ropy  mucus;  sudden  asthmatic  attack;  attacks-
of  palpitation  and  pain  about  heart;  sleeplessness  and
feeling  of  great  anxiety;  uneasy  sleep;  frequent  awak-
ing in  fright,  dreams  of  falling;  frequent  startled  awak-
ing; cold  sweat.

Towards  midnight:  cough  <.
^^  Temperature  and  Weather. Getting  heated:  cough  <.

In  room:  lachrymation  <.

Open  air:  fear  of  suffocation  with  desire  for;  cough  <C
walking  in;  symptoms  of  catarrh  >,

Cold :  great  sensitiveness  to.

Cold  food :  <  after.

Cold  drinks:  stitches  in  forehead  extending  into  nose  <
after ;  cough  <  ;

Cold  air:  lachrymation  <.

Cold  weather:  asthmatic  paroxj^sms  <;  paroxysms  in
emphysema  <.

Changes  of  weather:  cough  brought  on  by.
^^  Fever, l Chilliness  and  shivering  over  whole  back.

Chill  commencing  in  fingers,  palms  of  hands  and  soles  of
feet,  spreading  thence  over  whole  body.

Coldness  first  of  hands  and  arms.

1 1  Cold  extremities.

■  Excessive  coldness  of  hands  and  feet,  with  cold  sweat,
llnternal  coldness  of  whole  body.

1 1  Great  coldness  of  skin.

I  Chill  early  in  morning  and  lasting  until  10  o'clock,  fol-
lowed by  heat  and  offensive  smelling  sweat  towards-
noon;  complete  loss  of  appetite,  with  disgust  for  food,
foul  eructations,  bitter  taste,  yellow  coated  tongue  and
difficult  stool;  sleep  restless  and  unrefreshing;  pulse
weak  and  slow;  face  yellow;  lips  and  eyelids  bluish.
^Tertian  intermittent.

■  Great  sensitiveness  to  cold.

■  ■Chill  more  internal,  with  warmth  of  face,  beginning

with  cold  extremities,  then  spreading  over  body.

■  Internal  chill,  with  external  heat.

■  Chill,  with  heat  and  redness  of  face.

■  Shivering  alternating  with  heat. ^Icterus.

■  One  hand  hot,  the  other  cold.

■  Heat  of  body,  with  cold  sweat  of  face.

■  Sudden flushes of heat, followed by  great  debility.
Heat  without  thirst.

General  violent  heat,  with  swollen  veins  and  rapid  pulse.
Heat,  with  profuse  sweat  at  same  time.


119  DIGITALIS  PURPUREA.

■  Sweat  immediately  after  chill,  no  heat  intervening.

I  Covered  with  copious  perspiration,  without  relief  of  heart
symptoms.

iSweat  at  night,  generally  cold  and  somewhat  clammy.

Cold  sweat  on  body,  warm  sweat  on  palms  of  hands.

Sweat:  on  upper  part  of  body;  on  face.

Typhus, with bad smell from nose and hardness of
hearing.
^^  Attacks, Periodicity. Paroxysmal : mania with rage ;
pressure  in  temples  and  in  head ;  thirst.

Transient:  flushes  of  heat.

For  half  an  hour:  pressure  in  bladder  and  burning  in
urethra  after  micturition.

For  an  hour :  paroxysm  of  cough.

For  one  or  two  hours:  terrible  pain  and  uneasiness  in
stomach  after  vomiting.

Constant:  fears  of  death  or  loss  of  reason;  dizziness  of
head  and  ringing  in  ears;  falling  backward  of  head;
lachrymation;  nausea;  urging  to  urinate;  icy  coldness;
restlessness;  yawning  and  violent  pulsations  of  heart;
desire  to  take  deep  breath;  nervous  excitement;  pain
or  anguish  in  region  of  heart;  fear  of  losing  reason;
hacking  cough  with  dyspnoea.

Day  and  night:  lascivious  fancies;  painful  erections;
pollutions.

For  three  days:  amaurotic  blindness;  toothache.

For  eight  to  twelve  nights :  after  coitus,  pollutions.

Sudden:  awakening  at  night  by  crash  in  head;  cracking
noise  in  head  during  mid-day  nap;  sharp  crying,  and
clutching  of  hair  or  face  of  nurse,  with  squinting  and
retraction  of  head;  asthmatic  attacks;  violent  beating
of  heart;  sensation  as  though  heart  stood  still;  attack
of  angina  pectoris;  flushes  of  heat.

Gradual:  increasing  pain  in  pit  of  stomach;  decline  of
strength  and  heat  of  body.

Every  night:  awakened  by  crash  in  head;  emissions.

Every  other  day:  at  same  hour  in  morning,  diarrhoea.

Tertian:  intermittent.

Three  or  four  times  a  week:  pollutions.

Every  four  weeks:  after  menstruation,  oedematous  swell-
ing of  face  and  lower  extremities.

For  several  years:  monorrhagia.

Chronic:  inflammation  of  conjunctiva;  catarrhs  in  tubercu-
lar patients.
*"  Locality  and  Direction.  Right:  painful  feeling  on  turn-
ing eyes  tor.;  burning  in  eyebrow;  contusive  pain  in
testicle;  pain  in  scapular  region  and  hand;  dulness
over  lower  half  of  lung;  stitches  along  lower  border  of
ribs  below  axilla;  swelling  of  hands  and  fingers.


DIGITALIS  PURPUREA.  120

Left:  lachrymation  and  discharge  of  mucus  from  eye;
both  eyes  inclined  to  turn  to  1. ;  convulsions  on  side  of
face;  testicle  most  affected  with  hydrocele;  leg  espe-
cially affected  with  oedema;  oppression  of  chest  extend-
ing to  arm;  sharp  pain  in  shoulder  and  arm,  tingling
in  arm  and  fingers;  pain  in  chest  and  arm;  palpitation
<  lying  on  side ;  drawing,  tearing  in  side  of  chest  and
border  of  sternum,  extending  to  nape  of  neck  and
shoulder;  sharp  pain  in  shoulder  and  arm;  tingling  in
arm  and  fingers;  heaviness  or  paralytic  weakness  of
arm.

One-half:  of  face  convulsed.

One-sided:  itching  in  head.
^Sensations.  As  if  faintness  would  occur;  as  if  head  was
full ;  as  if  waves  were  beatiiig  from  side  to  side  in  head ;
as  if  blood  bubbled  and  swashed  in  head ;  as  if  brain
was  loose;  as  if  something  fell  forward  in  head  on
stooping ;  as  if  brain  were  made  of  fine  glass  and  shat-
tered at  a  blow ;  as  if  waves  of  water  were  beating  on
skull;  as  if  sand  were  in  eyes;  as  if  bladder  were  too
full;  as  if  urethra  were  constricted;  as  if  something
were  running  out  of  urethra;  as  of  a  weight  attached  to
stomach;  as  if  chest  could  only  be  half  filled  on  breath-
ing, or  as  though  some  impediment  existed  deep  in
chest;  as  if  walls  of  chest  were  being  constricted;  as  if
sternum  were  torn  to  pieces;  as  if  each  breath  would  be
the  last;  as  if  internal  parts  were  grown  together;  as  if
lungs  were  constricted  and  tied  up  in  bundles;  as
though  heart  stood  still;  as  if  heart  had  torn  itself  loose
and  were  swaying  to  and  fro  by  a  thin  thread ;  as  if
stomach  would  sink  into  abdomen.

Pain:  above  root  of  nose;  terrible,  after  vomiting;  in
stomach;  in  prsecordial  region;  in  penis;  in  chest;  in
back;  severe,  indefinable,  through  whole  body;  in
hepatic  region  and  through  back,  extending  to  knees;
in  scapular  region  and  r.  hand;  across  front  of  chest;
in  region  of  heart;  spasmodic,  in  sternum  and  between
ribs;  in  1.  chest  and  arm;  sharp,  in  1.  shoulder  and
arm;  in  hip-joint;  in  hepatic  region  and  through  back,
extending  to  knees; in  scapular  region  and  r.  hand.

AngLiish:  in  region  of  heart.

Cutting:  in  abdomen;  with  diarrhoea;  colic  before  stool ;
in  abdomen  during  stool;  in  nape  of  neck.

Tearing:  with  diarrhoea;  colic  before  stool;  in  limbs;  in
1.  side  of  chest  and  border  of  sternum,  extending  to  nape
of  neck  and  shoulder.

Lacerating:  in  small  of  back.

Piercing  pain:  in  joints.


121  DIGITALIS  PURPUREA.

Lancinating:  headache  in  occiput  and  vertex.

Stitches:  in  forehead,  extending  into  nose;  in  temples;
darting  through  eyes;  behind  ears;  in  pit  of  stomach,
extending  to  sides  and  back;  in  chest;  dull,  clawing,
along  lower  border  of  ribs,  below  r.  axilla;  tearing,
sharp,  in  nape  of  neck;  sharp,  in  small  of  back.

Stinging:  in  throat.

Drawing:  in  sides  of  head;  in  1.  side  of  chest  and  border
of  sternum,  extending  to  nape  of  neck  and  shoulder;  in
nape  of  neck.

Gnawing:  in  external  j^arts.

Constriction:  in  chest  and  throat;  suffocative,  painful,  of
chest.

Pressing  constrictive  heart-beats.

Pressing  cramps :  in  stomach.

Contracting  pain :  in  chest.

Contractive  pain:  in  abdomen,  in  bladder;  under  sternum.

Labor-like  pains:  in  abdomen;  back.

J^^euralgic  pains:  after  scarlet  fever.

Horrid  pain:  in  hollow  tooth.

Throbbing:  in  forehead,  or  at  bottom  of  orbits;  in  region
of  neck  of  bladder;  in  every  part  of  body  when  touched.

Crashing:  in  head.

Contusive  pain:  in  r.  testicle.

Prickling:  in  muscles  of  upper  and  lower  extremities.

Burning,  prickling:  in  skin.

Burning:  in  eyes;  of  margin  of  lid;  in  r.  ej^ebrow;  in
stomach;  in  urethra;  on  urinating.

Pressive  pain:  in  eyes.

Pressing  pain :  in  chest.

Tensive  pressure:  in  arm  and  shoulder.

Pressure:  in  forehead;  in  temples;  in  head;  in  prsecor-
dium  and  region  of  liver;  on  bladder;  in  nape  of  neck.

Soreness:  of  mouth  and  throat;  gums  and  tongue;  of  pit
of  stomach;  in  region  of  liver;  of  oesophagus ;  inchest.

Rheumatic  pains:  in  chest.

Aching :  in  nape  of  neck.

Creeping:  all  over  skin.

Roughness :  in  roof  of  mouth  and  trachea.

Scraped  feeling:  in  mouth  and  throat.

Scraping  sensation:  extending  to  larynx.

Scratching:  in  roof  of  mouth  and  trachea.

Oppression:  in  centre  of  chest;  about  heart;  of  chest,  ex-
tending to  head  and  1.  arm.

Weight :  in  head.

Heaviness:  of  head;  inchest

Uneasiness:  in  stomach  after  vomiting.

Dull  uneasiness :  in  various  parts  of  region  of  heart.


DIGITALIS  PURPUREA.  122

Confusion :  of  head.

Anxiety :  in  epigastrium.

Sinking  sensation :  at  stomach,  as  if  he  would  die ;  with
palpitation  and  pain  about  heart;  at  heart.

Emptiness:  in  stomach  before  falling  asleep.

Weakness :  in  forearm.

Lassitude :  in  lower  extremities ;  in  legs  and  knees.

Discomfort :  after  eating  little.

Dulness :  of  head.

Paralytic  sensation  :  in  thighs ;  in  scapular  region  and  r.
hand ;  in  limbs.

Itching :  in  head ;  of  skin ;  corrosive,  darting,  in  skin ;
gnawing,  in  skin.

Titillation :  in  affected  parts.
"  Tissues. Discharged  blood  coagulates  slowly  or  not  at  all.

Skin  and  muscles  lax.

Strengthens  and  regulates  action  of  heart,  when  it  has  lost
its  energy  and  becomes  irregular.

i  It  is  a  cardiac  tonic  and  useful  in  delirium  tremens,
from  aneemia  of  brain,  or  from  weakened  action  of
heart;  in  hysterical  fainting  from  same  causes;  in
shock,  with  collapse.

It  is  not  a  diuretic  per  se,  but  by  increased  activity  of  1.
ventricle  it  produces  increased  fluxion  to  kidneys  and
thus  diuresis.

Acts  profoundly  upon  muscular  substance  of  heart  and
arteries  through  pneumogastric  and  vasomotor  nerves,
producing  debility  of  these  tissues  even  to  paralysis,
causing  a  depression  of  circulation,  and  an  intermission
of  beats  of  pulse;  it  also  secondarily  produces  func-
tional derangements  of  brain,  kidneys  and  digestive
apparatus;  chief  characteristic  is  its  extremely  slow,
intermittent  pulse.

i  Valvular  defects,  where,  in  stage  of  compensatory  dis-
turbance, radial  arteries  show  an  abnormally  low  ten-
sion; but  it  must  only  be  given  till  the  tension  is  in-
creased; normal  diuresis  then  sets  in,  and  dropsy  with
its  concomitants  are  removed.

■  Distended  veins  on  eyes,  ears,  lips  and  tongue.

llBlueness  of  skin,  especially  of  eyelids,  lips,  tongue  and
nails;  cyanosis.

With  drunkards  congestion  of  blood  to  head  and  heart.

Has  a  specific  venous  relation  to  kidneys,  and  may  act  as
a  palliative  in  morbus  Brightii.

I  Lrine  frequent,  scanty  and  black-colored ;  lower  eyelids
puffed,  abdomen  distended  and  legs  oedematous;  pulse
120,  and  small;  tongue  dirty  white;  constant  hacking^
cough  with  dyspnoea;  oedema  pulmonum.  ^Scarlatinal
dropsy.


123  DIGITALIS  PURPUREA.

All  kinds  of  dropsies,  with  difficult  micturition,  pale  face,^
intermitting  pulse,  doughy  swelling,  which  easily  yields
to  pressure  of  finger;  cyanotic  symptoms,  with  fainting^
when  there  are  organic  affections  of  heart.

Dropsy  of  internal  and  external  parts.

Flabby,  oedematous  swelling  all  over.

Piercing  pains  in  joints.

Scrofulous  glandular  enlargements.

Gouty  nodosities.
*^  Touch. Passive  Motion. Injuries. Touch :  skin  pain-
ful to;  throbbing  in  body  on.

Pressure:  region  of  liver  sensitive  to;  legs  and  thighs  pit.

On  being  raised  to  upright  posture :  fatal  syncope.

Riding:  vertigo.

After  cut  or  wound:  sluggish  escape  of  dark,  thick  blood.
^  Skin. iSurface,  especially  of  extremities,  cold;  slow  pulse,

■  General  paleness  of  skin.

■  Yellowness  of  body,  particularly  of  conjunctivae.

I  I  Stools  almost  white;  scanty  brown  urine,  frequent  and

empty  retching;  much  debility. ^Jaundice.

I I  Cyanosis.

Elastic  white  swelling  of  whole  body.

I  Itching  of  skin.

Corrosive  itching  darting;  gnawing  itching  increasing  to
intolerable  burning  pricking,  alternately  increasing  and
decreasing;  skin  painful  to  touch;  titillation  in  affected
parts.

E  Creeping  all  over  skin. ^Angina  pectoris.

Black  pores  in  skin ;  sebaceous  follicles  ulcerate.

Pimples  on  back ;  rash  on  hands;  desquamation.
^'^  Stages  of  Life. Constitution, i  During  climacteric  period,,
sudden  flushes  of  heat,  followed  by  great  debility,  irreg-
ular pulse; weak  action  of  the heart; least motion,
brings  on  palpitation.

Nervous  lymphatic  constitutions.

Children  with  very  white  complexion,  light  hair  and
more  or  less  tendency  to  scrofula;  post-scarlatinal
dropsy.

Girl,  £et.  IJ  years,  scrofulous;  post-scarlatinal  dropsy.

Girl,  set.  3,  well  nourished  and  healthy,  after  suffering  for
8  days  from  general  malaise;  acute  hydrocephalus.

Man,  set.  18;  frequent  nocturnal  pollutions.

Young  lady,  set.  19,  strong,  well  built;  emansio  mensium.

Man,  set.  20,  results  of  excessive  coitus  and  debauchery.

Man,  set.  20,  sculptor,  small  in  stature  but  strong,  other-
wise well;  asthma.

Mrs.  R.  R.,  set.  26,  blonde,  good  phj^sique,  pulmonary  ten-
dencies hereditary;  vicarious  menstruation.


DIGITALIS  PURPUREA.  124

Mrs.  B.,  young  married  lady,  subject  to  frequent  attacks
of  palpitation  of  heart,  was  exposed  to  wet  and  cold,
was  taken  with  acute  pain  in  hip-joint,  which  lasted
about  twelve  hours,  and  then,  as  she  expressed  herself,
"  went  to  her  head,"  and  for  following  6  or  8  weeks  was
afflicted  with  angina  pectoris.

Josepha  N.,  a3t.  30;  gastric  disturbance.

Woman,  a^t. 30,  lymphatic  temperament; intermittent.

Woman,  set.  41,  married  twice  within  5  years,  one  child
by  first  marriage,  second  childless,  has  hypertrophy  of
heart  and  dilatation  of  r.  ventricle,  with  mitral  and  tri-
cuspid insufficiency;  metrorrhagia.

Woman,  set.  48,  unmarried,  gouty  diathesis,  had  two  at-
tacks of  gout,  in  consequence  of  which  abnormalities  in
tricuspid  areas  developed.

Woman,  set.  50,  unmarried,  sentimental  and  very  excit-
able, rheumatic  tendency;  palpitation  of  heart.

Man,  set.  60;  hypertrophy  of  heart.

John  F.  C,  set.  65,  enfeebled  from  frequent  illness;  diar-
rhoea.

J.  T.,  set.  65,  of  intemperate  habits,  has  been  confined  to
house  for  3  months,  and  subjected  to  much  allopathic
treatment;  cardiac  dropsy.

Woman,  set.  66;  cyanosis  of  one  month's  standing.

Woman,  set.  66,  ill  6  weeks;  morbus  coeruleus.

Sarah  H.,  set  66 ;  palpitation  of  heart  originating  in  grief.

Mrs.  F.,  set.  69;  heart  disease,  with  extensive  congestion
to  lung.
^Relations.  Antidoted  by:  Sweet  milk  with  Foenum  grse-
cum;  vegetable  acids,  vinegar,  infusion  of  galls,  ether.
Camphor.,  Serpentaria.  Keep  the  patient  recumbent  and
give  alcohol.  Tannin  has  been  recommended,  in  order
to  precipitate  Digitalin  in  the  stomach.  Effects  of  small
doses  may  be  removed  by  Nax  vom.,  Opium.

It  antidotes:  Wine;  Myrica  cerifcra  (the  jaundice  caused
thereby).

Compatible:  Bellad.,  Bryan.,  Chamom.,  Cinchon.,  Lycop.,
Nux  vom.,  Opium,  Phosphor.,  Pidsat.,  Sepia,  Sulphur,  Veratr.

Incompatible;  Cinchon.  (increases  the  anxiety),  Spir.  nitr.
dulc.

Compare:  Alkaloids  which  have  similar  action,  such  as
Oleandrin,  Scilliain,  Adonidin,  Neriin,  Convalamarin,
Antiarin,  Ilelleborein.  Aeon,  (anxiety,  pulse);  Ant.
tart,  (deathly  nausea);  Apocynum  (cardiac  dropsy) ;  Arsen.
(anxiety,  weakness);  Bellad.  (throbbing  headache,  dilated
pupils);  Bryon.  (stomach,  thirst);  Camphor,  (coldness);
Cinchon.  (anxiety,  respiration);  Conium  (heart  inter-
mittent and  frequent);  Fermm  (bladder);  /va^mia  (heart.


125  DIGITALIS  PURR— DIOSCOREA  VILL.

rheumatism);  Laches,  (sleep);  Lobelia,  Lycop.  (feeble
heart);  Natr.  mur.  (frequent  and  intermittent  heart);
Nux  vom.  {antidotal) ;  Phosphor,  (genitals);  Pulsat.  {sad-
ness and  depression);  Spigel.  (heart);  Sulphur  {YQTtigo,
eyes);  Ta6ac.  (deathly  nausea) ;  Fera^n  (weakness,  cold-
ness).


DIOSCOREA  VILLOSA.

Wild Yam.  Dioscoreacese.


A  perennial  creeper,  growing  wild  in  this  country,  principally  in  Southern
States,  on  bushes  and  fences.  Introduced  and  proved  extensively  by  Gushing  (see
Monograph) ;  also  proved  by  Woods,  Burt  and  Nichols  (see  Allen's  Encyclopedia,
vol.  4,  p.  123.)

The  tincture  is  prepared  from  the  root.  Dioscorein  is  obtained  by  precipitating
the  tincture  with  water.  Both  preparations  have  been  proved  and  used  clinically,
in  various  potencies.

CiiiNiCAi,  Authorities. — Headache,  Hale's  Therap  ,  p.  216;  Dull,  heamjpain
in  stomach,  (2  cases),  Hale,  Am.  Horn.  Obs.,  vol.  3,  p.  380 ;  Dyspepsia,  Hale's  Therap.,
p.  216;  Cramp-like  pains  in  region  of  sigmoid  flexure  of  colon  (Dioscorein),  Gambell,
Raue's  Rec,  1872,  p.  17;  Enteralgia,  Helmuth,  Am.  Horn.  Obs.,  vol  3,  p.  380;
Colic  (Dioscorein),  McLaren,  Eaue's  Kec,  1873,  p.  133;  Colic  (Bushnell,  Wood-
bury, Sandford,  Shafer,  Raue's  Rec,  1870,  p.  220;  (2  cases),  Rogers,  Am.  Horn.
Obs.,  vol.  3,  p.  379;  Clifton,  Hah.  M.,  vol.  13,  p.  127  ;  Bilious  colic,  Delavan,  Am.
Obs.,  vol.  7,  p.  415 ;  Roger's,  Am.  Hom.  Obs.,  vol  3,  p.  379 ;  Gregg,  Raue's  Rec,
1870,  p.  219;  Flatulent  colic  (Dioscorein),  Sunderlin,  Am.  Hom.  Obs  ,  vol.  3,  p.  382;
Raue's  Rec,  1871,  p.  122;  Colicodynia,  Terry,  K  A.  J.  H.,  vol.  25,  p.  307;  Consti-
pation and  dysmenorrhea.  Smith,  Allg.  Hom.  Ztg.,  101,  p.  23;  Cholera  morbus,  Wil-
liams, Am.  Hom.  Obs.,  vol.  3,  p.  379  ;  Diarrhcea,  Hale's  Therap.,  p.  216 ;  Morrison,
Hah.  M.,  vol.  10,  p.  222;  Griping  and  tenesmus  of  dysentenj,  Woodbury,  Raue's
Rec,  1870,  p.  21 1 ;  Cramps  during  stool,  Hale,  N.  A.  J.  H  ,  vol.  15,  p.  309 ;  Hcemor-
rhoids,  Drumm,  Hom.  Clinics,  vol.  3,  p.  62;  Renal  colic.  Hale,  Am.  Hom.  Obs.,
vol.  12,  p.  544;  Spasmodic  stricture  of  urethra,  Boyd,  Martin,  Eaue's  Rec,  1870,  p.
329 ;  Spermatorrhcea,  Pease,  Hale's  Therap.,  p.  218 ;  Nocturnal  seminal  emissions,
Gushing,  Jeanes  Hom.  Clinics,  vol.  4,  p.  5;  Cough,  Palmer,  Eaue's  Rec,  1871,  p.
96;  Gushing,  Hale's  Therap.,  p.  218  ;  Angina  pectoris.  Brown,  Raue's  Path.,  p.  463;
Sciatica,  Martin  (2  cases).  Trans.  Hom.  Med.  Soc,  Penna ,  1883,  p.  59;  Whitlow,
Bell,  Raue's  Rec,  1870,  p.  327 ;  Pain  of  suppurating  whitlow,  Morrison,  Hah.
M.,  vol.  10,  p.  222.

^  Mind. I  Calls  things  by  wrong  names;  writes  down  r.  arm
or  leg  when  he  means  1.,  and  must  correct  it  in  evening.


DIOSCOREA  VILLOSA.  126

Feels  tired ;  yet  still  keeps  walking  around  room.
Company  is  disagreeable,  conversation  troublesome.
Great  depression  of  spirits.
Irritable ;  feels  cross  and  troubled.
^  Sensorium. Vertigo :  with  heat  in  head ;  with  great  faint-

ness  at  stomach;  from  onanism.
Dull,  confused,  dizzy;  mouth  dry  and  bitter.
Dizzy,  dull  feeling;  goes  to  r.  while  walking;  inclined  to

fall  backwards.
Faintness  <  by sitting up  in  bed; numbness <  by

lying  down.
^  Inner  Head, i  i  Dull  frontal  headache.

Pain  in  front  of  head  and  temples  as  if  top  of  head  was

lifted  up.
Sharp  pains  over  eyes.
Pains in temples,  and  occiput,  dull  pressure or sharp

stabbing,  causing  a  dull  stupid  sensation;  neuralgia  in

temples,  <  from  least  change  of  position.
I  I  Vertigo  and  giddiness,  with  heat  in  head;  with  sharp

cutting  pains  in  r.  side  of  forehead,  extending  to  ears ;

a  remittent  pain,  <  by  pressure.
Violent  throbbing  in  temples  and  forehead ;  9  a.m.
Squeezing  pains  in  head;  temples  as  if  in  a  vise;  nausea,

dry  mouth,  belching  of  wind.
Headache  in  vertex  and  down  into  both  shoulders.
Vertex  pains  seem  to  be  deep-seated,  all  but  central.
Dragging  pain  in  r.  side  of  occiput,  making  him  feel  quite

stujDid.
Dull  pain  in  back  of  head  down  into  shoulders  and  back.
1  I  Fulness  in  head,  speedily  followed  by  spasmodic  pain

in  abdomen.
Head  feels  as  if  tied  with  a  band.
^  Sight  and  Eyes. Feeling  as  of  a  round  or  a  large  smooth

substance,  or  as  of  sticks,  dust  or  lashes  in  eyes.
Sharp  pain  from  r.  eye  to  occiput.
Lachrj^mation,  hot  tears,  eyes  fill  in  open  air,  smarting;

wants  to  keep  eyes  closed.
Eyes  weak,  sore,  smart;  r.  eye  smarts  <  ;  seems  as  if  hot

air  streamed  out,  evening;  lids  glued  together.
Eyelids  stiff  or  gummed  in  morning.
^  Hearing  and  Ears. Ringing,  buzzing  in  ears  with  head-
ache.
Small  balls  of  wax  drop  out  of  r.  ear  almost  daily.
Both  ears  feel  suddenly  stopped  up,  and  are  sore  to  touch.
Pains  in  ears,  <  blowing  nose.
Hard  pain  in  front  of  both  ears,  and  behind  1.  ear.
Itching  of  r.  internal  ear,  <  than  in  left.
"'  Smell  and Nose. Nose stopped  up,  dry,  or  watery  dis-
charge.


127  DIOSCOREA  VILLOSA.

Bright  red  blood  from  1.  nostril,  followed  by  a  dark  clot,

while  sitting  writing.
Watery  discharge  from  1.  nostril  and  eyes,  with  smarting

in  fauces.
I  I  Bad  smell  in  nose,  as  from  bilious  fever  or  bilious  dys-
entery; dryness  of  nose.
Nostrils  sore  inside.
^  Upper  Face. Sharp  pain  in  1.  cheek  or  lower  portion  of
temporal  region.
Hard  aching  in  1.  side  of  face  (parotid),  extending  to  neck.
I  I  Little  pimples  with  black  heads.
^  Lower  Face. Corners  of  mouth  sore.
I  I  Lips  dry.
Spasmodic  closing  of  jaws,  biting  tongue,  when  neither

eating  nor  drinking.
Stiffness  of  jaw;  sore  pain  at  angle,  1.  side.
^^  Teeth and  Gums. Pain  in front  teeth and  burning  in
mouth  and  fauces.
Sharp  aching  in  an  upper  r.  molar,  a  filled  tooth,  as  if  the

bare  nerve  was  touched.
Soreness  of  gums,  extending  to  roof  of  mouth.
Gums  on  inner  side  of  front  upper  teeth  swollen.
"Taste  and  Tongue. Taste:  bitter,  nasty;  rough;  sweetish
or  flat,  pappy.
lAwakes  4  a.m.,  with  bitter  taste,  dry  mouth  and  dizziness.
Dry  tongue,  in  morning,  with  heavy  brown  coating,  with-
out thirst,  and  with  bitter  taste.
Tongue  white,  dry;  yellowish  white;  brown  and  sore  on

tip,  <  in  morning.
Tongue  sore  on  sides,  or  as  if  burnt.
Bites  tongue,  spasmodic  closure  of  jaw.
^^  Inner  Mouth, i  i Mouth  bitter  and  clammy;  dry  in  morn-
ing.
Dry,  yet  full  of  sticky  mucus ;  no  thirst.
I  Mouth  dry  and  bitter,  tongue  heavily  coated,  no  thirst.
Saliva  runs  out  while  asleep.
13  Throat. Fauces  dry,  burning,  smarting,  sore.

Fauces  rough,  dry;  frequent  inclination  to  swallow.
Left  tonsil  smarts  and  itches,  with  inclination  to  cough.
Pain  on  back  and  r.  side  of  throat  causing  choking  sen-
sation.
Constant  desire  to  swallow,  but  it  causes  nausea  and  irri-
tated feeling  in  throat,  1.  side.
Sharp  stitching  pains  seemingly  in  tonsil  up  to  ear.
Constricted feeling in  throat  as from  something tight
about  neck,  makes  breathing  difficult.
'*  Appetite,  Thirst,  Desires,  Aversions. 1 1  Disgust  for  food,
with  flat  clammv,  bitter  or  sweet  taste.


DIOSCOREA  VILLOSA.  128

^^  Eating and  Drinking. After  eating: nausea,  faint,  dis-
tressed at  stomach,  it  burns;  dull,  heavy  pain,  >  by
belching;  can  taste  food  eaten;  relief  of  symptoms.
Eating  >  sharp  pain  in  stomach.

■  Flatulence  after meals; wind colic,  with little or  no

hepatic  derangement.

Several  hours  after  eating  patient  is  attacked  with  violent
colicky  pains,  causing  desire  to  bend  double,  which
makes  him  <  ;  must  walk  erect ;  distension  of  stomach,
tasteless  eructations  (except  after  long  attack  when  they
may  be  sour) ;  cold  extremities  ;  pulse  feeble.

Dull  pains  in  head,  <  after  dinner.

After  excess  in  eating,  errors  in  diet,  or  in  tea  drinkers,
excessive  flatulent  colic.
^®  Hiccough,  Belching,  Nausea  and  Vomiting,  i  Sharp
cramping  pain  in  pit  of  stomach,  followed  by  raising,
belching  and  gulping  enormous  quantities  of  tasteless
wind,  for  fifteen  minutes,  followed  by  hiccough  and  dis-
charge of  flatulence  from  bowels.

I  Belching  large  cpantities  of  wind,  tasteless,  sour,  bitter,
or  like  rotten  eggs,  with  only  partial  relief  of  pains.

■  Inordinate  belching  of  gases.
1  I  Nausea.

Vomiting  and  purging;  watery  stools,  painful  cramps  in
stomach,  bowels  and  extremities.
"  Scrobiculum  and  Stomach. Faintness  at  epigastrium.

■  Distressing  pain  at  epigastrium,  >  by  raising  sour,  bitter

wind;  with  shuddering.
I  I  Sharp  pain  in  epigastrium  >  by  standing  erect,  <  from
stooping.

■  Sharp  pain in  epigastrium,  extending  to  1.  hypochon-

drium.

■  Dull,  heavy  pain  in  pit  of  stomach,  <  after  eating,  >  by

frequent  eructations  of  air;  pains  radiate  from  stomach
in  all  directions,  and  at  times  appear  suddenly  in  head
and  feet;  belching  large  quantities  of  wind,  with  sensa-
tion as  if  both  temples  were  in  a  vise;  must  unfasten
clothing,  >  by  stretching  body  or  by  walking  about;
sharp,  prickling  pains  in  stomach,  faintness;  flatulent
distension  after  meals  in  persons  of  weak  digestion.

■  Sharp  cramping  pain  in  pit  of  stomach,  followed  by  rais-

ing, belching  and  gulping  of  enormous  quantities  of
wind,  then  hiccough  and  discharge  of  flatulence  from
bowels.

■  Constant,  dull,  weary  pain  in  cardiac  region  of  stomach,

extending  to  1.  side  and  dorsal  region.
I  I  Stomach  painful  on  pressure,  faintness;  burning  distress
with  sharp,  pricking  pains;  forenoon  and  evening.


129  DIOSCOREA  VILLOSA.

■  Cutting  pains  in  stomach;  gastrodynia.

■  Distress  at  stomach  all  day,  at  times  so  sharp  he  had  to

walk  around  room  to  get  breath.
Burning,  jerking  pains  in  stomach,  with  faintness.

■  Distress  and  burning  at  stomach.
Sensation  as  of  a  stone  in  stomach.

■  Continued  distress  at  stomach,  with  frequent  very  sharp

pains,  at  7  a.m.,  must  unfasten  clothing.

■  Hard  pain  in  region  of  stomach.

■  Neuralgic  pain  in  stomach. ^Angina  pectoris.
I  I  Gastralgia;  cramps  in  stomach.

I  I  Pyrosis  in  pregnant  women.
I  I  Stomach  painful  on  pressure,  with  faintness.
^^  Hypochondria. '  l  Sharp  pain  in  1.  hypochondrium.

■  Hard  dull  pain  in  region  of  gall-bladder,  at  7  a.m.

■  Dull, heavy,  grinding pain in  region  of  liver,  quite

severe,  in  evening.

■  Cutting,  squeezing  and  twisting  pain  in  region  of  liver.

■  Sharp  pains  in  liver,  extending  to  nipple.

Aching  in  1.  hypochondrium,  with  faint  feeling  in  stomach.

I  I  Neuralgia  and  spasmodic  affections  of  liver  and  gall-
ducts.

Digging  in  1.  hypochondrium.
^^  Abdomen. ■■  Rumbling  of  bowels  and  discharge  of  large
quantities  of  flatulence.

■Tenderness  or  soreness  of  bowels  on  pressure;  much
belching.

■  Constant  aching  distress  in  whole  of  bowels,  with  frequent

sharp  cutting  pains  in  stomach  and  small  intestines.

Remitting,  griping  pain  in  epigastric  and  umbilical  region.

■Severe  cramping  pain  just  above  umbilicus.

Pain  and  spasm  arising  from  umbilical  region  and  radi-
ating all  over  abdomen,  extending  into  stomach,  pelvic
organs,  and  even  extremities.

■  Constant,  dull,  aching  pains  in  whole  umbilical  region,

with  frequent  sharp,  cutting  pains  all  through  small
intestines.

■  ■Constant  distress  in  umbilical  and  hypogastric  regions,

with  severe  cutting,  colic-like  pains  every  few  minutes
in  stomach  and  small  intestines.

■  Severe  remitting,  griping  pains  above  and  near  umbili-

cus; constipation;  vomiting;  abdomen  tympanitic  and
very  sensitive  to  pressure;  great  prostration ;  pale,  cold,
clammy skin; pulse 30; respiration 5 per minute.

■  Intense  cutting,  twisting,  agonizing  pains  in  abdomen,

commencing  in  umbilical  region  radiating  all  over  ab-
domen, >  or  not  by  pressure,  with  distension,  soreness
and  sensitiveness  of  abdomen;  vomiting,  cramps.

VOL.  V. — 9.


PIOSCOREA  YILLOSA.  130

1 1  Griping pain  in bowels; < at  umbilicus; in  lower

portion.
I  I  Severe  cramping  pains  beginning  just  below  umbilicus,

extending  into  back,  thence  flying  to  fingers  and  toes,

where  the  pain  is  intense  (in  pregnant  women).
I  Sudden attack of  constant heavy joressing pain,  two

inches  below  umbilicus.
iMolent,  cutting,  lancinating,  pains  in  bowels,  eliciting

shrieks  from  jDatient. ^Dysentery.

I  Sharp  cutting  pain  in  bowels,  <  by  walking.

■  Severe  pain  in  bowels,  with  discharge  of  large  quantities

of  flatulence.

II  Violent  twisting  colic,  occurring  in  regular  paroxysms,
with  remissions.

■  Twisting  pain  in  all  parts  of  bowels,  <  in  lower  part,

continually  changing.
I  Constant  pains,  worse  in  paroxysms,  of  a  violent  twisting
character,  with  constipation,  thirst,  and  sensitiveness  of
r.  side  of  abdomen. ^Enteralgia.

■  Twisting  pains,  <  by  lying  down,  >  by  pressure,  unless

abdomen  is  tender. ^Enteralgia.
Severe  colic  and  heat  in  stomach  and  abdomen,  <  from
doubling  up  and  at  rest,  pains  compel  him  to  keep  in
constant  motion.

■  Severe  pain  in  1.  iliac  region,  running  upwards  to  1.  kid-

ney, >  from  crouching  together  with  hands  clasping
knees. ^Colic.

I  Pain  beginning  suddenly  at  a  small  spot  in  r.  iliac  region,
continuing  sometimes  for  two  days,  ending  always  in
an  attack  of  vomiting,  and  leaving  as  suddenly  as  it
commenced. ^Flatulency.

I  I  Crampy,  spasmodic  pain,  commencing  near  crest  of
ilium  (r.  side)  extending  into  lumbar  region  and  hypo-
gastrium;  gradually  increasing  for  days;  ending  in  an
attack  of  vomiting  or  headache;  <  by  physical  or  men-
tal labor,  and  by  lying  on  affected  side;  >  lying  on
back,  and  1.  side;  always  leaving  suddenly.

iSpasmodic,  very  sharp  pains  in  umbilical  and  r.  iliac
regions,  not  modified  by  pressure,  although  pressure
causes  rumbling.

■  Pain  in  both  sides  of  bowels,  going  round  and  back  to

lumbar  region,  with  much  rumbling  of  wind;  pain  <
as  soon  as  lying  down  at  night,  when  going  to  sleep,
when  it  becomes  acute;  >  by  gentle  rubbing  and  pass-
age of  inodorous  flatus;  gets  still  more  relief  by  walkmg
about  room;  pain  in  region  of  ascending,  transverse,
and  descending  colon ;  bowels  loose. ^Colicodynia.

■  Severe  constant  pjain,  greatly  aggravated  every  three  or


131  DIOSCOREA  VILLOSA.

five  minutes,  near  head  of  colon ;  pain  in  a  small  spot,
which  feels  as  if  it  were  drawn  forcibly  upward  and
backward  to  spine;  constant  desire  to  defecate  and  uri-
nate, but  without  accomplishing  much ;  cannot  remain
in  any  one  position. ^Colic.

iCramjD-like  pain  in  region  of  sigmoid  flexure  of  colon,
extending  to  back,  with  vomiting.

I  Pain  in  1.  inguinal  regioD.

I  Pain  in  both  inguinal  regions  extending  to  testicles.

•  Bilious  colic,  pain  extremely  severe  and  remitting.

I  I  Flatulent  colic,  occurring  every  night.

Flatulent  colic,  chiefly  in  persons  of  feeble  digestive  power.

■Spasmodic  colic.

1  I Hypersesthesia  of  the  abdominal  nerves;  neuralgia  of
the  bowels.

■  Abdominal  pains  suddenly  shift  and  appear  in  distant

localities,  as  the  fingers  or  toes.
Pains  begin  in  a  small  spot  and  radiate,  may  early  in  at-
tack extend  to  stomach,  liver,  spleen  or  uterus;  pains

often  jump  from  place  to  place,  especially  to  a  distant

part.
With  the  colic  patient  has  a  tendency  to  bend  double,  and

feels  as  if  pressure  would  >,  but,  as  a  matter  of  fact,  it

<,  and  most  solace  is  obtained  by  stretching  body  out.
Colic  <  by  sitting,  or  lying,  or  bending  double;  >  by

currant-wine,  pressure,  and  walking.
Stool  and  Rectum, l  l  Very  offensive  flatulence  from  bowels.
Expulsion of  flatus  difficult and  with violence; often

with  watery  evacuations,  but  with  only  partial  relief  of

pains.
Sudden  urging  to  stool,  especially  early  in  morning.
Driven  hurriedly  out  of  bed  in  morning,  with  hurried

desire  for  stool,  which  is  loose  and  offensive  and  followed

by  straining  and  burning  at  anus.
I  Painful  diarrhoea  with  much  straining  early  in  morning.
I  Morning  diarrhoea  with  profuse,  deep  yellow,  thin  stools,

followed  by  very  weak,  faint  feeling,  without  relieving

the  constant  twisting  pains  in  bowels.
Bilious  colic  and  diarrhoea  early  in  morning.

■  Loose  stools,  with  much  straining.

■  Constant  desire  to  defecate  and  urinate,  without  accom-
plishing much. ^Colic.

Stools:  profuse,  deep  yellow,  thin,  bilious,  watery;  white,

slimy,  jelly-like.
Black,  hard,  dry,  lumpy  stool,  last  part  of  it  soft,  white

and  mushy,  followed  by  prolapsus, ^Piles.

■  Only  about  once  during  week,  desire  for  stool,  although
she  eats  heartily;  abdomen  feels  full  and  distended;


20


DIOSCOREA  VILLOSA.  132

face  red ;  eyes  heavy ;  confusion  of  head. ^Constipation

and  dysmenorrhcea.
Sensation  as  if  feces  were  hot;  hot  flatus.
I  I  All the  abnormal  alvine  discharges  are  attended by

twisting  writhing,  severe  pain  around,  and  extending

from  region  of  umbilicus.

■  During  pregnancy,  alternate  constipation  and  relaxation

of  bowels ;  pyrosis,  and  burning,  aching  pain  in  stomach ;
just  before  and  during  each  fecal  evacuation,  severe
pain  in  sacral  region  of  bowels,  of  a  writhing,  drawing
character,  which  radiates  upward  and  downward  until
whole  body  and  extremities  become  involved,  the  fingers,
hands,  feet  and  toes  feeling  as  if  they  were  about  to  be
cramped,  from  the  severe,  drawing,  darting  pains  in
them ;  great  anxiety,  faintness  and  palpitation  of  heart.

Spasmodic  pains  in  bowels,  with  unusually  severe  tenes-
mus; stools  like  albumen,  but  lumpy,  with  straining^
and  burning  in  rectum,  and  sensation  as  if  feces  were
hot;  during  the  stool  nearly  fainting.

Before  stool :  much  straining  even  with  loose  stool ;  sudden
urging,  hurried  out  of  bed  in  morning;  burning  in  rec-
tum ;  severe  writhing  pain  in  sacrum  and  back,  radiat-
ing up  and  down  until  the  whole  body  and  extremities,
are  involved  (also  during  stool).

During  stool:  severe  tenesmus;  burning  in  rectum ;  emis-
sion of  much  offensive  flatus.

After  stool:  haemorrhoids;  prolapsus  ani;  weak,  faint,
feeling  in  abdomen;  colic,

■Stool  in  morning,  followed  by  protrusion  of  four  hsemor-
rhoidal  tumors,  size  of  large  red  cherries,  with  great
pain  and  distress  in  anus.

■  Piles,  like  grapes,  around  anus,  not  bleeding;  involuntary

discharge  of  slimy  mucus  from  anus; darting pain,,
from  old  hsemorrhoidal  tumor,  to  liver;  hsemorrhoidal
tumors  of  livid  color  prolapsed,  with  great  pain  and
distress  in  them.
I  I  Itching  of  rectum.

■  Griping  and  tenesmus  of  dysentery.

■  Spasmodic  pains  in  abdomen,  with  severe  tenesmus  in

dysentery.

■  Cholera  morbus  with  vomiting,  diarrhoea,  painful  cramps

in  stomach,  bowels  and  extremities.
I  I  Cholera  morbus, cholera  infantum; dysentery; diar-
rhoea.
^^  Urinary  Organs, i  Writhing,  twitching  and  crampy  pains
with  passage  of  renal  calculus.

■  Agonizing  pain  in  small  spot  over  crest  of  r.  ilium  ;  pains

radiate  from  this  spot  up  to  renal  region,  and  down  r.


133  DIOSCOREA  VILLOSA.

leg  and  into  r.  testicle ;  patient  writhes  about  in  bed,
with  loud,  tremulous  moaning ;  skin  bathed  with  cold,
clammy  sweat;  pulse  feeble  and  quick;  retching;  fre-
quent desire  to  urinate.  ^Renal  colic.
■Spasmodic  stricture  of  urethra,  with  pain  about  umbili-
cus, >  by  pressure;  pressure  on  rectum,  paroxysmal
colic  pains.
^^  Male  Sexual  Organs.  ■  Constant  excitement  of  genital
organs,  with  frequent  erections  night  and  day,  amorous
dreams.

■  I  Emission  of  semen  during  sleep,  sometimes without

erections.

■  Sexual  desire  greatly  diminished;  no  erections  for  many

days.

■  Nocturnal  emissions,  with  erections  and  amorous  dreams

when  asleep,  or  without  erections,  sensations,  or  dreams,
but  with  great  weakness  of  knees;  depression  of  spirits;
pain  in  lumbar  and  inguinal  region,  extending  to  test-
icles; desire  to  be  alone.

■  Nocturnal  emissions,  with  lameness  of  back  ;  weakness  of

knees;  can  appear  happy,  but  looks  down  when  on  street.

■  Amorous  dreams  and  erections  when  asleep;  no  torpidity

of  the  genitals.

■  Frequent  nocturnal  emissions,  with  great  despondency.

■  Nocturnal  emissions,  with  vivid  dreams  of  women  all

night ;  great  despondency  ;  knees  very  weak.

■  Frequent  emissions  in  sleep,  without  erections  or  dreams.

■  Frequent  involuntary  emissions,  without  dreams  or  ex-

citement, by  day  as  well  as  night ;  memory  impaired
and  energy  gone.
Pain  and  spasm  of  spermatic  cord  when  the  pains  com-
mence in  inguinal  region,  and  extend  to  testicles  and
penis.

■  Genitals  relaxed  and  cold  ;  cold  and  almost  insensible.

■  Strong-smelling  perspiration  on  scrotum  and  pubes.

^^  Female  Sexual  Organs.  ■Dysmenorrhoea;  spasmodic  uter-
ine colic  ;  pains  suddenly  fly  to  distant  parts.

2^  Pregnancy,  Parturition,  Lactation.  Vomiting,  pyrosis
and  gastralgia  of  pregnant  women,  or  when  occurring
during  menses.

■  ■Severe  pains  with  cramp  in  flexor  tendons  of  fingers

and  toes,  alternating  with  false  labor  pains.
After  pains:  false  pains  of  pregnancy.

^^  Voice,  Larynx,  Trachea,  Bronchia.  Constant  tickling  in
larynx  causing  cough.

^®  Respiration. ■Laborious  breathing. ^Angina  pectoris.

^  Cough.  ■Irritating  hacking  cough,  caused  by  constant  tick-
ling sensation  in  larynx  and  bronchia.


DIOSCOREA  VILLOSA.  134

I  Cough  with  pain  in  epigastrium;  dull  pain  in  temples,
brownish-yellow  tongue,  weak  knees.

Frothy,  profuse  expectoration  seemingly from posterior
nares.
^  Inner  Chest  and  Lungs. Tightness  across  upper  part  of
chest;  distressed  feeling.

Pain  in  region  of  nipples.

Sharp  pain  in  1.  lung  near  nipple,  with  an  occasional
stitch  in  region  of  heart,  with  numbness  of  1.  arm,  ex-
tending whole  length  as  if  asleep ;  1.  leg  also  numb.

Pains  through  lungs  to  back  and  vice  versa.

I  I  Pains  through  side  of  chest,  with  headache  in  temples.
^  Heart,  Pulse  and  Circulation, i  Sharp  cutting  pain  in
region  of  heart  arresting  breathing  and  motion,  with
faintness. ^Angina  pectoris.

■  Neuralgic  pain in stomach; cannot speak; laborious

breathing;  sudden  severe  pain  in  middle  of  sternum,

extending  to  both  arms  and  hands;  cannot  move;  cold

clammy  sweat  all  over;  impulse  very  feeble;  pulseless.

^Angina  pectoris.
Angina  pectoris ;  sharp  pain  in  1.  chest,  region  of  heart,

takes  his  breath,  <  lying  on  1.  side.
I  Pulse  intermitting  every  eight  or  ten  minutes  after  the

attack  for  weeks. ^Angina  pectoris.
^^  Outer  Chest, l Sharp  pains,  cutting  in  region  of  nipples,

arrest  breathing ;  >  by  pressure.
I  I  Pain  through  from  back  to  front  of  both  lungs,  or  vice

versa.
I  I  Sharp  cutting  from  1.  axilla  to  nipple  and  down  side

deep  in  lung.
Burning  behind  top  of  sternum.
^^  Neck  and  Back. Lame  and  stiff;  weakness  in  small  of

back.
Back,  in  region  of  liver  so  lame  it  is  almost  impossible  to

turn  in  bed ;  >  by  motion.
Dull  pain  in  back  of  neck,  extending  to  head  and  shoulders.
I  I  Sharp  deep  pain  in  lower  portion  of  1.  scapula,  followed

by  sharp  pain  through  centre  of  r.  lung.
Dull  pain  in  lumbar  region,  <  bending  spine ;  sharp,  ex-
tending to  testicles.
Lameness  of  back,  cannot  sit  up  without  support.

■  Severe,  drawing,  writhing pains  in sacral region  and

bowels,  radiating  upward  and  downward,  until  whole
body  and  even  fingers  and  toes  become  enveloped  in
spasms,  so  severe  as  to  elicit  shrieks.
Itching  over  r.  scapula  and  over  1.  ribs.

■  Hypertesthesia  of  spinal  cord,  or  reflex  irritation.
Drawing  pains  in  sacrum.


135  DIOSCOEEA  VILLOSA.

Dull,  heavy  pain  in  region  of  sacro-iliac  symphisis  and  a

dull  pain  in  region  of  liver.
^^  Upper  Limbs, i  i  Pain  in  1.  shoulder.

Sharp  jerking  pains  in  shoulders,  1.  elbow  stiff.
Numbness  of  1.  hand  and  forearm,  <  in  little  finger  as  if

asleep,  arms  and  hands  numb.
Dull  grinding  in  middle  of  1.  forearm,  at  intervals  during

evening.
Grinding  in  elbows.
1 1  Panaritium,  early  when  pains  are  sharp  and  agonizing,

or  when  pricking  is  felt;  nails  brittle.
Disposition  to  paronychia.
^  Lower  Limbs. ■  Painful  affection  of  r.  hip  completely  im-
pairing use  of  r.  leg;  pain only  during motion,  rest

bringing  complete  relief. ^Sciatica.
While  lying,  sharp  pain  like  an  electric  shock  from  1.  hip

to  head.
I  Pain  about  region  of  exit  and  along  course  of  sciatic  nerve

down  r.  leg;  pain  only  when  moving  limb,  or  on  sitting

up ;  entire  relief  when  lying  still. ^Sciatica.
Cramping  pain  in back side  of  legs; dull  pain  whole

length  of  r.  leg  posteriorly  <  at  buttock  and  heel.
Pain  in  1.  popliteal  space,  then  r.  knee,  then  r.  popliteal

space.
Right  hip  lame  as  if  gluteal  muscles  were  too  short.
Neuralgic  rheumatism  of  extremities.
I  I  Knees  weak  and trembling;  painful  walking,  but  >

from  continued  walking;  weak  in  morning.
Feet  and  legs  feel  numb  and  strange.
Pains  in  legs  and  knees,  >  by  motion,  and  by  rubbing.
Sharp  pain  in  1.  knee  while  r.  feels  lame  and  stiff";  both

feel  weak,  walking  is  difficult,  but  is  compelled  to  walk.
Sharp  pain  in  r.  ankle  joint,  soon  drifting  into  toes ;  >

from  motion  ;  <  evenings.
I  I  Pain  and  soreness  in  fourth  toe  of  r.  foot..
Toes  stiff,  especially  in  morning,  fourth  toe  of  r.  foot  sore,

painful.
Jumping  darting  in  corns.
^*  Limbs  in  General, i  i  Rheumatic  pains  <  at  night  and

early  morning.
Sharp  pains  in  various  parts  of  body  and  limbs ;  darting

from  place  to  place.
I  I  Severe  pains,  with  cramp  in  flexor  tendons  of  fingers

and  toes  and  pregnant  woman,  alternating  with  false

labor  pains.
Aching  pain  in  elbow,  alternating  with  pain  in  knees.
Limbs  feel  weak,  especially  knees.
Sharp  pain  in  ankles  and  wrists  on  awaking,  shifting  to

toes  and  fingers.


DIOSCOREA  VILLOSA.  136

Nails  seem  unusually  brittle.
^^  Rest,  Position,  Motion. Rest:  pain  in  hip  and  leg  >.

Lying  down:  numbness  <;  twisting  pain  in  abdomen
<  ;  on  affected  side,  pain  in  ilium  <  ;  pain  in  both
sides  of  bowels  < ;  colic  <  ;  sharp  pain  in  1.  hip  to
head;  pain  along  sciatic  nerve  down  r.  leg  >.

Lying  on  1.  side:  pain  in  r.  ilium  >  ;  sharp  pain  in  1.  chest;
region  of  heart  <.

Lying  on  back:  pain  in  ilium  >.

Rising:  chill,  could  not  get  warm.

Sitting  up:  in  bed,  faintness  <;  colic  <;  impossible  from
lameness  of  back ;  pain  in  sciatic  nerve  down  r.  leg  <.

Standing  erect:  pain  in  epigastrium  >.

Change  of  position  :  neuralgia  <  ;  desire  to  change  position.

Pains  except  headache  are  usually  >  by  motion.

Motion:  constant,  compelled  by  pain;  lameness  of  back
>  ;  pain  in  hip  and  leg  during ;  pain  in  legs  and  knees
> ;  pain  in  r.  ankle  joint  >  ;  must  move,  yet  hurts  him.

Cannot  turn  in  bed  :  back  so  lame.

Blowing  nose:  pain  in  ears  <.

Crouching:  with  hands  clasping  knees  >  ;  pain  in  1.  iliac
region.

Desire  to  bend  double :  <  colic.

Stooping :  pain  in  epigastrium  <  ;  dull  j)ain  in  lumbar
region  <.

Stretching  body  >  pain  in  j)it  of  stomach.

Walking:  keeps  on  even  though  tired;  erect  >  pains;
distress  at  stomach  > ;  cutting  pain  in  bowels  <  ;  pain
in  both  sides  of  bowels  > ;  colic  >  ;  continued  walk-
ing > ;  difficult  walking  on  account  of  weak  knees,  but
is  compelled  to  walk.

Physical  labor:  cramp  pain  in  ilium  <.

Writhes  in  bed.
^^  Nerves. Strengthens  nerves ;  later  trembling,  languor,  faint-
ness, numbness  and  tingling.

Great  weariness  and  loss  of  strength.

■  Chorea,  with  seminal  emissions.

Many  cases  of  reflex  nerve  action,  neuralgia,  colic,  etc.

Disorders  of  male  genitals.

Paralyzed,  numb  sensations.
^^  Sleep. Could  not  sleep  from  too  intent  thinking.

i  I  Went  to  sleep  in  his  room  in  the  afternoon;  awoke
with  bitter  mouth  and  pains  in  the  bowels.

Sleep  heavy,  full  of  dreams  awoke;  lame  and  weary.

Restless  sleep;  dry,  bitter  mouth  on  awaking.

Aroused  suddenly  with  slow,  but  hard  beating  of  the  heart.

Restless  after  2  a.m.  ;  must  move,  yet  hurts,  he  is  so  sore.

Goes  to  sleep  late,  awakens  early.


137  DIOSCOREA  VILLOSA.

Very  sleepy  after  dinner,  but  on  lying  down  could  sleep
but  a  few  minutes ;  tired  and  lame,  <  after  the  nap.

Awoke  2  A.M.,  with  sharp  piercing  deep  in  vertex,  with
frequent  cutting  cramp,  like  pain  in  epigastrium  down
to  navel,  with  a  faint  distressed  feeling  as  if  diarrhoea
would  come  on ;  bitter  taste  ;  mouth  dry.

I  Worse  on  awaking;  mouth  dry,  bitter;  urging  to  stool
and  eyes  gummed,  etc.
^  Time. 2  a.m.:  restless  after;  sharp,  piercing  pain  in  vertex.

4  A.M.:  wakes  with  bitter  taste,  dry  mouth  and  dizziness;
chill ;  slimy  stool.

7  A.M. :  distress  at  stomach ;  pain  in  region  of  gall-bladder.

9  A.M. :  throbbing  in  temples.

Morning:  eyes  stiff  or  gummed;  dry  tongue;  tongue  sore
on  tip  <  ;  dry  mouth;  sharp  pains  in  stomach;  sudden
urging  to  stool;  driven  out  of  bed;  painful  diarrhoea;
bilious  colic ;  after  stool,  protrusion  of  tumors,  pain  in
anus;  rheumatic  pains  <;  toes  stiff.

Evening:  eyes  feel  as  if  hot  air  streamed  out;  sharp  pain
in  stomach;  pain  in  region  of  liver;  dull  grinding  in
middle  of  1.  forearm;  pain  in  r.  ankle  joint  <.

At  night:  pain  in  both  sides  of  bowels  <  when lying
down; flatulent  colic; emissions  with  erections  and
amorous  dreams; rheumatic  pains  <.
^^  Temperature  and  Weather. Generally  >  in  open  air.

Open  air :  eyes  fill  with  tears.

Chills  :  could  not  get  warm.
^•^  Fever. Chill commences  over  1.  scapula,  spreading  over
back.

Chilliness:  with  bitter  mouth  ;  with  aching  bones,  back-
ache, pains  in  lungs,  sore  throat,  etc. ;  pains  in  bones  of
legs.

Chill  4  A.M.,  with  slimy  stools ;  could  not  sleep  again  be-
cause of  chills  running  down  back ;  on  rising,  chills,
could  not  get  warm.

Cold  extremities,  feeble  pulse,  but  no  fever;  with  colic.

Sweats  easily  while  chilly,  from  least  exertion.

I  Cold,  clammy  sweat  all  over. ^Angina  pectoris.
^^  Attacks,  Periodicity. Pains  remit,  are  spasmodic.

Sudden  attack:  constant  heavy  pain  below  umbilicus.

Every  few  minutes:  colic-like  pains  in  stomach;  pain
near  head  of  colon  < .

Prequent:  sharp  pain  in  intestines;  desire  to  urinate;
erections  night  and  day;  nocturnal  emissions;  emissions
without  erections;  cutting  cramp-like  pains  in  epi-
gastrium,

Regular  paroxysms :  violent  colic.

Attacks:  of  vomiting  and  headache  following  pain  in  r.
iliac  region.


DIOSCOREA  VILLOSA.  138

At  intervals:  dull  grinding  in  middle  of  1.  forearm.

Fifteen  minutes :  belching  lasts.

Daily :  small  balls  of  wax  drop  out  of  r.  ear.

Two  days :  pain  in  r.  iliac  region.

For  days:  pain  in  r.  side  of  ilium.

Once  a  week:  desire  for  stool.
^Locality  and  Direction.  Left:  pain  behind  ear ;  itching
in  internal  ear;  watery  discharge  from  nostril;  sharp
pain  in  cheek;  aching  in  side  of  face;  sore  pain  at
angle  of  jaw;  tonsil  smarts  and  itches;  irritating  feeling
in  side  of  throat;  pain  in  hypochondrium;  dull,  heavy
pain  in  side;  severe  pain  in  iliac  region  extending  to
kidney;  pain  in  r.  side  of  ilium  >  from  lying  on  side;
pain  in  inguinal  region;  sharp  pain  in  lung;  numbness
of  arm  and  leg;  sharp  pain  in  chest ;  sharp  cutting  from
axilla  to  nipple;  sharp,  deep  pain  in  lower  portion  of
scapula ;  itching  over  ribs ;  pain  in  shoulder ;  elbow
stiff";  numbness  of  forearm  and  hand;  dull  grinding  in
forearm;  sharp  pain  from  hip  to  head;  pain  in  popliteal
space ;  sharp  pain  in  knee ;  chill  commencing  over
scapula.

Right:  he  goes  to  side  while  walking;  sharp  pain  side  of
forehead;  pain  in  side  of  occiput;  pain  from  eye  to
occiput;  eye  smarts;  small  balls  of  wax  drop  out  of
ear;  itching  in  internal  ear;  pain  in  upper  molar;
pain  side  of  throat;  side  of  abdomen  sensitive;  pain
in  small  spot  in  iliac  region ;  crampy  pain  in  side
of  ilium;  pain  in  testicle;  sharp  pain  through  lung,
following  pain  in  1.  scapula ;  itching  over  scapula;  pain
in  leg;  painful  affection  of  hip,  impairing  use  of  leg;
lameness  of  hip;  pain  along  sciatic  nerve  clown  leg;
pain  in  knee;  pain  in  popliteal  space;  knee  feels  lam&
and  stiff;  sharp  pain  in  ankle  joint;  pain  and  soreness.
in  fourth  toe  of  r.  foot.

1 1  Frequent  sharp  darting  pains  from  one  part  to  another.

I  Pains  spread,  especially  from  abdomen  to  distant  parts.

Pains  go  downwards;  often  fly  to  remote  parts.

Both  sides:  pain  in  bowels;  pain  in  inguinal  regions;  in
testicles.

Radiating  upward  and  downward :  severe  writhing  pain
in  sacral  region.

Changes  position :  pain  in  bowels ;  pains  suddenly  shift
and  appear  in  different  localities.
^^  Sensations.  As  if  top  of  head  was  lifted  up  ;  temples  as  if
in  a  vise;  head  feels  as  if  tied  with  a  band  ;  feeling  as
of  a  round,  or  a  large  smooth  substance,  or  as  of  sticks,
dust,  or  lashes  in  eyes ;  seems  as  if  hot  air  streamed  out
of  eyes;  ears  feel  suddenly  stopped  up  ;  tooth  feels  as  if


139  DIOSCOREA  VILLOSA.

bare  nerve  was  touched ;  tongue  feels  as  if  burnt ;  as  if
something  tight  were  about  neck ;  as  of  a  stone  in  stom-
ach ;  in  a  small  spot  in  abdomen,  feels  as  if  it  were  drawn
forcibly  upward  and  backward  to  spine ;  as  if  feces  were
hot;  arm  as  if  asleep ;  little  finger  as  if  asleep  ;  as  if  glu-
teal muscles  were  too  short ;  fingers,  hands,  feet  and  toes
as  if  they  were  about  to  be  cramped.

Pain :  in  front  of  head  and  temples ;  in  occiput ;  in  vertex,
deep-seated  ;  into  both  shoulders ;  in  ears ;  in  front  teeth ;
on  back  and  r.  side  of  throat ;  radiates  from  stomach  in
all  directions,  suddenly  into  hands  and  feet ;  in  1.  hypo-
chondrium ;  in  epigastrium  ;  from  umbilical  region  and
radiating  all  over  abdomen,  into  stomach,  pelvic  organs
and  extremities ;  beginning  at  a  small  spot  in  r.  iliac
region ;  in  both  sides  of  bowels  to  lumbar  region ;  in
region  of  ascending,  transverse  and  descending  colon ;
1.  inguinal  region ;  in  both  inguinal  regions,  extending
to  testicles;  in  anus,  with  diarrhoea;  of  spermatic
cord;  in  penis;  in  region  of  nipples;  through  lungs  to
back,  and  vice  versa ;  through  side  of  chest ;  in  1.  shoul-
der ;  in  r.  hip ;  about  region  of  exit,  along  course  of
sciatic  nerve  down  r.  leg;  in  1.  popliteal  space,  and  r.
knee ;  in  legs  and  knees ;  in  fourth  toe  of  r.  foot ;  in
joints.

Agonizing  pain:  in  abdomen;  in  small  spot  over  crest  of
r.  ilium,  radiates  to  renal  region  down  r,  leg  and  into
r.  testicle.

Cutting  pain:  in  stomach;  in  region  of  liver;  in  small
intestines ;  in  abdomen ;  in  region  of  heart ;  in  region
of  nipples ;  from  1.  axilla  to  nipple  and  down  side  deep
in  lung.

Stabbing  pain :  in  head.

Writhing  pain :  extending  from  region  of  umbilicus ;  in
sacrum  and  back  extending  through  body  and  ex-
tremities.

Lancinating  pain  :  in  bowels.

Severe  pain:  in  bowels;  in  1.  iliac  region  running  up  to  1.
kidney;  near  head  of  colon;  in  sacral  region  of  bowels
extending  to  extremities;  with  cramp  in  flexor  tendons
of  fingers  and  toes ;  in  middle  of  sternum,  extending  to
both  arms  and  hands.

Sharp  pain:  over  eyes;  in  head;  in  r.  side  of  forehead,
extending  to  ears ;  from  r.  eye  to  occiput ;  in  L  cheek ;
in  upper  r.  molar;  in  tonsil  and  ear;  in  stomach;  in
pit  of  stomach;  extending  from  epigastrium  to  1.  hypo-
chondrium ;  in  liver,  extending  to  nipple ;  in  1.  lung
near  nipple;  in  1.  chest;  in  region  of  heart;  in  lower
portion  of  1.  scapula; through  centre  of r.  lung;  in


DIOSCOREA  YILLOSA.  140

shoulders ;  like  an  electric  shock  from  1.  hip  to  head ;
in  1.  knee;  in  r.  ankle  joint,  extending  to  toes;  in
ankles;  in  wrists;  to  toes  and  fingers;  deep  in  vertex.

Grinding  pain :  in  region  of  liver ;  in  middle  of  forearm ;
in  elbows.

Darting  pain :  from  old  liEemorrhoidal  tumor  to  liver ;  in
corns.

Stitch :  occasionally  in  region  of  heart.

Twisting  pain :  in  region  of  liver ;  in  abdomen.

Cramp-like  pain :  in  region  of  sigmoid  fliexure  to  colon.

Cramping  pain :  in  pit  of  stomach ;  in  bowels  and  ex-
tremities; just  above  umbilicus;  extending  to  back,
flying  to  fingers  and  toes;  near  crest  of  ilium,  extend-
ing into  lumbar  region  and  hypogastrium ;  in  back  part
of  legs.

Colicky  pain:  with  flatulency;  in  stomach  and  small  in-
testines ;  spasmodic  uterine  colic.

Griping  pain:  in  epigastric  and  umbilical  region;  in
bowels.

Digging :  in  1.  hypochondrium.

Squeezing  pain:  in  head;  in  region  of  liver.

Jerking  pain  :  in  shoulders.

Burning,  jerking  pain :  in  stomach.

Dragging  pain :  in  r.  side  of  occiput.

Drawing  pain  :  in  sacrum.

Distressing  pain :  at  epigastrium  ;  in  whole  of  bowels ;  in
umbilical  and  hypogastric  region.

Hard  pain:  in  front  of  both  ears;  behind  1.  ear;  1.  side  of
face;  extending  to  neck;  in  region  of  stomach ;  in  region
of  gall-bladder.

False  labor  pains.

Neuralgia:  in  temples;  in  stomach;  in  liver;  in  gall
ducts ;  of  bowels ;  of  extremities.

Spasmodic  pain  :  in  abdomen ;  from  abdomen  to  stomach,
pelvic  organs  and  extremities;  near  crest  of  ilium,  ex-
tending into  lumbar  region  and  epigastrium  ;  umbilical
and  r.  iliac  region ;  in  abdomen.

Paroxysmal  pains :  in  urethra.

Aching  pain  :  in  elbow.

Yiolent  throbbing :  in  temples  and  forehead.

Prickling  pain  :  in  stomach.

Burning :  in  mouth  ;  in  fauces ;  in  stomach  ;  in  rectum  ;
behind  top  of  sternum.

Smarting: in  eyes;  in  fauces;  1.  tonsil.

Ptheumatic  pain  :  in  limbs.

Dull  pain  :  in  head  ;  in  temples ;  in  back  of  head,  shoul-
ders and  back ;  in  stomach  ;  in  pit  of  stomach  ;  in  car-
diac region  of  stomach,  extending  to  1.  side  and  dorsal


141  DIOSCOREA  VILLOSA.

region  ;  in  region  of  liver ;  in  umbilical  region ;  in  back
of  neck,  extending  to  head  and  shoulders ;  in  lumbar
region ;  in  region  of  sacro-iliac  symphisis ;  along  r.  leg.

Heavy  pain  :  in  pit  of  stomach  ;  in  region  of  liver ;  two
inches  below  umbilicus.

Dull  pressure :  in  head  ;  on  rectum.

Soreness:  of  nostrils;  corners  of  mouth;  at  1.  angle  of
jaw ;  of  gums,  extending  to  roof  of  mouth ;  on  tip  and
sides  of  tongue;  of  fauces;  of  abdomen  ;  of  fourth  toe  of
r.  foot.

Heat :  in  head ;  in  stomach ;  in  abdomen.

Constricted  feeling :  in  throat.

Tightness :  across  upper  part  of  chest.

Irritated  feeling :  in  1.  side  of  throat.

Distressed  feeling :  at  stomach.

Faintness :  in  stomach.

Lame  feeling :  in  back ;  r.  hip ;  r.  knee.

Stiffness:  of  toes.

Numbness :  of  1.  arm  ;  1.  leg;  1.  hand ;  of  feet  and  legs.

Weakness :  in  small  of  back ;  of  limbs ;  of  knees.

Fulness:  in  head;  in  abdomen.

Ringing,  buzzing :  in  ears.

Tickling :  in  larynx.

Dizzy,  dull  feeling.

Itching :  r.  internal  ear ;  1.  tonsil ;  of  rectum ;  over  r..
scapula  and  over  1.  ribs.
**  Tissues.  Acts  through  the  ganglionic  nervous  system,  par-
ticularly affecting  the  umbilical  region,  giving,  as  its
most  characteristic  effect,  severe  pain,  simulating  a  so-
called  bilious  colic.

Acts,  probably,  chiefly  upon  the  nerves,  especially  upon
solar  plexus  and  upon  spinal  nerves,  causing  pain  over
body  and  in  viscera,  also  reflex  pains.

Myalgic  and  neuralgic  pains.

Joints  painful;  w^eak,  especially  knees.
*^  Touch. Passive  Motion. Injuries. Touch :  ears  sore  to.

Rubbing :  gently,  >  pain  in  both  sides  of  bowels ;  pain
in  legs  and  knees  >.

Pressure :  pain  in  forehead  <  ;  stomach  painful ;  bowels
sensitive  to;  abdomen  sensitive ;  intense  pain  >  ;  pain
<;  twisting  pain  in  abdomen  >;  pain  in  umbilical
and  r.  iliac  region  not  modified  by  pressure;  causes
rumbling ;  colic  >  ;  pain  about  umbilicus  >  ;  sharp
pain  in  region  of  nipples  >.
^^  Skin. I  I  Little  pimples  with  black  heads.

Itching  and  burning  of  various  parts.
*''  Stages  of  Life,  Constitution. Persons  of  feeble  digestive
powers,  old  or  young,  with  flatulence  after  meals,  in


DIOSCOREA  VILLOSA.  142

stomach  or  bowels,  but  unattended  with  any  hepatic
derangement  or  irregularity  of  bowels ;  these  persons,
from  some  excess  in  eating,  or  from  fasting,  or  from
some  error  in  diet,  as  eating  old  cheese,  uncooked  fruit,
pastry,  etc.,  especially  if  they  are  great  tea-drinkers,  may
be  suddenly  seized  with  violent  colic.

Biliousness  with  neuralgic  pains  as  reflex  symptoms.

Disposition  to  felons,  possibly  with  a  tendency  to  colic.

Young  man;  involuntary  emissions.

Man,  set.  22,  onanist;  nocturnal  emissions.

Young  lady,  set.  23; constipation  and  dysmenorrhoea.

Man,  set.  25;  nocturnal  emissions.

Mrs.  C,  set.  25,  worn  out  by  nursing  sick  child ;  constant
pain  in  cardiac  portion  of  stomach.

Mrs,  D.,  set.  30,  has  phthisis  pulmonalis,  with  hectic  night-
sweats,  etc.;  dull,  heavy  pain  in  pit  of  stomach.

Mrs.  A.  v.,  set.  30,  nervous  temperament;  flatulent  colic
coming  every  night,  except  during  summer,  when  at-
tacks are  not  so  regular  or  severe.

Widower;  nocturnal  emissions.

Man,  set.  35,  married,  father  of  three  children;  nocturnal
emissions.

Mrs.  D.,  set.  about  35,  five  months  pregnant,  has  been
lying  in  bed  for  a  month  on  account  of  pain ;  sciatica.

Man,  set.  50;  cholera  morbus.

Man,  set.  50;  renal  colic.

Old  lady,  set.  betw^een  50  and  60,  who  had  been  walking
with  crutches  for  nearly  a  year;  sciatica.

Mrs.  B.,  an  old  lady,  set.  78;  colicodynia.
"^^  Relations.  Compare :  Bismuth,  Bryon.,  Nux  vom.  (stomach) ;
Chamom.,  Coloc,  Ipec,  Kali  bich.,  Podoph.,  Rhus  tox.,
Rumex,  Sulphur  (abdomen  and  stool);  JEscuL,  Aloes,
Collin.,  Nux  vom.  (hsemorrhoids);  Sarsap.  (urinary  symp-
toms ;)  Cede,  ostr.,  Cann.  ind.,  Nux  vom.,  Phosphor.,  (sexual
organs) ;  Act.  rac,  jEscuL,  Aloes,  Bryon.  Nux  vom.  (head-
aches) ;  Silic.  (paronychia).


143  DOLICHOS  PRURIENS.


DOUCHOS  PRURIENS.

Cowhage,  or  Cowitch.  Leguminosse.


A  climbing  plant,  native  to  the  West  Indies  and  tropical  America,  synony-
mous with  Mucuna  pruriens,  bears  a  fruit  pod,  about  four  inches  long,  covered
Tvith  bristly  hairs,  from  which  the  alcoholic  tincture  is  prepared.

Introduced  and  proved  by  Jacob  Jeanes.

CiiiNicAii  Authorities. — Sensation  as  of  a  splinter  below  angle  of  r.  lower  jaw,
Jeanes,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  5,  p.  238 ;  Cough,  Jeanes,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  5,  p.  680 ;
Chronic  neuralgic  pains  in  gums,  Jeanes,  Kiick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  5,  p.  206  ;  Skin  disease,
Lippe,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  4,  p.  239  ;  Dry,  tettery  eruption  on  limbs,  resembling  zona,
Williamson,  Eaue's  Rec,  1873,  p.  28 ;  Herpes  zoster,  Baikie,  Raue's  Eec,  1871,
p.  210.

^  Sensorium. Sensation  as  of  a  blow  on  head,  feels  stunned,
^  Inner  Head. Head  feels  as  if  it  would  separate,  it  pains  so.

Aching  pain  in  r.  temple.
^  Sight  and  Eyes. lEyes  yellow. ^Jaundice.

Pain  in  r.  eye.

Eruption  on  margin  of  ej^elids.
^  Hearing  and  Ears. Pain  in  neighborhood  of  r.  ear.

Sudden  dart  of  pain  in  r.  ear,  later  in  left.
^  Upper  Face. iFace  yellow. ^Jaundice.


I  Swelling  of  face,  most  of  lips.

Prickling  itching  of  face.

Pain  in  r.  maxilla.
^'^  Teeth  and  Gums. ■  Soreness  and  tenderness  of  gums,  even
in  teething  children.

Dull  aching  in  a  carious  tooth,  r.  side.

I  Gums  exceedingly  sensitive,  but  not  sore.

I  Gums  swollen;  neuralgic  pains  in  them,  <  at  night.

I  Gums  swollen,  red,  painful,  can  scarcely  eat  or  drink.
•' I  Pain  in  gums,  preventing  her  sleep  half  the  night.

I  Gums  irritated,  wants  them  continually  rubbed ;  dentition.
"  Taste  and  Tongue. Strong  taste  of  blood  in  mouth,  with

cough.
"  Throat. Slight  fulness  just  behind  posterior  palatine  arch.

Sudden  sensation  of  choking  lump  in  pit  of  throat.

Roughness  of  throat.

■  I  Painful  sensation  in  throat  below  angle  of  lower  jaw  on


DOLICHOS  PRURIENS.  144

r.  side,  as  if  a  splinter  three  quarters  of  an  inch  in  length
was  imbedded  vertically  in  that  spot;  pain  <  by  swal-
lowing.
I  Pain  in  r.  throat,  a  subdued,  contracting  sensation,  went
to  1.  side.
^^  Hiccough,  Belching,  Nausea  and  Vomiting. Flatulent
eructation.
I  I  Vomits  bile. ^Liver  complaint.
^^  Scrobiculum  and  Stomach. Noisy  movement  of  flatus  in

stomach.
^^  Hypochondria. Swelling  of  liver ;  pain  goes  through  from

1.  lobe ;  pains  in  spleen  with  gravel.
^^  Abdomen. Bloated,  swollen  abdomen,  with  constipation.
I  At  intervals  fearful  cramps  in  abdomen,  off  and  on  for
4  or  5  years ;  attacks  come  on  2  or  3  times  a  day ;  sud-
den movement  would  bring  it  on. ^Spine  disease.
Colic  from  getting  feet  wet.
Pain  in  abdomen  in  r.  lumbar  region.
Bruised  pain  below  umbilicus.
Bruised  pain  in  1.  inguinal  region.
^  Stool  and  Rectum, i  Constipation during teething  or
pregnancy.

■  White  stools. ^Jaundice.
Tenesmus  with  looseness  of  bowels.
Pain  in  anus,  with  stool.
iCostiveness. ^Dentition. ^  Worms.

■  Thread  worms  and  complaints  therefrom.

■  Constipation  with  liver  complaint  and  itching.
^^  Urinary  Organs. ■  Enuresis  with  gravel.

■Small  calculi  pass  away.
I  Ischuria,  with  or  without  gravel.
^^  Male  Sexual  Organs. Impotence.

^*  Pregnancy. Parturition. Lactation. ■Intolerable  itch-
ing all  over  body,  in  pregnant  women,  <  at  night,  pre-
venting sleep; <  from  scratching;  no  perceptible  erup-
tion on  the  skin.
^^  Respiration. Sudden  sensation  of  a  choking  lump  in  throat.

I  i  Orthopnoea. ^ Worms.
^  Cough. ■Cough:  on  lying  down  at  night;  with  wheezing
and  dyspnoea;  4  p.m.  till  morning.
I  I  Loud  ringing,  incessant  cough. ^ Worms.
Slight  cough  with  easy  expectoration,  and  strong  taste  of

Vjlood  in  mouth.
Easy,  mucous  expectoration.
^  Inner  Chest  and  Lungs. Pains  through  the  apices  of  both

lungs.
^'  Outer  Chest. ■Eruption  appeared  on  1.  axilla,  spreading  in
rings  forward  to  sternum  and  back  to  spine,  with  much
burning  and  smarting. ^Herpes  zoster.


145  DOLICHOS  PRURIENS.

^^  Neck  and  Back. Pain  over  r.  carotid  artery,  as  if  a  splinter
was  sticking  there.
Pain  in  muscles  on  r.  side  of  neck.
Pain  under  1.  scapula  continuing  till  zona  broke  out.
^^  Upper  Limbs. Pain  on  the  top  of  r.  shoulder.
Aching  pain  in  r.  arm  and  shoulder.
Aching  soreness  in  last  phalanx  of  r.  middle  finger.
Pain  at  root  of  nail  of  r.  index  finger.
^  Limbs  in  General. <  Dry,  tettery  eruptions  on  arms  and

legs,  resembling  zona.
^  Rest. Position. Motion. Lying  down :  at  night,  cough
with  wheezing.
Swallowing: <  pain  as  if  from  a  splinter  in  jaw.
Sudden  movement:  brings  on  fearful  cramps  in  abdomen.
^®  Nerves, l  Twitching  of  muscles.

I  Clonic  spasms  of  extremities,  w4th  loss  of  consciousness;

eyes  fixed;  lids  open.
Convulsions  of  children.

I  I  Nervous  affections  of  children  during  dentition.
I  I  Neuralgia  following  herpes  zoster.
^^  Sleep. 'At  night  in  bed  burning  in  skin  is  intolerable.

I  Night  without  sleep. ^Liver  complaint.
^  Time. Night:  neuralgic  pain in gums  <;  pain  in  gums
prevents  sleep;  terrible  itching  <;  lying  down  from  4
P.M.  till  morning;  cough  with  wheezing;  skin  burns;
cannot  sleep  on  account  of  itching.
^^  Temperature  and  Weather. Warmth:  <  itching  at  night.
I  Cold  water  burns  on  the  itching  skin.
I  Cold  water  lessens  itching  but  causes  great  trembling.
■  Getting  feet  wet:  colic.
^^  Fever. Skin  burns  at  night,  in  bed.

*^  Attacks,  Periodicity. At  intervals : fearful cramps  in
abdomen,  off  and  on  for  4  or  5  years.
Two  or  three  times  a  day :  attacks  of  cramps  in  abdomen.
Three  days:  pain  under  1.  scapula.

Seven  to  ten  days :  itching  lasts ;  after  desquamation  itch-
ing and  swelling  returns.
For  seven  years  every  winter :  itching.
Locality  and  Direction. Left:  pain  through  liver  from
lobe ; pain in inguinal region ; eruption on axilla ;
pain  under  scapula.
Right :  aching  pain  in  temple,  in  eye,  near  ear ;  pain  in
maxilla;  dull  aching  in  tooth  r.  side;  painful  sensation
in  side  of  jaw  as  of  a  splinter  imbedded  there ;  pain  in
throat; pain in abdomen, lumbar region; pain in
carotid  artery  as  of  a  splinter ;  pain  in  muscles  in  side
of  neck,  on  top  of  shoulder ;  aching  in  last  phalanx  of
middle  finger ;  pain  at  root  of  nail  of  index  finger.
VOL.  v.— 10.


42


DOLICHOS  PEURIENS.  146

Right  to  left :  pain  passing  from  r,  side  of  throat  to  left ;
dart  of  pain  in  r.  ear  then  1.  ear.

Upwards :  itching  first  on  feet,  every  winter  higher  up,
until  it  reaches  hip  and  abdomen.

Spreading  in  rings  forward  and  back :  eruption  on  axilla.
^^  Sensations.  Sensation  as  of  a  blow  on  head;  head  feels  as
if  it  would  separate ;  sensation  of  choking  lump  in  pit
of  throat;  in  throat  below  angle  of  lower  jaw  on  r.  side,
as  if  a  splinter  three-quarters  of  an  inch  in  length  was
imbedded  vertically  in  that  spot.

Pain :  in  head ;  in  r.  eye ;  in  neighborhood  of  r.  ear ;  in
r.  maxilla;  in  gums;  in  r.  throat;  goes  through  liver
from  1.  lobe ;  in  spleen,  with  gravel ;  in  abdomen ;  in  r.
lumbar  region ;  in  anus,  with  stool ;  through  the  apices
of  both  lungs;  over  r.  carotid  artery  as  if  a  splinter  was
sticking  there;  in  muscles  of  r.  side  of  neck ;  under  1.
scapula  till  zona  broke  out ;  on  top  of  r.  shoulder ;  at
root  of  nail  of  r.  index  finger.

Pearful  cramps :  in  abdomen  at  intervals.

Sudden  dart:  in  ears.

Aching :  in  r.  temple ;  dull,  in  a  carious  tooth,  r.  side ;  in
r.  arm  and  shoulder.

Neuralgia:  in  gums;  following  herpes  zoster. .

jBruised  pain  :  below  umbilicus ;  in  1.  inguinal  region.

Burning  and  smarting :  with  eruption  on  1.  axilla,  spread-
ing in  rings  forward  to  sternum  and  back  to  spine ;  in
skin  is  intolerable.

Soreness:  of  gums;  with  aching  in  last  phalanx  of  r.
middle  finger.

Sensitiveness:  of  gums.

Contracting  sensation :  from  r.  side  of  throat  to  left.

Irritation  of  skin.

Prickling  itching:  of  face.

Itching :  constipation  with  liver  complaints  all  over  body
intolerable.
^  Tissues. Acts  upon  cerebro-spinal  system,  producing  mus-
cular twitchings  and  convulsions.

Irritation  of  skin  in  jaundice,  liver  complaint,  and  during
pregnancy.
*^  Touch. Passive  Motion. Injuries. Pvubbing : >  irri-
tated gums.

Scratching:  <  itching.
^®  Skin. 1 1  Violent  itching  all  over  body,  without  any  visible
eruption. ^Constipation  during  pregnancy. ^Jaundice.
■  Intolerable  itching  all  over  body;  worse  at  night,  pre-
venting sleep; scratching increases  itching; there is
nothing  perceptible  on  skin ;  nor  is  there  any  swelling.

Jaundice;  skin  yellow  in  spots  or  all  over,  and  itching
excessively  at  night.


147  DOLICHOS  PRURIENS.

■  Terrible  itching  over  whole  body,  with  swelling  of  face

and  particularly  of  lips;  she  is  compelled  to  scratch  in-
cessantly, but  without  relief;  <  at  night;  in  bed;  from
warmth;  cold  water  applied  to  skin  causes  burning;
hands  and  face  wounded  by  violent  scratching;  lasts
7-10  days,  when  desquamation  of  small  scales  from
surface  of  whole  body  occurs;  as  soon  as  desquamation
is  completed,  itching  and  swelling  again  return.
iPain  under  1.  scapula,  which  continued  three  daj'-s,  when
an  eruption  made  its  appearance  on  axilla  of  affected
side,  and  assumed  the  herpetic  form,  spreading  in  rings
forward  to  sternum,  and  backward  to  spine,  attended
with  much  burning  and  smarting. ^Herpes  zoster.

■  Dry  tettery  eruption  on  arms  and  limbs,  resembling  zona.
I  Itching,  without eruption,  first on feet,  every winter

higher  up,  after  7  years  reaches  hips  and  abdomen.
^'^  Stages  of  Life,  Constitution. 1 1  Teething  children.

A  child,  5  or  6  years  old;  jaundice.

Woman,  unmarried,  set.  36,  suffered  from  chronic  rheu-
matism; skin  disease.

Lady,  set.  45;  herpes  zoster.

Woman,  set.  45,  formerly  asthmatic ;  painful  sensation  of
splinter  in  r.  side  of  neck,  below  lower  jaw.
^®  Relations. Antidoted  by :  Aeon.,  which  must  be  given  pre-
ceding Dolich.,  in  cases  of  dentition  attended  by  fever,  to
prevent  convulsions.

Cured  herpes  zoster,  after  failure  of  Rhus  tox.


DORYPHORA  DECEMLINEATA.  148

DORYPHORA  DECEMLINEATA.

The  Colorado  Potato  Bug.  Coleoptera.

"This  insect  belongs  to  the  same  family  as  the  squash  bug,  the  black  potato
bug,  and  the  Cantharides — all  possess  the  power  of  blistering  the  skin  if  bruised
upon  it.  The  Colorado  potato  bug  has  its  original  home  in  the  Kocky  Mountains,
where  it  fed  on  a  species  of  Solanum  indigenous  to  that  locality.  It  got  a  taste  of
the  Solanum  tuberosum,  the  common  potato,  and  rapidly  travelled  East,  until
it  reached  the  Atlantic." Hale's  Symptomatology.

The  tincture  is  prepared  by  crushing  the  live  beetle  and  covering  it  with  alco-
hol. Provings  by  Kuden  and  Jenkins,  see  Allen's  Encyclopaedia,  v.  4,  p.  167.

Clinical  Authokities.  —  Parotitis,  Euden  ;  Gastric  derangement,  Kuden,
Horn.  Clin.,  V.  3,  p.  73;  Gonorrhoea,  Euden,  Hom.  Clin.,  v.  3,  p.  85;  Gleet,  Ruden,
Hem.  Clin.,  v.  3,  p.  71.


^  Mind.  Stupor,  with  muttering  and  loud  rumbling  in  bowels.
Delirious;  talking  and  muttering  about  business  matters.
Delirium,  with  red  bloated  face,  protruding  eyes,  and  pulse

one  hundred  and  twenty-four.
Irritable  temper.
^  Sensorium. Dizziness  in  head,  with  nausea  and  vomiting.

Congestion  of  blood  to  head ;  meningitis.
^  Inner  Head. Dull,  heavy  headache.
^  Sight  and  Eyes. Sight  much  impaired.

Sensation  of  dimness  and  blackness  before  eyes.
Pupils  dilated.

Eyes  red,  congested  and  very  much  protruded.
Eyes  feel  sore,  as  from  overwork.
Inflammation  of  the  eyes.
^  Upper  Face. Face  bloated,  red,  like  that  of  a  confirmed
drunkard.
Face  mottled,  puffed,  eyes  congested,  staring;  high  fever,

with  delirium,  vomiting  and  stupor.
Erysipelas  of  head  and  face.
"  Taste  and  Tongue. Dark  brown  coating  on  tongue.
^^  Inner  Mouth, i  Violent  heat;  severe  pain  across  kidneys,
<  by  pressure  and  motion;  full,  hard  pulse;  face  red
and  bloated ;  staring  eyes ;  constipation  and  retention
of  urine. ^Parotitis.
"  Throat. Burning  in  throat  down  oesophagus,  with  pain  in
stomach.
Throat  feels  sore,  raw  and  constricted.


149  DORYPHORA  DECEMLINEATA.

"  Appetite,  Thirst. Desires,  Aversions. Loss  of  appetite ;
great  thirst;  craving  for  something  sour;  symptoms  <
by  smoking.
^^  Hiccough,  Belching,  Nausea  and  Vomiting, i  Nausea
and  vomiting.
Vomiting:  with  stupor  and  delirium;  of  dark,  grumous,
acrid  matter;  of  dirty  brown  fluid,  with  diarrhoea.
^^  Scrobiculum  and  Stomach. Pain  in  stomach.

I  Nausea,  at  times  vomiting;  faint  feeling;  very  tired;
trembling  in  all  her  limbs,  especially  hands ;  cramp-
like constriction  in  pit  of  stomach ;  stools  hard;  difficult,
painful  urination. ^Gastric  derangement.
^^  Hypochondria. Pain  all  over  body,  especially  in  region

of  spleen.
^^  Abdomen. Loud  rumbling  in  abdomen,  with  stupor.
Abdomen  feels  very  sore  and  tender.
Abdomen  feels  heavy,  as  if  it  were  full ;  severe  burning.
Burning  pain  in  abdomen  about  umbilicus.
Pain  in  bowels,  in  hypogastric  region.
Violent  pain  in  bowels  in  r.  side,  passing  downward  to

rectum.
Pain  in  bowels  <  by  eating  and  drinking  and  taking  a
long  breath.
^  Stool  and  Rectum. iStools  hard. (^Gastric  derangement.
Diarrhoea  in  morning,  with  intense  pain  in  abdomen  and

burning  in  rectum.
Profuse  and  persistent  diarrhoea.
Continued  bloody,  slimy  diarrhoea.
I  I  Dysentery,  with  intense  pain  in  rectum.
Feeling  of  heaviness  in  rectum.
^^  Urinary  Organs. Retention  of  urine.
I Difhcult  urination.
iDysuria,  with  burning,  stinging  pain.
Profuse  dark  red  urine,  with  dirty  sediment,  and  voided
with  much  pain.
''  Male  Sexual  Organs. Utching  and  burning  in  glans  penis,
which  is  swollen  and  bluish-red;  urethra  inflamed,  with
excruciating  pain,  especially  when  urinating. ^Gonor-
rhoea.
I  1  Gleet  and  gonorrhoea.
^^  Inner  Chest  and  Lungs. Soreness  and  oppression  of  chest.
^^  Heart,  Pulse  and  Circulation. Pulse  very  weak,  with
coldness  and  collapse.
Pulse  120  to  140.
^^  Neck  and  Back. iPain  in  back,  in  lumbar  region.
^^  Upper  Limbs. Swelling  of  whole  arm,  very  painful ;  ab-
raded spot  on  wrist  developed  into  a  deep  ulcer,  angry,
red,  with  sticking,  stinging  pains  through  arms;  ulcer


DORYPHORA  DECEMLINEATA.  150"

assumed  a  malignant  character,  eating  until  bones  of
wrist  were  exposed. (Local  effects  through  an  abraded
surface.)
Could  not  guide  pen  while  endeavoring  to  write.
^  Lower  Limbs. Swelling  of  feet,  with  burning  and  sting-
ing ;  sensation  as  if  full  of  pins.
^  Limbs  in  General, i  Great  trembling  in  extremities. ^Gas-
tric derangement.
Trembling  in  r.  arm  and  leg.
Icy  coldness  of  hands  and  feet.
^  Rest. Position. Motion. Lie  down :  inclination  to.
Slightest  exercise :  causes  fatigue.
Talking:  weakness  <.
Walking :  causes  fainting  sensation.
Motion:  pain  across  kidneys  <.
^^  Nerves. Restlessness  without  weariness.

Nervous  restlessness;  twitching  and  spasms.

Trembling  in  r.  arm  and  leg  as  if  a  galvanic  battery  were

attached  to  the  extremity.
I  Great  trembling  in  extremities. ^Gastric  derangement.
Fatigued  by  slightest  exercise.
Weak,  languid ;  after  sleeping.
Great  weakness  and heaviness,  with  inclination  to lie

down,  weakness  <  by  talking.
Great  weariness  increased  by  talking.
Sensation  as  if  he  would  fall  at  every  step,  with  dimness-

of  sight.
Fainting  sensation  when  walking.
Great,  general  prostration,  ending  in  collapse.
^^  Sleep. Restless  during  night;  constant  tossing  about.

Sleeplessness  untill  12  at  night,  then  restless  sleep,  with

terrifying  dreams.
Comatose  slumber ;  wild  dreams  and  screams  as  if  in  great
distress.
^^  Time. 8  a.m.  to  2  p.m.  :  violent  fever.
Morning:  diarrhoea.

Until  12  at  night:  sleepless,  then  restless  sleep.
Night:  restlessness.
*^  Fever. Coldness  of  hands  and  feet.

Fever ;  skin  alternately  cold  and  clammy,  then  hot  and

burning.
Violent  fever,  with  cerebral  congestion,  vomiting  and  de-
lirium ;  pulse  120  to  140.
Fever  of  typhoid  character.
Violent  fever  from  8  a.m.  to  2  p.m.
^^  Attacks,  Periodicity. At  times:  vomiting.
^^  Locality  and  Direction. Right :  pain  in  side  of  bowels ;
trembling  in  arm  and  leg.


151  DORYPHORA  DECEMLINEATA.

^^  Sensations.  '  Eyes  feel  sore,  as  from  overwork ;  abdomen
feels  heavy,  as  if  it  were  full;  sensation  in  feet  as  if  full
of  pins ;  trembling  in  r.  arm  and  leg  as  if  a  galvanic
battery  were  attached  to  them ;  as  if  he  would  fall  at
every  step.

Pain :  in  stomach  ;  all  over  body  ;  in  region  of  spleen ;  in
bowels ;  in  hypogastric  region ;  in  lumbar  region ;  in
arm.

Excruciating  pain :  in  urethra.

Intense  pain  :  in  abdomen  ;  in  rectum.

Violent  pains :  in  bowels ;  in  r.  side  down  to  rectum.

Severe  pain :  across  kidneys.

Burning  pain  :  in  abdomen.

Stinging  pain :  through  arms.

Burning:  in  throat;  down  oesophagus;  in  abdomen;  in
rectum  ;  in  glans  penis  ;  in  feet.

Cramplike  constriction  :  in  pit  of  stomach.

Sore  feeling :  in  throat ;  in  abdomen ;  in  chest.

Dull :  headache.

Heavy:  headache.

Constrictive  feeling:  in  throat.

Oppression :  of  chest.

Heaviness :  feeling  of,  in  rectum.

Trembling:  in  extremities.
• Itching:  in  glans  penis.

Coldness:  of  hands  and  feet.
^  Tissues. The  blood  will  not  coagulate;  blood  globules  dis-
organized as  after  serpent  poisoning.

Enormous  swelling  of  whole  body,  with  the  mental  and
cerebral  symptoms.

General  elastic  swelling  of  whole  body,  which  will  not  pit
on  pressure.
*^  Touch. Passive  Motion. Injuries. Pressure :  pain  in

kidneys  <.
*^  Stages  of  Life,  Constitution. T.  M.  Joliet,  little  girl,  set.
5 ;  parotitis.

Mrs.  B. ;  gastric  derangement.

Robust  young  man,  light  hair,  sanguine  temperament;
gleet.

Mr.  G.  L.,  set.  25,  weakly  constitution,  single,  light  hair,
yellow  complexion ;  gonorrhoea.
^^  Relations. Antidotedby:  earth,  which  absorbs  and  neu-
tralizes the  poison;  vinegar,  or  other  vegetable  acids;
Sti'amon.

Compare :  Agar.,  Ailanth.,  Apis,  Bellad.,  Canthar.,  Crotal.y
Laches.,  Stramon.


DEOSERA  ROTUNDIFOLIA.  152


DROSERA  ROTUNDIFOLIA.

Round  leaved  Sundew.  Droseracese.


Grows  in  mossy,  turfy  bogs  in  Europe,  Northern  Asia,  and  America.

The  tincture  is  prepared  from  the  active,  fresli  plant.

Used  empirically  by  physicians  in  the  sixteenth  century  (Dodoens),  princi-
pally outwardly  against  skin  eruptions.

Introduced  into  our  Materia  Medica  by  Hahnemann,  and  proved  by  himself
and  others. See  Allen  s  Encyclopedia,  vol.  4,  p.  170.

Became  famous  as  a  remedy  in  whooping  cough  at  Hahnemann's  own  recom-
mendation based  on  observations  of  Wislicenus,  one  of  the  proveis.

Clixical  Authorities. — Laryngitis,  Macfarlan,  Kaue's  Rec,  1870,  p.  156;
Hoarseness  after  catarrh,  Hartmann,  Eiick.  Kl.  Eif.,  v.  1.  3,  p.  167  ;  Irritation  in  lar-
ynx with  cough,  Baumann,  Eaue's  Path.,  p.  31"J;  Cough,  Pemeil.,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf.,
vol  3,  p.  12;  Spasmodic  cough,  Hannes,  Allg.  Houi.  Ztg.,  vol.  106,  p.  66;  Becker;
Eiick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  3,  p.  12;  Jousset,  B.  J.  H.,  vol.  26,  p.  210;  Catarrhal  cough,
Gross,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  3,  p.  12;  ir/ioopin^r  cou^A,  Hahnemann,  Hrg.,  Hart-
man,  Lobeth,  Schron,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf.,  voh  3,  p.  12;  Neumann,  Nenning,  Miihlen-
bein,  Trinks,  Schindler,  Belhmann,  Knorre,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  3,  p.  73;  Engle-
hardt,  Becker,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  3,  p.  74;  Schindler,  Tietze  (6  cases),  Neumann,
Eiick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  3,  p.  75;  Groi^s,  Bethmann,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  3,  p.  76;  Miiller,
Eiick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  5,  p.  718;  Cretin,  Allg.  Horn.  Ztg.,  vol.  106,  p.  39;  Skinner  (2
cases),  Allg.  Horn.  Ztg.,  vol.  106,  p.  53;  Night  cough,  Hale,  Horn.  Clinics,  vol.  1,  p.
82;  Cough  during  measles,  Stapf,  Tietze,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf,,  vol.  4,  p.  95;  Cough  and
hoarseness  after  measles,  Stapf,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  3,  p.  167;  Cough  of  phthisical  sub-
jects, Lobeth,  Hartmann,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  3,  p.  366;  Catarrhal  affections  of  chest,
Hrg.,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  3,  p.  12;  Catarrhal  fever,  Hartmann,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.
3,  p.  12;  Intermittent  fever,  Knorre,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol  4,  p.  917;  Allen's  Int.
Fever,  p.  98.

^  Mind.  I  1  Mental  restlessness;  when  reading  cannot  dwell
long  on  one  subject,  must  change  to  something  else.

i  1  Depressed  by  persecutions  of  others  on  all  sides,  and
also  discouraged  and  solicitous  about  future.

I  Anxiety:  with  flushes  of  heat;  when  alone,  especially  in
evening,  also  when  awaking  at  night;  as  if  it  would  im-
pel him  to  commit  suicide  by  drowning.

Dread  of  ghosts  and  of  being  alone.  •

■  Great  mistrust.

Very  irritable;  a  trifle  will  disturb;  irascible,  getting  be-
side one's  self  with  anger.

Selfwilled;  obstinate;  insists  upon  carrying  out  his  j^lans.


153  DROSERA  ROTUNDIFOLIA.

^  Sensorium. I'Dulness  and  heaviness  of  head.

I  Vertigo  when  walking  in  open  air,  tendency  to  fall  to  left.
^  Inner  Head, l  Lancinating  pain  in  fore  part  of  brain,  <
moving  eyes,  >  from  supporting  head  on  hands.

■  Lancinating,  tensive,  frontal  headache,  <  from  stooping.
I  iPressive  pain  in  forehead  and  zygoma,  within  outward.
Boring  pain  in  forehead.

Headache  above  orbit  when  stooping,  disappearing  on
walking.

I  I  Pressing  headache  (temples),  with  stupefaction  and  nau-
sea (morning);  <  when  stooping  and  from  heat;  >
from  motion  and  in  cold  air.

Aching  pain  above  r.  temple.

Soreness  in  temples.

■  Drawing  pain  in  1.  side  of  head.
iPressive  headache.

Brain  painfully  affected  by  stepping.
^  Outer  Head. 'Smarting,  burning  pain  in  scalp.

I  I  Sore  feeling  in  skin  of  r.  temple.

I  Itching,  gnawing  on  fore  part  of  scalp,  >  by  rubbing.

I  Corrosive  itching  on  scalp.
■*  Sight  and  Eyes. Frequent  vanishing  of  sight,  especially
when  reading,  letters  look  pale  and  blurred  ;  photopho-
bia; eyes  dazzled  by  light  or  glare  of  fire;  they  are  very
dry;  nose  dry  and  stopped  up,  stitches  in  eyes.

I  Like  gauze  before  eyes;  when  reading  letters  run  together,
^xlmblyopia.

Far-sighted ;  weakness  of  eyes  when  looking  carefully  at
small  objects  ;  quivering  before  eyes ;  dazzling ;  <  from
light,  daylight,  candle-light.

I  I  Pupils  first  contracted,  later  dilated.

■  Protrusion  of  eyes.

■  Severe  stitches,  from  within  outward,  in  eyes.
Eyelids  livid.

^  Hearing  and  Ears, i  Difficult  hearing,  with  increased  hum-
ming before  ears.

I  Roaring,  humming,  and  drumming  in  ears.

I  Pain  in  right  internal  ear,  as  if  pressed  together.

I  I  Sticking  pain  and  aching,  especially  when  swallowing.

Otalgia,  with  sticking  pain  in  inner  ear.

I  Stitches  in  ears.
^  Smell  and  Nose. Nose  dry  and  stopped  up.

Nosebleed,  <  morning  or  evening,  and  on  stooping.

■  Bleeding  from  nose  and  mouth. ^Pertussis.
Profuse  iiuent  coryza,  particularly  in  morning.

I  I  Frequent  sneezing,  with  or  without  fluent  coryza ;  <
from  sneezing.
^Tipper Face. 'Pale  face,  with  sunken  eyes;  jDufi'ed  and
livid.


DROSERA  ROTUNDIFOLIA.  154

Cheeks  and  eyes  sunken.

I  I  Prickling,  burning  pain  in  skin  of  cheek  below  1.  eyelid.

I  I  Coldness  of  1.  half  of  face,  with  stinging  pain  and  dry

heat  on  r.  half  of  face.
I  Heat  of  face,  with  cold  hands.
I  I  Face-ache,  aggravated  by  pressure  and  contact.
I  I  Small pustules, here and there, on face, with fine

stitching  sensation,  <  when  touched.
Cold  sweat  on  forehead.
®  Lower  Face, i  Stitching,  tearing  pain  on  1.  inferior  maxilla,

as  in  periosteum.
I  1  Burning  in  skin,  at  r.  angle  of  mouth.
I  I  Lower  lip  cracked  in  the  middle.
■  Dryness  of  the  lips  and  little  sense  of  taste.
I  1  Black  pores  on  the  chin.
^°  Teeth  and  Gums. iCold  sensation  in  the  body  of  an  in-
cisor.
iStitching  toothache,  mornings,  after  warm  drink.
^^  Taste  and  Tongue. Taste:  bitter,  in  throat,  after  eating;.

putrid;  bread  tastes  bitter;  food  seems  tasteless.
I  I  Fine  prickings  on  dorsum  of  tongue.
IStitching,  smarting  pain  in  r.  side  and  tip  of  tongue,
iSmall,  round,  painless  swelling  in  middle  of  tongue.
1  I  Whitish  ulcer  on  tip  of  tongue.
^^  Inner  Mouth. '  l  Smarting  pain  on  inside  of  left  cheek,  like

from  pepper.
I  Putrid,  pus-like  taste  in  mouth. ^Phthisis.
I  1  Profuse  discharge  of  watery  saliva  (water-brash).
I  Bloody  saliva.

I  I  Hemorrhage  from  the  mouth.
^^  Throat, i  Difficulty  of  swallowing  solid  food;  oesophagus  as

if  contracted,
i  I  Ulceration  of  velum.

■  Sensation  of  dryness  in  fauces  and  throat  with  thirst.

I  I  Sensation  in  pharynx  as  if  crumbs  of  bread  had  re-

mained behind.

■  Stinging  in  throat  during  deglutition.

I I  Burning,  rough  sensation  deep  in  throat,  immediately
after  dinner.

I  I  Scraping  in  throat  from  eating  salt  food.

I  I  Hawking  up  of  green  or  yellow  mucus.

!  Rough,  scraping  feeling  of  dryness  deep  in  fauces  and  in
region  of  soft  palate,  producing  a  short,  hacking  cough,
accompanied  by  expectoration  of  yellow  mucus,  and
hoarse  voice,  having  a  deep  bass  sound.  ^Laryngeal
phthisis.

Throat  dark,  coppery,  red,  dry,  but  not  shining ;_  muscles
of  pharynx  swollen,  deglutition  most  painful;  incessant,
cough,  sometimes  ending  in  vomiting.


155  DROSERA  ROTUNDIFOLIA.

^*  Appetite,  Thirst. Desires,  Aversions. 1 1  Morning  thirst.

■  Aversion  to  pork.

"  Eating  and  Drinking,  i  '  Mouth  in  a  bitter  state  when  eat-
ing. ^Pregnancy.

I  Right  after  dinner,  burning  raw  feeling.

I  Cough,  <  after  drinking;  after  tobacco  smoke. ^Per-
tussis.
^^  Hiccough,  Belching,  Nausea  and  Vomiting. 1 1  Frequent
hiccough.

I  I  Eructations  tasting  bitter  or  sour;  water-brash.

Nausea,  with  stupefying  pressure  in  forehead.

I  I  Nausea  after  fatty  food;  <  after  midnight  till  morning.

Nausea  and  retching.

Vomiting:  of  blood,  of  bile,  in  morning ;  of  mucus,  water,.
or  food  when  coughing;  after  drinking;  especially  at
night  or  before  dinner;  first  food  then  mucus,  at  the
end  of  the  attack  (pertussis).

Vomiting  of  slimy  matter.

Worse  after  vomiting.
^^  Scrobiculum  and  Stomach. Clawing  sensation  in  pit  of
stomach.

■  Contractive  tension  at  pit  of  stomach,  as  if  everything

would  be  drawn  inwards,  especially  during  deep  inhala-
tion, and  with  cough.
^^  Hypochondria. Anxious  feeling  in  the  hypochondria.

■  Painful  to  touch,  and  when  coughing.

I  I  Must  support  the  hypochondria  with  the  hands  when
coughing. ^Pertussis.

■  Constrictive  pain  in  both  hypochondria,  impeding  cough-

ing; unable  to  cough  on  account  of  pain,  unless  hand  i&
pressed  upon  pit  of  stomach.
^^  Abdomen. ■Painful  constriction  of  epigastrium.

■  Dull  stitch  from  r.  to  1.  across  abdomen,  almost  taking

the  breath,  while  walking.
1  I  Stitches  in  r.  side  of  abdomen  while  sitting.
I  I  Stitch  from  left  loin  into  penis.

■  Constriction  in  abdomen,  with  vomiting. ^Pertussis.

■  Bellyache  after  sour  food.

^°  Stool  and  Rectum.  ■Outward  pressing  pain,  independent
of  stool.

Frequent  stool,  with  colic.

Stools:  soft,  fluid;  loose;  papescent;  white,  slimy  and
stinking,  with  watery,  odorless  urine.

Loose  stool  almost  continually,  but  rather  <  after  mid-
night; bloody,  mucous  or  offensive  stools,  followed  by
pains  in  abdomen  and  small  of  back.

Before  and  after  stool :  tensive  pain  in  upper  part  of  ab-
domen while  holding  breath.


DROSERA  ROTUNDIFOLIA.  156

After  stool:  iiiefFectual  straining;  constant  inclination  to
stool;  abdominal  and  dorsal  pains.
^^  Urinary  Organs. '  '  Frequent  urging  to  urinate,  with  scanty
discharge,  frequently  only  by  drops.
I  I  Frequent,  profuse  urination.
I  I  Urine  dark  and  of  strong  smell.
Urine  watery,  inodorous,  with  fetid  mucous  stool.
^^  Male  Sexual  Organs. Drawing  stitches  from  1.  loin  into
penis.
I  Itching  stitches  in  the  glans  penis.
^^  Female  Sexual  Organs. ■  Delay  of  the  first  menses.

Menses  too  late;  too  scanty;  suppression  of  menses;  blood
dark.

■  Leucorrhoea,  with  labor-like  pain.

^^  Voice  and  Larynx.  Trachea  and  Bronchia,  n Voice:
hoarse,  deep,  requires  exertion  to  speak;  husky;  hollow,
toneless;  cracked.

■  Catarrhal  hoarseness,  with  or  without  coryza  or  cough;

is  only  able  to  sj^eak  in  a  bass  voice;  hoarseness  after
measles.
B  Chronic  persistent  hoarseness  resulting from repeated
catarrhal  attacks.

I  Great  hoarseness,  with  sjDasmodic  cough,  after  measles.

I I  Epiglottis  in  constant  motion  to  and  fro,  constant  en-
deavor to  cough ;  larynx  very  dry ;  patient  involun-
tarily supports  thyroid  cartilage  on  swallowing  or
coughing,  and  there  appears  to  be  a  constant  strain  in
box  of  larynx,  with  disposition  to  vomit. ^Laryngitis.

■  Constant  tickling  in  larynx,  causing  cough  and  prevent-

ing sleep  at  night.

I  iSensation  like  from  a  feather  in  larynx,  exciting  cough.

I  I  Crawling  in  larynx,  which  provokes  hacking  cough,
with  sensation  as  if  a  soft  substance  were  in  it,  with  fine
stitches  extending  thence  to  r.  side  of  pharynx.

■  Bruised  feeling  in  larynx  whilst  inhaling.
iConstriction  of  the  larynx  when  talking.

I  Mucus  in  the  larynx,  either  hard  or  soft.

I  Chest  and  throat  symptoms  worse  from  talking  or  singing.

■  Laryngeal  phthisis,  with  hoarseness,  rapid  emaciation.

^°  Respiration,  i  l  Oppression,  with  every  word  he  speaks  the
throat  contracts ;  not  so  when  walking.

Respiration  slow;  predominant  with  moist  sound.

Intolerable  stitches  when  coughing  and  taking  a  deep  in-
spiration, in  the  upper  part  of  the  chest  near  the  axilla,
>  by  pressing  on  affected  part  with  the  hand,  with
purulent  expectoration  mixed  with  blood.

Whilst  inhaling,  felt  severe  aching  pains  in  ana  below
both  clavicles,  over  a  small  space  in  lungs;  the  infra-


157  DROSERA  ROTUNDIFOLIA.

clavicular  pain  afterwards  extended  round  to  the  scap-
ulae ;  also  a  bruised  feeling  of  the  larynx.

■Sensation  as  if  something  in  chest  prevented  exhalation
when  talking  or  coughing.

I  I  Oppressive  sensation  in  chest  as  if  expiration  were  pre-
vented by  coughing  or  talking.

I  I  During  an  expiration  in  evening,  when  lying  in  bed,
sudden  contraction  of  abdomen  occasioning  a  heaving
as  if  he  would  vomit  and  bringing  on  cough.

I  Difficult  breathing,  <  after  midnight.

■  Dyspnoea,  especially  on  talking,  with  every  word  throat

becomes  constricted;  no  dyspnoea  while  walking.
■Severe  dyspnoea  threatening  suffocation;  blueness  of  face
and  lips; cold  sweat  on  forehead;  vomiting  of  tough
mucus. ^Whooping  cough.

■  Oppression  of  chest  as  if  from  holding  back  the  breath.

■  Attack  of  suffocation;  cannot  recover  the  breath;  gasping.

■  Asthma,  particularly  when  talking,  with  contraction  of

throat  at  every  word  that  is  uttered.
I  I  Bad,  offensive-smelling  breath  when  coughing.
""  Cough. ■  'Deep  sounding,  hoarse  barking  cough.

■  ■Rough,  scraping,  dry  sensation  deep  in  fauces  and  soft

palate,  causing  hacking  cough,  with  yellow  mucous  ex-
pectoration and  hoarseness,  speaks  only  with  exertion,
and  in  a  deep  bass  voice;  oppression  of  chest  as  if  air
was  withheld  on  talking  and  coughing,  so  that  breath
could  not  be  expired.

■  Whooping  cough;  attacks,  every  one  to  three  hours,  with

barking  or  dull-sounding  coughs,  choking  breathing,
caused  by  tickling  or  dryness  in  throat,  or  from  a  sen-
sation of  a  soft  feather  in  larynx;  expectoration,  only  in
morning,  yellow  and  bitter;  has  to  swallow  the  mucus.

■  Attacks  of  coughing  preceded,  fifteen  or  twenty  minutes,

by  rattling  of  mucus  in  bronchial  tubes  to  which  patient

■  ■Whooping  cough,  with  feeling  of  constriction  in  chest

and  hypochondria,  so  that  ]3atient  tries  to  support  these
parts  with  hands;  <  after  midnight;  perspires  on
waking  from  sleep.

■  Cough  comes  in  fits,  at  long  intervals;  cough  during  in-

tervals is  short,  not  exhausting,  and  he  considers  it
trifling  in  comparison  with  the  tormenting  attacks ;  the
fits  begin  mildly,  are  short,  but  increase  during  course
of  disease,  until  cough  becomes  unceasing,  the  attacks
occur  in  quick  succession,  and  forces  to  sit  up,  always  be-
ginning with  titillation  and  renewed  inspiration,  until
finally  vomiting  of  mucus  (rarely  of  food)  sets  in,
which  fiiiishes  the  paroxysm;  great  exhaustion  after  the


DROSEPvA  ROTUNDIFOLIA.  158

fit;  frequently  <  at  night  on  lying  down. ^Whooping
cough.
■Paroxysmal  dry  cough,  exciting  cause  of  which  seems  to
be  in  abdomen  with copious  perspiration  over  whole
body  and  culminating  in  an  attack  of  severe  nausea.

■  Spasmodic,  nervous,  and  sympathetic  cough.

■  Spasmodic  cough  of  phthisical  girls.

I  I  When  coughing  a  feeling  as  if  something  kept  the  air
in  the  chest,  cannot  cough  right,  cannot  speak.

■Whooping  cough,  with  hemorrhage  from  mouth  and
nose,  anguish,  blue  face,  wheezing  breathing,  suffocation.

During  cough:  face  pale  or  bluish;  eftbrts  to  vomit;  vomit-
ing of  water,  mucus  and  food;  stitches  in  muscles  of
chest;  bleeding  from  nose  or  mouth;  has  to  support
chest  and  hypochondria;  hoarseness;  offensive  breath ;
rising  up  in  bed  with  fear  and  trembling.

■  Attacks  characterized  by  certain  typhoid  conditions,  with

severe  spasmodic  retraction  of  abdomen,  followed  by
vomiting  of  food,  mucus  and  water. ^Whooping  cough.

I  Cough  which  marks  the  sequelee  of  measles,  especially

when  it  occurs  in  paroxysms,  and  is  <  in  afternoon  and
evening;  even  when  cough  is  attended  by  bloody  and
purulent  expectoration.

■  I  Very  hoarse  cough,  <  after  midnight,  during  or  after

measles.

II  Spasmodic  cough,  attended  by  retching  and  vomiting.

■  Cough  when  singing,  causing  smarting  in  larynx.

■  Harassing,  titillating  cough  in  children,  not  at  all  during

day,  but  commences  as  soon  as  head  touches  pillow  at
night.

■  Cough,  in  evening,  immediately  after  lying  down.

■  The  fever  and  cough,  which  is  very  hoarse,  are  worse  after

twelve  at  night. ^Bronchitis  infantum.
•■Awakes  at  night  about  2  o'clock,  coughs  for  a  short  time

and  then  falls  asleep  again.
■Nocturnal  cough  of  phthisical  patients.

■  Severe  cough  of  young  phthisical  subjects,  with  bloody

and  purulent  expectoration,
1  1  Cough  sounds  loose,  nothing  comes  up. ^Catarrh.

■  Cough,  with  expectoration  of  bright  red  frothy  or  of  black

clotted  blood.

■  Bloody  and  purulent  expectoration  after  measles.  _

■  Very  violent  cough;  spitting  of  blood  and  pus,  with  vio-

lent pains  in  chest. ^Phthisis.

■  Expectoration: yellow; bitter;  offensive; bloody;  pus-

like; salty;  has  to  be  swallowed.
Cough  aggravated:  by  warmth;  drinking;  tobacco  smoke;
laughing; singing; weeping; after  lying  down;  after
midnight  or  in  the  morning.


159  DROSERA  ROTUNDIFOLIA.

^  Inner  Chest  and  Lungs,  i  Constriction  of  chest  and  hypo-
chondria.
I  Cough  with  sense  of  constriction  in  cliest,  which  seems  to
hold  breath  back  and  prevent  coughing,  with  pain  in
ribs,  so  that  he  is  compelled  to  support  the  parts  with
hands; vomiting  of  food,  then  of  mucus  and  water.

I  I  Tightness  of  chest,  especially  when  talking,  or  even

uttering  a  single  word;  >  wdiile  walking;  the  throat
seems  to  contract.

I I  Severe  stitches  in chest  when  sneezing or  coughing,
must  press  on  chest  with  hands,  for  relief.

■  Violent  oppressive  stitching  pain  across  chest,  passing

off  during  motion.

■  Sensation  of  oppression  in  chest  as  if  the  air  were  retained

when  coughing,  and  as  if  breath  could  not  be  expelled.

■  Burning  sensation  in  centre  of  chest.

■  Bronchitis  of  old  age,  in  connection  with  emphysema  or

bronchiectasie;  nocturnal  paroxysms;  <  lying  down;
cough  seems  to  come  from  abdomen,  shaking  all  the
muscles  of  chest  and  body,  with  much  exhaustion  after
attack ;  expectoration  of  yellow  mucus  or  pus ;  parox-
ysms of  cough  from  one  to  two  hours  apart.

■  Phthisis  with  severe  pains  in  chest,  purulent  expectora-

tion and  foul  pus-like  taste  in  mouth.

■  Tuberculosis.

^°  Outer  Chest. ■Stitches  in  muscles  of  chest,  when  breath-
ing or  coughing.
I  I  Sternum  painful  when  pressing  on  it,  as  from  festering

under  skin.
I  Black  pores  on  chest  and  shoulder.
^^  Neck  and  Back. iNeck  stiff  and  painful  on  motion.
Nape  of  neck  painful  to  touch.

■  Pain  between  scapulse  drawing  to  small  of  back.

I  I  Stitching  tearing  from  spine  to  anterior  s23inous  process
of  1.  ilium,  when  sitting.

■  Back  pains  as  if  bruised,  in  the  morning.
I  I  Itching  stitch  in  coccyx  when  sitting.

^^  Upper  Limbs, l  l  Quivering  on  r.  shoulder  when  at  rest.
I  I  Nightly  pains in  humerus,  going  off  by  day  during
motion.

■  Coldness  of  the  hands.

Deep  ulcer  on  back  of  r.  hand  discharging  bloody  water.
Red  spots  on  back  of  hand  and  behind  wrist.

■  Fingers  spasmodically  contracted,  rigid  in  grasping.

^  Lower  Limbs, ll  Laming  pain  in  r.  hip-joint  and  tliigh,
with  pain  in  ankle,  as  if  sprained;  limp  when  walking.
I  I  Violent  stitch  in  os  ischium  on  rising  from  a  seat.
■Pressing pain  in  posterior  muscles  of  thigh,  < from


DROSERA  ROTUNDIFOLIA.  160

pressure  and  stooping ;  could  not  lie  thereon  at  night,
passes  off  after  rising.

I  I  Occasional  stitches  in  middle  of  1.  thigh  anteriorly.

I  I  Fine  cutting  stitch  in  r.  calf,  coming  on  when  sitting,
passing  off  when  walking.

I  1  Tearing  pain  in  r.  ankle,  as  if  sprained,  only  when
walking.

I  I  Stiffness  of  ankles.

I  Feet  feel  chilly,  covered  with  a  cold  sweat.
^^  Limbs  in  General, i  l  All  the  limbs  feel  lame  and  bruised
as  if  beaten,  and  are  outwardly  painful.  ^Catarrhal  fever.

I  I  Gnawing  and  stitching  pain  in  bones  of  limbs,  especially
severe  at  joints;  severe  stitches  in  joints;  less  painful
during  motion  than  during  rest.

I  I  Painful  stitching  pressure  in  muscles  of  upper  and  lower
limbs,  in  every  position.
^  Rest. Position. Motion. During  rest: Cjuivering  in  r.
shoulder;  stitches  in  joints  <  ;  shivering;  internal  chill.

Lying:  in  bed,  during  expiration  sudden  contraction  of
abdomen;  great  exhaustion  after  fit  of  coughing;  on
side  <  pain  in  muscles  of  thigh;  on  back,  snoring;
forced  to  lie  down  from  chilliness ;  at  night,  brings  on
titillating  cough  in  children  ;  cough  in  evening  <  ;  pain
in  ulcers  <  when  lying  on  sore  side.

Rising  from  seat:  violent  stitching  in  os  ischium.

Sitting :  pain  in  side  of  abdomen ;  cough  forces  him  to  sit
up ;  tearing  from  spine  to  anterior  spinous  process  of  1.
ilium ;  itching  stitch  in  coccyx ;  fine  cutting  stitch  in
r.  calf  < ;  pain  in  ulcers  <.

Supporting:  head  on  hands  >  pains  in  brain;  hypochon-
dria with  hands  Avhile  coughing ;  thyroid  cartilage  when
swallowing.

Stooping:  frontal  headache  <  ;  pain  in  temples  <  ;  nose-
bleed <  ;  pain  in  muscles  of  thigh  <.

Stepping :  affects  brain  painfully.

Walking:  vertigo;  tendency  to  fall;  headache  >;  pain
across  abdomen;  >  oppression  and  contraction  of  throat
dyspnoea  > ; causes  perspiration ;  pain  in ankle <
>  stitches  in  r.  calf;  pain  in  ankle  only  when  walking
pain  in  ulcers.

Singing: < throat  and  chest  symptoms.

Cough:  causes  smarting  in  larynx.

Talking:  constriction  of  larynx;  <  chest  and  throat
symptoms;  sensation  as  if  something  prevented  exhala-
tion ;  oppressive  sensation  in  chest ;  dyspnoea ;  constric-
tion of  throat ;  asthma.

Motion :  of  eyes  <  pains  in  brain ;  pain  in  temples  >  ;
of  epiglottis  constantly  to  and  fro ;  >  violent  stitching


161  DROSERA  ROTUNDIFOLIA,

pains  across  chest ;  neck  painful ;  pain  in  humerus  >  ;
stitches  in  joints  >  ;  >  shivering.
^  Nerves, l  l  Weakness  of  whole  body  with  sunken  eyes  and
cheeks.

■  Great  exhaustion  after  coughing  fits. ^Whooping  cough.
Torpidity;  attacks,  with  numbness.

I  I  Epileptic  attacks:  with  rigidity;  with  twitching  of  limbs;-,
after  attack,  htemoptysis  and  sleep.
^^  Sleep. I  Frequent  yawning  and  stretching.
Sleepiness  immediately  after  sunset.

Frequent  starting  from  sleep,  at  night,  as  from  fright,  yet
when  awake  is  not  fearful.

■  Sleeplessness  or  frequent  waking  from  sleep.
Snoring  when  lying  on  back,  asleep.

Dreams:  vivid;  partly  pleasant,  partly  anxious;  vexa-
tious, over  wrong  doing  of  others ;  of  thirst  and  drink-
ing, awakes,  is  thirsty  and  must  drink.

On  waking,  great  weariness.

^  I  Perspires  immediately  on  w^aking  from  sleep. ^Pertussis.
^  Time. Morning :  headache  in  temples ;  nosebleed  <  ;  pro-
fuse fluent  coryza ;  toothache ;  thirst ;  vomiting ;  expec-
toration; pain  in  back;  pain  in  ulcers  <.

2  A.M. :  wakes  coughing.

Forenoon:  chill.

Afternoon  :  cough  < ;  towards  evening  warmth  of  upper
portion  of  body.

Lasting  till  3  P.M. :  thirst  after  chilliness ;  headache;  heat
of  face.

By  day:  pain  in  humerus  >  ;  chill.

Immediately  after  sunset :  sleepiness.

Evening:  anxiety;  flushes  of  heat ;  nosebleed  <;  during
expiration  sudden  contraction  of  abdomen ;  cough  < ;
thirst,  headache  and  heat  of  face  after  chilliness  >.

Night;  anxiety;  flushes  of  heat;  vomiting  after  drinking;
great  exhaustion  after  fit  of  coughing;  paroxysms  of
bronchitis;  pain  in  humerus;  frequent  starting  from
sleep;  in  bed,  chilliness;  internal  chill;  heat;  only  at
night,  in  children,  harassing,  titillating  cough ;  cough
of  phthisical  patients ;  warm  sweat.

After  midnight:  nausea  after  fatty  food;  stools  < ;  diffi-
cult breathing  <;  cough  <;  hoarse  cough  <;  cold-
ness of  1.  side  of  face,  r.  half  hot  and  dry;  fever  and
cough  < ;  heat  < ;  warm  sweat  <  ;  cutting  pains  in
ulcers  <.

^^Temperature and  Weather. Open  air: vertigo  when,
walking.
Warm  drink  :  produces  toothache.
Warmth  :  <  cough ;  <  pain  in  ulcers.

VOL.  V — 11.


DROSERA  ROTUNDIFOLIA.  162

On  getting  warm  in  bed :  cough ;  pain  in  long  bones.
Heat:  pain  in  temples  <.

Cold  air:  >  pain  in  temples;  >pain  in  ulcers.
After  undressing:  itching.
Fever. Rigors  or  shuddering  spells.

Chill  with  icy-cold  hands,  blue  nails,  cold,  pale  face,  and
cold  extremities  ;  must  lie  down.

■  Chill  in  forenoon.

I  Always  feels  too  cold,  cannot  get  warm ;  feels  cold  at
night  in  bed ;  shivering  during  rest,  none  during  motion.

■  Frequent  crawls  over  body  with  cold  hands  and  hot  face.
Cannot  keep  from  shivering  and  feeling  cold,  although

body  is  warm  to  touch.
I  Internal  chill  at  night,  in  bed  and  during  rest.

■  Chill  during  the  day,  heat  at  night.

I  I  One-sided  chill  or  coldness,  principally  left  side.

I  Whooping  cough  with  chills  and  disposition  to  sink  in
the  chill.

I  1  After  chilliness,  slight  thirst,  heaviness  of  head,  throb-
bing pain  in  occiput,  and  heat  of  face,  usual  warmth  of
rest  of  body,  lasting  till  3  p.m.  ;  feels  well  in  evening.

After  midnight,  coldness  of  1.  half  of  face,  with  sticking
pains  in  it;  r.  half  hot  and  dry.

il  I  Febrile  shivers  over  whole  body,  with  heat  of  face  and
icy  coldness  of  hands,  no  thirst.

'I  Warmth  of  upper  portion  of  body  towards  evening.

I  Heat  and  redness  of  face.

■  Heat  almost  exclusively  on  face  and  head.

■  Painful  heaviness  and  lameness  in  all  the  limbs,  frequent

shudderings  over  whole  body,  coldness  of  hands  with

heat  of  face. ^Catarrhal  fever.
1  Profuse  discharge  of  watery  saliva  during  febrile  stage.
Heat,  without  thirst.

■  Heat,  worse  after  midnight.

■  Cold  sweat  on  forehead,  feet,  face  and  abdomen.

■  Warm  sweat  at  night,  particularly  after  midnight  and  in

morning  hours,  most  profuse  on  face  and  abdomen.

■  Sweat  over  whole  body,  with  a  cough  which  brought  on

violent  retching.

■  Severe  chill  with cold  face,  icy  coldness  of  hands  and

feet,  and  bilious  vomiting;  heat  accompanied  by  violent
pressing  and  throbbing  pains  in  head,  and  spasmodic
cough; apyrexia  accompanied by  gastric symptoms.

■  Intermittent  fever,  with  sore  throat  and  nausea.

I  I  Paroxysm  before  9  a.m.  every  morning. ^Intermittent.

■  Fevers  occurring  when  whooping  cough  is  epidemic.

"  Attacks,  Periodicity. Fifteen  or  twenty  minutes  before
attacks  of  coughing  rattling  of  mucus  in  bronchial  tubes.


163  DPvOSERA  ROTUNDIFOLIA.

Frequent :  vanishing  of  sight ;  sneezing ;  hiccough  ;  stool
with  colic;  urging  to  urinate;  profuse  urination;  great
exhaustion,  after  fit  of  coughing,  yawning;  stretch-
ing; starting  from  sleep;  waking  from  sleep;  crawls
over  body;  shuddering  over  whole  body.

Attacks:  of  vomiting;  of  cough  at  long  intervals;  of  cough
occur  in  quick  succession ;  of  severe  nausea  after  cough ;
of  torpidity  with  numbness ;  epileptic.

Evening  one  to  three  hours :  attacks  of  whooping  cough.

Paroxysms :  of  cough ;  of  nocturnal  bronchitis.
'"  Locality  and  Direction.  Left :  tendency  to  fall  to  side ;
pain  in  side  of  head;  pain  in  skin  of  cheek  below  eye-
lid ;  coldness  of  half  of  face ;  pain  in  inferior  maxilla ;
pain  on  inside  of  cheek ;  pain  from  loin  to  penis ;  tear-
ing from  spine  to  anterior  spinous  process  of  ilium  ;
stitches  in  middle  of  thigh ;  chill  principally  1.  side ;
side  of  face  cold.

Right:  pain  above  temple;  soreness  of  skin  of  temple;
pain  in  internal  ear ;  pain  and  heat  on  side  of  face ;
burning  in  angle  of  mouth ;  pain  in  side  and  tip  of
tongue;  in  side  of  abdomen ;  stitches  to  side  of  pharynx;
quivering  on  shoulder ;  deep  ulcer  on  back  of  hand ;
laming  pain  in  hip  joint  and  thigh;  cutting  stitch  in
calf;  tearing  pain  in  ankle;  side  of  face  hot  and  dry.

From  r.  to  1. :  stitches  across  abdomen.

From  within  outward :  pain  in  forehead ;  stitches  in  eyes.

Outward  :  pain  in  rectum.
'^  Sensations.  Pain  in  ear  as  if  pressed  together ;  oesophagus
as  if  contracted  ;  in  pharynx  as  if  crumbs  of  bread  were
left  behind ;  sensation  in  pit  of  stomach  as  if  everything
would  be  drawn  inwards ;  sensation  like  from  a  feather
in  throat;  sensation  as  if  a  soft  substance  were  in  larynx;
as  if  something  in  chest  prevented  exhalation  ;  oppres-
sion of  chest  as  if  from  holding  back  the  breath ;  as  if
something  kept  the  air  in  the  chest;  limbs  feel  as  if
beaten  and  sore,  as  from  too  hard  a  bed.

Pain:  in  r.  internal  ear;  in  throat  when  swallowing;  in
abdomen  ;  in  small  of  back ;  in  ribs ;  between  scapulae
drawing  to  small  of  back  ;  in  humerus;  in  ankle.

Tearing  pain :  in  1.  inferior  maxilla ;  from  spine  to  ante-
rior spinous  process  of  1.  ilium  ;  in  r.  ankle.

Violent  pains :  in  chest.

Lancinating  pain  :  in  fore  part  of  brain.

Cutting  stitch  :  in  r.  calf.

.Stitches:  in  eyes;  in  ears;  in  r.  side  of  abdomen  ;  from  1.
loin  into  penis ;  from  larynx  to  pharynx ;  in  upper  part
of  chest ;  in  muscles  of  chest ;  in  chest ;  in  middle  of  1.
thigh ;  in  joints.


DROSERA  ROTUNDIFOLIA.  164

Stitching  pain :  in  1.  inferior  maxilla ;  in  teeth ;  in  r.  side
and  tip  of  tongue ;  across  chest ;  from  spine  to  anterior
spinous  process  of  1.  ilium  ;  in  os  ischium  ;  in  bones  of.
limbs ;  in  joints ;  in  muscles  of  upper  and  lower  limbs.

Stinging  pain :  on  r.  side  of  face ;  in  throat ;  in  joints ;  in
long  bones ;  in  skin.

Drawing  pain  in  1.  side  of  head.

Gnawing :  on  fore  part  of  scalp ;  in  bones  of  limbs ; in
joints ;  in  skin.

Constrictive  pain  :  in  both  hypochondria ;  of  epigastrium.

Clawing :  in  pit  of  stomach.

Labor-hke  pains:  in  abdomen.

Pressing  pain :  in  temples ;  in  head ;  in  rectum ;  in  poste-
rior muscles  of  thigh.

Pressive  pain  :  in  forehead.

Sticking  pain  :  in  ear ;  in  face.

Throbbing  pain  :  in  occiput.

Boring  pain  :  in  forehead.

Burning  pain :  in  scalp ;  in  skin  of  cheek.

Prickling  pain  :  in  skin  of  1.  cheek ;  on  dorsum  of  tongue.

Smarting  pain  :  in  scalp  ;  in  side  and  base  of  tongue ;  on
inside  of  cheek.

Itching  stitches :  in  the  glans  penis ;  in  coccyx.

Dull  stitch:  across  abdomen.

Bruised  feeling :  in  larynx ;  in  back.

Sprained  feeling  :  in  ankle.

Aching  pain:  above  r.  temple;  in  ear;  in  face;  in  belly;
in  and  below  both  clavicles,  extending  to  scapulse.

Soreness :  in  temples ;  in  skin  of  r.  temple.

Scraping:  in  throat;  in  region  of  soft  palate.

Stitching  sensation  :  in  pustules  on  face.

Burning  :  in  skin  at  angle  of  mouth ;  deep  in  throat ;  in
centre  of  chest.

Laming  pain:  in  r.  hip  joint;  in  thigh.

Tensive  pain :  in  upper  part  of  abdomen.

Contraction:  of  abdomen;  of  epigastrium.

Lameness  :  in  all  the  limbs.

Heaviness :  of  head  ;  of  all  the  limbs.^^

Dulness  of  head.

Tension  in  head  ;  at  pit  of  stomach.

Stiffness  :  of  neck ;  of  ankles.

Oppression  :  in  throat ;  in  chest.

Constriction:  in  abdomen;  in  larynx;  of  throat;  in  chest;
in  hypochondria.

Pressure:  in forehead ;  in  muscles of  upper  and  lower
limbs.

Dry  heat :  on  r.  side  of  face.

Humming :  in  ears.


165  DROSERA  ROTUNDIFOLIA.

Drumming  in  ears.

Roaring :  in  ears.

Quivering :  on  r.  shoulder.

Dryness :  of  lips ;  in  fauces ;  in  throat ;  of  larynx.

Rough  feeling:  in  throat;  in  region  of  soft  palate.

Itching :  in  fore  part  of  scalp ;  in  skin.

Crawling :  in  larynx.

Tickling :  in  larynx.

Coldness:  of  1.  half  of  face;  of  hands;  of  the  body  of  an
incisor.
**  Tissues.  Acts  powerfully  upon  the  respiratory  system,
through  its  influence  on  the  pneumogastric  nerve,  pro-
ducing a  spasmodic  dry  cough,  simulating  that  of
whooping  cough.

The  attacks  of  cough  are  of  a  spastic  character,  depending
on  irritation  of  the  vagus,  and  affect  the  bronchi;
whooping  cough,  bronchial  catarrh,  bronchitis  in  sen-
ility, emphysema  and  bronchiectasie.

Hemorrhages,  blood  light-red.

Rapid  emaciation,  with  acute  phthisis  laryngealis.

Gnawing,  stinging  pains  in  joints  and  long  bones.
*^ Touch. Passive  Motion. Injuries. Touch: stitching
sensation  in  pustules  on  face  <  ;  hypochondria  painful ;
nape  of  neck  painful.

Pressure:  faceache  <  ;  of  hand  on  pit  of  stomach  >  pain
when  coughing;  >  stitches  in  chest;  on  chest  when
coughing  or  sneezing  >  stitches ;  pain  in  muscles  of
thigh  <.

Rubbing :  itching  on  scalp  >  ;  >  pain  in  ulcers.
*®  Skin. I  I  Prickling,  burning,  stinging,  itching,  gnawing  in
skin.

1  I  Itching  >  by  scratching,  rubbing  or  wiping  with  hand.

I  I  A^iolent  itching  while  undressing ;  when  scratching,
skin  readily  peels  off.

■  Eruption,  like  measles.

1  I  Eruption,  with  painful  soreness  or  stinging.

Black  pores  on  chest,  shoulder  and  chin.

■Bleeding,  burning  ulcers;  cutting  pains;  pus  bloody,
thin  and  watery,  ichorous ;  <  in  morning  and  during
latter  part  of  night;  also  when  lying  on  sore  side,  when
sitting,  when  getting  warm  in  bed ;  >  from  cold,  rub-
bing and  while  walking ;  r.  side.

II Measles;  very  hoarse  cough  follows  or  accompanies  the
disease,  <  after  midnight.
^^  Stages  of  Life,  Constitution. Boy,  a^t.  1 ,  after  having  been
cured  of  dysenteric  diarrhoea  by  Chamom. ;  whooping
cough.

Girl,  set  1|,  has  been  suffering  for  half  a  year  from  cough
which  has  grown  gradually  more  severe.


DROSERA  ROTUND.— DULCAMARA.  16&

Sensitive  child,  set.  2 ;  whooping  cough.

Boy,  get.  10;  girl,  set.  3;  child,  set.  4;  boy,  set.  3;  boy,  set.

28  weeks;  child,  set.  10  weeks;  whooping  cough.
Phlegmatic  torj)id  girl,  set.  14,  of  hemorrhagic  diathesis ;.

whooping  cough.
Poor  woman,  set.  60,  after  catching  cold ;  cough.
*^  Relations. Antidotedby: Camphor.

Compatible: Calc.  ost.,  Fulsat.,  Veratr.,  Sulphur.

Complementary :  Nux  vom.

Compare: BellacL, Chelid., Cina, Corall. rub., Cuprum^.

Hyosc,  Ipecac,  Nux  vom.,  Sambuc,  in  spasmodic  coughs.


DULCAMARA.

Bittersweet.  Solanacese.


A  climbing  shrub,  from  six  to  eight  feet  high,  flowering  in  clusters,  berries-
oval,  bright  scarlet;  grows  in  moist  places  through  Europe  and  North  America.

The  tincture  is  prepared  from  the  fresh  stems  and  leaves,  gathered  before
flowering.

Introduced  by  Hahnemann,  and  extensively  proved  by  him  and  others,
among  whom  were  Gross,  Nenning,  Riickert,  and  Stapf,  later  by  Kockwith  (tinc-
ture), Berrige  and  Kobinson  (high  potencies).  See  Allen's  Encyclopedia,  vol.  4,.
p.  178.

CLiNiCAii  Atjthobities.— Gaspary,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  1,  p.  176;  Chronic-
headache,  Small,  Raue's  Eec,  1874,  p.  258;  Ophthalmia  neonatorum,  (2  cases),  Wes-
selhoeft,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol,  1,  p.  252;  Allen  &  Norton's  Oph.  Therap.,  p.  59^
Blepharophthalmia  and  adenitis,  Caspari,  Dunham's  Lectures  on  Mat.  Med.,  vol.
2,  p.  292;  Hay  fever,  Boyce,  Hom.  Clinics,  vol.  1,  p.  112;  Facial  neuralgia,  O.  W.
Smith,  Organon,  vol.  1,  p.  481;  Swelling  of  tonsils  (2  cases),  Hofrichter,  Eiick.  Kl.
Erf.,  vol.  5,  p.  238;  Catarrhal  angina,  Zeller,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  5,  p.  238;  Biar-
rAosa,  Small,  Eaue's  Eec,  1873,  p.  119;  Hartmann,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  1,  p.  831  j
Gross,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  1,  p.  832;  (7  cases)  Gross,  Sonnenberg,  Schindler,  Sei-
del,  Tietze,  Schreter,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  1,  p.  832-3;  Diarrhoea  and  catarrh  of
stomach,  Kafka,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  5,  p.  414;  Bloody  diarrhoea,  Sonnenberg,  Eiick.
Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  1,  p.  832  ;  Dysentery,  Gouwerky,  Euck.  Kl.  Erf.,  v.  5,  p.  444 ;  Cholerine
with  urticaria,  Billig,  Allg.  Hom.  Ztg.,  v.  101,  p.  109  ;  Incontinence  of  urine,  Gouwerky,
Eiick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  2,  p.  43;  Urinary  difficulty,  Eiickert,  Euck.  Kl.  Erf.,  v. 2,  p.
16;  Herpes  preputialis,  Gilchrist's  Surgery,  p.  532;  Influenza,  Payne,  Eaue's  Eec,
1870,  p.  182;  Cough,  Hrg.,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf,,  v.  3,  p.  11,  78;  Whooping-cough
Schron,  Kreuss,  Eiick,  Kl.  Erf.,  v.  3,  p.  78;  Catarrhal  affections  of  chest,  Battmann
Euck.  Kl.  Erf.,  v.  5,p.  739;  Myelitis,  Hirsch,  Euck.  Kl.  Erf,  v.  5,  p.  8C9;  Spinal
meningitis  following  poorly  developed  eruption,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf.,  v,  3,  f.  468; Warts


167  DULCAMARA.

on  ^ ant/s,  Stapf,  Dunham's  Lectures  on  Mat.  Med.,  v.  2,  p.  306;  Pains  in  shin-bones,
Shephard,  Organon,  v.  3,  p.  361 ;  Rheumatism  (3  cases),  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf.,  v.  5,  p
897;  Rheumatic  pains  (4 cases),  Gaspnn',  Rumnael,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf.,  v.  3,  p.  516
Pain  in  limbs,  Goullon,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf.,  v.  3,  p.  17  ;  Scarlet  fever,  Hartmann,  Buchner.
Eiick.  Kl.  Erf., v.  4,  p.  49;  Typhoid  fever, Bart].,  Dunham's  Lectures  on  Mat,
Med.,  V.  2,  p.  306 ;  Glandular  enlargements,  "Wood,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf.,  v.  4,  p.  369
Adenitis,  Hartmann, Dunham's  Lectures  on  Mat.  Med.,  v.  2.  p.  294 ;  Anasarca.
Mschk.,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf,  v.  4,  p.  345 ; Urticaria,  Knorre,  Sonnenberg,  Eiick.  Kl
Erf.,  V.  4,  p.  198;  Sonnenberg,  Dunham's  Lectures  on  Mat.  Med.,  v.  2,  p.  305
Herpes,  Trinks,  Knorre,  Eomig,  Gross,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf.,  v,  4,  p.  239 ;  Crusta  lactea,
Eomig,  see  Dunham's  Lectures  on  Mat.  Med.,  v.  2,  p.  306  ;  Mehlflechte  {lichen)  on
^wee.  Gross,  Dunham's  Lectures  on  Mat.  Med.,  v.  2,  p.  306;  Eruption  of  itching
pustules,  Nottingham,  Eaue's  Eec  ,  1874,  p.  293;  Pemphigus,  Bethmann,  Dunham's
Lectures  on  Mat.  Med.,  v.  2,  p.  305,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf,  v.  4,  p.  165.

^  Mind. iCaniiot  find  the  right  word.

iMental  confusion,  cannot  concentrate  his  thoughts.

I  I  Delirium  at  night  witli  the  pain,  and  during  fever-heat.

Imbecility  more  frequent  than  insanity.

I  Asks  for  one  thing  or  another,  rejecting  it  when  proffered.

■  Depressed;  solicitude  concerning  the  future.

■  Quarrelsome,  irritable  mood;  easily  angered.

■  Great  restlessness  and  impatience.

■  Inclination  to  scold,  without  being  angry.

^  Sensorium. Momentary vertigo; vertigo when walking,
with  darkness  before  eyes.

■  On  awaking  in  morning,  dizzy,  dark  before  eyes.
I  I  Dulness  of  senses.

,  ■Dulness  and  painful  stupefaction  of  head.

■  Heaviness  of  head.

^  Inner  Head. '  i  Sensation  as  of  a  board  pressing  against  the
forehead.

■  Boring,  burning  in  forehead,  with  digging  in  brain;  <

from  motion,  even  talking;  head  heavy;  increased  flow

of  saliva,  with  dryness  of  tongue  and  thirst;  pulse  hard

and  tense;  great  weakness  and  prostration  in  limbs.
I  I  Boring  headache  from  within  to  without,  in  the  temples

and forehead; < before midnight and when lying

quiet.
I  I  Pressing,  stupefying  pain  in  forehead,  with  obstruction

of  nose.
I  I  Bursting  pains  extending  from  forehead  to  bridge  of

nose.
■Stupefying  ache  in  occiput,  ascending  from  nape  of  neck.

■  Chilliness  in  cerebellum  and  over  back,  returning  every

evening;  cerebellum  as  if  enlarged; <  in  cold,  damp
weather; <  until  2  p.m;  >  better  lying  down.

■  Congestion to  head,  buzzing  in  ears,  dull  hearing;  <

from  getting  feet  wet.


DULCAMARA.  168

I  Feeling  as  if  head  was  enlarged.

I  Continual  dull  pain  in  head,  chest,  and  stomach,  with
great  uneasiness,  depression  of  spirits,  labored  respira-
tion, mental  confusion,  and  inability  to  concentrate
thoughts. ^Chronic  headache.

llCatarrhal  and  rheumatic  headaches,  <  in  damp,  cold
weather.

*  Outer  Head, l Sensation  of  chilliness  in  cerebellum  and

over  back ;  feeling  as  if  hair  stood  on  end  ;  recurs  every
evening.

■  Ringworm  of  scalp;  glands  about  throat  swollen.

■  Thick  crusts  on  scalp,  causing  hair  to  fall  out.

■  ■Scald-head,  thick,  brown  crusts  with  reddish  borders  on

forehead,  temples,  and  chin,  bleeding  when  scratched.

■  Tinea  capitis,  crusta  lactea  and  dandruff,  <  by  change

of  weather.

*  Sight  and  Eyes, i  i  Aching  in  eyes  when  reading;  sight

dim';  scintillations;  <  at  rest.
I  1  Threatened  amaurosis  in  scrofulous  children.

■  Dim  sight,  sees  as  through  a  gauze.
I  I  Sparks  before  eyes.

(  I  Sensation  as  if  fire  were  darting  out  of  eyes,  when  walk-
ing in  sun  or  in  room.
I  I  Pupils  greatly  dilated.

■  Idiopathic  iritis  after  exposure  in  damp  weather; <  at

night,  also  in  cold  air; > during  motion and  from
warmth.

■  Ophthalmia;  scrofulous,  from  every  exposure  to  cold.

I  I  Ophthalmia  neonatorum  (often  accompanied  by  consti-
j)ation),  with  chemosis  of  conjunctiva.

■  Scrofulous  blepharophthalmia  and  adenitis;  crusty  erup-

tion on  margin  of  eyelids  and  swelling  and  induration

of  cervical  glands.
I  I  Twitching  of  eyelids  in  cold  air.
I  i  Paralysis  of  upper  lids.

■  Eruption  of  yellow  vesicles  under  eyes ;  bluish-red  cheeks.
^  Hearing  and  Ears. ■  Buzzing  in  the  ears.

■  Dull  pains,  humming  in  ears,  obtuse  hearing.

■  ■Earache;  nausea; buzzing; <  at  night  and  when  still.

■  ■  Earache  the  whole  night,  preventing  sleep.
■Stitches  in  auditory  meatus  and  parotid  gland.

■  Swelling  of  parotids;  also  after  measles.

'^  Smell  and  Nose. ■Nosebleed, hot,  clear  blood;  pressure
above  nose; <  after  getting  wet.

■  Coryza,  dry; >  during  motion;  <  during  rest;  renewed

by  slightest  exposure,  and  <  in  cold  air.
■Severe  coryza,  skin  hot,  dry;  limbs  cold,  stiff,  numb  and
painful;  general  offensive  sweat;  coryza  with  children.


169  DULCAMARA.

I  Nostrils  entirely  filled  up,  preventing  breathing  through
nose,  constant  sneezing,  profuse  discharge  of  water  from
nose  and  eyes,  <  in  open  air,  >  in  closed  room,  <  on
awaking  in  morning,  in  evening,  eyes  sometimes  swelled
and  full,  at  one  time  nose  most  affected,  then  again  eyes,
cannot  be  near  cut  grass  or  newly  mown  hay,  >  at  sea-
side. ^Hay  fever.

■  Stoppage  of  nose;  discharge  suppressed  from  least  con-

tact with  cold  air.
I  I  Nasal  catarrh  dry,  in  a  dry  atmosphere.
■*  Upper  Face, l Complexion  pale,  watery  or  milky.

■  Face  bloated;  dropsy.

I  Facial  neuralgia  on  1.  side,  involving  temple,  ear,  orbit

and  jaws;  usually  seemed  to  start  from  malar  bone;
paroxysms  preceded  by  the  parts  becoming  very  cold,
and  attended  by  canine  hunger ;  <  or  excited  by
slightest  exposure  to  cold;  >  by  external  warmth.,
iFaceache  and  asthma,  after  disappearance  of  tetters  in
face.

I I  Humid  eruptions  on  cheeks.

I  I  Pimples  and  little  ulcers  around  mouth,  with  tearing

pains  when  moving  the  parts.

I I  Thick  brown-yellow  crusts  on  face,  forehead,  temples  and
chin;  crusta  lactea.

■  Thick  brown  herpetic  crusts  on  face,  with  reddish  borders,

bleeding  when  scratched.

■  Impetigo  faciei.

■  ■Warts  and  eruptions  on  face.

I  I  Convulsions  beginning  in  face.
^  Lower  Face. '  l  Twitchings  of  lips  when  in  the  cold  air.

■  Toothache  with  salivation.
Teeth  feel  blunt.

■  Mouth  distorted;  drawn  to  one  side.

^°  Teeth  and  Gums. ■Toothache  from  cold,  especially  with
diarrhcea;  confusion  in  head;  profuse  salivation ;  teeth
feel  blunt,  or  as  if  asleep.
I  Scurvy  from  cold.

■  Receding,  spongy  gums;  ptyalism.
^^  Taste  and  Tongue. ■Bitter  taste.

I  I  Itching,  crawling  on  tip  of  tongue.

■  Mouth  and  tongue  dry;  dry,  swollen  tongue.

I  I  Dryness  and  roughness  of  tongue,  with  much  thirst  and
increased  flow  of  saliva.

■  Swelling of  tongue, hindering speech and impeding

breathing.

■  ■Inarticulate  speech  from  a  swollen  tongue,  but  talks  in-

cessantly.


DULCAMARA.  170

I  Tongue  and  jaws  become  lame,  if  cold  air  or  water  chills

him.

I I  Tongue  paralyzed  from  cold.

^"  Inner  Mouth, i Saliva  tenacious,  soap-like;  gums  spongy.

■  Increased  flow  of  saliva ;  rheumatic.
I  I  Mouth  dry,  without  thirst.

iStomacace,  rheumatic,  also  after  abuse  of  mercury,  with
ptyalism  and  swollen  cervical  glands.

iMucous  membrane  of  mouth  greatly  swollen  and  very
red  ;  throughout  its  whole  extent  here  and  there  raw,  ex-
coriated and  very  painful  spots  denuded  of  epithelium;
talking,  chewing,  and  swallowing  greatly  impeded ;  teeth
thickly  coated  with  tenacious,  foul  mucus,  deeply  im-
printing cheeks  and  edges  of  tongue;  constant  flow  of
saliva,  which  as  well  as  the  breath,  has  a  fetid,  putre-
factive odor;  attack  preceded  by  paleness  of  face,  heavi-
ness of  eyes,  and  lassitude  of  limbs. 6'Stomacace.

I  Ulceration  trivial,  but  swelling  extreme,  with  spongy,,
loose  gums  and  swollen  tongue;  holds  cold  water  con-
stantly in  mouth,  as  pain  and  heat  is  >  thereby. ^Can-
crum  oris.
13  Throat. '  i  Much  mucus  in  fauces.

I  I  Continual  hawking  up  of  very  tough  saliva,  with  much
rawness  in  fauces.

I  Tonsillitis  from  every  cold  change.

■  Pressure,  as  if  uvula  were  too  long.

■  Catarrhal  angina  after  catching  cold;  hypersemia  of  soft

palate  and  uvula;  swelling  of  tonsils;  difficult  deglu-
tition.
^^  Appetite,  Thirst. Desires,  Aversions. ■  Hunger,  without
appetite. ^Pemphigus.
Hunger,  after  the  fever.

■  Great  thirst  for  cold  drinks.

■  Unquenchable  thirst.

■  Aversion  to  food  ;  shuddering  as  though  he  would  vomit.
^^  Hiccough,  Belching,  Nausea  and  Vomiting, i  i  Empty

eructations,  with  shuddering  as  from  disgust.
I  I  Frequent  eructations  while  eating.
1  I  Nausea,  loss  of  appetite. ^Cholerine.

■  Nausea,  vomiting,  disgust  for  coffee,  great  thirst.

■  Nausea  accompanies  the  desire  for  stool ;  general  prostra-

tion. 6'Diarrhoea  from  cool  change  of  weather.

■  Great  chilliness  during  vomiting.

■  Vomiting,  early  in  morning,  of  tenacious  mucus.

■  Vomiting:  of  greenish,  yellow,  slimy  substances,  together

with  the  liquid  drank;  after  cold  drinks.
"  Scrobiculum  and  Stomach. ■  Retraction  and  burning  in
epigastric  region.


171  DULCAMARA.

I  Sensation  of  inflation  in  pit  of  stomach,  with  disagree-
able sensation  of  emptiness  in  abdomen.

I  I  Diaphragmitis,  with  simultaneous  rheumatic  affections
of  spinal  cord.

I  Indigestion with chilliness, < every cool change of
weather.
^^  Abdomen, l Cutting  pain  about  navel.

I  I  Violent  pinching  in  abdomen,  as  if  worms  were  crawl-

ing up  and  down  in  it  and  were  gnawing  and  pinching
the  parts.

I I  Colic,  as  if  diarrhoea  would  occur,  with  rumbling  in
bowels  and  pain  in  small  of  back.

iColic  after  a  cold;  griping,  nausea,  followed  by  diarrhoea.
1 1  Colic,  such  as  is  usually  caused  by  cold  and  wet  weather.

■  Dropsy  of  the  abdomen.

iSwelling  of  inguinal  glands  from  a  cold.
^°  Stool  and  Rectum, l  Vomiting  and  diarrhoea,  with  great
inclination to chilliness during vomiting ; copious
mucous,  or  watery  yellowish  evacuations,  expelled  with
much  force;  faintness  when  at  stool. ^Influenza.

iDesire  for  stool,  in  evening,  w4th  griping  in  whole  lower
abdomen,  followed  by  a  large,  moist,  at  last  very  thin,
sour  smelling  stool,  after  which  relief,  but  feeling  of
weakness.

iNightly  stools  w^ith  colic,  especially  in  umbilical  region;
loss  of  appetite,  thirst,  nausea,  vomiting,  pale  face,  lan-
guor, restlessness.

■Severe  cutting  in  abdomen,  <  about  umbilicus,  followed
by  nausea,  cold  sweat,  watery  diarrhoea  and  occasional
vomiting;  at  night,  stools  follow  each  other  in  rapid
succession,  nausea  is  constant,  with  eructations  and  vio-
lent thirst;  biting  in  rectum  as  from  salt;  evacuations
often  green,  bilious. t^After  exposure.

lAlternately  watery,  or  slimy,  or  dark-brown  fecal  diar-
rhoea, preceded  by  cutting  in  abdomen  and  followed  by
burning  in  anus;  tongue  coated,  no  appetite;  abdomen
bloated. ^Diarrhoea  and  catarrh  of  stomach.

B Bloody  diarrhoea  of  fifteen  months  duration,  brought  on
by  exposure  to  cold  and  dampness;  violent  cutting
around  navel,  <  at  night;  unceasing,  unquenchable
thirst;  pain  and  diarrhoea  allow  no  sleep  at  night;
rectum  protrudes; biting  at  anus,  as  from  pepper.

■  Diarrhoea  with  great  prostration  or  colicky  pains  around

umbilicus; <  after  every  change  of  cold  weather.

■  Drawing  and  tearing  in  limbs,  stiffness  of  limbs;  painful

stiffness  of  nape  of  neck;  pain  in  small  of  back;  diar-
rhoea without  much  pain;  little  urging;  slimy,  bloody
discharges. ^Dysentery.


DULCAMARA.  172

iProfuse  diarrhoea  with  severe  cutting  in  abdomen  ;  evac-
uations mucous  and  bloody  with  tenesmus  and  pain
in  back;  chilliness  alternating  with  heat,  great  thirst.

I  Patient  lies  in  a  constant  drowsy  condition,  cheeks
slightly  flushed,  soft  and  painless  bloating  of  abdomen,
great  emaciation  of  body,  aversion  to  all  food  ;  painless,
thin,  yellowish,  greenish,  watery  stools,  sometimes  pass-
ing involuntarily,  and  containing  flakes  of  mucus;  urine
turbid  with  white  sediment;  neither  speaks  nor  eats;
at  night,  moaning  and  restless  tossing  about.

IPatient  pale,  weak,  emaciated  and  without  least  desire
for  food;  after  eating,  morning,  and  frequently  in  even-
ing, and  particularly  in  damp  weather,  watery,  slimy,
lienteric  stool,  preceded  by  pains  in  abdomen  and  fol-
lowed by  tenesmus. ^Chronic  diarrhoea.

I  Thin  stools,  several  afternoons  in  succession,  with  flatu-

lence.

I I  Yellow  watery  diarrhoea  twice  a  day,  with  tearing  cut-
ting colic  before  each  evacuation,  as  after  taking  cold.

I  I  Slimy  diarrhoea  with  faintness.

I  Slimy,  alternate  yellow  and  greenish  diarrhoea.
iSlimy,  brown,  liquid  stools. ^Pemphigus.

■  Intestinal  catarrh  with  mucous  stools  and  tenesmus.

i  I  Chronic,  bloody  diarrhoea,  with  biting  at  anus,  or  with
vomiting,  eructations  and  thirst.

iStools:  frequent;  scanty;  corrosive;  whitish,  watery;  with
flocculi;  slimy,  mucous,  watery,  yellow-green;  change-
able, white,  yellow  or  green;  watery;  sour  smelling ;  nau-
sea, with  desire  to  evacuate;  <  at  night  and  in  wet
weather.

I I  Diarrhoea:  from  cold,  or  change  from  warm  to  cold,
especially  cold,  damp  weather;  in  morning,  profuse  thin
stools;  of  rheumatic  origin;  during  dentition;  with
colic,  particularly  in  summer;  with  prolapsus  recti.

iDj'sentery,  from  cold,  damp  weather;  increased  flow  of
saliva;  burning,  itching  of  rectum;  heat  of  skin;  thirst.

■  Cholera  infantum,  relapse  from  an  unusually  cold  night

or  caused  thereby.

■  Constipation  and  painful  strangury.

^^  Urinary  Organs. ■Dropsy,  with  pain  in  region  of  kidneys,
and  albumen  in  urine.
I  iBright's  disease  from  exposure  to  cold  and  dampness.

■  Constant  desire  to  urinate,  felt  deep  in  abdomen.  6'Cystitis.

■  Constant  desire  to  urinate,  with  an  unpleasant  sensation

of  bearing  down  towards  the  vesical  region  and  urethra.

■  Retention  of  urine;  strangury  from  cold,  or  cold  drinks.

■  ■Urine  passed  involuntarily. ^Paralysis  of  bladder.

■  Catarrh  with  strangury,  followed  after  six  weeks  by  in-


173  DULCAMARA.

continence  of  urine ;  very  impatient,  scolding  and  irrit-
able mood.
•  Painful  pressing  about  bladder  and  urethra,  discharge  of
a  few  drops  of  urine,  with  mucous  sediment.

■  Burning  in  meatus  urinarius  while  urinating.

lUrine:  scanty,  fetid,  turbid;  on  standing,  oily ;  contain-
ing a  tough,  jelly-like,  white  or  red  mucus  mixed  with
blood;  milky;  fetid  or  muco-purulent;  reddish,  burning.

■  Emission  of  urine,  drop  by  drop;  slimy  sediment.

■  Urine  offensive,  turbid  when  passed,  and  excoriating  the

skin. ^Pemphigus.

■  Catarrh  of  the  bladder  from  taking  cold  in  damp  weather.
^^  Male  Sexual  Organs. ■  Impotence; herpes  on  genitals.

Herpes:  preputialis,  bleeding;  brown,  dry,  humid  or  fur-
furaceous;  painful;  red,  pale-red,  or  with  a  red  areola;
round,  scaly  and  small;  suppurating,  yellow.
^^  Female  Sexual  Organs.  ■Heat  and  itching  in  genitals,
with  desire  for  an  embrace,  <  by  a  cold  change  in  the
weather.

■  Menses  too  late  and  too  short;  blood  watery,  thin;  sup-

pressed by  cold.

■  Dysmenorrhoea  in  those  taking  cold  easily  ;  has  blotches

all  over, especially  in  cold,  damp  weather;  liable  to
take  cold  in  head.

■  Rash  before  menses.

■  As  a  forerunner  of  catamenia,  a  rash  appearing  on  skin,

with  extraordinary  sexual  excitement  during  rash  and
catamenia.

■  Herpetic  eruptions  on  vulva,  <  by  ever}^  cold  change  of

weather,  or  by  exposure  in  cold,  damp  situations.

■  Catarrhal  ailments  in  damp,  cold  weather.

■  Mammse  engorged,  hard,  sore  and  painful,  with  leucor-

rlioea  or  amenorrhoea.
'^  Pregnancy. Parturition. Lactation. ■  Threatened  mis-
carriage induced  by  exposure  in  a  damp,  cold  place,  as
in  a  spring-house  or  cellar.

■  Lochia  suppressed  by  cold  or  damp.

■  Mammse  swollen,  inactive,  painless, itching, in  conse-

quence of  a  cold  which  seems  to  have  settled  in  them.
I  I  Suppression  of  milk  or  lochia,  from  taking  cold.
I  I  Herpes  on  mammse  ;  nursing  women.
I  I  After  weaning,  mother  has  eruptions  on  the  skin;  sore

nipples.
^^  Voice  and  Larynx. Trachea  and  Bronchia. 1 1  Rough,

hoarse  voice. ^Catarrh  after  measles.

■  Constant  titillation  in  larynx,  with  desire  to  cough.

■  Trachea  full  of  mucus,  tough,  greenish  expectoration  with

moderate  cough. ^Laryngo  tracheitis.


DULCAMARA.  174

I  Influenza.

I  Bronchitis  of  children,  caused  by  cold,  damj)  air,  with
offensive  smelling  night-sweats.
■^^  Respiration. '  l  Labored  respiration.

1  Asthma,  with  faceache,  after  disappearance  of  tetters  in
face.

■Asthma  humidum,  dyspnoea,  loose  rattling  cough,  co-
pious sputa ; <  during  wet  weather.

I  I  Oppression  of  chest,  from  mucus.
•^'  Cough. I  Cough  dry,  hoarse,  and  rough,  or,  loose,  with  co-
pious expectoration  of  mucus,  and  dull  hearing. ^Ca-
tarrhal fever.

I  iCough  from  damp,  cold  atmosphere,  or  from  getting  wet;
must  cough  a  long  time  to  expel  phlegm,  especially  in-
fants and  old  people ;  threatened  paralysis  of  vagi.

■Spasmodic  cough,  with  profuse  secretion  of  mucus  in
larynx  and  trachea.

■  Barking  cough  after  a  deep  breath.

■  Panting  cough,  like  whooping  cough,  <  from  each  deep

inspiration.
I  I  Whooping  cough ;  attacks  excited  by  excessive  secretion

of  mucus  in  larynx  and  trachea ;  during  each  attack

easy  expectoration  of  tasteless  mucus,  often  streaked  with .

blood.
I  I  Chronic  mucous  cough  after  measles.

■  Cough: <  lying  down,  from  warmth  of  room,  or  deep

inspiration; >  in  open  air.
During  cough:  stitches  in  sides;  hoarseness.

■  Tough,  greenish expectoration,  with moderate  cough;

diarrhoea;  great  disposition  to  catch  cold. ^Phthisis.
I  I  Easy  expectoration  of  tasteless  mucus,  often  streaked

with  blood.
I  I  Expectoration  of  bright  blood.
^  Inner  Chest  and  Lungs. ■  Mucus  on  chest,  must  cough  long

before  raising  it; suffocative  catarrh.

■  Bronchitis;  offensive  smelling  night-sweats.

■  Catarrhal  affections  of  chest,  with  or  without  mucous  rales ;

cough  with  either  easy  or  difficult  expectoration ;  pulse
excited.

■  Tuberculosis  in  scrofulous  subjects;  <  in  changes  from

warm  to  cold; sputa tough,  green; cough  moderate;
stitches  here  and  there  in  chest;  diarrhoea.

■  Phthisis  mucosa.

■  Rheumatic  pleuritis  and  pleuro-pneumonia,  with  tough,

difficult,  discolored  sputa.
1  Continuous  irritable  states  from  rheumatic  pleuritis  and
pleuro-pneumonia,  with  tough,  difficult,  discolored  ex-
pectoration ;  simultaneously  hypersemia  of  cord.


175  DULCAMARA.

iPneumonia  notha,  when  the  morbid  condition  has  lasted
some  time,  and  has  almost  developed  into  a  chronic
affection,  a  preponderance  of  inflammatory  symptoms
being  present.

iHydrothorax,  <  in  wet  weather.

■  Haemoptysis,  bright  red;  tickling  in  larynx;  <  at  rest;

caused  by  a  cold  or  protracted  loose  cough.

I  I  Deep  cutting  pain  in  1.  side  of  chest,  close  below  clavicle,
>  by  pressing  on  part.

I  Dull  stitch  in  chest  below  r.  clavicle  from  within  outward.

I  Pain  in  1.  chest,  as  if  lung  moved  in  waves.

I  I  Dull  stitching  pain  in  r.  side  of  chest,  in  region  of  third
rib,  especially  when  pressing  on  part,  wdien  the  pain
went  to  small  of  back  and  extended  between  the  shoul-
ders; with  stitches  in  border  of  1.  scapula,  during  in-
spiration.

I  I  Pain  in  1.  side  of  chest  in  region  of  fifth  and  sixth  ribs,
as  if  a  blunt  knife  were  thrust  in.

I  1  Lancinating  pain  from  middle  of  sternum  to  the  dorsal
spine,  when  sitting,  goes  off  when  rising.
'^^  Heart,  Pulse  and  Circulation. 1 1  Palpitation  at  night.

Pulse:  small,  hard  and  tense,  especially  at  night;  soft,
full,  slow,  bounding;  slower  than  beat  of  heart;  frequent
at  night,  slow  during  day,  collapsed.

iPulse  full,  hard,  somewhat  accelerated. ^Diarrhoea.
^'^  Outer  Chest. Stitching  pains  here  and  there  in  chest.

Small  pimples  on  chest  and  abdomen.
^^  Neck  and  Back, i  Xeck  stiff,  back  painful,  loins  lame,  after
taking  cold.

I  Pain  in  nape,  as  if  head  had  been  lying  in  an  uncom-
fortable position.

iSwelling  of  glands  on  neck.

I  Adenitis,  glands  swollen,  often  very  painful  and  sensitive ;
cervical  and  submaxillary  lymphatic  glands  (with  a
sub-inflammatory  condition),  painful  every  turn  of  head.

iChilliness  with  dull  pain  in  region  of  lower  cervical  and
upper  dorsal  vertebras;  difficulty  in  raising  head  or  turn-
ing about  in  bed  ;  at  night,  fever,  sleeplessness ;  in  morn-
ing motion  of  arms  greatly  impaired,  as  if  thej^  were  of
wood,  numbness  and  formication  in  r.  hand,  cannot
close  the  hand;  pulse  100,  hard;  temperature  of  skin
elevated;  tongue  dry;  loss  of  appetite;  urine  scanty,
dark,  offensive,  ammoniacal;  stool  absent;  spine  not
sensitive  to  pressure;  cervical  portion  of  spinal  column
stiff,  any  motion  thereof  causing  disagreeable  tension
and  dull  pain  deep  in,  which  extends  toward  both
shoulders. ^Myelitis.

■  Lassitude,  pains  like  those  brought  on  by  a  cold;  dryness,


DULCAMARA.  176

heat  and  burning  of  skin;  restlessness;  delirium  at
night;  nausea  and  vomiting  of  mucus;  sensation  of  in-
flation at  pit  of  stomach ;  white  mucous  diarrhoea;  diar-
rhoea with  faintness;  oppression  or  tightness  of  chest;
pinching  or  deep  cutting  pain  in  chest;  constrictive
pain  as  if  in  muscles  of  back;  drawing  in  muscles  of
thigh;  bloatedness  and  swelling  of  leg ;  burning  in  feet;
<  at  night,  from  cold,  while  lying  down  and  from
washing. ^Myelitis.

■  Spinal  meningitis  during  scarlatina  or  measles,  eruption

does  not  develop,
i  i  Myelitis  after  taking  cold  during  menstruation.
iHypertemia  of  the  spinal  cord.

■  Rheumatic  affections  of  spinal  cord.

I  I  Dull  stitches  in  both  loins,  with  sensation  as  of  squeezing
from  within  outward,  at  every  inspiration,  while  sitting
bent  (after  a  short  walk.)

■  Deeply  cutting  pain  in  r.  loin,  transiently  disappearing

upon  pressure.

■  Drawing  pain  from  small  of  back  down  thighs,  during

rest;  stitches  when  moving,  >  by  pressure.

■  ■Pain  in  small  of  back,  as  after  stooping  a  long  time.
■Severe  rheumatic  stitching  pressing  pains  in  arms  and

back,  after  catching  cold  while  sweating;  pains  <  at
night  and  while  resting;  >  from  motion;  slight  fever,
much  thirst.

■  Burning  in  head,  with  stupefying  headache,  red  face,  dry

tongue,  burning  heat  in  gums,  unquenchable  thirst  for
extremely  cold  drinks;  anorexia;  urine  very  red,  with
painful  burning  on  urination;  sleepless;  skin  dry  and
hot,  burning  sensation  in  skin ;  severe  rheumatic  stitch-
ing, drawing  in  small  of  back,  shoulders,  and  arms;
after  getting  wet  whilst  warm.

■  ■Lameness  in  the  small  of  the  back,  from  a  cold.

■  Cold  chilly  feeling  in  small  of  back.

■  Sacrum  feels  cold.

^^  Upper  Limbs.  ■Paralysis  of  arms;  they  are  icy  cold,  es-
pecially during  rest.

■  Paralytic,  bruised  pain  in  1.  arm.
I  I  Herpes  on  arms  and  hands.

■  Exostosis  on  the  arm,  from  suppressed  itch.

■  ■Warts  on  hands,  on  backs  of  fingers.
■Sweat  in  palms  of  hands.

^  Lower  Limbs.  ■  Drawing-tearing  pain,  or  constant  pain,
at  one  time  sticking,  at  another  pinching,  in  both  thighs,
disappearing  on  walking,  then  changing  to  weariness,
and  immediately  returning  while  sitting.

■  Drawing  from  small  of  back  through  thighs,  during  rest,


177  DULCAMARA.

with  stitches  in  parts  during  motion,  which  are  >  by

pressure.
I  I  Herpetic  eruption  on  knee.
I  Exostosis  on  upper  part  of  r.  tibia,  with  bluish-red  spots ;:

suppurating  lumps.
•  Intolerable (non-syphilitic)  pains  in shin-bones,  <  at

night,  from  rest,  obliging  him  to  walk  the  floor,  and  in

damp  weather.

■  Swelling  of  calf  of  leg ;  scrofula.

I  Gout  in  big  toe ;  first  left,  then  right.
I  I  Tingling  and  burning  in  feet.
I  I  Erysipelas  of  feet;  skin  peels  off;  itching.
^  Limbs  in  General. ■  Cold  limbs.

I  Rheumatism  after  acute  eruptions,  or  when  chronic  forms;
alternate  with  attacks  of  diarrhoea.

■  After  getting  wet,  tearing  in  limbs,  particularly  in  feet;-

restless  sleep,  profuse  sweat.
iStitching-drawing  and  tearing  pains  in  limbs  after  an
acute  eruption  or  after  catching  cold ;  <  at  night,  or
during  evening,  when  there  is  an  exacerbation  of  fever.

■  Rheumatism  after  exposure  to  wet;  parts  as  if  beaten;

severe  pains  when  remaining  in  one  position,  subside
only  when  he  moves  about.

■  Pains  in  the  joints  on  exposure  to  cold.

I  I  Sharp  shooting  pains  in  1.  toes  and  thumb.

■  Sudden  swelling  of  body  and  puffiness  of  limbs,  at  times

painful,  or  accompanied  by  a  sensation  as  if  going  to
sleep,
i  I  White  blotches  with  red  areola  on  arms  and  thighs.
^  Rest. Position. Motion. Worse  lying  on  back,  >  on  side.

Worse  when  stooping,  >  when  erect.

Worse  bending  diseased  part  backwards.

Worse  dancing.

At  rest:  scintillations  < ;  buzzing  in  ears  <  dry  coryza
<;  tickling  in  larynx  <;  drawing  pain  from  small  of
back  down  thighs;  arms  icy  cold;  intolerable  pains  in
shin  bones;  rheumatism  <.

Lying  quiet:  headache  < ;  cerebellum  as  if  enlarged,  > ;
cough  <;  myelitis  <.

Sitting:  pain  from  sternum  to  spine;  dull  stitches  in  both
loins;  drawing  tearing  pain  in  thighs.

Rising:  pain  from  sternum  to  spine  >.

Walking:  vertigo;  sensation  as  if  fire  were  darting  out  of
eyes;  after  short  walk  dull  stitches  in  both  loins;  draw-
ing tearing  pain  in  thighs  disappears;  pain  in  shin
bones  forces  him  to  walk;  must  get  up  and  walk  at
night.

Motion:  headache  <;  iritis  >  ; dry  coryza  >;  pimples.

VOL.  V. — 12.


DULCAMARA.  178

and  ulcers  around  mouth  painful ;  cervical  and  submax-
illary lymphatic  glands  painful ;  stitches  in  back ;  pain
in  back  >  ; stitches  in  thighs ; drawing  in  small  of
back;  rheumatism  >.
^  Nerves, l  Great  general  uneasiness,  restlessness.

■  Weariness,  prostration,  languor.

■Trembling,  particularly  of  r.  arm. ^Urinary  difficulty.
I  I  One-sided  spasms ;  speechlessness.
I  I  Convulsions  beginning  in  face.

■  Paralysis: of  different,  single  parts; from suppressed

eruptions;  from  cold;  of  upper  and  lower  limbs  and
tongue;  the  paralyzed  arm  feels  icy  cold.
^^  Sleep. ■On  falling  asleep  in  evening,  starts  as  in  affright.

■  During  sleep,  mouth  open,  snoring.

■  Uneasy  sleep,  confused  dreams,  frequent  sweat; tosses

from  side  to  side.

■  Sleep  restless  after  12  a.m.  ;  worst  after  3  a.m.

I  I  Uneasy  sleep  after  4  a.m.,  no  matter  how  he  lay.

\  I  Sleeplessness.

I  Fearfully  confused  dreams;  she  has  to  get  up  at  night

and  walk  about  the  room;  a  sinking  sensation  all  over;

she  fancied  she  would  sink  through  the  bed.

■  On  awaking  in  morning  giddy  and  dizzy;  dark  before

eyes,  trembling  and  weakness.
.^8  Time. Morning :  on  awaking  dizzy,  dark  before  eyes  ;  hay
fever  <;  vomiting;  watery,  slimy  stools ;  profuse  thin
stools; motion of  arms greatly impaired; offensive
sw^eat.

Day:  pulse  slow;  sweat  on  back;  sweat  in  axillse ;  sweat
on  palms.

Until  2  p.m.:  cerebellum  as  if  enlarged.

Evening:  hay  fever  <;  desire  for  stool;  watery,  slimy
stools,  preceded  by  pains  in  abdomen  and  followed  by
tenesmus;  tearing  drawing  pains  in  limbs  <  ;  on  fall-
ing asleep,  starts  as  if  in  affright;  chilliness  over  back
towards  evening;  cold  shuddering  up  back.

Night:  delirium;  idiopathic  iritis  <;  buzzing  in  ears  <;
earache  the  whole  night ;  stools  with  colic;  stools  follow
each  other  in  rapid  succession ;  violent  cutting  around
navel  < ;  pain  prevents  sleep ;  moaning ;  restless  toss-
ing about;  palpitation;  pulse  small,  hard  and  tense;
pulse  frequent;  fever;  sleeplessness;  myelitis  <;  pain
in  back  <;  intolerable  pain  in  shin  bones;  stitching
drawling  pains  in  limbs  <  ;  must  get  up  and  walk  about
the  room  ;  sleeplessness ;  offensive  sweat.

Before  midnight:  headache  <.

After  midnight:  sleep  restless.

After  3  a.m.  :  sleep  very  restless.


179  DULCAMARA.

^^  Temperature  and  Weather.  Warmth  :  idiopathic  iritis  >  ;
facial  neuralgia  >  ;  cough  < ;  chill  not  > ;  nettle
rash  <.

Cannot  get  warm  near  hot  stove.

Closed  room  :  nostrils  stopped  up  ;  constant  sneezing  <  ;
profuse discharge of  water from nose and eyes <.

Dry  air :  nasal  catarrh  dry.

Open  air :  nostrils  stopped  up  ;  constant  sneezing ;  profuse
discharge  of  water  from  nose  and  eyes ;  cough  >  ;  chil-
liness.

Cold :  ophthalmia  from  exposure ;  twitching  of  eyelids ;
dry  coryza  < ;  discharge  from  nose  suppressed  from  least
contact  with  cold  air ;  facial  neuralgia  <  ;  twitching  of
lips;  toothache;  diarrhoea;  scurvy;  tongue  and  jaws
become  lame  from  contact;  tongue  paralyzed  by;  ul-
ceration in  mouth  >  by  holding  cold  water  in  it;  ton-
sillitis from  cold  change  of  weather ;  great  thirst  for  cold
drinks;  diarrhoea  from  cool  change  of  weather;  vomit-
ing after  cold  drinks ;  dysentery  < ;  strangury  from
cold  drinks;  pains  in  joints;  paralysis  of  different  parts
from  cold;  exposure  causes  urticaria;  nettle  rash >  ;
herpetic  eruptions  <  by  applications  of  cold  water.

Damp  weather:  watery,  slimy  stools,  preceded  by  pain
in  abdomen  and  followed  by  tenesmus;  asthma  <;
hydrothorax  <  ;  intolerable  pain  in  shin  bones.

Change  of  weather :  tinea  capitis,  crusta  lactea,  and  dan-
druff <  ;  tonsillitis;  diarrhoea  from  cool  change;  indi-
gestion with  chilliness  <;  diarrhoea  and  colic  <  by
cold  change;  heat  and  itching  on  genitals  <  ;  herpetic
eruption  on  vulva  <  ;  cold  change,  tuberculosis  <  ;  in-
sensible painless  ulcers  <-

Getting  wet  feet :  dull  hearing  <  ;  pressure  above  nose  <  ;
cough ;  rheumatic  pains  in  small  of  back  getting  wet
whilst  warm ;  tearing  in  limbs ;  rheumatism.

Cold,  damp  weather:  cerebellum  as  if  enlarged ;  catarrhal
and  rheumatic  headache  _< ;  idiopathic  iritis;  bloody
diarrhoea  brought  on  by  exposure;  dysentery;  Bright's
disease;  catarrh  of  bladder;  dysmenorrhoea  with
blotches  all  over  < ;  herpetic  eruptions  on  vulva  < ;
catarrhal  ailments  (female  sexual  organs);  threatened
miscarriage  by  exposure ;  bronchitis  of  children;  cough;
fever  caused  by  exposure;  dropsical  affections ;  retroces-
sion of  eruptions  from  exposure ;  insensible  painless  ul-
cers <  ;
^  Fever.  Chilliness  of  back,  without  thirst,  in  open  air,  but
especially  in  a  draft.

Chilliness,  mostly  towards  evening,  over  back,  nape  of
neck,  occiput,  with  sensation  as  if  hair  stood  on  end.


DULCAMARA.  180

Shaking,  with  a  feeling  of  coldness,  or  actual  coldness  over
whole  body,  cannot  get  warm  near  hot  stove,  with  shud-
dering from  time  to  time.

llChill  commencing  in  or  spreading  from  back,  not  >  by
warmth  ;  mostly  towards  evening.

Chill :  with  pains ;  with  violent  thirst ;  without  thirst.

I  Chilliness  alternating  with  fever,  mind  dull,  face  red,
skin  dry  and  hot;  nausea  with  anxiety;  sleeplessness
at  night ;  pulse  feels  hard,  somewhat  accelerated  ;  gen-
eral prostration. ^Diarrhcea.

I  General  dry  burning  heat  all  over.

iHeat:  burning  in  back;  with  delirium  ;  without  thirst.

Burning  in  skin  of  whole  back  as  if  he  were  sitting  by  a
hot  stove,  with  sweat  in  face  and  moderate  heat.

Double  tertian  fever.

■  Scarlet  fever,  particularly  in  scrofulous  subjects,  pain  in

limbs,  cold  shuddering  up  back  in  evening,  vomiting
followed  in  many  cases  by  sopor;  dry  burning  heat  of
skin ;  frequently,  suppression  of  urine.  As  the  case
progresses,  the  pains  become  particularly  severe  in  head
and  feet;  eruption  assumes  a  miliary  character, although
light-red  spots  can  also  be  detected;  redness  of  gums
and  throat,  with  difficult  deglutition ;  great  swelling  of
the  glands  of  neck  and  of  those  about  ears;  at  times  the
inflammation  extends  to  larynx,  causing  a  croupous
cough;  high  fever  with  delirium  and  thirst;  urine  tur-
bid and  offensive.  Cases  where  the  eruption  is  scanty
and  does  not  develop  properly,  looking  very  much  like
a  nettlerash,  with  slight  anginose  symptoms,  but  severe
pains  in  limbs,  which  often  cause  crying  and  are  fre-
quently followed  by  cedematous  swelling  of  whole  body;
extremely  tardy  desquamation.

■  Typhoid  fever,  when  patient  distinctly  remembers  hav-

ing taken  cold;  tongue  clean,  stools  yellow,  liquid,  with
rumbling,  cutting,  digging  and  griping  pain  in  umbili-
cal region  or  whole  abdomen.

B  BFevers  caused  by  exposure ;  living  in  damp  rooms,  sleep-
ing in  a  damp  bed;  during  cold,  rainy,  changeable
weather.

iFetid  sweat,  with  skin  diseases;  copious  limpid  urine.

■  Offensive  sweat,  night  and  morning,  over  whole  body;

during  day,  more  over  back,  in  axillse  and  palms.

■  Sweat  suppressed  and  entirely  wanting.  "

■  Conditions  arising  from  sudden  cooling  of  body  whilst

sweating.
*^  Attacks,  Periodicity. Frequent: sweat; suppression  of
urine.
Attacks :  of  whooping  cough.


181  DULCAMARA.

Twice  a  day :  yellow  watery  diarrhoea.

From  time  to  time :  shuddering.

Every  evening:  chilliness  in  cerebellum;  feeling  as  if
hair  stood  on  end.

Several  afternoons  in  succession :  thin  stools,  with  flatu-
lency. ,

Six  weeks:  incontinence  of  urine.

Fifteen  months:  bloody  diarrhoea.
*^  Locality  and  Direction.  Left :  facial  neuralgia  on  side ;
deep  cutting  pain  in  side  of  chest;  pain  in  chest  as  if
lung  moved  in  waves;  stitches  in  border  of  scapula;
pain  in  chest  as  if  knife  were  thrust  in ;  bruised  pain  in
arm ;  sharp  shooting  pains  in  toes  and  thumb.

Right:  dull  stitch  in  chest  below  clavicle ;  dull  stitching
pain  in  chest;  numbness  and  formication  in  hand;
deeply  cutting  pain  in  loin ;  exostosis  on  upper  part  of
tibia;  trembling  of  arm.

From  left  to  right:  gout  in  big  toe.

From  within  to  without:  headache;  dull  stitch  in  chest
below  r.  clavicle;  dull  stitches  in  loins  with  sensation
of  squeezing  from  within  outward.

I  Rending  pains  upward. ^Rheumatism.
*^  Sensations. iPains  in  many  parts,  as  if  from  cold;  bruised
feeling.

Sensation  as  of  a  board  pressing  against  forehead;  as  if
head  were  enlarged;  as  if  hair  stood  on  end;  as  if  fire
were  darting  out  of  eyes ;  teeth  as  if  asleep ;  pressure  as
if  uvula  were  too  large;  shuddering  as  though  he  would
vomit;  sensation  of  inflation  in  pit  of  stomach;  sensa-
tion of  emptiness  in  abdomen;  as  if  worms  were  crawl-
ing up  and  down  in  abdomen;  as  if  diarrhoea  would
occur;  biting  in  rectum  as  from  salt;  as  if  lung  moved
in  waves;  as  if  a  blunt  knife  were  thrust  into  chest;  as
if  head  were  lying  in  an  uncomfortable  position;  as  if
arms  were  of  wood;  sensation  in  loins  as  of  squeezing
from  within  outward;  pain  in  back  as  after  stooping  a
long  time;  limbs  as  if  beaten;  limbs  as  if  going  to  sleep;
heat  in  back  as  if  he  were  sitting  by  hot  stove;  as  of
needles  over  whole  body ;  burning  itching  like  crawling
of  insects.

Pain:  in  limbs;  in  spots  in  mouth;  in  small  of  back;  in
back;  in  abdomen;  in  region  of  kidneys;  inchest;  in
1.  side  of  chest ;  in  nape  of  neck ;  in  cervical  glands ;  in
shin-bones ;  in  joints.

Lancinating  pain :  from  middle  of  sternum  to  dorsal  spine.

Tearing  pains:  around  mouth;  in  limbs;  in  abdomen;
in  thighs.

Cutting  pain  :  about  navel ;  in  abdomen  ;  in  chest ;  in  r.
loin.


DULCAMARA.  182

Shooting  pains :  in  1.  toes  and  thumb.

Stitching  pain:  in  r.  side  of  chest;  here  and  there  in  chest;

in  arms  and  back;  in  thighs.
Stitching  sensation :  over  whole  body.
Stitches:  in  auditory  meatus;  in  sides;  inchest;  in  one

border  of  1.  scapula;  in  both  loins;  in  thighs.
Constrictive  pain :  in  muscles  of  back.
Pinching :  violent,  in  abdomen  ;  in  chest ;  in  thighs.
Colic :  in  umbilical  region.
Griping :  in  abdomen.

Bursting  pains  :  from  forehead  to  bridge  of  nose.
Drawing  pain :  from  small  of  back  down  thighs.
Boring:  in  forehead; in  temples.
Neuralgia :  of  face ;  temple ;  ear ;  jaws.
Tensive  pain  :  in  cervical  and  inguinal  glands.
Bruised  pain  :  in  1.  arm.

Rooting  digging  pains :  in  brain ;  in  abdomen.
Burning:  in  forehead;  in  epigastric  region ;  in  anus;  in

rectum ;  in  meatus  urinarius ;  in  feet;  in  gums ;  in  back ;

in  skin  of  back.
Tingling :  in  feet.
Pressing  pain  :  in  forehead;  about  bladder  and  urethra;

in  arms ;  in  back.
Aching :  in  eyes ;  in  ears ;  in  teeth.
Dull  pain :  in  head ;  in  chest ;  in  stomach ;.  in  ears ;  in

region  of  liver ;  deep  in  spinal  column.
Rheumatic  affection :  of  spinal  cord.
Stupefying  ache:  in  occiput  from  nape  of  neck.
Stupefaction :  painful,  of  head.
Pressure :  above  nose.

Bearing  down :  towards  vesical  region  and  urethra.
Rawness:  in  fauces.
Dryness :  of  tongue.
Roughness:  of  tongue.
Drawing:  in  limbs;  in  muscles  of  thigh.
Heaviness:  of  head;  of  eyes.
Dulness :  of  senses ;  of  head.
Heat:  dry  and  burning  all  over;  in  genitals.
Biting:  in  rectum,  as  from  salt;  in  anus.
Sinking  sensation  ;  all  through  body.
Prostration :  of  limbs.
Lassitude:  of  limbs.
Blunt  feeling:  in  teeth.
Stiffness:  in  limbs;  of  nape  of  neck;  in  cervical  portion

of  spinal  column.
Lameness:  of  loins;  in  small  of  back.
Numbness:  in  limbs;  in  r.  hand.
Oppression :  of  chest.


183  DULCAMARA.

Buzzing :  in  ears.

Formication :  of  r.  hand.

Crawling :  on  tip  of  tongue.

Titillation :  in  larynx.

Tickling :  in  larynx.

Itching :  on  tip  of  tongue ;  of  rectum ;  in  genitals ;  in
mammse  ;  over  skin  of  body.

Chilly  feeling  :  in  cerebellum.
^Tissues. I  Hemorrhages;  blood  watery,  or  bright  red.

I  Skin  inactive;  mucous  surfaces  overactive,  especially
from  suppression  of  eruptions  by  cold.

I  iCatarrhal  troubles,  caused  by  exposure  to  damp,  cold
weather.

Acts  especially  on  mucous  membranes  and  muscular
tissues,  giving  rise  to  catarrhal  inflammations,  the  symp-
toms like  those  which  result  from  exposure  to  damp,
rainy  weather;  it  also  acts  upon  lymphatics  and  skin,
producing  glandular  enlargements,  cellular  effusions
and  eruptions.

Chronic  rheumatism,  <  from  a  little  exposure  to  cold,  or
any  change  of  temperature  from  warm  to  cold ;  rheu-
matic pains  after  acute  cutaneous  eruptions,  or  when
chronic  form  alternates  with  attacks  of  intestinal  catarrh.

iCold  swelling  of  glands,  also  inflammation  and  indura-
tion of  cervical  and  inguinal  glands;  tensive  pain.

Induration  of  cellular  tissue.

I  Dropsical  affections  after  suppression  of  sweat  by  damp,
cold  air,  and  from  taking  cold;  the  neck  stiff,  the  back
painful,  the  loins  lame.

■  Paralysis  of  tongue,  internal  organs,  and  of  limbs.

■  Anasarca  after  fever  and  ague,  scarlatina,  or  rheumatic

fever.

■  Scrofula;  exostoses;  emaciation.

"^  Touch.  Passive  Motion.  Injuries. Touch :  eruption  sen-
sitive.
Pressure :  pain  on  1.  side  of  chest  >  ;  dull  stitching  in  r.
side  of  chest  < ;  dull  stitches  in  loins  >  ;  stitches  in
back  >  ;  drawing  in  small  of  back  >  ;  stitches  in  thighs
and  small  of  back  >.
i  1  Small  furuncles  on  places  hurt  by  concussion.
'"  Skin. ■Skin  hot  and  dry.

■Sticking  itching  in  various  parts  of  body.

■  Sticking  sensation  as  of  needles,  over  whole  surface  of

body. (^Urticaria.

Burning  itching,  like  the  rapid  crawling  of  insects.

Skin  delicate  and  sensitive  to  cold ;  has  urticaria  or  some
other  eruption  every  time  she  takes  cold,  or  is  long  ex-
posed to  cold.


DULCAMARA.  184

I  Vesicular  eruption,  large  as  a  pea,  containing  yellow,
translucent  fluid,  and  on  a  red,  inflamed  base,  covering
whole  body,  except  face. ^Pemphigus.

1  Vesicular  eruption  on  face  and  extremities,  oozing  a
watery  fluid.

1  Tetter,  oozing  a  watery  fluid,  bleeds  after  scratching.

lEruption  of  itching  pustules,  ceasing  to  itch  after  scab-
bing over ;  sensitive  to  touch ;  <  from  washing.

Bright  red  acuminated  pimples,  filling  with  pus.

■  Small  furuncles  on  places  formerly  injured  by  concussion.
I  I  Red  spots,  as  from  flea-bites.

■  I  Nettle-rash  over  whole  body,  without  fever.

■  Nettle-rash :  with  much  itching ;  after  scratching  it  burns ;

<  in  warmth,  >  in  cold ;  with  gastric  fever.
Eczema  scrofulosum;  tettery  crusts  over  whole  body;  glan-
dular enlargements;  exudating  vesicles  on  face  and  ex-
tremities; eruption  of  itching  vesicles,  which  pass  into
suppuration,  and  become  covered  with  a  crust,  espec-
ially on  lower  limbs  and  posterior  surface  of  body.

■  Impetiginous  eczema  of  scrofulous  children.

■  Thick  brown  herpes,  red  border;  glands  swollen.

■  ■Thick  crusts  all  over  body.

■Round,  scaly  and  small  herpes;  suppuratingyellow  herpes.

■  Herpetic eruptions associated with  fetid  perspiration;

skin  affection  <  by  application  of  cold  water.
Herpes  prejjutialis,  easily  bleeding,  brown,  dry,  humid  or
furfuraceous,  red,  pale-red  or  with  a  red  areola.

■  Lichen  (mehlflechte)  on  knee;  old,  obstinate,  size  of  a

dollar.

■  ■  Retrocession  of  eruptions,  from  exposure  to  damp,  cold  air.

■  Suppressed  itch.

■  Skin  callous.

■  ■Warts,  fleshy,  or  large,  smooth;  on  dorsa  of  hands  and

on  face.

■  Insensible,  painless  ulcers,  hard,  sensitive; <  at  night,

from  wet  or  cold  and  when  weather  changes.
I  I  Painful  ulcers ;  discharge  scanty.

■  Swelling  and  induration  of  glands.

*^  Stages  of  Life,  Constitution.  ■  Phlegmatic,  torpid,  scrofu-
lous patients,  who  are  restless  and  irritable;  take  cold
in  cold  damp  changes.

Dark  hair:  skin  delicate,  sensitive  to  cold;  liable  to  erup-
tions from  being  exposed  to  cold.

Child,  set.  13  mos.,  no  teeth,  old-looking  face,  great  emaci-
ation; pemphigus.

Boy,  set.  13  mos.,  delicate,  weak;  pemphigus.

Girl,  set.  5;  diarrhoea  and  cata,rrh  of  stomach.

Boy,  a^t.  12;  weak,  pale,  ill-nourished,  poorly  developed,
with  constant  tendency  to  diarrhoea;  severe  diarrhoea.


185  DULCAMARA.

Girl,  set.  16,  not  yet  menstruated;  strangury  followed  by
incontinence  of  urine.

Wm.  Baker,  set.  about  18 ;  hay  fever.

Girl,  set.  20,  choleric  tem]3erament,  sparely  built,  but
strong;  diarrhoea  after  cold.

Man,  set.  24 ;  urticaria.

Man,  set.  27,  headache  for  two  years.

Woman,  frail  constitution;  diarrhcea.

Woman,  cook,  slender  build,  after  exposure  of  heated
body  to  cold ;  cholerine  with  urticaria.

Shepherd,  who  had  been  in  habit  of  watching  flocks  by
night;  bloody  diarrhoea.

Man,  set.  30,  choleric  temperament,  energetic,  strong;  diar-
rhoea for  3J  years.

Woman,  set.  35,  another,  set.  G3;  muscular  rheumatism.

Unmarried  woman,  set.  36 ;  for  six  days,  severe  diarrhoea.

Healthy  woman,  set.  40,  during  a  damp,  rainy  day,  sud-
den loss  of  consciousness,  from  which  she  recovered  wnth
a  severe  headache ;  headache.

Woman,  set.  40,  choleric  temperament,  strong,  after  catch-
ing cold  from  washing  during  a  cold  day;  diarrhoea.

Man,  set.  60,  after  catching  cold;  urinary  difficulties.

Man,  set. 72,  gouty, with  tendency  to  marasmus,  after
catching  cold;  myelitis.
'^  Relations. It  antidotes : Cuprum,  Mercur.

Antidoted  by: Camphor,  Cuprum,  Ipec,  Kali  carb.,  Mercur.

Compatible  after:  Bryon ,  Cole,  ostr.,  Lycop.,  Blms  tox.,
Sepia,  Veratr.

Incompatible :  Bellad.,  Laches.

Complementary:  Baryta  carb.

Compare:  Aeon.,  Act.  rac,  Arsen.,  Bellad.,  Bryan.,  Calc.  ostr.,
Chamom.,  Cuprum,  Helleb.,  Ipec,  Kali  carb.,  Lycop.,  Mer-
cur., Nitr.  ac,  Pulsat.,  Bhus  tax.,  Sepia,  Staphis.,  Stannum,
Sulphur  and  Veratr.


ELAPS  CORALLINUS.  186


ELAPS  CORALLINUS.

The  Coral  Viper.  Elapidse.

The  poison  of  the  Brazilian  Coral  Snake  was  first  proved  by  Mure,  who  used
the  3d  trit.  of  the  venom,  and  again  by  Lippe,  on  a  woman  who  took  4t]i  dilution.

The  poison  is  pressed  from  the  venom  sac  of  the  living  reptile,  and  triturated
with  sugar  of  milk.  The  cures  reported  by  S.  B.  Higgins,  however,  were  made
with  a  preparation  made  from  the  gall  of  the  snake,  Fel  Elaps  Corallinus.  Higgins,
N.  A.  J.  H.,  V.  24,  p.  115,  remarks:  "The  pathogenetic  action  of  Fel  E.  C.  is  in
many  respects  similar  to  Elaps  Corallinus,  but  in  almost  every  case  its  action  will
probably  be  found  to  be  much  more  strongly  marked  than  that  of  the  latter."
These  symptoms  are  marked .

Clinical  Authorities. — Headache,  Decran,  Kiick.  Kl.  Erf.,  v.  5,  p.  84;  De-
cran,  Allg.  Horn.  Ztg.,  v.  49,  p.  189 ;  Amaurosis,  Decran,  Kiick.  Kl.  Erf.,  v.  5,  p.  151  •
Loss  ofheariny,  Escalier,  Allg.  Hom.  Ztg.,  v.  51,  p.  87 ;  Impairment  of  hearing,  with
otalgia,  Decran,  Allg.  Hom.  Ztg.,  v.  49,  p.  189;  Otorrhcea  and  deafness,  Decran,  Allg.
Hom.  Ztg.,  V.  49,  p.  189;  Discharge  from  ears,  Cochran,  Raiie's  Rec,  1872,  p.  81 ;
Chronic  otorrhcea,  with  high  febrile  condition,  Clifton,  Rnue's  Rec,  1874,  p.  89,  also
Hah.  Mo.,  V.  9,  p.  171 ;  Itching  in  ears,  blotches  in  throat,  Cochran,  Hah.  Mo  ,  v.  6,
p.  396;  Chronic  stuffing  of  nose,  Clifton,  Raue's  Rec,  1874,  p.  100;  Epistaxis,  Gil-
christ, Surg.  Therap.,  p.  323;  many  cases  (Fel  Elaps  Corallinus),  Higgins,  N.  A.
J.  H.,  V.  24,  p.  115;  Chronic  inflammation  of  naso-pharyngeal  mucous  membrane,  Clif-
ton, Raue's  Rec,  1874,  p.  108;  Chronic  ulceration  of  throat,  Clifton,  B.  J.  H.,  v.  31,
p.  658;  Sore  throat  (Fel  Elaps  Corall.),  Higgins,  N.  A.  J.  H.,  v.  24,  p.  115;  Sore
throat  with  oedema  (Fel  E.  C),  Higgins,  N.  A.  J.  H.,  v.  24,  p.  116 ;  Affection  ofstom'
ach.  Payne,  Hah.  Mc,  v.  5,  p.  199;  Uterine  hemorrhage  Fel  E.  C),  Higgins,  N.
A.  J.  H.,  V.  24,  116;  Metrorrhagia  (Fel  E.  C),  Higgins,  N.  A.  J.  H.,  v.  24,  p.  117;.
Croup  (Fel  E.  C),  Higgins,  N.  A.  J.  H.,  v.  24,  p.  116;  Cough  (Fel  E.  C),  Higgins,
N.  A.  J.  H.,  v.  24,  p.  116;  Pneumonia  (Fel  E.  C),  Higgins,  K  A.  J.  H.,  v.  24,  p.
118;  Pain  about  r.  knee,  Decran,  Allg.  Hom.  Ztg.,  v.  49,  p.  189;  Hemiplegia,  De-
cran, Allg.  Hom.  Ztg.,  V.  49,  p.  189.

^  Mind. I  I  Absence  of  mind.

I  Imagines  he  hears  some  one  talking.

I  I  Depjression  of  spirits,  and  desire  for  solitude.

■  Fearful  and  apprehensive  of  some  fatal  disease.

1  i  Fear  of  being  left  alone,  as  if  something  horrible  might.

happen;  horror  of  rain.
i  i  Angry  about  one's  self,  does  not  wish  to  be  spoken  to.
At  the  least  contrariety,  body  shudders,  blood  boils,  with

prickling.
^  Sensorium. l  Vertigo,  with  tendency  to  fall  forward.


187  ELAPS  CORALLINUS.

Fainting,  with  vomiting  of  mucus,  or  fainting  on  stooping.

Fulness  in  the  head,  as  if  all  blood  were  collected  in  it;,
cold  hands ;  fears  apoplexy.

Congestion  of  blood  to  head  on  stooping.
^  Inner  Head.  I Severe  stitching  pains  in  forehead,  with
heaviness  of  head ;  occasionally  pain  intermits  from  8-10
days ;  rumbling  in  1.  ear  as  of  thunder,  with  impair-
ment of  hearing ;  lachrymation  of  eyes,  pain  and  red-
ness of  1.  eye.

Weight  and  pain  in  forehead.

Pain  in  cerebellum,  right  side.

Lancinating  headache,  1.  then  r.  side.

Violent  pain  in  vertex  (afternoon),  as  if  brain  were  shak-
ing, with  nausea,  which  prevents  her  from  keeping
head  quiet.

Frontal  and  occipital  headache,  <  from  motion  and
stooping.

■  Headache  in  occiput  after  mental  exertion. ^Chronic

naso-pharyngeal  catarrh.

Stinging  headache,  with  sleeplessness.

I  I  Frequent  headache.  ^Ozsena.
'  Sight  and  Eyes.  Aversion  to  light,  desire  to  close  eyes.
Everything  seems  w^iite,  even  at  night;  grey  veil  before
eyes;  on  stooping,  rush  of  blood  to  head  with  vertigo
and  pain  at  root  of  nose ;  can  scarcely  distinguish  light
from  dark.

Large  red,  fiery  spots  before  eyes.

Red  bar  before  eyes  when  opening  them.

When  closing  the  eyes  everything  looks  red ;  dotted  black
points.

Sometimes  dark  spots,  as  large  as  a  penny,  before  open
eyes,  which  gradually  diminish  and  disappear  by  keep-
ing eyes  still;  they  do  not  move  with  the  eye,  last  two
or  three  seconds  at  a  time.

Dirty  red  spot  before  eyes,  half  the  size  of  hand ;  some-
times, when  eyes  are  closed,  a  dirty  red  appearance,
covered  with  black  spots.

■  Completely  blind  in  1.  eye  for  three  years,  and  nearly  so

in  r.  for  three  months,  following  headache;  now  has
severe  headache  with  drawing,  sometimes  sticking  pains
from  forehead  to  occiput;  pain  at  root  of  nose,  with
vertigo;  even  with  r.  eye  can  scarcely  tell  light  from
dark;  everything  seems  white,  even  at  night;  some  old
rheumatic  sj^mptoms  in  legs.  ^Amaurosis.
Eyes  red  and  inflamed; blear-eyed;  glassy  look.

■  Eyeballs  feel  sticky  under  lids  and  as  if  rough.
Dryness  and  burning  in  both  eyes  on  waking;  bloated

around  the  eyes  in  the  morning.


ELAPS  CORALLINUS.  188

Violent  itching  in  1.  eye.

Stye  on  1.  eye,  with  lancination.

*  Hearing  and  Ears. Illusions  of  hearing; hears  whistles

and  ringing.

■  Continued  buzzing,  as  if  a  fly  were  enclosed  in  auditory

meatus.
I  I  Crackling  in  ears  on  swallowing.
iDulness  of  hearing  with  buzzing  in  ears;  no  pain;  slight

discharge  from  ears,  which  leaves  a  green  spot  upon

bed-linen ;  consequent  upon  otorrhoea,  from  which  he

suffered  during  childhood.
iSudden  deafness  of  r.  ear,  after  catching  cold ;  no  pain,

no  tinnitus; secretion  of  wax  profuse  but  dry.

■  Hearing  of  both  ears  impaired;  otalgia  of  r.  ear.
■Sudden  j)ainless  attack  of  marked  deafness  at  night,  with

constant  roaring  and  cracking  in  ears.

■  Offensive  discharge  from  r.  ear,  with  deafness  on  that  side ;

constant  buzzing  noise  in  diseased  ear,  subject  to  epis-
taxis  and  eruptions  about  nose  and  face;  skin  hot  and
dry,  but  constantly  complains  of  feeling  cold;  pulse  120.
^Chronic  otorrhoea.

■  Watery,  yellow  or  yellow-green  discharge  with  deafness.
Discharge  of  blood  from  ear.

Cerumen  black  and  hardened.

llntolerable  itching  in  ears;  watery  yellowish  discharge.
Crusty  eruption  on  ear  and  cheek.
'  Smell  and  Nose. ■  Stoppage  of  both  nostrils.

Nostrils  plugged  up  with  lumps  of  dry  mucus;  sleeps  with
mouth  open.

■  Partial  stoppage  and  stuffiness  high  up  in  nostrils,  with

dull  aching  in  forehead;  <  in  wet  weather;  occasion-
ally bad  smell  from  nose;  offensive  discharge;  posterior
wall  of  throat  covered  with  a  dry,  greenish-yellow  scab,
wrinkled  and  fissured,  extending  up  to  nose;  nose-
bleed; pains  from  root  of  nose  to  ears  on  swallowing;
sneezing  at  night;  sense  of  smell  gone;  profuse  and
dark  catamenia. ^Ozsena.

■  Offensive  discharge from  nose;  subject  to  epistaxis  and

eruption  about  nose  and  face;  snuffles  and  pain  from
root  of  nose  to  forehead.

■  Discharge  smelling  like  putrid  herring  pickle.

■  Coryza  from  least  draft  of  air.

White  and  watery  mucus  discharged  from  nose.

■  Blood  black,  flows  in  a  steady  stream,  copious.

■  Epistaxis:  sudden,  profuse,  while  walking;  after  a  blow.

■  Xose  bleeds  when  violently  blown. ^Nasal  catarrh.

■  Arterial  blood  gushes  from  nose  and  ears.

*  Upper  Face. Dark  complexion.


189  ELAPS  CORALLINUiS.

■  Face  of  a  dull  yellowish  color. ^Ozsena.

Redness  and  swelling  of  r.  cheek,  chilliness  all  over  body.

Redness,  heat  and  formication  in  r.  cheek.

Swelling  of  face,  extending  to  r.  side  of  nose.

Red  blotches  on  bloated  face.
"  Taste  and  Tongue. Taste  as  of  blood  ;  before  haemoptysis.

Salty  tasting  saliva.

Tongue  deep  red,  clean,  black  or  dark  red ;  swollen ;  whitish
in  morning;  pricking  at  tip.
^^  Throat. Sensation  as  if  food  turned  like  a  corkscrew,  on
swallowing.

Constriction  in  [^liarynx,  with  pressure  in  throat.

The  beverage  is  arrested  in  oesophagus  as  from  a  spas-
modic contraction.

I  Irritable  throat,  broken  out  with  red  blotches,  about  as
large  as  half  of  a  split  pea;  blotches  also  extended  over
soft  palate  and  sides  of  cheeks,  and  bled  upon  slightest
irritation ;  intolerable  itching  in  ears.

I  Ulceration  of  throat,  <  1.  side,  difficulty  of  swallowing
liquids,  occurring  five  or  six  times  a  year,  lasting  two
or  three  weeks  at  a  time ;  attacks  brought  on  by  ex-
posure to  rain  or  wind ;  dislikes  wet  weather  apart  from
the  throat  affection,  never  feels  happy  in  wet  weather.

lExceedingly  painful  deglutition  of  both  solids  and  liquids;
sharp  pain  and  soreness  to  touch  across  chest  from  r.  to
1.  axilla;  frontal  cephalalgia;  sides  of  throat  sore  to
touch ;  sides  of  buccal  cavity  above  fauces  covered  with
numerous  dark-red  points,  like  incii3ient  pustules.

■  Deglutition  of  solids  or  liquids  almost  impossible;  throat

exceedingly  sensitive  to  touch ;  tonsils  swollen  so  that
no  passage  is  visible.

I  Dull  pain  from  nares  to  ears;  when  swallowing,  pain
goes  to  ears;  posterior  wall  of  pharynx  dry,  mucous
membrane  fissured  and  covered  with  crusts;  offensive
discharge  from  nose;  skin  dry  and  hot,  but  always
complains  of  feeling  cold.

iSore  throat,  offensive  discharge  from  nose,  epistaxis,  dis-
charge offensive,  smelling  like  putrid  herring  pickle ;
posterior  wall  of  throat  covered  with  a  dry,  greenish-
yellow  membrane,  wrinkled  and  fissured,  extending  to
nares;  occasionally  portions  are  detached  and  expelled
from  nose  or  mouth,  leaving  a  raw,  corrugated  surface;
membrane  dry  and  corrugated ;  stuffiness  about  root  of
nose,  and  dull  aching  from  there  to  forehead ;  on  swal-
lowing, pain  extends  to  ears;  sense  of  smell  gone;  fre-
quent headaches ;  face  dull  yellowish  ;  catamenia  early,
profuse,  dark ;  skin  hot  and  dry,  pulse  140.  ^Chronic
inflammation  of  naso-pharyngeal  mucous  membrane.


EL  APS  CORALLINUS.  190

^*  Appetite,  Thirst,  Desires,  Aversions, i  Canine  hunger,
yet  unable  to  eat.
Hunger  with  violent  headache  if  not  satisfied  at  once.
I  Violent  thirst ;  desire  for  sweetened  buttermilk.
^^  Eating  and  Drinking. After  eating :  weight  in  stomach
with  nausea;  oppression;  fruit  lies  like  ice.
I  After  drinking  cold  drinks  lie  like  ice  in  stomach,  and
cause  cold  feeling  in  chest.
^^  Hiccough,  Belching,  Nausea  and  Vomiting. Acidity  of
stomach,  w^ith  nausea  and  faint  feeling.
Sour  belching.

Vomiting:  of  mucus,  with  fainting ;  of  green  bile ;  followed
by  diarrhcea.
^^  Scrobiculum  and  Stomach. iCold  drinks  feel  like  icein
stomach;  weight  at  stomach  after  eating;  sinking,  faint
feeling  at  pit  of  stomach ;  pain  in  stomach  >  by  lying
upon  abdomen;  desire  for  sweetened  buttermilk  ;  fear-
ful and  apprehensive  of  some  fatal  disease ;  constipation.
B  Fruits  and  cold  drinks  lie  like  ice  on  stomach.
I  I  Burning  in  stomach. ^Phthisis.

Sudden  pain  in  stomach,  as  if  she  must  sink  down,  <
while  sitting,  >  walking  about.
■^^  Hypochondria. '  l  Painful  pressure  in  right  side  of  liver.
"  Abdomen. Sensation  as  if  blood  in  abdomen  were  flowing
backwards.
Intestines  feel  twisted,  as  if  by  a  cord  and  strung  together
in  a  knot,  with  strangulating  sensation  and  black  stool.
Lancinating  from  both  groins  to  symphisis  pubis.
Colic  with  urging  to  stool.
^•^  Stool  and  Rectum. Diarrhoea : blackish,  frothy  ;  yellow,
watery ;  mucous  and  rumbling  ; bile  ;  bloody  mucus ;
in  phthisis,  black,  liquid  blood.

■  Bowels  constipated.

Constriction  of  sphincter  after  bloody  stools.

Formication  at  anus  as  from  worms.

Prolapsus  ani.
^^  Urinary Organs. i  i  Red  urine, with cloudy  sediment.

Thick  urine,  with  red  sediment.

Suppression  of  urine  ;  strangury.

B I  Discharge  of  mucus  from  urethra. ^Phthisis.
^-  Male  Sexual  Organs. Impotence.

Weight  and  swelling  of  testes.

Discharge  of  prostatic  fluid.

Skin  of  prepuce  thick  and  inflamed.
^^  Female  Sexual  Organs. Weight  at  uterus  and  vagina  after
an  hysteric  attack.

I  Menses  every  2  or  3  weeks  ;  flow  profuse  dark. ^Ozsena,

■  Black  blood  between  menses.


191  ELAPS  CORALLINUS.

I  Metrorrhagia;  discharge  of  very  dark  colored  liquid  and
clots,  but  mostly  liquid,  and  varies  from  half  a  i^ound
to  two  or  three  pounds  in  twenty -four  hours;  is  so  weak
cannot  rise  from  bed  or  hold  anything  in  hand  ;  has  the
appearance  of  a  corpse ;  sensation  of  soreness  across
lower  abdomen  ;  slight  pain  to  urinate ;  dragging  pain
in  both  temples ;  at  times  slight  pain  in  1.  pleara,
almost  always  >  by  chewing  a  small  piece  of  gum
camphor.

■  Sensation  as  if  something  burst  in  womb,  followed  by  a
continuous  stream  of  dark-colored  blood,  on  attempting
to  urinate ;  flow  very  profuse,  venous,  and  containing
some  clots. ^Cancer  uteri.

Itching  in  vagina ;  formication  at  vulva.
^  Voice  and  Larynx.  Trachea  and  Bronchia,  i  Complete
aphonia;  sibilant  rales,  wheezing;  at  night  chokes  and
turns  pale  while  sleeping;  soreness  in  throat  below  fauces
on  swallowing;  no  respiratory  sound  in  1.  lung,  dull
by  percussion;  rales  very  distinct  in  r.  lung  at  each  in-
spiration ;  pulse  90,  skin  dry,  but  not  hot.

I  I  Laryngeal  phthisis.
^^Respiration, l Oppressed  breathing  in  evening  <  on  going
up  stairs.

Constriction  of  the  chest.

I  I  Feeling  of  a  heavy  load  on  chest. ^Phthisis.
^^  Cough. I  Dry cough, frequent and constantly recurring
paroxysms,  after  suddenly  catching  cold.

Very  violent  attacks  of  dry  cough,  followed  by  expectora-
tion of  black  blood,  with  severe  tearing  pains  through-
out whole  chest  and  principally  at  apex  of  r.  lung.

Constant  cough,  with  frightful  pains  throughout  lungs,  as
if  they  were  torn  out,  <  upper  part  of  r.  chest.

Cough  with  expectoration  of  masses  of  black  blood,  and
often  with  sensation of  laceration  in  region  of  heart;
before  cough,  taste  of  blood  in  mouth.
^  Inner  Chest  and  Lungs. Stitches  in  upper  part  of  each
lung; >  when  walking.

Stitches  in  1.  side  of  chest ; <  when  breathing.

SVery  violent  attacks  of  dry  cough  whicli  terminate  with
expectoration  of  black  blood,  with  severe  tearing  pain;
throughout  chest,  and  principally  at  apex  of  r.  lungs
oppression  after  having  eaten. ^Phthisis.

BPain  in  r.  lung  for  eight  days;  cannot  turn  to  either  side
nor  sit  up  without  assistance;  sleeplessness;  sibilant  rales
with  crepitation  in  both  lungs;  r.  lung  sounds  dull  under
mamma  and  near  armpit  to  percussion;  each  inspiration
causes  a  crackling  sound  ;  respiration  very  difficult,  al-
most agonizing;  vomiting  all  forenoon;  diarrhoea  all
day;  constant  cough;  urine  like  blood. ^Pneumonia.


ELAPS  CORALLINUS.  192

I  I  Pulmonary  pnthisis ; <  in  r.  lung;  rush  of  blood  to

chest  and  throat  in  morning.
Haemoptysis,  expectoration  of  black  blood,  with  sensation
of  laceration  in  region  of  heart.
^^  Heart,  Pulse  and  Circulation. Tearing  as  from  region  of
heart;  ha3moptysis.
Palpitation  with  anxiety  and  trembling  of  hands.
I  Pulse  120. ^OzEena.
^^  Outer  Chest. iSharp  pain  and  soreness  to  touch  across

chest,  from  r.  to  1.  axilla. ^Sore  throat.
^^  Neck  and  Back. Stiffness  in  r.  side  of  neck.

Lancinations  in  1.  side  of  neck,  also  whole  spinal  marrow.
Painful  pressure  at  nape  of  neck.

I  I  Weight  as  of  an  iron  bar  pressing  on  small  of  back.
Pain  in  back  with  chilliness,  cold  feet  and  strangury.
^^  Upper  Limbs. Itching  under  axilla,  with  tetter.

Arms  and  hands  are  swollen,  bluish,  covered  with  red

spots;  also  r.  leg  and  foot.
Arms  cold  by  ])utting  hand  in  cold  water.
Yellow  spots  on  hands  and  fingers.
Crampy  constriction  at  bend  of  elbow,  extending  to  hand,

as  if  one  had  carried  a  heavy  weight.
Pricking  in  1.  upper  arm.
Hot  rash  on  r.  wrist.
Right  hand  feels  as  if  paralyzed.
Tips  of  fingers  peel  off.
^^  Lower  Limbs, l  Transient  stitching  pains  at  one  time  above,
at  another  below  r.  knee;  <  from  motion  or  warmth  of
bed.
Sensation  of  spraining  and  stiffness  in  knee-joint.
Cramps  in  the  calves.
Icy  coldness  of  r.  leg.
Rheumatic  pains  in  1.  leg.
I  I  Icy  cold  feet.

Left  foot  swollen  and  blue,  with  red  spots.
Picking  under  toe  nail.
A^esicles  on  feet.
''Limbs in General, i  i Soreness of limbs < at night.

^Rheumatism.
^^Rest. Position. Motion. Lying  on  abdomen: pain  in
stomach  >  ;  change  of  position  painful.
Breathing:  stitches  in  1.  side  of  chest  <.
Sitting:  pains  in  stomach  <.
Stooping:  fainting;  headache  <;  rush  of  blood  to  head;

vertigo;  pain  at  root  of  nose.
Cannot  keep  head  C|uiet:  with  pain.
Cannot  turn  on  either  side  without  assistance.
Motion: <  headache;  pain  about  knee  <.


193  ELAPS  CORALLINUS.

Walking:  sudden,  profuse  epistaxis;  pain  in  stomach  >;,

stitches  in  lungs  >.
Going  up  stairs:  oppressed  breathing  <.
^  Nerves. I  Sensation  of  numbness,  with  great  weakness  and.

coldness  in  whole  1.  side  of  body  ;  deglutition  impaired ;

at  times,  darkness  before  eyes  with  vertigo;  dimness  of

vision; lachrymation  of  r.  eye; menses  very  scanty;

pain  in  r.  side  of  chest  and  r.  shoulder. ^Hemiplegia.
^^  Sleep. Drowsy  all  day ;  no  sleep  at  night.
During  sleep  bites  hand.
Sleeplessness  from  lancinating  headache.
Dreams  of  business,  of  dead  persons,
^  Time. Morning:  bloated around eyes;  rush of  blood ta

chest  and  throat;  inability  to  rise.
All  day:  diarrhoea;  drowsy.
10  A.M. :  fever  lasts  all  night  until.
Forenoon:  vomiting.
Noon:  chill.

Afternoon:  pain  in  vertex;  dry  heat.
Evening:  oppressed  breathing ;  flushes  of  heat.

7  P.M. :  fever.

From  7  to  9  p.m.  :  dry  heat.

8  P.M.:  chilliness  and  heat  alternately.
From  9  to  10  p.m.:  chill.

Night:  Everything  seems  white;  sudden  attack  of  deaf-
ness; sneezing;  chokes  and  turns  pale  while  sleeping;
soreness  of  limbs  <;  no  sleep;  fever  lasting  all  night.

At  midnight:  dry  heat.
^^  Temperature  and  Weather. Horror  of  rain.

Warmth  of  bed:  pain  about  head  <.

Draft  of  air:  coryza;  sensitive  to;  chilly,  with  otorrhoea.

Wind:  exposure  causes  ulceration  of  throat.

Wet  weather:  dull  aching  in  forehead  <  ;  never  feels
happy  during.

Rain :  exposure  to,  causes  ulceration  of  throat.

Cold  water:  arms  cold  by  putting  hands  in;  coldness  <C
from  drinking.

Great  sensitiveness  to  cold.
*^  Fever. Coldness  in  the  back.

Terrible  coldness  after  drinking,  and  as  if  ice  water  were
rising  and  falling  through  a  cylindrical  opening  in  1.
lung.

Coldness  <  drinking  cold  water;  shivering  from  head  to
foot  with  chattering  of  teeth  after  a  drink.

Shaking  chill,  felt  internally  as  if  in  bones,  followed  in
half  an  hour  by  burning  heat;  skin  hot,  thirst,  fever
lasting  whole  night,  and  until  10  a.m.  next  day.

Chill  followed  by  dry  heat  and  burning  redness  of  face.

VOL.  V. — 13.


ELAPS  CORALLINUS.  194

Chill  ai  noon,  without  thirst,  followed  by  dry  heat  in  after-
noon, without  perspiration.

I  I  Skin  hot  and  dry,  but  constantly  complains  of  feeling
cold;  pulse  120. ^Chronic  otorriioea.

Chilliness  and  heat  alternately  at  8  p.m.  ;  chilly  for  a  few
minutes,  then  heat  for  a  quarter  of  an  hour.

Heat:  with  thirst;  alternating  with  chilliness.

■  Flushes  of  heat  in  evening,  with  redness  and  heat  of  face
and  ears.

With  the  fever,  oppression  of  breathing.

Fever  at  7  p.m  ,  with  less  chill,  more  violent  heat,  but  little
sweat;  sleep  interrupted  by  heavy  dreams  (of  bad
people),  with  difficult  breathing  the  whole  night.

Dry  heat  from  7  to  9  p.m.,  followed  by  chill  till  10  p.m.

Dry  heat,  at  midnight;  cannot  endure  any  cover.

iSkin  hot  and  dry;  jDulse  140. ^Ozsena.

Sweat:  cold;  profuse;  all  over  body;  on  forehead  and
nape  of  neck.

Intermittent  fever;  attacks  8  to  10  p.m.,  every  day.
*^  Attacks, Periodicity. Constantly recurring paroxysms

of  cough. .
^ Frequent:  headache;  attacks  of  cough.

At  times:  slight  pain  in  1.  pleura;  darkness  before  eyes;
vertigo.

IFor  2  or  3  seconds  at  a  time :  dark  spots  before  eyes.

For  a  few  minutes :  chill.

For  quarter  of  an  hour :  heat.

Half  hour:  after  chill,  burning  heat.

Every  day :  attacks  of  intermittent  fever,  from  8  to  10  p.m.

For  8  days :  pain  in  r.  lung.

Prom  8  to  10  days :  pain  intermits.

Every  two  or  three  weeks :  menses.

For  two  or  three  weeks  at  a  time:  ulceration  of  throat.

Five  or  six  times  a  year :  ulceration  of  throat.

Three  months: blindness  in  r.  eye.

Three  years:  blindness  of  1.  eye.
^  Locality  and  Direction.  Left :  rumbling  in  ear ;  redness
and  pain  in  eye;  blindness  in  eye;  itching  in  eye;  stye
on  eye;  ulceration  on  side  of  throat;  pain  in  pleura;  no
respiratory  sound  in  lung;  stitches  in  side  of  chest;  lan-
cinations  in  side  of  neck;  pricking  in  upper  arm;  rheu-
matic pains  in  leg;  foot  swollen  and  blue,  with  red
spots;  numbness,  weakness  and  coldness  of  whole  side
of  body ;  as  if  ice  water  were  rising  and  falling  through
cylindrical  opening  in  lung;  rheumatic  pains  commence
on  side.

Right:  pain  in  side  of  cerebellum;  blindness  of  eye;  eye
can  scarcely  tell  light  from  dark;  sudden  deafness;  otal-


195  ELAPS  CORALLINUS.

gia;  offensive  discharge  from  ear;  buzzing  in  ear;  red-
ness and  swelling  of  cheek;  heat  of  cheek;  formication
in  cheek;  swelling  of  side  of  nose;  painful  pressure  in
side  of  liver;  rattling  in  lung;  pain  at  apex  of  lung;
upper  part  of  chest  lungs  feel  torn  out;  lung  sounds  dead;
pulmonary  phthisis  <  in  r.  lung;  stiffness  in  side  of
neck;  leg  and  foot  swollen,  bluish,  covered  with  red
spots;  hot  rash  on  wrist;  hand  feels  as  if  paralyzed;
stitching  pain  about  knee;  icy  coldness  of  leg;  lachry-
mation  of  eye;  pain  in  side  of  chest;  pain  in  shoulder;
jDhthisis  <  r.  side;  side  feels  sensitive.

From  1.  to  r.  lancinating  headache.

From  r.  to  1.  pain  from  one  axilla  to  the  other.

Rheumatic  pains  commencing  on  1.  side.
*^  Sensations.  As  if  all  the  blood  were  collected  in  head ;
rumbling  in  ear  as  of  thunder;  as  if  brain  were  shaken,
with  nausea;  eyeball  as  if  rough;  as  if  a  fly  were  en-
closed in  auditory  meatus;  as  if  food  turned  like  a  cork-
screw on  swallowing;  pain  in  stomach  as  if  she  must
sink  down;  as  if  blood  were  flowing  backwards  in  ab-
domen ;  intestines  feel  twisted  as  if  b}'-  a  cord  and  strung-
together  in  a  knot;  formication  at  anus  as  from  worms;
of  a  heavy  load  on  chest;  as  if  lungs  were  torn  out;  as
of  an  iron  bar  pressing  on  small  of  back ;  constriction
at  elbow  as  if  one  had  carried  a  heavy  weight;  hand
feels  as  if  paralyzed.

Pain:  1.  eye;  in  forehead;  in  cerebellum;  at  root  of  nose;
from  root  of  nose  to  forehead;  in  stomach;  in  r.  lung;
in  back ;  in  r.  side  of  chest ;  in  r.  shoulder.

Frightful  pain:  throughout  lungs.

Violent  pain :  in  vertex.

Severe  tearing  pains:  throughout  whole  chest;  at  apex
of  r.  lung.

Tearing:  as  from  the  region  of  the  heart.

Sensation  of  laceration:  at  region  of  heart.

Lancinating:  headache;  pain  in  1.  eye;  from  both  groins;
1.  side  of  neck;  spinal  marrow.

-Sharp  pain:  across  chest.

Stitches  :  upper  part  of  each  lung ;  in  1.  side  of  chest.

Stitching  pain:  in  forehead  ;  about  r.  knee.

Pricking:  at  tip  of  tongue;  in  1.  upper  arm.

Sticking  pain:  from  forehead  to  occiput.

Stinging :  headache.

Picking :  under  toe  nail.

Constriction :  in  pharynx ;  of  the  chest.

Crampy  constriction:  at  bend  of  elbow,  extending  to  hand.

•Cramps :  in  the  calves.

Drawing  pain  :  from  forehead  to  occiput.


ELAPS  CORALLINUS.  196

Dragging  pain :  in  both  temples.

Burning :  in  eyes ;  in  stomach.

Painful  pressure :  in  r.  side  of  liver ;  at  nape  of  neck.

Pressure :  in  throat.

Soreness :  across  lower  abdomen ;  in  throat.

Rheumatic  pain  :  in  1.  leg.

Dull  pain :  from  nares  to  ears.

Dull  aching :  in  forehead ;  from  root  of  nose  to  forehead.

Slight  pain :  in  1.  pleura.

Weight: in  forehead;  in  stomach;  of  testes;  at  uterus;

in  vagina ;  on  small  of  back.
Heaviness:  of  head.
Heat :  on  r.  cheek.

Faint,  sinking  feeling:  at  pit  of  stomach.
Sticky  feeling:  in  eyeballs  under  lids.
Dryness :  in  eyes.
Crackling:  in  ears.
Spraining:  in  knee  joint.
Stiffness:  in  r.  side  of  neck;  in  knee  joint.
Roaring :  in  ears.
Rumbling :  in  1.  ear.
Buzzing :  in  ears.
Numbness :  in  1.  side  of  body.
Weakness :  of  1.  side  of  body.
Formication :  on  r.  cheek  ;  at  anus.
Itching  on  1.  eye;  in  ears;  under  1.  axilla  ;  chill  felt  as  if

in  bones.
Coldness: of  1.  side  of  body.
"  Tissues. I  Hemorrhages  black,  often  fluid.
*^ Touch. Passive  Motion. Injuries. From  a  blow:  sudden

profuse  epistaxis.
Touch:  soreness  to,  across  chest;  sides  of  throat  sore.
^^  Skin. Red  pimples  on  tips  of  fingers.
The  tips  of  the  fingers  peel  off.
Little  pimples,  followed  by  desquamation.
Yellow  spots  on  hands  and  fingers.
Red  tetter  from  corner  of  r.  nostril  to  cheek.
Phlyctense  especially  on  extremities.
*''  Stages  of  Life,  Constitution. Woman,  ^t.  30,  suffering  for

nine  years ;  hemiplegia.
H.,  set.  6,  white,  full  habit,  rosy-cheeked,  after  a  blow  upon

nose;  epistaxis.
Girl,  set.  7;  croup.

Girl,  set.  16,  for  three  years;  otorrhoea.
Girl,  £et.  18,  consequent  upon  an  otorrhoea  occurring  in  her

fifth  year;  dulness  of  hearing  and  otorrhoea.
Man,  set.  18,  after  otorrhoea,  when  he  was  two  years  old;

otorrhoea  with  deafness.


197  EL  APS  CORALLINUS.

Woman,  aet.  22,  tall,  robust,  seamstress;  sore  throat  with
oedema.

Man,  eet.  24 ;  chronic  stuffing  of  nose.

Man,  set.  25,  after  catching  cold ;  sudden  deafness  of  r.  ear.

Man,  set.  26,  foundryman,  after  sudden  catching  cold;
cough.

Miss  H.,  set.  27,  blonde;  epistaxis.

Woman,  suffered  several  years;  inflammation  of  naso-
pharyngeal mucous  membrane.

Mrs.  H.,  white,  set.  36,  above  medium  size,  full  habit;  sore
throat.

Man,  set.  36,  another,  set.  48 ;  chronic  ulceration  of  throat.

Woman,  set.  38,  suffering  for  ten  years;  impaired  hearing
of  both  ears,  with  otalgia  of  r.  ear.

Woman,  set.  39,  white,  unmarried;  confined  to  bed  for  a
year  with  cancer  uteri;  uterine  hemorrhage.

Man,  set.  44,  pain  about  r.  knee.

Woman,  set.  44,  suffering  for  8  years;  cephalalgia.

Octoroon,  set.  47,  married,  but  childless,  has  been  suffering
for  a  year  past ;  metrorrhagia.

Woman,  set.  49,  black,  has  had  lung  trouble  for  three  years;
pneumonia.

Mr.  B.,  set.  50,  mother  and  sister  supposed  to  have  died
from  cancer,  believes  himself  to  be  troubled  with  a  can-
cerous humor;  itching  in  ears,  blotches  in  throat.

Man,  set.  61,  rheumatic  symptoms  in  legs;  amaurosis.

Man,  set.  61;  sudden  impairment  of  hearing.
^  Relations. Antidoted  by:  Radiated  Heat,  Alcohol,  Arsen.

Compare:  t Arsen.,  Carb.  veg.,  Crotal.,  Laches.,  Mur.  ox.,  Nitr.
ac,  Mhus  tox.


ELATERIUM.  19S


ELATERIUM.

Squirting  Cucumber.  Cucurbitacese.

A  species  of  Momordica  used  by  the  ancients  in  angina,  dropsv,  gout,  sciatica
and  rheumatism,  and  applied  as  a  cataplasm  in  hemicrania.  Mesne,  the  Arabian,,
speaks  highly  of  it.

The  tincture  is  prepared  from  the  fruit.

Provings  by  Matthews  and  Cooper. See  Allen's  Encycl.,  vol.  4,  p.  200.

Clinical  Authoeities. — Flattdent  colic,  Matthews,  Allg.  Hom.  Ztg.,  vol.  83^
p.  127;  Diarrhoea,  Matthews,  Allg.  Hom.  Ztg.,  vol.  83,  p.  126;  Dysenteria  biliosa,
Matthews,  Allg.  Hom.  Ztg.,  vol.  83,  p.  126;  Cholera  morbus  (2  cases),  Matthews,,
Allg.  Hom.  Ztg.,  vol.  83,  p.  126;  Rheumatic  sciatica,  Matthews,  Allg.  Hom.  Ztg.
vol.  83,  p.  127 ;  Neuralgic  pains  of  r.  side  of  body,  Matthews,  Allg.  Hom.  Ztg.,,
vol.  83,  p.  127;  Intermittent  fever  (2  cases),  Matthews,  Allg.  Hom.  Ztg.,  vol.  83.  p.
126;  (2  cases)  Jeanes,  Allen's  Int.  Fever,  p.  119;  Allg.  Hom.  Ztg.,  vol.  83,  p.
127  ;  'Tertian  intermittent,  IngersoU  and  Goodno,  Organon,  vol.  3,  p.  369  ;  Quotidian
intermittent  with  icterus,  Firmat,  Raue's  Eec,  1875,  p.  273 ;  Febris  biliosa  (2  cases),,
Matthews,  Allg.  Hom.  Ztg.,  vol.  83,  p.  126.


^  Mind. Depression  of  spirits.

■Irresistible  propensity  to  wander  from  home,  even  in  the

night,  and  range  in  woods. ^^Intermittent.
Fear  of  some  approaching  disaster.
^  Sensorium. >  Head  feels  heavy  with  heat  in  forehead.

I  In  the  fever  violent  tearing  pains  throughout  head,  but
most  in  the  region  of  benevolence.
^  Inner  Head. Pains  in  the  temples.

I  I  Headache  preceding  paroxysms. ^Intermittent.
I  Pains  in  head,  especially  in  region  of  combativeness  on
both  sides,  with  dull  pain  in temples. ^Indigestion.
^  Sight  and  Eyes. Sticking  as  of  a  splinter,  in  inner  can  thus
of  1.  eye.
I  I  Whites of  eyes tinged  deeply yellow. ^Jaundice  of
new  born.
^  Hearing  and  Ears. Sticking  pain  near  rim  of  cartilage  of

1.  ear.
'  Smell  and  Nose, i Running  at  the  nose. ^Intermittent.
''  Upper Face. Heat  in  forehead.

"  Taste  and  Tongue, i  i  Bitter  taste  in  the  mouth. ^Indi-
gestion.
Tongue  coated  with  a  dirty  brown  fur;  bitter  taste.


199  ELATERIUM.

^^  Inner  Mouth. TrSpitting  large  lumps  of  yellow  matter,  ap-
parently from  the  stomach.
^^  Throat. A  feeling  as  if  posterior  nares  and  upper  part  of
oesophagus  were  enlarged.
Angina  aretaeus.
^*  Appetite,  Thirst. Desires,  Aversions, i '  Much  thirst

with  the  paroxysms. ^Intermittent.
^'^  Hiccough,  Belching,  Nausea  and  Vomiting.  Eructations
of  flatus.
I  Nausea. ^Indigestion.

I  I  Constant  nausea  and  disposition  to  vomit.  ^Bilious  fever.
•  Nausea;  vomiting  of  a  watery  substance,  or  of  greenish,,

bilious  matter,  with  great  weakness.
I  I  Nausea and vomiting, with fluid stool. ^Cholera-
sporadica.
^'^  Scrobiculum  and  Stomach, l  Oppression  and  constriction
in  epigastrium. ^Cholera  morbus.
I  Dull  pain  and  oppression  in  epigastrium. ^Indigestion.
^^Hypochondria. SDullpain  inr. hypochondrium. ^Biliary
calculi.

I  Pain  in  left  side. ^Intermittent. ^Flatulent  colic.

^^  Abdomen, l Cramping,  tearing,  gnawing  pains  in  abdomen
and  chest  with  constipation. ^Flatulent  colic.

I I  Violent  cutting  pain  in  the  bowels,  recurring  at  inter-
vals of  10  or  15  minutes. ^Cholera  morbus.

■  Cutting,  griping  pains  in  bowels.

Awoke  in  night  with  violent  pains  in  stomach  and  bowels,
with  cramps  in  abdomen,  in  many  places  drawn  up  in
knots;  frequent  vomiting  ;  in  the  morning  weakness.

■  Cutting  pains  in  bowels. ^Bilious  fever.

I  Flatulent  colic,  supervening on  obstinate  diarrhoea,  at-
tended by  borborygmus  and  severe  pain  in  lower  belly.
I  I  Pain  in  the  abdomen. ^Intermittent.
Pain  of  a  dull  aching, pressing kind,  over  crest  of r.

ilium,  round  to  back,  extending  deep  into  pelvis.
Rumbling  of  flatus  in  course  of  csecum  and  colon.
^^  Stool  and  Rectum. Costiveness  with  colicky  pains.

■  Dull  olive-green  discharges.

■  Frequent dark-green  mucous  stools,  in masses mixed

with  whitish  mucus,  streaked  with  blood;  great  pain
in  abdomen;  constant  urging  to  stool.  ^Dysenteria
biliosa.

Discharge  of  dark  masses  of  bilious  mucus.

■Stools  bilious. /^Jaundice  of  new  born.

■  Frequent  and  copious  stool,  with  cutting  pain  in  abdo-

men, after  taking  cold  by  standing  on  damp  ground
after  exertion.

■  Severe  and  copious  discharge  of  a  frothy  fluid  matter,  fre-


ELATERIUM.  200

quently  dejected,  with  cutting  pains  at  intervals  and

vomiting. ^Intermittent.
1 1  Watery  discharges  from  bowels  of  a  frothy  character.
1 1  Copious  liquid  stools.

■  Frequent stools  of a watery nature, with vomiting.

■  Squirting  diarrhoea.
Itching  in  anus,  with  worms.
Bleeding  of  hemorrhoidal  tumors.

■  I  Sporadic  and  Asiatic  cholera.

^^  Urinary  Organs.  Constant  heat  at  neck  of  bladder,  with
extremely  painful  micturition,  inducing  even  con-
vulsions.

■  Suppression  of  urine,  with  cramps  and  neuralgic  pains.
Increased  flow  of  limpid  urine.

■  Urine  stains  the  diaper. ^Jaundice  of  the  new  born.
^^Respiration, i Difficult  breathing. ^Cholera sporadica.

^^  Inner  Chest  and  Lungs. Sharp  pains  at  lower  part  of
sternum,  passing  through  to  spine  or  lower  angle  of  r.
shoulder  blade.
^^  Heart,  Pulse  and  Circulation. Stitch-like  pain  in  region
of  heart,
i  Cardiac  dropsy.
^^  Neck  and  Back. Pains  in  1.  sterno-mastoid  muscle  near
its  insertion  at  sternum.
TiGreat  heat  under  shoulder  blades.

■  Pains under  shoulder blades and in  small of back.
Fugitive  stitching  pains  in  lumbar  region,  more  onr.  side.

^  Upper  Limbs. Sharp  shooting  pains  in  1.  axilla,  near  inser-
tion of  pectoralis  major  muscle.
Pains  extending  from  shoulder  to  ends of  fingers  and

shooting  back  up  to  elbow.
Dull  pain  in  r.  shoulder,  forearm  and  hand,  extending  to

fingers.
Sharp stitching pains  in fingers of 1. hand to their

extremities.
Sharp  stitching  pains  in  muscular  parts  of  thumb.
^  Lower  Limbs. ■  Tearing  and  gnawing  pains  in  hips  and

thighs,  deeply  seated. ^Sciatica.
Shooting  and  dull  aching  pains  in  1.  thigh,  in  courseof

sciatic  nerve,  extending  down  to  instej)  and  extremities

of  toes.
Pain  in  r.  knee,  extending  into  instep  and  toes.

■  Cramps  in  legs  and  soles  of  feet. ^Intermittent.
Arthritic  pain  in  great  toe.

^  Limbs  in  General. ■  Neuralgic  pains  involving  whole  of  r.
side  of  body,  from  temples  to  foot,  with  swelling  of  r.
knee,  suppression  of  urine  and  bitter  taste  in  mouth.
I  1  Soreness  of  limbs  precedes  the  j^aroxysm.  ^Intermittent.


201  ELATERIUM.

I  Great  pain  in  limbs,  darting  down  into  fingers  and  toes.
'^  Nerves. Great  prostration.
^"^  Sleep. Incessant  gaping,  lasting  for  nearly  an  hour.

■  Continued  gaping  and  stretching  before  the  attack. ^In-

termittent.

■  Yawning  and  gaping  with  a  sound  resembling  the  neigh-

ins:  of  a  horse. ^Intermittent.
■^  Time. Morning:  weakness.

7  A.M.:  chill  lasting  one  to  two  hours.

12  M.  and  1  p.m.:  paroxysms  of  ague.

5  p.m.:  severe  chill,  lasting  one  hour.

Night:  desire  to  wander  from  home;  awoke  with  violent
pain  in  stomach  and  bowels.
^^  Temperature and  Weather. From  exposure  to damp
weather  after  measles:  bilious  dysentery.

Standing  on  damp  ground  after  great  bodily  exertion:
cholera  morbus.

Damp  ground:  caused  cutting  j)ain  in  abdomen  and  co-
pious stools.
■*Tever. Chilliness  with  continued  gaping  and  quivering;
headache  and  soreness  of  limbs;  pains  in  bowels.

Chills  and  fever,  when  chill  comes  on  with  excessive  yawn-
ing and  stretching,  which  lasts  all  through  chill.

■  Obstinate  ague  for  five  years,  suppressed  by  Chin,  sulph.,

in  large  doses,  but  always  recurring  at  longer  or  shorter
periods;  when  chills  were  suppressed  urticaria  devel-
oped over  whole  surface,  with  a  disordered  state  of  mind,
characterized  by  an  irresistible  propensity  to  wander
from  home  even  in  the  night,  and  range  the  woods.  Chill
occurred  every  third  day,  twice  in  the  day,  continu-
ing two  hours;  pains  in  head,  under  shoulder  blades,
in  1.  side,  in  calves  of  legs  and  small  of  back ;  yawning
and  gaping  with  a  sound  resembling  the  neighing  of  a
horse;  lachrymation;  profuse  coryza;  cramps  in  legs  and
soles  of  feet.  Chill  followed  by  high  fever,  which  ended
in  copious  perspiration.

■  Quotidian  ague,  which  was  repeatedly  suppressed  for  a

few  days  and  then  became  tertian;  paroxysms  preceded
by  much  gaping  and  attended  by  much  thirst,  pain
in  abdomen  and  great  pain  in  extremities,  darting  down
into  fingers,
i Intermittent  fever  suppressed  by  abuse  of  quinine;  par-
oxysm at  1  P.M.,  preceded  by  headache;  pains  in  bowels;
soreness  of  limbs;  continual  gaping  and  stretching;
during  chill,  slightly  increased  pain  in  head  and  limbs;
during  heat,  violent  tearing  pains  throughout  head,  <
on  vertex;  increased  pain  in  bowels  and  extremities;
pains  shooting  to  very  tips  of  fingers  and  toes,  and  then


ELATERIUM.  202

shooting  back  into  body;  intense  thirst;  nausea,  vom-
iting and  copious  discharges  from  bowels  of  a  frothy-
character,

I  Quartan  ague  of  six  weeks'  standing,  paroxysms  occur-
ring about  12  M.,  when  an  attack  resembling  cholera
morbus  supervened ;  after  this  period  severe  and  copi-
ous discharges  of  frothy  fluid  matter,  frequently  ejected
from  bowels,  wdth  cutting  pains  at  intervals  and
vomiting.

I  At  5  p.  M.,  severe  chill  preceded  by  gaping  and  yawning,
and  lasting  about  an  hour,  follow^ed  by  nausea,  vomit-
ing, fever,  cephalalgia,  violent  pains  in  abdomen  and  in
all  the  muscles  of  the  body,  and  liquid  stools,  this  con-
dition continued  until  early  next  morning,  when  it  dis-
appeared after  a  profuse  perspiration.

Ilnfant  has  chill  every  other  day,  commencing  at  7  a.m.,.
and  lasting  one  to  two  hours;  heat  till  noon ;  diarrhoea^
dark  green,  slimy,  stringy  stools  most  frequent  in  after-
noon, smelling  like  decayed  meat;  starts  in  sleep;,
mother  had  ague  before  and  after  birth  of  child.

I  Fever,  follow^ed  by  cutting  pains  in  abdomen,  watery

evacuations,  wdth  nausea  and  vom  iting. ^Febris  biliosa..

I I  Burning  fever,  with  vomiting.

Copious  perspiration,  with  gradual  relief  of  all  the  symp-
toms.

■  During  apyrexia,  tongue  white,  taste  bitter,  skin  of  body
and  sclerotica  of  a  deep  yellow  color,  much  pruritus  of
whole  body,  urine  dark  colored,  frequent  watery  stools,
accompanied  by  violent  pains  in  abdomen,  perspiration
staining  linen  yellow.  ^Quotidian  intermittent  with
icterus.

During  apyrexia  urticaria,  >  by  rubbing.

Intermittents:  quotidian;  double  quotidian;  tertian;
double  tertian ;  when  suppressed  by  quinine  or  "  ague
cures,"  prone  to  appear  under  some  other  type,  or  even,
assuming  the  double  type;  frequent  change  of  type.

Time: 12m.;  1  p.m.;  twice  a  day.  every  third  day.
"  Attacks,  Periodicity. At  intervals: cutting  pain  in  ab-
domen.

Intervals  of  10  or  15  minutes:  violent  pain  in  bowels.

Frequent:  vomiting;  dark  green  stools.

Attacks:  of  yawning  and  stretching  before  chill;  cholera,
morbus.

For  one  hour:  gaping.

Twice  in  the  day:  chill  lasting  two  hours.

Every  other  day:  chill.

Of  six  weekf'  standing :  quartan  ague.

Five  years:  obstinate  ague.


203  . ELATERIUM.


42


Locality  and  Direction.  Left:  sticking  as  of  splinter  in
eye;  pain  in  side;  pain  in  sterno-mastoid  muscle;  pain
in  axilla;  pain  in  fingers  of  hand;  pain  in  thigh.

Right:  dull  pain  in  hypochondrium;  pain  over  crest  of
ilium;  pain  in  shoulder  blade;  pain  in  side  of  lumbar
region;  pain  in  shoulder;  pain  in  knee;  pain  in  side
of  body  from  temples  to  foot;  swelling  of  knee.
*^  Sensations.  As  of  a  splinter  in  1.  eye ;  as  if  posterior  nares
and  upper  part  of  oesophagus  were  enlarged.

Pain:  in  temples;  in  head;  in  region  of  combativeness;
in  1.  side;  in  abdomen;  in  1.  sterno-mastoid  muscle;
under  shoulder  blade;  in  small  of  back;  from  shoulder
to  ends  of  fingers  and  shooting  up  to  elbow ;  in  r.  knee
to  instep  and  toes;  in  calves.

Violent  pain:  in  stomach;  in  bowels;  in  lower  belly.

Violent  tearing  pains:  throughout  head.

Tearing  pain:  in  abdomen;  in  chest;  in  hip;  in  thighs.

Cutting  pain:  in  bowels.

Shooting  pain:  in  1.  axilla  near  insertion  of  pectoralis
major  muscle;  from  fingers  to  elbow;  in  1.  thigh  to  in-
step and  toes.

Stitching  pain:  in  lumbar  region;  in  fingers  of  1.  hand;,
in  muscular  part  of  thumb.

Stitch -like  pain  in  region  of  heart.

Sticking  pain:  in  1.  eye;  near  rim  of  cartilage  of  ear.

Great  pain:  in  limbs.

Griping  pain:  in  bowels.

Cramps:  in  legs;  in  soles  of  feet.

Cramping  pain:  in  abdomen;  in  chest.

Gnawing  pain:  in  abdomen;  inchest;  in  hips;  inthighs,-

Constriction:  in  epigastrium.

Neuralgic  pains:  in  urinary  organs;  in  whole  r.  side  of"
body.

Sharp  pain:  at  lower  part  of  sternum;  through  to  spine
or  shoulder  blade.

Dull  aching  pain:  over  crest  of  r.  ilium  round  to  back;  in
1.  thigh ;  to  instep  and  toes.

Arthritic  pain :  in  great  toe.

Burning:  over  whole  body.

Soreness:  of  limbs.

Dull  pain:  in  temples;  in  epigastrium;  in  r.  hypochon-
drium; in  r.  shoulder;  in  forearm;  in  hand,  extending
to  fingers.

Heat:  in  forehead;  at  neck  of  bladder;  under  shoulder
blade.

Heavy  feeling:  of  head.

Oppression:  in  epigastrium.

Itching:  in  anus;  over  whole  body.


ELATERIUM.  204

^*  Tissues. Causes  profuse  flow  of  watery  serum  from  mucous
membranes,  especially  from  that  of  stomach  and  intesti-
nal tract.
1 1  Chills  and  fever.

■  Hydrops;  post-scarlatinal  dropsy.
Promotes  opening  of  abscesses  and  boils.

^^  Touch.  Passive  Motion.  Injuries.  Rubbing:  urticaria  >.

^^  Skin. I  Whole  surface  of  body  of  an  orange  yellow  color,
whites  of  ej^es  deeply  tinged;  urine  stains  the  diaper;
bilious  stools. ^Icterus  neonatorum.
I  I  Skin  and  conjunctiva  yellow;  much  burning  and  itch-
ing over  the  body. ^Intermittent  fever.

■  Urticaria  with  intolerable  itching,  >  by  rubbing.

■  Urticaria  over  whole  surface  of  body  when  chills  of  ter-

tian intermittent  were  suppressed.

■  Measles  followed  by  dysentery.
Erj^sipelas.

^"^  Stages  of  Life,  Constitution. Child,  set.  3  days ;  icterus.

Child,  set.  5,  after  worry  from  an  attack  of  measles  caught
cold  from  exposure  to  damp  weather;  dysentery.

E.  C.  Griffith,  aged  6  years,  dark  hair  and  eyes,  brunette
skin  and  strong  constitution;  colic.

Girl,  set.  10 ;  intermittent  fever  with  icterus.

Girl,  set.  25;  cholera  morbus.

Th.  Myers ;  cholera  morbus.

Mrs.  N.;  tertian  intermittent  for  five  years.

Captain  of  a  canal  boat,  and  one  of  the  hands,  during  Au-
gust; febris  biliosa.

Man,  set.  56,  suffering  four  weeks;  quartan  intermittent.
^^  Relations.  Compare :  Bryon.  and  Colocyn.  in  sciatica ;
Veratr.  in  neuralgic  affections;  Colchic,  Croton  tig.  and
Veratr.  in  choleraic  symptoms;  Secale  in  olive-green
diarrhoea ;  Canthar.  in  dysenteric  diarrhoea,  with  pain-
ful micturition  ;  Apis,  Hepar,  Jgnat.  and  Rhus  tox.,  which
have  urticaria  during  different  stages  of  intermittent
fever.


205  EQUISETUM  HYEMALE.

EQUISETUM  HYEMALE.

Scouring  Rush.  Equisetacese.

A  rush,  growing  in  damp  soil  in  Europe  and  North  America.

The  tincture  is  prepared  from  the  fresh  plant,  chopped  and  pounded  to  a
pulp.

A  popular  remedy  for  dropsy,  suppression  of  urine,  gravel,  hsematuria,  gonor-
rhoea and  gleet.

Proved  by  Smith,  De  Korth,  and  Chapin.  See  Allen's  Encyclopedia,  vol.  4,
p.  204.

Clinical  Authorities. — Enuresis  of  children,  Conant,  AUg.  Horn.  Ztg.,  vol.
101,  p.  23;  Enuresis,  Mitchell,  Organon,  vol.  2,  p.  233;  Dysuria  (Infusion),  Mars-
den,  Hale's  Therap.,  p.  223;  Enuresis  (20  cases  mentioned),  Carmichael,  B.  J.  H.,
vol.  34,  p.  392  ; General  paralysis,  Heath,  Hahn.  Monthly,  Sept.,  1877.

'^  Scrobiculum  and  Stomach. l  Dyspepsia,  with  obstinate

acidity  of  stomacli.
^^  Urinary  Organs. >Dull  pain  in  region  of  r.  kidney,  with

urgent  desire  to  urinate.

I  Pain  and  tenderness  in  region  of  bladder,  with  soreness

of  testicles,  extending  up  spermatic  cords.

■  Tenderness  in  region  of  bladder  on  pressure.

■  Tenderness  in  region  of  bladder,  and  r.  side  of  lower  ab-

domen, extending  upward  from  groin;  same  in  1.  but
more  on  r.,  in  forenoon.

I I  Pain  in  bladder,  as  from  distension.

I  iSevere  and  dull  pain  in  bladder,  not  >  after  urinating.
iDysuria  of  women,  with  extreme  and  frequent  urging  to

urinate,  with  severe  pain,  especially  immediately  after

urine  is  voided.

■  Sharp  cutting  pain  in  urethra.

■  Excessive  burning  in  urethra  while  urinating.
Extreme  and  frequent  urging  to  urinate,  with  severe  pain,

especially  immediately  after  urine  is  voided.

■  Frequent  desire  to  urinate,  during  afternoon,  with  biting

sensation  in  urethra  during  and  after  urination.

■  ■Constant  desire  to  urinate,  and  pass  large  quantities  of

clear  light-colored  urine  without  relief
Profuse  flow  of  urine  night  and  day,  pain  after  urination;
involuntary  urination  without  pain.

■  Enuresis  diurna  et  nocturna  of  children.

■  ■Enuresis  nocturna,  when  there  is  no  tangible  cause,  ex-

cept a  habit.


JEQUISETUM  HYEMALE.  206

■  Obliged  to  get  up  several  times  during  night  to  urinate,
I  Great  desire  to  urinate,  but  only  a  small  amount  passed

each  time.
1  1  Amount  of  urine  grows  less  each  time  he  urinates,  but
the  desire  increases.

■  Passed  small  amount  of  urine,  but  felt  as  though  had

not  urinated  for  hours.
B I  Urine  high-colored  and  scanty.
I  Urine  on  standing  shows  great  excess  of  mucus,  otherwise

normal.
I  Painful  urination  with  albuminous  urine.

■  Cystitis.

■  General  paralysis  in  an  old  woman,  in  whom  control

over  stools  and  urine,  long  completely  lost,  was  rapidly
restored.
^^  Pregnancy. Parturition. Lactation, i  i  Dysuria,  espe-
cially in  women  during  j^regnancy  and  after  confine-
ment.
^^  Sleep. ^Wets  bed  at  night;  when  he  dreams,  he  always

sees  crowds  of  people.
^  Time. Day:  profuse  flow  of  urine.

Forenoon:  more  tenderness  of  abdomen  r.  side.
Afternoon:  frequent  urging  to  urinate.
Night:  profuse  flow  of  urine;  obliged  to  get  up  several
times  to  urinate; wets  bed.
^  Locality  and  Direction. Left:  tenderness  of  lower  abdomen.
Right: dull  pain  in  region  of  kidney;  tenderness  of  side
of  lower  abdomen.
*^  Sensations. Pain:  in  bladder.
Severe  pain: in  bladder.
Sharp  cutting  pain:  in  urethra.
Biting  sensation :  in  urethra.
Burning:  in  urethra.
Soreness:  of  testicles.

Tenderness: in  region  of  bladder;  r.  side  of  lower  abdo-
men extending  upward  from  groin.
Dull  pain:  in  region  of  r.  kidney;  in  region  of  bladder;
in  bladder.
''^  Touch. Passive  Motion. Injuries. Pressure:  tenderness

of  bladder.
■**  Relations. Compare in  bladder  troubles  Apis, Cannab.,
Cantliar.,  Ferr.  phos.,  Pulsat.


207  EEIGERON.

ERIGERON.

Canada  Flea  Bane.  Compositx.

Grows  in  Canada  and  the  United  States  as  a  weed.  The  tincture  is  prepared
from  the  fresh  plant  when  in  bloom  in  July  and  August.

Used  by  the  aborigines  as  an  application  to  wounds.

Proved  by  W.  11.  Burt.  See  Allen's  Encyclopedia,  vol.  4,  p.  211.  A  frag-
mentary proving  of  the  Erigeron  phlladelphicum,  by  A.  Lijjjje,  not  published,  is
here  inserted,  the  symptoms  marked .

CLrsTCATj  ArxiTORiTiES. — Dys^vria  in  teething  children  (2  ca.ses),  Eing,  N.  A.  J.
H.,  vol.  5,  p.  282  ;  Uterine  fljw ,  Warren,  Med.  Inv.,  vol.  5,  p.  35;  Cough,  Wright,
Horn.  Times,  vol.  2,  p.  10 ;  Hemorrhages,  Palmer,  Eaue's  Eec,  1871,  p.  121.

^  Mind. Lowness  of  spirits,  with  a  feeling  of  great  languor.
^  Inner  Head, l Congestion  of head,  red  face,  nosebleed;
febrile  action.
Dull  frontal  headache  on  waking  in  morning.
Dull  headache,  with  ringing  in  r.  ear.
Headache,  with  pain  in  forehead  and r.  eye,  and  pain  in
large  joints.
^  Sight  and  Eyes. Smarting  of  eyes  all  day.

Redness,  swelling,  inflammation,  with  profuse  muco  puru-
lent discharges  from  eyes.
I  1  Echymoses  upon  eyeballs  or  around  eye,  from  a  blow.
^  Smell  and  Nose. Increased  secretion  of  mucus  in  nostrils
all  forenoon.
I  I  Epistaxis  of  bright  red  blood.
^^  Teeth  and  Gums, i  i  Profuse  bleeding  from  gums.
'^  Throat. Dryness  of  pharynx;  roughness,  with  sensation  as
if  something  had  lodged  in  upper  part  of  oesophagus.
Sore  throat  all  night,  with  frequent  inclination  to  swallow.
I  I  Inflammation  and  ulceration  of  throat.
I  I  Tonsillitis.
'"  Hiccough, Belching,  Nausea  and  Tomiting. Nausea,
with  frequent  eructations.
■  Violent  retching  and  burning  in  stomach,  with  vomiting
of  blood.
^^  Scrobiculum  and  Stomach. Sharp  cutting  pains  in  region
of  stomach  every  few  minutes.
Violentretching,  with  burning  in  stomach.
I  iHsematemesis,  from  ulceration  and  rupture  of  blood-
vessels.


ERIGERON.  208

"  Hypochondria. Dull  pains  in  hypochondria.
^^  Abdomen. Frequent  dull  pains  in  bowels.

Sudden,  severe  pains  in  hypogastrium,  followed  by  mushy-
stool.

I  i  Flatulent  colic.

I  I  Tympanites. ^Typhoid  fever. ^Dysentery.
'^  Stool and Rectum. Stools, bloody or  mucous ; small^
streaked  with  blood ;  tormina ;  burning  in  bowels  and
rectum;  hard  lumps  of  feces  mixed  with  the  discharges;
mushy,  undigested.

Sudden  pain  in  hypogastrium  followed  by  papescent
stools.

I  I  Dysentery,  with  burning  in  any  part  of  alimentary
canal ;  extreme  tenesmus,  with  frequent  small  stools,
streaked  with  blood  or  bloody,  and  great  irritation  of
urinary  organs;  urination  painful  or  suppressed.

I  lScybala,with  dysentery.

Inflammation  of  mucous  coats  of  colon  and  rectum.

Thin  papescent  stool,  with  burning  in  bowels  and  rectum.

Natural  stool,  followed  by  severe  neuralgic  pains  in  anus,
with  tenesmus.

I  Hemorrhoids:  bleeding;  with  hard  lump}- stools  ;  burn-
ing in  margin  of  anus;  it  feels  as  if  torn.

I  Bleeding  of  hemorrhoidal  tumors,  and  hemorrhage  of
bowels.
^^  Urinary  Organs.  Sharp  stinging  pains  in  region  of  1.  kid-
ney; complete  suppression  of  urine,  and  pain  in  renal
region,  followed  by  urging  to  urinate,  with  emission  of
only  a  few  burning  drops.

I  I  Vesical  catarrh,  with  pain  and  irritation;  also  vesical
irritation  from  calculi.

Inclination  to  urinate  about  every  hour,  Avith  aching  dis-
tress in  bladder.

i Urination  painful  or  suppressed.

Urging  to  urinate,  with  emission  of  only  a  few  burning-
drops  at  a  time.

I  i  Dysuria  of  teething  children ;  frequent  desire,  crying-
when  urinating;  urine  profuse,  of  very  strong  odor;
external  parts  (female)  inflamed  or  irritated,  with  con-
siderable mucous  discharge.

Urine  dark,  afterwards  pale,  double  in  quantity.

Hemorrhages  from  bladder  or  urethra.

Hematuria,  with  metrorrhagia.
^'  Male  Sexual  Organs. Sticky  sweat  on  the  male  genitals.

Fain  in  riglit  lumbar  region,  passing  down  to  testicle.

I  I  Gonorrhoea  and  gleet.
"  Female  Sexual  Organs, i  i  Premature  and  profuse  menses.

I  iMetrorrhaHa: with violent irritation  of  rectum  and


209  ERIGEROK

bladder; after  abortion,  with  diarrhoea and  dysuria;
with  prolapsus  uteri.
1 1  Very  profuse  flow  of  bright  red  blood ;  every  movement

of  patient  increases  the  flow;  pallor  and  weakness.
I  I  Dvsmenorrhoea,  with  monorrhagia.
I  I  Menorrhagia,  with  spasmodic  pains.
■  Steady  painless  flow  occurring  during  pregnancy,  at  6th

month,  caused  by  overexertion.
iLeucorrhoea  profuse,  with  spasmodic  pains,  and  irritation

of  bladder  and  rectum,  usually  scanty  menses.
I  I  Chronic  uterine  leucorrhoea.
^^  Pregnancy. Parturition. Lactation, i  i  Abortion,  with
profuse  hemorrhage,  diarrhoea  and  dysuria.
I  I  Post-partum  hemorrhage.

I  Bloody  lochia  return  after  least  motion ;  >  by  rest.
I  I  Profuse  locliia.
^^  Voice  and  Larynx. Trachea  and  Bronchia. 1 1  Chronic

bronchial  affections.
^  Cough. I  Cough,  with  expectoration  of  blood-streaked  mat-
ter; hard  pains  in  lungs;  cannot  lie  on  side,
a  Bloody  expectoration,  incipient  2:)hthisis.
I  Haemoptysis,  dark  coagula,  passive  hemorrhage.
^^  Inner  Chest  and  Lungs, i  i  Incipient  stages  of  phthisis,

wuth  bloody  expectoration.
^^  Heart,  Pulse  and  Circulation. Palpitation  of  heart.
^^  Neck and  Back. Dull aching  distress  in whole  dorsal
region.
Severe,  drawing  pains  in  lumbar  region.

^^  Upper  Limbs. Rheumatic  pains  in  1.  shoulder,  hand

and  thumb.
Great  aching  distress  in  elbows  and  wrists  during  rainy

weather.
Rheumatic  pains  in  thumb  all  evening.

^^  Lower  Limbs. Rheumatic  pain  in  rig^it  hip.

Dull  pains  in  knees.

Severe  drawing  pains  in  ankle  joint,  <  walking.
^^  Rest. Position. Motion. Rest:  bloody  lochia  >.
Cannot  lie  on  painful  side.

Every  movement:  increases flow;  bloody  lochia return.
Walking:  pain  in  ankle  joint  <.

^''  Sleep. Very  drowsy  early  in  the  evening ;  soon  after

falling asleep  wakes  up  feeling  numb  and  unable  to
move,  lies  in  this  way,  suflPering  painful  agony  for  half
an  hour.
^^  Time. Morning:  dull  headache  on  awakening.
Forenoon:  secretion  of  mucus  in  nostrils.
Evening:  rheumatic  pains  in  thumbs;  very  drowsy  early.
Night:  sore  throat.

VOL.  V. — 14.


ERIGERON.  210

'^  Temperature  and  Weather. All  symptoms < during

rainy  weather.
Rainy  weather:  great  aching  distress  in  elbows  and  wrists.
^^  Attacks, Periodicity. Frequent:  inclination  to  swallow;

eructations;  dull  pains  in  bowels;  small  stools;  desire

to  urinate.
Every  few  minutes:  pains  in  region  of  stomach.
Half  hour :  lies  awake  suffering.
Every  hour:  inclination  to  urinate.
^  Locality and  Direction. Right :  pain  in eye ;  pain in

lumbar  region; rheumatic  pain  in  hip.
Left:  sharp  stinging  pains  in  kidney;  rheumatic  pain  in

shoulder.
^  Sensations. As  if  something  had  lodged  in  upper  j^art  of

oeso]3hagus;  anus  feels  as  if  torn.
Pain:  in  forehead;  in  r.  eye;  in  large  joints;  in  renal  re-
gion; in  r.  lumbar  region  to  testicles.
Severe  pains:  in  hypogastrium.
Sharp  cutting  pains:  in  region  of  stomach.
Sharp  stinging  pains:  in  region  of  kidney.
Neuralgic  pains:  in  anus.
Spasmodic  pains:  in  female  sexual  organs.
Sudden  pain:  in  h3qDogastrium.
Hard  pains:  in  lungs.

Drawing  pains:  in  lumbar  region ;  in  ankle.
Aching  distress:  of  bladder;  in  dorsal  region;  in  elbows;

in  wrists.
Burning:  in  stomach;  in  bowels;  in  rectum;  in  aliment-
ary canal;  in  anus.
Rheumatic  pains:  in  1.  shoulder;  in  hand;  in  thumb;  in

r.  hip.
Dull  pain:  in  forehead;  in  hypochondria;  in  bowels;  in

knees.
Dryness:  of  pharynx.
Smarting:  of  eyes.
Irritation:  of  rectum;  of  bladder.
^*  Tissues. Produces  active  congestion  of  various  organs,  with

a  tendency  to  hemorrhage  therefrom.
Useful  in  hsematocele  in  the  first  stages.
1 1  Hemorrhages.
^  Touch.  Passive  Motion. Injuries. From  a  blow:  ecchy-

mosis  upon  eyeball.
^'^  Skin. Slightly  elevated,  sharply  defined  vesicles  on  skin.
^^  Stages  of  Life,  Constitution. Small,  frail,  delicate  woman,

from  overexertion  at  Gth  month  of  pregnancy;  uterine

flow.
^  Relations. Canthar.,  Copaiba,  Cubeba,  Sabina,  Terebmtli.


211  ERYNGIUM  AQUATICUM.

ERYNGIUM  AQUATICUM.

Button  Snakeroot.  Umbelliferse..

An  indigenous  plant,  growing  in  low,  wet  places;  flowers  in  August.

The  tincture  is  prepared  from  the  fresh  root.

Provings  by  C.  H,  McClelland,  Coggswell  and  Jones.  See  Allen's  Encylo-
pedia,  vol.  4,  p.  213.

Clinical  Authoeities. — Inconiinence  of  urine,  Barenburg,  Organon,  vol.  3,
p.  367;  Spermatorrhcua  (2  cases),  Parks,  Thomas'  Add.  to  Mat.  Med.,  p.  49.

^  Mind. Very  sober  and  depressed  in  spirits;  very  dull  at
night.

Not  able  to  think  steadily  on  any  subject.

Thoughts  confused ;  cannot  concentrate  them  upon  any
subject  without  much  exertion;  causes  heavy  full  pain
if  persisted  in.
^  Sensorium. Vertigo.

^  Inner  Head. Expanding  sensation  in  frontal  region  above
eyes,  <  stooping.

Continual  dull  heavy  pain  in  frontal  portion  of  brain.

Severe  pain  in  frontal  region,  causing  dimness  of  sight.

Frontal  headache  on  rising.

Reading  or  writing  causes  hard,  heavy  pain  in  forehead;
<  stooping.

Pain  in  head,  <  by  lowering  it  or  thinking  intently  upon
any  subject;  pain  especially  in  frontal  region  and  more
particularly  over  1.  eye,  of  a  sharp  and  shooting  charac-
ter; when  sitting  in  stooping  posture  it  leaves  eye,
passes  into  neck  and  along  muscles  of  shoulder,  and  be-
neath scapula,  where  it  remains  for  some  time.

Shooting  pains  in  coronary  region,  and  in  r.  side  of  face,
from  eyes  to  teeth,  in  morning.

Dull  dragging  pain  in  occiput,  neck  and  shoulders.
*  Outer  Head. Scalp  sore  to  touch,  combing  hair  causes  pain.
^  Sight  and  Eyes. Dull  expression  of  eyes,  great  inclination
to  sleep.

Eyes  sensitive  to  light.

Burning  pain  in  eyes,  they  feel  heavy  and  slightly  con-
gested.

Sclerotitis;  smarting  burning  sensation,  with  heavy  aching
pains,  produced  by  strong  light;  squinting. on  exposure
to  strong  light;  tearing  burning  pains  in  eyes;  watery
or  purulent  discharge.


ERYNGIUM  AQUATICUM.  212

Purulent  inflammation  of  1.  eye;  congested,  red,  swollen,,
tender  to  pressure;  constant  dull  aching,  >  by  heat;
profuse  discharge  of  purulent,  sticky  fluid,  glueing  lids
together,  and  flowing  on  cheek  from  all  parts  of  eyelid;,
conjunctiva  granulated  and  rough.
Muscles  of  eye  feel  stiff,  pain  on  turning  them  quickly.
Severe  tearing,  boring  pain  over  1.  eye.
^  Hearing and Ears. Continued ringing, singing with
cracking  sound  in  1.  ear.
Bruised  tearing  pain  about  ears,  as  if  they  were  being  torn

from  their  location.
Inflammation  of  Eustachian  tube;  1.  ear  swollen  in  and
out,  tender  to  pressure,  constant  aching  pain,  bleeding
readily,  thick,  white,  bloody,  foul-smelling  pus.
^  Smell  and  Nose. Profuse  thick,  yellow,  mucous  discharge

from  nose.
^  Upper  Face. Shooting  pains  in  r.  side  of  face  from  eye  to

teeth.
^^  Inner Mouth. Thick,  tenacious,  disagreeable  mucus  in

mouth.
^^ Throat. Smarting  raw  pain  along  1.  side  of  throat;  dry
tongue.
Intense  redness  and  congestion  of  mucous  membrane  of
throat,  slight  swelling  without  pain,  profuse  secretion  of
thick,  wdiitish  mucus.
^*  Appetite,  Thirst. Desires,  Aversions. Partial  anorexia.
^^  Hiccough,  Belching,  Nausea  and  Vomiting. Nausea  fol-
lowed by  acrid  eructations.
^^  Scrobiculum  and  Stomach. Hollowness  or  emptiness  in
stomach,  with  heavy,  dragging  pain,
i  I  Spitting  up  of  bright  arterial  blood,  mixed  wdtli  black
clots,  with burning  in  epigastrium,  after  a  blow  on
stomach.
^^  Abdomen. Severe  colicky  or  cramping  pain  in  small  intes-
tines.
Severe  pain  in  1.  groin  and  testicle.
^*'  Stool  and  Rectum. Bowels  constipated.
I  I  Mucous  diarrhoea  of  children.
Tenesmus  at  stool; faeces  seem  to  be  cut  as  they  pass

through  anus.
I  I  Hemorrhoids  and  prolapsus  ani.
^^  Urinary Organs. Frequent desire to urinate; stinging
burning  pain  in  urethra,  behind  glans  during  urination.
I  Must  urinate  every  five  minutes;  urine  dripping  away
all  the  time,  and  burning  like  fire.
^^  Male  Sexual  Organs, i  ■  Sexual  desire  suppressed,  then  ex-
cited, with  lewd  dreams  and  pollutions.
■  Discharge  of  prostatic  fluid  from  slightest  causes.


213  ERYNGIUM  AQUATICUM.

I  Involuntary  emissions  occasioned  by  onanism  or  excessive
sexual  indulgence.

■  Emissions  at  night  with  erections;  semen  also  passed  by

day  with  urine;  loss  of  semen  followed  by  great  lassi-
tude and  depression,  lasting  from  twelve  to  forty-eight
hours ;  partial  impotence.

■  Emissions  of  semen  without  erections,  day  and  night,  and

followed  by  great  lassitude;  after  injury  to  testicles.
I  I  Gonorrhoea  with  painful  erections.
I  I  Gleet.
^^  Female  Sexual  Organs. 1 1  Leucorrhoea.
^^  Voice  and  Larynx. Trachea  and  Bronchia, i  i  Laryngeal
irritations;  short,  hacking  cough.
I  I  Chronic  laryngitis.
^  Cough. I  I  Cough,  with  sensation  of  constriction  in  throat.
^®  Inner  Chest  and  Lungs. Oppression  of  chest,  feeling  of

fulness,  inability  to  take  a  full  breath.
^^  Neck  and  Back. When  pain  in  head  is  less  severe,  it  is
worse  in  neck  and  shoulders.
Weakness  and  heavy  dragging  pain  in  lumbar  region.
^^  Lower  Limbs. Lower  extremities  languid  and  heavy,  with

profuse  perspiration  on  walking.
^*  Limbs  in  General. Transient  rheumatic  pains  in  1.  shoul-
der and  arm,  also  r.  wrist  and  hand.
^^  Rest. Position. Motion. Sitting in stooping  posture :
pain  leaves  eye  and  passes  to  neck  and  shoulders.
Stooping:  expanding  sensation  above  eyes  <;  heavy  pain

in  forehead  <.
Lowering  head :  <  pain  in  head.
Rising:  frontal  headache.
Turning  eyes:  causes  pain  in  them.
Walking:  causes  profuse  perspiration.
^^  Nerves. Slight  erethism  of  nervous  system

Loss  of  energy.
^  Time. Morning:  shooting  pains  in  r.  side  of  face.
By  day:  semen  passes;  emissions  without  erections.
Night:  very  dull  in  spirits;  emissions  without  erections.
^^  Temperature  and  Weather.  Heat:  <  dull  aching  in  1.  eye.
*"  Fever. Flashes  of  heat.

^^  Attacks,  Periodicity.  Every  five  minutes:  must  urinate.
From  twelve  to  forty-eight  hours:  great  lassitude  after  loss
of  semen.
^Locality  and  Direction.  Left:  pain  over  eye;  inflamma-
tion of  eye;  severe  tearing  boring  pain  over  eye;  con-
stant ringing,  singing  and  cracking  sound  in  ear;  ear
swollen;  ear  tender  to  pressure;  pain  along  side  of
throat;  pain  in  groin  and  testicle;  rheumatic  pains  in
shoulder.


ERYNGIUM  AQUATICUM.  214

Right:  pain  in  face;  pain  in  side  of  face;  rheumatic  pain
in  wrist  and  hand.
^^  Sensations. As  if  ears  were  being  torn  from  their  location.

Pain :  in  head ;  in  forehead ;  over  1.  eye.

Erratic  pains :  all  over  body.

Tearing  pain :  in  eyes ;  about  ears.

Severe  pain :  in  frontal  region ;  in  1.  groin ;  in  testicle.

Severe  boring  pain :  over  1.  eye.

Hard  pain  :  in  forehead.

Sharp  shooting  pain:  over  1.  eye;  extending  to  neck  and
shoulders;  in  coronary  region;  r.  side  of  face  from  eye
to  teeth.

Stinging  pain  :  in  urethra.

Colicky  pain:  in  small  intestines.

Cramping  pain :  in  small  intestines.

Constriction :  of  throat.

Burning  pain:  in  eyes;  in  epigastrium;  in  urethra.

Bruised  pain:  about  ears.

Dull  dragging  pain  in  occiput;  in  neck;  in  shoulders;  in
stomach;  in  lumbar  region.

Rheumatic  pains :  in  1.  shoulder ;  in  1.  arm ;  in  wrist ;  in  r.
hand.

Aching  pain :  in  1.  ear.

Dull,  heavy  pain:  in  frontal  part  of  brain.

Heavy  aching:  in  eye.

Smarting:  in  eyes;  along  1.  side  of  throat.

Soreness:  of  scalp.

Oppression :  of  chest.

Ringing:  in  ears.

Singing:  in  ears.

Cracking  sound  in  1.  ear.

Expanding  sensation  in  frontal  region.
^  Tissues. I  '  Dropsy  of  an  asthenic  character.
*^  Touch. Passive  Motion. Injuries. Touch : scalp  sore.

Pressure:  1.  eye  tender;  1.  ear  tender  to  pressure.

After  a  blow;  burning  in  epigastrium.

After  injury  to  testicles:  emissions  without  erections,  fol-
lowed by  lassitude.
*'  Stages  of  Life, Constitution. Married  man,  after  injury
to  testicles  by  jumping  upon  a  horse,  for  fifteen  years;
spermatorrhoea.
Married  man,  not  conscious  of  having  sustained  any  in-
jury, seminal  emissions  for  eight  or  ten  years.
Man,  £et.  82;  incontinence  of  urine.
*^  Relations. Compare  in  pollutions  Cinchona,  Gelsem.,  Phos-
p?ior.


215  EUCALYPTUS  GLOBULUS.

EUCALYPTUS  GLOBULUS.

Australian  Fever  or  Gum  Tree.  Myrtacese.

A  tree  of  great  height,  native  to  Australia,  transplanted  to  marshy  districts
in  mild  climates  on  account  of  its  capability  for  absorbing  water  and  alleged  power
to  destroy  malarious  poisons. The  tincture  is  prepared  from  the  fresh  leaves.

Eucalyptol  is  the  essential  oil.

Experiments  by  Maurin,  Hale,  Faucett,  Siegen  and  Ringer.  See  Allen's
Encyclopedia,  vol.  4,  p.  228.

Clinical  Authorities. — Dysuria,  Bahrenburg,  Allg.  Hom.  Ztg.,  vol.  107,  p.
59  ;  Vascular  tumors  of  female  urethra  (2  cases),  Woodbury,  B.  J.  H.,  vol.  34,  p.  376 ;
Intermittent  fever  (310  cases  reported  cured),  see  N.  A.  J.  H.,  vol.  21,  p.  124  ;  Use  as
a  disinfectant,  Pignedupritier,  See  Hale's  Symptomatology,  p.  287.

^  Mind. Mental  exhiliration.

Irresistible  desire  to  move  about,  with  a  feeling  of  buoy-
ancy and  increased  strength.
Stimulation, intoxication ; excitement  even  unto fever.
Drunkenness, followed by mental depression and ex-
haustion.
Drowsy  and  dull.
^  Sensorium. Vertigo.

^  Inner  Head. Cerebral  congestion,  with  much  excitement.
General  full  feeling  in  head;  congestive  headache.
Congestive  headache,  in plethoric  subjects,  followed  by

actual  fever.
Dull  frontal  headache.
■  Nervous headache  and  other  pains  of  head,  which  are

not  exactly  periodic.
II Headache  in  anasmic  persons; relieves  the  pain and
causes  sleep.
^  Sight  and  Eyes. Dimness  of  vision.
Eyes  hot,  burning,  smarting.
I  I  Catarrhal  and  gonorrhoeal  ophthalmia.
Eyelids  heavy.
^  Smell  and  Nose. Stiffness  of  nose.
Stuffed  up  sensation  in  nose.
Considerable  coryza  ;  cold  in  head.
Thin,  watery  coryza.

I  Chronic  catarrh  of  nasal  passages,  even  when  purulent
and  fetid.
®  Upper  Face. Flushed  face,  congested  appearance.


EUCALYPTUS  GLOBULUS.  216

^'  Inner  Mouth. Relaxed,  aphthous  condition.

I  Excessive  secretion  of  saliva.
13  TJiroat. Burning sensation,  extending to pharynx and
oesophagus,  with  thirst.

Feeling  of  fulness  and  soreness  in  throat  on  swallowing ;
burning  in  throat.

Constant  sensation  of  phlegm  in  throat,  with  expectora-
tion of  slightly  thick  white  frothy  mucus,  not  j^rofuse.

Throat  relaxed  and  pale.
^*  Appetite,  Thirst. Desires,  Aversions. Increased  appetite ;

tormenting  thirst.
^^  Hiccough,  Belching,  Nausea  and  Vomiting. Burning,

strong  smelling  eructations.
^^  Scrobiculum  and  Stomach. Hot  burning  sensation  in
stomach.

Fulness,  pressure  and  weight  in  stomach  ;  as  if  he  had
eaten  too  much.

Faintness  and  goneness  at  stomach,  accompanied  by  a
distinct  sensation  of  beating  synchronous  with  heart.

I  1  Difficult  and  painful  digestion.

Slow  digestion ;  eructations  and  bloating.

Atonic  dyspepsia ;  chronic,  gastric  and  intestinal  catarrh.
^^  Hypochondria. Produces contraction of spleen, which,
under  its  use,  becomes  more  resistant  and  hard,  its  sur-
face granulated  and the  whole  organ  diminished  in
size.
^^  Abdomen. Feeling  of  weight  in  epigastrium.

Burning  in  epigastric  and  umbilical  regions,  with  tor-
menting thirst,  vertigo,  dimness  of  vision,  sense  of  ful-
ness in  head,  with  dull  frontal  headache,  and  tightness
across  bridge  of  nose,  as  if .  profuse  epistaxis  would
occur.

Uncomfortable  pressure  and  fulness  in  umbilical  region.

Uncomfortable,  uneasy  feeling  in  umbilical  region,  ex-
tending through  bowels ;  skirmishing,  aching  pains  in
upper  portions  of  bowels ;  sensation  as  if  he  would  have
diarrhoea.

SharjD,  aching  j)ain  in  hypogastric  region  after  dinner.

Gastro-intestinal derangements; sleeplessness and rest-
lessness.
^°  Stool  and  Rectum, i  Sharp,  aching  pains  in  lower  part  of
bowels,  with  thin,  watery  yellow  diarrhoea,  on  rising  in
morning.

Violent  purgation  and  hemorrhage  from  bowels.

I  I  Chronic  diarrhoea,  mucous  and  bloody.

■  Dysentery,  with  heat  in  rectum,  tenesmus,  discharge  of
mucus,  great  prostration;  hemorrhage  from  bowels.

I  1  Typhoid  diarrhoea  and  dysentery.


217  EUCALYPTUS  GLOBULUS.

^^  Urinary  Organs. •  Chronic  desquamative  nephritis,  granu-
lar degeneration  of  kidneys,  pyelonephritis,  aud  hydro-
nejjhrosis.
I  I  Vesical  catarrh.

Sensation  as  if  the  bladder  had  lost  its  expulsive  force.
I  I  Suppressed  urine.
■  Severe  pain  on  urinating  ;  burning  and  tenesmus,  with

fever ;  urine  loaded  with  mucus.
I  i  Spasmodic  stricture  of  urethra.
I  I  Diuresis,  nocturnal  and  diurnal.
1  I  Incontinence  of  urine.
Urine  smells  of  violets.
Greatly  increased  the  elimination  of  urea.
^^  Male  Sexual  Organs. Increased  sexual  appetite.
Gonorrhoea,  subacute  and  chronic  form.
I  I  Recent  cases  of  syphilitic  chancres.
I  I  Gonorrhoea  syphilitica.
^^  Female  Sexual  Organs, i  Vascular  tumors  of  the  urethra.
I  1  Ulcer  around  orifice  of  female  urethra.
I  I  Leucorrhoea,  of  acrid,  fetid  mucus.

Swellings  in  different  parts  of  the  body  ;  one  below  nipple
on  r.  side,  size  of  iilbert,  with  stabbing  darting  pains.
^^  Voice  and  Larynx. Trachea  and  Bronchia, i  i  Bronchitis

in  old  and  feeble  persons.
^^  Respiration. Breathing  quickened.

i  Asthma,  in  debilitated  anaemic  subjects,  with  terrible
dyspnoea,  the  heart  sympathizing  strongly.
I  I  Asthma humidum in bronchitic patients; relieves

bronchial  cough,  and  aids  in  expelling  thick  sputa.
I  I  Cardiac  asthma;  allays  the  terrible  dyspnoea.
A.sthmatic  neuralgic  states  from  organic  and  mechanical
causes,  with  orthopnoea  and  nocturnal  paroxysms.
^^  Cough. Expectoration  of  white,  thick,  frothy  mucus.
^^  Inner  Chest  and  Lungs. •  Chronic  catarrhal  affections  of
broncho-pulmonary mucous membrane,  accompanied
by  free  muco-purulent  expectoration;  bronchorrhoea.
^^  Heart,  Pulse  and  Circulation. Painful  palpitation.

;  Atthe  climacteric,in  women  who  suffer  much  fromflatu-

lence,  palpitation  of  heart,  and  sudden  flushings  of  face.

I  I  Strong  beating  of  abdominal  aorta  svnchronous  Avith

beating  of  heart.
I  1  Aneurisms involving jDressure on vagus and its

branches.
Pulse  accelerated.
^^  Limbs  in  General. Pricking  sensation,  followed  by  painful
aching,  in  arms  and  legs,  with  sense  of  fulness  in  veins,
and  a  stiff,  weary  sensation,  as  if  too  lazy  to  move.
Pains  rheumatic,  jerking,  tearing,  stitchlike,  <  at  night.


EUCALYPTUS  GLOBULUS.  21&

Can  neither  walk  nor  carry  anything  without  great  pain.

Nodular  swellings  over  metacarpal  and  metatarsal  joints.
^^  Rest. Position. Motion. Raising  arm  to  mouth  is  painfuL

Irresistible  desire  to  move  about.

Can  neither  walk  nor  carry  anything  without  great  pain.
^^  Nerves. General  excitement  and  desire  for  exercise.

jMalaise ;  faintness ;  great  prostration.

Intermittent  neuralgia.
^'^  Sleep. Sleeplessness.

^  Time. Morning: on  rising pains  in  bowels with  watery
diarrhoea.

By  day:  diuresis.

By  night:  diuresis;  asthmatic  paroxysms;  pains  in  limbs.
*°  Fever. Fall  of  temperature.

Fevers  of  a  relapsing,  obstinate  and  prolonged  character^
of  a  miasmatic  origin,  in  which  spleen  becomes  affected
early  in  disease;  it  is  at  first  swollen  and  sensitive,.
then  becomes  more  resistant,  harder,  bunchy  on  its  sur-
face ;  vertigo  is  pronounced  in  all  its  stages  ;  dull  con-
gestive headache ;  malaise;  rheumatic  pains  of  a  jerk-
ing, tearing,  stitching  character,  <  at  night.

Tuberculous  hectic  fevers,  with  profuse,  exhaustive  sweats.
':  Is very  serviceable  in  convalescence  from  intermittent
and  remittent  fevers;  and  in  chronic  malarial  poison-
ing it  has  a  high  degree  of  utility.

1  I  Intermittent  fever,  quotidian  tertian  and  double  tertian.

I  I  Typhoid  fevers.

Odorous  sweat.
^^  Attacks,  Periodicity. Paroxysms  of  asthmatics.

Nervous  headache  not  exactly  periodic.
^^  Locality  and  Direction. Right :  swelling  below  nijDples  size

of  filbert.
^^  Sensations. Feels  as  if  he  had  taken  cold.

Nose  as  if  stuffed  up;  weight  in  stomach  as  if  he  had
eaten  too  much;  feels  as  if  he  would  have  diarrhoea;,
as  if  bladder  had  lost  its  exj)ulsive  force;  as  if  too  lazy
to  move.

Pains  in  head:  painful  palpitation.

Severe  pain:  on  urinating.

Tearing  pains:  in  limbs.

Stabbing  darting  pains:  in  swelling  below  nipple.

Jerking  pains:  in  limbs.

Pricking:  in  arms  and  legs.

Sharp  aching  pains:  in  hypogastric  region;  in  lower  part
of  bowels.

Painful  aching: in  arms  and  legs.

Skirmishing,  aching  pains:  in  upper  portion  of  bowels.

Burning:  of  eyes;  in  pharynx  and  oesophagus;  in  throat;,
in  stomach;  in  epigastrium  ;  in  umbilical  region.


219  EUCALYPTUS  GLOBULUS.

Rheumatic  pains:  in  limbs.
Dull  frontal  headache.

Dull  feeling:  in  head;  in  throat;  in  stomach;  in  umbili-
cal region ;  in  veins  of  arms  and  legs.
Pressure:  in  stomach;  in  umbilical  region.
Heat :  in  rectum.
Nervous:  headache.
Smarting:  in  eyes.
Soreness :  of  throat.
Tightness :  across  bridge  of  nose.
Weight:  in  stomach;  in  epigastrium.
Faintness :  in  stomach.
Goneness :  in  stomach.
*^  Tissues. Cord  and  medulla  paralyzed.

i  It  possesses  decided  anti-periodic  powers.
Violent  palpitation  of  heart ;  blood  pressure  lessened.
Temperature  greatly  lowered ;  asthenic  fever.
■  Remittent  fevers  and  ague.
Spleen  contracted;  fatty  degeneration.
•  Muscular  weakness extreme,  so  that  raising arm  to
mouth  is  painful ;  sensations  blunted,  but  mind  abso-
lutely unaffected.

:  Is  a  diuretic  of  rare  virtue,  showing  notably  restorative
effects  in  low  states  of  the  system,  as  in  typhoid  fever,
typhoid  diarrhoea,  and  dysentery ;  it  relieves  spasmodic
strictures,  vesical  catarrh,  and  cures  gonorrhoea.
Diuresis,  with  enormous  increase  of  urea,
i  The  condition  of  the  mucous  membrane  which  favors
production  of  intestinal  parasites  is  removed.
•Is  a  powerful diaphoretic; has  been  used  with fine
results in  exhaustive night  sweats,  also  for herpetic
eruptions,  glandular  enlargements,  and  indolent  ulcers.
I  I  Fistulous  ulcers,  discharging  ichorous  matter,  of  a  fetid
odor;  wounds  and  ulcers  of  a  putrid  septic  character.
:  Externally,  the  tincture  and  distilled  water  are  used  as
disinfectant  applications,  to  foul-smelling  and  ill-con-
ditioned ulcers  and  wounds.
''^  Skin« Eruptions  of  a  herpetic  character,  glandular  enlarge-
ment, and  development  of  foul  and  indolent  ulcers.
I  I  Ulcers  from  a  varix,  of  a  year's  duration.
^'^  Stages  of  Life,  Constitution, i  i  Quinine  cachexia.

Miss  M.,  set.  6,  after  recovery  from  attack  of  meningitis ;.
dysuria.
Relations.  Compare :  Ant.  crud.  (condition  of  mucous  mem-
branes favoring  worms);  A7it.  tart,  (bronchial  asthma,
bronchorrhoea) ;  Arsen.  (malarial  fevers;  suits  after  Arsen.
in  relapsing  fever) ;  Cinchona  (intermittent  fevers) ;  Silica
(fistulous  ulcers) ; Terebinth  (urinary  symptoms).


48


EUPATORIUM  PEEFOLIATUM.  220


EUGENIA  JAMBOS.

(See  Jambos.)


EUPATORIUM  PERFOLIATUM.

Boneset ; ThorougJnvort.  Compositse.

It  ^vas  recommended  by  Dioscorides  for  ill-conditioned  ulcers,  dysentery,  and
the  stings  of  reptiles ;  chronic  fevers,  obstructions  of  liver. — Leadam.,  B.  J.  H.,
vol.  8,  p.  381.

Clinical  Authorities. — Ophthalmia,  Miller,  Eaue's  Kec,  1873,  p.  QQ ;  Cracks
■in  corners  of  mouth,  Williamson,  Eaue's  Eec,  1874,  p.  104 ;  Cough  (2  cases),  Berridge,
Organon,  vol.  3,  p.  114;  Intermittent  fever, 'Neidha.rd,  Lippe,  "Williamson,  Frost,
Fisher,  Allen,  Miller,  Allen's  Int.  Fever,  p.  124-7 ;  (3  cases)  Ingersoll  and
Goodno,  Organon,  vol.  3,  p.  370 ;  Dunham,  see  Lectures  on  Mat.  Med. ;  Swan,
Eaue's  Eec,  1871,  p.  195;  Williamson,  Eaue's  Eec,  1872,  p.  21,  and  1873,  p.  20;
Landesmann,  Eaue's  Eec,  1873,  p.  213 ;  (3  cases)  Frost,  Eaue's  Eec,  1873,  p.
213,  and  1875,  p.  271;  (23  cases)  Eaue's  Eec,  1875,  p.  269;  Bilious  fever,  Dun-
ham, Hughes'  Pharm.,  p.  359.

^  Mind. 1  Feels  at  night  as  if  he  was  going  out  of  his  mind.
I  Moaning:  with  tlie  aching  j^ain  ;  during  cold  stage.

■  Anxious  countenance.

I  Despondency,  with  fever.

Anxiety,  desj^air,  depression.

Headache  >  by  conversation.
^  Sensorium. iFaintness  from  motion,  during  fever.

I  Early  in  morning  an  attack  of  whirling  around  in  brain,
coal  screen  and  whirled  around  two  or  three  times,  re-
peated after  a  short  cessation."

■  Sensation  as  if  falling  to  the  left.

I  1  Vertigo  on  attempting  to  rise  in  bed.
^  Inner  Head, i  Aching  in  forehead.

Throbbing  headache,  pain  extending  from  forehead to

occiput,  <  1.  side.
Beating  pain  in  forehead  and  occiput,  >  after  rising.

■  Darting  pains  through  temples,  with  sensation  of  blood

rushing  across  head.


221  EUPATORIUM  PERFOLIATUM..

I  Shooting  from  left  to  right  side  of  head.
I  Thumping  in  side  of  head  above  r.  ear.
Painful  soreness  in  r.  parietal  protuberance.
iHeat  on  top  of  head,  with  pain,  >  by  pressure.

■  Distress  on  top  and  in  back  part  of  head.
llSoreness  and  pulsation  in  back  part  of  head.

■  Intense  pain  in  occiput;  distress.

Beating  pain  in  nape  and  occiput ;  >  after  rising.
I  Pain  in  occiput  after  lying,  with  sense  of  weight,  must,
aid  with  hand  in  lifting  head.

■  Headache,  with  sensation  of  soreness  internally, >  in

the  house,  <  when  first  going  into  open  air,  >  by  con-
versation.
■Violent  pain  in  head  and  back  before  chill  or  during  chill.

■  Throbbing  headache  during  chill  and  heat.

■  Headache  and  trembling  during  hot  stage.  ^Intermittent.

■  Headache and nausea every other morning, when

awaking.

■  Nervous  headache;  hemicrania.

■  Sick  headache:  when  first  awaking,  continuing  all  day;.

every  other  morning.
Suitable  to  bilious  headache ;  also  headaches  of  persons
suffering  from  ague.

■  Headache  arising  from  disordered  stomach.

*  Outer  Head. ■  Heat  on  top  of  head,  wdth  buzzing  in  ears.

■  Right  parietal  protuberance  sore.

■  Insuf)portable  heaviness  in  head.

■  Head  drawn  spasmodically  backwards. ^Spotted  fever..

■  Tinea  capitis.

^  Sight  and  Eyes. ■  Great  aversion  to  light.

TrDimness  over  eyes  when  looking  at  small  things  ;  could

not  sew  for  a  whole  week,  all  being  dark.
Intense  pain  darting  through  eyes,  as  from  needles ;  eyes

not  inflamed.

■  ■Painful  soreness  of  eyeballs.

■  Eyes  glistened.
■Sclerotica  yellowish  red.

■  Increased  lachrymation,  with  cough.

■  ■Redness  of  margins  of  lids,  with  glutinous  secretion  from

Meibomean  glands.

■  Lachrymation and photophobia,  1.  eye  worse. ^Con-

junctivitis.
^  Hearing  and  Ears. ■Buzzing  in  ears ;  heat  on  top  of  head.
Could  hear  everything  while  seemingly  in  profound  sleep,
but  could  not  speak.
^  Smell  and  Nose. ■The  smell  of  food,  odors  and  cooking
produced  qualmishness.
TrNose  very  dry  and  stopped  up.


EUPATORIUM  PERFOLIATUM.  222

I  Fluent  coryza ;  sneezing;  hoarseness.

llCoryza,  with  aching  in  every  bone.

I  Catarrh,  with  sore  fauces;  with  costiveness.

I  I  Influenza :  with  weakness  of  pulse  and  great  prostration.;
with  pain  in  bones ;  with  pain  in  back  and  limbs ;  las-
situde; skin  bathed  in  perspiration;  surface  pale  and
morbidly  sensitive ;  of  old  people  and  inebriates.

■  Epidemic  influenza.

^  Upper Face. Anxious countenance with difficulty  of
breathing.
■Sickly,  sallow  countenance.
I  Pale  and  stretchy.
Face :  pale,  sunken ;  cholera  like.
I  I  Cough,  with  flushed  face  and  painful  eyes.

■  Flushed  face :  with  dr}^,  hot  skin  ;  during  the  fever ;  with

cough ;  flushes  of  heat.

■  Itedness  of  cheeks,  with  dry  skin.

■  Face  of  a  dull  red  color.

■  During  heat  face  is  of  a  dull  mahogany-red  color,  and

eyes  glisten ;  sclerotica  yellow.

■  Sudden  severe  contraction  of  muscles  of  right  cheek.

^  Lower  Face. Cracks  in  corners  of  mouth  :  yellow-coated

tongue;  thirst.
"  Taste  and  Tongue. Taste:  bitter;  insipid.
Tastelessness  of  food ;  want  of  appetite.

■  Tongue  coated  yellow,  or  covered  with  white  fur.

^^  Inner Mouth. ■Paleness  of  mucous  membrane  of  mouth.

■  Breath  smells  mouldy,  sourish.

^^  Throat. Fauces  sore,  dryness  of  throat.

■Soreness  of  fauces,  with  catarrh.

Throat  dry ;  at  times  becomes  hoarse  and  loses  her  voice.
^*  Appetite,  Thirst.  Desires,  Aversions.  ■Good  appetite
every  intervening  day ;  other  days  sick  headache.

■  Canine  hunger  with  or  before  ague,  or  after  quinine.

■  Longs  for  ice-cream.
Disgust  for  food.
■Anorexia  of  drunkards.

Very  thirsty  during  chill  and  heat ;  took  only  a  little  sip
of  water  at  a  time.

■  ■Thirst  for  cold  water.

■  ■Thirst  throughout  night  before joaroxysm. ^Tertian

ague.

■  ■Thirst  a  long  time  before  chill,  continues  during  chill

and  heat;  no  thirst  during  sweat.
■Thirst,  sometimes  for  warm  drinks,  from  one  to  three

hours  before  chill ;  knows  chill  is  coming  because  he

cannot  drink  enough.
Desire  for  acid  drinks.


223  EUPATORIUM  PERFOLIATUM.

^'^ Eating  and  Drinking.  After  eating:  violent  distressing
pains ;  no  ease  until  all  is  vomited.

Insatiable  thirst,  but  drinking  causes  nausea  and  vomit-
ing, and  hastens  the  chill.

I  After  drinking  cold  water:  shuddering;  vomiting  bile.
^^  Hiccough,  Belching,  Nausea  and  Vomiting.  ■  Eructa-
tions :  of  bitter,  tasteless  wind,  with  feeling  of  obstruc-
tion in  epigastrium.

I  Qualmishness  from  odors,  the  smell  of  food,  cooking,  etc.

Sick  stomach,  with  headache.

I  Nausea  from  least  motion,  with  chilliness.

I  Nausea  with  excessive  trembling  and  chilliness.

iSick  stomach,  night  before  ague  paroxysm.

Nausea  and  sense  of  extreme  prostration,  not  real.

Distressing  disposition  to  vomit,  and  weakness  of  stomach.

I  Nausea  as  the  chill  goes  off.

■  Nausea  and  vomiting  of  food.

I  Nausea  and  sickness  of  stomach  (in  one  case  vomiting)

at  beginning  of  heat,  with  violent,  throbbing  headache.
Nausea  and  vomiting,  with  free  perspiration  and  copious
expectoration.

I I  Vomiting  preceded  by  thirst.

■  Vomiting  immediately  after  drinking.

Vomiting: of  whatever  is  taken  into  stomach,  and  of  bile

or  mucus.
Vomiting  of  bile  with  great  tenderness  in  epigastrium,

and  trembling.

■  Vomiting:  preceding,  during,  or  at  conclusion  of  chill;

during  fever ;  of  bile  at  close  of  hot  stage.

■  ■Retching  and  vomiting  of  bile.

^'' Scrobiculum  and  Stomach. ■Extreme  tenderness  in  epi-
gastrium.
Beating  in  epigastrium  at  night.

■  Distressing  pain  in  scrobiculum  during  chill  and  heat.
Sensation  of  something  in  stomach  that  ought  to  come  up,

without  ability  to  raise  it.
Weakness  of  stomach  after  the  chill.
Sensation  of  fulness  in  stomach.
General  shuddering  proceeding  from  stomach.
Heat  in  the  stomach.

■  Most  violent  pains  in  stomach  after  eating  something;

no  rest  until  all  is  vomited  up  again,  aided  by  drinking
warm  water.

■  Indigestion  consequent  on  the  use  of  alcoholic  drinks.
Indigestion  of  old  people.

^^  Hypochondria. ■  Soreness  in  region  of  liver.

■  Fulness  and  tenderness  in  hepatic  region,  with  stitches

and  soreness  on  moving  and  coughing.


EUPATORIUM  PERFOLIATUM.  224

Tightness  in  1.  hypochondrium.
I  I  Tight  clotliing  is  oppressive.
^^  Abdomen, s  Soreness  around  waist ;  tight  clothing  oppressive.
Violent  colicky  pains  in  upper  abdomen,  with  headache

and  other  pains.
I  Abdomen  full  and  tympanitic.
^"  Stool  and  Rectum. Tenesmus,  with small  discharge  of
loose  stool.

■  Purging  stools,  with  smarting  and  heat  in  anus.

I  Considerable  griping,  <  after  stool,  with  tenesmus.
Emission  of  fetid  flatus,  with  relief.
Morning  diarrhoea.

■  Frequent  green,  watery  stools.

Profuse  bilious,  watery  stools,  with  nausea  and severe

colic;  prostration.
I  Constipation,  with  catarrh,

■Smarting  and  heat  in  anus. ^Cholera  asiatica,  after  sub-
sidence of  urgent  symptoms.
I  I  Herpetic  eruption,  affecting  anus  and  surrounding  parts,,
scrotum  and  thighs.
'^  Urinary  Orga,ns. ■  Dark  colored  clear  urine.

Urine:  dark  brown,  scanty,  depositing  a  whitish,  clay-like
sediment;  profuse,  pale,  with  gout;  dark,  in  bilious  dis-
orders; watery,  during  intermittents.
I  I  Inflammation  of  meatus  urinarius,  in  a  woman.
^^  Male  Sexual  Organs. Bitching  of  the  mons  veneris.

I  I  Herpes  on  scrotum  and  thighs.
^^  Voice  and  Larynx.  Trachea  and  Bronchia.  Throat  dry,
sore,  hoarse;  can  hardly  talk;  <  mornings,  when  he
gets  up.
I  I  Hoarseness ;  roughness  of  voice;  cough  <  evenings;
aching  in  all  the  bones ;  much  sweat ;  lassitude ;  pale ;,
sensitive;  secretion  passive. ^Nasal  catarrh.

■  Soreness,  scraping  and  heat  in  bronchi,  with  cough.

^  Respiration. ■  Great  oppression  of  chest ; a  full  breath
hurts;  rattling  on  chest.

■  Difficulty  of  breathing,  attended  with  perspiration  and

anxious  countenance.

I  I  Dyspnoea  very  great,  obliging  jDatient  to  lie  with  head
and  shoulders  high.

I  I  Dyspnoea,  with  hard,  dry  cough.

With  a  deep  inspiration,  grating  in  chest;  on  full  inspira-
tion, soreness.
^  Cough. ■Disposition  to  cough,  with  dyspnoea.

■  ■Hoarse,  rough  cough,  with  scraping  in  bronchia.

■  Cough  with  soreness  and  heat  in  bronchia;  flushed  face;

tearful  eyes.

■  Rough,  scraping  cough,  chest  sore;  must  support  it  with

hands;  flushed  face,  tearful  eyes.


225  EUPATORIUM  PERFOLIATUM.

I  Violent  cough,  with  soreness  in  chest.

I  I  After  catching  cold,  cough,  <  2  to  4  a.m.  ;  excited  by  tick-
ling in  chest,  causing  tightness  of  chest;  cough  <C  lying
on  back,  >  kneeling  with  face  towards  pillow ;  scanty
expectoration;  painful  fulness  in  head  on  coughing  or
blowing  nose;  lowness  of  spirits.

Stitches  in  liver  when  coughing.

■  Hacking  cough  in  evening.

I  I  Cough  at  night  with  headache.

■  Nocturnal  loose  cough;  particularly  after  eruptive  stage

of  measles.
I  Cough  preceding  or  following  measles.
Fatiguing  cough  with  heat.
During  apyrexia,  loose  cough.
I  Hectic  cough  from  suppressed  intermittent  fever.
^^  Inner  Chest  and  Lungs. Soreness  and  grating  sensation

in  chest,  at  every  deep  inspiration.
■Soreness  in  chest;  worse  from  inspiration.
iPain  and  soreness  behind  sternum;  heart  feels  as  if  in

too  small  a  place.

■  Oppression  in  middle  of  sternum;  feels  as  if  something

was  pressing  against  his  heart;  palpitation.

■  Cannot  take  a  natural  inspiration,  or  twist  body  either

to  r.  or  1.,  because  of  soreness  behind  sternum.

■  Soreness  in  chest,  with  cough.

Pain  through  r.  nipple  when  breathing.
.  Aching  pain  under  1.  breast,  cannot  lie  on  1.  side.

■  Deep-seated  pain  in  1.  side  and  in  r.  shoulder.
■Supports  chest  with  his  hands  during  cough.

■  Painful  irritation  of  pulmonary  organs,  with  heat  in  chest.
^^  Heart,  Pulse  and  Circulation. Pain,  soreness  and  heavi-
ness behind  sternum  and  in  cardiac  region ;  <  by  least
motion  or  turning  body  around.

Palpitation  of  heart.

Heart  feels  as  if  in  too  small  a  place ;  as  if  something  was
pressing  against  it.

■  Beating  pain  in  occiput,  <  by  motion ;  pain  and  soreness

of  eyeballs.
^°  Outer  Chest. Aching  pain  under  1.  breast,  and  inability  to
lie  on  1.  side.
Pain  through  r.  nipple  when  he  breathes.
^^  Neck  and  Back. ■  Beating  pain  in  neck  and  occiput;  >
after  rising.
I  I  Pain  in  back  of  neck  and  between  shoulders.

■  ■Creeping  chills,  principally  on  back.

■  Trembling  in  back  during  fever.

■  Weakness  in  small  of  back.

Intolerable  aching  soreness,  as  if  beaten,  in  small  of  back.

VOL.  V. — 15.


EUPATORIUM  PERFOLIATUM.  226

1 1  Pain  in  back  as  from  a  bruise.

I  Pain  in  back  before  and  during  chill.

I I  Intense  aching  in  back  and  limbs; extremities  as  if
broken.

Deep-seated  pains  in  loins,  with  soreness  from  motion.

I  I  Severe  pain  and  bruised  sensation  in  sacrum  and  ex-

tremities; copious  sweat  without  relief;  spasms. ^In-
termittent.
^^  Upper  Limbs. '  '  Stiffness  of  arms  and  fingers  during  chill.

I I  Aching  pain  and  soreness,  as  from  having  been  beaten
in  arms,  above  and  below  elbows.

1 1  Soreness  and  aching  in  arms  and  forearms; painful
soreness  in  both  wrists,  as  if  broken  or  dislocated.

I  Hands  icy  cold.

I  Heat  in  palms  of  hands;  sometimes  with  moisture.

Moisture  of  hands  with  chill.

Stiffness  of  fingers,  with  obtuseness  of  sense  of  touch.
^^  Lower  Limbs. Aching  pain  in  r.  hip  while  sitting.

I  I  Lameness  in  r.  hip  and  leg  when  walking.

I  I  Pain  above  r.  ilium  before  chill.

I  iPain  in  spot  not  larger  than  a  pea,  over  1.  hip,  with
soreness.

Pain  with  extreme  sensitiveness  in  1.  glutei  muscles,  pass-
ing around  in  front  of  trochanter  major.

i  I  Flagging  of  muscles  of  1.  thigh,  as  if  they  were  falling
off  the  bone.

1  I  Burning  in  skin  on  inner  side  of  thighs.

1  1  Herpes  on  thighs.

I  I  Rheumatic  pain  on  inside  of  1.  knee.

i  iSoreness  and  aching  of  lower  limbs ;  stiffness  and  general

soreness  when  rising  to  walk.
Pains  in  joints  of  lower  extremities.
■Severe  pains,  like  cramps,  weaken  out  of  sleep;  cold  sweat

follows.

I I  Calves  of  legs  feel  as  though  they  had  been  beaten.
I  I  Sprained  ankle-joint.

Pain  and  soreness  of  upper  part  of  1.  foot,  with  increased

sensibility  of  big  toe.
Pain  in  foot  <  by  standing  upon  it.

■  Stinging  in  feet,  as  from  pins,  at  beginning  of  chill.
Sharp  burning  pain  in  feet,  could  not  keep  her  shoes  on

while  pain  in  feet  lasted;  feet  seemed  swollen.
^rSoreness  and  swelling  of  both  feet  when  standing  on
them,  in  a  gouty  subject.

■  Throbbing  in  r.  foot.
Pricking  in  soles  of  feet.

■  Feet  icy  cold.

Heat  in  soles  of  feet  in  morning.


227  EUPATORIUM  PERFOLIATUM.

Pain  in  heel,  as  if  stabbed.

I  Dropsical  swelling  of  feet  and  ankles.

Gouty  swelling  of  big  toe ;  profuse  pale  urine ;  dropsical
swelling  of  ankles  and  feet,  after  gout,  with  profuse  uri-
nary discharge.

BPain  in  first  joint  of  1.  great  toe,  wdiich  suddenly  moves
to  corresponding  joint  of  right  one.

I  I  Intolerable  pain  under  toe  nails  of  both  feet. ^Inter-

mittent.
^*  Limbs  in  General. ■  Gouty  inflammation  of  1.  knee  and
r.  elbow ;  pains  <  from  10  a.m.  until  4  p.m.
Sharp  pain  in  1.  ankle,  hip  and  shoulder,  came  on  in-
stantly and  went  away  as  quickly.

I I  Intense  aching  in  limbs  and  back,  as  if  bones  were
broken. ^Influenza. ^Ague.

■Aching  pain  and  soreness,  as  if  beaten,  in  calves  of  legs,
small  of  back,  and  in  arms,  above  and  below  elbows.

I  Pain  in  bones  early  in  morning,  before  paroxysm.  ^In-
termittent.

I  Pains  in  bones  accompanying  influenza.

I I  Aching  in  bones  of  extremities,  with  soreness  of  flesh;
soreness  in  bones.

I  I  Aching  pain,  with  moaning  throughout  cold  stage.

I  Bones  of  extremities  ache  in  latter  part  of  chill,  and  be-
ginning of  heat.

I  Rheumatic  affections,  accompanied  by  perspiration  and
soreness  of  bones.

I  Syphilitic  pains.

I  Stretching  and  pale,  9  a.m.,  before  chill.

■  Walks  about  crouched  up.

■  Cramps.

^  Best. Position. Motion. Must  lie  high  with  head  and

shoulders,  on  account  of  dyspnoea.
After  lying:  pain  in  occiput.
While  in  great  pain  he  lies  quiet.
Lying  on  back:  cough  <.
Could  not  raise  head  from  pillow.
Kneeling  with  face  towards  pillow:  cough  >.
While  sitting,  aching  in  hips.
Must  support  chest  with  hands  during  cough.
Cannot  lie  on  1.  side.
Rising:  in  bed,  vertigo;  pain  in  forehead  >  ;  pain  in  neck

and  occiput  > ;  stiffness and  general  soreness  when

rising.
Standing  on  foot:  pain  < ;  soreness.
Walks  about  crouched  up.
Walking:  lameness  of  r.  hip  and  leg.
Motion :  faintness ;  nausea ;  stitches  and  soreness  in  hepatic


EUPATORIUM  PERFOLIATUM.  228

region;  pains  in  cardiac  region  and  behind  sternum;

pain  in  occiput  <;  pains  in  loins  and  soreness;  chilli-,

ness;  sweat  <.  ^

Cannot  turn  body  because  of  soreness  behind  sternum.
Cannot  keep  still,  although  there  is  great  desire  to  do  so.
^  Nerves. A^ery  restless,  cannot  keep  still,  although  there  is.

great  desire  to  do  so.
Trembling: with  vomiting; with  chill; internal;  with

external  heat ;  during  heat;  in  back;  during  fever.
Great  weakness  and  prostration  during  fever,  with  faint-

ness  from  motion.

■  During  fever,  weak,  faint,  nervous,  trembling.

■  Hands  have  to  assist  the  head  in  lifting  it;  with  headache.
■Weakness  during  fever;  could  not  raise  head  from  j)illow.
General  debility  from  intemperance.

I  I  General  lassitude  with  influenza.
I  I  Great  prostration,  almost  syncope.
I  I  Faintness  from  motion,  during  fever.

1  I  Cerebro-spinal  meningitis,  with  intense soreness  and

aching  all  over,  vomiting,  pain  in  back  of  head  and
neck.
^''  Sleep. ■  Stretching  and  yawning. ^Intermittent  fever.

■  Disposed  to  yawn  before  chill.

■  Sleepiness  with  difficult  breathing.

Profound  sleep  at  noon ;  could  hear  everything,  but  could
not  speak.

■  During  sleep,  some  sweat  in  evening.

■  Has  to  lie  with  his  head  high.

■  Headache  on  awaking.

^  Time.  Morning:  attack  of  whirling  around  in  brain;  at-
tacks of  chills ;  diarrhoea;  sore  throat  <;  heat  insoles
of  feet;  pains  in  bones;  chilliness;  slight  perspiration.

2  to  4  A.M. :  cough.
7  A.M. :  chill.

9  a.m.:  stretchy  and  pale;  chill.
Forenoon:  fever.

2  p.m.  :  severe  headache  with  chill.

10  A.M.  to  4  p.m.:  pains  <.
All  day:  sick  headache.

Evenings :  cough  <  ;  during  sleep  some  sweat.

Night:  feels  as  if  he  was  going  out  of  his  mind;  thirst;
sick  stomach;  beating  in  epigastrium;  cough  with  head-
ache; chilliness;  coldness  during  sweat;  pungent  heat
and  sweat.
^^  Temperature  and  Weather.  AVants  to  be  warmly  covered
during  chill.

From  uncovering:  chilliness.

Better  in  house:  headache.


229  EUPATORIUM  PERFOLIATUM.

Aggravated  when  first  going  in  open  air :  headache.

After  being  in  an  ice-house :  chill  and  fever.
*"  Fever, l  Chilliness in  morning,  heat  throughout  rest  of
day,  no  perspiration,  or  slight  in  morning.

Attacks  of  chills  in  morning,  no  fever ;  so  chilly,  could  not
get  warm;  throat  dry,  becomes  hoarse  at  times  and  loses
her  voice ;  very  great  oppression  in  chest ;  sharp  burning
pain  in  feet,  could  not  keep  her  shoes  on  while  pain  in
feet  lasted,  feet  seemed  swollen ;  cough  short  and  dry ;
sharp  pains  in  1.  ankle,  hip  and  shoulder,  come  on  in-
stantly and  go  away  as  quickly.

I  Chilliness  through  night  and  in  morning,  with  nausea

from  least  motion.

I I  Chilliness,  with  excessive  trembling  and  nausea.

II A  greater  amount  of  shivering  during  chill  than  is  war-
ranted by  the  degree  of  coldness.
I  I  Coldness  during  nocturnal  perspiration.
Alternate  chilliness  and  flushes  of  heat.
iSick  stomach,  night  before  paroxysm.

I  I  Cough  in  night  previous  to  paroxysm.

I I  Paroxysm  generally  commences  in  morning.

1 1  Thirst  several  hours  before  chill,  continues  during  chill
and  heat.

I  Chill  preceded  by  pain  above  r.  ilium,  with  thirst  and  a

disposition  to  yawn.

I I  Pain  in  all  the  bones,  as  if  broken,  before  commence-
ment of  chill.

I  Coldness  and  stinging  or  pricking,  as  from  pins,  in  both
feet  at  commencement  of  chill.

I  Violent  pain  in  head  and  back  before  chill.

I I  Chill  induced  or  hastened  by  drinking  cold  water.

I  I  Chill  at  7  A.M.,  preceded  by  thirst,  and  attended  with

moisture  of  hands.
I  I  Chill  at  9  o'clock  in  morning.

I  I  Intermittent  fever  with  a  heavy  chill,  early  in  morning

of  one  day,  and  a  light  chill  about  noon  next  day,  and
so  on  successively.

I I  Chill  spreads  from  back ;  begins  between  7  and  9  a.m.

I  Severe  headache,  with  slight  chill  at  2  p.m.

During  chill :  thirst,  headache  and  backache ;  aching  all
over,  as  if  in  bones ;  more  shivering  than  degree  of  cold-
ness warrants;  trembling,  nausea;  moaning  with  pains;
wants  to  be  covered.

I I  Thirst  during  chill  and  heat,  with  vomiting  after  least
drink  of  water. ^Intermittent.

1  I  Distressing  pain  in  scrobiculus  cordis,  throughout  chill

and  heat.
At  conclusion  of  chill :  vomiting  of  bile ;  loose  cough.


EUPATORIUM  PERFOLIATUM.  230

I  I  Fever,  with  despondency,  morbid  sensitiveness  of  skin,

and  sleeplessness.
Fever  preceded  by  thirst,  cannot  raise  head ;  cheeks  red ;
throbbing  headache; sleep  and  moaning; trembling,
faint  from  motion.

I I  Vomiting  of  bile  at  end  of  hot  stage,  followed  by  slight
sweat  and  sleep.

During  heat:  trembling  in  back;  headache;  thirst  con-
tinues ;  patient  is  very  sensitive  to  the  aggravation  from
drinking,  "  a  swallow  of  water  will  make  him  shiver ;"
the  less  thirst  the  more  severe  the  cephalalgia  and  bone
pains ;  great  weakness,  cannot  raise  head ;  faintness
from  motion ;  cheeks  mahogany  red  ;  dry,  hot  skin._

1  I  Fever  in  forenoon,  preceded  by  thirst  early  in  morning,
but  no  chill;  attended  by  fatiguing  cough,  and  not  fol-
lowed by  perspiration.

Pungent  heat  attending  the  perspiration  at  night.

■  During  apyrexia,  loose  cough.

Sweat :  Hght  or  wanting ;  >  all  pains  but  headache,  which
is  <  ;  profuse  at  night  in  old  cases,  <  by  uncovering  or
least  motion,  rarely  debilitating.

I  I  Pains  did  not  abate  with  the  occurrence  of  the  sweat.

Copious  sweat  with  rheumatism.

Skin  bathed  in  sweat ;  or  sweat  scanty.

■  Nightly  sweat,  with  chilliness,  from  moving  or  uncovering.
lAnteponing  chill,  with  congestive  throbbing,  thirst  and

aching  in  bones.

■  Cold  stage  in afternoon  each alternate day an hour

earlier,  never  amounted  to  a  chill;  thirst  before  and
during  cold  stage,  which  lasted  three  hours ;  vomiting
much  bile  after  drinking;  muscles  painful,  <  in  cold
stage,  followed  by  intense  heat,  with  perspiration ;  hot
stage  lasting  six  to  eight  hours,  with  thirst ;  during  at-
tack she  would  be  warmly  covered,  then  profuse  per-
spiration, without  heat,  continuing  during  sleep  _  all
night ;  great  debility  even  when  free  from  fever ;  liver
much  enlarged  and  very  sensitive  to  touch;  urine  ex-
tremely scanty,  turbid,  and  of  an  offensive  odor;  no  ap-
petite.
■Exceedingly  severe  chill  followed  by  burning  fever;  face
of  a  dull  red  color ;  glistening  eyes,  scleroticae  yellowish
red;  tongue  covered  with  thick,  yellowish  fur;  intense
headache  in  occiput  and  insupportable  heaviness ;  nau-
sea and  frequent  effort  to  vomit;  extreme  tenderness  in
epigastrium ;  fulness  and  tenderness  in  hepatic  region,
with  stitches  and  soreness  on  moving  and  coughing ;
intolerable  aching  in  back  and  limbs,  *'  as  if  bones  were
broken;"  urine  scanty  and  of  a  dark  mahogany  color;


231  EUPATOPvIUM  PERFOLIATUM.

hard,  dry  cough  and  some  dyspnoea. ^Intermittent
fever.

■  Intense  headache  with  soreness  of  scalp,  soreness  of  eyes,
redness  of  face,  nausea  and  prostration,  soreness  in  re-
gion of  liver,  constipation,  high  colored  urine,  violent
bone-pains. ^Bilious  fever.

I  I  Remittent  fever,  bilious  and  malarial ;  with  severe  gas-
tric and  intestinal  irritation,

I  In  first  stage  of  yellow  fever  as  an  intercurrent  remedy,
when  the  bones  ache  as  if  broken,  with  headache  and
backache,  thirst  and  vomiting.

I  Intermittent  fever,  quotidian,  tertian  and  quartan.

I  I  Chill  and  fever  after  staying  in  an  ice-house.

I  Fevers  attended  with  gastric  derangement.

I  Hectic  cough  from  suppressed  intermittent.

Bilious  fever ;  remittent  fever ;  dengue ;  typhoid.
^^  Attacks,  Periodicity. Frequent :  green  watery  stools;  effort
to  vomit.

At  times :  becomes  hoarse.

Intermittents  of  any  type,  but  especially  the  tertian.

Pains  come  quickly  and  go  quickly.

Every  other  morning:  headache  and  nausea;  good  appe-
tite; alternate  heavy  and  light  chill.

Alternate  afternoons:  cold  stage  each  day  an  hour  earlier.
*^  Locality  and  Direction.  Pvight :  thumping  in  head  above
ear;  soreness  of  parietal  protuberance;  pain  through
nipple;  pain  in  shoulder;  pain  in  hip;  lameness  in  hip
and  leg;  pain  above  ilium;  rheumatic  pain  on  inside
of  knee;  throbbing  in  foot;  pain  in  joint  of  great  toe;
gouty  inflammation  of  elbow ;  foot  throbbing.

Left:  as  if  falling  to  side;  throbbing  headache;  eyeball,
pain  and  soreness;  lachrymation  and  photophobia;
tightness  in  hypochondrium;  aching  pain  under  breast;
pain  in  side;  pain  over  hip;  pain  and  extreme  sensi-
tiveness of  glutei  muscles;  flagging  of  muscles  of  thigh ;
pain  and  soreness  of  upper  part  of  foot ;  pain  in  joint  pf
great  toe;  gouty  inflammation  of  knee;  sharp  pain  in
ankle,  hip  and  shoulder.

Left  to  right: shooting  pain  in  head.

Left  great  toe  to  right  toe :  moving  pain.
*^  Sensations.  Feels  as  if  he  was  going  out  of  his  mind ;  as  if
he  had  been  placed  in  a  coal  screen  and  whirled  around
two  or  three  times;  as  if  falling  to  left;  as  if  blood  was
rushing  across  head;  sensation  of  weight;  inner  head
feels  sore;  pain  as  if  from  needles;  feeling  of  obstruction
in  epigastrium ;  as  if  extremely  prostrated,  not  real;  as
if  something  were  in  stomach  that  ought  to  come  up;
heart  as  if  in  too  small  a  place ;  as  if  something  was


EUPATORIUM  PERFOLIATUM.  232

pressing  against  heart ;  back  as  if  beaten  ;  pain  in  back
as  if  from  a  bruise  ;  extremities  as  if  broken ;  wrists  as
if  dislocated  or  broken ;  as  if  muscles  were  falling  off
bones  of  1.  thigh ;  calves  of  legs  feel  as  if  beaten ;  heel
as  if  stabbed.

1 1  Bruised  feeling,  as  if  broken,  all  over  body.

Pain:  in  occiput;  in  eyeballs;  in  bones;  in  back;  in
limbs;  behind  sternum;  through  r.  nipple ;  in  cardiac
region ;  in  back  of  neck  and  between  shoulders ;  in
back ;  in  r.  ilium  ;  in  small  spot  over  1.  hip  ;  in  1.  glutei
muscles,  passing  round  in  front  of  trochanter  major;  in
joints;  in  upper  part  of  1.  foot;  in  foot;  in  heel;  in  first
joint  of  great  toe.

Numbness :  as  if  flesh  was  falling  from  bones.

Intolerable  pain :  under  toe  nails.

Intense  pain :  in  occiput ;  darting  through  eyes.

Violent  pain:  in  head  and  back;  after  eating;  in  stomach;
in  abdomen.

Severe  pain :  in  sacrum ;  in  extremities.

Sharp  pain:  in  1.  ankle;  in  hip;  in  shoulder.

Shooting:  from  l.'to  r.  side  of  head.

Darting  pains :  through  temples.

Stitches :  in  hepatic  region ;  in  liver.

Colicky  pains  :  in  abdomen.

Griping :  in  abdomen.

Burning  pain :  in  feet.

Pricking :  in  soles  of  feet.

Painful  soreness :  in  r.  parietal  protuberance;  of  eyeballs;
in  small  of  back ;  of  wrists.

Distressing  pain :  after  eating ;  in  scrobiculum.

Deep-seated  ijain:  in  1.  side  and  r.  shoulder;  in  loins.

Beating  pain:  in  forehead  and  occiput;  in  nape.

Throbbing:  headache;  j^ain  from  forehead  to  occiput;  in
r.  foot.

Beating:  in  epigastrium.

Thumping:  in  side  of  head  above  ear.

Aching:  in  forehead;  in  every  bone;  under  1.  breast;  in
back  and  limbs ;  in  arms  above  and  below  elbows ;  in
r.  hip; of  lower  limbs.

Rheumatic  ijain :  on  inside  of  1.  knee.

Bruised  sensation : in  sacrum  ;  in  extremities.

Grating: in  chest.

Scraping: in  bronchi.

Stinging: in  feet,  as  from  pins.

Distress:  on  top  and  on  back  part  of  head ;  occiput;  with
pain  after  eating.

Heat:  on  top  of  head;  in  stomach;  in  anus;  in  bronchi;
in  palms  of  hands;  in  soles  of  feet.


233  EUPATORIUM  PERFOLIATUM.

Burning :  in  skin ;  on  inner  side  of  thighs.

Soreness :  in  back  part  of  head ;  of  scalp ;  in  eyeballs ;  of
fauces;  in  region  of  liver;  around  waist;  in  bronchi;
of  chest ;  behind  sternum ;  in  cardiac  region  ;  in  arms
above  and  below  elbows ;  above  1.  hip ;  of  lower  limbs ;
general ;  of  upper  part  of  1.  foot ;  of  feet.

Smarting :  in  anus.

Painful  irritation  of  pulmonary  organs.

Sensitiveness:  of  big  toe  on  1.  foot;  of  1.  glutei  muscles.

Tenderness :  of  epigastrium  ;  in  hepatic  region.

Pulsation  in  back  part  of  head.

Trembling :  in  back.

Shuddering.

Buzzing  in  ear.

Stiffness :  of  arms ;  of  fingers.

Faintness.

Lameness:  in  r.  hip  and  leg.

Tightness:  in  1.  hypochondrium;  of  chest.

Fulness :  in  head ;  in  stomach  ;  in  hepatic  region.

Oppression:  of  chest;  in  middle  of  sternum.

Heaviness :  in  head ;  behind  sternum  ;  in  cardiac  region.

Weakness:  in  small  of  back.

Itching :  of  mons  veneris,
^  Tissues. Acts  upon  gastro-hepatic  system,  fibrous  tissues
and  bronchial  mucous  membranes,  its  most  character-
istic condition  being  a  bilious  derangement  partaking
of  a  malarial  character.

Rheumatism  and  gouty  affection.
"^  Touch.  Passive  Motion.  Injuries. Pressure :  heat  on  top
of  head  > .

Tight  clothing  is  oppressive.

Standing  upon  it,  increases  pain  in  foot;  soreness  and
swelling  of  feet.
^^  Skin. I  Jaundiced  color. ^Intermittent  and  bilious  fevers.

I  I  Anasarcous  swellings  of  extremities,  depending  on  gen-
eral debility.

I  I  Surface  pale  and  morbidly  sensitive ;  morbid  sensitive-
ness of  skin,  with  fever.
I  I  Tardy  development  of  eruptive  diseases,  and  especially

measles.
1  I  Measles  preceding  or  following  cough.
1  I  Petechial  or  spotted  fever ;  head  drawn  spasmodically

backward.
I  I  Spotted  fever,  with  severe  aching  and  soreness  of  limbs.

■  Ringworms  and  herpetic  eruptions.
^^  Stages  of  Life,  Constitution, l  Cachectic  condition  of  sys-
tem from  long  continued  or  frequent  attacks  of  bilious
and  intermittent  fevers.


EUPATORIUM  PERFOLIATUM.  234

Adapted,  to  diseases  of  old  people ;  worn-out  constitutions,
especially  from  inebriety.

Old  people  suffering  from  indigestion.

Boy,  fet.  8;  tertian  intermittent.

Boy,  set.  14,  sallow  face,  sickly  aspect ;  tertian  ague.

Boy,  set.  18 ;  intermittent  fever.

Mrs.  A.  T.,  a3t.  22;  intermittent  fever.

Strong  man,  set.  27;  second  attack  of  tertian  ague.

Miss ,  caught  cold  ten  clays  previously ;  cough.

Mrs.  A.,  four  months  pregnant;  intermittent  fever.

R.  D.,  set.  35,  stout  mechanic,  dark  complexion,  after  re-
maining in  an  ice-house  for  quarter  of  an  hour,  during
a  warm  August  morning;  intermittent  fever.

Miss  W.,  set.  50,  corpulent;  intermittent  fever.
Relations. Compatible :  Natr.  mur.  and  Sepia,  which  follow
well.

Compare:  Chelid.,  Podoph.  and  Lycop.,  but  especially
Bryon.,  which  is  its  closest  analogue.  These  may  be
distinguished  by  Bryon.  having  free  sweat,  and  pains
keep  patient  quiet,  and  by  Eupat.  having  deficient  sweat,
and  pains  make  the  patient  restless.


48


235  EUPATOREUM  PURPUREUM.


EUPATOREUM  PURPUREUM.

Queen  of  the  Meadow.  Compositse.

An  old  Indian  medicine,  used  by  herb  doctors,  particularly  in  gravel  and
other  diseases  of  the  kidney  and  bladder.

Proved  by  Mrs.  H.  H.  Dresser,  whose  excellent  proving  appears  in  full  in
Allen's  Encyclopedia,  vol.  4,  p.  237.

For  a  full  arrangement  of  the  symptoms  see  Hering's  Monograph.

Clinical  Authorities. — Cystitis  (2  cases),  B.  L.  Dresser,  Am.  Hom.  Obs.,
vol.  3,  p.  405;  Retention  of  urine,  B.  L.  Dresser,  Am.  Horn.  Obs.,  vol.  3,  p.  405;
Intermittent  fever  (105  cases  reported  cured),  Von  Tagen,  Hom.  Clinics,  vol.  4,  p.
126;  Hom.  Clinics,  vol.  1,  pp.  3  and  52;  Howard,  Hom.  Clinics,  vol.  1,  p.  16;  (2
cases),  Bane's  Eec,  1871,  p.  195;  Kane's  Eec,  1872,  p.  244;  Gardiner,  Eaue's
Eec,  1870,  p.  52;  Analytical  Therap.,  vol.  1,  p.  266  ;  Dropsy,  Hale,  A.  PL  O.,  voL
1,  p.  133.

^  Mind. I  I  Stupid,  dull. <?Dropsy. ^Intermittent.
Confusion  with  falling  to  1.  side.
The  mind  encompassed  by  various  delusions.
Talkative ;  exclamations ;  delusions  of  sight  and  hearing.
Sighing  every  few  minutes,  with  gnawing  at  stomach.
I  I  Moaning;  suffering  expressed  by  peculiar  cries.  ■
Hysterical  mood,  weeping,  sighing, and  a  feeling  like

home  sickness,  though  occupying  her  own  home  and

surrounded  by  her  own  family,  with  fluttering  of  heart

and  a  disagreeable  fulness  in  throat.
Feels  extremely  depressed  and  sleepy.
Has  a  great  fear  of  sickness.
^  Sensorium. iHead  feels  light  and  dizzy,  as  though  flying

round  and  round ;  cannot  get  rid  of  the  sensation  as  if

falling  towards  the  left  side ;  the  whole  body  seems  to

participate.
Lightness  of  head  <  in  morning,  disappearing  at  12  o'clock.
Sensation  as  if  her  head  were  moving  in  all  directions.
Illusions  of  sight  and  hearing,  with  vertigo.
Confused,  heavy ;  cannot  seem  to  prevent  falling.
Dull,  sleepy;  great  effort  required  in  order  to  move  about.
^  Inner  Head, i  l  Dull,  heavy  pain  in  head ;  most  severe  in

forehead.
I  Much  headache  and  constriction  over  frontal  region,  with

chill.


EUPATOREUM  PURPUREUM.  236

Dizzy,  with  deep,  dull,  aching  pain  through  temporal  re-
gion on  1.  side.
Vertex  full,  pressing,  as  though  lifting  up  from  adjoining

parts.
I  I  Head  feels  as  though  she  had  a  bad  cold.
Hard  thumping  pain  on  1.  occipital  bone.
Pain  from  1.  shoulder  extends  to  occiput.
Sick  headache;  dull  hammering,  beating, stitching, or

boring  pain  in  1.  side  of  head ;  pressing  from  r.  to  1. ;

beginning  in  morning  and  increasing  during  afternoon

and  evening;  <  in  cold  air;  >  while  walking  slowly

in  fresh  air.
■  Violent  headache: before  the  chill; during  morning;

with  fever.
■*  Outer  Head. Fine pricking sensation on scalp, rather

pleasurable  than  otherwise.
I  I  Soreness,  tenderness,  and  itching  of  scalj).
I  Sweat,  princij)ally  on  head,  particularly  profuse  about

forehead.
^  Sight  and  Eyes. ■  l  Staring ;  looking  with  fixed  eyes,  wide

ojDen.
Cannot  see  as  far  as  usual,  with  sleepy  feeling.
Eyes  weeping ;  copious  flow  of  tears.
I  I  Copious flow of  tears,  filling eyes,  making  constant

wiping  necessary.
I  1  Eyes  red  and  swollen ;  violent  headache.
I  I  Conjunctiva  j^ellow,  with  the  chill.

*  Hearing  and  Ears, i  i  Ears  feel  as  though  they  were  full.

Squeaking  sound  in  ears ;  reports ;  illusions  of  hearing.
I  I  Crackling,  like  burning  of  birch-bark ;  very  much  <

upon  swallowing  anything.
^  Smell  and  Nose. '  '  Fluent  coryza ;  great  heat,  sneezing.
Abundant  discharge  of  a  thin,  watery  fluid,  making  nose

sore  and  irritable.

*  Upper  Face. Congestion  to  face,  wdth  burning  heat,  dry  and

hot  to  touch.
I  Face  flushed,  with  fever.

Shining  appearance  of  face,  as  when  having  used  a  large
Cjuantity  of  soap  in  washing.
^  Lower  Face. ■  Lips  blue. ^Intermittent.
^'^  Teeth  and  Gums. Gums  red  and  hot.
^^  Taste  and  Tongue. ■  Tongue  furred,  brown  along  centre;
Ijitter,  pappy  taste,  with  chill.
Pricking  and  stinging  in  end  of  tongue.
Fine  pricking  sensation  on  posterior  part  of  tongue.
Kumb  feeling  of  tongue,  as  if  caused  by  aconite.
^"  Inner  Mouth. Increased  action  of  all  the  glands  of  the
mouth;  abundance  of  saliva.


237  EUPATOREUM  PURPUREUM.

13  Throat. Fluttering  in  throat-pit ;  extends  upward  from  heart.

Disagreeable  fulness  in  throat;  can  hardly  prevent  crying.

I  I  Choking  fulness  of  throat,  must  swallow  often.

I  Swallowing:  <  crackling  in  ears;  causes  pain.

Soreness,  roughness  and  dryness  in  throat.

Sensation  in  throat  as  if  having  swallowed  tobacco.

Burning,  smarting,  as  if  having  been  scalded  by  swallow-
ing some  hot  substance.

I  Continued  smarting  and  burning,  most  severe  in  posterior
part  of  throat.

I  Pain  in  left  side  of  throat,  causing  pain  in  swallowing;
before  chill.
^*  Appetite,  Thirst. Desires,  Aversions. No  appetite ;  much
thirst.

Loss  of  appetite  with  fever;  desire  to  eat  immediately  after.

I  Thirst  before  the  chill,  none  during.

■  Constant  thirst  with  fever.
I  Thirst,  in  a  case  of  dropsy.

Longing  for  lemonade,  or  cold  acid  drinks,  with  violent
bone  pains,  blue  lips  and  nails,  extremities  cold,  and
frontal  headache.

Longing  for  hot  drinks.
^^  Hiccough,  Belching,  Nausea  and  Vomiting.  Great  quan-
tity of  wind  in  stomach;  eructations  almost  constant.

I  I  Great  nausea  and  sickness  of  stomach,  but  no  vomiting
with  the  chill.

I  I  Nausea;  vomiting  with  fever.

lA'^omiting,  with  sick  headache.
^^  Scrobiculum  and  Stomach. Great  nausea,  swelling,  and
fulness,  mostly  on  1.  side.

Crampy  pains  in  pit  of  stomach,  with  weak,  sick  feeling.

I  I  Crampy  pain  in  stomach ;  gnawing  and  sighing.
^^  Abdomen. Bowels  hard  as  a  rock.

Fulness  and  pain  in  bowels.

Swelling  and  fulness,  mostly  on  1.  side.

■  Rumbling,  rolling,  and  twisting  pain  in  bowels.
Crampy,  windy  bowels.

I  I  Severe  colic  pain  over  whole  abdomen,  after  voiding
urine.

Pain  and  soreness  of  whole  abdomen,  much  <  on  1.  side.

I  I  Hypogastric  region  swollen  and  hot. ^Suppression  of
urine.
^^  Stool  and  Rectum, i  Bowels  inclined  to  be  loose. ^Inter-
mittent.

■  Bilious  diarrhoea.

Feeling  as  though  bowels  must  be  moved  immediately,

without  being  able  to  do  so.
Pressure  and  heaviness  upon  rectum.


EUPATOREUM  PURPUREUM.  238

^^  Urinary  Organs. '  iDuU,  deep  pain  in  kidneys;  also  cut-
ting pain.
I  Chronic  nephritis.

■  Suppression  of  urine.

Hard,  aching  pressure  upon  bladder ;  evacuated  bladder
every  half  hour  during  day,  still  it  is  full  and  tense.

1  Smarting  and  burning  very  intense  in  bladder  and
urethra,  so  much  so  that  she  could  not  stand.

■  Severe,  deep,  dull  aching  in  bladder.
Cutting  pain,  pressure,  fulness  in  bladder.

I  I  Chronic  irritation  of  bladder,  with  increased  mucous

secretion.
■Excessive  irritation  of  bladder,  with  large  deposits  of

lithates.

■  Uneasiness  in  region  of  bladder  while  suffering  from  a

violent  cold;  continued  to  increase  until  it  became  a
confirmed  chronic  inflammation,
ilncontinence  of  urine;  especially  with  children.

■  Restless  tossing  about;  constant  moaning,  expressed  by

peculiar  cries;  lower  belly  swollen  and  hot.

■  Violent  headache,  soreness  all  over,  aching,  gnawing  in

joints;  eyes  red  and  swollen;  violent  cutting  pain  in
back;  labor-like  pains  in  back;  constant  desire  to  void
urine;  most  excruciating,  smarting  and  burning  in
urethra  upon  voiding  urine;  passes  a  few  drops  at  a
time,  and  is  obliged  to  make  the  effort  very  often;
numbness  of  legs;  deep,  dull  aching  in  kidneys;  also  in
bladder;  great  emaciation;  hectic  fever;  night  sweats;
rheumatic  pains  shifting  from  j)lace  to  place.  ^Chronic
cystitis.

■  Catarrhus  vesicae,  attended  by  ulceration.

■  After  riding  four  miles  a  very  rough  road,  with  much

jolting  and  shaking,  seven  months  pregnant,  and  taking
a  bad  cold,  violent  dysuria.
■Strangury,  due  to  uterine  displacement.

■  Ischuria  with  child  two  weeks  old.

Constant  urging  to  urinate  all  day;  has  passed  twice  as

much  urine  during  the  day  as  usual.
Felt  an  uncontrollable  desire  to  void  urine,  after  which

she  experienced  a  severe  colic  pain,  occuj)ying  whole

extent  of  abdomen.
Constant  desire  to  pass  water  accompanied  by  a  cutting,

aching  pain  in  bladder.
Voiding  urine  as  often  as  once  an  hour  during  whole  day.

■  Passes  a  few  drops  of  urine  at  a  time,  and  is  obliged  to

make  the  effort  very  often.
Profuse  flow  of  clear,  limpid  urine;  weak,  tired  and  faint
after  urinary  symjjtoms.


239  EUPATOREUM  PURPUREUM.

I  Urine  scanty,  albuminous,  and  frequent.

Stream  of  urine  smaller  than  natural.

Mucous  sediment  in  urine  in  excess,  indicating  inflam-
mation.

Diabetes  insipidus;  albuminuria;  dropsy  due  to  renal  dis-
ease, with  severe  dyspnoea  and  oedema  all  over  body.

I  I  Renal  and  vesical  calculi.

Diuresis  and  vesical  irritation; hypersemia  and  vesical
inflammation.

iDysuria,  enuresis  nocturna,  and  other  conditions  of  irri-
tation of  bladder  from  direct  or  reflex  causes.

■  Vesical  irritability  in  women.
'^^  Male  Sexual  Organs. '  '  Impotency,  from  exhaustion  or

abuse  of  the  generative  functions.
'^^  Female  Sexual  Organs. Tense  cutting  pain  two  inches
above  1.  ovary.

A  smart,  quick,  jerking  motion  in  1.  ovary.

Heavy  pressure  during  day  directly  above  1.  ovary.

I  I  Sterility,  from  atony  of  ovaries.

Strangury  from  uterine  displacement,  or  during  pregnancy.

Leucorrhcea  quite  abundant,  leaving  no  stain  upon  linen.

I  1  Uterine  leucorrhcea  caused  by  exhaustion  of  uterus  and
chronic  metritis.

I  The  external  generative  organs  feel  as  though  wet,  though
a  delusion.

I  I  Inflammation  of  meatus  urinarius.

I  I  Numbness,  worse  in  groin.
2*  Pregnancy.  Parturition.  Lactation,  i  Threatened  abortion.

I  I  Habitual  abortion  at  third  or  fourth  month.

i  I  Insufficient  labor  pains.
^^  Voice  and  Larynx.  Trachea  and  Bronchia.  Flowing
coryza;  sneezing;  hoarseness,  with  roughness  of  voice;
hacking  cough  in  evening;  cough  with  soreness  and
heat  in  bronchi;  difficult  breathing;  grating  sensation
in  chest  at  every  deep  inspiration.
^^  Respiration, l  l  Difficult  breathing;  distressing  dyspnoea.

Choking  compels  to  swallow.

I  1  Grating  sensation  in  chest  at  every  deejD  inspiration.
^  Cough. Hacking  cough  in  evening.

Cough,  with  soreness  and  heat  in  bronchia.

I  I  Spell  of  dry,  hacking  cough  previous  to  attack,  continu-
ing throughout  paroxysm.
^®  Inner  Chest  and  Lungs.  Strong  desire  to  inflate  lungs,
which  she  continued  to  do  from  time  to  time,  without
noticing  particularly  that  she  was  doing  so;  sighing.
^  Heart,  Pulse  and  Circulation.  Palpitation  of  heart ;  flut-
tering of  heart  and  fulness  in  throat.

J I  Pulse  accelerated  and  full. ^Ague.


EUPATOREUM  PURPUREUM.  24a

Pulse  80  to  100,  full  and  bounding.
^^  Neck  and  Back. Lame  feeling  in  nape  of  neck.
Stiff,  wry  neck.

Cutting  pain  in  neck,  running  from  1.  shoulder  to  occiput.
I  i  Between  shoulder  blades  chilly  feeling.
Sore  pain  directly  within  spine,  its  whole  extent,  from  be-
low upwards.
I  I  Violent  cutting  pain  in  back.

I  I  Labor-like  pains  in  back.

I I  Chill  begins  in  lower  dorsal  region  and  runs  up  the  back.
■Neuralgic  pains  from  below  upw^arcls,  mostly  1.  side  of

back  and  hip.

■  Distressing  pain  in  lumbar  region  before  chill.
Rheumatic  pains  in  lumbar  region.

Dull,  aching  pain  in  sacrum,  running  upward  into  kidneys.
^^  Upper Limbs, l  '  Arms  perspire  most ; hands are cold ;

finger-nails  blue.
^^  Lower  Limbs. Pain  from  hip  and  back  upwards.

llClnawing  in  hip-bone.

Legs  feel  weak,  tired ;  1.  leg  w^eak,  worse  than  r.,  in  which
she  has  a  severe  numbness.

Numbness  of  legs,  after  or  in  conjunction  with  the  sever©
bone-pains.

Feet  feel  as  if  she  had  walked  a  long  journey.

It  seems  to  her  as  though  her  heels  were  crowding  through
her  boots ;  the  delusion  so  marked  that  she  felt  com-
pelled to  look  and  see  if  it  was  really  the  case.

1  I  Thighs  perspiring  most ;  feet  cold.
^^  Limbs  in  General. Tired,  weak,  uneasiness  in  limbs,  with
numbness  and  gnawing  pain.

■  Rheumatic  pains  shifting  from  place  to  place,  always  from

below  upwards.
■Pains  in  arms  and  legs  before  chill.

■  Limbs  cold,  during  fever.

Ischias  sinistra;  severe  shooting  pains  in  course  of  1.
sciatic  nerve,  producing  a  palsied  sensation,  especially
after  motion;  neuralgia  of  r.  shoulder,  or  of  r.  knee,
passing  over  to  1.  side;  neuralgic  pains  from  below  up-
wards, mostly  in  1.  side  of  back  and  hip ;  gnawing  in
hip-bone,  legs  feel  weak  and  tired,  1.  leg  more.

Rheumatism,  especially  in  aged  persons,  with  sensation  of
soreness  of  bones,  leaving  ankles  and  feet  swollen  ;  pro-
fuse discharge  of  clear  urine;  intense  aching  in  limbs,
as  if  bones  were  broken ;  pains  come  and  go  suddenly ;
very  restless,  cannot  keep  still,  though  there  is  great  de-
sire to  do  so,  and  the  pains  are  not  >  by  motion.
^  Rest. Position. Motion. Unable  to  lie  down.

Great  effort  required  to  move  about.


37


241  EUPATOREUM  PURPUREUM.

Changing  position  ever  so  little,  chilly  down  back.

Walking  slowly:  pressing  in  head  >.

Motion:  shooting  pain  in  sciatic  nerve  produces  palsied

sensation,  <  after  motion;  pains  in  limbs  not  >  by

motion.
^  Nerves. Suffers  from  unusual  weakness ; with a  staring

look  of  eyes.
Faint,  dizzy  feeling,  pervading  whole  body.
Tired,  weak  feeling  in  every  organ  of  body ;  general  pros-
tration.
Faintness,  languor,  sickness ;  cannot  move  about.
A  weak,  tired,  wearied,  faint  feeling,  almost  insupportable

accompanies  symptoms  of  urinary  organs.
■Restlessness,  tossing,  constant  moaning.
I  Unable  to  lie  down.
Nervous,  restless,  hysterical  mood.
Sleep. I  I  Yawning,  gaping,  sighing.
Sleepy  and  depressed.
•Sleep  restless  and  much  disturbed,  frightful  dreams.
Sleeplessness,  with  wild,  staring  eyes.
^^Time. Morning:  lightness  of  head  <,  disappearing  at  12

o'clock; pressing  in  head;  violent  headache;  pain  in

lumbar  region;  in  arms;  in  legs;  1.  side  of  throat.
At  10  A.M. :  yawning,  gaping,  stretching  out,  then  shake.
During  day:  voiding  urine  every  hour;  heavy  pressure

directly  above  1.  ovary.
Afternoon:  pressing  in  head  <.
After  3  p.m.:  chilly  feeling  in  lumbar  region.
Evening:  pressing  in  head  <;  hacking  cough.
^^  Temperature  and  Weather. Hot  drinks:  longing  for.
Fresh  air:  pressing  in  head  >.
Cold  drinks:  longing  for.
Cold  air:  pressing  in  head  <.
*"  Fever. ■  Chilly  down  back,  when  changing  position  ever  so

little.
■  General  coldness  of  whole  body.
llChill  begins  in  small  of  back,  and  spreads  over  body;

violent shaking, with comparatively little coldness;

bone  pains ;  thirst  in  chill  and  heat ;  nails  blue.
I  I  Skin  hot  and  dry  with  fever;  hot  to  touch  in  face._  _
I  I  Fever  protracted,  with  bone  pains,  nausea  and  vomiting,
followed  by  slight  sweat,  mostly  about  forehead  and

head.
Heat  with  thirst.

I  Sweat:  principally  about  forehead;  chilly  when  attempt-
ing to  shift  position.
I  Hectic  fever,  with  night  sweats ;  pulse  feeble  but  regular.
I  I  Pulse ranged from 80 to 100 ; full and bounding.

VOL.  V. — 16.


EUPATOREUM  PURPUREUM.  242

I  Chill  commences  in  small  of  back  and  extends  from  this
point  up  and  down  body  simultaneously;  slightest  move-
ment while  covered,  or  draft  of  air  blowing  upon  patient,
j)roduces  a  transient  return  of  chill  after  it  has  appar-
ently passed  away,  and  after  the  fever  has  set  in ;  this
is  also  the  case  during  the  sweat,  but  not  so  marked ;
severe  bone  pains. ^Intermittent  fever.

■  During  morning,  headache,  pain  in  lumbar  region,  arms,
legs,  and  1.  side  of  throat ;  after  3  p.m.,  chilly  feeling  in
lumbar  region,  extending  up  as  far  as  between  shoulder-
blades,  cold  hands  and  feet,  finger-nails  blue,  general
coldness ;  after  from  one  to  three  hours,  fever,  flushed
face,  suffused  eyes,  lachrymation,  running  at  nose ;  con-
stant thirst;  desire  for  cold  and  acid  drinks ;  loss  of  ap-
petite; restless  sleep,  with  frightful  dreams.

I  At  10  A.M.,  every  other  day,  begins  to  yawn,  gape,  stretch
out,  and  then  to  shake ;  coldness  appears  to  commence
about  trunk  first,  while  hands  and  feet  become  so  in
half  or  three-quarters  of  an  hour  afterwards ;  finger  and
toe-nails  become  blue ;  child  does  not  shake  continually
during  the  chill,  but  appears  to  shudder  at  intervals  for
a  moment  or  so;  after  two  hours  slight  fever  with  thirst,
both  continuing  about  an  hour  and  followed  by  perspi-
ration, particularly  about  upper  portion  of  body.
^Quotidian  intermittent.
^^  Attacks,  Periodicity. Chill  at  different  times  of  day.

At  intervals  for  a  moment  or  so :  child  shakes.

Every  few  minutes :  sighing.

Every  half  hour  during  day :  evacuates  bladder.

Every  hour  during  day:  voiding  urine.

Every  other  day :  chills.
*^  Locality  and  Direction.  Left:  falling  to  side;  dull,  ach-
ing pain  through  temporal  region ;  thumping  pain  on
occipital  bone;  pain  from  shoulder  to  occiput;  boring
pain  on  side  of  head;  pain  in  side  of  throat;  swelling
and  fulness  in  stomach;  soreness  of  whole  abdomen  <
on  side;  cutting  pain  two  inches  above  ovary;  a  smart,
quick,  jerking  motion  in  ovary;  heavy  pressure  above
ovary;  cutting  pain  in  neck,  from  shoulder  to  occiput;
neuralgic  pains  side  of  hip  and  back;  leg  weak;  shoot-
ing pain  in  course  of  sciatic  nerve.

Right:  leg  numb;  neuralgia  of  knee  or  shoulder.

Right  to  left:  pressing  in  head;  neuralgia  of  knee  or
shoulder.

From  below  upwards: sore  pain  directly  within spine;
neuralgic  pains  hip  and  back.
"^Sensations. As  though  tendons  flying  round  and  round;
as  if  falling  to  1.  side;  as  if  head  were  moving  in  all


243  EUPATOREUM  PURPUREUM.

directions;  vertex  as  though  lifting  up  from  adjoining
parts;  head  feels  as  though  she  had  a  bad  cold;  ears  feel
as  though  they  were  full;  numb  feeling  of  tongue,  as  if
caused  by  aconite;  throat  feels  as  if  having  swallowed
tobacco;  throat  feels  as  if  having  been  scalded  by  swal-
lowing some  hot  substance ;  bowels  hard  as  a  rock ;  feel-
ing as  though  bowels  must  be  moved  immediately  with-
out being  able  to  do  so;  external  generative  organs  feel
as  though  wet;  grating  sensation  in  chest;  as  if  she  had
walked  a  long  journey;  as  though  her  heels  were  crowd-
ing through  her  boots;  as  if  bones  were  broken.

Pain:  from  1.  shoulder  to  occiput;  in  1.  side  of  throat;  in
bowels;  from  hip  and  back  upwards;  in  arms  and  legs.

Violent: headache;  bone  pains.

Cutting  pain:  in  kidneys ;  in  bladder;  in  back;  two  inches
above  1.  ovary ;  in  neck.

Shooting  pain :  in  course  of  1.  sciatic  nerve.

Boring  pain:  in  1.  side  of  head.

Stitching  pain:  in  1.  side  of  head.

Gnawing: at  stomach;  in  joints;  in  hip  bone;  in  limbs.

Neuralgic  pains:  1.  side  of  hip  and  back;  of  r.  shoulder;
of  r.  knee.

Dull,  deep  pain :  in  kidneys.

Rolling  and  twisting  pain  :  in  bowels.

Distressing  pain :  in  lumbar  region.

Crampy  pains:  in  pit  of  stomach ;  in  stomach.

Colic  pain: over  whole  abdomen.

Rheumatic  pains: from  place  to  place;  in  lumbar  region.

Labor-like  pains: in  back.

Burning  heat: in  face;  in  throat;  in  bladder;  in  urethra.

Sore  pain: directly  within  spine.

Smarting: in  throat;  in  bladder;  in  urethra.

Fine  pricking  sensation:  on  scalp;  in  end  of  tongue;  on
posterior  part  of  tongue.

Soreness:  of  scalp;  of  throat;  over  whole  abdomen;  all
over; in  bronchi.

Dull  pain: in  head.

Dull  aching: in  bladder;  in  kidneys;  in  sacrum.

Dull,  hammering  pain :  in  1.  side  of  head.

Beating : in  1.  side  of  head.

Heavy  pain: in  head.

Constriction : over  frontal  region.

Tense  pain: over  1.  ovary.

Pressure: upon  rectum;  upon  bladder;  above  1.  ovary.

Heaviness: upon  rectum.

Heat: in  bronchi.

Roughness: in  throat.

Dryness:  in  throat.


EUPATOREUM  PURPUREUM.  244

Fluttering:  in  throat-pit;  of  heart.

Fulness:  in  throat;  in  bowels;  in  bladder.

Dizzy  feeling:  in  head;  over  whole  body.

Light  feeling:  in  head.

Uneasiness:  in  region  of  bladder;  in  limbs.

Tenderness :  of  scalp.

Chronic  irritation:  of  bladder.

Squeaking:  in  ears.

Rumbling:  in  bowels.

Lame  feeling:  in  nape  of  neck.

Numbness:  of  legs;  <  in  groin;  in  limbs.

Numb  feeling:  of  tongue.

Itching:  of  scalp.
**  Tissues. Through  the  spinal  nervous  system  it  produces  a
state  of  muscular  system  similar  to  rheumatism ;  it  prob-
ably affects  the  anterior  portion  of  spinal  cord  the  most.

Through  the  renal  plexus,  this  remedy  has  a  specific  and
special  action  upon  the  kidneys,  acting  as  a  powerful
diuretic,  producing  great  increase  of  urinary  secretion ;
large  doses  produce  vesical  irritation,  with  frequent  de-
sire to  urinate,  which  is  very  urgent  and  painful ;  urine
loaded  with  mucus,  and  high-colored  and  scanty.

■  Distressing  dyspnoea;  whole  body  and  extremities  ex-
tremely oedematous ;  secretion  of  urine  very  scanty,  only
3  or  4  ounces  in  twenty-four  hours ;  no  organic  disease
discernible;  urine  however  slightly  albuminous;  pulse
feeble  but  regular ;  extremities  cold ;  considerable  gen-
eral prostration.  ^Droj^sy.
^^  Touch.  Passive  Motion.  Injuries.  After  riding  four
miles  a  very  rough  road,  with  much  jolting  and  shak-
ing, while  pregnant,  violent  dysuria.
*^  Stages  of  Life,  Constitution.  Infant,  aet.  2  weeks ;  reten-
tion of  urine.

Babe,  set.  11  months,  living  in  a  miasmatic  district,  is  pale^
wan,  debilitated ;  intermittent  fever.

Girl,  set.  2J  years,  delicate,  pale,  frail,  living  in  a  mias-
matic district,  was  seized  with  convulsions,  followed  by
paroxysm  of  intermittent  fever.

Girl,  £et.  6  years ; intermittent  fever.

Miss  C.,  set.  20 ; intermittent  fever.

,Mrs.  P.,  pregnant  7  months,  after  riding  over  a  rough  road
and  being  greatly  jolted  and  shaken  ;  cystitis.

Elias  Stafford,  after  enlisting  in  army  took  violent  cold ;
chronic  cystitis.

Old  gentleman;  twice  had  attacks  of  dropsy ;  dropsy.
*^ Relations. Compare:  Apoci^n.  (dropsy),  Cann.  sat,  Canthar.,
Copaiba,  Ferrum  and  Senecio  (renal  symptoms).


245 EUPATOEEUM  PURPUREUM.— EUPHORBIUM.

EUPHORBIUIW.

Gum  Euphorbium.  Euphorhiacese.-

The  acrid  resinous  exudation  of  a  plant  native  to  Morocco.

Was  strongly  recommended  by  Mesue  in  diseases  of  the  joints,  and  for  noises
in  the  ears.

Clinical  Authorities. — Headache,  Berridge,  Kaue's  Eec,  1875,  p.  208-
Cataract,  Bojanus,  Allen  &  Norton,  Ophtli.  Therap. ;  Crumbling  of  teeth,  Hartmann,
Eiick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  1,  p.  461 ;  Toothache,  Eiickert,  Gutraann,  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  1,  p.
461 ;  Epidemic  influenza.  Wells,  Raue's  Eec,  1873,  p.  106;  Cough,  Chapman,  B.  J.
H.,  vol.  8,  p.  34 ;  Spasmodic  cough,  Chapman,  B.  J.  H.,  vol.  8,  p.  34 ;  Coccygeal  affec-
tion with  diarrhoea,  W.  P.  Wesselhceft,  MSS. ;  Erysipelas,  (2  cases)  Eaue,  Eaue's
Eec,  1870,  p.  135.

^  Mind.  Earnest,  quiet,  reflective  mood ;  seeks  quiet,  though
with  inclination  to  work.

Anxious,  apprehensive,  solicitous  mood.

Temporary  attacks  of  craziness,  insists  upon  saying  his
prayers  at  the  tail  of  his  horse ;  knows  his  freaks  and
wants  to  be  by  himself  and  in  silence.

Imagines  he  sees  the  same  man  walking  after  him  that  he
sees  walking  before  him.
^  Sensorium. Vertigo  when  standing  or  walking  in  open  air.
^  Inner  Head. Dull,  stupefying,  pressive  pain  in  forehead.

Sticking  headache,  especially  in  forehead.

Tensive  pressure  in  head,  especially  in  forehead  and  cer-
vical muscles.

Screwed-in  sensation  in  whole  of  brain  and  in  zygomata,
with  toothache.

Headache  as  though  head  would  be  pressed  asunder.

■  Bruised  pain  in  head,  especially  in  occiput  and  forehead,

<  in  morning,  >  by  cold  applications.

Sensation  of  soreness,  as  if  beateii,  in  back  part  of  head;

<  in  morning; when  lying; from  heat; sitting;  in
rest ;  >  by  motion  and  cooling  head.

^  Outer  Head,  l Erysipelas  of  head  and  face,  with  digging,
boring,  and  gnawing  pains,  followed,  when  ameliorated,
by  creeping  and  itching  of  parts ;  considerable  swelling
of  affected  parts,  with  small  vesicles  discharging  a  yel-
lowish fluid.

■  Erysipelatous  inflammation  efface  and  external  head.

*  Sight  and  Eyes, Everything  appears  larger  than  it  really


EUPHORBIUM.  246

is ;  even  in  walking  he  raises  his  legs  more  than  is  neces-
sary, because  he  imagines  he  has  to  step  over  elevations.

Diplopia ;  seeing  a  person  walk  before  him  he  imagines
he  sees  the  same  man  walking  after  him.

I  Lens  milk  white;  cannot  see  to  go  alone,  though  sees
better  on  a  dark  day. ^Cataract.

I  Biting  and  smarting  of  eyes,  with  lachrymation.

Inflammation  of  eyes,  with  itching  of  eyelids  and  canthi,
which  are  excoriated.

Feeling  of  great  dryness  in  eyes  with  profuse  discharge.

Purulent  discharge  from  eyes.

■  Chronic  ophthalmia ;  lids  pain  and  itch  severely,  are  wet

and  agglutinated.
Pale-red  inflammation  of  eyelids ;  with  nightly  secretion

of  matter  which  agglutinates  them.
Swelling  of  lids,  with  tearing  above  eyebrows,  on  opening

eyes.
Upper  lids  sink  down ;  they  close  irresistibly,  with  reeling

in  head.
^  Hearing  and  Ears. Roaring  in  ears,  at  night.
Ringing  in  the  ear.

I  Buzzing  in  r.  ear,  cannot  sleep  at  night.
^  Smell  and  Nose. Sneezing.

Fluent  coryza,  without  sneezing.

Discharge  of  a  quantity  of  mucus  from  posterior  nares.
^  Upper  Face. Paleness  of  face ;  sickly  look.
White,  oedema-like  swelling  of  the  cheeks.
iRed,  inflamed  swelling  of  cheek,  with  boring,  gnawing,

and  digging  from  gum  into  ear ;  itching  and  crawling  in

cheek  when  the  pain  is  relieved.
I  Red  inflammatory  swelling  of  cheek,  with  sensation  of

burning  heat.

■  Excessive  red  swelling  of  cheek,  with  many  yellow  vesi-

cles upon it,  which open and  discharge  a  yellowish
moisture.
■Erysipelas  of  cheeks,  preceded  by  alternating  chills  and
heat ;  constrictive  headache,  especially  in  occiput ;  and
burning,  stinging  and  itching  of  parts ;  yellow  blisters.

■  ■Erysipelatous  inflamed  swelling  of  cheek,  with  vesicles

as  large  as  peas  filled  with  yellow  liquid.
^^  Teeth  and  Gums.  "Throbbing,  beating  pains,  and  sensa-
tion as  if  teeth  were  being  screwed  together ;  under  eye-
tooth  a  swelling  extremely  sensitive  to  touch,  which  ul-
timately developed  into  an  abscess;  cheek  greatly
swollen  and  inflamed. /^Toothache.

■  Aching,  stitching,  or  boring  pains,  with  erysipelatous

swelling  of  cheek ;  crumbling  of  teeth. /^Toothache.
I  I  Toothache,  as  if  screwed  in,  in  a  hollow  tooth,  with  jerk-
ing, as  if  it  would  be  torn  out.


247  EUPHORBIUM.

I  Toothache  <  when  touched  or  when  masticating.

I  The  teeth  crumble  off.

^^  Taste  and  Tongue. Flat  taste  in  mouth,  after  breakfast;

white-coated  tongue.
^"  Inner  Mouth. Dryness  of  the  mouth  without  thirst.
Taste  in  mouth  as  if  it  was  lined  with  rancid  grease.
Much  tenacious  mucus  in  mouth,  after  midday  sleep.
Ptyalism  preceded  by  shivering  or  with  inclination  to
vomit;  shuddering  and  griping  in  stomach;  saliva  tastes
salt.
13  Throat. Scraping  and  rawness  in  throat.

Burning  in  throat  as  from  hot  coal,  extending  to  stomach,

with  pain  and  anxiousness.
Burning  in  the  throat  and  stomach  as  if  a  flame  were
rushing  out.
^*  Appetite,  Thirst. Desires,  Aversions, i  Great  hunger,
the  stomach  hanging  down  relaxed  and  abdomen  feeling
hollow.
Great  thirst  for  cold  drinks.
^^  Eating  and  Drinking. Chilly  when  beginning  to  eat.

Drowsiness  after  dinner.
'^  Hiccough,  Belching,  Nausea  and  Vomiting. Profuse
empty  eructations.
Nausea  with  shuddering.
Vomiting  with  diarrhoea.
^^  Scrobiculum  and  Stomach, i  Relaxation  of  stomach,  it
hangs  down  loose.
Spasmodic  constriction  in  stomach,
■  Burning  like  fire  in  stomach  and  abdomen.

I I  Inflammation  of  stomach;  erysipelatous  gastritis.

^^  Abdomen. Sensation  of  emptiness  in  abdomen  as  after  an

emetic;  in  morning.
Spasmodic  flatulent  colic,  in  morning  in  bed,  with  pain  as

if  abdomen  was  pressed  asunder,  >  by  leaning  his  head

upon  elbows  and  knees.
Excessive  colic  and  tympanitis.
Griping  through  whole  intestinal  canal,  followed  by  thin

stool,  with  burning  itching  about  rectum.
Anxious  SOTO  aching  in  lower  abdomen.
Pinching  pain  on  posterior  portion  of  ilium.
Pressive  pain  in  inguinal  region.
Affections  of  1.  abdominal  ring.

Violent  sprained  and  lame  pain  in  1.  side  of  pubis,  extend-
ing to  thigh,  on  stretching  the  limb  after  sitting.
Tearing  pain  in  1.  groin,  as  from  a  sprain,  while  standing.
^^  Stool  and  Rectum. Diarrhoea,  with  tenesmus,  burning  at

anus,  and  soreness  in  abdomen.
Stools like glue, painful and  flatulent, after previous

itching  of  rectum.


EUPHORBIUM.  248

Stool  first  thin,  then  knotty.

Constipation  from  torpidity  of  bowels ;  hard  stool,  difficult

to  pass.
Violent  itching  of  rectum  during  urgent  desire  for  stool,

and  after  evacuation.
Burning  sore  pain  around  anus.
^^  Urinary  Organs. Hemorrhoids  of  the  bladder.

Frequent  desire  to  urinate  with  slight  discharge  of  urine.

Strangury.

Itching  stitch  in  external  portion  of  urethra  between  acts

of  urinating.
White  sediment  in  the  urine.
^^  Male  Sexual  Organs. Erections  without  sexual  desire.
Voluptuous  itching  of  prepuce.
Discharge  of  prostatic  fluid  from  a  relaxed  penis.
I  I  Chronic  gonorrhoea  when  the  discharge  is  mixed  with

blood.
^^  Female  Sexual  Organs. Ovaritis.

Itching  of  the  nions  veneris.
^  Voice  and  Larynx. Trachea  and  Bronchia, b  Chills,

headache,  frontal  and  occipital,  with  stiffness  of  cervical

muscles; pains  in  back  and  limbs; general  malaise;

prostration ;  watery  discharge  from  eyes  and  nose,  with

burning  and  smarting;  also  burning  and  smarting  in

trachea,  with  profuse  secretion  of  mucus; tickling  in

larynx  with  cough. ^Influenza.
Cough, caused by burning tickling in upper part of

trachea.
^^  Respiration. Oppression  of  breathing,  as  if  chest  were  not

wide  enough.
^  Cough. Dry,  hollow  cough,  from  tickling  in  chest  and  throat
Constant,  dry,  titillating,  hacking  cough,  day  and  night

with  lachrymation.
•Severe  spasmodic  cough,  day  and  night,  interrupting

sleep,  and  greatly  wearing  him  out;  cough  dry,  with

stitches  which  seem  to  proceed  from  pit  of  stomach  to

both  sides  of  chest.
Dry  cough  day  and  night;  sputa  copious  only  in  morning.
I  Cough  with  asthma.
^''  Inner  Chest and Lungs. Warm  feeling  in  middle  of

chest,  as  if  hot  food  had  been  swallowed.
Sensation  as  if  left  lobe  of  lung  was  adhering.
Burning  and  stitching  in  1.  side  of  chest,  during  rest,  >

by  motion.
^  Heart,  Pulse  and  Circulation. Sinking  pulse.
^  Outer  Chest. Stitch-like  pressure  upon  sternum  while  sit-
ting and  standing.
Heaviness  in  pectoral  muscles  especially  when  turning

body  to  the  right  side.


249  EUPHORBIUM.

•^^  Neck  and  Back. Pain  in  back ;  a  pressure  in  the  muscles.
Sensation  in  lumbar  region  or  joints,  as  if  paralyzed.
iPainfulness  of  coccyx  as  if  in  the  bone,  <  on  rising  from

sitting  and  beginning  to  move ;  sensitive  to  touch ;  three

times  daily  diarrhoeic  stools,  which  <  pain  in  coccyx.
^^  Upper  Limbs. Scarlet  red  streaks  on  1.  forearm,  itching

when  touched.
Paralytic tightness in shoulder-joint, mornings, from

moving  arm.
Pressive  pain  in  upper  arm,  on  outer  side  above  elbow ;

in  ball  of  r.  thumb.
Scarlet  streaks  on  1.  forearm,  disappearing  when  passing

finger  over  them.
Cramp  pain  in  muscles  of  r.  hand  when  writing.
Paralytic  pain  in  wrist  on  moving  it.
■^  Lower  Limbs, l  Burning  pain  at  night  in  bones  of  hip  and

thigh ;  frequently  awakened  thereby  several  nights  in

succession.
iPains  in  hip  joint  on  moving,  as  if  sprained;  burning

pain  at  night  in  femur  and  hip  joint.
I  iTearing,  stinging,  pressing  pains,  >  by  motion,  <  during

rest;  paralytic  sensation,  with  difficulty  of  rising  from

seat. ^Ischias.
Pain  as  of  a  sprain  in  1.  thigh,  <  walking,  >  standing.
Great  weakness  of  legs.
Cold  perspiration  on  legs  in  morning.
Feet  go  to  sleep  when  sitting.
Sore  pains  in  r.  heel  when  walking  out  doors.
^*  Limbs  in  General. Rheumatic  pains  in  limbs.
"^^Rest. Position. Motion. Rest: soreness  in head <;

burning  and  stitching  in  1.  side  of  chest;  tearing  pain

<; rheumatic  pains  <.
Sleeps  with  arms  over  head.
Lying:  soreness  in  head  <  ;  ulcers  <.
Sitting:  soreness  in  head <; stitch-like  pressure  upon

sternum; feet  go  to  sleep;  ulcers  <.
Leaning  head  on  elbows  and  knees  >  pain  in  abdomen.
Standing: vertigo; tearing pain in groin; stitch-like

pressure; pain  in  thigh  >.
Motion:  soreness  in  head  > ;  burning  in  chest  > ;  heavi-
ness in  muscles  when  turning  body;  of  wrist,  paralytic

pain;  pain  in  hip  joints;  tearing  pains  >  ;  ulcers  >.
Beginning to move : paralytic  weakness in  joints < ;

ulcers  <.
Opening  eyes:  tearing  above  eyebrows.
Changing  position:  ulcers  <.
Rising  from  sitting:  painfulness  of  coccyx  <.
Writing:  cramp  pain  in  r.  hand.


EUPHORBIUM.  250'

Stretching  limb  after  sitting :  violent  pain.

Walking:  vertigo;  pain  in  thigh  <;  ulcers  >.
^^  Nerves. Weariness,  faintness ;  whole  body  seems  relaxed
and  tired,

I  I  Prostration  ;  fainting  spells.

Periodic  attacks  of  cramps.

Writers'  cramp.

Convulsions,  with  loss  of  consciousness  and  congestion  of
blood  to  head ;  hot  skin ;  slow,  full  pulse.
^^  Sleep. Sleepiness  during  the  day.

Sleeplessness,  with  tremulous  tossing  about  before  mid-
night, roaring  in  ears,  unable  to  close  eyes.

Sudden  starting  up  as  from  an  electric  shock  at  night,
while  lying  awake  in  bed.

Anxious,  vivid  dreams  at  night,  causing  him  to  cry  out,,
whereupon  he  awakes.
^  Time.  Morning:  headache  <;  sensation  of  soreness  <;
sensation  of  emptiness  in  abdomen ;  flatulent  colic  in
bed;  sputa  copious;  cold  perspiration  on  legs;  chill  of
whole  body;  sweat  over  whole  body;  sweat  over  neck,
thighs  and  legs;  sweat  in  bed;  ulcers  <.

Day: spasmodic  cough;  sleepiness;  great  heat.

Before  midnight: sleeplessness.

Night:  roaring  at  night;  cannot  sleep;  spasmodic  cough;
burning  pain  in  bones  of  hip  and  thigh;  awakened  by
pain;  burning  pain  in  femur  and  hip  joint;  sudden,
starting  up  in  bed;  vivid  dreams.
^^  Temperature  and  Weather.  Heat:  soreness  in  head  <;
near  fire  <  ulcers.

Open  air:  vertigo  when  walking;  walking,  sore  pains  in
heel;  chill  when  walking.

Cooling  head  >  soreness.

Cold  application: headache  >.
^^  Fever. Chill :  of  whole  body  in  morning ;  while  walking  in
open  air;  when  beginning  to  eat.

Constant  chilliness,  with  constant  sweat.

Chill  with  sweat  at  the  same  time.

Shivering  over  whole  body;  over  back,  with  glowing
cheeks  and  cold  hands.

The  body  is  cold,  with  internal  burning  heat

Great  heat  the  whole  day ;  all  the  clothes  seem  burden-
some, even  his  whole  body  is  too  heavy  for  him,  as  if  he
had  carried  a  great  load.

Heat  with  aversion  to  be  dressed,  the  clothing  feels  too
heavy.

Heat  only  on  the  head.

Sweat:  in  morning,  extending  from  feet  over  whole  body;,
some  thirst.


251  EUPHORBIUM.

Morning-sweat,  on  neck,  thighs  and  legs.

Sweat  only  on  thighs.

Cold  sweat  on  legs.

Sweat  in  morning  in  bed.

Usually  a  morning  paroxysm.
^  Attacks,  Periodicity.  Three  times  daily:  diarrhoeic  stools.
*^  Locality  and  Direction.  Left :  affections  of  abdominal
ring;  sprained  and  lame  pain  in  side  of  pubis;'  tearing
pain  in  groin;  as  if  lobe  of  lung  was  adhering;  burn-
ing, stitching  in  side  of  chest;  scarlet  streaks  on  fore-
arm; pain  as  from  a  sprain  in  thigh;  burning  heat  on
either  cheek,  generally  left.

Right:  buzzing  in  ear;  turning  body  to  side;  heaviness
of  muscles;  cramp  pain  in  muscle  of  hand;  sore  pains
in  heel.
^Sensations.  As  though  head  would  be;  pressed  asunder;
soreness  as  if  beaten  in  back  part  of  head ;  as  if  teeth
were  being  screwed  together;  jerking  in  tooth  as  if  it
would  be  torn  out;  taste  as  if  mouth  w^as  lined  with
rancid  grease;  burning  in  throat  as  from  a  hot  coal;  as
if  flames  were  rushing  out  of  stomach  and  throat;  empti-
ness as  if  after  an  emetic ;  as  if  abdomen  was  pressed
asunder;  as  if  chest  were  not  wide  enough;  feeling  in
middle  of  chest  as  if  hot  food  had  been  swallowed ;  as
if  left  lobe  of  lung  was  adhering;  in  lumbar  region  or
joints  as  if  paralyzed;  pain  in  hip  joint  as  if  sprained;
pain  as  of  a  sprain  in  1.  thigh ;  sudden  starting  up  in
bed  as  from  an  electric  shock;  as  if  a  thin  cord  lay
under  skin.

Pain:  in  eyelids;  in  stomach;  in  back  and  limbs;  pain-
fulness  of  coccyx;  in  hip  joint.

Lancinating  pains:  on  skin.

Tearing:  above  eyebrows  ;  in  1.  groin;  in  limbs.

Beating  pain:  in  teeth.

Gnawing  pain:  in  head;  from  gum  to  ear.

Stitching  pains:  in  cheek;  from  pit  of  stomach  to  sides  of
chest;  in  1.  side  of  chest.

Sticking  pain:  in  forehead.

Throbbing  pains:  in  teeth.

Digging  pain:  in  head;  from  gum  to  ear.

Boring:  in  head;  from  gum  to  ear;  in  cheek.

Pinching  pain  :  on  posterior  portion  of  ilium.

Griping:  in  stomach;  through  intestinal  canal.

Cramp  pain :  in  muscles  of  r.  hand ;  writers'  cramp.

Screwed-in  sensation: in  brain;  in  zygomata.

Spasmodic:  flatulent  colic.

Stich-like  pressure :  upon  sternum.

Stinging  pain:  in  limbs.


EUPHORBIUM.  252

Itching  stitch:  in  external  portion  of  urethra  between  acts

of  urinating.
Constriction:  in  head;  of  stomach.
Burning  heat:  in  cheek.
Burning :  in  head ;  in  throat ;  in  stomach  and  abdomen ;

about  rectum  at  anus;  in  side  of  chest;  in  bones  of  hip

and  thigh;  in  femur  and  hip  joint;  in  bones.
Stinging :  in  head ;  in  inner  organs ;  in  bones.
Heat:  on  head.
Biting  and  stinging :  on  skin.
Biting:  of  eyes.
Smarting  of  eyes.
Soreness:  in  abdomen;  in  r.  heel.

Pressive  pain :  in  forehead ;  in  inguinal  region ;  in  limbs.
Tensive pressure: in head; in forehead; in cervical

muscles.
Anxious  sore  aching :  in  lower  abdomen.
Dull,  stupefying  pain:  in  forehead.
Bruised  pain :  in  head.
Rheumatic  pains:  in  limbs.
Sprained  lame  pain:  in  1.  side  of  pubis.
Scraping:  in  throat.
Feeling  of  dryness:  of  eyes.
Rawness:  in  throat.
Pressure:  in  muscles.
Paralytic  tightness:  in  shoulder  joint;  pain  in  w^rist;  in

joints.
Heaviness:  in  pectoral  muscles.
Shuddering:  in  stomach.
Reeling:  in  head.
Buzzing:  in  r.  ear.
Roaring  and  ringing  in  ears.
Crawling:  in  cheek.
Tickling:  in  larynx;  in  upper  part  of  trachea;  in  chest;

in  throat.
Feet  go  to  sleep  when  sitting.
Itching:  of  head;  of  eyelids;  in  cheek;  about  rectum;  of

prepuce;  of  mons  veneris;  of  1.  forearm.
^  Tissues. Chronic  inflammatory  conditions  of  mucous  mem-

Vjrane.
Burning  in  the  bones.

Paralytic  weakness  in  joints,  <  when  beginning  to  move.
Caries  and  other  diseases  of  bones.
Inflammation  and  swelling,  followed  by  cold  gangrene;

chilliness  and  shuddering;  gangrene  of  old  persons.
Old,  torpid  uicers; warts; blood-boils;  facial  erysipelas.
'^  Touch. Passive  Motion. Injuries. Touch:  <  toothache;

coccyx  sensitive  to  touch ; <  ulcers.


253  EUPHORBIUM.

Clothes  too  heavy.
^^  Skin. Sensation  as  if  a  thin  cord  lay  under  skin.

Biting,  stinging,  gnawing  and  burning  itching.

Burning  itching  which  induces  scratching.

Biting  and  stinging  on  skin ;  biting  exanthema;  red  in-
flammatory swelling;  sensation  of  burning  heat  on
either  cheek,  generally  1.  side.

Eruptions  on  hairy  and  covered  parts.

1 1  Erysipelas  bullosa.

Blood-boils;  chronic  and  erysipelatous  eruptions;  warts.

Swelling  of  face  with  pea-sized  yellow  vesicles ;  old,  indo-
lent ulcers ;  blood-boils.

Old,  torpid  ulcers;  lancinating  and  lacerating  pains;  ulcers
turning  black  ;  insensible  ulcers ;  biting  in  ulcer  ;  gan-
grenous ulcers  ;  <  in  morning ;  on  getting  heated  near
Are ;  lying  down ;  changing  position ;  beginning  to
move ;  while  sitting ;  when  touching  them  ;  >  from
motion  and  walking.
^'^  Stages  of  Life,  Constitution. Secondary  syphilis.

Girl ;  toothache.

Girl,  set.  18 ;  affection  of  coccyx  and  diarrhoea.

Man,  ait.  55 ;  cataract.
^  Relations. Antidoted  by  Camphor,  Opium,  large  quantities
of  lemon  juice.

It  antidotes :  Arsen.,  Nux  vom.

Compatible:  after  Arum  triph.  (in  hay  fever);  after  GraphiL
(in  erysipelas);  Laches.,  Pulsat.,  Sepia,  Sulphur.

Compare; Colchic,  Elat,  Tart,  em.,  Veratr.


EUPHRASIA.  254

EUPHRASIA.

Eyebright.  Scrophulariacese.

Provings  bv  Hahnemann,  etc. See  Allen's  Encyclopedia,  vol.  4,  p.  254.

Clinical  Authoeities. — Cataract,  Eummel,  A.  H.  Z.,  vol.  35,  p.  205;  Iritis,
Stein,  Eaue's  Eec,  1873,  p.  70;  Rheumatic  iritis,  Dudgeon,  Norton's  Ophthalmic
Ther. ;  Opacity  o/ co?-?iea,  Tvretschmar,  A.  H.  Z,  vol.  1,  p.  40;  Opacities  of  cornea  ;
conjunctivitis,  Eummel,  A.  H.  Z.,  vol.  3,  p.  25 ;  Opacity  of  cornea,  Knorr,  A.  H.  Z.,
vol.  5,  p.  163 ;  Opacity  of  cornea  after  attack  of  podagra,  Knorre,  B.  J.  H.,  vol.  6,  p.
360 ;  Staphyloma  of  the  cornea,  Deventer,  B.  J.  H.,  vol.  33,  p.  545  ;  Ulcer  of  cornea,,
Thorer,  B.  J.  H.,  vol.  6,  p.  359;  Puig,  Eaue's  Eec,  1871,  p.  58;  Thorer,
Etick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  1,  p.  233;  Ulceration  of  cornea,  Dunham,  Lectures  on  Mat.
Med.,  p.  101 ;  Keratitis,  Allen,  Payr.  Eaue's  Eec,  1872,  p.  70,  75 ;  Norton,  Eaue's
Eec,  1875,  p.  46  ;  Sensation  of  hair  on  cornea,  Payr,  Eaue's  Eec,  1870,  p.  106 ;  Hy-
drophthalmus  anterior.  Hunt,  Eaue's  Eec,  1872,  p.  75 ;  Ophthalmia,  Teller,  Eiick.
Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  5,  p.  106;  Frank,  B.  J.  H.,  vol.  1,  p.  358;  Ophthalmia  and  blindness,
Brlsley,  Hom.  Eev.,  vol.  10,  p.  104;  Ophthalmia,  Segin,  Horn.  Clinics,  vol.  1,  p.
98  ;  Catarrhal  ophthalmia  (4  cases),  Frank,  Weigel,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  1,  p.  310 ;
Rheumatic  ophthalmia  (2  cases),  Dudgeon,  B.  J.  H.,  vol.  22,  p.  355 ;  Strumous  oph-
thalmia, "VVatzke,  B.  J.  H.,  vol.  6,  p.  359;  Scrofulous  inflammation  of  eyes,  Kretzsch-
mar,  A.  H.  Z  ,  vol.  1,  p.  40;  Inflammation  of  eye,  Turrell,  Hom.  Clinics,  vol.  4,  p.
48 ;  Conjunctivitis,  Thorer,  Practische  Beitrage,  3,  17  ;  Lobethal,  A.  H.  Z.,  vol.  13,
p.  200;  Weizel,  Pract.  Beitrage,  4,  2,  97;  Conjunctiintis,  TiilfF,  H.  V.  S.,  3,  202;
H.  V.  S.,  3,  218 ;  Teller,  H.  V.  S.,  4,  60 ;  Blepharitis,  Norton,  N.  A.  J.  H.,  vol.  23,
p.  350 ;  Norton's  Opthal.  Tlierap.,  p.  82 ;  Lachrymation,  Gross,  Archives,  vol.  1,  p.
113;  Paralysis  of  third  nerve,  Norton,  B.  J.  H.,  vol.  34,  p.  377  ;  Paralysis  of  motor
oculi,  Norton,  N.  E.  M.  G.,  vol.  10,  p.  339;  iJrMweo/ei/e,  Turrell,  Eaue's  Eec,  1871,
p.  56  ;  Nasal  catarrh,  Hrg.,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  1,  p.  387 ;  Periodical  hard  sivelling
of  lip,  Bordenoll,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol  5,  p.  202;  Affection  of  lips,  Bordenoll,  A.  H.
Z.,  5,  3,  37:  Constipation,  Kippax,  Organon,  vol.  3,  p.  96;  Hooper,  Eaue's  Eec,
1875,  p.  160;  Prolapsus  ani,  Mohr,  Hah.  Mo.,  vol.  13,  p.  536;  Condylomata  of  anus,
Muller,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  5,  p.  558 ;  Cough,  Hrg.,  Balogh,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.
3,  p.  13;  Cough  after  influenza,  Balogh,  A.  H.  Z.,  vol.  2,  p.  108;  Cough,  catarrhal
fever,  measles,  Hartmann,  Therap.,  vol.  1,  p.  116;  Measles  (3  cases),  Boyce,  N.  A.
J.  H.,  vol.  3,  p.  91;  Tiilff,  Drysdale,  Boyce,  Euck.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  4,  p.  95;  Tiilff,
V.  J.  Schrift,  4,  266  ;  Miiller,  A.  H.  Z.,  49,  23.

^  Mind. Weakness  of  memory;  confusion  of  the  head.

Jiiert  hypochondriacal  mood,  takes  no  interest  in  his  sur-
roundings.
Taciturn,  disinclined  to  talk.
^  Sensorium. Vertigo:  with  heaviness  of  head; with ten-
dency to  fall.
'  Inner  Head. iDull  frontal  headache.


^55  EUPHRASIA.

Aching  pain  in  outer  part  of  head,  especially  forehead.
Dulness  of  heacl,  with  pressure  on  vertex.
Painful  bewilderment  in  head.
Confusion  and  bruised  pain  in  head.

■  Headache  in  evening  as  if  bruised,  with  coryza.
Pulsating  of  head  which  is  felt  externally.

■  Violent  beating  headache. ^Measles.

■  Headache,  as  if  head  would  burst,  with  dazzling  of  eyes,

from  sunlight.
Headache,  light  of  candle  seems  to  be  dark  and  to  flicker.

■  Stitches  in  brain.

■  ■Catarrhal  headache,  accompanied  by  profuse,  watery

discharge  from  eyes  and  nose.
^  Sight  and  Eyes. Dreams  of  fire,  lightning,  flames,  etc.

■  Eyes  very  sensitive  to  light,  and  candlelight.
■Vision  somewhat  dim,  as  through  a  veil,  in  evening.
Obscuration  of  vision  for  distant  objects;  while  walking

in  open  air.

Dimness  of  vision,  the  result  of  an  hysterical  condition;
profuse  lachrymation.

Dimness  of  vision  by  candlelight;  the  light  seems  to  varj^,
sometimes  burning  brightly,  sometimes  dimly.

Right  eye  so  weak  and  obscured  that  she  feared  she  would
not  be  able  to  sew;  after  some  minutes  a  stitch  extend-
ing from  forehead  out  of  same  eye,  followed  by  disap-
pearance of  obscuration.

Obscuration  of  eyes,  so  that  for  half  an  hour  he  was  unable
to  clearly  distinguish  objects;  everything  seemed  envel-
oped in  a  mist  and  to  move;  these  disappeared  after
three-quarters  of  an  hour,  and  gave  place  to  the  usual
burning.

Amblyoj)ia,  with  inflammation  of  conjunctiva  and  lids.

Sudden  and  momentary  obscuration  of  vision,  >  by  wink-
ing, caused  by  presence  of  opaque  mucus  upon  surface
of  cornea.

Diseased  eyes,  he  was  made  almost  blind.

'Stitches  in  eyeballs  from  bright  light.

■  Pressive cutting pain in eyes, extending to frontal

sinuses.
Pressure  and  tension  of  the  globe.
Contractive  pressure  in  eye,  whilst  walking  in  open  air.

■  ■Painful  pressure  in  inner  angle  of  1.  eye ;  lachrymation.

■  Violent  pressure  in  1.  eye,  with  lachrymation,  it  seems

smaller  and  weaker.

■  Pressure  in  eyes,  on  looking  at  candlelight.

■  ■Dry  pressure  in  eyes,  as  if  sleepy.

■  Stitching  pressure  in  eyes.

■  Burning  stitches  in  eyes.


EUPHRASIA.  256

I  Burning  in  eyes,  with  lachrymation.

I I  Frequent burning biting  in  eyes, obliging frequent
winking;  acrid  water  runs  from  them.

■  Sensation  as  if  dust  or  sand  were  in  eyes.

■  Sensation  as  if  a  hair  hung  over  eyes,  and  must  be  wiped

away. ^Keratitis.
Disagreeable  dryness  in  eyes.
I  Itching  of  eyes  on  going  out,  obliging  frequent  winking

and  wiping  of  eyes,  with  increased  lachrymation  in

afternoon.
iPain  in  eye,  alternating  with  pain  in  abdomen.
Cataract.

■  Pupils  much  contracted.

■  Violent  pressure  in  r.  eye,  extending  from  inner  can  thus,

with  much  lachrymation;  lids  seem  smaller,  pupil  dim-
mer, and  eye  seems  cold.

■  Pains  in  1.  eye,  diminished  vision;  sclerotica  shows  in-

jected vessels,  singly  or  in  bundles;  conjunctiva  slightly
reddened;  cornea  turbid,  ash-colored;  iris  discolored;
eye  looks  as  if  dead;  lachrymation;  sees  as  through  a
fog;  violent  periodical  pains.  ^Iritis.
iPheumatic  iritis,  with  constant  aching  and  occasional
darting  pain  in  eye,  always  <  at  night;  ciliary  injec-
tion, photophobia,  aqueous  humor  cloudy,  and  iris  dis-
colored and  bound  down  by  adhesion.

■  Kerato-iritis  after  injuries  and  surgical  operations  upon

eye;  stitching  pains;  burning,  smarting  lachrymation^
very  excoriating,  causing  varnished  appearance  of  tis-
sues with  which  it  comes  in  contact;  fluent  coryza;  in-
tense photophobia.

■  Feeling  as  though  cornea  was  covered  with  much  mu-

cus; it  obscures  his  vision  and  obliges  him  to  frequently
close  and  press  lids  together;  lids  swollen  and  red.

■  Sudden  and  momentary obscuration  of  vision, >  by

winking,  and  caused  by  pressure  of  opaque  mucus  upon
surface  of  cornea.

■  Hydrophthalmia  anterior;  irritation  of  conjunctiva,  re-

sulting from  bulging  of  cornea  and  circumjacent
sclerotic.

■  Meibomian  glands  much  inflamed  and  swollen;  on  albu-

ginea  an  inflammatory  focus  of  a  deep  red  color,  whence
proceeded  fasciculi  of  vessels  running  towards  middle
of  cornea  and  converging  at  a  deep  ulcer;  cornea  dim
and  conical  in  form;  iris  lighter  in  color  than  that  of
sound  eye;  pupil  greatly  contracted  but  perfectly  round;
no  photophobia  nor  morbid  secretions;  pressure  in  eye
when  looking  at  light.

■  Cornea  ulcerated;  ulceration  red  and  pufl"y;  lids  swollen,,


257  EUPHRASIA.

thickened,  deprived  of  their  cilise,  and  covered  with
small  ulcerations;  large  quantities  of  mucus,  clear  as
tears,  or  thick  like  pus,  flows  constantly  from  eyes;  in-
tense photophobia;  eye  only  painful  when  exposed  to
light,  producing  burning  sensation  with  flow  of  corrosive
tears,  and  a  feeling  of  a  foreign  substance  in  eyes;
affected  eyes  look  smaller  by  half  than  other  eyes.
■Ulcer  and  pannus  extending  from  above  downward  to
centre  of  cornea;  slight  dimness  of  cornea  with  profuse
smarting  lachrymation ;  profuse,  thick,  acrid  discharge;
lids  thick  and  red;  photophobia  and  pains  <  in  day-
light ;  blurring  of  eyes,  >  by  wiping.

■  Keratitis  pustulosa,  border  of  cornea  surrounded  by  small

superficial  ulcers.

■  ■Keratitis  pustulosa,  with  intense  photophobia  and  pro-

fuse purulent  discharge;  hot,  scalding  lachrymation.

■  Pustules  on  cornea,  which  are  very  vascular;  eyes  feel

heavy  and  sleepy.

■  Recurrent  pustular  inflammation  of  cornea,  moderate

photophobia,  lids  covered  with  matter.

■  Inflammation  of  eyes,  with  formation  of  opaque  spots  on

cornea ;  great  photophobia.

■  Opacity  of  the  cornea  after  mechanical  injuries;  bluish.
■Spots,  vesicles  and  ulcers  of  cornea;  pannus.

■  Catarrhal  or  strumous  inflammation  of  cornea  and  con-

junctiva.

■  Inflammation  of  r.  eye,  with  complete  obscuration  of

cornea ;  after  attack  of  gout.

■  For  four  months,  considerable  photophobia  of  both  eyes,

greater  in  evening;  redness  of  sclerotic  and  conjunctiva;
blood  vessels  very  numerous;  wounded  by  a  straw.

■  After an injury, severe  pain,  inflammation, excessive

lachrymation  and  burning;  tears  felt  burning;  intense
fluent  coryza;  thick  masses  accumulated  in  inner  cor-
ner of  ej^e;  pains  <  from  contact  of  air;  surface  of  eye
felt  as  if  studded  with  warts.

■  Conjunctiva  reddened,  vesicles  enlarged,  mucous  secre-

tion at  first  diminished,  but  speedily  increased,  finally
becoming  purulent  in  character.

■  Chemosis,  acrid  tears  and  coryza.

Acute  conjunctivitis;  after  first  stage,  lax  or  ecchymosed
tissue,  watery  mucus,  or  milky  secretion.

■Photophobia:  in  day  and  sunlight;  <  in  evening;  must
remain  in  darkened  room;  even  to  spasm  of  lids;  with
swollen,  agglutinated  lids;  thick  yellow  discharge  be-
tween lids.

■  Conjunctiva of  lids  and  eyeballs  red; injected  vessels

running  from  outer  and  inner  canthi  to  cornea,  resem-
VOL.  v.— 17.


EUPHRASIA.  258

bling  a  vascular  network ;  continual  itching  and  j^ain-
ful  sensation  as  of  a  grain  of  sand  at  outer  angle;  lach-
rymation;  photophobia;  pain  <  in  r.  eye;  coryza,  <
on  r.  side.  ^Ophthalmia  after  a  chill.
I  Conjunctivitis  pustulosa,  lids  much  swollen,  eruption  on
head  and  profuse  fluent  coryza.

I  Catarrhal  ophthalmia,  with  lachrymation  and  consider-

able mucous  discharge,  injection  of  conjunctiva,  phlyc-
tenulce  near  cornea,  at  same  time  coryza  and  pain  in
forehead.

I I  Ophthalmia  with  agglutination  in  morning ;  burning,
itching  and  smarting  pain;  cold  air  and  wind  cause
lachrjanation,  <  by  gaslight.

I  Fluent  coryza'  with  scalding  tears ;  aversion  to  light ;  <
in  evening  or  during  night  when  lying  down,  from
glare  of  daylight  or  sun;  >■  in  the  dark.

■Streaming  of  hot,  burning  tears  from  eyes,  with  great
photophobia;  profuse  running  from  nose  without  burn-
ing; cough  only  during  day. ^Measles.

I  I  Ophthalmia,  ej^es  suftused  wdth  tears;  painful,  dry  ulcer
on  r.  side  of  bridge  of  nose. ^Amenorrhoea.

■  Granular  ophthalmia,  with  or  without  pannus;  profuse

lachrymation  and  thick  discharge,  excoriating  lids  and
cheeks.
1  Rheumatic  inflammation  of  eyes,  almost  blinding  him.

■  Pterygium  extending  from  inner  canthus.

■  Ophthalmia  of  the  new  born.

■Great  dryness  of  lids  and  nose,  so  that  for  last  five  days
has  not  been  obliged  to  use  handkerchief.

■  Margins  of  lids  red,  with  sensation  of  dryness  in  them.

■  ■Burning  and  swelling  of  margins  of  lids;  distressing

sensation  of  dryness.

■  Lids  sensitive  and  swollen.

■  iRedness  and  swelling  of  margins  of  lids,  especially  of  1.;

at  times  itching  burning  in  them  with  increased  watery
secretion.

■  Lids  itch and  burn  with  profuse  acrid  lachrymation.

■  Lids  much  swollen,  with  a  fluent  coryza. ^Blepharitis.
Suppurating  lid-margins;  constant  winking  of  lids.

■  Acute  inflammation  of  lids,  with  acrid  muco-j)urulent

discharge. ^Blepharitis.

■  Liflammation  and  ulceration  of  margin  of  lids.

■  Violent  itching  of  lids,  with  catarrhal  ophthalmia.

■  Constant  desire  to  wink,  which  relieves  any  blurring  of

vision. ^Blepharitis.

■  Inflammation  and  swelling  of  Meibomian  glands.
■Secretion  of  tears  greatly  increased,  eyes  constantly  suf-
fused, tears  overflow  upon  face  and  run  down  cheek.


259  EUPHRASIA.

Burning,  smarting  lachrymation,  particularly  in  the  wind.

I  Troublesome  lachrymation,  remaining  after  affection  of
eyes  have  been  cured.

I  Fine  eruption  around  eyes,  parts  look  red  aud  puffy.

Paralysis  of  muscles  of  eyes  from  cold.

I  Paralysis  of  third  nerve.

I  Blurring  of  eyes,  >  by  winking.  ^Paralysis  of  motor  oculi.
^  Hearing  and  Ears. Ringing  in  ears.

Earache.
^  Smell  and  Nose, i  Violent  irritation  to  sneeze,  without  cold
or  apparent  cause.

■Sneezing,  wath  profuse  fluent  coryza.

I  Acute  coryza,  in  stage  of  serous  secretion,  where  there  is
redness  of  conjunctiva,  swelling  of  lids  and  watery  eyes.

I  Nasal  mucous  membrane  swollen,  with  abundant  secre-
tion of  water,  and  later  of  a  muco-purulent  substance,
with  sneezing  and  some  degree  of  dyspnoea.

Profuse  coryza,  with  smarting,  lachrymation  and  photo-
phobia, or  with  sneezing  and  discharge  of  mucus  from
anterior  and  posterior  nares;  j)rofuse,  fluent  coryza,  with
cough  and  expectoration  in  morning;  soreness  and
painfulness  of  inner  nose ;  eruptions  on  wings  of  nose ;
<  in  open  air; head  and  eye  symptoms  <  on  r.  side.

1  Profuse,  bland,  fluent  coryza,  with  scalding  tears  and
aversion  to  light ;  <  evening  and  during  night,  while
lying  down ; after  windy  w^eather.

■  I  Profuse  fluent  coryza,  in  morning,  with  much  cough  and
expectoration.

I  Cough  with  coryza,  heat  and  sensitiveness  of  nose ;  red-
ness of  eyes;  photophobia  and  lachrymation;  no  cough
at  night,  but  severe  in  morning;  <  in  fresh  air;  r.  side
of  head  not  affected. ^Bronchitis.

Pain  from  r.  to  1.  over  bridge  of  nose ;  1.  half  of  face  and
forehead  and  1.  eye  inflamed ;  earache.

Small  red  spots,  like  pimples,  on  upper  r.  side  of  nose,
twinging,  darting  pain  in  nose.

Flat  cancer  on  r.  side  of  nose.
^  Upper  Face. Redness  and  heat  of  fiice.

Stiffness  of  1.  cheek  wdren  talking  or  chewing,  with  sensa-
tion of  heat  and  stitches  therein.

Rash  in  face,  itching  in  warmth,  becoming  red  and  burn-
ing when  moistened.
^  Lower  Face, i Stiffness  of  upper  lip,  as  if  made  of  wood.
^^  Taste  and  Tongue. Imjjeded  sj^eech  from  lameness  and

stiffness  of  tongue.
^^  Abdomen. Frequent  colic.

^'^  Stool  and  Rectum, l  Fluent,  profuse  coryza,  with  slight
flow  of  tears  and  a  bright  red  eruption  upon  cheek,  <


EUPHRASIA.  260

in  afternoon  and  after  crying ;  persistent  constipation ;
stools  in  large  balls,  which  are  dry,  hard,  voided  with
great  difficulty  and  almost  tearing  anal  passage,

■  Severe  coryza;  much  sneezing,  profuse  bland  discharge

from  nose,  watery  excoriating  discharge  from  eyes,  pho-
tophobia, slight  cough ;  five  days  after  administration
of  Euphrasia  coryza  had  entirely  subsided,  but  a  pro-
fuse painless  diarrhoea  set  in  lasting  all  day,  after  last
stool,  a  prolapsus  ani  from  which  she  had  been  suffering
for  nine  months  disappeared  and  did  not  again  return.

Daily  stool,  but  it  is  hard  and  scanty.

Pressure  in  anus  while  sitting ;  hemorrhoids.

I  Old,  flat  condylomata  at  anus,  with  severe  burning ;  <
at  night.
"^  Urinary  Organs, i  i  Frequent  micturition.

Urine  too  often  and  copious.
"  Male  Sexual  Organs. Genital  organs  appear  drawn  in ;

pressure  above  pubes,  evenings.
"^  Female  Sexual  Organs. Menses  late,  scant,  and  of  short
duration.

Menses  painful,  lasting  only  one  hour,  time  regular.

Amenorrhoea,  with  inflammation  of  eyes  and  ulcer  on  r.
side  of  bridge  of  nose.

Condylomata,  with  stitching  and  itching,  especially  when
walking.
'^  Voice  and  Larynx. Trachea  and  Bronchia, b  A^oice
somewhat  hoarse,  in  morning.

■  Catarrhal  hoarseness.

■  Irritation  of  larynx,  impelling  him  to  cough,  followed  by

tensive  pressure  beneath  sternum.
■Abundant  mucous  secretion,  with  loose  cough,  and  aloud
bronchial  rale.

"^^  Respiration. ■  Deep  inspiration  difficult,  even  while  sitting.

-''  Cough.  ■  Cough  with  severe  coryza,  eyes  also  affected,  dur-
ing day  a  scanty  expectoration  with  occasional  difficult
respiration,  >  at  night,  <  again  in  morning  with  co-
pious expectoration.

■  Sudden  violent  cough,  caused  by  tickling  in  larynx,  ceas-

ing after  a  few  seconds.

■  No  cough  at  night;  as  soon  as  he  rises  from  bed  cough

begins  and  is  so  continuous  he  can  scarcely  get  his
breath,  >  when  he  again  lies  down ;  constant  tickling
in  larynx;  <  from  tobacco  smoke;  >  from  eating;
can  be  suppressed  by  a  sip  of  water.
Cough:  from  mucous  or  watery  vomiting;  came  on  after
hemorrhoids  had  disappeared ;  with  severe  coryza ;  eyes
affected;  difficult  expectoration  during  day;  interrup-
tion of  breath ;  no  cough  at  night;  from  smoke  of  wood.


261  EUPHRASIA.

I  Cough  after  influenza,  early  in  morning  and  during  day.
Whooping-cough  with  constant  mild,  watery  exudation

from  eyes,  whether  inflamed  or  not;  <  during  paroxysm.
Cough  on  rising  in  morning,  with  abundant  expectoration
of  mucus.

I I  Profuse  expectoration  of  mucus  by  voluntary  hawking.
^^  Inner  Chest  and  Lungs. iPressive  pain  beneath  sternum,

especially  in  forenoon,  with  transient  stickings  here  and
there  in  chest.
^^  Neck  and  Back. Swelling  of  cervical  glands.

Cramp-like  pain  in  back.
^^  Upper  Limbs. Sensation  in  arms  as  if  they  had  gone  to
sleep.
Numbness  of  fingers.
^  Lower  Limbs. Cramp  in  calf,  particularly  when  standing.
^^  Limbs  in  General. Crawling  as  of  a  fly  in  one  or  other  of
limbs,  from below  upward in a straight line, with
numbness  of  part.
^  Rest. Position. Motion. Lying  down  :  fluent  coryza  <  ;
cough  >.
Sitting :  deep  inspiration  difficult.
Standing :  cramp  in  calf.
Rising :  cough  begins.
Walking:  stitching  and  itching  in  female  sexual  organs;

in  open  air,  unusual  yawning.
Tosses  about  in  bed.
^'^  Sleep. I  I  Unusual  yawning  while  walking  in  open  air.
Tosses  about  in  bed  and  cannot  get  warm.
I  I  Frequent  waking  as  from  fright,  at  night.
Sleeplessness  after  midnight.
Awakes  too  late.
Usually  <  after  sleep.
^^  Time. Morning :  ophthalmia  with  agglutination ;  cough  and
expectoration ; coryza <  ; voice somewhat hoarse ;
cough  <.
Forenoon :  pressive  pain  beneath  sternum.
Day :  cough ;  scanty  expectoration ;  difficult  expectoration ;

attacks  of  heat.
Afternoon : lachrymation  ;  fluent  coryza ; external  chill

and  coldness  of  arms.
Evening: headache; photophobia  <  ;  fluent  coryza  <  ;

pressure  above  pubes.
After  midnight:  sleeplessness.

Night :  darting  pain  in  eye  <  ;  fluent  coryza  <  ;  severe
burning  at  anus  < ;  cough  >  ;  frequent  waking  as  from
fright;  sweat  during  sleep;  agglutination  of  lids.
^^  Temperature  and  Weather. Generally  <  in  bed ;  >  after
getting  out  of  bed.


EUPHRASIA.  262

Better  out-doors ;  worse  in-doors.

Open  air :  pain  in  eye  <  ;  profuse  coryza  <  ;  cough  <  ;

■walking,  unusual  yawning.
Windy  weather:  fluent  coryza  <.
Cold  air  and  wind  cause  lachryrnation.
Cannot  get  warm  in  bed.
^°  Fever, Chill  and  internal  chilliness  in  forenoon ;  external

chill  and  coldness  on  arms,  in  afternoon.
Chill  predominating.
Attacks  of  heat  during  day,  with  redness  of  face  and  cold

hands.
Heat  descending.

Sweat  often  confined  to  front  part  of  body.
Sweat  during  sleep  at  night,  of  very  strong,  offensive  odor,

most  profuse  on  chest.

■  Catarrhal  fever  when  chilliness  and  coldness  predomi-

nates, inflammation  of  conjunctiva  with  lachrymation ;
hardness  of  hearing;  photophobia;  nightly  agglutination
of  lids ;  painful  dulness  and  heat  in  head,  as  if  head
would  burst;  fluent  coryza;  inner  nose  painful;  sneez-
ing and  copious  expectoration  ;  cough,  particularly  in
morning.

■  Symptoms  of  incipient  measles  for  two  weeks,  but  no  ap-

pearance of  an  eruption;  tendency  to  a  typhoid  con-
dition, with  danger  of  inflammation  of  brain. ^Measles.

I  Chill  followed  by  fever,  pain  in  bones,  eyes  red  and  sen-
sitive to  light;  face  and  neck  covered  with  dark  spots
looking  like  petechise. ^Measles.

I  Streaming  of  hot,  burning  tears  from  eyes,  with  great  pho-
tophobia ;  profuse  running  from  nose,  without  burning ;
cough  only  during  day. ^Scarlatina.
*^  Attacks,  Periodicity. One  hour :  menses  lasting.

For  five  days:  great  dryness  of  lids  and  nose.

For  two  weeks:  symptoms  of  incipient  measles.

For  four  months:  photophobia  of  both  eyes.
^Locality  and  Direction.  Right:  violent  pressure  in  eye;
inflammation  of  eye;  pain  in  eye;  coryza  <  ;  head  and
eye  symptoms  <;  small  red  spots  like  pimples  on  upper
side  of  nose;  flat  cancer  on  side  of  nose;  ulcer  on  side  of
bridge  of  nose.

Left:  painful  pressure  in  inner  angle  of  eye;  violent
pressure  in  eye;  pain  in  eye,  with  diminished  vision,
redness  and  swelling  of  margins  of  lid ;  half  of  face  and
forehead  inflamed;  stiffness  of  cheek.

From  above  downward :  ulcer  and  pannus,  extending  to
centre  of  cornea.
*"  Sensations. As  if  head  would  burst;  as  if  dust  or  sand
were  in  eyes  ;  as  if  a  hair  hung  over  eyes ;  eye  looks  as


263  EUPHRASIA.

if  dead ;  as  though  cornea  was  covered  with  mucus ;
surface  of  eye  felt  as  if  studded  with  warts ;  as  if  grain
of  sand  were  at  outer  angle ;  upper  lip  as  if  made  of
wood ;  as  if  arms  had  gone  to  sleep ;  as  of  a  fly  crawl-
ing in  either  limb.

Pain :  in  eye ; .  in  abdomen ;  in  1.  eye ;  in  forehead ;  in
inner  nose;  over  bridge  of  nose;  in  ears;  in  bones.

Severe  pains :  in  eyes.

Pressive  cutting  pain :  in  eyes,  extending  to  frontal  sinuses.

Darting  pain:  in  eye.

Stitching  pain :  in  eye.

Burning  stitches:  in  eyes.

Stitches :  in  brain ;  in  eyeballs;  in  cheek ;  in  female  sexual
organs.

Stitching  pressure :  in  eyes.

Sticking:  here  and  there  in  chest.

Violent  beating :  headache.

Cramp:  in  calf.

Cramp-like  pains :  in  back.

Twinging  pain :  in  nose.

Burning  biting :  in  eyes.

Bruised  pain :  in  head.

Aching  pain:  in  outer  part  of  head;  in  forehead;  in  eye.

Violent  pressure:  in  1.  eye;  in  r.  eye.

Dry  pressure :  of  eyes.

Painful  pressure:  in  forehead;  in  inner  angle  of  1.  eye;
beneath  sternum.

Pressure:  on  vertex;  on  globe  of  eye;  in  anus  while  sit-
ting; above  pubes;  beneath  sternum.

Dull  frontal  headache.

Painful  bewilderment  of  head.

Smarting:  in  eye.

Burning:  in  eyes;  in  anus.

Soreness :  of  inner  nose.

Sensitiveness :  of  nose.

Heat :  of  head ;  of  nose ;  of  1.  cheek.

Pulsating:  of  head.

Tension :  of  the  eyeball ;  beneath  sternum.

Dazzling:  of  eyes.

Dryness :  of  eyes ;  of  eyelids  and  nose.

Lameness:  of  tongue.

Stiffness:  of  1.  cheek;  of  upper  lip;  of  tongue.

Numbness:  of  fingers;  of  limb.

Tickling: in  larynx.

Ringing:  in  ears.

Crawling :  in  one  or  other  limb.

Itching:  of  eyes,  of  outer  angle;  of  eyelids;  of  rash  on
face ;  female  sexual  organs.


EUPHRASIA.  264

Coldness:  on  arms.
^*  Tissues. Affects  principally  the  eyes.

Emaciation.
*^  Touch. Passive  Motion. Injuries. Touching  skin  pro-
duces aggravation.

Bad  effects  from  falls,  contusions,  or  other  mechanical
injuries  of  external  parts.
^  Skin. Burning,  formication  and  numbness  of  parts.

Shooting  itching,  stitches  here  and  there  all  night.

Fine  eruption  around  eyes  and  on  nose.

■  First  stage  of  measles ;  catarrhal  symptoms  marked ;  eyes

inflamed,  with  photophobia  and  profuse  discharge ;
severe  coryza  with  pressing  pain  in  forehead ;  cough
during  da3^

■  Measles  with  eye  symptoms,  and  more  or  less  nasal  and

bronchial  catarrh.

■  Intense  throbbing  headache,  redness  of  eyes,  photophobia,

least  light  being  intolerable,  high  fever,  constant  dry
cough,  evident  signs  of  eruption  about  forehead  and
temples  but  no  tendency  to  develop. ^Measles.

Warts.

Aggravation :  in  evening ;  when  touched.
^^  Stages  of  Life,  Constitution. Boy,  set.  six  months ;  oph-
thalmia.

Child,  set.  1  year,  Calc.  carb.  constitution,  suffered  for  six
months ;  constipation.

Girl,  set.  2  years,  treated  for  coryza;  prolapsus  ani.

Child,  set.  3  years,  whose  recovery  had  been  des^jaired  of;
measles.

Girl,  set.  6  years,  daughter  of  peasants,  not  been  well  since
she  was  vaccinated,  in  her  tenth  month,  nodosities  and
tumors  on  head,  followed  by  swelling  and  suppuration
of  glands  of  neck ;  ophthalmia.

Robust  boy,  set.  14 ;  ophthalmia.

Girl,  set.  16,  blonde,  nervous ;  measles.

Girl,  set.  20,  strong,  brunette,  menses  regular ;  ophthalmia.

AVoman,  set.  22,  married,  robust  constitution,  phlegmatic
sanguine  temperament,  after  a  chill ;  ophthalmia.

Girl,  set.  22,  light  hair,  blue  eyes,  generally  nervous;
measles.

Schoolmaster,  set.  26,  scrofulous  during  childhood,  suffers
from  glandular  swellings  which  occasionally  suppurate ;
hard  swelling  of  nose  and  lip.

Gardener,  set.  50,  otherwise  healthy  ;  ulcer  on  cornea.

Man,  set.  52;  paralysis  of  motor  oculi.

Woman,  set.  53;  oj)hthalmia.

Man,  £et.  54;  iritis.

Old  woman,  gouty ;  obscuration  of  cornea.


265  EUPHRASIA— FERRUM.

^  Relations. Antidoted  by : Cami^thor,  Pulsat.

Compatible:  Aeon.,  Calc.  ost.  (keratitis),  Conium,  Nux  vom.,
Phosphor.,  Pulsat,  Rhus  tox.  (parotitis),  Silica  (keratitis).
Sulphur  (cataract).
Compare:  JEthusa,  Allium  cep., Apis, Arg.  nitr.,  Arsen.,
Hepar,  Kalibich.,  Kalijod.,  Mercur.,  Merc,  cor.,  Pulsat.


FERRUM.

Iron.  The  Element.

Triturations  of  pure  metallic  iron ;  solution  of  the  acetate  and  triturations  of
the  carbonate.

Brovings  bj  Hahnemann,  Gross,  the  American  Pro  vers'  Union,  etc.  See
Allen's  Encyclopedia,  vol.  4,  p.  303.

Clinical  Authokities. — Hydrocephalus  in  ancemic  children,  Liedbeck,  Eiick.
Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  5,  p.  43;  Headache,  Sorge,  Hah.  Mo.,  vol.  10,  p.  482;  Megrim,  Miil-
ler,  B.  J  H.,  vol.  21,  p.  17;  Exophthalmic  goitre,  Norton,  Ophth.  Therap.,  p.  196;
Facial  neuralgia,  Schron,  Stens,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf,,  vol.  5,  p.  185 ;  Toothache,  Saeger,
"Times  Ketrospect,  1875,  p.  110;  Berridge,  Times  Ketrospect,  1875,  p.  110;  Influ-
enza, Hartman,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  3,  p.  41 ;  Vomiting  after  eating  (3  cases),  Knorre,
Eiick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  1,  p.  557  ;  Vomiting  of  infants,  Hartmann,  Eaue's  Eec,  1871,
p.  112;  Swelling  and  pai^ifidness  of  liver, 'KaWenhach,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  1,  p.  696;
Diarrhcea,  A.  E.  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  5,  p.  415;  Gross,  Knorre,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf.,
vol.  1,  p.  834 ;  Werber,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  1,  p.  835 ;  Chronic  diarrhoea,  Saeger,  Times
Eetrospect,  1875,  p.  76;  Cholerine  (5  cases),  Pemerl,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  5,  p.  47;
Prolapsus  recti,  Cooper,  Eaue's  Eec,  1871,  p.  123;  Incontinence  of  urine.  Price,  Or-
ganon,  vol.  2,  p.  121;  Enuresis  diurna  (2  cases),  Eichards,  Eaue's  Eec,  1873.  p.
141;  Gonorrhoea,  Eosenberg,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  2,  p.  84;  Uterine  hemorrhage,
Hrg.,  Bigel,  Attomyr,  Scholz,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  2,  p.  310;  Vomiting  during  preg-
nancy, Schron,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  2,  p.  382;  Threatened  abortion,  Schiiler,  Eiick.
Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  2,  p.  310;  Premature  labor,  Scholz,  Euck.  Kl.  Erf,  vol.  2,  p.  310;
Aphonia,  Eiickert,  Hom.  Clin.,  vol.  3,  p.  58;  Spasmodic  cough  after  influenza,  Hart-
mann, Eiick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  3,  p.  41 ;  Whooping  cough,  Boenninghausen,  Eiick.  Kl.
Erf,  vol.  5,  p.  719;  Constriction  of  chest,  Knorre,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf.,  voL  3,  p.  189;
Hcemoptysis,  Bathman,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  5,  p.  264;  Hartman,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf.
vol.3,  5,216;  Hrg.,  Kreuss,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  3,  p.  216;  Pneumonia,  Cate,
Times  Eetrospect,  1876,  p.  11 ;  Tuberculosis,  H.  V.,  Euck.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  5,  p.  838;
Phthisis  after  pneumonia,  H.  in  Z  ,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  3,  p.  368  ;  Lobeth,  Hartmann,
H.  in  Z.,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  3,  p.  367-9;  Palpitation  of  heart,  Griess,  Eiick.  Kl.
Erf.,  vol.  3,  p.  445;  Hypertrophy  of  heart  with  attacks  of  palpitation  (2  cases),  Billig,
Lirsch,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf,  vol.  5,  p.  857-9 ;  Ancemia,  Werber,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf.  vol.  2,
p.  273;  Jahr.,  B.  J.  H.,  vol.  12,  p.  445;  Debility  after  hemorrhage,  AVerber,  Eiick.


FERRUM.  266'

Kl.  Erf.,  vol.2,  p.  273;  Debility  ivith  chlorosis,  Eidherr,  B.  J.  H.,  vol.  27,  p.  303;
Chlorosis,  Knorre,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  2,  p.  271  ;  Stapf,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  2,  p.
73;  Goullon,  Knorre,  Lobeth,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  2,  p.  271-3;  Hofrichter,  Eiick.
Kl.  Erf.,  vol,  5,  p.  310 ;  Miiller,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  5,  p.  602 ;  Lameness  of  shoul-
der, Saeger,  Times  Eetrospect,  1875,  p.  110;  Omodynia,  Miller,  Eaue's  Eec,  1874>
p.  253;  Hhettmatism  of  deltoid  muscle,  Plate,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  5,  p.  898;  Rheu-
matismus  humeri,  Ide,  Allg.  Horn.  Ztg.,  vol.  101,  p.  27;  iscAws,  Goullon,  Eiick.
Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  3,  p.  517  ;  Cramp  in  legs  and  feet,  Hirsch,  Eaue's  Eec,  1874,  p.  2G1 ;
Oehme,  Eaue's  Eec,  1875,  p.  248 ;  Cramps  in  ccdves,  Oehme,  Hah.  Mo.,  vol.  9,  p.
318;  Intermittent  fever  (2  cases),  CI.  Miiller,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol,  4,  p.  919;  Pear-
son, Organon,  vol.  3,  p.  99;  (from  Eiickert),  see  Allen's  Int,  Fever,  p,  131 ;  Hrg.,
Baertl,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol,  4,  p,  917  ;  Hectic  fever,  Miiller,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  5,
p.  837  ;  Rheumatism,  Berridge,  Times  Eetrospect,  1875,  p.  110;  Hartmann,  Eiick.
Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  3,  p.  517 ;  BoUe,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  5,  p.  899.

^  Mind. I  Mind  confused,  cannot  collect  his  thoughts.

I  Prone  to  weep  or  laugh  immoderately;  with  a  choking
sensation  in  throat,  as  if  swollen  outside.

I  I  Lively  in  evening.

I  Not  inclined  to  talk  or  study;  nervous,  restless.

Great  indifference.

Changeable  disposition,  one  evening  low-spirited  and  mel-
ancholy, next  excessively  cheerful.

■  Depression  of  spirits;  also  after  menses.

I  Mental  depression,  gloomy  foreboding  thoughts.

iMind  in  highest  degree  oppressed;  despondent;  great  so-
licitude about  those  belonging  to  him,  with  constant
thoughts  of  death. /^Aphonia.

I I  Anxiety  as  after  committing  a  crime.

■  From  slightest  cause,  anxiety,  with  throbbing  in  pit  of

stomach.

■  Nervous,  hysterical  feeling;  fear  of  apoplexy.

I  Irritability;  little  noises,  such  as  crackling  of  a  newspaper^
drive  him  to  despair.

Pettish,  quarrelsome,  disputative,  easily  excited,  least  con-
tradiction angers.

■  Excited  by  slightest  opposition;  everything  irritates  or

depresses  her.
Vehement;  quarrelsome ;  anxious.
Haughtiness ;  proud,  self-contented  look.
Ailments  from  anger.

■  Moderate  mental  exertion  improves  many  symptoms.
^Sensorium. Head  confused,  muddled;  with  cold  feet  and

stiff  fingers.
Gloomy  feeling  in  head,  which  feels  heavy  and  confused.
Dulness  of  head,  want  of  disposition  to  think.

■  Confusion  of  head.

■  ■Vertigo:  on  rising  suddenly,  things  grew  black,  had  to


267  FERRUM.

lean  against  something  or  fall;  with  nausea,  prostration,
lethargy;  as  if  balancing  to  and  fro;  as  when  on  water;
when  walking  over  water,  like  when  crossing  a  bridge ;
when  descending,  with  disposition  to  fall  forward.

■  Whilst  walking,  giddy  as  if  drunk,  as  though  she  would

fall  over  obstacles.

I  On  looking  at  running  water  dizzy  and  giddy  in  head,,
as  if  everything  went  round  with  her.

Staggering  in  walking,  as  if  intoxicated ;  reeling  sensation
and  vertigo  on  seeing  flowing  water;  vertigo  with  sick-
ness at  stomach  in  walking;  momentary  shock,  with
giddiness  in  brain.

Sensation  as  if  head  would  constantly  incline  to  r.  side.
^  Inner  Head. •  Pressive  headache  in  forehead  as  if  it  would
burst.

■  Pressure  in  frontal  eminences,  after  rising  and  dressing,

in  morning,  after  quarter  of  an  hour,  extending  over
whole  forehead  to  vertex  and  becoming  more  intense,
and  after  twenty  minutes  changing  to  a  pressive
pain  from  within  outward;  on  going  down  stairs  pain
<,  involuntarily  presses  palm  of  hand  on  painful  spot,
which  momentarily  >  the  pain,  but  it  is  only  decidedly

>  in  open  air.

■Dull,  pressive  sensation  in  frontal  eminence,  afterwards
spreading  over  whole  forehead  and  finally  to  vertex ;

>  by  pressure  of  hands;  in  open  air;  <  descending.
■Severe  frontal  headache  all  day,  with  cold  feet.
Lancination  in  forehead.

■  Awake  3  a.m.  with  severe  stitches,  as  from  a  pen-knife,

in  both  temples,  gradually  extending  over  whole  fore-
head, with  chilliness,  rendering  her  unable  to  go  to
sleep  again.

Headache  every  evening  above  root  of  nose.

Sticking  pain  over  1.  eye,  coming  suddenly.

■  Hammering,  boring  pain  beginning  mostly  in  1.  temple,

with sensation of  expansion of  blood-vessels in the
temples.
■Violent  shooting  headache  in  1.  side,  in  afternoon.

■  Headache:  occupying  1.  side  of  head;  with  coryza;  after

menses.
Tearing  from  lambda  to  temporal  bone.

■  Headache  on  top  of  head,  as  if  skull  was  pushed  upward.

■  Throbbing  pain  in  top  of  head  when  moving  suddenly.

■  Beating  in  back  of  head  and  neck,  gradually  extending

to  sides  and  forehead,  <  stooping  or  moving.
Drawing  from  nape  of  neck  into  head,  with  stinging,
hammering  and  roaring  in  head.

■  Drawing,  from  nape  upward  into  head,  in  which  there

is  then  shooting,  roaring  and  humming.


FERRUM.  268

I  Pain  ill  back  of  head  when  coughing.

■  Weight  in  back  of  head,  from  ear  to  ear.

Confusion  of  mind,  with  liammering,  beating  sensation

in  liead.
I  Sensation  in  head  as  of  tlie  beatings  of  the  pulse,  witli

slight  sticking.
iRush  of  blood  to  head,  wdth  swelling  of  veins  of  head,

and  slight  flushes  of  heat.
iRush  of  blood  to  head,  with  throbbing  pains,  roaring,

buzzing  and  prickling  in  brain.
Hammering  and  throbbing  headache,  obliging  one  to  lie

down,  or  as  if  brain  were  rent  asunder.

I  Hammering,  pulsating  pain; humming  in  ears; con-

gestion of  head,  with  pale  face;  intolerance  of  all  spirit-
uous liquors ;  dread  of  movement,  with  loss  of  muscular
tone  and  debility.

I I  Headache :  for  two,  three,  or  four  days,  every  two  or  three
weeks;  hammering,  beating,  pulsating  pains,  must  lie
down  in  bed ;  with  aversion  to  eating  and  drinking.

1  Hammering,  pulsating  headache;  ulcerative  pain  of
scalp,  with  loss  of  hair ;  bruit  du  diable  in  vessels  of
neck ;  paleness  of  mucous  membranes  of  mouth  and
eyes;  vigorous,  healthy  appearance,  the  general  con-
dition simulating  a  plethoric  rather  than  an  ansemic
habit. ^Megrim.

I  Congestion  of  blood  to  head,  with  pulsation  and  hammer-
ing in  head,  heat  and  redness  of  face,  enlarged  veins,
sensitiveness  of  head  to  touch ;  <  after  midnight  and
towards  morning;  returning  periodically;  >  external
pressure.

I  Head  dull  and  full,  eyelids  heavy,  apt  to  sleep,  while
sitting  reading.

I  Writing  causes  headache  to  re-appear.

I  Headaches  of  anaemic,  debilitated  persons,  especially  with
congestion  of  head  or  chest.

I  Head  hot,  feet  cold.

Apoplexia  sanguinea.

■  Hydrocephalus  with  open  fontanelles  and  great  ansemia.
•*  Outer  Head. l  Pressure  on  top of  head  when cold air

touched  it.

■  Great  sensitiveness  of  scalp  to  touch.

■  Scalp  and  hair  feel  sore;  falling  out  of  hair.

■  Formication  or  slight  itching  in  scalp;  cold  feet.
Cannot  keep  head  quiet.

Distended  veins  on  temples.
''  Sight  and  Eyes. ■At  night  capability  to  see  in  dark,  with
liysteric  persons;  pupils  can  be  dilated  but  little;  red
eyes  with  burning  pains.


269  FERRUM.

I  Dark  before  eyes;  giddy.

Darkness  before  eyes  in  evening,  with  aching  pains  and

slight  epistaxis.
I  Amaurosis.

■  Letters  run  together  when  reading  or  writing.
I  Weak  eyes  with  lachrymation.

Pupils  contracted.

I  Blue  rings  around  eyes,  which  are  dull,  lustreless.

I  Bloated  appearance  about  eyes;  face  j)ale. ^Intermittent.

I  Face  fiery  red; red  spots  on  cheeks;  puffiness  of  face

around  eyes; livid,  jaundiced  complexion; pale  face

and  li]3S.
I  Inflamed  eyes,  burning,  stinging;  suj)purating  sties.
Pressure  in  eye  as  of  a  grain  of  sand.

■  Pressure  in  eyes  as  if  they  Avould  protrude;  the  r.  worse.

■  Sticking  pain  over  1.  eye  coming  very  suddenly  and  last-

ing a  short  time.

■  Can  scarcely  open  eyes;  lids  pressed  down.

■  Redness  and  swelling  of  both  lids.

■  Marked  muscular  debility;  redness  of  eyes,  swelling  of

lids;  slimy  pus-like  discharge  from  Meibomian  glands;
spots  on  skin. ^Intermittent.
Suppurating  stye  on  upper  lid  and  nightly  agglutination.

■  ■Morbus  Basedowii;  especially  after  suppression  of  men-

ses; protruding  eyes;  enlarged  thyroid;  palpitation  of
heart;  excessive  nervousness.
^  Hearing  and  Ears. ■Over-sensitive  to  sounds.

■  Discharge  from  1.  ear;  chlorotic  complexion; impaired

hearing; murmur  in  1.  jugular  vein; palpitation  of
heart.
■Ringing  in  ears,  particularly  the  right.

■  Stitches  in  ears  in  morning.

Ulcerative  pain  in  outer  ear;  singing,  humming  in  ears;
>  laying  head  on  table.
''  Smell and Nose. ■Bleeding  from  nose  in  morning  on
stooping.

■  ■Epistaxis  in  anaemic  children,  with  frequent  changing

of  color  of  face.

■  Epistaxis  in  ansemic  patients  subject  to  ebullitions.

■  Epistaxis  alternating  with  spitting  of  blood.

I  Nose  continuously  filled  with  clotted  blood;  especially
with  coryza.

■  Dropping  of  fluid  from  posterior  nares  or  frontal  sinuses;

headache. ^Nasal  catarrh.

■  Bloody,  puruloid  greenish,  whey-like,  slimy,  acrid  dis-

charge; cold  in  head.

■  Scabs  come  out  of  nose  or  are  coughed  up  every  few

weeks.


FERRUM.  270

^  Upper  Face.  H  Extreme  paleness  of  face,  which  becomes
red and flushed on least  emotion,  pain  or  exertion.

I  Face  pale,  collapsed,  or  expressionless,  stiff  and  stupid.

I  Face  ashy  pale  or  greenish;  pale  and  wan.

I  Pale,  earthy  color  of  face. ^Aphonia.

I  Pale,  livid  face,  sometimes  bloated,  with  blue  margins
around  e3"es.

I  Pale  face,  with  red  si3ots  on  each  cheek.

I  Livid,  or  pale  face  and  lips.

■  Cadaverous,  jaundiced  complexion.

I  Face  yellow,  or  yellow  in  spots.

I I  Face  flushes  easily  on  least  excitement  or  exertion.
I  Flushed  face  with,  burning  cheeks.

■  Face  fiery  red,  veins  large;  congestion  to  head.

■  Face  becomes  suddenly  fier}^  red,  with  vertigo;  ringing

in  ears ;  great  palpitation  of  heart,  and  dyspnoea.
I  I  Very  red  face  of  children.

■  Face  feels  as  if  swollen  and  bloated.

iCEdema  of  feet  and  face,  especially  upper  and  lower  eye-
lids.

I  Pain  in  face  <  to  an  intense  degree  by  lying  down;  >
sitting  up. ^Neuralgia.

■  Neuralgia  after  cold  washing  and  overheating;  during

paroxysm  face  fiery  red,  sometimes  only  in  one  spot ;
cannot  keep  head  quiet;  at  intervals  face  looks  pale  and
earthy.
Eruption  on  face  followed  by  bluish  spots.
^  Lower  Face. iLips  pale,  dry. ^Intermittent  fever.

I  I  Swelling  of  gums  and  cheeks;  with  bleeding;  pale  lips.
^^  Teeth  and  Gums, i Great  paleness  of  gums. ^Intermit-
tent fever.

■  Toothache  all  morning.

■  Toothache,  momentarily  >  by  cold  water,

■  Persistent  diarrhoea  the  result  of  morbid  dentition ;  stools

composed  of  mucus  and  undigested  food ;  face  flushed
or  has  a  red  spot  on  each  side;  dentition  advances  slowly.
"  Taste  and  Tongue. ■Unbearable  taste  of  blood;  children
complain  of  it.

■  Taste  like  rotten  eggs.

I  I  Sweet  or  bitter  taste  in  mouth. ^Intermittent  fever.
Bread  tastes  dry  and  bitter.

■  Earthy,  putrid  taste;  all  food  has  a  dry,  woody,  insinid

taste;  no  appetite;  no  thirst;  vomiting  of  blood.

■  Bad  taste,  mouth  dry,  tongue  coated  white.

I  I  Numb  and  pithy  feeling  of  tongue,  as  if  burned.
Burnt  sensation  on  back  and  middle  portion  of  tongue.
^^  Inner  Mouth. ■Lips,  gums,  tongue  and  mucous  membrane
of  entire  buccal  cavity  joale  and  bloodless.


271  FERRUM.

I  Mouth  dry  in  the  morning.

I  Cankered  sore  mouth; mucous  membrane  very  pale;

vomiting  after  coughing.
^^  Throat, l  Sensation  of  a  himp  in  1.  side  of  throat  below

tonsil ;  <  when  swallowing  empty,  not  when  eating  or

drinking.
I  I  Aching,  pressing  pain  in  throat  during  deglutition,  with

heat  in  fauces.
I  Constrictive  sensation  in  throat.

I  I  Throat  sore ; feels  dull  and  heavy  all  day ;  lively  in

evening.

I I  Exophthalmic  goitre,  especially  after  suppression  of
menses;  protruding  eyes,  enlargement  of  thyroid,  pal-
pitation of  heart  and  excessive  nervousness.

^*  Appetite,  Thirst.  Desires,  Aversions,  i  Appetite  vora-
cious, double  amount  of  an  ordinary  meal  in  evening
hardly  sufficient.

1 1  Canine  hunger,  alternating  with  loss  of  ajDpetite.

1 1  Anorexia;  extreme  dislike  to  all  food.

■  Anorexia,  without  bad  taste  or  thirst.

I  Has  no  appetite,  always  feels  full;  drinks  are  relished.
I  Unquenchable  thirst  or  thirstlessness.

■  Insatiable  thirst. ^Intestinal  catarrh.

■  Appetite  for  bread.

Improved  by  wine,  except  such  as  are  termed  acid  wines.
Desire  for  raw  tomatoes.

■  Can  only  eat  bread  and  butter;  meat  disagrees ;  children

accustomed  to  meat  suddenly  become  disgusted  with  it.

■  Aversion  to: meat,  wdiich  disagrees;  eggs;  beer  and  ale;

hot  things;  sour  things.
■^^  Eating  and  Drinking. ■All  food  tastes  bitter.

■  Solid  food  is  dry  and  insipid  while  masticating.

■  ■After  eating  eructation  and  regurgitation  of  food,  with-

out nausea  or  inclination  to  vomit.
Taste  putrid,  bitter,  or  dry  and  insipid;  loss  of  appetite,
owing  to  a  constant  feeling  of  repletion;  meat  disagrees;
after  eating,  heat  and  anxiety,  clulness  of  head,  present-
ing mental  exertion ;  vomiting  after  eating.

■  After  eating:  heat  in  stomach;  nausea;  regurgitation  of

food.
■After  least  food  or  drink,  especially  after  meat,  spasmodic
pressure  at  stomach.

■  After  fat  food,  bitter  eructations.

■  After  eggs,  vomiting.

Worse  from  meat;  sour  fruit;  drinking  milk;  tobacco,  tea
and  beer.

■  Beer  rises  to  head ;  stomach  disordered  after  drinking  beer.
Wine  agrees,  if  not  acid.


FERRUM.  272

Bad  effects  from  drinking  tea ;  toothache,  etc.
Worse  on  an  empty  stomach,  better  after  breakfast.
^^  Hiccough,  Belching,  Nausea  and  Vomiting, i  Constant

eructation  as  soon  as  she  has  eaten.
Eructations:  sour;  foul; burning;  relieving burning in

stomach.
Regurgitation  of  food.
Nausea: with headache; witli nightly diarrhoea; with

vertigo.
Reeling  and  staggering  as  if  intoxicated,  with  sickness  in

stomach  when  walking.
lA^omiting  of  food,  and  a  flow  of  water  from  mouth.
I  Vomiting  after  breakfast.
lA'omiting  after  eating,  coming  each  time  with  new  force;

vomiting  of  infants.
I  Spasmodic  vomiting  of  food  during  pregnancy.
I  Vomiting  as  often  as  food  has  been  taken,  never  at  other

times ;  not  as  a  symptom  of  other  disease,  nor  depend-
ing on  organic  affections  of  stomach.
Vomiting of  ingesta with constant pressure in pit of

stomach  and  weariness  of  feet.
Vomiting  with  pain  in  stomach.

I  Vomiting  of  everything  eaten  without  being  digested.

■  Vomiting  of  food,  particularly  after  breakfast..

I I  Vomiting  of  food  immediately  after  midnight,  followed
by  aversion  to  food  and  dread  of  open  air.

■  Everything  vomited  tasted  sour  and  acid.

■  Frequent  vomiting  of  food  with  children  ;  easy  vomiting..

■  A^omiting  of  food  with  a  fiery  red  face.
Vomiting  of  ingesta  after  every  cough ;  after  exercise.
Better  after  vomiting.

■  Hsematemesis.

^^  Scrobiculum  and  Stomach. Distension  of  epigastric  region.
Anxiety from slight  causes,  with throbbing  in pit of
stomach.

■  Palpitating  in  stomach  and  through  oesophagus,  as  if  a,

nerve  was  quivering,  with  an  occasional  suffocating  feel-
ing, as  if  a  valve  rose  in  throat.

■  Pit  of  stomach  sensitive  to  touch.

■  Feeling  of  fulness  and  pressure  in  pit  of  stomach.

■  Stomach  feels  full  and  bloated  after  eating  a  few  mouth-

fuls,  with  burning  heat  in  it.

■  Spasmodic  pressure  at  stomach  after  taking  least  food  or

drink,  especially  after  eating  meat.

■  Pressure  in  stomach  after  eating. ^Intermittent  fever.

■  Pressure  at  stomach  with  vomiting  of  food,  followed  by

nausea  and  vomiting  of  water;  pain  in  stomach  >  after
vomiting;  <  drinking  milk. ^Chlorosis.


273  FERRUM.

I  Pressure  in  stomach  and  acidity. ^Chronic  diarrhoea.

Pressure  in  stomach  and  head.

Heat  rising  from  pit  of  stomach.

iHeat  and  burning  in  stomach,  with  momentary,  cramp-
like pain  in  splenic  region.

I  I  Occasional  uneasiness  at  splenic  end  of  stomach.

I  I  Cramp-like  stomachache.

iNeuralgic  and  anaemic  cardialgia;  atony  of  digestions-
vomiting  of  food  immediately  after  eating,  without  any
preceding  nausea,  also  when  coughing  or  moving
about;  cardiac  uneasiness.

I  I  Gastralgia  after  drinking.

iPit  of  stomach  sensitive  to  touch,  and  soreness  all  over
abdomen;  pulse  full,  excited;  face  pale;  greatly  ex-
hausted. ^Haematemesis.

■  Hemorrhage  from  stomach  and  pain  in  stomach  through

to  spine.
^^  Hypochondria. Swelling  and  hardness  in  hypochondriac
regions.

■  Tightness  in  r.  hypochondriac  region  and  shooting  pains

in  left.
I  Fulness  in  region  of  liver.

■  Liver  enlarged,  sensitive  to  pressure.

■Marked  swelling  of  liver  which  is  very  sensitive  to  touch;
pains  along  back  particularly  in  places  upon  which  she
must  lie;  cannot  lie  long  upon  either  side.

■  Pain  in  small  of  back  and  liver,  all  day.
i  Dropsy  of  liver.

■  Cramp-like  sensation  in  splenic  region.

■Splenic  region  swollen  and  sore  on  pressure;  spleen  large.

■  Chronic  affections,  and  swellings  of  spleen  and  liver,  with

infarctions  of  liver.
^^  Abdomen. Painful  weight  of  viscera  when  walking,  as  if
they  would  drop.

■  Congestion  to  head,  blood-vessels  dilated;  swelling  about

eyes;  pressure  in  stomach  and  abdomen  after  smallest
quantity  of  food,  vomiting  of  food,  tension  in  abdomen
causing  shortness  of  breath,  weakness  almost  to  paraly-
sis, hardness  and  fulness  in  r.  side  of  abdomen,  begin-
ning dropsy,  swelling  of  feet. ^Intermittent.

■  Bowels  feel  sore  when  touched,  as  if  bruised,  or  weakened

by  cathartics.

■  On  feeling  abdomen  and  on  coughing,  bowels  are  sore  as  if

beaten,  or  as  if  they  had  been  acted  upon  by  purgatives.
■Abdomen  feels  sore  and  bruised  when  walking.
■Soreness  all  over  abdomen ;  >  by  warmth. ^Intestinal

catarrh.
Stitching  in  abdomen,

VOL.  V. — 18.


FERRUM.  274

■  Hardness  and  distension  of  abdomen,  without  flatulence.
I  Rumbling,  with  pain  in  small  of  back  and  kidne3^s,  and

slight  urethral  soreness  when  urinating.
I  I  Rumbling  in  bowels,  with  constant  feeling  as  though

they  were  going  to  move.
I  Flatulent  colic  at  night;  violent  rumbling.
I  Colic  with  watery  diarrhoea.
I  I  Pale  face  and  lips,  or  fiery  redness,  with  scanty  discharge

of  pale  blood  with  violent  colic. ^Dysmenorrhoea.
^^  Stool and Rectum. lAt  8  a.m. very  sudden discharge

from  bowels,  waterj^  painless  and  odorless.

■  Diarrhoea  <  mornings;  bad  sleep  before  midnight.

■  Sudden,  gushing  diarrhoea.

■Sudden,  watery,  painless  stool,  without  smell.

■  ■  Frequent  diarrhoea ;  stools  watery,  with  or  without  te-

nesmus, and  preceded  or  not  by  pain,  but  always  with
much  flatulence  and  more  frequent  after  taking  food  or
water.

■  Acrid  watery  diarrhoea,  excoriating  the  anus,  with  vom-

iting of  food  soon  after  eating.

■  Frequent  diarrhoeic  stools,  corroding  the  anus,  face  being

fiery  red.

■  Watery  diarrhoea  with  burning  at  anus.

■  Obstinate  diarrhoea,  stools  composed  of  slime  and  undi-

gested food;  painless,  excoriating  and  exhausting.

■  Chronic, watery,  painless diarrhoea, coming regularly

every  afternoon.
I  I  Painless  diarrhoea,  involuntary  during  a  meal.

■  Painless  stools  like  from  a  spout. ^Intestinal  catarrh.

■  Chronic  watery  diarrhoea  in  children,  usually  soon  after

eating  and  drinking,  without  pain  or  effort,  mostly  con-
taining undigested  substances.

■  ■Undigested  stools  at  night,  or  while  eating  or  drinking.

■  Diarrhoea;  pale, miserable  complexion;  emaciation;  abdo-

men hard  and  distended  without  flatulency ;  bulimia
alternating  with  anorexia;  thirst.
■Slimy,  watery,  painless  diarrhoea,  <  at  night;  abdomen
painless  to  pressure;  face  pale;  marked  swelling  of  body
which  pits  upon  pressure;  skin  cold;  no  appetite;  great
thirst;  great  weakness:  slight  fever  towards  evening;
peevish  and  tearful.

■  Painless,  large,  watery  discharge,  with  a  good  appetite.

■  Watery  diarrhoea,  brown,  painless  and  weakening.

■  Colliquative diarrhoea  in phthisical subjects; passages

very  frequent  and  finally  become  almost  involuntary;
great  debility.
I  I  Diarrhoea  during  pregnancy.

■  Summer  complaint  of  children  with  emaciation.


275  FERRUM.

I  Rice-water  discharges;  cold,  with  cold,  sour  sweat.

I  1  Profuse  discharge  of  flakes  of  mucus,  or  formed  into
lumpy  balls.

I  Cholerine  where  the  enteric  symptoms  are  particularly
severe;  extreme  sensitiveness  of  intestinal  tract,  so  that
the  least  motion,  or  smallest  amount  of  food  or  drink,
renews  or  <  diarrhoea;  intestinal  scrapings  discharged  in
large  quantities;  vox  cholera  present;  blue  rings  around
eyes;  pulse  beginning  to  fail.

I  I  Slimy,  bloody  stools  with  tenesmus.

■Straining  for  stool  all  day,  sick  at  stomach,  disagreeable
taste,  worse  drinking  cold  water.

Constipation  from  intestinal  atony.

■  Costive:  stools  hard  and  difficult,  followed  by  backache.

■  Chronic  constipation;  ineffectual  urging;  anaemia;  easily

flushed  head  and  face,  with  cold  hands  and  feet.

■  Hard,  difficult stools,  followed  for  hours  by  cramping

pain  in  rectum. ^Intermittent.
1  1  Constipation  with  hot  urine.
I  1  Contractive  spasm  in  the  rectum.

■  Prolapsus  recti,  particularly  with  children.

■  Itching  at  anus  at  night,  from  ascarides ;  taenia.
I  I  Discharge  of  ascarides  with  slimy  stool.

■  Helminthiasis; wretched  complexion;  itching  in  anus  at

night,  from  seat  worms.

■  Piles,  copious  bleeding  or  ichorous  oozing;  tearing  pains

with  itching  and  gnawing.

■  Protrusion  of  large  varices  at  anus.

■  Profuse  hemorrhoidal  flux  from  anus  and  bladder.
Aggravation: after  abuse  of  cinchona; while  eating  or

drinking; at  night.
^^  Urinary  Organs. ■  Pains  in  bladder.

■  Urging  to  urinate,  with  tickling  in  urethra  extending  to

neck  of  bladder.

■  Continual  desire  to  urinate,  with  pain  in  liver,  chest  and

kidneys.

■  ■Involuntary  urination  at  night,  and  also  when  walking

about  by  day.

■  Incontinence  of  urine,  more  frequent  by  day  than  by

night,  but  floods  bed  five  or  six  times  at  night;  urine
smells  like  strong  ammonia,  stains  sheets  very  dark;
yellowish  clay-colored  sediment  sticks  to  sides  and  bot-
tom of  vessel.

■  Nocturnal  enuresis;  urine  dark  red,  sometimes  with  mu-

cous sediment.
I  I  Urine blood-red,  and  plentifully  charged  with  blood
corpuscles.

■  Urine  clear  as  w^ater. ^Anaemia.


FERRUM.  276

lUrine  more  copious  and  clear;  with  relaxation  and  pros-
tration, making  him  very  nervous.
I  Urine  alkaline.

■  Hot  urine;  metrorrhagia.

Burning  in  urethra  during  micturition,  as  if  urine  were  hot.

■  Slight  soreness  in  urethra.
Diabetes.

I  1  Albuminuria,  with  chronic  fatty  degeneration,  much
aneemia  and  excessive  prostration,  with  anasarca.

I  Chronic  vesical  catarrh  and  gleet.
^^  Male  Sexual  Organs. Erections  night  and  day;  nocturnal
emissions;  sterility;  sexual  desire  increased.

I  Impotence.

Discharge  of  mucus  from  urethra  after  a  cold.

■  Copious,  slimy,  painless  discharge  from  urethra,  remain-

ing after  an  attack  of  gonorrhoea.
iGonorrhoea  of  long  standing  with  milky  discharge.
I  I  Chronic  gleet  with  anaemia.
^  Female  Sexual  Organs, i Sexual  desire  lessened,  sterility.
■Ansemia of ovaries, with amenorrhoea and general
anaemia.

■  Dropsy  of  uterus;  face  flushes  red;  great  debility.
I  Sticking,  shooting  pains  in  uterus.

I  Pain  in  os  tinc£e  on  lying  down;  bearing  down  feeling,,
at  same  time  dryness  in  vagina.

I  Sharp  pains  in  abdomen,  bearing  down  in  uterus,  with
aching  below  it.

•  Before  menses,  stinging  headache,  ringing  in  ears,  dis-
charge of  long  pieces  of  mucus  from  uterus.

I  Labor-like  colicky  pains.

■Anaemia,  with  uterine  congestion,  burning  pain  or  press-
ure and  weight  in  sacrum;  dragging  pains  in  loins,
pelvis  and  thighs ;  cold  hands  and  feet.

Menses:  too  late,  long  lasting  and  profuse;  flow  watery,
or  in  lumps;  preceded  by  labor-like  j)ains;  varices  in
legs  <;  intermit  two  or  three  days,  then  return;  uterus
displaced;  come  on  with  a  physical  languor  and  mental
depression  unfitting  her  for  work,  could  overcome  them
by  forced  exertion;  followed  by  hysterical  symptoms.

I I  Menses:  too  soon,  too  profuse,  too  long  lasting,  with  fiery
red  face,  ringing  in  ears;  flow  pale,  watery,  debilitating.

■  During  menses,  must  keep  perfectly  still,  least  movement

greatly  <  the  flow.

■  Copious  discharge  of  partly  fluid  and  partly  black  and

coagulated  blood,  with  pains  in  loins  and  labor-like
colic  in  weakly  persons,  with  fiery  red  face  and  vascular
excitement;  headache  and  vertigo;  constipation  and
hot  urine. ^Hemorrhage.


277  FERRUM.

I  Uterine  hemorrhage  with  labor-like  pains  in  abdomen
and  small  of  back,  and  hard,  full  pulse.

■  Passive  hemorrhage  dark  grumous  in  character. ^Menor-

rhagia.
I  Metrorrhagia,  especially  when  accompanied  by  a  very
red  face; menses  profuse; acrid  leucorrhoea; miscar-
riage ;  sterility ;  painfulness  of  vagina  during  an  embrace.

■  Face  pale  and  bloated  in  appearance;  skin  cold  and  pits

upon  pressure,  especially  about  ankles,  great  lassitude,
cries  easily,  want  of  ajDpetite,  aversion  to  food,  indica-
tion of  acidity  of  stomach,  constipation,  stool  often  absent
a  whole  week,  menses  too  frequent  and  too  copious.
^After  severe  hemorrhages.
iThe  menses  intermit  and  then  re-appear.

■  Scanty  pale  catamenial  discharge,  with  violent  colic.
llMenses  pale,  watery,  debilitating.

I  Amenorrhoea  or  watery  menses;  women  who  flush  easily,
especially  after  drinking  wine,  with  dyspnoea  and  pal-
pitation.

■Amenorrhoea  with  chlorosis;  congestive  headache;  fiery
red  face;  they  feel  weary  and  tired  all  the  time,  with
desire  to  lie  down.

■  Suppression  of  menses  with  extreme  nervousness.

■  Mucous  discharge  in  place  of  menses. ^Chlorosis.

■  Headache  and  singing  in  ears  after  menses.
Displacement  of  uterus;  hysteralgia;  metritis.
I  I  Swellings  and  indurations  in  vagina.

■  Prolapsus  of  vagina.

■  Vagina  too  dry.

■  Insensible  or  jjainful  during  coitus.

■  Much  itching  of  vulva  in  weakly,  delicate  women  with

red  face,
i  I  Leucorrhoea  before  menses.

■  Leucorrhoea  resembling  watery  milk,  smarting  and  cor-

roding when  first  appearing,  not  afterwards;  dragging
pains  in  loins,  pelvis  and  thighs.

■  Leucorrhoea  mild  and  milky,  or  acrid  and  sharp,  with

soreness. ^Chlorosis.
Eruption  on  genitals  or  inflamed;  ascarides  in  vulvae.
I  I  Gonorrhoea  of  women.
^*  Pregnancy. Parturition. Lactation. iSterility;  insensi-
bility during  coition.

■  Prevents  abortion; promotes  expulsion  of  moles.
I  I  Prolapsus  of  vagina,  only  during  pregnancy.

■  ■Suddenly  leaves  table  and  with  one  effort  vomits  all  the

food  taken,  appetite  not  thereby  impaired,  can  sit  down
and  eat  again. ^Pregnancy.

■  Varicose  veins  during  pregnancy.


FERRUM.  278

I  I  Great  nervous  erethism,  flowing,  and  pain,  with  fiery-
red  face ;  she  is  weak  and  pale. ^Miscarriage.

■  Uterine  hemorrhage  with  threatened  premature  labor,  at

end  of  eighth  month.

■  Uterine  hemorrhage  with  labor-like  pains,  glowing  face;

flow  watery,  or  containing  lumps;  j^ulse  full,  hard.

i  I  Spasmodic  labor  pains.

I  I  Violent  pains  in  loins  and  abdomen,  like  those  of  labor,,
with  discharge  of  partly  fluid  and  partly  clotted  blood ;
full,  hard  pulse;  frequent  short  shuddering;  headache
and  vertigo;  hot  urine;  feeble;  fiery  red  face.  ^Ex-
cessive or  too  long  lasting  after-pains.
^  Voice  and  Larynx.  Trachea  and  Bronchia.  ■  Voice
hoarse,  almost  extinct,  utterance  diSicult  and  panting..
^Intermittent.

I  I  Complete  aphonia,  causing  much  anxiety.

■  Can  talk  only  in  a  toneless  whisper,  and  only  that  which

is  absolutely  required  from  him;  pain  in  larynx  and
trachea;  after  talking,  burning;  sensation  as  if  some-
thing was  in  larynx,  which  he  wished  to  remove  by
hawking  or  coughing;  sensation,  externally,  as  if  throat
was  being  squeezed;  tickling  in  larynx,  producing  vio-
lent attacks  of  cough,  loses  breath,  blood  mounts  to
head,  tears  run  from  eyes,  he  sinks  down  exhausted ;
easily  vexed;  least  thing  excites  him;  pulse  accelerated
toward  evening;  cannot  get  to  sleep  in  evening,  and
after  he  does  fall  asleep,  sweat  awakens  him;  some
nights,  congestion  to  chest;  palpitation  of  heart;  pulsa-
tions in  all  the  arteries,  and  anxiousness;  despondent;
solicitude  about  those  belonging  to  him,  with  constant
thoughts  of  death;  pale,  earthy  color  of  face.  ^Aphonia.
I  I  Low  tone  of  voice;  pain  in  larynx  and  trachea;  burning
sensation  after  talking;  laryngeal  hemorrhages;  asth-
matic symptoms  with  haemoptysis. ^Aphonia.

■  Hoarseness,  with  sensation  of  roughness  in  larynx.

■  General  weakness,  caused  by  speaking.

■  Influenza,  cough  and  vomiting  of  food  immediately  after

eating.
^*^  Respiration. iHot  breath.

■  Uneasy  breathing,  from  pain  across  chest.

■  Breathing dry,  loud, anxious; sometimes rattling in

children.
I  1  Oppressed,  short  breathing.
I  1  Continued  shortness  of  breath.
I  I  Difficult  inspiration,  as  from  heaviness  of  chest.

■  ■Difficult  breathing,  oppression  of  chest,  as  if  some  one

pressed  with  hand  upon  it.

■  Cannot  get  any  air;  even  when  seated  his  breathing  is

difficult.


279  FERRUM.

■  Oppression  from  orgasm  of  blood;  chest  scarcely  moves

when  breathing;  nostrils  dilated  during  expiration.

■  Difficult  inspiration,  want  of  air  in  coughing  out,  want

of  air  in  drawing  in.

■  Breath  fails  at  end  of  coughing  fit.

■  Suffocative  fits  in  evening,  in  bed,  with  warmth  of  neck

and  trunk,  limbs  cold. ^Spasmodic  asthma.

■  Asthma,  with  oppression  of  chest  and  anxiety  at  pit  of

stomach,  preventing  free  respiration.

■  Catarrhal  asthma  every  morning  from  10  to  11.
■Asthma  worse  after  12  p.m.,  must  sit  up;  >  walking

about  slowly  and  talking;  >  uncovering  chest;  after
itch.

■  Asthma,  with  difficult,  slow  breathing,  >  by  walking

and  talking  or  by  constant  reading  or  writing;  <  when
sitting  still,  and  most  violent  when  lying  down,  espe-
cially in  evening.
I  I  Dyspnoea  increases  slowly. ^Pneumonia.

■  Pneumonia  epidemica:  dyspnoea  gradually  increased;  no

pressure  under  sternum;  pale  face;  stupid;  roof  of
mouth  white;  skin  neither  burning  nor  cold  and  damp;
pulse  never  hard  and  full.

■  Dyspnoea. ^Intermittent  fever.

^  Cough.  "Spasmodic,  from  tickling  in  trachea;  at  night,
must  sit  up  to  raise  sputa;  spasmodic,  after  eating,  with
vomiting  of  food;  after  drinking;  with  stitches  in  chest
and  soreness.
I  I  Cough  with  expectoration  only  in  morning  of  blood-
streaked,  purulent,  albuminous  mucous,  greenish  or
frothy,  tasting  sweetish,  putrid  or  sour.

■  Constant  tickling  irritation  to  cough,  with  copious,  green-

ish, blood-streaked,  purulent  expectoration,  great  de-
bility, emaciation  and  hectic  fever;  complete  cessation  of
menstrual  flow  which  is  replaced  by  a  blenorrhagia.

I  I  Catarrhal  cough,  with  aching  pain  in  upper  part  of
sternum.

■Spasmodic  cough  with  expectoration  of  transparent,  tena-
cious mucous,  and  vomiting  of  ingesta.

■  ■Spasmodic  cough  after  meals  with  vomiting  of  all  the

food  taken.
1  I  Cough  with  gagging  and  vomiting.

■  Spasmodic  cough,  in  evening  without,  in  morning  with

blood-streaked,  purulent,  slimy,  sometimes  frothy  expec-
toration, of  a  sweetish,  putrid  or  sour  taste,  <  in  eve-
ning till  midnight;  during  this  period  the  sputa  are  not
dislodged,  but  in  daytime,  during  motion,  they  are
loosened;  suitable  for  drinkers  of  brandy,  excessive  tea-
drinkers,  or  for  persons  who  have  taken  much  Cinchona.


FERRUM.  280

■  Spasmodic  whooping  cough,  dry  in  evening,  in  morning,

copious,  purulent,  blood-streaked  expectoration,  and  sour

vomiting  of  food  ;  at  once  >  by  eating  a  small  quantity

of  food.
1 1  Whooping  cough ;  child  vomits  food  with  every  coughing

spell ;  great  pallor  and  weakness.
I  Cough :  worse  from  abuse  of  tea,  quinine,  brandy ;  tobacco

smoke;  loss  of  fluids;  when  moving;  violent  exertion;

after  talking;  at  night.
Cough  with  oppression  of  chest  and  pale  face.
Cough  excited  by  drinking,  often  >  by  eating.
Cough  only  in  daytime.
Gastric  cough,  eased  by  vomiting.

I  So-called  galloping  consumption  with  pus-like  expecto-
ration; vomiting  of  ingesta;  swollen  feet;  leucorrhoea;

diarrhoea.
t  I  Chronic  blenorrhoea  pulmonum.
I  Sputa: copious, putrid,  purulent, greenish or frothy,

bloody; < morning; copious when moving;  scanty,

thin,  frothy,  with  streaks  of  blood.

■  Hawking  up  of  bloody  phlegm.

1 B  Scanty,  thin,  frothy  expectoration,  with  streaks  of  blood.
1  Coughing  up  of  blood  in  morning  on  rising  from  bed.

■  Dry,  tickling  cough  with  blood- spitting.

■  Cough  with  expectoration  of  blood,  in  lean  people  with

yellowish  color  of  face,  who  cannot  sleep  well  at  night.

■  Patients  of  venous  constitution,  who  have  for  some  time

had  bloody  expectoration  and  complain  of  shortness  of
breath  without  any  particular  pain  in  chest,  and  suffer
occasionally  from  palpitation  of  heart.

■  iHsemoptysis:  of  onanists  and  consumptives;  from  severe

exertion; after  loss  of  fluids; from  suppressed  menses.

■  Haemoptysis  in  a  laborer  whose  work  compelled  him  to

receive  constant  light  blows  on  pit  of  stomach ;  blood
watery  and  coagulated;  prsecordial  region  sensitive  to
touch  and  painful,  pain  spreading  from  thence  over
nearly  whole  abdomen;  pulse  full,  hard  and  excited;
face  pale; great  weakness.

■  Blood  scanty,  clear  and  bright  red,  escaping  with  an  easy

effort  at  vomiting;  pain  between  shoulders;  constriction
of  chest,  <  at  night;  cannot  sit,  but  is  >  by  slowly
walking  about,  must  frequently  lie  down,  is  very  weak,
particularly  after  talking;  must  cough  after  any  exer-
tion. ^Haemoptysis.

■  Haemoptysis  morning  and  night; blood bright,  coagu-

lated, scanty  during  slight  cough  with  interscapular
pains;  heavy  breathing;  must  sit  up;  >  walking  slowly
about,  notwithstanding  weakness  obliges  lying  down;
palpitation.


•281  ,  FERRUM.

^  Inner  Chest  and  Lungs.  ■  Slight  heaviness  in  upper  part
of  1.  lung,  making  breathing  rather  difficult;  sore  feel-
ing below  clavicle  and  1.  nipple,  cannot  take  a  long
breath.

I  Slight,  dull,  heavy  pain  across  upper  part  of  chest,  ren-
dering breathing  uneasy.

Fulness  and  tightness  in  chest  as  if  constricted,  <  walking.

I  Pain  in  1.  side  with  dyspnoea. ^Intermittent  fever.

I  I  Fugitive  pains  in  chest,  flying  from  one  point  to  another.

•  Women  who  blush  easily;  <  after  wine;  epistaxis  in  al-
ternation with  spitting  of  blood;  pains  in  chest  fugrtive,
cannot  be  located;  menses  watery  or  absent.  ^Pul-
monary consumption.

■  Shooting  stinging  in  chest.

■  Sticking  and  bruised  sensation  in  chest.

I  I  When  coughing,  stitches  in  chest;  sensation  of  soreness.

I  Feeling  of  dryness  and  heat  in  chest.

I  Burning  in  upper  part  of  sternum  after  coughing.

■  Pressure  superiorly under sternum, with  catarrh  and

cough.
I  Contractive  cramp  in  chest,  and  cough  only  when  moving

and  walking.
I  Constriction  of  chest  at  night  due  to  erethism  of  vascular

system  and  congestion  of  blood  to  chest ;  <  from  least

covering  of  bed  clothing ;  >  lying  with  chest  elevated ;

boring in chest; not noticeable during day while

going  about.
I  Congestion  to  chest. ^Aphonia.
I  Congestion  of  blood  to  lungs,  with  haemoptysis,  attended

by  palpitation  of  heart,  obliging  patient  to  sit  up.
I  Rush  of  blood  to  head  and  chest,  with  cold  hands  and

feet,  followed  by  debility.
1  Haemoptysis,  especially  when  tickling  cough  and  oppres-
sion of  chest  are  present.
I  Haemoptysis; morning  and at  night; > by walking

slowly.
-I  Incipient  tuberculosis,  with  transient  pains  in  chest  and

discolored  sputa; in  later  stages  when  there  is  vomiting

of  food; constant  pressure  in  epigastrium,  and  crowded

sensation  in  chest.
■Tuberculosis  with  flying  pain  in  chest,  and  hectic  fever.

■  Pulmonary  tuberculosis;  especially  in  young,  florid  sub-

jects, with  a  remarkable  erethism  of  vascular  system,
and  inclination  to  congestion  to  chest.
lAnsemia  in  chlorotic,  or  tuberculous  subjects  with  profuse
serous  effusion,  with  ascites  and  oedematous  feet,  scanty
urination;  bruised  feeling  in  chest,  orthopnoea;  want  of
air; <  in  walking,  j^reventing  inspiration  and  compel-


FERRUM.  282

ling  them  to  sit  up  in  bed;  <  after  midnight;  pains  in
chest,  with  stitching  and  tension  between  shoulders,
allowing  no  motion.

■  Consumption  in  consequence  of  erethic  chlorosis.

■  Whole  body  emaciated  and  covered  with  a  clammy  col-

liquative, sweat;  face  hippocratic,  sunken,  earthy  in
sunken,  dull,  yellowish  and  filled  with  tears;  pale  lips;
tongue  pale  and  flabby ;  whole  throat  and  pharynx  sore
and  ulcerated;  voice  rough,  hoarse,  scarcely  audible;
constriction  of  chest;  difficult  respiration  (mainly  accom-
plished by  abdominal  muscles,  the  thorax  being  mo-
tionless, with  great  expansion  of  alse  nasi  during  expi-
ration); stitching  pain  in  chest  extending  back  into
shoulder  blades ;  tickling  in  larynx  with  anxious  irri-
tation to  cough,  copious,  greenish,  blood-streaked,  foul-
tasting  expectoration ;  great  debility  and  lassitude ;  stitch-
ing pain  here  and  there  in  limbs;  colliquative  diar-
rhoea excoriating  the  rectum;  chilliness,  particularly
over  back,  <  evenings,  with  cold  extremities  and  hot
palms  of  hands;  loss  of  appetite;  thirst  and  sleepless-
ness; scalp  painful  to  touch  with  falling  out  of  the  hair.
^Phthisis  florida  after  pneumonia.
■No  ailments  previous  to  chill;  dyspnoea  increases  slowly;
face  pale,  and  in  adults  collapsed,  hippocratic  or  expres-
sionless, stiff  and  stupid;  roof  of  mouth  always  white;
skin  neither  cold  nor  burning  hot;  pulse  neither  full
nor  hard;  stool  consistent,  brown. ^Pneumonia.

■  Inflammation  of  lungs  with  roof  of  mouth  white;  dry

skin  and  gradually  increasing  oppression.

■  Pneumonia  senilis;  laxity  of  fibre;  pulse  soft  and  quick,

occasionally slow and easily compressible; dyspnoea,
slowly  increasing;  bloody  expectoration.
I  I  Neglected  pleuropneumonia;  absorbs  exudation.
^^  Heart,  Pulse  and  Circulation. Drawing  constrictive  pain
in  region  of  heart.

■  Congestion  to  chest ;  anxiety;  palpitation  of  heart;  pul-

sation in  all  the  arteries. ^Aphonia.

■  Palpitation,  with  fear;  has  to  move  about,  can  neither

sit  nor  stand.
I  I  Palpitation ;  beats  of  heart  <  from  least  motion.

■  Palpitation: > walking  slowly;  in  onanists;  after  loss

of  fluids;  with  blood-spitting;  in  chlorosis.

I  I  Anxiety  in  chest,  heat  rising  from  pit  of  stomach  up-
ward, after  bodily  exercise ;  palpitation. ^Heart  disease.

■Rapid  action  of  heart.

■  Hard,  strong  beating  of  heart;  pseudo-pk'thora.

■  Bellows-sound of  heart,  and  anaemic murmur  of  the


283  FERRUM.

arteries  and  veins;  muscles  feeble,  and  easily  exhausted
from  slight  exertion ;  oedema  of  body. ^Anaemia
iConsecutive  heart  disease ;  chlorosis.

■  Hypertrophy  of  heart.

I  i  Endocarditis  with  chlorotic  symptoms.

I  Fatty  degeneration  of  heart.

I  Pulse  accelerated  towards  evening. ^Aphonia.

■  Violent  ebullitions.

■  Pulse  full,  hard;  increased  by  exertion.

I  I  Pulse  hard  and  full  at  beginning  of  paroxysm  ;  or  weak^

small  and  scarcely  perceptible  during  apyrexia.  ^In-
termittent fever.

■  Soft,  quick,  occasionally  slow  pulse;  weak,  easily  com-

pressible. ^Pneumonia.
■Small,  weak  pulse,  sometimes  intermittent,  sometimes
uneven.

■  Chlorosis  with  vertigo  on  moving,  stooping,  etc.,  pressing

pain  in  forepart  of  head  and  in  stomach,  anorexia,  con-
stipation, skin  of  face  and  body  of  waxy  appearance,
lips  and  tongue  pale,  menses  scanty,  watery  and  at
times  entirely  absent,  emaciation,  great  debility,  as  if
her  knees  would  sink  under  her,  occasionally  swelling
of  face,  hands  and  particularly  of  feet,  urine  clear  as
water,  constant  chilliness  and  coldness,  pulse  weak.

■  Chlorosis  in  consequence  of  retarded  puberty;  after  loss

of  blood.

■  lErethic  chlorosis,  <  in  winter.

■  lAnsemia  masked  behind  plethora  and  congestions;  pale

color  of  mucous  membranes,  with  nun's  murmur.

■  Great  erethism  of  the  circulation;  red  face  and  full  pulse;

blood  partly  fluid  and  partly  clotted,  with  labor-like
pains  in  abdomen;  feels  <  in  the  night,  particularly
after  midnight,  from  fat  food,  abuse  of  Peruvian  bark ;
very  weak. ^Hemorrhage.

■  Throbbing  in  all  the  blood-vessels;  soft  bellows-sound

at  apex.

II  Nun's  murmur  in  the  veins.

^°  Outer  Chest. Sensation  in  clavicle  as  if  gone  to  sleep.
Pain  in  outer  parts  of  chest.

■  Drawing  in  chest  and  around  heart;  scalp  sore.
^^  Neck  and  Back. ■  Neck  sore  as  if  bruised ;  stiff.

■  Neck  and  shoulder  painful  when  lying  on  r.  side.

■  Pains  between  shoulders.

■  Constant  pains  along  back,  <  in  those  parts  she  had  to

lie  on. ^Enlargement  of  liver.

■  Lumbago  all  night,  goes  off  on  rising.

■  Pain  in  region  of  kidneys,  with  desire  to  make  water;

urine  albuminous,  feet  and  legs  dropsical.


FERRUM.  284

I  Stitch-like  jerks  in  small  of  back  when  walking,  extend-
ing toward  hips  rather  than  upper  parts ;  more  painful
after  sitting  or  standing  (almost  as  after  straining  the
parts  by  lifting).
^^  Upper  Limbs, l Paralytic  heavine'ss  in  shoulder-joint.

I  Omodynia,  either  side ;  pain  especially  in  deltoid  muscle,
of  a  constant,  drawing,  tearing,  laming  nature,  <  in
bed,  must  get  up  and  slowly  move  about;  also  <  from
being  too  lightly  covered  for  an}^  length  of  time ;  face
pale,  flushing  easily;  no  swelling.

I  Omodynia  in  Spring,  affecting  both  deltoid  muscles;  in
Fall  a  recurrence,  but  only  in  1.  deltoid;  violent  lanci-
nating pain  when  moving  arm,  making  her  cry  out.

■  Constant  dull  tearing  or  quick  darting  pain  in  deltoid,

particularly  at  insertion  of  biceps  muscle,  and  extend-
ing with  decreasing  severity  to  elbow ;  <  holding  arm
quiet,  warmth  of  bed,  uncovering  for  any  length  of
time;  cannot  move  elbow  from  body  without  severe
pain;  lifting  arm,  or  lifting  hand  to  head,  or  putting
hand  behind  back  utterly  impossible.
I  I  Pain,  shooting  and  tearing,  from  shoulder-joint  into
upjDcr  arm  and  farther  downward,  which  makes  it  im-
possible to  raise  it.

■  Downward  shooting  pains  (in  shoulders  and  arms)  more

severe  than  the  shooting  upward.

■  Slight  gnawing  pain  in  1.  arm,  finally  becoming  so  severe

as  to  compel  her  to  keep  arm  quietly  at  side ;  pain  con-
stant, preventing  sleep;  least  movement  of  fingers  causes
pain  in  arm;  arm  heavy  as  lead;  pressure  upon  head
of  humerus  very  painful;  chilliness,  heat,  thirst  and
sweat  present.  ^Rheumatismus  humeri.
Flesh  of  r.  arm  and  shoulder  sore  to  touch,  feels  bruised,
<  from  motion,  pain  >  by  external  heat.

■  Pinching  in  r.  deltoid.

■  Boring  in  r  shoulder,  and  from  biceps  to  elbow;  <  from

motion; >  from  heat; <  from  weight  of  bedclothes.

■  Paralytic  tearing  pain from  shoulder-joint  into  upper

arm  (left);  he  cannot  raise  arm;  slow  movement  im-
proves it  gradually.

■Nightly  tearing  and  stinging  in  arms.

I  I  Cracking  in  shoulder-joint.

■  Right  arm  lame.

■  Arms  nearly  rigid.

■  Irresistible  desire  to  bend  arm,  with  intense  pain;  drives

out  of  bed,  2  a.m.  ; >  walking  slowly  about.
I  I  Swelling  and  stiffness  of  arm  and  hand.
1  I  When  writing  hand  trembles,  >  when  writing  fast.
■Hands  cold,  stiff,  numb;  palms  hot.


285  FERRUM.

I  Fingers  stiff,  numb,  contracted.
^^  Lower  Limbs. I  Violent  pain  in  hip-joint,  <  evening  until
12  P.M.;  must  get  out  of  bed  and  walk  about;  can  hardly-
put  foot  down,  but  pain  lessens  while  walking.

■  Shooting  and tearing  in  hip-joint, which  pains as  if

bruised  when  touched ;  down  along  tibia;  <  evening,
in  bed ;  must  get  up  and  walk  about.

I  Remitting  pains;  <  in  night;  although  at  first  scarcely
able  to  stand  on  affected  limb,  by  continued  motion  and
walking  about,  pain  gradually  becomes  milder;  pain  in
1.  shoulder;  face  pale,  emaciated,  but  flushes  easily.
^Sciatica.

I  Numbness  of  thighs.

I  Varicose  veins  inside  of  r.  thigh,  then  of  1.

■  Neuralgia,  throbbing  at  night;  <  in  rest; >  moving.

■  Painful  drawing  in  legs,  with  heaviness  and  stiffness.

■  Legs  feel  weak.

■  Great  weakness  of  knees,  almost  sinks to  the  ground.

■  Calves  weak  as  if  bruised.

■  Cramps  in  calves,  <  at  rest,  especially  at  night.

■  Sore  throat  and  chronic  enlargement  of  tonsils; great

weakness  in  joints,  especially  in  ankles;  ligaments  be-
came so  relaxed  that  she  could  not  walk  or  stand,  on
attempting  to  do  so  her  legs  seemed  to  slip  off  the  feet
and  she  would  drop  upon  her  external  ankles. ^Ansemia.

■  Feet  cold,  numb,  stiff.

■  CEdema  of  feet. ^Intermittent  fever.
■Varices  on  feet.

I  I  Shooting  pricking  in  r.  instep.

■  Cramps  in  soles  of  feet  and  toes,  with  painful  contraction

of  toes ;  cramps  in  calves  of  legs  at  night.

■  Soles  feel  hot.

■  Heel  pains.

■  Easily  fatigued  by  walking; better  from  moving  and

walking  slowly  about,  but  weakness  obliges  to  lie  down.
^*  Limbs  in  General. ■Nightly  tearing  in  arms  and  legs.

■  Stitching  tearing  pains,  < at  night; must  constantly

change position  of  limbs; face pale and emaciated.
Neuralgia  in  limbs,  throbbing,  <  at  night,  by  lying  down,

in  rest,  in  sitting;  >  on  moving.
I  I  Restlessness  in  limbs.
I  1  Contraction  of  limbs.
I  I  Cramps  in  limbs  (during  the  day).
I  1  Cracking  in  joints.

■  Swelling  of  hands  and  of  legs  up  to  knees.

■  Hands  and  feet  almost  continually  cold.

^^Rest. Position. Motion. Rest:  neuralgia  <;  cramps  in
calves  <.


FERRUM.  286

Laying  head  on  table:  >  singing  and  humming  in  ears.

Holding  arm  quiet:  <  pain.

Lying  with  chest  elevated:  constriction  >.

Ljang  down:  desire  to;  hammering  pain  in  head  compels
one  to ;  pain  in  face  < ;  pain  in  os  tincse ;  asthma  < ;
weakness  obliges.

Pain  <  from  lying  down,  >  from  rising.

Sitting  up :  >  pain  in  face ;  asthma  > ;  cough  compels  him
to  sit  up  to  raise  sputa;  congestion  of  blood  to  lungs,
with  palpitation,  obliges  patient  to  sit  up.

Sitting  up  after  sleeping:  sweat  goes  off  suddenly.

Pain  <  in  part  of  back  she  lies  on.

Can  only  lie  on  back  at  night.

Cannot  lie  long  on  either  side.

Must  change  position  to  relieve  pains  in  limbs.

Sitting  still :  asthma  <;  stitch-like  jerks  in  back  <;  falls
asleep.

Standing:  stitch-like  jerks  in  back  <.

■  Better  walking  slowly  about.

Motion:  sudden,  brings  on  throbbing  headache;  beating
pain  in  head  <;  the  least  renews  diarrhoea;  least  <
flow  of  menses;  sputa  dislodged  during;  cough  <;
cramp  and  cough ;  boring  in  chest  >  ;  pains  in  chest  and
between  shoulders  allow  no  motion;  must  move  about,
cannot  sit  or  stand ;  palpitation  < ;  vertigo  with  chlo-
rosis; of  arm,  lancinating  pains;  the  least  of  fingers
causes  pain ;  bruised  feeling  in  r.  arm  and  shoulder  < ;
boring  in  shoulder  <;  slow  motion  >  pain  in  arm;
>  pain  in  lower  limbs;  neuralgia  > ;  heat  > ;  sweat  <.

Talking:  burning  in  larynx;  asthma  >  ;  cough  <.

Rising:  vertigo;  after  rising  and  dressing  pressure  in
frontal  eminence;  coughing  up  blood  on  rising  from
bed;  lumbago  >.

Cannot  keep  head  quiet.

Cannot  move  elbow  from  body  without  severe  pain ;  can-
not raise  arm.

Irresistible  desire  to  bend  arm.

Stooping:  <  beating  pain  in  head;  nosebleed;  vertigo
with  chlorosis.

Must  get  up  and  slowly  move  about.

After  getting  out  of  bed:  chill  >.

Going  down  stairs:  headache  <.

Fall  forward:  must  lean  against  something  to  prevent
falling;  danger  of  falling  when  descending.

Walking:  giddy,  as  if  drunk;  vertigo,  with  sickness  of
stomach;  painful  weight  of  viscera;  abdomen  feels  sore
and  bruised;  involuntary  urination;  asthma  >  ;  heavy
breathing  >;  tightness  inchest  <;  cramp  and  cough;


•287  FEPtRUM.

slowly,  haemoptysis  > ;  palpitation  >  from  slow ;  stitch-
like jerks  in  small  of  back;  slowly  >  pain  in  arms;
pain  in  hip-joint  > ;  must  get  out  of  bed  and  walk  slowly.
•^^  Nerves, l  Over-sensitiveness  to  pain.
I  Nervous  excitability  and  anxiety.

■  Increased  bodily  irritability.

•  I  Restless,  must  walk  slowly  about.

I  Great  nervousness  and  debility;  great  disposition  to  lie
or  sit;  red  face;  weak,  clilorotic.

■  Weak  and  nervous,  suffers  much,  has  very  red  cheeks.

I  Very  weak  and  tired,  but  always  >  w^alking  slowly  about.

■  Tired,  aching,  as  from  lying  long  in  one  position.
Relaxation  and  debility  after  excitation  which  might  be

mistaken  for  exuberance  of  life.

■  After  an  attack  of  pneumonia,  debility  and  chlorosis;

paleness  of  face  and  mucous  membranes;  swelling  of
spleen;  want  of  muscular  power;  anaemic  murmurs.

■  Great  weakness  and  prostration;  very  easily  fatigued.

iLaxness  and  weakness  of  whole  musculature,  with  ema-
ciation, weakness  of  digestion,  and  coldness  of  ex-
tremities.

■  General  w^eakness,  even  from  talking.

■  Great  languor,  with  emaciation.

■  Prostration,  debility  and  great  loss  of  muscular  power.

■  Pr-ostration,  with  slow,  weak  pulse.

I  I  Prostration,  lethargic  dulness,  vertigo,
i Weakness  of  body  almost  paralytic;  she  is  so  weak  that
she  must  lie  down.

■  Paralysis  from  loss  of  fluids.
Consecutive  paralysis;  generally  one-sided.

■  Frequent  attacks  of  tremor,  alternating  with  a  sensation

of  weakness,  as  if  very  weary ;  trembling  of  whole  body.
I  I  Frequent  and  sudden  attacks  of  trembling  throughout
body,  with  great  weakness,  lassitude  and  desire  to  sleep,
which  does  not  relieve.

■  Fainting  spells,  with  subsequent  weakness.
I  I  Light  spasms,  with  numbness  of  limbs.

I  I  Tetanic  spasms  with  cataleptic  condition  of  upper  por-
tion of  body.

■  Chorea.

■  Cataleps3^

^^  Sleep. Falls asleep : from weariness or debility ; while
sewing;  sitting  and  studying.

■  Excessive  and  drowsy  fatigue,  with  restless  sleep  at  night.

■  Sleepy  at  night,  with  inability  to  sleep.

■  Restless  sleep  at  night;  cannot  get  to  sleep  in  evening;

after he  does fall asleep,  a  sweat  breaks  out  which
awakens  him,  and  he  has  to  lie  a  long  time  before  he


FERRUM.  28a

can  go  to  sleep  again,  and  so  on  until  morning ;  some
nights,  congestion  to  chest;  palpitation  of  heart;  pulsa-
tion in  all  the  arteries,  with  anxiousness. ^Aphonia.

I  Bad  sleep  before  midnight.

lAnxious  tossing  in  bed  before  12  p.m.  ;  has  to  get  up  and
walk.

■  Child  does  not  sleep  because  of  itching  from  ascarides.

I  Can  lie  only  on  back  at  night.

I I  The  pain  forces  him  to  get  up  out  of  bed  at  night  and
walk  slowly  about.

1  I  Is  worse  from  being  too  lightly  covered  for  any  length

of  time.

■  Weariness  and  drowsiness  in  daytime,  with  light  sleep

at  night,  full  of  dreams,  attended  with  seminal  emis-
sions; vivid  dreams  of  being  engaged  in  war,  or  that
he  fell  into  water.

■  Disturbed by dreams; much  weariness on rising in

morning.

■  Dreams :  vivid ;  confused ;  unpleasant.

■  Nightmare.

^^  Time.  Morning :  pressure  in  frontal  eminence,  extending-
over  whole  forehead  to  vertex  and  becoming  more  in-
tense; headache  <  towards;  stitches  in  ears;  nosebleed;
toothache;  mouth  dry;  diarrhoea  <;  cough  with  ex-
pectoration of  blood-streaked  mucus;  whooping  cough;
copious  blood-streaked  expectoration;  coughing  up  of
blood;  haemoptysis;  much  uneasiness  on  rising;  loose
stool  early  in;  chilliness  with  headache;  sweat  <.

2  A.M.:  driven  out  of  bed  by  pain.

3  A.M.:  severe  stitches  in  temples.

8  A.M.:  sudden  discharge  from  bowels.

12  P.M.:  asthma  <  after.

All  day:  frontal  headache;  dull  and  heavy;  pain  in  small
of  back  and  liver;  straining  for  stool.

By  day:  involuntary  urination;  incontinence  of  urine
more  frequent;  erections;  sputa  dislodged;  cough  and
boring  in  chest  >  ;  sweat  <.

Afternoon:  shooting  headache;  violent  chill  lasting  half
hour.

Evening:  lively;  headache;  darkness  before  eyes;  appetite
voracious;  fever  towards;  pulse  accelerated  towards;
cannot  get  to  sleep;  suffocating  fits;  asthma  <;  spas-
modic cough;  putrid  or  sour  taste  <;  till  midnight
sputa  not  dislodged;  whooping  cough  dry;  haemoptysis;
chilliness  <  ;  violent  pain  in  hip  joint  <  till  midnight;
chilly;  general  coldness;  heat  <  ;  can  only  sit  up  short
time.

Night:  capability  to  see  in  dark;  diarrhoeic  flatulent  colic;,


289  FERRUM.

undigested  stool;  slimy,  watery  diarrhoea  < ;  itching  in
anus;  hemorrhoidal  flux  from  anus  and  bladder  <;
involuntary  urination ;  incontinence  of  urine,  floods  bed
five  or  six  times;  erections;  nocturnal  emissions;  con-
gestion to  chest;  must  sit  up  to  raise  sputa;  cough  <;.
constriction  of  chest;  after  abuse  of  Peruvian  bark,  from
fat  food  feels  <;  lumbago;  tearing  and  stinging  in.
arms ;  remitting  pains  in  lower  limbs  < ;  cramps  in
calves  < ;  tearing  in  arms  and  legs ;  restless  sleep  at
night;  can  only  lie  on  back;  chilly;  general  coldness;
feet  cold  and  numb;  sweat.

Midnight:  headache  <  after;  vomiting  of  food  immediately
after;  bad  sleep  before;  after,  anaemia  < ;  after  abuse  of
Peruvian  bark,  or  from  fat  food  feels  <.
^^  Temperature  and  "Weather. Overheating  produces  neu-
ralgia.

External  heat:  >  pain  in  arms;  boring  in  shoulder  <.

Warmth  of  bed:  pain  in  arm  <.

Warmth: >  soreness  of  abdomen.

Uncovering  chest:  asthma  >.

Too  lightly  covered:  omodynia  <.

Least  covering:  constriction  <.

After  getting  oat  of  bed:  chill  >.

Open  air: >  headache;  dread  of.

Cold  water:  >  momentarily  toothache ;  taste  in  mouth  <,

Cold  washing  produces  neuralgia.

Cold  air :  pressure  on  top  of  head  caused  by.

In  July,  sleeping  with  window  open :  intestinal  catarrh.

Generally  <  in  cold  weather,  >  in  warm  air.

Winter:  erethic  chlorosis  <.
*°  Fever, l Vomiting  of  ingesta  as  chill  is  coming  on;  loose
stool  in  early  morning.

I  Frequent  short  attacks  of  shivering  or  shuddering.

I  Chilliness  with  trembling  all  over.

iChilly;  want  of  animal  heat.

I  1  Chilliness,  with  headache  in  morning.

I  Chill  with  thirst; headache; hot,  red  face; chilly  all
night.

I  Chilliness,  with  great  thirst,  preceded  and  succeeded  by
headache.

■  During  chill  face  is  glowing  hot.

I  Chilly  every  evening;  hectic  fever.

•  General  coldness  of  body,  hands  and  feet  very  cold.

■  General  coldness  in  evening,  in  bed,  often  lasting  all

night.
I  Hands  and  feet  cold  and  numb,  chilly  all  over,  not  >

by  walking.
I  Feet  very  cold,  toes  cold  as  ice,  fingers  stifi".

VOL  V. — 19.


FERRUM.  290

I  Feet  cold  and  numb  all  night,  as  after  skating.

I  I  Chill,  lessened  after  getting  out  of  bed.

I  Chill  better  after  eating.

I  I  Sensation  of  heat  all  over  body,  which  is  cold  to  touch,

with  sensation  in  face  and  around  eyes,  as  if  swollen

and  bloated.

■  Heat,  with  very  red  face  and  inclination  to  uncover,
i  I  Heat  in  body,  with  red  cheeks,  but  head  is  free.

■  Head  hot,  feet  cold.

I  Great  heat  of  palms  of  hands  and  soles  of  feet

I  I  Heat  in  stomach  (  >  by  eating),  vomiting  of  ingesta.

I  I  Dry  heat,  <  towards  evening ;  inclination  to  uncover ;

>  by  moving  about,  eating  and  speaking.
I  Heat,  without  thirst.
I  I  Fever,  without  chill,  3  to  8  p.m.
i  Heat  abating  when  moving  about,
i Flushes  over  body  as  if  perspiration  would  break  out.
I  I  The  perspiration  is  immediately  preceded  by  headache.
1  Sweat  profuse,  long  lasting  and  debilitating,  by  day  at

every  motion,  at  niglit  and  morning  in  be,d-
iSweat  from  early  morning  until  noon,  every  other  day,

preceded  by  headache.
I  At  times  anxious  cold  sweat  (with  cramps  of  different

parts).
.  Nausea  during  sweat.
I  Clam  my,  generally  debilitating  sweat.

■  Strong  smelling  night-sweat.

■  Sweat  stains  yellow,  is  fetid  on  going  to  sleep.
iViscid,  exhausting  sweats.

Sweat  often  confined  to  lower  part  of  body.
• Sweat  lessened :  while  speaking;  after  meals.
All  the  symptoms  <  while  sweating.

■  Cold  perspiration  with  convulsions.

■  During apyrexia profound disturbance of digestive

organs,  fulness  and  pressure  in  stomach,  regurgitation
and  vomiting  of  food,  slimy  or  watery  diarrhoea;  op-
pression of  chest,  tendency  to  mucorrhoea  and  hemor-
rhage, palpitation  of  heart,  vertigo  and  headache,  great
palenessof  lips  and  gums;  anaemic  murmur;  paroxysms
not  severe  but  protracted  and  irregular;  sweat  profuse
and  debilitating;  type  of  fever  easily  changing;  marked
swelling  of  spleen. ^Intermittent.

■  Prostration,  debility  and  great  loss  of  muscular  power;

anaemia;  cedema  of  feet  and  face,  especially  upper  and
lower  eyelids;  headache;  vertigo;  swelling  of  cutaneous
veins;  splenic  region  swollen  and  sore  on  pressure;
vomiting  of  everything  eaten;  constipation  or  chronic
diarrhoea  with  lienteria; cadaverous,  jaundiced  com-


^91  FERRUM.

plexion;  yellow  spots  on  face;  very  weak  and  tired,  but
always  >  walking  slowly  about;  cases  maltreated  by
quinine. ^Intermittent.

iCliill  lasting  one  hour,  7  to  8  a.m.,  one  day,  and  from  9
to  10  the  next,  first  in  feet,  extending  to  back,  <  r.  side;
nails  blue;  very  little  thirst,  nausea  or  pain;  slight
temporal  headache;  paroxysm  preceded  by  one  loose
stool  early  in  morning,  and  great  nervousness;  ill-
humor,  scolds  about  everything  and  everybody ;  fever
lasts  two  hours,  feet  continuing  cold  some  time  after
fever  sets  in;  sweat  profuse  and  debilitating  on  falling
asleep,  but  goes  off  suddenly  on  sitting  up;  dreads  sweat
more  than  chill  or  fever;  nausea  during  sweat;  sleep
restless  and  disturbed;  no  appetite;  face  sallow,  light
leather-color;  r.  cheek  slightly  swollen,  though  not  sore;
weak,  can  only  sit  up  a  short  time  in  evening.  ^Inter-
mittent.

■  Complete  aphonia,  great  prostration,  skin  pale,  puffi-
ness  about  eyes,  lips  and  gums  colorless,  ansemic  mur-
mur, constant  dyspnoea,  oedema  of  feet,  loss  of  appetite
with  pressure  in  stomach  after  least  food,  hard,  difficult
stool  followed  by  cramping  pains  in  rectum,  lasting
several  hours,  profuse,  offensive  smelling  sweat  on  going
to  sleep;  cough;  spleen  enlarged. ^Tertian  intermittent.

iParoxysm  every  other  day;  headache;  pressing  in  fore-
head, followed  by  violent  chilliness,  lasting  three-quar-
ters of  an  hour,  with  increased  headache  and  much
thirst,  afterwards  moderate  heat  and  sweat;  bitter  taste,
loss  of  appetite,  constipation,  yellowish  complexion ;  great
weakness;  moderate  headache  during  apyrexia.  ^In-
termittent.

lln  afternoon  violent  chill  for  half  an  hour,  then  thirst,
must  go  to  bed,  followed  by  heat  with  perspiration.

I  Intermittent  fever  after  abuse  of  quinine;  congestion  to
head;  veins  distended;  vomiting  ingesta;  swelling  of
spleen;  anaemia,  masked  by  pseudo-plethora;  skin  trans-
parent when  it  is  not  earthy.

I  Intermittent  fever  of  long  duration  and  maltreated  by
quinine,  where  there  is  complete  prostration  with  great
anaemia,  face  and  lips  pale,  body  cold,  particularly  ex-
tremities, digestion  impaired,  lassitude  and  weakness  of
whole  musculature,  and  great  emaciation,  lungs  affected,
circulation  disturbed  and  tendency  to  hemorrhages;
tuberculosis  threatens.

'■(Edematous  swelling  of  body;  cool  skin;  constant  chilli-
ness, evening  fever,  simulating  hectic  fever.

iThe  skin  becomes  paler  and  paler;  well-marked  black  or
dark  purplish  spots  on  skin. ^Intermittent.


FERRUM.  292

Type:  tertian;  morning  chill;  afternoon  fever.
^^  Attacks,  Periodicity. Frequent  short  shuddering.

Periodical  headaches.

Quarter  of  an  hour:  headache  in  morning,  grows  <.

20  minutes: headache  changing  to  pressive  pain  from
within  outward.

Three  quarters  of  an  hour  :  chilliness.

Stools  followed  for  hours  by  cramping  pain  in  rectum.

Chill  lasting  one  hour  from  7  to  8  a.m.,  one  day,  and  from
8  to  10  the  next.

Every  morning  from  10  to  11 :  catarrhal  asthma.

Every  afternoon:  chronic  watery,  painless  diarrhcea.

Every  evening:  chilly.

Every  other  day,  from  early  morning  until  noon :  sweat,
preceded  by  headache;  paroxysm.

Every  two  or  three  days:  menses  intermit  and  then  return.

Every  two  weeks:  for  a  few  days  headache.

Every  few  weeks:  scabs  come  out  of  nose  or  are  coughed  up.
^-  Locality  and  Direction.  Right:  as  if  head  would  incline
to  side;  eye  feels  as  though  it  would  protrude;  ringing
in  ear;  tightness  in  hypochondriac  region;  hardness
of  cheek;  neck  and  shoulder  painful  when  lying  on
side;  flesh  of  arm  and  shoulder  sore  to  touch;  pinching
in  deltoid;  boring  in  shoulder;  arm  lame;  varicose
veins  inside  of  thigh;  pricking  in  instep;  chill  <  r.
side  ; cheek  slightly  swollen.

Left:  sticking  pain  over  eye;  hammering  boring  pain  in
temple;  shooting  headache  in  side;  headache  on  side;
sudden  pain  over  eye;  discharge  from  ear;  murmur  in
jugular  vein;  sensation  of  lump  in  side  of  throat;  shoot-
ing pains  in  hypochondriac  region;  heaviness  in  upper
part  of  lung;  sore  feeling  below  nipple;  pain  in  side;
omodynia  in  deltoid;  gnawing  pain  inarm;  paralytic
tearing  pain  from  shoulder-joint  to  upper  arm;  varicose
veins  inside  of  thigh.
From  within  outward: headache.
^Sensations.  Giddy,  as  if  drunk;  as  if  everything  went  around
with  her;  as  if  balancing  to  and  fro;  staggering  as  if
intoxicated;  as  if  head  would  constantly  incline  to  r.
side;  as  if  skull  were  pushed  upward;  as  if  brain  were
rent  asunder;  as  if  grain  of  sand  were  in  eyes;  pressure
in  eyes  as  if  they  would  protrude;  face  as  if  swollen  or
bloated;  tongue  as  if  burnt;  as  of  a  lump  in  1.  side  of
throat;  throat  as  if  swollen  outside; as  if  a  nerve  was
quivering  in  stomach ;  as  if  a  valve  rose  in  throat ;  as  if
viscera  would  drop ;  bowels  as  if  bruised ;  bowels  as  if
beaten,  as  if  they  had  been  acted  upon  by  purgatives;


293


FERRUM.

bowels  as  though  they  were  going  to  move ;  as  if  some-
thing was  in  larynx ;  as  if  throat  was  being  squeezed ;
chest  as  if  constricted ;  clavicles  as  if  gone  to  sleep.
Pain :  in  back  of  head ;  in  face ;  in  stomach ;  in  stomach
through  to  spine;  in  back;  small  of  back  and  liver;  in
kidneys;  inchest;  in  bladder;  in  os  tincse;  in  loins;  in
vagina;  in  larynx  and  trachea;  across  chest;  between
shoulders;  in  1.  shoulder;  between  scapulae;  in  1.  side;  in
outer  parts  of  chest;  in  neck  and  shoulders;  in  deltoid
muscle;  in  heels.
Intense  pain :  in  arms.
Severe  frontal  headache.

Violent  pains:  in  loins  and  abdomen;  in  hip-joint.
A/'iolent  shooting:  headache  in  1.  side.
Lancinating:  in  forehead;  when  moving  arm.
Tearing  :  from  lambda  to  temporal  bone;  at  anus;  in  del-
toid, extending  to  elbow;  from  shoulder-joint  to  upper
arm;  from  shoulder-joint  into  upper  arm;  in  arms;  in
hip-joint;  in  legs.
Shooting  pains: in  1.  hypochondriac  region;  in  uterus;
in  chest; from  shoulder-joint  into  upper  arm;  down-
ward in  shoulder  and  arms;  in  hip-joint;  in  r.  instep.
Stitches:  severe  in  both  temples;  in  ears;  in  abdomen;

in  chest.
Stitch-like  jerks:  in  small  of  back;  to  hips.
Stitching  pain:  between  shoulders;  inchest;  into  shoul-
der-blades; in  limbs.
Sticking  pain:  over  1.  eye;  in  head;  in  uterus;  in  chest.
Stinging:  in  head;  in  eyes;  inchest;  inarms.
Pulsating  pain :  in  head.
Beating:  in  back  of  head  and  neck,  extending  to  sides

and  forehead;  of  pulse  in  head.
Hammering :  in  temples ;  in  head.
Throbbing:  in  pit  of  stomach;  pain  in  top  of  head;  in

brain ;  in  all  arteries ;  in  limbs.
Boring:  in  1.  temple ;  in  chest;  in  r.  shoulder;  from  biceps

to  elbow.
Pinching :  in  r.  deltoid.
Sharp  pains :  in  abdomen.
Labor-like  pains:  in  abdomen.
Remitting  pains :  in  lower  limbs.
Fugitive  pains :  in  chest.
Flying  pains :  in  chest.
Darting:  in  deltoid,  extending  to  elbow.
Neuralgia :  in  face ;  neuralgic  cardialgia  in  limbs.
Cramps:  in  calves;  in  soles  of  feet  and  toes;  in  limbs.
Cramping  pain :  in  rectum.
Contractive  cramp  :  in  chest.


FERRUM.  294

Cramp-like  pains:  in  splenic  region ;  stomachache.

Constrictive  pain  :  in  region  of  heart.

Colicky  pains:  in  abdomen.

Gnawing:  at  anus;  in  1.  arm.

Burning  pains :  in  eyes ;  in  sacrum.

Constant  pains  along  back.

Aching  pains:  in  eyes;  in  throat;  below  uterus;  upper-
part  of  sternum.

Paralytic  pain  from  shoulder-joint  to  upper  arm.

Ulcerative  pain  :  of  scalp ;  in  outer  ear.

Pressing  pain :  in  forehead ;  in  throat ;  in  forepart  of
head;  in  stomach;  in  head  of  humerus.

Dragging  pain:  in  loins;  in  pelvis ;  in  thigh.

Heavy  pain :  across  upper  part  of  chest.

Headache:  above  root  of  nose,  1.  side;  on  top  of  head.

Dull  pain:  across  upper  part  of  chest.

Burning:  in  stomach;  at  anus;  in  urethra;  in  larynx;:
in  upper  part  of  sternum.

Heat:  of  face;  of  head;  in  stomach;  in  chest;  in  soles;,
all  over  body.

Flushes  of  heat :  in  head.

Anxiety:  at  pit  of  stomach;  in  chest.

Bruised  feeling:  of  abdomen;  inchest;  in  neck  ;  in  hip-
joint;  in  calves.

Constriction :  of  chest.

Contraction :  of  limbs.

Drawing:  from  nape  of  neck  to  heel;  in  region  of  heart;.
in  chest ;  painful  in  legs.

Choking  sensation  :  in  throat.

Tickling:  in  urethra ;  in  larynx;  in  trachea.

Prickling :  in  brain.

Pricking:  in  r.  instep.

Soreness :  of  throat ;  of  abdomen  ;  of  bowels  :  of  urethra ;.
in  chest ;  below  clavicle ;  below  1.  nipple ;  of  ])harynx.

Roughness :  in  larynx.

Dryness :  of  mouth  ;  of  vagina ;  in  chest.

Crowded  sensation :  in  chest.

Heavy  feeling  in  head ;  in  eyelids ;  in  upper  part  of  1.,
lung;  in  legs.

Paralytic  heaviness: in  shoulder-joint.

Fulness:  in  pit  of  stomach;  in  region  of  liver;  in  r.  side
of  abdomen;  inchest.

Bearing  down  feeling:  in  uterus.

Painful  weight:  of  viscera.

Weight:  in  back  of  head;  in  sacrum.

Pressure :  on  top  of  head;  in  eyes;  at  stomach  ;  in  pit  of
stomach;  in  abdomen;  in  sacrum  ;  under  sternum.

Tension:  in  abdomen;  between  shoulders.


295  FERRUM.

Tightness :  in  r.  hypochondriac  region ;  in  chest.

Oppression :  of  chest.

Palpitation :  in  stomacli.

Trembling :  of  whole  body.

Restlessness:  of  limbs.

Uneasiness :  at  splenic  end  of  stomach.

Weakness:  of  legs;  of  knees;  of  calves;  of  whole  body.

Weariness :  of  feet.

Diilness:  of  head.

Roaring :  in  head  ;  in  brain.

Murmur:  in  1.  jugular  vein.

Humming :  in  ears.

Singing  or  ringing :  in  ears.

Buzzing: in  brain.

Cracking :  in  shoulder-joint ;  in  limbs.

Rumbling:  in  abdomen.

Burnt  sensation :  on  back  and  middle  of  tongue.

Pithy  feeling:  of  tongue.

Stiffness:  of  legs.

Numb  feeling :  of  tongue ;  in  arms ;  in  fingers ;  in  feet ;
in  thighs.

Formication :  of  scalp.

Itching:  on  seal});  at  anus;  of  vulva.
**  Tissues. "A  cachectic  state  from  faulty  nutrition  and  assim-
ilation.

Tendency  to  get  fat.

1 1  Emaciation.

I  Relaxation  and  weakness  of  entire  musculature  with
emaciation;  muscles  feeble  and  easily  exhausted  from
slight  exertion.

I  Pseudo-plethora;  congestions,  etc.,  yet  ana?mic;  face  is
earthy,  flushing  easily.

iHemorrhages;  blood  light  or  lumpy;  coagulates  easily.

I  Blood-vessels  distended,  especially  those  of  head,  face  and

feet.

I I  Red  parts  become  white.

llncrease  of  watery  elements  of  blood  and  decrease  of  solids.

llAneemia,  from  whatever  cause;  chlorosis  of  defective
menstruation,  or  simple  poverty  of  blood  induced  by
hemorrhages,  deficiency  of  air,  light,  and  suitable  food,
or  of  exhausting  diseases.

lAfter  severe  hemorrhages;  pale,  bloated  appearance;  skin
cool,  and  pitting  upon  pressure,  particularly  about  joints;
great  lassitude  and  debility;  cries  easily;  loss  of  appe-
tite with  aversion  to  food;  indications  of  acidity  of
stomach;  constipation;  menses  too  frequent  and  too  pro-
fuse. ^Anaemia.

I  lErethic  chlorosis,  worse  during  cold  weather.


FERRUM.  296

llChlorosis  after  great  loss  of  blood.
I  Anaemia  and  asthenia  of  Addison's  disease.
I  Dropsy  after  loss  of  fluids,  abuse  of  Cinchona,  intermit-
tent fever ;  anasarca.
Dropsy  of  scrotum,  legs  and  feet.
Dropsy  acute  or  chronic  in  liver  complaints.
Body  bloated;  pressure  with  finger  leaves  indentations.

■  Swelling  of  cutaneous  veins;  varices.

I  Glands  swollen,  with  rending,  tearing  pains.

■  Bonds  disposed  to  soften  or  bend;  fracture  unites  slowly.
Scrofulosis.

■  Atrophy  of  children.

■  Cracking  in  joints.

■  Sudden emaciation; muscles lax, limbs cold; weak

digestion.
^5  Touch.  Passive  Motion.  Injuries.  Touch:  head  sensi-
tive to  ;  scalp  very  sensitive  ;  pit  of  stomach  very  sensi-
tive; bowels  sore  to;  flesh  of  r.  arm  and  shoulder  sore
to  touch;  burning  sensation  with  pain  in  skin  when
touched.

Pressure:  >  headache;  liver  sensitive  to;  splenic  region
sore  on  pressure;  abdomen  painless;  swelling  of  body
pits  upon  pressure;  upon  head  of  humerus  very  painful.

Weight  of  bedclothes:  boring  in  shoulder  <.

Constant  light  blows  on  pit  of  stomach :  cause  hsemoptysis.
^^  Skin. BDry  skin. ^Pneumonia.

■  Skin  pale,  yellow,  sallow,  dirty,  withered,  flabby.

■  Burning  sensation, with pain as if excoriated when

touched.

■  Yellow-brown  spots,  sore  to  touch.

■  Inflammation  and  suppuration  of  dark  hepatic  spots.

■  Dirty  brownish  discoloration  of  skin.

■  Sharply defined black, or dark violet  spots on  skin.

■  Skin  peels  off  on  shoulders  and  left  hand.

■  Scarlatina  during  desquamation.

■  Swelling  of  cutaneous  veins.

■  Anasarca.

■  Ulcers  pale,  cedematous.

■  Warts  on  fingers  and  backs  of  hands.

*^  Stages  of  Life,  Constitution.  ■  ■Adapted  to  persons  of  san-
guine, choleric  temperament;  pettish,  quarrelsome,  dis-
putative,  easily  excited,  least  contradiction  angers;
women  are  weak,  delicate,  chlorotic,  yet  have  a  very  red
face.
■Very  weak  and  thin.

■  ■General  hemorrhagic  diathesis.

■  ■Hemorrhophilia.
Dark  hair.


297  FERRUM.

Child,  set.  2|  years,  marked  lymphatic  constitution;
diarrhoea.

Child,  set.  3 ;  enuresis  diurna.

Boy,  set.  14  years,  of  rapid  growth,  very  pale  and  thin;
diarrhoea.

Girl,  set.  15,  not  yet  menstruated;  ansemia.

Boy,  set.  16;  gonorrhoea.

Girl,  set.  20;  chlorosis.

Man,  set.  24,  sanguine,  choleric  temperament,  after  pneu-
monia; phthisis.

Man,  set.  24,  light  com plexioned,  strong,  had  intermittent
fever  of  tertian  type  suppressed  by  quinine,  and  then
reappeared  as  a  quartan  with  marked  symptoms  of  Cin-
ch onism.

Girl,  set.  25;  blonde,  chlorosis.

Woman,  set.  26,  mother  of  two  children,  lymphatic  consti-
tution, phlegmatic  temperament,  after  loss  of  much
blood;  ansemia.

Man,  set.  27,  tall,  pale,  while  at  work  in  factory  receives
constantly  a  slight  blow  in  epigastric  region;  hsemop-
tysis.

Plump,  strong,  butcher's  widow,  aged  28;  ansemia  with
migraine.

Mrs.  B.,  set.  28,  lymphatic  temperament;  enuresis  diurna.

Man,  lively  disposition,  dark  complexioned,  after  washing
face  in  cold  water  while  overheated;  neuralgia.

Man,  set.  34;  intermittent  fever.

Man,  set.  37;  aphonia.

Man,  set.  45,  dyer,  thin,  muscular,  choleric,  dark  com-
plexion; rheumatism.

Woman,  set.  53, after  inflammation  of  liver; pain  and
swelling  of  liver.
^^  Relations. Antidoted  by: Arsen., Cinchona, Hepar, Ipec,
Pulsat.

It  antidotes:  Arsen.,  Cinchona,  lodum,  Mercur.,  Prus.  acid,
tea,  and  alcoholic  drinks.

Compatible:  Aeon.,  Arnica,  Bellad.,  Cinchona,  Conium,
Lycop.,  Mercur.,  Phosphor.,  Veratr.

Incompatible: Thea,  beer.

Complimentary:  to  Alum.,  Cinchona.

Compare :  Borax  (vertigo  when  descending),  Anac,  Spongia
(cough  >  after  eating),  Arsen.,  Cinchona  (intermittent
fever),  Phosphor,  (cholerine),  Selen.,  Thuja  (bad  effects
of  tea).


FERRUM  lODATUM.  295

FERRUM  lODATUM.

Iodide  of  Iron.  Fel^.

Trituration  of  freshly  prepared  crystals.

Proven  by  Fr.  Miiller,  of  New  York,  in  1851,  and  by  Gosewisch,  cf  Wilming-
ton, Del.,  in  1854.  The  latter  proving  (not  contained  in  Allen's  Encyclopedia)
vras  made  with  two  half-drop  doses  of  "Iodide  of  Ferri  potency,"  taken  four  days-
apart.

A  proving  conducted  by  E.  A.  Farrington,  with  Ferri  lod.  6th,  upon  a  female
prover  (not  in  Allen's  Encyclopedia),  has  also  been  inserted.  For  record  of  proving
see  Trans.  Horn.  Med.  Soc.  of  Penna.,  1874-78,  p.  254.

Clinical  Authorities. — Scrofulous  inflammation  of  eyes,  Fischer,  Eaue's  Eec.
1874,  p.  74;  Scrofulous  affection  of  nose,  Kaue's  Eec,  1870,  p.  119;  Ovarian  dropsy,.
Forcke,  Frank's  Mag.,  vol.  1,  p.  225;  Uterine  displacements,  Preston,  B.  J.  H.,  vol,
25,  p.  497;  Cough,  Miiller,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf,  vol.  5,  p.  681  ;  Tuberculosis,  Altschul.,
Eiick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  5,  p.  839 ;  Scoliosis,  distortion  of  spine  (3  cases),  Forcke,  Frank's
Mag.,  vol.  1,  p.  226;  Cancer,  Schneider,  Frank's  Mag.,  vol.  1,  p.  227.

^  Mind. Dulness  of  mind  and  general  thickness  in  head,  <

when  reading  aloud.
^  Sensorium. Dizzy ;  <  moving.

^  Inner  Head.  Headache,  a  confused  sensation,  with  feeling
of  heaviness  and  pressure,  especially  in  forehead,  more
on  r.  side,  <  in  warm  room,  by  smoking,  hat,  reading,
writing,  motion;  >  in  of)en  air,  sitting  down  or  stand-
ing in  a  draft  of  air.
Sharj)  pain  from  below  eye  up  through  head  to  vertex.
Headache  beginning  under  1.  eye  and  passing  up  through

to  top  of  head.
On  going  to  bed  slight  throbbing  pain  in  head  on  r.  side
and  upper  part  of  forehead,  also  at  back  part  on  1.  side
at  junction  of  head  and  neck.
Headache  felt  as  a  cutting  from  bridge  of  nose  through  the
occiput.
'  Sight  and  Eyes. A  phenomenon  similar  to  nebula  before
eyes,  except  that  the  objects  floating  before  eyes  are
bright  as  sparks  of  fire,  instead  of  dark  specks;  after
breakfast.
■  Eyes  shut  on account  of  pain and  photophobia; lids
swollen, discharging copious  quantities  of  pus  when
forcibly  opened; conjunctiva  bluish-red  ancl  swollen;
skin  pale;  nose  thick;  eczema  of  face;  submaxillary  and


299  FERRUM  lODATUM.

cervical  glands  swollen  and  hard;  periostitis  of  one
finger  and  two  toes;  body  emaciated ;  abdomen  large;
no  appetite. ^Scrofulous  inflammation  of  e,yes.

lAfter  suppression  of  menses,  protrusion  of  eyes,  enlarge-
ment of  thyroid  gland,  palpitation  of  heart  and  exces-
sive nervousness. ^Exophthalmic  goitre.

Burning  in  eyelids.

Trachoma.
^  Hearing  and  Ears, l  Roaring  in  ears.
"^  Smell  and  Nose. Nose  dry,  stopped  as  in  coryza,  more  free
towards  noon.

Coryza,  profuse  discharge  of  mucus  from  nose,  and  frequent
expectoration  of  mucus  from  larynx  and  trachea.

A  chronic  nasal  catarrh  becomes  worse;  discharge  usually
in  mornings,  now  lasts  all  day,  with  a  stuffed-up  feeling
at  night;  blowing  nose  gives  no  relief;  discharge  thick,
yellow  or  green.

■  Nose  thick. ^Scrofula.

■  Scrofulous  swelling  of  nose,  with  ulcers  and  crusts  inside.
^  Upper Face. Injected,  red  face.

Cheek  (right)  itches,  reddens  when  rubbed.
Vesicles  form,  which,  when  rubbed,  become  raw.
"  Taste  and  Tongue. Offensive  taste  in  mouth ; burning

on  tongue.
Tongue  coated  thickly  yellow.
^^  Inner  Mouth. Taste:  metallic;  bitter;  flat,  insipid;  bad  in

morning;  of  peppermint.
Increase  of  saliva.

Unpleasant  dryness  of  mouth  and  throat;  burning.
Sudden  bleeding  of  gums  at  3  p.m.
Mucous  membrane  of  mouth  and  pharynx  bright  red  or

dotted  with  red,  presenting  a  fine,  dense,  bright  red

papular  eruption,
i Submaxillary  and cervical glands swollen and  hard.

^Scrofula.
13  Throat. Violent  tickling  and  scraping  in  throat  and  nose,

with  sensation  as  though  he  would  suffocate;  hawking

of  mucus  and  cough.
Frequent  rattling  of  mucus  in  throat  and  expectoration.
Food seems  to  push  up  to  throat  as  if  it  had  not  been

swallowed.
^*  Appetite,  Thirst. Desires,  Aversions. iNo  appetite.

^Scrofula.
Very  thirsty.
^®  Hiccough,  Belching,  Nausea  and  Vomiting. Sour  and

bitter  rising  from  stomach.
Rising  up  in  throat  of  greasy,  acrid,  stinging  taste.
Violent  eructations,  some  nausea  and  a  qualmish  sensa-
tion; nausea  and  vomiting.


FERRUM  lODATUM.  300

^^  Scrobiculum  and  Stomach. Tenderness  in  pit  of  stomach ;

at same time  a  pinching pain in  back,  over  spine,

directly  behind  pit  of  stomach.
Fuhiess  even  after  a  little  food,  as  if  she  had  eaten  too

much,  a  sort  of  upward  pressure ;  stuffed  feeling  as  if

she  could  not  lean  forwards.
Stomach  full  of  wind ;  every  breath  gives  pain  as  from  a

weight  in  epigastrium.
On  rising,  or  at  night  when  turning  in  bed,  heart  beats

violently, with  pain in  epigastrium  or  lower  end  of

sternum.
Uncomfortable  feeling  in  epigastrium,  with  nausea  and

headache.
Digestion  impaired ;  dyspepsia  atonica.
^^  Hypochondria. Dull  pain  under  short  ribs.
^^  Abdomen. Stuffed  feeling  in  abdomen  as  if  she  could  not

lean  forward.
I  Abdomen  swollen. ^Scrofula.
Abdomen  bloated  after  food  or  drink ;  it  seems  to  push

upward;  even  a  small  quantity  of  food  causes  it;  may

or  may  not  feel  hungry,  but  food  soon  satisfies  her.
Rumbling  in  abdomen,  wdth  slight  colicky  pains,  before

stool.
Abdomen  when  pressed  feels  like  a  rubber  ball.
A  feeling  as  of  a  cord  drawn  connecting  anus  and  navel,

with  cutting  pain  every  time  he  straightens  up  from  bent

position.
If  she  happens  to  pinch  abdominal  walls,  or  to  crease  them,

the  parts  feel  sore  for  a  long  time.
A  feeling  of  numbness  in  fleshy  part  of  abdomen,  as  if

asleep,  but  without  the  tingling.
Inguinal  pains  extending  across  hypogastrium,  sides  feel

stiff,  as  after  a  strain.
Feeling  in  sides,  low  down,  as  of  needles  pricking  her;  <

raising  arms  and  walking; inguinal  region  sore  on

walking.
Stitches  in  r.  inguinal  region  when  walking.
"'^  Stool  and  Rectum. Bowels  not  moved  for  a  week;  then

stools  loose;  may  have  two movements,  first costive,

second  sudden  and  loose,  preceded  by  griping.
Small,  hard  stool,  with  sticking  and  pain  as  from  constric-
tion in  anus  on  passage  of  feces  through  it.
Feeling  in  rectum  and  especially  in  anus  as  if  it  were  com-
pressed,  a constriction, as  if  worms  were  in it; the

stool  is  easy  and  painless.
A  peculiar  feeling  in  rectum  and  anus,  as  if  something

twisted  and  turned  about  in  a  circle,  and  something  like

drops  of  water  flowed  down,  and  as  if  a  screw  were  boring

upward  and  downward.


301  FERRUM  lODATUM.

^'  Urinary  Organs. Pain  in  both  kidneys,  principally  left.

A  feeling  in  fossa  navicularis  as  though  the  water  remained
in  it  and  could  not  be  forced  out  any  further,  in  morning.

lUrine  dark-colored,  depositing  a  thick,  white  sediment;
urine  scalds.

Frequent  and  profuse  emission  of  light  yellow  urine,  hav-
ing a  sweetish  smell,  and  slight  milky  sediment.

I  Albuminuria  with  oedema  of  lower  extremities  was  in
some  cases  temporarily  relieved,  in  other  cases  entirely
cured.

A  hard  drinker,  set.  45,  after  catching  cold,  who  had,  next
day,  fever,  headache,  nausea,  vertigo,  oppression  of
chest,  oedema  of  feet,  and  much  albumen  in  urine,  was
entirely  cured.

I  I  Albuminuria;  diabetes.
"  Male  Sexual  Organs. Erections  at  night,  with  violent  pain
and  burning  in  urethra;  unable  to  urinate;  tenesmus
of  neck  of  bladder.

Prickling  itching  in  urethra,  especially  in  forepart,  with
frec|uent  urging  to  urinate,  but  very  little  flow.

Crawling  tickling  in  urethra  and  rectum.

I  Gonorrhoea.
^^  Female  Sexual  Organs.  !  Severe  hysterical  attacks,  with
frequent  spasms  and  syncope;  great  debility,  cachectic
appearance,  leucorrhoea,  anorexia;  finally  hydrops  of  r.
ovary  set  in;  enormous  swelling  under  border  of  r.  ribs;
menses  scanty,  preceded  by  painful  swelling  of  r.  breast,
and  followed  by  an  aggravation  of  the  constant  and  pro-
fuse leucorrhoea;  three  weeks  after  beginning  of  treat-
ment there  occurred  sudden  loss  of  consciousness  and
discharge  of  about  two  quarts  of  yellowish  fluid  from
vagina,  after  which  swelling  subsided  and  health  was
entirely  restored. ^Plydrops  ovarii.

■  Constant  bearing  down  as  if  something  was  coming  away;

while  sitting  feels  as  if  pushing  something  up;  she  can
touch  the  cervix  uteri.

■  On  standing  erect,  disagreeable  sensation  of  pressure  and

protrusion  of  rectum;  could  not  walk  across  room,  sub-
ject to  dysenteric  attacks  with  severe  neuralgic  and  hys-
teric spasms,  constant  tenesmus,  and  white,  slimy  evacua-
tions every  four  or  five  hours;  sympathetic  fever,  tender-
ness of  abdomen,  urine  high-colored  and  scanty,  dis-
agreeable and  painful  pressure  high  up  in  rectum;  fun-
dus and  OS  tincse  on  a  level. ^Retroversion.

■  Complete  prolapsus  and  inversion  of  uterus  after  mechan-

ical replacement.

■  Uterine  displacements,  including  ante  and  retroversion

and  prolapsus.


TERRUM  lODATUM.  302

1 1  Ainenorrhoea.

lltching  and  soreness  of  vulva  and  vagina;  parts  much
swollen.

Leucorrhoea  like  boiled  starch ;  when  the  bowels  move  the
discharge  is  stringy.
^^  Respiration.  Shortness  of  breath  :  obliged  to  take  a  deep
breath,  with  sensation  of  oppression  of  chest,  and  a  pres-
sure beneath  sternum.
""  Cough.  iShort  hacking  cough,  with  yellowish-white,  rather
thick  expectoration,  and  at  times  with  pains  in  chest.

Cough  with  expectoration  of  greyish-white,  rather  tena-
cious mucus  drawn  out  in  threads.

I  Haemoptysis.
^  Inner  Chest  and  Lungs. Great  oppression  of  chest; is
obliged  to  take  a  deep  breath,  which  causes  feeling  of
soreness  in  chest,  together  with  a  feeling  of  oppression,
as  though  expansion  of  thorax  were  prevented.

iGreat  debility  and  emaciation;  in  evening  chilliness  fol-
lowed by  heat  and  sweat  all  night;  cough  at  first  dry,
later  accompanied  by  greenish,  purulent  expectoration,
containing  small,  cheesy  particles;  oppression  of  chest;
inclination  to  lie  on  back;  sides  of  chest  tympanitic;
under  clavicle  rales  and  bronchial  breathing.  ^Tuber-
culosis.

■  Phthisis  pulmonalis  in  subjects  of  relaxed  fibre,  especially

in  third  stage.
iBronchorroea  and  chronic  pneumonia.
'^^  Heart,  Pulse  and  Circulation. Running  up  stairs  causes

violent  beating  of  heart  and  pain  on  top  of  head.
Heartbeat  so  violent,  it  awoke  her  from  sleep;  throbbing

all  over.
Circulation  excited;  heart  beats  Cjuickly  and  seems  to  force

the  blood  violently  through  whole  body.
Blood-vessels  throb  all  over,  even  when  quiet.

■  Chlorosis.

^°  Outer  Chest. •  Indurated,  painless  swelling  near  r.  nipple

as  large  as  a  hazel  nut,  finally  becoming  as  large  as  a

fist,  scirrhous  in  character,  with  sharp,  lancinating  pains

spreading  from  breast  to  axilla;  pain  in  epigastrium;

emaciation; swelling  sensitive  to  touch,  and  threatens

to  develope  from  a  cancer  occultus  to  a  cancer  apertus.

\  Scoliosis  and  paralysis  of  muscles  of  inspiration  on  r.  side.

^"^  Neck  and  Back. Sides  of  neck  feel  sore  when  touched  or

on  moving.

iBronchocele.

Small  of  back  as  if  broken;  felt  only  at  night;  as  if  lying

in  a  cramped  position.
Dull  pain  in  back  on  each  side  about  six  inches  above
kidneys,  extending  through  chest.


303  FERRUM  lODATUM.

Painful  sensation  in  back  and  kidneys  and  lower  portion

of  spine,  starting  from  lumbar  vertebrae.
^^  XJpper  Limbs. A  rheumatic,  bruised,  paralyzed  feeling  in

r.  upper  arm  and  shoulder.
Painful  drawing  in  tendons  and  back  of  r.  hand  and  1.

foot.
Right  arm  weary  and  as  if  paralyzed,  has  to  stop  writing,

in  evening.
^^  Lower  Limbs. Rheumatic  pain  extending  upward  from

back  of  1.  foot  to  pelvis,  in  evening.
Paralyzed  and  bruised  feeling  in  all  the  limbs,  especially

in  legs.
Bruised,  paralytic  sensation  in  thighs,  extending  to  knees,

which  are  heavy.
^*  Limbs  in  General. Weakness  and  bruised  sensation  in  all

the  limbs,  with  great  aversion  to  moving  about.
B Periostitis  on  one  finger  and  two  toes. ^Scrofula.
^  Rest. Position. Motion. As if  lying in a cramped

position.
Inclination  to  lie  on  back.
Turning  in  bed :  heart  beats  violently.
Straightening  from  bent  position :  cutting  pain  from  anus

to  navel.
Standing :  in  draft,  heaviness  in  head  >  ;  erect,  sensation

of  pressure  and  protrusion  of  rectum.
Sitting  down :  heaviness  and  pressure  in  head  >  ;  feels  as

if  pushing  something  up.
Raising  arms:  <  feeling  in  sides  as  if  needle  pricking  her.
Rising:  heart  beats  violently ;  abdomen  feels  sore;  back

stiff.
Motion: dizziness; heaviness  in  head  <; side  of  neck

feels  sore.
Walking :  as  of  needles  pricking  her  <  ;  inguinal  region

sore  on walking; stitches  in  r.  inguinal  region ;  weak,

trembling  feeling  in  limbs.
Could  not  walk  across  room.
Running  up  stairs :  violent  beating  of  heart  and  pain  on

top  of  head.
^''Nerves. Nervous; hand  shakes  while  sewing; heartbeats

violently;  each  beat  seems  to  go  into  stomach,  and  cause

a  nervous,  trembling  feeling  across  epigastrium;  weak,

trembling  feeling  in  limbson  usinghands  and  on  walking.
■  Great  weakness.
•  Epilepsy  with  dementia  and  paresis  of  r.  arm;  bones  of

skull  hypertrophied; scrofula.
^^  Sleep. Frequent  starting  in  sleep  and  waking  with  a  feeling

as  though  paralyzed,  the  hands  and  feet  could  not  rest.
Night  restless,  with  frequent  waking,  many  dreams,  with

easy  erections.


FERRUM  lODATUM.  304

Dreams:  of  long  past  events;  of  thieves  and  of  fighting
with  them.

In  his  sleep  it  seemed  as  if  he  had  grown  exceedingly-
large  and  was  thirty  to  fifty  feet  high;  everything  about
him  seemed  small  and  insignificant.

At  night  in  bed,  feels  as  if  back  would  break;  on  getting
up,  abdomen  feels  sore.

Back  stiffen  getting  up  from  bed,  but  >  during  da}'.
^'^  Time. Morning:  discharge  from  nose;  bad  taste  in  morn-
ing ;  a  feeling  in  fossa  navicularis  as  though  the  water
remained  in  it  and  could  not  be  forced  out  any  further.

All  day:  discharge  from  nose;  stiffness  of  back  >.

3  p.M :  sudden  bleeding  of  gums.

Evening :  chilliness  followed  by  heat  and  sweat  and  has
to  stop  writing;  rheumatic  pain  from  foot  to  pelvis.

Night :  stufted  up  feeling ;  cheek  itches ;  heart  beats  vio-
lently ;  erections ;  violent  pain  and  burning  in  urethra ;
heat  and  sweat ;  small  of  back  feels  as  if  broken ;  rest-
less ;  frecjuent  waking ;  easy  erections ;  as  if  back  would
break.
^^  Temperature  and  Weather.  AVarm  room :  heaviness  in
head  <.

Open  air:  heaviness  in  head  >.

Draft  of  air:  heaviness  and  pressure  in  head  >.
^^  Attacks, Periodicity. Every  four  or  five  hours : white

slimy  evacuations.
^"  Locality  and  Direction.  Right :  feeling  of  heaviness  and
soreness;  throbbing  pain  in  side  of  head;  stitches  in
inguinal  region;  hydrops  of  ovary;  enormous  swelling
under  border  of  ribs;  painless  swelling  near  nipple;
scoliosis  and  parah^sis  of  muscles  of  inspiration  on  side;
rheumatic  feeling  in  upper  arm  and  shoulder;  drawing
of  tendons  and  back  of  hand ;  arm  weary  as  if  paralyzed ;
paresis  of  arm.

Left:  pain  under  eye ;  throbbing  pain  in  back  j)art  of  head
on  side;  pain  in  1.  kidney  ;  drawing  of  tendons  of  foot;
rheumatic  pain  from  back  of  foot  to  pelvis.
^'Sensations.  Sensation  as  though  he  would  suffocate;  food
seems  to  jjush  up  in  throat  as  if  it  had  not  been  swal-
lowed ;  as  if  she  had  eaten  too  much ;  stuffed  feeling  as
if  she  could  not  lean  forwards;  pain  in  stomach  as  from
a  weight  in  epigastrium;  abdomen  when  pressed  feels
like  a  rubber  ball;  as  of  a  cord  drawn  connecting  anus
and  navel;  abdomen  as  if  asleep;  sides  feel  stiff  as  after
a  strain;  in  side  as  of  needles  pricking  her;  as  if  lying
in  a  cramped  position ;  feeling  in  anus  as  if  it  were  com-
pressed; as  if  worms  were  in  anus;  feeling  in  rectum
and  anus  as  if  something  twisted  and  turned  about  in  a


305  FERRUM  lODATUM.

circle,  something  like  drops  of  water  flowed  down ;  as
if  a  screw  were  boring  in  anus ;  feeling  in  fossa  navicu-
laris  as  though  the  water  remained  in  it ;  constant  bear-
ing down  in  vagina  as  if  something  was  coming  away,
while  sitting  as  if  pushing  something  up ;  small  of
back  as  if  broken ;  as  though  paralyzed ;  as  if  back
would  break.

Pain :  in  eyes ;  in  stomach ;  in  epigastrium  ;  in  lower  end
of  sternum ;  in  both  kidneys ;  in  chest ;  in  top  of  head ;
painful  sensation  in  kidneys ;  in  back ;  in  lower  part  of
spine.

Violent  pain  in  urethra.

Sharp  pains:  through  head  to  vertex.

Lancinating  pain :  spreading  from  heart  to  axilla.

Cutting  pain :  from  bridge  of  nose  through  occiput ;  from
anus  to  navel.

Pinching  pain :  in  back.

Griping:  in  abdomen.

Colicky  j)ains :  in  abdomen.

Stitches;  in  r.  inguinal  region.

Sticking: in  anus.

Severe:  neuralgic  spasms.

Throbbing  pain :  in  head ;  upper  part  of  forehead ;  back
part  on  side  at  junction  of  head  and  neck  ;  all  over.

Rheumatic  feeling :  in  arm ;  in  shoulder.

Bruised  feeling:  in  upper  arm;  in  shoulder;  in  thighs.

Inguinal  pains:  across  hypogastrium.

Burning:  in  eyelids;  in  tongue;  of  mouth;  of  throat;  in
urethra.

Dull  pain:  under  short  ribs ;  in  back.

Paralyzed  feeling :  in  all  the  limbs.

Heaviness:  in  head;  in  knees.

Soreness:  of  abdominal  walls ;  of  inguinal  cord  ;  of  vulva;
of  vagina; of  abdomen.

Tenderness:  at  pit  of  stomach ;  of  abdomen.

Uncomfortable  feeling:  in  epigastrium.

Confused  sensation  in  head.

Thickness:  in  head.

Pressure:  in  forehead ;  in  rectum  beneath  sternum.

Oppression:  of  chest.

Scraping:  in  throat;  in  nose.

Dryness:  of  mouth;  of  throat.

Roaring:  in  ears.

Numbness:  in  fleshy  part  of  abdomen.

Tickling;  in  throat;  in  nose;  in  urethra.

Crawling:  in  urethra;  in  rectum.

Itching:  of  cheek;  in  urethra;  of  vulva  and  vagina.

VOT^.  V. — 20.


FERRUM  lODATUM.  -  306


44


Tissues. Symptoms of  plethora; general turgescence of
peripheric  capillary  system.

■  Body  emaciated. ^Scrofula.
■Rheumatism  without  fever.
■Scirrhus ;  early.

Anaemic  people,  with  indurated  glands;  constitutional
syphilis.

■  Chlorosis,  particularly  in  scrofulous  subjects.

I  Scrofulous affections; rhachitis; exostoses; periostitis;
spinal  curvature.
^^  Touch. Passive  Motion. Injuries. Touch : swelling
sensitive;  sides  of  neck  feel  sore  when  touched.

Pressure:  abdomen  feels  like  a  rubber  ball.

Rubbing:  reddens  cheek ;  vesicles  become  raw.

Pinching:  makes  walls  of  abdomen  feel  sore  for  a  long  time.
*^  Skin. ■Skin  pale. ^Scrofula.

Short  lasting  cutaneous  eruptions,  like  urticaria;  eczema  ;
lichen.
'*'' Stages  of  Life,  Constitution. Scrofulous  diathesis.

Mercurial  cachexia.

'Girl,  weak  and  scrofulous;  scoliosis.

Boy,  set.  11;  scrofulous  epilepsy.

Delicate  woman,  set.  36,  has  only  been  pregnant  once  and
then  aborted,  after  coitus;  ovarian  dropsy.

Woman, set.  44,  widow, of  psoric  constitution;  retroversion.

Woman,  set.  48,  mother  of  several  children,  sanguine  tem-
perament, of  slender,  graceful  build,  during  youth  had
three  times  inflammation  of  lungs,  subject  to  epistaxis,
catarrhal  diarrhoea,  in  thirty-second  year  cessation  of
menstruation,  chest  barrel-shaped  and  elongated,  supra
and  infra-clavicular  regions  sunken;  tuberculosis.

Single  lady,  set.  50,  suffered  from  metrorrhagia  during  cli-
maxis;  cancer  of  breast.
^  Relations.  Compare:  Alumina  (ansemia,  profuse  leucor-
rhoea,  prolapsus  uteri);  Alumen  (swollen  vagina,  pro-
lapsus uteri);  Cauloph.  (prolapsus  uteri  and  leucorrhoea
from  atony;  fitful,  crampy  pains);  Helonias  (vulva  itch-
ing, prolapsus,  leucorrhoea,  albuminuria)  ;  Hydrast.
(debility  and  atony;  tenacious  profuse  leucorrhoea;
palpitation);  Graphit.  (chlorosis,  leucorrhoea  profuse  but
watery);  lodum  (red  face,  irritability;  corroding  leucor-
rhoea, emaciation  marked) ;  Kali  hicli.  (stringy,  albumin-
ous leucorrhoea).


.307  FEERUM  MURIATICUM.

FERRUM  MURIATICUM.

Chloride  or  Muriate  of  Iron.  Fe^  Cl^YlH^  0.


The  tincture  is  jjrepared  by  dissolving  one  part  by  weight  in  nine  parts  of
alcohol.

Clinical  Authoeities. — Enlargement  of  spleen  (2  cases),  Kiick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.
4,  p.  917  ;  Schleicher,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  5,  p.  343;  Chronic  diarrhoea,  Michaelis,
Frank's  Mag.,  vol.  1,  p.  483 ;  Ascarides  (2  cases),  Dixon,  Eaue's  Rec,  1875,  p.  163 ;
Pleurisy,  Schleicher,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  5,  p.  819;  Omodynia  (2  cases),  Plate,
Hiick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  5,  p.  898  ;  Chronic  ulcers,  Warren,  Times  Eetros.,  1877,  p.  25;
■  observations  by  Bonninghausen.

^  Mind. Loquacity.

Much  depressed  in  spirits.
^  Sensorium. i  Vertigo. ^Enlargement  of  spleen.
'^  Inner  Head. I  Severe  neuralgic  pains  in  r.  temple  and  r.
side  of  face.

I  Headache. ^Ascarides.

Pain  in  back  part  of  head  when  coughing,
^  Sight  and  Eyes. Eyes  injected.

Bright  redness  of  margin  of  lids.
'' Smell  and  Nose, i  Itching  of  nose. ^Ascarides.

I  Constantly  coagulated  blood  in  nose.
*  Upper  Face. iFace  pale. ^Enlargement  of  spleen.

I  Paleness  of  face,  red  spots  upon  pale  cheeks.

Face  somewhat  flushed;  cheeks  flushed.

Face  swollen  and  livid.
'^^  Taste' and  Tongue. Unsipid,  flat  taste  in  mouth. (?En-
largement  of  spleen.

■  Solid  food  tastes  dry  and  insipid.

Tongue  very  much  coated.

Tongue  swollen  and  protruded,  with  ropy  mucus  from
mouth.

Dryness  of  tongue.
^^  Inner  Mouth. Palate  and  interior  of  mouth  burnt,  present-
ing a  parboiled  appearance.
^^  Throat. Extremely  severe  sense  of  burning  and  constriction
in  throat.

I  I  Angina  tonsillaris.
"'*  Appetite,  Thirst. Desires,  Aversions, i  Anorexia. ^En-
largement of  spleen.

I  No  appetite  in  morning.


FERRUM  MURIATICUM.  308

I  Unquenchable  thirst,  or  thirstlessness.
fl  Longing  for  acids.
I  Aversion  to  meat,  or  anything  sour.
^^  Hiccough, Belching, Nausea and Vomiting. iSour

belching;  particularly  after  solid  food.
S  Bitter  eructations  after  fat  food.
lA^omiting:  after  eating;  after  eating  eggs.
^^  Scrobiculum  and  Stomach.  1 1  Stomach  somewhat  distended.

^Enlargement  of  spleen.
I  I  Hand  riveted  to  region  of  stomach,  as  the  principal  seat

of  pain. ^Gastralgia.

■  Dyspepsia;  gastromalacia.

^  Hypochondria, i  Severe pains  in  1. hypochondrium ; at
times  in  night. ^Enlargement  of  spleen.

I  Spleen  enlarged  and  sensitive  to  pressure. ^Intermittent.
^^  Abdomen, l  Spasmodic  constriction  of  abdominal  muscles,
as  if  abdomen  were  constricted,  especially  when  stoop-
ing, so  that  he  can  only  straighten  himself  slowly.

Great  pain  along  whole  length  of  colon,  <  by  pressure
and  any  movement  of  body.

Hypogastrium  swollen  and  very  sensitive,  especially  above
pubes.

Piercing  pains  in  hypogastrium.

':  Typhus  abdominalis  with  extensive  ulceration,  meteor-
ism,  and  debilitating  fetid  discharges.
^°  Stool  and  Rectum. Diarrhoea  with  pain  in  limbs.

I  Chronic  diarrhoea  with  loss  of  appetite  and  rapid  emacia-
tion.

':  Diarrhoea  w^th  intestinal  catarrh  in  typhoid  fevers,  also
fetid  debilitating  discharges.

Dysenteric  diarrhoea,  with  considerable  pain  and  tenesmus,
evacuations  consist  of  blood  and  membranous  shreds.

Stools  dark;  two  quarts  of  inky  evacuations  at  one  stool.

I  Dysentery,  last  stage.

Obstinate  constipation.

I  Dry  cough  ending  in  retching;  itching  of  nose  and  anus,
enuresis,  headache,  neuralgia,  nervousness; ascarides.

lAscarides,  coincident  with  bleeding  piles.
^^  Urinary Organs, i Diabetes  mellitus.

I  Chronic  affections  of  bladder.

iHeematuria,  the  hemorrhage  occurring  from  urethra  or
kidneys.

■  Habitual  discharge  of  phosphates  in  urine.

■  Enuresis. LAscarides.

Almost  complete  retention  of  urine.
Urine  scanty.

Deposition  of  bright  red  crystals  in  urine.
^  Male  Sexual  Organs, i  Enlarged  prostate.


309  FERRUM  MURIATICUM.

^^  Female  Sexual  Organs. ■  During  coition  soreness  and  cut-
ting pain  in  vagina ;  want  of  pleasurable  sensation,
i Troublesome  metrorrhagia;  dysmenorrhcea ;  leucorrhoea.
^^  Voice  and  Larynx. Trachea  and  Bronchia, i  Bronchitis.
^"Respiration, i While  sitting,  loud  breathing  as  if  asleep.
Respiration  noisy  and  stertorous;  suffocation  impending.
Res|)iration  noisy,  as  in  a  bad  case  of  croup.
Breathing,  especially  inspirations,  oppressed.
^  Cough, lln  morning,  spasmodic  cough  with  expectoration
of  transparent,  tough  mucus,  at  once  >  by  eating  small
quantity  of  food.
I  When  coughing :  pain  in  occiput ;  bruised  pain  in  chest ;

stitches  in  chest
I  Spasmodic  cough  >  by  eating.
I  Dry  cough  ending  in  retching. ^Ascarides.
^^  Inner  Chest  and  Lungs, i  Stitches  in  chest  with  the  cough.
I  Bruised  pain  in  chest  on  coughing.

I  High  fever,  severe  cough,  with  scanty  expectoration,
stitching  pains  in  sides  of  chest,  constriction  of  chest;
severe  diarrhoea ;  exudation  four  fingers  in  height,  with
no  tendency  to  decrease.

■  Great  weakness  and  emaciation. ^Pleurisy.

^^  Heart,  Pulse  and  Circulation,  i  Heart  affections  with  hec-
tic ;  quick,  superficial  breathing ;  cough ;  involuntary
sighing ;  dj^spnoea  from  slight  exertion ;  painful  draw-
ing and  expansion  about  apex;  tumultuous  and  flutter-
ing heart-beat;  anxiety  almost  insupportable;  small,
almost  thread-like  pulse,  occasionally  beating  double,
sometimes  intermitting  when  the  heart's  action  is  accel-
erated.
Pulse  small,  accelerated  ;  very  feeble.

■  Chlorosis;  muscular  debility ;  weak  circulation.

^^  Upper  Limbs.  ■Paralytic  tearing  pain  in  shoulder-joint,
arm,  clavicle  and  muscles,  making  it  impossible  to  lift
arm,  >  by  gentle  motion.

■  Slight  drawing  pain  in  shoulder,  followed  by tearing,

stitching  pains  extending  to  elbow;  paralytic  lameness
of  upper  arm ;  pain  <  from  least  motion ;  <  at  night
driving  him  out  of  bed ;  slight  >  walking,  about ;  no
swelling.

■  Acute  inflammatory  rheumatism  of  r.  shoulder-joint,  pain

deep  in  socket  preventing  motion.

■  Mechanical  injury  to  shoulder-joint  with  rheumatic  lame-

ness.
^  Lower  Limbs. ■During  day,  frequent  sudden  cramps  in
limbs.

■  Cramps  in  calves  of  legs,  particularly  at  night  in  bed.

■  Large  deep  ulcer  upon  calf  of  leg,  centre  black  and  hard.


FERRUM  MURIATICUM.  310

I  After  gunshot  wound  received  seven  years  previously^
several  open  sores,  involving  all  the  soft  parts  from  knee
to  ankle;  pus  thick,  greenish,  and  somewhat  offensive;,
sensibility  of  parts  much  deadened.

■  (Edematous  feet,  drawing,  tearing  pain,  particularly  on

beginning  to  walk ;  after  metrorrhagia.
^^  Limbs  in  General. I  Great  weakness  and  debility  in  all  the
limbs,  compelling  her  to  lie  down. ^Enlargement  of
spleen.

Sudden  cramps  in  limbs.

I  Distortion  of  limbs.
^  Rest. Position. Motion. Compelled  to  lie  down  on  ac-
count of  great  weakness.

Sitting:  loud  breathing  as  if  asleep.

Stooping:  spasmodic  constriction  of  abdominal  muscles.

Motion:  pain  in  colon  <;  tearing  pain  in  shoulder-joint
>  ;  pain  to  elbow  <  ;  pain  in  shoulder-joint  and  socket
prevents  motion.

Lifting  arm  impossible  on  account  of  tearing  pain  in
shoulder-joint.

"Walking:  >  pain;  <  tearing  pain  in  feet.
^^  Nerves. Exceedingly  weak,  with  an  anxious,  feverish  coun-
tenance.

Restlessness.

■  Nervousness  and  neuralgia. ^Ascarides.  ,
Unable  to  speak  ;  apparently  unconscious.
Ilrritability  of  circulatory  and  nervous  system  after  hem-
orrhages.

Violent  convulsions  affecting  whole  body,  which  was  much
contorted;  muscles  of  extremities  contracted  violently^
teeth  clenched  and  ground  together ;  must  be  restrained
upon  the  couch,  and  her  hold  upon  those  near  could
not  be  unloosed  until  spasm  suddenly  ceased  ;  duration
of  attacks  about  two  minutes,  that  of  the  intervals  three.
^^  Sleep. I  Sleeplessness,  or  light  and  restless  sleep. ^Enlarge-
ment of  spleen.
"^  Time. Morning:  no  appetite;  spasmodic  cough.
Day:  sudden  cramps  in  limbs.

Kight:  pain  drives  him  out  of  bed;  cramps  in  calves.
^  Fever. Skin  cold  and  clammy.

■  Sensation  of  coldness,  alternating  with  heat,  and  lasting

for  hours. ^Enlargement  of  spleen.
I  Dry  heat,  with  tendency  to  uncover.
Skin  hot  and  disposed  to  be  clammy.

■  Cold  anxious  sweat  with  muscular  cramps.
iStrong-smelling  night-sweat.

*^  Attacks, Periodicity. Convulsions  lasting  two minutes,
intervals  three  minutes.


311  FERRUM  MURIATICUM.

Coldness  lasting  for  hours.
^'Locality  and  Direction. Right:  severe  neuralgic  pains
in  temple  and  in  side  of  face;  inflammatory  rheumatism
in  shoulder-joint.

Left :  severe  pains  in  hypochondrium.
^^  Sensations. Pain:  in  limbs;  in  abdomen;  in  occiput;  in
socket  of  shoulder-joint.

Great  pain:  along  whole  length  of  colon.

Severe  pain:  in  1.  hypochondrium.

Piercing  pain:  in  hypogastrium.

Tearing  pain:  extending  from  shoulder  to  elbow;  in  feet.

Paralytic tearing pain in shoulder-joint; in arm; in
clavicle;  in  muscles.

Cutting  pains:  in  vagina.

Stitches :  in  chest.

Stitching  pain :  in  sides  of  chest,  extending  from  shoulder
to  elbow.

Neuralgic  pains :  in  r.  temple ;  in  r.  side  of  face.

Painful  drawing  and  expansion  about  apex  of  heart.

Drawing  pain  :  in  shoulder ;  in  feet.

Rheumatism :  of  r.  shoulder-joint.

Cramps :  in  limbs ;  in  calves  of  legs.

Bruised  pain  in  chest.

Burning :  in  throat.

Anxiety  almost  insupportable.

Soreness :  of  vagina.

Dry  heat.

Constriction :  of  throat ;  of  chest ;  of  abdomen.

Paralytic  lameness  of  upper  arm.

Dryness :  of  tongue.

Weakness :  in  all  the  limbs.

Itching:  of  nose;  of  anus.
^  Tissues. Hemorrhages  of  all  kinds.

Irritability  of  the  circulatory  and  nervous  systems  after
hemorrhage.

Scrofula;  rheumatism;  rachitis  and  marasmus.
*^  Touch. Passive  Motion. Injuries. Pressure :  spleen  sen-
sitive; pain  in  colon  <.

Mechanical  injury  to  shoulder-joint.
*^  Skin. I  Typhoid  eruption.

Phagadenic  ulcers.
■"^  Stages  of  Life,  Constitution. Scrofulous  boy,  set.  2  years ;
chronic  diarrhoea.

Girl,  set.  19 ;  strong  constitution,  tendency  to  nervous  affec-
tions, after  catching  cold ;  enlargement  of  spleen.

Girl,  set.  20,  weakly,  pale;  pleurisy.

Man,  set.  33,  large,  strong;  omodynia.

Man,  set.  52,  laborer;  omodynia.

Large,  fleshy  woman,  set.  60:  ulcer  on  calf  of  leg.


FERRUM  PHOSPHORICUM.  312


FERRUM  PHOSPHORICUM.

Phosphate  of  Iron.  Fe^2P04,  FePO^,  12H^  0.

One  of  the  organic  tissue-salts  introduced  by  Schuessler. Needs  proving.

Tlais  arrangement  includes  all  of  Schuessler's  Third  American  edition,  with
additions  from  the  current  literature.

Prepared  by  trituration.

Good  results  with  the  200th  potency  have  been  obtained.

ClijSHCAL  Authorities. — Congestion  of  blood  to  head,  Eaue'sEec,  1875,  p.  6;
Headache  (5  cases),  Eaue's  Rec,  1875,  pp.  5-6;  Attacks  of  nausea,  Eaue's  Eec ,
1875,  p.  6;  Dyspepsia  with  vomiting,  Mossa,  Allg.  Horn.  Ztg.,  vol.  104,  p.  51 ;  Sum-
mer complaint  with  bloody  siooU,  Goodno,  MSS.,  1877;  Irritability  of  neck  of  bladder,
Hunt,  Eaue's  Eec,  1872,  p.  164;  Incontineiice  of  urine,  Parsons,  Trans.  Am.  Inst.
Horn.,  1883,  p.  181 ;  Enuresis,  Cooper,  Hughes'  Pliarm.,  p.  369;  Cronoj'rAcea,  first
stage,  Eaue's  Pathol.,  p.  697;  Hemorrhage  from  urethra  or  bladder,  Ashton,  Hah.
Mo.,  vol.  10,  p.  466 ;  Dyspareunia,  Sulzer,  Times  Eetros.,  1875,  p.  18;  Diphtheria  (2
cases),  Morgan,  Hah.  Mo.,  1885,  p.  231;  Pneumonia  in  phthisis,  Goodno,  MSS.;
Cough,  Cooper,  Eaue's  Eec,  1871,  p.  132;  Cough,  Fischer,  Times  Eetros.,  1875,  p.
18;  Acute  bronchial  catarrh,  Goodno,  MSS.;  Hcemopty sis  of  phthisis,  Knerr,  MSS.;
Sugillation  of  foot,  Fischer,  Times  Eetros.,  1875,  p.  18;  Articular  rheumatism,  Plate,
Eaue's  Eec,  1874,  p.  253;  Acute  synovitis,  C.  E.  Norton,  MSS.;  Debility  of  children.
Cooper,  Eaue's  Eec,  1872,  p.  206;  Ileasles  (35  cases),  Koeck;  Intermittent,
Curtis,  MSS.

^  Mind. Very  talkative  and  hilarious  ;  unnatural  excitement.
Delirium  tremens.
I  Sows  eat  up  their  young;  a  transient  mania  depending

upon  hypersemia  of  brain.
^  Sensorium. Dizziness  with  constant  feeling  as  if  head  were

being  suddenly  pushed  forward,  with  danger  of  falling.
Great dizziness; every thing swims around him ; his

muscles  seemed  so  weak  he  could  har(Jly  move  about.
I  Vertigo  caused  by  congestion  to  various  parts  of  brain  or

head.
Relieved  symptoms  supposed  to  be  due  to  cerebral  venous

congestions.
^  Inner  Head, l Hammering  pain  in  forehead  and  temples,

so  severe  that  she  fears  an  apoplectic  stroke; <  in  r.

side,  formerly  <  on  1. ^Dyspepsia.
iFrontal  headache,  followed  and  relieved  by  nosebleed.
■  Scarcely  endurable,  dull,  heavy  pain  on  top  of  head  dur-
ing menses  which  are  very  profuse.


313  FERRUM  PHOSPHORICUM.

I  Top  of  head  sensitive  to  cold  air,  noise  and  any  jar;  on
stooping,  sharp  pain  through  head,  from  back  to  front;
at  times,  a  feeling  as  if  head  were  being  pushed  forward,
with  danger  of  falling.

■Severe  headache,  soreness  in  vertex,  general  soreness  of
scalp,  cannot  bear  to  have  hair  touched,  great  nervous-
ness at  night.

I  On  stooping  a  sharp  pain  through  head,  from  back  to
front.

■  Headache  or  neuralgia  of  face  with  stinging,  pressing  or

throbbing, < from shaking head,  stooping and all
motion.

■  "Blind  headache,"  in  a  lady  who  had  at  the  same  time  a

bearing  down  sensation  in  uterus,  with  a  constant  dull
pain  in  either  ovarian  region.

■  Headache  with  hot,  red  face  and  vomiting  of  food.
I  I  Rush  of  blood  to  head  with  vertigo.

■  Congestion  of  brain  in  children  and  grown  persons;  men-

ingitis.
I  I  Congestion  to  head  with  epilepsy.
*  Outer  Head. ■  Soreness  in  vertex,  general  soreness  of  scalp,
cannot  bear  to  have  the  hair  touched. ^Headache.

■  Top  of  head  sensitive  to  cold  and  noise  or  any  jar.

■*  Sight  and  Eyes. 'On  stooping  cannot  see;  seems  as  if  all
blood  ran  into  eyes.

■  Blinding  headache.

Acute  conjunctivitis  wdthoat  suppuration,  or  discharge  of

mucus.
Ophthalmia,  first  stage;  marked  redness  with  great  pain,

and  without  mucus  or  pus.
Traumatic  conjunctivitis  from  a  bad  wound,  after  case  had

been  badly  treated;  it  lessened  the  burning,  redness  and

trickling  of  tears.
Eyes  inflamed  during  dentition.

■  Conjunctivitis  and  photophobia. ^Measles.
TrStye  on  lower  lid  of  r.  eye.

'®  Hearing  and  Ears. Sensitive  to  noise.

Roaring  or  buzzing  from  rush  of  blood  to  head.
Inflammatory  pain  in  ear;  otitis.

Catarrhal  affection  of  Eustachian  tube  and  ear,  often  com-
bined with  catarrh  in  chest,  or  bowels,  or  both.

■  Painful red swelling of  parotids, one side or both.

^Measles.
■''Smell  and  Nose. ■  Nosebleed  of  bright  blood. ^Summer
complaint.
Nosebleed:  with  blood  spitting; following  and  relieving
headache;  a  concomitant  of  other  complaints.

■  Bleeding  of  nose  in  children.


FERROI  PHOSPHORICUM.  314

iCorvza;  at  the  ver}'-  beginning,
^  Upper  Face. Face  earthy,  j^ale,  sallow.

Red  face,  with  dysmenorrhoea.

Pain  with  heat  and  redness  of  face.

Hot  cheeks  with  toothache.

Neuralgia  in  face.
^°  Teeth  and  Gums. Toothache,  with  hot  cheeks.

Congestive  or  inflammatory  toothache  or  faceache.

Toothache  always  appearing  after  eating  food ;  >  by  cold..

:  Caries  dentium.

Complaints  during  dentition,  with  fever.

Toothache  <  by  warm,  and  >  by  cold  drinks.
^^  Taste  and  Tongue. Tongue  swollen  and  dark  red.

Inflammation  of  tongue,  fauces  and  tonsils;  redness,  pain
without'  exudation .
13  TJiroat. Constant  inflammation  of  palate,  tonsils  and  phar-
ynx, with  dryness,  redness  and  pain.

■  Fever;  glistening,  flushed  eyes;  red  cheeks;  tonsils  red

and  swollen,  especially  r.,  on  wdiich  was  a  tuft-like  exu-
dation, about  its  centre,  and  about  one-fourth  inch  in
diameter,  hanging  downwards,  the  upper  attachment
looking  blackish,  next  to  the  tonsils;  fetid  breath;  next-
day  tonsil  clear,  fever  gone,  but  a  similar  mass  of  exu-
dation on  posterior  wall  of  pharynx;  on  day  following
apparently  well,  but  next  morning  another  patch  of  ex-
udation appeared  on  1.  side,  wdiich  finally  disappeared
on  resumption  of  remedy.

■  Soreness  of  throat;  tonsils  red  and  moderately  swollen ;

some  fever;  diphtheritic  membrane  on  part  of  r.  tonsil.
^*  Appetite,  Thirst. Desires,  Aversions. Loss  of  appetite.
Poor  appetite  with  attacks  of  sickness;  could  hardly  get.
enough  to  eat  after  attacks  of  nausea.

■  Great  thirst  for  much  water. ^Summer  complaint.
Aversion  to  meat.

I  I  Aversion  to  milk. ^Dyspepsia.
Better  from  drinking  tea.

■  Worse  after  meat,  herring,  coffee,  cake. ^Dyspepsia.
^^  Eating  and  Drinking. While  eating  at  table,  chill.

After  warm  food  or  drinks,  toothache,  >  by  cold.

Eating  aggravates  gastralgia.

^'  Hiccough,  Belching, Nausea  and  Vomiting. Sudden

attacks  of  "deathly  sickness  at  stomach,"  coming  on  at

no  jDarticular  time,  sometimes  even  awaking  her  out  of

sleep,  and  lasting  from  a  half  to  one  hour;  appetite  poor.

■After  eating,  nausea  and  vomiting  of  food;  vomited  mat-
ter very  sour,  setting  teeth  on  edge;  vomiting  in  morn-
ing before  eating. ^Dyspepsia.

■  Vomiting. ^Gastritis. ^Whooping  cough. /^Summer

complaint. /^Intermittent  fever.


315  FERRUM  PHOSPHORICUM..

Vomiting  witli  the  pains.

I  I  Green  vomiting. ^Pneumonia.

I  Vomiting  of  blood.
^'^  Scrobiculum  and  Stomach.  Puffed  up  in  region  of  stomach
and  hypociiondria.

Pain  in  stomacli  <  after  eating.

Acute  and  clironic  gastralgia  <  by  eating  and  pressure  on
stomach;  vomiting  of  food.

Acute  gastritis  witli  violent  pain  in  region  of  stomach
which  is  distended ;  vomiting  and  fever.

I  Anorexia;  aversion  to  milk;  nausea  and  vomiting  after
eating;  vomited  matter  so  sour  that  it  sets  the  teeth  on
edge;  <  from  meat,  herring,  coffee  and  cake,  particu-
larly sour  things;  sometimes  vomiting  in  morning  be-
fore food  has  been  taken;  cephalalgia,  hammering  in
forehead  and  temples,  formerly  <  on  1.  side,  now  <  on
r.  side,  so  severe  that  she  fears  she  will  have  an  apoplec-
tic stroke;  menses  profuse  and  early;  stool  regular;
sleep  restless,  with  anxious  dreams;  greatly  depressed
in  morning;  in  evening  sensation  of  constriction,  must,
loosen  her  clothing. ^Dyspepsia.

Catarrh  of  stomach  and  bowels.
^^  Abdomen. Colic  before  stool.

Bellyache  with  watery  diarrhoea.

Infianimatory  colic  of  horses.

Peritonitis.

Abdominal  hernise  in  persons  otherwise  robust.

Inflamed  and  incarcerated  hernia.
"''Stool and Rectum, l Yellow, watery  diarrhoea. ^Pneu-
monia.

I  1  Chronic  diarrhoea.

Lienterie  from  relaxation  of  pyloric  muscles.

Stools  contain  undigested  food  in  consequence  of  disturb-
ance in  the  muscular  fibres  of  the  stomach.

Lienterie  after  a  catarrh.

Dysentery  commencing  with  violent  fever;  pain  depends
upon  inflammatory  condition,  does  not  intermit  and  is
<  from  pressure  on  stomach.

Before  stool:  colic; no  tenesmus  or  but  slight.

Daring  stool: no  tenesmus  or  only  slight.

■  Frequent  stools,  green,  watery  or  hashed,  mixed  with
mucus,  scanty;  straining  at  stool,  also  retching;  child
rolls  its  head  and  moans;  eyes  half  open;  face  pinched;
urine  scanty;  pulse  and  respiration  accelerated;  starting
in  sleep. t'Summer  complaint.

iStools:  of  pure  blood,  bloody  mucus,  or  bloody  scum;
yellowish,  whitish,  brown  witli  blood;  like  bloody
fish-brine;  green  watery  or  green  mucous,  with  blood,,
no  pain;  blood  dark  or  light. ^Summer  complaint.


FERRUM  PHOSPHORICUM.  316

1  Aggravation:  midnight  till  morning  (bloody  serous
stools);  bloody  mucus  mixed  with  watery  discharges
day  or  night. ^Summer  complaint.

Cholera  depending  on  an  inflammatory  state.

Habitual  constipation.

Constipation  caused  by  atony  of  muscular  fibres  of  intes-
tines.

Disposition  to  prolapsus  recti.

Hemorrhoidal  troubles  and  obstinate  constipation.

Hemorrhoids,  with  catarrh  of  stomach  and  bowels.
^^  Urinary  Organs. •  Bright's  disease ;  diabetes.

I  Hemorrhage  from  bladder  or  from  urethra.

Cystitis,  with  violent  fever.

■  Frequent  desire  to  urinate,  urgent,  with  pain  in  neck  of

bladder  and  end  of  penis;  must  urinate  immediately,
which  >  the  pain ;  the  above  only,  or  chiefly  during
day,  not  at  night;  <  the  more  he  stands.

Enuresis  nocturna  from  weakness  of  sphincter.

I  Diurnal  enuresis,  depending  on  an  irritability  of  trigone
and  cervix  vesicae,  >  when  pressure  of  urine  is  taken
ofii'  by  recumbent  posture.

Urine  spurts  out  with  every  cough.

Retention  of  urine,  with  fever  in  little  children.

Complaints  before  making  water.
^"  Male  Sexual  Organs. Seminal  emissions.

■  Inflammatory  stage  of  gonorrhoea.

^^  Female  Sexual  Organs. <  Bearing  down  sensation  in  uterus
with  constant  dull  pain  in  either  ovarian  region.

■  Vaginismus,  pain  in  vagina  during  coitus;  cannot  bear

examination.
Dysmenorrhoea  with  accelerated  pulse  and  red  face.

■  Menses  every  three  weeks,  profuse,  with  pressure  in  ab-

domen and  small  of  back. ^Dyspepsia.
During  profuse  menses  pain  on  top  of  head.

■  Chlorosis.

^*  Pregnancy. Parturition. Lactation. ■During  the  third
month  of  pregnancy. ^Headache.

■  Cough  with  ejection  of  urine;  during  pregnancy.

^"  Voice  and  Larynx. Trachea  and  Bronchia. ■Laryngitis
and  hoarseness  from  overstraining  voice.

■  Much  mucus  in  throat  and  rattling  in  chest.

■  Acute bronchial catarrh affecting  larger and smaller

bronchi.
■Bronchitis  of  young  children.
A^iolent  fever  in  beginning  of  croup.
^'''  Respiration. Pleuritic  stitch  with  a  deep  inspiration  or

cough.  ^

^  Cough. Acute,  short,  spasmodic  and  very  painful  cough.


317  FERRUM  PHOSPHORICUM.

Tormenting  cough  when  bending  head  over  or  touching
larynx.

■Short,  dry,  hacking  cough,  with  involuntary  spurting  of
urine. ^During  pregnancy.

■Spasmodic  cough  every  morning  when  dressing,  greatly
<  by  going  into  open  air;  fits  of  coughing  produce  in-
voluntary micturition.

I  Cough  in  paroxysms,  most  at  night  or  during  day  when
asleep.

■  Cough  <  at  night  with  much  rattling  of  mucus  in  chest

which  is  also  most  marked  at  night;  slight  fever.
Whooping  cough  with  retching  and  vomiting.

■  Inflammatory  or  catarrhal  stage  of  whooping  cough.

■  Expectoration  of  clear  blood. ^Pneumonia.
Haemoptysis,  after  concussion  or  a  fall.

^^  Inner  Chest  and  Lungs. ■Catarrhs  on  chest  of  children,
similar  to  Aconite.

■  Right-sided  pleuritic  stitch  < when  coughing  and  on

deep  inspiration.

■  Pleuritis  and  pneumonia,  first  stage.

Pneumonia,  the  hypersemia  depending  on  relaxation  of
muscular  fibres  of  blood-vessels  as  long  as  no  exudation
has  taken  place;  general  heat  of  body ;  very  little  thirst;
first  stage.

■  Coughs  up  clear  blood;  nosebleed  at  same  time. ^Pneu-

monia.
■In  a  tuberculous  woman,  set.  49,  pneumonia  of  1.  upper
lobe,  with  well  marked  crepitation  and  profuse  expecto-
ration of  frothy,  pink  mucus,  patient  almost  moribund.

■  Full,  round  pulse;  congestion;  inflammation  before  any

exudation;  sputa  blood-streaked,  caused  by  least  exer-
tion or  cold  air,  when  congestion  comes  in  opposite  lung.
^Phthisis  pulmonalis.

■  Haemoptysis  of  phthisis.
Phthisis  florida.

^^  Heart,  Pulse  and  Circulation.  Palpitation  from  congestion.
It  will  not  cure  thoroughly  unless  there  is  a  full  pulse,  but
a  pulse  less  bounding  than  in  Aeon.,  and  not  so  flowing
as  in  Gelsem. (Farrington.)

■  Pulse  full,  from  120  to  160. ^Summer  complaint.
I  i  Accelerated  pulse. ^Dysmenorrhoea.

Quick  pulse.

Anaemia  incidental  to  climacteric  period.
^'^  Outer  Chest. Rheumatism  in  upper  thorax.
^^  Neck  and Back. Crick  in  neck  or  back.
^^  Upper  Limbs. ■  Violent  pain  in  r.  shoulder  and  upper  arm,
of  a  drawing  tearing  character.,  <  by  violent  motion  of
arm,  >  by  gentle  motion,  and  so  the  patient  hardly  kept


PERRUM  PHOSPHORICUM.  318

the  arm  still  at  all ;  the  affected  part  somewhat  sensitive
to  touch;  feeling  of  deadness  in  r.  hand  and  loss  of
strength  so  that  she  could  not  lift  heavy  things.  ^Rheu-
matism.

I  Acute  rheumatism  of  r.  shoulder-joint;  red,  swollen  and
very  sensitive  to  touch.

I  Rheumatism  of  r.  deltoid;  unable  to  work,  even  to  wear
his  cloak.

I  Swelling  of  elbow  after  a  sprain,  horribly  maltreated  by
leeches  and  an  incision,  with  general  weakness,  loss  of
appetite,  fever  and  earthy,  pale  face;  on  ui:)per  part  of
forearm  and  lower  part  of  upper  arm  a  large  swelling,
red  and  hot, not  allowing  the  least  motion-  insufferable
pains,  burning;  sleepless.

I  I  Rheumatism  in  wrist.

B  Palms  of  hands  are  hot,  with  children.  ^Rheumatic
complaints.

a  Fingers  contracted  by  acute  articular  rheumatism.
'^  Lower  Limbs. Inflammation  of  hip-joint,

■  Severe  pain  in  both  knees,  shooting  down  the  legs;  every
motion  painful;  high  fever,  quick  pulse  and  increased
temperature;  sleepless  at  night  from  severity  of  pains;
in  addition  to  the  knees  one  joint  after  another  was
attacked;  joints  puffy,  very  little  redness;  finally  swell-
ing in  shoulder-joints  and  upper  thorax  ;  (after  Ferr.phos.
it  went  downwards  from  one  joint  to  the  other,  to  the
knees  and  then  passed  off).

I  Skin  on  outer  side  of  ankle  pale  red ;  foot  greatly  swollen
and  sensitive  to  touch  •  toes  feel  as  if  they  were  burning.
<?Acute  synovitis.

•  Steady  terrible  pain  all  over  foot  and  ankle;  cries  with
the  pain;  occasional  shooting  pains  up  inside  of  leg;
once  in  a  minute  or  two  a  shooting  pain  in  foot  around
ankle. ^Acute  synovitis.

I  i  An  acute  very  painful  sugillation  on  dorsum  of  foot.
■^^  Limbs  in  General, ii  Acute  articular  rheumatism.

I  Rheumatism  attacking  one  joint  after  another;  joints
puffy  but  little  red; high  fever.

I  I  Wrist  and  knee  affected  by  rheumatism.

1  Articular  rheumatism  <  from  slightest  motion.

Rachitis  with  no  pains  in  the  epipheses.
'^^  Rest. Position. Motion. Desire  to  lie  down.

Recumbent  position: >  diurnal  enuresis.

Standing: desire  to  urinate  <.

Stooping:  sharp  pain  through  head ;  cannot  see;  faceache
<;  produces  tormenting  cough.

Motion:  causes  headache;  <  pain  in  arm  and  shoulder-
_gentle motion >  pain in  upper  arm and shoulder-


319  FERRUM  PHOSPHORICUM.

swelling  in  arm  allows  no  motion;  pain  in  knees  <;

articular  rheumatism  <.
Exertion :  sputa  blood-streaket.
Desire  to  get  out  of  bed  and  run  about.
Can  hardly  move  about.
^®  Nerves, i  l  Great  nervousness  at  night. ^Headache.

lA  general  feeling  of  weakness  and  desire  to  lie  down.

^Rheumatism  of  shoulder.
iHe  desired  to  get  out  of  bed,  and  wished  to  run  around,

but  he  was  so  weak  that  he  fell  over;  very  talkative  and

hilarious.

■  Muscles  so  weak  could  hardly  move  about.
I  Great  prostration. ^Summer  complaint.

Debility  of  children,  with  no  organic  lesion,  save  a  carious
condition  of  teeth;  flesh  fairly  firm,  complexion  delicate,
hair  light  and  curly.
Convulsions  with  fever.
Epilepsy  with  congestion  to  head.
Acute  cases  of  rheumatic  paralysis.
^^  Sleep. I  I  Restless  at  night. ^Summer  complaint.

■  Restless  sleep  at  night,  with  anxious  dreams;  great  de-

pression in  morning. ^Dyspepsia.
Sleepless  from  severity  of  pains.

■  Restlessness  and  sleeplessness. ^Measles.
Cough  in  day  time  when  asleep.

^^  Time. Between  4  and  6  a.m.:  sweat.

Morning:  vomiting; greatly  depressed.

By  day:  bloody  and  watery  discharges;  frequent  desire  to

urinate;  cough.
Evening:  sensation  of  constriction,  must  loosen  her  clothes.
Night:  great  nervousness;  bloody  and  watery  discharges;

cough  <; more  rattling  of  mucus  on  chest;  sleepless.
Midnight  till  morning: bloody  serous  stools.
^^  Temperature  and  Weather. Open  air:  <  cough.
Warm  drinks: toothache  <.

Cold  air:  top  of  head  sensitive  to:  sputa  blood-streaked.
Cold  and  cold  drinks: >  toothache.
Fever. ■Chill  returning  at  same  time  (1  o'clock)  every  day,
while  sitting  at  table,
i  I  General  heat  with  very  little  thirst.
I  I  Fever  with  vomiting  and  puffed  up  stomach.

■  High  fever,  C{uick  pulse  and  increased  temperature.

■  Skin  hot  and  dry. /I^Summer  complaint.

Fever:  with  complaints  accompanying  teething ;  with  gas-
tritis; with  cystitis;  retention  of  urine;  beginning  of
croup;  with  cough;  with  rheumatism;  with  convulsions.

■  Intermittent  fever  with  vomiting  of  food.
In  beginning  of  typhus.


■40


FERRUM  PHOSPHORICUM.  320

I  CojDious  night  sweats,  not  relieving  the  great  pains  of  rheu-
matism, driving  out  of  bed.

I  I  Sweat  between  4  and  0  a.m.,  with increase of  pains.
^Rheumatism  of  shoulder.
^^  Attacks,  Periodicity. ■  Sudden  attacks  of  sick  stomach.

Once  in  a  minute  or  two:  shooting  pain  in  foot  and  around
ankle.

Half  an  hour:  deathly  sickness  at  stomach.

Every  morning:  spasmodic  cough.

Every  day  at  same  time :  chill.

Every  three  weeks:  menses.

I  Cough  in  paroxysms.

I  Headache  at  intervals  for  many  years.
*■  Locality  and  Direction.  Right :  pain  in  head  <  r.  side ;
stye  on  lower  lid  of  eye;  tonsil  red  and  swollen;  diph-
theritic membrane  on  tonsil;  hammering  in  side  of
head;  pleuritic  stitch;  violent  pain  in  shoulder  and
upper  arm;  hand  numb.

Left:  pneumonia  of  lobe;  exudation  on  side  of  throat:
hammering  on  side  of  head.

Shooting:  up  inside  of  leg;  down  legs.

From  back  to  front:  pain  in  head.
^^  Sensations. As  if  head  were  being  suddenly  pushed  for-
ward; as  if  all  the  blood  ran  into  eyes;  toes  feel  as  if
they  were  burning.

As  if  bursting:  toes.

Pain:  in  eyes;  of  face;  of  palate;  of  tonsils;  of  pharynx;
in  stomach;  in  neck  of  bladder;  in  end  of  penis;  in
vagina;  on  top  of  head.

Insufferable  pains:  in  upper  limbs.

A'^iolent  pain:  in  region  of  stomach;  in  r.  shoulder;  in
upper  arm.

Steady  terrible  pain:  all  over  foot  and  ankle.

Tearing  pain:  in  r.  shoulder;  in  upper  arm.

Severe  pain:  in  both  knees;  in  head;  cries  because  the
pain  is  so  bad.

Sharp  pain:  through  head.

Shooting  pains:  from  knees  to  legs;  up  inside  of  leg;  in
foot;  around  ankle.

Pleuritic  stitch.

Neuralgia:  of  face.

Blinding  headache.

Hammering  pain:  in  forehead;  in  temples.

ThrobVjing  in  iiead.

Stinging :  in  head.

Acute  riheumatism :  of  r.  shoulder  joint;  of  r.  deltoid;  in
wrist;  in  fingers;  in  knee;  in  shoulder.

Heavy  pain :  on  top  of  head.


321  FERRUM  PHOSPHORICUM.

Bearing  down  sensation  :  in  uterus.

Inflammatory  jDain  :  in  ear.

Inflammation:  of  tongue;  palate;  of  tonsils;  of  pharynx;
of  fauces;  of  hip-joint.

Burning :  of  eyes ;  of  upper  limbs.

Heat :  of  face.

Soreness : in  vertex ;  of  scalp  ;  of  throat.

Constriction :  in  region  of  stomach.

Pressing:  in  head;  in  abdomen;  in  small  of  back.

Painful  swelling:  of  parotids.

Dull  pain: on  top  of  head;  in  either  ovarian  region.

Roaring  buzzing: from  rush  of  blood  to  head.

Dryness: of  tonsils; of  palate  ;  of  pharynx.

Dead  feeling: in  r.  hand.
*^  Tissues. Hypersemia  dependent  upon  relaxation  of  muscu-
lar fibres  of  blood-vessels.

All  kinds  of  inflammation  as  long  as  no  exudation  has
taken  place.

First  stage  of  all  inflammations  as  long  as  there  is  no  sup-
puration.

In  first  stage  of  inflammation,  hypersemia,  to  the  abate-
ment of  fever  and  beginning  of  sweat.

Relaxation  of  muscular  fibres  presiding  over  voluntary
motion.

Diarrhoea  from  disturbed  function  of  molecules  of  iron  in
the  muscles  of  the  villi.

■  Bleeding  (bright  red)  from  any  orifice  of  body.
Blood  red,  easily  coagulating  to  a  gelatinous  mass.
Leukemia ;  the  blood  corpuscles  are  normal  as  to  quantity

but  lack  color.

To  be  given  in  true  chlorosis  as  soon  as  the  general  con-
dition has  been  improved  by  Calc.  phosph. (Schiissler.)

Varicose  veins,  in  young  persons.

Rheumatic  fevers;  acute  articular  rheumatism.

■  Scrofula; rachitis;  periostitis;  cancer.

In  the  beginning  of  inflammation  of  the  skin  or  connective

tissue.
Telangiectasy; nsevus.

■  Dropsy  from  loss  of  blood  or  other  fluids.

*^  Touch.  Passive  Motion.  Injuries.  Top  of  head  sensitive
to  every  jar.

Touch:  scalp  sensitive;  on  larynx  produces  tormenting
cough;  rheumatic  shoulder  and  arm  sensitive;  foot  sen-
sitive.

Pressure:  on  stomach  <  gastralgia;  diurnal  enuresis  >
when  pressure  of  urine  is  taken  off"  by  recumnent  posi-
tion.

Hypersemia  following  mechanical  injuries.

VOL.  V. — 21.


FERRUM  PHOSPHORICUM.  322

Injuries:  to  the  eye.

After  concussion  or  a  fall :  haemoptysis.

After  a  sprain  of  elbow.

In  fractures:  at  the  beginning  for  injury  to  the  soft  parts;
the  adjacent  parts  are  red,  hot  and  painful.
*®  Skin. I  Capillary  congestion,  with  burning  of  skin,  <  from
severe  exercise  or  in  warm  room.

Telangiectasy,  nsevus.

In  beginning  of  measles.

iMeasles  with  conjunctivitis  and  photophobia  (35  cases).

Iln  beginning  of  small-pox,  with  violent  fever  and  cerebral
congestion.

Erysipelas  with  intense  fever  and  inflammatory  symptoms.
*''  Stages  of  Life,  Constitution. Leucophlegmatic  tempera-
ment.

Young  people,  varicose  veins.

Hoy,  get.  5  years,  very  bright  and  shrewd ;  diphtheria.

-Boy,  set.  5,  very  fair;  pleurisy  and  rheumatism. •

•Girl,  set.  12,  mother,  aet.  20;  headache.

•Girl,  set.  17 ;  attacks  of  nausea.

Young  lady,  nervo-sanguine  temperament;  diphtheria.

Miss  C.,  set.  22;  headache  during  catamenia.

Woman,  set.  29;  sanguine  temperament,  after  drinking
cold  water  while  overheated,  five  years  ago;  dyspepsia.

Mrs.  Z.,  set.  35; rushes  of  blood  to  head.

Woman,  set.  37;  nervous  temperament;  acute  rheumatism.

Woman,  in  third  month  of  pregnancy,  has  suffered  at
times  for  many  years ;  headache.

Workman,  set.  39;  unable  for  a  long  while  to  raise  up  his
arm.

A  w^oman,  set.  49;  left-sided  pneumonia.

Old  maid,  set.  75;  chronic  diarrhoea.
^  Relations. Compare: in fevers Aeon, (more bounding
pulse)  and  Gelsem.  (more  flowing  pulse);  lin  cough  with
spurting  urine.

Compatible:  Kali  mur.  (croup,  pneumonia,  palpitation,
typhus;  Kali  phosph.  (colic,  threatened  gangrene);  Calc.
sulph.  (hip  joint  disease) ;  Calc.  phosph.  (chlorosis,  hsemor-
rhoids);  Calc.  fluor.  (hsemorrhoids);  Natr.  sulph.  (dia-
betes); Ant.  tart,  (capillary  bronchitis).


323  FERRUM  SULPHURICUM.

FERRUM  SULPHURICUM.

Sulphate  of  Iron ; Copperas.  Fe  SOi,  7H'2  0.

The  pure  sulphate  of  iron  prepared  by  trituration.

Clinical  Authorities. — Diarrh<xa,  Kafka,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  5.  p.  414.
.3Ienorrhagia,  Bojanus,  Eaue's  Rec,  1871,  p.  155.

^  Sensorium. l  Severe  vertigo. ^Diarrhoea.
^  Inner  Head. Confusion  of  head  and  dull  pain  through  head.
Heaviness  and  dull  pain  in  upper  part  of  forehead.
Severe  burning  and  pain  in  head,  with  thirst.
8  Pressing,  throbbing  headache,  <  in  forehead,  with  ring-
ing in  ears,  and  sensation  as  if  all  the  blood  were  rush-
ing into  head  and  face;  face  scarlet  red,  glowing;  >  in
fresh,  open  air;  <  in  warm  room  ;  toothache. 6'Menor-
rhagia.
^  Hearing  and  Ears. Pain  apparently  in  walls  of  meatus

auditorius  externus.
^'' Teeth  and  Gums, l Violent,  tearing  toothache;  teeth  all
sound;  >  from  cold  air,  or  application  of  ice  upon
cheek;  headache. ^Menorrhagia.
^^  Inner  Mouth. Very  troublesome  soreness  of  soft  palate.
^^  Throat. Taste  of  salt  with  smarting  in  throat.
^*  Appetite,  Thirst. Desires,  Aversions. ■  Bulimia,  cannot
be  satisfied,  thirst  not  marked. ^Diarrhoea.
iLoss  of  appetite;  aversion  to  meat. /^Menorrhagia.
"  Hiccough,  Belching,  Nausea  and  Vomiting. Eructation
of  flatus  and  food  with  acidity.
Sickness,  with  vomiting.
'^'  Scrobiculum  and  Stomach. Sensation  of  fermentation  or
of  a  noise  or  movement  like  purring  of  a  cat  in  region
of  stomach.
Cardialgia.
Gastritis  with  pain  after  eating  and  regurgitation  of  food

by  mouthfuls.
Inflammatory  condition  of  membranes  of  stomach.
^^  Hypochondria. '  '  Pain  in  region  of  gall-bladder.
^^  Abdomen. Colicky  pains  in  abdomen.

Abdominal  pains  with  flatulence  and  diarrhoea.
'^  Stool and Rectum, l  Watery, reddish-brown, odorless,
painless  diarrhoea,  with  great  paleness  of  skin,  emacia-
tion, vertigo, oedema of scrotum and lower limbs,
bulimia  without  thirst,  venous  murmurs.


FERRUM  SULPHURICUM.  324

Diarrhoea,  with  pains  in  abdomen.

■  Constipation. ^Menorrhagia.

I  I  Hehninthiasis ;  tapeworm  ;  ascarides.
^^  Urinarv  Organs. Great  weakness  accompanying  Bright's
disease.
I  I  Bloody  urine  with  albuminuria.
^^  Male  Sexual  Organs. ■  CEdema  of  scrotum  and  lower  limbs.

I  1  Secondary  gonorrhoea.
^Pemale  Sexual  Organs,  i  Menstruation  copious,  of  five  to
six  days' duration,  with  colic  before  and  during  time;
headache  frequently  between  menstrual  periods  ;  head-
ache pressing,  throbbing,  especially  in  forehead,  with
ringing  in  ears,  and  sensation  as  if  all  the  blood  was
rushing  into  head  and  face;  face  scarlet  red,  glowing;

>  in  fresh,  open  air;  <  in  warm  room;  often  accom-
panied by  violent,  tearing  toothache,  teeth  all  sound ;

>  in  cold  air,  or  from  ice  upon  cheek ;  <  in  warmth ;
loss  of  appetite;  aversion  to  meat;  constipation.  ^Menor-
rhagia.

■  Metrorrhagia;  leucorrhoea.

^^  Heart,  Pulse  and  Circulation, i  Marked  venous  mur-
murs. ^Chlorosis. ^Diarrhoea.
^^  Neck  and  Back. Sensation  on  skin  of  back  as  if  he  wore  a
stout  woolen  flannel  shirt.
Pain  shooting  down  r.  side  of  back.
^^  Upper  Limbs. Arms  bent  at  elbows,  and  fingers  drawn
towards  forearm  by  flexure  of  wrist.
Hands  yield  to  forcible  extension,  but  immediately  return
to  same  condition.
^  Lower  Limbs. •  Paralysis  of  lower  extremities.

Knees  slightly  flexed;  toes  drawn  upwards  rigidly.
Pain  in  sole  of  1.  foot  in  middle  of  thick,  fleshy,  anterior
part  and  at  same  time  an  aching  pain  through  lower
part  of  leg.
^  Limbs  in  General. Limbs  very  painful,  especially  feet  and
calves,  where  the  pain  is  distracting.
Contractions  in  arms,  hands  and  feet.
'^  Nerves, i  i  Chorea.

^^  Temperature  and  Weather. Warmth :  toothache  <.
Warm  room  :  face  red  and  glowing.
Cold  air:  toothache  >.
Ice:  toothache  >.

Fresh  open  air :  face  red  and  glowing,  > .
^*^  Fever. Feeling  of  general  heat  and  disposition  to  sweat
with  a  sensation  on  skin  of  back  as  if  he  wore  a  stout
woolen  flannel  shirt.
*^  Locality  and  Direction. Right ;  pain  shooting  down  side
of  back.
Left:  pain  in  sole  of  foot.


325  FERRUM  SULPHURICUM.

*^  Sensations.  As  if  all  the  blood  were  rushing  into  head  and
face;  sensation  of  fermentation,  or  of  a  noise  or  move-
ment like  purring  of  a  cat  in  region  of  stomach  ;  sensa-
tion on  skin  of  back  as  if  he  wore  a  stout  woolen  shirt.

Pain:  in  head;  in  walls  of  meatus  auditorius  externus:
after  eating;  in  region  of  gall-bladder;  in  abdomen;
shooting  down  r.  side  of  back;  in  sole  of  foot;  in  middle
of  thick,  fleshy  part ;  in  lower  limbs.

Distracting  pain :  in  feet  and  calves.

Tearing  pain  :  in  tooth.

Colicky  pains :  in  abdomen.

Throbbing:  forehead.

Aching  pain :  through  lower  part  of  leg.

Smarting :  in  throat.

Burning :  in  head.

Soreness :  of  soft  palate.

Feeling  of  general  heat.

Dull  pain :  through  head ;  in  upper  part  of  forehead.

Contractions  :  in  arms ;  hands ;  in  feet.

Pressing:  forehead.

Confusion  :  of  head.

Ringing :  in  ears.

Heaviness : in  upper  part  of  forehead.
**  Tissues. I  Emaciation. ^Diarrhoea.

•Local  atony;  disposition  to  congestions,  nettle-rash,
aphthse.

:  Relaxed  condition  of  ligaments;  joints  easily  dislocated;
hernia.

Passive  bloody  or  mucous  flux,  from  genitals  or  alimentary
canal.

Hydrops;  scrofula.
^^  Skin. ■  Great  paleness  of  skin. ^Diarrhoea.
^^  Stages  of  Life,  Constitution. Boy,  eet  thirteen  months ;

diarrhoea.
^^  Relations. Compare :  Phosphor,  (regurgitation  of  food  in
particles); Caustic, (fermentation  in  abdomen); Cina
(worms).


FILIX  MAS.  326

FILIX  MAS.

Male  Fern.  Filices.


"  Galen,  Theophrastns,  and  Avicenna  speak  of  it  as  a  vermifuge  medicine^
Dioscorides  adds  to  this  its  capability  to  induce  sterility  and  abortion."

Fragmentary  provings  by  Berridge,  Med.  Inv.,  N.  S.,  vol.  3,  p.  282.

The  tincture  must  be  prepared  from  the  fresh  root;  "old  preparations  and
tinctures  won't  do.  The  best  time  for  curing  tapeworm  is,  therefoie,  tlie  summer
season,  when  the  root  of  Filix  mas  may  be  obtahied  in  a  fresh  state.  It  is  grated
and  taken  in  the  course  of  the  forenoon,  to  the  amount  of  an  ounce.  Usually  in
the  afternoon,  the  tapeworm,  rolled  up  in  a  lump,  takes  its  depurlure."  (A.  H..
Z.,  80,  p.  141.)  *

Clinical  Authorities. —  Tape-icorm,  (100  ra-es  repoited),  B.  J.  H.,  vol.  22,
p.  322;  (24  cases),  Ogle,  B.  J.  H.,  vol.  23,  p.  273;  (2  ctses),  Lobetli,  Riick.  Kl.
Erf.,  vol.  1,  p.  804;  Miiller,  Etick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  5,  p.  388 ;  Worms,  Werber,  Riick..
Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  1,  p.  804.

^  Mind. I  Irritable  and  cross. ^  Worms.
Great  anxiety ;  loss  of  consciousness.
"  Smell  and  Nose, i Itching  of  nose. ^Worms.
^  Upper  Face. iPale  face;  blue  rings  around  eyes. ^Worms..
"  Taste  and  Tongue. Furred  tongue. ^  Worms.
^^  Appetite,  Thirst. Desires,  Aversions. bLoss  of  appetite.

^  Worms.
^^  Eating and  Drinking. Coffee  >  the  numbness  in  r.  arm.
^^  Hiccough,  Belching,  Nausea  and  Vomiting. Painless
hiccough,  starts  10  minutes  after  meal,  lasting  15  to  30-
minutes.
Nausea,  vomiting  and  diarrhoea.
^^  Hypochondria. Tightness  in  1.  hypochondrium,  extending
forward  to  middle  line,  causing  difficulty  of  breathing,,
in  a  warm  room,  in  the  evening  after  sunset;  >  walk-
ing in  open  air;  kept  her  awake  in  bed  till  1  a.m.,  on
awaking  next  morning,  the  same;  >  after  a  Turkish,
bath.
^^  Abdomen. Bloating  of  abdomen.

Kinawing  and  boring  in  bowels,  <  eating  sweet  things.
Abdominal  pains.
^  Stool  and  Rectum. Ineffectual  urging  to  stool.
Pappy  stools.

iGnawing  and  boring  in  bowels,  <  eating  sweet  things;
constipation  ;  loss  of  appetite ;  furred  tongue  ;  pale  face ;;


S27  FILIX  MAS.

blue  rings  around  eyes ;  itching  of  nose ;  irritable  and
cross. ^Worms.
■  Symptoms  indicative  of  worms,  particularly  when  consti-
pation is  present.
I A  woman  who  had  repeatedly  passed  segments  of  tape-
worm was  seized  with  severe  colic  which  quickly  disap-
peared under  Filix  mas,  and  was  followed  eight  days
later  by  discharge  of  tape-worm,  50  inches  in  length.
^^  Female  Sexual  Organs. Menstrual  function  stimulated.
2i  Pregnancy. Parturition. Lactation. Causes  abortion.

I  I  Sterility.
^^  Upper  Limbs.  Numbness  of  back  of  r.  wrist,  extending  up
radial  side  of  arm  to  just  above  elbow ;  felt  as  if  the  use
of  the  limb  would  go ;  then  the  same  feeling  in  1.  wrist,
but  transient  and  slighter;  afterwards  the  same  in  a
small  spot  on  r.  vertex,  rather  anteriorly ;  afterward  in
anterior  r.  shoulder ;  the  numbness  seemed  to  be  in  the
bone  in  every  case.
^^  Sleep. Restless  and  sleepless  at  night.

^  Time. Evening  after  sunset:  tightness  of  1.  hypochondrium.
^^  Temperature  and  Weather. Warm  room :  tightness  of  1.
hypochondrium.
Open  air: >  tightness  of  hypochondrium.
Turkish  bath  : >  tightness  of  1.  hypochondrium.
■"*  Fever ilWorm  fever.

^'  Attacks,  Periodicity. 15  or  30  minutes:  hiccough.
^^  Locality  and  Direction. Right :  numbness  in  arm  ;  numb-
ness of  wrist,  extending  up  arm ; numbness  in  small
spot  on  vertex  ;  numbness  in  shoulder.
Left  hypochondrium:  tightness  in ;  wrist  numb.
*^  Sensations. As  if  the  use  of  the  limb  would  go.
Abdominal  pains.
Gnawing:  in  bowels.
Boring :  in  bowels.
Tightness :  of  1.  hypochondrium.
Bloating :  of  abdomen.
Numbness :  of  r.  arm ;  of  back  ;  of  r.  wrist,  extending  up

arm ;  1.  wrist ;  r.  vertex  ;  r.  shoulder.
Itching :  of  nose.
*''  Stages  of  Life,  Constitution. A  large  majority  of  the  pa-
tients cured  were  young  girls  or  women.


FLUOEICUM  ACIDUM.  328

FLUORICUM  ACIDUM.

Hydrofluoric  acid.  HF.

"  This  acid  is  prepared  by  distilling  pure  fluor  spar  (Calcium  fluoride)  in  a
state  of  line  powder  with  sulphuric  acid.  As  the  acid  dissolves  glass,  the  distilla-
tion must  be  performed  in  platinum  vessels,  and  the  acid  can  only  be  preserved  in
bottles  of  the  same,  or  in  bottles  made  of  gutta  percha." — Amer.  Hom.  Pharm.,
1882,  p.  83.

Fluorine  appears  to  be  the  predominant  healing  agent  in  the  Missisquoi
Springs.  The  real  cures  reported  to  have  been  made  by  the  waters  and  clay  cor-
respond to  the  symptoms  obtained  by  the  provings,  as  well  as  to  the  clinical  results
obtained  since  by  the  guidance  of  these  symptoms.

Introduced  and  proved  in  low  and  high  dilutions  (30th),  by  Hering,  assisted
by  Jeanes,  Williamson,  Keidhard,  Behlert,  Campos,  Freit;ig,  Geist,  Gosewich,
Husman,  Lippe,  Peterson,  Kreiner  and  Thenard.  See  Eesume,  Neue  Archiv.,  2,
1,  100,  and  Trans,  of  Am.  Institute,  1846.

Clinical  Authorities. — Alopecia,  Williamson,  Raue's  Eec,  1872,  p.  7 ;
Caries  of  temporal  bone,  C.  Hg.,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  4,  p.  434 ;  Sensation  of  cold  wind
blowing  in  eye,  Allen  and  Norton's  Oph.  Therap.,  p.  84 ;  Martin,  Organon,  vol.  3,  p.
374;  Lachrymal  fistula,  Mul\er,'Ruck.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  5,  p.  119;  C.  Hering,  Allen
and  Norton's  Oph.  Tiier.,  p.  84;  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  5,  p.  119;  Hardness  of
hearing,  Gross,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  5,  p.  159 ;  Aural  itching,  Cochran,  Eaue's  Eec,
1872,  p.  81 ;  Ulceration  of  ala  nasi,  Kirsch,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  C),  p.  172 ;  Fistula
dentalis,  Hrg.,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  1,  p.  461;  Ulceration  of  uvula,  Haubold,  Eiick.
Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  5,  p.  239 ;  Disease  of  liver  and  dropsy,  Haubold,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  4,
p.  345;  Chronic  diarrhoea  and  bilious  vomiting,  Ijumie,  B  J.  H.,  vol.24,  p.  156;
Bitio-mucous  diarrhcea,  Laurie,  B.  J.  H.,  vol.  24,  p.  157;  Gonorrhcea,  Eosenberg,
Eiick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  2,  p.  85;  Ulcerations,  necrosis,  joint  affections,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf.,
vol.  4,  p.  434;  Diseases  of  bone,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  4,  p.  434;  Syphilis  (2  cases),
Laurie,  B.  J.  H.,  vol.  24,  p.  154;  (6  cases),  Beyer,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  5,  p.  559;
Coccyodynia,  Mohr,  Trans.  State  Soc.  Penna.,  1886,  p.  158.

^  Mind. I  Great  loss  of  memory;  forgets  almost  everything.

Forgetfulness every evening; good memory in the
morning.

Forgetfulness: in  his  daily  employment; of  dates; on
making  notes  he  mistakes  "  right "  for  "  left."

1  I  Mental  weakness. ^Ascites.

Mental  excitability.

■  Feeling  of  indifference  towards  those  he  loves  best;  has  no
objection  to  their  presence  but  does  not  care  to  converse
with  them,  yet  if  strangers  or  mere  acquaintaces  come
in  will  enter  into  animated  conversation.
Aversion  to  his  own  family,  bordering  on  insanity


329  FLUORICUM  ACIDUM.

I  I  Gay  disposition,  everything  is  satisfactory.

■  Excessive  hilarit}';  great  buoyancy  of  mind,  happy,  serene.
1  I  Greatly  depressed  in  mind. ^Ascites.

Disposition to be  exceedingly anxious,  causing  sweat;

>  in  morning  than  in  evening.
•  Sensation  as  if  danger  menaced  him,  but  without  fear.
Felt  certain  that  something  dreadful  would  happen,  with

dulness  in  head,  mostly  in  front,  1.  side,  extending  into

middle  of  brain.
Fear  of  apoplexy.

■  Anxiety. ^Ascites.
Irritable,  disagreeable  mood.
Moodiness  in  evening,  >  in  morning.

■  Very  ill  humored. (^Ascites.

Discontent  and  excessive  ill  humor  followed  by  indiffer-
ence and  forgetfulness,  and  finally  by  perfect  content-
ment and  uncommonly  gay  disposition  of  mind.
^  Sensorium. ■  Congestion  of  blood  mostly  to  forehead,  with
dulness  in  occiput  toward  night.

Feeling  in  brain  as  if  on  the  verge  of  being  struck  with
apoplexy.

Vertigo  with  sickness  of  stomach.

A  kind  of  sinking  weakness,  has  to  sit  down.

I  I  Feeling  as  if  in  an  earthquake.

■  Sensation  of  weakness,  like  numbness  in  head,  same  in

hands.
^  Inner  Head. Sensation  of  numbness  in  forehead

Congestion  of  blood  to  forehead  with  dulness  in  occiput

towards  night.
Heaviness  above  eyes,  with  nausea,  <  by  motion.
I  I  Severe  pressing  in  both  temples,  from  within  outward.

■  Compressing  pain  in  temples.

Slight  pain  in  r.  temple,  five  hours  after  in  left.

■  Headache  in  sutures  behind  ears  at  3  p.m.

■  Headache  accompanied  by  congestion  of  blood  to  head,

sensation  of  numbness,  with  heaviness  and  compressive

pains.
Headache  every  morning  >  by  micturition.
Sensation  of  weakness,  like  numbness  in  head.
Numbness  in  head  and  hands.
I  I  Dull,  heavy  headache. ^Dyspepsia.

■  Congestive  headache.  '
Dulness  and  pressure  in  occiput.

I  I  Dulness  of  occiput;  towards  right  in  occiput.

■  ■Pressure  on  both  sides  of  occiput.

■  Headache  in  occiput,  with  fulness  in  head.
Headache  from  nape,  extending  through  centre  of  head  to

forehead  ;  also  dull  feeling  in  head.
Atrophy  of  brain.


FLUORICUM  ACIDUM.  330

*  Outer  Head, i  Sensation  of  numbness  in  forehead.

Scalp  sensitive.

1 1  Pain  along  the  sutures.

I  Itching  of  head  ;  baldness.

I  Congestion  of  blood  to  scalp ;  hair  becomes  dry,  breaks

off  and  falls  out.

■  Falling  otf  of  hair.

I I  Hair  falling  out  after  typhoid  fever.
1 1  Alopecia  areata.

I  Must  comb  hair  frequently,  it  mats  so  at  the  end.  ^Plica
polonica.

iScaly  eruptions  on  head.

iCrusta  lactea,  dry,  scaly,  itches  very  much,  makes  bald.

iCaries  of  temporal  bone,  discharging  offensive-smelling
pus  periodically;  whole  1.  side  of  head  retarded  in
growth,  1.  eye  seems  smaller.

I  Syphilitic  caries  of  bones  of  skull.
^  Sight  and  Eyes.  Clearness  of  sight  and  increased  power
of  vision.
-Pleasant  sensation  as  though  the  eyelids  were  opened
wider,  or  eyes  more  prominent,  whereby  circle  of  vision
becomes  enlarged,  the  sight  clearer  and  he  feels  a  luxu-
rious enjoyment  in  looking  at  the  same  things  he  is
accustomed  to  see  every  day.

Retinal  excitement  with  red  photopsia.

Flashes  like  lightning  before  the  eyes.

Amaurosis ;  dreaming  of  fire.

Dark  spot  before  eye,  <  from  reading.

■  Heaviness  above  eyes,  with  nausea; <  on  motion.

■  Pressure,  as  if  behind  right  ball.
Burning  in  the  eyes.

Pain  in  1.  inner  canthus.

I  iSensation  as  of  a  cold  wind  blowing  under  lids,  even  in
a  warm  room,  must  tie  them  up  and  keep  them  warm.

I  ISensation  of  sand  in  eyes,  or  as  if  a  fresh  wind  was  blow-
ing on  them.

iChronic  ophthalmia;  feeling  of  sand  in  eye,  must  wink
constantly.

I  Feeling  as  if  he  must  wink,  as  if  something  was  in  eye
that  could  be  rubbed  out.

I  Increased  lachrymation.

I  Itching  in  canthi.

I  Fistula  lachrymalis.

■  Lachrymal  fistula  on  1.  side,  of  one  year's  duration;  a

clear  yellow  scab  on  cheek  near  inner  angle,  which  is
but  slightly  red  and  painful  to  pressure;  every  three  or
four  days  it  begins  to  itch  and  grow  moist,  then  heals
again ;  sometimes  painful  before  it  opens.


331  FLUORICUM  ACIDUM.

^  Hearing  and  Ears. I Great  sensitiveness  in  morning  to
little  noises.

■  Hardness  of  hearing  with  rheumatism;  constant  disagree-

able ringing  in  ears  and  sensation  of  numbness  in  bones

of  face  around  r.  ear.
Hardness  of  hearing  >  on  bending  head  back ;  falling  out

of  hair  with  sensitiveness  of  scalp.
I  Difficulty  in  hearing  human  voices;  numbness  of  bone&

around  ear.
I  Singing  in  ears.
iRinging  in  ears  and  numb  feeling  in  bones  of  face  near

r.  ear.

■  Intolerable  itching  in  both  ears.

I  Itching  momentarily  >  from  scratching,  but  followed  by
burning.

■  Otorrhoea;  discharge  copious.

■  Otitis  externa ;  chronic  diffuse  otitis.
'  Smell  and  Nose, i  Fluent  coryza.

Cold  water  produces  coryza.

■  Posterior  nares  feel  expanded,  during  a  walk.
Chronic  nasitis,  with  pain;  chronic  obstruction  of  nose,.

with  dull,  heavy  pain  in  forehead,  followed  by  semi-flu-
ent coryza.

■  Chronic  nasal  catarrh,  with  ulceration  of  septum.

■  Pimple  on  1.  wing  of  nose  perforated  and  left  an  opening

as  large  as  a  pea.
Pimple  with  extensive  inflamed  base  on  top  of  nose.

■  Red,  swollen,  inflamed  nose. ^Rhinitis.
1  I  Itching  on  right  side  of  nose.

^  Upper  Face. ■  Pale  face.

u  Heat  in  face,  wants  to  wash  it  with  cold  water.
Perspiration,  particularly  in  face.

■  Tubercles  in skin of  forehead  and  face, suppurating,

//Syphilis  infantum.
^  Lower  Face. iRight  lower  jaw  swollen.
^°  Teeth  and  Gums. iThe  teeth  feel  warm  (left  side,  upper

jaw).

■  Heaviness  of  the  teeth.

Sensation  of  roughness  (low^er  incisor  teeth).

■  Great  sensitiveness  of  teeth ;  cannot  be  plugged.

■  Toothache  <  from  cold  drink;  or  >  until  water  becomes

warm  in  mouth.

■  Mouth  and  teeth  coated  with  mucus  in  morning.

■  Violent pains  at  root  of  r.  eye-tooth,  with  frequent  dis-

charge of  pus.

■  Fistula  at  root  of  tooth,  or  of  gum  ;  teeth  exceedingly  sen-

sitive.
■Acrid,  foul  taste  from  roots  of  teeth.


FLUORICUM  ACIDUM.  332

1 1  Rapid  caries  of  teeth.

I  The  teeth  come  late  in  children ;  wisdom  teeth  come  late.

■  Great  sensitiveness  to  pressure  on  gum  over  r.  eye-tooth.

^Fistula  dentalis.
^^  Taste  and  Tongue. •  Acrid  foul  taste  from  roots  of  teeth.
I  Tongue  always  more  or  less  tender,  feeling  of  rigidity  in
it,  with  restricted  mobility. ^Secondary  syphilis.

■  Tongue  painful  when  talking.

■  Tingling  and  numbness  of  tongue.

■Tongue  vivid  red  at  tip  and  edges,  coated  yellow  in  centre.

■  Tongue  whitish  and  dry. ^Ascites.

■  Tongue  deeply  and  widely  fissured  in  all  directions,  with

a  large,  deep,  phagadenic  looking  ulcer  in  centre.

■  Ulcer  on  and  under  tongue.

^^  Inner  Mouth. ■  Increased  flow  of  saliva ; with  sneezing ;
with  pricking  of  tongue.

■  Mouth  and  teeth  are  full  of  mucus,  in  morning.

■  Teeth  and  mouth  covered  with  dark  mucus. ^Typhus.
Viscid,  tasteless  saliva  in  mouth ;  before  stool ;  at  night  on

waking.
I  I A  very  painful  little  ulcer  in  back  part  of  mouth,  on  r,
side,  in  angle  of  upper  and  lower  jaw ;  very  troublesome
during  mastication  and  otherwise.
^3  Throat. ■  Constriction  in  throat  with  difficult  deglutition ;
in  the  morning,  hawking  of  phlegm  mixed  with  blood.

■  Red  blotches,  size  of  half  pea,  over  palate  and  sides  of

cheeks,  bleeding  easily.

■  Tonsils,  uvula  and  soft  palate  of  a  livid  red  color,  and

greatly  swollen.

■  Excessive  suffering  on  swallowing  or  talking.
■Sleep  disturbed  by  accumulation  of  mucus  in  fauces.

■  Throat  irritable  and  peculiarly  sensitive  to  cold,  slightest

exposure  resulting  in  inflammatory  action  with  increase
of  pain  and  impeded  deglutition.

■  Syphilitic  affections  of  fauces  and  tongue.

■Soft  palate  and  uvula  intensely  red  and  much  tumefied;
breath  fetid,  voice  nasal,  articulation  indistinct  and  un-
intelligible. ^Secondary  syphilis.

■  Ulceration  of  uvula  a  portion  of  which  seems  only  attached

by  a  thread ; ulceration  of  nose ;  fetid smell  from  nose
and  mouth  ;  hardness  of  hearing ;  stubborn  exanthema.

■  Chronic  catarrhal  inflammation  of  pharynx  and  fauces,

with  ptvalism  ;  especially  if  syphilitic.
'^  Appetite,  Thirst. Desires,  Aversions. ■Hunger  predomi-
nates ;  great  appetite  in  evening.

■  Loss  of  appetite. ^Dropsy.
I  I  Speedy  satiety.

■  Thirst;  craves  refreshing  drinks.


333  FLUORICUM  ACIDUM.

Craves  cold  water,  and  is  continually  hungry.
Desire :  for  highly  seasoned  and  piquant  things ;  for  wine.
Aversion  to  coffee.
^^  Eating  and  Drinking. Complaints  worse  from  sweet  things
and  from  coffee.

■  After  eating  salmon. ^Bilious  diarrhoea.

I  During  the  day,  mainly  soon  after  drinking,  especially
warm  drinks,  such  as  tea,  cocoa,  beef  tea,  bilious  diarrhoea.
Sweat  lessened  after  meals.
^^  Hiccough,  Belching,  Nausea  and  Vomiting, i  Nausea
and  eructations,  with  lassitude.

■  Heartburn  and  offensive  smelling  eructations.

I  I  Frequent  eructations  and  discharge  of  flatulency.
Constant  nausea,  with  heat,  vertigo  and  headache.

■  Sickness  and  nausea,  combined  with  general  heat  and

heat  at  stomach.

■  Bilious  vomiting:  after  slight  errors  in  diet;  with  in-

creased al  vine  discharges,  preceded  by  tormina.  ^Chronic
diarrhoea.
'^  Scrobiculum  and  Stomach. ■  Feeling  of  fulness  and  press-
ure in  epigastrium. ^Dropsy.

■  Feeling  of  weight  in  stomach  between  meals.
I  I  Heat  in  stomach  before  a  meal.

■  Chronic  gastritis.

^^  Hypochondria. ■Sensitive  to  pressure  in  r.  hypochondrium.

■  Pressing  pain  in  region  of  spleen  and  1.  arm.

■  Pinching  in  region  of  spleen.
Itching  under  ribs  1.  side.

Liver  very  sensitive  to  pressure ;  ulceration  of  liver ;  asci-
tes from  hepatic  induration  and  portal  congestion.

■  Skin pale, grayish, dry;  emaciation;  great  weakness,

can  hardly  walk  across  room ;  mind  impaired ;  ano-
rexia ;  tongue  white  and  dry ;  fulness  and  pressure  in
epigastrium;  great  tension  and  dropsical  swelling  of  ab-
domen ;  stools  tardy  and  hard ;  scanty,  dark-red  urine ;
painful  urination;  scrotum  swollen  as  large  as  a  child's
head ;  penis  S  shaped  and  terribly  swollen,  prepuce  so
oedematous  as  to  completely  hide  orifice  of  urethra ;  dry
cough  with  occasional  frothy  expectoration ;  dyspnoea,
can  only  lie  in  an  elevated  position ;  anxiety ;  sleeps
little  and  but  for  a  short  time ;  violent,  unquenchable
thirst;  longs  for  refreshing  drinks;  great  oedema  of
lower  limbs,  extending  from  feet  to  abdomen;  great
depression  of  spirits ;  pulse  small  and  frequent;  speech
listless;  liver  enlarged  and  indurated,  particularly  1.
lobe.  ^Affection  of  liver  with  dropsy.
^^  Abdomen.  Sensation  of  distension  from  flatulence  before
stool.


PLUORICUM  ACIDUM.  ^  334

I  Sensation  of  emptiness  in  region  of  navel,  with  desire  to
take  a  deep  breath ;  >  from  bandaging  or  tightening
the  clothing.

Burning,  pinching  pain  in  stomach  and  about  navel.

Pinching  in  region  of  spleen,  extending  to  hip.

Pain  from  1.  side  of  chest  to  groin,  <  by  deep  inspiration,
particularly  in  groin  and  back,  like  a  stitch.

■  Great  tension  and  dropsical  swelling  of  abdomen.

■  Ascites  from  hepatic  disorder.

I  Ascites  from  enlarged  and  indurated  liver,  in  consequence
of  drinking  whisky.
■^"  Stool  and  Rectum. <  Frequent  passage  of  flatus,  and  belch-
ing, with  constriction  of  anus.

Watery  diarrhoea  in  morning  after  rising,  protrusion  of
anus  during  stool.

Offensive,  watery,  yellowish-brown  stools,  in  the  morning
after  coffee.

Soft,  small  stools  in  morning  after  drinking  coffee,  and
again  in  evening,  with  protrusion  of  hemorrhoids.

I  Stools  pappy,  yellowish-brown,  fetid,  with  tenesmus  and
prolapsus  ani.

I  Very  loose,  bright  yellow  stools,  with  a  quantity  of  mucus,
preceded  by  considerable  griping.

1  Bilious  diarrhoea  <  during  day,  soon  after  drinking,  espe-
cially warm  drinks.

■  Diarrhoea  and  bilious  vomiting.

Before  stool: viscid,  tasteless  saliva  in  mouth;  burning,

pinching  pain  in  stomach  and  about  navel;  sensation

of  distension  from  flatulence.
During  stool: protrusion  of  hemorrhoids;  prolapsus  ani;

pain  about  navel.
After  stool :  tenesmus ;  abdominal  pain.
Aggravation:  in  morning; after  coffee;  on  alternate  days,

a  later  hour  each  time.

■  Tongue  vivid  red  at  tip  and  margins  and  coated  yellow^

in  centre;  appetite  good;  evacuations  never  less  than
twice  a  day  of  liquid,  bilious  fecal  matter,  intermixed
with  frothy  mucus;  no  griping  and  no  tenesmus ;  some
sensibility  to  external  pressure  in  r.  hypochondrium;
face  pale;  muscles  soft  and  flabby;  bilious  vomiting
after  trivial  errors  in  diet,  with  aggravation  of  the  diar-
rhoea, stools  on  such  occasions  being  preceded  by  tor-
mina. ^Chronic  looseness  of  bowels  and  bilious  vom-
iting.
J  Six  to  eight  evacuations  in  twenty-four  hours,  consisting
of  "  very  loose,  bright  yellow  matter  and  a  quantity  of
mucus,"  each  relief  being  preceded  by  considerable
.griping;  dejections  occur  chiefly  during  night,  or  early


335  FLUORICUM  ACIDUM.

in  morning;  during  day  they  mainly  occur  soon  after
drinking,  especially  warm  fluids.  ^Bilio-mucous  diar-
rhoea.

Severe  pain  in  lower  part  of  abdomen,  with  desire  to
evacuate ;  rumbling  pain  most  acute  in  1.  side ;  followed
by  a  free  discharge  of  yellow,  bilious  matter  about  4  a.m.,
recurring  daily  for  a  week  at  same  hour.

I  Tardy,  infrequent  and  hard  stools. ^Dropsy.

I  Constipation,  with  great  varicosis  of  hemorrhoidal  veins.

■  Copious  hemorrhage  after  constipated  stool.

■  Protrusion  of  anus  during  defecation.

I  Itching  within  and  around  anus,  in  perineum.

I I  Pruritus  ani.

^^  Urinary  Organs. '  '  Frequent  and  free  discharge  of  light-
colored  urine,  with  increased  thirst.

TrFrequent  urging  to  make  water,  if  he  cannot  immediately
it  causes  pressing  pain  on  vertex,  at  other  times  pressing
in  temples.

I  I  Involuntary  discharge  of  urine  in  night.

I  Urine  scanty  and  dark,  painful  in  passing. ^Dropsy.

Urine  pungent  and  fetid.

I  Urine  alkaline.

I  Whitish  or  purple-colored  sediment.

I  Burning  before  and  after  urination,  with  aching  in  bladder.

After  urination:  elastic  feeling  in  urinary  organs,  with
subsequent  pleasurable  sensation.
^^  Male  Sexual  Organs, i  Satyriasis.

I  I  Sexual  passion  increased,  with  erections  at  night  dur-
ing sleep.

I  I  Sexual  passion  strong,  with  violent  erections  all  night,
and  desire  to  cohabit.

I  I  Highly  excessive  enjoyment  and  pleasure  during  coi-
tion, which  was  not  the  case  before.

I  I  Seminal  discharge  not  so  quick  and  early  as  usual,  but
free  and  without  any  bad  after-feeling.

■  Increased  sexual  desire  in  old  men,  with  violent  erections

at  night.
Pollutions  without  erection.
■Sudden  loss  of  sexual  power;  impotence.
Sensation  of  fulness  in  both  spermatic  cords.

■  Yellow  drop  from  urethra  in  morning.

■  Gleety  discharge  at  night,  staining  linen  yellow.

■  Fulness  of  glans  penis  and  lower  part  of  scrotum.

■  Dropsical  swelling  of  penis.

Penis  curved  in  the  shape  of  an  ^S*,  and  swollen  at  least
four  inches  in  circumference,  the  prepuce  oedematous
to  sucii  a  degree  as  to  hide  the  orifice  of  the  urethra.

■  Hydrocele.


FLUORICUM  ACIDUM.  336

I  Oily,  pungent  smelling  sweat  on  genitals.
I  I  Gonorrhcea.
^^  Female  Sexual  Organs, i  Nymphomania.

■  Obstinate  cases  of  ulcerated  os  uteri ;  sharp,  darting  pains

about  half  an  inch  in  length,  like  streaks  of  lightning.

bToo  frequent  appearance  of  menses.

INIuch  congestion  of  sexual  organs.

I  Menses  too  early ;  too  copiovis ;  blood  thick  and  coagulated.

Metrorrhagia  with,  or in  alternation  with,  difficulty  of
breathing.

B  Leucorrhoea  acrid,  excoriating,  with  itching.

Itching  on  1.  breast  and  r.  side  of  nose.
^  Pregnancy. Parturition.  Lactation. During  pregnancy
has  much  congestion  of  blood  to  head.

I  Itching,  redness  and  swelling  of  r.  nipple.

I  Nipples  very  red,  sore  and  cracked.
^^  Voice  and  Larynx.  Trachea  and  Bronchia.  Weak,  hoarse
voice.

Dr5mess  in  larynx  and  trachea.

Itching  in  larynx,  causing  hawking  and  swallowing.

Soreness  and  increased  irritability  in  larynx,  with  im-
peded resj)iration  and  wheezing.

A  sore,  raw  feeling  in  trachea.

I  Goitre.
^®  Respiration. Oppression  of  chest,  >  when  bending  back-
wards.

I  Difficult  breathing,  afternoon  and  evening.

I  Wheezing  respiration. ^Hydrothorax.

■  Great  dyspnoea,  has  to  be  propped  up  in  bed. ^Ascites.
^''  Cough. I  Short,  frequent  cough,  mostly  dry,  occasionally

some  whitish,  frothy,  mucous  expectoration. ^Dropsy.
Hawking of  phlegm mixed with blood, especially in
morning.
^  Inner  Chest  and  Lungs. Upper  part  of  chest  seems  most
affected.
1  I  Phthisis  pulmonalis.

■  Dropsy  of  chest;  pulse  frequent,  small  and  often  irregu-

lar;  cannot  lie  down  ;  dyspnoea.

■  H3'drothorax.

^^  Heart,  Pulse  and  Circulation. ■Sore  pain  at  heart;  sore-
ness and  jerking.

■  Small,  frequent  pulse. 6'Dropsy.

Pulse  somewhat  accelerated,  only  during  exercise.
^'  Outer  Chest. ■Scaly  eruption  on  chest  and  arms.
"'  Neck and  Back. iPain  in  third  cervical  vertebra.

I  Pain  from  nape  of  neck,  extending  through  centre  of
head  to  forehead.

■  Rigidity  of  nape.


337  FLUORICUM  ACIDUM.

Lameness  in  back,  hips  and  legs.

Aching  in  os  sacrum  and  lumbar  region,  >  by  stretching
and  bending  backwards,  especially  by  pressure.

Tz-Pain  in  os  coccygis,  sore  to  touch,  on  pressure  pain  ex-
tends through  to  bladder,  <  from  motion  and  exercise.

I  Bruised  pain  in  sacrum.
^^  Upper  Limbs, l Pain  in  r.  shoulder-joint;  shoulder-joints,
stiffened  by  rheumatism.

I  I  Pain  in  r.  shoulder-joint  extending  towards  fingers,  as.
if  air  was  passing  down.

■Rheumatism,  especially  venereal ;  arms and shoulders.
are  very  lame  and  painful.

I  Rheumatic  pains  in  1.  arm,  from  shoulder  to  elbow,  with
lameness.

I  I  Slight  lameness  in  r.  arm ;  has  some  difficulty  in  writing..

Trembling  in  biceps  and  triceps  of  r.  arm.

■  Numbness  and  powerlessness  of  hands.

■  Constant  redness  of  hands,  especially  palms.

■  Burning  in  hands.

■  ■Heat  and  sweat  of  palms  of  hands;  moist  palms  regain

their  health}^  condition.
1  I  Acute  pricking,  as  with  needles,  in  fingers.

■  Pain  in  1.  index  finger,  as  if  in  bone,  now  and  then  dur-

ing day ;  whole  finger  painful  internally,  particularly
in  evening.

■  First  and  second  phalanx  of  1.  index  finger  swollen  to

four times natural  size; first phalanx particularly
swollen  so  that  finger  is  pear-shaped  ;  on  dorsum  of  fin-
ger an  opening  occasionally  occurs  from  which  an  ichor-
ous, purulent  discharge  takes  place.
Sharp  sticking  pain  at  root  of  thumb-nail.

■  Whitlow.

■  Panaritium;  also  simple  onychia,  ulceration  having  set  in.

■  Nails grow more rapidly; crumpled,  or longitudinal

ridges  in  them.

■  Sharp  sticking  pain  at  root  of  right  thumb  nail.
^^  Lower  Limbs. "■  Acute  stitches  in  right  hip-bone.

■  Lameness  in  left  hip.

■  Coxalgia.

■  CEdematous  sw^elling  of  legs  up  to  abdomen. ^Ascites.
I  I  Left  leg  goes  "  to  sleep  "  easily.

■  ■Varicosis  of  lower  limbs.

■  Varicose  veins  upon  legs,  tend  to  ulceration.
1  I  Pain  in  right  knee-joint.

■  Synovitis  of  knee-joint;  much  pain,  followed  by  dropsy.
I  I  Top  of  foot  oedematous ;  instep.

■  Chronic  ulcerations  on  feet,  particularly  about  joints  and

on  tibia;  bones  more  or  less  affected.
VOL.  V. — 22.


FLUORICUM  ACIDUM.  338

■  Burning  stitches  in  soles.
iFeet  hot  and  burn  much.

■  Soreness  between  toes.
■Soreness  of  all  the  corns.

^  Limbs  in  General. 1 1  Pain  in  all  the  limbs,  with  weakness
and  numbness.
I  I  Limbs  go  to  sleep,  although  he  does  not  lie  on  them.

■  Feet  and  hands  excessively  moist.

^  Rest. Position. Motion, l  l  Many symptoms < when

standing,  though  >  when  standing  than  when  sitting.
Can  only  lie  in  an  elevated  position.
Cannot  lie  down.
Has  to  be  propped  up  in  bed.

Limbs  go  to  sleep,  although  he  does  not  lie  on  them.
'Vertigo  compels  her  to  sit  down.
Motion:  heaviness  above  eyes  with  nausea  <  ;  accelerates

pulse;  pain  in  os  coccygis  <;  nausea;  clammy  sweat.
Bending  backwards: oppression  of  chest  >  ; aching  in

OS  sacrum  and  lumbar  region  >.
Bending  head  back:  hardness  of  hearing  >.
Talking:  tongue  painful.
Can  hardly  walk  across  room.
^  Nerves. ■  ■  Increased  ability  to  exercise  his  muscles  without

fatigue;  is  less  affected  by  excessive  heat  in  summer  or

cold  in  winter.
I  1  Sensation  of  going  to  sleep  of  side  not  lain  on.
i  I  Limbs  go  to  sleep,  although  he  does  not  lie  on  them.
I  I  Lassitude.
1  Great  diurnal  languor. ^Secondary  syphilis.

■  Loss  of  strength;  great  prostration  and  fear  of  death.
iCoccyodynia,  with  excessive  aching,  especially  in  rheu-
matic subjects.

Progressive  locomotor  ataxia.

■  Tabes  dorsalis  with  great  excitement  of  sexual  system.
^^  Sleep. I  1  Drowsiness.

I  I  Sleep  earlier  in  evening ;  sudden  sleepiness.

■  Loss  of  sleep  in  evening,  from  crowding  of  thoughts.

■  Sleeplessness,  without  inclination  to  sleep;  a  short  sleep

suffices  and  refreshes  him.

■  Sleep  restless  and  un refreshing. ^Dropsy,
I  1  Dreams  towards  morning.

^  Time.  Morning:  good  memory;  anxiety  >;  moodiness  >,
headache;  great  sensitiveness  to  noise ;  mouth  and  teeth
coated  with  mucus;  viscid,  tasteless  saliva  in  mouth;
constriction  of  throat;  watery  diarrhoea  wnth  protrusion
of  anus;  offensive  yellowish-brown  stools;  soft  small
stools;  early,  dejections;  yellow  drops  from  urethra;
hawking  of  phlegm  ;  dreams.


:339  FLUORICUM  ACIDUM.

4  A.M.:  discharge  of  yellow  bilious  matter.

During  day:  diarrhoea;  bilious  diarrhoea  <;  pain  in  in-
dex-linger.

3  P.M.:  headache  behind  ears.

Afternoon:  difficult  breathing;  clammy  sweat.

Evening:  forgets  everything;  anxiety  <;  moodiness;
great  appetite ;  soft  small  stools;  protrusion  of  hemor-
rhoids; difficult  breathing;  sleep  earlier;  loss  of  sleep
from  crowding  of  thoughts ;  clammy  sweat.

Night:  congestion  of  blood  to  forehead  and  dulness  in
occiput  towards  night;  dejections;  involuntary  dis-
charge of  urine;  erections;  gleety  discharge;  pains  in
bones;  pains  <.
^^Temperature  and  "Weather.  Is  less  susceptible  to  extreme
heat  of  summer  and  cold  of  winter.

I  Worse  in  wet,  cold  weather.

Must  keep  eyes  tied  up  and  warm.

Warm  drinks  cause  bilious  diarrhoea.

Teeth  feel  warm.

Desire  to  wash  hot  face  with  cold  water.

Cold  drink: toothache  <.

Ulcers  >  by  washing  or  sponging  them  with  cold  water,
<  from  heat  applied. {Silic.  has  reverse).
-*o  Fever, l  Chill  entirely  wanting.

■  General  heat,  with  nausea  from  slightest  motion,  with

inclination  to  uncover,  and  to  wash  with  cold  water.
Face  constantly  hot,  wants  to  bathe  it  continually  in  cold

water.
I  I  Heat  returns  every  evening  with  frequent  pulse  and

thirst,  lasting  3  to  4  hours. ^Intermittent.
Hectic  fever,  with  sour  sweat,  emaciation  and  great  debility.
Rheumatic  fever,  or  gout,  with  sour,  clammy,  fetid  sweat.

■  Decubitus. ^Typhoid  fever.

■  Clammy,  sour  and  unpleasant  smelling  sweat,  mostly  on

upper  body,  particularly  during  exercise  in  afternoon
and  evening.

■  Heat  and  sweat  of  palms  of  hands.
Perspiration  particularly  in  face.
Sweat  excessive  on  feet.

■  The  sweat  promotes  excoriation  and  decubitus.
One-sided  sweat,  left  side;  sweat  on  diseased  ];)art.

■  Better  during  sweat.

■  Symptoms  following  typhus  fever.

"^^  Attacks,  Periodicity. Frequent  urging  to  make  water.
Twice  a  day:  evacuations.
Twenty-four  hours:  six  to  eight  evacuations.
Every  day  for  a  week  at  same  hour :  discharge  of  yellow
bilious  matter.


FLUORICUM  ACIDUM.  340

Every  morning:  headache.

Every  evening:  heat  returns  lasting  three  to  four  hours.

Alternate  days :  aggravation  an  hour  later  each  time.

Ever}^  three  or  four  days:  scar  begins  to  itch.
^  Locality  and  Direction.  Right:  pain  in  temples;  numb-
ness of  bones  around  ear;  itching  on  side  of  nose;  lower
jaw  swollen;  violent  pains  at  root  of  eye-tooth  ;  pressure
on  gum  over  eye-tooth ;  back  part  of  mouth,  painful  little
ulcer;  hypochondrium  sensitive  to  pressure ;  itching  on
side  of  nose;  pain  in  shoulder-joint;  slight  lameness  of
arm;  trembling  of  biceps  and  triceps  of  arm.

Left:  dulness  in  side  of  head;  pain  in  temple;  side  of
head  retarded  in  growth  ;  eye  seems  smaller ;  pain  in
inner  canthus;  lachrymal  fistula  on  side;  pimple  on
wing  of  nose;  pressing  pain  in  arm;  itching  under  ribs;
lobe  of  liver  enlarged  and  indurated;  pain  from  side  of
chest  to  groin;  rumbling  pain  most  acute  in  side;  itch-
ing on  breast;  itching  of  nipple;  rheumatic  pains  in
arm;  pain  in  index-finger;  first  and  second  phalanx  of
index-finger  swollen; one-sided  sweat.

Right  to  left :  pain  in  temples.

■  Symptoms  seem  to  go  from  below  up.

Within  outward :  pressing  in  temples.
*^  Sensations.  As  if  danger  menaced  him  ;  brain  feels  as  if
on  the  verge  of  being  struck  with  apoplexy;  as  if  in  an
earthquake;  as  of  a  cold  wind  blowing  under  lids  even
in  a  warm  room ;  as  if  sand  w^ere  in  eyes;  as  if  he  must
wdnk;  as  if  something  were  in  eye  that  could  be  rubbed
out;  as  if  air  was  passing  down  from  shoulder-joint  to
fingers;  pain  as  if  in  bone  of  1.  index- finger;  as  if  a
burning  vapor  was  emitted  from  pores  of  whole  body.

Pain:  in  r.  temple;  in  sutures  behind  ears;  from  nape
extending  through  centre  of  head  to  forehead  ;  in  1.  in-
ner canthus;  in  chronic  nasitis;  in  tongue;  from  1.  side
of  chest  to  groin ;  about  navel ;  in  abdomen ;  urine
painful  in  passing;  in  third  cervical  verterbra;  in  os
coccygis;  in  r.  shoulder-joint;  in  r.  knee-joint;  in  all
the  limbs;  in  bones.

Violent  pains  at  root  of  r.  eye-tooth.

Severe  pain:  in  lower  abdomen.

Stitches:  in  r.  hip-bone;  in  soles.

Sharp  darting  pains  about  half  an  inch  in  length,  like
streaks  of  lightning

Sticking  pains  at  root  ot  thumb-nail.

Pinching  in  region  of  spleen;  in  stomach;  about  navel.

Griping  in  abdomen.

Burning  pain  :  on  small  spots  of  skin.

Bruised  pain: in  sacrum.


341  FLUOPJCUM  ACIDUM.

Pressing  pain:  in  region  of  spleen;  in  1.  arm;  in  vertex.

Compressing  pain:  in  temples.

Rumbling  pain:  in  1.  side.

Rheumatism:  in  arms  and  shoulders.

Dull  heavy  headache:  in  forehead.

Sore  pain :  at  heart.

Aching:  in  bladder;  in  os  sacrum;  in  lumbar  region.

Burning:  in  eyes;  in  ears;  in  stomach;  about  navel;  be-
fore and  after  urination ;  in  hands.

Soreness:  of  larynx; at  heart; between  toes;  of  all  the
corns.

Raw  feeling :  of  trachea.

Irritability: of  throat;  of  larynx.

Sensitiveness:  of  teeth.

Constriction:  in  throat;  of  anus.

Oppression: of  chest.

Heat:  at  stomach.

Distension :  of  abdomen.

Fulness: in head; in  epigastrium; in both spermatic
cords;  of  glans  penis;  lower  j)art  of  scrotum.

Pricking: of  tongue;  in  fingers.

Tingling: of  tongue.

Emptiness: in  region  of  navel.

Singing: in  ears.

Ringing: in  ears.

Roughness:  of  teeth.

Dryness: of  larynx  ;  of  trachea.

Dulness : of  head ;  in  occiput.

Pressing: in  both  temples ;  in  occiput;  as  if  behind  r.  eye-
ball; in  epigastrium.

Heaviness: above  eyes;  of  teeth.

Weight:  in  stomach.

Lameness: in  back;  in  hip;  in  legs;  inarms;  in  shoul-
ders; in  1.  hip.

Elastic  feeling :  in  urinary  organs.

Sinking  weakness:  in  head.

Numbness:  in  forehead;  in  hands;  in  bones  around  ear;
of  tongue;  of  hands.

Sensation  of  going  to  sleep  of  side  lain  on;  legs  go  to  sleep
easily.

Itching:  of  head  ;  in  canthi ;  of  fistula  on  1.  side  of  cheek ;
in  both  ears;  on  r.  side  of  nose;  under  ribs;  within  and
around  anus; on  1. breast;  on  r.  side  of  nose;  of  r.
nipple ;  in  larynx ;  of  skin ;  of  ulcers.
"**  Tissues. Atrophy  of  brain.

Chronic  irritation  of  mucous  membranes.

■  Emaciation. ^Dropsy.

iMuscles  soft  and  flabby. ^Chronic  diarrhoea.


FLUORICUiM  ACIDUM.  342;

■  Alopecia.

■  Goitre.

■Liver  Enlarged  and  indurated.
I  I  Dropsy  of  drunkards.

■  Acute  suppurations.

■  Threatening  gangrene  in  swollen  scrotum  and  penis.
' ■■Varicose  veins  of  legs.

■  ■Naevus,  flat.

■Varicose  veins,  obstinate  and  long  standing  cases,  espe-
cially in  women  who  have  borne  many  children.

■  A^aricose  ulcers.
■Pains  in  the  bones.

■  Swelling  of  bones.

■  Osteitis.

■  Exostoses  and  nightly  pains  in  bones.

■  Diseases  of  bones,  particularly  of  long  bones;  suppurate

and  get  better  and  worse  periodically  ;  pains  <  at  night,,
with  great  prostration.

■  ■Diseases  of  bones;  particularly  of  long  bones  ;  caries  and

necrosis,  especially  when  they  are  of  u  psoric  or  syphi-
litic nature;  or  from  abuse  of  mercury.
Promotes  expulsion  of  necrotic  bones.

■  Syphilis.

*^  Touch.  Passive  Motion.  Injuries.  Touch  :  sore  pain  in
OS  coccygis.

Pressure:  scab  on  cheek  painful  to;  r.  hypochondrium
sensitive;  liver  sensitive;  of  clothes  >  ;  emptiness  in
region  of  navel ;  >  aching  in  os  sacrum  and  lumbar
region;  makes  pain  extend  from  os  coccygis  through  to-
bladder.

Bedsores  on  parts  which  do  not  sweat  much.

■  Decubitus. ^Typhus.
*^  Skin. Sallow  skin.

■  Skin  grayish-white. ^Dropsy.

■  Burning  pains  on  small  spots  of  skin.

■  Itching  of  skin.

■Sensation  as  if  a  burning  vapor  was  emitted  from  the^
pores  of  the  whole  body.

■  Elevated  red  blotches.

Several  small  round  blood-vesicles,  elevated,  of  a  light,
carmine  color,  soft  and  compressible  and  resembling
little  flesh  warts.

■Skin  tubercles  on  forehead  and  face,  even  when  ulcerat-
ing; elevated  red  blotches  on  palm  of  hands;  squamous
eruptions  on  body  (psoriasis  guttata);  syphilitic  ero-
sions, mucous  tubercles ;  exostoses  and  nightly  pains  in
bones.

Frequent  small  boils ;  carbuncles.


343  FLUORICUM  ACIDUM.

Pustules.

I  Dry  cutaneous  eruptions.

I  Squamous  eruptions  on  body.

iNsevus  of  children  (on  right  temple);  capillary  aneurism.

I  Erosions,  mucous  tubercles.

■  Varicose  veins  and  ulcers.

I  Ulcers:  painful;  <  from  warmth,  >  from  cold;  with
copious  discharge ; with  red  borders  and  vesicles.

I  Old  cicatrices  become  red  around  edges,  covered  or  sur-
rounded by  itching  vesicles  or  they  itch  violently.

■  Bedsores;  nsevi  materni ;  pimples.

Carious  ulcers  becoming  <  from  too  large  or  too  frequently
repeated  doses  of  Stlic.
^'^  Stages  of  Life,  Constitution, i  Complaints  of  old  age,  also
premature  old  age,  in  consequence  of  syphilitic-mercu-
rial dyscrasia.

Young  people  look  very  old.

I  Weakly  constitutions,  sallow  skin,  emaciation.

■  Secondary  syphilis  ; syphilis  infantum.

Boy,  set.  9,  after  scarlet  fever; caries  of  temporal  bone.

Man,  aet.  24,  primary  sore  two  years  ago  which  disappeared
under  use  of  blue  pill,  and  topical  application  of  black
wash,  four  months  afterwards  had  secondary  ulceration
of  throat,  which  also  temporarily  healed  under  blue  pill;
syphilis.

Mrs.  G.,  suffering  for  a  month ;  diarrhoea.

Man,  set.  30,  secondary  symptoms  for  five  or  six  months;
syphilis.

Man,  set.  32,  formerly  much  troubled  with  scrofulous  erup-
tions; ulceration  of  uvula.

Man,  set.  40,  subject  to  indigestion  and  attacks  of  bilious
vomiting  and  diarrhoea  nearly  all  his  life ;  diarrhoea
and  vomiting.

Mr.  B.,  set.  50;  aural  itching.

Man,  set.  59,  weak  constitution,  hard  drinker,  has  enlarge-
ment of  liver ;  dropsy.
^^  Relations. Compatible:  after  Arsen.  in  ascites  from  gin-
drinker's  liver;  after  Kali  carb.  in  hip  disease; after
PJtos.  ac.  in  diabetes; after  tiilic.  in  bone  affections.

Compare:  Coca  in  increased  ability  to  exercise;  Coffea  in
toothache ;  Citr.  ac.  and  Sepia  in  aversion  to  one's  family ;
Oxal.  ac.  in  diarrhoea,  <  from  coffee ;  Rhus  tox.  and  Ruta
in  coccygodynia ;  Silic.  in  dental  fistula,  onychia,  bone
diseases  and  coccygodynia ;  Spongia  and  Kali  carb.  in
goitre ;  Staphis.  in  sensitive  teeth.


FORMICA  RUFA.  344

FORMICA  RUFA.

The  Ant.  Hymenoptera.

"  The  name  Formica  was  used  by  Linnaeus  as  a  generic  name  for  a  large  num-
ber of  species,  all  of  which  appear  to  common  people  to  be  ants.  Later  entomolo-
gists had  to  separate  the  species  and  arrange  them  under  different  names,  as  differ-
ent genera.  The  genus  to  which  the  old  name,  Formica,  was  left  by  Latrielle,  is
the  one  from  which  we  have  reports  of  cures,  and  from  whicli  we  made  our  prov-
ings.  Ants  belonging  to  the  genus  Formica,  as  Latrielle  has  it,  when  attacked
defend  themselves  by  biting  with  tlieir  mandibulaj,  or  jaws,  and  bending  at  the
same  time  their  abdomen  downward  and  forward,  they  eject  from  tlie  anus  a  sharp,
sour  fluid  towards  the  place  which  they  tried  to  wound  with  their  pincers.  The
fluid  reddens  litmus  paper,  and  contains  Formyl  acid  (Formica  or  Formic  acid)
CH2O2."

For  historical  data  See  N.  Amer.  J.  of  H.,  Aug.,  1870,  article  by  C.  Hering.

The  tincture  is  prepared  from  crushed  live  ants.

The  provings  were  principally  made  and  conducted  by  Lippe  and  Hering.
See  Hering's  Monograph,  and  Allen's  Encyclopedia,  vol.  4,  p.  355.  The  prepara-
tions used  were  the  formic  ether,  formyl  acid,  spiritus  formicarum,  formica  rufa
and  subsericea.

Clinicax,  Authorities. — See  Hering's  Monograph.

^  Mind. I  Want  of  memory;  forgetful  in  evening.

Undisposed,  forgetful,  morose,  fearful  and  apprehensive.

Exhilarated  condition  after  pain  in  vertex  had  abated.
^  Sensorium. l Vertigo;  all  things  seem  to  move  to  and  fro,
and  reeling  of  body.

Inclined  to  be  dizzy  while  eating;  giddiness  after  dressing
in  morning  or  on  attempting  to  rise;  pain  in  1.  supra-
orbital region  when  going  to  bed,  with  dizziness;  black-
ness before  eyes,  >  by  sitting  down.

Giddy  on  attempting  to  rise.

Fulness  in  head;  stupid  feeling  in  head,  with  sensation  of
stiffness  of  neck.

Heaviness  of  head ;  sensation  as  if  brain  was  too  heavy
and  large;  congestion  to  head;  pulsations  in  head.

Dull,  sleepy  feeling,  with  heaviness  of  eyelids,  and  inability
to  study.

Dull,  uncomfortable  feeling  in  forehead,  with  heat,  fulness
and  pulsations.

I  iDulness  of  head;  pressure  on  both  sides  between  tem-
ples and  ears.

■  In  all  kinds  of  apoplectic  diseases.

I  Strengthens  the  brain.


B45  FORMICA  RUFA.

*  Inner  Head. Forepart  of  head  aches,  with  the  cough.

Sensation  like  a  bubble bursting  in  forehead,  running

around  1.  side  of  head.
Dull  frontal  headache,  with  occasional  shooting  pains  from

r.  temple  into  head,  in  afternoon.

■  Headache  in 1.  forepart  of  head and  temple  back to

occiput,  beginning  earlier  every  day,  with  a  sore  pain
over  eye,  increasing  gradually,  with  cutting,  extending
into  ear.

■  Headache  with  cracking  in  1.  ear,  followed  by  pain  in  1.

temple,  then  in  vertex,  with  nausea,  and  abatement  of

pain  in  forehead.
■Sick  headache,  with  shooting,  neuralgic  pains  in  temples.
Lancinating  in  r.  temple,  from  within  out.
Dull  pain  in  whole  head,  with  occasional  boring  in  r.  tem-
poral region.
Severe  pain  in  vertex,  like  a  stitch  from  a  dull  instrument,

as  from  a  pressing  nail.
Pain  on  top  of  head  shifting  from  epigastrium.
Headache on top of head and forehead, particularly

through  temples.
In  morning  headache  in  posterior  upper  and  inner  part  of

head; <  drinking  coffee;  each  time  during  and  after

washing  with  cold  water.
Tearing  pain  in  occiput.
;rPain  from  neck  up  to  back  of  head.

TrSensation  running  up  into  head  from  oody  like  lighmmg.
When waking in morning, headache with vomiting,

stitches  in  r.  side  of  chest.
Headache:  with  nausea;  <  sitting  up  in  bed;  with  nausea

and  vomiting;  in  afternoon,  with  occasional  fluttering

of  heart;  daily  from  12  m.  to  10  p.m.;  <  stooping;  all  day,

>  after  combing  hair.
■Nervous  headache.
^  Outer  Head. ■  Itching  of  scalp  and  head.

■  Hair  on  head  ceased  falling  out  when  combing.

■  Contusions  of  head.

^  Sight  and  Eyes.  Pain  in  1.  supraorbital  and  1.  temporal
region,  the  seat  of  pain  being  tender  to  touch;  pain  and
aching  over  1.  eye;  objects  appear  as  if  seen  through  a
mist;  blackness  before  eyes,  must  sit  down  for  a  few
moments.

■  Dimness  of  sight.

;rAlthough  improved,  she  cannot  see,"  has  flickering  before
eyes,  and  eyes  are  very  weak.

■  Nebula;  leucoma;  pterygium.

■  Maculse  and  ulcers  on  cornea.

;rPain  in  eyes  mornings  when  awaking,  >  by  washing.


FORMICA  RUFA.  346

1 1  Rheumatic  inflammation  of  eyes  and  sequelae.
Spasmodic  twitching  of  upper  eyelid  of  r.  eye.
^  Hearing  and  Ears, i  Ringing,  buzzing  in  ears.

■  Cracking  in  1.  ear,  with  headache.

■  Difficult  hearing;  deafness.

■  Earache  in  both  ears,  morning  getting  up.
Pressing  pain  in  ears,  with  heat.

Slight  stitches  in  1.  ear,  followed  by  a  small  abscess  in

external  portion  of  meatus  auditorius.
TrExternal  sensitiveness  of  r.  ear  and  temple.
ttAII  the  parts  around  ear  feel  swollen  and  uncomfortable;

slight  pain  in  (right)  deaf  ear,  extending  up  into  temple,

w'ith  external  sensitiveness.
;rBehind  the  ear,  pain  from  neck.
ttAII  ear  symptoms,  like  cold  in  head,  have  been  on  r.  side,

where  ear  is  deaf;  1.  ear  occasionally  sympathizing.
"^  Smell  and  Nose. Sneezing  and  fluent  cor3^za.

■  Catarrh.

®  Upper  Face.  Entire  1.  side  of  face  and  cheek  feel  as  if  par-
alyzed.
;rAfter  taking  first  powder,  the  blister  on  face,  for  which,
the  medicine  was  given,  seemed  rather  smaller  and
harder;  after  the  second,  it  was  softer  and  felt  sore,,
and  a  small  pimple  appeared  on  face;  the  morning
after  the  third,  surface  of  blister  was  irregular.

^°  Teeth  and  Gums. ■Grumbling  in  teeth  during  afternoon,
from  draught.

■  Pain  in  decayed  last  molar,  1.  side.

^^  Taste  and  Tongue. "Watery  taste  in  mouth,  very  off'eu-

sive  to  him.
:rWater  tastes  badly,  sweetish  and  insipid.
-Root  of  tongue  sore;  at  the  tip  stinging.
^^  Throat. Dry  throat  all  night,  could  scarcely  speak;  when

she  got  into  a  position  in  wdiich  she  could  sleep  a  little,

the  dryness  of  throat  awoke  her.
"In  morning  on  rising  very  sore  throat  and  earache  in

both  ears.
■Sore  throat  in  morning  with  much  mucus.

■  Sore  throat  <  1.  side.

"Pain  in  neck  wdien  hawking  and  gargling.
"  Appetite,  Thirst. Desires,  Aversions. TrMuch  thirst  all

day,  but  water  tasted  badly,  sweetish  and  insipid.
^^  Eating  and  Drinking. ^While  eating  and  drinking,  espe-
cially when  closing  jaws,  severe  pain  in  neck.
"After  drinking  tea,  copious  sweat.
'^  Hiccough,  Belching,  Nausea  and  Vomiting. TrFrequent
belching  without  any  relief

■  Nausea  and  vomiting.


347  FORMICA  RUFA..

I  I  Nausea  with  headache,  and  vomiting  of  yellowish,  bitter

mucus.
TrVomiting:  with  diarrhoea,  in  evening;  with  cough.
^^  Scrobiculum  and  Stomach. ;rWarmth  and  burning  in
stomach,  acceleration  of  pulse,  increased  urination,  in-
creased transpiration, excitement  of sexual organs,,
viscous,  stinking  urine,  with  gouty  patients.
Burning  pain  in  stomach,  with  oppression  and  weight.
I  I  Constant  pressure  at  cardiac  end  of  stomach, and  a
burning  pain  there.
^^  Hypochondria. Dull  pain  in  region  of  spleen.
^^  Abdomen. -Severe  pain  in  belly,  and  shuddering  chilliness.
Sensation  across  abdomen  as  if  bruised  below  navel,  also
tired  feeling  in  back,

■  Flatulency.

I  Hardening  of  mesenteric  glands.
2°  Stool  and  Rectum. TrAfter  having  a  thin  evacuation  with

bellyache,  every  morning  for  a  week,  without  much

relief  from  the  eruption,  there  appeared  in  the  evening,.

at  8  or  9  o'clock,  violent  diarrhoea  and  vomiting.
I  Diarrhoea  after  meals,  or  only  during  day,  not  at  night,

or  day  and  night,  or  before  midnight.
I  I  Diarrhoea,  with  tenesmus;  pain  in  bowels  before  stool.
Loose  diarrhoeic  stool,  which  left  a  desire  for  another  stool,

with  an  uncomfortable  feeling  in  anus,  as  if  the  passage

was  not  all  through,  and  more  must  pass.
Difficult  passage  of  small  quantities  of  flatus  in  morning;

afterwards  diarrhoea-like  urging  in  rectum.

■  Diarrhoea  of  children.

;rln  the  morning  second  stool.
B  White  stools.

■  Constipation  and  sensation  of  constriction  of  sphincter  ani..
Pressure  in  rectum,  <  evening  and  in  bed.

Painful  desire  in  anus  and  rectum  for  stool,  which,  how-
ever, will  not  pass.

■  Tapeworm.

^^  Urinary Organs. Paralysis  of  bladder.
^^  Male  Sexual  Organs. Long-lasting  erections  after  urinat-
ing in  morning.

■  Seminal  emissions.

■  Weakness  of  sexual  organs.

■  Scanty  ejaculation  with  incomplete  erection.

A  kind  of  nervous,  floating  and  jerking  pain  in  1.  half  of
penis  and  region  of  prostate,  frequently  repeated.

On  ascending  stairs  feeling  as  if  several  parts  had  gone  to^
sleep.

Itching  on  scrotum.
^^  Female  Sexual  Organs. ■Uterine  complaints.


FORMICA  RUFA.  348

Menses  scanty  and  pale,  with  bearing  down  pain  in  back;
3d  day;  darker  4th  day;  crampy  pain  through hip-
joint  and  pelvis.
Menses  appear  eight  days  too  soon.
21  Pregnancy. Parturition. Lactation. iLack  of  milk

with  nursing  women.
^  Voice  and  Larynx. Trachea  and  Bronchia. ■  Hoarse-
ness wath  sore  throat.
B  Small  piece  of  phlegm  in  larynx  which  cannot  be  brought
up  by  coughing.
^'  Cough. iTedious  and  long  lasting;  <  at  night  and  from
motion;  with  an  aching  in  forehead  and  a  constrictive
pain  in  chest.
■Violent  attacks  of  cough  with  vomiting,  day  and  night.
^®  Inner  Chest  and  Lungs, i Pleuritic  pains.
^  Heart,  Pulse  and  Circulation. Uneasy  pain  in  region  of
heart.
Palpitation  of  heart; fluttering  of  heart.
^^  Outer  Chest. .  l  l  Violent  penetrating  itching  at  r.  nipple.
I  I  Violent  prickling,  pressing  stitches  in  region  of  1.  nipple;
later  on  1.  side  of  back,  but  more  violent; still  later,  the
same  sensation  on  other  parts  of  body.
^^  Neck  and  Back. TrSoreness  in  neck  and  up  into  head;  >
by  external  pressure.
;rWhile  eating  and  chewing  food,  especially  when  closing
her  jaws,  severe  pain  in  1.  side  of  neck,  which  extended
into  back  of  head  and  particularly  behind  ear.
jrln  morning,  on  gargling  her  throat,  when  hawking,  sud-
denly a  violent  pain  in  1.  side  of  nape  of  neck,  extend-
ing dowai  1.  arm,  can  scarcely  move  it,  <  above  elbow;
>  in  evening  in  1.  arm,  but  it  went  to  r.,  where  it  was
<  than  before;  on  bending  head  back,  could  scarcely
bring  it  forward  again,  on  account  of  pain ;  whole  neck
stiff,  and  very  painful  up  to  back  of  head,  <  from  least
motion ;  on  wishing  to  rise  from  bed,  must  press  both
hands  behind  ears,  cries  out  on  least  motion.
Trinto  the  neck  pain  with  least  turn  or  twist.
;rAfter  sitting  up  pain  in  neck  <  again,  >  by  application

of  a  hot  iron.
I  I  Violent  itching  on  1.  shoulder-blade.

I  Pain  in  back.

Severe  pain  across  sacrum  and  dorsum  of  each  hand,  <
on  motion.

I I  Affection  of  spinal  cord.

"^^  Upper  Limbs, i  i  Itching  in  armpits  in  morning.

"Pain  from  neck  down  1.  arm;  in  evening  to  r. ;  could

scarcely  move  her  arm.
I  1  Severe  pain  above  r.  elbow.


349  FORMICA  RUFA.

;rPain  <  in  upper  arm,  above  1.  elbow.

Rheumatic  pain:  in  r,  elbow-joint;  in  r.  forearm  and  wrist;

along  course  of  ulna.
Pain  leaves  1.  arm  and  goes  to  right.
^  Lower  Limbs. Severe  pain  through  pelvis,  as  if  from  one

acetabulum  to  the  other.
Bruised  pain  in  hips  at  night  in  bed,  causing  him  to

change  from  side  to  side.
Legs  felt  as  if  she  had  no  power  in  them,  sore  and  tired;

sensation  across  abdomen  as  if  bruised  below  navel,  also

tired  feeling  in  back  ;  felt  a  little  giddy.
Lancinating  pain  in  1.  knee-joint,  waking  him  from  sleep.
Rheumatic  pains  in  knee-joints,  <  walking.
Cramp  in  both  feet,  especially  in  soles  near  toes.
iGout; gout}^  pain  in  limbs.

■  Arthritis  vaga.

I  Chronic  gout  and  stiffness  of  joints.
iOld  atonic  gout.

■  Checked  foot-sweat. ^Chorea.

^*  Limbs  in  GeneraL Sensation  as  if  muscles  were  strained
and  being  torn  from  attachment.

I I  Rheumatism  appearing  suddenly,  mostly  in  joints,  with
restlessness ;  patients  desire  motion,  although  it  makes
pain  more  acute ;  pains  >  by  pressure ;  sweat  without
relief;  r.  side  principally  and  more  severely  affected
than  left.

■  Old  local  or  general  rheumatic  affections; internal  or

external.

■  Rheumatic  or  gouty  pains.

■  Stiffness  and  contraction  of  joints.

^^Rest. Position. Motion. Sitting: upon  bed,  headache
with  nausea  <;  pain  in  neck  <.

Stooping:  headache  with  nausea.

Sitting  down:  blackness  before  eyes  >.

Bending  head:  could  scarcely  bring  it  forward  again  on
account  of  pain.

Could  get  to  sleep  if  she  could  get  right  position.

Pain  in  hip  compels  him  to  change  from  side  to  side.

Closing  jaws: severe  pain  in  neck.

Attempting  to  rise:  giddiness;  pain  in  neck.

Can  scarcely  move  arm  for  pain.

Walking:  pain  in  knee-joints.

Ascending  stairs:  feeling  as  if  sexual  parts  had  gone  to
sleep.

Motion :  cough  < ;  pain  in  back  of  neck  < ;  pain  across
sacrum  and  dorsum  of  each  hand  < ;  <  pain,  but  pa-
tient desires  it.
^  Nerves. Languid  feeling  of  whole  system,  with  pain  in  all


_FORMICA  RUFA.  350

the  limbs,  accompanied by  chills  and  horripilations
along  spine.
Legs  felt  as  if  she  had  no  power  in  them.

■  Great  lassitude  and  prostration.

General  weakness  of  the  whole  muscular  system.

iFaintings.

1  Limbs  lame;  paralyzed.

B  Paralysis.

I  Spasms.

I A  long,  horribly  maltreated  chorea  lessened  as  soon  as
the  foot-sweat,  which  had  been  checked,  was  brought  on
again  by  putting  feet  in  a  bag  with  living  ants  and
creating  steam  with  hot  stones.

■  Epilepsy.

■  Affections  of  the  spinal  cord.

■  Strengthens  the  nerves.

^'  Sleep. :rAll  night  dry  throat,  woke  her  out  of  sleep.

;rDisagTeeable  sweat  during  night,  awoke  with  clammy

skin.
TrPassed  a  dreadful  night ;  pains  suddenly return  with

violence,  only  lessening  somewhat  after  midnight.
;rCould  get  to  sleep  if  she  could  get  the  right  position.

■  Wakes  up  early  and  feels  that  she  has  had  sufficient  sleep.

■  When  awaking  in  morning: headache;  vomiting,  with

headache ;  pain  in  eyes ;  stitches  in  ear.
■^^  Time.  Morning:  after  dressing,  giddiness;  headache;  head-
ache with  vomiting;  pain  in  eyes;  earache;  dry  throat;
sore  throat;  difficult  passage  of  small  quantities  of  flatus;
second  stool;  long-lasting  erections  after  urinating;  vio-
lent pain  in  1.  side  of  neck;  itching  in  armpits;  sweat.

Day:  headache;  diarrhoea;  cough  with  vomiting.

Afternoon:  shooting  pain  in  r.  temple;  headache  with
nausea  and  fluttering  of  heart;  grumbling  in  teeth.

Evening:  forgetful;  vomiting  with  diarrhoea;  pressure  in
rectum  <;  pain  in  arm  > ;  pain  goes  from  1.  to  r.  arm.

Night:  dry  throat;  diarrhoea;  cough  <;  cough  with  vom-
iting; bruised  pain  in  hip.

After  midnight:  pains  >.
^^  Temperature  and  Weather. Creating  steam  with  hot
stones  in  a  bag  of  live  ants  brought  back  foot-sweat.

Hot  iron  >  pain  in  neck.

Cold  water:  headache  <  during  and  when  washing  with
cold  water;  renews  burning  pains.

■Great  liability  to  take  cold.

■  Consequences of  cold and wet; cold bathing; damp

weather.
■^^  Fever. ;rShuddering  chilliness  with  pain  in  belly.
TrClammy  skin,  awaking  her.


351  FORMICA  RUFA.

;rDisagreeable  sweat  during  night.

;rPerspired  for  about  half  an  hour,  but  without  slightest
amelioration  of  pain  in  arm.

TrAt  noon,  after  drinking  tea,  copious  sweat  without  relief.

1 1  Sweat  without  relief
^^  Attacks,  Periodicity. Frequently  repeated  pains  in  1.  half
of  penis.

Attacks:  of  violent  cough  with  vomiting.

Every  morning:  thin  evacuation  wdth  bellyache.

Earlier  every  day:  headache.

Daily  from  12  m.  to  10  p.m.  :  headache  with  nausea.

Third  day:  menses  pale  and  scanty  with  bearing  down
pain  in  back.

Fourth  day:  menses  darker.
^  Locality  and  Direction.  Right :  shooting  pains  in  temple;
lancinating  in  temple;  boring  in  temple;  stitches  in  side
of  chest;  spasmodic  twitching  of  upper  eyelid  sensitive-
ness of  ear  and  temple;  violent  penetrating  itching  at  r.
nipple;  pain  from  neck  down  arm ;  severe  pain  above
elbow;  rheumatic  pain  in  elbow-joint,  in  forearm,  in
wrist,  along  course  of  ulna.

Left:  pain  in  supraorbital  region;  sensation  of  bubble
bursting  in  side  of  head;  headache  in  forepart  of  head
and  temple;  cracking  in  ear;  pain  in  temple;  pain
and  aching  over  eye;  stitches  in  ear;  small  abscess  on
external  portion  of  meatus  auditorius;  side  of  face  and
cheek  feel  as  if  paralyzed;  pain  in  decayed  molar;  side
of  throat  sore;  a  kind  of  nervous,  floating,  jerking  pain
in  half  of  penis;  prickling  stitches  at  nipple;  on  side  of
back;  closing  jaws  severe  pain  in  neck;  severe" pain  down
arm;  violent  itching  of  shoulder-blade;  pain  from  neck
down  arm;  pain  in  upper  arm  above  elbow;  lancinating-
pain  in  knee-joint.

I  Pains  1.  then  r. ;  r.  then  left.
^  Sensations.  As  if  brain  was  too  heavy  and  large;  sensation
like  a  bubble  bursting  in  forehead ;  like  a  stitch  from  a
dull  instrument  in  vertex;  as  from  a  pressing  nail  in
vertex;  1.  side  of  face  and  cheek  as  if  paralyzed;  as  if
bruised  below  navel;  as  if  male  sexual  organs  had  gone
to  sleep;  as  if  muscles  were  strained  and  being  torn  from
attachments;  legs  feel  as  if  she  had  no  power  in  them.

Pain:  in  1.  supraorbital  region;  in  forepart  of  head;  in  1.
temple;  in  forehead;  in  vertex;  from  neck  up  to  back
of  head;  over  1.  eye;  in  both  ears;  in  r.  ear  extending
up  into  temple;  from  neck  behind  ear;  in  decayed  last
molar  1.  side;  in  neck;  in  bowels;  down  1.  arm;  in
back;  in  upper  arm  above  1.  elbow;  from  1.  arm  to  r.;
in  all  limbs.


FORMICA  RUFA.  352

Severe  pain:  in  vertex;  in  neck;  in  belly;  across  sacrum
and  dorsum  of  each  hand ;  above  r.  elbow ;  through  pel-
vis as  if  from  one  acetabulum  to  the  other.

Lancinating:  in  r.  temple;  in  1.  knee-joint.

Tearing  pain :  in  occiput.

■  Cutting  pain:  in  head;  into  ear.

Shooting  pains:  from  r.  temple  into  head.

Boring:  in  r.  temporal  region.

Stitches:  in  r.  side  of  chest;  in  1.  ear;  in  region  of  1.  nipple.

Prickling  stitches:  in  region  of  1.  nipple;  in  1.  side  of  back ;
on  other  parts  of  body.

Pleuritic  pains:  inner  chest  and  lungs.

Crampy  pain:  through  hip-joint  and  pelvis.

Cramp:  in  both  feet;  in  soles.

Neuralgic  pains :  in  temples.

Rheumatic  pain:  in  r.  elbow-joint;  in  r.  forearm;  in  r.
wrist;  along  course  of  ulna;  in  knee-joints.

Gouty  pain :  in  limbs.

Bearing  down  pain :  in  back.

Pressing  pain :  in  ears.

Bruised  pain:  in  hips.

Burning  pain :  in  stomach.

Stinging:  at  tip  of  tongue.

Sore  pain:  over  eye.

Jerking  pain  :  in  1.  half  of  penis ;  region  of  prostate.

Nervous  floating  pain:  in  1.  half  of  penis;  in  region  of  pros-
tate.

Constrictive  pain :  in  chest.

Dull  pain :  in  whole  head ;  in  region  of  spleen.

Uneasy  j^ains :  in  region  of  heart.

Soreness:  at  root  of  tongue;  of  throat;  in  neck  up  into
head;  of  legs.

Burning:  of  stomach.

Grumbling:  in  teeth.

Constriction:  of  sphincter  ani.

Spasmodic  twitching:  of  upper  eyelid  of  r.  eye.

Dull  frontal  headache.

Dull  feeling:  in  head;  in  forehead.

Dulness:  of  head.

Fulness: in  head.

Pressure:  at  cardiac  end  of  stomach;  in  rectum.

Stupid  feeling:  in  head.

Dryness:  of  throat.

Heaviness:  of  head;  of  eyelids.

Stiffness:  of  neck;  of  joints.

Fluttering:  of  heart.

Cracking:  in  1.  ear.

Buzzing:  in  ears.


353  FORMICA  RUFA.

Ringing :  in  ears.

Tired  feeling:  in  back;  in  legs.

Lameness:  of  limbs.

Itching:  of  scalp ;  of  head;  on  scrotum;  at  r.  nipple;  on  1.
shoulder-blade;  in  armpits.
^  Tissues. Rheumatic  affections;  so-called  rheumatic  inflam-
mation of  eyes;  aural  affections  and  sequelae.

Nervous  and  spasmodic  affections.

■  Nodes  around  joints,  internally  and  externally.

■  Watery  swellings;  dropsy;  cachexies.

*^  Touch. Passive  Motion. Injuries. Touch :  seat  of  pain
tender.
Pressure:  soreness  in  neck  and  up  into  head  >■;  of  both
hands  behind  ears;  >  pain  in  neck.

■  Contusions; dislocations.

■  Atrophy  after  wounds.

■  Complaints  from  overlifting.

^'^  Skin. Itch ;  cold  tumors ;  goitre ;  leprosy.

^*  Relations. Compatible:  after  Chamom.

Compare:  Apis,  Bryon.  (rheumatism),  Chloral  and  Urtica
urens  (nettle-rash),  Dulcam.  (rheumatism),  Frag.  ves.  (lack
of  mammary  secretion),  Thrombid.  (diarrhoea.)


VOL.  V. — 23.


GAMBOGIA.  354

GAMBOGIA  (Gummi  Gutti).
Gamboge.  Guttijerse.

Tincture  of  the  resinous  gum  obtained  from  a  tree  native  to  China.

Proved  by  Nenning,  see  Allen's  Encyclopedia,  vol.  4,  p.  373,  and  Jacob
Jeanes  in  18-10  (not  included  in  Allen's  Encyclopaedia),  also  by  Hering  and
Husmann.

Clinical  Authorities. — Diarrhea,  Berridge,  Raue's  Eec,  1871,  p.  114;
Knerr,  Organon,  vol.  2,  p.  115;  (2  cases)  Conant,  Times  Retros.,  1877,  p.  25;
•Chronic  dia7-rhcea,  Boy ce,  Raue's  Rec,  1875,  p.  147;  (5  cases)  Hilberger,  Kafka,
Riick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  5,  p.  416  ;  Lienteria,  Brigham,  Organon,  vol.  2,  p.  134;  Cholera
■infantum,  Hunt,  Raue's  Rec,  1871,  p.  119;  Wells,  Raue's  Rec,  1873,  p.  122.

^  Mind. I  Irritable  mood.

I  I  Cheerful,  talkative,  feeling  of  ease,  great  lightness  of  all

his  motions.
Despondency ;  sadness.
^  Sensorium. > Vertigo  during  rest  or  motion;  morning  when

rising.
Confusion  of  head  with  a  feeling  of  reeling  or  motion  from

side  to  side.
1  Heaviness  in  whole  head,  with  dulness,  sleepiness  and

pain  in  back.
^  Inner  Head. Pain  in  whole  head  and  beating  in  forehead

towards  nose.
Oppressive  headache  with  heaviness  in forehead,  >  in

open  air,  or  with  heat  in  whole  head  and  body.
Transitory  tearing  in  1.  temple.

Feeling  of  great  coldness  in  1.  temple  as  from  a  wet  cloth.
Sharp  stitches  in  r.  side  of  head  and  in  temples.
Compressive  pain  in  head  from  both  sides.
Pain  in  vertex,  as  if  bruised,  in  forenoon; >  in  open  air.
Heaviness  in  whole  head,  with  inertia,  drowsiness,  and

pain  in  small  of  back.
Heat  rises  to  head,  with  perspiration.
Gastric  headaches.
*  Outer  Head. Pain  in  the  coronal  suture.
Sight  and  Eyes. "Violent  burning  of  eyes  and  photophobia,

evening  or  afternoon,  >  from  walking  in  open  air,  but

returning  in  morning.
Pain  in  1.  eye  succeeded  immediately  by  sickness  of  stom-
ach, and  dull,  heavy  aching  and  pain  in  tibia  below  in-


5


"355  GAMBOGIA.

sertion of  tendon from patella,  then by  pain  above
patella  on  1.  side.

■  Violent  itching  of  eyes  in  evening.

■  Itching  of  inner  canthi,  with  discharge  of  acrid,  corrosive

tears  after  rubbing;  >  in  open  air.
Smarting  of  e3^es  with  increased  flow  of  tears.
Pain  in  both  eyes;  very  severe  in  eyeballs;  sometimes  <

in  one  eye,  with  severe  pain  in  adjoining  temple,  most

in  left.
Catarrhal  affection  of  eyes.
Feeling  of  stickiness  and  dryness  of  eyes.

■  Nightly  agglutination  of  lids,  burning  in  morning,  pho-

tophobia through  day,  and  frequent  stitching  pain  in
eyes.

Frequent  itching  on  skin  over  outer  and  lower  edge  of
orbit  of  1.  eye.
'^  Hearing  and  Ears. ■Ringing  in  1.  ear  all  the  time;  some-
times hissing.

Lancination  in  ears.

Pain  in  both  ears,  most  in  1.;  also  in  1.  molars,  afterwards
in  r.  and  in  region  of  articulation  of  jaw.
^  Smell  and  Nose. Tendency  to  hemorrhages  from  nose  and
lungs.

■  Violent  chronic  sneezing  in  daytime  only; feeling of

coldness  in  points  of  incisor  teeth ;  extremely  painful

burning  in  region  of  liver.
I  1  Dryness  of  r.  nostril.
Smarting  as  if  a  sore  pimple  existed  immediately  below

r.  nostril.
Ulceration  of  r.  nostril,  with  burning  pain.
Much  mucus  in  nose,  smelling  like  pus.
"^  Upper  Face. Smarting,  itching  on  r.  cheek,  chin  and  upper

lip.
Swelling  of  face,  especially  of  eyelids,  nose  and  lips;  upper

lip  remained  swollen  for  twelve  hours.
^°  Teeth  and  Gums. ■  Tearing  in  all  the  right  molars.

■  Sensation  of  coldness  at  edge  of  incisors.

"  Taste  and  Tongue. '  i  Bitter  taste  in  mouth.

Tongue  and  gums  sensitive.

Smarting  of  tongue;  raw,  sore  feeling.

I  I  Burning  of  tongue.

Burning  of  anterior  half  or  only  of  tip  of  tongue,  which
feels  hard.
^^  Inner Mouth. ■Dryness  of mouth; clammy, adhesive
state  of  mouth.

Burning  vesicles  on  inner  side  of  lips.

Aphthae;  deep  ulcers  in  mouth,  inner  side  of  lips  and  cheek.

Raw,  rough  feeling  in  fauces  and  at  root  of  tongue.


GAMBOGIA.  356

^^  Throat. iPain  as  from  soreness  in  throat.

I  I  Sore  pain  in  throat,  which  is  felt  when  even  touching

outer  side  of  neck.
I  Rawness  and  burning  in  throat,  constant  hawking.
■Violent  stitches  in  r.  side  of  throat.
I  I  Stinging  in  r.  side  of  throat  during  and  between  acts  of

deglutition.
I  I  The  throat  feels  swollen.
Difficulty  in  swallowing.
^*  Appetite,  Thirst. Desires,  Aversions. Appetite  good,  but
a  little  food  satisfies.
Diminished  appetite;  aversion  to  food.

I  Thirst  after  dinner,  and  especially  evenings.

^^  Hiccough,  Belching,  Nausea  and  Vomiting, i  Frequent
violent  empty  eructations.
■Nausea  from  stomach,  when  walking  in  open  air.

I I  Nausea,  inclination  to  vomit,  accumulation  of  saliva  in
mouth;  gulping  up  of  sour  water.

Nausea  and  vomiting,  after  taking  drink  or  food.
1 1  Frightful  vomiting  and  purging,  with  fainting.
^^  Scrobiculum  and  Stomach, i  Empty  feeling  in  stomach
and  abdomen.

■  Gnawing  in  stomach.

■  Constant  sore  pain  in  stomach.

I  I  Ulcerative  pain  in  stomach,  passing  off  after  eating.

■  Acute  stitches  in  stomach.
Cutting  pain  in  stomach.

I  iDartings  in  stomach,  causing  one  to  start.
Sticking  pains  in  region  of  and  below  cardiac  orifice.
Sensation  of  heat  in  stomach  and  abdomen,  also  at  times
a  feeling  similar  to  a  cool  and  refreshing  wind  blowing
on  face  when  overheated.
^^  Hypochondria, l  l  Burning  in  region  of  liver.

Sharp  cutting  in  1.  hypochondrium.
^^  Abdomen. ■  Pinching  in  abdomen  immediately  after  eating.

■  Frequent severe pinching  in  entire abdomen  without

urging,  or,  with  diarrhoea  and  burning  in  anus,  with

relief  of  pain.
I  1  Gnawing  in  a  small  spot  below  umbilicus.
Feeling  of  fermentation  in  abdomen.

■  ■Rumbling  and  rolling  in  bowels.

■  Gurgling  in  abdomen,  as  of  fluid  running  from  a  bottle.
I  1  Rushing  sounds  in  abdomen  as  from  motions  of  air  and

fluid  feces,  as  occurs  before  diarrhoeic  stools.

■  Inflation  and  tension  of  abdomen,  with  pinching  in  um-

bilical region.
Peculiar  itching  sensation  in  umbilicus.

■  Ileo-ccjecal  region  painful  and  sensitive  to  pressure.


357  GAMBOGIA.

I  I  In  groins  sticking,  tension ;  pinching.
Pressing  pain  at  1.  inguinal  ring.
^^  Stool  and  Rectum, i  Profuse  discharge  of  flatus,  especially-
evening  and  night.

■  Yellow  and  green  diarrhoeic  stool,  mixed  with  mucus,

preceded  by  excessive  cutting  around  umbilicus.
Diarrhoea  of  watery  mucus,  with  colicky  pains  in  umbilicus

during  stool.
liProfuse  watery  diarrhoea,  with  colic  and  tenesmus.

I  iStool  expelled  all  at  once,  with  a  single,  somewdiat  pro-

longed effort.

■  iStools  of  dark  green  mucus,  offensive,  corrosive.

I I  Stools  very  fetid,  and  come  away  with  a  gush  all  at  once;
or  mucus  and  blood,  with  great  tenesmus.

H  Fecal  diarrhoea,  stools  evacuated  with  great  force.

1 1  Great  relief  after  stool  as  though  an  irritating  substance
were  removed  from  bowels.

iDiarrhoea:  <  forenoon,  or  during  day;  after  drinking  ale;
>  from  pressing  abdomen  (cutting  pains).

1 1  Profuse  yellow  watery  diarrhoea  in  hot  weather,  partic-
ularly old  people.

•Acute  and  chronic  diarrhoea;  infantile  diarrhoea;  dys-
entery.

■  Summer  complaint.

I  Bloody  stools  in  dysentery.
iLienteric  stools.

IDiarrhoea,  with  burning  pain  and  tenesmus  of  rectum
protrusion  of  anus  and  constant  pinching  around  um-
bilicus, sometimes  with  mucous  stools.

I I  Burning  in  anus  after  stool;  anus  sore  and  excoriated.
Diarrhoea  alternating  with  constipation.

■  Hard,  insufficient  stool,  with  strong  urging,  pressing  and

protrusion  of  rectum.

I  I  Hard  stool,  succeded  by  burning  at  anus.

Before  stool:  sudden  urging,  with  hot  pinching  through-
out abdomen;  darting  stitches  in  anus;  sensation  of
fulness  in  abdomen.

During  stool:  strong  urging,  causing  stool  to  pass  quickly;
much  flatus;  burning  and  heat  in  anus;  tenesmus;  pro-
lapsus ani;  cutting  about  navel;  cold  sweat  on  limbs.

After  stool:  great  relief,  thinks  she  is  w^ell,  but  is  soon
seized  with  urging  again  and  stool.

I iThin,  watery,  yellow  stool,  coming  out  all  at  once;  <
morning  and  forenoon;  before  and  during  stool  some
pain  and  urging;  after  stool  great  relief 6'Diarrhoea.

■  Stools  copious,  watery,  yellow,  or  like  curdled  milk,  of

oflensive,  sickening  smell,  expelled  with much  force;
vomits  food  undigested. ^Diarrhoea  during  hot  weather.


GAMBOGIA.  35&

I  Soon  after  eating  irresistible  desire  to  evacuate  bowels^
which  continued  as  long  as  there  was  anything  to  pass ;
after  these  passages  great  pain  in  lower  bowels,  lasting
an  hour;  emaciation;  prostration;  stools  consist  of  yel-
low mucus  and  undigested  food. ^Chronic  diarrhoea.

I  Chronic  diarrhoea  consequent  upon  exposure;  evacuations-
occur  principally  at  night,  if  they  occur  earlier  they
are  preceded  by  colicky  pains  and  much  rumbling  in
abdomen;  finds  relief  only  after  four  or  five  passages;;
stools  are  of  a  chocolate-brown  color,  containing  lumps
of  mucus,  often  streaked  with  blood  or  mixed  with  un-
digested food;  great  lassitude.

■  Constant  urging  to  stool  with  colicky  pains;  abdomen

distended  with  flatus,  and  very  painful  and  sensitive  to-
pressure,  particularly  in  ileo-c£ecal  region;  food  passes
undigested,  diarrhoea  watery  and  often  mucous;  fever
towards  evening;  night  sweats;  anorexia;  great  thirst;
mind  much  depressed;  twelve  to  fifteen  stools  occur
daily.  ^Chronic  diarrhoea.
iPainful,  muco-serous,  odorless  diarrhoea;  evacuations-
occur  every  hour,  preceded  and  followed  by  severe  pains,
causing  him  to  draw  up  limbs  and  cry  out ;  tenesmus
during  each  stool  causes  rectum  to  protrude  about  one
inch,  which,  however,  returns  again  in  ten  or  fifteen
minutes,  after  which  he  is  free  of  pain  for  about  twenty
minutes  and  can  sleep;  face  pale,  showing  evidences  of
suffering;  skin  cool;  meteorism ;  hypogastrium  sensi-
tive to  pressure;  during  attack  limbs  are  cool  and  cov-
ered with  cold  sweat,  face  red,  head  hot. ^Diarrhoea.

■  Diarrhoea  coming  on  at  night;  stools  mixed  with  lumps

of  mucus  and  blood.
■Watery,  greenish  stools  mixed  with  mucus;  griping  be-
fore forcible  and  profuse  stool. //Cholera  infantum.

■  Lienteria  for  a  month;  emaciated  almost  to  a  skeleton;

bowels  seemed  to  hold  nothing;  stools  very  fetid,  and
come  away  with  a  gush,  nearly  all  of  stool  at  a  time;,
often  gurgling  sounds  are  heard  as  if  water  were  passing
through  a  bunghole.
Dysentery  with  tarlike  discharge;  dark  blood  with  menses;

general  weakness  of  whole  body.
Itching,  smarting,  as  from  a  pustule  three-quarters  of  an
inch  from  anus  on  left.
^^  Urinary  Organs, i  i  Stitches  in  1.  kidney.

Increased  secretion  of  urine,  or  diminished  in  dropsy,  with

emission  of  a  few  drops  at  a  time,
i  I  Emission  of  a  few  drops  of  urine  at  a  time,  then  inter-
mitting, and  finally  returning,  with  burning  at  orifice-
Urine  smells  like  onions,  scenting  the  room.


359 .  GAMBOGIA.

^'  Male  Sexual  Organs. Gleety  discharge  agglutinating  orifice

of  urethra.
^  Female  Sexual  Organs, l  i  Menses  too  early  and  too  pro-
fuse; long  lasting.
I  I  Leucorrhoea.
^^  Voice  and  Larynx. Trachea  and  Bronchia. Tickling
in  larynx  and  trachea  from  epiglottis  to  pit  of  throat.
Sensation  of  scratching  in  larynx.
^'^  Cough. Dry  cough,  hoarseness  and  hawking  of  phlegm.
Severe  cough  at  night,  compelling  him  to  sit  up,  with  easy
expectoration  of  mucus.
^  Inner  Chest  and  Lungs, i Pressure  in  middle  of  chest.
Sensation  of  pressure  and  weight  in  chest,  dull  pains  or

sharp  stitches  in  chest,  oppression  of  chest.
Repeated,  extremely  painful,  stitches  in  sternum.
Feeling of  fulness and soreness  under upper  third  of

sternum.
I  I  Stitches  going  from  both  sides  of  chest  towards  each

other.
I  I  Pain  in  chest  as  if  it  were,  all  raw.
I  I  Sensation  of  soreness  in  every  part  of  chest.
Congestion  of  blood  to  chest;  expectoration  of  blood.
^°  Outer  Chest. Pain  in  r.  clavicle.

■  Weight  on  chest,  causing  sleeplessness.

■  Repeated  extremely  painful  stitches  in  sternum.
Painful  stitch  from  ribs  to  axilla,  arresting  the  breathing.
Pain  cutting  and  heavy  in  r.  side,  about  the  sixth  rib,  ap-
parently in  integuments.

Pain  about  fourth  and  tenth  dorsal  vertebrae  and  cutting
pain  in  r.  side  below  edge  of  pectoralis  major,  before  it
leaves  the  thorax  to  pass  to  humerus,  subsequently  in
nearly  same  situation  on  1.  side.
^'  Neck  and  Back. Pain  down  r.  side  of  neck.

Pain  and  itching  between  the  shoulders.

Stitches  in  left  kidney.

I  I  Pain  in  small  of  back,  as  if  bruised  or  as  if  sprained.

'Pain  across  lumbar  vertebrse.

Cutting  pain  across  top  of  sacrum  and  in  1.  hip,  also  in
muscles  just  above  sacro-iliac  symphysis  on  1.  side.

■  Repeated  gnawing  in  coccyx. ^Coccyodynia.
^^  Upper  Limbs. ■Pain  in  shoulders;  tearing.

I  I  Stitch  on  top  of  r.  shoulder.

Pain  in  r.  shoulder,  clavicular  junction.

I  I  Stitching  pains  in  upper  limbs,  come  on  or  are  <  in

evening.
Aching  of  r.  arm  and  biceps  flexor  cubiti.
I  I  Stinging  and  numb  feeling  in  ball  of  r.  thumb.
Severe  aching  pain  in  upper  joint  of  little  finger  of  1.  hand.
Papulae  on  both  hands,  at  first  pale,  afterwards  red.


GAMBOGIA.  360

^  Lower  Limbs. Severe  aching  pain  deep  in  hip,  and  severe
cutting  pain  about  troclianter  major.

Aching  in  and  about  the  knees.

Sliarp  cutting  pain  in  r.  shin,  midlength  of  tibia.

Pain  in  r.  fibula  just  above  ankle-joint.

I  I  Cramp  in  calf,  with  contraction  of  toes.

I  I  Heaviness  and  languor  of  feet.

Pulsating  pains  in  three  middle  toes  at  night  in  bed.

Sticking  pains  and  soreness  in  integuments  over  large
joint  of  great  toe  1.  side,  and  afterwards  of  skin  on  back
of  great  toe,  same  side.
^  Rest. Position. Motion. Many symptoms come on
while  sitting,  and  pass  off  during  motion  in  open  air.

Rest:  vertigo.

Cough  compels  him  to  sit  up.

Pain  causes  him  to  draw  up  limbs.

Motion:  vertigo.
^'^  Nerves. iMuch  lassitude  and  debility;  emaciation.
^"  Sleep. I  Sleepiness,  great  inclination  to  sleep.

■  Sleep  broken  by  anxious  dreams.

I  Anxious,  vexatious  dreams.
^  Time. liThe  conditions  are  especially  apt  to  occur  toward
evening  or  at  night.

Day:  photophobia;  chronic  sneezing;  diarrhoea  <.

Morning:  vertigo  when  rising;  burning  of  eyes;  sharp  cut-
ting in  hypochondrium:  thin,  watery  stools  <.

Forenoon:  diarrhoea  <;  thin,  watery  stools  <.

Afternoon:  burning  of  eyes.

From  6  to  8  p.m.:  internal  and  external  coldness  lasting
from  a  quarter  to  two  hours.

7  P.M.:  paroxysm  of  intermittent  fever.

7  P.M.  till  4  A.M.:  violent  shaking.

Evening:  burning  of  eyes;  itching  of  eyes;  thirst;  pro-
fuse discharge  of  flatus  towards  evening;  fever;  stitch-
ing in  limbs  <  ; violent  itching.

Night:  agglutination  of  lids;  profuse  discharge  of  flatus;
evacuations;  sweats;  diarrhoea  comes  on  at  night;  severe
cough;  pulsating  pains  in  toes  in  bed;  biting  as  of  ants;
coldness  lasting  all  night;  shaking  chill  at  night;  par-
oxysm of  fever;  violent  itching.
^'^  Temperature  and  Weather.  Open  air:  headache  >;  pain
in  vertex  >;  burning  in  eyes  >  ;  itching  of  inner  can-
thi  > ;  nausea  when  walking.
Fever.  Chilliness  is  accompanied  by  empty  eructations,
yawning,  thirst,  pain  in  small  of  back,  biting  as  of  ants
over  whole  body  (by  night),  excessive  stitches  in  ears,
sensation  of  elongation  of  incisors.

Internal  and  external  coldness  from  7  to  8  i'.m.,  lasting  from
a  quarter  to  two  hours,  or  whole  night  to  5  a.m.


40


361  GAMBOGIA.

I  Violent  chill,  beginning  in  back.

I  Violent  shaking  at  7  p.m.,  beginning  in  back,  with  exter-
nal coldness  of  whole  body,  continues  till  4  a.m.

Sudden  shaking  chill  at  night,  waking  him  from  sleep,
and  as  suddenly  disappearing.

Chill  for  two  hours  with  chattering  of  teeth  and  violent
thirst ;  skin  is  warm  to  touch.

i Increased  heat  with  anxiety,  flushes  and  perspiration.

I  I  Heat  always  slight,  often  wanting. ^Intermittent  fever.

Sweat  over  whole  body  on  awaking  at  4  a.m.

I  I  Night-sweat  all  over.

Intermittent  occurs  while  diarrhoea  is  prevalent;  paroxysm
consists  almost  wholly  of  cold  stage;  the  others  being
light  or  wanting.

Fevers  of  intermittent  or  remittent  type,  consisting  of  chill,
fever  and  sweat.

B  Paroxysm  7  p.m.  ;  evening  6  to  8  p.m.,  lasting  all  night.

Type. — Quotidian;  tertian; double tertian; intermittent
often  becomes  remittent;  postponing  oftener  than  an-
ticipating.
*^  Attacks,  Periodicity. At  times:  feeling  of  cool  wind  blow-
ing on  face.

Every  hour:  evacuations.

Every  day:  twelve  to  fifteen  stools.

For  one  hour:  great  pain  in  bowels,  after  stool.

For  two  hours:  chill.

For  twelve  hours:  upper  lip  swollen.

For  one  month  :  lienteria.
*^  Locality  and  Direction.  Right:  sharp  stitches  in  temple
and  side  of  head;  pain  in  molars;  dryness  of  nostril;
smarting  as  of  a  pimple  below  nostril;  ulceration  of
nostril;  smarting,  itching  of  cheek;  tearing  in  molars;
violent  stitches  in  side  of  throat;  stinging  in  side  of
throat;  pain  in  clavicle;  pain  in  side;  pain  below  pecto-
ralis  major;  pain  down  side  of  neck;  pain  in  muscles
just  above  sacro-iliac  symphysis;  stitch  on  shoulder;
pain  in  shoulder,  clavicular  junctures,  aching  of  arm;
cutting  pain  in  shin;  pain  in  fibula.

Left:  tearing  in  temple;  coldness  in  temple;  pain  in  eye;
pain  above  patella  on  1.  side;  itching  of  orbit  of  eye;
pain  in  eye  and  temple;  ringing  in  ear;  pain  in  ear;
pain  in  molars;  pressing  pain  in  inguinal  ring;  stitches  in
kidney;  pain  on  side;  cutting  pain  in  hip;  aching  pain
in  upper  joint  of  little  finger;  sticking  pains  in  joint  of
great  toe.
"Sensations.  Feeling  as  of  reeling;  vertex  as  if  bruised;
coldness  in  temple  as  from  a  wet  cloth;  as  if  a  sore
pimple  existed  immediately  below  nostril;  pain  as  from


GAMBOGIA.  362

soreness  in  throat;  gurgling  as  of  fluid  running  from  a
bottle;  rushing  sounds  in  abdomen  as  from  motions  of
air  and  fluid  feces;  as  if  chest  were  raw;  small  of  back
as  if  bruised  or  sprained;  biting  as  of  ants  over  whole
body;  incisors  as  if  elongated.

Pain:  in  back;  in  whole  head;  in  vertex;  in  coronal  su-
ture; in  1.  e3^e;  in  tibia;  above  patella  on  1.  side;  in  both
eyes;  in  both  ears;  in  molars;  in  region  of  articulation
of  jaw  ;  in  throat;  in  ileo-csecal  region;  in  chest;  in  r.  cla-
vicle; about  fourth  and  tenth  dorsal  vertebrae;  down  r.
side  of  neck;  between  shoulders;  small  of  back;  across
lumbar  vertebrae ;  in  fibulae.

Severe  pain:  in  eyeballs;  in  temple;  in  bowels;  before
and  after  evacuations.

Lancinating:  in  both  ears.

Cutting  pain:  in  stomach;  in  1.  hypochondrium ;  around
umbilicus;  in  r.  side;  across  top  of  sacrum;  in  1.  hip;
about  trochanter.

Tearing:  in. temple;  in  r.  molars;  in  shoulders.

Pinching:  in  abdomen;  in  groins;  around  umbilicus.

Darlings:  in  stomach.

Sharp  stitches:  on  side  of  head;  in  temples;  inchest.

Stitches:  in  ears;  in  r.  side  of  throat;  in  stomach;  in
anus;  in  1.  kidney;  in  sternum;  from  both  sides  of  chest
towards  each  other;  from  ribs  to  axilla;  on  top  of  r.
shoulder.

Stitching  pain:  in  eyes;  in  mouth;  in  upper  limbs.

Sticking  pains:  in  region  of  and  below  cardiac  orifice;  in
groins;  in  integuments  over  great  toe.

Stinging:  in  r.  side  of  throat;  in  ball  of  thumb.

Gnawing  in  stomach:  below  umbilicus.

Colicky  pains:  in  umbilicus;  before  evacuations.

Griping:  before  stools.  v

Cramp:  in  calf.

Ulcerative  pain :  in  stomach.

Violent  burning :  of  eyes.

Burning:  in  eyes;  very  painful  in  region  of  liver;  ulcera-
tion of  r.  nostril;  of  tongue;  of  anterior  half  or  only  of
tip  of  tongue;  in  vesicles:  on  inner  side  of  lips;  in  re-
gion of  liver;  in  rectum;  in  anus;  at  orifice  of  urethra
when  urinating.

Pressing  pain:  at  1.  inguinal  ring.

Dull  pains: in  chest.

Aching:  in  tibia;  in  r.  arm;  upper  joint  of  little  finger;,
deep  in  hip;  in  and  about  knees.

Pulsating  pains:  in  three  middle  toes.

Beating:  m  forehead.

Compressive  pain:  in  head.


363  GAMBOGIA.

Smarting:  of  eyes;  below  r.  nostril;  of  r.  cheek;  of  chin;

of  upper  lip;  of  tongue;  on  left  of  anus.
Sore  feeling:  of  tongue;  in  throat;  at  stomach;  in  anus;

under  sternum;  in  every  part  of  chest.
Sensitiveness:  of  tongue;  of  gums.
Heat:  in  whole  head  and  body;  in  stomach.
Raw  feeling: in  fauces;  at  root  of  tongue.
Stickiness: of  eyes.
Dryness: of  eyes;  of  nostril.
Ringing  and  hissing :  in  ears.
Pressure:  in  middle  of  chest;  in  chest.
Weight:  in  chest.

Heaviness: in  whole  head;  in  forehead;  of  feet.
Oppression: of  chest.
Fulness: under  sternum.
Tension: of  abdomen ;  in  groins.
Contraction : of  toes.

Empty  feeling:  in  stomach  and  abdomen.
Weakness: of  whole  body.
Numb  feeling  in  ball  of  r.  thumb.
Tickling: in  larynx;  in  trachea,  from  epiglottis  to  pit  of

throat.
Biting  as  of  ants :  over  whole  body.
Scratching: in  larynx.
Itching: on  skin  over  outer  and  lower  edge  of  orbit  of  1.

eye;  of  eyes;  of  inner  canthi;  of  cheek;  of  chin ;  upper

lip;  in umbilicus; on  1.  of  anus; between shoulders.
Coldness: in  temple;  in  points  of  incisor  teeth.
"  Tissues. Emaciation.

Feeling  of  soreness  all  over  body  ;  rheumatism.
Pain  as  if  bruised.

Congestion  to  head,  lungs  and  female  sexual  organs.
1 1  Profuse  watery  diarrhoea,  particularly  with  old  people.
•Anasarca; ascites.

Swelling  and  redness  of  affected  parts.
*^  Touch. Passive  Motion. Injuries. Touch :  outer  neck

sensitive; abdomen  sensitive.
Pressing abdomen:  >  cutting  pains;  abdomen  sensitive

to  pressure.
Gentle  rubbing: >  itching.
*^  Skin. Itching  on  various  parts  of  surface  pleasantly  >  by

gentle  friction.
■  Violent  itching  on  various  parts  of  body;  burning  after

scratching,  <  evenings  and  nights.
Itching  and  formication  here  and  there  all  night.
After  scratching,  burning  and  ulcerative  pain,  with  swell-
ing and  redness  of  parts,  <  evening  and  night.
I  Biting  like  from  ants  over  whole  body  <  evening  and

night.


GAMBOGIA.  364

I  I  Itching  blisters  on  both  hands,  first  pale,  then  red.
Pemphigus.
■^^  Stages  of  Life,  Constitution. Diarrhoea  of  old  people.
Boy,  set.  14  months,  suffering  for  four  days ;  diarrhoea.
Boy,  set.  2,  has  suffered  10  days;  diarrhoea.
AVoman, set. 30, slight build, has suffered 8 months;

diarrhoea.
Man,  set.  30,  has  suffered  a  year;  diarrhoea.
Fisherman,  has  suffered  1|  years  after  being  drenched  in

a  storm;  diarrhoea.
Captain,  set.  46,  strong,  well  built,  after  a  long  ride  during

which  he  caught  cold ;  chronic  diarrhoea  of  six  months'

standing.
^^  Relations. Antidoted  by  :  Camphor.,  Coffea,  Coloc,  Kali  carb.,

Opium.
Compare: Aloes,  Podoph.,  Fulsat. (cough,  >  sitting  up;

general  symptoms,  >  open  air).


365  GELSEMIUM.

GELSEMIUM.

Yellow  Jasmine.  Loganiacese.


A  climbing  plant  native  to  the  Southern  States ;  flowers  in  early  Spring.
Tincture  prepared  from  the  root.

Introduced  by  John  H.  Henry,  in  1852,  proved  by  Douglas,  Payne,  Bering,
Kemper,  Morgan,  Hare  and  others. See  Allen's  Encyclopsedia,  vol.  4,  p.  385.

Clinical  Authorities. — Acute  mania,  Hart,  Eaue's  Eec,  1874,  p.  60 ;  *S/eep-
lessness  in  delirium  tremens,  Blakely,  Kaue's  Eec,  1873,  p.  54;  Frigid  from  thunder
storm,  Lippe,  Anaiyt.  Therap.,  vol.  1,  p.  302;  Apprehension  and  distress  from
thunder  storm,  Morgan,  Anaiyt.  Therap.,  vol.  1,  p.  76;  Effects  of  grief  (2  cases),
Morgan,  Hom.  Clin.,  vol.  4,  p.  98 ;  Hysteria  from  grief,  Blakely,  Eaue's  Eec,  1873,
p.  203;  Vertigo,  Small,  Eaue's  Eec,  1872,  p.  56 ;  (2  cases),  Lee,  Hom.  Obs.,  vol.  2,
p.  136;  Brain  affection,  Norton,  Eaue's  Eec,  1874,  p.  63;  Meningitis,  Morgan,
Times  Eetros.,  1876,  p.  11;  Headache,  Lilienthal,  Eaue's  Eec,  1870,  p.  289;  Mad-
den, Hughes'  Phar.,  p.  374;  Swan,  Eaue's  Eec,  1873,  p.  23  ;  Wallace,  Eaue's  Eec,
1872,  p.  213;  Neuralgic  headache,  Miller,  Eaue's  Eec,  1873,  p.  198;  Smith,  King's
Headaches,  p.  109 ;  Obscure  vision,  Lewis,  Organon,  vol.  3,  p.  101 ;  Serous  choroid-
itis, Norton,  Oph.  Therap.,  p.  86 ;  Iriclo-choroiditis  (2  cases),  see  Norton's  Opth.
Therap.,  p.  86 ;  Detachment  of  retina,  Boynton,  see  Norton's  Opth.  Therap.,  p.  88 ;
Ptosis,  Gallinger,  Eaue's  Eec,  1870,  p.  100;  Infra-orbital  neihralgia,  Cushing,  Eaue's
Eec,  1874,  p.  260;  Deafness  and  loss  of  speech,  Hawke,  Eaue's  Eec,  1870,  p.  119;
Prosopalgia,  Hendricks,  Allg.  Hom.  Ztg.,  vol.  103,  p.  175;  Tie  douloureux,  Von
Tagen,  Hom.  Clin.,  vol.  1,  pp.  103, 105, 182 ;  Pimples  on  face,  Triplett,  Organon,  vol.
3,  p.  377;  Affection  of  throat  (2  cases),  Bullard,  B.  J.  H.,  vol.  33,  p.  566;  Throat
affection  with  deafness,  Allen,  Hom.  Eev.,  vol.  5,  p.  392 ;  Influenza,  Payne,  Eiiue's
Eec,  1870,  p.  181 ;  Teething,  Morgan,  Eaue's  Eec,  1874,  p.  104;  Chronic  diarrha;a,
Hale,  Eaue's  Eec,  1874,  p.  188;  Dysentery,  Younghusband,  Hom.  Obs.,  vol.  4,  p.
444;  Gonorrhoea,  Anderson,  Eaue's  Eec,  1871,  p.  139;  Turrell,  Med.  Inv.,  vol.  8,
p.  59;  Spermatorrhoea,  Carr,  Hom.  Times,  1875,  p.  19;  Nichols,  Eaue's  Eec.  1872,
p.  168;  Eogers,  Hom.  Obs.,  vol.  6,  p.  142;  After menorrhagia,^^\uney, Horn.  Obs,
vol.  3,  p.  60;  Dysmenorrhea,  Dyce  Brown,  Allg.  Hom.  Ztg.,  vol.  105,  p.  128,  Ri-
gidity of  OS  uteri  (4  cases),  Page,  Eaue's  Eec,  1870,  p.  264;  Uterine  pains,  Guernsey,
Allg.  Hom.  Ztg.,  vol.  102,  p.  23;  Threatened  abortion,  Gilbert,  Organon,  vol.  3,  p.
247;  Dystocia,  Strong,  Eaue's  Eec,  1875,  p.  186;  Puerperal  convulsions,  Ostrow,
Eaue's  Eec,  1875,  p.  192;  Woodbury,  Eaue's  Eec,  1872,  p.  192;  Albuminuria  of
pregnancy,  Farrington,  Eaue's  Eec,  1874,  p.  216;  Nervous  aphonia  with  deafness,
Hawkes,  Hom.  Obs.,  vol.  6,  p.  315  ;  Cough,  Merrell,  Hom.  Obs ,  vol.  3,  p.  217  ;  Con-
gestive pneumonia,  Small,  Eaue's  Eec,  1874,  p.  148  ;  Spinal  congestion,  Hughes,  see
Phar.,  p.  374 ;  Affection  of  arm  and  fingers,  due  to  excessive  piano-playing,  Price,
Times  Eetros.,  1877,  p.  25;  Sciatica,  Huber,  Allg.  Hom.  Ztg.,  vol.  103,  p.  186;
Ischias,  Huber,  Allg.  Hom.  Ztg.,  vol.  103,  p.  186;  Rheumatism,  of  extremities,
Macfarlan,  MSS. ; Fever,  Bullard, B.  .T.  H.,  vol. 31,  p. 566; Spinney,  Hom.


GELSEMIUM. '  366

Obs.,  vol.  3,  p.  60;  Febrile  disturbances,  Hall,  Eaue's  Eec,  1870,  p.  313;  Wells,
Horn.  Eev.,  vol.  4,  p.  85;  Febrile  attacks  (6  cases),  Douglass,  B.  J.  H.,  vol.  18,  p.
287 ;  Miliary  fever,  Whiteside,  Horn.  Obs.,  vol.  8,  p.  557 ;  Ague,  Eldridge,  Horn.
Obs.,  vol.  4,  p.  437  ;  Eaue's  Path.,  p.  955  ;  Intermittent  fever,  Williams,  Polhemus,
see  Allen's  Int.  Fev.,  p.  135;  Price,  Times  Eetros.,  1877,  p.  25;  Eoth,  Eaue's
Eec,  1875,  p.  269  ;  Remittent  fever  of  childhood,  Hughes,  see  Phar.,  p.  375 ;  Infan-
tile remittent  fever,  Merrell,  Hom.  Obs.,  vol.  3,  p.  217;  Low  fevers.  Small,  Eaue's
Eec,  1872,  p.  248;  Typhoid,  Blakely,  Eaue's  Eec,  1873,  p.  216;  Morgan,  Eaue's
Path.,  p.  988;  Kash,  Eaue's  Eec,  1871,  p.  198  ;  Yellow  fever,  Angell,  Eaue's  Path.,
p.  968  ;  Night-sweats,  Hale,  Anderson,  Hom.  Obs.,  vol.  7,  p.  535  ;  Hale,  Eaue's  Eec,
1871,  p.  102  ;  Effects  of  drink.  Spinney,  Am.  Hom.  Obs.,  vol.  3,  p.  60  ;  Effects  of  heat,
iilientbal,  Eaue's  Eec,  1873,  p.  54 ;  Itching  of  skin,  Triplett,  Organon,  vol.  3,  p.  377.

'^  Mind. Cataleptic  immobility,  with  dilated  pupils, closed
eyes,  but  conscious.
iStupid,  comatose  condition  attending  typhoid  fever.
iTorpor,  sleepiness,  and  dread  of  movement.
I  Stupor,  cannot  open  the  eyes.
■Unconsciousness.

■  After  losing  son,  inclined  to  brood  over  her  loss;  at  times

becomes  unconscious,  or,  rather,  "rapt;"  in  imagination
thinks  herself  at  the  grave ;  smothered  pressure  on  chest
after  the  spell.

■iDulness  of  all  the  mental  faculties.

iDulness  of  mind,  >  after  profuse  emission  of  watery
urine.

Uncapacity  to  think  or  fix  the  attention.

'I Unconnected  ideas,  cannot  follow  any  idea  for  any  length
of  time;  if  he  attempts  to  think  consecutively,  he  is  at-
tacked by  a  painful,  vacant  feeling  of  the  mind.  ^Yel-
low fever.

■  Delirium  in  sleep,  half  waking,  with  incoherent  talk.
I  I  Sensation  of  intoxication  with  diarrhoea.

■  Confusion;  wdien  attempting  to  move,  the  muscles  refuse

to  obey  the  will ;  head  giddy.

■  Paroxysms  of  frenzy;  eyes  red,  protruding  and  ghastly,

hair  dishevelled  and  wild  demeanor;  talking  and  sing-
ing alternately;  hands,  feet  and  head  alternately  hot
and  cold;  tongue  much  coated;  constipation;  appetite
capricious.  ^Acute  mania  after  melancholia.
■■Loquacity;  brilliant  eyes ;  shooting  through  temples  and
nasal  sinuses;  fever.

■  Starts  up  screaming.

■  ■Desires  to  be  let  alone;  irritable,  sensitive.

'■  ■  Desires  to  be  quiet,  does  not  wish  to  speak,  nor  have  any
one  near  her  for  company,  even  if  the  person  be  silent.

ii Depression  of  spirits;  anxiety  following  a  somewhat
■cheerful,  careless  mood.


S67  GELSEMIUM.

I  Great  depression  of  spirits  in  onanists,  with  confusion  of

mind  and  excessive  languor.

■  Melancholy  and  desponding  mood.

■  Solicitude  about  the  present  and  the  future.

I I  Fear  of  death ;  has  no  courage.

■  Anxiety;  incoherency  of  thought,  aversion  to  study.
I  1  Great  irritability,  does  not  wish  to  be  spoken  to.

I  I  Nervous,  irritable,  easily  angered.

■  Mental  exertions  cause  a  sense  of  helplessness  from  brain-

weakness;  inability to attend to anything requiring
thought.

■  ■Great  lack  of  courage.

■  ■Every  exciting  news  causes  diarrhoea;  bad  effects  from

fright  and  fear.

■  Bad effects from suddenly hearing bad news; from

fright;  diarrhoea,  abortion,  etc.

■  ■Nervous  dread of  appearing in public; singers and

speakers.

■  ■Complaints:  from  exciting  or  bad  news;  sudden  emo-

tions; the  anticipation  of  any  unusual  ordeal;  general
depression  from  heat  of  sun  or  summer.

■  Effects  of  grief;  cannot  cry;  <  when  thinking  of  his

symptoms,  also  when  spoken  to  of  his  loss;  >  from  di-
verting talk;  oppression  and  palpitation  of  heart;  feels
a  sense  of  peril; face  flushed; sleeplessness; subdued
manner;  sensation  of  soreness  about  heart.
^  Sensorium. Head  feels  light  and  large,  with  vertigo.

■  Lightness  of  head:  with  vertigo;  with  dimness  of  vision;

<  by  sudden  movement  of  head  and  walking.
Heaviness  of  head,  with  dulness  of  mind,  dimness  of  sight
and  vertigo;  swimming  sensation  in  head,  vertigo  on
rapid  movement.

■  Heaviness  of  head,  >  after  profuse  emission  of  watery

urine.
Fulness  in  head,  with  heat  in  face  and  chilliness,

■  ■Dizziness  of  head  and  blurring  of  vision,  gradually  in-

creasing, all  objects  appear  very  indistinct.

■  ■Vertigo,  confusion  of  head,  spreading  from  occiput  over

whole  head;  pupils  dilated,  dim  sight;  general  depres-
sion from  heat  of  sun  or  summer.

■  ■Vertigo,  dim  vision,  fever;  seems  as  if  intoxicated  when

trying  to  move; <  from  smoking.

■  ■Giddy,  with  loss  of  sight,  chilliness,  accelerated  pulse;

dulness  of  sight,  double  sight.

■  ■When  attempting  to  move,  the  muscles  refuse  to  obey

the  will;  giddy,  confused,  lack  of  muscular  co-ordination.

■  ■Child  dizzy,  when  carried  seizes  hold  of  nurse,  fearing

that  it  will  fall.


GELSEMIUM.  368

I  Patient  appears  intoxicated.

■  Staggering  as  if  intoxicated  when  trying  to  move.

I  iSensation  of  falling,  in  children;  child  starts  and  grasps

nurse  or  crib,  and  screams  out  from  fear  of  falling.
I  Serious  attacks  of  vertigo,  with  dimness  of  vision  and

fever,  appears  like  one  intoxicated.
^  Inner  Head. Pain  most  frequently  in  forehead  and  temples.
I  I  Pain  in  head,  over  eyes  and  across  forehead.
I  Severe  pain  in  forehead  and  vertex,  dim  sight,  roaring  in

ears ; head  feels enlarged ; wild feeling ; alternating

with  uterine  pains.

■  Severe  and  continued  pain,  day  and  night,  accompanied

by  dizziness  when  stooping,  and  a  sensation  as  if  he
would  fall  headlong;  tongue  coated;  appetite  poor;  pain
<  in  frontal  region,  but  at  times  extended  over  entire
head.
iHypersemia  of  brain  ;  dull  feeling  in  forehead  and  vertex,
and  a  fulness  in  region  of  medulla  before  spasms.

■  Fulness  in  head,  heat  of  face,  chilliness;  pulsation  of  car-

otids; thick  speech;  brain  feels  as  if  bruised;  eyeballs
feel  sore  when  moving  them  ;  double  vision.

I  ■Heaviness  of  head:  slightly  >  by  shaking  head;  >  after
profuse  micturition.

iSick  headache,  principally  in  r.  temple,  beginning  in
morning  and  increasing  during  day  ;  <  from  motion  and
light;  >  after  lying  down,  and  >  by  sleep  or  vomiting.

■  Tightness  of  brain.

■  Pain  as  from  a  tape  around  head.

■  Band-like  pain  surrounds  head,  with  shooting  pain  in

each  jaw.

■  Sensation  of  weight  and  pressure  in  head.

i  I  Pain  in  head  constant,  dull,  stupefying  and  pressive.

■  Cramp-like  pains  of  drawing  or  tearing  character,  <  by

study  or  exertion,  following  fever  and  ague.

■  ■Sensitive,  bruised  sensation  of  brain.

I  I  Excruciating  headache,  accompanied  by  slight  nausea ;
pain  slightly  >  by  shaking  head.

■  In  morning  on  rising,  dull  pain  in  head  and  a  slight  ten-

dency to  throbbing  in  r.  side  of  head.

Blind  headache,  shooting  pain  into  ears  when  swallowing,
cannot  sit  or  lie,  must  stand  or  walk.

■Headache  coming  on  suddenly,  with  dimness  of  sight  or
double  vision;  with  vertigo,  great  heaviness  of  head,  it
feels  too  big,  and  often  too  light,  semi-stupor,  bright  red
face;  dull,  heavy  expression  of  countenance;  full  pulse,
general  malaise.

■  Nervous  headache,  from  emotional  excitement.

■  Hemicrania  with  dim  sight  or  double  vision,  or  preceded

by  great  sensibility  to  noise.


369  GELSEMIUM.

I  Excruciating  pains  in  head  preceding  or  following  inter-
mittent fever.

■  Headache especially of a remittent or intermittent

character.
I  Headache  all  over  head,  extending  into  bones  of  face;,
head  feels  very  sore,  as  from  a  bruise ;  sharp  neuralgic
pains  running  around  edges  of  the  teeth  ;  shooting  pains
extending  into  ears  when  swallowing;  roof  of  mouth
feels  terribly,  as  if  swollen  and  as  if  cavity  were  closing
up,  but  upon  examination,  it  did  not  appear  swollen  or
even  inflamed ;  constant  burning,  stinging  sensation  in
mouth  ;  burning  and  stinging  pains  occurring  suddenly
in  various  parts  of  body,  as  if  a  bee  had  stung  her;  uri-
nation frequent  and  scanty,  with  scalding;  burning-
pains  in  urethra  while  passing  urine,  and  temporary
prostration  after  it ;  cannot  sit  or  lie,  has  to  stand  or
walk.

■  Constant,  gradually  increasing  headache  for  three  or  four

months ;  dull,  heavy  pain,  extending  to  nape  of  neck,
frequent  throbbing  in  temples,  and  vertigo  on rapid
movement.
■Nervous headache,  pain  begins in  cervical  portion  of
spinal  column,  and  from  thence  extends  over  whole  head.

■  Dull  aching  in  occipital  region,  occasionally  extending

into  OS  frontis.

■  Dull  pain  in  back  part  of  head  after  breakfast,  <  when

moving  and  stooping.

■  Headache,  principally  in  occiput,  >  by  reclining  head

and  shoulders  on  a  high  pillow.
■Settled,  dull,  heavy  headache,  mainly  in  occiput,  mastoid
or  upper  cervical  region,  extending  to  shoulders ;  >
when  sitting  by  reclining  head  high  on  a  pillow.

■  Patient  finds  himself  getting  blind  before  headache;  they

faint  away  in  consequence  of  their  suffering,  or  have  to
lie  down  and  be  quiet  all  day;  swimming-tearing  sensa-
tion as  in  sea-sickness  ;  headache  principall}'  in  occiput;
>  reclining  head  and  shoulders  on  a  high  pillow;  stag-
gering, as  if  drunken,  when  trying  to  move;  double
vision;  squinting;  great  heaviness  of  head;  >  by  pro-
fuse micturition  or  shaking  head;  severe  pain  in  fore-
head and  vertex;  dim  sight;  roaring  in  ears;  head  feels
enlarged;  wild  feeling,  alternating  with  uterine  pains;
sensation  as  if  brain  were  bruised;  passive  venous  con-
gestion.

■  Terrible  neuralgia,  commencing  in  upper  portion  of  spinal

cord,  proceeding  thence  gradually  through  upper  por-
tion of  cerebrum,  and  terminating  in  a  bursting  pain  in
forehead  and  eyeballs,  <  about  10  a.m.  ;  <  lying  down,

VOL.  V. — 24.


GELSEMIUM.  370

with  nausea,  vomiting,  cold  sweat  on  forehead,  and  cold
feet;  vertigo  and  obscuration  of  sight  on  stooping;  sen-
sation of  a  band  drawn  tightly  around  head  above  ears,
and  soreness  in  scal]3  and  brain;  vertebra  prominens
and  cervical  vertebrte  sensitive  to  pressure;  lameness
and  stiffness  of  neck;  on  waking  at  night  retraction  of
head  backward,  >  bending  head  forward;  frequent
urging  to  urinate,  with  partial  loss  of  power  in  sphincter
vesicse;  heat  in  palms  of  hands  and  itching  all  over  body,
preventing  sleep;  after  scratching,  a  raw  sore,  sur-
rounded by  blisters.  ^Neuralgic  headache  after  cerebro-
spinal meningitis.

■  ■Neuralgic  headache  beginning  in  upper  cervical  spine;

vertebra  prominens  sensitive;  pains  extend  over  head,
causing  a  bursting  pain  in  forehead  and  eyeballs;  <  at
10  A.M.,  when  lying;  with  nausea,  vomit,  cold  sweat,
cold  feet.

■  Neuralgic  headache  with  cramp-like drawing, tearing

pains  in  upper  cervical  and  occipital  region,  extending
upward  and  forward;  or  in  forehead,  over  one  or  both
eyes;  <  by  exertion  or  study.

.■With  headache,  giddiness,  faintness,  pain  in  neck,  pulsa-
iion  of  carotid  arteries,  pain  in  limbs,  great  drowsiness,
'sneezing,  double  vision,  loss  of  sight.

Pain  <  by  anything  around  head.

Headache  >  when  sitting  and  reclining  head  and  shoul-
ders on  a  high  pillow.

Smoking  tobacco  aggravates  headache.

iSymptoms  of  depression  from  heat,  with  vertigo,  dilatation
-of  pupils,  dimness  of  sight,  dull,  confused  headache,
spreading  from  occiput  over  whole  head ;  no  thirst ;  no
appetite ;  feels  completely  played  out.

iStupor  attending  the  fevers  of  children.

■  Intense  congestion  of  brain  in  children  during  dentition.
Active  congestion  of  brain,  when  occurring  during  fevers,

from  unusual  exertion,  or  from  exposure  to  sun.
Meningitis,  especially  in  children.
■Threatened  or  actual  apoplexy,  with  stupor,  coma  and

nearly  general  paralysis  (rarely  useful  in  hemipleiga  or

paraplegia);  headache,  with  nausea,  lightness  of  brain;

giddiness;  tendency  to  stagger,  with  imperfect  vision;

vertigo  with  falling ;  intense  passive  congestion  to  head

with  nervous  exhaustion.
■Dull  burning  pain  in  occiput,  coming  in  forenoon,  feeble

gait, twitching of  single muscles, starting in sleep ;

double  vision  followed  by  burning  pain  in  occiput,  <

by  anything  light  around  head  ;  >  j^ressure  on  vertex ;

^Brain  affection.


S71  GELSEMIUM.

llrritation  of  mucous  surfaces;  lower  jaw  wagging  side-
ways, has  no  control  over  it ;  jerking  of  whole  1.  side  on
falling  asleep  Indisposition  to  squint;  sudden  shrill  cries
on  awakening';  frantic  spells  from  pain  ;  fear  of  falling;
pulsating  fontanelle;  red  or  sometimes  sickly  face.
t/Meningitis.

iCerebro-spinal  meningitis,  stage  of  congestion;  severe
chill,  dilated  pupils;  congestion  of  spine  and  brain.

■  Meningitis cerebro-spinalis, at  very onset of disease,

severe  chill  followed  by  congestion  of  brain  and  spinal
cord,  livid  cheeks,  dilated'  pupils,  little  or  no  thirst;
loss  of  strength  and  great  exhaustion,  staggering  gait,
dulness  of  speech,  icy-coldness  of  hands  and  feet,  pulse
very  weak  or  hardly  perceptible ;  laborious  and  weak
respiration,  nausea,  vomiting ;  e3^elids  close  involunta-
rily in  spite  of  all  he  can  do;  itching  of  head,  face  and
neck;  sweating  relieves;  mental  faculties  retain  their
activity  though  power  over  muscles  is  impaired,  cannot
direct  movements  of  limbs  with  precision ;  coma.

iChild  wants  to  be  let  alone,  wants  to  lie  still;  head  hot,
hands  and  feet  cool ;  face  red ;  eyes  dull ;  tongue  coated
yellowish-white;  no  thirst;  breath  hot,  sometimes  offen-
sive; sleepy  and  drowsy,  sometimes  comatose;  during
sleep,  convulsive  motions;  creeps  and  flushes  run  up
back;  more  or  less  moisture  of  skin,  especially  on  palms
of  hands  and  in  axilla3 ;  pulse  depressed  at  first,  later
frequent  and  soft;  during  summer  or  warm  weather
w^itli  southerly  or  southeasterly  winds.  ^Meningitis.
*  Outer  Head.  Sensation  of  contraction  of  skin  in  middle  of
forehead.

Itching  on  head  (face,  neck,  shoulders),  preventing  sleep.

MSensation  of  a  band  around  head  above  ears;  scalp  sore.

I  Dull  dragging  pain  in  occiput,  mastoid  and  upper  cervi-
cal regions,  extending  to  shoulders;  >  quietly  resting
head  on  a  high  pillow,  with  eyes  half  closed ;  eyes  heavy,
sleepy,  red.

•  Pressure  on  vertex  so  great  as  to  extend  into  shoulders;
head  feels  very  heavy.

1  I  Cramp-like  drawing  and  tearing,  <  from  study  and  ex-
ertion; after  fever  and  ague.

I  Cannot  hold  head  erect.
■^  Sight  and  Eyes. '  l  Aversion  to  light,  particularly  to  candle-
light.

I  Sees  double,  when  inclining  head  towards  shoulder,  or
looking  sideways.

I  Double  vision  controllable  by  strength  of  will.

I  I  Paralysis  of  oculo-motor  and  abducens. ^Diplopia.

■  Diplopia  with  spasm  of  various  muscles  throughout  body,

without  thirst.


GELSEMIUM.  ^  372

■  Diplopia  and  dim  vision  during  pregnancy.

I  Swimming  black  specks  before  eyes,  vision  dim,  can
neither  read  nor  write,  words  run  together,  cannot  rec-
ognize one  across  room,  with  heat  in  eyes  extending  to
forehead.

I  As  if  a  snake  w^ere  before  vision,  with  pain  over  eyes.

■  Blindness  with  dilated  pupils.
I  Photophobia.

I  Black  and  bright  specks  before  eyes. ^After  ague.
llThirstfor  light.

■  Sense  of  sight  tardy  in  following  movements  of  objects.

■  Disturbance  of  power  of  accommodation.

■  Confused  vision,  eyes  look  heavy.

■Misty  or  glimmering  appearance  before  eyes.

■  ■Smoky  appearance  before  eyes,  with  pain  above  them.

■  ■Dimness  of  sight  and  vertigo.

■  Distant  objects  seem  indistinct,  riding  or  walking.

■  ■Amaurosis  from  masturbation;  mind  and  body  pros-

trated.

■  Pupils  dilated,  iris  sluggish,  vision  nearly  lost ;  palate

slightly  paralyzed  ancl  uvula  deviated  to  left.  ^Amau-
rosis after  an  attack  of  putrid  sore  throat.

■  Amaurosis  of  congestive  origin ;  after  apoplexy ;  caused

by  quinine.

■  Confusion  of  sight;  blindness.

■  Blindness  :  with  violent  dizziness;  with  ptosis;  with  ver-

tigo and  dilated  pupils.

■  Cloud  over  outer  half  of  field  of  vision  of  1.  eye,  due  to

sub-retinal  effusion.

■  Increased  tension,  balls  sore.

Glaucoma  from  increased  secretion  rather  than  from  ob-
structed secretion.
Hazy  vitreous,  very  fine.

■  Serous  choroiditis; iritic complications; vision varies

from  day  to  day  or  from  hour  to  hour ;  sometimes  fever,
with  thirstlessness.

■  Serous choroiditis  with  dull  pain  in  or  about  eye  ex-

tending to  back  of  head,  >  by  hot  application,  but  not
by  cold;  impairment  of  vision  gradually  developed  and
not  characterized  by  sudden  changes,  either  for  >  or
or  <;  heaviness  of  lids;  inability  to  accommodate  eye
quickly  for  varying  distances;  asthenopic  symptoms
not  marked,  but  great  irritability  of  eye,  resulting  from
want  of  tone  or  energy  of  muscular  structures,  constitut-
ing a  passive  rather  than  an  active  asthenopia ;  general
feeling  of  depression  and  lassitude,  not  >  by  food  or
stimulants.

■  Inflammatory  affections  of  retina  and  choroid.


373  GELSEMIUM.

Retinitis  albuminurica,  sudden  dimness  of  vision  during
pregnancy,  <  after  delivery ;  no  pain,  only  an  itching
of  eyes ;  white  patches  and  extravasations  of  blood  in
retina ;  outer  part  of  optic  nerve  whiter  than  usual.

iRetino-choroiditis,  in  which  there  seemed  to  be  a  bluish
snake  before  vision.

I  Vitreous  so  hazy  fundus  cannot  be  seen;  vision  nearly
lost;  eyes  red  and  irritable;  pupils  slightly  dilated;
constant  sore,  aching  pain  in  eyes  and  around,  with
sharp  sticking  pain  on  moving  eyes;  finally  small  trans-
parent points;  elevations  of  epithelium  appeared  on  r.
cornea,  looking  like  swollen  ends  of  nerve  filaments;
they  were  excessively  sensitive  to  touch  or  movement  of
lids. ^Serous  choroiditis.

■  Disseminate  choroiditis  and  retino-choroiditis,  with  no

outside  symptom.

■  Choroidal  and  venous  congestions,  either  with  or  with-

out serous  eff'usion  ;  amaurotic  symptoms,  with  dilata-
tion of  pupils,  disturbed  accommodation,  pain  in  eyes, '
with  or  without  lachrymation.

■  Detachment  of  retina  dependent  upon  an  injury,  with

difiiise  haziness  of  vitreous  and  serous  inflammation  of
choroid  and  retina.

■  Right  vision  y^o  with difficulty; left  vision, counted

fingers  at  20  feet;  serous  inflammation  of  iris  and
choroid,  deposits  on  membrane  of  Descemet,  aqueous
and  vitreous  hazy  in  both  eyes,  1.  pupil  dilated  and
sluggish;  sensation  of  pressure  over  both  eyes  and  head-
ache in  temples.

■  Detachment  of  retina  from  myopia; severe  attacks  of

neuralgia.
I  I  Serous  iritis;  serous  choroiditis;  dull  pain  to  back  of
head  ; >  from  hot  applications.

■  Astigmatism.

■  Pupils  dilated.

■  Deposits  on  lower  posterior  portion  of  1.  cornea,  pupil

dilated,  vitreous  hazy  with  floating  opacities,  moderate
ciliary  injection;  no  pain;  vision.

■  Heat  in  eyes  and  forehead.

■  Bruised  pain  above  and  behind  eyes.

■Soreness  as  from  a  foreign  body,  with  photophobia  and

lachrymation.
I  Aggravation  of  eye  symptoms  from  the  use  of  wine.

■  Heaviness  of  eyes,  as  after  night- watching.
Soreness  of  eyeballs;  drawing  over  eyes.

■  Dull,  full  feeling  with  aching  in  whole  of  orbits.

■  Eyes  feel  bruised.

■  Pain  in  both  eyes,  <  1.,  with  dimness  of  sight.


GELSEMIUM.  374

■  Constant  inclination  to  squint.

■Asthenopia,  with  insufficiency  of  external  rectus;  edges
of  lids  red,  as  if  from  crying,  with  hypermetropia ;
photophobia  from  sun  or  gas-light.

■  Asthenopia  dependent  upon  weakness  of  external  recti

muscles.

■  ■Paresis  or  paralysis  of  any of  ocular muscles; also-

paralysis  following  diphtheria,  and  when  associated  with
paralysis  of  muscles  of  throat.

■  Eyeballs  oscillate  laterally  when  using  them.

■  Fulness  and  congestion  of  lids.

■  ■Drooping  of  eyelids;  ptosis.

■  Eyelids  heavy  ;  eyes  close  when  looking  steadily.

■  ■  Great  heaviness  of  lids  ;  difficulty  of  opening  or  keeping

them  open.

■  Ptosis  due  to  congestion  of  brain coming  on  after  an

attack  of  ophthalmia.
Eyes  red  and  watery  ;  lachrymation.

■  Inflammation  with  great  flow  of  tears  at  intervals.

■  Blepharitis  and  conjunctival  hyperemia  due  to  refractive-

errors.

■  Eyes  feel  sore  in  evening,  sensitive  to  light,  with  lachry-

mation ;  lids  feel  full  and  congested.

■  Yellow  color  of  eyes.

■  Orbital  neuralgia,  periodic,  every  day  at  same  hour.
Rarely  found  of  benefit  in  superficial  aft'ections  of  eye^

but  especially  adapted  to  diseases  of  fundus  and  paraly-
sis of  nerves.
^  Hearing  and  Ears. Great  sensitiveness  to  all  sounds.

■  Rushing  and  roaring  in  ears.

■  Sudden,  temporary  loss  of  hearing.

■  Neuralgia;  nearly  deaf;  spasms  of  throat,  sometimes  ex-

tending to  upper  part  of  chest;  loss  of  consciousness;
<  towards  night.  ^Deafness  with  loss  of  speech  pro-
duced by  massive  doses  of  Quinine.

■  Catarrhal  deafness,  with  pain  from  throat  into  middle  ear-
Digging  in  r.  ear; also  stitclies.

■  Neuralgic  otalgia,  especially  when  periodical.

■  Earache  from  cold.

■  Catarrhal  inflammation,  at  beginning;  cold  in  head  and

closure  of  Eustachian  tube;  tense,  dull,  bound,  giddy
sensation  in  head,  with  chilliness;  stupor,  drowsiness.
^Otitis  media.

■  Pains  ascending  from  back  to  occiput,  affect  the  ears.
Stitches  behind  ear.

Left  ear  seems  to  matter  which  it  never  did  before.
^  Smell  and  Nose. ■  Violent  morning  paroxysms  of  sneezing;
tingling  in  nose.


375  GELSEMIUM.

I  Fulness  at  root  of  nose;  pains  extending  to neck  and

clavicles.
I  Watery,  excoriating  discharge;  a  feeling  from  throat  up

into  1.  nostril,  like  a  stream  of  scalding  water;  r,  nostril

stopped  up ;  nasal  voice.
I  Hay  fever,  with  morning  sneezing.

■  Acute  coryza,  with  dull  headache  and  fever.

iCoryza  in  changeable  w^eather,  with  inflammation  of
upper  part  of  throat  and  shooting  pain  into  ear  when
swallowing,  also  hard  hearing.

B Summer  colds  with  violent  sneezing  in  morning;  edges
of  nostrils  red  and  sore;  pharyngeal  inflammation  with
pain  on  swallowing,  shooting  up  into  ear;  deafness;
hands  and  feet  cold  in  p.m.;  then  drowsy;  fever  until
morning;  disposition  to  catch  cold,  with  every  change
in  weather.

■  Tingling  in  nose;  bloody,  mucous  discharge.

■  Coryza  in  spring  and  summer  weather.

■  Edges  of  nostrils  red,  sore.

■  Epistaxis  with  suppressed  menses.

^  Upper  Face. ■Expression  heavy,  dull,  drowsy.

■  Face  flushed  and  hot  to  touch.

■  Heavy  besotted  appearance  of  face.

■  Heat  of  face  with  fulness  in  head  and  cold  feet.

■  Crimson  flush  of  whole  face  in  all  positions.

■  Face  dark  red,  mahogany  color.

■  Erythema  of  face  and  neck.

■  Paleface;  sickly  look;  paleness  and  nausea.

■  Face  yellow;  jaundiced.

Sensation  as  though  skin  on  middle  of  forehead  and  about
face,  was  contracted.

■  Muscles  of  face,  especially  around  mouth,  seem  contracted,

making  speech  difficult.

■  Orbital  neuralgia  in  distinct  paroxysms,  with  contrac-

tions and  twitchings  of  muscles  on  affected  side.

■  Facial  neuralgia  in  nervous  women;  jaws  affected  spas-

modically.
I  I  Congestive facial neuralgia ; grumbling or shooting
pains; <  on  pressure;  especially  if  malarial.

■  Neuralgic  affections  of  fifth  pair,  particularly  when  pain

is  traceable  along  one  of  its  three  divisions  at  a  time.

■  Pain  in  r.  temple  gradually  growing  more  severe  and

extending  into  ear,  and  spreading  from  thence  to  eye
and  side  of  head;  these  parts  affected  alternately,  finally
pain  settles  in  r.  wing  of  nose  where  the  paroxysms  be-
come extremely  severe. ^Prosopalgia.

■  Sudden  darting,  acute  pains,  traceable  from  region  of  ear

and  side  of  head  to  supra-orbital  region,  and  again  to


GELSEMIUM.  376

infra-orbital  region,  still  at  other  times  to  chin  and  front
of  lower  jaw;  pain  flying  from  one  branch  of  fifth  pair
to  another,  without  any  regular  order  as  to  succession,
pain  however  being  more  or  less  constantly  present  and
starting  from  region  of  temi:)le  or  ear. ^Facial  neuralgia.

I  Sharp  shooting  pains  through  face,  eyes  and  head,  which
feel  like  rheumatic  pains ;  face  congested  and  of  a  dark
or  dusky  hue ;  headache  commences  in  neck  quite  sud-
denly, spreads  from  thence  over  head,  or  vice  versa;
dimness  of  vision;  heaviness  of  head;  vertigo;  stupor;
dull  expression  of  countenance;  powerlessness  of  muscles.

I  Severe  pain  increasing  for  past  two  years,  in  region  of
infra-orbital  nerve;  <  from  motion,  as  eating,  laughing
or  crjdng.

iSore,  acute,  red  ])imples  on  face.

Papular  eruption  on  face.
^  Lower  Face. iLips  dry;  coated  with  dark  mucus.

I  Muscles  of  face  seem  to  be  contracted,  especially  around
mouth,  making  it  difficult  to  speak.

■  Shooting  pains  in  jaws.

I  i  Lower  jaw  wagging  sideways,  has  no  control  over  it.
I  Sensation  of  stiffness  in  muscles  of  jaws.

■  Stiffness  of  jaws;  difficulty  of  opening  mouth;  trismus.

^^  Teeth  and  Gums. ■  Toothache  from  a  cold,  or  purely  neu-
ralgic; pains  from  teeth  to  temple.

■  Toothache  with  general  nervous  excitement  or  weak  and

trembling  condition ;  pains  come  in  paroxysms,  are  de-
cidedly neuralgic,  and  dart  through  jaws  and  face;  con-
gestion of  head  and  face.

I  Tic  douleureux  after  exposure  on  a  cold  damp  day;  seat
of  irritation  located  at  root  of  1.  canine  tooth  of  upper
jaw;  gum,  upper  lip  and  infra-orbital  region  swollen
and  very  sensitive  to  touch;  tooth  exquisitely  tender
and  loose  in  its  socket;  constant  pain,  at  times  shooting
and  darting  and  then  changing  to  a  grumbling  tooth-
ache.

1  Dentition;  child  frantic,  awakens  with  fierce  and  sudden
screams;  face  deep  red;  fontanelle  pulsates  too  strongly;
pain  about  ear.

Gums  swollen  and  tender.

■  Child  frantic  at  times,  especially  when  gums  areexamined.
"  Taste  and  Tongue. Taste:  foul,  putrid,  with  blood-colored

saliva;  seldom  bitter;  clammy  and  feverish  during  the
sweat.

■  ■Numbness  of  tongue.

■  Can  hardly  put  tongue  out,  it  trembles  so;  red,  raw,  pain-

ful, inflamed  in  middle.

■  ■Tongue  felt  very  thick;  could  hardly  speak.


377  GELSEMIUM.

Irritation  or  paralysis  of  tongue  or  glottis.

iTongue  and  glottis  partially  paralyzed;  speech  thick,  as
if  drunk,  from  congestion  of  base  of  brain,

I  Tongue : yellowish-white, breath fetid; coated thick,
brown;  nearly  clean;  margin  red,  centre  white.
^^  Inner Mouth. Dryness  of  mouth  and  throat,  with  dispo-
sition to  swallow  frequently.

I  Dryness  of  mouth ;  thickly  coated  tongue.

I  I  Sticky  feverish  feeling  in  mouth.

I  Saliva  colored  yellow  as  from  blood.

■  Partial  paralysis  of  glottis  and  tongue.

■  Irritation  and  soreness  of  fauces.

I  Sore  mouth,  coincident  with  febrile  and  catarrhal  states,
intermittent  or  remittent  type.

■  Tonsils  much  sw^ollen,  high  fever,  intense  heat  of  skin,

photophobia,  pain  shooting  in  r.  ear,  thirst,  partial  deli-
rium.

■  Tonsils  swollen  and  very  red ;  crimson  flush  of  face  ;  cold

hands  and  feet;  great  nervous  excitement. ^Scarlatina.

■  Tonsillitis,  from  acute  catarrh.

■  Aphthous  looking  spot on r. tonsil, and another on

pharynx;  no  swelling;  throat  sore;  deglutition  j)ainful ;
vomiting. ^Miliary  fever.
"'^Throat. ■Fauces  dry,  burning,  irritated,  sore.

■  Inability  to  swallow  or  speak. ^Paralysis.

■  Tried  to  swallow  but  could  not.

I  I  Warm  or  spirituous  fluids  can  partially  be  swallowed ;
cold  drinks  come  up  immediatel3^ ^Stenosis  oesophagi.

■  Paralytic  dysphagia.

■  Spasmodic  affections  of  throat.

■  Swallowing  causes  shooting  in  ear.

■  Dryness  and  burning  in  throat.

I  'Dry  roughness  in  throat  when  coughing.
I  I  Dryness  of  throat  with  hoarseness.

■  Sensation  of  heat  and  constriction  in  throat.

■  Throat-  feels filled up; tonsils  inflamed,  swollen, fre-

quently, or  at  beginning,  in  right.

■  Throat  red,  raw,  tonsils  swollen  ;  tongue  white  or  yellow-

ish-wdiite  ;  tickling,  tearing  cough  preventing  sleep.
■Soreness  of  throat  felt  at  upper  part  of  1.  tonsil,  extend-
ing thence  across  soft  palate,  along  1.  nostril,  attended
by  a  sensation  at  every  inspiration  as  if  a  stream  of
scalding  water  rushed  along  nasal  passage  of  that  side,
the  other  nostril  at  same  time  being  stopped  up ;  con-
tinuous accumulation  of  irritating  mucus  about  throat,
with  hard,  painful  cough ;  shooting  pain  in  ear,  when
swallowing;  hard  hearing;  thirstlessness  with  the  fever;
<  at  night. ^Influenza.


GELSEMIUM.  378

I  Inflammation  of  upper  part  of  throat  and  shooting
pain  into  ear  when  swallowing;  hardness  of  hearing.
^Coryza,  after  changeable  weather.

I  Chilly  creepings  up  spine;  sore  throat,  headache,  fever,
intense  thirst,  earache ;  tonsils  much  swollen  and  cov-
ered with  diphtheritic  patches ;  nausea,  extreme  ner-
vousness, partial  delirium.

■  Tonsillitis  and  inflammation  of  throat,  palate  and  uvula.

■  Catarrhal  inflammation  of  pharynx  and  tonsils.
IlLocal  tingling  of  i^arts  during  fever;  incipient  paralysis

or  anassthesia;  defective  or  impaired  vision;  objects
appear  a  long  way  off,  are  seen  double  or  inverted.
^Diphtheria.

■  Painful  sensation  of  a  lump  in  oesophagus  that  cannot  be

swallowed  in  hysterical  women.

■  Painful  sensation  of  something  having  lodged  in  oeso-

phagus.

■  Spasmodic  sensations  and  cramp-like  feeling  in  gullet.

■  CEsophagitis  (catarrhal).

■  Burning  in  (]eso]3hagus  extending  to  stomach.

■  Inflammation  and  irritation  of  throat  from  acid  secretion

of  stomach.
^* Appetite,  Thirst. Desires,  Aversions. "Great  hunger;
eructation ;  nausea.

■  Increased  appetite,  or  easily  satisfied  with  small  quan-

tities of  food.

■  Increased appetite from active  hypergemia  of  mucous

lining  of  stomach.

■  Little  appetite  and  thirst,  but  can  take  food  or  drink.

■  Want  of  appetite  and  weakness  of  stomach,  or  paralytic

state  of  masticating  organs.

■  Thirst,  but  does  not  drink  much;  it  hurts  to  swallow.

/^Prodromal  stage  of  intermittent  fever.
I  I  Thirst  during  perspiration.

■  Little  or  no  thirst.

■  Thirstlessness,  with  sticky  sweat,  especially  about  genitals.
^^  Eating  and  Drinking. iWine  aggravates,  especially  head-

ache  and  eye  symptoms.
Thirst  absent  or  slight.
Worse  from  smoking  tobacco,
^^  Hiccough, Belching, Nausea and  Vomiting. ■Sour
eructations.
Nausea,  giddiness,  headache.

■  Nausea,  vomiting,  cold  sweat  on  forehead  and  cold  feet.

(!^Neuralgic  headache.

■  Slow,  intermittent  pulse,  slightly  furred  tongue,  wild,  pro-

truding eye,  dilated  pupil;  had  been  drinking  hard  for
tw^o  or  three  weeks;  stomach  rejects  everything,  even
water;  sleepless,  feels  as  if  he  would  become  delirious..


879  ■  GELSEMIUM.

^^  Scrobiculum  and  Stomach,  i  Sensation  of  a  heavy  load,
with  weiglit,  tension  and  dull  pain ;  empty,  faint  sensa-
tion in  epigastrium ;  a  false  hunger,  a  kind  of  gnawing;
nervous  exhaustion,  as  found  in  persons  of  dissolute
habits.
■Rumbling  and  dull  pain  in  epigastrium,  >  by  passage  of
flatus.

■  Great  sensation  of  weakness,  emptiness  of  stomach,  as  if

it  were  quite  gone.

■  Feeling  of  emptiness and weakness in stomach and

bowels.

■  Sensation  of  weight  in  stomach,  with  dull  pain.

■  Oppression  and  fulness  in  stomach,  <  from  pressure  of

clothing.
Distension,  with  pain  and  nausea.

■  Flatulence  of  stomach,  swelling,  eructation  and  dull  pain,

probably  caused  by  want  of  elasticity  in  muscular  fibres
of  this  organ.

■  Cramp  in  stomach,  >  riding  and  sitting  erect.
I  I  Burning  in  stomach,  extending  to  mouth.

■  Congestion  of  stomach,  with  hypersemia  of  its  mucous

lining.

■  Gastralgia, cardialgia, cramps in stomach and other

cramp-like  conditions  of  this  organ.
^®  Hypochondria, i  Passive  congestion  of  liver,  with  vertigo,
dim  sight  and  fulness  of  head.
Deficient  secretion  of  bile.

■  Passive  congestion  of  liver,  bilious  diarrhoea  and  relaxed

gall  ducts.
Jaundice,  with  prostration  ;  clay-colored  stools.
^^  Abdomen. •  Rumbling  and  roaring  in  abdomen,  with  dis-
charge of  wind  up  and  down.

■  Sudden  spasmodic  pain  in  upper  part  of  abdomen,  leav-

ing a  sensation  of  contraction  causing  him  to  cry  out.

■  Gnawing  pain  in  transverse  colon.

■  Periodical  colic,  with  yellow  diarrhoea  in  evening.

■  Griping  in  lower  abdomen,  >  by  copious  bilious  stools.

■  Spasmodic  and  flatulent  colic.

■  Wandering,  pinching  wind  colic,  >  when  sitting  erect;

<  beginning  to  move,  >  during  continual  motion.
I  I  Tenderness  in  right  iliac  region  during  typhus.

■  Neuralgia  of  intestines  periodic,  malarial;  sharp, lan-

cinating pains,  with  great  excitement  and  restlessness,
cold  hands  and  feet,  rapid  pulse,  and  tendency  to  gene-
ral cramps.
Intestinal  obstructions.

■  Acute  enteritis  (catarrhal)  during  damp  weather,  warm

or  cold.


OELSEMIUM.  380

I  Sensation  of  soreness  of  abdominal  walls.

I  In  strangulated  hernia,  at  the  very  first;  applied  inter-
nally and  externally.
^  Stool and  Rectum. ■  Disposition  to  go  to  stool  whenever
anything  startles  her.

I  iDiarrhoea,  or  threatening  of  same,  after  excitement,  espe-
cially after  fright.

iDiarrhcea:  in  nervous  persons,  subject  to  nervous  chills;
after  sudden  emotions,  as  grief,  fright,  bad  news,  the  an-
ticipation of  any  unusual  ordeal;  of  soldiers  before  a
battle;  during  dentition;  with  intermittent  fever.

iSudden  depressing  emotions  cause  yellow  fecal  stools
with  colic  and  flatus.

Before  stool: colic;  passage  of  flatus.

Frequent  discharge  of  flatus.

Loose,  papescent  stool.

Bowels  loose,  with  great  difficulty  in  discharging  anything,
as  if  sphincter  resisted  passage  by  contraction.

iStools:  yellow  fecal;  bilious;  cream-colored;  clay-colored;
color  of  green  tea;  involuntary.

IDiarrhoea,  bilious,  fermented,  with  much  wind  and  great
nervous  weakness,  more  than  the  evacuations  could
cause.

iChronic  diarrhoea,  with  watery,  thin,  dark  brown,  or  dark
green  stools;  little  or  no  pain;  brought  on  or  made  <  by
any  exciting  news,  emotion,  or  mental  irritation;  chilli-
ness in  back,  every  day  during  diarrhoea,  but  not  at  any
fixed  hour;  became  much  tired  by  a  short  walk;  sank
into  a  chair  and  appeared  quite  unconscious  for  about
two  minutes,  during  which  time  her  eyes  were  closed,
her  arms  when  lifted  dropped  down  heavily ;  she  did
not  hear  when  spoken  to  or  see  when  her  eyelids  were
opened;  when  conscious,  said  that  she  could  not  open
eyelids;  very  nervous  and  prostrated.

Catarrhal  diarrhoea,  with spasmodic  colic  and  tenesmus.

Acute  catarrhal  enteritis,  mucous  diarrhoea,  mucous  dys-
entery; discharges  almost  involuntary;  intense  spas-
modic colic  and  tenesmus.

■  Dysentery  (epidemic),  malarial  or  catarrhal.

I  Slow  stool,  leaving  a  sensation  of  more  remaining  to  be
passed,  and  of  abdominal  repletion.

I  Constipation,  when  the  motion  is  retained  in  consequence
of  want  of  tone  in  muscles  of  bowels.

•  Acts  specifically  on  nerves  and  muscles  of  rectum.

Difficult  passage  of  stool,  as  though  sphincter  ani  were
spasmodically  closed.

i Paralysis  of  sphincter  ani,  with  involuntary  diarrhoea,
the  result  of  nervous  excitement.


381  GELSEMIUM.

■  Paralysis  of  sphincter  ani,  with  disposition  to  prolapsus.
^'  Urinary  Organs, i  Spasmodic  affection  of  ureters  from  pas-
sage of  calculi.

I  Spasm  of  bladder,  with  alternate  dysuria  and  enuresis.
iSpasm  of  bladder; in  women,  often  combined  with  uter-
ine spasm  ;  in  men,  with  colic.
Tenesmus  of  bladder.

■  Paralytic  conditions of sphincter muscles  of  bladder:

following  diphtheria;  in  old  people.
lAcute  catarrhal  conditions  of  bladder  and  uterus.

■  Detrusor  and  sphincter  muscles  paralyzed.

I  Bladder  distended  up  to  navel;  constant  dribbling  of
urine,  but  not  a  drop  flows  on  making  the  greatest  effort;
no  pain,  not  even  on  pressure. ^Paral3^sis  of  bladder.

■  Frequent  urging,  with  scanty  emission  and  tenesmus  of

bladder.

I  Dysuria,  with  frequent  urging,  scanty  urine  and  vesical
tenesmus;  spasmodic  retention  of  urine.

I  Alternate  dysuria  and  enuresis;  spasm  of  bladder.

■Sensation  as  if  something  remained  behind  when  urinat-
ing; the  stream  stops  and  commences  again.

■  Involuntary  micturition  from  excitement.

■  Constant involuntary  discharge of  urine  every  fifteen

minutes.

■  Enuresis,  from  paralysis  of  sphincter,  in  nervous  children

at  night.

■  ■Frequent  emission  of  copious,  clear,  limpid  urine,  re-

lieving dulness  and  heaviness  of  head.
Urine  much  increased  in  c[uantity.
Albuminuria.

Painful  redness  of  urethra.  -
^^  Male  Sexual Organs. ■Involuntary  emissions  of  semen

without  an  erection.

■  Seminal  emissions  from  excessive  irritation  of  organs  of

generation,  either  from  emotional  or  local  congestive
causes,  with  a  condition  similar  to  satyriasis.
■Seminal  weakness  from  irritability  of  seminal  vesicles.

■  Spermatorrhoea  from  relaxation  and  debility.

■  Sexual organs  irritable,  weak; involuntary emissions

without  erections;  spermatorrhoea;  emissions  of  semen
during  stool.

■  Flaccidity  and  coldness  of  genitals,  with  great  languor

and  depression  of  spirits;  nocturnal  emissions,  with
sexual  dreams,  followed  next  day  by  great  languor  and
irritability,  with  pain  in  base  of  brain.

■  Excitable  sexual desire; depression  of  spirits; heavy

dragging  gait;  pale  face,  sunken  eyes. ^Spermatorrhoea.
■Sexual  power  completely  exhausted,  so  that  most  power-


GELSEMIUM.  382

ful  stimuli  fail  to  cause  an  erection  ;  after  marriage,
slightest  caress  produced  an  emission;  face  pale  and
emaciated,  dark  circles  around  eyes ;  mind  weak,
memory  defective,  haunted  by  thoughts  of  suicide ;
emission  while  straining  at  stool ;  penis  flaccid ;  both
testicles  had  become  small.  ^Spermatorrhoea  due  to
onanism.
nBlue  rings  around  eyes ;  discharge  of  liquor  seminis  with
micturition;  during  coition  too  early  discharge  of  semen.

■  Gonorrhoea,  in  acute  stage; great  pain,  inflammation,

fever  and  scanty  discharge.

■  Gonorrhoea; last  part  of  incubation,  and  first  part of

inflammatory  stage,  when  discharge  is  rather  moderate;
little  pain  but  much  heat,  and  urine  is  voided  in  suffi-
cient quantities,  rather  frequent,  with  smarting  at
meatus.

■  Whitish discharge; severe erections; burning when

urinating;  rheumatism;  orchitis. ^Gonorrhoea.

■  Suppressed  gonorrhoea,  with  fever,  rheumatism,  orchitis.

■  Painful  redness  at  urethra. ^Secondary  gonorrhoea.
■Spasmodic  stricture  of  urethra.

■  Genitals  cold,  relaxed;  dragging  pains  in  testicles.

■  Testicles  very  much  relaxed,  bag  continually  sweating.

■  Profuse  warm  sweat  on  scrotum.

^^^  Female  Sexual  Organs. ■Ovarian  irritation  with  char-
acteristic headache.

■  Uterus,  as  if  squeezed  by  a  hand;  anteflexion.

■  Sensation  of  heaviness  in  uterine  region,  with  increase

of  white  leucorrhoeal  discharge;  nervous,  excitable,
hysterical  females,  given  to  masturbation,  with  great
depression  of  spirits  and  excessive  languor;  feeling  of
fulness  in  hypogastrium,  and  aching  across  sacrum.

■  Congestion  of  uterus;  pains  spasmodic;  neuralgic  pains

with  cramps  in  uterus  and  legs;  cramps  in  uterine
ligaments.

■  Uterine  j^ains  shoot  up  back  and  compel  her  to  sit  up.

^Labor.  ^Dysmenorrhoea.  ^Hemorrhage  during  meno-
pause.

■  ■Severe,  sharp  labor-like  pains  in  uterine  region,  extend-

ing to  back  and  hips.

■  Languid  aching  in  back  and  limbs  day  before  appear-

ance of  menses.

■  Loss  of  voice  during  menses.

■  Amenia.

■JDysmenorrhoea:  vertigo;  sick  headache;  faintness  at
stomach,  vomiting;  congestion  to  head;  deep  red  face;
bearing  down  in  abdomen;  spasmodic  neuralgic  pains  ;
-cramps  in  uterus  and  legs ;  general  hysterical  condition.


J83  GELSEMIUM.

I  Menses  suppressed,  with  congestion  to  head  ;  sharp  dart-
ing, twitching  pains  in  face  and  head  ;  convulsions
every  evening.

I  I  Menorrhagia,  ahuost  continuous  flow,  without  any  pain.

■After  menorrhagia,  low,  quick,  intermittent  pulse,  cold
extremities,  extreme  restlessness,  tossing  of  hands ;  in-
tolerable nausea,  vomits  everything  taken  into  stomach.

I  I  Vaginismus  of  purely  nervous  character  with  uterine
irritation.

I  White  leucorrhoea  with  fulness  in  uterine  region,  in
nervous,  excitable,  hysterical  females,  old  maids  and
students.

■  Leucorrhoea  white,  with  aching  across  lower  part  of  back;

heavy  fulness  in  uterine  region  ;  amenorrhoea.

■  Leucorrhoea  in  gushes,  day  and  night;  constipation.
^Pregnancy.  Parturition.  Lactation. ■During  pregnancy:

dimness  of  sight;  double  vision,  headache,  drowsiness,
vertigo,  pulsating  carotids,  small,  slow  pulse;  cannot
walk,  for  muscles  will  not  obey  the  will ;  cramps  in
abdomen  and  legs ;  convulsions,  with  complete  uncon-
sciousness.

■  ■Threatened  abortion  from  sudden  depressing  emotions.

■  Severe  vomiting;  pain  in  uterus;  severe  pain  across  small

of  back,  and  a  burning  pain  up  the  spine  to  head,  which
ached ;  confused  feeling  in  head  affecting  mental  opera-
tions. ^Threatened  abortion  from  fright.

■  False  pains  before  parturition.

■  Severe  pains  in  abdomen,  which  run  directly  upward,  or

backward  and  upward;  feeling  as  if  muscular  power
was  weakened,  which  arises  from  a  weakness  of  will
power.  ^False  labor  pains.
i  ■  False  labor  pain,  so  severe  as  to  interrupt  true  pains
which  seem  utterly  inefficient ;  sometimes  cramping
pain  in  various  parts  of  abdomen ;  os  rounded  and  hard,
and  feels  as  if  it  would  not  dilate.

■  Cutting  pains  in  abdomen  from  before  backward  and

upward,  rendering  labor  pain  useless;  these  come  on
with  every  pain,  are  very  distressing,  and  may  be  felt
throughout  body.

■  ■Nervous  chills,  "chatters,"  in  first  stage  of  labor.

■  Pains  in  uterus  going  through  to  back  and  then  up  back.

■  With  every  pain child  seems to  ascend  instead  of  de-

scend.

■  Pains  leave  uterus  and  fly  all  over  body.

■  Sensation  like  a  wave,  from  uterus  to  throat,  ending  with

a  choking  feeling;  this  seems  to  impede  labor  ;  impend-
ing spasms.

■  ■Hysterical women,  with rigid unyielding os  during

labor,  attended  with  much  nervous  excitement.


GELSEMIUM.  384

I  Atony  of  uterus,  loss  of  contractility  ;  passive  hemorrhage.

■  Labor  pains  gone,  os widely  dilated,  complete atony;

face  flushed  ;  patient  drowsy,  dull.
I  Insufficient  labor  pains  from  uterine  inertia.

■  Everything  seems  relaxed ;  neck  of  uterus  flabby,  os  open^

no  pains,  bag  of  waters  bulging,  patient  grows  more  and
more  drowsy,  speech  thicker,  convulsions  seem  threat-
ening.

■  Albumen  in  urine  during  pregnancy;  at  beginning  of

labor  patient  sank  into  a  semi-stupid  state,  out  of  which
she  could  be  aroused  by  shaking,  but  would  soon  relapse;
if  an  answer  could  be  forced  from  her,  it  was  spoken
with  a  thick  tongue  like  one  intoxicated ;  no  labor  pains,
but  OS  dilated  and  membranes  protruding;  face  pinkish
as  if  uniformly  flushed ;  pulse  slow,  full.

■  Albuminuria;  thirstless;  erratic  pains.

■  Threatened  convulsions  during  confinement;  pulse  large

and  soft;  face  puffed  and  expression  heavy.

■  Convulsions  (apoplectic  form)  during  labor.

■  A  convulsion  every  fifteen  minutes,  lasting  from  one  to

ten  minutes  ;  during  intervals  rational,  knew  every  one
but  her  child  ;  did  not  know  she  had  been  confined,  and
when  questioned,  insisted  angrily  to  the  contrary ;
would  have  every  one  in  the  house  with  her ;  rather
disposed  to  expose  herself;  very  anxious  to  know  what
was  the  matter  with  her;  burning  heat  in  head  with
flushed  face ;  palms  of  hands  very  hot,  bathing  them
in  cold  water  somewhat  modified  a  convulsion;  would
cry  if  not  talked  to  constantly ;  could  not  endure  gas-
light. ^Puerperal  convulsions.

■  Afterjmins;  cramps  in  uterus,  commencing  in  front  and

extending  upward  and  backward.

■  Afterpains too severe  and  lasting too  long; sensitive

women,  who  cannot  compose  themselves  to  sleep;  sleep
with  half-waking  and  murmuring.
^^  Voice  and  Larynx. Trachea  and  Bronchia. ■Hoarse
in  paroxysms,  with  dry,  rough  throat;  rawness  of  chest,
catarrh.

■  Voice  weak,  thick.

■  Nervous  aphonia,  with  dryness  and  burning  in  throat,

restless  sleep  and  twitching  of  muscles.

■  Aphonia  from  catarrhal  paralysis.

■  Paralytic  aphonia  during  menstruation;  voice  returning

when  catamenia  stops.

■  Paralysis  of  the  glottis.

I  I  Spasm  of  glottis,  evening,  threatening  suffocation.
■Laryngismus  stridulus,  Miller's  asthma,  or  spasm  of  glot-
tis, in  children.


385  GELSEMIUM.

I  I  Burning  in  larynx,  descending  into  trachea.

I  I  Roughness  of  throat,  raw,  as  if  ulcerated. ^Laryngitis..

I I  Acute  catarrhal  bronchitis.
1 1  Hawking  bloody  water.

^^  Respiration.  ■  Sudden  sensation  of  suffocation,  as  in  hyste-
ria; respiration  almost  imperceptible;  sighing  respiration.

I  Sudden  and  severe  attacks  of  dyspnoea,  with  crowing
noise, profuse perspiration and darkly flushed face.

■Spasmodic  asthma;  asthma  Millari.

I  Slow  breathing  and  slow  pulse;  heavy,  labored  breathing;;
congestion  to  chest.

I  Long  crowing  inspiration,  sudden  and  forcible  expiration;^

spasm  of  glottis.

I I  Breathing  frequent.

^^  Cough.  Excessive  excitability  of  respiratory  centre,  with
small  secretion  of  mucus  and  violent,  frequent  cough.

I  Convulsive,  spasmodic  cough,  especially  in  hysterical
women;  irritative  cough  without  expectoration.

■Severe  cough,  with  much  pain  in  chest  in  places;  tender-
ness of  epigastrium  with  vomiting,  in  paroxysms.

I  Cough  from  tickling  or  roughness  of  fauces;  hoarse;  raw-
ness and  soreness  of  chest;  coryza;  bronchial  catarrh.

I  I  Burning  in  larynx  and  chest  when  coughing.

Coughs  a  good  deal  during  the  night.

iCroupy  cough;  measles.

I  i  Spasmodic  croup.

■  Catarrhal  affections  growing  out  of  relaxed  and  debilitated

condition  of  system  on  return  of  warm  weather  at  close
of  Winter;  Spring  fever;  hoarseness,  with  dryness  of
throat;  burning  in  larynx,  descending  into  trachea;
cough  from  tickling  and  dryness  of  fauces;  sensation  of
soreness  in  chest  when  coughing.

■  Catarrhal affections, especially if motor disturbances

occur,  such  as  spasm  of  larynx,  pharynx  and  glottis,  or
so-called  spasmodic  asthma.
^®  Inner  Chest  and  Lungs. Paroxysmal  pain  in  upper  part
of  r.  lung,  when  taking  a  long  breath.
Stitches  in  lungs  from  above  downward.

■  Stitches  in  chest  in  region  of  heart.

■  Constrictive  pain  around  lower  part  of  chest.

■  Soreness  in  chest  when  coughing.

I  1  Dry  cough  with  soreness  of  chest  and  fluent  coryza.
I  I  Lleaviness  in  middle  of  chest  (afternoon).

■  Severe  chill,  with  great  weariness  and  prostration,  pains

in  back,  head  and  limbs;  extreme  oppression  of  chest.

■  Extreme  and  alarming  difficulty  of  breathing,  with  dis-

tressing sense  of  fulness  and  oppression  of  chest,  great
chilliness;  extremities  cold;  pulse  slow,  sluggish,  labor-

VOL.  V. — 25.


GELSEMIUM.  386

ing;  extreme  restlessness  from  threatened  suffocation;
continual  demand  for  fresh  air;  respiratory  murmurs
feeble  and  obscure.

■  Paralysis  or  debility  of  lungs  of  nervous  origin.

■  Affections  of  lungs  and  pleura  marked  by  erethism  or

vascular  irritation,  or  when  congestion  is  to  be  feared,
or  is  already  present.
■Spasmodic  affections  of  lungs  and  diaphragm,  such  as
convulsive  hiccough,  certain  forms  of  asthma,  sj^asms  of
passages,  convulsive  cough.

■  First  stage  of  pneumonia.

■  Congestive  pneumonia,  with  suffering  under  scapulae,  both

sides;  caused  by  checked  sweat ;  short  paroxysms  of  pain
superior  part  of  r.  lung,  on  taking  a  deep  breath;  jralse
slow,  full.
^^  Heart,  Pulse  and  Circulation. Stitching  sensation  in  re-
gion of  heart.  <

I  I  Pain  in  heart  when  rising  from  a  seat.

i  Oppression  and  palpitation  of  heart,  <  when  thinking  of
it,  or  when  spoken  to  of  his  loss;  sensation  of  soreness
about  heart. ^Effects  of  grief

a  Excessive  action  of  heart  from  plethora,  congestion,  neu-
ralgic or  rheumatic  irritation,  or  hysterical  palpitation.

[■Irregular  beating  of  heart;  palpitation.

.1  I  Cardiac  neurosis,  with  deficient  power  and  action;  hys-
terical palpitation  in  plethoric  women.

1  Action  of  heart  and  arteries  much  dej^ressed,  with  cold
hands  and  feet;  chills  with  pain  in  head.

■  ■Heart's  action  slow  and  feeble;  beats  cannot  be  felt.

lA  peculiar  action  of  heart,  as  though  it  attempted  its  beat
which  it  failed  fully  to  accomplish,  the  pulse  intermit-
ting each  time ;  <  lying,  especially  on  1.  side.

■  ■Fears  that  unless  constantly  on  move,  her  heart  will

cease  beating,  with  fear  of  death.
■Nervous  chill,  yet  skin  is  warm;  wants  to  be  held  that
she  may  not  shake  so. ^Heart  disease.

■  After  a  violent  fit  of  anger  and  a  quick  run,  the  beating

of  the  heart  omits  every  tenth  beat;  with  the  intermis-
sion he  feels  faint,  sinks  backwards,  feels  as  if  he  would
die,  without  fear.

■  Full,  round,  soft,  flowing  pulse,  with  slight  fever.

■  ■Pulse  frequent,  soft,  weak,  almost  impercejDtible;  slow

and  full.

■  Pulse  quick,  soft,  irregular. ^Intermittent  fever.
Pulse  irregular,  intermitting,  yet  full.

Fluttering  pulse;  pulse  full,  120;  pulse  slow  and  full,  or
slow  and  soft.

■  Marked  decrease  in  frequency  of  pulse.


-387  GELSEMIUM.

Sensation  as  though  blood  had  ceased  to  circulate.

■  Heart's  action:  feeble,  slow; dej^ressed ;  hands  and  feet

cold.
^^  Outer  Chest. ■  Periodical  pains  in  pectoral  muscles.
^'  Neck  and  Back. 1 1  Pains  in  neck  like  those  of  cerebro-spi-

nal  congestion.

■  Lameness  and  stiffness  of  neck;  on  waking  at  night  re-

traction of  head  backward,  >  bending  head  forward.

^Neuralgic  headache.
B  Contractive  sensation  in  r.  side  of  nape.
I  Pains  in  neck,  myalgic,  mostly  in  upper  part  of  sterno-

cleido  muscles,  back  of  parotid  glands.
llPain  in  neck  and  under  1.  shoulder-blade.
I  The  muscles  of  the  neck  feel  bruised.
1  Vertebra  prominens  and  cervical  vertebrae  sensitive  to

pressure. ^Neuralgic  headache.
I  Dull,  aching  pain  in  back,  extending  up  to  occiput.
I  Pains  from  spine  to  head  and  shoulders.
I  Chills  run  up  back  from  sacrum  to  base  of  occiput.

■  Creeps  and  chills  running  up  back.

■  Feeling  of  lightness  in  body  from  spinal  exhaustion,  in

onanists  and  hysterical  subjects.

■  Congestion  of  spinal cord  and  cerebellum;  prostration,

languor;  muscles  feel  bruised  and  will  not  obey  the  will.
■Spinal  congestion;  with  incipient  aphasia.

■  Paralytic  condition  of  lumbar  and  sacral  muscles.

■  ■Dull  aching  in  lumbar  and  sacral  region;  cannot  walk,

muscles  will  not  obey.
■Sharp  cutting  pains  from  back  down  to  hips.

■  Severe  pain  in  hip,  <  at  rest  and  when  beginning  to

walk ;  burning  pain  during  forepart  of  night,  preventing
sleep. ^Ischias.
I  I  Pain  in  back  and  loins  and  lower  part  of  thigh ;  in  eve-
ning, when  entering  warm  room ;  thirst.

■  Paraplegia.

■  Locomotor  ataxia.

■  Early  stage  of  myelitis  of  anterior  horns;  spinal  weakness

from  exhaustion ;  confusion  of  head,  spreading  from
occiput  to  forehead;  dim  sight;  expression  of  face
heavy,  dull,  drowsy;  paresis  of  tongue  and  glottis;  in-
continence of  urine;  muscles  feel  bruised  and  will  not
obey  the  will;  loss  of  voluntary  motion.
"^^  Upper  Limbs, i  l  Pain  in  shoulders  during  night.

■  Deep-seated  muscular  pains  in  both  arms.

■  Arms  weak,  numb.

■  Arms  become  powerless;  loss  of  voluntary  motion.

■  Tired  sensation  in  arms  when  playing  piano,  steadily  in-

creasing; vague  pains  from  tips  of  fingers  to  scapulae.


GELSEMIUM.  388

I  I  Severe  aching  pain  in  1.  elbow.
I  I  Pain  as  if  sprained  in  r.  wrist  and  elbow.
.  iColdness  of  wrists  and  hands.
I  I  Trembling  of  hands  when  lifting  them  up.
I  I  Hot,  dr}^  hands,  especially  the  palms.
^  Lower  Limbs. 1 1  Fatigue  of  lower  limbs,  after  slight  exer-
cise.

■  Difficulty  of  walking  or  inability  to  stand,  due  to  inability

to  control  muscular  movements.

■  Heaviness,  weight;  loss  of  voluntary  motion,  muscles  not

obeying  will ;  calves  feel  bruised ;  pain  at  night.

■  Unsteady  gait;  staggers  as  if  drunk,  on  attempting  to

walk.

■  Obstinate  sciatica ;  pains  <  at  rest  and  particularly  when

beginning  to  walk ;  burning  pains,  <  at  night,  compel-
ling her  to  lie  awake;  pain  in  sole  of  foot  when  walking.

■  Deep-seated  muscular  pains  in  legs,  >  by  motion.

■  Shooting  pains  in  paroxysms.

■  Paroxysmal  pain  in  lower  extremities.

■  Drawing,  contracting,  crampy  pains  in  legs,  from  thighs

into  toes; <  on  motion  or  walking.

■  Coldness  of  extremities,  especially  of  feet,  as  if  in  cold

water,  with  anguish  and  pain  in  legs.
I  I  Violent  lancinating  pain  in  thigh.

■  She  was  so  sore  on  her  thighs,  touch  felt  like  aboil;

pains  were  all  >  when  in  a  sweat.

I  I  Rheumatic  pains  during  night  in  knees.

I  I  Feeling  when  walking,  as  in  a  partial  luxation  of  patella.

Sudden  dislocation  or  slipping  of  patella  (during  breakfast).

I  I  Excessive  drawing  and  contractive  pains  in  gastrocne-
mius muscle  of  1.  leg.

■  The  calves  of  the  legs  feel  bruised,  and  pain  at  night.
Rheumatic  pain  in  r.  knee  and  1.  side  of  neck.

Pains  in  1.  foot  and  ankle ;  spasmodic  contraction  of  toes.

■  Cold  feet.

^  Limbs  in  General. ■  Trembling  in  all  the  limbs.

■  Control  of  limbs  gradually  lost,  could  not  direct  their

movements  with  precision.

■  Great  soreness  of  thighs, <  1.,  sore  as  a  boil  to  touch;

pains  >  while  sweating;  almost  total  paralysis,  <  1.
side;  head  drawn  to  1.  side;  can  move  thigh  but  slightl}^;
cannot  raise  hands  to  head.

■  Neuralgic  and  rheumatic  pains  in  extremities.

■  Neuralgic  pains  in  limbs. ^Sequel  to  scarlatina.

■  Deep-seated,  dull  aching  in  limbs  and  joints  generally,

induced  by  cold,  and  attended  by  loss  of  motion.
Deep-seated,  aching  pains  in  bones  and  joints  of  extremities.

■  Numbness,  feeling  as  if  limbs  were  going  to  sleep,  m  ner-

vous, hysterical  subjects.


389  GELSEMIUM.

iLimbs  cold,  with  oppressed  breathing;  cold  hands  and
feet.
^  Rest. Position. Motion. At  rest:  pain  in  hip  <.

Wants  to  lie  still  and  rest;  wants  to  keep  quiet.

Lying  down :  sick  headache  > ;  neuralgia  < ;  bursting  pain
in  eyeballs  <  ;  pulse  intermitting.

Cannot  lie  or  sit,  must  stand  or  walk.

Sitting:  >  dull  heavy  pain  in  back  part  of  head;  cramp
in  stomach  >  ;  pinching  wind  colic  >.

Compelled  to  sit  down  by  pains  up  back.

Wants  to  be  held  that  he  may  not  shake  so  much.

Reclining  head  on  high  pillow : <  headache.

Bending  head  forward: >  retraction  of  head  backward.

Stooping:  headache  and  dizziness;  dull  pain  in  back  part
of  head  <  :  obscuration  of  sight.

Motion  :  sick  headache  <  ;  dull  pain  in  back  part  of  head
<;  of  eyelids  <  elevation  of  epithelium  on  cornea;
pain  in  region  of  infra-orbital  nerve  <  ;  colic  >  from
continued  motion ;  fears  heart  will  stop  beating  unless
constantly  in  motion ;  slight  exercise,  fatigue  of  lower
limbs;  muscular  pains  >;  drawing  crampy  pains  in
legs  <;  loss  of  motion  with  deep-seated  pains  in  limbs
and  joints;  of  arms  and  legs  makes  them  tremble.

Dread  of  movement.

Slight  exertion :  causes  sweat.

When  attempting  to  move:  muscles  refuse  to  obey  will;
seems  as  if  intoxicated ;  eyeballs  feel  sore ;  colic  < ;  to
walk,  staggers  as  if  drunk.

Sudden  movement  of  head:  lightness  of  head  <;  vertigo.

Can  move  thigh  but  slightly.

•  Rising  from  a  seat:  pain  in  heart.

Shaking  head:  >  heaviness  of  head.

Cannot  open  eyes:  cannot  raise  hand  to  head.

Lifting  arms:  trembling  of  hands.

Playing  piano:  tired  sensation  in  arms.

Walking:  distant  objects  seem  indistinct;  causes  complete
exhaustion;  impossible,  for  muscles  will  not  obey  will;
pain  in  hip  <;  difficult;  pain  in  sole  of  foot;  crampy,
drawing  pain  in  legs  < ;  feeling  as  in  a  partial  luxation
of  patella.
^^  Nerves. Hypersesthesia.

i  Excessive  irritability  of  mind  and  body ;  vascular  excite-
ment.

■  Nervous  excitement  of  hysterical  patients.

■  Nervous  chills  in  very  sensitive  subjects.

■  Nervous  chill,  yet  skin  is  warm ;  wants  to  be  held  that  she

may  not  shake  so.

■  Great  distress  and  apprehensive  feeling  at  approach  of


GELSEMIUM.  390

thunder-storm,  after  having  seen  a  house  struck  by
lightning  in  a  previous  storm.
iPam  from  occiput  through  to  forehead,  as  if  a  knife  were
thrust  through;  pain  across  root  of  nose;  pain  in  eyes  as
if  they  were  jumping  out  of  head;  pain  through  chest
below  heart,  from  1.  side  to  r. :  complete  blindness.
^Hysteria,  from  grief.

■  Hysterical  women,  with  spasms;  feeling  as  of  a  lump  in

throat  which  cannot  be  swallowed;  general  numbness  of
extremities.

Hysteria,  with  spasms,  palpitation  of  heart,  great  nervous
excitability,  a  copious  flow  of  nervous  urine.

I A  nervous  yoi^ng  lady,  uneasy  before  a  thunder-storm,,
set  up  a  terrific  scream  after  a  heavy  thunder-bolt,  and
continued  it  without  cessation  in  spite  of  all  efforts  to
quiet  her.

■Hysterical  convulsions,  with  spasms  of  glottis ;  hysterical
epilepsy;  excessive  irritability  of  mind  and  body,  with.
vascular  excitement;  semi-stupor,  with  languor  and
prostration ;  nervous  headache,  commencing  in  neck
and  spreading  over  whole  head;  migraine;  dysmenor-
rhoea  of  a  neuralgic  or  spasmodic  character.

■  Hysterical  epilepsy,  after  suppressed  menses,  lasting  an

hour  or  two;  so  severe  was  the  spasm  of  glottis  that  as-
phyxia seemed  inevitable.

■  Hysterical  condition  in  plethoric  subjects.
■Sudden  hysterical  spasms.

■  Spasmodic  croup;  laryngismus  stridulus.

■  Jactitation  of  muscles.

■  Convulsions  from  reflex  irritation;  spasms  of  one  leg.

■  To  prevent  convulsions,  before  development  of  eruptive-

disorders.

■  Puerperal  spasms,  preceded  by  great  lassitude,  dull  feel-

ing in  forehead  and  vertex,  fulness  in  region  of  medulla;
head  feels  "big;"  heavy,  with  half  stupid  look;  fac&
deep  red;  speech  thick  ;  pulse  slow,  full;  from  protracted
labor;  rigid  os  uteri; albuminuria.

■  Epilepsy  of  ten  years'  standing,  preceded  by  dull  feeling

in  head  and  vertex,  and  some  pain  and  fulness  in  region
of  medulla  oblongata.
Epileptiform  convulsions  after  suppressed menses, with
severe  spasm  of  glottis.

■  Tetanic  spasms;  jaws  locked.
Hydrophobia.

■Acute,  sudden,  darting  pains,  evidently  along  single
nerve  branches,  in  almost  any  part  of  body  or  limbs,,
sometimes  so  sudden  and  acute  as  to  cause  starting.

Neuralgia;  shooting,  tearing  along  tracks  of  nerves,  espe-
cially if  <  by  changes  in  weather.


391  GELSEMIUM.

■  Neuralgia;  absence  of  organic  lesion,  with  indistinct  or

double  periodicity.

■  Listless  and  languid.

■  Great  lassitude;  general  fatigue.

I  I  Feeling  of  relaxation  of  whole  body,  especially  of  hands
and  feet,  with  indisposition  to  move.

■  Becomes easily tired and  exhausted;  especially lower

limbs.

■  Curious  sensation  of  falling. ^Ague.

■  ■Weakness  and  trembling  through  whole  system.

I  1  Great  weakness,  with  paleness  of  face,  nausea,  and  trem-
bling of  lower  extremities.

■  Tremulousness  with  profuse  urination.

■  Intense  prostration  of  whole  muscular  system.

■  Great  feebleness;  complete  loss  of  muscular  power.

■  ■Complete  relaxation  and  prostration  of  whole  muscular

system,  with  entire  motor  paralysis.

■  Insulatio ;  feels  "  played  out;"  hot,  damp,  stifling  weather.
I  I  Coup  de  soleil.

■  Overpowering  fear,  with  fatigue;  tendency  to  diarrhoea;

exhaustion,  drowsiness;  anxious,  unconscious  muttering;
pale  and  languid  face;  aching  in  back  and  limbs;  fear
of  injury. ^Traumatic  shock.
Numbness  and  coldness.

■  Paralysis of  motion;  muscles will not obey will;  feel

bruised;  tingling,  pricking,  crawling.
Muscles  lose  power  to  contract  at  will  of  patient,  without
loss  of  sensation  or  slightest  change  in  temperature.

■  Periodic  aphonia;  loss  of  voice  only  during  menses.
■Suddenly  an  inability  to  raise  eyelid  which  increased  un-
til eye  was  completely  closed.

■  Numbness  and  coldness  of  r.  hand,  r.  side  of  face,  and  r.

half  of  tongue;  speech  thick  as  if  drunk.

■  In  a  case  of  long-standing  diarrhoea,  child  fell  down  with-

out power  to  raise  her  arms  or  legs,  mind,  however,  re-
mained bright  and  clear.

■  Infantile  paralysis,  complete  relaxation  of  whole  muscu-

lar system,  with  enteric  motor  paralysis;  giddiness  and
faintness,  with  pain  in  neck;  great  drowsiness;  loss  of
sight;  muscles  weak  and  will  not  obey  the  will,  feel
bruised;  tingling,  pricking,  crawling;  limbs  cold;  loco-
motor ataxia;  paraplegia,  unsteady  gait;  trembling  of
hands  when  lifting  them  up;  mental  exertions  cause  a
sense  of  helplessness  from  brain  weakness;  no  loss  of
sensation.

■  Paralytic  symptoms  throughout  entire  muscular  system.

■  Paralytic  symptoms  in  throat,  in  limbs;  spasms  from  re-

flex irritation ;  cataleptic  immobility,  with  dilated  pupils,
closed  eyes,  but  consciousness.


GELSEMIUM.  392

I  Coma  and  apoplexy,  subarachnoid,  arising  from  passive
congestion  with  nervous  exhaustion,
^^  Sleep, s  Yawning,  chilly.

Languor  and  drowsiness  when  trying  to  study.

■  Peculiar  stupor  or  sleepiness  in  students,  or  persons  of

sedentary  life,  especially  in  hot  weather.

■  Disposition  to  sleep,  a  sort  of  stupor.
Drowsiness  and  long,  sound  sleep.

Unusually  sound  morning  sleep,  with  difficult,  weary
waking.

■  Drowsy;  dim  sight;  a  kind  of  drunken  stupor.

■  Stupor  in  beginning  of  fevers;  especially  with  children,

■  Cannot  get  to  sleep  on  going  to  bed  at  night,  on  account

of  thinking,  which  she  cannot  control.

■  Sleeplessness  from  nervous  irritation.

■  Sleeplessness;  a  wide  awake  feeling.

■  Wakeful  or  lies  in  a  half  awake  state ;  incoherent  talk.

■  Languid,  drowsy,  but  cannot  compose  mind  for  sleej).
■Sleeplessness  during  dentition.

■  Sleeplessness  in  delirium  tremens.

■Sleepless  from  violent  itching  of  face,  head  and  shoulders;
also  from  exhaustion.

■  Very  restless  during  night,  especially  towards  morning;

unpleasant  dreams  after  midnight.

I  1  Jerking  of  whole  1.  side  on  falling  asleep;  sudden  shrill
cries  on  awaking. ^Meningitis.

Night  terrors,  on  account  of  his  nose  being  stopjDed  up
and  dry.

Delirium  in  sleep,  half  waking,  with  incoherent  talk;  de-
lirium as  soon  as  he  falls  asleep.

Awakens  from  sleep  with  headache  or  colic.
^  Time. Morning:  sick  headache;  dull  pain  in  head;  sneez-
ing; fever  until morning; unusually  sound morning
sleep;  decline  of  heat  without  perspiration;  decline  of
fever;  crimson  flush  of  whole  face;  chill.

10  a.m:  <  bursting  pain  in  forehead  and  eyeballs;  fever
without  chill.

Forenoon:  dull  burning  pain  in  occiput.

Day:  sick  headache;  leucorrhoea  in  gushes.

Afternoon:  hands  and  feet  cold;  heaviness  in  middle  of
chest.

Evening:  eyes  feel  sore;  spasm  of  glottis;  pain  in  back,
loins  and  lower  part  of  thigh ;  crimson  flush  of  whole
face.

Night:  on  waking,  retraction  of  head  backwards;  neural-
gia; fever;  sore  throat  <;  enuresis;  leucorrhoea  in
gushes;  cough;  burning  pain  in  hip;  pain  in  shoulders;
pain  in  limbs;  rheumatic  j^ain  in  knees;  calves  pain;


393  GELSEMIUM.

cannot  sleep  on  going  to  bed; very  restless;  terrors;

heat  long  lasting;  sweats;  marked  exacerbation  of  fever.
After  midnight:  unpleasant  dreams.
^^  Temperature  and  Weather, i  Heat  of  sun  or  summer :  gen-
eral depression ;  insulatio;  stupor;  sleepiness.
Hot  application:  >  dull  pain  back  of  head.
Must  be  covered  in  all  stages  of  paroxysm.
Cannot  move  away  from  fire  without  chilliness.
Complaints  from  sudden  change  from  hot  or  dry  to  damp

air.
Warm  or  spirituous  fluids  can  partially  be  swallowed.
Continual  demand  for  fresh  air.
Changeable  weather :  coryza.

Atmospheric  changes  cause  bilious  remittent  fevers.
Damp  weather:  acute  enteritis ;  insulatio.
^ Cold  open  air:  relieves.

Cold  damp  day:  tic  douleureux.

Cold  damp  atmosphere:  causes  catarrhal  fevers.

Cold  water:  on  hands  modified  a  convulsion;  feet  feel  as

if  in  cold  water.
Cold  drinks:  come  up  immediately.
*°  Fever. iChilHness,  languid  aching  in  back and  limbs;

sense  of  fatigue,  desire  to  avoid  all  muscular  exertion;

every  day,  4  to  5  p.m
iSudden  mental  emotions  hasten  onset  of  chill.

■  Chilliness,  especially  along  spine.

I  Chills  begin  in  hands;  chills  running  up  back;  hands
and  feet  cold,  as  if  they  were  in  cold  water ;  hot  head
and  face.

■Shaking  begins  in  hands,  \vith  thirst,  headache,  vertigo;
pains  in  back,  limbs,  knee,  with  cramps.  ^Intermit-
tent fever.

iChill  ascending  from  feet;  chill  and  chilliness,  especially
along  spine;  running  up  back  from  loins  to  nape  of
neck,  and  following  each  other  in  rapid  wave-like  suc-
cessions from  sacrum  to  occiput.

■  Transient  chilliness,  with  profuse  urination.

■  Chill  preceded  by  incontinence  of  urine. ^Intermittent.

■  Nervous  chills,  in  which,  with  shivering  and  chattering

of  teeth,  there  is  no  sensation  of  chilliness.

■  Nervous  chill,  skin  warm;  wants  to-be  held  that  he  may

not  shake  so  much.
Chill:  mostly  during  morning;  every  day  at  same  hour;
with  or  without  thirst;  with  weak  pulse.

■  Chill  every  day,  4  or  5  p.m.;  slight  with  "goose-flesh;"

lasts  three-quarters  of  an  hour;  wuth  thirst.
I  I  Limbs  cold,  with  oppressed  breathing.
Coldness  so  severe  as  to  be  painful.


GELSEMIUM.  894

After  chill:  sleepy;  flying  heat  and  pricking  in  skin,  rap-
idly followed  by  j)rofuse  perspiration ;  heat,  principally
of  head  and  face.

I  Heat,  with  some  thirst,  begins  in  head;  headache,  ver-
tigo;  heat  and  chill  together,  shivers  up  back;  red
cheeks,  hot  face. ^Intermittent  fever.

I  I  Warmth  over  whole  body,  as  if  sweat  would  break  out,,
then  chilly  down  back.

I  Slight  fever,  with  full,  round,  soft,  flowing  pulse.

General  heat,  mostly  about  head  and  face.

I  Heat:  with  nervous  restlessness;  with  languor  or  drow-

siness.

I I  Fever  without  thirst;  wants  to  lie  still  and  rest;  tonsils
inflamed,  r.  side.

■  Flushed,  crimson  face  during  fever.
1 1  Heat,  with  intense  burning.

I  Fever,  with  shooting,  pressive  pains  through  temples,
and  nasal  sinuses,  with  brilliancy  of  eyes  and  loquacity.

iHeat  in  face;  sleepy,  stupid,  besotted;  with  half- waking,
muttering  delirium;  tired,  wants  to  lie  still,  or  great
nervous  restlessness;  sensation  of  falling  in  children;
child  starts  and  grasps  attendant  or  crib,  and  screams-
out  from  fear  of  falling.

iFever  heat,  with  drowsiness;  sleep,  with  half-waking  and
murmuring  frequently;  little  thirst;  feels  very  languid,
and  wants  to  be  still;  chill  beginning  in  hands  and
feet;  throat  feels  thickened,  filled  up  and  sore;  tonsils^
slightly  swelled;  throat  somewhat  red.

■  With  the  heat,  semi-stupor; cannot  open  eyes  or  think

correctly ;  vertigo ;  staggers  as  if  intoxicated ;  sensitive
to  light  or  noise.
Long-lasting  heat,  far  into  night;  pain  in  one  leg;  jerking,
of  limbs.

■  Heat  in  palms  of  hands. ^Neuralgic  headache.
Fever  without  chill  at  10  a.m.

■  Slight  occasional  moisture;  sweat  coming  gradually  and

moderately,  always  relieving  the  pains.
Thirst  during  sweat,  clammy,  feverish  taste.

■  Perspiration,  sometimes  profuse  and  lasting  from  a  few

hours  to  twenty-four,  with  languor  and  prostration.

■  Sweat  most  profuse  on  genitals.

I  I  Thir.stlessness,  with  sticky  sweat,  especially  about  geni-
tals.

■  Sweats  freely  from  slight  exertion.

■  Night-sweats,  especially  those  of  phthisis.

■  Intermittents,  in  which  nervous  symptoms  predominate;

severe  chill  and  fever,  but  not  much  sweat;  paroxysms,
occur  daily,  with  great  restlessness.


395  GELSEMIUM..

I  Intermittent  or  remittent  fevers  contracted  at  summer
watering  places  and  "wintered  over,"  making  their  ap-
pearance in  early  Spring.

I  Fevers  characterized  by  severe  chill,  little  shaking,  fol-
lowed by  fever.

I  Intermittent  fever  with  sick  stomach  and  vomiting  dur-
ing paroxysm;  thirst  during  sweat;  sleeping  through-
out heat;  muttering  on  half  waking  up;  wants  to_  be
held  so  that  he  will  not  shake  so  much;  heavy  eyelids;
great  prostration;  drowsy,  stupid  condition,  with  little
thirst.

I  Cold,  chilly,  congestive  stage  with  depressed  pulse,  dull
headache',  etc.;  the  reactive  stage  with  hot,  dry  skin,
flushed  face,  acute  pain  of  head  and  quickened  pulse,,
followed  by  sweats;  headache  mostly  in  temples.

I  Heat  long,  severe,  may  last  till  nearly  time  for  next  chill;
the  sweating  short,  most  marked;  much  debility  during
apyrexia;  attacks  had  been  suppressed  by  quinine,  but
always  reappeared,  preceded  by  enuresis.

Ilntermittent  fever  (tertian  type) ;' fever  lasts  five  hours,  very
hot,  with  delirium,  jerking  of  limbs,  violent  headache;
aching  in  one  leg.

Ilntermittent  fever  (tertian  type);  pain  in  head  and  pain
over  body  wdien  he  has  no  chill ;  tongue  not  much
coated.

Ilntermittent,  where  there  is  want  of  distinctness  in  its.
several  stages,  and  the  whole  presenting  an  adynamic
condition  of  the  system.

I  Fever  coming  on  every  evening  after  supper,  which  grad-
ually increased  and  went  off  before  morning,  the  patient
continuing  asleep.

Regular  periodic  fever,  without  chill.

Type:  quotidian;  tertian;  same  hour  of  day  with  every
paroxysm;  periodicity  well  marked;  fevers  of  regular-
type,  but  characterized  by  disorders  of  innervation.

Time:  afternoon  and  evening  paroxysm  2,  4, 5  and  9  p.m.  ;
fever  without  chill  at  10  a.m.

I  She  must  be  covered  in  all  stages  of  paroxysm.  ^Inter-
mittent fever.

I  As  soon  as  reaction  takes  place  after  chill,  pulse  rises  as
much  above  normal  as  it  was  depressed  below  it.

Ilntermittent  of  children;  burning  fever  and  restlessness,
no  thirst,  no  fear  of  falling,  great  regularity  of  paroxysm.

iConvulsions  in  children  with  ague;  "dumb  ague,"  from
abuse  of  quinine;  "  masked  ague,"  choreaic  or  neuralgic
manifestations  being  present.

Ilntermittent  fever;  malarial,  generally  quotidian.

iSuppressed  intermittents,  with  general  prostration,  ach-
ing and  soreness  in  body;  "dumb  ague."


GELSEMIUM.  396

Simple,  uncomplicated  cases  of  intermittent  fever.

B  Post-typhoid  intermittents.

lApyrexia  often  wanting  or  very  short;  great  prostration
of  whole  muscular  system  during  apyrexia.

Heat  and  perspiration  are  so  extended  that  many  fevers  are
more  remitting  than  intermitting.

When  the  remittent  takes  on  the  intermittent  type,  or
vice  versa.

Irritative,  remittent  and  intermittent  fevers  in  very  nerv-
ous, sensitive  people  and  children,  with  excessive  ere-
thism and  no  gastric,  hepatic,  or  visceral  complications.

■  Infantile  remittents,  due  to  irritation  of  teething,  intesti-

nal troubles,  worms,  or  malarial  influences.
I  Bilious  remittent  fevers,  caused  by  atmospheric  changes
in  Spring,  or  due  to  miasmatic  influences  in  Autumn;
intense  frontal  or  occipital  headache,  puffed  face,  slimy,
bitter  taste  in  mouth;  tongue  white  or  yellow;  breath
foul.

■  Marked  exacerbation  of  fever  towards  night,  and  decline

of  heat  without  perspiration  towards  morning ;  heavi-
ness of  head,  with  vertigo  and  blindness;  loss  of  appe-
tite, with  bitter  taste;  large,  deeply  bilious  stools,  asthma
and  stupor.

■  Simple  fever,  without  functional  disturbance.

■  Irritable,  sensitive  children,  sometimes  wakeful;  nervous,

even  threatened  with  convulsions,  or  drowsy;  e3''elids
heavy;  want  to  remain  perfectly  quiet;  chills  up  and
down  back;  followed  by  fever,  with  increased  drowsi-
ness; pulse  full,  soft; sweat  moderate,  with  relief.

■  When  fever  develops  under  circumstances  which  favor  a

paresis  of  motor  nerves  of  both  voluntary  and  involun-
tary muscles;  it  corresponds  to  that  stage  in  which  the
blood-vessels  are  dilated  and  full,  but  lack  the  firmness
and  resistance  of  a  fully  developed  sthenic  inflamma-
tion; such  a  fever  is  accompanied  by  languor,  muscular
weakness,  desire  for  absolute  rest  and  drowsiness.

■  Nausea  and  disgust;  confusion  of  head  with  dull  pain;

drowsiness;  indisposition  and  almost  inability  to  exert
mind  or  body;  sense  of  debility;  pains  in  region  of
kidneys,  as  if  produced  by  pressure  of  a  blunt  instru-
ment as  large  as  end  of  thumb ;  dull,  heavy,  pressing
pains  in  bones  of  upper  and  lower  limbs,  becoming
cramp-like  in  muscles;  pains  <  in  shin-bones;  malaise.

■  For  a  week,  languor,  loss  of  appetite,  confusion  of  head,

etc.;  finally  confused  headache;  pains  in  back  and
limbs;  no  appetite;  bad  taste  in  mouth;  nausea;  thick
dirty-white  coat  on  tongue;  languid,  listless,  prostrated;
pulse  quick;  skin  hot  and  dry.


397  GELSEMIUM.

■Violent  pains  in  limbs,  back  and  head ;  wants  to  be  quiet
and  let  alone ;  does  not  want  to  talk  or  have  persons
about  her  in  the  room. ^Febrile  conditions.

llNervous  chills,  with  shivering  and  chattering  of  teeth,,
depending  upon  some  irritation  of  nerves  of  motion,  in
very  sensitive  subjects;  from  fear  or  fright;  they  often
attend  relaxation  of  os  uteri  in  labor,  or  occur  after  labor
has  just  been  completed.

■  Fevers  of  children  during  dentition.

■Low  fevers  when  pulse  is  slow,  and  by  lifting  or  turning

patient  it  becomes  accelerated.
Ilncipient  typhoid,  with  severe  pains  in  head,  back  and

limbs;  extreme  lassitude;  fever;  chilliness;  thick, brown

coated  tongue.

■  First  stage  of  typhoid,  when  patient  seems  to  have  "taken

cold;"  sudden  onset;  non-complication  by  drugs;  pa-
tient of  an  afternoon  gets  "very  tired,"  with  languid
aching  in  back,  extending  down  limbs;  wants  to  rest,
even  to  sleep;  hands  and  feet  become  cold;  general
chilliness,  then  hot  fever,  with  crimson  flush  of  whole
face;  occasional  moisture  here  or  there;  sleeps  fre-
quently half  waking  and  talking  incoherently;  morning
decline  of  fever;  throat  feels  sore  and  filled  up;  tongue
clean  or  yellow;  head  feels  "big  as  a  bushel;"  tremu-
lous; vertigo;  blind  spells;  epistaxis;  iliac  tenderness.

iPulse  full,  weak,  vacillating,  about  100;  tougue  red  and
dry;  hands  and  tongue  tremulous;  when  a  little  drowsy,
mind  wanders  and  he  reaches  after  imaginary  objects;
lips  dry  and  parched,  teeth  covered  with  sordes.

I  Typhoid  fever;  nervous  symptoms  predominate;  patient
drowsy  and  stupid,  with  great  debility;  legs  and  arms
tremble  when  moving,  with  some  chilliness.

■Typhoid  fever  in  a  child,  nervous  movements,  every
night,  like  spasms;  oscillation  of  eyeballs.

■  Dull,  heavy  headache;  drowsy  and  stupid;  he  is  so  weak

that  he  can  hardly  control  his  movements;  feeling  of
great  prostration;  tongue  slightly  coated,  can  hardly
put  it  out,  it  trembles  so;  mouth  sticky,  no  thirst,  no
appetite;  skin  hot  and  dry;  pulse  120  and  full;  eyes
look  dull,  eyelids  drooping;  hands  tremble  violently
when  trying  to  lift  or  move  them;  legs  also  tremble
very  much  when  trying  to  walk. /^Typhoid.

■  Great  prostration  of  all  vital  forces,  with  strange  sensa-

tion in  head  and  continued  jactitation  of  muscles.  ^Ty-
phoid.
■Unconnected  ideas,  cannot  follow  up  any  idea;  painful
vacant  feeling  in  mind  on  attempting  to  think;  giddi-
ness with  loss  of  sight;  indistinctness  of  vision,  or  double-


GELSEMIUM.  398

vision;  fulness  of  head,  with  heat  in  face,  and  cold  feet;
pain  in  back  of  neck ;  heavy,  dull  expression  of  coun-
tenance and  yellow  face,  or  nausea  and  paleness;  sticky
feeling  in  mouth ;  fetid  breath ;  tongue  whitish  or  yel-
low; dryness  and  burning  in  throat;  sour  eructations;
pulse  frequent,  full,  but  soft;  as  soon  as  he  goes  to  sleep,
is  oblivious. ^Yellow  fever.

■iCerebro-spinal  fevers,  especially  if  caused  by  malaria,
with  stupor  and  tendency  to  convulsions;  intense  passive
congestion;  wild,  incoherent  delirium;  sweating  re-
lieves; trembling,  weak  limbs;  bruised  pain  in  muscles.

'iCerebro-spinal  meningitis,  ushered  in  by  a  severe  chill,
accompanied  by  evident  congestion  of  spine  and  brain.

I  In  forming  and  inflammatory  stage  of measles,  with

chilliness,  watery  discharge  from  nose,  etc.
■lEruptive  fevers:  especially  children,  tendency  to  con-
vulsions at  time  of  eruption ;  intense  fever,  heat,  ere-
thism, but  less  restlessness  than  Aeon.;  less  violence  and
suddenness  of  aggravation  than  Bellad.;  languid;  as-
thenic fever;  stupor.

I  Catarrhal  fevers,  from  influence  of  cold,  damp  atmosphere,
or  sudden  change  from  hot  and  dry  to  damp  air.

I  Chilliness  up  back,  cannot  move  away  from  fire  without
chilliness;  head  hot  before  fever  sets  in;  torpid,  heavy
condition  during  fever;  head  feels  heavy  and  big,  face
scarlet,  eyes  suffused,  nose  runs  a  watery  mucus,  but
little  sore  throat,  pulse  large,  full  and  quick,  but  not
very  hard,  febrile  motions  remittent;  <  about  same
hour  every  day. ^Influenza.

iHeat  with  languor  and  drowsiness;  aching  in  back  and
limbs;  little  thirst;  sleep  interrupted  by  half- waking
and  muttering;  evening  or  early  morning  crimson  flush
of  whole  face,  sometimes  preceded  by  cold  hands  and
feet;  distant  objects  look  confused,  as  if  outlines  were
shaded  with  some  colors ;  eyes  heavy  looking,  suffused,
sometimes  oscillating;  wants  to  keep  very  still;  pulse
full,  frequent,  not  tense. ^Inflammatory  fever.

■  Rheumatic  fever,  especially  in  muscular  rheumatism.

I  Irritative  fevers  due  to  some  local  irritation,  such  as
ulceration,  suppuration,  abscess,  presence  of  a  foreign
body,  etc.

I  Hectic  fever,  even  when  shaking  chills,  followed  by  great
heat,  and  drenching  sweats  occur.
*^  Attacks,  Periodicity. Fevers  remit  or  intermit.

Periodical  attacks;  every  day  at  same  hour.

Sudden:  loss  of  hearing.

Eapid  wave-like  succession:  chills  follow  each  other.

Every  fifteen  minutes:  constant  involuntary  discharge  of
urine;  convulsions.


S99  -'GELSEMIUM.

Lasting  an  hour  or  so :  hysterical  epilepsy.
From  hour  to  hour:  vision  varies.

From  a  few  hours  to  twenty-four:  profuse  perspiration.
Five  hours:  fever  lasts.
Three-quarters  of  an  hour :  chill  lasts.
Every  afternoon  from  4  to  5:  chilliness.
Every  day  at  same  hour:  orbital  neuralgia;  chilliness  in
back  during  diarrhoea;  chill;  chills  and  fever,  and  rest-
lessness; chilliness  <.
From  day  to  day :  vision  varies.
2,  4,  5,  9  P.M.:  paroxysm.
Evening:  periodical colic with diarrhcea; convulsions;

after  supper,  fever.
Every  night:  nervous  movements  like  spasms.
Regular  periodic  fever  without  chill.
For  a  week :  languor,  loss  of  appetite.
Return  of  complaints  when  the  year  comes  round.
Three  or  four  months  constantly  increasing  headache.
Ten  years'  standing:  epilepsy.
^Locality  and  Direction. Right:  temple,  sick  headache;
throbbing  in  side  of  head;  elevations  of  epithelium  ap-
peared on  cornea ;  digging  in  ear ;  nostril  stopped  up ;
pain  in  temple;  pain  in  wing  of  nose;  shooting  pain
into  ear;  aphthous  lookingspot  on  tonsil;  tonsil  swollen
and  inflamed;  pain  in  upper  part  of  lung;  side  of  nape
contractive  feeling;  sprained  pain  in  wrist  and  elbow;
rheumatic  pain  in  knee;  numbness  and  coldness  of  hand,
face  and  half  of  tongue; tonsil  inflamed.
Left:  jerking  of  side;  uvula  deviating  to  left;  cloud  over
outer  half  of  fluid  of  vision  of  eye;  pupil  dilated;  de-
posits on  lower  posterior  portion  of  cornea;  pain  in  eye;
feeling  up  into  nostril  as  of  a  stream  of  scalding  water;
pain  at  root  of  canine tooth,  upper  jaw;  tonsil  sore;
soreness  extends  to  nostril;  tenderness  in  iliac  region;
lying  on  side  pulse intermits; pain under  shoulder-
blade;  severe  pain  in,  elbow;  drawing  pain  in  gastroc-
nemius muscle  of  leg ;  rheumatic  pain  in  side  of  neck ;
pain  in  foot,  in  ankle;  thigh  sore  as  a  boil;  side  of  head
drawn  to  side;  jerking  of  whole  side  on  falling  asleep.
From  1.  to  r.:  pain  through  chest. below  heart.
From  above  downward:  stitches  in  lung.
Pains  in  abdomen:  run  upward  or  backward  and  upward.
^Sensations. Rheumatic pains  (wandering)  in  bones  and
joints.
Bruised  sensation  all  over  body,  as  if  from  severe  bodily

exertion.
Local  tingling  of  parts  during  fever.
As  if  intoxicated ;  head  as  if  enlarged ;  as  if  he  would  fall


GELSEMIUM.  400

headlong;  brain  as  if  bruised;  pain  as  from  a  tape
around  head;  roof  of  mouth  feels  as  if  swollen;  as  if  a
bee  had  stung  her ;  as  if  skin  was  contracted  in  middle
of  forehead;  as  if  a  snake  were  before  vision;  from
throat  up  into  1.  nostril  like  stream  of  scalding  water;  as
if  a  lump  were  in  oesophagus;  as  if  something  had  lodged
in  oesophagus;  feels  as  if  he  would  become  delirious;
sensation  of  a  heavy  load  in  stomach;  as  if  stomach
W'ere  quite  gone;  as  if  sphincter  resisted  passage  by  con-
traction; as  if  something  remained  behind  when  urin-
ating; uterus  as  if  squeezed  by  a  hand;  as  if  muscular
power  weakened ;  like  a  wave  from  uterus  to  throat,  end-
ing with  a  choking  feeling;  throat  as  if  ulcerated;  feels
as  if  he  would  die;  os  feels  as  if  it  would  not  dilate;  as
though  blood  had  ceased  to  circulate;  as  if  sprained  in
r.  wrist  and  elbow;  as  if  feet  were  in  cold  water;  when
walking  as  in  a  partial  luxation  of  patella;  as  if  limbs
were  going  to  sleep;  as  if  a  knife  were  thrust  through

•  from  occiput  to  forehead;  as  if  eyes  were  jumping  out  of
head ;  as  of  a  lump  in  throat  which  cannot  be  swallowed ;
head  feels  big  as  a  bushel;  distant  objects  feel  as  if  out-
lines were  shaded  by  colors;  pain  in  kidney  as  if  pro-
duced by  pressure  of  a  blunt  instrument  as  large  as  the
end  of  a  thumb.

Pain:  in  forehead;  in  temples;  in  head;  over  eyes;  across
forehead;  in  base  of  brain  ;  in  uterus;  in  bones  of  face;
begins  in  cervical  portion  of  spinal  column,  extends
over  whole  body;  in  neck;  in  back  of  neck;  in  limbs;
in  eyes ;  from  throat  to  middle  ear ;  from  back  to  ear ;
from  nose  to  neck  and  clavicles ;  in  r.  temple  then  to
ears,  eye  and  side  of  head,  then  to  nose;  in  teeth,  about
ear,  in  tongue ;  in  urethra ;  uterus  into  back ;  leave
uterus  and  fly  all  over  body;  in  chest;  in  heart;  in
neck;  in  upper  part  of  sterno-cleido  muscles;  under  1.
shoulder-blade;  from  spine  to  head  and  shoulders;  in
back  and  loins  and  lower  part  of  thigh;  in  shoul-
ders; in  muscles  of  arms;  in  legs;  in  1.  foot  and  ankle;
across  root  of  nose;  through  chest  below  heart;  over
body;  in  region  of  kidneys;  in  shin-bones.

Anguish  of  legs.

Violent  pains  in  limbs,  back  and  head.

Acute  pains:  flying  from  one  part  of  head  and  face  to
another;  in  almost  any  part  of  body;  in  head.

Excruciating  pain  :  in  head.

Sharp  pains:  in  uterine  region  ;  from  back  down  to  hips.

Severe  pain :  in  forehead ;  in  vertex ;  in  region  of  infra-
orbital nerve;  in  uterine  region;  across  small  of  back  ;
in  abdomen  ;  in  hip  ;  in  1.  elbow ;  in  limbs ;  in  head  ;
in  back.


401  .  GELSEMIUM.

Tearing  sensation :  in  head  ;  in  upper  cervical  region ;  in
occipital  region ;  cough ;  along  tracks  of  nerves.

Sudden  spasmodic  pain  :  in  upper  part  of  abdomen ;  colic ;
in  uterus.

Lancinating  pain :  in  abdomen ;  in  thigh.

Darting  pains :  flying  from  one  part  of  head  and  face  to
another ;  in  tooth ;  in  almost  any  part  of  body.

Cutting  pain :  in  abdomen ;  from  back  down  to  hips.

Stitches :  in  ear ;  behind  ear ;  in  lungs ;  in  chest ;  in  region
of  heart.

Stitching  pains:  on  moving  eyes.

Stinging :  in  mouth  ;  in  various  parts  of  body.

Shooting :  through  temples ;  through  nasal  sinuses ;  in  each
jaw ;  into  ears ;  in  face ;  in  tooth ;  along  track  of  nerves.

Stitching  sensation :  in  region  of  heart.

Pricking:  in  skin.

Prickling :  in  muscles.

Burning :  in  mouth ;  in  urethra ;  in  occiput ;  in  oesopha-
gus; in  stomach;  when  urinating;  up  the  spine  in
back ;  in  head ;  in  throat ;  in  larynx ;  in  trachea ;  in
chest;  in  hip.

Smarting :  at  meatus.

Digging:  in  r.  ear.

Gnawing  pain  :  in  transverse  colon.

Bursting  pain:  in  forehead  and  eyeballs.

Cramp-like  pain:  in  gullet;  in  legs;  in  thighs;  in  toes;  in
muscles.

Cramps:  in  stomach ;  in  uterus;  in  legs;  in  abdomen.

Constrictive  pain :  around  lower  part  of  chest.

Contractive  pains :  in  legs ;  in  gastrocnemius  muscle  of  1.
leg.

Contraction  :  of  abdomen ;  in  r.  side  of  neck.

Labor-like  pains :  in  uterine  region.

Griping:  in  lower  abdomen.

Rumbling  pain:  in  epigastrium  ;  in  abdomen.

Grumbling  pain:  in  face;  in  tooth.

Pinching  colic.

Band-like  pain  :  around  head.

Bearing  down :  in  abdomen.

Dragging  pain :  in  occiput ;  mastoid  and  upper  cervical
regions ;  in  testicles.

Drawing  pain :  in  upper  cervical  region ;  in  occipital
region;  over  eyes;  in  legs;  thighs;  toes.

Deep-seated,  dull,  aching  pains  in  bones  and  points  of  ex-
tremities.

Aching :  in  occipital  region ;  in  os  frontis ;  in  eyes ;  in  or-
bits ;  across  sacrum ;  in  back ;  in  limbs ;  in  lumbar
and  sacral  region  ;  in  1.  elbow  ;  in  body.

VOL.  V. — 26.


GELSEMIUM.  402

Languid  aching:  in  back;  in  limbs.

Soreness :  of  heart ;  of  eyeballs  ;  of  head  ;  in  scalp  ;  in
brain ;  of  eyes ;  of  edges  of  nostrils ;  of  throat ;  of  ab-
dominal walls ;  of  chest ;  of  thighs ;  in  body.

Bruised  pain  :  above  and  behind  eyes ;  in  muscles  of  neck;
in  calves  ;  in  muscles.

Pressing  pain :  in  bones  of  upper  and  lower  limbs.

Pressive  pains :  through  temples  and  nasal  sinuses.

Pressure:  of  chest;  in  head;  on  vertex ;  over  both  eyes.

Throbbing:  in  r.  side  of  head.

Sudden  pains :  in  almost  any  part  of  body.

Paroxysmal  pain  in  upper  part  of  r.  lung.

Twitching  pains:  in  face  and  head.

Neuralgic  pains:  around  edges  of  teeth  ;  in  upper  portion
of  spinal  cord;  upper  portion  of  cerebrum;  in  forehead;
in  eyeballs;  in  face;  in  teeth;  in  intestines;  in  uterus;
in  limbs.

Kheumatic  pains:  1.  side  of  neck;  in  knees;  in  limbs.

Suffering:  under  scapulse.

.Dull  pain:  in  head;  in  back  part  of  head;  in  occiput,
mastoid  or  upper  cervical  region  extending  to  shoulders;
in  or  about  the  eye;  feeling  in  orbits;  in  stomach.

"Vague  pains  from  tips  of  fingers  to  scapulae.

IFalse  pains  before  parturition.

Rawness :  of  chest.

Roughness :  of  throat.

Sticky  feeling  in  mouth.

Periodical  pains:  in  pectoral  muscles.

Stiffness:  in  muscles  of  jaws;  of  neck.

■Stiffness:  of  neck.

Tightness:  of  brain.

Tension:  in  stomach.

Pressure:  on  chest.

Excitability:  of  respiratory  centre.

Irritability:  of  eye;  of  throat;  of  organs  of  generation;  of
seminal  vesicles;  ovarian;  of  mind  and  body.

Sensitiveness:  to  sounds.

Tenderness  in  r.  iliac  region;  of  epigastrium.

Strange  sensation  :  in  head  ;  falling  sensation.

Lightness :  of  head  ;  in  body.

Vacant  feeling :  in  mind.

Empty  sensation  :  at  epigastrium ;  of  bowels.

Big  feeling  of  head.

Distension:  of  stomach;  of  bladder.

Swimming  sensation :  in  head.

Depression :  from  heat  of  sun.

Faintness :  at  epigastrium ;  of  body.

Elaccidity :  of  genitals.


403  GELSEMIUM.

Relaxation:  of  whole  body;  hands  and  feet.
Weakness:  of  stomach;  of  bowels;  of  spine;  of  arms;  of
whole  system;  of  brain.
^^Sense  of  fatigue,
^^rired  sensation:  in  arms.

Confusion :  of  head ;  blind  headache.

Weight:  in  head;  in  stomach.

Heaviness:  of  head;  of  eyelids;  of  eyes;  in  uterine  region;

in  middle  of  chest.
Oppression:  of  heart;  of  chest.
Dulness:  of  all  mental  faculties;  of  sight;  in  forehead;  in

vertex.
Wandering  colic.
Fulness:  in  head;  in  region  of  medulla;  of  lids;  at  root  of

nose;  in  hypogastrium ;  in  uterine  region;  of  chest.
Congestion:  to  chest;  of  stomach;  of  spinal  cord;  of  cere-
bellum.
Roaring:  in  ears;  in  abdomen.
Rushing:  in  ears.
'Suffocation :  sensation  of.
Palpitation:  of  heart.
Twitching:  of  single  muscles.
Jerking:  of  whole  1.  side;  of  limbs.
Trembling:  of  hands;  in  all  the  limbs;  of  whole  body.
'Spasms:  of  bladder;  of  glottis;  of  one  leg.
Paralytic  condition:  of  lumbar  and  sacral  muscles.
Lameness:  of  neck.
Crawling:  in  muscles.

Numbness:  of  tongue;  of  limbs;  of  extremities.
Tingling:  in  nose;  of  throat;  in  muscles.
Tickling:  cough;  of  fauces.
Itching:  all  over  body;  of  head;  of  face;  of  neck;  of  eyes;

of  shoulders.
Heat:  in  face;  in  palms  of  hands;  in  eyes;  in  forehead;

of  skin;  in  head.
Coldness:  of  genitals;  of  wrists  and  hands;  of  r.  hand;  r.

side  of  face;  r.  half  of  tongue.
Dryness:  of  mouth;  of  throat.
"**  Tissues. Active  or  passive  congestion  of  brain,  spinal  cord,
lungs,  liver  and  other  organs.
Paralysis,  general  and  special,  of  voluntary  and  involun-
tary nerves.
Acts  principally  upon  motor  side  of  spinal  cord,  upon

brain  and  the  mucous  membranes.
Affects  principally  the  nerves  of  motion ;  causes  muscular

prostration  through  the  nerves.
Partial  paralysis  of  all  involuntary  muscles.
-Myalgia  from  over-exertion ;  lameness  and  stiffness.


GELSEMIUM.  404

Pains  in  back,  shoulders,  neck  and  occiput,  preceding  or
following  attacks  of  ague;  also  when  these  or  similar
pains  are  of  a  neuralgic  nature,  arising  from  some  form
of  spinal  irritation,  or  come  on  as  the  result  of  a  cold,
having  something  of  a  rheumatic  character.

Congestions,  arterial  or  venous,  with  sluggish  circulation.

Hemorrhages,  blood  in  drops,  crimson.

SepticEemia;  during  the  drowsiness  fever  and  great  pros-
tration.

I  In  scarlet  fever  it  determines  the  eruption  to  the  surface,
controls  the  pulse,  calms  the  nervous  erethism,  and  les-
sens the  cerebral  congestion.

At  first  arrests  secretion  of  glands  and  afterwards  in-
creases it.

Catarrh  of  eyes,  nose,  mouth,  particularly  in  flabby,  lax-
fibred  persons,  or  from  conditions  of  atmosphere  favor-
ing relaxation  of  body.

Colds  in  Spring;  soreness  over  body,  great  tiredness,  as  if
he  could  not  move;  spasmodic  sneezing,  <■  in  morning;
thin,  excoriating  discharge;  nose  red,  inflamed;  mucous
membrane  dark ;  co-existing  neuralgia.

I  Catarrh  of  mucous  membranes;  w^atery  mucous,  never
purulent  discharges.

■  Suppressed  or  undeveloped  catarrh.

^  Touch.  Passive  Motion.  Injuries.  Touch :  elevations  on
epithelium  appeared  on  touch ;  r.  cornea,  gum,  upper
lip  and  infra-orbital  region  very  sensitive ;  great  sore-
ness of  thigh.

Pressure :  vertebrae  sensitive ;  on  head  <  pain  ;  on  vertex
>  burning  pain  in  occiput ;  facial  neuralgia  <  ;  op-
pression of  stomach  <  from  pressure  of  clothing ;  causes
no  flow  of  urine ;  vertebra  prominens  and  cervical  ver-
tebrse  sensitive.

Lifting  or  turning  patient  accelerates  pulse.

Riding: distant objects seem indistinct; cramp in
stomach  >.
^  Skin. I  Erythema  of  face  and  neck.

■  Itching  all  over  body,  preventing  sleep;  after  scratching,

a  raw  sore,  surrounded  by  blisters. ^Neuralgic  head-
ache.
I  I  Itching  on  head,  face,  neck  and  shoulders.

■  Itching  of  skin,  without  eruption,  <  at  night  and  from

warmth.

■  Skin  hot,  dry;  gastric  and  nervous  fevers.
Pimples  on  forehead  and  neck.

Vesico-pustules  not  itching ;  pimples  like  small  cutaneous
indurations.

■  Papulous  eruption  like  measles,  especially  on  face.


405  GELSEMIUM.

I  Measles:  catarrhal  symptoms  predominant;  watery,  exco-
riating discharge;  spasmodic  sneezing;  dry,  teasing
cough;  fever  with  drowsiness,  dulness;  clinging  to  crib.

■  Erysipelas,  not  vesicular  or  phlegmonous,  but  a  milder

variety,  with  erythema  or  papular  eruption.

■  Measles,  with  torpor,  sleepiness  and  dread  of  movement.

■  Rubeola;  it  seems  to  prevent  chronic  catarrhal  affections

and  bronchitis.

■  After  Aeon.;  great  deal  of  coryza;  drowsy  with  fever  heat,

no  thirst;  when  the  eruption  turns  livid,  with  cerebral
symptoms. t/Measles.

■  In  retrocedent  measles,  with  livid  spots;  dulness  of  brain

or  abdominal  or  thoracic  congestion;  fever  heat,  with
drowsiness.

■  Scarlet  fever,  with  stupor  and  flushed  red  face.

■  Asthenic  forms  of  scarlet  fever;  intense  fever,  with  nerv-

ous erethism  during  prodromal  stage,  followed  by  pro-
found prostration  of  muscular  power;  cerebral  intoxica-
tion ;  pulse  frequent,  soft,  weak,  sometimes  filiform ;  im-
paired vision;  heat,  with  languor  and  drowsiness;  crim-
son flush  of  face  in  all  positions ;  heavy-looking,  suffused
eyes;  throat  feels  as  if  swelled  or  filled  up,  is  diffusely
red;  tonsils  red  and  slightly  swelled;  delirious  mutter-
ings  when  asleep  or  half  awake;  spasms  and  paralysis;
when  eruption  recedes,  viscera  are  threatened.
^^  Stages  of  Life,  Constitution.  ■■  Adapted  to  children;
young  people;  women  of  a  nervous,  hysterical  tempera-
ment; irritable,  sensitive,  excitable;  people;  onanists,
both  sexes.

Girl,  set.  3,  "has  always  had  ague,"  many  times  suppressed
by  quinine,  only  to  re-appear;  intermittent  fever.

Girl,  set.  12;  sciatica.

Miss,  set.  16;  acute  mania.

Girl,  set.  16;  affection  of  throat.

Mrs. ;  rigid  os  uteri.

Girl,  set.  18,  after  exposure;  miliar}^  fever.

Boy,  set.  19;  fever.

Miss ,  set.  19,  had  two  years  ago  severe  attack  of  con-
gestive intermittent  fever,  quotidian  type;  facial  neu-
ralgia.

Lady,  set  19,  red  hair;  quotidian  intermittent  every  after-
noon at  1  o'clock.

Man,  set.  21;  chest  affection.

Man,  set.  21;  nervous  headache.

Man,  set.  21,  sanguine  temperament,  ailing  for  some  weeks;
febrile  disturbance.

Girl,  set.  21,  thin  and  spare,  dark  eyes,  black  hair,  bilious
temperament;  intermittent  fever.


GELSEMIUM.  40&

Man,  set.  22;  irido-choroiditis.

Man,  £et.  22,  bilious  temperament;  spermatorrhoea.

Man,  £et.  24,  lymphatic  temperament,  subject  to  epistaxis;
gonorrhoea.

Piano  teacher,  observed  for  two  years  tired  sensation  in.
arms  when  playing.

Man,  bilious  temperament;  febrile  attack.

Man,  nervous-bilious  temperament;  fever.

Woman,  £et.  30,  spare,  of  dark  complexion,  in  third  month,,
after  fright;  threatened  abortion.

Miss  S.,  set.  30,  was  afflicted  with  neuralgia,  for  which
massive  doses  of  quinine  and  morphia  were  given;,
aphonia  and  deafness.

Man,  set.  30;  febrile  attack.

Miss  B.,  set.  30;  chronic  diarrhoea.

Woman,  set.  32,  seamstress;  irido-choroiditis.

Mrs. ,  set.  35;  brain  affection.

Primipara,  set.  35;  rigidity  of  os  uteri.

Mrs.  H.,  set.  36;  menorrhagia.

Woman,  set.  40  dystocia.

Woman,  set.  45;  after  exposure  on  a  cold,  damp  day;  tic-
douloureux.

Mrs.  R.,  set.  46,  subject  to  Cjuinsy;  affection  of  throat.

Mrs.  E.,  set.  50,  after  losing  son;  bad  effects  of  grief

Man,  set.  52,  light  hair,  blue  e3^es,  had  cerebro-spinal  men-
ingitis; neuralgic  headache.

Mrs.  T.,  set.  56,  dark  complexion,  bilious  temperament;
serous  choroiditis.

Man,  set.  69;  typhoid._

Mrs.  M.,  set.  74;  febrile  disturbance.
^^  Relations. Antidoted by: Atrop.,  Cinchon., Coffea,  Digit,
Nux  mosch.,  salt,  stimulants,  galvanism. In cases  of
poisoning,  resort  to  artificial  respiration,  and  faradism
of  muscles  of  respiration.

It  antagonizes :  Atrop.  and  Opium.

Compatible:  Baptis.  in  typhoid  fever;  Ipecac,  in  dumb
ague.

Compare:  Bellad.  in  labor;  Cauloph.  and  Caustic,  in  com-
plaints of  women;  Coccul.  and  Conium  in  paralysis;
Ferr.  phosph.  in  fever ;  Quillaia  in  catarrhs ;  Oleuvi  an.
and  Veratr.  in  headaches.


407  GLONOINUM.

GLONOINUM.

Nitro-glycerine.  O3  H^  {NO^ )  03.

Nitro-glycerine  was  discovered  by  Sobrero,  In  1847,  but  none  could  be  obtained
for  physiological  experiment  until  Morris  Davis,  a  Philadelphia  chemist,  in  the
same  year,  after  long  and  laborious  trial,  under  direction  of  Hering,  succeeded  to
produce  the  substance  in  sufficient  quantity  for  proving.  It  was  extensively  proven
here  and  abroad  (See  Allen's  Encyclopaedia,  vol.  4,  p.  425),  and  the  symptoms
have  received  abundant  clinical  verification.

Clinical  Authorities. — Mania,  Field,  B.  J.  H.,  vol.  16,  p.  519;  Loss  of
location,  Cochran,  Hah.  Mo.;  vol.  5,  p.  23  ;  Affection  of  brain,  Lippe,  Kaue's  E.ec.,
1874,  p.  63 ;  Hypercemia  of  brain,  Mossa,  Raue's  Eec,  1874,  p.  62 ;  Congestion  to
head,  Okie,  B.  J.  H.,  vol.  11,  p.  287;  Congestion  to  head,  (2  cases),  Okie,  B.  J.  H.,
vol.  11,  p.  288;  Cerebral  congestion,  Battman,  B.  J.  H.,  vol.,  23,  p.  436;  Congestion
to  brain,  Coxe,  N.  A.  J.  H.,  vol.  6,  p.  76 ;  Symptoms  of  cerebrospinal  meningitis.
Smith,  ]Sr.  E.  M.  G.,  vol.  9,  p.  492;  Cerebrospinal  meningitis.  Von  Tagen,  Raue's
Rec,  1874,  p.  66;  Vertigo,  Gardiner,  N.  E.  M.  G.,  vol.  9,  p.  394  ;  Sunstroke,  For.
N.  E.  M.  G.,  vol.  9,  p.  394;  Von  Tagen,  Organon,  vol.  3,  p.  106;  Effects  of  expos-
ure to  sun.  Small,  N.  E.  M.  G.  vol.  9,  p.  394;  Campos,  B.  J.  H.,  vol.  11,  p.  287.
Sun-headaches,  McCIatchey,  Hah.  Mo.,  vol.  6,  p.  36 ;  Headache,  Neuralgia,  Field,
B.  J.  H.,  vol.  16,  p.  336 ;  Headache  (2  cases),  Vinal,  B.  J.  H.,  vol.  7,  p.  421 ;  Raue,
B.  J.  H.,  vol.  11,  p.  288;  Hering,  B.  J.  H.,  vol.  11,  p.  287  ;  Hirscliel,  N.  E.  M.  G.,
vol.  9,  p.  433;  Battman,  N.  E.  M,  G.,  vol.  9,  p.  487 ;  Geist,  N.  E.  M.  G.,  vol.  9,  p.
441 ;  Berridge,  N.  E.  M.  G.,  vol.  9,  p.  439 ;  A.  J.  H.  M.  M.,  vol.  4,  p.  47  ;  Thayer,
N.  E.  M.  G.,  vol.  9,  p.  536;  Willard,  Raue's  Rec,  1874,  p.  258;  A.  H.  O.,  vol.  10,
p.  477;  Boardman,  A.  H.  O.,  vol.  13,  p.  216;  Fehrman.  Med.  Inv.,  vol.  8,  p.  190;
(4  cases),  Coxe,  N.  A.  J.  H.,  vol.  6,  p.  76 ;  Headache  after  hemorrhage,  Nicholls,
N.  A.  J.  H.,  vol.  5,  p.  439 ;  Headache  in  a  chlorotic  patient,  Menz,  N.  E.  M.  G.,  vol.
9,  p.  489;  Hemicrania,  Field,  B.  J.  H.,  vol.  16,  p.  520;  (6  cases),  Lichtenfels,
Eichorn,  N.  E.  M.  G.,  vol.  9,  p.  482;  Supra-orbital  neuralgia.  Field,  B.  J.  H.,  vol.
16,  p.  520;  Paralysis  of  auditory  nerve,  Coxe,  B.  J.  H.,  vol.  11,  p.  291 ;  Facial  neu-
ralgia (3  cases),  Brady,  Nankivell,  N.  E.  M.  G.,  vol.  9,  p.  531 ;  Toothache  (3  cases),
Field,  Nankivell,  N.  E.  M.  G.,  vol.  9,  p.  532;  B.  J.  H.,  vol.  16,  p.  335;  (2  cases),
Gaillard,  Raue's  Rec,  1870,  p.  138;  Aphasia,  Burnett,  Raue's  Rec,  1874,  p.  61;
Suppression  of  menses,  Hah.  Hospital,  B.  J.  H.,  vol.  11,  p.  291 ;  Climacteric  com-
plaints, Raron,  Raue's  Rec,  1874,  p.  237 ;  Congestion  of  blood  to  head  during  preg-
nancy and  during  menses,  Hering,  B.  J.  PI.,  vol.  11,  p.  288;  Convulsions  after  labor,
Battman,  B.  J.  H.,  vol.  23,  p.  435 ;  Palpitation  of  heart  (2  cases),  Dunham,  B.  J.  H.,
vol.  11,  p.  287;  Hah.  Hospital,  B.  J.  H.,  vol.  11,  p.  290;  Neurosis  cordis,  Kafka,
Raue's  Rec,  1874,  p.  165 ;  Acute  rheumatism  in  I.  knee,  Benson,  MSS. ;  Nervous  affec-
tions, Nankivell,  Am.  Hom.  Rev.,  vol.  3,  p.  465 ;  Neuralgic  affections,  Brady,  B.  J.
H.,  vol.  18,  p.  137  ;  Neuralgia,  Field,  B.  J.  H.,  vol.  16,  p.  519 ;  Convulsions,  Wes-
selhceft,  Raue's  Rec,  1871,  p.  185 ;  Parcdytic  symptoms,  Hawkins,  Raue's  Rec,  1874,
p.  271 ;  Effects  of  violent  jarring,  Wesselhceft,  N,  E.  M.  G.,  vol.  9,  p.  493.


GLONOINUM.  408

^  Mind. ■  Loses  senses,  sinks  down  unconscious;  congestion
alternately  to  head  and  heart.

■  Recognized  no  one;  repulsed  her  husband  and  children;

raved,  screamed,  and  wished  to  rush  from  house;  jumped
out  of  bed,  but  fell  because  her  knees  gave  way.

I  She  could  not  remember  which  side  of  the  street  her
house  was  on.

llAVell-known  streets  seem  strange;  way  home  too  long.

■  Loses  his  w^ay  in  the  known  streets.
The  chin  feels  too  long.

•  Loss  of  location;  commenced  about  ten  years  ago;  loses
himself,  even  when  walking  in  streets  that  he  has  trav-
eled in  for  years;  all  right  in  regard  to  everything  else.

Long  forgotten  old  offences  come  back  to  him.

■  Frantic ;  attempted  to  jumjD  from  the  window.  ^Headache.
lAfter  an  attack  of  epilepsy  patient  awoke  in  a  state  of

violent  mania,  struggling  with  great  violence ;  eyeballs
projecting,  mouth  half  open,  looked  as  if  he  were  con-
templating some  afflicting  sight,  while  he  rapidly  reit-
erated an  unmeaning  monosyllable,  cloe-doe-doe,  in  a
painfully  plaintive  voice.

I  I  Unusually  bright  and  loquacious,  with  great  flow  of
ideas.

I  I  Great  mental  agitation ;  attempts  to  run  away ;  at-
tempted to  spring  from  window.

I  I  During  intermissions  of  pain,  she  shudders  and  weej)s

bitterly.

I I  Disinclined  to  speak ;  would  scarcely  answer.

Fear;  throat  feels  swollen ;  chest  as  if  screwed  together;

apprehensive  of  approaching  death ;  fears  she  has  been

poisoned.
iBad  effects  of  mental  excitement,  fright,  fear,  mechanical

contusions  and  their  later  consequences.
^  Sensorium. ■  l  Heaviness  in  head,  principally  in  forehead.
I  Fulness  in  head,  as  if  all  blood  had  mounted  to  head;

very  disagreeable  sensation,  but  without  pain.
Fulness  in  head,  as  if  brain  was  expanding  itself,  were

moving  in  waves.
■Sensation  in  head  as  if  he  were  hanging  with  head  down-
wards, and  as  if  there  was  a  great  rush  of  blood  to  head

in  consequence.

■  Determination  of  blood  to  head  sometimes  preceding  apo-

plexy, also  for  that  which  often  occurs  in  softening  and
tumors  of  brain.

■  Could  not  allow  his  head  to  be  on  a  level  with  his  body,

but  must  have  it  elevated,  it  felt  full,  could  not  see  ob-
jects distinctly  ;  dizzy.
I  I  Giddiness  when  the  head  is  moved.


409  GLONOINUM.

I  Confusion  and  vertigo;  after  stooping.

I  I  Throbbing,  pulsation  and  confusion  of  all  senses ;  sensa-
tion of  balancing,  requiring  a  constant  effort  to  keep
head  erect,  which  inclined  to  droop  as  on  going  to  sleep.

I  I  Undulating  sensation  in  head.

I  Head  feels  larger.

■  Vertigo;  confusion,  fain tness,  black  spots  before  eyes;  <

stooping  or  moving  head  ;  <  in  open  air ;  with  head-
ache ;  with  nausea ;  in  sunstroke ;  after  a  violent  fall  on
head ;  when  rising  in  morning.

■  Congestive  vertigo  ;  forerunner  of  apoplexy;  intoxication

and  heaviness  of  head,  with  bending  head  forward ;

reeling,  trembling,  falling  ; headache  ; heat  in  head  ;

redness  of  face  ;  pJiotophobia  ;  injection  of  conjunctivee  ;

flickering  before  eyes ; buzzing  in  ears ; pulsation  of

carotids  ;  <  sitting  up.
I  Nausea,  then  unconsciousness,  with  convulsive  action  of

facial  muscles;  face  pale,  breathing  stertorous,  feeble

pulse.
■Sinking  down  unconscious,  with  congestion,  alternating

to  head  and  heart.

■  Syncope,  nausea,  face  pale  or  livid;  beating  in  head.

■^  Inner Head, iSevere pain  in forehead; throbbing in
temples,  <  from  walking.

■  Dull  headache  in  forehead  over  eyes;  <  by  use  of  eyes

and  mental  effort;  becomes  a  throbbing  pain  after  rapid
motion,  felt  both  front  and  back  of  head ;  action  of  heart
very  easily  excited.

■  Tensive  pain  over  eyes  and  nose,  also  behind  ears,  fol-

lowed by  choking  sensation  about  throat.

■  Headache  beginning  at  root  of  nose.

■  Crushing  weight  across  forehead.

I  I  Piercing  pain  from  within  outward,  towards  middle  of

forehead,  more  upward.
I  I  Pain  in  vertex  and  sides  of  head,  as  if  pressed  together.

■  Headache  in  forepart  of  head  with  nausea;  in  1.  side,

with  vomiting.

■  ■Throbbing  in  front  of  head.

■  Painful  pulsation  from  forehead  to  vertex.

■  When  walking  every  step  is  felt  in  neck,  when  moving

the  head.

■  Great  heat  and  congestion  in  head  with  severe  pains  in

forehead,  throbbing  in  temples.

■  Pain  in  forehead,  <  shaking  head.

■  Dull  headache  in  forehead,  with  warm  sweat.

■  Front  of  head  and  vertex  excessively  hot.

■  Feels  as  if  ice-cold  sweat  were  on  forehead,  which,  how-

ever, is  not  there.


GLONOINUM.  4ia

I  Head  felt  throbbing  and  bursting,  especially  above  ears
and  at  temples;  choking  sensation,  as  if  ligature  were
tied  around  neck,  which  prevented  blood  from  return-
ing from  head.

I  Throbbing  in  whole  head,  especially  in  temples  and  over
eyes,  with  excessive  heat  in  head ;  <  morning ;  >  sit-
ting still  and  lying,  also  by  pressure  upon  it.

I  I  Pain  most  intense  from  5  to  10  minutes,  during  which
she  shudders  and  weeps  bitterly ;  during  intermissions,
throbbing  in  temples;  while  pain  is  raging,  sight  im-
paired.

■Violent  pressing  pain  in  temples,  which  went  undulating
and  raging  throughout  whole  head,  especially  at  last  in
region  of  saggital  suture.

I  I  Neuralgia,  nervous  temperament ;  sudden  pain  starting
from  decayed  inferior  molar  tooth  and  concentrates  in
temple;  head  feels  heavy  but  cannot  lay  it  on  pillow.

I  Stitches  in  temples  or  r.  side  of  forehead.

I I  Pressure  and  throbbing  in  temples.

1 1  Pressure  and  pain  from  within  out  in  both  temples.
Fulness  in  head,  feels  pulse  in  head,  especially  in  temples,,

could  count  the  beats.
iSharp, piercing pain in 1. temple, daily for several

months.

■  Temporal  and  carotid  arteries  beating  violently.
■Throbbing  in  temj^oral  arteries,  and  sense  of  constric-
tion about  neck.

■  Throbbing  in  temj)oral  arteries,  which  were  raised  and

felt  like  whip-cords.

■  Heat  in  head,  with  throbbing.

■  Flushes  of  heat  and  congestion  to  head.

■  Suddenly  sensation  as  if  whole  head  were  crowded  with

blood.

■  Constant  sensation  of  fulness  in  vertex,  increasing  all  the

time  as  if  something  were  pumped  in.
■Sensation  of  weight,  or  painful  fulness  at  vertex,

■  Brain  feels  as  if  too  heavy  and  too  large  for  skull,  v/ith

raving  headache.

■  ■Sensation  as  if  skull  were  too  small;  as  if  brain  were

attempting  to  burst  it.

■  Cracking  sensation  in  brain,  obliging  him  to  hold  on  to

head  during  every  movement,  to  prevent  an  apparent
threatened  rupture  of  cranium.

■  Feels  every  pulsation  in  head.

■  Shocks  in brain, synchronous  with  every  i;)ulsation  of

arteries.

■  Intense  throbbing  pain  over  whole  head,  flushed  face.

■  Painless  throbbing  in  head,  extending  under  frontal  bona

to  temple.


411  GLONOINUM.

■  Throbbing:  in  temples;  in  vertex;  in  occiput;  in  whole

head.
I  Most violent throbbing,  tearing  pains,  before,  during,
after  or  instead  of  menstruation.

■  Old  nurse  with  chronic  heart  disease  frequently  suffered

from  severe  headaches  in  attacks  that  lasted  all  day,
especially  during  wet,  dull  weather;  the  pain  is  tearing,,
and  extends  from  nape  to  vertex,  where  it  is  throbbing;

<  from  motion  or  stooping;  >  lying  still;  full  sensa-
tion like  rush  of  blood  in  nape,  neck  and  head.

■  Throbbing  beginning  in  1.  breast,  suddenly  darting  up

into  head,  throbbing  as  if  something  were  moving  in
waves  to  head,  <  from  motion.

■  Throbbing  headache,  with  vertigo  and  flushes  of  heat  to

the  face  and  head;  she  felt  as  if  sore  inside  of  her  head
when  she  moved  it.

■  Headache  in  vertex  and  crown,  like  waves  rising  and

falling;  excessive,  so  that  she  longs  for  death,  with
small,  weak  pulse.

■  Brain  as  if  moving  in  waves.

■  Undulating,  dull  pain  in  middle  of  brain.

■  A  lady  could  not  lie  upon  back  or  either  side,  because

"the  pillow  would  beat;"  she  could  not  remember  which
side  of  street  her  house  was  on.

■  Pressive,  throbbing  headache,  with  obvious  enlargement

of  cutaneous  veins  of  head  and  face.

■  Pulsating  headache,  with  sensation  of  soreness  when  mov-

ing head,  and  drowsiness  with  vertigo  after  stooping.

■  Headache  on  top  of  head,  which,  without  being  throb-

bing, increased  and  diminished  just  as  waves  rise  and
fall,  yet  it  was  not  an  undulating  pain,  and  in  these
fluxes  and  refluxes  it  increased  to  such  a  terrible  height
that  death  would  have  been  welcome  to  her;  cold  water
gave  some  relief.

■  Racking  pain  with  raving,  heat  in  head,  redness  of  face,,

red,  protruding  eyes,  wiry  pulse  of  92.
Head  began  to  throb,  and  for  an  hour  all  arteries  in  head
felt  as  distinct  as  though  they  had  been  dissected  out,
and  were  on  exhibition;  head  was  full  of  blood;  motion

<  throbbing  and  pain;  this  condition  lasted  all  day.

■  Children  scream  with  pain  in  head,  exclaiming,  "My

head!  my  head!"

■  ■Holds  head  with  both  hands;  presses  sinciput.

■  Burning  pain  in  middle  of  head  after  brain  fever,  >  by

pressure;  every  excitement  causes  it.

■  Pain  deep  in  brain,  shaking  is  without  influence.

■  Sore  and  bruised  feeling  in  brain,  <  when  shaking  head^

■  Face  purple,  vertex  hot,  bloodshot  eyes,  knew  no  one.


OLONOINUM.  412

I  Headache  with  red  face,  accelerated  pulse,  sweat  on  face,
unconsciousness;  >  in  open  air,  after  sleep,  after  vom-
iting. _

■  Sensation  of  soreness  through  whole  head,  is  afraid  to

shake  head;  it  seems  to  him  as  if  head  would  drop  to
pieces.
I  Congestive  headache,  sensation  of  fluttering  in  head,  sen-
sation of  constriction  in  vessels  of  head,  expansive  press-
ure, flushed  face,  drowsiness,  venous  congestion  to  ab-
domen.

■  Congestion  to  head  in  pregnant  women,  with  pale  face,

loss  of  senses,  and  falling  down  unconscious,  cold  sweat.

■  Frequent  congestion  to  head  in  an  old  woman,  causing  a

sensation  of  coldness.

■  Congestion  to  head  alternates  with  congestion  to  heart.

■  Hyperaemia  from  excessive  cold  or  heat.

■  Habitual  hemicrania;  as  if  focus  of  r.  eye  were  suddenly

displaced;  sees  everything  half  light  and  half  dark,
with  a  sensation  as  if  he  must  die;  nausea,  is  obliged  to
sit  down,  dimness  before  eyes  like  a  cloud,  followed  by
most  violent  headache,  with  repeated  vomiting,  after
which  it  grows  better.

■  Hemicrania  from  excessive  use  of  wine.

■  Eyeballs  protrude  during  headache;  red capillaries  in

eye,  as  if  injected.

■  Feels  deadly  sick  with  headache,  like  sea-sickness.

■  Headache:  with  heat  in  face;  with  nausea  and  vomiting;

with  increased  secretion  of  urine.
1  Violent,  heavy  beating  in  head,  from  back  to  front,  as  if
it  would  crowd  everything  out  at  forehead.

■  First,  pain  in  occiput,  then  in  vertex.

■  Headache  beginning  in  occiput  and  spreading  from  there

over  whole  head.

■  Pressure  and  throbbing  extends  to  back  of  neck.

■  Congestion  to  occiput  like  pressure;  such  excessive  de-

termination to  occiput  that  it  seems  as  if  he  would  lose
his  reason.

■  Congestion  to  head,  sudden,  violent;  throbbing  felt  with

every  pulse,  at  every  step,  or  jarring;  blood  mounts  from
neck,  throat  or  chest;  from  occiput  toward  eyes.

■  Flushes  of  heat  rising  from  chest  to  head,  then  throbbing

in  head.

■  Pain,  heat  and  fulness  in  head  ascend  from  chest,  neck

or  back  part  of  head.

■  Pains  seem  to  ascend  from  chest  and  neck  to  occiput;

pain  the  whole  length  of  spine;  oppression  of  chest;
blindness,  with  faintness  and  nausea;  congestion  to
head  with  sense  of  expansion ;  can't  bear  heat  about
head. ^Cerebro-spinal  meningitis.


413  GLONOINUM.

I  Violent  throbbing  headache  with  sense  of  expansion;

blindness  with  faintness  and  nausea; pale  face;  pain

through  whole  length  of  spine.
I  I  Great  rigidity  of  occipito-frontalis.
I  I  During  day  a  cataleptic  state  of  occipito-frontalis  muscle,.

and  a  degree  of  obtuseness  of  brain.
I  I  After  overheating,  with  copious  sweat,  headache.
I  The  vajs  of  the  sun  on  his  head  were  not  to  be  borne,

and  his  head  would  not  allow  the  hat  to  touch  it.
I  Headache  begins  with  warm  weather,  and  lasts  all  sum-
mer, increases  and  decreases  every  day  with  the  sun;

great  sensitiveness  to  rays  of  sun,  and  to  pressure  from

covering  of  head.

I  After  working in  sun: throbbing headache  gradually

growing  more  severe;  fever;  face  yellowish-red;  eyea
staring,  dull,  glassy,  pupil  contracted;  pulse  small  and
quick;  would  not  speak,  would  scarcely  give  a  reply;
frequent  retching.

■  Headaches  produced  by  powerful  rays  of  sun.

■  Troubles  of  head  in  type-setters,  and  in  men  who  work

under  gas-light  steadily,  so  that  heat  falls  on  head ;  bad
results  from  sunstroke;  can't  bear  any  heat  about  head;
can't  walk  in  sun,  must  walk  in  shade  or  carry  an  um-
brella ;  can't  bear  heat  from  stove.

I I  Headache  on  damp,  rainy  days,  after  taking  cold,  much
sitting  and  mental  exertion.

I  Apoplexia  serosa  with  small,  thread-like,  very  quick  pulse.

■  Hydrocephalus; cri  encephalique.

■  Symptoms  of  cerebro-spinal  meningitis,  with  confusion

and  loss  of  memory;  in  one  case  temporary  blindness;
intense  pain  in  cervical  and  occipital  regions,  and  in
eyes ;  tingling  pulsation  in  fingers ;  irregular  pulse ;
tightening  around  neck.
Headache  worse:  from  shaking  or  jarring  head;  stooping;
bending  it  backwards ;  after  lying  clown ;  when  ascend-
ing steps;  in  damp  weather;  in  sun;  while  working
under  gas-light;  after  overheating,  with  copious  sweat;
from  touch  of  hat;  cold  water  (even  causing  spasms);
reading;  writing; wine.

■  Frightful  headache,  runs  about  room  with  head  pressed

between  hands;  as  if  head  would  burst;  sometimes
knocks  head  against  wall;  pulse  hard,  full,  quick;  face
red ;  occasionally  violent  shoots  in  head  making  him
cry  out;  jerkings  through  body.

■  Headache  of  a  chlorotic  patient,  pain  so  intense  that  she

attempted  to  spring  from  window.
■Violent  headache  after  romping,  overheating,  sweat  and
taking  cold.


•GLONOINUxAI.  414

lA'^iolent  congestive  headache,  eyes  painful  and  bloodshot
never  relieved  under  24  hours ;  had  taken  cathartics
these  attacks  every  twelve  or  fifteen  days  for  many  years
found  her  lying  on  a  bench  holding  head  with  both
hands ;  face  and  head  very  hot ;  eyes  much  inflamed ;
vertigo  preventing  rising ; urine  high-colored,  with  a
reddish  sediment,  and  mucus  of  dirt}^  reddish-yellow
tint; moaned  much,  and  complained  that  brain  was
forcing  itself  out  front ;  that  it  was  too  large  and  had
grown.

■  Violent  headache;  face  flushed  and  very  hot,  whole  head

extremely  hot;  eyes  much  inflamed  and  with  a  wild
expression ;  trembling  of  knees  and  lower  extremities ;
slight  quiver  in  wrists  and  hands,  only  now  and  then
perceptible  ;  pulse  only  86,  but  full  and  tense.

I  Congestion  to  head,  as  if  warm  water  were  running  up-
wards from  nape  of  neck  ;  turns  very  red  in  face  and
then  pale ;  very  little  headache  but  a  painless  throbbing ;
frequent  attacks  during  day,  <  in  morning  when
moving;  conjunctiva  injected,  cannot  see  well,  like  a
mist  before  eyes ;  hot  feet.

'  iSome  months  after  being  violently  jarred  by  being  thrown
from  carriage,  a  sensitiveness  of  upper  part  of  back  and
neck  came  on,  painful  to  touch,  or  from  lying  upon  it,
with  swelling,  heat;  sharp,  cutting  pains  into  occiput,
and  from  across  shoulder-blades  to  anterior  part  of  chest;
when  lying  down  she  had  frequent  attacks  of  constric-
tion around  neck,  as  if  it  were  gripped  by  a  hand  ;  <
from  wine.

i  I  Congestive  headache,  pain  beginning  in  forehead  and
sides  of  head,  slowly  passing  to  vertex  and  occiput,  when
it  becomes  a  throbbing  pain,  <  from  motion  and  least
noise,  from  lying  with  the  head  low  and  after  sleeping ;
>  from  application  of  cold  water  and  from  external
pressure;  vertex  burning  hot,  likewise  the  upper  part
of  back;  face  bluish,  with  a  heavy,  stupid  expression;
lips  swollen,  frequent  deep  inspirations;  pit  of  stomach
sensitive  to  touch;  frequent  and  profuse  flow  of  pale
urine.

■  Headache;  every  pulse  is  felt,  as  if  head  would  burst;

stupefaction;  sunken  eyes;  bluish  pallor  under  eyes;
redeyes,  with  photophobia;  optical  illusions;  lightning;
black  spots  before  eyes ;  blindness;  in  ears,  pain,  fulness,
pulsation,  ringing,  deafness;  face  pale  in  spite  of  high
fever,  or  red  and  hot ;  temporal  arteries  pulsate  violently ;
heart  beats  strong  and  laborious ;  pulse  mostly  acceler-
ated, often  changing  suddenly  to  slow,  and  back  again;
nausea,  vomiting  with  the  headache;  sudden  spasms.
^Meningitis.


415  GLONOINUM.

iHypereemia  of  brain  caused  by  influence  of  excessive  cold
or  heat.

■  Burning  pain  in  cerebrum  and  violent  chills,  vertigo  in

morning;  <  from  light;  had  been  exposed  to  sun  till
sparks  flashed  before  eyes,  and  a  sense  of  heaviness  and
enlargement  of  head  came  over  him.

■  Sunstroke:  loss  of  consciousness,  sensation  and  motion;

countenance  expressionless ;  pulse  full,  slow  and  inter-
mittent ;  respiration  slow  and  labored ;  pupils  dilated,
with  eyes  turned  up ;  jaws  firmly  clenched ;  limbs  re-
laxed and  motionless ;  occasional  muscular  tremors.

■  Unconscious; excessive trembling and jactitation of

muscles,  more  or  less  through  entire  body;  jaws  set;
eyes  relaxed ;  pupils  dilated ;  skin  cold,  clammy,  and
covered  with  profuse  sweat ;  pulseless  at  wa-ist  and
ankles ;  only  a  faint  fluttering  at  breast ;  breathing  rapid
and  almost  imperceptible ;  did  not  respond  to  loud  calls
near  ear,  nor  to  gentle  shaking  ;  tendency  to  vomiting,
shortly  followed  by  vomiting  of  bile  and  mucus,  suc-
ceeded by  involuntary  stool,  with  escape  of  much  flatus
and  urine ;  could  not  swallow. ^Sunstroke.

I  Sunstroke:  vertigo,  violent  pain ;  pale  face,  feeble  pulse ;
labored  breathing,  nausea ;  comatose ;  or,  throbbing  in
head ;  face  yellowish-red,  or  livid ;  eyes  fixed ;  pulse
full,  slow ;  tongue  coated,  no  appetite.

'■Severe  headache,  pulsation  in  temples,  fulness  and  heavy
aching  on  vertex ;  she  had  her  hair  cut  off  to  within  two
inches  of  scalp,  because  heaviness  and  heat  of  it  almost
distracted  her;  pain  <  from  least  motion;  has  not  slept
for  three  nights ;  keeps  eyes  closed  because  light  is  dis-
agreeable, though  not  painful;  tongue  coated  heavily
on  back  part ;  moderate  thirst,  putrid  taste ;  perspiration
alternately  with  chilliness,  which  causes  her  to  cover
herself  up  very  heavily,  till  perspiration  breaks  out
again ;  oppressed  breathing  caused  by  sense  of  weight
in  chest,  and  occasional  light  cough ;  pulse  106,  small
and  empty;  hands  hot;  aversion  to  food;  on  attempting
to  rise,  such  weakness  of  limbs  she  could  not  stand.
^Affection  of  brain.

1  Threatened  meningeal  inflammation. ^Yellow  fever.
*  Outer  Head. BBad  consequences  of  cutting  hair.

■  Rigidity  of  occipito-frontalis.

■  Head  felt  too  large ;  larger  than  usual ;  enormously  large.
Constant  inclination  to  throw  head  backward.

^. Sight  and  Eyes. ■  Flashes  of  lightning,  sparks,  mist  or
black  spots  before  eyes.

■  Photophobia.

J  As  if  focus  of  r.  eye  were  suddenly  displaced  ;  sees  every-
thing half  light  and  half  dark.


GLONOINUM.  416

■  Letters  appear  smaller.

■  Objects  dance  with  every  pulsation.

■  Sensation  of  whirling,  of  confused  vision,  of  objects  danc-

ing before  eyes.

■  Black  spots  before  eyes  during  headache,  especially  when

turning  quickly.

■  Dim  sight  with  vertigo,  or  fainting.

■  Pupils  contracted. t^Sunstroke.

■  Pupils  dilated; eyes  upturned; sunstroke; eyes  rolled

outwards  and  up;  convulsions.

■  Eyes  dull,  staring,  sunken.

■  ■Red  injected  eyes  during  headache  ;  reddened  with  wild

expression.

■  Staring,  wild  look,  protrusion  of  eyes.

■  Eyes  very  painful,  bloodshot.

■  Face  flushed,  eyes  inflamed.

■  Said  her  eyes  were  falling  out.

■  Eyes  feel  as  if  some  one  were  pulling  them  from  within

outward.

■  Drawing,  pressing,  aching,  bursting  pain  in  eyes;  sore-

ness, quivering  and  twitching.
In eyeballs: stitches; twitchings; soreness; pressure;
pain  as  if  protruding.

■  Pressing  downward  towards  eyes.

■  Heat  in  eyeballs,  lids  and  around  eyes.

■  Beating  over  orbits.
Throbbing  contracting  the  eyelids.

■  Supra-orbital  neuralgia; pain  usually  commences  at  6

A.M.  and  continues  till  11  or  12.

■  Pain  under  1.  eye.

^  Hearing  and  Ears. ■Ringing  in  ears;  audible  pulse.

■  Noise  in  1.  ear,  as  if  it  came  from  heart,  every  evening

while  reading,  sometimes  prevents  falling  asleep,  but
gets  better  during  sleep.

■  Deafness,  ears  as  if  stopped  up; deafness  followed  by

blurred  vision.
I  I  Heaviness,  deafness,  and  sensation  of  being  stopped  up,
in  ears.

■  Hardness  of  hearing.

■  Paralysis  of  auditory  nerve.
Stitches  in  ears; ears  feel  as  if  closed.

■  Throbbing  piercing  from  within  outward,  in  r.  ear.

■  Throbbing:  above  ears;  from  occiput  to  ears.

■  Sensation  of  fulness  in  and  around  ears.

■  Ears  red.

^  Smell  and  Nose. ■Pains  in  root  of  nose,  headache  extends
to  nose.

■  Sudden  sneezing;  fluent  coryza.


417  GLONOINUM.

^  Upper  Face. iFace  flushed  and  very  hot,  especially  about
eyes  and  forehead,  with  headache.

■  Flushes  of  heat  to  face  and  head.

I  Heat  in  face  with  pulsations  in  head  and  palpitation.
iRedness  of  face,  especially  upper  part,  with  headache.
I  Unconscious  with  deep  red  or  purple  face.
I  Convulsions  after  deliver}^,  with  red  face.
I  Face  alternately  flushed  and  pale.

■  Paleness  of  face  with  heat  and  congestion  of  blood  to.

head  and  chest.

■  Paleness  of  face  with  congestion  to  head,  in  pregnant

women.

■  Heat  of  face,  with  pallor  and  sleepiness.

■  Pale  face :  in  sunstroke ;  after  sweating.

■  Yellowish-redness  of  face  during  sunstroke.

■  Faceache:  muscles  twitch,  even  unconsciousness;  breath-

ing stertorous; <  in  heat  of  bed.

■  Sudden  neuralgic  pains  from  decayed  tooth,  concentrating

in  temple;  head  heavy,  but  cannot  lay  it  on  pillow.

■  Periodical  attacks  of  facial  neuralgia.

■  Tic  douleureux,  1.  side  of  face.

■  Sweat  on  face.

■  Cold  sweat  on  face  during  congestion  to  head.
Itching,  especially  in  middle  of  face.

^  Lower  Face. ■  Convulsions  with  frothing  at  mouth.

■  Burning  in  various  small  places  on  lips.

■  Lower  lip  feels  swollen.

■  Numbness  in  lower  lip;  sensation  as  if  swollen.

Strange  sensation  in  chin;  it  feels  as  if  it  were  being  elon-
gated to  knees;  was  obliged  to  put  his  hand  to  his  chin
repeatedly,  to  convince  himself  that  it  was  not  the  case ;
prover  had  considerably  jarred  and  injured  his  chin  by
a  fall  twenty  3^ears  before.

Special  action  on  masseter  muscles,  region  of  mastoid
process,  and  head.

■  Gnawing  sensation  in  masseter  muscles.
Pain  and  stiffness  of  articulation  of  jaw.

■  Jaws  firmly  clenched. ^Sunstroke.

^^  Teeth  and  Gums. ■Throbbing  pain  in  all  the  teeth.

■  Pulsating  toothache  with  headache.

■  Pulsating,  throbbing  pains;  teeth  feel  elongated.

i  Toothache  from  taking  cold,  after  having  been  over-
heated; beating  of  pulse  felt  in  all  the  teeth,  or  a  draw-
ing; pain  extending  to  whole  r.  side  of  face,  having
waves  of  spontaneous  exacerbation,  without  being  influ-
enced by  anything  in  particular.

■  Toothache;  after  hitting,  in  chewing  a  hard  substance,  a

bad  tooth,  a  pain  extends  from  that  tooth  into  whole  row
VOL.  v.— 27.


GLONOINUM.  418

of  teeth,  into  whole  r.  lower  jaw  and  cheek,  and  here  es-
pecially in  nervus  infra  orbitalis,  also  into  r.  ear,
temple  and  parietal  bone ;  pain  is  continual,  with  sud-
den spasmodic  exacerbations ;  it  has  no  rhythm,  nor  is  it
influenced  by  cold  or  warm  air,  rest  or  motion ;  gum&
swollen  and  sensitive  to  touch.

■  Pain  in  decayed  teeth,  1.  side,  after  falling  asleep;  pain

felt  only  at  night,  awakens  her;  malar  bone  sore  to
touch ;  pain  under  1.  eye  and  on  side  of  neck.

mooting  pain  in  one  upper  and  one  lower  molar  tooth,  r.
side ;  both  were  carious ;  they  feel  longer,  the  gums  are
swollen ;  pain  extends  into  r.  temple,  ear  and  parietal
bone ;  nothing  seems  to  influence  the  pain. ^Toothache.

1  Sudden  pain  from  decayed  inferior  molar,  concentrates  in
temple.

1  Severe  pain  from  decayed  tooth,  lasting  several  hours.

■  Stabbing  pain  in  gums,  r.  side  passing  to  L,  without  ceas-

ing in  r. ;  <  from  hot,  >  from  cold  applications.

■  Teeth  decay :  after  mercury ;  catamenia  scanty ;  following-

exposure  to  sun.
^^  Taste  and  Tongue. Taste :  bitter,  with  nausea  ;  aromatic ;

sweet ;  warm  ;  leaves  fatty  taste.
I  Tongue  milk-white,  without  coating;  violent  headache;

wants  head  pressed  or  bound ;  cannot  eat ;  very  weak

and  miserable.
I  I  Tongue  coated heavily  on back part; putrid taste.

^Brain  affection.
I  I  Tongue  feels  swelled  and  raw,  with  spasmodic  twitchings.

■  Tongue  numb,  as  if  burnt;  prickling,  stinging.

■  Difficulty in conversing, from diminished power of

tongue  and  confusion  of  ideas.
^^  Inner  Mouth. ■  Saliva  increased,  slimy.

■  Froth  about  mouth; convulsions.

■  Sensation  of  soreness  and  swelling  on  roof  of  mouth,  with

pulsation.
13  Throat. Soft  palate:  dry  ;  feels  as  if  drawn  up.

■  Itching  of  soft  palate  and  throat.

■  Swollen  sensation  in  fauces.

■  Throat  feels  as  if  swelling ;  full  sensation  in  both  sides  of

neck.

■  Constriction  at  top  of  larynx;  in  throat,  as  if  throttled.

■  Tickling,  heat  and  soreness  in  throat.

^*  Appetite,  Thirst. Desires,  Aversions. « Coated  tongue,
no  appetite. /^Sunstroke.

■  Wants  cold  water;  also  from  dry,  parched  feeling.
I  I  Increased  desire  to  smoke.

"Eating  and  Drinking. ■Wine  aggravates  all  symptoms.

■  Alcoholic  stimulants  cause  deliriu,m,  congestion,  stupor,

etc.


419  GLONOINUM.

*"  Hiccough,  Belching,  Nausea  and  Vomiting,  i Nausea:
with  congestion;  and  retelling,  during  sunstroke;  with
faint  feeling ;  causing  sweat,  which  relieves.

I  I  Nausea  with,  and  caused  by,  headache,  with  colic;  con-
gestion of  blood  to  head  and  chest,  and  pale  face.

I  Faint,  warm,  sickening  sensation  in  chest  and  stomach,

'  resembling  threatening  of  sea-sickness;  also  slight  gid-
diness, especially  on  moving  about.

I  Vomiting: spasmodic,  in  hydrocephalus;  in  sunstroke.

B  Sea-sickness.
^^  Scrobiculum  and  Stomach. » Gnawing  in  epigastrium.

■  Attack  begins  suddenly  with  violent  pain  in  epigastrium.
0 Sensation  of  emptiness  in  pit  of  stomach.

I  Faint  feeling  at  pit  of  stomach ;  also  with  throbbing  there.
I  I  Sensitiveness  of  pit  of  stomach,  esi^ecially  on  stooping.

■  Pain  in  pit  of  stomach,  as  if  sore,  when  touched ;  <  when

stooping.

■  Respiration  labored ;  pit  of  stomach  the  seat  of  distress.

^Sunstroke.
I  Dull,  heavy  pain  in  stomach,

■  Stomach  and  head  feel  as  if  he  had  been  out  in  hot  sun.
'^^  Hypochondria. Pain  in  1.  hypochondrium,  half-way  be-
tween pit  of  stomach  and  side.

'"  Abdomen.  ■  Rumbling  in  bowels,  belching,  passing  offen-
sive flatus.

■  Cutting,  mostly  below  navel  (wakens  one  in  morning).

■  Venous  congestion  to  abdomen.

"^^  Stool  and  Rectum. (Stools: loose,  scanty,  with  much
rumbling; copious,  loose,  dark,  lumpy,  with  colic,  heat
in  anus,  nausea  and  sudden  urging.
I  i  Diarrhoeic  stools  with  rumbling  and  discharges  of  flatus,
beginning  in  morning  and  lasting  all  day.

■  Diarrhoea,  with  sudden  cessation  of  menses.
Frequent  passage of  flatus  during stools,  with  a  loud,

sharp  noise.

■  Inclined  to  be  costive.

After  10  in  evening,  an  unaccustomed  time,  a  hard  and
unusual  stool,  pinching  in  abdomen  before  and  after  it,
till  going  to  sleep.

^^  Urinary  Organs.  ■  Urine :  abundant,  highly  albuminous ;
must  rise  often  at  night  to  pass  it ;  high-colored,  burn-
ing while  passing ;  with  red  sediment  and  muddy,  red-
dish-yellow slime.

^  Female  Sexual  Organs. During  menstruation :  congestion
of  blood  to  head  and  chest ;  headache ;  fainting.
I  I  Menstrual  period  three  days  every  six  weeks,  accompa-
nied by  lumbar  pain ;  pupils  dilated ;  <  at  night ;  some
relief  from  hot  fomentations.


GLONOINUM.  420

iCatamenia  had  not  appeared  for  six  weeks  ;  throbbing
pains  through  temples  and  pressure  and  heaviness  on
head  ;  feels  sick  ;  constipation  ;  restless  at  night.

Illntense  congestion  of  brain  induced  in  plethoric  consti-
tutions by  sudden  suppression  of  menses,  or  appearing
in  place  of  the  menses.

■  Disturbances  in  intercranial  circulation  at  time  of  meno-

pause.

Instead  of  menses :  headache ;  congestion  to  head ;  pale
face:  <  in  warm  room,  >  when  walking  in  cold  air;
diarrhoea;  fainting.

■Before,  during,  or  at  end  of  menstruation,  or  when  it  does
not  appear  at  all,  fulness  in  head,  with  or  without  red-
ness of  face  and  eyes,  especially  with  throbbing,  some-
times with  excessive  tearing,  throbbing  pains.

llHeadaches  occurring  after  profuse  uterine  hemorrhage.

■  Flushings  to  head  during  climacteric  period.

■  During  climacteric:  flushes  of  heat  daily  in  frequent  at-

tacks, with  pressure  in  head,  nausea,  loss  of  senses  ;  can-
not go  alone  in  street;  vertigo;  swelling  and  numbness
in  feet.
■Since  first  menstruation,  congestion  to  head,  with  loss  of
consciousness ;  face  became  deep  red  or  purple  color ;
hands  clenched,  thumbs  thrown  into  the  palms;  froth
before  mouth;  attacks  became  more  frequent  and  severe,
so  that  instead  of  appearing  only  at  times  of  menstrua-
tion, they  had  for  several  years  occurred  three  or  four
times  in  twenty-four  hours;  menstruation  scanty,  con-
stant fear  of  attack ;  <  froin  mental  or  physical  effort ;
after  attack,  palpitation  violent,  subsiding  after  an  hour ;
constant  sensation  of  tremulousness  in  cardiac  region;
pulse  quick,  small,  irregular;  heart's  impulse  increased,
action  rapid,  irregular  and  tumultiious,  blending  of  first
and  second  sounds,  so  that  they  were  indistinguishable;
numbness  in  1.  extremities.
^  Pregnancy.  Parturition.  Lactation.  ■  During  pregnancy:
headache ;  congestion  of  blood  to  head  and  chest.

■  iRush  of  blood  to  head  in  pregnant  women,  especially

with  paleness  of  face,  loss  of  consciousness,  falling  down
insensible,  sometimes  with  cold  sweat,  especially  in  face.

■  Face bright red, unconsciousness, extraordinary full,

quick  pulse ;  strikes  about  her  with  hands  and  feet,  can
scarcely  be  kept  in  bed,  throws  herself  wildly  about,
foams  at  mouth,  eyeballs  roll  convulsively  about,  or  stare
straight  in  front,  or  are  drawn  upwards,  convulsions  last
four  or  five  minutes,  during  intervals  turns  about  rest-
lessly in  bed ;  violent  throbbing  of  heart  and  carotids.
^Convulsions  after  labor.


421  GLONOINUM

I  Eclampsia:  unconscious;  face  bright  red ;  puffed;  pulse
full,  hard  ;  urine  copious  and  albuminous.

^^  Voice  and  Larynx.  Trachea  and  Bronchia,  i  Acute
irritation  of  cerebral  nerves,  vertigo ;  slight  bronchial
irritation  with  frequent  expectoration  of  thick  mucus.
^Laryngo-trachitis.

^^Respiration. l Breathing:  heavy,  labored,  stertorous;  op-
pressed from  feeling  of  weight ;  accelerated ;  must  often
breathe  deeply;  sighing.
Sensation  of  constriction  and  oppression  of  chest,  with  per-
ceptible palpitation,  compelling  to  draw  deep  breath.

■  Oppressed  breathing,  caused  by  sense  of  weight  in  chest;

occasional  light  cough. ^Affection  of  brain.
^^  Inner  Chest  and  Lungs, i  Constriction  of  chest ;  chest  feels

as  if  laced.
I  I  Pain  in  chest  like  tension,  and  frequent  inclination  to

deep  respiration.
I  I  Oppression  of  chest  alternating  with  headache.

■  Congestion  alternating  between  chest  and  head.
■Sinking  feeling  in  head  and  chest,  as  from  working  in

hot  room.
I  I  Sensation  of  flying  heat,  rising  from  chest  to  face  and
head.

■  Sharp,  cutting  pains  across  shoulder-blades  to  anterior

part  of  chest.

■  Numb  sensation  moving  upwards  in  chest  and  down  1.

arm.
^^  Heart,  Pulse  and  Circulation. ■Sharp  pains  in  the  heart.

■  Fulness  in  the  heart.

■  Violent  action  of  heart,  distinct  pulsation  over  whole  body.

■  ■Violent  palpitation  of  heart,  with  throbbing  carotids,

pulsating  headache  in  forehead  and  between  temples.

■  Violent  palpitation  of  heart;  frequency  of  pulse ;  stitches

in  1.  hypochondrium ;  feeling  as  if  she  would  die;  numb-
ness in  whole  1.  arm.

I  Violent  palpitation ;  constant  tremulous  sensation  in  car-

diac region; heart's impulse  increased; pulse quick,
small.

■  Palpitation  of  heart  with  heat  in  face,  accelerated  pulse

and  pulsation  of  carotid  arteries.

After  several  minutes,  violent  and  rapid  palpitation ;  felt
also  in  head  like  a  hammer,  especially  when  stooping,  so
that  stooping  seemed  impossible  to  him ;  several  times
when  stooping,  stitching  pain  in  region  of  heart,  so  vio-
lent that  he  feared  to  bend  forward  again.

iHeart's  action  easily  excited ;  violent  palpitation,  throb-
bing carotids,  pulsating  headache; <  stooping.

II  Laborious  action  of  heart;  oppression;  frequent  pulse.


GLONOINUM.  422:.

B  Pressure  in  heart,  as  if  it  was  being  contracted.

I  I  Sensation  of  fulness  about  heart,  almost  increased  to-

pain;  it  seems  as  if  it  would  rise  to  throat;  pulse  de-
creased.

■  In  heart  sensation  of  fulness,  heaviness  and  heat,  with

labored  beating  of  heart.

I I  Blood  seems  to  rush  to  heart  and  mount  rapidly  into-
head.

I  Alternate  congestion  to  heart  and  to  head.
I  I  Sharp  pains  in  heart.

■  Severe  stitches  from  heart  extending  into  back,  between

shoulders.
I  Anxiety  in  prsecordia;  weakness.

■  Purring  noise  in  region  of  heart  when  lying ;  pulse  inter-

mittent; must  have  head  high; <  when  lying  on L
side  ; >  on  right.

■  Blending  of  first  and  second  sounds  so  that  they  were  in-

distinguishable.

■  Accelerated  pulse;  beats  increased.

■  Pulse  accelerated  while  the  headache  lasts.

■  Pulse  full,  slow  and  intermittent. /^Sunstroke.
Pulse  accelerated  to  100  by  walking;  soon  fell  to  38.

■  Pulse  mostly  accelerated,  often  changing  suddenly  to  slow

and  back  again.
Pulse: irregular, intermitting; quick,  small, irregular,,
with  violent  action  of  heart ;  small  and  rapid ;  weak  and
slow;  low  and  feeble,  in  sunstroke.

■  Arteries  in  head  become  distinct.

■  Throbbing  of  carotid  arteries,  both  seen  and  felt.

■  Temporal  and  carotid  arteries  beating  violently.

■  Plethoric  female  had,  since  she  began  to  menstruate,  at-

tacks of  blood  to  head  alternately  with  rush  of  blood  to-
heart,  with  pale  or  red  face,  five  or  six  times  in  day;  at
same  time  she  lost  her  consciousness  and  lell  down ;  al-
ternate palpitation  and  cerebral  congestion,  with  loss  of
consciousness,  convulsions  and  foam  before  mouth.
As  an  intercurrent  remedy  in  angina  pectoris,  to  prevent
the  organism  from  getting  accustomed  to  the  influence
of  Aur.  viur.

^  Outer  Chest. ■  Sweat  on  the  chest.

'^  Neck  and  Back. ■The  neck  feels  weak  and  tired,  cannot
support  the  head.

■  When  lying  down,  sensation  as  if  neck  were  grasped.

■  Constriction  around  lower  part  of  neck.

Sensation  of  stiffness  or  tension  about  head  and  neck  as  if
they  had  been  laced  in  ;  clothing  seems  loo  tight,  was
obliged  to  ease  his  coat  and  necktie.

On  neck  sensation  of  fulness,  tension,  pulsation.


423  GLONOINUM.

I  Nape  of  neck  stiff,  with  headache.

When  throwing  back  his  head,  he  felt  a  pain  like  cramp

in  back  of  his  neck,  to  the  left,  in  region  of  sixth  and

seventh  cervical  vertebrEC.
I  Sensitiveness  and  pain  in  occiput,  upper  back  and  upper

chest,  coming  on  a  few  months  after  violent  jarring  from

being  thrown  from  a  carriage.

■  Severe  neuralgic  pain  in  lower  part  of  cervical  region  of

spine  and  r.  arm.

■  Sharp  cutting  across  scapulae.

■  Hot  sensation  down  back  ;  burning  between  scapulae.  _

■  Pain  down  entire  spine,  after  constriction  in  chest ;  shiv-

erings  downward.

■  Old  contusions  and  jars.

^^  Upper  Limbs.  "Arms:  nervous,  uneasy  ;  heavy,  as  if  cir-
culation was  checked ;  numbness,  heaviness  following
throbbing;  restlessness,  weakness,  want  of  circulation.

■  Numbness  and  sensation  of  weariness  of  1.  arm,  so  that

it  requires  great  effort  to  raise  the  arm  ;  stiffness  of
middle  joints  of  fingers.

■  Pain  from  shoulder  to  back  of  r.  hand.

■  Weakness  of  wrists  after  headache.

■  Quivering  in  hands  and  wrists  during  headache.

■  Hands  clenched,  thumbs  thrown  into  palms. ^Convul-

sions.

■  Beating  of  pulse  is  perceptible  in  all  fingers.

■  Trembling  of  fingers.

■  Rheumatic  pains  in  fingers  of  1.  hand.

^  Lower  Limbs. ■  sOn  attempting  to  rise,  such  weakness  of
limbs  could  not  stand. ^Affection  of  brain.
Restlessness  in  limbs  causes  him  to  rise.

■  Jerking  of  limbs  with  loss  of  consciousness.

■  Limbs  relaxed  and  motionless. ^Sunstroke,
a  Thighs  weak  during  headache.

I  1  Weakness  and  numbness  of  thigh.

■  Unsteady  gait.

I  I  Weakness  of  legs,  knees  and  ankles  give  way.

■  The  knees  give  (when  getting  up  from  bed)  on  account

of  headache ;  weakness  of  knee-joints  afterwards  for  an
hour.

■  Knocking  of  knees  and  thighs  together  during  headache.

■  Acute  pain  in  1.  knee  on  moving,  seemed  to  be  deep  in

joint,  without  much  heat  or  swelling ;  sudden  twinges
or  pricks,- while  at  rest,  is  obliged  to  rise  and  straighten
limb. ^ Acute  rheumatism.

■  Cold  feet,  with  nausea,  palpitation.

^^  Limbs  in  General. Great  weakness  in  middle  portion  of
thiehs  and  arms.


GLONOINUM.  424

Sensation  of  weakness  and  trembling  in  limbs.
Extremities  feel  bloated.
Sharp  pricking  pain  in  arms  and  legs.
8  Numbness  in  left  extremities.
^  Rest. Position. Motion. While  at  rest  pain  in  knee  <,

must  rise  and  straighten  limb.
When  lying  down  sensation  as  if  neck  were  grasped.
Lying  still :  >  headache.
Lying:  on  back  or  side  causes  "pillow  to  beat;"  purring

noise  in  region  of  heart.
Lying  on  1.  side:  purring  in  region  of  heart.
After  lying  down:  headache  <.
Must  have  his  head  elevated.
Cannot  lay  head  on  pillow,  head  is  so  heavy.
Sitting  still :  >  headache.
Sitting  up:  vertigo  <.
Bending  head  backwards:  <  headache.
Bends  head  forward:  from  heaviness.
Stooping:  vertigo; <  headache;  pit  of  stomach  sensitive;

stitching  pain  in  region  of  heart;  palpitation  <.
Motion:  of  head,  giddiness; <  headache.
Using  eyes: <  headache.
Restlessness  in  limbs  causes  him  to  rise.
Shaking  head: <  pains  in  forehead;  <  sore  and  bruised

feeling  in  brain.
Turning  quickly  during  headache:  black  spots  before  eyes.
Ascending  steps:  headache  <.
Walking:  <  headache;  every  step  felt  in  neck ;  in  cold  air

>  headache;  accelerates  pulse  to  100.
Knocks  head  against  wall  with  headache.
Attempts  to  spring  from  window.
Runs  about  room:  with  headache.
Romping:  causes  headache.
^  Nerves, l  Feeling  as  after  inhaling  ether.
i Restlessness  in  limbs,  must  rise  and  walk.

■  Feeling  as  after  fright,  not  mental,  but  bodily.
■Sensation  as  of  throbbing  throughout  body,  with  heat

and  sweat.

Painless  pulsation  all  over  body  ;  circulation  easily  quick-
ened.

Feeling  of  fulness  throughout  body.

Pulsations,  tingling,  thrills,  and  a  peculiar  sensation  of
warmth  through  body,  extending  from  above  downward.

AVeakness  as  from  loss  of  sleep.

■  Feeling  of  prostration. ^Sunstroke.

■  Unconscious  falling  down,  or  fainting  with  consciousness.
IJerkings  through  body.

■  Convulsions:  epileptiform,  cerebral  congestion,  scanty  or


425  GLONOINUM.

suppressed  menses ;  hands  clenched,  thumbs  in  palms,
face  red,  eyes  rolled  upward,  then  sopor ;  left-sided,  with
fingers  spread;  face  alternately  red  and  pale;  each  at-
tack occurs  regularly  every  three  hours,  begins  suddenly
with  violent  pain  in  epigastrium,  upward  in  chest  and
down  1.  arm,  with  uterine  derangement.  ^Convul-
sions.
■Strong,  healthy-looking  child  subject  to  convulsions  at
intervals  of  a  few  months ;  attacks  preceded  by  drow-
siness, soon  after  which  child  fell  into  a  convulsive  state,
with  clenching  and  jerking  upward  of  fists  and  legs ;
face  red;  eyes  rolled  outward  and  upward;  then  fol-
lowed a  soporific  condition,  lasting  several  hours,  fol-
lowed by  another  convulsion.

■  Great  congestion  of  head  and heart;  during  spasms  he

spreads  his  fingers  and  toes  asunder.
I  Convulsions,  especially  1.  fingers  spread  ajDart.

■  Convulsions  after  mental  or  physical  effort.

■  Epileptic  attacks  with  aura  epileptica.

■  Epileptiform  attack  in  young  lady  set.  20;  congestion  to

head,  loss  of  consciousness,  jerking  of  limbs ;  no  foam
at  mouth;  dysmenorrhoea  with  scanty  menstruation.

■  ■Epileptic  convulsions  with  congestion  to  head  and  heart.

■  Unable  to  speak,  although  usually  a  very  noisy  child  ;

mouth  drawn  to  1.  side;  cannot  i^rotrude  tongue  in  a
straight  line.

■  Loss  of  power  to articulate,  also  has  no memory  for

words. ^Aphasia.

■  Effects of  alcoholic  stimulants, intoxication,  delirium

tremens,  congestions,  sleepiness  and  subsequent  depres-
sion.

■  Spasmodic  and  neuralgic  affections.

'^^  Sleep. ■  Drowsy,  yawning;  inclination  to  deep  inspiration  ;
face  hot  and  pale.

■  Yawning  with  headache,  congestion  of  blood  to  head.
Sleepiness  early  in  evening.

■Restless  sleep;  awakes  with  fear  of  apoplexy.
B  Sleepless.

■  Dreams:  confused;  of  homesickness,  with  tears;  of  comi-

cal heads.

Difficult  to  awaken.
■^  Time. Worse  morning  and  forenoon:  headache,  languor,
colic.

Worse  afternoon  and  evening:  headache  ;  diarrhoea.

Morning:  on  rising,  vertigo;  throbbing  in  head  <;  con-
gestion to  head;  vertigo;  cutting  pains  below  navel
wakes  one ;  diarrhoeic  stools.

During  day:  cataleptic  state  of  occipito-frontalis  muscle.


GLONOINUM.  426

From  6  a.m.  until  11  or  12:  supra-orbital  neuralgia.

After  10  in  evening:  a  hard,  unusual  stool.

Night:  pain  in  decayed  teeth;  must  rise  to  pass  urine,

lumbar  pains  < ;  restless.
^^Temperature  and  Weather, ii Children  get  sick  in  the

night  after  sitting  opposite  an  open  coal  fire,  or  falling

asleep  there.

I  Bad  effects  from  having  the  hair  cut.

I I  Bad  effects  from  being  exposed  inordinately  to  the  sun's
rays.

Open  air:  vertigo  <  ;  headache  with  unconsciousness  >.

Damp,  rainy  days:  headache.

Wet,  dull  weather:  attacks  of  headache.

Gas-light:  causes  headache.

Warm  weather:  brings  back  headache.

Warm  room:  headache  <.

Heat  of  bed:  faceache  <.

Taking  cold  from  overheating:  causes  headache.

Overheating:  causes  headache.

Hot  applications: <  pain  in  gums.

Heat :  head  will  not  bear  it.

Cannot  walk  in  sun  nor  bear  heat  from  stove.

Eays  of  sun  cannot  be  borne  on  head.

■  Bad  results  from  sunstroke.

Cold  applications  :  >  pains  in  gums.

Cold  air :  >  headache.

Cold  water:  <  headache; causes  spasms;  >  congestive

headache.
Excessive  cold  and  heat:  cause  hypersemia  of  brain.
^^  Fever, l  Chill:  after  getting  heated  ;  alternates  with  sweat;

with  vomiting ;  head  as  if  screwed  up ;  in  intermittent

fever.

I  Chill  after  getting heated; drawing  pain  and  heat  in

head,  vertigo,  buzzing  in  ears,  flushed  face.

■  Perspiration  alternately  with  chilliness,  which  causesher

to  cover  herself  up  very  heavily,  till  perspiration  breaks
out  again. ^Affection  of  brain.

I I  Flushes  of  heat;  waves  of  heat  upward.

iHeat,  especially  in  face,  ascending  from  pit  of  stomach  to

head.
I  As  if  warm  water  were  running  upward  from  nape  of

neck.

■  Sensation  of  warmth  throughout  body.

■  Fever  heat,  and  small,  quick  pulse. ^Sunstroke.

■  Feeling  as  if  perspiration  would  break  out  all  over.
I  I  Sweat  especially  on  forehead.

■  Cold  sweat,  especially  on  face,  during  congestion  to  head.
1  I  Perspiration  principally  on  face,  after  sleeping.


427  GLONOINUM.

I  I  Very  profuse  perspiration,  especially  on  face  and  chest.
I  I  Perspiration  in  the  hands.
Perspiration  relieves  nausea.

■  Sweat  alternates  with  chill.

■  Typhoid fever; very violent headache; wants head

squeezed  ;  tongue  is  not  furred,  but  as  white  as  milk  ;
can't  eat,  feels  weak  and  miserable.
*^  Attacks,  Periodicity.  Frequent:  congestion  to  head;
constriction  around  neck  after  ajar;  flow  of  pale  urine;
passages  of  flatus  during  stools;  attacks  of  flushes  of
heat.

Gradually:  headache  growing  more  severe  after  working
in  sun.

Periodical  attacks :  of  facial  neuralgia.

AVaves  of  spontaneous  exacerbation :  toothache.

Four  or  five  minutes:  convulsions.

From  five  to  ten  minutes:  intense  pain  in  head.

For  an  hour: arteries  in  head  became  distinct.

Lasting  several  hours:  pain  from  decayed  tooth.

Five  or  six  times  a  day:  congestion  to  head  accompanied
by  unconsciousness  and  convulsions.

Every  3  hours: convulsions.

Lasting  24  hours: congestive  headache.

Daily  for  several  months:  sharp  pain  in  1.  temple.

All  day:  attacks  of  headache;  congestion  to  head;  diar-
rhceic  stools.

Every  evening: while  reading  noise  in  1.  ear.

Every  12  or  15  days:  attacks  of  headache.

For  3  nights: has  not  slept  from  headache.

Three  days  every  six  weeks:  menstrual  period.

All  summer: headache  < every  day  with  the  sun.

Every  day  during  climacteric  period:  flushes  of  heat.
*^  Locality and Direction. Right:  stitches  in  temple  and
forehead; focus  of  eyes  displaced;  piercing,  throbbing  in
ear;  toothache,  lower  jaw  and  cheek;  neuralgic  pain  in
arm;  pain  from  shoulder  to  back  of  hand.

Left:  headache  witli  vomiting;  sharp  pain  in  temples;
pain  under  eye;  noise  in  ear;  tic  douleureux  of  side
of  face;  pain  in  decayed  teeth;  pain  under  eye  and  on
side  of  neck;  pain  in  hypogastrium;  numbness  in
extremities;  numbness  down  arm;  stitches  in  hypochon-
drium;  weariness  and  numbness  of  arm;  rheumatic
pains  through  fingers;  pain  in  knee;  convulsions  on
side;  fingers  spread  apart  in  convulsions;  mouth  drawn
to  side  in  convulsions

From  right  to  left:  stabbing  pains  in  gums.

From  within  outward:  piercing  pain  in  forehead;  pain  in
temples;  ej^es  feel  as  if  pulled;  throbbing  piercing  in  i\
ear.


OLONOINUM.  428

From  back  to  front :  beating  in  head.

From  above downward: sensation  of  warmth tlirough
body.

From  1.  breast  into  head :  throbbing  moving  in  waves.

Rising  and  falling :  like  weaves,  headache ;  fulness  in  brain.

Alternating  to  head  and  heart:  congestion.
^Sensations. Chin  feels  as  if  too  long; chest feels as  if
screwed  together; as  if  brain was expanding, were
moving  in  waves;  as  if  all  the  blood  had  mounted  to
head ;  as  if  he  were  hanging  with  head  downwards ;  as
if  there  was  a  great  rush  of  blood  to  head ;  head  feels
large;  as  if  head  were  pressed  together;  as  if  cold  sweat
were  on  forehead;  arteries  felt  like  whip-cords; as  if
whole  head  were  crowded  with  blood ;  as  if  something
were  pumped  into  vertex;  brain  feels  as  if  too  heavy
and  too  large  for  skull ;  as  if  brain  were  attempting  to
burst  skull;  as  if  something  were  moving  in  waves  to
head;  as  if  inside  of  head  were  sore;  as  if  head  would
drop  to  pieces;  as  if  focus  of  r.  eye  were  suddenly  dis-
placed; as  if  he  must  die;  red  capillaries  in  eye  as  if  in-
jected; as  if  everything  were  crowded  out  at  forehead;
pressure  in  occiput,  seems  as  if  he  would  lose  his  reason;
as  if  head  w^ould  burst;  as  if  warm  water  were  running
upwards  from  nape  of  neck ;  as  if  neck  were  gripped  by
a  hand;  as  if  some  one  were  pulling  eyes  from  within
outward ;  noise  in  1.  ear  as  if  it  came  from  the  heart;  ears  as
if  stopped  up;  low^er  lip  as  if  swollen;  teeth  feel  as  if  elon-
gated; teeth  feel  as  if  loose;  tongue  feels  swollen ;  tongue
as  if  burnt;  palate  feels  as  if  drawn  up;  fauces  as  if
swollen;  throat feels as if  swelling; in throat as if
throttled;  pit  of  stomach  as  if  sore;  stomach  and  head
feel  as  if  he  had  been  put  out  in  hot  sun;  chest  feels  as
if  laced ;  palpitation  in  head  like  a  hammer; as  if  heart
w^as  being  contracted;  as  if  heart  would  rise  to  throat;
as  if  neck  were  grasped;  as  if  head  and  neck  were  laced
in;  arms  as  if  circulation  was  checked;  as  after  inhaling
ether;  as  after  fright; weakness  as  from  loss  of  sleep;
as  if  screwed  up  during  chill;  as  if  warm  water  were
running;  as  if  perspiration  would  break  out.
Pain:  beginning  at  root  of  nose;  in  vertex  and  sides  of
head;  in  forehead; starts  from  decayed  inferior  molar
tooth,  concentrates  in  temples; in  vertex  and  crown;
deep  in  brain;  in  occiput;  the  whole  length  of  spine;
in  ears;  in  eyes;  under  1.  eye;  in  jaw;  from  teeth  to  r.
side  of  face;  in  decayed  tooth;  under  1.  eye;  on  side  of
neck;  in  pit  of  stomach;  in  1.  liypochondrium;  in  lum-
bar region; in  chest;  in  occiput; upper  back;  upper
chest;  down  spine  from  shoulder  to  back  of  r.  hand.


429  GLONOINUM.

Intense  pain  :  in  cervical  and  occipital  regions;  in  eyes.

Frightful  headache.

Raving  headache.

Raging  pain:  in  whole  head;  in  saggital  suture.

Violent  pain:  in  epigastrium;  in  chest;  in  1.  arm  before
convulsion.

Violent  shoots:  into  head.

Violent:  headache;  pain  in  epigastrium.

Severe  pain:  in  forehead;  in  tooth.

Tearing  pain:  through  head.

Sharp  cutting:  across  scapulae.

Piercing  pain:  in  forehead;  in  1.  temple;  in  r.  ear.

Racking:  in  head.

Cutting  pains:  into  occiput;  across  shoulder-blades  to  an-
terior part  of  chest;  below  navel.

Acute  pain:  in  1.  knee-joint.

Stabbing  pain:  in  gums.

Sharp  pain:  in  1.  temple;  into  occiput;  across  shoulder-
blades  to  anterior  part  of  chest;  in  the  heart.

Stitching  pain  in  region  of  heart.

Stitches:  in  temples;  r.  side  of  forehead;  in  eyeballs;  in
ears;  in  1.  hypochondrium;  from  heart  to  back.

Bursting:  in  head;  above  ears;  in  temples;  in  eyes.

Cracking  sensation  in  brain.

Burning  pain:  in  middle  of  head,  in  cerebrum.

Rooting  pain:  in  one  upper  and  one  lower  molar  tooth.

Pinching:  in  abdomen.

Pressing  pain:  in  temples;  in  eyes.

Shoots:  in  head.

Neuralgia:  in  head;  in  eyes;  in  face;  in  lower  cervical
region;  in  spine;  in  r.  arm.

Crampy  pain:  in  back  of  neck.

Drawing  pain:  in  eyes;  in  teeth;  in  head.

Tensive  pain:  over  eyes  and  nose;  behind  ears.

Shocks:  in  brain  synchronous  with  pulsation  of  arteries.

Violent  beating:  in  head.

Beating:  in  head;  in  temporal  and  carotid  arteries;  across
orbits.

Throbbing:  in  head;  in  temples;  in  front  of  head;  over
eyes;  in  temporal  arteries;  under  frontal  bone;  in  1.
breast,  then  in  head;  back  of  neck;  contracting  eyelids;
in  ears;  in  all  the  teeth;  heart  and  carotids;  in  arms;
throughout  body.

Pulsating:  in  head;  in  carotids;  from  forehead  to  vertex;
in  teeth;  over  whole  body.

Painless  pulsation :  all  over  body.

Gnawing  sensation:  in  masseter  muscles;  in  epigastrium.

Aching:  in  vertex;  in  eyes;  in  teeth;  in  ear;  in  temple;
in  parietal  bone.


GLONOINUM.  430

Twinges:  in  1.  knee.

Tingling:  througliout  body.

Stinging:  of  tongue.

Prickling :  of  tongue.

Pricking:  in  1.  knee;  in  arms;  in  legs.

Violent  palpitation  of  heart.

Thrills:  throughout  body.

Jerkings:  through  body.

Bruised  feeling:  in  brain.

Rheumatic  pains:  in  fingers  of  1.  hand.

Anxiety:  in  prtecordia.

Burning :  on  lips ;  between  scapulae.

Sore  feeling:  in  brain;  in  eyeballs;  in  roof  of  mouth;  in
throat.

Choking  sensation  :  about  throat.

Dull:  headache;  in  forehead;  pain  in  stomach.

Undulating  sensation:  in  head.

Pressure:  in  temples;  extends  to  back  of  neck;  in  eye-
balls; in  heart.

Heaviness:  of  head;  in  ears;  in  heart;  inarms.

Oppression:  of  chest.

Tickling:  in  throat.

Fluttering:  in  head.

Flickering:  before  eyes.

Pinging:  in  ears.

Buzzing:  in  ears.

Confusion:  of  all  senses.

Balancing  sensation :  in  head.

Waves  of  heat :  going  upward.

Peculiar  warmth:  through  body.

Heat:  in  head;  in  eyeballs;  in  lids;  around  eyes;  in
throat;  in  anus;  in  heart;  in  face;  from  pit  of  stomach
upward.

Hot  sensation :  down  back.

Warmth:  throughout  body.

Constriction:  in  vessels  of  head;  around  neck.

Congestion :  in  head ;  to  occiput.

Tension:  of  head  and  neck.

Fulness:  in  head:  in  vertex;  in  ears;  around  ears;  in  the
heart;  in  neck;  throughout  body.

Swollen:  throat  feels.

Bloated  feeling:  in  extremities.

Expansive  pressure :  in  head.

Uneasy  feeling:  in  arms.

Sensitiveness  of  upper  part  of  back  and  neck.

Pestlessness:  in  arms;  in  limbs.

Twitching:  of  eyes;  in  eyeballs.

■Quivering:  of  eyes;  in  hands;  in  wrists.


431  GLONOINUM.

Trembling:  of  fingers;  in  limbs.

Crushing  weight:  across  forehead.

Weight:  at  vertex.

Stiffness:  of  articulation  of  jaw;  of  neck  and  head;  of
middle  joints  of  fingers.

Numbness:  in  lower  lip;  of  tongue;  in  extremities;  in
chest;  in  1.  arm;  in  arms;  of  thigh;  in  1.  extremities.

Rigidity :  of  occipito-frontalis.

Faint  feeling:  in  stomach;  in  chest. .,

Sinking  feeling:  in  head  and  chest.

Tired  feeling:  in  neck.

Emptiness :  at  pit  of  stomach.

Weariness:  of  harm.

Weakness:  in  neck;  in  arms;  of  wrists;  of  thighs;  of
legs;  of  knee-joints;  in  middle  portions  of  thighs  and
arms;  in  limbs.

Itching:  in  middle  of  face;  of  soft  palate  and  throat.

Shivering:  down  spine.
**  Tissues. lCongestio]is;  blood  tends  upward; vessels  pul-
sate; veins  (jugular,  temporal)  enlarged.

iSeeming  plethora,  rapid  deviations  in  distribution  of
blood ;  useful  as  a  substitute  for  Ijleeding.

I  Bad  eifectsfrom  mental  excitement,  fright,"^fear,  mechani-
cal contusions  and  their  later  consequences,  from  having
hair  cut  and  exposure  to  rays  of  sun.
^^  Touch. Passive Motion. Injuries, b Sea-sickness,  or
bad  effects  of  too  much  riding  or  driving.

Pressure:  >  headache;  cannot  bear  weight  of  hair ;  cloth-
ing seems  too  tight.

Touch  :  pit  of  stomach  sensitive ;  malar  bone  sore.

Reading :  causes  headache.

Old  contusions  and  jars.

From  hurting  a  bad  tooth  in  chewing,  toothache.

After  jarring  chin  by  a  fall  twenty  years  before,  chin  feels
elongated.

Shaking  or  jarring :  causes  headache.

After  being  thrown  from  carriage :  sensitiveness  of  cervi-
cal region;  cutting  pains  into  occiput  through  chest;
constrictions  around  neck.

After  violent  fall  on  head  :  vertigo.
*^  Stages  of  Life,  Constitution, i  Florid,  plethoric,  sensitive
women.

I  Nervous,  sanguine,  readily  affected  persons.

Girl,  get.  2,  had  convulsions,  which  yielded  to  Bellad. ;
paralytic  symptoms.

S.  A.  C,  girl,  set.  8,  bilious  nervous  temperament,  high-
tempered;  occasional  attacks  of  epistaxis;  headache.

L.  S.,  boy,  set.  12,  bilious  nervous  temjoerament,  slightly
lymphatic;  headache.


GLONOINUM.  432

Woman,  set.  17,  healthy,  but  weak  and  thin;  convulsions

after  labor.
Girl,  set.  19 ;  palpitation  of  heart.
Girl,  set.  20,  decayed  teeth  ;  toothache.
Man,  set.  24,  epileptic  eight  years;  mania.
Lady,  ^et.  25 ;  congestion  to  head  and  convulsions  during

menstrual  period.
Girl,  set.  26 ;  suppression  of  menses.
Miss,  set.  28,  subject  to  nervous  headaches ;  headache  from

fright.
Lady,  set.  28,  extremely  nervous  temperament;  affection  of

brain.
Woman,  set.  28,  weak  from  undue  lactation  and  neglect  of

air  and  exercise;  supra-orbital  neuralgia.
Patient,  set.  30,  has  suffered  since  childhood  ;  violent  head-
aches.
Man,  set.  30,  after having retired  in ordinary  health ;

aphasia.
B,  M.  S.,  set.  32,  large,  full-formed  man,  bilious  sanguine

temperament; caught a  violent cold by  overheating

and  standing  in  a  draft  of  air  with  his  coat  off;  had

drank  large  quantities  of  cold  water ;  had  eaten  nothing

in  twenty-four  hours ;  violent  headache.
Mrs.  M.  J.  C,  set.  35,  bilious  sanguine  temperament;  has

had  four  children  and  four  miscarriages ;  congestion  to

head.
Woman,  set.  35;  congestive  headaches.
Woman,  set.  36,  dyspeptic;  hemicrania.
AVoman,  colored  cook,  set.  40,  widow,  one  child,  set.  15;

violent  headache  and  congestion  to  brain.
Clergyman,  set.  44,  large  and  fleshy,  and  in  enjoyment  of

perfect  health  ;  loss  of  location.
Laborer  in  iron  foundry ;  congestion  to  head.
*^  Relations. Antidoted  by: a  Aeon., Camphor.,  Coffea,  Nux

vom.
Compare: itArnyl  nitr.,  Bellad., Ferrum, Gelsem., Natr.

carb.,  Opium,  Potas.  nitr..  Sod.  nitr.,  Stramon.


433  GNAPHALIUM  POLYCEPHALUM.

GNAPHALIUM  POLYCEPHALUM.

Commo7h  Life  Everlasting.  Compositas.

A  fragrant,  bitterish,  aromatic  annual,  growing  in  fields  and  woods ;  flowers
in  summer  and  autumn.

Tincture  from  the  fresh  plant,  chopped  and  pounded  to  a  pulp.

Provings  by  Banks,  Fuller  and  Woodbury.  See  Allen's  Encyclopaedia,  vol.
4,  p.  456.

Clinical  Authorities. — Sciatica,  Gate,  Raue's  Eec,  1874,  p.  261 ;  Dudley,
McCourt,  Trans.  Horn.  Med.  Soc.  Penna.,  1882,  p.  161.

^  Sensorium. Giddiness,  especially  after  rising  from  recum-
bent position.
^  Inner  Head. Fulness  about  temples.

Dull,  continuous  pain  in  back  of  head,  with  shooting  pain
in  eyeballs.
^  Upper  Face. Dull,  heavy  expression;  face  appears  bloated.
Neuralgic  pain,  of  an  intermittent  form,  of  superior  max-
illary of  both  sides.
^^  Taste  and Tongue. Flat,  sweetish,  sickening taste  in
mouth.
Tongue  covered  with  long,  white  fur.
^^  Inner  Mouth. Mouth  feels  parched  and  tastes  badly.
^^  Hiccough,  Belching,  Nausea  and  Vomiting. Flatus  of

stomach,  windy  eructations,  nausea  and  hiccough.
^^  Abdomen, l  Colic  pains  in  various  parts  of  abdomen,  which
is  sensitive  to  pressure,  in  caecum.
Borborygmus,  with  emission  of  much  flatus.
^^  Stool  and  Rectum. Rumbling  in  bowels  with  stool  before
breakfast.
Looseness  of  bowels,  with  passage  of  pale-colored  feces.
iDiarrhoeic  discharges  in  morning  and  during  day,  with

irritable  temper; pains  in  bowels  in  children.
Copious, watery stool  at  night,  with  much  prostration,

nausea,  pain  and  rumbling  in  bowels.
Dark-colored,  liquid,  offensive  stool  in  morning,  afterwards

pain  in  bowels  all  day.
I  Vomiting  and  purging,  like  cholera  morbus,  in  the  night

and  all  next  day.
Constipation  for  three  days  after  the  diarrhoea.
^^  Urinary Organs. Pain  in  kidneys,  with frequent slight
pain  in  prostate  gland.
Sensation  of  fulness  and  tension  in  bladder,  even  when

just  emptied.
VOL.  V. — 28.


GNAPHALIUM  POLYCEPHALUM.  434

^  Male  Sexual  Organs. Increase  of  sexual  passion,  waking
with  an  erection  and  urgent  desire  for  an  embrace;  the
desire  was  rather  mechanical  than  passional.
I  I  Irritation  of  prostate  gland.
^  Inner  Chest  and  Lungs. Pains  in  chest,  darting  from  side

to  side.
^^  Neck  and  Back. Numbness  of  lower  part  of  back,  with
lumbago.
Sensation  of  weight  in  pelvis.
^^  Upper  Limbs. Feeling  of  debility  in  anus,  wdth  rheumatic

pains.
^  Lower  Limbs. Pains  dull  or  darting,  or  cutting  from  r.
hip-joint  j)Osteriorly  downward  to  foot;  <  lying  down,
from  motion,  stepping;  >  sitting  in  chair.
■  Intense  pain  along  sciatic  nerve,  following  its  larger  rami-
fications.
1  Sciatica,
i Feeling  of  numbness  occasionally  taking  j^lace  of  sciatic

pains,  making  exercise  very  fatiguing.
Rheumatic  pains  in  knee  and  ankle-joints.
Frequent  cramps  of  calves  of  legs.
Cramps  of  feet  in  bed.
I  Gouty  pains  in  big  toes.
^  Rest. Position. Motion. Lying  down :  pain  from  hip-
joint  to  foot  <.
Sitting  in  chair:  pain  from  hip-joint  to  foot  >.
After  rising  from  recumbent  position :  giddiness.
Motion:  pain  from  hip-joint  to  foot  <.
Stepping:  j^ain  from  hip-joint  to  foot  <.
Exercise  very  fatiguing :  from  numbness  in  lower  limbs.
^  Time. Morning :  diarrhcEic  discharges ;  dark-colored,  liquid,
offensive  stool.
During  day : diarrhoeic  discharges ;  pain  in  bowels.
Night:  copious,  watery  stool ;  vomiting  and  purging.
^^  Attacks, Periodicity. Intermittent : neuralgic  pains  in
face.
Three  days:  constipation.
^^  Locality  and  Direction. Right :  dull,  or  darting,  or  cutting

pain  from  hip-joint  to  foot.
^•^  Sensations. Pain: in bowels; in kidneys; in prostate
gland ;  in  chest.
Intense  pain :  along  sciatic  nerve.
Cutting  pain:  from  r.  hip-joint  to  foot.
Darting  pains :  from  side  to  side  in  chest ;  from  r.  hip-
joint  to  foot.
Shooting  pain :  in  eyeballs.
Neuralgic  pain: of  superior  maxillary.
Gouty  pains :  in  big  toes.


435  GNAPH.  POLYC— GOSSYP.  HERB.

Rheumatic  pains:  in  limbs;  in  knees  and  ankle-joints.

Colic  pains :  in  various  parts  of  abdomen.

Cramps :  of  calves  of  legs ;  of  feet.

Dull,  continuous  pain:  in  back  of  head,  from  r.  hip-joint

to  foot.
Lurhbago.

Irritation  :  of  prostate  gland.
Weight :  in  pelvis.
Fulness :  about  temples ;  in  bladder.
Tension :  in  bladder.
Debility :  in  arms.

Numbness :  of  lower  part  of  back  ;  in  limbs.
*^  Touch. Passive  Motion. Injuries. Pressure:  abdomen

sensitive.
■^^  Relations. Compare: A7ds.  stel., Chamom.,  Ipec,  3Iercur.,

Pulsat.,  Xantlwx.


GOSSYPIUM  HERBACEUM.

Cotton  Plant.  Malvacese.

The  cotton  producing  plant  of  the  South;  a  native  of  Asia.  The  root  pos-
sesses the  medical  virtues,  and  the  tinctui'e  is  prepared  from  the  fresh  inner  root-
bark,  chopped  and  pounded  to  a  pulp.

Proved  by  Williamson. See  Allen's  Encyclopaedia,  vol.  4,  p.  458.

^  Sensorium. i  i  Giddiness  of  head.

^  Inner  Head. Stinging  pain  in  head,  going  from  forehead
to  vertex.
I  I  Pain,  first  burning,  then  stinging,  extending  from  both

temporal  bones  to  middle  of  frontal  bone.
1  I  Drawing  pain  over  eyes,  with  stinging  pain  in  pupils.
Knocking  pain  in  r.  parietal  bone.
'  Smell  and  Nose. Nostrils  swollen  and  inflamed,  1.  <.
"  Taste  and  Tongue. Taste  of  bad  eggs,  >  after  breakfast.
^^  Inner  Mouth. Tonsils  swollen,  r.  <.
*^  Hiccough,  Belching,  Nausea  and  Vomiting. Nausea,
with  accumulation  of  saliva  in  mouth.
■  Nausea with inclination to  vomit in  morning  before

breakfast.
■Morning  sickness. ^Pregnancy,
'^^  Scrobiculum  and  Stomach. Rotating  sensation  in  pit  of
stomach,  with  uneasiness,  anxiety  and  sighing.
I  I  Anorexia,  with  uneasy,  depressed  feeling  at  scrobiculum.
cordis,  at  time  of  menses.


GOSSYPIUM  HERBACEUM.  436

^^  Hypochondria.  Stitching  in  r.  hypochondrium,  lasting  for
a  few  minutes,  and  then  drawing  pain  from  both  hypo-
chondriac regions  to  pit  of  stomach.
^  Female  Sexual  Organs.  Stinging  pain  in  both  ovarian  re-
gions, and  at  tlie  same  time  drawing  towards  uterus,
lasting  about  ten  minutes  at  a  time.

Soreness  between  thigh  and  vulva,  with  a  watery  secretion.

Soft  tumor  between  1.  thigh  and  vulva,  first  as  large  as
pea,  and  increasing  to  size  of  pigeon's  egg,  secreting  a
watery  fluid,  with  sticking  pain  as  if  caused  by  a  needle,
<  at  night.

Swelling  of  outer  part  of  1.  labium,  accompanied  by  intol-
erable itching;  some  swelling  in  r.  labium.

Outer  skin  of  both  labia  studded  with  innumerable  pale,
somewhat  reddish  granules.

lAmenorrhoea;  clysmenorrhoea; monorrhagia.

I  i  Scanty  and  painful  or  painless  menses.

I  I  Amenorrhoea,  wdth  ansemia,  and  dyspeptic  symptoms.

I  Menstrual  flow  lasts  about  twenty -four  hours,  and  then
becomes  very  sparse  and  painful.

Menses  too  watery  and  nineteen  days  too  late.

■  Sterility,  from  uterine  torpor.

2^  Pregnancy.  Parturition.  Lactation,  i Morning  sick-
ness during  early  months  of  pregnancy;  sensitiveness
over  hypogastric  region;  prostration  of  nervous  system
almost  to  syncope;  nausea  from  least  motion  in  morn-
ing soon  after  waking,  with  distress  in  pit  of  stomach ;
and,  immediately  on  raising  head,  retching  and  violent
efforts  to  vomit;  at  first  very  little  comes  up,  except
wind,  with  a  loud  noise;  soon  after,  saliva  and  some
thick  fluid  is  discharged,  and,  occasionally,  after  much
retching,  a  little  bilious  matter,  but  rarely  any  ingesta;
wind  is  often  discharged  from  bowels  during  efforts  to
vomit.

■  Morning  vomiting,  followed  by  faintness;  she  was  unable

to  rise  from  bed.

■  Great distress, weakness and prostration. ^Morning

sickness.

Miscarriage.

In  cases  of  lingering  almost  painless  labors,  where  the  uter-
ine contractions  are  feeble  or  entirely  inefficient.  The
case  presents  negative  rather  than  positive  symptoms.

1  I  Retained  placenta.
^^  Upper  Limbs. Tearing  pains  in  r.  arm  and  hand,  and
jumping  pain  from  one  finger  to  another.

Pale,  red,  papular  eruption  on  back  of  both  hands,  with
intense  itching  and  watery  exudation.

Heavy  feeling  in  both  hands,  >  when'  hanging  them
down,  <  in  warmth  of  bed.


437  GOSSYPIUM  HERBACEUM.

Crawling  sensation  in  all  the  fingers,  as  if  from  worms.
^  Lower  Limbs. Stinging,  drawing,  tearing,  and  burning

pain  in  lower  extremities.
Trembling,  twitching,  and  weary  sensation  in  legs.
Small,  round,  dark  red  spots,  with  pale  red  spots  around

patella,  on  shins  and  ankles,  itching  intensely.
^  Rest. Position. Motion. On  raising  head  :  retching  and

violent  efforts  to  vomit.
Unable  to  rise  from  bed :  from  faintness  and  nausea.
When  hanging  hands  down:  heavy  feeling  >.
Motion  :  nausea  from  least  motion.
^®  Nerves. General  lassitude,  with  pains  as  if  beaten.
^^  Time. Morning:  nausea  with  inclination  to  vomit.

Night:  sticking  pain  in  tumor  <.
^^  Temperature  and  Weather. Warmth  of  bed :  <  heavy

feeling  in  hands.
^°  Fever. General  external  chilliness,  with  internal  heat.
*^  Attacks, Periodicity. The  pains  are  wandering,  come

and  go.
A  few  minutes :  itching  in  hypochondrium.
About  ten  minutes  at  a  time :  drawing  towards  uterus.
Twenty-four  hours :  menstrual  flow.
Menses  nineteen  days  too  late.

During  early  months  of  pregnancy :  morning  sickness.
^  Locality  and  Direction. Right:  knocking  pain  in  pari-
etal bone; tonsil  swollen;  itching  in  hypochondrium;

some  swelling  of  labium ;  tearing pains  in  arm  and

hand.
Left:  soft  tumor  between  thigh  and  vulva;  swelling  of

outer  part  of  labium ;  itching  of  labium.
Pains  are  generally  from  above  downward ;  <  by  motion ;

>  by  rest.
*^  Sensations. As  if  caused  by  a  needle;  pain  in  soft  tumor;

crawling  sensation  in  fingers  as  if  from  worms ;  as  if

beaten.
Painful  menses :  pains  as  if  beaten.

Tearing  pains :  in  r.  arm ;  in  hand  ;  in  lower  extremities.
Stinging  pain :  in  head  from  forehead  to  vertex ;  from  both

temporal  bones  to  middle  of  frontal  bone ;  in  pupils  ;  in

both  ovarian  regions; in  lower  extremities.
Sticking  pain:  in  soft  tumor  between  1.  thigh  and  vulva.
Burning  pain :  from  both  temporal  bones  to  middle  of

frontal  bone;  in  lower  extremities.
Jumping  pain :  from  one  finger  to  another.
Knocking  pain :  in  r.  parietal  bone.

Drawing  pain:  over  eyes;  from  both  hypochondriac  re-
gions to  pit  of  stomach ;  in  lower  extremities.
Soreness:  between  thighs  and  vulva.


GOSSYPIUM  HERBACEUM.  438:

Anxiety :  in  pit  of  stomach.

Sensitiveness :  over  hypogastric  region.

Uneasiness:  in  pit  of  stomach.

Uneasy,  depressed  feeling  at  scrobiculum  cordis  at  time  of
menses.

Drawing :  towards  uterus.

Twitching  sensation :  in  legs.

Trembling  sensation  :  in  legs.

Rotating  sensation  :  in  pit  of  stomach.

Crawling  sensation  :  in  all  fingers.

Distress:  in  pit  of  stomach.

Heavy  feeling :  in  both  hands.

Weary  sensation :  in  legs.

Weakness.

Itching:  in  r.  hypochondrium  ;  in  outer  part  of  1.  labium;
intense  on  backs  of  both  hands ;  intense  on  red  spots  oa
shins  and  ankles ;  of  skin  all  over  body.

Itching  changes  to  burning  after  scratching.
^  Tissues. Sympathetic  symptoms  of  stomach,  heart,  bowels-
and  nervous  system,  arising  from  disturbance  of  uterine-
functions,  connected  with  menstruation  or  pregnancy.
*^  Skin. Itching  of  skin  over  whole  body.

Itching  changes  to  burning  after  scratching.
**  Relations. Compare :  Act.  rac,  Apis,  Asar.,  Bellad.,  Bryon.y
Lit  tig.,  Pulsat.,  Sabina,  Secale,  Sepia,  Ustil.


439  GRAPHITES.


GRAPHITES.

Plumbago;  black  lead.  Carbon,  amorphous.


The  purified  Graphite  prepared  by  trituration  and  potentized.
Introduced  by  Hahnemann. See  Chronische  Krankheiten.
Proved  by  Hahnemann  and  his  provers. See  Allen's  Encyclopedia,  vol.  4,
p.  467.

Clinical  Authorities. — Headache,  Goullon,  Eaue's  Eec,  1873,  p.  197 ;  Her-
petic  eruption  on  scalp,  Goullon,  Eaue's  Eec,  1870,  p.  98  ;  Tinea  capitis,  A.  H.  O.,
vol.  4,  p.  436 ;  Eczema  capitis  (4  cases),  Arcularius,  Eaue's  Eec,  1873,  p.  63 ;  Goul-
lon, Eaue's  Eec,  1871,  p.  55;  Eruption  on  head,  Edgar,  Organon,  vol.  3,  p.  98;
Keratitis,  Norton,  Eaue's  Eec,  1875,  p.  47  ;  Herpes  cornea,  Payr,  Eaue's  Eec,  1872,
p.  71  ;  Pustule  on  cornea,  Allen,  Eaue's  Eec,  1871,  p.  58;  Chronic  pustular  inflam-
mation of  cornea,  Norton,  Oph.  Therap.,  p.  9.0 ;  Conjunctivitis,  Kreuss,  Eiick.  Kl.
Erf.,  vol.  1,  p.  233;  Affections  of  eye,  Cooper,  Horn.  Eev.,  vol.  13,  p.  675;  Goullon,
Hah.  Mo.,  vol.  7,  p.  273;  Ophthalmia,  Goullon,  Eaue's  Eec  ,  1873,  p.  66;  Scrofu-
lous inflammation  of  eyes,  Hirschel,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  5,  p.  124  ;  Blepharitis  ciliaris,
Cooper,  Hughes'  Pharm.,  p.  383;  Styes,  Klinert,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf,  vol.  5,  p.  106;
Cystic  tumors  of  eyelids,  Eaue's  Eec ,  1875,  p.  39 ;  Wens  of  eyelids  (several  cases),
"VVesselhoeft,  Eaue's  Eec,  1874,  p.  71 ;  Deafness,  Macfarlan,  Eaue's  Eec,  1871,  p.
64;  Hardness  of  hearing,  Eentsch,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf,  vol.  1,  p.  364;  Catarrh  nf  Eus-
tachian tube,  G.  M.  O.,  Med.  Adv.,  vol.  3,  p.  213;  Soreness  in  nose,  Hirsch,
Eaue's  Eec,  1874,  p.  102;  Inflammation  of  nose,  Eosenberg,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  5,
p.  172;  Nasal  catarrh,  Eosenberg,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf,  vol.  5,  p.  166;  Ozcena,  Kafka,
Eosenberg,  Eaue's  Eec,  1870,  p.  123;  Martin,  A.  J.  H.  M.  M.,  vol  2,  p.  274;
Crusts  about  nostrils,  Bayes,  Hughes'  Pharm.,  p.  383 ;  Cracked  lips,  Plirsch,  Eaue's
Eec,  1875,  p.81;  Gaslrodynia,  Eaue's  Eec,  1872,  p.  134;  Cardialgia,  Goullon,
Eaue's  Eec,  1873,  p.  5 ;  Hah.  Mo.,  vol.  7,  p.  274  ;  Gastrulgia,  Goullon,  Eaue's  Eec,
1875,  p.  142;  Cramp  instomach,  Goullon,  Eaue's  Eec,  1871,  p.  112;  Gastric  catarrh,
Goullon,  Eaue's  Eec,  1873,  p.  117;  Burning  in  hypochondrium,  Morgan,  Eaue's
Eec,  1872,  p.  4;  A.  J.  H.  M.  M.,  vol.  4,  p.  126;  Colic,  Eing,  A.  J.  H.  M.  M.,  vol.
2,  p.  262;  Gastro-inteslinal  affection  itdth  erythema  of  face,  Bernard  and  Strong,  p.  46;
Ascites,  Miller,  Hah.  Mo.,  vol.  10,  p.  163;  Eaue's  Eec,  1875,  p.  163;  Diarrhoea,
Morgan,  Eaue's  Eec,  1872,  p.  4;  Williamson,  Eaue's  Eec,  1874,  p.  188;  Constipa-
tion, Goullon,  Eaue's  Eec,  1873,  p.  129,  and  1875,  p.  160;  Hcemorrhoids,  Preston,
Organon,  vol.  3,  p.  359;  Morgan,  Eaue's  Eec,  1872,  p.  4;  Smith,  Eaue's  Eec,
1873,  p.  132  ;  Gillet,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf,  vol.  1,  p.  998;  Fissures  of  anus,  Dunham,  Eaue's
Eec,  1870,  p.  217;  Marston,  Horn.  Eev.,  vol.  13,  p.  760;  Tcenia,  Goullon,  N.  A.
J.  H.,  vol.  22,  p.  503;  Seminal  emissions  (4  cases),  Neidhard,  Eaue's  Eec,  1870,  p.
242;  Stricture  of  urethra,  Morgan,  A.  J.  H.  M.  M.,  vol.  4,  p.  75 ;  Eaue's  Eec,  1872,
p.  4;  Gleet,  Gardiner,  Eaue's  Eec,  1872,  p.  170;  Hydrocele,  Hughes'  Pharm.,  p.
383  ;  Nunez,  Eaue's  Eec,  1874,  p.  219 ;  Miiller,  Eaue's  Eec,  1875,  p.  169;  Muller,
Eiick.  Kl.  Erf,  vol.  5,  p.  585 ;  Black,  B.  J.  H.,  vol.  7,  p.  526 ;  Ovarian  tumors.


GRAPHITES.  440

Dudgeon,  B.  J.  H.,  vol.  31,  p.  183;  Eaue's  Eec,  1874,  p.  229  ;  Ovarian  tumor;
uterine  hemorrhage,  Ussher,  Organon,  vol.  3,  pi  89;  Cancer  uteri,  Raue's  Rec,  1875,
p.  175;  Dysmenorrhcea,  Neidliard,  Raue's  Rec,  1870,  p.  254;  Raue's  Rec,  1875,  p,
181;  Lobeth,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  2,  p.  232;  Amenorrhea,  Hocking,  Raue's  Rec,
1874,  p.  233  ;  Goullon,  Raue's  Rec,  1875,  p.  178  ;  Knorr,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  2,  p.
232;  Goullon,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  2,  p.  232  ;  Wesselhceft,  Times  Retros.,  1876,  p.
11;  Menstrual  disturbance,  Stens,  Raue's  Rec,  1875,  p.  178;  Goullon,  Raue's  Rec,
1872,  p.  180;  Pruritus  vagince,  Holcombe,  Raue's  Rec,  1873,  p.  175;  Leucorrhcea,
Neidhard,  Raue's  Rec,  1870,  p.  247;  Molin,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  2,  p.  362;
Eaue's  Rec,  1875,  p.  173;  Suffocative  paroxysms,  Landesmann,  Raue's  Rec,  1873,  p.
109;  Whooping-cough,  Morgan,  Raue's  Eec,  1872,  p.  114;  Induration  and  cicatriza-
tion of  mammce,  Whittier,  Times  Retros.,  1876,  p.  12;  Cicatrices  after  mammary  ab-
scess, Guernsey,  Raue's  Rec,  1871,  p.  4;  Mammary  cancer,  Raue's  Rec,  1875,  p.  181 ;
Glandular  swellings  of  neck,  Hirsch,  Raue's  Rec,  1875,  p.  87 ;  Eruption  on  neck,
Goullon,  Raue's  Rec,  1871.  p.  211;  Psoriasis  palmaris,  Bayes,  Hughes'  Pharm.,  p.
382 ;  Eczema  of  hand,  Goullon,  Raue's  Eec,  1871,  p.  210 ;  Affection  of  finger,  Kreuss,
Eiick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  3,  p.  559 ;  Disease  of  finger-nail,  Hasbrouck,  Eaue's  Eec,  1874,
p.  255  ;  Ulcers  on  feet,  Kretschman,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  4,  p.  283  ;  (Edema  pedum,
Miiller,  Eaue's  Eec,  1875,  p.  169;  Hypertrophy  of  nail,  Hirsch,  Eaue's  Eec,  1875,
p.  206;  Neuralgia,  Bojanus,  Eaue's  Eec,  1871,  p.  183;  Hysteria,  Goullon,  Eaue's
Rec,  1873,  p.  203;  Spasms,  Goullon,  Hah.  Mo.,  vol.  7,  i).  274;  Convulsions,  Vil-
liers,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  4,  p.  562;  Paralysis,  Neidhard,  Raue's  Rec,  1870,  p.
367  ;  Chlorosis,  Kapper,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  5,  p.  603 ;  Scrofulosis,  Goullon,  Eaue's
Eec,  1875,  p.  259  ;  Goullon,  N.  A.  J.  H.,  vol.  23,  p.  223 ;  Meniagra  (3  cases),  Biihr,
Hughes'  Pharm.,  p.  382;  Dropsy,  Weber,  B.  J.  H.,  vol.  34,  p.  708;  Prurigo,  Wes-
selhceft, Times  Eetros.,  1875,  p.  135  ;  Miiller,  Eaue's  Eec,  1875,  p.  295 ;  Erysipelas,
Payne,  Eaue's  Eec,  1870,  p.  134;  Goullon,  Kretschmar,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf,  vol.  4,  p.
142;  Bojanus,  Eaue's  Eec,  1871,  p.  66;  Lippe,  Times  Eetros.,  1877,  p.  25;  Effects
of  vaccination,  Eaue's  Eec,  1872,  p.  254;  Phus  poisoning,  Morgan,  Eaue's  Eec,
1870,  p.  85;  McNeil,  Times  Eetros.,  1877,  p.  25;  Eczema,  Hirsch,  Eaue's  Eec,
1874,  p.  293;  Eczema  squamosum,  Hirsch,  Raue's  Rec,  1875,  p.  291 ;  Eczema  impe-
tiginoides,  Hirsch,  Raue's  Rec,  1874,  p.  292 ;  Hale,  Hughes'  Pharm.,  p.  382  ;  Ec-
zema chronica,  Goullon,  Raue's  Rec,  1874,  p.  293;  Herpetic  eruption  on  scalp;  on
nape  of  neck,  Goullon,  Raue's  Eec,  1873,  p.  64;  Herpes  zoster.  Miller,  Times  Eet-
ros., 1876,  p.  11;  Zona,  Lobethal,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  4,  p.  160;  Miller,  Eaue's
Eec,  1875,  p.  291 ;  Afi'ections  of  skin,  Kretschmar,  Diez,  Hirschel,  Dudgeon,  Hirsch,
Eiick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  4,  p.  240;  Eruption,  Morgan,  A.  J,  H.  M.  M.,  vol.  3,  p.  121 ;
Eaue's  Eec,  1872,  p.  4;  Chronic  eruption,  Ji'mg,  Eaue's  Eec,  1874,  p.  293;  Fis-
sures, Gilchrist,  Eaue's  Eec,  1871,  p.  212.


*  Mind. iForgetfulness;  dim  recollection  of  recent  events.
•  Weakness  in  head,  can  scarcely  think.

■  Slow  in  thought;  absent  minded.
I  Dread  of  work.

Mood:  changeable;  forlorn;  depressed;  dejected.

■  iSadness,  with  thoughts  of  nothing  but  death.

llSad,  despondent; she must weep;  music makes her

weep.
I  I  Oppression.


441  GRAPHITES.

1 1  Feels  miserable,  unhappy.

I  Grief  about  slightest  occurrences,  even  to  despair.
llApprehensiveness,  with  inclination  to  weep,  in  frequent
attacks.

■  Extreme  apprehensiveness,  so  that  she  did  not  know  how

to  overcome  it.

■  It  frequently  seemed  to  him  as  though  his  end  was  near,

or  the  greatest  misfortunes  were  impending.

■  Full  of  fear  in  the  mornings.

■  Solicitude  concerning  spiritual  welfare.

■  Great  anxiety.

■  ■Fidgety  while  sitting  at  work.

■  Desperate  state  of  mind. ^Ophthalmia  after  syphilis._

■  Extreme  hesitation;  she  is  unable  to  make  up  her  mind

about  anything ;  timidity.

■  Irritability. (/Gastrodynia.

■  Fretful; ill-humored;  easily  vexed;  irritable.

■  Extremely  fretful;  everything  angers  and  offends  him.

■  Impudent,  teasing,  laughs  at  reprimands. ^Cough  after

pertussis.
I  I  Very  easily  excited ;  hot  hands  even  from  speaking.

■  Scientific  labor  fatigues  him.

■  Thoughts  of  many  things  at  night  prevent  sleep.

■  Ailments  from  grief  (or  fright).

^  Sensormm. i  i  Weakness  of  head  down  to  neck.

■  Desolate,  empty  feeling  in  head.

■  Dulness  of  head.

■  Beclouded  feeling  in  forehead.

I  i  Confusion  of  head,  in  morning,  with  nausea  and  sour
vomiting.

■  Feels  as  if  drunken  when  rising  from  bed  in  morning.

■  Attacks  of  dizziness,  with  inclination  to  fall  forward.

■  Vertigo  :  during  and  after  stooping ;  on  looking  upwards ;

in  the  morning  on  awaking ;  in  evening ;  was  obliged
to  lie  down ;  with  inclination  to  fall  forward ;  venous
stagnation.

■  Rush  of  blood  with  feeling  of  heat  in  head.

I  I  Congestion  to  head  with  roaring  in  ears,  in  young  people.
I  I  Frequently  feels  faint,  with  partial  loss  of  senses.

■  Forehead  ;  pressure  deep  in  ;  drawing ;  tearing ;  bursting.

Lancinating  pain  in  right  temple,  with  flickering  before
eyes  and  lassitude  ;  heaviness  of  eyelids.

■Transient  stitches  in  1.  temple.

I  I  Stinging  or  stitching  pains  in  temples.

■  Pain  from  1.  temple  down  side  of  face  to  shoulder;  face

distorted  ;  1.  corner  of  mouth  drawn  inward  and  down-
ward.
JPeriodical,  unilateral  headache;  numbness  in  1.  side  of


GRAPHITES.  442.

head ;  violent  nausea  with  straining  and  retching ;  ob-
stinate constipation. ^Amenorrhoea.

I  I  Semilateral  headache,  early  in  morning,  in  bed,  with  in-
clination to  vomit.

■Tearing  pain  in  one  side  of  head,  in  teeth  and  glands  of
throat.

■  Throbbing  in  sides  of  head.

I  I  Oppressive  headache  on  top  of  head.
iPressive  pain:  in  vertex;  in  occiput.

I I  Pain  as  if  constricted,  especially  in  occiput,  extending  to-
nape  of  neck,  which  pains  on  looking  up,  as  if  broken.

1 1  Pain  as  if  head  were  numb  and  pithy.
iPressive  pain  in  head.

■  Violent  headache,  with  eructations  and  nausea,  during

menstruation.

■  Frequent  congestions  to  head  and  chest,  dark  red  cheeks,,

oppression  and  anguish  when  lying  down. ^Amenor-
rhoea.
I  1  Headache,  in  morning  on  waking.
*  Outer  Head. ■  Sensation  as  if  skin  of  forehead  was  drawn
into  folds.

■  Scalp  feels  bruised,
i  1  Coldness  of  scalp.

■  ■Itching  on  scalp.

■  Sweat  on  head  when  walking  in  open  air.

■  ■  Burning  round  spot  on  top  of  head.

I  1  Lumpy  patches  on  vertex,  red  and  painful.

■  ■Humid  eruption  on  vertex,  painful  to  touch.

■  ■Scurfy  spots  on  vertex,  with  violent  sore  pain  when

touched.

■  ■Much  scaliness  on  head,  causing  distressing  itching,  be-

comes scurf,  which  disappears  on  washing,  and  is  then
humid.

■  Humid  eruption  on  head,  pains  as  if  suppurating,  only

when  touched.

■  Intolerable  itching  all  over  body,  followed  by  a  moist

eruption  behind  r.  ear ;  crept  gradually  upwards  on  r.
side  of  scalp,  forming  pustules,  which  discharged  an
acrid,  sticky  fluid,  by  which  hair  sjtuck  together,  and
finally  fell  off,  leaving  a  bare  spot  behind,  covered  with
a  mealy  dust  and  small  crusts ;  felt  <  after  washing ;
is  very  sensitive  to  cold  air ;  has  chronic  lachrymation
and  fluor  albus.

■  ■Eczema  capitis,  of  entire  scalp,  forming  massive,  dirty

crusts,  which  mat  the  hair  together;  painful  and  sore  to
touch.

■  Fissured  eruption  back  of  and  above  ears,  on  cheeks,  and

about  region  of  posterior  fontanelle,  exuding  a  glutinous


443  GRAPHITES..

secretion,  forming  a  scab,  and  cracking  open,  itching  a.
little  all  the  time,  but  excessively  before  a  storm ;  per-
fectly indifferent  to  any  one  touching  the  sore  places.
I  Tinea  capitis  ;  eruption  dry  and  scabby,  large  and  conflu^
ent,  color  dark ;  cervical  glands  swollen  and  hard.

I  Eczema  capitis  in  scrofulous  child,  infesting  entire  hairy

scalp,  and  forming  massive,  dirty  crusts,  which  mat  the
hair  together.

I I  Falling  out  of  hair  of  scalp.

I  Bald  places  on  head  perfectly  smooth  and  shining.

herpes.

iPorrigo  decalvans.

I  Hair  falls  out,  even  on  sides  of  head.
^  Sight  and  Eyes, i  Photophobia ;  great  sensitiveness  of  eyes
to  day-light ;  more  than  gas-light.

iPhotophobia  usually  intense  and  lachrymation  profuse;
child  cannot  open  eyes  before  9  or  10  a.m.  ;  redness  of
eye  generally  marked ;  muco-puruleut  discharges,  con-
stant, thin  and  excoriating ;  pains  sticking,  burning,,
aching  or  itching.

■  Light  blinds  or  dazzles  the  eyes.

■  Eyes  very  sensitive  to  sun-light;  it  causes  lachrymation.
I  I  Sun-light  causes  lancinating  pains  in  eyes.
iHypersesthesia  of  eyes;  venous  stagnation;  constipation;.

incarceration  of  flatus.

I  From  overexertion  of  eyes  by  reading,  sewing,  etc.  ^Ver-
tigo.

I  I  Weakness  of  eyes.

I  Short-sightedness.

8  Letters :  appear  double  when  writing ;  run  together  when
reading.

iSees  fiery  zigzags  around  outside  of  field  of  vision,  in  eve-
ning, with  open  eyes.

■  Flickering  before  ej^es. ^Headache.

■  Sees  as  through  a  mist.

lEverything  turns  black  before  eyes  when  stooping.

■  During  menstruation  sight  vanishes;  blackness before

eyes ;  1.  hand  becomes  numb  and  dead ;  with  crawling
in  it  extending  up  arm,  and  also  with  crawling  in  lips.

■  Tiredness  of  eyes.

I  I  Pressing  pain  in  eyes,  morning  and  evening.

■  Drawing,  extending  from  eyes  up  into  head.

■Stitches  from  temple  through  eye  to  inner  canthus,  on.

looking  at  anything  white  or  red,  or  at  sun.
■Smarting  in  eyes,  with  heat  in  them.

■  Biting  in  eyes.

■Burning  and  aching  in  eyes.


GRAPHITES.  444

I  Burning  pain  around  eyes.

I  Ulcer  on  cornea:  with  a  few  small  vessels  running  into
it ;  with  moist  fissured  eczematous  eruptions.

■  Pustules  on  cornea  and  conjunctiva,  with  much  lachry-

mation.
Pustule  on  cornea,  of  reddish  appearance,  with  white  halo

around  it ;  corners  of  lids  raw  and  bleed  easily.
■Arthritic  ophthalmia,  with  contraction  and  irregularity

of  pupils.

■  Deep  ulcers  on  cornea,  even  with  hypopyon;  more  par-

ticularly adapted  to  superficial  ulcerations,  especially  if
resulting  from  pustules,  often  with  considerable  vascu-
larity of  cornea;  pustules  on  cornea  or  conjunctiva,  es-
pecially on  former;  attacks  may  be  acute  or  chronic,
but  it  is  particularly  called  for  in  chronic  recurrent
forms.
i  Chronic  pustular  inflammation  of  cornea ;  recovery  from
one  attack  quickly  followed  by  another;  great  photo-
phobia, could  not  open  eyes  to  see  his  way,  profuse  lach-
rymation,  burning  and  aching  in  eyes,  sneezing  upon
opening  them,  external  canthi  cracked  and  easily
bleeding,  both  corneae  pannused,  thin,  acrid  discharge
from  eyes,  nose  sore  and  surrounded  by  thick,  moist
scabs.

■  Keratitis  pustulosa  in  children,  who  cry  whenever  light

comes  to  eye,  so  must  be  kept  in  a  dark  room,  corners  of
eyes  cracked  and  bleed  easily,  eruption  on  face.

■  Conjunctivitis pustulosa and ciliary blepharitis,  with

cracks  behind  ears.

i Keratitis  pustulosa,  corners  of  lids  crack  and  bleed  easily,
great  photophobia  and  lachrymation,  with  some  yellow-
ish discharge.

1  Superficial  keratitis  with  pustules  of  r.  eye  and  pustules
on  lower  borders  of  corner  of  1.  eye,  outer  canthi  cracked,
also  cracks  behind  ears  and  eruption  on  face.

■  Pustule  on conjunctiva  of  a  child,  nose  sore  and  exco-

riated, prickly  heat.

■  Pustular  conjunctivitis  with  old,  ciliary  blepharitis  after

measles ;  thick,  heavy  scabs  on  lashes.

■  Old,  recurrent  pustular  keratitis  with  no  pain  or  photo-

phobia.

■  Recurrent  pustular  keratitis,  no  photophobia  or  pain,  eye

some  red  and  agglutinated  in  morning,  lids  red  and
margin  covered  with  scurfs.

■  Small  pu.stules  on  edge  of  cornea,  photophobia  and  red-

ness, and  characteristic  eruption  behind  ears  and  on  face.

■  Pustule  on  cornea  of  a  reddish  appearance  and  with  a

white  halo  around  it,  canthi  cracked,  great  photophobia
and  lachrymation.


445  GRAPHITES.

I  Keratitis  pustulosa  with  vascular  cornea  and  pannus.
I  I  Pustules  on  cornea  and  conjunctiva,  much  lachrymation,

slight  photophobia,  and  the  child  acts  as  if  it  had  pain,.

which  is  <  about  noon  and  in  afternoon.

■  Herpes  cornese,  when  combined  with  a  chronic  eczema,

which  covers  face  and  eyelids  like  a  mask.

■  Frequent  lachrymation  of  eyes.

■  Lachrymation:  in  open  air;  chronic.

■  Thin,  acrid  discharge  from  eyes.

■  Pus-like  discharge  from  eyes.

■  Internal  canthi:  itching;  burning;  stitches;  sore.

■  ■External  canthi:  sore  and  fissured;  fissured  and  bleed

easily.

■  Stillicidium  lachrymarum,from  obstruction  of  nasal  duct.

■  Right  eye  waters  constantly,  especially  in  damp,  sultry

weather,  and  skin  underneath  inner  half  of  lower  eyelid
sore  and  excoriated,  from  constant  irritation  of  tears
trickling  over  it ;  projection  underneath  inner  canthus
(mucocele),  arising  from  obstruction  to  duct ;  lachrymal
sac  not  much  inflamed.

■  Catarrhal  or scrofulous ophthalmia, characterized by

ulcers  and  pustules.

■  Intense  photophobia,  with  nightly  sticking  together  of

lids;  obstinate  constipation;  rhagadic  places  running
like  radii  towards  corners  of  mouth ;  outside  on  cheek
an  infiltrated  spot  covered  with  dry  scales.
■Syndesmitis  exanthematica,  especially  with  crusta  lactea.

■  Conjunctiva  swollen  and  red,  puffed  about  edge  of  cor-

nea; constant  purulent  discharge,  with  agglutination  of
lids  at  night;  great  photophobia;  burning  pain  about
region  of  eyes ;  sensation  of  foreign  body  in  throat  on
swallowing,  as  if  ulcerated ;  constipation ;  despairing
mood.

■  Redness  of  whites  of  eyes,  lachrymation  and  photophobia.

■  Heat  in  eyes  and  about  lids.

■  Heat  in  eyes  and  some  pus  in  canthi.

■  Swelling  of  eyeli-ds  and  lachrymal  gland.

■  Red,  painful  inflammation  of  lower  lid  and  inner  canthus.

■  Sensation  of  dryness  in  lids  and  pressure.

■  Heaviness  of  eyelids ;  cannot  open  his  eyes. ^Hemicrania.

■  ■Edges  of  lids  much  inflamed.

■  Chronic  ciliary  blepharitis;  edges  of  lids  slightly  swollen,

and  of  a  pale  red  color;  inflammation  may  be  confined
to  canthi  (blepharitis  angularis),  especially  to  outer,
which  have  a  great  tendency  to  crack,  and  bleed  easily
upon  any  attempt  to  open  lids ;  margins  ulcerated ;  dry
scurfs  on  cilise;  burning  and  dryness  in  lids,  and  biting
and  itching,  which  cause  a  constant  desire  to  rub  the
eyes.


GRAPHITES.  446

1 1  Eczema  of  lids,  eruption  moist  and  fissured,  margins  of
lids  covered  with  scales  or  crusts.

I  Agglutination  of  lids:  at  night;  in  morning.

I I  Lids  red  and  margins  covered  with  scurfs.

I  I  Left  lower  lid  hangs  down.

■  Inverted  lids  (margins),  wild  hairs.

■  Slight  roughness  of  integument  of  lids,  in-tense  itching.

I I  Dry  mucus  in  lashes.

I  Styes  on  lower  lid,  with  drawing  pain.

■  Prevents  recurrence  of  successive  crops  of  styes.

■  Cystic  tumors  of  ej^elids;  wens  on  lids.

■  On  both  eyes  hordeolse  and  chalazonai  in  all  stages.
I  I  Coldness  over  eyes.

I  I  Twitchings  beneath  eyes.
"^Hearing  and  Ears. ■Music  makes  her  weep.

■  lieverberations  in  ear,  even  his  own  words  and  every  step.

■  Humming,  hissing,  ringing,  rushing,  roaring,  cracking,

or  clucking  sounds  in  ears.

■  Violent  nocturnal  roaring,  ears  feel  stuffed  at  times  (dur-

ing full  moon).

■  Thundering,  rolling  sound  before  ears.

■  Cracking  in  ear:  when  eating  in  evening;  on  moving

jaw,  but  only  in  morning  while  lying  in  bed;  when
sneezing.

■  Snapping  in  ear  after  every  eructation,  as  if  air  penetrated

the  Eustachian  tube.
I  I A  sound  in  vertex  like  the  ticking  of  a  watch.
Sensation  as  if  1.  ear  were  filled  with  water.

■  Sensation  as  if  skin  were  before  the  ear.

■  Loss  of  hearing,  with  dryness  of  ears.

■  Deafness,  with  dry  external  meatus.

■  Deafness  after  scarlet  fever ;  cannot  hear  watch  held  close

to  ear,  nor  ordinary  conversation ;  thin,  watery,  offensive
discharge  from  both  ears;  mucous  membrane  of  meatus
red  and  excoriated;  moist  eczematous  rash  on  face;
tympani  not  perforated,  but  appear  covered  with  a  white
coating.

■  ■  Hears  better  when  in  a  noise ;  when  riding  in  a  carriage.

■  Acute  pressure  in  inner  ear,  like  otalgia.

■  Stitches  in  ears.

■  Distended  capillaries  on  membrane  of  r.  drum.

■  Both  tympani  covered  with  a  white  coating,  but  not  per-

forated.

■  Moisture  in  ears.

■  Gluey,  sticky  discharge  at  external  meatus.  '

■  Pus  runs  out  of  ear.

■  Bloody  discharge  from  ear.
•  ■Bad  odor  from  ear.


447  GRAPHITES.

I  I  Copper-colored  nodes  on  ears.

llSwelling  of  both  ears,  with  moist  eruption  behind  ears.

I I  Behind  the  ears:  moisture;  fissures;  sore  places;  scabs;
itching.

I  Eczema  impetiginoides ;  began  at  first  as  a  moisture  be-
hind 1.  ear,  spread  over  cheeks  and  neck;  child  moved
continually  on  account  of  severe  itching.

■  Sensation  as  if  a  hard  body  as  large  as  an  egg  were  be-

hind ear.
iSwelling  of  glands  beneath  ears,  with  tensive  pain.
Affections  of  1.  ear,  particularly  if  r.  ear  becomes  affected;

generally  spreads  from  1.  to  r.
'Smell  and  Nose. llSmell  abnormally  acute ;  she  cannot

tolerate  flowers.
iLoss  of  smell:  with  dryness  of  nose;  with  coryza.

■  Nosebleed:  in  evening,  preceding  afternoon  rush  of  blood

to  head  and  heat  of  face;  at  night;  in  morning;  with
running  coryza.

■  Bloody  mucous  discharge  from  nose.

■  Blowing  of  blood  from  nose.

■  Offensive  purulent  discharge  from  nose.

■  Frequent  discharge  of  thick,  yellowish,  fetid  mucus  from

nose.

■  Discharge  of  bloody,  fetid  slime  or  purulent  secretion ;

bad  smell  from  nose,  as  from  burnt  hair  or  sulphur
vapors;  ulcerative  nostrils  covered  with  crusts ;  herpetic
eruption.  dOzsena..
lOzsena;  discharge  more  offensive  during  menstruation;
eruption  about  anus  and  genitals;  takes  cold  very
readily.

■  Chronic  nasal  catarrh.

■  ■Dryness  of  nose,  sometimes  painful.

■  ■Sore  sensation  in  nose  on  blowing  it.

■  Soreness  of  mucous membrane of  nose; injections  of

iodine  in  water  had  made  it  worse,  and  caused  obstruc-
tion of  nose  and  an  erysipelatous  redness  upon  1.  cheek.
1  I  Violent  stopped  catarrh,  with  great  nausea  and  head-
ache, without  vomiting;  was  obliged  to  lie  down.

■  ■Sneezing: on  opening  eyes;  with  very  dry  nose  or  run-

ning coryza.

■  Periodical  attacks  of  fluent  coryza  of  short  duration  with

continual  stoppage  and  breathing  through  mouth;  dul-
ness  with  heat  in  head  and  face,  especially  nose;  sore-
ness and  roughness  of  larynx  with  tickling  cough ;  smell
in  nose  as  from  an  old  cold ;  hawking  up  of  phlegm ;
nausea;  <  in  cold  and  in  open  air.
*  ■Stoppage  of  nose,  with  secretion  of  tough,  badly-smell-
ing: mucus.


GRAPHITES.  448

I  Thin,  acrid discharge from nose accompanying oph-
thahiiia.

I  1  Coryza  on  getting  cold.

I I  Excoriation  of  nose.

I  Mucus  often  forms  hard  masses  or  crusts  in  coryza.

I I  Dry  scabs  in  nose,  with  sore,  cracked  and  ulcerated
nostrils.

I  Swelling  of  nose.
llNose  painful  internally.
I  Red  nose,  with  black  pores.

I  I  Black,  watery  pores  on  nose.

■  Ulcerated  nostrils  covered  with  scurf.

I I  Nose  sore,  surrounded  by  thick,  moist  scabs.

-  Upper  Face. iFace:  pale  and  haggard;  pale  and  bloated;
pale  and  yellow; chlorotic;  flushed;  eyes  sunken.
1 1  Flushes  of  heat  in  face.

I  iDulness  with  heat  in  face  and  head,  especially  of  nose.

I I  Constant  sensation  as  of  a  cobweb  on  face.

I  Itching  blotches  on  face  and  other  parts  of  body.

I I  Itching  pimples  on  face,  becoming  moist  after  scratching.

■  Scabs  on  face,  skin  dry; constipated,  large  stools.
Il^loist  eczema  on  face.

I  Eczema  sciuamosum  on  face  of  fifteen  years'  duration;
applications  had  caused  the  external  eruption  to  recede,
the  patient  suffered  with  headache,  vertigo  and  a  general
feeling  of  debility  and  loss  of  appetite.

I  I  Whole  surface  of  forehead and  cheeks  red  and  scurfy;

after  vaccination  in  a  child  eighteen  months  old.
iRhagades  on  cheek,  running  like  radii  toward  corners  of
mouth;  an  infiltrated spot on cheek,  is  covered  with
dry  scales.

■  Annular  raised  sj^ots  on  face.

■  Erysipelas,  eruption appearing on  cheeks,  preceded  by

chills  and  heat  alternating; constrictive  headache,  espe-
cially in  occiput; burning,  stinging  and  itching  of  parts.

I I  Erysipelas:  of  both  sides  of  face,  with  burning,  stinging
pain;  of  cheeks,  preceded  by  alternating  chills  and  heat;
of  left  cheek,  after  mal-application  of  lodum  for  sore  of
inner  nose;  of  face,  from  smell  of  wood;  commencing
on  r.  side  and  going  to  left.

■  Freckles.

■  Very  painful  tearing  in  1.  zygoma,  so  that  she  had  to  cry

out,  in  evening  in  bed.
I  Pain  from  1.  temple  down  1.  side  of  face  to 1.  shoulder;
face  distorted;  1.  corner  of  mouth  drawn  inward and
downward,  and  1.  lower  eyelid  hangs  down;  after  catch-
ing cold.

■  Muscles  on  one  side  of  face  contracted;  speech  difficult.


449  GRAPHITES.

I  Rheumatic,  peripheric  paralysis  of  face.
I  Hair  of  whiskers  or  beard  falls  out.
^  Lower  Face, i Upper  lip:  twitching; stinging;  swollen;
painful  pimples.

■  Heaviness  in  lower  lip.

I  I  Formication  in  lips  during  menses.

I  Dryness  of  lips,  with  constant  burning ;  they  crack.

I I  Soreness  and  cracking  of  lips  and  nostrils  as  from  cold.

■  Lips  chap; corners  of  mouth  ulcerate  and  are  the  seat

of  eruptions.
I  Chin  covered  with  eruptions.
I  Scabby  eruptions  on  chin  and  around  mouth.

■  Painful  nodules  on  lower  jaw.

■  Indurated swelling  of  submaxillary  glands,  painful  to^

touch.
^^  Teeth  and Gums. ■Pressing  pain  in  teeth,  <  from  toucK
or  biting.

■  Drawing  pain  in  molars  wdiile  walking  in  wind.
Tearing  pain,  <  by  warmth;  renewed  by  going  to  bed.
I  I  Drawing  or  sticking  toothache.

■  Stinging  toothache  after  cold  drinks.

■  Toothache,  <  at  night,  wath  heat  in  face.

■  Ulcerations  on  inside  of  lips.

■  Painful  soreness  on  inner  side  of  gums.

■  Swelling  of  gums  and  dryness  of  mouth.

■  Gums  bleed  readily  when  rubbing  them.

■  Fetid  odor  from  gums  and  mouth.

^^  Taste  and Tongue. '  '  Sour  taste  after  a  meal.

■  Bitter  taste  in  mouth,  wath  sour  eructations.

■  Salty  taste.

■  ■Taste  in  mouth  as  of  rotten  eggs  every  morning,  which

nauseates  her.

■  Tongue  coated  white.

I  I  The  tongue after  a  meal  is  rough,  raw  and  scraping;
the  papillae are  very  sensitive,  as  if  they  were  rubbed
against  the  teeth.
Sore  pain  on  1.  side  of  tongue  when  moving  it.

■  Whitish,  painful  ulcer  on  lower  surface  of  tongue.

■  ■  Burning  blisters  on  lower  side  and  tip  of  tongue.

■  Painful  vesicles  and  tubercles  on  back  part  of  tongue.
^^  Inner  Mouth. ■Rotten  odor  from  mouth  and  gums.

■  Acid,  foul  odor  from  mouth.

■  Breath  smells  like  urine.

I  I  Saliva  increased,  much  spitting.

I  I  Saliva  runs  from  mouth  in  morning  on  stooping.

■  Dryness  of  mouth  in  morning.
^^  Throat. Palate:  feels  sore.

■  Palate  and  fauces  somewhat  reddened. ^Deafness.

VOL..  V. — 'A9.


GRAPHITES.  450

■  Violent  catarrh  in  fauces,  with  sensation  as  though  food

had  to  pass  over  a  lump  in  throat;  roughness  and  raw-
ness in  throat;  hoarseness  in  evening.  ^Ozsena  scrofu-
losa.

■  Swelling  of  tonsils,  with  pain  when  swallowing.

■  Ulcerative  pain  in  throat.
■Roughness  and  rawness  in  throat.

■  Hawking  of  phlegm;  throat  seems  full  of  gurgling  mucus.

■  Sensation  on  1.  side  of  throat  as  though  he  had  to  swallow

over  an  elevation,  with  scraping  in  it.

■  On  swallowing  sensation  of  lump  in  throat,  and  especially

on  empty  swallowing  a  constrictive  retching  from  oesoph-
agus up  to  larynx.

■  Constant  spasm  in  throat,  obliging  him  to  swallow  as  if

he  were  choking,  as  if  food  would  not  go  down.
J  I  Constant  cramp  in  throat,  causing  him  to  retch,  as  if  the

food  would  .not  go  down.
1  Nightly  pains  in  throat  like  a  plug,  as  if  the  food  filled
him  to  the  top.
^*  Appetite, Thirst. Desires, Aversions. ■■Excessive
hunger.

■  Canine  hunger  with  acidity  of  stomach.

■  Appetite  excessive  or  wanting,  with  much  thirst,  or  with

fulness  of  abdomen.
■Violent  thirst,  early  in  morning.

■  Desire  for  drink  to  cool  one's  self  internally,  without  thirst.

■  ■Aversion:  to  animal  food,  when  thinking  of  it;  to  fish;

to  cooked  food.

■  Great  aversion  to  salt.

■  ■  Sweet  things  are  disgusting  and  nauseous.
*^  Eating  and  Drinking. Worse  when  hungry.

■  Food  will  not  go  down.

■  ■Pains  in  stomach  necessitate  eating.

■  Is  obliged  to  eat  on  account  of  burning  in  stomach.

■  Must  quickly  eat  a  piece  of  bread,  to  >  suffocative  par-

oxysm.
I  I  Hot  things  disagree  with  the  stomach.
Abdomen  becomes  inflated  after  eating.
^^  Hiccough,  Belching,  Nausea  and  Vomiting. ■  Hiccough
after  meals.

■  Eructations: sour;  bitter  or  sour  green  water;  putrid;

tasting  of  the  food  eaten ;  >  pressure  in  stomach ;  con-
stant; ineffectual;  while  walking.

■  Cramp  in  stomach,  with  nausea,  collection  of  water  in

mouth  in  such  quantities  that  she  cannot  speak,  but  has
to  keep  the  mouth  open ;  vertigo,  at  times  has  neuralgia
of  face  (region  of  os  zygomaticum),  and  intense  head-
ache (clavus) ;  during  first  day  of  menses  cramp-pain  in
legs,  costiveness,  cold  feet.


451  GRAPHITES.

iRancid  heartburn,  particularly  after  eating.

I  Qualmishness,  as  from  abdomen,  with  contractive  pain
below  umbilicus,  and  much  mucus  in  throat,  especially
in  morning,  and  for  several  hours  after  a  meal.

■  Nausea:  and  vertigo  ;  and  sweat,  with  anxiety  ;  like  faint-

ness,  preventing  sleep ;  with  spasm  in  throat ;  with  eruc-
tations; with  headache;  with  inclination  to  vomit;  and
sour  vomiting;  in  morning;  after  eating.

I  Nausea,  in  morning,  with  weakness  and  trembling  during
day,  during  menstruation.

B  Vomiting:  of  all  food  taken;  with  pressure  in  stomach  ;
sour ;  of  food.

a  Vomiting,  purging,  and  icy-cold  sweat,  with  headache.
"  Scrobiculum  and  Stomach.  « Sickening,  painful  feeling
at  pit  of  stomach.

Ilnsipid  and  "spoiled"  sensation  in  stomach,  though  a
good  appetite.

■  Pressure  in  pit  of  stomach:  whole  forenoon,  >  by  eructa-

tion; night  and  morning.

■  Binding,  constricting  pain  in  gastric  region.

■  ■Constrictive  pain  in  stomach.

■Sensation  of  lump  in  stomach,  with  constant  beating,  as
of  two  hammers. ^Hysteria.

■  Pain  in  stomach: necessitates eating; > from  warm

milk,  <  from  boiled  meat  and  cold  drinks.

■  Nightly  pinching  pain  in  stomach  and  rooting  pain  in

chest,
i  Griping  in  stomach,  with  flatulency.

■  Griping  in  stomach,  with  nausea; she  was  constantly

obliged  to  spit,  as  in  water-brash.

■  Fulness  in  stomach  and  abdomen.

■  Burning  in  stomach,  causing  hunger.

■  Crampy,  spasmodic,  or  clawing  pains,  or  pressure,  with

vomiting  of  ingesta,  >  by  lying  down,  and  warmth  of
bed,  returning  when  rising,  with  vomiting;  acidity;
constipation;  pain  in  hepatic  region;  >  from  warm
food  or  drinks;  nervous  cardialgia,  with  anaemia ;  chlo-
rotic  color  of  face ;  dysmenorrhoea;  herpetic  constitution.

■  Gastralgia  a  few  hours  after  dinner; <  by  cold  drinks

and  boiled  meats  ;  >  by  warm  milk ;  furry  taste ;  pain
is  to  1.  of  stomach  and  of  great  severity,  with  absence  of
usual  gastric  symptoms  as  acidity,  water-brash,  nausea,
vomiting;  constant  yawning  with  bloatedness  of  gastric
region. ^Chlorosis.

■  Periodical  gastralgia  with  vomiting  of  food  immediately
after  eating;  the  pains  are  burning  and  radiate  into  ab-
domen.
■■Gastrodynia  with  anaemia;  chlorotic  color  of  face;  dys-
menorrhoea ;  constipation ;  irritability.


GRAPHITES.  452

iCardialgia  or  gastric  catarrh  ;  in  women  during  climac-
teric period.

■  Chronic  catarrh  of  stomach,  with  frequent  eructations;

frequently  feels  faint  with  partial  loss  of  senses.

I  Chronic  gastritis,  with  thirst,  especially  after  abuse  of

alcoholic  drinks.
^^  Hypochondria, l Stitches  in  both  hypochondria.

I I  Hardness  in  region  of  liver.

I  Burning  in  1.  hypochondrium,  internally,  <  when  lying-
on  it.

■  Cannot  bear  tight  clothing  around  hypochondria.

■  Cutting,  bearing  down  pains  in  hypochondria  and  hips.
^^  Abdomen. ■■Pain  in upper  abdomen, as if  everything

would  be  torn  to  pieces  during  menstruation.

■  Cramp  in  lower  abdomen. ^Dysmenorrhoea.

■  ■Pain  below  navel,  as  if  intestines  were  torn.

1  ■Burning  pains  radiating  through  abdomen.  ^Gastralgia.
I  I  Burning  in  a  small  spot  on  1.  side  of  abdomen.

■  Pain  in  belly,  in  1.  side,  when  lying  on  r.,  and  vice  versa.
■Stitches  in  1.  side  of  abdomen.

■  ■Colic  immediately  after  eating.

■  Griping,  digging  pains  in  abdomen.

■  Zona;  large  blisters  on  raised  ground,  from  umbilicus  to

spine ;  all  blisters  opened  by  scratching ;  excruciating
burning.
I  I  Rumbling  in  abdomen.

■  Croaking,  as  of  frogs,  in  abdomen.

■  Cannot  endure  anything  tight  about  abdomen  after  eating.

■  ■Heaviness  in  abdomen.

■  Distension  of  abdomen,  with  rush  of  blood  to  head,  heav-

iness of  head,  vertigo  and  confusion.

■  ■Great  distension  of  abdomen,  with  dulness  and  heaviness

of  head.

■  Distended  abdomen:  after  eating;  with  diarrhoea.

■  Abdomen  tense,  with  menses  delaying,  scanty  and  pale.

■  Abdomen  distended,  tense,  hard.

■  Hardness  in  lower  part  of  abdomen.

■  ■Full  abdomen,  as  from  accumulation  and  incarceration

of  flatus;  she  cannot  bear  anything  tight  about  hypo-
chondria.

■  Incarcerated  flatus,  painfully  pressing  towards  groins  and

anus.

■  First  two  weeks  after  birth,  colic,  arising  from  excessive

accumulation  of  inodorous  gas;  during  paroxysm  of
pain,  which  occurs  mostly  in  evening,  child  throws  itself
back  and  straightens  body.

■  Flatulence  suddenly  appears  and  presses  painfully  to-

wards abdominal  ring.


453  GRAPHITES.

■  Passage  of  much  offensive  flatus,  which  constantly  col-

lects anew.

I  Griping  in  abdomen  every  time  before  passage  of  flatus.

I  (Edema  of  external  abdomen.

■Ascites  progressing  steadily  and  apparently  to  a  fatal  ter-
mination; great  accumulation  of  serum  in  abdominal
cavity,  and  great  oedema  of  extremities,  chiefly  lower,
which  were  elephantine  in  size ;  profuse  and  constant
watery  exudation  from  skin  below  knees ;  epidermis  ex-
foliated ;  exudation  glutinous  in  character.

■  Ascites  in  conjunction  with  moist  tetter,  with  glutinous

exudation. 6'Herpes  zoster.

■  Itching  of  abdomen.

■  Pain  in  inguinal  regions.

■  Swelling  and  great  sensitiveness  of  one  inguinal  gland.

■  ■Herpetic  eruption  in  groins.

■  Glandular  swellings  in  groins.

^^  Stool  and  Rectum. ■  ■  Excessive  discharge  of  flatus.

■  Frequent  discharge  of  offensive  flatus,  with  distension  of

abdomen.

■  ■Stools  brown,  fluid,  mixed  with  undigested  substances,

and  of  an  intolerable  fetor.

■  Thin,  scalding  stools,  light  brown.

■  Diarrhoea,  almost  without  colic,  followed  by  great  pros-

tration, of  short  duration.

■  Watery  stools.

■  Mucous  diarrhoea.

■  Continuous  soft  stools  of  too  small  a  size.

■  Chronic  softness  of  stool.

■  Stool  pasty,  like  mud,  adhering  to  vessel.

■  A  c[uantity  of  white  mucus  is  expelled  with  the  stool,  or

the  hard  feces  are  covered  with  slime.

■  ■Stools knotty, the lumps being united by mucous

threads;  even  after  stool  there  is  still  mucus  coming
from  anus.

■  Much  inclination  to  stool;  though  not  hard,  still  it  is

evacuated  with  much  exertion,  on  account  of  total  inac-
tivity of  rectum.

■  ■Constipation; stool  large,  knotty.

■  Feces  very  large  and  difficult  of  passage.

■  ■Hard  stool,  with  much  urging  and  sticking  in  anus.

1  Obstipation  from  hardened  stool  or  from  inactivity  of
bowels; stools  knotty  and  large.

■  ■Obstinate  constipation  and  delayed  menstruation  occur

together.

■  Hard,  lumpy  stool,  with  slime  and  blood. ^Hemorrhoids.

■  Sensation  of  heaviness  in  abdomen;  chronic  constipation

with  hardness  in  region  of  liver ;  hard,  knotty  stool,  with


GRAPHITES.  454

pain  in  hemorrhoids  and  discharge  of  mucus  and  blood  ;
prolapsus  of  rectum  without  any  urging  to  stool,  as  if
anus  were  paralyzed ;  menses  late ;  thin,  watery  leucor-
rhoea.

I  Constipation  with  dryness  of  mucous  membrane  of  rec-
tum and  fissure  of  anus.

I  Constipation  in  women  who  are  inclined  to  erysipelatous
inflammation  and  ulcerative  processes  of  lower  extremi-
ties on  a  rheumatic  basis,  and  who  are  of  a  timid,  mo-
rose and  dejected  disposition.

■Constipation  in  subjects  of  herpetic  diathesis  or  with
scrofulous  cachexia;  in  hypochondriacal  subjects  with
marked  abdominal  symptoms.

I  Constipation ;  menses  irregular;  a  cough  and  a  fixed  pain
in  1.  side,  just  above  cardiac  region ;  she  was  dejected
and  had  lost  her  natural  vivacity  and  spirits.

Stools :  rarely  diarrhoeic  and  then  usually  painless ;  purg-
ing and  vomiting,  with  icy-cold  sweat;  insufficient;
hard,  lumpy,  with  slime  and  blood.

I  Sour-smelling  stool  with  burning  at  rectum.

iStools  very  thin,  like  a  roundworm.

During  stool:  burning  in  rectum  ;  tenesmus.

■  With  the  stool  discharge  of  a  little  blood  ;  of  tape-worm.
After  stool:  smarting  and  soreness  in  anus;  much  mucus

remains  about  anus ;  great  but  transient  prostration.

■  Prolapsus  of  rectum  with  its  hemorrhoids,  even  without.

urging  to  stool,  as  if  anus  had  lost  its  contractility  and
was  paralyzed.

lEasy  prolapse  of  rectum,  as  though  parts  had  lost  their
tonicity;  it  becomes  prolapsed  without  even  a  desire  for
stool.

llDischarge  of  mucus  from  rectum.

iPiles  of  twelve  years'  duration,  with  frequent  attacks  of
hemorrhage,  which  caused  anaemia;  she  was  daily  get-
ting weaker  from  loss  of  blood  and  restless  nights ;  pulse
low  and  feeble;  rectum  partially  prolapsed  with  two  fil-
bert-shaped piles,  as  large  as  little  finger,  knotty  and  fis-
sured, from  which  a  sanious  fluid  oozed  witli  an  odor  like
that  which  is  characteristic  of  cancer.

I  iHemorrhoids  of  rectum,  with  burning  rhagades  at  anus.

■  Hemorrhoids,  with  pain  on  sitting  down,  or  on  taking  a

wide  step  as  if  sj^lit  with  a  knife,  also  violent  itching^
and  very  sore  to  touch.

■  Varices  feel  very  sore  after  an  evacuation;  painful  burn-

ing fissures  between  varices.

■  Large  hemorrhoidal  tumors.

■  Fissura  ani;  severe,  sharp,  cutting  pain  daring  stool,  fol-

lowed by  constriction  and  aching  for  several  hours,  <
at  night.


455  GRAPHITES.

I  Severe  pain  during  evacuation,  sharp,  cutting,  followed
by  constriction  and  aching  for  several  hours,  and  espe-
cially severe  at  night. ^Fissures  of  anus.

I  Burning  and  bleeding  during  stool;  pressure  and  burn-
ing and  sharp,  cutting  stitches  in  anus;  soreness  at
anus,  and  smarting  on  contact;  bleeding  from  rectum,
with  sharp,  stitching  pains;  prolapsus  ani,  with  sensa-
tion as  though  sphincter  had  lost  its  contractile  power
and  was  paralyzed. ^Fissures  of  anus.

I  Hemorrhoids  in  anus,  causing  burning.

I  Swelling  of  anus.

I  Cutting  and  stitches  in  anus.

I I  Smarting,  sore  pain  in  anus  on  wiping  it.
Hitching  of  anus.

I  Tape- worm.
^^  Urinary  Organs. Cutting  and  downward  pressure  in  both
kidneys  before  urinating.

Anxious  pressure  in  bladder,  with  sudden  desire  to  uri-
nate, but  scanty  emission.

■  Frequent  urination,  particularly  at  night.

■  Urging  to  urinate,  with  scanty  discharge.

■  Urging  to urinate,  with dribbling  after  the  usual  dis-

charge.

■  Urine  clear,  but  after  four  or  five  hours,  covered  with  an

iridescent  film.

■  ■Urine  becomes  turbid  and  deposits  a  white  sediment.

■  Urine  becomes  very  turbid  after  two  hours,  with  reddish

sediment; biting  in  urethra  while  passing  it.

■  Urine:  dark  brown; fetid;  sour.

■  Stitches  or  smarting  in  urethra  when  urinating.
Urinary  troubles,  with  burning  in  urethra  between  acts

of  micturition.

■  Very  thin  stream  of  urine,  as  if  urethra  were  contracted.
Pain  in  sacrum  or  coccygis  when  urinating.

■  Nocturnal  enuresis.

^^Male  Sexual  Organs. ■Uncontrollable  sexual  excitement;
violent  erections.

■  Voluptuous  irritability  of  genitals.

I  I  Tension  and  lascivious  feeling  in  genitals.
I  I  Revival  of  sexual  desire  and  fantasies.

■  Pollutions  with  weakness  and  pain  in  sacrum;  neuralgic

pains  in  back  of  neck.

■  Seminal  emissions  at  night,  with  flaccid  penis ;  they  wake

him,  but  no  voluptuous  feelings;  sensation  of  great
weakness  in  genitals ;  costiveness  ;  from  previous  sexual
abuse.

■  Emissions  with  amorous  dreams.

■  Sexual  weaknesses,  consisting  of  lively  desire  with  incom-


GRAPHITES.  456

plete  erection  and  too  rapid  or  too  early  discharge  of
semen,  such  as  sometimes  follows  the  habit  of  mastur-
bation, acquired  in  boyhood  and  abandoned  early.

I  lAlmost  involuntary  emission,  without  much  erection,

during  an  embrace.

I I  Sexual  debility  from  sexual  abuse.
llDecided  aversion  to  coition.

■  Impotence,  with  dislike  to  coition.

I  Want  of  proper  sensation  during  coition.

■  Painful  cramps  in  calves  during  an  embrace.

■  No  ejaculation  follows  coition  in  spite  of  every  exertion.

■  After  an  embrace  coldness  of  legs,  exhaustion,  heat  of

body  and  perspiration.
1  I  Dropsical  swelling  of  prepuce  and  scrotum.

■  Herpetic  eruptions  on  penis.

■  Prepuce  swells  to  a  large  water  blister  without  pain.

■  Vesicular  eruf)tion  on  j)repuce.

■  Testes  swollen.

■  Hydrocele (1. side),  herpetic  eruption on  scrotum, in

groins,  or  on  lower  extremities  either  preceding  or  ac-
companying the  disease,  or  when  arising  from  suppres-
sion of  cutaneous  disease.

■  ■Itching  and  moist  eruption  on  scrotum.

■  Itching  on  scrotum.
I  I  Gonorrhoea.

■Stricture  of  urethra  with  sudden  arrest  of  flow,  then
oozing  of  snuff-colored  slime  in  a  long  thread,  or,  in-
stead, a  few  drops  of  bloody  water;  after  micturition
sudden  peremptory  urging  near  glans,  or  seems  to  run
back  when  costive.

■  Gluey,  sticky  discharge  at  meatus  urinarius,  blocking  up

urethra. ^Gleet.
^^  Female  Sexual  Organs. ■Great  aversion  to  coitus.

■  Enlarged  ovaries,  which  become  more  tender  and  more

enlarged  every  time  she  takes  cold  or  gets  her  feet  damp,

■  Swelling  and  hardness  of  ovaries  after  menses.

I  I  Tearing,  grinding,  twisting  pains  in  r.  ovar}^,  as  if  it
would  burst,  before  or  during  menses.

■  The  indurated  left  ovary  swells  and  becomes  very  hard;

violent  pains  on  touch,  respiration  or  hawking,  when
violent  stitches  shoot  into  it;  profuse  general  sweat;
continual  loss  of  sleep.

■  Tumor,  size  of  an  orange,  in  r.  iliac  fossa,  also  similar  one

ink;  both  hard,  round,  slightly  movable;  not  painful
to  pressure,  nor  producing  inconvenience  from  weight.

■  Bearing  down  pain  in  uterus  to  back,  with  weakness  and

sickness. ^Dysmenorrhcea.

■  Pain  in  uterus  when  reaching  high  with  arms.


457  GRAPHITES.

I  Os  uteri  standing  backwards,  can  only  be  readied  with
difficulty.

iCaulifiower  excrescences;  cancer  uteri;  severe  lancin-
ating, stitching  pains  through  uterus  down  to  lower
extremities ;  heaviness  of  abdomen  with  increased  pain
when  standing.

■  Hot  and  painful  vagina ;  swelling  of  lymphatic  vessels

and  mucous  follicles;  neck  of  uterus  harcl  and  swollen,
with  tuberculous  nodes  and  cauliflower  excrescences ;
great  weight  in  abdomen  on  rising,  with  fainting  sort  of
weakness  and  <  of  pains ;  delaying  menses,  with  <  of
pains  shortly  before  and  at  appearance  of  menses ;  dis-
charge of  black,  lumpy,  fetid  blood ;  stitches  shooting
through  abdomen  as  far  as  thighs ;  burning  and  stitch-
ing pains;  constipation;  livid  complexion;  sad  and
anxious  mood. ^Cancer  uteri.

■  Bearing  down  pain  in  womb,  with  weakness  and  sinking;

pain  over  eyes;  pain  in  middle  of  breast,  with  cough,
scraping,  rawness  and  soreness. ^Dysmenorrhcea.

1  Retarded,  deficient  menstruation  ;  discharge  watery,  thin,
and  in  small  quantities;  pulse  thin  ;  constitution  feeble;
sick  headache,  with  pain  over  eyes  and  numb  pain  froni
sacrum  down  legs;  cold  hands  and  feet ;  acne  solare  in
face. ^Dysmenorrhoea.

lAfter  mental  trouble  during  menstruation  suffered  for
five  years  from  dysmenorrhoea.

^  I  Great  emaciation'^with  paleness  of  face;  terrible  pain  in
small  of  back  and  abdomen,  which  compel  her  to  stay
in  bed ;  for  next  five  days  constant  discharge  of  coagula
with  continuous  cramps,  so  severe  that  she  cries  out
aloud  with  pain;  want  of  appetite;  stools  scanty  and
painful; spasmodic  urination.

1  Dysmenorrhoea  with  severe  and  obstinate  megrim.

■Menses  delayed,  scanty,  thick  and  dark,  or  else  serous
pale  blood,  with  griping  and  abdominal  spasms,  head-
ache, nausea  and  pain  in  chest.

i  Occasional  show  of  menses  which  are  very  pale  ancl  very
scanty,  with  abdominal  pains  and  pains  in  limbs;
swelling  of  hands  and  feet.

iMenses:  too  scanty  and  too  pale;  too  late,  with  violent
colic;  irregular,  lasting  only  for  a  few  days ;  blood  dark;
delayed  from  getting  feet  wet.

I  Menses  very  irregular,  appear  after  8  or  10  weeks,  are
very  scanty  and  last  but  a  short  time ;  discharge  pitchy
black;  constant  pressing  headache;  cutting,  bearing
down  pains  in  hypochondria  and  hips ;  backache ;  swell-
ing of  abdomen  and  of  upper  and  lower  limbs,  with  sen-
sation of  numbness,  crawhng  and  stitching,  as  if  they


GRAPHITES.  458.

were  asleep  ;  chilliness ;  coldness  of  hands  and  particu-
larly of  feet ;  rapid  obesity.

■  Sensation  of  lassitude,  heaviness  and  tiredness;  small^

round,  red,  itching,  herpetic  patches  on  forearms,  neck
and  throat.

■  Menses  too  late  and  scanty,  sometimes  black,  often  pale,,

with  stitches,  burning  and  dryness  of  vagina.

■  Scanty  menses  with  congestion  to  brain.

■  Scanty  catamenia  preceded  by  menstrual  colic. ^Gas-

tralgia.

■  Menses  keep  postponing,  discharge  scanty  and  pale.

■  Menses  suppressed,  with  weight  in  arms  and  legs.

■  Suppression  of  menses,  with  heaviness  of  limbs  and  con-

gestion of  blood  to  head.

■  Eruptions  appear  during  menses.

■  Non-appearance  of  menses  for  five  months;  severe  con-

gestion to  head  and  chest,  with  dark  redness  of  cheeks,,
anxiety  and  oppression  of  chest  when  lying  down.

■  Tendency  to  spasms; menses  have  not  appeared  for  six

months;  chronic  catarrh  of  stomach,  with  frequent
eructations;  frequently  feels  faint,  with  partial  loss  of
senses;  os  uteri  standing  backwards,  and  can  only  be
reached  with  difficulty.

■Young  woman,  chlorotic,  irregular  menses;  became  preg-
nant, recovery  after  labor  very  slow;  oedema  of  eye-
lids, vulva  and  abdominal  walls ;  menses  very  late,  pale
and  scanty;  yellowish  tint  of  skin;  vagina  cold;  ab-
dominal walls  thick,  doughy,  pitting  on  pressure;  great
aversion  to  coitus.

■Lassitude  and  heaviness  in  lower  extremities,  and  chronic
hoarseness,  a  forerunner  of  tuberculosis ;  no  menses  for
three  months.

I  iMenostasis.

■  Aneemia,  with  dryness  of  vagina.

■  First  menses  delayed.

■  Instead of regular period  has  leucorrhoea  and  suffers

with  constipation ;  has  grown  very  fat ;  as  a  child  had
tettery  eruption  on  both  forearms,  of  which,  however,
no  trace  is  left.
iQildema  pedum  from  amenorrhoea.

■  Before  and  during  menstruation  fatiguing  cough.

I  I  Before  and  during  menses  cough  throughout  day,
fatiguing  chest; no  cough  at  night.

■  ■Leucorrhreic  discharge  occurs  in  gushes  day  or  night.

■  Pain  in  epigastrium during  catamenia,  as  if  everything

would  be  torn  to  j>ieces,  with  labor-like  pains  ;  persistent
and  stinging  toothache. ^Dysmenorrhoea.

■  During  menses:  dry  cough  and  profuse  sweats,  morning


459  GRAPHITES.

sickness,  swelling  of  feet  and  painless  swelling  of  face ;.
hoarseness,  violent  coryza  and  catarrhal  fever;  colic;
violent  headache  with  nausea ;  morning  sickness ;  chaf-
ing between  legs ;  swelling  of  feet;  chilliness;  pain  in
varices;  hoarseness  with  dry  cough,  headache  evenings;
painless  swelling  of  cheeks;  colic-like  labor  pains;  back-
ache; heat  in  abdomen;  urging,  pressing,  like  labor
pains;  itching  in  abdomen;  weakness  in  feet,  that  she
cannot  walk;  pain  in  abdomen;  growing  dark  before
eyes.
After  menses,  jerking  in  arms ;  at  other  times,  pain  below
navel,  as  if  intestines  were  torn;  lying  upon  r.  side,  pain
is  in  1.,  and  vice  versa;  reaching  with  arms  high,  pain
in  region  of  womb ;  constipation.

■  Lassitude  and  weakness  with  the  catamenia.
iMorning  sickness  of  pregnancy  or  during  menses.

■  Vagina  cold. ^Chlorosis.

■  Biting  or  smarting  in  vagina.

I  I  Vesicles  or  excoriations  in  vagina. ^Pruritus.
Hitching,  smarting, painful  vesicle on  vulva; itching

pimples  on  vulva.
I  I  Itching  vesicles  and  pimples  on  labia,  which  smart  and

are  painful; painless  pimples  on  inside  of  labia.

■  Painful  pressure  towards  pudenda.

■  ■  Itching  of  pudenda  before  menstruation.

■  Excoriations  in  perineum,  vulva  and  between  thighs.
■Soreness  between  thighs,  near  pudenda,  during  menstru-
ation.

■  Feeling  of  external  irritation  at  genitals  as  if  the  parts

were  swollen.

■  Qi^dema  of  pudenda. ^Chlorosis.

■  ■Acrid,  excoriating  leucorrhoea,  in  gushes,  day  and  night,,

before  and  after  menses.

■  Profuse  leucorrhoea,  with  weakness  of  back  and  sacrum,.

when  walking  and  sitting.

■  Yellowish-white  leucorrhoea,  excoriating  skin  ;  uterus  in-

durated, swollen  and  sore;  straining  in  anus,  with  pro-
truding piles,  and  bearing  down  in  bowels  long  after  an
evacuation.

■  ■Leucorrhoea;  profuse,  perfectly  white,  especially  on  ris-

ing in  morning;  weakness  of  back  when  walking  or  sit-
ting, with  distension  of  abdomen,  and  painful  pressure
towards  pudenda;  discharges  occur  in  gushes  day  and
night;  turbid  urine;  frequent  micturition,  especially  at
night ;  difficult  stool ;  great  lassitude.

■  Copious,  thin  leucorrhoea,  causing  a  biting,  smarting  sen-

sation in  vagina.

■  ■  During  climaxis :  cardialgia ;  gastric  catarrh.


GRAPHITES.  460

I  Tendency  to  obesity. /^Uterine  complaints.
^^  Pregnancy. Parturition.  Lactation. iLarge  and  corpu-
lent women  of  venous  constitution,  who  are  subject  to
tettery  eruptions,  which  itch  and  emit  glutinous  fluid.

■  Labor  pains  weak  or  have  ceased  entirely.
I  Nipples  painful  and  cracked.

I  Sore  nipples  of  nursing  women,  end  of  nipple  cracked  and

fissured,  exuding  a  limpid  serum.
II Hard  cicatrices  remaining  after  mammary  abscess,  re-
tarding flow  of  milk.

I I  Cancer  of  mammse,  from  old  cicatrices,  which  had  re-
mained after  repeated  abscesses.

^  Voice  and  Larynx. Trachea  and  Bronchia, i Voice:
impaired;  not  clear,  in  singing;  cracked,  in  singing.

■  Hoarseness  in  evening. ^Coryza.

■  Chronic  hoarseness.'

I  I  Soreness  and  roughness  of  larynx,  with  tickling  cough.

■  Laryngeal  region  sensitive  to  touch.

^^  Respiration. ■Respiration  has  a  dry  sound.

■  Constriction  of  chest,  as  if  about  to  suffocate  when  falling

asleep.

■  ■Constriction  of  the  chest,  as  if  too  narrow.

■  Suffocative  paroxysm  at  night,  awakens  him  out  of  sleep,

usually  after  midnight,  must  quickly  jump  out  of  bed,
hold  himself  finnly  to  something,  and  quickly  eats
wdiatever  is  on  hand,  which  gives  relief;  very  hoarse
cough. ^Asthma  spasmodicum.

■  Cough,  caused  by  taking  a  deep  inspiration  in  evening

and  at  night.
^  Cough. Cough :  caused  by  deep  inspiration ; loose,  from
tickling  deep  in  chest.

■  ■Cough  at  night.

■  Whooping-cough  with  strangling,  red  face,  watery  eyes ;

strains  all  over;  sometimes  wind  comes  from  anus;
raises  phlegm;  morning  much  hard  coughing,  throat
feels  full  of  gurgling  mucus;  impudent,  teasing;  laughs
at  reprimands ;  several  hard  straining  small  stools  daily.

■  Expectoration:  salty; day  and  evening.

^^  Inner  Chest  and  Lungs. ■Cramps  of  chest.

■  Pains  in  chest.

■  Pain  in  middle  of  chest,  with  cough,  scraping,  rawness

and  soreness.

■  Raw  pain  in  chest,  like  raw  flesh.

■  Stitching  pains  in  chest.

■Stitches  in  chest  and  palpitation  of  heart  from  least  ex-
ercise.
^'^  Heart,  Pulse  and  Circulation. Region  of  heart :  constric-
tion; pressure;  stitches.


461  GRAPHITES.

iSensation  like  an  electric  shock,  from  heart  toward  front
of  neck.

■  Strong  pulsation  of  blood  in  whole  body,  but  especially

about  heart,  <  by  every  motion.

■  Palpitation  of  heart:  with  anxiety;  with  nosebleed.

■  Pulse  full  and  hard,  somewhat  accelerated  in  morning,,

slow  during  day  and  evening
^  Outer  Chest. ■  Stinging  in  fleshy  part  of  chest.

■  Pimples  and  herpes  on  chest.

■  Zona  on  1.  side,  with  pain  in  thoracic  muscles  on  motion.

■  Itching  vesicles  and  restlessness  at  night.

■  Perspiration  on  sternum  every  morning.

■  Nipples  painful  and  cracked.

;rAching  soreness  and  bleeding  of  male  nipples.

■  Soreness  of  nipples,  with  small,  corrosive  blisters  or  ulcers,

oozing  a  limpid  serum,  or  a  thick,  glutinous  fluid,  which
forms  a  crust  that  is  removed  by  nursing,  when  the
same  formation  again  occurs,  and  so  on ;  disposition  to
fissure  and  crack.
■Small  bluish  blisters  on  nipple,  with  fluid  discharge.

■  Threatened  suppuration,  when  breasts  are  marked  with

many  cicatrices  from  former  ulcerations.

■  ■Hard  scars  remaining  after  mammary  abscesses.

■  Mammary  cancer  developed  from  old  cicatrices  formed

from  repeated  abscesses  in  mammse.
^^  Neck and  Back. ■  Pain  in  nape  of  neck.

I  I  Stiffness  of  back  of  neck ;  also  with  headache.

■  Glands  on  side  of  neck  down  to  shoulder,  swollen  and

painful  when  bending  neck  to  one  side,  or  lying  upon
it;  as  if  tense  and  stiff.

■  Glandular  swellings  on  1.  side  of  neck.

■  ■Painless  sw^ollen  glands  on  side  of  neck.
■Small  boils  on  neck,  back  and  arms.

■  Eruption  on nape  of  neck  dry,  peeling  in  fine,  mealy

scales,  without  itching.

■  Chronic  eruption  on  scalp  and  nape  of  neck;  falling  out

of  hair;  dandruff;  terrible  itching  and  burning;  skin
on  nape  of  neck  hard,  nodulous  and  rough ;  habitual
constipation ;  in  a  woman  past  climacteric  age.

■  Small  of  back  aches,  as  if  bruised  or  broken.

■  Pain  in  small  of  back,  as  if  broken,  especially  on  touch-

ing; pressing,,  grasping  and  twitching,  with  sensation  in
arms  and  feet  as  if  they  were  turned  outward.

■  Tabes  dorsalis,  especially  in  women,  with  great  weakness.

in  legs  and  back,  palpitation ;  dulness  of  sense ;  numb-
ness or  torpor  of  genital  organs  and  pains  in  chest.

■  Contracting  pains  in  back.

■Weakness  in  back  and  loins  on  walking ;  back  aches.


•GRAPHITES.  462

I  Sacral  pains,  with  sensation  of  crawling  and  stitching.
I  Numb  pain,  from  sacrum  down  legs,
i  I  Dull  drawing  in  coccyx  in  evening.
I  Pain  in  os  coccygis  while  urinating.

■  Violent  itching  of  coccygeal  region,  the  part  becoming

moist  with  scurfy  formations.
^"  Upper  Limbs. '  i  Shoulder  and  neck  painful.
I  Tearing  in  1.  shoulder-joint,  on  moving  arm.
I  Rheumatic  or  burning  pains,  especially  in  1.  shoulder.

■  Violent  sticking  in  1.  shoulder.

■  Burning  pressure  beneath  armpit.

I  I  Right  upper  arm  sore,  tender  and  swollen.

■  Arms  feel  "  asleep."

■  Jerking  in  arms.

■  Herpes  circinatus  hard  to  touch  and  wrinkled  looking,

itching  terribly,  in  bend  of  elbow.

■  Cramp  in  hand.

I  I  Tearing  in  hands  like  rheumatism.

■  Left  hand  numb  and  dead,  with  formication  extending

up  arm.

■  Horny  callosities  in  hands.

■  I  Skin  of  hands  hard  and  cracked.

■  Eczema  upon  back  of  1.  hand;  commencing  in  a  small

place  with  vesicles ;  spreads,  forms  crusts,  and  finally
fissures,  especially  upon  knuckles  of  first  phalanges.

■  Gouty  swellings  of  fingers ;  in  joints.
■Raw,  moist  places  between  fingers.

■  Constant  chafed  soreness  between  fingers.

■  Pain  in  thumb-joint,  as  if  sprained.

■  Rheumatic  pressive  tearing  in  first  joint  of  r.  thumb.

■  Vesicle  on  little  finger  itches,  suppurates  and  discharges

much  matter,  with  burning  and  sticking,  which,  like
the  suppuration,  continues  a  long  time.

■  Finger-nails  black  and  rough,  matrix  inflamed,  with  sore-

ness, throbbing  and  numbness,  no  suppuration  ;  <  from
water.

I I  Finger-nails  become  thick.

■^'  Lower  Limbs. ■  iSmarting  soreness  between  nates.

■  Eruption  over  nates  and  posterior  part  of  thighs  ;  no  dif-

fused redness,  but  numerous  small,  brown  scabs,  with
slight  moisture ;  occasional  paroxysms  of  itching ;  trou-
blesome at  night;  some  small,  red,  itching  sj)ots  on
arms.

■  Painful  soreness  between  pudendum  and  thigh,  covered

with  pimples,  vesicles  and  ulcers.

■  Red,  raw  spot  like  a  tetter  on  upper  part  of  thigh,  oppo-

site scrotum,  itching  somewhat  in  morning.

■  Painful soreness between upper part of thighs near

genitals.


463  GRAPHITES.

I  I  Pains  extending  from  pudenda  to  thighs.

I I  Soreness  high  up  between  thighs,  during  and  after
walking.

■  Tearing  or  bruised  pains  in  thighs.

■  Numbness  of  thighs.

■  Ulcers  on  lower  limbs,  with  acrid  pus,  dryness  of  skin

and  constipation.

■  Restlessness  in  legs.

■  Heaviness  of  legs.

■  Legs  and  feet  heavy  and  swollen;  she  thought  her  feet

must  burst.
I  1  Swelling  of  legs,  even  while  lying  in  bed.

■  Great  oedema  of  limbs,  chiefly  lower,  which  are  very  large,

with  profuse,  constant,  watery  exudation  from  skin  below

knees,  epidermis  exfoliated. ^Ascites.
I  I  Bruised  pain  in  knees.
■Stiff  feeling  in  hollow  of  knee,  as  if  tendons  were  too

short.

■  ■Tetters  in  hollow  of  knee.

I  I  Jerking  in  all  the  muscles  of  1.  calf.

■  Cramp  in  calves.

■  Weakness  of  feet,  cannot  walk.

I  I  Sometimes  feet  are  icy-cold,  again  quite  burning.

■  I  Cold  feet  in  evening  in  bed.
I  I  Coldness  of  dorsum  of  foot.

■  Feet  sweat  profusely  (not  so  offensive  as  under  Silica),  but

moderate  walking  causes  soreness  between  toes,  so  that
the  parts  become  raw.
I  I  Profuse  sweat  on  feet;  they  begin  to  smell.

■  Ulcers  on  feet,  form  purulent  pustules,  always  inflamed

and  very  painful.

■  Callous  ulcers  of  the  feet.

■Qj^dema  pedum,  with  solitary  itching  papulae;  erysipela-
tous redness  of  face;  menses  scanty.

■  ■Qlldema  pedum  from  amenorrhoea.

■  Rheumatic  tearing  in  feet  and  toes.

■  Burning  of  heels  with  crawling,  especially  in  morning  in

bed.
■Stitches  in  heel,  when  putting  it  down.

■  Gouty  tearing  in  toes.

■  Stiffness  and  contraction  of  toes.

B  Ulcers,  or  spreading  blisters  on  toes.

■  Horny  skin  on  toes.

■  Sore  pains  of  corns. ^Lung  disease.

■  Thick  and  crippled  toe-nails.

iHypertrophied  nail  of  1.  big  toe;  it  was  formed  almost
like  a  horn,  and  so  hard,  that  onl}^  by  repeated  and  long-
continued  oi3erations  with  a  file,  it  could  be  diminished.


GRAPHITES.  464

I  Pain  in  nail  of  great  toe.

■  Ingrowing  toe-nail.

^  Limbs  in  General, i  Drawing  pains  in  limbs.

■  Tearing  pain  in  feet  and  hands;  in  all  the  limbs.

■  Falling  asleep  of  arms  and  legs  while  sitting; while

walking,  crawling  in  them.

■  Limbs  go  "to  sleep."

■  Weakness  of  all  the  limbs.

■  Startings  of  hands  and  feet.

■  Heaviness  in  limbs.

■  Paralyzed  sensation  of  all  the  limbs.
I  I  Hands  and  feet  either  hot  or  cold.

Limbs  drawn  together,  crooked,  from  bones  being  bent.

■  Back  of  both  forearms  and  dorsum  of  hand  covered  with

corroding,  herpetic  exanthema,  consisting  partly  of  a
kind  of  cortical  crusts,  partly  of  red  fissures,  looking-
like  raw  meat,  partly  of  elevated  islets ;  the  exanthem
was  spreading  and  painfully  itching,  especially  at  night;
discharge  of  turbid  matter  and  acrid  water;  lips  and
skin  of  fingers  fissured;  upper  arm  nearly  free;  on
lower  extremities  flexors  are  affected,  and  especially  bend
of  knee  and  external  surface,  with  same  discharge  and
same  burning  itching,  which  becomes  <  when  eruption
is  dry ;  <  during  fall;  >  during  summer ;  pale,  slightly
oedematous  face;  sluggishness  of  all  secretions  and  ex-
cretions; spontaneous  fissures  in  skin;  cannot  bear
damp  atmosphere;  when  a  youth  had  measles,  and  in
consequence  of  bathing  too  soon  had  paralysis  of  face;
mouth  drawn  sideways;  cannot  close  1.  eye,  which  looks
smaller  than  right.

■  Eczema  chronica  on  dorsal  region  of  both  forearms  and

hands,  and  on  bends  of  knees  and  calves  of  legs;  erup-
tion comjDOsed  partly  of  thick  crusts  and  partly  of  a  raw
surface,  with  deep  rhagades,  constantly  secreting  ecze-
niatous  fluid;  intolerable  itching,  <  at  night  and  from
warmth  of  bed;  lips  chapped,  fingers  full  of  rhagades;
face  pale,  bloated;  bowels  torpid,  constipated;  all  <
in  damp  and  wet.
^  Rest.  Position  Motion.  Obliged  to  lie  down :  vertigo
headache.

Pains  in  back  compel  her  to  stay  in  bed.

Inclination  to  sit  down.

Lying  in  bed:  swelling  of  legs,  soreness  from.

Lying  down:  >  crampy,  spasmodic,  clawing  pain  in
stomach;  on  1.  hypochondrium,  pain  <  ;  anxiety  and
oppression  of  chest.

Lying  on  neck:  causes  pain.

■  Lying: on  r.  side,  pain  in  belly,  in  1.;  lying  upon  L

pain  in  r.  side. 6'Between  catamenial  periods.


465  GRAPHITES.

While  sitting:  falling  asleep  of  arms  and  legs.

Sitting  down :  pain  in  hemorrhoids ;  profuse  leucorrhoea ;

weakness  of  back.
Stooping: during  and  after,  vertigo; everything turns

black  before  eyes ;  saliva  runs  from  mouth.
Standing: <  pain  with  heaviness  of  abdomen.'
Looking  upward :  vertigo.
Putting  down  heel :  causes  stitches.
Bending  neck  :  causes  pain.
Stiffness  on  first  beginning  to  move.
Motion :  causes  pain  in  thoracic  muscles.
Motion during eating, talking, laughing or  yawning:

brings  on  attacks  of  convulsions  of  1.  side  of  body.
Every  motion: <  strong  pulsation  of  blood;  causes  sweat.
Least  exertion:  stitches  in  chest  and  palpitation  of  heart.
Rising:  from  bed  feels  as  if  drunken;  <  crampy  pain  in

stomach;  weight  in  abdomen.
Moving  jaw:  cracking  in  ear.
Walking:  eructations; profuse  leucorrhoea;  w^eakness  in

back  and  loins;  soreness  high  up  between  thighs  during

and  after;  causes  soreness  between  toes.
Every  step  makes  reverberations  in  ear.
Reaching  high  with  arms:  pain  in  uterus.
Child  throws  itself  back  and  straightens  body.
^^  Nerves, l  l  Tremulous  sensation  through  whole  body.
I  Tired  feeling ;  lassitude ;  inclination  to  sit  down.

I  I  Amazingly  weary  and  sleepy.

Debility,  without  pain,  compelling  him  to  groan.
Frequently  feels  faint,  with  partial  loss  of  senses.

I I  Weak  exhaustion  of  whole  body.
■Sudden  sinking  of  strength.

■  Binding,  constricting  pain  in  different  parts,  especially

in  gastric  region ;  sensation  of  lump  in  stomach,  with
constant  beating  as  of  two  hammers;  great  desire  to
vomit ;  feels  so  tired  that  death  would  be  a  relief ;  hates
to  be  addressed,  or  to  work,  feels  indifferent  to  everybody
and  everything;  constant  chilliness  as  if  skin  were
tightened  over  body;  great  anguish  before  menses;  ob-
stinate constipation.
I  Full  of  spasms. ^Amenorrhoea.

■  Contractions  of  muscles.

■  After  local  treatment  of  erysipelas,  twitching  of  eyelids,

which  gradually  spread  to  muscles  of  1.  side  of  face,  and
in  course  of  tw^o  years  developed  into  general  convul-
sions of  whole  1.  side;  any  motion  during  eating,  talk-
ing, laughing  or  yawning,  brought  on  an  attack  which
often  lasted  a  quarter  of  an  hour.

■  ■Cataleptic  condition;  conscious,  but  without  power  to

move  or  speak.

VOL.  V. — 30.


GRAPHITES.  466

1 1  Numbness  and  deadness,  with  coldness  of  fingers  of  both
hands,  extending  as  far  as  middle  of  upper  arm;  cold-
ness and  numbness  of  face,  <  1.  side ;  great  vertigo  and
blindness,  with  prostration  of  strength ;  face  pale  and
haggard ;  much  emaciation  without  perceptible  cause ;
both  kidneys  sore,  with  ischuria.  ^Paralysis.
^^  Sleep.  1 1  Constant  yawning,  with  bloatedness  of  gastric  re-
gion.

I  Inclination  to  stretch,  without  being  able  to  satisfy  it  suf-
ficiently.

■  Excessively  tired  and  sleepy.

I  I  Sleepiness :  during  day,  must  lie  down ;  after  dinner.

I  I  Perspiration  about  head,  when  falling  asleep.

I  Night-sweat.

I  I  Constant  talking  during  sleep.

■Wetting  the  bed  at  night  while  asleep.

■  Wakens  at  night  with  a  suffocative  attack,
i  I  Bleeding  from  nose  at  night.

I  Light  slumber  or  unrefreshing  sleep;  starting;  wander-
ing fancies.

!l  Nightly  pains  felt  in  sleep.

ilStupid  morning  sleep.

il  Cannot  go  to  sleep  till  late.

I  Unable  to  fall  asleep  before  midnight  on  account  of  a
fixed  idea.

■Sleeplessness.

I  Great  sleepiness  by  day,  goes  to  sleep  early  in  evening,

but  during  night  there  is  wakefulness,  tossing  about,
heat^and  anxiety;  dreams  anxious  and  terrifying;  at
last  sinks  into  a  profound  and  dull  morning  sleep.

■  Great  agitation  at  night;  anxious,  frightful  dreams.
il  I  Sleep  disturbed  by  dreams.

'\  I  Numerous  dreams,  with  distorted  images.

II  Disturbed  sleep.

1 1  Dreams:  vivid;  anxious;  horrible;  vexatious;  about
fatal  accidents.
^  Time.  Morning:  full  of  fear;  confusion  in  head;  feels  as  if
drunken  when  rising  from  bed;  vertigo;  semilateral
headache;  headache;  pressing  pain  in  eyes;  eye  red
and  agglutinated;  lying  in  bed  cracking  in  ear;  nose-
bleed; saliva  runs  from  mouth;  dryness  of  mouth;  vio-
lent thirst;  qualmishness;  much  mucus  in  throat;  nau-
sea; pressure  at  pit  of  stomach;  much  hard  coughing;
accelerated  pulse;  perspiration  on  sternum;  itching  in
spots  on  thigh;  burning  of  heels  with  crawling;  stupid
sleep;  chilliness.

9  or  10  A.M. :  child  cannot  open  eyes.

Till  noon:  headache  on  vertex  and  nape  of  neck.


467  GRAPHITES.

Forenoon:  pressure  in  pit  of  stomach.
Afternoon:  child  acts  as  if  it  had  pain;  rush  of  blood  to
head.

4  P.M.  till  evening:  chill.

5  P.M. :  chilliness  and  coldness  of  whole  body.

During  day:  trembling;  cough;  leucorrhoea;  salty  expec-
toration;  slow  pulse;  must  lie  down;  great  sleepiness.

Evening:  vertigo;  sees  fiery  zigzags  around  outside  of
field  of  vision;  pressing  pain  in  eyes;  cracking  in  ears
when  eating;  nosebleed  in  bed;  had  to  cry  out  on  ac-
count of  tearing  in  zygoma;  hoarseness;  paroxysms  of
pain  from  accumulation  of  gas;  headache;  cough;  salty
expectoration;  slow  pulse;  dull  drawing  in  coccyx;  cold
feet  in  bed ;  goes  to  sleep  early ;  heat.

Night:  thoughts  prevent  sleep;  agglutination  of  lids;
nosebleed;  toothache  <;  pains  in  throat  like  a  plug;
pressure  at  pit  of  stomach;  pain  in  fissura  ani;  after
an  evacuation  sharp  cutting  followed  by  constriction
and  aching  for  several  hours;  frequent  urination;
seminal  emissions;  leucorrhoeic  discharge;  frequent
micturition;  suffocating  paroxysm;  cough;  itching
vesicles  and  restlessness  at  night;  itching  troublesome;
painful  itching  of  exanthema  on  back  of  forearms  and
dorsum  of  hand;  wakens  with  a  suffocating  attack;
pains  felt  in  sleep;  unable  to  fall  asleep  before  midnight;
wakefulness ;  great  agitation ;  heat,  with  scrofulous  affec-
tions of  bones.

After  midnight :  profuse  perspiration  lasting  till  morning ;
dry  heat.
^^  Temperature  and  "Weather. Open  air : sweat  on  head
when  walking;  lachrymation;  fluent  coryza  <  ;  chill  >.

Warmth :  tearing  pain  in  teeth  < ;  >  crampy  pain  in
stomach;  >  scrofulous  affection  of  bones.

Warmth  of  bed  :  <  itching.

Warm  drinks:  pain  in  stomach  >;  pain  in  hepatic  re-
gion >.

Wind :  while  walking,  drawing  pain  in  molars.

Water:  inflamed  matrix  <.

Bathing  after  measles:  paralysis  of  face.

Washing:  scurf  disappears ;  feels  <  after.

Wet  feet:  delayed  menses.

Damp,  wet  atmosphere :  <  symptoms.

Cold  drinks: stinging  toothache;  pain  in  stomach  <.

Cold  air:  very  sensitive  to;  fluent  coryza  < ;  scrofulous
affections  of  bones  <.
■*"  Fever. I  l  Chilliness  in  morning,  in  bed.

Shaking  chill  every  day,  in  evening ;  after  an  hour,  hot
face  and  cold  feet  without  subsequent  sweat.


GRAPHITES.  468

Chill  in  evening,  with  headache  and  tearing  in  limbs,
great  thirst  and  profuse  perspiration  after  midnight,
lasting  till  morning.

I  Chill  and  chilliness,  most  in  evening.

Chill  from  4  p.m.  till  evening.

Chilliness  and  coldness  of  whole  body  at  5  p.m.,  with  icy-
cold  feet.

1  Chill  <  after  meals,  >  after  drinking,  >  in  open  air.

I  I  Sometimes  feet  are  icy-cold,  again  quite  burning.

■Flushes  of  heat.

Violent  febrile  chilliness  morning  and  evening,  the  heat
followed  by  sweat.

Dry  heat  every  evening  and  night,  lasting  till  morning,
with  headache  on  vertex  and  in  nape  of  neck  till  noon.

Heat  evening  and  night;  with  restlessness;  unable  to
sleep,  or  remain  in  bed  on  account  of  it.

I  Hands  and  soles  of  feet  hot  and  burning.

Heat  when  riding  in  a  carriage.

■  Sweats  from  slightest  motion.

■  Sweat  often  on  front  of  body  only.

■  Sweat  on  front  of  body  and  centre  of  chest  (sternum).

■  Sweat  stains  yellow,  is  sour  and  offensive  smelling,  and

frequently  cold.
I  I  Fetid  sweat.
I  I  Profuse  sw^eat  on  feet;  they  swell  and  become  sore.

■  Profuse  night-sweat.

■  Entire  inability  to  sweat.

Type :  quotidian ;  double  quotidian.

Time :  6  or  7  a.m.  ;  morning  in  bed ;  afternoon,  4,  5,  6,  7,

8  P.M.

I  I  Glands  are  affected,  along  with  hectic ;  discharge  gluey ;

chills  and  fever  (p.m);  cold  feet;  hot,  red  face  or  pale  face;

sweat  absent,  or  else  offensive. ^Irritative  fever.
^  Attacks,  Periodicity. Recovery  from  one  attack  quickly

followed  by  another.
At  times: neuralgia  of  face.
Attacks  of  convulsions  last  quarter  of  an  hour.
Periodical  attacks : of  fluent  coryza  of  short  duration  with

continual  stoppage  and  breathing  through  mouth.
Daily:  small  stools.

Every  morning: violent  febrile  chilliness.
Every  evening: shaking  chill ;  chill  with  headache  and

tearing  in  limbs; violent  febrile  chilliness;  dry  heat._
Every  night: eyelids  stick  together;  violent  roaring  in

ears;  pinching  pains  in  stomach ;  rooting  pain  in  chest.
During  Summer:  discharge  and  burning  of  eruptions  >.
During  Fall :  discharge  and  burning  eruption  on  limbs  <.
During  full  moon:  ears  feel  stuffed.


469  GRAPHITES.

One  hour  after  chill :  hot  face,  cold  feet.

For  several  hours  after  a  meal :  qualmishness.

For  five  days :  constant  discharge  of  coagula.

Eight  or  ten  weeks :  menses  appear.

Five  months :  non-appearance  of  menses.

Six  months :  menses  have  not  appeared.

In  two  years :  twitching  of  face  developed  into  convulsions
of  whole  1.  side.

Five  years :  dysmenorrhoea.

Twelve  years'  duration  :  piles.

Fifteen  years'  duration  :  eczema  squamosum.
*^  Locality  and  Direction.  Right:  lancinating  pain  in
temple ;  moist  eruption  behind  ear  crept  gradually  up-
wards on  side  of  scalp ;  pustules  of  eye ;_  tearing,  grind-
ing, twisting  pains  in  ovary ;  tumor  in  iliac  fossa  ;  lying
upon  r.  side  pain  is  in  1. ;  upper  arm  sore ;  rheumatic
pressive  tearing  in  first  joint  of  thumb.

Left :  stitches  in  temple ;  pain  from  temple  down  side  of
face  to  shoulder ;  corner  of  mouth  drawn  inward  and
downward ;  numbness  on  side  of  head  ;  hand  becomes
numb ;  crawling  into  arm ;  pustules  on  lower  borders
of  corner  of  eye ;  lower  lid  hangs  down ;  as  if  ear  was
filled  with  water;  moisture  behind  ear ;  erysipelatous  red-
ness upon  cheek  ;  tearing  in  zygoma;  pain  from  temple
down  side  of  face  to  shoulder ;  corner  of  mouth  drawn
downward  and  inward  ;  lower  eyelid  hangs  down ;  sore
pain  on  side  of  tongue  when  moving  it;  as  tliough  he  had
to  swallow  over  an  elevation  on  side  of  throat,  with
scraping  in  it;  pain  is  to  1.  of  stomach;  burning  in  hypo-
chondrium;  burning  in  small  spot  on  side  of  abdomen ;
pain  in  side  of  belly ;  stitches  in  side  of  abdomen ;  fixed
pain  in  side  just  above  cardiac  region;  hydrocele  (1.  side);
herpetic  eruption  on  scrotum;  tumor  in  iliac  fossa  ;  lying
upon  1.  side  pain  in  r. ;  zona  on  side;  glandular  swell-
ings on  side  of  neck ;  tearing  in  shoulder-joint ;  rheu-
matic pain  or  burning  in  shoulder ;  violent  sticking  in
shoulder ;  hand  numb  and  dead ;  eczema  on  back  of
hand ;  jerking  in  all  muscles  of  calf;  hypertrophied  nail
of  great  toe;  cannot  close  eye  on  account  of  paralysis;
twitching  of  muscles  of  side  of  face;  convulsions  of
whole  side;  coldness  and  numbness  of  face  <  on  side;
circular  herpes  at  bend  of  elbow.
^^  Sensations.  Great  sensitiveness  of  internal  parts.
Numbness  in  various  parts.
1  1  Drawing  pain  in  whole  body.

As  if  drunken  when  rising  from  bed ;  pain  as  if  constricted
in  occiput  extending  to  nape  of  neck,  which  pains  as  if
broken;  as  if  head  were  numb  and  pithy;  as  if  skin  of


GRAPHITES.  470

forehead  was  drawn  into  folds ;  humid  eruption  as  if
suppurating;  sensation  of  foreign  body  in  throat ;  throat
feels  as  if  ulcerated;  as  if  air  penetrated  Eustachian
tube ;  a  sound  in  vertigo  like  ticking  of  a  watch ;  as  if
1.  ear  were  filled  with  water ;  as  if  a  skin  were  before
ear ;  as  if  hard  body  as  large  as  an  egg  were  behind  ear ;
as  of  a  cobweb  over  face ;  papillte  of  tongue  sensitive  as.
if  it  were  rubbed  against  teeth;  as  though  food  had  to
pass  over  a  lump  in  throat;  throat  as  if  full  of  gurgliug
mucus ;  sensation  on  1.  side  of  throat  as  though  he  had
to  swallow  over  an  elevation,  as  if  he  were  choking;,
as  if  food  would  not  go  down;  as  if  food  filled  him  to
the  top ;  sensation  of  lump  in  stomach  with  beating  as
of  two  hammers;  as  if  everything  would  be  torn  to
pieces  during  menstruation;  as  if  intestines  were  torn;,
croaking,  as  of  frogs,  in  abdomen;  full  abdomen  as
from  accumulation  of  wind;  incarceration  of  flatus;
as  if  arms  w^ere  paralyzed;  hemorrhoids  as  if  split
with  a  knife;  as  if  sphincter  had  lost  its  contractile
power  and  was  paralyzed  ;  as  if  urethra  were  contracted;
as  if  r.  ovary  would  burst;  as  if  everything  would
be  torn  to  pieces  during  catamenia;  as  if  genitals  were-
swollen ;  constriction  of  chest  as  if  about  to  suflbcate ;
chest  as  if  too  narrow;  like  an  electric  shock  from
heart  to  front  of  neck ;  glands  of  neck  tense  and  stiff;
small  of  back  aches  as  if  bruised  or  broken ;  in  arm&
and  feet  as  if  they  were  turned  outward ;  arm  feels
'' asleep;"  pain  in  thumb-joint  as  if  sprained;  she
thought  her  feet  must  burst;  as  if  tendons  of  knees  were
too  short;  sensation  of  lump  in  stomach ;  as  if  skin  were
tightened  over  body;  itching  as  though  fecal  matter
would  pass  through  skin;  nails  as  if  ulcerated  ;  itching
as  if  she  must  tear  with  her  nails.
Pain :  from  1.  temple  down  side  of  face  to  shoulder ;  in
head;  in  lumpy  patches  on  vertex;  in  eczema;  from  1.
temple  down  1.  side  of  face  to  1.  shoulder;  in  ulcer  on
lower  surface  of  tongue;  in  vesicles;  in  nodules  on
lower  jaw;  "when  swallowing;  in  throat;  in  stomach;
in  hej)atic  region;  on  1.  of  stomach  ;  in  upper  abdomen ;,
below  navel;  in  belly;  in  inguinal  region;  in  hemor-
rhoids; in  sacrum;  in  coccyx;  in  uterus  when  reaching
high  Muth  arms;  over  eyes;  in  middle  of  breast;  in
chest;  in  limbs;  in  epigastrium;  in  varices;  in  pim-
ples and  vesicles,  on  vulva;  in  nipples;  in  chest;  in
thoracic  muscles;  in  nape  of  neck;  in  glands  of  neck  ;
OS  coccygis  while  urinating;  in  shoulder  and  neck;  in
thumb-joint;  in  ulcers  on  feet;  in  nail  of  great  toes,  in
periosteum.  '


471  GRAPHITES.

Terrible  pain  in  small  of  back  and  abdomen.

Violent  pain  in  head ;  in  1.  ovary.

Intense  headache.

Great  anguish  before  menses.

Very  painful  tearing  in  1.  zygoma.

Tearing: in forehead; in one  side  of  head; in  teeth;

glands  of  throat ;  in  teeth  and  gums ;  in  r.  ovary;  inl.

shoulder-joint;  in  hands;  pains  in  thighs,  in  limbs ;  in

feet.
Gouty  tearing  in  toes.
Lancinating:  in  r.  temples;  in  eyes;  through  uterus  down

to  lower  extremities.
Severe,  sharp,  cutting  pain  during  stool.
Cutting  stitches:  in  anus.

Stitching:  in  upper  and  lower  limbs;  in  sacrum.
Cutting  pains :  in  hypochondria;  in  both  kidneys.
Ulcerative  pain  in  throat.
Pinching  pain: in  stomach.
Stitches:  from  temple  througn  eye  to  inner  canthus;  in

ears;  in  both  hypochondria;  in  1.  side  of  abdomen;  in

urethra;  in  1.  ovary;  shooting  through  abdomen;  in

vagina;  inchest;  in  region  of  heart.
Transient  stitches :  in  1.  temple.
Stitching pains: in  temples; in  anus;  through uterus

down  to  lower  extremities;  through  abdomen;  in  chest;

in  fleshy  part  of  chest.
Stitching  pains:  in  eyes;  in  teeth;  in  gums;  in  1.  shoulder;

in  vesicle  on  little  finger.
Stinging pains :  in  temples ; on  cheeks ; both  sides of

face;  in  upper  lip;  in  teeth;  in  old  ulcers.
Violent  colic.

Gnawing  pain:  in  bones  of  forearm.
Severe  cramps: in  abdomen.
Griping:  in  stomach;  in  abdomen.
Cramp  pain:  in  legs;  in  stomach;  in  varices.
Labor-like  pains:  during  catamenia.
Cramp: in  stomach; in lower  abdomen;  in calves;  in

chest;  in  hand.
Constant  cramp:  in  throat.
Spasmodic  pains.
Bearing  down  pains:  in  hypochondria;  in  hips;  in  uterus

to  back; in  womb;  in  bowels.
Colic:  after  eating.
Neuralgia:  of  face;  in  back  of  neck.
Twisting  pain ;  in  r.  ovary.
Clawing  pain:  in  stomach.
Digging  pains:  in  abdomen.
Rooting  pain :  in  chest.


GRAPHITES.  472

Drawing  pain:  in  molars;  in  limbs;  in  thigh  bones;  in
forehead ;  from  eyes  up  into  head.

Tensive  pain :  beneath  ears.

Fixed  pain:  in  1.  side,  just  above  cardiac  region.

Twitching:  in  arms;  in  feet;  in  eyelids;  of  muscles  of  1.
side  of  face.

Starting :  of  hands  and  feet.

Throbbing:  in  sides  of  head ;  in  matrix.

Grasping:  in  arms  and  feet.

Bursting:  in  forehead.

Burning:  round  spot  on  top  of  head;  in  eyes;  around
e3^es;  on  cheeks;  both  sides  of  face;  of  lips;  in  blisters
on  lower  side  and  tip  of  tongue;  in  stomach;  in  1.  h3^po-
chondrium ;  ina  small  spot  on  1.  sideof  abdomen ;  through
abdomen;  of  vagina;  of  scalp  and  nape  of  neck;  in  vesi-
cles on  little  finger;  of  heels,  hands  and  soles  of  feet;
in  small  red  pimples;  in  fissures  between  varices;  in
shoulder;  in  old  cicatrices.

Burning  pressure:  beneath  armpit.

Rheumatic  pressive  tearing:  in  first  joint  of  r.  thumb;  in
feet  and  toes.

Binding,  constrictive  pain:  in  gastric  region;  in  different
parts.

Constrictive  headache:  in  occiput;  pain  in  stomach.

Constrictive  pain: below  umbilicus;  in  back.

Aching: in  eyes;  in  male  nipples.

Pressive  pain:  in  vertex;  in  occiput;  in  head;  in  eyes;
in  teeth ;  from  incarcerated  flatus  towards  groins  and
anus ;  in  head.

Pressure:  deep  in  forehead;  in  lids;  in  stomach;  in  pit
of  stomach;  in  anus;  in  both  kidneys;  in  bladder  tow-
ards pudenda;  in  region  of  heart;  in  abdomen;  in  arms
and  feet.

Raw  pain:  in  chest.

Numb  pain:  from  sacrum  down  legs.

Sickening,  painful  feeling:  at  pit  of  stomach.

Violent  sore  pain:  in  spots  on  vertex.

Painful  soreness:  between  pudenda  and  thigh;  between
upper  part  of  thighs  near  genitals;  of  corns.

Soreness:  of  larynx;  of  lips;  on  1.  side  of  tongue;  in  arms;
of  breast;  between  thighs;  of  male  nipples;  of  r.  upper
arm;  between  fingers;  of  matrix;  between  nates;  be-
tween toes;  in  both  kidneys;  in  nose.

Smarting:  in  eyes;  in  urethra; between  nates;  in  vagina.

Biting:  in  eyes;  in  eyelids;  in  urethra  while  urinating;
in  vagina.

Bruised  feeling:  in  scalp;  in  thighs;  in  knees.

Sensitiveness:  of  one  inguinal  gland.


473  GRAPHITES.

Oppressive  headache:  on  top  of  head.

Constriction :  in  region  of  heart.

Beating: in  stomach.

Fulness: of  abdomen;  in  stomach.

Hardness: in  lower  part  of  abdomen.

Irritation: of  genitals.

Jerking: inarms;  in  all  muscles  of  1.  calf. -

Constant  spasm:  in  throat.

Heat:  in  head;  in  eyes;  in  abdomen.

"  Spoiled,"  insipid  sensation  in  stomach.

Rawness :  of  mouth  ;  of  breast.

Scraping : of  tongue ;  of  breast.

Roughness  : of  larynx ;  of  tongue ;  of  mouth.

Dryness :  in  lids ;  of  ears ;  of  nose ;  of  lips ;  of  mouth ;  of
mucous  membrane  of  rectum ;  of  vagina.

Urging:  in  abdomen.

Straining: in  anus.

Weakness: of  head  down  to  neck;  in  back;  in  legs.

Sinking  feeling:  in  back.

Torpor: of  genital  organs.

Stiff  feeling: in  hollow  of  knees.

.Stiffness: of  neck;  of  toes.

Tremulous  sensation  through  whole  body.

Flickering: before  eyes.

Tiredness: of  eyes;  of  forearms.

Heaviness:  of  eyelids;  in  lower  lij);  in  abdomen;  of  head;
of  limbs; of  legs.

Desolate,  empty  feeling :  in  head.

Numbness:  in  1.  side  of  head;  of  1.  hand;  of  matrix;  in
various  parts.

Dulness: of  head;  in  face;  in  head.

Beclouded  feeling :  in  head.

Confusion  of  head.

Paralyzed  sensation  :  of  all  limbs.

Restlessness : of  legs.

Tickling: deep  in  chest.

Crawling:  in  1.  hand  and  arm;  in  lips;  in  upper  and
lower  limbs; in  sacrum;  in  heels.

Formication: in  lips;  in  hand  extending  up  arm.

Itching:  on  scalp;  all  over  body;  in  eyes;  of  eyelids;  in
ears;  blotches  on  face  and  other  parts  of  body;  pimples
on  face;  on  cheeks;  of  abdomen;  violent  itching  in
hemorrhoids;  on  arms;  on  scrotum ;  of  small  herpetic
patches  on  forearms,  neck  and  throat;  vesicles  on  vulva;
pimples  on  vulva;  vesicles  on  labia;  of  jDudenda;  of
scalp  and  nape  of  neck;  violent  itching  of  coccygeal
region;  herpes  circinatus,  itching  terribly  in  bend  of
elbow;  in  eruption  over  nates;  small  spots  on  arms;  of


GRAPHITES.  474

red  spot  on  upper  part  of  thigh ;  papulae ;  on  various
parts  of  body ;  violent  on  face  and  genitals.

Coldness :  of  scalp ;  of  legs.
*^  Tissues. Contraction  of  muscles.

Hemorrhages,  blood  light  red.

■  Anaemia;  chlorosis.  ^Gastrodynia. ^Gastralgia. ^Amen-

orrhoea.
Pain  in  periosteum ;  gnawing  pains  in  bones  of  forearm  -^

drawing  pain  in  thigh  bones ;  malleoli  painful  to  touch  ;

exostosis and osteo-sarcoma ; scrofulous affections of

bones;  <  at  night  and  from  cold  draught  of  air;  >

from  warmth.
Soreness  from  lying  in  bed,
■Very  offensive  exhalations  from  body.

■  Dyscrasise,  especially  when  caused  by  a  suppression  of

habitual  secretions  and  excretions.
■Scrofulosis;  swelling  and  induration  of  glands.

■  Tumors  in  persons  of  herpetic  dyscrasia;  wens,  smooth

and  shining,  on  scalp ;  sebaceous  cysts,  particularly
when  atheromatous ;  pus  scanty  and  smelling  like  her-
ring-brine.

■  Emaciation.

■  1  Emaciation  of  suffering  parts.

■  Burning  pain  in  old  cicatrices.

■  General  dropsy  after  an  acute  exanthem;  was  so  swollen

that  he  looked  like  a  corpse  about  to  be  decomposed ;
could  not  move  a  limb,  and  did  not  even  emit  a  groan ;.
large  round  blister  that  seemed  about  to  burst,  on  pre-
puce; legs  and  scrotum  shone  like  a  mirror.

■  (Edematous  complaints.

^^  Touch.  Passive  Motion.  Injuries.  Touch:  humid  erup-
tion on  vertex  painful;  scurfy  spots  on  vertex  painful ;_
pain  in  teeth  < ;  hemorrhoids  sore;  violent  pains  in
ovary ;  laryngeal  region  sensitive ;  causes  pain  in  small
of  back; circular  herpes  feels  hard.

Cannot  bear  tight  clothing  around  hypochondria.

Rubbing  makes  gums  bleed.

When  riding  in  carriage :  hears  better  ;  heat.

■  lOverlifting,  easily.

^®  Skin. I  Itching  over  various  parts  of  body.

■  Itching  becomes  general  and  very  violent,  even  on  face

and  genitals.
I  I  Great  itching,  as though foreign matter  would pass
through  skin.

■  Continual  itching,  <  at  night;  nothing  visible  upon  skin

before  scratching,  which  produces  nodules  and  long,
welts.

■  A^'iolent  itching  and  burning,  with  eruptions.


475  GRAPHITES..

1 1  Nightly  heat. ^Keratitis.

I  Prurigo  in  children,  with  sore,  raw  places  on  skin.

I  Long-lasting  want  of  proper  transpiration.

I  Harsh,  rough  skin,  disposed  to  chafing.

I  Skin  dr}^,  inclined  to  crack.

■  Excoriation  of  skin,  especially  in  children.

■  Raw,  moist  places  between  fingers  and  on  face.

I I  Unhealthy  skin;  every  injury  suppurates.
iSkin  is  not  inclined  to  heal,  ulcerates  readily.

1 1  Cracks  or  fissures  of  ends  of  fingers  and  nipples,  labial
commissures,  of  anus,  between  toes,  etc.

■  Irregular  fissures  about  half  an  inch  in  length  and  one-

eighth  of  an  inch  deep,  looking  like  cuts  with  the  edges
closely  in  apposition;  no  discharge;  on  separating  the
edges  a  little  a  dirty,  yellowish-white  slough  was  seen
looking  like  a  piece  of  tape.
1 1  Itching  eruption  full  of  corrosive  water  in  many  parts,
of  body.

■  Itching  blotches  on  various  j^arts  of  body,  from  which

oozes  a  watery,  sticky  fluid. ^Uterine  complaints.

■  Erysipelas  beginning in  face  and  gradually  spreading

over  whole  body ;  high  fever.

■  Erysipelas  in  women  and  young  girls  at  time  of,  or  in-

stead of,  menses.

■  Erysipelas  beginning  on  forehead  and  spreading  thence

to  hairy  scalp  and  neck;  vesicles  also  form  which  be-
come dry.
■Erysipelas;  eruption  assumes  a  vesicular  appearance,  or
it  exudes  a  transparent,  glutinous  fluid ;  or  assumes  a
chronic  form.

■  Erysipelatous  inflammation,  running  in  streaks.

■  ■  Erysipelas  in  face  commencing  on  r.  side  and  extending

to  left.

■  Sumach  poisoning;  abdomen  and  knees  affected.

■  Varicosities  itch  very  much,  and  have  little  pimples  on

surface  of  integument.

■  ■  Eruption  behind  ears,  on  various  parts,  from  which  ooze

a  watery,  transparent,  sticky  fluid ;  nails  brittle,  crum-
bling, deformed,  painful  and  sore,  as  if  ulcerated.

■  ■Eczema,  with  profuse  serous  exudations;  in  blondes  in-

clined to  obesity.

■  Numerous  small,  red,  itching  pimples,  tipped  with  pus,

which  burn  after  scratching.

■  Eruption  first  like  very  light-colored  elevations  under

skin,  increasing  without  areola;  becoming  pitted  like
early  vaccine  scab ;  then  itching  and  gets  larger;  picked
forms  ulcerous  scab;  ceases  itching  and  dries  up.

■  Eruption  of  red  spots,  one  inch  in  diameter,  little  ele-


GRAPHITES.  476

vated,  but  having  milky,  bluish-white  vesicles,  appa-
rently papillary,  one  line  in  diameter,  and  not  very
high;  constantly  tormented  by  violent  itching  and
burning ;  felt  as  if  she  must  tear  it  with  her  nails,  but
only  rubbed  it,  followed  by  such  an  aggravation  that
she  wept ;  face  warm  and  flushed ;  menses  late,  having
been  checked  near  end  of  last  period  by  getting  feet  w^et.
1 1  Herpes  exuding  a  sticky  matter.

■  Circular  herpes  feels  hard  to  touch  and  wrinkled,  situ-

ated in  bend  of  1.  elbow,  wdiich  itched  terribly.
Obstinate  lupus  of  cheeks  (improved).

■  Leprous  spots,  coppery,  annular,  raised  on  face,  ears,  but-

tocks, legs  and  feet ;  ulcers  on  toes,  obduration  of  nose,
crusts  in  nostrils.

■  Callous  ulcers  of  feet,  originating  from  corroding  blisters.

■  Crusty  and  scabby  ulcers;  pus  bloody,  watery,  acrid  and

corroding,  smelling  like  herring-brine.
■Sensitive,  sore,  spongy  ulcers,  with  a  salty  discharge. _

■  Old  ulcers,  with  fetid  pus,  proud  flesh,  itching,  stinging.

■  ■Old  hard  scars.

Adenitis;  boils;  dandruff;  phlegmonous  and  vesicular
erysipelas;  encysted  tumors;  erythema;  eczema;  felons;
freckles;  falling  off  of  hair;  zona;  herpes;  intertrigo;
lichen  agrius;  prurigo;  nodosities;  scrofulosis;  scald
head;  ulcers.
^^  Stages  of  Life,  Constitution.  ■  Scrofulous  habitus  with
lymphatic  oedema,  blonde hair,  pale  face,  low  spirits.

■  ■Adapted  to  women  inclined to  obesity,  wdio  suffer  from

habitual  constipation,  and  whose  history  reveals  a  ten-
dency to  delaying  menstruation.

Child,  set.  8  mos.,  tinea  capitis  of  four  months'  standing.

Girl,  set.  13  mos.,  had  an  eruption  which  was  suppressed
by  mercurial  ointment,  followed  by  a  bloody  mucous
diarrhcea; fissures.

Girl,  £et.  4,  health  generally  good ;  chronic  eruiDtion.

Girl,  set.  5,  third  attack ; erysipelas.

Boy,  set.  5,  after  suppression  of  anacuteexanthem;  dropsy.

Boy,  set.  8 ;  hydrocele.

Boy,  set.  8,  scrofulous;  inflammation  of  eyes.

;Miss  S.,  set.  15,  large,  well  built ;  headaches.

Boy,  set.  15  ;  zona.

Young,  chlorotic  woman,  ^t.  16,  menses  appeared,  lasting,
however,  but  a  short  time,  and  finally  not  coming  at  all ;
at  18  married  and  gave  birth  to  a  child,  four  months
after  which  menses  again  appeared,  but  were  extremely
pale  and  scanty ;  three  months  after  their  disappearance
became  pregnant ;  chlorosis.

Mrs.  A.,  set.  IS,  black  hair,  pale  face,  irritable,  choleric  tem-
perament; amenorrhoea.


477  GRAPHITES.

Man,  set.  20;  chronic  eczema.

Girl,  get.  20,  after  mental  trouble  ;  dysmenorrhoea.

Girl,  set.  20,  pale  complexion,  not  clear ;  amenorrhoea.

Girl,  set.  20 ;  dysmenorrhoea.

Girl,  has  suffered  for  seven  years ;  disease  of  finger-nail.

Young  lady,  fine  complexion,  skin  and  other  organs  of
sense  rather  sensitive,  manners  and  character  impres-
sible; eruption.

Man,  set.  21,  after  scarlet  fever,  seven  years  ago;  deafness.

Mrs.  S.,  blonde ;  leucorrhoea.

Woman,  every  eight  days,  for  half  a  j^ear ;  erysipelas.

Woman,  who  had  been  exposed  to  wet  for  a  good  while,
twelve  years  ago ;  herpetic  eruption  on  scalp.

Man,  set.  24,  after  catching  cold ;  styes.

Man,  set.  25,  robust,  confined  three  weeks  after  catching
cold  ;  neuralgia.

Miss  AV.,  set.  34,  menstruation  only  twice  a  year ;  leucor-
rhoea instead  of  menses.

Man,  set.  40,  had  syphilis;  conjunctivitis.

Woman,  set.  45 ;  hysteria.

Woman,  set.  56,  since  15  years;  eczema  squamosum  of
face.

Woman,  set.  56,  robust  and  healthy  until  climaxis,  which
occurred  at  age  of  51,  when  she  had  erysipelas  of  face,
which  was  treated  locally ;  convulsions.

Man,  set.  58,  subject  to  hemorrhoids  and  cramps  in
stomach ;  hardness  of  hearing.

Woman,  set.  65,  mother  had  died  of  paralysis ;  paralysis.

Man,  set.  70,  every  night  for  seventeen  years;  suffocative
paroxysms.

Man,  set.  81,  has  been  doctored  for  erysipelas;  sick  six
months;  ascites.
*^ Relations. Antidoted  by: Aeon,  (cough); Arsen.  (grief);
Nux  vom.

It  antidotes:  Arsen.,  lodum,  Rhus  tox.

Compatible:  after  Calcar.  in  obesity;  Lycop.;  Pulsat.,  men-
strual troubles;  Sepia  {in  leucorrhoea);  aRer  Sulphur  in
skin  affections.

Complementary:  Caustic,  Hepar,  Lycop.


GRATIOLA  OFFICINALIS.  478

GRATIOLA  OFFICINALIS.

Hedge  Hyssop.  Scrophulariacese.

A  plant  growing  in  moist  places  in  Central  and  Southern  Europe.

The  tincture  is  prepared  from  the  fresh  plant  before  flowering.

Extensively  proved  by  German  pro  vers ;  also  by  Nicol  and  Spearman.  See
Allen's  Encyclopedia.,  vol.  4,  p.  491.

Clinical  Authorities. — Throbbing  in  temples,  Berridge,  Raue's  Kec,  1872,
J).  24;  Pain  in  occiput,  Berridge,  Horn.  Clinics,  vol.  4,  p.  Ill ;  Hydrocephalus,  Alt-
dorfer,  Eaue's  Eec,  1872,  p.  63;  Cardialgia,  Raue's  Rec,  1872,  p.  134 ;  Swelling  of
mesenteric  glands,  Hartung,  Hom.  Clinics,  vol.  3,  p.  35 ;  Cholera,  Wiirzler,  Eiick.
Ki.  Erf.,  vol.  5,  p.  475 ; Cholera  infantum.  Miller,  Raue's  Rec,  1873,  p.  122.

^  Mind. Irresolute ;  want  of  perseverance.
Serious,  taciturn,  absorbed  in  reverie.
iHypocliondriacal  affections;  melancholia.
I  I  Great  depression  and  disinclination  to  do  anything.
Peevish ;  capricious ;  constipation ;  oppression  of  stomach

after  a  meal,  etc. ^Hypochondriasis.
Ill  humor,  tired  of  life,  apprehensive  of  the  future.

■  Delirium  tremens,  when  the  delirium  assumes  the  char-

acter of  anger  rather  than  of  anxiety,  in  subjects  not  yet
greatly  exhausted.

I  Hypochondriasis  and  hysteria  arising  from  abdominal

troubles.
;  ]\Iental  troubles  from  overweening  pride.
^  Sensorium. Intoxicated  feeling  during  and  after  a  meal.
Vertigo:  with  heat  in  head;  on  closing  eyes;  while  read-
ing ;  on  rising  from  a  seat.

I I  Vertigo  during  and  after  a  meal.

Violent  rush  of  blood,  with  throbbing  in  forehead;  vertigo
and  blackness  before  eyes ;  <  by  motion.

I  Determination  of  blood  to  head,  heat  and  somnolence.

Fulness  and  congestion  of  blood  to  head  with  peculiar
biting,  burning  in  face  and  other  parts;  languor;  nau-
sea; disgust  for  food  and  vertigo ;  >  in  open  air.
"^  Inner  Head. Sensation  as  if  brain  contracted  and  as  if
head  grew  smaller.

Sensation  of  heaviness  in  forehead,  as  if  brain  would  fall
forward,  with  stoppage  of  nose.

Pressure  in  forehead,  with  vertigo.

■  Throbbing  in  temples.


479  GRATIOLA  OFFICINALIS.

Heat  in  head  after  rising  from  stooping.
Heaviness  in  head  with  nausea.

■  Headaches  with  peculiar  biting  and  burning  in  face  and

other  parts,  languor  in  arms  and  legs,  nausea,  disgust

for  food,  vertigo;  >  in  open  air.
Pain  in  occiput  on  early  waking,  >  by  rising  or  lying

prone.
Pain  in  1.  occiput  on  sneezing.

■  After  several  days'  headache,  weakness,  loss  of  appetite,

etc., convulsions, followed by sopor and occasional
screaming;  unconsciousness;  lies  upon  back,  with  low
respiration;  occasional  sighing;  gnashing  of  teeth  ;  eyes
shut; pupils enlarged; slow pulse; unconscious  dis-
charge of  feces  and  urine. ^Hydrocephalus.
iSick  headache  with  mental  depression ;  nausea,  disgust
for  food ;  giddiness  >  in  open  air ;  sensation  of  heavi-
ness in  head  and  constriction  of  forehead.
^  Outer  Head. Tightness  in  forehead  with  wrinkles  in  skin.
Itching  of  scalp.

Peculiar  coldness  in  and  about  head.
Frequent feeling of coldness on vertex, painful, and

changing  to  a  feeling  of  warmth  wdien  moving  head.
Head  very  sensitive  to  cold.
^  Sight  and  Eyes. Objects,  even  green  ones,  appear  white.
Mist  before  eyes,  when  reading  or  writing.
Short-sightedness,  with  burning  heat  in  face.
I  Eyes  shut;  pupils  enlarged. ^Hydrocephalus.
Eyes  feel  dry  as  if  sand  were  in  them.
Itching  about  the  eyelashes.
^  Hearing  and  Ears. Itching  of  ears.
''  Smell  and  Wose. Pressure  at  upper  part  of  nose.

Smarting  itching  in  1.  nostril.
®  Upper  Face. Redness  of  face.

I  Sensation  of  tension  and  tingling  in  face;  it  feels  swollen.
Tingling  burning  in  malar  bones.
Burning  heat  in  face,  while  it  feels  cold  to  hand.
Every  morning,  for  weeks,  swelling  of  upper  lip,  disap-
pearing after  a  few  hours.
^^  Teeth  and  Gums. Teeth  ache  from  cold.

I  Gnashing  of  teeth. f^Meningitis.
"  Taste  and  Tongue, i Tongue  rough,  coated  with  mucus.
^^  Inner  Mouth. Fetid  breath  on  waking.

Accumulation  of  clear  water  in  mouth,  causing  frequent
spitting.
^^  Throat. Pain  in  throat  obliging  one  to  swallow  constantly ;
swallowing  is  difficult,  as  if  throat  w^ere  contracted ;  <
during  empty  deglutition.
Stinging  in  throat  (1.  side).


GRATIOLA  OFFICINALIS.  480

Phlegm  in  throat,  with  inability  to  throw  it  off.
^^  Appetite, Thirst. Desires, Aversions, i  Hunger  after
eating,  with  feeling  of  emptiness;  without  appetite.

Appetite  for  nothing  but  bread,

A"'iolent  thirst.

Aversion  to  smoking.
^^  Hiccough,  Belching,  Nausea  and  Vomiting. Hiccough.

Gulping  up  of  bitter  substances;  empty  retching.

Nausea:  >  after  eating, and  by  eructations;  in  afternoon.

I  Two  attacks  of  vomiting  in  quick  succession,  of  yellow,
bitter,  sour  water.

I  Vomiting  of  mucous  and  bilious  matter.
^"^  Scrobiculum  and  Stomach. Feeling  of  anxiety  in  epigas-
trium and  stomach.

I  Gnawing  at  pit  of  stomach  after  eating,  as  of  hunger.

■  Pressure  at  pit  of  stomach,  as  from  a  stone  rolling  from

side  to  side,  with  cramp-like  drawing  which  mounts  into
chest ;  at  same  time  frequent  urging  to  vomit  and  eruc-
tations ;  <  after  food.
Pain  in  pit  of  stomach,  spreads  to  upper  abdomen,  back,
and  especially  kidneys  ;  nausea  and  vomiting ;  peculiar
sensation  in  abdomen  and  stomach.

■  Great  distension  of  stomach  after  meals.
Pressure  in  stomach  after  every  meal.
Cold  feeling  of  stomach,  as  if  full  of  water.
Empty  or  cold  feeling  in  stomach.

I  Pain  in  stomach,  with  nausea  and  general  discomfort.

I  I  Cramps  in  stomach.

iCardialgia; pain commences in pit of  stomach,  and

spreads  to  upper  abdomen,  back,  and  especially  kidneys;

vomiting ;  constipation ;  urine  scanty,  reddish,  turbid,

and  painful  to  discharge.

■  Gastralgia.

^^  Hypochondria. Heating  pain  and  burning  in  1.  hypochon-

drium.
^^  Abdomen. Distension  of  abdomen  in  afternoon  and  evening.
Rumbling,  with  nausea,  eructations  and  vertigo ;  much

flatulence.
I  Cold  feeling  in  abdomen.
Burning  in  abdomen.
Gnawing  about  umbilicus,  as  of  worms.
Tingling  in  hypogastrium  and  around  umbilicus.
Sticking  pain  about  umbilicus.

Pinching  in  umbilical  region,  >  by  emission  of  flatus.
I  Colic,  violent  bellyache  with  nausea.
I  I  Blenorrhoea  of  the  intestines  with  great  depression  and

greatest  disinclination  to  do  anything.
I  Swelling  of  mesenteric  glands  after  abuse  of  Iodine  prep-
arations.


481  GRATIOLA  OFFICINALIS.

^"  Stool  and  Rectum. 1 1  Frequent  discharge  of  yellow,  watery

feces.

I  I  Diarrhoea-like  stools  of  thin,  fluid,  bright  yellow  feces^

followed  by  chilliness.
llDiarrhcBa,  consisting  only  of  yellow-greenish  water,  fol-
lowed by  burning  in  anus.

I I  Diarrhoea  of  green,  frothy  water,  forcibly  evacuated  with-
out pain.

I  Yellow,  watery  evacuations  upwards  and  downwards,
with  much  flatus.

■  Frequent  stools,  consisting  of  thin,  watery  feces,  with  sore-
ness in  anus.

I  Stools  frequent,  gushing  out  with  force.

1  I  Brown  fetid  mucous  stools.

I  Stools:  watery;  yellow;  green;  frothy.

Diarrhoea:  <  in  open  air;  <  after  drinking  too  freely  of
water.

I  I  Cholera  morbus  from  drinking  excessive  quantities  of
water  of  moderate  coldness ;  the  quantity  and  not  the
coldness,  being  the  cause.

IlFully  developed,  rapid,  Asiatic  cholera.

I  Vomiting  particularly  severe,  and  often  accompanied  by
pains  in  head;  cramps  beginning  in  solar  plexus  and
spreading  thence  over  whole  body;  the  evacuations  from
above  and  below  were  always  green,  and  gradually
changed  into  a  colorless  fluid.

lUnconscious  passage  of  feces. ^Hydrocephalus.

Stools  hard,  scanty,  tenacious,  expelled  with  difficulty.

Before  stool:  nausea;  rumbling  in  abdomen;  cutting
around  umbilicus;  pressing  and  ineffectual  desire;  re-
peated tenesmus  and  rumbling,  as  if  diarrhoea  would
come  on.

During  stool:  nausea;  burning  pain  in  rectum;  straining.

After  stool:  burning  pains  in  rectum;  tenesmus;  wrench-
ing pain  in  coccyx;  creeping  chills;  painful  pressure  in
abdomen  when  walking,  >  by  sitting  down.

Pain  not  >  by  stool,  but  by  escape  of  flatus.

Soreness  in  the  rectum,  burning  during  and  after  stool.

Stools  with  burning  and  protrusion  of  large,  stinging-burn-
ing tumors ;  varices  of  rectum.

Tearing  in  rectum,  or  prickling  in  anus.

I  Great  rectal  and  anal  irritation,  with  passage  of  fetid
mucus.

Constriction  of  anus.

Itching  of  anus.

Discharge  of  ascarides.
^^  Urinary  Organs. Burning  in  urethra  during  and  after  mic-
turition.

VOL.  V. — 31.


GRATIOLA  OFFICINALIS.  482

I  Urine  diminished.

lUrine  scant,  reddish,  becomes  turbid  on  standing.
■  Unconscious  discharge  of  urine. ^Hydrocephalus.
Flocculent  sediment  in  urine.
^^  Male  Sexual  Organs. Involuntary  emission  succeeded  by
a  painful  erection.
Stitches  in  1.  spermatic  cord,  ascending  through  abdomen
up  to  chest.
^^  Female  Sexual  Organs. Nymphomania.

Irritable  condition  of  sexual  organs  with  congestions.
Menses  too  early  and  too  profuse.
Leucorrhoea  with  pains  in  small  of  back.
Darting  in  r.  mamma  when  stooping  <  on  rising,  during
menses.
^^Respiration. iRespiration feeble; occasional sighing.

^Hydrocephalus.
^  Inner  Chest  and  Lungs. Oppression  of  chest,  r.  side.
Burning  in  1.  side  of  chest.

Heat  in  chest,  then  in  head  and  hands,  with  redness  of
face.
-^'  Heart,  Pulse  and Circulation. Violent  palpitation  of
heart,  particularly  immediately  after  stool,  and  with  op-
pression of  chest.
Pulse  small,  intermittent.
^'^  Outer  Chest. Darting  in  r.  mamma.

^^  Neck  and  Back. Seusation  as  if  neck  were  seized  with
hand.
Darting  from  1.  scapula  to  shoulder  and  mamma.
Painful  cramps  in  os  coccygis.
Wrenching  pain  in  coccyx  after  stool.
^^  Upper  Limbs. Rheumatic  pains  in  shoulders,  arms,  fingers,
particularly  in  elbow  and  wrist-joint.
Itching  in  palm  of  r.  hand.
^  Lower  Limbs. Bruised  pain  in  thigh,  after  a  short  walk.
Lancinating  tearing  in  tibia  when  sitting,  disappearing

when  walking.
Smarting  itching  on  tibia.
^^Rest. Position. Motion. Lies  upon  back: with low
respiration.
Lying  prone : pain  in  occiput ;  tetanic  condition.
Sitting  down: pressure  in  abdomen  >  ;  lancinating  tear-
ing in  tibia.
Stooping:  darting  in  r.  mamma.
Rising from stooping: heat in head; darting in r.

mamma  <.
Rising  from  a  seat:  vertigo;  pain  in  occiput  >.
Motion : <  vertigo  and  blackness  before  eyes.
Walking:  pressure  in  abdomen;  bruised  pain  in  thigh;
lancinating  tearing  in  tibia  >.


483  GRATIOLA  OFFICINALIS.

^•^  Nerves. Physical  and  mental  depression.

Great  languor  and  prostration.

Tetanic  condition,  without  loss  of  consciousness,  while
lying  down  after  a  meal,  followed  by  deep  sleep  with
emission  of  semen ;  bruised  feeling  of  body,  back  and  1.
arm  on  waking.

Nervous  diseases,  such  as  mania,  nymphomania,  etc.,  and
neuralgic  affections  caused  by  prolonged  abuse  of  coffee.
■^''  Sleep. Irresistible  drowsiness  with  yawning,  and  involun-
tary closing  of  eyes.

Great  somnolence  and  lassitude  after  meals.

Deep  sleep,  like  stupor.
■^  Time. Afternoon:  nausea  >  after  eating  and  eructations;
distension  of  abdomen.

Evening : distension  of  abdomen.
^^  Temperature  and  Weather. Open  air:  >  fulness  and  con-
gestion of  blood  to  head;  languor  in  arms  and  legs,
nausea,  disgust  for  food,  vertigo  >;  diarrhoea  <.

Warm  room :  chilliness.

Cold :  head  sensitive  to  cold ;  toothache.
"^''  Fever. Chilliness  in  a  warm  room,  during  sleep,  after  an
evacuation ;  with  hair  standing  on  end.

■  Coldness;  shuddering  when  entering  a  room.  ^Diar-
rhoea.

Heat,  ascending  to  face,  with  redness  and  increased  exter-
nal warmth.
^^  Attacks,  Periodicity. Two  attacks :  of  vomiting,  in  quick
succession,  of  yellow,  bitter,  sour  water.

After  every  meal :  pressure  in  stomach.

Every  morning:  for  several  weeks  swelling  of  upper  lip
disappearing  after  a  few  hours.
^Locality  and  Direction. Right:  darting  in  mamma;  op-
pression in  chest; itching  in  palms.

Left:  smarting,  itching  of  nostril;  stinging  in  throat;
heating  pain  and  burning  in  1.  hypochondrium;  stitches
in  spermatic  cord;  burning  in  side  of  chest;  darting  in
scapula;  bruised  feeling  in  arm;  itch-like  pustules  be-
low buttock.
■^  Sensations.  As  if  brain  contracted ;  as  if  head  grew  smaller ;
as  if  brain  would  fall  forward ;  eyes  feel  as  if  sand  were
in  them;  as  if  throat  were  contracted;  as  from  a  stone
rolling  from  side  to  side  in  stomach;  as  if  stomach  was
full  of  water;  gnawing  as  from  worms  in  abdomen;
rumbling  and  tenesmus  as  if  diarrhoea  would  come
on ;  as  if  neck  were  seized  with  hand.
Pain:  in  occiput;  in  throat;  in  pit  of  stomach,  spreads  to
upper  abdomen ;  in  back;  in  kidneys;  in  stomach;  in
head;  in  small  of  back.


GRATIOLA  OFFICINALIS.  484

Lancinating  tearing:  in  tibia.

Tearing:  in  rectum.

Cutting:  around  umbilicus.

Stitches:  in  L  spermatic  cord,  extending  through  abdomen

to  chest.
Sticking  pain:  about  umbiUcus.
Darting:  in  r.  mamma;  from  1.  scapula  to  shoulder  and

mamma.
Pinching:  in  umbilical  region.
Painful  cramps:  in  os  coccygis.
Cramps: in  stomach; beginning in solar plexus and

spreading  thence  over  whole  body.
Gnawing:  at  pit  of  stomach ;  about  umbilicus.
Wrenching  pain  :  in  coccyx.
Rheumatic  pains:  in  shoulders,  arms,  fingers,  particularly

in  elbow  and  wrist-joint.
Biting:  in  face.

Throbbing:  in  forehead;  in  temples.
Stinging:  in  throat.
Burning  pain :  in  rectum.

Bruised  pain :  in  thigh ;  in  body,  back  and  1.  arm.
Burning  heat:  in  face.
Heating  pain:  in  1.  hypochondrium.
Tingling,  burning:  in  malar  bones.
Tingling:  in  hypogastrium  and  about  umbilicus.
Burning:  in  face;  in  1.  hypochondrium;  in  abdomen;  in

anus;  in  urethra  during  and  after  micturition;  in  1.

side  of  chest.
Heat:  in  head.

Painful  pressure:  in  abdomen.
Soreness:  of  anus;  in  rectum.
Constriction:  of  forehead;  of  anus.
Tightness:  in  forehead.
Pressure:  in  forehead; at  upper  part  of  nose;  at  pit  of

stomach;  in  stomach.
Peculiar  sensation:  in  abdomen  and  stomach.
Feeling  of  anxiety:  in  epigastrium  ;  in  stomach.
Fulness:  of  head.
Oppression :  of  stomach.
Empty  feeling:  in  stomach.
Languor:  in  arms  and  legs.
Tension  and  tingling:  in  face.
Heaviness:  in  forehead.
Smarting,  itching:  in  1.  nostril;  on  tibia.
Itching:  of  scalp;  about  the  eyelashes;  of  ears;  of  anus;

in  palm  of  r.  hand.
Peculiar  coldness:  in  and  about  head.
Painful  coldness  changing  to  feeling  of  warmth  in  mov-
ing head.


485  GRATIOLA  OFF.— GRINDELIA  ROBUSTA.

**  Tissues. Constant  vaporous  exhalation  from  body.
:  Dropsy  and  ascites.

Subacute  or  chronic  inflammatory  conditions  of  stomach
and  intestinal  tract,  with  pains  and  spasmodic  ailments.
^^  Skin. Itching,  with  burning  after  scratching.
Acne  punctata.
Running,  corrosive  eruption.
Scabies  or  herpes.
Small  boils.

Itchlike  pustule  below  1.  buttock.
Miliary  pimples  with  yellow  tips.
*^  Stages  of  Life,  Constitution. Boy,  aet.  8 ;  hydrocephalus.
^^  Relations. Antidoted  by: Caustic,  Bellad.,  Eu])horb.,  Nux
vom.
It  antidotes:  lodum.

Compare:  Apis.,  Bellad.,  Helleb.  (h.ydvoceiph.8ilus);  Chamom.
(Teste  considers  it  the  Chamom.  of  chronic  diseases);
Nux  vom.  (neuralgia  after  coffee).


GRINDELIA  ROBUSTA.

Gi'indelia.  Compo^itse.

A  plant  growing  on  the  Pacific  coast  and  inland  on  the  mountains.
Proving  by  Bundy  (not  in  Allen's  Encyclopedia)  and  by  Hale,  see  N.  A.
J.  H.,  vol.  25.

Clinical  Authorities.— JnYis,  Fiske,  N.  A.  J.  H.,  vol.  25,  p.  204 ;  Hay-
Jever,  rose-cold,  asthma,  Steele,  Times  Ketros.,  vol.  2,  p.  12;  Asthma,  Scudder,  N.  A.
J.  H.,  vol.  25,  p.  203;  Smith,  N.  E.  M.  G.,  vol.  11,  p.  353;  Spasmodic  asthma,  Hale,
Times  Eetros.,  vol.  3,  p.  25  ;  Pneumonia,  bronchitis,  Hale,  N.  A.  J.  H.,  vol.  25,  p.
202 ;  Ulceration  of  leg,  Scudder,  N.  A.  J.  H.,  vol.  25,  p.  204 ;  Affection  of  pneumo-
gastric,  Guernsey,  N.  E.  M.  G.,  vol.  12,  p.  138  ;  Epidemic  rash,  Hale,  N.  A.  J.  H.,
vol.  25,  p.  202 ;  Bhus  tox.  poisoning,  Steele,  Times  Eetros.,  vol.  2,  p.  12 ;  N.  E.
M.  G.,  vol.  11,  p.  351.

^  Inner  Head. Terrible  fulness  in  head,  as  though  he  had

taken  ten  or  more  grains  of  quinine.
^  Sight  and  Eyes. Conjunctiva  injected,  eyes  j^resenting  ap-
pearance noticed  in  congestion  of  brain.
Pain  in  eyeballs  running  directly  back  to  brain,  <.  from

moving  eyes.
Pain  in  1.  eye  and  r.  knee-joint,  like  rheumatism;  pain  in
knee  did  not  last  longer  than  half  an  hour ;  pain  in  eye


GRINDELIA  ROBUSTA.  486;

became  more  intense,  pupil  becoming  dilated  ;  two  hours-
after  ward  r.  eye  became  affected.
I  Conjunctivitis  and  purulent  ophthalmia.

I  Iritis,  traumatic,  or  arising  from  cold  or  a  metastasis  of

rheumatism; the  pain  is  intense  and  the  fever  runs-

^^  Hypochondria.  Unbearable  pain  in  region  of  liver  and
spleen,  so  severe  that  he  cannot  lie  still  a  moment;  sore-
ness like  that  of  acute  rheumatism.

^  Female  Sexual  Organs.  !  Pruritus  affecting  vulva  and
vagina ;  whether  arising  from  leucorrhoea,  or  of  venous
origin,  or  aphthae.

"®  Respiration. iiFear  of  going  to  sleep  on  account  of  loss  of
breath,  which  awakens  him.

I I  On  falling  asleep  respiratory  movement  ceases,  and  is.
not  resumed  until  awakened  by  the  suffocation  resulting.

I  I  Mucous  asthma  depending  on  an  abnormal  accumula-
tion of  mucus  in  the  smaller  bronchi,  tenacious  and
difficult  to  detach;  patient  feels  and  knows  that  expec-
toration brings  relief.

I  Humid  asthma,  originating  in  catarrhal  bronchitis.

lAfter  an  attack  of  pneumonia  vital  forces  so  greatly
reduced  that  recovery  was  despaired  of;  patient  almost,
in  a  sitting  position  in  bed,  with  a  peculiar  interrupted
breathing,  which  entirely  prevented  sleep;  every  time
he  dropped  into  a  doze  breathing  would  become  so  in-
terrupted that  he  would  have  to  be  aroused;  pneumo-
gastric  nerve  appeared  half  paralyzed  and  action  of
heart  was  very  weak.

I  Cardiac  asthma.
"■^  Cough. Cough  from  reflex  causes;  a  cough  maintained  by
habit ;  chronic  bronchitis  and  bronchorrhoea.

Mucus  tenacious  and  difficult  to  detach.
^^  Inner  Chest  and  Lungs. Chronic  bronchitis,  and  cough,
with  muco-purulent  expectoration  after  pneumonia.

■  Bronchitis  accompanying  heart  disease.

1  I  Severe  cough  with  considerable  purulent  expectoration;;
on  examination,  flatness  of  entire  1.  lung;  dyspnoea.
^Chronic  pneumonia.

I  Cough,  dyspnoea;  flatness  of  r.  lung  and  partial  consolida-
tion at  base  of  lung.

Asthma;  clironic  bronchitis  ;  hay-fever;  pneumonia.
''Lower  Limbs.  'Leg  greatly  swollen,  especially  about
ankle-joint;  purplish-black  color;  two  large  ulcers  over
tibia,  two  and  three  inches  long  and  half  an  inch  in
depth;  abundant  fetid  secretion;  severe  pain;  van  hardly
get  about.  //Chronic  ulceration  of  leg.
^  Rest.  Position.  Motion.  Sitting  position  in  bed:  on  ac-
count of  difficulty  of  broathinp;.


487  GUINDELIA  ROBUSTA.

Cannot  lie  still  a  moment  on  account  of  pain.

Can  hardly  move  on  account  of  pain  in  legs.

Moving  eyes: <  pain.
*^  Locality  and  Direction. Right:  pain  in  knee-joint;  flat-
ness of  lung.

Left:  pain  in  eye;  flatness  of  lung.
*^  Sensations. As  though  he  had  taken  ten  or  more  grains
of  quinine,  such  terrible  fulness  in  head.

Pain:  in  eyeballs;  in  1.  eye  and  r.  knee-joint.

Pains  with  soreness,  like  that  of  rheumatism.

Unbearable  pain :  in  region  of  liver  and  spleen.

Severe  pain:  in  limbs.

Burning: of  chin.

Terrible  fulness:  in  head.

Soreness:  in  region  of  liver.

Itching: of  skin.
''^  Skin. I  Epidemic  rash like roseola, suffusing  face,  neck
and  often  whole  body,  with  severe  burning  and  itching.

■  Irritable  eruptions,  papular  or  vesicular.

I  Rhus  tox.  poisoning.

Bites  of  insects ;  flea-bites.
*^  Stages  of  Life,  Constitution. Woman,  set.  48,  for  two  years;
chronic  pneumonia.

Man,  set.  60,  after  injury  to  1.  eye;  iritis.

Man,  get.  60,  suffering  for  twenty  years;  ulceration  of  leg.

Old  man,  broken  down  with  years  of  sickness,  with  organic
disease  of  heart,  just  rallying  from  an  attack  of  pneu-
monia ;  paresis  of  pneumogastric.
^*  Relations. It  antidotes:  Rhus  tox.

Compare:  Amm.  mur.,  Ant.  tart.,  Kali.  hich.


GUAIACUM.  488


GUAIACUM.

Gwm  Resin  of  Lignum  Vitse.  Zygophillese.

A  large  tree  growing  in  the  West  Indies.
The  tincture  is  prepared  from  the  resin.

Introduced  by  Hahnemann  (Chr.  Kranklieiten)  and  proved  by  himself,  Hart-
mann,  Langhammer,  Teuthorn,  etc.

Clinical  Authorities. — Neuralgia,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf,  vol.  5,  p.  88 ;  Sharp,
Riick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  5,  p.  186 ;  Diphtheria,  Couch,  B.  J.  H.,  vol.  23,  p.  513 ;  Affec-
tion of  stomach,  Eiick.  Th.,  p.  120;  Ovaritis,  Terry,  Laird,  Trans.  Hom.  Med.  Soc,
N.  Y.,  1884,  p.  100;  Dysmenorrhoea,  amenorrhoea,  Laird,  Trans.  Hom.  Med.  Soc,
N.  Y.,  1884,  p.  100;  Pleuritic  stitches  in  chest,  Miiller,  Eaue's  Eec,  1871,  p.  102;
Pleuritic  stitches,  Haines,  Organon,  vol.  2,  p.  233 ;  Sciatica,  lumbago,  Laird,  Trans.
Hom.  Med,  Soc,  N.  Y.,  1884,  p.  102;  Rheumatism,  Kippax,  Organon,  vol.  3,  p_
96;  Laird,  Trans.  Hom.  Med.  Soc,  N.  Y.,  1884,  p.  102;  Gouty  abscesses,  Verwey,
Eiick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  5,  pp.  899,  926.

^  Mind. I  I  Weakness  of  memory ;  excessive  forgetfulness,  es-
pecially of  names.

I  Thoughtless  staring;  during  the  morning.

I  Disinclination  to  labor.

I  Very  sad  and  depressed. ^Consumption.

Fretful ;  obstinate.
^  Sensorium. I  Dizziness  on  rising.
^  Inner  Head. '  i  Headache  across  forehead.

Drawing  and  lacerating  in  occiput  and  forehead.

Headache  at  night,  like  a  pressure  in  brain,  from  below
upward.

I  I  Violent,  sharp  stitches  in  brain.

Sensation  as  if  brain  were  detached  and  loose.

1  Megrim.

I  Rheumatic  pains  in  one  side  of  head,  extending  to  face.

■  Attacks  of  gout  in  head.

*  Outer  Head, i  Neuralgia  of  1.  side  of  head  and  face,  extend-
ing to  neck.
I  I  Lacerating  in  wdiole  1.  side  of  head.

■  External  headache,  with  sensation  as  if  blood-vessels  were

overfilled;  extends  to  face  and  neck. 6'Neuralgia.
iPulsative  throbbing  in  outer  parts  of  head,  with  stitches
in  temples;  removed  for  a  short  time  by  external  press-
ure and  by  walking,  <  by  sitting  and  standing.


489  ,  GUAIACUM.

I  Perspiration,  principally  on  head  and  forehead  (when
walking  in  open  air).

■  Tearing  pains  in  skull.

^  Sight  and  Eyes, i  Dilated  pupils.

■  Swelling  of  eyes.

llSensation  of  swelling  and  protrusion  of  eyes; eyelids

appear  too  short  to  cover  them.
I  I  Hard  pimples  around  eyes.

*  Hearing  and  Ears, l  Painful  dragging  and  tearing  in  1.

ear. ^Otalgia.
I  I  Spasmodic  earache.
"^  Smell  and  Nose. Pains  in  bones  of  nose.
Pains  from  head  to  nose.
Nose  swollen.
Fluent  coryza.

*  Upper  Face, l  Heat  in  face,  especially  in  evening.

■  Face:  red  and  j)ainfully  swollen;  gets  spotted,  eyes,  nose,

cheeks  swell;  looks  old.

■  Lancinating  painful  stitches  in  r.  malar  bone  and  cheek.

■  Severe  neuralgia  1.  side  of  face,  head  and  nape  of  neck;

paroxysms  appear  every  day  at  6  p.m.,  and  last  till  4  a.m.
^  Lower  Face. sDull  ache  in  1.  side  of  jaw.
^^  Teeth  and  Gums, l  Toothache  when  biting  jaws  together.

■  Tearing  in  teeth,  ending  with  stitches.
"Taste  and  Tongue. ■Food  does  not  taste  right.

■  Tongue  thickly  furred;  thick,  white  fur.

■  Tongue  brown,  much  furred. ^Consumption.
^^  Inner Mouth. Inflammation  of  mouth.

13  Throat. ■Violent  burning  in  throat.

I  I  Threatened  tonsillitis;  cjuinsy;  diphtheria.
^*  Appetite,  Thirst. Desires,  Aversions. ■Violent  hunger,
afternoon  and  evening.

I  I  No  appetite.

■  Much  thirst.' ^Consumption.

■  Desire  for  apples,  which  >  gastric  symptoms.

■  Aversion  to  milk.

■  Aversion  to  food,  could  not  eat  anything. ^Consumption.
^^  Eating and Drinking, i  i  After  eating  without  appetite,

she  gets  sick.
^^  Hiccough,  Belching,  Nausea  and  Vomiting, i  i  Frequent
empty  eructations.
I  I  Nausea  from  sensation  of  phlegm  in  throat.

■  Every morning  vomits  a  mass  of  watery  phlegm  with

great exertion, followed  by  great exhaustion. ^Con-
sumption.
^^  Scrobiculum and  Stomach, i  i  Burning  in  stomach  and
abdomen.
I  I  Cramps  and  pains  in  stomach.


GUAIACUM.  490

I  Every  Summer  for  many  years  recurrence  of  affection  of
stomach,  which  at  times  becomes  very  severe,  vomiting
of  blood  occurring.
^^  Hypochondria. ■  Constrictive  sensation  in  epigastric  region^

with  anguish  and  difficult  breathing.
^^  Abdomen. I Great  accumulation  of  wind  in  whole  abdo-
men; pinching  in  abdomen  from  incarcerated  flatulence,,
receding  towards  rectum  until  emitted.
I  I  Twitches  in  abdominal  muscles.
I  Inguinal  hernia.
■°  Stool  "and  Rectum. ■  Diarrhoea  commencing  in  morning;
skin  dry;  chill5^
Thin  mucous  stool.

I  I  Soft  stool,  in  pieces,

I I  Cholera  infantum,  emaciation;  face  like  that  of  an  old
person.

I  Costive;  stool  hard,  crumbling;  very  offensive.
'^  Urinary  Organs, l  Continuous  urging  even  after  urination,,
with  profuse,  fetid  urine.
I  Stitches  in  neck  of  bladder  after  ineffectual  pressure  to

urinate.
■  Cutting  in  urethra  while  urinating,  as  from  something
biting  passing.
^  Male  Sexual Organs. l  l  Nocturnal emissions without
dreams.
I  I  Gonorrhoea-like  discharge.
Female  Sexual Organs. iSubacute  and  chronic  ovaritis,
especially  in  rheumatic  women.
lAmenorrhoea.

I  I  ^lembranous  dysmenorrhoea.
Pregnancy. Parturition.  Lactation, i  Chilly  crawls  over
mannn*.
^  Voice  and  Larynx. Trachea  and  Bronchia, i  Violent,
spasmodic,  inflammatory  affection  in  windpipe,  most  in
larynx,  with  such  palpitation  of  heart  could  not  get  out
of  bed,  nor  call  for  help;  feels  as  if  suftbcating.
^^Respiration. iSudden stuffed feeling in pra?cordia,  like
arrest  of  breathing; often  attacks  her  suddenly  even  at
night  in  sleep,  causing dry  cough,  frequently  repeated
until  expectoration  appears.
''  Cough. I  Cough  tight  and  dry,  with  burning  fever;  hot  face.
I  Dry  cough  with  shortness  of  breathing  till  expectoration

sets  in.
I  Dry  cough,  >  by  detaching  and  raising  a  little  mucus;

rheumatic  patients.
I  Cough with  copious spitting  of  phlegm,  and  later  of

stinking  pus;  coughing  up  blood. ^Consumption.
iSputa  and  all  excretions  had  such  a  horrible  odor  that.


23


24


491  GUAIACUM..

the  relatives  could  hardly  come  into  the  sick room.
^Consumption.
^  Inner  Chest  and  Lungs, i  Intense  pain  in  upper  part  of
chest,  from  motion  of  head ;  expectoration  of  fetid  pus.

■  Continued  stitches,  finally  terminating  in  one,  close  below

r.  scapula;  they  seem  to  come  from  middle  of  r.  half  of
chest,  and  are  <  by  an  inspiration.

■  Pleuritic  stitches;  1.  side,  <  from  breathing  deeply.

■  Severe  pleuritic  stitches  of  phthisis,  especially  when  in

region  of  third  or  fourth  rib,  1.  side.
■Pseudo-pleuritic  pains;  frequently  attending  tuberculosis
pulmonum  in  stage  of  softening  and  suppuration ;  in-
tense pain  in  upper  part  of  chest,  from  motion  of  head;,
expectoration  of  fetid  pus.

■  Chronic  pulmonary  catarrh,  even  simulating  phthisis,

beginning  as  a  metastasis,  or  extension  of  rheumatism
or  gout  to  fibrous  portion  of  bronchial  mucous  mem-
brane, with  expectoration  of  blood  and  fetid  pus.

^^  Heart,  Pulse  and  Circulation. ■  Palpitation.

i Pulse  soft,  small  and  very  frequent. ^Consumption.

^•^  Outer  Chest.  After  riding  in  open  car,  rheumatic  stiffness
of  1.  side  of  neck  and  shoulders,  and  pleuritic  stitches  in
chest  and  between  scapulae,  <  by  each  inspiration;,
sharp  stitches  from  scapulae  to  occiput.

■  Sharp,  stitching  pains  from  third  rib  up  on  either  side.
^^  Neck  and  Back. ■Pain  from  head  to  neck.

■  Frequent stitches on  1.  side  of  nape, extending from

scapula  to  occiput.

■  Aching  in  nape  of  neck,  right  and  left  of  vertebrse.

■  Stiff  neck  due  to  cold,  muscles  of  shoulders  and  spine

affected.

■  Excessive  stiffness  of  one  side  of  neck,  from  neck  extend-

ing to  small  of  back,  <  when  moving.

■  ■Contractive  pain  between  scapulae.

■  Rheumatic  stiffness  of  whole  1.  side  of  back,  from  nape

down  to  sacrum,  with  intolerable  pain  on  slightest  mo-
tion, not  noticed  on  touch  or  during  rest.

■  Stitches  in  1.  side  below  true  ribs,  rather  towards  the  back.
I  1  Chilliness  in  back  in  afternoon.

I  I  Shuddering  and  feverish  chill  in  back.
I  i  Corrosive  itching  on  back  (by  day).
^^  Upper  Limbs. ■Sharp  stitches  in  top  of  r.  shoulder.

■  Rheumatic  pains  in  1.  arm,  from  shoulder  or  elbow  to

wrist.

■  Painful  drawing  and  lacerating  in  arm.

■  Lancinating  rheumatic  pains  from  elbow  to  wrist,  1.  arm.

■  Rheumatic  pains  in  1.  wrist-joint.

■  Pains  first  in  knuckles,  then  in  whole  hand.


GUAIACUM.  492

I  Hands  hot.
iStitches  in  r.  thumb.
^'  Lower  Limbs, l  Pricking  in  nates,  as  if  sitting  on  needles.

■  Tension  in  thighs,  especially  r.,  as  if  muscles  were  too

short,  with  languor  when  walking;  <  from  touch,  >
when  sitting.

■  Sciatica  and  lumbago.

•  Itching,  pressing  and  crawling  pains in thighs when
seated.

■  Pains  begin  in  middle  of  thigh  or  leg  and  extend  to  knee.

■  Tearing,  drawing  lancinations  in  leg,  from  r.  tarsus  to

knee.

■  Pains  in  bones  of  legs,  the  limbs  feeling  as  if  swelled.
I  I  Exhaustion  in  lower  limbs.

■  Gouty  inflammation  and  abscess  at  knee,  repeated  after  a

fall,  with  violent  pain  and  loss  of  sleep.

■  Darting  pains,  apparently  of  a  rheumatic  neuralgic  char-

acter, extend  from  feet  to  knees.

■  Osteomalacea  of  tibia  and  of  tarsus,  even  slightest  touch

<  the  pain. ^Consumption.

■  Spongoid  state  of  tibia.

I  I  The  whole  1.  leg  is  cramped.

■  Right  leg  swollen  and  contracted,  stiff,  immovable,  drawn

close  to  thigh. ^Consumption.

■  Violent  stitches  from  outside  of  r.  calf  down  to  ankle.

^Consumption.
^  Limbs  in  General, ■Tearing  and  stinging  in  limbs.

■Tearing,  pricking  pains  in  muscles  of  extremities,  with
heat  of  parts.

■  Gouty  tearing  and  stitching  in  limbs,  with  contractions

of  affected  parts.

■  Stinging  pains  in  limbs,  <  from  least  motion.

■  Arthritic  lancinations,  followed  by  contraction  of  limbs.

■  Feeling  of  heat  in  painful  limbs;  rheumatic  cases.

■  Pain  in  foot  became  more  violent  every  day,  painful  parts

got  hot,  pain  extended  gradually  to  thigh,  arms  down  to
fingers  and  to  side  of  head,  and  raged  so  that  the  patient
for  some  weeks  lamented  and  screamed  day  and  night
on  account  of  tearing  and  shooting  pains;  entirely  sleep-
less. 6'Consumption.

■  Pain  as  from  fatigue  and  weakness  in  arms  and  thighs,

with  dread  of  motion.
I  I  Pains  after  abuse  of  mercury.

■  The  limbs  go  to  sleep.

■  Immoval)le  stiffness  of  contracted  limbs.

^  Rest. Position. Motion. Yawning  and stretching >
general  ill  feeling.

■  Has  lain  for  six  weeks  exactly  in  same  spot,  for  she  can-

not bear  slightest  exertion  without  increasing  her  pains.


493  GUAIACUM.

Lying  on  back  :  nightmare.

When  seated:  itching,  pressing,  crawling  pains  in  thighs.
Sitting:  throbbing  in  head  <  ;  tension  in  thighs  >.
Standing: <  throbbing  in  head.

Motion:  of  head,  intense  pain  in  upper  part  of  chest ;  stiff-
ness of  neck  < ;  intolerable  pain  from  slightest  motion  ;

stinging  pains  in  limbs  <  ;  contractions  with  pain.
Biting  jaws  together :  causes  toothache.
Rising:  dizziness.
Walking: >  throbbing  in  head;  perspiration  on  head;

languor.
^^  Nerves. lExhaustion,  as  after  great  exertion,  especially  in

thighs  and  arms.
^^  Sleep. I  I  Yaw^ning  and  stretching  >  general  ill  feeling.
Great  desire  to  sleep  in  afternoon.
I  Nightly  restlessness  and  sleeplessness.
I  Frequent  aAvaking  from  sleep  as  if  falling.
iNightmare  when  lying  on  back;  waking  with  screams.
I  On  awaking: unrefreshed;  everything  seems  too  tight;

clothes  feel  damp.
^^  Time. Morning:  thoughtless  staring;  diarrhoea  commences.
By  day: corrosive  itching  on  back.
Afternoon: violent  hunger;  chilliness  in  back;  desire  to

go  to  sleep.
Evening : heat  in  face ;  violent  hunger ;  chilliness.
Night:  headache;  stuffed  feeling  in  prsecordia.
^*  Temperature  and  Weather, i  After  a  cold,  violent  pain  in

limbs.
Cannot  bear  heat,  with  pain  in  joints.
Open  air: walking  causes  perspiration  on  head.
Clothes  feel  damp.
*°  Fever. Unternal  chilliness  through  whole  body,  followed

by  heat,  most  in  face,  towards  evening,  without  thirst.
I  Chilliness internally,  even  near  w^arm  stove,  principally

in  afternoon  and  evening.
■  Burning  fever,  face  spotted;  eyes,  nose  and  cheeks  swol-
len; tight,  dry  cough.
I  Heat  in  painful  limbs.

iSkin  hot,  especially  on  hands. ^Consumption.
Sweat,  mostly  on  head  and  forehead,  also  wdien  walking

in  open  air.
I  Night-sweats,  smelling  very  offensive.
I  The  usual  general  sweat,  changes  to  dryness  and  chilliness.
The  provers  that  sweated  had  no  urinary  disturbances,

and  vice  versa.
*^  Attacks, Periodicity. Every  morning:  vomits  a  mass  of

watery  phlegm  with  great  exertion.
Every  day  at  6  p.m.  :  neuralgia  till  4  a.m.


OUAIACUM.  494

Every  day :  pain  in  foot  more  violent.

Every  Summer  for  many  years:  recurrence  of  affection  of
the  stomach.
^  Locality  and  Direction.  Right:  lancinating  stitches  in
malar  bone;  stitch  below  scapulae ;  stitches  come  from
middle  of  half  of  chest ;  sharp  stitches  in  top  of  shoulder ;
stitches  in  thumb;  tension  in  thigh;  lancinations  in
leg  from  tarsus  to  knee;  leg  swollen,  contracted,  stiff,
immovable;  drawn  close  to  thigh  ;  violent  stitches  from
outside  of  calf  to  ankle.

Left:  neuralgia  of  side  of  head;  lacerating  in  whole  side
of  head;  dragging  and  tearing  in  ear;  neuralgia  on  side
of  face;  dull  ache  in  side  of  jaw;  pleuritic  stitches;  stiff-
ness of  neck;  frequent  stitches  on  side  of  nape;  rheu-
matic stiffness  of  side  of  back ;  stitches  in  side,  below
true  ribs;  rheumatic  jjains  in  arm;  rheumatic  pains  in
wrist-joint;  leg  cramped.

From  above  downward :  stiffness  from  neck  to  back ;  rheu-
matic pain  in  limbs.

From  below  upward:  headache;  pain  from  tarsus  to  knee;
pains  in  knuckles,  then  in  hand.
*^  Sensations. '  Pressi  ve,  drawing,  tearing  pains ;  often  ending
in  a  stitch,  especiall}^  the  head-pains.

Like  a  pressure  in  brain;  sensation  as  if  brain  were  de-
tached and  loose ;  as  if  blood-vessels  were  overfilled ;  sen-
sation of  swelling  and  protrusion  of  eyes,  eyelids  appear
too  short  to  cover  them;  cutting  in  urethra  as  from
something  biting  passing;  feels  as  if  suffocating;  as  if
sitting  on  needles;  as  if  muscles  of  thighs  were  too  short;
limbs  feel  as  if  swelled.

Pain:  in  head  across  forehead;  in  bones  of  nose;  from
head  to  nose;  in  stomach;  from  head  to  neck;  in
knuckles;  in  whole  hand;  in  legs;  in  foot  extending  to
thigh ;  arms  down  to  fingers  and  to  side  of  head ;  as  from
fatigue  and  weakness  in  arms  and  thighs ;  after  abuse
of  mercury;  in  all  joints  even  chest.

Anguish :  in  epigastric  region.
■ Violent  pain:  in  knee.

Intolerable  pain:  in  back.

Intense  pain: in  upper  part  of  chest.

Violent  sharp  stitches:  in  brain ;  from  scapulae  to  occiput;
from  outside  of  r.  calf  to  ankle.

Stitches:  in  temples;  in  r.  malar  bone  and  cheek;  in
teeth;  in  neck  of  bladder;  on  1.  side  of  nape;  in  1.  side
Vjelow  true  ribs;  in  r.  thumb.

Pleuritic  stitches  in  1.  side  of  chest ;  in  region  of  third  and
fourth  rib,  1.  side ;  in  chest  between  scapulae.

Continued  stitches:  in  middle  of  r.  half  of  chest  terminat-
ing in  one  close  below  r.  scapula.


495  GUAIACUM.

Sharp  stitches :  in  top  of  r.  shoulder.

Sharp,  stitching  pains:  from  third  rib  up  on  either  side;

in  limbs.
Tearing  pains:  in  skull;  in  1.  ear;  in  teeth;  in  limbs.
Gouty,  tearing  pains:  in  Mmbs.
Lancinating:  in  r.  malar  bone  and  cheek,  from  elbow  to

wrist.
Arthritic  lancinations :  of  limbs.
Cutting:  in  urethra  while  urinating.
Shooting  pains:  through  limbs  and  head.
Lacerating: in  occiput; in  forehead; in  whole  side of

head ;  in  arm.
Stinging  pains:  in  limbs.
Darting  pains:  from  feet  to  knees.
Twitches:  in  abdominal  muscles.
Pseudo-pleuritic  pains.

Violent  burning:  in  throat;  in  stomach;  in  abdomen.
Painful  dragging:  in  1.  ear.
Drawing:  in  occiput;  in  forehead;  in  1.  arm.
Cramps:  in  stomach.
Pinching:  in  abdomen.
Contractive  pain:  between  scapulae.
Crawling  pains:  in  thighs.
Pressing  pains:  in  thighs;  in  bones.
Pricking:  in  nates;  in  muscles  of  extremities.
Rheumatic  pains:  in  one  side  of  head  extending  to  face;

in  1.  arm;  in  1.  wrist;  in  extremities.
Neuralgia:  of  1.  side  of  head  and  face  extending  to  neck.
Gout:  in  head.
Aching:  in  nape  of  neck.
Dull  ache:  in  1.  side  of  jaw.
Pulsative  throbbing:  in  outer  parts  of  head.
Heat:  in  face;  in  painful  limbs.
Rheumatic  stiffness:  of  1.  side  of  neck  and  shoulders;  of

whole  1.  side  of  back  from  nape  down  to  sacrum.
Tension:  in  thighs.

Constrictive  sensation  in  epigastric  region.
Sudden  stuffed  feeling  in  praecordia.

Stiffness:  of  one  side  of  neck  extending  to  small  of  back.
Itching:  in  thighs  when  sitting.
Corrosive  itching:  on  back.
Chilly  crawls:  over  mammae.
**  Tissues. ■  Excretions  are  all  intolerably  offensive.

■  Great  emaciation.

llActs  especially  upon  muscular  tissues,  producing  rheu-
matic and  arthritic  pains.

■  Acts  on  fibrous  tissues.

I  Contraction  of  limbs;  stiffness  and  immobility.


GUAIACUM.  496

I  Contractions,  with  pain  from  slightest  motion.

Ijoints  swollen,  painful  and  intolerant  of  pressure;  can

bear  no  heat.
I  Rheumatic  swelling  of  joints.
I  Pain  in  all  the  joints,  even  on  chest.

■  Softness  of  joints  (after  Caustic,  in  rheumatism).
I  Aching  in  bones,  with  swelling. ^S^'philis.

■  Pressing  pain  in  bones.
■Swelling  and  softening  of  bones.

Suppuration  of  bone,  with  hectic,  in  men  of  dry  habit.

■  Caries  and  spongious  affection  of  bones;  tibia  and  tarsal

bones  spongious,  cannot  bear  slightest  touch.

■  Promotes  the  spontaneous  breaking  of  gouty  abscesses,

greatly  relieving  sufferings  of  patient.

■  Gout.

*^  Touch. Passive  Motion. Injuries. The  affected  parts
are  very  sensitive  to  touch.

Touch:  tension  in  thighs  <;  osteomalacea  of  tibia  and
tarsus  <  ;  cannot  bear  slightest  touch  in  carious  affec-
tions of  bones.

Pressure:  >  throbbing  in  head;  intolerant  on  swollen
joints.

Everything  seems  too  tight.

After  riding  in  open  air:  rheumatic  stiffness  of  side  of
neck;  shoulders.

After  a  fall:  gouty  inflammation  and  abscess  at  knee.
^^  Skin. I  I  Itching,  tetter-like  eruptions.

Scratching  improves.
*''  Stages  of  Life,  Constitution. ■  Rheumatic  affections,  es-
pecially in  syphilitic  and  mercurial  patients.

■  Syphilides.

■  Old  women.

■  Dark  hair  and  eyes.
Children;  growing  pains.

■  Girl,  £et.,  23,  sanguine,  choleric;  after  being  overheated

got  a  violent  cold,  followed  by  consumption.  >

■  Woman,  set.  40,  every  Summer  for  many  years;  affection

of  stomach.
^^  Relations. Antidoted  by  Nux  vom.
It  antidotes : Caustic,  and  Rhus  tox.
Compatible: after Mercur. in rheumatism, gout and

syphilis;  after  Sulphur  in  cholera  infantum ;  after  Caustic.

in  torticollis.
Compare:  Kali  hydr.,  Mezer.,  PhytoL,  Bhodod.,  Stilling.


497  GUAEANA.

GUARANA.

Paullinia  Sorbilis;  Brazilian  Cocoa.  Sapindaceas.

A  climbing  shrub,  native  to  Brazil,  the  seeds  of  which  contain  Caffeine,  and
are  used  by  the  aborigines  as  a  beverage.

Alcoholic  solution  of  the  dried  paste  made  from  the  seeds.

Introduced  by  Gavrelle,  who  found  it  useful  "  in  diarrhoea  of  phthisis,  sick
headache,  paralysis,  tedious  convalescence,  and  as  a  general  tonic." U.  S.  D.

Proving  by  Macdowell,  see  Allen's  Encyclopedia,  vol.  4,  p.  511.

Clinical  Authorities. — Headache,  Bradley,  Hom.  Eev.,  vol.  16,  p.  504 ;
Megrim,  Eaue's  Eec,  1873,  p.  34  ;  Palliative  use  in  megrim,  Miiller,  Trinks,  B.  J.  H.,
vol.  21,  p.  20,  284;  Diarrhcea,  dysentery,  Eaue's  Eec,  1873,  p.  34.

^  Mind. Gayety ;  extravagant  behavior.

Mental  hypersesthesia ;  intellectual  excitement.
^  Inner  Head. >  iSick  headache  in  persons  who  have  used
tea  and  coffee  to  excess,  or  in  whom  nervous  headaches,
followed  by  vomiting,  are  excited  by  any  error  in  diet
or  depression  of  mind.
■  Frequent  attacks  of  sick  headache,
I  Megrim.
*  Outer  Head. l  Throbbing,  congestive  headache  after  ex-
cessive use  of  liquor.
^  Sight  and  Eyes. Persistent  twitching  of  eyelids.
^^  Appetite,  Thirst. Desires,  Aversions. Loss  of  appetite.
^^  Stool and Rectum, i  i  Profuse, green,  odorless, mucous
stools. ^Infantile  diarrhoea.
I  I  Summer  complaints  of  children  ;  diarrhoea  from  teeth-
ing ;  diarrhoea  and  vomiting  from  improper  food.
I  I  Cholera  infantum.

I  I  Chronic  diarrhoea,  nearly  to  marasmus,  in  a  child.
I  I  Diarrhoea  of  phthisis.
2^  Urinary  Organs. Spasm  of  the  bladder.
^^  Heart,  Pulse  and  Circulation. Diminution  of  the  heart-
beats.
^^  Nerves. Restlessness.

I  I  Nervousness  and  weariness.
I  I  Neuralgia.
I  I  Rheumatic  neuralgia.

Reduced  vital  powers;  grief;  depression  of  spirits;  ano-
rexia; nervous  hemicrania.
I  I  Convalescence  from  prostrating  diseases.
VOL.  v.— 32.


GUARANA— GUAREA  TRICHILIOIDES.  498

I  i  Paralysis,
^^  Sleep. Unpleasant  and  uncontrollable  sleepiness,  drowsiness
and  heaviness  of  head,  with  flushed  face,  in  persons  of
sedentary  habits,  after  eating.
Sleeplessness.
*^  Attacks,  Periodicity. Frequent  attacks  of  sick  headache.
*^  Sensations. Rheumatic  neuralgia.
Throbbing,  congestive  headache.
Twitching :  of  eyelids
Spasm  of  bladder.
**  Tissues. 1 1  Chlorosis.
*^  Skin. Urticaria ;  prurigo.

^Relations. Compare: Agar, (in twitching of eyelids);
Ignat,  Nux  vom.,  especially  latter,  in  sick  headache,  etc.


GUAREA  TRICHILIOIDES.

^ed-wood;  Ball-wood.  Meliacese.


Tincture  and  triturations  of  the  bark.

Symptoms,  pathogenetic  and  clinical,  by  Petroz. See  Allen's  Encyclopedia,
vol.  4,  p.  512.

^  Mind. Weak  memory.
Indifference.
Mental  anxiety.
Fear  of  losing  her  reason.
^  Sensorium. i  i  Vertigo,  on  stooping;  reeling  on  seeing  ob-
jects in  confusion.
Buzzing  and  sensation  as  if  brain  were  falling  forward.
Sensation  as  of  blow  on  head,  leaving  a  sort  of  stupefac-
tion, with  diminution  of  power  of  thought  for  several
days.
*  Outer  Head. Immobility  of  head ;  heaviness.

Yellowish  spots  on  temples ;  acne  rosacea.
^  Sight  and  Eyes. Objects  appear  greyish.
Dilatation  of  pupils.

Sensation  as  if  eyeballs  were  being  pushed  out.
I  Chemosis  where  the  pad  was  so  extended  and  so  thick
that  nothing  of  eye  could  be  seen  but  23uj)il,  at  the  bot-
tom of  a  veritable  tunnel. ^After  cataract  extraction.
Paralysis  of  eyelids.


499  GUAREA  TRICHILIOIDES.

^  Hearing^  and  Ears. Sensation  as  if  ears  were  stopped  up,
with  pressure  outwards.
Eruption  beliind  ears.
''  Smell  and  Nose. Cor^'za  with  indurated  excretion;  heat,

and  ineffectual  effort  to  sneeze.
^  Upper  Face. Pain  as  if  burnt;  puffiness  below  eyes;  swell-
ings which  suppurate.
^  Lower  Face. Twitchiiigs  of  mouth.

Swelling  of  upper  lip;  pimples,  scabs,  chaps  on  lips  and
at  commissures.
'^°  Teeth  and  Gums. Compressive,  corrosive  pain  of  teeth.
"Taste  and  Tongue. Tearing  pain  in  tongue;  lancinations;
paralysis  of  tongue.
Tongue  heavy,  swelled,  bleeding;  greenish-yellow  fur.
Tongue  feels  cold  and  dry.
^  Inner  Mouth, i  Roughness,  with  caries  of  palate-bone.

Dryness  of  mouth,  with  absence  of  thirst.
13  Throat. Swelling  of  tonsils,  rendering  swallowing  difficult.
Sensation  of  constriction  and  burning  heat  in  throat.
Throat  >  from  warm  drinks.
*^  Hiccough,  Belching,  Nausea  and  Vomiting. Bitter  ris-
ings, with  distension  and  pressure  at  stomach.
Vomiting  of  bitter,  greenish  matter.
"  Scrobiculum  and  Stomach. Sensation  of  rupture  at  prae-
cordial  region; <  after  supper.

■  Sensation  as  if  bruised;  itching;  constriction.
*^  Abdomen. Pressure  in  region  of  umbilicus.

I  Pain,  tensive  as  if  contused,  in  abdominal  walls.

I  Lancination  in  groins  and  inguinal  rings.

I  Ailments  from  flatulence.
^  Stool  and  Rectum. Dysentery.

Constipation  during  dentition.

I  Chronic  constipation.

I  During  stool,  pain  in  rectum.
^*  Urinary  Organs. Inflammation  of  bladder.

I  Involuntary  urination.

■  Frequent  desire  to  urinate  in  evening.
Urine  clay-colored.

^  Female  Sexual  Organs. Menorrhagia.

I  Fetid  leucorrhoea  after  menses.
^*  Pregnancy. Parturition. Lactation, i  Labor  pains  too

feeble ;  suppression  of  labor  pains.
Lochia  scanty.
^Respiration, i Asthma  of Miller;  attacks of  suffocation;

burning;  sobbing  respiration;  intermittent  constriction

of  chest;  respiratory  symptoms  <  from  putting  hand

to  throat.
^  Cough. I  Whooping  cough,  with  bloody  sputa;  dry,  hack-


GUAREA  TRICHILIOIDES.  500

ing-cough; cough  deep,  suffocating,  violent,  with  ex-
pectoration.
^  Inner  Chest  and  Lungs. ■  Sense  of  anxiety;  emptiness;
distension  of  chest; heaviness.

I  Lancinations  in  r.  side  of  chest  <  by  deep  inspirations.
^^  Neck  and  Back. Weak  back.

Cutting  pain  in  back.

Constricted  feeling  in  back ;  burning  in  loins.

Cutting  pain  in  sacrum.
^^  Upper  Limbs. Violent  shocks  in  arms ;  cramps  in  arms ;
burning  heat  in  arms";  brown  spots  under  arms;  boils.

Trembling  of  hands.

Paralysis  of  metacarpus.

Swelling  of  hands.
^  Lower  Limbs. Cutting  pains  in  legs ;  jerking  motions.

Red  spots  on  legs.

Contraction  of  feet  and  toes.
^  Limbs  in  General. Cutting  pain  in  joints;  burning  heat.
^  Rest. Position. Motion. Stooping:  vertigo.

Putting  hand  to  throat:  respiratory  symptoms  <.
^^  Nerves, i Weakness;  sensation  of  distension.

Weakness  of  the  muscles.

I  Cramps  and  convulsions  of  children.

■  Cramps  when  touched.

■  Convulsions  during  vomiting.

■  Hysterical  tetanus.

■  Paralysis  subsultus.

^^  Sleep. Somnolence,  with  dreams.

Frequent  waking ;  sad  dreams  full  of  graves.
^  Time. Evening :  frequent  desire  to  urinate.
^^  Temperature  and  Weather. Warm  drinks:  throat  >.
^  Fever. Heat  of  upper  part  and  coolness  of  lower  part  of
body.

■  During  fever,  anxiety,  forgetfulness,  pain  in  eyes,  coated

tongue,  desire  to  vomit,  oppression  of  chest,  chest  painful.

■  Intermittent  fever,  principally  before  noon ;  cold  followed

by  heat  with  sweat ;  shivering,  with  flushes  of  heat;  hor-
ripilation in  affected  parts.

■  Sweat,  principally  when  eating  or  after  eating.

^  Locality  and  Direction. Right :  lancinations  in  side  of
chest.

^  Sensations.  As  if  brain  were  falling  forward ;  sensation  as
of  blow  on  head;  as  if  eyeballs  were  being  pushed  out;
as  if  ears  were  stopped  up;  pain  in  face  as  if  burnt;
sensation  of  rupture  at  prsecordial  region ;  as  if  bruised
at  scrobiculum  and  stomach ;  as  if  contused  in  abdomi-
nal walls.
Pain:  in  rectum;  in  eyes;  in  chest;  in  bones.


501  GUAREA  TRICH.— GUMMI  GUTTI.

Lancinations :  of  tongue ;  in  groins  and  inguinal  rings ;  in
r.  side  of  chest.

Tearing  pain :  in  tongue.

Cutting  pain:  in  back;  in  sacrum;  in  legs;  in  joints.

Cramps :  in  arms ;  of  children.

Compressive,  corrosive  pain :  of  teeth.

Tensive  pain :  in  abdominal  walls.

Burning  heat:  in  throat;  in  loins;  inarms;  in  limbs.

Heat:  of  upper  part  of  body.

Constriction :  in  throat ;  of  stomach ;  of  chest ;  in  back.

Pressure :  at  stomach ;  in  region  of  umbilicus.

Emptiness :  of  chest.

Heaviness :  of  chest.

Dryness:  of  mouth.

Roughness :  of  palate-bone.

Tongue  feels  cold  and  dry.

Twitchings  of  mouth.

Itching :  at  stomach.
^*  Tissues. iSteatoma; hot swelling; swelling  of affected
parts.

Suppuration  of  glands.

I  Caries  of  bones ;  nocturnal  pain  in  bones.
*^  Skin. I  Itching.

I  Itching  eruptions ;  dry  eruptions ;  eruptions  of  burning
vesicles.

■  Lupus  of  an  ochre-red  color.
^^  Relations. Compare:  Ajns  (chemosis,  asthma  Millari,  etc.);
Arnic.  (injuries); Phosphor,  (steatoma);  Ignat.  (nerves;
Mercur.  and  Silica  (bone  pains,  suppuration,  etc.).


GOMMI  GUTTI. (See  Gambogia.)


GYMNOCLADUS  CANADENSIS.  502;

GYMNOCLADUS  CANADENSIS.

Chicot,  American  coffee-tree.  Leguminosx.

Introduced  by  Hering  and  proved  under  his  supervision. See  Allen's  Ency-
clopedia, vol.  4,  p.  519.

Tincture  of  the  fresh  pulp  in  the  pods.

^  Mind. Cannot  think,  comprehend  or  study  ;  forgets  every-^
thing.
Indifference  to  what  happens  around  him.
^  Sensorium. Dizziness with dimness of sight; nausea,,
belching.
Head  feels  full,  tight,  as  if  bound  up.
^  Inner  Head. Intense frontal headache, eyes feel as  if
pushed  forward.
Fulness  and  pressure  in  and  over  eyes,  extending  to  top

of  head.
Throbbing  headache  over  1.  eye.
Pain  in  1.  temple  to  ear  and  top  of  head,  shooting  through

to  r.  side.
Bruised  feeling  of  head,  1.  side.
Pain  in  head  and  back.
Intense  headache,  with  stitches  in  bowels;  in  umbilical

region  at  times.
Catarrhal  headaches,  premonitory  stages;  feeling  of  ful-
ness in  head,  with  throbbing  in  temples  and  forehead,,
with  vertigo,  heat  of  face,  numbness  and  tired  feeling.
^  Outer  Head. Desire  to  lean  the  head  on  something.
^  Sight  and  Eyes. Eyes  feel  as  if  pushed  forward.
Pain  in  1.  eyeball  and  temple.
Burning  heat  and  pain  through  eyes.
Eyes  feel  sore  in  morning.
^  Smell  and  Nose. Frequent  violent  sneezing,  originating

very  high  up  in  nose.
^  Upper  Face. Sensation  as  if  flies  were  crawling  over  r.  side
of  face.
I  Erysipelatous  swelling  of  face  and  head;  hot  face ;  it  feels
swollen ;  is  compelled  to  rub  the  eyes.
^^  Teeth  and  Gums. Great  sensibility  of  teeth;  <  on  1.  side
and  in  u[)per  teeth; slightest  draught  of  cold  air  causes
toothache; cold  drink  very  painful.
"  Taste  and  Tongue. Tongue  coated  bluish-white.
"Inner  Mouth. Burning,  drawing  and  scraping;  burning,
in  roof  of  mouth,  extending  to  uvula  and  tonsils.


12


503  GYMNOCLADUS  CANADENSIS.

13  'Yh.YOSit. Inflammation  and  purple  color  of  r.  tonsil.
I  Sore  throat,  dark  livid  redness  of  fauces  and  tonsils.
Sticking  and  shooting  in  throat.
Mucus  in  throat  and  frequent  hawking.
^^  Hiccough, Belching, Nausea  and  Vomiting. Belch-
ing of  sour  water.
Nausea  after  eating,  with  pain  and  fulness  in  stomach,  and
belching.
^"^  Scrobiculum  and  Stomach. Burning  in  oesophagus  and
stomach.
Heat  in  stomach  and  sour,  watery  eructations.
^^  Hypochondria. Pain  in  1.  side,  as  if  spleen  were  swollen.
^^  Abdomen. Soreness  and  tenderness  of  abdomen.

Stitches  in  bowels  and  umbilical  region,
'"  Stool  and  Rectum. Constipation,  with  ineffectual  disposi-
tion to  go  to  stool.
After  stool,  aching  fulness  in  rectum.
^^  Urinary  Organs. Pressure  on  bladder  and  frequent  desire

to  urinate;  urine  passed  in  a  small  stream.
^^  Maie  Sexual  Organs. Itching  of  glans  penis  and  prepuce.
^^  Voice  and  Larynx. Trachea  and  Bronchia. Smarting

in  larynx.
^^  Cough. Tickling  in  throat  in  morning,  causing  cough,  in-
creasing through  day;  cough  dry,  hard  and  racking.
^^  Inner  Chest  and  Lungs. Pressure  on  chest  and  sternum.
^^  Heart,  Pulse  and  Circulation. Pulse  small  and  weak.
^'^  Outer  Chest. Stitches  in  r.  breast  and  intercostal  muscles.
^^  Upper  Limbs. Violent  pain  in  1.  forearm,  in  radius,  as  if
bones  were  crushed  and  broken.
Pulsation  in  1.  index,  as  if  panaritium  were  forming.
^^  Lower  Limbs. Stinging  pain  in  1.  knee-joint.
^^  Rest. Position. Motion. Desire  to  lean  head  on  some-
thing.
Repugnance  to  motion.
Easily  fatigued.
^^  Nerves. Repugnance  to  motion ;  a  short  walk  in  afternoon

fatigues  him  much.
^^  Time. Morning:  eyes  feel  sore;  tickling  in  throat.
Afternoon :  short  walk  fatigues  him  much.
Aggravation  in  evening.
^^  Temperature  and  Weather. Desire  for  heat ;  wants  to  be
near  fire.
Cold  drinks  very  painful.
Cold  draughts  of  air  cause  toothache.
**^  Fever. Desire  for  heat;  wants  to  be  near  the  fire.

Cold  chills  and  pains  in  bowels  (in  descending  colon).
Perspiration  of  axillary  region  and  palms  of  hands.


GYMNOCLADUS  CANADENSIS.  504

I  Epidemic  fevers,  typhoid  in  character.
^  Attacks,  Periodicity.  At  times  stitches  in  umbilical  region.

Frequent  sneezing.
^  Locality  and  Direction. Right :  sensation  as  if  flies  were
crawling  on  side  of  face;  inflammation  and  purple  color
of  tonsil;  stitches  in  breast.

Left:  throbbing  headache  over  eye;  pain  in  temple  to
ear;  bruised  feeling  of  head ;  pain  in  eyeball;  sensibility
of  teeth;  pain  in  side  as  if  spleen  were  swollen;  violent
pain  in  forearm;  pulsation  in  index  finger;  stinging
pain  in  knee-joint.
^^  Sensations.  Head  feels  as  if  bound  up;  eyes  feel  as  if
pushed  forward;  as  if  flies  were  crawling  over  r.  side  of
face;  as  if  spleen  were  swollen;  as  if  bones  of  forearm
were  crushed  and  broken ;  pulsation  in  1.  index  as  if
panisitium  were  forming.

Pain :  in  1.  temple  to  ear  and  top  of  head ;  in  head  and
back;  in  1.  eyeball;  in  temple;  through  eyes;  in  stom-
ach; in  1.  side;  in  bowels.

Violent  pain :  in  1.  forearm ;  in  radius.

Intense  frontal  headache.

Stitches:  in  bowels;  in  umbilical  region;  in  breast  and
intercostal  muscles.

Sticking:  in  throat.

Stinging  pain:  in  1.  knee-joint.

Shooting :  through  head  to  r.  side ;  in  throat.

Throbbing  headache:  over  1.  eye;  in  temples.

Burning  heat:  in  eyes;  in  roof  of  mouth;  in  oesophagus;
in  stomach.


Heat:  in  face; in  stomach.

Aching  fulness : in  rectum.

Drawing:  in  roof  of  mouth.

Bruised  feeling : of  head ;  1.  side.

Tenderness: of  abdomen.

Great  sensibility  of  teeth.

Sore  feeling:  in  eyes;  in  throat;  in  abdomen.

Smarting: in  larynx.

Tickling :  in  throat.

Scraping:  in  roof  of  mouth.

Swollen  feeling  of  face.

Fulness:  in  and  over  eyes;  in  stomach.

Head  feels  full,  tight.

Pressure:  in  and  over  eyes;  on  bladder;  on  chest  and
sternum.

Numbness  and  tired  feeling.

Itching:  of  glans  penis  and  prepuce.
*^  Relations. Compare  :  Agar.,  JEthusa,  Bellad.,  Cicuta,  Hyosc,
Laches.,  Lachnanih. ,  Solan,  nigr.,  Stramon.


505  HAMAMELI8  VIRGINICA.


HAMAMELIS  VIRGINICA.

Witch-Hazel.  Haniamelacex.


A  shrub  growing  in  all  parts  of  the  United  States,  in  damp  woods  or  along
streams  ;  flowers  in  the  Fall,  the  seeds  ripen  the  year  following.

The  tincture  is  prepared  from  the  fresh  bark  of  the  twigs  and  root.

Introduced  by  C.  Hering,  in  1850.

Provings  by  Preston,  Burt  and  McGeorge.  See  Allen's  Eacyclopedia,  vol.
4,  p.  528.

Clinical  Authorities. — Intraocular  hemorrhage ;  ophthalmia,  Norton's  Ophth.
Therap.,  p.  91 ;  Traumatic  ophthalmia,  Newton,  Raue's  Eec,  1872,  p.  67 ;  Trau-
matic conjunctivitis,  Holcombe,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  5,  p.  107  ;  Blepharitis,  conjunctivi-
tis, Hendricks,  Allg.  Hom.  Ztg.,  vol.  103,  p.  183;  Ectropion,  Searle,  Eaue's  Eec,
1873,  p.  65;  Inflamed  eyes,  Mann,  Bragdon,  Med.  Inv.,  vol.  11,  p.  236;  Epistaxis,
Burritt,  Hom.  Eev.,  vol.  1,  p.  513;  Kenyon,  Hom.  Eev.,  vol.  2,  p.  412;  Belcher,
N.  A.  J.  H.,  vol.  3,  p.  462;  (2  cases)  Belcher,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  5,  p.  176;  Van-
derveer,  Hah.  Mo.,  vol.  10,  p.  419 ;  Preston,  Hale's  Therap.,  p.  280 ;  Hemorrhage
-after  extraction  of  teeth.  Knight,  Eaue's  Eec,  1870,  p.  138 ;  Throat  affection,  Hen-
dricks, Allg.  Hom.  Ztg.,  vol.  103,  p.  183 ;  Ucematemesis,  Bennett,  Eaue's  Eec,  1873,
p.  115;  Burritt,  Hom.  Eev.,  vol.  1,  p.  511 ;  Belcher,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  5,  p.  264;
Angioleucitis,  Blake,  A.  H.  O.,  vol.  9,  p.  410 ;  Dysentery,  Lee,  B.  J.  H.,  vol.  24,  p.
332;  Spiuney,  A.  H.  O.,  vol.  3,  p.  215 ;  Mekena,  Belcher,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf,  vol.  5,  p.
493;  Hemorrhage  from  bowels,  Pratt,  B.  J.  H.,  vol.  17,  p.  527;  Discharge  of  blood
from  anus,  Guernsey,  Eaue's  Eec,  1870,  p.  62;  Hemorrhage  from  bowels,  in  typhoid.
Spinney,  A.  H.  O.,  vol.  3,  p.  215;  Seward,  Eaue's  Eec,  1874,  p.  283;  Hemorrhoids,
Hunt,  T.  A.  I.  H.,  1874,  p.  880;  Hughes,  B.  J.  H.  vol.  25,  p.  429;  Okie,  B.  J.  H.,
vol.  15,  p.  168;  A.  E.,  Eaue's  Eec,  1870,  p.  219;  Harper,  Times  Eetros.,  vol.  3,
p.  26;  Jousset,  B.  J.  H.,  vol.  34,  p.  332;  Fissure  ani,  Koch,  Eaue's  Eec,  1871,  p.
123 ;  Spermatorrhoea  (3  cases),  Allen,  T.  A.  I.  H.,  1874,  p.  880;  Hcematuria,  Harper,
Times  Eetros.,  vol.  3,  p.  26;  Orchitis,  Jaeger,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  5,  p.  583;  Vari-
cocele, J.  A.  B.,  Eaue's  Eec,  1872,  p.  168;  Morgan,  B.  J.  H.,  vol.  30,  p.  411 ;  Phimo-
sis, Gatchell,  Eaue's  Eec,  1871,  p.  144;  Ovarian  disease  (2  cases),  Burt,  B.  J.  H.,
vol.  23,  p.  614;  Amenorrhcea  (2  cases),  Burritt,  Hom.  Eev.,  vol.  1,  p.  512;  Metror-
■rhagia.  Brown,  Hom.  Eev.,  vol.  14,  p.  476-7 ;  Menorrhagia,  Brown,  Eaue's  Eec,
1871,  p.  155;  Hai'per,  Times  Eetros.,  vol.  3,  p.  26;  Uterine  hemorrhage  (6  cases),
Brown,  Eaue's  Eec,  1871,  p.  27  ;  Iszard,  Hah.  Mo.,  vol.  10,  p.  420 ;  Preston,  B.  J.  H.,
vol.  15,  p.  168;  Ludlam,  N.  A.  J.  H.,  vol.  7,  p.  479;  Inflammation  of  internal
genitals  after  a  blow,  Thomas,  B.  J.  H.,'Vol.  16,  p.  174;  Vaginismus  (2  cases),
.McGeorge,  Trans.  Am.  Inst.  Hom.,  1874,  p.  881 ;  Chronic  parenchymatous  metritis
(2  cases),  Hendricks,  Allg.  Hom.  Ztg.,  vol.  103,  p.  183;  Threatened  abortion  [S
•cases),  Brown,  Eaue's  Eec,  1871,  p.  162;  (4  cases)  Brown,  Hom.  Eev.,  vol.  14,  p.
473;  Phlegmasia  alba  dolens,  Holcombe,  Eaue's  Eec,  1872,  p.  195;  (2  cases)
Thomas,  B.  J.  H.,  vol.  16,  p.  174;  Sore  nipples,  McGeorge,  Trans.  Am.  Inst.  Horn.,


HAMAMELIS  VIRGINICA.  506

1874,  p.  SSI;  Affection  of  vocal  cord,  Hendricks,  AUg.  Horn.  Ztg.,  vol.  103,  p.  183;
Bronchial  hemorrhages,  Lippincott,  Trans.  Am.  Inst.  Horn.,  1874,  p.  881;  Dia-
phragmitis,  Thomas,  B.  J.  H.,  vol.  16,  p.  174 ;  Affection  of  I.  leg,  Burritt,  Hom.  Kev.,
vol.  1,  p.  514;  Inflammation  of  femoral  vein,  Thomas,  B.  J.  H.,  vol.  16,  p.  174;  Typho-
malarial  fever,  Goodno,  Organon,  vol.  3,  p.  369 ;  Passive  congestions  of  skin  and
mucotts  membranes,  Blake,  Kane's  Rec,  1873,  p.  29;  Venous  hemorrhages,  Palmer,
Eaue's  Eec,  1871,  p.  27  ;  Hemorrhages,  Wilson,  Gardner,  T.  A.  I.  H.,  1874,  p.  880 ;
Phlebitis,  Eobinson,  Trans.  Hom.  Med.  Soc,  N.  Y.,  1865,  p.  185  ;  Bennett,  T.  A.
I.  H.,  1874,  p.  880 ;  Purpura  hemorrhagica,  Thomas,  B.  J.  H.,  vol.  16,  p.  175 ;
Varices  and  hemorrhoids,  Preston,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  5.,  p.  493 ;  Varicose  veins,
Baething,  Eaue's  Eec.,  1870,  p.  262 ;  Burritt,  Hom.  Eev.,  vol.  1,  p.  513 ;  Muscular
rheumatism,  McGeorge,  Trans.  Am.  Inst.  Horn.,  1874,  p.  881 ;  Wounds  (4  cases),
Hamisfar,  A.  H.  O.,  vol.  5,  p.  524;  Burns,  Burritt,  Hom.  Eev.,  vol.  1,  p.  511;,
Dissecting  ivound,  Coxe,  MSS. ;  Ulcers,  Fischer,  Windleband,  B.  J.  H.,  vol.  33,  p.
548 ;  Chilblains,  Blake,  Eaue's  Eec,  1873,  p.  29.


^  Mind. I  Forgetful,  especially  of  words  when  talking.

I  No  desire  to  study  or  work;  ideas  confused,  could  not.
compose.

■  Depressed  in  mind;  also  after  emissions,  with  regretful

mind.
I  I  Irritable ;  gloomy ;  depressed ;  stupid.
Felt  as  if  he  was  going  out  of  his  mind.
I  Hemorrhages  with  tranquil  mind.
^  Sensorium. >  Vertigo  when  stooping.
I  Swimming  sensation  on  rising.
I  Nausea  and  vertigo,  with  desire  to  lie  down.
I  Fulness  in  head.

I  Stupor,  headache,  crowding  fulness  in  head  and  neck^
also  in  forehead.

■  General  stupor.

^  Inner  Head, l Fulness  in  forehead,  with  pressing  in  root

of  tongue.
■Hammering  over  1.  eye,  as  if  he  would  go  out  of  his

mind.
I  Feeling  as  if  a  bolt  was  passing  from  temple  to  temple,,

and  tightly  screwed.
Sharp  pains  in  temples.

Dull  throbbing  pain  in  back  and  top  of  head.
Dulness  and  fulness  in  head  all  day.
Distressing  throbbing,  aching  and  sense  of  fulness  in  head ;

head  feels  as  if  it  would  burst;  face  flushed.

■  Bursting  headache  on  awaking,  insupportable  on  bend-

ing downward.

■  Headache  after  an  emission;  depressed  in  mind.
I  I  Headache  on  rising.

Congestive  headaches  with  cool  skin.

Headaches accompanying  venous congestion of brain,


507  HAMAMELIS  VIKGINICA.

lungs,  portal  or  general  venous  systems;  especially  if

followed  by  epistaxis.
Passive  congestion  or  venous  stagnation.
*  Outer  Head. ■  After  injury  of  head  and  face,  great  ecchy-

mosis, with disposition to loose bowels  and uneasy

stomach ;  fainting  on  walking.
^  Sight  and  Eyes. lEyes  feel  weak; painful  weakness  of

eyes.

■  Headache  from  straining  the  eyes.

I  Feeling  as  if  both  eyes  would  be  forced  out  of  head,  >
by  pressing  them  with  fingers,  but  <  a  few  moments
afterwards.

I  Sore  pain  in  eyes;  eyes  painful  under  slight  pressure.

■Traumatic  iritis  with  hemorrhage  into  iris.

I  After  injury  to  1.  eye,  abrasion  of  cornea,  some  blood  in
anterior  chamber,  vitreous  so  dark  from  hemorrhage
that  fundus  could  not  be  illuminated;  there  was  only
perception  of  light.

I  Inflammation  and  ulceration  of  conjunctiva  and  cornea,
if  caused  by  a  blow  or  burn.

I  Traumatic  conjunctivitis  from  burn  of  a  flame;  excruciat-
ing pain,  great  photophobia,  constant  acrid  lachryma-
tion  and  great  vascularity  of  conjunctiva.

I  Conjunctivitis  traumatica  from  a  piece  of  splinter  under
upper  lid.

■  Eyes  inflamed; vessels  greatly  injected; intense  sore-

ness caused  by  a  foreign  substance.

I  Eyes  inflamed  and  burning,  from  being  on  the  water  fish-
ing, in  the  hot  sun.

I  Traumatic  ophthalmia,  caused  by  a  drop  of  boiling  sugar
getting  into  eye.

I  Extravasations  in  whooping-cough,  eyeball  congested
from  violence  of  concussion,  and  small  vessels  are  rujD-
tured.

■Swelling  of  eyeballs  and  lids,  with  bloodshot  appearance
of  eye.

■  Excessive  congestion  of  conjunctiva.

■  Painful  inflammation  of  eyes.

■  Spontaneous  eversion  of  upper  lid  during  course  of  severe

conjunctivitis.

■  Blepharitis  granulosa;  catarrhal  conjunctivitis  with  great

pain  and  hypersemia.

■  Black  eye  from  a  bruise.

®  Hearing  and  Ears. ■Deafness  in  r.  ear,  passes  off"  by  noon.

■  Bleeding  at  r.  ear,  also  nosebleed,  which  clears  her  head,.

relieving  her.
I  I  Buzzing,  ringing  in  ears.
'  Smell  and  Nose. ■Oversensitive  smell.


HAMAMELIS  VIRGINICA.  508

I  Bad  odor  from  nose.

I  I  Sneezing  spells,  watery,  excoriating,  burning  discharge.

I  Nose  feels  stopped  up.

I I  Profuse  epistaxis.

1 1  Epistaxis,  flow  passive,  non-coagulable.

■  Bleeding  of  nose, which  clears  her  head,  and  affords

great  relief.
I  Nosebleed  >  headache  and  tightness  across  bridge  of
nose.

■  Idiopathic  or  vicarious  epistaxis.

■  Epistaxis;  bleeding  commenced  on  1.  side;  child  weak

from  loss  of  blood.

■  ■Epistaxis  in  morning,  with  feeling  of  tightness  of  bridge

of  nose,  and  considerable  crowding  pressure  in  forehead
between  eyes,  and  a  benumbed  sensation  over  whole  os
frontis.

■  Epistaxis  occurring  in  a  strong  man  suffering  from  a

fever,  with  a  miliary  eruption ;  hemorrhage  dark ;  pulse
Cjuick ;  respiration  ojDpressed ;  lijDS  and  mouth  dry ;  con-
junctivitis,

■  Epistaxis  at  irregular  intervals  of  from  six  to  twenty-four

hours;  pale,  enfeebled.
■Oozing  of  very  dark  blood  from  nose  of  hemiplegic  old
man.

■  Epistaxis  of  childhood,  passive,  venous.
^  Upper  Face. '  l  Burning  in  right  cheek.

■  Occasional  shooting  pains  along  r.  superior  maxillar}^  to

malar  bone ;  muscles  feel  sore  and  stiff.
®  Lower  Face, i  iLips  dry;  sore,  cracked.
Teeth,  and  Gums. ■Sharp  lancinating  along  molar  teeth,
extending  to  malar  bone;  also  in  temporal  region.

■  Teeth  ache,  yet  not  decayed ;  can  scarcely  sleep ;  pains  <

in  warm  room.

■  Gums:  sore,  painful,  swollen;  bleed  easily;  passive,  dark

fluid  bleeding; hemorrhage  after  extraction  of  teeth.

■  Bleeding  and  spongy  gums.

"  Taste  and  Tongue. Taste:  flat;  rough;  metallic.
Tongue  coated  white.

■  Scalding  sensation  on  tongue;  feels  as  if  burnt.

■  Blisters  on  sides  of  tongue;  canker  spots  near  tip.

■  Burns  of  tongue  and  lips.

''  Inner  Mouth. Dryness  of  mouth.

I  I  Scalding  of  tongue  and  mucous  membrane  of  mouth
and  fauces.
^  Throat, i  '  Severe  stinging  in  uvula,  as  if  it  would  break,
when  he  coughs.
I  I  Dryness  of  lips  and  fauces;  must  drink  large  quantities
of  water  to  assist  deglutition.


10


509  HAMAMELIS  VIRGINICA.

I  I  Dryness  of  throat  not  >  by  water.

I  I  Feeling  as  if  something  had  lodged  in  fauces.

I  Tonsils  and  fauces  congested.

iChronic  inflammation  of  throat;  deglutition  painful,  even
empty  swallowing;  nasal  voice;  dry,  short  cough  with
sensation  of  dryness  in  throat;  mucous  membrane  of
pharynx  very  red  and  permeated  by  enlarged  blood-
vessels; great  swelling  and  redness  of  tonsils;  catarrh  of
upper  part  of  larynx  and  vocal  cords.

iVaricosis  of  throat,  the  parts  look  bluish  from  distended
veins,  and  there  is  more  or  less  discomfort,  with  pain  on
swallowing,  and  hawking  of  mucus  with  blood.

I  Sore  throat  in  those  predisposed  to  fulness  of  veins;  <  in
warm,  moist  air.

I  Sore  throat,  <  r.  side;  r.  tonsil  more  swollen,  reddened^
and  veins  enlarged,  varicose.

I  I  Sore  throat,  preventing  sleep.

IVaricosis  of  throat  in  gouty  subjects.

I  Hemorrhage  from  throat  and  fauces.

I  I  Hawks  considerably.
^*  Appetite,  Thirst. Desires,  Aversions. iNo  appetite  for
breakfast ;  considerable  thirst,  >  by  small  quantities  of
water.

I  Great  thirst.

1  1  Very  thirsty,  afternoon  and  evening ;  throat  dry.

i  I  Averse  to  water,  makes  him  sick  to  think  of  it.
^^  Eating  and  Drinking. After  eating : nausea,  must  keep
quiet,  eructations;  hiccough.

I  I  Pork  nauseates.
^^  Hiccough,  Belching,  Nausea  and  Vomiting, i  Eructa-
tions after  a  meal  tasting  of  food.

I  I  Nausea,  eructations  and  violent  hiccough  after  pork,
followed  by  burning  in  stomach  and  cesophagus ;  later,
cramp  pains  in  stomach  and  chest.

1  I  Nausea  and  vertigo,  must  lie  still  to  prevent  vomiting.

I  I  Nausea;  with  headache  in  frontal  bone  on  awaking.

I  I  Nausea  and  inclination  to  vomit  after  a  meal.

I  Nausea,  from  pain  in  testicles.

■  Painful,  bloody  vomiting.

■After  fulness  and  constant  pains  in  abdomen  with  irreg-
ular chills,  sudden  vomiting  of  blood  and  hemorrhage
from  bowels;  great  prostration;  profuse  cold  sweat;
weak,  quick  pulse;  restlessness;  fulness  and  gurgling  in
abdomen.

I  iHsematemesis.
^^  Scrobiculum  and  Stomach, l  l  Burning  in epigastrium ;
sharp  pains  in  stomach.

■Violent  throbbing  in  stomach.


HAMAMELIS  VIRGINICA.  510

I  1  Heaviness and pain back  of  stomach, along spinal

column.
I  I  Cramp  in  stomach ;  after  eating.
I Hfematemesis,  blood  black; sensation  of  trembling  in

stomach,  or  fulness  and  gurgling  in  abdomen ;  feverish

by  spells;  restless;  weak,  cold ;  quick  pulse;  profuse  sweat.
I H^matemesis,  very  profuse,  dark,  clotted;  slight  bloody

discharge  from  bowels.
^^  Hypochondria. Dull  pain  in  hypochondriac  region.

Sharp  pains  in  1.  hypochondrium,  in  region  of  spleen.
^^  Abdomen, i  i  Flatulence.

Constant  distress  or  drawing  pains  in  umbilicus.

•  Burning  in  epigastrium  and  umbilicus.

I  Cramps  in  stomach  and  transverse  colon  two  hours  after

a  hearty  dinner.

■  Soreness  of  abdomen.

I  Angioleucitis,  surface  of  abdomen  covered  with  distended

lymphatic  sacculi,  filled  with  amber  fluid,  varying  in
size  from  pin's  head  to  Spanish  nut ;  inguinal  glands
tender  and  enlarged.

■  I  Varicose  veins  of  abdomen.

^■^  Stool  and  Rectum. Great  desire  for  stool  without  being
able  to  accomplish  it.
Tenesmus  or  nervous  pressure  when  at  stool  so  intense
that  it  appeared  to  strain  out  to  tips  of  fingers.

■  From  12  to  15  stools  every  day  with  violent  tenesmus,

must  often  get  up  at  night,  stool  of  blood  mixed  with
masses  of  mucus,  entirely  scentless,  violent  colicky  pains ;
some  fecal  lumps  in  stools ;  only  region  of  anus  and  rec-
tum painful;  great  loss  of  spirit.  ^Hemorrhoidal  affec-
tion.
iDj^sentery  consisting  of  profuse  flow  of  clear  blood,
amounting  almost  to  a  hemorrhage,  with  no  pain  or
tenesmus.

II  Dysentery;  when  amount  of  blood  is  unusual  in  quan-
tity and  amounts  to  an  actual  hemorrhage,  generally  of
dark  blood ;  or  when  there  are  clots  or  patches  of  blood
scattered  through  the  mucus; soreness  of  abdomen.

I  Every  fifteen  minutes  discharge  of  pure  blood,  with  severe
tenesmus;  crampy  pain  around  umbilicus  before  stool;
no  appetite;  great  thirst;  tongue  coated  brown  and
parched;  hippocratic  countenance;  emaciation;  desire
for  sour  pickles. ^Dysentery.

■  Hemorrhoidal  dysentery.

I  Stools:  costive;  hard,  coated  with  mucus;  hard,  dry,
dark  colored.

■  Discharge  of  blood  from  anus  in  large  quantities,  of  a  tar-

like consistency.


511  HAMAMELIS  VIRGINICA.

I  Hemorrhage  from  ulceration  of  bowels.

I  Profuse  hemorrhage  of  dark,  grumous  blood  from  bowels.

■  Dark,  fetid  diarrhoea,  large,  hemorrhagic  discharges  of

black,  grumous,  fetid  blood;  rapid  sinking;  pale"  and
excited;  slight  delirium;  fearful  of  death.
I  Fulness  in  hypochondriac  region  followed  by  diarrhoea ;
great  weakness ;  pale,  dark  red  face ;  thirst ;  quick  pulse ;
every  three  or  four  hours,  thin,  dark,  rose-colored,  offen-
sive passages. ^Melsena.

I  Hemorrhage  from  bowels  of  fluid,  dark,  fetid  blood.

I I  Hemorrhage  from  portal  congestion.

■  Pulsation  in  rectum,  as  if  piles  would  protrude.

■  Before stool difficult to defecate, anus spasmodically

closed ;  great  pains  in  anus  during  stool ;  after  passage  in-
tense burning  at  orifice ;  at  times,  when  he  had  no  stool
for  several  days,  heavy  frontal  headache,  low-spirited ;
thinks  constantly  of  his  ailment;  nausea  after  eating.
^Fissure  ani.
1  I  Hemorrhage  from  piles,  in  which  the  loss  of  a  small
quantity  of  blood  was  followed  by  prostration  out  of
proportion  to  the  loss.

■  Hemorrhoids,  with  hemorrhage,  more  or  less profuse,

occurring  with  every  evacuation  for  months  or  years,
with  other  symptoms  of  piles.

■  Bleeding  hemorrhoids  in  which  the  blood  flows  with

a certain regularity and without much expulsive
effort.

■  ■Piles:  bleeding  profusely;  with  burning  soreness,  ful-

ness and  weight ;  back  as  if  it  would  break ;  urging  to
stool.

■  Congestion  of  liver,  with  bleeding  piles;  pale  from  con-

stant daily  loss  of  blood.

■  Tumid  hemorrhoidal  veins  of  bluish  color,  the  anus  sur-

rounded with  red  erythematous  circle.

■  Protrusion  of  varices,  anus  feels  sore  as  if  raw.

■  Itching  at  anus.

'^^  Urinary  Organs. Hsematuria ;  passive  congestion  of  kid-
neys ;  dull  pain  in  renal  region.

■  Hemorrhoids  of  bladder;  passive  congestions.
I  I  Vesical  catarrh.

I  I  Increased  desire  to  urinate.
■Ardor  urinse  in  females.
I  I  Urine  clear,  copious.
Urine  more  copious  lying  down.

■  Scanty,  high-colored  urine.

■  Irritation  of  urethra,  followed  by  a  discharge  and  ardor

urinee.

■  Catarrh  of  urethra,  with  disease  of  prostate  gland.


HAMAMELIS  VIRGINICA.  512

I  Much  urging  to  urinate, violent  pains,  thick  mucous

urine,  discharge  of  blood  from  bladder,  either  in  drops

or  in  lumps,  by  the  half-pint.
iHeematuria,  after  blow  in  r.  iliac  region;  blood  bright

red;  face  pale;  pulse  feeble;  partial  shock.
^^  Male  Sexual  Organs. Amorous  dreams,  with  emissions,

followed by  lassitude,  gloomy,  depressing  mood,  dull

pain  in  lumbar  region.
Sexual  dreams,  with  emissions ;  feels  in  morning  as  if  he

had  not  slept.

■  Emissions  at  night,  without  being  aware  of  it;  headache,

depression  of  mind.
1  I  Erections;  great  desire  for  an  embrace.

I  Great  prostration  of  animal  passions.

a  Impotence, organs greatly relaxed and constantly
sweating.

I I  Pain  running  down  spermatic  cords  into  testes.

■  Enlargement  of  1.  spermatic  vein,  first  noticed  after  vio-

lent exercise ;  four  years  previously  tumor,  from  that
time  constantly  increasing  in  size;  dull  aching  pain  in
groin,  sometimes  extending  into  back,  <  horseback
riding.  ^Varicocele.
I  For  three  months  drawing  pain  in  1.  spermatic  cord,,
which  is  painful,  swollen  and  inflamed ;  1.  testicle  pain-
ful, swollen  and  hard.

■  Dull  aching; severe  drawing  or  excruciating  pains  in

testicles.
Drawing  pains  in  testicles  day  and  night,  extending  from
groins.

■  Severe  dull  pains  in  testicles.

■  Enlargement  of  r.  testicle;  hot  and  painful;  following

gonorrhoea.

■  Severe  neuralgic  pains  in  testicles,  suddenly  shifting  to^

bowels, causing iiausea and faintness; profuse cold
sweat  on  scrotum  ;  capillary  stasis.

■  Severe  neuralgic  pains  in  testicles,  pains  dart  from  testi-

cles to  stomach,  <  nights  and  during  rainj^  weather.
Awoke  at  3  a.m.  with  severe  neuralgic  pains  in  testicles,

preventing  further  sleep.
Pain  in  testicles  <  after  midnight,  until  morning.

■  Orchitis; intense soreness and swelling; gonorrhoeal

orchitis.

■  Gonorrhoeal  epididymitis,  especially  in  those  cases  where

the  disease  partakes  of  a  congestive  or  sub-acute  charac-
ter rather  than  the  inflammatory.

■  Varicocele;  circocele.

■  A^aricosis  of  spermatic  veins.

■  Fluid  blood  in  hsematocele.


513  HAMAMELIS  VIRGINICA.

I  Urethritis,  with  discharge  of  transparent  mucus,  with
pain.

I  Phimosis.

Profuse  cold  sweat  of  scrotum  at  night.
^^  Female  Sexual  Organs. Congestion,  inflammation  and
neuralgia  of  ovaries,  with  cutting,  tearing  pains  in  ovary,,
which  is  swollen  and  very  tender.

Ovarian  affections  with  swelling  and  tenderness,  <  at
menses ;  retention  of  urine.

I  Ovarian  soreness  and  painfulness.

I  Paroxysm  of  pain  in  r.  groin ;  pain  commences  in  region
of  r.  ovary  and  passes  down  broad  ligament  to  uterus,,
resembling  labor  pains;  swelling  in  r.  groin  half  as-
large  as  a  hen's  egg,  very  tender  to  pressure ;  pain  in
epigastrium  and  lumbar  region;  no  appetite;  tongue
furred  white ;  quite  weak ;  confined  to  bed ;  constipation ;
pale,  chlorotic  appearance.

■  After  a  blow,  ovary  swollen;  diffuse,  agonizing  soreness

over  whole  abdomen ;  menses  irregular,  very  painful,
with  exacerbation  of  all  sufferings  at  catamenial  epoch ;
retention  of  urine.

■  Frequent  paroxysm  of  pain  in  1.  ovary,  passing  down  to

uterus,  with  ansemia ;  every  clay  or  tw^o  ovarian  region
becomes  much  swollen.

■  Ovaritis,  1.  side,  following  miscarriage.

■Subacute  ovaritis  incident  to  j^regnancy  and  menstrua-
tion.

I  I  Congestion  and  inflammation  of  internal  genitals,  after
blow  in  region  of  1.  ovary.

■  Vicarious  menstruation  from  ovarian  irritation.
I  iGonofrhcBal  ovaritis.

■  Chronic parenchymatous metritis  after subinvolution,

with  lumbo-abdominal  neuralgia  and  painful  sensation
of  heaviness  in  lower  abdomen  when  standing  and  walk-
ing; uterus  hypertrophied,  anteverted,  prolapsed  and
immovable;  vaginal  portion  blue,  hard  and  hypertro-
phied with  oedematous,  pouting  lips ;  debility.
■Uterine  disturbance  and  tenderness,  with  retention  of
urine,  tumefaction  of  os  uteri,  and  diffused  agonized
soreness  over  whole  abdomen,  after  violent  blow  in  ova-
rian region.

■  ■Menses  very  dark  and  profuse,  with  soreness  in  abdo-

men.

■  Dysmenorrhoea:  from  ovarian  irritation;  inflammatory

or  neuralgic.

■  ■  Amenorrhoea ;  vicarious  bleeding  from  nose  or  stomach  ;

costive ;  varices  on  legs,
■Severe  pains  in  lumbar  and  hypogastric  regions  and  down

VOL.  V. — 33.


HAMAMELIS  VIRGINICA.  514

legs  when  menses  should  have  appeared ;  fulness  of
bowels  and  brain,  with  severe  pain  through  whole  head,
resulting  in  stupor  and  deep  sleep  lasting  12  to  36  hours,
from  which  it  was  impossible  to  arouse  her,  ^Amen-
orrhcea.

lAmenorrhoea  in  a  girl,  set.  18;  has  never  menstruated,
but  had  suffered  instead  with  hsematemesis,  constant
constipation  and  varices  on  legs.

iVicarious  menstruation

1 1  Active  or  passive  uterine  hemorrhage.

■  Profuse,  bright  arterial  hemorrhage  ;  face  and  extremi-

ties cold  and  clammy ;  skin  shrivelled  and  blue,  as  in
collapse  of  cholera  ;  said  her  tongue  was  cold,  and  that
it  felt  like  her  hands  and  feet,  as  though  it  were  dead ;
pulse  feeble,  thread-like,  almost  imperceptible,  respira-
tion slightly  labored.

■  Bright  red  uterine  hemorrhage,  no  clots ;  bearing-down

pain  in  back.
I  Uterine  hemorrhage,  had  been  flowing  for  twenty-four

hours,  and  lost  over  a  quart  of  blood,  bright  and  fresh,

and  not  coagulable.
a  Uterine  hemorrhage,  with  aching,  boring  pain  in  back,

and  sensation  of  bearing-down  pain  in  either  ovarian

region.
'■Menorrhagia;  feels  very  weak  ;  ''weak"  pain  in  back;

pain  in  1.  ovarian  region.

■  Uterine  hemorrhage  in  an  unmarried  woman,  brought

on  by  jolting  while  riding  in  a  heavy  wagon  over  rough
road.

■  Active  uterine  hemorrhage  caused  by  fall.

■  Uterine  hemorrhage; menses  regular  up  to  three  weeks

ago,  since  when  the  discharge  has  not  left  her.
■Menorrhagia,  profuse discharge  of  dark-colored  blood ;

ceases  at  night,  occurring  only  in  daytime.
I  Metrorrhagia,  passive  flow;  antemia.

■  Uterine  hemorrhage,  flow  steady  and  slow;  blood  dark

colored,  no  uterine  pains.

■  Acute  vaginitis  with  si^asmodic  action  and  pain,  fulness

of  vagina.

■  Great  tenderness  of  vagina,  causing  pain  during  coition;

leucorrhoea.
I  I  Vaginismus,  intense  soreness  ;  prurigo  of  vulva.
■Pruritus.
■Profuse,  persistent  leucorrhoea,  with  great  sensitiveness  of

parts ;  vagina  raw  and  sore  during  an  embrace ;  vulva

itches;  vaginitis.

■  Leucorrhoea,  with much relaxation  of  vaginal  walls;

profuse  fluor  albus,  constituting  a  drain  on  system  as
severe  as  a  bleeding.


515  HAMAMELIS  VIRGINICA.

iLeucorrhoea;  great  tenderness  of  vagina;  flow  bloody.
^* Pregnancy.  Parturition.  Lactation.  Threatened  abortion:
in  consequence  of  ovarian  irritation  and  inflammation ;
after  a  fall.

I  In  threatened  abortion  when  the  hemorrhage  continues
after  uterine  pains  have  been  controlled  by  other  reme-
dies.

■  Hemorrhage  of  lying-in  women.

I  Painful  stiffness  and  sensation  of  swelling  and  weakness
in  1.  leg  during  pregnancy.

■  Varicose  veins  on  both  legs  during  pregnancy  so  pain-

ful that  she  could  neither  stand  nor  walk  ;  veins  of  feet
appeared  as  if  blood  were  dried  up.

■  During pregnancy, varicose enlargement of  veins  of

lower  limbs  with  cramping  pains  at  night,  preventing
sleep  ;  cannot  move  about ;  three  days  after  labor,  three
hemorrhoids  forming  a  tumor  as  large  as  a  child's
head,  of  dark  leaden  color,  painful,  and  very  sensitive
to  touch,
i Milk-leg,  with  swelling  of  1.  labium,  groin  and  thigh;
difficulty  of  moving  leg  ;  painful  but  benumbed  sensa-
tion of  limb ;  swelling  white  and  opaque,  extending
downwards,  and  in  three  days  occupying  whole  of  1.
leg.

■  Milk -leg,  swelling  commencing  in  ankle,  with  difficult

motion  of  limb  from  stiffness  and  pain  in  1.  hip.
■Two  weeks  after  confinement,  feverish,  thirsty,  sleepless,
very  weak,  intensely  nervous;  pain  in  r.  groin,  about
Poupart's  ligament;  next  day  upper  part  of  thigh
swollen,  hard,  white,  very  painful  on  pressure,  especially
along  tract  of  femoral  vein ;  the  breast-milk  left  a  faint
pink  stain  upon  a  napkin. ^Phlegmasia  alba  dolens.

■  Hemorrhoids  after  confinement ;  also  after  miscarriage,

painful,  but  not  bleeding;  great  prostration  from  small
loss  of  blood.

■  Bleeding  nipples,  with  great  soreness.
I  I  Sore  nipples.

^^  Voice  and  Larynx. Trachea  and  Bronchia. "Hoarse
on  arising  ;  awoke  hoarse.

■  Long-lasting  affections  of  vocal  cords.

■  Granulations  and  redness  of  1.  vocal  cord  with  varicose

enlargement  of  blood-vessels.
Tickling  in  larynx,  with  constant  inclination  to  cough,

■  Catarrh  of  upper  part  of  larynx  and  vocal  cords.
^^Respiration. ■Labored  inspiration;  oppressive  tightness  of

lower  part  of  thorax,  with  inability  to  take  a  deep  and
full  inspiration ;  breathing  impossible  in  recumbent
posture ;  crowded  fulness  in  neck  and  head ;  sensation


HAMAMELIS  VIRGINICA.  516

of  suffocation  so  as  to  prevent  him  lying  down;  cannot
take  a  deep  inspiration  when  standing  up.  ^Dia-
phragmitis.

I  When  lying,  felt  a  smothering  sensation.
^  Cough. I  Tickling  cough,  tastes  of  blood  on  awaking.  _

I  I  Dry  cough,  severe  in  uvula,  as  if  it  would  break  ;  stitch-
ing.

■  Slight  hacking  cough,  with  blood-spitting.

I  Cough ;  haemoptysis,  with  dull  frontal  headache ;  taste

of  sulphur  in  mouth.
I  Cough  from  a  varicose  condition  of  throat.
I  1  Expectoration  thick,  yellowish  or  greenish-gray,  tasting

putrid.

■  Spitting  of  blood  by  day  without  cough,  with  great  re-

laxation of  nerves,  and  weariness.

■  Hfemoptysis,  active  or  passive,  blood  venous  and  comes

up  into  mouth  without  coughing  or  scarcely  any  effort.

■  HEemoptysis  in  consumption.

■  Hemorrhages;  blood  venous,  raised  with  little  effort, like

a  simple,  warm  current,  established  from  within  out-
wards.

■  Hemorrhages  from  lungs,  sometimes  every  month,  for

over  twenty  years.
^  Inner  Chest  and  Lungs.  ■  ■  Hsemoptysis,  tickling  cough,
with  taste  of  blood  or  of  sulphur;  dull  frontal  headache;
tightness  of  chest;  cannot  lie  down,  because  of  diffi-
cult breathing  from  congestion;  fulness  in  head  ;  mind
calm.
I  I  Sensation  of  constriction  across  chest,  increased  by  a  long

or  deep  breath.
I  I  Severe  pleuritic  stitches  with  phthisis.
Stitches  in  lower  part  of  lungs.
^^  Heart,  Pulse  and  Circulation. 1 1  Palpitation.

■  Pricking  pain  in  region  of  heart  and  superficial  veins  of

both  arms.
Femoral  pulse  beats  faster  than  radial.
^°  Outer  Chest. '  '  Dull  aching  pain  constantly  in  muscles  of

1.  chest,  <  using  arms,  afternoon  and  evening.
^^  Neck  and  Back. iSore  pain  down  cervical  vertebrae.

Fulness  in  neck ;  had  to  sleep  with  neck  free  of  any  cov-
ering.

■  Small  of  back  feels  as  if  it  would  break  ;  tearing  pains.
After  sensation  of  heat,  tearing  pains  across  small  of  back,

with  fulness  of  joints  of  legs,  extending  to  all  parts  of
body.

■  Severe  headache  all  day,  after  an  emission.

■  Dull,  dragging  pain  in  lumbar  region.

■  Severe  pains  in  lumbar  and  hypogastric  regions,  extend-

ing down  legs.


517  HAMAMELIS  VIRGINICA.

Dull  pains  in  sacrum  and  hips.
^^  Upper  Limbs, i  Bruised  feeling  in  upper  arms  and  shoul-
ders, <  from  motion.

■  Stiffness  in  arms  and  shoulders.

■  Soreness  in  head  of  humerus  extending  down  arm  to

elbow-joint;  continuing  for  days. ^Rheumatism.

Sore  pain  in  head  of  r.  humerus  (glenoid  cavity),  contin-
uing for  hours.

I  I  Tenderness  of  r.  biceps,  increased  by  pressure.

I  I  Dull  pains  in  r.  elbow-joint.

I  I  Stiffness  of  elbow-joint.

I  I  Rheumatic  pain,  constant  aching  in  1.  arm.

Severe  drawing  pains  in  flexor  muscles,  wrists,  hands  and
fingers.

1  I  Lancinating  in  1.  WTist-joint.

I  I  Prickling  pain  from  wrist  to  shoulder,  along  superficial
veins.

I  1  Violent  pain  in  back  of  r.  hand  to  shoulder-joint.

Palms  of  hands  hot  and  dry.

I  I  Hands  chapped.

Stiffness  in  hands  and  fingers.

I  I  Thumb-nail  becomes  sore,  pus  discharges  after  a  slight
knock.
^^  Lower  Limbs. ■  Intense  aching  and  soreness  in  thighs.
^Muscular  rheumatism.

■Sore  pain  in  r.  femur ;  muscles  of  thighs  sore  as  if  bruised.

■  Soreness  in  femoral  vessels  to  middle  of  thigh.

■  Inflammation  of  femoral  vein,  with  erysipelatous  spot  near

groin  and  over  the  vein,  spreading  over  nearly  one-
half  of  thigh  with  flexure  of  leg ;  swelling  of  entire  leg
and  foot,  with  tension;  heat  and  pale  appearance  of
limb ;  scanty  urine,  stiffening  the  linen ;  tympanitis ;
oedema  of  whole  body,  limbs  and  face.

■  Great  pain and swelling  in  r. leg  from  knee  to  hip,

very  sensitive  to  touch  ;  cutaneous  veins  hard,  swollen,
knotty  and  painful,  finally  involving  veins  of  abdomen ;
skin  erysipelatous;  pulse  120,  small  and  wiry;  great
thirst ;  no  appetite ;  constipation ;  urine  red  and  scanty,
later  suppressed;  pain  in  kidneys,  <  from  motion;  great
debility. ^Phlebitis.

I  1  Varicose  veins  above  knee.

I  I  Weakness  of  knees,  afternoon.

I  I  Forcing  feeling  in  varices  ; veins  sensitive ;  dilated.

■  Varicose  veins,  very  lame,  great  pain,  can  scarcely  move

about.

■  ■Varicose  veins  of  legs;  varicose  ulcers.
Dull,  dragging  pains  in  legs.

Dull,  heavy,  drawing  pains  in  feet  and  toes.


HAMAMELIS  VIRGINICA.  518

^  Limbs  in  General, i Tired  feeling  in  arms  and  legs.

I  Painful  fulness  of  joints  of  legs,  as  if  they  would  burst,
which  soon  extends  to  all  the  joints  of  body.

■  Great soreness of affected parts, especially muscles;

bruised  feeling  in  muscles  of  upper  and  lower  extremi-
ties ;  <  from  motion.

I  1  Rheumatism,  with  great  soreness  of  muscles.

I  I  Articular  rheumatism,  with  swollen  and  painful  joints.
^  Rest. Position. Motion. Must  lie  still  to  prevent  vom-

Rising:  swimming  sensation ;  headache;  hoarseness.

Lying  down:  urine  more  copious;  felt  a  smothering  sensa-
tion ;  at  night  sweats  freely.

Recumbent  position:  makes  breathing  impossible.

Desire  to  lie  down.

Standing:  painful  heaviness  of  abdomen;  cannot  take  a
deep  inspiration.

Stooping:  vertigo;  insupportable  headache.

Motion:  bruised  feeling  in  upper  arms  and  shoulders  <  ;
23ains  in  kidneys  <.

Violent  exercise:  caused  enlargement  of  1.  spermatic  vein.

Horseback  riding: <  dull  aching  pain  in  groin.

Walking:  fainting  caused  by;  painful  heaviness  of  abdo-
men.

Using  arms:  pains  in  muscles  of  1.  chest  <.

Can  scarcely  move  about:  on  account  of  painfulness  of
lower  limbs;  from  varicose  veins  in  limbs.

Can  neither  walk  nor  stand:  legs  so  painful  during  preg-
nancy.
^  Nerves, l  General  lassitude  and  feeling  of  weariness.

■  Easily  becomes  tired.

1  i  Prostration  out  of  proportion  to  loss  of  blood. ^Bleeding
piles.
^"  Sleep. Restlessness  at  night.

■  Uneasy,  restless  morning  sleep.

■  Emissions  of  semen  during  sleep.

^^  Time.  Morning:  epistaxis;  feels  as  if  he  had  not  slept;
restless  sleep.

After  3  a.m.:  severe  pain  in  testicles.

Noon:  deafness  passed  off.

Day:  drawing  pain  in  testicles ;  discharge  of  blood ;  spit-
ting of  blood; severe  headache.

Afternoon:  very  thirsty;  throat  dry;  dull  aching  pain  in
muscles  of  1.  chest  < ; weakness  of  knees.

Evening:  very  thirsty;  throat  dry;  dull  aching  pain  in
muscles  of  1.  chest  <.

Night:  stools  of  blood  mixed  with  mucus;  emissions;
drawing  pain  in  testicles; pains  dart  from testicle  to


519  HAMAMELIS  VIRGINICA.

stomach  < ;  profuse  cold  sweat  of  scrotum ;  discharge
of  blood  ceases;  cramping  pains  in  lower  limbs;  restless-
ness; whole  body  dry  and  hot;  fever;  sweats  freely.

After  midnight:  pain  in  testicles.

24  hours:  uterine  hemorrhage  flowing.

12  to  36  hours:  slept.
^^  Temperature  and  Weather, i  Takes  cold  easily  from  every
exposure,  but  especially  to  warm,  moist  air;  subject  to
varicose  veins.

I  I  Cold  creeps  in  open  air,  chills  run  up  legs,  head  stopped
up,  dull  pain  over  orbit.

Rainy  weather: pains  in  testicles  <.
*"  Fever, i  Chilly  on  going  to  bed ;  dreaded  an  attack  of  fever.

I  Chilliness  over  back  and  hips,  extending  down  extremities.

Whole  body  dry  and  hot,  at  night.

Fever  at  night ;  hands  hot,  burning  in  eyelids  on  closing
them.

Sweats  freely  at  night,  after  lying  down.

Pulse  accelerated ;  fever.

Pulse  60  to  70  and  full.

iTypho-malarial  fever;  seventeenth  day  bloody  stools,  on
twentieth  day,  profuse  stool,  consisting  almost  entirely
of  black,  partly  coagulated,  offensive  blood  ;  six  profuse
hemorrhages  occurred  on  this  day  and  night ;  tempera-
ture fell ;  respiration  hurried ;  surface  circulation  poor ;
skin  cool,  pulse  weak,  140;  anxious  look  on  face;
bruised  sore  feeling  in  abdomen  and  hips.

■  Hemorrhagic  variola;  blood  dark,  venous;  oozing  of
dark  blood  from  nose;  bleeding  gums,  hsematemesis,
bloody  stools;  uterine  hemorrhage,  petechiee;  tearing
pains  across  small  of  back,  with  fulness  of  joints  of  legs;
typhoid  condition.

I  I  Uterine  hemorrhages,  with  or  without  abortion,  in  yel-
low fever.
"Attacks,  Periodicity. At  irregular  intervals:  epistaxis  of
from  six  to  twenty-four  hours.

Every  fifteen  minutes: discharge  of  pure  blood.

Two  hours  after  a  hearty  meal:  cramps  in  stomach.

Every  three  or  four  hours:  thin,  dark,  rose-colored,  offen-
sive stools.

For  hours: severe  pain  in  head  of  r.  humerus.

Every  day:  from  10  to  15  stools;  ovarian  region  becomes
swollen.

For  days:  soreness  in  head  of  humerus,  extending  down
arms  to  elbow-joint.

In  three  days:  swelling  spread  from  thigh  to  whole  1.  leg.

Seventeenth day:  typhoid  malarial  fever;  bloody  stools.

Twentieth  day:  profuse  stools;  six  profuse  hemorrhages
occurred.


HAMAMELIS  VIRGINICA  520

Two  weeks  after  confinement:  feverish,  thirsty,  sleepless.

Every  month  for  twenty  years:  hemorrhage  from  lungs.

For  months  or  years:  hemorrhoids  with  hemorrhage  with
every  evacuation.

For  three  months:  drawing  pain  in  1.  spermatic  cord.
^  Locality  and  Direction.  Right:  deafness  in  ear;  bleeding
at  ear;  burning  in  cheek;  shooting  along  superior  max-
illary to  malar  bone;  sore  throat  r.  side;  tonsil  more
swollen;  enlargement  of  testicle;  paroxysm  of  pain  in
groin;  pain  commences  in  region  of  ovar}^;  swelling  in
groin;  pain  in  groin;  severe  pain  in  head  of  humerus;
tenderness  of  r.  biceps;  dull  pains  in  elbow-joint;  vio-
lent pain  in  back  of  hand  to  shoulder-joint;  sore  pain  in
femur  and  muscles  of  thigh;  great  pain  and  swelling  in
leg  from  knee  to  hip.

Left:  hammering  over  eye;  after  injury  to  eye  abrasion
of  cornea;  bleeding  of  nose  commenced  in  side  of  nose;
sharp  pains  in  hypochondrium;  enlargement  of  sper-
matic vein;  drawing  pain  in  spermatic  cord;  testicle
painful;  paroxysms  of  pain  in  ovary;  ovaritis;  stiffness
and  weakness  of  leg;  swelling  of  labium,  groin  and
thigh,  then  of  whole  leg;  pain  in  hip;  granulations  and
redness  of  vocal  cord;  dull  aching  pain  in  muscles  of
chest;  rheumatic  pains  in  arm;  lancinating  in  wrist-
joint.

From  w^ithin  outwards:  blood  venous,  raised  with  little
effort,  like  a  simple  warm  current.
*^  Sensations, n  Prickling  stinging:  veins,  muscles,  skin.

1 1  Bruised,  soreness.

Felt  as  if  he  were  going  out  of  his  mind;  as  if  a  bolt  were
passing  from  temple  to  temple  and  tightly  screwed;  as
if  head  would  burst;  as  if  both  eyes  would  be  forced  out
of  head;  tongue  feels  as  if  burnt;  as  if  uvula  would
break  when  he  coughs;  feeling  as  if  something  had
lodged  in  fauces;  as  if  piles  would  protrude;  back  as  if
it  w^ould  break;  anus  as  if  raw;  as  if  he  had  not  slept;
tongue  as  though  dead;  veins  of  feet  appeared  as  though
blood  was  dried  up;  the  muscles  of  thighs  sore  as  if
bruised;  legs  feel  full  as  if  they  would  burst.

Pains:  in  teeth  in  warm  room;  on  swallowing;  in  testicles;
back  of  stomach;  running  down  spermatic  cords  into
testes;  in  1.  testicle;  dart  from  testicles  to  stomach;  in
r.  groin;  in  epigastrium;  in  lumbar  region;  in  1.  ova-
rian region;  in  hemorrhoids;  in  1.  hip;  in  r.  groin;  in
kidneys.

Excruciating  pain:  in  eyes;  in  testicles.

Violent  pain:  in  back  of  r.  hand  to  shoulder-joint:  at
bladder.


•521  HAMAMELIS  VIRGINICA.

Severe  pain :  in  head ;  in  lumbar  and  hypogastric  region ;

in  head  of  humerus.
Great  pains:  in  anus;  in  r.  leg.
Sharp  lancinating:  along  molar  teeth  extending  to  malar

bone; in  temporal  region ;  in  1.  wrist-joint.
Bursting  headache.
Cutting,  tearing  pains:  in  ovary.
Tearing  pains: across  small  of  back.
Shooting  pains :  along  r.  maxillary  to  malar  bone.
Sharp  pains:  in  temple;  in  stomach;  in  1.  hypochondrium.
Severe  pleuritic  stitches :  with  phthisis.
Stitching:  in  lower  part  of  lungs.
Severe  stinging: in  uvula.
Severe  neuralgic  pain:  in  testicles;  of  ovaries.
Burning  pain: in  back.

Pricking  pain :  in  region  of  heart  and  veins  of  arms.
Prickling  pain : from  wrist  to  shoulder.
Violent  colicky  pains.
€ramp  pains:  in  stomach  and  chest;  around  umbilicus;

of  lower  limbs.
Cramp: in  stomach;  in  transverse  colon.
Intense  aching:  in  thighs.
Bearing  down  pain:  in  back;  in  ovaries.
Severe  drawing  pains:  in  flexor  muscles,  wrists,  hands  and

fingers.
Drawing  pains:  about  umbilicus;  in  1. spermatic  cord;

in  testicles.
Hheumatic  pain:  in  1.  arm.
Agonizing  soreness:  over  whole  abdomen.
Burning:  in  eyes;  in  r.  cheek;  in  stomach;  in  oesophagus ;

in epigastrium ;  in umbilicus ;  at orifice of  anus ;  of

piles;  of  eyelids.
•Sore  pain: in  eyes;  in  gums;  down  cervical  vertebra3;  in

r.  femur  and  muscles  of  thighs.
Soreness:  of abdomen;  of  anus;  of  nipples;  in  head of

humerus; of  thumb-nail;  in  femoral  vessels ;  of  affected

parts;  of  skin.
Scalding  sensation:  on  tongue.

Bruised  feeling:  in  upper  arms  and  shoulders ;  in  abdo-
men and  hips.
Aching :  in  head ;  in  groin.
Violent  throbbing:  in  stomach.
X)istressing  throbbing :  in  head.
Dull  throbbing  pains:  in  back  and  top  of  head.
Dull,  heavy,  drawing  pains:  in  feet  and  toes.
Dull,  dragging  pain:  in  lumbar  region;  in  legs.
Dull  frontal  headache.
Heavy  frontal  headache.


HAMAMELIS  AaHGINICA.  522

Dull  i^aiii :  in  hypochondriac  region ;  in  renal  region ;  in
lumbar  region ;  in  testicles ;  in  sacrum ;  in  hips ;  in  r.
elbow-joint.

Dull  aching  pain:  in  muscles  of  1.  chest.

Painful  fulness:  of  joints;  of  legs.

Painful  weakness :  of  eyes.

Constant  pains:  in  abdomen.

Painful  sensation  of  heaviness:  in  lower  abdomen.

Painful  but  benumbed  sensation  of  limb.

Weak  pain:  in  back.

Sore,  stiff  feeling: in  muscles.

Stiffness:  in  arms  and  shoulders;  of  hands  and  fingers.

Crowding  fulness:  in  head,  in  neck,  in  forehead.

Fulness:  in  head;  in  hypochondriac  region;  of  vagina;
in  neck;  of  joints  of  legs.

Forcing  feeling :  in  varices.

Stopped  up  feeling:  in  nose.

Tightness:  across  bridge  of  nose;  across  lower  part  of  tho-
rax; of  chest.

Dulness:  in  head.

Tired  feeling :  in  arms  and  legs.

Hammering:  over  1.  eye.

Pulsation:  in  rectum.

Trembling:  in  stomach.

Benumbed  sensation:  over  whole  os  frontis.

Tickling :  in  larynx.

Itching:  at  anus;  of  vulva.
**  Tissues. 1 1  Venous  congestions;  hemorrhages.

■  Passive  congestion,  or  venous  stagnation  of  skin and

mucous  membranes.

I  Venous  congestion,  hemorrhoids,  conjunctival  vascu-
larity, ciliary  neuralgia,  photophobia,  l^chrymation.

Hemorrhages  from  all  mucous  membranes.

Hemorrhages  with  asthenia  or  aneemia.

Profuse  discharges,  which  simulate  a  hemorrhage,  and
constitute  a  drain  upon  system  as  severe  as  a  loss  of
blood.

Evil  effects  from  loss  of  blood.

Phlegmasia  alba  dolens.

■  Hemorrhagic  purpura.

I  Phlebitis; prickling  pains.

Varices,  knotted  appearance,  extreme  thinness  of  skin,,
blueness,  almost  blackness  of  pouches,  parts  feel  soft
and  fluctuating.

I I  Varicose  veins  and  ulcers  with  stinging  or  pricking.
Varicose  ulcers  deep,  circular,  flat;  ulcers  that  are  very

dark,  almost black  at  base ;  surrounding  skin  bluish-
black  ;  oozing  of  blood ;  Vjurning,  stinging,  or  biting  in


523  HAMAMELIS  VIRGINICA.

ulcer ;  edges  sharp  cut  and  on  level  with  surrounding
skin  ;  pus  thin,  watery,  bad  smelling.

iVery  sensitive  varices,

■  Purpura  hemorrhagica  with  epistaxis  and  congestion  of
conjunctiva.

Articular  and  muscular  rheumatism.

Rheumatism  with  great  soreness  of  affected  parts.

Ilncised, lacerated  or  contused  wounds;  checks  hemor-
rhage, removes  pain  and  soreness  and  promotes  healing.

Dissecting  wounds.

I  Burns.
*^  Touch. Passive  Motion. Injuries. The  pains  are  often
unbearable,  with  great  sensitiveness  to  touch,  and  fear
of  exciting  new  pain  on  moving.

Touch:  hemorrhoids  very  sensitive;  swollen  leg  sensitive.

Had  to  sleep  with  neck  free  from  all  covering.

Pressure:  swelling  in  r.  groin  tender;  upper  part  of  thigh
very  painful; tenderness  of  r.  biceps  <.

Slight  pressure : sore  pain  in  eyes.

Pressing  eyes  with  fingers :  >  feeling  of  being  pushed  out
for  a  few  moments.

Jolting  while  riding  in  a  heavy  wagon  over  a  rough  road-
brought  on  uterine  hemorrhage.

After  a  slight  knock:  thumb-nail  becomes  sore;  pus  dis-
charges.

After  injury  of  head  and  face:  great  ecchymosis.

Blow  or  burn : inflammation  and  ulceration  of  conjunc-
tiva and  cornea.

Blow:  r.  iliac  region  caused  hsematuria;  ovary  swollen.

Bruise:  causes  black  eye.

Caused  by  a  fall: active  uterine  hemorrhage.

After  a  fall: threatened  abortion.
*^  Skin. Soreness  and  smarting  on  small  spots,  not  very  sen-
sitive to  touch.

Ulcers  with  very  thin  and  watery  pus,  bad  smelling;  more
an  ichor  than^  pus.

Carbuncles; boils  ;  abscesses ;  injuries  resulting  from  falls.

I  Chilblains  always  bluish.
*^  Stages  of Life, Constitution. Hemorrhages  in  patients
of  nervo-sanguine  temperament.

Boy,  £et.  14,  growing  rapidly ;  epistaxis.

Boy,  after  a  blow ;  htematuria.

Colored  boy,  after  injury ;  intraocular  hemorrhage.

Irish  girl,  «t.  18  ;  amenorrhoea.

Man,  set.  21,  light  complexioned,  in  good  health;  varicocele.

Young  married  woman  ;  vaginismus.

Miss  S.,  set.  28 ;  uterine  hemorrhage.

Man,  set.  30,  scrofulous  ;  orchitis.


HAMAMELIS  VIRGINICA.  524

Woman,  set.  30,  bilious-lymphatic  temperament,  nursing  a
babe ;  ovarian  disease.

AYoman,  set.  30,  six  months  pregnant;  varicose  veins.

Man,  set.  30,  well  built,  strong ;  hsematemesis.

Colored  woman,  set.  35  ;  amenorrhoea.

Woman,  had  miscarriage  during  typhoid  fever,  subinvo-
lution of  uterus  probably  present ;  angioleucitis.

Married  woman,  whose  menses  have  always  been  profuse,
has  been  suffering  from  dysenteric  diarrhoea  for  day  or
two ;  uterine  hemorrhage.

Woman,  plethoric  habit;  epistaxis.

Married  woman,  mother  of  two  children  ;  vaginismus.

Middle-aged  man,  with  congested  liver  ;  bleeding  piles.

Man,  set.  40,  thin ;  melsena.

Woman,  set.  40,  mother  of  six  children  ;  varices  and  hem-
orrhoids.

Woman,  set.  60,  hemorrhages  for  over  twenty  years.
.Woman,  set.  60,  nervous  temperament,  was  taken  suddenly
with  a  severe  chill  followed  by  fever ;  phlebitis.

Old  man,  hemiplegic ;  epistaxis.
■*®  Relations. Antidotedby:  Arnic,  Camphor.,  Cinchon.,  Pulsat.
(toothache).

Complementary:  to  Ferrum  (hemorrhages).

Compare:  Arnica  and  Calend.  (better  than  either  in  hasten-
ing absorption  of  intraocular  hemorrhage) ;  Chloral,  Sul.
ac,  Clemat.  vitalba  (purpura);  JEscid.,  Bovista,  Collin.,
Eriger.,  Galium,  Lycopus,  Senec,  Trillium  (hemorrhages,
etc.


525  HEKLA  LAVA.

HEKLA  LAVA.

The  lava  and  scorise  thrown  out  from  Mount  Hekla,  in  Iceland.

combe,  of  New  Orleans.  He  writes :  "  Its  known  pathological  effects  on  the  sheep
in  the  vicinity  of  Hekla  are  immense  exostosis  of  the  jaws.  It  also  produces  dry-
ing up  of  the  milk  in  both  sheep  and  cows.  The  finer  ash,  which  fell  on  the  pas-
tures in  distant  localities  was  particularly  deleterious,  while  the  gross  ash  near  the
mountain  was  inert.  In  cows,  post-mortem  examination  showed  intestines  filled
with  ashes  hardened  to  a  mass,  and  stomach  coated  over  with  a  pitch-black  mem-
brane, spotted  with  brown,  and  difficult  to  remove  by  washing ;  the  jaw  teeth  were
covered  with  a  shining  metallic  crust.  Several  young  horses  died  from  lumps  on
the  jaw-bones,  so  large  as  to  cause  dislocation.  The  sheep,  when  butchered,  were
found  to  be  of  a  bluish  hue  internally,  and  the  intestines  were  friable.  In  many
cases  worms  from  two  to  three  inches  long,  with  pale  gray  bodies  and  brown  heads,
and  a  little  thicker  than  a  horsehair,  were  found  in  the  bronchise.  In  sheep  the
osseous  and  dental  systems  were  much  affected.  The  head-bones,  and  especially
the  jaw-bones  swelled  and  became  so  friable,  that  when  boiled  they  fell  to  pieces.
The  thigh,  and  especially  the  shin-bones  swelled  and  bulged.  The  jaws  were
sometimes  covered  with  large  swellings,  which  spread  and  were  loose  of  texture,
and  darker  in  color  than  the  bone ;  these  could  be  separated  from  the  bone  with-
out injuring  it ;  but  in  some  fatal  cases  a  hole  in  the  bone  going  down  to  the  mar-
row, was  discovered  under  the  swelling.

These  particulars  are  from  a  Danish  account  of  the  eruptions  of  Hekla,  and
their  consequences  to  nature,  to  man,  beast  and  vegetable.

Hekla  lava,  according  to  Prof.  Morris,  of  University  College,  London,  has  for
general  constituents,  combination  of  Silica,  Alumina,  Lime,  Magnesia,  with  some
Oxide  of  Iron.  Sometimes  it  contains  anorthite  and  other  minerals.  In  this  im-
perfect pathogenesy  we  have  undoubtedly  symptoms  pointing  to  diseases  of  teeth
and  bone.  I  have  used  the  lava  in  toothache  and  in  swellings  about  the  jaws,  with
magical  effect  in  several  cases ;  also,  in  gum-abscess  from  decayed  teeth,  and  with
apparently  good  results  in  difficult  teething." — Kaue's  Eec,  1872,  p.  6.

Clinical  Authorities. — Tumor  in  antrum  of  Highmore,  Bowie,  Trans.
Horn.  Med.  Soc.  Pa.,  1886,  p.  153;  Neuralgia,  Whiting,  Times  Ketros.,  1876,  p.
12;  N.  E.  M.  G.,  vol.  10,  p.  461  ;  Affection  of  tooth  with  conjunctivitis,  Whitney,
N.  E.  M.  G.,  vol.  10,  p.  461 ;  Carious  teeth  (4  cases).  Whiting,  N.  E.  M.  G.,  vol.  10,
p.  460,  Affections  of  jaiv-bones  (2  cases),  Bowie,  Trans.  Hom.  Med.  Soc.  Pa.,  1886,
p.  153;  Affection  of  r.  maxilla.  Whiting,  N.  E.  M.  G.,  vol.  10,  p.  461 ;  Whitloiv  and
gumboil,  Acales,  B.  J.  H.,  vol.  34,  p.  692 ;  Caries  of  hone,  McClelland,  Trans.  Hom.
Med.  Soc.  Pa.,  1881,  p.  114.

^  Sensorium. '  i  Vertigo,  everything  goes  up,  down  and  side-
wise.
^  Inner  Head. 1 1  Chronic  headache.


HEKLA  LAVA.  526

^  Smell  and  Nose. ■  Destructive  (syphilitic) ulceration  of

nasal  bones.
^  Upper  Face, l  Facial  neuralgia  or  headache  dependent  on

derangement  of  dental  nerves,  or  where  the  irritating

cause  is  a  carious  tooth.

■  Polypoid growth commencing in antrum Highmorii

and  from  thence  encroaching  upon  adjacent  structure
so  as  to  deform  face,  forcing  eyeball  upwards  and  evert-
ing lid,  and  obstructing  nostrils ;  downward  into  mouth,
so  that  breathing  and  mastication  were  seriously  im-
peded ;  epistaxis ;  headache.
^'^  Teeth  and  Gums.  '  l  Toothache,  particularly  if  teeth  are  very
sensitive  to  pressure.

■  Toothache  with  swelling  about  jaws.

■  After  extraction  of  carious  wisdom  tooth  pain  in  wound,

and  at  times  in  various  localities  in  head  and  face,  so
severe  that  he  cannot  eat  or  sleep.

■  Neuralgia,  when  irritating  cause  is  a  carious  tooth.

■  Neuralgic  pains  in  cavities  from  which  teeth  had  been

extracted.

■After  extraction  of  molar  tooth  violent  pain  in  upper  jaw
which  is  sore,  swollen  and  painful  to  touch.

■Since  extraction  of  inferior  molar  of  r.  maxilla  two  years
ago,  tissues  have  not  healed;  continuous  slight  discharge
of  bad  tasting  pus,  at  times  containing  small  jDarticles
of  a  soft,  gritty  substance.

■Right  cuspid  of  upper  jaw  very  sensitive  to  slight  press-
/  ure  on  crown ;  swelling,  and  indurated  tumor  as  large

as  a  pea  under  r.  alse  nasi  very  sensitive  to  touch ;  con-
junctivitis of  r.  eye.

■After  extraction  of  sore  tooth  gradual  enlargement  of
lower  jaw  near  cavity  of  tooth  finally  becoming  as  large
as  a  hickory  nut,  causing  cheek  to  bulge.

■Gum  abscesses  from  decayed  teeth.

■  Toothache  caused  by  abscesses  of  gums,  injuries  to  alve-

olar process,  or  diseases  of  antrum  Highmorii.
■Enlargement  of  maxillary  bone  from  injury.

■  Injury  to  inferior  maxillary  of  a  scrofulous  girl,  which

produced  an  immense  abscess,  and  afterwards  great  en-
largement of  maxillary  bone.

■  Difficult  dentition  in  scrofulous  or  rachitic  children.

^"^  Outer  Chest. 'Myalgia,  especially  of  intercostal  muscles.
'^  Neck  and  Back. ■  Induration  and  infiltration  of  cervical

glands,  studding  neck  like  a  row  of  pearls.
^  Lower  Limbs, i  i  Hip  disease.

■  Exostoses  of  tibia ;  nodosities  very  large ;  severe,  contin-

uous pain,  incapacitating  him  from  work;  the  exostoses
and  portion  of  periosteum,  which  had  become  carious


527  HEKLA  LAVA.

and  soft,  were  removed  by  operation ;  necrosis  of  whole
bone  had  been  diagnosed ;  three  days  after  administra-
tion of  Hekla  lava  the  pain,  which  still  continued  after
operation,  subsided,  and  by  end  of  second  week  wound
had  healed.

I  Caries  of  bones  of  feet.
^  Locality  and  Direction. Right :  cuspid  of  upper  jaw  very
sensitive  to  slight  pressure;  swelling  under  alse  nasi;
conjunctivitis.
^'^  Sensations. Pain  in  wound  when  tooth  has  been  extracted.

Violent  pain  :  in  upper  jaw.

Severe  continuous  pain :  in  lower  limbs.

Neuralgia :  of  face ;  in  cavities  where  teeth  have  been  ex-
tracted.

Headache :  dependent  on  derangement  of  dental  nerves.
^*  Tissues. It  affects  mostly  the  bones  of  the  head,  jaws,  teeth
and  legs.

In  five  or  six  cases  of  osteo-sarcoma,  exostosis,  and  osteitis
it  arrested  the  development  and  prevented  recurrence.

Scrofulous  ostitis  or  periostitis,  resting  on  a  syphilitic  basis,
and  especially  affecting  bones  of  face  and  antrum  High-
morii.

Osteitis;  periostitis ;  exostosis ;  osteo-sarcoma ;  rachitis.

White  swelling.

Whitlow  and  gumboil.

Syphilis.
*^  Touch. Passive  Motion. Injuries. Painful  to  touch:
upper  jaw;  swelling  under  r.  alse  nasi  sensitive.

Slight  pressure :  right  cuspid  of  upper  jaw  sensitive.

From  injury  to  jaw^ :  had  enlargement  of  maxillary  bone.

*^  Stages  of  Life,  Constitution. Girl,  £et.  10,  after  falling

upon  an  upright  stick ; enlargement  of  maxillary  bone;

Hekla  lava  3d  given  for  several  days  had  no  effect,  but

disappeared  rapidly  after  Lava  31st.

Colored  boy,  set.  15;  exostoses  of  lower  jaw.

Scrofulous  girl,  after  injury  to  inferior  maxillary ;  abscess
and  enlargement  of  maxillary  bone.

Miss ,  set.  27 ;  affection  of  r.  maxilla.

Man,  set.  35;  neuralgia  after  extraction  of  tooth.
*^  Relations. Compare: Mercur., Phytol., Phosphor.,  Silica,
Stilling.,  Sulphur.


HELLEBOBUS.  528


HELLEBORUS.

Christmas  Rose;  Black  Hellebore.  Ranunculacese.

Introduced  by  Hahnemann  and  proved  by  himself  and  others.  See  Allen's
Encyclopedia,  vol.  4,  p.  547.

The  tincture  is  prepared  from  the  dried  powdered  root.

CliiNiCAL  Authorities. — Hysterical  mania,  Zwingenberg,  B.  J.  H.,  vol.  34,
p.  165;  Melancholia  after  typhoid  (2  cases),  Knorre,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  1,  p.  25-
Brain  affection,  Knorre,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  1,  p.  124;  Inflammation  of  brain,
Hartmann,  Kiick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  5,  p.  44;  Meningeal  affections.  Chapman,  B.  J.  H.,^
vol.  8,  p.  226-7;  Cerebrospinal  meningitis,  Wells,  Eaue's  Rec,  1873,  p.  57;  Con-
cussion o/ 6ram,  Farrington,  MSS. ;  Aphthce  (2  cases),  Ehrhardt,  Brennfleck,  Riick.
Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  1,  p.  507;  Ascites,  Ozanne,  B.  J.  H.,  vol.  10,  p.  122;  Cholera,  Alt-
schul,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  1,  p.  942;  Cystitis,  Moszbauer,  Kreuss,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf.,
vol.  2,  p.  17;  Amenorrhcea  (5  cases),  Thomas,  B.  J.  H.,  vol.  16,  p.  327;  Traumatic
tetanus,  Kimball,  Organon,  vol.  2,  p.  233;  Typhoid  fever,  Trinks,  Raue's  Rec,  1871,
p.  199;  Anasarca,  Martini,  Rau,  Seidel,  Hromada,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  4,  p.  347-9|
Anasarca  and  ascites,  B.  J.  H.,  vol.  34,  p.  709 ;  Dropsy  after  scarlet  fever  (3  cases),
Miiller,  Tietze,  Wiedemann,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  4,  p.  50;  Newton,  Raue's  Rec,
1871,  p.  218;  Post-scarlatinal  dropsy.  Miller,  Raue's  Rec,  1873,  p.  226.

^  Mind. II  Total  unconsciousness.

I  Weak  memory.  _ '

I I  When  questioned  answers  slowly;  stupefaction  border-
ing on  insensibility.

I  Diminished  power  of  mind  over  body;  cannot  fix  ideas;
slow  in  answering,  stares  unintelligently ;  muscles  do
not  act  properly  if  wdll  is  not  strongly  fixed  upon  their
action,  as  w^hen  spoken  to,  the  attention  being  thereby
diverted,  she  drops  things.

I A  perfect  picture  of  acute  idiocy.

I  Idiocy  and  cretinismus.

I  Dull,  says  nothing.

I  I  Delirium.

I  Mania  demonica;  sees  evil  spirits  at  night.

I  I  Mania  of  a  melancholy  type,  with  fixed  ideas.

Psychical  conditions  occupying  a  place  between  melan-
cholia and  mania,  and  in  conditions  where  true  de-
pression and  weakness  is  present,  in  which  the  patient
is  governed  by  a  fixed  idea.

I  An  old  woman having been  accused  of  theft  by  the


529  HELLEBORUS.

women  around,  took  it  so  much  to  heart  that  she  hanged
herself.  This  suicide  produced  a  profound  effect  upon
the  women  of  the  village.  One  after  another  accused
herself  of  having  caused  the  death  of  the  old  woman  by
their  insinuations;  they  wept  and  howled,  ran  about,
day  and  night  wringing  their  hands  and  despairing  of
salvation  on  account  of  their  sin;  they  became  quite=
irrepressible  and  deranged.  In  this  way  twenty-four  or-
twenty-five  women  were  affected,  every  fresh  case  being-
followed  by  another. ^Hysterical  mania.

1 1  Thoughtless  staring.

I  Stares  at  her  surroundings  in  a  strange,  stupid  manner,,
and,  if  questioned,  stares  in  the  same  way  at  one,_  or-
glances  wildly  about  grasping  her  head ;  when  walking-
reels  about,  allowing  her  head  to  hang;  the  sensorial
apathy  and  constant  staring  at  one  spot  alternates,
occasionally  with  unintelligible  muttering;  constipa-
tion. ^Melancholia  after  typhoid.

I  Constantly  picking  his  lips  and  clothes.

I  I  Much  lamenting,  moaning.

I  I  Involuntary  sighing.

I  Frequent  screams  in  meningitis,  or  hydrocephalus'..

I  I  Tries  to  escape,  to  throw  herself  into  the  river.

I  After  typhoid,  great  mental  dejection  and  apathy;  dull
and  indifferent  to  all  external  impressions;  will  not
speak;  sits  quietly  in  bed  and  seems  lost  in  brooding;
face  pale,  disturbed;  languid,  unsteady  glance  of
eye;  pupils  dilated;  pulse  slow  and  weak;  will  take,
proffered  food  but  never  expresses  desire  for  anything ;
sleep  infrequent,  restless;  constantly  seeks  to  escape,
but  is  not  violent;  without  a  word  quietly  climbs  out
of  window,  and  if  she  succeeds  in  escaping,_  goes  in
direction  of  river ;  finally  threw  herself  into  privy,  from
which  she  was  rescued.

■  Stubborn  silence.

■  Excessive  anxiety  and  anguish.

■  Restless  and  anxious.

I  I  Dread  of  dying;  feels  unhappy  in  presence  of  cheerful

faces,.
■Melancholia  in  girls  at  puberty  before  menstruation  has

been  established,  or  if  menses  have  appeared  and  then

failed  to  return.
I  I  Melancholy:  silent;  during  puberty ;  with  anguish.
I  1  Homesickness.

■  ■Woeful,  despairing  mood.
I  I  Indifferent.

I  I  Irritable;  easily  made  angry;  <  from  consolation,  does

not  want  to  be  disturbed.
VOL.  V. — 34.


HELLEBOPvUS.  530

I A  noise  or  shock  shortens  the  attack. ^Eclampsia.

■  Thinking  about  symptoms  lessens  them.

^  Sensorium. Confusion  of  head,  as  if  bruised,  with  fluent
coryza.
■Vertigo:  with  nausea,  watery  vomit  and  loose  bowels;
while  stooping,  ceasing  when  becoming  erect.

■  Dull  and  heavy  in  head.

Brain  feels  too  large  and  occiput  empty;  afterwards  re-
verse in  forehead;  occiput  feels  as  if  it  would  fall  for-
ward; wants  to  lie  down  and  roll  head  from  side  to
side ;  feels  helpless  as  an  infant.

■  Sensorial  apathy.

■  Stupefied; head hot,  heavy; boring head in  pillows,

chilly ;  fingers  cold.

■  ■Stupor,  blunting  of  general  sensibility; vision  unim-

paired, nevertheless  sees  imperfectly  and  does  not  re-
gard the  objects  he  sees;  apparatus  of  hearing  intact,
yet  hears  nothing  distinctly  nor  comprehends;  organs
of  taste  in  working  order,  yet  finds  not  the  proper  taste
in  anything;  often  distraught,  hardly  remembers  the
past  or  what  has  just  happened;  has  no  pleasure  in
anything;  slumber  light  and  unrefreshing ;  undertakes
to  work  without  having  the  power  or  strength.

■  All  perceptions  by  the  senses  grow  but  slowly  or  not  at

all  conscious. t'TyjDhoid  fever.

■  Obtuseness  of  sensory  nervous  system. ^Brain  disease

in  children.

■  Thorough unconsciousness; all impressions  on  senses

and  all  expressions  of  will  wanting;  heart  beat  and
pulse  very  slow ;  skin  only  moderately  warm  ;  bowels
inactive;  involuntary  micturition;  difficult  swallowing;
constantly  picking  his  lips  and  clothes.

■  Sopor  and  coma.

^  Inner  Head.  Violent  pains  in  head,  especially  pushing  out
at  forehead;  >  only  in  getting  head  down  and  remain-
ing perfectly  quiet.

■  Heat  deep  within  head.

■  Burning  heat  in  head;  pale  face;  cold  hands.

■  Intense and intolerable  pain in head. ^Spasms of

children.
■Shooting  pains  in  whole  head  with  giddiness. ^Anasarca
after  scarlatina.

■  A  shock  passes  through  brain,  as  from  electricity,  fol-

lowed by  spasms. /^Puerperal  convulsions.
I  1  Pain  in  vertex  as  if  a  nail  were  driven  in.

■  Pressing  headache  from  within  outward,  with  stupefac-

tion and  heaviness  of  head;  <  on  moving  head,  from
exertion; >  in  open  air  and  from  distraction  of  mind.


531  HELLEBORUS.

iStupefying  headache:  with  coryza  (4  to  8  p.m.);  <  from

stooping;  >  at  rest  and  in  open  air.
I  I  Violent  pressive  headache,  with  great  heaviness,  <  in

occiput,  on  awaking.
I  Headache,  stupefying,  mostly  in  occiput. ^ After  scarlet

fever.

■  Sensation  in  occiput  as  from  a  blow. ^Meningitis.
IStupefying  headache  in  occiput,  < on  stooping,  from

nape  of  neck  to  vertex,  changing  to  burning  pain  on
rising  to  erect  posture,  >  only  by  lying  quiet  with
closed  eyes.

■  Headache  from  nape  to  vertex.

I  Headache  nearly  always  with  scalp  symptoms.

1  I  Congestion  of  brain.

I  Chills  with  vomiting;  sensation  in  occiput  as  from  re-
ceiving a  blow;  then  flushed  face,  unconsciousness,
delirium;  livid  spots  on  body  and  limbs;  head  thrown
back;  neck  rigid;  eyes  rolled  upward ;  pulse  120;  fre-
quent convulsions. ^Cerebro-spinal  meningitis.

■  Inflammation  of  brain,  with  stupefaction;  heat  and  heav-

iness of  head ;  boring  with  head  in  pillow,  with  chilli-
ness of  whole  body;  coldness  of  fingers;  <  from  think-
ing of  pain.

1  Acute  meningitis  when  exudation  is  completed;  reaction
almost  nothing; paralysis  more  or  less  complete.

1  Hydrocephalus  when  fever  has  abated  and  following
symptoms  set  in:  difficult  breathing,  want  of  sensation,
trembling  and  moving  of  hands  towards  head,  squinting
of  eyes  with  insensibility  to  light,  chewing  motion  of
mouth,  and  sopor.

iFor  a  whole  week  has  lain  only  upon  back  in  apparent
slumber,  eyes  half  closed,  pupils  contracted,  cornea  and
albuginea  dim  and  dull,  as  if  covered  with  dust,  with
dry  mucus  in  corners  of  eyes ;  eyes  sunken,  surrounded
by  blue  circles,  with  squinting  towards  nose;  face  pale
and  emaciated;  nose  pointed,  orifices  sooty;  lips  dry
and  cracked;  body  emaciated,  with  dry,  flaccid  skin;
epigastrium  sunken;  lower  limbs  spread  apart,  legs
flexed  upon  thighs;  on  endeavoring  to  change  this  po-
sition, moaning,  anxious,  complaining  outcries;  face  dis-
torted with  pain;  head  sinks  helplessly  back;  on  forcing
eyes  open  dilatation  of  pupils,  spasmodic  action  of  iris,
the  light  falling  into  the  eye  making  as  little  impression
upon  him  as  calling  or  speaking  to  him;  drinks  eagerly,
bites  spoon  without  being  aroused  from  apathetic  con-
dition; distorts  face ;  chewing  motion  of  mouth;  grasps
head  with  hands;  grinding  of  teeth;  cramps  in  muscles
of  back;  constipation; involuntary urination; partial


HELLEBORUS.  532

sweat  on  scalp;  pulse  slow,  soft  and  intermittent.
^Brain  affection.

I  i  Inflammation  of  brain  with  moderate  fever,  pulse  weak,
not  accelerated,  with  occasional  deep  sighing;  patient
lies  in  an  apathetic  condition,  cannot  raise  himself;  in-
voluntary trembling  of  hands  and  grasping  of  head ;  on
being  raised  head  sinks  back;  frequent  rubbing  of  nose;
eyes  half  open,  pupils  dilated,  eyeballs  turned  to  side  or
rolled  upward;  convulsive  twitching  of  eyelids;  fore-
head wrinkled  and  covered  with  cold  sweat;  no  appetite ;
desires  only  drink,  which  is  eagerly  taken  in  large  quan-
tities, and  is  preceded  and  followed  by  chewing  motion
of  mouth;  easily  angered,  especially  after  being  kindly
spoken  to;  strikes  about  him;  face  pale  and  bloated;
dulness  and  drowsiness;  frequently  starts  up  shrieking
and  crying;  nostrils  dry  and  dirty;  dropping  of  lower
jaw.

I  1  No  sign  of  having  sight  or  hearing,  utters  no  articu-
late sound  for  two  weeks. ^Acute  hydrocephalus.

■  Concussion  of  brain  from  a  blow  on  head;  pupils  dilated,

almost  inactive  to  light ;  pulse  full,  easily  compressed ;

could  arouse  him,  but  he  would  become  drowsy  again

at  once;  breathing  heavy  and  slow;  especially  <  at

3  to  6  P.M. ;  after  Arnica  failed.
I  Dropsy of brain: post-scarlatinal, acute or chronic;

mostly  in  scrofulous  subjects.
I  Serous  apoplexy.
*  Outer  Head. '  '  Boring  with  head  in  pillows,  with  sensation

as  if  scalp  on  occiput  were  pulled  down  tight.
I  Rolls  head  night  and  day,  moaning. ^Hydrocephalus.

^Typhoid.

■  Throws  head  back,  and  from  side  to  side. ^Brain  affec-

tions.
I  Sore  feeling,  as  if  bruised,  <  in  back  part  of  head;  >

on  stooping.
I  Occiput  sore  to  touch.

■  Partial  sweat  on  scalp. ^Hydrocephalus.

I  Hair  falls  off,  with  pricking  on  scalp,  <  on  occiput ;  face

and  body  oedematous.
I  Humid  scurf  on  scalp.
I  I  Scald  head ;  moist  scales,  with  engorgement  of  glands  of

neck.
^  Sight  and  Eyes, i  Vacant  look,  pupils  dilated,  eyes  wide

open  or  half  closed. ^Typhoid. ^Hydrocephalus.
•  Eyeballs  turned  upwards,  squinting. ^Hydrocephalus.
BEyes  sunken,  blue  edges.

■  Nyctalopia.

I  Photophobia  'without  inflammation.


533  HELLEBORUS.

Worse  from  light,  particularly  daylight.
I  Insensible  to  light. (^Hydrocephalus.

■  Hippus; alternate  contraction  and  dilatation  of  pupil,

tremor  iridis,  after  every  attempt  to  arouse  patient  from
stupor  and  especially  if  we  move  the  head. ^Hydro-
cephalus.
I  Early  stage  of  gutta  serena.

■  Pupils:  contracted;  dilated;  alternately  contracted  and

dilated.

■  Eyeballs  red,  glassy. ^Hydrocephalus.

I  Cornea and albuginea  dim, as if  covered  with  dust.
^Hydrocephalus.

Cannot  keep  ej^es  open  on  account  of  heaviness.

I  Lids,  sticky,  dry,  sensation  as  if  they  were  pressed  down.

I  I  Loses  hair,  from  eyebrows.

•  Twitching  in  elevator  of  brows.
®  Hearing  and  Ears. '  Roaring  and  ringing  in  ears.
''Smell  and  Nose, i Smell  diminished.

I  Nostrils  look  as  if  smoked,  sooty. ^Hydrocephalus.

■  Nose  pointed;  nostrils  dirty,  dry. ^Hydrocephalus.

■  Frequently  rubs  nose. ^Hydrocephalus.
I  I  Sneezing.

*  Upper  Face, i  i  Stupid  expression. ^Typhoid.

■  Forehead  or  face  wrinkled. ^Hydrocephalus.

■  Wrinkled forehead, bathed in  cold sweat. ^Hydro-

cephalus.

■  Face:  red;  hot,  but  pale;  flushes  red  and  then  becomes

pale ; pale, oedematous ; distorted ; yellowish ; pale,
sunken,  icy-cold ;  livid,  with  cold  sweat.

■  Paleness  of  face  with  heat  of  head.

■  Twitching  in levatores  palj^ebrarum  and  cheeks,  with

heat  in  face.

■  Left-sided  neuralgia; parts  so  tender,  cannot  chew.
I  i  Dull  pain  in  r.  malar  bone.

^  Lower  Face. ■Constant  chewing  motion.

■  Corners  of  mouth  sore;  steady  flow  of  saliva;  upper  lips

cracked  ;  lips  dry,  cracked.

■  White  blisters  on  swollen  lips.
■Sore  lips.

■  Lower  jaw  hangs  down.

^•^  Teeth  and  Gums. ■Grinds  the  teeth.

When  biting  teeth  together  feels  a  pain  near  the  roots  in

third  molars,  opposite  each  other.
I  Pricking  toothache  in  molars,  evening  and  night,  can

bear  neither  cold  nor  heat.
I  I  Toothache  during  the  chill,
"  Taste  and  Tongue. ■Taste  bitter.

■  Tongue:  dry;  white  mornings;  dry  and  red,  previously


HELLEBORUS.  534

black,  in typhus;  slightly  protruded and  oscillating;
trembling; feels  stiff;  numb,  insensible;  swollen;  full
of  vesicles;  pimples  on  tip;  yellow  with  red  edges.
^^  Inner Mouth. l  l  Mouth and palate dry,  with  cutting,
scraping  in  palate  on  moving  mouth  to  swallow.
Vesicles  in  mouth.

I  Mouth,  gums  and  tongue  full  of  flat  yellow  ulcers,  witli
elevated  gray  edges,  or  red,  swollen  bases  ;  carrion-like
odor;  salivation;  will  take  no  food  except  drink;  glands
of  neck  and  under  chin  swollen;  eruption  of  blisters
around  mouth;  face  red  and  hot;  stool  watery  and
slimy,  with  tenesmus ;  pulse  feverish ;  restlessness ;  moan-
ing and  crying. ^Aphthae.

I  Aphtha,  with  lienteria.
Painless  ulcer  in  mouth.

^^  Throat. lAVater  rattles  down  throat.
^*  Appetite,  Thirst.  Desires,  Aversions, i Hunger: child
nurses  greedily;  wdth  disgust  for  food.
Wants  food  occasionally,  but  rejects  it  when  offered.

I I  Thirst.

I  Greedily  swallows  cold  water;  bites  spoon,  but  remains

unconscious. ^Hydrocephalus.
I  1  Thirst  with  disgust  for  drink.
I  I  Absence  of  thirst  in  all  complaints.
Aversion  to  vegetables.
^^  Hiccough,  Belching,  Nausea  and  Vomiting, i  Nausea.

^Cystitis. ^Hydrothorax.
I  Nausea,  yet  hungry;  still  food  is  repulsive  although  taste

is  natural.

■  Nausea  during  pregnancy.
I  Vomiting.

Nausea  and  violent  vomiting,  with  much  heat  in  stomach.
Vomiting  of  a  greenish,  slimy  substance.

■  Vomiting  of  greenish-black  substances,  with  colic.

^^  Scrobiculum  and  Stomach. Intense  burning  in  oesophagus.

■  Intense  painful  burning  in  stomach  extending  into  oesoph-

agus. ^During  pregnancy.

■  Pit  of  stomach  sunken. /^Hydrocephalus.
I  I  Fulness  and  distension  of  pit  of  stomach.

■  Pressing  in  region  of  stomach. ^Anasarca.
Burning  and  scraping  in  stomach.

I  I  Stomach  painful  when  coughing  or  walking.
^^  Hypochondria. Liver  complaint,  particularly  after  abuse

of  Cinchona.
^^  Abdomen. iSensation  of  coldness  in  abdomen.

■  Rumbling  in  abdomen.

Much  rumbling  in  abdomen,  excessive  colic,  debility.

■  Gurgling,  as  if  bowels  were  full  of  water.


535  HELLEBORUS.

■  Excessive  distension  of  abdomen.

■  Abdomen  swollen,  distended,  painful  to  touch.

■  Griping,  pinching  about navel,  followed  by  gelatinous

stools. ^Ascites.

■  Excessive colic; weakness,  features sunken,  face cold,

pale,  covered  with  clammy  sweat;  pulse  thready;  thin
diarrhoea.

■  Ascites: especially after scarlet fever; in scrofulous

children.
^°  Stool  and  Rectum. ■  AVatery  diarrhoea,  nausea,  colic  and
great  debility.

■  ■Stool  consisting  solely  of  clear,  tenacious,  colorless  mucus.
■White,  jelly-like  mucus,  wdth  burning  and  smarting  in

anus;  diarrhoea  preceded  by  colic,  which  is  >  after  every
stool.

■  White,  gelatinous  stool,  like  frog  spawn  is  passed  three

or  four  times  a  clay,  with  much  pressure.

■  White,  jelly-like  stools  with  tenesmus.

II Diarrhoea: during  pregnancy;  during  dentition;  dur-
ing acute  hydrocephalus.

■  Involuntary  stools.

■  Diarrhoea  and  vomiting,  with  cramps  in  extremities,  cold-

ness of  whole  body,  great  thirst,  altered  features,  weak,
hoarse  voice. ^/Cholera.

■  Cholera  acuta  with  heaviness  and  dulness  of  head,  cramps

in  abdomen,  fever,  slow  pulse,  vertigo,  nausea,  watery
vomiting  and  diarrhoea.

■  Feeling  as  if  intestines  had  no  power  to  evacuate  feces,

during  soft  stool.

■  Constipation.

Before  stool:  nausea  and  colic.

During  stool:  urging;  tenesmus; nausea.

After  stool :  burning,  smarting,  at  anus ;  relief  of  colic.

■  Blenorrhoea  of  rectum,  with  spasm  of  bladder.

■  Hemorrhoids.

^^  Urinary  Organs,  i  l  Congestion  of  kidneys  with  extensive
effusion  of  serum  in  abdominal  cavity  and  tissue  of
lower  extremities.

■  Dropsy  after  scarlet  fever  with  albumen  and  fibrin  casts

in  urine.

■  Suppression  of  urine,  or  urine  highly  albuminous,  dark

color,  no  sediment ;  breathes  easier  lying  down ;  acute
dropsies.
I  I  Nephritis  causing  dropsical  symptoms. ^Syphilis  in-
fantum.

■  Bladder  overdistended  ;  retention  of  urine  from  atony  of

muscular  coats.

■  Cystitis;  the  inflammatory  process increases slowly  to


HELLEBORUS.  536

greatest  violence,  with  constant  desire  to  urinate,  caus-
ing spasms;  little  urine  is  voided;  constant  nausea;
distended  abdomen.

I  Yellowness  of  whole  body,  nausea  with  aversion  to  food,
dry  tongue,  great  thirst,  abdomen  painful  and  distended
on  account  of  enormous  swelling  of  bladder,  discharge
of  urine  gradually  became  less,  and  for  last  three  days
ceased  entirely;  after  great  pressure  he  passes,  with  much
pain,  a  few  drops  of  blood;  lower  limbs  swollen  and
cedematous,  swelling  finally  extending  to  abdomen;
whole  body  cold  to  touch,  and  in  many  places  covered
with  clammy  sweat;  pulse  small  and  quick;  great  rest-
lessness ;  introduction  of  catheter  difficult  on  account  of
great  pain  and  sensitiveness  of  parts. ^Cystitis.

1  I  Bladder  becomes  paralyzed  and  greatly  distended
during  pregnancy.

1  I  Irritation  of  neck  of  bladder  threatening  inflammation.

1  Passes  blood  and  slime,  with  burning  and  stinging.
^Uterine  complaints.

■  I  Frequent  urging  to  urinate,  with  scanty  discharge.

I  I  Constant  desire  to  urinate,  passing  ver}^  little  and  of

dark  color. ^During  jjregnancy.

■  Spasmodic  urging  to  urinate  causing  spasms.

■  Suppressed  urinary  secretion  with  dropsy.

I I  Urine:  scanty,  dark,  with  floating,  dark  sjDecks;  like
coffee-grounds;  albuminous,  scanty.

1 1  Dark  urine,  feeble  stream.

I  Urine  with  dark  sediment  like  coflee-grounds,  top  part  is

clear.

I I  Coffee-grounds  sediment.  ^During  complaints  of  preg-
nancy. ^Diarrhoea.  ^Amenorrhoea.  ^Uterine  dropsy.
^Spasms  of  children.  ^Hydrocephalus.  ^Scarlatina.
^Dropsy  after  scarlatina. 6'Anasarca.

^Large  quantity  of  pale,  watery  urine.

■  Unconscious  discharge  of  urine. ^Hydrocephalus. ^T}''-

phoid:
^  Male  Sexual  Organs. iSexual  desire  suppressed;  genitals
relaxed ;  no  erections.

■  Hydrocele  after  suppressed  eruptions,  either  side.
"Female  Sexual  Organs. i Uterine  dropsy; secretion of

urine  almost  suppressed.
Pain  under  1.  nipple,  pains  all  over  her,  forced  her  menses
on ;  had  to  get  up  at  night  to  make  water.

■  Suppression  of  menses.

■  Amenorrhoea  from  disappointed  love.

■  Amenorrhoba  consequent  upon  getting  feet  damp, and

getting  wet  through.

■  Menses  absent  for  many  months.


mi  HELLEBORUS.

■  Voice  weak;  speech  unintelligible. ^Hydrocephalus.
Loses  hair  from  pudenda.

^  Pregnancy. Parturition. Lactation, i  Puerperal  con-
vulsions.
^^Respiration. iSighing.

■  Breathing difficult,  with anxiety, < every  evening;

must  sit  up.

■  Chest  constricted,  gasps  for  breath,  with  open  mouth;

propped  up  in  bed. ^Hydrothorax.

■  Constriction  of  throat,  nose  and  chest.

I  !  Suffocative  attacks,  as  from  constriction  of  lungs.

I  I  Maltreated  pneumonia,  with  moderate  fever;  breathing

very  difficult,  anxiety ;  torments  most  towards  evening ;

patient  has  to  sit  up.
^  Cough. 'Dry, < at night, with gagging; dry, while

smoking  tobacco.
I  I  Constant  hacking cough, appearing suddenly while

smoking.

■  Tension  in  region  of  1.  short  ribs  during  cough.

^  Inner  Chest  and  Lungs.  Sharp  cutting  in  region  of  lower-
most true  ribs  across  chest,  from  within  outward,  <  by
inspiration.

■  iHydrothorax.

^.^  Heart,  Pulse  and  Circulation.  Anxiousness  about  heart,
which  prevents  him  from  resting  anywhere.

■  Pulse:  often  slower  than  beating  of  heart;  frequent,  soft,

intermittent  in  hydrocephalus ;  small,  wiry,  in  hydro-
thorax;  almost  imperceptible ;  rapid,  small  and  tremu-
lous; slow.
^^  Neck  and  Back. iNeck  rigid,  in  spotted  fever.

■  Cervical  muscles  stiff  as  far  as  occij^ut.

■  Cervical  glands  swollen.

■  Severe  pain  down  neck,  in  1.  side  of  face  and  in  teeth.

■  Cramp  in  spinal  muscles. ^Hydrocephalus.

Pain  as  from  stagnation  of  flatulence;  contractive  pains.
I  I  Sudden  amelioration  in  myelitis,  with  cold  sweats  which

do  not  relieve,  followed  by  symptoms  of  paralysis.
^  Upper  Limbs. ■Arms  moving  continually,  automatically,

except  when  asleep.
;rFrequent  twitching  in  r.  arm. ^Hydrocephalus.
Complete  loss  of  power  of  muscles  in  both  hands,  with

numbness  in  arms.
•  Thumb  drawn  in  to  palm.

■  Boring,  sticking  in  wrist  and  finger-joints.

Small  vesicles  on  fingers  of  r.  hand,  humid  for  a  long
time,  and  then  covered  wuth  scurf.

■  Humid,  painless  vesicles  between  fingers.
J  I  Ulceration  around  the  nails.


HELLEBORUS.  538

^  Lower  Limbs. 1 1  Hip  and  knee-joints  stiff.

I  I  Pricking  in  1.  hip.

I  I  Violent,  somewhat  slow  stitches,  as  with  several  pins.

Needle-like  stitches  in  1.  hip.

Inflammation  of  psoas  muscle  in  a  scrofulous  case;  spasms
in  bladder;  burning  and  stinging  when  urinating.

■  Legs  oedematous.

I  Legs  drawn  up,  with  every  attempt  to  change  her  posi-
tion. ^Hydrocephalus.

I  Boring,  stinging  in  knee  and  foot-joints.

iWeaknessof  feet;  tottering  of  knees;  he  could  only  walk
slowly; numbness  of  both  feet; prickling  in  toes.

I  I  Humid,  painless  vesicles  between  toes.
^  Limbs  in  General. ■  Involuntary  throwing or  whirling-
about  of  one  arm  and  one  leg.

I  Piercing  in  limbs,  with  uterine  dropsy,
^^Rest. Position. Motion, i  Slides down  in  bed. ^Ty-
phoid.

I  Lies  on  back,  limbs  drawn  up. ^Typhoid.

I  I  Worse  from  bodily  exertion.

Cannot  rest  anywhere on  account  of  anxiousness  about
heart.

Has  lain  upon  back  for  a  whole  week.

Lying  quiet  with  closed  eyes.

Lying  down :  breathes  easier ;  heat  with  sweat.

Wants  to  lie  down  and  roll  head  from  side  to  side.

Getting  head  down  and  remaining  perfectly  quiet :  >  vio-
lent pain  in  head.

Propped  up  in  bed :  chest  constricted,  gasps  for  breath.

Must  sit  up  :  on  account  of  difficult  breathing.

Legs  drawn  up :  with  every  attem23t  to  change  her  position.

Stooping:  vertigo  with  nausea;  stupefying  headache  < ;
sore  feeling  in  back  part  of  head  < .

Standing  erect:  vertigo  ceases;  headache  >.

Motion  :  of  head,  <  pain ;  external  head  painfully  sensi-
tive; chill  <.

Moving  head :  hippus ;  alternate  contraction  and  dilata-
tion of  pupils.

Arms  and  hands  moving  continually.

Chewing  motion  of  mouth.

Grasps  head  with  hands.

Involuntary  throwing  or  whirling  about  of  one  arm  and
one  leg.

Boring  head  in  pillow.

Throws  or  rolls  head  from  side  to  side.

Can  walk  but  slowly  on  account  of  weakness  of  feet.

Walking :  reels  about  allowing  her  head  to  hang  ;  stomach
painful.


539  HELLEBORUS.

^^  Nerves. '  Great  debility.
■Heaviness  of  parts.
iSudden  relaxation  of  muscles.
1 1  Want  of  bodily  irritability.
I  Muscles  refuse  their  service  when  not  governed  by  strong

attention  and  will.
I  Automatic  motion  of  one  arm  and  leg  in  hydrocephalus.

■  Convulsive  twitching  of  muscles.
■Spasmodic  twitching  in  muscles  of  lower  limbs.

■  Horrible  convulsions,  with  extreme  coldness.

■  ■Convulsions  of  sucklings.

■  Epilepsy,  with  consciousness,  followed  by  deep  sleep.
■Rigidity  of  muscles  of  neck  and  limbs.

■  Traumatic  tetanus.

■  Chiefly  indicated  when  all  reaction  is  past  and  we  deal

with  the  consequent  paralysis.

■  Paralysis  of  detrusor;  oedema  of  legs;  vomiting  of  all  he

eats;  constipation;  sleeplessness;  despair  of  getting  well.
^  Sleep. ■Drowsy;  when  left  alone,  he  goes  to  sleep.

■  Constant  somnolence;  can  be  aroused,  but  not  to  full
consciousness. ^Typhoid  fever.

■  Soporous  sleep,  with  shrieks  and  starts.
TrStarting  with  fright  in  sleep. ^Hydrocephalus.

■  During  sleep  muscles  twitch.

■  Dreams:  confused,  anxious,  cannot  be  remembered.

^^  Time. Morning: tongue dry, white; chill commences;
sweat  with  heat  <.

Day :  rolls  head.

4  to  8  P.M. :  headache  with  coryza.

Evening:  pricking  toothache  in  molars;  difficult  breath-
ing <  ;  burning  heat  all  over  body  between  5  and  6 ;
hot  head  and  cold  body.

Night:  sees  evil  spirits;  rolls  head;  pricking  toothache
in  molars;  had  to  get  up  to  make  water;  dry  cough  <.
^^  Temperature  and  Weather. Worse  from  uncovering ;  >
in  warm  air  or  wrapping  up.

Feels  better  in  open  air ;  sensation  as  after  a  long  illness.

Open  air:  headache  >.

Getting  feet  wet  and  getting  wet  through  :  amenorhoea.

Aversion  to  uncovering.

After  getting  out  of  bed :  chill  <.

Cold  to  touch  :  whole  body.

Can  bear  neither  heat  nor  cold.
*"  Fever. ■  Coldness  over  whole  body,  with  cold  hands  and  feet.

I  1  Pale,  sunken  face,  loss  of  pulse,  icy-coldness,  cold  sweat
all  over,  so  that  a  drop  is  on  the  end  of  every  hair.

I  I  Chill  in  alternation  with  pain  in  joints.

I  I  General  shaking  chill,  with  goose-flesh;  painful  sensi-


HELLEBORUS.  540

tiveness  of  external  head  to  touch  and  motion;  drawing
tearing  in  Hmbs,  and  frequent  sticking  in  joints,  espe-
cially in  elbows  and  shoulders;  without  thirst;  com-
mences in  morning.

I  Chill  spreads  from  arms;  goose-flesh,  pains  in  joints;
face  hot;  drowsy;  <  after  getting  out  of  bed,  and  from
motion.

Heat  with  shuddering.

Repeated  attacks  of,  first  heat,  then  chill  with  pains  in
abdomen.

■  Burning  heat,  follow^ed  by  chill  and  colic.

I  I  Burning  heat  over  whole  body,  especially  violent  in
head,  with  internal  shivering  and  chilliness,  without
thirst,  in  evening  between  five  and  six,  and  especially
after  lying  down;  when  he  desires  to  drink,  it  becomes
repugnant  to  him,  and  can  drink  only  a  little  at  a  time.

i  I  Internal  heat  of  head  with  coldness  of  hands.

I  Hot  head  wdth  cold  body,  towards  evening.

iHeat  principally  in  head.

I  I  Fever  with  painful  sensibility  of  head  to  touch  and  mo-
tion; withdrawing,  tearing  pains  in  limbs  and  stitches
in  joints.

■  After  lying  down  in  bed,  heat  generally  wdth  sweat.
Heat  in  evening  and  through  day,  as  soon  as  he  lies  do"^n,

generally  with  sweat.
I  Heat  or  sweat,  with  aversion  to  uncover.

I  I  Sweat  with  heat,  in  bed,  <  toward  morning.

I I  Cold  sweat.

I  I  Whole  body  covered  with  cold,  clammy  sw^eat.

I  I  Sweat:  sticky;  less  after  sleep;  towards  morning,  tem-
perature unchanged.

I  In  consequence  of  catching  cold  after  scarlet  fever:  stitch-
ing pains  in  head;  vertigo;  pale  swollen  face  unrecog-
nizable; loss  of  appetite,  bitter  taste  in  mouth,  nausea
after  eating  and  drinking,  gagging  and  vomiting  with
relief;  constipation;  urine  very  scanty  and  brown;  no
sw^eat;  skin  hot  and  dry;  abdomen  swollen,  but  soft;
great  depression  of  mind,  fears  she  will  die;  sits  about
despondent  the  whole  day.

I  Stupid  expression,  though  face  is  not  collapsed;  vacant
look  of  eyes  with  dilated  pupils ;  constant  somnolence,
out  of  which  patient  may  be  roused,  but  does  not  gain
full  consciousness;  he  stares  at  physician,  is  slow  in
comprehending  and  answering  c{uestions;  all  perception
by  senses  grow  only  slowly  or  not  at  all  conscious;  utters
no  desire;  when  left  alone  sinks  into  slumber;  lies  upon
back  with  limbs  drawn  up;  sliding  down  in  bed  ;  mu-
cous membranes  but  little  or  not  at  all  affected ;  ab-


541  HELLEBORUS.

domen  not  bloated,  unpainful ;  no  diarrhoea ;  sometimes
unconscious  discharge  of  urine ;  slow  action  of  heart ;
pulse  only  80;  respiration  slow;  temperature  of  skin
nearly  normal ;  no  miliary  eruption ;  no  sign  of  putrid
dissolution  of  blood;  loss  of  flesh  trifling;  only  brain
seems  to  be  invaded. ^Typhoid.

1  I  Temperature  106. ^Typhoid.
*^  Attacks,  Periodicity. Repeated  attacks  of  first  heat,  then
chill,  with  pain  in  abdomen.

Three  or  four  times  a  day  :  white,  gelatinous  stool,  like
frog  spawn.

For  two  weeks :  no  sign  of  having  sight  or  hearing,  ut-
tered no  articulate  sounds.
*^  Locality  and  Direction. Right :  dull  pain  in  malar  bone ;
frequent  twitching  in  arm ;  small  vesicles  on  fingers  of
hand.

Left:  neuralgia  of  face;  pain  under  nipple;  tension  in
short  ribs ;  severe  pain  side  of  face ;  pricking  in  hip ;
needle-like  stitches  in  hip.

Within  outward :  pressing  headache ;  sharp  cutting  in  re-
gion of  lower  end  of  true  ribs ;  pain  in  forehead.
*^  Sensations.  Confusion  of  head,  as  if  bruised;  occiput  feels
as  if  it  would  fall  forward ;  brain  as  if  too  large ;  shock
as  from  electricity  passes  through  brain ;  as  if  a  nail
was  driven  into  vertex ;  s^isation  in  occiput  as  from  a
blow ;  cornea  as  if  covered  with  dust ;  as  if  scalp  on  occi-
put were  pulled  down  tight ;  as  if  eyelids  were  pressed
down;  nostrils  look  as  if  smoked;  gurgling  as  if  bowels
were  full  of  water ;  as  if  intestines  had  no  power  to  evac-
uate feces.

Pain:  under  roots  in  third  molars;  under  1.  nipple;  all
over  patient;  pain  as  from  stagnation  of  flatus;  in
joints;  in  abdomen.

Violent  pains  :  in  head,  especially  in  forehead.

Intense  and  intolerable  pain:  in  head.

Severe  pain:  down  neck;  in  1.  side  efface;  in  teeth.

Great  pain :  in  urinary  organs.

Violent  pressive  pain :  in  head.

Drawing  tearing:  in  limbs.

Sharp  cutting:  in  region  of  lowermost  true  ribs  across
chest.

Shooting  pains :  in  whole  head.

Cutting  scraping :  in  palate.

Piercing :  in  limbs.

Violent  slow  stitches :  in  lower  limbs.

Needle-like  stitches :  in  1.  hip.

Stitching  pains  :  in  head.

Stitching : in  wrist  and  finger-joints ;  in  joints.


HELLEBORUS.  542

I  Pricking,  tearing,  pressing  pains,  running  across  affected

parts.
Pricking :  about  navel.
Pricking  pain :  in  molars ;  in  1.  hip.
Boring:  in  wrist  and  finger-joints;  in  knee  and  foot-joints.
Cramps :  in  muscles  of  back ;  in  extremities ; in spinal

muscles.
Griping:  about  navel.
Neuralgia :  left  side  of  face.
Contractive  pains :  neck  and  back.
Pressing  pain :  in  head ;  in  region  of  stomach.
Burning  pain :  in  head.
Smarting:  in  anus.
Scraping:  in  stomach.
Dull  pain :  in  r.  malar  bone.
Stupefying  headache.
Burning heat : in head ;  in oesophagus ;  with pain in

stomach ;  in  anus ;  in  urinary  organs ;  all  over.
Sore  feeling :  in  head.
Soreness :  of  corners  of  mouth  ;  of  lips.
Sensitiveness :  of  urinary  organs ;  of  external  head.
Stinging :  of  urinary  organs.
Prickling :  in  toes.
Dull  and  heavy :  in  head.
Constriction :  of  chest ;  of  throat ;  of  nose.
Tension:  in  1.  rib.
Heat:  deep  within  head.
Anxiousness:  about  heart.
Heaviness :  of  head ;  of  limbs.
Numbness :  of  both  feet.
Twitching:  in  r.  arm.
*^  Tissues. >  Red  parts  become  white ;  ansemia.
I  Great  emaciation.
I  Loss  of  flesh;  aphthse.
I  Hydrocephalus  and  kidney  troubles  after  exanthema.

■  Diseases  of  serous  membranes,  approaching  insidiously,

rather  as  a  sequel  from  some  other  diseases  than  as  a
natural  termination  of  an  inflammation  of  brain.

I  Acts  especially  upon  kidneys  and  serous  membranes,
giving  rise  to  dropsical  effusions  of  brain,  thorax,  peri-
toneum and  cellular  tissue.

I  Dropsy:  of  brain,  chest,  or  abdomen;  sudden  swellings;
anasarca;  after  scarlatina,  nephritis,  intermittents,  etc.
Concomitants:  debility,  fever,  pains  in  limbs,  diarrhoea,
suppressed  urine,  etc.

■Anasarca  and  effusion  into  pericardium  and  pleura;  black
urine.

■  Scarlatinal  dropsy  without  much  fever  or  pain  in  kidneys.


643  '  HELLEBORUS.

I  Face  swollen;  respiration  difficult;  urine  blood-red,
^After  scarlet  fever.

■  Anasarca,  ascites,  hydrothorax,  etc.,  and  especially  for

acute  dropsies  where  there  is  great  weakness,  drowsi-
ness, fever,  stitching  pains  in  limbs,  diarrhoea  and  sup-
pressed urine.

1  iSyphilitis  infantum.

■Stinging  boring,  in  periosteum;  <  in  cool  air.
^^  Touch. Passive  Motion. Injuries. Touch :  occiput  sore ;
abdomen  painful;  painful  sensitiveness  of  external  head.

From  a  blow :  concussion  of  brain.
^^  Skin. Skin :  pale ;  yellow ;  cold  and  clammy.

I  Skin  peels  off;  hair  and  nails  fall  out.

■  Livid  spots  on  skin.
Miliary  or  humid  eruptions.
Elephantiasis.
■Repercussion  of  exanthemata.

■  ■Sudden  dropsical  swelling  of  skin.

■Sudden  severe  chill,  burning  fever,  headache,  pain  in  all
the  limbs,  pressure  on  chest,  dry  cough,  unquenchable
thirst;  after  36  hours  face  and  body  greatly  swollen,
pitting  upon  pressure;  dull  headache,  difficulty  in
answering  questions,  cannot  concentrate  his  mind,  low-
spirited;  want  of  appetite,  pressure  in  region  of  stomach;
frequent  griping  in  umbilical  region  followed  by  urging
to  stool,  with  bilious  mucous  discharges;  frequent  urging
to  urinate  with  scanty  discharge;  great  weakness;  pulse
small  and  slow. -  ^Anasarca.

Anasarca  after  scarlet  fever;  urine  dark,  frequent  and
scanty;  stupefying  headache,  <  in  occiput;  pupils
dilated.

■  Whole  body  enormously  swollen  on  account  of  the  oede-

matous  infiltration  of  the  connective  tissue ;  cannot  sit
up,  lies  in  a  drowsy  condition ;  complaining,  dissatisfied
when  he  is  disturbed;  urine  greatly  diminished;  pale-
ness of  face  and  body. ^After  purpura.
B  Painless  ulcers.

■  Itching  unchanged  by  scratching.

^^  Stages  of  Life,  Constitution. ■During  dentition,  brain
symptoms.

■  Weakly,  scrofulous  children.
Girl,  set.  5  weeks ;  eclampsia.
Boy,  set.  15  months ;  ascites.
Child,  set.  18  months ;  aphthse.
Child,  set.  2;  aphthse.

Boy,  set.  2| ;  hydrocephalus.
Girl,  set.  2| ;  brain  affection.
Girl,  set.  2^,  weak  and  scrofulous,  after  purpura; dropsy.


HELLEBORUS— HELONIAS  DIOICA.  544

Small,  weak,  emaciated  child  ;  aphthae.

Boy,  £et.  3,  another  4;  hydrocephalus.

Girl,  £et.  6;  cerebro-spinal  meningitis.

Girl,  set. 8,  brunette,  brown  eyes,  lively  temperament;

dropsy  after  scarlet  fever.
Girl,  £et.  17 ; amenorrhoea.
Girl,  £et.  19,  suffering  for  five  weeks ;  melancholia  after

typhoid.
Girl,  set.  20,  after  tjq^hoid;  melancholia.
Girl,  £et.  22; amenorrhoea.
Phlegmatic  patient;  amenorrhoea.
Man,  set.  40,  dwarfed,  hunchbacked;  anasarca.
Nervous  woman,  set.  42;  neuralgia.
Man,  set.  47;  sanguine  temperament,  three  weeks  ago  had

fever,  which  was  treated  with  China ;  cystitis.
Woman,  eet.  50 ;  anasarca  and  ascites.
■^^ Relations. Antidoted  by: Camphor.,  Cinclion.

Compatible: Zincuni (hydrocephalus); Bellad., Bryon.,

Cinchon.,  Lycop.,  Nux  vom.,  Phosphor.,  Pulsat.,  Sulphur.
Compare: Ajyis, Apocyn., Arsen., Canthar., Digit., Kali

brom.,  Laches.,  Phos.  ac.


HELONIAS  DIOICA.

Blazing  Star ;  Starwort ; Unicorn  Plant.  Melanthacese.

A  plant  indigenous  to  the  United  States  and  Canada;  grows  in  low  groundR
and  shady  hilly  places;  flowers  in  June.  The  fresh,  bulbous  root  is  gathered  for
the  tincture  before  flowering.

Introduced  by  C.  B.  Parr.

Provings  by  Tully,  Branch,  Burr,  Clark,  Paine,  Hale  and  Jones.  See
Allen's  Encyclopedia,  vol.  4,  p.  .565.

Clinical  Authorities. — Melancholia,  Dunham,  N.  A.  J.  H.,  vol.  23,  p.  499;.
Affections  of  stomach,  Coe,  Close,  N.  A.  J.  H.,  vol.  23,  p.  493 ;  Gastric  disturbances,
Coe,  N.  A.  J.  H.,  vol.  23,  p.  499 ;  Pain  in  kidneys,  Rogers,  Farrington,  N.  A.  J.  H.,
vol.  23,  p.  497;  Bright' s  disease,  Jones,  Am.  Hom.  Obs.,  vol.  10,  p.  53;  Diabetes,
Oehnie,  Raue's  Pec,  1874,  p.  211 ;  Pane's  Path.,  p.  648;  Diabetes  mellilus,  Schwei-
kert,  Raue's  Rec,  1875,  p.  166;  Albuminuria,  Farrington,  Pane's  Rec,  1874,  p.
216;  Am.  Journ.  of  Hom.  Mat.  Med.,  vol.  6,  p.  332;  Disease  of  kidneys  (2  cases),
Rogers,  N.  A.  .1.  H.,  vol  15,  p.  319;  Profuse  urination,  Martin,  Trans.  Hom.  Med.
Soc.  Pa.,  1881,  p.  265;  Urinary  difficulties,  Rogers,  Howard,  N.  A.  J.  H.,  vol.  23,
p.  495 ;  Uterine  displacements,  Foster,  N.  A.  J.  H.,  vol.  23,  p.  498 ;  Uterine  displace-
ments with  leucorrhcea,  Navarro,  Times  Retros.,  vol.  3,  p.  26 ; Uterine  hemorrhage,.


545  HELONIAS  DIOICA.

Hale,  N.  A.  J.  H.,  vol.  23,  p.  497  ;  Menorrhagia,  Burr,  Eggert,  N.  A.  J.  H.,  vol.  23,
p.  497  ;  Amenorrhcea,  Coe,  Farrington,  N.  A.  J.  H.,  vol.  23,  p.  497  ;  Leucorrhcea^
Gushing,  Lilienthal,  IST.  A.  J.  H,  vol.  23,  p.  498 ;  Climacteric  affection,  Jones,  N.  A.
J.  H.,  vol.  23,  p.  498  ;  Threatened  abortion,  Frost,  Raue's  Eec,  1875,  p.  183;  Pains-
in  back,  Jones,  N.  A.  J.  H.,  vol.  23,  p.  498;  Post-diphtheritic  debility,  Ockford^
Raue's  Eec,  1875,  p.  10 ; Chlorosis,  Hughes,  Pharmacodynamics,  p.  398.

^  Mind. ■  Great  weakness  of  memory.
I  Dull,  inactive  and  gloomy.
I  Restless,  wants  to  be  continually  moving  about.
I  Desire  to  be  let  alone;  conversation  is  unpleasant.
I  Irritable;  cannot  endure  the  least  contradiction  or  re-
ceive suggestions  in  relation  to  any  subject.
I  Fault  finding.

■  Always  better  when  doing  something,  when  the  mind  is.

engaged.

i Profound melancholy; deep, undefined depression of
mind.
^  Sensorium. Dizziness;  fretful;  everything  turns  in  a  circle;
anaemia.

I  Pain  in  head  is  <  by  stooping,  and  attended by  in-
creased vertigo.
^  Inner  Head, l Fulness  and  pressure  in  forehead  or  vertex;
<  or  renewed  when  thinking  thereof

Pain  in  forehead  as  if  a  band  about  an  inch  wide  were
drawn  across  it  from  temple  to  temple.

Pressing  pain  in  one  or  both  temples  (in  a  small  spot);  "a
burning  sensation  "  in  top  and  front  of  head,  >  by  mo-
tion and  mental  exertion,  <  when  either  is  desisted
from.

Pressure  from  within  upwards  to  vertex,  <  by  looking
steadily  at  any  fixed  point.

Pain  in  occiput,  with  pulsative  pain  in  vertex,  vertigo,  <
stooping.

■  Uterine  and  hysterical  headache.

^  Upper  Face, i  '  Expression  of  suffering.
I  Pale,  earthy  face.
I  I  Face  swollen.
"  Taste  and  Tongue, i  Bitter,  disagreeable  taste,  every  morn-
ing, 5  A.M.,  on  awaking;  lips,  tongue  and  fauces  dry.
I  I  Tongue  white. ^Diabetes.
Tongue  red  at  tip  and  borders,  white  in  centre.
^^  Inner  Mouth, l Salivation  of  pregnant  women  and  teething
children.
I  Mouth  gets  sore;  stomatitis  materna.
^*  Appetite,  Thirst. Desires,  Aversions. iLoss  of  appetite,
eructations,  fulness,  cramp,  and  painful  congestion  of
stomach.

VOL.  V. — 35.


HELONIAS  DIOICA.  546

■  Appetite  2)oor,  food  tasteless; "bilious;"  sleej)y  during

day.
^^  Hiccough,  Belching,  Nausea and  Vomiting. Empty
eructations.

■  Tasteless  eructations  and  flatulence,  causing  nausea.
I  Nausea  at  supper.

I  Vomiting  of  food. ^Dropsy.
I  Obstinate  vomiting  in  Bright's  disease.
^^  Scrobiculum and Stomach. Constricting,  pressing  pain
in  stomach.
I  Cramp-like  pain  in  stomach.

■  Burning  in  stomach;  burning  and  aching  in  spine;  eruc-

tations.

■  Irritable  stomach,  with  general  dropsy.

■  Idiopathic  diseases  of  stomach,  or  sympathetic  gastric

disorders  which  accompany  uterine  and  renal  diseases;
loss  of  appetite,  eructations,  fulness,  cramp  and  painful
congestion,  with  depression  of  spirits.

"■^  Hypochondria.  ■Pain  in  1.  side,  as  if  in  spleen,  which  feels
as  if  distended,  causing  a  dull  ache.

^^  Abdomen.  ■Motion  and  rumbling  in  abdomen,  as  if  diar-
rhoea would  come  on; cramps  in  stomach.

■  Colic-like  pains  in  hypogastric  region,  off  and  on  all  day.

■  Burning  in  lower  third  of  abdomen.

^°  Stool  and  Rectum.  ■Stool:  loose;  yellow  in  morning;
lumps  of  feces  in  evening.

^^  Urinary  Organs.  ■Burning  sensation  at  kidneys;  can  trace
their  outlines  by  burning;  at  2.30  p.m.,  dull  heat  and
pressure  in  vertex,  as  if  skull  were  too  full.

■  Weariness,  languor,  weight  in  region  of  kidneys;  mind

dull,  inactive; afternoon  and  evening.
iPain  in  kidneys  with  albuminous  urine.

■  Congestion  of  kidneys  with  albuminuria  from  amenor-

rhoea.

■  Right  kidney  sensitive.

■  Burning  scalding  when  urinating;  desire  frequent  and

urging.
I  1  Strangury,

■  Involuntary  discharge  of  urine  after  bladder  seemed  to

be  emptied.
Urine:  profuse,  clear,  light  colored;  albuminous;  diabetic.

■  Great  emaciation  and  debility ;  can  walk  but  a  few  steps

at  a  time;  complete  loss  of  appetite;  pale,  chlorotic  skin ;
tongue  red  at  tip  and  edges,  white  in  centre;  headache
in  occiput  in  morning;  immediate  vomiting  of  animal
food  unless  some  acid  was  taken  with  it;  constant  aching
and  extreme  tenderness  in  region  of  kidneys,  especially
the  right;  aching  in  region  of  bladder;  intense  cutting,


547  HELONIAS  DIOICA.

tearing  pain  in  urethra  when  urinating;  very  frequent
desire  to  urinate;  urine  limpid  when  first  voided,  but
depositing  after  a  time,  a  lead-colored,  fiocky  sediment,
adhering  to  vessel;  the  amount  of  urine  reached  nearly
three  quarts  a  day.

■  Restlessness,  constant  "fidgetty  "  desire  to  be  doing  some-

thing, low  spirits,  burning  aching  in  lumbar  spine,  fre-
quent profuse  urination,  urine  pale  yellow,  sp.  gr.  1,013,
reaction  faintly  acid;  must  get  up  several  times  at  night
to  urinate;  debility,  easily  fatigued,  palpitation  from
going  up  stairs;  feels  her  weakness  less  when  she  is  at
work  ;  in  evening,  sensation  as  if  cold  wind  was  blowing
up  limbs  from  heel  to  popliteal  space;  appetite  poor;
bowels  relaxed;  sleep  difficult  and  unrefreshing.
^Ante-desquamative  stage  of  Bright's  disease.

I  Pain  in  region  of  kidneys;  painful  stiffness  of  back;
,  burning,  scalding  pain  when  urinating;  frequent  and
urgent  desire  to  urinate,  with  emission  of  large  quanti-
ties of  red  urine; complete  impotence.

■Scanty  menstruation,  heaviness,  languor,  drowsiness,
albuminous  urine. ^Albuminuria.

■  Chronic  albuminuria.

■  ■  First  stage  of  diabetes  insipidus  and  nervosus  of  women,

with  congestion  of  lower  third  of  medulla  spinalis.

■  Dull,  gloomy  and  irritable;  melancholy;  complete  impo-

tence; pain  and  lame  feeling  in  back;  numbness  in  feet,
going  off  by  motion. ^Diabetes.

■  Lips stick together; thirst; restlessness; emaciation;

urine  profuse,  clear;  linen  coming  in  contact  with  urine
becomes  stiff;  large  quantities  of  sugar  in  urine.

■  ■Saccharine  diabetes.

^^  Male  Sexual  Organs. Sexual  desire  and  power  increased.
Unusually  strong  and  frequent  erections  at  night.

■  Impotence,  complete  or  partial.

^^  Female  Sexual  Organs. ■  Loss  of  sexual  desire  with  or
without  sterility.

■  Profound  melancholy,  deep,  undefined  depression,  with  a

sensation  of  soreness  and  weight  in  womb;  a  "  conscious-
ness" of  a  womb

■  Ovarian  pains;  soreness  and  heaviness  in  hypogastrium.

■  Dragging  weakness  in  sacral  region,  with  prolapsus;  also

at  climaxis,  with  marked  debility;  profound  mental
gloom.
■Uterine  displacement  in  weak  patient;  dyspeptic,  lethar-
gic, or  indisposed  to  move  about;  aches  and  feels  tired
all  the  time;  uterus  sensitive;  feels  uterus  move  when
she  moves,  it  is  so  sore  and  tender;  miscarries  easily;
depressed  spirits.


HELONIAS  DIOICA.  548

■  Prolapsus  uteri  and  ulceration  of  cervix ;  discharge  con-

stant, dark,  badly  smelling;  flooding  on  lifting  a  weight,
and  on  least  exertion ;  face  sallow,  having  an  expression
of  suffering ;  great  vaginal  irritation ;  pain  in  small  of
back.

■  Uterus  low  down,  fundus  tilted  forwards;  finger  passes

with  difficulty  between  os  and  rectum.

■  Prolapsus  uteri,  leucorrhoea;  os  protrudes  externally.

■  Prolapsus  uteri  dependent  upon  want  of  tonicity.

■  Feeble  women,  with  prolapsus  or  other  displacements ;

aqueous,  abundant  leucorrhoea.
lProlaj)sus  uteri  with  tendency  to  miscarriage.
I  1  Pain  in  lower  part  of  back,  through  to  uterus,  piercing,

drawing.
Great  uterine  hemorrhage  all  through  proving ;  j)ain  in

back,  through  to  uterus.

■  Profuse  flooding,  with  serous  leucorrhoea,  much  uterine

and  ovarian  pain ;  climaxis.

■  Excessive  uterine  hemorrhage.
■Menorrhagia  from  active  congestion.
■Menorrhagia  from  ulcerated  os  or  cervix,  blood  dark  and

bad  smelling,  and  continuing  a  long  while ;  very  pro-
fuse flow  at  every  period,  so  that  her  strength  is  ex-
hausted, and  she  suffers  from  debility;  flow  increased
by  least  exertion;  complexion  pale,  sallow,  earthy-look-
ing.

■  Menstrual  flow  too  profuse;  from  atony  of  uterus;  passive

flow;  <  from  slightest  motion;  dark  colored,  coagulated,
of  bad  odor;  face  pale;  face  earthy  color;  feeble  from
loss  of  blood.
■Menses  too  frequent  and  profuse  in  women  who  are
feeble  from  loss  of  blood ;  flow  jDassive,  dark,  coagulated,
offensive.

■  Frequent  and  profuse  menstruation  when  patients  lose
■  more  blood  than  is  made  in  inter-menstrual  period,  with

pain  in  back,  and  frequent  palpitation  of  heart.

■  Atonic  and  passive  menorrhagia.

■  Dysmenorrhoea  occurring  in  delicate  women,  of  lax  fibre,

or  who  are  chlorotic;  sharp  cutting  and  drawing  pains
during  period,  passing  from  back  through  uterus;  swell-
ing of  mammae,  with  considerable  tenderness  of  mam-
mae and  nipples; painful  soreness  over  the  ovaries.

■  During  menses,  weakness,  weariness,  lassitude.

■  Scanty  menstrual  flow,  with  heaviness,  languor,  drowsi-

ness and  albuminous  urine.

■  General  weariness  and  languor;  gloominess  and  dulness

of  mind;  amenorrhoea  from  general  atony  and  torpid
condition  of  whole  body.


.549  '  HELONIAS  DIOICA.

lAmenia,  arising  from or accompanied by disordered

'  digestive  apparatus  and  anaemia.

I  Atrophic  ovarian  amenorrhoea,  with  anaemia,  consider-
able impairment  of  digestion  and  assimilation,  sterility,
extinguished  sexual  impulses,  little  or  no  pain  in  uterus
or  its  appendages,  except  some  congestion  at  menstrual
period,  with  heaviness,  fulness  and  pressure  in  hypogas-
trium.

I  I  Pain  in  back,  with  irritation  of  vagina.

I  I  Aphthous  vaginitis,  and  erythema  of  external  genitals.

I  Intense  pruritus  of  vulva  and  vagina,  with  curdy  secre-
tion from  vulva.

■  Labia  and  pudendum hot, red,  swollen,  burning  and

itching  terribly;  ej)idermis  falls  off  in  thin,  transparent
exfoliations;  mucous  surface  of  labia  red,  swollen,  cov-
ered with  a  curdy  deposit,  like  aphthae.

■  Leucorrhoea,  with  pain  in  lower  part  of  back;  soreness

and  tenderness  of  breasts  and  nipples,  particularly  at
catamenial  period.

■  Leucorrhoea,  with  atony  and  anaemia.

■  Leucorrhoea  in  old  people,  atrophied,  cancer  cachexia.

■  Breasts  swollen,  nipples  painful  and  tender,  cannot  bear

least  pressure  of  dress.
24  Pregnancy. Parturition. Lactation. ■Threatened
abortion,  from  atonic  conditions;  especially  in  habitual
abortion;  slightest  overexertion or  irritating  emotion
tends  to  cause  loss  of  foetus.

■  Had  been  flowing  for  several  days;  severe  bearing  down

pains  preventing  sleep,  great  pain  in  small  of  back ;
walking  about  excites  pains. ^Threatened  abortion.

■  Useful  for  many  of  the  consequences  of  miscarriage.

■  Intense  pain  in  stomach,  with  burning  pains;  vomiting

and  salivation  during  pregnancy.
■Subacute  gastritis  and  vomiting  in  pregnancy.

■  Albuminuria  during  pregnancy ;  great  weakness,  drowsi-

ness.

■  Chronic  parenchymatous  nephritis  in  connection  with

pregnancy  and  symptoms  of  approaching  convulsions.

■  Pruritus  vulva  during  pregnancy.

■  Nipples  sensitive,  painful,  breasts  swollen;  cannot  bear

pressure  of  ordinary  dress.
^^  Heart,  Pulse  and  Circulation, i  i  Palpitation.
^^  Outer  Chest. ■  Chest  sensitive  to  air.

■  Aching  as  if  front  of  chest  had  been  compressed  in  a  vice.
'^^  Neck  and  Back. ■  Burning and  heat  in  dorsal region,

mostly  between  lower  half  of  scapulae,  while  sitting  read-
ing, at  night.

■  Pains  in  back,  with  lameness,  stiffness,  and  weight.


HELONIAS  DIOICA.  55a

I  Pains  in  back,  more  troublesome  during  night.

■  Feeling  of  weight  and  uneasiness  in  region  of  kidneys.

I  Pain  in  lower  part  of  back,  through  to  uterus;  piercing,.

drawing.
I  Sharp,  spasmodic  pain  in  back,  running  to  crest  of  L

ilium.
I  Pain  about  upper  part  of  sacrum  and  pelvis;  more  severe-

at  night.
I  Back  aches  across  lumbar  region;  feels  tired  and  weak;.

burning  and  tired  aching  in  lumbar  and  sacral  region.

on  sitting  down.
I  Pains  in  sacro-lumbar  region,  with  lameness,  stiffness.

■  Dragging,  aching  pains  in  sacral  region  attending  prolap-

sus uteri.

■  Aching  pain  in  sacrum,  also  down  into  each  buttock.  _

^^  Lower  Limbs. ■Severe  pains  in  r.  hip-joint,  <  during
motion.

■  Numbness  in  feet,  going  off  by  motion,  only  felt  when

sitting  still.
^Rest. Position. Motion. Stooping: < pain in  head;

pain  in  occiput  <.
Sitting  down:  tired  aching  in  sacral  and  lumbar  region.
Motion :  burning  sensation  in  top  of  head  >  ;  numbness

in  feet >  ;  feels  uterus  move;  menstrual  flow  <;  pain

in  hip-joint  <  ;  profound  debility  >  ;  of  arms  causes.

chills.
Wants  to  be  continually  moving  about.
Least  exertion :  causes  loss  of  foetus.
Going  up  stairs :  palpitation.
Can  walk  but  a  few  steps  at  a  time.
Walking:  excites  pain  during  pregnancy.
2^  Nerves. "Tired,  weary,  drowsy.
i  I  General  feeling  of  malaise.

■  Languor,  unusually  tired,  yet  knows  no  reason.
I  I  Great  weariness,  with  copious  acid  urination.

I  I  Sense  of  profound  debility  is  lost  upon  exercising.

■  Profound  debility,  as  after  severe  acute  diseases.

■  Debility  after  diphtheria.
'^^  Sleep. ■Drowsy,  heavy,  sleepy  during  day.
""  Time. Morning :  yellow  stools ;  headache  in  occiput.

During  day:  sleepy;  colic-like  pain  in  hypogastric  region..

Afternoon:  weariness,  languor,  weight  in  region  of  kid-
neys ;  mind  dull,  inactive.

2.30  P.M. :  dull  heat  and  pressure  in  vertex.

Evening:  weariness,  languor;  mind  inactive;  sensation-
as  if  cold  wind  was  blowing  up  her  limbs.

Night:  must  get  up  several  times  to  urinate;  frequent,
erections;  burning  and  heat  in  dorsal  region;  pain  in.
back  <  ;  in  upper  part  of  sacrum  and  pelvis  <.


38


B51  HELONIAS  DIOICA.

^^  Temperature  and  Weather. Air :  chest  sensitive  to.
Warm  room : <  tootliache.
Warm  moist  air: <  sore  throat.
From  being  in  hot  sun :  eyes  inflamed  and  burning.
^^  Fever. I  Chill,  seemingly  radiating  from  solar  plexus  all
over  body ;  caused  by  motion  of  arms.
■  Flushes  of  heat  pass  over  him  on  every  movement  while
in  a  room.
*^  Attacks,  Periodicity. Every  morning,  5  a.m.  :  bitter  taste.
^  Locality  and  Direction. Right :  severe  pains  in  hip-joint.
Left:  pain  in  side;  sharp,  spasmodic  pain  in  back  run-
ring  to  crest  of  ilium.
From  within  upwards: pressure  into  vertex.
*^  Sensations. As  if  band about  an  inch  wide  were  drawn
across  from  temple  to  temple ;  spleen  as  if  distended ;
as  if  diarrhoea  would  come  on;  as  if  skull  was  too  full;
as  if  cold  wind  was  blowing  up  limbs  from  heel  to  pop-
liteal space ;  as  if  front  of  chest  had  been  compressed  in
a. vice.
Pain:  in  head; in occiput; in  1.  side; in  kidneys;  in
back ;  in  ovaries ;  in  small  of  back ; in  lower  part  of
back ;  about  upper  part  of  sacrum  and  pelvis.
Intense  pain  :  in  stomach.
■Severe  pains :  in  r.  hip-joint.
Piercing,  tearing  pain :  in  back.

Intense  cutting,  tearing  pain:  in  urethra  when  urinating.
Sharp  cutting  and  drawing  pains:  during  menstrual  period.
Sharp  spasmodic pain :  in  back,  running  to  crest  of  1.

ilium.
Colic-like  pain  :  in  hypogastric  region.  ,
Cramp :  of  stomach.
Bearing  down  pains  :  in  abdomen.
Burning,  scalding :  when  urinating.
Painful  soreness :  over  ovaries.
Pressing  pain:  in  one  or  both  temples;  in  stomach.
Pulsative  pain :  in  vertex.
Painful  congestion  :  of  stomach.
Constricting  pain :  in  stomach.

Soreness :  in  womb ;  in  hypogastrium ;  over  ovaries.
Irritation :  of  vagina.

Burning:  in  top  and  front  of  head ;  in  kidneys,  can  trace
their  outlines  by  burning;  in  dorsal  region;  in  stomach  ;
in  spine  ;  in  lower  third  of  abdomen ;  labia  and  puden-
dum.
Burning  aching :  in  lumbar  spine.
Aching :  in  spine ;  in  kidneys ;  in  region  of  bladder ;  in

chest;  in  sacrum  also  down  into  each  buttock.
Dull  ache :  in  spleen.


HELONIAS  DIOICA.  552:

Painful  stiffness :  of  back.

Pressure:  in  hypogastrium.

Dragging  weakness:  in  sacral  region.

Lameness :  of  back.

Fulness :  in  forehead ;  in  vertex ;  of  stomach ;  in  hypo-
gastrium.

Kumbness:  in  feet.

Pressure : in  forehead  ;  in  vertex.

Heaviness :  in  hypogastrium.

Weight :  in  region  of  kidneys  ;  in  womb.

Terrible  itching:  in  labia  and  pudendum.
"  Tissues. I  Chlorosis.

I  Anaemia,  atony,  from  prolonged  hemorrhage.

I  Dropsy  from  albuminuria,  general  debility,  uterine  atony
or  after  uterine  hemorrhage.

I  I  Rheumatism.
*^  Touch. Passive  Motion. Injuries. Cannot  bear  least
pressure  of  dress.

Extreme  tenderness :  of  kidneys ;  mammte  and  nipples.

Sensitiveness :  of  uterus.

Consciousness  of  a  womb ;  feels  it  move  when  she  moves..
*^  Skin. I  '  Paleness  and  icteric  color  of  skin.

I  I  Jaundice.
^^  Stages  of  Life,  Constitution, i Women: with  prolapsus,
from  atony, enervated  by indolence  and luxury, >
when  attention  is  engaged,  hence  when  doctor  comes;,
worn  out  with  hard  work,  do  not  care  for  sleep,  so  tired,,
and  strained  muscles  burn  and  ache  so.

iClimaxis.

Girl,  £et.  15  ;  albuminuria.

Young  woman,  after  getting  feet  wet ;  threatened  abortion.

Man,  previously  in  good  health,  ill  six  weeks;  disease  ot
kidneys.

Man,  set  50,  troubled  occasionally  for  several  years ;  affec-
tion of  kidneys.

Woman,  eet.  65 ;  diabetes  mellitus.
^^  Relations. It  antidotes : Kali  brom.  (mental  depression) ;;
Lil.  tig.  (prolapsus  uteri).

Compare :  Aletris,  Ferrum,  Fhos.  ac,  Se7iec.,  Stannum.
