The Guiding Symptoms of Our Materia Medica, Vol. IV
Constantine Hering
The Guiding Symptoms of Our Materia Medica, vol. IV. Philadelphia: Globe, 1880.
Public domain. Transcribed from the Internet Archive copy (https://archive.org/details/guidingsymptomso00heri4).
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

Boston  Medical  Library
in  the  Francis  A.  Countway
Library  of  Medicine  --Boston


COLUMBIAN NATURAL CLASP NO.  lONi

PAT.  1,290,083  PAT.  1,593,048

THE  UNITED  STATES  ENVELOPE  T".. 5PRINGFiELD,MASS,

33/8  X  8


THE


GUIDING  SYMPTOMS


or  OUR


MATERIA  MEDIOA


BY


C.  HERING,  M.  D.


VOLUME  lY.


PHILADELPHIA:
THE  AMERICAN  HOMCEOPATHIC  PUBLISHING  SOCIETY.

J.  m:.  stodd^rt  &  CO.


Copyright,  1884,  by  Theresa  Hering.


PRESS.OF  GLOBE  PRINTING  HOUSE, PHILADELPHIA.


PREFACE.


WE  take  pleasure  in  presenting  to  the  medical
profession  Volume  IV  of  The  Guiding  Symp-
toms, which,  like  the  preceding  volumes,  contains  a
complete  collection  of  the  prominent  cured  symptoms,
as  well  as  the  characteristic  pathogenetic  ones,  of  each
remedy,  according  to  the  original  plan  projected  by
Dr.  Hering.

We  have  added  one  new  feature,  however,  which  will
doubtless  prove  useful  to  the  busy  practitioner.  At  the
head  of  each  drug,  will  be  found  a  clinical  index,  giving
a  list  of  authorities,  and  designating  the  publication  in
which  the  full  report  of  each  case  with  its  cured  symp-
toms may  be  found.

To  many  physicians  acquainted  with  the  former  vol-
umes issued,  we  are  indebted  for  encouraging  words  of
approval  of  our  task,  and  we  send  forth  this  volume
on  its  divine  mission,  feeling  assured  that  it  will  prove
as  useful  an  aid  in  healing  the  sick  as  have  its  prede-
cessors.

Chaeles  G.  Raue,  ^
Calvin  B.  Knerr,  i  Editors.
Charles  Mohr, J


Digitized  by  the  Internet  Archive

in  2010  with  funding  from

Open  Knowledge  Commons  and  Harvard  Medical  School


GUIDING  SYMPTOMS


OF OUR


MATERIA  MEDICA,


CHELIDONIUM  MAJUS.

Celandine.  Papaveracese.


"A  perennial  plant  with  a  sharp,  bitter  and  burning  taste,  yielding  when
pressed,  a  yellow,  corrosive,  milky  juice;  it  grows  in  hedges  and  waste  places,
among  stones  and  rubbish."

Tincture  from  the  fresh  root,  or  of  the  whole  plant.

This  remedy,  famous  in  antiquity,  preserved  its  repute  through  the  Middle
Ages.  It  was  administered  in  serious  complaints,  particularly  in  hepatic  derange-
ment, according  to  the  law  of  signatura,  the  yellow  juice  of  the  plant  against  the
yellow  bile  and  jaundiced  look.  It  was  proved  by  Hahnemann  and  later  more
extensively  by  O.  Buchmann,  of  Alvensleben  (Vide  Encyclopaedia,  v.  3).  Its
place  in  the  Materia  Medica  is  well  defined  by  numerous  clinical  reports,  verify-
ing the  provings.

Most  symptoms  marked  ^  are  pathogenetic  observations  by  Berridge.

Clinical  Authorities. — Mental  disturbances,  Buchmann,  B.  J.  H.,  v.  25;
A.  C.  Clifton,  Mon.  Hom.  Rev.,  v.  17,  p.  153 ;  Headache,  Hale,  Am.  Horn.  Obs.,  v.  7,
p.  536  ;  Sick  headache,  E.  Hughes,  B.  J.  H.,  1870,  p.  796 ;  Amaurosis  (three  cases).
Von  Schallern,  B.  J.  H.,  v.  25,  p.  34 ;  Slaphylomatous  swelling  of  cornea,  C.  G.  Raue,
MSS.;  Opacity  of  cornea  (two  cases).  Von  Schallern,  B.  J.  H.,  v.  25,  p.  34;  Orey
cataract,  Buchmann,  B.  J.  H.,  v.  25,  p.  35 ;  Hordeolum  and  violent  inflammation  of
eyes,  Buchmann,  B.  J.  H.,  v.  25,  p.  36 ;  Acute  ophthalmia,  F.  Ferinat,  N.  A.  J.  H.,
V.  10,  p.  728;  Neuralgia  above  eyes  and  in  temples  (fifteen  cases),  Ferinat,
(mentioned  by  Buchmann),  B.  J.  H.,  v.  25,  p.  29;  Prosopalgia,  Buchmann,  B.  J.
H.,  V.  25,  p.  29 ;  Kanzler  (two  cases),  B.  J.  H.,  v.  25,  p.  29 ;  Facial  pustular
erysipelas,  Buchmann,  B.  J.  H.,  v.  25,  p.  227 ;  Facial  vesicular  erysipelas,
Dommes,  B.  J.  H.,  v.  25,  p.  226 ;  Spasmus  glottidis,  Buchmann,  B.  J.  H.,  v.  25,
p.  64;  Vomiting,  H.  M.  B.,  Organon,  v.  3,  p.  365;  Persistent  vomiting  (two  cases),
VOL.  IV. — 1.


CHELIDONIUM  MAJUS.  2

IT.  M.  B.,  Organon,  v.  3,  p.  365 ;  Bilious  vomiting,  C.  Neidhard,  N.  A.  J.  H.,  v.
3,  p.  355;  Dyspepsia,  Plale,  New  Remedies,  1880;  Indigestion,  A.  C.  Clifton,  Esq.,
Mon.  Hcni.  Rev.,  v.  17,  p.  152;  Cardialgia,  V.  Meyer,  B.  J.  H.,  v.  18,  p.  268;
Buchmann,  B.  J.  H.,  v.  25,  p.  37 ;  Hepatic  affections,  C.  Neidhard,  N.  A.  J.  H.,
V.  3,  p.  354 ;  Buchmann,  B.  J.  H.,  v.  25,  p.  46 ;  Fatty  liver,  Buchmann,  B.  J.  H.,
V.  25,  ]).  48;  Biliary  calculi,  two  cases  by  Creuzbauer;  one  case  by  Dommes,
B  .J.  H.,  V.  25,  p.  38 ;  E.  M.  Hale,  N.  A.  J.  H.,  1880,  p.  17 ;  Intestinal  catarrh.
Kissel  (five  cases),  B.  J.  H.,  v.  25,  p.  50;  Chronic  diarrhoea  with  Liver  affection,
B.  J.  H.,  V.  34,  p.  736;  Helminthiasis  (three  cases),  Schallern,  B.  J.  H.,  v.  25,
p.  221 ;  Nephritis,  A.  J.  H.  M.  M ,  v.  2,  p.  259;  Buchmann,  B.  J.  H.,  v.  25,  p.  54  ;
Diabetes  mellitus,  A.  H.  Z.,  v.  89,  p.  92 ;  Cases  of  gonorrhoea  and  syphilis  treated
with  the  tincture,  from  Frank's  Magazine ;  Laryngitis,  Buchmann,  B.  J.  H.,  v.  25,
p.  56;  Cough,  C.  C.  Smith,  N.  A.  J.  H.,  v.  3,  p.  354;  Kissel  (two  cases),  B.  J.  H.,
v.  25,  p.  55;  Whooping  cough  (epidemic),  Buchmann,  B.  J.  H.,,  v.  25,  p.  60;
Muzzy,  Organon,  v.  2,  p.  116;  Influenza  (three  cases),  B.  J.  H.,  v.  25,  p.  58;
Pneumonia,  Buchmann  (five  cases).  Miller,  Teste,  Chaillet,  Schadler  and  Krieger,
B  J.  H.,  v.  25,  p  66 ;  Hepatization  of  lungs,  Buchmann,  B.  J.  H.,  v.  25 ;  Rheu-
matism, also  Acute  rheumatism  after  confinement,  Buchmann,  B.  J.  H.,  v.  25,  p.  222;
Rheumatism,  Heyne,  A.  H.  Z.,  v.  79,  p.  146;  Neuralgia  connected  with  injuries,
Buchmann,  B.  J.  H.,  v.  25 ;  Chorea,  Buchmann,  B.  J.  H.,  v.  25,  p.  222 ;  Bilious
fever,  Raderaacher,  and  a  large  collection  of  cures  by  O.  Buchmann  of  Alvens-
leben,  B.  J.  H.,  v,  25;  Bilious  fever  with  hemorrhages,  Comyn,  A.  H.  Z.,  v.  36,
p.  14;  Autumn  typhus  (epidemic)  with  Affection  of  liver,  Rademacher,  1827,  see
Buchmann,  B.  J.  H ,  v.  25,  p.  206,  also  Kissel  and  LoefHer;  Intermittent  fever.
Kissel,  B.  J.  H.,  v.  25,  p.  216;  Icterus,  Rademacher  (two  cases),  B.  J.  H.,  v.  25,
p.  41 ;  Kissel  (one  case),  B.  J.  H.,  v.  25.  p.  45 ;  Acne,  Von  Schallern,  Buchmann,
B.  J.  H.,  V.  25,  p.  228 ;  Eczema  rubrum,  Buchmann,  B.  J.  H.,  v.  25,  p.  229 ;  Su-
perficial ulcer  of  neck,  chest  and  arms,  Kunzmann,  B.  J.  H.,  v.  25,  p.  234.

^  Mind. lA^anishing  of  senses.

1  I  Loses  her  head  when  she  gets  out  of  bed,  could  not  ex-
plain why. ^Influenza.

■  Forgets  what  she  wants  to  do  or  has  done;  great  absence
of  mind.

I  I  Sudden  excitement  with  confusion  of  intellect  at  night.
^Intestinal  catarrh.

I  Difficult  thinking.

I  Imagines  she  cannot  think  and  will  lose  her  reason.

I  Thinks  she  must  die.

I I  Delirium. ^Influenza. ^Pneumonia.

1 1  Quiet  delirium,  mostly  at  night,  followed  by  lethargy
which  continues  through  the  day.

I  I  Talked  incoherently  during  the  fit  of  anxiety.  ^Ery-
sipelas.

I  I  Stupefaction. ^Valvular  disease  of  heart.

AVhimpering,  with  headache  on  1.  side.

I  Weeping  and  despondency.

I I  Distaste  for  mental  exertion  and  conversation.  ^Dys-
pepsia. ^Indigestion.


3  •  CHELIDONIUM  MAJUS.

■  Sadness  and  depression of  spirits. ^Hepatic  troubles.
I  Anxiety. ^Chorea. ^Influenza. ^Erysipelas.

■  Restlessness  and  uneasiness  of  conscience;  feels  that  she

has  committed  the  unpardonable  sin,  and  that  she  will

be  eternally  lost.
■Anxiety:  allowing  no  rest  at  any  employment;  ■■as  if

she  had  committed  a  crime ;  fear  of  getting  crazy,  with

restlessness  and  heat.
I  I  Anxiety,  with  a  sense  of  constriction  in  larynx.  ^CEdema

of  lungs.
;TDreadful  anxiety  and  uneasiness. ^Influenza.
Sudden  anxiety,  with  strong  palpitation.

■  Sudden  excitement  and  confusion  of  intellect. ^Intes-

tinal catarrh.

I  I  Irritability  and  ill-humor.

I  I  Fretful  mood,  with  inclination  to  weep.

I  I  Is  vexed  about  every  trifle  and  has  violent  attacks  of
passionate  outbursts  of  temper.

I  I  Quarrelsomeness.
^  Sensorium. Giddiness  in  morning  and  headache  on  awak-
ing. ^Indigestion.

■  ■  Vertigo:  with  bilious  vomiting  and  pain  in  liver;  with

confusion  of  head;  with  stumbhng,  as  if  to  fall  forwards;
with  mental  disturbance;  on  closing  eyes,_as  if  every-
thing was  turning  in  a  circle;  on  sitting  up  in  bed;  with
shivering  over  upper  part  of  body;  on  attempting  to  rise
in  morning,  keeping  her  in  bed.  ^Influenza.  ^Valvular
disease. ^Dyspepsia. ^Hemorrhoids. ^Chorea.

■  Confusion  in  head. ^Valvular  disease.

■  Loss  of  consciousness. ^Kidney  disease.

■  Fainting. ^Valvular  disease.

^  Inner  Head. Shooting  in  forehead  under  skin.

Shooting  in  frontal  bone  over  left  eye;  later  on  1.  side  of
occiput.

■  Hammering,  burning,  stitching,  or  tearing  pains. ^Su-

praorbital neuralgia.

■  Tensive  pain  in  forehead,  as  from  a  band  above  eyes.

^Acute  rheumatism.
I  I  Outward  pressing  pain  in  forehead.
I  I  Pressive  pain  in  r.  side  of  forehead.

■  Violent  pains  in  forehead  above  eyes. ^Influenza.

■  Pressure  in  forehead,  extending  to  orbits,  which  pain  as

if  sore  on  moving  eyes.

■  Pain  extending  to  forehead  and  all  over  head; begin-

ning at  2  or  3  p.m.,  at  its  height  at  8  or  9  p.m.,  prevent-
ing all  sleep  or  even  lying  down  till  nearly  daybreak.
^Acute  inflammation  of  eyes.

■  Violent  neuralgia  over  r.  eye,  extending  into  eye  and

cheek. ^Prosopalgia.


CHELIDONIUM  MAJUS.  4

I  Dull  frontal  headache.

I  Continuous  sharp  frontal  headache. ^Hepatic  typhus.

I  I  Sensation  of  heat  in  forehead.

I  I  Tearing  pain  in  r.  temple,  <  by  motion.

■  Neuralgic  pains  in  temples,  forehead,  ears,  teeth,  eyes

and  eyebrows.
1  I  Tensive  pains  in  temples.

■  Neuralgia  of  temple  and  eyebrow,  particularly  of  r.  side.
iPressive  pain  in  r.  temple,  r.  parietal  bone  and  finally

overr.  eye.
I  I  Throbbing  in  temples.

■  Ticking  like  a  watch  in  r.  temple.
■Violent  pain  in  1.  side  of  head  and  face.
■Periodical  shooting  pain  in  1.  parietal  bone.

■  Sensation  of  heat  in  1.  side  of  head,  proceeding  from  ear.
Stitching  pains  in  vertex,  <  when  walking  rapidly.

I  I  Periodical  stitching,  pressing  pain  in  vertex.

I  I  Pressing  on  vertex.

I  I  Pinching  stitching  in  r.  side  of  occiput.

■  Painful  throbbing  and  drawing  in  occiput.

■  Tensive  sensation  in  back  of  head  on  r.  side.

■  Pain  in  occiput  and  nape  of  neck. ^Hemorrhoids.

■  Great  heaviness  in  occiput,  with  drawing  in  neck  from

above  downwards.

■  Occiput  feels  heavy,  as  if  it  could  not  be  raised  from

pillow,  at  night.

■  Heaviness  in  occiput  with  pressing  to  left  ear. ^Hepatitis.

■  Coldness  in  occiput,  rising  up  from  nape  of  neck, <

when  moving ;  >  during  rest.

■  Drawing,  pressing-like  stitches,  extending  from  1.  side  of

occiput  to  forehead.
■Violent  drawing  from  crown  to  nape;  she  is  forced  to
draw  up  her  shoulders,  close  her  eyes  and  tread  lightly.

■  Violent  pain  in  left  side  of  head  and  face,  as  if  cut  off

at  septum  and  middle  of  forehead. ^Prosopalgia.

■  Pressive headache,  with frequently  recurring heat of

face. ^Liver  complaint.
I  I  Pressure  and  transient  pains  under  bones  of  head,  even
in  brain ;  headache  >  after  eating.

■  Pulsating  headache.

■  Pain  in  head  with  sparks  before  eyes. ^Kidney  disease.
I  I  Pressure  in  brain,  with  burning  over  eyebrows.
Cranium  feels  too  small.

■  Headache  in  morning  on  waking. ^Dyspepsia.

■  Headache  <  in  open  air,  when  coughing,  blowing  nose

and  stooping.
■Megrim  with  lethargy. ^Bright's  disease.

■  Heaviness  like  a  weight  in  different  parts  of  head;  on


5  CHELIDONIUM  MAJUS.

vertex,  extending  to  occipital  protuberance,  heavy  press-
ure inwardly;  weight  in  forehead  as  if  it  was  falling
outwards;  occiput  seems  as  if  fastened  to  pillow  and
broken  off  from  rest  of  skull;  must  raise  head  with
hand  when  sitting  up. ^Liver  complaint.

■  Congestion  to  cerebellum. ^Chorea.

Congestion  of  blood  to  head ;  throbbing  in  temples  with
great  anxiety;  repeated  attacks  of  violent  throbbing
pains  from  nape  to  occiput.

I  I  Dull  pain  in  head.

■  Pressure  in  occiput.
■Heat  of  head. /^Erysipelas.

■  Heat  and  confusion  of  head,  with  great  thirst. ^Lar^^n-

gitis.
Twitching  here  and  there  in  head.
■Sick  headache  every  fortnight,  with  pain  in  r.  hypochon-

drium,  pain  <  in  r.  forehead  and  temple;  nausea  and

bilious  vomiting.
I  I  Vertex  feels  as  if  bruised  on  being  touched.
*  Outer  Head, i  Trembling  of  head.

;r  Feeling  as  if  the  head  was  drawn  forcibly  backward.

^Influenza.

■  (Drawing  in  nape  and  occiput. (^Influenza.

■  Scalp  very  sore  at  the  slightest  touch. ^Erysipelas.
■Head  heavy  as  lead;  during  exacerbation  of  pain  head

drawn  to  1.  side. ^Prosopalgia.
I  I  Scalp  on  crown  painful,  hot  when  touched ;  pain  as  if

in  roots  of  hairs  when  combed,  as  if  from  ulceration.
I  I  Sensation  as  if  hair  stood  on  end.

■  Falling  out  of  hair.

I  I  Superficial  ulcer  on  mastoid  process  subsequent  to  neu-
ralgia in  1.  side  of  head  and  face;  the  ulceration  ex-
tends downward  to  shoulder  and  breast  and  across  to  r.
shoulder,  has  a  lardaceous  appearance,  bleeds  readily
and  discharges  thin  fetid  pus.

■Severe  itching  on  occiput.

■  Facial  erysipelas  spreading  over  hairy  scalp;  very  sore

to  the  slightest  touch.
Scald  head.
^  Sight  and  Eyes. ■Photophobia. ^Influenza. ^Ophthalmia.
^Hordeolum. ^Measles.

■  Photophobia,  with  pain  in  forehead  and  eyes.
Flickering before eyes; brilliant specks before eyes.
TrCandle  light  seems  very  small.

■  Sparks  before  eyes. ^Valvular  heart  disease. ^Nephritis.

■  Dazzling  spot  before  eyes,  lachrymation  when  looking  at

it. ^Cataract.

■  Blackness  before  eyes,  with  a  sensation  of  fainting. ^In-

fluenza.


CHELIDONIUM  MAJUS.  6

I  Misty  appearance  before  eyes. ^Cataract.
I  Amaurosis  from  rheumatic  troubles,  also  after  suppres-
sion of  ringworm.

■  Objects  appear  double. ^Opacity  of  lens.

When  reading  or  writing,  letters  run  together  and  seem
blurred  ;  blackish-gray  specks  before  eyes.

lAVeak  sight,  cannot  distinguish  letters. ^Opacity  of  lens.

Looking  intently  makes  eyes  water,  and  produces  a  stupid
feeling.

I  Eyes  inflamed  and  very  sensitive  to  light,  sees  very  in-
distinctly. ^Prosopalgia.

I  iMuscse  volitantes.

I  I  Amblyopia  with  vomiting  and  coma.  ^Retinitis  apo-
plectica.

I  Eyes  dull,  dilated  pupils. ^Intestinal  catarrh.

I  Pupils  contracted,  or  contractility  diminished.

I  Sensation  of  burning  in  eyes,  as  of  a  foreign  body.  ^Acute
inflammation  of  eye.

I  Feeling  of  sand  in  eyes ;  tears  flow  constantly  over  cheeks.
^Prosopalgia. ^Measles.

I  Pain  in  eyes  as  if  pierced  with  knives. ^Prosopalgia.

Shooting  pains  in  eyes,  first  1.  then  r. ;  pressure  in  upper
part  of  eyeballs  as  if  they  were  squeezed,  1.  worse.

■  Burning  and  shooting  in  eyes. ^Hordeolum.
I  Pulsating,  burning,  lancinating  pains  in  eyes.

■  Repeated  tearing  in  1.  eye.

■  Tearing  pain  in  1.  eye,  extending  to  zygoma,  teeth,  fore-

head and  temple;  first  >  by  pressure,  but  soon  can-
not endure  slightest  touch;  periodic,  evening  in  bed.
^Prosopalgia.
I  I  Tearing,  pressing  and  stitching  in  r.  and  afterwards  in

TcK  momentary  biting  sting  in  r.  eye,  changing  its  place.
I  Neuralgic  pain  in  and  above  eyes,  with  lachrymation.

■  ■Right  supraorbital  neuralgia.

■  Aching  in  eyeballs  on  looking  up  or  moving  the  eyes.

■  Bruised  pain  in  r.  eye,  from  front  to  back,  >  by  pressure,

<  from  light,  air  and  holding  down  head. ^Neuralgia.
I  I  Pressing  in  eyes.

■  Pressure  in  eyeball. ^Hepatitis.

I  Severe  pressive  pain  in  1.  eyeball,  in  middle  of  ball,
which  seems  to  be  so  large  that  the  upper  lid  would  not
cover  it.

■  Sensation  of  heat  in  1.  eye.
Feeling  of  sand  in  eyes.

■  Lamp  light  aggravates  pains  of  eyes.

■  Tearing  pain  in  and  above  eyes;  stitches  above  left.
I  I  Pressure  in  orbits.


CHELIDONIUM  MAJUS.

I  I  Pain  in  orbits  as  if  bruised  on  moving  eyes.
I  Stupefying  pressure  on  r.  orbit  from  without  in.

I  Raging  pain  above  edge  of  r.  brow,  drawing  through  eye

to  cheek  and  jaw.
■Violent  pain  above  eyes. ^Influenza.

I I  Stitches  above  1.  eye.

■  Pressing  pain  over  1.  eye,  which  seems  to  press  down

upper  lid.

■  Pulsating  pain  in  r.  eyebrow  and  temple  on  waking,  pre-

ceded by  shivering;  the  pain  slight  at  first  increases
almost  to  distraction.
Squinting ;  loss  of  power  of  r.  external  rectus,  eye  turned
inward.

■  Distortion  of  eyes. ^Pneumonia.

■  Eyes  distorted,  with  twitching  of  corners  of  mouth  and

diarrhoea. ^Intestinal  catarrh.
Eye  inflamed,  sensitive  to  light,  sight  indistinct.

■  Conjunctiva  swollen,  dark  red,  as  far  as  cornea. ^Hor-

deolum. ^Whooping  cough.
■Whites  of  eyes  of  a  deep  or  dirty  yellow.

■  Opacity  of  lens  on  r.  side,  with  a  small  speck  on  cornea.

■  Opacity  of  cornea.

■  Lens  uniformly  grey.

■Staphylomatous  swelling  of  cornea;  water  gushes  from
eye  on  looking  up.

■  Eye  red,  burning,  protuberant,  and  watery. /^Neuralgia.

■  Lachrymation. ^Influenza.

■  Lachrymation, with pains of  eyes; from tickling in

larynx.
On  opening  eyes,  tears  flow  over  cheek. ^Fistula  lachry-
malis.

■  i  Increased  secretion  of  Meibomian  glands.

■  Could  not  open  her  ej'-es  at  all. ^^Prosopalgia.

■  Inclination  and  necessity  to  close  lids,  which  >  the  pain,

without  photophobia.
I  I  Sticking  pain  on  the  inside  of  lower  left  lid.
I  I  Burning  in  lids.

I  i  Pressure  in  upper  lids ;  sometimes  painful.
I  I  Twitching  of  lids.
I  I  Heaviness  of  lids.
Weight,  burning  and  pressive  swelling  of  lids.

■  Eyelids  sore  and  swollen,  conjunctivae  much  inflamed.

^Prosopalgia.

■  Lids  swollen,  red,  could  open  them  but  little. ^Hordeo-

lum.
Inflammation  and  nightly  agglutination ;  the  lower  tarsal
edges  are  red  and  swollen ;  dimness  of  eyes  in  morning.

■  Left  eye  sunken,  lids  separated  with  difliculty  when  tears

flowed  over  cheek. ^Prosopalgia.


CHELIDONIUM  MAJUS.  8

Catarrhal  inflammation  of  lids  with  sympathetic  irritation

of  Meibomian  glands.
I  Redness  and  swelling  of  margins  of  lids.
I  Right  eyelids  inflamed  and  scabby,  cannot  open  them.

^Influenza.

■  Lower  lids  bordered  by  dark  blue  rings. ^Intestinal

catarrh.
I  I  Itching-sticking  in  1.  inner  canthus.
I  Thick,  yellow  mucous  discharge  from  eyes. ^Hordeolum.
I  Agglutination  of  lids  in  morning. ^Acute  inflammation.

■  Eyelashes  almost  all  gone  on  r.  lower  lid. ^Hordeolum.
Fistula  lachrymalis.

^  Hearing  and  Ears, l  '  Humming  in  ears. ^Valvular  dis-
ease.
I  Loud  roaring  in  ears,  as  from  a  distant  storm  of  wind.
I  Ringing  in  1.  ear  while  walking.
■Sensation  of  wind  rushing  out  of  ears.
I  Sensation  as  if  ears  were  stopped.

■  Deafness  associated  with  hepatic  disorder.
Ears  obstructed  during  cough ;  deafness.

■  Pressure  from  occiput  towards  1.  ear. ^Hepatitis.
I  I  Burning  or  coldness  of  ears.

I  1  Sticking  in  ears.

I  I  Sticking  and  drawing  in  1.  ear.

■  Frequent  tearing,  extending  from  r.  ear  into  r.  teeth,  in

afternoon.
Tearing  pain  in  internal  ears.
Long-lasting  stitch  in  external  ear,  going  off  gradually ;

tearing  in  meatus  and  temporal  bone ;  tearing  behind

r.  ear  downwards.
I  I  Itching  in  r.  concha.
''  Smell  and  Nose. ' '  Hallucinations  of  smell.

■  Dryness  of  nose.

I  I  Nose,  tongue  and  throat  dry. ^Influenza.
Coryza  :  dry,  nose  stopped ;  fluent,  with  sneezing.
Thick  blood  in  mucus  in  morning  when  blowing  nose.

■  Itching  of  nose  and  tip  of  nose.
Twitching  and  tremor  of  tip  of  nose.
Swelling  and  redness  of  tip  of  nose.

■  Fan-like  motion  of  nostrils.

Soreness  of  nostrils  and  flow  of  water  from  nose,  with  erup-
tion like  measles.

Feeling of soreness in nostrils; dryness and itching,
mostly  left.
^  Upper  Face. ■Expression:  anxious,  disturbed;  sickly,  suf-
fering ;  collapse  of  features.

■  Face  collapsed  and  pale. ^Prosopalgia. ^Intestinal  ca-

tarrh. ^Pneumonia.


CHELIDONIUM  MAJUS.

Countenance  sunken,  blue  around  eyes;  face  pale  or  grey-
ish or  yellow;  changed  complexion;  greyish-yellow
complexion.

I  Dirty  grey  complexion. ^Cough.

■  Pale,  dingy  yellow  color  of  face. ^Hepatitis.
Face  red  and  swollen.

I  Redness  in  face  did  not  disappear  under  pressure  of  the

fingers. ^Erysipelas.
I  Face  bright,  then  darkred;  one  cheek  red. ^Pneumonia.


I I  The  usual  redness  of  cheeks  has  a  mixture  of  yellow,  of
a  dark  color.

■  Icteric,  bloated  face. ^Diabetes  mellitus.

1 1  Greyish-yellow,  sallow,  sunken  countenance.  ^Hepatic
affections. ^Dyspepsia.

■  Yellow  color  of  face  and  hands,  with  yellow  whites  of

eyes. ^Enlargement  of  liver. ^Jaundice.

Face  puffy.

I  Flushes  of  heat  in  face. ^Mental  affections.

I  Heat  in  face  with  dark  red  cheeks. ^Pneumonia.

I  I  Great  and  dry  heat,  most  in  face. ^Influenza.

I  I  Burning  of  cheeks.

Heat  in  face  with  red  cheeks  and  chilliness ;  with  eruption
like  measles.

■Supraorbital  neuralgia,  <  right  side;  eyes  water;  throb-
bing pains;  shivering;  pains  in  eyes,  head,  ears ;  tem-
ples tender  on  pressure;  >  from  cold  water;  <  from
warmth,  and  at  night  in  bed.

■  Pains  in  region  of  trigeminus,  especially  supraorbital.

^Bright's  disease.

■  Violent  tearing  in  maxillary  antrum.
■Jerking,  tearing  pain  in  r.  zygoma.

■  Pain  in  r.  cheek  bone,  and  in  upper  part  of  occiput.
I  I  Pain  in  1.  malar  bone.

I  I  Pressure  and  transient  pains  in  upper  maxilla.

■  Right  cheek  bone  feels  as  if  swollen.

I  I  Severe  pressure  in  r.  maxilla  in  night  on  waking.
I  Tearing  pain  in  r.  maxilla ;  in  antrum  of  Highmore.
I  I  Drawing  pain  from  1.  maxilla  to  1.  eye  and  ear.
Drawing  pain  in  1.  malar  bone  when  lying  down.
1  I  Slight  convulsive  twitches  in  face  and  limbs. ^Pneu-
monia.

■  Twitching  of  corners  of  mouth,  with  distortion  of  eyes.

^Intestinal  catarrh.
Itching  herpes,  mostly  on  chin.
■Burning  pain  like  nettles,  followed  by  red  spots  on  face,

around  ears  and  under  chin.
Red  elevated  spots  on  cheek,  gradually  growing  larger  and

darker.


CHELIDONIUM  MAJUS.  10

Inflamed  sebaceous  glands ;  comedones.

I  1  Red  pimples  on  different  parts  of  face.

■  Inflamed  pimples  on  face,  more  on  chin  and  cheeks.

^Liver  complaint.

I I  On  upper  portion  of  r.  cheek,  many  red,  elevated  pim-
ples, with  prominent  centres,  and  rough  to  touch.

I  I  Vesicles  on  lip  and  alee  nasi,  forming  scabs.
■Nodular  eruptions  on  face.

■  Face  covered  with  scabs;  pale,  oedematous. ^Pustular

eruption,
i  I  Acne.
^  Lower  Face. Lips  burning,  dry,  chapped,  scabby ;  mouth
dry  with  thirst.

■  Lips  and  gums  pale. ^Intestinal  catarrh.

■  Brown  and  dry  coating on  lips  and  teeth. ^Hepatic

typhus.
I  1  Herpetic  exanthem  on  lips  and  alee  nasi. ^Intermittent.
A^esicle  full  of  serum  on  mucous  membrane  of  lower  lip.

■  Lower  jaw  drops. ^Influenza.

^^  Teeth  and  Gums, l  l  Drawing  in  upper  incisors.

I  I  Drawing  pain  through  middle  incisors  of  lower  jaw.
■Tearing  pains  from  r.  ear  to  r.  teeth,  afternoons.
Toothache  with  facial  neuralgia ; <  from  warmth  and  in
bed at night;  >  from cold water;  1. lower molars;
jerking,  tearing  in  antrum.
■Toothache,  chiefly  in  whole  of  1.  cheek,  <  at  night.
I  I  Pressure  or  transient  pain  in  teeth.

■  Gums  pale. ^Intestinal  catarrh.

■  Gums  bleed.

^^  Taste  and  Tongue. ■Mucous  pasty  taste. ^Prosopalgia.
Taste:  bitter;  insipid;  pappy;  acid.
Taste  disgusting  or  bitter,  but  not  of  food  or  drink.
Taste  in  mouth  bitter,  food  tasting  natural.

■  Bitter  taste  in  mouth. ^Hepatitis. ^Mental  affections.
Metallic  sour  taste.

Speech  difficult  and  unintelligible.

■  Tongue  narrow,  pointed. ^Dyspepsia.

■  Tongue  dried  up,  brown,  cracked. ^Influenza. ^Pneu-

monia.
I  I  Tongue  inordinately  dry  or  moist,  of  good  natural  color,
but  slightly  coated  white  and  sometimes  streaky,  the
shape  of  it  being  narrow  and  pointed. ^Dyspepsia.

■  Tongue  pale,  moist,  whitish. ^Intestinal  catarrh.
Tongue  red  on  edges  and  tip.

I  I  Tongue  red  and  sore  with  raised  papillae. ^Typhus.
I  I  Tongue  slimy,  coated  white  or  grey.

■  ■Tongue  thickly  coated  yellow,  with  red  margin,  show-

ing imprint  of  teeth.


11  CHELIDONIUM  MAJUS.

I  Tongue covered  with thick yellow fur. ^Laryngitis.
^Intestinal  catarrh. ^Erysipelas.
^^  Inner  Mouth, i Dryness  of  mouth. ^Liver  complaint.

I  I  Burning  in  mouth.  ■

■  Salivation,  with  nausea  and  giddiness.

■  Bitter  water  collects  in  mouth.

I I  Mucus  in  mouth  and  tough  mucous  saliva.

I  Mucus  flies  from  mouth  when  coughing.

I I  Bad  odor  from  mouth.

■  Oozing of  blood from mucous membrane of  mouth;

hemorrhagic  vesicles,  also  hemorrhage  from  bowels  and
urethra. ^Bilious  fever.
^^  Throat. ■Sore  tonsils. ^Hepatitis.

Fauces  red ;  uvula  and  tonsils  swollen ;  shooting  in  tonsils.
Shooting,  burning  and  scraping  in  throat.

■  Nose,  tongue  and  throat  dry. /^Influenza.

■  Dryness  in  throat,  with  increased  thirst.

■  Diflicult  swallowing.

I  I  Choking  sensation  in  throat,  <  by  breathing.

■  Choking,  as  from  hasty  swallowing.

Great  sense  of  tightness  around  neck,  above  larynx,  as  if

parts  were  constricted,  hindering  deglutition,  but  not

respiration.
Sensation  in  throat  as  after  swallowing  too  large  a  morsel

of  food ;  as  if  a  foreign  body  were  rising  in  throat,  which

must  be  swallowed.

■  Hawking up lumps of  phlegm, with sensation  as  if

larynx  were  pressed  upon,  impeding  swallowing.
I  I  Burning  in  oesophagus.
I  I  Secretion  of  thin  mucus  in  oesophagus.
I  I  Venereal  ulcers  in  throat.
^*  Appetite,  Thirst. Desires,  Aversions. iLoss  of  appetite.

^Hepatic  affections.  ^Chorea. ^Influenza. ^Gastralgia.

^Erysipelas.,

■  Loss  of  appetite,  with vertigo and  confusion  of  head.

^Chorea.

■  ■Loss  of  appetite,  with  disgust  and  nausea.

■  Great  emaciation,  with  complete  loss  of  appetite. ^Pros-

opalgia.

■  Thirst. ^Influenza. ^Erysipelas. ^Acute  rheumatism.

^Pneumonia.
Thirst,  with  dry  mouth ;  or  thirstlessness.

■  Thirst,  with  dryness  of  mouth  and  throat. ^Liver  com-

plaint.
I  I  Desire  for  sour  things. /^Cardialgia.
Longing:  for  very  hot  drinks;  for  wine  or  vinegar;  for

milk;  for  cofli'ee;  for  beer,  which  disagrees.
Dislike:  to  cheese;  to  meat;  to  coffee.


CHELIDONIUM  MAJUS.  12

^^  Eating  and  Drinking.  Milk  improves ;  wine  relieves  ab-
dominal pain;  coffee  agrees;  hot  drinks  agree;  cold
drinks  disagree.

Smoking  causes  burning  and  acidity  from  cardia  to  throat.

1 1  All  complaints  lessen  after  dinner.

I  Eating  relieves  pains  in  stomach  and  region  of  liver.
^Dyspepsia.

I  I  After  dinner  laziness  and  great  dislike  to  work,  with
sleepiness.
^^  Hiccough,  Belching,  Nausea  and  Vomiting. Hiccough.

■Belching.  ^Influenza.  ^Hemorrhoids.  ^Liver  com-
plaint.

I  Empty,  acid  or  bilious  eructations.

■  Constant  eructation  of  wind. ^Affection  of  liver. ^Car-

dialgia.
■Heartburn;  with  eructations.
I  I  Qualmishness,  relieved  by  belching.
Nausea: after  belching; with  vomituritio;  with  heat  in

stomach ;  before  stool ;  causes  great  bodily  heat.
■Great  nausea  succeeds  the  violent  pain,  then  eructations

follow,  which  relieve  pain  if  she  lies  down  and  does  not

move. ^Prosopalgia.

■  Nausea  and  retching  during  an  attack  of  anxiety.

■  ■  Nausea  in  hepatitis  and  vomiting  of  pregnancy.

■  Retching,  followed  by  sour  vomiting. ^Hepatic  typhus.

■  Nausea  and  bilious  vomiting. ^Sick  headache.
Relieved  by  belching:  short  breath  and  anxiety. ^Gas-

tralgia.

■  Retching  during  bilious  eructation.

■Retching  and  vomiting  either  transient  or  permanent;
sometimes  in  spells;  always  with  distressing  constric-
tion in  gastric  region.

■  ■  Bilious  vomiting.

■Vomiting  of  tough,  or  acid  or  greenish  mucus.
■Persistent  vomiting;  nothing  can  be  retained  but  water
nearly  boiling.

■  Bilious  vomiting, giddiness  in head, nausea,  choking

during  bilious  eructations. ^Bilious  vomiting.

■  Acute  gastric  or  intestinal  catarrh  preceding  pneumonia.
^^  Scrobiculum  and  Stomach. ■  Feeling  of  anguish,  in  pit

of  stomach. ^Hepatic  typhus.
■Scrobiculum  sensitive  on  pressure. ^Mental  affections.

^ Acute  rheumatism.
Awakened  by  a  sense  of  tightness  in  scrobiculum.
Pressure  in  scrobiculum  on  stooping.
■Pressure  in  scrobiculum,  with  oppression  of  chest  and

difficult  breathing. ^Hepatic  typhus.

■  Persistent  pains  in  scrobiculum; <  by  motion;  >  by

eructation. ^Cardialgia,


13  CHELIDONIUM  MAJUS.

I  I  Griping,  pressing  pain  in  and  below  scrobiculum  <

from  touch.
Throbbing,  cramp-like  pain  in  pit  of  stomach ;  feeling  of
anguish,  difficulty  of  breathing.

I I  Constriction,  tension  and  sensitiveness  in  pit  of  stomach
and  r.  hypochondrium.  ^Hepatic  affections.  ^Dys-
pepsia.

■  A  sharp  painful  stitch  in  pit  of  stomach,  which  extends

through  to  back.

I  I  Stitches  in  pit  of  stomach.

I  Aching,  gnawing  pain  in  stomach,  with  a  sense  of  con-
striction; <  from  pressure;  >  from  eating.

Sensation  as  of  an  animal  wriggling  in  epigastric  region.

■  Pressure,  with  distension  of  stomach.

■  Constant  aching  pain  in  stomach;  >  after  food. ^Indi-

gestion.

■  Pressure  and  oppression  in  stomach,  drawing  up  into

chest.
Oppressive  or  cramp-like  throbbing  in  pit  of  stomach,

and  breathing  with  anguish.
Constriction,  pinching,  squeezing  pain  in  stomach ;  >  on

drawing  up  the  limbs  and  lying  on  left  side.

■  Gnawing,  grinding  pain  in  stomach; >  from eating.

^Cardialgia.

■  Digging  pain  in  region  of  stomach.

Cutting  in  stomach;  <  from  pressure  and  yawning;  sour

after  eating.
I  I  Sensation of  heat in region  of  stomach  and slight

griping.
I  I  Cold  sensation  in  stomach.
Nothing  can  be  kept  on  stomach,  but  hot  water.

■  Gastralgia.

^^  Hypochondria. ■  ■  Stitches  in  region  of  liver.

■Shooting,  stitching  pains  through  liver  to  back;  crampy
pain  in  inner  angle  of  scapula. ^Congestion  of  liver.

■  ■Pains  from  region  of  liver,  shooting  toward  back  and

shoulder.

■  Spasmodic  pain  in  region  of  liver. ^Bilious  vomiting.

■  ■Pressive  pain  in  region  of  liver.

■  Pain  in  region  of  liver,  extending  quickly  downwards

across  navel  into  intestines. ^Biliary  colic.
■Biliary  calculi; chill; intense  pain in  region of  gall
bladder,  vomiting  and  clay  colored  stools.

■  Pain  in  region  of  liver  and  spleen.

■  Pain  in  region  of  liver  >  by  eating. ■Hepatic  fever.
Dull  throbbing  in  region  of  liver.

■Region  of  liver  painful  on  pressure. /^Pneumonia.

■  Liver  enlarged,  indurated,  sensitive  on  pressure.


CHELIDONIUM  MAJUS.  14

I  Fatty  liver,  border  of  which  extends  to  navel,  with  ic-
terus.

I A  kind  of  numbness  in  muscles  of  hepatic  region  and  in
whole  r.  side  of  neck,  face  and  head.

I  t  Contused  pain  in  r.  hypochondriac  region.

I  Chronic  pain  in  liver.

I  Right  hypochondrium  and  scrobiculum  cordis  tense  and
painful  to  pressure.  ^Acute  rheumatism.  ^Liver  affec-
tions.

■  Left  hypochondrium  and  scrobiculum  cordis  sensitive  to

pressure. ^Mental  disturbance.

■  Sense  of  fulness,  pressure  and  tension  in right  hypo-

chondrium. ^Liver  complaint.

Cutting  pains  and  stitches  in  hypochondrium,  with  sense
of  constriction  like  a  cord.

Clothes  feel  too  tight,  causing  anxiety  from  the  accumula-
tion of  wind  in  throat  pressing  on  diaphragm.
^^  Abdomen, l Griping  in  umbilical  region;  then  cutting  in
abdomen  and  across  r.  lumbar  region,  extending to
back.

I  I  Severe  pain  around  umbilical  region.

I  I  Spasmodic contraction of umbilicus, with transient

nausea.

I I  Pain  across  umbilicus,  as  if  abdomen  were  constricted
by  a  string.

I  I  Painful  pressure  over  umbilicus.

■Retraction  of  umbilicus,  great  heat  of  body,  nausea;  vio-
lent pressing,  returning  periodically,  >  from  wine.

Coldness  and  pressing  mostly  below  umbilical  region ;
body  cold.

■  Constrictive  sensation  in  hypogastrium,  just  before  pas-

sage of  turbid  urine.

■  Spasmodic  drawing  pains  in  both  inguinal  regions.
Pinching  pain  in  1.  groin.

■  Colic,  with  nausea  and  retraction  of  navel.

I  i  Griping,  extending  toward  chest  and  back ;  >  by  pass-
ing flatus.

Cutting  in  bowels  immediately  after  a  meal.

I  I. Jerking,  cutting  in  intestines  as  from  knives  without
relief  from  a  thin  stool.

Burning  in  bowels.
• Pain  and  rumbling  in  coecal  region.

■  Rumbling,  gurgling,  pinching  and  cutting  in  bowels.
I  I  Rumbling  followed  by  diarrhoea.

■  Abdomen  distended,  feels  full  and  uncomfortable. ^In-

testinal catarrh.

■  ■Abdominal  plethora. ^Hemorrhoids. /^Liver  affections.

■  Abdomen  sensitive  to  pressure. ^Hepatic  typhus.


15 •  CHELIDONIUM  MAJUS.

I  Pot-belly. ^ Worms. .

I  Ascites ;  urine  scanty  and  yellow ;  palms  of  hands  yellow.

I  I  Contraction  of  abdominal  walls.

I  Swelling  and  vilceration  of  inguinal  glands. ^Suppressed
gonorrhoea. ^Secondary  syphilis.
"^  Stool  and  Rectum, i  Frequent  discharge  of  flatus.

I  Diarrhoea,  with  pain  under  inner  and  lower  angle  of  r.
shoulder-blade. ^Pregnancy.

Diarrhoea  without  pain,  without  urging

I  Fluid  feces,  often  escape  unexpectedly.  ^Intestinal
catarrh.

I  Chronic  diarrhoea  with  liver  affection.

I  Stools:  brown  watery,  white  watery ;  green  mucous;  thin,
pasty,  bright  yellow;  pasty,  light  grey;  like  rice-water,
tinged  yellow ;  pale,  slimy ;  mucous  diarrhoea,  at  night ;
constipated,  like  sheep's  dung;  like  dr}^  clay;  invol-
untary.

■  Yellow watery passages containing flakes of mucus.

^Hepatic  typhus.
I  Slimy,  greyish-green  diarrhoeic  stool,  comes  on  involun-.

tarily. /^Intestinal  catarrh.
AVhite,  clay-colored  stools.

I  Stools  quite  white  like  thick  pap,  in  children. ^Cough.
I  Hard,  white  stools,  every  4  or  5  days. ^Prosopalgia.
I  Grey  stool,  with  slight  coloring  of  urine  and  absence  of

icteric  symptoms.

I  Flakes,  strings,  gelatinous  lumps;  deficiency  of  biliary

coloring  matter  in  stools. ^Diarrhoea.

I I  Diarrhoea  and  constipation  alternately.
I  Constipation. ^Hepatitis.

I  Hard  and  whitish-yellow  stools. ^Mental  affection.

I  Stool  bright  yellow  and  consistent. ^Cough.

I  I  Stool  very  hard  and  difficult,  with pains  in  anus  in

consequence.
I  I  Some  blood  follows  stool.
I  With  stool  a  sensation  as  if  anus  were  contracted.

■  Round  worms. t'Intestinal  catarrh.
Before  and  after  stool  rumbling  in  abdomen.

■  Burning and cutting in rectum,  with constriction  of

anus,  alternating  with  itching  in  anus.
I  !  Periodic  straining  and  pressing  on  rectum  as  if  before  a

stool,  without  result.
i  I  Drawing  in  rectum.

■  Crawling  and  itching  in  rectum  and  on  perineum,
I  I  Sticking  and  itching  in  anus. ^Hemorrhoids.

^^  Urinary  Organs. ■Spasmodic  pain  in r.  kidney  and  in
liver ;  <  from  4  to  9  p.m.
Shooting  in  region  of  kidneys  and  of  bladder ;  >  lying
on  face.


CHELIDONIUM  MAJUS.  16

Pain  in  region  of  kidneys,  which  are  sensitive  to  pressure,
even  of  clothing.

I  I  Tenderness  in  renal  region. ^Bright's  disease.

■Violent  pains  in  direction  of  ureters,  preceding  passage
of  turbid  urine.

I  Violent  paroxysms  of  pain  in  kidneys,  with  intense  head-
ache, vertigo,  and  syncope. ^Nephritis.

■  Violent  pain  in  hypogastrium  and  vesical  region,  not  <

by  pressure. ^Liver  complaint.
■Stabbing  pains  in  region  of  bladder.
Spasmodic  pain  just  above  os  pubis,  with  frequent  passing

of  urine.
•  Dragging  pain  in  bladder,  with  spasmodic,  trembling

pains  in  inguinal  region.
■Discharge  of  pus  from  urethra. ^Gonorrhoea.
I  I  Cutting  pain  in  urethra  on  urinating  and  continuing

after  urinating.

■  Burning  in  urethra  on  urinating. ^Gonorrhoea.

I  I  Strangury,  lasting  all  day,  with  scanty  urination.

I  I  Frequent  call  to  pass  water,  which  passes  away  without

being  obliged  to  urinate.
I  I  Frequent  urging  to  urinate.

■  Urine:  profuse,  whitish,  foaming ;  red  and  turbid ;  dark

yellow,  clear;  lemon  yellow,  turbid;  dark;  brownish-
red;  green.

■Urine  turbid,  acid,  and  yellow  as  gold. ^Typhus.

■Urine  bright  yellow,  clear  and  acid. ^Cough.

I  I  Urine  bright  and  clear,  or  turbid,  acid  and  reddish.
^Acute  rheumatism.

■Urine  reddish,  cloudy,  with  reddish,  slimy  sediment.
^Liver  complaint.

■  Urine  reddish,  turbid,  containing  fibrin,  flakes  and  sand.

^Nephritis.
■Red  urine. ^Laryngitis.
Urine  red,  cloudy,  with  a  chalky  sediment.
Urine  smells  acid  or  ammoniacal.
I  I  Urine  has  a  resinous  odor.

■  Diabetes  mellitus.

^^  Male  Sexual  Organs. ■  Frequent  erections,  even  during
day.

■  Drawing  pain:  in  spermatic  cords;  in  testicles.
I  I  Sticking  in  urethra,  especially  towards  orifice.

■  Pain  in  glans.

■  Itching  and  creeping  on  scrotum  and  glans.
■Redness,  heat  and  swelling  of  scrotum,  with  small,  flat

vesicles,  painful  to  touch,  they  become  moist,  next  day
form  dry  scales.
I  I  Acne  on  male  parts. ^Hemorrhoids.


17  CHELIDONIUM  MAJUS.

I  lEczematous exanthema on male parts and anus.

^Hemorrhoids.
Eczema  rubrum  on  scrotum.
I  I  Painful  swelling  of  r.  testicle,  with  tension  and  drawing

in  spermatic  cord. ^Suppressed  gonorrhoea.
I  I  Gonorrhoea and secondary syphilis, with  .  ulcerated

buboes.
^  Female  Sexual  Organs. ■  Menses  too  late ;  too  profuse ;

pain  under  right  scapula.
Menses  retarded,  but  continue  longer  than  natural.
Amenorrhoea.
I  Burning  in  vagina,  recurring  each  day  at  precisely  the

same  hour.
I  Acrid  leucorrhoea.
^  Pregnancy. Lactation, i  Longing  for  unusual  articles  of

food,  during  pregnancy. .
I  Milk  diminished.

Secretion  of  milk  grows  less  and  less  until  it  entirely  ceases.
^'  Voice  and  Larynx. Trachea  and  Bronchia, i  Hoarse-
ness.
I  I  Voice  weak. ^Erysipelas.
iSpasm  of  glottis  on  expiration,  with  cough.

■  Spasm  of  glottis  daily,  with  profuse  perspiration  at  night.
Spasm  of  glottis  during  violent  fits  of  coughing,  with  ex-
pectoration of  mucus.

■  Pricking  pain  in  larynx  rendering  loud  speaking  impos-

sible.

■  While  coughing,  pain  in  larynx  and  sacrum.

■  Severe  tickling  in  larynx.

■  ■Pressure  on  larynx,  as  if  air  could  not.pags.thxough;  as

if  swollen ;  more  to  the  right.

■  Sticking  pain  in  throat  in  region  of  larynx.
Shooting  and  burning  in  throat  and  larynx;  dullthrob-

bing  from  congestion.

Constriction  in  trachea,  deadly  anguish ;  desire  for  eruc-
tation.

Choking  sensation  in  throat,  <  when  breathing.

I  I  Sensation  as  if  throat  was  constricted  at  larynx.

■  Sensation  as  if  larynx  were  pressed  back  upon  oesophagus,

impeding  swallowing.
I  I  Pressure  or  heat  in  trachea.
I  I  Irritation  to  cough  in  trachea.
Sensation  of  dust  in  trachea,  throat,  and  behind  sternum,

not  relieved  by  cough.
■Capillary  bronchitis.
^®  Respiration. ■  Great  dyspnoea. ^Pneumonia.

I  Dyspnoea  after  awaking  out  of  frightful  dreams.


GHELIDONIUM  MAJUS.  18

B  Breathes  with  great  difficulty  and  a  loud  mucous  rale.

^Influenza.
Difficult  respiration  with  short  fits  of  coughing,  preceded

by  pain,  first  in  r.  then  in  1.  side  of  thorax.
1 1  Short  and  quick  breathing :  with  oppression,  which  is

relieyed  by  a  few  deep  inspirations ;  with  anxiety,  as  if

he  must  choke.

■  Shortness  of  breath  and  tight  chest. ^Influenza.

■  Respiration  improved  in  evening  in  bed.

Complains  of  anxiety,  tightness  and  pains  in  r.  side  during
inhalation ;  on  inspiration  thorax  is  not  distended.

I  Every  day  repeated  attacks  of  difficult  breathing  and
constriction  of  chest. ^Prosopalgia.

I  Hindrance  to  breathing  as  if  by  a  tight  girdle.

Tightness  and  oppression;  must  loosen  clothing;  >  in
open  air.

Breathes  short  from  stitch  pains  in  chest.

I  On  inspiration  it  seems  as  though  something  were  press-

ing on  chest,  after  dinner.
Bronchial  respiration  in  pneumonia.
Interrupted  speech.

I I  Nightly  attacks  of  asthma  with  a  sense  of  constriction  in
chest ;  region  of  diaphragm.

Spasm  of  respiratory  muscles  of  thorax.
^  Cough,  i Cough:  violent,  somewhat  spasmodic,  dry,  in
paroxysms ;  hollow,  short,  exhausting,  racking,  as  in
consumption,  with  much  expectoration  from  lungs,  also
with  pain  behind  sternum,  especially  at  night ;  morn-
ings, with  copious  mucous  expectoration.

■  Straining  cough,  <  in  morning,  with  much  expectora-

tion coming  from  lungs.

Violent,  spasmodic,  straining  cough,  bringing  tears  to  eyes,
lasting  long,  even  awaking  them  from  sleep.

I  Cough,  with  little  expectoration;  hot  spell  every  evening ;
great  emaciation.

■Spasmodic  cough  without  expectoration ;  or,  ■■with  for-
cible ejection  of  small  lumps  of  mucus.

■  Cough,  with  painful  contraction  of  whole  abdomen  with

every  cough.
■Repeated  attacks  of  short  cough  with  stitches  in  r.  side

and  difficulty  of  breathing.
Cough  in  paroxysms,  with  burning,  shooting  pains,  and

constant  tickling  in  larynx.
Short  spells  of  cough  with  difficult  breathing,  with  pain

first  in  r.  then  1.  side  of  thorax.
iShort  cough  with  a  little  greyish  phlegm. ^Pneumonia.

■  Painless,  racking,  fatiguing  cough. ^Hepatic  typhus.
Cough,  excited  by  tickling  in  larynx,  bringing  tears  to  the


19  .  CHELIDONIUM  MAJUS.

eyes ;  by  sensation  of  dust  in  trachea,  throat,  or  behind
sternum,  not  relieved  by  cough.

■  Cough re-echoes in  stomach; flying out of  detached

lumps  of  mucus  when  coughing. ^Whooping  cough.

Cough  with  short  breath ;  with  spasm  of  glottis  on  expi-
ration.

Loose,  rattling  cough,  remaining  a  long  time  after  whoop-
ing cough  or  measles.

■  Loose morning cough,  copious  mucous expectoration.

^Pneumonia. ^Capillary  bronchitis.
Cough  with  obstruction  of  ears,  deafness.

■  Catarrhal  cough.

Force  of  cough  throws  out  lumps  of  mucus.

■  Dry  cough  through  day  with  pain  and  stitches  in  r.  side,

with  severe  hoarseness  each  evening  at  five  o'clock,  so
that  her  voice  could  scarcely  be  heard.

■  Cough  with  blood-streaked  phlegm,  or  brownish -bloody

sputa. ^Pneumonia.
^  Inner  Chest  and  Lungs. Stitches  under  1.  clavicle  and  in

region  of  r.  mamma.
I  I  Constrictive  pressure  below  1.  clavicle  extending  to  neck.
I  I  Pains,  anxiety  and  tightness  in  upper  part  of  chest.

^Pneumonia.
I  I  Stitches  in  1.  side  towards  1.  scapula.
Burning  between  chest  and  scapulse,  with  internal  heat

and  want  of  breath.
Shooting, jerking pains from lower part of sternum

through  to  back.
■Spasmodic  pressure  behind  middle  of  sternum,  awoke

him  at  night ;  extended  into  bronchi,  with  sensation  of

constriction  in  them.

■  Spasm  of  diaphragm.

I  I  Pain  in  sternum,  directly  over  cardiac  region,  while
yawning.

■  Periodic  attacks  of  tightness  and  pain  in  chest  along

sternum. ^Acute  rheumatism.

■  Pain  internally  behind  sternum,  especially  noticed  on

inspiration.
Drawing from lower part of  sternum towards r.  side
around  to  si:)ine ;  sore  pain,  even  touch  of  clothes  in-
creases it.

■  Violent  stitches  in  lower  portion  of  r.  side  of  thorax  on

inspiration,  <  by  motion  and  by  cough.
At  2 P.M. stitches and soreness  in lungs,  < by deep

breathing,  coughing  or  sneezing.
I  I  Stabbing  in  r.  side,  close  under  mammary  gland.

■  Stitches  in  fore  part  of  lower  portion  of  thorax,  extending

into  intestines  below  navel.


CHELIDONIUM  MAJUS.  20

I  I  Stitches  under  heart.

Violent  pain  in  r.  side,  in  region  of  seventh  and  eighth
ribs ;  <  by  breathing,  and  movement ;  followed  by
burning  headache.

Painful  tension  on  deep  inspiration,  all  round  inside  of
thorax  at  its  base.

I I  Stitches  in  chest,  worse  r.  side.

1 1  Deep  seated  pain  in  whole  r.  side  of  chest.
I  Stitches  in  1.  chest  on  inspiring.

Pain  deep  down  in  chest,  <  on  stooping  low,  quick  walk-
ing, blowing  nose,  and  sneezing.
I  I  Contused  pain  in  chest,  <  by  motion.
I  Stitches  in  1.  side  prevent  her  from  taking  a  deep  breath.

I  I  Pressive  pain  in  1.  side.

I I  Oppression  of  chest ;  clothing  seemed  too  tight.
I  I  Tightness  of  chest  during  expiration.

I  I  Pressure  on  chest  with  dyspnoea.
Motion  increases  pains  in  chest.

I  Sudden,  great  anxiety,  with  palpitation.

I I  Soreness  in  lower  ribs,  r.  side.
Dull  throbbing  in  apices  of  lungs.

Stinging  and  soreness  in  lungs  with  sneezing  and  cough-
ing, or  deep  inhalations.

I  Inflammation  of  r.  lung,  with  persistent  cough;  stitches,
bloody  expectoration,  dyspnoea,  and  intense  headache  in
forehead  and  vertex,  sleeplessness  and  delirium,  yellow,
watery  diarrhoea,  tongue  loaded,  great  prostration.

I  Lungs  full  of  mucus,  great  oppression,  desire  to  change
place,  anxiety;  loose,  rattling  cough;  dark  red  face,  one
ear  cold  the  other  warm,  one  foot  cold  the  other  warm  ;
violent  motion  of  the  alse  nasi;  palpitation  forcible;
stools  thin,  bright  yellow.  ^Capillary  bronchitis.
^Pneumonia.

Shooting,  stitch  pains,  through  r.  lung  to  back ;  short
breathing;  must  sit  upright;  <  during  deep  inspira-
tion, movement  and  cough.

I  Hepatization  of  upper  half  of  r.  lung;  pale  as  death;
countenance  sunken ;  constant  stupor ;  distortion  of
eyes ;  slight  convulsive  twitches  in  face  and  limbs ;
strong  rattle  in  throat ;  extreme  weakness.

I  Inflammation  of  lower  lobe  of  1.  lung,  cough  and  bloody
sputum,  dyspnoea  and  frontal  headache. ^Pneumonia.

I  I  In  1.  lung  soreness  like  a  wound,  by  deep  breathing,
coughing  and  sneezing.

I  Hepatization  of  lungs. ^Pneumonia.

I I  Haemoptysis. ^Pneumonia.

^  Heart,  Pulse  and  Circulation, i  i  Lancinating  pains  in
heart.


21  -  CHELIDONIUM  MAJUS.

■  Stitches  in  cardiac  region,  must  breathe  short,  followed

by  strong  palpitation  and  anxiety.
Violent stitches  in  region  of  heart.
I  I  Palpitation. ^Chorea.

■  Violent  palpitation with  tightness of  chest. ^Mental

affections.

■  Very  irregular  palpitation of  the heart. ^Hepatitis.

^Pneumonia.

■  Beating  of  heart  so  strong  that  the  clothing  is  lifted  from

chest. ^Hepatic  affections.

■  Pulse  slow;  small  and  quick;  full  and  hard,  though  but

slightly  accelerated  toward  evening.

■  Pulse  soft,  not  frequent. ^Cough.

I  I  Pulse  irregular,  130,  missed  every  fifth  or  sixth  stroke.

^Influenza.

I I  Pulse  100  and  full. ^ Acute  rheumatism.

■  Pulse  115,  and  small. ^Pneumonia.

■  Stenocardia.

^  Outer  Chest. '  •  Lancinating  pains  in  pectoral  muscles.
Stitches  in  right  mammary  region.
Depression  between  ribs  less  perceptible.

■  Intercostal  neuralgia.

■Skin  yellow  on  throat  and  chest.

I  I  Superficial  ulceration  extending  downward  from  1.  mas-
toid process.
^^  Neck  and  Back. ■Drawing  in  nape  and  occiput. ^Influ-
enza.

■  Left  half  of  nape  of  neck  stiff,  during  periods  of  exacer-

bation, head  drawn  across  to  left,  nape  feels  as  if  broken.
^Prosopalgia.

■  Cervico-bronchial  neuralgia.

Neck  feels  as  if  constricted  or  tied  with  a  napkin.
Stiffness  of  cervical  muscles.

■  Pain  in  r.  cervical  muscles,  and  in  region  of  r.  clavicle.

■  Sharp,  shooting  pain  in  1.  side  of  neck  and  across  temple

and  over  eye;  liver  sore  to  touch,  with  nausea.

■  Pressive  pain  in  muscles  of  1.  side  of  neck.

■  Heaviness  and  tension  in  muscles  of  nape  of  neck  and

in  occiput.

■  Stiffness:  of  neck;  of  muscles  of  r.  side  of  neck.

■  Stiffness  of  neck:  on  moving  head;  with  painfulness  on

deep  breathing;  with  cracking  of  vertebrae  on  moving
neck.

■  ■Stitches  beneath  r.  scapula.

■  Constant  pain  under  lower  inner  angle  of  r.  shoulder-

blade,  extending  into  chest  or  stomach,  causing  nausea
and  vomiting. ^Amenorrhoea. ^Pregnancy.

■  Fixed  pain  under  inner  and  lower  angle  of  r.  shoulder-

blade,  with  frightful  cough,  diarrhoea  and  exhaustion.


CHELIDONIUM  MAJUS.  22

I  Pressing  and  oppression  in  r.  scapula,  extending  through

thorax  to  sternum.
I  I  Violent  pains  at  lower  angle  of  1.  scapula.
I  I  Pain  at  outer  margin  of  1.  scapula.

■  Violent  pains  in  r.  shoulder-joint,  whence  they  have  ex-

tended from  scapula.
Percussion  dull  under  1.  shoulder-blade,  covering  the  size
of  a  hand.

■  Violent  tearing  pains  in  back  and  limbs;  <  from  least

touch. ^Acute  rheumatism.
Violent  pains  in  back  from  nape  to  sacrum.
I  Pains  in  r.  side  of  back,  with  painful  feeling  in  occiput,

pressing-aching  toward  1.  ear. ^Hepatitis.
Pinching,  cramp-like  pain  in  internal  border  of  r.  scapula,

with  a  kind  of  pressing  stitch  from  1.  side  of  occiput  to

forehead.
I  Pain  in  spine  between  shoulders.

■  Percussion  gives  a  dull  sound  on  each  side  of  spine.

^Pneumonia.
Drawing,  stiffness  and  stitches  in  muscles  of  back;  pain

as  after  excessive  exertion.
Burning  in  back.
Shivering  running  down  back.
■Violent  pain  in  back. ^Influenza.
■Sensation  as  if  the  vertebrae  were  being  torn  apart  when

stooping  forwards,  and  then  bending  backwards  again ;

also  when  walking.
Pain  like  a  wound  in  lower  dorsal  vertebrse  and  five  lowest

ribs  on  right;  <  by  pressure  and  movement.

■  Pain  as  though  lower  lumbar  vertebrse  would  separate,

when  bending  forwards.
Tearing in  lower lumbar  vertebrae,  extending  to iliac
bones.

■  Drawing  pain  in  back  and  sacrum. ^Liver  affection.
I  I  Pain  in  sacrum.

■  Painful  drawing  in  back  and  limbs. ^Hepatic  typhus.

■  Drawing  from  sacrum  to  r.  side  of  scrobiculum. t'Gas-

tralgia.

■  Aching  soreness  in  all  the  vertebrae;  <  by  motion  and

by  pressure  on  spinous  processes.

■  iRed  miliary  eruption  on  neck,  chest  and  arms. ^Acute

rheumatism.
^^  Upper  Limbs. ■■Fixed  pain  under  inner  angle  of  r.  scap-
ula;  often  accompanies  cough,  diarrhoea,  pneumonia,
menses,  loss  of  milk,  exhaustion,  etc.
Tearing  pain  in  shoulder  and  r.  arm  on  moving  arm.

■  ■Pain  in  r.  shoulder.

I  I  Drawing  pain  from  r.  shoulder  down to  wrist,  with
coldness  and  stiffness  of  arms.


23  CHELIDONIUM  MAJUS.

I  Pain  in  1.  shoulder  as  if  sprained  or  fractured,  with  cold

feeling  in  upper  arm.
I  Pain  in  1.  shoulder,  extending  into  deltoid  muscle.

■  Paralytic  pain  in  1.  shoulder  and  in  whole  of  1.  arm.
Inability  to  use  r.  arm  and  forearm  with  much  freedom,

sometimes  attended  with  tearing  pain.
I  I  Lancinating  pains  in  upper  extremities.
I  I  Pain  directly  over  1.  elbow-joint.
I  I  Repeated  twitching  in  r.  arm.

TrSwelling  of  elbows  as  in  acute  rheumatism. ^Toothache.
I  I  Elbows  swollen. ^Acute  rheumatism.

■  Stiffness  in  wrist.

I  I  Stitches  in  r.  wrist.

I  I  Hands  hot  up  to  middle  of  forearm,  swollen,  with  dis-
tention of  superficial  veins.

I  I  Drawing  pain  in  dorsum  of  1.  hand.

Tearing  in  metacarpals  and  tips  of  fingers,  r.  side;  <  by
pressure.

Joints  of  fingers,  r.  hand,  yellow,  cold,  nails  blue.

I  I  Stabbing,  drawing  pain  in  1.  index  finger.

■  I  Tips  of  fingers  cold.

■  Rheumatic  attacks  of  upper  extremities,  with  black  jaun-

dice. ^Hepatic  calculus.
Paralytic  heaviness  of  arms  as  if  weights  were  hung  upon
them.

■  Pain  in  1.  shoulder,  with  want  of  power  in  1.  arm,  which

must  be  kept  close  to body,  because  any  attempt  to
move  it  causes  a  sensation  as  if  1.  shoulder  was  breaking
off. ^Prosopalgia.
^  Lower  Limbs. ■  Shooting  pain  in  r.  hip,  extending  into
abdomen,  with  heat  and  anxiety. ^Liver  complaint.
Pains  in  r.  hip  when  rising  from  a  seat.
I  I  Shooting  pain  in  hip-joint.

■  (Drawing  pain  in  hips,  thighs,  legs  and  feet,  more  r.  side.

■  Bruised  pain  from  thighs  to  calves;  <  on  walking  and

when  touched.
Paralytic  weakness  in  1.  thigh  and  knee  when  stepping.

■  ■Pain  in  r.  knee,  with  burning  and  stiffness;  <  when

moving.
I  1  Violent  pain  in  1.  knee  and  popliteal  space.
Hard  pressure  in  a  space  of  two  fingers'  breadth  below

patella.
I  I  Pain  in  knees,  as  after  a  long  march.
I  I  Giving  away  of  knees  when  standing  and  walking.
I  I  Trembling  of  knees.
Weight  in  legs  as  if  she  could  not  step  out,  as  if  she  had

to  drag  a  burden.
■Weight  in  lower  limbs. ^Bright's  disease.


CHELIDONIUM  MAJUS.  24

iHer  legs  appear  thicker  and  heavier;  fears  dropsy.

I  Right  leg  as  if  paralyzed,  feels  as  if  weights  were  hung

upon  it. ^Acute  rheumatism.
I  Coldness  of  legs,  with  loss  of  sensation.
Ankles  painful,  especially  the  r. ;  <  moving.

I  Painful  pressure  on  outside  of  ankle.

I I  Stiffness  of  ankles.

I  (Edematous  swelling  about  ankles.

I  Rose  colored,  elastic  swelling  of  both  ankle-joints.  ^Acute

rheumatism.

I I  Foot  highly  oedematous,  most  around  ankle;  swelling
a  little  reddened  and  hard  over  inner  ankle.  ^Acute
rheumatism.

lEczematous  eruption  on  r.  ankle,  which  is  swollen,  hot,

red,  moist  and  itching.
I  Feet  feel  as  if  paralyzed.

1  Cold  feet. ^Affection  of  liver. ^Rheumatism.
I  Right  foot  cold  as  ice,  1.  natural. ^Pneumonia.
Cramp  in  sole  of  r.  foot,  which  with  toes  is  bent  under;
<  putting  foot  down;  >  by  compressing  calf.
I  Itching  in  sole  of  r.  foot.
I  I  Stabbing,  drawing  pain  at  under  side  of  1.  great  toe.

I  I  Pain  in  fourth  and  fifth  toes  of  r.  foot.
Toes  without  sensation,  feel  dead.

■  Intolerable  pain  in  heels  as  if  they  had  been  pinched

by  too  narrow  a  shoe.
^  Limbs  in  General. ■  Twitching  in  arms  and  legs.

I I  Neiiralgia  in  limbs. ^Bright's  disease.
llRheumatism,  least  touch  anywhere  is  exceedingly  pain-
ful; sweat  without  relief

■  Drawing  and  paralytic  feeling  in  limbs. ^Laryngitis.
Wandering  pains  in  joints;  <  1.  side  and  from  motion.

1 1  Limbs:  feel  heavy,  stiff  and  lame ;  feel  paralyzed ;  cold.
I  I  Sudden  uneasiness  in  all  limbs;  must  move  about.
I  I  Trembling  in  limbs. ^Measles.

I  I  CEdematous  swelling  of  limbs. ^Bright's  disease.

I I  Limbs  flabby. ^Intestinal  catarrh.

I  Cold  extremities. ^Valvular  disease.

1  I  Emaciated  legs. ^Influenza.

I  Pain  in  all  the  limbs,  with  bruised  sensation. ^Influenza.

■  Cutting  pain  in  calves  and  upper  arms,  alternating  with

headache  and  preventing  sleep. /^Epidemic  typhus.
^  Rest. Position. Motion. Rest:  >  coldness  in  occiput

and  nape;  >  stitch  pains.
Lying  down:  drawing  in  1.  malar  bone.
Lying  on  face:  >  pain  in  kidneys  and  bladder.
Lying  on  1.  side :  >  pain  in  stomach.
Standing :  knees  give  way.


25  CHELIDONIUM  MAJUS.

Sitting  up  in  bed :  vertigo.

Stooping:  <  headache;  causes  pressure  in  scrobiculum.  .

Stooping  and  bending  back :  causes  sensation  as  if  verte-
brse  were  being  torn  apart.

Rising  from  a  seat:  pains  in  r.  hip.

Motion :  disinclined  to  move,  does  so  reluctantly ;  <  tear-
ing  in r.  temple ; <  coldness  in  occiput  and  nape ;

<  pain  in  scrobiculum;  <  pains  in  chest;  <  pain  in
lower  dorsal  vertebrae;  <  soreness  in  vertebrae;  of  r.
arm  <  pain  in  shoulder  and  arm ;  causes  sensation  as
if  1.  shoulder  was breaking off; <  pain  in  r.  knee;

<  pain  in  ankles;  >  nervousness.

Walking:  ringing  in  1.  ear;  <  bruised  pain  from  thighs
to  calves;  knees  give  way;  near  falling  asleep;  in  open
air,  chill.

Walking  rapidly:  stitching  in  vertex.

When  stepping :  paralytic  weakness  in  1.  thigh  and  knee.

Getting  out  of  bed :  loses  her  head ;  vertigo.

Holding  down  head :  <  pain  in  r.  eye.

Looking  up  or  moving  eyes :  causes  aching  in  eyeballs.

Moving  eyes :  they  pain  as  if  sore.

Blowing  nose:  <  headache.

Coughing:  <  headache.

Drawing  up  limbs:  >  pain  in  stomach.

Putting  foot  down :  <  cramp  in  sole  of  foot.

Slightest  exertion :  causes  perspiration.
^^  Nerves, l  Restlessness. ^Erysipelas. ^Influenza.

■Sudden  restlessness  of  limbs,  must  move;  feet  move  in-
voluntarily. ^Pneumonia.

I  1  Trembling  of  whole  body,  with  faintness,  nausea  and

anxiety.

I I  Trembling  and  twitching  of  limbs.

■ I  I  Pricking  as  with  needles,  in  different  places.  ^

Twitching  in  muscles  on  awaking.
iSubsultus tendinum,  with slight delirium. ^Hepatic

symptoms.
1 1  Tonic  spasms  in  flexors  of  fingers  and  toes.
General  numbness  with  somnolence.
1 1  Lethargy. ^Valvular  disease.

I  Prostration. ^Chorea.

I I  Great  debility  and  lassitude.

■  Great  languor  and  faintness. ^Influenza.
Cannot  raise  himself  in  bed  without  assistance.

■  Great  weariness and anorexia. ^Pneumonia. ^Liver

complaint.

■  ■Weariness,  indolence,  indisposed  to  work.
Fainting,  with  cold  extremities.

Aversion  to  motion;  tired  from  least  exertion.


CHELIDONIUM  MAJUS.  26

I  I  Great  discomfort.

Paralytic  drawing  and  lameness  in  single  parts.

I I  Neuralgia,  particularly  r.  supraorbital.

■  Neuralgia  connected  with  injuries. ^Chorea.
^''  Sleep. I  Frequent  yawning.

1 1  Sleepy,  lethargic  in  daytime. ^Jaundice.
H  Constant  sopor,  with  a  sunken  face. ^Pneumonia.
1 1  Sleepiness,  desire  to  lie,  without  being  able  to  sleep.
At  2  P.M.  drowsiness  so  marked  even  in  open  air,  that  she
was  near  falling  asleep  while  walking.

■  Falls  asleep,  while  speaking,  for  several  minutes  at  a

time. ^Laryngitis.

I  I  Unusual  wakefulness  towards  4  a.m.  from  various  com-
plaints.

Cannot  go  to  sleep  because  of  a  cutting  pain  in  calves
and  upper  arms,  alternating  with  headache.

Cannot  sleep  because  of  numbness  and  coldness  of  ex-
tremities.

■Sleepless,  with  headache.

I  I  Wakes  up  repeatedly,  feeling  wretchedly.

■  Unrefreshing sleep  from  vivid  dreams  about  business

matters. ^Dyspepsia.
■Restless  sleep:  full  of  dreams;  before  midnight.

■  Awakes  terrified,  by  the  usual  sufferings.

Sweat  during  sleep,  after  midnight  and  toward  morning,

passing  off  soon  after  awaking.
■Awakes  in  morning  perspiring,  after  many  unremem-

bered  dreams. ^Liver  complaint.

■  Dreams: of  corpses and  funerals;  frequent  and  vivid;

confused.

■  On  awaking  he  cannot  remember  what  he  dreamt  about.
^^  Time. At  night:  excitement,  confusion  of  intellect;  quiet

delirium;  occiput  feels  heavy;  in  bed,  supraorbital
neuralgia  < ;  on  waking,  pressure  in  r,  maxilla ;  in  bed,
toothache  <;  profuse  perspiration;  attacks  of  asthma;
pain  behind  sternum.

After  midnight:  sweat  during  sleep.

Toward  4  a.m.  :  wakefulness.

4  a.m.:  many  symptoms  <.

Toward  morning:  profuse  general  perspiration.

Morning:  giddiness;  headache;  thick  blood  in  nasal  mu-
cus; attacks  of  supraorbital  neuralgia;  agglutination
of  lids;  dimness  of  eyes;  cough,  with  copious  expec-
toration; straining  cough,  with  expectoration;  on
awaking,  chilliness  and  cold  feet ;  occasionall  perspira-
tion ;  on  awaking,  spots  on  face.

Through  day:  lethargy.

Afternoon:  tearing  from  r.  ear  into  teeth;  intermittent
fever;  dry  heat.


27  CHELIDONIUM  MAJUS.

2  P.M. :  stitches  and  soreness  in  lungs ;  drowsiness.

2  or  3  P.M. :  headache  begins.

3  P.M. :  complete  intermission  of  pain  in  eye ;  attack  of
neuralgia  in  1.  eyebrow  and  temple ;  shivering.

4  to  9  P.M. :  pain  in  r.  kidney  and  liver.

5  P.M.:  hoarseness.

8  or  9  P.M. :  headache  at  its  height.

Toward  evening: repeated  chill,  dry  heat;  cheeks  red,

head  and  1.  eye  very  hot.
Evening:  in  bed,  tearing  in  1.  eye; hot  spell;  in  bed,

chill;  rigor; after  lying  down,  internal  heat  without

thirst;  copious  sweat.
During  day:  frequent  erections.
All  day :  strangury.
^^Temperature and Weather. Renewal  of  ailments  on

change  of  weather.
Warmth: <  supraorbital neuralgia; <  toothache  and

facial  neuralgia.
Gold  water:  >  supraorbital  neuralgia  and  toothache.
In  room :  chill  passes  off.
In  open  air: headache  <; oppression  of  breathing  >;

drowsiness ;  chill,  while  walking.
Air: <  pain in r. eye; airing room caused  a chill,

pneumonia.
From  getting  feet  wet:  ophthalmia.
'"Fever, l Internal  chill: with  severe  shaking,  evening in

bed ;  when  walking  in  open  air,  passes  off  in  room.
I  Chill  and  coldness  of  whole  body;  <  on  hands  and  feet,

with  distension  of  veins.
Towards  evening  repeated  chills.
I  Chilliness,  with  cold  feet,  in  morning  on  waking.

■  Shivering  from  time  to  time. ^Inflammation  of  eyes.

■  Shivering: without external  coldness; running down

back.
I  I  Shivering,  with  chattering  of  teeth.

■  Yawning  and  shivering  before  attack. ^Neuralgia.
I  1  Skin  cool  and  rough. ^Intestinal  catarrh.

I  I  Icy  coldness  of  r.  foot. ^Pneumonia.

■Violent  fit  of  shivering  daily,  3  p.m.,  for  a  whole  hour,
with  pains  in  head  as  from  a  band  tightly  bound  around
forehead  and  temples. ^Acute  rheumatism.  _

■  ■Attacks  of  rigor  in  evening. ^Liver  complaint.

■  Intermittent  fever,  paroxysm  coming  every  afternoon;

hot  fit  worse  than  cold;  bright  yellow  stool.
I  I  After  a  severe  rigor  vertigo  and  vomiting. ^Pneumonia.

■  ■Rigor,  followed  by  heat  and  sorrowful,  anxious  mood.

^Valvular  disease.

■  Great and  dry  heat,  especially  in  face; in  afternoon,


CHELIDONIUM  MAJUS.  28

particularly  towards  evening;  rigors;  moderate  thirst.
^Influenza.

■  Constant  chilliness,  except  towards  evening,  when  cheeks

become  red  and  head  and  1.  eye  feel  very  hot;  toward
morning,  profuse  general  perspiration,  so  that  bed  is
wet  through. ^Prosopalgia.

■  Violent  fever. ^Pneumonia.

■  Heat:  of  head  and  face ;  on  scapulae;  in  hip-joints.

■  Heat  of  head,  dark  red  cheeks,  pulsation  in  arteries;  full

pulse;  faintness;  difficulty  of  speech;  nausea;  short
breath;  cold  feet.

■  High  fever;  pulse  110;  skin  burning  hot  and  perspiring ;

great  heat  and  confusion  of  head;  great  thirst;  sunken
countenance. ^Laryngitis.
.  ■  Internal  heat  without  thirst,  evening  after  lying  down,

■  Internal  and  external  heat,  warm  perspiration  of  face,

neck  and  chest,  with  vertigo  and  nausea.

■  ■Burning heat  of  hands,  spreading from  thence  over

bod}^
Moist  burning  skin.
■Skin hot,  with  watery,  sour smelling sweat. ^Acute

rheumatism.

■  Perspires  from  slightest  exertion. ^Hepatic  calculus.
Copious  evening  sweat.

■Perspiration  occasionally  in  morning. ^Intestinal  catarh.

■  ■Sweat  during  sleep,  after  midnight  and  towards  morn-

ing; >  after  awaking.

Typhous  complication  in  epidemic  bronchitis.
*^  Attacks,  Periodicity.  Periodical:  anxiety;  shooting  in  1.
parietal  bone;  stitching,  pressing  pain  in  vertex;  even-
ing in  bed,  tearing  pain  in  1.  eye ;  pressure  over  umbili-
cus ;  straining  and  pressing  on  rectum ;  daily  at  same
hour,  burning  in  vagina;  daily,  spasm  of  glottis;  daily,
attacks  of  difficult  breathing;  nightly  attacks  of  asthma;
attacks  of  tightness  and  pains  in  chest;  shivering  fit
daily  3  P.M.;  intermittent, every  afternoon ;  inflammatory
swelling  of  ankle.

Paroxysms : of  pam  in  kidneys ; of  cough ; of  rigor  in
evening ;  intermittent  in  afternoon.

Frequently  recurring:  heat  of  face.

Repeatedly:  tearing. in  1.  eye.

Repeated  attacks:  of  short  cough.

Every  fortnight:  sick  headache.

Transient:  pains  under  bones  of  head  and  in  brain;  biting
sting  in  r.  eye;  pains  in  upper  maxilla;  in  teeth.

Persistent  pain :  in  scrobiculum.

Gradually  increasing:  supraorbital  neuralgia.

Gradually  decreasing:  secretion  of  milk.


29  CHELIDONIUM  MAJUS.

Going  off  gradually:  stitch  in  external  ear.
^  Locality  and  Direction. Left:  headache;  over  eye,  shoot-
ing; on  side  of  occiput,  shooting;  side  of  face  and  head,
violent  pain;  parietal  bone,  periodical  shooting;  from
occiput  to  ear,  pressing;  from  side  of  occiput  to  fore-
head, stitches; head  drawn  to  side;  eye  pressure  <;
tearing  in  eye ;  stitches  above  eye ;  pressive  pain  in  eye-
ball; heat  in  eye;  stitches  above  eye;  over  eye,  pressing
pain ;  sticking  on  inside  of  lower  lid ;  eye  sunken ;  inner
canthus,  itching  sticking;  ringing  in  ear;  sticking  and
drawing  in  ear;  dryness  and  itching  in  nostril;  pain  in
malar  bone;  maxilla  to  eye  and  ear,  drawing  pain;
drawing  in  malar  bone ;  pain  in  lower  molars  and  in
cheek ;  hypochondrium  sensitive  to  pressure ;  pinching
pain in groin; pain under shoulder-blade; stitches
under  clavicle;  pressure  below  clavicle  to  neck;  stitches
in  side  toward  scapula ;  stitches  in  chest;  stitches  in  side
preventing  a  deep  breath; pressive  pain  in  side;  in-
flammation of  lower  lobe  of  lung;  soreness  in  lung  like
a  wound;  ulceration  from  mastoid  process  downward;
half  of  neck  stiff;  head  drawn  to  left;  sharp  shooting
pain  in  side  of  neck  and  across  temple  and  over  eye;
pressive  pain  in  muscles  of  side  of  neck ;  pains  at  lower
angle  of  scapula;  pain  at  outer  margin  of  scapula;  dull
percussion  sound  under  shoulder-blade;  pressing,  ach-
ing from  occiput  toward  ear;  pressing  stitch  from  side
of  occiput  to  forehead ;  pain  in  shoulder  as  if  sprained
or  fractured;  pain  in  shoulder  and  deltoid;  paralytic
pain  in  shoulder and  arm; pain above elbow-joint;
drawing  in  dorsum  of  hand;  stabbing,  drawing  pain  in
index  finger;  pain  in  shoulder,  with  want  of  power  in
arm ;  shoulder  feels  as  if  breaking  off  on  motion ;  par-
alytic weakness  in  thigh  and  knee ;  pain  in  knee  and
popliteal  space;  stabbing,  drawing  pain  in  under  side
of  great  toe;  wandering  pains  in  joints.
Right:  forehead,  pressive  pain;  over  and  in  eye,  violent
neuralgia;  in  cheek,  neuralgia;  temple,  tearing  pain;
temple,  pressive  pain ;  parietal  bone,  pressive  pain ;  over
eye,  pressive  pain ;  temple,  ticking  like  a  watch ;  side  of
occiput,  pinching-stitching ;  back  of  head,  r.  side,  ten-
sive sensation ;  with  sick  headache,  pain  in  hypochon-
drium, and  forehead  and  temple;  in  eye,  biting  sting
tearing behind ear downwards; itching  in concha
pressure  on  orbit;  above  edge  of  brow,  raging  pain
pulsating  pain  in  eyebrow  and  temple ;  external  rectus
of  eye  paralyzed;  opacity  of  lens;  eyelids  inflamed  and
scabby ;  lashes  almost  gone  on  lower  lid ;  from  ear  into
teeth,  tearing;  jerking,  tearing  in  zygoma;  cheek  bone


CHELIDONIUM  MAJUS.  30

feels  as  if  swollen;  pressure  in  maxilla;  red  spot  on
cheek;  pimples  on  upper  portion  of  cheek;  tearing
pains  from  ear  to  teeth ;  constriction,  tension  and  sensi-
tiveness in  pit  of  stomach;  numbness  in  side  of  neck,
face  and  head ;  contused  pain  in  hypochondriac  region ;
fulness  and  pressure  in  hypochondrium ;  cutting  across
lumbar  region;  spasmodic  pain  in  kidney  and  liver;
painful  swelling  of  testicle ;  pain  under  scapula ;  press-
ure on  side  of  larynx;  stitches  in  region  of  r.  mamma;
drawing  from  lower  sternum  towards  side  around  to
spine;  stitches  in  lower  portion  of  thorax;  stabbing  in
side  under  mammary  gland ;  violent  pain  in  region  of
seventh  and  eighth  ribs ;  stitches  in  chest  < ;  deep  seated
pain  in  whole  side;  soreness  in  lower  ribs;  I  linflamma-
tion  of  lung;  shooting  stitch  pains  through  lung  to
back;  hepatization  of  upper  half  of  lung;  stitches  in
mammary  region;  pain  in  cervical  muscles  and  region
of  clavicle;  stiffness  of  side  of  neck;  stitches  beneath
scapula;  constant  pain  under  lower  inner  angle  of
shoulder-blade ;  fixed  pain  under  inner  and  lower  angle

•  of  shoulder-blade;  pressing  and  oppression  in  scapula;
violent  pains  in  shoulder-joint;  pain  in  side  of  back;
pinching,  cramp-like  pain  in  internal  border  of  scap-
ula; drawing  from  sacrum  to  side  of  scrobiculum;
pain  in  shoulder  and  arm;  drawing  from  shoulder  to
wrist;  inability  to  use  arm  with  freedom;  twitching  in
arm;  stitches  in  wrist;  tearing  in  metacarpal  and  finger-
tips; finger-joints  yellow,  cold,  nails  blue;  shooting
pain  in  hip;  pains  in  hip;  drawing  in  hips,  thighs,  legs
and  feet;  pain  in  knee,  burning  and  stiffness;  leg  as  if
paralyzed ;  ankle  painful ;  eczematous  eruption  on  ankle ;
foot  cold  as  ice;  cramp  in  sole  of  foot;  itching  in  sole
of  foot;  pain  in  fourth  and  fifth  toes  of  foot;  foot,  icy
coldness.

First  1.  then  r. :  shooting  in  eyes.

First  r.  then  1. :  pains  in  eyes;  pneumonia;  pain  in  thorax;
acute  rheumatism.

From  above  downward:  tearing  behind  r.  ear;  drawing
in  neck;  acute  rheumatism.

From  front  to  back :  pain  in  r.  eye.

From  without  in :  pressure  on  r.  orbit.

Changing  its  place:  biting  sting  in  r.  eje.
■'^  Sensations.  As  of  a  band  tightly  bound  around  forehead
and  temples;  as  from  a  band  above  eyes;  as  if  head
were  drawn  forcibly  backward ;  as  if  hair  stood  on  end ;
as  of  a  foreign  body  in  eyes;  as  of  sand  in  eyes;  as  if
pierced  with  knives,  pain  in  eyes;  as  of  wind  rushing
out  of  ears;  as  if  ears  were  stopped;  as  if  swollen  in  r.


31  CHELIDONIUM  MA  JUS.

cheek  bone;  as  if  a  foreign  body  were  rising  in  throat;
as  if  larynx  were  pressed  upon ;  as  of  an  animal  wrig-
gling in  epigastric  region ;  as  if  swollen,  larynx ;  as  if
throat  was  constricted  at  larynx;  as  if  larynx  were
pressed  back  upon  oesophagus;  as  if  broken,  nape  of
neck ;  as  if  vertebrae  were  being  torn  apart ;  as  after  ex-
cessive exertion,  pain  in  back ;  as  if  shoulder  was  break-
ing off;  as  if  sprained  or  fractured,  pain  in  1.  shoulder ;
as  if  weights  were  hung  upon  arms  and  legs.
Pain:  all  over  head;  in  occiput  and  nape;  in  forehead
and  eyes;  in  malar  bone;  in  scrobiculum;  in  region  of
liver  and  gall  bladder;  in  region  of  spleen;  severe
around  umbilical  region ;  in  coecal  region ;  in  region  of
kidneys;  in  glans  penis;  under  r.  scapula;  in  sternum,
over  cardiac  region ;  in  chest,  along  sternum ;  internally
behind  sternum;  deep  seated  in  whole  r.  side  of  chest;
deep  down  in  chest;  under  lower  inner  angle  of  r.
shoulder-blade;  extending  into  chest  or  stomach;  at
outer  margin  of  1.  scapula ;  in  r.  side  of  back ;  in  spine
between  shoulders;  in  sacrum;  in  r.  shoulder;  in  1.
shoulder;  directly  over  1.  elbow-joint;  in  r.  hip;  in  r.
knee;  in  knees,  as  after  a  long  march;  in  ankles;  in
fourth  and  fifth  toes  of  r.  foot;  intolerable,  in  heels.

I  I  Pain  as  if  from  a  deep  seated  abscess.
Sharp  pain:  in  frontal  region.

I I  External  neuralgia.

Neuralgia:  over  r.  eye;  in  r.  eye;  in  r.  cheek;  in  temples,

forehead,  ears,  teeth,  eyes  and  eyebrows.
Raging  pain:  above  r.  eye.
A^iolent  pain:  in  forehead;  in  1.  side  of  head  and  face;

above  eyes;  in  direction  of  ureters;  in  kidneys;  in  hy-

pogastrium and  vesical region;  in r.  side,  region of

seventh  and  eighth  ribs;  at  lower  angle  of  1.  scapula;

in  r.  shoulder-joint;  in  back,  from  nape  to  sacrum ;  in

back;  in  1.  knee  and  popliteal  space.
Lancinating  pain :  in  eyes;  in  pectoral  muscles;  in  upper

extremities.
Stitching:  in  vertex;  in  r.  side  of  occiput;  above  1.  eye;

in  r.  then  L  eye;  in  external  ear;  above  1.  eye;  in  pit

of  stomach,  through  to  back ;  in  region  of  liver;  through

liver  to  back;  in  hypochondrium;  in  urethra;  inchest;

under  1.  clavicle;  in  r.  side;  in  1.  side  towards  scapula;

in  lower  r.  thorax ;  in  lungs ;  in  forepart  of  lower  thorax

extending  into  intestines; under  heart;  in  chest  <  r.

side;  in  1.  chest;  in  r.  lung;  through  r.  lung  to  back;

in  r.  mammary  region;  beneath  r.  scapula;  in  muscles

of  back;  in  r.  wrist.
Pressing  stitch :  from  1.  side  of  occiput  to  forehead.


CHELIDONIUM  MAJUS.  '  32

Stabbing  pain:  in  region  of  bladder;  in  r.  side  close  under
mammary  gland;  in  1.  index  finger;  at  underside  of  1.
great  toe.

Cutting:  in  stomach;  in  hypocliondrium ;  in  abdomen;
across  r.  lumbar  region ;  in  bowels ;  in  intestines  as  from
knives;  in  rectum;  in  urethra;  in  upper  arms;  in
calves.

Sticking  pain:  on  inside  of  1.  lower  lid;  in  ears;  and
drawing  in  1.  ear ;  in  region  of  larynx.

Itching-sticking:  in  1.  inner  canthus;  in  anus.

Stinging:  in  lungs.

Biting  sting :  in  r.  eye.

Pricking:  pain  in  larjnix;  as  with  needles,  in  different
places.  _ •

Pricking  running  along  different  parts  of  body,  lasting
half  a  minute  at  a  time.

Shooting:  in  forehead;  in  frontal  bone  over  1.  eye;  across
temple  and  over  eye;  on  1.  side  of  occiput;  in  1.  parietal
bone;  in  eyes;  in  tonsils;  in  throat;  through  liver  to
back;  in  region  of  kidneys  and  bladder;  in  larynx;
from  lower  sternum  through  to  back ;  through  r.  lung
to  back;  in  1.  side  of  neck;  in  r.  hip;  in  hip-joint.

Tearing  pain:  in  forehead;  in  r.  temple;  in  1.  eye;  in  and
above  eyes;  in  zygoma;  in  teeth;  in  r.  afterwards  in  1.
eye;  in  meatus  and  temporal  bone;  behind  r.  ear  down-
wards; in  internal  ears;  from  r.  ear  into  teeth;  violent
in  maxillary  antrum;  in  r.  zygoma;  in  r.  maxilla;  vio-
lent in  back  and  limbs ;  in  lower  lumbar  vertebrae  to
iliac  bones;  in  shoulder  and  r.arm;  inr.  arm  and  fore-
arm ;  in  metacarpals  and  tips  of  fingers,  r.  side.

Jerking:  in  r.  zygoma;  in  antrum;  in  intestines;  from
lower  part  of  sternum  through  to  back.

Grinding  pain :  in  stomach.

Digging  pain :  in  region  of  stomach.

Gnawing:  in  stomach.

Pinching :  in  r.  side  of  occiput ;  in  stomach ;  in  1.  groin ;
cramp-like  pain  in  internal  border  of  r.  scapula.

Griping:  in  umbilical  region;  in  abdomen  extending  to
chest  and  back.

Squeezing  pain:  in  stomach.

Scraping:  in  throat.

Dragging  pain :  in  bladder.

Burning:  over  eyebrows;  in  eyes;  in  lids;  swelling  pf
lids;  of  ears;  like  nettles  on  face;  lips;  in  mouth;  in
throat;  in  oesophagus;  in  bowels;  in  rectum;  in  ure-
thra; in  vagina;  in  throat  and  larynx;  between  chest
and  scapulae ;  in  back ;  in  r.  knee ;  like  nettles  in  skin ;
spots  on  forearm.


33  CHELIDONIUM  MAJUS.

Dull  throbbing :  in  apices  of  lungs.  _

Drawing:  in  occiput;  in  neck;  1.  side  of  occiput  to  fore-
head; from  crown  to  nape;  in  nape  and  occiput;  in  1.
ear;  from  1.  maxilla  to  1.  eye  and  ear;  in  1.  malar  bone;
in  upper  incisors;  through  middle  incisors  of  lower
jaw ;  in  rectum ;  in  spermatic  cords  and  testicles ;  in  r.
testicle;  from  lower  part  of  sternum  around  r.  side  to
spine;  in  nape  and  occiput;  in  muscles  of  back;  in
back  and  sacrum ;  in  back  and  limbs ;  from  sacrum  to
r.  side  of  scrobiculum;  from  r.  shoulder  down  to  wrist;
in  dorsum  of  1.  hand;  in  1.  index  finger;  in  hips,  thighs,
legs  and  feet;  at  under  side  of  the  great  toe;  in  limbs.
Paralytic  drawing:  in  single  parts.

Pressive  pain: in  forehead; in  r.  temple;  in  r.  parietal
bone ;  over  r.  eye ;  in  1.  eyeball ;  in  region  of  liver ;  in
muscles  of  1.  side  of  neck ;  in  1.  side.
Pressing  pain :  in  vertex ;  from  occiput  to  1.  ear ;  in  r.  then
1.  eye ;  over  1.  eye.

Pressure:  in  forehead,  extending  to  orbits;  on  vertex;
under  bones  of  head  and  in  brain;  in  occiput;  in  upper
part  of  eyeballs  as  if  squeezed ;  in  eyes ;  in  eyeball ;  in
orbits ;  stupefying,  on  r.  orbit ;  in  upper  lids ;  from  occi-
put towards  1.  ear ;  in  upper  maxilla ;  in  r.  maxilla  at
night  on  waking ;  in  teeth ;  in  scrobiculum ;  in  stomach ;
in  r.  hypochondrium;  painful  over  and  beneath  umbili-
cus; on  larynx;  in  trachea;  on  chest;  spasmodic  be-
hind middle  of  sternum ;  in  r.  scapula  through  thorax
to  sternum ;  below  patella ;  painful  on  outside  of  ankle.

Pressing-aching:  from  occiput  toward  1.  ear.

Dull  pain:  in  forehead;  in  head.

Aching:  in  eyeballs;  in  stomach;  soreness  in  all  the
vertebrae.

Soreness:  in  nostrils;  in  lower  ribs,  r.  side;  in  lungs;  in
1.  lung  like  a  wound.

Ulcerative  pain:  in  roots  of  hair;  when  combing.

Contused  pain:  in  r.  hypochondriac  region;  in  chest.

Bruised  feeling:  in  vertex;  in  r.  eye;  in  orbits;  from
thighs  to  calves;  in  all  the  limbs.

Pain  like  a  wound :  in  lower  dorsal  vertebrae.

Wandering  pains:  in  joints.

Spasmodic  pain:  in  region  of  liver;  drawing  in  inguinal
regions;  just  above  os  pubis;  in  inguinal  region;  ni  r.
kidney  and  liver.

Cramp-like  pain:  in  pit  of  stomach;  in  inner  angle  of
scapula.

Painful  contraction:  of  abdomen  with  cough.

Painful  tension:  all  round  inside  of  thorax  at  its  base.


CHELIDONIUM  MAJUS.  34

Tensive  pain:  in  forehead;  in  temples;  back  of  head,  r.
side.

Constrictive  pressure:  below  1.  clavicle  to  neck.

Choking  sensation:  in  throat,  as  from  hasty  swallowing,
or  swallowing  too  large  a  morsel.

Constriction:  in  gastric  region;  in  pit  of  stomach;  in
stomach;  in  hypochondrium ;  across  abdomen;  in  hy-
pogastrium;  of  anus;  in  trachea;  of  chest;  in  bronchi;
in  neck.

Fixed  pain:  under  inner  and  lower  angle  of  r.  shoulder-
blade.

Trembling  pains :  in  inguinal  region.

Paralytic  pain:  in  1.  shoulder  and  arm.

Pulsating :  headache ;  in  eyes ;  in  r.  eyebrow  and  temple.

Throbbing :  in  temples ;  painful  in  occiput ;  from  nape  to
occiput;  in  pit  of  stomach;  dull,  in  region  of  liver;
dull,  in  throat.

Fulness :  in  r.  hypochondrium ;  in  abdomen.

Tightness:  around  neck;  above  larynx;  in  scrobiculum;
in  upper  part  of  chest.

Tension:  in  pit  of  stomach;  in  r.  hypochondrium;  in
spermatic  cord;  in  muscles  of  nape  of  neck;  in  occiput.

Stiffness:  in  muscles  of  back;  of  arms;  in  wrist;  in  r.
knee;  of  ankles.

Heaviness :  in  occiput ;  on  vertex,  extending  to  occipital
protuberance;  in  muscles  of  nape  of  neck;  in  occiput;
of  lids ;  paralytic,  of  arms.

Heavy  as  lead :  head.

Weight:  in  forehead,  as  if  it  was  falling  outwards;  of  eye-
lids; in  legs.

Outward-pressing:  in  forehead.

Feels  too  small :  cranium.

Uneasiness :  in  limbs.

Ticking:  in  r.  temple.

Tremor:  of  tip  of  nose.

Twitching:  in  head;  of  tip  of  nose;  in  muscles  on  awak-
ing; in  r.  arm;  in  arms  and  legs.

Crawling :  in  rectum ;  on  perineum.

Creeping:  on  scrotum  and  glans.

Tickling:  in  larynx.

Numbness:  in  muscles  of  hepatic  region;  in  r.  side  of
neck,  face  and  head;  general,  with  somnolence.

Dead  feeling:  of  toes.

Paralyzed  feeling :  of  feet ;  in  limbs.

Heat:  in  forehead;  in  1.  side  of  head,  from  ear;  of  head;
of  face;  in  1.  eye;  in  stomach;  of  scrotum;  in  trachea;
on  scapulse;  in  hip-joints;  of  skin.

Shivering:  running  down  back.


35  CHELIDONIUM  MAJUS.

Coldness:  in  occiput  and  nape;  of  ears;  in  stomach;  be-
low umbilical  region; of  arms; in  1.  upper  arm;  of

finger-tips;  of  legs;  of  feet.
Itching:  in  r.  concha;  of  nose  and  tip ;  in  nostrils;  herpes

on  chin;  in  anus;  on  perineum;  on  scrotum  and  glans;

on  r.  ankle;  in  sole  of  r.  foot;  of  skin.
Sensation  of  dust:  in  trachea,  throat  and  behind  sternum.
Drj^ness:  in  nostrils.
^  Tissues. Mind  affections,  with  melancholia,  indolence  and

ill  humor.
Inflammatory  affections  of  eyes  and  meatus  of  ear.
Neuralgia  in  and  above  eyes,  affecting  principally  the  r.

side.
Congestion  of  mucous  membranes.
1 1  Chronic,  gastric,  and  intestinal  catarrhs,  with  decreased

secretion  of  bile,  great  lassitude  and  heaviness  of  limbs,

headache  and  inability  to  think.
1 1  Hepatitis;  jaundice;  fatty  liver; painful  enlargement

of  liver ;  gall  stones ;  bilious  condition  in  general.
Congestion  of  liver  and  kidneys.

Alternate  diarrhoea  and  constipation,  clay-colored  stools.
Catarrh  of  bladder,  with  sexual  excitation.
Catarrhal  inflammation  of  eyes,  nose,  larynx  and  bronchi.
Inflammation  of  lungs  and  pleura,  particularly  r.  side.
Irregular  menstruation,  with  profuse  flow.
I  Great  emaciation,  patient  so  weak  as  to  be  unable  to  walk

alone.

■  Rapid,  general  emaciation,  with  loss  of  appetite. ^Pros-

opalgia.

■  Muscular  and  articular  rheumatism;  the  least  touch  on

any  part  of  body  is  exceedingly  painful.
In  rheumatic  and  gouty  afifections  of  single  joints  or  nerve

branches,  with  frequent  headache,  attacks  of  vertigo,

dimness  of  vision.
Excites  the  whole  arterial  and  capillary  system.

■  ■Distension  of  veins;  abdominal  plethora;  hemorrhoids.
Ailments  accompanied  with  or  without  fever,  where  the

functions  of  the  liver  are  disturbed.
Typhoid  and  intermittent  fevers.
CEdema.

■  ■  Yellow  grey  color  of  skin.
Vesicular  and  pustular  eruptions.

Touch,  Passive  Motion,  Injuries.  Touch:  scalp  sore;
vertex  feels  bruised ;  did  not  cause  erysipelatous  redness
in  face  to  disappear ;  <  pain  in  and  below  scrobiculum ;

<  pain in region of  spleen; vesicular eruption on
swollen  scrotum,  painful  to;  of  clothes  <  pain  in  chest;

<  tearing  pains  in  back  and  limbs;  <  bruised  pain


45


CHELIDONIUM  MAJUS.  36

from  thighs  to  calves ;  <  pains  in  muscular  and  articu-
lar rheumatism ;  child  did  not  wish  to  be  touched.

Combing :  pain  in  roots  of  hair.

Pressure:  first  >  then  <  tearing  in  1.  eye,  zygoma,  teeth,
forehead,  and  temple;  >  pain  in  r.  eye;  scrobiculum
sensitive  to;  pain  in  stomach;  close  under  short  ribs  r.
side  produces  violent  pain  in  pneumonia;  region  of
liver  painful  to ;  abdomen  sensitive  to ;  region  of  kid-
neys sensitive  to,  even  to  clothing;  <  pain  in  lower
dorsal  vertebrae;  <  pain  in  metacarpals  and  finger-tips.

Clothes  feel  too  tight  about  waist.

Injuries:  neuralgia  from.

Compressing  calf:  >  cramp  in  sole  of  foot.

Bad  consequences  of  neglected  punctured  wounds.
^^  Skin. I  Skin  dry,  hot,  or  shining  red  and  moist,  itching  in-
tolerably.

I  Skin  cold  and  dry.

I  Skin  cool  and  rough. ^Intestinal  catarrh.

II  Yellow,  yellowish-grey,  wilted  skin.  ^Hepatic  affec-
tions. ^Intestinal  catarrh.  ^Valvular  disease.  ^Ty-
phus.

I  Yellow  color  of  skin,  neck,  chest  and  hands.

I  Acute  jaundice.
Hitching  of  skin.

Burning  pain  like  nettles,  preceding an eruption like

measles.
Bright  red,  lentil-sized,  round  spots  on  face,  on  awaking

in  morning.
Red,  round,  burning  spots  on  forearm.
iRed,  ring-shaped,  confluent  spots,  skin  seems  mottled.

^Acute  rheumatism.

I I  Red  and  painful  pimples  and  pustules  on  various  parts.
1  I  Eczema.

I  Red,  miliary  eruption  on  neck,  chest  and  arms. ^  Acute

rheumatism.
Scabs,  exuding  moisture  and  scaling  off.

I I  Old  j^utrid  spreading  ulcers.

A  large  superficial  ulcer  behind  1.  ear,  with  reddish,  fetid
discharge.

Eruptive  diseases  depending  chiefly  on  disorganization  of
skin.
*'^  Stages  of  Life,  Constitution. Melancholic,  choleric  tem-
peraments with  bilious  tendencies  and  complications.

Suits  every  age,  sex  and  temperament,  but  particularly
spare  subjects  disposed  to  abdominal  plethora,  cutaneous
diseases,  catarrh  or  neuralgia.

Blonde,  pale,  gentle  girls,  with  inflammation  of  lungs.

Adapted  to  children  with  capillary  bronchitis  and  liver
complaints.


37  CHELIDONIUM  MAJUS.

Children  with  intestinal  catarrh,  followed  by  great  emaci-
ation and  feebleness.

Bright  colored  diarrhoea,  with  children.

Epidemics  of  malarious  or  other  miasm.

A  child  eight  weeks  old ;  spasm  of  glottis.

A  boy,  set.  14 ;  hereditary  syphilis.

A  youth  set.  19 ;  syphilis.

A  man ;  orchitis  from  suppressed  gonorrhoea.

A  man ;  secondary  gonorrhoea.

A  girl,  set.  18 ;  syphilis.

A  woman;  gonorrhoea.

Dorothy  D.,  set.  22,  previously  always  healthy,  catamenia
regular,  strongly  built,  florid;  mental  disturbance.

A  woman,  set.  25 ;  ulceration  on  mastoid  process,  extend-
tending  down  neck  to  shoulder  and  breast,  of  two
years'  standing.

Woman,  set.  28,  five  months  pregnant;  gastric  fever.

A  woman,  set.  34,  thin,  bilious,  dark  and  irritable;  r.  su-
praorbital neuralgia.

A  woman,  set.  38 ;  typhus  with  hepatic  symptoms.

A  girl,  set.  10,  fair,  pale,  blue  eyes,  amiable;  left  supra-
orbital neuralgia.

A  man,  set.  about  45  ;  biliary  calculus.

A  man,  set.  62;  ophthalmia,  from  getting  wet  feet.

A  drinking  man,  set.  30 ;  pneumonia,  r.  lung.

A  man,  set.  52,  spare  habit ;  dyspepsia.

A  girl,  set.  12 ;  hepatic  typhus.

A  robust  farmer's  wife,  set.  68 ;  hepatic  typhus.

A  woman,  set.  60 ;  nephritis.

A  widow,  set.  60 ;  hordeolum  on  r.  eye.

A  girl,  set.  6  ;  rheumatism.

An  aged  woman ;  pneumonia.

A  man,  set.  31 ;  diabetes  mellitus.

A  woman,  set.  30 ;  sick  headache.

A  young  man,  set.  30,  tall,  sanguine,  of  a  lively  and  irritable
temper,  fair,  whitish-grey  hair,  grey  eyes,  affected  with
herpes ;  right  supraorbital  neuralgia.

A  young  man,  set.  26,  lymphatic,  sanguine,  stout  and  tall,
with  black  eyes  and  hair,  gentle  disposition,  aff'ected
with  herpes,  brother  of  the  one  aged  30 ;  r.  supraorbital
neuralgia.
-  A  woman,  set.  64,  small,  lymphatic,  fair  skin,  grey  eyes,
and  fickle  character ;  supraorbital  neuralgia.

Working  man ;  prosopalgia.

A  man,  set.  48,  suffering  for  four  days ;  prosopalgia.

A  widow,  set.  44,  ceased  menstruating  for  seven  years,  has
suffered  from  rheumatism  in  hands,  the  wrists  particu-
larly swollen  and  painful  on change  of  weather. A


CHELIDOXIOI  MAJUS.  38

year  ago,  ten  weeks  ill  of  pneumonia. For  last  nine

weeks,  prosopalgia.
Girl,  set.  22 ;  opacity  of  cornea.
Youth,  set.  15,  suffering  for  several  years  from  weak  sight ;

opacity  of  lens.
A  bleacher,  set.  50,  who  had  to  watch  bleaching  ground,

every  other  night,  summer  and  winter,  was  attacked

with  rheumatism,  finally  amaurosis.
Bricklayer,  get.  60,  who  had  lost  1.  eye  many  years  before ;

grey  cataract.
Widow,  in  poor  circumstances,  hordeolum  and  violent  in-
flammation of  eyes.
A  merchant,  set.  47,  melancholic,  choleric  temperament ;

biliary  calculus.
"Widow,  set.  35,  melancholic,  phlegmatic  temperament,  suf-
fered from  quartan  ague,  which  was  cured  by  bark;

after  this  catamenia  suppressed  by  fright ;  gall  stones.
A  stout  C[uinquegenarian ;  gall  stones.
Five  boys,  sets,  from  5  months  to  9  years,  all  previously

healthy ;  intestinal  catarrh.
Girl  and  boy,  both  set.  4 ;  cough.
A  man,  set.  27  ;  laryngitis.
Widow,  set,  75;  epidemic  influenza.
Child,  set.  8  weeks;  spasm  of  glottis.
Child,  set.  7  months;  hepatization  of  r.  lung.
Engineer,  set.  30,  sanguine  and  strong ;  double  pneumonia

with  hepatization.
Man,  set.  59;  pneumonia.
Man,  set.  18;
Man,  set.  51 ; "
Boy,  set.  5;  "

Delicate  girl,  set.  9;  pneumonia.
A  man,  set.  20;  intermittent  fever.
Three  children,  sets.  2,  3,  9;  worms.
Girl,  set.  10;  chorea.
Mrs.  E.  B.,  set.  23,  blonde  complexion,  healthy  and  strong  ;

acute  rheumatism.
Mr.  W.,  shop-keeper,  set.  30 ;  acute  rheumatism.
Woman,  set.  47 ;  facial  vesicular  erysipelas.
Woman,  set.  43 ;  facial  pustular  erysipelas.
Wilhemina  J.,  wife  of  a  poor  weaver,  set.  25 ;  neuralgia  of

trigeminus,  followed  by  ulceration  of  neck,  chest  and

arms.
Middle-aged  woman,  who had suffered  for  years  from

hepatic  disorder;  headache.
Gentleman,  set.  52,  of  spare  habit,  accustomed  to  moderate

amount  of  exercise  during  day,  but  poring  over  books

and  plans  until  1  or  2  at  night;  indigestion.


39  CHEL.  MAJ.— CHEXOPOD.  AXTHELMIXTICUM.

^  Relations.  Antidoted  by:  Aeon.,  when  the  c-irculation  be-
comes excited ;  acids,  wine  and  coffee  restrict  its  action.

It  antidotes :  Bryon.

Compatible:  Arsen.,  Bryon.,  Cor.  rub.  (pertussis),  Ipec.
(spasm  of  glottis),  Ledum,  Sulphur  (hepatized  lung).

Compare:  ttAcon.,  Arsen.,  ^Baryta,  iBellad.,  iBryoa.,
Calcar.,  Capsic,  Chelerythrin,  Chen,  ant.,  tCinchon.,
Corall.  (whooping  cough),  Gambog.  (diarrhoea),  Graphit.,
Ignat.,  ULycop.  (hver;  pneumonia,  one  foot  cold),
iMercur.  (pneumonia,  with  liver  complications),  Xitr.
ac,  iiXux  vom.,  Opium  (family  relation),  PJiosphor.
(chest,  yellow  diarrhoea),  Podoph.  (hver),  Pulsat.,  Rhus
tox.,  iSanguin.  (faixdly  relation),  Selen.,  iSepia,  Silk.,
Spigel.,  I  \ Sulphur  audi  Viol.  od.


CHENOPODIUM  ANTHELMINTICUM.

Worm  Seed.  Chenopodiacese.

A  rank,  odorous  j)lant  known  by  the  names  Worm  seed,  Stinking  weed  and
Jeru.salein  oak,  grows  about  waste  places  in  almost  all  parts  of  the  United  States.
The  tincture  is  prepared  from  the  fresh  herb  in  flower.  The  seeds  of  this  species
of  Chenopodium  are  in  common  use  as  a  vermifuge.  Cfienopodium  ambrosoides,
sometimes  confounded  with  anthelminticum,  has  been  employed  as  a  remedy  in
hysterical  nervous  affections,  particularly  chorea,  and  in  Frank's  Magazine,  v.  2,
is  reported  a  case  of  paralysis  of  the  tongue,  in  an  old  woman,  after  apoplexy,
which  had  lasted  several  years ;  one  of  aphasia  in  a  young  man  suffering  from
nervous  prostration  after  small-pox;  one  of  hemiplegia  in  a  girl,  aet.  10.  after
scarlatina,  and  in  v.  3,  another  of  paralysis  of  both  feet  in  a  man,  set.  52.  In  Oe-str.,
Med.  Wochenschrij't,  1842,  No.  28,  is  reported  a  cure  of  right-sided  hemiplegia  wiih
aphasia  in  a  primipara,  set.  35,  of  eight  weeks'  duration.  Another  species,  Cheno-
podium Botrys,  has  been  used  in  France  in  catarrh  and  humoral  asthma.

For  remarks  by  E.  W.  Berridge  (proving  by  chewing  the  seed),  see  Saue's
Record,  1872,  p.  30.

To  Jacob  Jeanes  the  profession  is  indebted  for  the  principal  characteristic
of  this  remedy,  the  ivfrascapular  pain,  right  side;  the  same  was  verified  in  his
proving  by  olfaction,  also  clinically  by  C.  Hg.

Clixical  Authorities. — Hemicrania  and  Tonsillitis,  C.  Hering,  MSS. ;
Asthma,  Jeanes,  Hahnemann  Monthly,  v.  6,  p.  332;  Suppressed  menstruation,  G.
Bute,  MSS.

^  Mind. lAVeeping  mood. ^Suppressed  menses.
■  Sensorium. l^'ertigo  with transient  vanishing of  sight.
^Hemicrania.


CHEXOPODIUM  AXTHELMIXTICOI.  40

Sense  of  giddiness  in  forehead  accompanies  infrascapular
pain.
^  Inner  Head. iPain  in  head  and  eyes;  neuralgia.

I  Pain  in  whole  r.  side  of  head,  with  roaring  in  ears  and

dimness  or  complete  loss  of  vision. <?Hemicrania.
I  Dull,  pressive  pain  in  vertex,  extending  through  head.
I  Megrim  and  frontal  headache.
^  Sight and Eyes, l Vanishing of sight. ^Hemicrania.

^Suppressed  menses.
^'  Hearing  and  Ears, i Roaring  in  ears;  deafness;  ringing  in

ears.
'  Smell  and  Nose. Papular  eruption  on  lower  portion  of  r.

nares  between  ala  and  column.
^  Upper  Face. Pale  face,  with  infrascapular  pain  r.  side.
13  Throat. I Subacute  inflammation  of  tonsils.

I  Chronic  enlargement  of  tonsils  in  pale,  scrofulous  children.
I  Caseous  deposits,  with  painful  inflammation  of  tonsils.
^*  Hypochrondria. •  Hepatic  affections.
'"  Urinary  Organs, i  Slight  pain  in  region  of  kidneys.
^^  Female  Sexual  Organs, i Menses  suppressed;  has  leucor-

rhoea  instead.
^  Voice and Larynx, i  Soreness  in larynx, cannot sing.
^Suppressed  menses.
I A  rough  furry  feeling  in  throat. ^Suppressed  menses,
^'  Respiration. Difficulty  of  breathing. ^Suppressed  menses.
^  Inner  Chest  and  Lungs. ■  Pains  through  breast,  under  r.
scapula,  and  in  r.  shoulder.
I  Pain  through  r.  chest,  beginning  at  the  attachment  of
the  sixth  rib  to  its  cartilage  and  extending  to  inferior
angle  of  r.  scapula.
I  Cough,  with  expectoration  and  rattling  of  phlegm.
^^  Neck and Back. llPain beneath the  point of  the r.
shoulder-blade, with sense of  giddiness in  forehead,
ringing  in  ears  and  pale  face.
llSlight  dull  pain  a  little  lower  do^xm  than  the  inferior
angle  of  the  r.  scapula,  but  nearer  the  spine. ^Hemi-
crania. ^Asthma.
^  Upper  Limbs. Pain  in  r.  shoulder.
^'  Fever. !  Fever  after  a  fright.
^  Attacks,  Periodicity. Attacks  of  right-sided  hemicrania

return  at  intervals  of  from  one  to  five  weeks.
^Locality  and  Direction. Right:  pain  in  side  of  head;
eruption  on  naris ;  pains  under  scapula  and  in  shoulder ;
pain  through  chest  to  inferior  angle  of  scapula.
■*"  Sensations. Pain :  in  r.  side  of  head ;  in  region  of  kidneys ;
through breast; under r. scapula;, in r. shoulder;
through  r.  chest.
Xeuralgic  pain:  in  head  and  eyes.


41  CHENOPODIUM  VULVAEIA.

Dull  pain :  below  inferior  angle  of  r.  scapula,  near  spine.
Dull  pressive  pain :  in  vertex  and  through  head.
^  Skin. ;  Dropsv.

*'  Stages  of  Life,  Constitution. Pale,  scrofulous  children,
with  inflamed  and  swollen  tonsils.
I A  man,  set.  35;  hemicrania.
Old  lad}^;  asthma.

Mary  S.,  set.  about  20;  suppressed  menstruation.  _  _
^  Relations. Compare:  Pimpinella  saxifraga  (tonsillitis),  CM.
maj.  (r.  infrascapular  pain),  Aphis  chenopodii  glauci  (1.
infrascapular  pain).


CHENOPODII  GLAUCI  APHIS.

(See  Aphis,  Vol.  I,  p.  372.)


CHENOPODIUM  VULVARIA.

Stinkender  Gansefuss.  Chmopodiacese.


"This  plant  has  an  odor  of  decaying  fish,  and  contains  a  large  amount  of
Trimethylaraine  (Propylamine)." Allen's  Encydopaedm.

Recommended :  by  Culien ;  by  Jahn  (decoction)  in  uterine  complaints ;  by
Houlton  (extract),  in  1829,  for  disturbances  of  uterine  life,  insuflScient  menstrua-
tion, hysteria,  etc. ;  by  Helbig  (the  tincture),  in  nocturnal  enuresis.

Provings,  in  1846,  with  10  drops  of  the  tincture,  by  C.  Hering  on  himself
and  son  Max,  ten  years  old,  also  clinical  verifications.

Proving  by  E.  W.  Berridge,  on  Mr.  J.  E.  Croker,  Malvern,  Worcestershire,
■with  30  to  40  grains  a  da}-,  of  the  extract  from  the  entire  plant,  excepting  the  root,
for  three  weeks. Mon.  Horn.  Review,  v.  15,  p.  297.


"  Sensorium. Feeling  of  dulness,  commencing  in  both  sides
of  head  behind  ears,  going  upward.
Dulness  more  in  back  part  of  head,  upper  part  of  occiput,

particularly  behind  both  ears.
The  dulness  or  fulness  in  head  returns  in  waves,  and  is
worse  in  back  part  of  head.
^  Inner  Head. Tenderness  in  1.  parietal  region.


CHENOPODIUM  VULVARIA.  42

Pressure,  first  on  1.  parietal  region,  posterior  portion,  then

on  vertex.
Pain  in  1.  parietal  region.
In  occiput  sense  of  dulness  coming  in  waves.
^  Hearing  and  Ears. Dull  feeling  in  ears  and  region  of  ears  ;
sensation  in  r.  ear  as  if  muffled  by  an  obstruction  within.
"  Taste  and  Tongue. Peculiar  sensation^in  tongue  as  if  en-
veloped by  saliva.
'^  Inner  Mouth. Saliva  feels  cold,  particularly  in  1.  side  of
mouth.
Constant  cold  saliva.
^^  Thirst. Unusual  thirst.

^^  Eating  and  Drinking. Dulness  and  yawning,  >  after
eating.
Better  after  drinking  wine.
^^  Scrobiculum  and  Stomach.  Sensation  of  fulness  in  stomach
and  scrobiculum.
Acidity  with  pain  in  stomach  and  epigastrium,  extending
to  1.  side  into  chest,  while  in  school.
^^  Hypochondria. Stitches  in  upper  part  of  region  of  spleen

while  walking.
^^  Abdomen. Cooling  sensation,  which  is  felt  first  in  mouth,
later  in  hypochondriac  region,  and  finally  in  abdomen.
Twitching  in  1.  abdomen,  extending  toward  groins,  fol-
lowed by  pain  in  1.  forearm.
^  Stool  and  Rectum. Increased  action  of  bowels,  not  amount-
ing to  actual  diarrhoea,  sometimes  attended  with  griping.
Urging  to  stool;  stool  softer  than  usual.
I  I  Constipation  improved.

Often  constipation,  bowels  not  acting  for  three  or  four
days,  and  then  with  difficulty ;  constipation  was  accom-
panied by  external  piles.
^^  Urinary  Organs. Increased  secretion  of  urine  of  offensive
odor.
Urging  to  urinate.

I  I  Nocturnal  enuresis  improved  the  first  night.
^^  Male  Sexual  Organs. Increased  sexual  desire,  followed  by
diminished  desire  and  erectile  power,  though  secreting
power  of  testicles  was  not  diminished.
^  Female  Sexual  Organs. •  Amenorrhoea.
^  Inner  Chest  and  Lungs. Fulness  in  chest  in  region  of  last
ribs.
Feeling  in  lower  lobe  of  r.  lung,  as  if  some  fluid  wanted
to  discharge  itself  into  region  of  duodenum.
^^  Neck  and  Back. Very  severe  stitching-pressing  in  r.  side
of  back,  >  on  bending  backward.
Sensitive  spot  in  back,  in  region  of  1.  hypochondrium,  soon
after  having  eructated.


43  CHENOPODIUM  VULVARIA.

Pain  directly  over spinous  process of  1.  scapula,  as  if
pressed  by  two  or  three  fingers,  well  marked  but  tran-
sient.
Pain  in  middle  of  back,  on  r.  side  of  spinal  column,  in-
creasing gradually  to  a  pressing,  wedge-like  pain,  be-
neath r.  scapula,  <  when  sitting.
Painful  feeling,  of  weariness  and  weakness  in  lumbar  and
lower  dorsal  region.
^^  Upper  Limbs. Weakness  in  hands  and  arms.
Twitching  of  1.  forearm  while  sitting  still.
Jerking  pain  through  1.  forearm  like  electric  shocks,  but
without  muscular  contraction,  shoots  from  the  forearm
to  the  fingers.
Pain  on  inner  side  of  1.  forearm,  deep  in.
Pain  in  middle  of  1.  radius,  particularly  severe  in  small

spot.
Stitch  in  second  joint  of  r.  index  finger.
^  Lower  Limbs. Pricking  here  and  there  in  legs,  and  also
in  other  places,  compelling  him  to  move.
Pricking  and  restless  feeling  in  legs  in  evening; also
pricking  in  other  parts  of  body,  causing  him  to  jump  ;
this  is  accompanied  by  the  feeling  of  fulness  which
makes  him  feel  uneasy  and  restless.
Pain  in  anterior  inner  side  of  1.  thigh.
Stitching  pain  through  r.  knee  while  walking.
Pain  in  r.  ankle ;  severe  stitch  from  within  outwards.
^  Limbs  in  General. Feebleness  of  hands  and  arms.
^Rest. Position. Motion. When  sitting :  pain  in  back  < ;
twitching  of  1.  forearm.
Bending  back:  >  stitching-pressing  in  r.  side  of  back.
While  walking: stitches  in  spleen; stitches  through r.

knee.
Compelled  to  move:  by  pricking  in  legs  and  other  places.
^^  Nerves. Lassitude  and  heaviness  through  body.

Sensation  of  heaviness  in  whole  body,  which  goes  through
all  the  limbs,  causing  a  feeling  of  dulness  and  languor.
^'^  Sleep. Yawning.

Frequent  yawning  preceding  the  lassitude  and  heaviness.
Somnolence  with  weakness  and  lassitude  in  entire  body.
Somnolence  with  deep  inspirations  and  yawning.
Time. In  evening:  pricking  and  restless  feeling  in  legs.
Attacks,  Periodicity. In  waves: dulness or fulness  in

head;  dulness  in  occiput.
Locality  and  Direction.  Left:  tenderness  in  parietal  re-
gion ;  pain  and  pressure  in  parietal  region ;  saliva  feels
cold  in  mouth;  pain  in  stomach  and  epigastrium  ex-
tend into  chest;  twitching  in  abdomen;  pain  in  fore-
arm; sensitive  spot  in  back,  region  of  hypochondrium ;


38


CHENOPODIUM  VULVARIA.  44

pain  over  spinous  process  of  scapula ;  twitching  of  fore-
arm; jerking  pain  through  forearm  like  electric  shocks;
pain  on  inner  side  of  forearm ;  pain  in  middle  of  radius ;
pain  in  anterior  side  of  thigh.

Right:  muffled  sensation  in  ear;  as  if  fluid  wanted  to  dis-
charge from  lower  lobe  of  lung  into  duodenum ;  stitch-
ing-pressing  in  back,  on  side  of  spinal  column,  in  mid-
dle of  back;  stitch  in  second  joint  of  index  finger;  stitch-
ing through  knee ;  stitch  in  ankle.

Both  sides :  dulness  behind  ears.

Going  upward :  dulness  behind  ears.

Within  outward :  stitch  in  r.  ankle.
^  Sensations. Sensation  in  tongue  as  if  enveloped  by  saliva.

As  if  fluid  wanted  to  discharge  into  duodenum  from  lower
lobe  of  r.  lung.

Pain:  ink  parietal  region;  in  stomach  and  epigastrium,
extending  to  1.  side  of  chest;  in  1.  forearm;  over  spinous
process  of  1.  scapula  as  if  pressed ;  in  middle  of  back  to
r.  of  spine;  inner  side  of  1.  forearm;  in  middle  of  1.
radius ;  in  anterior  side  of  1.  thigh ;  in  r.  ankle.

Stitch :  in  spleen ;  in  second  joint  of  r.  index  finger;  through
r.  knee;  from  within  outwards  in  r.  ankle.

Stitching-pressing :  in  r.  side  of  back.

Shooting :  from  forearm  to  fingers.

Pricking:  here  and  there  in  legs;  in  various  parts.

Jerking  pain :  through  1.  forearm  like  electric  shocks.

Twitching:  in  1.  abdomen  to  groins;  of  1.  forearm.

Griping:  in  bowels.

Wedge-like  pain :  beneath  r.  scapula.

Pressure:  1.  parietal  region;  on  vertex;  as  from  two  or
three  fingers  over  spinous  process  of  1.  scapula.

Tenderness:  in  1.  parietal  region.

Sensitive  spot:  in  back,  region  of  1.  hypochondrium.

Fulness :  in  stomach  and  scrobiculum ;  in  chest,  region  of
last  ribs;  in  legs.

Muffled  sensation:  in  r.  ear.

Painful  weariness :  in  lumbar  and  lower  dorsal  region.

Heaviness:  through  body.

Cooling  sensation:  in  mouth;  in  hypochondriac  region;
in  abdomen.

Coldness:  of  saliva.

Dulness: in  both  sides  of  head,  behind  ears; in  upper
part  of  occiput ;  in  region  of  ears.
^^  Relations. "  Exhales  pure  ammonia  during  its  whole  ex-
istence."

Compare:  Amm.  carb.


45  CHIMOPHILA  MACULATA.

CHIMOPHILA  MACULATA.*

Spotted  Wintergreen.  Pyroleacese.


Grows  in  the  woods  of  North  America.  Proved  by  George  H.  Bute  on  him-
self and  members  of  his  family,  also  clinically  verified  by  him.  Provings  by
Dr.  H.  P.  Gatchell  in  A.  0.,  v.  13,  p.  75,  1876.  Prof.  H.  C.  Wood  in  his
Materia  Medica,  p.  476,  pronounces  it  "the  inert  congener  of  Chimophila  umbel-
lata."  The  United  States  Dispensatory,  Wood  and  Bache,  says,  "  it  probably  pos-
sesses similar  virtues."  The  umbellata  and  the  maculata,  although  easily  dis-
tinguished, have  been  strangely  mixed  up,  or  still  more  strangely  separated.  By
some  the  maculata  has  been  pronounced  inert  The  Indians  declared  it  to  be  poi-
sonous. If  the  latter  opinion  rests  on  correct  observation  and  experience,  it  could
only  be  explained  by  the  supposition  that  the  maculata  has  volatile  properties
which  the  other  has  not.  Both  the  Chimophila  maculata  and  umbellata  are  old
Indian  and  popular  medicines.  They  were  proved  by  Jeanes  and  G.  Bute  as
long  ago  as  1840  and  1856.  It  was  particularly  the  latter  prover  who  began  to
separate  the  symptoms  of  the  two.  The  Indian  doctors  used  only  the  umbellata
and  avoided  the  maculata,  which  they  thought  poisonous,  a  difference  which  to  us
would  be  a  recommendation.  Darlington,  Flora  Cestrica,  says,  "maculata  possesses
properties  similar  to  the  umbellata,  but  in  a  lesser  degree."  Rafinesque,  a  good
authority,  regards  the  effect  in  sickness,  preferring  maculata  (mentioned  in  his
Look  as  a  Pyrola),  and  gives  each  to  a  different  sub-genus,  calling  the  maculata
Chimophila  and  the  umbellata  Pipsissewa.

^  Sensorium. Momentary  unconsciousness.

■Sudden  headache  with  dimness  of  vision;  she  had  to  be
led  to  bed;  felt  light  headed.
^  Inner  Head, i Sensation  of  lightness  in  head.

Pressing  frontal  headache ;  <  after  lying  down.

■Sudden  headache  above  eyes;  <  on  lying  down.

■  Frontal  headache  with  fulness  in  stomach  and  belching.

Pain  in  and  above  forehead.

Rheumatic  tearing  pain  in  temples.

Dull,  heavy  pain  in  whole  front  and  top  of  the  head.

Sharp  pains  and  heat  in  interior  of  head,  unfitting  for
exertion.

Wants  the  head  pressed.

Headache  with  pain  in  bowels.

*  It  is  against  the  genius  of  the  Greek  language  to  spell  Kreosote  with  an  a
(see  Gross'  Comparative  Materia  Medica),  and  a  scholar  will  never  adopt  such
Bailliornian  improvements  (see  N.  J.  Lucas'  Dictionary  of  English  and  German
Language,  v.  2,  p.  239),  and  yet  we  find  the  same  blunder,  in  a  reversed  form,
committed  in  spelling  the  Greek  name  of  this  dear  little  wintergreen.


CHIMOPHILA  MACULATA.  46

^  Sight  and  Eyes. Inflammation  of  eyes,  with  secretion  of
mucus.
Whites  of  eyes  yellow.
^  Hearing  and  Ears. Pressive  pain,  as  from  a  swelling,  ex-
tending from  r.  ear  downwards,  with  toothache.
^^  Teeth  and  Gums. iToothache;  <  during  eating.
13  Throat. Tensive  pain  in  throat  on  swallowing.

I  I  Sore  throat  and  swollen  tonsils.
^*  Appetite,  Thirst. Desires. No  desire  for  food.
Extreme  gnawing  hunger.
No  thirst,  even  during  fever.
^^  Nausea  and  Vomiting. Nausea  accompanies  colic.

Nausea,  with  inclination  to  vomit  without  being  able  to
do  so.
^^  Scrobiculum  and  Stomach. Stitches  in  scrobiculum.
The  acid  of  fruit  produces  pain  in  stomach.
Cutting  pain  in  stomach.
Heaviness  in  stomach.
^^  Abdomen. Griping  in  abdomen,  with  nausea  and  lassitude
in  all  the  limbs.
Colic  and  flatulent  distension,  with  drowsiness  and  sensa-
tion as  if  abdomen  would  burst,  after  supper.
Colic,  with  nausea.

Sensation  of  a  heavy  stone  in  abdomen;  severe  griping,
with  repeated  stabbing  pains  upward,  followed  by  diar-
rhoea.
Colic-like  pains  between  pubes  and  navel.
Pain  in  bowels.

Bowels  hard  and  swollen;  thinks  the  glands  are  swollen.
Bowels  very  painful,  sore  and  hard.
Feels  as  if  there  was  dropsy  of  abdomen.
^**  Stool  and  Rectum. Colicky  pain  after  stool.
Diarrboeic  stool  containing  air-bubbles.
Grey  stool.

■  Diarrhoea  accompanying  worm  fever.
After  the  colic  pains,  a  diarrhoea,  not  very  weakening.
^^  Urinary  Organs. Had  to  rise  twice  a  night  to  urinate.

Urine  cloudy  and  red  after  standing.
^^  Male  Sexual  Organs. Excitement  of  sexual  system.
^  Female  Sexual  Organs. Stinging  in  labia,  as  if  boils  were

there.
^  Voice  and  Larynx. Trachea  and  Bronchia. Feeling  of
roughness  in  throat  when  talking.
Feeling  of  soreness  and  dryness  in  larynx.
Hawking  of  tough  mucus  from  larynx  in  morning.
^  Inner  Chest  and  Lungs, i  Angina  with  stupor.
^^  Heart,  Pulse  and  Circulation. Blood  as  if  heated,  with
prickling.


47  CHIMOPHILA  MACULATA.

■'^^  Neck  and  Back. Feels  as  if  neck  was  tired  and  too  small.

Sweat  on  back,  with  sensitiveness  to  cold  air  in  morning.

Needle-like  pains  in  sacrum  and  similar  pains  in  hip  bone.

^^  Upper  Limbs. Sensation  in  armpits,  as  if  boils  were  there.

Sensation  of  swelling  in  armpits;  pain  from  armpits  to

scapulae.
Pain  in  bones  of  forefinger.
Right  arm  as  if  paralyzed.
^^  Lower  Limbs. Chilliness  of  knees.
Cold,  damp  feet  in  evening.

Painful  stiffness  in  r.  hip  and  leg  as  if  bruised,  at  5  p.m.
Pain  as  if  beaten  in  calf  and  thigh,  going  downward  in

r.  leg  and  coming  up  in  left.
Pain  in  r.  foot,-  extending  to  knee  and  afterwards  into
thigh.
^*  Limbs  in  General. Weakness  in  all  the  limbs.

Limbs  feel  full  as  if  distended;  a  feeling  like  that  from

erysipelas.
Pains  as  if  in  all  the  bones.
■''^  Rest. Position. Motion. Lying  down:  headache  <.

Exertion:  <  headache.
^^  Nerves. Very  nervous;  cannot  bear  anything  at  all.

Hot,  irritable,  restless.
^*  Time. At  night:  rose  twice  to  urinate;  dry  heat.
Morning:  hawking  of  tough  mucus.
5  P.M. :  painful  stiffness  in  r.  hip  and  leg.
Evening:  cold,  damp  feet.
^^  Temperature  and  We  ather. Feels  better  in  a  warm  room

without  being  chilly.
*^  Fever. Dry  heat  during  night.

Fever,  with  burning  hot  skin  and  thirst.
Exceedingly  hot,  as  if  blood  boiling,  but  cannot  sweat.
*"^  .Locality  and  Direction: Sensation  as  of  something  pass-
ing downward  on  r.  side  of  body  and  coming  up  again
on  1.,  within  the  space  of  an  hour.
Beaten  feeling  goes  down  r.  leg  and  comes  up  left.
Going  upward :  pain  from  r.  foot  to  knee  and  thigh.
Right :  pressive  pain  from  ear  downwards ;  arm  feels  par-
alyzed; painful  stiffness  in  hip  and  leg.
^^  Sensations. As  if  boils  were  in  labia  and  in  armpits;  as
if  neck  was  tired  and  too  small;  as  if  beaten,  in  calf  and
thigh; as if  distended,  limbs,  like erysipelas; as if
blood  were  boiling  or  on  fire ;  as  of  something  passing
down  r.  side  of  body  and  up  left.
Pain :  in  and  above  forehead ;  in  bowels,  with  headache ;
in  throat; in  stomach; in bowels; from  armpits  to
scapulse; in  bones  of  forefinger;  in  r.  foot,  knee  and
thigh;  in  bones.


CHIMOPHILA  MACULATA.  48

Sharp  pain :  in  head.

Stitches:  in  scrobiculum.

Stabbing:  upward  in  abdomen.

Cutting:  in  stomach.

Stinging:  in  labia.

Needle-like  pains :  in  sacrum  and  hip  bone.

Prickling:  in  blood.

Griping:  in  abdomen.

Colic  pains :  between  pubes  and  navel ;  after  stool.

Rheumatic  tearing:  in  temples.

Pressure :  frontal  headache,  as  from  a  swelling  from  r.  ear

downward.
Soreness :  in  throat ;  in  larynx.
Tensive  pain:  in  throat.
Swelling  sensation :  in  armpits.
Fulness:  in  stomach.
Lightness:  in  head.

Painful  stiffness:  in  r.  hip  and  leg  as  if  bruised.
Heaviness:  in  stomach;  as  of  a  stone  in  abdomen.
Roughness:  in  throat.
Heat:  in  head.
Chilliness:  of  knees.
Paralj^zed  feeling:  in  r.  arm.
Dryness:  in  larynx.
^^  Touch,  Passive  Motion. Wants  head  pressed.
^*^  Skin. Exceedingly  hot  as  of  blood boiling, but cannot

sweat.
Thinks  diseased  state  of  the  blood  irritates  the  skin,  as

before  the  eruption  of  erysipelas,  scarlet  fever,  or  measles ;

itches  terribly.
''"  Stages  of  Life,  Constitution. Adapted  to  mild,  amiable,

refined,  sensitive,  intellectual  persons.


49  CHIMOPHILA  UMBELLATA.

CHIMOPHILA  UMBELLATA.

Pipsissewa,  Princess  Pine,  Ground  Holly.  Pyrolacese.

Grows  in  all  parts  of  the  United  States  and  in  Northern  Europe  and  Asia.
The  Pyrolacese  are  very  similar  to  the  Ericaceae  from  which  we  have  the  three  great
medicines,  Ledum  palustre,  proved  by  Hahnemann ;  Rhododendron  chrysanthum,
by  Seidel ;  and  Kalmia  latifolia,  by  the  Allentown  College;  Arbutus  uva  ursi
(Arctostaphylos  officinalis)  is  still  waiting  for  a  prover.

Used  by  the  aborigines  in  various  complaints,  principally  scrofula,  rheuma-
tism and  kidney  affections. It  was  also  a  popular  remedy  with  European  settlers.

Proved  by  Jeanes,  in  1840;  by  G.  Bute,  1856,  and  later  introduced  into  our
literature  by  E.  M.  Hale.

Dr.  H.  P.  Gatchell  (one  of  the  provers  of  the  maculata)  has  made  clinical
use  of  it.

This  collection  contains  a  few  symptoms  by  E.  P.  Scales,  Mass.  Trans.,  v.  4,
p.  601.

Our  learned  Doctor  S.  A.  Jones  has,  in  his  masterly  way,  given  us  the  his-
tory of  this  plant. We  annex  the  gist  of  his  compilation:

In  1578,  it  was  recommended  "to  heal  wounds."

In  1633,  "fistulas,  malignant  ulcers,  burns,  ulcers  of  the  kidneys."

In  1640,  again  for  ulcers  of  the  kidneys  and  neck  of  the  bladder,  fluxes  of
blood,  humors,  or  womens'  too  abundant  courses.  "  It  taketii  away  inflammation
rising  upon  the  pains  of  the  hurt,  and  hindereth  any,  being  presently  applied  after
the  hurt  received  ;  useful  also  for  foul  ulcers  hard  to  be  cured,  as  also  for  cankers
and  fistulas.".

In  1657,  it  was  pronounced  a  principal  herb  for  the  throat.

In  1804  and  1814,  it  was  recommended  as  a  useful  diuretic.

The  authorities  quoted  by  Dr.  Jones,  are  Dodoen's  History  of  Plants  ;  Girarde
General  History  of  Plants;  Parkinson,  The  Theatre  of  Plants ;  Cole's  Paradise  of
Plants;  Tournefort's  Compleat  Herbal;  Barton's  Collections  for  an  Essay  towards
Materia  Medica  of  the  United  States.

The  Huron  and  other  Indian  Nations  use  it  as  a  diuretic  and  in  gravelly  com-
plaints.

Pursch,  Fior.  Amer.,  says  it  is  useful  in  hysteria.

Clinicai,  Authorities. — Toothache,  C.  Hering,  MSS. ;  Obstinate  vesical  irri-
tability, E.  M.  Hale,  Am.  Hom.  Obs.,  v.  4,  p.  92 ;  Constant  pain  in  region  of  kidneys,
Hull,  Am.  Hom.  Obs.,  v.  4.  p.  116;  Dysuria,  E.  M.  Hale,  New  Eemedies;  Ure-
thral irritation,  Taber,  Organ.,  v.  1,  p.  223 ;  Fellger,  MSS. ;  Urinary  difficulty,
Kendell,  Am.  Hom.  Obs.,  v.  3,  269 ;  Stricture  of  urethra,  H.  W.,  v.  7,  p.  208 ;
Acute  prostitis,  E.  V.  Moffat  (contributed  by  Berridge) ;  Atrophy  of  breasts,  Or-
ganon,  vol.  1,  p.  223;  Tumor  ofmammce,  Hull,  Am.  Hom.  Obs.,  v.  4,  p.  115;  Scir-
rhous tumor  of  right  breast.  Hale,  N.  E.  Med.  Gaz.,  v.  2,  p.  4;  Cancer  of  breast,  E.  S.
Coburn,  Tr.  H.  M.  S.,  N.  Y.,  1870,  p.  471.

VOL. IV. — 4.


CHIMOPHILA  UMBELLATA.  50

•^  Inner  Head. Pain  in  left  frontal  protuberance.

■*  Outer  Head. •  Tinea  capitis.

^  Sight  and  Eyes. Halo  around  the  lamp  flame.

Eyes  painful.

TT^Sudden  stitch  in  front  part  of  both  eyes,  from  r.  to  1. ;

eyes  run  water.
Stabbing  or  shooting  pain  in  1.  eyeball.
Itching  and  smarting  of  edges  of  eyelids,  and  inside  of

eyelids.
Itching  of  1.  eye.

Stinging  pain  in  1.  eye ;  a  colored  halo  around  the  candle.
Blue  rings  around  eyes.
Pterygium;  cataract.
^  Ears. Pain  in  r.  ear.
Upper  Face. ■  A  flushing  of  cheeks  with  some  general  heat,

and  accelerated  pulse.
Pain  at  lower  edge  of  zygomatic  process  of  1.  superior

maxillary  bone,  above  second  bicuspid  tooth,  sore  on

pressure.
^"  Teeth. Continuous  pain  in  upper  teeth,  extending  into  r.

Drawing  in  an  upper  and  lower  tooth,  as  if  it  was  being
gently  pulled.

■  Toothache,  <  after  eating  and  from  exertion.

■  Cannot  close  the  teeth  at  night,  jaws  feel  stiff",  sleeps  with

open  mouth. ^Toothache.

■  Toothache,  >  by  cold  water.

^^  Taste  and  Tongue. Pungent,  bitter-sweet  taste.
Smarting  of  the  tongue.
Tongue  sore ;  full  of  little  vesicles ;  great  thirst  and  desire

to  cool  the  tongue.
;rTongue  furred,  more  towards  the  root,  no  appetite.
^^  Inner  Mouth. Vesicular  ulcers  in  mouth.
^^  Throat. ;rPalate  sore,  very  sensitive  to  warm  drink  or  food.

Rawness  of  upper  and  back  part  of  palate.
^*  Appetite,  Thirst. Great  increase  of  appetite.

Much  thirst ;  desire  to  cool  tongue.
^^  Eating. Poor  digestion.

Eating  aggravates  toothache.
^^  Stomach, l  l  Agreeable  sensation  in  stomach,  soon after,
followed  sometimes  by  an  extraordinary  increase  of  ap-
petite.
^^  Hypochondria. Aching pain below r. hypochondrium
whilst  writing.
•  Plepatitis.

I  I  Organic  disease  of  liver  with  ascites.
"  Abdomen. ■Abdominal  and  renal  dropsies,  in  broken  down
constitutions  and  intemperate  subjects.


51  CHIMOPHILA  UMBELLATA.

■Ascites  and  swelling  of  legs.

:  Atonic  or  passive  dropsies.

Abdomen  bloated.

I  I  Ascites  in  consequence  of  organic  affection  of  liver.

I  I  Scrofulous  swelling  of  abdominal  glands ;  enlarged  mes-
enteries.

Worm  troubles.
^°  Stool  and  Rectum. Griping  after  stool.

Sticking  pain  in  rectum,  1.  side,  deep  in.

Shooting  pain,  deep  seated,  in  1.  side  of  anus;  more  inter-
nal than  a  pile,  which  at  times  protrudes  there.

Bloody  mucous  stools.

i  Diarrhoea.

Inclination  to  stool  either  ineffectual  or  attended  with
great  pain.

■  Obstinate  constipation. ^Renal  disturbances. ^Cystitis.
I  Constipation  and  hemorrhoids. ^Dysuria.

f  Constipation,  stool  every  third  day. ^Vesical  irritability.

■  Sensation  of  swelling  in  perineum  on  sitting  down,  as  if

a  ball  was  pressing  against  it. /^Urinary  troubles.
■Acute  prostitis  from  sitting  on  a  cold,  wet  stone;  pain
and dysuria,  which increased to complete  retention
from  swelling  of  prostate;  pain  and  soreness  in  peri-
neum, with  sensation  as  if  sitting  on  a  ball.

■  Ineffectual  urging  to  stool. ^Dysuria.

^'  Urinary  Organs.  ■  Constant  pain  in  region  of  kidneys;
urine  scanty,  dark  colored,  fetid,  and  very  thick,  depos-
iting a  copious  sediment ;  obstinate  constipation.

■  Frequent  desire  to  urinate,  with  scanty  urine. ^Urinary

difficulty.

■  Vesical  tenesmus,  from  prolapsus  or  retroversion.

■  Pressing  fulness  in  region  of  bladder. ^Nephritis. ^Cys-

titis.
■Strangury.

■  Constant  disposition  to  urinate;  as  often  as  every  hour

or  two ;  passes  only  a  small  quantity.
Urging  to  urinate  after  voiding  urine. ^Nephritis,  etc.
:  Retention  of  urine.
M Difficult  urination,  cutting,  scalding  pain; sometimes

stream  is  split,  at  other  times  small  as  a  thread,  or  drops

pass  only. ^Stricture.
Inability  to  pass  urine  without  standing  with  the  feet  wide

apart  and  the  body  inclined  forward.

■  Catarrhal  affection  of  bladder.

■  Urethritis  with  purulent  or  profuse  mucous  discharge.
Copious,  clear,  limpid  urine.

■  ■Great  quantities  of  thick,  ropy,  bloody  mucus  in  urine.

■  Color  of  urine  changed  from  that  of  brick-dust  to  green

tea.


CHIMOPHILA  UMBELLATA.  52

TrGreenish-black  color  of  urine. (?Ague.

Urine  thick,  ropy,  of  brick  color.

I  Urine  scanty,  frequently  voided  with  much  pressing  pain

before,  scalding  and  smarting  during  and  after,  and

vesical  tenesmus. ^Dysuria.

■  Burning,  pricking  pain  during  emission  of  urine. ^Ob-

stinate vesical  irritability.

I  Urine  high  colored,  depositing  a  copious  mucous  sedi-
ment. ^Dysuria.

I  Tenderness  of  anterior  portion  of  vagina  (bladder)  and
urethra. ^Dysuria.

■  Constant  urging  to  urinate  without  sufficient  discharge;

catheter  will  not  enter;  <  when  sitting,  walks  about.

■  Causes  mucous  sediment  to  disappear  from  urine. ^Cys-

titis. ^Nephritis. ^DrojDsy,  etc.

■  Scanty  urine,  with  muco-purulent  sediment.

I  Lessens  the  lithic  acid  or  lithates,  while  it  increases  the

renal  secretion. ^Urinary  difficulty.
I  I  Albuminuria  occurring  during  Bright's  disease,
i  Advanced  stages  of  albuminuria.

■  Hgematuria  from  long  lasting  gonorrhoea.

■  Clots  of  coagulated  blood  pass  with  the  urine.
':  Chronic  nephritis ;  diabetes ;  gravel.

I  I  Dropsy  from  renal  disease.
^^  Male  Sexual  Organs. ■  Smarting  pain  from  neck  of  blad-
der the  whole  length  of  urethra  to  meatus.

■  Excessive  itching  and  painful  irritation  of  urethra  from

end  of  penis  to  neck  of  bladder. ^Urinary  difficulty.
Burning  in  urethra.
Atrophy  of  testicles.
■Sensation  of  swelling  in  perineum,  as  if  in  sitting  down

a  ball  was  pressing  against  it.. 6'Urinary  difficulty.

■  Disease  of  prostate  with  waste  of  prostatic  fluid.
:  Gonorrhoea  ;  chronic  gleet ;  syphilis.

^^  Female  Sexual  Organs. Prolapsus  and  slight  uterine  leu-
corrhoea. ^Dysuria.
i  Leucorrhoea.
Vaginal  prolapsus.
■Rapid  atrophy  of  breasts.
I  I  Atroj^hy  or  tumors  of  mammse.

■  Lump  in  left  breast  broke  leaving  small,  irregular  ulcer

with  ragged,  everted  edges,  sloughing  and  discharging

fetid  pus. ^Cancer  of  breast.
■Scirrhous  tumor  of  r.  breast,  about  an  inch  in  diameter ;

hard,  but  movable ;  nipple  drawn  in ;  a  good  deal  of

sharp  pain  in  tumor  and  in  axillse.
TrTaken  as  tea  for  cancer  on  breast,  three  years  after  the

cessation  of  menses,  she  had  soon  a  slight  return,  three

weeks  later  a  copious  flow,  and  another  two  weeks  later.


53  CHIMOPHILA  UMBELLATA.

I  Painful  tumor  of  mammae  in  a  young  unmarried  woman
^*  Lactation. Undue  secretion  or  suppression  of  milk.
^  Inner Chest  and  Lungs. Dull  pains  under  middle  of
sternum.
Pain  in  r.  side,  ribs,  and  integument  below  axilla.
Tuberculosis  of  lungs.
\  Hydrothorax.
^^  Neck  and  Back. I  l  A  most  uncommon  sensation  in  small
of  back,  in  region  of  kidneys ;  sometimes  on  one  side  of
spine,  sometimes  on  other,  as  if  something  were  flutter-
ing within,  without  occasioning  pain  or  uneasiness  of
any  sort.
On  back  and  thighs  painless  dark  red  pustules  which  do
not  suppurate.
^"  Upper  Limbs, l  Acute  rheumatism  of  shoulder.

Pain  in  r.  arm  about  upper  half  of  biceps  and  shoulder-
joint.
Pain  in  lower  part  of  1.  arm.
CEdematous  swelling  of  r.  arm  as  in  dropsy.
Stinging  in  swelling  on  arm.
Swelling  in  arm  feels  better  when  uncovered.
Fistulous  ulcer  on  r.  forearm,  with  stinging  and  crawling.
Paronychia.
^^  Lower  Limbs. An  opening  and  shutting  pain,  slow  pulsa-
tory in  middle  of  anterior  part  of  right  thigh,  very
singular,  and  leaving  a  severe  aching  and  a  tenderness
on  pressure,  whilst  lying  down.
Pain  in  flexors  of  left  knee,  extending  around  thigh,  im-
mediately above  patella  ;  pain  as  if  limb  were  severely
grasped.
Bruised  sensation  in  calves  and  thighs.
Cold  feet  in  evening,
i  Ischias.
^■'  Rest. Position. Motion. On  sitting  down :  as  if  a  ball
were  pressing  against  perineum.
Writing:  aching  below  r.  hypochondrium.
Exertion:  <  toothache.
^^  Nerves, l  Inward  trembling  without  mental  disturbance.
^Toothache.
■  Strength  improved. ^Liver  complaint,
i  Torpor  and  debility  with  kidney  aff'ection.
Hysteria.
^'  Sleep. ■  Would  have  slept  well  if  he  had  not  been  constantly
waked  by  calls  to  make  water. ^Vesical  irritability.
Great  drowsiness.

I  Sleeps  with  open  mouth,  cannot  close  the  jaws. ^Tooth-
ache.
^^  Time. At  night:  cannot  close  teeth.


CHIMOPHILA  UMBELLATA.  54

Worse  in  evening.
^^  Teinj)eratiire  and  Weather. Worse  in  damp  weather.

Shivering  after  washing  with  cold  water.

Cold  water :  >  toothache.

From  sitting  on  a  cold,  wet  stone:  acute  prostitis.
'**'  Fever. Great  heat,  irritation  and  redness,  followed  by  such
sharp  pain  that  profuse  sweat  over  whole  body  ensued.

I  I  Hectic  fever  and  night  sweats. ^Cystitis,  or  renal  dis-
ease.

■  Flushing  of  cheeks,  with  some  general  heat  and  acceler-
ated pulse.

i  Intermittent  or  low  fevers,  typhus.
*^  Attacks. Every  third  day,  constipated  stool.
^^  Locality  and  Direction. Left :  pain  in  frontal  protuber-
ance; stabbing  or  shooting  pain  in  eyeball;  itching  of
eye;  stinging  in  eye;  pain  in  superior  maxillary  bone;
pain  in  rectum  and  anus.

Right:  pain  in  ear;  pain  from  upper  teeth  into  eye;  ach-
ing below  hypochondrium.

Right  to  left:  sudden  stitch  in  eyes.
^^  Sensations. As  if  tooth  was  being  gently  pulled ;  as  if  a
ball  were  pressing  against  perineum  ;  as  if  sitting  on  a
ball.

Pain: in  1.  frontal  protuberance;  in  eyes;  in  r.  ear;  at
- lower  edge  of  zygomatic  process  of  1.  superior  maxillary
bone ;  continuous  in  upper  teeth ;  extending  into  r.  eye ;
in  region  of  kidneys.

Stitch :  in  front  part  of  both  eyes  from  r.  to  left.

Stabbing:  in  1.  eyeball.

Sticking :  in  1.  side  of  rectum.

Shooting  in  1.  eyeball ;  in  1.  side  of  anus.

Stinging:  in  1.  eye;  in  ulcer.

Smarting:  of  edges  of  lids  and  inside  of  lids;  of  tongue.

Soreness :  of  palate ;  of  tongue.

Aching:  below  r.  hypochondrium.

Drawing:  in  an  upper  and  lower  tooth.

Griping:  after  stool.

Pressing  fulness:  in  region  of  bladder.

Stiffness:  in  jaws.

Crawling:  in  ulcer.

Itching:  of  edges  of  eyelids  and  inside  of  lids;  of  1.  eye.

Swelling:  in  perineum.
**  Tissues. Acts  in  a  very  prominent  degree  on  the  kidneys.

Abnormal  elimination  of  solid  matters  in  the  urine,  with
atrophy  of  glandular  structures.

Dropsy  from  renal  diseases.

Anasarca  and  ascites  following  intermittents.

I  Glandular  enlargement,  especially  of  lymphatics; en-
largement of  mesenteric  glands. ^Scrofulosis.


55  CHIMOPHILA  UMBELLATA.

Scrofula,  with  ulcers  of  an  indolent  or  flabby  character.

Tumors  in  mammse.

Useful  in  scrofula  and  chronic,  rheumatic,  and  nephritic
affections.

In  stranguary,  chronic  gonorrhoea,  and  catarrh  of  the  blad-
der ;  and  as  antilithic,  it  is  said  to  diminish  lithic  acid
in  urine.

In  dropsy  it  is  better  adapted  to  cases  accompanied  with
weakness  and  loss  of  appetite.

Enlargement  of  lymphatic  glands  in  neck.

■  Enlarged  lymphatic  and  mesenteric  glands.
*^  Skin. Redness,  vesication,  or  desquamation  of  skin.
Ulcers  of  an  indolent  and  flabby  character.
Malignant  ulcers.

Ulcer,  discharging  yellowish  ichor.

Crawling  and  stinging  in  ulcer.

I  I  Jaundice  and  dropsy.

Eruption  of  dark  red  spots  without  sensation.

Anasarca  following  intermittents.

I  Scarlet  fever.  ^

■*^  Stages  of  Life,  Constitution. Cachectic  and  scrofulous  in-
dividuals.

Broken  down  constitutions  in  intemperate  subjects;  ab-
dominal and  renal  dropsies.

A  woman,  ait.  21 ;  cancer  of  breast.

A  man,  £et.  38  ;  stricture  of  urethra.

Plethoric,  hysterical  young  woman  ;  dysuria.

Sir  James  C. ;  organic  disease  of  liver  with  ascites.

Married  lady,  set.  34,  suffering  formerly  from  uterine
troubles  ;  obstinate  vesical  irritability.

Woman,  set.  26 ;  in  a  cachectic  condition,  menses  always
scant ;  scirrhous  tumor  of  breast ;  the  mother  of  patient
had  also  had  scirrhous  tumor  of  breast,  necessitating
extirpation  of  the  gland.

Old  gentleman;  suffered  for  years  with  "the  gravel,"  so
called  by  his  physicians.
^  Relations.  Compare:  Apocynum;  (^Chimoph.  cured  ascites
and  swelling  of  legs,  where  Apoc.  had  been  of  benefit
but  did  not  cure),  Coffea  {Chimoph.  cured  toothache,  re-
lieved by  cold  water,  when  Coffea  failed).  Ledum,  Rho-
dod.  and  Kalmia,  all  Ericacese.

:  Recommended  as  a  substitute  for  Uva  ursi.


CHININUM  ARSENICOSUM.  56

CHININUM  ARSENICOSUM.

Arseniate  of  Quinine. 2  C20  -^24  -^2^2-  ^^  -^3-  4  ^2^-

Until  proved  by  the  Philadelphia  Clinical  Society,  at  the  instigation  of  Dr.
William  H.  Bigler,  who  cured  with  it  a  case  of  scrofulous  ophthalmia,  the  only
proving  we  had  was  the  short  one  by  Dr.  Muhr,  contained  in  Allen's  Encyclo-
pcedia,  v.  3,  here  designated  No.  6.  The  provers  of  the  Clinical  Society  are:
1.  Dr.  W.  B.  Trites,  2d  dec.  trit.;  2.  Mr.  J.  J.  Sturges,  1st  dec.  trit. ;  3.  Mr.  E.
W.  Le  Roy,  6th  dec.  trit.  (both  under  supervision  of  Dr.  C.  Mohr) ;  4.  Dr,  C.  B.
Knerr,  30th  cent.,  and  6.  Mr.  Walter  K.  Furness  (under  supervision  of  Dr.  Knerr)
2d  dec.  trit.

Clinical  Authorities. — Intermittent  hemicrania,  Altschul.,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf.,
V.  5,  p.  82;  Headache,  D.  F.  and  J.  C.  Moore,  N.  E.  Med.  Gaz.,  1869,  v.  4,  p.  446;
Occipito-cervico  intercostal  neuralgia,  Payr,  Hom.  Klink.,  1869,  p.  19 ;  Rheumatic
headache,  H.  G.  Bojanus,  Eaue's  E.,  1874,  p.  257 ;  Scrofulous  ophthalmia  and  kera-
titis superficialis,  Wm.  H.  Bigler  (unpublished);  Malignant  angina  in  scarlatina,
Kafka's  Therapie,  1,  p.  433:  Diphtheritis,  numerous  cases,  Findeisen,  A.  H.  Z.,  v.
87,  p.  113  and  196  ;  Diphtheria,  A.  Neuschsefer,  A.  H.  Z.,  v.  78,  1869;  Intermitting
diarrhoea,  Kafka,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf.,  v.  5,  p.  410;  Suffocative  attacks  in  tuberculosis,
Kafka,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf.,  v.  5,  p.  797;  Epileptiform  spasms,  Payr,  Hom.  Klinik,
1869,  p.  2 ;  Interm,ittent  fever,  S.  E.  Geiser,  Cin.  Med.  Adv.,  v.  4,  p.  79.

^  Mind. Depressed  in  spirit,  with  dulness  of  mind^.

Listless  after  previous  fever;  no  desire  to  do  anything^.
Desire  to  sit  or  lie  in  one  place  and  not  be  disturbed^.
Mental  dulness,  with  inclination  to  vomit^.
■Anxiety  and  nightly  delirium. ^Diphtheria.
The  chilly  waves  are  brought  on  by  thinking  of  them 2.

■  Anxiety,  with  dyspnoea. ^Tuberculosis.

Greatest  anxiety,  with  unquenchable  thirst;  must  sit  up
bent  forward,  if  possible  at  open  window. ^/Tuberculosis.

■  Child  sits  up  in  bed  lamenting. ^Keratitis.

I  iHe  believes  he  cannot  long  endure  such  utter  prostra-
tion. ^Epilepsy.

■  Irritable  mood  precedes  the  headache,  which  is  <  by

mental  and  bodily  exercise. ^Hemicrania.

■  In  consequence  of  fright,  1.  sided  hemicrania.

■  Sensorium. ■Confused  feeling  in  head. ^Diphtheria.
^  Inner  Head. ■Severe,  darting,  tortuous  pains  running  up
into  head  and  preventing  sleep.

■  Without  previous  aura  he  feels  it  rushing  like  lightning

through  brain  and  down  r.  side  of  neck  into  arm,  which
is  distorted  and  wrenched  so  as  to  crack  audibly;  the


57  CHININUM  ARSENICOSUM.

facial  muscles  are  convulsively  drawn,  sight  and  speech
cease,  consciousness '  leaves,  and  he  falls  to  the  ground ;
the  attack  is  followed  by  cold  sweat,  loud  eructations
and  a  feeling  of  utter  prostration. ^Epileptiform  spasms.

Confused  headache  i.  .

Frontal  and  occipital  headache^.

Headache  affecting  occipital  protuberance^.

Dull  headache  in  frontal  region,  not  relieved  by  eating.^

Neuralgic  pain  in  r.  temple  and  above  eye,  lasting  several
days,  with  inclination  to  move  the  skin  over  the  aching
place  with  his  hand^.

■  Tearing,  boring  pain  in  1.  side  of  head,  affecting  the  eye,
with  flickering,  pain  and  lachrymation;  ringing  in  ears,
nausea  and  vomiting  during  the  attack,  which  regu-
larly appears  at  midnight;  is  subject  to  furuncles  and
abscesses  which  relieve  the  head.
^  Outer  Head.  I  Burning  pain  in  1.  occipital  protuberance,
extending  down  nape  of  neck,  along  shoulder-blade  and
over  I:  half  of  thorax,  producing  orthopnoea;  the  attack
commences  with  stretching  and  yawning  and  a  shaking
chill,  generally  in  the  morning,  and  lasts  until  after
midnight.

Bruised  feeling  all  over  head  after  fever  and  sleep  2.

Neuralgic  pain  about  head,  particularly  in  temples ;  <  in
1.  side;  >  by  rubbing  the  aching  spots*.

Slight  painful  pressure  in  forehead  and  temples^.

Slight  sudden  throbbing  of  temporal  arteries  after  1  p.m.
^  Sight  and  Eyes.  ■  Intense  photophobia  and  spasms  of  or-
bicularis muscles,  gushing  hot  tears,  large  ulcers  attack-
ing each  eye,  aggravation  from  midnight  until  3  a.m.,
during  which  time  the  child  sat  up  in  bed  lamenting.
^Keratitis.

■  Scrofulous  ophthalmia;  <  after  1  a.m.

■  Flickering  before  1.  eye,  with  pain  and  lachrymation.

6'Hemicrania.
"  Hearing  and  Ears. ■  Ringing  in  ears. ^Hemicrania.
^  Smell  and  Nose. Watery  discharge  from  nose''^.

Constant  running  of  profuse  limpid  and  watery  discharge^.
Yellow  discharge  from  nose^.
Left  nostril  fills  up  when  lying  on  that  side  2.
Nostrils  stop  up,  particularly  left,  on  lying  down,  prevent-
ing breathing  through  nose^.
Nose  clearer  when  prover  is  in  an  erect  posture  and  out

of  doors^.
Sneezing,  <  sore  throat^.
Profuse  discharge  from  both  nostrils  2.

■  Nose  stopped  up  with purulent  and  bloody  substance.

^Diphtheria.


CHININUM  ARSENICOSUM.  58

I  Corners  of  nose  excoriated. ^Diphtheria.
^  Upper  Face. iFace  pale,  sallow  and  bloated. ^Intermit-
tent fever.
^  Lower  Face. ■  Swelling  of  submaxillary  and  parotid  glands.
^Diphtheria.

iBlueness  of  lips. ^Tuberculosis.
"  Taste  and  Tongue. Sweetish  taste  after  clearing  throat
and  coughing  2.

Yellow  slimy  coating  on  tongue,  with  bitter  taste ^.

Soreness  and  redness  of  tip  of  tongue^.

Metallic  bitter  taste  in  mouth^.

I  Tongue  coated  thick  and  brown. ^Diphtheria.
^^  Inner  Mouth. Burning  canker  spot  inside  of  1.  upper  lip^.

iFoetor  oris. ^Diphtheritis. ^Scarlatina.
^^  Throat. Post  nasal  catarrh;  <  on  1.  side^.

■  Diphtheria,  diffused  blackish  exudation,  hoarseness,  great

prostration,  confusion  in  head,  nightly  delirium,  diffi-
cult swallowing,  fetid  stench  from  mouth,  dry  tongue,
dry  skin,  pulse  130,  fever  assuming- a  putrid  type^.

Constant  hacking  and  clearing  of  throat^.

Throat  feels  sore  and  inflamed,  with  a  good  deal  of  cough^.

Throat  feels  raw  and  sore;  <  by  coughing  and  sneezing^.

■  Malignant angina  during  scarlatina, with  paleness of

skin,  quick  exhaustion  and  rapid  destruction  of  mucous
membrane  of  fauces.

■  Diphtheria:  foe  tor  oris,  swelling  of  submaxillary  glands,

frequently  also  of  parotids,  violent  fever  and  great
prostration.

■  Diphtheria:  strong  foetor  oris;  submaxillary  glands  swol-

len and  painful ;  breathing  through  mouth  because  nose
is  stopped  up  with  purulent  and  bloody  substance;
corners  of  nose  excoriated;  tongue  coated  thick  and
brown,  both  tonsils  covered  with  a  grey  exudation,  on
right  tonsil  a  bloody  ulcer  with  uneven  edges  which
corresponded  to  size  of  a  membrane  just  retched  out;
lower  half  of  uvula  gangrenous,  upper  half  covered
with  exudation;  posterior  wall  of  fauces  completely
covered  with  exudation;  swallowing  of  liquids  very
difficult;  great  weakness;  sleeplessness;  pulse  small,
very  frequent.

^*  Appetite,  Thirst. No  appetite  for  breakfast  after  fever  in
the  night^.
No  thirst  with  the  fever^.

■Thirst which cannot  be appeased;  during attacks of
suffocation. (^Tuberculosis.

^^  Eating  and  Drinking. 'Eggs  and  fish  cause  painless  di-
arrhrjea  at  once. ^Rheumatic  headache.

■  She  does  not  like  cold  water. ^Rheumatic  headache.


59  CHININUM  ARSENICOSUM.

Water  tastes  bitter,  or  has  a  disagreeable  flavor  like  the
water  found  in  cars^.
^^  Hiccough,  Belching,  Nausea  and  Vomiting. Inclination
to  vomit,  with  mental  dulness^.

Sudden  inclination  to  vomit  at  2  p.m.,  lasting  only  a  few
minutes^.

Regurgitation  of  food*.

Eructations. ^Epilepsy.

I  Nausea  and  vomiting,  followed  by  sleep. ^Hemicrania.
^'^  Scrobiculum and Stomach. Sensation from stomach
through  entire  intestinal  canal  as  if  diarrhoea  would  set
in*.

Burning,  sore  feeling  in  stomach;  <  on  motion,  particu-
larly going  up  stairs*.

Uncomfortable  feeling  in  stomach  is  >  by  expanding  the
chest*.

Burning  in  stomach*.
^^  Hypochondria. ■  Left  hypochondriac  region  enlarged.  ^In-
termittent fever.  *
^^  Abdomen. ■  Abdomen  bloated. ^Intermittent  fever.

Sore  pain  in  a  small  spot,  which  could  be  covered  with
tip  of  a  finger  below  and  to  right  of  umbilicus,  coming
and  going,  but  continuing  all  day^.

Very  severe  colic  ^.

Pressure  in  solar  plexus,  as  if  he  had  eaten  tough  meat  or
hard  nuts,  extending  towards  back  where  it  changes  to
a  pinching  sensation,  spine  painfully  sensitive  to  touch
at  this  point ^.
^^  Stool  and  Rectum.  Diarrhoea  from  malarious  poisoning ;
stools  thin,  watery,  undigested,  off"ensive,  dark  or  light
brown,  sometimes  with  a  meal-like  sediment.

From  ten  to  fifteen  painless,  watery,  very  off'ensive  stools
from  6  to  10  a.m.,  with  burning  in  anus  after  each  pas-
sage; slightly  emaciated,  pale  and  weak.

I  Fetid  diarrhoea  with  pains  in  bowels.  ^Intermittent
fever.
^'  Urinary  Organs.  ■  Spasmodic  retention  of  urine;  >  by
application  of  hot  cloths  to  chest,  which,  however,  is
followed  by  syncope.  ^Occipito-intercostal  neuralgia.
^  Voice  and  Larynx.  Trachea  and  Bronchia,  i  Hoarse-
ness. ^Diphtheria.

Aching  in  bronchial  region;  <  1.  side*.

I  Seemed  to  prevent  diphtheritic  membrane  from  spread-
ing to  larynx. ^Malignant  scarlatina.
^^  Respiration. Respiration  very  free  as  if  the  thorax  were
hollow^.

iBlueness  of  lips,  hands  and  nails  with  attacks  of  suffoca-
tion, which  begin  in  morning  and  last  until  noon.
^Tuberculosis.


CHININUM  ARSENICOSUM.  60

I  Must  sit  bent  forward  and  if  possible  at  an  open  window

during  attack  of  suffocation;  <  by  any  other  position.
■  Dyspnoea  with  anxiety. ^Tuberculosis.
Every  forenoon  at  9  o'clock  attacks  of  suffocating  spells.
"^  Cough. Coughing  <  sore  throat^.

Cough  with  but  little  expectoration^.

Slight  cough  at  long  intervals,  seems  to  come  from  full

feeling  in  chest^.
^  Inner  Chest  and  Lungs, i  Senile  subacute  catarrh  with

periodical  fever,  generally  <  at  night.
Peculiar  colicky  pain  in  lower  part  of  1.  lung  felt  like  a

pain  from  flatulence,  comes  and  c[uickly  passes  away,

often  repeated  1.
Sharp  stitch  in  lower  part  of  r.  chest  in  front;  <  when

inspiring,  causing  him  to  cry  out^.
Desire  to  inflate  lungs  to  their  fullest  extent  to  relieve  un-
comfortable feeling  in  stomach  while  riding  in  the  open

air  on  a  raw  cold  day^.
The  chest  feels  hollow  and  respiration  freer*.
Limbs  icy  cold; cold  clammy  sweat  all  over; greatest

anxiety  and  unquenchable  thirst; must  sit up,  bent

forward  if  possible,  at  open  window. ^Tuberculosis.
^^  Heart,  Pulse  and  Circulation, n  Angina  pectoris,  with

dropsical  symptoms,  venous  hypersemia  and  cyanosis.
Trembling  of  heart,  with  rumbling  noise,  unable  to  dis-
tinguish ]3ulsations,  lasting  one  hour^.
PaljDitation ;  noticed  on  leaning  against  back  ^.
Sensation  as  if  heart  had  stopped^.
No  perception  of  beating  of  heart^.
Beat  of  heart  and  pulse  irregular,  numbering  200  per

minute^.
Pulse  cannot  be  felt  on  1.  side^.
Beat  of  heart  becomes  regular  towards  noon^.
Pulse  in  radial  and  temporal  arteries  200"^.
I  Pulse  small,  very  frequent. ^Diphtheria.
I  Pulse  130. /^Diphtheria.
Pulse  98,  full  and  strong  during  fever^.
^  Outer  Chest, l  Paralysis  of  respiratory  muscles  on  1.  side.

^Intercostal  neuralgia.
■  Violent  neuralgic  pain  in  1.  mammary  region,  as  though

that  part  were  torn  with  red  hot  tongs. ^Intercostal

neuralgia.
Aching  in  intercostal  muscles,  r.  side  in  locality  of  sixth

and  seventh  ribs  on  making  inspiration*.
^^  Neck  and  Back. Back  feels  weak  as  after  taking  a  long

journey^.
Pain in muscles between 1.  shoulder  and neck, as if

sprained,  on  rising  from  sleep  at  4  p.m.*


61  CHININUM  ARSEXICOSUM.

^"  Upper  Limbs. Painful  weariness  in  shoulder  and  elbow-
joints^.
Aching  in  biceps  of  1.  arm^.
Acute  fugitive  j)ain  in  1.  olecranon  process^.
Pain  in  flexors  of  1.  forearm  on  radial  side  near  elbow^.
Palms  of  hands  hot  and  dry^.
Sore,  aching  fugitive  pains  in  first  phalanx  of  1.  thumb,

the  same,  but  in  a  less  degree,  in  right^,
I  Blueness  of  hands  and  nails. ^Tuberculosis.
^^  Lower  Limbs. Weariness  of  lower  extremities.

Gooseflesh  on  lower  extremities,  with  chillv  feelino-2.
Sore,  aching  fugitive  pain  in  1.  leg  near  knee^.
Aching,  sore  pain  in  anterior  lower  two-thirds  of  1.  tibia  ^.
Itching  on  internal  malleolus  of  r.  foot  at  2  a.m.  ;  on  in-
vestigation discovered  eruption  of  bright  red  pimples^.
Inci'eased  tenderness  of  corn  on  1.  little  toe;  had  to  remove
shoe  to  ease  pain"*.
^^  Limbs  in  General, i  Limbs  icy  cold. ^Tuberculosis.
^  Rest. Position. Motion. Desire  to  sit  or  lie  in  one  place.
Desire  to  move  skin  over  aching  place  in  temple  with  his

hand.
Lying :  on  1.  side,  nostril  fills  up.
Sitting :  bent  forward  >  anxiety  and  suffocation.
Leaning  against  back  :  palpitation  noticeable.
Erect  posture  :  nose  clearer.

Expanding  chest :  >  uncomfortable  feeling  in  stomach.
Motion: and going up stairs < burning soreness in

stomach;  <  intercostal  neuralgia.
Bodily  exercise : <  headache.

Riding  in  open  air :  desire  to  expand  lungs  to  relieve  un-
comfortable feeling  in  stomach.
Sneezing: <  sore  throat;  and  coughing  <  rawness  in
throat.
^"Nerves, l  Great  j^rost  ration. ^Diphtheria.
Lassitude  and  fatigue*.

Feels  as  when  suftering  from  partially  developed  malaria^.
Felt  sore  and  ached  all  over^.
Felt  like  one  having  taken  a  long  journey  2.

■  Great  prostration,  followed  by  a  deep  sleep  after  an  attack

of  dyspnoea. ^Tuberculosis.
•  I  I  Epilepsy ; after attack cold persj^iration,  eructations,
and  a  feeling  of  such  utter  prostration  that  patient  be-
lieves he  cannot  endure  it  long.
^'  Sleep. Goes  to  sleep  after  tea  and  sleeps  heavily  all  night*.

■  Deep  sleep  after  suffocative  attacks. ^Tuberculosis.

I  Awakes  from  sleep  exhausted  and  bathed  in  sweat  after
an  attack  of  dyspnoea. ^Tuberculosis.

Restless  until  3  a.m.,  constantly  changing  position,  par-
ticularly as  soon  as  pillow  becomes  warm^.


CHININUM  ARSENICOSUM.  62

Sleep  frequently  interrupted^.

iSleejDlessness. ^Diphtheria.
^  Time. Nightly :  delirium  in  diphtheria.

At  night:  senile  subacute  catarrh  <;  sleeps  heavily;  is
more  feverish.

From  midnight  until  3  a.m.  :  ophthalmia  <.

From  morning  until  after  midnight:  burning  pain  in
head  with  chills.

At  2  A.M. :  itching  eruption  on  internal  malleolus  of  r.  foot.

Until  3  A.M. :  restless.

At  4  A.M. :  sprained  feeling  in  muscles  of  back.

From  morning  to  noon :  suffocation  with  blueness  of  lips,
hands  and  nails.

In  morning:  broken-up  feeling  after  fever,  no  appetite
for  breakfast.

6  to  10  A.M. :  diarrhoea.

At  9  A.M. :  suffocating  spells.

Toward  noon  :  beat  of  heart  becomes  regular.

Forenoon  :  chill  at  irregular  hours.

Towards  midnight :  fever  following  chilliness,  pulse  90.

After  1  P.M.:  throbbing  of  temporal  arteries.

At  2  P.M.:  sudden  inclination  to  vomit.

After  8.30  p.m.:  chilliness  with  gooseflesh.
^^  Temperature  and  Weather. Hot  cloths  to  chest  >  reten-
tion of  urine  but  cause  syncope.

Warmth  of  pillow  <  restlessness.

Open  window  :  sits  there  to  >  anxiety  and  suffocation.

On  a  raw,  cold  day,  while  riding,  desire  to  expand  lungs
to  relieve  uncomfortable  feeling  in  stomach.

Damp  weather :  is  sensitive  to  it,  and  feels  chilly.  ^Rheu-
matic headache.

Cool  part  of  bed  <  chilliness.

Inclination  to  throw  off  covers  and  open  windows,  with
fever  towards  midnight.
*"  Fever. Chilly  feeling  like  cold  waves  after  8|-  p.m.  in  bed,
with  gooseflesh  all  over  body,  but  particularly  on  legs^.

Chilliness  coming  in  waves,  with  restlessness;  <  by  mov-
ing hands  and  feet  to  a  cool  part  of  bed,  also  by  think-
ing of  it^.

I  Chill  always  in  forenoon,  not  at  a  regular  hour,  however;
sometimes  once  every  day,  again  every  other  clay ;  some-
times paroxysms  would  close  with  perspiration,  some-
times without;  before  the  attack,  headache,  yawning
and  stretching. ^Intermittent  fever.

After  chilliness,  feverish  towards  midnight,  pulse  98,  full
and  strong,  with  inclination  to  throw  off  covers  and
open  windows,  no  sweat^.

Feverish  all  the  time,  but  more  so  at  night^.


63  CHININUM  ARSENICOSUM.

No  sweat  after  fever,  but  weak,  broken-up  feeling  in  the
morning  and  no  appetite  for  breakfast^.

iViolentfever  with  great  prostration. ^Diphtheria. ^Ma-
lignant scarlatina.
^^  Attacks, Periodicity. Periodically : furuncles and ab-
scesses. ^Hemicrania.

Like  cold  waves :  chilliness  in  evening.

At  long  intervals :  slight  cough  from  full  feeling  in  chest.

Coming  and  going  quickly :  peculiar  colicky  pain  in  lower
part  of  1.  lung,  often  repeated.

Coming  and  going,  all  day :  sore  pain  in  spot  below  and
to  r.  of  umbilicus.

Lasting  a  few  minutes :  inclination  to  vomit.

Lasting  one  hour :  tremor  of  heart.

Every  day  or  every  other  day :  chill.

Lasting  several  days :  neuralgia  in  head.
^  Locality  and  Direction.  Left :  hemicrania ;  boring  in
side  of  head,  affecting  eye ;  burning  in  occipital  protu-
berance, down  nape  of  neck,  along  shoulder-blade  and
over  half  of  thorax  ;  neuralgia  about  head ;  flickering
before  eye ;  nostril  fills  up  when  lying  on  side ;  canker
spot  inside  upper  lip  ;  post  nasal  catarrh  <  ;  hypochon-
driac region  enlarged ;  aching  in  bronchial  region  ;  pe-
culiar colicky  pain  in  lower  part  of  lung ;  pulse  cannot
be  felt ;  paralysis  of  resj)iratory  muscles ;  neuralgia  in
mammary  region ;  pain  as  if  sprained  between  shoulder
and  neck;  aching  in  biceps;  acute  pain  in  olecranon
process ;  pain  in  flexors  of  forearm ;  pains  in  thumb ;
pain  in  leg  near  knee ;  pain  in  anterior  lower  two-thirds
of  tibia ;  tender  corn  on  little  toe.

Right:  rushing  like  lightning  through  brain  and  down
side  of  neck  into  arm ;  neuralgia  in  temple  and  above
eye ;  diphtheritic  ulcer  on  tonsil ;  sore  pain  in  small
spot  to  r.  of  umbilicus;  sharp  stitch  in  lower  part  of
chest,  in  front ;  aching  in  intercostal  muscles,  locality
of  sixth  and  seventh  ribs; pains  in  thumb;  itching
eruption  on  internal  malleolus  of  foot.
*^  Sensations. As  if  diarrhoea  would  set  in  ;  as  if  heart  had
stopped ;  as  if  torn  with  red  hot  tongs  in  1.  mammary
region  ;  as  after  a  long  journey,  weakness  in  back  ;  as  if
he  had  eaten  tough  meat  or  hard  nuts,  in  solar  plexus ;
as  when  suffering  from  partially  developed  malaria.
Pains :  in  flexors  of  1.  forearm.
Acute  pain :  in  1.  olecranon  process.
Neuralgic  pain  :  in  r.  temple  and  above  eyes ;  about  head,

particularly  in  temples ;  in  1.  mammary  region.
Stitch :  in  lower  r.  chest.
Darting :  running  up  into  head.


CHININUM  ARSENICOSUM.  64

Tearing :  in  1.  side  of  head  and  eye.

Boring :  in  1.  side  of  head  and  eye.

Burning:  in  1.  occipital  protuberance  to  nape  of  neck,
along  shoulder-blade  and  over  1.  half  of  thorax;  canker
spot  in  upper  lip  ;  in  stomach  ;  in  anus.

Colicky  pain  :  in  abdomen ;  in  lower  part  of  1.  lung.

Raw  feeling :  in  throat.

Sore  pain :  in  a  small  spot  below  and  to  r.  of  umbilicus.

Sprained  pain  :  in  muscles  of  back  between  shoulder  and
neck.

Pinching :  back,  in  region  of  solar  plexus.

Pressure  :  in  forehead  and  temples ;  in  solar  plexus.

Tenderness:  of  corn  on  1.  little  toe.

Aching :  in  bronchial  region ;  iii  intercostal  muscles  r.
side ;  in  biceps ;  in  phalanges  of  thumbs ;  in  1.  leg  near
knee ;  in  anterior  lower  1.  tibia ;  all  over.

Dull  pain  :  in  frontal  region.

Bruised  feeling :  all  over  head.

Sore  feeling :  in  throat ;  in  stomach ;  all  over.

Broken-up  feeling :  in  morning  after  fever.

Lightning-like  sensation  runs  through  brain  and  down
r.  side  of  neck  into  arm.

Tortuous  pains  :  run  up  into  head.

Hollow  feeling :  in  chest.

Uncomfortable  feeling :  in  stomach.

Weariness,  painful :  in  shoulder  and  elbow-joints.

Throbbing :  of  temporal  arteries.

Chilly  feeling:  with  gooseflesh  all  over  body.

Itching :  on  internal  r.  malleolus.
*^  Tissues. Dropsical  symptoms,  venous  hypersemia  and  cy-
anosis.
^■'  Touch. Passive  Motion. Touch  :  spine  sensitive  to.

Rubbing :  >  aching  spots  in  head.

Pressure  of  shoe :  <  aching  of  corn.
*^  Skin. Recommended  in  plague  by  Lorbacher.

I  Dry  skin. ^Diphtheria.

Gooseflesh  over  the  whole  body,  particularly  lower  ex-
tremities 2.

■  Pallor  of  skin,  with  rapid  exhaustion. /^Scarlatina.
I  Cold,  clammy  sweat  all  over. ^Tuberculosis.
Cold  perspiration  after  attacks. 6'Epilepsy.

■  Periodical  furuncles and  abscesses,  which relieve the

head. ^Hemicrania.
*^  Stages  of  Life,  Constitution. ■  Lady,  set.  58,  hydrogenoid

constitution;  rheumatic  headache.
A  man;  epileptiform  spasms  of  nine  years  standing,  caused

by  masturbation  and  use  of  spirituous  drinks.
A  young  lady  of  slender  build,  set.  20 ;  diphtheria.


65  CHININUM  ARS.— CHININUM  MUR.

A  stout  girl,  £et.  10 ;  diphtheria.

Strong  man  of  sanguine  temperament;  intermittent  hemi-

crania  of  three  years  standing.
Woman,  set.  50 ;  diarrhoea.

A  tuberculous  woman,  set.  30 ;  suffocative  attacks.
Albert  S.,  set.  4;  had  chills  for  two  weeks;  intermittent

fever.
^  Relations. Compare:  Apis  (diphtheria),  Arsen.  (neuralgias,

diarrhoea,  tuberculosis),  Cinchon.  (diarrhoea,  suffocative

attacks  in  tuberculosis).


CHININUM  MURIATICUM.

Muriate  of  Quinia.  C2Q  H^^  N^  0^,  HCl,  SH^  0.

Clinic Aii  Authorities:  Intermittent  Fever,  a.nd  Sclerotitis  rheumatica  inter-
mittens, Frank's  Mag.,  v.  4.

Used  by  Liebold  and  other  surgeons  of  the  N.  Y.  Ophthahnic  Hospital,  at
the  instigation  of  Dr.  Belcher,  in  various  diseases  of  the  eye,  particularly  when
accompanied  by  severe  neuralgic  pains.

^  Sight  and  Eyes. ■  Intense  pain  in  and  around  eye,  periodic
in  character  and  accompanied  by  chills.

I  I  Lachrymation,  photojDhobia  and  violent  paroxysms  of
pain  in  the  eye,  daily,  at  5  p.m. ^Sclerotitis  rheumatica.

Pannus :  severe,  intermitting  pains ;  anaemic  conditions  of
malarial  origin.

■  Ulceration  of  cornea  of  malarial  origin,  or  dependent
upon  anaemia,  especially  when  iris  becomes  affected,
with  severe  pain  in  or  above  eye ;  periodic  in  character,
especially  when  accompanied  by  chills.

Ulcers  formed  in  the  course  of  pannus,  with  much  pain  in
morning.

Severe  neuralgic  pains  in  iritis  and  other  diseases  of  the
eye.

I  Trachoma  with  and  without  pannus.
^^  Bronchia. Fatiguing  cough  with  rattling  in  bronchi,  with-
out  expectoration. ^Intermittent following broncho-
pneumonia.
^^  Time. In  morning:  pain  in  pannus  <.

At  5  A.M.,  daily,  shaking  chill  with  cough.

At  5  P.M.,  daily,  sclerotitis  rheumatica  <.
^'^  Fever. 1  1  Shaking  chill  daily  at  5  a.m.,  accompanied  by


CHININUM  MUR.— CHININUM  SULF.  66

fatiguing  cough,  rattling  in  bronchi,  but  no  expectora-
tion, burning  heat  followed  by  sweat  and  great  pros-
tration.

^'  Attacks,  Periodicity. I  Periodic  pain  in  and  around  eyes.
I  I  Paroxysms  of  pain  daily  at  5  p.m. ^Sclerotitis  rheu-

matica.
Intermitting  pains :  pannus.

^"^  Sensations. Intense  pain :  in  and  around  eyes.

Neuralgic  pains:  in  iritis  and  other  eye  affections.

*^  Stages  of  Life,  Constitution.  A  widow,  set.  54,  phleg-
matic constitution;  intermittent  fever,  following  bron-
cho-pneumonia.

^  Relations.  Compare:  Chin,  sulph.  (Chin.  mur.  cured  inter-
mittent following  broncho-pneumonia  when  CJiin.  sulph.
failed.)


CHININUM  SULFURICUM.

Sulphate  of  Quinine  or  Chinin. ^C^f^H^^N^  0^,H2SOrj-\-1H2  0.


One  of  the  earliest  provings  was  that  by  A.  Noack,  in  1839,  Journal  fiir  Arz-
neimiitellehre,Y.  2,  p.  379;  who  also  proved  Cinchoninum  sulfuricum,  in  1842,  Hy-
gea,  v.  16. For  other  provings,  see  Encyclopedia,  v.  3.

The  pernicious  and  dangerous  effects  of  crude  doses  of  this  drug,  given  in  ex-
cess, are  too  well  known  to  need  mention.  When  indicated,  as  this  remedy  often
is,  in  the  worst  forms  of  intermittent,  there  is  more  safety  and  reliability  to  be
found  in  the  use  of  the  potencies,  even  the  higher,  which  act  promptly  and  well,
than  in  the  use  of  massive  doses.  In  the  words  of  Dr.  H.  C.  Allen,  the  author  of
Therapeutics  of  Intermittent  Fever,  wliich  should  be  in  the  hands  of  every  homoeo-
pathic practitioner:  "there  is  a  wide  difference  between  suppressing  and  curing  a
fever  paroxysm,  or  any  other  disease ;  the  homoeopath  can  and  ought  to  cure,  not
'break  up'  the  chill,  'suppress,'  or  'cover  up'  the  disease."

Clinical  Authorities. — Intermittent  cephalalgia,  Frank,  v.  2;  Periodical,
suborbital  neuralgia,  Escallier,  N.  A.  J.  H.,  v.  13,  p.  385;  Periodical  supraorbital,
neuralgia,  B,  Hughes,  B.  J.  H.,  v.  26,  p.  131;  Intermittent  supraorbital  neuralgia,
Frank,  v.  3 ;  Intermittent  ophthalmia,  3  cases,  Frank,  vols.  1  and  3 ;  Eye  and  Ear
Symptoms,  Scarlatina,  E.  W.  Berridge,  A.  J.  H.  M.  M.,  v.  4,  p.  90-95 ;  Tinnitus,
Winslow,  H.  M.,  p.  121 ;.  Intermittent  prosopalgia,  2  cases,  Frank,  v.  1  ;*  Enlarge-

*  The  same  author  mentions  thirteen  cases  of  cholera,  giving  a  careful  analysis  of  symp-
toms, treated,  however,  with  Chin,  salph.  in  conjunction  with  Opium,  which  preparation  was
also  used  successfully  as  a  prophylactic  in  two  epidemics.  These  cases  are  not  included  in  our
arrangement,  on  account  of  the  compound  prescription.

Dr.  Aegidi,  an  old  German  practitioner,  says:  "  For  the  precursory  stage  of  cholera,  I  gave
Chin,  sulph.,  0.01  to  0.06,  one  dose  every  evening  for  eight  days.  None  of  the  persons  thus
treated  were  attacked  by  cholera.  If  I  ever  should  live  to  see  another  cholera  epidemic,  I
would  give  Chin,  sulph.  and  ozonized  water."


67  CHININUM  SULFURICUM.

ment  of  spleen,  3  cases,  Frank,  v.  4;  Intermittent  colic,  Elb,  Eiickert's  Klinische
ErfahrLingen,  v.  5,  p.  364;  Intermittent,  diarrhoea,  Eiickert,  K.  E.,  v.  5,  p.  410 ;
Intermittent  uterine  neuralgia,  Frank,  v.  4 ;  Menorrhagia  with  headache,  Frank,
V.  2;  Puerperal  convulsions,  Arnold,  Riiek.  K.  E.,  v.  5,  p.  660;  Intermittent  pul-
monary hemorrhage,  Frank,  v.  1  ;  Intercostal  neuralgia  during  convalescence  from
typhus,  Kafka,  Hirscli,  Zeitschrift,  1,  123;  Periodical  cervical  neuralgia,  Escal-
lier,  N.  A.  J.  H.,  v.  13,  p.  387  ;  Sciatic  neuralgia,  Escallier,  N.  A.  J.  H.,  v.  13,
p.  387;  Acute  articular  rheumatism,  Escallier,  Horn.  Rev.,  v.  4;  Acute  rheuma-
tism, Frank,  v.  4,  p.  103 ;  Spinal  irritation,  Schleicher,  Eiick.  K.  E.,  v.  5,  p.  868 ;
Epilepsy,  Frank,  v.  1 ;  Intermittent  apoplexy,  Frank,  v.  2 ;  Intermittent  paraplegia,
2  cases,  Frank,  v.  1  ;  Ordinary  cases  of  Ague,  B.  J.  H,,  v.  23,  p.  104 ;  Intermittent
fever,  11  cases,  Eiick.  K.  E.,  v.  4,  p.  895;  C.  H.  von  Tagen,  A.  J.  H.  M.  M.,  v.  4
p.  123;  2  cases,  Watzke,  Oestr.  Zeit.  fiir  Horn.,  v.  2;  H.  V.  Miller,  Allen's  Thera-
peutics of  Intermittents;  J.  W.  Eouth,  3  cases,  Med.  In  v.,  v.  10.  p.  28;  Escallier
and  Jeans,  B.  J.  H,  v.  32,  p.  723 ;  W.  H.  Holcombe,  U.  S.  Med.  &  Surg.  Journ.,
1872 ;  Lembke,  N.  A.  J.  H.,  v.  4,  p.  277  ;  Chronic  intermittent  fever.  Anon.,  Med.
Ind.,  V.  7,  p.  296;  Typhus,  Frank,  v.  3;  Dropsy  with  enlarged  spleen,  Frank,  v.  4;
Confluent  hemorrhagic  variola,  Frank,  v.  3.

^  Mind. I  I  Indifference,  stupid  expression,  vacant  stare,  averse
to  answering  questions. ^Typhus.
I  I  Great  mental  depression. ^Variola.

■  Despondency.

I  Semi-consciousness,  she  is  f)artly  insensible  to  pain.
^Spinal  irritation.

I  Unconsciousness. ^Puerperal  convulsions.

I  I  Unconsciousness,  with  red  face,  deep  and  noisy  respira-
tion, pulse  full  and  very  slow,  recurring  every  other  day
at  same  hour. ^Intermittent  apoplexy.

Decrease  of  imaginative  faculty,  with  inability  to  remain
standing.

■  Anxiety, down-heartedness, moroseness, despondency,

laziness,  lassitude,  and  aversion  to  all  kind  of  work.
^Cholera.

I  Recurrence  of  feeling  of  impending  evil.

Anguish  and  general  sweat.

I  Loud  sobbing  and  weeping. ^Spinal  irritation.

I  I  Delirium  all  night  while  lying  quietly  on  his  back.
^Typhus.

Delirium  as  if  from  intoxication,  with  humming  in  ears.

I  1  Furious  delirium  with  screaming  and  jumping  out  of
bed.

I  I  Furious  delirium  at  night,  with  great  restlessness,  fol-
lowed by  stupor  in  morning.

■  Delirium  during  heat.

^  Sensorium. i  l  Apathy, with stupid facial expression.
^Typhus.

■  Head  heavy  and  gidd}^,  he  wants  to  lie  down. ^Periodi-

cal cervical  neuralgia.


CHININUM  SULFURICUM.  68

Dizziness  and  enlarged  feeling  of  head.

1 1  Whirling  in  head  like  a  mill-wheel.

II  Vertigo,  with  buzzing  in  ears,  difficult  breathing,  and
sickness  at  stomach.
^  Inner  Head.  Pain  in  temple  and  forehead  at  noon,  increas-
ing gradually  till  temporal  arteries  throb  obviously,
with  heat  in  head,  tingling  in  ears,  thirst,  copious  mic-
turition, anxiety  and  great  debility.

I  Frontal  headache,  where  frontal  bone  verges  toward  top
of  head,  a  shaking  pain,  she  feels  every  step,  begins
towards  noon  with  chill.

■  Beating  in  vertex. ^Scarlatina.

Violent  headache,  particularly  on  left  side,  with  throbbing
of  temporal  arteries.

I  Heaviness  in  head  as  from  a  cold. ^Cholera.
Dull  headache,  with  debility  or  with  numbness.

I I  Intermittent  neuralgia  at  regular  hours.

1 1  Intermittent  headache,  violent  throbbing,  with  vertigo
and  heat  in  face,  involuntary  closing  of  eyelids  from
sheer  prostration.

I  I  Headache  with  nausea,  chilliness,  cold  feet,  great  pros-
tration. ^Menorrhagia.

I  lA^iolent  attacks  of  left-sided  hemicrania  occurring  in
evening.

■  Headache,  the  pain  is  not  severe,  but  day  after  day,  and

week  after  week,  the  brain  is  one  continued  ache.
*  Outer  Head. Sensitiveness  and  tightness  of  scalp,  and  sore-
ness of  roots  of  hair.

■  Distension  of  veins  about  head  and  neck. ^Puerperal

convulsions.
^  Sight  and  Eyes. ■  Bright  lights  and  sparks  before  eyes.

■  Black  spot,  size  of  pin's  head,  about  eighteen  inches  from

r.  eye,  and  moving  with  eye,  for  some  weeks.

■  Dimness  of  vision  as  from  a  net  before  eyes,  and  once  as

from  a  dark  fog. ^Typhus.
1  I  Blindness;  amblyopia;  amaurosis.

■  Can  only  see  objects  when  looking  at  them  sideways.

■  Great  sensitiveness  of  eye  to  light,  with  lachrymation  in

full  glare  of  light.

■  Disk  and  retina  both  very  anaemic.

■  Eyes  staring  and  lustreless. ^Spinal  irritation.
Eyes  lustreless  and  restless.

■  Dilatation  of  pupils.
■Supraorbital  neuralgia  occurring  daily.

■  Neuralgic  twinges  in  suj)ra  and  infraorbital  nerves  gen-

erally periodic  in  character.

■  Intermittent  strabismus ;  child  would  squint  one  day  and

be  entirely  well  on  the  next.


69  CHININUM  SULFURICUM.

I  Conjunctiva  injected,  lids  red  and  swollen,  pupils  con-
tracted, lachrymation,  extreme  photophobia,  tearing  in
orbit  and  headache,  with  thirst  and  fever ;  all  appearing
every  second  day.

I  I  At  12  o'clock,  daily,  violent  paroxysms  of  pain  in  and
around  1.  eye,  conjunctiva  inflamed,  photophobia,  pupil
contracted,  lachrymation,  pressure  >  pain;  aggravation
lasts  until  8  p.m.

I  1 A  sudden  attack  of  violent  pain  above  1.  eye,  at  8  p.m.,
four  days  in  succession,  accompanied  by  slight  delirium,
muscular  twitching  and  excessive  sensitiveness  to  light
and  noise.

I  I  Violent  stitching,  throbbing  pain  in  1.  eye,  extending  to
forehead  and  temple,  with  photophobia,  lachrymation,
and  inflamed  conjunctiva,  beginning  at  1  p.m.  daily,  and
lasting  until  7,  followed  by  perspiration. ^Intermittent.

■  Lancinating  pain  under  r.  eye,  commences  at  7  a.m.,

lasting  until  after  3  p.m.,  when  it  disappears,  leaving
a  sensation  within  cranium  as  if  there  was  water  drop-
ping.

Peculiar  dryness  of  eyes.

Eyes  close  from  weariness.
^  Hearing  and  Ears. Violent  ringing  in  ears  during  a  chill.

I  iRinging  in  ears,  especially  noticed  in  1.,  seldom  in  right.

I  Ringing  as  of  bells. ^Spinal  irritation.

I I  Buzzing  in  ears. ^Typhus.

Deafness  from  concussion  of  brain,  especially  of  region  of
auditory  nerve.

Hardness  of  hearing,  with  violent  headache.

Tingling  in  ears,  continually  or  only  during  headache,
with  giddiness  when  stooping.

;rTinnitus,  with  injection  of  vessels  along  handle  of  mal-
leus, with  fulness  in  head  and  giddiness.
^  Smell  and  Nose. Frequent  epistaxis.

■  Violent  epistaxis  of  young  persons.

^  Upper  Face. Dull  and  stupid  expression,  with  flushed  face .
I  While  writing  sudden  ache  above  1.  zygoma,  also  at  tem-
poral ridge.
I  Aching  about  1.  malar  bone  in  evening.
Flushing  of  face  with  redness  of  eyes  and  ears.

■  Face  pale  and  suffering,  lips  and  nails  blue.

I  Very  pale,  anxious  face. ^Spinal  irritation.

Paleness  of  face,  violent  thirst,  nausea,  weakness  of  feet

with  deafness  when  walking,  and  occasional  sweat  over

whole  body.

■  Jaundiced  hue  of  face  and  conjunctivae. ^Intermittent.
I  I  Face  emaciated,  stupid. ^Typhus.

1  I  Attacks  of  prosopalgia,  occurring  at  10  a.m.,  3  p.m.  and

10  P.M.


CHININUM  SULFURICUM.  70

I  I  Right-sided  prosopalgia  daily,  from  7  a.m.  until  noon,
accompanied  by  fever  and  lachrymation  of  r.  eye;  the
suffering  parts  become  moist.

I  Facial  neuralgia,  morning  periodicity,  pains  usually  com-
mence on  1.  side,  but  sometimes  on  r.  side,  and  occasion-
ally on  both ;  attacks  commence  every  morning,  and
continue  from  7  to  12  o'clock;  pains  are  lancinating,
commence  under  eye,  and  soon  extend  into  and  around
eye,  causing  considerable  lachrymation;  pains  >  by
pressure.
^  Lower  Face.  '  '  Swelling  of  submaxillary  region.  ^Variola.
"  Taste  and  Tongue.  Tongue  flabby,  coated  white  or  yellow
in  centre,  pale  on  margin.

Bitter  taste  with  clean  tongue.

I  I  Tongue  and  mouth  dry ;  bitter  taste. ^Typhus.

Inability  to  pronounce  names,  and  slowness  of  sense.
1*  Thirst,  Aversions. Thirst  during  chill  and  apyrexia.

Excessive  thirst,  with  dryness  of  mouth  and  fauces,  just
before  and  during  hot  stage.

BReal  thirst  mostly  only  during  sweat.

lExcessive  repugnance  to  all  food.
^^  Eating  and  Drinking. After  eating,  oppression,  nausea

and  desire  to  sleep.
^'^  Nausea  and  Vomiting. ■  Nausea  and  loathing  of  food.

^Cholera.
^^  Scrobiculum  and  Stomach, i  Pressure  in  pit  of  stomach
up  into  throat,  and  pressure  in  stomach,  <  after  drink-
ing water. ^Cholera.

I  After  eating,  pressure  in  stomach,  followed  by  cutting  in
upper  and  middle  abdominal  region.

I  Even  the  slightest  food  causes  pressure  in  stomach  and  a
return  of  the  usual  symptoms.

Pain  in  epigastrium,  <  by  pressure.

Sw^elling  and  sensitiveness  of  epigastrium.

■  Dyspepsia  or  cardialgia,  with  nausea,  loathing  of  food,

bitter  eructations,  bitter  taste  in  mouth,  vomiting  of  bile,
oppression  of  stomach,  heartburn  or  burning  in  stormach
and  oesophagus,  and  feeling  of  constriction  and  pulling
sensation  in  stomach.
Severe  cardialgia.
^^  Hypochondria.  iPain  in  region  of  liver,  shortly  before
going  to  bed.

■  Severe  pain  in  1.  hypochondrium,  with  shaking  chill.

I  Pain  in  region  of  liver  and  spleen,  on  bending,  taking  a

deep  breath,  or  coughing. ^Intermittent.

I I  Painful  enlargement  of  spleen  after  intermittent.
I  Enlargement  of  spleen  with  dropsy.

^^  Abdomen. iPain in bowels, especially after eating.
6'Cholera.


71  CHININUM  SULFURICUM.

Griping  and  tearing  in  abdomen,  extending  to  chest,  with
pressing  toward  groin  during  menses, ^Dysmenorrhoea.
Flatulent  colic  of  an  intermittent  type.
I  I  Abdomen  distended. ^Typhus. ^Variola.

■  Visceral  obstructions,  especially  engorgement  of  spleen

and  liver.
I  I  Coecal  region  distended,  gurgling  on  pressure. ^Typhus.
■Relaxed condition of  digestive organs  of  old  people,

under  the  form  of  dyspepsia.
^  Stool  and  Rectum, i  Nightly  diarrhoea.

Diarrhoea;  stools  watery,  slimy,  dark,  or  even  blackish,

having  an  offensive  smell.

■  Constipation  or  soft  stools  followed  by  weakness.
I  I  Involuntary  diarrhoeic  stools. ^Typhus.
Stool  hard,  resembling  sheep  dung.

^^  Urinary  Organs. Burning  in  urethra  during  urination.

The  urine  soon  becomes  turbid,  with  slimy  flocks  and  a
clay-colored,  greasy  sediment.

I  Urine  fatty  and  deposits  a  straw-yellow,  brick-dust  sedi-
ment.

I  I  Involuntary  urination. ^Typhus.

Diabetes.

■  Albuminuria. ^Puerperal  convulsions.
Phosphates  increased.

■  Urine  loaded  with  lithates. /^Supraorbital  neuralgia.
Hsematuria.

^  Female  Sexual  Organs. Menses  too  early  and  too  profuse.
Violent  uterine  contractions  sufficient  to  produce  abortion.
I  I  Profuse  menstruation  followed  by  headache,  with  nau-
sea, chilliness,  cold  feet,  and  prostration.

■  Passive  metrorrhagias,  with  diminished  irritability.

^  Pregnancy,  Parturition,  Lactation.  1 1  Two  weeks  after
confinement,  in  consequence  of  fright,  violent  uterine
neuralgia,  returning  at  the  same  hour  every  afternoon,
accompanied  by  dyspnoea,  small  pulse,  and  clammy
sweat  on  extremities,  uterine  region  sensitive  to  touch.

■  The  labor  pains  appear  like  tonic  spasms,  and  are  accom-

panied by  convulsive  twitches,  unconsciousness  after
parturition,  tetanic  convulsions,  in  the  intervals  convul-
sive action  of  muscles  of  face,  eyes,  etc.;  want  of  con-
sciousness, oppressed  respiration,  distended  veins  on
head  and  neck,  weak,  rapid  and  intermitting  pulse,  and
albuminuria.

^^  Voice  and  Larynx. Intermittent  aphonia.

More  or  less  complete  loss  of  voice,  about  4  p.m.  ;  preceded
by  thirst,  cough,  constriction  of  neck,  headache  or  neu-
ralgia ;  heat  in  head  and  frequent  pulse.

^  Respiration.  ■Can  scarcely  breathe  from  weakness.  ^In-
termittent.


CHININUM  SULFURICUM.  72

I  I  Respirations  28. ^Variola.

■  Oppressed  respiration. ^Puerperal  convulsions.

■  Painful  sense  of  pressure  and  weight  on  chest. ^Spinal

irritation.
I  Anxiety  and  dyspnoea  with  intercostal  pain. ^Typhus.
I  Respiration  very  much  accelerated,  abnormal  rising  and

falling  of  thorax. ^Spinal  irritation.
Respiration  slow  and  irregular.
^  Cough. I  I  Troublesome,  moist  cough. /^Variola.
^  Inner  Chest  and  Lungs, b  Oppression  of  chest.

■  Stitches  in  1.  side,  below  short  ribs.

Lancinations  in  r.  half  of  chest,  extending  towards  shoul-
der, arresting  breathing,  >  by  bending  trunk  forward.

I  I  Rattling  of  phlegm  through  entire  r.  side  of  chest.
^Typhus.

1  I  Hemorrhage  from  lungs;  with  diarrhoea,  fever,  cold
sweat  and  prostration.

I  Pain  in  chest  during  chill.
^^  Heart,  Pulse  and  Circulation. iWeak,  rapid  and  inter-
mitting pulse. ^Puerperal  convulsions.

I  Pulse  100,  very  small,  heartbeat  not  perceptible,  the
sounds  scarcely  audible. ^Spinal  irritation.

I  I  Pulse  120. ^Variola.  '

■  Palpitation  from  a  little  exercise.
Angina  pectoris  with  marasmus.

Pulse:  accelerated;  large;  full  during  chill  and  heat,
weak  and  trembling  at  close  of  paroxysm,  from  fifty  to
sixty  per  minute;  slow,  particularly  after  eating;  ful
or  small,  but  weak  and  slow;  frequent  during  heat.

^^  Outer  Chest.  ■  Stinging,  tearing  pain  in  intercostal  space,
between  eighth  and  ninth  ribs,  r.  side,  extending  from
spine  to  sternum,  sensitive  to  pressure,  <  from  4  to  7
P.M.,  produces  anxiety  and  dyspnoea. ^Typhus.

^'  Neck  and  Back.  ■  Every  day  at  about  4  p.m.  violent  pain
in  lateral  muscles  of  neck,  which  appear  to  him  to  be
swollen  and  contracted,  his  head  is  giddy  and  heavy,
and  he  wants  to  lie  down.  ^Periodical  cervical  neu-
ralgia.

■  ■Sensitiveness  of  last  cervical  and  first  dorsal  vertebrae  to

pressure.

■  ■Spine  painful  on  pressure  in  all  stages  of  fever  par-

oxysm.

■  Three  upper  dorsal  vertebrae  are  sensitive  and  painful  to

touch;  pressure  causes  dyspnoea. ^Spinal  irritation.

■  Periodical  pain  in  back,  returning  about  midnight  and

extending  into  head. ^Spinal  irritation.
"^  Upper  Limbs. Rheumatism  of  right  shoulder.

■  Hands  cold  and  cold  sweat.


73  CHININUM  SULFURICUM.

^  Lower  Limbs, i  Sciatic  neuralgia,  on  r.  side,  of  many  weeks

duration.
I  I  Acute  rheumatic  pain  in  1.  ankle-joint  after  taking  cold,

accompanied  by  fever  and  profuse  sweat.
I  I  Paralysis  of  lower  extremities,  involuntary  stools  and

urination,  occurring  every  other  day  during  fever  epi-
demic.
I  I  Paralysis  of  lower  extremities,  first  occurring  at  6  p.m.,

then  half  an  hour  earlier  every  day,  with  headache,

chill,  heat  and  sweat.
I  Cutting  pains  in  feet  during  chill,  ankles  swollen.
^^  Limbs  in  General, l  Heaviness  and  aching  in  all  the  limbs

and  especially  in  joints. ^Cholera.
I  I  Stiffness  of  nearly  all  the  joints,  r.  wrist  and  knee-joint

very  painful  and  much  swollen. ^Acute  rheumatism.

I  Acute  articular  rheumatism.

*^  Rest. Position. Motion, i  Wants  to  lie  down. ^Periodi-
cal cervical  neuralgia.

Lying  on  back :  delirium  all  night.

Bending:  taking  a  deep  breath  or  coughing;  pain  in  re-
gion of  liver  and  spleen.

Bending  trunk  forward :  >  lancinations  in  chest.

Stooping:  giddiness.

Motion :  during  fever  produces  chilliness.

While  writing :  sudden  ache  above  1.  zygoma  and  at  tem-
poral ridge.

Walking:  she  feels  every  step,  frontal  headache ;  deafness.

Exertion :  the  least  excites  sweat.

Exercise:  palpitation.
^^  Nerves. Great  irritation  of  whole  body.

Extreme  restlessness.

iGreat  sensitiveness  against  external  influences;  general
weakness. ^Cholera.

I I  Feels  weak  and  nervous,  a  little  exercise  gives  him  pal-
pitation.

■Lassitude  and  inability  to  attend  to  his  studies,  has  lost
all  zest  for  sport  and  exercise.

llDebility  caused  by  considerable  losses  of  fluids;  par-
ticularly after  weakening  loss  of  blood.

■  General  weakness,  especially  of  the  feet.
■Weakness  and  trembling  in  limbs  and  slow  pulse.
■Trembling  in  extremities;  the  power  of  will  over  them

seemed  to  be  very  much  hampered.
I  I  Subsultus  tendinum. ^Typhus.

■  Twitching,  or  clonic  spasm  in  limbs. ^Spinal  irritation.
Epileptic  attacks  returning  every  seven  days,  of  short

duration.

■  Tetanic  spasms  with  loss  of  consciousness  during  partu-


CHININUM  SULFURICUM.  74

rition  and  afterwards  ;  swollen  veins  on  head  and  neck ;
pulse  frequent,  intermittent  and  weak ;  albuminuria.

I  Tetanic  convulsions;  during  the  intervals  unconscious-

ness.
Falling  in  the  streets.
Paralj^sis.

I I  Intermittent  neuralgia,  pains  return  with  great  regu-
larity.

^  Sleep. I  Sleeplessness  from  overstimulation  of  the  nervous

system.
^  Time. All  night:  delirium;  high  fever.

At  night:  furious  delirium;  diarrhoea.

About  midnight :  pain  in  back  returns.

In  morning:  stupor  after  delirium;  facial  neuralgia.

8  A.M.:  chill.

10  A.M.:  attacks  of  prosopalgia.

7  A.M.  until  noon:  right-sided  prosopalgia ;  facial  neuralgia.

Towards  noon:  frontal  headache,  with  chill.

At  noon :  pain  in  temple  and  forehead ;  violent  neuralgia
in  and  about  1.  eye;  chill.

Afternoon:  uterine  neuralgia.

7  A.M.  until  after  3  p.m.:  lancinating  under  r.  eye.

3  P.M. :  prosopalgia ;  shaking  chill.
About  4  P.M. :  cervical  neuralgia.

4  P.M.:  aphonia;  chill.

4  to  7  P.M.:  intercostal  neuralgia  <.
6  P.M. :  paralysis  of  lower  extremities.
From  12  to  8  p.m.:.  neuralgia  around  1.  eye.

I  to  7  P.M. :  stitching,  throbbing  pain  in  1.  eye.

8  P.M. :  attack  of  pain  above  1.  eye.

10  p.M  :  prosopalgia;  dull;  fever  reaches  its  height.
6  P.M.  to  4  A.M. :  duration  of  fever.

Evening:  attacks  of  hemicrania;  aching  about  malar
bone.

^^  Temperature  and  Weather.  Heat:  partially  >  symptoms
in  chill.

'"'  Fever,  l  Paroxysms  ushered  in  with  a  mere  transitory,  at
times  almost  imperceptible  chilly  feeling,  principally
across  shoulders  and  nape  of  neck,  up  and  down  spine,
lasting  for  a  few  moments  only,  occurring  at  different
times  throughout  the  day.

I I  Chill,  regular  paroxysms  at  the  same  hour.

1 1  Decided  shaking  chill  at  3  p.m.

■  During  chill,  blue  lips  and  nails,  ringing  in  ears,  pale

face,

■  Internal  chilliness.

■  Chilliness,  especially  in  back,  alternating  with  flushes  of

heat. ^Cholera.


75  CHININUM  SULFURICUM.

I  Chill  every  third  day  at  10  p.m.,  with  intense  thirst  and
pain  in  chest,  followed  by  heat  with  headache,  after-
wards profuse  perspiration ;  little  thirst  during  heat  and
sweat.

I  Chill  every  third  day  at  10  a.m.,  with  cutting  pains  in
feet,  and  swollen  ankles.

■  Quartan;  chill  at  4  p.m.;  chilly  and  hot  flashes  in  alter-

nation for  an  hour,  introducing  a  high  fever,  which  lasts
all  night,  with  profuse  sweat ;  during  the  fever  motion
produces  chilliness;  constant  burning  in  stomach;  thirst
satisfied  for  a  moment  with  a  swallow  of  cold  water;
lips  covered  with  colorless  vesicles.

■  Quotidian;  chill  at  8  a.m.;  chill,  fever  and  sweat  well

marked,  each  lasting  about  two  hours ;  thirst  for  large
draughts  of  cold  water  during  whole  paroxysm ;  nausea
continually  and  lasting  till  next  chill.

I  Fever  and  ague,  no  symptoms  during  apyrexia  except

some  lassitude ;  the  paroxysms  are  regular  and  not  at-
tended with  very  obvious  disturbances  of  any  organ.

I I  Distinct  cold,  hot  and  sweating  stages,  and  perfect  apy-
rexia.

Paroxysm  anticipates  about  two  hours  each  time;  apy-
rexia clear.

■  Tertian;  chill  at  twelve  o'clock,  m.; chill  illy  defined,

lasting  one-half  hour,  followed  by  intense  fever,  lasting
ten  hours,  and  terminating  in  scanty  sweat;  constant
frontal  headache ;  severe  aching  in  limbs ;  heat  partially
relieves  all  symptoms,  particularly  the  chilliness.

■  Fever  and  ague  with  spinal  irritation,  cervical  and  dor-

sal vertebrae  very  tender  to  touch,  pains  in  loins,  thighs,
and  lower  limbs  generally,  convulsive  movements  and
jerks  of  single  muscles,  slight  cramps,  often  only  of
muscles  of  1.  side,  dyspnoea  and  oppression  of  chest,
noises  in  ears  with  vertigo  and  dulness  of  mind.

■  Fever  sets  in  about  6  p.m.  and  reaches  its  height  about

10,  continues  until  about  4  a.m.,  when  sweat  usually  fol-
lows, with  great  prostration.

■  Fever  with  fulness  in  head,  ringing  in  ears,  together  with

hardness  of  hearing,  dimness  of  vision,  jaundiced  hue

of  face  and  conjunctiva. ^Intermittent  fever.
Fever  heat  with  delirium,  fulness  of  head,  ringing  in  ears,

and  hardness  of  hearing.
Strong  heat  over  whole  skin,  with  accelerated  pulse.
Great  heat  of  skin  and  dryness  of  mouth  and  fauces.
Violent  heat  with  frequent  yawning  and  sneezing.
Heat  gradually  breaks  into  sweat  while  perfectly  quiet.
Profuse  perspiration,  especially  on  back  and  neck,  when

he  sleeps.


CHININUM  SULFURICUM.  76

Sweat  easily  excited  through  least  exertion.

I  Sweat  relieves  all  symptoms  but  headache,  w^hich  is  in-

creased.

I I  Debilitating  sweat.

■  Typhus  w^ith  great  prostration,  stupid  facial  expression,
headache,  diarrhoea,  nosebleed,  alternate  chill  and  fever,
aversion  to  move.
^^  Attacks,  Periodicity. I  Chill  comes  at  10  or  11  a.m.  or  be-
tween 3  and  10  p.m.

Paroxysms  return  every  other  day,  or  anticipate  one  to
three  hours  every  day.

1 1  Stages  of  chill,  fever  and  sweat  well  marked  and  distinct.

Attacks  of  prosopalgia:  at  10  a.m.,  3  p.m.  and  10  p.m.

Every  other  day:  at  same  hour,  unconsciousness;  con-
junctivitis; paralysis  of  lower  extremities;  chill.

Every  seven  days:  epileptic  attacks.

Daily:  supraorbital  neuralgia;  stitching,  throbbing  pain
in  1.  eye;  prosopalgia;  uterine  neuralgia;  cervical  neu-
ralgia; paralysis  of  lower  extremities.

At  regular  hours :  neuralgia;  chill.
[ Periodic: neuralgic twinges in supra and infraorbital
nerves;  ophthalmia;  facial  neuralgia ;  pulmonary  hemor-
rhage ;  pain  in  back ;  nervous  and  congestive  paroxysms ;
trismus;  paraplegia.

Intermittent:  neuralgia;  headache;  strabismus;  colic;
uterine  neuralgia;  pulse.

Anticipates  about  two  hours  each  time :  fever  paroxysm.

Half  an  hour  earlier  every  day:  paralysis  of  lower  ex-
tremities.

Four  days  in  succession :  violent  pain  above  1.  eye  at  8  p.m.

For  some  weeks :  black  spot  before  r.  eye.

Of  many  weeks  duration :  sciatic  neuralgia.

Day  after  day  and  w^eek  after  week :  continuous  headache.
^  Locality  and  Direction.  Left:  headache  and  throbbing  of
temporal  arteries;  hemicrania;  neuralgia  around  eye;
pain  above  eye;  stitching,  throbbing  in  eye;  ringing  in
ear;  sudden  ache  above  zygoma;  aching  about  malar
bone ;  pain  in  hypochondrium,  with  chill ;  stitches  be-
low short  ribs;  acute  rheumatic  pain  in  ankle-joint
cramp  in  muscles  in  fever  and  ague,  with  spinal  irritation

Right: black spot before eye; lancinating  under eye
ringing  in  ear  more  seldom  than  in  left;  prosopalgia
with  lachrymation  of  eye;  lancinations  in  half  of  chest
stinging,  tearing  in  intercostal  space,  between eighth
and  ninth  ribs;  rheumatism  of  shoulder;  sciatic  neu-
ralgia; wrist  and  knee-joint  painful  and  swollen.
^Sensations. Unternal  bad  feeling,  as  of  coming  illness.
^Cholera.


77  CHININUM  SULFURICUM.

As  of  water  dropping  in  cranium ;  as  if  swollen  and  con-
tracted, lateral  muscles  of  neck.

Pain:  in  temple  and  forehead ;  in  epigastrium;  in  region
of  liver ;  in  1.  hj^pochondrium ;  in  bowels ;  in  chest,  dur-
ing chill;  in  lateral  muscles  of  neck;  in  r.  wrist  and
knee-joint.

Lancinating:  under  r.  eye;  in  face;  in  r.  half  of  chest,
towards  shoulder.

Cutting:  in  upper  and  middle  abdomen;  in  feet  during
chill.

Stitches:  in  1.  eye,  forehead  and  temple;  in  1.  side,  below
short  ribs.

Stinging:  in  intercostal  space.

Tearing:  in  head;  in  orbit;  in  abdomen;  in  intercostal
space.

Neuralgia:  in  head;  in  eyes;  around  eyes;  in  face.

Rheumatic  pain:  of  r.  shoulder;  in  1.  ankle-joint.

Shaking  pain :  in  frontal  region.

Griping:  in  abdomen.

Burning :  in  stomach ;  in  urethra.

Soreness:  of  roots  of  hair.

Aching:  in  brain;  above  1.  zygoma  and  at  temporal  ridge;
about  1.  malar  bone;  in  all  the  limbs.

Throbbing:  headache;  in  1.  eye,  forehead  and  temple.

Beating:  in  vertex.

Pressure:  in  pit  of  stomach  up  into  throat;  in  stomach;
on  chest.

Constriction:  in  stomach;  of  neck.

Tightness:  of  scalp.

Pulling  sensation :  in  stomach.

Heaviness :  in  head ;  in  all  the  limbs.

Numbness:  with  headache.
■ Tingling:  in  ears.

Heat:  in  head;  in  face.

Dryness:  of  eyes.
■"  Tissues. "  Debility  of  ganglionic  nutritive  fibres."

"  Builds  up  and  prevents  destruction  of  nerve  tissue."*

Phthisis  intestinalis,  nausea,  gagging,  loss  of  appetite,  dis-
tension of  the  abdomen,  constant  pressure  in  the  umbili-
cal region,  constipation,  emaciation,  hectic  fever  and
delirium.

*  "  Binz  and  his  disciples  found  that  Chininum  sulfuricum  in  solutions  of  one
to  ten  thousand,  acts  fatally  to  infusoria,  vibriones,  etc.,  but  not  on  fungi  of  mould
and  on  salt  water  amoeba,  prevents  the  fermentation  of  lactic  acid  and  of  alcohol,
but  not  the  diastatic  action  on  starch  and  on  the  digestive  juices  ;  that  it  destroys
the  movements  of  the  white  blood  globules  in  the  protoplasma,  and  thus  prevents
their  emigration  in  inflammations ;  that  it  diminishes  the  quantities  of  urea,  and
diminishes  and  retards  the  change  of  tissue  in  the  animal  body."


CHININUM  SULFURICUM.  78

Intermittent  fever  in  cachectic  persons  by  loss  of  blood
or  from  continued  and  long  prostration.

Angina  pectoris,  where  marasmus  is  a  prominent  symptom.

Fever  with  regular  type,  complete  intermissions.

Periodical  recurrence  of  nervous  and  congestive  parox-
ysms, trismus,  paraplegia,  ophthalmia,  pulmonary
hemorrhage,  etc.

Diminished  pulse  and  propelling  power  in  arterial  system,
injures  the  muscular  fibres.

Fever  complicated  with  gastric  troubles  and  torpidity  of
the  bow^els.

Erethism  of  the  circulatory  system.

Prostration  with  hypersesthesia.
*^  Touch. Passive  Motion. Injuries. "Great  sensitiveness
against  external  influences. ^Cholera

Pressure:  >  neuralgia  around  1.  eye;  >  facial  neuralgia;
<  pain  in  epigastrium ;  intercostal  space  sensitive ;  last
cervical  and  first  dorsal  vertebrae  sensitive ;  dorsal  verte-
brae painful;  spine  painful;  on  dorsal  vertebrae  causes
dyspnoea.

Touch: uterine  region  sensitive; third  dorsal  vertebrae
painful;  three  upper  dorsal  vertebrae  painful  and  sensi-
tive; skin  sensitive.
*^  Skin. Inflammation  of  skin.

Skin  flaccid  and  sensitive  to  touch.

Deadness  and  livid  redness  of  skin,  with  formation  of  a
gelatinous  pseudo-membrane  or  thin  superficial  scurf.

Urticaria  eruption  over  body.

Red  rash  over  whole  body  with  severe  stinging  followed
by  desquamation.

Gangrenous  and  fetid  suppurations.

Cancerous  ulcers,  thick,  livid,  humid  crust,  which  becomes
dry  and  black,  with  red,  humid,  and  finally  yellowish
dilated  margins.

Recommended  in  plague,  by  Lorbacher.

Sudamina  and  red  spots  in  typhus.

I  I  Confluent  smallpox,  eruption  hemorrhagic;  pulse  120,
respiration  28,  abdomen  distended  but  painless,  submax-
illary region  swollen,  moist,  troublesome  cough,  great
mental  depression.
^'^  Stages  of  Life,  Constitution.  >  ■  Cachectic  persons  weak-
ened by  loss  of  blood.

Suits  weakly,  florid,  sanguine  and  nervous  constitutions.

Boy,  ixit.  10 ;  enlargement  of  spleen.

A  young  lady,  inclined  to  hysteria.

A  boy,  aet.  13;  epileptic  attacks.

A  boy,  aet.  13;  intermittent  paralysis  of  lower  limbs.


79  CHININUM  SULFURICUM.

Boy,  get.  15,  growing  very  fast,  and  undergoing  changes

incident  to  puberty ;  lassitude.
Young  P.,  set.  16,  jeweler;  periodical  cervical  neuralgia.
A  youth,  set.  17;  enlargement  of  spleen.
A  robust  brunette,  set.  '23 ;  spinal  irritation.
Woman,  set.  24,  nervo-sanguineous  temperament;  inter-
mittent fever.
Mrs.  A.,  set.  25,  blue  eyes,  auburn  hair,  mirthful  tempera-
ment. ^Chronic  intermittent.
A  woman,  set.  26;  intermittent  cephalalgia.
A  primipara,  set.  28,  lymphatic,  chlorotic;  puerperal  con-
vulsions.
A  woman ;  intermittent  paraplegia.

A  woman,  two  weeks  after  confinement ;  intermittent  uter-
ine neuralgia.
A  woman, in first month of  pregnancy; epileptiform

spasms.
A  very  sensitive  lady,  in  seventh  month  of  pregnancy,

subject  to  hysteria;  intermittent  ophthalmia.
A  weakly,  hectic  woman,  mother  of  four  children,  preg-
nant; diarrhoea,  with  night  sweats.
Plethoric  woman,  set.  30 ;  intermittent  apoplexy.
A  young  soldier,  of  middle  stature,  good  constitution  and

sanguine  temperament;  typhus.
A  man  of  plethoric  habit;  intermittent  prosopalgia.
Two  men,  with  general  dropsy  and  enlarged  spleen.
Man,  set.  30,  bilious  temperament;  intermittent  fever.
J.,  set.  30,  clerk;  suborbital  neuralgia.
A  woman,  set.  31,  in  sixth  month  pregnancy;  intermittent

fever.
A  man,  set.  34;  acute  rheumatism.

Mr.  B.,  lawyer,  set.  36,  during  past  ten  years  had  many
attacks  of  intermittent  fever,  which  have  been  cut  short
by  sulphate  of  quinia ;  suborbital  neuralgia.
A  robust  man,  set.  36 ;  intermittent  ophthalmia.
Robust  man,  set.  40,  choleric  temperament ;  intermittent

ophthalmia.
Man,  set.  42,  blonde,  weakly  constitution,  subject  to  gastric

troubles;  typhus.
A  woman,  set.  48 ;  menorrhagia  followed  headache.
A  woman,  set.  48;  intermittent  fever.
A  woman,  set.  50;  intermittent  prosopalgia,
A  w^eakly,  short,  thick-set  man,  set.  50;  intermittent  pul-
monary hemorrhage  and  diarrhoea.
Man,  set.  59,  choleric  temperament,  large  and  strong;  in-
termitting colic.
Man, set. 60, nervo-bilious temperament; intermittent
fever.


CHIN.  SULF.— CHIONANTHUS  VIRGINICA.  80

^^  Relations.  Antidotes :  Arnic,  Arsen.,  Carb.  veg.,  Ferrum,
Hepar,  Laches.,  Natr.  mur.,  Fulsat.
Compare :  Apis  (chill  at  3  p.m.),  Arsen.  (pyaemia,  spinal  ir-
ritation), Bryon.  (sweat  from  least  exertion),  Carb.  an
(all  discharges  are  debilitating),  Eupat.  perf.  (sweat  re-
lieves all  symptoms  but  headache),  Nux  vom.  (blue  lips
and  nails  with  chill),  Fulsat.  (rheumatic,  erratic  pains),
Stannum  (supraorbital  neuralgia),  Staphis.  (head  gradu-
ally breaks  into  sweat  while  perfectly  quiet).


CHIONANTHUS  VIRGINICA.

Fringe  Tree.  Oleacese.


''A  singular  looking  shrub,  or  low  tree,  from  ten  to  thirty  feet  high,  growing
from  Pennsylvania  to  Georgia,  on  river  banks  and  sandy  plains.  It  presents
clusters  of  snow-white  flowers  in  May  and  June."

The  bark  contains  Saponin.  The  bark  of  the  root,  bruised,  is  sometimes  used
for  healing  wounds.

Clinicat^  Authorities. — Hypertrophy  of  liver,  Obstruction  of  liver,  and
Jaundice,  Goss,  Hale's  N.  R.,  p.  161 ;  Hepatic  disorder,  E.  Guernsey,  Trans.,  v.  4,  p.
226.

^^  Hypochondria. ■  Hypertrophy  of  liver.

■  Obstruction  of  liver,  in  malarious  districts.

I  Enormous  liver,  constipation,  stools  clay-colored,  skin
and  urine  colored  as  is  usual  in  severe  cases  of  jaundice,
great  emaciation.

■Soreness  in  region  of  liver,  quick,  weak  pulse,  stools  un-
digested and  showing  an  absence  of  bile,  urine  almost
black.

■  Chronic  cases  of  jaundice.
■Jaundice  recurring  every  summer.

^^  ■  Stool and  Rectum. ■Constipation, stools clay-colored.
^Enlargement  of  liver.

■  Stools  undigested  and  showing  an  absence  of  bile. ^He-

patic disorder.
^^  Urinary  Organs. ■Urine  colored  as  usual  in  cases  of  severe
jaundice. ^Hypertrophied  liver.

■  Urine  almost  black. ^Hepatic  disorder.

•'^  Pulse. ■Quick,  weak  pulse. ^Hepatic  disorder.
■'^  Tissues. ■Great  emaciation. ^Hypertrophied  liver.
^•^  Skin. ■Jaundice  of  years  standing,  recurring  annually.


81  CHLORALUM.

CHLORALUM.

Hydrate  of  Chloral  C^HGl^  0+H^  0.


Discovered  in  1832,  by  Lieblg.

Proved  by  W.  Eggert,  S.  Swan,  D.  A.  Babcock,  etc. See  Encyclopedia,  v.  3.

Poisoning,  by  E.  W.  Berridge,  N.  Y.  J.  H.,  v.  2,  p.  307.

"  Prepared  by  passing  a  stream  of  chlorine  through  absolute  alcohol,  until  it
comes  over  unchanged.  The  thick  fluid  remaining  behind  is  chloral.  The  simple
addition  of  water  converts  chloral  into  its  hydrate."

The  first  therapeutic  application  of  this  substance  was  made  by  O.  Liebreich,
of  Berlin,  who  conceived  that  the  transformation  of  chloral  into  chloroform  might
be  expected  when  it  reached  the  blood  of  a  living  animal.  On  coming  into  contact
with  its  alkalis  the  chloral  would  separate  into  chloroform  and  formicic  acid.

W.  W.  Keen,  of  Philadelphia,  has  made  use  of  chloral  as  an  antiseptic  and
deodorant  in  the  dissecting  room  and  in  surgical  practice.

CiiiNiCAii  Authorities. — Melancholia  and  headache,  J.  H.  Sherman,  X.  E.
M.  G.,  V.  9,  p.  412;  Mania-a-potu,  J.  C.  Wilson,  K  E.  M.  G.,  v.  6,  p.  160;  Ophthal-
mia, Dyce  Brown  (2  cases),  B.  J.  H.,  v.  32,  p.  509;  Conjunctivitis,  (2  cases),  Dyce
Brown,  B.  J.  H.,  v.  32,  p.  510 ;  Conjunctivitis  and  Keratitis  on  left  eye,  Dyce  Brown,
B.  J.  H.,  v.  32,  p.  510 ;  Toothache  from  decayed  teeth  (2  cases)  Excelsior,  N.  A.  J.
H.,  V.  23,  p.  123;  Odontalgia  traumatica,  Hale,  N.  E.  M.  G.,  1872;  Colic  of  children,
Hale,  Symptomatology;  Ascites,  Bishop,  Med.  Inv.,  v.  11,  p.  139 ;  Enuresis,  Oehme,
Kaue's  Path.,  p.  691,  also  El.  Crit.  Med.,  Aug.,  1874;  Incontinence  of  urine  (5
cases),  E.  Vechetti,  Horn.  Kev.,  v.  18,  p.  571,  Leonardi,  N.  A.  J.  H.,  v.  22,  p.  408  ;
Chordee,  E.  M.  Hale,  N.  A.  J.  H.,  1870,  p.  244;  Dysmenorrhcea,  Excelsior,  N.  A.
J.  H.,  V.  23,  p.  122;  Pruritus  vulvce  during  pregnancy,  Dyce  Brown ;  Inefficient  labor
pains.  Excelsior,  N.  A.  J.  H.,  v.  23,  p.  123;  Puerperal  convidsions,  F.  A.  Lord,  U.
S.  M.  &  S.  J.,  V.  7,  p.  360 ;  Puerperal  eclampsia,  D.  Baumetz  (from  Lancet),  Horn.
Kev.,  V.  17,  p.  310;  Infantile  tetanus.  Hale  (see  Sympt.) ;  Typhoid  pneumonia  with
sleeplessness,  J.  C.  Neilson,  N.  E.  M.  G.,  v.  6,  p.  161;  Palpitation  during  phthisis,
Swan,  Am.  Ob.,  v.  10,  p.  136  ;  Foul-smelling  foot  sweats,  Ortega,  N.  A.  J.  H.,  v.  26,  p.
412 ;  Violent  hysterical  fit,  J.  C.  Neilson,  N.  E.  M.  G.,  v.  6,  p.  161 ;  Chorea,  Strange,
N.  A.  J.  H.,  V.  23,  p.  123 ;  Chorea  during  pregnancy,  J.  Russell,  N.  A.  J.  H.,  v.
23,  p.  123 ;  Idiopathic  tetanus,  M.  L.  Sircar,  Calcutta  Journ.,  v.  3,  p.  389 ;  Ana-
sarca from  valvular  disease  of  heart.  Swan,  A.  H.  Obs.,  1873,  p.  135  ;  Preventive  to
sea-sickness,  Geraldis,  A.  O. ;  J.  C.  O.  Will,  Horn.  Rev.,  v.  16,  p.  561,  Ober,  N.  A.
J.  H.,  V.  24,  p.  567 ;  Urticaria  and  Pruritus,  Dyce  Brown,  B.  J.  H.,  v.  32,  p.
512;  Urticaria  (2  cases),  Dyce  Brown ;  J.  C.  Burnett,  H.  M.,  v.  13,  p.  56  (2  cases) ;
A.  C.  Clifton,  H.  R.,  v.  21,  p.  526.

^  Mind. Comatose  for  days,  ending  in  cerebral  congestion.
Melancholia,  idiocy  and  insanity.

vol..  IV. — 6.


CHLORALUM.  82

Fixed  despair  of  recovery ;  believes  he  will  give  his  imagi-
nary disease  (syphilis)  to  others.

Confusion  of  mind,  inability  to  concentrate  thoughts,
impaired  memory ;  could  not  keep  the  thread  of  sermon.

I  Mental  diseases,  and  general  paralysis  of  patients  suffer-
ing from  mental  diseases.

I  I  Constantly  hears  voices.

■Sleeplessness  at  night,  with  restless  irritability;  headache,
confusion  in  head;  melancholy;  inclined  to  wander
and  hide  herself,  avoiding  shrewdly  the  vigilance  of
her  friends ;  would  then  return,  unable  to  give  any  ac-
count of  where  she  had  been.

I  He  walks  hurriedly  up  and  down  the  room,  talking  to
himself  in  an  excited  manner,  and  holding  conversation
with  imaginary  beings.  ^Acute  mania  induced  by  se-
vere mental  excitement.

Jumps  out  of  bed  with  fear,  cold  sweat,  screams  as  if  in
mortal  terror ;  night  terrors  of  children.

Gorgeous  visions  of  arches,  tapestry  and  colors,  pass  before
the  eyes  when  shut,  or  open  in  the  dark.

I  !  Wild  delirium  changing  to  a  busy  delirium ;  visions  of
fantastic  objects ;  a  great  deal  of  fever;  pulse  120  most
of  the  time. ^Delirium  tremens.

Delirious,  she  hurls  a  hot  water  bottle  at  an  imaginary
figure  at  foot  of  bed.

I  I  Boisterous  mania.

':  Delirium  of  typhus.

I  I  Delirium  tremens,  when  brain  is  congested.

I  I  Puerperal  mania,  with  sleeplessness.

Hydrophobia.
^  Inner  Head, i  '  Cephalalgia.

I  Hard,  full,  pressing  pains  in  head  continuing  a  long  time
without  relief. ^Dysmenorrhoea.

Dull,  heavy,  aching  pain  in  forehead  and  occiput  all  day,
<  by  motion.

Severe  pain  in  frontal  region  over  supraorbital  ridge,
which  nothing  relieves,  <  by  motion.

Headache  in  forehead,  extending  to  occiput.

Headache  over  both  eyes,  running  down  into  eyes,  1.  side
worse,  with  feeling  as  if  eyes  were  constricted.

I  Neuralgia  of  temporal  region.

Feeling  as  if  a  hot  band  was  drawn  across  forehead  from
temple  to  temple  directly  over  eyes,  with  sensation  of  a
burning  ring  around  each  eye.

Dull,  heavy  headache  in  occiput  and  forehead  over  eyes;
a  feeling  of  weight  and  soreness,  which  seems  wholly
within  cranium;  <  by  moving  about  and  lying  down,
slightly  >  by  going  into  open  air.


83  CHLORALUM.

1  I  Cerebro-spinal  congestion.

I  I  Cerebral  congestion  following  a  condition  of  extraordi-
nary depression  of  nervous  system.

Congestion  of  brain  with  some  mental  excitement.
*  Outer  Head, l Great  heaviness  of  head;  cannot  lift  it.

Erythema  of  head  and  neck.
^  Sight  and  Eyes. Retinal  hypersesthesia.

Sensitive  to  light.

Colors  are  unusually  bright.

Objects  look  white;  color  blindness.

Dark  spots  before  the  eyes.

I  Dimness  of  sight.

Eyesight  weak,  dim,  globe  congested,  lids  swollen  and
sometimes  partially  paralyzed.

Peculiar  dimness  or  weakness  of  sight;  must  read  with
one  eye  at  a  time — for  a  minute  or  two  with  each ;  if
one  eye  was  used  longer  than  a  minute,  the  words  and
letters  became  blurred  and  indistinct.

If  one  eye  only  is  used  until  objects  fade,  the  other  sees
objects  plainly  for  awhile.

Can  see  small  objects  only  for  a  few  moments,  they  fade
away.

Eyeballs  feel  too  large.

■  Burning  in  eyes  and  lids.

Sensation  of  a  burning  ring  around  each  eye.

Feeling  as  if  eyes  were  constricted,  with  headache.

Sharp  pain  in  the  eyeballs.

Redness  and  watering  of  eyes.

Watery  eyes,  especially  when  looking  at  anything.

■  Conjunctiva  congested.

■  Eyes  injected  and  bloodshot,  constantly  watering.

■  I  Face  and  eyelids  so  swollen  that  he  could  hardly  see.

^Urticaria.
Conjunctivae  injected,  face  has  a  puffed  and  swollen  appear-
ance, especially  below  eyes.

■  Ocular  and  palpebral  conjunctiva  of  1.  eye  much  injected,

with  considerable  pain ;  a  small  ulcer  on  cornea  reduced
to  size  of  a  pin  point.
■Right  eye  much  injected,  with  great  pain;  1.  eye  also
slightly  injected. ^Conjunctivitis.

■  Conjunctivitis  of  r.  eye,  which  is  very  red  and  painful,

deepcut  ulcer  in  centre  of  cornea ;  of  a  strumous  family.

■  Conjunctivitis  and  corneitis  on  1.  eye;  cornea  is  diru;  in

r.  eye  considerable  redness  of  palpebral  and  ocular  con-
junctiva at  one  point ;  great  photophobia.

■  Conjunctivitis  of  both  eyes;  small  ulcer  on  .1.  cornea;

feeling  of  sand  in  eyes,  but  almost  no  photoj)hobia ;  is  a
very  strumous  patient.


CHLORALUM.  84

B Catarrhal  ophthalmia;  there  are  one  or  two  phlyctenee  on
r.  eye,  at  edge  of  cornea ;  severe  circumorbital  pain  and
photophobia.

■  Intense  itching  of  inner  canthi  and  edges  of  lids.
I  Puffy  swelling  of  lids.

Eyelids  feel  so  heavy  he  can  hardly  lift  them.
Ptosis  (in  a  man  who  took  it  for  overtaxed  mind).
^  Hearing  and  Ears. Great  sensitiveness  to  noise.
^  Upper  Face. Dark  scarlet  flushing  and  heat  of  head  and
face,  from  roots  of  hair  to  ramus  of  lower  jaw,  neck
and chest,  including  eyes,  persistent  under  pressure;
blotchy  in  places.
I  I  Face  red  and  swollen. ^Urticaria.
Face  erysipelatous ;  swollen  so  he  could  not  see.
i  Neuralgia  of  infraorbital  branch  of  fifth  nerve.
^  Lower  Face. Lips  covered  with  sordes  and  dried  blood.
Swelling  of  parotid  and  submaxillary  glands.
I  I  Blueness  of  lips.
^°  Teeth  and  Gums, l  l  Neuralgia  from  decayed  teeth.

I  I  Odontalgia  traumatica  from  pressure  of  filling ;  pain

unbearable;  <C  when  lying  down.
I  Excruciating  toothache  from  decayed  teeth,  with  neural-
gic affection  of  jaw.

■  Neuralgia  of  inferior  dental  branch  of  fifth  nerve.
"  Taste  and  Tongue. Deeply  coated  tongue.

A  black  streak  along  centre  of  tongue  as  though  ink  had
been  rubbed  over  it.
^^  Inner  Mouth. Lips,  mouth  and  fauces  red  and  raw,  gums

spongy,  tongue  blistered  and  ulcerated.
^^  Throat. Spasm  of  throat.

Partial  paralysis  of  oesophagus.

I  I  She  could  not  utter  a  syllable  and  swallowed  with  diffi-
culty.
^*  Appetite,  Thirst. Loss  of  appetite.

Thirst.
^^  Vomiting, l  Vomiting and nervous irritability during

course  of  cerebro-spinal  meningitis.
^^  Scrobiculum  and  Stomach, i  i  Feebleness  of  stomach.
1  Sense  of  sinking  and  oppression  at  pit  of  stomach.
Sense  of  emptiness  shortly  after  eating.
^^  Hypochondria, l  l  Hepatic  and  renal  colic,  dependent  on
passage  of  calculus.
I  Gall  stones.
Atrophy  of  liver.
^^  Abdomen. ■  Severe  colic  of  children,  when  the  pain  threat-
ens to  cause  spasms.
■Ascites  attendant  upon  supposed  case  of  phthisis  pulmo-
nalis.


85  .  CHLORALUM.

^  Stool and  Rectum. Soft,  lumpy,  strong smelling  stools
twice  a  clay,  and  frequent  passage  of  fetid  flatus.
I  I  Diarrhoea  at  night  with  excessive  nervous  excitement.

^Dentition.
Cholera  without  vomiting  or  diarrhoea.
^^  Urinary  Organs. ■  i  Nephritic  and  hepatic  colic  dependent
upon  passage  of  calculus.
I  1  Increases  urine  when given  for  anasarca  from  heart
disease.

■  Urinated  copiously  in  bed  without  knowing  it.

I  Nocturnal  incontinence  of  urine ;  in  *  children  in  latter

part  of  night,  even  if  they  have  urinated  during  night

and  drank  no  water.
Frequent  and  profuse  urination  of  dark  amber  color,  clear

and  without  odor.
^^  Male  Sexual  Organs. Loss  of  sexual  power;  no  desire  or

erections;  impotence.
iChordee  during  gonorrhoea.
^  Female  Sexual  Organs. If  taken  immediately  before  onset

of  catamenial  discharge,  it  entirely  checks  it.
I  I  Menses  irregular. ^Urticaria.

■  Severe  spasmodic  pains  in  and  about  the  uterus. ^Dys-

menorrhoea.
■Pains  very  severe  and  labor-like. ^Dysmenorrhoea.
I  I  Thick, yellow leucorrhoea, tinged sometimes with  a

little  blood. ^Urticaria.
^  Pregnany,  Parturition,  Lactation. ■  Troublesome  pruritus

during  pregnancy.

■  Tedious  labor  lasting  over  eighteen  hours;  nervous,  irri-

table, hysterical  condition;  the  pains  which  are  appar-
ently normal  and  forcible  have  no  effect  on  the  uterus.
:  Severe  labor  pains.
I  I  Puerperal  convulsions.
1  I  Severe  case  of  chorea  during  pregnancy.
^  Voice  and  Larynx.  Trachea  and  Bronchia. •  Bronchitis.
^  Respiration. I  Gasping  breathing  and  confusion  of  thought;
sinking  at  stomach.

■  Great  dyspnoea,  a  sense  of  suffocation;  oppression  at  base

of  chest  (in  front),  with  urgent  thirst.
I  I  Slow  resjDiration,  with  imperceptible  pulse.
Laborious  respiration,  occasional  deep  inspiration,  with  a

sighing  expiration.
Wheezing  respiration.
Stertorous  breathing,  with  loud  snoring  during  sleep,  in

any  position.
When  lying  on  back,  the  inspiration  was  through  the

nose,  while  the  ex23iration  was  blown  from  the  lips  as

in  apoplexy.


CHLORALUM.  .  86

■Asthma;  the  nightly  paroxysms  are  very  severe;  he  is
bent  forwards^  can  hardly  catch  his  breath.
^  Cough. I  I  Hard,  difficult  cough. ^Chest  affections.

Spasmodic  cough  accompanying  last  stage  of  phthisis.

I  I  Labored  cough  of  bronchitis  and  phthisis.

Whooping  cough.

Croup.
^^  Inner  Chest  and  Lungs. Pulmonary  congestion.

I  I  Constriction  at  base  of  chest,  with  dyspnoea,  in  organic
heart  affections.

Sense  of  weight  on  chest  in  region  of  sternum  at  night,
causing  expiration  to  be  easier  than  inspiration.

Singular  sensation  of  fulness  of  chest,  not  as  if  it  w^as  filled
up  as  a  person  experiences  after  a  meal,  but  rather  as  if
all  the  tissues  were  hypertrophied,  producing  an  inde-
scribable sense  of  tightness  and  pressure  on  the  lungs,
causing  very  labored  breathing  and  redness  of  face.

I  I  Great  dyspnoea  with  labored  action  of  lungs. ^Dropsy.

I  Congestive  bronchitis  with  spitting  of  blood;  painful
and  audible  breathing.

I  1  Severe  attacks  of  typhoid  pneumonia ;  unable  to  sleep
from  nervous  irritation,  dyspncea  and  cough.
^  Heart,  Pulse  and  Circulation. Heart's  action  regular  but
with  increased  frequency  and  diminished  force.

■  Increased  action  of  heart  and  oppressed  respiration.

I  I  Violent  palpitation  with  dyspnoea.  ^Hypertrophy  with
dilatation.

I  I  Palpitations  so  violent  that  they  can  be  heard ;  great
difficulty  of  respiration,  patient  requires  constant  fan-
ning. ^Phthisis.

Palpitation  accompanies  hypersemic  condition  of  skin ;  <
from  wine,  beer  or  spirits.

Heart  dilated  or  weakened,  with  peculiar  fulness  and
lightness  of  chest  and  sense  of  emptiness  in  stomach.

i  Angina  pectoris.

Valvular  disease  of  heart  with  anasarca.

I  I  Diminution  of  heart's  action  in  organic  affections,  with
dyspnoea  and  constriction  of  base  of  chest.

I  I  Heart  beats  become  feeble,  irregular,  very  rapid.

I  I  Heart  feeble,  pulse  weak ;  could  not  lie  down ;  general
anasarca.

Cardiac  neurosis.

I  I  Threatened  paralysis  of  heart. ^Pericarditis.

I  1  Pulse  frequent,  irregular,  weak,  intermittent,  heart  act-
ing regularly  but  with  increased  frequency  and  dimin-
ished force.

Weak,  irritable  pulse,  threatening  paralysis  of  heart.

Imperceptible  pulse,  cold  extremities,  slow  respiration.

Pulse  88.


87  CHLORALUM.

^^  Neck  and  Back. Erj^thema  of  head  and  neck.

A  purple  discolored  band,  two  inches  wide,  along  each  side

of  vertebral  column.
I  I  Large  patches  of  redness  with  urticarious  wheals  about

neck,  trunk  and  extremities.
At  base  of  skin  large  greenish  spots.
^^  Upper  Limbs. Upon  red  surface  of  1.  arm  a  piass  of  minute
points  of  a  deeper  red.
Left  arm  swollen  and  indurated.

Erythematous  inflammation,  desquamation  and  ulceration
around  border  of  nails;  pain,  great  sensibility  to  touch.
^  Lower  Limbs. Sensation  and  motion  paralyzed  in  both
legs.
Foul  smelling  foot  sweats.
^  Limbs  in  General. Wandering  rheumatoid  pains.

I  I  Cold  extremities,  with  blueness  of  lips,  slow  respiration,

imperceptible  pulse.

I I  Large  red  patches  on  arms  and  legs,  exactly  like  nettle
rash,  in  large  raised  wheals,  with  intense  irritative
itching.

^  Rest. Position. Motion, i '  Limbs  extended,  head  low,
appearance  of  impending  death.

Lies  in  a  state  resembling  catalepsy ;  hysteria.

Lying  down :  <  headache ;  <  toothache ;  impossible  on
account  of  weak  action  of  heart.

Lying  on  back :  inspiration  through  nose,  expiration,
through  lips.

In  any  position :  stertorous  breathing.

Bent  forward  :  in  asthma.

Could  neither  lie  nor  stand ;  chorea.

Motion:  <  pain  in  forehead  and  occiput;  pain  over  supra-
orbital ridge.
36  jferygg^ Lassitude.

Unaccountably  depressed  and  very  weak,  especially  in
lower  limbs,  this  weakness  increasing  until  he  is  com-
pelled to  give  up  his  daily  walks  from  sheer  inability
to  put  one  leg  before  the  other.

I  I  Great  muscular  prostration,  limbs  extended,  head  low,
appearance  of  impending  death,

I  I  Tendency  to  weakness,  feebleness  of  stomach,  blue  lips,
cold  extremities,  slow  respiration,  imperceptible  pulse.

I  I  Great  exhaustion  from  sleeplessness.  ^Acute  rheuma-
tism.

Extraordinary  depression  of  nervous  system,  following
cerebral  congestion.

Great  prostration,  tendency  to  somnolence.
I  I  Neuralgia.

I  Violent  hysterical  fit;  she  lies  in  a  state  resembling  cata-
lepsy.


CHLOKALUM.  88

I  1  Nervous  irritation;  mania;  hysteria;  mania  sL  potu;
epilepsy  ;  convulsions  of  children.

I  I  Chorea :  patient  could  neither  lie  nor  stand,  the  head,
limbs  and  body  being  in  constant  motion  and  each
muscle  apparently  partaking  of  irregular  action.

I  I  Long  continued  and  obstinate  chorea.

I  I  Intense  chorea,  where  constancy  and  severity  of  spas-
modic movements  threaten  life  of  patient.

I  I  Trismus  and  trismus  nascentium.

I  Traumatic  tetanus  and  infantile  tetanus.

I  The  whole  body  engaged  in  tetanic  rigidity,  fits  coming
on  at  very  short  intervals ;  mouth  can  only  be  slightly
opened;  deglutition  very  difficult. ^Tetanus.

iSudden  violent  tetanic  fit  with  lockjaw;  weeping  mood;
sudden  very  violent  pain  in  abdomen. ^Tetanus.

Motor  and  sensory  paralysis  of  both  legs.
^'  Sleep. I  I  Insomnia arising from overfatigue, mental or
physical.

During  sleep,  stertorous  breathing  with  loud  snoring  in
any  position.

I  Night  terror,  especially  in  teething  children.

Horrible  dreams  with  frightful  visions,  they  scream  and
cry  out,  sit  up  in  bed  and  cannot  be  quieted.

I  I  Wakes  from  disturbed  rest,  cries  out  and  screams  until
perfectly  exhausted  and  in  danger  of  general  convul-
sion. ^Chorea.
^'^  Time.  At  night :  sleeplessness ;  terror  of  children ;  diarrhoea
with  nervous  excitement ;  enuresis ;  paroxysms  of
asthma ;  sense  of  weight  on  chest,  in  region  of  sternum ;
irritation  of  skin.

Latter  part  of  night :  incontinence  of  urine  in  children.

Towards  evening :  itching  of  chin,  and  front  and  back  of
neck.
^^  Temperature  and  Weather. Requires  constant  fanning ;
palpitation  and  dyspnoea  in  phthisis.

Open  air:  >  headache.
"*"  Fever. Sensation  of  heat  all  over body,  particularly  in
face.

High  fever.

I  I  Fevers  where  cephalic  symptoms  do  not  contraindicate
its  use.
*^  Attacks,  Periodicity. Paroxysms  :  of  asthma  nightly.

Lasting  over  eighten  hours :  tedious  labor.

All  day :  headache  in  forehead  and  occiput.

Continuing  a  long  time :  pains  in  head.

For  days :  comatose.
■*"  Locality  and  Direction. Left:  above  and  in  eye,  head-
ache  <; conjunctiva  injected; eye slightly  injected;


89  CHLORALUM.

conjunctivitis  and  keratitis ;  small  ulcer  on  cornea ;  bad
eruption  on  arm ;  arm  swollen  and  indurated.

Right:  eye  injected,  painful ;  conjunctivitis:  ulcer  on  cor-
nea; redness of palpebral and ocular conjunctiva;
phlyctense  on  edge  of  cornea.
^  Sensations. As  if  a  hat-band  was  drawn  across  forehead.

As  if  eyes  were  constricted.

As  of  a  burning  ring  around  each  eye.

As  if  eyeballs  were  too  large.

As  of  sand  in  eyes;  sinking  and  oppression  at  pit  of
stomach ;  as  if  tissues  in  chest  were  hypertrophied  (ful-
ness) ;  on  chin  and  neck  like  minute  insects  or  hairs.

Sharp  pain :  in  eyeballs.

Hard  pains :  in  head.

Severe  pain :  in  frontal  region.

Neuralgia :  of  fifth  nerve ;  from  decayed  teeth ;  from
pressure  of  filling  of  jaw;  of  inferior  dental  branch  of
fifth  nerve.

Rheumatoid  wandering  pains.

Stinging :  over  whole  body.

Spasmodic  pains :  in  and  about  uterus.

Colic  :  hepatic  and  renal ;  of  children.

Labor-like  pains :  in  dysmenorrhoea.

Burning :  in  eyes  and  lids ;  ring  around  each  eye ;  sting-
ing over  whole  surface.

Aching  pain :  in  forehead  and  occiput.

Dull  pain :  in  forehead  and  occiput ;  over  eyes.

Full  pains :  in  head.

Heavy  pain :  in  forehead  and  occiput ;  over  eyes.

Pressing  pains :  in  head.

Soreness :  within  cranium.

Pressure :  on  lungs.

Oppression :  at  base  of  chest  in  front.

Tightness :  on  lungs ;  over  whole  surface.

Constriction  :  at  base  of  chest.

Fulness :  of  chest.

Heaviness :  of  head ;  of  eyelids.

Weight :  within  cranium ;  in  chest  in  region  of  sternum.

Lightness :  of  chest.

Emptiness :  in  stomach  shortly  after  eating.

Heat :  of  head ;  of  face ;  all  over  body.

Itching :  of  inner  canthi  and  edge  of  lids,  of  chin,  and
front  of  back  and  neck ;  over  whole  body.

Hardness :  over  whole  surface.
^'  Tissues. I  I  Patient  anaemic  and  emaciated. ^Chorea.

Acts  primarily  on  ganglia  of  brain,  then  of  spinal  cord,
finally  on  those  of  heart,  so  that  paralysis  of  heart  sets
in.


CHLORALUM.  90

Causes  cessation  of  cardiac  movements,  diminishes  excita-
bility of  motor  centres,  of  respiratory  and  abdominal
muscles,  and  lessens  irritability  of  vaso  motor  centres.

Produces  first  sleep,  then  more  or  less  ansesthesia,  and
during  both  relaxation  of  muscles.

In  muscular  debility,  fatty  degeneration  and  dilatation,
when  there  are  evidences  of  nervous  deficiency,  as
shown  by  irregularity  or  intermittency  of  action  and
palpitation  of  heart.

The  temperature  falls,  with  sinking  of  pulse  and  respira-
tion.

I  Destroys  coagulability  of  the  blood.

I  I  Hemorrhagic  diathesis.

Typhoid  cases  with  epistaxis ;  haemoptysis ;  hgematemesis.

Favors  the  production  of  hemorrhage  and  tends  to  reopen
recently  cicatrized  ulcers  of  mucous  membranes.

I  I  Anasarca.

I  I  Purpura  hsemorrhagica.

Gangrene  on  places  exposed  to  pressure,  especially  in
patients  laboring  under  mental  diseases,  the  gangrene
spreads  in  depth  with  an  intact  skin.

I  I  Rheumatism  and  gout.

Antiseptic  dressing  for  wounds  even  when  there  is  ery-
sipelas.

Applied  to  fetid  ulcers  it  has  septic  properties.
*^  Touch. Passive  Motion. Injuries. iSeasickness;  is
said  to  be  preventive.

Touch  :  sensitive  around  border  of  nails.

Pressure :  does  not  alter  scarlet  flush  on  head  and  face ;
erythema  remains  unchanged.
*^  Skin. Hypersemia  of  skin <  from smallest  quantity  of
wine,  beer  or  spirits,  with  distressing  palpitation.

I  An  itchiness  of  chin  and  front  and  back  of  neck,  coming
on  towards  morning,  sensation  like  minute  insects  or
hairs.

Pruritus  of  whole  skin  and  of  mucous  surfaces  of  upper
outlets  of  body,

I  I  Violent  stinging,  itching  sensation  over  whole  body.
d  Urticaria.

Burning-stinging  sensations,  and  a  feeling  of  tightness
and  hardness  over  whole  surface.

Intense  irritation  and  itching  of  skin,  preventing  sleep  at
night.

Great  irritation  of  skin  with  swelling  of  eyelids.

Marked  cutaneous  anaesthesia.

Bright,  scarlet  eruption  on  face,  body  and  limbs.

She  is  much  flushed,  and  there  is  present  over  the  whole
body  a  diffuse  inflammatory  redness  closely  resembling
the  smooth  eruption  of  scarlatina.


91  CHLORALUM.

Bright  red  or  bluish  erythema  over  whole  body,  per-
manent under  pressure,  mottled  with  livid  patches  and
deep  red  spots.

■  Eruption  on  arms,  legs  and  face  and  subsequently  over

whole  body  in  large  blotches  of  different  shapes,  raised
above  the  surface  and  of  a  deep  red  color ;  these  blotches
gradually  coalesce,  till  the  whole  skin  is  in  a  red  and
blotchy  state,  resembling  measles.

■  Blotches  of  redness  over  legs  and  body  in  distinct  wheals,

not  much  fever.

A  mass  of  minute  points  or  stigmata  upon  the  red  surface
of  1.  arm,  of  a  much  deeper  red,  permanent  under
pressure.

Eruption  on  arms  and  legs,  exactly  like  nettle  rash  in
large  raised  wheals,  with  intense,  irritating  itching,
oedematous  swelling  of  face,  cheeks,  eyelids,  ears,  com-
ing on  suddenly  from  a  chill,  not  from  heat.

1  I  Wheals  come  on  suddenl}^  from  a  chill,  crops  of  them
appearing  many  times  a  day;  as  long  as  she  remains
in  the  warmth  is  not  troubled  with  them.

■  Rash  "like  the  sting  of  a  nettle,"  coming  out  every  night,

and  almost  disappearing  during  the  day; it  is  very

itchy,  and  after  washing  with  soap  and  water  becomes

painful,  disturbing  sleep  at  night.
■Urticarious  eruption,  which  disappears  by  day  and  comes

out  at  night,  with  such  itching  as  to  keep  child  from

sleeping.
Large  greenish  spots  at  base  of  spine.

■  Eruption  rises  in  white  blisters  on  being  scratched,  there

is  great  pruritus. ^Urticaria.

Nettle  rash  <  night,  compelling  scratching  until  places
bleed ;  fever  and  restlessness.

Arms  red  and  speckled,  with  threads  of  white  dead  epi-
dermis partially  separated  from  subjacent  cutis.

General  desquamation  in  round  patches  like  blisters,  from
which  serum  had  been  absorbed,  leaving  skin  beneath
of  a  purple  and  in  some  places  yellow  color.

Purpura  hsemorrhagica ;  herpes  circinatus.

■  ■Decubitus. ^Dropsy. ^Scarlatina. ^Erysipelas.

^'^  Stages  of  Life,  Constitution. "  Its  action  is  more  uncertain

in  persons  who  are  free  livers  and  in  those  accustomed

to  the  use  of  alcohol."
Children,  incontinence  of  urine.
Peter  B.,  set.  6  months;  already  weaned;  red  blotches  and

wheals  over  legs  and  body.
Robert  J.,  set.  9,  of  a  strumous  family ;  conjunctivitis.
Girl,  set.  13;  symptoms  commencing  at  menstrual  period;

the  remedy  also  caused  passage  of  a  round  worm;  tetanic

convulsions.


CHLORALUM— CHLOROFORMUM.  92

Jane  W.,  set.  13;  taken  ill  with  headache,  sickness  and
vomiting,  which  lasted  three  days,  when  an  itching
urticaria  developed.

Girl,  £et.  18,  had  a  previous  attack ;  violent  hysterical  fit.

Mrs.  S.,  set.  38 ;  catarrhal  ophthalmia.

Mrs.  S.,  set.  38,  and  son,  set.  8 ;  urticaria.

German,  set.  46 ;  from  having  become  wet ;  urticaria.

German,  set.  64;  urticaria.
^Relations. Antidotes: Ammonia, Atrop., Digit, (heart);
Mosch'us,  electricity.

Compare:  1  Bellad.,  1 1  Chlorof.,  I  Gelsem.,  I  Nux  vom.,  I  Opium.

\  It  may  be  used  where  opium  is  contraindicated,  in  gen-
eral, after  operations.


Chloroform.  CHCl


Provings  by  Lembke,  A.  H.  Z.,  v.  39,  p.  369,  and  E.  W.  Berridge,  effects  of
inhalation,  M.  H.  Rev.,  v.  16,  p.  38.

Clinical  Authorities. — Arachnitis  ending  in  convulsions,  E.  E.  Marcy,  N.
A.  J.  H.,  V.  1,  p.  337;  Mania-a-potu,  Pearce,  Add.  to  Horn.  Mat.  Med.;  Sick
headache,  G.  A.  Hall,  Burt's  Mat.  Med.;  Biliary  calculi,  C.  Hering;  T.  H.  Buckler,
Horn.  Times,  v.  8,  p.  48;  E.  M.  Hale,  Am.  Horn.  Obs.,  v.  7,  p.  471 ;  Paralysis  of
sphincter  vesicce,  Woodward  (10  drop  doses),  Burt's  Mat.  Med.;  Puerperal  convul-
sions, Sanford,  Browne,  and  Talbot,  Med.  Inv.,  v.  7,  p.  169;  Puerperal  convidsions
{per  rectum),  W.  H.  Holcomb,  Trans.  Am.  Inst.,  1870,  p.  446 ;  Tetanic  spasms  in
typhus,  Watson,  Add.  to  Horn.  Mat.  Med.

^  Mind. Difficult  comprehension.

Excitement  quickly  subsiding  into  stupefaction,  in  which,
however,  the  will  of  the  individual  is  evidently  active.

Great  weakness  of  brain,  with  loss  of  memor}^,  retarded
power  of  comprehension  and  thinking,  with  frequent
occurrence  of  confusion  of  intellect.  ,

Weeping.

Low  moaning.

I  I  Mania  from  intoxication  (olfaction).

Delirium,  sometimes  quiet,  sometimes  violent.

Delirium  tremens  where  excitement  and  violence  pre-
dominate.
^  Sensorium. Giddiness.

Seasickness.


93  CHLOROFORMUM.

^  Inner  Head. Pressure  in  brain  and  roaring  in  ears.
Headache  with  dizziness.

■  Sick  headache  with  excessive  nausea  and  vomiting.
*  Outer  Head. A  desire  to  lay  head  upon  one  side,  to  stretch
lower  limbs  and  to  let  the  arms  hang  down.
I  Head  drawn  down  upon  shoulders. ^Arachnitis.
^  Sight  and  Eyes. Inclination  to  close  the  eyes.
Floating  images  before  eyes.

Photophobia  (greatly  relieved  by  fumes  of  chloroform).
First  contraction,  then  dilatation  of  pupils.
I  Eyes  open  and  close  with  incredible  rapidity,  eyeballs

rolled  downward,  pupils  contracted. ^Arachnitis.
Exophthalmic  goitre,  morbus  Basedowii.
^  Hearing  and  Ears. Ringing  in  ears,  buzzing  and  rum-
bling  in  ears like the  noise  of  railroad  cars or  the
striking  of  clocks.
Singing  in  ears,  with  pressure  in  head,  as  after  use  of  tea.
Indistinct  hearing.
I  I  Earache.
^  Upper  Face. Blueness  of  face.

iRajDid  convulsive  movements  of  muscles  of  face;  whole
face  frightfully  distorted. ^Arachnitis.
^  Lower  Face. A  slight  stinging  and  burning  in  lips.

I  Foaming  at  mouth;  jaws  locked,  lips  tightly  compressed.
^Arachnitis.
"  Taste. Sweetish  taste  in  mouth.
^^  Inner  Mouth. Coolness  in  mouth.

^^  Hiccough,  Nausea and  Vomiting, i Hiccough of  ner-
vous form.
Nausea  and  vomiting,  seasickness  or  morning  sickness,
with  much  acidity  of  stomach,  and  great  distension  of
stomach  and  bowels  with  gas.
^"^  Stomach. Pain  in  region  of  cardiac  orifice  of  stomach.
^'  Hypochondria. iCholestric  gall  stones  and  biliary  colic.
^■''  Abdomen. Enteralgia,  or  colic,  with  intense  suffering,  and
tympanitis ;  especially  if  accompanied  by  great  restless-
ness from  intense  pain.
iGastralgia,  enteralgia,  hepatic  and  renal  colic.
^^  Stool. Involuntary  stools.

Involuntary stools of mucus and blood, with great
tenesmus.
^^  Urinary  Organs. Bladder  irritable.

I  Paralysis  of  sphincter  vesicae. ^After  parturition.
I  Renal  colic  during  passage  of  calculi.
^^  Male  Sexual  Organs. Great  weakness  and  relaxation  of

sexual  organs.
^^  Female  Sexual  Organs. Hysterical  conditions  dependent
on  irritability  and  spasm  of  the  cervix.


CHLOROFORMUM.  94

Neurosis  of  sexual  organs.


24


Pregnancy. Parturition.  Lactation. Prevents  the  shock
engendered  by  labor,  in  very  nervous  patients.
No  freedom  from  suffering  between  the  pains;  she  com-
plains much  of  her  back,  or  of  extreme  pain  and  per-
haps tenderness  over  whole  abdominal  region;  she  is
very  restless,  can  find  rest  in  no  position,  tosses  about
and  is  very  nervous.
Protracted  and  severe  labors ;  rigidity  of  os  uteri.
Women  subject  to  convulsions  during  labor.
■  Complete  paralysis  of  sphincter  vesicse  following  labor.
^^  Voice  and  Larynx. Aphonia.

Pain  in  larynx.
^  Respiration. Sighing  or  snoring  breathing.
I  Stertorous  breathing. ^Arachnitis.
Want  of  breath.

Respiration  deeper  and  slower,  constantly  increasing  re-
tardation and  weakness  of  action  of  heart  and  arteries;
trembling  of  hands  and  feet,  total  cessation  of  motion
and  sensibility.
Respirations  almost  stopped,  so  few  and  feeble;  uncon-
sciousness; motionless  features;  livid  lips;  feeble  pulse,
as  if  dying. ^Shock  of  injury.
Neurosis  of  respiratory  organs,  as  laryngismus  stridulus,
asthma,  and  pertussis.
^'^  Cough. 'Dry,  hard,  spasmodic,  irritable  cough.
^^  Heart. Constantly  increasing  retardation  and  weakening
of  action  of  heart  and  arteries.
Fluttering  of.  heart.
^^  Back. Pain  in  region  of  1.  kidney.
^^  Upper  Limbs. Desire  to  let  the  arms  hang  down.

Pain  in  dorsum  of  hand  and  joint  of  thumb.
^^  Lower  Limbs. Desire  to  stretch  the  lower  limbs.

Pain  in  region  of  r.  sciatic  nerve.
^^  Limbs  in  General. A  sensation  of  fingers  and  toes  being
asleep.
Trembling  of  hands  and  feet.
Convulsive  twitching  of  extremities.
I  Rapid  convulsive  movements  of  muscles  of  arms  and

legs,  blue  color  under  the  nails. ^Arachnitis.
Rheumatic  pain  about  the  joints.
^^  Rest. Position. Motion. Can  find  rest  in  no  position.
A  desire  to  lay  head  upon  one  side,  to  stretch  lower  limbs

and  to  let  the  arms  hang  down.
Total  cessation  of  motion.
^^  Nerves. Insomnia,  deafness,  apathy,  and  tremulousness  of
hands.
iSudden  jerking  and  trembling  of  every  muscle  of  body,


95  CHLOROFORMUM.

which  continues  for  about  one  minute  and  then  passes
off,  without  waking  him  from  sleep. ^Arachnitis.

Spasms  resembling  hysteria,  especially  in  females.

Tonic  and  clonic  spasms.

I  I  Tetanic  spasms. ^Typhus  fever.

Trismus.

I  I  Convulsions.

■  Puerperal  convulsions  from  uraemia  or  reflex  irritation.

Entire  inactivity  of  all  the  external  sensibilities,  so  that
even  considerable  injury  to  the  nerves  produce  no  reflex
motion  in  the  periphery.

Total  cessation  of  motion  and  sensibility.
^  Sleep. Great  sleepiness,  yawning,  and  invincible  lassitude.

Sleep  commonly  dreamless.

Comatose  sleep.
^°  Fever. A  general  feeling  of  warmth  flowing  through  whole
body.

I  I  Typhus  fever,  with  tetanic  spasms.

Typhus  fever,  with  great  prostration,  delirium,  subsultus,
irregular  respiration  and  nervous  restlessness.
*^  Sensations. As if fingers and toes were asleep ; as of
warmth  flowing  through  whole  body.

Pain:  in  region  of  cardiac  orifice  of  stomach;  in  abdomen;
in  back;  in  larynx;  in  region  of  1.  kidney;  in  dorsum
of  hand  and  joint  of  thumb;  in  region  of  r.  sciatic
nerve.

Stinging:  in  lips.

Burning:  in  lips.

Colic:  biliary;  abdominal;  renal.

Rheumatic  pain:  about  the  joints.
*"  Skin. Skin  cold,  pale.

Unhealthiness  of  skin,  it  is  slow  to  heal.
*^  Stages  of  Life,  Constitution.  "Those  that  bear  chloro-
form best  are  delicate,  weakly  people,  reduced  by  dis-
ease, and  women  and  children.  The  robust  and  healthy
are  more  exposed  to  the  dangerous  effects  of  this  agent.
The  age  of  the  individual  seems  to  have  no  special
influence."

"It  must  not  be  used  when  there  is  softening  of  the  brain;
severe  organic  heart  disease,  with  intermittent  pulse;
aneurisms  of  aorta;  extreme  weakness  from  hemor-
rhages ;  extreme  ansemia,  and  great  tendency  to  syncope."

"  In  drunkards  the  stage  of  excitement  can  not  be  over-
come without  grave  danger  to  life."

"  Use  contraindicated :  in  fatty  degeneration  of  heart ;  in
those  addicted  to  the  use  of  spirituous  liquors;  where
there  is  albuminaria."

Clergyman,  set.  58,  who  had  suffered  twenty-three  years
from  gall  stones.


CHLOROFORMUM— CHLORUM.  96

Son  of  J.  W.  Crane,  M.D.,  set.  13,  sanguine  bilious  temper-
ament, previous  to  attack  had  enjoyed  good health;
arachnitis  ending  in  convulsions.
^^  Relations. Antidotes : Nitrite of  Amyl, Ipecac, (against
action  on  stomach) ;  brandy  ameliorates  the  symptoms.

In  narcosis  from  chloroform,  small  pieces  of  ice  placed  in
rectum  produce  deep  inspiration  soon  followed  by
natural  breathing.

It  antidotes:  Strychnine.

CHLORUM.

Chlorine.  The  element.


Introduced  and  first  proved  by  C.  Hering,  in  1846,  and  published  in  Archives,
2,  3,  p.  165,  which  contains  his  symptoms  and  those  of  aaotlier  prover,  Mr.
Wliitey,  besides  numerous  chemical,  toxicological  and  pharmacological  obser-
vations. For  later  provings,  including  S.  A.  Jones'  involuntary  proving,  from
inhaling  the  gas,  see  Encyclopedia,  v.  3.  It  was  first  used  in  practice  by  Carroll
Dunham.

CLiNiCAii  Authorities. — Hemorrhage  from  bowels  in  typhus,  Schweich,
Eiick.  Kl.  Erf.,  v.  4,  p.  754;  Spasmus  glottidis,  C.  Dunham,  Hom.  Eev.,  v.  2,  p.  20,
and  U.  S.  Med.  &  Surg.  Journ.,  Oct.  1869,  p.  117;  Suffocative  attacks,  Searle,
Ilaue's  Path.,  p.  337;  Spasmodic  cough,  C.  Dunham,  Hom.  Rev.,  v.  3,  p.  370;
rhthisis  and  Chronic  catarrh,  a  number  of  cases  relieved  and  cured  by  inha-
lation, Frank's  Mag.,  v.  3,  p.  130 ;  Malignant  pustule,  Frank's  Mag.,  v.  1,  p.  432.

^  Mind. Mind  tranquil  and  active.
Apprehension.
A  horrible  state  of  mind,  fears  he  will  go  crazy,  fears  he

cannot  make  a  living.
Everything  seems  in  confusion.
Cannot  remember  names  if  he  sees people,  and  when

seeing  the  names  does  not  remember  the  j^erson.

■  Quiet  delirium,  in  alternation  with  the  greatest  restless-

ness and  desire  to  run  away. ^Typhus.
Restless  desire  to  walk  about,  as  if  whole  attention  must
be  centred  on  act  of  respiration.

■  Intoxicated  feeling  with  sopor  and  great  nervous  irrita-

tion ;  dry  mouth  and  diarrhoea. ^Typhus.
Inclined  to  anger.

■  After  excitement. ^Spasmus  glottidis.

^  Sensorium. ■Disposition  to  faint. (^Typhus.


97  CHLORUM.

Vertigo  and  stupor.

I  Coma,  fainting  and  cold,  viscous  sweats.  ^Typhus,
^Scarlatina. ^Measles. ^Variola.

■  Partially  comatose  during  suffocative  attack.

Partial  unconsciousness,  followed  by  free  respiration  and
deep  sleep.
■^  Inner  Head. Rush  of  blood  to  head.

Painful  aching  in  vertex  and  down  1.  side,  with  inclina-
tion to  lie  down.

*  Outer  Head. Warm  sweat  breaks  out  on  forehead  while

coughing.
■^  Sight  and Eyes. iDuU and  glassy  expression  of  eyes.
^Spasmus  glottidis.

■  Staring  eyes.
Dimness  before  eyes.

I  I  Running  of  tears  <  in  open  air.

Eyes  protrude  with  coryza,  sunken  face,  and  spasmodic
cough.

■  Purulent  ophthalmia.

*  Hearing  and  Ears. Singing  in  ears.

I  Deafness. ^Typhus.
^  Smell  and  Nose. Dryness  in  nose  before  coryza.

I  Nose  smoky  or  sooty. ^Typhus.
Corrosive  feeling  in  corners  of  nose.
Nose  completely  stopped.

Sudden  running  in  drops,  of  a  sharp,  corroding  fluid,  with
tears  in  eyes,  dry  tongue,  palate  and  fauces.

Nose  discharged  mucus  freely.

Water  dropped  from  left  nostril,  did  not  burn  or  excoriate
the  skin.

I I  Coryza  with  headache.

Fluid  coryza  very  soon  changes  to  yellow,  copious  phlegm.
■ Evening  coryza,  morning  sneezing.
Severe  sneezing.

Nasal  complaints  <  lying  down.
^  Upper  Face. iFace  pale  and  bloated. ^Spasmus  glottidis.
Pale,  dirty -yellow,  cadaverous  color ;  face  puffed  up.
Face  high  colored.

■  Child  became  livid. ^Spasm  of  glottis.

■  Face  extremely  livid,  blue.

■  Ash  colored  face. ^Typhus.

Swollen  face,  with  protrusion  of  eyes,  abundant  discharge

of  mucus  from  nostrils.
Warm  sweat  broke  out  on  forehead  while  coughing.
^  Lower  Face. iLips,  tongue  and  teeth  brown,  black  and

sooty. ^Typhus.
'"  Teeth  and  Gums. Sensation  as  if  teeth  were  too  full,  or
had  been  injured  by  acids.

VOL.  IV. — 7.  ,


CHLORUM.  98


I  Teeth  black.
"  Taste  and  Tongue, i  Tongue  dry. (^Typhus.

Sensation  as  if  tongue  had  been  burnt.

I  Tongue  black.
^'  Inner  Mouth, l  Dryness  of  whole  buccal  cavity. ^Typhus.

Abundant  discharge  of  mucus  from  mouth  and  nose.

Salivation.

Soreness  of  mouth,  fauces  and  oesophagus,  as  if  tongue  had
been  burnt;  as  if  he  had  been  eating  vegetable  acids,  or
as  if  his  teeth  had  been  injured  by  acids.

Sore  mouth.

Increased  vascularity  and  minute  ulcerations  in  mouth
and  throat.

Opening  the  mouth  to  take  food  or  drink  produced  spasm
of  glottis.

I  Putrid  odor  from  mouth. ^Stomacace.
13  Throat. Dryness  of  throat.

Inability  to  swallow.

Throat  sore  from  uvula  to  bronchi,  including  fauces  and
oesophagus.

Throat  and  chest  sore,  voice  hoarse.

Any  attempt  to  examine  the  throat  produced  spasm  of  the
glottis.

Reported  to  have  had  a  favorable  effect  upon  the  diphthe-
ritic process.
^^  Appetite,  Thirst. iLoss  of  appetite. ^Spasmus  glottidis.

No  thirst  with  coryza,  but  cold  water  is  very  serviceable.
^^  Eating  and  Drinking. Even  tasting  food  was  prevented
by  spasm  of  glottis;  while  eating,  and  after  it,  hot  feel-
ings; irritable,  and  disposed  to  get  into  a  rage.

After  eating  increase  of  the  headache  with  fever.

Smoking  causes  a  dryness  in  mouth.
^'^  Nausea  and  Vomiting. Disposition  to  vomit.

Desire  to  vomit  when  coughing,  without  nausea.

Violent  vomiting  of  dark  liver-colored  masses  of  blood,
without  any  pain,  lessening  the  pain  in  prsecordia  and
the  sensation  of  suffocation.
^'^  Scrobiculum  and  Stomach. Contracting  sensation  and
pain  in  prsecordia.

Cannot  bear  any  pressure  on  pit  of  stomach.

Peculiar  painful  sensation  with  the  cough,  beginning  in
region  of  stomach  and  extending  to  head.

Acidity  of  stomach.

Irritation  of  stomach.

Stomach  inflamed.

Mild  catarrh  of  stomach  and  chronic  bronchitis,  with  loss
of  flesh,  and  an  unhealthy  color  of  skin.


99  CHLORUM.

^^  Hypochondria. Increased  secretion  of  bile.

^^  Abdomen. Weakness  in  abdomen.

^  Stool  and  Rectum. Stools  of  bright  blood.

I  I  Diarrhoea  with  dryness  of  mouth,  after  the  appearance

of  eruption  in  typhus.
I  I  Hemorrhage  from  bowels  in  typhus;  blood  black,  coag-
ulated or  thin,  smelling  like  carrion.
I  I  Diarrhoea  in  the  morning.
^^  Urinary  Organs. Urine  possesses  bleaching  properties.
Urine  does  not  redden  litmus  paper.
Frequent  urging  to  urinate.
^^  Male  Sexual  Organs. Sudden  impotence  with  aversion  to

sexual  intercourse.
^  Voice  and  Larynx. Trachea  and  Bronchia. Loss  of
voice.
I  Aphonia  from  damp  air.
Great  difficulty  in  articulating  or  breathing.
I  Spasms  of  vocal  cords.

Sensation  of  warmth  in  respiratory  passages; increased
secretion  from  mucous  membranes,  and  increased  ex-
pectoration.
Feeling  of  stiffness  in  rima  glottidis  with  impeded  expira-
tion.
■Sensation  of  constriction  in  air  tubes,  tightness  and  suffo-
cation.
Sensation  as  if  the  whole  larynx  were  raw  or  would  be-
come so,  with  single  coughs  threatening  a  very  violent
attack.
Feeling  as  if  the  rima  glottidis  were  stiff,  as  if  composed

of  an  iron  ring.
I  I  Violent  irritation  in  epiglottis,  larynx  and  bronchial
tubes.
- 1 1  Violent  spasms  of  glottis ;  air  is  admitted  well  enough,
but  its  exit  is  prevented.
So firmly  did the glottis appear  to  be  closed,  that  it
seemed  as  though  air  might  pass  through  any  part  of
the  thoracic  walls  more  readily  than  by  way  of  larynx.
■  Thirty  or  forty  attacks  of  spasmus  glottidis  occurring

within  twenty-four  hours.
Scratching  sensation  in  bifurcation  of  windjDipe.
Chronic  bronchitis  and  mild  catarrh  of  stomach,  with  loss
of  flesh  and  an  unhealthy  color  of  skin  (workmen  ex-
posed to  fumes).
Phlegmonous  inflammation  of  bronchial  membranes.
Inflammation  of  air  passages  and  lungs.
Is  said  to  have  caused  croup.
^®  Respiration. Respiration  and  pulse  frequent.
■Sudden  tightness  of  chest.


CHLORUM.  100

Sensation  of  oppression  felt  more  in  r.  lung.

Dyspnoea  with  great  physical  anxiety.

liSudden and  extreme dyspnoea from  spasm of  vocal

cords.
When  dyspnoea  was  at  the  worst,  it  was  attended  by  a

feeling  as  if  a  narrow  band  were  drawn  tightly  around

lower  third  of  whole  chest.
I  Dyspnoea  increasing,  great  anxiety,  not  that  he  thinks

he  will  die,  but  on  account  of  the  impeded  respiration;

physical,  not  psychical  anxiety.
Sense  of  impending  suffocation.

■  Paroxysms  of  suffocation  followed  by  catarrh.

■  Inspiration  easy,  but  could  not  completely  fill  the  lungs

with  air.
•  Inspiration  is  attended  by  a  short  crackling  rale.

■  Suddenly  and without  warning, child makes a long

crowing  inspiration,  an  attempt  is  made  to  exhale,  but
without  success;  another  crowing  inspiration  followed
by  a  forcible,  but  ineffectual  effort  to  exhale ;  and  this
was  repeated  until  she  became  blue  around  the  mouth,
and  sank  into  partial  unconsciousness,  when  free  in-
spiration would  take  place  and  child  would  generally
sink  into  deep  sleep;  frequently  toward  close  of  an
attack,  convulsive  movements  of  extremities  take  place.
^Spasmus  glottidis.
Expiration  easy  and  noiseless;  inspiration  difficult,  with
rales.

■  B  Inspiration  unimpeded  and  can  be  effected  in  the  natural

manner,  but  expiration  is  absolutely  impossible.

■  Gasping  inhalation  and  expiration  nearly  impossible.

■  Breathing  consists  of  a  succession  of  crowing  inspirations,

each  followed  by  an  ineffectual  effort  at  expiration,  in-
flating the  chest  to  a  more  painful  extent.  ^Spasmus
glottidis. t'Emphysema  pulmonum.

■  Crowing  inspiration; absolutely  obstructed  expiration;

face  turgid  and  livid; convulsive  movements of  ex-
tremities; partial  coma.
Expiration accompanied by prolonged,  loud,  whistling
rales,  each  pulsation  of  heart  gives  a  crescendo  dimin-
uendo effect  to  them.

■  Expiration  difficult,  prolonged,  and  seems  as  if  insuffi-

cient, as  if  air  cells  were  hardly  half  empty.
Whistling  rales  quite  loud  in  forced  expiration.
'"  Cough. 'Any  attempt  to  cough  produces  spasm  of  glottis.
Spasmodic  cough.
Whistling-wheezing  cough.

■  Desire  to  cough  resulting  from  a  tickling  and  a  sensation

of  rawness  behind  the  thyroid  cartilage;  when  he  seeks


101  CHLORUM.

to  yield  to  this  desire,  he  finds  it  impossible  to  expel
the  air  from  the  chest;  the  cough  is  therefore  abortive,
although  the  desire  grows  continually  more  and  more
intense;  the  obstruction  to  cough  results  from  an  ap-
parent constriction  just  below  larynx,  although  he  can
draw  air  freely  into  the  lungs.

■  The  freedom  of  inhalation  and  impeded  exhalation,  to-
gether with  constantly  increasing  tickling  in  larynx
which  compelled  him  to  make  very  energetic  but  un-
availing efforts  to  cough,  continue  until  he  sinks  ex-
hausted and  covered  with  sweat  upon  a  couch,  when
the  spasm  seems  to  relax  and  he  can  cough  and  exhale
with  comparative  freedom;  paroxysms  recur  about
every  two  hours. ^Spasmodic  cough.

I  I A  continuous  little  dry  cough.

Cough  seldom ;  no  expectoration,  but  a  little  hoarseness.

At  each  cough,  a  spot  in  the  chest  (region  of  r.  bronchus)
feels  sore,  as  if  the  cough  jarred  and  hurt  it.

Cough,  tightness  and  sensation  of  pressure  in  chest.

Violent  cough,  sensation  of  constriction  in  air  tubes,  tight-
ness and  suffocation.

While  coughing,  warm  sweat  breaks  out  upon  forehead.

Coughing,  with  a  desire  to  vomit.

When  coughing  it  seems  as  if  he  must  surely  vomit;  as
if  the  effort  to  "raise"  the  phlegm  would  also  empty
the  stomach ;  yet  no  nausea  is  felt.

Constant  cough,  the  bronchi  apparently  filled  with  thick,
tenacious  mucus.

Fits  of  coughing  in  which  phlegm  was  always  raised  and
ejected,  but  only  after  long  and  fatiguing  efforts;  in  a
minute  or  two,  phlegm  would  again  collect,  causing  a
fit  of  exhausting  coughing,  until  it  was  expectorated.

Cough,  with  expectoration  of  thick,  white,  frothy  mucus.

1  I  Cough,  with  spitting  of  blood,  with  pleuritic  pains.

No  relief  from  expectoration;  chest  seems  to  fill  again  at
once.
^^  Inner  Chest  and  Lungs. Sensation  of  w^armth  in  respira-
tory organs.

Feeling  as  if  a  narrow  band  was  tightly  drawn  around
lower  third  of  whole  chest.

Lungs  inflated  to  a  most  painful  degree.

Sensation  in  lower  and  inner  third  of  r.  lung  as  if  it  was
ruptured;  there  is  a  feeling  as  if  air  escaped  from  the
lung  into  the  pleural  cavity  at  each  inspiration,  the
inspirations  being  attended  by  a  separate  rattling  rale,
confined  to  the  quasi  ruptured  locality,  the  vibrations  of
which  were  felt  by  the  common  sensation,  perceptible  to
the  touch  (hand  on  chest)  and  audible  to  the  bystander.


CHLORUM.  102

Rush  of  blood  to  chest.
Hgemoptysis.

■  Inflammation  of  lungs  and  air  passages. ^Phthisis  pul-

monalis.
Increased secretion from mucous membranes and in-
creased expectoration.
^^  Heart,  Pulse  and  Circulation. Heart's  action  much  in-
creased.
Pulse  frequent.
I  Pulse  small  and  soft.
Pulse  diminished.
I  i  Congestions  to  head  and  chest.
^  Lower  Limbs. Weakness  in  lower  limbs.
^  Limbs  in  General. ■  Convulsive  movements  of  extremities.
In  the  morning  less  stiffness  in  back  than  usual,  but  more
in  limbs.
^^  Rest. Position. Motion. '  l  Inclination  to  lie  down  with
pain  in  head  and  exhaustion.
Lying  down :  <  nasal  complaints.
Attempt  to  cough :  produces  spasm  of  glottis.
Was  restless;  desired  to  walk  about;  could  not  be  easy
"either  lying,  sitting  or  walking;  seems  as  though  the
whole  attention  must  be  centered  upon  the  act  of  respi-
ration.
Walking  up  or  down  improves  feverish  malaise.
36  jferyes. Nervous  sensibility.

Great  physical  anxiety  with  dyspnoea.

■  Loss  of  strength  and  playfulness. ^Spasmus  glottidis.
I  Great  prostration. ^Typhus.

I  The  nervous  symptoms  continually  increase  in  third  or

fourth  week  of  typhus.
iSubsultus  tendinum. ^Typhus.
I  I  Violent  spasms  with  the  coming  of  eye  teeth.
I  The  interrupted  breathing  results  in  asphyxia  with  or

without  convulsions,  during  which  relaxation  follows

and  free  perspiration  takes  place  again. ^Laryngismus

stridulus.

■  Towards  the  close  of  an  attack  convulsive  movements.

^Laryngismus  stridulus.
^"^  Sleep. I  Attacks  of  spasmus  glottidis  occur  frequently  dur-
ing sleep,  arousing  child  suddenly;  they  are  most  fre-
Cjuent  from  midnight  to  7  a.m.

Night  sweat.
38  Time. Midnight  to  7  a.m.  :  attacks  of  spasmus  glottidis.

I  I  Wakens  at  3  or  4  a.m.  with  apprehension  of  a  terrible
disease  coming  on.

On  waking  in  morning  he  has  tears  in  his  eyes.

In  the  morning:  ill  humor;  difficult  to  rouse;  sneezing;


103  '  CHLORUM.

feverish  taste ;  weakness  in  abdomen ;  diarrhoea ;  stiff  in

all  the  limbs.
10  A.M.  to  2  P.M.:  crawling  over  front  of  arms,  back  and

thighs.
oActs  quicker  when  taken  in  the  evening.
In  the  evening  less  appetite,  sudden  coryza,  threatening


39


cough,  crawls  and  chilliness.


Temperature  and  Weather.  When  sitting  with  the  sun
shining  on  his  back,  drizzling  crawl,  followed  by  febrile
sensations.

Walking  in  open  air  relieves  chest  affections.

Warm  room  is  suffocating  to  him,  but  cold  open  air  gave
no  marked  relief.

In  open  air,  running  of  tears.

Chilly  in  warm  room,  evenings;  not  in  open  air,  morn-
ings.

From  damp  air,  loss  of  voice.
*^  Fever. Cold  feeling  in  head,  stomach  and  limbs.

Chilliness  and  crawls.

Crawls  and  shaking  in  evening.

From  10  a.m.  to  2  p.m.  crawls  over  front  of  arms,  back  and
thighs.

Dimness  of  eyes,  followed  by  fever.

■  Burning  dry  heat  with  anxiety  and  raving. ^Typhus.

Copious  perspiration.

I  Cold  sweat  covers  the  body.

Cold  viscous  sweat  in  typhoid  state  of  eruptive  diseases.

I  I A  genial  glow  all  over  surface  with  night  sweat  during
sleep.

I  Night  sweat  of  consumptives.

I I  In  typhus  give  five  drops  of  chlorine  water,  every  two
or  three  hours  until  the  tongue  gets  moist  (Goullon,  Sr.).

*^'  Attacks,  Periodicity. Every  two  hours,  attacks  of  spas-
modic cough.

Thirty  or  forty  attacks  of  spasmus  glottidis  within  twenty-
four  hours.
^  Sensations.  As  of  impending  suffocation ;  as  if  teeth  were
too  full  or  had  been  injured  by  acids;  as  if  tongue  had
been  burnt;  as  if  rima  glottidis  were  made  of  an  iron
ring;  as  if  a  narrow  band  were  drawn  tightly  around
lower  third  of  chest;  as  if  lower  third  of  r.  lung  was
ruptured  and  air  escaped  into  pleural  cavity;  as  if  an
insect  flitted  over  skin  and  stung  it.

Pain:  in  prsecordia;  from  stomach  to  head,  with  cough.

Aching:  in  vertex  and  down  1.  side.

Stinging:  in  skin,  as  of  a  nettle  or  minute  insects.

Corrosive  feeling:  in  corners  of  nose.

Rawness:  of  larynx;  behind  thyroid  cartilage.


CHLORUM.  '  104

Scraping:  in  windpipe.
.  Soreness :  at  each  cough  in  a  spot  in  region  of  r.  bronchus.

Pressure:  in  chest.

Biting:  in  skin  as  of  minute  insects.

Contracting  sensation :  in  prsecordia.

Constriction:  in  air  tubes;  just  below  larynx.

Oppression:  most  in  r.  lung.

Weakness:  in  abdomen;  in  lower  limbs.

Stiffness :  in  rima  glottidis.

Warmth:  in  respiratory  organs.

Cold  feeling:  in  head,  stomach  and  limbs.

Tickling:  behind  thyroid  cartilage.

Itching:  with  stinging  and  smarting  in  skin.
^  Tissues. Acts  principally  on  the  mucous  membranes,  par-
ticularly on  those  in  juxtaposition  with  the  ascending
aorta.

■  Rapid  emaciation. ^Spasmus  glottidis.

1  I  Loss  of  fat ;  absorption  of  fat.

I  Acute  rheumatic  pains.
^^  Touch. Cannot  bear  pressure  in  pit  of  stomach.
^  Skin. I  Excessive  sensitiveness  of  skin.

Itchiness  with  greatlj^  increased  sensibility;  he  tries  to
avoid  scratching;  slight  smarting.

Stinging,  as  of  a  nettle.

Stinging  and  biting  here  and  there  as  of  very  minute  in-
sects, indescribably  transient  and  minute,  occurring  at
intervals  on  arm,  back,  belly  and  lower  limbs;  as  if  an
insect  flitted  over  the  part  and  stung  it,  desires  to  slap
the  part  with  the  palm,  has  no  rest.

Stinging  like  from  cantharides  leaves  soreness  and  bruised
sensation,  replaced  by  itching;  cuticle  comes  off  in
white  scales.

Accumulation  of  blood  in  capillaries  of  skin  with  heat.

Determination  of  blood  to  skin,  with  eruption  of  minute
papillae,  so  close  that  the  skin  has  a  general  red  ap-
pearance at  a  short  distance,  like  injected  papillae  of
cutis  anserina;  the  papillae  suppurate  and  vesicate,  or
desquamate.

Eruption  of  minute  vesicles  thickly  studded  over  skin,  on
shoulders  their  bases  very  nearly  touch  one  another;
on  disappearing,  leave  minute  red  and  livid  spots.

Nettle  rash,  wheals,  white,  small,  in  clusters  surrounded
by  diffuse  redness.

Skin  red  and  painful,  becoming  tumid  and  swollen  and
thick  as  in  facial  erysipelas.

Inflammation  of  the  cuticle  and  ulceration.
I  I  Cutis  anserina;  dry,  yellow  and  shrivelled.

Urticaria  febrilis.


105  CHLORUM.

■  Typhoid  state  in  scarlatina,  measles,  variola,  spotted  and
piitrid  fever. ^Typhus.

Furfuration;  slight  desquamation.

':  Malignant  pustule  and  carbuncle.
^'^  Stages  of  Life,  Constitution. Female  infant,  set.  9  months,
well  developed  and  large ;  spasmus  glottidis.

Child,  set.  1^;  spasms  during  dentition.

J.  S.,  set.  52,  has  suffered  from  follicular  pharyngitis,  has
had  larynx  and  fauces  treated  with  nitrate  of  silver,
until  it  became  unendurable,  has  now  much  pain  in
throat,  habitual  cough  and  expectoration  of  glairy  mu-
cus; spasmodic  cough.
^®  Relations.  Antidotes :  Inhalation  of  sulphuretted  hydro-
gen is  the  best  chemical  antidote;  albumen;  Lycop.  an-
tidotes the  impotency;  Plumb,  ac.  antidotes  the  blood
spitting  and  pleurisy.

It  antidotes:  Hydr.  ac;  sulphuretted  hydrogen  (suffocation
from).

When  Phosphor,  had  been  given,  without  use. ^Typhus.

Closely  resembles  Mephitis  (suffocative  feeling  with  ina-
bility to  exhale,  bloated  face,  convulsions).

Similar  to  all  the  halogens,  particularly  to  Bromine.

Like  all  other  constituent  elements  of  the  human  body,
it  acts  by  preference  on  those  organs  in  which  it  has
a  function  to  perform.


CHROMICUM  ACIDUM.  106

CHROMICUM  ACIDUM.

Chromic  Acid.  \  CrO^jH^O.


Used  by  the  old  school  as  an  escharotic  in  the  burning  away  of  condylomata,
etc.,  also  as  a  disinfectant  in  hospital  gangrene,  etc.,  on  account  of  its  germ  killing
properties,  which  were  found  to  be  greater  than  those  of  any  other  substance  in  use.

The  only  systematic  treatment  it  has  received  at  the  hands  of  the  medical
profession  was  in  our  ranks,  from  Drysdale,  who  proved  the  sesquioxide  in  1842,
see  Hahn.  Materia  Medica,  Part  I  (the  symptoms  are  marked  —  in  our  arrange-
ment); by  Henry  Duffield  and  Guernsey  in  1852,  Inaugural  Thesis  at  Philadel-
phia Homoeopathic  Medical  College,  and  by  Oehme  in  1873,  N.  Y.  J.  of  Horn.,
V.  1,  p.  367. Clinical  use  of  it  was  made  in  six  cases  of  phrenitis  by  Pehrson.

^  Mind.  —  Mind  in  a  state  of  confusion  for  two  days ;  memory
aggravated  at  times  to  such  a  degree  that  he  found
himself  at  a  loss  to  know  how  to  make  several  of  the
letters  in  the  alphabet.

■  Delirious  states. ^Phrenitis.

■  Quarrelsome  in  delirium. ^Phrenitis.

^  Sensorium. —  Dull  confusion  in  head,  in  forenoon.

Is  heavy,  dull,  stupid.

Sensation  of  lightness  of  head  like  vertigo,  with  heat  in
face;  face  flushed;  pulse  full,  slightly  accelerated.

At  10  o'clock,  while  walking,  lightness  in  head  which  in-
clined him  continually  to  r.  side.

Giddiness  when  going  down  stairs.
^  Inner  Head. Pain  extends  into  anterior  portion  of  brain
from  r.  eyeball,  and  from  aching  teeth.

Fulness  of  head;  in  the  evening  lightness  at  heart  as  if  a
vacuum  was  there;  giddiness  when  going  down  stairs,
and  cold  feet.

Woke  at  5  a.m.  with  feeling  of  fulness  in  upper  and  fore-
part of  head.

—  Shooting  pains  in  1.  temple.

Pulsative,  throbbing  sensation  from  region  of  heart  to  1.
eye  and  1.  side  of  head ;  general  fulness  of  forepart  of
head,  with  occasional  slight  pains  in  1.  hypochondrium.

■Throbbing  in  occiput. ^Phrenitis.

■  Great  sensitiveness  of  brain. ^Phrenitis.

■  Inflammatory  affections  of  the  brain.

*  Outer  Head.  Heavy  pain  along  coronal  suture,  extending
backward  and  occupying  all  of  parietal  portion,  at  10


107  CHROMICUM  ACIDUM.

A.M.;  was  not  >  by  dinner,  warmth,  or  cold,  and  con-
tinued without  variation  until  4  p.m.  ;  walking  in  open
air  for  one  hour  did  not  change  the  pain.
^  Sight  and  Eyes. Diminished  vision.

—  Several  sharp  cutting  pains  across  1.  eyeball  at  night  in
bed ;  smarting  and  heaviness  in  eyelids  in  evening.

—  A  kind  of  sudden  jerk  of  both  ej^eballs  for  a  second.
Throbbing  in  1.  eye.

Pain  from  r.  eyeball  up  into  anterior  portion  of  brain,
with  soreness  of  orb  to  touch.

—  Feeling  of  dryness  and  uneasiness  in  r.  eye  and  nostril.
Eyes  feel  sore  and  as  if  they  were  inflamed.

—  Cutting  pain  across  1.  eyeball,  with  flow  of  tears  in
morning  in  bed.

—  Smarting  in  eyelids ;  in  evening  accompanied  by  prick-
ing in  skin.

—  Itching  and  smarting  around  eyes,  especially  in  inner
canthi.

Dull  pain  over  1.  eye  as  if  headache  would  set  in,  con-
tinued all  day.

—  Dull,  pressive  pain  over  r.  eye  on  awaking  in  morning.
^  Hearing  and  Ears. Occasionally  sensation  in  r.  ear,  as  if

water  was  in  it,  it  appears  and  disappears  suddenly.
■  Pain  from  toothache  extends  into  ear.

—  Sudden  jerking  pains  in  1.  ear  and  a  cold  feeling  in  a
small  spot  in  meatus.

^  Smell  and  Nose. Uneasy  feeling  in  r.  nostril.

Fetid,  musty  smell  in  posterior  nares,  chiefly  perceived

during  expiration,  after  breakfast  and  dinner,
i  Oz?ena.
^  Upper  Face. Face  flushed  and  hot.

I  Face rose red during coughing spells. ^Laryngeal

phthisis.
^  Lower  Face. —  Quivering  of  lower  lip.
Lips  dry  and  disposed  to  chap.
I  I  Trismus.
'°  Teeth  and  Gums, i  Toothache,  with  pain  extending  into

ear.
Soon  after  going  to  bed,  10  p.m.,  two  attacks  of  very  violent

toothache  on  r.  side;  each  attack  lasted  about  ten  to

fifteen  minutes,  with  a  free  interval  of  several  minutes ;

during  the  second  attack  painful  teeth  seemed  as  if  too

long;  pain  extended  into  forehead.
A  pain  between  the  head,  1.  shoulder-blade  and  shoulder

grew  much  better  during  toothache;  during  the  pain

he  was  frequently  obliged  to  change  his  position.
After  the  second  attack  of  toothache  such  uneasiness  in

limbs  that  he  was  obliged  to  get  up  and  walk  about,


CHROMICUM  ACIDUM.  108

teeth  of  r.  side  felt  too  long  even  next  morning,  and
cold  water  produced  pain  in  teeth.

Repeated  toothache  of  short  duration,  especially  in  lower
jaw  r.  side;  during  attacks  of  toothache  the  correspond-
ing artery  beats  more  violently  than  on  the  other  side.

In  the  night  sudden  violent  pain  in  several  undecayed
teeth,  1.  side,  especially  in  lower  jaw;  while  the  pain
lasts  the  corresponding  arteries  beat  more  violently.

In  morning  after  usual  rinsing  of  mouth  with  cold  water,
toothache  in  1.  lower  jaw  for  a  short  time.
^^  Taste  and  Tongue. A  swallow  of  diluted  Madeira  tastes
singularly  disagreeable.

—  Metallic  taste  in  mouth  before  dinner.

—  Pricking  in  tongue.

^^  Inner  Mouth. During  the  eating  of  food,  which  tastes  well
and  natural,  sensation  as  if  exhaled  air  smelled  putrid,
almost  causing  nausea.
I  Periodical  ranula  with dry  mouth, <  afternoon,  sore
when  chewing;  at  same  time  blind  piles  and  costiveness.
:  Scorbutic  diseases  of  gums.
13  Throat. Accumulation  of  tough  mucus  in  throat,  with  con-
stant disposition  to  swallow  it,  because  it  cannot  easily
be  hawked  up.
White phlegm in throat causing hawking, especially

mornings,
i  Ulceration  of  mucous  membrane  of  mouth  and  pharynx.
Sore  throat  awakens  at  night,  is  very  painful,  with  short

cough  and  retching.
I  Angina  diphtheritica,  crouposa  and  gangrsenosa.
^*  Appetite. No  appetite  for  breakfast.

—  Unusual  hunger  in  middle  of  day.

^^  Eating  and  Drinking. After  breakfast  and  dinner,  musty

smell  in  posterior  nares.
After  dinner,  2  p.m.,'  a  qualmishness  of  stomach  lasting

until  4  P.M.
Half  an  hour  after  a  simple  supper,  nausea,  gradually  in-
creasing, with  sensation  as  if  a  stool  would  follow.
While  eating,  sensation  as  if  exhaled  air  smelled  putrid,

smells  the  food  repeatedly  to  satisfy  himself  that  it  is

not  putrid.
^®  Nausea and  Vomiting. Nausea, transient  at different

times,  especially  when  the  stomachis  empty.
Several  times  vomiting  of  food,  and  afterwards  three  times

of  bile,  with  much  retching  at  intervals  of  five  to  ten

minutes,  with  warm  sweat  and  usual  heat.
Sudden  inclination  to  vomit  in  morning  while  dressing,

with flow of  water in mouth and  dull pressure in

stomach.


109  CHROMICUM  ACIDUM.

Retching  with  cough  and  sore  throat  in  night.
I  Vomits  his  breakfast.
^^  Scrobiculum  and  Stomach. Frequent  aching  and  shooting

pains  in  epigastrium.
Pinching  pain  in  epigastrium.
Between  the  attacks  of  vomiting  a  kind  of  pressure  and

fulness  in  stomach,  so  that  he  is  obliged  to  loosen  his

clothes.
Soon  after-  last  vomiting,  sleep  for  half  an  hour,  after

which  slight  heaviness  or  pressure  in  stomach.
^^  Hypochondria. Occasional  slight  pains  in  1.  hypochon-

drium.

—  Pressive  pain  in  r.  hypochondrium  in  morning  on
awaking.

'^  Abdomen.  Woke  at  4  a.m.  with  sick  feeling  in  abdomen,
which  was  very  tender  to  touch,  especially  along  colon;
at  6  o'clock  nausea  and  frequent  eructations  with  retch-
ing, which  brought  up  white  mucus.

Awoke  at  5  a.m.  very  restless,  could  not  lie  quiet  five  min-
utes at  a  time;  at  6  a  very  sharp  pain  was  experienced
in  hypogastric  region  and  along  ascending  colon,  grow-
ing very  acute  and  lasting  half  an  hour,  then  relieved
by  a  profuse  diarrhcea  lasting  three  hours;  when  these
symptoms  ceased  the  same  headache  returned,  and  soon
was  followed  by  the  same  sick  stomach,  lasting  as  on
the  first  day  till  4  p.m.

Uneasiness  in  bowels  before  rising  in  morning,  similar  to
premonitory  symptoms  of  diarrhoea,  >  after  rising.

Awoke  with  pain  in  colon  accompanied  by  rumbling  and
wind,  but  passed  off  on  rising.

—  Flatulence  and  rumbling  in  abdomen.

—  In  evening  disagreeable,  violent  pain,  like  flatulence,  in
r.  side  from  lumbar  region  round  to  coecum,  brought  on
by  any  movement  of  the  trunk,  or  by  deep  inspiration;
not  felt  in  sitting  or  lying  still.

—  Pain  in  loins  and  r.  side,  in  morning  in  bed,  >  on  get-
ting up.

^^  Stool  and  Rectum.  Frequent  passage  of  flatus  for  several
days.

—  Fulness  about  rectum,  and  difficult  evacuation  of  a  soft,
scanty  stool.

—  After  tea  a  sudden  and  pressing  desire  to  stool,  with
scanty,  thin,  lumpy  evacuation.

Diarrhoeic  discharge  from  bowels,  after  which  the  pulse

rose  to  75  (from  52).
Small  stool  of  mucus  and  knotty  feces.
1 1  Watery  diarrhcea,  with  nausea  and  dizziness.
■  Blind  piles  with  costiveness.


CHROMICUM  ACIDUM.  110

External  piles  disappeared,  became  internal  and  bleeding.
Copious  discharge  of  hemorrhoidal  blood.
Discharge  of  hemorrhoidal  blood  with  weakness  in  small
of  back.
^^  Female  Sexual  Organs. •  Uterine  hemorrhage.

•  Leucorrhoea.
^*  Lactation. llFoul  smelling  sanious  lochia.
^^  Larynx, l  Consumption  of  larynx,  with  very  red  face  dur-
ing attacks  of  coughing.
':  QLdema  of  glottis.
^^  Respiration. During  expiration,  fetid,  musty  smell  from

posterior  nares.
^''  Cough. Coughing caused very  violent pain  over  whole
upper  1.  part  of  chest,  and  deep  coughing  was  impossible.
Feeling  of  fulness  in  head,  with  sensation  of  rawness  or

soreness  in  chest  and  a  slight,  dry,  hacking  cough.
■  Redness  of  face  during  cough. ^Laryngeal  phthisis.
I  Cough hard,  sometimes deep; swallows  sputa,  vomits
breakfast.
^^  Inner  Chest  and  Lungs. Pressure  on  chest.

—  In  the  night  a  severe  boring  pain  in  1.  side  of  chest  be-
low axilla,  about  the  fourth  rib,  not  <  by  motion  or
respiration,  goes  off  on  turning  on  r.  side.

—  Deep  seated  pain  in  back  of  1.  side  of  chest,  and  cor-
responding place  in  front,  with  a  feeling  on  deep  inspi-
ration as  if  root  of  lung  could  not  expand  and  was
painful.

In  drawing  a  long  breath,  a  stitch  in  upper  1.  part  of  chest
near  the  shoulder.

Slight  pain  in  1.  lung  with  throbbing  pulsation  in  it.

Throbbing  pulsation  through  chest  with  cold  feet,  in  day-
time.

Sensation  of  emptiness  in  chest,  with  soreness  and  pressure
about  chest,  and  cold  feet.

Weakness  of  chest  and  a  kind  of  twitching  in  1.  knee-joint.
^®  Heart,  Pulse  and  Circulation.  Lightness  at  heart;  as  if  a
vacuum  was  there.

I  Angina  waking  at  night,  pains  much,  short  hacking  and
retching.

—  In  evening  in  bed,  pain  in  region  of  heart,  a  fine  draw-
ing, nervous  pain,  at  times  reaching  through  chest  to
shoulder  and  neck ;  on  lying  on  heart,  a  sort  of  clucking,
painful  sensation  on  deep  inspiration.

—  Fixed  pressive  pain  at  apex  of  heart.

—  Pain  under  apex  of  heart  awoke  him.

Suddenly  a  violent  stitch  in  region  of  heart ;  pain  disap-
pears gradually  after  several  minutes.
Pulse  full  and  slightly  accelerated.
Pulse  below  50.


Ill  CHROMICUM  ACIDUM.

Normal  pulse  being  about  52  to  56,  it  varied  during  the
two  weeks  proving  between  48  and  84.

Pulse  48,  at  7  a.  m.,  6th  and  8th  days;  62  to  64  in  afternoon
and  evening.

Pulse  mostly  72  in  morning,  and  84  at  4  p.m.

In  second  proving,  from  52  to  70,  and  from  58  to  75  in
afternoon.
^^  Neck  and  Back. Turning  of  head  toward  left  and  back-
ward was  impossible.

Cold  sensation  on  back  of  neck,  at  10  a.m.

Stiffness  of  muscles  on  1.  side  of  back  and  neck,  with  stric-
ture in  chest  in  region  of  heart.

—  Heavy  pains  in  muscles  of  neck  and  shoulders,  and  vari-
ous parts  of  trunk,  soon  went  off  and  were  only  slightly
felt  in  back  during  day.

For  almost  three  weeks  an  apparently  deep  seated  pain
with  distress,  at  times  more  severe,  at  others  less,  in  1.
shoulder,  shoulder-blade  and  1.  part  of  back  of  neck  up
to  occiput ;  the  least  pains  were  felt  when  standing  and
walking.

All  muscles  connected  with  the  shoulder-blade  were  more
or  less  affected  and  painful  to  touch.

The  pain  moved  from  1.  shoulder-blade  down  to  pelvis,
and  lumbar  region  was  sensitive.

—  Dull  pain  at  inner  angle  of  1.  scapula  in  evening,  and  at
inferior  angles  of  both  in  morning.

—  Rheumatic  pains  about  r.  shoulder  and  various  jDarts  of
back.

—  Superficial  burning  pains  about  middle  dorsal  spines,
with  sudden  jerking  pains  in  1.  ear  and  cold  feeling  in  a
small  spot  in  meatus.

—  Pains  in  back  and  loins.

■  —  Pain  in  loin,  seems  to  arise  in  a  spot  which  is  tender  to
pressure,  about  an  inch  to  r.  of  middle  lumbar  spine.

—  Lumbar  pain  most  painful  in  morning  in  bed.

Pain  in  lumbar  region  (lumbago)  as  if  a  change  of  position
would  ameliorate ;  desire  to  stretch  out  straight.

Shooting  pain  from  small  of  back  into  1.  hip-bone.

Weakness  and  pain  in  small  of  back  and  sharp  shooting
from  lumbar  vertebra3  to  crest  of  ilium  on  r.  side.
^^  Upper  Limbs. Dull,  aching  pain,  over  the  top  of  1  shoulder
as  if  from  great  fatigue,  for  two  hours.

—  Pains  in  1.  scapula.

—  Drawing  pains  in  1.  scapula  occasionally  throughout
the  day,  but  most  in  the  morning.

—  Pain  about  1.  scapula  in  the  morning.

—  Itching  in  the  armpits  at  night.

—  Transitory,  undefined  pains  in  the  elbows,  in  the
morning.


CHROMICUM  ACIDUM.  112

Short  lasting,  slight  pain  in  r.  elbow.

Transient  pain  in  1.  elbow.

Several  times  a  short  lasting,  growing  pain  with  lameness,

in  the  middle  of  the  1.  brachium,  in  front,  as  from  a

severe  blow.
The  use  of  the  1.  arm  was  impeded.
Arms  fall  asleep  easily.

Frequent  dull,  deep  seated  pains  in  the  hands  and  fingers.
Itching  in  the  palm  of  the  r.  hand,  in  the  morning.
^^  Lower  Limbs. Drawing,  deep  seated  pain,  as  if  in  bone,  in

upper  half  of  1.  thigh,  in  front,  extending  to  hip-joint.

—  In  bed  a  severe  quivering,  boring,  deep  seated  pain  in
the  inner  side  of  the  thighs,  chiefly  the  left.

■ —  A  dull,  bruised,  fatigued  feeling  in  the  legs,  especially
above  the  knees,  with  some  pain  on  firm  pressure  ;  for
several  days.

—  I  Pains  in  the  knee.

A  kind  of  twitching  in  1.  knee-joint.

In  the  afternoon  a  rheumatic  feeling  in  the  r.  knee-joint,

continuing  till  10,  p.m.
Knee-joints  weak  and  knocking.

Weakness  of  1.  knee-joint,  knocking  a  little  when  walking.
Sensation  of  paralysis  from  the  r.  knee  down.

—  Occasionally  indistinct  pains  like  a  strain  about  the
feet  and  ankles.

—  Sharp  drawing  pains  in  bones  and  ligaments  of  r.  foot.

—  Shooting,  drawing  pains  about  the  balls  of  the  feet.

—  Itching  and  drawing  pains  in  the  balls  of  the  feet,  at
the  root  of  the  toes,  painful  on  treading  on  the  ground.

—  Itching  in  the  feet,  toes  and  various  parts  in  the
evening.

Burning  and  itching  in  the  toes  like  chilblains.

Cold  feet,  with  fulness  in  head,  giddiness,  and  with  chest
symptoms.
^*  Limbs  in  General.  Uneasiness,  stiffness  and  dull  pain  in
muscles,  in  morning;  chiefly  in  shoulder-blades  and
back  of  neck,  also  between  shoulders  and  in  hips;
coming  occasionally  during  day  until  evening.

Cold  hands  and  feet.

I  Rheumatic  attacks.
^■'  Rest. Position. Motion. In  bed :  severe  pain  in  thighs.

On  lying  on  heart:  painful  sensation  on  deep  inspiration.

On  lying  down :  cannot  fall  asleep.

Sitting  or  lying  still :  >  pain  in  r.  side  from  lumbar  re-
gion round  to  coecum.

Rising  from  a  lying  position  caused  much  pain.

After  rising:  in  morning,  uneasiness  in  bowels  >;  pain
in  loins  and  r.  side  >.


113  CHROMICUM  ACIDUM.

Obliged  to  change  position  during  pain  between  head,  L
shoulder-blade  and  shoulder.

At  night  sleep  was  impaired,  as  only  certain  positions  were
indurable.

Obliged  to  get  up  and  walk  about:  after  attack  of  tooth-
ache; in  evening.

Movement  of  trunk  brings  on  violent  pain  in  r.  side  from
lumbar  region  round  to  coecum.

While  walking  lightness  in  head.

Quick  walking:  gives  relief;  >  the  nausea  which  pre-
cedes each  attack  of  vomiting.

On  going  down  stairs  giddiness.

On  turning  on  r.  side  pain  in  chest  >.

The  slightest  motion  of  the  affected  parts  was  very  painful.
^  Nerves. Tiredness  and  weakness.

^^  Sleep.  Notwithstanding  the  good  sleep  at  night,  great  sleepi-
ness in  daytime;  but  if  he  lies  down  for  a  nap  cannot
fall  asleep.

Excessively  sleepy  one  hour  before  bedtime.

Fell  asleep  late.

Wakes  up  at  early  dawn  and  cannot  fall  asleep.

Going  to  sleep  late,  much  restlessness  and  very  anxious
dreams,  dreams  not  recollected.

—  A-^ivid  dreams ;  awoke  early  with  pains  suddenly  shifting
to  various  parts  of  trunk ;  dull  pain  at  one  time  at  in-
ferior angles  of  scapulae,  then  pressure  in  r.  hypochon-
drium,  at  edge  of  false  ribs,  then  in  region  of  bladder;
pain,  dull,  pressive,  over  the  r.  eye.

—  Had  a  dream  in  morning,  with  pain  under  apex  of
heart,  which  awoke  him.

Dreams  much  all  night;  he  rides  on  horseback  through  a

stream,  and  after  crossing  the  water  it  freezes  on  him.
Dreams  unpleasant;  about  to  be  put  to  death  by  poison,

while  innocent  of  crime.
Dreamed  that  he  had  an  attack  of  strangury,  which  the

next  morning  proved  to  be  the  fact,  and  which  he  did

not  get  over  for  two  hours.
^  Time. At  night:  cutting  pains  across  1.  eyeball;  toothache;

sore  throat  awakens;  retching  cough  and  sore  throat;

itching  in  armpits;  good  sleep;  dreams  much.
At  2  A.M. :  pulse  48.

At  4  A.M. :  woke  with  sick  feeling  in  abdomen.
At  5  A.M. :  fulness  in  upper  and  forepart  of  head ;  awoke

very  restless;  could  not  lie  quiet  five  minutes;  boring

pain  in  1.  side  of  chest;  angina.
In  morning:  in  bed,  flow  of  tears,  with  cutting  pain  across

1.  eyeball;  on  awaking  dull,  pressive  pain  over  r.  eye;

toothache; hawking  of phlegm; nausea;  pains  in  1.

VOL.  IV. — 8.


CHROMICUM  ACIDUM.  114

hypochondriuna ;  uneasiness  in  bowels  before  rising;
pain  in  loins  and  r.  side;  pulse  72;  pain  at  inferior
angles  of  both  scapulae;  in  bed,  lumbar  pain  <;  pain
in  1.  scapula  <;  transitory  pains  in  elbows;  itching  in
palm  of  hand ;  uneasiness,  stiffness  and  pain  in  mus-
cles; had  a  dream.

At  6  A.M. :  nausea ;  sharp  pain  in  hypogastric  region  and
along  ascending  colon.

In  forenoon:  dull  confusion  in  head.

At  10  o'clock :  lightness  in  head.

From  10  a.m.  to  4  p.m.  :  pain  along  coronal  suture ;  cold
sensation  in  back  of  neck.

Middle  of  day:  unusual  hunger.

Afternoon:  ranula  with  dry  mouth;  pulse  62  to  64;  58  to
75 ;  rheumatic  feeling  in  r.  knee.

2  to  4  P.M. :  qualmishness.

All  day:  pain  over  1.  eye.

In  daytime:  pulsation  through  chest  with  cold  feet;  sleepi-
ness.

In  evening :  lightness  at  heart  as  of  a  vacuum ;  smarting
and  heaviness  in  eyelids;  smarting  in  eyelids  with
pricking  in  skin ;  pain-like  flatulence ;  pain  in  region  of
heart ;  pulse  62  to  64 ;  pain  at  inner  angle  of  1.  scapula ;
itching  of  feet  and  various  parts;  pricking  and  itching
here  and  there;  uneasiness  in  limbs.

10  p.m.:  violent  toothache.
^^  Temperature  and  Weather. The  least  draught  of  air  <
pain.

Warmth :  does  not  >  pain  along  coronal  suture.

Cold :  does  not  >  pain  along  coronal  suture.

Cold  water:  produced  pain  in  teeth;  pain  <  by.

Cold  water  and  a  strong  draught  of  air  cause  or  increase
the  pain.

Walking  in  open  air :  did  not  >  pain  along  coronal  suture.
*°  Fever. Cold  head  and  feet.

Sensation  of  general  coldness  which  continued  for  one
week ;  could  not  get  warm  at  all.
^^  Attacks,  Periodicity. For  a  second:  sudden  jerk  of  eye-
balls.

Appears  and  disappears  suddenly:  sensation  as  of  water
in  r.  ear.

Transitory :  pains  in  elbows.

At  intervals  of  5  to  10  minutes :  retching  and  vomiting.

Lasting  10  to  15  minutes:  attacks  of  toothache.

After  several  minutes :  sudden  stitches  in  region  of  heart
gradually  disappear.

Lasting  half  an  hour:  pain  in  hypogastric  region  and
along  ascending  colon.


115  CHROMICUM  ACIDUM.

For  two  hours:  pain  over  top  of  1.  shoulder;  attack  of
strangury.

Lasting  three  hours :  morning  diarrhoea.

Throughout  day :  pain  in  1.  scapula ;  occasionally  pains  in
muscles  until  evening.

For  two  days:  mind  in  a  state  of  confusion.

For  one  week :  sensation  of  coldness.

For  three  weeks :  deep  seated  pain  with  distress,  at  times
more  severe,  at  others  less,  in  1.  shoulder  and  neck.

Periodical:  ranula.
*^  Locality  and  Direction. Pains  <  on  1.  side  and  lasting
longer  than  on  the  right.

Left :  shooting  pains  in  temple ;  pulsati ve  throbbing  from
region  of  heart  to  eye  and  side  of  head ;  slight  pains  in
hypochondrium  with  fulness  of  head;  cutting  pains
across  eyeball;  throbbing  in  eye;  dull  pain  over  eye;
sudden  jerking  pains  in  ear;  cold  feeling  in  meatus;
pain  in  undecayed  teeth;  toothache  in  lower  jaw;  pain
over  whole  upper  part  of  chest  on  coughing;  boring-
pain  in  side  of  chest  below  axilla;  deep  seated  pain  in
back  of  chest;  stitch  in  upper  part  of  chest  on  drawing
a  long  breath ;  slight  pain  in  lung ;  twitching  in  knee-
joint;  deep  seated  pain  with  distress  in  shoulder,  shoul-
der-blade and  neck;  pain  moved  from  shoulder-blade
down  to  pelvis;  dull  pain  at  inner  angle  of  scapula;
jerking  pains  in  ear;  shooting  pain  into  hip-bone;  dull
aching  pain  over  top  of  shoulder;  pain  in  scapula;
transient  pain  in  elbow;  short  lasting,  growing  pain
with  lameness  in  brachium;  drawing,  deep  seated  pain
in  upper  half  of  thigh ;  twitching  in  knee ;  weakness  of
knee-joint.

Right:  lightness  in  head  inclines  him  to  side  when  walk-
ing; dull,  pressive  pain  over  eye  on  awaking  in  morn-
ing; pain  from  eyeball  and  aching  teeth  into  anterior
portion  of  brain ;  as  of  water  in  ear ;  dulness  and  uneasy
feeling  in  e3^e  and  nostril;  pressive  pain  over  eye  in
morning;  violent  toothache  after  going  to  bed;  teeth
feel  too  long  after  toothache;  toothache  in  lower  jaw;
from  lumbar  region  round  to  coecum,  pain  like  flatulence ;
pain  in  loins  and  side ;  rheumatic  pains  about  shoulder ;
sharp  shooting  to  crest  of  ilium;  short  lasting  pain  in
elbow;  itching  in  palm  of  hand;  rheumatic  feeling  in
knee;  sensation  of  paralysis  from  knee  down;  drawing
pains  in  bones  and  ligaments  of  foot ;  j^ressure  in  hypo-
chondrium ;  dull,  pressive  pain  over  eye.
*^  Sensations.  As  of  a  vacuum  at  heart ;  of  tiredness  and
weakness ;  as  of  water  in  ear ;  as  if  painful  teeth  were
too  long;  as  if  root  of  lung  could  not  expand  and  was


CHROMICUM  ACIDUM.  116

painful  on  deep  inspiration ;  as  from  a  severe  blow  in
middle  of  1.  brachium;  as  of  paralysis  from  r.  knee
down.

Pain:  from  teeth  and  r.  eyeball  into  anterior  brain;  in  1.
hypochondrium ;  from  toothache,  extends  into  ear  and
forehead;  between  head,  1.  shoulder-blade  and  shoulder;
in  teeth,  from  cold  water;  in  hypogastric  region  and
along  ascending  colon;  in  colon;  like  flatulence,  in  r.
side  from  lumbar  region  round  to  coecum ;  in  loins  and
right  side;  over  whole  upper  1.  part  of  chest;  in  1.  lung;
under  apex  of  heart ;  from  1.  shoulder-blade  down  to
pelvis ;  in  back  and  loins ;  in  lumbar  region ;  in  small
of  back ;  in  1.  scapula ;  in  elbows ;  in  legs,  especially
above  knees,  on  firm  pressure ;  in  knee ;  at  root  of  toes
on  treacling  on  ground;  suddenly  shifting  to  various
parts  of  trunk.

Cutting:  across  1.  eyeball.

Boring:  in  1.  side  of  chest  below  ax:illa;  about  fourth  rib;
in  inner  side  of  thighs,  chiefly  the  left.

Stitch:  in  1.  chest  near  shoulder;  in  region  of  heart,  sud-
den and  violent.

Shooting:  in  1.  temple;  in  epigastrium;  from  small  of
back  into  1.  hip-bone;  from  lumbar  vertebrae  to  crest  of
ilium  on  r.  side ;  about  balls  of  feet.

Pricking :  in  tongue ;  in  skin ;  in  various  parts.

Drawing:  in  1.  scapula;  in  upper  half  of  1.  thigh;  as  if  in
the  bone,  extending  to  hip-joint;  in  bones  and  ligaments
of  r.  foot ;  about  balls  of  feet.

Burning:  superficial,  about  middle  dorsal  spines;  in  toes
like  chilblains.

Sudden  jerking:  in  1.  ear;  of  both  eyeballs.

Sudden  violent  pain :  in  teeth  in  1.  side.

Fine,  drawing,  nervous  pain  in  region  of  heart,  at  times
reaching  through  chest  to  shoulder  and  neck.

Quivering  pains :  in  inner  side  of  thighs,  chiefly  the  left.

Soreness :  of  orb  to  touch ;  of  eyes  as  if  inflamed ;  of  mouth
when  chewing;  of  throat;  in  chest.

Deep  seated  pain:  in  back  and  front  of  1.  side  of  chest;  in
1.  shoulder,  shoulder-blade  and  1.  part  of  back  of  neck
up  to  occiput;  in  hands  and  fingers;  in  upper  half  of  1.
thigh,  in  front,  extending  to  hip-joint;  in  inner  side  of
thighs,  chiefly  the  left.

Pressive  pain :  at  apex  of  heart.

Dull,  pressive  pain :  over  r.  eye.

Dull,  aching  pain:  over  top  of  1.  shoulder,  as  if  from  great
fatigue.

Dull  pain:  over  1.  eye  as  if  headache  would  set  in;  at
inner  angle  of  1.  scapula;  at  inferior  angles  of  both
scapulae;  in  hands  and  fingers.


117  CHROMICUM  ACIDUM.

Heavy  pain:  along  coronal  suture;  in  muscles  of  neck
and  shoulders  and  various  parts  of  trunk.

Pinching:  in  epigastrium.

Rawness:  in  chest.

Smarting:  in  eyelids;  around  eyes;  in  inner  canthi.

Bruised  feeling:  in  legs,  especially  above  knees.

Indistinct  pains  like  a  strain  about  feet  and  ankles.

Aching:  in  epigastrium.

Rheumatic  pains:  about  r.  shoulder;  about  various  parts
of  back.

Clucking,  painful  sensation  on  deep  inspiration  when
lying  on  heart.

Growing  pains :  in  1.  brachium.

Transitory  pains :  in  elbows ;  in  1.  brachium ;  in  various
parts.

Sensitiveness:  of  brain;  of  lumbar  region.

Heaviness:  in  eyelids;  in  stomach.

Throbbing  pulsation:  from  region  of  heart  to  1.  eye  and
side  of  head;  in  occiput;  in  1.  eye;  in  1.  lung;  through
chest.

Pulsation :  from  region  of  heart  to  1.  eye  and  side  of  head.

Pressure:  in  stomach;  on  chest;  in  r.  hypochondrium,  at
edge  of  false  ribs,  then  in  region  of  bladder.

Stricture:  in  chest,  in  region  of  heart.

Twitching:  in  1.  knee-joint.

Stiffness:  in  muscles,  chiefly  in  shoulder-blades,  back  of
neck ;  between  shoulders  and  in  hips.

Rheumatic  feeling:  in  r.  knee-joint.

Sick  feeling:  in  abdomen.

Fulness:  of  head;  in  upper  and  forepart  of  head;  in
stomach ;  about  rectum.

Emptiness:  in  chest.
"  Lightness:  of  head;  at  heart  as  of  a  vacuum.

Dull  feeling:  in  legs,  especially  above  knees.

Fatigued  feeling:  in  legs,  especially  above  knees.

Weakness:  in  small  of  back;  of  chest;  of  knee-joints;  of
1.  knee-joint.

Lameness:  in  1.  brachium.

Falling  asleep :  of  arms.

Uneasiness:  in  r.  eye  and  nostril;  in  limbs;  in  bowels,
similar  to  premonitory  symptoms  of  diarrhoea ;  in  mus-
cles, chiefly  in  shoulder-blades,  back  of  neck,  between
shoulders  and  in  hips.

Heat:  in  face.

Coldness:  general,  he  cannot  get  warm.

Cold  feeling:  in  small  spot  in  meatus;  on  back  of  neck.

Itching:  around  eyes;  in  inner  canthi;  in  armpits;  in
palm  of  r.  hand;  at  balls  of  feet;  in  feet,  toes  and  vari-
ous parts.


CHROMICUM  ACIDUM.  118

Dryness:  in  r.  eye  and  nostril;  of  mouth.
^^  Tissues. Inflammation  and  destruction  of  epithelium  of
mucous  membranes.
Pseudo-membrane  similar  to  that  of  angina  faucium  and

croup.
Gangrene.
For  disinfection  of  cholera  and  fever  stools.
To  arrest  fetid  discharges  and  correct  fetid  odors.
"^^  Touch. Passive  Motion. Touch :  soreness  of  orb  to ;  ab-
domen tender  to ;  muscles  of  shoulder-blade  painful  to.
Pressure :  a  spot  about  an  inch  to  r.  of  middle  lumbar  spine
sensitive to ; pain above knees on ; on treading  on
ground  feet  at  root  of  toes  painful.
Obliged  to  loosen clothes  to  >  pressure  and  fulness  in

stomach,
i  To  prevent  suppuration  and  putrefaction  in  wounds.
*^  Skin. Mostly  in  evening  disagreeable  pricking  and  itching
here  and  there,  with  uneasiness  in  limbs,  so  that  he  was
obliged  to  get  up  from  sitting  or  lying  and  walk  about.
—  Pricking  in  skin,  in  various  parts,  accompanies  smart-
ing in  eyelids.
Causes  the  disappearance  of  warts.

Hospital  gangrene; phagadenic ulcers; bites  of  rabid
animals;  poisoned  wounds.
*^  Stages  of  Life,  Constitution. Girl,  set.  14;  watery  diar-
rhoea.
^"  Relations. Workmen  engaged  in  the  manufacture  of  an-
hydro  chromate  of  potassium  are  liable  to  symptoms
like  secondary  syphilis. Small  doses  of  corrosive  sub-
limate have  been  found  the  remedy.
Daphne  indica  cured  the  rheumatic  pain.
Compare :  Kali  bich.  derived  from  the  same  metal.


119  CICUTA  VIROSA.

CICUTA  VIROSA.

Water  Hemlock,  Cowbane.  Vmbelliferse.

"  Grows  on  the  borders  of  ditches  and  rivulets,  swamps,  meadows,  ponds,  lakes,
etc.,  all  over  Germany,  and  the  north  and  east  of  France.  It  is  apt  to  be  mistaken
for  Conium  maculatum.  The  stem  of  Cicuta  is  furrowed,  that  of  Conium  is  spot-
ted, Cicuta  virosa,  though  called  water-hemlock,  should  not  be  confounded  with
the  true  water-hemlock,  which  is  the  Phellandrium  aquaticum,  and  belongs  to  the
same  natural  order.  Cicuta  grows  on  the  border  of  the  water,  Phellandrium  in
water.  The  Cicuta  root  is  characterized  by  cellular,  hollow  spaces,  which  are
well  seen  when  the  root  is  cut  longitudinally." — Sircar.

The  American  water-hemlock,  Cicuta  maculata,  is  analogous  in  botanical
character,  but  we  have  but  few  toxicblogical  reports  and  no  clinical  experience
from  it.  Old  authors  have  frequently  confounded  Cicuta  virosa  with  Conium
maculatum.

With  the  exception  of  the  symptoms  from  Hahnemann's  provings  and  those
of  his  followers,  Hornburg  and  Langhammer,  the  synTptoms  are  mainly  toxico-
logical  (see  Encyclopedia)  and  clinical.

Clinical,  Authorities. — Hallucinations  with  convulsions  during  convalescence
from  typhoid,  Watzke,  Letter  de  Propag.  de  Dr.  Y.,  p.  61 ;  in  Cerebrospinal  menin-
gitis, sixty  cases  cured,  within  7  years,  in  all  stages  and  all  degrees  of  malignancy,
J.  T.  Baker,  Hah.  Mo.,  v.  8,  p.  42 ;  Meningitis  basilaris,  Stens,  A.  H.  Z.,  vols.  8,9;
Concussion  of  brain,  Messerschmidt,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf.,  v.  4,  p.  551 ;  Ophthalmia,  Wi-
dermann,  Gaz.  Horn,  de  Leipzig,  v.  2;  Eruption  on  scalp  and  chin,  Wesselhoeft,
Hom.  Eev.,  v.  20,  p.  295 ;  Eruption  on  chin  and  face,  (two  cases),  Wesselhoeft,
Hom.  Rev.,  v.  20,  p.  294;  Cancer  of  lip,  Veith,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf,  v.  5,  p.  202;
Eruption  on  face,  Caspari,  Archives,  33,  p.  78;  verified  by  W.  McGeorge,  Raue's
Rec,  1875  p.  14;  Habit  of  eating  coal  in  child,  Berridge,  Organon,  v.  2,  p.  355;
Helminthiasis,  Caspari  and  Krauss,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf.,  v.  1,  p.  800;  Paralysis  of  blad-
der, Gross,  Archives,  2,  3,  145;  Puerperal  spasms,  Wielobicky,  Allg.  Hom.  Ztg.,
35,  301.;  Goccyodynia,  Brueckner,  N.  A.  J.  H.,  v.  19;  Hysteria,  Krauss,  Riick.  Kl.
Erf.,  V.  1,  p.  800;  Hysterical  spasms,  Bethmann,  N.  A.  J.  H.,  v.  2,  p.  42;  Periodi-
cal ecstasy,  Widermann,  N.  A,  J.  H.,  v.  2,  p.  42,  and  Gaz.  Hom.  de  Leipzig,  v.  2,
p.  226;  Clonic  and  tonic  spasms,  Gross,  Arch.  Horn.,  v.  7 ;  Corivulsions  from  cere-
bral irritation,  H.  V.  Miller,  H.  M.,  72,  p.  198;  Convulsions,  Baker,  Hah.  Mo.,  v.
8,  p.  42;  H.  V.  Miller,  Med.  Inv.,  v.  9,  p.  487;  J.  F.  Baker,  H.  M  ,  v.  72,  p.  42 ;
Eclampsia  in  child,  from  abuse  of  opium,  Strecker,  N.  A.  J.  H.,  v.  2,  p.  42;  Spasms
following  injury  to  knee  by  splinter.  Gage,  Organon,  v.  2,  p.  128;  Chorea,  B.  J.  H.,
1873,  p.  748;  Epilepsy,  Beckwith,  Gilchrist,  Surg.  Ther.,p.  193;  Watzke,  B.J.  H.,
v.  25;  Tetanus,  Kafka,  B.  J.  H.,  v.  25;  W.  Eggert,  Med.  Inv.,  v.  8,  p.  161 ;  Teta-
nic convulsioru^,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf,  v.  4,  p.  551 ;  Typhoid  fever,  Watzke,  N.  A.  J.  H.,
V.  2,  p.  43.

^  Mind. I  I  Loss  of  consciousness  and  sensation.

I  She  knows  no  one,  but  when  touched  and  spoken  to,  she
answers. ^Periodical  ecstasy.


CICUTA  VmOSA.  120

I  I  Became  insensible  and  convulsed  generally.

■  Suddenly consciousness returns, and she remembers

nothing  of  what  has  occurred. ^Periodical  ecstasy.

Very  absent-minded.

I  He  confounds  the  present  with  the  past.
•  iHe  thinks  himself  a  young  child.

He  imagined  he  was  not  living  in  his  usual  condition  and
circumstances ;  everything  appears  to  him  strange  and
almost  terrible.

I  She  thinks  she  sees  coming  towards  her  a  huge  drunken
man,  who  lies  down  alongside  of  her,  she  begs  him  to
retire,  falls  into  convulsions,  and  turns  over  on  her  ab-
domen.

I  Feels  as  if  he  was  in  a  strange  place,  w^hich  causes  fear.

Fantastic  illusions,  attacks  of  madness.

I  I  Delirium;  crazy  delirium.

■  Delirium,  cries,  sings;  loss  of  consciousness  with  open

eyes,  knows  no  one,  but  when  touched  or  spoken  to  an-
swers questions;  consciousness  returns  suddenly,  and
she  does  not  remember  what  has  passed ;  attacks  twice
a  day. 6  Periodical  ecstasy.

■  Mental  torpor  and  stupefaction.

I  I  Loss  of  ideas ;  loss  of  sensation.

■  Thinks  of  the  future  with  anxiety,  and  is  constantly  sad.
■Strange  desires,  as  desire  to  eat  coal.

■  Fondness  for  solitude;  great  disregard  and  dislike  for  the

society  of  others.

■  Gives  short  answers.

Funny  gesticulations,  with  redness  of  face  and  heat  of
body.

I  I  Aberration  of  mind,  singing,  performing  the  most  gro-
tesque dancing  steps,  shouting.

■  ■Likes  childish  toys,  jumps  from  bed  in  a  happy,  childish

state.

■  ■Weeping,  moaning  and  howling.

I  I  Sobbing  and  weeping,  pain  in  neck,  head  drawn  back
spasmodically,  with  trembling  of  hands.

■  Great  agitation,  child  grasps  at  one's  clothing  in  a  fright-

ened manner. ^Convulsions.

■  ■Very  violent  in  all  his  actions.

■  Quiet  disposition,  contented,  happy.

■  Melancholia;  indifference  and  sadness. ^Concussion  of

brain.

■  ■Anxious  thoughts  of  the  future;  feels  sad.

■  ■Anxiety,  excessively  affected  by  sad  stories.

■  Greatest  anxiety. ^Wounded  oesophagus.
Anxiety  and  fretfulness.

■  Old  men  fear  a  long  spell  of  sickness  before  dying.


121  CICUTA  VIROSA.

Is  afraid  of  society,  and  wants  to  be  alone.

■  Excited,  with  apprehension  concerning  the  future;  every-

thing that  could  befall  him  seemed  to  be  dangerous.

1 1  Mistrust  and  shunning  of  men;  despises  others.

Disposition  to  be  frightened.
^  Sensorium. When  standing  still  there  is  a  desire  to  hold
on  to  something,  because  objects  seem  to  approach  and
then  to  recede.

Vertigo :  on  rising  from  bed  as  if  everything  was  moving
from  side  to  side,  or  approached  and  then  receded;  reel-
ing; falling  on  stooping;  after  injuries  to  the  head.

■  Vertigo;  things  turn  in  a  circle,  darkness  before  the  eyes

on  attempting  to  rise. ^Paralysis  of  bladder.
I  Giddiness  with  falling  forwards.

■  Loss  of  sight  and  vertigo  in  walking. ^Ophthalmia.

■  Vertigo:  buzzing  in  ears;  deafness;  eyes  glassy,  dim,  so-

porous state;  loss  of  consciousness ;  muttering  delirium.
^Typhoid.
^  Inner  Head. Headache  above  orbits.

Stupefying  frontal  headache,  increasing  when  at  rest.
■Semilateral  headache,  as from congestion to head  or
external  pressure ;  >  when  sitting  erect.

■  Rending,  cutting  pain  of  one  side,  thinking  of  headache

causes  it  to  disappear.

■  Headache  >  by  sitting  erect,  or  by  emission  of  flatus.

■  Severe  headache  in  occiput,  like  a  dull  pressure,  and  as

with  coryza.

■  Pressure  deep  in  brain;  heaviness  in  front  or  back  of

head.

■  Headache  in  morning  on  waking,  as  if  brain  were  loose

and  was  shaken  on  walking;  when  thinking  as  to  its

exact  nature,  it  ceased.
Headache,  drawing  from  corners  of  eyes  towards  temples.
Stupid  feeling  of  the  head  with  chills;  the  neck  felt  stiff

and  the  muscles  too  short.

■  ■Concussion  of  brain  and  chronic  effects  therefrom,  par-

ticularly spasms.
Cerebral  diseases  following  suppressed  eruptions.
Head  heavy;  boring  of  occiput  into  cushion;  jerking  of

limbs ;  eyes  closed ;  on  lifting  lids  the  eyes  stare  upwards.

^Meningitis  basilaris.
Cerebro-spinal  meningitis;  hydrops  meningis  acutus.
*  Outer  Head. ■  Sinking  of  head  forward  when  looking  at

anything,  or  sitting  in  apparent  sleep;  when  aroused

head  was  bent  forward  and  stiff.

■  During  intervals,  head  falls  back  if  she  attempts  to  raise

herself,  and  that  with  violent  spasmodic  pains. ^Hys-
terical spasms.


CICUTA  VIROSA.  122

1 1  Head  bent  backwards;  with  convulsions.

I  Head  retracted ;  rigid  spine. ^Cerebro-spinal  meningitis.

I  Head  bent  to  one  side. ^Epilepsy.

IJerking  and  twitching  of  head.

■Violent  jerking  backward  of  head. ^Cholera.

■  Starting,  trembling  of  head,  <  moving  head;  with  this,

single  jerks,  like  electric  shocks,  <  in  cold;  >  at  rest
and  from  warmth.

I  Spasm  begins  in  head  and  goes  down. ^Epilepsy.

I I  Violent  shocks  through  head,  arms  and legs,  which
cause  them  to  jerk  suddenly;  head  hot. ^Tetanus.

■  Burning,  suppurating  eruptions on  hairy  scalp; scald

head.

■  Child  is  subject  to  scalp  sweat  when  sleeping. ^Convul-

sions from  cerebral  irritation.

■  Child  rolls  head  from  side  to  side,  has  fever  and  hot  head,

sudden  convulsions  with  froth  at  mouth,  eyes  rolled  up,
dilated  pupils,  screamed  fearfully,  great  agitation,  con-
vulsive movements  of  limbs,  head  and  trunk,  grasps  at
one's  clothing  in  a  frightened  manner,  pulse  rapid.
^Convulsions  from  cerebral  irritation.

Lentil-sized  pimples  on  forehead,  causing  at  first  burning
pain,  become  confluent,  assume  a  deep  red  color,  and
end  in  desquamation.
^  Sight  and  Eyes.  ■Objects  vacillate,  appear  black,  double
vision,  ins-like  circles  around  candle,  eyes  burn  slightly,
can  scarcely  see  in  sunlight,  weak  sight,  lids  glued  in
morning. ^Ophthalmia.

Momentary  loss  of  sight.

Double  sight,  vertigo,  with  twitching  over  left  eye,  cutting
pain.

■  Frequent  vanishing  of  sight,  as  if  by  absence  of  mind,

with  vertigo,  when  walking. ^Ophthalmia.

■  When  she  attempts  to  stand,  she  wishes  to  hold  on  to

something,  because  objects  seem  now  to  come  nearer,
and  now  to  recede  from  her.

■  Letters  go  up  and  down  or  disappear;  or  colors  of  rain-

bow around  them;  iris-like  circles  around  candle.
^Ophthalmia.

■  Eyes  staring;  she  stares  with  unaltered  look  at  one  and

the  same  place,  and  cannot  help  it;  head  inclines  for-
ward.
■Staring,  fixed  and  glassy,  or  upturned  eyes. ^Epilepsy.

■  ■Pupils  dilated  and  insensible. <?Basilar  meningitis.
Pupils :  dilated  in  concussion  of  brain ;  contracted  in  spas-
modic aff'ections ;  contract  and  dilate,  alternately,  at  in-
tervals.

■  Eyes  sensitive  to  light. ^Ophthalmia.

■  Eyes  protruded. ^Wounded  oesophagus.


123  CICUTA  VIROSA.

I  Blue  margin  around  eyes ;  eyes  sunken. ^Ophthalmia.

I I  Trembling  and  twitching  of  lids.

1 1  Strabismus  convergens  in  children,  if  periodic  and  of  a

spasmodic  character,  or  caused  by  convulsions.
Strabismus  occurring  after  a  fall  or  blow.
^  Hearing  and  Ears. ■  Oversensitiveness  of  hearing.

■  Hardness  of  hearing  in  old  people.

I  Perfect  deafness. ^Cerebro-spinal  meningitis.
I  She  does  not  hear  well  unless  one  speaks  loudly  to  her,
and  she  pays  attention.

■  Detonation  in  right  ear  when  swallowing.

Roaring  before  both  ears,  <  in  rooms  than  in  ojjen  air.
I  Ears  very  hot,  at  other  times  very  cold.
I  Sore  pain  behind  ear,  as  after  a  blow.

■  Burning,  suppurating  eruption  on  and  around  ears.

■  Hemorrhage  from  ears.

'^  Smell  and  Nose. ■Nose  very  sensitive to touch, slight
touch  causes  it  to  bleed.
■Yellow  scurfs  in  nose,  or  yellow  discharge  from  it.

■  Frequent  sneezing,  without  coryza.

^  Upper  Face. ■Face  pale,  without  expression. ^Typhoid.

■  Rolls the eyes, hideous countenance, piercing cries.

^Hysterical  spasms.

■  Face:  pale  and  drawn ;  deathly  pale  and  cold;  red;  bluish,

puffed  up.

■  Ashy  paleness  of  face. ^Convulsions.

■  Pale,  earthy  color  of  cheeks,  scrofulous  eruption  about

mouth. ^'Ophthalmia.

■  Flushed  face,  with  headache  and  restless  sleep,  later  pal-

lor and  cold  face. ^Concussion  of  brain.

■  ■Convulsion  of  facial  muscles;  distortions,  either  horrible

or  ridiculous.

■  Painful,  burning,  ulcerated  lips.

Burning  and  itching  vesicle  on  upper  lip,  near  vermillion
border.

■  Eruption  at  corners  of  mouth,  spreading  over  face  and

hands,  and  appearing  on  breast,  resembling  erysipelas,
gradually  forming  a  yellow,  honey-colored  crust,  with
burning  and  itching,  unaccompanied  by  fever.

■  Thick,  honey-colored  scurf  on  chin,  upper  lip,  and  lower

portion  of  cheeks  (milk  crust),  burning,  soreness  and
oozing,  accompanied  with  swelling  of  submaxillary
glands,  and  insatiable  appetite. /^Ophthalmia.

■  Dark  red  pimples  on  face  and  hands,  come  with  burning

pain,  coalesce.

■  Herpes  on  face;  acne  rosacea.

^  Lower  Face. ■■  Lockjaw,  the  teeth  pressing  firmly  against
one  another. ^Concussion  of  brain.


CICUTA  VIROSA.  124

■  Yellow  scurfs  on  1.  corner  of  mouth,  discharging  yellow,

corrosive  fluid,  may  extend  over  lip,  chin  and  cheek.

■  Cancer  of  upper  and  lower  lip;  painful  ulcers  on  lips.

■  Gradually  increasing  eruption  upon  chin,  extending  to

both  sides  over  j)arts  occupied  by  beard;  skin  is  red,
shining,  swollen ;  terrible  itching  and  burning  sensation ;
beard  matted  together  with  a  yellowish-white  crust,
mostly  dry;  this  had  been  preceded  by  vesicles,  which
exuded  the  fluid,  and  subsequently  formed  the  scab.

^°  Teeth  and Gums. ■  Grinding  of  teeth,  with  pressing  of
jaws  together  like  lockjaw. ^Dentition. 6'Tetanus.
■Toothache,  faceache,  or  earache,  caused  by  filling  teeth
with  gold.

"  Taste  and  Tongue. ■  Speech  difficult; when  talking  he
feels  a  jerk  in  head  from  before  backwards,  as  if  he  had
to  swallow  the  word  as  in  hiccough.
I  I  Could  not  speak  from  having  no  control  over  move-
ments of  mouth  and  tongue. ^Chorea.

■  Speechlessness. ^Wounded  oesophagus. ^Cerebro-spinal

meningitis.

■  Tongue  coated,  dry.

■Swelling  of  tongue; white,  painful,  burning  ulcers  on

edges  of  tongue ;  painful  to  touch.
■Bites  his  tongue,  later  lockjaw,  painful  ulcers  on  edge  of

tongue  and  inside  of  lips. ^Concussion  of  brain.
^^  Inner  Mouth. ■Foam  in  and  at  mouth. ^Epilepsy.

■  Mouth  closed,  unquenchable  thirst,  drinks  swallowed
with  difficulty. ^Hysterical  spasms.

13  Throat. I  I  Dryness  of  throat. ^Ophthalmia.

■  Very  great  difficulty  in  swallowing;  sometimes  it  is  im-

possible. ^Tetanus.
■Strangling  when  an  attempt  is  made  even  to  swallow
medicine. ^Cerebro-spinal  meningitis.

■  The  throat  felt  as  if  grown  together,  internally;  exter-

nally painful,  as  if  bruised,  on  moving,  or  touching  it;
eructations  from  noon  till  evening.

■  ■After  swallowing  a  sharp  piece  of  bone,  or  other  injuries

to  oesophagus  the  throat  closes,  and  there  is  danger  of
suffocation.

■  Constriction  of  oesophagus  from  intestinal  irritation,  par-

ticularly verminous,  with  spasmodic  contraction  of  mus-
cles of  neck,  almost  like  tetanus ;  tonic  contraction  with
intermittent  clonic  spasms.

■  CEsophagus  hurt  by  a  splinter  of  bone  swallowed,  this

was  followed  by  pain  and  swelling ;  six  days  later  could
not  swallow  a  drop  of  fluid ;  three  days  after  it  was  diffi-
cult for  the  air  to  get  into  the  windpipe,  and  she  feared
suffocation  every  moment;  throat  and  neck  were  swollen
to  double  their  natural  size,  stiff  and  hard.


125  CICUTA  VIROSA.

^*  Appetite,  Thirst. Desires,  Aversions, i  Loss  of  appetite
or  almost  insatiable  appetite. ^Ophthalmia.
I  Great  thirst,  with  inability  to  swallow. /^Typhoid.
Violent  thirst  during  the  spasms.

Great  longing  for  charcoal;  child  puts  coals  into  mouth,
crunching  and  swallowing  them  with  apparent  relish.
Longing  for  wine.
^^  Eating  and  Drinking, i  Great  hunger  shortly  after  a  meal ;
irresistible  desire  to  eat  coal.
iLnmediately  after  commencing  to  eat,  feels  satisfied.
I  Immediately  after  eating,  bellyache  and  sleepiness.
^^  Hiccough, Nausea and  Vomiting. iLoud sounding,
dangerous  hiccough. ^Cholera.
I  Violent  hiccough  and  crying.

■  Nausea  in  morning  and  when  eating.

■Vomiting:  of  bile;  of  blood;  on  stooping;  when  trying
to  rise ;  during  pregnancy;  alternating  with  tonic  spasms
in  the  pectoral  muscles,  and  distortion  of  eyes.

■  Violent  vomiting. ^Ophthalmia. ^Convulsions.

■  Vomiting  aliments  when  swallowed,  very  violently;  yel-

low, like  mucus;  with  headache,  thirst,  and  dryness  of
throat.  ^Ophthalmia.
^^  Scrobiculum  and  Stomach.  iShe  feels  a  blow  deep  in  the
epigastrium  (plexus  coeliaci),  which  passes  like  lightning
up  the  back,  and  forces  her  to  throw  herself  backwards
in  the  midst  of  most  tormenting  pains.  ^Hysterical
spasms.

■  ■  Sudden  shock  deep  in  pit  of  stomach  causes  opisthotonus.

^Tetanic  convulsions.

■  ■Burning pressure  at stomach and abdomen. ^Oph-

thalmia.

■  ■Swelling  and  throbbing  in  pit  of  stomach.

■  Heat  and  burning  in  stomach.

■Sw^elling  of  stomach  as  from  violent  sjDasm  of  diaphragm.
^Epileptic  attack.

■  Waterbrash,  a  quantity  of  saliva  flowing  from  mouth,

with  sensation  of  heat  all  over.
Gastralgia  with  vomiting,  painful  distension  of  abdomen,
and  spasm  of  pectoral  muscles.
^^  Abdomen. BMeteorism; rumbling and  roaring  in  abdo-
men. ^Typhoid.

■  I  Distension  and  painfulness  of  abdomen.

■  Pain  at  times  in  head,  then  in  abdomen. ^Periodical

ecstasy.
Sudden,  sharp,  stitching pains from navel to  neck  of

bladder.
Tearing  pains  deep  in  abdomen.

■  Colic  and  borborygmi  as  before  a  stool. ^Ophthalmia.


CICUTA  VIROSA.  126

Worms,  with  fever,  colic,  and  convulsions.
1 1  Colic,  with  convulsions  and  vomiting.
I  Chronic  painful  hernia.
^^  Stool  and  Rectum. iThin  stool,  with  violent  urging  to

urinate,  which  could  not  be  withstood;  also desire  to

urinate  after  stool.
Stools thin, slimy,  expelled  suddenly; sudden  urging,

scarcely  able  to  retain  stool,  at  2  and  5  a.m.

■  Frequent  liquid  stools. ^Ophthalmia.

Cholera,  when  purging  ceases,  and  congestion  to  brain  and
chest,  turning  the  eyes,  difficult  breathing,  and  other
symptoms  set  in.

iDiarrhoeic  stool  followed  by  constipation. ^Convulsions.

■  Itching  in  rectum,  with  burning  pain  after  rubbing.

■  Itching  of  lower  part  of  rectum.
Prolapsus  recti.

^^  "Urinary  Organs. ■Paralysis  of  bladder,  with  great  anxiety.

■  Involuntary  emission  of  urine,  with  old  men.

■  Frequent  micturition ;  the  urine  is  propelled  with  great

force.

■  Either  great  quantities  of  urine,  with  great  urging,  or  no

urine  at  all.
^^  Male  Sexual  Organs. ■Testicles  drawn  up  toward  external
abdominal  ring.
■Sore  drawing  pain  in  urethra,  as  far  as  glans,  obliging
one  to  urinate.

■  Stitches  in  fossa  navicularis,  with  nightly  emissions.
■Pollutions  without  lascivious  dreams.

Strictures  (spasmodic)  sometimes  after  gonorrhoea.
^Female Sexual  Organs. ■Menses delayed; spasmodic
symptoms.

■  Tearing and drawing in  os  coccj^gis,  during menses.

^Coccyodynia.
^Parturition. ■■  Spasms during parturition; convulsions
continue  after  delivery.

■  Puerperal  convulsions,  very  violent  and  exhausting;  fre-

quent interruptions  of  breathing,  after  respiration  has
been  restored  patient  remains  weak  and  insensible,  as
if  dead.
Puerperal  spasms,  with  trembling  of  limbs,  jerks  as  from
electric  shocks,  borborygmus,  want  of  breath,  opisthoto-
nus, cold,  pale  face,  half  closed  eyes  with  blue  margins.

^■'  Voice  and  Larynx.  ■Violent  and  loud  screaming.  ^Spasms
following  injury  from  splinter.

^  Respiration. ■Oppression,  can  scarcely  breathe;  may  arise
from  tonic  spasm  of  pectoral  muscles.

■  Respiration  snoring. ^Tetanus.
■Breathing  interrupted,  in  spells. ^Epilepsy.


27


127  CICUTA  VIROSA.

I  Want  of  breath  the  whole  day.

■  Difficulty  of  breathing,  chest  feels  too  tight.

■  Respiration  suspended,  at  times  gasping. ^Hysterical

spasms. ^Convulsions.

■  Dyspnoea. ^Cerebro-spinal  meningitis.
Cough. ■Cough,  with  expectoration. ^Cholera.

^  Inner  Chest  and  Lungs.  ■  Sensation  in  chest  and  throat
as  though  something  of  the  size  of  a  fist  were  lodged
there.

■  Sensation  of  soreness,  as  if  bruised,  at  lower  end  of  ster-

num, when  walking.

■  Oppression  of  chest. ^Tetanus.

■Tightness  in  chest;  scarcely  able  to  breathe. ^Paralysis

of  bladder.
■Burning  and  great  heat  in  chest.

■  Cold  sensation  in  chest.

^  Heart,  Pulse  and  Circulation.  ■  ■Trembling  palpitation  of
heart.

■  ■Feels  as  if  heart  stopped  beating;  and  sometimes  faint

feeling  therewith.
■Pulsation  of  heart  weak. ^Tetanus.

■  Rapid  pulse. ^Cerebro-spinal  meningitis.

■  Pulse  weak, slow, trembling, at times imperceptible.

(^Tetanus.
^  Outer  Chest. ■  Violent  tonic  spasms  of  pectoral  muscles.

■  Sensation  of  soreness  at  lower  end  of  sternum.
Chill  begins  in  chest.

^^  Neck  and  Back.  Neuralgia  at  nape,  with  tendency  to
drawing  of  head  backwards  and  dull  occipital  headache.

■  The  muscles  of  neck  contract  and  become  hard  as  wood.

^Hysterical  attacks.

■  ■Tension  or  cramp  in  muscles  of  neck;  if  he  turns  head,

he  cannot  easily  turn  it  back  again.

■  ■Pain  in  nape,  spasmodic  drawing  of  head  backward,

with  tremor  of  hand.

■  Tonic  spasm  of  cervical  muscles. ^Tetanus.

■  Tetanic  stiffness  of  back  and  legs  with  drawing  pains  in

thighs  and  calves. ^Concussion  of  brain.

■  Swelling  of  neck,  arising  from  wounding  oesophagus  with

a  splinter  (bone)  or  similar  sharp  body.
I  I  Painful  sensation  on  inner  surface  of  scapulae.

■  Bruised  feeling  on  r.  scapula.

■  ■The  back  bent  backward  like  an  arch.

■  Bod}^  and  legs  straight;  head  drawn  back;  if  lying  on

side  is  straightened  out  upon  back  quick  as  lightning.
^Spasms  following  injury  to  knee  from  splinter.

■  Tearing,  jerking  in  os  coccygis. ^Dysmenorrhoea.

I  I  Coccyodynia,  coming  on  for  the  first  time  during  cata-
menia,  after  parturition.


CICUTA  A^IROSA.  .  128

^^  Upper  Limbs. ' '  Complete  powerlessness  of  limbs,  after
spasmodic  jerks.

■  Spasmodic  jerking  of  arms  and  upper  part  of  body ^Fol-

lowing injury  to  knee  by  splinter.
II Frequent  involuntary  jerking  and  stitches  in  arms  and

fingers. ^Epilepsy.
IJerking  in  1.  arm  all  day,

■  Arms  bent  at  elbows,  fingers  clenched. ^Spasms  follow-

ing injury  from  splinter.
' I  Sensation  of  heaviness  in  arm  when  raising  it,  accom-
panied by  stitches  in  shoulder,  so  violent  that  patient
must  desist;  he  dare  not  move  the  fingers  even;  occurs
more  frequently  in  1.  arm.
I  Veins  of  hands  enlarged.

■  Trembling  of  hands,  with  pain  in  occiput. ^Helmin-

thiasis.

■  Numbness  of  fingers.

■  Creeping,  trembling  and  starting  of  fingers  in  convales-

cence from  typhoid.

■  Thumbs  turned  inward. ^Epilepsy.

Pimples on  hands, burning when  first  appearing,  but
finally  blending  and  forming  one  dark  red  scab.

I  I  Nails  blue.
^  Lower  Limbs. l  i  Weakness,  especially  in  knees  and  in
muscles  of  back  after  standing  only  a  short  time.

I  1  Frequent  involuntary  jerking  of  lower  limbs.

■  Swelling  and  pain  of  1.  knee.

■  Painful  feeling  of  stiffness  in  muscles  of  lower  limbs.
■Trembling  of  1.  leg.

■  His  legs  refused  to  carry  him,  and  he  staggered.
■When  walking,  she  does  not  step  properly  on  soles  of

feet,  they  tilt  inwards,  and  the  walking  is  done  on  outer
edge  of  foot. ^Gressus  vaccinus.

■  Suddenly  grasped  his  knee  with  his  hands  and  screamed

fearfully  and  was  seized  with  convulsions.

■  Drawing  pain  in  thighs  and  calves  with  tetanic  stiffness.
■Violent  pain  in  entire  1.  leg,  later  also  in  r.,  recurring

periodically,  ending  in  tetanic  convulsions  with  uncon-
sciousness.

■Rending  in  muscles  of  lower  limbs,  front  side  down  to
the  feet,  <  at  night.
^  Limbs  in  General. ■  Great  weakness  in  arms  and  legs,
after  slight  exertion.

Bruised  feeling  of  forearms  and  legs.

■Trembling  in  upper  and  lower  limbs.

■  Spasmodic  contortions  and  fearful  jerking  of  limbs,  with

violent  convulsions.
■Jerking  of  limbs. ^Basilar  meningitis.


129  CICUTA  VmOSA.

Cold  extremities.
^^  Rest. Position. Motion. When  at  rest :  headache  < ;

pressive,  stupefying  headache;  shocks  in  liead  >.
While  lying:  jerking  of  head  or  throwing  it  backward;

on  side,  is  straightened  out  upon  back  quick  as  light-
ning.
When  standing  still: desire  to  hold  on to something;

vertigo.
After  standing:  weakness  in  knees  and  muscles  of  back.
Lies  on  back  unable  to  turn.

Sitting  in  apparent  sleep:  sinking  of  head  forward.
On  attempting  to  rise :  darkness  before  eyes ;  falling  back

of  head ;  vomiting.
On  sitting  erect:  headache  and  pressure  >.
On  rising  from  bed:  vertigo.
On  attempting  to  stand: vertigo;  wishes  to  hold  on  to

something.
On  stooping:  falling;  vomiting  of  bile;  of  blood,  during

pregnancy.
On  raising  arm:  sensation  of  heaviness  in  arm;  stitches

in  shoulder.
On  walking :  loss  of  sight ;  vertigo ;  as  if  brain  were  loose

and  was  shaken; epistaxis;  soreness  as  if  bruised  at

lower  end  of  sternum;  does  not  step  properly,  feet  tilt

inward.
^^  Nerves. ■  Great  depression  and  prostration  of  strength ;  he

feels  at  noon  more  fatigued  than  at  evening.

■  Lassitude  and  constant  sleepiness.

■Weak  and powerless,  muscles refuse  to  obey  the  will.

^Paralysis  of  bladder.
State  of  insensibility  and  immobility,  with  loss  of  strength

and  consciousness.
.  I  Catalepsy,  limbs  hang  down  and  patient  appears  lifeless.

■  Dysphagia;  no  muscular  flinching  when  trunk  or  lower

extremities  are  pricked  with  pin,  perfect  paralysis;  has
not  moved  or  winked  for  several  days.  ^Cerebro-spinal
meningitis.

■Tremulous  movements.

I  Twitchings  of  extremities.

■Sudden  shocks  and  jerks  through  head,  arms  and  legs.
^Concussion  of  brain.

■Sudden  rigidity,  with  jerks,  afterwards  great  relaxation
and  weakness. ^Worm  affections.

■Strange  contortions  of  upper  part  of  body  and  limbs,
during  paroxysms,  with  blue  face  and  frequent  inter-
ruptions of  breathing  for  a  few  moments.

■  Child suddenly grasped knee with his hands and

screamed  fearfully;  immediately  afterwards  was  seized

VOL.  IV. — 9.


CICUTA  VIROSA.  130

with  convulsions  and  insensibility,  head  being  perma-
nently retracted.

■  The  attacks  twist  the  child  into  most  curious  and  fright-

ful  contortions,  sometimes causing it  to  scream  out.
^Chorea.
1 1  Convulsions,  with  loss  of  consciousness,  frightful  distor-
tions of  limbs  and  whole  body.

■  Convulsions and insensibility, head permanently re-

tracted, high  fever,  vomiting,  dilatecl  pupils,  double
vision,  ashy  paleness,  one  cliarrhoeic  stool  then  con-
stipation.

■  Convulsions,  with  limbs  relaxed  and  hanging  down,  or

unnaturally  stiffened  and  extended. ^Dentition.

■  Convulsions  with  cries.

■  Epilepsy,  with  violent  contortions  of  limbs  and  upper

portion  of  body  and  head,  bluish  face,  interrupted  res-
piration and  frothing  at  mouth.

■  ■Epileptic attacks,  with  swelling  of  stomach,  as  from

v^iolent spasms of  diaphragm; hiccough; screaming;

redness  of  the  face ;  trismus ;  loss  of  consciousness  and

distortion  of  limbs.
■Eclampsia,  in  a  child  of  five  months,  from  abuse  of  opium.
■Attacks  come  on  twice  a  day,  and  she  seems  to  be  dying

when  in  them. ^Periodical  ecstasy.

■  After  convulsions  child  is  unconscious  and  nearly  lifeless.

■  Spasms  in  muscles,  especially  of  neck  and  chest.

■  Child  lies  on  back,  not  being  able  to  turn,  legs  alternately

contracted  and  extended,  with  severe  pains  in  them.
^Spinal  curvature.

■  Violent  tonic  spasms,  each  muscle  being  perfectly  rigid.

■  The  most  violent  tonic  spasms,  so  that  neither  the  curved

limbs  could  be  straightened  out  nor  the  straight  ones
curved.

■  ■Tonic  spasm  renewed  from  slightest  touch ;  from  oj^en-

ing  door,  and  from  loud  talking.
■Violent  spasms  with  opisthotonus,  difficult  breathing,
arms  bent  at  elbows,  screaming,  tongue  coated  and  dry,
thirst. ^Splinter  in  knee  two  weeks  before.

■  Spasms  of  pregnant or parturient  females; hysterical

convulsions,

■  Body  and  extremities  hard  as  wood. ^Hysterical  spasms.
I  I  Tetanus  centric;  cases  somewhat  ej)ileptiform. ^Cere-

bro-spinal  meningitis.

■  Catalepsy.

"'  Sleep. ■Soporous  condition,  in  cholera.

■  Erequent  waking,  with  sweat  all  over,  from  which  he

feels  invigorated.

■  Dreams:  vivid,  about  events  of  previous  day;  vivid  but

unremembered.


131  CICUTA  VIROSA.  "

■  Starts  up  suddenly  out  of  sleep,  raises  head,  stares  fixedly

before  him,  breathing  ceases,  turns  blue  in  face,  catches
anxiously  at  breath  and  perspiration  stands  in  great
drops  on  forehead. ^Epilepsy.

■  Soporous  sleep,  weeps  on  being roused,  distorts  facial

muscles,  stares  vacantly  and  holds  head  stifhy  bent
forward. ^Concussion  of  brain.

■  While  asleep,  starting  and  biting  tongue. ^Hysterical

spasms.

■  Is  roused  from  sleep  with  difficulty. ^Convulsions.

■  Complete  sleeplessness. ^Hysterical  spasms.

^^  Time. At  night:  sweat,  most  on  abdomen;  profuse  sweat;
unable  to  sleep.
In  morning :  on  waking,  headache ;  when  eating,  nausea ;

sweat,  most  on  abdomen.
During  midday:  loss  of  appetite;  more  fatigued  than  at

evening.
Worse  in  afternoon.
From  noon  till  evening:  eructations.
Whole  day:  want  of  breath;  jerking  in  1.  arm.
^^  Temperature  and  Weather. Warmth :  >  shocks  in  head ;
chilliness  with  desire  for.
Cold:  shocks  in  head  <;  generally  <.
'"'  Fever. ■  Chill  and  chilliness,  with  desire  for  warmth  and
warm  stove.

■  Chill  starts  in  chest  and  runs  down  legs  and  into  arms,

with  staring  look.

■  Cold  internally  and  externally.

■  Heat  slight  and  only  internal.

■  In  intervals  she  is  calm,  slightly  feverish  and  face  flushed.

^Periodical  ecstas}''.

■  High  fever. ^Convulsions.

Typhoid  fever:  vertigo,  buzzing  in  ears,  deafness,  glassy,
dim  eyes;  face  pale,  without  expression;  great  thirst;
meteorism;  soporous  state;  loss  of  consciousness;  mut-
tering delirium.

Nervous  fevers,  characterized  by  great  stupidity.

Worm  fevers,  in  children,  with  colic  and  convulsions.

■  Sweat  at  night  and  in  morning  hours,  most  on  abdomen.

■  Sweats  profusely  at  night  without  being  able  to  sleep.

^Concussion  of  brain.
^^  Attacks, Periodicity. Suddenly becomes  stiff and im-
movable.
Twice  a  day,  periodical  ecstasy.

Periodic: strabismus convergens in children; pain  in
legs;  ecstasy.
^^  Locality  and  Direction. Right :  detonation  in  ear  when
swallowing: bruised  feeling  on  scapula;  violent  pain
in  leg;  vesicle  on  scapula.


CICUTA  VIROSA.  132

Left:  twitching  over  eye;  jerking  in  arm;  sensation  of
heaviness  in  arm,  with  stitches  in  shoulder;  swelling
and  pain  of  knee ;  trembling  of  leg ;  violent  pain  in  leg.

Forward:  falling  with  giddiness;  sinking  of  head  when
looking  at  anything;  bending  of  head  when  aroused
from  apparent  sleep ;  on  staring,  head  inclines.

Backward :  bending  of  head,  with  convulsions ;  falling  of
head  with  spasms;  jerking  of  head;  throwing  of  head.
^^  Sensations.  As  if  he  were  in  a  strange  place ;  as  if  muscles
of  neck  were  too  short ;  as  if  throat  had  grown  together ;
as  of  a  blow  deep  in  epigastrium  which  passes  like
lightning  up  back;  as  if  something  the  size  of  a  fist
were  lodged  in  chest  and  throat;  as  if  heart  stopped
beating.

Rending  pain:  in  one  side  of  head;  in  muscles  of  lower
limbs.

Tearing :  deep  in  abdomen ;  in  os  coccygis.

Cutting  pain :  in  one  side  of  head ;  over  1.  eye.

Jerking :  in  os  coccygis.

Drawing :  from  corners  of  eyes  towards  temples ;  in  ure-
thra ;  in  OS  coccygis ;  in  thighs  and  calves.

Stitching  pains :  from  navel  to  neck  of  bladder.

Stitches:  in  fossa  navicularis;  in  arms  and  fingers;  in
shoulder  on  raising  arm.

Sharp  pain:  from  navel  to  neck  of  bladder.

.Burning:  in  eyes;  in  eruptions;  ulcerated  lips;  vesicle
on  upper  lip;  ulcers  on  tongue;  in  stomach;  in  chest;
in  rectum  after  rubbing.

Bruised  feeling:  on  moving  or  touching  throat;  at  lower
end  of  sternum;  of  forearms  and  legs;  as  from  a  contu-
sion or  blow;  in  many  parts.

Sudden  shock:  deep  in  pit  of  stomach;  through  head,
arms  and  legs.

Throbbing:  in  pit  of  stomach.

Pressure:  deep  in  brain.

Dull  pressure:  in  occiput.

Burning  pressure :  at  stomach  and  abdomen.

Compression:  from  both  sides  of  head.

Heaviness :  in  front  or  back  of  head ;  of  head ;  in  arm  on
raising  it.

Soreness :  behind  ear,  as  after  a  blow ;  in  urethra ;  in  chin,
upper  lip  and  cheeks,  with  milk  crust;  at  lower  end  of
sternum.

Tightness:  in  chest.

Numbness :  of  fingers.

Creeping :  of  fingers.

Itching:  vesicle  on  upper  lip;  eruption  on  face,  hands
and  breast;  in  rectum;  of  lower  part  of  rectum ;  of  skin
over  whole  body;  eruption  on  scalp;  crusts  on  chin.


46


133  CICUTA  VIROSA.

Heat:  in  stomach;  all  over.

Coldness:  in  chest.

Dryness :  of  throat.
**  Tissues. Acts  particularly  on  nervous  system.

Cerebro-spinal  irritant,  producing  tetanus,  epileptic  and
epileptiform  convulsions,  trismus  and  local  tonic  and
clonic  spasms  in  general.

Congestions  to  brain  and  spinal  cord,  also  to  lungs  and
abdominal  viscera.

Tonic  spasms  of  extensors  and  flexors.

Strictures  (spasmodic)  following  inflammations.

Affections  caused  by  getting  splinters  into  flesh;  trismus
and  tetanus :  injurious  effects  of  concussions.

Worm  complaints  in  children,  with  convulsions.
*^  Touch. Passive  Motion. Injuries. >i  Injurious  eff'ects
from  concussions  of  the  brain  and  spine.

Touch:  nose  very  sensitive  to;  bleeding  of  nose  from
slight;  tongue  painful  to;  answers  questions  while  un-
conscious when  touched;  causes  bruised  sensation  of
throat;  tonic  spasm  renewed  from  slightest;  vesicle  on
r.  scapula  painful  to;  causes  pain  in  eruption  on  hands.

Rubbing :  burning  pain  in  anus  after.
Skin. BSkin  burning  hot. ^Wounded  oesophagus.

I  Burning,  itching  of  skin  over  whole  body.

I  Red  vesicle  on  r.  scapula  very  painful  to  touch.

■  Elevated  eruption  as  large  as  peas,  on  both  hands,  even

on  balls  of  fingers,  with  burning  pain  when  touched,
later  it  became  confluent.
■Pustules  which  run  together,  forming  thick,  yellow  scabs,
on  face  and  other  parts  of  body.

■  Suppurating  eruptions,  with  yellow  scurf  and  burning

pain.

■  Eczema:  no  itching;  the  exudation  dries into a hard

lemon  colored  scab.

Impetigo ;  honeycomb-like  crusts,  which  fall  off  and  leave
a  bright  red  smooth  surface.

Suppressed  eruptions  cause  cerebral  disease.

■Scaly,  moist,  itching  eruption  upon  scalp,  with  numerous
hard  nodes  upon  chin,  throughout  beard ;  these  nodes
give  birth  to  a  crop  of  vesicles  which  soon  fill  the  beard
with  yellow  crusts,  matting  the  hair  together  and  ac-
companied with  burning  and  itching.
^^  Stages  of  Life,  Constitution. Old  people  and  children.

Scrofulous  child,  spinal  curvature;  clonic  and  tonic  spasms.

Male  child,  set.  10  months;  epilepsy.

Child,  set.  22  months;  has  for  a  week  or  two  been  in  the
habit  of  eating  coal.

Boy,  set.  2 J,  light  complexion  and  hair,  blue  eyes;  convul-
sions from  cerebral  irritation.


CICUTA  VmOSA.  134

Boy,  ?et.  8;  convulsions.

Female,  set.  9;  ophthalmia.

Child,  set.  11 ;  chorea.

Boy,  a3t.  11 ;  helminthiasis.

Boy,  set.  13;  concussion  of  brain.

Robust  boy,  set.  15 ;  tetanic  convulsions.

Girl,  set.  17,  large,  strong,  brown  hair,  red  cheeks,  has  not
menstruated;  tetanic  spasms.

David  Gray,  set.  17,  treated  allopathically  and  unsuccess-
fully for  five  weeks;  three  children  in  family  died  of
same  disease;  cerebro-spinal  meningitis.

Woman,  set.  23,  in  second  confinement;  puerperal  spasms.

Man,  set.  40,  thin,  weak  constitution ;  tetanus.

Woman,  set.  76;  wounded  oesophagus.

Man,  nearly  90 ;  paralysis  of  bladder.

Mr.  J.  E.  M.,  blonde,  hair  moist,  oily  skin,  comedones  upon
cheeks  and  nose,  of  hypochondriacal  disposition,  subject
to  dyspepsia  and  vertigo;  eruption  upon  scalp  and  chin.

Man,  ran  splinter  into  knee,  and  was  then  wet  through  by
a  cold  rain;  spasms.

Man;  renewed  cancer  of  lip  after  operation.
^^  Relations. Antidoted  by:  Arnic,  Opium;  tobacco  for  mass-
ive doses.

It  antidotes: Opium.

Compatible:  After  Laches.,  after  Arsen.  and  Conium  (cancer
of  lip),  Cuprum  (aphasia  in  chorea).

Compare:  Hydr.  ac.  and  Strychnia.


135  CIMEX  LECTULARIUS.

CIMEX  LECTULARIUS.

The  bedbug.  Hemiptera.

Known  to  Dioscorides,  wlio  mentions  it  in  the  treatment  of  fevers,  and  to
through  the  Middle  Ages,  and  is  still  in  use  among  the  people,  especially  the
Italians,  as  a  remedy  for  fever  and  ague.

Proved  by  W.  Wahle,  of  Kome,  in  the  2d  and  3d  trituration,  on  Dr.  Bertoldi,
a  woman  past  the  change  of  life,  and  a  girl  £et.  seventeen ;  also  by  Dr.  Berridge,
in  the  200th  dilution,  on  a  man.  Wahle  made  use  of  the  6th  and  12th  dilutions
in  the  successful  treatment  of  "  most  malignant  and  most  obstinate  tertian  and
quartan  fevers,  from  three  to  four  doses  being  sufficient."

Clinical  Authokities. — Headache  with  hiccough  and  dryness  of  throat,  E.  W.
Berridge,  N.  Y.  J.  H.,  v.  2,  p.  462,  1874;  Nocturnal  emissions,  Jeanes;  Intermittent,
T.  D.  Stowe,  Allen's  Therapeutics  of  Intermittent;  H.  M.,  v.  7,  p.  162.

^  Mind. I  Anxiousness.

Anxious  with  the  oppression  of  chest,  pains  in  shoulder,

and  during  the  sweat  has  no  rest  anywhere.
I  At  the  setting  in  of  the  chilly  stage  her  hands  become

clinched; she  becomes  vehement; would  like  to  tear

everything  to  pieces,  and  is  scarcely  able  to  restrain  her

rage. ^Intermittent.
■Sensation  as  if  he  would  creep  into  himself,  and  on  that

account  could  not  sufficiently  crouch  together.

■  His  own  sweat  is  disgusting  to  him.
^  Sensorium. iDulness  of  head.

^  Inner  Head. Confusion  of  head,  as if  headache  would
ensue.

■  Pressing  outwards  in  forehead,  first  1.  then  r.  side.

■  Drawing  headache,  particularly  under  r.  frontal  bone.

■  Pain  like  stitches  with  needles  in  middle  of  vertex,  and

pressing  pain  in  vertex  with  the  cough. t/Intermittent.

■  Headache,  almost  depriving  him  of  power  of  thinking.

■  ■Headache  of  the  most  violent  kind. ^Intermittent.
■Violent  headache,  caused  by  drinking. ^ After  chill.

^  Outer  Head. Sweating  on  head  and  nose  or  on  head  and

chest.
''  Smell  and  Nose. ■Annoying  dryness  of  nostrils.

■  Fluent  coryza,  with  pressure  in  frontal  sinuses.

■  Constant  sneezing  in  forenoon;  sneezing  for  an  hour,  at

noon.
Sweat  on  the  nose  in  the  morning,  during  rest.


CIMEX  LECTULARIUS.  136

^"  Teeth  and  Gums. Violent  itching  on  inner  side  of  gum  of
upper  jaw;  is  compelled  to  rub  it  with  tongue  and  fin-
ger, after  which  it  pains  as  if  burnt.
"  Taste  and  Tongue. ■  Swollen  feeling  of  tongue.
iTongue  feels  as  if  scalded;  coated  whitish.

■  Feeling  as  if  burnt  on  tongue,  in  region  of  palate  and

upper  anterior  gums.

Tongue  whitish  furred,  feels  scalded.

A  taste  like  iron  to  the  saliva.
13  Throat. ■  Pressure  and  gagging  in  oesophagus,  which  af-
fects whole  chest  and  impedes  respiration ;  although  she
is  not  thirsty,  she  drinks  for  the  purpose  of  stopping  the
gagging.

■  Pressure  and  choking  in  gullet,  during  fever  heat,  spread-

ing through  chest,  impeding  breathing;  no  thirst,  but
when  drinking  to  overcome  the  choking,  the  water  goes
down  only  at  intervals,  as  if  the  throat  was  contracted;
or,  as  if  she  had  swallowed  too  large  a  morsel.

■  Palate  and  upper  gums  feel  as  if  scalded.

■  Dryness  of  throat,  causing  him  to  drink  all  day.

"  Appetite,  Thirst. Desires,  Aversions. ■Great  hunger
after  the  heat.

■  Thirst:  with  dryness  in  throat;  but  afraid  to  move  to  get

a  drink;  during  apyrexia;  after  the  chill;  before  the
chill  and  immediately  after,  not  with  it.

■  Desire  to  drink,  without  thirst.

^^  Eating  and  Drinking. Water  can  only  be  swallowed  at
intervals,  as  if  oesophagus  were  constricted.

■  After  drinking,  violent  headache,  tickling  and  cough,  op-

pressive breathing,  heaviness  in  chest  and  anxiousness.

■  Drinking  during  the  chill  causes  headache.

'■M^hen  the  patient  drank  she  lost  breath,  gagged,  had

dyspnoea  and  a  gagging  cough. ^Intermittent.
I  I  Many  complaints  do  not  appear  at  all  if  they  abstain
from  drinking.
^''Hiccough,  Belching,  Nausea  and  Vomiting. ■Hiccough
slightly  painful.

■  Qualmishness  with  the  fever.

■  Sour  eructations;  sour  vomit  with  the  cough.
Vomits  ingesta  from  the  day  before.

I  I  Vomituritio. ^Dry  cough.
^^  Hypochondria. ■Pain  in  liver,  as  if  it  had  been  strained
by  bending  r.  side  inward;  the  spot  is  painful  when
touching  it  and  when  coughing.

■  ■Chronic  liver  complaint.

^■'  Abdomen. Abdomen  puffed  up  with  backache.

■  Colic,  followed  by  emissions  of  flatus  or  liquid  stools.

■  I  Colic  ceases  after  wind  passes.


137  CIMEX  LECTULARIUS.

^^  Stool  and  Rectum. Relief  from  discharge  of  wind.
I  Constipation,  feces  dry  and  hard,  hke  dog  stool.
I  No  stool  for  six  days. ^Intermittent.

I  Urging  to  stool ;  after  the  discharge  of  a  small  piece  of

white  stool  the  rectum  closes  firmly.

I I  Hemorrhoidal  complaints;  hemorrhoidal  pains  with
stool.

^^  Urinary  Organs. B  Incontinentia  urinse;  ischuria.

■  During  and  after  fever,  urine  very  hot.

I  Urine  brown,  with  a  deposit  of  sediment.
lUrine  deposits  a  red  coating  on  inside  of  vessel.
Urine  less,  more  saturated,  next  day  a  red  sediment.
^^  Male  Sexual  Organs.  ■  Frequent  erections  in  morning  hours.

I  Seminal  emissions.
^^  Female  Sexual  Organs. BHot  sensation  inside  the  labia.
^  Pregnancy,  Parturition,  Lactation. •  Expels  the  dead

foetus  and  the  afterbirth.
^^  Voice  and  Larynx. Trachea  and  Bronchia. Tickling
in  larynx,  causes  a  dry,  continued  cough  as  long  as
fever  lasts.

■  Tightening  pains  in  1.  side  of  trachea. ^Dry  cough.

^'^  Respiration. Oppression  of  chest,  shortness  of  breath,  and
frequent  deep  inspiration.

■  Loses  breath  when  drinking,  gags,  has  dyspnoea  and  a

gagging  cough. ^Intermittent.

■  During  the  chill  a  constriction  of  the  chest,  has  often  to

take  a  deep  inspiration. ^Intermittent.
^  Cough. Constant,  short,  dry  cough,  with  painfulness.

■  Gagging  cough  when  drinking. ^Intermittent.

■  Violent  cough,  with  purulent  sputa,  and  chill  and  fever
in  daily  attacks.

Cough  with  a  tense  pain  from  upper  1.  chest  across  to  r.,
causing  a  shock,  then  dry  cough  often  repeated,  shaking
the  middle  part  of  lower  chest,  extending  to  the  liver.

■  Cough,  with  belching,  gagging,  or  vomiting;  with  per-

spiration ;  at  intervals  with  gagging  and  pain  in  chest.
Scratching  sensation  behind  upper  part  of  sternum  causes

a  continued  short  cough.
Scraping,  paroxysmal  cough,  which  causes  retching,  with

pain  in  middle  of  chest  after  coughing ;  sternum  painful

to  touch.
^^  Inner  Chest  and  Lungs. ■  Concussive  pain  and  pressure

in  chest  behind  sternum. ^Dry  cough.

■  Chronic  chest  complaints.

^^  Heart,  Pulse  and  Circulation. "Pulse  feeble,  intermitting.
^"  Outer  Chest. Sternum  painful  to  touch.

Scraping  sensation  beneath  sternum  with  short  cough.
'^^  Neck  and  Back. Sensation  of  weariness  and  soreness  in
small  of  back.


CIMEX  LECTULARIUS.  138

I  Pain  in  small  of  back,  extending  over  abdomen,  with

distension  of  abdomen.
iPain  in  small  of  back;  <  when  sitting.
I  Pain  in  region  of  sacrum  and  loins.
^^  Upper  Limbs. iPain  in  r.  shoulder  and  anterior  muscles  of

chest,  extending  through  whole  arm  down to  nails;

fingers  feel  as  if  they  had  gone  to  sleep.
Intermittent  pricking  pain  in  muscles  at  back  of  r.  upper

arm.
I  At  the  beginning  of  chill  draws  fingers  together,  making

a  fist, intermittent.
^^  Lower  Limbs, i  Uneasiness  in  lower  limbs  as  if  she  were

tired  by  walking. ^After  chill.

■  Heaviness  in  lower  limbs.

Great  weariness  in  loins,  she  is  obliged  to  sit  down.

The  pain  in  sacrum  and  right  hip  bone  extends  below  the

knee,  has  to  loosen  her  garter  and  lie  down.
I  Pain  in  recti  muscles  of  thighs.
I  Chill  with  pain  in  muscles  of  thighs,  knee-joints  and  legs.

I  Knees  feel  cold,  like  from  a  cold  wind.

I I  Hamstrings  feel  too  short,  knees  are  flexed;  attempting
to  stretch  them  causes  pain  in  thighs. ^During  _  chill.

I  Cold  feet  at  the  beginning  of  the  fever. ^Intermittent.
^  Limbs  in  General. Great  weariness  in  limbs,  with  sleepi-
ness.
I  She  must  change  position  of  limbs  constantly.  ^  After  chill.

■  During  chill  hands  and  feet  get  cold  and  numb  as  if

dead. ^Intermittent.

■  Every  attempt  to  stretch  out  arms  or  legs  causes  tensive

pains  in  these  parts,  and  he  suffers  thirst  rather  than
move.

■  Pains  in  all  the  joints  as  if  tendons  were  contracted  and

too  short. ^During  chill.
^Rest. Position. Motion. During  rest :  in  morning,  sweat
on  nose.
Sitting :  pain  in  small  of  back  < ;  falls  asleep  in  morn-
ing while.

■  Has  to  sit  down;  loins  or  limbs  are  weary.

Must  lie  down;  on  account  of  pain  in  sacrum  and  r.  hip

bone.
Suffers  thirst  rather  than  move.

Great  restlessness  of  lower  limbs,  like  from  overfatigue.
Must  change  position  of  limbs  constantly.

■  Every  movement,  especially  extending  a  limb,  gives  ten-

sive pain  in  extensor  tendons.
Stretching :  on  attempting  to  stretch  legs,  pain  _  in  thighs ;
causes  tensive  pains  in  limbs;  all  day  inclination  to;
during  the  chill  causes  pains.


139  CIMEX  LECTULARIUS.

^^  Nerves. iWeariness,  with  inclination  to  stretch,  all  clay.
^^  Sleep. Frequent  yawning  as  if  he  had  not  slept  well,  with
a  feeling  of  coldness  on  skin,  and  a  sensation  as  if  the
wind  were  blowing  on  the  knees  for  several  hours.

Gaping  with  cold  feeling  of  the  skin.

•  Irresistible  sleepiness.

She  falls  asleep  in  morning  while  sitting.

Sleepy  with  great  weariness  in  limbs.

■Sleep  very  restless  during  fever,  wakens  often  and  falls
asleep  again.
^^  Time. In  morning :  sweat  on  nose ;  falls  asleep  while  sit-
ting; phlegm  in  throat; dry  cough  from  scratching
under  sternum ;  chill  and  flushes  on  head ;  sweating.

In  forenoon :  constant  sneezing.

At  noon :  sneezing  for  an  hour ;  after  aching  in  belly,  loose
stool.

3  P.M. :  backache  most  violent.

Towards  evening:  urging  without  stool.

In  evening:  chilliness.

At  night :  night  sweats.
^  Fever, l  Before  chill,  thirst  and  heaviness  in  legs.

I  Chill,  commencing  with  clenching  of  hands  and  violent

raging.

■  Evening  chilliness  without  thirst;  her  feet  become  cold

first;  after  this  she  has  a  cold  shuddering,  as  if  cold
water  had  been  poured  over  her,  with  painful  prickings
in  centre  of  vertex  for  two  hours.

I I  During  chilliness  all  her  joints  are  painful,  as  if  the  ten-
dons were  too  short.

iChill,  attended  with  pain  in  all  joints;  sensation  as  if  ten-
dons were  too  short,  knee-joints  are  usually  contracted,
so  that  the  legs  cannot  be  stretched ;  chest  feels  oppressed,
must  take  a  long  breath,  frequently;  irresistible  sleepi-
ness ;  hands  and  feet  as  if  dead.

■Well-marked  chill  followed  by  thirst,  no  fever.  ^Inter-
mittent.

■After  the  chill  thirst,  drinking,  however,  causes  violent
headache ;  tickling  in  larynx,  causing  dry,  continuous
cough,  which  lasts  through  the  heat;  oppression  of
breathing,  heaviness  in  middle  of  chest,  and  anxiety;
abstaining  from  drinking  >  all  this.

■The  most  violent  headache,  but  only  after  the  chill.
^Intermittent.

■  During  apyrexia  much  thirst,  less  with  the  chill,  during

the  dry  heat  still  less,  none  with  the  sweat.

■  Chill  terminates  with  a  tired  feeling  in  legs,  obliging  one

to  change  position  constantly.
Chilliness,  followed  by  creeping  flushes  of  heat  on  body,
with  sensation  as  if  sweat  would  break  out.


CIMEX  LECTULARIUS.  140

I  Chilliness  over  whole  body,  followed  by  dry  heat,  which
is  succeeded  by  some  moisture  over  skin.

I  Heat:  without  thirst;  with  gagging;  the  oesophagus  feels
constricted;  respiration  is  impeded.

■  Sweat,  mostly  on  head  and  chest,  accompanied  by  hun-
ger but  no  thirst.

I  Musty  smelling  sweat,  the  odor  is  to  him  very  offensive.

■Sweat  relieves  all  other  symptoms;  during  feverish  affec-
tions.

I  Night  sweats  of  several  years  standing. ^Hemorrhoids.

iTertian  and  1 1  quartan  intermittent.
^^  Attacks,  Periodicity. Often  repeated:  dry  cough;  yawn-
ing; waking;  taking  a  long  breath.

For  an  hour:  sneezing.

For  two  hours :  pricking  in  centre  of  vertex.

For  several  hours :  sensation  as  if  wind  were  blowing  on
knees.

All  day :  drinking  on  account  of  dryness  of  throat ;  weari-
ness with  inclination  to  stretch.

Tertian  and  quartan  intermittent.

For  six  days :  no  stool.

For  several  years:  night  sweats.
^  Locality  and  Direction.  Right :  pressing  outward  in  side
of  forehead;  headache  under  frontal  bone;  pain  in
liver  as  if  he  had  strained  side  by  bending  inward;
twitching  in  muscle  of  neck;  pain  in  shoulder  extend-
ing through  whole  arm  down  to  nails ;  pricking  pain  in
muscles  at  back  of  upper  arm ;  pain  in  hip  bone  extend-
ing below  knee.

Left: pressing  outward  in  side  of  forehead; tightening
pains  in  side  of  trachea.

From  1.  to  r. :  pain  in  upper  chest;  headache.
*^  Sensations.  As  if  he  would  creep  into  himself  and  could
not  sufficiently  crouch  together;  as  if  tongue  was  swol-
len; as  if  tongue  was  scalded;  as  if  burnt  on  tongue,
in  region  of  palate  and  upper  anterior  gums;  as  if
throat  was  contracted;  as  if  she  had  swallowed  too  large
a  morsel;  palate  and  upper  gums  as  if  scalded;  as  if
oesophagus  were  constricted;  as  if  he  had  been  strained
by  bending  r.  side  inward ;  as  if  fingers  were  asleep ;  as
if  hamstrings  were  too  short;  as  if  hands  and  feet  were
dead;  as  if  tendons  were  contracted  and  too  short;  as  if
wind  were  blowing  on  knees;  as  if  cold  water  had  been
poured  over  her,  causing  shuddering;  as  if  sweat  would
break  out.

Concussion :  in  chest  behind  sternum.

Scraping:  cough  causing  retching;  beneath  sternum.

Scratching: behind  upper  portion  of  sternum,  causing
cough.


141  . CIMEX  LECTULARIUS.

Constriction:  of  chest.

Tightening  pains:  in  1.  side  of  trachea;  in  tendons  and

extensor  muscles  on  motion.
Tense  pain :  from  1.  upper  chest  across  to  r. ;  in  arms  and

legs  on  attempting  to  stretch  them ;  in  extensors.
Drawing:  headache.
Pricking:  in  muscles  at  back  of  r.  upper  arm;  in  centre

of  vertex.
Pain  like  stitches  with  needles :  in  middle  of  vertex.
Pressure:  in  forehead;  in  vertex  with  cough;  in  frontal

sinuses;  in  oesophagus;  in  chest  behind  sternum.
Oppression:  of  chest.
Heaviness :  in  chest ;  in  lower  limbs.
Soreness:  in  small  of  back.
Pains: in  shoulder; in  liver; with  stool; in  chest;  in

middle  of  chest  after  coughing;  in  small  of  back;  in

region  of  sacrum  and  loins;  in  r.  hip  bone;  in  thighs;

in  all  the  joints.
Dulness:  of  head.

Itching :  on  inner  side  of  gum  of  upper  jaw.
Tickling:  after  drinking;  in  larynx.
Numbness:  of  hands  and  feet.
Weariness:  in  small  of  back;  in  loins;  in  limbs.
Tiredness :  in  legs ;  at  termination  of  chill.
Uneasiness:  in  lower  limbs  as  if  she  had  been  tired  by

walking.
Hotness :  inside  labia.
Cold  feeling:  on  skin.
Dryness:  of  nostrils;  of  throat.
^  Tissues. Acts  principally  on  portal  system  and  liver.

iThe  flexors  are  most  affected;  every  motion  or  stretching

of  the  extensor  muscles  causes  a  tightening  pain  in  ten-
dons and  extensors.
^^  Touch. Passive  Motion. Injuries. Touch:  spot  on  r.

side  painful  to ;  sternum  painful  to.
Pressure  lessens  aching  in  upper  and  lower  jaw;  has  to

loosen  her  garter.
Rubbing:  pain  as  if  burnt  in  gum  after.
^  Relations. Compare : Natr.  mur. (headache  lessens the

sweating  stage);  Arsen.  (headache  remains  or  increases

in  the  sweating  stage);  Bellad.  (throbbing  of  the  head

in  intermittents).


CINA.  142

CINA.

Wormseed.  • Com2:>osit8e.

It  is  known  that  the  drug  brought  to  market  under  the  name  "  wormseed  "
does  not  consist  of  seed,  but  of  the  undeveloped  flowers  mixed  with  the  scales  of
the  calyx  and  pedicles  of  different  species  of  the  genus  Artemesia.

Semen  Cina  Levanticse,  consisting  of  small  ovate-oblong,  green-yellow  flower
heads,  have  a  peculiar,  nauseous  aromatic  odor  which  is  somewhat  like  camphor,
and  a  rough,  loathsome  bitterish  taste. — A.  H.  Pharmacopceia.

Levant  wormseed  contains  volatile  oil,  resinous  matter  and  a  crystalline
principle,  Santonin,  or  santonic  acid.

Cina,  belonging  to  the  family  of  Artemesias,  was  known  to  and  used  by  the
Greeks  and  Romans.  Semen  Cina  came  later  under  the  name  Semen  Alexandri-
num,  and  the  Crusaders  brought  the  Semen  Sanctum  from  the  Levant,  from  Syria
and  Palestine.

Proved  by  Hahnemann,  Gross,  Langhammer,  Eiickert,  Stapf,  etc.

CiiiNiCAii  Athorities. — Headache  in  temple,  E.  W.  Berridge,  H.  M.,  1874,
p.  159;  Weakness  of  sight,  the  result  of  onanism,  H.  Z.,  v.  4,  p.  37;  Strabismus,
Hirschel,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf.,  v.  5,  p.  140;  Epistazis,  Ileichelheim,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf.,  v.
1,  p.  411;  Helminthiasis,  F.  B.  Smith,  Am.  Ob  ,  1871,  p.  293;  Bayes,  H.  W.,  v.  12,
p.  538 ;  Mossa,  H.  M.,  v.  13,  p.  189  ;  Caspari,  Bethmann  and  Maly,  Mon.  Horn.  Eev.,
V.  15,  p.  16 ;  Kretschen,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf,  v.  1,  p.  803 ;  Diarrhcea  with  bronchial  catarrh,
Mossa,  H.  M.,  v.  13,  p  189;  Diarrhoea  with  bronchial  catarrh  and  helminthiasis,
Huber,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf,  v.  5,  p.  411 ;  Amenorrhoea,  Aegidi,  Allg.  Hom.  Ztg.,  v.  60,
p.  69 ;  Aphonia,  J.  Kafka,  Allg.  Hom.  Ztg.,  v.  88,  p.  202 ;  Bronchitis  in  children,
M.  S.  Bing,  N.  E.  M.  G.,  1869,  v.  4;  Bronchitis;  Remittent  fever;  Cough,  M.  Des-
chere,  N.  A.  J.  H.,  v.  8,  p.  115;  Croup,  M.  S.  Briery,  N.  E.  M.  G.,  v.  4,  p.  451  ;
Periodical  cough,  Diez,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf,  v.  3,  p.  11 ;  Spasmodic  cough,  E.  M.  Hale,
A.  J.  H  M.  M.,  1868,  v.  1 ;  Whooping  cough,  Gn.,  A.  H.  Z.,  v.  79,  32 ;  Riick.  Kl.
Erf.  (four  cases),  besides  an  epidemic,  see  v.  3,  p.  69;  Neidhard,  B.  J.  H.,  v.  12,
p.  438 ;  M.  S.  Briery,  N.  E.  M.  G.,  v  4,  p.  450 ;  Contraction  of  leg,  O.  W.  Louns-
bury,  Med.  Adv.,  v.  2,  p.  227  ;  Shuddering  after  wine,  Bcenninghausen,  A.  J.  H.  M.
M.,  V.  4,  p.  130;  Paraplegia,  O.  W.  Lounsbury,  Med,  Adv.,  v.  2,  p  227;  Threat-
ened convulsions  in  scarlatina,  J.  E.  Winans,  M.  I.,  v.  5,  p.  78 ;  Chorea,  Mossa,
H.  M.,  V.  13,  p  189;  Convdsions,  toxicological  effect,  Noak,  Hygea,  v.  16,  p.  81  ;
Clonic  spasms  with  helminthiasis,  Maly,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf,  v.  4,  p.  504 ;  Drowsiness  in
a  child,  J.  C.  Morgan,  A.  .1.  H.  M.  M.,  v.  4,  p.  22 ;  Intermittent  fever,  T.  D.  Stowe,
H.  M.,  V.  7,  p.  162;  Le  Roy  Fisher,  N.  A.  J.  H.,  v.  25,  p.  173;  Scarlatina,  J.  E.
Winans,  Med.  Inv.,  v.  5  (new  sen),  p.  78.

^  Mind. iLoss  of  consciousness  and  frothing  from  mouth.

I  Hallucinations  of  sight,  smell  and  taste.

I I  Children  wake  up  in  evening  or  before  midnight  with
fear  or  fright,  jump  up,  see  sights,  scream,  tremble  and
talk  about  it  with  much  anxiety.


143  CINA.

I  Delirium  and  crying  out.

I  Child  is  whining  and  complaining; very  restless  even

during  sleep ;  it  will  not  lie  awake  five  minutes  without
crying;  it  must  be  rocked,  carried,  or  dandled  upon  the
knee  constantly,  day  and  night;  does  not  want  to  be
touched;  cannot  bear  you  to  come  near  it;  desires  many
things  which  it  refuses  when  offered;  is  not  pleased  or
satisfied  with  anything;  uneasy  and  distressed  all  the
time ;  throws  away  everything  given  it,  and  cries  about
nothing;  often  sullen  and  unwilling  to  play  during  the
day.

I I  Pitiful  weeping  when  awake. ^Hydrocephaloid.

I  Child  cries  piteously  if  one  takes  hold  of  it,  or  carries  it.
I  Great  earnestness  and  sensitiveness;  he  is  offended  at
the  slightest  joke.

■  Fretting  excites  the  cough.

■  Usually  good  natured  child  was  cross,  fretful,  irritable

and  dissatisfied  with  everything,  and  passed  urine  in-
voluntarily, with  prostration. ^After  remittent  fever.

■  Child,  though  weak,  was  cross  and  obstinate,  and  cried

when  his  will  was  not  carried  out. ^Bronchitis.

■  ■  Child  exceedingly  cross,  cries  and  strikes  at  all  around

him.
^  Inner  Head. ■Weak,  hollow,  empty  feeling  in  head,  with
inclination  to  vomit.

■  Stupefying  headache,  especially  in  forehead,  then  also  in

occiput;  when  walking  in  open  air.
I A  slow  stitch,  extending  from  upper  orbital  margin  deep

into  brain.
Swashing  sensation  in  forehead  when  shaking  head.

■  Drawing  pain  in  r.  temple  in  a  vertical  direction,  on

coughing  feels  as  if  it  would  burst.

■  Drawing  from  1.  frontal  eminence  to  root  of  nose,  causing

confusion  of  head.

■  Intermitting  pressure,  as  from  a  heavy  weight,  as  if  brain

pressed  down  on  middle  of  vertex ;  pressure  increases
and  renews  the  pain.

■  Dull  headache,  with  sensitiveness  of  eyes  in  morning.
Stupefying headache  brought on  by  eating or  mental

labor.

■  Headache,  before  and  after  epileptic  attacks  and  after

attacks  of  intermittent  fever.
Headache :  with  pain  in  chest  and  back ;  caused  by  fixing
eyes steadily  upon  some object,  as  when  sewing;  <
from  pressure;  alternating  with  pain  in  abdomen;  >
by  stooping.

■  Heat  mostly  in  head  during  fever,  with  yellow  color  of

face  and  blue  rings  around  eyes.


CINA.  144

iHydrocephaloid  and  inflammation  of  brain.
*  Outer  Head. iHead  falls  to  side  and  is  jerked  backwards,
with  twitches  in  limbs  and  cold  perspiration  on  face.

■  Child  leans  its  head  sideways,  all  the  time. IHydro-

cephaloid.
■Turning  head  from  one  side  to  other. IHydrocephaloid.

■  Head very hot; could not  bear to have it  touched.

^Scarlatina.  •

■  Dislikes  having  head  combed  or  brushed,  from  sensitive-

ness of  scalp. ^Scarlatina.
Better  by  shaking  head.
^  Sight  and  Eyes, l  Chronic  weakness  of  sight,  with  aching
in  eyes  and  photophobia. ^Result  of  onanism.

■  Pains  renewed  by  looking  steadily  at  an  object,  as  in

sewing. ^Amenorrhoea.
When  looking  at  a  thing  steadily,  reading,  he  sees  it  as

through  a  gauze,  which  is  relieved  by  wiping  eyes.
Pressure  in  eyes  as  if  sand  had  got  in,  especially  when

reading.

■  Can  see  more  clearly  for  awhile  after  rubbing  eyes.

■  On  rising  from  bed,  black  before  eyes,  with  dizziness  in

head  and  faintness,  totters  to  and  fro ;  >  on  lying  down.

■  i  Optical  illusions  in  bright  colors ;  blue,  violet,  yellow  or

green.
Aversion  to  light.
Pain  in  eyes  when  using  them  at  night  by  candle  light.

■  Pupils  dilated.
Itching  of  inner  canthus.

From  9  a.m.  to  1  p.m.,  daily,  soreness  over  and  in  1.  eye,  in
1.  side  of  nose,  forehead  and  temples  to  occiput.

■  Pulsation  of  superciliary  muscles;  a  kind  of  convulsion.
Drooping  and  heaviness  of  lids.

■  ■  Looks  sickly  about  eyes,  with  paleness  of  face.
Eyes  staring. ^Chorea.

Eyeballs  convulsively  turned  upward,  showing  only  the
whites,  or  fixed  and  staring,  with  dilated  pupils.

Spots  on  cornea.

■Strabismus,  dependent  upon  helminthiasis;  child  has  a
pale,  sickly  look,  blue  rings  around  eyes,  pains  about
umbilicus,  frequent  urination,  boring  of  nose,  etc.
^  Hearing  and  Ears. ■Boring  in  ears. ^Scarlatina.

■Dull  stitches  below  mastoid  process;  when  pressed  upon
it  feels  as  after  a  bruise  or  blow.

■  Cramp-like  jerking  in  external  ear,  like  earache.

''  Smell  and  Nose. ■Violent  sneezing:  with  stitches  in  tem-
ples; with  whooping  cough;  <  when  sneezing.
Bleeding  from  nose  and  mouth,  with  burning  in  nose.
■Bleeding  of  nose,  blood  dark;  itching,  causing  rubbing
and  boring;  pain  in  forehead.


145  ,  CINA.

■Stoppage  of  nose,  in  evening.

Running  coryza  with  violent  sneezing,  makes  child  cry.

Fluent  coryza  at  noon;  slimy  discharge  from  nose.

1 1  Itching  of  nose ;  child  frequently  bores  into  nose  until
blood  comes.

1 1  Child  picks  its  nose  very  much,  is  very  restless,  cries
and  is  very  unamiable.

iChild  rubs  nose  on  pillow,  on  shoulders  of  nurse,  or  with
hands. 6'Hydrocephaloid.
*  Upper  Face. Face:  pale,  with  sickly  look  about  eyes;  pale
and  cold ;  red ;  one  cheek  red  the  other  pale.

I  Pale,  earthy,  yellowish  face. ^Chorea.

■Bloated,  pale  face,  with  blueness  around  mouth. ^Inter-
mittent fever.

Pale,  cold  face,  with  cold  perspiration.

■  Pale  streak  down  centre  of  face. ^Scarlatina.

■  Dark  rings  around  eyes.

■  Pain,  as  if  both  malar  bones  were  pressed  together  with

pincers;  <  from  external  pressure.
■Heat  mainly  in  face. ^'Intermittent.

■  ■Burning  heat  over  whole  face,  with  redness  of  cheeks

and  thirst  for  cold  drinks.

■  ■Rising heat and  glowing  redness of  cheeks,  without

thirst,  after  sleep.
^  Lower  Face. ■  ■White  and  bluish  appearance  about  mouth.

■  Frothing  from  mouth,  with  loss  of  consciousness.

^*'  Teeth  and  Gums. ■■Grinding  of  teeth  and  tumbling  and
tossing  during  sleep.
Sensitiveness  of  teeth  to  cold  air  and  cold  water;  feel  sore.
During  dentition  spasmodic  cough.
^^  Taste  and  Tongue. Bitter  taste  before  chill,  bread  tastes
bitter.
Tongue  brownish-yellow,  whitish;  always  clean.
Cylindrical  contraction  of  tongue,  which  is  spasmodically
forced  through  lips.
^^  Inner  Mouth. ■  Much  frothy  saliva,  with  rattling  phlegm
on  chest.

■  Breath  foul. ^Intermittent.
Bleeding  from  mouth  and  nose.

Sensation  of  dryness  and  roughness  of  mouth,  especially
of  palate.
^^  Throat. ■  Frequent  motion,  as  though  swallowing  something.

■  Inability  to  swallow,  especially  fluids.

■  Audible  gurgling  noise  along  oesophagus. ^Aphonia.
Is  worse  when  swallowing,  particularly  drink.

■  Choreic movements extend  to  tongue,  oesophagus  and

larynx,  causing  a  clucking  noise  from  throat  to  stomach,

VOL.  IV. — 10.


CmA.  ,  146

similar  to  that  caused  by  water  when  poured  from  a
bottle.
/*  Appetite,  Thirst. Desires,  Aversions, i  Little  appetite.
^Bronchitis.

■  Unnatural  hunger. ^Paraplegia.

1 1  Great  hunger  soon  after  a  meal,  with  feeling  of  empti-
ness.

I  Thirst. ^Bronchitis. ^Intermittent.

I  Desire  for  bread.

H  Desires  many  and  different  things.

Child  refuses  to  take  mother's  milk.
^^  Eating  and  Drinking, i  Shudders  on  drinking  wine,  as  if
it  were  vinegar  or  the  strongest  whisky.

Is  worse  from  drinking  quickly.

After  eating  or  drinking,  vomiting  or  diarrhoea.
^^  Hiccough,  Belching,  Nausea  and  Vomiting. ■  Frequent
hiccough,  also  during  sleep. ^Hydrocephaloid.

Inclination  to  vomit,  with  a  weak,  hollow,  empty  feeling
in  head.

1  Nausea  and  vomiting. ^Intermittent.

■  Vomiting:  of  mucus; and  diarrhoea  after  drinking;  of

lumbrici  and  ascarides; of  food  and  mucus; during
fever,  with  clean  tongue ;  of  food  and  bile ;  violent.
■Vomiting  during  chill. ^Intermittent.

■  Vomiting  precedes  fever  and  heat,  which  is  followed  by

a  deep  sleep. ^Amenorrhoea.
^^  Scrobiculum  and  Stomach. ■Pain  in  pericardial  region,
oppressi]  ig  breathing.
Digging  up  pain  in  epigastrium,  with  a  feeling  of  crawl-
ing of  numberless  worms.
■Audible  gurgling  from  throat  into  stomach  when  drink-
ing.

■  Constant  pressure  in  stomach  at  night,  causing  restless-

ness.

■  ■  Gnawing  sensation  in  stomach,  as  from  hunger.

■  Pain  or  uneasiness  below  sternum,  sometimes  extending

to  navel ;  <  on  rising  in  morning ;  >  after  a  meal.

■  Gastric  disorders,  with  helminthiasis.

^^  Abdomen.  ■  Constant  uneasiness  below  sternum,  sometimes
extending  to  navel;  <  on  rising  in  morning;  >  from
eating;  patient  has  grown  thin  and  weak. ^Tapeworm.

■  Pinching,  cramp-like  pressure,  transversely  across  epigas-

tric region,  after  a  meal.

■  Cutting  and  pinching  pain  in  abdomen  from  worms.

■  Boring  pain  above  navel,  passes  off  when  pressing  thereon.

■  Painful  twisting  about  navel,  pain  also  on  pressing  upon

navel.
Pressing  outward  in  belly.


147  CINA.

■  Unpleasant  sensation  of  warmth  in  abdomen.

I  Belly  hard  and  distended;  painful  on  pressure. ^Hel-
minthiasis.
I  Bloated  abdomen,  especially  in  children.

■  Feeling  of  emptiness  in  abdomen.

I  Child  discharges  worms ;  picks  nose  or  anus ;  has  a  hack-

ing cough;  continually  making  attempts  at  deglutition,
as  if  to  swallow  something;  is  very  hard  to  please.

■  Pain  in  bowels,  flashes  of  heat,  constant  motion  of  super-

ficial  cutaneous surface,  restless sleep,  moaning and
starting.

I I  Sufferings  caused  by  worms.

^  Rectum  and  Stool, i  Watery  diarrhoea.

■  Involuntary  diarrhoeic  white  stools. ^Intermittent.

■  Diarrhoea  after  drinking.

Stools:  watery;  white;  white  mucous,  like  little  pieces  of
popped  corn;  reddish  mucous;  greenish  slimy;  bloody;
involuntary ;  frequent.

■  Discharges  lumbrici  and  ascarides.

■  Diarrhoea  with  discharge  of  round  worms.

■  Constipation. ^Bronchitis.
■Stool  rather  hard  and  black.

■  Itching  at  anus.

^^  Urinary  Organs. ■  Enuresis. ^Scarlatina.

■  Frequent  urging,  with  passage  of  much  urine,  all  day.

■  Involuntary  emission  of  urine  at  night,  with  worm  symp-

toms and  ravenous  appetite.

■  Passes  urine  involuntarily; is  irritable  and  prostrated.

^After  intermittent  fever.
■Urine  copious  and  involuntary. ^Bronchitis.
Urine  white  and  turbid,  or  white  and  jelly  like.

■  Urine  turbid,  becomes  semi-solid  on  standing. ^Inter-

mittent fever.

■  Urine  clear,  or  turns  milky  on  standing. (^Chorea.

^^  Male  Sexual  Organs. iBad  effects  from  onanism. ^Weak-
ness of  sight. ^Chorea.
^  Female  Sexual  Organs. ■Menses  too  early  and  profuse.

■  Hemorrhage  from  uterus,  particularly  before  the  age  of

menstruation.
^  Parturition. Lactation. ■  Labor-like  pains  in  abdomen,
frequently  recurring,  as  if  menses  would  appear.

■  Child  refuses  breast.

^'  Voice  and  Larynx. Trachea  and  Bronchia. ■Attempt-
ing to  talk  causes  a  peculiar,  hoarse,  soundless  cough,
with  pain  in  larynx. 6/ Aphonia  from  exposure.
Hoarseness  with  much  mucus  in  larynx  and  trachea.
■Paralysis  of  vocal  cords  from  catching  cold,  with  twitch-
ing of  r.  hand,  and  pectoralis  major,  constriction  of  r.


CINA.  148

side  of  thorax  and  difficulty  of  breathing  at  every  fit  of
coughing,  followed  by  gurgling  in  oesophagus.

■  Great  bronchial  irritation  of  children,  mucous  rales  in

bronchi,  moaning  at  night,  frequent  rubbing  of  nose.

Titillation  low  down  in  trachea,  inducing  cough.

•  Bronchitis:  short,  rapid  respiration,  rattling  and  cough-
ing, very  cross,  obstinate  and  crying ;  restless  sleep,  con-
stantly broken  by  cough ;  thirst,  poor  appetite ;  urine  co-
pious and  involuntary;  pulse  120  to  140;  spasmodic
twitchings  with  threatening  collapse;  pupils  dilated;
gnashing  of  teeth ;  deathly  paleness.

■Bronchial  catarrh,  with  diarrhoea  and  helminthiasis.
^  Respiration. Very  short  breath,  as  if  he  had  much  mucus
in  chest,  without  being  obliged  to  cough.

■  ■Very  short  breath,  at  times  with  interruptions.
Difficult,  loud  respiration.

■Respiration  accelerated,  short  and  rattling,  when  cough-
ing at  short  intervals  could  not  raise  mucus,  and  was
nearly  suffocated  in  consequence. ^Bronchitis.

Short  moaning  respiration  with  open  mouth.

■Respiration  wheezing  and  panting.

While  inspiring,  a  loud  whistling  whoop  in  trachea,  not
audible  on  expiration.

■  Inhalation  broken  into  two. ^Hydrocephalus.

■  Oppression  of  chest,  as  from  a  cramp-like,  contracted  sen-

sation in  chest; sternum seems  to  lie  too  close  and
breathing  becomes  oppressed.

■  Suffocative  attacks.

^  Cough. ■Fretting  excites  cough.

■Paroxysm  of  violent  cough  from  time  to  time.

■  Spasmodic,  dry  cough,  returning  periodically  each  Spring

and  Fall.
■Violent,  periodically  recurring  paroxysms  of  whooping
cough,  excited  by  sensation  of  a  feather  or  down  in
throat,  or  by  adherent  mucus  in  larynx ;  in  morning
without  expectoration,  in  evening  with  difficult  expec-
toration of  white,  occasionally  blood-streaked  mucus,
which  is  tasteless;  <  in  morning  and  in  evening;  >
during  night;  <  by  drinking,  walking  in  open  air,
pressing  on  larynx,  lying  on  r.  side,  in  cold  air,  and
when  awaking  from  sleep.

■  Dry,  spasmodic  cough,  with  rigidity  of  body  and  uncon-

sciousness. ^Whooping  cough. ^/Helminthiasis.

■  Dry  cough,  with  sneezing,  want  of  appetite  and  sleepless-

ness.

■  ■Gagging cough in morning, after rising; irritation

thereto  (as  from  dust)  is  renewed  by  inspiration  after  a
long  interval.


149  •  CINA.

I  Hoarse  gagging  cough,  consisting  of  a  few  shocks,  which
is  renewed  only  after  long  intervals,  in  evening.

■Hacking  cough,  followed  immediately  by  an  effort  to
swallow  something.

I  Short  hacking  cough  at  night.

■  Rattling  cough  in  spells. ^Hydrocephaloid.
I  I  Cough  <  in  evening. ^Hydrocephaloid.

I  Dry  cough  and  sneezing; baby  would  not  nurse  and

cried  when  not  coughing,  with  inappetency,  sleepless-
ness and  pains  in  throat.

I I  Before  coughing  child  raises  herself  suddenly,  looks
wildly  about,  the  whole  body  becomes  stiff,  she  loses
consciousness,  just  as  if  she  would  have  an  epileptic
spasm,  then  follows  the  cough.

1  After  coughing,  the  child  cries  au!  au!  a  noise  like  a
gurgling  going  down  is  heard ;  she  is  anxious,  catches
her  breath,  and  becomes  very  pale  in  face ;  paroxysms
lasting  two  minutes.

■  Paroxysms  of  spasmodic  cough  at  night,  ending  in  spasms

throwing  the  body  of  the  child  backward  so  suddenly
as  to  force  the  child  off  the  nurse's  lap ;  ravenous  appe-
tite; hard,  distended  abdomen;  picks  nose;  stools  of
mucus  and  undigested  food.

When  coughing  peculiar  twitching  of  r.  hand.

Expectoration:  whitish,  slimy,  rarely  somewhat  bloody,
almost  tasteless,  detached  with  difficulty.

I  In  morning,  after  rising,  mucus  hangs  in  larynx;  he  is
frequently  obliged  to  hawk  it  up,  after  which  it  soon
collects  again.
^  Inner  Chest  and  Lungs, i  Stitches  in  1.  side.

I  Burning  stitches  and  soreness  in  chest.

Chest  as  if  pressed  together  from  both  sides.

I  Chest  seemed  to be  full  of  mucus,  with  coarse  rales;
threatened  collapse. ^Bronchitis.
^^  Heart,  Pulse  and  Circulation. Anguish  about  heart  as
though  he  had  committed  some  evil  deed,  when  work-
ing in  open  air.

Trembling  beating  of  heart.

I  Pulse  small,  but  hard  and  accelerated.

I  Pulse  136,  intermitting  every  seventeenth  beat. ^Scar-
latina.
^  Outer  Chest. Two  dull  piercing  stitches  in  quick  succes-
sion near  sternum,  beneath  clavicle,  during  a  deep  in-
spiration ;  painful  on  pressure.

I  Right  side  of  chest  constricted,  with  difficult  breathing.
^Aphonia.
^^  Neck  and  Back, l  Drawing-tearing  pain  along  whole  spine.

■  Tearing,  jerking  pains  in  middle  of  spine.


CINA.  •  150

■Fatigued  pain  in  loins,  as  if  he  had  stood  a  long  time.

■  Bruised  pain  in  small  of  back,  not  <  by  motion.
Lancinating  in  upper  part  of  spinal  column  towards  r.

scapula.
^^  Upper  Limbs, l  Cramp-like,  drawing  pains  in  arms  and
hands.
I  I  Boring,  pinching  pains  in  1.  upper  arm,  >  by  motion.
■Sprained  feeling  in  wrist-joint.
I  I  Single,  small,  jerking  stitches,  now  in  r.,  again  in  1.  hand.

■  Spasmodic  contraction  of  hand.

Peculiar  twitching  of  r.  hand  when  coughing.

■  Weakness  of  hand;  he  can  hold  nothing  with  it.
■Twitching  of  fingers.

^  Lower  Limbs. ■Paralytic  pain  in  1.  thigh,  near  knee.

■  Left  leg  semiflexed,  both  upon  itself  and  upon  abdomen.
■Rigidity  of  lower  limbs;  spasmodic  stretching  and  twitch-
ing of  feet.

■Sudden  loss  of  use  of  lower  limbs,  with  unnatural  hunger.
^  Limbs  in  GeneraL ■  "Twitching  of  limbs.

■  Jerking  and  distortion  of  limbs.

■  Pain  in  limbs. ^Intermittent.
■Coldness  of  hands  and  feet  with  thirst.

^  Rest. Position. Motion. Lying  on  belly  during  sleep.

On  lying  on  r.  side:  cough  <.

On  lying  down :  dizziness  and  faintness.

On  rising:  dizziness  and  faintness;  pain  or  uneasiness  be-
low sternum,  sometimes  extending  to  navel.

On  stooping:  pain  in  abdomen  >.

Continually  rolling  over  and  about.
^'^  Nerves. ■  Child  is  very  weak,  pale  and  sick;  constant  rest-
lessness; children  constantly  turn  and  twist  at  night,
call  for  water,  and  are  ravenous  for  food.

■  Child  tosses  about  uneasily,  even  while  awake,
Oversensitiveness  of  whole  body  to  touch.

■  Trembling of body, with shivering sensation, while

yawning.

■  Twitching,  jerking  and  distortion  of  limbs.

■  Spasmodic  twitchings,  with  threatened  collapse. ^Bron-

chitis.
The  child  gets  perfectly  rigid  in  every  coughing  spell.

■  General  rigor  of  whole  body,  and  loss  of  consciousness.

^Whooping  cough.

■  Spasms  of  children,  with  throwing  arms  from  side  to  side.

■  Convulsive  attacks  at  night.

■  ■Convulsions  of  extensor  muscles; child  becomes  sud-

denly stiff;  there  is  a  clucking  noise,  as  though  water
were  poured  out  of  a  bottle,  from  throat  down  to  abdo-
men.


151  CINA.

1 1  Worm  spasms,  the  child  stiffens  out  straight.

Epileptic  attacks,  especially  at  night.

I  Epileptiform  convulsions,  with  consciousness.

■Eclampsia,  especially  at  night,  with  or  without  conscious-
ness; lying  on  back;  violent  screams  and  violent  jerks
of  hands  and  feet.

Chorea;  the  distortions  often  commence  with  a  shriek,  ex-
tend to  tongue,  oesophagus  and  larynx,  continue  even
through  night;  from  intestinal  irritation.

■  Chorea  complicated  with  worms.

I  I  Paraplegia  with  unnatural  hunger.
^^  Sleep. I  Spasmodic yawning; pains  renewed  by  yawning
which  cannot  be  suppressed. ^Amenorrhoea.
■Sleeps  erect  with  head  leaned  backward  or  to  r.  side.

■  Child  hangs  its  head  to  one  side,  is  drowsy.

■  Sudden  distressing  cries  in  sleep. ^Hydrocephaloid.

■  Grinding  of  teeth  during  sleep.

■  Tossing  about  during  sleep,  with  lamentations  and  cries

about  colic. ^Hydrocephaloid.
I  I  Restless  sleep  broken  by  cough. ^Bronchitis.

■  Lying  on  belly. ^Intermittent.

■Awakes from sleep trembling and frightened, with

screams,  and  will  not  be  pacified. ^Intermittent.
■Wakes  in  morning,  restless  and  lamenting,  in  a  start.

■  Cannot  sleep;  when  falling  asleep,  starts,  screams,  turns

over,  kicks  off  bedclothes. ^Hydrocephaloid.
I  1  Child never sleeps long at a time. ^Intermittent.
^Atrophy.

■  Sleeplessness,  with  restlessness,  crying  and  lamentations.
During  sleep  hiccough.

■  Child  will  not  sleep  unless  rocked,  or  kept  in  constant

motion.

Heat  <  after  sleep.
^  Time.  In  morning:  sensitiveness  of  eyes;  dull  headache;
pain  in  sternum  < ;  paroxysms  of  whooping  cough,
without  expectoration;  paroxysms  of  whooping  cough
■< ;  after  rising,  gagging  cough,  mucus  in  larynx,  wakes
restless  and  lamenting,  in  a  start.

From  9  a.m.  to  1  p.m.:  soreness  in  eyes,  nose,  forehead,
temples  and  occiput.

At  noon :  fluent  coryza ;  chorea  while  at  dinner.

During  day:  child  is  unwilling  to  play,  sullen.

In  evening:  child  awakes  frightened;  stoppage  of  nose;
paroxysm  of  whooping  cough  with  difficult  expectora-
tion; paroxysm  of  whooping  cough  < ;  hoarse,  gagging
cough ;  cough  < ;  chill  with  great  paleness  of  face ;
chorea.

At  night:  pain in  eyes;  constant  pressure  in  stomach;


CINA.  152

involuntary  emissions  of  urine,  with  worm  symptoms
and  ravenous  appetite ;  moaning ;  whooping  cough  > ;
hacking  cough ;  spasmodic  cough ;  children  constantly
turn  and  twist,  call  for  water,  and  are  ravenous  for  food ;
convulsive  attacks;  eclampsia;  restlessness;  chorea;  ag-
gravation of  symptoms.

Before  midnight:  child  wakes  up  frightened.
^^  Temperature  and  Weather. Open  air :  cough  and  expec-
toration < ;  anguish  about  heart  when  working  in.

Cold  air :  teeth  sensitive  to ;  cough  <  by.

Cold  water :  teeth  sensitive  to.
^  Fever, l  Before  chill,  hunger,  vomiting  of  food,  pain  in
limbs. ^'Intermittent.

I  Chill,  with  shivering  and  shaking,  even  near  a  warm
stove.

I  Chill  ascends  from  upper  part  of  body  to  head,  or  from
back  upward.

Chill  without  thirst.

I  Chill  not  relieved  by  external  warmth,  mostly  in  evening
and  with  great  paleness  of  face.

I  Chill  in  evening  and  fever  all  night  (nursing  children).

I I  Chill,  with  thirst,  face  pale  and  cold;  hands  warm;
nausea,  or  vomiting  of  bile  or  ingesta. ^Intermittent.

I  Chill  lasted  an  hour,  then  heat,  with  headache.  ^Inter-
mittent.

I  Chill  followed  by  convulsions  and  high  fever ;  heat  mostly
in  face  and  head;  pain  in  stomach  and  abdomen;  pupils
enlarged;  rubbing  of  nose;  restlessness,  with  grinding
of  teeth;  sudden  starts;  abdomen  bloated.  ^Helmin-
thiasis.

■  Shivering  creeping  over  trunk,  so  that  he  trembles  even
by  a  warm  stove.

I  Chill  in  P.M.,  not  >  by  heat;  heat  is  mainly  in  face;
vomiting  during  chill;  child  pale  and  puny;  abdomen
bloated;  breath  foul;  an  occasional  thin,  whitish  diar-
rhoea ;  rubbing  of  face,  ears,  nose,  and  perineum ;  wet-
ting bed ;  starting  in  sleep ;  lying  on  belly ;  restless  at
night,  continually  rolling  over  and  about;  throws  away
everything  given  it  and  cries  about  nothing.

I  Febrile  shivering  over  whole  body,  with  hot  cheeks,  with-

out thirst.

I I  Rising  heat  and  glowing  redness  of  cheeks,  without
thirst,  after  sleep.

I  Fever, :  vomiting  of  food,  followed  by  chill  all  over,  and
then  heat  with  great  thirst;  violent  with  vomiting  and
diarrhoea;  daily  at  same  hour;  chill,  followed  by  heat
without  thirst.

After  remittent  fever  excessive  prostration  with  irritability
and  involuntary  urination.


153  CINA.

I  After  fever,  hunger. ^Intermittent.

I  Daily  fever  at  same  hour,  with  very  short  breath.

■Burning  heat  over  whole  face,  with  redness  of  cheeks  and
thirst  for  cold  drinks.
*^  Attacks,  Periodicity. Lasting  two minutes :  .  spasms  in
throat  after  coughing.

For  an  hour :  chill.

All  day :  frequent  urging,  with  passage  of  much  urine.

All  night:  fever.

Through  the  night:  chorea.

Each  Spring  and  Fall :  spasmodic  dry  cough.

Periodical :  paroxysms  of  whooping  cough ;  daily  fever.

Alternating:  headache,  with  pain  in  abdomen.

Intermitting:  pressure  in  head.
^^  Locality  and  Direction.  Right :  drawing  pain  in  temple ;
twitching  of  hand  and  pectoralis  major;  constriction  of
side  of  thorax ;  twitching  of  hand  when  coughing;  con-
striction of  chest;  lancinating  towards  scapula;  small,
jerking  stitches  in  hand;  twitching  of  hand  when
coughing.

Left:  drawing  in  frontal  eminence  to  root  of  nose;  sore-
ness over  and  in  eye;  in  side  of  nose  and  forehead;
stitches  in  side;  pinching  in  upper  arm;  small,  jerking
stitches  in  hand ;  paralytic  pain  in  thigh  near  knee ;  leg
semiflexed  both  upon  itself  and  upon  abdomen.

Backward:  jerking  of  head;  spasms  throw  body  of  child
suddenly  backward.
*^  Sensations.  As  if  brain  pressed  down  on  middle  of  vertex ;
as  if  he  saw  objects  through  gauze;  as  if  both  malar
bones  were  pressed  together  with  pincers;  as  if  sternum
was  lying  too  close  and  oppressed  breathing;  as  of
feather  or  down  in  throat;  as  if  chest  was  pressed  to-
gether from  both  sides;  as  if  chest  was  full  of  mucus.

Dull  twinges  sometimes  like  a  pinching,  at  others  like  a
pressure,  or  a  blow,  or  jerk,  or  again  like  an  itching,  at
various  places,  but  especially  at  the  posterior  portion  of
the  crest  of  the  ilium,  on  the  hip ;  the  places  are  painful
on  pressure,  as  if  sore  or  bruised.

Lancinating:  in  upper  part  of  spinal  column,  towards  r.
scapula.

Tearing :  along  whole  spine ;  in  middle  of  spine.

Stitches:  from  upper  orbital  margin  deep  into  brain;
below  mastoid  process ;  in  temples ;  in  1.  side ;  in  chest ;
dull,  piercing  near  sternum  beneath  clavicle;  now  in  r.,
again  in  1.  hand ;  here  and  there  in  body.

Cutting:  in  abdomen.

Digging  up  pain  in  epigastrium.

Boring :  in  ears ;  above  navel ;  in  1.  upper  arm.


CINA.  154

Gnawing:  in  stomach  as  from  hunger.

Pinching:  transversely  across  epigastric  region;  in  abdo-
men; in  1.  upper  arm.

Burning :  in  nose ;  in  chest ;  over  whole  face.

Bursting:  in  r.  temple  on  coughing.

Jerking :  in  external  ear ;  in  middle  of  spine.

Twisting:  about  navel.

Drawing :  in  r.  temple ;  along  whole  spine ;  in  arms  and
hands.

Constriction :  r.  side  of  chest.

Contraction:  in  chest.

Labor-like  pains  in  abdomen.

Cramp-like  pains  in  arms  and  hands.

Cramp-like  pressure:  in  abdomen;  in  chest.

Pressure:  in  head  as  from  a  heavy  weight;  in  eyes  as
from  sand;  in  stomach;  transversely  across  ej)igastric
region ;  in  belly  outward.

Oppression :  of  chest.

Anguish :  about  heart.

Pulsation :  of  superciliary  muscles.

Swashing:  in  forehead,  when  shaking  head.

Aching:  in  eyes.

Bruised  pain :  in  small  of  back.

Sprained  feeling  in  wrist-joint.

Soreness:  over  and  in  1.  eye;  in  1.  side  of  nose,  forearm
and  temples  to  occiput;  in  chest;  of  body  when  touched,
or  when  moving.

Pain:  in  chest  and  back;  in  abdomen;  in  eyes;  about
umbilicus;  in  forehead;  in  pericardial  region;  below
sternum,  sometimes  extending  to  navel;  in  bowels;  in
larynx;  in  throat;  in  limbs;  in  stomach  and  abdomen.

Shivering  sensation :  while  yawning ;  over  trunk.

Creeping  over  trunk.

Crawling  as  of  numberless  worms  in  epigastrium.

Itching :  in  inner  canthus ;  of  nose ;  at  anus.

Titillation :  low  down  in  trachea.

Uneasiness:  below  sternum,  sometimes  extending  to  navel.

Heaviness:  of  lids.

Fatigued  pain :  in  loins  as  if  he  had  stood  a  long  time.

Confusion  of  head.

Stupefying  pain:  in  forehead;  in  occiput;  when  walking
in  open  air;  after  eating;  after  mental  labor.

Weak  feeling:  in  head.

Empty  feeling :  in  head ;  after  a  meal ;  in  abdomen.

Hollow  feeling:  in  head.

Roughness :  of  mouth ;  of  palate.

Dryness:  of  mouth;  of  palate.

Warmth:  in  abdomen.


155  CINA.,

^  Tissues. Cachexia  of  helminthiasis.

Great  emaciation  from  impaired  nutrition.

Intestinal  irritation  affecting  brain  and  other  organs.

The  voluntary  muscular  system  is  affected,  paralytic  sen-
sations and  partial  temporary  paralysis  occur  in  extremi-
ties, complicated  with  convulsive  muscular  contraction,
the  co-ordinating  power  in  abeyance. ^Chorea.

Abnormal  sensitiveness  of  individual  nervous  filaments.

Hypersesthesia  of  laryngeal  mucous  membrane.

Reflex  spasms  in  dominion  of  nervus  vagus.
^  Touch.  Passive  Motion.  Pressure :  aggravates  headache ;
mastoid  process  feels  as  after  a  bruise  or  blow  after;
pain  in  malar  bones  < ;  boring  pain  in  navel  < ;  causes
pain  in  navel ;  belly  painful  to ;  on  larynx  <  cough ;
sternum  near  clavicle  painful  on;  upon  previously
affected  parts  reproduces  paroxysms  of  chorea ;  suffering
renewed  or  aggravated  by.

■  Child  wants  to  be  carried. ^Hydrocephaloid.

Touch:  child  cannot  bear  least;  cannot  bear  to  have  head
touched;  oversensitiveness  of  whole  body;  paroxysms
of  chorea  reproduced  by.

On  taking  hold  of  child :  it  cries  piteously.

Child  dislikes  having  head  combed  or  brushed.

Can  see  better  after  rubbing  eyes.

On  wiping  eyes,  sensation  as  if  looking  through  a  gauze  >.

Child  must  be  rocked,  carried,  or  dandled  on  knee  con-
stantly, day  and  night;  will  not  sleep  unless  rocked  or
kept  in  constant  motion.

When  carried :  child  cries  piteously.

■  Desire  to  remain  perfectly  still  and  in  the  dark. ^Inter-

mittent.
^'^  Skin. ■  Itching  lessened  or  unchanged  by  scratching.

■  Furuncles  or  red  pimples.

■  Ulcers  with  scanty  discharge.
■Rubbing  of  face,  ears,  nose  and  perineum.

Minor  skin  affections  of  infants  and  scrofulous  children.
^^  Relations. Antidotedby: Camphor.,  Capsic,  Cinchon.,  Pip.

nigr.
It  antidotes  ailments  from  Capsic,  Cinchon.,  Mercur.
Compatible :  after  Droser.  in  pertussis ;  after  Ant.  tart,  in

bronchitis.
Cina  cured  aphonia  from  exposure  when  Aeon.,  Carb.  veg.,

Phosphor,  and  Spongia  had  failed.
Compare :  Ant.  crud.  and  Ant.  tart,  (irritability  of  children ;

will not  be touched or looked at without crying) ;

Cuprum  (gurgling  along  oesophagus  when  swallowing

fluids) ;  Digit,  (white  stools) ; the  action  of  Santonine

on  the  eyes  is  comparable  with  that of  Atropia  and

Digit.


CINCHONA  BOLIVIANA.  156


CINCHONA  BOLIVIANA.

A  variety  of  Cinchona  Calisaya,  discovered  by  Weddell  in  Bolivia,  growing
somewhat  further  northward  than  Calisaya.

Clinical  Authority.— M.  M.  Modiedo,  Bogota,  La  Homceopatia,  vol.  1,
p.  333.

^  Mind. Painful  sense  of  humiliation.

Excessive  gloominess  with  alternations  of  serenity ;  hilari-
ous in  evening.

Great  lack  of  moral  courage ;  disposed  to  feel  cowardly.

Feels  sad,  like  shedding  tears;  thinks  much  about  the
future.

Feels  abandoned  and  deserted.

Fits  of  rage,  breaks  out  in  blasphemous  language.

Alternate  bad  and  good  humor.

Calm,  feels  repentant,  resigned.

Absent-minded  while  conversing.
^  Sensorium. Vertigo as after a drunken fit, voracious
appetite.

Head  feels  heavy,  stupid.
^  Inner  Head. Dull  headache  in  morning  on  awaking,  leaves
during  day.

Violent  headache  on  awaking  in  morning,  continuing  all
day  and  night  and  following  day,  leaving  during  sleep
on  next  night.

Headache  after  eating.

Pulsations  in  1.  side  of  head.

Headache  with  pulsations  over  r.  eye.

Head  heavy.
*  Outer  Head. Sweat  on  forehead.

Pain  in  roots  of  hair  on  crown  of  head.

Some  of  the  hair  falls  off  in  a  spot  where  pain  was  felt.
^  Sight  and  Eyes. Turning  to  right,  eyes  closed,  seems  to
see  a  bright  flame  horizontally  from  r.  to  1.  terminating
in  a  point ;  feels  as  if  caused  by  pressure  on  lids.

Desires  to  close  eyes  at  night  during  fever.

Burning  pain  in  eyes,  wants  to  rub  them.

Veins  in  inner  angle  of  1.  eye  injected;  morning.

Cramp-like  pain  in  inner  angle  of  r.  eye.

Violent  pains  like  a  stab  in  1.  eye,  followed  by  itching  and
tears.

Lids  weak,  drooping.
^  Hearing  and  Ears. Sudden  sounds  as  of  a  far-off  land-
slide; detonation  of  a  cannon  in  r.  ear.


157  CINCHONA  BOLIVIANA.

Sounds  in  1.  ear  as  of  ringing  of  bells.

Sounds  like  humming  of  bees  in  1.  ear,  and  as  of  blowing

of  a  trumpet,  at  night.
Whistling  sound  in  r.  ear  at  night.
Deafness  in  1.  ear;  took  large  ball  of  cerumen  from  it.
''  Smell  and  Nose. Much  sneezing  on  awaking  in  morning,
with  smell  as  of  fresh  pus.
I  I  Sensation  as  of  incipient  cold,  with  tight  feeling  and

pain  in  throat.
i  I  Violent  cold  in  head ;  coryza.
Nostrils  dry,  stopped  up.
Mucus  from  posterior  nares.
^  Upper  Face. Face :  hot ;  pale ;  sweating.

Pulsation  in  1.  side  of  face  extending  to  ear.
Painful  pustule  on  prominence  of  r.  cheek  bone.
^  Lower  Face. Aphthae  on  inner  surface  of  lips.
I  I  Ulceration  of  commissures  of  mouth.
Slight  eruption  on  lower  lip,  much  itching;  pustules  leave
before  fully  forming,
^^  Teeth  and  Gums. Teeth  on  edge  sore  on  chewing,  espe-
cially 1.  side.
Pulsating  in  decayed  teeth,  1.  side.
Gums  feel  excoriated,  1.  side.
"  Taste  and  Tongue. Saltish  taste;  acid  taste  as  of  iron.
Tip  of  tongue  as  if  burnt.
Epithelium  peels  off  base  of  tongue.

Sensation  on  tongue  as  of  violent  bites,  seemingly  extend-
ing towards  1.,  also  to  right,
^^  Inner  Mouth. Mouth  bitter;  morning  on  awaking.

I  I  Aphthae.
^^  Throat. Feeling  of  constriction  and  burning  in  throat.

Tonsils  painful.
"  Appetite,  Thirst. Desires,  Aversions. Hunger,  or  lack
of  appetite ;  repugnance  to  meat.
Thirst  during  day ;  also  in  morning.
^^  Eating  and  Drinking. At  night,  after  preserves,  mouth
fills  with  a  sour  liquid.
After  food,  feeling  of  weight  in  stomach.
After  eating:  cold;  sneezing;  sleepy,  and  desire  to  sleep  in
evening.
^^  Belching,  Nausea, l  l  Much  gas  arises  from  stomach.

Nausea  while  eating  at  night.
^'^  Scrobiculum  and  Stomach. Heat  in  skin  in  region  of
stomach.
Unpleasant  sensation  in  stomach  on  lying  down,
^^  Hypochondria. Pain  in  hepatic  region.

Pains  in  both  hypochondria  and  under  short  ribs on
awaking  in  morning.


CINCHONA  BOLIVIANA.  158

Pain  in  splenic  region.
^^  Abdomen. Cramp-like  pain  in.  lower  part  of  abdomen,  r.

side.
Great  heat  as  from  a  poultice.
Pricking  as  from  pins  in  pubis.
^  Stool  and  Rectum. Hard,  then  soft  stools,  without  diar-
rhoea.
Expulsion  of  gases  from  intestines.
Impulse  to  stool  at  night;  stools  hard,  scanty.
I  I  Biting  in  anus  as  from  worms ;  excoriated  sensation.
Viscous  sweat  on  anus.
^^  Urinary  Organs. Pain  in  1.  kidney  on  sitting  down,  in

morning.
Heavy  pressure  in  bladder ;  cramp  in  sphincter ;  tenesmus

on  urinating.
Flow  of  urine  bifurcated ;  or  small  stream  curving  to  left.
Flow  of  urine  frequent  and  clear.

Urine  in  nebulous  flocks,  smelling  strong  in  a  few  hours.
^^  Male  Sexual  Organs. Morning  erections,  no  sexual  desire.
Pollutions  exceedingly  debilitating.
Pricking,  crawling  in  urethra  up  to  sphincter.
I  I  Excoriation  on  inner  and  lower  part  of  prepuce.
I  I  Gleet  and  ulceration  of  prepuce.
^  Cough. Cough  dry,  then  loose ;  sputum  saline  or  tasting  of

blood ;  sputum  of  milk-white  globules  of  mucus.
I  I  Cough  with  pain  in  r.  lung  as  from  a  dagger  buried

there;  at  times  makes  breathing  laborious;  burning  in

eyes;  extremities  cold. ^Pneumonia.
^  Inner  Chest  and  Lungs. Pain  in  chest  as  if  it  was  one

great  sore.
I  I  Unbearable  pain  in  r.  lung,  extends  to  region  of  liver ;

sensitive  to  touch.
Dull  cramp  in  thoracic  cavity.
I  I  Violent  attack  of  pneumonia.
^  Heart,  Pulse  and Circulation. Palpitation ; heartache.

Pulse  feeble  and  quick  during  nocturnal  fever.
^'  Neck  and  Back, l  l  Nape  of  neck  rigid,  cannot  turn  head

to  right;  any  sudden  movement  causes  a  snap  or  crack.
Sudden  cramp  in  anterior  lower  part  of  neck  causing

fright.
Rheumatic  pains  in  1.  shoulder.
Pain  in  1.  buttock,  also  in  r.  hip  bone  on  sitting  up  in  bed

in  morning.
I  I  Wry  neck.
^^  Upper  Limbs. Rheumatic  pains  in  1.  arm  from  shoulder  to

hand,  also  in  both  arms.
Dull  pains  alternate  from  arm  to  arm.
Pains  in  r.  arm  on  moving  it.


159  CINCHONA  BOLIVIANA.

Left  hand  and  arm  lose  sensation;  cramp  about  thumb-
nail.

Rheumatic  pains  from  1.  wrist  to  elbow.

Pains  in  joints  of  both  hands.

Pricking  pains  in  hands.

Lack  of  strength  in  arms  and  hands.

I  I  Hands  red;  vessels  distended.

Hands  hot  even  in  cold  and  rainy  weather.

Hands  cold,  sticky.

Prolonged  hemorrhage  from  a  small  wound  on  joint  of
first  phalanx,  second  finger  of  r.  hand.
^  Lower  Limbs. Convulsive  pains  in  muscles  of  1.  thigh.

Pricking  pains  in  legs.

Pains  in  1.  knee.

I  i  Legs  and  feet  icy  cold  as  if  blown  on  by  a  wintry  wind.

Sudden,  violent  pulsating  in  joint  of  r.  big  toe;  cramp  in
it  at  night,  on  lying  down.

Rheumatic  pains  in  r.  foot.

I  I  Painful  corns.
^^  Rest. Position. Motion. After  lying  down:  no  disposi
tion  to  sleep.

On  lying  down :  unpleasant  sensation  in  stomach ;  sudden
violent  pulsating  in  joint  of  r.  big  toe;  sudden  and  pro-
found sleep.

On  sitting  down:  pain  in  1.  kidney.

On  sitting  up  in  bed:  pain  in  1.  buttock,  and  in  r.  hip
bone.

Cannot  turn  head  to  right,  nape  rigid,  any  sudden  move-
ment causes  a  snap  or  crack.

Turning  to  right,  eyes  closed,  seems  to  see  a  bright  flame
horizontally  from  r.  to  1.  terminating  in  a  point.

Pains  in  r.  arm  on  moving  it.
^^  Nerves. Feels  lazy  in  bed  in  morning,  but  cannot  go  to
sleep  again.

Inclination  to  oscillation  of  body  after  writing.

Nervous  susceptibility,  cannot  bear  noise.

Whole  body  uneasy.
^^  Sleep. No  disposition  to  sleep  after  lying  down.

Sudden  and  profound  sleep  on  lying  down.

Dreams  of  the  sea;  of  fishes;  of  swimming;  of  bathing;
of  journeys;  of  journeys  by  water;  of  death;  of  vulgar
scenes ;  of  vomiting  worms.

Drools  from  mouth  in  sleep.
^^  Time.  In  morning :  dull  headache  on  awaking ;  violent
headache  on  awaking;  veins  in  inner  angle  of  1.  eye  in-
jected; much  sneezing  on  awakiug;  mouth  bitter  on
awaking ;  thirst ;  pain  in  both  hypochondria  and  under
short  ribs  on  awaking;  pain  in  1.  kidney  on  sitting  down;


CINCHONA  BOLTVIANA.  160

erections;  pain  in  1.  buttock  and  r.  hip  bone  on  sitting
up  in  bed;  in  bed  feels  lazy  but  cannot  go  to  sleep
again ;  feels  cold  in  bed.

Evening :  hilarious ;  desire  to  sleep ;  fever.

At  night:  desire  to  close  eyes  during  fever;  sounds  in  1.
ear  as  of  a  trumpet;  whistling  in  r.  ear;  mouth  fills  with
a  sour  liquid  after  preserves;  nausea  while  eating;  im-
pulse to  stool;  fever;  sudden,  violent  pulsating  in  joints
of  r.  big  toe ;  feels  cold  in  bed ;  heat  of  body.
^  Temperature  and  Weather. Disinclination  for  the  bath.

In  cold  rainy  weather:  hands  hot.
^  Fever. Feels  cold  in  bed  all  night;  also  in  morning.

General  excessive  cold  during  day;  heat  of  body  at  night.

Fever,  p.m.,  head  heavy,  burning  in  eyes,  frequent  sneez-
ing; cold  feet.

Sweat  excessive  on  face  and  head;  burning  in  eyes;  veins
swollen;  pulse  96  to  104.

I  I  Intermittent  fever.
*^  Attacks,  Periodicity. Sudden:  sounds  in  ears;  pulsating
in  joints  of  r.  big  toe.

Frequent :  flow  of  urine ;  sneezing.

At  times:  laborious  breathing.

During  day:  thirst;  general  excessive  cold.

All  night:  feet  cold  in  bed.

Alternate :  dull  pains  from  arm  to  arm.

Intermittent  fever.
^  Locality  and  Direction.  Right:  headache,  with  pulsations
over  eye;  cramp-like  pain  in  inner  angle  of  eye;  deto-
nation of  cannon  in  ear;  whistling  in  ear;  painful  pus-
tule on  prominence  of  cheek  bone;  cramp-like  pain  in
lower  part  of  abdomen  on  side;  pain  in  r.  hip  bone;
rheumatic  pains  in  arm;  sudden,  violent  pulsating  on
joints  of  big  toe;  rheumatic  pains  in  foot.

Left:  pulsations  in  side  of  head;  veins  in  inner  angle  of
eye  injected ;  violent  pain  like  a  stab  followed  by  itch-
ing and  tears  in  eye;  sounds  like  ringing  of  bells  in  ear;
sounds  like  humming  of  bees  in  ear,  as  of  blowing  of  a
trumpet;  deafness  in  ear;  pulsations  in  side  of  face,  ex-
tending to  ear;  soreness  of  teeth  on  chewing;  pulsating
in  decayed  teeth  on  side;  gums  feel  excoriated;  pain  in
kidney;  rheumatic  pains  in  shoulder;  pain  in  buttock;
rheumatic  pains  in  arm,  front  shoulder  to  hand ;  hand
and  arm  lose  sensation;  convulsive  pains  in  muscles  of
thigh ;  pains  in  knee.

From  1.  to  r.:  seems  to  see  a  bright  flame  terminating  in
a  point.
*^  Sensations. As  of  a  stab  in  1.  eye;  as  of  a  far-ofl"  land-slide
sounding  in  ears;  as  of  incipient  cold;  as  of  teeth  being


161  CINCHONA  BOLIVIANA.

on  edge;  as  if  tip  of  tongue  was  burnt;  as  of  violent
bites  on  tongue;  as  of  a  dagger  buried  in  r.  lung;  as  if
there  was  one  great  sore  in  chest;  as  if  legs  were  blown
on  by  a  wintry  wind.

Pain :  in  roots  of  hair  on  crown  of  head ;  in  throat ;  in  ton-
sils; in  hepatic  region;  in  both  hypochondria,  and
under  short  ribs;  in  splenic  region;  in  1.  kidney;  in  r.
lung,  with  cough;  in  chest;  in  1.  buttock;  in  r.  arm  on
moving  it;  in  joints  of  both  hands;  in  1.  knee;  in  corns.

Unbearable  pain  in  r.  lung,  extending  to  region  of  liver.

Burning:  in  eyes;  in  throat;  constriction  in  throat.

Excoriated  feeling:  of  gums  on  1.  side;  in  anus;  on  inner
and  lower  part  of  prepuce.

Biting:  in  anus,  as  from  worms.

Pricking:  in  pubis,  as  from  pins;  in  urethra  up  to  sphinc-
ter; in  hands;  in  legs.

Convulsive  pains:  in  muscles  of  1.  thigh.

Soreness:  of  teeth  on  chewing.

Dull  pains:  alternate  from  arm  to  arm.

Dull  cramp:  in  thoracic  cavity.

Sudden  cramp :  in  anterior  lower  part  of  neck.

Cramp-like  pain:  in  inner  angle  of  r.  eye;  in  i  ower  part
of  abdomen,  r.  side.

Cramp:  in  sphincter;  about  thumb-nail;  in  r.  big  toe  at
night.

Rheumatic  pains:  in  1.  shoulder;  in  1.  arm  from  shoulder
to  hand;  in  both  arms;  from  1.  wrist  to  elbow;  in  r.  foot.

Pulsations :  in  1.  side  of  head ;  over  r.  eye ;  in  1.  side  of  face,
extending  to  ear;  in  decayed  teeth  on  1.  side;  sudden
and  violent  in  joint  of  r.  big  toe.

Tight  feeling :  in  throat.

Heavy  pressure:  in  bladder.
•  Pressure:  on  lids.

Heaviness :  of  head.

Weight:  in  stomach.

Uneasiness :  in  whole  body.

Crawling :  in  urethra  up  to  sphincter.

Unpleasant  sensation  in  stomach  on  lying  down.

Itching:  in  1.  eye;  of  eruption  on  lower  lip.

Heat:  in  skin;  in  region  of  stomach;  in  abdomen;  as  from
a  poultice ;  of  body  at  night.

Coldness:  after  eating;  of  hands;  of  feet;  ic}^  coldness  of
legs.

Dryness:  of  nostrils.

Hands  sticky.
*^  Touch. Touch:  unbearable;  pain  in  r.  lung,  extending  lo
region  of  liver,  sensitive  to.

Rubbing:  wants  to  rub  eyes.

VOL.  IV. — 11.


CINCHONA  OFFICINALIS.  162

CINCHONA  OFFICINALIS  (<'hma).

Peruvian  Bark.  Rubiacese.

Unknown  previous  to  middle  of  seventeenth  century.  Named  from  Countess
El-Cinchon,  wife  of  the  vice  king  of  Peru.  It  was  distributed  by  the  Jesuits
among  the  poor  as  a  febrifuge.  Grows  on  eastern  range  of  Andes,  and  is  being
naturalized  in  India,

It  was  first  proved  by  Hahnemann  in  1790.

The  yellow  bark  was  mainly  used  in  the  provings.  Those  chiefly  used  in
pharmacy  are:  1.  Cinchona  Calisaya,  also  called  Cinchona  Eegia  or  Cinchona
Flava,  Koyal  or  genuine*  yellow  bark.  2.  Cinchona  de  Huanuco,  grey  or  silver
Cinchona ;  and,  3.  Cinchona  Rubra,  or  Ked  Cinchona.

Hahnemann  mentions  that  in  1790,  when  proving  Cortex  China,  the  first  idea
of  the  homoeopathic  law  of  cure  dawned  upon  his  mind.

For  provings,  see  Allen's  Encyclopedia,  v.  3.

CiiiNiCAL  AuTHOBiTiES. — Coma,  D.  Wilson,  Organon,  v.  2,  p.  340  ;  Neuralgic
headache,  Hirschel,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf.,  v.  5,  p.  82 ;  Hemicrania,  C.  Hartlaub,  Eiick.
Kl.  Erf.,  V.  1,  p.  171 ;  Biirkner,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf.,  v.  5,  p.  82 ;  Rheumatic  ophthalmia
(two  cases),  Arnold,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf.,  v.  5,  p.  129;  Bamberg,  A.  H.  Z.,  v.  37,
p.  357  ;  Scrofulous  ophthalmia,  Caspari,  Allen  and  Norton;  B.  J.  H.,  v.  6,  p.  343;
Amblyopia,  Caspari,  Allen  and  Norton,  Ophth.  Therap.,  p.  45;  N.  A.  J.  H.,  v.  24,
p.  345 ;  Amaurosis  from  sexual  excesses  and  alcoholism,  Caspari,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf.,  v.  1,
p.  337;  Amaurosis  with  spinal  irritatiov,  Stens,  A.  H.  Z.,  v.  79,  p.  132;  Oonorrhoeal
iritis,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf.,  v.  1,  p.  314 ;  Intermittent  ciliary  neuralgia,  Eaue,  Allen  and
Norton,  Ophthal.  Therap.,  p.  45 ;  St.  Martin,  Allen  and  Norton,  Opthal.  Therap.,
p.  45;  Supraorbital  neuralgia  (two  cases),  Escallier,  N.  A.  J.  H.,  v.  13,  p.  385;  Epis-
taxis,  Erg.,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf,  v.  1,  p.  410;  J.  A.  Terry,  N.  A.  J.  H.,  v.  25,  p.  317  ;
Faceache,  K.  Eochlitz,  B.  J.  H.,  v.  30,  p.  698  ;  Prosopalgia,  L.  Schron,  Eiick.  Kl.
Erf.,  V.  5,  p.  183;  after  massive  doses  of  Quinine  in  cholera,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf.,  v.  1,
p.  422;  Tempero-facial  neuralgia,  Escallier,  N.  A.  J.  H.,  v.  13,  p.  386;  Erysipelas
of  face  and  scalp  (two  cases),  Allg.  Horn.  Ztg.,  1882,  p.  166;  Toothache,  Boenning-
hausen,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf.,  v.  1,  p.  460  ;  Neuralgia  of  inferior  dental  nerve.  Buck,  Trans.
Hom.  Med.  Soc,  Penna.,  1882,  p.  159;  Hasmatemesis  (two  cases),  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf.,
V.  5,  p,  263;  Obstructions  in  gall  bladder,  D.  Thayer,  Eaue's  Path.,  p.  615;  Biliary
calculi,  S.  J.  Bumstead,  U.  S.  M.  and  S.  J.,  1869,  p.  Ill ;  Gall  stones,  Smith,  Or-
ganon, V.  3,  p.  366 ;  Biliary  colic,  D.  Thayer,  N.  E.  M.  G.,  v.  9,  p.  453 ;  Ascites,
Hirsch,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf.,  v.  4,  p.  341  ;  Painless  diarrhcea  with  prostration,  Wood,
Euck.  Kl.  Erf.,  v.  5,  p.  410;  A.  Capen,  Mass.  Trans.,  v.  4,  p.  376;  Stapf,  Eiick.
Kl.  Erf.,  V.  1,  p.  888 ;  Diarrhoea,  Wood,  Hom.  Times,  1854;  J.  C.  Morgan,  A.  J.
H.  M.  M.,  V.  4,  p.  122 ;  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf,  v.  1,  p.  830 ;  Chronic  diarrhcea,  F.  L.  Gage,
Am.  Horn.,  v.  1,  p.  232 ;  Dysentery  in  marshy  districts,  A.  E.  Small,  U.  S.  M.  and
S.  J.,  V.  7,  p.  426 ;  Cholera  infantum,  0.  P.  Baer,  Med.  Inv.,  v.  9,  p.  374 ;  Morbid
appetite  and  sexual  desire,  Bethmann,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf.,  v.  2,  p.  57 ;  Bloody  leucor-
rhoea,  D.  Hunt,  N.  E.  M.  G.,  v.  6,  p.  12 ;  Menorrhagia,  A.  C.  Cowperthwaite,  A.  J.
H.  M.  M.,  V.  8,  p.  11;  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf.,  v.  2,  p.  305;  Miscarriage,  T.  F.  Smith,


163  CINCHONA  OFFICINALIS.

Trans.  N.  Y.  Soc,  1873,  v.  4,  p.  360 ;  Asthma  after  frequent  venesection,  Hartund,
Eiick.  Kl.  Erf.,  v.  3,  p.  187;  Asthmatic  cough,  L.  Whiting,  N.  E.  M.  G.,  1872,  p.  24;
Phthisical  symptoms,  with  pain  in  chei-t  and  affected  spleen,  Stens,  B.  J.  H.,  v.  34,  p.
725;  Htzmoptysis,  Heichelheim,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf.,  v.  3,  p.  215;  Hemorrhage  from  lunrjn,
Vanderveer,  H.  M.,  v.  10,  p.  419;  Pneumonia,  Hartman,  Arnold  and  Argenti,  Riick.
Kl.  Erf.,  V.  3,  p.  295;  PI  euro-pneumonia  after  parturition,  Kafka,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf.,
V.  5,  p.  818  ;  Fever  and  congestive  headache,  W.  H.  Burt,  U.  S.  M.  and  S.  J.,  1871 ;  In-
termittent fever,  C.  Pearson,  U.  S.  M.  and  S.  J.,  v.  1,  p.  207  ;  Sarcliet.  U.  S.  M.  and  vS.
J.,  V.  7,  p.  365;  Schab,  Homoeop.  Clinique;  J.  C.  Robert,  A.  J.  H.  M.  M.,  v.  2,  p.  218 ;
Skinner,  Med.  Inv.,  v.  8,  p.  301 ;  Griesselich,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf.,  v.  1,  p.  20 ;  Riick.  Kl.
Erf,  V.  4  (27  cases) ;  O.  J.  Lyons,  Med.  Adv.,  v.  4,  p.  236  ;  Typhoidfever  (two  cases),
Riickert,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf,  v.  4,  p.  729  (one  case) ;  Riick.  Kl.  Erf.,  v.  5,  p.  890;  Night
sweat  in  diphtheritic  laryngitis,  Van  Peine,  Raue's  R.,  1875,  p.  98  ;  Great  debility  with
dropsy,  A.  C.  Pope,  B.  J.  H.,  v.  12,  p.  486 ;  Acute  dropsy  following  parturition,  J.  C
Robert,  Organon,  v.  3,  p.  37 ;  Rheumatism  (two  cases),  Kopp,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf.,  v
p.  508 ;  Frank,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf.,  v.  3,  p.  509 ;  Profuse  suppuration  in  hip  disease
Raiie,  A.  J.  H.  M.  M.,  v.  2,  p.  171;  After  operation  for  strangulated  hernia,  M
McFarland,  Raue's  Rec,  1870,  p.  338 ;  Jaundice  (two  cases),  Riick.  Kl.  Erf.,  v.  5,
p.  339;  After  abuse  of  Mercury,  Exostosis  tibice,Fr.  Hartman,  Raue's  Rec,  1875,  p
204 ;  Chronic  arsenical  poisoning,  W.  C.  Doane,  Trans.  Horn.  Med.  Soc,  Penna.,  1871
p.  132 ;  Quinine  poisoning,  W.  M.  Williamson,  Trans.  Hom,  Med.  Soc,  Penna.
1872,  p.  151.

^  Mind. I  Quite  unconscious  to  pinching;  loudly  calling  into
ears  arouses  some  momentary  consciousness;  answers  to
questions  unintelligible. ^Coma.
1 1  Chooses  wrong  expressions,  or  misplaces  them.
llDelirium  after  depletion;  on  closing  eyes,  sees  persons.

■  Head  very  much  confused  in  morning,  as  after  intoxica-

tion, with  dryness  of  mouth.

I  He  makes  many  plans  and  reflects  upon  their  execution.

I I  Full  of  projects  and  ideas,  especially  in  evening  and  at
night.

■  Excessive  vividness  of  mind  and  fancy,  wdth  headache.
Slow  train  of  ideas,  as  though  there  was  a  difficulty  in

thinking.
Mind  constantly  changing  from  one  thing  to  another.
I  Fixed  idea  that  he  is  unhappy,  persecuted  by  enemies.
iShe  thinks  she  is  very  unfortunate  and  constantly  har-

rassed  by  enemies. 6'Pregnancy.
I  Disposition  to  be  alone.

I  An  excessively  anxious  solicitude  about  trifles.
■Maniacal  condition,  says  and does  foolish  things  and

runs  about. ^Intermittent.

■  During a  cheerful  mood,  sudden  transient screaming

and  tossing  about  bed,  without  any  apparent  cause.

■  ■Compelled  to  jump  out  of  bed;  wants  to  destroy  him-

self, but  lacks  courage.

■  ■  Dislike  to  all  mental  or  physical  exertion.


CINCHONA  OFFICINALIS.  164

I  Disinclination  to  think;  alternating  condition  of  cheer-

fulness and  gloominess.

I I  Indifference,  apathy,  taciturnity.

I  Indifference  to  his  pains,  great  lassitude  and  weakness.

^Typhoid.
iWhat  usually  appears  to  him  bright  and  joyous  seems

now  unattractive,  unworthy  and  shallow.
Fitful  mood ;  cheerfulness  alternating  with  sadness.

I I  Low-spirited,  gloomy,  has  no  desire  to  live.

■  Excessive  nervousness  with  lowness  of  sjDirits  and  intol-

erance of  noise.
Hypochondriacal  mood  and  inability  to  work,  especially
after  a  meal.

I  In  morning  on  waking,  anxious  thoughts  and  ideas.

I I  Inconsolable  anxiety,  even  to  suicide.

1 1  Dread  of  dogs  and  other  animals  at  night.

nil  humor;  cheerful  persons  become  cross  and  irritable.

Bill  humor  increased  by  petting  and  caressing.

1 1  Inclined  to  reproach  and  vex  others.

I  Stubborn,  disobedient,  longing  for  dainties;  face  pale,  or
at  times  red;  restless  all  night;  children.

I  Dreadful  feeling  of  excitement.

I  General  excitation  during  attacks,  followed  by  depression.
^Ciliary  neuralgia.

•  Nervous  irritation,  wdth  slowness  of  ideas.

I  Intolerance  of  sensual  impressions.

i  Worse  after  exerting  the  mind.
'  Sensorium. Great  sensation  of  emptiness  in  head  in  morn-
ing, as  after  drunkenness,  with  dry  mouth.

I  Vertigo:  after  loss  of  animal  fluids;  anaemia;  head  feels

weak,  can  hardly  hold  it  erect;  with  the  chill;  on  rais-
ing head;  with  nervous  erethism,  excitable,  hysterical;
■  with  fainting;  on  rising  as  if  he  would  fall  backwards;
with  faintness;  she  staggered  and  could  not  walk
straight;  head  inclined  to  sink  backward;  <  on  motion
and  when  walking;  >  when  lying;  in  occiput  when
seated;  on  waking  at  night  he  does  not  dare  to  rise;
dizziness  and  heat  in  head,  <  when  lying.

■  Stupefaction  of  head,  with  pressure  in  forehead.
llDulness  of  head:  giddiness,  as  from  sitting  up  at  night,

sleeplessness;  as  from  coryza  or  intoxication  and  lan-
guor in  limbs  in  morning  on  awaking.

I I  Heaviness  of  head,  fainting,  loss  of  sight,  ringing  in
ears,  cold  surface;  after  hemorrhage.

Weight  on  head,  with  tendency  to  fall  backwards,  while

seated.

^  Inner  Head. Rush  of  blood  to  head,  wdth  heat  and  fulness.

Fuhiess  in  head,  sensation  as  if  brain  were  rolled  around,

with  great  excitement,  nervous  susceptibility  increased.


165  CINCHONA  OFFICINALIS.

Sensation  as  if  brain  were  balancing  to  and  fro,  and  were
striking  against  the  sknll,  occasioning  great  pain.

1 1  Headache,  so  sensitive  that  it  seems  as  though  tlie  skull
would  burst;  brain  beats  in  waves  against  skulL

■  Congestion  to  head,  pain  in  temples,  noise  and  tingling

in  ears,  frequently  deafness  and  confused  vision,  heat
,and  redness  of  face  and  head,  while  rest  of  body  is  cold
and  chilly.

■  Severe  headache,  flushed  face,  full,  throbbing  pulse,  re-

sembling one  whose  brain  is  congested. ^Intermittent.

■  ■Sensation  as  if  head  would  burst,  with  sleeplessness;  <"

from  motion  or  any  jar;  >  in  room  and  when  opening-
eyes.

■  ■Intense  throbbing  headache;  carotids  throb;  after  loss

of  blood.
Painful  pressure  towards  forehead,  as  if  something  would

fall  out ;  <  by  firm  pressure  of  hand.
Pressive  frontal  headache;  on  leaning  back  pain <  in

temples  and  again  in  forehead  when  sitting.

■  Pain  in  head  as  if  brain  were  pressed  into  a  ball,  with

excessive  vividness  of  mind.

■  Headache,  as  if  brain  were  pressed  together  from  both

sides  and  out  at  forehead,  very  much  <  by  walking  in
open  air.
Sensation  of  constriction  as  if  bound  with  a  cord,  espe-
cially on  r.  side  of  forehead  and  occiput;  <  by  walking,
when  there  are  violent  throbbings  and  head  feels  as  if
it  would  burst.

■  Headache  like  a  heaviness  and  heat  in  it;  <  on  turning

eyes,  together  with  jerking  pain  in  temples.

■  Jerking  headache  in  temple,  iextending  to  upper  jaw.
Constant,  dull,  cutting  pain  from  temples  to  orbits  and

occiput;  <  by  stooping  and  motion.

■  ■Stitches  in  head,  with  pulsation  in  temples,  which  can

be  felt  by  finger;  >  by  hard  pressure,  but  <  by  move-
ment of  head.

■  ■  Stitches  from  temple  to  temple.

■  Headache, first like a cramp  in  vertex, followed  by

bruised  sensation  in  side  of  head;  <  by  slightest  motion.
Tractive  headache,  from  occiput  to  forehead,  as  if  latter
were compressed,  which terminates in throbbing at
temples ;  >  after  walking,  and  <  on  sitting  still.

■  I  Headache  from  occiput  over  whole  head  from  morning

until  afternoon;  <  lying,  must  stand  or  walk;  drives
to  madness.

■  ■Headache  in  occiput  after  sexual  excesses  or  onanism.
Severe pressure  in occiput as  if  cerebellum  would be

forced  out.


CINCHONA  OFFICINALIS.  166

■  Soreness  of  brain  as  if  bruised,  particularly  when  walk-

ing in  wind  or  making  any  mental  effort.
1 1  Whole  head  feels  bruised; <  from  exerting  mind,
i  I  Brain  feels  bruised;  <  on  moving,  even  opening  his

eyes ;  scalp  sensitive ;  <  at  night.

■  Violent  jerking-tearing  in  several  places  in  head;  <  on

motion  and  when  walking;  relieved  when  lying.
Violent  tearing,  darting  pains  in  various  parts  of  head;

<  by  walking;  >  when  sitting  still;  weight  and  dart-
ing pains  in  forehead,  especially  on  moving  eyes;  dart-
ing j)ain  in  parietals,  which  descend  along  neck ;  darting
pains  disappear  by  evening.

■  Throbbing,  hammering,  tearing,  pressing  headache,  ex-

tending to  neck  and  teeth ;  <  at  night,  with  great  rest-
I  lessness  and  sleeplessness ;  nodes  on  head  as  large  as  a

filbert;  profuse  sweat  without  relief;  scalp  painful  to
touch.

■  Periodical  cephalalgia  of  1.  side,  occurring  each  morning;

attacks  commence  at  1  o'clock  in  morning,  lasting  until
10,  12  and  sometimes  1  o'clock  p.m.;  pain  confined  to  1.
side  of  head  and  is  of  a  boring  and  pulsating  character.

■  Hemicrania,  1.  side,  affecting  eye  and  neck.

■  Headache  on  alternate  mornings,  1.  side  into  1.  cervical

region. ^Asthmatic  cough.

■  Neuralgic  headache,  first  on  1.,  subsequently  on  r.  side,

beginning  in  teeth  and  jaw,  extending  to  ear,  temples
and  vertex ;  <  from  a  current  of  air,  or  taking  anything
cold  or  hot  into  the  mouth;  >  by  external  warmth;

<  at  night,  during  and  after  lactation.

■  Headache,  changing  from  side  to  side.
Headache,  with  yawning  and  great  weakness.

■  ■Tearing,  drawing,  oppressive  pains,  as  from  a  load  on

head.
Jerking-tearing  in  head,  or  tearing  with  pressure.

■  Pressive  headache  in  that  side  which  is  leant  upon.
Tractive  pains  in  various  parts  of  head ;  <  by  motion.
Lancinating  pains  in  various  parts,  especially  in  frontal

region.

■  ■Headache  irhproved  by  moving  head  up  and  down.

■  ■Headache: < from  draught  of  air;  in  the  open  air;

from  the  sun ;  slightest  touch ;  >  from  hard  pressure.

■  Headache  from  suppressed  coryza; <  in  open  air,  or

from  exerting  mind.

■  Headache,  particularly  at  night,  with  sleeplessness.
Inflammation  of  the  brain  and  hydrocephaloid.

*  Outer  Head. ■  ■  Burning  in  forehead,  with  hot  sweat  on  it.
Distended  veins  on  temples  and  forehead.

■  Pain  externally  on  occiput;  >  from  drinking  coffee.


167  CINCHONA  OFFICINALIS.

I  Contractive  pain  of  scalp,  as  if  scalp  were  clutched  and

drawn  together  to  one  point  of  a  circle.

I I  Scalp  feels  as  if  hair  was  grasped  roughly.

1 1  Scalp  sensitive  to  touch,  roots  of  hair  hurt  when  hair  is
moved;  <  when  walking  in  open  air  and  from  a  draft
of  air;  >  by  a  strong  external  pressure  and  scratching
head.

1 1  Profuse  sweat  on  head,  especially  when  walking  in  open
air.
^  Sight  and  Eyes. ■  Illusion  in  morning  of  bright  gold  chain
dangling  before  eyes  whether  eyes  are  open  or  closed,
with  headache. 6* Asthmatic  cough.

I  I  Flame  of  candle  seems  to  be  of  a  dazzling  sulphur  color,

after  a  few  minutes  all  surrounding  objects  appear  en-
veloped in  dazzling  rosy  light.

I I  Sensitiveness  of  eyes  to  bright  sunlight.

■  Letters  pale,  surrounded  by  white  borders. ^Amblyopia.

I  iScintillations,  or  black  motes  before  eyes.

I I  Dimness  and  weakness  of  sight;  she  can  only  distin-
guish the  outlines  of  distant  objects.

■  Shortsightedness  after  typhus,  with  diarrhoea.

■  Amblyopia,  consequent  upon  venereal  excesses  and  in-

toxication; only  large  objects  could  be  distinguished  at
six  paces ;  letters  run  together  and  look  like  black  spots
on  a  white  ground ;  pupils  dilated  and  sluggish ;  fundus
of  eye  hazy;  cornea  dim;  vision  >  in  morning;  with
loss  of  strength,  trembling  of  limbs,  weak  digestion  and
uneasy  sleep;  in  drunkards;  after  masturbation;  after
loss  of  fluids,  tendency  of  blood  to  head.

■Amaurosis,  first  r.  then  1.  eye,  with  spinal  irritation.

I  I  Sudden  blindness  with  violent  pain  in  occiput,  extend-
ing into  eyes.

■  ■Nocturnal  blindness,  hemeralopia.

Dimness  of  cornea,  as  if  eyes  were  filled  with  smoke.

■  Ulcers  in  course  of  pannus,  with  much  pain  in  morning.

■  Ulceration  of  cornea,  particularly  if  iris  becomes  involved,

dependent  upon  malarious  causes  or  antemia.

■  Iritis  from  loss  of  blood,  after  confinement.

■  Iritis  from  inoculation  with  gonorrhoeal  virus,  intense

photophobia,  with  pain  in  forehead.

■  ■Dilated,  not  very  sensitive  pupils. /? Amblyopia.

■  ■Yellow  color  of  eyes. ^Fever  and  ague.

■  Focal  distance  of  eyes  unequal. /^Muscular  asthenopia.
■Motion  of  eyes  painful  and  difficult,  with  sensation  of

mechanical  hindrance. ^Ophthalmia.
Distortion  of  eyeballs,  one  eye  being  open  and  the  other
half  closed.

■  I  Pressure  in  eyes,  as  from  drowsiness.


CINCHONA  OFFICINALIS.  168

Pressive  pain  in  outer  canthus;  tearing  in  1.  outer  canthus.

■  Excessive  pain  as  if  a  knife  were  thrust  between  orbit

and  ball  and  moved  about  in  orbital  cavity  as  if  to
scoop  out  eye,  from  8  a.m.  to  2  or  3  p.m.  ^Ciliary  neu-
ralgia.

■  Every  other  day  between  8  and  9  a.m.  an  attack  of  violent

pain  in  eye  which  becomes  inflamed ;  at  noon  all  symp-
toms disappeared. ^Ophthalmia  rheumatica.

1 1  Smarting,  first  in  one,  then  in  other  eye,  with  lachry-
mation.

I  I  Pressive  smarting  pain  in  eyes  as  from  salt ;  she  must
constantly  rub  them.

I  1  Eyes  red,  with  pressive  burning  pains  in  them,  much

heat.

I I  Pressure,  as  from  sand  in  eyes ;  photophobia ;  eyes  hot,
red,  or  dim,  as  if  filled  with  smoke.

I  I  Dry  feeling  betwixt  lids  and  balls,  rubbing  pain  on
moving  the  lids,  without  perceptible  alteration  in  eye.

Formicating  pains  in  eyes  and  on  inner  surface  of  lids,
with  lachrymation.

■  Inflammation  and  itching of  the  eyes  and  eyelids  in

persons  debilitated  by  loss  of  animal  fluids.
Crawling  inside  of  lids ;  <  in  evening,  with  running  tears.
Uncontrollable  twitching  of  r.  upper  eyelid.
I  I  Involuntary  closing  of  eyelids  from  mere  weakness.
■Vision  better  in  morning. ^Amblyopia.
Inflammation;  <  at  night;  also  in  scrofulous  individuals.

■  ■Worse  from  light;  >  in  dark.

■  Ciliary  neuralgia  dependent  upon  iritis,  following  ma-

larial disease.

■  Pressing  pain  in  one  spot  at  inner  and  upper  border  of

orbit,  extending  to  nose  and  sometimes  into  lid,  closing
it,  and  of  an  intermittent  type,  coming  on  every  evening
about  11  o'clock.  ^Scrofulous  ophthalmia.
■Supraorbital  neuralgia  of  r.  side,  with  morning  perio-
dicity; the  pains  are  lancinating  and  tearing,  the  parts
intolerant  to  pressure,  with  redness  of  eyes  and  lachry-
mation.

■  Intermittent  ciliary  neuralgia  with  painful  pressure  and

drawing  in  forehead  and  temples  every  day  at  10  a.m.;
<  from  touch  or  motion.
"  Hearing  and  Ears. ■Intolerance  of  noise.

■  ■  Ringing  in  ears,  with  headache  in  temples ;  debility.

■  Ticking  sound  in  ear,  as  from  a  distant  watch.

■  Something  seems  to  be  constantly  before  the  ear.

■  ■Hardness  of  hearing;  humming  or  roaring  in  ears.

■  ■Tearing  pains  in  ears,  <  from  the  least  touch,  ears  red.

■  ■Stitches  in  ears.


169  CINCHONA  OFFICINALIS.

I  External  ear  hurts  when  lying  on  it  and  is  hot.
iHemorrhage  from  ear,  offensive,  bloody,  purulent  dis-
charges.

■  Hemorrhage  from  ears  after  prolonged  suj^puration.
^  Smell  and  Nose, b  i Smell  too  acute.

llDr}^  coryza,  toothache,  lachrymation,  much  sneezing.

■  Suppressed  coryza,  headache  from  it.

I I  Nosebleed:  anaemia;  ringing  in  ears ;  face  pale;  fainting;
with  tendency  of  blood  to  head ;  after  blowing  it,  espe-
cially morning,  on  arising.

1 1  Frequent  bleeding  from  nose;  hemorrhage  from  nose
and  mouth.

■  Tearing  in  dorsum  of  nose.

■  Pressive  pain  in  root  of  nose,  which  extended  to  side.

■  ■Redness  and  heat  of  nose.

■  ■  Cold  sweat  around  nose  and  mouth.

^  Upper  Face. ■Hippocratic  countenance,  with  listlessness
and  apathy.

■  Face  and  eyes  sunken  and  jaundiced. ^Biliary  colic.

■  Face  quite  yellow. ^Fever  and  ague.

■  ■Face: red,  during  fever; hollow,  pale,  or  livid,  with

atrophy;  pale,  blue  around  eyes;  yellow;  earthy;  grey,
yellow,  or  black ;  hippocratic.

■  ■Face  hot,  when  entering  room  from  open  air.

Cheeks  are  red,  feel  hot  to  the  patient  although  they  are
not  warm,  while  other  parts  are  chilly  and  cold.

■  Bloated,  red  face;  face  intensely  flushed. ^Coma.
Frequent  change  of  color  in  face.

■  Neuralgia:  periodical  attacks ;  pains  excessive,  skin  sen-

sitive to  least  touch;  part  feels  weak;  face  alternately
red  and  pale;  pains  from  1.  to  r.;  mostly  in  infraorbital
and  maxillary  branches.
Prosopalgia  <  by  touch  or  movement.

■  Supraorbital  periodical  neuralgia;  lancinating  and  tear-

ing pains,  with  swelling  and  persj)iration  of  face;  she
cannot  work,  speak  or  swallow.

■  Facial  neuralgia  of  1.  side,  with  morning  periodicity;

darting,  constrictive  pressure  which  extends  from  temple
and  eyes  to  whole  side  of  face ;  lachrymation ;  pains  <
by  noise,  movement  and  touch.

■  Violent,  tearing,  laming,  burning  pain  in  r.  side  of  face,

extending  up  to  parietal  bone  and  down  to  clavicle;  <
at  night;  >  from  eating,  but  <  from  touch  and  lying
down;  r.  arm  numb;  great  weakness  and  prostration.

■  Needle-like  pains  in  1.  face,  1.  chest  and  1.  hand..

■  Right-sided  faceache.

■  Faceache;  nervous  or  rheumatic.  ,


CINCHONA  OFFICINALIS.  170

I  Erysipelas  of  face  and  hairy  portion  of  scalp,  with  much

fever  and  dyspnoea;  somnolence  alternating  with  de-
lirium, constantly  present;  excessive  weakness.

■  Enormous  swelling  of  face,  particularly  of  eyelids ;  several

large  vesicles  filled  with  fluid  upon  the  cheeks ;  pulse
120;  temperature  39°;  constant  but  quiet  delirium.
^Erysipelas  of  face  and  scaljD.

I I  Veins  of  face  distended.

^  Lower  Face. Lips:  burning;  swollen;  dry,  hard,  cracked,
blackish ;  shrivelled.

I  Lips  deep  blue. ^Coma.

I  iSubmaxillary  glands  swollen,  painful  during  swallowing.

^°  Teeth  and Gums. H  Toothache,  veins  in  forehead  and

hands  distended;  throbbing  pain.

Tearing,  drawing,  jerking,  boring  in  teeth ;  from  every  cold.

Twitching,  tearing  in  upper  molar  teeth,  from  taking  cold

in  a  draft  of  air.

■  Throbbing  toothache  >  by  external  warmth.

I I  Toothache  <  from  least  contact,  moving  body,  tea,  open
air,  or  current  of  air ;  >  from  pressing  teeth  together.

1 1  Toothache  while  nursing  infant  at  the  breast.

1 1  Toothache  during  sweat.

I  Pressure  in  teeth  as  if  blood  were  forced  into  teeth.

Distressing,  dull  pain  in  hollow  teeth.

Painful  numbness  in  decayed  teeth.

■  Teeth  are  loose  and  painful  only  when  chewing.

■  Black  coating  of  teeth ;  covered  with  dark  sordes.

■  ■Swelling  of  gums;  mouth  dry.

^^  Taste  and  Tongue. ■  Taste : too  acute ;  putrid,  morning ;
bitter  in  back  part  of  throat;  flat,  watery.

■  ■Bitter  taste  in  mouth,  even  tobacco  tastes  bitter  while

smoking.

■  Shmy  taste  in  mouth,  which  disgusts  him  with  butter.

■  Taste  at  first  sweetish,  then  sour;  profuse  saliva.

■  ■Food  tastes  bitter  or  too  salt.

■  Although  he  had  no  bitter  taste  in  his  mouth  by  itself,

yet  everything  tasted  bitter;  after  swallowing  food  there
was  no  bitter  taste.

■  Burning  stitches  on  tongue.

■  ■Burning  as  from  pepper  on  tip  of  tongue,  followed  by

ptyalism.

■  Cracked,  black,  or  yellow  coated  tongue.

■  ■Tongue  black,  parched;  or  raw  as  if  burned.

■  ■Tongue  white,  mornings; child  restless  all  night;  no

appetite  for  breakfast.

■  ■Tongue  coated  white,  or  yellow;  thick,  dirty  coating.

■  Mouth  very  moist  from  an  unusual  flow  of  saliva;  tongue

dotted  here  and  there  with  yellowish  vesicles,  some  of


171  CINCHONA  OFFICINALIS.

them  broken  and  looking  sore;  fauces  very  red;  child
in  bad  humor,  hungry  but  could  not  take  the  breast.
^Nursing  sore  mouth.
^^  Inner  Mouth. ■  Dryness  of  mouth,  with  thirst.

Painful,  sensitive  swelling  of  uvula.
'  I  Much  saliva  in  mouth,  with  nausea.

1 1  Salivation day  and  night,  years  after  mercury, great
weakness,  especially  of  stomach.
^^  Throat. Ifl  Throat  feels  rough,  scraped,  producing  a  sore
sensation  on  swallowing.
1 1  Difficult  deglutition  as  from  contraction  of  oesophagus.
Enlargement  of  tonsils.

I  Gangrene  of  throat.

^*  Appetite,  Thirst. Desires,  Aversions, ii  Voracious  ap-
petite; atrophy.

I I  Canine  hunger ;  worse  at  night.

Longs: for  spirits;  sweets;  sour,  cooling  things; roasted

coffee.
llChilden  dainty,  desire  various  things  without  knowing

what.

I  Morbid  craving  for  dainties,  accompanied  by  sexual  de-

sire and  lascivious  fancies.

I I  Wants  highly  seasoned  food.

lITungerand  yet  want  of  appetite;  food  tastes  natural,  yet

seems  disagreeable  in  mouth.
1 1  Indifference  to  eating  and  drinking;  only  while  eating'

some  appetite  and  natural  taste  of  food  return.
1 1  Loss  of  appetite,  nausea,  desire  to  vomit.
1 1  Loss  of  appetite  in  foggy  weather.
1 1  Loathing of  food  as  if  he  had  overeaten; continual

sense  of  satiety.
1 1  Aversion  to  all  food,  even  when  thinking  of  it;  dread

of  labor;  drowsy  by  day;  yellow  eyes.
1 1  Averse  to  bread; to  beer; to  butter;  to  meat;  to  fat

things ;  to  warm  food ;  to  coffee,  although  food  has  a

natural  taste.

I  Thirst  and  hunger,  in  evening,  an  hour  after  fever,  then,

after  he  had  eaten,  coldness  and  rumbling  in  bowels.

I I  Violent  thirst  for  cold  water;  drinks  little  and  often.
I  Thirst  after  chill,  without  subsequent  heat.

I  Thirst  after  fever,  during  sweat  on  back  and  forehead.
liThirst  only  between  the  cold  and  hot  stages,  or  during
the  sweat. ^Intermittent.
^^  Eating  and  Drinking. 1 1  Feels  satiated  all  the  time ;  loss
of  appetite.
I  Bread  tastes  good  while  chewing,  but  bitter  on  swallowing.
iThe  slightest  portion  of  food  causes  much  pain.  ^Debility.
After  eating: weariness,  desires  to  lie  down  and  sleep;


CINCHONA  OFFICINALIS.  172

drowsiness,  oppressive  fulness  of  stomacli  and  abdomen,

general  malaise  and  languor.
I  After  a  meal,  fulness  as  if  stomach  and  oesophagus  were

filled  up  to  throat.
Sleepy  after  eating,  during  hot  stage.
Worse  after  breakfast.

■  During  and  after  dinner,  the  pain  is  relieved. ^Proso-

palgia.

■  Gastric  sjanptoms  from :  eating  fish ;  excessive  use  of  tea ;

sour  wine;  new  beer;  impure  water;  fruit;  eating  bad
meat. or  fish.
Shuddering and  chilliness,  with gooseflesh  after every
swallow  he  takes.

■  Drinking  <  the  chill.

■  ■Worse  from  drinking  wine  and  other  liquors;  suitable

for  inveterate  drunkards.
■Sour  eructations  after  milk;  milk  disagrees.
Beer  intoxicates  easily.

■  Warm  drinks  impede  digestion.

■  Worse  from  smoking.

^^  Hiccough,  Belching,  Nausea  and  Vomiting. ■  Hiccough.
^Biliary  colic.
Nausea  felt  in  throat  pit  after  a  meal.

■  ■Belching,  sour  rising.

■  Child  belches  after  eating  and  does  not  care  to  nurse.

■  Empty  eructations  of  air  only.

■  Frequent  eructation,  which  affords  no  relief.
I  ■Eructations  taste  of  food;  or  are  bitter.

■  Sour  eructations,  >  a  while  after  swallowing  milk.
■Gagging.

■  ■Frequent  vomiting.

■  ■Vomiting  of  food,  in  debilitated  persons,  after  eating.
■Vomit:  sour;  mucus,  water,  food,  blood  and  bile;  black-
ish ;  bloody ;  <  at  night.

■  Vomiting  bile. ^Biliary  colic.

■  ■Spitting  or  vomiting  of  biood.

^^  Scrobiculum  and  Stomach. ■Heartburn:  after  milk  and
after  every  meal,  with  flatulency.

■  Pyrosis  and  heartburn;  most  in  the  afternoon.

■  ■  Pulsations  in  pit  of  stomach.

■  ■  Rumbling,  especially  in  epigastrium.

■  ■Cold  feeling  in  stomach;  constant  satiated  feeling,  yet

can  eat,  but  feels  <  afterwards.

■  Sensation  of  emptiness  and  qualmishness  in  stomach.

■  Sensation  of  fulness  in  stomach  takes  his  appetite  away.

■  ■Fulness  in  stomach  and  bowels; flatulence;  belching

does  not  relieve.

■  ■Heavy  pressure  in  stomach,  after  small  quantity  of  food.


173  CINCHONA  OFFICINALIS.

iSensation  as  if  food  pressed  upon  and  hurt  the  stomach.

■  Violent  oppression  in  pit  of  stomach; <  at  night  in  the

recumbent  position.
1 1  Stomach  feels  sore,  as  if  ulcerated,  cannot  bear  slight

touch.
Spasmodic  pains  in  stomach.
1 1  Fermentation  after  eating  fruit ;  acidity.
■Milk  easily  disorders  stomach.
1 1  Slow  digestion,  food  remains  long  in  stomach,  especially

if  eaten  too  late  in  day.
1 1  Dyspepsia from loss of animal fluids or noxious

miasmata.
llHsematemesis, great loss of  blood, weak, pale, cold

hands  and  feet;  stomach  very  sensitive  to  touch.
1 1  Gastralgia :  after  dej)letion ;  from  acidity ;  with  bloating

after  food  or  drink;  satiety;  relieved  by  motion.
^^  Hypochondria. iPain  in  hepatic  region,  as  from  subcuta-
neous ulceration;  <  from  touch.
I  Shooting  in  region  of  liver; also  tenderness  and  pain

when  touching  the  part.

I  Sensitiveness  in  region  of  liver  to  least  pressure.

I I  Swollen,  hard  liver.

■  Obstruction  in gall  bladder  with  colic,  periodic  recur-

rence, yellow  skin  and  conjunctiva,  constipation,  with

dark  greenish  scybala.
1 1  Biliary  calculi.
I  iGastro-duodenal  catarrh  after  loss  of  fluids  or  severe

illness.

I  i Aching,  stitching  pains  in  spleen  when  walking  slowly;

pains  extend  in  direction  of  long  axis  of  spleen.

I I  Swelling  and  hard  ness  of  spleen ;  region  of  spleen  painful
and  tender. ^Intermittent.

1 1  Enlarged  spleen.
^^  Abdomen. iSensation  of  internal  coldness  in  upper  abdo-
men after  every  swallow  of  drink,  and  renewed  at  every
inspiration.

1 1  Abdomen  distended,  wants  to  belch;  eructations  afl'ord
no  relief.

I  In  connection  with  the  tightness  about  the  abdomen,  she

often  feels  as  if  her  garters  were  too  tight  and  loosens
them ;  she  must  loosen  waistbands  also.

I I  Tympanitic  abdomen,  pressure  as  from  a  hard  body;  or
spasmodic,  constrictive  pains  from  incarcerated  flatu-
lence; <  at  night  or  after  depletion;  also  in  typhus;
<  mornings.

■  Great  rumbling  and  moving  of  much  flatus  in  abdomen,

with  a  pressive  sensation  in  evening  between  6  and  10,
followed  by  passage  of  much  off'ensive  flatus.


CINCHONA  OFFICINALIS.  174

1 1  Flatulence  from  excessive  tea  drinking.

1 1  Fermentation  in  abdomen  from  eating  fruit.

I  Heat  in  abdomen  as  of  hot  water  running  down.

I  Pinching  in  abdomen,  bending  double  aSbrds  relief.

I I  Cutting  pain  in  bowels.

I  Pressing-aching  below  navel.

I  Colic:  in  region  of  umbilicus,  with  shivering;  at  a  certain
hour  each  afternoon;  three  months  colic;  periodical
from  biliary  calculi,  or  other  causes;  from  weakness
and  loss  of  fluids;  from  flatulence;  before  passage  of
flatus;  before  stool;  followed  by  diarrhoea;  with  great
thirst;  with  hunger;  >  bending  double;  <  at  night
and  after  eating.

I  Griping,  with  violent  pains  in  abdomen  on  passing  flatus.

■  Doughy,  dropsical  swelling  of  abdomen.

■Swelling  of  abdomen,  legs  and  feet;  oppression  in  chest
as  if  from  a  lump ;  appetite  very  poor ;  on  lying  down,
feet  become  less  swelled  but  she  has  more  oppression  of
chest;  face  puffed;  albumen  in  urine.  ^Acute  dropsy
following  parturition.

I I  Worm  troubles,  <  at  night,  fulness  in  abdomen,  with
heartburn  and  water  brash.

■  Strangulated  hernia;  gut  black;  after  operation.

^°  Stool  and  Rectum. ■  Accumulation  of  much  flatus,  which
will  pass  neither  up  nor  down.

■  ■Emission  of  a  quantity  of  flatulence,  frequently  very

fetid,  without  relief.

■  Flatulent  discharges.

Stools:  profuse;  frec{uent;  putrid;  corrosive,  loose,  brown-
ish, j)ainless,  with  feeling  of  debility;  frothy,  painless
diarrhoeic,  with  fermentation  in  bowels ;  painless,  black ;
thin,  large,  with  passage  of  wind,  mornings;  off'ensive,
undigested,  or  white,  papescent,  at  night;  yellow,  watery,
involuntary;  cadaverous  smelling,  chocolate  colored,
<  at  night;  bilious;  greenish;  bloody;  yellow  mucous.

■Very  copious  stool;  <  every  other  da3^

■  Stool  loose  and  green  in  childen,  with  much  flatulence.

■  Dark,  greenish,  scybalous  stools. ^Biliary  colic.

■  In  swarthy  persons:  thin,  large  stools,  digested  or  not,

usually  with  passage  of  wind  and  sometimes  colic;  but
always  <  in  morning;  sleep  <  after  3  a.m.

■  Soft  stools,  with  biting,  burning  pain  in  anus  and  colic

before  and  after  every  stool.

■  ■Diarrhoea  comes  on  gradually,  stools  more  and  more

watery,  pale,  pinkish,  with  rapid  emaciation.

■  ■Diarrhoea:  particularly  after  meals,  at  night,  painless

early  in  morning;  in  hot  weather;  from  eating  fruit;
from  drinking  sour  beer;  after  measles;  during  small-


175  CINCHONA  OFFICINALIS.

pox;  after  severe  acute  disease;  after  loss  of  fluids;  on
alternate  days;  with  much  flatulence;  with  trembling
and  debility.

■  After  long  lasting  attack  of  cholera  infantum,  child  be-

comes  drowsy, pupils dilated, rapid and superficial
breathing, nose and tips  of  ears  cold. ^Impending
hydrocephaloid.
I  Dysentery  in  marshy  districts,  with  intermittent  symp-
toms.

■  Bowels  frequently  constipated. ^Dropsy  and  debility.
Difficult  passage  of  the  feces,  even  when  soft  or  papescent,

as  from  inactivity  of  the  bowels;  sluggish  peristalsis.
Accumulation  of  feces  in intestines,  with  dizziness  and

heat  in  head. "
Constipation:  large  accumulation;  stool  difficult,  even  if

soft ;  after  long  purging.
Hard,  intermitting  stool,  with  sensation  of  tightness  and

fulness  in  abdomen ;  also  with  burning  and  heat  in  head.
I  Involuntary  passing  of  feces  and  urine. ^Coma.
Mucous  discharge  from  the  rectum.
In  the  rectum,  stitches,  also  during  stool.
Tingling  in  the  anus,  and  discharge  of  pin  worms.
Bleeding  piles,  burning  and  itching;  debility.
^^  Urinary  Organs, i  Frequent  and  urgent  desire  to  urinate.

■  Burning  at  orifice  of  urethra,  especially  painful  from  rub-

bing of  clothes.

■  Urine:  turbid,  dark,  scanty;  white,  turbid,  with  white

sediment;  pale,  becoming  cloudy  or  depositing  a  dingy,
yellow,  loose  sediment;  dark  colored,  with  brick  red
sediment.

■  Scanty,  greenish -yellow,  brick-dust  or  pinkish  sediment.

■  Enuresis  of  weakly  children.
■ ■Albuminuria.

■  Diabetes.

^^  Male  Sexual  Organs. Sexual  desire  too  strong  or  too  con-
tinuous.

■  Morbid  sexual  desire;  lascivious  fancies.

■  Impotence,  with  lascivious  fancies.

■  ■Impotence  from  overindulgence.

■  ■  Nocturnal  emissions  too  frequent  and  debilitating ;  par-

ticularly after  onanism.

■  ■Consequences  of  excessive  or  long  continued  seminal

losses.
■Painful  swelling  of  spermatic  cord  and  testicle,  especially
the  epididymis;  tearing  in  1.  testicle  and  1.  side  of  pre-
puce ;  cramp-like,  contractive  pain  in  testicles,  evenings ;
after  gonorrhoea.


CINCHONA  OFFICINALIS.  176

■Stitches  or  contractive  pain  in  urethra.

■  Burning  at  orifice  of  urethra,  especially  painful  if  clothes

rub  against  the  parts.
^  Female  Sexual  Organs. ■Ovaritis  from  sexual  excess  or
hemorrhage,  parts  very  sensitive  to  slight  touch.

■  Dropsy:  of  ovaries;  of  uterus.

■  Congestion  to  uterus,  fulness,  pressing  and  heaviness,  <

when  walking.

■  Metritis  after  great  loss  of  blood,  or  excessive  coitus.

■  Prolapsus  and  attendant  symptoms  superinduced  by  loss

of  fluids,  particularly  blood.

■  Menses:  too  early,  profuse,  black  clots,  with  spasm  in

chest  and  abdomen ;  painful ;  profuse,  with  sensation  of
great  distension  of  abdomen.

■  Menstrual  colic.

■  During  menses:  spasms  in  chest  and  abdomen;  conges-

tion of  blood  to  head.

■  After  menses:  great  weakness,  trembling  debility,  with

singing  in  ears  and  fainting.

■  Suppression  of  menses  from  chagrin;  secretion  of  milk

in  breasts.

■  I  Metrorrhagia,  blood  dark;  fainting;  convulsions.

■  Discharge  of  bloody  serum,  alternating  with  pus.
Leucorrhoea:  acrid;  instead  of  menses,  with  itching;  with

spasmodic  uterine  contractions,  painful  bearing  down  to
vulva  and  anus;  menses  increased.

■  One  week  after  menses  bloody  leucorrhoea  with  clots;

lame,  sore  feeling  through  lower  bowels,  dull  headache,
weakness  and  dej)ression.

■  Painful  induration  in  vagina;  slightest  contact  causes

darting,  tearing  .pain,  or  tearing  with  pressure.

■  Suitable  to  women  after  climacteric  period.

^^  Pregnancy. Parturition. Lactation. iNyphomania  of
lying-in  women.

■  Threatening  miscarriage.

■  Abortion;  abdomen  distended,  belching  does  not  relieve;

much  loss  of  blood.
To  promote  the  expulsion  of  moles.
Uterine  spasms.

■  Labor  pains  cease  from  hemorrhage;  cannot  have  the

hands  touched.

■  Uterine  hemorrhages,  ringing  in  ears,  fainting,  imper-

ceptible pulse,  cold;  loss  of  sight;  discharge  of  dark
clots;  uterine  spasms;  twitches,  jerks;  wants  to  be
fanned.

■  Hemorrhage  from  atony  of  uterus.

■  Uterine  hemorrhage,  after  expulsion  of  immature  foetus;

unconsciousness.


177  CINCHONA  OFFICINALIS.

I  Hemorrhage  from  abuse  of  chamomile.

■  Lochia  last  too  long;  drawing  pain  about  ovaries;  dis-

charge fetid  or  cheesy,  purulent.

I  Asphyxia  of  the  newborn,  after  great  loss  of  blood  by  the

mother.

■  Eclampsia,  from  loss  of  blood.

I I  Deterioration  of  health  from  protracted  lactation.

■  Nursing  children  jaundiced;  bloated  or  tympanitic  abdo-

men, and  enlarged  spleen  or  liver.

■  Toothache  of  nursing  mothers.

■  Haemoptysis  during  lactation.

^^  Voice  and  Larynx. Trachea  and  Bronchia. ■Hoarse;
voice  rough ;  deep  from  adhering  mucus.

■  Deep,  husky  voice  when  talking  or  singing.

■  Sore  sensation  in  larynx  and  trachea.

■  Chronic  catarrh  with  mucous  rales,  coarse  and  loud.

■  Bronchorrhoea  wdth  general  malaise,  simulating  last  stage

of  phthisis.

■  Influenza,  with  debility,  loss  of  appetite,  heat  without

thirst.
^  Respiration. ■Asthma,  looks  as  if  dying;  <  Autumn,  w^et
weather,  or  after  depletion.

■  Cannot  breathe  with  head  low.

■  Wheezing,  whistling  inspiration,  crowdng,  rattling,  op-

pressed and  painful.

■  Inspiration  slow,  difficult; expiration  quick,  blowing,

short. ^CEdema  glottidis.

■  Respiration  labored,  loud  and  stertorous,  with  puffing,

blowing  out  of  cheeks  at  each  inspiration. ^Coma.

■  Inclination  to  take  a  deep  breath.

The  breathing  is  tight,  oppressed  and  painful,  or  short
and  hurried.

■  Oppression  of  chest:  evenings,  lying  down;  as  from  ful-

ness in  stomach ;  from  continued  talking.

■  Constant  choking;  every  day  between  6  and  7  p.m.,  short

breath  and  loud  wheezing,  making  the  choking  worse;
must  sit  up  and  sip  water;  tight,  stuffy  cough,  with  very
little  sputa;  pain  in  spine,  like  a  weight  there,  worse  by
lifting;  sensation  of  fulness  in  abdomen  wdiile  eating;
all  her  clothes  feel  tight;  constant  tiredness,  must  lie
down,  else  she  has  such  palpitation  that  she  cannot
breathe;  head  dragged  backwards.

■  Rattling  in  chest;  loud  sounds  through  nose.

■  i Suffocative  catarrh  and  paralysis  of  lungs  of  old  j)eople.

■  Nightly  suffocative  fits;  spasmodic  cough.
■Suffocative  fits,  as  from  mucus  in  larynx.

■  Breath  cold.

■  Wants  to  be  fanned,  but  not  hard,  for  it  takes  her  breath.

VOL.  IV. — 12.


CINCHONA  OFFICINALIS.  178

^  Cough.  I  Continual  irritation  to  hacking  cough,  in  morning
after  rising,  as  from  sulphur  vapor,  whereby  nothing
could  be  loosened,  for  several  mornings.

I  Cough:  with  pain  in  larynx  and  sternum;  with  pain

throughout  whole  cavity  of  chest;  with  stitches  in  chest;
immediately  after  eating;  spasmodic  with  retching;
caused  by  a  tickling  in  chest;  first  hollow,  dry  and  pain-
ful, later  bloody  expectoration ;  dry,  with  a  taste  of  blood ;
hacking,  with  blood  spitting  and  great  prostration ;  lac-
tation with  expectoration  of  blood-streaked  mucus,  or
with  difficult  expectoration  of  clear,  tenacious  mucus;
with  granular  sputa  during  day  or  evening,  none  night
or  morning;  causing  cutting  in  1.  lower  abdomen ;  caused
by  laughing;  during  or  after  measles.

I I  Dry,  spasmodic,  or  suffocative  night  cough,  as  from  va-
por of  sulphur,  with  bilious  vomit.

I  Constant  cough,  with  expectoration  of  blood  and  fetid
pus,  loss  of  appetite,  thickly  furred  tongue,  constant  pain
in  chest,  and  especially  in  gastric  region,  which  is  pain-
ful to  pressure;  spleen  affected,  splenic  region  painful,
and  peculiar  irritation  in  chest,  proceeding  from  1.  side.

■  Asthmatic  cough  at  3  a.m.,  followed  by  frothy,  badly

tasting  expectoration;  sharp  stitches  in  r.  pneumo-
hepatic  region.

I  Sputa:  slimy,  whitish;  black  and  difficult;  striped  with
blood ;  taste  like  old  cheese.

Cough  worse :  lying  with  head  low,  or  on  1.  side ;  moving ;
deep  breath,  talking,  laughing;  eating,  drinking;  even-
ing or  after  12  p.m.;  lightly  touching  larynx;  least
draught;  loss  of  fluids ;  after  being  awakened.

■Whooping  cough.
^^  Inner  Chest  and  Lungs. iPressive,  drawing  pain  across
lower  portion  of  chest  while  sitting,  causing  anxiety;
disappeared  while  standing  and  walking.

Stitches:  in  r.  chest  up  to  axilla,  prevents  bending  for-
ward and  breathing;  in  1.  chest;  under  sternum;  <
during  deep  breathing  and  sudden  movements;  in  car-
tilages of  third  and  fourth  1.  false  ribs,  without  affecting
inspiration  or  expiration.

■  Continuous  pain  in  1.  chest,  and  in  stomach,  on  touch-

ing stomach  he  shrinks.

■  Pain  in  side,  as  if  beaten,  or  as  from  a  blow.

■  Small  spot  below  last  r.  ribs,  in  which  even  slightest

pressure  or  walking  causes  a  sticking  pain.
Pressing,  stinging  pain  in  chest  and  windpipe.

■  ■Pressure  in  chest,  as  from  violent  rush  of  blood,  violent

palpitation;  bloody  sputa;  sudden  prostration.

■  ■  Cannot  bear  percussion  or  even  auscultation,  chest  so

sensitive.


179  CINCHONA  OFFICINALIS.

IlLoud,  coarse  rales,  great  debility,  anaemia;  oedema  of
legs.

I  Pneumonia  after  hemorrhages,  with  bleeding  or  with
bilious  symptoms,  or  incipient  gangrene  of  lungs.

iHsemoptysis:  with  subsequent  suppuration  of  lungs;
stitches  in  chest  <  from  slight  touch;  cough  with  dizzi-
ness in  head  and  eyes  feel  enlarged ;  clotted  blood  mixed
with  pus;  in  females  exhausted  by  nursing;  after  bullet
wound  through  lung  and  collapse;  with  saltish  expec-
toration; pleurodynia.

I  Hemorrhage  from  lungs  with  coughing  spells ;  dizziness
in  head;  eyes  feel  big;  feels  full  after  eating  a  mouthful.

■  Phthisis  from  loss  of  fluids  and  loss  of  vitality;  copious

night  sweats ;  phthisis  of  drunkards.

•  Pleurisy  in  persons  who  have  lost  much  blood.

iPleuro-pneumonia  with  profuse  exudation,  prostration,
emaciation  and  pallor  during  confinement.

I  Pneumonia,  and  other  affections  of  chest,  symptoms  being
<  every  other  day.

I  Chest  affections  in  hysterical,  weakly,  and  fidgety  females.
^^  Heart,  Pulse  and  Circulation. Melancholy  feeling  about
heart,  with  desire  to  take  a  deep  breath.

Palpitation :  with  rush  of  blood  to  face,  heat  and  redness
of  face,  with  cold  hands;  after  loss  of  fluids;  with  dis-
tension of  veins;  strong,  violent,  with  feeble  pulse  and
cold  skin.

Pulse: frequent,  small,  hard; more  quiet after meals;
feeble,  rapid;  unequal,  intermitting;  quick,  hard  and
irregular  during  chill  and  heat;  slow  and  feeble  in  ap}^-
rexia;  full,  throbbing.
^'  Outer  Chest, Tearing  pain  in  sternum  with  cough.

Boils  on  chest.
^^  Neck  and  Back. I Shooting  pains  in  nape  of  neck,  which
becomes,  in  a  measure,  stiff,  with  constrictive  pain  in
skin  over  1.  occiiDut.

■  Drawing  pain  at  nape  of  neck  and  each  side  of  spine,  and

pains  in  small  of  back  as  if  bruised.

■  Pressure  as  from  a  stone  between  scapulae.

■  Sensitiveness  of  spine. ^Amaurosis.

■  Stitches  in  spine  and  shoulders.

■  Stitches  in  1.  side  of  back.

■  Tensive  pain  in  small  of  back,  as  from  a  heavy  load,  or

after  long  stooping.

■  Insupportable  pain  in  small  of  back,  like  a  cramp,  <

from  least  movement.

■  Pain  in  small  of  back,  at  night,  lying  on  it.

■  Laming,  drawing,  tearing  pains  in  back  and  thighs.
■Aching  pain  across  the  loins. ^Dropsy.


CINCHONA  OFFICINALIS.  180

iSpinal  affections  with  diminished  sexual  desire.
1 1  Perspiration  on  back  and  neck  from  least  motion.
^^  Upper  Limbs. ■  Aching  in  shoulder-blades  and  limbs,  <
from  least  pressure;  restless,  wants  to  change  position.

■  Paralytic  grinding-tearing  in  bones  of  upper  limbs,  <

by  touch.

■  Spasmodic  stretching  of  arms,  with  clenched  fingers.
I  Hands  tremble  (when  writing).

■  Numbness  in  r.  arm. ^Prosopalgia.

■  Paleness  and  coldness  of  hands  and  feet,  like  marble,

even  in  a  warm  room.
I  One  hand  icy  cold,  the  other  warm.
■Veins  of  hands  distended;  swelling  of  back  of  1.  hand;
nails  blue.
^  Lower  Limbs. ■  ■  Hip  disease,  with  profuse  suppuration,
sweat  and  diarrhoea.

■  Legs  feel  as  after  a  long  walk;  uneasiness,  must  move

them  or  draw  them  up.
Darting  and  tearing  pain  in  lower  limbs,  <  by  contact.

■  Drawing  pain  in  bones  of  thighs,  as  if  periosteum  had

been  scraped  with  a  dull  knife.

■  Pain  in  r.  knee,  up  to  thigh  or  down  towards  leg;  pains

<  from  contact  than  from  motion.

■  Hot  swelling  of  r.  knee,  painful  to  slight  touch.

■  Knees  weak,  especially  when  walking.

■  Legs  and  feet  swollen,  can  hardly  walk,  when  she  walks

calves  of  legs  smart  and  sting. ^Acute  dropsy  following
parturition.

■  ■Sensation  in  lower  leg  as  if  garters  were  tied  too  tightly,

and  as  if  leg  would  go  to  sleep  and  become  stiff.

Hard,  dark  red  swelling  on  calf  of  leg  terminating  by  sup-
puration.

■Weakness  of  feet,  as  if  they  were  bruised.

Rheumatic  pains  in  metatarsal  bones  and  phalanges  of
toes,  <  from  contact,  not  from  motion.

■  Swelling  of  feet;  hot,  arthritic;  dropsical;  soft  swelling

of  soles.
Pain  with  swelling  of  big  toe,  <  by  touch  and  motion,

especially  during  evening  and  night.
Red  swelling  of  toe-tips.
^^  Limbs  in  GeneraL ■A  sensible  though  invisible  trembling

of  all  the  limbs,  combined  with  a  cooling  sensation.

■  Sensation  as  of  a  band  tightly  tied  around  different  parts

of  leg  or  arm.

■  Numbness  and  deadness  of  limbs,  they  go  to  sleep  when

lying  on  them.

■  Laxity  of  all  the  limbs  and  trembling  of  hands.


181  CINCHONA  OFFICINALIS.

■  Heaviness  in  limbs,  especially  the  thighs.

Painful  weariness  of  joints  with  pressure  as  of  a  load,  par-
ticularl}^  in  morning,  in  bed  or  when  sitting.

I  Pains  in  limbs,  as  if  clothing  was  too  tight,  after  a  walk
in  open  air.

I  Pains  in  limbs  <  from  slight  touch,  graduallj^  increased.

I  Darting,  tearing,  <  from  contact,  especially  in  hands  and

feet.

I I  Limbs  pain,  especially  joints,  as  if  bruised,  <  in  rest,
>  moving.

I  Parts  around  swollen  joints  very  sensitive  to  least  touch;
<  at  night,  parts  feel  weak.

I  Parts  about  the  joints  are  swollen  and  excessively  sensi-
tive to  touch ;  jmins  <  at  night.

I  Tensive,  extremely  sensitive  drawing  pain  in  almost
all  the  bones,  now  in  one,  now  in  another,  which  is  for
the  moment  relieved  while  lying,  but  soon  returns  more
violent  than  ever.

■Stiffness  of  limbs.

Arthritic  and  rheumatic,  hard,  red  swellings.

Cold  hands  and  feet,  <  by  walking,  with  vertigo  and  pale
face.

Emaciation,  especially  of  hands  and  feet.
^  Rest. Position. Motion. While  resting:  pain  in  limbs
and  joints  <.

Standing:  headache  compels;  >  pressive,  drawing  pain
across  lower  portion  of  chest.

While  seated:  vertigo  in  occiput;  weight  on  head,  with
tendency  of  head  to  fall  backward;  pain  in  forehead;
throbbing  at  temples  < ;  tearing,  darting  in  A^arious
parts  of  head  > ;  pressive,  drawing  pain  across  lower
portion  of  chest;  weariness  and  pressure  in  joints  <;
tensive  pains  about  swollen  joints;  weakness  <•

Lying:  vertigo  >;  dizziness  and  heat  in  head  <;  head-
ache <;  jerking,  tearing  in  several  places  in  head  >;
pains  in  r.  side  of  face  < ;  oppression  in  pit  of  stomach
< ;  swelling  of  feet  less  but  oppression  of  chest  < ;  ten-
sive pains  in  parts  about  swollen  joints;  bone  pains
momentarily  >.

Lying  on  back:  pain  in  small  of  back.

■  She  lies  upon  her  back,  sliding  down  in  bed. ^Coma.
Ljang  on back  with head bent  backwards  with  arms

crossed  over  head.
L^dng  on  1.  side:  cough  <.
Lying  with  head  low:  cough  <.
Bending  double:  pinching  in  abdomen  >  ;  colic  >.
Bending  forward:  prevented  by  stitches  in  chest.


CINCHONA  OFFICINALIS.  182

■  On  rising  from  sitting:  sensation  of  weakness;  is  much
inclined  to  sit  down,  even  sinks  back  upon  a  chair  if  he
does  not  exert  the  muscles.

On  rising:  as  if  he  would  fall  backwards.

Motion:  vertigo  <;  headache  <;  cutting  pains  from  tem-
ples to  orbits  and  occiput  <;  bruised  feeling  of  brain  <;
jerking,  tearing  in  several  places  in  head  <;  tractive
pains  in  various  parts  of  head  <;  ciliary  neuralgia  <;
prosopalgia  <;  neuralgic  pains  of  1.  side  of  face  <;
toothache  <;  gastralgia  >;  cough  <;  stitches  in  chest
<  from  sudden;  cramping  pain  in  small  of  back  <
from  least;  perspiration  on  back  and  neck  from  least;
pain  with  swelling  of  big  toe  <;  pain  in  limbs  and
joints  >;  disposition  to  perspire  during.

Walking:  cannot  walk  straight;  staggering;  vertigo  <;
headache  <;  constriction  in  head  <;  throbbing  at  tem-
ples >;  headache  compels;  soreness  of  brains  <;  jerk-
ing, tearing  in  head  < ;  darting  in  various  parts  of  head
<;  sensitiveness  of  scalp  <  in  open  air;  profuse  sweat
on  head  in  open  air;  aching,  stitching  pains  in  spleeii;
fulness,  pressing  and  heaviness  in  uterus  <;  pressive,
drawing  pain  across  lower  portion  of  chest  > ;  sticking
pain  in  small  spot  below  last  r.  ribs;  weakness  of  knees
<;  calves  of  legs  smart  and  sting;  cold  hands  and  feet
<;  weakness  <;  general  heat  <;  sweats  easily  in  open
air;  sensation  of  lightness  in  body;  oppression  in  all
parts  of  body.

Stooping:  cutting  pains  from  temples  to  orbits  and  occi-
put <,

Moving  head:  stitches  in  head,  pulsation  in  temples  <;
headache  >.

On  raising  head :  vertigo.

Opening  e^^es:  bruised  feeling  of  brain  <.

Moving  eyes:  headache  <;  weight  and  darting  pains  in
forehead.
^^  Nerves,  ll Excessive  sensitiveness  of  nervous  system;  spe-
cial senses,  sight,  smell,  hearing  and  taste,  seem  too
acute;  his  internal  sensibility  is  offended,  and  his  mind
is  unpleasantly  affected ;  a  morbid  sensation  of  general
weakness;  mental  and  physical  languor.

iSensation  of  weakness;  especially  on  rising  from  sitting;
is  much  inclined  to  sit  down,  and  even  sinks  back  upon
a  chair  if  he  does  not  exert  the  muscles;  whereupon  a
comfortable  sensation  of  rest  follows.

1 1  Weakness  from  loss  of  animal  fluids  (blood,  etc.),  or  after
severe  and  exhausting  illness.

llAVeakness:  with  coldness  of  the  skin;  with  inability  to
undergo  the  least  fatigue;  even  <  while  sitting,  still  more


183  CINCHONA  OFFICINALIS.

while  walking;  with  excessive  irritability  and  sensi-
bility.

Great  debility ;  trembling ;  averse  to  all  exercise ;  nervous ;
sensitive  to  j)ain,  to  draughts  of  air;  sleepless;  dispo-
sition to  sweat  during  exercise  or  sleep;  from  over-
study;  from  loss  of  blood.

I  Torpor  and  paralytic  weakness  of  affected  parts.

■  After continued or repeated hemorrhage (subacute),

occur  prostration,  nervous  agitation,  anxious  manner;
can  hardly  respire  at  all;  very  pale  and  ghastly;  pulse
failing;  hemorrhage  of  dark  blood;  sensation  as  if  it
flowed  warm  from  the  heart.

■  Twitching  of  limbs,  and  jerking  of  single  muscles.

■  Stretching,  drawing,  or  jerking  and  tearing,  mostly  in

extremities,  with  lameness  and  weakness  of  affected  parts.

.■Fainting  after  loss  of  blood  or  other  animal  fluids,  with

ringing. in  ears,  cold  skin,  loss  of  pulse,  cold  perspiration.

■  Convulsions:  rush  of  blood  to  head,  throbbing  carotids;
•  from  great  loss  of  blood,  and  debilitating  causes.

■  Epileptic  spasms  far  apart:  deathly  pallor;  relaxation  of

muscles.

■  Chorea  from  great  loss  of  arterial  blood  or  from  mastur-

bation.

■  Paralysis:  from  loss  of  fluids;  after  arsenical  poisoning;

after  onanism.

■  ■  Complaints  from  loss  of  animal  fluids.
Neuralgia  of  malarious  origin.
Numbness  of  parts  on  which  he  lies.

^^  Sleep. ■Irresistible  sleepiness  during  day  and  after  eating.

■  Constant  sopor  or  unrefreshing  sleep;  worst  sleep  after  3

A.M. ;  awakens  too  early.
■Sleepless,  aching  in  head  (until  12  p.m.),  anxiety  on  wak-
ing from  frightful  dreams.

■  Restless  sleep,  night  before  paroxysm. ^Intermittent.

■  Sleeplessness  with  headache  or  great  hunger.

■  Sleepless  from  crowding  of  ideas,  making  plans,  one  can't

stop  thinking.

Durnig  sleep:  snoring,  blowing  expiration;  moaning
whining.

On  awaking:  cannot  collect  one's  senses;  vertigo;  hunger;
sweat;  languor;  unrefreshed;  head  hot;  oppression  of
chest.

Pains  wake  her  at  night ;  <  from  noise  and  when  feet  get
cold.

Dreams :  confused,  as  soon  as  he  goes  to  sleep.

Frightful,  heavy,  anxious,  confused,  absurd  dreams;  wak-
ing only  half  conscious;  make  him  anxious  after  awak-
ing; confused  and  senseless  after  midnight.


CINCHONA  OFFICINALIS.  184

1 1  Sweating  during  sleep.
^  Time.  In  morning :  confusion  of  head ;  on  awaking,  anx-
ious thoughts  and  ideas;  emptiness  in  head  as  after
drunkenness;  languor  in  limbs  on  awaking;  periodical
cephalalgia  of  1.  side;  illusion  of  bright  gold  chain
dangling  before  eyes ;  vision  better;  great  pain  in  ulcers
in  course  of  pannus;  violent  pain  in  eye;  supraorbital
neuralgia  of  r.  side;  intermittent  ciliary  neuralgia  with
painful  pressure  and  drawing  in  forehead  and  temples;
facial  neuralgia  of  1.  side;  putrid  taste;  tongue  white;
pains  in  abdomen  <;  thin,  large  stool  with  passage  of
wind;  painless  diarrhoea  early;  after  rising,  continual
irritation  to  hacking  cough,  as  from  sulphur  vapor;
weariness  and  pressure  in  joints  <;  debilitating  sweat.
Between  8  and  9  a.m.  :  violent  pain  in  eye,  which  becomes

inflamed.
10  A.M.:  ciliary  neuralgia,  with  painful  pressure  and  draw-
ing in  forehead  and  temples.
At  noon:  pain  in  eye  >.
After  12  P.M.:  cough  <.

In  afternoon:  pyrosis  and  heartburn;  colic  in  region  of
umbilicus;  pain  in  big  toe  <;  sensitive  swollen  joints
<;  chill;  chill  and  heat  alternating.
During day: drowsiness; granular sputa; irresistible

sleep ;  debilitating  sweat.
In  evening:  full  of  projects  and  ideas;  darting  pains  in
parietals  disappear;  crawling  inside  of  lids  <;  pressing
pain  in  one  spot  at  inner  and  upper  border  of  orbit;
thirst  and  hunger;  pressive  sensation  in  abdomen,  fol-
lowed by  passage  of  much  offensive  flatus;  contractive
pain  in  testicles;  oppression  of  chest;  granular  sputa;
cough  <;  pain  in  big  toe  <;  in  bed  he  cannot  get
warm;  chill;  heat  for  several  hours.
At  night:  full  of  projects  and  ideas;  dread  of  dogs  and
other  animals;  restlessness;  on  awaking  he  does  not
dare  to  rise;  colic  <;  worm  troubles  <;  off'ensive,  un-
digested, or  white,  papescent  stool;  diarrhoea  <;  fre-
quent nocturnal  emissions ;  dry,  spasmodic  or  suffocative
cough,  as  from  vapor  of  sulphur,  with  bilious  vomit;
copious  sweats;  bruised  feeling  of  brain  <;  headache
extending  to  neck  and  teeth  <;  restless  and  sleepless;
blindness;  inflammation  of  eyes  <;  pain  in  r.  side  of
face  <;  restlessness;  canine  hunger;  oppression  in  pit
of  stomach;  pains  in  abdomen  <;  suffocative  fits;  pain
in  small  of  back;  pains  awake  her.
Between  6  and  10  p.m.:  pressive  sensation  in  abdomen.
11  P.M. :  pressing  pain  at  inner  and  upper  border  of  orbit,
extending;  to  nose  and  sometimes  to  lid.


185  CINCHONA  OFFICINALIS.

At  12  o'clock  at  night:  coldness,  followed  by  light  fever
and  sweat.

After  midnight:  confused  and  senseless  dreams.

At  3  A.M. :  asthmatic  cough,  followed  by  frothy,  badly
tasting  expectoration;  sharp  stitches  in  r.  pneumo-
hepatic  region.

After  3  a.m.:  sleep  <.
^^  Temperature  and  Weather.  Current  of  air :  neuralgic
headache  <;  headache  <;  sensitiveness  of  scalj)  <;
pain  in  upper  molar  teeth  from  taking  cold;  tooth-
ache <;  cough  <  by  least;  patient  sensitive  to;  <  from
exposure  to  slightest.

Open  air:  headache  <  by  walking  in;  headache  <;  sen-
sitiveness of  scalp  <  when  walking  in;  toothache  <
from;  sweats  easily  when  walking  in;  oppression  of  all
parts  of  body  after  walking  in.

Entering  room  from  open  air :  face  hot.

In  room:  headache  >.

External  warmth:  neuralgic  headache  >;  throbbing
toothache  >.

Heat:  anything  hot  in  mouth,  <  neuralgic  headache.

Heat  of  stove:  wants  to  be  near;  chill  <  by.

Hot  weather :  diarrhoea.

In  the  sun:  headache  <.

Cold :  neuralgic  headache  <  from  anything  cold  in  mouth ;
violent  thirst  for  cold  water.

Cold  air :  sneezing  when  exposed  to.

Cold  water:  great  thirst  for.

Wind :  soreness  of  brain  <  when  walking  in.

Foggy  weather:  loss  of  appetite.

Wet  weather:  asthma  <.

I  After  getting  wet. ^Neuralgic  headache.
■ Autumn:  asthma  <.
^  Fever, l  Shivering  or  chilliness,  with  gooseflesh,  after  every
swallow  of  drink.

■  Coldness  over  whole  body  as  if  dashed  wdth  cold  water.

■  In  evening  in  bed,  he  cannot  get  warm.

■  Coldness  every  night  at  12  o'clock,  followed  by  light  fever

and  sweat. ^Intermittent.

■  ■Chill  preceded  by  palpitation,  anxiety,  hunger,  thirst,

nausea,  headache,  debility,  sneezing  when  exposed  to
cold  air,  oppressive  colic.

■  ■Internal  violent  chill,  with  icy  cold  hands  and  feet,  and

congestion  of  blood  to  head.

■  Rigors,  cold  perspiration  and  great  prostration  of  strength.

^Biliary  colic.

■  ■Chill  over  whole  body,  increased  by  drinking,  thirst

before  or  after,  but  not  during  chill.


CINCHONA  OFFICINALIS.  186

I  Chill,  beginning  in  legs  below  knees.

I  Chills  on  alternate  days,  little  fever,  profuse  sweat;  rest-
less sleep,  abdomen  bloated.

I  I  Chill  postpones  or  anticipates ;  pain  in  liver,  which  is
often  greatly  swollen ;  hunger  in  fever,  and  sleepy  after
having  eaten.

I  Chill  most  afternoon  or  evening;  less  forenoon;  never  at
night ;  paroxysms  return  every  fourteen  days.

■  Wants  to  be  near  the  stove,  but  it  increases  the  chill.
During  chilly  stage,  headache,  congestion  of  head,  pale-
ness of  the  face;  pain  in  liver.

■  Fugitive  chills  in  back,  tendency  to  sweat  on  covering  up.
I  Chill  and  heat  alternating  in  afternoon.

I  Heat  of  face,  with  cold  body.

Heat  for  several  hours  in  evening,  without  previous  chilli-
ness, with  burning  thirst,  and  succeeded  by  sweat.

■  General  heat, <  ■  by  walking;  long  lasting  heat  with

sleep.
During  heat:  thirst,  with  dry  mouth,  burning  lips;  red
face,  delirium ;  distended  veins ;  congested  head ;  desire
to  uncover,  but  chilly  when  uncovered;  canine  hunger
or  aversion  to  food ;  pain  in  liver,  back,  chest  and  limbs.

■  Heat of  whole body,  externally  and internally,  with

swollen  veins  of  arms  and  hands,  without  sweat  or  thirst.

■  Heat  over  whole  body,  with  fine,  needle-like  stitches  in

skin,  especially  of  throat,  together  with  great  thirst  for
cold  water.
Fever  with  thirst  during  chill,  and  vomiting  after  the  at-
tack.

■  Marsh  intermittent,  with  pains  in  region  of  liver,  vomit-

ing of  bile  and  great  anguish.

■  Long  lasting  heat,  which  frequently  sets  in  late  after  the

chill.

■  ■Hectic  fever,  frequent  night  sweats,  diarrhoea,  pallor;

skin  dry,  flaccid;  sleepless;  nervous;  hunger;  after  ex-
hausting disease,  loss  of  fluids,  etc.
Thirst  follows  an  hour  after  the  heat.

■  ■Typhoid  or  putrid  fever  in  patients  much  reduced  by

loss  of  blood,  or  by  malarious  poisons.

■  Acute  fevers,  with  profuse  sweats.

■  She  is  bathed  in  profuse,  hot  perspiration. ^Coma.

During  apyrexia :  exhausting  sweats,  anaemic  and  cachec-
tic appearance,  sensitiveness  in  hypochondria;  scanty
urine;  loss  of  appetite;  bloated  abdomen.

Sweat:  debilitating  night  or  morning;  profuse;  partial,
cold  or  profuse,  with  thirst;  greasy  or  oily  on  side  on
which  one  lies ;  less  after  meals.

Cold  and  clammy  sweat  with  hemorrhage;  sweats  easily,


187  CINCHONA  OFFICINALIS.

especially  at  night  in  sleep;  or  when  walking  in  open
air.

■  Copious,  exhausting  night  sweats,  especially  on  forehead,

neck  and  chest,  slightly  staining  the  linen,  not  offensive,
occurring  the  moment  patient  drops  into  sound  sleep.
^Phthisis  pulmonalis.

■  Great  disposition  to  perspire  during  motion  and  sleep.

1 1  On  being  covered  he  sweats  profusely  all  over;  this  is
very  troublesome,  yet  he  is  so  sleepy  with  it  that  he
cannot  collect  himself  and  get  up.

■  During  the  sweat;  increased  thirst.

■  Revulsion  of  sweaty  and  therefrom  want  of  sweat,  sup-

pressed sweat.
*^  Attacks,  Periodicity. Sudden :  blindness.

Spasmodic:  pains  in  abdomen;  uterine  contractions;
cough.

Alternate  weakness  and  feeling  of  great  strength,  especially
in  joints.

Pains  in  organs  alternate  with  wandering  rheumatic  pains.

Frequent:  bleeding  from  nose;  nocturnal  emissions.

From  morning  until  afternoon:  headache  from  occiput
over  whole  head.

From  1  o'clock  a.m.  until  10,  12  or  1  p.m.:  periodical
cephalalgia.

From  8  a.m.  to  2  or  3  p.m.  :  excessive  pain  in  eye.

Periodical:  cephalalgia  of  1.  side  each  morning;  pressing
pain  in  one  spot  at  inner  and  upper  border  of  orbit,
every  evening  about  11  o'clock;  supraorbital  neuralgia
of  r.  side;  ciliary  neuralgia  every  day  at  10  a.m.;  neu-
ralgia; supraorbital  neuralgia;  facial  neuralgia  of  1.
side;  obstruction  of  gall  bladder  with  colic;  colic  in
umbilical  region  at  certain  hour  each  afternoon ;  dis-
eases of  malarial  origin.

Every  night:  suffocative  fits;  at  12  o'clock,  coldness,  fol-
lowed by  light  fever  and  sweat.

Every  other  day:  between  8  and  9  a.m.,  violent  pain  in
eye,  which  becomes  inflamed;  copious  stool  <;  diar-
rhoea; symptoms  of  pneumonia  and  other  chest  affec-
tions <;  chills,  little  fever,  profuse  sweat;  congestions;
neuralgia.

On  alternate  mornings:  headache.

Every  fourteen  days :  paroxysms  of  chill  and  fever  return.

Worse  during  increase  of  moon.

Three  months  colic.

Asthma  <  in  Autumn.

Day  and  night  for  years :  salivation  after  mercury.  ;

^  Locality  and  Direction. Right: constriction  on  side  of
forehead; amaurosis  in  eye;  uncontrollable  twitching


CINCHONA  OFFICINALIS.  188

of  upper  eyelid;  supraorbital  neuralgia;  tearing,  lam-
ing, burning  pain  in  face ;  numbness  of  arm ;  faceache ;
stitches  in  pneumo-hepatic  region;  stitches  in  chest  up
to  axilla ;  numbness  in  arm ;  pain  in  knee,  up  to  thigh
or  down  towards  leg;  hot  swelling  of  knee.

Left:  periodical  cephalalgia  each  morning;  boring,  pul-
sating pain  in  head ;  hemicrania  affecting  eye  and  neck ;
headache  in  side  of  head  into  cervical  region;  amauro-
sis in  eye ;  tearing  in  outer  canthus ;  pain  over  orbit ;
facial  neuralgia;  needle-like  pains  in  face,  chest  and
hand ;  tearing  in  testicle  and  side  of  prepuce ;  irritation
in  chest;  cutting  in  lower  abdomen;  stitches  in  chest;
stitches  in  cartilages  of  third  and  fourth  false  ribs ;  con-
tinuous pain  in  chest;  constrictive  pain  in  skin  over
occiput;  stitches  in  back  and  side;  swelling  of  back  of
hand.

From  1.  to  r. :  neuralgic  headache;  neuralgic  pains  of  face.

Backward :  head  inclined  to  sink ;  on  rising  as  if  he  would
fall;  tendency  of  head  to  fall;  pain  in  temples  <  on
leaning.
*^  Sensations. Melancholy  feeling  about  heart.

As  if  unhampered  by  a  material  body,  causing  a  light  and
airy  sensation  and  ease  of  movement;  as  from  coryza  or
intoxication ;  as  if  brain  were  rolled  round ;  as  if  brain
were  balancing  to  and  fro,  and  were  striking  against
skull;  as  if  skull  would  burst;  as  if  brain  were  pressed
into  a  ball ;  as  if  brain  were  pressed  together  from  both
sides  and  out  at  forehead;  as  if  r.  side  of  temple  and
occiput  were  bound  with  a  cord ;  as  if  forehead  were
compressed;  as  if  cerebellum  would  be  pressed  out;  as
from  a  load  on  head;  as  if  scalp  were  clutched  and
drawn  together  to  one  point  of  a  circle;  as  if  hair  were
grasped  roughly;  as  if  eyes  w^ere  filled  with  smoke;  as
of  mechanical  hindrance  in  eyes  on  motion;  as  if  a
knife  were  thrust  between  orbit  and  ball  and  moved
about  in  orbital  cavity,  as  if  to  scoop  out  eye ;  as  of  salt
in  eyes;  as  of  sand  in  eyes;  as  if  something  was  con-
stantly before  ear ;  as  if  blood  were  forced  into  teeth ;
as  from  pepper  on  tip  of  tongue;  as  if  beaten,  or  as  if
from  a  blow,  in  side ;  as  if  eyes  were  enlarged ;  as  if  a
stone  were  between  scapulse ;  legs  feel  as  after  a  long
walk;  as  if  periosteum  of  bones  of  thighs  had  been
scraped  with  a  dull  knife ;  as  if  garters  were  tied  too
tightly,  and  as  if  leg  would  go  to  sleep  and  become
stiff;  as  if  feet  were  bruised ;  as  of  a  band  tightly  tied
around  different  parts  of  leg  or  arm ;  as  if  clothing  were
too  tight  about  limbs,  after  a  walk  in  open  air;  as  if
blood  flowed  warm  from  heart  during  hemorrhage;  as


189  CINCHONA  OFFICINALIS.

if  whole  body  was  clashed  with  cold  water;  as  if  clothes
were  too  tight;  as  if  tongue  was  burnt;  as  if  oesophagus
was  contracted;  as  if  oesophagus  were  filled  up  to
throat;  as  if  food  pressed  upon  and  hurt  stomach;  as
if  stomach  was  ulcerated ;  as  from  subcutaneous  ulcera-
tion in  hepatic  region;  as  if  her  garters  were  too
tight;  as  if  her  waist  were  too  tight;  as  of  water  run-
ning down  abdomen;  as  of  a  lump  in  chest;  as  of  great
distension  of  abdomen;  as  if  periosteum  was  strained.

Pain:  in  hepatic  region ;  in  region  of  spleen;  in  abdomen
on  passing  flatus ;  in  larynx  and  sternum ;  throughout
whole  cavity  of  chest;  in  splenic  region ;  continuous  in
1.  chest  and  stomach;  in  limbs;  in  liver;  in  glands;  in
every  joint;  in  bones;  in  temples;  in  head;  externally
in  occiput;  in  occiput;  in  forehead;  in  eye;  over  1.
orbit;  in  external  ear;  in  submaxillary  glands  when
swallowing;  in  teeth;  in  uvula;  spasmodic,  in  stomach.

Boring :  in  1.  side  of  head ;  in  teeth.

Jerking:  in  temples;  in  temple  extending  to  upper  jaw;
in  several  places  in  head;  in  head;  in  teeth;  in  ex-
tremities.

Cutting:  from  temples  to  orbits  and  occiput;  in  abdomen;
in  1.  lower  abdomen.

Lancinating:  in  various  parts,  especially  in  frontal  region ;
supraorbital  neuralgia  of  r.  side.

Darting:  in  various  parts  of  head;  in  forehead;  in  parie-
tals  which  descend  along  neck;  from  1.  temple  and  eyes
to  whole  side  of  face;  in  vagina;  in  lower  limbs;  in
hands  and  feet.

Fine,  needle-like  stitches  in  skin,  especially  of  throat.

Stitches:  in  head;  from  temple  to  temple;  in  ears;  on
tongue;  in  spleen;  in  rectum,  also  during  stool;  in  ure-
thra; in  chest;  in  spine  and  shoulders;  in  1.  side  of
back;  in  r.  pneumo-hepatic  region;  in  r.  chest  up  to
axilla;  in  1.  chest;  under  sternum;  in  1.  side.

Stinging:  in  chest  and  windpipe;  in  calves  of  legs  when
walking;  in  wounds.

Paralytic  grinding-tearing  in  bones  of  upper  limbs.

Tearing:  in  various  parts  of  head;  headache  extending
to  neck  and  teeth; _  in  1.  outer  canthus;  supraorbital  neu-
ralgia of  r.  side;  in  ears;  in  dorsum  of  nose;  in  r.  side
of  face  extending  up  to  parietal  bone  and  down  to  clavi-
cle; in_ teeth;  in  upper  molar  teeth ;  in  vagina;  in  ster-
num; in  back  and  thighs;  in  lower  limbs;  in  hands
and  feet;  in  extremities.

Drawing:  in  head;  in  forehead  and  temples;  in  teeth;
about  ovaries;  across  lower  portion  of  chest;  at  nape  of
neck  and  each  side  of  spine;  in  back  and  thighs;  in


CINCHONA  OFFICINALIS.  190

bones  of  thighs;  in  joints;  in  almost  all  the  bones;  in
extremities.

Twitching:  in  upper  molar  teeth.

Tensive  pain:  in  small  of  back  as  from  a  heavy  load,  or
after  long  stooping;  in  almost  all  the  bones;  in  joints.

Tractive  pain:  from  occiput  to  forehead;  in  various  parts
of  head.

Stretching:  in  extremities.

Cramping:  in  testicles;  in  small  of  back.

Cramp :  in  vertex.

Griping:  in  abdomen  on  passing  flatus.

Pinching:  in  abdomen.

Constriction :  on  r.  side  of  forehead  and  occiput ;  from  1.
side  of  temple  and  eyes  to  whole  side  of  face;  in
abdomen.

Constrictive  pain :  in  skin  over  1.  occiput.

Contractive  pain:  in  scalp;  in  testicles;  in  urethra;  in
uterus ;  spasmodic,  in  inner  parts.

Shooting:  in  region  of  liver;  in  nape  of  neck.

Burning :  .  in  forehead ;  in  head ;  in  eyes ;  of  lips ;  on
tongue ;  on  tip  of  tongue :  in  anus ;  bleeding  piles  with ;
at  orifice  of  urethra.

Congestive  pains :  with  carbonaceous  caries.

Painful  bearing  down  to  vulva  and  anus.

Laming  pain :  in  r.  side  of  face,  extending  up  to  parietal
bone  and  down  to  clavicle;  through  lower  bowels;  in
back  and  thighs.

Sticking:  in  small  spot  below  last  r.  ribs.

Formicating  pains  in  eyes  and  inner  surface  of  lids.

Biting:  in  anus.

Pressive:  frontal  headache;  headache  extending  to  neck
and  teeth ;  headache  in  side  leant  upon ;  pain  in  outer
canthus;  in  eyes;  pain  in  one  spot  at  inner  and  upper
border  of  orbit,  extending  to  nose  and  sometimes  into
lid;  in  root  of  nose,  which  extended  to  side;  from  1.
temple  and  eyes  to  whole  side  of  face;  in  abdomen;
across  lower  portion  of  chest;  in  chest  and  windpipe;
in  joints  as  of  a  load.

Pressure:  in  forehead;  towards  forehead,  as  if  something
would  fall  out;  in  occiput;  in  head;  in  eyes  as  from
drowsiness;  in  eyes  as  from  sand;  in  forehead  and  tem-
ples; in  teeth;  in  stomach;  in  abdomen  as  from  a  hard
body;  below  navel;  in  uterus  <  when  walking;  in
vagina;  in  chest,  as  from  a  violent  rush  of  blood;  be-
tween scapulae.

Oppression :  in  head ;  of  stomach  and  abdomen  after  eat-
ing; in  pit  of  stomach;  in  chest  as  if  from  a  lump;  of
chest,  as  from  fulness  in  stomach ;  of  all  parts  of  body.


191  CINCHONA  OFFICINALIS.

Tightness:  about  abdomen ;  in  abdomen.
Needle-like  pains :  in  1.  face,  1.  chest  and  1.  hand.
Throbbing:  headache; at  temples; headache  extending

to  neck  and  teeth ;  toothache ;  pains,  with  carbonaceous

caries.
Hammering:  headache  extending  to  neck  and  teeth.
Pulsation: in temples; in 1. side of head; in pit of

stomach.
Aching:  in  spleen;  below  navel;  across  loins;  in  shoul-
der-blades and  limbs;  in  head.
Bruised  sensation:  in  side  of  head; of  whole  head; in

small  of  back;  in  limbs  and  especially  in  joints.
Soreness:  of  brain  as  if  bruised;  in  throat  on  swallowing;

in  stomach  as  if  ulcerated;  through  lower  bowels;  in

larynx  and  trachea.
Smarting:  first  in  one,  then  in  other  eye; in  eyes;  in

calves  of  legs  when  walking.
Rheumatic  pains :  in  metatarsal  bones  and  phalanges  of

toes.
Distressing  dull  pain  in  hollow  tooth.
Rubbing  pain :  on  moving  lids.
Crawling:  inside  of  lids.
Scraped  feeling:  in  throat.
Rawness:  of  tongue.
Roughness:  of  throat.
Irritation :  in  chest  proceeding  from  1.  side.
Painful  weariness  of  joints.
Lameness:  of  affected  parts.
Weakness: of  head; of  part  affected by  neuralgia; of

feet;  of  parts  around  swollen  joints;  of  affected  parts.
Stiffness:  of  limbs.
Uneasiness:  in  legs;  in  affected  parts,  is  obliged  to  move

them  constantly.
Limbs  go  to  sleep  when  lying  on  them.
Numbness: of  r.  arm; in  decayed  teeth  painful;  in  r.

arm; of  limbs; of  parts  on  which  he  lies; of  single

parts.
Deadness:  of  limbs.
Tickling:  in  chest.
Tingling :  in  ears ;  in  anus.
Itching: of  eyes; eyelids;  piles  bleeding  with;  of  skin;

in  the  inner  parts ;  in  wounds.
Fulness :  of  head ;  of  stomach  and  abdomen  after  eating ;

in bowels; in abdomen; in uterus; after eating a

mouthful.
Weight :  on  head ;  in  forehead.

Heaviness :  in  head ;  in  stomach ;  in  uterus  <  when  walk-
ing; in  limbs,  especially  in  thighs.


\  .

CINCHONA  OFFICINALIS.  192

Dulness:  of  head.

Lightness  in  body  when  walking.

Emptiness:  in  head;  in  stomach.

Languor:  in  limbs.

Heat:  in  head;  of  face;  of  external  ear;  of  nose;  in
abdomen.

Coldness:  in  bowels;  in  stomach;  in  upper  abdomen  after
every  swallow  of  drink,  and  renewed  at  every  inspira-
tion; in  limbs;  over  whole  body.

Dryness:  of  mouth; between  lids  and  balls; of  lips;  of
skin.
**  Tissues. 1 1  Sufferings  caused  by  loss  of  fluids,  such  as  hem-
orrhage, seminal  emissions,  diarrhoea,  diuresis,  excessive
sweating,  overlactation,  etc.

Excessive  sensitiveness  of  nervous  system.

Acts  upon  ganglionic  nervous  system,  producing  gen-
eral depression  and  exhaustion.

Asthenia;  exhaustion  of  vital  powers  of  whole  organism,
or  of  single  parts,  organs,  systems,  accompanied  by  ex-
cessive sensitiveness,  and  irritability  of  the  nerves,  or
with  relaxation  of  the  solids,  deficiency  of  animal  heat,
disposition  to  passive  hemorrhage  from  every  orifice  of
body,  and  decomposition  of  organic  matter.

I  Muscles  lax;  great  emaciation.

Blood  thin  and  watery,  circulation  lacks  energy.

In  cases  threatening  to  become  anaemic ;  with  diarrhoea  or

lienteria.
Chlorosis  with  tendency  to  oedematous  swellings  and  to

dropsical  effusions,  from  loss  of  vital  fluids.

I I  Disposition  to  hemorrhage  from  every  orifice  of  body;
useful  after  long  continued  hemorrhage.

Enlarged  veins.

■  Anasarca,  ascites  in  the  aged;  also  from  liver  and  spleen

diseases,  and  in  drunkards,  after  excessive  depletion.

Diseased  periosteum.

Carbonaceous  caries,  commencing  with  a  black  spot,  scrof-
ulous or  tuberculous  subjects;  the  pain  is  throbbing,  of
a  congestive  nature,  or  caused  by  abuse  of  mercury.

■  Caries  with  profuse  sweat,  or  excessive  suppuration.
Rheumatic,  hard,  red,  inflammatory  swellings;  painful  to

touch,  not  to  pressure.
Has  a  special  afiinity  for  liver  and  spleen,  producing  hy-

persemia  and  congestion.
Glands  swollen,  hot,  painful.
In  cholera  infantum  after  the  disease  has  been  checked,

suitable  on  account  of  loss  of  liquids  and  feebleness  of

digestion.
Flat  ulcers  with  copious  discharge.


193  •  CINCHONA  OFFICINALIS.

I  Wounds  become  black  and  gangrenous ;  humid  gangrene.
Collapsed  states,  with  waxy  paleness  and  coldness  of  skin.

I I  Jaundice.

1 1  Diseases  of  malarial  origin  with  marked  periodicity.
^' Touch.  Passive  Motion.  Injuries.  Touch:  scalp  pain-
ful to;  headache  <  by  slightest;  ciliary  neuralgia  <;
tearing  in  ears  <  from  least;  neuralgia,  skin  sensitive
to  least;  prosopalgia  <;  neuralgic  pains  of  1.  side  of
face  <;  toothache  <  from  least;  stomach  very  sensitive
to;  pain  in  hepatic  region  <;  tenderness  and  pain  in
region  of  liver;  ovaritis,  parts  very  sensitive  to  slight;
painful  induration  in  vagina  <  from  slightest;  stomach
sensitive  to ;  cannot  bear  percussion  or  auscultation ;
stitches  in  chest  <;  pains  in  upper  limbs  <;  pains  in
lower  limbs  <;  r.  knee  swollen  and  painful  to  slight;
rheumatic  pains  in  metatarsal  bones  and  phalanges  of
toes  <;  pain  in  big  toe  <;  pain  in  limbs  <  from  slight;
darting,  tearing,  especially  in  hands  and  feet,  <;  parts
about  swollen  joints  very  sensitive  to  least;  rheumatic
swellings  painful  to;  affected  parts  sensitive  to  least;
during  the  pains  she  is  sensitive  to.

Light  touch  on  larynx  aggravates  cough.

Cannot  have  the  hands  touched.

Pressure:  pressure  in  forehead  <  from  iirm;  stitches  in
head  and  pulsation  in  temples  <  by  hard ;  headache  >
from  hard;  sensitiveness  of  scalp  >  by  strong;  parts
affected  by  supraorbital  neuralgia  intolerant  to;  region
of  liver  sensitive  to  least;  gastric  region  painful  to;
sticking  pain  in  small  spot  below  last  r.  ribs  from
slightest;  aching  in  shoulder-blades  and  limbs  <  from
least.

Desire  to  uncover,  but  chilly  wdien  uncovered.

Numbness  of  parts  uj)on  which  he  lies.

Itching  of  parts  upon  which  one  is  lying,  >  by  lying  on
another  j^art.

Pain  in  external  ear  w^hen  lying  on  it.

Rubbing  of  clothes :  burning  at  orifice  of  urethra  <  from.

Rubbing:  pain  in  eyes  compel  constant.

Scratching:  sensitiveness  of  scalp  >  by;  bleeding  of  skin
after;  nettle  rash  after.

Pinching:  unconsciousness  to.

Pressing  teeth  together  >  toothache.

Petting,  caressing,  etc. :  <  ill  humor.

Jarring:  headache  <  from.
**' Skin. I  i  Excessive,  almost  painful  sensitiveness  of  skin  of
whole  body,  even  of  palms  of  hands.

Skin:  dry,  flaccid;  waxy  pale  or  yellow;  itching,  bleeding
after  scratching;  cold  and  blue.

VOL.  IV. — 13.


CINCHONA  OFFICINALIS.  '  194

The  sweat  parboils  the  skin.

1 1  Yellow  color  of  skin. ^Jaundice.

Boils  on  chest;  pimples  on  loins,  arms  and  chest.

I  Ulcers  ichorous,  sensitive;  ichor  has  a  putrid  sniell.

■  Ulcers  flat,  shallow,  coj^ious  discharge.
Erysii3elatous  swelling  of  whole  body;  nettle  rash  coming

out  after  scratching.

■  Smallpox,  pustules  black; variola  hemorrhagica,  with

great  exhaustion  from  copious  painful  stools.

■  Psoriasis  and  ichthyosis.
Pemphigus.

Humid  gangrene.
^'^  Stages  of  Life,  Constitution. Persons  who  are  highly  sen-
sitive to  pain,  of  querulous  or  discontented  disposition.

Suitable  to  persons  of  swarthy  complexion.

Old  women  after  menopause ;  pleurisy,  dropsy.

Useful  for  weakly  persons,  who  have  lost  much  blood  or
other  vital  fluids.

Useful  for  faceaches  of  chlorotic,  anaemic,  leucophlegmatic,
scrofulous  subjects,  and  sometimes  also  in  those  of  arth-
ritic patients.

Child,  set.  2  weeks,  prematurely  born;  jaundice.

Girl,  set.  2,  good  constitution,  lymphatic  temperament;
dijjhtheritic  laryngitis  with  night  sweat.

Boy  with  hip  disease;  profuse  suppuration.

Boy,  set.  12;  intermittent  fever.

Female,  set.  12,  suffering  some  years ;  chills  and  fever.

Young  girl,  set.  15,  has  not  m"enstruated ;  hemicrania.

M.  T.,  set.  17,  weaver,  after  severe  illness  four  years  ago,
during  which  he  was  frequently  bled;  debility  and
dropsy.

Mrs.  M.,  set.  20,  recently  married;  intermittent  fever.

A  blooming  girl,  now  pale  and  thin ;  toothache.

M.,  strong,  slender,  blonde;  neuralgic  headache  after  get-
ting wet.

Robust  young  man ;  mania  in  intermittent.

Young  man,  pale,  cachectic  appearance,  suffered  for  ten
weeks  from  quartan  ague;  enlarged  spleen.

Woman,  set.  23,  married  one  year;  bloody  leucorrhoea  of
five  years  standing.

Woman,  set.  23,  eight  days  after  second  confinement;
pleuro-pneumonia.

Woman,  set.  25,  slender  build,  mother  of  two  children;
prosopalgia.

Man,  set.  30,  strictly  moral ;  morbid  sexual  desire,  with
morbid  craving  for  dainties.

M.  A.,  set.  30,  periodical  cephalalgia.

Hysterical  woman;  jaundice.


195  CINCHONA  OFFICINALIS.

A  thin,  weakly  woman;  rheumatic  ophthahnia  during
confinement.

A  woman  in  fourth  month  of  pregnancy ;  miscarriage.

Woman,  after  confinement;  ascites.

Lymphatic,  scrofulous  woman;  rheumatic  ophthalmia
during  lactation.

Woman,  set.  34,  phthisical  habit;  pneumonia  after  vene-
section.

Hannah  P.,  set.  about  35,  complexion  dark,  medium
height,  had  a  child  five  weeks  ago,  and  had  for  some
months  past  pain  in  loins ;  never  had  ■  rheumatism ;
heart  normal ;  acute  dropsy  following  parturition.

Woman,  set.  36,  blonde,  delicate,  hysterical;  prosopalgia
after  massive  doses  of  quinine  in  cholera.

Woman,  set.  37,  small,  thin,  delicately  formed,  of  a  highly
nervous  organization,  mother  of  several  children,  opera-
tion for  strangulated  hernia  and  formation  of  artificial
anus.

Man,  set.  40;  gonorrhoeal  iritis.

Man,  get.  40,  subject  to»hemorrhoids ;  rheumatism  of  thigh.

Weakly  woman,  set.  40;  hsematemesis  after  carcinomatous
.  ulcer  in  stomach.

Woman,  set.  40,  nursing  the  tenth  child;  hsemoptysis.

Man,  set.  43,  blacksmith,  tall,  dark  hair,  had  phthisis  ten
years;  hemorrhage  from  lungs  of  four  weeks  duration.

Woman,  set.  45,  large,  weighing  180  pounds,  leuco-
phlegmatic  temperament;  intermittent  fever.

Woman,  set.  48;  typhoid  fever.

Man,  set.  50;  amaurosis  from  sexual  excess  and  alcoholism.

■  A  wiry,  intense,  active,  planning,  business  man,  set.  50

morning  diarrhoea.
Two  men,  one  set.  50,  the  other,  55,  both  full  blooded

erysipelas  of  face  and  hairy  portion  of  head.
Woman,  set.  50,  weakly  constitution,  lively  temperament

monorrhagia.
Woman,  set.  52;  rheumatism.
Woman,  set.  60,  thin  and  emaciated,  subject  to  gastralgia;

hsematemesis.

■  Married  woman,  set.  64;  biliary  calculi.

An  old  woman,  reduced  by  care  and  poverty;  pneumonia

following  intermittent.
Man,  set.  70,  retired  farmer; diarrhcea  of  twenty  years

standing.
Man,  set.  70 ;  nocturnal  rheumatism  in  hip.
Lady,  set.  80;  coma.
Man,  set.  81;  painless  diarrhoea.
*^  Relations. Antidoted  by:  Aran,  diad.,  Arnica,  Arsen.,  Carb.

veg.,  Eiip.  per/.,  Ferrum,  Ipec,  Laches.,  Mercur.,  Natr.  mur.,

Nax-vom.,  Pulsat.,  Rhus  tox.,  Sepia,  Sidphur  and  Vei^atr.


CINCH.  OFF.— CINNABARIS.  196

It  antidotes:  Arsen.,  Calcar.,  Chamom.,  Coffea,  Ferrum,
Helleb.,  lodvm,  Mercur.,  Sulphur  and  Veratr.

Is  useful  in  bad  effects  from  excessive  tea  drinking,  and
after  abuse  of  Chamomile  tea  when  hemorrhage  from
uterus  results.

Compatible :  Calc.  phos.  (follows  well  in  hydrocejDhaloid) ;
Ferrum,.

Incompatible:  after  Digit,  (increases  anxiety);  after  Selen.

Complementary :  Ferrum.

Compare:  Arsen.  (great  prostration  without  pain,  black
stools) ;  Carb.  veg.  (diarrhoea) ;  Coloc.  (beer  intoxicates
easily);  Cedron  (intermittents) ;  Cupr.  ac.  (black,  thin,
watery  stools) ;  Pulsat.  (bitter  taste,  etc.) ;  Stramon.  (black
stools);  Sulphur  and  Sulph.  ac.  (sensation  as  if  brain
were  iDalancing  to  and  fro  and  were  striking  against  the
skull,  occasioning  pains).


CINNABARIS.

Red  Sulphide  of  Mercury.  HgS.

A  very  ancient  remedy,  originally  from  the  Orient,  handed  down  to  the  Greeks,
and  down  through  the  Middle  Ages  to  modern  medicine,  with  a  voluminous  history.

Provings  by  Hahnemann,  Hering,  Neidhardt,  etc.

Clinical  Authorities. — Prosopalgia  iviih  catarrh  of  bladder,  Schelling,  Riick.
Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  4,  p.  387 ;  Toothache,  E.  W.  Berridge,  H.  M.,  1874,  p.  107 ;  Tapeworm,
Heinigke;  Oonorrhcea,  D.  E  Gardiner,  H.  M.,  1871,  p.  47  ;  Chancre,  A.  E.,  A.  H.
Z.,  vol.  78,  p.  37;  Sommer,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  2,  p.  119;  Condylomata,  Lingen,
Eiick.  Kl.  Erf,  vol.  2,  p.  153;  Syphilis,  CI.  JVLiiller,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf,  vol.  2,  p.  152;
Hofrichter,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf,  v.  2,  p.  154;  Syphilitic  idcerations,  8  cases,  CI.  Miiller,
Eiick.  Kl.  Erf,  vol.  2,  p.  151.

^  Mind. Indisposition  for  mental  labor.

Sensation  of  fulness  of  the  head  from  mental  application.

Forgetfulness  (forgets  things  he  has  to  do).

Fretful,  easily  provoked,  irritable.

Desire  to  be  alone.

iMind  clear  and  cheerful.

Exhilaration.
^  Sensorium. l Dizziness: in morning after rising; when

stooping;  with  nausea.
^  Inner  Head. Dulness  and  heaviness  of  head,  with  ringing
in  ears  after  dinner  and  late  in  evening.


197  CINNABARIS.

■  Fulness  in  head;  eyes  are  reddened.

1 1  Congested  sensation  over  whole  head,  principally  fore-
head.

1 1  Congestion  of  blood  to  head,  particularly  to  vertex ;  <
after  eating.

■  Sensation  as  if  touched  by  a  cold  metallic  body,  on  a

small  space  over  root  of  nose.
Feeling  like  a  vice  or  band  around  head,  cutting,  shooting
pain  in  forehead,  aching  in  superciliary  ridge  of  r.  eye,
extending  to  back  of  head,  with  nausea.

■  Pressing  in  forehead  with  sensation  of  congestion.

■  Dull  pain  in  forehead,  which  is  cold;  >  by  heat.

■  Tearing  pain  in  forehead,  before  catamenia.

■  In  morning,  after  waking,  pain  in  forehead  and  top  of

head ;  <  when  lying  on  1.  side  and  back ;  >  and  going
off  when  turning  on  r.  side,  and  after  rising.

■  Dull  pain  in  1.  temple  and  side  of  head.

■  Shooting  pain  in  1.  side  of  head,  with  increase  of  saliva

and  great  flow  of  urine.

■  Pain  from  back  of  head  to  forehead  with  vertigo,  cannot

grasp  ideas ;  shooting  from  occiput  forward.

■  Intense  headache;  cannot  raise  his  head  from  pillow;  >

by  external  pressure.
■Headache  with  nosebleed.
^  Outer  Head. iThe  bones  of  skull,  the  scalp,  and  even  the
hair  are  painfully  sensitive  to  touch.

■  Tensive,  stinging  pains  in  ears,  cheeks,  temples  and  sides

of  head,  extending  to  occiput  and  nape  of  neck,  with
swelling  of  parotids  and  face. ^Catarrh  of  bladder.
^  Sight  and  Eyes. Dimness  and  opacity  of  cornea.

Marked  photophobia  and  lachrymation,  with  redness.

■  Redness  of  whole  eye,  mth  swelling  of  face.
Shooting  pains  through  eye  into  head.

■Sharp,  stitching,  stinging,  or  dull,  aching  pain  above  eye,
extending  from  internal  to  external  canthus,  or  runs
around  eye;  pain  may  extend  into  eye  or  up  into  head.

■  Inflammation  of  r.  eye;  itching,  pressing  and  pricking

at  inner  angle  and  lower  lid ;  constant  lachrymation  on
looking  steadily,  with  profuse  discharge  of  mucus  from
nose.
Shooting  pains  in  inner  canthus  of  r.  eye,  with  burning
and  itching.

■  Outer  half  of  1.  eye  injected  and  puff}' ;  pains  severe,  seem-

ing to  run  around  the  eye,  <  at  night.
■Sticking  pain  about  punctum  lachrymale  of  upper  eyelid.
Lids  so  heavy  that  they  are  kept  open  with  difficulty,  <

in  evening.
■Asthenopia,  with  pain extending  from inner canthus


CIXXABARIS.  198

around  eye,  with  soreness  over  exit  of  supraorbital
nerve,  <  in  morning.

■  Conjunctivitis  and  blej^haritis,  discharge  <<  in  morning.

iKerato-iritis  and  uncomplicated  iritis,  especially  in  syphi-
litic variety,  and  if  condylomata  are  present  on  iris,  or
on  lids;  <  at  night;  pain  intermitting.

■  Keratitis.

■  Soreness  along  course  of  supraorbital  nerve  and  corre-

sponding side  of  head,  <  at  night.

■  Ciliary  neuralgia.

"  Hearing  and  Ears. ■  Roaring  in  ears,  with  swelling  of  face
(after  eating).
Scurfy  eruption  in  r.  external  ear.
Itching  in  r.  ear.
"  Smell  and  Nose. ■Sensation  on  bridge  of  nose  similar  to
that  produced  by  touching  it  with  a  metallic  substance.

■  Uneasy  creeping  and  pressive  sensation  about  ossa  nasi,

lasting  about  an  hour;  the  sensation  experienced  by
most  persons  on  putting  on  a  pair  of  heavy  spectacles,  if
not  accustomed  to  wear  them.

■  Sensation  of  weight  and  pressure  over  the  root  of  the

nose,  zygoma  and  temples. ^Catarrh.
Itching  of  nose,  with  bleeding  (very  dark  blood)  after
blowing  it.

■  Coryza,  with  lameness  of  thighs  and aching  pain  in

small  of  back ;  lumps  of  dirty  yellow  mucus  are  dis-
charged from  posterior  nares.

^  Upper  Face. ■Hot  face,  which  is  much  swollen,  mostly
about  eyes.

^  Lower  Face. Corners  of  mouth  chapped.

^^  Teeth  and  Gums. ■Right  molars  and  bicuspids  (some  de-
cayed) feel  soft,  heavy,  and  too  large,  at  8  p.m.  and  at  2
or  3  A.M. ;  sensation  comes  and  goes  gradually.
On  biting  teeth  together,  second  r.  upper  decayed  molar
feels  as  if  it  would  fly  to  pieces.

"  Taste  and  Tongue. ■Taste:  metallic;  bitter  (in  morning),
putrid.
Tongue  coated  white  in.  morning.

^^  Inner  Mouth. Soreness  in  roof  of  mouth.

A  small  ulcer  on  roof  of  mouth,  on  r.  side  of  tip  of  tongue.

■  Salivation;  increased  flow  of  saliva  and  of  urine. ^In-

flammatory affections  of  mouth  and  fauces.
■Inflammation  with  great  dryness  in  mouth  and  throat,
<  at  night,  which  causes  him  to  drink  often.

■  Dryness  and  irritation  of  throat  at  night,  with  soreness

in  morning,  secretion  of  tenacious  mucus  during  day,
inclination  to  empty  deglutition.
Scant}",  tenacious,  pasty  saliva  in  mouth,  without  thirst;
>  after  drinking.


199  CIXXABARIS.

13  TJuoat. I  Inflammation,  with  great  dryness  of  throat  and
mouth;  <  at  night.
I  Contracting  pain  in  throat  during  empty  deglutition,
i  Fulness  in  throat,  causing  a  constant  desire  for  swal-
lowing.
iDrj'ness  and  irritation  of  throat  (posterior  nares,  tonsils,
fauces)  at  night,  with  soreness  during  day;  in  miorning,
secretion  of  tenacious  mucus,  in  lumps,  from  posterior
nares.
I  Increased  dr^mess  of  throat  and  mouth,  being  obliged  to
moisten  and  rinse  mouth  every  time  he  wakes.
^^  Appetite. Aversions. Want  of  appetite  with  aversion  to

food.
^■'  Eating  and  Drinking. After  eating,  great  discomfort  and
feeling  of  distension  and  pressure  in  ujjper  abdomen,
with  flushes  of  heat.
^^  Nausea  and  Vomiting. Xausea:  with  waterbrash;  allevi-
ated by  eructations  and  vomiting. ■
^"  Scrobiculum  and  Stomach. Soreness  in  stomach,  with
dizziness  and  lightness  in  head,  and  tightness  in  temples.
I  Flatulence  of  stomach:  with  irregularity  of  stools.
^^  Abdomen. Griping  colic,  followed  by  soft,  niush}^  stools.

I  I  Tapeworm.

I I  Syphilitic  buboes,  indurated,  not  very  sensitive  or  in-
flamed ;  surrounding  glands  also  swollen.

^  Stool  and  Rectum, l  Irregularity  of  passages.

■  Bloody  dysenter3\

I  Green,  mucous  diarrhoea  which  stains  the  skin  about  the

anus  and  scrotum  a  copper  color.
Thin  stools  with  tenesmus.
iXightly  painful  diarrhoea.

Sensation  of  formication  in  anus,  as  if  from  a  large  worm.
I  Little  pimples  around  anus,  with  burning  and  itching.

■  Protrusion  of  anus  during  stool.

'^  Urinary Organs. Frequent and increased emission of
watery  urine ;  also  during  night.
I  Pain,  as  if  from  a  sore  in  urethra  when  urinating;  this

pain  wakes  him  up  at  nighf.
Albuminuria.
"  Male  Sexual  Organs. Increased  sexual  desire  with  violent
erections,  jjarticularly  in  eA^ening.

■  Swelling  of  penis  and  twitching  in  it.

■  Great  redness  of  urethra  with  pinching  pain,

■  Pain  in  urethra  on  urination.

■  ■  Violent  itching  of  corona  giandis,  with  j)rofuse  secretion

of  pus.

■  Small,  shining  red  points  on  glans  penis.

■  A  lentil-sized  swelling  surrounded  by  a  reddish -yellow


CINNABARIS.  200

circle,  on  gians  penis,  near  urinary  meatus ;  several  red-
dish-yellow lentil-shaped  discolorations  on  glans  and
prepuce.

llfledness  and  swelling  of  prepuce,  with  painful  itching.

1 1  Warts  on  prepuce,  frgenum  and  inner  surface,  bleeding

• when  touched.

I  Phimosis  with  profuse,  fetid,  dirt}^,  pus-like  discharge.
^Secondary  syphilis.

I  Syphilitic  phimosis,  prepuce  terribly  swollen,  purplish
and  ulcerated,  with  fetid,  gangrenous  odor.

I  Red,  swollen  chancres  with  hard  elevated  edges,  not  sen-

sitive, discharging  thin  pus.

I I  Indurated  or  neglected  chancres.

I  Indurated  chancre  on  middle  of  penis.

I  Round  chancre  above  corona  glandis  as  large  as  a  pea,
surrounded  by  a  red  circle ;  three  red  patches  on  glans
penis  and  prepuce,  resembling  in  color  the  eruptions  of
scarlatina. '

I  Gonorrhoea  of  very  long  standing,  with  much  pain  and

soreness  during  urination ;  yellowish-green  discharge.
Gonorrhoea  on  a  sycotic  basis,  or  complicated  with  syphilis.
Blenorrhoea  of  glans  penis.

I I  Sycotic  excrescences.
■  Indurated  testicles.

^•'  Female  Sexual  Organs. lA  few  days  before  appearance  of
menses,  and  during  their  continuance,  tearing  pain  in
forehead,  sensation  of  weakness  in  eyes,  rending  in  spine,
tearing  pains  and  cramps  in  bowels,  with  diarrhoea  and
great  prostration.
iLeucorrlKDea,  the  discharge  of  which  causes  a  pressure  or
labor-like  pain  in  vagina.
21  Pregnancy. Parturition. Lactation. "Shooting  across
abdomen,  either  r.  to  1.  or  1.  to  r.,  during  pregnancy.
I  Long  continued,  false  labor  pains,  child's  head  pressed
against  symphysis  pubis  with  violent  tenesmus  in  anus.
^^  Voice  and  Larynx. Hoarseness  in  evening.

I  Syphilitic  laryngeal  ulcers,  torpid,  and  associated  with
tuberculosis.
^^  Cough. Cough  from  tickling  in  throat.
^^  Inner  Chest  and  Lungs. Dyspnoea  with  heat.  _

Chest  oppressed,  feels  contracted;  >  by  stretching  himself.
Oppression  of  chest  awakens  after  midnight.
Pain  running  over  ensiform  cartilage,  from  seventh  rib  on
r.  side  diagonally  through  chest  to  back.
^^  Pulse. Pulse slower in forepart of day, accelerated in

evening.
■'^'  Outer  Chest. Red spots  and  points  on  neck and  chest,
chanoins  to  little  blotches.


201  CINNABARIS.

^^  Neck  and  Back.  The  muscles. of  back  part  of  neck  seem
as  if  contracted.

iPain  in  back  of  neck  shooting  to  occiput,  with  stiffness
and  hard  swelHng  of  glands  at  back  of  neck. ,

Aching  in  small  of  back  as  if  bruised,  with  coryza.

Sudden  stitches  and  tearing  pains  on  each  side  of  spine,
in  back  and  lumbar  region.

Pain  all  over  back  down  to  loins,  <  on  drawing  a  long
breath.
^^  Upper  Limbs. Pain  in  1.  shoulder,  between  clavicle  and
scapula,  interiorly.

Periodical  shooting  pains  in  arms.

Pain  in  upper  part  of  r.  arm,  as  if  it  would  break.

Sensation  of  lameness  in  r.  arm.

Numbness  of  1.  arm,  from  elbow  to  end  of  little  finger.

Sensation  as  if  "crazy-bone"  had  been  struck.

Joints  of  fingers  and  knuckles  are  red  and  hot.

(Edema  of  r.  arm.
■^^  Lower  Limbs. Shooting, drawing  and  aching  pains in
thighs,  from  hip-joints  nearly  down  to  condyles;  <  at
night. ^Ischias  rheumatica  and  syphilitica.

Lameness  of  thighs  with  coryza.

Violent  itching  on  inside  of  thighs,  knees  and  legs ;  <  on
knees,  especially  at  night.

Profuse,  offensive  sweat  between  thighs  (when  walking).

Painful  twitching  in  leg,  awakens  from  sleep  at  night.

Rheumatic  pain  in  r.  knee-joint;  <  when  walking  (ascend-
ing), >  at  rest.

■  Tearing  pain  in  legs  below  knees.
Coldness  in  joints.

I  Nodes  on  shin  bones.

Pain  in  tenclo  achilles  and  os  calcis  after  walking.
Pressure  and  feeling  of  numbness  in  foot.
Coldness  of  feet,  day  and  night.
^^  Limbs  in  General. Chilliness  and  lameness  in  arms  and
legs.

■  Wandering  gout.

^^  Rest.  Position.  Motion.  At  rest :  rheumatic  pain  in  r.
knee-joint  >.

Lying  on  back:  pain  in  forehead  and  top  of  head  <.

Lying  on  1.  side:  pain  in  forehead  and  top  of  head  <.

Turning  on  r.  side :  >  pain  in  forehead  and  top  of  head.

After  rising:  pain  in  forehead  and  top  of  head  >.

Stretching:  >  oppression  and  contracted  feeling  of  chest.

Stooping :  dizziness,

Walking:  profuse,  offensive  sweat  between  thighs;  rheu-
matic pain  in  r.  knee-joint  <.

After  walking:  pain  in  tendo  achilles  and  os  calcis.


CINNABARIS.  202

^®  Nerves. General  nervous,  uneasy  sensation.

Great  lassitude,  prostration,  and  feeling  of  lameness  in
limbs.

Weariness,  languor,  tiredness  and  prostration;  <  before
eating,  >  when  riding  in  open  air.

Sensation  of  lameness  in  all  the  limbs.
^^  Sleep. Sleepiness  in  daytime  and  sleeplessness  at  night;
unconquerable  desire  to  sleep  after  dinner  and  early  in
evening.

Restlessness  and  sleeplessness  at  night,  from  a  constant
flow  of  ideas  changing  from  one  thing  to  another.

Wakes  suddenly  after  midnight  wuth  oppression  of  chest.

Restless  sleep,  with  vivid  dreams  and  much  talking.
38  [TijYj^g^ In  morning:  dizziness,  after  rising;  pain  in  forehead
and  top  of  head  after waking;  soreness over  exit  of
supraorbital  nerve  <;  discharge  of  blepharitis  <;  tongue
coated  white;  soreness  of  throat;  pulse  slower.

In  forenoon:  flashes  of  heat  in  abdomen  with  great
flatulency.

At  noon:  perspiration  <.

After  dinner:  ringing  in  ears,  with  dulness  and  heaviness
of  head;  unconquerable  desire  to  sleep;  symptoms  >.

During  day:  secretion  of  tenacious  mucus,  inclination  to
empty  deglutition;  soreness  of  throat;  sleepiness.

Early  in  evening :  unconquerable  desire  to  sleep.

In  evening:  heaviness  of  lids  <;  increased  sexual  desire
with  violent  erections;  hoarseness;  pulse  accelerated.

At  8  P.M. :  r.  molars  and  bicuspids  feel  soft,  heavy  and  too
large.

Late  in  evening:  clulness  and  heaviness  in  head  with
ringing  in  ears.

At  night:  pain  of  1.  eye  <;  kerato-iritis  and  uncompli-
cated iritis  <;  soreness  along  course  of  supraorbital
nerve  and  corresponding  side  of  head  <;  inflammation
with  dryness  in  mouth  and  throat  <;  dryness  and  irrita-
tion of  throat;  painful  diarrhoea;  frequent  and  increased
emission  of  watery  urine;  pain  in  urethra  wakes  him
up;  pains  in  thighs  <;  violent  itching  on  inside  of
thighs,  knees  and  legs  <;  painful  twitching  in  leg
awakens  from  sleep;  sleepless;  restlessness  and  sleep-
lessness from  a  constant  flow  of  ideas;  internal  and  ex-
ternal heat  of  body.

After  midnight:  awakens  suddenly  with  oppression  of
chest.

At  2-or  3  A.M.:  r.  molars  and  bicuspids  feel  soft,  heavy  and
too  large.
^^  Temperature  and  Weather. In  open  air:  weariness,  lan-
guor, tiredness  and  prostration  >  when  riding;  symp-
toms >.


203  CINNABARIS.

In  warm  room:  coldness  and  chilliness.

Heat:  >  dull  pain  in  forehead,  which  is  cold.

Worse  in  Summer.
^°  Fever. Coldness  and  chilliness  in  warm  room.

Internal  and  external  heat  of  body  during  whole  night.

Flashes  of  heat  confined  to  abdomen,  with  great  flatulence;
<  in  forenoon.

■  Nightly  fever  with  dry  mouth. •

Perspiration  most  at  noon.
*^  Attacks,  Periodicity. Frequent  emission  of  watery  urine.

Intermitting;  pain  of  kerato-iritis  and  uncomplicated
iritis.

Coming  and  going  gradually:  sensation  as  if  r.  molars
and  bicuspids  were  soft,  heavy  and  too  large.

Lasting  about  an  hour :  uneasy  creeping  and  pressive  sen-
sation about  ossa  nasi.

Long  continued :  false  labor  pains.

During  whole  night:  internal  and  external  heat  of  body.

Nightly  fever  with  dry  mouth.

Periodical :  shooting  pains  in  arms.

Day  and  night:  coldness  of  feet.
^^  Locality  and  Direction.  Eight :  aching  in  superciliary_
ridge  of  eye;  inflammation  of  eye;  itching,  pressing
and  pricking  at  inner  angle  and  lower  lid;  shooting  at
canthus  of  eye,  with  burning  and  itching;  scurfy  erup-
tion in  external  ear;  itching  in  ear;  molars  and  bicus-
pids feel  soft,  heavy  and  too  large ;  second  upper  decayed
molar  feels  as  if  it  would  fly  to  pieces  on  biting  teeth
together ;  small  ulcer  on  side  of  tongue ;  pain  in  middle
of  upper  part  of  arm,  as  if  it  would  break ;  sensation  of
lameness  in  arm;  oedema  of  arm;  rheumatic  pain  in
knee-joint;  itching  of  palm  of  hand;  red  eruption,
sometimes  with  pustules  filled  with  yellow  matter,  under
knee ;  nostril  somewhat  tumefied.

Left:  dull  pain  in  temj)le  and  side  of  head;  shooting  pain
in  side  of  head;  outer  half  of  eye  injected  and  puffy;
severe  pains  seeming  to  run  around  eye ;  pain  in  shoul-
der, between  clavicle  and  scapula,  interiorly;  numbness
of  arm,  from  elbow  to  end  of  little  finger;  itching  of
side  of  face.

From  r.  to  1.  and  from  1.  to  r. . shooting  across  abdomen
during  pregnancy.
^^  Sensations. General  nervous,  uneasy  sensation.

As  if  touched  by  a  cold  metallic  body  on  a  small  space
over  root  of  nose;  as  of  a  vice  or  band  around  head;  as
of  congestion  in  forehead;  as  of  putting  on  a  heavy  pair
of  spectacles;  as  if  r.  molars  and  bicuspids  were  soft,
heavy  and  too  large; as  if  second  r.  u|)per  decayed


CINNABARIS.  204

molar  would  fly  to  pieces  on  biting  teeth  together ;  as  if
upper  abdomen  were  distended ;  as  of  a  large  worm  in
anus ;  as  if  a  sore  were  in  urethra  when  urinating ;  as
if  chest  were  contracted ;  as  if  muscles  of  back  part  of
neck  were  contracted ;  as  if  bruised  in  small  of  back ;
as  if  middle  of  upper  part  of  r.  arm  would  break ;  as  if
pimples  were  coming  out  over  body;  as  if  crazy-bone
was  struck.

Pain :  in  forehead  and  top  of  head ;  from  back  of  head  to
forehead;  severe,  running  around  1.  eye;  from  inner
canthus  around  eye ;  in  urethra  on  urinating ;  running
over  ensiform  cartilage,  from  seventh  rib  on  r.  side
diagonally  through  chest  to  back;  in  back  of  neck
shooting  to  occiput;  all  over  back  down  to  loins;  in  1.
shoulder,  between  clavicle  and  scapula,  interiorly;  in
middle  of  upper  part  of  r.  arm;  in  tendo  achilles  and
OS  calcis  after  walking.

Cutting:  in  forehead.

Sudden  stitches:  on  each  side  of  spine,  in  back  and  lum-
bar region.

Stitching:  above  eye,  from  internal  to  external  canthus,
or  runs  around  eye;  may  extend  into  eye,  or  up  into
head.

Sticking:  about  punctum  lachrymale  of  upper  eyelid.

Stinging:  in  ears,  cheeks,  temples  and  sides  of  head,  ex-
tending to  occiput  and  nape  of  neck ;  above  eye,  from
internal  to  external  canthus,  or  runs  around  eye ;  may
extend  into  eye  or  up  into  head.

Pricking:  at  inner  angle  and  lower  lid  of  r.  eye.

Shooting:  in  1.  side  of  head;  from  occiput  forward;  in
.  forehead;  through  eye  into  head;  at  inner  canthus  of  r.
eye;  across  abdomen  during  pregnancy;  in  arms;  in
thighs,  from  hip-joints  nearly  down  to  condyles.

Tearing:  in  forehead;  in  bowels;  on  each  side  of  spine,
in  back  and  lumbar  region ;  in  legs  below  knees.

Rending:  in  spine.

Drawing:  in  thighs,  from  hip-joints  nearly  down  to  con-
dyles.

Burning:  in  inner  canthus  of  r.  eye;  around  anus;  of
skin.

Soreness:  over  exit  of  supraorbital  nerve;  along  course  of
supraorbital  nerve  and  corresponding  side  of  head;  in
roof  of  mouth;  of  throat;  in  stomach.

Sharp  pains :  above  eye,  from  internal  to  external  canthus,
or  runs  around  eye;  may  extend  into  eye  or  up  into
head.

Irritation:  of  throat.

Pressure:  over  root  of  nose,  zygoma  and  temples;  in  upper
abdomen,  after  eating ;  in  vagina ;  in  foot.


205  .CINNABARIS.

Pressilig :  in  forehead ;  at  inner  angle  and  lower  lid  of  r.

eye.
Pressive  sensation :  about  ossa  nasi.
Oppression:  of  chest.
Pinching:  in  urethra.
Cramps:  in  bowels.

Contracting  pain:  in  throat  during  empty  deglutition.
Tensive  pains :  in  ears,  cheeks,  temples  and  sides  of  head,

extending  to  occiput  and  nape  of  neck.
Labor-like  pain  in  vagina.
Rheumatic  pain:  in  r.  knee-joint.
Aching:  in  superciliary  ridge  of  r.  eye,  extending  to  back

of  head;  in  small  of  back;  in  thighs,  from  hip-joints

nearly  down  to  condyles.
Tightness:  in  temples.
Fulness:  of  head;  in  throat,  causing  constant  desire  for

swallowing.
Heaviness:  of  head.

Weight:  over  root  of  nose,  zygoma  and  temples.
Congested  sensation  over  whole  head,  principally  forehead.
Lightness:  in  head.
Dulness:  of  head.

Dull  pain:  in  forehead;  in  1.  temple  and  side  of  head.
Painful  twitching:  in  leg.
Twitching:  in  penis.
Tickling:  in  throat.
Formication :  in  anus.
Creeping:  about  ossa  nasi.
Numbness:  of  1.  arm,  from  elbow  to  end  of  little  finger;

in  foot.
Weakness:  in  eyes.
Lameness:  of  thighs;  in  r.  arm;  in  arms  and  legs;  in  all

the  limbs.
Uneasiness:  about  ossa  nasi.
Painful  itching:  of  prepuce.
Violent  itching;  of  corona  glandis;  on  inside  of  thighs,

knees  and  legs;  <  on  knees.
Itching:  of  eyelids,  outer  canthi;  ears,  face  (1.  side),  palm

of  r.  hand ;  inside  of  thighs ;  on  knees,  legs  and  shoulders ;

of  skin; occasionally,  in  eruption  under  r.  knee; at

inner  angle  and  lower  lid  of  r.  eye;  in  inner  canthus  of

r.  eye;  in  r.  ear;  of  nose;  around  anus.
Dryness:  in  mouth  and  throat.
Coldness:  of  forehead;  in  joints;  of  feet.
^^  Tissues. Syphilis;  gonorrhoea  and  sycotic  excrescences.

Wandering  gout.
^^  Touch. Passive  Motion. Injuries. Touch: bones  of

skull,  scalp  and  even  hair  painfully  sensitive  to;  causes

bleeding  of  warts  on  prepuce,  frsenum  and  inner  surface.


CINNABARIS'.  .  206

Pressure:  >  intense  headache.

Scratching:  <  burning  and  itching  of  skin.

On  biting  teeth  together:  second  r.  upper  decayed  molar
feels  as  if  it  would  fly  to  pieces.

Riding  in  open  air:  >  weariness,  languor,  tiredness  and
prostration.
^^  Skin.  Itching  of  nose  (bleeding  after  blowing  it),  of  eye-
lids, canthi  (outer),  ears,  face  (1.  side),  palm  of  hand
(right),  thighs  (inside),  knees,  legs,  at  the  anus  (at  night),
on  shoulders  (evening).

Burning  and  itching  of  skin,  <  after  scratching.

Redness  of  skin ;  red  spots  on  skin.

Sensation  as  if  pimples  were  coming  out  over  body.

Eruption  of  red  points,  spots  and  pustules.

Red,  papulous  eruption,  without  itching,  on  both  elbows.

I  Red  eruption  on  finger,  sometimes  with  pustules  filled
with  yellow  matter;  the  same  under  the  r.  knee,  with
occasional  itching.

I  Chronic  impetigo,  pustules  and  scabs  on  upper  lip,  imme-
diately under  nose;  r.  nostril  also  somewhat  tumefied.

■  Gangrenous  ulcerations;  fiery,  angry -looking  ulcers.
^Sycosis.

I  Honeycombed  ulcers;  fistulous.

Elevated  ulcers,  which  have  the  appearance  as  if  condy-
lomata would  grow  .out  of  them.
^^  Stages  of  Life. Constitution. Combination  of  scrofula
with  syphilis  or  sycosis,  or  syphilis  and  tuberculosis.

Syphilis  complicated  by  scrofula,  or  previous  mercurial
treatment.

Arthritic  patient  addicted  to  spirituous  liquors ;  prosopal-
gia, parotitis  and  vesical  catarrh.

Girl,  suffering  from  dysmenorrhoea ;  tapeworm.

Man,  set.  28,  sanguine  temperament,  scrofulous;  secondary
syphilis.

Man,  £et.  29;  syphilitic  phimosis.
^^  Relations. Antidoted by Oinchon., llHepar, llNitr. ac.
Opium,  ■  Sulphur.

Compare:  Camphor  {red  spots);  Laches.;  Mercur.;  Nitr.  ac.
and  Thuja.


207  CINNAMOMUM.

CINNAMOMUM.

Cinnamon.  Lauracese.


The  symptoms  marked  —  are  from  the  Cinnamomum  Cassia  (from  Eastern
Asia),  the  variety  in  general  use  as  a  spice  in  this  country.  The  genuine  Cinna-
momum Zeylanicun  (from  Ceylon),  was  very  rarely  found  in  the  apothecary  shops
of  Philadelphia.

Authorities. — Allen's  Encyclopedia,  v.  3,  p.  333;  E.  Darwin  Jones  Albany,
N.  Y.,  poisoning  of  a  child  ;  Ersch  and  Gruber;  Strumpf,  v.  1,  p.  666;  Frank,  v.
2,  p.  695,  V.  4,  p.  110;  Tanner,  Lancet,  Oct.,  1853;  Hirschel's  Archiv.,  v.  1,  p.  195  ;
Chaumier,  Br.  Quart.,  v.  14,  p.  693.

^  Mind. — Anxiety.

— Child  screams  and  weeps  until  midnight.

I  1  Forgetfulness.
^  Sensorium. i  Great  stupor. ^Hysteria.

Vertigo  with  weakness  and  oppression  of  breathing.

Fainting.
^  Inner  Head. iHead  severely  affected,  with  oppression  of
chest. ^Hysteria.

—Complained  bitteo-ly  of  headache;  child,  £et.  18  months.

Headache  and  apoplectic  attacks.
*  -Outer  Head. — Head  and  face  hot  as  an  oven ;  feet  cold.
^  Sight  and  Eyes. •  Improves  weakness  of  vision.

— Pain  from  1.  eye  up  to  vertex  in  a  line  along  the  middle.

Itching  of  the  eyes.
"  Hearing  and  Ears. — Heat  around  1.  ear.
'''  Smell  and  Nose. Frequent  attacks  of  nosebleed;  child  set.

3;  t. ;  tough  mucus  from  nose.
^  Upper  Face. — Whole  face  turned  red.
^^  Teeth  and  Gums. Toothache.
"  Taste  and  Tongue, i  Nothing  brought  on  the  attacks  more

surely  than  talking. ^Hysteria.
^^  Inner  Mouth. Offensive  taste  in  mouth.

Ptyalism,  particularly  with  pain  in  back.
^^  Throat. Sore  throat.

^^  Appetite,  Thirst. — Canine  hunger,  with  nausea  and  de-
bility when  passing  the  meal  hour.

Want  of  appetite,  with  diarrhoea  and  acidity  of  stomach.
^•^  Hiccough,  Belching,  Nausea  and  Vomiting, i  i  Belching,
with  colic.

■  Each attack subsides with  a  dozen  eructations,  soon,
however,  returning. ^Hysteria.


CINNAMOMUM.  208

— Nausea  while  riding,  with  gagging  and  vomiting  of

mucus.
— Nausea  with  weakness  and  vomiting  of  mucus,  2  to  3  p.m.
— Nausea  and  retching  every  day  at  same  hour  for  four

days.
Chronic  vomiting.

■  Paroxysms  subside  as  soon  as  vomiting  sets  in.  ^Hysteria.
^^  Scrobiculum  and  Stomach. Hiccough  witli diarrhoea;

want  of  appetite  and  acidity  of  stomach,
i  Has  a  tonic  effect  upon  stomach.
Pressure  and  cramps  in  stomach.
^^  Hypochondria. •  Obstructions  or  induration  of  liver.
^^  Abdomen. Much  flatulence,  with  colic  and  pain  in  uterus.

Metastasis  of  gout  to  stomach  and  intestines.
^'^  Stool  and  Rectum. Diarrhoea:  always  <  after  drinking;
with  acidity  of  stomach;  long  continued  constipation
with  fever  and  urging  to  stool.
— Stool  first  of  hard  balls,  then  soft  and  easily  evacuated.
Hemorrhage  from  bowels,  occurring  especially  after  any
physical  exertion,  even  running  across  the  room;  blood
bright  red  and  clear ;  child,  a^t.  3 ;  t.
^^  Urinary  Organs. Retention  of  urine.

^^  Male  Sexual  Organs. Excessive  irritability  of  sexual  or-
gans; causes  erections.
Impotence;  sensation  of  weakness  in  legs.
^  Female  Sexual  Organs. Uterine  pains.

iMenses  regular  every  four  weeks,  each  period,  however,
lasting  eight  days  longer  than  usual,  and  followed  by
leucorrhoea.

I  Menses  too  early  and  too  profuse,  particularly  in  females

troubled  with  itching  of  nose  and  nightly  restlessness,
profuse  flow  of  red  blood.
Irregular  menstruation.

■  Menorrhagia  depending  upon  chlorosis  or  ansemia.

■  After  a  false  step  or  a  strain  in  loins,  profuse  flow  of

bright  red  blood.

I I  Chronic  metrorrhagia.

■  Chronic  leucorrhcea.

^  Pregnancy. Parturition. Lactation. Vomiting  of  preg-
nancy.

■  Hemorrhage  during  or  after  gestation  from  lifting,  strain-

ing, overstretching  the  arms,  or  taking  a  false  step.

■  Hemorrhage  during  pregnancy,  threatening  abortion.
Weak,  ineffectual  or  false  labor  pains,  spasms,  twitchings,

or  syncope  during  labor.
Complete  cessation  of  labor  pains.
Mitigates  the  severity  of  labor.
■Severe  metrorrhagia  in  primipara  after  the  first  few  pains,


209  CINNAMOMUM.

when  the  os  had  dilated  about  an  inch;  placenta  de-
scended with  the  head.

llRepeated  small  hemorrhages  during  the  puerperal  state.

1 1  Metrorrhagia  some  days  after  delivery,  unaccompanied
by  plethora.

■Three  hours  after  birth  convulsions  followed  the  tearing
of  the  cord;  after  subsidence  of  the  spasms,  violent
hemorrhage.

To  lessen  the  severity  of  after-pains.
^  Voice  and  Larynx. Hoarseness,  with  cough.

i  It  clears  the  voice  when  muffled  by  secretions,  scatters
the  phlegm,  and  is  useful  for  tickling  in  larynx.
^®  Respiration. Oppressed  breathing  with  vertigo  and  weak-
ness.
^®  Inner  Chest  and  Lungs, i  i  Pain  in  shoulders  and  side.
^Rheumatic  catarrh.

Pain  in  chest.

■  Anxiety  and  oppression in  precordial region,  causing

constriction  of  chest. ^Hysteria.
^^  Heart,  Pulse  and  Circulation. ■  Great  cardiac  anxiety
with  the  attacks. ^Hysteria,
i  Heart  affections ;  strengthens  the  heart.

■  Loss  of  pulse  during  the  attack. ^Hysteria.

^^  Neck  and  Back. Pains  in  small  of  back,  with  ptyalism.
■^'^  Lower  Limbs. Sensation  of  weakness  in  feet. ^Impotence.
Pain  in  muscles  (myalgia).
Erysipelas  with  ruptured  vesicles  on  r.  leg.
^^  Rest. Position. Motion. Hemorrhage  from  bowels  after
any  phj'sical  exertion;  even  running  across  room.
After  a  false  step  or  a  strain  in  loins,  profuse  flow  of  bright

red  blood.
Hemorrhage  during  or  after  gestation  from  lifting,  strain-
ing, overstretching  arms,  or  taking  a  false  step.
^^  Nerves. Nervous  weakness  without  fever;  syncope,  hysteri-
cal attacks  after  loss  of  fluids.
Trembling  of  limbs.

1  I  Insensibility  occurred  with  each  attack. ^Hysteria.
Spasmodic  nervous  affections;  epilepsy;  paralysis.

^^  Sleep. Profound  sleep  with  the  attacks. ^Hysteria.
^^  Time. Canine  hunger  with  nausea  and  debility  when  pass-
ing the  meal  hour.

2  to  3  P.M. :  nausea,  with  weakness  and  vomiting  of  mucus.
In  evening :  great  fever.  "
Child  screams  and  cries  until  midnight.

Fever. •  Chilliness  with  trembling  of  limbs.
— Great  fever  in  evening.
— Transient  heat  with  sweat.
VOL.  IV. — 14.


40


CINNAMOMUM.  210

Nervous  and  typhoid  fevers  with great  impairment of
digestion,  vomiting,  diarrlioea  and  exhaustion.
*^  Attacks, Periodicity. Frequent: attacks of  nosebleed;
small  hemorrhages  during  puerperal  state.
Transient :  heat  with  sweat.
Long  continued  constipation  with  fever and  urging  to

stool.
Every  day  at  same  hour  for  four  days,  nausea  with  retching.
Menses  regular  every  four  weeks,  each  period,  however,

lasting  eight  days  longer  than  usual.
Chronic:  vomiting;  metrorrhagia;  leucorrhoea.
*^  Locality  and  Direction. Right :  ruptured  vesicles  on  leg.

Left:  heat  around  ear.
*^  Sensations. Pain :  from  1.  eye  up  to  vertex  in  a  line  along
the  middle ;  in  back ;  in  uterus ;  in  shoulders  and  side ;
in  chest;  in  small  of  back;  in  muscles;  in  bones.
Anxiety:  in  precordial  region;  in  heart  with  hysterical

attacks.
Oppression:  of  chest;  of  respiration;  in  precordial  region.
Pressure:  in  stomach.
Cramps :  in  stomach.
Constriction:  of  chest.
Formicating  pains.
.Tickling:  in  larynx.
Weakness:  in  legs;  in  feet.
Heat:  of  head;  face;  around  1.  ear.
Coldness:  of  feet.
Itching:  of  eyes;  of  nose.
**  Tissues. Hemorrhages,  particularly  uterine; too  copious
evacuations,  exhaustion.
Bone  pains,  and  caries.
Ascites  and  anasarca.
^  Touch. Passive  Motion. Injuries. — Nausea  while
riding,  >  by  getting  out  of  the  wagon,  <  by  getting  in.
While  riding: nausea,  with gagging and  vomiting of

mucus.
':  Snake  bites.
*^  Stages  of  Life. Constitution. Lymphatic,  feeble,  cachec-
tic women,  with  lax  tissues  and  languid  circulation.
A  woman  advanced  in  years ;  hysterical  convulsions.
^^  Relations. Antidoted  by :  Aeon,  (fever  and  anxiety).
It  antidotes: Opium.
Compare:  ISilic.


211  CISTUS  CANADENSIS.

CISTUS  CANADENSIS.

Rockrose;  Iceplant;  Frostweed.  Cistacese.


"It  is  an  old,  popular  medicine  in  this  country,  for  all  kinds  of  scrofulous
diseases.

It  grows  on  low,  dry,  mica  slate  hills  and  serpentine  rocks.  It  is  abundant
at  the  foot  of  Pine  Eock,  New  Haven,  on  the  barren  plains,  and  seems  to  be  de-
pendent on  the  presence  of  talc  (magnesia).

It  is  said  that  in  tlie  months  of  November  and  December  these  plants  send
out  near  the  roots,  broad,  thin,  curved,  ice  crystals,  about  an  inch  in  breadth,
which  wilt  in  the  day  and  are  renewed  in  the  morning."

Proved  under  the  supervision  of  Dr.  Hering,  by  J.  H.  Bute,  in  1835-6,  with
the  tincture  and  first  centesimal  potency,  and  by  Gosewich,  with  globules  of  the
X,  in  1837.  See  Bering's  Monograph,  Philadelphia,  1866,  or  Hale's  New
Remedies.

"  It  has  been  recommended  in  hospital  gangrene,  phagsedenic  ulcers,  bites  of
rabid  animals,  poisoned  wounds,  etc.,  a  wash  to  arrest  fetid  discharges,  ozcena,  leu-
corrhoea,  gonorrhoea,  gargle  in  diphtheria,  etc." — U.S.  D.

Clinical  Authoeities. — Sore  throat,  Guernsey,  Hering's  Monograph  ;  Colic
after  acid  fruit,  Lilienthal,  Hering's  Mon. ;  Chronic  dysentery,  T.  J.  Comstock,  Am.
Hom.  Obs.,  vol.  1,  p.  123;  Mastitis,  Pehrson  &  Guernsey,  Hering's  Mon.;  Cough,
with  tumors  on  neck,  D.  A.  Tyler,  Am.  Hom.  Obs.,  vol.  3,  p.  474 ;  Goitre  and  erysip-
elas, Gabalda,  Hering's  Mon. ;  White  swelling  of  knee-joint,  Bradshaw,  M.  H.  Rev.,
v.  13,  p.  38 ;  Intermittent  fever,  Marehberg,  Organon,  v.  3,  p.  361 ;  Scrofula,  etc.,
Bute  and  Ives,  Hering's  Mon. ;  Herpes,  C.  Hg.,  Hering's  Mon.

^  Mind. I  Cheerfulness  after  supper,  until  bedtime.
I  All  mental  excitement  increases  the  suffering.

■  Bad  effects  of  vexation;  feels  as  if  paralyzed.

I  Every mental excitement is followed by stitches in

throat,  producing  cough.
I  Mental  agitation  increases  the  cough.
^  Sensorium. Vertigo.

^  Inner  Head, l  Headache  in  sinciput  after  being  kept  wait-
ing for  dinner;  >  after  eating;  <  toward  evening  and
lasts  all  night;  in  r.  side,  with  piercing  pain  in  eye.
Pressure  above  eyes  in  forehead.

■  Violent  pain  in  head;  stitches  from  temples  into  ears.

^Intermittent  fever.
Sick  headache  with  chilliness.
*  Outer  Head. Forehead  cold,  and  sensation  of  coolness  in-
side forehead,  in  a  very  warm  room.

■  Pressing  pain  at  root  of  nose  with  headache.


CISTUS  CANADENSIS.  212

I  Head  drawn  to  one  side  by  swellings  in  neck.
^  Sight  and  Eyes. Pressure  alDove  eyes  and  feeling  of  weight.

Stitches  in  1.  eye.

Left  eye  most  affected.

I  Scrofulous  inflammation  of  long  standing;  feeling  as  if
something  were  passing  around  in  eye,  with  stitches.

Spasmodic,  piercing  pain  in  middle  of  upper  rim  of  r.  or-
bit, with  some  headache  on  that  side.
^  Hearing  and  Ears. Itching :  in  ears ;  intense  and  deep  in
1.  ear.

I  I  Stitches  from  temples  into  ears,  swelling  below  and  be-
hind ears. ^Intermittent  fever.

■  Discharge  from  ears;  watery,  bad  smelling  pus;  inner

swelling,  of  ears.

■  Tetters  on  and  around ears, extending into external

meatus.
Swelling  beginning  at  ear,  and  extending  half  way  uj)

cheek.
■Swelling  of  parotids.
^  Smell  and  Nose. ■Cold  feeling  or  burning  in  nose.

■  Frequent and violent sneezing, mostly evening and

morning;  chronic  nasal  catarrh.
1  I  Left  side  inflamed  and  swollen ;  burning  sensation  in  1.
nostril.

■  Tip  of  nose  painful.

■  Eczema  of  nose.

^  Upper  Face. Feeling  as  if  facial  muscles  would  be  drawn
to  one  side.

■  Flushes  of  heat  in  face.

Heat  and  burning  in  face  and  bones  of  face.
I  I  Half  way  up  cheek,  swelling  beginning  at  ear. ^Paro-
titis.
I  I  Vesicular  erysipelas  on  face.

■  Sharp  shooting,  intolerable  itching,  and  thick  crusts,  with

burning  on  r.  zygoma.
I  I  Lupus  on  face.
^  Lower Face. ■Caries of lower  jaw; with suppurating
glands  on  neck.

■  Open,  bleeding  cancer  on  lower  lip.

I  I  Lupus  exedens  about  mouth  and  nose.
Pains  in  all  the  joints  of  face;  drawing,  tearing;  <  in
evening.
^°  Teeth  and  Gums. Twitching,  stitching  toothache  in  an
upper  1.  molar,  which  was  decayed.
■Scorbutic,  swollen  gums,  separating  from  teeth;  easily
bleeding,  putrid,  disgusting.
^^  Taste  and  Tongue. ■  Dryness  of  tongue  and  roof  of  mouth.
Tongue  sore,  surface  as  if  raw.


213  CISTUS  CANADENSIS.

Sensation  of  coldness  of  tongue,  laiynx  and  trachea ;  saliva

is  cool ;  breath  feels  cold.
I  Impure  breath.
^^  Inner  Mouth. Scorbutis.

13  Throat. Coolness  particularly  in  throat,  continues  all  day.
■A  feeling  of  softness  in  throat.
I A  feeling  as  if  sand  were  in  throat.

I  Continuous  feeling  of  dryness  and  heat  in  throat,  <  after
sleeping,  eating  and  drinking.

■  Dryness  of  throat  from  midday  until  1  to  3  a.m.,  then  >

until  next  noon.
I A  small  dry  spot  in  gullet;  <  after  sleeping;  must  get
up  and  drink ;  >  after  eating ;  throat  looks  glassy ;  on
back  of  throat  stripes  of  tough  mucus.

■  Must  swallow  saliva  to  relieve  unbearable  dryness,  espe-

cially during  night.

■  Periodical  itching  in  throat.
Crawling-itching  in  throat  and  fauces.
Rawness  extending  from  chest  into  throat.

Burning  in  throat  high  up  in  cavity  posterior  to  uvula.

■  Stitches  in  throat  cause  cough;  when  mentally  agitated.
■Tearing  pain  in  throat  when  coughing.

■  Tickling  and  soreness  in  throat.

■  Sore  throat  from  inhaling  the  least  cold  air,  not  from

warm  air.

■  Sore  pain  in  throat  and  drjmess  of  tongue,  in  morning.

■  Fauces  inflamed  and  dry,  without  feeling  of  dryness.

■  Hawking  of  mucus,  tough, gum-like, thick, tasteless;

mostly  mornings.

■  Expectoration  of  bitter  mucus.

■After  discharging  phlegm  from  throat  he  feels  generally
much  relieved.

■  ■Scrofulous  swelling  and  suppuration  of  glands  of  throat.
^*  Thirst,  Desires. ■  Desire  for  acid  food  and  fruits,  but  pain

and  diarrhoea  follow  after  eating  them.

■  Desire  for  cheese.
Thirst,  with  fever.

^^  Eating  and  Drinking. ■  Eating  and  drinking  relieve  dry
throat  and  pain  in  sinciput.
After  eating:  pain  in  stomach;  cold  feeling  in  stomach;
after  fruit  or  coffee,  diarrhoea.
^^  Belching,  Nausea. Empty  and  cool  eructations.
Eructation,  with  feeling  as  though  it  would  relieve.

■  Frequent  nausea;  nausea  with  diarrhoea.

^^  Stomach. ■  Cool  feeling  in  stomach  before  and  after  eating.

Pain  in  stomach  after  eating,  with  diarrhoea.
^^  Hypochondria. Much  flatulence  and  pain  in  hypochondria.

Bruised pain under  hypochondria, with flatulence, in
morning  on  awaking.


CISTUS  CANADENSIS.  214

Stitches  in  1.  hypochondrium.
^^  Abdomen. iCool  feeling  in  whole  abdomen.

I  I  Flatulence  and  bruised  pain  in  hypochondria ;  evening

and  night.
Belly  puffed  up  with  flatulency.
Itching  of  belly  and  umbilicus.
Colic  with  diarrhoea.
Pain  in  groin  coming  from  back.
^°  Stool  and Rectum. iThin,  greyish-yellow,  hot stools,

squirting  out;  irresistible  urging;  <  afterpart  of  night

until  noon.
I  Diarrhoea :  from  coffee,  acid  fruits ;  with  goitre ;  chronic ;

in  wet  weather;  in  scrawny,  scrofulous  children.
Discharge  of  much  flatus.
Irresistible  urging  to  stool  early  in  morning.
Diarrhoea with desire for acid food, nausea, pain in

stomach  after  eating,  or  swelling  and  suppuration  of

cervical  glands.
I  Chronic  dysentery.
^^  Male  Sexual  Organs. Bitching  on.  scrotum.
^  Female  Sexual  Organs. iCatamenia  absent  after  erysip-
elas.
I  Induration  and  inflammation  of  mammse.

■  Left  mamma  inflamed,  suppurating,  with  a  feeling  of

fulness  in  chest;  sensibility  to  cold  air;  scrofulous.
Cancer  of  mammse.
^^  Larynx  and  Trachea, i  Inhaled  air  feels  cool  in  larynx

and  trachea.
Itching  and  scratching  in  larynx  at  night,  with  anxious

dreams.
Dryness  in  larynx.
I  Chronic  itching  in  larynx  and  trachea.

■  Feeling  as  if  windpipe  had  not  space  enough.

■  Pain  in  trachea.

I  I  Goitre  size  of  a  hen's  egg ;  frequent  diarrhoea.
^  Respiration. ■  Impure  or  cold  breath.

I  Asthmatic  in  evening  after  lying  down  and  at  night;
loud  wheezing;  sensation  as  if  trachea  had  not  space
enough.

In  evening  soon  after  lying  down  a  sensation  as  if  ants
were  running  through  whole  body ;  then  anxious,  diffi-
cult breathing;  is  obliged  to  get  up  and  open  window;
fresh  air  relieves  him;  immediately  on  lying  down
again  these  sensations  return.

I  Inhaling  slightest  cold  air  causes  sore  throat,  which  he
has  not  when  inhaling  in  a  warm  room.
^  Cough. Cough  <  by  mental  agitation.

I  Cough  from  stitches  in  throat;  with  painful  tearing  in
throat;  neck  studded  with  tumors.


215  '  CISTUS  CANADENSIS.

I  Expectoration  of  bitter  mucus.
I  After  raising  phlegm  he  feels  very  much  relieved.
^^  Inner  Chest  and  Lungs, i  Pressure  on  chest.
Fulness  in  chest.

I  Raw  feeling  in  upper  chest,  extending  up  into  throat.
Pain  in  chest  accompanied  by  desire  to  eructate.
Pain  in  chest  and  shoulder.
^^  Outer  Chest. Chest  hurts  when  touched.
Pressure  on  chest.
• I  Small  painful  pimples,  which  bleed  easily  and  heal  slowly,

across  shoulders  and  on  breast.
^^  Neck  and  Back, ii  Scrofulous  swelling  and  suppuration

of  glands  of  throat.
Itching  and  scratching  on  outside  of  throat  near  larynx.
Itching  on  back.
Below  r.  shoulder-blade,  extending-  around to  front  of

body,  a  very  much  inflamed  spot,  about  size  of  palm  of

hand,  painfully  sore  to  touch ;  soon  after  pimples  appear

on  this  spot  in  a  large  group,  causing  violent  burning ;

later,  rheumatoid  pain  from  this  spot  into  1.  hip  and

groin,  <  from  motion.
I  Eruption  on  back  like  zoster.

■  Scrofulous  ulcers  on  back.

I  I  Burning,  bruised  pain  in  os  coccygis,  preventing  sitting ;
<  from  touch.
^^  Upper  Limbs. Pain  in  front  of  r.' shoulder.

I  Violent  pain  in  1.  shoulder  and  chest;  feels  as  if  eructa-
tion would  relieve  it.

Tearing  pain  in  nerves  of  shoulder,  drawing  pain  in  uhiar
nerve,  pain  extending  to  point  of  little  finger.

Periodical,  sensitive,  jDiercing,  drawing  pain  in  arm,  ex-
tending to  tip  of  little  finger,  drawing  it  up.

Right  arm  and  back  of  hand  painfully  sensitive  to  least
touch.

Sprained  pain  in  wrists,  drawing  and  scraping.

In  the  hands,  drawing,  trembling  feelings.

Bad  pain  on  r.  hand,  in  afternoon,  so  that  he  cannot  use  it.

■  Hard,  thickened  places  on  hands  of  workmen,  with  deep,

oblique  cracks,

1  I  Tetter  on  hands;  blisters,  oozing  after  scratching,  with
hot  swelling.

Tearing  in  finger-joints.

Pain  in  fingers  (right  hand)  while  writing.

I  I  Panaritium.

I  I  Tips  of  fingers  sensitive  to  cold  air.
^  Lower  Limbs. Scrofulous  hip  disease,  with  fistulous  open-
ings leading  to  the  bone,  and  ulcers  on  surface,  with
night  sweats.


CISTUS  CANADENSIS.  216

Pain  as  from  a  blow  or  shock  in  1.  buttock,  going  down  on
inside  of  thigh  bone,  distinctly  felt  in  knee-joint,  and
spasmodic  drawing  together  of  calf  of  leg.

Tearing  pain  in  sciatic  nerve.

Drawing,  trembling  feeling  in  lower  extremities.

I  Pains  in  knee  and  r.  thigh,  walking  or  sitting.

■  Tearing  in  knees;  evening.

I  Hard  swelling  around  mercurial,  syphilitic  ulcers  on  legs.

■  Piercing  pain  in  r.  great  toe;  evening.
I  Cold  feet.

iSwelling  of  1.  leg,  ulcer  thereon;  skin  copper-colored.
^*  Limbs  in  General, i  Bruised  pain,  as  from  fatigue.

Tearing  pain  in  the  joints.
^'^  Rest. Position. Motion. After  lying  down  in  evening :

asthmatic  sensation  as  if  ants  were  running  through

whole  body;  anxious,  difficult  breathing,  is  obliged  to

get  up  and  open  window.
Sitting:  pains  in  knee  and  r.  thigh.
While  writing:  pain  in  fingers  of  r.  hand.
Motion :  <  rheumatoid  pain  from  inflamed  spot  under  r.

shoulder-blade  into  1.  hip  and  groin.
Walking:  pains  in  knee  and  r.  thigh.
^'^  Nerves. Neuralgia.

Involuntary  drawing  and  trembling  feeling  in  muscular

parts  of  hands  and lower extremities,  with pain in

wrists,  fingers  and  knee-joints.
Trembling  with  the  fever.
A  feeling  of  lassitude  and  depression  through  the  whole

body.
Very  sensitive  to  a  draught  of  air.
•^^  Sleep. I  Restless  at  night;  pain  from  flatulence.

I  Sleeplessness  from  dryness  of  throat,  constantly  swallows

saliva,  must  get  up,  dryness  <  after  sleep.

■  Anxious  dreams.

I  On  awaking,  pain  under  hypochondria.
'^^  Time. Early  in  morning:  irresistible  urging  to  stool.

In  morning:  frequent  or  violent  sneezing;  sore  pain  in
throat  and  dryness  of  tongue;  hawking  of  tough,  gum-
like, thick,  tasteless  mucus;  on  awaking,  bruised  pain
under  hypochondria,  with  flatulence.

In  afternoon :  bad  pain  on  r.  hand  so  that  he  cannot  use  it.

In  evening:  sick  headache  in  r.  side,  with  chilliness  and
piercing  pain  in  eye  <  ;  frequent  and  violent  sneezing ;
pain  in  all  the  joints  of  face  < ;  flatulence  and  bruised
pain  in  hj^pochondria ;  after  lying  down,  asthmatic;
tearing  in  knees;  piercing  in  r.  great  toe;  tearing,
piercing  pain  <.

At  night:  must  swallow  saliva  to  relieve  unbearable  dry-


217  CISTUS  CANADENSIS.

ness  of  throat;  flatulence  and  bruised  pain  in  hypochon-
dria; itching  and  scratching  in  larynx,  with  anxious
dreams;  asthmatic;  night  sweats;  very  restless ;  sensa-
tion as  if  ants  were  running  through  whole  body.
^^  Temperature  and  Weather.  In  a  very  warm  room :  fore-
head cold,  and  sensation  of  coolness  inside  forehead;
skin  grows  moist.

Draft  of  air:  very  sensitive  to.

Fresh  air:  >  anxious,  difficult  breathing,  and  sensation  as
if  ants  were  running  through  whole  body.

Cold  air:  sore  throat  from  inhaling  least;  sensibility  of
inflamed  and  suppurating  1.  mamma  to;  tips  of  fingers
sensitive  to;  <  scrofula;  extremely  sensitive  to;  pains
in  throat  from.

In  wet  weather :  diarrhoea.
^  Fever. I  Chilliness ;  chill  succeeded  by  heat,  with  trembling,
accompanied  by  a  rapid  swelling  and  great  redness  of
glands  below  ear  and  in  throat.

Cold  feeling:  in  abdomen;  in  larynx.

I  Cold  feet.

Heat  in  face.

i  Heat  with  thirst,  causing  to  drink  frequently.  •

Intermittent  fever,  with  violent  pain  in  head,  and  swelling
below  and  behind  ears.

I  In  a  warm  room,  skin  grows  moist;  forehead  externally
cool,  with  an  internal  feeling  of  coolness.

I  Night  sweats.

■Sweats  very  easily.
^^  Attacks,  Periodicity. Frequent:  sneezing;  nausea;  diar-
rhoea; drinking.

Spasmodic:  piercing  pain  in  middle  of  upper  rim  of  r.
orbit.

All  day:  coolness  in  throat;  dryness  of  throat.

From  noon  until  3  a.m.:  dryness  in  throat  <:

After  supper  until  bedtime:  cheerfulness.

Afterpart  of  night  until  noon:  diarrhoea  and  urging  <.

All  night:  sick  headache  in  r.  side,  with  chilliness  and
piercing  pain  in  eye.

Periodical:  itching  in  throat;  pain  in  a;rm,  extending  to
tip  of  little  finger,  drawing  it  up.

Intermittent  feyer.

Continuous:  feeling  of  dryness  and  heat  in  throat;  swal-
lowing of  saliva.

Chronic: diarrhoea; dysentery;  itching in larynx and

trachea;  catarrh;  scrofulous  inflammation.

*^  Locality  and  Direction. Right: sick headache  in  side

with  piercing  pain  in  eye ;  spasmodic,  piercing  pain  in

middle  of  upjDer  rim  of  orbit,  with  some  headache  on


CISTUS  CANADENSIS.  218

side;  sharp  shooting,  intolerable  itching,  and  thick
crusts,  with  burning  on  zygoma ;  below  shoulder-blade,
extending  around  to  front  of  body,  an  inflamed  spot,
about  as  large  as  palm  of  hand,  painfully  sore  to  touch ;
pain  in  front  of  shoulder ;  arm  and  back  of  hand  pain-
fully sensitive  to  least  touch ;  bad  pain  in  hand  so  that
he  cannot  use  it ;  pain  in  fingers  of  hand  while  writing ;
pain  in  knee  and  thigh,  walking  or  sitting;  piercing  in
great  toe.

Left:  eye  most  affected ;  stitches  in  eye ;  intense  and  deep
itching  in  ear;  side  of  nose  inflamed  and  swollen;  burn-
ing sensation  in  nostril;  toothache  in  upper  decayed
molar;  stitches  in  hypochondrium ;  mamma  inflamed,
suppurating ;  rheumatoid  pain  in  hip  and  groin,  extend-
ing from  inflamed  spot  below  r.  shoulder-blade ;  violent
pain  in  shoulder  and  chest;  pain  as  from  a  shock  or
blow  in  buttock,  going  down  on  inside  of  thigh  bone,
felt  in  knee-joint,  and  spasmodic  drawing  together  of
calf  of  leg;  swelling  of  leg,  ulcer  thereon,  skin  copper-
colored.
^^  Sensations.  As  if  paralyzed ;  as  of  coolness  inside  forehead ;
as  of  a  w^eight  above  eyes;  as  if  something  were  passing
around  in  eye ;  as  if  facial  muscles  would  be  drawn  to
one  side;  surface  of  tongue  as  if  raw;  as  of  softness,  in
throat;  as  if  sand  were  in  throat;  as  if  windpipe  had  not
space  enough;  as  if  ants  were  running  through  whole
body ;  as  if  eructation  would  relieve  violent  pain  in  1.
shoulder  and  chest;  as  from  a  blow  or  shock  in  1.  but-
tock, going  down  on  inside  of  thigh  bone,  -distinctly  felt
at  knee  joint,  and  spasmodic  drawing  together  of  calf
of  leg;  as  of  lassitude  and  depression  through  whole
body.

Pain:  in  head  violent;  in  tip  of  nose;  in  all  the  joints  of
face;  in  sinciput,  >  by  eating  and  drinking;  in  stom-
ach, after  eating;  in  hypochondria;  in  groin,  coming
from  back;  in  trachea;  in  chest,  with  desire  to  eructate;
in  chest  and  shoulder;  in  front  of  r.  shoulder;  violent
in  1.  shoulder  and  chest;  on  r.  hand;  in  fingers ;  (r.  hand)
while  writing;  in  knee  and  r.  thigh;  in  wrists,  fingers,
and  knee-joints;  under  hypochondria  on  awaking;  in
head.

Piercing:  in  eye;  in  arm,  extending  to  tip  of  little  finger;
in  r.  great  toe.

Spasmodic  piercing :  in  middle  of  upper  rim  of  r.  orbit.

Stitches:  in  throat;  from  temple  into  ears;  in  1.  eye;  in
upper  1.  decayed  molar;  in  1.  hypochondrium;  sharp
shooting  on  r.  zygoma.

Scraping:  in  wrists.


219  CISTUS  CANADENSIS.

Scratching:  in  larynx  at  niglit;  on  outside  of  throat  near
larynx.

Tearing :  in  all  the  joints  of  face ;  in  throat  when  cough-
ing; in  nerves  of  shoulder;  in  finger-joints;  in  sciatic
nerve;  in  knees;  in  joints.

Drawing:  in  all  the  joints  of  face;  in  ulnar  nerve;  pain
extending  to  point  of  little  finger;  in  wrists;  in  hands;
in  lower  extremities.

Involuntary  drawing  feeling  in  muscular  parts  of  hands
and  lower  extremities.

Burning :  in  nose ;  in  1.  nostril ;  in  face  and  bones  of  face ;
on  r.  zygoma;  in  throat  high  up  in  cavity  posterior  to
uvula ;  in  inflamed  spot  about  as  large  as  palm  of  hand
below  r.  shoulder-blade;  in  os  coccygis.

Soreness :  of  tongue ;  in  throat.

Rawness:  from  chest  into  throat.

Pressing  pain :  at  root  of  nose.

Pressure:  in  forehead  above  eyes;  on  chest.

Sprained  pain :  in  wrists.
. Bruised  pain:  under  hypochondria,  in  morning;  in  hj^po-
chondria  at  evening  and  at  night;  in  os  coccygis;  in
limbs.

Rheumatoid  pain :  from  inflamed  spot  below  r.  shoulder-
blade,  into  1.  hip  and  groin.

Sensitive  pain:  in  arm,  extending  to  tip  of  little  finger.

Fulness:  in  chest,  with  inflammation  and  suppuration  of
1.  mamma.

Twitching :  in  upper  1.  decayed  molar.

Trembling  feeling:  in  hands;  in  lower  extremities;  in
muscular  parts  of  hands  and  lower  extremities.

Crawling-itching :  in  throat  and  fauces.

Tickling:  in  throat.

Itching:  in  ears;  intense  and  deep  in  1.  ear;  intolerable
on  r.  zygoma;  in  throat;  of  belly  and  umbilicus;  of
scrotum ;  in  larynx ;  at  night ;  on  outside  of  throat  near
larynx;  on  back;  all  over  body.

Dryness:  of  tongue  and  roof  of  mouth;  in  throat;  of  small
spot  in  gullet;  in  larynx;  in  trachea.

Pleat :  in  face  and  bones  of  face ;  in  throat.

Cool  feeling :  in  throat  all  day ;  of  eructations ;  in  stomach ;
in  whole  abdomen ;  of  inhaled  air  in  larynx  and  trachea.

Cold  feeling:  in  nose;  in  stomach;  in  abdomen;  in  larynx.
'^  Tissues. 1 1  Glands  swollen,  inflamed,  indurated,*  or  suppu-
rating; scrofula;  caries;  old  ulcers.

Chronic  catarrh,  with  strumous  disease  of  glands.

Chronic  diarrhoea  and  dysentery.

•  Hospital  gangrene,  phagsedenic  ulcers,  bites  of  rabid
animals,  poisoned  wounds,  etc.,  a  wash  to  arrest  fetid


CISTUS  CANADENSIS.  220

discharges,  ozsena,  leucorrhoea, gonorrhoea,  gargle in

diphtheria.
*^  Touch. Passive  Motion.  Injuries. When  touched :  chest

hurts.
Toucli :  below  r.  shoulder-blade,  extending  around  to  front

of  body,  a  very  much  inflamed  spot,  about  size  of  palm

of  hand,  painfully  sore  to;  pain  in  os  coccygis;  r.  arm

and  back  of  hand  painfully  sensitive  to  least.
Scratching :  oozing  from  blisters  on  hand  after.
*^  Skin. I  Itching  all  over  body,  without  eruption;  sensation

as  of  ants  running  through  whole  body,  especially  at

night.

■  Herpetic  eruption  on  various  parts.

1 1  Scrofula;  extremely  sensitive  to  cold  air.
iMercurio-syphilitic  ulcers,  surrounded  by  hard  swelling;

on  lower  limbs.
Adenitis.
I  Panaritium.
■Small,  painful  pimples, which bleed easily  and heal

slowly,  across  shoulders  and  on  breast.
■Vesicular  erysipelas  on  face.

■  Lupus  on  face.
Eruptions  on  back  like  zoster.

Furuncules  which  commenced  with  a  number  of  small
blisters.
*^  Stages  of  Life,  Constitution. Scrofulous  subjects  with  great
sensitiveness  to  cold  air,

A  lad,  set.  7  years;  scrofulous  hip  disease.

Mrs. C,  set.  19,  delicate  constitution;  cough  with  neck
thickly  studded  with  tumors.
*^  Relations. Antidotes :  Rhus  tox.,  Cam.phor,  {f)  Sepia  (swollen
nose).

Compatible:  Magnesium  (the  plant  requires  a  magnesian
soil),  Bellad.,  Garb,  veg.,  Phosphor.

Incompatible :  Coffee  causes  diarrhoea.

Compare:  Argent,  nitr.,  Bellad.,  Calc.  carb.,  Garb.  veg.  (cold
breath),  Gorydalis,  Graphit.,  Hepar,  Kali  bich.,  Laches.,
Nitr.  ac,  Paris  quad.,  Phosphor.,  Sulphur  (stool  in  morn-
ing with  urging).


221  CITRUS  LIMONUM.

CITRUS  LIMONUM.

Lemon.  Rutacese.

A  popular  remedy  with  the  Arabians.

"The  Citrus  Medica,  like  the  orange  tree,  is  a  native  of  Asia.  It  was  intro-
duced into  Europe  from  Persia  or  Media,  was  first  cultivated  in  Greece,  afterwards
in  Italy,  so  early  as  the  second  century.  It  is  considered  almost  a  specific  for
prevention  and  cure  of  scurvy.  Kevillont,  a  French  physician,  recommends  it  as
a  gargle  in  diphtheritic  affection  of  fauces,  but  states  that  it  is  without  action  on
the  white  lenticular  patches." —  U.  S.  D.

Clinical  Authorities. — Diphtheria,  recommended  by  Buchner ;  Dysentery,
natives  of  Tchian,  Persia,  Ausland,  p.  18,  1855;  Dropsy  and  hydrothorax,  Schwabe,
Casper's  Wschrft.,  1843,  No.  8 ;  Dropsy  after  scarlatina,  Biittner,  Pr.  Med.  Ztg.,  1842,
No.  26;  Dropsy  with  splenitis.  Gross,  Horn.  Arch.,  v.  20,  p.  178;  Hydrothorax  (two
cases),  Borner,  Frank's  Mag.,  v.  1,  p.  1 ;  Hydrothorax  and  general  anasarca,  Frank's
Mag.,  V.  1,  p.  157 ;  Convulsions,  caused  by  eating  the  seeds  of  Datura  Stramonium,
Euckert's  Horn.  Therap.,  p.  377;  Cancer,  Denny,  B.  J.  H.,  v.  24,  p.  518;  Willis
and  Brondini ;  Sunstroke,  Med.  Inves.,  v.  8,  p.  477.

Symptoms  marked  t.  are  toxicological  symptoms. See  Encyclopedia.

^  Mind. I  Women  who  are  generally  very  attentive,  suddenly
become  averse  to  domestic  duties.
Insensibility,
^  Inner  Head, i  Headache  occurs  daily,  compels  her  to  lie

down. ^Splenitis.
^  Upper  Face. Lividity  of  face ;  t.
^^  Inner  Mouth. iScorbutis.

13  Throat. Throat  is  sore  posteriorly  and  low  down,  <  on
waking.
Diphtheria.
^*  Appetite. iWant  of  appetite. ^Splenitis.
^^  Belching. ■  Empty  eructations,  particularly  after  eating.

^Splenitis.
^'^  Scrobiculum. iScrobiculum  painful  to  pressure  of  hand.

6'Splenitis.
^^  Hypochondria, i  Affections  of  spleen.

I  Painful  enlargement  of  spleen.
^^  Abdomen, i  i  Ascites.

^°  Stool  and  Rectum, i  Constipation. ^Splenitis.
•  Dysentery.
Hemorrhage  from  bowels  and  death,  in  dropsy  following

intermittent;  t.
Itching  of  anus  from  pin  worms.
^^  Male  Sexual  Organs. Itching  of  scrotum.
1  1  Dropsy  of  scrotum.


CITRUS  LIMONUM.  222

^  Female  Sexual  Organs. Itching  of  pudenda.

^^  Respiration. Breathing  in  the  form  of  gasping;  t.

I  Dyspnoea. ^Splenitis.
^^  Inner  Chest  and  Lungs. '  '  Great  dj^spnoea,  almost  suffo-
cation ;  sits  with  face  bent  over  as  far  as  possible ;  un-
consciousness ;  dry  skin ;  cold  sweat  on  face  and  arms.
^Hydrothorax  following  metritis.
Haemoptysis;  t.
I  I  Hydrothorax.
^^  Heart  and  Pulse. Heart  beating  very  feebly;  absence  of

pulse  at  WTist;  t.
^^  Lower  Limbs. Excessive  dropsy  of legs  from  ankte  to

knee  (from  eating  lemons  daily  for  months).
^*  Limbs  in  General. iStiffness.  of  the  joints,  particularly  in
the  fingers;  bruised  feeling,  particularly  in  the  feet;
she  is  averse  to  domestic  duties.
^^  Best. Position. Motion. Daily  headache  compels  lying
down.
Great  dyspnoea ;  sits  with  face  bent  over  as  far  as  possible.
^^  Nerves. Great  prostration  and  collapse ;  t.

I  Convulsions  from  poisoning  by  Stramonium.
*°  Fever, i  Typhus.

I  Intermittent  fever  (lemon-juice  wdth  coffee  during  the
apyrexia).
^^  Attacks,  Periodicity. Headache  daily.

Intermittent  fever.
^^  Sensations. Bruised  feeling:  in  joints,  particularly  in  feet.
Soreness:  of  throat,  posteriorly  and  low  dowm.
Stiffness:  of  joints,  particularly  in  fingers.
Itching:  of  anus  from  pin  worms;  of  scrotum;  of  pudenda.
Dryness  of  skin.
**  Tissues. :  Citric  acid  was  applied  with  good  results  to  as-
suage pain  in  three  cases  of  cancer.
l  Malignant  cancer,  which  commenced  some  years  since  as
an  enlarged  submaxillary  gland,  supposed  to  be  caused
by  a  carious  tooth,  pain  at  times  excessive. Lotion  of
citric  acid,  one  drachm  to  eight  ounces  of  water,  and
mouth  rinsed  out  as  often  as  pleased,  afforded  perfect
relief  from  pain.
I  Pain  from  cancer  of  tongue ;  also  affords  instantaneous

relief  in  other  affections;  is,  however,  not  curative.
:  Useful  as  a  gargle  in  diphtheria,  causing  detachment  of
the  false  membranes,  decrease  of  the  glandular  enlarge-
ment and  rapid  recovery.
A  man  who  was  sun  struck  near  the  Dead  Sea,  heat  being
125.5°  F.,  was  treated  by  a  Bedouin  guide,  who  bathed
his  hands,  head  and  face  with  lemon-juice,  after  which
he  was  able  to  ride  two  hours,  to  the  banks  of  the  Jor-


223  CITEUS  LIMONUM— CLEMATIS  ERECTA.

dan,  where  he  could  rest  for  several  hours,  and  there
completely  recovered.
^^  Touch. Scrobiculum  painful  to  pressure  of  hand.
^*^  Skin. I  I  Dry skin, with cold sweat on face and arms.
^Hydrothorax.

General  surface  of  body  cold.

I  I  Dropsy,  particularly  of  chest,  and  after  scarlatina.

I  I  Herpetic  eruption.
^^  Stages  of  Life,  Constitution. A  woman,  set.  35;  hydro-
thorax.

A  farmer's  wife,  set.  60 ;  hydrothorax.

Inn-keeper,  set.  64,  drank  much  beer  and  whiskey ;  hydro-
thorax  and  general  anasarca.

Man,  set.  75 ;  dropsy.
^^  Relations. Antidoted  by :  Aeon.  Asarum,  Datura,  Euphorb.,
I  Hepar,  1 1  Sepia.

It  antidotes:  Aeon,  (diuresis  of),  Euphorb.,  Stramon.,  snake
bites  and  all  animal  poisons.

Compatible :  after  Bellad.  (increases  curative  effects,  espe-
cially in  women  in  childbed).

Compare:  Acet.  ac.  (dropsies),  Bellad.,  Laches., Mereur.


CLEMATIS  ERECTA.

Upright  Virginia  Bower.  Ranunculacese.

Grows  in  Southern  and  Central  Europe,  on  sunny  hills,  in  bushes  and  on  the
sides  of  forests.

"  Stoerck,  before  Hahnemann  (1769),  recommended  it  in  cancerous  ulcers  of
lips  and  mammre:;  spongy  excrescences;  tophi;  inveterate  eruptions;  old,  foul
ulcers;  peculiar  kinds  of  chronic  headaches,  and  melancholia;  arthritis  and
secondary  syphilis." — Frank's  Mag,,  v.  4.

"Was  known  as  Flammula  Jovis  in  older  pharmacy,  because  of  its  irritating,
action  on  the  mucous  membranes,  and  its  power  to  produce  inflammation  and  vesi-
cation, when  applied  to  the  skin." — U.  S.  D.,  p.  1619.

It  was  extensively  proved  by  Hahnemann  and  his  provers,  and  also  by  the
Austrian  provers. See  Encyclopedia,  v.  3,  p.  340.

Clinicai,  Authorities. — Painful  ewelling  of  face  with  decayed  teeth,  E.  W.  B.,
N.  A.  J.  H.,  V.  22,  p.  197  ;  Toothache,  Berridge,  Horn.  Clinics,  v.  4,  p.  94;  Iritis,  Mad-
den &  Hughes;  Blepharitis,  Hirsch  ;  Urinary  difficulties  (2  women),  K.  T.  Cooper,
B.  J.  H.,  V.  28,  p.  662;  Stricture  of  urethra,  Hirsch,  B.  J.  H.,  v.  25,  p.  612;  recom-
mended by  Desterne ;  several  cases  by  Jahr,  in  Galilean  Journal ;  Schleicher,
Eiick.  Kl.  Er.,  v.  5,  p.  503;  the  spasmodic  form,  Hirsch,  B.  J.  H.,  v.  25,  p.  612;  in-


CLEMATIS  ERECTA.  224

flammatory  variety,  Franklin,  Surgery,  v.  1,  p.  428;  after  chronic  gleet,  Hughes
Pharm.,  p.  297 ;  Orchitis,  Rosenberg,  Eiick.  K.  E.,  v.  1,  p.  80;  Ransford,  B.  J.  H
V.  25;  R.  Koch,  Horn.  Clin.,  v.  1,  p.  51;  Orchitis,  after  gonorrhaa,  A.  C.  Pope,
B.  J.  H.,  V.  24,  p.  662 ; Orchitis,  after  suppressed  gonorrhcea,  Attomyr,  Riick.  Kl
Erf,  V.  1,  p.  80; Orchitis,  with  indurated  swelling  of  testes,  after  gonorrhcea,  Stapf
Swelling  of  r.  testicle,  after  having  been  cured  of  a  syphilitic  ulcer  a  year  previous.  Hart
mann,  B.  J.  H.,  v.  12,  p.  294;  Chronic  bubo,  Rosenberg,  Riick.  Kl.  Er.,  v.  1,  p.  80
Scirrhus  mammce,  2  cases,  Schoenfeld,  Riick.  Kl.  E.,  v.  5 ;  Enlargement  of  lymphatic
glands, Vienna  Homceop. Hospital ; Herpes  exedens, Prager Monatschrift  fiir
Homoeop. ; Crusta  serpiginosa,  R.  Arnold,  B.  J.  H.,  v.  26,  p.  653 ;  Eczema  impeti-
ginosum,  Hirsch,  B.  J.  H.,  v.  25,  p.  610;  Chronic  tetter  of  hands,  R.  Arnold,  B.  J.
H.,  V.  26,  p.  654.

^  Mind. BMelancholy;  preoccupied  by  sad  thoughts.

I  Despairing  mood. ^Stricture.

Indiiferent,  silent,  almost  thoughtless.

1  Low-spirited,  and  fear  of  approaching  misfortune.

I  Fear  of  being  alone,  but  disinclined  to  meet  even  agree-
able company.

I  Irritable,  taciturn,  does  not  want  to  go  out.

Peevish  and  dissatisfied  without  any  cause.

■Ailments  from  homesickness,  or  contrition  of  spirit.

I  Difficulty  in  thinking,  memory  impaired.

1  Furious  delirium  and  violent  fever. ^Orchitis.
^  Sensormm. Confusion  and  heaviness  of  head  in  morning.

iDulness  and  cloudiness  in  head,  with  tendency  to  vertigo.

Giddiness  on  lifting  head  up,  or  when  moving  head.
^  Inner  Head. Head  feels  full  and  heavy,  and  drops.

iPressive,  tensive  pain  in  forepart  of  brain,  <  when  walk-
ing than  when  sitting ;  with  heaviness  of  head.

Headache  in  forehead  >  by  pressure.

Drawing  pain  in  1.  side  of  forehead.

I  Boring  ^^ain  in  1.  temple.

Grinding  in  r.  half  of  brain  when  walking.

Tight  aching  in  whole  of  1.  side  of  head,  more  in  the  bones
than  in  the  brain.

Shocks  in  brain,  from  behind  forwards.

Hammering  sensation  in  head  in  evening  when  lying
down.

Headache  <  by  bending  head  backward.
*  Outer  Head. Eruption  of  painful  pimples  on  forehead.

I  Itching  of  scalp.

■  Small  itching  crusts  and  some  stitches  in  scalp.

Tinea  capitis  over  greater  part  of  head,  with  pustular  con-
junctivitis.

■  Eruption  on  occiput,  extending  down  neck,  moist,  sore,

with  crawling  and  stinging-itching;  often  drying  up  in
scales;  itching  <  w^hen  getting  warm  in  bed;  only
slight,  and  but  temporary  relief  by  scratching.


225  CLEMATIS  ERECTA.

Eruption  on  back  of  head  and  neck ;  tingling  and  itching ;
the  vehicles  break,  overflow  the  other  parts,  with  ten-
dency to  ulceration.
'"  Sight  and  Eyes. Staring  look.

I  Burning  heat  and  dryness  in  eyes  as  if  fire  were  stream-
ing from  them;  great  sensitiveness  to  cold  air,  to  light
and  bathing.

I  Pressing  pain  in  eyes,  photophobia  and  lachrymation  <
in  open  air;  heat  in  eyes.

■  Smarting  of  eyes  <  when  closing  them;  on  re-opening

them,  great  sensitiveness  to  light.

■  Complaints  from  bright  sunlight.
Obscured  sight.

While  writing  the  letters  momentarily  run  together;  at
times  double  vision,  with  flickering  before  eyes.

I  Inflammation  of  iris;  posterior  synechia.

iKerato-iritis,  particularly  of  the  ulcerative  type.

Pain  in  eyes ;  pressure  in  middle  of  1.  eyeball.

Pulsating,  itching,  burning  drynesss,  as  if  fire  were  stream-
ing from  the  eyes,  with  biting,  acrid  lachrymation.

I  Eyes  smart,  as  if  raw,  capillaries  enlarged,  lachrymation;
smarting  <  when  closing  eyes;  sensitive  to  open  air,
fears  to  open  them ;  "  gets  black  "  before  the  eyes.

Ulceration  of  cornea  with  burning,  tingling  and  stitching
pains,  sensitive  to  heat  and  bathing.

I  SjDot  on  1.  eye  caused  by  gonorrhoea ;  inflammation  in  op-

posite eye.

I I  Pustular  conjunctivitis,  complicated  with  tinea  capitis;
with  agglutination  of  lids  in  morning.

Whites  of  eyes  have  a  yellow  tint.

■  Burning  and  inflammation  of  inner  canthi;  dim,  weak

sight.
Stitches  in  inner  canthus  of  1.  eye,  as  from  a  sharp  pointed

body,  lasting  some  minutes.
Itching  in  canthi.  "

Smarting  and  burning  in  eyes,  especially  in  margins  of

lids.
1 1  Eyes  inflamed,  protruded,  dim;  eyelids  badly  ulcerated

and  secreting  acrid  water. 6'Syphilis.
I  Chronic  irritable  condition  of  lids,  with  swelling  of  mei-
bomian glands,  in  young,  scrofulous  subjects.
I  I  An  itching  pimple  over  the  arcus  ciliaris,  with  coryza

and  moroseness.
^  Hearing  and  Ears, i  Ringing  in  ears,  as  from  bells.

I  Burning  pain  in  auricles,  with  heat.
"  Smell  and  Nose. Violent  coryza,  with  sneezing;  discharge

streaked  with  blood.
Dryness  of  nose,  with  heat  and  burning,
vol,.  IV. — 15.


CLEMATIS  ERECTA.  22G

®  Upper  Face. iPale  and  sickly  countenance.

I  Aching  in  r.  side  of  face,  which  is  tender  to  touch;  >

from  smoking,  <  when  lying  on  painful  side.
■Shooting,  upwards,  in  r.  side  of  face  to  eye,  ear  and

temple.

■  Burning  of  face;  cheeks  red  and  hot,  momentary  flushes.
I  Moist  eruption  on  face,  preceded  by  stinging  pain.
White  blisters  on  face  as  if  burnt  by  the  sun.

^  Lower  Face. ■  Burning,  cutting  through  lower  lip.

■  Vesicular  eruption  on  lip.

Pustular  eruption  about  lips,  tender  to  the  touch.

■  Lower lip swollen, deeply ulcerated and cancerous.

^Syphilis.

■Suppurative  pimples  on  chin.

I  I  Swelling  of  the  submaxillary  glands,  with  hard,  little
tubercles,  throbbing,  tight  as  if  they  would  ulcerate;
painful  when  touched  and  exciting  a  toothache.
^"  Teeth  and  Gums.  Toothache:  stitching  and  drawing  <  at
night,  >  for  short  time  from  cold  water,  >  when  draw-
ing in  air,  >  in  open  air;  <  from  warmth  of  bed;
crumb  of  bread  starts  aching;  <  from  smoking  to-
bacco; from  syphilitic  affections,  when  mercurialized.

■  Toothache,  tolerable  during  day,  but  as  soon  as  he  lies

down  in  bed  and  assumes  a  horizontal  position,  it  in-
creases to  an  unbearable  degree.

■  Toothache  in  a  hollow  tooth,  only  transiently  relieved  by

cold  water,  also  relieved  by  drawing  in  cold  air.

■  Dull  pain  in  hollow  tooth  >  by  cold  water  or  sucking  it.

■  Decayed  teeth  feel  too  long;  contact  extremely  painful ;

free  flow  of  saliva.

■  Gums  of  1.  lower  molars  pain,  as  if  sore,  <  while  eating.
"  Tongue. ■Tongue  dry  in  morning,  on  awaking.

Small  blisters  on  tongue  and  in  throat,  which  soon  become
ulcers.
^^  Inner  Mouth. ■Breath  ofl'ensive  to  others.
Heat  and  burning  in  mouth  and  throat.

■  Continued  salivation. ^Syphilis.

13  Throat. Sensation  of  roughness  in  throat.
^^  Aversions. ■Long lasting  satiety;  can  eat,  and  with  relish,,
yet  immediately  feels  it  is  too  much.

■  Aversion  to  beer.

^^  Eating.  ■After  eating,  weakness  in  all  the  limbs,  with  pul-
sation in  arteries.

^^  Nausea.  ■  Nausea,  with  weakness  in  legs,  from  smoking
tobacco.

^^  Stomach. Disagreeable  sensation  of  coldness  in  stomach.

■  Pressure  on  stomach,  after  dinner.

^^  Hypochondria.  ■Bruised  pain  in  hepatic  region,  when
touched  or  bending.


227  .  CLEMATIS  ERECTA.

^^  Abdomen, l  Lancinating  pains,  from  belly  to  chest,  <  by
breathing,  also  during  micturition.
I  Increased  sensitiveness  of  both  inguinal  regions.

■  Swelling  and  induration  of  inguinal  gland,  with  jerking

pains.

■  Sensation  in  abdominal  ring  and  in  inguinal  glands,  as

if  a  swelling  would  form.
Sensation  of  constriction  in  lower  abdomen,  which  is  hard.

■  Swelling  of  r.  inguinal  region,  painful  to  touch.

■  ■Swelling  of  glands  in  both  inguinal  regions,  with  sensi-

tiveness while  walking;  the  r.  inguinal  glands  become
more  swollen,  with  prickling  pain  in  them,  <  by  walk-
ing and  in  bed;  afterwards  a  tensive  sensation  in  them,
especially  when  walking.

■  ■Swelling  of  r.  inguinal  gland,  <  than  left,  not  painful

when  rising  after  walking.
Large  pustules  about  loins.
^**  Stool  and  Rectum. ■Frequent  stools  becoming  more  and

more  loose,  without  abdominal  pain.
Loose  stools,  with  burning  at  anus.
Diarrhoea  and  dysentery.

■  Constipation; hard stool, difficult to discharge (in

evening).
Burning  heat  and  itching  at  anus.
Hemorrhoids ;  itching,  discharging  mucus.
^^  Urinary  Organs. ■Urine  frequent  but  scanty.
Urgent  desire  to  urinate,  without  pain.
■Spasmodic  urging  and  tenesmus.
■Vesical neuralgia;  the urethra or seminal  cord  most

affected.

■  Long  lasting  contraction  or  constriction  of  urethra,  urine

emitted  by  drops,  as  in  spasmodic  stricture.

■  Burning  in  urethra  on  urinating.

■  Sharp  stitches  in  urethra.

■  Tingling  in  urethra,  culminating  at  frsenum.

Urethra  painful  to  touch,  <  at  night  and  from  heat  of  bed.

■  Urethra  painful  to  pressure.

■  Micturition  remarkably  slow.

■  Urine  passes  slowly  and  in  a  thin  stream,  as  if  urethra

was  constricted.

■  Interrupted  flow  of  urine,  with  burning  during,  but  most

at  beginning  of  micturition,  or  during  the  interruptions.

■  Acute  pain  (ardor  urinse)  and  tenesmus  while  urinating,

with  aching  pain  in  lower  part  of  back;  the  forcing  in-
duces copious,  involuntary  lachrymation,  and  is  most
violent  before  6  p.m.  ;  not  so  troubled  at  night.
After  great  straining  a  few  drops  of  urine  pass,  which  is
followed  by  a  full  stream  without  pain ;  after  this  some-
times dribbling  of  urine.


CLEMATIS  ERECTA.  228

1 1  Involuntary  flow,  by  drops,  after  micturition.

I  Heavy,  aching  pain  in  lower  part  of  back,  with  sense  of
bearing  down  and  heavy  pain  in  chest;  continual  desire
to  pass  water  with  inability  to  perform  the  act;  urine
comes  away  first  in  drops,  as  if  something  blocked  up
the  passage,  after  this  stream  is  full  and  continuous.

■  Inability  to  evacuate  all  the  urine  at  once.

I  When  beginning  to  urinate  it  burns  the  worst,  while
urinating  it  sticks  in  urethra,  and  after  urinating  it  still
continues  to  burn  and  bite.

I  The  last  drops  of  urine  cause  violent  burning.

iFlocculent,  pale  urine. ^Stricture.

Urine  turbid,  milky,  dark,  with  flakes  of  mucus  and  froth.

■  Urinary  deposit  pus-like.

I  Discharge  from  urethra  of  thick  pus. ^Gonorrhoea.
^^  Male  Sexual  Organs, i  Sexual  desire  weak.

■  Involuntary  erections  by  day.

Violent,  long  continued  erections,  with  stitches  in  urethra.

■  Burning  in  penis  during  seminal discharge  in  coitus.

^Stricture.

■  ■Right  spermatic  cord  sensitive,  testicles  drawn  up.

■  Pain  in  testicles,  drawing  to  spermatic  cord.

■  Swelling  of  1.  testicle  with  intolerable  drawing  pain  in

testicle  and  cord. ^Suppressed  gonorrhoea.
Drawing  pain  in  testes  and  spermatic  cord  from  below

upwards.
Painful  sensitiveness  of  testes.
• ■  Pinching  pain  in  testicles,  <  from  slightest  touch.

■  ■Painful,  inflamed  and  swollen  testicles.

Testes  painful  to  touch,  as  if  bruised,  with  drawing  and
stretching  in  inguinal  region,  1.  thigh  and  scrotum;  a
clawing  pain  when  touching  it  or  when  walking.

■Severe  and  painful  strangury,  with  enlargement  and
tenderness  of  1.  testicle  and  swelling  in  groin  of  same
side ;  testicle  hard  and  tender  to  touch ;  the  swelling  and
pain  extend  along  cord  into  groin,  is  shooting  in  char-
acter and  <  by  motion;  a  slight  gleety  discharge
present;  no  pain  in  micturition.  ^Orchitis  after  mis-
managed gonorrhoea.

■  Orchitis  with  much  urethral  irritation.

Swelling  and  induration  of  both  testicles,  or  only  of  r. ;
pain  as  if  bruised  on  touching  the  testes.

■  ■Induration  of  testicles.

■  i Swelling  of  r.  half  of  scrotum,  which  is  thickened  and

hangs  low  down; testicle also relaxed and  hanging
down.
Itching  about  genitals.
^^  Female  Sexual  Organs. ■Menses  too  early.


229  CLEMATIS  ERECTA.

I  Softened  scirrhus,  with  corrosive  leucorrhoea  and  lanci-
nating pains  running  upwards,  <  by  breathing  and
during  micturition.

I  Swelling  and  induration  of  breasts;  cancer  of  breast;
glandular  induration  above  nipple,  painful  when
touched.

■  Scirrhus, 1. mamma, with stitches in shoulder; the

gland  is  very  painful,  <  in  cold  weather  and  during

night;  <  during  growing  moon;  while  perspiring  she

cannot  bear  to  be  uncovered.
^^  Larynx, l  Dryness  and  burning  in  throat.
^^  Respiration, i  Respiration  impeded  when  ascending  a  hill

or  walking  over  an  uneven  road.
^''  Cough. Violent  cough  with  irregular  respirations,  at  times

too  slow,  at  times  too  rapid.
Barking  cough  with  burning  pain  in  sternum  and  stitches

in  both  sides  of  lungs.
Cough  usually  dry.
^^  Inner  Chest  and  Lungs, i  Oppression  of  chest.

■  Aching  or  stitching  pains  in  chest.
Tearing  pain  in  forepart  of  chest,  above  heart.
Burning  pain  in  sternum  and  stitches  in  both  sides  of

lungs,  with  barking  cough.
Left  side  of  chest  seems  most  affected.
^^  Heart  and  Pulse. ■Sharp  stitches  in  region  of  heart,  from

within  outwards.
Pulse  unchanged ;  excited,  with  throbbing  in  veins.
Distinctly  perceptible  pulsations  in  whole  body,  especially

about  the  heart.
^^  Neck  and  Back. Small  of  back : burning ; pressure  in ;

bruised pain; as if  broken, with tension, < when

stooping.

■  Moist  eruption  on  neck  extending  to  head.
^^  Upper  Limbs. ■  Swelling  of  axillary  glands.

■  Pressing  or  drawing  in  muscles  of  arms  and  hands.

■  Rheumatic  pains  in  hands.

■  Arthritic  nodes  on  finger-joints.

Fiddling  motion  of  1.  and  r.  arm ;  slow  bass  viol  move-
ment.

Hands  feel  as  if  they  were  too  large;  they  are  dry  and  hot.

Spreading  blisters  on  swollen  hands  and  fingers,  < by
cold  air.
^^  Lower  Limbs. ■Weakness  in  legs  from  smoking  tobacco.

■  Scaly  herpes  on  thighs.

■  Burrowing,  boring,  or  pressive  pains  on  tibiee.

■  Rheumatic  pains  in  lower  limbs.

■  Painful  swelling  in  knee  after  gonorrhoea.

■  Violent  itching  of  toes,  evenings,  after  lying  down ;  sweat

between  toes.


CLEMATIS  ERECTA.  230

Dry,  scaly  tetter  on  legs.
^*  Limbs  in  General, i  Weakness,  heaviness,  weariness  and
bruised  sensation  in  limbs.

Great  emaciation  and  relaxed  muscles.
^'^  Rest. Position. Motion. When  lying  down :  in  evening,
hammering  in  head; toothache  <  to an  unbearable
degree.

After  lying  down :  violent  itching  of  toes,  evenings.

Sitting:  pressive,  tensive  pain  in  forepart  of  brain,  <
when  walking  than  when  sitting.

Closing  eyes:  <  smarting  in  eyes.

On  opening  eyes :  great  sensitiveness  to  light.

Motion :  <  shooting  along  cord  into  groin.

When  moving  head:  giddiness.

Bending  head  backward :  <  headache.

On  lifting  head  up :  giddiness.

While  writing:  letters  momentarily  run  together.

Bending:  causes  bruised  pain  in  hepatic  region.

Stooping:  <  pain  an(i  tension  in  small  of  back.

When  walking :  pressive,  tensive  pain  in  forepart  of  head
< ;  grinding  in  r.  half  of  brain ;  sensitiveness  of  in-
guinal glands;  prickling,  tensive  pain  in  r.  inguinal
glands;  clawing  pain  in  scrotum;  over  an  uneven  road,
impeded  respiration.

When  ascending  a  hill :  respiration  impeded.
^^  Nerves. ■  Great  debility.

I  Twitching  of  muscles.

I  Vibratory  sensation  through  whole  body  after  lying  down.

■  After  typhoid  fever,  while  getting  better,  and  in  hydro-

cephalus, sudden  stupor  and  look  as  if  dying.
^  Sleep. I  Sleepiness,  great  desire  to  sleep  during  day,  even
mornings  early.

■  Sleeplessness,  evening  and  night.

■  Uneasy  sleep,  dreaming  and  tossing  about;  rises  unre-

freshed  from  sleep  in  morning.
Restless,  tossing  about,  vivid,  lascivious  dreams ;  profuse

perspiration  after  midnight.
Feels  exhausted  on  waking.
^^  Time. Before  6  p.m.:  forcing  to  urinate,  inducing  copious,

involuntary  lachrymation.
In  morning:  heaviness  of  head;  pustular  conjunctivitis,

with agglutination of  lids; on awaking, dryness of

tongue ;  rises  unrefreshed  from  sleep.
During  day :  involuntary  erections ;  great  desire  to  sleep.
Early  in  morning:  great  desire  to  sleep.
In  evening :  hammering  in  head ;  constipation ;  after  lying

down,  violent  itching  of  toes;  sleeplessness.
At  night:  toothache  <;  pain  in  urethra  <; scirrhus,  1.


231  CLEMATIS  ERECTA.

mamma,  with  stitches  in  shoulder  <;  sleeplessness;  dry

heat  with  general  hot  sensation;  profuse  sweat,  most

towards  morning;  herpes  exedens,  itching  and  burning

<;  ulcers  <.
After  midnight :  profuse  perspiration.
^^  Temperature  and  Weather. Warmth  of  bed :  <  itching

in  eruption  on  scalp  and  neck ;  <  toothache ;  <  painful

urethra;  <  moist  eczema,  itching  terrible.
Heat :  ulceration  of  cornea,  eye  sensitive  to.
When  drawing  in  air,  toothache  >  ;  toothache  in  hollow

tooth,  transiently  >.
When  uncovering  in  bed :  chilliness  over  whole  body.
Open  air :  <  pressing  pain  in  eyes,  photophobia,  lachry-

mation ;  eyes  sensitive  to ;  >  toothache.
Cold  air :  sensitiveness  of  eyes  to ;  <  spreading  blisters  on

swollen  hands  and  fingers.
Bathing:  sensitiveness  of  eyes.

Cold  water :  >  toothache  for  a  short  time ;  <  moist  eczema.
Moist  poultices:  <  eczema  and  ulcers.
Cold  weather:  <  scirrhus,  1.  mamma.
^  Fever. ■  Chill,  with  shivering,  followed  by  sweat,  without

intervening  heat.

■  Chilliness  over  whole  body,  particularly  when  uncover-

ing in  bed. ^Orchitis.

■  Dry  heat,  with  general  hot  sensation  only  at  night.
I  Heat  of  one  side.

I  Profuse  sweat  at  night,  most  toward  morning,  with  aver-
sion to  uncovering.
*^  Attacks,  Periodicity. Sudden:  stupor,  after  typhoid  and
in  hydrocephalus.

Spasmodic:  urging  and  tenesmus.

Momentary:  flushes  to  cheeks.

Lasting  some  minutes:  stitches  in  inner  canthus  of  1.  eye.

Frequent:  stools;  urination.

At  times:  double  vision,  with  flickering  before  eyes;  res-
piration too  slow;  respiration  too  rapid.

Continuous :  salivation ;  desire  to  pass  water  with  inability
to  do  so.

Long lasting : satiety ; contraction  -  and  constriction of
urethra;  violent  erections.

During  growing  moon:  scirrhus,  1.  mamma,  with  stitches
in  shoulder  < ;  eruption  looks  inflamed.

During  decreasing  moon :  eruptions  look  dry.

Chronic:  irritable  condition  of  lids  with  swollen  meibo-
mian  glands;  exanthematous  eruption; constitutional
herpes ;  tetter  of  hands.
*^  Locality  and  Direction. Right:  grinding  in  half  of  brain ;
inflammation  in  eye;  aching  in  side  of  face;  shooting


CLEMATIS  ERECTA.  232

upwards  in  side  of  face,  to  eye,  ear  and  temple;  prick-
ling in  swollen  inguinal  glands;  swelling  of  inguinal
gland;  spermatic  cord  sensitive;  swelling  and  indura-
tion of  testicle;  swelling  of  half  of  scrotum,  which  is
thickened  and  hangs  low  down,  testicle  also  relaxed  and
hanging  down ;  fiddling  motion  of  arm.

Left :  drawing  pain  in  side  of  forehead ;  boring  in  temple ;
tight  aching  in  whole  of  side  of  head,  more  in  bones
than  in  brain;  pressure  in  middle  of  eyeball;  spot  on
eye  caused  by  gonorrhoea ;  stitches  in  inner  canthus  of
eye;  gums  of  lower  molars  pain,  while  eating;  swelling
of  testicle  with  intolerable  drawing  pain  in  testicle  and
cord ;  drawing  and  stretching  in  thigh ;  enlargement  and
tenderness  of  testicle  and  swelling  in  groin,  testicle
hard  and  tender  to  touch;  scirrhus  of  mamma,  with
stitches  in  shoulder,  gland  very  painful;  side  of  chest
most  affected;  fiddling  motion  of  arm;  sore  on  side  <
from  washing.

From  behind  forwards:  shocks  in  brain.
■*^  Sensations.  As  if  fire  were  streaming  from  eyes ;  as  if  eyes
were  raw ;  as  if  little  tubercles  of  swollen  submaxillary
glands  would  ulcerate;  as  if  decayed  teeth  were  too
long;  as  if  gums  of  1.  lower  molars  were  sore;  as  if  a
swelling  would  form  in  abdominal  ring  and  in  inguinal
glands ;  as  if  testes  were  bruised ;  as  if  bruised  on  touch-
ing testes ;  as  if  small  of  back  was  broken ;  as  if  hands
were  too  large.

Pain  in  pimples  on  forehead ;  in  eyes ;  acute,  while  uri-
nating; in  testicles,  drawing  to  spermatic  cord.

Lancinating  pains:  from  belly  to  chest;  with  softened
scirrhus.

Cutting :  through  lower  lip.

Boring :  in  1.  temple ;  on  tibise.

Sharp  stitches:  in  urethra;  in  region  of  heart,  from  within
outwards.

Stitches:  in  scalp;  as  from  a  sharp  pointed  body,  in  inner
canthus  of  1.  eye;  in  urethra;  in  1.  shoulder.

Stitching  pains:  with'  ulceration  of  cornea;  toothache;
in  chest;  in  both  sides  of  lungs.

Sticking  sensation  when  touching  skin.

Stinging  pain :  precedes  eruption  on  face.

Stinging-itching:  in  eruption  on  occiput  and  neck.

Shooting:  upwards,  in  r.  side  of  face  to  eye,  ears  and
temple;  along  cord  into  groin;  in  ulcer.

Jerking:  in  swollen  and  indurated  inguinal  gland;  in
ulcer.

Tearing:  in  forepart  of  chest,  above  heart.

Drawing:  in  1.  side  of  forehead;  toothache;  in  1.  testicle


233  •  CLEMATIS  ERECTA.

and  spermatic  cord;  in  inguinal  region,  1.  thigh  and
scrotum ;  in  muscles  of  arms  and  hands.

Burning :  of  face ;  through  lower  lip ;  at  anus ;  in  urethra
on  urinating;  during,  but  most  at  beginning  of  urina-
tion, or  during  the  interruptions;  after  urinating;  last
drops  of  urine  cause  violent;  in  penis  during  seminal
discharge  in  coitus;  in  throat;  in  sternum;  in  small  of
back;  in  skin;  herpes  exedens  with;  miliary  eruption
with;  in  ulcer;  with  ulceration  of  cornea;  of  inner
canthi ;  in  eyes,  especially  in  margins  of  lids ;  in  auricles ;
of  nose,  with  heat  and  dryness;  in  mouth  and  throat.

Burning  heat:  in  eyes;  at  anus.

Burning  dryness :  of  eyes.

Smarting.:  of  eyes ;  in  eyes,  especially  in  margins  of  lids.

Pressive  pain :  in  forepart  of  brain ;  on  tibiae.

Pressing  pain :  in  eyes ;  in  muscles  of  arms  and  hands.

Pressure:  in  middle  of  1.  eyeball;  on  stomach,  after  dinner;
in  small  of  back.

Oppression :  of  chest.

Tensive  pain:  in  forepart  of  brain;  in  swollen  inguinal
glands  of  r.  side.

Tension :  in  small  of  back.

Stretching :  in  inguinal  region,  1.  thigh  and  scrotum.  _

Clawing  pain :  when  touching  scrotum  or  when  walking.

Pinching:  in  testicles.

Grinding :  in  r.  half  of  brain  when  walking.

Burrowing:  on  tibse.

Gnawing:  in  skin.

Biting :  lachrymation ;  in  urethra  after  urinating.

Constriction :  in  lower  abdomen.

Hammering:  in  head.

Shocks  in  brain  from  behind  forward.

Rheumatic  pain:  in  hands;  in  lower  limbs.

Bruised  pain:  in  hepatic  region;  in  small  of  back;  in
testes  when  touched;  in  limbs.

Dull  pain :  in  hollow  tooth.

Tight  aching :  in  whole  of  1.  side  of  head,  more  in  bones
than  in  brain.

Heavy  aching:  in  lower  part  of  back  with  sense  of  bear-
ing down  and  heavy  pain  in  chest.

Aching :  in  r.  side  of  face ;  of  tooth  from  crumb  of  bread ;
in  lower  part  of  back ;  in  chest.

Throbbing:  in  swollen  submaxillary  glands;  in  ulcer.

Pulsating:  in  eyes;  in  arteries,  after  eating.

Prickling:  in  swollen  inguinal  glands  of  r.  side.

Tingling :  in  eruption  on  back  of  head  and  neck ;  pains
with  ulceration  of  cornea ;  in  urethra.

Creeping:  in  ulcer.


CLEMATIS  ERECTA.  •  234

Crawling:  in  eruption  on  occiput  and  neck.

Itching:  of  scalp;  of  small  crusts  on  scalp;  in  eruption
on  back  of  head  and  neck;  of  eyes;  in  canthi;  in
pimple  over  arcus  ciliaris;  at  anus;  hemorrhoids;  about
genitals ;  of  toes ;  over  whole  body ;  terrible  with  eczema
and  chronic  herpes;  with  miliary  eruption;  in  and
about  ulcer.

Painful  sensitiveness :  of  testes.

Sensitiveness:  of  both  inguinal  regions;  of  r.  spermatic
cord.

Roughness:  in  throat.

Heaviness:  of  head;  in  limbs.

Fulness :  of  head.

Dulness:  in  head.

Confusion:  of  head.

Cloudiness :  in  head.

Weakness:  in  all  the  limbs,  after  eating;  in  legs,  from
smoking.

Weariness:  in  limbs.

Feels  exhausted  on  waking.

Coldness:  in  stomach.

Dryness:  in  eyes;  of  nose ;  of  tongue ;  in  throat;  of  hands.

Hotness :  of  cheeks ;  of  hands.

Heat:  in  eyes;  in  auricles;  of  nose;  in  mouth  and  throat.
**  Tissues. Inflammatory  variety  of  stricture,  terminating  by
serous  infiltration  into  the  suburethral  tissue  and  the
formation  of  a  submucous  callus.

I  Hot,  painful  swelling  and  induration  of  glands.

I  Skin  and  muscles  lax.

Acts  especially  upon  skin,  lymphatic  glandular  system,
and  genito-urinary  organs.

Rheumatic  and  gouty  affections  of  joints;  catarrhal  and
rheumatic  affections  of  bladder ;  rheumatic  affections  of
eyes  and  ears.

I  Obscure  inflammatory  conditions  of  some  glands  where
infiltrations  are  the  result,  causing  greater  or  less  swell-
ing of  the  affected  organ  without  much  pain.

Organic  strictures,  formed  by  infiltration  of  corpus  spon-
giosum at  some  point,  by  coagulable  lymph,  and  forma-
tion of  a  submucous  callosity.
*5  Touch.  Passive  Motion.  Injuries.  Touch :  right  side
of  face  tender  to ;  pustular  eruption  about  lips,  tender
to ;  swollen  submaxillary  glands  painful  to ;  toothache
excited  by ;  decayed  teeth  extremely  painful  to ;  bruised
pain  in  hepatic  region  from;  urethra  painful  to;  pinch-
ing pain  in  testicles  <  from  slightest ;  testes  painful  to ;
clawing  pain  in  scrotum  from;  1.  testicle  tender  to;
glandular  induration  above  nipple  painful  to;  causes
shooting  in  ulcer.


235  CLEMATIS  ERECTA.

Sticking  sensation  when  touching  skin.
^  Pressure :  headache  in  forehead  >  by ;  urethra  painful  to.
Scratching: slight  and temporary  relief  of  itching in
eruption  on  scalp  and  neck  by;  gnawing  in  skin  not

Aching  in  r.  side  of  face  <  when  lying  on  painful  side.
^®  Skin. Itching  over  whole  body.

Sticking  sensation  when  touching  the  skin.
Gnawing  sensation  in  skin,  not  >  by  scratching.
Skin  inflamed,  red,  burning;  eruption  of  blisters,  which
burst  and  form  ulcers.

■  Eruption  of  vesicles  and  pustules,  from  the  former  exuded

a  clear,  watery  secretion,  from  the  latter  a  purulent  fluid,
followed  by  the  formation  of  scales  and  scabs;  this
chronic  exanthem,  which  extended  almost  over  whole
body,  was  always  exuding  and  accompanied  with  tor-
menting itching.
Vesicular  eruptions  on  body ;  herpetic  eruptions ;  chronic
constitutional  herpes.

■  Eruption  looks  inflamed  during  increasing,  and  dry  dur-

ing decreasing  moon;  moist  eczema,  itching  terribly,  <
from  washing  in  cold  water,  from  warmth  of  bed  and
from  wet  poultices.

■  Head  and  face  a  solid  mass  of  scabs,  dark  and  rough,  ad-

hering firmly,  exuding  a  yellowish  fluid  when  removed,
which  excoriates  parts  with  which  it  comes  in  contact;
body  completely  covered,  front  and  back,  and  the  legs
to  the  knees. ^Crusta  serpiginosa.

Chronic,  red,  humid  herpes,  with  intolerable  itching  in
warmth  of  bed  and  after  washing;  tendency  towards
rupture  and  ulceration  of  the  vesicles.

I  Herpes  exedens,  secreting  an  acrid,  purulent  fluid ;  itch-
ing and  burning  <  at  night.

■  Dark,  burning,  miliary  eruption,  with  violent  itching.
•  Eruptions  following  suppressed  gonorrhcea.
Impetigo,  especially  after  abuse  of  mercury,  in  psoric  con-
stitutions.

Burning,  creeping,  jerking,  throbbing  or  shooting  in  ulcer;
shooting  pain  in  ulcer,  only  when  touched;  scabby,
deep  ulcers;  indurated  ulcers,  with  high,  elevated  edges,
difficult  to  heal;  itching  in  and  around  about  the  ulcer;
pus  serous,  sanious,  yellow,  acrid,  corrosive  or  ichorous;
scanty  secretion,  or  total  suppression  of  pus ;  <  at  night,
also  from  poulticing ;  <  when  washing  the  sore,  1.  side.

■  Ichorous,  spreading,  fetid  ulcers. ^Syphilis.

■  Eruption  on  neck  and  occiput.

■  Chronic  tetter  of  hands.

■ Tetter:  painful  over  whole  body ;  moist;  scaly,  with  thick
crusts.


CLEMATIS  ERECTA— COCA.  236

Scald  head;  psoriasis;  scabies;  varicella;  acne  indurata;
cancerous  ulcers.
*^  Stages  of  Life,  Constitution. Light  hair.

Torpid,  cachectic  conditions;  swelling  and  induration  of
glandular  system ;  syphilitic  taint.

Clara  B.,  set.  23,  and  Sarah  F.,  set.  25,  servant;  urinary
difficulties.

Strong  man,  set.  30,  had  gonorrhoea;  stricture  of  urethra.

Woman,  set.  50,  of  scrofulous  habit;  herpes  exedens.
*'^  Relations. Antidotes: Bryon.  (toothache,  urinary symp-
toms), Camphor.

It  antidotes:  Mercur.

Compatible:  8ilic.

Compare:  Arsen., Bellad., Bryon.,  Calc.  carb.,  Canthar.,  Capsic.,
Conium,  Caustic,  Dulcam.  (syphilitic  ulcerations), G^'ajj/ii/.,
Mercur.  (iritis,  sensitive  to  cold),  Petrol,  (impetigo  on
neck  and  occijDut),  Fulsat.  (orchitis),  Sarsap.  (syphilitic
ulcers).


ERYTHROXYLON  COCA.

Coca.  Linese  {suborder  Erytliroxylese).

Nearest  related  to  the  Malpighiacese  and  Sapindacere,  next  to  the  Aceripacese
and  the  Rhizoboleae.

A  bush  six  or  eight  feet  high,  small  white  flowers  and  bright  green  leaves.
The  leaves  are  two  and  a  lialf  inches  long  and  half  as  wide;  the  characteristic
sign  of  the  leaf  is  an  arched  line  on  each  side  of  the  naidril?.  Coca  was  first
nsed  in  the  United  States  as  a  tobacco  antidote.  It  is  known  to  have  been  in
use  with  the  Peruvians  since  the  Conquest.  In  the  time  of  the  Incas  the  Coca
was  regarded  as  sacred.  It  is  largely  cultivated  in  Bolivia  for  the  sake  of  its
leaves,  which  are  much  used  in  that  country  for  cliewing.  In  1856,  the  sale  of
the  leaves  secured  an  income  to  tiie  Republic  of  thirteen  million  francs.  It  is
now  in  general  use  among  the  Indians  as  a  narcotizing  beverage.  The  plant,
which  is  propagated  from  the  seed  in  nurseries,  begins  to  yield  in  eighteen  months
and  continues  productive  for  half  a  century.

In  1856,  it  was  proved  by  Clotar  MiiUer,  Horn.  Viert.,  v.  7,  p.  443.  Proving  by
Stokes  in  Mon.  Horn.  Bev.,  v.  3,  p.  274,  in  1859.  Provings  were  suggested  in  1867
by  W.  S.  Searle  in  N.  A.  J.  of  H.,  v.  16,  p.  1,  and  made  in  the  same  year  by
Berridge,  Croker,  Eay  and  Scheibler.  Other  provings  were  made  in  1869  by
Lilienthal,  Safford,  Williams,  Ferguson  and  Labeau.  In  1870,  C.  Hering  made  a
complete  arrangement  of  the  effects  from  all  available  sources  in  the  form  of  a
monograph  fur  the  Journal  of  Materia  Medlca.


237  COCA.

Clinical  Authorities. — Shocks  in  the  head,  Searle,  Organon,  v.  3,  p.  359;
Chronic  constipation,  Stokes,  Organon,  v.  3,  p.  267 ;  Cough,  Berridge,  H.  M.,  v.  10,
p.  110;  Phthisis  pulmonalis,  E.  W.  Berridge,  H.  M.,  1874,  p.  110;  Heart  disease,
Oehme,  A.  H.  Z,,  v.  101,  p.  101 ;  Overexertion  in  ascending  heights,  Kichter,  B.  J.  H.,
T.  34,  p.  163;  Three  years  sickness  caused  by  removal  of  cancer,  N.  Williams,  Horn.
Clinics,  V.  2,  p.  269;  Morphine  and  Opium  habit,  Oehme,  A.  H.  Z.,  v.  101,  p.  100.

^  Mind. I  Melancholy  from  nervous  exhaustion,

I  Hypochondriasis. ^AmenorrhcBa. ^Dysmenorrhoea.

^Veta.

I I  Bashful,  timid,  ill  at  ease  in  society.

Sadness,  irritability;  he  delights  only  in  solitude  and  ob-
scurity ;  frequently  he  gives  proof  of  obstinacy.

■  Remarkable  aversion  to  exertion  of  any  kind  in  conse-

quence of  nervous  exhaustion.
I  Loss  of  energy.

I  Slow  in  finding  the  words  to  express  himself  at  times.
I  Mental  depression  with  beginning  of  atrophy.

■  Overpowered  by  an  indescribable  anxiety. ^Veta.

I  Feeling  of  anguish  increased  with  failure  of  ever}^  effort
to  strive  against  the  weariness;  torment  only  diminishes
with  perfect  rest. ^Veta.

■  Stupidity. ^Veta.

I  Brain  feels  so  muddled  that  he  cannot  read  understand-

ingly.
Gentle  excitement,  followed  by  wakefulness.

■  Peevish  temper. ^Veta.

Imparts  unusual  buoyancy;  cheers  the  heart,  brightens
the  mind  and  renews  bodily  strength  for  the  vigorous
tasks  of  life.

Want  of  will  power;  shakiness  and  mental  depression.
^  Sensorium. Giddiness  and  dizziness.

■  Vertigo. ^Veta.

Fear  of  falling  when  walking:  vertigo  with  involuntary,
quick  stepping  when  walking,  head  inclined  forward
with  giddiness  and  fear  of  faUing;  nausea  and  dizzy
feeling  makes  him  unfit  for  mental  work;  giddiness
with  pressing  on  back  of  head  and  weariness.

■  Fainting  and  violent  sickness. ^Veta.
I  I  Fainting  fits  from  nervous  weakness.

^  Inner  Head.  Sensation  of  tension  over  forehead,  as  if  an
India  rubber  band  was  stretched  over  it.

Fulness  in  forehead  and  dull  feeling  over  whole  brow.

A^iolent  headache  just  over  eyes,  with  low  ringing  in  ears.

Headache  just  above  eyebrows,  not  constant;  <  by  ele-
vating head  or  turning  eyes  up.

Dull  frontal  headache,  which  vanishes  with  the  setting  of
the  sun,  followed  by  a  state  of  mental  exhilaration.


COCA.  238

Slight  shooting  pains  in  r.  temple.

Headache  in  r.  temple  in  morning,  sharp  on  first  rising

and  all  day  when  looking  up,  pain  darts  from  temple

in  straight  line  to  top  of  head,  leaving  a  sore  feeling

behind.
Pressing  headache  on  r.  side  of  occiput  and  on  r.  side  of

forehead, with giddiness  and chill after dinner; >

towards  evening.
I  Shocks  in  the  head,  dull,  full  feeling  in  occiput,  with

vertigo,  <  by  lying  down,  often  only  possible  position

in  bed  is  on  face.

■  Occiput  painful,  tender  to  touch;  pains  <  on  coughing.
Headache  in  occiput,  with  chilliness  and  mild  fever.
Occipital  headache.

Headache  in  afternoon,  with  chilliness.
Headache  with  sensation  of  dryness  in  throat.

■  Flow  of  blood  to  head  and  lungs.

Headache  >  after  eating,  returning  in  3|^  hours  and  leav-
ing at  sunset.
I  Nervous  sick  headache;  megrim.
*  Outer  Head. I  Occiput  painful  and  tender  to  touch,  pain

<  on  coughing. ^Phthisis.
^  Sight  and  Eyes. Great  intolerance  of  light,  with  remarkable
dilatation  of  pupils.

■  Dark cloud before eyes; eyes deeply reddened until

bloody  tears  gushed  out. ^Veta.

White,  dark  or  fiery  spots  before  eyes ;  flickering  or  flash-
ing ;  letters  seem  to  run  together.

I  Indistinct  vision,  soon  followed  by  headache  and  nausea.
^Veta.

1  I  Aching  pain  behind  eyes,  making  them  feel  as  if  they
were  squinting  inwards.
^  Hearing  and  Ears. Ringing  in  ears  with  fever.

I  Loud  ringing,  buzzing  and  humming  in  ears. ^Veta.

■  Deafness  of  three  months  duration,  in  an  old  soldier,

set.  102;  complained  of  noise  in  head  and  inability  to
hear  himself  when  he  read  aloud.
''  Smell  and  Nose, l  l  Epistaxis  passing  from  r.  to  left.
^  Lower  Face. Lips  blue,  swollen,  chapped. ^Veta.
Lips  and  gums  pale;  dryness  of  lips  and  mouth.
Ulcerations  at  commissure  of  lips.
^"  Teeth  and  Gums, i  Prevents  caries  of  teeth.
"  Taste  and  Tongue. iNo  taste  in  morning.

■  Much  furred  tongue.

^'  Inner  Mouth. Dryness  of  lips  and  mouth,  especially  on
awaking.
At  night  and  in  morning  a  sensation  in  mouth  and  palate
as  if  he  had  eaten  pepper.


239  COCA.

Fetid  breath.
^^  Throat. >  A  distinct  feeling  of  swelling  of  uvula,  difficulty

of  swallowing.
Early  in  morning,  sensation  of  dryness  in  throat,  very

disagreeable  on  swallowing,  as  if  swollen.
^*  Appetite,  Thirst. Desires,  Aversions. Great  appetite.
Retards  hunger  and  thirst.
Great  satiety,  without  longing  for  nourishment,  for  a  long

time.
I  Loss  of  appetite,  especially  for  solid  food.
Great  thirst.
I  I  Longing  for  spirituous  liquors  and  tobacco,  accustomed

stimulants.
^^  Eating and Drinking, i  Can  eat  but  little  at  a  time.

^Chronic  constipation.
■Ailments  from  salt  food.
^^  Hiccough,  Belching,  Nausea  and  Vomiting. Nausea

with  vertigo.
Hiccough  after  supper.
Frequent  eructations.
I  Flatus  rises  with  such  force  that  it  seems  as  if  oesophagus

would  be  rent  by  it. ^Chronic  constipation.
^^  Scrobiculum  and  Stomach. Feeling  of  emptiness  or  ful-
ness in  stomach.
Weak  and  difficult  digestion.
I  Catarrh  of  stomach ; .  gastralgia ;  dyspepsia.

■  Confirmed  dyspepsia,  especially  in  hypochondriacs.

^^  Hypochondria. ■  Pressure  and  tension in  hypochondria,

after  meals.
^^  Abdomen. ■  Flatulence.

■  Violent palpitation from incarcerated flatus, which

sometimes rises  with such force  that  it seems as  if
oesophagus  would  be  rent  by  it. ^Chronic  constipation.

■  Violent  bellyache,  with  tympanitic  distension  of  abdo-

men, >  by  frequent  discharges  of  inodorous  flatus.

■  Puffing  up  of  abdomen.

■  Spasmodic  colic;  enteralgia. .

■  Pituitous  diseases  of  abdominal  organs.

^^  Stool  and  Rectum. Flatus  from  bowels  smells  like  burnt
gunpowder.

■  Constant  desire  to  stool. ^ After  gonorrhoea.

■  Dysentery. ^Veta.

Every  day  bowels  moved  one  hour  later.

■  Constipation  from  inactivity  of  rectum.

■  Piles  painful  on  walking  or  sitting,

^^  Urinary  Organs. Rises  in  night  to  urinate.

Urine  copious,  with  a  dark  red  sediment  adhering  to  the
vessel.


COCA.  240

I  Pain  in  perineum  at  end  of  urination;  stream  of  urine
twisted;  dribbling;  orange  colored,  flocculent  sediment
collects  in  one  spot  "like  a  sponge;"  ammoniacal  odor.
^Following  checked  gonorrhcBa.

1  Urine  after  standing  deposits  a  yellow-white  gelatinous
sediment,  adhering  to  vessel,  sometimes  an  iridescent
oily  film  on  surface. ^Phthisis  pulmonalis. ^Cough.

Urine  becomes  turbid  after  standing  and  is  covered  with
a  light  pellicle.

I  I  Nocturnal  enuresis.
^^  Male Sexual Organs. Nervous prostration  from  sexual
excesses.

Spermatorrhoea  and  partial  impotence.
^^  Female  Sexual  Organs. Menses  flow  in  gushes,  awaken-
ing from  sound  sleep.
^'  Voice  and  Larynx. Trachea  and  Bronchia, i  Weakness
of  voice.

■Phthisis  laryngea,  when  from  irritability  of  pharynx,
stomach  would  retain  no  food.

I  I  Feels  much  stronger  in  voice;  can  sing  much  louder
and  clearer.
^"^Respiration, l  Painful  shortness  of  breathing. ^Veta.

In  evening  in  bed,  most  severe  oppression  with  great
anxiety  and  prostration.

Painful  oppression  of  chest  and  continued  need  of  deep
respiration.

■  Oppression  of  breathing  during  nocturnal  hours.

■  Obliged  to  stand  still  and  draw  breath,  scarcely  able  to

do  so. ^Veta.
Heaviness  in  chest  and  obstructed  breathing  obliged  him
to  walk  slowly.

■  Impeded  respiration,  violent  palpitation,  with  feeling  of

weariness,  making  further  progress  impossible. ^Veta.

■  Frequent  spasmodic  dyspnoea. ^Chronic  constipation.

■  Dyspnoea,  from  emphysema,  asthma  or  disease  of  heart.

■  ■Want  of  breath  in  those  engaged  in  athletic  sports;  or

in  those  using  tobacco  or  whiskey  to  excess.

■  iHEemoptysis. ^Yeta.

^''  Cough. Tickling  cough,,  causing  tingling.

■  On  coughing,  pain  in  occiput.

Cough,  in  morning,  with  whitish-yellow  expectoration,
dense  and  viscous,  at  same  time  dryness  of  mouth  and
throat  with  thirst.

Cough  dry  in  evening,  in  bed.

■  Cough  from  cold  air  and  fast  walking.
■Sputa  scanty,  but  relieving. /yCough.

■  Expectoration  of  small  lumps,  like  boiled  starch,  imme-

diately after  rising  in  morning.


241  COCA.

^^  Inner  Chest  and  Lungs.  Vainly  endeavors  to  fill  lungs
with  air  by  full  inspirations  and  utmost  enlargement  of
chest. ^Veta.

Pains  under  clavicles,  more  severe  under  left.

During  the  whole  day,  feeling  of  constriction  in  upper
portion  of  both  lungs.

Transient  shooting  pains  in  1.  lung,  between  third  and
sixth  ribs,  <  during  a  deep  inspiration.

■Suddenly  attacked  with  cramp  in  chest;  she  became
quite  cold  and  could  not  continue  the  ascent.  ^Over-
exertion in  ascending  heights.

I  Rush  of  blood  to  chest  with  slight  headache. ^Veta.

I  Emphysema. ^Phthisis  pulmonalis.
^^  Heart, Pulse and Circulation, i  Throbbing  of heart
against  ribs  audible. OYeta.

I  Palpitation  of  heart  with  general  weakness. ^  Veta.

■Violent  palpitation  from  incarcerated  flatus.  6'Chronic
constipation.

I  Angina  pectoris  while  climbing;  she  became  quite  cold.

■  Exhaustion  of  heart  with  irregular  action.

I  I  Disease  of  heart,  functional,  from  overexertion.
Increased  frequency  of  the  pulse,  in  one  instance  from  70

to  143  beats  per  minute.
iPulse  108  to  120.  ^Veta.
Pulse  weak,  quickened,  small.

I  Pulse  intermitting  every  fifth  beat. ^Heart  disease.
^"  Outer  Chest. ■  Spasm  in  chest. ^From  overfatigue  while

ascending  a  mountain.
^^  Upper  Limbs. Pain  in  fourth  finger  of  r.  hand,  it  was  cold
and  remained  so  for  weeks,  also  affecting  the  little  finger.
^  Lower  Limbs, i  Weakness  in  walking.

Ilmpaired  power  of  walking. ^Chronic  constipation.
^*  Limbs  in  General, i  Feeling  of  internal  cold,  with  numb-
ness of  hands  and  feet. ^Veta.

■  Rheumatism,  coming  from  slightest  cold.

^  Rest.  Position.  Motion.  Rest:  anguish,  weariness  and
torment  only  diminishes  with  perfect  rest;  after  every
ten  steps  obliged  to  take  rest.

Sitting:  piles  painful.

Lying  down:  <  shocks  in  head,  dull,  full  feeling  in
occiput.

Obliged  to  stand  still  and  draw  breath,  scarcely  able  to  do  so.

He  la^^s  himself  upon  the  earth,  unable  to  drag  himself
any  further.

Impossible  to  make  any  exertion,  lassitude,  desire  to  re-
main constantly  in  bed.

Head  inclined  forward,  with  giddiness  and  fear  of  falling.

Only  possible  position  in  bed  is  on  face.

VOL.  IV. — 16.


COCA.  242

Awakes  at  night  lying  on  back.

Elevating  head  or  turning  eyes  up  <  headache.

Walking: fear  of  falling; involuntary  quick  stepping;

piles  painful ;  cough;  weakness.
Heaviness  in  chest  iand  obstructed  breathing,  obliging  him

to  walk  slowly.
^^  Nerves. Retards  hunger  and  imparts  unusual  buoyancy,

enabling  one  to  ascend  great  heights,  carry  burdens,  or

run  rapidly  without  the  sense  of  fatigue  or  breathlessness.
I  Erethism  in  the  sensitive  sphere.

■  Nervousness  and  nightly  restlessness  of  children  during

dentition.

■  Can  find  rest  nowhere. ^Veta.

■  Nervous  depression,  result  of  overwork,  mental  anxiety,

sexual  excesses  or  abuse  of  tobacco.
■Trembling;  he  lays  himself  upon  the  earth,  physically
and  mentally  unable  to  drag  himself  any  further,  half
unconscious. ^Veta.

■  Feeling  of  weariness  amounts  to  an  impossibility  of  ad-

vancing, owing  to  impeded  respiration  and  violent  pal-
pitation of  heart. ^Veta.

■  Impossible  to  make  any  exertion,  lassitude  with  desire  to

remain  constantly  in  bed. ^After  operation  for  cancer.
I  I  Debility  during  convalescence  from  typhus.
I  I  Fainting  fits  from  nervous  weakness.
Hysterical  complaints.
^^  Sleep. '  Inclination  to  sleep  and  constant  weariness,  which
do  not  induce  refreshing  sleep. ^Veta.

■  I  Inclination  to  sleep,  but  can  find  no  rest.
Awakes  at  night,  lying  on  back.

Sleeplessness  in  the  night,  or  sleep  too  sound  and  heavy.
^  Time. Early  in  morning:  sensation  of  dryness  in  throat.

In  morning:  on  first  rising,  sharp  headache  in  r.  temple;
no  taste ;  sensation  in  mouth  and  palate  as  if  he  had
eaten  pepper;  cough,  with  whitish-yellow  expectoration,
dense  and  viscous;  dryness  of  mouth  and  throat  with
thirst.

In  afternoon:  headache  with  chilliness.

After  dinner:  giddiness  and  chill.

After  supper:  hiccough.

In  evening:  in  bed,  most  severe  oppression  with  great
anxiety  and  prostration;  in  bed,  dry  cough.

At  night:  sensation  in  mouth  and  palate  as  if  he  had  eaten
pepper ;  rises  to  urinate ;  enuresis ;  oppression  of  breath-
ing; awakes  lying  on  back;  sleeplessness,  or  sleep  too
sound  and  heavy,  heat  and  sleeplessness,  with  throbbing
in  arteries.
^^  Temperature  and  Weather. Cold  air :  cough  from.

Cold :  rheumatism  from  slightest.


243  COCA.

Worse  in  all  stages  of  weather  with  a  low  barometer,  also
if  remissions  come  during  the  high  tides  of  barometer.
^^  Fever. Chilliness  and  headache  in  afternoon.

At  night  heat  and  sleeplessness,  with  throbbing  in  arteries.

Flushes  of  heat  on  the  back  and  burning  in  abdomen.

The  fever  distinguished  by  extreme  weariness  accompa-
nying it.
•  I  Debility  during  convalescence  from  low  fevers.

I  Night  sweats.
^^  Attacks,  Periodicity.  ■ Spasmodic :  colic ;  dyspnoea.

Sudden:  attack  of  cramp  in  chest.

Transient :  shooting  pain  in  1.  lung.

Frequent:  eructations;  discharges  of  inodorous  flatus.

Constant:  desire  to  stool ;  need  of  deep  respiration ;  weari-
ness and  inclination  to  sleep.

For  a  long  time:  great  satiety.

All  day:  headache  in  r.  temple  when  looking  up;  con-
striction in  upper  portion  of  both  lungs.

Every  day :  bowels  moved  one  hour  later.

Dull  frontal  headache,  which  vanishes  with  setting  of  sun.

Headache  >  after  eating,  returning  in  three  and  a  half
hours  and  leaving  at  sunset.

Nightly:  restlessness  of  children,  during  dentition.

Aggravations  from  midnight  to  4  a.m.,  or  from  10  a.m.  to

2  P.M.

For  weeks :_  pain  and  coldness  in  fourth  finger  of  r.  hand,
also  affecting  little  finger.

Deafness  of  three  months  duration.

Chronic:  constipation;  dyspepsia.
^^  Locality  and  Direction.  Right:  slight  shooting  pains  in
temple;  headache  in  temple  darting  to  top  of  head;
pressing  headache  on  side  of  occiput  arid  side  of  fore-
head ;  pain  and  coldness  in  fourth  finger  of  hand ;  also
affected  little  finger.

Left:  severe  pain  under  clavicle;  transient  shooting  pains
in  lung,  between  third  and  sixth  ribs.

From  r.  to  1. :  epistaxis.
^^  Sensations. Feeling  of  anguish  increased  with  failure  of
every  effort  to  strive  against  the  weariness.

As  if  brain  was  -muddled;  as  if  a  rubber  band  was
stretched  over  forehead;  as  if  eyes  were  squinting  in-
wards; as  if  he  had  eaten  pepper;  as  if  throat  was
swollen;  as  if  oesophagus  would  be  rent  by  force  of
rising  flatus.

Pain :  in  perineum  at  end  of  urination ;  in  piles  on  walk-
ing or  sitting;  in  occiput  on  coughing;  under  clavicles;-
in  fourth  finger  of  r.  hand,  also  affecting  little  finger.

Shooting:  in  r.  temple;  in  1.  lung  between  third  and  sixth
ribs,  <  during  a  deep  inspiration.


COCA.  244

Burning:  in  abdomen.

Sore  feeling:  from  r.  temple  to  top  of  head.

Tension :  over  forehead ;  in  hypochondria,  after  meals.

Pressing:  on  back  of  head  and  weariness;  on  r.  side  of

occiput  and  r.  side  of  forehead.
Pressure:  in  hypochondria,  after  meals.
Oppression:  of  respiration;  of  chest.
Cramp:  in  chest.

Constriction :  in  upper  portion  of  both  lungs.
Spasm:  in  chest.
Shocks:  in  head.
Aching :  behind  eyes.

Fulness :  in  forehead ;  in  occiput ;  in  stomach.
Heaviness:  in  chest.
Tingling:  caused  by  tickling  cough.
Numbness :  of  hands  and  feet.
Tickling:  cough.
Weakness:  general;  in  walking.
"Weariness :  amounting  to  an  impossibility  of  advancing ;

extreme  with  fever.
Lassitude,  impossible  to  make  any  exertion.
Dull  feeling :  over  whole  brow ;  in  occiput.
Emptiness :  in  stomach.
Dryness:  in  throat;  of  lips  and  mouth.
Heat:  on  back,  flushes  of;  of  skin.
Coldness :  in  fourth  finger  of  r.  hand,  also  affecting  little

finger;  feeling  of  internal.
^*  Tissues. Retards  destructive  metamorphosis  and  imparts

temporary  vigor.
Overexcitement  of  nervous  and  muscular  systems.
In  mental  or  physical  fatigue  or  exhaustion;  dyspepsia;

hysteria; nervous  erethism; protracted fevers;  spinal

irritation  and  convulsions; bad effect of  stimulants,

alcohol,  tobacco,  etc.
• Diminished  secretion  of  solid  ingredients  of  urine.
Emaciation.
Marasmus  of  children.

1  I  Rheumatism,  coming  on  from  slightest  cold.
■Scurvy  from  anaemic  conditions.
■Scrofula.
*^  Touch. Passive Motion. Touch : occiput  painful and

tender  to.
Ill  effects  from  climbing  mountains  or  aeronauting.
^'^  Skin. ■  Increased  heat  of  skin.

■  Dry  papular  eruption  on  back  of  hand.

■  Protection  to  cutaneous  diseases.

"''  Stages  of  Life,  Constitution.  Suits  persons  who  are  wear-
ing out  under  the  mental  and  physical  strain  of  a  busy
life,  suffering  from  exhausted  nerves  and  brains.


245  COCA— COCCINELLA  SEPTEM.

Suits  bashful,  timid  people,  ill  at  ease  in  society.

Old  people,  not  only  when  losing  their  breath,  but  for
other  ailments.

Children  with  marasmus.

Weakly,  nervous,  fat  or  plethoric  persons  and  such  as
have  disease  of  heart  and  lungs,  suffer  more  from  veta.

Miss  R.,  £et.  24,  tall,  slim,  black  eyes  and  hair,  very  pale;
sick  three  years  after  removal  of  mammary  cancer,

Man,  in  consequence  of  dissipation ;  heart  disease.

An  old  soldier,  set.  102 ;  deafness.
*^  Relations. Has  been  used  for  centuries  by  the  natives  of
Peru, Chili and Bolivia as a  substitute  for  tobacco,
betel,  hasheesh  and  opium.

Compare:  Stramon.,  patient  likes  company.  Coca,  patient
solitude;  Stramon.,  light.  Coca,  darkness;  Arsen.,  injuri-
ous effects  of  climbing  heights;  Paullinia,  Scutellaria,
Cyprip.  and  Valer.,  tea,  coffee,  Cann.  ind.  and  tobacco.


COCCINELLA  SEPTEMPUNCTATA.

Lady  bird;  Sun  chafer.  -  Coleoptera.

A  well-known  and  widely  spread  insect,  living  on  vegetables  in  gardens  and
fields.  Its  head  and  thorax  are  black,  flat,  under  body  and  feet  black,  wing-shells
arched,  oval,  red  or  orange  yellow,  with  black  dots,  usually  seven  in  number,  of
unequal  size,  the  wings  nearly  as  long  again  as  body.  When  touched  with  hand
there  issues  from  joints  of  feetthickish  juice,  yellow,  like  gambogia. — Am.  Horn.
Pharm.

Tincture  prepared  from  the  freshly  crushed  beetles.

Dr.  Corradori  was  the  first  who  directed  the  attention  of  physicians  to  tlie
value  of  this  remedy  in  affections  of  the  teeth;  Dr.  Hirsch  confirmed  his  views,
and  made  it  public  in  1798.  (See  Salzburger,  Med.  Ztg.,  v. -3,  p.  76;  Roth,  N.  A.
J.  H.,  V.  2,  p.  45.)

Dr.  Sauter  states  that  if  the  insect  is  crushed  upon  the  gum  of  a  healthy  per-
son it  excites  a  feeling  of  coldness  in  the  part,  without  which  sensation  a  cure  is
seldom  efTected. — N.  A.  J.  H.,  v.  2,  p.  45.

According  to  Noak  and  Trinks,  the  Coccinella  septem punctata  has  been  used
in  hydrophobia.— £.  /.  H.,  v.  15,  p.  688.

AuTHOKiTiES.— Franz,  Archiv  f.  Horn.,  13,  2,  187;  Sauter,  Hiifel.  Journ.,  14,
2,  91  (from  Roth's  Mat.  Med.) ;  Pehrson  (sore  throat),  manuscript.

Chronic  faceache ;  Frontal  neuralgia;  Periodical  toothache;  Nocturnal  attacks
of  toothache;  Sauter  (translated  by  Roth),  N.  A.  J.  H.,  v.  2,  pp.  45  and  474.


COCCINELLA  SEPTEMPUNCTATA.  246

^  Sensorium. i Slight  vertigo  after  cessation  of  toothache'.

lDisapj)earance  of  pain  in  face  attended  by  fainting,  oj)-
pressed  breathing,  subdued,  intermittent  pulse. ^Tooth-
ache.
^  Inner  Head.  .  ■  Pressure  and  heaviness  in  forehead. ^Neu-
ralgia.

Tensive  pressure  in  head  of  very  brief  duration.

One-sided headache in forepart of  head, tearing, fine
sticking.

Dull  headache  toward  both  temples  and  occiput,  as  if
brain would become enlarged  or  distended  at these
places.
^  Sight  and  Eyes, l  Pressure  and  heaviness,  especially  over
r.  eye,  which  is, sensitive  to  least  touch. ^Neuralgia.

I  During  whole  paroxysm,  cannot  open  eyes,  pain  <  by
any  bright  object. ^Neuralgia.

I  Eyelids  open  with  difficulty,  light  increases  pain.' ^Neu-
ralgia.
^  Upper  Face. Tearing  pain  rhythmical  with  pulse,  extending
from  r.  upper  jaw  to  lobule  of  ear.

Redness  and  heat  of  cheeks,  especially  at  night.

Rush  of  blood  to  face,  like  flushes  of  heat.

I  Pain  over  whole  side  of  r,  face,  suddenly  jumping  to  1.
side,  after  use  of  lancet. ^Toothache.

I  Pain in  course  of  frontal nerve,  becoming more  and
more  severe. ^Neuralgia.

I  Pain extending  over  whole  face,  even  to  hairy  scalp.
/^Periodical  toothache.

■  Chronic  pain  extending  from  superior  molars  to  forehead;

affected  part  paler;  attack  lasts  onlj^  about  one  minute,
but  is  instantly  repeated;  <  at  night,  preventing  sleep
for  many  weeks.

■  Frontal  neuralgia,  attack  commencing  by  a  pressure  and

heaviness  in  forehead,  especially  over  r.  eye,  which  was
sensitive  to  least  touch ;  attack  lasts  six  to  twelve  hours,
ending  in  a  general  heat  and  sleep  of  two  to  three  hours,
at  end  of  which  he  awoke  without  the  least  pain ;  par-
oxysms returning  every  eight,  twelve,  fourteen  or  twenty-
one  days.
^°  Teeth  and  Gums. Sensation  of  coldness  in  all  the  teeth.

Pleasant  sensation  of  coldness  in  one  tooth  when  touched
with  finger.

Painful  sensation  in  back  teeth,  as  if  they  were  hollow  and
air  was  forced  into  them.

Dull,  drawing  pain  in  upper  back  teeth,  extending  towards
r.  ear  while  sitting.

Severe  drawing,  in  jerks,  as  though  tooth  would  be  torn
out  with  a  hook.


247  COCCINELLA  SEPTEMPUNCTATA.

Rhythmical,  violent  drawing,  in  both  rows  of  teeth,  while

eating.
Jerking  and  tearing  in  one  and  tearing  in  the  other  teeth,

with some stitches extending towards occiput, and

warmth  through  whole  head.
Grumbling  pain  in  back  teeth.
Violent  throbbing  or  pulse-like  jerking  in  back  teeth.

■  Periodical  toothache,  coming  on  every  day  at  noon  in

third  inferior  molar,  extending  over  whole  face,  even  to
hairy  scalp.

■  Paging  toothache  during  day,  almost  entirely  disappear-

ing at  night,  sleep  sound  and  undisturbed.
Gum  swollen.
"  Tongue. Tobacco  bites  the  tongue  severely.
^^  Inner  Mouth. Sensation  of  icy  coldness  in  entire  buccal

cavity.
^3  Throat. Is  awakened  by  profuse  accumulation  of  saliva ;

vomits  and  complains  of  sore  throat.
^*  Appetite. iLoss  of  appetite. ^Neuralgia.
^  Respiration. iWith  disappearance  of  pain  in  face  breath-
ing becomes  oppressed. /^Toothache.
^^  Pulse. I  Subdued, intermittent  pulse, with remission of

pain  in  face. ^Toothache.
I  Contracted  pulse. ^Toothache.
^*  Limbs  in  General. 'Icy  cold  extremities. ^Neuralgia.
^^  Position. While  sitting:  dull,  drawing  pains  in  upper  back

teeth,  extending  towards  r.  ear.
^  Nerves. 'Is  much  weakened  by  long  continued  suffering.

^Toothache.
^^  Sleep. I  Nocturnal  attacks  of  toothache,  entirely  preventing

sleep,  even  when  pain  did  not  appear  at  night,  could

not  sleep.

■  Attack  ends  in  a  general  heat  and  sleep  of  two  or  three

hours,  from  which  he  awakes  without  any  pain.  ^Neu-
ralgia.
^^  Time.  At  night :  heat  of  cheeks ;  sleep  prevented  for  many
weeks  by  chronic  pain  in  face;  attacks  of  toothache,
entirely  preventing  sleep,  even  when  pain  did  not  ap-
pear, could  not  sleep.
*^  Attacks,  Periodicity.  Of  brief  duration :  tensive  pressure
in  head.

Raging  toothache  during  day,  almost  entirely  disappear-
ing at  night.

Lasting  six  to  twelve  hours :  attacks  of  frontal  neuralgia.

Periodical:  toothache,  coming  on  every  day  at  noon  in
third  inferior  molar,  extending  over  whole  face,  even  to
hairy  scalp.

Paroxysms  of  frontal  neuralgia  returning  every  eight,
twelve,  fourteen  or  twenty-one  days.


COCCINELLA  SEPTEMPUNCTATA.  248

Chronic:  pain  extending  from  superior  molars  to  fore-
head; attack  lasts  only  about  one  minute,  but  is  in-
stantly repeated,  <  at  night,  preventing  sleep  for  many
■  ,  weeks.
^^  Locality  and  Direction.  Right:  pressure  and  heaviness
over  eye,  which  is  sensitive  to  least  touch ;  tearing  pain,
rhythmical  with  pulse,  extending  from  upper  jaw  to
lobule  of  ear;  dull,  drawing  pains  in  upper  back  teeth
extending  towards  ear.

From  r.  to  1. :  pain  over  whole  side  of  r.  face  suddenly
springing  to  1.  side,  after  use  of  lancet.
*^  Sensations.  As  if  brain  would  become  enlarged  or  dis-
tended at  temples  and  occiput;  as  if  back  teeth  were
hollow  and  air  was  forced  into  them ;  as  if  tooth  would
be  torn  out  by  a  hook.

Pain:  in  face;  in  eyes  <  from  light  or  any  bright  object;
in  course  of  frontal  nerve,  becoming  more  and  more
severe;  extending  over  whole  face,  even  to  hairy  scalp.

Stitches :  extending  towards  occiput,  with  toothache.

Fine  sticking:  in  forepart  of  head.

Jerking  in  one  and  tearing  in  the  other  teeth.

Tearing:  in  forepart  of  head;  rhythmical  with  pulse,  ex-
tending from  r.  upper  jaw  to  lobule  of  ear.

Severe  drawing,  in  jerks,  as  though  tooth  would  be  torn
out  by  a  hook.

Rhythmical,  violent  drawing  in  both  rows  of  teeth,  while
eating.

Drawing :  in  upper  back  teeth  extending  towards  r.  ear.

Soreness:  of  throat.

Tensive  pressure:  in  head.

Pressure :  in  forehead ;  over  r.  eye.

Oppression:  of  breathing.

Violent  throbbing  or  pulse-like  jerking  in  back  teeth.

Grumbling  pain:  in  back  teeth.

Dull:  headache  towards  both  temples  and  occiput;  in
upper  back  teeth,  extending  towards  r.  ear.

Heaviness :  in  forehead ;  over  r.  eye.

Tobacco  bites  the  tongue  severely.

Heat:  of  cheeks;  to  face,  flushes  of.

AVarmth :  through  whole  head,  with  toothache.

Coldness:  of  skin  of  whole  body.

Icy  coldness:  in  entire  buccal  cavity;  of  extremities.
^^  Touch. Touch :  r.  eye  sensitive  to  least.
^^  Skin. I  Skin  of  whole  body  moist  and  cold. ^Neuralgia.
^^  Stages  of  Life, Constitution. Woman,  aet.  30,  robust ;
toothache.

Young  lady ;  frontal  neuralgia.


249  COCOULUS.

COCCULUS.

Cocculus  Indicus.  Menispermacese.

Tincture  of  the  powdered  seeds,  which  contain  a  crystallizable  principle,
Picrotoxine,  a  powerful  poison.

Cocculus  was  used  by  the  ancients  as  a  poison  for  fish,  stupefying  them,  and
rendering  it  easy  to  catch  them.

It  has  been,  and  still  is,  extensively  used  for  adulterating  malt  liquors.

It  was  known  to  the  Arabian  physicians,  and  for  a  long  time  imported  into
Europe  from  the  Levant. It  is  now  brought  exclusively  from  the  East  Indies.

It  was  first  introduced  into  the  Materia  Medica  and  used  as  a  remedy  by
Hahnemann,  who  proved  it  on  himself  and  his  disciples.  Reil  employed  a  tinc-
ture of  the  seeds  with  success  in  chorea,  hemiplegia  from  cold,  and  paralysis  of
bladder  from  the  same  cause.

Clinical,  Authorities. — Mental  alienation  from  suppressed  menses,  Stens,
Sr.,  A.  H.  Z.,  v.  89,  p.  117,  or  Raue's  Rec,  1875,  p.  82;  Vertigo  recurring  every
two  weeks,  Knorre,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf.,  v.  1,  p.  75 ;  Sudden  unconsciousness,  Tietze,  Riick.
Kl.  Erf.,  V.  1,  p.  91 ;  Encephalitis,  Malan,  Raue's  Rec,  1872,  p.  64;  Headache,
Hartman,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf.,  v.  1,  p.  172;  Black,  Hughe's  Man.,  p.  301;  Eczema
capitis,  Gross,  MSS. ;  Arthritic  ophthalmia,  Thorer,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf.,  v.  1,  p.
300;  Rheumatic  ophthalmia,  R.  E.  Dudgeon,  B.  J.  H.,  v.  6,  p.  347;  Prosopalgia,
G.  Gerson,  B.  J.  H.,  v.  20,  p.  413;  Paralysis  of  face,  one  side,  Wurmb,  Riick.  Kl.
Erf.,  V.  4,  p.  469 ;  Oastralgia,  Wurmb,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf.,  v.  5,  p.  652 ;  Acute  inflam-
mation of  liver,  Hartman,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf.,  v.  1,  p.  678;  Abdominal  spasms  from
mortification,  Jahr,  Hom.  Clinics,  v.  3,  p.  38 ;  Cramp  in  stomach,  Somer,  Riick.  Kl.
Erf,  V.  1,  p.  654;  from  cold  during  menstrual  period,  Frank,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf,  v.  1,
p.  747;  Colic,  Gross,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf,  v.  1,  p.  635;  Incarcerated  hernia,  Bethm.,
Riick.  Kl.  Erf,  v.  1,  p.  784;  Inguinal  hernia,  Knorre,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf,  v.  1,  p.  784;
Chronic  diarrhea,  Gauwerky,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf.,  v.  5,  p.  412;  Diarrhoea  from  riding,
D.  Dyce  Brown,  M.  H.  R.,  v.  16,  p.  224;  Raue's  Rec,  1873,  p.  118;  Amenorrhcea,
W.  Morgan,  H.  W.,  v.  12,  p.  71;  Dysmenorrhcea,  Altschul,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf.,  v.  5,  p.
589;  Menorrhagia,  Kreuss,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf,  v.  2,  p.  227  ;  Leucorrhcea,  Pleyel,  Riick.
Kl.  Erf.,  V.  2,  p.  362 ;  Leucorrhcea  during  pregnancy,  Diez,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf,  v.  2,
p.  306;  Puerperal  eclampsia,  O.  B,  Gause,  Raue's  Rec,  1874,  p.  247;  Palpitation,
C.  R.  Norton,  Med.  &  Surg.  Journ.,  1871,  p.  391;  Heart  disease,  CI.  Miiller,
Riick.  Kl.  Erf,  v.  3,  p.  440 ;  Constant  pain  in  back,  H.  N.  M.,  Hom.  Clinics,  v.  1,
p.  41;  Abscess  of  toe  with  diarrhoea,  E.  W.  Berridge,  H.  M.,  March,  1874,  p.  346;
Raue's  Rec,  1875,  p.  346;  Paralysis  of  lower  limbs  after  abuse  of  mercury,  H.  Kaan  ;
Paralysis  of  r.  arm  and  leg,  W.  Gross,  Hom.  Clinics,  v.  1,  p.  5  ;  Palsy  of  I.  side,  Hal-
lock,  N.  A.  J.  H.,  V.  25,  p.  298;  Acute  articular  rheumatism,  Gross,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf.,
V.  3,  p.  509 ;  Spinal  irritation,  A.  E.  Small,  B.  J.  H.,  v.  29,  No".  105 ;  Raue's  Rec,
1872,  p.  196;  Convulsions,  Tietze,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf.,  v.  4,  p.  554;  Apoplexy,  Low,
Riick.  Kl.  Erf,  v.  5,  p.  28 ;  Chorea,  Miiller,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf,  v.  4,  p.  506 ;  Typhoid,
Bosch,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf,  v.  4,  p.  731 ;  Drs.  Wurmb  and  Caspar,  B.  J.  H.,  v.  12,  p.
202;  Intermittent,  Parimaribo,  1827,  C.  Hering,  manuscript;  CI.  Miiller,  Ruck.Kl.
Erf,  V.  4,  p.  915;  Hamilton  Ring,  Hom.  Clinics,  v.  2,  p.  246.


COCCULUS.  250

^  Mind. I  Stupid  feeling  in  head.

I  Loud  cries  of  despair,  and  irritation,  alternate  with  stu-
pefaction of  brain. ^Prosopalgia.
Memory weakened, or  want of  memory; head  readily
fatigued  by  mental  exertion.

■  Distracted;  he  easily  forgets  of  what  he  has  just  thought.

I  During  the  attack  speech  difficult,  afterwards  difficulty

in  reading  and  thinking. ^Vertigo.

I I  Time  passes  too  quickly.

■  Often  failed  to  use  right  expression  for  thoughts,  could

scarcely  recollect  anything;  mumbled,  so  that  it  was
great  trouble  for  him  to  pronounce  his  words.  ^Typhoid.

■Thinks  and  answers  correctly  but  slowly;  takes  a  long
time  in  reflecting.

■Slowness  of  comprehension;  cannot  find  the  right  word;
what  has  passed  he  cannot  remember;  forgets  himself,
cannot  talk  plainly,  or  is  irritable,  speaks  hastily,  cannot
bear  least  noise  or  contradiction,

■  Difficulty  in  understanding  what  is  heard  or  read  and  in

appreciating  the  lapse  of  time.

■  Thoughts  fixed  on  one  unpleasant  subject;  she  is  absorbed

within  herself  and  observes  nothing  about  her.

■  She  appears  imbecile;  at  other  times  acts  like  a  maniac,

is  wicked,  talks  constantly;  dances  and  makes  all  kinds
.of  gesticulations.  ^Mental  derangement  following
amenorrhoea.

■Angry  and  indignant  form  of  delirium,  when  roused
complains  of  dizziness  and  cephalalgia,  as  if  head  were
tightly  compressed ;  soon  falls  into  a  murmuring  stupor,
with  tossing  of  head  and  trembling  of  hands ;  has  not
slept  an  instant  for  seven  days. ^Encephalitis.

■Mental  derangement  with  vertigo,  constant  desire  to  es-
cape; great  fear  and  talkativeness.

Talkativeness  with  witty  joking.

■  Irresistible  inclination  to sing and  tra  la;  a  kind of

mania.

■  Sobbing,  moaning  and  groaning.
Intolerance  of  noise  or  any  disturbing  influence.

■  Lies  with eyes closed,  regardless of  what is  passing

around  him.
I  I  Languid,  shirks  her  work. ^Amenorrhoea.
Is  sad  and  complaining.
Great  sorrowfulness,  with  constant  inclination  to  sit  in  a

corner  buried  in  thought.

■  Changeable,  hypochondriacal  humor,  melancholy  reflec-

tions; disposition  to  be  anxious  and  frightened.

■  Melancholy  and  sad;  indulges  in  sad  reveries;  is  sensitive

to  insults,  slights  and  disappointment.


251  COCCULUS.

I  Melancholy  and  sadness,  with  weeping  and  constant  pro-
found absorption  in  sorrowful  thoughts;  great  appre-
hensive anxiety  of  conscience  and  feeling  at  the  heart
as  after  committing  a  wicked  deed,  with  desire  to  escape.

I  Pale,  prostrated  and  full  of  despair. ^Menorrhagia.

■  Apprehensive  mood;  fears  death  and.  unknown  dangers.

■  Great  fear  of  death. ^Gastritis.
Frightened  look.

■Mental  terror  during  paroxysm. ^Puerperal  eclampsia.
I  1  Little  concerned  as  to  his  own  health,  he  is  very  anxious
about  others  sickness.

■  Mild,  indolent  and  despondent  in  the  face  of  difficulties.
Tearful  chagrin  about  the  least  trifle.

■  Vacillating,  cannot  accomplish  anything  at  her  work  or

finish  anything;  with  contracted  pupils.
■Nothing  pleases  her,  is  tearful  and  easily  discouraged.
^Chronic  diarrhoea.

■  Very  sensitive  mood;  everything  worries  him;  irritable;

sullen.
Excessive  irritability,  excited  by  loud  talking  or  least  in-
crease of  temperature.

■  Very  easily  affronted;  every  trifle  makes  him  angry. ^

■  Angry  and  indignant  form  of  delirium. ^Encephalitis.

■  Startles  very  easily.

AVhen  her  mind  is  turned  away  from  herself,  her  suffer-
ings are  forgotten.

■  ■Ill  effects  of  anger  and  grief.

^  Sensorium.  ■■Vertigo:  as  if  intoxicated ;  with  confusion  of
mind;  with  nausea;  when  rising  from  a  recumbent
I30sition;  whirling;  tt things  whirl  from  r.  to  1.;  with
dulness  in  forehead,  as  if  there  were  a  board  across
head ;  with  pressure  in  forehead ;  with  flushed  hot  face
and  head;  following  palpitation  of  heart.
■Vertigo,  occurring  every  two  weeks  and  lasting  several
days ;  comes  during  stool,  when  assuming  an  erect  posi-
tion in  bed,  while  standing,  but  most  frequently  after
eating.

■  Dizziness  with  ringing  in  ears  and  headache. ^Typhoid.
Hysterical  dizziness.

Giddy,  empty  feeling,  as  if  there  was  no  head.
■Sensation  of  emptiness  and  hollowness  in  head,  <  in
open  air  and.  after  eating,  >  when  getting  warm  in  bed.

■  Congestion  of  blood  to  head  wdth  mental  derangement.

^Amenorrhoea.
Sensation  of  cloudiness  in  head,  with  dimsightedness  and

black  spots  before  eyes  after  reading.
Clouded,  confused  feeling  in  head,  with  aching  pain  in

forehead.


COCCULUS.  252

iDulness  of  head,  as  after  being  drunk.

I  Confusion  of  head,  generally  increased  by  eating  and

drinking.
IDulness  and  confusion  of  head,  <  by  reading,  frequently

obliged  to  pause  in  order  to  understand  what  he  is

reading.

■  Confusion  of  head;  giddiness  when  sitting  up;  roaring

in  ears;  heat  in  head  and  shivering  of  whole  body.
(^Typhoid.
Objects  around  seem  to  move  up  and  down  on  sitting  up,
with  nausea.

■  Constant  sensation  as  if  about  to  faint.  ^Dysmenorrhoea.
Semiconsciousness.

Us  conscious  during  paroxysm,  but  cannot  move. ^Puer-
peral eclampsia.
Syncope  following  any  bodily  exertion.
Falls  down  unconscious,  with  nausea  and  vertigo.

■  Falls  suddenly  to  the  ground  unconscious,  no  restorative

calls  forth  least  sign  of  life.
Coma  and  coma  vigil.

■  ■Seasickness.

^  Inner  Head. ■Thinking  fatigues  the  head.

■  Painful  sensation  of  emptiness  in  head.

■  Head  dizzy,  heavy  and  painful. ^Intermittent  fever.
Weight  in  head,  with  great  weakness  of  muscles  of  neck.

■  Pressing  pain  in  forehead,  from  without  inwards,  with

nausea ;  <  by  riding  in  a  wagon ;  reading  and  think-
ing; from  eating;  drinking  and  sleeping;  >  during
rest,  in-doors.

Beating  in  forehead,  pvenings,  <  before  and  after  eating;
also  when  riding,  especially  in  cold  air;  from  talking;
>  in-doors.

Drawing,  pulsating  pain,  especially  in  forehead,  with  nau-
sea, violent  vomiting  and  sense  of  contusion  in  hypo-
gastrium.

Headache  chiefly  in  forehead  and  temples ;  somewhat  in
vertex.

Compression,  dull  and  undulating  sensation  in  1.  frontal
region.

Frequent  attacks  of  headache  over  r.  frontal  eminence,
which  lasts  a  few  minutes,  followed  by  a  violent,  lanci-
nating, throbbing  pain,  then  a  sensation  of  formication
felt  over  this  part,  after  which,  headache  ceases.

■  Headache  as  if  something  forcible  closed  eyes,  or  as  if

eyes  were  being  torn  out.
Pains  pass  from  over  r.  eye  into  head.
Brain  feels  as  if  constricted  by  a  ligature,  throbbing  in

temples.


253  COCCULUS.

Stitches  in  temples  and  in  r.  frontal  region.

Sensation  of  a  blunt  body  forced  slowly  into  r.  temple.

■  Pressing,  throbbing  headache  in  both  temples.

I  Headache  in  temples  as  if  head  were  seized  in  a  vice.
iThrohbing  in  vertex  <  by  motion  of  eyes  and  touch  of

fingers,  with  congestion  to  head.
■Violent  headache  extending  from  vertex  to  1.  side  of
forehead  and  nose. ^Apoplexy.

I I  Headache  in  occiput  and  nape,  pain  as  if  opening  and
shutting  like  a  door.

■  Headache,  pain  extending  down  spine;  head  hot;  eyes

and  balls  protruding.

■  Violent,  dull  headache,  cannot  lie  a  moment  on  back  of

head,  forced  to  lie  on  side;  cannot  bear  least  light;
noise  excites  nausea,  feeling  of  seasickness,  objects  move
up  and  down.
Violent  headache,  which  compels  patient  to  sit  up,  <  by
talking,  laughing,  noise,  or  bright  light.

■  Sick  headache,  with  vertigo. ^Spinal  irritation.

■  ■  Headache,  with  nausea  and  inclination  to  vomit.

■  Nervous  or  gastric  headaches,  with  nausea  as  if  at  sea,

violent  vomiting  or  cramps.
Painful  concussion  in  brain  when  walking,  moving  head,
or  talking.

■  Feeling  as  if  brain  were  rolled  up  or  compressed  into  a

small  bulk.
Constrictive  headache,  tearing  and  boring  pain,  with  heat
and  nausea.

■  Head  is  painful  as  if  bound  up;  as  if  tightly  bound  by  a

cord ;  as  if  nerves  in  head  were  drawn  up  tightly.

Lancinating  pain,  especially  on  one  side  of  head.

■Pressing  headache  from  without  inwards;  or,  as  if  com-
pressed by  a  bandage ;  or,  as  if  screwed  together.

Digging  and  boring  in  head.

■  Violent,  throbbing,  tearing  headache,  <  by  motion  and

talking  and  in  evening.

■  Headache  <  during  heat,  with  heaviness  in  head,  <  on

sitting  up. ^Intermittent.

■  Headache from working  in the sun,  or from riding

through  sand  in  the  hot  sun.

■  ■Sick  headache  from  riding  in  a  carriage,  boat,  train  of

cars,  etc.

■  Headache,  with  colic,  after  catching  cold.

■  Headache  returns  at  each  catamenial  period.

*  Outer  Head. ■Sensation  on  1.  side  of  occiput  as  if  hair  was
rising  up. ^Eczema  capitis.

■  Convulsive  trembling  of  head  from  weakness  of  muscles

of  neck;  <  in  open  air  and  after  sleeping;  from  coffee
and  tobacco ;  >  in  warm  room.


COCCULUS.  254

Spasmodic  shaking  of  head.

I  I  Tossing  of  head  and  incessant  trembling  of  hands.  /^En-

cephaloid.
Cramp-Hke  pain  in  1.  temporal  muscle.

■  Severe  tearing  pains  on  one  side  of  head,  especially  in

bones  and  particularly  in  1.  jaw.

Head  is  most  relieved  by  leaning  it  back.
^  Sight  and  Eyes, i Objects  seem  to  move  up  and  down.

I  Dark  spot  before  eyes,  though  objects  appear  clearly.

Muscse  volitantes;  a  black  figure  seems  to  float  before  eye,
moving  as  the  eye  moves,  yet  without  impairing  vision.

Black  spots  before  eyes  after  reading.

I  While  reading,  can  only  see  1.  half  of  line  of  writing.

I  Dimsightedness.

I  I  Light  does  not  affect  the  eyes,  sight  being  gone.  ^En-
cephalitis.

I  I  Pain  in  1.  side  of  head  and  eye,  then  blindness  and  un-
consciousness. ^Puerperal  eclampsia.

■  Sclerotic  of  1.  eye  most  inflamed;  a  rose-colored,  inflamed

circle,  deeper  in  color  next  cornea,  diminishing  towards
canthi;  cornea  dim,  as  if  covered  with  dust,  surrounded
by  a  bluish-white  circle;  iris  of  1.  eye  inflamed,  especi-
ally towards  its  inner  border;  pupil  drawn  upwards,
angular  and  contracted;  photophobia  and  contraction
of  upper  lid,  no  lachrymal  flux,  sees  as  through  a  veil.
^Rheumatic  ophthalmia.

■.Rheumatic  glaucoma,  with  venous  hypereemia,  dilated
pupils,  insensibility  to  light,  haziness  of  lens  and  vitre-
ous, severe  pain  in  and  around  eyes ;  iritis,  with  corneal
and  scleral  complications,  pupils  irregular  and  con-
tracted, blue  borders  around  cornea,  photophobia,  no
lachrymation,  tearing  pains  in  brow  and  1.  side  of  head.

Pupils  dilated  or  contracted.

i  I  Eyes  open  and  immovable. ^Puerperal  eclampsia.

■  Eyes  closed,  with  balls  constantly  rolling;  pupils  dilated.

^Sudden  unconsciousness.

■Eyes  protruding.

Headache :  as  if  eyes  would  be  torn  out ;  or  as  if  eyes  were
forcibly  closed.

Stitches  or  shooting  in  eyes  from  within  outward.

Pressure  in  both  eyes,  as  from  dust  in  them.

Dull  j)ressure  on  outer  border  of  orbit.

Blue  margins  around  eyes.

■Pressive  and  contused  pain  in  eyes  at  night,  with  diffi-
culty in  opening  lids.

■  .Jerking  of  eyelids.

■  Eyelids  feel  as  if  paralyzed. ^Typhoid.
Dryness  of  lids.


255  COCCULUS.

1  Eyelids  inflamed.
^  Hearing  and  Ears. ■  Sensitiveness  of hearing; dreads
sudden  noise. .
I  Noise  in  ears  like  rushing  of  water,  with  hardness  of

hearing.
iRoaring  or  ringing  in  ears. ^Typhoid.
^  Smell  and  Nose. iSense  of  smell  either  acute  or  weak.
Worse  from  strong  smells.
Sneezing;  coryza.

■  Discharge  from  nose  bloody;  pus-like.

■  Ulcerated  nostrils. ^Intermittent.

^  Upper  Face. Countenance  devoid  of  all  signs  of  mental

activity.
I  Red  cheeks  and  heat  of  face,  in  cold  room.
Flushed  hot  face  and  head  with  vertigo  or  unconsciousness.
I  I  Burning  heat  and  redness  of  face  with  great  thirst  and

small,  hard  pulse. ^Inflammation  of  liver.
I  Face  bloated,  hot  and  red;  suffused  with  perspiration,

which  stands  out  in  drops,  and  is  now  cold,  now  hot;

eyes  closed;  unconsciousness;  spasmodic  jerks  through

whole  body ;  face  very  much  distorted. ^Convulsions.

■  Intoxicated  aspect. ^Intermittent.

Face  pale;  blue  around  eyes;  pinched,  pale  features  and
sharp  nose ;  pale  and  sallow,  puffy  and  bloated ;  yellow-
ish-grey; eyes  dull  and  glassy;  earthy,  with  a  very
painful  expression.

I  I  Leaden  hue  of  face,  anguish  about  heart.  ^Puerperal
eclampsia.

■  Face  puffed,  sometimes  bluish. ^Chorea.

■  Quivering  and  twitching  of  eyelids,  facial  muscles  and

limbs. ^Typhoid.

■  Attacks  of  prosopalgia  coming  on  regularly  in  afternoon;

before  occurrence  of  paroxysm,  irritable  disposition,
prostration,  yawning,  chilliness,  coldness  of  feet;  then
follows  a  violent  jerk  in  affected  nerve  (pes  anserinum);
boring,  stitching,  crushing,  lancinating  pains  in  jaws,
drawing,  jerking  in  sympathetically  affected  nerves;
these  radiations  extend  very  far,  as  far  as  finger  points.

■  Face  distorted  and  cold  to  touch. ^Prosopalgia.

■  Wing  of  nose,  corner  of  mouth  and  tip  of  tongue  dis-

torted. ^Apoplexy.

■  Paralysis  of  one  side  of  face.

■  Tearing  pains  in  eyebrows  and  1.  side  of  head,  <  in  even-

ing and  at  night. ^Rheumatic  ophthalmia.
Dull  sensation  of  pressure  on  1.  malar  bone;  cramp-like

pains  in  temporal  and  malar  regions,  <  on  opening

mouth.
Swelling  of  one  eye  and  half  of  nose  in  morning,  after  a

violent  headache  during  night.


COCCULUS.  256

I  Sweat  in  face,  cold.
^  Lower  Face, i  Quivering  of  lower  jaw  and  chattering  of
teeth  when  attempting  to  speak. ^Intermittent.
Pressive,  benumbing,  cramp-like  pain  in  region  of  malar

bone  and  masseter  muscles,  <  by  opening  jaw.
I  I  Lips  parched  and  dry,  slight  thirst. ^Encephalitis.

■  Corners  of  mouth  sore. ^Intermittent.

■  Pustule  below  r.  angle  of  mouth,  with  tensive  pain  when

touched.

■Swollen,  hard  glands  under  lower  jaw,  and  nodes  on  fore-
arm, which  are  painful  when  stroked.

■Swelling  of  parotid  glands.
^'^  Teeth  and  Gums. ■Chilly  feeling  through  teeth,  and  fine
drawing  in  borders  of  teeth, ^Prosopalgia.

Teeth  are  long  and  loose.

■  Hollow  tooth,  pains  only  when  chewing,  even  soft  food;

not  when  biting  with  empty  mouth.

■  Drawing  in  dental  nerves  continues  during  remission  of

paroxysm. ^Prosopalgia.
Toothache  in  upper  incisors.

■  Toothache,  with  headache  and  ringing  in  ears.  ^Gastritis.
"  Taste  and  Tongue. Taste:  bitter;  putrid;  sour;  nauseous;

offensive;  metallic;  coppery;  like  sulphur;  pappy.

■  Putrid,  sour  taste,  with  aversion  to  acid  drinks. ^Inter-

mittent.

■  Foul  taste  in  mouth. ^Cramps.

■  ■Metallic  taste  with  loss  of  appetite.

■  Food  tastes  as  if  it  lacked  salt.
Sourish  taste  after  a  meal.

■  Tobacco  tastes  bitter.

■  Bitter  taste  at  root  of  tongue.

Speaks  hastily,  cannot  endure  contradiction.

■Talks  in  a  muttering,  mumbling  manner;  it  requires

great effort to speak the words plainly. ^Typhoid.

^Apoplexy,

■  Speech  difficult  at  beginning  of  attacks  of  vertigo;  after-

wards, difficulty  in  reading  and  thinking;  attacks  occur
every  fourteen  days,

■  Tongue  seems  paralyzed;  speech  difficult,

■  Tip  of  tongue  distorted. ^Apoplexy.

I  I  Peculiar sensation at root of tongue. ^Puerperal

eclampsia.
Sensation  of  swelling  at  root  of  tongue.
Pain  at  base  of  tongue  when  stretching  tongue  out.
Dry,  rough  tongue.

■  Dryness  of  tongue,  with  a  whitish-yellow  coat,  without

thirst.

■  Complains  of  dryness  of  tongue,  which is moist and

clean. ^Intermittent.


257  COCCULUS.

■  Tongue  coated  white  and  drj  upon  edges.

■  White  coating  on  tongue. ^Typhoid.
■Tongue  covered  with  white  mucus. ^Gastritis.
■Yellow  coated  tongue  with  aversion  to  food.

^^  Inner  Mouth. ■Dryness  of  mouth,  at  night,  without  thirst.
Dryness  and  burning  of  mouth  and  throat,  oesophagus
seems  inflamed,  with  difficulty  in  swallowing.

■  Sensation  of  dryness  in  mouth,  with  frothy  saliva  and

violent  thirst.
Afflux  of  saliva  with  nausea  and  vertigo.
I  I  Thick  saliva. ^Puerperal  eclampsia.
13  Throat. Burning  in  palate  and  dryness  in  fauces.

■  Paresis  of  deglutition  and  of  tongue. ^Typhoid.

■  Pressive  pain  in  tonsils,  <  when  swallowing  saliva  than

when  swallowing  food.

■  Choking  constriction  in  upper  part  of  fauces,  with  diffi-

cult breathing  and  irritable  cough,  or  disposition  to
cough.
Sensitiveness  of  throat  and  a  sense  of  constriction  as  if
lame.

■  Spasms  in  throat. ^Prosopalgia.

■  Dryness  in  pharynx  and  oesophagus. ^Intermittent.

■  Burning  in  oesophagus,  extending  into  fauces,  with  taste

of  sulphur  in  mouth.
"  Appetite,  Thirst. Desires, Aversions. ■Sensation  of
hunger  at  epigastrium,  with  disgust  for  food.

■  Will  eat  nothing  but  bread  and  water,  at  other  times  eats

ravenously. ^Mental  derangement  from  amenorrhoea.

■  ■Loss  of  appetite,  metallic  taste  in  mouth.

■  ■  Extreme  aversion  to  food,  caused  even  by  smell  of  food,

although  with  hunger.
Sensation  of  hunger  or  of  emptiness,  even  to  fainting  or

real  bulimy.
Intense  thirst  while  eating.

■  Longing  for  cold  drink,  especially  beer.

■Thirst  with  aversion  to  drink;  drinking  <  tension  in

abdomen. ^Intermittent.
Thirstless.
I  I  Slight  thirst,  lips  parched  and  dry. ^Encephalitis.

■  Aversion  to  sour  things  and  to  beer.

^^  Eating  and  Drinking. ■All  symptoms  and  affections,  par-
ticularly of  head,  <  by  eating  or  drinking.

■  Coffee  aggravates  headache.

■  Eats  and  drinks  ver}^  little. ^Intermittent  fever.
■After  eating  or  drinking  anything  cold,  tearing  pains  in

limbs. ^Leucorrhoea.
After  eating,  pains  of  contusion,  of  pressure,  of  grinding
and  squeezing  in  pit  of  stomach.

VOL.  IV. — 17.


COCCULUS.  258

^'^  Hiccough,  Belching,  Nausea  and  Vomiting,  i  Hiccough.

Eructations:  empty;  fetid;  bitter;  putrid,  causing  sore
pain  in  epigastrium  and  chest;  followed  by  pain  (stitch-
ing) in  stomach.

I  Nausea  felt  in  head.

■  Marked  tendency  to  nausea  resembling  seasickness,  as  if

stomach  heaved  up  and  down,  becomes  sick  by  looking
at  the  pitching  of  a  vessel.

I I  Nausea:  with  vertigo  and  muscse  volitantes;  caused  by
tormenting  dryness  in  pharynx,  >  by  swallowing  (^In-
termittent); in  afternoon  after  every  drink,  it  seems  to
be  mostly  in  mouth;  provoked  by  eating,  drinking,
motion,  -becoming  cold,  or  sudden  change  of  posture;
producing  fainting;  to  point  of  vomiting,  with  faintness
and  vertigo  when  lifting  head;  with  inclination  to
vomit,  in  morning,  can  scarcely  rise  on  account  of
faintness.

I  l-Nausea  and  inclination  to  vomit  while  riding  in  a  car-
riage, boat,  train  of  cars,  etc.

■  Disposition  to  vomit,  with  profuse  flow  of  saliva,  on  get-

ting a  chill  or  taking  a  cold.

■  Disposition  to  vomit  in  connection  with  headache  and

pain  in  bowels,  as  if  bruised.

■  Ineffectual  efforts  to  vomit. ^Gastritis.

■Directly  after  rising,  nausea  and  vomiting  of  food.
^Intermittent  fever.

Morning  nausea  and  vomiting  of  food  and  mucus,  espe-
cially at  night,  wdth  sleeplessness,  headache  and  con-
stipation.

■  Vomiting  of  mucus  and  water,  with  distension  of  abdo-

men, pain  <  after  vomiting. ^Hepatitis.

■Vomiting  of  green  mucus  >  oppression  in  chest,  ^In-
termittent.

■Unable  to  retain  any  food  on  stomach;  vomit  foul,  some-
times bitter, ^Colic.

Vomit:  sour;  bitter;  bilious;  of  bad  odor.
^'^  Scrobiculum  and  Stomach. ■  ■Contractive  pain  in  epigas-
trium, taking  the  breath.

■  Epigastrium  commences  to  bloat  with  beginning  of  chill,

increases  more  and  more;  sensitive  to  external  touch;
spasmodic  internal  heaving. ^Intermittent.

■  Collection  of  wind  in  epigastrium. ^Prosopalgia.
■Sensation  in  stomach  as  if  one  had  been  a  long  time

without  food  till  hunger  was  gone.
■Sensation  as  though  a  worm  were  moving  in  stomach.

■  Painful  sensation  of  fulness  in  stomach  impeding  respira-

tion. ^Gastritis.
■Spasms  of  stomach  with  shortness  of  breath,  fulness  with
griping  in  stomach,  followed  by  a  sensation  of  emptiness.


259  COCCULUS.

I  Violent  spasm  of  stomach,  with  griping,  tearing  pains.

I  In  morning  between  eight  and  nine  o'clock,  after  a  quiet
night,  twisting  sensation  in  stomach,  with  great  pain,
nausea,  anxiety  and  perspiration ;  empty  eructations
without  much  relief;  foul  taste  in  mouth ;  attacks  last
three  to  four  hours,  each  attack  growing  less  severe  as
evening  advances.

■Violent  attacks  of  gastralgia,  she  has  to  roll  and  twist,  is
thirsty,  gasps  for  breath,  sometimes  wakes  from  sleep.

■  Violent  cramp  of  stomach;  griping,  pinching,  constrictive

pain.

I  Pain  beneath  stomach  immediately  after  eating.

I  Tensive  feeling  below  stomach  as  if  waist  were  constricted
by  a  tight  band,  <*  from  pressure. ^Intermittent.

I  Pinching,  constrictive  pain  in  upper  abdomen  after  eat-
ing, extending  to  1.  side  of  abdomen  and  chest.

i  Chronic  dyspepsia  from  abuse  of  stimulants  or  from  too
long  study.

I  Acidity  of  stomach. ^Chronic  prosopalgia.
^^  Hypochondria. iPressive  pain  in  hepatic  region,  <  by
coughing  and  bending  over.

I  Stitches  in  hepatic  region. ^Gastritis,

I  Pain  in  region  of  spleen,  at  first  <  then  >  by  lying  on
that  side. ^Intermittent.

■  Enlarged  spleen. ^Typhoid.

I  Pain  as  if  beaten  in  both  hypochondrise.

■  Pain  in  r.  hypochondriac  region  extending  towards  epi-

gastrium and  stomach,  <  by  bending  forward,  cough-
ing and  breathing;  cannot  bear  least  touch.  ^Acute
hepatitis.

I  Abdomen  feels  distended  and  tense,  particularly  in  1.

hypochondriac  region,  which  is-  painful  on pressure.
^Intermittent.
^^  Abdomen, l  Emptiness and sensation of hollowness in
abdomen.

I I  Great  distension  of  abdomen. ^Dysmenorrhoea.

■  Tension  in  abdomen  oppressing  chest  and  hindering  deep

inspiration  and  talking. ^Intermittent.

■  Abdomen  feels  distended  and  tense,  particularly  in  1.

hypochondriac  region,  which  is  painful  on  pressure.
^Intermittent.

■  Tension  in  abdomen  <  by  drinking. ^Intermittent.

■  Great  rumbling  in  bowels.

■  Gurgling  in  abdomen  with  sensation  of  contraction  near

umbilicus. ^Typhoid.
■Abdomen  drawn  spasmodically  towards  vertebral  column;
then  becoming  swollen  and  distended,  with  constantly
changing  swellings  over  surface. ^Colic.


COCCULUS.  260

I  Spasmodic,  flatulent  colic  about  midnight,  flatus  passed
without  relief;  belching  relieves,  <  by  coughing,  pain
severest  in  epigastric,  umbilical  and  r.  iliac  regions.

■  Distension  of  abdomen,  flatulent  colic,  pain  in  umbilical

and  hypogastric  regions  as  of  a  heavy  stone;  every
movement  or  touch  pains  as  from  an  internal  ulcer.

■  Spasmodic,  crampy  pain  in  abdomen,  with  feeling  of  dis-

tension followed  by  oppressed  breathing  and  sensation
of  emptiness  in  bowels.

■  Sensation  in  abdomen  as  if  sharp  stones  rubbed  together

at  every  movement.
Pressure,  sticking  and  cutting  pains  in  various  parts  of
abdomen,  chiefly  around  navel.

■  Darting  pain  below  umbilicu's  through  to  spine. ^Ty-

phoid.
Pain  in  1.  side  of  abdomen  <  b}^  bending  double.

■  Pain  under  1.  ribs  <  from  pressure,  sleep  disturbed  when

lying  on  that  side. ^Intermittent.
Several  stitches  through  abdomen  and  lower  part  of  back,
from  before  backwards,  early  in  morning,  in  bed.

■  Constant  pain  in  r.  iliac  region  near  coecum,  < from

least  touch ;  pain  often  remits,  returning,  however,  very
much  aggravated;  during  paroxysm,  drawing  pains
through  whole  abdomen,  causing  her  to  work  the  limbs

.  constantly;  can  find  relief  in  no  position.  ^Cold  dur-
ing catamenia.

Constricting  pains  in  hypogastrium,  with  pressure  towards
genitals,  and  qualmishness  in  epigastrium.

■  Rupture  pain  <  on  r.  side;  fulness  in  groin,  with  sensa-

tion as  if  all  would  give  wa}^  there.

■  ■Painful  inclination  to  a  hernia,  especially  after  rising

from  sitting.

■  Protrusion  takes  place  very  slowly,  as  if  from  a  paralytic

state  of  abdominal  ring. ^Inguinal  hernia.

■  Incarcerated  hernia;  chill;  cutting  and  burning  in  ab-

domen; scrotum  as  large  as  a  man's  fist,  hot  and  tense;
pulse  full.
^  Stool  and  Rectum. Fetid  or  hot  flatus; emission  of  hot
flatulence  before  stool.

■  Incarcerated  flatus;  obstruction  of  bowels.

■  For  a  week,  watery  stools,  three  or  four  a  day;  but  there

would  be  a  dozen  if  he  yielded  to  it;  none  in  night,  but
comes  on  directly  after  rising  from  bed,  has  scarcely
time  to  dress,  diarrhoea  <  from  standing,  >  by  sitting
down,  with  stool,  pain  in  bowels,  which  causes  dyspnoea,
sweat  and  faintness.
Stools:  yellow,  soft,  fecal;  slimy;  fetid;  frequent;  thin,
jiainless.


261  COCCULUS.

I  Thin,  yellowish,  painless  stools  only  by  day.  ^Chronic
diarrhoea.

■  Diarrhoea,  with  sensation  in  abdomen  as  of  sharp  stones

rubbing  together.

I  Diarrhoea  from  riding  but  a  short  distance  in  an  omni-
bus or  car.

I  Soft,  loose  stool,  sometimes  yellow,  with  burning  in  rec-
tum. ^Gastritis.

■  Diarrhoea,  with  bilious  vomiting.

■Simultaneous  with  vomiting,  sudden,  thin,  black,  slimy,

very  fetid  stool. ^Intermittent.
Small,  frequent  stools,  accompanied  by  flatus.

■  Urging  to  stool  and  burning  in  rectum,  feces  at  first  dry

and  fetid,  later  scanty,  watery,  offensive  and  weakening.
^Intermittent.
Disposition  to  stool,  but  peristaltic  motion  in  upper  intes-
tines is  wanting.

■  Constipation. ^Dysmenorrhoea.

■Hard  stool  every  other  day,  expelled  with  great  difficulty.

■  Foul  smelling  stool. ^Colic.

■  Prolapsus  recti  after  stool.

■After  stool,  violent  tenesmus,  even  unto  fainting.

■  Hemorrhoidal  flux.

■  Contractive  pain  in  anus,  preventing  sitting,  afternoons.
Burning  and  itching  in  anus;  anus  contracted.

^^  Urinary  Organs. ■Frequent  desire  to  urinate,  with  small

discharge.
Tensive,  aching  pain  in  orifice  of  urethra,  between  acts  of

micturition.
Itching  and  stinging  near  fossa  navicularis.

■  Diuresis. ^Prosopalgia.

■  Watery  urine.

■  Urine  scanty,  clear  and  smarting. ^Intermittent.
Involuntary  discharge  of  urine  during  an  attack  of  epi-
lepsy.

^^  Male  Sexual  Organs. ■Increased  sensitiveness  of  genitals.

■  Excitement  of  genitals,  with  desire  for  coition.
Alternate  excitement  and  depression  of  genitals.
Weakness  with  excitability  of  sexual  organ,  sensitiveness

of  testicles.
■Seminal  emissions  at  night;  spermatorrhoea.

■  Drawing,  sore  pain  in  testicles  when  touched.

■  Itching  of  scrotum.

^  Female  Sexual  Organs. ■Painful  pressure  in  uterus,  with
cramps  in  chest,  fainting  and  nausea.

■  Cutting,  cramping  pains,  particularly  in  region  of  uterus

and  ovaries,  on  appearance  of  menses.  ^Dysmenorrhoea.

■  Uterine  cramps.


COCCULUS.  262

I  Violent  abdominal  spasms  caused  by  extreme  mortifica-
tion during  menstrual  period;  howling,  crying  and
moaning.

Cramps  deep  in  abdomen,  instead  of  monthly  flow;  press-
ure in  chest  and  anxiety;  is  so  weak  she  can  scarcely
speak.

iCatamenia  appears  too  early,  with  violent  colic.

I  Catamenia  two  weeks  before  the  time. ^Intermittent.

I I  Menstruation  seven  days  too  early,  with  distension  of
abdomen  and  cutting,  contracting  pains  in  abdomen  on
every  motion  and  every  breath,  together  with  contraction
of  rectum.

I  Menstruation  eight  days  too  early,  pain  in  upper  region
of  abdomen  on  every  motion,  when  stooping,  and  even
while  sitting,  as  if  inner  parts  were  suffering  from  sharp
pressure  of  a  stone;  the  parts  painful  to  external  touch
as  if  there  were  an  internal  ulcer.

I  During  each  catamenial  period,  return  of  headache.

I  During  effort  to  menstruate  she  is  so  weak  that  she  is
scarcely  able  to  stand  or  talk,

I  Dysmenorrhoea  followed  by  hemorrhoids.

ICatamenia  lessen  during  abdominal  spasms  and  become
copious  with  abatement  of  the  pains.

I  Discharge  coming  in  gushes  and  mixed  with  mucus  dur-
ing menstrual  period.

I  Menses  profuse  and  too  often;  when  rising  upon  feet  it
gushes  out  in  a  stream.

iMenses  too  frequent,  with  scanty,  coagulated,  dark  blood,
with  uterine  spasms,  cardialgia  or  enteralgia  in  nervous
sensitive  women  with  irregular  menses,  spinal  irrita-
tions and  disordered  (hysterical)  minds.

Menstruation  difficult,  with  violent  spasmodic  pain  in  ab-
domen and  loins,  <  by  motion,  cold  and  contact.

Suppression  of  menses,  with  spasms  in  abdomen  or  chest.

lAmenorrhoea  causing  mental  alienation.

Menses  fitful,  scanty  and  irregular.

Scanty  discharge  of  a  few  drops  of  black,  coagulated
blood.

Sudden  cessation  of  menses.

Menses  become  more  and  more  scanty  until  they  finally
disappear,  but  the  leucorrhoea  is  constant.

iLeucorrhoea  in  place  of  menses  or  between  the  periods,

iLeucorrhoea,  like  serum,  mixed  with  a  purulent,  ichorous
liquid;  leucorrhoea  like  the  washings  of  meat;  bloody;
gushing  out  on  bending  or  squatting  down;  with  fre-
quent urging  to  urinate,  during  pregnancy.

Shivering  over  the  mammas.
^  Pregnancy. Parturition. Lactation. Vertigo,  not  al-


263  COCCULUS.

lowing  her  to  rise  from  bed ;  nausea  and  vomiting,  faint

feeling  and  some  fever.
I  Bloody,  serous,  painless  discharge  from  uterus  during

pregnancy.
iLeucorrhoea,  with frequent urging to urinate during

pregnancy.

■  Third  month  of  pregnancy,  profuse  discharge  of  bloody

mucus.

■  Spasmodic  and  irregular  labor  pains.

■  Terrible  pain  in  small  of  back,  with  hour-glass  contrac-

tion of  uterus.

■  Spasms  following  difficult  labor,  and  those  brought  on  by

changing  position  of  patient.

■  Shivering  over  mammae.

^^  Voice  and  Larynx. ■  Voice  whimpering  and  tremulous.
^Intermittent.

■  Speech  difficult. ^Vertigo.

■  Talking  aggravates  all  symptoms,  particularly  of  head.

■  Tightness  in  larynx.

^^  Respiration. ■Respiration short, noiseless, for several
hours  scarcely  perceptible. ^Sudden  unconsciousness.

■  Respiration  quick,  anxious  and  oppressed.  ^Convulsions.

■  Respiration  slow,  heavy  and  laborious. ^Apoplexy.

■  Pants  for  breath. ^Amenorrhoea.

■  Obstruction  of  breath  at  throat-pit,  as if  throat  were

constricted.
Dyspnoea:  as  from  constriction  in  larynx;  from  pain  in
bowels  during  diarrhoeic  stool;  in  amenorrhoea.

■  Cannot  take  a  deep  inspiration  on  account  of  tension  in

abdomen  and  oppression  of  chest. ^Intermittent.
^'^  Cough. ■  Disposition  to  cough  from  irritation  high  up  in
larynx,  or  from  constriction  in  trachea  and  chest.

■  Fatiguing,  racking  cough  from  oppression  of  chest,  par-

ticularly at  night.
Tickling  cough.

After  coughing,  coppery,  metallic,  sour  taste  in  mouth.
Cough  <  by  indulging  the  disposition  to  cough.

■  Spasmodic  cough  occurring  in  anaemic  and  hysterical

women.
^  Inner  Chest  and  Lungs. ■  Oppression  of  chest  caused  by
tension  in  abdomen,  which  hinders  deep  inspiration  and
talking. ^Intermittent.
Much  oppression  of  chest,  a  stony  sort  of  a  feeling.

■  Contractive  tension  of  r.  side  of  chest,  taking  the  breath

away.

■  Cramping  pain  in  chest  during  menstrual  period. ^Dys-

menorrhoea.
Pressure  under  ribs  >  by  belching.


COCCULUS.  264

I  Oppression  in  chest  > by  vomiting  of  green  mucus.

^Intermittent.
I  Audible  rumbling  in  1.  side  of  chest,  as  if  from  empti-
ness, especially  noticeable  when  walking.
Sense  of  emptiness  or  of  constriction  in  chest,  heart  or

stomach.
I  Cramps  in  chest,  hysteric,  with  sighing  and  moaning.
Fine  stitches  in  various  parts  of  chest.
^^  Heart,  Pulse  and  Circulation, i  Anguish  about  heart,

face  leaden  in  hue. ^Puerperal  eclampsia.
I  Palpitation. ^Spinal  irritation.
I  Tremulous  palpitation  of  heart,  from  quick  motion  and

mental  excitement;  with  anxiety;  dizziness  and  faint-

ness  and  with  great  tendency  to  fall.
Palpitation  after  rheumatism.
■Irregular murmuring action of heart; pulse 100.

^Apoplexy.

■  Palpitation  of  heart,  followed  immediately  by  vertigo,

then  stretching  of  arms,  thumbs  being  drawn  inward
over  palms  of  hands.
■During  an  attack  of  palpitation  he  seizes  an  object  by
which  he  may  support  himself,  has  vertigo  and  sensa-
tion as  if  about  to  faint.

■  Pulse  small,  hard,  frequent. ^Sudden  unconsciousness.

■  Pulse  small  and  spasmodic,  often  imperceptible,  weak,

seldom  hard  and  somewhat  accelerated.
Very  quick  pulse  and  beat  of  heart.
■Pulse  frequent,  small  and  tense. ^Intermittent.

■  Pulse  96. ^Typhoid.

■  She  feels  her  pulses  beat  through  the  whole  body  during

the  heat,  at  times  palpitation. ^Intermittent.
Endocarditis:  occasional  inflammatory  attacks,  great  anx-
iety, distorted  face;  great  weakness ;  with  inflammatory
swelling  of  knees;  when  there  remains  great  fearful-
ness;  after  Aeon.

■  Chlorosis.

^  Outer  Chest. '  Painful  stiffness  of  neck  when  moving  it.

■  Disabling  drawing  in  small  of  back.

Red,  irrgular  shaped  spots  on  skin,  over  whole  chest  and
on sides of  neck  and  behind  ears,  without heat or
itching.
^'  Neck and Back. Sensation of  cracking or stiff'ness  of
vertebrae.

■  Pain  in  neck  on  moving  head,  as  if  cervical  vertebrae

were  stiff". ^Intermittent.

■  Stiffness  of  cervical  muscles  and  great  weakness.  ^Spinal

irritation.

■  ■Weakness  of  cervical  muscles,  with  heaviness  of  head.


265  COCCULUS.

■  Stiff  pain  in  cervical  muscles  on  moving  neck  and  on

yawning.
Paralytic  drawing  of  sides  of  throat.
I  Stitches  between  scapulae  and  in  small  of  back.  ^Gastritis.
Stitches  in  scapulae  from  r.  to  1.

■  Pressure  in  scapula  and  nape  of  neck.

■  The  pain  extends  down  spine. ^Headache.

■  Trembling  in  back.

■  Paralytic  pain  in  small  of  back,  with  spasmodic  drawing

across  hips,  which  prevents  walking,  with  anxious,  fear-
ful mood.

■  Sensitiveness,  as  if  paralyzed,  in  back  and  neck.

She  has  a  great  deal  of  pain  in  back,  as  if  menses  were

coming  on.
Spasmodic  constriction  through  whole  length  of  spine,

especially  on  motion.
Drawing,  lacerating  or  boring  pain  in  back.

■  During short intervals  of  consciousness,  complains of

great  sensitiveness  of  back  and  neck  and  whole  spine.
^Encephalitis.

■Sensitiveness  of  vertebra  to  touch,  but  cannot  locate  the
pain. ^Intermittent.

■Pain  in  lower  part  of  spine  and  trembling  of  limbs.
^Spinal  irritation.

■Constant  pain  in  back,  shooting  through  body  to  both
sides  and  along  spine  to  occiput  and  even  to  temples  at
times,  <  by  walking  and  stooping,  tenderness  on  press-
ure on  vertebral  spines  from  last  dorsal  vertebra  to
sacrum,  frequent  giddiness;  does  not  fall  asleep  until
late  on  account  of  pain.
^^  Upper  Limbs.  ■  Stitches  in  shoulder-joint  and  muscles  of
upper  arm,  during  rest.

When  lifting  arm  after  a  meal  he  feels  an  excessive,  draw-
ing bone  pain  in  shoulder-joint  and  long  bones  of  arm;
when  touching  the  parts  they  feel  bruised  and  contused.

■Sensation  as  of  very  fine,  delicate  wires  or  fibres  pulling
and  continually  in  motion,  down  both  arms  from  elbow
to  hand.

■  Stitches  in  r.  upper  arm.

■Sensation  as  if  arms  were  asleep,  which  alternates  with  a
similar  feeling  in  back,  jerking  of  arms  with  drawing
in  thumbs. ^Intermittent.

■  Arms  as  if  asleep,  lame;  with  a  crawling  sensation.

■  ■Numbness  and  paralytic  feeling  in  arms.
Pain  with  heaviness  of  arm.

Pain  in  arms,  felt  on  lifting  them.

■  Arms  stretched,  thumbs  drawn  inward  over  palms  of

hands,  with  vertigo. ^Palpitation.


COCCULUS. •  266

I  Forearm  asleep,  with  sensation  as  if  hand  were  swollen.

•  Convulsions  of  arms  with  clenching  of  thumbs — a  sort  of
epileptic  paroxysm.

I  Pains  radiate  as  far- as  points  of  fingers;  paralyzed  feel-
ing in  arm  of  that  side  of  body  corresponding  to  affected

• side  of  face. ^Prosopalgia.

I  Numbness  of  r.  and  then  of  1.  hand. ^Gastritis.

I I  Now  one  hand  and  again  the  other  is  numb  as  if  asleep.
■Twitching  and  jerks  in  hands  and  fingers.

■  Incessant  trembling  of  hands. ^Encephalitis.

1 1  Hand  trembles  while  eating,  and  the  more  the  higher  it

is  raised.
Paralysis  of  hand  when  writing.

■  Paralysis  of  1.  hand  and  fingers,  particularly  of  extensors.

■  Hands  feel  pithy,  lose  their  sensibility.

Now  one  hand  and  again  the  other  is  alternately  hot  or
cold.

■  Hands  look  blue  and  as  if  frozen. ^Chorea.

Hard,  dry  blotches,  surrounded  by  red  borders,  on  limbs,

wrists  and  back  of  fingers.
Blister  on  edge  of  hand  where  finger  commences.
^^  Lower  Limbs. Paralytic  immobility  of  lower  limbs  ex-
tending from  sacrum.
Lameness  and  cracking  in  hip  and  knee-joints.

■  Weakness in lower limbs as if paralyzed. ^Dys-

menorrhoea.
Unwieldiness of  lower extremities, the legs cannot  be
lifted  in  walking,  but  are  dragged  along.

■  Legs  become  more  and  more  useless. ^Chorea.
Paralysis  of  lower  limbs,  with  stiffness,  numbness  and

bruised  feeling.

■  Paralysis  of  lower  extremities:  proceeding  from  small  of

back,  and  arising  from  cold ;  after  abuse  of  mercury.
Anguish  with  convulsive  motions  of  extremities.
Spasms  and  convulsions  of  extremities.

■  Pain  as  if  beaten  in  thighs.

Boil  or  pimples  on  inner  side  of  thigh.

■  ■  Knees  sink  down  from  weakness ;  totters  while  walking

and  threatens  to  fall  to  one  side.
Paralytic  pain  in  knee-joints.
■Disagreeable  pain  in  knees,  cannot  rest  in  any  position,

<  from  motion. ^Intermittent.

■  Inflammatory  swelling  of  knee,  with  transitory  stinging

pains.

■  Cracking  in  knees  when  moving.

■  Acute  articular  rheumatism,  pain  springing  from  joint

to  joint,  with  redness,  swelling  and  stiffness ;  slightest
touch  or  motion  cause  intense  pain.


267  COCCULUS.

I  Sensation  of  heaviness  of  feet. ^Typhoid.

I I  Soles  of  both  feet  go  to  sleep  while  sitting.

■  Burning  in  feet. ^Gastritis.

■  Hot,  itching,  swelling  of  feet.
I  Cold  feet.

iGEdema  of  feet,  with  paralysis  of  lower  limbs,  after  a

cold.
I  Superficial  abscess  just  above  root  of  nail  of  r.  little  toe,

pain  as  if  a  hot  iron  went  into  it  on  raising  foot  from

ground  in  walking ;  walks  with  great  difficulty.
^*  Limbs in General, i Trembling  in all the  limbs with

chilliness,  which  does  not  disappear,  even  in  a  warm

room,  especially  evenings.
I  Trembling  and  jerking  in  limbs,  occurring  frequently

but  not  lasting  long. ^Typhoid.

■  Paralytic  condition  of  limbs,  with  drawing  pain  in  bones.
■Paralytic rigidity of extremities — a sort of partial

paralysis.

■  Paralytic  weakness  of  r.  side,  numbness  in  r.  upper  and

lower  extremities. ^Spinal  irritation.

■  Great  weakness; aching  of  limbs,  feeling  of  weight  in

feet. ^Typhoid.
■Here  and  there  in limbs,  a  laming-drawing,  as  if  in
bones,  continuous  or  in  attacks.

■  The  limbs  are  painful  when  moved,  as  if  thej  would  be

broken  or  crushed  by  bending.

■  Tearing  pain  in  limbs,  especially  after  eating  or  drink-

ing anything  cold. ^Leucorrhoea.

■  Painful  lameness  in  arms  and  legs;  can  scarcely  rise

from  seat,  with  loss  of  power.
Upper  arm  or  thigh  cannot  be  moved  in  their  joints  on
account  of  a  lame  pain.

■  Involuntary  motions  of  r.  arm  and  r.  leg,  cease  during

sleep.

■  Unable  to  move  r.  arm  and  r.  leg,  a  feeling  of  numbness

as  if  fallen  asleep.

■  Violent  spasms  of  arms. and  legs,  which  were  continually

shaken  and  pushed  from  the  body. ^Convulsions.

■  On  rising  in  morning,  involuntary  movements  of  r.  hand

and  then  of  r.  foot. ^Chorea.

■  Now"  the  hands  and  again  the  feet  "go  to  sleep,"  alter-

nately, in  short  attacks.

■Paralysis  of  1.  hand  and  foot.  ^Apoplexy.

■  Hands  and  feet  cold,  face  pale.  ^Palpitation.

■  Hands  and  feet  become  cold  after  change  of  position.

(?  Intermittent.
Convulsive  motions  of  the  limbs  whenever  she  wants  to
use  them.


COCCULUS.  268

■  Cracking  and  creaking  in  joints.

■  Painful  stiffness  of  joints.
Pain  in  bones  as  if  bruised.

^^  Rest.  Position.  Motion.  Rest:  <  pressing  pain  in  fore-
head, with  nausea;  stitches  in  shoulder-joint  and  mus-
cles of  upper  arm,  during.

After  lying  down  in  bed :  constant  yawning  and  stretching.

Sitting:  <  heaviness  in  head;  >  headache;  pain  in  upper
region  of  abdomen;  soles  of  both  feet  go  to  sleep;  diar-
rhoea >.

Standing:  vertigo;  <  diarrhoea.

On  lying  on  1.  side :  sleep  disturbed  on  account  of  pain
under  1.  ribs.

Pain  in  region  of  spleen,  first  <  then  >  by  lying  on  that
side.

Cannot  lie  a  moment  on  back  of  head,  forced  to  lie  on
side.

Motion:  <  headache,  nausea,  pains  in  abdomen;  as  if
sharp  stones  rubbed  together  in  abdomen ;  tremulous
palpitation  of  heart;  spasmodic  constriction  through
whole  length  of  spine;  disagreeable  pain  in  knees,  can-
not rest  in  any  position ;  cracking  in  knees ;  articular
rheumatism,  with  intense  pain  from  slightest;  limbs
painful  as  if  they  would  be  broken  or  crushed  by  bend-
ing; painful  lameness  in  upper  arm  or  thigh  prevent.

On  moving  body :  faintness,  with  splasmodic  distortion  of
muscles  of  face.

Changing  position :  spasms  during  puerperal  state  from ;
hands  and  feet  become  cold  after.

Sudden  change  of  posture  provokes  nausea.

When  rising  from  a  recumbent  position:  vertigo.

On  sitting  up:  giddiness;  objects  around  seem  to  move  up
and  down;  headache  <.

Rising  from  sitting:  painful  inclination  to  hernia.

On  rising  from  bed:  diarrhoea.

When  rising  upon  feet:  menstrual  discharge  gushes  out
in  a  stream.

Bending  over:  pressive  pain  in  hepatic  region  <  ;  pain  in
r.  hypochondriac  region,  extending  towards  epigastrium
and  stomach  <.

Bending  double:  pain  in  1.  side  of  abdomen  <.

When  stooping:  pain  in  upper  region  of  abdomen;  pain
in  back,  shooting  through  body  to  both  sides  and  along
spine  to  occiput  and  temples  <.

Bending  or  squatting  down:  leucorrhoea  gushes  out.

When  moving  head :  painful  concussion  in  head.

When  lifting  head:  faintness  and  vertigo.

Leaning  head  back :  head  most  relieved.


36


269  COCCULUS.

From  motion  of  eyes :  throbbing  in  vertex.

On  opening  mouth:  cramp-like  pains  in  temporal  and
malar  regions.

When  chewing:  pains  in  hollow  tooth.

AVhen  stretching  tongue  out :  pain  at  base  of  tongue.

On  moving  neck :  stiffness  of  neck  and  pain.

When  lifting  arm:  bone  pain  in  shoulder-joint  and  long
bones  of  arm.

The  higher  the  hand  is  raised  the  more  it  trembles.

When  writing:  paralysis  of  hand.

When  walking:  painful  concussion  in  brain;  audible
rumbling  in  1.  side  of  chest  as  if  from  emptiness ;  pain
in  back  shooting  through  body  to  both  sides  and  along
spine  to  occiput  and  temples  <;  legs  are  dragged ;_  tot-
ters and  threatens  to  fall  to  one  side;  as  if  a  hot  iron
went  into  r.  little  toe  on  raising  foot  from  ground.

Convulsive  motion  of  limbs  wdienever  she  wants  to  use
them.

Has  to  roll  and  twist,  with  violent  attacks  of  gastralgia.
Nerves. Great  hypersesthesia of all the senses and an
exalted  susceptibility  to  impressions.

I  Extreme irritability of  nervous  system, especially of
'  spinal  cord. ^Prosopalgia.

I  The  least  noise  or  jar  is  unbearable.
•  I A  slight  noise  or  slight,  unexpected  touch  cause  starting
and  trembling  all  over  body. ^Intermittent.

■  Sensitiveness  to  talking,  warm  air,  riding  and  grief.

I  Nervousness  of  twelve  years  standing  aggravated  to  in-
sanity by  grief;  commenced  w^hile  riding  in  a  boat.

I I  Trembling,  from  excitement,  overexertion  and  pain.

■  Trembling  over  whole  body.  ^Dysmenorrhoea.  ^Pro-
sopalgia.

■Shuddering.

■  Tired  feeling  with  some  headache,  wants  to  lie  down
most  of  the  time ;  easily  startled. ^Palpitation.

■  Weakness,  wdth  trembling;  feels  too  weak  to  talk  loud;
cannot  give  her  symptoms.

■  Great  lassitude  of  whole  body,  it  is  an  exertion  to  stand
firmly;  faintness  from  slightest  exertion.

■  Prostration  and  exhausting  sweat  over  whole  body  from
slightest  exertion.

■  ■Sensation  of  seasickness.

■  Faintness  on  moving  body,  with  spasmodic  distortion  of
muscles  of  face.

■  Faintness  caused  by  pain  in  bowels  during  diarrhceic
stool.

Fainting  fits,  epileptiform  and  hysterical  convulsions,
paralysis.


COCCULUS.  270

Melancholia,  nervous  fevers,  nervous  weakness,  hysteria,

convulsions,  syncope.
1 1  Hysteric  complaints,  with  sadness.
Automatic  movements  of  muscles,  and  tendons.
■Twitching  of  isolated  groups  of  muscles.

I  Spasms  through  whole  body,  coming  like  electric  shocks.

^'Epilepsy.

Spasms,  occurring  frequently  at  midnight.

Spasms,  hysterical,  or  from  cerebro-spinal  irritation.

iSudden  spasms  from  non-appearance  or  sudden  checking
of  menses.

Violent  convulsions  and  cramps,  especially  in  lower  ex-
tremities, in  chest  and  in  abdomen.

I I  Convulsions  after  loss  of  sleep.

■  Puerperal  eclampsia;  paroxysms  passing  off  with  a  sigh

after  several  minutes;  paroxysms  then  become  more
frequent,  last  longer  and  come  during  sleep  or  when
awake;  the  spells  cause  mental  terror  at  the  time;
is  conscious  during  the  paroxysm,  but  cannot  move,
eyes  open  and  immovable.

■  Tetanus,  chorea.

■  ■Attacks  of  paralytic  weakness,  with  pain  in  back.

■  Numbness,  migratory,  coming  and  going.

Paralysis,  one  sided,  with  numbness,  bruised  feeling  and

stiffness.
Hemiplegia,  1.  side,  with  coldness  of  affected  part.
■Apoplexy.

■  Paralysis  of  face,  tongue  or  pharynx,  paraplegia.

Paralytic  affections  originating  in  small  of  back  after  tak-
ing cold,  with  cold  feeling  of  extremities  and  oedema  of
feet;  likewise  after  apoplexy.

■No  reflex  movement  produced  upon  tickling  sole  of  r.
foot,  while  on  tickling  that  of  1.,  the  limb  is  drawn  up.
^Sudden  unconsciousness.

■  Locomotor  ataxia.

■  Post-diphtheritic  paralysis.
"''  Sleep. Spasmodic  yawning.

■  Constant  yawning  and  stretching  after  lying  down  in  bed.
■Sleepiness  or  a  half  waking  state,  with  dreams. ^Ty-
phoid.

Somnolence  and  stupor.

■  Unconquerable  sleepiness,  the  least  interruption  of  sleep

is  followed  by  great  loss  of  strength,  eyelids  heavy  and
shut  as  if  paralyzed ;  drowsiness  may  increase  to  coma.

■  Must  remain constantly  in  bed because -of  the  great

sleepiness  and  weakness,  on  rising  vertigo  and  dizziness.
^Intermittent  fever.

■  Sleep  disturbed  when  lying  on  1.  side  on  account  of  pain

under  1.  ribs. ^Intermittent.


271  COCCULUS.

I  Many  thoughts  of  business  of  day  prevent  sleep  for  an

hour,  wide  awake  at  about  one  o'clock,  cannot  go  to
sleep  again.

I I  Sleep  disturbed  by  excessive  anxiety  and  restlessness.  •
I  Frequent  waking  from  sleep  as  from  fright.

Wishes  to  sleep,  but  directly  on  closing  eyes  a  frightful
sensation,  as  of  a  hideous  dream,  comes  over  him,  mak-
ing him  start  up  again.

■Sleeplessness. ^Dysmenorrhcea.

I  iSleeplesness  from  long  continued  nursing;  from  night
watching.

I  Maniacal  sleeplessness.

I I  Anxious,  frightful  dreams.

■  Sleep  aggravates  all  the  symptoms,  particularly  of  head.

■  Does  not  feel  refreshed  in  morning,  yawns  incessantly.
■Slightest  loss  of  sleep  tells  on  him.

■  ■  111  effects  from  loss  of  sleep  and  night  watching.

^^  Time.  Early  in  morning:  in  bed,  stitches  through  abdo-
men and  lower  part  of  back.

In  morning :  after  a  violent  headache  during  night,  swell-
ing of  eye  and  half  of  nose;  inclination  to  vomit;  nau-
sea and  vomiting  of  food  and  mucus ;  on  rising,  invol-
untary movements  of  r.  hand  and  then  of  r.  foot;  does
not  feel  refreshed,  yawns  incessantly;  sweat,  principally
on  chest.

In  morning  between  8  and  9  o'clock :  twisting  in  stomach,
nausea,  anxiety  and  perspiration;  empty  eructations,
foul  taste  in  mouth ;  attacks  last  three  or  four  hours,
each  attack  growing  less  severe  as  evening  advances.

About  11  A.M.:  chilliness,  with  great  disgust  at  even  smell
of  food.

In  afternoon:  prosopalgia;  nausea  after  every  drink;  con-
tractive pains  in  anus ;  internal  chill,  with  shivering
through  whole  body,  but  more  in  back  and  on  legs;
prosopalgia.

During  day:  thin,  yellowish,  painless  stools.

In  evening:  beating  in  forehead;  headache  <;  tearing
pains  in  eyebrows  and  1.  side  of  head  <;  trembling  in
limbs  with  chilliness;  internal  chill,  with  shivering
through  whole  body,  but  more  in  back  and  on  legs;
shaking  chill ;  chills  run  down  back ;  itching  of  skin.

At  night:  pressive  and  contused  pain  in  eyes  with  diffi-
culty in  opening  lids;  tearing  pain  in  eyebrows  and  1.
side  of  head ;  dryness  of  mouth  without  thirst ;  nausea
and  vomiting  of  food  and  mucus,  with  sleeplessness;
seminal  emissions;  fatiguing,  racking  cough  from  op-
pression of  chest;  night  sweats;  in  feather  bed,  much
itchins  of  skin.


COCCULUS.  272

About  midnight :  spasmodic,  flatulent  colic ;  spasms.

About  1  o'clock :  wide  awake,  cannot  go  to  sleep  again.
^^  Temperature  and  Weather. Warmth :  itching  of  skin
from.

Warm  air:  is  sensitive  to.

Sun:  headache  from  working  in,  or  from  riding  through
sand.

In-doors:  pressing  pain  in  forehead,  with  nausea;  beating
in  forehead  >.

In  warm  room:  convulsive  trembling  of  head  <;  trem-
bling in  limbs  with  chilliness.

From  warmth  of  bed :  sensation  of  emptiness  and  hoUow-
ness  in  head.

Cold:  spasmodic  pains  in  abdomen  during  menstruation
<  by.

Open  air:  sensation  of  emptiness  and  hollowness  in  head;
convulsive  trembling  of  head  <;  cannot  bear  cold  or
w^arm  air.

Cold  air:  beating  in  forehead  <;  sensitive  to.

In  cold  room :  red  cheeks  and  heat  of  face.

Eating  or  drinking  anything  cold :  tearing  in  limbs  after.

Cold  drinks:  longing  for.
^'^  Fever. ■  Before  chill  and  before  shaking  commences,  dur-
ing an  hour,  and  while  extremities  were  becoming  cold,
a  great  dread  of  the  coming  paroxysm. ^Intermittent
fever.

I  During  paroxysm  restless  and  anxious,  no  thirst ;  during
chill,  which  was  internal,  great  trembling,  particularly
of  head,  which  she  could  not  support. ^Intermittent.

■  Chilliness  began  about  11  a.m.,  and  was  attended  with

great  disgust  at  even  smell  of  food. ^Intermittent.

■  Internal  cliill  in  afternoon  and  evening;  attended  with

shivering  through  whole  body,  but  more  in  back  and
on  legs;  not  >  by  external  warmth.

■  Frequent  shivering  mingled  with  heat,  later  chill,  fol-

lowed by  heat;  skin  at  times  moist,  perspiration  does
not  relieve. ^Intermittent.

■  Shaking  chill  in  evening,  preceded  by  shivering  and

blueness  of  nails.

■  Upward  and  downward  shaking  instantly  ceases  when

vomiting  and  diarrhoea  set  in,  but  coldness  continues
for  an  hour  longer  when  fever  begins  to  predominate.
^Intermittent.
Chills  run  down  the  back  in  evening.

■  ■Chill  frequently  alternating' with  heat. ^Chronic  diar-

rhoea. ^Typhoid.

■  Continuous  chilliness,  with  hot  skin. ^Gastritis.

■  ■Flushes  of  heat,  with  burning  heat  of  cheeks  and  cold

feet.


273  COCCULUS.

I  Heat  in  head  and  chilliness  in  body. ^Typhoid.

I  Dry  heat  the  whole  night  through.

I  Fever  setting  in  with  giddiness,  during  fever  a  state  of

apparent  stupor  with  consciousness  and  no  confusion  of

thought. ^Intermittent.

■  During  heat:  headache  <;  heaviness  in  head,  <  on  sit-

ting ;  she  feels  her  pulse  beat  through  whole  body ;  at
times  palpitation. ^Intermittent.

I  Hectic  fever,  with  emaciation  and  night  sweats.
Intermittent  fever,  with  colic  and  lameness  of  small  of

back.

■  Low,  nervous,  bilious  and  lingering  cases  of  gastric  fever.

I I  Insidious  nervous  fevers,  particularly  in  cases  which
have  been  produced  by  frequent  fits  of  anger,  or  are  ac-
companied by  great  disposition  to  anger.

I  Febrile  stage  followed  by  general  perspiration,  profuse,
clammy,  offensive,  runs  off"  from  chest  in  streams.  ^In-
termittent.

I  Morning  sweat  principally  on  chest.

■Prostration  and  exhausting  sweat  over  whole  body  from
slightest  exertion.

■  Sweat,  caused  by  pain  in  bowels,  during  diarrhoeic  stool.

■  Perspiration  stands  out  in  drops  on  face,  is  now  cold  and

then  again  hot. ^Convulsions.
Cold  sweat  now  of  one,  now  of  the  other  hand.

■  Sweat  of  body  from  evening  till  morning,  attended  with

cold  sweat  on  face.

■  Sweat  of  affected  parts.

■Temperature  very  slightly  affected  or  increased.  ^Ty-
i^hoid.
^^  Attacks,  Periodicity.  Sudden:  unconsciousness;  thin,
black,  slimy,  very  fetid  stool;  cessation  of  menses;
spasms  from  non-appearance  or  sudden  checking  of
menses.

Spasmodic:  shaking  of  head;  jerks  through  whole  body;
drawing  of  abdomen  towards  vertebral  column;  flatu-
lent colic;  pains  in  abdomen;  pains  in  abdomen  and
loins  during  menstruation;  labor  pains;  cough;  draw-
ing across  hips;  constriction  through  whole  length  of
spine;  yawning.

Transitory:  stinging  pains  in  swollen  knee.

Frequent:  attacks  of  headache  over  r.  frontal  eminence;
stools;  desire  to  urinate ;  giddiness;  trembling  of  limbs ;
waking  from  sleep  as  from  fright;  shivering  mingled
with  heat ;  alternation  of  chill  with  heat.

Constant :  inclination  to  sit  in  a  corner  buried  in  thought ;
talking;  sensation  as  if  about  to  faint;  trembling  of
hands ;  rolling  of  e3^eballs,  eyes  being  closed ;  pain  in  r.

VOL.  IV. — 18.


COCCULUS.  274

iliac  region,  near  coecum ;  working  of  the  limbs,  with
drawing  pains  in  abdomen;  leucorrhoea;  pain  in  back;
yaw^ning  and  stretching  after  lying  down  in  bed ;  chilli-
ness with  hot  skin.

Lasting  a  few  minutes :  frequent  attacks  of  headache  over
r.  frontal  eminence.

For  an  hour:  many  thoughts  of  business  of  day  prevent
sleep.
^, For  several  hours :  respiration  scarcely  perceptible.

Lasting  through  whole  night:  dry  heat.

From  evening  till  morning:  sweat  of  body,  with  cold
sweat  on  face.

Lasting  several  days:  vertigo.

For  seven  days:  has  not  slept  an  instant;  watery  stools,
three  or  four  a  day,  but  there  would  be  a  dozen  if  he
yielded  to  it.

Regularly  in  afternoon:  attacks  of  prosopalgia.

Every  other  day:  hard  stool.

Every  two  weeks:  vertigo,  which  lasts  several  days;  at-
tacks of  vertigo,  with  difficult  speech  and  difficulty  in
reading  and  thinking.

At  each  catamenial  period :  headache  returns.

Intermittent  fever.

Chronic:  diarrhoea;  dyspepsia;  prosopalgia.

For  twelve  years :  nervousness  aggravated  to  insanity  by
grief.
*^  Locality  and  Direction.  Right :  frequent  attacks  of  head-
ache over  frontal  eminence;  stitches  in  frontal  region;
as  if  a  blunt  body  were  forced  slowly  into  temple;  pus-
tule below  angle  of  mouth ;  pain  in  hypochondriac  region
extending  towards  epigastrium  and  stomach;  pain  in
iliac  region  with  flatulent  colic ;  constant  pain  in  iliac
region,  near  coecum;  rupture  pain  on  side;  contractive
tension  of  side  of  chest,  taking  breath  away;  stitches  in
upper  arm;  superficial  abscess  above  root  of  nail  of  lit-
tle toe ;  paralytic  weakness  of  side ;  numbness  in  upper
and  lower  extremities ;  involuntary  motions  of  arm  and
leg;  unable  to  move  arm  or  leg;  feeling  of  numbness
in  arm  and  leg-,  as  if  asleep;  involuntary  motions  of
hand  and  then  of  foot.

Left:  compression,  dull  and  undulating  sensation  in  fron-
tal region;  headache  extending  to  side  of  forehead  and
nose,  from  vertex;  sensation  as  if  hair  were  rising  up
on  side  of  occiput;  cramp-like  pain  in  temporal  muscle;
tearing  pains  in  jaw;  pain  in  side  of  head  and  eye;
sclerotic  of  eye  inflamed ;  iris  of  eye  inflamed ;  tearing
pains  in  side  of  head;  tearing  in  side  of  head;  dull
pressure  on  malar  bone;  hypochondriac region feels


275  COCCULUS.

distended  and  tense,  and  is  painful  on  pressure;
pain  in  side  of  abdomen;  pain  under  ribs;  audible
rumbling  in  side  of  chest,  as  if  from  emptiness ;  paraly-
sis of  hand  and  foot;  hemiplegia  of  side.

From  r.  to  1. :  things  whirl ;  stitches  in  scapulse ;  numb-
ness of  hands.

From  before  backwards:  stitches  through  abdomen  and
lower  part  of  back.

From  within  outward :  stitches  or  shooting  in  eyes.

From  without  inward :  pressing  pain  in  forehead ;  press-
ure in  glands.
^^  Sensations.  As  if  her  head  were  tightly  compressed;  as  if
there  were  a  board  across  head ;  as  if  there  was  no  head ;
as  if  about  to  faint ;  as  if  eyes  were  being  torn  out ;  as
if  brain  was  constricted  by  a  ligature;  as  if  a  blunt
body  were  forced  slowly  into  r.  temple;  as  if  head  were
seized  in  a  vice;  as  of  seasickness;  as  if  brain  were
rolled  up  or  compressed  into  a  small  bulk ;  as  if  head
were  bound  up;  as  if  head  were  bound  tightly  by  a
cord ;  as  if  nerves  in  head  were  drawn  up  tightly ;  as  if
head  were  compressed  by  a  bandage,  or  as  if  screwed  to-
gether;  as  if  hair  were  rising  up  on  1.  side  of  occiput;  as
if  something  forcible  closed  eyes ;  as  of  dust  in  both  eyes ;
as  if  eyelids  were  paralyzed ;  as  if  tongue  were  paralyzed ;
as  of  swelling  at  root  of  tongue;  as  if  oesophagus  were
inflamed ;  as  if  throat  were  lame ;  as  of  hunger  in  epi-
gastrium ;  as  if  stomach  heaved  up  and  down ;  as  if  one
had  been  a  long  time  without  food  till  hunger  was  gone ;
as  though  a  worm  were  moving  in  stomach ;  as  if  waist
were  constricted  by  a  tight  band;  as  if  opening  and
shutting  like  a  door,  in  occiput  and  nape;  as  if  cervical
vertebrae  were  stiff;  as  if  paralyzed  in  back  and  neck ;
as  if  menses  were  coming  on;  as  of  very  fine,  delicate
wires  or  fibres  pulling  and  continually  in  motion  down
both  arms  from  elbow  to  hand ;  as  if  arms  were  asleep,
which  alternates  with  a  similar  feeling  in  back ;  as  if
hand  were  swollen;  as  if  forearm  were  asleep;  as  if
hands  were  asleep;  as  if  lower  limbs  were  paralyzed;
as  if  beaten,  in  thighs ;  as  if  a  hot  iron  went  into  r.  lit-
tle toe;  as  of  weight  in  feet;  as  if  limbs  would  be  broken
or  crushed  by  bending  when  moved;  as  if  r.  arm  and
leg  were  asleep;  as  if  beaten,  in  bones;  as  if  beaten,  in
both  hypochondria);  as  if  abdomen  was  distended  and
tense;  as  of  a  heavy  stone  in  hypogastric  region;  as  of
an  internal  ulcer  in  abdomen;  as  if  all  would  give  way
at  groin;  as  of  sharp  stones  rubbing  together  in  abdo-
men; as  if  inner  parts  were  suffering  from  sharp  press-
ure of  a  stone ;  as  if  throat  were  constricted ;  as  of  stiff-
ness or  cracking  of  vertebrae.


COCCULUS.  276

Pain:  in  head;  from  over  r.  eye  into  head;  in  1.  side  of
head  and  eye ;  in  stomach ;  beneath  stomach  immediately
after  eating ;  in  region  of  spleen ;  in  epigastric,  umbili-
cal and  r.  iliac  regions  with  flatulent  colic;  in  hypo-
gastric region;  in  1.  side  of  abdomen;  under  1.  ribs;
in  bowels,  with  stool ;  in  small  of  back ;  extending  down
spine;  in  back;  in  lower  part  of  spine;  in  back,  shooting
through  body  to  both  sides  and  along  spine  to  occiput
and  even  to  temples  at  times ;  in  arm.

Lancinating:  over  r.  frontal  eminence;  esjDecially  on  one
side  of  head.

Cutting:  in  various  parts  of  abdomen,  chiefly  around
navel ;  in  region  of  uterus  and  ovaries  on  appearance  of
menses;  in  abdomen.

Lacerating:  in  back.

Darting :  below  umbilicus  through  to  spine.

Boring:  in  head;  in  jaws;  in  back.

Stitches:  in  temples;  in  r.  frontal  region;  in  eyes;  in  jaws;
in  hepatic  region;  through  abdomen  and  lower  part  of
back,  from  before  backwards;  between  scapulse  and  in
small  of  back ;  in  scapula  from  r.  to  1. ;  in  shoulder-
joint  and  muscles  of  upper  arm;  in  r.  upper  arm.

Fine  stitches :  in  various  parts  of  chest.

Dull  stitches:  in  skin.

Stitching  pain :  in  stomach.

Sticking:  in  various  parts  of  abdomen,  chiefly  around
navel.

Stinging:  near  fossa  navicularis;  in  swollen  knee;  in
glands.

Shooting:  in  eyes.

Jerking :  in  pes  anserinum ;  in  nerves  sympathetically  af-
fected by  prosopalgia ;  in  arms.

Tearing:  in  head;  on  one  side  of  head,  especially  in  bones
and  j)articularly  in  1.  jaw;  in  brow  and  1.  side  of  head;
in  eyebrows  and  1.  side  of  head ;  in  limbs ;  in  stomach ;
in  bones.

Laming  drawing :  here  and  there  in  limbs,  as  if  in  bones.

Paralytic  drawing:  of  sides  of  throat.

Spasmodic  drawing:  across  hips.

Disabling  drawing:  in  small  of  back.

Fine  drawing:  in  borders  of  teeth.

Drawing:  in  forehead;  in  nerves  sympathetically  affected
by  prosopalgia;  in  dental  nerves;  through  whole  ab-
domen; in  testicles  when  touched;  in  back;  bone  pain
in  shoulder-joint  and  long  bones  of  arm;  in  thumbs,
in  bones  of  limbs.

Burning:  of  mouth  and  throat;  in  |)alate;  in  oesophagus,
extending  into  fauces;  in  abdomen;  in  rectum ;  in  anus ;
in  glands.


277  COCCULUS.

Twisting:  in  stomach.

Smarting:  urination.

Sore  pain:  in  epigastrium  and  chest;  in  testicles  when

touched;  in  bones.
Tensive  pain:  in  pustule  below  r.  angle  of  mouth  when

touched;  beneath  stomach.
Contractive  tension: of  r. side of  chest,  taking  breath

aw^ay.
Pinching:  in  stomach;  in  upper  abdomen,  extending  to

1.  side  of  abdomen  and  chest.
Squeezing:  in  pit  of  stomach.
Griping:  in  stomach.
Crushing  pain :  in  jaws.
Grinding:  in  pit  of  stomach.
Digging:  in  head;  in  bones.
Painful  concussion :  in  head.
Contused pain: in hypogastrium ; in eyes; in pit of

stomach;  in  shoulder-joint  and  long  bones  of  arm  when

touched.
Compression:  in  1.  frontal  region.
Cramping  pains:  in  abdomen;  in  region  of  uterus  and

ovaries  on  appearance  of  menses ;  in  chest  during  men-
strual period.
Cramp-like  pain :  in  1.  temporal  muscle ;  in  temporal  and

malar  regions ;  in  region  of  malar  bone  and  masseter

muscles.
Cramps:  of  stomach;  in  chest;  in  uterus;  deep  in  abdo-
men ;  in  lower  extremities.
Constriction:  of  throat;  in  larynx;  in  trachea;  in  chest;

in  heart ;  in  stomach ;  of  internal  parts.
Constrictive :  headache ;  pain  in  stomach ;  pain  in  upper

abdomen,  extending  to  1.  side  of  abdomen  and  chest;

pains  in  hypogastrium.
Choking  constriction:  in  upper  part  of  fauces.
Spasmodic  constriction:  through  whole  length  of  spine.
Contractive  pain:  in  epigastrium,  taking  the  breath;  in

anus;  in  abdomen.
Contraction:  near  umbilicus ;  of  rectum.
Pressing  pain :  in  forehead ;  in  both  temples.
Pressive  pain :  in  eyes ;  in  region  of  malar  bone  and  mas-
seter muscles ;  in  tonsils;  in  hepatic  region.
Painful  pressure:  in  uterus.
Pressure:  in  forehead;  in  both  eyes;  in  pit  of  stomach;

in various parts of abdomen, chiefly about navel;

towards  genitals ;  in  chest ;  under  ribs ;  in  scapula  and

nape  of  neck;  in  glands.
Dull  pressure:  on  outer  border  of  orbit;  on  1.  malar  bone.
Oppression:  in  chest;  of  respiration.


COCCrLUS.  278

Anguish  about  heart.

Eupture  pam :  on  r,  side.

Gouty  pains:  in  joints.

Paralytic  pain :  in  small  of  back ;  in  knee-joints ;  in  bones.

Bruised  pain:  in  bowels;  in  shoulder-joint  and  long  bones
of  arm  when  touched;  in  lower  limbs;  in  bones.

Aching :  in  forehead :  of  limbs.

Sensitiveness :  of  throat :  of  genitals ;  of  testicles ;  in  back
and  neck :  of  whole  spine.

Disagreeable  pain :  in  knees.

Benumbing  pain:  in  region  of  malar  bone  and  masset^r
muscles.

Painful  lameness :  in  arms  -and  legs.

Painful  stiffness:  of  neck  when  moving  it ;  of  joints.

Stiff  pain:  in  cervical  muscles  on  moving  neck  and  on
yawning.

Tensive  aching :  in  orifice  of  urethra  between  acts  of  mic-
turition.

Tension:  in  abdomen.

Tightness :  in  larynx.

Painful  sensation  of  emptiness  in  head.

Emptiness :  in  head ;  in  abdomen ;  in  bowels ;  in  chest ;  in
heart;  in  stomach;  in  internal  parts.

Fulness :  in  groin.

Painful  sensation  of  fulness :  in  stomach.

Heaviness:  of  head:  in  head:  of  arm:  of  feet:  of  eyelids.

Weight :  in  head.

Throbbing:  over  r.  frontal  eminence;  in  temples;  in  ver-
tex: in  head.

Beating:  in  forehead;  in  feet:  in  skin.

Pulsating  pain :  in  forehead.

Spasmodic  internal  heaving  in  epigastrium.

Undulating  sensation:  in  1.  frontal  region.

Irritation :  high  up  in  larynx.

Excitement:  of  genitals.

Xausea :  felt  in  head ;  seems  to  be  mostly  in  mouth.

Qualmishness :  in  epigastrium.

Faintness:  from  shghtest  exertion;  from  pain  in  bowels
during  diarrhceic  stool.

Crawling:  in  arms.

Formication :  over  r.  frontal  eminence.

ZSumbness:  in  arms;  of  r.  then  of  1.  hand;  of  lower
limbs;  in  r.  upper  and  lower  extremities.

Tickling:  cough.

Stiffness :  of  lower  limbs.

Stony  sort  of  feeling  in  chest.

Pithy  feeling:  of  hands,  with  loss  of  sensibility.

HoUowness :  in  head ;  in  abdomen.


279  COCCULUS.

Trembling:  in  back;  of  limbs.

Paralytic  weakness:  of  r.  side.

^'eakness:  of  muscles  of  neck;  of  sexual  organs;  of  cer-
vical muscles;  in  lower  limbs;  of  knees.

Paralytic  feeling:  in  arms;  in  arm  of  that  side  of  body
corresponding  to  affected  side  of  face.

Lameness:  in  arms;  in  hip  and  knee-joints;  of  small  of
back.

Confusion:  of  mind:  of  head.

Dulness:  in  forehead;  of  head  as  after  being  drunk;  in  1.
frontal  region.

Peculiar  sensation  at  root  of  tongue.

Cloudiness :  in  head.

Depression:  of  genitals.

Dryness:  of  lids;  of  tongue;  of  mouth;  in  fauces;  in
pharynx  and  oesophagus ;  of  lips.

Itching :  in  anus :  near  fossa  navicularis :  of  scrotum ;
swelling  of  feet:  of  skin;  on  che^t.  tibi^  and  in  axilla;.

Burning  heat  of  face.

Shivering:  over  mammae.

Chilly  feeling:  through  teeth.

Coldness:  of  feet;  of  face;  of  hands:  of  extremities.
^  Tissues. 1 1  111  effects  of  loss  of  sleep  and  mental  excitement.

Vomiting  and  intestinal  spasm  dependent  on  reflex  action
such  as  migraine,  and  also  in  nervous  women  at  the
menstrual  period.

"  Acts  chiefly  upon  those  piortions  of  nervous  system  which
control  muscular  movements,  found  in  anterior  portion
of  cranio-spinal  axis."

"  It  influences  the  voluntary  muscles  rather  than  the  in-
tellectual powers."'

"^Tiile  convulsions  are  produced  in  acute  poisoning,  par-
alytic symptoms  abound  in  the  continued  experiments
of  the  provers."

Violent  emesis;  syncope.

Ovario-uterine  organs:  spasms;  hypienesthesia.

Paraplegia  occurring  in  debilitated,  nervous  f»ersons.

■  Paralysis  of  inner  parts.
Pain  of  muscles  when  touched.

lAna?mic  states;  impeded,  sluggish  circulation  giving  rise
to  oedema.

■  Paralytic  pain; tearing; soreness; digging; or as if

beaten  in  bones.

■  Assisted  the  expulsion  of  necrosed  bone  after  fracture  of

head  of  femur.

■  Gouty  pains  or  cracking  in  joints.

■  Glands:  burning:  pressure  from  out  inwards;  hot  swell-

ing: cold;  stinging.
■Emaciation.


COCCULUS.  280

iPatienthas  a  sunken  corpse  like  appearance.  ^Intermittent.
^^  Touch.  Passive  Motion.  Injuries.  Touch:  throbbing
in  vertex  <  from ;  tensive  pain  in  pustule  below  r.  angle
of  mouth  from;  epigastrium  sensitive  to;  r.  hypochon-
driac region  sensitive  to  least;  pain  as  from  an  internal
ulcer  in  abdomen  from;  constant  pain  in  r.  iliac  region
near  coecum  <  from  least;  drawing  sore  pain  in  testicles
from;  upper  region  of  abdomen  painful  to;  spasmodic
pains  in  abdomen  during  menstruation  <  by;  vertebrse
sensitive  to;  bruised  and  contused  pain  in  shoulder-
joint  and  long  bones  of  arm  from;  articular  rheumatism
with  intense  pain  from  slightest ;  starting  and  trembling
all  over  body  from  slight,  unexpected ;  pain  in  muscles
from ;  ulcers  very  sensitive  to.

Pressure:  <  tensive  feeling  below  stomach;  1.  hypochon-
driac region  painful  on;  <  pain  under  1.  ribs;  vertebral
spines  from  last  dorsal  vertebra  to  sacrum  tender  on.

When  stroked:  swollen,  hard  glands  under  lower  jaw,  and
nodes  on  forearm  painful.

Least  jar  unbearable.

Riding:  beating  in  forehead  <  when;  in  a  carriage,  boat
or  train  of  cars,  sick  headache  from;  nausea  and  incli-
nation to  vomit;  diarrhoea  from ;  sensitiveness  to.

From  riding  in  a  wagon :  nausea  with  pressing  pain  in
forehead  <.
*"  Skin. I  Skin  feels  soft,  is  white  and  moist. ^Typhoid.

I  Paleness  of  skin;  wretched  color. ^Intermittent.

I  Skin  pale  and  lax.

I  Much  itching,  especially  in  evening  when  undressing,  or
at  night  in  a  feather  bed,  or  from  warmth.

Burning  and  itching  as  from  nettles.

Burning,  itching  stitches  and  dull  stitches  in  skin.

Itching  on  chest,  tibise  and  in  axillae.

I  Ulcers  very  sensitive  to  touch.

Miliary  eruptions  or  red  spots,  <  on  undressing.

Adenitis,  cold,  hard  glandular  swellings.

Hard  blotches,  containing  no  fluid,  surrounded  by  a  red
areola.

Single  pimples  filling  with  pus,  and  then  drying  up  and
disappearing,  on  nose,  temple,  chest  and  between  scapulse.

Wine-colored  (red),  irregular  spots  on  chest  and  behind
ears.
""  Stages  of  Life,  Constitution. Mild  and  sluggish  tempera-
am  ent;  light  hair.

Hypochondriacal,  melancholy,  timid,  fearful  persons.

Depression  of  nervous  system,  with  little  disturbance  of
vegetative  sphere.

Women  of  great  nervous  and  paralytic  weakness,  with
suppressed  or  very  painful  menstruation.


281  COCCULUS.

Indicated  after  mental  and  bodily  overtaxation.

Suits  especially  book-worms  and  sensitive,  romantic  girls
with  irregular  menstruation ;  onanists,  rakes  and  other
debilitated  persons ;  drunkards.

Chlorotic  females.

Cramps  of  unmarried  girls  and  childless  women.

Often  indicated  with  children  and  women.

I  Chronic  prosopalgia  in  ladies  of  high  rank,  of  ages  vary-
ing from  30  to  40  years;  abdominal  plethora,  extreme
irritability  of  nervous  system,  especially  of  spinal  cord ;
wind  in  epigastrium;  acidity;  obstinate  constipation;
diarrhoea;  menstrual  colic;  bland,  thick  leucorrhoea;
spinal  irritation,  with  nocturnal  pains;  temperament
choleric;  through  long  continued  suffering  had  been
brought  into  a  state  of  desperation,  constantly  changing,
and  that  quickly,  from  pusillanimity  and  despondency
to  extreme  gaiety.

Girl,  set.  6,  small,  weak;  intermittent.

Robust  girl,  set.  8;  sudden  lameness  of  r.  arm  and  leg.

Girl,  set.  8 ;  palpitation.

Boy,  set.  12;  encejDhalitis.

Girl,  set.  12;  necrosis  of  femur.

M.  B.,  set.  14;  abscess  of  toe  with  diarrhoea.

Girl,  set.  15;  paralysis.

Girl,  set.  16,  tall,  slender,  blonde  hair,  delicate  complexion ;
chronic  diarrhoea.

Girl,  nervous,  delicate,  addicted  to  much  coffee  drinking,
and  compelled  to  sit  much;  dysmenorrhoea.

Boy,  set.  16,  slender;  chorea.

Boy,  set.  16,  strong,  well  nourished;  typhoid.

Boy,  set.  17;  vertigo  every  two  weeks.

Girl,  set.  18,  slender,  has  not  yet  menstruated ;  sudden  at-
tack of  unconsciousness  followed  by  hemiplegia.

J.  Q.,  set.  19,  married,  lymphatic  temperament,  delicate  as
a  child,  subject  to  headache  and  pain  in  back,  menstru-
ates regularly  since  16th  year;  pain  in  back.

Girl,  set.  19;  acute  articular  rheumatism.

Girl,  set.  20,  healthy,  strong,  menses  regular;  cramps  from
cold  during  catamenia.

Miss ,  set.  20;  spinal  irritation.

Man,  set.  22;  incarcerated  hernia.

Servant  girl,  set.  24;  amenorrhoea.

Woman,  set.  26;  leucorrhoea  during  pregnancy.

Woman,  set.  26,  plethoric  constitution;  menorrhagia.

Woman,  set.  28,  sanguine  temperament;  leucorrhoea.

Mrs.  T.,  set.  29;  puerperal  eclampsia.

Man,  set.  30,  cachectic  appearance;  colic.

Delicate  woman  of  good  family,  married  late ;  intermittent.


COCCULUS.  282

Man,  set.  34,  had  scabies  all  over,  later  rheumatism  of  1.
arm,  also  had  pneumonia;  heart  disease.

Man,  set.  34,  formerly  had  itch;  cramjDS  in  stomach.

Miss  H.,  set.  35,  plethoric;  headache  for  15  years,  came
shortly  after  appearance  of  menses.

G.,  set.  43,  strong,  muscular,  formerly  suffered  from  rheu-
matic pains  in  limbs;  rheumatic  ophthalmia.

Mrs.  B.,  set.  48,  nervo-sanguine-bilious  temperament,  scro-
fulous diathesis,  has  prolapse  of  pelvic  viscera;  inter-
mittent.

Woman,  set.  50,  large,  emaciated;  apoplexy.

Mother,  set.  69,  much  exposed  to  cold ;  arthritic  ophthalmia.

Old  man,  compelled  to  stand  during  his  work;  inguinal
hernia.
*^  Relations. Antidoted by: Camphor., Chamom., Cuprum,
Ignat.,  Nux  vom.

It  antidotes:  Alcohol,  Chamom.,  Cuprum,  Ignat.,  Nux  vom.,
Tabac.

Compatible:  After  Aeon,  in  endocarditis  with  fearfulness;
after  abuse  of  Chamom. ;  after  Chamom.  and  Nux  vom.  in
gastralgia ;  after  Ignat.  and  Nux  vom.  in  paralytic  symp-
toms, in  chorea.

Incompatible:  Coffee.

Compare:  Aeon.,  Act.  rac.  Ant.  crud.  (gastralgia);  Agar.
(somnolency);  Ant.  tart.;  Arsen.,  Bellad.,  Calc.  carb.,
Carb.  veg.  (lingering  pain  of  parotitis) ;  Chamom.,  Coffea,
Colchic,  Cuprum,  t Ignat.  (headache);  Ipecac,  Jodum.,
Laches,  (sopor);  Lycop.,  Mercur.,  Moschus.,  Nitrum.,  I  Nux.
vom.  (somnolency);  Oleander,  Petrol.,  iPulsat.  (headache);
Rhus  tox.,  Sabina,  Sassafras,  Scutellaria,  i Silica,  Stramon.,
Tabac,  Valeriana,  Veratr.


283  COCCUS  CACTI.

COCCUS  CACTI.

Cochineal.  Hemiptera.

This  insect  is  found  wild  in  Mexico  and  Central  America,  inhabiting  differ-
ent species  of  cactus  and  allied  genera  of  plants.  It  is  also  cultivated  to  some
extent  in  Texas  and  New  Mexico.  The  female  insect  is  the  one  used  in  medicine
and  commerce.  They  are  collected  and  killed  either  by  immersing  in  boiling
water  or  over  the  heat  of  a  fire.  The  insect  has  a  peculiar  coloring  matter  or
principle,  called  by  most  authorities  Cochinilin. — Hale's  Symptomatology.

The  complete  symptomatology  was  first  published  in  Metcalf 's  New  Homcso-
pathic  Provings,  1863.

The  female  insects  perish  quickly  after  having  deposited  their  eggs,  which
are  hatched  in  the  sun  and  give  origin  to  innumerable  insects,  which  spread
themselves  over  the  plant;  after  fecundation,  the  females,  which  before  moved
about,  attach  themselves  to  the  leaves  and  increase  rapidly  in  size,  so  that  in  the
end,  legs,  antennae  and  proboscis  are  scarcely  discoverable,  and  they  appear  like
excrescences  on  the  plant ;  they  are  then  gathered  with  a  blunt  knife,  quill  or
feather. — A.  H.  Pharmacopoeia.

The  trituration  is  the  better  preparation,  as  it  contains  also  ethereal  oil  and
formic  acid. — Prof.  Eapp,  Retrospect,  1878,  p.  14.

Dr.  Cretin  calls  attention  to  the  confusion  which  frequently  prevails  in  French
homoeopathic  literature  between  the  Cochineal,  Coccus  cacti;  and  the  lady-bii-d,
Coccionella  septempunctata,  both  being  known  in  that  language  as  Cochenille.
He  points  out  that  it  is  Coccus  cacti  which  is  used  in  whooping  cough,  while
the  medicine  which  Dr.  Jousset  recommends  in  some  cases  of  prosopalgia  is  Coc-
cinella.— 5.  J.  H.,  v.  36,  p.  184.

Clinical  Authorities. — Tinnitus,  Horn.  Monatsbl.,  Oct.,  1880  ;  Acute  des-
quamative nephritis,  Grauvogl,  Am.  Obs.,  v.  11,  p.  106 ;  Impotence  and  backache,  E.
M.  Theobald,  Eaue's  E.,  1873,  p.  144  ;  Menorrhagia,  C.  B.  Knerr,  Hom.  Clinics,  v.
4,  p.  100;  Vaginitis,  J.  B.  Bell,  Eaue's  E.,  1872,  p.  181;  Whooping  cough,  nine
cases,  Wachtl,  B.  J.  H.,  v.  1,  p.  296 ;  Catarrh,  C.  W.  Boyce,  Hom.  Eev.,  v.  5,  p.
69 ;  Asthma,  Frank,  N.  A.  J.  H.,  v.  8,  p.  92 ;  /Spasms,  D.  Cowley,  H.  M.,  v.  12,  p.
332.

^  Mind. Great  indolence.

Depressed,  apprehensive  and  anxious.

I  Fit  of  unconsciousness  and  absence  of  mind;  urine  tur-
bid. ^Morbus  Brightii.

Ill  humored,  fretful.

Lively,  talkative  mood.
^  Sensorium. Great  confusion  of  head.

Dizziness.
^  Inner  Head. iRush  of  blood  to  head  and  spitting  of  dark
blood. ^Menorrhagia.


coccus  CACTI.  284

Dull,  pressive,  burrowing  or  tearing  frontal  headache.
Tearing  pain  extending  from  1.  eye  up  into  forehead,  in

evening  after  lying  down.
Dull  headache  above  r.  eye  in  morning  on  waking.

■  Headache  in  forehead  and  temples. ^Acute  desquama-

tive nephritis.
Pressive  or  sticking  pains  in  both  temples  and  sensation

of  fulness  of  head.
Violent  raging  pain  extending  from  r.  eye  along  squamous

portion  of  temporal  bone,  on  its  inner  side,  to  occiput.
Pressive  pain  in  r.  side  of  forehead,  sometimes  extending

to  occiput.
Indefinite  drawing  and  pressure  in  occiput,  temples  and

r.  eye.
Head  pains  as  if  it  would  split.
I  Pain  in  head,  with  aching  pain  through  small  of  back.

^Menorrhagia.

■  Pressive  headache. ^Catarrh.

I  Pain  in  occiput  <  from  mental  exertion. ^Tinnitus.
*  Outer  Head. Sensation  as  if  scalp  were  drawn  tightly  over

skull.
Stitches  in occiput,  or crawling  pain in  scalp,  induce

scratching.
®  Sight  and  Eyes. Pressure  upon  1.  eye  and  eyeball.
Pressive  pain  in  orbits.
Smarting,  biting  pain  between  eyeballs  and  lids,  as  if  a

hair  were  between  them.
Sensation  as  of  a  foreign  body  between  lids  and  balls.
Inflammation  of  conjunctiva.
^  Hearing  and  Ears, i  Roaring  in  ears  begins  in  evening,

lasts  through  night  and  disturbs  sleep.
Sensation  as  if  external  auditory  passages  were closed,

with  crackling  in  r.  ear.
Roaring,  ringing,  crackling  sounds  in  1.  ear.
Tickling-itching  in  one  or  both  ears.
Violent  stitching  in  ears.

Painful,  cramp-like  drawing,  especially  in  r.  ear.
^  Smell  and  Nose. Dryness of nose, with inclination to

sneeze.
Swelling  of  nose,  with  itching,  violent  sneezing  and  in-
creased secretion  of  mucus.
Redness  of  edges  of  nostrils;  crusts  on  edges  of  nostrils.
Frequent,  violent  sneezing.

■  Discharge  of  thick,  yellow  mucus  from  nose. ^Catarrh,
Secretion  of  much  mucus  in  nose.

Nose  dry,  stopped ;  dryness  of  mucous  membrane  of  nose,
posterior  nares  and  throat.
^  Upper  Face, i  Sallow  complexion. ^


285  COCCUS  CACTI.

I  Face  deeply  red. ^Acute  desquamative  nephritis.

Purple  face,  with  racking  cough  and  splitting  headache.

Crawling,  beginning  in  malar  bones  and  extending  over
nose  to  opposite  cheek.
^  Lower  Face. Parotitis.
^^  Teeth  and  Gums. Sudden  drawing  pains  in  teeth.

Toothache,  with  shooting  pains  in  hollow  roots  of  teeth,
great  sensitiveness  to  touch.

Great  sensitiveness  of  teeth  to  cold  things.
"  Taste  and  Tongue. Offensive,  nauseous  taste  in  mouth.

I  Unpleasant,  sweetish,  metallic  taste  in  mouth.

■  Sweetish  taste. ^Acute  desquamative  nephritis.

■  Metallic  taste,  with  accumulation  of  water  in  mouth;

constant  desire  to  spit.

Great  dryness  of  tongue  and  of  whole  mouth.

Tongue  rough,  clean  and  dry.
^^  Inner  Mouth. ■Great  sensitiveness  of  mouth  and  fauces,
so  that  rinsing  the  mouth  causes  cough  and  vomiting  of
thick  masses  of  mucus.

Dryness  of  mouth  and  palate,  causing  much  thirst.

■Accumulation  of  much  tasteless  saliva  in  mouth;  con-
stant desire  to  spit;  salivation.

Odor  from  mouth  as  from  a  disordered  stomach.

Rawness  of  mouth,  throat  and  pharynx.
^^  Throat. ■  Arches  of  palate  very  irritable,  so  that  loud  speak-
ing or  brushing  teeth  cause  cough  and  vomiting.

Sensation  as  if  a  crumb  or  hair  were  lodged  in  throat  be-
hind larynx.

Tickling  in  throat.

■  Fauces  very  sensitive.

Arch  of  palate  and  fauces  as  far  as  visible  slightly  red.

Constriction  of  throat.

Roughness  of  throat,  cough  and  sneezing.

Burning  in  throat  with  hawking.

Frequent  hawking  of  mucus.

Rawness  and  scraping  in  throat.

Sore  throat  with  great  dryness.

■  Throat  <  in  warmth,  especially  in  bed.

^*  Appetite,  Thirst. Great  appetite  or  ravenous  hunger  with
speedy  satiety,  or  sensation  of  hunger  even  after  eating.

■  Little  appetite. ^Acute  desquamative  nephritis.

■  Great  thirst ;  drinks  water  often  and  in  large  quantities.

^Menorrhagia.

■  Thirst. ^ Acute  desquamative  nephritis.

^'  Eating. ■Anxiety  after  eating,  from irregular  action of

heart.
^•^  Hiccough,  Belching,  Nausea  and  Vomiting. Eructations

of  air.


coccus  CACTI.  286

I  Nausea. ^Menorrhagia.

Gagging  and  vomiting  of  food  caused  by  expectoration  of
ropy  mucus.

I  Hawking  of  mucus  provokes  vomiting.

■Vomiting:  of  thick  masses  of  mucus;  and  cough  pro-
duced by  loud  speaking,  rinsing  mouth  or  brushing
teeth ;  on  account  of  irritability  of  arches  of  palate  and
sensitiveness  of  mouth  and  fauces;  with  copious  expec-
toration after  midnight  caused  by  a  spasmodic  cough.

■Vomiting  of  white,  bitter  tasting  froth.  ^Menorrhagia.
^''  Scrobiculum  and  Stomach.  Epigastric  region,  especially
pit  of  stomach,  sensitive  to  pressure.

Distension  of  stomach.

Sensation  of  fulness  and  pressure  in  stomach.

Pain  in  stomach  with  sensation  as  of  a  ball  or  stone  lying
in  it.

Severe  heartburn.

Sensation  as  of  something  ascending  toward  stomach,
which  makes  her  think  she  will  vomit  water.

■  For  three  evenings  in  succession,  sickness  at  stomach

with  faintness  and vomiting of  white,  bitter  tasting
froth. ^Menorrhagia.
^^Hypochondria. ■  Burning  and  drawing  in  1.  hypochon-
drium.

■  Constant,  dull,  burning  pain  in  1.  hypochondrium  and

pain  across  loins  as  if  broken,  <  from  lying  on  affected
side,  with  loss  of  sexual  power.

■  Pains  in  1.  hypochondrium,  as  from  incarcerated  flatu-

lence ;  the  pains  extending  to  1.  side  of  back  and  lum-
bar vertebrae.
Dull  stitches  in  region  of  spleen.
^^  Abdomen. iWeak forcing across  lower part of  bowels.
^Vaginitis.

■  Abdomen  distended. ^Menorrhagia.

Distension  with  constant  gurgling  and  rumbling  of
bowels.

Sensation  of  tension  and  constriction  about  abdomen.

Griping  in  abdomen,  followed  by  liquid  stool.

Griping,  cutting  pain  in  umbilical  region.

■Sharp  pains  in  lower  part  of  abdomen  drawing  her  dou-
ble, first  in  r.  side,  then  in  1. ^Menorrhagia.

■  Insufferable  abdominal  pains  at  night. ^ Acute  desqua-

mative nephritis.
Sticking,  drawing,  thrusting  pain  in  inguinal,  vesical  and

pubic  regions,  followed  by  a  mucous  leucorrhoea.
Bruised  pain  in  groins  and  sacro-lumbar  region.
^  Stool  and  Rectum. Frequent  ineffectual  urging  to  stool.
Profuse,  soft  and  pasty  stools.


287  COCCUS  CACTI.

Hard,  dry  stool.

Sticking  pains  in  rectum.

Burning,  crawling  or  itching  in  anus.
^^  Urinary  Organs. Dull  pressing,  sticking,  cramp-like,  op-
pressive pains  in  kidneys,  <  from  pressure  or  motion.

Spasmodic  pains  in  kidneys.

I  I  Nephritis  with  pericarditis.

Nephritic  colic,  with  very  copious  urine  and  dull  pain  in
urethra.

Spasmodic  pains  in  kidneys,  with  vesical  tenesmus  and
frequent  emissions  of  deep  colored  urine.

Renal  pains  with  spasmodic  difficulties  of  chest.

Irregularities  in  urinary  secretion.

I  I  Acute  renal  dropsy.

Sudden,  acute,  prolonged  lancinations,  extending  from  1.
renal  region  along  ureters  into  bladder.

Cutting  pain  in  region  of  bladder.

Pressure  in  bladder  with  constant  urging  to  urinate.

■  Urging  to  urinate. ^Acute  desquamative  nephritis.
■Urging  to  urinate,  but  can  pass  no  urine  until  an  enor-
mous clot  of  black  blood  has  passed. ^Menorrhagia.

Frequent  scanty  discharges  of  urine,  difficult  and  slow
in  coming,  taking  place  with  straining  and  vesical  te-
nesmus.

■Urine  excoriates;  falls  over  vulva  drop  bj^  drop.

Urine  contains  mucus  in  the  form  of  filaments,  clouds,
and  flocks,  and  the  sediment  is  entangled  with  much
mucus.

Very  acrid,  irritating  urine.

The  urine  seems  to  be  thick  like  oil.

I  I  Hemorrhage  from  the  kidneys.

Brick-dust  sediment  in  urine,  adhering  to  vessel.

■  Urine  dark  colored,  with  white  sediment,  an  inch  deep,

over  which  was  a  granular  layer,  half  an  inch  thick,

deeply reddened with blood. ^Acute desquamative

nephritis.
Odor  of  urine  sometimes  alkaline,  often  ammoniacal;  also

cadaverous  when  it  is  dark  colored  and  cloudy.
I  1  Urethral  tenesmus.

Burning  in  urethra  when  urinating  and  continuing  after.
Very  violent  lancinating  thrusts  in  the  anterior  portion  of

urethra  and  glans,  a  long  time  after  having  urinated

when  in  bed  at  night;  they  force  him  to  groan  and  cry

out  and  last  a  minute  and  a  half.
Violent  pruritus  and  itching  at  orifice  of  urethra.

■  Gravel.

^^  Male  Sexual  Organs. Great  sexual  excitement  with  fre-
quent erections.


coccus  CACTI.  288

I  Loss  of  sexual  power,  with  constant,  dull,  burning  pain

in  1.  hypochondrium  and  pains  across  loins  as  if  broken.

^^  Female  Sexual  Organs. ■  Hemorrhage  from  uterus  with

passage  of  large  clots,  which  escape  when  quiet  or  when

getting  up  to  pass  water.

I  Great  tenderness  and  irritation  in  extreme  lower  part  of
vagina,  <  when  urinating;  can  walk  a  long  distance,
but  is  <  after  sitting  in  the  house  all  day. ^Vaginitis.

I  Sudden  cessation  of  menstrual  flow  on  second  day  from
exposure;  non-appearance  of  menses  for  seven  weeks,
when  she  was  taken  with  rush  of  blood  to  head  and
spitting  of  dark  blood;  menses  lasted  but  a  few  hours;
a  week  later  flow  returned  with  pain  in  head,  aching
pain  through  small  of  back,  at  times  chilliness,  then
again  fever  and  sweat;  flow  continued  two  weeks,  but
only  in  evening  after  lying  down,  never  when  stirring
about;  discharge  pink. ^Menorrhagia.

Menses  too  early  and  too  abundant,  of  dark,  thick  blood,
with  a  sensation  of  tension  and  constriction  about  ab-
domen and  of  something  ascending  toward  stomach,
which  makes  her  think  she  will  vomit  water.

■  Enormous  black  clots  pass  from  vagina. ^Menorrhagia.
iLeucorrhoea,  not  constant. ^Vaginitis.
Leucorrhcea  consisting  of  mucus,  preceded  by  drawing,

thrusting  pain  in  inguinal,  vesical  and  pubic  regions.

Pain  in  vulva  so  severe  on  going  to  bed  that  she  is  obliged
to  sit  up  and  go  to  sleep  in  that  position;  tumor  of
vulva  increases,  becomes  hard  and  is  sensitive  to  touch,
throbbing  and  burning  in  tumor  and  excoriated  feeling
on  walking.

■Soreness  of  vulva;  cannot  bear  pressure  of  clothing.

Inflammation  of  labia.
^'  Voice  and  Larynx. Trachea  and  Bronchia, i  Fatigue
of  vocal  organs,  even  after  speaking  without  exertion ;
the  voice  becomes  rough  and  hoarse;  respiration  some-
what laborious.

■Hoarseness.

■Sensation  as  though  a  lump  as  large  as  a  walnut  were
sticking  behind  larynx,  which  obliged  him  to  swallow
constantly.

■Rawness  of  air  passages,  which  frequently  compels  him
to  cough.

■  ■Tickling'  in  larynx,  very  violent,  waking  him  at  11.30

P.M.,  causing  cough  with  expectoration  of  much  tena-
cious mucus,  for  ten  minutes.

■Scraping  sensation  in  larynx,  causing  some  paroxysms
of  cough,  with  expectoration  of  little  balls  of  mucus.

■Scraping  and  dry  feeling  in  larynx,  <  towards  evening,
with  hacking  cough  and  hawking. ^Catarrh.


289  COCCUS  CACTI.

Laryngeal  irritation.

Feeling  as  of  mucus  ascending  and  descending  trachea,

causing  tickling  and  cough,  <  in  a  warm  room,  >  in

open  air.
Constant tickling  in bronchi, about their bifurcation,

caused  by  a- feeling  as  if  a  plug  of  mucus  was  moving

in  chest,  in  spite  of  the  profuse  expectoration.

■  Catarrh  of  larynx  and  air  passages.

I  I  Chronic  bronchitis  complicated  with  gravel ;  acid  dia-
thesis.

■  Protracted  bronchial  catarrhs  remaining  after  whooping

cough.
^  Respiration. ■  Respiration  somewhat  laborious,  with fa-
tigue of  vocal  organs.

■  Difficult  breathing;  dyspnoea.

■  Shortness  of  breath. ^Catarrh.

I  Asthma  complicated  with  affection  of  kidneys  and  turbid
urine.
^"^  Cough.. Frequent  hacking  cough.

■  Paroxysms  of  tickling  cough,  ending  with  expectoration

of  mucus.

■  Cough  <  at  6  or  7  in  morning,  or  on  first  rising,  in

paroxysms,  which  do  not  cease  until  a  quantity  of
tenacious  mucus  is  raised. ^Whooping  cough.

■  Cough  wakes  him  at  6  a.m.,  having  remissions  of  a  min-

ute ;  it  is  at  first  dry,  clear  and  barking ;  subsequently
some  thick  mucus  is  detached,  and  the  effort  of  doing
this  causes  desire  to  vomit,  with  excoriated  feeling  in
throat  and  pressive  headache. ^Catarrh.

■  Cough  <  when  waking,  at  6  a.m.  clear,  dry  and  barking;

slight  expectoration  of  thick,  viscid  mucus,  <  an  hour
after  dinner,  3  p.m.,  so  violent  as  to  cause  vomiting  and
expectoration  of  a  great  quantity  of  thick,  viscous  and
albuminous  mucus.

■  Attacks  of  barking,  tickling  cough,  particularly  night

and  morning,  after  coughing  awhile,  expectoration  of  a
great  quantity  of  mucus,  which  is  like  the  white  of  an
egg,  tough,  white  or  whitish-yellow,  can  be  drawn  into
threads  and  has  a  saltish  taste,  with  nausea  and  vomit-
ing of  food.

■  Cough  most  constant  in  morning,  with  expectoration  of

slime  and  yellowish  mucus  of  a  salt  taste. ^Catarrh.

Cough  <  on  waking,  which  racks  the  system  all  over;
head  pains  as  if  it  would  split;  purple  face.

Suffocative  cough,  with  expectoration  of  much  tough,
ropy,  white  mucus,  which  accumulates  in  chest  and
throat  and  is  difficult  to  raise,  nearly  causing  strangu-
lation and  vomiting  of  food,  <  during  night  after  going

VOL.  IV. — 19.


coccus  CACTI.  290

to  bed  and  after  remaining  long  in  one  position,  when
entering  a  heated  room  after  having  been  in  cold,  open
air.

■  Spasmodic  cough  after  midnight  causes  vomiting  with

copious  expectoration.

I  Coughing  and  vomiting  follow  loud  speaking,  rinsing  of
mouth  or  brushing  teeth.

■Cough  more  or  less  constant,  but  <  when  Ijdng  or  during
exercise. ^Catarrh.

Cough  caused  by  a  feeling  as  of  mucus  ascending  and  de-
scending trachea.

Expectoration :  of  globular  mucus,  some  as  large  as  a  pea ;
of  viscid,  albuminous  mucus;  ropy;  of  lumpy,  yellow
or  greyish  mucus;  with  a  feeling  as  if  a  plug  of  mucus
was  moving  in  chest;  easy  in  morning;  of  yellow  mu-
cus of  an  acrid  taste.

■Spitting  of  dark  blood. ^Menorrhagia.

■  ■Whooping  cough,  <  when  first  waking.

■  Catarrhal  attacks,  which  came  on  early  in  Fall,  upon

first  change  from  warm  to  cold  weather,  lasting  until
next  Summer  when  weather  again  became  warm.

■  Cough  of  drunkards.

^  Inner  Chest  and  Lungs. Bruised  pain  in  1.  clavicular
region,  <  from  motion.
Tensive  pain  in  upper  part  of  1.  chest,  near  clavicle.
Feeling  as  of  a  plug  of  mucus  moving  in  chest.
Sensation  of  burning,  soreness  or  pressure  beneath  sternum.
Stitches  in  upper  part  of  chest.

■  Soreness  and  pain  of  whole  chest,  <  at  superior  portion.

^Catarrh.
Oppression  of  lower  part  of  chest,  difficult  breathing.
Pressure  upon  chest,  with  hoarseness.
Spasmodic  difficulties  of  chest,  with  renal  pains.
Transient,  very  painful  stitches,  at  times  in  1.,  at  times  in

r.  side  of  chest.
■Sudden pulmonary congestion, with profuse mucous

secretion  and  spasmodic  suffocative  cough.

■  Accumulation  of  mucus  in  chest,  difficult  to  raise,  nearly

causing  strangulation  and  vomiting  of  food.
^^  Heart,  Pulse  and  Circulation. Severe  pressive  pain  in
precordial  region,  with  palpitation  at  night.

■  Irregular  beating  of  heart  in  rapid  succession,  causing

anxiety  after  eating.
Tumultuous  action  of  heart  while  lying  down  after  dinner.
Pulse  accelerated.
^^  liTeek  and  Back, Slight  sticking  pain  in  both  scapulae.
Stitches  between  shoulders.
■Aching  pain  through  small  of  back. ^Menorrhagia.


291  COCCUS  CACTI.

■Region  of  kidneys  painful  to  pressure. ^Acute  desqua-
mative nephritis.

I  Pain  across  loins  as  if  broken,  with  loss  of  sexual  power.

■  Fleeting  stitches  in  loins.  ^Acute  desquamative  nephritis.

Bruised  pain  in  sacro-lumbar  region  and  in  groins.
^^  Upper  Limbs. Tension,  drawing  and  tearing  in  r.  shoulder.

Burning,  tearing,  pressive  pain  near  1.  elbow.

Severe  stitches  in  tip  of  1.  elbow.
^  Lower Limbs. Great lassitude and weariness of  lower
limbs.

Drawing  down  the  thighs  and  calves,  with  great  weariness
in  the  latter.

Pressive,  stitching  pain  in  patellae.

I  Pain  and  stiffness  in  r.  leg. ^Menorrhagia.

Tearing  stitches  along  muscles  of  r.  calf,  frequently  re-
peated.

Great  weariness  of  the  feet;  burning  pain  in  soles  of  feet.
^  Limbs  in  General. Sensation  of  weakness  or  prostration
in  limbs.

I  Pain  in  limbs. ^Acute  desquamative  nephritis.
^^  Rest. Position. Motion. When  quiet :  hemorrhage  from
uterus,  with  passage  of  large  clots.

After  sitting  in  house  all  day:  tenderness  and  irritation
in  extreme  lower  part  of  vagina  <.

While  lying  down: after  dinner,  tumultuous action  of
heart.

After  lying  down :  tearing  from  1.  eye  up  into  forehead ;
cough  <.

Menstrual discharge  takes place in  evening and  only
when  lying  down,  never  when  stirring  about.

After  remaining  long  in  one  position  in  bed :  suffocative
cough  <.

Pain  in  1.  hypochondrium  and  across  loins  <  from  lying
on  affected  side.

Pain  in  vulva  so  severe  on  going  to  bed  that  she  is  obliged
to  sit  up  and  go  to  sleep  in  that  position.

Motion:  <  pains  in  kidneys;  <  bruised  pain  in  1.  clavi-
cular region.

From  least  exertion :  lassitude  and  tendency  to  perspire.

When  getting  up :  hemorrhage  from  uterus  with  passage
of  large  clots.

On  walking :  excoriated  feeling  in  tumor  of  vulva.

During  exercise:  cough  <.
^®  Nerves. ■  General  lassitude.  ^Acute  desquamative  nephritis.

Lassitude,  with  a  tendency  to  perspire  from  least  exertion.

Great  weariness,  weakness  and  prostration.
■  Hemiplegia  with  numbness.

;r  Spasms  of  chest  with  renal  pains.


coccus  CACTI.  292

Nervousness.
.  I  I  Spasms.
^^  Sleep. Inclination  to  yawn;  great  sleepiness.

Uneasy  sleep,  with  extreme  restlessness  during  night.

Vivid  dreams.
^^  Time. After  midnight:  spasmodic  cough  with  copious  ex-
pectoration and  vomiting.

At  11.30  P.M.:  violent  tickling  in  larynx,  followed  by
cough  with  expectoration.

At  6  A.M.:  cough  wakes  him.

At  6  or  7  in  morning:  cough  <.

In  morning:  on  awaking,  dull  headache  above  r.  eye;
cough  <  on  first  rising;  attacks  of  barking,  tickling
cough,  with  vomiting  and  excoriation  of  mucus;  cough
most  constant.

At  3  P.M. :  violent  cough,  with  vomiting  and  expectoration
of  mucus.

In  evening:  after  lying  down,  tearing  in  1.  eye  up  into
forehead ;  scraping  and  dry  feeling  in  larynx  < ;  attacks
of  barking,  tickling  cough,  with  vomiting  and  expec-
toration of  mucus.

At  night: insufferable  abdominal  pains; in bed,  very
violent  lancinating  thrusts  in  anterior  portion  of  ure-
thra and  glans ;  suffocative  cough  < ;  pressive  pains  in
precordial  region  with  palpitation ;  extreme  restlessness.
^^  Temperature and Weather. Warmth :  throat  <  in.

In  warm  room:  tickling  in  trachea  and  cough  <.

When  entering  heated  room  from  cold  open  air:  suffoca-
tive cough  <.

Warmth  of  bed :  <  throat.

In  open  air:  tickling  in  trachea  and  cough  >.

■Slightest  exposure  aggravates  catarrh  severely.

Cold  things:  great  sensitiveness  of  teeth  to.

Catarrhal  attacks  come  on  early  in  Fall,  upon  first  change
from  warm  to  cold  weather,  lasting  until  next  Summer
when  weather  again  became  warm.
^  Fever. General  heat  over  whole  body  followed  by  slight
perspiration.

Sensation  of  coldness  in  various  parts  of  body.

•  Chilliness,  then  again  fever  and  sweat. ^Menorrhagia.

Profuse  sweat.
*^  Attacks,  Periodicity.  Sudden :  drawing  pains  in  teeth ;
lancinations  from  renal  region  along  ureters  into  blad-
der; cessation  of  menstrual  flow  on  second  day,  from
exposure;  pulmonary  congestion,  with  profuse  mucous
secretion  and  spasmodic,  suffocative  cough.

Spasmodic:  cough  after  midnight;  pains  in  kidneys;
difficulties  of  chest  with  renal  pains;  suffocative  cough.


293  COCCUS  CACTI.

Transient:  painful  stitches  at  times  in  I.,  at  times  in  r.
side  of  chest ;  stitches  in  loins.

Paroxysmal:  tickling  cough,  ending  with  expectoration
of  mucus.

Frequent:  violent  sneezing;  hawking  of  mucus;  ineffec-
tual urging  to  stool;  emissions  of  deep  colored  urine;
scanty  discharges  of  urine,  with  straining  and  tenesmus ;
erections;  coughing;  hacking  cough;  tearing  stitches
along  muscles  of  r.  calf.

Lasting  a  minute  and  a  half:  violent  lancinating  thrusts
in  anterior  portion  of  urethra  and  glans  at  night  in  bed.

For  ten  minutes :  cough  with  expectoration  of  much  tena-
cious mucus,  at  11.30  p.m.

Constant:  desire  to  spit;  pain  in  1.  hypochondrium  and
pain  across  loins;  gurgling  and  rumbling  of  bowels;
urging  to  urinate;  swallowing;  tickling  in  bronchi
about  their  bifurcation ;  cough.

Beginning  in  evening  and  lasting  through  night:  roaring
in  ears,  disturbing  sleep.

Protracted :  bronchial  catarrhs  remaining  after  whooping
cough.

For  three  evenings  iii  succession:  sickness  of  stomach,
with  faintness  and  vomiting.

For  seven  weeks:  non-appearance  of  menses.

From  early  in  Fall  until  next  Summer:  catarrhal  attacks.

Chronic:  bronchitis  complicated  with  gravel.
*^  Locality  and  Direction.  Right:  dull  headache  above  eye;
pressive  pain  in  side  of  forehead;  indefinite  drawing
and  pressure  in  eye;  crackling  in  ear;  painful,  cramp-
like drawing  in  ear;  tension,  drawing  and  tearing  in
shoulder;  pain  and  stiffness  in  leg;  tearing  stitches
along  muscle  of  calf.
"  Left;  pressure  upon  eye  and  eyeball;  roaring,  ringing
and  crackling  in  ear;  burning  and  drawing  in  hypo-
chondrium; constant,  dull,  burning  pain  in  hypochon-
drium; pains  in  hypochondrium,  as  from  incarcerated
flatulence,  pains  extending  to  side  of  back  and  lumbar
vertebrae;  bruised  pain  in  clavicular  region;  tensive
pain  in  upper  part  of  chest  near  clavicle;  burning,  tear-
ing, pressive  pain  near  elbow ;  severe  stitches  in  tip  of
elbow.

From  r.  to  1. :  sharp  pains  in  lower  part  of  abdomen.
^^  Sensations.  As  if  head  would  split;  as  if  scalp  were  drawn
tightly  over  skull ;  as  if  a  hair  were  between  eyeballs
and  lids ;  as  of  a  foreign  body  between  lids  and  balls ;
as  if  external  auditory  passages  were  closed;  as  if  a
crumb  or  hair  were  lodged  in  throat  behind  larynx ;  as
of  hunger  even  after  eating;  as  of  a  ball  or  stone  lying


coccus  CACTI.  294

in  stomach ;  as  of  something  ascending  toward  stomach,
which  makes  her  think  she  will  vomit  water;  as  if  loins
were  broken ;  as  of  incarcerated  flatulence  in  1.  hypo-
chondrium,  pains  extending  to  1.  side  of  back  and  lum-
bar vertebrse ;  as  if  a  crumb  or  large  walnut  were  stick-
ing behind  larynx ;  as  of  mucus  ascending  and  descend-
ing trachea ;  as  if  a  plug  of  mucus  was  moving  in  chest ;
as  if  head  would  split.

Pain :  in  head ;  in  occiput ;  in  stomach ;  in  lower  part  of
abdomen ;  in  head ;  in  vulva ;  of  whole  chest ;  in  r.  leg ;
in  limbs.

A^iolent  lancinating  thrusts  in  anterior  portion  of  urethra
and  glans.

Lancinations :  sudden,  acute  and  prolonged,  from  1.  renal
region  along  ureters  into  bladder.

Cutting :  in  umbilical  region ;  in  region  of  bladder.

Stitches:  in  occiput;  in  region  of  spleen;  in  upper  part
of  chest;  at  times  in  1.,  at  times  in  r.  side  of  chest.

Stitches :  between  shoulders ;  in  loins ;  in  tip  of  1.  elbow.

Tearing  stitches :  along  muscles  of  r.  calf.

Stitching:  in  ears;  in  patellae.

Sticking :  in  both  temples ;  in  inguinal,  vesical  and  pubic
regions;  in  rectum;  in  kidneys;  in  both  scapulae;  in
various  parts  of  skin.

Thrusting:  in  inguinal,  vesical  and  pubic  regions.

Shooting:  in  hollow  roots  of  teeth.

Tearing :  frontal  headache ;  from  1.  eye  up  into  forehead ;
in  r.  shoulder ;  near  1.  elbow.

Drawing :  in  occiput,  temples  and  r.  eye ;  in  teeth ;  in  1.
hypochondrium ;  in  inguinal,  vesical  and  pubic  regions ;
in  r.  shoulder;  down  thighs  and  calves.

Painful  cramp-like  drawing:  especially  in  r.  ear.

Splitting:  headache.

Racking:  cough.

Scraping:  in  throat;  in  larynx.

Raging  pain  :  from  r.  eye  along  squamous  portion  of  tem-
poral bone,  on  inner  side,  to  occiput.

Burning:  in  throat;  in  1.  hypochondrium;  in  anus;  in
urethra  when  urinating  and  continuing  after ;  in  tumor
of  vulva;  beneath  sternum;  near  1.  elbow;  in  soles  of
feet.

Soreness:  of  throat;  of  vulva;  beneath  sternum;  of  whole
chest,  <  at  superior  portion.

Tensive  pain :  in  upper  part  of  1.  chest,  near  clavicle.

Tension:  about  abdomen;  in  r.  shoulder.

Griping:  in  abdomen;  in  umbilical  region.

Smarting:  between  eyeballs  and  lids.


295  COCCUS  CACTI.

Biting: between  eyeballs  and  lids;  in  various  parts  of

skin.
Burrowing:  frontal  headache.
Cramp-like  pains:  in  kidneys.
Constriction:  of  throat;  about  abdomen.
Bruised  pain: in  groins  and  sacro-lumbar  region;  in  1.

clavicular  region.
Excoriated  feeling:  in  tumor  of  vulva  when  walking;  in

throat.
Rawness :  of  mouth,  throat  and  pharynx ;  of  air  passages.
Roughness:  of  throat.
Aching:  through  small  of  back.
Pressive  pains:  in  orbits;  in  both  temples;  in  r.  side  of

forehead,  sometimes  extending  to  occiput;  in  occiput,

temples  and  r.  eye;  in  precordial  region  with  palpita-
tion; near  1.  elbow;  in  patellae.
Pressive:  frontal  headache;  headache.
Pressing:  in  kidneys.
Pressure:  upon  1.  eye  and  eyeballs;  in  stomach;  in  bladder;

beneath  sternum ;  upon  chest.
Oppressive  pains:  in  kidneys.
Oppression :  of  lower  part  of  chest.
Fulness :  of  head ;  of  stomach.
Throbbing :  in  tumor  of  vulva.
Tickling:  in  one  or  both  ears;  in  throat;  in  larynx;  in

trachea ;  in  bronchi  about  their  bifurcation.
Crawling  pain:  in  scalp;  in  malar  bones,  or  beginning  in

malar  bones  and  extending  over  back  of  nose  to  opposite

cheek;  in  anus.
Numbness:  with  hemiplegia.
Weariness :  of  lower  limbs ;  in  calves ;  of  feet.
Lassitude :  of  lower  limbs.
Dull:  frontal  headache;  headache  above  r.  eye;  pain  in

1.  hypochondrium ;  pains  in  kidneys ;  pain  in  urethra.
Coldness :  in  various  parts  of  body.
Dryness:  of  nose;  of  posterior  nares  and  throat;  of  tongue

and  of  whole  mouth ;  of  palate ;  in  larynx.
Violent  pruritus :  at  orifice  of  urethra.
Itching:  in  one  or  both  ears;  of  nose;  in  anus;  at  orifice

of  urethra ;  in  various  parts  of  skin ;  pimples  in  various

parts  of  skin.
^*  Tissues. Especially  afli'ects  mucous  membranes ;  catarrh ;

whooping  cough,  etc.
Menorrhagia  with  large  coagula.
Renal  and  vesical  troubles.
^  Touch. Passive  Motion. Injuries. Touch : toothache

with  great  sensitiveness  to;  tumor  of  vulva  hard  and

sensitive  to.


coccus  CACTI— COCHLEARIA.  296

Pressure:  epigastric  region,  especially  pit  of  stomach,
sensitive  to;  pains  in  kidneys  <  from;  region  of  kid-
neys painful  to.

Pressure  of  clothing:  vulva  cannot  bear.

Scratching:  pains  in  scalp  oblige.

Rinsing  mouth  causes  cough  and  vomiting  on  account  of
sensitiveness  of  mouth  and  fauces.

Brushing  the  teeth  causes  cough  and  vomiting,  arches  of
palate  being  very  irritable.
*^  Skin. Itching,  sticking  and  biting  in  various  parts  of  skin.

Here  and  there,  small  red  spots  and  itching  pimples  in
various  parts  of  skin.
*^  Stages  of  Life,  Constitution. Girl,  ^et.  2| ;  spasms.

Miss  Smith,  set.  20,  sallow  complexion,  comparatively
healthy,  never  any  menstrual  troubles;  menorrhagia.

Student,  set.  20;  tinnitus.

Mrs.  C,  set.  27,  ailing  for  two  years,  <  for  six  months;
vaginitis.

"W.  P.,  set.  40,  married ;  impotence  and  backache.

Mrs.  Smith,  set.  50;  subject  for  years  to  catarrhal  attacks.
*^  Relations. Compare :  Canthar.  (action  on  kidneys).


COCHLEARIA.

Horseradish.  Cruciferse.

Tincture  prepared  from  the  root.

Fragmentary  proving  in  MSS.  by  Franz,  printed  in  Archiv.  f.  Horn ,  v.  17,
No.  3,  p.  176,  and  a  proving  by  Gate,  N.  Am.  J.  of  Horn.,  v.  1,  p.  336.

Clinical. — Scorbutis,  Jahr's  Leitfaden.

^  Mind. Thinking  difficult  in  evening  without  confusion  of
head.
Is  extremely  irresolute.
^  Sensorium. Dulness  of head,  is  unable  to collect  his

thoughts  with  rapidity.
^  Inner  Head. Headache  in  a  small  spot,  now  here,  now
there,  a  pressure  deep  in  brain,  not  aggravated  by  mo-
tion, but  <  on  widely  opening  eyes.
Pressive-boring  headache,  as  if  frontal  bone  would  fall  out.
^  Sight  and  Eyes. Obscuration  of  vision  for  a  few  minutes.
Eyes  swollen.


297  COCHLEARIA.

Sore  and  scrofulous  eyes.

I  Traumatic inflammation of eyes; blearedness and
cataract.
^^  Teeth  and  Gums. Dull  sensation  in  teeth,  as  if  they  were
soft  and  became  bent  on  chewing.
■Scorbutis.
13  Throat. Scraping  in  throat,  with  nausea.
^^  Nausea  and  Vomiting. Nausea  with  scraping  in  throat.

Retching  and  vomiting  of  bilious  fluid.
^^  Scrobiculum  and  Stomach. Crampy,  tensive  pain  above
the  epigastrium,  apparently  in  diaphragm ;  >  by  bend-
ing forward.
^^  Abdomen. •  Flatulence.

Griping  pain  around  umbilicus.
'^^  Stool  and  Rectum. Involuntary  passage  of  mucus  from
anus.
Stools  increased  in  frequency.
^^  Urinary Organs. i  Burning and cutting at  the  glans
during  micturition ;  felt  also  before  and  after.
■  Increased  inclination  to  urinate; urinates  eight  or  ten

times  daily  instead  of  four.
Increased  secretion  of  urine.
Urine  pale  and  limpid.
^*  Limbs  in  General. Pain  in  all  the  joints,  while  lying  still
towards  morning,  <  when  lying  on  side;  disappeared
on  moving  about  and  on  rising.
^^  Rest. Position. Motion. Pain  in  all  the  joints,  while
lying  still,  towards  morning,  <  when  lying  on  side;
disappeared  on  moving  about  and  on  rising.
Bending  forward :  >  crampy,  tensive  pain  in  epigastrium.
On  widely  opening  eyes:  headache  <.
^  Time. Towards  morning:  while  lying  still,  pain  in  all  the
joints.
In  evening:  thinking  difficult,  without  confusion  of  head.
^^  Attacks,  Periodicity. For  a  few  minutes:  obscuration  of
vision.
Urination  eight  or  ten  times  daily  instead  of  four.
'^  Sensations. As  if  frontal  bone  would  fall  out;  as  if  teeth
were  soft  and  became  bent  on  chewing.
Pain:  in  all  the  joints.
Pressive-boring :  headache.
Burning :  at  glans  during  micturition ;  felt  also  before  and

after  micturition.
Scraping:  in  throat.

Tensive pain: above epigastrium apparently in dia-
phragm.
Griping :  about  umbilicus.


COCHLEARIA— CODEINUM.  298

Crampy  pain:  above  epigastrium  apparently  in  epigas-
trium.
Pressure:  deep  in  brain.
Dull  sensation :  in  teeth.
Dulness:  of  head.
^^  Injuries. Traumatic  inflammation  of  eyes.


CODEINUM.

An  alkaloid  of  Opium.  Ci^H^iNO^.

Provings  by  E.  E.  Marcy  and  others  (see  Encyclopedia,  v.  3).

"Discovered  in  1832  by  Kobiquet  in  the  muriate  of  morphia,  prepared  ac-
cording to  the  process  of  Gregory.  It  exists  in  opium,  combined  with  meconic
acid,  and  is  extracted  along  with  morphia  in  the  preparation  of  muriate  of
morphia."

The  provings  evolve  many  symptoms  similar  to  those  we  find  in  the  prov-
ings of  morphia.

Clinical  Authorities. — Twitching  of  eyelids,  Marcy,  Hale's  Therap.,  p.  185 ;
Soreness  of  skin  of  face  and  scalp  after  neuralgia,  E.  E.  Marcy,  N.  A.  J.  H.,  v.  5,  p.
414 ;  Spasmodic  pain  in  stomach,  Marcy,  N.  A.  J.  H.,  v.  5,  p.  419 ;  Diabetes,  Pavy,
B.  J.  H.,  V.  29,  p.  818  ;  Night  cough  of  consumptives,  Hale's  Therap.,  p.  185 ;  Sudden
twitchings  during  sleep,  E.  E.  Marcy,  N.  A.  J.  H.,  v.  5,  p.  416  ;  Disturbed  sleep  from
frightful  dreams,  E.  E.  Marcy,  N.  A.  J.  H.,  v.  5,  p.  416.

^  Mind. Great  mental  exhilaration.

Depression  of  spirits  with  dull  headache.
Inability  to  apply  the  mind.
Lascivious  thoughts.
^  Sensorium. Confusion  and  heat  of  head.
^  Inner  Head. Heat  in  head.

I  Dull  headache  in  morning,  which  gradually  diminishes

until  noon,  when  it  disappears.
I  Dull  headache  soon  after  getting  up  in  morning,  <  on

1.  side,  and  lasting  about  two  hours.
Headache  from  fatigue  and  excessive  mental  excitement.
^  Sight  and  Eyes. Weakness  of  vision.

■  Involuntary twitching of  1. eyelid, sometimes > by

rubbing.
I  Involuntary  twitching  of  both  eyelids,  whenever  he  at-
tempted to  read  or  write.
^  Smell  and  Nose. Entire  loss  of  smell.


299  CODEINUM.

^  Upper  Face, l  Painful  soreness  of  skin  of  face  and  scalp,

which  remained  after  a  severe  attack  of  neuralgia.
^  Lower  Face. Lips  dry  and  parched,  constant  inclination

to  moisten  skin.
^^  Inner  Mouth. Dryness  of  mouth.
13  Throat. Tickling sensation  in throat,  in  afternoon  and

evening.
^*  Thirst. Desires. Great  thirst,  with  a  particular  desire  for

bitter  substances.
^^  Nausea  and  Vomiting, i  Empty  eructations,  with  acute
pains  in  stomach.
I  Nausea  and  vomiting.
^^  Scrobiculum  and  Stomach. Tenderness  in  stomach,  with
violent  pulsations  of  heart  and  carotids.
■Violent  spasmodic  pain  at  pit  of  stomach.
■  Gastralgia.

:  Neuralgia  of  stomach  and  solar  plexus.
I  Affections  of  stomach  or  abdomen,  dependent  on  disor-
der of  solar  plexus  of  great  sympathetic.
^^  Abdomen. Extreme  tenderness  of  lower  part  of  abdomen.
Dull  pain  throughout  entire  abdomen.
Gastric  and  abdominal  neuralgia.
"^  Stool  and  Rectum. Constij)ation  with  tenderness  of  bowels,

especially  in  transverse  and  descending  colon.
^^  Urinary  Organs. Increased secretion of  urine,  it  being
lighter  in  color.
Semi-paralysis  of  bladder.

■She  passed  five  pints  of  urine  daily,  specific  gravity  10.40

and  sugar  to  the  extent  of  32.72  grains;  <  from  anxiety

and  overwork.

I  The  urine  previously  saccharine  contained  no  trace  of

sugar.

^^  Male  Sexual  Organs. Sexual  excitement  during  night

leading  to  nocturnal  pollutions.
^  Pregnancy. Nausea  and  vomiting  during  pregnancy.
^  Cough. I  Short,  irritating  cough  <  during  night.

I  Troublesome  cough,  with  copious  mucous  and  sometimes

purulent  expectoration.
I  I  Obstinate  cough  with  expectoration  and  nervous  excita-
bility.
I  Night  cough  of  phthisical  patients.
^  Inner  Chest  and  Lungs. Fulness  and  oppression  of  chest.
Sharp  pain  in  r.  lung  on  inspiration.
Stitching  pains  in  1.  lung  on  breathing.
Severe  pain  in  shoulder  and  chest  on  motion.
^^  Heart,  Pulse  and  Circulation. Sympathetic  palpitation
of  heart  and  irregular  action  from  derangement  of  gan-
glionic system.


CODEINUM.  300

Violent  palpitation  of  heart  and  carotids.

Painful  pulsations  of  heart  on  attempting  to  study  or  write.

Drawing  pain  around  heart,  which  beats  loud  and  full.
^^  Neck  and  Back. Convulsions  in  muscles  of  neck.

Convulsive  movements  of  muscles  of  back  and  neck.

Neuralgic  pains  from  occiput  to  back  of  neck.

Painful  pulsations  in  1.  side  of  neck.

Sharp  pains  extending  from  stomach  and  chest  through
to  back,  between  shoulders,  <  on  r.  side.

Acute  pains  in  region  of  kidneys.
^^  Upper  Limbs. I  Spasmodic  twitches  in  arms.

On  moving  arm,  severe  pain  in  deltoid  muscles.

Pulsating  pain  in  1.  upper  arm.

Numbness  of  hands  and  arms.
^^  Lower  Limbs. Sensation  and  power  of  motion  impaired.

I  Involuntary  twitchings  of  lower  limbs.

■  Painful,  spasmodic  jerking  of  legs.

■  Neuralgic  pains  in  thighs  and  legs,  and  subacute  rheu-

matic pains  in  knee  and  ankle-joints.
Sudden  pain  in  knee-joints,  making  walking  impossible

for  a  few  minutes.
Paralytic affections  of  lower extremities,  with extreme
restlessness,  constant  desire  to  change  position,  and  ina-
bility to  sleep.
^*  Limbs  in  General. Spasmodic  twitchings  of  upper  and

lower  extremities.
^  Motion. Motion :  severe  pain  in  shoulder  and  chest.

On  moving  arm :  severe  pain  in  deltoid  muscles.
^  Nerves. Extreme  restlessness.

■  Trembling  of  whole  body.

■  Morbid  sensitiveness  of  surface  in  nervous  and  hysterical

females. /

Frequent  paroxysms  of  involuntary  twitchings  of  muscles
of  all  parts  of  body,  indigestion  and  various  mani-
festations of  morbid  excitability  of  nervous  system,  in
consequence  of  chronic  ovaritis  and  suppressed  men-
struation.

Chorea ;  sleep  constantly  disturbed ;  unusual  tendency  to
involuntary  twitchings  of  muscles  of  different  parts  of
body.
^^  Sleep. Sleepiness,  drowsy  feeling.

■Sudden  twitchings  during  sleep,  so  violent  as  to  wake
up  the  sleeper  in  affright. ^Chorea.

■  Disturbed  sleep  from  frightful  dreams,  causing  patients

to  wake  in  morning  exhausted  and  unrefreshed.
■Sleep constantly disturbed by severe night cough.
^Phthisis.
^  Time. In  morning :  dull  headache,  which  gradually  di-


301  CODEINUM.

minishes  until  noon,  when  it  disappears ;  dull  headache
soon  after  getting  up,  <  on  1.  side,  and  lasting  about
two  hours;  awakes  exhausted  and  unrefreshed  on  ac-
count of  disturbed  sleep.

In  afternoon:  tickling  in  throat.

In  evening :  tickling  in  throat.

During  night:  sexual  excitement,  leading  to  nocturnal
pollutions;  short,  irritating  cough  <.

Night  cough  of  phthisical  patients.
*^  Attacks,  Periodicity. Sudden:  pain  in  knee-joints;  twitch-
ings  during  sleep.

Spasmodic:  twitching  of  1.  eyelid;  twitches  in  arms ;  jerk-
ing of  legs;  twitching  of  upper  and  lower  extremities.

Frequent:  paroxysms  of  involuntary  twitchings  of  mus-
cles of  all  parts  of  body.

For  a  few  minutes :  walking  impossible  on  account  of  sud-
den pain  in  knee-joints.

Constant :  inclination  to  moisten  skin ;  desire  to  change
position ;  disturbance  of  sleep  from  chorea ;  disturbance
of  sleep  by  night  cough.

Lasting  about  two  hours :  dull  headache  <  on  1.  side,  soon
after  getting  up  in  morning.

Dull  headache  in  morning,  which  gradually  diminishes
until  noon,  when  it  disappears.
^  Locality  and  Direction. Right :  sharp  pain  in  lung  on
inspiration; sharp pains from stomach and chest
through  to  back,  between  shoulders,  <  on  side.

Left:  dull  headache  <  on  side;  involuntary  twitching  of
eyelid;  stitching  pains  in  lung  on  breathing;  painful
pulsations  in  side  of  neck;  pulsating  pain  in  upper
arm.
*^  Sensations.  Pains:  in  stomach;  in  shoulder  and  chest  on
motion;  in  deltoid  muscles  on  moving  arm;  in  knee-
joints.

Stitching  pains:  in  1.  lung  on  breathing.

Painful  spasmodic  jerking  of  legs.

Drawing  pains:  around  heart.

Painful  soreness:  of  skin  of  face  and  scalp,  after  neu-
ralgia.

Sharp  pain:  in  r.  lung  on  inspiration;  from  stomach  and
chest  through  to  back,  between  shoulders,  <  on  r.  side.

Acute  pains  in  region  of  kidneys.

Neuralgic  pains :  from  occiput  to  back  of  neck ;  in  thighs
and  legs.

Subacute  rheumatic  pains  in  knee  and  ankle-joints.

Spasmodic  pain :  at  pit  of  stomach.

Pulsating  pain :  in  1.  upper  arm.

Painful  pulsations:  of  heart  on  attempting  to  study  or
write;  in  1.  side  of  neck.


CODEINUM.  302

Prickling  of  skin.

Dull  pain :  throughout  entire  abdomen.
Dull:  headache.

Oppression:  of  chest.  ^

Fulness:  of  chest.

Itching:  of  skin  over  whole  body;  of  eczema  and  porrigo.
Tenderness:  in  stomach;  of  bowels,  especially  in  trans-
verse and  descending  colon.
Tickling:  in  throat.
Numbness:  of  hands  and  arms.
Dryness:  of  lips;  of  mouth.
Heat:  of  head.
^  Tissues. Sensation  of  general  warmth  with  itching  of  skin,

over  whole  body.
*^  Touch. Rubbing:  involuntary  twitching  of  1.  eyelid,  some-
times >  by.
*®  Skin. Itching  of  skin  over  whole  body.

■Troublesome  itching  of  eczema  and  porrigo.
Prickling  of  skin.
*^  Stages  of  Life  and  Constitution.  Woman,  set.  68 ;  diabetes.
*^  Relations. Codeinum  cured  gastralgia,  which  had  withstood
all  other  remedies,  Bellad.  included.
Codeinum  relieved  cough  and  sleeplessness  in  phthisical

patients  after  failure  of  Hyos.,  Ipecac,  and  Conium.
Compare:  Agar,  (twitching  of  eyelids);  Arsen.  (pains  in
legs  and  nightly  restlessness);  Hyos.  (twitching  of
eyelids  after  reading);  Laches,  (superficial  sensitive-
ness) ;  Rhus  tox.  (chorea,  nightly  restlessness,  pains  in
legs) ;  Sulphur  (spasmodic  twitching  of  legs) ;  Sulph.  ac.
(trembling  of  whole  body).


303  COFFEA  CRUDA.

COFFEA  CRUDA.

Coffee.  Rubiacese.


Introduced  by  the  Dutch  into  Java  about  1690.

The  Coffee  plant  is  a  small  tree  from  15  to  30  feet  in  height ;  the  branches
are  opposite,  gradually  diminishing  in  length  as  they  ascend,  forming  a  pyra-
midal summit,  which  is  covered  with  green  foliage  throughout  the  year;  the
leaves  are  opposite,  smooth,  dark  green,  oblong-ovate  and  four  or  five  inches
long,  the  flowers  are  white,  with  an  odor  resembling  jasmine,  the  fruit  is  first
green,  then  red,  and  ultimately  dark  purple. —  U.  S.  D.

For  medical  use  we  take  that  which  is  imported  under  the  name  of  Levantic
(Mocha  beans).  We  use  the  raw,  not  the  roasted  bean.  When  Cofiee  is  roasted  it
destroys  the  caffein  and  changes  it  into  caffeone — this  is  stimulating  like  tobacco.
Hahnemann's  caution  in  this  respect  is  justified.  His  treatise  on  the  effects  of
Coffee  was  published  in  Leipzig  in  1803.  A  full  proving  of  coffee  by  five  persons,
one  of  whom  was  Hahnemann,  is  recorded  by  Stapf  in  his  additions  to  the  Materia
Medica,  and  contains  246  symptoms.  Caffeine,  the  alkaloid  of  Coffea,  contains
the  toxic  principles  of  coffee  in  a  very  concentrated  form.  It  was  first  discovered
by  Runge,  and  afterwards  by  Robiquet.  It  occurs  in  long,  snow-white,  opaque,
odorless  crystals,  sometimes  conjoined  into  feathery  crystals,  of  a  feeble,  bitter
taste.

Clinical  Authorities. — Religious  insanity,  L.  B.  Wells,  Raue's  E.,  p.  31,
1875;  Delirium  tremens,  Strecker,  Ruck.  Kl.  Erf,  v.  1,  p.  142;  Sick  headaches,
Med.  Adv.,  v.  8,  p.  43;  Cephalalgia,  Foote,  MSS. ;  Pain  in  head  and  throat,  Biichn.,
Riick.  Kl.  Erf.,  v.  4,  p.  47;  Hardness  of  hearing,  Allg.  Hom.  Ztg.,  v.  3,  p.  272;
Odontalgia  (two  cases),  E.  M.  Hale,  B.  J.  H.,  v.  23,  p.  492;  Toothache,  Bcenning-
hausen,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf.,  v.  1,  p.  460 ;  Colic  during  paroxysm  of  intermittent  Jever,
Riick.  Hom.  Therap.,  p.  478 ;  Incarcerated  hernia,  Nagel,  Allg.  Wiener  Ztg.,  J.  Pr.
1875,  p.  123;  Raue's  R.,  1875,  p.  158;  Diarrhcea,  Oehme,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf,  v.  5,  p.
412;  Metrorrhagia,  Jager,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf.,  v.  5,  p.  623;  Ineffectual  labor  pains,
Kallenbach,  Allg.  Hom.  Ztg.,  v.  50,  p.  186;  Parspino,  Ruck.  Kl.  Erf,  v.  5,  p.  655;
Spasmus  glottidis,  Billig,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf,  v.  5,  p.  779 ;  Cardiac  hypercesthesia,  Hale,
Raue's  R.,  1875,  p.  132;  Crural  neuralgia,  Pril,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf.,  v.  5,  p.  892;  Trau-
matic shock,  J.  C.  Morgan,  Analyt.  Therap.,  p.  109 ;  Sleeplessness,  W.  P.  Armstrong,
U.S.  Med.  Inv.,  Oct.,  1878,  p.  325;  Sleeplessness  after  typhoid.  Low,  Riick.  Kl.
Erf,  V.  5,  p.  58 ;  Ague,  J.  D.  Craig,  Hom.  Obs.,  v.  4,  p.  442 ;  Allen's  Intermittent
Fever,  p.  93 ;  Chamomilla  poisoning.  Van  Cutsem,  Rev.  Hom.,  p.  100 ;  Raue's  R.,
1875,  p.  12.

'  Mind. I  Memory active, easy comprehension; increased
power  to  think.
1 1  Unusual  activity  of  mind  and  body.
■Sentimental  ecstacy;  excited  imagination.
1 1  Full  of  ideas ;  quick  to  act,  no  sleep  on  this  account.


COFFEA  CRUDA.  304

■Lively  fancies:  full  of  plans  for  the  future.

I  I  Delirium  at  night,  with  dry  heat.

I  Delirium  tremens:  unsteady  running  about;  imagines
he  is  not  at  home,  with  trembling  of  hands;  small,
frequent  pulse.

Great  loquacity,  brain  feels  clear  and  is  active,  he  feels
strong  enough  to  do  anything,  feels  impelled  to  push
things;  veneration  for  the  Supreme  Being  and  love  for
family;  benevolence  excited.

Answers  short,  not  disposed  to  talk,  or  endless  volubility
when  describing  his  ailments.

Patients  cannot  contain  themselves,  crying  out  in  a  most
terrible  manner ;  they  bend  the  body  double  and  throw
the  limbs  about,  grate  the  teeth,  are  covered  with  a
cold  sweat,  and  finally  stretch  themselves  out  in  a  stiff,
rigid  manner,  with  groaning  and  difficult  respiration.

■Weeping  mood.

■Weeping  and  complaining,  with  fear  of  death;  thinks
that  she  will  die. ^Metrorrhagia.

■  Excessive  weeping  and  lamentations  over  trifles.
Whining  and  moaning;  much  crying.

■  Child  cries  and  laughs  easily;  while  crying  it  suddenly

laughs  quite  heartily  and  finally  cries  again.

■  Cries  and  trembles,  does  not  know  w^hat  to  do.
■Throws  things  about,  away,  down,  etc.

■  Cheerfulness;  lively  temper ;  mirthful.

■  Depression  of  spirits.

■  Weeping, complaining,  disheartened  mood,  anxiety  of

mind  and  conscience  filled  with  many  fears. ^Hysteria.

■  Fear  of  death. ^Asthma,

I  i  Metrorrhagia,  large  black  lumps,  <  from  every  motion,
violent  pain  in  groins,  fever,  bright  red  face ;  in  greatest
despair,  believes  herself  dying.

■  ■Fright  from  sudden  pleasant  surprises.

■  Pains  unbearable,  feels discouraged,  cries  and  throws

himself  about;  fear  of  fresh  air  and  of  least  noise;  ex-
cessive weeping  and  lamentations  over  trifles.

■  Great  anguish;  cannot  be  composed;  is  not  able  to  hold

the  pen;  trembles.

■  Exasperation,  tears;  tossing  about  in  great  anguish.

■  ■  Pains  seem  insupportable,  driving  to  despair.

■  Irritability;  oversensitive  disposition.
Fretful  mood,  alternately  merry  or  whining.

■  Child  frets  and  worries  in  an  innocent  manner;  is  not

cross,  but  sleepless ;  it  laughs  one  moment  and  cries  the

next.
■Mental  excitability.
Feels  <  when  hurried.


305  COFFEA  CRUDA.

Ailments  from  excessive  joy,  excessive  laughing  and  play-
ing ;  from  disappointed  love ;  from  anger,  or  from  vexa-
tion with  vehemence  or  fright;  from  narcotic  medicines,
noises,  strong  smells.

■  Weeping  from  uncontrollable  delight.  ^After  parturition.
1 1  Affections  after  sudden  emotions,  particularly  pleasant

surprises.
^  Sensorium. l Cerebral  erethism,  with  nervousness  and  pal-
pitation of  heart. ^Cardiac  hypersesthesia.

Sensorium  more  vivid,  hence  increased  susceptibility  to
pain.

1 1  All  the  senses  more  acute,  reads  fine  print  easier,  hear-
ing, smell,  taste  and  touch  acute,  particularly  also  an
increased  perception  of  slight  passive  motions.

Vertigo :  with  whirling  sensation  in  head,  occasionally  a
general  faint  feeling,  <  by  thinking;  with  burning  in
stomach ;  with  sick  headache,  >  by  a  change  of  jDOsition
or  from  moderate  outdoor  exercise ;  she  cannot  stand ;
with  blackness  before  eyes;  when  stooping.

■  Dizzy  confusion  of  head.
Confusion  of  the  senses.

■  ■Threatening  of  apoplexy;  overexcited,  talkative,  full  of

fear,  pangs  of  conscience,  aversion  to  open  air,  sleepless,
convulsive  grinding  of  teeth.
■'  Inner  Head. ■  Feels  and  hears  a  crackling  in  vertex  when
sitting  quietly.
Heaviness  of  head,  particularly  in  forehead  over  eyes.

■  Head  feels  too  small.

■  Congestion  of  blood  to  head; especially  after  pleasant

surprise;  from  talking;  while  talking.

■  Headache  like pressing with  something hard  on  the

surface  of  the  brain.
'  Headache  with  great  mental  excitement.

■  Headache  from  slightest  cause,  from  thinking,  excessive

joy,  contradiction,  vexation,  catching  cold,  chill,  eating
too  much,  with  aversion  to  the  accustomed  use  of  coffee,
sensitive  to  least  noise  and  music;  the  pain  seems  un-
bearable, making  patient  tearful;  they  lose  all  self  pos-
session, throw  themselves  about  crying  violently,  dread
the  cold  air,  are  chilly.
Headache  with  whining  mood.

■  Headache  as  if  whole  brain  were  torn  and  bruised,  or

dashed  to  pieces;  <  from  motion,  noise,  or  light.

■  Headache  intolerable,  head  feels  small  and  as  if  filled

with  a  fluid ;  as  if  it  would  burst  or  fly  to  pieces  if  she
moved.
Stinging  pain  in  locality  of  amativeness  on  1.  side.

VOL.  IV.— 20.


COFFEA  CRUDA.  306

■Nervous,  hysterical  headaches  in people  of  nervous  or

sanguine  temperament.
1 1  One-sided  headache,  as  from  a  nail driven  into  the

head ;  <  in  open  air.
■Pain  drives  to  despair  and  patient  runs  wildly  about

room.
I  Sick  headache,  with vertigo,  flushed  face,  burning in

eyes,  throbbing  in  temples.
I  Migraine  from  mental  exertion,  in  persons  who  do  not

use  coffee.
I  Headache  renewed  and < after  eating and  sleep; it

disappears  in  open  air,  but  returns  in  a  short  time  in

room,

■  Headache  after  intoxication.

I  Hypersemia  of  brain  after  abuse  of  Bellad.
Threatening  of  apoplexy,  with  congestion  to  head.
^  Sight  and  Eyes. Eyes reddish  and shining; increased

visual  power,  sees  much  more  clearly  in  open  air;  reads

fine  print  easily.
Scintillations  before  eyes.

■  Pupils  dilated.

I  1  Eyes  half  open  during  sleep,  with  convulsive  motion  of
eyes  when  awake. t'Summer  complaint.

■Burning  in  eyes  and  throbbing  in  temples. ^Sick  head-
ache.
*  Hearing  and  Ears. ■Hearing  more  acute  and  sensitive;
music  has  a  shrill  sound.

■Aversion  to  noise;  it  hurts  him.

■Noises  and  singing  in  ears,  with  nervous  people.

■  Crackling  noise  in  head  (one  side),  synchronous  with

pulse ;  particularly  in  morning  and  in  open  air ;  >  in
doors.

■  Hardness  of  hearing,  with  buzzing  in  1.  ear  as  of  a  swarm

of  bees.
''  Smell  and  Nose. ■Acute,  sensitive  smell.

■  Nosebleed :  with  heaviness  of  head  and  ill  humor ;  during

straining  at  stool.
Bleeding  from  air  passages.
^  Upper  Face. Transitory  flushes  in  face.

■  Shining  red  face  with  much  fever. ^Metrorrhagia.

■  Dry  heat  of  face,  with  red  cheeks.

■  Flushed  face,  burning  in  eyes  and  throbbing  temples.

^Sick  headache.

■  Prosopalgia,  extending  to  molar  teeth  of  r.  side;. she  is

very  irritable,  sensitive  and  moaning  from  distressing
pain;  painful  teeth  >  by  contact  with  ice.

■  Sweat  on  face,  with  internal  chilliness.

^^  Teeth  and  Gums. Convulsive  grinding  of  teeth.


307  -  COFFEA  CRUDA.

Toothache:  driving  the  patient  ahnost  frantic;  with  weep-
ing, trembling,  anguish  and  tossing  about;  indescribable
pains;  stinging,  jerking,  intermittent  aching;  with  rest-
lessness, anguish  and  weeping  mood,  especially  at  night
and  after  a  meal;  <  from  hot  or  warm  drink,  from
chewing,  at  night;  >  when  holding  ice  or  ice  cold
water  in  mouth.

■Violent  throbbing  toothache;  run  about  crying  and  com-
plain of  insupportable  pain,  though  they  confess  that
sometimes  the  pain  is  not  so  intense,  yet  they  are  af-
fected very  much;  they  behave  like  persons  distracted.

1 1  Neuralgic  toothache,  entirely  >  by  holding  cold  water
in  mouth,  returning  as  this  becomes  warm.

■  Toothache  during  catamenia.

I  Complaints  of  anaemic  children  during  dentition.
"  Taste  and  Tongue. > Taste:  more  acute;  delicate;  sweetish.

Loss  of  taste.
^^  Inner  Mouth. Excessive  dryness  of  mouth  at  night.
^^  Throat. <  Uvula  too  long,  swollen.

■Steady  pain  from  side  of  palate  into  oesophagus;  con-
stant desire  to  swallow,  from  sensation  as  of  plug  or
phlegm  in  throat.

■  Constantly  increasing pain  in throat and head,  with

weeping  mood.

■  Sore  throat,  <  from  cool  air,  affected  parts  very  sensitive.

■  Swelling  and  painfulness  of  the  throat;  <  when  swal-

lowing.

■  Influenza.

^*  Appetite,  Thirst. Desires,  Aversions. Morbid  sensation
of  excessive  hunger.

■  Increased  hunger,  with  hurried  eating.

■  Diminished  appetite.

With  the  headache  a  loathing  of  food  and  drink  on  ac-
count of  a  continuance  of  sickness  at  stomach.

■  ■Thirst:  at  night,  wakens  him;  during  sweat;  rather  in-

frequent during heat,  almost  constant  after  heat  and
during  sweat.
Aversion  to  coffee.
^^  Eating  and  Drinking. ■Eats  and  drinks  hastily.

■  ■Bad  effects  from  wine  or  liquor  drinking.
Headache  renewed,  or  <  after  eating.

^^  Hiccough,  Belching,  Nausea  and  Vomiting. Hiccough.
Eructations: burning; sour; like  rotten eggs; violent,

spasmodic,  with  rising  of  the  ingesta.
Continual  sickness  at  stomach  with  headache.

■  Constant  inclination  to  vomit,  felt  in  throat.

■  Vomiting  of  mucus  with  violent  attacks  of  migraine.

■  Bilious  vomiting  and  restlessness  at  commencement  of

variola.


COFFEA  CRUDA.  308

^'  Scrobiculum  and  Stomach. Tension  of  epigastric  region,
with  sensitiveness  to  touch.
Anguish  and  pressure  in  epigastrium.
Burning  in  stomach  with  vertigo.
-Cramps  in  stomach.
I  Gastric  derangements  of  infants.

■  Disordered  stomach,  indigestion.
^^  Abdomen. Flatulency.

.1  Pressure  in  abdomen,  as  from  incarcerated  flatulence.

I  I  Distended  abdomen,  extreme  emaciation.  ^Summer
complaint.

Excessive  pains  with  anguish,  great  nervousness,  loud
crying  and  grating  of  teeth.

Colic :  as  if  stomach  had  been  overloaded ;  as  if  abdomen
would  burst ;  cannot  suffer  clothes  to  be  tight  on  abdo-
men; exceedingly  painful,  driving  to  desperation;  as  if
intestines  were  being  cut;  in  paroxysms  excessively
painful  and  violent.

I  Terrible  colic,  with  horripilation,  anxiety  and  violent
tossing  of  limbs,  during  j)aroxysm. ^Intermittent  fever.

■  Continuous  pinching  pain  in  iliac  region.

■  Summer  complaint  of  children.

■  Incarcerated  hernia.

^°  Stool  and  Rectum. ■Fetid  flatus.

■  Diarrhoea:  watery,  painless, weakening,  from  domestic

cares;  during  dentition,  after  the  use  of  chamomile;
of  liquid, fecal,  offensive  stools,  from  sudden  joy  or
taking  cold  in  open  air;  painless.
Constant  alternations  of  constipation  and  diarrhoea.

■  Constipation  and  hemorrhoids. ^Sick  headache.

■  Hemorrhoidal  conditions.
During  straining  of  stool,  nosebleed.

Spasmodic contraction of  sphincter,  with  burning and
itching  in  anus.
"^  Urinary  Organs. Pressure  on  bladder.

■  Frequent,  profuse  micturition,  urine  colorless.
Emission  of  a  large  quantity  of  urine  at  midnight.
Urine  passes  off'  drop  by  drop.

'^  Male Sexual Organs. Excessive excitability of  sexual
organs.

■  Sexual  organs  much  excited  without  emission  of  semen,

and  with  dry  heat  of  body.
Ilypersensitiveness  of  sexual  organs ;  little  suffering  seems

unbearable;  <  in  morning  and  at  night,  also  in  open

air;  >  from  cold  water.
Nocturnal  emissions,  followed  by  great  languor  and  irri-

taljility  of  temper.
■Scrotum  relaxed.


309  COFFEA  CRUDA.

^Female  Sexual  Organs.  iHysteralgia;  metritis;  nym-
phomania.

Great  sensitiveness  of  female  genital  organs,  with  general
excitability ;  she  is  in  a  state  of  ecstasy.

lOversensitiveness  of  vagina.

Aversion  to-  intercourse,  on  account  of  the  pain  it  produces.

I  Inflammation  induced  by  excessive  joy ;  she  is  in  a  state
of  ecstasy,  and  is  very  sensitive  to  contact. ^Metritis.

Bearing  down  in  genitals  during  and  after  walking,  with
frequent  urination.

■  Uterine  hemorrhage,  with  excessive  sensitiveness  of  or-

gans and  voluptuous  itching.

■Metrorrhagia:  large  black  lumps ;  <  from  every  motion,
with  violent  pain  in  groins  and  fear  of  death.

Menses:  too  profuse  and  of  long  duration;  profuse,  with
coldness  and  stiffness  of  body;  only  during  evening;
profuse  with  excessive  sensitiveness  of  organs  and  vo-
luptuous itching;  flowing  profusely  during  first  part  of
night.

I  Dysmenorrhoea.

■Abdominal  cramps  during  menstrual  period,  or  at  the
beginning;  twitching  of  limbs,  bending  the  body  double,
crying,  fear,  cold  perspiration,  she  throws  herself  upon
the  ground.

Excessively  painful  and  violent  paroxysms  of  colic,  with
profuse  bloody  discharge,  profuse  secretion  of  mucus,
voluptuous  itching  and  excessive  sexual  excitement.

■  Leucorrhcea :  like  mucus,  or  milky;  more  while  urinating.

■  Excessive sensitiveness  about vulva, with voluptuous

itching,  desire  to  rub  or  scratch  the  parts,  but  they  are
too  sensitive.

■  Eruptions  on  female  genitals.

^^  Pregnancy. Parturition. Lactation. ■Ptyalism of

pregnancy.
She  is  very  sleepless,  wide  awake,  and  the  pains  are  ver}'^

distressing;  she  feels  them  very  acutely.
Continuous  and  very  distressing  pains,  making  her  feel

as  if  she  would  "  go  distracted."
Abortion;  patient  querulous  and  in  great  fear  of  death.

■  Excessive  labor  pains; too  long  continuation  of  after-

pains.

■  Excessively  severe  pains  from  threatened  abortion,  or

labor.

■  I  During  labor  or  after-pains,  extreme  fear  of  death.

■  Irregular,  ineffectual  labor  pains.

■  Ineffectual  labor  pains,  contractions  of  uterus  and  press-

ure upon  OS  uteri,  causing  only  pain  in  small  of  back.
■Labor  pains  insui3portable  to  her  feelings;  she  feels  them


COFFEA  CRUDA.  310

intensely,  weeps  and  laments  fearfully;  although  the
pains  are  severe,  they  are  not  eihcacious;  constant  whin-
ing, crying,  lamenting;  violent  moving  of  limbs;  head
hot,  red;  lace  puffed,  eyes  glittering;  complete  despair,
great  fear  of  death.

I  Labor  pains  ceasing,  with  complaining  loquacity.

Lochial  discharge  too  profuse,  exalted  nervous  sensibility.

Insupportably  intense  after-pains,  or  pains  followed  by
convulsions,  coldness  and  rigidity  of  body.

■Puerperal  fever  from  mental  excitement;  frequent  crawl-
ing, with  feverish  heat,  tongue  moist,  no  thirst;  delirious
talking,  eyes  open,  shining;  violent  abdominal  pains,
with  oversensitiveness,  despair,  sleej^lessness,  trembling
of  hands,

■  Puerperal  convulsions;  extreme  excitability.

■  Agalactia.

^^  Voice  and  Larynx.  Trachea  and  Bronchia,  i  Rawness
in  larynx,  with  hoarseness  and  roughness  in  morning
on  awaking.

I  Larynx  as  if  covered  with  dry  mucus.

Spasmodic  constriction  of  larynx.

■  Spasmus  glottidis;  starts  from  sleep  with  short  inhalation

or  gasping,  with  wheezing,  cold  sweat,  blue  face; <

when  put  into  bath ;  mucous  vomiting.
Sensation  of  rawness  in  trachea.
^•^  Respiration. ■Oppression  of  chest;  short  inspiration;  chest

heaves  visibly.
Moaning.
Hot  breath.

■  Child  gasps  for  breath  several  times  during  day;  then

more  frequently,  and  finally  three  or  four  times  every
hour.
Suffocative  fits.

■  Asthmatic  attacks  in  morning,  wants  to  move  continuall3^

■  Asthma.

^  Cough. ■  Irritation  to  cough,  with  coryza,  <  in  open  air.

■  Irritation  to  cough,  outdoors.

Continual  inclination  to  cough;  feels  exhausted  after
coughing.

Cough:  short,  dry,  hacking;  spasmodic  and  dry,  moist;
single,  sudden  shocks,  quickly  following  each  other;
from  irritation  in  throat,  phlegm  in  back  part  of  throat;
with  dimness  before  eyes;  during  evening  and  mid-
night; when  falling  asleep  or  soon  after;  during  measles.

■Short,  dry  cough,  as  from  constriction  of  larynx.

Dry,  hacking  cough,  like  whooping  cough,  with  this  dif-
ference, that  the  spasms  are  principally  experienced
during  inspirations,  not  during  expirations.


311  COFFEA  CRUDA.

I  Constant  cough,  emaciation  and  cachectic  appearance.

■  During  cougii:  stitches  in  sides;  anxiety;  dimness  before

eyes  and  vertigo.
^  Inner  Chest  and  Lungs. Oppression  of  chest.

Sensation  as  if  body  would  burst,  with  feeUng  of  fulness

and  pressure,  severe  cramps  extending  into  chest.
Constriction  of  chest,  asthma  at  night.
^  Heart,  Pulse  and  Circulation, i  Palpitation  of  heart,
violent,  irregular,  with  trembling  of  limbs.
I  Nervous  palpitation  of  heart.

■  Palpitation  after  excessive  exaltation,  joy,  surprise.

■  Strong,  quick  palpitation  of  heart  with  extreme  nervous-

ness, sleeplessness  and  cerebral  erethism,  caused  by  un-
expected news  of  great  good  fortune.
Pulse  full  and  frequent.

Pulse :  more  frequent,  but  less  vigorous,  even  small  and
weak ;  intermitting.
^^  Neck  and  Back. ■Laming  pain  in  small  of  back,  while

sitting  or  standing.
^^  Upper  Limbs. ■  Pains  extend  from  face  down  arms,  even
to  finger  ends.

■  Continual  jerking and  twitching  of  arms  and  hands,

otherwise  well.

■  The  hands  tremble  if  he  tries  to  hold  them  still.

■  Great  trembling  of  hands. ^Delirium  tremens.
Trembling  of  hands,  with  heat  in  palms  and  coldness  of

back  of  hands.
^^  Lower  Limbs. ■Crural neuralgia of  gouty,  rheumatic
origin,  tearing,  stitching  pain,  <  from  motion ;  attacks
irregular  in  appearance  and  lasting  several  hours,  mostly
at  night  or  in  the  afternoon.

■  Crural  neuralgia  of  1.  limb,  >  from  pressure,  but  very

much  <  by  pressure  at  point  of  exit  of  nerve.
■Sciatic  or  crural  neuralgia, in  attacks;  rending,  shooting,
<  by  walking;  >  by  pressure,  <  afternoon  and  night;
restless  and  sleepless  at  night.
^^  Limbs  in  General. Coldness  of  limbs,  hands  and  feet.

■  Twitching  of  limbs.
Pains  in  limbs.

^^  Rest.  Position.  Motion.  While  sitting :  laming  pain  in
small  of  back ;  feels  and  hears  crackling  in  vertex.

Lying  down:  external  heat,  with  shivering  in  back  in
evening  after.

While  standing:  laming  pain  in  small  of  back.

After  walking:  bearing  down  in  genitals.

Motion:  metrorrhagia  <  from  every;  headache  <  from;
crural  neuralgia  <  from;  spasms  or  convulsions,  re-
newed after  every;  chill  increased;  inclination  for.


COFFEA  CRUDA.  312

Change  of  position :  >  vertigo.

When  stooping:  blackness  before  eyes.

Worse  when  bending  diseased  part,  particularly  when
bending  it  backwards  or  forwards.

Worse  when  moving  diseased  limb.

Worse  when  sitting  down.

While  walking:  bearing  down  in  genitals;  sciatic  or
crural  neuralgia  <.

Exercise:  vertigo  >  by  moderate  outdoor;  chill  increased
by ;  inclination  for.

Worse  from  bodily  exertion.

AVants  to  be  continually  moving.

Cries  and  throws  himself  about.

Tosses  about  in  great  anguish.

Patients  cannot  contain  themselves,  they  bend  the  body
double  and  throw  the  limbs  about,  grate  the  teeth,  are
covered  with  a  cold  sweat  and  finally  stretch  themselves
selves  out  in  a  stiff,  rigid  manner.
^®  Nerves.  Overexcitement  of  entire  nervous  system,  <  out-
doors.

I  Physical  excitement  through  mental  exaltation.

Great  excitement  and  irritability  of  sensory  organs  and  of
whole  nervous  system,  as  in  lying-in  women,  and  par-
ticularly after  the  abuse  of  chamomile.

Great  sensibility,  mental  and  physical;  intolerance  of  all
manipulations,  which  cause  great  agitation,  interfering
with  treatment ;  rather  quiet  when  let  alone ;  afraid  of
the  surgeon;  sleepless,  so  long  as  any  noise  or  light
continues,  at  night.

Extreme  excitability  of  nervous  system  when  spasms  are
apprehended,  or  if  spasms  have  actually  been  developed,
attended  with  cold  extremities  and  grinding  of  teeth.

The  child  is  very  excitable  and  weakly,  and  in  conse-
quence frequently  suffers  with  spasms.

Extreme  sensitiveness,  especially  in  children.

Fear  of  fresh  air  and  of  the  least  noise.

Slight  pain  unendurable.

I I  Great  agitation  and  restlessness.

I  Great  restlessness,  lying  awake  most  of  night  and  tossing
about  in  bed. ^Ague.

■  Extreme  nervousness  with  strong,  quick  palpitation  of

heart. ^Cardiac  hypergesthesia.

■  Hysteria  and  nervousness;  screams,  weeping.

■  Fainting  from  sudden  emotions.

■  The  greatest  mental  and  physical  exhaustion,  lassitude

and  general  debility.
Headache  or  other  nervous  pains,  with  whining  mood.
Muscular  jerking.


313  COFFEA  CRUDA.

Spasms  brought  on  by  excessive  laughing  and  playing,  in

weakl}',  excitable  children.
iSpasms  or  convulsions,  renewed  after  every  emotion.
I  Convulsions  of  teething  children,  with  grinding  of  teeth

and  coldness  of  limbs,  after  overexcitement.
Paralysis.
^^  Sleep. 1 1  Sleeplessness  from  overexcitement  of  body  or  mind.
Cannot  get  to  sleep  because  some  ideas  force  themselves

upon  the  mind.

■  Sleeplessness  from  joy  or  agreeable  surj)rise,  from  long

watching,  from  excessive  use  of  coffee.
Nervous,  restless  agitation,  preventing  all  sleep.
I  Quick  to  act;  no  sleep  on  this  account.
The  child  is  very  excitable,  playful  and  sleepless ;  it  seems

as  if  it  could  not  sleep;  it  frets  and  worries  in  an  innocent

manner; is  not  cross,  but  sleepless;  it  laughs  at  one

moment  and  cries  the  next,  is  feverish  for  want  of  sleep,

which  it  cannot  obtain.
Wide  awake ;  not  the  slightest  inclination  to  sleep ;  after

great  mental  strain,  joy,  night  watching;  acute  diseases;

dental  irritation.

■  Sleeplessness,  with  palpitation  and  nervousness.  ^Cardiac

hyperaesthesia.
I  Sleeplessness  of  Ijdng-in  women.

■  Sleeplessness  during  reconvalescence.

■  Drowsiness  with  inability  to  go  to  sleep;  very  weary  with

sleep;  much  gaping.
On  going  to  sleep,  starts up  suddenly  in  affright,  with

groans  and  fear  of  falling.
Restless  sleej) ;  frequent,  sudden  starting  and  waking.
Tossing  about  or  turning  from  side  to  side  in  bed.
I  I  Imperfect  sleep,  with eyes  half  open  and  convulsive

motion  of  e3^es  when  awake. ^Summer  complaint.
■Sleeps  until  3  a.m.,  after  which  he  only  dozes,  on  waking

does  not  come  to  his  senses.

■  Very long,  vivid dreams  at night; pleasant dreams,

even  merry.
^^  Time. In  morning:  crackling  noise  in  head;  hypersensl-
tiveness  of  sexual  organs  < ;  hoarseness  and  roughness
in  larynx  on  awaking;  asthmatic  attacks;  slight  sweat.

In  afternoon:  attack  of  crural  neuralgia;  sciatic  or  crural
neuralgia  <.

During  evening:  menses  only;  cough;  dry  heat  with
chilliness  in  back  after  going  to  bed ;  external  heat  with
shivering  in  back,  after  lying  down.

First  part  of  night :  23rofuse  flow  of  menses.

At  night:  delirium,  with  dry  heat;  toothache  <;  exces-
sive dryness  of  mouth  wakens  him ;  hypersensitiveness


COFFEA  CRUDA.  314

of  sexual  organs  <;  emissions;  asthma;  attack  of  cru-
ral neuralgia ;  sciatic  or  crural  neuralgia  < ;  restless
and  sleepless;  lies  awake,  tossing  about  in  bed;  very
long,  vivid  dreams;  pleasant  dreams;  dry  heat,  with
delirium ;  dry  heat,  with  measly  spots  on  skin.

At  midnight:  emission  of  a  large  quantity  of  urine;  cough.

Sleeps  until  3  a.m.,  after  which  he  only  dozes,  on  waking
does  not  come  to  his  senses.
^^  Temperature  and  Weather. In  room:  headache  returns
in  a  short  time.

Indoors:  crackling  in  head  >.

Feeling  of  heat  in  bed,  yet  avoids  being  uncovered.

Better  after  getting  out  of  bed.

Hot  or  warm  drinks:  toothache  <  from.

Worse  from  cold ;  >  from  warmth.

Affected  parts  sensitive  to  warmth  or  cold  air.

Generally  dislikes  to  be  uncovered.

Shunning  open  air.

Outdoors:  irritation  to  cough;  overexcitement  of  entire
nervous  system.

In  open  air:  headache  <;  headache  disappears;  sees
more  clearly ;  crackling  noise  in  head ;  dirrrhoea  from
taking  cold ;  hypersensitiveness  of  sexual  organs  < ;
irritation  to  cough,  with  coryza  <.

Fresh  air:  fear  of.

Cold  air:  dread  of;  sore  throat  <  from;  chilliness  and
shivering  from  least  exposure  to.

Liability  to  take  cold  from  the  least  change.

Cold :  great  sensitiveness  to ;  prosopalgia  from ;  pain  in
limbs  from.

From  bath:  spasmus  glottidis  <.

Cold  water:  toothache  >  from;  neuralgic  toothache  en-
tirely >  by ;  hypersensitiveness  of  sexual  organs  >  from.

Ice :  painful  teeth  >  by  contact  with.
^'^  Fever. Coldness  and  chilliness  running  all  through  limbs.

I  Chills  running  down  back.

I  Chill  increased  by  exercise  or  motion.

Chilliness  and  shivering  from  least  exposure  to  cold  air;
cannot  get  warm,  hands  and  feet  cold,  on  account  of
easy  perspiration;  chills  ascend  from  fingers  and  toes
to  nape  of  neck  and  thence  to  vertex.

Chill  without  thirst.

I  Internal  shivering,  or  inward  chills,  with  external  heat
of  face  or  whole  body.

I  Chilly  feelings,  with  internal  and  external  warmth.

I  Cold,  followed  by  pain  and  a  desire  to  weep.

■  Great  sensitiveness  to  cold.

Flushes  of  heat  or  currents  of  cold  air  down  back.


515  COFFEA  CRUDA.

I  I  Flushes  of  heat  and  transitory  flushes  in  face.

■  External  heat,  with  shivering  in  back,  in  evening  after

lying  down.
I  Dry  heat  in  evening  after  going  to  bed,  with  chilliness

in  back.
Child  feverish  for  want  of  sleep.

Feeling  of  heat  when  in  bed,  yet  avoids  being  uncovered.
I  Dry  heat  at  night,  with  delirium.
I  I  Feverish  with  pain  and  always  ready  to  weep.
Heat  with  thirst.

I  Heat  in  face,  with  red  cheeks  after  eating.
One  cheek  hot  and  red,  with  constant  shuddering.
External  dry  heat  of  skin  and  dry  warmth  of  face.
Hot  flushes  to  face,  hot  cheeks  and  delirium.
Fever  is  not  violent,  but  the  nerves  are  irritated,  with

sleeplessness.
Even  with  mild  fever  patient  is  very  nervous  and  sensitive.
I  Much  fever,  with  shining  redness  of  face. ^Metrorrhagia.
Cold,  clammy  perspiration  over  the  body,  but  chiefly  in

palms  of  hands.
Sweat  occasionally  follows  heat.

■  Slight  morning  sweat.

I  Perspiration  of  affected  j^arts.

Sweat  with  thirst.

General  sweat  over  whole  body,  most  on  palms  of  hands
and  in  face,  with  internal  shivering.

Perspiration  slight,  mostly  in  face,  with  internal  shivering.

I  Ague,  paroxysms  every  fourth  day,  two  well  days  inter-
vening.

I  Intermittent.

■  Traumatic  fever.

^  Attacks,  Periodicity.  Spasmodic:  eructations;  contrac-
tion of  sphincter  ani ;  constriction  of  larynx ;  cough.

Occasional :  general  faint  feeling.

Transitory:  flushes  in  face.

Frequent:  profuse  micturition;  short,  dry  cough.

Constant:  desire  to  swallow;  thirst,  after  heat  and  during
sweat;  sickness  at  stomach  with  headache;  inclination
to  vomit,  felt  in  throat ;  pinching  pain  in  iliac  region ;
alternation  of  constipation  and  diarrhoea;  whining,
crying,  lamenting;  desire  to  move,  with  asthma;  incli-
nation to  cough ;  cough,  jerking  and  twitching  of  arms
and  hands;  shuddering.

Several  times  during  day,  child  gasps  for  breath,  then
more  frequently  and  finally  three  or  four  times  every
hour.

Lasting  several  hours:  attacks  of  crural  neuralgia.

Intermittent :  aching;  in  teeth.


COFFEA  CRUDA.  316

Every  fourth  day :  paroxysms  of  ague.
*^  Locality  and  Direction. Right:  prosopalgia  extending  to
molar  teeth.

Left:  stinging  pain  in  locality  of  amativeness;  buzzing
in  ear  as  of  a  swarm  of  bees ;  crural  neuralgia  of  limb.

From  without  inward :  as  if  a  nail  were  being  driven  into
head.  '

From  above  downwards:  pains  extend  from  face  down
arms,  even  to  finger  ends;  chills  running  down  back.
*^  Sensations.  As  if  head  was  too  small ;  as  of  something  hard
pressing  on  surface  of  brain;  as  if  whole  brain  was  torn
and  bruised,  or  dashed  to  pieces;  as  if  head  was  small
and  filled  with  fluid ;  as  if  head  would  burst,  or  fly  to
pieces  if  she  moved ;  as  if  a  nail  was  driven  into  head ;
as  of  a  plug  or  phlegm  in  throat ;  as  if  stomach  had  been
overloaded,  with  colic;  as  if  stomach  would  burst;  as  if
intestines  were  being  cut;  as  if  larynx  was  covered  with
dry  mucus;  as  of  constriction  of  larynx;  as  if  body
would  burst,  with  feeling  of  fulness  and  pressure.

Pain:  in  groins;  from  side  of  palate  into  cesophagus;  in
throat  and  head,  constantly  increasing;  in  small  of
back  with  ineffectual  labor  pains ;  from  face  down  arms,
even  to  finger  ends;  in  limbs.

Stitching  pains :  with  crural  neuralgia.

Stinging:  in  locality  of  amativeness  on  1.  side;  toothache;
on  skin.

Shooting  pains:  of  sciatic  or  crural  neuralgia.

Jerking:  toothache.

Tearing  pains:  with  crural  neuralgia;  in  flesh  and  cellular
tissue,  rather  than  in  bones;  in  parts  between  articula-
tions themselves.

Rending  pain :  of  sciatic  or  crural  neuralgia.

Burning :  in  stomach ;  in  eyes ;  eructations ;  in  anus.

Smarting:  on  skin.

Soreness :  of  throat.

Rawness:  in  larynx;  in  trachea.

Roughness:  in  larynx.

Pinching:  in  iliac  region.

Whirling :  in  head.

Pressure:  in  epigastrium;  in  abdomen,  as  from  incar-
cerated flatulence;  on  bladder.

Bearing  down :  in  genitals.

Cramps:  in  stomach;  in  abdomen  during  menstrual
period,  or  at  the  beginning ;  extending  into  chest.

Constriction :  of  chest.

Bruised  pain:  in  internal  parts.

Anguish:  in  epigastrium.

Aching:  in  teeth.


317  COFFEA  CRUDA.

Laming  pain:  in  small  of  back.

Opj)ression :  of  chest.

Tension:  of  epigastric  region.

Crackling :  in  vertex  when  sitting  quietly ;  in  head  (one

side),  sj^nchronous  with  pulse.
Throbbing :  in  temples ;  toothache.
Dizzy  confusion :  of  head.
Confusion :  of  senses.

Heaviness :  of  head,  particularly  in  forehead  over  eyes.
Dryness  :  of  mouth ;  of  skin.
Sensation  of  warmth.
Coldness:  of  limbs,  hands  and  feet;  of  body;  running  all

through  limbs.
Itching:  in  anus;  of  sexual  organs ;  all  over,  changing  to

burning.
*^  Tissues. ■  Great  sensitiveness  and  pain  of  affected  parts.
Increased  mobility  of  muscles,  or  muscles  rigid.
Tearing  pains  in  flesh  and  cellular  tissue,  rather  than  in

bones;  in  parts  between  articulations  themselves.

I  I  Extreme  emaciation. ^Summer  complaint  of  children.

I I  Affections  after  sudden  emotions,  particularly  pleasant
surprises.

I  Bad  effects  from  wine  drinking.

*^  Touch.  Passive  Motion.  Injuries.  Touch:  epigastric
region  sensitive  to;  inflammation  induced  by  excessive
joy,  she  is  very  sensitive  to.

Very  sensitive  to  contact.

Cannot  suffer  clothes  to  be  tight  on  abdomen.

Intolerance  of  all  manipulations,  which  cause  great  agi-
tation, interfering  with  treatment.

Pressure :  crural  neuralgia  >  by ;  at  point  of  exit  of  nerve
<  crural  neuralgia.

I I  Would  like  to  scratch  or  rub  the  part,  but  it  is  too
sensitive.

Slight  passive  motions  (rocking,  etc.)  startle  him ;  are  j)er-

ceived  as  enormous.
Children,  at  times  cannot  bear  to  be  carried  about.
*®  Skin. I  Dryness  of  skin,  but  not  in  febrile  diseases.
I  Excessive  sensitiveness  of  skin.
Hot  skin.

Itching  all  over  changes  to  burning.
Stinging  and  smarting  on  skin.

■  Eruptions  with  overexcitability  and  weejDing.
"" Purple  miliary  eruptions  all  over.

I  I  Measly  spots  on  skin  with  dry  heat  at  night ;  overexcita-
bility and  weeping.

■  Measles:  frequent,  short, and  dry  cough,  hoarse  when

crying; skin  and  all  senses  oversensitive; sjpasmodic


COFFEA  CRUDA.  318

motions,  trembling,  grinding  of  teeth ;  overwakefulness,
with  heat  and  sweat  in  face.

■  Measles,  with  overexcitability  and  weeping.

■  Scarlet  rash,  with  overwhelming  pains  and  lamenting

mood.
■Scarlet  fever;  may  aid  in  bringing  out  the  eruption  in
cases  of  extreme  wakefulness  and  nervous  excitement.

■  Varicella;  smallpox.

^^  Stages  of  Life,  Constitution. Tall,  lean,  stooping  persons,

with  dark  complexions.
Coffee  should  be  used  by  wine  drinkers.
Weakly  and  excitable  children.
Suitable  to  sensitive  persons,  and  if  the  symptoms  caused

by  fright  do  not  yield  to  Aeon.
Suitable  to  children  for  great  restlessness,  tossing  about,

nervousness,  screams  and  weeping.
Sanguine  choleric  temperament.

■  Complaints  during  infancy  and  dentition.
Coffee  drinkers  are  hard  to  cure  of  ague.

Minna  G.,  set.  20  weeks,  father  subject  to  attacks  of  hoarse-
ness; spasmus  glottidis.

Boy,  8et.  5,  broken  thigh ;  traumatic  shock.

Young  girl;  convulsions.

Woman,  set.  25,  easy  labor  two  years  ago;  ineffectual
labor  pains.

Mother  of  five  children,  set.  28,  well  built,  black  hair  and
eyes,  red  cheeks,  menses  regular;  metrorrhagia.

Mother  of  five  children;  ineffectual  labor  pains.

Lady  unaccustomed  to  the  use  of  cofi'ee ;  toothache.

E.  S.,  set.  32;  ague  of  eighteen  months  standing,  contracted
in  army.
. Landlady,  set.  45,  using  cofi'ee  two  or  three  times  a  day ;
diarrhoea.

Married  woman,  set.  50;  sleeplessness.
^^  Relationship. Antidoted  by:  Aeon.,  Chamom.,  Ignat.,  Mer-
cur.,  Nux  vom.,  Pulsat.,  Sulphur.

It  antidotes:  Bellad.,  Chamom.,  Cicuta,  Coloc,  Nux  vom.,
Strychnia,  Valer.  (See  antidotal  relations  under  Coffea
tosta.)

Compatible:  Aeon,  (after  Cq^ea  in  ineffectual  labor  pains) ;
Ignat.  (tenderness  after  Coffea  relieved  toothache);  after
Thea  (sleeplessness);  after  Chamom.  (belly-pains  and
diarrhoea  in  teething  children);  Sulphur  (nervous  ere-
thism caused  by  coffee).

Incompatible:  Canthar.,  Caustic.,  CoccuL,  Ignat.

Compare:  Aeon.,  Agar.,  Arsen.,  Bellad.,  Canthar.,  Caustic,
Chamom.,  Coca,  CoccuL,  Ignat.,  Mercur.,  Natr.  mur.,  Nux
vom..  Opium,  Pulsat.,  Sepia,  Sulphur,  Thea.


319  COFFEA  TOSTA.

COFFEA  TOSTA.

Infusion  of  the  ivell  roasted  berries.

Roasting  developes  Methylamine  or  cofFeone  in  Coffee.

The  pathogenetic  effects  are  principally  such  as  were  derived  from  sensitive
persons  upon  whom  strong  coffee  acted  injuriously,  and,  according  to  these  the
clinical  results,  to  which  we  give  preference  in  the  following  arrangement,  were
mainly  obtained.

Clinical  Authorities. — Migraine,  etc.,  Hahnemann,  The  injurious  effects
of  strong  coffee.  Monograph;  Periodical  attacks  of  vertigo  and  insensibility,  Felix,
Frank's  Mag.,  v.  1,  p.  718 ;  Seminal  emission,  Martin,  MSS. ;  Mental  effects  and
general  nervous  excitement;  Vertigo  while  sleeping  in  a  hammock  after  taking  a  very
strong  infusion,  C.  Hg.,  MSS.;  Severe  labor  fains  (two  cases),  Kallenbach,  Riick.
Kl.  Erf.,  V.  5,  p.  655 ; Urinary  troubles,  B.  J.  H.,  v.  5,  p.  444.

^  Mind. Increased  intellectual activity  and perception of
sounds,  motion,  etc.

I  She  is  greatly  excited  and  is  sure  she  will  die. ^Labor.

■  Full  of  apprehension  of  terrible  things  happening.

Painful  anxiety,  without  fear  of  falling,  during  downward
motion  of  hammock  while  asleep.

I  Begs  that  some  one  might  end  her  life. ^Labor.

She  does  not  know  where  she  is;  feels  strangely  in  her
head ;  palpitation,  trembling  and  chilliness.
^  Sensorium.  While  sleeping  in  a  hammock  the  gentle
swinging  motion  is  felt  to  an  enormous  degree,  in-
creasing more  and  more  until  he  seems  to  be  swinging
above  the  tree-tops  into  the  clouds,  in  rhythmic  motion ;
the  descent  is  intensely  disagreeable  and  accompanied
by  painful  anxiety,  without  fear  of  falling;  when  near
the  ground  he  awakes  and  puts  his  feet  to  the  ground,
which  momentarily  interrupts  the  sensation ;  but  he  is
too  sleepy  to  keep  awake,  and  passes  a  horrible  night.

i  Attacks  of  vertigo  with  obscured  vision;  she  is  unable
to  distinguish  surrounding  objects,  they  seem  to  leave
their  places  and  follow  her,  or  turn  in  a  circle  about
her;  ringing  in  ears  and  noise  as  of  falling  rain;  she
suddenly  falls  to  the  ground  insensible,  with  palpitation
of  heart;  easy  vomiting  and  paleness  of  face  during
paroxysms,  which  often  last  two  hours  and  are  followed
by  no  troublesome  symptoms.
^  Inner  Head,  l  Migraine  comes  on  in  morning  shortly  after
awaking,  and  increases  little  by  little;  the  pains  become


GOFFEA  TOSTA.  320

intolerable  and  sometimes  burning;  integuments  of
head  sensitive,  hurt  when  touched  ever  so  slightly;
body  and  mind  excessively  sensitive ;  looks  exhausted ;
retires  to  lonely  and  dark  places  and  closes  eyes  in  order
to  avoid  the  light;  remains  seated  in  an  arm-chair,  or
stretched  upon  bed;  least  noise  or  motion  excites  the
pain ;  avoids  talking  or  being  talked  to  or  hearing  others
talk;  the  body  is  colder  than  usual,  although  no  chills
are  experienced;  hands  and  feet  are  especially  very  cold ;
loathes  all  food  and  drinks  on  account  of  continual
sickness  at  stomach;  if  the  attack  is  very  violent,  vomit-
ing of  mucus  takes  place,  which,  however,  does  not  di-
minish the  headache;  there  are  no  alvine  discharges;
the  pain  scarcely  ever  ceases  before  evening ;  the  attacks
come  on  irregularly,  without  premonitory  symptoms.

1 1  Periodic  headache  of  hysterical  women.

I  Nervous  and.  gastric  headaches.
^  Sight  and  Eyes. Dazzling colors,  principally blue and
yellow,  before  the  eyes.

I  Eyes  shining. ^Labor.

:  Eyes  sunken ;  half  open  during  sleep ;  convulsive  move-
ments of  eyes  while  awake. ^Cholera  infantum.
^  Hearing  and  Ears. •  Ringing  in  ears  and  noise  as  of  fall-
ing rain. ^Vertigo.
®  Upper  Face, l  l  Paleness  of  face. ^A-^ertigo  with  fainting.

I  Face  hot  and  deeply  flushed. ^Labor.

I  Excruciating  facial  neuralgia  from  decayed  teeth ;  patient
not  in  habit  of  taking  coffee.
^"  Teeth  and  Gums.  Intense  pain  in  sound  teeth  of  r.  lower
jaw  nearly  driving  him  crazy;  no  application  relieves
except  cold  water,  pain  returning  as  the  water  becomes
warm.

Causes  premature  decay  of  teeth  in  children.
^'^  Vomiting. •  A^omits  without  least  exertion. ^Vertigo  with
fainting.

I  Vomiting  of  yellow,  sour,  slimy,  offensive  smelling  masses,
looking  as  if  chopped;  child  greatly  emaciated,  with
bloated  abdomen,  small  and  frequent  pulse ;  eyes  sunken
and  half  open  during  sleep,  convulsive  movements  of
eyes  while  awake ;  great  restlessness;  diarrhoea.  6'Chol-
era  infantum.

Was  found  ver}^  useful  in  epidemic  cholera  of  1831  and
1836,  particularly  against  the  weakening  vomiting  and
tormenting  thirst,  and  it  was  found  serviceable  in  sub-
duing the  premonitory  symptoms.
^^  Stomach. Stomach  feels  tight  after  food.

I  Cramp  of  stomach.
^^  Abdomen. •  Great  emaciation  with  bloating  of  abdomen.
^Cholera  infantum.


321  COFFEA  TOSTA.

I  Cramp-like drawing  in  umbilical  region,  with severe
pains  in  small  of  back, ^Labor.
^^  Stool  and  Rectum. Torpidity  of  bowels.

iDiarrhcea  from  overwork  and  too  much  care.

■  Obstinate  diarrhoea  of  old  people  occurring  after  an  at-

tack of  cholera.

■  Obstinate  chronic  diarrhoea.

:  Cholera  infantum  with  copious  diarrhoea.

Hemorrhoidal  complaints.
^^  Urinary  Organs. Assists  the  passage  of  gravel  and  small
urinary  calculi,  and  impedes  their  further  formation  in
bladder.

Catarrh  of  bladder,  particularly  of  old  debauchees.

Diabetes  mellitus.
^^  Male  Sexual  Organs.  Seminal  emission  at  3  a.m.,  Avith
voluptuous  itching,  followed  by  chill  and  cold,  clammy
perspiration.
^^  Parturition.  iVery  severe  labor  pains,  patient  becoming
greatly  excited;  constant  tossing  about  with  violent
movements  of  extremities;  she  complains  of  the  se-
verity of  pains  and  is  sure  she  will  die;  face  deeply
flushed  and  bloated;  eyes  shining;  small  and  frequent
pulse.

■  Twenty-four  hours  after  rupture  of  bag  of  waters,  very

severe  pains  in  small  of  back,  with  cramp-like  drawing
in  umbilical  region;  pulse  small  and  frequent;  face  red ;
head  and  body  excessively  hot  and  dry;  she  tosses
about,  greatly  excited,  begging  that  some  one  would  end
her  life.

^  Respiration. Spasmodic  asthma ;  asthma  thymicum.

^  Cough. Whooping  cough.

^^  Heart,  Pulse  and  Circulation.  1 1  Palpitation  of  heart.
^Vertigo  with  fainting.

■  ■  Palpitation  from  irritable  heart.
Pulse  quick,  but  force  lessened.

■  Small  and  frequent  pulse. ^Labor.
Arteries  tense.

^^  Neck  and  Back. iVery severe pains in small  of  back,
with  cramp-like  drawing  in  umbilical  region. ^Labor.
^^  Upper  Limbs. Pain  in  1.  shoulder-joint.

■  Trembling  of  hands.

^^  Lower  Limbs. ■  Iliac  pains.

Pain  in  1.  foot  and  joint  of  big  toe.
^*  Limbs  in  General. Gout  and  rheumatism,  where  there  is
a  disposition  to  the  formation  of  chalkstones  in  joints.
^^  Rest. Position. Motion. Remains  seated  in  arm-chair,
or  stretched  upon  bed. ^Migraine.
Motion:  excites  pains.

VOL.  IV. — 21.


COFFEA  TOSTA.  322

Constant  tossing  about,  with  violent  movements  of  extremi-
ties, duriiig  labor.
^^  Nerves. 1 1  General  nervous  excitement.

I  I  Pain  in  head  with  depression  of  spirits  due  to  indiges-
tion  from weakness of  nervous  system  produced  by
overexertion.
^  Sleep. ■  Obstinate  sleeplessness.

'^^  Time. At  3  a.m.: seminal  emission,  voluptuous  itching,
chill  and  cold,  clammy  perspiration.
In  morning:  shortly  after  awaking,  migraine.
^^  Temperature  and  Weather. Serviceable  against  both  cold
and  heat;  also  useful  in  hot  climates.
Beneficial  to  persons  who  live  in  open  air.
Cold  water:  >  intense  pain  in  sound  teeth  of  r.  lower  jaw.
*"  Fever, l Inflammatory  fever  in  children,  with  excitability,
starting  and  twitching  in  sleep,  restlessness  and  crying.
Feels  chilly,  without  being  cold,  and  tl'embles.
Local  congestions,  flushes  of  heat.
Intermittent  fever.

Continued  fever,  particularly  when  attended  with  a  dis-
position to  diarrhoea.
Typhus.

Typhus  of  children ;  epidemic  cholera  infantum ;  under
its  use  the  pulse  becomes  more  frequent  and  fuller,  the
eyes  shining,  the  face  gets  a  fresher  appearance,  extrem-
ities and  face  regain  their  natural  heat  and  the  skin
again  shows  some  moisture  (in  cases  of  cerebral  ansemia);
when  the  child  lies  in.  a  stupor  and  moans,  coffee  will
soon  quiet  it.
*^  Attacks,  Periodicity. Spasmodic  asthma.

Two  hours :  paroxysms  of  vertigo  and  insensibility.
Migraine  comes  on  in  morning  shortly  after  awaking,
scarcely  ever  ceases  before  evening;  attacks  come  on
irregularly.
Periodic  headache  of  hysterical  women.
Chronic:  diarrhoea.
*^  Locality  and  Direction. Right:  intense  pain  in  sound
teeth  of  lower  jaw.
Left:  pains  in  shoulder-joint; pain  in  foot  and  joint  of
big  toe.
*^  Sensations. Pain:  in  sound  teeth  of  r.  lower  jaw,  nearly
driving  him  crazy;  in  small  of  back;  in  head;  iliac.
Cramp-like drawing:  in umbilical region,  with  severe

pains  in  small  of  back.
Burning  pain :  with  migraine.
Cramp :  of  stomach.
Lightness :  of  stomach  after  food.
Voluptuous  itching:  of  genital  organs.
^*  Tissues. Coffee  and  tea  are  injurious  to  the  young,  but


323  COFFEA  TOSTA.

beneficial  to  the  old,  because  they  increase  the  nitrog-
enous bodies  by  diminishing  tissue  waste.

Useful  when  weary  from  travel  in  heat,  with  deprivation
of  food.

Is  important  as  an  article  of  diet  for  soldiers,  on  account
of  its  invigorating  properties,  and  is  also  serviceable
against  both  cold  and  heat;  it  is  also  useful  in  hot
climates.

Affects  injuriously  the  teeth  and  bones  of  children,  pre-
disposes them  to  caries.

Tense  fibre.
^^  Touch. Passive  Motion. Touch : integuments  of  head
sensitive  and  painful  to  slightest.

During  downward  motion  of  hammock  while  asleep,
painful  anxiety  without  fear  of  falling.

Swinging  motion  of  hammock  felt  to  an  enormous  degree.
*''  Stages  of  Life,  Constitution. Beneficial  to  persons  who
live  in  the  open  air  and  to  old  people  of  nervous  and
excitable  temperament.

Useful  during  lactation,  but  harmful  during  puerperal
state  or  during  menstruation.

Relieves  the  last  moments  of  the  dying,  particularly  those
suffering  from  abdominal  complaints,  dropsy  and  con-
sumption.

Useful  as  a  stimulant  in  apparent  death,  particularly  in
asphyxia  and  premature  birth.

Girls,  set.  10  and  14  weeks;  cholera  infantum.

Primipara,  set.  23,  strong,  well  built;  has  had  labor  pains,
for  thirty-five  hours  which  have  become  excessively
severe  during  last  eighteen  hours.

"Woman,  «t.  32,  well  built,  mother  of  two  children;  irreg-
ular and  excessively  severe  labor  pains.

"Marie  Bouvard,  married,  set.  45,  has  never  used  coffee;
periodical  attacks  of  insensibility.
*^  Relations.  Strong,  black  coffee,  the  beans  being  little
roasted,  drank  as  hot  as  possible  is  indispensable  as  an
antidote  in  a  large  number  of  poisons,  especially  nar-
cotics, when  causing  drowsiness,  intoxication,  loss  of  con-
sciousness, or  mental  derangement,  delirium,  etc.;  in
general  it  antidotes  narcotic  substances,  such  as  opium,
morphine,  nux  vomica,  belladonna,  narcotic  mushrooms,
poisonous  sumach,  tobacco,  bitter  almonds,  prussic  acid,
Bellad.,  Coloc,  Valer.,  Cicut.  and  Chamom.  In  case  of
poisoning  with  salts  of  antimony,  lead,  phosphorus  and
phosphoric  acid,  coffee  is  no  less  indispensable.

Coffee  should  be  used by  wine-drinkers; tea  by beer-  '
drinkers.

Coffee  removed  the  symptoms  produced  by  mesmerism.

Compare:  Aeon,  (in  fever).


COLCHICUM  AUTUMNALE.  324

COLCHICUM  AUTUMNALE.

Meadow  Saffron.  Liliacese.


The  Autumn  Crocus,  or  Meadow  Saffron,  is  found  in  most  parts  of  temperate
Europe,  especially  near  Rome.

Colchicum  was  well  known  to  the  ancients,  who  possessed  extensive  knowl-
edge of  its  properties  and  uses.

Alexander  of  Tralles,  in  the  fifth  century,  says  that  although  it  speedily  re-
lieves the  pain  and  soreness  of  an  attack  of  gout,  it  nevertheless  favors  the  frequent
recurrence  of  attacks,  an  opinion  repeated  by  recent  authorities.

Proved  by  Hahnemann,  Stapf,  Lindeman  and  others,  too  numerous  to  mention.
"Vide  Encyclopedia,  v.  3,  p.  449.

Clinical  AuTH0RiTiES.^;S'i2/e,  E.  W.  Berridge,  Eaue's  E.,  1874,  p.  71 ;  Ileus,
E.  V.  Nash,  Eaue's  E.,  1875,  p.  144;  Ascites,  W.  McGregor,  Eaue's  E.,  1873,  p.
135 ;  Obstinate  acute  diarrhoea,  Hughes,  Hughes'  Manual,  p.  309 ;  Dysentery,  Brown,
Organon,  v.  3,  p.  375 ;  Miiller,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf.,  v.  5,  p.  443 ;  H.  C.  Allen,  Organon,
V.  3,  p.  375 ;  Hartman,  Henke,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf.,  v.  1,  p.  866 ;  Hemorrhage  from
bowels,  E.  V.  Nash,  Eaue's  E.,  1875,  p.  137 ;  Inflammation  of  kidneys,  Goullon,
AUg.  Horn.  Ztg.,  v.  50,  p.  20 ;  Renal  derangement,  A.  E.  Small,  Eaue's  E.,  1872,  p.
160;  Nausea  of  pregnancy,  J.  B.  Bell,  Organon,  v.  3,  p.  372;  Chronic  night  cough,
Elb,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf.,  v.  4,  p.  342 ;  Hydrothorax,  Hartman,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf,  v.  4,  p.
341 ;  Elb,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf,  v.  4,  p.  342 ;  Pleurisy,  Seidel,  Euck.  Kl.  Erf,  v.  4,  p.
341  ;  Pericarditis,  Kidd,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf,  v.  5,  p.  895  ;  Rheumatism  (3  cases),  Wil-
liams, Eiick.  Kl.  Erf,  v.  3,  p.  511 ;  (3  cases),  Godart,  Frank's  Mag.,  v.  3,  p.  144;
Acute  articular  rheumatism,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf.,  v.  3,  p.  895 ;  Gout,  Chrichow,  Frank's
Mag.,  V.  1,  p.  454 ;  Gi'cat  prostration,  Haden,  Analytical  Therapeutics,  v.  1,  p.
134;  Paralysis,  Hartman,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf,  v.  4,  p.  470;  Asiatic  cholera,  Engelhard,
Eiick.  Kl.  Erf,  v.  5,  p,  471 ;  Post  scarlatinal  dropsy,  CI.  Miiller,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf,  v.
4,  p.  47 ;  Dropsy,  Ign.  Pollak,  Eaue's  E.,  1870,  p.  226.

^  Mind. I  Perception  entirely lost; unconscious. ^Typhus.

^Myelitis  acuta.
1 1  Memory  weakened,  ideas  not  so  clear  as  usual;  forget-

fulness ;  absence  of  mind.
Disorders  in  comprehension  and  association  of  ideas;  he

lacks words to  express his  ideas;  when writing, he

forgets  syllables  and  entire  words;  he  confounds  objects.
I  Confusion  of  head;  intellect  clouded,  though  he  answers

correctly.
I  I  Says  nothing  unless  questioned,  his  condition  does  not

seem  to  him  dangerous. ^Typhus.
I  Can  read,  but  cannot  understand  even  a  short  sentence;

cannot  understand  the  words;  vision  is  heightened,  but

intellectual  facilities  dulled.


325  COLQHICUM  AUTUMNALE.

I  Delirium  with  headache,

■  Great  desire  for  rest,  and  disinclination  to  mental  exer-

tion, or  exertion  of  any  kind.

I  Mind  depressed. ^Dropsy. ^Gout.

I  Surly,  ill-humored,  not  satisfied  with  anything.

iHis  sufferings  seem  intolerable  to  him;  external  impres-
sions, light,  noise,  strong  smells,  contact,  etc.,  disturb  his
temper.

I  Pains  so  excessive  they  almost  drive  one  mad,  in  the
evening.

Aggravation  very  often,  after  mental  exertion.

Pains  <  by  mental  exertion  or  by  motion.

Ailments  from  grief  or  misbehavior  of  others.
^  Sensorium. Confusion  and  drowsiness  of  the  head.

Vertigo :  while  sitting,  after  walking ;  on  rising.

Delirium,  with  headache.

Coma,  or  unconsciousness.
^  Inner  Head. iPressive  heaviness  deep  in  cerebellum,  es-
pecially on  moving  or  stooping.
I  I  Pressing  pain  above,  in  small  spots,  or  very  severely  in
substance  of  cerebellum,  and  occurring  on  the  slightest
intellectual  exertion.

■  Pressure  in  head;  especially  in  occiput,  also  deep  in  cere-

bellum, excited  by  mental  exertion,  or  night  watching.
Boring,  pressing  headache,  brought  on  by  mental  labor,

and  by  entering  room  from  open  air.
■Sensation  of  constriction  in  ciliary  region,  with  great  de-
sire  for rest, and disinclination to  mental  exertion.

^Iritis.
Spasmodic  pains  in  head,  especially  over  eyes.
Boring  headache, especially  over eyes,  extending  into

dorsum  of  nose.
■Headache  over  1.  eye,  <  in  open  air.
I  I  Painful  rending,  tearing,  drawing  pains  in  1.  side  of  head,

from  eyeball  to  occiput.
Very  painful  drawing-tearing  in  half  the  head,  beginning

at  the  ball  of  eye,  extending  to  occiput.
Hemicrania,  either  of  r.  or  1.  side,  changing  about.
Pressing  pain  in  r.  and  afterwards  in  1.  frontal  region.
Tearing,  wandering  pains,  in  one  half  of  head,  in  occiput,

in  temples,  or  pericranium.

■  Creeping  sensation  in  forehead.
Pressing-tearing  in  occiput.

Oppressive  weight  in  occiput,  during  movement  and  when
bending  the  body  backward.

■  Pressing  headache. ^Dropsy.
Pulsations  in  head.

Very  violent  headache,  coming  in  evening,  and  lasting
until  morning.


COLCHICUM  AUTUMNALE.  326

Headache  >  after  supper,  from  warmth  and  lying  quiet

in  bed.
*  Outer  Head. Heaviness  of  head.

Head  bent  forward  upon  breast,  arms  hang  hstless.

I  When  raised  the  head  falls  back,  mouth  wide  open.

1  I  Extreme  weakness,  cannot  move  her  head  from  pillow

without  help. ^Hemorrhage  from  bowels.

■  Difficulty  in  moving  head.
I  Hot  forehead. ^Dropsy.

■  Forehead  covered  with  cold  sweat. ^Typhus.
■Tearing  in  scalp,  on  small  spots,  particularly  on  occiput.
Lacerating  pain  in  scalp.

Great  falling  off  of  the  liair.

■  Porrigo  favosa,  oozing,  acrid  ichor.

^  Sight  and  Eyes. 'Eyes  half  open;  sunken,  staring;  hollow,
congested,  protruding.
Loss  of  sight  for  a  minute  or  two  on  getting  out  of  bed.

■  Drawing,  digging  pain,  deep  in  orbit,  like  in  sclerotitis.
Drawing  tension  deep  in  eye.

A  slight  nebulous  dimness  appears  in  posterior  chamber,
probably  proceeding  from  vitreous  body.

■  Soft  cataract,  glaucoma.

I  1  Complete capsulo-lenticular cataract, with increased

size  of  lens.
Lens  pressed  forward  against  the  iris,  then  closing  up  the

pupil.
Iris  first  of  a  beautiful  brown  color,  afterwards  dim  and

as  if  blotted  out.

■  Iritis,  rheumatic  cases,  with  great  soreness  of  eyeballs.

■  Pupils  much  dilated,  only  slightly  sensitive  to  light,  or

immovable  and  slightly  dilated;  1.  pupil  contracted,
while  r.  is  dilated. ^Typhoid.

II  Pupil  naturally  large,  is  excessively  sensitive  to  light,
contracting  not  much  but  very  rapidly.

I  I  Deposit  of  a  purulent  fluid  in  lower  part  of  anterior
chamber.

■  Dimness,  opacity  of  cornea;  maculae.

■  Inflammation  of  eyes,  dimsightedness,  watering  of  eyes,

white  spot  on  cornea.
Soreness  and  pressive  pain  in  eyes.
■Violent,  short,  sharp,  tearing  pain,  in  and  around  eyeball.

■  Ulceration  of  meibomian  glands  of  1.  lower  lid,  which  is

much  swollen,  with  great  nervousness.

■  Burning  and  redness  of  edges  of  eyelids.

I  I  Smarting  in  the  eye,  especially  in  outer  canthus,  with
lachrymation ;  feeling  as  if  canthus  were  glued  up.

■  Pressure  and  biting  in  canthi,  with  moderate  lachryma-

tion.


327  COLCHICUM  AUTUMNALE.

I  Stye  on  1.  lower  lid,  near  inner  canthus.

■  Excoriating  lachrymation,  <  in  open  air. ^Iritis.
Worse  when  looking  upwards.

Around  the  edge  of  the  pupil,  from  behind  the  iris,  a  yel-
lowish flocculent  membrane  appears  in  the  pupil,  and
protrudes  into  the  anterior  chamber.
^  Hearing  and  Ears, i  Hearing  generally  acute.

Arthritic  vertigo  of  auditory  nerve.

I  Roaring  in  ears;  they  feel  stopped  up.

I  Tingling  of  ears,  as  after  being  frosted.

I  Earache,  with  stitches  in  ears.

Dryness  of  ears.

I  Discharge  from  ears,  with  tearing  pain. ^Otorrhoea  after

measles.
^  Smell  and  Nose. I Smell  morbidly  acute;  the  odor  of  meat
broth  causes  nausea,  and  that  of  fresh  eggs  nearly  faint-
ing; excessive  sensitiveness  of  smell  to  cooking.

I I  Strong  odors  make  him  quite  beside  himself.

■  Tingling  and  itching  in  nose. ^Coryza.
■Sneezing,  with  crawling  sensation  in  nose. .

■  Nostrils  dry  and  black.
■Sore  pain  in  septum.

■  Nosebleed,  particularly  in  evening.

Long lasting coryza; discharge thin, tenacious, never

watery.
^  Upper  Face. 1 1  Extreme  anxiety  of  countenance. dFeii-

carditis.
Anxious  countenance; sharp  features; cheeks,  lips  and

eyelids  purple.
Face:  doleful, sad expression;  suffering,  like that  of  a

chronic  patient ;  hippocratic,  sunken,  cadaverous  look ;

risus  sardonicus;  pale;. pale  and  blue;  yellow  spotted;

cheeks  red  and  hot;  covered  with  sweat;  cachectic  (dys-
entery).


of  cheeks,  with  marked  paleness  about  nose  and  mouth.

■  Face,  and  especially  nose,  color  of  bleached  coal  ashes.

/^Chronic  asthma.

■  Tingling  in  skin  of  face  as  after  being  frosted.
■Tearing  and  tensive  pains  in  facial  muscles,  moving  from

one  location  to  another.

■  Drawing  in  bones  of  face  or  nose;  sensation  as  if  they

were  being  rent  asunder.

■  GEdematous  swelling  of  face.

I  iQLdema  of  lids  and  face;  great  sensitiveness  to  con-
tact, motion,  and  changes  to  damp  weather;  gouty  di-
athesis. ^Iritis.

I  I  Pain  and  swelling  from  a  decayed  tooth;  tongue  furred.


COLCHICUM  AUTUMNALE.  328

^  Lower  Face. iLips  chapped,  livid,  or  blue.

I  Thick,  brownish  coating,  on  lips,  teeth  and  tongue.

I A  paralytic  sensation,  a  cramp-like  pain  in  maxillary
joint. ^Arthritic  toothache.
^'*  Teeth  and  Gums.  .  ■  Grinding  of  teeth ;  teeth  feel  too  long.

I  Teeth  very  sensitive  when  pressed  together,  as  in  biting.

■  Toothache,  <  from  cold  and  immediately  after  warm

things
■Arthritic  toothache,  <  at  night.

■  Tearing  in  jaws  and  gums.

"  Taste  and  Tongue. ■  Flat,  bitterish  taste,  or  tastelessness  of
food. ^Dysentery.

■  Inability  to  talk,  or  talks  with  effort. ^Cholera. ^Typhus,
Loss  of  sensibility  in  tongue.

Tearing,  burning  and  sticking  in  tongue.
•  iTongue:  bright  red;  heavy,  stiff  and  numb;  cold;  moved
and  projected  with  difficulty.

■  Tongue  coated:  with  whitish  fur;  with  a  thick  yellow

fur ;  with  brown  slime. ^Intestinal  disturbances.  ^Peri-
carditis. ^Dysentery.
'^  Inner  Mouth, i  l  Mouth  open  to  the  widest  extent. ^Ty-
phus.

■  Sensation  of  warmth  and  dryness  in  mouth.

■  Heat  in  mouth,  with  thirst.

■  Inflammation  of  mucous  membrane  of  mouth  and  throat.
I  I  Salivation. ^Cholera  sporadica.

■  Profuse  flow  of  saliva,  with  dryness  of  throat.
■Affection  of  salivary  glands. ^Bright's  disease.

The  saliva  causes  nausea  and  inclination  to  vomit  when
swallowing  it.
^^  Throat. ■Tickling  in  throat,  as  if  coryza  were  setting  in,
inducing  cough  and  clearing  throat.
■Smarting  and  sensation  of  dryness  of  tongue  and  throat.

■  Biting-tingling  in  throat  and  fauces.

■The  throat  is  dry,  and  yet  there  is  a  flow  of  watery  saliva,
accompanied  by  nausea  and  discomfort  in  abdomen.

■  Inflammation  and  redness  of  palate  and  fauces.
■Tonsils  inflamed  and  swollen;  here  and  there  spots  cov-
ered with  pus,  swallowing  difficult.

■  Heat  in  pharynx  and  whole  length  of  oesophagus.
Itching  in  pharynx.

■  Constriction  of  oesophagus.
Accumulation  of  mucus  in  throat.

■  Much  greenish,  thin  mucus  in  throat,  sometimes  comes

involuntarily  into  mouth,  or  is  hawked  up.
"  Appetite,  Thirst. Desires,  Aversions. ■Enormous  appe-
tite.

■  He  has  appetite  for  different  things,  but  as  soon  as  he


329  COLCHICUM  AUTUMNALE.

sees  them,  or  still  more  smells  them,  he  shudders  from
nausea,  and  is  unable  to  eat  anything.

■  Appetite  entirely  gone. ^Dysentery.

I  No  apj)etite,  but  intense  thirst. ^Pericarditis. ^Rheu-

matism. ^Dropsy.

I I  Aversion  to  food;  loathing  the  sight,  and  still  more  the
smell  of  it. Aliens. ^Hemorrhage  from  bowels.

I  The  smell  of  fish,  eggs,  fat  meats  or  broth,  causes  nausea

even  unto  faintness. ^Dysentery.

■  Great  thirst. ^Hemorrhage  from  bowels. ^Dysentery.

^Cholera  sporadica.

I I  No  thirst.

^^  Hiccough,  Belching,  Nausea  and  Vomiting, i  Frequent,
copious  eructations  of  tasteless  gas.

■  Eructations,  with  burning  in  stomach.

■  Gulping  up  of  water,  followed  by  nausea. ^Dropsy.

■  Nausea  and  inclination  to  vomit,  caused  by  swallowing

saliva.

■  Deathly  nausea  and  prostration. ^Acute  diarrhoea.

■  Nausea,  with  great  restlessness ;  on  assuming  upright  pos-

ture, a  qualmishness in  stomach  and inclination  to
vomit.

■  ■Smell of cooking nauseates to faintness. ^Dropsy.

^Hemorrhage  from  bowels. ^Typhilitis. ^Intermittent
fever.

■  ■  Nausea,  eructations  and  copious  vomiting  of  mucus  and

bile.
Disposition  to  vomit,  >  by  lying  perfectly  still;  renewed,

however,  by  every  motion.
Violent  and  excessive  retching  without  vomiting.

■  ■Violent  retching,  followed  by  copious  and  forcible  vom-

iting of  food  and  then  of  bile.

■Vomiting  first  food,  then  fluid,  finally  considerable  quan-
tities of  stercoraceous  matter. ^Ileus.

Vomiting:  of  food;  of  bilious,  glairy  matter,  of  greenish
mucus;  the  water  he  drank;  of  acrid,  sour  slime;  of  rice
water ;  of  fluid  like  coffee  grounds ;  renewed  after  every
motion ;  occurring  with  great  ease.

■Vomiting  followed  by  weakness  and  sometimes  ravenous
hunger. ^Dropsy.

■  He  was  obliged  to  bend  himself  up  and  lie  quite  still  the

whole  day,  without  the  slightest  movement,  else  he  was
seized  with  the  most  violent  vomiting.

■  Ravenous  hunger  and  weakness  after  vomiting.  ^Dropsy.

■  Vomiting,  with  watery  diarrhoea.

Vomiting  and  purging  of  rice  water  stools,  with  thirst.
^"^  Scrobiculum  and  Stomach. ■  Uneasiness  at  epigastrium ;
extremely  sensitive  to  touch  or  pressure. ^Dysentery.


COLCHICUM  AUTUMNALE.  330

1 1  Violent  burning  in  epigastrium.
Pain  in  epigastrium  as  if  pierced  with  a  knife.
I  Stomach  deranged  after  eating  too  many  eggs.
iThe  stomach  seems  constantly  icy  cold.

■  Pressure  in  stomach.

Burning  in  stomach,  or  icy  coldness,  with  great  pain  and
debility.

■  Burning  in  pit  of  stomach. ^Dropsy.

Burning  in  pit  of  stomach,  followed  by  nausea  and  finally
vomiting,  with  subsequent  weakness,  and  sometimes
ravenous  hunger.

■  Severe  pain  and  tenderness  over  region  of  stomach,  at

times  extending  over  the  bowels.

■  Fulness  of  stomach;  swelling  as  if  he  had  eaten  too  much,

even  when  he  had  taken  nothing,  <  after  eating  even

light  food.
Sensation  of  gnawing  hunger  in  stomach.
Stitches  in  pit  of  stomach.

■  Violent  burning  pain  in  stomach.

■  Cramps  in  stomach.

■  Colic:  aggravated  by  eating;  after  flatulent  food;  with

great  distension  of  belly;  better  when  bending  double.

■  Gastric  affections,  with  a  coated  tongue,  clammy  taste,

anorexia,  pressure  in  stomach,  empty  eructation.

■  Gastric  affections  before  and  during  an  attack  of  rheu-

matism.
^^  Hypochondria. ■  Anxious  feeling  in  prsecordia.

■  Distension  of  gas  under  short  ribs,  as  after  eating  too

much.

■  Pain  in  r.  hypochondrium,  like  from  incarcerated  flatus.
^'Abdomen. ■Tympanitis. ^Colic. ^Dysentery.

■  Tympanitis  with  pain  in  back. ^Typhoid.

■  Great  distension  of  abdomen  with  gas,  as  if  he  had  eaten

too  much.

■  Flatulent  distension  of  abdomen,  with  less  frequent  and

less  copious  stools.
■Belching  and  great  meteoristic  distension  of  stomach  and

upper  abdomen. ^Ileus.
Great  swelling  of  lower  part  of  abdomen.

■  Abdomen  much  swollen,  with  a  fold  or  crease  below  um-

bilicus, extending  across. ^Ascites.
Distended abdomen, contracts spasmodically when
touched.

■  No  bellyache,  but  rumbling  noise  and  sensation  as  if

diarrhoea  would  begin  every  moment. ^Dysentery.
Surface  of  abdomen  hotter  than  rest  of  body  and  extremely
sensitive  to  touch.

■  Intense  intermitting  pain  in  upper  portion  of  small  intes-

tines, with  constipation,  fever,  thirst  and  yellow  tongue.


331  COLCHICUM  AUTUMNALE.

I  Pain  extends  from  stomach  over  abdomen,  followed  by
large  watery  evacuations;  each  discharge  with  severe
griping  pain.

■Burning,  or  icy  coldness  in  stomach  and  abdomen.
^Colic. ^Cholera  sporadica.

Pulsation  in  abdomen.

■  Pressing,  tearing,  cutting  or  stitching  pains  in  abdomen.
■Spasmodic  pains  in  lower  abdomen,  loss  of  appetite  and

general  lassitude. ^Dysentery.

■  Great  pain,  tenderness  and  swelling  in  r.  ilio-coecal  and

ilio-inguinal  regions. ^Ileus.

■  Tearing  pain  in  belly,  especially  about  sigmoid  flexure

of  colon,  <  from  pressure,  and  at  night. ^Rheumatic
diarrhoea.

■  Griping  in  abdomen  and  colicky  pains. ^Dysentery.

■  Colic:  <  by  eating;  after  flatulent  food;  until  diarrhoea

sets  in ;  >  from  bending  double.
■Painless  cholera  morbus,  with  much  weakness  and  pros-
tration.

■  In  inflammatory  irritation  of  abdominal  viscera,  by  me-

tastasis from  gout.

■  Pain  in  bowels  increases,  towards  evening,  and  continues

until  daybreak. ^Hemorrhage  from  bowels.

■  Pain  in  belly,  <  on  pressure  and  at  night. ^Rheumatic

diarrhoea.
^  Stool  and  Rectum. ■  Very  offensive  flatus  in  evening.

■  Urging  to  stool:  unsatisfactory;  >  by  frequent  passages

of  flatus.
Ineffectual  pressing  to  stool,  feels  feces  in  the  rectum  but
cannot  expel  them.

■  ■Very  painful  urging  to  stool;  at  flrst  only  a  little  feces

passed,  afterwards  followed  transparent,  gelatinous  and
very  membranous  mucus,  with  some  relief  of  pain  in
abdomen.
Stools  scanty,  discharged  only  by  hard  straining,  even  if
soft,  with  pain  in  small  of  back.

■  ■Extremely  painful  stools.

Stools:  changeable;  mucous,  jelly-like;  greenish;  reddish;
yellowish;  light  yellow;  orange  yellow;  slimy;  fecal;
excoriating;  slightly  sour-smelling;  white,  shreddy  par-
ticles; with  borborygmus;  frequent,  abundant,  watery,
with  flocculi;  like  rice  water;  yellowish  and  bloody;
scanty,  with  tenesmus,  salivation,  and  copious  secretion
of  urine;  copious,  frequent,  watery,  or  bilious,  often
without  pain,  sometimes  with  cutting  colic;  watery,
with  bright  yellow  flakes;  scanty,  difficult,  of  bloody
mucus  and  shreds,  with  pain  in  anus,  and  violent  tenes-
mus; green,  watery,  very  offensive  mucus;  pass  insen-


COLCHICUM  AUTUMNALE.  332

sibly,  involuntarily;  only  mucous  discharges,  and  dur-
ing night.

I  Very  offensive  evacuations. ^Dysentery. ^Dropsy.

■  Feces mixed with small, white membranes,  or  light

bluish  matter. ^Dysentery.

I I  Discharge  from  bowels  like  gelatine. ^Dysentery.

■  Evacuated  mere  mucus  without  blood,  with  a  good  deal

of  tenesmus. ^Dysentery.
1 1  Watery,  jelly-like  mucus  passes  from  anus,  with  violent

spasm  in  sphincter. ^Dysentery. ^Cholera  sporadica.
I  Bilious  diarrhoea,  the  stools  afterwards  mixed  with  white

membranous  pieces.

■  Constant  vomiting  and  passages  of  green  matter,  with

cutting  pains  about  umbilicus,  each successive stool
growing  more  watery. ^Asiatic  cholera.
■Profuse,  watery  stools,  in  hot,  damp  weather,  or  in  the
Autumn. ^Diarrhoea.

■  Obstinate,  acute  diarrhoea,  with  deathly  nausea  and  pros-

tration.

■  Diarrhoea,  with  violent  colicky  pains.

■  After  a  few  discharges  from  bowels  of  a  slimy,  watery

substance,  without  relief,  obstinate  constipation. ^Ileus.
■Stools  slimy,  streaked  with  blood,  and  lumpy,  attended
with  tenesmus  and  nocturnal  fever. ^Rheumatism.

■  ■Bloody  stools,  with  scrapings  from  intestines  and  protru-

sion of  anus. ^Dysentery.

■  ■Fall  dysentery,  with  discharges  of  white  mucus  and

violent  tenesmus;  bloody  stools,  mingled  with  a  slimy
substance.

■  ■  Bloody  discharge  from  bowels  with  deathly  nausea  from

smelling  cooking.

■  Putrid,  dark  colored  blood  and  mucus  pass  from  bowels.

■  Pain  al3out  the  sigmoid  flexure  of  the  colon. ^Rheumatic

diarrhoea.

■  ■Tenesmus  in  rectum.

■  Long-lasting,  agonizing  pain  in  rectum  and  anus,  after

stool,  causing  screams  and  crying.

■  Forcing,  pressing  pains  in  rectum,  with  frequent  scanty

discharge. ^Dysentery.

■  Tingling,  itching,  burning  and  tearing  in  anus.

■  Protrusion  of  rectum, ^Dysentery.

■  Hemorrhage  from  anus  in  autumnal,  cold,  damp  weather.

■  Oozing  of  copious  mucus  from  anus.

■  Spasm  of  sphincter  during  or  independent  of  discharge,

with  a  shuddering  over  back.

■  Child  falls  asleep  on  the  vessel  as  soon  as  the  tenesmus

ceases. ^Dysentery.
Before  stool :  flatulency ;  pinching  in  abdomen.


333  COLCHICUM  AUTUMNALE.

During  stool :  stinking  flatus ;  rending  pain  in  anus,  back-
ache; vomiting,  vertigo,  faintness,  cardial  stitches.

After  stool :  remission  of  intestinal  pains  and  of  sensorial
complaints;  increase  of  pelvic  pains;  stinking  flatus,
feeling  of  diarrhoea  in  rectum,  and  sore  biting  in  anus ;
renewed  desire  to  go  to  stool;  exhaustion.
^^  Urinary  Organs.  I  Constant  burning  in  urinary  organs,
with  diminished  secretion.

1 1  Pain  in  region  of  kidneys.

iHypersemia  of  kidneys;  urine  contains  albumen.

■  Nephritis;  bloody,  ink-like,  albuminous  urine. ^Dropsy

after  scarlatina.

■  Strangury  with  hemorrhage  from  bladder.
Bladder  contracted  and  empty.

■  Vesical  irritability  and  tenesmus,  depending  upon  gouty

diathesis.
Evacuations  of  urine  attended  and  followed  by  tenesmus

of  bladder  and  a  burning  pain  in  urethra,  as  if  the  urine

were  very  warm.
Before  urination :  burning  in  urinary  passages.
During  urination: burning  in  urethra; constriction  in

neck  of  the  bladder.
After  urination:  tickling  in  the  fossa  navicularis;  tickling

burning  in  urethra  and  discharge  of  a  few  drops.

■  Constant  urging,  scanty  urine,  painful  discharge  from

spasm  in  neck  of  bladder. ^Hydrothorax.
■Urging  to  urinate,  and  discharge  of  hot,  highly  colored
urine;  burning  and  tenesmus. ^Dysentery.

■  Copious,  involuntary  urination,  or  suppression  of  urine.

/^Typhus.

■  Profuse  secretion  of  urine.

Frequent  micturition  with  diminished  discharge.

Urine:  copious,  watery  and  frequent;  dark  and  turbid,
with  tenesmus  of  bladder  and  burning  in  urethra;  of
sour  smell  and  acid  reaction ;  dark,  scanty,  discharged
in  drops,  whitish  sediment;  pale  yellow;  clear;  reddish;
bloody;  brown;  albuminous;  suppressed;  greenish;
black;  inky;  contains  clots  of  putrid,  decomposed  blood ;
contains  phosphates  and  some  sugar.

■  Scanty  urine. ^Hydrothorax.

■  Urethra  hurts  while  the  urine  passes,  as  if  raw.
■Urine  turbid,  leaves  an  orange-colored  ring  in  vessel.

^Nephritis. ^Gout.

■  Nephritis  and  dropsy  after  scarlatina.

■  ■Urine  like  ink. ^Dropsy  after  scarlet  fever.

^  Male  Sexual  Organs. ■Tearing  in  glans  and  1.  spermatic
cord.
Itching  at  prepuce  and  orifice  of  urethra.


COLCHICUM  AUTUMNALE.  334

I  (Edema  of  scrotum. ^Dropsy.

I  Chordee  after  gonorrhoea.
^^  Female  Sexual  Organs, i Hemorrhage  of  uterus.

Menses  too  early  and  scanty.

I  Sudden  suppression  of  menses,  followed  by  dropsy  of
uterus.

Tiredness  and  heaviness  of  feet.

Lancinating  tearing,  deep  in  r.  breast,  through  to  back.
24  Pregnancy.  Lactation.  •  Faint  aching  about  navel  as  if
she  must  eat,  but  with  loathing  and  disgust  at  thought,
sight,  or  smell  of  food;  all  attempts  to  eat  cause  violent
nausea  and  vomiting;  smell  of  meat  and  eggs  especially
repugnant. ^Nausea  of  pregnancy.

■  Feverish  restlessness  in  last  months  of  pregnancy.

■  Nipples  dark,  brownish-red,  protruding;  unbearable  pain

on  slightest  touch  by  child ;  breasts  full,  skin  hot,  pulse
strong  (lying-in,  fourth  day).

■  Puerperal  fever.

^  Voice  and  Larynx. Trachea  and  Bronchia. ■Voice
hoarse,  or  deeper  than  usual.
Hoarseness  in  morning,  with  roughness  of  throat.
Itching  in  larynx  and  trachea.
Tickling  in  trachea  with  coryza  and  a  little  cough.
Trachea  inflamed  at  its  bifurcation.

■  Catarrh  of  the  air  passages.
^^  Respiration. Cold  breath.

■Kespiration: difficult; rapid and short; quick, and

heart's  impulse  strong;  accelerated  and  audible;  slow;

irregular,  or  intermittent;  asthmatic;  with  moist  sound;

hurried,  with  groans. ^Pericarditis.
■Breathing  so  oppressed  she  could  hardly  lie  down,  >

on  bending  forward. ^Ascites.
Racking  pain  during  respiration  and  oppression  of  chest.

■  Lies  in  bed  gasping  for  breath. ^Pericarditis.

■  Great  dyspnoea. ^Gastro-pleurodynia.

■  Dyspnoea  at  night. ^Dropsy.

■  Dyspnoea  with  palpitation  of  heart  from  11  to  3  a.m._

■  Asthma:  depending  upon  hydrothorax  or  hydropericar-

dium ;  with  dropsy  of  lower  extremities,  extending  to
knees.
'"  Cough. ■  Slight  cough,  with  coryza.

■  Frecjuent,  short,  dry  cough,  from  tickling  in  larynx.
■Short,  dry  cough,  with  great  exhaustion. ^Dysentery.

■  Night  cough,  with  involuntary  spurting  out  of  urine.

■  Troublesome  night  cough,  compelling  him  to  sit  up,  ex-

cited by  scraping  in  chest,  with  much  expectoration.
^^  Inner  Chest  and  Lungs. ■  Violent  cutting  pain  in  chest,
interrupting  breathing.


335  COLCHICUM  AUTUMNALE.

Lancinating  pain,  as  with  a  knife,  in  r.  side  of  chest.

I  Dull  stitches  in  posterior  part  of  thorax,  during  expira-
tion. ^Hydrothorax.

■Stinging  in  region  of  heart,  with  oppression.

■Severe  pain  at  1.  side,  below  region  of  heart,  shooting
from  behind  forward;  <  on  breathing,  wdth  rapid,
sharp,  irregular  pulse,  and  great  dyspnoea.  ^Gouty
pleurodynia.

■  Spasms  of  chest.

■  ■  Oppression  of  chest,  dyspncea,  a  tensive  feeling  in  chest,

sometimes  high  and  sometimes  low  down. ^Asthma.

■  Oppression of  chest,  with  anxiety  >  by  bending  "for-

ward.

■  1  Oppression  of  chest  and  violent  palpitation. ^Myelitis.
Frequent  pressure  in  small  spots  in  chest.

■  Indescribable  dulness  and  gnawing  in  sternum,  about

midw-ay  and  deep  in,  slightly  >  from  constantly  press-
ing and  rubbing  sternum  with  hand;  cannot  keep  still,
constantly  tossing  from  side  to  side.  ^Nausea  of  preg-
nancy.

■  Spitting  blood,  after  injuries;  hemorrhage  of  lungs.

■  ■Hydrothorax,  with  oedema  of  hands  and  feet.
■Serous  effusion  in  chest,  with  rheumatic  and  gouty  persons.

^Arthritic  pleurisy.
^^  Heart,  Pulse  and  Circulation. Quick  stitches  in  pericar-
dial region.

Pressure  and  oppression  in  region  of  heart,  as  if  an  attack
of  apoplexy  threatened ;  >  by  walking.

Pressure  and  anxiety  in  precordial  region ;  fulness  and
oppression  as  from  stagnation  of  blood  in  heart,  at  night
while  lying  on  1.  side,  is  obliged  to  turn  to  the  r.  side ;
dull,  irregular,  seemingly  suppressed  beats  of  heart,
with  a  peculiar  sensation  in  chest,  pulse  small,  slow  and
w^eak.

Heart's  impulse  strong.

■  Violent  palpitation  with  anxiety. ^Dropsy. ^Hydro-

pericardium.

■  Palpitation  of  heart  and  dyspnoea  from  11  to  3  a.m.

■  On  assuming  upright  posture,  vertigo,  palpitation,  stitches

about  heart  and  loss  of  consciousness.

■  Heart's  action  muffled,  indistinct,  very  weak. ^Pericar-

ditis.

■  Heart  sound,  murmuring,  weak,  indistinct; whistling.

^Pericarditis.

■  ■Effusion  into  the  pericardium  after  inflammatory  affec-

tion of  heart.

■  Effusion  into  pericardium,  with  sympathetic  irritation  of

endocardium. ^Pericarditis.


COLCHICUM  AUTUMNALE.  336

■  Heart  disease,  following  gout  or  acute  rheumatism.
Pulse:  accelerated  and  hard,  or  full  and  slow;  slow  and

feeble;  quick  and  thready;  pulseless;  170,  full,  bound-
ing, incompressible;  rapid,  sharp,  irregular  (gouty
pleurodynia);  large,  full  and  hard;  more  full  and  fre-
quent (nephritis) ;  small,  weak,  somewhat  frequent  (dys-
entery) ;  rapid,  weak  and  fluttering  (pericarditis) ;  trem-
bling; very  small,  contracted,  almost  imperceptible;  90,
soft  and  weak  (acute  rheumatism);  slow,  small  and
thready;  low,  45  and  very  full;  scarcely  perceptible,  oc-
casionally intermitting  (dysentery);  changeable  in  fre-
quency, often  irregular;  1 1  threadlike,  imperceptible.
^"^  Outer  Chest.  iSupramammary  region  dull  on  percussion
up  to  about  lower  edge  of  third  costal  cartilage;  sharp
rending  pains  along  sternum  and  into  1.  shoulder.
^Pericarditis.

■  Darting  pains  through  r.  side. (^Nephritis.
1 1  Stinging  and  tearing  in  muscles  of  chest.

■  Pleurodynia  from  catching  cold  or  from  living  in  damp

dwellings.
I  Rheumatism  of  pectoral  muscles.
^^  Neck  and  Back. A  pressing  pain  or  tension  in  cervical
muscles,  felt  even  when  swallowing.

■  Torticollis.

■  Rheumatic  pains  in  neck  and  back.
Pains  in  shoulder  and  hip-joints.

■  Stitching  and  tension  between  scapulae.

■Drawing,  tension  and  stitches  occurring  in  back,  much

<  on  motion.
Soreness  in  small  of  back  when  touched.

■  Frequent  shudderings  down  the  back. ^Dysentery.

■  Tension  and  pain  in  region  of  kidneys. ^Nephritis.

■  Violent  pain  in  region  of  r.  kidney,  could  only  lie  on  his

back,  <  from  pressure  and  motion. ^Nephritis.
■Pain  in  loins  like  toothache,  with  a  feeling  of  weight

when  she  stands,  which  makes  her  feel  sick  and  good

for  nothing.
Pain  in  loins  as  if  all  power  was  going,  and  the  back  was

turning  to  pulp.
■Rheumatic pains in loins and hips, extending  to  1.

shoulder  and  chest;  pains  most  severe  from  4  p.m.  until

6,  and  lasting  until  8  or  9,  in  evening,  or  returning  at

1  in  morning. ^Rheumatism.
■Sudden  tearing  and  shooting  in  loins. ^Myelitis  acuta.

■  Violent  writhing  in  region  of  loins  and  urinary  passages,

■  Spot  on  sacrum  feels  sore,  as  if  ulcerated;  very  sensitive

to  touch.
^^  Upper  Limbs. ■Rheumatic  pains:  in  clavicle,  shoulders,


337  COLCHICUM  AUTUMNALE.

arms,  back  and  neck,  preventing  moving  head;  in
elbow-joint,  forearm,  wrist,  and  ligaments  of  finger-
joints.

Stitches  in  r.  shoulder.

Painful  swelling,  and  sensitiveness  to  pressure  of  humero-
cubital  articulation,  with  burning.

Lacerating  in  elbows,  in  direction  of  upper  arm.

Tearing  in  arms,  hands  and  fingers.

1 1  Paralytic  pain  in  arms,  so  violent  that  he  cannot  hold
the  lightest  thing  firmly.

Bubbling  sensation  in  1.  upper  arm.

Heat  of  palms  of  hands.

Trembling  of  r.  hand,  preventing  writing.

Tearing  in  back  of  r.  hand.

iQidematous  swelling  of  hands.

I  Cannot  hold  anything  with  the  hand. ^Rheumatism.

■  Cramps  in  fingers. ^Cholera.
Lacerations  of  finger-joints.

■  Enlarged  and  distorted  finger-joints. ^Gout.

■  Fingers  spasmodically  flexed  but  in  constant  motion.
Fingers  cold ;  tingling  in  tips.

■  Lividity  of  nails.

^^  Lower  Limbs. Rheumatic  pains  in  loins  and  legs,  extend-
ing to  toes.
■Flying  pains  in  hips.

■  Tearing:  in  thighs;  knee-joints,  with  swelling;  in  patella;

in  tibiae,  calves,  ankles,  toes,  tendo  achilles.
A  feeling  of  muscular  weakness,  or  paralytic  feeling,  which
interferes  with  locomotion ;  on  attempting  to  walk  thinks
he  shall  lose  the  use  of  his  limbs,

■  With  the  pains,  weariness,  heaviness,  and  inability  to

move. ^Rheumatism.

■  Lower  limbs  oedematous  and  cold. ^Dysentery.  ^Dropsy.
I  I  Constant  pain  in  r.  thigh,  which has  become  much

emaciated.

■  CEdematous  swelling  of  lower  limbs  with  asthma. ^Hy-

drothorax.

■  Cramps  in  calves. ^Dysentery. ^Cholera.

■  Knees  strike  together,  can  hardly  walk.

■  i  Lameness  after  suddenly  checked  sweat,  particularly  on

feet,  by  getting  wet  all  over.

■  It  is  difficult  to  lift  the  feet  or  go  up  stairs;  stumbles  over

threshold;  uncertain  walk. ^Rheumatism.
Feet  feel  heavy.

■  Very  painful  cramps  in  both  feet,  particularly  in  soles.

■  Heels  contracted,  so  that  he  fears  never  to  be  able  to

walk. ^Chronic  rheumatism.

VOL.  IV. — 22.


COLCHICUM  AUTUMNALE.  338

■Tearing  pains  in  feet,  particularly  in  heel,  1.  tarsus,  dorsa

of  feet,  and  1.  sole.
I  Tingling  in  r.  big  toe,  as  if  it  would  go  to  sleep.
I  Pain  in  1.  big  toe,  as  if  nail  would  grow  into  flesh.

■  Drawing  with  pressure  in  toes.

I  Tingling  in  toes,  like  after  being  frosted.

I  Pain  in  ball  of  1.  big  toe  as  if  inflamed. ^Chronic  rheu-
matism.

I  Burning-itching  over  nail  of  r.  big  toe.
**  Limbs  in  General. All  muscles  of  voluntary  motion,  espe-
cially those  of  arms  and  legs,  paralyzed.

Sensation  of  lameness  through  limbs,  with  .great  weakness.

Neuralgic  pains  in  extremities  and  other  parts.

■Violent  pains  in  arms  and  legs,  cannot  use  the  limbs.

■  Drawing,  tearing  pains  in  limbs,  changing  place.
■Stiffness  in  joints,  and  swelling  of  hands  and  feet. ^Gout.

■  Shooting,  tearing  pains  in  suffering parts, increasing

with  the  fever.
■Rheumatic  tearing  pains  in  limbs  during  warm  weather;
stitches  during  cold.

■  Attacks  of  rheumatism  breaking  forth  suddenly  and  dis-

appearing suddenly;  pains  shifting;  acute  attacks
merging  into  the  chronic  form,  or  during  chronic  form
acute  attacks  set  in.

■  Arthritic  pains  in  limbs,  with  stiffiiess  in  joints  and

swelling  of  hands  and  feet. ^Gout.

■  Arthritic  pains  in  joints,  especially  when  knocking  the

joints;  makes  patient  scream  with  pain,  or  when  stub-
bing the  toes  hurts  exceedingly.
■Articular  rheumatism,  particularly  in young  persons,
when  first  attack  makes  its  appearance.

■  ■At  the  beginning  of  acute  rheumatism,  before  fully  de-

veloped.

■  ■  Pains  in  shoulder  and  hip-joints;  and  in  all  bones,  with

difficulty  of  moving  head  and  tongue.

■  Joints  most  affected,  without  swelling  or  redness.

■  Now  the  one  then  the  other  joint  affected,  sore  to  touch

and  swollen,  without  redness. ^Rheumatism.

■  Painful  flexure  of  joints.

■  Tearing  and  stitching  pains  in  muscles  and  joints.

■  Muscular  rheumatism  with  sensation  of  lameness  and  real

paralysis  of  muscles.

■  Disease  of  the  periosteum,  with  rending,  tearing  pain.

■  Numbness  of  hands  and  feet,  with  prickling  as  if  asleep.

■  (Edematous  swelling  of  hands  and  feet.

■  Bloating  of  hands  and  feet. ^Dysentery,

■  Limbs  cold;  hands  and  feet  cold.

^■■^  Rest. Position. Motion. Rest:  great  desire  for.


339  COLCHICUM  AUTUMNALE.

Lying  perfectly  still:  >  headache;  >  disposition  to  vomit.

While  sitting:  after  walking,  vertigo.

While  lying  on  1.  side:  fulness  and  oppression  as  from
stagnation  of  blood  in  heart  at  night,  must  turn  to  r.
side.

Sleepless  because  he  cannot  lie  on  1.  side,  on  which  he  is
accustomed  to  go  to  sleep.

Violent  pain  in  region  of  kidney,  can  only  lie  on  back.

Lies  prostrate  on  back.

Was  obliged  to  bend  himself  up  and  lie  quite  still  the
whole  day,  without  slightest  movement,  else  he  was
seized  with  most  violent  vomiting.

Head  bent  forward  upon  breast,  arms  hang  listless.

Troublesome  night  cough  compelling  him  to  sit  up.

Standing:  feeling  of  weight  in  loins  which  makes  her  feel
sick  and  good  for  nothing.

Motion:  pains  <  by;  pressive  heaviness  deep  in  cerebel-
lum on;  oppressive  weight  in  occiput  during;  cedema-
tous  lids  and  face  very  sensitive  to ;  disposition  to  vomit;
vomiting  renewed  after  every;  drawing,  tension  and
stitches  in  back  <;  pain  in  region  of  kidney  <.

On  looking  upwards:  eyes  <.

On  assuming  upright  posture:  qualmishness  in  stomach
and  inclination  to  vomit;  vertigo,  palpitation,  stitches
about  heart  and  loss  of  consciousness.

On  rising:  vertigo.

I  I  Difficulty  to  rise  after  sitting. ^Rheumatism.
Cannot  rise  from  bed  in  morning  but  with  difficulty.
Bending  forward :  >  oppression  of  breath ;  >  oppression

of  chest.
On  stooping:  pressive  heaviness  deep  in  cerebellum.
Bending  double:  >  colic.

On  bending  body  iDackward :  oppressive  w^eight  in  occiput.
On  attempting  to  walk:  sensation  as  if  he  would  lose  use

of  limbs.
Walking:  >  pressure  and  oppression  in  region  of  heart,

as  if  an  attack  of  apoplexy  threatened;  a feeling of

muscular  weakness  or  paralytic  feeling  interferes  with;

knees  strike  together.
Difficult  to  lift  feet  or  go  up  stairs ;  stumbles  over  threshold ;

uncertain  walk.
Writing:  trembling  of  hand  prevents.
Inability  to  move.
Nerves. iGreat  irritability  with  the  pains;  very  sensitive

to  slightest  touch ;  the  least  vibration  renders  the  pain

unbearable.
■  Distressing  restlessness  and  sleeplessness. ^Pericarditis.

I I  Great  weakness  and  exhaustion,  as  after  exertion ;  can-
not move  head  from  pillow  without  help. ^Dysentery.


36


COLCHICUM  AUTUMNALE.  340

I  Sudden  sinking  of  strength ;  prostration  with  restlessness ;
deep  fainting.

■  Lassitude,  nausea  and  great  prostration,  with  anxious

expression  of  face. 6'Acute  rheumatism. ^Cholera.
■Paralytic  feeling  with  the  pains.

Frequent  starting  and  trembling  is  felt  through  the  body.
Tingling  in  many  parts  of  body,  as  if  frost-bitten,  when

the  weather  changes.

■  Sudden  loss  of  all  power. ^Cholera.

Tearing  twitches,  like  electric  shocks,  through  one  side  of
body,  with  sensation  of  lameness.

■  Paralysis  after  sudden  suppression  of  sweat,  particularly

foot-sweat,  by  getting  wet.

■  Loss  of  muscular  power;  all  muscles  of  voluntary  motions,

especially  those  of  arms  and  legs,  are  paralyzed.

■  Convulsions,  cramps,  neuralgia,  paralytic  conditions,  and

debility,  in  persons  of  gouty  constitution.
I  I  Carpologia ;  subsultus  tendinum. ^Typhoid.
^  Sleep. ■  Great  sleepiness during  day; falls asleep while
reading.

■  Irresistible  sleepiness,  drowsiness,  when  not  in 'too  much

pain;  pains  <  towards  evening,  and  do  not  diminish
before  daybreak. ^Hemorrhage  from  bowels.

■  Comatose  state.

■  Lying  on  the  back.

■  Starting  and  jerking  in  sleep.

■  Sleep  disturbed  or  driven  away  by  pains,  or  restlessness

of  limbs. ^Rheumatism.

■  Sleeplessness  because  he  cannot  lie  on  1.  side,  on  which

he  is  accustomed  to  go  to  sleep.

■  Sleep disturbed at night by  dyspnoea,  from  11 to  3

o'clock. ^Dropsy.

■  Sleep  disturbed  by  frightful  dreams. ^Dysentery.

■  Cannot  rise  in  the  morning  from  bed,  but  with  difficulty.

^Rheumatism.
^^  Time. In  morning:  hoarseness,  with  roughness  of  throat;
cannot  rise  from  bed  but  with  difficulty.

In  afternoon  :  exacerbation  of  fever.

Rheumatic  pains  in  loins  and  hips,  extending  to  1.  shoul-
der and  chest,  most  severe  from  4  p.m.  until  6,  and
lasting  until  8  or  9  in  evening,  or  returning  at  1  in
morning.

During  day:  great  sleepiness,  falls  asleep  while  reading.

In  evening:  pains  so  excessive  they  almost  drive  one  mad ;
very  offensive  flatus;  very  violent  headache,  lasting
until  morning;  nosebleed;  j)ain  in  bowels' <;  exacer-
bation of  fever  and  of  pain.

At  night:  arthritic  toothache  <;  pain  in  abdomen,  espe-


341  COLCHICUM  AUTUMNALE.

cially  about  sigmoid  flexure  of  colon  < ;  mucous  stools ;

dyspnoea ;  palpitation ;  cough  with  spirting  out  of  urine ;

fulness  and  oppression  as  from  stagnation  of  blood  in

heart,  while  lying  on  1.  side,  must  turn  to  r.  side;  sleep

disturbed  by  dyspnoea;  exacerbation  of  pain  and  fever

with  copious  sweating.
^  Temperature  and  Weather. Warmth:  headache  >  by.
Warm  weather:  rheumatic  tearing  in  limbs  during.
In  warm  weather  rheumatic  pains  are  felt  principally  at

surface  of  body,  as  the  air  grows  cooler  they  seem  to

penetrate  the  deeper  tissues  and  the  bones.
In  hot,  damp  weather:  profuse  watery  stools.
Warm  food:  toothache  <  immediately  after.
Warm  stove:  constant  chilly  feeling  even  when  sitting

near.
Warm  room :  chill  and  shivering.
On  entering  room  from  the  open  air:  boring,  pressing

headache.
In  open  air:  headache  over  1.  eye  < ;  excoriating  lachry-

mation  <.
Cold:  toothache  <  from.
Cold  weather:  stitches  in  limbs  during.
1 1  Rheumatic  pains  excited  or  <  by  damp  or  cold  weather.
From  catching  cold:  pleurodynia.

I  After  getting  cold  by  lying  down  on  ice  when  overheated :

ileus.
After  heating  body  in  dancing :  acute  rheumatism.
From  getting  wet  all  over,  or after suddenly  checked

sweat:  lameness;  paralysis.
After  being  drenched  when  sweating.
Complaints  from  cold  bathing
From  living  in  damp  dwelling:  pleurodynia.
"Changes  to  damp  weather:  cedematous  lids  and  face  very

sensitive  to.
On  change  of  weather:  tingling  in  many  parts  of  body  as

if  frost-bitten.
In  Autumn :  diarrhoea.
In autumnal, cold, damp weather: hemorrhage from

anus.

I I  Fall  dysentery.

I  In  Spring:  rheumatism.
^  Fever. Chill  and  shivering:  running  through  all  the  limbs ;

even  in  warm  room ;  frequent  shiverings,  running  down

back;  general  coldness.
■  Frequent  chilliness. ^Acute  rheumatism,
I  Cold  sensation  of  head  and  limbs. ^Acute  rheumatism.

I  Body  hot  and  limbs  cold. ^Typhus.

I I  Constant  chilly  feeling,  even  when  sitting  near  the  stove ;
with  flushes  of  heat.


COLCHICUM  AUTUMNALE.  342

I  Constantly  increasing  dry  heat  of  whole  body,  with  pal-
pitation and  thirst.

I  Hands  and  feet  cold;  trunk  hot  and  extremities  cold;
skin  dry;  sweating;  suppressed  sweat;  forehead  covered
with  cold  sweat. ^Typhoid.

■  External,  dry  heat  the  whole  night,  with  violent,  un-

quenchable thirst.

lExacerbation  of  the  fever  in  the  afternoon.

lAlmost  constant  shivering,  skin  dry,  not  any  thirst,  urine
clear  and  reddish. ^'Rheumatism.

I  Sweat  wanting,  intermittent,  ^Nephritis.  ^Bright's  dis-
ease.

I  After  sudden  suppression  of  general  perspiration,  or  of
sweat  of  feet  by  getting  wet. ^Dysentery.

■  Copious  sour  sweat,  without  relief. ^Gout. ^Rheuma-

tism.

■  Clammy sweat on whole  surface, with low tempera-

ture of  skin.  ■  ^Acute  rheumatism.

■  Acid  reaction  of  sweat  and  urine.

■  Intermittent  fever  with  sensitiveness  to  odor  of  food.

^^  Attacks,  Periodicity.  Frequent :  eructations ;  stools ;  scanty
discharge  from  rectum;  micturition  with  diminished
discharge ;  short,  dry  cough ;  pressure  in  small  spots  in
chest;  shudderings  down  back;  darting  and  trembling
through  body;  shiverings,  down  back;  chilliness.

Sudden :  loss  of  all  power.

Break  forth  suddenly  and  disappear  suddenly:  attacks  of
rheumatism.

Spasmodic:  pains  in  head,  especially  over  eyes, extending
into  dorsum  of  nose.

For  a  minute  or  two:  loss  of  sight  on  getting  out  of  bed.

Intermitting:  intense  pains  in  upper  portion  of  small
intestines.

Constant:  vomiting  and  passages  of  green  matter;  burn-
ing in  urinary  organs;  urging  to  urinate;  motion  of
fingers;  chilly  feeling;  increasing  dry  heat  of  body,
with  palpitation  and  thirst;  shivering.

Long  lasting:  coryza;  agonizing  pain  in  rectum  and  anus
after  stool.

of  cheeks,  with  paleness  about  nose  and  mouth.

From  11  to  3  in  the  night:  dyspnoea  with  palpitation  of
heart.

For  a  whole  day :  was  obliged  to  bend  himself  up  and  lie
quite  still,  else  he  was  seized  with  violent  vomiting

From  evening  until  morning:  very  violent  headache;
pain  in  bowels.

Whole  night:  external  dry  heat,  with  violent,  .unquench-
able thirst.


343  COLCHICUM  AUTUMNALE.

Chronic:  asthma.
^^  Locality  and  Direction.  Right:  pupil  dilated;  pain  in
hypochondriac  region,  like  from  incarcerated  flatus;
great  pain,  tenderness  and  swelling  in  ileo-coecal  and
ileo-inguinal  regions;  lancinating-tearing  deep  in  breast
through  to  back;  lancinating  pain,  as  with  a  knife  in
side  of  chest;  at  side,  below  region  of  heart,  severe
pain,  shooting  from  behind  forward;  darting  pains
through  side ;  stitches  in  shoulder ;  trembling  of  hand,
preventing  writing ;  tearing  in  back  of  hand ;  constant
pain  in  thigh  which  has  become  much  emaciated ;  tin-
gling in  big  toe,  as  if  it  would  go  to  sleep ;  burning-itch-
ing over  nail  of  big  toe.

Left:  headache  over  eye;  rending,  tearing,  drawing  pains
in  side  of  head,  from  eyeball  to  occiput;  pupil  con-
tracted ;  ulceration  of  meibomian  glands  of  lower  lid,
which  is  much  swollen;  stye  on  lower  lid  near  inner
canthus;  tearing  in  spermatic  cord;  sharp  rending  pains
along  sternum  and  into  shoulder;  rheumatic  pains  in
loins  and  hips  extending  to  shoulders  and  back;  bubbling
sensation  in  upper  arm ;  tearing  in  tarsus,  in  sole ;  pain
in  big  toe,  as  if  nail  would  grow  into  flesh ;  pain  in  ball
of  big  toe  as  if  inflamed.

From  r.  to  1. :  pressing  pain  in  frontal  region,

1 1  Pain  going  from  1.  to  r.,  in  gout.

Hemicrania,  either  of  r.  or  1.  side,  changing  about.
' From  behind  forward :  severe  pain  at  r.  side,  below  region
of  heart,  shooting.

From  above  downwards:  frequent  shiverings  running
down  back.

Pains  often  change  their  location.
^  Sensations.  As  if  canthus  were  glued  up ;  as  if  ears  were
stopped  up;  as  if  bones  of  face  or  nose  were  being  rent
asunder;  as  if  teeth  were  too  long;  as  if  epigastrium
were  pierced  by  a  knife;  as  if  stomach  was  constantly
icy  cold;  as  if  he  had  eaten  too  much;  as  of  gnawing
hunger,  in  stomach ;  as  if  diarrhoea  would  begin  every
moment;  as  if  abdomen  was  icy  cold  ;  as  if  urine  were
very  warm ;  as  if  urethra  were  raw ;  as  if  all  power  was
going  from  loins,  and  back  was  turning  to  pulp ;  as  if  a
spot  on  sacrum  were  ulcerated;  as  of  bubbling  in  1.
upper  arm ;  as  of  muscular  weakness,  or  paralytic  feel-
ing interfering  with  locomotion;  as  if  he  would  lose
use  of  limbs,  on  attempting  to  walk;  as  if  r.  big  toe
"would  go  to  sleep ;  as  if  nail  on  1.  big  toe  would  grow
into  the  flesh ;  as  if  ball  of  1.  big  toe  was  inflamed ;  as
if  muscles  were  paralyzed.

Pain:  over  region  of  stomach;  in  r.  hypochondriac  region,


COLCHICUM  AUTUMNALE.  344

like  from  incarcerated  flatus;  in  back;  in  upper  portion
of  small  intestines;  in  small  of  back  with  stool;  during
stools;  in  region  of  kidneys;  in  shoulder  and  hip-joints;
in  loins ;  in  r.  thigh ;  in  1.  big  toe ;  in  arms  and  legs ;  in
all  the  bones.

Long  lasting  agonizing  pain  in  rectum  and  anus  after
stool,  causing  screams  and  crying.

Cutting:  in  abdomen;  about  umbilicus;  in  chest.

Lancinating  pain,  as  with  a  knife :  in  r.  side  of  chest.

Lancinating-tearing:  deep  in  r.  breast,  through  to  back.

Lacerating:  on  scalp;  in  elbows,  in  direction  of  upper
arm;  in  finger-joints.

Darting  pains:  through  r.  side;  through  body.

Boring:  headache,  especially  over  eyes.

Stitches :  in  ears ;  in  pit  of  stomach ;  in  posterior  part  of
thorax;  in  pericardial  region ;  in  back;  in  r.  shoulder;
in  skin.

Stitching:  in  abdomen;  between  scapulae;  in  limbs  during
cold  weather ;  in  muscles  and  joints.

Sticking:  in  tongue.

Distressing  pains  in  sticking  shocks  or  jerks,  felt  deep  in
the  soft  parts,  and,  as  it  were,  upon  the  periosteum.

Stinging:  in  region  of  heart;  in  muscles  of  chest.

Sudden  shooting:  in' loins.

Flying  pains:  in  hips.

Tearing:  in  scalp,  on  small  spots,  particularly  on  occiput;
short,  sharp,  in  and  around  eyeball ;  in  ears ;  in  facial
muscles,  moving  from  one  location  to  another;  in  jaws
and  gums ;  in  tongue ;  in  abdomen ;  about  sigmoid
flexure  of  colon;  in  anus;  in  glans  and  1.  spermatic
cord;  in  muscles  of  chest;  in  loins  (sudden);  in  arms,
hands  and  fingers;  in  back  of  r.  hand;  in  thighs,  knee-
joints,  patella,  tibiae,  calves,  ankles,  toes,  tendo  achilles;
in  feet,  particularly  in  heel,  1.  tarsus,  dorsa  of  feet  and  1.
sole;  in  muscles  and  joints.

Tearing,  tensive  pains  over  small  parts,  at  a  time ;  quickly
changing  location.

Shooting-tearing:  in  suffering  parts,  increasing  with  the
fever.

Ren  ding-tearing:  in  1.  side  of  head  from  eyeball  to  occi-
put; in  periosteum.

Drawing-tearing :  in  limbs,  changing  place.

Tearing,  wandering  pains:  in  one-half  of  head,  in  occiput,
in  temples,  in  pericranium.

Rheumatic  and  arthritic  tearing  in  extremities  and  other
parts  of  body,  especially  when  the  weather  is  hot.

Shooting-darting  j3ains  in  muscles,  especially  in  cold
weather.


345  COLCHICUM  AUTUMNALE.

Tearing  twitches :  through  one  side  of  body,  like  electric
shocks,  with  sensation  of  lameness.

Rheumatic  tearing:  in  limbs  during  warm  weather.

Rending  pain:  in  anus;  along  sternum  -and  into  left
shoulder.

Drawing:  in  1.  side  of  head,  from  eyeball  to  occiput;  in
bones  of  face  and  nose;  in  back;  in  toes.

Drawing-digging;  deep  in  orbit,  like  in  sclerotitis.

Racking  pain :  during  respiration.

Forcing  pains :  in  rectum .

Burning :  of  edges  of  eyelids ;  in  tongue ;  in  stomach ;  in
epigastrium ;  in  pit  of  stomach ;  in  stomach ;  in  abdo-
men; in  anus;  in  urinary  organs ;  in  urethra;  in  swell-
ing of  humero-cubital  articulation.

Tickling-burning:  in  urethra.

Burning-itching :  over  nail  of  r.  big  toe.

Smarting:  in  eye,  especially  in  outer  canthus;  of  tongue
and  throat.

Soreness:  of  eyeballs;  in  eyes;  of  septum  of  nose;  in
.  small  of  back ;  of  spot  on  sacrum ;  a^nd  sensitiveness  of
whole  body.

Sore  biting:  in  anus.

Biting:  in  canthi.

Pressing  pain :  in  r.  afterwards  in  1.  frontal  region ;  in
occiput;  in  eyes;  in  abdomen;  in  rectum;  in  cervical
muscles.

Pinching:  in  abdomen.

Gnawing:  in  sternum.

Violent  writhing:  in  region  of  loins  and  urinarj^  passages.

Cramps:  in  stomach;  in  fingers;  in  calves;  in  both  feet,
particularly  in  soles.

Cramp-like  pain :  in  maxillary  joint.

Constriction :  in  ciliary  region ;  of  oesophagus.

Scraping:  in  chest.

Griping:  in  abdomen.

Colicky  pains:  in  abdomen.

Arthritic  pains:  in  limbs;  in  joints.

Rheumatic  pains:  in  neck  and  back;  in  loins  and  hips,
extending  to  r.  shoulder  and  chest;  in  clavicle,  shoulders,
arms,  elbow-joint,  forearm,  wrist  and  ligaments  of  fin-
ger-joints; in  loins  and  legs,  extending  totoes.

Paralytic  pain:  in  arms,  so  violent  that  he  cannot  hold
lightest  string  firmly.

Neuralgic  pains :  in  extremities  and  other  parts.

Drawing  tension:  deep  in  eye.

Tensive  pains:  in  facial  muscles,  moving  from  one  loca-
tion to  another.

Tension :  in  chest ;  in  cervical  muscles ;  between  scapulse ;
in  back ;  in  region  of  kidneys.


COLCHICUM  AUTUMNALE.  346

Faint  aching :  about  navel,  as  if  she  must  eat.

Like  toothache :  pains  in  loins.

Fulness :  of  stomach.

Pressure:  in  head;  in  occiput,  also  deep  in  cerebellum,
excited  by  mental  exertion  or  night  watching ;  in  canthi ;
in  stomach ;  in  small  spots  in  chest ;  in  region  of  heart ;
in  precordial  region ;  in  toes.

Weight:  oppression  in  occiput  during  movement;  in  loins
while  standing,  makes  her  feel  sick  and  good  for  nothing.

Pressive  heaviness :  deep  in  cerebellum.

Heaviness :  of  head ;  of  feet ;  with  the  pains.

Oppression:  of  chest;  in  region  of  heart.

Anxiety:  in  prsecordia.

Confusion :  of  head.

Dulness:  in  sternum.

Pulsations:  in  head;  in  abdomen.

Creeping:  in  forehead.

Shuddering  and  creeping,  in  isolated  parts,  such  as  is  felt
on  getting  cold  from  change  of  weather.

Crawling:  in  nose.

Prickling:  in  hands  and  feet,  as  if  asleep.

Biting-tingling :  in  throat  and  fauces.

Tingling :  in  ears,  as  after  being  frosted ;  in  nose ;  in  face ;
in  anus;  in  tips  of  fingers;  in  r.  big  toe  as  if  it  would
go  to  sleep;  in  toes  like  after  being  frosted;  in  many
parts  of  body,  as  if  frost  bitten;  here  and  there  in  skin,
like  after  being  frosted.

Tickling:  in  throat;  in  fossa  navicularis;  in  trachea.

Weakness:  with  the  pains.

Tiredness:  of  feet.

Frequent  trembling:  through  body.

Uneasiness :  at  epigastrium.

Paralytic  sensation:  in  maxillary  joint;  with  the  pains.

Numbness:  of  tongue;  of  hands  and  feet;  in  small  joints
which  are  swollen  and  stiff.

Stiffness:  in  joints.

Lameness :  through  limbs,  with  great  weakness.

Dryness:  of  ears;  in  mouth;  of  throat;  of  tongue.

Heat :  in  mouth ;  in  pharynx  and  whole  length  of  oesoph-
agus; of  palms  of  hands.

Warm  sensation :  in  mouth.

Cold  sensation :  of  head  and  limbs.

Itching:  in  nose;  in  pharynx;  in  anus;  at  prepuce  and
orifice  of  urethra;  in  larynx  and  trachea;  of  skin,  as  in
nettle-rash.
^  Tissues. ■  Metastasis  to  internal  organs.

I  Dropsy  of  cavities  and  internal  organs,  especially  hydro-
pericardium;  hydrothorax;  ascites;  hydrometra.


347  COLCHICUM  AUTUMNALE.

It  affects  the  urinary  and  digestive  tracts,  and  to  some  ex-
tent the  respiratory  organs.

Useful  in  hemorrhages  from  lungs,  stomach  and  uterus.

Muscular  rheumatism  and  loss  of  muscular  power.

Stands  in  close  relation  to  fibrous  tissues ;  redness,  swell-
ing, heat,  etc.,  not  tending  to  suppuration;  easily  and
quickly  changing  location.

Gout  attacking  many  joints;  muscular  pains  like  torticol-
lis; lumbago;  tearing  pains  in  joints;  pains  in  all  the
bones.

Acts  markedly  on  the  periosteum;  synovial  membranes
of  joints,  especially  the  small  joints;  that  part  of  the
nervous  system  which  presides  over  the  function  of  vol-
untary motion.

General  inflammation  of  the  joints,  with  excessive  hyper-
eesthesia,  slightest  concussion  of  air,  floor,  or  bed,  ren-
ders the  pains  unbearable;  exacerbation  of  fever  and
of  pain  in  evening,  and  at  night  with  copious  sweating ;
secretion  of  urine  diminished,  but  urine  highly  satu-
rated; excessive  thirst,  quickened  respiration,  and  in-
creased strong  beating  of  heart;  large  joints  intensely
red  and  hot ;  smaller  ones  swollen  and  stiff,  with  sensa-
tion of  numbness.

I  I  Acts  more  on  the  small  joints  than  on  the  large.

When  during  the  chronic  form  of  gout  acute  paroxysms
.  set  in,  also  in  metastasis  to  heart.

■Rheumatism :  articular,  acute  or  chronic;  with  or  without
fever;  after  getting  thoroughly  wet;  complicated  with
gastric  affections;  occurring  immediately  after  moist
weather;  in  the  later  stages.

It  hastens  relapses  of  gout  if  abused.

Secretions  of  all  mucous  surfaces  altered  and  increased.

■  Gastric  rheumatic  genus  epidemicus.

iDiphtheritis  of  mucous  membranes  and  submucous  cel-
lular tissue.

I  Emaciation,  oedema,  anasarca,  complicated  with rheu-

matism.

I I  Acute  dropsy,  with  renal  affections.

■  Dropsy  after  scarlatina.

^  Touch.  Passive  Motion.  Injuries.  Touch :  lips  and
face  oedematous  with  great  sensitiveness  to ;  epigastrium
sensitive  to;  distended  abdomen  contracts  spasmodi-
cally from ;  surface  of  abdomen  extremely  sensitive  to ;
unbearable  pain  in  nipples  from  slightest;  soreness  in
small  of  back  from ;  sore  spot  on  sacrum  very  sensitive
to ;  affected  joints  sore  to.
Pressure:  epigastrium  extremely  sensitive  to;  tearing
pain  in  abdomen,  especially  about  sigmoid  flexure  of


COLCHICUM  AUTUMNALE.  348

colon  <  from;  dulness  and  gnawing  in  sternum  >
from  constant;  pain  in  region  of  kidney  <  from ;  painful
swelling  of  humero  cubital  articulation  with  sensitive-
ness to.

Teeth  very  sensitive  when  pressed  together.

Rubbing:  dulness  and  gnawing  in  sternum  >  from  con-
stant.

When  raised:  head  falls  back,  mouth  wide  open.

Slightest  concussion  of  air,  floor,  or  bed  renders  the  pains
unbearable.

Knocking  joints:  arthritic  pains  <  by,  making  patient
scream.

Stubbing  the  toes  hurts  exceedingly.
^^  Skin. I  Delicate  skin.

I  Skin  dry  and  pale;  swollen;  parts  cool  and  glistening.
^Dropsy.

Dryness  of  skin,  particularly  when  accompanied  by  dark,
scanty  urine. ^Dysentery,

■  Hot,  dry  skin. ^Pericarditis.

■  Skin  dry,  sweat  suppressed,  or  profuse  sweating.
I  Stitches  in  skin.

■Tingling  here  and  there,  like  after  being  frosted.
Itching: as in nettle rash;  unchanged by scratching;

with  pinkish  redness  around  joints.
Erysipelas,  smooth.
Purple  efflorescence  on  face,  neck,  and  upper  anterior  part

of  thorax, inside of  thighs, scrotum and groiiis in

patches.
I  (Edematous  swelling  and  anasarca.
^'^  Stages  of  Life,  Constitution, i  Venous  constitutions.

I  Melancholic  temperament.

■  Cachectic  appearance. ^Dysentery. ^Gout.

I I  Uric  acid  diathesis.

■  Emaciated,  sensitive  individuals,  disposed  to  rheumatism

and  catarrh.

■  I  Gout  in  persons  of  vigorous  constitution.

■  Often  indicated  with  old  people.

■Vesical  irritability  depending  upon  gouty  diathesis.

■  Asthmatic  people.

Those  suffering  from  effects  of  night  watching,  and  from

hard  study.
Boy,  £et.  10,  subject  to  frequent  attacks  of  rheumatism,  has

for  last  fourteen  days  been  suffering  from  rheumatic

fever;  pericarditis.
Woman,  set.  22,  of  dissipated  habits,  and  mother  of  three

illegitimate  children;  gout.
Mr.  S.,  caught  cold  by  lying  on  ice  after  violent  exercise

while  skating.


349  COLCHICUM  AUTUMNALE.

Scrofulous  young  man,  set.  27;  dropsy.

M.,  eet.  30,  male;  rheumatism.

Mrs.  N.,  set.  43,  renal  derangement;  relieved.

Woman,  set.  43,  ceased  menstruating  half  a  year  ago;
pleurisy.

Male,  set.  46,  acute  articular  rheumatism.

Woman,  set.  55;  rheumatism.

M.,  male,  set.  56,  of  athletic  build;  inflammation  of  kidney.

M.,  set.  65,  coachman;  rheumatism.

Mrs.  M.,  set.  74;  hemorrhage  from  bowels.

Lady,  set.  85;  ascites.

An  old  lady,  to  all  appearances  in  good  health,  lying  in
bed,  free  from  any  inflammatory  symptoms;  prostration
with  an  anxious  expression.
*^  Relations.  Antidoted  by  Bellad.,  Camphor.,  Coccul.,  Nux
vom.,  Pulsat.,  honey  and  vinegar.  Spigel.,  when  in  heart
affections  patient  feels  as  if  dying.  Copious  draughts
of  ice  w^ater  prevents  its  action  on  the  bowels.  In
poisoning  give  Amm.  caust.  in  sugar  water.

Compatible:  useful  in  dropsy  after  failure  of  Apis  and
Arsen. Carb.  veg.  followed  well  in  ascites. After  Lycop.

Compare:  Aeon.,  Arnic.  (typhus),  Arsen.,  Bellad.,  Bryon.
(gout,  effusions  albuminous  or  serous,  hence,  while
symptoms  express  less  energy  than  Bryon.,  they  are
more  serious);  Cinchon.,  Coccul.,  Mercur.,  Natr.  mur.,  Nux
vom.,  O'pium,  Podoph.  (painless  cholera  morbus) ;  Pulsat.
(derangement  of  stomach  from  eggs) ;  Sepia.


COLLINSONIA  CANADENSIS.  350

COLLINSONIA  CANADENSIS.

Horsebalm,  RicJiweed,  Stone-root.  Labiatse.


An  indigenous  plant,  with  very  hard,  knotty  and  tough  root,  growing  in
woods  from  Canada  to  the  Carolinas;  flowers  from  July  to  September.

A  valuable  remedy,  of  wliich  we  have  but  a  single  proving,  by  Burt.

CiiiNicAL  Authorities. —  Constipation,  A.  L.  Carroll,  N.  A.  J.  H.,  v.  5,  p.
546  ;  H.  N.  Martin,  Trans.  H.  M.  S.  P.,  1882,  p.  205  ;  Hughes,  Eaue's  R.,  1870,  p.
247;  Constipation  during  gestation,  Hem  pel  &  Arndt's  Mat.  Med.,  p.  763;  Hemor-
rhoids (2  cases),  A.  L.  Carroll,  N.  A.  J.  H.,  v.  5,  p.  546  ;  E.  P.  Fowler,  N.  A.  J.  H.,
V.  6,  p.  181  ;  W.  H.  Williamson,  Eaue's  E.,  1874,  p.  202 ;  E.  P.  Fowler,  N.  A.  J.
H.,  V.  6,  p.  182;  E.  C.  Franklin  (several  cases),  A.  0.,  v.  3,  p.  301 ;  Prolapsus  ani,
Capen,  Hempel  &  Arndt's  Mat.  Med.,  p.  764  ;  Varicocele  consequent  upon  constipa-
tion, E.  P.  Fowler,  N.  A.- J.  H.,  v.  6,  p.  82;  Prolapsus  uteri,  with  pruritus  and  dys-
menorrhcea,  F.  G.  Snelling,  N.  A.  J.  H.,  v.  6,  p.  84  ;  Dysmenorrhcea,  E.  T.  Blake,
Eaue's  E.,  1873,  p.  172;  Dysmenorrhcea,  and  menstrual  convulsions,  Krebs,  B.  J.  H.,
V.  23,  p.  672;  E.  P.  Fowler,  N.  A.  J.  H.,  v.  6,  p.  83;  Pruritus  during  pregnancy,
A.  M.  Cushing,  N.  E.  M.  G.,  v.  1,  p.  107  ;  Sympathetic  aphonia,  J.  H.  Marsden,
Trans.  Horn.  Med.  Soc.  Penn.,  1882,  p.  291 ;  Pulmonary  hemorrhage,  C.  Th.  Lie-
bold,  N.  A.  J.  H.,  V.  7,  p.  494.

^  Mind. Is  gloomy  all  the  time  with a  heavy  expression ;

stool  hard  and  difficult.
^  Sensorium. Dizziness, with gastric and hemorrhoidal

troubles.
^  Inner  Head. iDull  pain  in  head. ^Constipation.

I  Dull  frontal  headache,  with  lassitude  and  desire  to  sleep,

or  fulness  in  head  and  throbbing. ^Hemorrhoids.
I  Gastric  and  hemorrhoidal  headaches,  with  dizziness.
I  I  Headache  from  suppressed  hemorrhoidal  discharges.
^^  Taste  and  Tongue, i  Whitish  coating  of  tongue,  with  loss
of  appetite. ^Constipation.
Tongue  coated  yellow  along  centre  or  base,  with  bitter
taste.
^^  Eating  and  Drinking. iLoss  of  appetite. ^Constipation,
^^  Nausea  and  Vomiting, i  Nausea,  with  cramp-like  pains
in  stomach.

■  Nausea,  with  obstinate  constipation,  during  gestation.
Vomiting  with  pain  and  heat  in  stomach.

"  Scrobiculum and Stomach. Constant heaviness in
stomach.

■  Dyspepsia,  with  waterbrash  and  hemorrhoids,  and  weight

in  epigastrium ;  generally  troubles  of  rectum.


351  COLLINSONIA  CANADENSIS.

Sharp  cutting  in  stomach  every  five  minutes  while  sitting.
Spasms  of  stomach,  flatulence,  excessive  appetite.
^^  Abdomen. '  Heavy,  dragging  ache  in  pelvis.  ^Constipation.
I  I  Colic  with  flatulence  and  nausea.

Flatulence  and  rumbling  in  stomach  and  bowels,  with
distension  of  abdomen.

I  Cutting,  colicky  pains  in  hypogastrium,  every  few  min-

utes; must  sit  down;  becomes  very  faint;  cannot  sleep.

■  Congestion  of  portal  system  and  of  pelvic  viscera,  with

flatulent  rumbling  in  stomach  and  bowels;  sluggish
stool  with  distended  abdomen;  piles.
^^  Stool  and  Rectum.  iPure  mucous  stools,  or  mucous  stools
mixed  with  dark  substances;  before  stools  severe  pain
in  lower  part  of  abdomen,  during  stool,  tenesmus;  little
pain  after  stool;  vomiting.  ^Chronic  diarrhoea  of
children.

■  Mucous, watery  stools, with cramp-like or  spasmodic

pains  in  bowels,  vomiting,  flatulence.
Diarrhoea  of  children,  with  colic,  cramps  and  flatulence.

I I  Mucous  or  black  and  fecal  stools,  with  colic  and  tenes-
mus. ^Chronic  diarrhoea  after  confinement.

Loose,  papescent  stool  and  nausea.

■  Four  to  twelve  stools  daily;  two  at  night. /^Chronic  diar-

rhoea of  children.

■  Light  colored,  lumpy  stools,  with  distress  in  anus.
Copious, bilious, yellow stools; mucous bloody,  with .

tenesmus.

■  ■Hemorrhoidal  dysentery  with  tenesmus.

■  Light  colored,  lumpy  stool,  with  hard  straining,  followed

by  dull  pains  in  anus  and  hypogastrium,  lasting  about
half  an  hour.

■  ■Obstinate  constipation  with  hemorrhoids; stools  very

sluggish  and  hard,  accompanied  by  pain  and  flatulence.

■Bowels  not  moved  for  six  or  seven  days,  a  feeling  of  con-
stant pressure  in  rectum,  with  a  heavy,  dragging  ache
in  pelvis.

Constipation  and  hemorrhoids  from  congestive  inertia  of
lower  bowel,  especially  in  pregnancy.

Before  and  after  stool,  severe  pain  in  hypogastrium  and
much  tenesmus.

■  Congestive  inertia  of  lower  bowel.

Weight  or  pressure  in  rectum,  with  intense  irritation  or
itching  there.

■  ■Piles  with  constipation,  or  even  with  diarrhoea,  bleed-

ing, or  blind  and  protruding;  feeling  of  sticks,  gravel  or
sand  in  rectum;  evening  and  night;  >  in  morning.

■  ■Flowing  piles,  hemorrhage  incessant  though  not  profuse,

with  alternate  constipation  and  diarrhoea.


COLLINSONIA  CANADENSIS.  352

1 1  Chronic,  painful,  bleeding  hemorrhoids.

■  Great  itching  or  burning  in  anus;  tumefaction  of  anus

and  rectum.
I  Prolapsus  ani,  with  hemorrhoids,  great  loss  of  blood  and

debility.
Hemorrhages  from  anus,  blood  dark  and  tough,  enveloped

in  viscid  phlegm.
I  I  Chronic  diseases  of  rectum.
^^  Urinary  Organs. '  l  Chronic  nephritis  and  cystitis;  catarrh

of  the  bladder.
Urine  increased.
^^  Male  Sexual  Organs, i  Varicocele,  with  extreme  consti-
pation.
I  I  Spermatorrhoea  kept  up  by  piles  and  constipation.
^^  Female Sexual Organs. l  l  Uterine diseases dependent

upon  diseases  of  rectum  and  bowels.
Prolapsus  or  displacement  caused  by  constipation.
Prolapsus  in  evening,  with  pruritus,  dysmenorrhoea  and

constipation.
Congestion  of  cervix  uteri,  with  painful  hemorrhoids  and

aggravated  constipation.
Menorrhagia,  with  constipation  and  piles.
Amenorrhoea  from  pelvic  congestion.
Obstructive  dysmenorrhoea,  especially  where  there  is  loss

of  appetite,  constipation,  piles  with  or  without  pruritus;

when  pelvic  and  portal  congestion  are  coexistent.

■  Terrible  dysmenorrhoea,  with  hemorrhoids,  constant  di-

arrhoea, and  loss  of  appetite.

■  Convulsions  preceded  by  severe  pain  in  region  of  womb,

amounting  to  twenty  or  more,  in  paroxysms  of  fifteen  to
twenty  minutes  in  duration,  and  requiring  two  or  three
persons  to  prevent  patient  from  hurting  herself;  convul-
sions followed  by  stupor,  lasting  twenty-four  hours  or
more,  from  which  patient  revives  with  a  severe  head-
ache. ^Dysmenorrhoea.

Membranous  dysmenorrhoea.

Leucorrhoea  with  pruritus,  obstinate  constipation  and  dys-
menorrhoea.

■  Pruritus  vulva,  accompanied  by  hemorrhoids.

^*  Pregnancy.  Parturition.  ■Pruritus  in  pregnancy;  vio-
lent itching;  parts  smell  badly,  are  swollen,  dark  red
and  protruding;  she  cannot  lie  down.

■  Pruritus  at  eighth  month  of  pregnancy,  genitals  consider-

ably swollen  and  inflamed,  very  sore,  so  that  she  could
neither  walk,  lie  down,  nor  sit,  except  upon  edge  of
chair;  the  itching  is  intolerable,  making  patient  almost
delirious.

■  Obstinate  constipation  during  gestation.


353  COLLINSONIA  CANADENSIS.

I  Diarrhoea  after  confinement.

^  Voice  and  Larynx.  ■  Voice  reduced  to  a  feeble,  scarcel}^
intelligible  whisper;  very  nervous;  creeping,  chilly  sen-
sation, especially  in  afternoon ;  spasmodic,  crampy  pains
in  abdomen;  frequent  necessity  to  urinate,  with  great
urgency;  sometimes  when  bowels  are  lax,  inability  to
retain  feces;  sensation  of  extreme  tenderness  in  rectum,
with  copious  discharge  of  offensive  muco-purulent  mat-
ter from  that  canal. ^Sympathetic  aphonia.

^^  Respiration. I  l  Dyspnoea,  cough,  with  cardiac  affections.

■  Severe  attacks  of  dyspnoea  with  great  weakness. ^Irri-

tation of  cardiac  nerves.
^^  Cough. I  I  Hard,  shaking  cough,  with  bloody  expectoration.
Cough,  with  expectoration  of  lumps  of  coagulated  blood
enveloped  in  mucus.
^^  Inner  Chest  and  Lungs, i  Hemorrhage  from  lungs,  with
short,  hacking  cough ;  dark,  tough  coagula,  enveloped  in
viscid  mucus;  uneasiness  in  chest  but  no  pain;  bleed-
ing from  rectum  the  first  day;  subsequent  costiveness.
I  I  Pains  in  chest  alternating  with  piles.
^^  Heart, Pulse  and  Circulation, i  Irritation  of  cardiac
* nerves;  cardiac hypersesthesia.
I  I  Periodical  spells  of  faintness  and  oppression ;  attacks  of
syncope  with  fulness  of  chest  and  difficult  breathing ;
heart's  action  rapid,  regular,  or  irregular;  pulse  130  to
140;  slightest  motion  or  excitement  aggravates.

■  Heart's  action  persistently  rapid  but  weak.

■  After  heart  is  relieved,  old  piles  re-appear  or  suppressed

menses  return.

■  Palpitation  in  patients  subject  to  piles,  dyspepsia  and

flatulence.
■Valvular  disease,  following  a  severe  and  prolonged  attack
■  of  acute  rheumatism.

■  Pulse  140  per  minute,  steady  and  quick.  •  ^Irritation  of

cardiac  nerves.

^  Lower  Limbs. ■Inability  to  walk,  must  be  carried  from  the

house  to  carriage. ^Dysmenorrhoea  and  convulsions.

Tearing  in  both  knees,  passing  down  inside  of  legs  to  feet,

while  sitting ;  dull  frontal  headache.

^*  Limbs  in  General. Tearing  pains  in  arms,  hands  and  legs;

frontal  headache.
^^  Rest. Position. Motion. While  sitting: sharp  cutting
in  stomach  every  five  minutes ;  tearing  in  knees,  passing
down  inside  of  legs  to  feet.
Must  sit  down:  on  account  of  cutting,  colicky  pains  in

hypogastrium.
Can  neither  walk,  lie  down,  nor  sit,  except  upon  edge  of
chair,  parts  so  swollen  and  inflamed,  during  pregnancy.
VOL.  IV. — 23.


COLLINSONIA  CANADENSIS.  354

Motion :  syncope  and  oppression  of  chest  <  from  slightest.

^^  Nerves. iThe  slightest  emotion  or  excitement  of  any  kind

aggravate. the  symptoms. ^Irritation  of  cardiac  nerves.

I  Becomes  very  faint,  from  pains  in  hypogastric  region.

I  Periodical  spells  of  faintness  and  oppression. ^Irritation

of  cardiac  nerves.

■  Attacks  of  syncope  with  fulness  of  chest  and  difficulty  of

breathing. ^Irritation  of  cardiac  nerves.

■  Great  debility. ^Prolapsus  ani.

^"^  Sleep. Disposition  to  sleep  during  day.

Sleep  disturbed  by  hypogastric  pains.
^^  Time. In  morning:  piles  >.

In  afternoon:  creeping,  chilly  sensation.

During  day :  four  to  twelve  stools ;  dispositionto  sleep.

In  evening:  jagging  sensation  in  lower  part  of  rectum  and
anus  <;  piles  <;  prolapsus  <.

At  night :  two  stools ;  piles  < ;  sleep  disturbed  by  hypo-
gastric pains.
^^  Attacks,  Periodicity. Constant: heaviness  in  stomach;
pressure  in  rectum ;  hemorrhage  from  piles ;  diarrhoea.

Frequent:  necessity  to  urinate.

Every  few  minutes:  cutting,  colicky  pains  in  hypogastrium.

Every  five  minutes :  sharp  cutting  in  stomach  while  sitting.

Spasmodic:  pains  in  bowels;  crampy  pains  in  abdomen.

Periodical :  spells  of  faintness  and  'oppression.

Lasting  fifteen  to  twenty  minutes:  convulsions.

Lasting  about  half  an  hour :  dull  pains  in  anus  and  hypo-
gastrium.

Jagging  sensation  in  lower  part  of  rectum  and  anus,  <  in
evening,  and  continues  so  until  late  at  night.

Lasting  twenty -four  hours  or  more:  stupor  following  con-
vulsions.

Tor  six  or  seven  days:  bowels  not  moved.

Chronic:  diarrhoea  of  children;  diarrhoea  after  confine-
ment; hemorrhoids;  diseases  of  rectum;  nephritis' and
cystitis.
^^  Sensations.  As  of  sand  in  rectum ;  as  if  sticks  or  gravel
had  lodged  in  lower  part  of  rectum  and  anus ;  as  of  ex-
treme tenderness  in  rectum.

Pain :  in  stomach ;  in  lower  part  of  abdomen,  before  stool ;
in  hypogastrium,  before  and  after  stool;  in  region  of
womb  before  convulsions;  in  chest,  alternating  with
piles.

Cutting:  in  hypogastrium.

Sharp  cutting:  in  stomach.

Tearing:  in  knees,  passing  down  inside  of  legs  to  feet,
while  sitting;  in  arms,  hands  and  legs.

Jagging :  in  lower  part  of  rectum  and  anus.


355  .  COLLINSONIA  CANADENSIS.

Burning:  in  anus.

Soreness :  of  genitals,  during  pregnancy.

Heavy  dragging  ache:  in  pelvis.

Colicky  pains :  in  hypogastrium.

Cramp-like  pains:  in  stomach;  in  bowels;  in  abdomen.

Dull  pain:  in  head;  in  anus  and  hypogastrium.

Pressure:  in  rectum.

Fulness :  in  head ;  of  chest.

Heaviness:  in  stomach.

Weight:  in  epigastrium;  in  rectum.

Throbbing:  in  head.

Distress:  in  anus.

Uneasiness:  in  chest.

Heat :  in  stomach ;  in  anus.

Creeping,  chilly  sensation :  in  afternoon.

Itching:  in  rectum;  in  anus;  of  parts,  during  pregnancy,
making  her  almost  delirious.
**  Tissues. 1 1  Pelvic  and  portal  congestion,  resulting  in  dys-
menorrhcea  and  piles.

Whole  gastro-intestinal  canal  affected,  especially  rectum.

1 1  Dropsy  from  cardiac  disease.
*®  Skin. Yellow  around  the  eyes.

^^  Stages  of  Life,  Constitution.  Young  lady,  subject  to  at-
tacks at  each  menstrual  period,  for  four  years ;  dysmenor-
rhoea  and  menstrual  convulsions.

Mrs.  B.,  at  eighth  month  of  pregnancy;  pruritus.

Mrs.  B.,  set.  29,  at  sixth  month  of  pregnancy,  suffering  as
she  had  previously  done,  under  same  circumstances,
from  obstinate  constipation.

Wm.  C,  set.  36,  short  in  stature,  very  scrawny  and  sallow,
of  a  nervous  temperament,  spinner  by  occupation,  wore
a  truss  supporting  abdomen  and  allowing  bowels  to  rest
"  upon  an  ivory  ball ;  prolapsus  ani.

Woman,  set.  59,  suffering  previously  from  pelvic  pains,  re-
lieved by  Aloes;  constipation.

Gentleman,  light-complexioned,  thin,  nervous  and  dyspep-
tic; flowing  piles.

Engineer,  extreme  bilious,  nervous  temperament,  suffering
somewhat  from  effects  of  Mexican  climate;  varicocele.
*^  Relations. Antidoted  by :  Nux  vom.

Was  used  with  benefit  in  a  case  of  cardiac  disease,  in  which
Digit.,  Cactus,  and  other  remedies  failed.

With  Aloes,  cured  a  case  of  pelvic  congestion.

With  Conium  cured  a  case  of  pulmonary  hemorrhage.

Compare:  JEsc.  hipp.  (piles);  Aloes  (proctitis  and  rectal
dysentery);  Coloc.  (colic);  Hamam,.;  Nux  vom.;  Sulphur,
also  Arnic,  Diosc,  Hydrast.  and  Ignat.

Cured  colic  after  Coloc.  and  Nux  vom.  failed.


COLOCYNTHIS.  356

COLOCYNTHIS.

Squirting  Cucumber.  Cucurhitacese.

An  annual  resembling  the  common  watermelon ;  herbaceous  stems,  with
rougli  hairs,  trail  upon  the  ground,  or  climb ;  flowers  yellow ;  fruit  globular,  of  the
size  of  a  small  orange,  yellow  and  smooth  when  ripe,  containing  within  a  hard
coriaceous  rind,  a  white,  spongy,  medullary  matter,  enclosing  numerous  ovate,
compressed,  white  or  brownish  seeds.  The  plant  is  a  native  of  Turkey,  and
abounds  in  the  islands  of  the  Archipelago.  It  grows  also  in  various  parts  of
Africa  and  Asia. — Horn.  Pharmacopoeia.

Proved  by  Hahnemann,  Aegidi,  Stapf,  Eiickert,  Austrian  provers  and  others.
See  Encyclopedia,  v.  3,  p.  477.

Clinical  Authorities. — Headache,  Sear]e,  Eaue's  R.,  1871,  p.  178;  Atto-
myr,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf.,  v.  1,  p.  174 ;  Schindler,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf,  v.  1,  p.  174;  Haustein,'
Riick.  Ki.  Erf.,  V.  1,  p.  175;  Violent  headache  for  ninety  hours,  M.SS. ;  Choroiditis^,
Payr,  Eaue's  E.,  1870,  p.  110;  Hom.  Clinics,  Case  311;  Arthritic  ophthalmia,  Schu-
ler,  B.  J.  H.,  v.  6,  p.  350;  Rheumatic  inflammation  of  eye,  Haustein,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf.,
V.  1,  p.  288;  Schiller,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf.,  v.  1,  p.  301 ;  Tic  douloureux,  J.  N.  Nankivell,
Eaue's  E.,  1870,  p.  291  ;  Faceache  (2  cases),  Gaspari,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf.,  v.  1,  p.  423;
Facial  neuralgia,  H.  Lehmann,  Hom.  Clinics,  Case  161 ;  Facial  neuralgia  and  tooth-
ache, Sybel,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf,  v.  5,  p.  184;  Neuralgia  of  infraorbital  nerve,  Gerson,  B.
J.  H.,  V.  20,  p.  415;  Acute  gastritis,  Watzke,  B.  J.  H.,  v.  25,  p.  561;  Colic  before
me?ises,  Weinke,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf,  v.  2,  p.  229;  Hechenberger,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf.,  v.
2,  p.  295;  Colic  with  kidney  complications,  ^g.,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf,  v.  1,  p.  15;  Colic,
C  M.  Conant,  Eetrospect,  1875,  p.  73;  H.,  Euck.  KI.  Erf,  v.  1,  p.  750;  Ng.,  Euck.
Kl.  Erf.,  V.  1,  p.  750;  Eiickert,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf,  v.  1,  p.  750;  Bethmann,  Eiick.  Kl.
Erf.,  V.  1,  p.  751;  Chapman  (3  cases),  B,  J.  H.,  v.  7,  p.  513;  Kock,  Allg.  Horn.
Ztg.,  1881,  p.  171;  Garay,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf,  v.  5,  p.  307;  A.  E.  Hawkes,  Eaue's  E.,
1875,  p.  145;  Periodic  neuralgic  colic,  GouUon,  Jr.,  B.  J.  H.,  v.  34,  p.  166;  Neural-
gia of  solar  plexus,  F.  C.  Winter,  N.  A.  J.  H.,  v.  1,  p.  344;  Lead  colic,  Spech,  Eiick.
Kl.  Erf,  V.  5,  p.  365;  Colicodynia,  J.  A.  Terry,  N.  A.  J.  H.,  v.  25,  p.  314;  Chronic
catarrh  of  colon,  with  paroxysms  of  colic,  Kafka,  Eaue's  E.,  1871,  p.  116;  Abdominal
inflammation  after  falling,  Ng.,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf,  v.  l,"p.  124;  Peritonitis,  Hirsch,
Eaue's  E.,  1872,  p.  155;  Paralysis  of  rectum.  Gross,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf,  v.  1,  p.  1007;
Chronic  morning  diarrhoea,  Veith,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf,  v.  5,  p.  413 ;  Chronic  diarrhcea,
J.  C.  Neilson,  N.  E.  M.  G.,  v.  5,  p.  330  ;  Dysentery,  Edmundson,  Eaue's  E.,  1874,  p.
174;  C.  Dunham,  Eaue's  E.,  1870,  p.  212;  Villers,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf,  v.  5,  p.  443;
Acute  catarrh  of  bladder  (3  cases),  Schron,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf,  v.  2,  p.  15 ;  Diabetes,  Eaue's
E.,  1874,  p.  211 ;  J.  B.  Wood,  Hah.  M..  v.  15,  p.  629 ;  Chyluria,  Bute,  Eiick.  Kl.
Erf,  V.  2,  p.  50;  Paraphimosis,  F.  C.  Winter,  N.  A.  J.  H.,  v.  1,  p.  345;  Ovarian
tumor,  C.Dunhsiin,  Eaue's  E.,  1870,  p.  245 ;  Gilchrist,  Eaue's  E.,  1874,  p.  229;
Ovarian  cyst  {2  cases),  Dunham,  Gilchrist,  Gilchrist's  Surgery,  p.  159;  Abortion
with  suppressed  lochia,  Attomyr,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf.,  v.  2,  p.  447 ;  Lumbago,  Schelling,
Euck.  Kl.  Erf,  v.  5,  p.  877; Coxalgia,  Stapf,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf,  v.  3,  p.  613;  Becker,


357  COLOCYNTHIS.

Riick.  Kl.  Erf.,  v.  3,  p.  514  ;  Sciatica,  Lilienthal,  Organon,  v.  3,  p.  357  ;  Pereire,
Riick.  Kl.  Erf.,  v.  3,  p.  514;  Deck,  Raue's  R.,  1864,  p.  261;  Ischias  (9  cases),
Riick.  Kl.  Erf.,  v.  5,  p.  896 ;  (5  cases),  C.  F.  Winter,  N.  A.  J.  H.,  v.  1,  p.  340 ;  .(2
cases)  Eidherr,  B.  J.  H.,  v.  19,  p.  133  ;  Bohm,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf.,  v.  3,  p.  514;  P.wtis,
Hoffendal,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf.,  v.  3,  p.  580 ;  Luxatio  spontanea,  Genzke,  Riick.  Kl.
Erf,  V.  3,  p.  573 ;  Rheumatism,  Y.,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf.,  v.  3,  p.  514 ;  Rheumatic  pains,
Riickert,  Organon,  v.  3,  p.  269.

^  Mind. Weak  memory.

I  Confusion  in  1.  side  of  head,  with  pressing,  burning  pain
in  1.  orbit,  temple  and  nose,  on  dorsum  nasi,  and  in
upper  teeth.

■  Delirium  alternating  with  sopor,  with  constant  desire  to

escape,  eyes  half  closed. ^Abortion.
Depressed  and  joyless;  disposition  to  cry  and  weep.
I  Complaining  bitterly  day  and  night.

■  Screaming  from  pain. ^Peritonitis.

■  Walks  about  the  room  in  great  anxiety. ^Headache.

■  Disinclined  to  talk,  to  answer,  or  see  friends.

■  Extreme  anxiety.

Extremely  irritable  and  impatient;  nothing  seems  right;

gets  angry  on  being  questioned.
■Morose  mood;  becomes  offended  at  everything.
I  Anger,  with  indignation  and  extreme  irritability;  throws

things  out  of  his  hands.
Indignation,  with  silent  internal  grief.

■  ■  Affections  from  anger,  with  indignation,  particularly

vomiting  and  diarrhoea,  also  suppression  of  menses.
^  Sensorium. Giddiness,  with  slight  delirium  and  deafness.

■  ■  Vertigo:  when  quickly  turning  head,  as  if  he  would  fall;

tottering  of  knees ;  from  stimulants.

■  Intimations  of  vertigo  and  nausea.

■  iDulness  of  head  and  giddiness,  at  beginning  of  colic.

■  Confusion  of  head :  in  frontal  region,  with  pressure  in  or-

bits; in  1.  side  of  head.
^  Inner  Head. ■Violent  shooting  or  stitching  pain  in  fore-
head and  eyes,  from  out  in,  sometimes  lessening  for  a
few  minutes,  but  returning  afterward  harder,  day  and
night.

■Sudden  sticking  pain  in  forehead,  towards  nose.

Rheumatic  inflammation,  with  terrible  burning,  cutting
pains,  which  extend  into  head,  particularly  into  fore-
head.

Drawing  pain  in  whole  brain,  becoming  pressive  in  fore-
head, <  on  moving  eyebrows.

■  Tearing  or  pressing  pain  in  forehead  and  root  of  nose;

as  if  a  coryza  would  appear.

■  Pressive  frontal  headache,  <  stooping  or  lying  on  back.


COLOCYNTHIS.  358

■  Sensitiveness  of  head,  during  whole  day,  as  though  it

were  compressed;  especially  in  forehead  and  temples.

■  Tensive  pain  in  forehead.

I  Aching  in  forehead,  <.by  bending  forward.

■  Heaviness  and  stupefaction  of  forehead.
I  Pressure  in  both  temples.

I  Boring  stitches  in  r.  temple,  disappearing  on  touch.

■  Severe  burning,  boring  pain,  on  r.  side  of  forehead.
I  Boring  and  drawing  in  r.  side  of  head,  in  forehead,

■  Pressing  and  dull  throbbing  in  1.  temple,  grows  gradu-

ally acute  and  cutting.
Pulsation  in  1.  temple  with  violent  pressure.

■  Tearing  in  1.  side  of  forehead.

■  Periodical,  tearing,  stitching,  jerking  headache,  occurring

daily,  half  an  hour  after  rising,  in  1.  side  of  forehead.
Hemicrania,  pains  extending  particularly  towards  fore-
head and  1.  side  of  head,  with  nausea  and  vomiting;  at-
tacks come  in  afternoon  towards  evening.

■  Cpnstant  horrible,  gnawing  pains  in  head. ^Arthritic

ophthalmia.

■  Painful  tearing-digging  through  whole  brain,  becoming

unbearable  when  moving  upper  eyelid.

■  Intense  pain  through  whole  head, <  by  moving  eyes.

■  Painfulness  of  whole  head  and  eyes,  very  much  <  by

bending  forward.
'■Severe  pressing,  tearing  headache,  causing  her  to  cry
out;  she  must  sit  up,  is  unable  to  remain  in  lying  po-
sition; bends  herself  double;  with  subsidence  of  pains,
attacks  of  suffocation,  constriction  of  chest  and  anxious
gasping  for  air;  hands  clenched;  attacks  recur  every
hour  or  half  hour.

■  Intermittent  headache  in  those  of  a  rheumatic,  gouty,  or

nervous  diathesis;  the  pains  are  violent,  semi-lateral,
tearing,  drawing  or  crampy;  aching,  compressive  sen-
sation in  forehead,  with  great  anguish  and  restlessness,
obliging  one  to  leave  the  bed.
Severe  headache  with  sweat  on  head  and.  body,  smelling
like  urine,  with  copious  watery  urine  during  pains,  or
scanty  fetid  urine  between  the  paroxysms.

■  Pain,  tearing  and  screwing  together.

■  Congestion  to  head,  with  constant  tearing  pain. ^Ar-

thritic ophthalmia.

■  ■Violent  periodical  or  intermittent  headache.

J  Bilious,  gouty  or  nervous  headaches,  of  excruciating  se-
verity.
"*  Outer  Head. Smarting,  burning  on  scalp,  painful  to  touch.

■  Ptiglit  side  of  head  very  sensitive  to  touch,  particularly

about  the  eye. ^Headache.


359  COLOCYNTHIS.

I  Roots  of  hair  painful.  ' -

I  Head  hot. ^Abortion.
^  Sight  and  Eyes. Eyes  dull  and  swimming ; vision  ob-
scured.

Rheumatic  form  of  iritis;  around  the  cornea  a  bluish-
white  ring;  photophobia;  no  lachrymation ;  tearing
pain  in  eye  and  surroundings;  <  in  evening  and  at
night.

•Severe  burning,  sticking  and  cutting  pains,  extending
from  eye  up  into  head  and  around  eye,  or  else  an  aching
pain  going  back  into  head,  usually  <  on  rest  at  night
and  on  stooping,  >  by  firm  pressure  and  walking  in  a
w^arm  room ;  sensation  on  stooping  as  if  eye  would  fall
out;  lachrymation  profuse  and  acrid.  ^Iritis.  ^Glau-
coma.

I  Inflammation  of  1.  eye,  with  subconjunctival,  venous
hypersemia,  which  anastomosed  with  the  superficial
conjunctival  vessels,  and  with  the  deep  sclerotic  around
cornea;  pupils  dilated,  immovable;  distant  objects  can
be  seen  better  than  near;  aqueous  humor,  slightly  tur-
bid, mixed  with  small  specks  from  the  soft  and  discol-
ored iris ;  bulb  tense,  hot  and  protruding ;  copious  lach-
rymation; at  night,  agonizing,  tearing,  palpitating  and
burning  pains,  with  great  photophobia,  upper  half  of
fundus  seen  as  if  smeared  over,  lower  half  not  transpa-
rent. ^Choroiditis.

■  External  strabismus  of  r.  eye,  with  redness  and  lachry-
mation; eye  diminished  half  in  size,  with  flickering
dimness  of  vision ;  region  around  eye  very  sensitive  to
touch. ^Headache.

■.Periodical  pain  in  r.  eye,  vessels  of  conjunctiva  as  if  in-
jected, redness  of  margin  of  lids,  lachrymation;  eye
appears  smaller;  upon  stooping  sensation  as  if  eye
would  fall  out,  the  pain  begins  with  stitches  in  forehead
above  eye,  the  tearing  pain  in  eye  extends  to  r.  temple
and  is  <  from  shaking  head,  coughing,  looking  at  the
light  and  touch. ^Rheumatic  ophthalmia.

•  Sharp,  cutting  stabs,  as  from  knives,  in  r.  eyeball.

•  Cutting  or  burning  pains  in  eye,  with  much  acrid  dis-

charge from  both  eyes. ^Rheumatic  inflammation.

•  Burning  pressure  in  1.  eye.

•  Painful  pressure  in  eyeballs,  especially  on  stooping.
Pressing  pain  in  1.  orbit  along  dorsum  of  nose,  >  by  sit-
ting down.

Pain  as  if  eyeballs  were  pressed  from  above  downwards,
Pressive  feeling  in  orbits  near  ro.ot  of  nose,  with  confusion

in  head  and  chilliness.
In  evening,  pressive  pain  in  r,  eyeball  from  above  and


COLOCYNTHIS.  360

outside,  <  by  wiping  with  finger;  eyeball  feels  harder

at  that  part.
1  Smarting  in  eyes;  painfulness  of  the  balls.
Pale  inflammatory  redness  in  eyeball.

■  Violent  pains  in  eyeball,  which  precede  full  development

of  arthritic  ophthalmia.
Inflammation  of  conjunctiva,  here  and  there  tendency  to

ulceration.
Great  itching  in  r,  eyeball,  compelling  him  to  rub.
Dry  feeling  in  eyes,  in  evening.
Prickling,  burning  pain  in  r.  inner  canthus.

■  Eyelids  burn,  even  after  sound  sleep.
Drawing  in  upper  r.  eyelid,  or  annoying  twitching.

I  Discharge  of  acrid  fluid  from  eyes.  /yArthritic  ophthalmia.

■  Severe,  cutting,  stitch-like  ciliary  neuralgia,  >  by  firm

pressure  and  while  walking  in  the  warm  room ;  <  by
rest  at  night  and  when  stooping.
^  Hearing  and  Ears. ■  Constant  roaring  and  throbbing  in
both  ears,  especially  the  left.
Pulsation  and  rushing  in  ears.

■  Crawling,  itching,  stitching,  cutting  or  aching  in  ears,

>  by  putting  fingers  into  ear.
''  Smell  and  Nose. ■Sense  of  smell  impaired. ^Headache.

■  Throbbing,  burrowing  pain  in  nose,  from  1.  side  to  root

of  nose.
Beating  and  digging  pain,  from  1.  side  of  nose  to  glabella.

■  Nose  stopped  up. ^Inflammation  of  eye.

■  Fluent  coryza,  <  in  open  air,  >  in  room. ^Headache.

■  Purulent  nasal  discharge. ^Rheumatic  ophthalmia.

^  Face. ■Expression  of  face. anxious;  despondent. ^Chronic
diarrhoea.
■Sallow  complexion,  with  expression  of  suffering.  ^Ovarian
tumor.

■  Face  distorted. ^  Colic.

■  Deathly  color  of  face,  with  colicky  pains  in  bowels.

■  Face  pale,  hot  and  sunken,  or  red  and  purple. ^Colic.

■  Hot  head,  red  face,  glistening  eyes.

■  Face  dark  red  or  pale,  relaxed  muscles  and  sunken  eyes.

■  Cheeks  cold. ^Peritonitis.

■  Tearing  in  cheeks.

■  Transient  stitches  in  upper  jaw  frequently  recurring.

I  I  After  feeling  of  heat  in  face  and  forehead,  there  occurs,
extremely  tiresome,  aching,  pinching  pain,  which  pro-
duces twitching  in  lower  lid,  dazzling  before  eyes  and
diplopia;  attacks  often  lasted  several  hours  and  left  be-
hind dull  frontal  headache. ^Infraorbital  neuralgia.

■  Right  side  of  face,  temple,  ear,  eye  and  sometimes  side

of  neck  attacked. ^Tic  douloureux.


361  COLOCYNTHIS.

■  Sensation  as  if  1.  side  of  face  were  being  torn  from  r.  side.
■Tensive,  tearing  pain,  with  heat,  swelling  and  redness

especially  of  1.  side,  <  from  touch  or  motion,  >  in  per-
fect rest  and  from  external  application  of  warmth.

■  Neuralgia  of  1.  face,  supra  and  infraorbital  regions  ex-

quisitely painful;  attacks  come  suddenly  at  10  p.m.;  the
pains  shooting  from  these  parts  to  1.  ear  and  down  1.
side  of  neck;  cannot  lie  in  bed,  must  get  up  and  walk
about;  >  from  walking  in  open  air;  great  tenderness
of  affected  parts;  dim  sight  and  profuse  lachrymation
of  1.  eye.

■  Shooting,  rending  pains  in  1.  side  of  face,  between  temple,

ear  and  jaw,  at  first  slight  and  intermittent,  but  gradually
increasing  in  severity  and  frequency,  until  they  were
accompanied  by  nausea,  empty  retching  of  most  dis-
tressing violence,  when  the  pains  in  face  became  almost
insupportable;  paroxysms  lasted  sometimes  for  twenty-
four  hours  and  sometimes  longer,  going  off  gradually
as  they  came  on,  depriving  her  of  sleep  and  rendering
her  unfit  for  work.

■  ■Left-sided  tearing,  or  burning and  stinging  pain,  ex-

tending to  ear  and  head ;  from  catching  cold ;  pain  <
from  least  touch;  patient  cries  out  with  pain  and  is  very
restless.

■  Constriction  and  pressing  in  1.  malar  bone,  extending

into  1.  eye.

■  Pain  from  back  of  1.  ear  to  eye  and  mouth  on  that  side.

■  Neuralgia  in  face,  from  1.  parotid  to  eye.
Pimples  on  face.

^^  Teeth  and  Gums. ■Drawing  and  twitching  toothache.

■  Beating  toothache,  first  in  one,  then  in  another  tooth  of

1.  side.

■  Pain  extends  into  teeth,  where  it  is  of  a  throbbing,  tear-

ing, twitching  nature. ^Headache.

■  Facial  neuralgia  and  toothache,  confined  to  one  side,  in

a  patient  recovering  from  sciatica,  the  pains  periodical
and  very  severe,  coming  three  to  four  times  a  day,  each
attack  lasting  about  an  hour;  toothache,  as  if  tension
were  made  upon  nerves  and  skin  suddenly  relaxed;
pains  extend  over  one  side  of  face  to  ear.
■Pain  in  lower  teeth  as  if  nerves  were  compressed  or
stretched.
"  Taste  and  Tongue. ■Persistent,  bitter,  disgusting  taste.

■  ■Bitter  taste  in  mouth. ^Chronic  diarrhoea.

■  Taste:  bitter,  of  food  and  drink,  less  frequently  off'ensive

or  metallic. ^Headache. ^'Dysentery.
Tongue  rough,  as  from  sand,  ancl  feels  scalded.
■Burning  on  anterior  surface  of  tongue.


COLOCYNTHIS.  362

I  Burning  on  tip  of  tongue.

■  Tongue  feels  burned  and  scalded.
Tongue:  coated  white,  or  yellow;  rough.

^^  Inner  Mouth. Stinging  in  velum  palati  as  from  a  beard
of  grain  sticking  in  it.

■  Dryness  of  mouth,  with  thirst. ^Lumbago.

I  Offensive  smell  from  mouth  from  decayed  teeth. ^Ischias.
.  Burning  of  under  lip,
^^  Throat. Feeling  of  constriction  in  throat,  with  empty  eruc-
tations and  palpitation  of  heart.

■  Dryness,  rawness,  roughness,  or  scraping  in  throat.

"  Appetite,  Thirst. Desires,  Aversions. ■  Canine  hunger,
with  longing  for  bread  and  beer.

■  Diminished  appetite,  without  thirst,  yet  great  inclination

to  drink,  succeeded  by  a  putrid  taste  in  mouth.

■  Appetite  variable,  mostly  poor. ^Ovarian  tumor.

■  Aversion  to  food,  with  scraping  in  throat.

.  ■  Great  emaciation,  though  appetite  is  good;  extreme  thirst,

drinking  much,  during  night  empties  a  pitcher  of  water

and  by morning fills  a  vessel with  urine  greater  in

quantity  than  amount  of  water  consumed. ^Diabetes.

■Violent  thirst. ^Dysentery.

■  Thirst  great,  everything  tastes  bitter,  complete  loss  of

appetite. ^Headache.

■  Burning  thirst. ^Peritonitis.

■  Thirsty,  but  can  only  take  a  spoonful  of  liquid  at  a  time.

^Chronic  diarrhoea.
^^  Eating  and  Drinking. ■Griping  and  flatulence  after  eat-
ing. 6'Sciatica.

■  After  least  food  or  drink,  diarrhoea.

■  Potatoes  cause  bellyache.

■  ■  Colic  from  drinking  while  overheated.

■  ■Coffee  relieves  the  colic.
Beer  intoxicates  easily.

■  Pains  <  from  eating  or  drinking  least  amount.

^'^  Hiccough,  Belching,  Nausea  and  Vomiting. Eructations :
inodorous;  violent;  after  eating  and  drinking;  empty.

■  Nausea  rising  from  stomach.

■  Squeezing  in  intestines  extends  up  into  stomach,  causing

nausea.

■  Nausea,  with  fruitless  efforts  to  vomit,  lasting  until  fall-

ing asleep  and  returning  on  awaking.

■  Nausea  and  vomiting,  with  coldness  of  extremities. ^In-

testinal catarrh.

■  Nausea,  with  greenish  vomiting. ^Chronic  diarrhoea.
Fruitless  efforts  to  vomit.

■  Retching  and  bending  the  body  forward.

■  ■Vomiting  and  diarrhoea  from  anger,  with  indignation.


363  COLOCYNTHIS.

Serous,  bilious  vomiting,  without  nausea.

Vomiting:  of  food  without  nausea;  of  ingesta,  afterwards
of  green  substances,  with  violent  colic ;  of  bitter  tasting,
yellow  fluid ;  of  bile  and  greenish  substances.

■Vomiting  of  a  green,  slimy  fluid. ^Peritonitis.

I  Bilious  vomiting,  during  paroxysms  of  pain. /^Ovarian
cyst.
'^  Scrobiculum  and  Stomach, i  Feeling  of  fulness  in  epigas-
tric region.

I  Griping  in  epigastrium,  after  each  meal,  <  toward  evening.

I  Compressive  sensation  in  epigastrium,  returning  at  short
intervals  and  changing  into  a  sharp  pinching,  with
slight  confusion  of  forehead.

■  Painful griping and movements in  epigastric  region,

followed  by  a  soft  almost  diarrhoeic  stool.

■  Feeling  of  emptiness  in  stomach.

Pressure  in  stomach,  with  sensation  of  hunger.

■  Burning  pain  in  stomach.

■  Cramp  in  stomach  at  night,  relieved  by  belching.

■  Sleepless  from  cramp-like  pressure  in  pit  of  stomach  and

constrictions  of  stomach; this  latter so  sensitive  that
the  lightest  covering  cannot  be  endured.

■  ■Violent  cutting,  tearing  pains,  which  come  from  differ-

ent parts  of  chest  and  abdomen  and  concentrate  in  pit
of  stomach,  >  from  hard  pressure  and  bending  double;
brought  on  by  vexation  and  indignation.
Pain  of  stomach  accompanies  pain  of  teeth  and  head.

■  Pit  of  stomach  very  sensitive  to  touch.

^^  Hypochondria. ■Transient  stitches  in  hepatic  region.

Flying  pains  in  hepatic  region.
^^  Abdomen. ■Epigastrium  and  abdomen  excessively  sensi-
tive and  painful  to  touch. /? Abdomen.

■  ■Abdomen  distended  and  painful;  tympanitic. ^Lead

colic.

■  Constant  rumbling  and  croaking  in  bowels  as  from  frogs;

borborygmus.

■  Movements  are  felt  in  abdomen.

■  Incarcerated  flatus.

■  Colic  preceded  by  discharge  of  flatus.

■  Each  paroxysm  of  pain  in  abdomen  is  attended  with  a

general  agitation  and  a  chill  ascending  from  hypogas-
trium. ^Colic.

■  Colic  preceded by pressure upon sides of abdomen,

which  spread  towards  stomach,  also  pressure  upon  chest,
going  upward  and  spreading  about  neck.

Pending,  tearing  pain  extending  up  to  r.  mamma.

Constrictive  pain  in  upper  part  of  abdomen,  returning
at  short  intervals  and  passing  into  sharp  griping.


COLOCYNTHIS.  364

1 1  Contractive,  twisting  pains  about  umbilicus,  spreading
afterwards  over  whole  upper  part  of  abdomen,  leaving
lower  portion  perfectly  free  of  pain,  this  lasting  about

.  an  hour,  and  followed  by  a  copious  evacuation  from
bowels,  with  immediate  relief  of  pains,  the  relief,  how-
ever, is  but  temporary;  sharp  pains  soon  return  and
last  until  another  discharge  takes  place,  this  is  again
followed  by  the  pains  and  continues  all  night,  stools
driving  her  out  of  bed.

■  Violent  colic  around  navel,  with  inflammation  of  abdo-

men ;  fulness  of  epigastric  region,  nausea  and  vomiting,
frequent  eructations  and  constipation.  ^Neuralgia  of
solar  plexus.
1 1  Severe  colicky  pains,  most  around  navel,  and  radiating
from  that  point;  has  to  bend  double,  being  <  in  any
other  posture ;  great  restlessness  and  loud  screaming  on
changing  position ;  <  at  intervals  of  five  or  ten  minutes ;
from  eating  fruit.

■  Violent  colicky  pain  near  umbilicus,  at  times  a  small

quantity  of  fecal  matter  in  the  stools. ^Dysentery.
■Colic,  spreading  from  navel,  >  from  frequent  discharge
of  flatus.

■  Constant,  violent,  bruised  pain  in  umbilical  region,  in  a

spot  as  large  as  a  hand,  <  by  walking,  not  from  press-
ure, somewhat  >  after  eructations  of  gas.
■Griping  in  umbilical  region,  gradually  subsiding,  then
returning  and  rapidly  changing  into  cutting,  as  if  a
chisel  was  thrust  deep  into  upper  abdomen,  thence
passing  in  a  curve,  backward  and  downward  into  pelvis,
and  then  cutting  its  way  upward  again.

■  i  Griping  and  cutting  in  umbilical  region,  <  after  stool,

with  chilliness  over  whole  body.

■  Cutting  and  constrictive  pain  in  umbilical  region  after

eating.
Feeling  at  umbilicus  as  after  taking  cold.

■  Sensation  of  inflation  in  umbilical  region,  with  compres-

sion in  throat,  and  nausea.
Tenderness  of  umbilical  region  with  swelling.

■  Pain  from  three  inches  below  navel  to  pit  of  stomach,

cramp-like;  sensitive  to  touch,  <  4  to  9  p.m.,  with
vomiting  and  sleepiness;  <  after  eating  and  walking;
>  in  morning  from  hot  tea  and  pressure. ^Colicodynia.

■  Twisting  stitches from umbilical  region  towards  loins

and  spine.

■  ■Pinching  pain  in  abdomen  as  if  bowels  were  pressed

inward,  with  cutting  extending  towards  pubic  region,
so  severe  below  the  navel  that  the  muscles  of  face  are
distorted  and eyes drawn together; pain  only  >  by


365  COLOCYNTHIS.

pressure upon bowels with the hands and  bending

inward.
1 1  Isolated  deep  stitches,  sometimes  in  left,  at  others,  right

flank,  apparently  connected  with  the  ovaries.
I  iColic-like,  spasmodic  pain  after  vexation.

I  Cramping  pain,  causing  her  to  draw  her  lower  limbs  up

to  abdomen,  with  restlessness,  moaning  and  lamenting,
<  by  eating  or  drinking.

■  Drawing,  tearing,  pinching  pains  in  whole  abdomen.
Cutting,  lancinating  pains  flying  all  over  abdomen.

I I  Colic  so  distressing  that  they  seek  relief  by  pressing  the
corner  of  a  table  or  head  of  bed-post  against  abdomen.

1 1  Neuralgic  pain  in  bowels ;  obstruction  as  from  dryness  of
bowels;  sensation  of  increasing  constriction.

1 1  Feeling  in  whole  abdomen,  as  if  the  intestines  were
being  squeezed  between  stones,  and  would  burst.

llCutting  in  abdomen,  as  from  knives. ^Lead  colic.

I  Pain  as  if  bowels  were  in  a  vice,  with  cutting  pain  down-
wards.

■  Intense  griping,  cutting,  or  squeezing  in  intestines,  com-

ing up  into  stomach  and  causing  nausea,  or  extending
down  into  thighs.

■  Colicky  pains  in  abdomen,  constant  inclination  to  vomit,

sleeplessness,  vomiting  of  bile  without  relief,  violent
fever,  skin  hot  and  dry,  pulse  hard  and  quick,  intoler-
able cutting  pain,  first  here  then  there  in  abdomen,  in-
teguments of  which  are  very  sensitive  to  touch,  >  from
drawing  up  feet,  bitter  taste  in  mouth,  dislike  to  water.
^Acute  gastritis  after  taking  cold.

■  Periodical  neuralgic  colic,  coming  every  morning  at  6

o'clock;  the  abdominal  walls  feel  as  if  festering,  and
the  pain  spreads  out  in  rays  to  all  sides.
■Severe  colic  in  lower  part  of  abdomen;  came  on  in
spasms,  each  lasting  about  half  a  minute,  between  the
paroxysms  no  pain,  <  when  lying  on  either  side  and
after  eating,  >  when  lying  on  back  and  bending  double.

■  Paroxysmal  griping  pains  in  bowels,  doubling  him  up,

with  profuse  warm  sweat  on  forehead  and  neck.  ^Colic.
■Sharp,  cutting  abdominal  pains;  pain  in  abdomen  upon
straightening  up;  walks  bent  with  hands  pressed  to
painful  side;  attacks  of  excruciating  pain,  cutting  and
griping,  obliging  to  bend  double  and  scream  with  agony,
during  paroxysms,  bilious  vomiting. ^Ovarian  cyst.

■  Chronic catarrh of colon, with paroxysms of colic;

usually  after  vexation,  violent  colicky  pains  along  colon,
frequent  watery  discharges  from  bowels,  tenesmus,  nau-
sea, vomiting,  coldness  of  extremities  and  cold  perspira-
tion; during  severe  spells  intestines  appear  distended
or  drawn  into  knots.


COLOCYNTHIS.  366

I  Sudden  severe  pains  in  abdomen  after  catching  cold.
•  Gnawing,  boring  pain  in  abdomen,  <  after  dinner,  must
sit  down  or  lie  and  bend  forward.

■  Deep  seated  pulsation  in  abdomen  when  lying  down.

I  Pains  in  abdomen  extending  to  small  of  back. /9Colic.

I A  violent  cutting  like  an  electric  shock  darting  through
whole  abdomen  to  anus.

I  After  falling,  abdomen  large  and  tense,  only  1.  side  pain-
ful to  touch,  with  sensation  as  if  a  tear  had  occurred
there,  paroxysmal  pains  every  two  hours,  pain  extend-
ing toward  r.  side  of  abdomen  and  to  pubis,  where  a
hard  body  as  large  as  a  nut  had  appeared-  this  tumor
upon  being  pressed  back  did  not  again  appear ;  menses
have  not  appeared  for  some  time.

I  Well  defined  tumor  in  r.  iliac  fossa  as  large  as  a  cocoanut,

of  elastic  feel  but  hard  and  immovable;  at  times  severe
cutting  pain  like  a  stab  in  tumor,  causing  her  to  bend
double  and  scream  and  toss  about  in  agony,  with  bilious
vomiting;  <  heat  and  warm  weather;  >  open  air

■  Tension  in  region  of  anterior  superior  spine  of  ilium,

changing  next  day  to  a  violent  drawing  from  spine  of
ilium  to  inguinal  region  and  upper  third  of  inner  sur-
face of  thigh. .

I I  Pain  in  groin,  like  from  hernia,  and  on  pressure,  sensa-

■  tion  as  if  a  hernia  were  receding.

■  Tenderness  over  1.  inguinal  region,  with  intense  cramp-

like pains  passing  around  to  back. ^Chronic  diarrhoea.

■  Tight,  cramp-like  pain  in  1.  iliac  and  inguinal  region,

which  is  <  after,  not  during  external  pressure;  espe-
cially observed  in  women  after  excessive  venery,  after
indignation,  abuse  of  opium ;  >  for  a  while  by  a  cup
of  coffee.
Hemorrhoidal  colic,  with  sensation  as  if  bowels  hung  on
easily  tearing  threads.

■  Pains  at  beginning  of  attack,  >  by  pressure,  later  <

from  pressure. ^Lead  colic.
■Pain  in  bowels  immediately  on  taking  only  a  few  steps.

■  Colic  only  when  walking.

■Pains  >  by  motion,  such  as  twisting,  turning  and  wrig-
gling around,  and  the  motion  is  kept  up  steadily  while
the  pain  lasts;  child  writhes  in  every  possible  direction,
doubles  itself  up,  and  seems  in  great  distress,  it  cries
very  hard.

■  Colicky  pains  >  by  lying  on  stomach.
Rheumatic  colicky  pains  <  from  eating.

■  Coffee  and  tobacco  smoking,  >  pain  in  bowels.

^°  Stool  and  Rectum. Noisy  emission  of  large  quantities  of
flatus.


367  COLOCYNTHIS.

1 1  Diarrhoea  from  anger  with  indignation.

I  Urging  to  stool,  with  constant  colic'

■Excessive  urging  to  stool,  which  was  copious,  yellowish-
brown,  partly  thin,  as  from  a  purge,  and  with  a  sourish,
offensive  odor,  followed  by  transient  relief  of  the  colic.

I  Urgent,  almost  irresistible  inclination  to  stool,  and  in
quick  succession,  two  abundant,  first  pappy,  then  fluid,
evacuations,  with  ulcerative  pains  in  bowels,  >  by  bend-
ing forward,  <  by  an  upright  position.

■  Griping  was  relieved  by  straining  and  the  consequent

expulsion  of  a  long  train  of  slippery  bubbles  of  wind
and  a  small  quantity  of  bland  mucus;  paroxysms  at
intervals. of  from  five  to  fifteen  minutes;  finally  a  very
painful  expulsive  pressure  ensued,  and  in  a  short  time
a.  quantity  of  thin  feces  passed  involuntarily  through
the  sphincter  at  a  single  impulse;  it  was  perfectly  bland,
causing  no  burning  or  smarting  at  anus,  which  was
rather  protected  all  about  by  the  slippery  mucus  of
which  a  great  portion  of  passage  consisted ;  pains  in  ab-
domen all  disappeared  with  this  passage.

I  Sudden  tenesmus,  soon  followed  by  a  copious,  pappy
evacuation,  succeeded  by  griping  and  sensation  as  if
taking  cold  in  abdomen.

■Violent  tenesmus,  with  pappy,  copious,  strong  smelling
stools,  which  an  hour  later  were  watery,  scanty,  yellow,
and  almost  inodorous.

■Stools:  copious  fecal,  accompanied  by  great  discharge  of
wind;  fluid;  after  eating,  with  discharge  of  flatus  and
painful  feeling  in  abdomen ;  >  after  getting  warm  in
bed;  ■thin,  frothy,  saff'ron  yellow,  greenish-yellow,  of
musty  odor;  slimy,  bloody,  like  scrapings  of  bowels,
with  tenesmus  during  stool;  relief  of  pain  after  stool;
bloody;  bilious;  watery;  sour;  putrid  smelling;  brown-
ish-yellow; liquid;  first  watery  and  mucous,  then
bilious,  and  lastly  bloody;  thin,  mucous  (painless),  un-
digested; excoriating;  frequent,  not  profuse;  green,
slimy,  with  straining;  pappy;  sour,  putrid;  musty,  like
brown  paper,  burning.

■  Child  has  colic,  >  by  carrying  on  stomach;  stools  during

or  right  after  nursing,  and  undigested;  stools small,
bilious,  frothy,  frequent,  preceded by  severe colicky
pains,  coming  on  in  paroxysms.
Frequent  watery  diarrhoea,  becoming  more  colorless  and
watery  with  every  new  stool.

■  Green,  yellowish,  slimy,  watery  discharges,  streaked  with

pure  blood;  afterwards  burning  and  jerking  in  anus.
■Stools  bloody,  full  of  mucus,  passing  every  half  hour,
great  straining  and  burning  of  anus. ^Dysentery.


COLOCYNTHIS.  868

■Bloody  stools,  with  violent  pain  in  bowels,  extending
down  into  thighs.

■  Dysenteric  diarrhoea,  renew^ed  after  least  food  or  drink;

chronic,  with  slimy  stools,  or  soft,  with  tenesmus,  sedi-
mentous  urine.
■Stools  increased  by  taking  any  nourishment,  with  com-
pressive, griping  pains,  commencing  at  umbilicus  and
passing  down  to  rectum;  stools  greenish  and  frothy,
and  followed  by  burning  at  anus;  tenesmus.

■  Diarrhoea  after  eating  ever  so  little.

■  Fluid  stool  after  eating,  with  discharge  of  flatus  and

painful  feeling  in  abdomen,  >  by  warmth  of  bed.

■  Chronic  watery  diarrhoea,  mornings,  with  pain  in  sides

of  abdomen.

■  Severe  cutting  pain;  doubles  up  and  rolls  all  over  bed,

before  stool ;  green,  slimy  stools  with  straining.

■  The  abdomen  and  thighs  must  often  be  approximated  as

much  as  possible  during  the  stool.

■  The  passages  are  small  and  frequent  with  very  much

pain,  causing  the  child  to  writhe  and  twist  and  double

up  with  every  stool.
Weakness,  paleness  and  prostration  after  stool.
■Stools  either  diarrhoeic  or  too  hard  and  unsatisfactory.

■  Frequent  urging  to  stool  without  any  evacuation.
■Stool  in  single  pieces  of  a  stony  hardness.

■  Intestinal  canal  torpid,  evacuations  hard  and  occurring

once  in  every  two  or  three  days,  contrary  to  usual  habit.

■  Dry  stool. ^Lumbago.

■  Retarded  stool. ^Ischias. ^Headache.

■  Constipation,  stools  hard. ^Colic.

■  ■  Bowels,  after  several  years  use  of  cathartics,  immovably

constipated. ^Ovarian  tumor.

■  Desire  to  go  to  stool  without  evacuation,  quick,  succeeding

ulceration,  cracking  of  bowels.
Difficulty  of  retaining  stool.

■  Involuntary  discharge  of  feces  from  anus,  although  hard

and  well  formed;  while  child  is  standing  or  playing.

^Paralysis  of  rectum.
Darting  in  rectum  alternating  with  stitches  through  the

bladder.
Constriction  of  rectum  during  stool;  discharge  of  blood

from  rectum,  with  stinging,  burning  pain  in  small  of

back  and  anus,  <  in  afternoon  and  evening,  also  during

rest;  >  from  motion.
No  pain  or  constriction  except  on  going  to  stool,  when  the

anus  becomes  painfully  constricted,  pain  running  up

back,  of  a  sharp,  cutting,  lancinating  character.

■  Discharge  of  blood  from  anus,  with  violent  sticking  and

burning  pain  in  small  of  back  and  anus.


369  COLOCYNTHIS.

I  Terrible  colic,  causing  cramping  up  double,  and  great
restlessness,  from  or  on  account  of  hemorrhoids.

I  Painfully  swollen  hemorrhoids,  in  rectum  and  at  anus.

Blood  flows  continuously  from  hemorrhoids  for  a  long
time.

■  Pricking  at  anus,  with  constant  discharge  of  mucus.
Burning,  sticking  and  excoriating  pain  in  anus,  with  dis-
charge of  moisture  from  rectum;  frequent  pressure  at
anal  sphincter,  which  ceases  on  escape  of  mucus.

Burning  and  darting  pains  in  anus.
•  I  Frequent  urging  to  stool,  with  sensation  as  if  anus  and

rectum  were  weakened  by  long  continued  diarrhoea.
Stools  excoriate  anus.

■  Chronic  diarrhoea;  epidemic  dysentery.

^^  Urinary  Organs. Kidney  affections  with  dysuria  or  dropsy.

■Stitching  and  burning  in  region  of  kidneys  and  loins.

■Cutting  pain  extending  from  umbilical  to  ovarian  re-
gion, followed  by  an  urging  to  urinate  with  discharge
of  turbid,  slimy  urine,  which  quickly  deposits  a  mucous
sediment;  labor-like  pains  in  course  of  ureters,  extend-
ing to  upper  part  of  thighs,  followed  by  burning  in
urethra;  constant  cutting  pain  at  region  of  fundus  of
bladder,  with  discharge  of  urine  every  fifteen  minutes.
^Acute  catarrh  of  bladder.

Alternate  stitches  in  bladder  and  rectum.

■  Urging  to  urinate  with  discharge  of  a  great  quantity  of

clear  watery  urine.

■  Frequent  urination.

■  Frequent  tenesmus  vesicae,  with  scanty  emission.
■Sudden  violent  pressure  upon  bladder,  which  was  full,

passed  off  suddenly  on  emission  of  flatus.
Itching  of  orifice  of  urethra,  with  desire  to  urinate.
■  ■Severe  burning  along  whole  urethra  daring  stool.
Burning  in  urethra  after  micturition.

■  Difficult  urination,  with  a  brown  discharge.
Retention  of  urine.

Pain  during  micturition  extends  all  over  abdomen.

I  I  Urine  clear,  like  water. ^Lumbago.

Urine:  scanty  and  fetid;  brown;  bad  smelling;  viscid;
deposits  copious  sediment,  which  becomes  jelly-like;
faint  flesh  colored,  with  light  brown,  flocky,  unequally
translucent  sediment,  and  depositing  small,  hard,  red-
dish crystals,  which  adhere  to  the  vessel  and  are  not
easily  removed  by  water;  gelatinous,  viscid,  jelly-like,
copious  deposits,  sometimes  like  gravel.

■  Increased  secretion  of  urine,  looking  like  brown beer,

which  becomes  turbid  and  deposits  a  copious  sediment
when  cold.

VOL.  IV.— 24.


COLOCYNTHIS.  370

Urine  viscid,  looks  like  and  has  the  consistency  of  thin

glue;  complaints  before  passing  water,  also  after.
Tough  mucous  sediment  in  urine  which  can  be  drawn  out

into  strings.
I  Urine  when  voided  is  white  and  turbid,  when  getting

cold  it  coagulates  and  becomes  a  milk-white,  jelly-like

mass,  which  when  poured  out,  glides  in  a  compact  cake

out  of  the  vessel.
I  Peculiar  milky  urine,  which  coagulates  when  standing.

^Diabetes.
^^  Male  Sexual  Organs. I  Sexual  desire  strong,  with  erections.
Impotence.

Pain  and  swelling  of  testicles  and  spermatic  cord.
Retraction  of  testicles  and  priapasm,  with  retention  of

urine.
Petraction  of  prepuce  behind  glans  during  sleep.
I  Prepuce drawn behind glans, inflamed and  swollen,

violent  pains  both  day  and  night. ^Paraphimosis.
^  Female  Sexual  Organs, l Cramp-like  pain  in  1.  ovarian

region,  as  though  the  parts  were  squeezed  in  a  vice.
■Severe  stitches  in  region  of  r.  ovary,  which  afterwards

becomes  a  burning  pain, ^Colic.

■  Intense  boring  or  tensive  pain  in  ovary,  causing  her  to

draw  up  double,  with  great  restlessness.

■  Deep  stitches  as  from  a  needle,  in  ovaries.

■  Ovaritis  supervening  on  abortion,  stitches  in  ovaries.

■  Swelling  in  region  of  1.  ovary  and  descending  colon,  be-

coming hard  during  the  pains;  parts  very  sensitive  to
touch;  pains  >  by  warm  drinks. ^Colic.

■  A  firm,  elastic  tumor between  uterus  and  vagina  an-

teriorly and  the  rectum  posteriorly,  completely  occluding
vagina  and  rendering  defecation  very  difficult;  par-
oxysms of  acute  pain  across  hypogastrium,  in  sacral
region  and  around  hip-joint  when  attempting  to  walk;
pain  extends  down  groin  and  along  femoral  nerve,  >
by  flexing  thigh  upon  pelvis,  always  induced  or  <  by
extending  thigh,  but  there  are  severe  paroxysms  with-
out any  provocation.

■  Ovarian  cysts,  with  pain  in  abdomen  upon  straightening

up ;  walks  bent,  with  hands  pressed  to  painful  side.

■  Ovarian  neuralgia.

■  Uterus prolapsed, inclined  to  1.  side  from  pressure  of

tumor;  difficult  breathing  with  menses,  during  which
must  remain  in  bed ;  between  periods  has  thick,  yellow,
offensive  leucorrhoea, ^Ovarian  tumor.

■  Metritis, from  indignation;  colicky  pains  bend  her  double;

cutting,  as  from  knives, in  bowels;  great  distress,  disten-
sion of  abdomen;  feeling  as  if  intestines  were  being
squeezed  between  stones.


371  COLOCYNTHIS.

iMenses  preceded  by  cutting  pains  beneath  umbilicus,
extending  towards  groins  and  internal  genital  organs,
>  from  warmth  of  bed ;  with  the  pains  coldness  of  feet
and  pappj'^  stool. ^Colic.

I  Occasionally,  sharp  pain  like  a  stab  in  r.  pelvic  region,
obliging  her  to  bend  double  and  press  strongly  with
her  hand  on  part. ^Ovarian  tumor.

■  Metrorrhagia,  with  cramp-like  pain  in  abdomen;  >  by

pressure  and  hot  drinks.

■  Drawing,  gnawing  pain  in  1.  ovarj^,  extending  towards

stomach,  before  appearance  of  menses,  which  are  profuse
and  too  early.
■Several  days  before  each  menses,  sharp,  darting  par-
oxysmal pains  in  stomach,  making  her  bend  forward
and  press  on  painful  part  to  get  relief,  with  extreme
nausea  and  vomiting;  these  all  ceased  on  appearance
of  menses;  on  last  day  of  menses  pains  returned,  lasting
to  within  about  thirty  minutes  of  end  of  menses,  when
an  erythematous  eruption  appeared  over  seat  of  pain,
itched  intensely  for  thirty  minutes  and  then  suddenly
disappeared;  no  return  of  symptoms  till  next  pre-men-
strual  time.

■  iDysmenorrhoea; cramping pains,  must bend  double,

sometimes  <  after  eating  or  drinking.

■  Catamenia  by  one  or  two  days  too  soon,  dark  colored,

offensive,  accompanied  by  almost  constant  sharp,  cut-
ting pains,  obliging  her  to  bend  double,  screaming  and
tossing  about  in  agony. ^Ovarian  tumor.

■  Menses  regular,  last  two  weeks,  scanty  and  bright  red,

with  cramp-like  pain.

■  Menses  increased,  with  pain  in  1.  foot;  <  before  men-

struation.

■  Menses  increased  and  too  frequent.

■  Difficulty  of  breathing  during  menses. ^Ovarian  tumor.

■  ■Suppression  of  menses,  caused  by  chagrin;  colicky  pains,

with  great  anguish  and  restlessness.

■  Menses  absent. ^Chronic  diarrhoea.

■  Between  menses,  yellow,  thick,  offensive  leucorrhoea.

■  Swelling  of  labia,  with  dragging  pain  and  heat  in  vagina.
May  be  indicated  in  some  cases  of  very  painful  cancer.

21  Pregnancy.  Parturition.  Lactation,  i  During  preg-
nancy, frequent  attacks  of  colic,  which  draw  the  patient
nearly  double.

■  Suppression  of  lochia:  with  violent  colic;  from  anger  or

indignation ;  with  tympanitic  swelling  of  abdomen  and
diarrhoea;  <  after  taking  food  or  drink,  great  restlessness.

■  Suppression  of  lochia,  after  abortion,  from  vexation,  head

hot,  face  dark  red,  tongue  yellow,  epigastrium  and  ab-
domen painful  to  touch. ^Abortion,


COLOCYNTHIS.  372

I  Child-bed  fever  brought  on  by  indignation  or  grief
because  of  unkind  treatment;  the  attacks  commence
with  fainting  spells  and  sleeplessness,  followed  by  a
febrile  heat,  hot,  dry  skin;  hard,  full,  quick  pulse;
stupor  alternating  with  delirium,  open  eyes,  desire  to
escape;  hot  head;  stitches  in  eyes  and  forehead;  dark
red  face;  pain  in  epigastrium  when  touched;  marked
pulsation  of  heart  and  in  all  the  arteries.

'^  Larynx, l Frequent  tickling  and  irritation  in  larynx.

I  Constriction  in  larynx,  which  induces  frequent  deglu-
tition, with  oppression  of  breathing;  >  in  open  air.

"^  Respiration, i  Oppression  of  chest,  <  evenings  and  before
midnight.

■  Difficulty  of  breathing  during  menses. ^Ovarian  tumor.

■  Respiration  anxious  and  oppressed,  with  sensation  as  if

he  were  about  to  smother;  stitches  in  sides  with  each
breath. ^Lumbago.
I  Dyspnoea,  with  constriction  of  chest  and  anxious  respira-
tion. ^Headache.

■  Asthmatic  attacks  at  night,  with  slow,  difficult  breath-

ing, which  provokes  cough.
"^  Cough. ■  Titillating  cough,  frequently  during  night,

■  Dry  cough  from  tickling  in  throat.

■  Cough  caused  by  smoking  tobacco.

■  Cough  with  greenish  expectoration  and  aggravation  of

headache.
^*  Inner  Chest  and  Lungs. ■Oppression  of  chest.

■  Nightly  attacks  of  oppression,  as  if  chest  were  constricted,

■  Stitching  pains  in  r.  or  1.  side  of  chest.

Cutting  and  shooting  pains  in  stomach  extend  to  chest.
^^  Heart,  Pulse  and  Circulation. ■Stitches  in  cardiac  region.
Palpitation  of  heart.

■  Hard,  full  and  hurried  pulse. ^Abortion.

■  Full,  quick  pulse;  great  thirst;  bitter  taste  in  mouth.
Pulse:  generally  full,  hard  and  accelerated;  less  frequently,

sniall  and  weak.

■  Strong  throbbing  in  all  the  blood-vessels.

■  Pulse  weak  and  frequent. 6'Peritonitis.

•  ■Pulse  small,  scarcely  perceptible. ^Colic. ^Lumbago.

■  Pulse  130,  feeble. ^Chronic  diarrhoea.

^^  Neck  and  Back. ■Feeling  of  stiffness  in  muscles  of  nape,
when  moving  head;  drawing  in  nape.
Heat  in  nape  of  neck.

■  Violent  tensive drawing  in  1.  cervical  muscles, <  on

motion.

■  Pressure  in  1,  side  of  nape,  <  from  turning.

■  Drawing  pain,  internally,  in  region  of  r,  scapula,  as  if

nerves  and  vessels  were  made  tense.


373  COLOCYNTHIS.

Rawness  in  r.  shoulder-blade  during  repose.
I  Pain  in  shoulder-blades  and  back,  extending  into  neck,
with  tension.

■  Great  tenderness  on  pressure  over  posterior  spinous  pro-

cesses of  all  cervical  and  first  four  dorsal  vertebrae;
pressure  on  spinous  processes  of  first  three  cervical  ver-
tebrae <  or  brings  on  neuralgic  attack.  ^Neuralgia  of
face.

Weakness  and  pains  in  back,  with  pressing  headache
mornings;  painful  lassitude  in  small  of  back  and  lower
limbs.

I  Pain  in  small  of  back.

■  Severe  stitching  pain  in  small  of  back,  <  from  motion.

^Sciatica.

■  Painful  lassitude  in  small  of  back  and  lower  extremities,

in  evening.

■  Sensation  of  a  heavy  weight  in  lumbo-dorsal  region  >

by  lying  on  1.  side,  with  increase  of  temperature  and
sensibility  of  parts  affected.

■  Pain  in  back  and  small  of  back  which  finally  locates  it-

self in  upper  part  of  thigh  and  buttock,  pain  seems  con-
fined to  a  small  spot  covering  an  area  of  about  an  inch,
making  him  limp;  the  pain  finally  becomes  so  severe
as  the  disease  progresses,  that  he  can  neither  stand  nor
walk. ^Lumbago.

■  Sharp,  cutting  or  lancinating  pain  running  up  back,  with

constriction  of  anus.

■  Tensive  stitch  pain  in  r.  loin,  felt  only  during  inspiration,

and  most  violent  when  lying  on  back.

■  Stitching  pains  in  small  of  back,  so  severe  upon  motion

that  he  gets  upon  arms  and  knees  in  order  to  obtain  re-
lief, pains  unendurable  in  any  other  position;  stitching
and  cutting  pain  in  r.  hip,  extending  down  leg  to  joint,
when  it  becomes  a  severe  tearing  pain ;  upon  remission
of  pain,  limb  is  numb  and  seems  without  sensation.
^Coxalgia.

■  Aching  in  region  of  1.  sacro-iliac  articulation,  with  crawl-

ing in  1.  sole  as  though  it  were  asleep.

■  Cramp-like  pain  in  hip,  from  kidneys  to  thighs,  with  sen-

sation as  if  hip-joint  was  fastened  by  iron  clamps.

■  Continuous  drawing  pains in  r.,  also  in  1.  hip;  lying,

sitting,  standing  and  walking  are  all  painful ;  she  can
find  no  comfortable  position,  especially  at  night  and  in
bed;  walking  difficult,  partly  on  account  of  paralytic
state  of  leg,  and  partly  on  account  of  pain. ^Ischias.

Shooting  pains  in  sacral  region,  so  that  he  must  keep  per-
fectly quiet,  <  from  every  motion.

Severe  burning  along  sacrum.


GOLOCYNTHIS.  374

iCoxalgia;  hip-joint  feels  as  if  femur  were  fastened  to  os

innominatuni  with  iron  claws,  accompanied  by  pains

which dart periodically from sacro-lum,balis muscle

into  thigh.

^^  Upper  Limbs. iSwelling  and  suppuration  of  axillary  glands.

1  I  Pain  in  r.  shoulder-joint,  as  if  it  had  been  bruised,
brought  on  by  vexation.

I  1  Stitches  in  r.  shoulder  towards  back,  with  pain  in
shoulder  on  motion  or  pressure;  great  restlessness  in
arm,  patient  unable  to  hold  it  quiet;  patient  scrofulous.
^Luxatio  spontanea.

iRight  shoulder  and  elbow-joint,  and  the  finger-joints  of
both  hands  painful,  stiff  and  swollen;  pains  sharp  or
sore. ^Rheumatism.

I  Rheumatic  pains  through  arms.

I  Hands  feel  stiff".

I  Tearing-drawing  in  1.  arm,  down  to  finger-joints.

I  Pain  in  palms,  as  if  muscles  were  contracted.

■  Tearing  in  joints  of  1.  hand.

I  Tensive  pain  in  1.  thumb,  impeding  motion.

Violent  drawing  pain  in  r.  thumb,  like  in  the  tendons,  be-
ginning in  ball  and  passing  off"  at  tip.

Pain  in  palms  of  hands,  as  if  the  muscles  were  contracted
and  hand  and  fingers  could  not  be  opened ;  <  when  at
rest.

Exceedingly  painful,  long  stitches  in  r.  metacarpus,  fre-
quently repeated,  embarrassing  the  opening  of  hand
and  stretching  of  fingers. -
^^  Lower  Limbs. Pain  in  the  hips,  extending  from  region  of
kidneys  down  to  upper  part  of  thighs.

I  Inflammation  of  r.  hip-joint,  the  buttock  is  swollen  and
joint  very  sensitive  to  touch,  pain  <  from  least  motion,
and  particularly  when  rotating  leg  inwards,  tearing
pain  in  limb,  which  has  increased  one  inch  in  length.

■  Drawing,  twitching,  with dull throbbing  in  region  of

1.  hip  and  r.  loin,  crest  of  ilium  towards  buttock.
I  Dull  stitches  in  region  of  r.  hip  so  severe  that  he  must

cease  walking,  >  while  resting  and  by  warmth  of  bed ;

sensibility  of  parts  affected.
I  Throbbing, boring in region  of  r. hip, waking him

from  sleep  about  4  a.m.
iCrampy  pain  in  affected  hip,  as  though  the  parts  were

screwed  in  a  vice;  lies  upon  affected  side,  with  knee

bent  up.
I  Constricting,  pressing  pain  shooting  from  hip  just  behind

joint  into  leg,  with  sensation  as  if  pain  were  boring

deep  into  bones,  also  stitching  pains.
llOrigin  of  pain  in  sacral  region,  corresponding  to  posi-


375  COLOCYNTHIS.

tion  of  plexus  ischiadicus,  thence  is  extended  through
the  incisura  ischiadica  major  towards  hip-joint  down
posterior  portion  of  thigh  into  fossa  poplitea;  sensibility
of  parts  affected.
■Violent,  continuous  tearing,  sticking,  burning  pains,  from
sacrum  along  course  of  sciatic  nerve,  behind  great
trochanter  of  r.  leg,  down  as  far  as  knee,  can  neither
lie,  sit  or  walk ;  <  from  warmth  of  bed. ^Ischias.

■  Pain  passing  down  outside  of  1.  leg,  from  hip  to  ankle;

pains  in  paroxysms  every  quarter  of  an  hour,  parts
very  painful  to  touch ;  paroxysms  <  at  night,  >  from
heat;  movements  at  first  <  afterwards  >  pain;  <
again  from  long  continued  motion,  every  two  or  three
hours,  four  or  five  successive  shocks  of  pain  pass  sud-
denly through  affected  parts;  tenderness  on  pressure
over  sciatic  nerve,  and  stiffness  of  knee-joint;  pain  >
from  rubbing;  <  between  1  and  2  a.m.  and  4  p.m.,
about  quarter  hour  after  rising ;  about  noon.  6'Sciatica.
■Severe  pain  in  r.  leg,  compelling  him  to  lie  quietly  in
one  place ;  slightest  attempt  at  motion  causes  great  pain
which  is  accompanied  by  a  sensation  as  if  marrow^
of  bone  were  being  crushed;  want  of  sensation  along
course  of  sciatic  nerve ;  occasionally,  pain  shooting
with  lightning-like  rapidity  from  small  of  back  to
heels. ^Sciatica.

■  Severe  stitching,  tearing  pains  from  hip  to  knee,  making

him  cry  out,  pains  <  from  motion. ^Ischias.

■  Continuous drawing  and tearing  pains in  r.  hip  and

thigh,  with  periodical  exacerbations. ^Ischias.

■  Rheumatic  pains  which  "seem  to  be  in  the  bone,"  con-

centrating itself  especially  in  r.  hip  and  radiating  thence
to  calf  and  knee;  it  became  so  violent  that  he  whined
day  and  night,  and  could  not  sleep  a  minute.
Pressure  at  1.  sacro-iliac  articulation,  with  tingling  in  sole
of  foot.

■  Pains  extend  down  leg  to  knee,  where  it  becomes  tearing

in  character;  when  the  pains  cease,  the  limb  feels  numb
•  and  without  sensation;  pains > in evening and at
night. ^Coxalgia.

■  Pain  in  r.  thigh  so  severe,  that  she  cannot  stand  upon

affected  limb. ^Psoitis.

■  Pain  in  r.  thigh only  when walking,  as  if  the  psoas

magnus  were  too  short.
Stiffness  of  muscles  of  r.  side  of  thigh.

■  Drawing  pain  in  r.  thigh,  down  to  knee.

■  Cramp  in  middle  of  1.  thigh.

■  Drawing  in  inner  side  of  1.  thigh,  afternoons.

■  Drawing  in  external  condyle  of  r.  femur.


COLOCYNTHIS.  376

Acute  paroxysmal  sciatic  pains  with  headache;  parts
tender  to  touch;  <  at  night,  by  motion,  by  heat  and
rubbing.

I  llschias  with  albuminuria.

Violent  pains  in  bowels,  extending  down  into  thighs.

I  Tearing  pain  in  legs,  particularly  in  r.,  with  cutting  in
abdomen,  as  of  knives. ^Colic.

■  Heaviness  of  lower  limbs.
■Cramp  in  the  legs.

I  Cannot  walk  much  on  account  of  weakness  and  trem-
bling of  legs,  especially  in  open  air;  walks  bent  over
with  hand  applied  to  r.  side. ^Ovarian  tumor.

■  Shooting  pains  in  1.  knee,  sometimes  lacerating  pains

running  from  hip  inwardly  down  to  knee,  <  from  least
attempt  to  move  leg;  walking  or  standing  on  it  im-
possible; the  nights  are  sleepless,  especially  in  bed;
knee  not  much  tumefied,  pale  and  of  normal  heat;
tongue  coated  white,  no  appetite  or  thirst;  lower  limbs
feel  heavy;  not  much  pain  in  it  as  long  as  she  keeps  it
quiet,  but  the  least  motion  produces  it;  shooting  in
knee  with  every  attempt  to  walk ;  chilliness.

■Stitching  pains  in  r.  knee-joint,  <  from  motion,  when  at
rest  pains  extend  towards  hip;  dragging  of  r.  leg  when
walking,  trochanter,  buttock  and  knee  of  r.  leg  lower
than  of  1.  leg,  which  is  shorter  in  length  than  right.
^Luxatio  spontanea.

■The  knees  feel  stiff,  preventing  stooping.

■  Sensation  of  coldness  in  knees.

■  Sticking-drawing  along  1.  tibia  into  ankle  bones,  with

burning  pressure  in  1.  eye.

■  Falling  asleep  of  feet  and  knee-joints.
Tearing  in  1.  calf  as  far  as  heel.

■  Cramp  in  1.  calf.

■  Cramps  in  legs  and  feet,  calves  feel  as  if  asleep.

■  Ankles,  toes  and  soles  of  both  feet,  painful,  swollen  and

stiff;  pains  sharp  and  pricking,  or  sore.

■  Constant  dull,  aching,  cramp-like  pain  as  if  in  perios-

teum or  dorsum  of  feet.
I A swelling on r. edge of  tarsus,  soft,  pale,  painless,
appearing  like  a  common  lymphatic  tumor.

■  Burning  in  feet  at  night. ^Lumbago.

■  Drawing,  aching  in  1.  foot.

Pain  in  1.  foot,  <  before  menstruation.

■  The  feet  go  to  sleep,  first  the  1.  then  the  right.

■  Crawling  in  1.  sole  as  though  it  were  asleep.

■  Sweating  of  feet.

■  Feet  cold. ^Colic.


377  COLOCYNTHTS.

^  Limbs  in  General, i  Tearing  or  drawing  pains,  in  all  the
limbs.

■  Tearing,  drawing  pains  in  both  thighs  and  in  1.  arm

down  to  finger-joints.

■  Rheumatic  pains  in  limbs  and  joints  after  catching  cold.

■  Heaviness  of  limbs. ^Headache.

■  Extremities  cold. ^Peritonitis. ^Chronic  diarrhoea.
Icy  coldness  of  hands  and  feet.

I  I  Cold  hands  with  warm  feet. ^Dysentery.
Stiffness  in  joints;  shortening  of  tendons.
^^  Rest. Position. Motion. Rest: pains extending from

eye  into  head  <; < ciliary  neuralgia; >  1.  side  of

face;  pain  in  palms  of  hands  <;  dull  stitches  in  region

of  r.  hip  > ;  stitching  in  r.  knee.
Repose:  rawness  in  r.  shoulder-blade.
Lying  down :  pulsations  in  abdomen.
Lying  on  back :  frontal  headache  < ;  tensive  stitch  pain

in  r.  loin  < ;  pain  in  lower  part  of  abdomen  > .
Lying  on  stomach:  colick}'  pains  >.
Lying  on  1.  side:  sensation  of  heavy  weight  in  lumbo-

dorsal  region  >.
Lying  on  either  side:  pain  in  lower  part  of  abdomen  <.
Crampy  pain  in  affected  hip,  as  though  parts  were  screwed

in  a  vice,  lies  upon  affected  side  with  knee  bent  up.
Severe  pain  in  r.  leg,  compelling  him  to  lie  quietly  in  one

place;  slightest  attempt  at  motion  causes  great  pain.
Pain  in  r.  thigh  so  severe  that  she  cannot  stand  upon  af-
fected limb.
Can  neither  stand  nor  walk  on  account  of  pain  in  small

spot  in  upper  part  of  thigh  and  buttock.
Continuous  drawing  pains  in  hips,  lying,  sitting,  standing

and  walking  are  all  painful,  can  find  no  comfortable

position,  walking  difficult.
Sitting:  pressing  pain  in  1.  orbit  along  dorsum  of  nose  >.
Must  sit  down  or  lie  and  bend  forward :  gnawing,  boring

in  abdomen.
Headache  compels  her  to  sit  up.
Upright  position:  ulcerative  pains  in  bowels  <.
While  standing  or  playing:  child  has  involuntary  dis-
charge of  hard  and  well  formed  feces.
Bending  forward:  aching  in  forehead  <;  pain  fulness  of

whole  head  and  eyes  <;  ulcerative  pains  in  bowels  >.
Bending  double:  pains  from  different  parts  of  chest  and

abdomen  concentrating  in  pit  of  stomach  > ;  pain  in

lower  part  of  abdomen  >.
Colicky  pains  compel  him  to  bend  double.
Walks  bent  with  hands  pressed  to  painful  side.
Abdomen  and  thighs  approximated  during  stool;  with

cramping  pains.


COLOCYNTHIS.  378

Drawing  patient  double :  cramping  dysmenorrhoeal  pains ;
frequent  attacks  of  colic  during  pregnancy;  paroxys-
mal griping  pains  in  bowels ;  boring,  tensive  pain  in
ovary.

Gets  upon  arms  and  knees:  stitching  pains  in  small  of
back.

Finds  rest  in  no  position,  throws  himself  constantly
about.

Obliged  to  leave  the  bed :  headache.

Motion:  head  and  eyes  sensitive  to  least;  pain  in  1.  side  of
face  < ;  violent  tensive  drawing  in  1.  cervical  muscles
<;  stitching  pains  in  small  of  back  <;  shooting  in
sacral  region  <;  pain  in  r.  shoulder;  tensive  pain  in  1.
thumb  impeding;  pain  in  r.  hip-joint  <;  pains  down
outside  of  1.  leg  from  hip  to  ankle  first  <,  afterwards
> ,  then  <  again  from  long  continued ;  stitching  from
hip  to  knee;  pains  from  1.  hip  to  knee  < ;  stitching  in
knee-joint  < ;  intense  pain  in  abdomen  < ;  discharge
of  blood,  with  burning  and  stinging  in  small  of  back
and  anus  > ;  such  as  twisting,  turning  and  wriggling
around  >  pain.

On  moving  eyes:  pain  through  head  <.

On  moving  upper  eyelid:  painful  tearing-digging  through
brain  unbearable.

On  moving  eyebrows:  pain  in  head  <.

On  quickly  turning  head :  vertigo.

Turning:  pressure  on  1.  side  of  nape  <;  sciatic  pains  <.

On  moving  head:  stiffness  in  muscles  of  nape.

On  shaking  head:  pains  in  r.  eye  <.

Stooping:  frontal  headache  <;  pains  in  eyes  extending
into  head  <  ;  sensation  as  if  eye  would  fall  out ;  painful

.  pressure  in  eyeballs ;  ciliary  neuralgia  <  ;  stiffness  of
knees  prevents.

On  straightening  up :  pains  in  abdomen.

Drawing  up  feet:  colicky  pains  >.

When  attempting  to  walk:  paroxysms  of  acute  pain
across  hypogastrium,  in  sacral  region  and  around  hip-
joint.

Walking:  pain  extending  from  eye  into  head  >;  ciliary
neuralgia  > ;  neuralgia  of  1.  face  >  ;  about  room  in
great  anxiety;  bruised  pain  in  spot  in  umbilical  region
<  ;  pain  from  three  inches  below  navel  to  pit  of  stomach
< ;  colic  only  when ;  paroxysms  of  acute  pain  across
hypogastrium,  in  sacral  region  and  around  hip-joint,
dull  stitches  in  region  of  r.  hip  so  severe  that  he  must
cease ;  pain  in  r.  thigh  only  when ;  neuralgia  of  1.  face ;
cannot  lie  in  bed,  must  get  up  and  walk  about ;  weak-
ness and  trembling  of  legs  prevent;  shooting  in  1.  knee


379  COLOCYNTHIS.

on  every  attempt  at;  dragging  of  r.  leg  when;  pain  in
bowels  immediately  on  taking  only  a  few  steps.
When rotating leg inwards: pain  in r.  hip-joint  and
limb  <.
^^  Nerves. Great  restlessness  and  anguish,  with  headache.

■  Extremely  restless,  very  weak,  unable  to  speak  except  in

a  whisper. ^Chronic  diarrhoea.

■  Extreme  weakness  and  lassitude  with  trembling  of  legs,

especially  when  walking  in  open  air,  though  the  other
symptoms  are  .better. ^Ovarian  tumor.
1 1  Finds  rest  in  no  position,  throws  himself  constantly
about. ^Colic.

■  General  lassitude  and  painful  weariness  in  small  of  back.

■  Sensation  as  if  all  his  strength  was  failing.

■  Great  prostration. ^Dysentery.

■  Faint  feeling,  paleness  and  great  prostration.

■  Fainting. ^Colic.

Fainting,  with  coldness  of  external  parts.

■  Great  tendency  of  muscles  of  all  parts  of  body  to  become

painfully  cramped.
Twitching  of  muscles.

■  A  shuddering  rises  from  abdomen  over  body.
-■Sensation  of  formication  in  affected  part.

■  Affected  parts  feel  asleep.

■  Neuralgia,  especially  facial,  and  sciatica.

■  Neuralgige  of  solar  and  other  abdominal  plexuses  and  of

lumbar  and  femoral  nerves.

■  Neuralgia  of  rheumatic,  or  gouty-rheumatic  diathesis.
^"^  Sleep. ■Yawning  and  sleepiness.

■  Sleeplessness. ^Chronic  diarrhoea.

■  ■  Sleeplessness  and  restlessness,  with  the  pains;  after  anger.

■  Sleeps  badly,  often  wakes  tired. ^Ovarian  tumor.
Dreams :  disturbing  sleep ;  vivid ;  anxious ;  voluptuous.

^  Time.  In  morning :  pain  below  navel  to  pit  of  stomach  >  ;
chronic  watery  diarrhoea.

In  afternoon:  attacks  of  hemicrania;  discharge  of  blood,
with  stinging  and  burning  in  small  of  back  and  anus  <.

From  4  to  9  p.m.  :  pain  below  navel  to  pit  of  stomach.

In  evening :  pain  in  eyes  < ;  pressive  pain  in  r.  eyeball
from  above  and  outside;  dry  feeling  in  eyes;  griping
in  epigastrium  < ;  discharge  of  blood,  with  stinging
and  burning  in  small  of  back  and  anus  < ;  oppression
of  chest  <;  weakness  and  pains  in  back,  with  piercing
headache;  painful  lassitude  in  small  of  back  and  lower
extremities;  pains  extending  down  leg  to  knee  >  ;  fever.

At  night:  pain  in  eyes  <;  pains  in  head  <;  pains  in  1.
eye;  ciliary  neuralgia  <;  cramps  in  stomach;  asth-
matic attacks;  titillating  cough;  attacks  of  oppression,


COLOCYNTHIS.  .S80

■  as  if  chest  was  constricted ;  pains  down  outside  of  1.  leg
from  hip  to  ankle  < ;  pains  extending  down  leg  to
knee  > ;  sciatic  pains  < ;  sleepless  on  account  of  pain
in  1.  hip  and  knee;  burning  in  feet;  profuse  sweat  over
whole  body.

At  10  P.M. :  sudden  attacks  of  neuralgia  in  1.  face.

Before  midnight:  oppression  of  chest  <.

At  1  and  2  a.m.:  pains  passing  down  outside  of  1.  leg  from
hips  to  ankle  <.

At  4  A.M.:  throbbing,  boring  in  region  of  r.  hip,  waking
him  from  sleep.

At  6  A.M.:  periodical  neuralgic  colic  every  morning.
^^  Temperature  and  Weather. Warmth:  >  left  side  of  face.

Warm  weather:  pain  in  tumor  in  r.  iliac  fossa  <.

Warm  room:  ciliary  neuralgia  >.

Warmth  of  bed :  painful  feeling  in  abdomen  > ;  cutting
beneath  umbilicus  before  menses  > ;  dull  stitches  in
region  of  r.  hip  > ;  pains  from  sacrum  along  course  of
sciatic  nerve.

Warm  drinks:  >  colic.

Heat:  <  pain  in  tumor  in  r.  iliac  fossa;  >  pains  down
outside  of  1.  leg  from  hip  to  ankle ;  <  sciatic  pains.

Hot  tea:  >  pain  from  three  inches  below  navel  to  pit  of
stomach.

Hot  drinks:  >  cramp-like  pain  in  abdomen.

Open  air:  neuralgia  of  1.  face  >;  fluent  coryza  <;  pain
in  tumor  in  r.  iliac  fossa  > ;  constriction  in  larynx,
with  oppression  of  breathing  > ;  cannot  walk  much  on
account  of  weakness  and  trembling  of  legs.

From  catching  cold :  left-sided  tearing,  burning  and  sting-
ing in  face,  extending  to  ear  and  head;  acute  gastritis;
sudden  severe  pains  in  abdomen ;  rheumatic  pains  in
limbs  and  joints.

Pain  residing  in  muscular  fibres  of  stomach  during  the
seasons  when  the  air  is  cold,  but  the  sun  still  powerful
enough  to  heat  the  blood,  likewise  in  Summer  in  con-
sequence of  sudden  changes  in  weather.
^^  Fever.  I  Chill  and  coldness  of  whole  body,  frequently  with
heat  of  face.

I  Skin  cool. ^Lumbago.

Internal  coldness  with  external  heat.

I  Chills  proceeding  from  abdomen.

I  Chilliness. ^Headache.

I  Chill  and  shivering,  with  the  pains.

Chilliness  with  inclination  to  perspire.

■  Coldness  of  hands  or  soles  of  feet,  rest  of  body  warm.
I  Chill  and  fever. ^Lumbago.

Cold  hands  with  warm  feet.


381  COLOCYNTHIS.

I  Skin  warm  and  moist. /^Dysentery.
Partial  heat  and  partial  coolness  of  skin.
iSkin  hot  and  dry. ^Abortion.

■  External  dry  heat.

■After  chill,  intense  pain  in  abdomen,  constantl}'"  in-
creasing, <  from  slightest  motion  or  touch,  high  fever,
burning  thirst,  cheeks  and  extremities  cold.  ^Peritonitis.

■  Dry  heat  over  whole  body. ^Headache.

■  Heat  of  whole  body,  with  full,  hard  pulse  and  thirst.

■  Internal  sensation  of  heat,  with  external  flushes.

■  Bilious  fever,  with  cardialgia,  spasmodic  colic,  diarrhoeic

stool.

■  Fever  in  evening. ^Acute  catarrh  of  bladder.

■  Perspiration  about  head. ^Ischias.

■  Profuse  warm  sweat  on  forehead  and  neck. ^Colic.

■  Profuse  sweat  over  whole  body  at  night,  towards  morning.

■  Sweat,  at  night,  smelling  like  urine,  causing  itching  of

skin.

■  Sweat  principally  on  head  and  extremities.

■  Cold  perspiration. ^Catarrh  of  colon  with  colic. ^Lead

colic.
^^  Attacks,  Periodicity. Occasionally:  pain  shooting  with
lightning-like  rapidity  from  small  of  back  to  heels.

Frequent:  eructations;  constipation;  watery  discharges
from  bowels;  urging  to  stool  without  any  evacuations;
pressure  at  anal  sphincter;  urination;  tenesmus  vesicae
attacks  of  colic  during  pregnancy;  titillating  cough  at
night.

Periodical:  headache  in  1.  side  of  forehead;  occurring
daily  half  an  hour  after  rising;  pain  in  r.  eye;  facial
neuralgia ;  neuralgic  colic,  every  morning  at  6 ;  darting
from  sacro-lumbalis  muscle  into  thigh;  exacerbations
of  pain  in  r.  hip  and  thigh.

Intermittent:  headache,  in  those  of  rheumatic,  gouty,  or
nervous  diathesis.

At  intervals  of  five  or  ten  minutes :  colicky  pains  about
navel  <.

At  intervals  of  from  five  to  fifteen  minutes :  griping  >  by
straining  and  consequent  expulsion  of  wind  and  mucus.

Every  fifteen  minutes :  constant  cutting  at  region  of  fundus
of  bladder,  with  discharge  of  urine;  paroxysmal  pains
down  outside  of  1.  leg  from  hip  to  ankle.

Every  half  hour:  headache  followed  by  attacks  of  suffoca-
tion and  constriction  of  chest;  bloody,  mucous  stools
with  great  vomiting  and  burning  in  anus.

Every  hour:  headache  followed  by  attacks  of  sufi'ocation
and  constriction  of  chest.

Every  two  hours:  paroxysmal  pains  in  abdomen.


COLOCYNTHIS.  '  382

Every  four  or  five  hours:  four  or  five  successive  shocks
pass  suddenly  through  parts  affected  by  sciatica.

Every  two  or  three  days:  hard  evacuation.

Sudden:  stitching  pain  in  forehead  towards  nose;  tenes-
mus; violent  pressure  upon  bladder.

Transient:  stitches  in  upper  jaw  frequently  recurring;
stitches  in  hepatic  region.

Lasting  half  a  minute:  colic  in  lower  part  of  abdomen
coming  on  in  spasms.

For  thirty  minutes:  intense  itching  of  erythematous
eruption  on  last  day  of  menses.

Lasting  an  hour:  periodical  facial  neuralgia  and  tooth-
ache coming  three  to  four  times  a  day;  constriction,
twisting  pains  about  umbilicus,  spreading  over  whole
upper  part  of  abdomen.

Lasting  several  hours:  twitching  in  lower  lid,  dazzling
before  eyes  and  diplopia.

For  a  whole  day:  sensitiveness  of  head  as  if  compressed.

Lasting  all  night:  sharp  pains  in  abdomen  followed  by
discharge,  stools  chasing  her  out  of  bed.

Lasting  24  hours:  shooting,  rending  pains  in  1.  side  of
face,  between  temple,  ear  and  jaw.

Day  and  night:  complaining  bitterly;  violent  shooting
or  stitching  in  forehead  and  eyes,  from  out  in,  some-
times lessening  for  a  few  minutes,  but  returning  after-
wards harder;  paraphimosis,  violent  pains;  whining,
on  account  of  rheumatic  pain  in  r.  hip,  calf  and  knee.

Constant:  desire  to  escape;  horrible,  gnawing  pains  in
head;  tearing  pain  in  head;  roaring  and  throbbing  in
ears;  rumbling  and  croaking  in  bowels  as  from  frogs;
violent,  bruised  pain  in  umbilical  region  in  spot  as
large  as  hand;  inclination  to  vomit;  flow  of  blood  from
hemorrhoids  for  a  long  time;  discharge  of  mucus  from
anus;  cutting  at  region  of  fundus  of  bladder;  sharp,
cutting  pains  during  menses;  dull,  aching,  cramp-like
pain  as  if  in  periosteum  or  dorsum  of  feet.

Chronic:  diarrhoea;  catarrh  of  colon.
*^  Locality  and  Direction.  Right:  boring  stitches  in  tem-
ple >  from  touch ;  burning,  boring  pain  in  side  of  fore-
head ;  boring  and  drawing  in  side  of  head ;  side  of  head,
«  particularly  about  eye,  very  sensitive  to  touch ;  exter-
nal strabismus  of  eye;  periodical  pain  in  eye;  tearing
in  eye  extending  to  temple;  sharp,  cutting  stabs  as  from
knives  in  eyeball ;  great  itching  in  eyeball;  prickling,
burning  pain  in  inner  canthus ;  drawing  in  upper  eye-
lid, or  annoying  twitching;  side  of  face,  temple,  ear,
eye  and  sometimes  side  of  neck  attacked  by  tic  doulou-
reux; inflammation  of  hip-joint,  buttock  swollen,  joint


383  COLOCYNTHIS.

very  sensitive  to  touch;  tearing  pain  in  limb;  dull
stitches  in  region  of  hip;  violent,  continuous  tearing,
sticking,  burning  pains  from  sacrum  along  course  of
sciatic  nerve  behind  great  trochanter  down  as  far  as
knee;  severe  pain  in  leg;  rheumatic  pains  in  hip  radi-
ating thence  to  calf  and  knee;  pain  in  thigh;  as  if
psoas  magnus  were  too  short;  stiffness  of  muscles  of
side  of  thigh;  drawing  in  thigh  down  to  knee,  stitch-
ing in  knee-joint;  dragging  of  leg  when  walking;  tumor
in  iliac  fossa;  severe  stitches  in  region  of  ovary,  which
afterwards  becomes  a  burning  pain ;  pain  like  a  stab  in
pelvic  region;  stitching  pains  in  side  of  chest;  drawing
in  region  of  scapula;  rawness  in  shoulder-blade  during
repose ;  tensive  stitch  pain  in  loin  during  inspiration ;
stitching  and  cutting  in  hip,  extending  down  leg  to
joint,  when  it  becomes  a  severe  tearing;  pain  in  shoul-
der-joint as  if  bruised;  stitches  in  shoulder  towards
back;  shoulder  and  elbow-joint  painful,  stiff  and
swollen;  violent  drawing  in  thumb  like  in  tendons,
beginning  in  ball  and  passing  off  at  hip ;  tearing  and
drawing  in  hip  and  thigh.
Left:  pressing-burning  in  orbit,  temple  and  nose  on  dor-
sum nasi  and  in  upper  teeth ;  confusion  in  side  of  head ;
pressing-throbbing  in  temple;  pulsation  and  pressure
in  temple;  tearing,  stitching,  jerking  in  side  of  fore-
head; inflammation  of  eye;  burning  pressure  in  eye;
pressing  pain  in  orbit  along  dorsum  of  nose ;  neuralgia
of  face,  supra  and  infraorbital  regions ;  shooting  to  ear
and  down  side  of  neck;  profuse  lachrymation;  shoot-
ing, rending  pains  in  side  of  face,  between  temple,  ear
and  jaw:  constriction  and  pressing  in  malar  bone,  ex-
tending into  eye;  pains  from  back  of  ear  to  eye  and
mouth  of  same  side;  neuralgia  in  face  from  parotid  to
eye;  beating  toothache  first  in  one,  then  in  another
tooth  of  side;  side  of  abdomen  painful  to  touch;  ten-
deiniess  over  inguinal  region ;  tight,  cramp-like  pain  in
iliac  and  inguinal  region;  cramp-like  pain  in  ovarian
region;  swelling  in  region  of  ovary  and  descending
colon;  drawing,  gnawing  pain  in  ovary  extending
towards  stomach,  before  menses;  menses  increased  with
pain  in  foot,  <  before  menstruation ;  stitching  pains  in
sides  of  chest;  violent  tensive  drawing  in  cervical  mus-
cles; pressure  in  side  of  nape;  aching  in  sacro-iliac
articulation,  with  crawling  in  sole ;  tearing-drawing  in
arm  to  finger-joints;  tearing  in  joints  of  hand;  tensive
pain  in  thumb ;  pains  down  outside  of  leg  from  hip  to
ankle;  pressure  at  sacro-iliac  articulation,  with  tingling
in  sole  of  foot ;  shooting  in  knee ;  lacerating  pains  run-


COLOCYNTHIS.  384

•ning  from  hip  inwardly  down  to  knee ;  sticking-draw-
ing  in  tibia  into  ankle  bones  with  burning  pressure  in
eye;  drawing-aching  in  foot.
From  1.  to  r.:  paroxysmal  pains  in  abdomen;  falling
asleep  of  feet.
*^  Sensations.  As  if  coryza  would  appear;  as  if  head  was
compressed ;  as  if  head  was  being  screwed  together ;  as
if  eye  would  fall  out  on  stooping;  as  if  eyeballs  were
pressed  from  above  downwards;  as  if  1.  side  of  face  were
being  torn  from  r.  side;  as  if  tension  were  made  upon
nerve  of  face  and  skin  suddenly  relaxed;  as  if  nerves
of  lower  teeth  were  compressed  or  stretched ;  as  if  tongue
was  scalded;  as  if  a  beard  of  grain  were  sticking  in
velum  palati ;  as  of  hunger,  in  stomach ;  as  if  a  chisel
were  thrust  deep  into  upper  abdomen,  thence  passing
in  a  curve  backward  and  downward  into  pelvis  and
thence  cutting  its  way  upward  again ;  as  if  umbilical
region  was  inflated;  as  if  bowels  were  pressed  inward;
as  of  increasing  constriction  in  bowels;  as  after  taking
cold,  at  umbilicus;  as  if  intestines  were  being  squeezed
between  stones  and  would  burst;  as  if  knives  were  cut-
ting in  abdomen ;  as  if  bowels  were  in  a  vice ;  as  if  ab-
dominal walls  were  festering;  as  of  an  electric  shock
darting  through  whole  abdomen  to  anus;  as  if  a  tear
had  occurred  in  1,  side  of  abdomen;  as  of  a  hernia  in
groin,  and  on  pressure  as  if  a  hernia  were  receding;  as
if  bowels  hung  on  easily  tearing  threads;  as  if  taking
cold  in  abdomen;  as  if  anus  were  weakened  by  long
continued  diarrhoea;  as  though  parts  about  1.. ovarian
region  were  squeezed  in  a  vice;  as  of  a  stab  in  r.  pelvic
region;  as  if  he  were  about  to  smother;  as  if  chest  was
constricted;  as  if  nerves  and  vessels  in  region  of  r.
scapula  were  made  tense;  as  of  a  heavy  weight  in
lumbo-dorsal  region;  as  though  1.  sole  were  asleep;  as
if  hip-joint  were  fastened  by  iron  clamps;  as  if  femur
were  fastened  to  os  innominatum  with  iron  claws;  as  if
r.  shoulder-joint  had  been  bruised;  as  if  muscles  in
palms  of  hands  were  contracted ;  as  though  parts  about
aftected  hip  were  screwed  in  a  vice;  as  if  pain  were
boring  deep  into  bones;  as  if  marrow  of  bone  were
being  crushed;  as  if  psoas  magnus  of  r.  side  were  too
short;  as  if  calves  were  asleep;  as  if  all  his  strength
were  failing.
Pain:  during  micturition  extends  all  over  abdomen;  of
testicles  and  spermatic  cord;  in  shoulder-blades  and
back,  extending  into  neck,  with  tension;  in  back;  in
small  of  back;  in  upper  part  of  thigh  and  buttock;  in
hips  from  region  of  kidneys  down  to  upper  part  of


385  COLOCYNTHIS.

thighs;  in  r.  leg;  in  bowels,  extending  down  into  the
thighs.

Agonizing  pains :  in  1.  eye,  at  night ;  during  menses.

Lancinating  pains:  flying  all  over  abdomen;  running  up
back  during  stool ;  running  up  back,  with  constriction
of  anus.

Lacerating:  running  from  1.  hip  inwardly  down  to  knee.

Cutting:  extending  into  head,  particularly  into  forehead ;
in  1.  temple;  in  eye;  in  ears;  from  eye  up  into  head
and  around  eye;  as  from  knives,  in  bowels;  in  stomach,
extending  to  chest;  in  bowels,  downward;  in  intestines,
coming  up  into  stomach,  or  extending  down  into  thighs;
here  and  there  in  abdomen;  sharp,  in  abdomen;  dart-
ing through  whole  abdomen  to  anus;  in  different  parts
of  chest  and  abdomen  and  concentrates  in  pit  of  stomach ;
in  umbilical  region;  in  abdomen,  extending  towards
pubic  region ;  flying  all  over  abdomen ;  during  menses ;
beneath  umbilicus,  extending  towards  groins  and  in-
ternal genital  organs;  before  menses;  like  a  stab,  in
tumor  in  r.  iliac  fossa;  in  abdomen;  pains  running  up
back  during  stool;  from  umbilical  to  ovarian  region;
at  region  of  fundus  of  bladder.

Sharp,  cutting  stabs,  as  from  knives,  in  r.  eyeball;  in
abdomen.

Severe  cutting,  stitch-like  ciliary  neuralgia.

Stitches:  in  forehead  above  r.  eye;  in  upper  jaw;  in
hepatic  region ;  twisting,  from  umbilical  region  towards
loins  and  spine;  isolated,  deep,  apparently  connected
with  ovaries;  through  bladder;  in  region  of  kidneys  and
loins ;  alternate,  in  bladder  and  rectum ;  in  region  of  r.
ovary;  as  from  a  needle,  in  ovary;  in  eyes  and  fore-
head; in  sides  with  each  breath;  in  cardiac  region;  in
r.  shoulder  towards  back ;  painful,  long,  in  r.  metacarpus,
frequently  repeated,  embarassing  opening  of  hand  and
stretching  of  fingers.

Stitching:  in  forehead  and  eyes  from  out  in;  in  fore-
head towards  nose;  in  1.  side  of  forehead;  in  ears;  dull,
in  region  of  r.  hip;  in  r.  or  1.  side  of  chest;  in  small  of
back;  in  r.  hip,  extending  down  leg  to  joint;  from  hip
to  knee;  in  r.  knee-joint.

Tensive  stitch  pain  in  r.  loin,  during  inspiration.

Piercing:  headache.

Sticking:  from  eye  up  into  head  and  around  eye;  in  small
of  back  and  anus;  from  sacrum  along  course  of  sciatic
nerve,  behind  great  trochanter  of  r.  leg,  down  as  far  as
knee.

Sticking-drawing :  along  1.  tibia  into  ankle  bones.

Pricking :  at  anus ;  in  ankles,  toes  and  soles  of  feet.
voii.  IV. — 25.


COLOCYNTHIS.  386

Prickling:  in  r.  inner  can  thus;  in  skin.

Stinging:  .in  1.  side  of  face,  extending  to  ear  and  head;  in
velum  palati;  in  small  of  back  and  anus.

Shooting:  in  forehead  and  eyes,  from  out  in;  in  1.  side  of
face,  between  temple,  ear  and  jaw;  in  stomach,  extend-
ing to  chest;  in  sacral  region;  from  small  of  back  to
heels;  in  1.  knee.

Darting:  shar^:),  paroxysmal,  in  stomach,  before  menses;
in  rectum,  alternating  with  stitches  through  bladder;
in  anus;  from  sacro-lumbalis  muscle  into  thigh.

Tearing:  in  forehead  and  root  of  nose;  in  1.  side  of  fore-
head; through  whole  brain;  headache;  in  eye  and  sur-
roundings; in  1.  eye  at  night;  in  r.  eye,  extending  to  r.
temple;  in  cheeks;  in  1.  side  of  face,  extending  to  ear
and  head ;  in  different  parts  of  chest  and  abdomen  and
concentrate  in  pit  of  stomach;  in  abdomen,  extending
up  to  r.  mamma;  in  whole  abdomen;  in  r.  knee-joint;
in  joints  of  1.  hand;  in  r.  limb;  from  sacrum  along
course  of  sciatic  nerve,  behind  great  trochanter  of  r.  leg
down  as  far  as  knee;  from  hip  to  knee;  in  r.  hip  and
thigh;  in  knee;  in  legs;  in  all  the  limbs;  in  skin.

Tearing-drawing:  in  1.  arm  down  to  finger-joints.

Tearing-twitching :  pains  in  teeth.

Tensive  tearing:  of  1.  side  of  face.

E-ending:  in  1.  side  of  face  between  temple,  ear  and  jaw;
in  abdomen,  extending  up  to  r.  mamma.

Drawing :  in  whole  brain ;  in  r.  side  of  head  and  in  fore-
head ;  in  r.  upper  eyelid ;  toothache ;  in  whole  abdomen ;
from  spine  of  ilium  to  inguinal  region  and  upper  third
of  inner  surface  of  thigh;  -in  1.  ovary,  extending  towards
stomach,  before  menses;  in  nape;  internally,  in  region
of  r.  scapula;  in  hips;  in  r.  thumb,  like  in  the  tendons,
beginning  in  ball  and  passing  off  at  tip;  in  region  of  1.
hip  and  r.  loin,  crest  of  ilium  towards  buttocks;  in  r.
hip  and  thigh;  in  r.  thigh  down  to  knee;  in  1.  foot;  in
all  the  limbs.

Violent  tensive  drawing :  in  1.  cervical  muscles.

Jerking:  in  1.  side  of  forehead;  in  anus;  in  skin.

Twisting:  about  umbilicus,  spreading  over  whole  upper
part  of  abdomen.

Boring:  in  r.  side  of  head  and  in  forehead;  in  abdomen;
in  ovary';  in  region  of  r.  hip.

Boring  stitches:  in  r.  temple,  >  from  touch;  in  r.  side  of

. forehead;  in  anus.

Burrowing:  in  nose,  from  1.  side  to  root  of  nose.

Beating:  toothache;  from  1.  side  of  nose  to  glabella.

Scraping:  in  throat.

Digging:  through  whole  brain;  from  1.  side  of  nose  to
glabella.


387  COLOCYNTHIS.

Dragging  pain :  in  vagina.

Burning:  extending  into  head,  particularly  into  forehead;
in  r.  side  of  forehead ;  on  scalp ;  from  eye  up  into  head
and  around  eye;  in  1.  eye  at  night;  in  eye;  in  r.  inner
canthus;  of  eyelids;  in  1.  side  of  face,  extending  to  ear
and  head;  on  anterior  surface  of  tongue;  on  tip  of
tongue;  of  under  lip;  in  stomach;  in  small  of  back  and
anus;  in  anus;  in  region  of  kidneys  and  loins;  in  ure-
thra ;  along  whole  urethra  during  stool ;  in  urethra  after
micturition;  in  region  of  r.  ovary;  along  sacrum;  from
sacrum  along  course  of  sciatic  nerve,  behind  great
trochanter  of  r.  leg  down  as  far  as  knee;  in  feet;  in
ulcers ;  in  carbuncles ;  on  skin.

Burning  pressure:  in  1.  eye.

Cramping :  headache ;  in  stomach ;  from  three  inches  be-
low navel  to  pit  of  stomach ;  pains  in  1.  inguinal  region
passing  around  to  back;  in  1.  ovarian  region;  in  abdo-
men; dysmenorrhoeal  pains;  in  hip,  from  kidney  to
thighs;  in  affected  hip;  as  if  in  periosteum  or  dorsum
of  feet.

Tight,  cramp-like  pain :  in  1.  iliac  and  inguinal  region.

Cramps:  in  middle  of  thigh;  in  legs;  in  1.  calf;  in  legs
and  feet.

Labor-like  pains :  in  course  of  ureters,  extending  to  upper
part  of  thighs.

Griping:  after  eating;  in  epigastrium;  sharp,  in  upper
part  of  abdomen;  in  umbilical  region;  in  intestines
coming  up  into  stomach,  or  extending  down  into  thighs ;
in  abdomen;  commencing  at  umbilicus  and  passing
down  to  rectum.

Gnawing  pains:  in  head;  in  abdomen;  in  1.  ovary  ex-
tending towards  stomach,  before  menses.
. Pinching:  in  small  spot  below  lower  eyelid;  sharp,  in
epigastrium ;  in  abdomen.

Squeezing:  in  intestines  extending  into  stomach,  or  down
into  thighs.

Compressive  pain  commencing  at  umbilicus  and  passing
down  to  rectum.

Compressive  sensation:  in  forehead;  in  epigastrium;  in
throat.

Constriction:  of  chest;  in  1.  malar  bone  extending  into  1.
eye;  in  throat;  of  stomach;  in  upper  part  of  abdomen:
about  umbilicus,  spreading  over  whole  upper  part  of
abdomen;  in  umbilical  region  after  eating;  of  rectum
during  stool;  of  anus  during  stool;  in  larynx;  of  chest;
from  hip  just  behind  joint  into  leg.

Pressure:  in  orbits;  in  temple;  in  1.  temple;  in  stomach;
cramp-like,  in  pit  of  stomach;  upon  sides  of  abdomen


COLOCYNTHIS.  388

which  spreads  towards  stomach;  upon  chest,  going  up-
wards and  spreading  about  neck;  at  anal  sphincter;
sudden,  upon  bladder;  in  1.  side  of  nape;  in  1.  sacro-
iliac articulation.

Pressive  pain :  in  forehead ;  frontal  headache ;  in  eyeballs ;
in  1.  orbit  along  dorsum  of  nose;  in  r.  eyeball  from
above  and  outside.

Pressing:  in  1.  temple;  headache;  in  1.  malar  bone  ex-
tending into  1.  eye;  from  hip  just  behind  joint  into  leg;
in  orbits  near  root  of  nose,  with  confusion  in  head  and
chilliness.

Oppression:  of  chest.

Ulcerative  pain :  in  bowels.

Excoriating  pain :  in  anus.

Rheumatic  pains:  through  arms;  "which  seem  to  be  in
the  bone,"  in  r.  hip,  radiating  thence  to  calf  and  knee;
in  limbs  and  joints  after  catching  cold.

Colicky  pains:  in  bowels;  around  navel;  after  vexation;
in  abdomen ;  along  colon ;  during  menses.

Tensive  pain:  in  forehead;  in  ovary;  in  1.  thumb  imped-
ing motion.

Tension :  in  region  of  anterior  superior  spines  of  ilium.

Bruised  pain:  in  umbilical  region,  in  spot  as  large  as
hand.

Sore  pain:  in  r.  shoulder  and  elbow-joint  and  finger-joints
of  both  hands;  in  ankles,  toes  and  soles  of  both  feet.

Smarting:  on  scalp;  in  eyes;  in  skin.

Aching:  in  forehead;  from  eye  back  into  head;  in  ears;
in  small  spot  below  lower  eyelid  extremely  tiresome;  in
region  of  1.  sacro-iliac  articulation;  dull,  as  if  in  peri-
osteum or  dorsum  of  feet;  in  1.  foot.

Throbbing:  in  1.  temple;  in  ears,  especially  in  1. ;  pains  in
teeth ;  in  nose,  from  1.  side  to  root  of  nose ;  dull,  in  re-
gion of  1.  hip  and  r.  loin,  crest  of  ilium  towards  but-
tock; in  region  of  r.  hip.

Palpitating  pains:  in  1.  eye  at  night.

Pulsation :  in  1.  temple ;  in  ears.

Twitching:  in  r.  upper  eyelid;  toothache;  in  region  of  1.
hip,  r.  loin,  crest  of  ilium  towards  buttock.

Stiffness:  in  muscles  of  nape  on  moving  head;  of  hands;
of  1.  knee-joint ;  of  muscles  of  r.  side  of  thigh;  of  knees;
of  joints.

Rawness:  in  throat;  in  r.  shoulder-blade  during  repose.

Irritation:  in  larynx.

Shuddering:  from  abdomen  over  body.

Confusion :  in  frontal  region;  of  1.  side  of  head ;  of  forehead.

Dulness:  of  head.

Painful  weariness:  in  small  of  back.


389  COLOCYNTHIS.

Heaviness :  of  forehead ;  of  lower  limbs ;  of  limbs.

Fulness:  in  epigastric  region.

Emptiness :  in  stomach.

Tingling:  in  sole  of  1.  foot.

Crawling:  in  ears;  in  1.  sole;  in  skin.

Formication:  in  affected  parts;  in  skin.

Falling  asleep:  of  feet  and  knee-joints.

Tickling :  in  larynx ;  in  throat.

Itching :  in  r.  eyeball ;  in  ears ;  of  orifice  of  urethra ;  of
erythematous  eruption  on  last  day  of  menses;  of  skin;
of  ulcers.

Roughness :  of  tongue  as  from  sand  in  throat.

Dry  feeling:  in  eyes.

Heat :  in  face  and  forehead  followed  by  tiresome  aching,
pinching  pain  in  small  spot  below  lower  eyelid;  in
vagina;  in  nape  of  neck.

Coldness:  in  knees.
^  Tissues. Inflammation,  or  colic  which  comes  on  in  conse-
quence of  violent  indignation.

Trigeminus  affected,  causing  toothache  and  hemicrania.
•  Seldom,  indicated  in  rheumatism,  is,  however,  useful  in
rheumatoid  pains  or  pains  along  course  of  sciatic  nerve,
from  reflex  nervous  action,  during  or  after  an  attack  of
rheumatism.

Rheumatic  and  arthritic  conditions ;  coxalgia.

I  Unusual  inclination  of  muscles  of  all  parts  of  body  to
become  painfully  cramped.

I  iCEdema.

Dropsy  after  scarlet  fever.

Indicated  in  some  cases  of  very  painful  cancer.

I  I  Emaciation.  ^Lumbago.  ^Chronic  diarrhoea.
''^  Touch.  Passive  Motion.  Injuries.  Touch:  boring
stitches  in  r.  temple  >;  scalp  painful  to;  right  side  of
head,  particularly  about  eye,  very  sensitive  to ;  pains  in
r.  eye  < ;  1.  side  of  face  < ;  pit  of  stomach  very  sensi-
tive to;  epigastrium  and  abdomen  excessively  painful
and  sensitive  to ;  swelling  in  region  of  1.  ovary  and  de-
scending colon,  parts  very  sensitive  to ;  epigastrium  and
abdomen  painful  to ;  r.  hip^joint  very  sensitive  to ;  pains
down  outside  of  1.  leg  from  hip  to  ankle,  parts  verj^
painful  to ;  sciatic  pains,  parts  tender  to ;  after  chill,  in-
tense pain  in  abdomen  <  from  slightest.

Stomach  so  sensitive  that  lightest  covering  cannot  be
endured.

Putting  fingers  into  ear:  crawling,  itching,  stitching,  cut-
ting or  aching  in  ears  >.

AViping  with  finger:  pressing  pains  on  r.  eyeball  <.

Rubbing: great  itching  in  r.  eyeball  compels; sciatic


COLOCYNTHIS.  390

pains <; pains  down  outside  of  1.  leg  from  hip  to
ankle  >.

Pressure:  pains  extending  from  eye  into  head  >  by  firm;
ciliary  neuralgia  > ;  pains  from  different  parts  of  chest
and  abdomen  concentrating  in  pit  of  stomach  >  by
hard;  pain  from  three  inches  below  navel  to  pit  of
stomach  >  ;  pinching  and  cutting  in  abdomen  > ;  sen-
sation in  groin  as  if  a  hernia  were  receding  on ;  tight,
cramp-like  pain  in  1.  iliac  and  inguinal  region  <  after,
not  during,  external;  lead  colic,  pains  at  beginning  of
attack  >,  later  <;  cramp-like  pain  in  abdomen  >;
sharp,  darting,  paroxysmal  pains  in  stomach  > ;  over
posterior  spinous  processes  of  all  cervical  and  first  four
dorsal  vertebrae  great  tenderness  on;  on  spinous  pro-
cesses of  first  three  cervical  vertebrae  brings  on  or  <
neuralgic  attack;  pains  in  shoulder  on;  over  sciatic
nerve,  tenderness  on.

Colic  so  distressing  that  they  seek  relief  by  pressing  cor-
ner of  table  or  head  of  bed-post  against  abdomen.

Carrying  on  stomach:  colic  of  child  >.
*®  Skin. Dryness  and  heat  of  skin.

Itching;  prickling;  crawling;  formication.

Burning,  jerking,  tearing  pain.

Smarting,  itching,  followed  by  perspiration.

Herpes  (scabby)  on  face.

Itch-like  eruptions.

Itching,  burning  ulcers.

Carbuncles,  with  continuous  burning  pain.

Boils  on  neck  and  face.

I  I  Desquamation  over  whole  body.

Corns.
*'  Stages  of  Life,  Constitution. Blonde  persons.

Persons  subject  to  violent  attacks  of  cramp  colic  from
fruit,  lead  poisoning  or  excessive  venery.

Rheumatic  or  gouty  rheumatic  diathesis.

I  Neuralgia  of  the  small  branches  of  the  infraorbital  nerves,
in  plethoric,  choleric,  irritable  men,  from  40  to  50  years
of  age,  and  disposed  to  hemorrhoidal  and  gouty  affec-
tions and  to  congestions  towards  head ;  most  frequent
cause  was  vexation,  but  sometimes  too  close  application
to  business;  but  once  produced,  this  neuralgia  was  apt
to  recur  many  days  successively  at  same  hour,  in  fore-
noon.

Boy,  set.  4,  feeble  constitution,  suffering  frequently  from
constipation;  paralysis  of  rectum.

Boy,  set.  13;  violent  headache  for  ninety  hours.

Boy,  set.  13,  after  catching  cold;  rheumatism.

Minna  G.,  set.  17,  had  begun  to  menstruate;  ischias.


391  COLOCYNTHIS.

A  young  countryman,  set.  18,  had  suffered  for  several
weeks;  rheumatic  sciatica.  v

Servant  girl,  set.  about  20,  healthy  complexion,  intelligent
appearance;  neuralgia  of  1.  face.

Miss  W.  B.,  set.  about  20,  after  taking  cold;  acute  gastritis.

Miss  C,  set,  23;  dysentery.

Mrs.  L.,  set.  24,  fond  of  tea  and  coffee,  of  a  venous,  hemor-
rhoidal temperament,  yellow  complexion,  inclined  to
hysterical  affections,  subject  to  cramps  in  stomach  and
pain  in  back,  and  suffering  under  stoppage  of  menses ;
neuralgia  of  solar  plexus.

Young  woman,  set.  25,  suffering  for  five  years;  ovarian
tumor.

Girl,  set.  26;  scrofulous  during  childhood,  not  well  devel-
oped; headache.

Woman,  set.  26,  in  sixth  week  of  lactation,  in  consequence
of  catching  cold;  colic.

Man,  set.  27;  ischias.

Woman,  set.  27,  with  amenorrhoea  and  chronic  disposition
to  vomit;  faceache.

M.  E.,  set.  28;  diarrhoea.

W.,  set.  29,  well  built,  choleric-phlegmatic  temperament,
accustomed  to  much  traveling ;  headache.

Woman,  set.  30,  abortion  at  fourth  month,  followed  by
suppression  of  lochia.

Girl,  set.  30,  tall,  slender  and  healthy,  although  somewhat
pale  and  emaciated  in  consequence  of  former  abdominal
troubles.

Woman,  wife  of  an  apothecary,  suffered  for  fourteen  months
under  unsuccessful  allopathic  treatment;  chronic  morn-
ing diarrhoea.

Girl,  set.  33,  lively  disposition;  colic  before  appearance  of
menses.

Man,  set.  34,  suffering  for  eight  days  from  periodical  re-
currence of  pain  in  r.  eye;  rheumatic  inflammation  of

Mrs. ,  set.  37,  in  consequence  of  taking  cold;  peritonitis.

Man,  set.  38 ;  colic  from  vexation.

Mrs.  C.  E.  H.,  set.  about  38,  always  been  in  good  health,
married  ten  years;  never  pregnant;  ovarian  tumor.

M.,  set.  40,  after  catching  cold  and  heavy  lifting;  coxalgia.

Potter,  set.  40,  had  rheumatism  and  lead  colic,  suffering
all  Winter  and  Spring;  lumbago.

Mrs. ,  a  lady,  set.  about  40,  had  been  for  two  or  three

years  suffering  from  chronic  diarrhoea,  nervous  pros-
tration and  general  debility;  the  result  of  mental  over-
exertion.

Military  man,  set.  40,  suffering  for  nine  months;  allopathic
treatment  without  result;  coxalgia.


COLOCYNTHIS.  392

Woman,  set.  44,  mild  disposition,  short  in  build;  after
having  fallen  twice;  inflammation  about  the  abdomen.

P.  L.,  set.  55,  always  been  in  good  health  until  within  four
or  five  years,  since  when  he  has  been  suffering  from
piles;  ischias.

Woman,  set.  56,  suffering  from  gastralgia  and  gout,  fol-
lowed by  inflammation  of  eyes;  choleric  temperament,
venous,  hemorrhoidal  constitution ;  choroiditis.

Man,  set.  56,  sanguine-choleric  temperament,  has  been
suffering  for  twenty  years  from  attacks  of  colic.

Man,  set.  59,  active;  sciatica.

Man,  set.  60,  otherwise  healthy;  faceache.

The  wife  of  a  custom  clerk,  set.  64,  had  suffered  for  two
years;  ischias.

Woman,  set.  78,  subject  to  attacks  of  vertigo  for  one  year,
otherwise  healthy;  dysentery.
^®  Relations. Antidoted by: Camphor., Caustic, Chamom.,
Coffea,  Opium,  Staphis.

Large  doses  are  counteracted  by  tepid  milk,  infusion  of
galls.  Camphor,  and  Opium.

It  antidotes : Caustic,  Magnes.

Compatible:  Coloc  in  alternation  with  Staphis.  cured  ova-
rian pains;  after  Chamom.  in  abdominal  pains  and  first
stage  of  cholera.

Complementary :  Mercur.  in  dysentery  with  much  tenes-
mus.

Compare:  Act.  rac,  Arnic,  Bellad., Bryon.  (closest ana-

.  logue),  Canthar.,  Caustic,  Chamom.,  Chelid.,  Cinchon.
(beer  intoxicates  easily),  CoccuL,  Coffea,  Digit. ,^  Gambog.,
Lycop.,  Mercur.,  Nux  vom..  Plumbum  (inclination  to  as-
sume strange  attitudes  in  bed),  Pulsat.,  Staphis.  (anger
with  vexation,  abdominal  pains,. neuralgia,  etc.),  Veratr.


393  COMOCLADIA  DENTATA.

COMOCLADIA  DENTATA.

Guao.  Anacardiacese.


A  very  common  tree  in  the  island  of  Cuba,  where  it  is  found  growing  near
the  coast,  hixuriating  mostly  on  barren  or  stony  soHs.  It  is  from  six  to  eight  feet
high,  having  beautiful  dark  green  leaves,  with  a  brownish  border.  The  flowers
are  small,  bluish-brown,  and  clustered  like  grapes.  The  trunk  and  branches  con-
tain a  milky  flui'd  that  turns  black  on  exposure  to  sunlight,  discoloring  the  skin,
linen,  etc.  A  suspicion  is  entertained  that  death  results  from  sleeping  in  its
shade. — Horn.  Pharviacopceia.

Clinical  Authorities. — Catarrhal  ophthalmia,  Hyde,  Eetrospect,  1876,  p.  8 ;
Swelling  of  face,  ear  of  same  side  involved,  Navarro,  Hale's  Symp ,  p.  240 ;  Toothache
from  caries,  Hyde,  A.  O.,  v.  13,  p.  601 ;  Eetrospect,  1876,  p.  8;  Neuralgic  pains  in
costal  region,  Hyde,  A.  O.,  v.  13,  p.  602 ;  Eetrospect,  1876,  p.  8 ;  Sloughing  ulcer  of
r.  breast,  Navarro,  Hale's  Symp.,  p.  241 ;  Inflammation  of  I.  leg  and  foot,  Navarro,
Hale's  Symp.,  p.  241 ;  Indolent  ulcer  on  leg,  Navarro,  Hale's  Symp.,  p.  241 ;  Rheu-
matic pains,  Hyde,  Eetrospect,  1876,  p.  8 ;  Leprosy,  Hale's  Th.,  p.  205.

This  arrangement  includes  the  principal  symptoms  of  J.  Hyde's  excellent
proving  published  in  A.  O.,  v.  13,  p.  593,  1876,  not  out  in  time  for  v.  3  of  the
Encyclopedia.

^  Sensorium. Dizziness  and  heaviness  of  head,  with  shoot-
ing pains,  >  from  motion.
Giddiness  on  rising  from  bed; everything  looks  dark;
motion  >  all  pains  in  head,  <  from  heat.
^  Inner  Head. Dull  aching  in  forehead.
Shooting  pains  through  1.  temple.
■ Severe  pain  at  intervals  from  posterior  portion  of  eyeballs
to  occipital  protuberance.
Head  <  near  warm  stove,  and  when  stooping  it  is  almost
impossible  to  hold  the  h®ad  down,  >  in  open  air.
^  Outer Head. Corrosive itching  of head, with  shooting

pains,  >  by  movement.

^  Sight  and  Eyes. On  rising  from  bed,  everything  looks

dark.

■  Face  most dreadfully  swollen,  eyes project far  out of

sockets,  can  see  but  a  faint  glimmer  of  light  with  left.

Sees  from  r.  eye  a  red  ring  around  light  of  lamp,  which

disappears  on  closing  eye.
I  Eyes  feel  very  heavy,  larger  than  usual,  painful  and
pressing  out  of  head,  as  if  something  was  pressing  on
top  of  eyeballs,  moving  then  downward  and  outward.
Aching  soreness  of  eyeballs,  which  feel  heavy  and  too
large.


COMOCLADIA  DENTATA.  394

1 1  Right  eye  very  painful,  feeling  much  larger  and  more

protruded  than  left.
■Right  eyeball  very  sore,  <  on  moving  eye.
Severe  pains  through  eyeballs,  extending  to  occiput.
1  Eyeballs  feel  <  on  moving  them.

■  Catarrhal  ophthalmia.

Erysipelatous  inflammation  of  tissues  in  and  around  eye.

■  Ciliary  neuralgia  from  asthenopia  and  chronic  iritis.

■  Eyes  more  painful  near  warm  stove,  with  profuse  lach-

rymation.
^  Hearing  and  Ears. Heat  and  fulness  in  interior  of  r.  ear.

■  Left  ear  all  cracked  and  desquamating  a  substance  like

powdered  starch.

"^  Smell  and  Nose. Intolerable  itching  of  nose.

^  Upper  Face. Burning  on  face  and  eyes,  <  towards  even-
ing.

■  Painful  burning  on  face,  particularly  about  eyes.
Excessive  swelling  of  face,  with  tormenting  itching  and

swelling.
Heat  and  sense  of  fulness  in  face  over  superior  maxillary
bone,  and  sensation  as  of  a  pimple  over  r.  antrum.

■  Left  side  of  face  swollen; 1.  ear  all  cracked  and  des-

quamating a  substance  like  powdered  starch.

■  Very  great  swelling  of  face.

^  Lower  Face. Lower  lip  blistered  and  swollen.
^"  Teeth  and  Gums. Sensation  as  if  molar  teeth  on  r.  side
were  loose.
Sensation  as  if  tooth  was  drawing  out  of  its  socket.
Aching  pains  in  teeth.

■Second  molar  tooth  r.  side  carious;  pain  commences  in
it  at  4.30  to  5  p.m.  ;  at  times  shoots  down  in  line  with
larynx,  leaving  sore  track ;  pain  <  in  bed,  >  from  ex-
ternal warmth  and  pressure.
Pains  in  teeth  >  by  pressure.
When  toothache  stops,  head  feels  large.
Inflammation  of  gums  of  lower  jaw.
^^  Taste  and  Tongue. Tongue  coated  dirty  yellow.
^^  Inner  Mouth. Mouth  dry.

^^  Belching  and  Nausea. Sour  eructations  two  hours  after
eating.
Sickness  of  stomach.
'^  Stomach. Pressure  and  heaviness  in  region  of  stomach.
^^  Abdomen. Abdomen  feels  swollen.

Dull  pain,  gurgling  and  uneasiness  in  intestines  in  hypo-
gastric region,  with  emission  of  odorless  flatus.
Acute  sore  pains  extending  across  abdomen  above  umbili-
cus, aff'ecting  the  breathing.
Dull  pain  in  abdomen,  clothes  too  tight.


395  COMOCLADIA  DENT  ATA-.

A  pale  red  flush,  as  if  an  eruption  would  make  its
appearance  across  abdomen.
^^  Stool  and  Rectum.  Severe  flatulent  pain  in  abdomen,  pre-
ceding and  during  a  diarrhoeic  stool ;  followed  by  a  feel-
ing of  weakness  and  perspiration  on  face  and  neck.
^^  Male  Sexual  Organs.  Intense  itching  on  lower  part  of
penis,  also  on  inner  side  of  prepuce.

Continued  tingling,  itching  of  scrotum  during  night.
^^  Respiration. Oppression  of  breathing.

Oppressian  of  breath  on  account  of  sharp  pains  in  1.  side.
^^  Cough. Spasmodic  dry  cough  at  night,  with tickling  in
throat  and  constant  dull  pain  under  1.  nipple,  extend-
ing through  to  1.  scapula.

Rheumatic  and  pleurodynic  pain  in  chest.

Titillating  cough ;  hacking  cough  in  daytime.
^^  Inner  Chest  and  Lungs. Cannot  draw  a  long  breath  on
account  of  sharp  pain  felt  at  centre  of  thorax  on  1.  side.

Soreness  in  1.  lung,  such  as  is  felt  during  convalescence
from  pneumonia.

Rheumatic  and  pleurodynic  pains  in  chest;  pain  under
1.  nipple  through  to  1.  scapula.

Constant  pain  across  chest.
^^  Outer  Chest. Drawing  in  r.  anterior  wall  of  chest.

Drawing,  cramping  in  r.  anterior  of  chest  and  axilla,  ex-
tending down  arm  to  fingers,  jerking  of  little  finger.

Acute  sharp  pains  in  1.  mammary  gland,  about  one  inch
above  nipple  and  leaves  a  burning  sensation;  it  goes  to
r.  side  and  down  r.  arm.

Intermitting,  throbbing,  pressing  pain  in  costal  cartilage
of  fifth  rib,  r.  side,  leaving  a  burning,  raw  sensation,  <
during  rest.

■Sloughing  ulcer  on  r.  breast.
^^  Neck  and  Back. On  moving  head,  sense  of  fulness,  rigid-
ity and  lameness  of  muscles  of  neck.

Rheumatic  pains  and  stitches  in  back;  stitches  leave  a
burning.
^^  Upper  Limbs. Sharp  pain  through  r.  shoulder  to  scapula.

Painful  burning  on  arms.

Crampy  sensation  in  muscles  of  r.  upper  arm.

Numb,  tensive  pain  in  forearm,  and  rheumatic  stiff'ness
of  shoulders  and  elbow-joints.

Drawing,  aching  in  forearm.

Drawing,  cramping  in  fingers.

Frequent  rheumatic  pains  in  hands,  arms  and  legs.

Vesicular  eruption  on  arms  and  hands.

Intermittent,  pressing  outward  pain  in  1.  sacro-iliac  artic-
ulation, sensitive  to  pressure,  >  by  walking,  but  feels
lame  and  sore.

Pulsating  pain  in  neck  of  r.  femur  and  in  r.  thigh.


COMOCLADIA  DENTATA.  396

Severe  pains  in  both  knees;  pressing  down  to  feet  on
inside  of  legs.

Drawing  in  r.  knee,  extending  into  anterior  muscles  of
thigh.

Drawing,  cramping  in  hollow  of  r.  foot,  passing  along
outer  border  of  gastrocnemius  muscle  to  knee,  then  in
tibia,  where  it  becomes  a  numb  aching,  then  in  tarsus,
where  it  becomes  a  drawing-aching,  as  if  foot  would
cramp.

Lameness  and  loss  of  strength  in  1.  ankle.

Crampy  lameness  in  r.  leg,  above  instep,  >  by  walking.

I  Inflammation  of  1.  leg  and  foot,  with  violent  fever;  the
swelling  increased  enormously  when  the  pain  subsided ;
the  skin  became  white  and  covered  with  thin  scales,
cracked  and  discharged  a  sanious  fluid.

Vesicular  eruption  on  legs  changing  to  pustules,  and
sometimes  to  deep,  unhealthy  ulcers.

I  Indolent  ulcer  of  six  years  standing,  on  lower  third  of  r.
leg,  near  external  malleolus,  of  irregular  shape  and
hard  edges ;  the  ulcer  was  deep  and  discharged  a  sani-
ous, fetid  pus.

Herpes  on  legs.
^*  Limbs  in  General. Lame,  aching  pain  in  r.  upper  arm ;  in

r.  knee.
^  Rest. Position. Motion. Rest:  pain  in  costal  cartilage
of  fifth  rib  <;  rheumatic  pains  and  swellings  <.

In  bed:  pain  in  second  molar  of  r.  side  <.

Motion :  dizziness  and  heaviness  of  head,  with  shooting
pains  > ;  all  pains  in  head  > ;  rheumatic  pains  and
swellings  >  by  continued.

On  moving  head :  sense  of  fulness,  rigidity  and  lameness
of  muscles  of  neck.

On  moving  eyes:  r.  eyeball  very  sore;  eyeballs  <.

On  rising  from  bed :  giddiness ;  everything  looks  dark.

Stooping :  almost  impossible  to  hold  head  down.

Walking:  intermittent,  pressing  outward  pain  in  1.  sacro-
iliac articulation  > ;  crampy  lameness  in  r.  leg  above
instep  >.
^^  Sleep. Dreamy, refreshing sleep, with pleasant dreams,

almost  clairvoyant.
^^  Time. During  day:  hacking  cough.

4.30  to  5  P.M. :  pain  commences  in  second  molar  tooth  of
r.  side.

Towards  evening:  burning  on  face  and  eyes  <.

Night: continued  tingling,  itching  of  scrotum  during;
spasmodic  dry  cough  with  tickling  in  throat  and  con-
stant dull  pain  under  1.  nipple  extending  through  to  1.
scapula.
^^  Temperature  and  Weather. Heat :  <  pains  in  head.


397  COMOCLADIA  DENTATA.

Warm  stove :  head  < ;  eyes  more  painful.

Warmth:  pain  in  second  molar  of  r.  side  >  by  external.

Open  air:  head  >.
*^  Fever, i  Violent  fever. ^Inflammation  of  1.  leg  and  foot.

Sense  of  weakness,  with  heat  and  perspiration  of  face  and
neck.
^^  Attacks,  Periodicity. Frequent :  rheumatic  pains  in  hands,
arms  and  legs.

Constant:  pressure  and  heaviness  in  region  of  stomach;
dull  pain  under  1.  nipple,  extending  to  1.  scapula;  pain
across  chest.

Of  six  years  standing:  indolent  ulcer  on  r.  leg,  near  ex-
ternal malleolus.
*^  Locality  and  Direction.  Right:  sees  a  red  ring  around
light  of  lamp;  eye  very  painful,  feeling  much  larger
and  more  protruded  than  L;  eyeball  very  sore;  heat
and  fulness  in  interior  of  ear;  as  of  a  pimple  over
antrum;  as  if  molar  teeth  were  loose;  second  molar
tooth  carious;  drawing  in  anterior  wall  of  chest;  draw-
ing-cramping in  anterior  of  chest  and  axilla,  extending
down  arm  to  fingers,  jerking  of  little  finger;  inter-
mitting, throbbing,  pressing  pain  in  costal  cartilage
of  fifth  rib,  leaving  a  burning,  raw  sensation ;  sloughing
ulcer  on  breast;  sharp  pain  through  shoulder  to  scap-
ula; crampy  sensation  in  muscles  of  upper  arm;  pul-
sating pain  in  neck  of  femur  and  thigh ;  drawing  in
knee,  extending  into  anterior  muscles  of  thigh;  draw-
ing-cramping in  hollow  of  foot  passing  along  outer  bor-
der of  gastrocnemius  muscle  to  knee,  then  in  tibia,
where  it  becomes  a  numb  aching,  then  in  tarsus,  where
it  becomes  a  drawing  aching,  as  if  foot  would  cramp ;
crampy  lameness  in  leg  above  instep;  indolent  ulcer  on
lower  third  of  leg  near  external  malleolus ;  lame,  ach-
ing pain  in  upper  arm,  in  knee.

Left:  shooting  pains  through  temple;  can  see  but  a  faint
glimmer  of  light  with  eye;  ear  cracked  and  desqua-
mating a  substance  like  powdered  starch ;  side  of  face
swollen;  sharp  pains  in  side  oppressing  breathing;  con-
stant dull  pain  under  nipple  extending  through  to  scap-
ula; sharp  pain  at  centre  of  thorax  on  side;  soreness
in  lung;  acute  sharp  pain  in  mammary  gland  about
one  inch  above  nipple  and  leaves  a  burning  sensation,
it  goes  to  r.  side  and  down  r.  arm ;  intermittent,  press-
ing outward  pain  in  sacro-iliac  articulation;  lameness
and  loss  of  strength  in  ankle;  inflammation  of  leg  and
foot,  skin  white  and  covered  with  scales,  cracked  and
discharging  a  sanious  fluid.
^^  Sensations.  As  if  eyes  were  larger  than  usual;  as  if  some-
thing were  pressing  on  top  of  eyeballs,  moving  them


COMOCLADIA  DENTATA.  398

downward  and  outward;  as  if  eyeballs  were  too  large;
as  if  r.  eyeball  was  much  larger  and  more  protruded
than  L;  as  of  a  pimple  over  r.  antrum;  as  if  molar
teeth  on  r.  side  were  loose;  as  if  tooth  was  drawing  out
of  socket;  as  if  head  was  large,  after  toothache;  as  if
abdomen  was  swollen ;  as  if  foot  would  cramp.

Pain:  at  intervals  from  posterior  portion  of  eyeballs  to
occipital  protuberance;  in  eyes;  in  second  molar  tooth
of  r.  side,  shoots  down  in  line  with  larynx,  leaving
sore  track ;  in  teeth ;  dull,  in  intestines  and  hypogastric
region;  dull,  in  abdomen;  sharp,  in  1.  side,  oppressing
breathing;  dull,  under  1.  nipple  extending  through  to
1.  scapula;  sharp,  in  centre  of  thorax  on  1.  side;  acute,
sharp,  in  1.  mmmary  gland  about  one  inch  above
nipple,  and  leaves  a  burning  sensation,  it  goes  to  r.
side  and  down  r.  arm;  sharp,  through  r.  shoulder  to
scapula;  severe,  in  both  knees.

Stitches:  in  back,  leaving  a  burning.

Shooting  pains:  in  head;  through  1.  temple.

Drawing :  in  r.  anterior  wall  of  chest  and  axilla,  extend-
ing down  arm  to  fingers;  in  forearm;  in  fingers;  in  r.
kiiee,  extending  into  anterior  muscles  of  thigh ;  in  hol-
low of  r.  foot,  passing  along  outer  border  of  gastrocne-
mius muscle  to  knee,  then  in  tibia,  then  in  tarsus.

Throbbing  pain :  in  costal  cartilage  of  fifth  rib,  r.  side,
leaving  a  burning,  raw  sensation.

Burning:  on  face  and  eyes ;  painful,  on  face  and  arms,  and
particularly  about  eyes ;  about  one  inch  above  1.  nipple ;
in  costal  cartilage  of  fifth  rib,  r.  side;  in  back;  painful,
on  arms ;  over  whole  body.

Numb,  tensive  pain  of  forearm  and  rheumatic  stifihess  of
shoulders  and  elbow-joints.

Pressing  pain :  in  costal  cartilage  of  fifth  rib,  r.  side,  leav-
ing a  burning,  raw  sensation.

Cramping:  in  r.  anterior  of  chest  and  axilla,  extending
down  arm  to  fingers;  in  muscles  of  r.  upper  arm;  in
fingers;  in  hollow  of  r.  foot  passing  along  outer  border
of  gastrocnemius  muscle  to  knee,  then  in  tibia,  then  in
tarsus.

Acute  sore  pains :  extending  across  abdomen  above  um-
bilicus, aff"ecting  breathing.

Aching  soreness:  of  eyeballs.

Soreness:  of  r.  eyeball;  in  1.  lung.

Rheumatic  pains:  in  chest;  in  back;  in  hands,  arms  and
legs.

Pleurodynic  pains :  in  chest.

Aching:  dull,  in  forehead;  in  teeth;  in  forearm;  numb,
in  tibia;  in  tarsus;  in  r.  upper  arm;  in  r.  knee.

Pressure:  constant,  in  region  of  stomach.


399  COMOCLADIA  DENTATA.

Pressing  down  to  feet  on  inside  of  legs.

Intermittent,  pressing  outward  pain  in  1.  sacro-iliac  articu-
lation, >  by  walking,  but  feels  lame  and  sore.

Crampy  lameness  in  r.  leg  above  instep.

Lameness:  in  1.  ankle;  in  r.  upper  arm;  in  r.  knee.

Pulsating  pain:  in  neck  of  r.  femur  and  thigh.

Raw  sensation:  in  costal  cartilage  of  fifth  rib,  r.  side.

Tingling:  of  scrotum.

Heaviness:  of  head;  of  eyes;  of  eyeballs;  in  region  of
stomach.

Fulness:  in  interior  of  r.  ear;  in  face  over  superior  max-
illary bone;  of  head  on  moving  head.

Itching:  corrosive,  of  head;  intolerable,  of  nose;  excessive
swelling  of  face  with  tormenting ;  intense,  on  lower  part
of  penis,  also  on  inner  side  of  prepuce;  of  scrotum;
tormenting,  over  whole  body.

Tickling :  in  throat.

Heat:  in  interior  of  r.  ear;  in  face  over  superior  maxil-
lary bone.
^*  Tissues. Rheumatic  pains  and  swellings,  <  by  rest,  >  by
continued  motion.

Aff'ects  the  skin  in  a  marked  degree.
^^  Touch. Pressure :  >  pain  in  second  molar  of  r.  side ;  pains
in  teeth > ; pressing  outward  pain in 1. sacro-iliac
articulation,  sensitive  to.
^^  Skin. I  Tormenting  itching  and  burning  over  whole  body.

Painful  burning  on  face  and  arms;  face  enormously
swollen.

Violent  itching-burning,  redness  and  erysipelatous  swell-
ing of  face,  hands  and  other  parts  of  body,  followed  by
yellow  vesication  and  desquamation  of  cuticle.

I  Red  color  all  over  body,  resembling  scarlet  fever.
. I  Skin  white  and  covered  with  shiny  scales;  cracked  and
discharged  sanious  fluid. ^Inflammation  leg  and  foot.

I  Inflammation  of  the  part,  with  deep,  hard  edged  ulcers,
which  discharge  a  thick,  purulent,  greenish-yellow  mat-
ter, having  a  very  peculiar,  fetid  smell,  parts  becoming
in  appearance  similar  to  a  piece  of  raw,  decayed  meat,
while  surrounding  skin  is  covered  with  small  shining
scales.

I  I  Malignant  erysipelas;  herjDes;  zona;  leprosy.
*^  Stages  of  Life,  Constitution. Miss  H.,  set.  17,  a  student,
dark,  thin  hair,  blue  eyes,  fair  complexion,  mixed  tem-
perament; toothache.

Mrs.  C,  set.  25,  mother  of  one  child,  auburn  hair,  fair
complexion,  blue  eyes,  nervo-sanguine  temperament;
neuralgic  pains  in  costal  region,  r.  side.

Lady,  £et.  38,  sloughing  ulcer  of  breast.
*^  Relations. Compare:  Anac,  RJius  tox.,  Rhus  rad.,  Rhus  ven.


CONIUM  MACULATUM.  400

CONIUM  MACULATUM.

Spotted,  or  Poison  Hemlock.  Umbelliferse.

A  native  of  Europe,  but  naturalized  in  the  United  States.  The  active  princi-
ple is  Conia,  a  yellowish,  oily,  transparent  fluid,  lighter  than  water,  of  an  acrid,
nauseous,  tobacco-like  taste.  It  is  very  volatile;  slightly  soluble  in  water;  its
combinations  with  acids  do  not  easily  crystallize,  and  are  very  soluble  and  poison-
ous. It  was  known  in  ancient  times,  but  not  used  until  recently  as  an  internal
medicine.  It  was  employed  in  the  execution  of  political  offenders,  and  was  the
means  of  Socrates'  death.  Dioscorides  recommended  the  dried  plant  to  be  applied
upon  the  genitals,  to  remedy  nocturnal  pollutions,  and  upon  the  breasts  of  girls,  to
prevent  their  development.  Pliny  and  Avicenna  recommended  poultices  of  it  to
remove  tumors  of  breasts  and  testes,  and  to  suppress  the  secretion  of  milk.

Proved  by  Hahnemann  and  his  pro  vers;  see  Encyclopedia,  v.  3,  p.  519.

CiiiNiCAii  Authorities. — Derangement  of  mind,  Elwert,  Analytical  Therapeu-
tics, V.  1,  p.  132;  Bad  effects  of  overstudy  (2  cases),  Berridge,  Analytical  Therapeu-
tics, V.  1,  pp.  104,  109;  Melancholia,  Elwert,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf.,  v.  1,  p.  22;  Ancemia
of  brain,  J.  A.  Terry,  Hom.  Times,  1877,  p.  49;  Vertigo,  Schreter,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf.
v.  1,  p.  76;  Vertigo  after  delivery,  B.  F.  Dake,  Organon,  v.  3,  p.  355 ;  Sick  headache
H.  N.  Guernsey,  Organon,  v.  2,  p.  222;  Asthenopia,  J.  S.  Hall,  N.  E.  M.  G.,  v.  6,  p
339;  Photophobia  (3  cases),  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf.,  v.  1,  p.  266;  W.  Eggert,  Raue's  R.,
1871,  p.  61 ;  Photophobia  during  parturition,  C.  Hg.,  Hom.  Clinics,  v.  1,  p.  I
Scrofulous  photophobia  (2  cases),  Seidel,  B.  J.  H.,  v.  6,  p.  35 ;  Ophthalmia,  R.  M
Theobald,  Raue's  R.,  1873,  p.  66 ;  Traumatic  inflammation  of  eye,  Haustein,  Riick
Kl.  Erf.,  V.  1,  p.  230;  Traumatic  gray  cataract,  Hah.,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf.,  v.  5,  p.  1026
Gray  cataract,  Allen  &  Norton,  p.  54 ;  Inflammation  of  eyes,  Segin,  Hom.
Clinics,  V.  1,  p.  99  ;  Affection  of  eyes,  R.  T.  Cooper,  Raue's  R.,  1872,  p.  66 ;  also  in
B.  J.  H.,  V.  29,  p.  779 ;  Swelling  of  upper  eyelids,  Knorre,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf.,  v.  1,  p.
263;  Blenorrhoea  of  lachrymal  sac  (2  cases),  Kirsten,  Allen  &  Norton,  p.  53;
Epistaxis  and  ozcena  after  abuse  of  mercury,  Rosenberg,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf.,  v.  5,  p.  172  ;
Epistaxis  and  Acne  faciei,  Hirsch,  Raue's  R.,  1872,  p.  96;  Cancer  of  cheek,  Gan-
werky,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf.,  v.  4,  p.  304;  Cancerous  ulcer  of  lip,  Kammerer,  Riick.  Kl.
Erf.,  V.  1,  p.  444;  Stens,  Ruck.  Kl.  Erf.,  v.  4,  p.  304;  Toothache,  Hom.  Clinics,
1875,  p.  9 ;  Cramp  in  stomach,  Werber,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf.,  v.  1,  p.  636 ;  Gastralgia,
Werber,  Hom.  Rev.,  v.  14,  p.  489  ;  Spasms  in  pit  of  stomach,  with  pyrosis,  Guernsey,
MSS. ;  Cancer  of  stomach,  Ganwerky,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf.,  v.  5,  p.  202;  Enlargement  of
liver,  Rentsch,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf.,  v.  1,  p.  693 ;  Acute  inflammation  of  pancreas,  B.
Buchner,  Raue's  R.,  1874,  p.  209 ;  Chronic  dysentery,  C.  H.  Goodman,  Raue's  R.,
1871,  p.  117;  Diabetes  with  parotitis  and  profuse  sweat,  A.  Lippe,  MSS,;  Nightly
emissions  and  spermatorrhoea,  T.  S.  Hoyne,  Organon,  v.  1,  p.  325;  Uterine  disorder,
H.  N.  Martin,  Hom.  Clinics,  v.  2,  No.  1 ;  Dysmenorrhosa,  H.  N.  Martin,  Raue's
E.,  1870,  p.  254 ;  Prolapsus  and  dysmenorrhcea,  W.  C.  Goodno,  Raue's  R.,  1873,  p.
166 ;  Uterine  polypi,  Raue's  R.,  1874,  p.  232 ;  Angel  Maria  Chavez,  Hom.  Clinics,
v.  1,  p.  126;  Morning  sickness,  H.  Hatch,  Hom.  Clinics,  v.  1,  p.  30;  Galaetorrhcea,
Lietzau,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf,  v.  2,  p.  412;  Chronic  laryngeal  inflammation,  with  twitching


401  CONIUM  MACULATUM.

of  facial  muscles,  Kiick.  Kl.  Erf.,  v.  5,  p.  788  ;  Diphtheria  (5  cases  cured,  3  of  which
were  after  scarlatina),  Kunkel,  Oehme's  Diphtheria,  p.  37  ;  Asthma  senile,  Lobeth
Kiick.  Kl.  Erf.,  v.  3,  187;  Cough,  Hirsch,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf.,  v.  3,  p.  11;  Hencke,
Eaue's  R.,  1870,  p.  164 ;  Wilcox,  Kane's  Rec,  1870,  p.  164 ;  Kiick.  Kl.  Erf.,  v.  5
p.  680;  Hirschel,  Kiick.  Kl.  Erf.,  v.  8,  p.  680;  Pain  in  chest  during  pneumonia,  L,
Shafer,  Gregg's  Ills.  Rep.,  p.  96;  Tumor  of  I.  breast,  C.  Preston,  Hah.  Mo.,  v.  1,  p
456 ;  Tumor  of  r,  breast,  Hartung,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf.,  v.  2,  p.  376 ;  J.  G.  Gilchrist,
Eaue's  R.,  1871,  p.  160 ;  Tumor  in  breast,  J.  H.  Nankivell,  Raue's  R.,  1874,  p.  239
Scirrhus  in  mamma,  H.  C.  Schneider,  Raue's  R.,  1871,  p.  161 ;  A.  Thompson  (2
cases),  Raue's  R.,  1872,  p.  182;  Induration  of  mamma  following  an  abscess,  Raue's  R.

1872,  p.  181 ;  Scirrhus  of  I.  breast,  Caspari,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf.,  v.  2,  p.  377 ;  Induration
of  mamma,  A.  M.  Gushing,  Horn.  Times,  1875,  p.  9;  Induration  and  swelling  of  cer-
vical glands,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf.,  v.  4,  p.  404;  Tumor  on  back,  Stens,  Sr.,  Raue's  R.,

1873,  p.  248 ;  Herpetic  eruption  on  forearm,  Hartlaub,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf.,  v.  4,  p.
237 ;  Herpes  in  hands  and  forearms,  Seidel,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf.,  v.  5,  p.  237 ;  Herpetic
eruption  (7  cases),  Seidel,  Schron.,  Kiick.  Kl.  Erf.,  v.  4,  p.  237.

^  Mind.  Obtuseness  of  all  the  senses;  unconsciousness;  wan-
dering about  as  if  half  asleep.

I  Extremely  insensible.

I  Weak  memory. ^Vertigo.

I  Memory  enfeebled,  likewise  the  power  of  correctly  express-
ing one's  self;  difficult  comprehension.

I  Forgetfulness ;  excessive  diflficulty  of  recollecting  things,

particularly  dates.
iDulness-,  like stupefaction, difficulty  in  understanding
what  he  reads.

I I  Inability  to  sustain  any  mental  effort.

I  Tired,  weary  sensation  in  brain,  with  physical  as  well  as
nervous  prostration.

Sensation  in  forehead  or  front  part  of  brain  like  an  ina-
bility to  fix  the  mind  on  any  subject;  Iosqs  hold  of  the
idea  and  gets  confused.

Buried  in  thought;  apprehensive  respecting  the  present  or
future.

I  Insanity  of  a  periodical  or  alternating  type.

Imbecility  more  frequent  than  insanity.

■  Inclined  to  cry,  sobs  aloud  when  alone.

I  I  Likes  to  wear  his  best  clothes,  makes  useless  purchases,

cares  very  little  for  things,  wastes  or  ruins  them ;  does

not  want  to  work,  prefers  to  play.
I  I  Picks  his  nose,  which  bleeds  easily;  or  picks  his  fingers;

lies  in  bed  most  of  the  time;  does  not  like  to  answer

questions.
Involuntary  laughing  and  weeping.

■  Dislike  to  society  and  yet  a  dread  to  be  alone. ^Hysteria.
I  He  is  averse  to  being  near  people,  and  to  the  talk  of  those

passing  him;  is  inclined  to  seize  hold  of  and  abuse  them.
VOL.  IV. — 26.


CONIUM  MACULATUM.  402

I  I  Patient  averse  to  talking,  dressing  himself,  taking  food
or  seeing  her  children;  spleen  enlarged. ^Melancholia.
I  Disinclination  for  business.
Mood  serious;  unsympathizing,  from  indolence.

■  Complete  indifference;  takes  no  interest  in  anything,  par-

ticularly walking  in  open  air. ^Hypochondriasis.

■  Great  depression  of  spirits  preceding  menstrual  period.

I  Alternate  fits  of  silent  depression  and  quarrelsome  liveli-
ness. ^Mania.
I  Sad  and  gloomy  for  days,  then  excited.

■  Great  unhappiness  of  mind,  recurring  every  fourteen  days.

■  Easily  disturbed  by  trifles,  moved  to  tears;  anxious.
Solicitude  concerning  the  future;  great  concern  about  any

little  thing  that' may  happen.

■  ■Hypochondriasis  and  hysteria  from  suppression  of,  or

too  free  indulgence  in  sexual  instinct,  with  low  spirited-
ness,  anxiety  and  sadness.

■  Hypochondriasis  with  suppression  of  menses.*

■  Great  anxiety ;  precordial  anguish ;  superstitious  and  full

of  fear,  with  frequent  thoughts  of  death ;  loss  of  memory.
Discouraged,  despondent,  and  dissatisfied  with  herself  and
her  surroundings.

■  Timid,  cannot  be  persuaded  to  work ;  want  of  proper  will.

■  Irritable,  gets  out  of  temper  easily,  and  then  his  sight

gets  blurred,  and  face  becomes  pale. ^Anaemia  of  brain.

■  Very  ill  humored  in  afternoon,  from  5  to  6,  as  though  a

great  grief  weighed  upon  him,  with  paralyzed  feeling  in
all  the  limbs,  indifference  and  taking  no  interest  in  any-
thing,

■  Morose  mood;  everything  about  him  impresses  him  un-

pleasantly.

■  She  feels  peevish,  vexed  and  easily  put  out  about  trifles.
Very  much  excited,  passionate,  doEiineering,  quarrelsome,

scolds  and  will  not  bear  contradiction.
Inclination  to  start,  as  with  fright.

■  Cannot  endure  any  kind  of  excitement,  it brings  on

physical  and  mental  depression,  with  weakness.
Ailments  from  grief.
Worse  when  idle.
^  Sensormm. ■Delirium  and  unconsciousness.

Continued  stupefaction,  with  constant  inclination  to  sleep.

■  Confused  feeling  in  head,  often  sits  lost  in  thought.

■  Constant  confusion of  forehead  in  region  of  eyebrows

and  root  of  nose.
Dizziness  and  whirling  sensation  in  head.
Vertigo  and  pressure  in  head  with  unaltered  pulse.

■  Cannot  count  up  anything; vertigo,  <  from  stooping.

^Uterine  disorder.


403  CONIUM  MACULATUM.

Vertigo:  each  time  when  turning  the  head;  like  turning
in  a  circle;  on  rising  from  a  seat;  worse  when  lying
down,  as  though  the  bed  were  turning  in  a  circle;  when
turning  in  bed  or  when  looking  around ;  from  motion
downwards;  when  walking;  with  inclination  to  fall
sideways;  with  black  spots  before  eyes;  from  smallest
quantity  of  spirituous  liquors;* depending  upon  paresis
of  third  pair.

I  The  slightest  spirituoQS  drink  intoxicates  him.

Patient  wishes  to  keep  the  head  perfectly  still.
^  Inner  Head. Brain  sensitive  to  noise.

Painful  sensation  of  looseness  (lockerheit)  in  head  when
shaking  head.

■  Heaviness  in  head.

Sensation  of  a  large,  heavy  lump  in  brain.

Cracking  in  head,  wakens  from  siesta  with  fright  and  a
start.

Stitching  pain  from  within  outward,  in  forehead,  morn-
ings, or  at  noon.

iPain  sometimes  shoots  over  to  front  of  head,  with  sensa-
tion as  if  something  like  a  fringe  was  falling  down  over
eyes. ^Uterine  disorder.

Darting,  tearing  pains,  chiefly  in  forehead  and  vertex.

■  Throbbing  from  forehead  to  occiput.

When  shaking  head,  feels  a  pain  from  brow  to  occiput,  as

if  something  had  become  detached.
Stupefying  headache,  first  in  forepart  of  head,  later  in

back  part,  with  coryza,  <  by  open  air,  >  by  moving

head  and  while  stooping.
Tearing  in  temples  and  sides  of  head,  with  sensation  as  if

brain  had  gone  to  sleep,  <  by  contact,  motion,  after

eating,  and  by  a  recumbent  position,  or  while  stooping.
Tightness  of  head  as  if  both  temples  were  compressed,

after  a  meal.

■  Stitches  in  top  of  head.

■Scorching  on  top  of  head;  hot  spots  on  back  of  head,  >
by  going  out  into  open  air,  and  by  cold  water,  <  from
excitement  or  overwork. ^Uterine  disorder.

■  Lancinating  pains,  especially  in  vertex.

■After  overstudy :  feeling  at  times  of  a  foreign  body  under
skull,  in  vertex;  >  during  reading  <  after;  <  on
going  to  sleep,  or  from  excitement  or  thinking  of  pain ;
>  by  touch ;  relief  during  reading  seems  to  rise  from
diversion  of  mind  from  the  pain;  clicking  noise  in  1.
vertex  on  walking  and  during  stool;  also  in  occiput  on
walking,  especially  in  evening  when  tired.

■  Pain  in  occiput,  with  every  pulse,  as  if  pierced  with  a

knife.


CONIUM  MACULATUM.  404

I  Heaviness  in occiput  on  bending  head forward; ver-

■Sensation  in  r.  half  of  brain  as  of  a  large  foreign  body.

Semi-lateral, gradually increasing headache, as if  the

head  had  been  bruised,  and  as  if  a  load  were  pressing

down  on  it;  this  sensation  is  increased  by  moving  head

towards  affected  side.

One-sided  headache,  with  nausea.

■  Numbness,  with  sensation  of  coldness  one  side  of  head.

■  Tearing  in  head,  must  lie  down;  one-sided.

Griping  and  heavy  fulness  alternately  in  various  parts  of
forehead;  this  sensation  seems  to  come  from  stomach,
at  same  time  brain  so  sensitive  that  it  is  painfully
shaken  even  by  a  slight  noise  or  conversation.

Stupefying  headache  in  outer  part  of  head.

I  Headache  as  if  head  were  too  full  and  would  burst;
morning  when  awaking,

■  Tearing  headache,  with  nausea.

Headache  early  in  morning,  as  if  head  had  been  bruised

by  blows,  or  would  fall  to  pieces.
Headache,  with  nausea  and  vomiting  of  mucus.

■  ■Sick  headaches,  with  inability  to  urinate;  great  giddi-

ness, <  lying  in  bed,  when  everything  in  room  seems

to  go  round.
■Chronic  stitching  headache.
Headache :  caused  by  too  small  but  frequent  stools,  with

tenesmus; with pains  all over  chest; during  violent

coughing  fits;  <  from  least  noise,  during  motion  and

from  a  sudden  jar  or  shock.

■  Congestion  to  head,  with  catarrhal  sensation  and  heat  of

face.

■  Hydrocephalus:  pains  <  when  awaking,  after  eating,  in

open  air; >  by  external pressure,  lying down,  and
closing  eyes.

■  Inflammation  of  brain  in  children.
^  Outer  Head. Falling  off  of  hair.

Impetigo  capitis.
^  Sight  and  Eyes. Optical  illusions  in  dark  or prismatic
colors.

■  ■Objects  look red; rainbow colored;-'  striped,  confused

spots.

■  Black  spots  before  eyes  with  vertigo. ^Dysentery.
Dark  points  and  colored  bands  before  eyes.
Flickering  before  eyes.

■  Sensation  as  if  something  like  a  fringe  was  falling  over

eyes.

■  Double  vision.

■  ■Weakness  of  sight;  amaurosis.


405  CONIUM  MACULATUM.

■  Shortsighted;  asthenopia.

■  Cannot  read  long  without  letters  running  together;  burn-

ing pain  deep  in  eyes,  with  hot  flushes,  cannot  bear
either  light  or  heat;  <  in  a  warm  room;  >  in  morn-
ings and  on  a  cloudy  day;  black  spots  are  seen  on
closing  eyes;  distant  objects  appear  more  distant;
objects  are  surrounded  by  prismatic  colors  out  of  doors;
eyes  perfectly  normal  in  appearance ;  asthenopia.

Feeling  of  coldness  in  eyes,  when  walking  in  open  air.

■Sluggish  adaptation  of  eye  to  varied  range  of  vision.

■  Near  objects  are  seen  indistinctly.

■  Vision  becomes  blurred  when  he  is  irritable. ^Anasmia

of  brain.
Vision  good  for  fixed  objects,  but  when  put  in  motion

before  eyes,  there  is  a  haze  and  dull  vision,  producing

vertigo.
Cannot  bear  bright  light  or  heat.

■  1  Weakness  and  dazzling  of  eyes,  together  with  giddiness,

and  debility,  especially  of  arms  and  legs ;  on  walking,

staggering  as  if  drunk.
Tremulous  look  as  if  eyes  were  trembling.
In  room,  eyes  are  dazzled  by  light  of  day.

■  ■Aversion  to  light,  without  inflammation  of  eyes.

■  Intense  photophobia  of  both  eyes,  with  which  were  asso-

ciated particularly  in  1.  eye,  redness  of  sclerotic,  dim-
ness of  cornea,  swelling  and  redness  of  eyelids,  great
increase  of  secretion  of  mucus  and  tears;  scrofulous
constitution.

■  Photophobia,  with  profuse  flow  of  tears  when  eyes  are

forcibly  opened ;  very  slight  or  no  redness ;  pains  <  at
night  and  in  any  light;  >  in  a  dark  room  and  by
pressure.
"  1  Severe  photophobia  and  lachrymation ;  borders  of  eye-
lids red  and  swollen;  ulcers  on  cornea  near  sclerotic
where  there  is  great  vascularity;  catamenia  irregular.

■  Photophobia  of  strumous  ophthalmia.

■  Conjunctival  vessels  injected  from  inner  canthus  of  eye

to  margin  of  cornea,  which  appears  dull  and  depressed
in  centre;  pressing  pain  in  eyeball;  <  from  light;  sen-
sation as  if  eyeball  was  swollen;  swelling  of  cheek  and
lids  of  affected  side;  twitchings;  laclirymation ;  ulcers;
tearing  pain  in  r.  side  of  head.  ^Traumatic  inflam-
mation.

■  Keratitis  punctata,  with  great  photophobia.

■  Pupils  dilated.

■  Cataract  from  contusion;  grey  cataract.

■Scrofulous  ophthalmia;  sluggish  cases,  not  much  injec-
tion but  excessive  photophobia.


CONIUM  MACULATUM.  406

I  Inflammatory  conditions  of  cornea  (ulcers  and  pustules),

especially  if  inflammation  is  superficial,  involving  only
the  epithelial  layers,  and  whether  caused  by  an  injury,
cold,  or  more  frequently,  a  scrofulous  diathesis.

I I  Ulcers  on  cornea,  r.  to  left.

iRiglit  eye  bloodshot;  aches  on  lying  down  to  sleep;  ag-
glutination in  morning.

1 1  Burning  of  eyes.

Drawing  pain  with  redness  in  eyes.

I  Eyes  feel  as  if  pulled  outward  from  nose  (external  rectus
muscle);  photophobia;  vertical  pain  in  head,  <  in  open
air;  must  often  leave  school  on  account  of  a  sensation
of  overpowering  giddiness  coming  over  her;  farsighted.

Pressure  in  eyes,  as  from  a  grain  of  sand ;  <  in  forenoon,
with  inflammation  and  redness  of  white  of  eye,  and
smarting  tears.

Feeling  of  pressure  in  eyes  when  reading,  writing,  or
doing  any  fine  work ;  photophobia.

I  Shooting,  smarting,  itching  in  inner  canthus,  with  lach-
rymation.

Pressure  in  outer  canthus,  as  from  a  grain  of  sand.

Partially  paralyzed  condition  of  external  muscles  of  eye.

Discharge  of  mucus  or  pus  rarely  profuse  and  intimately
mixed  with  tears.

■  Induration  of  lids;  ptosis.

I  Upper  lids  swollen  to  such  an  extent  as  to  completely
cover  the  lower  ones,  swelling  also  extends  above  eye-
brows; lids  pale  red,  shining,  with  a  doughy  feel  and
sensitive  to  slightest  touch ;  margin  of  lids  bluish -red
and  indurated;  on  attempting  to  open  lids,  the  pufl'ed,
dark  red  conjunctiva  palpebrarum  tilts  forward  in  a
swollen  mass;  conjunctiva  oculi  not  much  inflamed;
cornea  clear;  great  photophobia;  discharge  of  thin  yel-
low pus;  lachrymation;  burning,  stinging  pain,  <  at
night;  patient  scrofulous.

I  Lids  only  opened  with  great  difficulty,  and  when  done,

a  flood  of  hot  tears  spurts  out.

I I  Could  scarcely  raise  eyelids,  they  seemed  pressed  down
by  a  heavy  weight;  disposed  to  fall  asleep.

B I  Burning  on  inner  surface  of  lids.

Lids  glued  up  in  morning.

I  Hordeola,  where  the  trouble  recurs ;  several  hordeola  be-
come indurated,  and  on  occasion  inflame  again.

iBlenorrhoea  of  lachrymal  sac.

I  Itching  below  eyes  and  smarting,  burning  when  rub-
bing them.

I  Eyes  have  a  leaden  hue. ^iMorning  sickness.

■  Paralysis  of  optic  nerve;  amaurosis.


407  CONIUM  MACULATUM.

iHypersesthesia  of  retina.

■  Paralysis  of  muscles.

^  Hearing  and  Ears, l  Painful  sensitiveness  of  hearing ;  noise
startles,  deafness  follows,

■  Ringing,  singing, humming, buzzing and  roaring  in

ears.
Tingling  in  ears.

■  Obstruction  of  ears;  feel  stopped  up,  when  blowing  nose.

■  Hardness  of  hearing.

In  inner  ear,  sharp  shocks  from  within  outwards  when
swallowing,  and  piercing  pains  and  aching;  painful  ten-
sion behind  ear,  and  piercing  pains  in  mastoid  process.

■  Drawing-stitching  in  ear  from  within  outward.

■  Tearing  and  stitching  in  and  about  ears.

■  Pinching  pain  in  r.  ear. ^Uterine  disorder.

■  Hardness  of  hearing,  ceasing  when  wax  is  removed,  re-

turning as  wax  again  accumulates.

■  I  A.ccumulation  of  ear-wax,  looking  blood  red,  or  like  de-

cayed paper,  with  pus  or  mucus.

■  Tumors  and  boils  behind  ears.

■  Parotid  glands  swollen  and  hard.

■  Suppuration  of  1.  parotid  with  profuse  sweat,  disturbing

sleep. ^Diabetes.
^  Smell  and  Nose. ■Excessively  acute  sense  of  smell.

Boring  in  nostrils ;  smell  of  animals  in  back  part  of  nose.

■  Constantly  picks  his  nose,  which  bleeds  easily. ^Mental

derangement.
Troublesome  feeling  of  dryness  in  nose.
Tingling  in  nose,  frequent  sneezing,  with  watery,  slimy

discharge.

■  Stinging  soreness  and  itching  at  tip  and  inside  of  nose.

■  Pain  deep  in  root  of  nose  before  menses,  <  from  panting

or  pressure;  discharge  of  blood  and  pus  from  nose.

■  Ozsena,  with  burning  in  nostrils  and  stitching  pain  in

nasal  septum,  discharge  of  pus  and  blood  from  nose;
after  abuse  of  mercury.

■  Fluent  coryza. ^Cough.

■  Flow  of  acrid  mucus  from  nose. ^Inflammation  of  eyes.

■  Purulent  discharge  from  nose;  also  hardened  crusts.

■  Epistaxis.

■  Nosebleed:  with  suppressed  menses,  from  taking  cold;

frequent  ebullitions  of  blood;  from  slightest  cause;  in
Spring ;  after  sneezing.

■  Frequent  excessive  sneezing.

■  Obstruction  of  nostrils  of  long  standing.

■  Inflammation  of  nose  with  bleeding  from  r.  side,  after

abuse  of  mercury.

■  Fibrous  polypi,  hard  and  elastic,  pricking  and  itching


CONIUM  MACULATUM.  408

after  touching  or  handling;  excessively  acute  smell,  with

purulent  discharge.
^  Upper  Face. Sickly  and  pale  complexion.

Face: earthy, yellow; reddish-yellow; pale; sallow;

bluish;  purple;  bloated.
I  iFace  flushed. ^Whooping  cough.
Heat  in  face  with  congestion  of  blood.
Heat  of  face,  congestion  to  head,  with  catarrhal  sensation.
Itching  in  face.

■  Drawing,  extending  from  jaws  to  ears  and  head.
I  Stinging-tearing  faceache,  at  night.
Lacerating  in  r.  half  of  face.

I  Itching  pimples  in  face.

■  Gnawing  ulcers  in  face,  or  moist  and  spreading  herpes.
I  Eruption  of  small  and  large  pustules  on  r.  cheek. ^In-
flammation of  eyes.

lUlcers  on  face  and  lips;  cancer  of  cheek;  spreading  can-
cerous ulcers  ;  cancerous  tumors  of  lips  and  face.
®  Lower  Face. Pressure  and  compression  above  lips.
Lips  and  tongue  dry  and  sticky.
I  Lips  and  teeth  covered  with  black  crusts.
Lips :  burning ;  shooting  in  them ;  dry  and  scaly.

■  Blisters,  or  eruption  on  lips.

■  Induration  of  lymphatics  of  lip  after  contusion.

■  Cancer  of  lips;  from  pressure  of  pipe.

■  Submaxillary  glands  swollen  and  hard.
^^  Teeth  and  Gums. Gnashing  of  teeth.

■  Jerking  pain  in  teeth;  seem  loose  during  mastication.

■  Violent  drawing  toothache ;  teeth  feel  loose.
Drawing  pain  in  sound  teeth  when  walking  in  open  air.

■  Drawing  in  a  hollow  tooth,  when  eating  cold  things  or

from  cold  drink.
Darting  pains  in  teeth,  <  from  eating  and  drinking.
Stitching  pain  in  teeth.
Teeth  and  lips  covered  with  black  crusts.
Drawing  pains  and  fine  stitches  in  gums  and  teeth.
Gums  swollen,  blue-red  and  bleed  readily.
^^  Taste  and  Tongue. Bitter  taste  in  mouth,  with  thirst.
Loss  of  speech.

■  Speech  difficult;  distortion  of  tongue  and  mouth.
Lisping  voice.

Tongue  and  lips  dry  and  sticky.

■  Tongue  swollen,  painful,  stiff.

^^  Inner  Mouth. Dryness  of  mouth  and  fauces.
Violent  ptyalism ;  saliva  thready.
Drawing  extending  from  jaws  to  ears  and  head.
Parotid  and  submaxillary  glands  swollen  and  hard  as  a

stone; lips  and  teeth  are  covered  with  black  crusts;

skin  hot,  patient  delirious  or  senseless.


409  CONIUM  MACULATUM.

^^  Throat. I Constant inclination to swallow; involuntary
swallowing,  especially  when  walking  in  wind.
■Strange rising in throat,  with sense  of  stuffing,  as  if
something  was  lodged  there.

■  Sense  of  fulness  in  throat  as  of  a  lump,  with  involuntary

attempts  at  swallowing.

■  Fulness  in  pit  of  throat,  with  suppressed  eructations.

■  Pressure  in  oesophagus,  as  if  a  round  body  were  ascend-

ing from  stomach. ^Globus  hystericus.
The  bread  will  not  go  down,  it  does  not  taste  good.

■  Bitterness  in  throat.

■  Spasmodic  constriction  of  throat.
Contraction  in  throat,  with  retching.
Spasm  of  oesophagus.

Tickling  sensation  in  throat.

■  Itching  in  throat,  with  irritation  to  a  hacking  cough.
Scraping,  itching  and  tingling  in  throat,  causing  a  con-
tinual tickling  cough.

■  Excruciating  pains  in  throat. ^Uterine  polypi.
Burning  in  oesophagus  and  pharynx  after  a  meal.

■  Exudation  dirty  greyish. ^Diphtheria  after  scarlatina.
^*  Appetite,  Thirst. Desires,  Aversions. >  Loss  of  appetite.

^Morning  sickness.
Want  of  appetite  and  disturbed  digestion.
■Appetite  very  poor,  but  with  a  strong  craving  for  salt

things. ^Chronic  dysentery.

■  Appetite  very  poor,  no  thirst. ^Uterine  disorder.
Ravenous  hunger.

■  Craves  coffee,  salt,  or  sour  things.
Aversion  to  bread.

■  Thirst. ^Ophthalmia.

■Thirst, with internal heat,  or burning heat through
whole  body.
^^  Eating  and  Drinking. iSour  rising  from  stomach,  after
eating.

■  After  taking  a  small  quantity  of  milk,  sudden  distension

of  abdomen.

Nausea  and  vomiting,  with  swelling  and  soreness  of  breasts
with  menstrual  periods.

Worse  during  eating  and  after.

After  eating,  aching  in  back  of  neck,  vertex  and  forehead,
with  nausea;  a  gentle  heat  seems  to  pass  from  stomach
through  arms  to  fingers,  and  then  the  hands  appear  as
if  dead. •

Palpitation  after  drinking.
^^  Hiccough,  Belching,  Nausea  and  Vomiting. Eructa-
tions: of  wind;  loud,  tasting  of  ingesta;  frequent  and
sour,  with  hardness  and  distension  of  abdomen;  sup-


CONIUM  MACULATUM.  410

pressed,  with  subsequent  pain  in  stomach; offensive;

frequent,  empty;  painful  and  acid.
Heartburn  and  acidity  rises  from  stomach  after  eating.
I  Sour  rising  of  food. ^Suppressed  menses.

■  Sour  belching,  <  at  night. ^Marasmus.

■Nausea:  frequent;  with  tearing  headache;  after  eating;

of  pregnant  women.
Retching,  with  contraction  in  throat.

■  Nausea  and  vomiting  during  pregnancy;  slimy,  watery.
Nausea,  vomiting,  eructations  of  wind  and  expectoration

of  phlegm,  with  induration  and  enlargement  of  ovary.

■She  wakes  in  morning  very  sick  at  stomach  and  vomits
several  times  from  5  o'clock  until  breakfast;  substance
vomited  is  white  and  frothy,  followed  by  something
yellow,  like  bile;  vomits  several  times  during  day.

Vomiting:  violent;  of  mucus;  of  black  masses,  like  coffee-
grounds,  in  clear,  sour  water;  of  chocolate  colored
masses,  sour  and  acrid,  bitter,  slimy,  watery.
^^  Scrobiculum  and  Stomach.  ■Aching  and  pressure  in  epi-
gastrium; it  extends  from  epigastrium  up  to  pharynx,
and  feels  as  if  a  ball  were  rising  to  the  throat.

Oppressive  contraction  of  epigastrium.

■Sense  of  fulness  and  repletion  in  stomach.

Suppressed  eructations,  with  subsequent  pain  in  stomach.

Heartburn,  with  offensive,  frequent,  empty  eructations.

Pressure  in  stomach  during  eating,  contraction  in  back
part  with  sensation  of  coldness,  griping  and  sore  feeling.

■Violent  pains  in  stomach,  always  two  or  three  hours  after
eating,  but  also  at  night;  somewhat  >  in  knee-elbow
position.

■  Swelling  in  region  of  pylorus.

■  Pressing,  burning,  squeezing  pain,  extending  from  pit  of
.  stomach  into  back  and  shoulders.

A  stinging  seeming  to  come  from  stomach  and  extending
under  1.  ribs  and  as  far  as  back.

■  Pressure  and  sore  raw  feeling  at  pit  of  stomach.
Sensation  of  soreness  and  rawness  of  stomach  and  abdo-
men when  walking  on  stones.

Burning in stomach, nausea and severe vomiting of

mucus.
Contractive  spasmodic  pains  in  stomach.
■Spasm  of  stomach.

■  Cramps  in  stomach  with  tendency  to  constipation,  espe-

cially in  those  of  lymphatic  temperament.
■Spasms  in  pit  of  stomach  extending  from  r.  to  1.,  also  to
the  back,  coming  on  in  paroxysms;  before  the  attack
cramp  in  calves;  pyrosis;  throbbing  in  forehead  to  oc-
ciput.


411  CONIUM  MACULATUM.

I  Painful  spasm  of  stomach,  feeling  as  if  stomach  con-
tracted, or  of  a  heavy  burden  upon  stomach ;  she  can-
not bear  tight  clothing;  the  pain  never  entirely  ceased,
but  was  sometimes  moderate,  and  then  gradually  became
very  severe;  tendencj^  to  constipation;  wearisome,  spas-
modic cough  which  <  the  gastralgia ;  cough  <  by  talk-
ing, running,  and  by  emotion.

Dyspepsia  with  acidity  of  stomach.

I  Cancer  of  stomach.
^^Hypochondria, i Painful  tension  about  hypochondria  as
from  a  constricting  band.

I Pressive,  tensive  pain  in  hypochondria;  stitching  pains
in  hepatic  region ;  excessive  colicky  pains.

Aching  in  r.  hypochondrium,  <  by  inspiration ;  aching
tension  in  1.  hypochondrium,  extending  low  down  in
abdomen,  with  sensation  of  heaviness  throughout  ab-
domen.

I  Stitches  or  painful  tearing  in  hepatic,  region.

I  Pain  in  liver  with  accumulation  of  ear-wax.

Pressing  pain  in  r.  hypochondriac  region,  <  from  pressure,
convex,  hard  swelling,  extending  towards  precordial
region  and  nearly  to  r.  crest  of  iliurh.  ^Enlargement
of  liver.

I  Constant  pain  in  liver,  with  hardness  and  oedema.
^Uterine  polypi.

Enlarged  liver  with  pain  on  pressure;  jaundice.

I  Hard  swelling  of  liver.

Chronic  enlargement  of  liver  or  spleen,  with  torpid  action
of  bowels.

Stitches  in  1.  hypochondrium  and  in  spleen.

■  Enlargement  of  spleen. ^Melancholia.

■  Sudden  attack  of  vomiting  and  diarrhoea  at  night ;  vom-

iting of  a  white  substance  consisting  of  saliva  without

any  admixture  of  contents  of  either  stomach  or  bowels ;

gouty  diathesis. ^Acute  inflammation  of  pancreas.
^^  Abdomen, i Trembling  of  whole  abdomen.

Flatulency; incarceration  of  flatulence; rumbling and

grunting  in  abdomen.
Fulness  in  abdomen,  early  in  morning  when  awaking.
I  Fulness  and  bearing  down  in  abdomen. ^Dysmenorrhoea.
Heaviness  and  pressure  in  abdomen  or  perineum.
I  I  Inflation of  abdomen after meals,  particularly after

milk.

■  Swelling  of  abdomen.
Swelling  in  region  of  pylorus.

Hardness  and  distension  of  abdomen  with  frequent  sour
evacuations ;  <  during  night,  >  by  day.

■  Hardness  of  abdomen  from  swelling  of  mesenteric  glands.


CONIUM  MACULATUM.  412

I  Sensation  as  if  he  must  take  hold  of  abdomen  when
coughing;  feels  as  if  cough  came  from  there.  ^Anaemia
of  brain.

■  Great  sensitiveness  of  abdomen  and  sore  feeling.
Child  complains  of  pain  in  belly  when  coughing.
Aching  pain  in  abdomen  during  pregnancy,  every  night,

after  going  to  bed,  >  by  getting  up  and  moving
about.

Writhing  and  grinding  (searching)  in  umbilical  region.

Pressing,  aching  pain  in  abdomen,  with  involuntary  draw-
ing of  abdomen  up  towards  thorax.

Pain  in  umbilical  region  as  if  bowels  were  bruised  by
blows.

iStitches  extending  from  abdomen  to  r.  side  of  chest.

■  Pinching  pains  in  abdomen,  as  if  diarrhoea  would  set  in.
Oft  recurring,  constricting  pains  in  abdomen,  coming  and

going  at  intervals,  like  labor  pains.
Lancinations  in  abdomen  as  if  knives  were  plunged  in.

■  Griping  in  abdomen  before  discharge  of  leucorrhoea.
Painful  abdominal  spasms  during  menses.
Contractive,  labor-like  colic  from  both  sides  of"  abdomen.

■  Colic  from  incarcerated  flatus.

■  Cutting  in  abdomen  before  emission  of  flatus.
Colic  during  emission  of  flatus.

Colicky  pains  of  a  most  violent  kind.
Labor-like  contractions;  pain  in  iliac  regions.

■  Contractive  pain  in  lower  abdomen,  like  after-pains,  with

urging  to  stool.

■  Constrictive  pains  in  lower  part  of  abdomen.

■  Pain  in  hypogastric  region  during  menses,  going  down

the  legs.

■  Aching  pain  in  hypogastric  region,  like  menstrual  colic.

■  Forcing  down  feeling  in  hypogastric  region,  like  men-

strual or  labor  pains.

■  Bearing  down  pain  and  burning  in  hypogastric  region.

^Uterine  derangement.
Pains  in  groins  as  if  swollen.

■  Tumors  in  abdomen.

■  Enlargement  of  mesenteric  glands.

^^  Stool  and  Rectum. Constant  inclination  to  evacuate  the
bowels  to  relieve  soreness.
Emissions  of  fetid  or  cold  flatulence.

■  Involuntary  discharge  of  feces  during  sleep.

■  Diarrhoea. ^Vertigo.

■  Frequent  diarrhoea  and  copious  urination.

■  Slime,  mixed  with  greenish  substances  and  containing

bloody  specks;  the  stools  are  very  small,  offensive,  with
tenesmus  and  discharge  of  flatus  during  the  passage,


413  CONIUM  MACULATUM.

with  a  weak,  trembling  feeling  after;  no  pain  at  all;
eight  to  fourteen  stools  daily,  the  passages  becoming
more  frequent  at  night. ^Chronic  dysentery.

I  Stools:  liquid,  fecal;  mingled  with  hard  lumps;  water}^,
undigested,  and  passed  with  loud  emissions  of  flatus,
with  colic;  liquid,  diarrhoeic,  with  colic,  discharge  of
flatus  and  much  mucus  or  undigested  food,  or  even
blood;  undigested,  painless;  painful;  hard,  with  tenes-
mus; very  debilitating;  frequent  and  sour;  streaked
with  blood;  with  discharge  of  blood.

Diarrhoea  only  by  day,  not  at  night.

Chronic  diarrhoea  of  old  men.

■  Constipation  and  diarrhoea  alternately. ^Uterine  polypi.
I  Constipation  alternating  with  bilious  diarrhoea.

■  Stools  sometimes  regular,  sometimes  hard  and  tardy,  or

green  and  diarrhoeic. ^Enlargement  of  liver.
■Frequent  ineffectual  urging  to  stool;  or  small  quantity
passed  each  time.

■  Constipation,  with  ineffectual  desire  for  stool;  constant

urging,  without  stool.

■  Stools  tardy,  hard  and  dry. ^Cough.

■  Hard  stool,  with  tenesmus,  headache  and  discharge  of

prostatic  fluid.

■  Obstinate  constipation,  stools  large,  hard,  and  followed

by  tremulous  weakness;  she  must  lie  down.  ^Prolap-
sus and  dysmenorrhoea.

■  Hard  stool  every  other  day. ^Mental  derangement.
Before  stool :  cutting  abdominal  pain.

During  stool:  burning,  cutting  and  straining  in  rectum;
flatus;  prostatic  juice;  rigors.

■  During  stool  a  foreign  body  protrudes  from  the  vulva.

^Uterine  polypi.
■ ■■After  every  stool,  trembling,  weakness  and  palpitation.

■  Heat  in  lower  portion  of  rectum.

■  Frequent  stitches  in  anus.

^^  Urinary  Organs. Pain  in  kidneys  if  urine  is  restrained.

Sharp  pressing  in  bladder.

Pressure  upon  bladder  as  if  urine  w^ould  come  out  imme-
diately.

Pressure  in  neck  of  bladder,  with  stitches,  <  when  walk-
ing, >  when  sitting.

I  I  Great  pain  in  bladder,  constant  disposition  to  urinate,
only  a  few  drops  passing  at  a  time. ^Morning  sickness.

Sharp  stitches  shortly  after  urinating  in  region  of  neck  of
bladder  for  many  hours.

Shooting  stitches  in  back  part  of  urethra.

Burning,  cutting  and  drawing  through  urethra  while
urinating.


CONIUM  MACULATUM.  414

I  Pain  in  urethra  during  micturition. ^Vertigo.

I  Immediately after urinating, burning in urethra, in

morning.
I  Strangury.
Urine  cannot  be  retained.

■  Constant  urging  to  urinate,  with  heat  on  urinating.

■  Frequent  micturition  at  night. ^Mental  derangement.
Passing  water  does  not  relieve  the  desire  to  do  so.

■  Urine clear as crystal and intermitting  in its flow.

^Chronic  dysentery.

■  ■Intermittent  flow  of  urine  with  cutting  after  micturition.
Violent  itching,  the  urine  flowing  and  stopping  alter-
nately, at  every  emission.

Urine:  clear  as  crystal ;  thick;  white,  turbid,  with  grey  or
white  sediment;  mucous;  bloody.

■  Urine  turbid,  after  standing,  dirty  grey,  with  a  yellowish

tint. ^Diphtheria  after  scarlatina.
■Urine  scant,  brown  or  full  of  sediment,  containing  bile,
with  burning  on  urination. ^Enlarged  liver.

■  Urine  feels  hot. ^Uterine  disorder.
Parenchymatous  nephritis  after  scarlet  fever.
Gravel.

Diabetes:  accompanied  by  great  pain;  with  swelling  and
suppuration  of  1.  parotid  gland.
^^  Male  Sexual  Organs. ■■Sexual  desire  without  erection.

■  With  weakness  of  sexual  organs,  much  sexual  erethism,

amatory  thoughts,  even  emissions  provoked  by  mere
presence  of  women.

■  Great  sexual  desire  with  partial  or  complete  incapacity;

emissions  on  slightest  provocation,  melancholy.

■  Emissions  without  dreams.

■  Nightly  emissions  and  spermatorrhoea; urine flowing

and  stopping  again  at  each  passage  of  water.

■  Painful  emission  of  semen.

Pollutions,  with  subsequent  excitement  of  sexual  desire.

■  Excessive  pollutions,  particularly^  of  young  people.

■  Excessive  pollutions,  with  no  history  of  previous  excesses.

■  ■Bad  effects  from  suppressed  sexual  desire,  or  from  ex-

cessive indulgence.

■  Sexual weakness. dAnssmm of brain. ^Mental de-

rangement.

■  Insufficient  erection,  lasting  only  a  short  time;  feeble

embrace;  weakness  after  an  embrace.

■  Impotence  and  want  of  erections.

■  Swelling  and  induration  of  testicles,  particularly  after

contusion.

■  Cutting  pain  through  scrotum  to  root  of  penis;  pressing

and  tearing  pains  in  testes.


415  CONIUM  MACULATUM.

Chronic  prostatic  disease,  the  gland  swollen,  hard  as  stone,
firmly  fixed,  and  much  biting-itching,  or  biting  like
fleabites,  a  weight  like  a  stone  in  perineum.

1 1  Discharge  of  prostatic  fluid  on  every  change  of  emotion,
without  voluptuous  thoughts,  or  while  expelling  feces;
with  itching  of  prepuce.

Very  severe  pains,  coming  on  at  night,  waking  from  sleep ;
orchitis  from  contusion;  swelling  of  testes;  firm  hsema-
tocele,  like  a  stone.

■  Recent  cases  of  gonorrhoea  with  orchitis  and  severe  noc-

turnal pains.

I  Indurated  chancre  of  long  standing.

■  Rheumatism  after  suppressed  gonorrhoea.
Syphilitic  sarcocele.

^^  Female  Sexual  Organs, mil  effects  of  suppressed  sexual
instinct,  or  non-gratification  of  sexual  appetite.

I I  Induration  and  enlargement  of  ovaries  or  womb,  with
lancinating  pains.

1 1  Indurations,  especially  of  a  scrofulous  nature  or  from
injuries.

■  Prolapsus  uteri  complicated  with  induration,  ulceration

and  profuse  leucorrhoea.

■  Uterus prolapsed and ante  verted; bearing down as

though  womb  would  be  forced  from  vulva;  <  when
standing  and  walking,  before  and  during  menses;  dys-
menorrhoea.

■  Induration  of  cervix; sharp pains in  part; prolapsus

uteri;  acrid  leucorrhoea';  swelling  of  breasts;  stitches
in  breasts  mostly  at  night.

■  Weight  and  lancinating  pains  in  womb  and  ovaries,  ex-

tending through  whole  lower  part  of  abdomen,  hips
and  back;  during  stool  a  foreign  body  protrudes  from
vulva;  copious  and  frequent  uterine  hemorrhages;  leu-
corrhoea reddish,  extremely  fetid. ^Uterine  polypi.

Uterine  spasms ;  rigidity  of  os  uteri.

■A  grinding  pain  is  felt  above  pudendum;  the  abdomen
becomes  inflated,  the  chest  is  affected  and  stitches  are
felt  in  1.  side.

■  Uterine  spasm  during  too  early  and  scanty  catamenia,

followed  by  leucorrhoea,  with  nightly  pains,  hysterical
paroxysms.

Labor-like  contractions.

Labor-like  colic  from  both  sides  of  abdomen.

Stitching  pains  in  womb,  with  such  symptoms  as  accom-
pany pregnancy;  nausea  and  vomiting,  craving  sour  or
salt  things;  pain  and  swelling  of  mammae  during
menses,  dejection  of  spirits,  etc.

Pinching  and  griping  in  uterus.


CONIUM  MACULATUM.  416

.  Stitches  in  uterus  extend  to  r.  side  of  chest.

1 1  Burning,  stinging,  darting  pains  in  neck  of  uterus,
with  indurations  and  scirrhosities.

I  Burning,  sore,  aching  sensation  in  region  of  uterus.

Before  menstruation:  anxious  dreams;  heat  without  thirst;
general  bruised  feehng,  with  inclination  to  weep;  rest-
lessness and  anxious  apprehensiveness ;  pains  in  breasts,
with  soreness  and  swelling;  stitches  in  liver;  distension.

■  Great  soreness  of  breasts  precede  menstruation;  <  by

least  jar  or  walking.

Amenorrhoea:  genitals  very  sensitive ;  complicated  with
ovarian  or  uterine  disease  and  chlorosis;  with,  venous
abdominal  hypersemia.

Brownish  blood  instead  of  menses.

During  menstruation :  great  fears  when  alone,  but  dread  of
strangers  or  company;  labor-like  abdominal  pains,  ex-
tending into  thigh ;  stitches  in  chest ;  headache ;  erup-
tion ;  stinging  pains  in  neck  of  uterus.

I  At  every  menstrual  effort,  the  breasts  enlarge,  become
sore  and  painful.

Breasts  relaxed,  except  at  menstrual  period.

■  Pressure  from  above  downwards,  and  drawing  in  legs

during  menses.

I  Menses  too  weak.

I  Menses  irregular,  three  months  passing,  sometimes  with-
out appearance  of  menses,  and  then  they  are  scanty.
^Inflammation  of  eyes,

iDysmenorrhoea,  with  shooting  pains  in  1.  chest,  or  sharp
pains  about  heart.

IDysmenorrhoea:  pains  in  hypogastric  region  and  down
legs;  sharp  pain  in  back;  chills  commencing  in  breasts;
vertigo  in  bed,  everything  turning  round;  menses  too
soon,  too  profuse,  natural  in  color;  has  weak  spells.

iCatamenia  too  late,  scanty,  and  of  short  duration.

I  Menses:  suppressed;  feeble,  too  late  and  scanty,  of  short
duration.

Delayed  and  scanty  menstruation,  with  symptoms  point-
ing to  congestions  in  other  organs,  and  especially  when
mammse  are  lax  and  shrunken.

■  Menses  scant,  clotted,  accompanied  by  rash  over  whole

body  of  small  red  pimples,  which  burn  severely  when
scratched,  and  disappear  with  cessation  of  menstrua-
tion.

iMenses  stopped  by  taking  cold;  putting  hands  in  cold
water;  sour  rising  of  food;  urine  intermits;  nosebleed.

I  Every  four  weeks,  great  sensitiveness  of  labia  majora
and  minora;  constant  dry  heat  of  body  without  thirst;
anxious  dreams;  heaviness  in  all  the  limbs;  tearfulness;


417  CONIUM  MACULATUM.

restlessness;  anxious  concern  about  trifles;  stitches  in
hepatic  region,  often  lasting  several  days  and  greatly
prostrating  her,  with  entire  absence  of  menstruation.

Violent  itching  of  pudenda  and  vagina,  especially  after
menses.

iLeucorrhoea  ten  days  after  menses,  stopping  suddenly
and  soon  flowing  again,  lasting  several  days,  with  much
pain  in  bowels  before  discharge.

Acrid  and  burning  leucorrhoea,  white  or  yellow,  preceded
by  griping  and  pinching  pains  in  abdomen  and  lame-
ness of  small  of  back,  followed  by  weariness.

■  Leucorrhoea:  profuse;  bloody,  mucous ;  excoriating ;  thick,

milky,  with  contractive,  labor-like  colic,  coming  from
both  sides;  of  white,  acrid  mucus,  causing  burning  or
smarting  sensation.

■  Bearing  down  and  stitches  in  vagina.
■Severe  itching  deep  in  vagina.

■  Indurations  of  vulva  from  injuries.

■  Severe  stitches  in  vulva.

Peculiar  digging  in  vulva,  a  crampy  pain.

Violent  itching  of  vulva,  followed  by  pressing  down  of

uterus,  especially  after  menses.
Sensitive  pudenda  and  mammary  glands.
Cutting  pain  between  labia  on  micturition.
Sero-purulent  eruption  on  mons  veneris.

■  Large  pimple  on  mons  veneris,  painful  to  touch.
Climaxis,  with  flushes  of  heat  and  sweat.

■  ■Shriveling  of  mammae,  without  sexual  desire.

■  Fibroid  tumors  of  uterus.

^*  Pregnancy. Unready  conception  due  to  passive  congestion.
Terrible  nausea  and  vomiting  in  women  suffering  from
scirrhosities  during  pregnancy.

■  Terrible  nausea  and  vomiting  during  pregnancy.

■  Wakes  in  morning  sick  at  stomach,  vomiting several

times  from  5  o'clock  till  breakfast;  the  substance  vomited
is  white  and  frothy,  followed  by  something  yellow,  like
bile,  <  from  raising  head ;  vomits  several  times  during
day;  three  months  pregnant.

■  Aching  pain  in  abdomen  during  pregnancy;  is  disturbed

between  12  and  3  o'clock  at  night  by  having  to  get  up
to  urinate ;  has  no  aflection  for  anybody.

■  Cough  during  pregnancy,  <  at  night.

■  Obstinate  cramps  in  stomach  during  pregnancy;  sensa-

tion of  constriction,  or  of  a  heavy  weight  pressing  upon
stomach ;  pains  are  constant  but  remittent  in  character,
gradually  growing  so  severe  as  to  become  unbearable;
constant,  dry,  spasmodic  cough  which  aggravates  the

VOL.  IV. — 27.


CONIUM  MACULATUM.  418

cramps;  cough  <  from  speaking,  walking,  or  mental
emotions.

Excessive  heartburn  at  night  while  going  to  bed,  in  preg-
nant women.

I  Rigidity  of  os  uteri  during  labor.

•  During  parturition,  complete  sleeplessness  and  exhaus-
tion ;  can  hardly  speak  a  few  words ;  extreme  sensibility
to  light,  shunning  the  light  to  such  a  degree  that  smallest

■  ray  of  sunlight  causes  great  anguish.

After-pains excited by  child  nursing, pains extending

from  1.  to  right.
I  In  first  week  after  delivery,  could  not  move  head  to  turn

over  in  bed  on  account  of  great  vertigo.

■  Constant  discharge  of  thin,  watery  milk  from  breasts  for

nine  months  after  child  has  been  weaned.

■  Induration  of  r.  mammary  gland  during  lactation;  burn-

ing pain. ^Mastitis.
^  Voice  and  Larynx. Trachea  and  Bronchia. Lisping
voice.

I  Larynx  sensitive  to  touch. ^Cough.

I I  Dry  spot  in  larynx,  where  there  is  crawling  and  almost

■  constant  irritation  to  cough.

Constant  tickling  and  itching,  dry,  teasing  cough,
■Scraping  in  larynx,  with  irritation  to  cough,  and  dry

cough  in  evening.
Hoarseness:  cough  and  expectoration; after  leucorrhoea.
Blenorrhoea  bronchialis.
Chronic cough from enlargement  of  bronchial  glands,

with  irritation  of  tracheal  and  laryngeal  lining.
Nervous  bronchial  asthma,  paroxysmal,  coming  on  in  wet

weather.
^^  Respiration. Want  of  breath  on  taking  least  exercise  and

copious  cough,  with  mucous  discharge.
Shortness  of  breath  when  walking.

■  Constriction  of  chest,  with  dyspnoea. ^Cough.

■  Oppressed  breathing,  in  morning,  when  waking.
■Sawing,  snoring  breathing. ^Diphtheria  after  scarlatina.
■Asthmatic  paroxysms come on in wet  weather; face

bluish-red.

■  Asthma  in  morning  when  awaking.
Nervous  bronchial  asthma.

■  Asthma  of  old  people,  with  tickling  cough.

■  Noise  in  larynx,  which  resembles  very  much  an  unartic-

ulated  " sha-li-sha-li "  in  sound;  this  is  so  disturbing  that
he  must  cease  going  to  school;  marked  spasmodic
twitchings  of  muscles  of  r.  side  of  face;  these  often  pre-
cede the  ^sounds;  spasmodic  pressing  pain  in  region  of
ligam.  glottid.;  the  noise  and  twitchings  of  face  <  from


419  CONIUM  MACULATUM.

talking,  >  by  rest  and  sleep;  patient  scrofulous  and
glands  are  swollen. ^Affection  of  inf.  laryngeal  nerve.

I  Bronchitis.

Catarrh,  with  dry,  tickling  cough,  great  lassitude,  restless-
ness and  thirst.
^"^  Cough, s  Unbearable  titillation  in  pit  of  throat,  with  lisping
voice,  causing  paroxysms  of  coughing.

Periodic,  dry  cough  with  tickling  sensation  in  throat,  or
behind  sternum ;  cough  comes  on  in  short  spells,  espe-
cially while  lying  down,  talking  or  laughing.

iDry,  tickling  cough  after  catarrh,  spasmodic  tickling  in
larynx,  which  is  very  sensitive  to  touch;  cough  recurs
every  evening  at  6  o'clock,  lasting  several  hours,  and  is
very  annoying  to  patient.

I  Tickling,  dry  cough,  annoying  most  at  night,  with  violent

headache,  disturbing  sleep;  fluent  coryza;  oppression
of  chest.

I I  Powerful,  spasmodic  paroxysms  of  cough  excited  by
itching  and  tickling  in  chest  and  throat,  or  by  a  dry
spot  in  larynx,  <  at  night  and  when  lying  down,  greatly
fatiguing  patient.

I  Dry  cough,  <  towards  morning,  with  constriction  and

oppression  of  chest.
iDry,  teasing  cough,  persistent  and  annoying,  <  lying

down,  going  out  of  warm  room  into  air,  and  changing

position  in  bed  at  night. ^Ansemia  of  brain.
Dry,  hacking,  almost  continuous  cough ;  <  on  lying  down

at  night;  hardly  any  cough  during  day;  paroxysms  of

cough  simulating  whooping  cough. ,
Especially  dry,  tickling  cough  in  children  and  nightly

cough  of  adults.
llCough,  when  first  lying  down,  during  day  or  evening;

is  obliged  to  sit  up  and  cough  it  out,  after  which  rest.

■  Cough  very  much  <  by  lying  down;  in  beginning  many

shocks  of  coughing  as  if  he  would  vomit;  constant
severe  cough  in  evening  on  going  to  sleep.

I  Cough,  wakes  frequently  at  night  out  of  a  restless  sleep,
with  stitching  pain  in  sides  of  chest.

Dry,  spasmodic,  nightly,  almost  continually  titillating
cough,  with  violent  oppression  of  chest  and  evening
fever;  suffocating  cough  in  scrofulous  patients;  want
of  breath  on  taking  least  exercise  and  copious  cough,
with  mucous  discharge.

■  Chronic  cough  from  enlargement  of  bronchial  glands,  or

irritation  of  laryngeal  lining;  dry,  hacking,  laryngeal
cough.
Headache  during  violent  coughing  fits.

■  I  Lying  down  and  taking  a  deep  breath  causes  cough.


CONIUM  MACULATUM.  420

I  Sensation  when  coughing  as  if  he  must  take  hold  of  ah-
domen,  feels  as  if  cough  proceeded  from  there.  ^Anse-
mia  of  brain.

Child  complains  of  pain  in  belly  when  coughing.

Cough,  with  flatulency,  dyspnoea,  pain  in  limbs  and  on
diff'erent  places  of  chest,  not  <  by  the  cough.

Cough  with:  stitches  in  head  or  chest;  shocks  in  head;
oppression  and  constricton  of  chest;  colic;  vomiting  of
mucus;  pain  in  abdomen.

Spasmodic  cough  after  influenza,  not  ceasing  until  a  mass
of  mucus  is  vomited.

I  After  influenza:  cough  coming  with  no  regularity,  but
more  frequent  at  night  than  at  any  other  time  and  con-
tinuing until  retching  and  vomiting  occur,  expelling  a
small  quantity  of  frothy  mucus  with  a  yellow  nucleus.

I  Cough :  loose,  with  inability  to  expectorate ;  must  swallow
what  is  raised.

Whooping  cough:  expectoration  only  during  day,  with-
attacks  of  suffocation;  tickling  in  chest,  shortness  of
breath,  bloody  mucus;  difiiculty  in  expectorating  what
has  been  loosened  by  cough,  <  at  night.

Violent  attacks  of  whooping  cough  in  scrofulous  children,
face  flushed,  expectoration  bloody.

iWhooping  cough  if  subacute  bronchitis  has  supervened.

Expectoration:  during  day;  difficult;  bloody,  purulent,
sometimes  hardened;  of  putrid  taste  and  smell,  especi-
ally after  measles,  scarlatina,  or  during  pregnancy.

■  Violent  cough  at  night,  with  influenza.

^^  Inner  Chest  and  Lungs. iThe  clothes  lie  like  a  weight
on  chest  and  shoulders.
Tickling  sensation  behind  sternum.
Tight  feeling  in  chest,  >  by  cough.

■  Oppressive  constriction  of  chest,  with  dry  cough.
Violent  oppression  of  chest  and  evening  fever.

■  Pressure  on  chest,  with  spasmodic,  tickling  night  cough.
Pains  all  over  the  chest,  with  headache.

Itching,  scraping  titillation  under  sternum,  or  in  throat,

causing  periodic  dry  cough.
■Sharp  thrusts  directly  through  chest,  from  sternum  to

spine,  while  sitting.

■  Stitches:  in  r.  chest  about  nipple,  on  every  inspiration,

while  walking,  <  from  hard  pressure  with  hand ;  in  1.
side  of  chest,  with  uterine  spasms;  from  abdomen  to  r.
side  of  chest.

Jerks  in  chest.

Cutting  pains  in  both  sides  of  chest,  <  by  inspiration;
tension  and  weakness  in  chest;  visible  palpitation,  espe-
cially after  drinking.


421  CONIUM  MACULATUM.

■  Dull pain in 1. chest, tenth rib, < from coughing.

^Ansemia  of  brain.
I  Haemoptysis,  or  hemorrhage  especially  after  masturba-
tion, with  tensive,  pressing,  stitching  pains  in  chest.
^^  Heart,  Pulse  and  Circulation. Precordial  anguish.
Jerking  sensation  about  heart.

■  Violent  palpitation  of  heart. ^Morning  sickness.

■  Violent  palpitation  after  drinking,  when  rising  from  bed.

■  Palpitation  after  stool; intermissions  in  beats  of  heart.
Violent  beating  of  heart,  with  pain  at  each  pulsation,  as

if  a  knife  were  being  thrust  through occiput; heart
beat  sometimes  strong,  sometimes  quick  or  vacillating.

Frequent  shocks  in  region  of  heart.

Aching  or  sharp  pains  about  heart,  with  dysmenorrhoea.

Sensible  beating  of  arteries  through  whole  body.

Pulse:  accelerated;  unequal  in  strength  and  sometimes
irregular  in  rhythm;  irregular,  generally  slow  and  full,
alternating  with  small  and  frequent  beats;  extremely
irregular,  principally  slow  and  large,  but  with  inter-
vening small  and  quick  beats;  pulseless.
^^  Outer  Chest.  iThe  clothes  lie  like  a  weight  on  chest  and
shoulders.

Itching  of  breast  and  nipple,  with  red,  scaly  skin,  and
burning  after  rubbing.

llStitches  as  with  needles  in  1.  mamma.

Stitching  pain  in  sides  of  chest,  with  cough,  which  wakes
him  at  night.

■  Violent  stitches  in  1.  side  of  chest  above  nipple,  on  every

inspiration  while  walking,  not  >  by  hard  pressure  of
hand.

■  Violent  stitches  in  r.  side,  as  if  a  knife  were  plunged

into  side,  causing  loud  moaning. ^Pneumonia.
Beating  stitch,  with  pain,  in  upper  and  1.  part  of  chest
toward  centre  of  chest.

■  Inflammation  of  the  breast,  with  stitches.
The  mammary  glands  painful  in  evening.

■  Pain  in  mammae,  which  often  swell  and  become  hard.

■  Hot  pains  through  1.  breast  and  axilla. ^Uterine  dis-

order.

■  Dull  pain  below  1.  mamma. ^Prolapsus  and  dysmenor-

rhoja.

■  ■Hardness  of  r.  mamma,  with  painfulness  to  touch,  and

nightly  stitches  in  it.

■  Mammary  induration  following  abscess  of  r.  mammary

gland,  remaining  without  change  for  two  years.

■  Painful  swelling  of  breast,  about  size  of  walnut.

■  Hard  and  painful  lumps  in  mammae.

■  Tumor  under  1.  nipple  as  large  as  a  hen's  egg,  moving


CONIUM  MACULATUM.  422

freely  under  superficial  fascia,  and  very  hard  and  pain-
ful on  pressure;  nipple  inverted  and  sensitive  to  touch;
stinging,  twinging  pains;  leaden  cast  of  areola. .

I  Small  and  painless  tumor  in  breast  near  nipple.

I  Tumors  in  manimse,  with  piercing  pains,  <  at  night,
gland  abnormally  tender.

I  From  contusion,  hard  lump  as  large  as  walnut  on  r.  side
of  nipple  of  r.  breast;  constant,  dull,  heavy  pain  in
breast;  at  night  after  spot  has  been  irritated  in  any  way,
sharp  and  shooting  pains.

■  After  contusion  of  r.  breast,  an  uneven  swelling,  hard  as

stone,  supporting  a  rough,  wart-like,  humid  elevation;

axillary  glands  swollen;  fever  in  evening;  dull  stitches

in  breast.
llHard,  scirrhous-like  tumors.
I  Stony-hard scirrhus of breast, sharp, shooting pains

and  occasional  twinges.
iScirrhus in mamma, hard as cartilage and uneven,

which  had  grown  during  climateric  period  to  size  of

hen's  egg.

■  Scirrhous  cancer  of  breast,  stony,  hard,  large  as  teacup;

pains  shooting;  sense  of  great  heaviness  in  breast.

■  Scirrhus  of  1.  breast;  occasionally  twitching  in  affected

part,  rarely  pain;  the  mass  is  immovable,  and  skin
covering  it  not  discolored.

■  Hypertrophy  of  breast,  either  general  or  lobular,  fol-

lowed by  atrophy.
■Wasting of breasts; complete atrophy of mammary

gland,  leaving  a  flaccid,  bag-like  skin.
Caries  of  sternum.
^^  Neck  and  Back. Tightness  in nape of  neck ; pain and

stiffness.
Soreness  in  lower  cervical  vertebrse.

■  Pain  as  from  a  sprain  in  1.  side  of  back  and  neck.

■  Enormously  enlarged  cervical  glands. ^Caries  lower  jaw.

■  Cervical  glands  hard  and  tender.

■  ■Indurated  and swollen cervical  glands  in  scrofulous

children.
I  I  Neck  twisted  by  hard  swelling  to  r.  shoulder. ^After
scarlatina.

■  Herpetic eruption  on  neck  and  behind  ears, <  from

heat,  which  causes  a  burning  sensation.
Pain  between  shoulders  and  in  lumbar  region.
Weakness  and  lameness  in  small  of  back  and  subsequent

lassitude.

■  Dragging  pain  in  small  of  back. ^Uterine  disorder.

■  Stitches  in  small  of  back,  with  drawing  through  lumbar

vertebrae,  while  standing.


423  CONIUM  MACULATUM.

Contraction  in  back,  with  sensation  of  coldness,  griping

and  sore  feeling.
I  Sharp  pains  in  back,  with  chills. ^Dysmenorrhoea.
I  Dorsal  pain  between  the  shoulders  and  in  lumbar  region.

■  Peculiar  tumor  in  central  part  of  back,  as  large  as  a

cherry,  growing  on  half  an  inch  long  pedicle;  tumor
and  pedicle  of  a  bluish  color.
Pain  in  back,  especially  on  bending  backwards,  or  after  a
short  walk,  with  nausea  and  weariness.

■  Lancinating  pains  and  weight  in  back,  hips  and  lower

part  of  abdomen,  extending  from  womb  and  ovaries.
^Uterine  polypi.

Stitches  and  tensive  drawing  pains,  much  increased  by
moving  arms  upward;  severe  aching  in  sacral  region
from  walking  a  short  distance,  followed  by  nausea  and
lassitude;  stitches  in  sacrum  when  standing,  with  draw-
ing through  lumbar  vertebrse.

•  I  After  falling  from  a  height  upon  back,  acute  pain  in
lower  part  and  in  region  of  small  of  back,  especially
when  laughing,  sneezing,  or  taking  a  quick  breath.

nil  effects  of  bruises  and  shocks  to  the  spine.

iCoccyodynia.

I  I  Upon  buttocks  small,  scattered,  flat,  wart-like,  greyish-
brown  growths  of  hypertrophied  epidermis. ^Enlarge-
ment of  liver.
'^  Upper  Limbs, l  Shoulders  feel  bruised  and  sore.

■  Axillary  glands  swollen. ^Mammary  tumor.

I  I  Arms  when  lifted  fall  like  inert  masses  and  remain  im-
movable.

Humid  tetters  on  forepart  of  arm.

I  Ichorous, biting, burning herpes on  hands  and fore-
arms.
" I  Cracking  in  wrist-joint.

Sweat  of  palms  of  hands.

■  Itching  on  dorsum  of  finger.
Yellow  spots  on  fingers.

■  Yellow  nails.

^^  Lower  Limbs. Drawing  pain  in  hips.
Uneasiness  in  lower  limbs.
Dragging  and  weakness  in  legs.

Pressing  downward  and  drawing  in  thighs,  scanty  menses.
Numbness  in  thighs.

■  Sensation  of  weakness  even  to  trembling,  in  r.  thigh

while  walking.

■  Staggering  gait.

Painless  loss  of  power  in  lower  limbs;  faltering,  vacillating
gait;  staggers  as  if  drunk,  dragging  his  legs  after  him.
Lassitude  in  the  knees.


CONIUM  MACULATUM.  424

I  Pain  in  knee  as  from  fatigue.

■  Herpetic  eruption  over  popliteal  space.

I  Pain  going  from  hypogastric  region  down  legs.  ^Dys-
menorrhoea.

■  Cracking  of  knee-joint.
I  Cramps  of  calves.

I  Red  spots  on  calves,  turning  yellow  or  green,  as  from

contusion,  preventing  movement.
I  Liability  of  feet  to  catch  cold  from  slight  exposure.
Pustule  on  foot.
^  Limbs  in  General, i  Heaviness  and  sense  of  weariness  in

all  the  limbs.
Limbs  feel  bruised.
I  Paralyzed  feeling  in  all  the  limbs.

■  Difficulty  in  using  limbs;  unable  to  walk,
I Unpainful  lameness;  trembling  of  limbs.
Weakness  and  debility,  especially  of  arms  and  legs.
■Shooting  pains  through  arms  and  legs. I  Uterine  dis-
order.

■Paralysis  of  lower,  afterwards  of  upper  extremities,  or  the
reverse.  '

■  Numbness  of  fingers  and  toes,  the  former  looking  as  if

they  were  dead.

■  All  the  joints  pain  as  if  beaten.

■Piercing  and  tearing  pains  through  extremities  and  in
joints,  particularly  in  elbows  and  hip-joints.

Coldness  of  hands  and  feet.

Sensation  as  if  bones  of  upper  and  lower  extremities  were
surrounded  by  tight  bands;  periostitis,  with  throbbing
and  burning  pain,  as  if  from  an  ulceration,  <  in  morn-
ing and  at  night,  also  when  standing,  lying,  or  lifting
the  part,  >  when  letting  limb  hang  down  and  from
motion ;  r.  side,  or  1.  upper  and  r.  lower.
^^  Rest.  Position.  Motion.  Rest:  >  noise  in  larynx  and
twitchings  of  face.

Patient  wishes  to  keep  head  perfectly  still.

Letting  limb  hang  down :  >  pain.

Lying  down:  vertigo  <;  hydrocephalus,  pains  >;  ach-
ing in  r.  eye;  cough  <;  powerful,  spasmodic  parox-
ysms of  cough  < ;  dry,  tearing  cough  < ;  dr}^,  hacking,
almost  continuous  cough  <;  pain  in  bones  <.

Must  lie  down:  tearing  in  head.

Lying  in  bed:  sick  headache  <.

Lying  on  side:  <.

Recumbent  position:  tearing  in  temple  and  sides  of
head  <.

Sitting:  pressure  in  neck  of  bladder,  with  stitches  > ;
sharp  thrusts  directly  through  chest  from  sternum  to
spine;  sweat  while  dozing;  pain  in  ulcer.


425  CONIUM  MACULATUM.

Is  obliged  to  sit  up  and  cough  it  out,  after  which  rest.

Patient  <  after  going  to  bed,  is  obliged  to  sit  up  or  walk
about  to  get  relief.

Standing :  bearing  down  in  uterus  <  ;  stitches  in  small  of
back,  with  drawing  through  lumbar  vertebrae;  pain  in
bones  < ;  stitches  in  sacrum ;  pain  in  ulcer.

Knee-elbow  position:  violent  pains  in  stomach  >.

Motion:  tearing  in  temples  and  sides  of  head  <;  head-
ache, with  pains  all  over  chest  < ;  aching  in  abdomen
after  going  to  bed,  during  pregnancy  >  ;  pain  in  bones
>;  pain  in  ulcer  <;  >  parts  affected;  symptoms  at
first  <,  >  by  continued.

Changing  position  in  bed:  dry,  tearing  cough  <.

When  turning  in  bed:  vertigo  <.

When  rismg  from  bed:  violent  palpitation.

Rising  from  seat:  vertigo.

Closing  eyes:  hydrocephalus,  pains  >;  black  spots  seen.

When  looking  around:  vertigo.

Moving  head:  headache,  with  coryza  >  ;  semilateral  head-
ache <•
, Raising  head:  vomiting  during  pregnancy  <.

On  bending  head  forward :  heaviness  in  occiput.

When  turning  head:  vertigo.

When  shaking  head:  painful  sensation  of  looseness;  pain
from  brow  to  occiput,  as  if  something  had  become  de-
tached.

Moving  arms  upward:  stitches  and  drawing  pains  in
back  <•

Bending  backwards :  pain  in  back.

Stooping:  vertigo  <;  headache,  with  coryza  >;  tearing
in  temples  and  sides  of  head  <.

Walking:  complete  indifference,  takes  no  interest  in  any-
thing; vertigo  <;  clicking  in  1.  vertex,  also  in  occi-
put; feeling  of  coldness  in  eyes;  staggers  as  if  drunk;
drawing  in  sound  teeth;  involuntary  swallowing;  sore-
ness and  rawness  of  stomach  and  abdomen;  pressure
in  neck  of  bladder,  with  stitches  < ;  bearing  down  in.
uterus  < ;  soreness  in  breasts  before  menses  <  ;  cough
during  pregnancy  <;  shortness  of  breath;  stitches  in
r.  side  of  chest,  about  nipple ;  violent  stitches  in  1.  side
of  chest,  above  nipple;  pain  in  back  after;  aching  in
sacral  region ;  weakness,  even  to  trembling  in  r.  thigh ;
great  weakness  after;  noise  is  felt  at  every  step,  as  of  the
breaking  of  a  finger-nail;  as  if  paralyzed  after;  sudden
loss  of  strength  while;  staggering  when;  after  stand-
ing, >  by.  •

Downward  motion:  vertigo  <.

On  ascending  an  eminence:  pains  in  ulcer  <.


CONIUM  MACULATUM.  426

Exercise :  want  of  breath  on  taking  least ;  urticaria  from
violent.

Running:  cough  <.
'^  Nerves. Great nervousness, involuntary laughing and
weeping,  great  weakness  after  the  least  walk;  urine  in-
termits in  its  flow.

Inclination  to  start  as  if  with  fright.

Fear  of  noise  and  talking,  on  account  of  great  sensitive-
ness of  head.

At  every  step  in  walking  a  noise  is  felt,  as  of  the  breaking
of  a  finger-nail.

Restlessness  and  constant  desire  to  change  position.

■  Very  easily  overstrained.

Weakness  and  lassitude  with  desire  to  sit  or  lie  down.
iWeak  spells. ^Dysmenorrhoea.
Weariness,  with  nausea  and  pain  in  back.
1  Great  physical  and  mental  debility.
Sensation  of  debility  in  morning  when  in  bed.
I  Great  prostration  of  nervous  and  muscular  systems,  <
from  excitement. ^Ansemia  of  brain.

■  Exhausted,  faint,  and  as  if  paralyzed  after  a  short  walk.
1  Sudden  loss  of  strength  while  walking.

I  Complete  sleeplessness  and  exhaustion,  can  hardly  speak

a  few  words.
iFaintness;  sick  and  faint  early  in  morning  in  bed,  or

after  stool.
Fainting  fits.

I I  Tremulous  weakness  after  every  stool,  >  in  open  air.

■  Trembling  of  all  the  limbs;  muscular  tremor.
Staggering  when  walking  out-doors.

I  Hysteria;  globus  hystericus.

I I  Paroxysms  of  hysteria  and  hypochondriasis  from  absti-
nence from  sexual  intercourse.

■  Hysterical  spasms,  convulsions.

■  Frequent  attacks  of  an  apoplectic  nature;  headache  and

fainting. ^Uterine  polypi.

Apoplexy  with  paralysis,  particularly  in  old  people.

Paralysis  of  old  people,  especially  of  old  women;  general
paralysis  of  voluntary  muscles,  paralyzing  first  periphe-
ral nerves,  and  finally  spinal  cord;  unpainful  lameness.

■  Muscular  paralysis  without  spasms.

■  General  spinal  paralysis  and  that  which  follows  diph-

theria.
Paraplegia,  after  concussion  of  spine.
Chorea.
Trismus.
^^  Sleep. ■  Drowsiness  by  day,  stupid  in  morning. ^Vertigo.
Drowiness  in  evening,  with  spasmodic  closing  of  eyelids.


427  CONIUM  MACULATUM.

I  Somnolence,  with  constant  waking  and  change  of  posi-
tion, sawing  snoring  breathing;  condition  <  at  night.
^Diphtheria  after  scarlatina.

iStupor-like,  nnrefreshing  sleep,  broken  by  heavy  dreams.

I  Very  restless  sleep. ^Mental  derangement.

Uneasy  sleep,  great  trembling  and  short,  rapid  snoring
respiration.

I  Cough  disturbing  sleep.

■  Falls  asleep  late,  after  midnight.

■  Complete  sleeplessness  and  exhaustion. ^Photophobia.

■  Five  minutes  after  falling  asleep  wakes  up  bathed  in

sweat,  most  profuse  on  head  and  upper  portion  of  body.
^Diabetes  with  parotitis.

■  Nocturnal  pains  in  ulcers  prevent  sleep.

■  Awakes  from  sleep  with  fright  and  start  on  account  of  a

cracking  in  head.
Anxious  sleep,  full  of  fancies.

■  Dreams  frightful.

■  Sleep  disturbed  by  nightmares. ^Ansemia  of  brain.
Patient  always  feels  <  after  going  to  bed,  is  obliged  to  sit

up  or  walk  about  to  get  relief.
^  Time.  In  morning:  stitching  in  forehead;  headache  on
awaking;  asthenopia  >;  agglutination  of  r.  eye;  press-
ure in  eyes  <;  awakens  very  sick  at  stomach  and
vomits  several  times,  from  5  o'clock  until  breakfast;
fulness  in  abdomen  when,  awaking  early ;  burning  in
urethra  after  urinating;  when  awaking,  oppressed  breath-
ing"; asthma  when  awaking;  pain  in  bones  <;  sensa-
tion of  debility  when  in  bed;  sick  and  faint  early,  in
bed;  stupid;  chill  and  coldness;  internal  chill;  sweat.

At  noon :  stitching  in  forehead.

In  afternoon:  very  ill  humored  from  5  to  6;  chill  and
coldness,  3  to  5;  shivering.

During  day:  vomits  several  times;  hardness  and  disten-
sion of  abdomen,  with  frequent  sour  evacuations  > ;
cough;  whooping  cough;  attacks  of  suffocation;  ex-
pectoration only;  drowsiness.

In  evening: clicking in vertex,  also in occiput; dry
'  cough ;  constant  severe  cough  on  going  to  sleep ;  fever ;
mammary  glands  painful;  drowsiness;  spasmodic  clos-
ing of  eyelids ;  irresistible  desire  to  scratch  eruption.

At  night:  pains  in  eyes  <;  stinging-tearing  faceache;
sour  belching  <;  violent  pains  in  stomach;  sudden
attack  of  vomiting  and  diarrhoea;  hardness  and  dis-
tension of  abdomen,  with  frequent  sour  evacuations  <;
frequent  micturition ;  orchitis,  very  severe  pains  coming
on;  stitches  in  breasts;  between  12  and  3  must  get  up
to urinate; cough during pregnancy <; excessive


CONIUM  MACULATUM.  428

heartburn  in  pregnant  women  while  going  to  bed;
tickling,  dry  cough,  with  violent  headache,  disturbed
sleep ;  powerful  spasmodic  paroxysms  of  cough ;  dry,
tearing  cough,  <  on  changing  position  in  bed;
dry,  hacking,  almost  continuous  cough  <  on  lying
down;  cough  wakes  frequently  out  of  a  restless  sleep,
with  stitching  pains  in  sides  of  chest;  whooping  cough
< ;  violent  cough,  with  influenza  < ;  stitches  in  r.
mamma;  pains  in  tumors  of  mamma?  <;  sharp,  shoot-
ing pains  in  r.  breast  after  any  irritation ;  pain  in  bones
<  ;  pains  in  ulcers  prevent  sleep ;  skin  hot,  burning  in
bed;  sweat;  pains  in  spine  prevent  sleep;  marasmus,
with  frequent  sour  belching  <  ;  pain  in  uterus  <.

Late  after  midnight:  falls  asleep.

Towards  morning:  dry  cough,  with  constriction  and  op-
pression of  chest  <.
^"Temperature and  Weather. Heat:  asthenopia  <;  her-
petic eruption  on  neck  and  behind  ears  < ;  causes  burn-
ing sensation  in  herpetic  eruption.

Warmth:  fibroids  >.

In  room:  eyes  are  dazzled  by  light  of  day.

Warm  room:  asthenopia  <.

From  warm  room  into  air:  dry,  tearing  cough  <.

Chill,  with  continuous  desire  for  warmth,  particularly
that  of  sun.

Open  air:  complete  indifference,  takes  no  interest  when
walking  in;  headache,  with  coryza  <;  hot  spots  on
back  of  head  > ;  hydrocephalus,  pains  < ;  feeling  of
coldness  in  eyes ;  vertical  pains  in  head  < ;  drawing  in
sound  teeth  when  walking;  tremulous  weakness  >;
fibroids  < ;  aversion  to.

Out  of  doors:  objects  surrounded  by  prismatic  colors;
staggering  when  walking.

Cold  water :  hot  spots  on  back  of  head  < ;  suppression  of
menses  from  putting  hands  in.

Cold  food  and  drink:  drawing  in  hollow  tooth.

In  wind:  involuntary  swallowing  when  walking.

Cloudy  day:  asthenopia  >.

Wet weather: nervous bronchial asthma,  paroxysmal.

From  taking  cold:  nosebleed,  with  suppression  of  menses.

Liability  of  feet  to  catch  cold  from  slightest  exposure.

Worse  from  growing  cold  and  in  cold  weather;  >  from
growing  warm  and  in  warm  air ;  <  in  snowy  air.

Spring:  nosebleed.
^  Fever, l Chill  and  coldness  in*morning  and  afternoon  (3  to
5  o'clock).

Extremities  and  whole  body  icy  cold;  shivering  over
whole  body.


429 ■  CONIUM  MACULATUM.

Chill,  with  trembling  in  all  the  limbs.

I  Chill,  with continuous  desire  for  warmth,  particularly

that  of  sun.
I  Chilliness  along  whole  of  back. ^Anaemia  of  brain.
Chilliness  in  back,  with  cold  hands  and  blue  nails.
Chilliness  during  stool.

I  Internal  chill  in  morning;  with  shivering  in  afternoon.
iChills  during  pains,  commencing  in  breasts. ^Dysmen-

orrhoea.

I  Heat,  with  thirst  and  redness  of  face.

I I  Great  heat,  internal  and  external,  with  great  nervousness.
Constant  dry  heat  all  over  without  thirst.

Skin  is  hot,  and  patient  delirious  or  senseless.

Feeling  of  heat  in  whole  body ;  perspiration  general.

I  Skin  hot,  burning  at  night  in  bed. ^Anaemia  of  brain.

I  Internal  heat,  with  thirst.

■  Catarrhal  fever.

■  Burning  heat  through  whole  body,  with  thirst.
Heat,  with  profuse  sweat  at  same  time.
iSweat  on  hand,  face  and  neck. ^Ophthalmia.

I I  Sweat  day  and  night,  as  soon  as  one  sleeps,  or  even  when
closing  eyes.

Sweat  while  sitting  in  a  chair  and  dozing.

Sweat  over  whole  body,  with  redness  of  face.

I  Night  and  morning  sweat,  with  offensive  odor  and  smart-
ing in  skin,  or  offensive  odor  without  perspiration.

Profuse  sweat  on  limbs,  perineum  and  genitals.

Fecal,  fetid,  smarting  perspiration,  with  pimples.
*^  Attacks,  Periodicity.  Frequent:  sneezing;  eructations,
sour  evacuations;  diarrhoea  and  copious  urination;  in-
effectual urging  to  stool;  stitches  in  anus;  uterine  hem-
orrhages; shocks  in  region  of  heart,  attacks  of  apo-
plectic nature ;  sour  belching.

Oft  recurring:  constricting  pains  in  abdomen,  coming  and
going  at  intervals,  like  labor  pains.

Periodical:  insanity;  dry  cough.

Every  evening  at  6:  dry,  tickling  cough,  several  hours.

Every  night:  after  going  to  bed,  aching  in  abdomen.

Every  other  day:  hard  stool.

Every  fourteen  days:  great  ur happiness  of  mind.

Every  four  weeks :  great  sensitiveness  of  labia.

Constant:  inclination  to  sleep;  confusion  of  forehead;  in-
clination to  swallow;  pain  in  liver;  inclination  to
evacuate  bowels;  urging;  without  stool;  urging  to  urin-
ate; dry  heat  of  body  without  thirst;  dry,  spasmodic
cough  during  pregnancy;  discharge  of  thin,  watery
milk  from  breasts  nine  months  after  child  has  been
weaned;  irritation  to  cough  in  larynx;  severe  cough  in


CONIUM  MACULATUM.  430

evening;  dull,  heavy  pain  in  r.  breast;  desire  to  change
position.

Lasting  many  hours :  sharp  stitches  after  urinating,  in
region  of  neck  of  bladder.

Diarrhoea  only  by  day,  none  at  night.

Day  and  night:  sweat.

Lasting  several  days:  stitches  in  hepatic  region.

Chronic:  stitching  headache;  dysentery;  enlargement  of
liver  or  spleen;  diarrhoea  of  old  men;  prostatic  disease;
cough,  from  enlargement  of  bronchial  glands.
^  Locality  and  Direction.  Right :  as  of  a  large  foreign  body
in  half  of  brain;  tearing  in  side  of  head;  eye  blood-
shot, aches  on  lying  down,  agglutination  in  morning;
pinching  in  ear;  bleeding  from  side  of  nose;  lacerating
in  half  of  face;  small  and  large  pustules  on  cheek;
aching  in  hypochondrium;  pressing  in  hypochondriac
region,  with  swelling  extending  towards  precordial  re-
gion and  nearly  to  crest  of  ilium;  induration  of  mam-
mary gland,  with  burning  pain ;  spasmodic  twitchings
of  muscles  of  side  of  face;  stitches about  nipple  on

■  every  inspiration;  violent  stitches  as  if  a  knife  were
plunged  into  side;  hardness  of  mamma,  with  painful-
ness  to  touch,  and  nightly  stitches  in  it,  mammary  in-
duration following  abscess  of  mammary  gland ;  after
contusion  of  breast,  hard  lump  as  large  as  walnut;  con-
stant, dull,  heavy  pain  in  breast;  after  contusion  of
breast,  uneven  swelling,  axillary  glands  swollen,  dull
stitches  in  breast;  neck  twisted  by  hard  swelling  to
shoulder;  weakness,  even  to  trembling  in  thigh.

Left:  clicking  in  vertex;  redness  of  sclerotic,  dimness  of
cornea;  in  hypochondrium;  stitches  in  side;  shooting
pain  in  chest;  dull  pain  in  chest,  tenth  rib;  stitches  as
with  needles  in  mamma;  hot  pains  through  breast  and
axilla;  dull  pain  below  mamma;  tumor  under  nipple;
scirrhus  of  breast;  pain  as  from  a  sprain  in  side  of  back
and  neck.

Right  to  left:  ulcers  on  cornea;  spasms  in  pit  of  stomach.

Left  to  right:  after-pains.
*^  Sensations.  As  though  a  great  grief  weighed  upon  him ;
as  though  bed  were  turning  in  a  circle;  as  of  looseness
in  head;  as  of  a  large  heavy  lump  in  brain;  as  if
something  like  a  fringe  were  falling  down  over  eyes;  as
if  something  had  become  detached  on  shaking  head;
as  if  brain  had  gone  to  sleep ;  as  if  both  temples  were
compressed;  as  of  a  foreign  body  under  skull;  as  if
occiput  was  pierced  with  a  knife,  with  every  pulse;  as
of  a  large  foreign  body  in  r.  half  of  brain ;  as  if  head
had  been  bruised,  and  as  if  a  load  were  pressing  down


431  •  CONIUM  MACULATUM.

on  it;  as  if  head  were  too  full  and  would  burst;  as  if
head  had  been  bruised  by  blows,  or  would  fall  to  pieces;
as  of  catarrh  in  head ;  as  if  eyes  were  trembling;  as  if
eyeball  were  swollen ;  as  if  eyes  were  pulled  outward
from  nose ;  as  of  overpowering  giddiness  coming  over
her;  as  of  a  grain  of  sand  in  eyes,  in  outer  canthus;
as  if  eyelids  were  pressed  down  by  a  heavy  weight;  as
if  ears  were  stopped  up  on  blowing  nose;  as- if  teeth  were
loose;  as  if  a  round  body  were  ascending  oesophagus
from  stomach;  as  of  a  gentle  heat  passing  from  stom-
ach through  arms  to  fingers,  and  then  hands  appear  as
if  dead;  as  if  stomach  contracted;  of.  a  heavy  burden
upon  stomach;  as  of  a  constricted  band  about  hypo-
chondria; as  if  he  must  take  hold  of  abdomen  when
coughing;  as  if  cough  came  from  abdomen;  as  if  bowels
were  bruised  by  blows;  as  if  diarrhoea  would  set  in;  as
if  knives  were  plunged  into  abdomen ;  as  if  groins  were
swollen;  as  if  urine  would  come  out  immediately;  as
though  womb  would  be  forced  from  vulva ;  as  of  a  heavy
weight  pressing  upon  stomach;  as  if  knife  were  being
thrust  through  occiput  with  each  pulsation  of  heart;  as
if  a  knife  were  plunged  into  r.  side;  as  from  a  sprain
in  1.  side  of  back  and  neck;  as  if  shoulders  were  bruised
and  sore;  as  from  fatigue  in  knees;  as  if  limbs  were
bruised;  as  if  beaten,  in  all  the  joints;  as  if  bones  of
upper  and  lower  extremities  were  surrounded  by  tight
bands;  as  from  an  ulceration,  in  limbs;  as  if  paralyzed
after  a  short  walk;  as  if  part  affected  by  ulcer  were
beaten  to  pieces.

Sensation  in  forehead  like  an  inability  to  fix  mind  on
any  subject.

Strange  rising  in  throat,  with  sense  of  stuffing,  as  if  some-
thing was  lodged  there.

Precordial  anguish.

Pain:  all  over  chest;  deep  in  root  of  nose  before  menses;
in  stomach;  in  liver;  in  belly  when  coughing;  in  um-
bilical region;  in  iliac  regions;  in  hj'pogastric  region
during  menses,  going  down  legs;  in  groin;  in  kidneys
if  urine  is  restrained;  in  bladder;  in  urethra  during
micturition;  in  mammse  during  menses;  sharp,  about
heart;  in  hypogastric  region  and  down  legs;  sharp,  in
back;  in  bowels  before  discharge  of  leucorrhoea;  in  belly
when  coughing;  in  limbs  and  on  different  places
of  chest;  in  abdomen;  in  1.  chest;  in  mammse;  in  nape
of  neck;  between  shoulders  and  in  lumbar  region;  in
back;  from  hypogastric  region  down  legs.

Lancinating:  in  vertex;  in  abdomen;  in  womb  and  ova-
ries, extending  through  whole  lower  part  of  abdomen,
hips  and  back ;  in  tumors.


CONIUM  MACULATUM.  432

Cutting:  in  abdomen;  in  rectum  during  stool;  through
urethra  while  urinating;  after  micturition;  through
scrotum  to  root  of  penis;  between  labia  on  micturition.

Cutting  in  both  sides  of  chest.

Lacerating:  in  r.  half  of  face.

Darting:  in  forehead  and  vertex;  in  teeth;  in  neck  of
uterus.

Piercing  pain :  in  inner  ear ;  in  mastoid  process ;  in
tumors  of  mammae;  through  extremities  and  in  joints.

Stitches:  in  top  of  head;  in  teeth;  in  hepatic  region;  in
hypochondrium  and  spleen;  from  abdomen  to  r.  side
of  chest;  in  anus;  in  neck  of  bladder;  in  breasts;  in  1.
side;  in  uterus,  extending  to  r.  side  of  chest;  in  vagina;
in  vulva;  in  head;  about  r.  nipple  on  every  inspiration;
as  with  needles  in  1.  mamma;  violent  in  1.  side  of
chest;  dull  in  r.  breast;  in  small  of  back;  in  sacrum;
in  swollen  and  indurated  glands.

Stitching:  in  forehead,  from  within  outward;  headache;
in  and  about  ears ;  in  nasal  septum ;  in  teeth ;  in  hepatic
region;  in  womb;  in  sides  of  chest;  in  chest.

Drawing-stitching :  in  ear  from  within  outward.

Burning  stitches:  in  ulcers.

Shooting  stitches:  in  back  part  of  urethra.

Beating  stitch :  in  upper  1.  chest  towards  centre.

Sharp  thrusts:  through  chest,  from  sternum  to  spine.

Stinging :  in  eyes ;  at  tip  and  inside  of  nose ;  seeming  to
come  from  stomach  and  extending  under  1.  ribs  and  as
far  as  back;  in  neck  of  uterus;  in  tumor  under  1.  nipple;
in  ulcers.

Stinging-tearing :  faceache.

Pricking:  in  fibrous  polyp  of  nose;  in  skin.

Shooting:  in  inner  canthus;  in  lips;  in  1.  chest;  sharp  in
r.  breast;  sharp  in  breasts;  in  cancer  of  breast;  through
arms  and  legs.

Tearing:  in  forehead  and  vertex;  in  temples  and  sides  of
head;  in  head,  one  sided;  headache;  in  r.  side  of  head;
in  and  about  ears;  in  hepatic  region;  in  testes;  through
extremities  and  in  joints.

Drawing:  in  eyes;  from  jaws  to  ears  and  head;  toothache;
in  sound  teeth;  in  hollow  tooth;  in  gums;  through
urethra  while  urinating;  in  legs  during  menses;  through
lumbar  vertebra3;  tensive,  in  back;  in  hips;  in  thighs.

Burning:  deep  in  eyes;  on  inner  surface  of  lids;  when
rubbing  eyes;  in  nostrils;  in  lips;  in  oesophagus;
from  pit  of  stomach  into  back  and  shoulders;  in
stomach;  in  hypogastric  region ;  in  rectum  during
stool;  through  urethra  while  urinating;  in  neck  of
uterus; in  region  of  uterus; of  rash  during  menses;


433  .  CONIUM  MACULATUM.

leucorrhoea  causes;  in  r.  mammary  gland;  of  breast
after  rubbing;  in  herpetic  eruption  on  neck  and  behind
ears;  herpes  on  hands  and  forearms;  with  periostitis;
in  ulcers;  of  inflammation  of  skin.

Digging:  in  vulva.

Twinging:  in  tumor  under  1.  nipple;  in  breasts.

Sharp  shocks:  in  inner  ear  from  within  outwards  when
swallowing.

Shocks :  in  head ;  frequent  in  region  of  heart.

Jerking :  in  teeth ;  about  heart.

Jerks:  in  chest.

Writhing:  in  umbilical  region.

Grinding:  (searching)  in  umbilical  region.

Pressive  pain:  in  hypochondria.

Tensive  pain:  in  hypochondria;  inchest;  in  ulcers.

Sharp  pains:  about  heart;  in  back.

Dragging:  in  small  of  back;  in  legs.

Squeezing:  from  pit  of  stomach  into  back  and  shoulders.

Pinching:  in  r.  ear;  in  abdomen;  in  uterus.

Griping:  in  various  parts  of  forehead;  in  stomach;  in
abdomen ;  in  uterus ;  in  back.

Scraping:  in  throat;  in  larynx;  under  sternum.

Smarting:  in  inner  canthus;  when  rubbing  eyes;  leucor-
rhoea causes.

Scorching:  on  top  of  head.

Excruciating  pains:  in  throat.

Biting-itching:  with  prostatic  disease.

Biting:  like  flea  bites,  with  prostatic  disease;  herpes  on
hands  and  forearms.

Soreness :  at  tip  and  inside  of  nose ;  of  breasts ;  in  stom-
ach; of  abdomen;  of  bowels;  of  breasts  before  menses ;
in  lower  cervical  vertebra;  in  back;  in  ulcers.
■  Sore  aching:  in  region  of  uterus.

General  bruised  feeling  before  menses.

Aching:  in  r.  eye;  in  inner  ear;  in  back  of  neck,  vertex
and  forehead;  in  epigastrium  up  to  pharynx;  in  r.
hypochondrium ;  in  1.  hypochondrium,  extending  down
in  abdomen;  in  abdomen  during  pregnancy;  in  hypo-
gastric region,  like  menstrual  colic;  about  heart;  in
sacral  region.

Straining:  in  rectum  during  stool.

Bearing  down:  in  abdomen;  in  hypogastric  region;  in
uterus;  in  vagina.

Labor-like  pains :  in  abdomen  during  menses,  extending
into  thigh.

Forcing  down  feeling  in  hypogastric  region,  like  men-
strual or  labor  pains.

VOL.  IV. — 28.


CONIUM  MACULATUM.  434

Pressing,  aching  pain  in  abdomen,  with  involuntary  draw-
ing of  abdomen  up  towards  thorax.

Pressing  pain:  in  eyeball;  from  pit  of  stomach  into  back
and  shoulders;  in  r.  hypochondriac  region;  in  abdo-
men; sharp  in  bladder;  in  testes;  spasmodic  in  region
of  ligamentum  glottidis;  in  chest.

Pressure:  in  head;  in  eyes;  in  outer  can  thus;  above  lips;
in  oesophagus ;  in  epigastrium  up  to  pharynx ;  in  stom-
ach; in  abdomen  or  perineum;  upon  bladder;  in  neck
of  bladder;  from  above  downwards  during  menses;
downwards  of  uterus  after  menses;  on  chest;  dowmward
in  thighs.

Constricting  pains:  in  abdomen,  like  labor  pains;  in
lower  part  of  abdomen.

Constriction:  spasmodic,  of  throat;  of  stomach  during
pregnancy;  of  chest;  oppressive  of  chest.

Contraction :  spasmodic  pains  in  stomach ;  in  lower  abdo-
men ;  like  after-pains.

Contractive,  labor- like  colic  from  both  sides  of  abdomen.

Contraction:  in  throat;  oppression  of  epigastrium;  in
back  part  of  stomach ;  in  back.

Cramps:  in  stomach;  in  calves.

Crampy  pain:  in  vulva.

Tension:  painful,  behind  ear;  painful,  about  hypochon-
dria; in  chest.

Rawness:  at  pit  of  stomach;  of  stomach  and  abdomen.

Hot  pains:  through  1.  breast  and  axilla.

Tight  feeling:  in  chest;  in  ulcers.

Tightness:  of  head;  in  nape  of  neck.

Stupefying:  headache;  headache  in  outer  part  of  head.

Constant  dull,  heavy  pain  in  r.  breast.

Heaviness:  in  head;  in  occiput;  throughout  abdomen;
in  perineum;  in  all  the  limbs;  in  breast.

Weight:  in  perineum,  like  a  stone;  in  womb  and  ovaries
extending  through  whole  lower  part  of  abdomen,  hips
and  back.

Clothes  lie  like  a  weight  on  chest  and  shoulders.

Oppression:  of  breathing;  of  chest.

Fulness :  in  various  parts  of  forehead ;  in  throat,  as  of  a
lump;  in  pit  of  throat;  in  stomach;  in  abdomen.

Twitching:  in  1.  breast.

Throbbing:  from  forehead  to  occiput;  with  periostitis.

Creeping:  in  ulcer.

Crawling:  in  larynx.

Tingling:  in  ears;  in  nose;  in  throat;  in  swollen  and
indurated  glands.

Tickling:  in  throat;  in  larynx;  cough,  in  old  people;  be-
hind sternum ;  in  chest.


435  CONIUM  MACULATUM.

Titillation:  in  pit  of  throat;  under  sternum.

Paralyzed  feeling:  in  all  the  limbs.

Lameness:  of  small  of  back.

Weakness :  in  chest ;  in  small  of  back ;  in  legs ;  in  r.  thigh ;
in  arms.

Weak,  trembling  feeling  after  stool.

Weary  sensation:  in  brain;  in  all  the  limbs.

Whirling:  dizziness  in  head.

Confusion:  in  head;  of  forehead  in  region  of  eyebrows
and  root  of  nose.

Cracking:  in  head.

Clicking:  in  1.  vertex;  in  occiput.

Tired  sensation :  in  brain.'

Lassitude:  in  knees.

Uneasiness:  in  lower  limbs.

Numbness:  of  one  side  of  head;  in  thighs;  of  fingers  and
toes;  from  contusions.

Dryness:  of  nose.

Heat :  in  lower  portion  of  rectum ;  on  urinating.
•  Coldness:  side  of  head;  in  eyes;  in  stomach;  in  back.

Itching:  in  inner  canthus;  below  eyes;  at  tip  and  inside
of  nose;  in  fibrous  polyp  of  nose;  in  face;  of  pimples
in  face;  in  throat;  urine  flows  and  stops  alternately,
with  violent;  of  prepuce;  violent,  of  pudenda  and  va-
gina; severe,  deep  in  vagina-  violent,  of  vulva;  in
larynx;  in  chest  and  throat;  under  sternum;  of  breast
and  nipple;  on  dorsum  of  finger;  erratic,  as  from  fleas
in  all  parts  of  body.
^  Tissues. I  Great  liability  to  take  cold.

1 1  Swelling  and  induration  of  glands,  with  tingling  and
stitches;  after  contusions  and  bruises.

Contusions  which  produce  a  condensation  of  cellular  tis-
sue and  induration  of  glandular  structures,  accompa-
nied by  a  sensation  of  numbness.

Bleeding  of  ulcers,  with  secretion  of  fetid  ichor;  a  por-
tion becomes  gangrenous;  concealed  cancer  of  bones;
cancerous  swelling  and  induration  of  glands;  cancer  of
lips;  spreading  cancerous  ulcers  in  face;  cancer  and
cancerous  ulcers  after  contusions,  burning  stitches;
stinging  in  affected  parts.

Burning,  crusty,  and  deep  ulcers;  painless,  hard,  and  fis-
tulous ulcers;  nocturnal  pains  in  spine  prevent  sleep ;
pus  fetid,  watery  and  ichorous.

Marasmus,  with  frequent  sour  belching,  <  during  night.

Scrofulosis,  with  engorgement  of  lymphatics.

Rachitis.

Tumors  of  all  kinds,  especially  scirrhous,  coming  on  after
contusions;  stony  hardness  of  tumor, and  feeling of


CONIUM  MACULATUxM.  436

weight;  cancerous  swelling  and  induration  of  glands
(secondary  deposit);  fibroids.

Gangrene  from  contusions,  and  of  one  part  of  an  ulcer.

Viscid,  putrid  pus.

Straining  and  overstretching  of  membranous  and  tendi-
nous structures  from  contusions,  falls,  or  other  external
injuries.
^^  Touch.  Passive  Motion.  Injuries.  Touch :  tearing  in
temples  and  sides  of  head  < ;  sensation  as  of  a  foreign
body  under  skull  >;  swollen  lids  sensitive  to  slightest;
pricking  and  itching  of  fibrous  polyp;  large  pimple  on
mons  veneris  painful;  larynx  sensitive;  r.  mamma
painful;  1.  nipple  inverted  and  sensitive.

Cannot  bear  tight  clothing.

Pressure :  hydrocephalus,  pains  >  by  external ;  pains  in
eyes  > ;  pain  in  root  of  nose  < ;  pain  in  r.  hypochon-
driac region  <;  enlarged  liver,  pain;  stitches  in  r.  side
of  chest  <  from  hard ;  tumor  under  1.  nipple  hard  and
painful;  fibroids  <.

From  pressure  of  pipe :  cancer  of  lips.

Rubbing:  smarting,  burning  of  eyes;  burning  of  breast;
fibroids  <  ;  pain  in  ulcer.

Scratching :  itching  <  ;  vesicles  < ;  pain  in  ulcer;

Jar  or  shock:  headache,  with  pains  over  chest  <;  sore-
ness in  breasts  before  menses,  <  from  least.

Lifting  affected  part:  pain  <.

From  injuries:  indurations;  indurations  of  vulva.

After  contusion:  induration  of  lymphatics  of  lip;  swell-
ing and  induration  of  testicles;  orchitis;  hard  lumps
on  r.  side  of  nipple  of  r.  breast,  as  large  as  walnut ;
swelling  and  induration  of  glands;  cancerous  ulcers;
tumors ;  gangrene ;  blackish  ulcers.

Ill  eff'ects  of  bruises  and  shocks  to  spine.

After  falling  from  a  height  upon  back,  acute  pain  in  lower
part  and  in  region  of  small  of  back.  •.
*"  Skin. Blueness  of  whole  body.

I  Yellow  color  of  skin;  jaundice.

■  Yellow  spots  on  fingers;  yellow  nails.
I  Brown  spots  upon  body.

Want  of  action  of  skin.

■  Erratic  itching  of  all  parts  of  body,  as  from  fleas.
I  I  Itching  on  dorsum  of  finger.

Itching  <  by  scratching.

■  Urticaria,  from  violent  bodily  exercise.
Eruptions  developed  by  being  overheated.
Inflammation  of  skin  all  over  body;  painful  and  burning.
White  transparent  pimples  filled  with  an  acrid  humor,

which  forms  scabs  resembling  those  of  scabies.


437  CONIUM  MACULATUM.

Glandular  enlargement;  moist  vesicles,  <  by  scratching,
followed  by  pricking  in  skin;  gluey,  sticky  discharge,
forming  hard  crusts  about  face,  arms  and  mons  veneris;
eruptions  in  old  people  suffering  from  vertigo,  especi-
ally in  bed.

(Sudden  herpetic  eruption  on  forearm,  beginning  as  a  small
spot  and  gradually  spreading  over  arm;  skin  red,  swol-
len and  corrugated,  lymph  or  blood  ooizing  from  broken
places  in  skin,  lymph  drying  and  forming  white  crusts
under  which  the  exudation  still  continues ;  intense  itch-
ing in  affected  parts,  with  irresistible  desire  to  scratch,
particularly  in  evening;  surrounding  lymphatics  swol-
len and  involved.

■  Herpetic  eruption  forming  into  scabs  as  large  as  hand  in

various  parts  of  body.

Acne  on  the  face.

Tetters:  humid,  burning,  corroding,  crusty,  old.

iSero-purulent  eruption  in  aged  people,  and  hypochon-
driacal old  maids.

■  Petechia  in  old  persons.

I  Tumor  can  be  traced  to  a  bruise;  lancinating  pains.

Adenitis.

I  Blackish  ulcers,  with  bloody,  fetid,  ichorous  discharges,
especially  after  contusions.

Ulcers :  cancerous ;  scabby ;  destitute  of  feeling ;  with
tight,  tense  feeling;  speckled.

Scurfy  exanthema;  polypus;  greenish  mortification;  tet-
ters in  general.

Edges  of  ulcer  become  black;  gangrene  of  parts  of  ulcer;
creeping,  with  a  tensive  pain;  ulcers  which  are  bluish,
have  a  livid  appearance  and  are  tumid;  pain  in  part  as
if  it  were  beaten  to  pieces ;  swollen  ulcers,  hard  to  heal ;
inflamed  ulcers,  with  a  feeling  of  soreness.

Bleeding  from  ulcers.
*''  Stages  of  Life,  Constitution. Cannot  take  alcoholic  stim-
ulants; easily  intoxicated.

Strong  persons  of  a  sedentary  habit  are  affected  more  than
lively  and  slender  persons  and  children.

iSuited  to  women  of  rigid  fibre,  easily  excited,  as  well  as
to  those  of  opposite  temperament.

Hypochondriacal  old  maids;  old,  weak  and  feeble  men.

Especially  useful  to  old  people,  and  among  these  to  women
more  than  to  men.

Light  haired  persons.

Debility  of  old  people ;  diseases  caused  by  a  blow  or  fiill ;
cancerous  and  scrofulous  people,  with  tight,  rigid  fibre.

llScrofulous  constitutions;  strumous  condition,  enlarged
glands.


CONIUM  MACULATUM.  438

■  Apoplectic  paralysis.

Children  who  are  prematurely  old ;  with  marasmus,  with
frequent  sour  evacuations,  <  during  night,  >  by  day.

Girl,  set.  4;  diphtheria  after  scarlatina.

H.  S.,  set.  4|,  had  jaundice  two  years  ago;  ophthalmia.

Girl,  set.  6,  of  scrofulous  constitution,  had  suffered  for  a
long  time  from  ulcer  on  r.  great  toe,  which  had  healed
up  for  ten-  months ;  she  had  also  cicatrix  resulting  from
suppuration  of  glands  on  neck  and  lower  jaw;  seven
months  after  healing  of  ulcer,  inflammation  of  eyes.

Girl,  set.  10;  cough.

Boy,  set.  13,  noise  in  larynx,  with  twitching  of  muscles  of
face;  allopathic  treatment  of  no  avail;  Bellad.  given
without  result ;  under  old  school  treatment  had  received
Conium  without  effect.

Young  man,  set.  16,  strong  and  h&althy;  derangement  of
mind.

Girl,  set.  16,  tissues  flabby,  scrofulous,  menstruated  one
year;  swelling  of  lids.

Young  lady,  set.  18,  lymphatic,  scrofulous  constitution;
photophobia.

Susanna  F.,  set.  19,  robust,  of  slender  form,  perfectly  de-
veloped, affected  from  infancy  with  ophthalmia;  in-
flammation of  eyes.

Robust  girl,  set.  20,  suffering  formerly  from  swelling  of
lymphatics  and  eruptions  on  head ;  herpetic  eruption.

Woman,  set.  22,  delicate,  but  healthy;  for  five  years  after
contusion  scirrhus  of  1.  breast.

Miss  G.,  set.  25,  has  always  had  dysmenorrhoea ;  prolapsus
and  dysmenorrhoea.

Girl,  set.  26;  suftering  since  childhood  from  herpes.

AVoman,  set.  27,  pale,  scrofulous  appearance;  cramps  in
stomach  during  pregnancy.

Miss  A.  P.,  set.  28;  dysmenorrhoea.

Woman,  set.  30,  otherwise  healthy;  half  year  after  con-
tusion of  r.  breast,  tumor.

Ammon  S.,  set.  32,  well  developed,  strong  looking,  five  feet
four  inches  in  height,  sick  with  peritonitis  after  having
for  a  year  felt  tired  and  overworked,  convalescence  slow
and  protracted;  ansemic  state  of  brain.

Woman,  set.  33,  married ;  uterine  disorder.

Mrs.  B.,  set.  35,  fell,  striking  r.  breast  on  back  of  chair,
causing  a  hard  tumor.

Young  man,  tuberculous,  after  attack  of  catarrh;  dry,
tickling  cough.

Young  man,  after  falling  from  second  story  upon  back ;
pain  in  lower  part  of  back  and  in  region  of  small  of
back.


439  CONIUM  MACULATUM.

Lady,  accomplished,  lively;  melancholia.

Strong,  corpulent  woman;  scirrhus  in  mamma.

Woman,  weak,  excitable ;  galactorrhoea.

Mrs.  G.,  set.  about  40;  tumor  of  1.  breast  of  six  or  seven
years  standing.

Mrs.  F.,  set.  40 ;  tumor  on  breast.

Edward  S.,  a  Russian,  set.  45,  formerly  soldier  in  United
States  army,  and  under  allopathic  treatment ;  dysentery
of  four  years  standing.

Woman,  set.  48 ;  vertigo.

Woman,  set.  48,  nervous  constitution;  enlargement  of
liver.

A  man,  set.  48 ;  first  threatened  softening  of  brain,  helped
by  Laches.,  then  right  sided  paralysis,  particularly  facial,
helped  by  Caustic,  afterwards  diabetes  mellitus  of  two
years  standing,  with  swelling  and  suppuration  of  1.  pa-
rotid and  profuse  sweat  with  insomnia.

Woman,  set.  54,  plethoric;  uterine  polypi.

Mrs.  S.  R.,  set.  54,  and  Mrs.  C.  N.,  set.  62;  scirrhous  cancer
of  breast.

Man,  set.  60;  after  injury  to  eye  by  a  splinter  of  wood,
traumatic  inflammation.

Woman,  set.  60;  cancer  of  stomach.

Lady,  set.  67,  unmarried ;  cough.

Woman,  set.  74,  paralyzed  many  years  on  1.  side ;  cough.

Mrs. ,  set.  75 ;  pain  in  chest  during  pneumonia.

*^  Relations. Antidoted  by:  Ooffea,  Dulcam.,  Nitr.  ac,  Nitr.
spir.  dulc.

It  antidotes:  Mercur.  (swelling  of  lymphatics);  Nitr.  ac,
Sulphur  (swollen  glands).

Compatible:  Arnic  (contusions);  Arsen,  (cancer);  Bellad.
(incipient  amaurosis,  cerebro-spinal  irritation,  cancer);
Calcar.  (scrofula,  lymphatic  enlargement);  Droser.  (per-
tussis); Lycop.,  Nux  vom.,  Phosphor.,  Fulsat.,  Rhus  tax.
(contusions) ;  Stramon.  (sexual  debility).

Wine  and  spirits  often  improve  the  sick  who  require  Co-
nium,  though  it  suits  persons  who  cannot  take  alcoholic
stimulants.

Compare:  Arnic,  Arsen.,  Bar.  carb.  (lymphatic  swellings);
Bellad.,  Calcar.,  Cicut.,  Coffea,  Droser.,  Dulcam.,  Lycop.,
Mag.  mur.,  Mercur.,  Nitr.  ac,  Nitr.  spir.  dulc,  Nux  vom.,
Phosphor.,  Pulsat,  Rhus  tox.,  Stramon.,  Sulphur,  Valer.


COPAIVA.  440

COPAIVA.

Balsam  Copaiva.  Leguminosse.


Mentioned  by  Hahnemann  in  Fragmenta  de  Vir.  Proved  by  Teste  in  the
6th  dilution.

Clinical  Authorities. — Epistaxis,  Carl  Miiller,  N.  A.  J.  H.,  v.  11,  p.  454;
Chronic  nasal  catarrh,  E.  M.  Hale,  Horn.  Rev.,  v.  4,  p.  163;  Acne  of  face,  Hughes,
p.  325 ;  Gastric  catarrh,  E.  M.  Hale,  Horn.  Eev.,  v.  4,  p.  163 ;  Intestinal,  catarrh,
E.  M.  Hale,  Horn.  Clinics,  v.  1,  p.  21 ;  Dysentery,  E.  M.  Hale,  Horn.  Eev.,  v.  4,
p.  165 ;  Fistula  in  ano  with  chronic  cough,  Cp.  K.,  Frank's  Mag.,  v.  1,  p.  202 ;
Dysuria,  Denker,  Frank's  Mag.,  v.  2,  p.  347 ;  Urinary  difficulties  after  catching  cold,
Wolf,  B.  J.  H.,  V.  30,  p.  584;  Induration  of  prostate  gland,  mentioned  by  Lippe,
Am.  Hom.  E.ev.,  v.  3,  p.  154;  Gonorrhoea,  Hartmann,  Attomyr,  Kiick.  KI.  Erf.,
V.  1,  p.  82;  Gollman,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf.,  v.  5,  p.  542;  Z.  Friedreich  (three  cases),
Frank's  Mag.,  v.  4,  p.  794;  Velpeau,  Frank's  Mag.,  v.  3,  p.  112;  Gonorrhoeal
rheumatism,  Eehfuss,  Eaue's  E.,  1870,  p.  239;  Gonorrhoeal  neuralgia,  D.  K.  Gutherz,
Frank's  Mag.,  v.  4,  p.  794  ;  Pruritus  vulvae,  Euan,  Archiv,  v.  9,  p.  156;  Burning
red  spots  in  vulva,  Berridge,  MSS. ;  Bronchial  and  vesical  catarrh,  Hale,  Hom.  Eev.,
V.  4,  p.  163;  Cough  during  measles,  MSS. ;  Blenorrhagia,  Lisle,  Frank's  Mag.,  v.  3,
p.  710; Urticaria,  Weil,  Eaue's  E.,  1874,  p.  291;  Turrell,  Eaue's  E.,  1875,  p.  290.

^  Mind. General  sense  of  uneasiness ;  depression.

I  Delirium. ^Urticaria.
^  Sensorium. l  Delirium,  intense  headache,  drowsiness,  em-
barrassed speech. ^Urticaria.
Vertigo.
^  Inner  Head, i Violent  headache. ^Urticaria.

Headache  as  from  congestion,  with  heat  in  face  and  sensa-
tion of  trembling  in  head ;  delirium.
I  I  Headache  and  general  malaise,  with  chills.  ^Nettle  rash.
^  Sight  and  Eyes. Inflammation  and  itching  of  eyes ;  dim-

sightedness.
"^  Smell  and  Nose. ■  Severe  spontaneous  epistaxis  of  small
boys,  lasting  several  days.
I  Epistaxis ;  hembrrhages  after  wounds.
\  Profuse,  yellow  and  green,  thick,  fetid  discharge  from
nasal  passages  of  several  years  duration;  at  night  the
discharge  runs  down  posterior  nares,  causing  choking
and other disagreeable symptoms. ^Chronic nasal
catarrh.
^  Upper  Face. ■  Flushed  face,  interspersed  with  rose  colored
spots. ^Urticaria.
I  Red  face  and  urticaria  over  whole  body;  face,  eyelids,
lips,  ears  and  hands  swollen.


441  COPAIVA.

lAcne  which  had  for  a  long  time  disfigured  face. ^Uri-
nary troubles.
"  Tongue, l Speech  embarrassed,  cannot  talk  well.  ^Urticaria.
iTongue  coated  white. ^Bronchial  and  vesical  catarrh.
^^  Inner  Mouth. Pain  in  mouth,  throat  and  joints.
Slight  but  painful  swelling  of  lips  and  mouth.
Dryness  of  tongue,  with  inflammation  of  throat  and  mouth.
Increased  flow  of  saliva.
13  TJiroat. I  Chronic  inflammation  of  throat.

Marked  inflammation  of  throat  with  great  swelling  of  sub-
maxillary glands  and  threatened  suff'ocation.
^*  Appetite,  Thirst, l  Loss  of  appetite. t'Bronchial  and  vesi-
cal catarrh. ^Urticaria.
I  Great  thirst. ^Urticaria.
^^  Belching,  Nausea  and  Vomiting. Eructations,  excessive
nausea;  nausea  in  throat;  gagging  and  vomiting.
Great  nausea  with  severe  colic,  somewhat  >  by  sweat.
■Spitting  up  of  ingesta,  with  large  quantities  of  mucus;
sometimes  vomiting  of  mucus. ^Gastric  catarrh.
^^  Stomach. Heartburn ;  pressure  and  uneasiness  in  stomach.
Pain  in  stomach  and  limbs.

■  Distension  and  fulness  after  eating;  spitting  up  of  ingesta,

with large quantities of mucus; stools coated with
mucus;  frequent  mucous  diarrhoea. ^Gastric  catarrh.

I  Gastric  troubles  during  menstruation,  or  following  urti-
caria.
^^  Abdomen. Borborygmus ;  rumbling  in  abdomen  so  loud
that  it  is  heard  by  others;  abdomen  distended  as  if  it
would  burst.

Pressure  and  burning  in  abdomen  in  umbilical  region.

Severe  colic  with  great  nausea,  somewhat  >  by  sweat.

I  Colic,  with  flatulency,  indigestion  and  looseness.
■ Colic,  with'water}^  diarrhoea;  colicky  tearing  pains  in  ab-
domen, preceded  by  drawing  pains  in  bones  of  thighs.

iHypogastriuin  sensitive. ^Dysentery.

Painful  swelling  of  inguinal  glands.
^°  Stool  and  Rectum. Diarrhoea,  with  loss  of  appetite ;  nausea
and  vomiting;  copious,  involuntary,  watery  stools;  <
in  morning;  colic,  >  by  bending  double.

■White, diarrhoeic stools, generally in morning, with
chilliness  and  colic,  obliging  one  to  bend  double.

■  Greenish  passages,  mixed  mucous  flocculi. ^Bronchial

and  vesical  catarrh.

■  White,  diarrhoeic,  mucous  stools  in  morning,  mucus  is

not  tenacious  or  stringy,  but  comes  away  in  masses.
^Intestinal  catarrh.

■  Stools often coated with mucus; frequent attacks of

mucous  diarrhoea. ^Gastric  catarrh.


COPAIVA.  ^  442

Debilitating  diarrhoea,  with  tenesmus.

Chronic  diarrhoea  and  dysentery,  with  or  without  fever.

Diarrhoea  alternating  with  obstinate  constipation.

I  Constipation,  with  large  red  blotches  over  whole  body,

and  fever.  •
Stools:  white,  fecal;  bloody;  watery ;  copious ;  involuntary.
During  stool:  chilliness,  tenesmus,  drawing,  tearing  colic,
1  Stitches  in  rectum  and  intolerable  burning  at  anus.
Hemorrhoidal  tumors  lasting  for  years  disappeared  under

its  use,  in  a  case  of  gonorrhoea.
\  Fistula  in  ano  of  ten  years  standing,  with  a  chronic

cough.
Sensation  of  weight  in  perineum.
Expulsion  of  several  yards  of  tape  worm.
^^  Urinary Organs. Inflammation of  kidneys. ^Bright's
'  disease.
I  Chronic  vesical  catarrh;  excessive  irritation  of  bladder.

■  Spasmodic  pains  in  bladder  every  morning,  at  nearly

same  hour. ^Bronchial  and  vesical  catarrh.
I  Frequent  calls  to  urinate,  with  violent  pains  in  neck  of

of  bladder  on  attempting  it,  occasional  retention  urine ;

after  catching  cold.
Pressure  on  bladder,  with  fruitless  urinary  tenesmus  and

passage  of  urine  in  drops.
Tenesmus  of  bladder  and  urethritis.
Irritation  of  urethra  and  neck  of  bladder,  occurring  in  old

women.

■  Burning  in  neck  of  bladder  and  urethra.
Induration  of  prostate  gland,  and  great  pain  in  it  on

urinating.

I  Inflammation  of  urinary  organs ;  swelling,  dilatation  and
tickling  at  oriflce  of  urethra,  with  pulsative  pain  through-
out penis. ^Gonorrhoea.

Urinary  difficulties  with  hsematuria.  '

Copious  secretion  or  retention  of  urine.

■  Constant  ineffectual  desire  to  urinate;  contraction  of  ure-

thra ;  emission  of  urine  in  drops.

■  Great  dysuria.

■  ■Urine  can  only  be  discharged  after  great  effort;  stream

thinner  than  usual,  causing  great  pain  under  fourchette,
when  reaching  glans  penis. ^Dysuria  after  gonorrhoea.

Itching,  biting  and  burning  in  urethra,  both  before  and
after  urination.

■Urine  emitted  in  drops. ^Induration  of  prostate.

Urine:  foaming;  greenish;  turbid;  with  odor  of  violets.

■  Urine  scant  and  full  of  sediment,  with  burning  in  ure-

thra after  micturition. ^Urticaria.
■Urine  high  colored  and  thick,  depositing  abundant  red-
dish sediment. ^Bronchial  and  vesical  catarrh.


443  .  COPAIVA.

I  Dark  red,  scanty  urine,  with  brick-dust  sediment.  ^Ur-
ticaria.

I  Urine  hot  and  scalding,  red,  depositing  thick,  mucous
sediment. ^Dysentery.

I  Evacuations  of  thick,  brown,  tenacious  mucus,  tinged  with
blood;  tormina  and  tenesmus;  sensitive  hypogastrium.
^Dysentery.

■Large  amount  of  viscid  mucus,  some  blood  and  detached
portions  of  mucous  tissue  in  urine.  ^Bronchial  and
vesical  catarrh.

iHsematuria  in  women.

Frequent,  copious  discharges  of  urine,  with  diabetes.
^^  Male  Sexual  Organs. Violent  emotions,  with  lascivious
thoughts,  constant  excitement  of  sexual  desire.

Long  continued  weakness  of  sexual  organs  with  absence
of  sexual  desire,  and  irritation  of  the  parts.

■Chronic  cystitis.

Induration  of  prostate  with  no  increase  in  size,  or  slight
augmentation  with  extreme  hardness.

Burning  and  sensation  of  dryness  in  region  of  prostate
gland,  and  in  urethra.

Soreness,  smarting,  itching  and  swelling  of  urethra;  puru-
lent discharge;  violet  smell  of  urine;  eruption  like
measles  or  urticaria  with  great  itching.

I  Biting  pain,  burning  and  itching  in  urethra  before  and
after  urination;  meatus  swollen  and  inflamed,  with  sore-
ness and  discharge  of  pus. ^Gonorrhoea.

■  Swelling  and  dilatation  of  orifice  of  urethra,  with  pulsative

pains  throughout  the  penis.

■  Gonorrhoea  in  early  stage,  no  strangury.

■  Gonorrhoea:  mild  cases,  or  in  first  part  of  second  stage,

when  the  discharge  is  moderate;  much  urinary  irrita-
tion, but  no  particular  difficulty.
■Yellow,  purulent,  or  mucous  discharge  from  urethra.

■  Chronic  gleet  with  muco-purulent  discharge.

■  Swelling  and  induration  of  testicles.
Aching-drawing  in  testicles.

Redness  and  acrid  humor  on  scrotum  and  between  it  and
thighs,  swelling  and  tenderness  of  inguinal  glands.

■Gonorrhoeal  rheumatism.
^^  Female  Sexual  Organs. Throbbing  and  pains  in  ovaries.

Forcing  down  in  bladder  and  uterine  region ;  drawing  in
uterus,  neck  of  bladder  and  vagina;  burning  and  itch-
ing in  urethra  and  vagina.

Wandering  uterine  pains.

Uterine  hemorrhages.

Discharge  of  bloody  and  thick,  purulent  mucus  from
uterus  with  pressure.


COPAIVA.  •  444

Leucorrhoea  arising  from  gonorrhoea;  yellow,  purulent
gonorrhoea;  heematuria;  strangury.

Milky,  acrid,  sore-making  discharge,  with  painful  mictu-
rition.

I  Profuse,  green  gonorrhoeal  discharge,  with  distressing
burning  and  sensation  of  warmth  in  vagina,  particularly
when  urinating.

■  Burning  red  spots  in  vulva.
1  Itching  of  vulva.  '

^'  Voice  and  Larynx. Trachea  and  Bronchia. Dryness
and  roughness  in  larynx.

Constant  irritation  in  larynx,  exciting  cough.

Hoarseness,  especially  in  morning.

Excoriating  pain  in  larynx.

Bronchial  catarrh,  soreness  of  chest  and  cough.

Bronchitis,  with  profuse  expectoration.

Chronic  bronchorrhoea  (dilated  bronchi),  with  profuse  ex-
pectoration of  greenish,  purulent,  fetid  mucus.
^^  Respiration. Oppression  of  chest,  with  labored  breathing,
while  working  in  a  stooping  position,  as  when  digging ;
pressure  on  sternum ;  slow  respiration.

iRespiration quick  and panting; could  breathe easily
when  bolstered  up  in  bed,  mucous  rales  in  whole  chest,
most  in  1.  lung. ^Bronchial  and  vesical  catarrh.
^''  Cough. Cough,  with  soreness  of  chest.

Mucous  cough ;  cough,  with  shortness  of  breath.

I  Dry,  painful  cough,  with  dryness  in  larynx  and  huskiness.

I  Cough  during  measles.

I  Chronic  cough,  with  fistula  in  ano.  '

Profuse  expectoration  of  greenish-grey,  purulent  mucus,
of  a  disgusting  odor,  sometimes  mixed  with  blood.

■  Severe,  harrassing  cough,  with  profuse  expectoration  of

thick,  heavy  masses  of  yellow  or  greenish  and  putrid
tasting  mucus,  sometimes  bloody  and  in  such  quanti-
ties as  to  cause  choking  and  vomiting.  ^Bronchial  and
vesical  catarrh.

Increased  expectoration  in  phthisis  pulmonalis.

■Spitting  of  blood.
^  Inner  Chest  and  Lungs. Oppression  of  chest,  with  labored
breathing  as  if  respiratory  passage  was  filled  with  mucus.

Pressure  and  anxiety  in  chest,  with  transient  flushes  of
heat  to  face  and  burning  in  palms  of  hands  and  soles
of  feet.

■  Burning  in  chest;  soreness  and  cough.

■  Dyspnoea,  soreness  and  rawness  in  chest  and  occasional

stitches  in  1.  side. ^Bronchial  and  vesical  catarrh.

■  Mucous  rales  in  whole  chest,  most  in  1.  lung;  dulness

under  1.  clavicle  and  want  of  normal  resonance  on  whole
of  1.  side. ^Bronchial  and  vesical  catarrh.


445  COPAIVA.

Chronic  pulmonary  catarrh,  with  profuse  expectoration  of
a  greenish-grey,  purulent  mucus,  of  a  disgusting  odor,
sometimes  mixed  with  blood.

■  Haemoptysis.

^^  Heart,  Pulse. Palpitation.

■  Heart's  action  tumultuous,  pulse  irritable  and  100  per

minute. ^Bronchial  and  vesical  catarrh. -
Quick  pulse.
^  Lower  Limbs. iPain  and  swelling  of  knees  and  malleoli.
Gonorrhoeal  rheumatism,  especially  if  located  in  fibrous

part  of  knee-joint.
:  Neuralgia  of  nervus  pudendus  internus,  in  consequence

of  gonorrhoea;  pains  begin  in  scrotum  and  anus,  and

extend  down  to  r.  side  of  foot,  with  severe  cramps.
^*  Limbs  in General, i  Great restlessness of extremities.

^Urticaria.
Pain  in  limbs,  stomach  and  joints.
^  Rest. Position. Motion. When  bolstered  up in  bed :

can  breathe  easily.
Unable  to  sit  up :  weariness,  debility.
Bending  double:  colic  >.
While  working  in  stooping  position:  pressure  on  sternum,

slow  respiration.
^®  Nerves. ■  Greatly  excited  during  night. ^Urticaria.
I  I  General  malaise. ^Nettle  rash.
■Weariness;  debility,  unable  to  sit  up. ^Bronchial  and

vesical  catarrh.
Involuntary  trembling  and movements of  head,  trunk

and  extremities.
Hemiplegia  after  disappearance  of  a  measle-like  eruption

which  had  covered  whole  body.
^"^  Sleep. ■  Drowsiness  or  sleepiness. ^Urticaria.

■  Restless  nights. ^Broncliial  and  vesical  catarrh.

^^  Time. In  morning:  diarrhoea  <;  white  diarrhoeic  stools,
with  chilliness  and colic; hoarseness; chilliness.
In  afternoon :  heat  and  thirst.

At  night:  discharge  runs  down  posterior  nares,  causing
choking  and  other  disagreeable  symptoms ;  greatly  ex-
cited; restless;  sweating.

^^  Temperature  and  Weather.  After  catching  cold :  pains  in
neck  of  bladder  on  attempting  to  urinate,  occasional  re-
tention of  urine.

^^  Fever.  ■Violent  chills,  with  headache  and  general  malaise.
^Nettle  rash.

■  Chilliness  and  coldness  in  forenoon,  with  pain  in  dorsa

of  feet;  in  afternoon,  heat  and  thirst  for  water.

■  Uneasiness  during  two  days,  followed  by  a  very  hard

chill,  which  is  succeeded  by  heat  and  an  eruption;  on
third  day,  fever  subsides  and  eruption  grows  paler.


COPAIVA.  446

I  Fever  and  burning  sensation,  insomnia  and  nocturnal
agitation. ^Urticaria.

I  Fever,  with  large  red  blotches  over  body,  constipation.

I  Perspiration  profuse,  of  a  pungent  smell.

Sweat  somewhat  relieves  nausea  and  colic.

■  Night  sweats. ^Bronchial  and  vesical  catarrh.

I  I  Febrile  disturbance  during  inflammatory  stage  of  gon-
orrhoea.
*^  Attacks,  Periodicity. Frequent:  mucous  diarrhoea;  calls
to  urinate.

Spasmodic :  pains  in  bladder,  every  morning  at  same  hour.

Occasional :  stitches  in  1.  side  of  chest.

Long  continued:  weakness  of  sexual  organs.

During  two  days :  uneasiness,  followed  by  chill,  heat  and
eruption,  which  subside  on  third  day.

Constant :  ineffectual  desire  to  urinate ;  excitement  of  sex-
ual desire;  irritation  in  larynx,  exciting  cough.

Lasting  several  days :  epistaxis  of  small  boys.

Chronic:  nasal  catarrh ;  inflammation  of  throat;  diarrhoea
and  dysentery;  hemorrhoidal  tumors;  cough  with  fis-
tula in  ano;  vesical  catarrh;  cystitis;  gleet;  bronchor-
rhoea ;  pulmonary  catarrh.
^  Locality  and  Direction.  Right :  pains  from  scrotum  and
anus  extend  down  to  side  of  foot.

Left:  mucous  rales  in  lung;  occasional  stitches  in  side  of
chest;  dulness  under  clavicle  and  want  of  normal  reso-
nance on  whole  side.
*^  Sensations. As  if  abdomen  would  burst;  as  if  respiratory
passage  was  filled  with  mucus.

Pain:  in  mouth,  throat  and  joints;  in  stomach  and  limbs;
in  bladder  every  morning;  in  neck  of  bladder  on  at-
tempting to  urinate;  in  prostate  gland  on  urinating;
under  fourchette  when  urine  reaches  glans  penis;  in
knees;  in  scrotum  and  anus,  extending  down  r.  side  of
foot,  with  severe  cramps ;  in  dorsa  of  feet.

Stitches :  in  rectum ;  in  1.  side  of  chest.

Tearing:  colicky  pains  in  abdomen.

Drawing-tearing:  colic  during  stool;  in  abdomen;  in
thighs.

Drawing:  in  bones  of  thighs;  in  uterus,  mouth  of  bladder
and  vagina.

Itching-drawing:  in  testicles.

Burning:  in  abdomen  and  umbilical  region;  intolerable,
at  anus;  in  neck  of  bladder  and  urethra;  in  urethra;  in
region  of  prostate  gland ;  in  vagina ;  red  spots  in  vulva ;
in  palms  of  hands  and  soles  of  feet;  in  chest.

Forcing  down :  in  bladder  and  uterine  region.

Throbbing:  in  ovaries.


447  COPAIVA.

Pulsative :  pain  throughout  penis.

Twitching:  in  skin,  urethra.

Biting:  in  urethra;  of  skin.

Pricking:  in  skin.

Excoriating  pain :  in  larynx.

Smarting:  of  urethra.

Soreness:  of  urethra;  of  meatus  urinarius ;  of  chest.

Rawness:  in  chest.

Roughness:  in  larynx.

Wandering  uterine  pains.

Pressure :  in  stomach ;  in  abdomen  and  umbilical  region ;

on  bladder;  in  uterus;  on  sternum;  in  chest.
Trembling:  in  head.
Fulness:  after  eating.
Oppression :  of  chest.
Weight:  in  perineum.
Anxiety:  in  chest.
Uneasiness:  in  stomach.
Tickling:  at  orifice  of  urethra.
Dryness:  of  tongue;  in  region  of  prostate  gland,  and  in

urethra;  in  larynx.
Warmth :  in  vagina.
Itching:  of  eyes;  in  urethra;  of  measle-like  eruption;  in

vagina;  of  vulva;  of  skin;  of  nettle  rash.
^*  Tissues. Blenorrhagia  or  profuse  discharges  from  various

mucous  surfaces;  chronic  catarrh.
Inflammatory  affections  of  intestinal  canal,  genital  and

urinary  systems.
Vesical  and  urethral  catarrh  of  both  sexes.

■  Emaciation. ^Bronchial  and  vesical  catarrh.
Post-scarlatinal  dropsy.

Dropsy  from  liver  and  heart.

Ascites,  general  anasarca  from  renal  disease,  especially

albuminuria  after  scarlatina.
iGonorrhoeal  rheumatism.
*^  Touch. Touch :  urticaria,  skin  disagreeable  to.
*^  Skin. Jaundice.

■Violent  itching. ^Urticaria.

Itching  and  pricking  in  skin;  annoying  itching  with  se-
vere inflammation  in  parts  denuded  of  epithelium.

■  Chilblains.

■  Nettle  rash,  isolated  patches,  pale  red  or  bright  red,  with

violent  itching.
■Urticaria  over  whole  body,  face  red;  dry,  hot  and  biting
skin  (calor  mordax),  especially  disagreeable  to  touch.
^Urticaria.

■  ■Urticaria  from  gastric  irritation  with  fever  and  intol-

erable itching.


COPAIVA.  448

Acne  of  long  duration,  with  much  disfigurement  of  face.

Papular  or  pustular  skin  eruption  occurring  in  groups,
with  pain  in  limbs  and  disordered  stomach.

■Large  red  blotches  all  oyer  body,  with  constipation  and
some  fever.

Dark  colored  or  bright  red,  elevated,  intolerably  itching,
lentil-sized,  measle-shaped  exanthema,  in  clusters,  flow-
ing one  into  another.

I  Uneasiness  during  two  days,  followed  by  a  very  hard
chill,  which  is  succeeded  by  heat  and  an  eruption  of
gives  rise  to  intense  itching  and  pricking  of  skin;  it  is
like  measles,  but  without  any  catarrhal  symptoms;  on
third  day  fever  subsides,  and  eruption  grows  paler;  on
seventh  skin  has  a  mottled  appearance;  the  eruption
does  not  wholly  disappear  for  five  days ;  no  desquamation.

Violent  chill,  headache  arid  general  malaise;  red,  hot  skin,
nettle  rash  all  over  body,  delirium,  drowsiness,  scanty
urine,  which  is  dark,  with  brick-dust  sediment.

Eczema,  consisting  of  small  vesicles,  smaller  and  flatter
than  the  mercurial  eczema.

Tormenting  eruptions  only  between  fingers,  and  on  both
forearms  as  far  as  bend  of  elbow ;  pustules  like  the  itch,
with  red  areolae,  containing  a  red,  watery  fluid,  with
itching  pain,  desquamation  after  a  few  days.

Measles,  scarlet  rash,  roseola;  miliary  eruption;  itch.
*^  Stages  of  Life, Constitution. Girl,  set. 4,  scrofulous;
dysuria.

Boy,  set.  12;  urticaria.

Mr.  R,,  set.  12;  urticaria.

Miss  G.,  set.  15;  lymphatic-sanguine  temperament;  caught
severe,  cold ;  bronchial  and  vesical  catarrh.

Miss  B.,  set.  24;  urticaria  and  gastric  disturbances.

M.  S.,  set.  25;  teacher,  delicate  health,  and  frequently  suf-
fering from  throat  affections,  neuralgic'  toothache,  gas-
tralgia,  with  constipation;  all  her  ailments  are  more  on
r.  side;  urticaria.

Young  German  girl;  gonorrhoea.

A  mason,  suff'ering  a  year  with  urinary  difficulties  arising
from  catching  cold  and  indulgence  in  beer  and  spirits.

Man,  set.  48,  with  tendency  to  hemorrhoids,  had  gonor-
rhoea several  times,  in  consequence  of  which  he  sufii'ered
from  strictures  and  dysuria,  he  was  relieved  by  caustics,
nevertheless  great  irritability  of  urethra  remained;
dysuria.

Man,  set.  50,  sufi^ering  ten  years  from  fistula  in  ano  con-
joined with  a  chronic  cough*;  had  an  attack  of  gonor-
rhoea, for  which  large  doses  of  balsam  copaiva  were
given,  which  resulted  in  curing  the  fistula  and  cough.


449  COPAIVA— CORALLIUM  RUBRUM.

Mrs.  B.,  set.  62;  nettle  rash.
*^  Relations. Antidoted  by:  BeMad.,  Calcar.,  Mercur.,  Sulphur.

Compatible :  After  Aeon.,  when  acute  symptoms  of  gonor-
rhoea have  been  subdued.

Compare:  Cannab.,  Canthar.,  Cuheba,  Erig.,  Kali  brom.,  Pul-
sat,  Kalijod.,  Sepia,  Senec.  grac,  all  of  which  cause  anal-
ogous symptoms  of  mucous  membrane,  especially  of
urinary  organs.


CORALLIUM  RUBRUM.

Red  Coral.  '  Gorgoniadese.

Proved  by  Attomyr,  in  the  3d  trituration ;  also  by  Melicher.  See  Encyclo-
pedia, V.  3,  p.  561.

Clinical  Authorities. — Inveterate  cases  of  nasal  catarrh,  Miller,  U.  S.
Med.  Inv.,  Nov.,  1878,  p.  418;  Chancre,  Attomyr,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf.,  v.  2,  p.  117;
Cough,  H.  N.  Martin,  Horn.  Clinics,  v.  2,  p.  215;  Hughes,  see  Pharmacody-
namics, p.  325 ;  Whooping  cough,  S.  M.  Cate,  N.  E,  M.  G.,  v.  3,  p.  85  ;  Eruption
on  elbows,  Nunez,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf.,  v.  4,  p.  239.

^  Mind. Peevish  and  ill  humored,  very  complaining;  scolds

and  swears  at  the  pains.
^  Inner  Head. iiWhen  moving  head  quickly,  or  shaking  it,

sensation  as  if  wind  was  blowing  through  skull.

■  Head  feels  very  large,  three  times  its  natural  size.
■ I  Sensation  of  emptiness  and  hollowness  of  head.

Extremely  violent  headache  -pressing  out  at  forehead,
obliging  him  to  move  head  from  one  side  to  other,  but
without  relief;  not  >  by  sitting;  >  for  a  short  time  by
almost  complete  uncovering  of  burning,  hot  body.

Sensation  as  if  forehead  was  flattened  by  pressure.

■  Pressing  headache in  forehead; she  cannot  keep  eyes

open;  >  by  walking  in  open  air.

■  Violent headache, as if parietal bones were forced

asunder ;  <  by  stooping.

■  Congestion  of  blood  to  head  on  stooping.

Meningeal  inflammation  threatening  in  yellow  fever,  es-
pecially in  children.
^  Sight  and  Eyes. ■  Enlarged  pupils. ^Whooping  cough.

Eyes  hot  and  painful,  with  sensation  as  if  swimming  in
tears,

VOL.  IV. — 29.


CORALLIUM  RUBRUM.  450

Burning  of  eyes  from  candle  light.

Extremely  sensitive  drawing  pain  in  external  wall  of  1.
orbit,  whence  pain  extends  down  beneath  cheek  bone,
apparently  along  course  of  nervus  malaris.

■Pressure,  as  from  sand,  in  reddened  eyes  (evening).

I  On  closing  eyes,  they  feel  hot,  as  if  bathed  in  tears.

I  I  Eyes pain violently during every motion. ^Gonor-

rhoeal  ophthalmia.
^  Smell  and  Nose. Subjective  odors  of  smoke,  onions,  etc.
Great  dryness  of  mucous  membrane  of  nose  and  throat.
Dry  coryza,  nose  stopped  up,  ulcerated  nostrils.

I I  Profuse  secretion  of  mucus  dropping  through  posterior
nares,  obliging  frequent  hawking;  inspired  air  feels
cold.

■  Violent,  fluent  catarrh  of  odorless  mucus,  looking  like

melted  tallow,  leaving  greasy  looking  spots  on  linen.
Bleeding  of  nose,  one  nostril  at  a  time,  especially  at  night.
Ulceration  of  nose.

■  Painful  ulcer  in  r.  nostril  and  on  inner  side  of  wing  of

nose,  affecting  nasal  bones,  with  a  sensation  as  if  they
were  pressed  asunder.
®  Upper  Face. 'Grows  purple  and  black  in  face. ^Whoop-
ing cough.
Left  zygoma  painful,  as  if  bruised;  <  when  touched.

■  Heat  in  face  on  bending  head  forward.

^  Lower  Face.  Pain  in  1.  articulation  of  lower  jaw,  as  if
sprained,  on  drawing  jaw  far  downward,  and  also  when
biting  and  yawning.

■  The  lips  are  chapped,  swollen  and  painful.

^^  Teeth  and  Gums.  ■Every  tooth  on  1.  side  feels  as  if  set  on
edge ;  as  if  teeth  were  too  close  to  one  another,  or  as  if
a  tenacious  body  was  lodged  between  them.

^^  Taste  and  Tongue.  ■  White  coated  tongue.  ^Whooping
cough.

^^  Inner  Mouth.  ■Painful  swelling  of  1.  submaxillary  gland;
<  when  swallowing  or  bending  head  forward.

13  Throat.  ■Mucous  membrane  of  throat  and  chest  very  sen-
sitive, any  change  of  air  sets  patient  coughing.
^Whooping  cough.

■  ■Constant  hawking,  owing  to  an  accumulation  of  mucus

in  posterior  nares;  inhaled  air  feels  cold. ^Catarrh.

■  Great  dryness  of  fauces.

^*  Thirst.  Desires.  ■Violent  thirst,  no  appetite.  ^Whoop-
ing cough.

■  ■  Longing  for  acids  and  salt  food.

*^  Eating  and  Drinking. ■After  dinner,  hot  cheeks  and  fore-
head, with  cold  feet.
Food  tastes  insipid,  like  sawdust;  farinaceous  food  tastes
like  straw;  beer  tastes  sweet.


451  CORALLIUM  RUBRUM.

^^  Nausea  and  Vomiting, l Nausea,  with  dryness  of  tongue  .
and  violent  headache,  <  when  sitting  up.
Severe  fit  of  coughing,  followed  by  a  loose  cough,  with
vomiting  of  quantities  of  tough,  ropy,  stringy  mucus.
^°  Stool  and  Rectum, l Constipation  (for  six  days),  followed
by  copious  papescent  stool.
Profuse  discharge  of  mucus  from  anus  at  night.
"^  Urinary  Organs, l Burning  urine.

* I  Loam  colored  urine,  with  similar  sediment.
^^  Male  Sexual  Organs, l AVeakened  sexual  power,  with  sper-
matorrhoea. ^Balanitis.

■  Involuntary seminal emissions during  sleep (without

dreams  or  erections).

I  Red,  flat  ulcers  on  glans  and  inner  surface  of  prepuce,
with  profuse  yellow,  ichorous  discharge.

iSuperhcial,  lardaceous  ulcers,  or,  more  commonly,  red
ulcers,  on  glans  penis  or  prepuce,  with  copious,  thin,
offensive  smelling  discharge,  which  can  be  easily  re-
moved. ^Chancre.

■Ulcers  flat  and  extremely  sensitive  to  touch,  sometimes
bleeding;  chancres  on  any  part  of  penis  or  scrotum,
very  sensitive  to  touch.

■  The  whole  glans  and  inner  surface  of  prepuce  secrete  a

yellowish -green offensive matter; great  sensitiveness,
redness  and  swelling.
■Swelling  of  prepuce;  margin  of  prepuce  feels  sore  when
linen  touches  it.

■  The  frsenum  is  painful,  as  if  pricked  by  needles.

■  Profuse  perspiration  of  genitals.

■  Balanitis.

■  Very  painful  soft  chancres.

■Syphilitic  erosions,  exuding  a  thin,  badly  smelling  ichor;
constant  trickling  of  mucus  from  posterior  nares  into
. fauces;  smooth,  copper  colored  spots  on  palm  of  hand
and  finger.
^^  Larynx. Laryngismus  stridulus.

^^  Respiration. 'On  deep  inspiration,  sensation  as  if  air  pass-
ing through  air  passages  was  icy  cold;  inclination  to
cough,  with  difficult  hawking  up  of  bronchial  mucus,
in  morning.
Difficult,  oppressed  respiration.

■  Crowing  during  inspiration. ^Whooping  cough.

■  Laryngismus  stridulus  resembling  whooping  cough.
Asthma.

^■^  Cough. Convulsive  spasmodic  cough,  occurring  in  parox-
ysms.

■  In some forms of violent spasmodic cough; "firing

minute-guns"  of  short,  barking  cough,  all  day,  and  for


CORALLIUM  RUBRUM.  452

half  an  hour  or  so  toward  evening,  increasing  to  a  vio-
lent spasmodic  paroxysm.

■  Nervous  and  spasmodic  cough;  so  violent  that  children

lose  their  breath  and  become  purple  and  black  in  face;
during  deep  inspiration,  sensation  as  if  air  passing
through  air  passages  was  icy  cold,  inclination  to  cough
'  and  difficult  hawking  up  of  bronchial  mucus;  every
atmospheric  change causes  coughing. ^Tuberculosis.

■  Fits  of  violent  spasmodic  cough,  commencing  with  gasp-

ing for  breath  and  continuing  with  repeated  crowing  in-
spirations until  he  grows  purple  and  black  in  face  and
is  quite  exhausted;  <  in  latter  part  of  night  and  morn-
ings; larynx  and  trachea  more  involved  than  chest;
mucous  membrane  of  throat  and  chest  very  sensitive,
and  change  of  air  sets  patient  coughing;  loss  of  appe-
tite and  thirst;  severe  fit  of  coughing  followed  by  a
loose  cough,  with  vomiting  of  quantities  of  tough,  ropy,
stringy  mucus. ^Whooping  cough.

I  Whooping  cough  or  any  other  kind  of  cough,  when
attack  comes  on  with  a  very  rapid  cough,  and  attacks
follow  so  closely  as  to  almost  run  into  each  other ;  cough
until  patient  falls  back  as  limber  as  a  rag.

■Whooping  cough,  with  bleeding  from  mouth  and  nose.

■  Cough,  with  morning  aggravation,  smothering  sensation

before  paroxysms.

■  Frequent  paroxysms of  violent coughing; spasms of

glottis  and  larynx  so  severe  as  to  produce  a  sound,  in
coughing,  similar  to  spasmodic  croup;  paroxysms  of
cough  every  ten  or  fifteen  minutes,  with  occasional  inter-
vals lasting  an  hour;  cough  <  latter  part  of  night  and
forenoon;  >  in  afternoon  and  evening;  she  seems  quite
weak,  with  quick  pulse,  white  coated  tongue,  consider-
able thirst,  no  appetite,  enlarged  pupils  and  rapid  loss
of  flesh.  ^Whooping  cough.
Nervous  cough,  asthma  Millari  and  endemic  whooping
cough.

■  Cough,  with  great  sensitiveness  of  air  passages.

■  Cold  expectoration.

^^  Inner  Chest  and  Lungs. Tuberculosis;  spasmodic  cough ;

cold  expectoration.
^^  Pulse. Pulse  full  and  hard.

■  Quick  pulse. ^Whooping  cough.

^^  Outer  Chest. Pains  in  sternum,  with  cough.
^^  Neck  and  Back. Neck  stiff.

Pressing  pains  in  shoulder-blades  with  the  cough.

Small  of  back  pains  as  if  broken.
^^  Upper  Limbs. ■Red,  itching,  miliary  eruption  rough,  feel-
ing like  a  grater  to  the  touch,  on  both  elbows.


453  CORALLIUM  RUBRUM.

Pain  in  wrists  as  after  writing  much  and  rapidly.

■  Smooth,  copper-colored spots on palm of hand and
finger. /^Syphilis.
^^  Lower  Limbs. Pain  in  knees,  tibise  and  tarsal  joints  as

after  walking  a  great  deal.
^*  Limbs  in  General. After  a  short  walk  in  evening,  great

lassitude  in  all  the  limbs.
^^  Rest. Position. Motion. Standing:  falls  asleep.

Motion :  eyes  pain  violently  during.

Sitting  up:  nausea  and  headache  <.

When  shaking  head  or  quickly  moving  it:  sensation  as  if
wind  was  blowing  through  skull.

Violent  headache,  obliging  him  to  move  head  from  side  to
side,  but  without  relief,  not  >  by  sitting.

Bending  head  forward:  heat  in  face;  pain  in  1.  submaxil-
lary gland  <.

On  closing  eyes:  they  feel  hot,  as  if  bathed  in  tears.

On  drawing  jaw  far  downward:  pain  in  1.  articulation,
also  when  biting  or  yawning.

Writing:  pain  in  wrists.

Stooping:  headache  <;  congestion  of  blood  to  head.

Walking:  headache  >;  lassitude  in  all  the  limbs  after;
great  fatigue  after.
^®  Nerves. ■  Great  weakness. ^Whooping  cough.

Great  fatigue  after  a  walk.

Hysteria.
^^  Sleep. Drowsiness;  yawning;  the  joint  of  the  jaw  pains.

Very  sleepy;  falls  asleep  while  standing.

Cannot  sleep  before  midnight ;  tosses  about.

Starts  as  soon  as  she  falls  asleep,  from  a  frightened  dream.
^^  Time. In  morning:  inclination  to  cough,  difficult  hawking
of  mucus;  spasmodic  cough  <.
"  In  afternoon:  cough  >.

Evening:  pressure  in  eyes;  cough  >;  lassitude  in  limbs.

At  night:  bleeding  of  nose;  profuse  discharge  of  mucus
from  anus ;  cannot  fall  asleep  before  midnight.

Latter  part  of  night:  spasmodic  cough  <.
^^  Temperature  and  Weather. Heat:  chill  >  by  outward;

Uncovering  of  body:  headache  >  for  a  short  time;  hot
parts  feel  cold.

Feels  cold  uncovered  and  too  hot  when  covered.

Open  air:  headache  >.

Change  of  air :  sets  patient  coughing.
^^  Fever. Heat  without  thirst  or  sweat;  full,  hard  pulse.

Chill,  but  skin  of  usual  warmth,  with  headache  and  vio-
lent thirst.

Chill  relieved  by  outward  heat.

Hot  parts  feel  cold  when  uncovered.


CORALLIUM  RUBRUM.  454

Dry  heat,  no  thirst,  no  sweat.

Tertian  or  quartan  intermittent; dropsy  following  sup-
pression of  chills.
*^  Attacks,  Periodicity. Frequent: paroxysms of  violent
coughing.

Constant: hawking; trickling  of  mucus  from posterior
nares  into  fauces.

Every  ten  or  fifteen  minutes :  paroxysms  of  cough,  with
occasional  intervals  lasting  an  hour.

For  half  an  hour:  toward  evening,  spasmodic  paroxysms
of  coughing.

All  day :  short  barking  cough.

For  six  days:  constipation.

Tertian  or  quartan  intermittent.
^^  Locality  and  Direction. Right:  painful  ulcer  in  nostril,
affecting  nasal  bones.

Left:  drawing  in  external  wall  of  orbit,  extending  down
beneath  cheek  bone;  zygoma  painful;  pain  in  articula-
tion of  lower  jaw;  every  tooth  on  side  as  if  set  on  edge;
painful  swelling  of  submaxillary  gland.
^^  Sensations.  As  if  wind  was  blowing  through  skull;  as  if
head  was  very  large,  three  times  its  natural  size;  as  if
forehead  was  flattened  by  pressure;  as  if  parietal  bones
were  forced  asunder;  as  if  eyes  were  swimming  in  tears;
as  of  sand  in  eyes;  as  if  nasal  bones  were  pressed  asun-
der; as  if  1.  zygoma  was  bruised;  as  if  sprained  in  1.  ar-
ticulation of  lower  jaw;  as  if  teeth  on  1.  side  were  set  on
edge;  as  if  teeth  were  too  close  to  one  another,  or  as  if
a  tenacious  body  was  lodged  between  them;  as  if  frse-
num  was  pricked  by  needles;  as  if  air  passing  through
air  passages  was  icy  cold ;  as  if  smothering  before  cough ;
as  if  small  of  back  was  broken.

Pain:  in  abdomen  with  coughing;  in  knees,  tibise  and
tarsal  joints,  as  if  after  walking  a  great  deal;  in  joint  of
jaw.

Drawing:  in  external  wall  of  1.  orbit,  extending  down  be-
neath cheek  bone.

Burning:  of  body;  of  eyes  from  candlelight.

Pressing  out:  at  forehead.

Pressing:  in  forehead;  in  shoulder-blades.

Pressure:  in  eyes.

Plollowness:  in  head.

Emptiness:  in  head.

Dryness:  of  fauces;  of  tongue.

.Itching:  miliary  eruption  on  elbows.
*^  Tissues. Difficult  breathing  and  spasmodic  cough.
I  Rapid  loss  of  flesh. ^Whooping  cough.

Scrofula;  syphilis  complicated  with  psora.


455  CORALLIUM  RUB.— CORNUS.

*^  Touch,  Passive  Motion.  Touch :  pain  in  1.  zygoma  < ;
ulcers  on  scrotum  or  penis  very  sensitive  to ;  eruption
on  elbows  feels  like  a  grater  to.

From  touch  of  linen:  margin  of  prepuce  feels  sore.
*^  Skin. I  Copper  colored  spots  on  skin.

Smooth,  red  spots  on  skin  and  palms  of  hands,  at  first
coral  color,  then  darker  red,  and  finally  coppery.

Pustular  eruption  resembling  varioloid.

Measles;  purpura;  psoriasis.
*''  Stages  of  Life,  Constitution. May  be  found  useful  for  a
combination  of  syphilis  and  psora.

Carrie,  set.  2 ;  whooping  cough.

Girl,  set.  13,  nervous  temperament,  has  several  times  mani-
fested hysterical  symptoms;  has  not  yet  menstruated;
cough.

Woman,  set  45 ;  sufi'ering  for  three  years  from  cough.

Woman,  set.  52; suffering  for  two  weeks; eruption  on
elbows.
*^  Relations. It  antidotes :  Mercur.

Complementary :  Sulphur.

Compare:  Bellad.,  Caustic,  Coffea,  Droser.,  Hyos.,  Lyssin.,
(inhaled  air  feels  cold);  Nitr.  ac,  Nux  vom.,  Mephi-
tis; Staphis.  (gastralgia).


CORNUS  CIRCINATA  AND  FLORIDA.

Dogwood.  Cornacese.

From  the  numerous  indigenous  species  of  dogwood,  the  Circinata  and  Florida
are  the  only  ones  proved.  Cornus  sericea  has  been  given  clinically  in  intermit-
tent fever  by  the  old  school.

The  Circinata  was  proved"  by  Marcy,  Crane,  Fiillgraff  and  Freeman  (see
Encyclopedia,  v.  3,  p.  565),  and  the  Florida  (potentized  to  the  30th  in  pure  snow
water)  by  G.  H.  Bute  in  the  Summer  of  1838;  also  proved  and  used  by  J.  Walker,
M.  B.  Koche  and  M.  Macfarlan.

The  symptoms  of  the  Florida  are  marked  — ,  and  are  not  in  the  Encyclopedia.

Clinical  Authorities  : Inflammation  of  chest,  MSS. ;  — Cough  with  stitches

in  chest,  Bute,  MSS. ;  Ague  (three  cases),  E.  J.  Bates,  Am.  Hom.  Obs.,  v.  1,  29  ;
—Intermittent  fever  (four  cases  reported),  A.  A.  Roth,  Kaue's  Kec,  1875,  p.  270.

^  Mind. Forgetful  of  familiar  matters.

Indifference  with  respect  to  subjects  which  usually  in-
terest.


COENUS.  456

Drowsiness  with  indifference.

■  Feeling  of  indolence  and  loss  of  mental  and  physical

energy.
Inability  to  fix  mind  upon  any  subject;  reads  without

behig  able  to  appreciate  the  ideas  of  the  subject.
Mind  confused ;  particularly  on  rising  in  morning.

■  Depression  of  spirits  and  petulance.

^  Sensorium. — l  Constant  dizziness. /^Inflammation  of  chest.
Dulness and sense of  fulness  in  head,  with  distension

of  stomach  >  after  stool.
Dulness  and  weight  in  head,  particularly  in  temples,  >

by  coffee.
Heaviness  of  head,  with  nausea.
^  Inner  Head. Aching  and  throbbing  pain  over  r.  eyebrow.
Dull  pains  over  eyeballs;  unusual  pulsations,  extending
from  front  to  back  of  head.

■  Pulsating  headache  in  temples.

■  Throbbing  headache,  mostly  in  temples,  >  by  coffee.
Drawing  sensation  from  back  of  head  to  nose.

Deep  seated  pulsating  pains  in  occipital  and  parietal
regions.

Heaviness  of  head,  with  great  disposition  to  sleep,  suc-
ceeded by  severe  cutting  pains  in  whole  head,  and  ex-
treme mental  and  physical  prostration,  >  by  cup  of
strong  coffee.

■Headaches,  with  drowsiness  and  confusion  of  ideas;  semi-
lateral  headaches;  deep  seated  pains  under  vertex;  dull
heavy  pains  over  whole  head,  with  drowsiness,  lassitude,
nausea  and  general  sweat.

I  1  Shooting,  aching  or  throbbing  pains  in  head.

Tensive,  aching  pains  throughout  whole  head.

— Severe  headache,  with  quick  pulse  and  violent  pains  in
bowels.

—  Fulness  and  pains  in  head,  with  gastric  derangement.

—  Cerebral  fulness,  with  constant  tendency  to  sleep.
Congestion  of  blood  to  head  and  face.

I  I  Bilious  cephalalgia.

Headache  <  by  walking,  stooping  or  shaking  head.
^  Sight  and  Eyes.  — iLeft  eye  weak,  like  a  cloud  over  it;
elbows  and  wrist  painful ;  pains  at  waist,  as  if  she  would
break  in  two ;  sighs  very  often ;  gagged,  as  if  to  vomit,
very  often  in  morning;  chilly  sensations  come  on  fre-
quently, although  she  is  warm;  pains  run  up  side  of
trunk  or  body  like  lightning,  seems  as  if  they  would
give  her  a  twist  while  running  up.

Eyes  sunken,  hollow;  dull  and  heavy  as  after  a  debauch;
dark  circles  under  them ;  yellowish  tinge  of  conjunctiva.

Sense  of  weight  or  a  feeling  of  contraction  around  eyes.


457  CORNUS.

■Soreness  of  eyeballs;  aching  pains  through  them.
Eyeballs  and  lids  feel  heavy,  as  if  pressed  down  by  a

weight;  great  inclination  to  close  eyes  in  sleep.
Scrofulous  ophthalmia,  herpes  of  eyelids.
^  Hearing  and  Ears. Ringing  in  ears.
"^  Smell  and  Nose, i  Prickling  in  nose  and  nasal  bones.
Drawing  sensation  from  back  of  head  to  nose.
Itching  of  nasal  mucous  membrane.
Coryza  early  in  morning.
®  Upper  Face. Heat  and  burning  in  face.

I  Burning  of  cheeks  without  redness,  but  feel  flushed.
I  Countenance  yellow  or  pale,  sallow,  sunken,  and  indica-
tive of  suffering  and  debility.
^^  Taste  and  Tongue. Pungent,  bitter  or  insipid  taste ;  yel-
lowish or  white  fur  upon  tongue.
Ulceration  of  tongue,  gums  and  mouth.
^^  Inner  Mouth. Smarting  in  mouth  and  throat.
Aphthous  ulceration  of  mouth  in  children.
Ulceration  of  buccal  mucous  membrane  from  a  cold  or
gastric  derangement.
13  Throat. Smarting and burning in mouth, throat and

stomach,  with  desire  for  stool.
^*  Thirst. Desires. Thirst  for  cold  drinks.

— I  Drinks  little  and  often;  hunger  soon  after  eating;  de^
sire  for  sour  things,  pickles,  pastry,  cakes,  etc. ^In-
flammation of  lungs.
^^  Hiccough,  Belching,  Nausea  and  Vomiting.  Eructations.
I  I  Acid  pyrosis;  painful  and  slow  digestion.

■  Gagging  as  if  to  vomit,  in  morning.
Nausea  with  confused  and  heavy  pain  in  head.

■  Nausea,  with  bitter  taste,  and  aversion  to  all  kinds  of

food  and  desire  for  sour  drinks.
Nausea,  sticky  sweat  and  feeling  of  exhaustion.
—  Nausea,  vomiting  and  pain  in  stomach,  with  headache.
— Nausea,  vomiting  and  violent  pains  in  bowels.
^^  Scrobiculum  and  Stomach. Sensation  of faintness  in
stomach  and  bowels.
•  ■Sense  of  emptiness  in  stomach.

■  Distension  of  stomach  and  bowels  with  wind.

■  Burning  sensation  in  stomach.

Fulness  and  oppression  in  stomach,  with  bad  taste  and
dry  mouth.

■  Pulsative  pains  in  stomach,  head  and  bowels.

■  Pain  in  pit  of  stomach.

— ■Indigestion  and  heartburn.

^*  Hypochondria.  ■Chronic  hepatitis  and  bilious  derange-
ments; jaundice.

^^  Abdomen.  Constant  working  of  bowels,  as  if  they  were  all
in  motion.


CORNUS.  458

Borborygmus ;  large  emission  of  very  offensive  flatus.
Distension  of  bowels  from  wind,  >  by  a  loose  fecal  dis-
charge.
I  Griping  in  umbilical  region,  with  much  rumbling of

wind.
Contraction and shooting  pains from centre of chest

(thoracic  muscles)  down  to  lower  part  of  abdomen,  pains

coming  on  severely  at  intervals  and  then  remitting.
Bearing  down  feeling  in  abdomen  and  rectum ;  creating

an  urgent  desire  for  stool.
— Violent  pain  in  bowels,  with  purging.
Abdominal  pains  more  acute  during  stool.
^  Stool  and  Rectum. ■  Urging  to  stool :  early  in  morning  in

bed;  with  fulness  and  uneasiness  of  bowels;  frequent

but  ineffectual.
I  Diarrhoea,  with  excessive  debility  and  nervous  excita-
bility.
1  Diarrhoea  of  a  dark  and  bilious,  or  watery  and  mucous

character,  with  griping,  burning  and  tenesmus,  nausea,

drowsiness,  dulness  of  head  and  general  perspiration.
Stools:  dark,  bilious,  very  offensive;  dark  green,  thin  and

offensive;  greenish,  slimy;  mucous,  bilious  or  watery;

frequent  and  scanty;  discharge  of  offensive  flatus.
■  Bearing  down  pains  in  rectum  and  bowels,  with  urgent

desire  to  go  to  stool. .
Hard,  dry  and  scanty  stool  with  pressing  in  rectum.
Ulceration  of  mucous  membrane  of  rectum.
I  Bowel  complaints  generally,  with  pains  in  bowels  before,

during  and  after  discharges.
I  Dysenteries  and  diarrhoeas,  accompanied  by  inactivity

of  liver.
Cholera  infantum, bowel complaints of infants  while

teething; bilious diarrhoea; bilious colic; jaundice;

biliary  derangements  generally.
Chronic  diarrhoea.
^^  Urinary  Organs. Frequent  inclination  to  pass  water.
— Difficult  urination  in  morning  in  old  men.
I  Urine  scanty  and  high  colored.
^^  Male  Sexual  Organs, i  Increased  sexual  desire,  but  lack

of  power.
Frequent,  strong  and  persistent  erections  during  night.
^^  Female  Sexual  Organs. iLeucorrhoea.
^®  Respiration. Frequent  inclination to expand chest by

taking  a  long  breath.
^^  Cough. I  Cough  with  sharp  stitches  in  chest.

I  Dry,  spasmodic  cough,  or  tedious  chronic  cough,  with

mucous  expectoration. ^Scrofulosis.
^^  Inner  Chest  and  Lungs. — i  Stitches  in  region  of  1.  clavi-


459  ■  CORNUS.

cle  extending  towards  r.  side,  <  by  taking  a  deep
breath;  constant  tickling  in  chest  compelling  him  to
cough,  with  difficult  expectoration ;  constant  dizziness ;
chilliness  followed  by  heat  with  thirst  and  finally
sweat;  drinks  little  and  often ;  hunger  soon  after  eating.
(^Inflammation  of  lungs.

Choking  sensation  in  upper  part  of  thorax.

Soreness  of  chest  on  rising  in  morning,

— Stitch  in  r.  chest  as  from  a  knife  thrust,  with  vertigo.

Sore,  bruised  feeling  or  stitches  in  chest  and  back.

Sensation  of  dragging,  or  bearing  down,  on  each  side  of
chest.

Shooting  pains  from  centre  of  thorax  to  lower  part  of
abdomen.

I  Intermittent  shooting  pains  in  chest  and  abdomen.

I  Rheumatic  or  neuralgic  pains  in  chest,  back  and  limbs.

— Inefi'ectual  urging  to  stool,  followed  by  cutting  pains  in
ribs  of  1.  side,  with  pain  under  1.  scapula  as  if  a  piece
of  flesh  were  being  forcibly  twisted  out;  later,  copious
stool.

Perceptible  pulsations  in  chest.
^^  Heart,  Pulse  and  Circulation. Palpitation  of  heart.

—  Increased  strength  and  frequency  of  jDulse,  with  fever
heat;  pulse  quick  and  hard.

■Acceleration  of  circulation.
^^  Outer  Chest, l  Dragging  pains  in  sides  of  thorax  and  in

.  lumbar  region,  <  by  motion,  bending  over  and  turning
in  bed.

Griping  and  shooting  pains  from  centre  of  chest  (thoracic
muscles)  to  lower  part  of  abdomen,  pains  severe  at
intervals.

Fine  scarlet  rash  upon  chest,  with  itching.
^^'  Neck  and  Back. — Sensation  like  a  jerk  or  a  shock  in
nape  of  neck.

I  Pains  at  the  waist  as  if  she  would  break  in  two;  pains
run  up  whole  1.  side  of  trunk  or  body  like  lightning,
seems  as  if  they  would  give  her  a  twist  while  running
up ;  pain  in  elbows  and  wrist.

Boring  pain  in  shoulder-blades.

Dull  pain  in  small  of  back,  with  drowsiness  and  lassitude.

Sore  pain  in  lumbar  region,  <  when  bending  over,  or  to
either  side.
^^  Upper  Limbs.  — Neuralgic  sharp  pains  begin  in  r.  elbow,
extending  to  hand  and  shoulder,  passing  down  r.  side
and  then  up  1. ;  pain  settled  about  heart,  causing  feeling
of  pressure  and  palpitation ;  could  not  use  arm  because
of  pain  and  lameness;  hands  and  feet  swollen,  pains  of
a  darting,  needle-like  kind,  very  severe;  difficulty  of
passing  water.


CrORNUS.  •  '460

Sense  of  weakness  and  fatigue  of  arms.

Burning  and  itching  sensation  in  hands  and  arms.

—  Numbness  and  stitches  in  wrist-joints.
Coldness  of  hands,  following  a  loose  stool.

—  Blueness  of  fingers.

^^  Lower  Limbs. Pain  in  r.  hip  while  lying  in  bed.

Legs  weak  and  tremulous,  particularly  when  ascending;
sensation  of  weariness  in  legs.

Itching  on  legs  and  thighs;  burning  sensation  in  feet.

Coldness  of  feet  following  a  loose  stool.
^*  Limbs  in  General. Weakness  of  extremities.

—  Cramps  in  popliteal  spaces  with  tension  in  flexor  mus-
cles, also  in  1.  arm,

^  Rest. Position. Motion. Lying :  pain  in  r.  hip.

Motion:  pains  in  sides  of  thorax  and  lumbar  region  <.

Turning  in  bed:  pains  in  sides  of  thorax  and  lumbar
region  <.

Shaking  head:  headache  <,

Bending  over:  pains  in  sides  of  thorax  and  lumbar  re-
gion <  ;  pain  in  lumbar  region  <.

Bending  to  either  side:  soreness  in  lumbar  region  <.

Stooping:  headache  <.

Walking:  headache  <.

When  ascending:  legs  weak  and  trem-ulous.

Exercise :  sweat  and  great  fatigue  from  slight.
36  "JjjQxyes. >  General  debility  and  impaired  mental  energy,

with  great  drowsiness;  in  heat  of  Summer.
^^  Sleep. ■  Great  disposition  to  sleep,  with  entire  loss  of  men-
tal and  physical  energy;  heavy  feeling  in  head.

■  Drowsiness,  with  great  depression  of  spirits  and  deep

seated  pains  in  head ;  disposition  to  perspire.
Sleepy  and  weak  during  day,  with  dull  pains  in  head,

back  and  limbs.
■Sleep  unrefreshing  and  disturbed  by  unpleasant  dreams.
^^  Time. In  morning : on  rising,  mind confused ; gagging ;
coryza  early; urging  to  stool,  early  in  bed; difficult
urination,  in  old  men ;  soreness  of  chest  on  rising.

■  Symptoms  generally  <  on  waking  in  morning.
During  day:  sleepy  and  weak,  with  dull  pains  in  head,

back  and  limbs.

At  night:  frequent  erections;  sleepy  but  constant  sleep;
must  get  up  and  look  out  of  -window ;  itching  in  parox-
ysms <.
^^  Temperature  and  Weather. Cold  drinks :  thirst  for.

From  catching  cold:  ulceration  of  buccal  mucous  mem-
brane; inflammation  of  chest.

Summer: debility,  impaired mental energy, and  great
drowsiness  in  heat  of.


461  CORNUS.

*"  Fever. Chilliness,  accompanied  by  nausea,  dull  pain  in
head  and.  feelings  of  debility  and  languor.

—  Chill  with  cold,  clammy  skin.

Chilly  sensation,  succeeded  by  transient  flushes  of  heat.
—I  Chilliness,  followed  by  heat  with  thirst  and  finally
sweat. /^Inflammation  of  lungs.

—  Chill  followed  by  heat  with  thirst,  drinks  often,  but  not
much  at  a  time,  then  sweat;  constant  giddiness;  hun-
gry soon  after  eating;  desire  for  sour  things,  later  for
sweets.

— I  First  moderate  heat,  then  light  perspiration,  ending
with  a  crawling  sort  of  chill,  beginning  in  back  and
going  upwards. ^Intermittent  fever.

—  Increased  temperature  of  body,  hot  sweat,  fulness  in
head.

Flushes  of  heat  and  coldness  in  alternation,  followed  by

cold  perspiration.
Transient  flushes  of  heat,  pervading  whole  body,  with

shooting  pains  through  brain,
— Heat:  with  violent  headache; thirst; hot,  but  moist

skin;  stupor.

■  Paroxysm  preceded  for  days  by  sleepiness,  dull,  heavy

headache,  sluggish  flow  of  ideas;  slight  exercise  causes
sweat  and  great  fatigue;  during  apyrexia,  debility  and
painful  diarrhoea;  first  moderate  heat,  then  light  per-
spiration, ending  with  a  crawling  sort  of  chill;  when  all
the  stages  seem  aborted  and  the  patient  says  his  chills
amount  to  nothing;  weak,  languid,  loss  of  appetite.
I  General  perspiration,  with  nausea,  drowsiness  and  heavy
pain  in  head.

■  General  clammy  sw^eat,  with  headache,  nausea,  pain  in

back,  lassitude  and  confusion  of  ideas,
■  — Sweat  rolls  down  from  her;  chilly,  but  warm;  cramps
from  sides  of  her  waist,  running  toward  pubes ;  sleepy,
but  couldn't  sleep  all  night;  had  to  get  up  and  look  out
of  window,  she  was  so  sleepless;  could  not  sleep  in  day-
time, sweating  all  the  time.

Bilious  remittents,  and  the  characteristic  gastric  and  in-
testinal symptoms  present.
^^  Attacks,  Periodicity.  Frequent:  sighing;  gagging;  chilly
sensations;  ineffectual  urging  to  stool;  diarrhoea;  incli-
nation to  urinate;  erections;  inclination  to  expand
chest,  by  taking  a  long  breath.

Constant:  dizziness;  tendency  to  sleep;  working  of  bowels;
tickling  in  chest;  sweating.

Daily:  paroxysms  of  ague.

Chronic:  hepatitis  and  bilious  derangement;  diarrhoea;
cough.


CORNUS.  462

*^  Locality and Direction. Right: aching  and  throbbing

over  eyebrow;  stitch  in  chest;  pain  in  hip.
Left:  eye  weak;  stitches  in  region  of  clavicle  extending

towards  r.  side;  cutting  in  ribs,  with  pain  under  scapula;

tension  in  arm.
*^  Sensations. As  if  a  cloud  was  over  1.  eye;  as  if  she  would

break  in  two  at  waist ;  as  if  pains  would  give  her  a  twist

while  running  up  body;  as  if  eyeballs  and  lids  were

pressed  down  by  a  weight;  as  if  bowels  were all  in

motion;  as  if  a  knife  was  thrust  into  r.  chest;  as  if  a

piece  of  flesh  was  being  forcibly  twisted  out  under  1.

scapula;  as  of  a  jerk  or  shock  in  nape  of  neck.
Pain :  deep  seated,  under  vertex ;  in  bowels ;  in  elbows  and

wrists; in  stomach; in  pit  of  stomach;  in  r.  hip;  in

back ;  in  chest,  abdomen  and  legs.
Stitches:  sharp,  in  chest,  in  region  of  1.  clavicle  extending

towards  r.  side;  in  r.  chest;  in  wrist-joints.
Darting,  needle-like  pain:  in  arm.
Prickling:  in  nose  and  nasal  bones;  heat  of  whole  surface

with;  in  skin.
Cutting:  in  whole  head;  in  1.  ribs.
Shooting:  in  head;  from  centre  of  chest  down  to  lower

part  of  abdomen;  in  brain.
Lightning-like  pains :  run  up  side  of  trunk  or  body.
Boring:  in  shoulder-blades.
Drawing:  from  back  of  head  to  nose.
Tensive  pain :  throughout  whole  head.
Tension:  in  flexor  muscles,  also  in  1.  arm.
Burning:  in  face;  of  cheeks;  in  mouth,  throat  and  stom-
ach; in  hands  and  arms;  in  feet;  heat  of  whole  surface

with;  in  skin.
Contraction:  around  eyes;  from  centre  of  chest  down  to

lower  part  of  abdomen.
Bearing  down :  in  abdomen  and  rectum ;  on  each  side  of

chest.
Dragging:  on  each  side  of  chest;  in  lumbar  region.
Rheumatic  or  neuralgic  pains:  in  chest,  back  and  limbs.
Neuralgic  pains : begin in  elbow,  extend to hand  and

shoulder,  pass  down  r.  side,  then  up  1.  and settling

about  heart.
Throbbing:  over  r.  eyebrow;  in  temples;  in  head.
Pulsating: headache  in  temples; deep seated  pains in

occipital  and  parietal  regions;  pains  in  head,  stomach

and  bowels.
Pulsations:  from  front  to  back  of  head.
Griping: in umbilical region; from centre of  chest  to

lower  part  of  abdomen.
Cramps :  in  popliteal  spaces ;  from  sides  of  waist  running

towards  pubes.


463  .  CORNUS.

Colic:  pains.

Smarting:  in  mouth  and  throat;  stomach.

Bruised  feeling:  in  chest  and  back.

Soreness:  of  eyeballs;  of  chest;  in  chest  and  back;  in
lumbar  region.

Aching:  over  r.  eyebrow;  in  head;  through  eyeballs.

Choking:  in  upper  part  of  thorax.

Confused  pain :  in  head.  '

Dull  pain:  over  eyeballs;  over  whole  head;  in  small  of
back;  in  back  and  limbs.

Heav}^  pain:  in  head.

Pressure :  about  heart.

Pressing:  in  rectum.

Oppression:  in  stomach.

Weight :  in  head,  particularly  in  temples ;  around  eyes.

Heaviness:  of  head;  of  eyeballs  and  lids.

Dulness:  within  head.

Weakness:  of  arms.

Weariness:  of  legs.

Faintness:  in  stomach  and  bowels.

Uneasiness:  of  bowels.

Fulness:  within  head;  in  stomach;  of  bowels.

Emptiness:  in  stomach.

Numbness:  in  wrist-joints.

Tickling:  inchest.

Itching:  of  nasal  mucous  membrane;  of  rash  upon  chest;
in  hands  and  arms;  on  legs  and  thighs;  heat  of  whole
surface  with;  in  skin;  of  scalp,  legs  and  feet;  of  external
genitals.
^^  Tissues.  Its  chief  action  appears  to  be  upon  the  liver  and
the  intestinal  canal;  a  marked  influence  is  likewise  ex-
erted upon  the  brain.

Accelerated  action  of  heart  and  arteries,  accompanied  by
hot  skin,  burning  of  face,  great  drowsiness,  headache,
inability  to  fix  the  mind,  nausea,  depression  of  spirits,
pains  in  back,  chest,  abdomen  and  legs,  lassitude,  de-
bility, sunken  eyes,  yellow  tinge  of  conjunctiva,  sallow
countenance,  diarrhoea  of  dark,  bilious  matter,  or  slimy
and  watery  fluid,  tenesmus,  colic  pains,  throbbing  pains
in  temples,  distressing  dreams,  tympanitic  distension  of
abdomen,  constant  desire  to  sleep.

I  Intermittent  fevers,  with  chills  and  sweat  predominating;
the  last  stages  of  remittent  and  typhoid  fevers,  when
diarrhoea  sets  in,  with  profuse  sweats  and  general  phys-
ical and  mental  exhaustion.
^^  Touch. Scratching  or  rubbing:  <  itching.
^^  Skin. I  Yellow  or  earthy  appearance  of  skin.

I  Heat  of  whole  surface,  with  itching,  burning  or  prick-
ling sensations.


CORNUS.  .  464

I  Prickling,  burning  and  itching  sensation  of  skin.

Itching  of  scalp,  legs  and  feet,  <  by  scratching  or  rubbing.

Itching  in  paroxysms,  <  at  night.

Eczema,  pruritus  or  similar  affections  of  external  genitals.

Skin  covered  with  copious  clammy  perspiration.

Fine  scarlet  rash  on  breast,  with  itching.

Dry  or  moist  eruption;  scrofulosis  with  cough.

Dry  or  moist  tinea ;  itching  of  scalp.

■  Vesicular  eruptions;  urticaria;  miliaria;  roseola.
*^  Stages  of  Life,  Constitution. Young  man,  set.  18 ;  daily
paroxysms  of  ague.

Young  man,  set.  20,  sick  seven  or  eight  weeks,  had  taken
usual  remedies  without  effect;  ague.

—  George  Schafer,  after  catching  cold;  inflammation  of
chest.

Man,  set.  35,  sick  seven  weeks  with  chills,  fever  and  vomit-
ing of  blood;  remedy  given  in  alternation  with  Tart.
emet.
*^  Relations. Compare: Cinchon., Eup.  per/., Hydrast.  and
Nux  vom.


CREASOTE. (See  Kreosotum.) .


465  CROCUS  SATIVUS.

CROCUS  SATIVUS.

Saffron.  Iridacese.

Employed  by  the  ancients  both  as  a  medicine  and  a  condiment.
The  provings  are  principally  by  Stapf  and  Gross, and  associate  provers.
See  Encyclopedia,  v.  3,  p.  578.

Clinical  Authorities. — Cerebral  disturbance,  Schmid,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf.,  v.
1,  p.  20;  Headache  during  climacteric  period,  H.,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf.,  v.  1,  p.  176;
Ophthalmia,  S.  Lilienthal,  Med.  Inv.,  v.  7,  p.  64 ;  Conjunctivitis,  T.  C.  Fanning,
Horn.  Clinics,  v.  3,  p.  21 ;  Epistaxis,  Landesmann,  Raue's  Rec,  1873,  p.  81 ;  Epis-
taxis  (four  cases),  Hartlaub,  Sonnenberg,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf.,  v.  1,  p.  412 ;  J.  Stein,
Raue's  Rec,  1875,  p.  81 ;  Gastric  disturbances  after  operation  for  hemorrhoids,
Schmidt,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf.,  v.  1,  p.  636 ;  Hemorrhage  from  uterus  (five  cases),  Diez,
Riick.  Kl.  Erf.,  v.  2,  p.  307;  Kopp,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf.,  v.  2,  p.  307;  Metrorrhagia,
Werber,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf.,  v.  2,  p.  306 ;  Metrorrhagia,  Camillo  Lederer,  Raue's  Rec,
1874,  p.  245 ;  Uterine  hemorrhage  during  pregnancy,  H.  M.  Warren,  Med,  Inv.,  v.
5,  p.  35 ;  Severe  after-pains  and  hemorrhage,  G.  Schmid,  Hom.  Clinics,  v.  4,  p.  150 ;
Hcemoptysis,  H.  Ring,  Raue's  Rec,  1874,  p.  159  ;  Chorea,  Gross,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf.,
V.  4,  p.  507.

^  Mind.  I  Child  sits  or  stands  up  in  bed  making  various
quick  movements  without  being  conscious  of  what  he
is  doing ;  this  is  followed  by  a  short  interval  of  quiet-
ness, in  which  he  may  regain  consciousness,  but  with-
out any  knowledge  of  what  has  passed;  this  remission
followed  by  another  attack,  and  so  on;  febrile  condition
with  congestion  to  head ;  eyes  fixed  and  bright ;  redness
and  heat  of  face^  urine  pale  and  scant;  desires  neither
food  nor  drink.
I  On  attempting  to  write  something  down,  cannot,  on  ac-
count of  loss  of  recollection.

■  Greatly  concerned  about  his  life,  believes  that  he  will  die,

is  no  longer  fit  for  business. 6'Epistaxis.
Extravagant  ideas  and  great  loquacity.
I  Sings  involuntarily,  on  hearing  even  a  single  note  sung;

laughs  at  herself,  but  soon  sings  again  in  spite  of  her

determination  to  stop.

■  Jumping,  dancing,  laughing,  whistling;  very  aflJection-

ate,  wants  to  kiss  everybody.
Gaiety;  uncommon  mirth  and  cheerfulness;  witty.

■  Changeable  disposition,  depression  and  hilarity.
Alternations  of excessive  happy  affectionate  tenderness

and  rage.

VOL.  IV. — 30.


CROCUS  SATIVUS.  466

■  Restless,  anxious,  sorrowful  mood;  deep  melancholy.
Excessive  timidity.

■  Vexation,  contradicted  by  bursts  of  laughter.

I  He  takes  everything  in  anger  and  suddenly  repents  of
having  injured  others.

■  Great  ill  humor;  behavior  of  relatives  and  friends  excite

her  to  anger,  and  she  is  at  the  point  of  permitting  an
outbreak  of  passion  towards  them,  but  at  this  moment
she  feels  calm ;  at  next  moment  this  calmness  seems  a
weakness;  she  is  vexed  with  herself,  and  her  anger  be-
comes greater  than  ever;  this  very  unusual  vacillation
of  mood  lasts  several  hours.
^  Sensorium. Giddiness  with  fainting.

Vertigo:  as  if  intoxicated,  in  forehead;  in  room,  but  not
in  open  air;  with  confusion;  and  heat  of  whole  body;
staggering  and  giddiness  when  raising  head  after  lying
down  at  night.

■  Congestion  of  head,  with  nosebleed.

^  Inner  Head. Sudden  shock  in  forehead  and  temples.

Pain  in  forehead  in  evening  by  candle  light,  with  burn-
ing and  pressure  in  eyes.

■  Sudden  broad  thrust  in  r.  temple,  extending  deep  into

brain,  causing  him  to  start;  above  1.  frontal  eminence,

extending  deep  into  brain.
Pulsating  pains  in  1.  side  of  head  extending  into  eye.
Sudden  cold  sensation  on  1.  parietal  bone,  as  if  a  drop  of

cold  water  had  fallen  on  it.
When  moving  head,  sensation  as  if  brain  were  loose.

■  Congestion  of  head;  violent  throbbing.
Nervous  or  menstrual  headache.

■  Headache  during  climacteric  period  with  throbbing,  pul-

sating pains  in  various  parts  of  head,  pressure  in  eyes,
dilatation  of  vessels  of  head  and  of  other  parts  of  body;
<  during  period  in  which  she  was  accustomed  to  have
menstrual  flow,  pain  continuing  at  that  time  two  or
three  days  without  remission,  preventing  sleep.

*  Outer  Head. Vertigo  when  raising  head,  with  heat  of  body.

^  Sight  and  Eyes.  ■Eyes  fixed  and  shining.  ^Cerebral  dis-
turbance.

■  Sudden  flashes  before  eyes  like  electric  sparks.

■  Appearance  of  a  spot  jumping  up  and  down  before  sight.
On  reading,  the  paper  looks  pale  red  or  rose  color,  shines,

■  The  light  seems  dim,  as  if  obscured  by  a  veil.

Acute  tearing  pain  in  head  and  r.  eye,  with  dimness  of
vision,  and  a  sensation  as  if  cold  air  was  rushing
through  eye.

■Sore  burning  in  eyes  after  reading  awhile;  also  dimness,
must  wink  frequently.


467  CROCUS  SATIVUS.

iPupils  much  dilated.

I  Pain  in  eye  to  top  of  head,  pain  in  1.  eye  darting  to  r.;
sensation  of  cold  wind  blowing  across  eyes.  ^Sclero-
choroiditis  post. ^Asthenopia.

I A  few  moments  use  of  eyes  causes  feeling  in  them  as  if
room  were  filled  with  smoke;  feeling 'of  drjaiess  and
burning,  very  soon  succeeded  by  lachrymation ;  press-
ure on  closed  lids  relieves  somewhat.

I  Feeling  in  eyes  as  if  she  had  been  violently  weeping,
with  corresponding  appearance  of  weeping ;  beginning
in  1.  and  extending  to  r.  eye;  feeling  of  something  alive
and  moving  in  abdomen  (r.  side). ^Conjunctivitis.

■Feeling  as  though  water  were  constantly  coming  into
eyes,  only  in  room.

■Sensation  as  if  she  had  been  looking  through  too  sharp
spectacles.

■  Feeling  as  of  biting  smoke  in  eyes.

Worse  from  looking  fixedly  at  an  object,  cannot  even
thread  a  needle.

Ophthalmia  menstrualis  in  patients  of  a  sanguine  tem-
perament, subject  to  attacks  of  congestion  and  inclina-
tion to  spasms  (hysterical)  at  climacteric  period.

■  Extreme  photophobia  and  most  copious  lachrymation;

impossible  to  read  without  a  torrent  of  tears  inundating
eyes,  so  that  light  gets  confused  and  veiled.
Lachrymation  in  room;  not  in  open  air.

■  Constant  winking,  with  tearful  suffusion  of  eyes.

■  Must  wink  and  wipe  eyes  frequently,  as  though  a  film  of

mucus  were  over  them.
Twitching  of  eyelids,

■  Jerking,  twitching  and  itching  in  upper  lid.
Nightly  spasms  of  lids.

" ■Sensation  as  if  eyelids  were  swollen.

■  Inclined  to  press  lids  tightly  together  from  time  to  time.

■  Heating  and  lancinating  pains  in eyes  after  surgical

operations.

®  Hearing  and  Ears.  ■Humming  and  roaring  in  ears,  caus-
ing impairment  of  hearing,  <  when  stooping.

''  Smell  and  Nose.  iMild  pressure  in  forehead  precedes  at-
tack of  nosebleed;  he  is  very  anxious,  believing  that
he  will  die,  constant  coldness  of  hands  and  feet;  towards
evening,  congestion  of  blood  to  head,  with  warmth  of
face,  quivering  in  1.  eyelid,  sour  taste  in  mouth,  pulse
full  and  quick.

■  lEpistaxis  of  very  tenacious,  thick,  black  blood,  every

drop  drawn into  a  thread,  with  cold  sweat  in  large
drops  on  forehead.

■  Violent  sneezing;  coryza  with  stringy  mucus.


CROCUS  SATIVUS.  468

I  Bloody  mucus,  or  dark,  stringy  blood  from  nose.
^  Upper  Face, i  Yellowish,  sallow  color  of  face. ^Epistaxis.
^Metrorrhagia.
I  Red,  hot  face,  or  alternate  redness  and  paleness.

■  Redness  and  heat  of  face,  with  congestion  to  head.  ^Cere-

bral disturbance.
•Sensation  of  warmth  in  face,  with  congestion  to  head  and
twitching  in  1.  eyelid. ^Epistaxis.
^  Lower  Face. ■  Lips  cracked.

"  Taste  and  Tongue, i Tongue  moist,  dirty  and  coated  in
centre. //Metrorrhagia.
I  Tongue  coated  white,  papillse  elevated,  >  after  breakfast.
^^  Inner  Mouth. Unusual  warmth  in  mouth.
iBour  taste  in  mouth. ^Epistaxis.
I  Foul  odor  from  mouth. ^Metrorrhagia.
^^  Throat. ■  Feeling  as  if  uvula  were  elongated,  during  and
when  not  swallowing.

■  Elongation  of  uvula.

■Sensation  in  oesophagus  as  from  a  plug.
■Scraping  in  throat  in  evening  before  and  after,  but  not
during  time  he  takes  his  food.

■  Scraping  rough  throat.

"  Thirst. ■  Excessive  thirst  for  cold  drinks;  thirst  in  evening.
^^  Nausea  and  Vomiting. ■Eructations,  tasteless.

■  Violent  heartburn.

■  Feeling  of  nausea  in  chest  and  throat.

■  Nausea,  disappearing  in  open  air.

^'^  Scrobiculum  and  Stomach. ■  Great  feeling  of  emptiness
in  pit  of  stomach.

■  Distension  of  stomach  and  abdomen.

■  Sensation  of  fermentation  in  stomach,  or  of  motion  up-

ward and  downward,  hither  and  thither.

■  ■Sensation  as  if  something  living  were  jumping  about  in

pit  of  stomach.

■  Fulness  and  bloatedness  of  stomach;  eructations  and  ran-

cid pyrosis;  nausea  and  difhcult  vomiting  of  decom-
posed fluids;  fine  cutting  pain  beginning  in  cardiac
region,  extending  to  and  fixing  itself  in  stomach;  ab-
domen sunken;  no  stools  during  paroxysms;  pulse  about
60,  intermittent,  as  also  beat  of  heart;  great  dyspnoea;
icteric  symptoms.  ^ After  operation  for  hemorrhoids.
Very  violent  heartburn.
^^  Abdomen. Bloated  abdomen.

■  ■Sensation in abdomen,  as if  something living were

jumping  about,  with  nausea,  faintness  and  shivering.
In  night  when  waking  she  experiences  repeated  kicks  in
1.  side  of  abdomen  as  from  a  foetus.


469  CROCUS  SATIVUS.

■  Stitches  in  abdomen  arresting  respiration,  with  uterine

inflammation.

■  Sensation  of  heaviness  in  abdomen,  with  pressing  towards

uterus.

■  Cutting  pains  deep  in  lower  abdomen  extending  towards

small  of  back. ^Uterine  hemorrhage.
Pain  in  groins.
^  Stool and  Rectum. ■Obstinate constipation caused by
stagnation  in  portal  system; costiveness  of newborn
children  when  based  on  venous  disturbances.

■  Stools  contain  dark,  stringy  blood.

■  Sensitive,  dull,  long  stitch  near  1.  side  of  anus,  from  time

to  time.

■  Stitches  and  itching  at  anus;  stitch  extending  from  anus

through  small  of  back  into  1.  groin,  <  during  an  in-
spiration.

■  Crawling  in  anus,  as  from  thread  worms.

■  Intolerable writhing  in  anus  affecting  whole  nervous

system  painfully.

^^  Urinary  Organs.  ■  Urine  scant  and  pale.  ^Cerebral  dis-
turbance.

^^  Male  Sexual  Organs. ■Excitement  of  sexual  desire.

^^  Female  Sexual  Organs.  ■Sensation  as  if  menses  would
appear,  with  colic  and  pressing  towards  genitals,

■  Menstruation  too  early  and  too  profuse.

■  Uterine  flow  during  new  or  full  moon.

■  Menses  profuse  and  lasting  too  long,  but  come  at  proper

time;  blood  dark,  clotted,  stringy,  viscid.

■  Dysmenorrhoea,  with  dark,  stringy  blood;  sensation  of

commotion  in  stomach  upward  and  downward,  hither
and  thither,  during  painful  menstruation.

■  After  non-appearance  of  menses  for  ten  weeks,  sudden

severe  bearing  down  pains  in  abdomen  and  small  of
back  with  severe  hemorrhage;  blood  flowing  in  large,
black,  coagulated  masses  from  uterus,  greatly  exhaust-
ing patient.

■  Menses  suppressed;  sensation  of  rolling  or  tumbling  in

abdomen.

■After  dancing  or  a  long  walk  during  catemenia,  with  or
without  pain,  when  there  is  a  discharge  of  dark,  stringy
blood ;  it  comes  away  in  dark  or  black  strings ;  sense  of
rolling  or  bounding  in  stomach  or  abdomen;  violent
cephalic  throbbing.

Nervous  excitement;  palpitation  of  heart;  fearfulness.

■  ■Metrorrhagia  of  dark,  viscid,  stringy  blood,  in  black

clots,  or  after  overheating,  straining,  or  lifting,  also  after
abortion  or  delivery ;  <  from  slightest  motion.

■  Daily  discharge  of  bright  red  blood,  viscid,  slimy,  coag-


CROCUS  SATIVUS.  470

ulated,  with  vertigo,  pains  in  head,  stitches  in  both
sides  under  false  ribs,  frequent  palpitation;  small  and
frequent  pulse,  pains  in  back  and  great  exhaustion.

Leucorrhoea  with  paroxysms  of  acute  stitches  from  puden-
dum to  r.  thigh,  as  if  a  knife  were  suddenly  thrust  into
these  parts  every  now  and  then,  gradually  penetrating
into  the  parts  and  with  increasing  pain.
24  Pregnancy. Parturition. Imaginary  pregnancy.

Motions  of  child  are  felt  too  violently,  and  are  painful.

■  Threatened  abortion,  especially  when  there  is  a  hemor-

rhage of  dark,  stringy  blood ;  miscarriage  third  month.

■  Quarter  of  an  hour  after  delivery,  placenta  still  remain-

ing, blood  in  large  clots;  womb  dilated,  soft;  fainting;
pale  as  death;  pulseless,  extremities  cold  as  ice.  ^Post-
partum hemorrhage.

■  Lochia  dark,  stringy;  abdomen  distended.

■  Discharge  composed  of  black  strings;  as  fast  as  blood

flows  from  vulva  it  is  formed  into  black,  string-like
masses.

■  Offensive  smelling  uterine  hemorrhage;  or  when  the  pa-

tient, in  consequence  of  long  continued  hemorrhage,  has
fallen  into  a  state  of  nervous  erethism.
^  Respiration. Oppression  of  chest,  with  desire  to  draw  a  long
breath,  >  by  yawning.

■  Offensive,  sickly  odor  of  breath.

^^  Cough. ■Violent  attack  of  exhausting  dry  cough,  relieved
by  laying  hand  on  pit  of  stomach.

■  Cough,  with  spitting  of  dark,  stringy  blood.

^^  Inner  Chest  and  Lungs. ■Heaviness  of  chest,  must  fre-
quently take  a  deep  breath.

■  Sensation  as  if  something  living  were  hopping  in  chest.

■  Jumping,  as  if  from  something  living  in  lower  portion  of

r.  chest,  as  if  beneath  the  ribs.

■  Dull  stitches  in  1.  chest.

^^  Heart,  Pulse  and  Circulation. ■Anxious  palpitation  of
heart. ^'Uterine  hemorrhage.

■  Palpitation  of  heart  on  going  up  stairs;  great  debility.
Pulse:  feverish,  accelerated;  full,  and  quick  (epistaxis);

slow,  scarcely  60  (cerebral  disturbance);  weak  and  in-
termitting, hardly  accelerated  (metrorrhagia) ;  pulseless.

■  Excited  circulation. ^Hemorrhages.

^  Outer  Chest. Peculiar  jerking  pain  in  interior  of  1.  breast,

as  if  drawn  towards  the  back  by  means  of  a  thread.
^'  Neck  and  Back. Swelling  of  neck.

Sensation  of  coldness  in  back.
^^  Upper  Limbs. ■Pain  on  moving  upper  arm,  as  if  head  of
humerus  was  loose  and  easily  dislocated ;  cracking.
Sensation  as  if  arms  and  hands  had  gone  to  sleep.


471  CROCUS  SATIVUS.

The  arms  (forearm)  feel  heavy,  as  if  bruised.
Burning,  tingling  and  tension  in  tips  of  fingers.

■  Chilblains  on  hands  and  fingers.

^^  Lower  Limbs. Sudden  concussion  in  buttocks  as  from  a
fall,  while  sitting.
■Violent  cracking  of  hip  or  knee-joint,  when  stooping.
Great  sensation  of  weariness  in  knee-joints  and  lower  legs.
Knees  give  way.

Trembling  of  feet  on  falling  asleep.
Burning  and  tingling  of  feet.
Aching  of  soles  from  standing.

■  Chilblains  on  toes.

^*  Limbs  in  General. Limbs  go  to  sleep  (at  night).

■  Constant  coldness  of  hands  and  feet.  '  ^Epistaxis.

■  Extremities  cold  as  ice. ^Metrorrhagia.

^^  Rest. Position. Motion. Sitting:  sudden  concussion  in
buttocks,  as  from  a  fall.

Motion:  metrorrhagia  <  from  slightest.

Raising  head  after  lying  down:  staggering  and  giddiness;
vertigo.

On  moving  head:  as  if  brains  were  loose.

On  moving  upper  arm:  pain,  as  if  head  of  humerus  were
loose  and  easily  dislocated.

Stooping:  <  humming  and  roaring  in  ears;  violent  crack-
ing of  hip  or  knee-joint.

On  going  up  stairs :  palpitation  of  heart.

Child  sits  or  stands  up  in  bed,  making  various  quick  move-
ments, without  being  conscious  of  what  he  is  doing.

After  dancing  or  long  walk  during  catamenia,  blood  dark
and  stringy,  bounding  in  stomach  or  abdomen,  violent
cephalic  throbbing.
^^  Nerves. Great  nervous  exaltation  and  depression.

■  Excessive  prostration  and  weariness  in  evening,  as  from

severe  physical  exertion,  accompanied  by  great  sleepi-
ness, with  feeling  as  if  eyelids  were  swollen;  literary  oc-
cupation relieves.

■  Fainting. ^Epistaxis. ^Metrorrhagia.

Hysteria;  excessive  mirth  and  cheerfulness  alternating
with  melancholy;  childish  follies;  pleasant  dementia,
with  paleness  and  headache.

■  Jerking  in  muscles.

■Spasmodic  contractions  of  single  sets  of  muscles.
Chorea,  every  seven  days,  with great hilarity,  singing
and  dancing.
^^  Sleep. Continuous  yawning  and  desire  to  sleep.

Drowsiness;  somnolency;  sleepiness  daytime,  after  meals.

■  Sings  in  sleep.

■  Dreams;  confused;  frightful.


CROCUS  SATIVUS.  472

^^  Time. In  daytime:  sleepiness.

In  afternoon:  chill,  growing  <  towards  evening,  with
shivering  and  trembling.

Towards  evening:  violent  heat  over  whole  body,  great
thirst.

In  evening:  pain  in  forehead;  when  reading,  sees  as
through  a  gauze;  congestion  of  blood  to  head,  quivering
in  1.  eyelid,  sour  .taste  in  mouth,  pulse  full  and  quick ;
scraping  in  throat;  thirst;  excessive  prostration,  weari-
ness and  sleepiness.

At  night:  staggering  and  giddiness  when  raising  head
after  lying  down;  when  waking,  as  of  kicking  of  foetus
in  1.  side  of  abdomen;  limbs  go  to  sleep;  sweat.
^^  Temperature  and  Weather. In  room :  vertigo ;  lachry-
mation.

In  hot  weather :  epistaxis.

Open  air:  nausea  >;  desire  for.

Cold  drinks:  excessive  thirst  for.
^°  Fever, l Chill  in  afternoon,  growing <  toward  evening,
with  shivering  from  back  down  legs;  trembling.

Chilliness,  only  on  back  part  of  body.

iTliirst,  with  chill  and  heat.

■  Flushes  of  internal  heat,  prickling  and  crawling  in  skin.
I  Heat, principally  of  head  and face,  with  paleness  of

cheeks  and  thirst.
iHeat  in  face:  and  in  front  of  head.
I  Heat,  intense  redness  of  face,  distension  of  blood  vessels.

■  Violent  heat  over  whole  body,  chiefly  in  head,  with  red-

ness of  face  and  great  thirst,  without  much  dryness  of
mouth;  toward  evening.

■  Internal  heat  and  great  anguish. ^Metrorrhagia.

■  Sweat  scant,  only  at  night,  and  then  cold  and  debilitating.
I  Sweat  only  on  lower  half  of  body.

■  Continual  foul  smelling  sweat,  which  aggravates  the  de-

bility. ^Hemorrhage  after  confinement.
*^  Attacks,  Periodicity.  Sudden:  shock  in  forehead  and
temples;  broad  thrust  in  r.  temple,  or  above  1.  frontal
eminence;  cold  sensation  on  1.  parietal  bone;  flashes
before  eyes  like  electric  sparks;  severe  bearing  down
pains  in  abdomen  and  small  of  back,  after  non-appear-
ance of  menses.

Frequent:  winking;  palpitation;  drawing  a  long  breath;
changes  in  sensations.

Constant:  winking;  coldness  of  hands  and  feet;  yawning
and  desire  to  sleep ;  foul  smelling  sweat.

Nightly :  spasms  of  lids.

Every  seven  days:  chorea.

During  new  or  full  moon:  uterine  flow.


473  CROCUS  SATIVUS.

For  two  or  three  days :  headache  during  climacteric  period.

For  twenty-two  days:  hemorrhage  from  uterus.

For  six  weeks:  daily  discharge  of  blood,  with  disturbed
menses.

For  three  months:  discharge  of  blood  from  uterus.
*^  Locality  and  Direction,  Right:  sudden  broad  thrust  in
temple;  acute  tearing  pain  in  eye,  and  sensation  as  if
cold  air  was  rushing  through  eye;  as  if  something  was
alive  and  moving  in  side  of  abdomen;  stitches  from
pudendum  to  thigh ;  jumping,  as  from  something  living
in  lower  portion  of  chest,  as  if  beneath  ribs.

Left:  sadden  broad  thrust  above  frontal  eminence;  pul-
sating pains  in  side  of  head,  extending  into  eye;  sudden
cold  sensation  in  parietal  bone;  quivering  in  eyelid;  as
of  kicking  of  foetus  in  side  of  abdomen;  stitch  near  side
of  anus;  stitch  from  anus  through  small  of  back  into
groin;  dull  stitches  in  chest;  jerking  in  interior  of
breast.

From  1.  to  r.  eye :  pains  darting ;  feeling  as  if  she  had  been
weeping,  with  corresponding  appearances.
^  Sensations.  As  if  a  drop  of  cold  water  had  fallen  on  1.  pa-
rietal bone;  as  if  brain  was  loose  and  .tottering  to  and
fro;  as  if  cold  air  was  rushing  through  r.  eye;  as  if  cold
wind  was  blowing  across  eyes;  as  if  room  was  filled
with  smoke;  as  if  she  had  been  violently  weeping;  as  if
something  was  alive  and  moving  in  abdomen;  as  though
water  was  coming  constantly  into  eyes;  as  if  she  had
been  looking  through  too  sharp  spectacles;  as  of  biting
smoke  in  eyes;  as  though  a  film  of  mucus  was  over
eyes ;  as  if  eyelids  were  swollen ;  as  if  uvula  was  elon-
gated; as  of  a  plug  in  oesophagus;  as  of  fermentation  in
stomach,  or  of  motion  upward  and  downward,  hither
and  thither;  as  if  something  living  was  jumping  about
in  pit  of  stomach,  or  in  abdomen ;  as  of  kicking  of  foetus
in  1.  side  of  abdomen ;  as  if  menses  would  appear,  with
colic  or  pressing  towards  genitals;  as  of  rolling  and
tumbling  in  abdomen;  as  if  a  knife  was  suddenly  thrust
into  pudendum  and  r.  thigh,  gradually  penetrating  into
these  parts  with  increasing  pain ;  as  of  something  living
and  hopping  in  chest,  also  in  lower  portion  of  r.  chest,
as  if  beneath  ribs;  as  if  1.  breast  was  drawn  towards
back  by  means  of  thread;  as  if  head  of  humerus  was
loose  and  would  be  easily  dislocated;  as  if  hands  and
arms  was  gone  to  sleep.

Pain:  in  forehead;  in  eye  to  top  of  head;  in  groins;  in
head;  in  back.

Stitches:  in  abdomen;  sensitive,  dull,  long,  near  1.  side  of
anus;  in  anus;  from  anus  through  small  of  back  into  1.


CROCUS  SATIVUS.  474

groin;  in  both  sides  under  false  ribs;  from  pudendum

to  r.  thigh ;  dull,  in  1.  chest.
Thrust:  sudden  broad,  in  r.  temple,  extending  deep  into

brain ;  above  1.  frontal  eminence.
Lancinating:  in  eyes.
Cutting:  in  cardiac  region,  extending  to  and  fixing  itself

in  stomach ;  in  lower  abdomen  extending  towards  small

of  back.
Jerking:  in  upper  lid;  in  interior  of  1.  breast;  in  muscles.
Tearing:  in  head  and  r.  eye.
Concussion:  sudden,  in  buttocks  as  from  a  fall.
. Shock:  sudden,  in  forehead  and  temples.

Burning:  in  eyes;  red  spots  on  face;  of  feet;  in  skin.

Burning-tingling:  in  tips  of  fingers.

Sore  burning:  in  eyes.

Pulsating  pains:  in  1.  side  of  head  extending  into  eye;  in

various  parts  of  head.
Throbbing:  in  various  parts  of  head.
Writhing:  intolerable,  in  anus,  affecting  whole  nervous

system  painfully.
Twitching:  in  upper  lid.
Scraping:  in  throat.

Bearing  down :  in  abdomen  and  small  of  back.
Aching:  of  soles  from  standing.
Tension :  in  tips  of  fingers.
'  Oppression :  of  chest.

Pressure:  in  eyes;  in  forehead;  towards  uterus.
Heaviness:  in  abdomen;  of  chest;  of  arms  as  if  bruised.
Weariness:  in  knee-joints  and  lower  legs.
Heartburn:  violent.
Tingling:  of  feet;  in  skin.

Crawling:  in  anus,  as  from  threadworms;  in  skin.
Prickling:  in  skin.
Itching:  in  upper  lid;  in  anus.
Dryness:  in  eyes.
Fulness:  of  stomach.
Emptiness:  in  pit  of  stomach.
Nausea:  in  chest  and  throat.
Warmth:  in  face;  in  mouth.
Heat:  in  eyes.

Coldness:  on  1.  parietal  bone;  in  back.
^  Tissues. Irritation  and  congestion  of  brain,  causing  hysteri-
cal mania,  congestion  of  womb  and  metrorrhagia.
1 1  Hemorrhage  from  various  parts,  blood  black,  viscid,

clotting,  forming  itself  into  long,  black  strings,  hanging

from  the  bleeding  orifice.
Tumors,  with  ulceration  and  characteristic  bleeding.
^  Touch,  Passive  Motion,  Injuries. Laying  hand  on  pit  of

stomach :  >  attacks  of  exhausting  dry  cough.


475  CROCUS  SATIVUS.

Pressure:  on  closed  lids  >  dryness  and  burning  in  eyes.

Inclined  to  press  lids  tightly  together  from  time  to  time.

Bruised  parts:  painful  suppuration.
*^  Skin, fl  Pricking,  crawling,  burning  and  tingling  in  skin.

iScarlet  redness  of  whole  body,  or  scarlet  spots  on  skin.

I  Painful  suppuration  of  bruised  parts,  old,  cicatrized
wounds  re-open  and  suppurate.

■  Lipoma  and  encephaloma  of  scalp. .

•  Chilblains.
*^  Stages  of  Life,  Constitution. Frequent  and  great  changes
in sensations;  the feelings changing suddenly from
greatest  hilarity  to  deepest  despondency.

Especially  suitable  for  women.

Headache  during  climacteric  period.

Epistaxis  in  children  who  develope  too  rapidly  or  slowly.

Boy,  set.  10,  whose  father  died  suddenly  in  insane  asylum ;
a  febrile  condition  with  congestion  to  head,  followed  by
cerebral  disturbances,  after  awaking  from  a  sleep.

Girl,  set.  10,  lively  disposition;  chorea.

Girl,  set.  20,  hemorrhagic  diathesis;  bright  red  epistaxis,
particularly  in  hot  weather.

Woman,  set.  36,  haggard  and  weak;  for  three  months  dis-
charge of  blood  from  uterus.

Woman,  set.  36,  good  constitution,  poorly  nourished,  after
an  apparent  abortion;  hemorrhage  from  uterus  for  22
days.

Woman,  set.  38,  pale,  thin,  of  slender  build,  menstrual
function  disturbed,  menses  lasting  three  weeks;  for  six
weeks  daily  discharge  of  blood.

Women,  set.  40,  with  tendency  to  hemorrhoids,  after  non-
appearance of  menses  for  ten  weeks  in  consequence  of
which  she  imagines  herself  pregnant;  uterine  hemor-
rhage.

Mrs.  M.,  set.  48,  medium  size,  fair  skin,  blue  eyes,  light
hair,  mild  and  sensitive  disposition;  hsemoptysis.

Man,  set.  50,  subject  to  hemorrhoids,  for  which  he  had  un-
dergone an  operation;  icteric  symptoms,  with  gastric
disturbauce.

Man,  set.  56,  strongly  built,  able;  epistaxis.

Man,  set.  70 ;  epistaxis,  in  spells,  without  apparent  cause.
^^  Relations. Antidotedby:  Aeon.,  Bellad.,  Opium.

Compatible:  with  Cinchon.  at  intervals  has  cured  many
cases  of  monorrhagia;  Nux  votti.,  Pulsat.,  Sulphur.

Compare:  Aeon.,  Act.  rae.,  Bellad.,  Calcar.,  Fluor,  ae.  (sensa-
tion of  cold  wind  blowing  across  eyes),  Ipec.,  Ignat.,
Laehes.  (pains  in  eye  to  top  of  head),  Nux  vom.,  Opium,
Platin.,  Pulsat.,  Rhus  tox.  Ruta,  Sabina,  Sepia  and  Sulphur.


CROTALUS  HORRIDUS.  476

CROTALUS  HORRIDUS.

Rattlesnake  poison.  Crotalidse.

The  first  regular  provings  of  the  poison  were  made  by  C.  Hg.,  and  his  prov-
ers,  who  proved  the  first  and  second  triturations,  see  Bering's  Monograph  on  the
Effects  of  Snake  Poisons,  1837;  a  single  proving  with  the  third  dilution  on  an
unmarried  ]ady,  set.  35,  by  Stokes,  is  recorded  among  the  aforementioned,  and  the
effects  of  the  bite,  from  various  sources,  recorded  in  v.  3  of  Encyclopedia.  The
Monograph  on  Crotalus,  by  J.  W.  Hayward,  of  Liverpool,  published  1884,  is  the
most  complete  record  of  the  effects  of  Crotalus  virus  on  the  sick  and  well  we  have
had  hitherto.  We  have  drawn  from  it  largely  to  complete  our  collection  of
clinical  and  guiding  symptoms,  rendering  due  thanks  to  the  author  of  the  valu-
able monograph  who  thereby  enriched  our  literature.

Clinical  Authorities. — Delirium  tremens,  Mackechnie,  Eaue's  Eec,  1874,
p.  62 ;  Delusions  during  incipient  stage  of  senile  dementia,  Hay  ward's  Mon.,  p.  255 ;
Sensorial  disturbance,  Hayward's  Mon.,  p.  260;  ^earfacAe,  Neidhard,  Hay  ward's
Mon.,  pp.  267,  268;  Sick  headache,  with  vertigo,  C.  Hg.,  MSS;  Affection  of  eyes,
Neidhard,  Hayward's  Mon.,  p.  272;  Amblyopia,  Decran,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf.,  v.  5,  p.
147  ;  Ciliary  neuralgia,  Decran,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf.,  v.  5,  p.  141 ;  Otorrhoea,  Hayward's
Mon.;  Ozcena,  Nankivell,  Hayward's  Mon.,  p.  276;  Distortion  of  face,  Hayward's
Mon.,  p.  280 ;  Papular  eruption  on  face,  Hayward's  Mon.,  p.  280 ;  Diphtheria,
Hayward's  Mon.,  p.  287;  Cushing,  Organon,  v.  1,  p.  223;  Spasm  of  oesophagus,
S.  P.  Burdick,  Hayward's  Mon.,  p.  296 ;  Bilious  vomiting,  Hayward's  Mon.,  p.
367;  Atonic  dyspepsia,  Hayward's  Mon.,  p.  296;  Hepatic  disorder  (2  cases),  Neid-
hard, Hayward's  Mon,,  p.  301 ;  Peritoneal  inflammation,  Hayward's  Mon.,  p.  300 ;
Perityphlitis,  Hayward's  Mon.,  p.  300 ;  Intestinal  hemorrhage,  Hayward's  Mon.,  p.
305;  Hasmaturia  (4  Cases),  Hayward's  Mon.,  p.  310  ;  Dysmenorrhea,  Hnywa.rd's
Mon.,  p.  310  ;  Mastitis  and  milk  leg  in  a  primipara,  C.  Hg.,  MSS. ;  Pertussis,  Hay-
ward's Mon.,  p.  317;  Palpitation  of  heart,  Hayward's  Mon.,  p.  327;  Tubercle  on
wist,  Hayward's  Mon.,  p.  337  ;  Red  spot  on  finger,  Hayward's  Mon.,  p.  337  ;  Ecchy-
moses  on  lower  limbs,  Hayward's  Mon.,  p.  342;  Tingling  and  prickling  in  hands  and
I.  leg,  Hayward's  Mon.,  p.  338 ;  Paralysis  of  extensors  of  I.  foot  after  typhus,  C.  Hg.,
MSS. ;  Neuralgia,  Neidhard,  Hayward's  Mon.,  p.  268 ;  Apoplexy,  Weber,  Eiick.
Kl.  Erf,  V.  1,  p.  91 ;  Chronic  sleeplessness,  Hayward's  Mon.,  p.  357 ;  Bilious  fever,
W.  Jackson  Simon,  Hayward's  Mon.,  p.  368 ;  Bilious  remittent  fever,  Neidhard's
Mon,  p.  49;  Hay  ward's  Mon.,  p.  366 ;  Yellow  fever,  l^eidhard'sMon;  Hayward's
Mon. ;  (2  cases),  Plate,  Euck.  Kl.  Erf.,  v.  4,  p.  664 ;  also  used  successfully  by
Hardenstein  in  an  epidemic;  Pycemia,  Bryce,  Hayward's  Mon.,  p.  369  ;  Petechia,
Hayw^i-d's  Mon.,  p.  352 ;  Erysipelas  after  vaccination,  Hayward's  Mon.,  p.  352 ;
Scarlatina  maligna  (2  cases),  Hayward's  Mon.,  p.  362;  Morbilli  (4  cases),  Hay-
ward's Mon.,  p.  365  ;  Pustular  eruption  after  vaccination,  Bryce,  Hayward's  Mon.,
p.  353 ;  Furuncle,  Weber,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf,  v.  4,  p.  183.

^  Mind. Memory  weak ;  obtuse,  stupid,  cannot  express  him-
self correctly ;  makes  ridiculous  mistakes  in  spelling.


477  CROTALUS  HORRIDUS.

Perception  diminished.

Confused  speech;  disconnected  answers,  with  coldness  of
skin  and  rapid  pulse.

Torpor,  sluggishness,  incoherency,  hesitation  and  quiet
indifference.

•  Mental  delusions,  such  as  mistakes  in  keeping  his  ac-
counts and  in  writing  letters,  forgetfulness  of  figures,
names  and  places;  awaking  in  the  night  struggling
with  imaginary  foes;  imagines  himself  surrounded  by
enemies  or  hideous  animals;  taking  antipathies  to
members  of  family. ^Incipient  stage  of  senile  dementia.

I  Delirium:  with  languor,  drowsiness,  stupor;  at  night;
with  moans;  with  wide  open  eyes;  in  yellow  fever.

1  Loquacious  delirium,  with  desire  to  escape  from  bed.

■  Muttering  delirium  of  typhus.

■  Delirium  tremens,  nearly  constant  drowsiness,  but  with

inability  to  sleep ;  trembling;  numbness  of  extremities ;
repeated  attacks;  broken  down  constitutions.

Mania  in  zymotic  diseases  and  when  connected  with  puer-
peral or  ovario-uterine  disease.

Moaning  and  groaning.

I  Pains  in  head,  with  oppression  of  chest,  burning  fever
and  accelerated  pulse ;  loss  of  speech,  sopor  from  which  he
cannot  be  aroused,  muttering  and  lockjaw. ^'ApojDlexy.

Marked  indifference,  seems  only  half  alive;  utter  apathy.

•Sadness,  her  thoughts  dwell  on  death  continually.

Oppression,  as  if  brain  had  been  intoxicated  by  carbonic
acid,  or  by  degraded  or  non-oxygenated  blood.

■  Depression,  anxiety  and  lowness  of  spirits. ^Intestinal

hemorrhage.

■  Nervousness  and  depression  of  spirits. ^Headache.

■  Excessive  sensitiveness;  moved  to  tears  by  reading.
. Weeping  mood,  agony  and  despair.

■Melancholy, with timidity,  fear;  anxiety;  weeping;  or

snappish  temper.
Melancholia,  with  timidity,  fear,  distress  and  anguish.
Suspicion  and  snappishness,  or  quiet  indifference.

■  Anxious  and  pale,  with  cold  sweat.
Anxiety  and  distress,  mental  and  bodily.

Great  anxiety,  intense  restlessness,  much  delirium.
Anguish,  moaning  and  groaning,  with  sleeplessness.

■  Snappish temper; irritable, cross, infuriated by least

annoyance.
Intense  restlessness,  twitching  and  nervous  agitation.
Lethargy, weakness, debility,  powerlessness,  staggering,

trembling, vertigo,  numbness,  loss  of  coordination  of

movements.
Fits  of  drowsiness  or  coma.


CROTALUS  HORRIDUS.  478

^  Sensorium.  Vertigo :  with  faintness,  weakness,  nervous
trembling;  with  pale  face;  with  falling  and  loss  of  con-
sciousness ;  epileptic ;  auditory ;  cardiac,  with  soft,  weak
pulse;  ansemic,  >  resting  head;  with  venous  conges-
tion and  degraded  blood;  with  dilated  pupils;  from
lightning  or  sunstroke;  from  fright.
Fainting:  on  assuming  an  upright  position;  in  attacks;
and  falling.

■  Attacks  of  dizziness,  fainting  and  weakness,  with  occipi-

tal headache,  several  times  a  day.
I  Apoplectic  convulsions,  especially  at  onset  of  some  zymotic
disease.

■  Apoplexy  in  hemorrhagic  or  broken  down  constitutions,

or  in  inebriates.
^  Inner  Head. Severe  frontal  headache,  with  coma  and  de-
lirium, difficult  deglutition,  nausea  and  bilious  vomiting.
■Awakes  in  morning  with  headache  over  eyes. ^Dys-
menorrhoea.

■  Headache  extending  into  eyes.

■  Dull,  heavy  pain  and  heat  over  eyes  and  in  sides  of  nose,

also  dull,  pressing  pain  at  back  of  ear,  heat  in  forehead,
lightness  of  head  in  open  air,  sickness  of  stomach  in
morning,  nausea  and  vomiting,  with  nervousness  and
depression  of  spirits.
Headache  in  forehead  above  eyes,  in  temples,  <  in  r.,
with  vertigo,  nausea  and  vomiting  of  bile ;  is  obliged  to
lie  down ;  constipation ;  >  from  walking  in  open  air.

■  Pressure  and  oppression  above  eyes.

■  Bilious  headache  every  few  days,  beginning  behind  1.

ear  and  passing  around  lower  forehead  as  a  pressing

down  on  eyes,  with  nausea  and  vomiting. ^Distortion

of  face.
■Severe  pain  at  centre  of  forehead;  dilated  pupils;  profuse

menses.
Dull,  heavy,  congested  feeling  in  front  of  brain,  <  from

exerting  intellect.
Frontal  headache  in  1.  anterior  lobe,  particularly  at  its

under  surface.

■  Pressure  and  heavy  pain  on  top  of  head  from  6  a.m.  until

evening.
■Very  severe  pain  in  r.  eye  and  top  of  head,  on  r.  side

down  back  of  neck,  at  intervals,  for  twenty  years.
■Sick  headache,  with  vertigo,  heat  on  top  of  head  and

general  sweat.

■  Throbbing  and  heat  in  1.  side  of  head,  with  nausea  before

menstruation;  vomiting  green  bile;  urine  high  colored.

■  Head  aches  all  over,  with  high  fever,  <  at  night,  with

great  drowsiness;  aching  in  all  the  bones;  heat  in  fore-
head and  burning  in  chest,  <  from  motion.


479  CROTALUS  HORRIDUS.

■  Frightful  headache. ^Diphtheria.

■  Dull,  heavy,  throbbing  occipital  headache,  faint  spells;

hunger  and  general  trembling.

I  1  Terrible  headache;  pain  as  from  a  blow  in  occiput.
^Cerebro-spinal  meningitis.

Headache:  especially  of  a  dull,  heavy,  aching,  drawing,
pressing,  compressive,  or  pulsating  character;  shooting,
or  stinging;  in  morning  on  awaking,  generally  going
off  while  dressing;  after  mental  exertion;  confusion
and  loss  of  memory,  especially  for  words  and  figures;
vertigo,  nausea,  vomiting  and  malaise.

Headache  as  if  constricted,  then  sensitiveness  of  brain;
pulsations;  sensitiveness  of  heart  when  lying  on  1.  side.

Cerebral  congestion;  severe  headache,  vertigo,  nausea  or
vomiting;  accompanying  zymotic  or  septic  diseases.

Meningitis  resulting  from  extension  of  ear  disease;  toxse-
mic,  alcoholic,  albuminuric,  scarlatinoid,  varioloid,  par-
ticularly at  period  of  effusion,  accompanied  by  paralytic
symptoms  or  mental  deficiency.

Softening  of  brain,  hydrocephaloid,  or  apoplexy  following
toxEcmic  states  in  broken  down  constitutions.
*  Outer  Head,  l Violent  itching  of  scalp;  eruptions,  pustules,
boils,  carbuncles,  with  tendency  to  unhealth}^  hemor-
rhagic contents,  or  recurrent,  or  slow,  or  with  oedema-
tous  surroundings.

Falling  off  of  hair,  especially  as  a  result  of  toxgemia,  such
as  scarlatina,  typhus,  variola,  etc.
^  Sight  and  Eyes. Illusions,  blue  colors,  dimness,  or  loss  of
vision ;  vanishing  of  sight  while  reading.

Momentary  disappearance  of  vision,  with  profuse  lachry-
mation.

I  Amblyopia,  caused  by  grief  and  overuse  of  eyes  in  sew-
ing; cutting  pains  around  eyes;  muscse  volitantes  and
various  colored  flames.

Retinal  hypersesthesia  in  debilitated,  broken  down,  stru-
mous and  hemorrhagic  constitutions.

Hemorrhages  into  retina,  whether  occurring  during  course
of  retinitis  albuminurica  and  other  diseases,  or  when  it
seems  to  be  of  spontaneous  origin.

Retinitis,  especially  albuminuric  and  syphilitic.

Amblyopia,  amaurosis,  especially  from  hemorrhage,  de-
bility and  exhaustion.

Diplopia;  glaucoma.

Ecchymosis,  chemosis,  conjunctival  hemorrhage,  especially
in  course  of  zymotic  disease,  menstrual  irregularities
and  in  hemorrhagic  states  of  bod}^

Ophthalmia,  conjunctivitis,  iritis,  especially  as  occurring
in  eruptive  diseases,  variola,  morbilli  and  syphilis,  or
other  blood  diseases.


CROTALUS  HORRIDUS.  480

Exopthalmic  goitre;  when  traceable  to  any  exhausting
or  toxsemic  cause,  such  as  overlactation,  excessive  or
suppressed  menstruation.

Dilated  pupils ;  blue  rings  around  eyes.

Outward  distortion  of  eyes.

Paralysis  of  ocular  muscles,

1 1  Yellow  color  of  eyes.

I  Blood  exudes  from  eye.

■Tearing,  boring  pain,  as  if  a  cut  had  been  made  around
eye,  sometimes  sticking  in  character  and  <  morning
and  evening;  great  sensitiveness  to  light,  especially
lamp  light;  lids  swollen  in  morning,  with  pains  in  fore-
head and  occiput;  palpitation  of  heart,  especially  at
menstrual  periods. ^Ciliary  neuralgia.

Sensation  of  dryness  and  burning;  redness  with  a  zone
around  cornea.

■  Burning  in  eyes;  redness  with  lachrymation.
•  Pressure  and  oppression  above  eyes.

I  Eyes  weak  and  very  red,  with  agglutination  of  lids,  sight
very  weak;  photophobia.

Blepharitis;  oedema  of,  or  hemorrhage  into  eyelids,  espe-
cially when  of  an  erysipelatous  character  and  when  oc-
curring in  the  course  of  septic  or  zymotic  diseases.

Ptosis.

To  clear  up  the vision after  an  attack  of  keratitis  or
kerato-iritis.
®  Hearing  and  Ears. Sensitive  to  noises.

■  Feeling  of  fulness  in  ears.

Deafness;  illusions  of  hearing;  auditory  vertigo.

Otorrhoea  the  result  of  exanthemata,  menstrual  irregu-
larities, alcoholism,  albuminuria,  naso-pharyngeal  ca-
tarrh, diphtheria,  typhoid,  syphilis,  etc.

Erysipelas  of  external  ear,  in  broken  down  or  hemor-
rhagic constitutions.

Abscess  and  furuncle  in  meatus,  or  external  ear;  frost-
bite.

■Severe  otorrhoea  after  scarlatina,  offensive  and  sanguino-
lent,  with  considerable  deafness.

■  ■Blood  oozes  from  ears.

''  Smell  and  Nose.  Epistaxis ;  at  onset  or  during  course  of
zymotic  and  septic  diseases ;  or  in  broken  down  consti-
tutions, or  depraved  state  of  blood  and  where  blood
appears  thin,  degraded,  uncoagulable,  dark;  also  with
flushes  of  face,  vertigo  or  fainting.
Catarrh;  with  sanguinolent  discharge.

■  Ozsena;  especially  left  by  exanthemata  or  syphilis,  dis-

charge sanguinolent  rather  than  offensive.
■Redness  and  blueness  of  point  of  nose;  with  swelling
and  coldness. 6'Old  inebriates. ^Zymosis.


481  CROTALUS  HORRIDUS.

I  iBleeding  from  nose  and  all  the  orifices  of  body.
^  Upper  Face. Expression:  besotted;  anxious,  pale;  excited,
flushed;  of  indifference.
Paleness  of  face,  as  in  faintness.
1  Yellow  color  of  face.

■  Flushes  of  face.

Color: livid,  bloated;  purple,  face  tumid; blue  around
sunken  eyes;  chalky;  death-like  pallor ;  leaden  colored.
Red,  puffed  face.

■  Distended  red  face  with  delirium  tremens  and  fever.

■  Wakes  up  during  night  grinding  her teeth and  face

much  distorted,  mouth  and  nose  drawn  to  1.  side.

■  Frequently  recurring  erysipelas  of  face.

Cold  sweat,  drawn  features,  formication,  trembling  and
quivering  of  lips  and  eyelids.

■  Face  swollen,  j^uffiness  at  angles  of  lower  jaw;  swelling

of  parotid  and  submaxillary  glands.

■  Acne:  all  its  varieties;  of  masturbators;  of  drunkards.

■  Discoloration,  blueness,  varicosis  of  nose  and  lips. ^Heart

disease. ^Asthma.
Neuralgia  of  a  dull  character,  chronic  or  periodic.

■  Parotitis.

^  Lower  Face. iLips  swollen;  stiff  and  numb.

■  Lockjaw. ^Apoplexy.

■  Copious,  red,  itching,  papular  eruption  on  face,  especially

chin,  which  has  existed  for  some  months  since  menstru-
ation has  been  delayed.
^^  Teeth  and  Gums. ■For  years  subject  to  grinding  of  teeth
during  sleep,  most  of  molars  broken;  mouth  and  nose
drawn  towards  1.  side. ^Distortion.

■  Gums:  white;  swollen;  painful;  borders  reddened.
"Taste  and  Tongue. ■Complete  loss  of  taste. ^Hepatic

disorder.

■  Tongue  and  all  around  throat  feels  tied  up,  he  cannot

speak  a  word.
•  ■Tongue  very  red,  smooth  and  polished,  feels  swollen.
^Atonic  dyspepsia.

■  Tongue:  red  and  sore;  yellow;  stiff  and  numb.

■  Tongue  yellowish-brown,  dry  in  centre. ^Remittent.

■  Foul  tongue  having  red  tip. ^Perityphliits.

■  Swelling  of  tongue  till  there  is  no  more  room  in  mouth,

with  inflammation.

■  Tongue  swollen  to  nearly  twice  the  normal  size.

■  ■Tongue  protruded.

QLdema  of  tongue;  after  sting  of  insects.

Glossitis;  erysipelatous  or  gangrenous  symptoms.

Syphilis  of  tongue.

Cancer  of  tongue,  with  much  tendency  to  hemorrhage.

VOL.  IV. — 31.


CROTALUS  HORRIDUS.  482

^^  Inner  Mouth,  l Fetid  breath;  peculiar  mouldy  smell  from
mouth.  ^Bilious  remittent.  ^Malignant  intermittent.
^Yellow  fever.

I  Mouth  feels  foul  and  sticky  on  awaking. ^Dyspepsia.

iStomacace  or  putrid  sore  mouth;  cancrum  oris.

■  Salivation;  flow  bloody  or  frothy.

^^  Throat, l Sensation  of  tight  constriction  of  throat.

Throat  dry  and  swollen,  with  thirst;  connective  tissue
greatly  infiltrated ;  glands  enlarged.

Scraping,  rancid  sensation  down  oesophagus  to  stomach.

Sensation  of  a  plug  in  throat  to  be  swallowed,  or  sensation
of  contraction  or  choking,  or  as  if  uvula  or  velum  were
elongated  or  stiff,  or  as  of  a  dry  spot  or  a  tickling  in
throat,  especially  1.  side,  <  on  awaking  from  sleep.

Sore,  raw  or  pricking  pain,  especially  at  1.  side,  near  root
of  tongue,  or  extends  to  ear,  or  is  as  if  proceeding  from
ear;  <  from  empty  deglutition  and  from  swallowing
fluids  rather  than  solids.

Neuralgic  drawing  in  fauces,  <  1.  side,  near  root  of  tongue,
almost  causing  choking,

■  Deglutition  of  any  solid  substance  quite  impossible ;  soup

must  be  strained  in  order  to  remove  all  meat  fibre  and
solid  particles. ^Spasm  of  oesophagus.

■  Fauces  much  swollen  and  dark red;  pulse 120; very

small  and  weak;  skin  hot  but  perspiring;  frightful
headache;  great  j)rostration,  can  hardly  raise  himself
in  bed ;  great  thirst. ^Diphtheria.

Nervous  sore  throat;  pain  out  of  all  proportion  to  the
visible  trouble ;  fauces  dry,  great  irritability  and  sensi-
tiveness to  dry  or  cold  air.

Sudden  sore  throat  as  if  uvula  and  velum  were  swelling,
with  dry  mouth ;  preceded  by  palpitation  and  trembling
of  heart.

Quinsy;  with  much  venous  congestion,  dark,  bluish  color
of  surrounding  parts,  much  oedema,  tonsils  bulge  and
are  tender  to  pressure  at  angles  of  lower  jaw;  pain  <
from  empty  deglutition;  especially  with  scarlatina  or
diphtheria.

■  Angina  tonsillaris;  constriction  of  throat;  tongue  yellow.

■  Diphtheria,  throat  swelling  fast;  difficult  swallowing,
■Malignant  diphtheria,  life  threatened  by  blood  poisoning,

much  oedema  or  gangrene  of  fauces  or  tonsils,  or  much
swelling  at  angles  of  lower  jaw,  head  thrown  up  and
backwards,  difficult  respiration,  dark,  swollen,  puffy
countenance;  great  j)rostration,  much  tremulousness,
very  soft,  scarcely  perceptible  pulse;  or  if  vomiting  or
diarrhoea  be  present.
"  Appetite,  Thirst.  ■  Hunger  with  trembling,  weakness  and
occipital  headache.


483  CROTALUS  HORRIDUS.

I  No  appetite,  extreme  thirst. ^Perityphlitis.
I  Unquenchable  burning  thirst. ^Diphtheria.
^^  Hiccough,  Belching,  Nausea  and  Vomiting. Heartburn ;

oesophagus  as  if  full  of  a  rancid  fluid.
Eructations  sharp,  sour;  acrid  or  rancid.
Sickness  of  stomach  in  morning.
Nausea  and  malaise,  anxiety ;  deathly  sickness.
Ineffectual  retching,  with  feebleness.
I  Nausea  and  vomiting. ^Headache.
Vomiting:  and  giddiness;  incessant  with  thirst;  preceded

byfaintness;  violent,  of  food ;  green;  of  bile;  of  blood;

on  least  exertion.

■  Nausea  on movement; bilious vomiting  every  month

after  menstruation. ^Hepatic  disorder.

■  Bilious  vomiting,  with  violent  fever  and  delirium;  dul-

ness  of  head,  with  great  apathy  and  forgetfulness ;  every-
thing tastes  bitter,  and  sometimes  acid ;  very  fetid  diar-
rhoea ;  tongue  dark  brown ;  constant  drowsiness ;  dryness
of  skin;  urine  high  colored.

■  Bilious  vomiting,  with  anxiety,  palpitation,  weak  pulse.

■  Cannot  lie  on  r.  side  or  back  without  instantly  producing

dark  green  vomiting;  soreness  in  back  part  of  head  on
pressure,  <  on  motion  or  sitting  up  in  bed ;  drawing  in
r.  side  of  head,  <  after  eating,  and  producing  great  diz-
ziness in  back  part  of  head ;  sleeps  only  in  middle  of
night,  after  which  she  feels  better;  feels  sick  if  she  sleeps
in  daytime;  light  hurts  the  eyes  and  everything  looks
yellow  (at  first  everything  looked  blue).

■  i Black  vomit. (^Yellow  fever.

"  Scrobiculum  and  Stomach.  ■  Frequent  faint,  sinking,
hungry  sensation  about  epigastrium,  with  trembling  and
fluttering  sensation  a  little  lower  down,  followed  by
flushes  of  heat  over  whole  body;  extreme  weakness;
tongue  very  red,  smooth  and  polished,  and  feels  swollen ;
mouth  foul  and  sticky  on  awaking.

■  Weight  on  stomach,  tremulous  weakness,  as  from  impend-

ing evil;  soreness,  tenderness.
Violent  cramp  in  stomach  after  eating.

■  Agonizing  pain,  restlessness,  coldness,  weak  pulse.
Pylorus  constricted;  lining  of  stomach  turgid.

■  Cannot  bear  clothes  around  stomach  and  hypochondria.

■  Painfulness  in  pit  of  stomach.

■  Stomach  irritable,  unable  to  retain  anything.

■  Hsematemesis  from  ulceration.

■  Distressing  sensation  of  sinking,  craving  for  stimulants.
Gastric  disturbances  of  nervous  origin,  cerebral,  sensorial,

or  reflex,  and  such  as  occur  on  invasion  of  zymotic  or
septic  diseases,  or  in  connection  with  menstrual  or  uter-
ine complaints,  jaundice,  nephritis,  albuminuria,  etc.


CROTALUS  HORRIDUS.  484

Heematemesis ;  blood  has  little  or  no  tendency  to  coagu-
late, or  is  dark,  as  if  from  passive  congestion  or  malig-
nant disease,  or  atonic  ulcer,  or  when  disease  is  sympa-
thetic, as  in  vicarious  menstruation.
Cancer:  much  hemorrhage  or  much  vomiting  of  mucus,
slimy  or  sanguinolent.
'^Hypochondria, l Intolerance  of  clothing  about  epigastric
region  and  hypochondria.
■  Shooting  in  region  of  liver.

■  Stitches  in  region  of  liver  on  drawing  a  long  breath,  <

by  pressure ;  complete  loss  of  taste ;  constij)ation ;  urine
jelly-like  and  red  like  blood.

iPain  in  region  of  liver,  also  on  top  of  shoulder;  pulsating
in  ascending  aorta,  nausea  on  movement,  stools  white ;
bilious  vomiting  every  month  after  menstruation.

1  Aching  in  liver;  great  heaviness  in  stomach,  with  vom-
iting of  everything  she  eats  in  morning,  can  eat  better
in  afternoon,  feels  sometimes  as  if  she  could  eat  fat  pork ;
continual  acid  taste  on  tongue;  constipation;  menses
too  early  and  too  sparse,  dark  at  first;  roaring  in  ears;
great  numbness  of  arms  and  legs,  with  coldness  at  times ;
skin  very  dark  brown. ^Bilious. vomiting.

Passive  hepatic  congestion;  especially  when  from  heart
disease,  or  from  imperfect  performance  of  uterine  func-
tions, or  if  a  sequel  of  malarial  fever.

Acute  atrophy  of  liver.

■  Violent  pain  in  1.  side  near  last  ribs,  as  if  in  diaphragm.
Iljaundice;  malignant  jaundice;  dark  hemorrhages  from

nose,  mouth,  etc. ;  dark,  scanty  urine.
^^  Abdomen. iHeat  and  tenderness  of  abdomen,  can  scarcely
bear  her  clothes  on. /^Peritoneal  inflammation.

■  Swelling  of  whole  abdomen.

■  Violent  pain  in  course  of  colon.

■  Pulse  140,  skin  hot  and  dr}'^,  extreme  j)ain  in  region  of

appendix,  with  frequent  paroxysmal  aggravations,  great
tenderness  on  pressure  in  a  spot  size  of  small  orange,
with  some  feeling  of  hardness;  cannot  bear  r.  leg
straightened,  but  lies  with  it  bent  and  supported  by
pillow. ^Perityphlitis.

■  Typhlitis  and  perityphlitis;  low  type,  red  tipped  tongue,

prostration;  no  stool,  or  discharges  very  offensive.

■  Peritonitis;  in  course  of  septic  or  zymotic  disease;  temper-

ature below  normal;  low,  debilitated  or  hemorrhagic
condition;  effusion  of  bloody  serum.

■  Enlarged  inguinal  glands;  sloughing,  unhealthy  pus.
Swelling  of  inguinal  glands,  bubo;  from  septic  absorption,

as  from  sloughing  sores  on  genitals,  or  gangrenous  affec-
tion of  toes,  etc.


485  CROTALUS  HOREIDUS.

^"  Stool  and  Rectum.  Violent  purging,  with  disagreeable
sensation  through  whole  body  and  nauseous  taste.

I  Stools:  black,  thin,  like  coffee-grounds;  offensive.

Liquid,  dark  green  stools,  followed  by  debilit}^;  yellow,
watery,  with  stinging  in  abdomen;  a  number  of  liquid
stools,  with  colic,  or  with  nausea  and  colic,  or  with
scraping  in  posterior  wall  of  rectum ;  lowness  of  spirits
and  indifference  to  everything.

■  Nausea  and  diarrhoea;  shuddering  with  diarrhoea;  pulse

feeble  and  quick,  then  slow;  aphonia.
» Diarrhoea:  from  noxious  effluvia;  imbibition  of  septic
matters  in  food  or  drink;  from  "high  game;"  summer
diarrhoea;  cholera,  etc.

■  Dysentery:  of  septic  origin;  from  foul  water,  food,  etc.;

excessive  flow  of  dark,  fluid  blood,  or  involuntary  evac-
uations ;  great  debility  and  faintness.

■  Bowels  irregular,  either  diarrhoea  or  constipation. ^Dis-

tortion of  face.

■  Constipation,  with  congestion  to  head  and  headache.

■  Vomiting,  purging  and  micturition  simultaneously  caused

by  spasmodic  contraction,  with  tenesmus  and  strangury.

■  Stools  white. ^Hepatic  disorder.

■  Bleeding  from  anus  and  other  orifices.

•■Bloody  passages  from  bowels,  sometimes  involuntary.

Intestinal  hemorrhage;  when  occurring  during  course  of
septic  or  zymotic  disease;  when  of  hepatic,  splenic,  or
cardiac  origin;  or  from  cancer,  atonic  ulcer,  menstrual
irregularities,  or  if  blood  is  dark,  fluid  and  uncoagulable.

■  Dark,  fluid  hemorrhage  with  stool,  with  oozing  of  blood

on  standing  or  walking;  debility,  faintness,  and  aching
in  1.  iliac  region;  with  depression,  anxiety  and  lowness
of  spirits;  bowels  relaxed.
■Cholera;  sudden  and  extreme  coldness  and  blueness;  col-
lapse, cramps,  diarrhoea,  vomiting;  embarrassed  res-
'piration,  scarcely  perceptible  pulse,  suppression  of  urine.

Varicosis  of  anus  and  lower  bowels;  idiopathic  hemor-
rhoids, with  great  tendency  to  bleed  on  using  paper,  or
straining  a  little  at  stool,  or  on  standing.

Hemorrhoids;  bleeding  piles;  blood  dark,  thin,  and  little
disposed  to  coagulate;  also  in  pregnant  women,  and
with  menstrual  irregularities,  and  connected  with  heart
disease,  liver  disease,  or  the  hemorrhagic  diathesis,  in
broken  down  constitutions,  in  chronic  inebriates.
^^  Urinary  Organs,  Passive  renal  congestion;  when  from
embarrassed  circulation,  as  from  obstructive  heart  dis-
ease, asthma,  chronic  bronchitis,  etc.,  particularly  dur-
ing a  course,  or  as  sequelae,  of  zymotic  disease.

■  Nephritis  albuminosa;  when  occurring  in  course  of  any


CROTALUS  HORPvIDUS.  486

of  the  toxaemia,  or  in  pregnancy;  urine  dark,  smoky
from  admixture  of  fluid  blood.

■  Hemorrhage  from  urethra.
Suppression,  or  painful  retention  of  urine.

I  Urine:  extremely  scanty,  dark  red  with  blood;  jelly-like;
green-yellow  from  much  bile;  copious  and  light  colored.

Hsematuria;  with  cancer  of  bladder  or  prostate.
^^  Male  Sexual  Organs. ■  Sexual  instinct  increased  with  en-
tire relaxation  of  penis.
^^  Female  Sexual  Organs. Ovaritis; in  hemorrhagic  con-
stitutions, or  connected  with  menorrhagia  or  puerperal
septicsemia;  ovarian  abscess.

Ovarian  neuralgia;  in  form  of  pure  neurosis,  and  at  cli-
macteric, with  flushings,  or  pressing  pain  in  vertex.

Menorrhagia;  during  course  of  septic  or  zymotic  disease,
or  other  toxeemic  states,  as  Bright's  disease ;  or  in  hemor-
rhagic diathesis;  blood  dark,  fluid,  offensive.

Sharp  neuralgic  pains,  intermittent,  from  1.  side  of  womb
to  transverse  colon,  thence  cutting  across  as  if  from  both
sides  towards  centre;  thence  up  to  face  and  temple;
dull  frontal  headache.

I  Menstruation  delayed,  dark  and  scant.  ^Papular  erup-
tion of  face.

I  Menstruation  late,  six  to  eight  weeks  interval,  scanty  and
dark,  very  painful  at  beginning. ^Distortion  of  face.

Catamenia  a  week  too  soon;  very  profuse  with  severe  fron-
tal headache,  weight  in  head  and  ears,  with  pains  in
abdomen  and  back,  cold  extremities;  yellowness  of  skin.

■  Five  days  before  menstruation,  much  pain  in  hypogas-

trium.and  down  thighs,  lasting  during  first  two  days  of
flow;  flow  very  copious  first  three  days  and  then  lingers
on  and  off  for  four  days  more;  much  dull,  continuous,
aching  pain  in  region  of  heart,  down  1.  arm  and  through
to  1.  shoulder-blade,  <  on  drawing  deep  breath  and
going  up  stairs  or  a  hill ;  feet  cold. /^Dysmenorrhoea.

I  Vicarious  menstruation;  in  debilitated,  depraved  states.

Leucorrhoea  offensive,  bloody.

■  Menopause ;  flushings,  jjerspirations ;  head  troubles  (throb-

bing, noises,  giddiness);  cardiac  troubles,  as  sudden  pal-
pitations; "sinking  at  stomach;"  fainting  at  epigas-
trium; weak,  debilitated  constitutions;  or  when  there
is  metrorrhagia  or  other  hemorrhagic  phenomena,  blood
being  dark,  fluid  and  offensive

■  Cancer  uteri,  fungoid,  malignant  sarcoma,  cauliflower  ex-

crescence, with  much  tendency  to  hemorrhage;  in  very
degraded  states  of  system.
2i  Pregnancy,  Parturition,  Lactation. Miscarriage  during
course  of  septic  or  zymotic  disease;  and  in  nurses  ex-


487  CROTALUS  HORRIDUS.

hausted  by  long  nursing  of  zymotic  or  septic  patients;
and  from  other  blood  poisoning  causes.
Puerperal  fever  or  convulsions ;  in  connection  with  albu-
minuria; torpidity,  coma;  blue,  bloated  countenance;
septic  or  zymotic  influence,  or  in  hemorrhagic  or  broken
down  constitutions.

■  Lochia  very  offensive,  from  retained  and  decomposing

matter;  also  after-pains  with  such  lochia.

■  After  parturition,  1.  breast  inflamed  and  hard,  with  fever

and  jjrostration,  yellow  spots  on  face;  trembling  tongue;
breast  discharges  thin,  milky  pus  and  masses  of  broken
down  tissue  from  an  opening  beneath  the  nipjDle ;  pulse
small  and  rapid;  stitching  pain  in  a  hard  lump  which
formed  in  the  lower  outer  part  of  breast.

Phlegmasia  alba  dolens;  1.  leg  swollen  to  twice  its  size,
grinding  pain  in  leg,  <  from  slightest  touch.
^^  Voice  and  Larynx. Trachea  and  Bronchia, i  Loss  of
sj^eech. ^Apoplexy.

Laryngismus  stridulus,  spasmus  glottidis:  from  local  ner-
vous irritabilit}^,  or  from  central  irritation,  being  a  part
of  a  general  convulsive  condition ;  during  course  of  zy-
motic disease;  hysteria.

I  Hoarseness,  with  weak,  rough  voice.

Paralysis  glottidis  (paralytic  aphonia)  from  muscular  or
nervous  irritability,  as  in  hysteria.

Laryngitis  acuta;  oedema  glottidis;  acute  catarrhal  apho-
nia, especially  erysipelatous  and  scarlatinal;  from
scalds,  stings  of  insects;  irritating  vapors,  with  great
sensitiveness  and  irritability  on  talking,  or  to  contact  of
dry,  cold  air,  or  to  pressure  (which  also  induces  cough-
ing) ;  sore,  raw,  pricking  pain,  <  on  1.  side ;  or  as  if  in
a  small  dry  spot;  much  tickling  irritability  and  hawk-
ing, as  if  from  presence  of  a  little  sticky  mucus,  which
had  to  be  got  up ;  also  during  course  of  scarlatina,  mor-
billi,  variola,  etc.

Ulceration  from  necrosis  of  cartilages  of  larynx.

Bronchiectasis,  putrid  bronchitis,  chronic  bronchorrhoea,
especially  in  broken  down  or  hemorrhagic  constitutions,
with  tendency  to  gangrene.
Respiration. iD3^spnoea,  anxiety,  thirst,  nausea,  diarrhoea.

Breathing:  anxious;  embarrassed,  with  constriction  of
throat;  jerking;  quick,  labored,  with  weak  pulse  and
nervous  agitation;  slow,  labored,  imperceptible  pulse;
difficult,  as  if  lungs  would  not  expand.

I  Asthma;  especially  with  cardiac  disease;  great  debility
and  prostration,  blue,  puffy  countenance,  cold  sweat.
Cough. Nervous  cough,  especially  laryngeal ;  dry,  tickling,
constant,  choking,  as  if  from  dry,  irritating  vapor,  or


26


CROTALUS  HORRIDUS.  488

salt  or  pepper,  or  as  if  from  dry  spot  in  larynx,  <  on
1.  side;  or  as  if  provoked  by  dry  or  cold  air,  or  by  deep
inspiration,  by  speaking,  and  particularly  by  external
pressure  on  larynx  which  cannot  be  borne;  or  is  very
apt  to  occur  on  awaking  from  sleep.
Extreme  sensitiveness  and  irritability;  dry  cough  on
speaking,  <  in  dry  or  cold  air;  much  hawking;  hoarse-
ness or  loss  of  voice;  sudden  tickling  causing  choking,
spasmodic  cough.

■  Pertussis;  with  great  debility,  much  cardiac  weakness,

blueness  or  pallor  of  countenance  after  an  attack  and
tardy  return  to  natural  color;  attacks  followed  by  puffi-
ness  of  face  or  hemorrhagic  spots,  purple  lips,  blood-
shot eyes,  epistaxis,  or  much  frothy,  stringy,  sanguine-
ous expectoration ;  when  there  is  any  threatening"  of
pulmonary  oedema  or  paralysis.

Cough ;  in  phthisis  when  incessant  and  apparently  from
nervous  sensitiveness  and  irritability.

I  Cough  with  stitch  in  1.  side  and  bloody  expectoration.

■  Spitting  of  blood.

^^  Inner  Chest  and  Lungs,  i Excessive  oppression  of  chest:
in  old  peo|)le  affected  with  hydrothorax;  in  fever  and
ague;  in  apoplexy.

I  Burning  in  chest,  with  heat  in  forehead.

Stitch  pains  in  chest;  pleurisy  with  remittent  fever.

Haemoptysis.

Hydrothorax:  in  broken  down  constitutions;  whether
secondary  dropsy  or  left  by  pleurisy ;  with  weak  heart,
albuminuria,  menstrual  irregularities  or  hepatic  disease.

ffidema  pulmonum ;  gangrena  pulmonum ;  in  inebriates
and  old  persons;  in  course  of  septic  or  zymotic  diseases.

Abscessus  or  cancer  pulmonum;  tendency  to  gangrene;
with  typhoid  symptoms;  with  hemorrhage  or  fetor.

Pneumonia;  with  tendency  to  gangrene  or  hemorrhage.
^^  Heart,  Pulse  and  Circulation. iMuch  dull,  continuous,
aching  pain  in  region  of  heart,  down  1.  arm  and  through
to  1.  shoulder-blade, <  on  drawing  deep  breath  and
going  up  stairs  or  a  hill. ^Dysmenorrhoea.

■  Heart  tender  when  lying  on  1.  side.

Pain  in  heart;  heart  beat  rapid,  sometimes  intermittent.

■  Palpitation,  with  sore  pain  in  and  about  heart,  feeling

as  if  heart  tumbled  over,  or  trembling  of  heart.
Palpitation  of  debility,  obesity,  or  fatty  heart;  nervous
palpitation,  angina  pectoris,  and  the  imitation  of  the
latter  occurring  in  hysterical  women.

■  Heart  beat  feeble,  or  imperceptible.

■  Pulse:  rapid;  slower  than  natural  (sixty  beats),  or  inter-

mitting and  scarcely  perceptible;  feeble  and  quick,  then


489  CROTALUS  HORRIDUS.

slow;  feeble,  fluttering,  frequent,  small,  quick,  thread-
like, weak,  scarcely  perceptible,  trembling,  wavy,  or
slow;  irregular.

I  Pulse  120,  very  small  and  weak. ^Diphtheria.

Passive  and  venous  congestions  in  low  states  of  vitality
and  in  broken  down  constitutions,  where  there  is  a  ten-
dency to  general  or  local  venous  relaxation  or  torpidity,
such  as  liability  to  chilblains,  frost  bite,  etc.

Pernicious  anaemia,  leucocythsemia;  in  constitutions
broken  down  by  gonorrhoea,  syphilis,  alcohol,  etc.,  ten-
dency to  hemorrhages  from  gums,  mucous  membranes
and  skin ;  blood  non-coagulable.

Haemophilia,  hemorrhagic  diathesis,  softening  in  vascular
walls,  or  disorganization  of  blood;  blood  indisposed  to
coagulate,  even  though  arterial,  or  is  dark  in color.

Passive  hemorrhages,  where  blood  appears  to  ooze  through
vascular  walls  and  escapes  into  surrounding  tissues,  or
over  or  from  free  surfaces,  mucous  membranes,  etc.,  as
if  blood  were  dissolved,  or  as  if  vessels  had  no  power
to  retain  within  them  the  circulating  fluid,  as  if  whole
system  were  in  a  state  of  dissolution.

Phlebitis;  in  low,  debilitated,  erysipelatous  state  of  system.

Varicosis,  varicose  veins,  varicocele,  venous  torpidity,  es-
pecially resulting  from  alcohol.

Lymphangitis,  angioleucitis;  from  septic  absorption,  py-
aemia, etc.
^^  Neck  and  Back. Drawing,  tensive  pain  from  r.  shoulder
along  neck,  as  from  a  tense  tendon,  <  from  pressure
and  moving  arm.

I  Carbuncles,  boils,  pustules,  pimples  or  bed  sores  owing  to
a  degenerate  state  of  blood.

I  Pain  in  top  of  shoulder;  also  in  ascending  aorta.  ^He-
patic disorder.

I  Aching  pain  in  r.  kidney  and  in  stomach. ^Headache.

Softening  of  spinal  cord,  bed  sores,  spinal  congestion,  or
irritation,  spinal  meningitis,  myelitis,  or  spinal  paralysis.
^^  Upper  Limbs. Left  axillary  glands  swollen  and  tender.

Paroxysms  of  bruised  pains  in  bones  of  shoulder.

Throbbing  pains  in  finger-tips,  etc.

Paralyzed  sensation,  trembling,  jerking,  cramps  and  neu-
ralgia in  arms.

■  Large  inflamed  furuncle  on  r.  upper  arm  near  elbow.

I  Tight,  cord-like  feeling  extending  from  front  of  1.  elbow
down  front  of  forearm,  with  "  round  spots  "  of  pain  here
and  there  along  front  of  forearm;  the  "spots  of  pain"
remain  only  for  a  few  minutes  and  then  pass  away,  but
recur  frequently  during  both  day  and  night,  cannot
grasp  with  1.  forefinger  and  thumb,  cannot  extend  1.


CROTALUS  HORRIDUS.  490

arm  without  pain.  ^Pyaemia  resulting  from  injury  to
r.  middle  finger.

■Right  middle  finger  swollen,  hard,  tense  and  of  a  glossy
blue-grey  color,  quite  rigid  and  incapable  of  any  move-
ment; the  other  fingers  also  more  or  less  involved;
blush  of  redness  on  back  of  hand,  with  pain  extending
to  elbow;  loss  of  appetite;  she  feels  low,  miserable,
weak ;  finally  angioleucitis  of  palm,  then  three  red  lines
and  an  abscess  in  r.  axilla  discharging. ^Pyaemia.

■Tubercle  on  wrist,  near  end  of  radius,  size  of  large  split
pea  and  rather  blue,  resulting  from  sting  of  insect
several  years  ago,  had  existed  ever  since,  being  more
pronounced  during  Summer  months.

■Vesicular  and  pustular  eruption  about  wrists.

■  Trembling  of  hands.

■  Tingling  and  pricking,  "going  to  sleep"  of  hands,  espe-

cially of  1.  one,  on  least  exertion,  "they  become  quite
dead"  when  she  sews;  1.  leg  similarly  affected.

■  Coldness  and  blueness  of  hands  and  fingers  connected

with  weak  nervous  system  and  heart.
I  I  Violent,  spasmodic  pain  in  1.  palm  as  from  a  bee  sting.
I  I  Itching  and  heat  of  palms.
Parchment-like  condition  of  skin  of  hands.

■  Burning,  itching  red  spot  on  back  of  1.  third  finger,

originally  resulting  from  bite  of  insect  twenty  years  ago ;
had  returned  regularly  at  same  time  every  year  since,
each  time  lasting  about  a  week.

■  Oozing  of  blood  from  under  nails.

■  Chilblains,  especially  when threatened  with gangrene,

and  when  chronic  or  occurring  in  not  very  cold  weather,
thus  indicating  a  low  nervous  and  vascular  vitality.
Psoriasis  palmaris,  pimples,  pustules,  boils,  suppurating
axillary  glands,  tubercles,  petechise  and  numbness.
^^  Lower  Limbs. Starting;  jerking;  trembling  and  cramps
of  lower  extremities.

■  Legs  "go  to  sleep  "  and  tingle  while  sitting,  or  when  cross-

ing them.

1. 1  Drawing  suddenly  from  1.  hip  to  foot.

I  I  During  and  after  walking  feels  as  if  a  tendon  was  draw-
ing from  sole  of  r.  foot  through  bone  of  leg.

■  Cramp-like  pains  in  calf,  heels  and  toes.
I  I  Sore  pain  in  calf;  in  sole  of  foot.

I  I  Swelling  of  feet  every  evening.

■  Paralysis  of  extensors  in  1.  foot  after  typhus ;  drags  toes.
Itching  of  skin  on  lower  extremities.

Pimples;  pustules;  boils;  tubercles;  petechise;  hemor-
rhagic spots;  varicose  veins;  ulcers,  especially  varicose,
hemorrhagic,  gangrenous;  chilblains.


491  CROTALUS  HORRIDUS.

I  Small  purple  spots  appearing  on  legs  and  very  soon  both
legs,  from  knees  to  ankles,  became  covered  with  ecchy-
mosis;  some  bleeding  with  stools  and  general  circula-
tion very  languid.
^*  Limbs  in  General. Painful  paralytic  sensation.

Starting,  jerking,  trembling  and  unsteadiness  of  limbs.

■  Rheumatic  and  neuralgic  pains.

■  Bruised  pain  in  joints  and  bones,

I  I  Heaviness,  as  if  bones  were  made  of  heavy  wood.

I  I  Numb  pain  as  after  cramp,  in  anterior  of  fingers  and  in

toes.
Drawing  pains  in  knee,  tibia,  back,  etc.

I  Contraction  of  flexors.

iGonorrhoeal  rheumatism;  in  chronic  syphilitics  and  in-
ebriates.
^^  Rest. Position. Motion. Resting  head :  >  vertigo.

Lying  down:  headache  compels.

Cannot  lie  on  1.  side.

On lying  on  r.  side  or  back  :  dark  green  vomiting.

When  lying  on  1.  side :  sensitiveness  of  heart.

Cannot  bear  r.  leg  straightened,  lies  with  it  bent  and  sup-
ported by  a  pillow.

Head  thrown  up  and  backwards,  with  diphtheria.

Sinking  down  towards  foot  of  bed.

Sitting:  legs  go  to  sleep.

Standing:  oozing  of  blood  from  anus;  great  tendency  of
hemorrhoids  to  bleed.

Motion:  vomiting;  soreness  in  back  part  of  head  <;
nausea;  heat  in  forehead  and  burning  in  chest  <.

Can  hardly  raise  himself  in  bed.

Sitting  up  in  bed:  soreness  in  back  part  of  head  <.

On  assuming  upright  position :  fainting.

Legs  go  to  sleep  when  crossing  them.

On  moving  arm:  pain  from  r.  shoulder  along  neck  <.

On  sewing :  going  to  sleep  of  hands.

Walking:  headache,  with  vertigo,  nausea  and  vomiting
>;  oozing  of  blood  from  anus;  as  if  a  tendon  was
drawing  from  sole  of  r.  foot  through  bone  of  leg  during
and  after.

Going  up  stairs :  aching  in  region  of  heart,  down  1.  arm
and  through  to  1.  shoulder-blade,  also  on  ascending  hill.

Exertion:  vomiting  on  least;  going  to  sleep  of  hands  from
least;  easily  tired  by  slightest.
^^  Nerves. ■  Tremulous weakness all over,  as if  some  evil
were  apprehended.

■  General  loss  of  power;  muscles  refuse  their  service.

I I  Easily  tired  by  slightest  exertion. ^Dysmenorrhoea.
1 1  Sudden  and  great  prostration  of  vital  force.


CROTALUS  HORRIDUS.  492

■  Great prostration, can hardly raise himself in bed.

^Diphtheria.

■  Frequent  fainting  spells,  with  imperceptible  pulse  and

inclination  to  vomit.

■  Palsy,  old  rheumatisms.

Paral3^sis:  following  apoplexy,  particularly  of  r.  side;
glosso-pharyngeal ;  post  diphtherical ;  of  the  insane;
general.

Myelomalachia,  with  elitire  absence,  or  very  little  local
pain;  pain  only  <  from  pressure,  weakness  of  back,
impaired  mental  activity,  difficult  speech,  oppression
of  chest,  convulsions,  painless  paralysis  of  extremities,
with  numbness  and  great  coldness  of  affected  limb.

Multiple  sclerosis,  lateral  sclerosis,  locomotor  ataxy,  pro-
gressive muscular  atrophy,  tetanus,  etc.

Hysteria:  especially  when  convulsive  or  apoplectiform.

Neuralgia:  when  occurring  as  a  sequel  of  septic,  toxsemic
or  even  miasmatic  disease,  or  chronic  bilious,  climac-
teric or  albuminuric  conditions.

Local  spasms,  cramps,  trismus,  etc. ;  when  occurring  as  a
sequel  of  toxaemia,  or  in  broken  down  constitutions,

■  Convulsions,  with  trembling  of  limbs,  without  foaming  at

mouth;  loss  of  senses;  indifference,  seems  only  half
alive;  paleness  of  face  as  in  faintness;  sensation  of  tight
constriction  of  throat.  ^Epilepsy.
Convulsions:  occurring  at  onset  of  exanthemata;  also
puerperal,  and  particularly  if  there  be  albuminuria,
coma,  blue,  bloated  countenance,  with  frothy,  sanguin-
olent  saliva,  or  tendency  to  hemorrhage.

■  Convulsions  and  paralysis. ^Cerebro-spinal  meningitis.
Cramps  and  convulsions,  with  shrieking  or  delirium.
Convulsions  resulting  from  extension  of  disease  of  ear,

after  the  exanthemata  and  in  whooping  cough.

Epile|)tic  convulsions,  occurring  at  onset  of  septic  or
zymotic  disease.

Chorea:  especially  when  it  can  be  traced  to  anything
septic  or  toxa^mic,  and  even  if  autogenetic,  as  in  rheu-
matic, gouty,  albuminuric,  or  amenorrhoeic  subjects.

Tremblings  and  twitchings,  especially  if  resulting  from
alcoholism,  or  septic  or  zymotic  disease.

H^^drophobia.
^''  Sleep. Yawning, with opj)ressed nervous  system,  or  de-
graded blood  supply.

■  Torpor  and  drowsiness  of  invasion,  or  termination  of

zymotic  or  septic  disease  or  other  toxa3mia,  such  as  al-
buminuria, menstrual  irregularities,  hepatic  or  cardiac
disease,  etc.
■Sopor,  from  which  he  cannot  be  aroused. ^Apoplexy.


493  CROTALUS  HORRIDUS.

I  Constant  drowsiness,  with  inability  to  sleep.  ^Delirium
tremens.

■  Sleeplessness  from  nervous  and  mental  distress  connected

with  bodily  suffering,  but  out  of  all  proportion  to  the
suffering.

■  Chronic  sleeplessness.

■  Starts  in  sleep.

■  Symptoms  <  after  sleep.

■  Dreams:  of  traveling;  of  quarrels;  of  the  dead.

^^  Time.  In  morning:  on  awaking,  headache  over  eyes;  sick-
ness of  stomach;  headache,  going  off  while  dressing;
pain  around  eyes  < ;  lids  swollen,  with  pains  in  fore-
head and  occiput;  sickness  of  stomach;  vomits  every-
thing she  eats.

In  afternoon :  can  eat  better.

During  day:  feels  sick  if  she  sleeps.

In  evening:  pains  around  eyes  <;  swelling  of  feet.

At  night:  awakes  struggling  with  imaginary  foes;  delir-
ium; headache  with  fever  <;  wakes  up  grinding  teeth,
face  much  distorted;  sleeps  only  in  middle  of  night.
^®  Temperature  and  Weather. Open  air:  lightness  of  head;
headache  with  vertigo,  nausea  and  vomiting  >.

Cold  air:  great  irritability  and  sensitiveness  of  throat  to
dry  or;  laryngitis  acuta  with  great  sensitiveness  to  dry
or;  dry  cough  <  in  dry  or.

Summer:  diarrhoea;  tubercle  on  wrist  more  pronounced.
*°  Fever. ■  Surface  cold,  especially  extremities.

■  Chilliness  every  afternoon;  a  kind  of  crawling  up  and

down  back  and  afterwards  all  over  for  five  or  six  hours ;
severe  pressure  on  top  of  head,  running  to  ears,  with
light-headedness  and  confusion  and  heat  from  head  to
feet;  shooting  pain  from  occiput  down  spine  and  arms;
foul  breath;  tongue  coated  yellow ;  bitter  taste  in  mouth
and  nausea;  soreness  r.  side  of  pit  of  stomach  through
to  shoulders;  aching  in  middle  of  chest  to  back;  dull
pain  across  hips  and  also  in  back  and  1.  shoulder;  con-
stant inclination  to  stool,  with  dark  brown,  blackish
discharges.

■  Chilliness  alternately  with  heat,  occasionally  sudden  cold

perspiration,  pulse  full  and  100;  eyes  sunken,  with
dark  brown  rings;  tongue  dry  in  centre  and  j^ellow,
point  red;  constant  vain  efforts  to  evacuate  bowels,
nausea,  sick  stomach  ;  passages  black,  slight  and  pappy;
soreness  in  chest  and  stomach,  pain  on  touching  them;
cannot  lie  on  1.  side;  great  drowsiness  and  excessive
weakness. ^Bilious  remittent  fever.

■  Flushes  of  heat  all  over.  '  •  .

■  Tongue dry and cracked, dark brown streak down


CROTALUS  HORRIDUS.  494

centre,  edges  of  a  deep  red  color;  occasional  bilious
discharges;  no  appetite;  cold,  clammy  perspiration-  on
forehead  and  temples;  skin  yellow;  would  speak  when
roused  by  shaking,  seemed  entirely  unconscious  of
everything;  urine  dark  red,  depositing  a  dark,  yellow-
ish-red sediment;  pulse  50  and  weak. ^Bilious  fever.

■  Intense  fever,  copious,  dark,  confluent  eruption,  consider-

able oedema  of  face;  ophthalmic  and  nasal  symptoms
very  severe,  throat  and  chest  symptoms  moderately  so;
some  delirium. ^Morbilli.

■Burning  fever,  accelerated  pulse. /9 Apoplexy.

I  Skin  hot  and  dry,  pulse  140. ^Perityphlitis.

No  sweat;  patient  sometimes  cold,  but  it  is  a  dry  cold.

■  Sweat  cold;  sudden  attacks  of  cold  sweat.

■  Sweat  colored,  especially  axillary;  bloody  sweat.

■  Malignant  scarlet  fever,  with  great  infiltration  of  con-

nective tissue,  especially  at  throat.

■  Bilious  remittents  of  the  South;  low  type,  tendency  to

hemorrhage.

■  Fevers  with  hemorrhagic  symptoms,  or  tendency  to  pu-

trescence.

■  ■Yellow  fever;  hemorrhagic  tendency,  oozing  of  blood

from  every  orifice  and  even  pores;  skin  yellow;  vomit-
ing of  bile  or  blood;  fetid,  bilious  or  bloody  stools;
liver  tender ;  heart  weak ;  fainting.

■  ■  Fevers  resulting  from  septic  absorption  and  in  purpuric

cases  of  zymotic  diseases ;  puerperal  fever.

Pysemia;  hectic  fever;  attending  suppuration,  ulceration,
burns,  scalds,  maturition  stage  of  variola,  compound
fractures,  lacerated  wounds,  dissection  wounds,  cellulitis,
erysipelas,  malignant  pustule,  carbuncle,  stings  of  in-
sects, phagedsena,  etc.;  for  that  attending  diphtherial
and  scarlatinal  absorption ;  or  that  of  secondary  or  ter-
tiary syphilis;  cholera.

Typhus;  oppression  of  nervous  centres;  eyes  congested,
countenance  heavy,  dull,  bloated,  besotted;  eruption
dark,  purple,  copious;  during  second  week,  heart  be-
comes markedly  soft,  systolic  sound  nearly  inaudible,
pulse  soft,  flagging,  tremulous;  great  and  distressing
restlessness,  much  stupor,  twitching,  jerking,  tremulous-
ness,  sinking  down  towards  foot  of  bed,  or  deafness;
pneumonia  or  oedema  glottidis  supervene;  swelling  of
salivary  glands,  diarrhoea,  albuminuria,  or  suppression
of  urine.

Relapsing  fever;  tendency  to  syncope,  hemorrhage,  epis-
taxis,  menorrhagia,  petechial  eruption  or  oedema  of
lungs  or  legs,  eff'usion  into  joints,  ophthalmia,  diarrhoea,
dysentery;  in  old  or  intemperate  subjects.


495  CROTALUS  HORRIDUS.

Cerebro-spinal  fever;  glanders;  plague.
^^  Attacks,  Periodicity. Sudden:  sore  throat;  extreme  cold-
ness and  bluen  ess;  palpitations;  tickling,  causing  chok-
ing; great  prostration  of  vital  force;  cold  perspiration.

Frequent:  erysipelas  of  face;  faint  sensation  about  epi-
gastrium, with  trembling  above  umbilicus,  followed  by
flushing  of  heat;  paroxysmal  aggravations  of  pain  in
region  of  appendix ;  fainting  spells.

Constant:  drowsiness,  with  inability  to  sleep;  vomiting;
acid  taste  on  tongue ;  cough;  inclination  to  stool;  vain
efforts  to  evacuate  bowels.

Several  times  a  day:  attacks  of  dizziness,  fainting  and
weakness,  with  occipital  headache.

Every  afternoon:  chilliness  and  crawling  sensation  for
five  or  six  hours.

From  6  a.m.  until  evening :  pressure  and  heavy  pain  on
top  of  head.

Every  few  days :  bilious  headache.

Every  month :  vomiting  after  menstruation.

For  some  months :  eruption  on  face.

Periodic:  neuralgia.

Marked  periodicity :  pains  come  and  go  suddenly  or  re-
appear every  three  months,  every  year,  etc.

For  years:  grinding  of  teeth  during  sleep,  wdth  distortion
of  face ;  tubercle  on  wrist.

Chronic:  neuralgia;  chilblains;  sleeplessness;  bronchitis;
bronchorrhoea.

For  twenty  years:  severe  pain  in  r.  eye  and  top  of  head,
on  r.  side  down  back  of  neck,  at  intervals.

Burning,  itching  red  spot  on  finger  resulting  from  bite  of
insect  twenty  years  ago,  returning  regularly  at  same
time  every  year  since,  each  time  lasting  about  a  week.
*^  Locality  and  Direction. Acts  more  on  r.  side.

Right:  headache  <  in  temple;  severe  pain  in  eye  and
top  of  head,  on  side  down  back  of  neck;  drawing  in
side  of  head;  cannot  bear  leg  straightened,  lies  with  it
bent  and  supported  by  a  pillow;  drawing,  tensive  pain
from  shoulder  along  neck ;  aching  in  kidney ;  large  in-
flamed furuncle  on  upper  arm  near  elbow;  middle
finger  swollen,  incapable  of  movement,  other  fingers
also  involved,  pain  extends  to  elbow,  abscess  in  axilla ;
as  if  a  tendon  was  drawing  from  sole  of  foot  through
bone  of  leg;  paralysis  of  side.

Left:  bilious  headache  beginning  behind  ear;  frontal
headache  in  anterior  lobe;  throbbing  and  heat  in  side
of  head;  throat  <  on  side;  neuralgic  drawing  in  fauces
<  on  side;  pain  in  side,  near  last  ribs  as  if  in  dia-
phragm; aching  in  iliac,  region; aching  in  region  of


CROTALUS  HORRIDUS.  496

heart,  down  arm  and  through  to  shoulder-blade;  neu-
ralgic pains  from  side  of  womb  to  transverse  colon ;
breast  inflamed  and  hard;  leg  swollen  twice  its  natural
size;  laryngitis  acuta  <  on  side;  stitch  in  side  with
cough;  tight,  cord-like  feeling  from  elbow  down  fore-
arm ;  round  spots  of  pain  along  front  of  forearm,  cannot
grasp  with  forefinger  and  thumb,  cannot  extend  arm
without  pain;  going  to  sleep  of  hand  and  leg;  violent
spasmodic  pain  in  palm;  red  spot  on  back  of  finger;
drawing  from  hip  to  foot;  paralysis  of  extensors  of  foot;
dull  pain  in  shoulder.
*^  Sensations.  As  if  brain  had  been  intoxicated  by  carbonic
acid,  or  by  degraded  blood ;  as  from  a  blow  in  occiput ;
as  if  head  was  constricted;  as  if  a  cut  had  been  made
around  eyes;  as  if  tongue  and  all-around  throat  were
tied  up ;  as  if  tongue  were  swollen ;  as  of  a  plug  in  throat
to  be  swallowed,  or  of  contraction  or  choking,  or  as  if
uvula  or  velum  were  elongated  or  stiff,  or  as  of  a  dry
spot  or  tickling  in  throat;  as  if  uvula  and  velum  were
swelling;  as  if  oesophagus  was  full  of  rancid  fluid;  as
if  lungs  would  not  expand ;  as  of  a  dry  spot  in  larynx ;
as  if  heart  tumbled  over;  as  of  a  tense  tendon  from  r.
shoulder  along  neck;  as  if  arms  were  paralyzed;  as
from  a  bee  sting  in  1.  palm ;  as  if  a  tendon  was  drawing
from  sole  of  r.  foot  through  bone  of  leg;  as  if  bones  were
made  of  heavy  wood.

Pain :  in  head ;  at  centre  of  forehead ;  in  r.  eye  and  top  of
head,  on  r.  side  down  back  of  neck;  in  forehead  and
occiput;  in  pit  of  stomach;  in  region  of  liver;  on  top  of
shoulder;  in  1.  side,  near  last  ribs,  as  if  in  diaphragm;
in  course  of  colon;  in  region  of  appendix;  in  abdomen
and  back ;  in  hypogastrium  and  down  thighs ;  in  heart ;
in  top  of  shoulder;  in  ascending  aorta;  violent,  spas-
modic in  1.  palm.

Tremulous  weakness,  as  from  impending  evil.

Distressing  sensation  of  sinking.

Agonizing  pain :  in  stomach.

Cutting:  around  eyes.

Boring:  around  eyes.

Grinding:  in  1.  leg.

Stitches :  in  region  of  liver ;  in  hard  lump  in  lower  outer
part  of  breast;  in  1.  side;  in  chest.

Stinging:  headache;  in  abdomen;  all  over.

Pricking:  in  throat,  especially  1.  side,  near  root  of  tongue,
or  extends  to  ear,  or  as  if  proceeding  from  ear  with;
laryngitis  acuta ;  of  hands.

Shooting:  headache;  from  occiput  down  spine  and  arms.

Tearing:  around  eyes.

Jerking:  in  arms.


497  CROTALUS  HORRIDUS.

Drawing: headache; neuralgic,  in  fauces; in  r.  side  of

head ;  from  r.  shoulder  along  neck ;  from  1.  hip  to  foot ;

in  knees,  tibia,  back ;  in  bones.
Scraping:  down  oesophagus  to  stomach;  in  posterior  wall

of  anus, .
Burning:  in  chest;  in  eyes;  in  spot  on  back  of  1.  third

finger.
Raw  pain :  in  throat,  especially  1.  side,  or  extends  to  ear,

or  as  if  proceeding  from  ear ;  with  laryngitis  acuta.
Sore  pain: especially  at  1.  side  of  throat,  near root of

tongue,  or  extends  to  ear,  or  as  if  proceeding  from  ear;

with  laryngitis  acuta;  in  and  about  heart;  in  calf;  in

sole  of  foot.
Soreness:  of  throat;  in  back  part  of  head;  of  r.  side  of  pit

of  stomach  through  to  shoulders ;  in  chest  and  stomach.
Pressing:  dull,  at  back  of  ear;  down  on  eyes;  headache;

in  vertex.
Tensive  pain :  from  r.  shoulder  along  neck.
Constriction :  tight,  of  throat.
Contraction:  in  throat.
Compressive:  headache.
Cramps:  in  stomach;  in  arms;  of  legs;  in  calf,  heels  and

toes.
Neuralgic  pains:  sharp,  from  1.  side  of  womb  to  transverse

colon,  thence  cutting  across  as  if  from  both  sides  towards

centre,  thence  up  to  face  and  temples; in  arms; in

limbs.
Rheumatic  pains:  in  limbs.
Paralytic  pain :  in  extremities ;  in  bones.
Numb  pain:  as  after  cramp,  in  anterior  of  fingers  and  in

toes.
Bruised  pain:  in  bones  of  shoulder;  in  joints  and  bones.
Dull  pain:  across  hips,  in  back,  in  1.  shoulder.
Heavy  pain :  dull,  over  eyes  and  in  sides  of  nose ;  on  top

of  head.
Aching:  in  bones;  dull, heavy  in  head;  in liver; in  1.

iliac  region;  dull,  continuous,  in  region  of  heart,  down

1.  arm  and  through  to  1.  shoulder-blade;  in  r.  kidney

and  in  stomach;  in  middle  of  chest  to  back.
Pulsating:  headache;  in  brain.
Throbbing:  in  1.  side  of  head;  dull,  heavy,  in  occiput;  in

finger-tips.
Fluttering:  above  umbilicus.
Oppression:  of  chest;  above  eyes.
Pressure:  above  eyes;  on  top  of  head.
Weight:  on  stomach;  in  head  and  ears.
Heaviness:  in  stomach;  of  limbs.
Congested  feeling :  dull,  heavy,  in  front  of  brain,
VOL.  IV. — 32.


CROTALUS  HORRIDUS.  498

Fulness:  in  ears.

Dulness:  of  head.

Lightness:  of  head.

Dizziness :  in  back  part  of  head.

Sinking:  about  epigastrium ;  at  stomach.

Faintness:  about  epigastrium.

Weakness:  of  back.

Numbness:  of  arms  and  legs;  of  affected  limb.

Crawling:  up  and  down  back.

Tingling:  of  hands;  in  legs.

Tickling:  in  throat;  with  laryngitis  acuta;  cough.

Choking:  in  throat.

Heartburn.

Hungry  sensation:  about  epigastrium.

Heat:  over  eyes  and  in  sides  of  nose;  in  forehead;  on  top
of  head;  in  1.  side  of  head.

Dryness:  in  eyes;  of  fauces;  of  mouth.

Itching:  of  scalp;  eruption  on  face;  of  palms;  in  red  spot
on  back  of  1.  third  finger;  of  skin  on  lower  extremities;
all  over.
^*  Tissues.  Very  rapid  and  direct  depressing  influence  on
sensorium  and  medulla  oblongata,  deranging  both  cir-
culation and  nutrition;  after  death,  in  subacute  and
chronic  cases,  the  cerebrum,  cerebellum  and  medulla
are  found  in  a  state  of  engorgement,  with  dark,  fluid,
degraded  blood,  and  apparently  threatened  with  sof-
tening.

Cortical  substance  of  brain,  and  membranes  of  brain  in  a
state  of  engorgement,  with  dark,  fluid,  degraded  blood;
the  cortex  highly  congested  and  stained  a  deep  brown
color;  the  arachnoid  thickened,  tough,  opaque  and  ad-
herent to  the  pia  mater,  and  the  meshes  of  the  latter
distended  with  serum;  extravasation  and  ecchymosis.

Seems  to  act  primarily  upon  cerebro-spinal  nerve  centres,
producing  secondarily  decomposition  of  blood  and  de-
struction of  blood  fibrin,  hemorrhages,  ecchymoses.

Affects  principall}^  the  blood,  the  solar  plexus  and  pneumo-
gastric  nerves;  also  the  cerebro-spinal  system.

Organs  of  vision  profoundly  affected,  even  to  extent  of
annihilating  their  functions.

•  Hemorrhages  from  all  orifices  of  body,  eyes,  ears,  nose,
mouth  and  urethra,  even  bloody  sweat;  blood  flows
suddenly  from  eyes,  ears,  nose,  gums  and  beneath  nails.

iCEdematous  swelling  of  whole  body.

Indicated  in  diseases  of  an  adynamic  character,  whether
caused  by  previous  low  states  of  system,  or  by  zymotic
and  septic  poisoning,  abuse  of  alcohol,  etc.,  especially
characteristic  are  evidences  of  cardiac  debility,  feeble


499  CROTALUS  HORRIDUS.

pulse,  sluggish  circulation,  bluish  skin,  faintness,  gen-
eral debility.

Bruised, drawing, or paralytic pains in bones, < on
awaking.
**  Touch. Passive  Motion. Injuries. Touch:  left  leg  <
from  slighest;  laryngitis  acuta,  with  great  sensitiveness
to;  pain  in  chest  and  stomach.

Cannot  bear  clothing  around  stomach,  hypochondria,  epi-
gastric region  or  abdomen.

Pressure:  at  angles  of  lower  jaw,  tonsils  sensitive  to;  sore-
ness in  back  part  of  head;  stitches  in  region  of  liver
< ;  region  of  appendix  very  tender  to ;  laryngitis  acuta
with  great  sensitiveness  to ;  laryngeal  cough  < ;  pain
from  r.  shoulder  along  neck  <;  myelomalachia,  pains  <.

Shaking:  seemed  entirely  unconscious,  would  speak  when
roused  by.

Great  tendency  of  hemorrhoids  to  bleed  on  using  paper.

From  irritating  vapors:  laryngitis  acuta.

After  sting  of  insects :  oedema  of  tongue;  laryngitis  acuta ;
tubercle  on  wrist ;  burning,  itching  red  spot  on  back  of
1.  third  finger.

From  scalds:  laryngitis  acuta.

Burns,  scalds,  compound  fracture,  lacerated  wounds,  dis-
secting wounds.

Compound  fractures;  in  course  of  septic  or  zymotic  dis-
ease, in  broken  down  constitutions,  old  inebriates  or
other  states  of  low  vitality  or  degraded  blood ;  tendency
to  gangrene,  or  unhealthy  suppuration,  threatening  sep-
tic absorption.
*^  Skin, lltching,  stinging,  all  over;  urticaria.

iSkin  dry,  stiff,  like  thin  parchment;  usually  cold.

I  Skin  hot,  perspiring. ^Diphtheria.

I I  Yellow  color  of  whole  body.

Acute  jaundice,  of  htematic  rather  than  of  hepatic  origin.
I  Petechia,  little  blotches,  or  ecchymosed  purple  spots.
Yellow-greenish  and  bluish  spots,  with  decreased  swelling.
Yellow  and  black  spots  all  over.
Purpura  hemorrhagica.

Scarlet  erythema  or  scarlet  redness,  with  rash-like  vesicles.
Blisters  and  livid  spots  on  body.
Small  blisters  around  eyes.
Vesicular  eruption  on  septum  narium.
Swelling  on  wrist  containing  serum.
Pimples  on  face.
Eruption  around  mouth.
Herpes  on  scrotum.

Swelling  of  whole  body  and  of  submaxillary  glands  and
tonsils  especially.


CROTALUS  HORPvIDUS.  500

Suppuration  of  glands;  in  broken  down  constitutions,
with  low  fever,  tendency  to  slough,  and  discharge  of
dirty  or  hemorrhagic  matter.

•■Burns  and  scalds,  threatening  erysipelas  or  gangrene.

Ulceration;  especially  phagedenic,  sloughing,  varicose,
irritable,  bubo,  "soft  sore,"  mercurio-syphilitic,  with
offensive  discharge,  etc.,  in  constitutions  broken  down
by  previous  disease  or  bad  living;  in  inebriates.

I  Stings  of  insects,  when  they  assume  an  erysipelatous  or
gangrenous  character.

lOn  eighth  day  after  vaccination,  centres  of  insertion
blackish,  and  circles  filled  with  dark  lymph  and  sur-
rounded by  a  patch  of  inflammation ;  small,  red,  raised
papules  on  arm  and  forearm ;  on  ninth  day  skin  of
nearly  whole  upper  extremity  inflamed,  dark  red  and
thickened,  skin  of  shoulder,  neck,  chest,  abdomen  and
back  in  similar  condition,  and  on  lower  extremities
eruption  in  small  patches;  about  the  elbow  blackish.
^Erysipelas.

■  Pustular  eruption  after  vaccination.

Abscesses  on  elbow  discharging  a  red-brown  matter,  with
shiny  particles.

■  Felons,  pemphigus,  pustules,  boils,  carbuncle,  furuncle,

gangrene,  abscesses,  etc.,  when  fever  is  low,  parts  bluish
and  discharges  scanty,  tardy,  or  dark  fluid,  unhealthy;
diarrhoea  with  gangrene.

■  Old  cicatrices  break  open  again.

■  Hot  swellings,  with  cold  skin  and  sickly  appearance.

■  Obstinate  ulcers,  even  malignant,  with  yellow  complexion

and  great  indifference.

■  Anthrax,  malignant  pustule; especiallj^; if  of  a dark

color,  with  much  fever  or  threatening  gangrene,  or  if
there  be  several  of  them,  or  if  occurring  in  a  constitu-
tion already  broken  down  by  disease  or  bad  living;
sloughing,  hemorrhage,  fever  of  a  low  type.

Dissection  wounds;  symptoms  those  of  phlegmonous  ery-
sipelas; accumulation  of  dirty  pus  in  distant  parts,
typhous  condition  supervening.

Eschorise,  dry  and  finally  black.

Malignant  ulcer  where  bite  Avas  inflicted  (fourteen  years
before),  with  swelling  of  the  parts.

■  Chilblains,  gangrene  pending;  circulation  sluggish.

■  Gangrene,  skin  separated  from  muscles  by  a  fetid  fluid;

black  spots  with  red  areola  and  dark  blackish  redness
of  adjacent  tissues.

■  General  local  phlegmonous,  phlyctenous  or  oedematous

erysipelas;  skin  bluish-red,  low  fever;  during  zymoses
or  in  the  enfeebled;  also  in  wounds;  more  frequent  in
face.


501  CROTALUS  HORRIDUS:

Morbilli ;  especially  malignant  or  purpuric  form ;  and  for
such  sequelae  as  gangrene  of  mouth  or  genitals;  and  for
retrocession  of  eruption;  also  in  later  stage  when  erup-
tion remains  too  long  or  reappears  as  a  mottling.

Scarlatina;  when  in  primary  invasion  there  is  evidence  of
great  toxication,  vomiting,  general  collapse  and  cold-
ness, or  brain  greatly  oppressed,  coma,  convulsions ;
throat  livid  and  rapidly  swelling,  much  oedematous
swelling  at  angles  of  lower  jaw,  chin  raised  and  head
thrown  back,  eruption  patch}'^,  dark  or  petechial,  pulse
extremely  quick  and  feeble,  frequent  epistaxis,  face
dusky;  moaning  and  tossing  about,  or  heavy,  dull  and
stupid;  swelling  of  fauces  and  tonsils  seem  to  threaten
suffocation  or  gangrene,  much  puffiness  around  neck,
tenacious,  sanguineous  mucus  from  mouth  and  nostrils,
breathing  irregular  and  jerky;  secondary  infection  by
absorption  from  gangrenous  and  sloughing  fauces,  in-
ducing a  low  typhoid  state;  also  for  complications,
oedema  glottidis,  laryngitis,  meningitis,  etc.;  and  for
succeeding  dropsy,  when  urine  is  of  dark,  smoky  color,
bloody  or  albuminous.

Syphilis;  primary,  if  chancre  becomes  gangrenous  or
phagedsenic;  secondary,  for  mucous  tubercles  and  phage-
dsenic  and  deeply  penetrating  ulceration  of  mucous
membranes,  necrosis  of  cartilages,  etc.;  tertiary,  for
fetid  and  hemorrhagic  ulceration,  and  if  brain,  liver  or
kidneys  become  implicated.

Pemphigus;  with  low  typhoid  conditions,  and,  when  con-
tained fluid,  assumes  a  dark  or  sanguineous  character,
or  gangrene  threatens.

Peliosis  rheumatica;  with  oedema,  large  purpuric  spots
and  bullae  in  which  black  purpuric  patches,  covered
with  a  flaccid  envelope  of  bullae  after  serum  had  escaped,
were  like  patches  of  skin  which  had  mortified.

Dropsy:  cardiac;  hepatic;  renal;  also  general  dropsy  not
dependent  on  organic  disease  of  any  of  great  central
organs,  but  rather  an  expression  of  a  debilitated,  sof-
tened state  of  capillaries,  or  a  general  break  down  of
vital  powers,  and  particularly  if  it  has  resulted  from
chronic  alcoholism,  or  from  septic  or  zymotic  or  other
depraving  or  debilitating  diseases.
*^  Stages  of  Life,  Constitution. Hemorrhagic  diathesis.

Disea.ses  caused  by  previous  low  states  of  system,  or  by
zymotic  or  septic  poisoning,  abuse  of  alcohol,  etc.

I  Low  typhoid  states.

■  Oppressed  nervous  system;  degraded  blood  supply.

Neuralgia:  occurring  as  a  sequel  of  septic,  toxsemic  or
even  miasmatic  disease;  or  chronic  bilious,  climacteric
or  albuminuric  conditions.


CROTALUS  HORRIDUS.  502

Convulsions  of  puerperal  women,  and  children.

Rheumatic,  gouty,  albuminuric,  or  amenorrhoeic  subjects.

1 1  Broken  down  constitutions.

M.  T.,  set.  4  mos.,  healthy  and  of  a  healthy  family;  ery-
sipelas after  vaccination.

W.  G.,  £et.  7J,  weakly  constitution  and  eruptive  skin,
whose  father  died  of  heart  disease  and  alcoholism,  had
severe  scarlatina,  followed  by  otorrhoea.

Miss  H.,  set.  9,  and  her  brother,  J.  D.  H.,  set.  13  ;  scarlatina
maligna.

Boy,  set.  10;  furuncle.

Girl,  set.  12 ;  diphtheria.

G.  R.,  set.  16,  whose  father  was  a  bonvivant  and  had  liver
disease,  is  a  weak,  pale,  bloodless  boy,  subject  to  bron-
chitis and  asthma;  after  a  nervous  shock  and  grief;
perityphilitis.

Miss  D.,  set.  19,  sorter  and  ripper,  working  in  a  small,  con-
fined room  connected  with  dye  works,  has  been  in  low
state  of  health  for  some  time;  peritoneal  inflammation.

A  girl,  set,  20,  paralysis  of  1.  foot  after  typhus.

Miss  K.,  set.  22;  tubercle  on  wrist.

Miss  M.  S.,  set.  22;  bilious  remittent  fever.

Mr.  W.,  set.  23,  weakly,  strumous,  lately  married,  very
closely  worked,  constantly  exposed  to  exhalations  from
leather;  sensorial  disturbances.

Woman,  set.  25,  weak  menstruation ;  ciliary  neuralgia.

Miss  K.,  set.  25,  of  dirty,  yellow,  bilious  appearance,  sub-
ject to  severe  bilious  headaches,  of  an  epileptic  family;
distortion  of  face.

Miss  M.,  set.  27,  subject  to  chronic  headaches;  papular
eruption  on  face.

A  primipara ;  mastitis  and  milk  leg.

K.  D.,  set.  27,  in  good  health,  but  weak  with  overwork  and
anxiety,  was  exposed  during  day  to  exhalations  of  night
soil;  diphtheria.

Miss  D.,  set.  28,  pale,  weak  and  strumous  looking;  dys-
menorrhoea.

Wm.  W.,  set.  28,  constitution  remarkably  good,  never  been
sick  until  two  months  previous,  at  which  time  he  was
in  the  West  and  had  fever  and  ague,  temperament
bilious,  sanguine;  bilious  fever.

Mr.  M.,  went  with  volunteers  into  Maryland,  and  was
encamped  on  a  small  stream;  bilious  fever.

Man;  suddenly  seized  with  apoplexy.

Mr.  G.  had  lived  freely  in  youth,  and  suffered  from
syphilis,  mercurialization,  polypus,  etc.,  had  taken  al-
cohol freely  all  his  life;  chronic  sleeplessness.

Lieutenant  W.,  of  Commodore  Wilkes  expedition,  con-
tracted yellow  fever  on  coast  of  Cuba.


503  CROTALUS  HORRIDUS.

Hannah  H.,  mother  of  four  children,  sews  much  and
does  housework ;  for  three  years,  throbbing  in  1.  side  of
head,  etc.,  before  menstruation.

Mrs.  S.,  set.  about  30,  has  suffered  for  many  years  from
spasm  of  oesophagus,  seems  to  be  hysterical  in  origin.

Miss  R.,  set.  33,  very  weak  and  low  after  much  nursing,
and  the  loss  of  her  mother;  some  years  previously  had
syphilitic  infection  with  re  vaccination,  got  her  clothes
damped,  followed  by  catarrh;  affection  of  eyes.

Mrs.  J.,  set.  33,  married  six  years,  no  children,  but  several
miscarriages;  husband  has  chronic  syphilis  and  has
lately  become  impotent,  for  last  twelve  months  she  has
had  ozsena;  tingling  and  pricking  in  hands  and  1.  leg.

Mr.  B.,  set,  48,  lived  freely  in  his  youth  and  had  syphilis;
petechise.

Mrs.  S.,  set.  57,  suffering  from  chronic  hemorrhoids;  red,
itching  spot  on  finger.

Mrs.  E.,  set.  57,  had  gastritis  two  years  ago,  now  much
exhausted  from  nursing  sick  family,  is  debilitated  and
bloodless;  atonic  dyspepsia.

Mr.  S.,  set.  58,  subject  to  asthma  and  with  weak  heart;
after  chill  had  bronchitis,  with  hsematuria.

Mr.  S.,  set.  60,  after  unsuccessful  allopathic  treatment;  in-
testinal hemorrhage.

Mr.  L.,  set.  62,  bachelor,  of  irregular  habits,  especially  as
to  alcohol,  living  in  an  isolated  way;  ecchymoses  on
lower  limbs.

H.  D.,  set.  69;  during  incijDient  stage  of  senile  dementia,
delusions,  etc.
*^  Relations.  Anti doted  by:  Laches.;  its  effects  modified  by  An%-
mon.,  Camphor,  Opium.,  Cojfea,  Alcohol,  and  radiated  heat.

Compare:  Laches.,  Naja,  and  Elaps.;  Crotal.  is  preferable
in  fluid  hemorrhages,  j^ellow  skin  (hence  in  yellow  fever
with  black  vomit,  etc.),  epistaxis  of  diphtheria.  Naja
has  more  nervous  phenomena.  Laches,  has  skin  cold
and  clammy,  rather  than  cold  and  dry;  hemorrhages
with  charred  straw  sediment;  and  more  markedly,  ail-
ments of  the  left  side.  Elaps.  is  preferable  in  otorrhoea,
and  in  affections  of  the  right  lung.  The  Cobra  poison
coagulates  blood  into  long  strings.  The  Crotalus  poison
is  acid;  the  Viper  neutral.  The  "Rotten-Snake"  causes
more  sloughing  than  any  other.

Compare  also:  0.  Cascar.  (thoughts  dwell  on  death  and
dreams  of  the  dead),  Tarent.  cub.,  Arsen.,  Lauroc.  (teta-
nus, whooping  cough).  Apis,  Carb.  veg.,  Silic.  (vaccina-
tion). Camphor,  (in  coldness;  probably  Crotal.  has  more
marked  genuine  collapse,  with  confused  speech,  etc.),
Hyosc.  (sleeplessness  in  delirium  tremens).  Opium,  Nux
vom.  and  Cuprum  (cerebral  congestion).


CROTON  TIGLIUM.  504

CROTON  TIGLIUM.

Oroton  Oil  Seeds.  Euphorbiacese.

The  Croton  seed  is  spoken  of  by  Avicenna  and  Serapion.  Cristoph  d'Acosta
cians of  the  seventeenth  century  used  it  very  little.  In  modern  times,  on  account
of  its  medicinal  oil,  it  was  brought  more  to  the  notice  of  physicians.

The  effects  of  the  oil  taken  or  applied  are  recorded  in  the  Encyclopedia,  v.  3,
p.  606,  the  principal  symptoms  being  from  J.  Buchner's  collection  of  provings
published  in  Archiv.f.  Horn.,  v.  19,  p.  113.

Clinical  Atjthokities. — Diarrhoea,  Martin,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf.,  v.  5,  p.  413;
J.  Loyd  Martin,  N.  A.  J.  H.,  v.  4,  p.  355 ;  Gushing,  Organon,  v.  3,  p.  304 ;  Goodno,
Hom.  Clinics,  v.  4,  p.  132;  E.  W.  Berridge,  Eaue's  R.,  1875,  p.  145;  Chronic
diarrhoea,  G.  W.  Richards,  Eaue's  R.,  1873,  p.  120;  H.  V.  Miller,  Raiie's  R.,  1873,
p.  121;  Summer  complaint,  V.  Zuydtryck,  Raue's  R.,  1870,  p.  214;  Cholerine,  Es-
callier,  N.  A.  J.  H.,  v.  4,  p.  124;  Riick.  Kl.  Erf.,  v.  5,  p.  472;  Cholera  infantum,
Goodno,  Hom.  Clinics,  v.  4,  p.  132 ;  C.  C.  Smith,  Med.  Inv.,  v.  9,  p.  7 ;  Aphonia,
Holeczek,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf.,  v.  3,  p.  166;  Brachial  neuralgia  (four  cases),  M.  Preston,
Hah.  Mo.,  V.  12,  p.  472;  Cough  (two  cases),  J.  C.  Robert,  Organon,  v.  3,  p.  486;
Neuralgia,  H.  N.  Martin,  Hom.  Clinics,  v.  1,  p.  112;  Cold,  J.  C.  Robert,  Organon,
V.  3,  p.  487 ;  Rheumatism,  Kirsch,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf.,  v.  5,  p.  897 ;  Eczema,  Bsehr,
B.  J.  H.,  V.  16,  p.  420-29;  v.  d.  Heyden,  Raue's  R.,  1870,  p.  323;  Poisoning  by
Ehus  tox.,  E.  A.  Farrington,  Horn.  Clinics,  v.  4,  p.  107-128.

^  Mind. I  Not  disposed  to  work.

I  Feeling  of  anxiety,  as  though  some  personal  misfortune
would  befall  him.

■  Morose,  dissatisfied.

Deep  depression,  peevish  and  restless. .

Feeling  as  though  one  cannot  think  outside  of  himself,

"feels  all  pent  up"  inside,  and  no  chance  for  thoughts

to  flow  out;  as  if  hide  bound.
^  Sensorium. iDulness,  heaviness,  or  confusion  of  head.

■  Dizziness  and  faintness,  <  in  open  air,  with  drowsiness,

nausea,  pale  complexion,  exhaustion  and  diarrhoea.
^  Inner  Head. ■  Sensitiveness  of  head;  weight  of  hat  causes

headache.
I  Heat  and  heaviness  in  head,  soreness  in  eyeballs  when

turning  eyes;  bad  taste  in  mouth,  feels  clammy  and

nasty;  thirst;  weak,  faint  spells;  flushes  of  heat.
Sticking  pain  in  head,  eyes  and  forehead.

■  Headache  worse  in  morning.

^  Outer  Head, i Sensitiveness  of  head  to  pressure  of  hat.


505  CROTON  TIGLIUM.

I  Boring  of  head  into  pillow;  fontanelles  sunken.  ^Cho-
lera infantum.

iCrusta  lactea.
^  Sight  and  Eyes, i  Opacity  of  cornea.

I  Keratitis  pustulosa :  with  much  eruption  on  lids  and  face ;
with  excessive  photophobia.

■  Ulceration  of  conjunctiva,  contraction  of  pupil,  profuse

lachrymation  and  dimness  of  cornea.

■  Conjunctivitis  pustulosa,  eyes  feel  hot  and  burning,  espe-

cially at  night;  face  red  and  burning;  feverish;  marked
photophobia,  ciliary  injection,  wdth  considerable  pain
in  and  around  eye,  usually  <  at  night.

■  Pustules  terminating  in  ulcers  and  ulceration  of  cornea,

with  much  pain  in  supraciliary  region  and  eruption  on
face;  much  pain  in  eye,  whenever  a  movement  from
bowels  occurred.

■  Iritis  with  pustular  eruption  of  face.

■  Irritation  and  inflammatory  redness  of  conjunctiva.

■Violent  ophthalmia;  on  second  day,  ulceration  of  con-
junctiva over  cornea  and  sclera,  irritation  of  sclera  and
iris;  contraction  of  pupil;  injected  state  of  vessels  of
conjunctiva,  sclera  and  eyelids,  profuse  lachrymation,
photophobia,  violent  pains  disturbing  night's  rest;  burn-
ing and  violent  pain  of  eye.

■  Pain  which  seemed  to  extend  from  pupil  of  1.  eye  to  back

part  of  head. ^Neuralgia.

■  Sensation  as  of  a  string  pulling  eyeball  back  into  head.
Sticking  pain  in  eyes;  eyes  swollen;  veil  before  eyes.

■  Stinging  in  eyeball.

■Soreness  in  eyeballs  when  turning  eyes.
■Burning  pain  in  inflamed  eye,  with  burning  in  ear,  ver-
tigo, and  fainting.
Blepharitis  with  vesicular  eruption  on  lids  and  face.

■  Itching  of  eyelids.

■  QEdematous  swelling  of  eyelids  (eyelids  look  puffed).

■  Twitching  of  eyelids.

■  Copious  lachrymation.

"  Hearing  and  Ears. ■Spasmodic  twinging  pains,  deep  within
1.  ear.
Otorrhoea,  with  great  itching.

■  Deafness.

^  Smell  and  Nose. ■Burning  in  nostrils;  inflamed  nose.

Eruption  upon  septum  of  nose  plugging  nostril.
^  Upper  Face. Swelling and  redness of face  and eyelids,
which  are  covered  with  small  vesicles.

■  Sensation  as  though  insects  were  creeping  on  face.

^  Lower  Face. ■Lips  dry  and  parched. 6'Cholera  infantum.

■  Burning  of  lips.


CROTON  TIGLIUM.  506

"  Taste  and  Tongue. ■  Bad  taste  in  mouth,  clammy  and  nasty.

I  Sensitiveness  of  tip  of  tongue.

Tongue  coated  white;  generally  dry,  red  and  shining.
^^  Inner  Mouth. Burning  and  smarting  in  mouth.

Irritation  of  salivary  glands.

I  Painful  swelling  of  submaxillary  glands  and  tonsils.
13  Tiiroat. Burning  and  scraping  in  fauces  and  throat.

I  General  irritation  in  fauces,  redness,  swelling  and  elon-
gation of  uvula.

I  Constrictive  sensation  in  throat.
^*  Thirst. I  Constant  thirst.

^^  Eating  and  Drinking. Vomiting  and  purging,  as  soon  as
patient  takes  a  drink.

Hot  milk  relieves  colic.
^^  Nausea  and  Vomiting. Nausea,  much  water  in  mouth,

■  Excessive  nausea,  with  vanishing  of  sight,  sweat  on  fore-

head, distension  of  abdomen,  excessive  gagging,  ver-
tigo, <  after  drinking,  with  frequent  discharge  of  green-
ish or  yellowish  water  from  bowels.

Vomiting  immediately  after  drinking.

Violent  vomiting  of  ingesta; of  yellowish- white  frothy
fluids.
^^  Scrobiculum  and  Stomach. Anguish,  oppression and
pressure  in  stomach.

■Sinking  in  stomach,  with  sensation  of  weakness.

■Sensation  of  emptiness  in  stomach.

■  Burning  in  stomach.

■  Sensitiveness  of  region  of  stomach  to  touch.
"Abdomen. ■  Abdomen  distended;  coldness,

■  Unpleasant  sensation  of  emptiness  and  hunger; rum-

bling in  abdomen.

■  Extreme  coldness,  amounting  to  chilliness  along  spinal

column  downwards  and  through  entire  abdomen,  with
nausea  and  vomiting,  subsequently  flushed  feeling  in
head  and  face,  with  writhing  pain,  commencing  in  re-
gion of  transverse  colon  and  gradually  extending  down-
wards through  whole  intestinal  canal;  very  copious
pap-like  and  watery  discharges,  generally  of  light  grey
color,  but  varying;  slight  tenesmus,  anxious  countenance,
depression  of  spirits,  great  restlessness. ^Diarrhoea.

■  Colicky  pain  in  transverse  colon  before  every  stool.

■  Griping  colic  and  writhing  around  umbilicus.
■Abdomen  full  and  distended,  griping  pain  about  navel.

■  Bearing  down  in  abdomen,  as  if  everything  was  relaxed.

■  On  pressing  on  umbilicus  with  hand,  painful  sensation

is  felt  all  along  intestinal  canal  to  termination  of  rectum,
causing  latter  to  protrude,

■  Colic  >  from  hot  milk.


507  CROTON  TIGLIUM.

■  Gurgling  in  intestines,  as  though  nothing  but  water  was

in  them,  mostly  on  1.  side.

1 1  Swashing  in  intestines  as  from  water.  ■
^^  Stool  and  Rectum. ■  Flatulence,  soon  followed  by  urgent
desire  for  stool.

llEvacuation  sudden,  and  with  much  flatus.

I  Stools  occur  suddenly,  one  gush  and  it  is  finished,  great
prostration  after  a  passage. ^Cholera  infantum.

llConstant  urging  to  stool,  followed  by  sudden  pasty
evacuation,  which  is  shot  out  of  rectum,  of  a  dirty  green
color  and  offensive.

I  Watery,  yellow,  at  times  slightly  green  passages,  passed
in  a  single  gush ;  each  stool  seems  to  "  drain  child  dry,"
but  notwithstanding,  very  little  prostration,  passages
every  half  hour,  from  8  a.m.  till  evening,  none  at  night.

I  Pasty,  light  brown  stool  covered  with  mucus,  with  fre-
quent urging,  followed  by  rumbling,  gurgling  in  1.  side
of  abdomen.

iStool:  dark  green;  tenacious,  mucous;  watery,  mixed
with  whitish  flakes;  watery,  painless;  coming  out  like
a  shot;  <  from  drink  and  food.

During  stool:  sweat,  nausea;  colic;  scraping  of  posterior
wall  of  rectum;  disagreeable  sensation  through  whole
body ;  nauseous  taste ;  protrusion  of  rectum.

After  stool:  sweat  on  forehead;  pressing  in  epigastrium
and  umbilicus,  with  protrusion  of  rectum  and  constant
urging  to  stool;  nausea,  with  fainting;  great  pallor,
weakness  and  prostration.

■Stools  preceded  by  colic  and  borborygmus;  during  stool
cutting  in  abdomen  with  sensitiveness;  after  stool,
burning  in  anus;  greatest  prostration,  patient  even
fainting;  coldness  of  body;  dizziness;  face  sunken  and
altered  in  expression. ^Cholerine.

■Vomiting  and  diarrhoea  after  taking  least  nourishment;
stools  profuse,  watery,  yellow  and  at  times  yellowish -
green;  stool  passed  with  a  single  gush;  has  about
twenty-five  stools  during  day,  none  at  night;  extreme
prostration  and  emaciation;  symptoms  of  hydrocepha-
loid  already  developed;  boring  of  head  in  pillow;  fon-
tanelles  sunken;  body  and  extremities  cool;  convulsions.
^Cholera  infantum.

■  Diarrhoea  coming  on  suddenly;  pain  in  abdomen,  faint

feeling before,  during  and  after  stool;  sweat  on  face

after  stool.
Gushing,  sudden  discharge  of  watery  stool,  mixed  with

undigested  food,  immediately  after  feeding,  with  great

weakness  and  pallor,  vomiting  at  same  time.
■Diarrhceic  attack  during  night,  very  copious  fecal  evac-


CROTON  TIGLIUM.  508

uations,  gradually  losing  their  natural  color  and  con-
sistence with  each  successive  stool;  swashing  feeling
and  sound  in  abdomen ;  great  apprehension  of  a  serious
termination. ^Diarrhoea.

■  Every  movement  of  body  renews  discharges,  producing

at  first  very  violent  pain  in  bowels  with  tenesmus;  dis-
charges frequent  and  small.

Intermittent  diarrhoea,  with  great  and  sudden  weakness.

iDiarrhoeic  stool  accompanied  by  sweat,  tenesmus,  or
with  nausea  and  colic.

■  Diarrhoea:  worse  after  drinking;  while  nursing;  while

eating; during summer; from  fruit  and sweetmeats.

■  ■Upon  pressure  at  umbilicus,  a  painful  sensation  is  felt

down  to  anus,  where  there  is  constant  pressure  outwards.

■  Dragging  in  anus,  as  if  diarrhoea  would  easily  ensue.

■  Burning  in  anus.

■  Pain  in  anus,  as  if  a  plug  were  forcing  outwards.

At  the  anus :  itching ;  pulsations ;  constrictive  sensation ;

stitches.
^^  Urinary  Organs. Burning  in  urethra  when  urinating.
Increased  secretion  of  (turbid)  urine.
Urine  dark  and  fiery,  flocculent  with greasy particles

floating  on  top;  turbid  sediment  which  is  somewhat

lighter  colored  at  bottom  of  vessel.
Night urine is foaming,  pale,  orange  colored,  with a

slightly  turbid  appearance  at  bottom  of  vessel,  first  part

of  urine  being  a  little  flocculent.
Blood  red  urine,  exhibiting  a  quantity  of  mucus  at  bottom

of  vessel,  which  is  drawn  into  threads  by  shaking.
After  lapse  of  twenty-four  hours,  brownish  crystals  form,

floating  about  at  spot  where  the  cloud  was  seen  and  de-
posited on  walls  of  vessel.
^^  Male  Sexual  Organs. ■■Frequent  corrosive itching on

glans  and  scrotum,

■  Scrotum  shrivelled,  itching  severely,  disturbing  sleep;

>  from  scratching,  which,  however,  causes  a  voluptu-
ous sensation.

■  Corrosive  itching  j)ain  on  scrotum,  <  while  walking;

redness  of  part.
Left  testicle  drawn  up ;  r.  testicle  relaxed.

■  ■Vesicular  eruption  on  scrotum  and  penis.

■  Eczema  of  scrotum,  itching  excessively,  <  at  night.
^^  Female  Sexual  Organs. Catamenia  too  scanty.

■  Intense  itching  of  genitals,  >  by  very  gentle  scratching.
24  Pregnancy. Parturition. Lactation. ■Inflamed,  hard,

swollen  breasts,  threatening  to  gather;  pain  from  nipple
through  to  back.

■  ■Nipple  very  sore  to  touch,  excruciating  pain  running


509  CROTON  TIGLIUM.

from  nipple  through  to  scapula  of  same  side,  when  child
nurses.
^  Voice  and  Larynx. Hoarseness  and  hollow  voice,  obliging
him  to  hawk  constantly.

■  Complete  loss  of  voice  after  drinking  cold  water  while

overheated.
Accumulation  of  rattling  mucus  in  larynx.
^®  Respiration, n  Feels as though he could not expand

lungs.
■Tightness  of  chest  and  inability  to  make  a  deep  insj)ira-

tion  and  inhale  as  much  air  as  usual. ^Cold.
■Asthma  with  cough,  causing  drawing  pain  through  1,

pectoral  region  into  back.
■Sense  of  suffocation,  compelling  him  to  jump  out  of  bed

and  sleep  in  a  chair. ^Cough.
^''  Cough. Cough,  with  violent,  sore,  drawing  pain  through

chest  into  back ;  <  on  1.  side ;  when  coughing,  soreness

of  abdomen;  accumulation  of  rattling  mucus  in  chest,

which  is  painful  to  touch.

■  Obstinate  cough,  <  at  night  when  lying  in  bed,  com-

pelling her  to  jump  out  of  bed  and  walk  about,  on  ac-
count of  sense  of  suffocation ;  is  compelled  to  lie  in  bed
in  a  partly  sitting  posture,  for  fear  of  suffocation.
Cough,  morning  and  evening.
^  Inner  Chest  and  Lungs. Sensation  of  hollowness  in  chest,
as  if  everything  were  hanging  down.

■  Feeling  of  fulness  in  both  sides  of  chest,  with  burning

stitches  in  1.  side  of  thorax  and  toward  both  scapulae.
Drawing  pain  through  1.  pectoral  region  into  back.
^^  Heart, Pulse. Palpitation of heart, with difficulty of
breathing,  especially  on  going  up  stairs.
Stitches  in  region  of  heart  during  an  expiration.
Pulse  frequent  and  full.
^^  Outer  Chest. Chest  painful  when  touched.
^^  Neck  and  Back. Stitches  in  region  of  kidneys,  arresting

breathing.
^^  Upper  Limbs. Sticking  or  aching  pains  in  shoulder-joints.

■  Tearing,  shooting  pain  in  1.  arm,  from  shoulder  to  elbow

and  back  of  hand,  with  swelling  of  shoulder  and  whole
arm;  inability  to  move  the  limb  or  to  lie  down;  <  at
night,  preventing  sleep,  but  if  rest  be  obtained,  he
awakes  relieved,  but  least  attempt  to  stir  causes  pain  to
re-appear  with  great  violence;  arm  becomes  paralyzed
and  feels  like  a  very  heavy  weight.  ^Brachial  neuralgia.
^^  Lower  Limbs.  ■  Pain  in  soles  of  feet  spreading  towards
great  toe,  with  sensation  as  if  it  had  been  sprained;  <
in  afternoons  and  from  touch ;  veins  on  dorsum  of  foot
swollen ;  between  swollen  veins,  red  patches  which  do
not  disappear  on  pressure. ^Rheumatism.


CROTON  TIGLIUM.  510

Lancinations  in  big  toes ;  pricking  in  toes.
^  Rest. Position. Motion. Lying:  cough  <.

Obstinate  cough  <  when  lying  in  bed,  compelled  to  jump

up  and  walk  about;  compelled  to  lie  in  bed  in  partly

sitting  posture.
Sense  of  suffocation,  compelling  him  to  jump  out  of  bed

and  sleep  in  a  chair.
Motion :  discharges  renewed  by  every.
Inability  to  move  1.  arm  or  lie  down;  least  attempt  to  stir

causes  pain  to  re-appear.
Turning  eyes:  soreness  in  eyeballs.
Walking: corrosive  itching  pain on scrotrum <; red

moist spot on 1.  thigh painfully sore, troublesome

smarting.
On  going  up  stairs:  palpitation  of  heart,  with  difficult

breathing.
^^  Nerves. Weakness and  bruised feeling through whole

body.
I  Very  great  debility.
I  Weak,  faint  spells,  with  flushes  of  heat.
^^  Sleep. Weariness ;  feeling  ill  and  irresistible  desire  to  sleep.

Drowsiness ;  palpitation  of  heart  prevents  sleep.
^  Time. Morning :  headache  < ;  cough.

In  afternoon :  pain  in  soles  of  feet,  spreading  towards  great

toe  <.
During  day :  about  twenty-five  stools,  none  at  night.
Evening:  cough.

Night :  eyes  < ;  violent  pains  in  eye  disturb  sleep ;  diar-
. rhoeic  attack  during;  urine  foaming,  turbid  at  bottom;

eczema  on  scrotum  itching  excessively ;  cough  < ;  pain

in  1.  arm  <.
^^  Temperature  and  Weather. Open  air : dizziness  and

faintness  <.
Cold  water:  while  overheated,  complete  loss  of  voice  from

drinking.
Hot  milk:  colic  >.
Summer:  diarrhoea  <.
*"  Fever. Chilliness  of  back.

■  Coldness  of  feet,  extending  as  far  up  as  calves.

I  Great  coldness  and  chilliness  along  spinal  column  and
through  whole  body;  nausea  and  vomiting,  followed  by
flying  heat  in  head  and  face. ^Diarrhoea.

Ascension  of  heat  on  body.

■  Flushes  of  heat.

I  Heat  and  fever  accompanying  cutaneous  eruption.
Perspiration  on  forehead.
*'  Attacks,  Periodicity. Sudden :  evacuation.

Frequent:  corrosive  itching  on  glans  and  scrotum.


511  CROTON  TIGLIUM.

Constant:  thirst;  urging  to  stool;  outward  pressure  at  anus.

Every  half  hour:  watery  passages,  from  8  a.m.  till  evening.
^^  Locality  and  Direction. Right:  testicle  relaxed.

Left:  pain  from  pupil  of  eye  to  back  part  of  head;
twinging  deep  within  ear;  gurgling  in  abdomen  mostly
on  side;  testicle  drawn  up;  drawing  through  pectoral
region  into  back;  burning  stitches  in  side  of  thorax  and
towards  scapula;  tearing,  shooting  pain  in  arm,  from
shoulder  to  elbow  and  back  of  hand,  with  swelling  of
shoulder  and  whole  arm ;  red,  moist  spot  on  thigh.

From  r.  to  1.:  Rhus  poisoning  in  face.
*^  Sensations.  As  if  hide  bound ;  as  of  a  string  pulling  eye-
ball back  into  head ;  as  though  insects  were  creeping  in
face;  as  if  a  plug  was  forcing  outwards,  at  anus;  as
though  he  could  not  expand  lungs;  as  if  suffocating;  as
if  everything  was  hanging  down  in  chest;  as  if  great
toe  had  been  sprained.

Pain:  in  and  around  eyes;  in  supraciliary  region;  from
pupil  of  1.  eye  to  back  part  of  head;  in  abdomen;  from
nipple  to  back ;  in  soles  of  feet,  spreading  towards  great
toe.

Anguish:  in  stomach.

Lancinations :  in  big  toes.

Cutting:  in  abdomen.

Stitches:  at  anus;  burning,  in  1.  side  of  thorax  and  towards
scapulee;  in  region  of  heart;  in  region  of  kidneys.

Sticking:  in  head,  eyes  and  forehead;  in  shoulder-joints.

Stinging:  in  eyeball;  here  and  there  in  skin;  of  vesicular
eruption;  in  septum  nasi  with  pustular  eruption.

Pricking:  in  big  toes.

Shooting:  in  1.  arm,  from  shoulder  to  elbow  and  back  of
hand.

Tearing:  in  1.  arm,  shoulder  to  elbow,  and  back  of  hand.

Drawing:  through  1.  pectoral  region  into  back.

Dragging:  at  anus,  as  if  diarrhoea  would  easily  ensue.

Scraping:  in  fauces  and  throat;  of  posterior  wall  of  rectum.

Twinging:  deep  within  1.  ear.

Writhing:  in  region  of  transverse  colon,  extending  down-
ward through  whole  intestinal  canal;  around  umbilicus.

Constriction:  in  throat;  at  anus.

Burning:  in  eyes;  of  face;  in  ear;  in  nostrils;  in  mouth;
in  fauces  and  throat;  in  stomach;  in  anus;  in  urethra;
painful,  in  skin;  of  vesicular  eruption.

Soreness:  in  eyeballs;  throughout  chest  into  back;  of  ab-
domen.

Smarting:  in  mouth;  in  red  moist  spot  on  1.  thigh.

Bruised  feeling:  through  whole  body.

Aching:  in  shoulder-joints.


CROTON  TIGLIUM.  512

Colic:  with  stool;  in  transverse  colon.

Griping:  colic,  around  umbilicus.

Bearing  down :  in  abdomen,  as  if  everything  was  relaxed.

Pressure :  in  stomach ;  in  epigastrium  and  umbilicus ;  out-
ward, at  anus.

Oppression:  in  stomach.

Tightness :  of  chest.

Pulsations :  at  anus.

Swashing  feeling:  in  abdomen.

Sinking:  in  stomach.

Hollowness:  in  chest.

Emptiness:  in  stomach.

Weakness:  in  stomach.

Confusion :  of  head.

Dulness:  of  head.

Heaviness :  of  head.

Fulness :  in  both  sides  of  chest.

Itching:  of  eyelids,  with  otorrhoea ;  at  anus;  corrosive,  on
glans  and  scrotum;  of  eczema  on  scrotum;  of  genitals;
of  eruptions;  erysipelas  with  excessive;  followed  by
painful  burning;  of  skin;  eczema  over  whole  body  with
excessive;  of  vesicles;  in  septum  nasi  with  pustular
eruption.

Hot  feeling:  in  eyes.
^*  Tissues.  Acts  especially  upon  mucous  lining  of  intestinal
tract  and  upon  skin,  in  the  former  producing  a  transu-
dation of  watery  portions  of  the  blood,  causing  copious
watery  diarrhoea,  and  on  the  latter  developing  a  true
eczema.
*^  Touch,  Passive  Motion,  Injuries.  Touch:  region  of
stomach  sensitive  to;  nipples  very  sore;  chest  painful;
pain  in  soles  of  feet  spreading  towards  great  toe  < ;  red
moist  spot  on  1.  thigh  painfully  sore.

Pressure:  head  sensitive  to  hat;  on  umbilicus,  causes  pain-
ful sensation  all  along  intestinal  canal  to  termination
of  rectum,  causing  latter  to  protrude.

Weight  of  hat  causes  headache.

Rubbing:  vesicles  >  by  gentle.

Scratching:  itching  on  scrotum  >,  followed  by  a  volup-
tuous sensation;  itching  of  genitals  >  by  very  gentle;
itching  of  eruptions  >  by  gentle,  <  from  hard.
^  Skin. I  Sensation  as  if  hide  bound.

Eruptions  itch  very  much,  patient,  however,  is  not  able  to
scratch  very  hard  as  it  hurts ;  a  very  slight  scratch,  a
mere  rub  suffices  to  allay  the  itching.

Erysipelas,  with  excessive  itching.

■  Itching  followed  by  painful  burning.

■  Intense  itching,  >  by  very  gentle  scratching.


513  CROTON  TIGLIUM.

■Scarlet  redness  of  skin  (with  vesicles).

■  Redness,  warmth,  stinging  here  and  there;  pustules  run-

ning into  one,  oozing  and  forming  a  grey-brown  crusty
which  finally  falls  off.

■  Red  moist  spot,  exuding  offensive  moisture,  on  1.  thigh

opposite  scrotum;  it  is  painfully  sore  to  touch  and  on
walking;  troublesome  smarting  when  walking.

■  Itching  and  painful  burning,  with  redness  of  skin;  for-

mation of  vesicles  and  pustules;  desiccation  of  pustules;
desquamation  and  falling  off  of  pustules.

■  Eczema  over  whole  body  to  soles  of  feet,  with  violent

itching.
Eczema  on  face  and  genitals.
Erysipelas  of  face;  oedematous  indented  eyelid  and  large

water  blisters  on  chin.

■  Pure idiopathic eczema, such as usually  appears,  in

children.
Vesicular  eruption,  with  itching,  burning,  stinging,  and

redness  of  skin,  and  speedy  development  of  sero-puru-

lent  exudation.
Vesicles,  especially  on  abdomen,  confluent  and  form  large

brown  scabs,  <  after  eating,  >  after  sleep,  >  by  gentle

rubbing;  swelling  of  the  glands.

■  Herpetic  eruption  on  scrotum.

Pustules,  first  size  of  millet  seeds,  growing  larger,  oozing

and  forming  a  grey-brown  crust.
Pustular  eruption  upon  an  inflamed  base  on  septum  nasi,,

plugging  nostril ;  with  itching  and  stinging  pain.

■  Itching  pustules.

■Right  face  first  affected,  then  1.,  or  i^t  may  go  downwards,,

involving  scrotum. ^Rhus  poisoning.
Impetigo;  prurigo;  pustules.
^''  Stages  of  Life,  Constitution. In  eczema,  not  so  beneficial

in  adults  as  in  children.
Dan.  C,  set.  6  mos.,  cholera  infantum.
Annie  K.,  set.  7  mos.,  had  diarrhoea  for  a  week.
Boy,  set.  3;  attacked  when  6  months  old  with  diarrhoea,.

which  had  continued  more  or  less  until  present  time.
Girl,  set.  8,  after  drinking  cold  water  while  overheated,  for

four  years;  aphonia.
Abram  L.,  butcher,  native  of  France,  robust,  large  and

deep  chest,  dark  complexion,  black  hair,  lungs  normal,.

caught  cold  while  working  in  an  icehouse;  cough.
Miss  J.  H.,  set.  about  30,  light  hair,  blue  eyes,  slender

build;  cough.
Farmer,  set.  40,  formerly  healthy;  rheumatism.
^^  Relations. Antidoted  by :  Ant.  tart
It  antidotes :  Rhus  tox.

VOL.  IV. — 33.


CROTON  TIGLIUM— CUBEBA.  514

Compatible :  with  Kali  hrom.  cured  chronic  infantile  diar-
rhoea.

Compare:  Anac,  Apis,  Colchic,  Mezer.,  Rhus  tox.,  Veratr.,
Phelland.,  Phosphor.,  Silic.  (pain  from  the  nipple  through
to  the  back).


CUBEBA.

Cubebs.  Piperaceas.


The  unripe  berries  of  the  Piper  Cubeba,  a  climbing  plant  of  Java  and  other
portions  of  the  East  Indies.

Clinical  Authorities. — Pressure  and  pain  in  region  of  femoral  ring,  E.  M.
Hale,  B.  J.  H.,  v.  26,  p.  496;  Dysentery,  Bachmeister,  Organon,  v.  3,  p.  357;
Nocturnal  enuresis,  Battmann,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf.,  v.  5,  p.  513 ;  Gonorrhoea  (six  cases),
Hirsch,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf.,  v.  2,  p.  83;  Cattell,  B.  J.  H.,  v.  11,  p.  176.;  Gleet,  Rosen-
berg, Riick.  Kl.  Erf.,  v.  2,  p.  83;  Urethro-vaginitis,  Cattell,  B.  J.  H.,  v.  11,  p.  176 ;
Group,  Emil  Tietze,  H.  M.,  v.  2,  p.  363.


^  Mind. Exaltation  of  temper  and  mental  faculties,  or  weak-
ness and  loss  of  memory.
Uneasiness,  anxiety,  cannot  remain  in  bed.
^  Inner  Head. '  l Sensation  as  if  head  w^as  choked  up;  with
heaviness  of  head  and  danger  of  suffocation. ^Croup.
Contractive  and  pressive  headache,  with  drowsiness,  but

without  sleep.
Deep  seated  headache;  dulness.
^  Sight  and  Eyes. Fulness  in  eyes,  turgid  and  watery.

Rheumatic  or  gonorrhoeal  ophthalmia.
^  Upper  Face. Fulness  of  face,  which  is  occasionally  florid

and  flushed,  or  red  and  pale  by  turns.
^  Lower  Face. Lips  puffed,  dry  and  shining.

Extraordinary  twist  of  mouth  to  one  side  every  time  he
attempts  to  speak  or  smile.
*"  Teeth  and  Gums. Aphtha  of  lips  and  gums.
^^  Taste  and  Tongue. Tongue  furred  and  moist  or  very  white.
^^  Inner  Mouth. Feeling  of  dryness  of  mouth,  though  mois-
tened with  an  oily  saliva,  great  thirst.
^'^  Throat. Constant  need  to  swallow  saliva  to  relieve  dryness
and  burning  in  throat  and  larynx.
Throat  dry  and  parched.
^*  Appetite,  Thirst. Increased  appetite.


515  CUBEBA.

Desire  for  delicacies ;  oranges ;  acid  fruits ;  spirits ;  brandy ;
fresh  bread;  onions;  almonds;  nuts.

Unquenchable  thirst,  with  feeling  of  dryness  of  mouth,
and  burning  in  throat.
^^  Hiccough,  Nausea  and  Vomiting. Disagreeable  or  acid
eructations.

I  Nausea  and  vomiting.
^'^  Scrobiculum  and  Stomach. Uneasiness,  heat  at  pit  of
stomach,  and  fever.

Burning  pain  in  stomach ;  feeling  of  warmth  in  epigastric

region.
:  Dyspepsia  of  long  standing;  sourness  after  eating,  and  dis-
tress of  stomach  from  food.
^^  Abdomen. Abdomen  distended  and  very  sensitive.

I  I  Burning  in  abdomen. ^Croup.

Burning  and  pressure  about  navel.

■Sensation  of  weight,  pressure,  and  pain  in  region  of  fem-
oral ring,  similar  to  that  which  precedes  occurrence  of
femoral  hernia ;  downward  pressure  and  weight  <  after
walking,  riding,  lifting,  and  especially  before  and  during
menstrual  period.

Hernia  femoralis.
^^  Stool  and  Rectum. Before  stool :  cutting  pains  in  hypo-
gastrium.

During  stool:  tenesmus;  cutting  pain;  loud  discharge  of
flatus.

Distressing  diarrhoea,  with  headache  and  griping.

Stools:  blackish,  yellowish,  fecal;  bilious;  j^ellow,  transpa-
rent, mucous;  mingled  with  whitish,  shining  particles,
looking  like  kernels  of  rice;  bloody  mucus;  frequent
(dysenteric);  copious;  bilious  and  fecal;  involuntary;
<  at  night  in  bed ;  >  from  rising  from  bed  and  moving
about  (colic).

■  Countenance  fallen,  indicating  great  suffering;  discharges

every  half  hour  of  transparent  slime  mixed  with  blood;
before  stool  severe  griping  pains  in  bowels,  with  back-
ache; with  stool,  the  same,  and  urging  to  urinate;  after
stool,  long  continued  tenesmus,  and  relief  of  pains,  ex-
cept heavy  dull  pain  in  back  and  bowels;  tongue  flabby,
white,  furred;  throat  dry;  little  thirst;  <  from  food  or
drink. ^Dysentery.

■  Stools  of  colorless,  transparent  slime,  mixed  with  bright

blood,  and  plentifully  interspersed  with  shining,  white
bodies,  the  shape  of  rice  kernels. ^Dysentery.

Diarrhoea,  with  rumbling  and  cutting  in  abdomen  and
burning  in  rectum.

Constipation ;  hemorrhoids ;  perineum  tender.

Suppuration  of  rectum.


CUBEBA.  516

Burning  and  itching  of  anus.
^^  Urinary  Organs. Chronic  cystitis ;  cutting  and  constriction
after  micturition;  urine  increased  in  quantity,  deepened
in  color;  hsematuria.

Urethritis  (accompanied  by  vesical  irritability)  of  females,
especially  of  married  women ;  feeling  of  fulness  in  blad-
der with  desire  to  urinate  every  ten  or  fifteen  minutes,
with  smarting  in  urethra  during  micturition,  which  is
very  scanty,  but  a  few  drops  passing  at  a  time,  and  fol-
lowed by  vesical  tenesmus;  filaments  of  ropy  mucus  es-
caping with  first  or  last  drops  of  urine.

Irritation  of  urinary  passages;  cutting  and  constriction
after  micturition ;  hsematuria.

After  micturition,  sensation  as  if  bladder  still  contained
water.

Last  drops  of  urine  passed  with  pain.

Urine:  foaming;  bloody;  smells  of  violets.

I  Nocturnal  enuresis.

Burning  and  itching  in  fossa  navicularis.
^^  Male  Sexual  Organs. Sexual  excitement.

Testicles  swollen.  .  .

■  Inflammation  of  urethra.
I  Prostatitis.

iSecretion  of  mucus  from  urethra  greatly  increased.

Discharge  from  urethra  of  a  dark  reddish  color.

Inflammation  of  penis,  pressure  and  heaviness.

I  Gonorrhoea,  with  profuse  discharge  and  scalding  pain
whilst  urinating;  pus  very  thick  and  glutinous;  exces-
sive ardor  urinse  and  frequent  desire  to  empty  bladder.

I  Pale,  copious,  slimy  discharge,  causing  soiled  linen  to
become  stiff;  sometimes,  particularly  after  coitus,  or  use
of  spirituous  liquors,  sensation  of  warmth  and  slight
burning  in  urethra  on  urinating. /^Gleet.

■  After  six  weeks,  thick,  yellow,  pus-like  discharge  from

urethra. ^Gonorrhoea.

■  After  two  months,  profuse  pus-like  discharge,  with  pain-

less urination,  slight  redness  of  meatus,  no  swelling  of
glans. ^Chronic  gonorrhoea.

■  Thick,  yellowish-green  discharge,  with  frequent  obstruc-

tion of  urethra.  ^Gonorrhoea.
^  Female  Sexual  Organs.  ■  Urethro-vaginitis,  severe  and  of
long  standing,  with  acute  pains  and  abundant  discharge.
Leucorrhoea  profuse,  yellow,  greenish,  very  acrid,  and  of  a
very  offensive  odor;  erythema  at  inner  surface  of  thighs
and  pruritus  of  vulva,  with  intense  desire  for  coition;
small,  burning  pimples ;  womb  swollen  and  painful,  as
if  from  a  tumor;  menses  too  soon,  often  preceded  and
followed  by  leucorrhoea,  or  in  small  quantity,  and  con-
sisting mostly  of  leucorrhoea.


517  CUBEBA.

Acrid  leucorrhoea  of  children.
^^  Voice  and  Larynx.  False  membranes,  thick  and  of  a  dark
shade,  principally  in  larynx;  respiration  noisy  and
panting;  sensation  as  if  head  was  choked  up,  with
heaviness  of  head;  danger  of  suffocation;  voice  harsh
and  wheezing.
^^  Respiration. Respiration  hurried  and  noisy.

•  Respiration  impeded,  difficult,  with  crepitant  rales;  great
fulness  of  chest;  dyspnoea  and  sense  of  suffocation.
^  Cough. Incessant  bronchial  cough;  <  evening,  by  heat,
and  in  open  air;  throat  dry  and  parched;  hurried  and
noisy  respiration.
Harsh  cough,  which  seems  to  tear  and  rupture  the  bron-
chi; expectoration difficult and painful, or yellow-
greenish,  rusty,  streaked  with  blood;  hsemoptysis,  espe-
cially evenings.
Barking  and  croupy  cough,  with  feeling  as  of  a  foreign

body  in  larynx.
Cough  with  coryza  and  hoarseness,  during  and  after  cough
cold  sweat  upon  breast  and  back,  burning  in  abdomen.
'^^  Inner  Chest  and  Lungs. Burning  and  tearing  pain  in
chest;  severe  cough.
Pulmonary  catarrh ;  hsemoptysis,  particularly  in  evenings.
^Phthisis  pulmonalis.
^^^ Heart,  Pulse. Pulse  full,  frequent.
Soft,  slow  pulse,  weak  and  small.

Pulse  irregular,  suspending  two  or  three  beats  each  minute,
sometimes  slow,  at  intervals  hurried,  not  exceeding  84.
^^  Upper  Limbs. Acute,  deep  seated  pain  in  wrists,  speedily
followed  by  redness  and  swelling ;  stiffness  of  wrist  and
thickening  around  joint.
^^  Lower  Limbs. Pricking  sensation  in  soles  of  feet.
^*  Limbs  in  General. Sensation  of  heat  in  palms  of  hands
and  soles  of  feet.
Numbness  of  fingers  and  toes,
^^  Rest. Position. Motion. Stools  and  colic  <  at  night  in
bed,  >  by  getting  up  and  moving  about.
Walking,  riding,  lifting:  downward  pressure  and  weight
in  region  of  femoral  ring  <.
^^  Nerves. I Great  restlessness;  extreme  weakness.
Convulsive  movements,  and  partial  paralysis.
^^  Time. Evening:  bronchial  cough  <;  hsemoptysis  <.

At  night:  stools  <  in  bed;  enuresis.
^^  Temperature  and  Weather. Heat:  bronchial  cough  <.

Open  air:  bronchial  cough  <.
^•^  Fever. Heat,  flushes  in  face,  soles  of  feet  and  palms  of  hands.
Increased  heat  with  thirst.
Feverish,  tingling  and  heat  over  whole  surface  of  body.


CUBEBA.  518

Fever  with  heat  at  pit  of  stomach.

I  I  Cold  sweat  upon  chest  and  back ;  burning  in  abdomen.

^Croup.
^^  Attacks,  Periodicity. Frequent :  stools ;  desire  to  empty

bladder.
Constant:  need  of  swallowing  saliva ;  bronchial  cough.
Every  ten  or  fifteen  minutes:  desire  to  urinate.
Every  half  hour:  discharge  of  transparent  slime  mixed

with  blood.
Chronic :  cystitis ;  results  of  gonorrhoea.
^  Sensations. As  if  head  was  choked  up ;  as  if  bladder  still

contained  water,  after  micturition;  as  if  cough  would

tear  and  rupture  bronchi ;  as  of  a  foreign  body  in  larynx.
Pain:  in  region  of  femoral  ring  similar  to  that  preced-
ing occurrence  of  femoral  hernia.
Cutting:  in  hypogastrium ; during  stool; in  abdomen;

after  micturition.
Tearing:  in  chest.
Burning:  in  throat  and  lar3arx;  in  stomach;  in  abdomen;

about  navel;  in  rectum;  of  anus;  in  fossa  navicularis;

in  urethra;  in  pimples  upon  vulva;  in  chest.
Constriction:  after  micturition.
Contractive:  headache.

Griping:  with  diarrhoea;  in  bowels  before  stool.
Scalding:  while  urinating.
Smarting:  in  urethra.
Pricking:  in  soles  of  feet.
Tingling:  over  whole  surface  of  body.
Deep  seated:  headache;  acute  pain  in  wrists.  •
Heavy  dull  pain  in  back  and  bowels,  with  dysentery.
Pressure:  about  navel; in  region  of  femoral  ring;  with

inflammation  of  penis.
Pressive:  headache.
Weight:  in  region  of  femoral  ring.
Heaviness:  of  head;  with  inflammation  of  penis.
Fulness:  in  eyes;  of  face;  in  bladder;  of  chest.
Uneasiness :  at  pit  of  stomach.
Dulness:  of  head.

Itching:  of  anus;  in  fossa  navicularis;  of  vulva;  of  skin.
Numbness :  of  fingers  and  toes.
Dryness:  of  mouth;  in  throat  and  larynx.
Heat :  at  pit  of  stomach ;  in  palms  of  hands  and  soles  of

feet.
Warmth:  in  epigastric  region;  in  urethra.
"*  Tissues. Skin  diseases  with  kidney  aff'ection; catarrh  of
bladder  and  urethra;  paralysis  of  sensation,  with  afl'ec-
tions  of  urinary  organs.
Makes  the  urine  albuminous  and  bloody,  and  increases
the  uroxanthine.


519  CUBEBA.

Emaciation.
^^  Skin. A  flush  of  red  over  whole  body.

Intense  itching.

General  eruption  of  roseolous  papules  without  fever  or
itching,  confluent  on  face,  buttocks  and  upper  limbs,
more  scant  on  the  lower.
,  Severe  urticaria  febrilis.
^^  Stages  of  Life,  Constitution.  Acts  particularly  well  in
persons  of  bilious  temperament  with  tendency  to  consti-
pation.

An  apprentice,  set.  15,  healthy,  suffering  for  three  months;
nocturnal  enuresis.

Man,  set.  26,  otherwise  healthy;  gleet.

Man,  set.  28;  gonorrhoea.

H.,  set.  32,  choleric  temperament;  gonorrhoea.

Man,  set.  34,  hemorrhoidal  constitution;  gonorrhcea.
^^  Relations. Compatible: Copaiba  (gonorrhoea,  gastric  urti-
caria). Oil  of  Sandal  Wood  (gonorrhoea).

Botanically  related  to:  Piper  meth.,  Medico,  Piper  nigrum.

Compare: Capsic,  Canthar.  (irritable  bladder  in  females),
Tereh.,  Cann.  sat.,  lod.  (membranous  croup).
