The Guiding Symptoms of Our Materia Medica, Vol. VIII
Constantine Hering
The Guiding Symptoms of Our Materia Medica, vol. VIII. Philadelphia: Globe, 1888.
Public domain. Transcribed from the Internet Archive copy (https://archive.org/details/guidingsymptomso00heri8).
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

COLUMBIAN NATURAL CLASP NO.  ION

PAT.  1,290,083  PAT.  1,533.048

M  UNITED  STATES  EN'VELDPE  CO. SPRINGFIELIMASS

3Ve  X  6


Digitized  by  the  Internet  Archive

in  2010  with  funding  from

Open  Knowledge  Commons  and  Harvard  Medical  School


THE


GUIDING  SYMPTOMS


OF  OUR


MATERIA  MEDICA


0.  HERING,  M.  D.


VOLUME  YIII.


PHILADELPHIA:

PUBLISHED  BY  THE  EStATE  OF  CONSTANTINE  HEEING^

112  and  114  North  Twelfth  Street.


Copyright,  1889,  by  Theresa  Hering.


Author's  Mark.


PRESS  OF GLOBE PRINTING HOUSE, PHILADELPHIA.


GUIDING  SYMPTOMS


Materia  Medica.


NATRUM  PHOSPHORICUM.

Sodium  Phosphate.  Na^  H  P  0^  12  H^^  0.

Prepared  from  calcined  bone;  the  crystals  are  colorless,  transparent,  obliquely
four-sided,  specific  gravity  1.55,  slightly  alkaline,  and  have  a  cooling  saline  taste;
insoluble  in  alcohol;  imparts  a  yellow  color  to  flame.— Am.  Hom.  Pharm.

Provings  by  Farrington  on  twelve  provers,  Hahn.  Mo.,  vol.  12,  p.  172;  also
proved  by  Corson,  Thesis,  Hahn.  Med.  Col.,  1877.  The  provings  were  made
principally  with  the  higher  potencies.

Clinical  Authorities.— Co7ywwc«M)i<is,  Schiissler's  Tissue  Remedies,  p.  114;
Chronic  dyspepsia,  Hering,  Schiissler's  Tissue  Remedies,  B.  and  D.,  p.  148 ;  Oas-
tralgia  and  enteralgia,  Schiissler,  A.  H.  Z.,  vol.  103,  p.  93;  Goitre,  Skeels,  Hahn.
Mo.,  vol.  15,  p.  104;  Weakness  of  legs,  Farrington,  Trans.  Hom.  Med.  Soc.  Pa.,
1874,  p.  272;  Swelling  of  glands  of  neck,  Fischer,  Horn.  Times,  1876,  p.  92.

^  Mind. Mental  dulness;  difficult  to  remember.
Nervous,  irritable;  vexed  at  trifles.
1  I  Anxious  and  apprehensive;  despondent.
Melancholy,  especially  after  emissions.
^  Sensorium. l  l Giddiness;  vertigo  with  gastric  derangement
^  Inner  Head. Headache:  in  temples;  on  crown  of  head  on
awaking  in  morning;  after  taking  thick  sour  milk.
I  1  Intense  pressure  and  heat  on  top  of  head  as  if  it  would

open.
I  I  Severe  pain  in  head  as  if  skull  was  too  full ;  frontal  or

occipital,  with  nausea  or  sour  slimy  vomiting.
I  I  Sickening  headaches,  ejection  of  sour  froth.


Copyright,  1889,  by  Theresa  Hering.


Author's  Mark.


PRESS  OF GLOBE PRINTING HOUSE, PHILADELPHIA.


GUIDING  SYMPTOMS


OF OUR


Materia  Medica.


NATRUM  PHOSPHORlCUffl.

Sodium  Phosphate.  Na^  H  P  O4  12  H^^  0.

Prepared  from  calcined  bone ;  the  crystals  are  colorless,  transparent,  obliquely
four-sided,  specific  gravity  1.55,  slightly  alkaline,  and  have  a  cooling  saline  taste;
insoluble  in  alcohol;  imparts  a  yellow  color  to  flame.— Am.  Horn.  Pharm.

Provings  by  Farrington  on  twelve  provers,  Hahn.  Mo.,  vol.  12,  p.  172;  also
proved  by  Corson,  Thesis,  Hahn.  Med.  Col,  1877.  The  provings  were  made
principally  with  the  higher  potencies.

Clinical  KvTnOBiTXE?,.— Conjunctivitis,  Schiissler's  Tissue  Kemedies,  p.  114;
Chronic  dyspepsia,  Hering,  Schiissler's  Tissue  Remedies,  B.  and  D.,  p.  148 ;  Oas-
tralgia  and  enter algia,  Schiissler,  A.  H.  Z.,  vol.  103,  p.  93;  Goitre,  Skeels,  Hahn.
Mo.,  vol.  15,  p.  104;  Weakness  of  legs,  Farrington,  Trans.  Hom.  Med.  Soc.  Pa.,
1874,  p.  272;  Swelling  of  glands  of  neck,  Fischer,  Horn.  Times,  1876,  p.  92.

^  Mind. Mental  dulness;  dijaicult  to  remember.
Nervous,  irritable;  vexed  at  trifles.
I  I  Anxious  and  apprehensive;  despondent.
Melancholy,  especially  after  emissions.
^  Sensorium. i  i Giddiness;  vertigo  with  gastric  derangement.
^  Inner  Head. Headache:  in  temples;  on  crown  of  head  on
awaking  in  morning;  after  taking  thick  sour  milk.
I  1  Intense  pressure  and  heat  on  top  of  head  as  if  it  would

open.
I  I  Severe  pain  in  head  as  if  skull  was  too  full ;  frontal  or

occipital,  with  nausea  or  sour  slimy  vomiting.
I  I  Sickening  headaches,  ejection  of  sour  froth.


NATRUM  PHOSPHORICUM.  6

®  Sight  and  Eyes. Dim  sight  as  if  veil  was  over  eyes ;  dull,

heavy  headache.
Flickering  of  sight  in  1.  eye,  on  rising  5  a.m.
Halo  around  gaslight.

Eyes  feel  weak,  <  from  gaslight ;  sore  when  reading.
Burning,  stitching,  cutting  in  eyes.
Eyes  feel  as  if  sand  was  in  them,  mostly  left.
J  I  Burning  lachrymation,  eyes  bloodshot.
I  I  Discharge  of  golden  yellow,  creamy  matter  from  eyes.
•  I  Ophthalmia,  conjunctivitis,  discharge  of  yellow,  creamy

matter,  lids  glued  together  in  morning.

■  Conjunctivitis  with  great  dread  of  light,  since  measles

some  years  previous ; enlargement  of  glands  of  neck,
creamy  secretion  from  eyelids.
I  I  Granular conjunctivitis when  granulations look  like
small  blisters.

■  Scrofulous  ophthalmia.

Dryness  of  1.  eyeball,  with  soreness  as  if  bruised.
I  I  Squinting  caused  by  intestinal  irritation  from  worms.
Quivering  of  r.  eyelid  while  reading.
Eyelids  feel  sore,  itch  and  burn.
I  1  Pain  over  eyes.
^  Hearing"  and  Ears. Sensation  in  ears  as  of  water  dropping

from  a  height  into  a  long,  narrow  vessel,  while  lying

down.
Fulness  in  ears.

Aching  and  itching  in  r.  meatus.
Tickling  from  middle  ear  into  eustachian  tube.
ilEars sore  externally,  burn  and itch,  thin,  creamlike

scabbing ;  yellow  tongue.
1  I  One  ear red,  hot,  frequently  itchy, accompanied by

gastric  derangement  and  acidit3^
Lobe  of  r.  ear  burns  intolerably,  scratches  until  it  bleeds.
"^  Smell  and  Nose. Subjective  offensive  odor  before  nose  in

morning.
Left  nostril  sore,  painful ;  picks  it,  scabs  form.
I  I  Pricking  in  nares,  brings  tears  to  eyes.
I  I  Picking  at  nose,  associated  with  acidity  and  worms.
Fulness  at  root  of  nose.
^  Upper  Face, i  iRed  and  blotched  face,  yet  not  feverish.
I  1  Paleness,  or  bluish,  florid  appearance.

I  1  Face  white  about  nose  or  mouth.
Facial  neuralgia,  shooting,  stitching  pains.

^  Lower  Face. Soreness  in  r.  side  of  lower  jaw,  at  angle,

occasional  darting.
^''  Teeth  and  Gums. '  l  Grinding  of  teeth  in  children  in  sleep.
^^  Taste  and  Tongue, i  l  Acid  taste ;  bad  taste  on  awaking.

I I  Thin,  moist  coating  on  tongue.


7  NATRUM  PHOSPHORICUM.

Tongue  coated  dirty  white,  dark  brown  centre.

I  1  Yellow,  moist  tongue.

I  Moist,  creamy  or  golden  yellow  coating  at  back  of  tongue.

■  Blisters  and  sensation  of  hair  on  tip  of  tongue;  pricking

numbness  of  whole  mouth.

I  I  On  rising  in  morning,  tongue  has  a  thin,  moist  coating,

a  creamy  deposit  at  back,  or  as  if  raw  or  yellow  sugar
had  been  partaken  of.
Tries  to  say  a  word,  but  it  will  not  come  out;  feels  as  if
something  closed  in  throat,  preventing  speech.
^^  Inner  Mouth, n  Yellow,  creamy  coating  at  back  part  of
roof  of  mouth.

I I  Soft  palate  has  a  yellowish,  creamy  look.

I  1  Catarrh  of  tonsils,  with  a  golden  yellow-tmged  exuda-
tion ;  acid  condition  of  stomach.
Gumboils.
^^  Throat. Tough,  clear,  white  phlegm  from  posterior  nares ;
much  hawking.

■  Dropping  of  thick,  yellow  mucus  from  posterior  nares,<

at  night ;  awakens  him,  must  sit  up  and  clear  throat.
Sensation  of  a  lump  in  throat;  r.  side  sore,  pricking  as  of

a  pin ; <  swallowing  liquids,  >  solids.
Throbbing  in  1.  tonsil.
Sore  throat,  tonsils  coated  with  a  yellow,  creamy  mucus,

raw  feeling,  moist  deposit  on  tongue  mornings,  looking

yellow.
I  1  Diphtheritic  sore  throat,  falsely  so  called.  _ _

I  I  Inflammation  of  any  part  of  throat  with  characteristic

coating ;  accompanied  by  an  acid  condition  of  stomach.
'*  Appetite,  Thirst. Desires,  Aversions. Canine  liunger,

or  loss  of  appetite.
Desire  for:  strong-tasting  things,  beer,  alcohol.
Aversion  to  bread  and  butter.
'^  Hiccough,  Belching,  Nausea  and  Vomiting. 1 1  Heart-
burn and  acidity ;  waterbrash.
I  I  Flatulence  with  sour  rising.
I  I  Nausea  and  vomiting  of  acid  fluids  and  curdled  masses

(not  food).
llSour eructations, sour vomiting, greenish diarrlioea,

pains,  spasms  and  fever  with  acid  symptoms.
I  I  Vomiting  of  sour  fluids  or  of  a  dark  substance  like

coffee-grounds,  sour  risings,  loss  of  appetite.
^^  Scrobiculum  and  Stomach. n  Empty,  gone  feehng  m

stomach,  with  feeling  of  weight  above  ensiform  cartilage.
I  I  Pain  sometimes  comes. on  two  hours  after  taking  food.
I  Every  day  several  attacks  of  gastralgia  and  enteralgia,

accompanied  by  vomiting  of  fluid  sour  as  vinegar;  over-
secretion  of  lactic  acid.


NATRUM  PHOSPHORICUM.  8

I  1  Stomachache  when  worms  are  present,  accompanied  by
acid  risings.

■  ■Gastric  derangements  with  symptoms  of  acidity.
■Dyspepsia  with  characteristic eructations and tongue,

sour  taste.

■  Chronic  dyspepsia;  thin,  yellow,  creamy  coating  on  soft

palate.
I  I  Ulceration  of  stomach,  pain  in  one  spot  after  food,  some-
times sour  risings,  loss  of  appetite,  face  red  and  blotched,
yet  not  feverish.

■  Gastric  abrasions  and  ulcers.

^*  Hypochondria. ■  Sclerosis  of  liver  and hepatic form of

diabetes,  especially  when  there  is  a  succession  of  boils.
^^  Abdomen. '  l  Pain  in  bowels,  restless  sleep.

I  I  Flatulent  colic.

I  I  Colic  in  children,  with  symptoms  of  acidity,  such  as
green,  sour-smelling  stools,  vomiting  of  curdled  milk,  etc.

I  I  Ulceration  of  stomach  or  bowels.

Pain  through  r.  groin,  after  seminal  emissions.
^^  Stool  and  Rectum. ■Diarrhoeic  stools  with  flatus,  weak
feeling  in  rectum  and  sphincter;  afraid  to  pass  flatus
lest  feces  escape.

I  I  Diarrhoea  caused  by  excess  of  aciditj^,  stools  sour-smell-
ing, green;  jellylike  masses  of  mucus,  painful  straining,
coagulated  casein,  scanty  and  frequent.

I  I  White  or  green  stools,  with  diarrhcea  or  jaundice.

I  I  Summer  diarrhoea,  with  lack  of  digestive  power,  stools
clay-colored  or  greenish.

I  I  Habitual  constipation,  with  occasional  attacks  of  diar-
rhoea, in  young  children.

i  1  Obstinate  constipation.

I  I  Itching,  sore  and  raw  anus.

I  I  Itching  at  anus  from  worms,  especially  at  night  when
warm  in  bed.

I  I  Intestinal,  long  or  thread  worms,  with  picking  at  nose,
occasional  squinting,  pain  in  bowels,  restless  sleep,  etc.
^^  Urinary  Organs. Burning  during  urination ;  frequent  mic-
turition.

1  I  Urine:  dark  red,  with  arthritis ;  pale;  increased,  scanty
and  dark.

1  1  Polyuria ;  diabetes.

I  I  Atony  of  bladder.

I  I  Incontinence of  urine in children, with acidity of
stomach.
^^  Male  Sexual  Organs. After  coitus  burning  and  itching  at
meatus.

I  I  Sexual  desire  increased  or  absent;  desire  without  erec-
tions.


9  NATRUM  PHOSPHORICUM.

I  I  Seminal  emissions  every  night,  at  first  with  erethism
and  lascivious  dreams,  but  later  without  any  sensation
whatever ;  followed  by  weakness  of  back  and  trembling
of  knees,  which  felt  as  though  they  would  give  way.
1  I  Seminal  emissions,  without  dreams.
iSemen  thin,  watery,  smells  like  stale  urine.
2^  Female  Sexual  Organs, i  i  Weakness  and  distress  in  uter-
ine region.
I  1  Prolapsus  uteri,  with  weak,  sinking  feeling,  after  defe-
cation.
I  I  Uterine  displacements  with  rheumatic  pains.
I  I  Discharges  from  uterus  sour  smelling,  acid. ^Sterihty.
II Menses:  too  early  and  pale,  with afternoon  headache
over  eyes,  <  after  menses,  with  sensation  in  knees  as  if
cords  were  shortened  ; sore  wrists ; chilliness  ; restless
sleep ;  feet  icy  cold  by  day  and  burn  by  night.
iLeucorrhoea: creamy or honey-colored; acrid and
watery.
^'  Pregnancy. Parturition. Lactation. 1 1  Morning  sick-
ness, with  vomiting  of  sour  masses  or  fluids.
^^  Inner  Chest  and  Lungs. Pain through  chest  and  in  1.
shoulder.
Pain  from  r.  clavicle,  diagonally  to  stomach ;  hoarseness.
I  I  Pains  in  chest,  <  from  deep  breathing  and  pressure.
Burning  deep  in  chest,  <  r.  side,  evening  in  bed.
Sudden  feeling  of  fulness  in  upper  part  of  chest.
I  I  Phthisis  florida  in  young  subjects.
I  I  Consumption.
''Heart,  Pulse  and  Circulation. Feels  as  if  a  lump,  or  a
bubble started from heart and w^as forced through
arteries.
I  1  Trembling  about  heart;  <  walking  up-stairs.
I  I  Pains  about  base  of  heart,  relieving  pains  in  limbs  and

great  toe.
I  I  Palpitation  :  caused  by  every  strange  noise ;  feels  pulse

in  different  parts  of  body.
Heart  feels  uneasy  and  pains,  when  pains  m  limbs  and

great  toe  are  better.
Sensation  as  though  shot  was  rolling  through  artery.
^•^  Outer  Chest. '  l  Intercostal  muscles  feel  sore  as  if  drawn.

Lower  third  of  sternum  pains  as  if  torn  in  two.
^^  Neck  and  Back. Crick  in  both  sides  of  neck.
I  Swelling  of  glands  of  neck,  extending  to  chest.
I  Goitre  (in  thirteen  cases),  the  feeling  of  pressure  was  re-
lieved in  three  to  five  days ;  in  some  cases  a  cure  was
effected.
I  I  Weak  feeling  in  back  and  limbs.  _  .

I  I  Spinal  anaemia  ;  paralytic  weakness  of  lower  extremities,


NATRUM  PHOSPHORICUM.  10

with  general  prostration,  heaviness and  sensation  of

fatigue,  especially  after  a  short  walk  or  ascending  steps  ;

legs  give  way,  so  as  to  be  unable  to  progress  further.
Pain  in  articulation  of  lumbar  vertebrae  and  sacrum,  1.

side ;  pressing  spot  causes  pain  down  thigh  to  knee ;

leg  gives  wa}^  when  walking.
^^  Upper Limbs. Rheumatic pains in r. shoulder ; feels

nervous.
Slight  drawing  in  1.  deltoid,  morning.
I  I  Arms  tired.

I  I  Contraction  of  extensor  muscles  on  back  of  arm.
I  I  Crampy  pain  in  hands  while  writing ;  hand  trembles ;

contraction  of  extensor  muscles  on  back  of  arm.
I  I  Aching  wrists ;  rheumatic  pains  in  joints  of  fingers.
I  I  Rheumatic  arthritis,  especially  of  joints  of  fingers,  pains

suddenly  go  to  heart.
^^  Lower  Limbs. Sudden  giving  way  of  legs  while  walking,

as  though  they  would  be  paralyzed.
I  I  Drawing  on  inside  of  thighs.

I  I  Sore  hamstrings ;  feels  stiff  on  rising,  cords  feel  too  short.
Calves  pain  or  feel  as  if  too  tightly  bandaged.
I  I  Pain  in  knees,  ankles,  shins,  in  hollow  and  ball  of  foot.
Right  big  toe  pains;  when  >,  pain  in  heart.
^*  Limbs  in  General, i  iSore  feeling  in  joints.

Right  wrist  and  1.  ankle  weak,  ache  as  if  paralyzed;  after

menses.
I  I  Synovial  crepitation.
^^  Rest. Position. Motion. Lying down : sensation of

water  dropping  in  ear.
Must  sit  up  :  at  night  to  clear  throat.
Sitting :  falls  asleep.
Writing :  crampy  pains  in  hands.
Walking  up-stairs  :  trembling  about  heart  <  ;  sensation

of  fatigue.
Walking :  legs  give  way.
^^  Nerves, l  l  Nervousness :  tired feeling, with goneness of

stomach,  crick  in  neck,  trembling  and  palpitation ;  in  a

thunderstorm.
I  I  Irritation  of  intestines  by  worms,  causing  squinting  and

twitching  of  facial  muscles.
^^  Sleep. Drowsy  feeling,  yet  not  sleepy.
I  I  Sleep  restless  with  worm  troubles.
I  1  Very  drowsy,  falls  asleep  while  sitting.
^^  Time. 5  a.m.  :  on  rising,  flickering  of  sight.

Morning :  headache  on  crown  of  head  on  awaking ;  lids

glued  together ;  offensive  odor  before  nose ;  on  rising,

tongue  has  a  thin,  moist  coating ;  slight  drawing  in  1.

deltoid.


11  NATRUM  PHOSPHORICUM.

Day  :  feet  icy  cold.

Evening:  in  bed,  burning  deep  in  chest.

Night :  dropping  of  thick,  yellow  mucus  from  posterior
nares  <  ;  itching  at  anus  <  ;  feet  burn.

During  menstruation  many  symptoms  have  an  afternoon
and  evening  aggravation.
^^  Temperature  and  Weather. Warmth  of  bed  :  itching  at
anus  from  worms.

In  a  thunderstorm:  trembling  and  palpitation;  pains  <.
^"  Fever. Chilliness:  during  menses;  in  chest;  followed  by
hot  flashes.

I  I  Flashes  of  heat  and  headache  every  afternoon.

I  1  Acid,  exceedingly  sour-smelling  sweats.

I  I  Intermittent  fever,  with  vomiting  of  acid,  sour  masses.
*' Attacks,  Periodicity. Two hours: after food, pain in
stomach.

Every  day :  several  attacks  of  gastralgia  and  enteralgia.

Every  night:  seminal  emissions.

Every  afternoon :  flashes  of  heat  and  headache.

Summer  diarrhoea.
*^  Locality  and  Direction.  Right :  quivering  of  eyelid  ;  ach-
ing and  itching  in  meatus ;  lobe  of  ear  burns  intoler-
ably ;  soreness  in  side  of  lower  jaw ;  side  of  throat  sore  ;
pain  through  groin;  pain  from  clavicle  to  stomach;
burning  deep  in  chest,  <  side;  rheumatic  pain  in
shoulder ;  wrist  weak.

Left :  flickering  of  sight  in  eye ;  as  if  sand  was  in  eye ;
dryness  of  eyeball ;  nostril  sore ;  throbbing  in  tonsil ;
pain  in  shoulder;  pain  in  sacrum;  slight  drawing  in
deltoid ;  ankle  weak.
*'  Sensations.  As  if  top  of  head  would  open  ;  as  if  skull  was
too  full ;  as  if  veil  was  over  eyes ;  as  if  sand  was  ni
eyes ;  as  if  eyeball  was  bruised ;  in  ears  as  of  water  drop-
ping from  a  height  into  a  long,  narrow  vessel;  as  of
hair  on  tip  of  tongue;  as  if  something  closed  in  throat;
as  of  a  lump  in  throat;  pricking  as  of  a  pin  in  throat;
limbs  as  though  they  would  give  way ;  as  if  cords  of
knees  were  shortened ;  as  if  a  lump,  a  bubble  started
from  the  heart  and  was  forced  through  arteries;  as
though  shot  was  forced  or  rolling  through  arteries;
intercostal  muscles  as  if  drawn  ;  lower  third  of  sternum
as  if  torn  in  two  ;  as  though  legs  would  be  paralyzed  ;
cords  of  legs  feel  too  short ;  as  if  calves  were  too  tightly
bandaged.

Pain :  over  eyes  ;  in  stomach,  in  one  spot  after  food ;  m
bowels;  through  r.  groin;  through  chest  and  in  1.
shoulder;  from  r.  clavicle,  diagonally,  to  stomach;  in
chest;  about  base  of  heart,  relieving  pains  in  limbs  and


NATRUM  PHOSPHORICUM.  12

great  toe ;  in  lower  third  of  sternum ;  in  articulation  of

lumbar  vertebrse  and  sacrum,  1.  side;  down  thigh  to

knee ;  in  calves ;  in  knees,  ankles,  shins  ;  in  hollow  and

ball  of  feet ;  in  r.  big  toe.
Severe  pain  :  in  head.
Shooting,  stitching  jDain  :  in  face.
Burning,  stitching,  cutting :  in  eyes.
Throbbing :  in  1.  tonsil.
Crampy  pain  :  in  hands.

Rheumatic  pain  :  in  r.  shoulder;  in  joints  of  fingers.
Aching:  in  r.  meatus  ;  in  wrists;  in  1.  ankle.
Dull,  heavy  pain :  in  head.

Drawing :  slight,  in  1.  deltoid ;  on  inside  thighs.
Crick  :  in  both  sides  of  neck.
Burning :  of  eyelids ;  of  external  ear ; of  lobe  of  r.  ear ;

at  meatus ;  deep  in  chest.
Soreness:  of  1.  eyeball;  of  eyelids;  of  external  ear;  of  1.

nostril; of  r.  side  of  lower  jaw; of  anus; of  ham-
strings.
Sore  feeling  :  in  joints.
Raw  feeling  :  in  throat ;  in  anus.
Pricking :  in  nares.
Pricking  numbness  :  of  whole  mouth.
Tickling :  from  middle  ear  into  eustachian  tube.
Dr3mess :  of  1.  eyeball.

Fulness  :  at  root  of  nose  ;  sudden,  in  upper  part  of  chests
Intense  pressure  and  heat :  in  top  of  head.
Feehng  of  weight :  above  ensiform  cartilage.
Empty,  gone  feeling :  in  stomach.
Weak  feeling : in  rectum  and  sphincter ; in back and

limbs.
Itching : of  eyelids  ; in  r.  meatus ;  of  external ear  ;  of

anus  ;  at  meatus.
Intense  itching :  in  various  places  over  body.
**  Tissues. Acts  upon  glandular  organs  of  intestinal  tract.
I  I  Marasmus  of  children who  are bottle-fed  ; abdomen

swollen,  liver  large;  colic  after  eating;  stools  containing

undigested  food.
I  I  Diseases  of  infants  suffering  from  excess  of  lactic  acid,

resulting  from  overfeeding  of  milk  and  sugar.
Ailments  with  excess  of  acidity.
I  1  Exudations  and  secretions  yellow,  honey-colored.
I  iLeucsemia.

I  I  Swelling  of  lymphatic  glands  before  hardening  ;  scrofula.
I  ) Leucocy tosis,  swellings  of  lymphatic  glands;  scrofulous

inflammation  of  eyes.
I  I  Rheumatic  arthritis.
*^  Touch. Passive  Motion. Injuries. Pressure  :  pains  in

chest.


13  NATRUM  PHOSPHORICUM.

*^  Skin. I  I  Chafing  of  skin.

I  I  Eczema  with  symptoms  of  acidity,  secretion  creamy,
honey-colored.

I  I  Erythema ;  "  rose  rash  ;  "  golden  yellow  scabs.

I  I  Crusta  lactea.

I  I  Hives,  itching  all  over  body,  like  insect-bites.

I  I  "Rose"  erysipelas,  smooth,  red,  shiny,  tingling  or  pain-
ful swelling  of  skin,  intense  itching ;  in  various  places
over  body ;  of  nose ;  of  prepuce ;  of  scrotum ;  about
anus ;  on  joints.
*^  Stages  of  Life,  Constitution.  Boy,  set.  2i,  suffering  from
a  chronic  diarrhoea,  cured  finally  by  Cinchona ;  swelling
of  glands  of  neck.

Girl,  set.  8,  several  years  ago  had  measles,  since  then  eyes
affected;  conjunctivitis.

Woman,  set.  50,  suffering  for  two  years ;  gastralgia  and
enteralgia.
*^  Relations. Antidoted  by  Sepia,  particularly  the  eruption
and  swelling  about  joints ;  Apis  relieved  the  hives.

Compare :  Calc.  ost.  in  scrofulosis  with  acidity ;  Calc.  ost.,
Carbo  veg.,  CoccuL,  Carbol.  ac,  Kali  carb.,  Nux  vom.,  Ro-
binia  in  gastric  catarrhs  ;  Rheum  in  sour  stools  and  sour
smell  of  body;  Benz.  ac,  Colchic,  Guaiac,  Lycop.  and
Sulphur  in  gouty  dyspepsia.


NATRUM  SULFURICUM.  14

NATRUM  SULFURICUM.

Sodium  Sulphate ;  Glauber  Salts.  Na  OSO^-\-10Aq.

Since  its  discovery  by  Glauber,  in  1658  (de  natura  salium),  it  was  called  Sal
Mirabile  by  himself,  and  afterwards  Sal  Glauberi.  It  has  been  used  as  a  laxative
in  so-called  inflammatory  affections,  or  employed  as  a  purgative  (Comp.  Pereira,
ed.  by  Carson).  The  Chinese  use  it  for  the  same  purpose,  according  to  Scherzer
(Austrian  Expedition).  It  is  rarely  given  in  smaller  doses,  largely  diluted,  as
an  aperient  and  diuretic  (American  Dispensatory).  It  was  proved  in  still  smaller
doses  by  Dr.  Schreter,  in  Lemberg,  Galicia;  the  proving  published  in  1832,  in
Hartlaub's  Annalen,  vol.  Ill,  No.  4,  and  by  the  zealous  and  meritorious  Nenning
in  Bohemia,  by  himself,  and  several  women  and  girls  ,  published  in  1833,  in  the
same  journal,  vol.  4,  No.  4.

In  Grauvogl's  works,  Grundgesetze,  1858,  Das  Homoopathische  Aehnlichkeits-
gesetz,  1861,  Diatetik  und  Prophylaxis,  1862,  Lehrbuch  der  Homoopathie,  1866,
it  is  recommended  as  a  polychrest  in  the  "  hydrogenoid  constitution,"  Sycosis,
Leucaemia  and  Thrombosis.

Long  before  this  it  had  been  used  in  the  30th  centesimal  to  prevent  the  develop-
ment of  some  forms  of  consumption  by  Hering,  was  given  in  important  cases  of
sickness  by  Jeanes,  in  abdominal  disorders  and  chronic  diarrhoea  by  Lippe,  and
in  the  second  potency  with  prompt  result  in  some  forms  of  sciatica  by  Raue  and
Hering,  according  to  symptoms  of  Nenning.

For  complete  collection  of  symptoms  see  Hering's  Monograph,  Am.  Jour.  Horn.
Mat.  Med.

Sulphate  of  soda  is  contained  in  a  great  many  springs,  used  and  abused  as  medi-
cines. It  predominates  in  the  warm  springs  of  Karlsbad  (Sprudel),  of  Bristol
(hot  well),  and  in  the  cold  springs  of  the  Isle  of  Wight,  and  of  Piillna,  Said-
schiitz,  Marienbad,  Bilin,  and  Franzensbad,  in  Bohemia. — CHg.

Introduced  by  Schreter,  proved  by  him  and  Nenning  (Hartlaub  and  Trink's
Annalen,  vol.  4,  p.  487),  Lembke  (N.  Zeit.  fiir  Hom.  Klinik,  1866,  vol.  11,  p.  97).

Clinical  Authorities. — Periodical  headaches,  Schtissler's  Tissue  Eemedies ;
Headache  with  malarial  symptoms,  Knerr,  MSS. ;  Ozcena,  Terry,  N.  A.  J.  H.,  vol.  25,  p.
309 ;  Posterior  nasal  catarrh,  Miller,  Hom.  Times,  1876,  p.  69 ;  Toothache,  Landes-
mann,  Eaue's  Eec,  1873,  p.  83  ;  Gastric  derangement,  Schiissler's  Tissue  Eemedies;
Sensitiveness  in  region  of  liver,  Paine,  Eaue's  Eec,  1870,  p.  29 ;  Affection  of  liver,
Paine,  Eaue's  Eec,  1871,  p.  11;  Hah.  Mo.,  vol.  5,  p.  200;  Bilious  colic,  Schiissler's
Tissue  Eemedies,  p.  117  ;  Dian-hoea,  Lippe,  Organon,  vol.  3,  p.  337  ;  Hom.  Phys.,
vol.  2,  p.  190;  Stillman,  Eaue's  Eec,  1875,  p.  146  ;  Sulzer,  Hom.  Times,  1875,
p.  76 ;  Norton,  C.  E.  Med.  Inv.,  1870,  p.  390 ;  Chronic  diarrhoea,  Pratt,  Eaue's
Eec,  1872,  p.  138 ;  H.  M.,  Sept.,  1871,  p.  96;  Diabetes  mellitus,  Aegidi,  Eaue's
Path.,  p.  649;  Gonorrhoea,  sycosis  (with  Thuya),  6  cases,  Bojanus,  Eaue's  Eec,
1871,  pp.  139-41;  Leucorrhcea,  Miiller,  B.  J.  H.,  voL  23,  p.  370;  Herpes  vulvae,
Heinigke,  Eaue's  Eec,  1871,  p.  160 ;  Phlegmasia  alba  dolens,  Burnett,  B.  J.  H.,
vol.  33,  p.  731 ;  Asthma,  Guernsey,  Hom.  Phys.,  vol.  7,  p.  129  ;  Leonard,  Schiissler's


15  NATRUM  SULFUPJCUM.

Tissue  Eemedies ;  Spinal  meningitis,  Kent,  Schiissler's  Tissue  Eemedies,  B.  and  D. ;
Soreness  in  spine  and  neck,  Pulsifer,  Hah.  Mo.,  vol.  5,  p.  195 ;  Swelling  of  cervical
glands,  Grauvogl,  Text-book,  p.  360  ;  Paronychia,  Grauvogl,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  5,
p.  913;  Panaritium,  Bell,  Raue's  Eec,  1870,  p.  327  ;  Heat  of  feet,  Berridge,  Horn.
Times,  1875,  p.  23;  Locomotor  ataxia  (with  Thuya),  Grauvogl,  B.  J.  H.,  vol.  26,
p.  639  ;  Spasms  after  injury  to  head,  Kent,  Horn.  Phys.,  vol.  6,  p.  279  ;  Chronic  fistu-
lous abscesses,  Grauvogl ;  Sycosis,  Kent,  Horn.  Phys.,  vol.  6,  p.  275.

^  Mind. I  I  Inability  to  think.

I  I  Cheerfulness,  happy  mood  ;  after  loose  stools.
iPepressed;  tearful;  lively  music  makes  her  sad.
I  Satiety  of  life;  must  use  all  self-control  to  prevent  shoot-
ing himself.

■  Irritable,  <  mornings ;  dislikes  to  speak  or  to  be  spoken  to.
I  1  Great  anxiety  caused  by  pressure  of  swelling  of  throat

on  windpipe.

iSpirits  low,  extremely  timid  and  anxious;  mind  en-
feebled.

I  I  Jaundice  after  anger.

Mental  troubles  arising  from  a  fall  or  other  injuries  to
head.

i Melancholy  with  periodical  attacks  of  mania.
^  Sensorium.  i  Vertigo:  after  dinner;  then  heat  from  body
towards  head,  becoming  more  violent  until  sweat  breaks
out  on  forehead  ;  >  after  forehead  becomes  moist ;  with
dulness  of  head ;  frequent  yawning  and  vomiting  of
sour  mucus ;  from  gastric  derangements,  excess  of  bile,
with  bilious  coating  on  tongue  or  bitter  taste  in  mouth.

■  Muddled  feeling,  dulness.

^  Inner Head. l Pressure in forehead, particularly after
meals ;  as  if  forehead  would  burst.
I  I  Periodical  attacks  in  r.  side  of  forehead.
I  I  Pain  as  if  forehead  would  burst  after  a  meal.

•  Pressure  in  forehead  and  coronal  region after  sunset,

with  heat  on  top  of  head ;  >  by  pressure  of  hand ;
during  quiet  and  while  lying  down ;  <  when  thinking.

I  I  Beating  pain  in  both  temples  when  walking.

I  I  Periodically  returning  headaches ;  pain  concentrated  in
r.  temple,  of  a  boring  nature,  as  if  a  screw  was  being
driven  in,  preceded  by  burning  sensation  in  pit  of
stomach,  bitter  taste  and  lassitude,  only  felt  at  night  or
in  morning ;  vomiting  of  bile  follows.

Indescribable  pain  on  top  of  head,  as  if  it  would  split.

Pressure  and  heat  in  vertex  during  menses.

•  Hot  feeling  on  top  of  head.

Heavy  and  dull  in  head,  especially  in  morning;  looks

pale  and  sickly.
I  I  Heaviness  in  head,  with  bleeding  of  nose,  without  relief.


NATRUM  SULFURICUM.  16

Congestion  of  blood  to  head  ;  pulsating  headache.

I  I  Headache  while  reading,  made  him  feel  hot,  and  sweat.

I  Brain  feels  loose,  when  stooping,  as  if  it  fell  towards  1.

temple.
I  Jerk  in  head,  throwing  it  towards  r.  side.

■  Headache: with giddiness; bitter  taste; vomiting  of

bile ;  bilious  diarrhoea ;  colicky  pain.
I  Dull  headache,  with  malarial  symptoms.
I  1  Occipital  headache.
I  I  Violent  pains  at  base  of  brain,  as  if  crushed  in  a  vise,

or  something  gnawing  there.

■  Violent  pains  in  head,  especially  at  base  of  brain  and

back  of  neck. ^After  injuries  to  head.

■  Irritation  of  brain  after  lesions  of  head.
*  Outer  Head. ■  Creeping  in  scalp  of  vertex.

I  Scalp  is  sensitive;  hair  is  painful  on  combing  it.
I  I  Burning  in  top  of  head.

■  Chronic  effects  from  injuries  upon  skull ;  simple  concus-

sions that  have  resulted  from  a  considerable  shock,  and
injuries  without  organic  affections.
° Sight  and  Eyes. ■Sight  dim;  eyes  weak;  watering.

■  Sensitiveness  of  eyes  to  light,  with  headache.
Yellowness  of  conjunctivae.

■  Large,  blisterlike  granulations,  with  burning  tears.

■  Burning  in  r.  eye,  burning  lachrymation,  dim  sight;  <

near  fire,  also  morning  and  evening ;  burning  of  edges
of  lids.

■  Crawling  sensation  in  eyes ;  great  dryness  and  burning

of  eyes;  <  from  afternoon  to  evening; seemed  as  if
her  eyeballs  were  hot.

■  Granulous  blisters  on  eyes.

■  Conjunctivitis  granulosa,  granulations  appear  like  small

blisters  {Ihuya).

■  Photophobia in scrofulous ophthalmia; lids aggluti-

nated.

■  Suffusion  with  burning  of  edges  of  lids.

■  Chronic  conjunctivitis,  with  granular  lids,  green  pus,

terrible  photophobia.

■  Lids  heavy  as  if  leaden,  pressing  in  eyes  while  reading

in  evening.

■  Burning  or  itching  of  edges  of  lids  in  morning.
^  Hearing  and  Ears. ■Ringing  in  ears,  as  of  bells.

I  I  Pressing  in  ears  as  if  tympanum  was  pressed  out.

■  Earache  as  if  something  was  forcing  its  way  out.

■  Piercing  pain  in  r.  ear  inward  ;  sharp,  lightning-like

stitches  in  ear ;  <  going  from  cold  air  into  warm  room,
<  in  damp  weather,  living  on  wet  ground,  etc.

■  Otalgia.


17  NATRUM  SULFURICUM.

I  Heat  in  r.  ear,  in  evening.
I  1  Irritable  mucous  membrane  of  ears  and  nose.
^  Smell and Nose, l Nosebleed: before menses; during
menses,  stops  and  returns  often  ;  in  afternoon.
BStutiiug  up  of  nose;  great  dryness  and  burning.
iSneezing  and  fluent  coryza.

■  Catarrhal  discharge,  yellowish-green  ;  becomes  green  on

exposure  to  light.
I  Accumulation  of  mucus,  particularly  at  night,  with  salty

expectoration  in  morning. ^Posterior  nasal  catarrh.
I  Watery  discharge  becomes  yellow  and  copious;  nostrils

sore;  discharge  thick,  yellow  and  mostly  from  anterior

nares. ^Chronic  nasal  catarrh.

■  Thick, yellowish discharge from nose; sometimes a

greenish-looking  scab  is  blown  from  nose  in  morning
with  some  blood  and  offensive  smell;  scab  seems  to
come  from  an  ulcer  in  Schneiderian  membrane ;  pain
in  root  of  nose,  feels  stopped  up;  hawking  up  during
day  and  in  morning  of  pieces  of  starchlike  greyish
phlegm,  with  a  salty  taste;  oppression  in  middle  and
upper  part  of  chest,  as  of  a  weight  in  chest,  <  at  night,
in  morning  and  in  damp  weather ;  sometimes  pain  in
1.  lower  side  of  chest ;  wart  on  r.  ring  finger. (^Ozsena.

lOzsena  syphilitica  beginning  with  ulcers  in  fauces,  no
fetor.

I  Itching  of  wings  of  nose,  inducing  rubbing.
*  Upper  Face. Face  :  pale,  wan ;  sallow  or  jaundiced  with
biliousness.

I  I  Vesicles  and  pimples  on  face.

I  I  Smooth  erysipelas  of  face.

•  Itching  of  face.

^  Lower  Face, l  i  Burning  pain  in  corner  of  mouth  at  night;
lips  burn  like  pepper.
I  Upper  lip  dry,  skin  peels  off.

•  Vesicles  on  lower  lip.

I  I  Vesicular  eruption  around  mouth  and  chin.

I  Pimple  on  chin,  burns  when  touched.
*°  Teeth  and  Gums, l Throbbing  toothache,  with  great  rest-
lessness; <  from  warm,  but  intolerable  to  hot  drink.

I  Toothache:  > taking  cold  water into mouth;  > by
cool  air  or  tobacco  smoke.

I  Gums  burn  like  fire.

I  I  Blister  on  upper  gums,  suppurating,  then  drying  up.

I  I  Painless,  movable  tumor  on  lower  gums.
"Taste and Tongue. iTaste: bitter; unpleasant;  slimy,
tongue  coated  with  mucus.

I  No  taste,  mornings;  mouth  feels  dry,  numb.

I I  Dirty,  greenish-grey  or  greenish-brown  coating  on  root
of  tongue.

VOL.  VIII. — 2.


NATRUM  SULFURICUM.  18

iTongue: coated greenish, with malarial symptoms;
slimy  ;  red  ;  burning  tip.

■  Blisters  with  burning  pain,  on  tip  of  tongue.
^^  Inner  Mouth. iRoof  of  mouth  sore  to  touch.

■  Burning  of  palate  as  if  sore  and  raw,  during  menses.

■  Blisters  on  palate,  which  increased  daily;  palate  became

so  sensitive  that  she  could  hardly  eat;  >  taking  any-
thing cold  into  mouth.

■  Burning  in  mouth,  as  from  pepper;  mouth  dry,  thirst,

gums  red.
Dryness  with  redness  of  gums  and  thirst.
Feeling  of  numbness  and  roughness  in  mouth.

■  Bitter  taste,  full  of  slime,  thick  and  tenacious,  white,

must  hawk  it  up  constantly  from  oesophagus,  trachea
and  stomach.

■  Accumulation  of  very  thin saliva  in  mouth;  copious

after  meals.
^^  Throat. ■  Dryness  of  throat,  no  thirst;  extends  to  oesophagus.

■  Throat sore,  feeling of contraction when swallowing

saliva ;  soreness < by  talking,  or when swallowing

solids.
I  I  Sore  throat,  feeling  of  a  lump  on  swallowing.
Frequent  constriction  of  throat  when  walking.

■  Inflammation  of  tonsils  and  uvula,  with  painful  deglu-

tition and  urging  to  swallow  saliva.
I  I  Ulcers  on  tonsils;  tearing  pain  down  throat.

■  Mucus  in  throat,  at  night ;  hawks  salt  mucus  in  morning.
1  lln  diphtheria  when  green  vomiting  occurs.

^^  Appetite,  Thirst. Desires,  Aversions. ■Loss  of  appetite :
with  great  thirst;  with  malarial  symptoms.

■  Thirst:  in  evening;  for  something  very  cold.

■  Great  desire  for  ice  or  ice-cold  water.

■  Disgust  for  bread,  of  which  she  was  formerly  fond.
I  i  Aversion  to  meat.

^^  Eating and Drinking. ■A^egetables,  fruit,  pastry, cold
food  or  drink  and  farinaceous  food  cause  diarrhoea.
Before  meals :  qualmishness  in  stomach.
After  eating:  headache;  perspiration  in  face.
Hot  drinks:  toothache  <.
^®  Hiccough,  Belching,  Nausea  and  Vomiting. Hiccough :
in  evening;  after  eating  bread  and  butter.

■  Constant  rising  or  gulping  up  of  sour  water  ;  heartburn.

■  Qualmishness  before  eating.
Constant  nausea.

■  Nausea,  sometimes  vomiting  first  of  sour,  then bitter

fluid. ^Hepatitis.

■  Vomiting:  of  bile  ;  very  sour  mucus  or  preceded  by  ver-

tigo; of  saltish sour  water;  of  bile  with bitter  sour


19  NATRUM  SULFURICUM.

taste,  giddiness  and  headache ;  of  greenish  water ;  with
colic.
^^  Scrobiculum and Stomach, i  Stomach feels  distended
and  heavy.
I  Full  feeling  in  stomach  and  chest,  difficult  breathing,
evening  in  bed.

I  i  Beating  pain  in  stomach,  with  slight  nausea.

Boring  in  stomach  as  if  it  would  be  perforated  ;  or  burn-
ing-pinching in  morning  after  rising ;  >  after  break-
fast.

I I  Gastric  complaints  with  acidity.

■  Constant  taste  of  bile;  tongue  covered with  a  curdy^

bitter  coating;  during  day,  especially  after  food,  bitter
or  tasteless  eructations ;  complexion  yellow ;  appetite
very  slight;  no  thirst;  beer  is  distasteful;  inclined  to
shiver;  faint;  pressure  over  one  eye;  stools  normal,
but  scanty.  ^Gastric  derangement.
'*  Hypochondria,  l  Cannot  bear  tight  clothing  about  waist.
I  I  Attacks  of  hepatitis  from which  she recovered  very

slowly.
I  Liver  swollen  and  sore  to  touch.

■  Stitches  in  region  of  liver,  sensitiveness  when  walking

in  open  air.

■  When  taking  a  deep  breath,  sharp,  violent  stitch  in  r.

side  of  abdomen,  as  if  in  liver;  as  if  it  would  burst  open
there,  while  sitting,  unchanged  by  pressure,  at  4  p.m.
I  Biliousness, excess of  bile, vomiting of  bitter fluids,
greenish-brown  or  greenish-grey  tongue.

■  Jaundice  arising  from  vexation.

■  Irritable  liver  sometimes  after  excessive  study  or  mental

work.

■  Liver  engorged,  <  lying  on  1.  side.

■  Pain  in  1.  hypochondriac  region  or  above,  on  last  ribs;

cough  with  purulent  expectoration.

■  Stitches  in  1.  hypochondrium  while  walking  in  open  air.
^^  Abdomen. ■Dead  heavy  pain  going  from  abdomen  to  back.

■  Burning  in  abdomen;  bruised  pain  in  bowels;  griping

>  by  kneading  abdomen.

■  Pinching  in  bowels:  with  pain  in  forehead;  with  sensa-

tion as  if  bowels  were  distended ;  with  rumbling,  shift-
ing pain  and  subsequent  diarrhoea.
I  1  Painful  digging  in  abdomen  during  menses,  in  evening,
followed  by  thirst.

■  Contractive  pain  in  abdomen,  extending  to  chest,  with

tightness  of  breath,  and  subsequent  diarrhoea.
Violent  colic and pain  in  small  of  back  as  if  bruised,
awakens  her  at  2  a.m.;  >  lying  on  side.

■  Bellyache  in  morning  before  breakfast.


NATRUM  SULFURICUM.  20

I  Constant  uneasiness  in  bowels  and  urging  to  stool.

I  Feeling  of  fulness.

I I  Abdominal  flatulency:  much  rolling  and  rumbling;
incarcerated,  especially  in  r.  side;  collects  at  night,
causing  great  pain;  grumbling  and  rolling  with  sudden
pinches,  as  after  a  purgative,  then  diarrhoea;  loud
rumbling  followed  by  emission  of  very  fetid  flatus:
after  confinement;  with  cutting  pains  and  congestion
of  liver;  at  night;  tearing  pain  around  umbilicus;  <
before  breakfast  when  stomach  is  empty.

I  Colic  pain  in  region  of  r.  groin,  extending  over  belly.
llBilious colic; excruciating  pains; vomiting of  bile;

bitter  taste.
I  Lead  colic.

I  iHeat  in  lower  bowels  with  green  bilious  discbarges.
I  Typhlitis.

I  Piercing  pain  in  r.  flank,  with  nausea.
I  Pain  in  r.  flank,  as  if  distended.
I  I  Stitch  from  1.  groin  to  axilla.

■  Tympanites  in  bilious  fevers.
I  I  Tuberculosis  abdominalis.

^°  Stool  and  Rectum,  l Morning  diarrhoea,  on  rising;  sud-
den urging,  gushing,  accompanied  with  flatulence;
stools  spatter  all  over  vessel;  prostration.

I  Loose  morning  stools,  particularly  after  a  spell  of  wet
weather.

iGreen  evacuations,  sallow  skin,  j^ellow  eyeballs.

I  Stool:  dark  bilious  .or  of  green  bile;  yellowish-green;
gushing;  scanty,  slimy,  light,  red  or  bloody;  forcibly
or  suddenly  expelled;  half  liquid,  with  tenesmus;
painless,  occasionally  involuntary  while  passing  flatus
or  urine,  or  during  sleep;  yellow,  fluid,  soon  after  rising
in  morning ;  in  a  gush ;  watery,  with  much  flatus ;  clay-
colored  (hepatitis) ;  flatulent  colic;  wind  incarcerated,  r.
side  ;  soft  but  difficult  to  expel.

■  Before  stool: contractive pain  in abdomen,  extending

into  chest ;  pinching  pains  in  groins  and  hypogastrium  ;

violent  colic  and  rumbling.
iDuring stool:  slight  tenesmus and burning in  anus;

profuse  emission  of  flatus;  voluptuous  feeling.
I  After stool: cheerfulness, happy mood; burning in

anus ;  relief  of  colic.

■  Diarrhoea:  <  in  wet  weather ;  in  morning;  after  farina-

ceous food  ;  in  cold  evening  air ;  from  vegetables,  fruit,
pastry,  cold  food  or  drink ;  alternating  with  constipa-
tion ;  comes  on  regularly  in  morning  and  returns  quite
regularly  each  day.
.  I  Diarrhoea  at  9  a.m.,  preceded  by  passage  of  much  bad-


21  '  NATRUM  SULFURICUM.

smelling  flatus ;  painless ;  stools  thin,  yellowish  and
scanty ;  onl}'  one  passage  daily.

I  Sudden  urging  to  stool ;  stool  scanty,  at  times  slimy,
bloody,  of  offensive  odor,  containing  bright  red  blood  ;
involuntary,  occur  during  micturition,  during  sleep,  or
during  expulsion  of  flatus ;  flatulent  colic  <  on  r.  side ;
<  in  damp  weather  or  during  a  storm  ;  <  eating  dishes
made  of  flour,  pastry,  fruits ;  occurs  particularly  between
2  or  3  A.M.  and  2  p.m.  ;  >  lying  on  side  and  discharge
of  flatus;  sensitiveness  of  hypochondriac  regions;  in-
tolerant of  tight  clothing ;  pain  and  heavy  sensation  in
stomach  ;  loss  of  appetite ;  aversion  to  bread ;  great
thirst ;  chilliness  ;  burning  in  abdomen  ;  sleeplessness  ;
prostration ;  eruption  about  anus  and  between  thighs.
^Chronic  diarrhoea.

I  Attacks  come  on  suddenly,  stools  scanty,  slimy,  light  red,
sometimes  blood}^  forcible  and  sudden,  sometimes  offen-
sive; movements  are  frequent  and  occasionally  invol-
untary stool  occurs  while  passing  flatus  or  urine,  or  dur-
ing sleep  ;  discharges  attended  with  pain;  <  from  eating
vegetables,  fruit  or  pastry,  from  2  or  3  a.m.  to  2  p.m.,  in  a
warm  room,  in  winter,  when  taking  cold,  at  night,  from
cold  food  or  drinks,  after  eating,  in  damp  weather,  and
from  exercise ;  pain  >  by  lying  down  and  from  passing
flatus;  cannot  bear  clothing  tight  about  waist;  pain
is  of  a  dead  heavy  character  and  goes  through  from
abdomen  to  back ;  much  wind  in  bowels,  and  sickness
at  stomach;  appetite  very  poor,  much  thirst;  inclined
to  be  chilly;  burning  in  abdomen  accompanying  pain;
does  not  sleep  well  at  night ;  after  an  attack  feels  very
tired  and  sore  across  bowels,  sides  and  back ;  is  very
weak ;  has  a  disgust  for  bread,  of  which  she  was  form-
erly fond ;  subject  to  rheumatism ;  and  has  had  at
times  a  discharge  from  1.  ear  of  a  yellow  color.
^Chronic  diarrhoea.

■  Diarrhoea  of  three  years' standing ;  bruised  pain  in  in-

testines, much  passing  of  wind.
Chronic  diarrhoea  with  frequent  involuntary  discharges,
since  rupture  of  perineum.

■  Hard  knotty  stools,  streaked  with  blood,  accompanied

and  preceded  by  smarting  in  anus ;  often  with  scanty
menses.
I  Emission  of  fetid  flatus ;  in  large  quantities ;  in  morn-
ing ;  after  meals ;  with  loose  stools.

■  Constant  uneasiness  in  bowels  and  urging  to  stool.
I  Chronic  diarrhoea;  tuberculosis  abdominalis.

■  Itching  of  anus;  as  from  worms.

■  Knotty,  wartlike  eruption  on  anus  and  between  thighs ;

condylomata ;  sycosis.


NATRUM  SULFURICUM.  22

^^  Urinary  Organs, ii  Nephritis  scarlatinosa.

I  Diabetes  after  a  cliill  and  an  attack  of  rheumatic  fever
brought  on  by  getting  wet  year  previous ;  extreme
emaciation,  face  sunken,  chest  flattened,  ribs  projecting,
muscles  of  extremities  soft  and  flabby,  little  but  skin
and  bone ;  tongue  and  gums  bright  red,  the  latter  re-
ceding from  teeth;  epigastrium  distended  and  very
sensitive ;  liver  hypertrophied  ;  bowels  confined,  feces
grey,  skin  flaccid,  chest  covered  with  erythema ;  dull
pain  in  region  of  r.  kidney  on  pressure ;  urine  enor-
mously increased,  10  to  18  pounds  daily;  urine  pale,
almost  like  water,  at  same  time  something  like  whey,
viscid,  frothy  on  being  passed,  with  sour  reaction,
specific  gravity  1103,  quantity  of  sugar  in  it  about  5|
per  cent.;  appetite  and  thirst  inordinate;  sleep  dis-
turbed by  frequent  calls  to  urinate;  spirits  low,  ex-
tremely timid  and  anxious;  mind  enfeebled,  thinking-
faculty  impaired ;  felt  weary,  powerless,  walking  and
all  bodily  movements  difficult;  pain  in  ankle  joints;
heaviness  of  feet ;  in  morning  fatigue  and  powerlessness ;
all  ailments  <  during  rest;  thirst  most  all  forenoon,
with  internal  chilliness,  confusion  of  head,  pressive  pain
in  forehead,  especially  after  every  meal ;  noises  in  ears,
sometimes  vertigo,  followed  by  nausea  and  difficulty  of
swallowing.

I  Polyuria  simplex,  excessive  secretion  of  urine,  especially
if  diabetic.

I  I  Copious  micturition,  with  brickdust  sediment.

Piercing  in  both  groins,  with  urging  to  urinate,  afternoon
while  walking  out-doors.

I  I  Pinching  around  navel  while  sitting,  with  urging  to
urinate,  pain  going  into  groin.

1  I  More  urine  than  usual,  with  burning  sensation  when
passing  it ; <  at  night,  obliged  to  rise  twice.

I  Urine  burns  when  passing;  it  passes  in  small  quantities.

I  Burning  during  and  after  micturition,  or  with  pain  in
small  of  back  on  retaining  urine.

■  Urine  loaded  with  bile.

I  Sediment  yellow  red;  in  morning  yellow  white.
iLithic  deposits  in  urine,  brickdust-like  coloring  matter

in  water,  often  associated  with  gout.
I  Gravel,  sandy  deposit  in  urine.
^^  Male  Sexual  Organs. Sexual  desire  excited  in  evening ;

also  morning  with  erections.

■  Enlarged  prostate,  pus  and  mucus  in  urine.

■  Gonorrhoea,  yellowish-greenish  discharge  of  thick  con-

sistency ;  little  pain.

■  ■Gonorrhoea;  sycosis.


23  NATRUM  SULFURICUM.

I  Chronic  gonorrhoea;  suppressed.

I  Condylomata,  soft  fleshy  excrescences  of  sycotic  origin,
with  greenish  discharges.

I  Preputial  and  scrotal  oedema.

I  Itching:  of  genitals;  of  glans  or  penis,  obliging  one  to
rub ; of  scrotum,  with burning after scratching ; of
perineum  and  mons  veneris.
^^  Female  Sexual  Organs, i  Before  menses,  nosebleed.

I  Menses :  profuse,  acrid,  corrosive,  with  colic  and  constipa-
tion, or  morning  diarrhoea  and  chilliness;  acrid,  corro-
sive and  flowing  profusely  first  days,  last  days  discharge
of  coagula ;  scanty,  with  knotty  stools,  streaked  with
blood;  too  late,  acrid,  making  thighs  sore;  flow  freely
when  walking;  retarded,  scanty,  with  colic;  with
diarrhoea.

iLeucorrhcea:  acrid  corrosive,  or  vulvitis  ;  parts  inflamed,
swollen,  covered  with  vesicles  of  size  of  lentils,  filled
with  purulent  matter. ^After  parturition.
^^  Pregnancy. Parturition. Lactation, i  Vomiting in
pregnancy,  with  bitter  taste.

I  Whole  1.  leg  greatly  swollen,  does  not  pit,  but  least  press-
ure causes  great  pain ;  intolerable  pain  starting  from  1.
temple,  goes  across  forehead  to  r.  vertex,  to  r.  side  of
occiput ;  begins  in  morning  as  soon  as  she  puts  foot  to
floor,  lasts  all  day  until  4  or  5  p.m.,  affected  parts  remain
sore;  affected  leg  smarts  like  nettles;  very  nervous,
cold  chills  come  on  suddenly;  begins  to  shake  as  soon
as  she  gets  into  bed,  lasts  greater  part  of  night,  followed
by  heat,  no  sweat;  always  chilly,  "starved  to  death;"
<  in  wet  weather;  urine  pale  and  scanty;  pain  in
small  of  back;  menses  suppressed;  leucorrhoea  profuse,
yellowish,  purulent;  radial  pulse  weak;  unable  to
walk,  but  manages  to  get  across  room  with  help  of
stick, ^Phlegmasia  alba  dolens.

I  Six  weeks  after  confinement,  violent  fever,  follow^ed  by
vulvitis  with  herpes;  great  prostration;  restlessness
and  sleeplessness;  loss  of  appetite;  bad  taste;  great
thirst ;  red  tongue ;  constipation ;  headache  and  sensi-
tiveness of  eyes  to  light ;  vesicles  size  of  lentils,  filled
with  purulent  matter ;  hydrogenoid  constitution.
^^  Voice  and  Larynx.  Trachea  and  Bronchia,  i  Hoarse-
ness ;  with  fluor  albus.
^^  Respiration. Constant  desire  to  take  a  deep,  long  breath.

I  Short  breath  when  walking,  gradually  >  by  rest;  later
want  of  breath  continues  while  sitting.

I  Short  breath,  with  piercing  pain  in  1.  side  of  chest.
I  I  When  taking  a  deep  breath  a  sharp  stitch  in  r.  side  of
chest,  later  also  on  inspiration,  in  1.  side.


NATRUM  SULFURICUM.  24

1 1  Great  dyspnoea,  desire  to  take  deep  breath  during  damp,
cloudy  weather.

I  Attacks  of  hay  asthma,  which  patient  dreads  very  much,
causing  great  prostration  and  forcing  her  to  remain  in
bed  ;  sneezing,  hard  breathing,  cannot  lie  down,  breath-
ing <  upon  least  motion,  accompanied  by  arching  out
between  scapulae.

I  For  years  attacks  of  asthmatic  breathing  so  marked  as
to  herald  his  approach  at  some  distance,  and  coming
on  after  any  unusual  exertion  ;  during  remission  coarse
rales  along  larger  bronchi.

I  Humid  asthma,  rattling  of  mucus.

■  Violent  attack  of  asthma;  greenish,  purulent  expectora-

tion ;  loose  evacuation  immediately  on  rising.

■  Asthmatic  attacks  for  years;  expectoration  greenish  and

remarkably  copious.
I  Asthma  with  young  people  from  a general  bronchial

catarrh ;  afterwards  with  every  change  to  damp  weather.
I  Asthma  about  4  or  5  a.m.,  with  cough  and  raising  of

glairy  slime,  and  vomiting  after  eating ;  always  <  in

damp,  rainy  weather.
I  Catarrh  which  has  become  chronic.

■  Offensive  breath,  with  malarial  symptoms.

^'^  Cough.  I  Cough:  dry,  with  soreness  in  chest,  rough  feeling
in  throat,  particularly  at  night ;  had  to  sit  up  and  hold
chest  with  both  hands ;  loose,  from  tickling  in  throat;
morning;  with  purulent  sputum  and  pain  about  last
ribs,  1.  side;  frequent,  with  some  sputum  ;  if  he  coughs
while  standing,  feels  a  sharp  stitch  in  1.  side  of  chest,
with  shortness  of  breath ;  with  thick,  ropy,  greenish,
puslike  expectoration.
I  Coughing  up  blood,  in  hydrogenoid  constitutions.

^®  Inner  Chest  and  Lungs.  After  sunset,  oppressed  feeling
in  chest,  and  feeling  of  a  ball  in  throat,  with  tendency
to  cry  ;  like  hysteria.

■  Pressure  on  chest,  as  of  a  heavy load; oppression in

morning  on  awaking.
I  I  Sensation  of  all-goneness  in  chest.
I  Stitches:  in  1.  side  of  chest  when  sitting,  when  yawning,

during  an  inspiration ;  running  up  from  abdomen  to

1.  side  of  chest.
I  Soreness  of  chest  w^hen  coughing,  >  from  pressure.
I  Constitutional  condition  in  children  that  results  in  chest

catarrhs  and  asthmatic  complaints.
I A  kind  of  phthisis,  not  a  true  tuberculosis,  in  those*  of  a

sycotic or hydrogenoid  constitution;  cough,  attended

with  muco-purulent  expectoration,  loud  rales  through

chest, and seat of inflammation seems to be  the


25  NATRUM  SULFURICUM.

lower  lobe  of  1.  lung ;  pain  about  ninth  or  tenth  rib  on
1.  side.

I  Phthisis  pulmonum  of  old  people;  phthisis  mucosa;
cough,  with  muco-purulent  sputa.

iSycotic  pneumonia,  inexpressible  agony ;  slowly  coagu-
lating blood.
^^  Outer  Chest. Swelling  of  ribs  near  sternum.

Spasmodic  motions  of  muscles,  <  1.  side.

iSycotic  exanthema  every  Spring.
^^Neck  and  Back, l Violent pains in back of neck and
head;  drawing  back  of  neck,  and  spasms  of  back,  to-
gether with  mental  irritability  and  delirium;  violent
determination  of  blood  to  head. ^Spinal  meningitis.

I  Chronic  swelling  of  cervical  glands.

I  Goitre.

I  I  Stitches  in  nape  of  neck  (at  night).

iPiercing:  as  from  knives,  between  scapulse,  while  sitting
in  evening ;  in  middle  of  sacrum.

I  I  Soreness  up  and  down  spine  and  neck.

I  Bruised  pain  in  small  of  back  and  sacrum.

Violent  suppurative  pain  in  small  of  back  at  night,  so  that
she  can  only  lie  on  her  r.  side ;  >  in  morning  after
getting  up.

■  Pressure  in  1.  side,  near  lumbar  region,  <  from  motion

of  body  p.nd  pressure.
I  I  Itching  on  back  when  undressing.
I  iPain  in  sacrum,  cannot  lie  on  either  side.
^^  Upper Limbs. l  Swelling and suppuration of axillary

glands.
I  IPiercing  in  1.  axilla,  on  humerus,  back  of  hand,  palm

of"  r.  hand,  fingers,  under  nails.
1  I  Tingling  in  arms  and  hands ;  they  feel  as  if  paralyzed.
iFuruncles  on  r.  forearm  and  near  armpit.
I  No strength in hands; flexors pain when grasping

anything.
I  Hands  tremble  on  awaking;  later,  when  writing.

■  Eruption  on  vola  of  each  hand,  some  on  dorsum  and

fingers ;  blisters  filled  with  clear  water.
I  I  Palms  raw  and  sore,  and  exude  a  watery  fluid.
I  I  Watery  blisters  between  thumb  and  index  finger.
I  I  Fingers  swollen  and  stiff.
I  I  Rheumatic arthritis, especially in  joints  of fingers,

pains  suddenly  go  to  heart,  urine  dark  red.

■  Paronychia;  patient  pale  and  feeble  in  morning,  heavy

feeling  in  head,  loss  of  appetite  ;  in  evening,  chills  and
heat;  after  a  blister,  filled  with  water,  which  came  on
last  phalanx,  swollen  all  around,  very  red  and  painful;
matter  around  root  of  nail ;  pain  more  bearable  out-
doors than  in  room,  damp  walls  (cellar).


NATRUM  SULFURICUM.  26

1 1  Panaritium,  pain  more  bearable  out-doors.

I  Inflammation  and  suppuration  around  roots  of  nails.

■  Tingling,  ulcerative  pain  under  nail;  in  tips  of  fingers.
^^  Lower  Limbs. '  l  Pain  in  r.  hip  joint ;  <  from  stooping,

motion,  rising  from  a  seat,  or  moving  in  bed.

■  While  walking,  suddenly  a  stitch  in  1.  hip,  which  makes

it  impossible  to  walk  on,  as  foot  no  longer  serves  as  a
support ;  pain  so  violent  that  it  could  not  be  borne  for
a  minute,  indescribable,  as  though  he  would  lose  his
senses  and  fall  down;  disappears  after  two  or  three
seconds  as  suddenly  as  it  came.

I  Pain  in  1.  hip  joint,  as  after  lying  in  a  bad  position;
makes  it  difficult  to  ascend,  also  to  sit  down  or  get  up ;
awakes  him  at  night ;  can  bear  any  one  position  only
for  a  short  time;  joint  pains  so  from  some  movements
that  he  can  hardly  help  screaming ;  at  times  one  spot  is
sensitive  to  pressure,  then  again  it  is  not,

I  I  Piercing  pain  in  1.  hip,  belly  and  small  of  back,  only
during  rest.

I  I  Stitches  in  1.  hip,  trembling  of  hands,  languor  and
oedema  of  feet.

I  1  Stabbing  pain  in  1.  hip  after  a  fall.

I  Pain  in  hip,  extending  to  knee.

■  Sciatica  when  getting  up  from  sitting,  or  turning  in  bed  ;

no  relief  in  any  position.
I  I  Pain  in  hip  >  in  certain  positions,  but  compels  one  to

move  again  after  a  short  time,  causing  intense  suffering.
I  Brown spots on inner surface of both thighs  after

syphilis.
I  Ulcers  on  outer  side  of  thigh.

■  Stiffness  of  knees  and  cracking  of  joints.

I  I  Legs  and  thighs  feel  weary  and  exhausted.

I  Legs  hot,  burn  to  knees,  evening  and  next  morning.

■  Piercing  in  soles,  in  heels;  ulcerative  pain.
I  I  Burning  in  soles  extending  to  knees.

■  Dry  heat  in  feet  at  night.

I  Itching  on  or  between  toes,  after  undressing.
iQEdema  of  feet.

■  Podagra,  gout  in  feet,  acute  and  chronic  cases.

^*  Limbs  in  General, i  i  Trembling  or  twitching  of  hands

and  languor  of  feet.
Twitching  of  hands  and  feet during sleep,  more after

midnight.
I  Pains  in  limbs,  making  him  change  his  position  often  to

obtain  relief.
I  Rheumatic  pains  in  limbs,  with  gastric  symptoms.
1  I  Cracking  of  joints  ;  arthritis.
I  Wartlike  eruptions  on  arms  and  between  thighs,  sycosis.


27  NATRUM  SULFURICUxM.

^'^  Rest.  Position.  Motion.  Rest :  pressure  in  head  > ;
most  ailments  <  ;  short  breath  >  ;  pains  in  1.  hip,  belly
and  small  of  back.

I  Can  hardly  find  a  position  where  the  pain  in  hip  and
loins  is  tolerable,  and  the  relief  by  changing  position
does  not  last  long.

I  Patient  is  obliged  to  lie  on  back.

•  Turning  or  twisting  the  body  very  painful.

Lying  down  :  >  pressure  in  head.

Lying  on  side:  violent  colic  >.

Lying  on  1.  side:  engorged  liver  <.

Can  only  lie  on  r.  side:  violent  pain  in  small  of  back.

Cannot  "lie  down  :  hay  asthma.

Cannot  lie  on  either  side  :  pain  in  sacrum.

Stooping:  brain  feels  loose;  pain  in  r.  hip  joint  <.

Sitting:  stitch  in  abdomen;  pinching  around  navel;
want  of  breath ;  stitches  in  1.  side  of  chest ;  piercing  be-
tween scapulse.

Had  to  sit  up  and  hold  chest  with  both  hands:  cough.

Standing :  coughing  causes  stitch  in  1.  side  of  chest.

After  lying  in  a  bad  position:  pain  in  1.  hip  joint.

Can  bear  any  one  position  only  for  a  short  time.

No  relief  in  any  position  :  sciatica.

Change  of  position :  compelled  by  pain  in  limbs.

Motion :  pressure  in  1.  side  <  ;  pain  in  r.  hip  joint  < ;
sometimes  causes  unbearable  pain  in  joints.

Exercise :  diarrhoea  <  ;  difficult,  from  weakness.

Moving  in  bed  :  pain  in  r.  hip  joint.

Walking :  beating  pain  in  temples ;  frequent  constriction
of  throat ;  difficult,  from  weakness ;  piercing  in  both
groins  with  urging  to  urinate;  menses  flow  freely;
short  breath  ;  stitch  in  1.  hip,  cannot  walk  on.

Swallowing:  throat  <.

Talking:  soreness  of  throat  <.

Writing :  hands  tremble.

Grasping  anything  :  flexors  pain.

Rising  from  a  seat :  pain  in  r.  hip  joint  <  ;  sciatica.

Least  motion:  breathing  <.
^^  Nerves. iWhen  lying  long  in  one  position,  the  restless  de-
sire to  move  compels  a  change  which  is  very  painful,
and  it  is  very  difficult  to  find  a  new  position  which  gives
relief.

iProstration; tired,  weary,  especially  knees,

■  Weak  and  languid,  with  malarial  symptoms.

■  Exhaustion,  with  colic.

■  Debility  and  dyspepsia  of  drunkards.

■  Trembling  of  whole  body; of hands  on  waking  and

when  writing.


NATRUM  SULFURICUM.  28

I  I  Twitching  of  hands  and  feet  during  sleep.

I  After  striking  head,  fits  driving  liim  to  distraction,  never
knew  when  they  were  coming  on,  epileptiform  ;  very-
irritable,  wanted  to  die ;  constant  pain  in  head ;  much
photophobia.

I  Chorea,  with  retarded  stools,  tetanus  of  1.  side  ;  trembling
of  r.,  gesticulating  convulsively  every  afternoon.

I  I  Locomotor  ataxia.
^"  Sleep. iDrowsiness:  in  forenoon,  especially  when  reading
or  writing;  precursor  of  jaundice.

I  Soon  after  falling  asleep,  starting  as  in  a  fright.

I  Restless,  sleepless.

I  He  may  lie  down  earlier  or  later,  after  four  or  five  hours
he  erets  awake  with  an  attack  of  asthma.

lis  awakened  by  pain  from  flatulency.

1  Heavy,  anxious,  frightful  dreams;  frequent  waking  from

unpleasant,  fantastic  dreams.
^  Time. At  2  a.m.  :  violent  colic.

Many  symptoms  <  in  morning,  >  after  breakfast  and
in  open  air.

Between  2  and  3  a.m.  :  flatulent  colic.

4  or  5  A.M. :  asthma.

Mornings:  irritable;  bitter  taste  and  lassitude;  heavy
and  dull  in  head;  burning  in  r.  eye  <;  burning  or
itching  of  edges  of  lids ;  salty  expectoration ;  greenish
scab  blown  from  nose ;  hawking  up  of  starchlike
phlegm;  oppression  on  chest  <;  no  taste;  burning
pinching  in  stomach ;  bellyache ;  diarrhoea;  loose  stools ;
emissions  of  flatus;  fatigue  and  powerlessness ;  yellow-
white  sediment  in  urine ;  sexual  desire  with  erections ;
cough  ;  oppression  on  chest ;  pain  in  back  >  on  getting
up ;  patient  pale  and  feeble ;  legs  hot,  burn  to  knees ;
perspiration.

Before  breakfast :  tearing  pain  in  belly.

After  breakfast;  pain  in  stomach  >.

At  9  A.M. :  diarrhoea.

Forenoon :  thirst ;  drowsiness.

During  day :  hawking  up  of  starchlike  phlegm ;  bitter
coating  on  tongue.

After  dinner :  vertigo.

Afternoon  :  nosebleed ;  piercing  in  both  groins  with  urging
to  urinate ;  dry  heat.

2  P.M. :  flatulent  colic.

At  4  P.M. :  stitch  in  abdomen.

After  sunset:  pressure  in  forehead;  oppression  in  chest

and  feeling  of  ball  in  throat.
From afternoon to evening:  burning  and  crawling  in

eyes  <.


29  NATRUM  SULFURICUM.

Evening :  burning  in  r.  eye  <  ;  while  reading  pressing  in
eyes ;  heat  in  r.  ear ;  thirst  for  something  very  cold ;
hiccough  ;  difficult  breathing  (in  bed) ;  painful  digging
in  abdomen  ;  sexual  desire  excited ;  piercing  between
scapulEe;  chills  and  heat;  legs  hot,  burn  to  knees;
towards,  chilliness  ;  chilly  and  feverish  ;  towards,  sudden
flashes  of  heat.

Night :  bitter  taste  and  lassitude ;  accumulation  of  mucus ;
oppression  on  chest  < ;  burning  pain  in  corner  of
mouth  ;  flatus  collects,  causing  great  pain  ;  diarrhoea  <  ;
does  not  sleep  well ;  more  urine  than  usual ;  rough  feel-
ing in  throat  <  ;  stitches  in  nape  of  neck ;  violent  pain
in  small  of  back ;  pain  in  hip  wakes  him ;  dry  heat  in
feet ;  could  not  get  warm  in  bed  ;  waking  with  anguish
and  thirst ;  sweat.

After  midnight :  twitching  of  hands  and  feet  during  sleep.
^^  Temperature  and  Weather, i  Ailments  which  are  <  or
dependent  upon  dampness  of  weather,  or  dwelling  in
damp  houses.

I  Every  Spring,  eruption  on  chest.

Open  air:  sensitiveness  of  liver  when  walking  in;  while
walking  stitches  in  1.  hypochondrium  ;  piercing  pain  in
groins  with  urging  to  urinate;  pain  more  bearable;
panaritium  more  bearable.

Warm  room  :  diarrhoea  <.

In  bed  :  chilly,  and  shaking  chills  out  of  it.

Near  fire:  burning  in  eye  <.

Hot  drink  :  toothache  intolerable.

Undressing :  itching  .of  skin.

Cool  air:  toothache  >.

From  cold  air  into  warm  room  :  pain  in  ear  <.

Cold  evening  air:  diarrhoea  <.

Cold  water :  in  mouth  >  toothache ;  blisters  on  palate  >  ;
thirst  for.

Cold  food  or  drink  :  diarrhoea  <.

Ice  and  ice-cold  water :  great  desire  for.

Moist  atmosphere  at  seashore:  ague  <.

Damp  weather:  earache  <  ;  oppression  on  chest  <  ;  loose
stools;  diarrhoea  <  ;  desire  to  take  deep  breath  ;  asthma
<  ;  ague  always  <.

Every  change  to  damp  weather :  asthma.

Living  on  wet  ground  :  earache  <.

Damp  walls:  increased  pain.

Getting  wet :  caused  rheumatic  fever.

During  storm:  flatulent  colic  <.
*"  Fever, l Internal  coldness,  with  yawning  and  stretching.

I  Chills:  with  icy  coldness  and  gooseflesh,  4  to  8  p.m.
during catamenia, towards evening, without thirst;


NATRUM  SULFURICUM.  30

evening  in  bed,  could  not  get  warm  all  night;  up  back,
with  chattering  of  teeth  and  shaking,  without  external
coldness;  waking  at  night  with  anguish  and  thirst.

I  Chilly  in  bed  and  shaking  chills  out  of  it,  thirst  in-
creased, pulse  verj^  rapid.

Chilly  and  feverish  in  evening.

I  1  Chilliness  with  warmth  of  forehead  and  hands.

1  I  Dry  heat  in  afternoon.

I  Hot  feeling  on  top  of  head  ;  sudden  flashes  towards  even-
ing; increased  warmth  of  body  and  restlessness.

I  I  Violent  fever  after  confinement.

iSweat:  without  thirst;  at  night;  in  face;  on  scrotum.

Perspiration  in  morning.

I  Chill  and  icy  coldness,  without  thirst,  followed  by  vio-
lent fever  and  sweat  without  thirst;  attacks  come  on
suddenly.

I  Chills  on  several  successive  days  followed  by  heat  and
sweat. /^Hepatitis.

iMalarial  symptoms;  alternately  creeps  and  fever.

I  I  Ague:  with  bilious  vomiting;  brought  on  or  always
made  <  by  damp  weather  or  moist  atmosphere  at  sea-
shore.

■  Remittent  bilious  fever,  or  yellow  fever  assuming  this
form ;  greenish-yellow  vomit,  brown  or  black.
^^  Attacks, Periodicity. Alternate : diarrhoea with con-
stipation.

Periodical :  returning  headaches.

Attacks  :  of  sudden  stool.

Every  morning :  diarrhoea.

Every  day  :  diarrhoea.

Every  afternoon  :  gesticulating  convulsively.

Begins  in  morning,  lasts  till  4  or  5  p.m.:  intolerable  pain
in  head.

After  every  meal :  pressive  pain  in  forehead.

4  to  8  P.M. :  chilliness  and  gooseflesh.

Four  or  five  hours  after  lying  down :  is  awakened  by  at-
tack of  asthma.

Several  successive  days:  chills  followed  by  heat  and
sweat.

During  catamenia :  chilliness.

Every  Spring :  sycotic  exanthema.

For  three  years  :  diarrhoea.

For  years  :  attacks  of  asthma.

Of  years  standing:  fistulous  abscesses.

Locality and Direction. Right: periodical attacks  of

pain  in  side  of  forehead  ;  pain  concentrated  in  temple;

head  jerked  to  side;  burning  in  eye;  piercing  pain  in

ear;  heat  in  ear;  wart  on  ring  finger;  violent  stitch  in


42


31  NATRUM  SULFURICUM.

side  of  abdomen ;  incarcerated  flatulency  in  side ;  colic
pain  in  region  of  groin ;  piercing  pain  in  flank';  dull
pani  m  region  of  kidney;  pain  on  side  of  occiput;
stitch  m  chest ;  piercing  in  palm  of  hand  ;  furuncles  on
forearm  and  near  armpit;  pain  in  hip  joint;  trembling
of  side  ;  between  scrotum  and  thigh  small  itching  scabs.

Left:_  as  if  brain  would  fall  to  temple  when  stooping;
pain  in  lower  side  of  chest ;  lying  on  side  liver  engorged
< ;  pain  in  hypochondrium ;  stitches  in  hypochon-
drium;  stitch  from  groin  to  axilla;  discharge  from  ear;
leg  greatly  swollen;  intolerable  pain  starting  from'
temple  to  r.  temple;  pain  about  last  ribs;  spasmodic
motion  of  muscles  of  side ;  pressure  in  side  near  lumbar
region  ;  piercing  in  axilla ;  stitch  in  hips ;  pain  in  hip
joint;  pain  in  hip;  stabbing  pain  in  1.  hip;  tetanus  of
side  ;  red,  knotty  eruption  on  side  of  nape  of  neck.

Inward  :  piercing  pain  in  r.  ear.
*^  Sensations.  As  if  forehead  would  burst ;  as  if  a  screw  was
being  driven  in ;  as  if  top  of  head  would  split ;  as  if
brain  was  loose  and  fell  to  1.  temple ;  as  if  brain  was
crushed  in  a  vise,  or  something  gnawing  there;  as  if
eyes  were  hot;  lids  heavy  as  if  leaden;  as  of  bells
ringing  in  ears;  as  if  tympanum  was  pressed  out;  as  if
something  was  forcing  its  way  out  of  ears  ;  as  of  a  weight
in  chest;  palate  as  if  sore  and  raw;  burning  as  if  from
pepper  in  mouth;  as  of  a  lump  in  throat  when  swal-
lowing; as  if  stomach  would  be  perforated:  stitch  as
if  in  liver,  as  if  it  would  burst  open  there ;  as  if  bowels
were  distended;  small  of  back  as  if  bruised;  r.  flank
as  if  distended;  as  of  a  ball  in  throat;  as  of  a  heavy
load  on  chest ;  piercing  as  from  knives  between  scapulae.

Sore  across  bowels,  sides  and  back.

Pain  :  in  ear ;  in  root  of  nose  ;  in  1.  lower  side ;  with  vom-
iting of  bile;  in  chest;  in  1.  hypochondriac  region;  in
small  of  back ;  in  belly ;  in  r.  flank ;  in  stomach  ;  in
ankle  joint ;  about  last  1.  ribs;  in  sacrum ;  in  hip  joints  ;
in  hip  to  knee ;  in  bones.

Intolerable  pain :  from  1.  temple  to  vertex  and  r.  temple ;
in  r.  occiput.

Excruciating  pain  :  in  abdomen.

Violent  pains :  at  base  of  brain ;  in  head  and  back  of  neck.

Indescribable  pain:  on  top  of  head;  in  1.  hip  joint.

Tearing  pain  :  down  throat ;  around  umbilicus.

Piercing  pain  :  in  r.  ear  ;  between  scapula?  and  in  middle
of  sacrum;  in  1.  axilla;  on  humerus;  back  of  hand;  in
palm  of  r.  hand;  fingers  under  nails;  in  r.  flank;  in
both  groins;  in  1.  side  of  chest;  in  1.  hip  joint;  belly
and  small  of  back  ;  in  soles ;  in  heels.


NATRUM  SULFURIC UM.  32

Violent  pulsating  pain  :  on  top  of  head.

Beating  pain  :  in  both  temples ;  in  stomach.

Throbbing  pain  :  in  teeth.

Sharp,  lightning-like  stitches:  in  ear.

Sharp,  violent  stitch  :  jn  r.  side  of  abdomen.

Sharp  stitch  :  in  r.  side  of  chest.

Stitches:  in  region  of  liver;  in  1.  hypochondrium ;  from

1.  groin  to  axilla ;  in  1.  side  of  chest ;  from  abdomen  to

1.  chest;  in  nape  of  neck;  in  1.  hip.
Stabbing  pain  :  in  1.  hip.
Violent  suppurative  pain  :  in  small  of  back.
Boring  pain:  in  r.  temple;  in  stomach.
Tingling,  ulcerative  pain :  under  nail ;  in  tips  of  fingers.
Bruised  pain:  in  bowels;  in  small  of  back  and  sacrum.
Burning  pinching :  in  stomach.
Pinching :  in  bowels ;  in  groins ;  in  hypogastrium  ;  around

navel.
Burning  pain  :  in  corner  of  mouth.
Violent  colic  :  in  abdomen.
Contractive  pain  :  in  abdomen.
Painful  digging:  in  abdomen.
Colic  pains:  in  region  of  r.  groin.
Shifting  pain  :  in  abdomen.
Pressive  pain :  in  forehead.
Rheumatic  pain  :  in  limbs.

Dead  heavy  pain :  going  from  abdomen  to  back.
Burning:  in  top  of  head;  in  r.  eye;  of  edges  of  lids;  of

lips  ;  in  gums ;  of  palate ;  in  abdomen  ;  in  anus ;  burn-
ing in  abdomen ;  in  soles  to  knees.
Smarting :  in  anus.
Soreness :  of  throat ;  of  chest ;  up  and down  spine  and

neck.
Hot  feeling :  on  top  of  head.
Burning  sensation :  in  pit  of  stomach.
Heat :  from  abdomen  to  head  ;  on  top  of  head  ;  on  vertex ;

in  r.  ear ;  in  lower  bowels ;  in  feet.
■Sensitiveness :  of  scalp  ;  of  eyes.
Pressure : in  forehead ; on  coronal  region  ; on vertex ;

over  one  eye ;  on  chest ;  in  1.  side  near  lumbar  region.
Pressing :  in  eyes.
Heaviness :  in  head  ;  of  feet.
Heavy  feeling :  of  stomach  ;  in  head.
Full  feeling  :  in  stomach  ;  in  chest.
Contraction :  of  throat.
Dulness :  of  head.

Feeling  of  numbness  and  roughness :  in  mouth.
Rough  feeling :  in  throat.
Dryness :  of  eyes  ;  of  gums ;  of  throat.


S3  NATRUM  SULFURICUM.

Creeping :  in  scalp  of  vertex.

Crawling :  in  eyes.

Sensation  of  all-goneness:  in  chest.

Itching :  of  edges  of  lids ;  of  wings  of  nose ;  of  face ;  of

anus ;  of  genitals ;  of  glans  or  penis ;  of  perineum  and

mons  veneris;  on  back;  on  or  between  toes.
"**  Tissues. Regulates  water  capacity  of  venous  system  {Natr.

m,ur.,  that  of  arterial  system).
Watery,  yellow  secretions.
QEdema,  smooth  swelling;  infiltration.
Simple  dropsy  invading  areolar  tissues  of  body ;  dropsy

after  scarlatina.
I  Sycosis,  hydrsemia  or  leucaemia,  thrombosis in hydro-

genoid constitutions, particularly with affections of

glands.
I  Morbid  ferments  in  blood,  also  in  gonorrhoea.

■  Cracking  of  joints;  knees  stiff ;  pain  in  bones;  sycosis.
I  Consumption,  in  some  forms,  to  prevent  development.

■  Fistulous  abscesses.

^^  Touch.  Passive  Motion.  Injuries,  i When  touched:  pain
in  region  of  liver ;  external  sensitiveness  of  belly ;  intes-
tines feel  bruised.

Touch:  hair  pains  on  combing;  causes  burning  of  pimple
on  chin  ;  mouth  sore  ;  liver  sore.

Pressure :  of  hand  >  pressure  in  head  ;  does  not  >  stitch
in  abdomen  ;  causes  pain  in  region  of  r.  kidney ;  causes
great  pain  in  swollen  1.  leg ;  >  soreness  of  chest;  press-
ure in  1.  side  <.

Cannot  bear  tight  clothing  about  waist.

Scratching :  causes  burning  on  scrotum ;  >  itching  of
small  scabs  between  scrotum  and  r.  thigh.

Kneading:  >  griping  in  abdomen.

Injuries:  cause  mental  troubles;  violent  pain  at  base  of
brain  and  back  of  neck.

After  a  fall :  mental  troubles;  stabbing  pain  in  1.  hip.
^^  Skin. I  Jaundice:  after  anger;  itching  of  skin  while  un-
dressing; with  malarial  symptoms;  with  hepatitis.

I  1  Chafing  of  skin  in  children  with  bilious  symptoms. •

■  Fistulous  abscesses  of  years  standing,  discharging  watery

pus,  surrounded  by  a  broad,  bluish  line,  burrowing.

■  Eczema moist and oozing profusely; secretion more

watery  than  viscid.

■  Pemphigus,  watery  vesicles  or  blebs  over  body,  wheals

containing  a  yellow,  watery,  not  glutinous  secretion.
I  I  Yellow  scales  after  breaking  of  vesicles  or  blisters.
I  I  Blisters  here  and  there.

■  Moist  skin  affections  with  bilious  symptoms,
I  iCEdematous  inflammation  of  skin.

VOL.  VIII. — 3.


NATRUM  SULFURICUM.  34

I  I  Erysipelas, smooth, red, shiny ; tingling or painful

swelling  of  skin.
iSycotic  excrescences  ;  wartlike,  red  lumps  all  over  body.

■  Between  scrotum  and  r.  thigh  small  scabs,  itching,  >  by

scratching; also on forehead, scalp, 1. neck, chest;
sycosis.

I  Red,  knotty  eruption  on  head  above  ears  ;  on  forehead

and  1.  side  of  nape  of  neck  ;  in  middle  of  chest.

■  Chronic  cutaneous  eruptions.

^^  Stages  of  Life,  Constitution, i  Sycosis.

I I  Hydrogenoid  constitution;  feels  every  change  from  dry
to  wet;  cannot  tolerate  sea  air,  nor  eat  plants  that
thrive  near  water ;  feels  best  on  a  dry  day ;  a  constitu-
tion in  which  the  gonorrhoeal  poison  is  most  pernicious.

Girl,  set.  16,  suffering  for  years ;  headache.

Woman,  set.  20,  mother  of  one  child  ;  ozsena.

Woman,  set.  24 ;  diarrhoea.

Woman,  set.  34,  blue  eyes,  brown  hair,  mother  of  six  chil-
dren, last  labor  very  difficult,  twelve  weeks  in  bed  after
it  with  wdiite  leg;  first  1.  leg  became  affected  then  r. ;
phlegmasia  alba  dolens.

Woman,  ^t.  36,  married  ;  asthma.

Woman,  set.  42,  married,  suffering  for  years;  asthma.

Man,  set.  43,  middle  height,  father  of  two  healthy  children,
blonde  hair,  grey  eyes,  gonorrhoeal  cachexy,  hydro-
genoid constitution ;  diabetes.

Man,  set.  44;  gastric  derangement.

Young  man  after  striking  head  by  being  hurled  from
truck  in  fire  department;  epileptiform  spasms.

Man,  tall,  strong,  narrow-chested,  but  no  family  histor}''
of  lung  trouble,  suffering  for  years ;  asthma.

Woman,  married,  during  past  year  under  treatment  for
chronic  bronchitis  and  other  troubles;  third  annual
attack ;  hay  asthma.

Old  lady,  hereditarily  disposed;  chronic  diarrhoea.
*®  Relations.  Compatible :  after  Ferr.  pJios.  in  polyuria  ;  after
Natr.  mur.  in  skin  diseases;  followed  by  Arsen.  in  herpes
vulvse ;  acts  well  with  Tliuya  in  sycosis  and  hydrogenoid
constitutions;  useful  in  alternation  with  Bellad.  in
oophoritis.

Compare :  Natr.  mur.  and  Sulphur,  which  have  many  sim-
ilarities ;  Graphit.  in  eye  symptoms  ;  Coffea  in  toothache;
Bryon.  in  cough  and  diarrhoea ;  Lycop.  in  cough  and
urine;  Pul sat.  in  toothache,  urine  and  >  in  open  air;
Silica  in  asthma ;  Stillingia  in  hip  disease ;  Rhus  tox.  in
pain  in  limbs  >  from  motion ;  Thuya  and  Mereur.  in
syphilis  and  gonorrhoea.


85  NICCOLUM.

NICCOLUM.

Nickel.  The  element.

Found  in  the  mountains  of  Germany,  Hungary  and  Sweden.  Called  Nickel  by
the  old  German  miners  who  discovered  it,  like  Kohalt,  thinking  it  a  kind  of
useless  or  false  ore.

It  is  a  white  malleable  metal,  of  great  density  and  high  melting  point,  of  less
oxidability  than  iron  and  strongly  magnetic.

Proved  by  Nenning  (Hartlaub  and  Trinks,  Annalen,  vol.  3,  p.  353).

Clinical  Axjtbokities. — Hiccough,  Landesmann,  Kane's  Eec,  1873,  p.  118 ;
DysmenoiThcea,  Berridge,  Organon,  vol.  1,  p.  419 ;  Hoarseness,  C.  Hg.,  MSS.

^  Mind. Low-spirited, tearful; fears something evil will

happen.
Vexed  and  very  angry  from  least  contradiction.
No  inclination  to  talk  ;  fretful.
Anxiet}^  on  moving,  as  if  sweat  would  break  out.
^  Sensorium. Confused,  as  after  intoxication,  in  morning.
Heaviness  in  forehead,  sense  of  reeling.
Dulness,  does  not  comprehend  conversation,  and  is  unable

to  relate  properly.
Vertigo :  on  rising  in  morning,  as  from  weakness ;  with

nausea and inclination to  vomit;  when rising  after

stooping,  in  evening.
*  Inner  Head. Heaviness  and  fulness  in  head,  compelling

to  rub  forehead  with  hand  ;  feels  as  if  brain  was  cut  to

pieces  on  stooping;  stupefied  sensation.
Heaviness  in  foreheiad  in  morning,  as  if  she  had  not  slept

sufficiently.
Heat  and  heaviness  in  forehead  (afternoon).
Head  feels  thick,  dull,  in  morning  as  from  loss  of  sleep.
Stitches  here  and  there,  <  stooping.
Intolerable  beating,  sticking  or  stitches  in  head,  < in

house,  >  in  fresh  air.
Pain  in  top  of  head,  as  if  a  nail  was  sticking  in  it.
■  Headache:  in  morning  after  rising,  <  till  noon,  pressure

on  vertex,  and  dulness ;  all  day,  in  forenoon  with  vom-
iting of  bile;  <  in  room,  after  walking  in  oj)en  air;

returns  every  two  weeks,  >  in  open  air.
Tearing  in  head  and  1.  eye  in  paroxysms.
'Sight  and  Eyes, l  l Vision  dim,  eyes  red  and  sensitive;

after  exertion,  especially  in  evening ;  eyes  give  out  and

burn.


NICCOLUM.  36

■  Objects  appear  too  large;  light  appears  double ;  is  sur-
rounded by  colors  of  rainbow.
Objects  look  blue  (before  r.  eye).
Cloud  before  eyes  (in  morning).
Stitches in edge  of  eyelids like  electric sparks, < on

touching.
Violent  twitching  in  eye,  with  lachrymation  and  difficulty

of  vision.
Dryness  and  heat  of  eyes  in  evening.
I  I  Burning  in  eyes,  <  morning  on  awaking  and  towards

evening ;  >  after  washing.
Heat  and  redness  of  eyes  with  pressing.
Eyelids  red  and  swollen,  with  lachrymation  and  swelling

of  Meibomian  glands;  agglutination  in  morning.
Cold  water  causes  redness  in  eyes  with  tension.
^  Hearing  and  Ears. Sudden deafness  with roaring and

humming.
Stinging  in  ears.
^  Smell  and  Nose. Violent  sneezing  without  coryza.
Dryness  of  nose.

Stoppage  of  nose,  cannot  breathe  through  it;  <  at  night.
Coryza,  fluent  during  day,  dry  during  night.
Stinging  tearing  and  soreness  at  root  of  nose.
Redness  and  swelling  at  tip  of  nose,  with  burning.
I  Nasal  catarrh.
^  Upper  Face. Sensation in face as if swollen, it seems

heavy.
Right  side  red  and  swollen,  with  sore  throat.
Redness  efface,  with  burning  and  itching  like  erysipelas.
Swelling  of  r.  side  of  face,  with  sore  throat.
Pain  in  swollen  face  wakens  him  at  night,  <  by  cold.
Skin  of  face  is  chapped.
Twitching  of  upper  lip  at  intervals.
^  Lower  Face. Herpes  on  lips  and  cheeks.
^°  Teeth  and  Gums. Teeth  feel  loose  and  elongated.
Toothache  with  tearing  in  r.  ear.
Gnawing  in  r.  lower  molar.
Ulcerated  gums.
I  iSour,  offensive  water  exudes  from  molars  on  sucking

them.
"  Taste  and  Tongue. Bitter  taste,  in  morning.

I  I  Tongue  stiff,  making  talking  difficult.
^^  Inner  Mouth. Breath  offensive,  not  aware  of  it.

Pimples  on  inner  side  of  lower  lip.
^^  Throat. Right  tonsil  swollen ;  sticking  on  swallowing,  as

if  in  uvula.
Spasmodic  choking  and  constriction.
Accumulation  of  thick  mucus  in  throat,  with  stinging.


37  NICCOLIIM.

Whole  throat  feels  sore  as  if  ulcerated,  on  swallowing,  <
in  morning;  r.  side  of  neck  is  very  sensitive,  painful  to
pressure.

Sore  throat  <  in  evening,  when  talking  and  yawning.
^*  Appetite,  Thirst. Desires,  Aversions. Hunger  without
appetite  or  any  relish  for  food,  feels  >  after  eating.

I  I  Thirst:  in  evening;  day  and  night.

Aversion  to  meat.
^^  Eating  and  Drinking. Generally  >  after  eating.
^^  Hiccough,  Belching,  Nausea  and  Vomiting. 1 1  Violent
hiccough,  especially  in  evening.

■  Hiccough,  since  two  years  almost  uninterruptedly  eight-
een to  twenty  times  a  minute,  with  soreness  of  pit  of
stomach  and  hypochondria,  coated  tongue  and  loss  of
appetite,  great  weakness,  emaciation.

Eructations  bitter,  sour  or  empty.

Nausea  in  morning.

Nausea,  dull  head ;  sour  eructations  also  mornings  after
rising.
^^  Scrobiculum and Stomach. Empty, fasting  sensation,
but  no  hunger.

Pressure  >  from  soup  or  from  eructations.

Sensation  of  great  fulness  in  stomach  after  eating.

Painful  sensation  of  constriction  of  stomach.

Stitches :  in  stomach  ;  in  pit  of  stomach,  extending  to  back.

Burning  in  stomach.

Violent  pain  like  stabs  with  a  knife,  in  pit  of  stomach.
^^  Abdomen. Abdomen  bloated,  distended.

Tension  of  abdomen  and  discharge  of  flatulence,  during
menses.

Painless  rumbling  in  abdomen.

Pinching  at  navel  and  tension  in  back  before  dinner.

Violent  cutting  in  abdomen,  followed  by  soft  stool.

Violent  stitches  as  with  knives  in  hypochondria.
^^  Stool  and  Rectum. iMuch  flatus,  fetid  or  inodorous.

Stools  :  thin,  fecal ;  yellow,  mucous,  coming  out  with  force
and  much  flatus.

•  Diarrhoea  and  tenesmus  after  milk,  <  in  morning.

Stool,  even  if  soft,  evacuated  with  great  pressure.

Constipation;  ineffectual  urging ;  stool  hard.

Before  stool ;  urging ;  pinching  ;  cutting.

During  stool :  burning,  stinging,  stitches  in  rectum  ;  vio-
lent urging ;  tenesmus.

After stool : colic ; renewed unsuccessful urging and
tenesmus;  itching,  burning  and  stitches  at  anus.
^'  Urinary  Organs. Urine  increased,  with  burning  during
micturition.

After  micturition,  discharge  of  thin  leucorrhoea.


N;CC0LUM.  38

^^  Male Sexual Organs. Erections :  after  dinner ;  in  fore-
noon ;  at  night.
Itching  on  a  small  spot  on  scrotum,  not  >  by  scratching.

^^  Female  Sexual  Organs.  Menses  :  early,  with  pain  in  ab-
domen and  small  of  back ;  late,  and  scanty ;  too  early,
too  short,  scanty.

■  Shooting  from  vertex  to  forehead, since  midnight;  weak-

ness; nausea  before  menses;  forcing  down  abdominal
pains,  first  on  1.  side  then  on  r. ;  anorexia.  ^Dysmen-
orrhoea.

During  menses,  bloated  abdomen,  colic,  pain  in  small  of
back,  burning  of  eyes,  great  debility.

I  I  Vomiting  and  colic  after  suppressed  menses;  great
restlessness.

Leucorrhoea profuse, watery, after urinating and  after
menses.
^°  Voice  and  Larynx. Trachea  and  Bronchia. Hoarse-
ness; is  scarcely  able  to  speak.

■  Hoarseness  returns  annually  (in  one  case  with  nausea,

intolerance  of  milk,  weak  eyes);  also  after  exposure  to
wind.

Roughness  in  throat,  >  by  coughing.
^^  Cough.  I  Cough:  from  tickling  in  throat,  <  evening  after
lying  down;  dry,  scraping,  from  tickling  in  trachea,
with  sleeplessness  from  midnight  till  4  a.m.;  violent,  at
night,  must  sit  up  and  hold  head ;  dry,  concussive,
often  continuing  for  hours ;  with  great  dyspnoea,  but
little  or  no  expectoration ;  dry  hacking,  in  paroxysms.

iDry,  hacking  cough,  like  tick  of  a  clock  in  its  regularity,
continuing  for  a  long  time ;  child  must  be  held  up
during  continuance  of  cough,  otherwise  it  is  seized  with
spasms ;  greatest  possible  degree  of  dyspnoea,  no  expec-
toration. ^Whooping  cough.

Expectoration  of  white  mucus.

When  coughing,  dyspnoea  and  pressure  on  chest.
^®  Inner  Chest  and  Lungs. Stitch  in  1.  chest,  also  striking
to inmost part  of  chest  and arresting  breathing,  or
causing  one  to  start,  or  when  walking,  <  on  drawing
breath.

iStitches  in  chest,  1.  side,  when  breathing.

Pressure  and  heaviness  on  chest.
^^  Neck  and  Back. Cracking  in  cervical  vertebra  on  mov-
ing head.

Pain  in  neck,  as  from  a  sprain.

Fine  stitches  and  feeling  of  tension  in  nape  of  neck  on
motion.

Stitches  in  small  of  back.

Painful  gnawing  in  small  of  back.


39  NICCOLUM.

Pain  in  small  of  back  during  soft  stool.

Itching  and  pimples  on  small  of  back.

Stitch  striking  from  back  to  pit  of  stomach,  in  afternoon

when  sitting.
^^  Upper  Limbs. Left  shoulder  as  if  sprained  or  dislocated,

<  from  violent  motion.
Itching  on  shoulders ;  scratching  does  not  relieve.
Rheumatic  pains  in  elbows,  extending  to  hands.
Hands  feel  heavy,  tremble,  feel  bruised.
Rheumatic  pains  in  fingers.
^^  Lower  Limbs. Itching  herpes  on  hips.

Pain  as  from  weariness  in  legs,  pressing  towards  groins,

diarrhoea,  during  menses.
Stitches  in  r.  patella.
Rheumatic  pains  from  knees  downward.
Feet  feel  heavy,  tremble  and  are  weak.
Itching  and  stitches  in  1.  heel.
^*  Limbs  in  General. Tearing  in  scapulae,  down  arms,  in

hips  and  down  legs.
Left  arm  and  leg  feel  as  if  they  would  fall  asleep ;  after-
noon, sitting.
Hands  and  feet  feel  heavy,  <  by  motion.
^^  Rest. Position. Motion. Sitting : stitch  from  back  to

pit  of  stomach.
Must  sit  up  and  hold  head :  cough.
Stooping:  as  if  brain  was  cut  to  pieces  ;  stitches  <.
Rising  :  after  stooping,  vertigo.
After  rising:  cough  <.
Compelled  to  change  position  continually.
Motion :  anxiety ;  of  head  ;  cracking  of  cervical  vertebrse ;

fine  stitches  and  feeling  of  tension  in  nape  of  neck  ;

violent pain in 1. shoulder >; heaviness  of  hands

and  feet.
Talking  and  yawning:  sore  throat  <.
Walking  :  stitch  in  1.  chest.

Must  rise  and  walk  to  obtain  relief  from  restlessness.
^®  Nerves. Great restlessness ; <  at night ; compelled to

change  position  continually ;  vomiting  and  colic  after

suppressed  menstruation.
Feels  sick  and  feverish,  as  if  a  severe  illness  was  impending.
Great  debility,  especially  in  evening.
Heaviness  in  hands  and  feet,  >  by  motion.
I  I  Literary  men  and  others  who  suffer  from  periodical

nervous  headaches;  weak,  asthenopic,  weak  digestion,

constipation ;  <  in  morning  on  awaking.
^^  Sleep. Yawning,  drowsiness.

Restless  sleep; wakefulness; at  3  a.m.,  restlessness  and

heat ;  feels  sore  all  over ;  must  rise  and  walk  about  to

obtain  relief.


NICCOLUM.  40

Awakens  after  midnight  with  colic.
^^  Time. At  3  a.m.  :  restless  sleep.

Morning :  confused  ;  on  rising,  vertigo  ;  as  if  she  had  not
slept  sufficiently  ;  head  feels  thick  and  dull ;  after  rising,
headache;  clouds  before  eyes;  burning  in  eyes  <;  ag-
glutination ;  bitter  taste ;  sore  throat  <  ;  nausea ;  sour
eructations  after  rising ;  diarrhoea  and  tenesmus  <  ;
sweat.

Forenoon  :  headache,  with  vomiting ;  erections.

Before  dinner :  pinching  at  navel  and  tension  in  back.

Till  noon  :  headache  <.

Day :  thirst.

After  dinner :  erections.

Afternoon :  heat  and  heaviness  in  forehead.

Evening :  vertigo ;  eyes  dim  and  sensitive ;  dryness  and
heat  in  eyes ;  towards,  burning  in  eyes ;  sore  throat  <  ;
thirst;  violent  hiccough;  cough  <;  great  debility;  in
bed,  shivering  followed  by  sweat;  heat,  followed  by
chilliness.

Night :  stoppage  of  nose  <  ;  dry  coryza ;  awakes  with
pain  in  swollen  face ;  thirst ;  erections  ;  violent  cough ;
great  restlessness  <  ;  heat,  restlessness  and  vomiting.

From  midnight  till  4  a.m.  :  sleeplessness  and  tickling  in
trachea.

After  midnight :  awakes  with  colic ;  sweat.

Since  midnight:  shooting  from  vertex  to  forehead.
^^  Temperature  and  Weather. Fresh  air :  stitches  in  head
>  ;  headache  >.

In  house:  stitches  in  head  <  ;  headache  <.

Warmth  of  stove  :  shivering  in  back  >.

Exposure  to  wind  :  hoarseness.

Cold:  pain  in  face  >.

Washing:  burning  of  eyes  >.

Cold  water:  causes  redness  of  eyes.
*°  Fever. Chilliness  predominates.

Chill  is  preceded  by  or  begins  with  yawning  and  sleepiness.

Shivering  in  back,  >  from  warmth  of  stove.

Shivering  and  heat  alternately.

Chill  with  chattering  and  shaking,  followed  by  profuse
general  sweat,  in  evening  in  bed.

Heat :  followed  by  chilliness,  in  evening,  continuous  chill,
with  moist  palms  of  hands.

Sensation  of  heat  all  over,  with  anxiety  and  prostration.

Anxious  heat  with  violent  thirst.

Dry  heat  with  thirst  every  afternoon  at  3  o'clock.

Heat,  restlessness  and  vomiting  at  night,  must  rise.

Heat  with  sweat  and  thirst,  followed  by  chill.

Sweat  in  morning  in  bed,  or  after  midnight.


41  NICCOLUM.

^'  Attacks,  Periodicity. Alternately :  shivering  and  heat.

Periodical  nervous  headache.

Eighteen  to  twenty  times  a  minute  :  hiccough.

Every  afternoon  at  3 :  dry  heat,  with  thirst.

Every  two  weeks :  headache  returns.

Annually :  hoarseness  returns.

Since  two  years  :  hiccough.
*^  Locality  and  Direction. Right :  objects  look  blue  before
eye ;  swelling  of  side  of  face ;  tearing  in  ear ;  gnawing
in  lower  molar ;  tonsil  swollen  ;  side  of  neck  sensitive ;
stitch  in  patella.

Left:  tearing  in  eye;  stitch  in  chest;  shoulder  as  if
sprained  or  dislocated  ;  itching  and  stitches  in  heel ;
arm  and  leg  feel  as  if  they  would  fall  asleep.

First  1.  then  r. :  abdominal  pains.
**  Sensations.  As  if  sweat  would  break  out ;  as  if  brain  was
cut  to  pieces ;  as  if  she  had  not  slept  sufficiently  ;  as  if
a  nail  was  sticking  in  head ;  face  as  if  swollen ;  teeth
as  if  loose ;  sticking  as  if  in  uvula ;  throat  as  if
ulcerated ;  pain  in  neck  as  from  a  sprain  ;  1.  shoulder
as  if  sprained ;  as  if  1.  arm  and  leg  would  fall  asleep ;
as  if  a  severe  illness  was  impending;  itching  as  if
from  fleas.

Pain  :  in  top  of  head  ;  in  swelled  face ;  in  teeth ;  in  abdo-
men and  small  of  back;  in  neck;  pressing  towards
groins.

Intolerable  beating,  sticking,  or  stitches :  in  head ;  in  r.
patella.

Violent  pain,  like  stabs  of  a  knife :  in  pit  of  stomach.

Violent  cutting :  in  abdomen.

Violent  stitches  :  in  hypochondria.

Tearing :  in  head ;  in  1.  eye  ;  in  r.  ear ;  in  scapulae,  down
arms,  in  hips,  down  legs.

Shooting  :  from  vertex  to  forehead.
.Painful  gnawing:  in  small  of  back.

Gnawing :  in  r.  molar  tooth.

Pinching :  at  navel.

Stitches :  here  and  there  ;  in  edge  of  eyelids;  in  stomach  ;
in  pit  of  stomach,  extending  to  back ;  at  anus ;  in  1.
chest ;  in  small  of  back ;  striking  from  back  to  pit  of
stomach  ;  in  1.  heel.

Burning,  stinging,  stitches:  in  rectum.

Stinging,  tearing  and  soreness :  at  root  of  nose.

Stinging :  in  ears.

Sticking :  in  tonsil.

Rheumatic  pains  :  in  elbows,  to  hands;  in  fingers;  from
knees  downward.

Soreness:  of  throat;  of  pit  of  stomach;  all  over.


NICCOLUM.  42

Painful  sensation  of  constriction  :  of  stomach.

Tension  :  in  back.

Burning:  in  eyes;  at  tip  of  nose;  of  face;  in  stomach;
at  anus.

Heat:  of  eyes;  all  over.

Violent  twitching  :  in  eye.

Twitching :  of  upper  lip.

Pressure  :  on  vertex  ;  in  eyes  ;  in  chest.

Heaviness :  in forehead ; in  head  ;  in  chest ; of hands
and  feet.

Fulness  :  in  head  ;  in  stomach.

Thick  feeling  :  in  head.

Tickling :  in  throat ;  in  trachea.

Roughness:  in  throat.

Dryness  :  of  eyes  ;  of  nose.

Itching:  of  face;  at  anus;  on  a  small  spot  on  scrotum;
on  small  of  back ;  on  shoulders  ;  herpes  on  hips  ;  in  1.
heel ;  over  whole  body.
**  Tissues. Catarrhs.

*^  Touch. Passive  Motion. Injuries. Touch  : stitch  in
edge  of  eyelids.

Pressure :  throat  painful.

Must  rub  forehead  with  hand  :  heaviness  in  head.

Scratching:  does  not  >  itching  on  a  small  spot  on
scrotum ;  does  not  >  itching  on  shoulder ;  followed  by
small  tubercles.
*®  Skin.  Itching  over  whole  body,  but  mostly  on  neck,  as
from  fleas ;  not  >  by  scratching,  but  follow^ed  by  small
vesicles.

Fine  burning,  stinging,  biting.

Burning  stinging  as  from  bees.

Small  tubercles  after  scratching.
^^  Stages  of  Life,  Constitution.  Girl,  set.  19,  menses  ap-
peared at  14 ;  dysmenorrhoea.
*^  Relations.  Hyosc,  Natr.  mur.,  Phosphor,  in  objects  appear
large;  Hyosc,  Flatin.,  Stramon.  in  objects  appear  small;
Lycop.,  Stramon.,  Zincum  in  objects  appear  blue ;  Phos-
phor.,  Gelsem.  in  diplopia ;  in  rainbow  colors  around
light ;  Nux  vom.  and  Sulphur  in  coryza ;  Sulphur  in
redness  of  tip  of  nose ;  Ferrum  in  red  face ;  Mangan.
in  toothache  with  tearing  in  ear ;  Gelsem.,  Silic.  and
Sulphur  in  periodical  headache ;  Carbo  an.,  Ignat.  and
Sepia  in  emptiness  of  stomach  ;  Petrol,  in  cracking  in
neck  and  stiffness  of  jaw ;  Pulsat.  in  headache,  menses,
chilliness ;  Fluor,  ac.  and  Kohalt.  in  feeling  better  in
morning  without  having  slept ;  Arsen.  in  annual  hoarse-
ness ;  Nux  vom.  in  literary  men.


43  NITRI  SPIRITUS  DULCIS.

NITRI  SPIRITUS  DULCIS.

Sweet  Spirits  of  Nitre.  .  C^  H^  NO^.

Alcoholized  nitric  ether  is  colorless,  perfectly  limpid,  of  a  strong  and  agreeable
smell,  a  sweetish,  aromatic  taste,  It  should  be  kept  in  well-stoppered  vials,  filled
completely. — Am.  Horn.  Pharra.

Provings  by  Lembke  (Zeit.  fiir  Hom.  Klin.,  vol.  4,  p.  145,  and  Neue  Zeit.  fiir
Hom.  Klin.,  vol.  17,  p.  36).

Clintcat.  Authorities. — Prosopalgia,  Liedbeck,  Kiick.  Kl.  Erf.,vol.5,  p.  187  ;
Allg.  Hom.  Ztg.,  vol.  73,  p.  66;  Soreness  of  mouth,  Georgii,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  5,
p.  203  ;  Biarrhoea,  Liedbeck,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  5,  p.  424 ;  Allg.  Hom.  Ztg.,  vol.
73,  p.  66  ;  Typhoid,  Hahnemann,  Fielitz,  Euck.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  4,  p.  758 ;  Hering's
Cond.  Mat.  Med.,  p.  751.

^  Sensormm. Lethargy.

I  Sensorial  apathy,  a  sort  of  half  paralysis  of  mental
organs;  can  be  aroused,  when  he  answers  slowly  but
relevantly,  and  again  goes  into  a  stupor.  ^Typhoid
fever.

I  Lies  indolently  without  sleeping  or  speaking;  scarcely
answers ;  appears  to  hear  without  understanding  what
is  said  or  without  allowing  it  to  make  any  impression
upon  him.  The  few  words  he  says  he  whispers,  but  not
irrelevant ;  he  appears  to  feel  almost  nothing  and  to  be
almost  immovable,  and  yet  not  quite  paralyzed.

Vertigo  with  dulness;  while  sitting,  upper  part  of  body
sways  to  and  fro.
^  Inner  Head. Confusion,  fulness,  heaviness  or  violent  bor-
ing pains  in  forehead.

Drawing,  tearing  pains  or  pressure  and  heaviness  in  head.

Boring  or  pressure  in  temple ;  heaviness.

Stitches  in  vertex.

Pressure,  heaviness  and  heat  in  occiput.
^  Outer  Head. Drawing  or  horripilation  on  scalp.
^  Sight  and  Eyes. Black  spots  and  rings  float  before  eyes ;
pupils  contracted.

Stitches  in  eyes  and  lids ;  burning  in  margins.

Twitches  in  r.  upper  lid.
®  Upper  Face. Sensation  as  of  a  cloud  over  upper  part  of
face.

■  Prosopalgia  after  catching  cold  during  stormy  w^eather  ;
both sides affected ; photophobia ; burning heat in


NITRI  SPIRITUS  DULCIS.  '  44

cheeks ;  vomiting  followed  by  lassitude ;  at  times  at-
tacks accompanied  by  pains  in  arms  and  back  ;  if  pain
is  confined  to  r.  side  it  is  less  severe,  but  vomiting  is  <,
often  thirteen  times  in  twenty-four  hours;  if  pain  is  on
1.  side  it  is  very  severe  and  vomiting  is  >  ;  eye  sym-
pathetically affected,  pupil  contracted,  eyelid  hanging,
shortness  of  breath  and  wheezing  before  an  attack,
especially  while  eating;  least  mental  disturbance  brings
on  or  aggravates  attack  ;  attacks  more  frequent  and
severe  during  Winter  and  Spring;  very  sensitive  to  cold.

Boring  and  pressure  in  bones  of  face  ;  stitches  in  muscles.
^  Lower  Face. Boring  in  lower  jaw,  in  angles.

Twitching  in  middle  of  1.  upper  lip.

■  Chronic  soreness  in  corners  of  mouth  ;  patient  eats  much

salt.
^°  Teeth  and  Gums. Tearing  drawing  pain  in  teeth.
"  Taste  and  Tongue. Taste :  salty  on  tip  of  tongue  ;  of  lye.
Cutting,  burning  and  stitches in tongue ;  fine stitches
in  tip.
^^  Inner  Mouth. ■  Cankers  after  eating  cheese.

Much  mucus  in  mouth  ;  salivation.
13  Throat. Increased  mucus,  dryness  in  throat.

Cramp  extending  from  below  upward  in  oesophagus.
^^  Eating and  Drinking, i  After  eating  cheese  cankers  in

mouth.
^^  Hiccough,  Belching,  Nausea  and  Vomiting. Eructa-
tions of  air.
Qualmishness,  nausea,  vomiting.
^^  Scrobiculum  and  Stomach. Paroxysmal  cutting  deep  in
stomach,  flushes  of  heat  and  hot  sweat.
Heaviness,  fulness  and  oppression  in  pit  of  stomach.
Pressure  in  stomach :  extending  up  oesophagus  ;  as  from

a  dull  instrument.
Aching,  contracting  pain  from  eating  too  much  salt;  ful-
ness in  stomach  after  a  meal,  with  sour  or  slimy  vomit-
ing ;  loss  of  appetite ;  heartburn  ;  acidity.

■  For  more  than  ten  years  has  suffered  from  an  affection

of  stomach  supposed  to  be  cancer ;  passive  motion  like

riding  greatly  aggravates  his  suffering  ;  eats  too  much

salt  and  salted  food.
'^  Hypochondria, llncarcerated  gall  stones  (with  yolk  of  egg

beaten  up  applied  inwardly  and  outwardly).
^^  Abdomen. Rumbling  in  abdomen ;  cutting  ^n  umbilical

region.

■  Colic.

Stitches  in  1.  side  below  navel,  extending  towards  bladder.
^^  Stool and  Rectum. ■Bloody diarrhoea after purpura
caused  by  excessive  use  of  salt.


45  NITRI  SPIRITUS  DULCIS.

I  I  Epidemic  dysentery  with  lethargy.
^'  Urinary  Organs. Frequent  desire  to  urinate,  urine  clear.

Increased  urination ;  diuretic  effects.
^^  Male  Sexual  Organs. Violent  cutting  stitches  in  tip  of

urethra.
^'  Voice  and  Larynx. Trachea  and  Bronchia. Tickling
in  larynx  ;  short,  dry  cough.
Stitches  in  larynx  and  constriction.
^^  Respiration. Inhalations  intermit.

I  Breathing  slow  and  regular;  on  walking  a  short  dis-
tance it  becomes  very  hurried ;  if  attempt  is  persevered
in  it  becomes  quick,  difficult  and  painful,  and  a  most
distressing  sense  of  painful  constriction  is  felt  under-
neath sternum.
'"  Cough. Short,  dry  cough.

^^  Inner  Chest  and  Lungs. Pressure  and  stitches  in  chest.
Cramp  rising  up  in  oesophagus ;  pressure  behind  sternum.
^^  Heart,  Pulse  and  Circulation. Violent  beating  of  heart ;
feeling  of  pressure.
Small  intermitting  pulse.
^^  Neck  and  Back. Violent  pressure  in  nape  of  neck  and
cervical  vertebrse.
Pressure  and  stitches  in  region  of  spine.
Sensation  as  if  hot  water  was  creeping  through  back  from
below  upward.
^^  Upper  Limbs. Painful weakness in 1.  shoulder  and in
several  fingers.
Stitches  in  shoulder  joints,  muscles  of  arms  and  finger

joints.
Violent  pain  in  r.  shoulder.

Pressure  in  clavicles,  shoulder  joints,  shoulders,  muscles
of  arms,  wrists  and  fingers.
Lower  Limbs. Persistent,  pressive  pain  in  1.  hip  joint.
Boring,  pressive  pain  in  lower  extremities.
Boring  in  1.  hip,  tibiae  and  feet.
Drawing,  pressure  and  stitches  in  knee.
Violent  pressure  in  r.  leg,  ankle  and  malleoli.
Tearing,  drawing,  boring  in  feet.
Stitches  in  toe  joints.
^*  Limbs in General. Pressure, boring and stitches in
muscles  and  joints  of  extremities.
Drawing  in  calves  and  scapulae.
Wandering  pains  in  limbs.
^  Rest. Position. Motion. Lies  in  bed  motionless.
While  sitting :  upper  part  of  body  sways  to  and  fro.
Walking:  a  short  distance,  breathing  becomes  hurried.
Nerves. Loss  of  muscular  power;  laming  of  muscles.
Exerts  a  stimulant  action  upon  nervous  system  ;  has  the


33


36


NITRI  SPIRITUS  DULCIS.  46

same  action  upon  disturbed  innervation  as  the  so-called

anti-spasmodics.
.^^Temperature  and  Weather. After  catching  cold  during

stormy  weather:  prosopalgia.
Cold :  very  sensitive  to.
*°  Fever. Chilliness: internal,  with  cold  hands; frequent;

creeping  under  skin,  from  small  of  back  to  lower  limbs ;

followed  by  heat ;  in  back  and  limbs.
Heat :  in  head  and  face ;  in  nape  of  neck  and  occiput ;

with  swollen  veins;  from  cervical  spine  into  occiput;  in

head  and  face,  with  chilliness  in  back,  and  cold  hands ;

in  back ;  with  inclination  to  perspire.

■  Sensorial apathy,  a sort of  half paralysis of mental

organs ;  lies  in  bed  motionless,  and  without  sleeping  or
speaking;  will  hardly  answer  when  urged  to  do  so;
appears  hardly  to  feel  anything,  and  yet  there  is  not
complete  stupor. ^Typhoid.

■  Wild,  staring  eyes; hears nothing; dry,  brown  lips;

desires  nothing,  unconscious  of  natural  necessities ;  great

prostration; murmuring  and  delirium during sleep;

cannot  be  wholly  aroused  from  her  apathy,  and  appears

to  be  unconscious  of  touch. ^Typhoid.
Adynamic  rather  than  sthenic  fevers ;  fever  with  nervous

symptoms,  such  as  startings,  jerkings,  etc.
*^  Attacks, Periodicity. In twenty-four  hours: vomiting

thirteen  times.
For  more  than  ten  years:  suffered  from  an  affection  of

stomach  supposed  to  be  cancer.
During  Winter  and  Spring:  attacks  of  prosopalgia  more

frequent  and  severe.
*"  Locality  and  Direction. Right : twitches  in  upper  Jid ;

pain  on  side  of  face  less  severe ;  violent  pain  in  shoulder ;

violent  pressure  in  leg,  ankle  and  malleoli ;  crawling

in  forepart  of  tibia.
Left:  pain on side of  face very severe; twitching in

middle of  upper lip ; stitches in side below navel ;

painful weakness in  shoulder ;  pressive pain in hip

joint;  boring  in  hip;  stitching  in  axilla.
From  below  upward  :  cramp  in  oesophagus.
*^  Sensations. As  of  a  cloud  over  upper  part  of  face;  pressure

as  from  a  dull  instrument  in  stomach ;  as  if  hot  water

was  creeping  through  back  from  below  upward.
Pains :  in  arms  and  back.
Violent  pain :  in  r.  shoulder.
Violent  boring  pains :  in  forehead.
Tearing,  drawing,  boring:  in  feet.
Drawing,  tearing  pains :  in  head ;  in  teeth.
Cutting :  in  tongue ;  deep  in  stomach;  in  umbilical  region.


47  NITRI  SPIRITUS  DULCIS.

Boring:  in  temple;  in  bones  of  face;  in  lower  jaw;  in  1.
hip,  tibiae  and  feet.

Boring,  pressive  pain :  in  lower  extremities.

Violent  cutting  stitches:  in  tip  of  urethra.

Stitches :  in  vertex  ;  in  eyes  and  lids  ;  in  muscles  of  face ;
in- tongue;  in  1.  side  below  navel  towards  bladder;  in
larynx;  in  chest;  in  region  of  spine ;  in  shoulder  joints,
muscles_  of  arms  and  finger  joints;  in  knee;  in  toe
joints  ;  in  muscles  and  joints  of  extremities ;  in  skin  of
1.  axilla.

Fine  stitches  in  tip  of  tongue.

Wandering  pains :  in  limbs.

Aching,  contracting  pain  in  stomach.

Cramps  extending  from  below  upward  in  oesophagus.

Drawing:  in  scalp;  in  knee;  in  calves  and  scapulEe.

Persistent  pressive  pain  :  in  1.  hip  joint.

Violent  pressure :  in  nape  of  neck  and  cervical  vertebrse ;
in  r.  leg,  ankle  and  malleoli.

Pressure  and  heaviness  :  in  head  ;  in  occiput.

Pressure :  in  temple ;  in  bones  of  face ;  in  stomach ;  in
chest;  behind  sternum;  about  heart;  in  region  of
spine ;  in  clavicles,  shoulder  joints,  shoulders,  muscles
of  arms,  wrists  and  fingers ;  in  knee.

Painful  weakness :  in  1.  shoulder  and  in  several  fingers.

Soreness :  in  corners  of  mouth.

Burning  heat:  in  cheeks.

Burning:  in  margins  of  lids;  in  tongue.

Heat:  in  occiput;  in  head  and  face;  in  nape  of  neck;
from  cervical  spine  .to  occiput ;  in  back.

Dryness :  in  throat.

Constriction  :  in  larynx  ;  painful  underneath  sternum.

Fulness:  in  forehead;  in  pit  of  stomach.

Heaviness :  in  forehead ;  in  pit  of  stomach.

Confusion :  in  forehead.

Twitches:  in  r.  upper  lid;  in  1.  upper  lip.

Crawling :  in  skin  and  forepart  of  r.  tibia.
*^  Touch. Passive  Motion. Injuries. Passive  motion  like

riding  greatly  aggravates  affections  of  stomach.
*®  Skin. Crawling  in  skin  and  forepart  of  r.  tibia.

Stitches  in  skin  of  1.  axilla.

1  I  Warts  from  having  used  too  much  salt.
Stages of Life, Constitution. Young girl, otherwise
healthy,  suffering  two  or  three  years ;  soreness  in  cor-
ners of  mouth.

Boy,  after  recovery  from  purpura,  caused  by  excessive  use
of  salt;  diarrhoea.

Woman,  set.  33,  unmarried,  blonde,  anemic,  five  years
ago  had  pneumonia  and  measles,  and  was  bled  much ;
prosopalgia.


47


NITRI  SPIRITUS  DULCIS— NITHIC  ACID.  48

Man,  set.  50,  small  stature,  smoker,  suffering  ten  years ;

affection  of  stomach.
Woman,  set.  55,  weak  during  typhoid ;  stupor.
^^  Relations. Antidoted  by : Calc.  ostr.,  Camphor,  I  Carbo  veg.,

t  Caustic,  I  Conium,  \Kali  carb.,  Natr.  carb.,  tiNat7\  mur.,

Nitrum,  Opium,  Sepia.
Incompatible:  Digit,  and  Ran.  bulb.


NITRIC  ACID.

Nitric  Acid.  H  N  0^.

Introduced  by  Hahnemann  ;  proved  by  himself,  Bethmann,  Foissac,  Hartmann,
Hering,  Rummel,  Stapf  and  others  (Chronische  Krankheiten).  Later  provings  by
Robinson  (B.  Jour.  Horn.,  vol.  25,  p.  235),  Berridge  (N.  Am.  Jour,  of  Hom.  N.  S.,
vol.  3,  p.  101,  and  Amer.  Jour,  of  Hom.  Mat.  Med.,  vol.  8,  p.  128).  Toxicological
reports  are  numerous.

Clinical  Authokities. — Effects  of  overexertion  of  mind  and  body,  Haynel,  Ana-
lytical Therapeutics,  vol.  1,  p.  108 ;  Dread  of  Cholera,  Salzer,  Raue's  Record,  1875,
p.  31;  Amblyopia  (with  Aurum),  Small,  Raue's  Rec,  1872,  p.  77  ;  Syphilitic  iritis,
Berridge,  N.  A.  J.  H.,  vol.  22,  p.  192 ;  Affections  of  cornea,  Lobethal,  Gross,  Weber,
Riick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  1,  p.  275;  Scrofulous  ophthalmia,  Goullon,  Times  Retros.,  1877,
p.  58;  (with  Sidph.),  Gonorrhceal  ophthalmia,  Norton,  Ophth.  Therap.,  p.  131;
Knorre,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  1,  p.  314;  Lachrymation,  Goullon,  Raue's  Rec,  1871,
p.  57  ;  Condyloma  on  eyelid,  Wahle,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf,  vol.  1,  p.  318  ;  Otorrhcea,  Lobe-
thal, Times  Retros.,  1876,  p.  66 ;  Epistaxis,  Rosenberg,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  5,  p.  177 ;
Catarrh  of  nose,  Rosenberg,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf,  vol.  5,  p.  173 ;  Syphilitic  ozcena,  T.  C.
D.,  Organon,  vol.  1,  p.  222 ;  Freckles  on  face,  Lippe,  Raue's  Rec,  1872,  p.  95 ;
Toothache,  Bcenninghausen,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  1,  p.  469;  Affection  of  teeth,  Alt-
schul,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  5,  p.  207  ;  Fetor  oris,  Matthes,  N.  E.  M.  G.,  vol.  6,  p.  6;
Raue's  Rec,  1872,  p.  6 ;  Stomacace,  Weber,  Mschk.,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  1,  p.  510 ;
Stomatitis,  Hartmann,  Meyer,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf,  vol.  5,  p.  222 ;  Raue's  Rec,  1876,  p.
83;  Ulcers  on  fauces  and  soft  palate,  Windelband,  Times  Retros.,  1877,  p.  38;
Ulcers  on  tonsils  and  pharynx,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  5,  p.  248  ;  Syphilitic  affections  of
mouth  and  pharynx,  Meyer,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  5,  p.  247 ;  Tumor  in  mouth,  Slo-
comb,  N.  E.  M.  G.,  vol.  5,  p.  485 ;  Ptyalism,  Kirsch,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf,  vol.  1,  p.  510 ;
Angina,  Griessel,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  1,  p.  537 ;  Sore  throat,  Edmundson,  Hah.
Mo.,  vol.  8,  p.  471 ;  Diphtheria,  Goullon,  Times  Retros.,  1875,  p.  60 ;  Lippe,  Times
Retros.,  1876,  p.  74 ;  Guernsey,  Raue's  Rec,  1871,  p.  73 ;  Houard,  Hah.  Mon.,  vol.
10,  p.  327;  Merritt,  A.  H.  O.,  vol.  4,  p.  399;  (3  cases)  Billig,  A.  H.  Z.,  vol.  110
p.  27,  45 ;  Hirsch,  Goullon,  Villers,  Lorbacher,  Lippe,  Sybel,  Billig,  Palmer,  Mer-
ritt, (Ehme's  Diphtheria,  pp.  61-5  ;  Chronic  affection  of  throat,  Arnold,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf.,
vol.  5,  p.  247 ;  Appetite  for  chalk]  Matthes,  N.  E.  M.  G.,  vol.  6,  p.  8 ;  Dyspepsia^
Miller,  Hah.  Mo.,  vol.  10,  p.  161 ;  Diarrhoea,  Negendank,  Hom.  CI.,  vol.  2,  p.  209  ;


49  NITRIC  ACID.

C hronic  diarrhcea,  Hirsch,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  5,  p.  423;  Chronic  ulceration  of  bowels,
Bennett,  Horn.  CI.,  vol.  2,  p.  159;  Dysentery,  Chapman,  B.  J.  H.,  vol.  7,  p.  390
Hirsch,  Raue's  Rec,  1875,  p.  147 ;  Constipation,  Brown,  Raue's  Rec,  1875,  p.  115
Hills,  Times  Retros.,  1877,  p.  96;  Constipation  and  piles,  Berridge,  Horn.  Phys.,
vol.  4,  p.  288 ;  Cutting  in  rectum,  C.  G.  R.,  Raue's  Rec,  1872,  p.  6  ;  Fissure  of  rec-
tum (with  Hepar),  Cox,  Raue's  Rec,  1872,  p.  153;  Hemorrhoids,  Williamson,,
Raue's  Rec,  1872,  p.  6;  Eggert,  Raue's  Rec,  1875,  p.  162;  Gillett,  Knorre,  L.,
Riick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  1,  p.  1000;  Gross,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.5,  p.  494;  Hemorrhoids
and  anal  fissure,  Ostrom,  Organon,  vol.  3,  p.  206  ;  Contracted  kidney,  Kidd,  B.  J.  H.,
vol.  13,  p.  567;  Kidd,  Hirsch,  Quaglio,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  5,  p.  524;  Urinary
difficulty,  Rentsch,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  5,  p-  505 ;  Hcemaiuria,  difficidt  urination,
Goullon,  Lembke,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  2,  p.  23;  Oonorrhcea,  Attomyr,  Stapf,  Goul-
lon,  Schreter,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  2,  p.  90;  Gollman,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  5,  p.
546 ;  Oonorrhcea  and  buboes,  Hirsch,  Raue's  Rec,  1874,  p.  222 ;  Ulcer  on  peniSy
Berridge,  Horn.  Phys.,  vol.  6,  p.  211 ;  Chancres,  Guernsey,  T.  H.  M.  S.  Pa.,  1874,
p.  233;  Times  Retros.,  1875,  p.  91;  Sycosis;  Chancres;  Condylomata;  Buboes;
Oonorrhcea ;  Hahnemann,  Lobethal,  Trinks,  Attomyr,  Buchner,  Hofrichter,  Hart-
mann,  AVehsemeyer,  Rummel,  Liedbeck,  Fielitz,  Rosenberg,  Horner,  Guylas,
Langhammer,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  2,  pp.  158-166 ;  Paraphimosis,  Hoyne,  Times
Retros.,  1876,  p.  113;  Gleet,  Stapf,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  2,  p.  90;  Itching  on  genitals,
Berridge,  Hah.  Mo.,  vol.  10,  p.  77;  Chronic  metritis,  Butman,  Times  Retros.,  1876,
p.  126  ;  Excrescences  on  uterus,  Goullon,  Raue's  Rec,  1870,  p.  251 ;  Uterine  hemor-
rhage, Goullon,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf,  vol.  2,  p.  318 ;  Menstrual  disturbance,  Howells,  Or-
ganon, vol.  2,  p.  383  ;  Vaginitis,  Triiger,  Maylander,  Times  Retros.,  p.  106 ;  Leu-
corrhoea,  Hartmann,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  2,  p.  365 ;  Goullon,  Raue's  Rec,  1873,  p.
164 ;  Uterine  hemorrhage  during  pregnancy,  Goullon,  Raue's  Rec,  1873,  p.  177 ;
Syphilitic  laryngitis,  Hoyne,  Times  Retros.,  1876,  p.  83  ;  Cough,  Hirsch,  Riick.  Kl.
Erf.,  vol.  5,  p.  688;  Whooping  cough,  6  cases,  inhalation  of  gas,  Lederer,  B.  J.  H.,
vol.  15,  p.  249 ;  Pneumonia  (with  Aeon.),  Stens,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  5,  p.  824;
Pleurisy,  Goullon,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  3,  p.  306  ;  Swelling  of  cervical  glands,  Kun-
kel,  A.  H.  Z.,  voh  109,  p.  134;  Whitlow,  9  cases  (locally),  Olmstead,  A.  H.  O.,
vol.1,  p.  183;  Panaritium,  3  cases,  (locally),  Hirsch,  B.  J.  H.,  vol.  21,  p.  218;
Warts  and  rhagades  on  hands,  Gaillard,  Horn.  CL,  vol.  3,  p.  135 ;  Chilblains,  Effects
of  cold,  Lobethal,  Goullon,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  4,  p.  175 ;  Offensive  foot  sweat,  Gorton,
Raue's  Rec,  1874,  p.  297  ;  Intermittent  fever,  Watson,  N.  A.  J.  H.,  vol.  6,  p.  208 ;
Ague,  Terry,  N.  A.  J.  H.,  vol.  25,  p.  310;  Night  sweats,  Miiller,  Raue's  Rec,
1871,  p.  102  ;  Typhoid  fever,  Goullon,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  4,  p.  757  ;  Post-scarlatinal
dropsy,  Mann  and  Bragden,  Raue's  Rec,  1875,  p.  286 ;  Carbuncular  diathesis,  Gal-
lupe,  N.  A.  J.  H.,  vol.  21,  p.  113;  Boils,  Gallupe,  Raue's  Rec,  1872,  p.  257;
Syphilis.  Guernsey,  Hah.  Mo.,  vol.  16,  p.  174 ;  Watzke,  2  cases,  B.  J.  H.,  vol.  26,  p.
201 ;  Scarlatina,  Lippe,  T.  A.  I.  H.,  1880,  p.  300 ;  Scarlatina  and  diphtheria,  Wilke,
Times  Retros.,  1877,  p.  81;  Eczema,  Blake,  B.  J.  H.,  vol.  30,  p.  118;  Pityriasis
versicolor,  Lilienthal,  Times  Retros.,  1875,  p.  134;  Psoriasis,  Blake,  B.  J.  H.,  vol,
30,  p.  125 ;  Bhypia  (with  Thuya),  Desterne,  Raue's  Rec,  1872,  p.  171 ;  Verrucce
plancB,  Schweikert,  A.  H.  Z.,  vol.  109,  p.  44  ;  Syphilitic  eruption  (with  Sulph.),  Hirsch,
Raue's  Rec,  1875,  p.  172.

'  Mind. Unconsciousness.

■  Great weakness of  memory,  with  aversion to mental
exertion.


NITRIC  ACID.  50

Has  no  ideas ;  comprehends  nothing,  does  not  understand

what  people  tell  her.
I  If  she  exerts  herself  to  reflect  upon  important  things,  her

thoughts  vanish.

■  Fancies  she  will  die  soon,  yet  is  not  physically  ill.
Raving,  as  if  delirious,  with  coldness  of  body  and  inclina-
tion to  fall.

Feels  as  though  he  had  partly  lost  his  will-power.
■Taciturn,  disinclined  to  communicate  anything ;  moody
in  morning.

■  Very  easily  affected  ;  inclined  to  weep.

■  Sadness,  great  fear  of  death,  sensation  of  extreme  weak-

ness, even  to  trembling.

■  Indifference;  tired  of  life;  joyless;  sadness  before  menses.

■  ■Depressed  and  very  anxious  in  evening.

■  Hopeless  despair.

■  ■Often anxious about his illness; constantly thinks

about  his  past  troubles;  mind  weak  and  wandering.

■  Anxiety  as  if  he  was  engaged  in  a  lawsuit  or  dispute,

causing  uneasiness.
'■■Anxiety  about  his  disease,  with  fear  of  death;  morbid
fear  of  cholera.

■  ■After  continued  loss  of  sleep,  long-lasting  anxiety,  over-

exertions of  mind  and  body  from  nursing  the  sick,  great
anguish  of  mind  from  loss  of  his  dearest  friend.

■  Satiety  of  life  with  fear  of  death.

■  Irritable  disposition  ;  headstrong;  trembling  while  quar-
■  reling ;  fits  of  rage  with  curses  and  maledictions ;  invet-
erate ill-will,  unmoved  by  apologies.

■  ■Nervous,  excitable,  especially  after  abuse  of  mercury.

■  Peevish,  irritable,  sad  and  obstinate;  vexed  at  trifles.

■  Discontent  with  himself  induces  violent  weeping.

■  Easily  startled  and  frightened;  starts  up  from  fright  on

falling  asleep.
^  Sensormm. ■Dizzy,  dull,  stupid  and  heavy.

■  Vertigo  :  in  morning,  must  lie  or  sit  down  ;  with  obscura-

tion of  sight ;  with  nausea  followed  by  eructations ;  with
pulsation  in  head  and  pressure  in  middle  of  brain,  in
evening;  when  raising  head  after  stooping;  when
walking  or  sitting,  obliging  him  to  lie  down  ;  in  evening,
after  lying  down,  during  climaxis  (syphilitic).

■  When collecting his  thoughts to reply to questions,

drops  what  he  is  holding.
^  Inner  Head. ■Head  sensitive  to  rattling  of  wagons  over
paved  streets  or  stepping  hard.

■  Congestion to head with heat; painful sensation of

fulness.

■  Pressure  in  forepart  of  head  and  upon  eyes.


51  NITRIC  ACID.

1 1  As  if  head  was  in  a  vise  from  ear  to  ear  over  vertex ;  as

if  someone  was  forcibly  pressing  head ;  as  if  head  was

tightly  bound  up.
1 1  Painful  tension  within  head  extending  to  eyes,  with

nausea.
I  Stitches  in  head:  compel  one  to  lie  down;  disturb  sleep.
Iln  temples:  drawing  pain  inr. ;  stitches  in  1.  or  both ;

piercing.

■  Violent  throbbing,  hammering  on  1.  side  of  head,  com-

ing on  gradually  towards  morning  and  going  off  about
breakfast  time.

I  I  Throbbing  headache.

I  Headache:  in  morning  on  waking,  >  after  rising ;  <  by
motion  and  succussion ;  <  from  noise ;  >  on  lying
down  or  from  riding  in  a  carriage ;  with  nausea  and
vomiting;  arthritic,  mercurial  or  syphilitic.

Headache  began  near  vertex,  descended  to  region  of  1.
ear,  then  went  gradually  over  vertex  to  r.  side  of  head,
but  still  <  on  1.,  not  >  by  warmth  of  flannel.

I  I  Violent  sticking  pain  in  occiput.

^  Outer  Head, i  Pain  in  skull,  with  sensation  as  if  constricted
by  a  tape.

I I  Head  very  sensitive  even  to  pressure  of  hat ;  <  in  even-
ing and  on  part  lain  on  ;  sensitive  as  if  contused,  either
all  over  or  in  certain  spots ;  whole  r.  side  of  skull  painful.

I  i  Pain  like  a  gathering  at  1.  temple.

I  Head  feels  hot.

I I  Profuse  falling  out  of  hair :  particularly  on  top  of  head ;
from  congestion  of  blood  to  scalp ;  from  syphilis ;  ner-
vous headaches,  debility,  emaciation.

■  On  anterior boundaries of hair,  and partly  on tem-

ples, numerous  intensely  red  and  brownish  pimples.
/^Syphilis.

■  Scabby,  moist,  itching,  offensive  eruption; paining  as

from  splinters  or  when  touched.
I  Humid,  stinging  eruption  on  vertex  and  temples,  also
in  whiskers ;  bleeding  easily  when  scratched  and  feel-
ing very  sore  when  lain  on.

■  Single,  burning,  moist  sores  on  scalp. ^Syphilis.

■  Inflammatory  swellings  on  scalp,  suppurating  or  becom-

ing carious ; <  from  pressure,  or  when  lying  thereon.

■  Caries  of  bones  of  skull.

"^ Sight  and  Eyes. lEyes  dim,  sunken,  pale  face;  sight  ob-
scured while  reading ;  black  spots  before  eyes ; objects
appear  dark.
I  I  Photophobia.

I  I  Great  sensitiveness  to  daylight,  a  kind  of  nyctalopia.
^Scrofulous  ophthalmia.


NITRIC  ACID.  52

1 1  Double  vision  ;  shortsightedness.

I  Pupils  dilated  and  dim.

I  On  lying  down  or  even  inclining  head  from  upright
position,  feeling  as  if  warm  water  was  flowing  over  and
from  eyes,  first  r.  then  1.,  >  by  cold  water.  /I^Syphilitic
iritis.

I  Iritis  :  pressing  stinging  as  if  an  ulcer  was  being  pressed ;

pains  <  in  change  of  temperature,  at  night  and  on

touching  parts ;  acrid  lachrymation  ;  continual  relapses ;

old  cases  spoiled  by  mercury;  posterior  synechia.
iCornea:  spots; dark  spots; dim  and ulcerated (after

Calc.  OY  Puis.); superficial  ulcers; phlyctenulse  which

become  flat  ulcers ; keratitis,  to  prevent  staphyloma ;

pannus ; herpetic pannus ; proliferation of corneal

lamellse.
Conjunctiva  inflamed.

■  Scrofulous  ophthalmia;  lids  much  inflamed  and  swollen,

intense  photophobia,  excessive  lachrymation  ;  great  red-
ness ;  complicated  with  shallow  ulcers  on  cornea.

I I  Ophthalmia :  neonatorum ;  scrofulous ;  gonorrhoeal ;
syphilitic ;  from  abuse  of  potash  and  mercury.

I  1  Burning  in  eyes ;  aching ;  pressure  like  sand  ;  biting ;
stinging ;  stitches.

■  Burning  in  lids  in  morning.

■  Region  of  eyes  painful,  sore  to  touch.

■  Flow-  of  irritating  tears ;  also  after  injury  to  eye.
I  I  Lachrymation  and  agglutination  of  lids.

■  Fistula  lachrymalis.

■  Difiiculty  in  opening  eyes  and  raising  lids  in  morning.

■  Paralysis  of  upper  lids.

■  Eyelids  swollen,  hard,  livid,  smart  and  burn.

■  Syphilitic  inflammation  and  swelling  of  lids,  with  copious

lachrymation. ^Ectropium.

■  Small  wart  on  upper  lid.

■  On  r.  lower  lid  a  large condyloma,  suppurating and

bleeding  easily  when  touched;  it  seemed  to  arise  from
a  lens-shaped  body  on  inner  surface  of  lower  lid ;  ectro-
pion ;  eye  and  vicinity  much  inflamed  wdth  burning,
sticking  paiii,  profuse,  hot  lachrymation  and  agglutina-
tion mornings.
Eyelashes  of  r.  side  all  point  stiffly  towards  nose.

■  Dermoid  swelling  on  eyes.

^  Hearing  and  Ears.  One's  speech  echoes  in  ears ;  roaring ;
buzzing ;  beating ;  humming ;  cracking  when  chewing  ;
stoppage  with  detonations.

■  Deafness :  >  when  riding  in  a  carriage  or  train ;  from

induration  and  swelling  of  tonsils ;  after  abuse  of  mer-
cury; syphilitic.


53  NITRIC  ACID.

I  Eustachian  tubes  obstructed.

I  Throbbing  in  ears.

lOtorrhoea:  fetid,  ichorous;  purulent;  post-scarlatinal.

I  Auditory  canal  nearly  closed.

■  Swelling  of  glands  behind  and  beneath  1.  ear.

I  Redness,  suppuration  and  violent  itching  behind  ears.

■  Caries  of  mastoid  process.

■  Auditory  derangements  depending  on  swelling  of  tonsils,
i  I  Cystic  tumors  in  lobes  of  ears.

^ Smell  and  Nose. ■Smell: disagreeable  on  inhaling  air;
unpleasant  evenings  on  lying  down.

■  Nosebleed:  mornings; at  night; black,  clotted;  when

weeping;  blood  acid.
■Sneezing:  frequent;  without  corj^za ; during  sleep;  un-
successful attempts.

■  Coryza: nose  dry  and  stuffed; with  obstruction; dry,

with  dryness  of  throat;  water  drops  out  in  open  air;
wings  of  nose  inflamed,  swollen,  burning ;  nasal  mucus
discharged  only  from  mouth  through  choanse ;  awakens
frequently  all  stopped  up  with  mucus,  has  to  blow  nose
and  expectorate ;  with  difficult  breathing  even  through
mouth ;  stitches  in  throat  when  swallowing ;  with  sore
throat  and  cough.

■  ■Nasal  catarrh  :  acrid,  watery  at  night ;  yellow,  offensive ;

corroding ;  with  swelling  of  upper  lip ;  with  night
cough;  with  scarlatina  or  diphtheria;  syphilitic.

■  In  nose: violent  itching,  burning,  soreness; bleeding,

scabbiness ;  stitches  as  from  a  splinter  on  touch  ;  stitches
in  root  which  is  distended,  especiall}^  on  sneezing  and
coughing.

■  Ozsena:  green  casts  every  morning;  with  ulcers;  syphi-

litic, involving  upper  lip  which  is  swollen  and  honey-
combed with  ulcers;  offensive  yellow  mucus  and  pus;
frequent  epistaxis ;  dry  coryza ;  throat  dry ;  fetid.

■  ■Ulceration:  of  nostrils,  scurfy;  of  inner  nose,  frequent

bleeding ;  bloody  matter  blown  from  nose.

■  Hard  plugs  form  in  nares,  hard  to  detach  and  leaving  a

raw  sore.

■  Condyloma: on  nose; on  and  in  nostrils,  bleeding  on

slight  touch ;  lipoma-like.

■  Tip  of  nose:  red;  scurfy;  vesicles.

■  Alse:  itching  herpes ;  feeling  of  soreness ;  large,  soft  pro-

tuberances, covered  with  crusts  (syphilis).
^  Upper  Face.  Face  :  yellow  ;  pale,  eyes  sunken  ;  dark  yel-
low about  eyes,  red  cheeks ;  bloated  around  eyes  on
waking ;  scaly ;  rash ;  pimples ;  black  pores ;  freckles
or  brown  spots ;  small,  elevated,  pigmented  warty  spots
upon  forehead,  rough  to  touch  ;  erysipelas.


NITRIC  ACID.  54

I  I  Right  parotid  greatly  enlarged. ^Ulcer  on  tongue.
I  Pricking;  tearing  in  malar  bones;  bones  painful.

■  Tension  in  skin  of  forehead.

■  Suppurating pustules, with broad red circumference,

forming  crusts. ^Syphilis.
^  Lower  Face. H  Cracking  in  maxillary  articulation  when
chewing  and  eating.

I  Lips:  swollen  and  itching;  ulcered  and  blistered;  under

lip  dry  and  cracked,  sore,  peeling  off; stitches  as  from
splinters  in  upper  lip  when  touched.

I I  Corners  of  mouth  ulcered  and  scabb^^
I  I  Blood-boils  on  chin.

I  Painful  swelling  of  submaxillary  glands.
^^ Teeth  and  Gums, l Tearing  in  teeth;  boring  or  shooting
when  touched  by  anything  cold  or  warm  ;  pain  in  hol-
low teeth.

I  Pulsating,  stinging  in  evening  in  bed  and  all  night,  after
abuse  of  mercury.

I  Teeth  feel  elongated ;  sensation  of  coldness  in  teeth.

■  Caries  of  teeth  after  abuse  of  mercury; teeth  painful,

loose ;  sensation  as  if  teeth  would  fall  out.

I  The  teeth,  previously  very  white,  became  yellow.

iSensation  as  if  teeth  were  soft  and  spongy;  did. not  dare
to  bite  them  together  for  fear  they  would  fall  out ;  on
slightest  sucking  of  teeth  blood  exuded  from  gum.

I  Gums:  red  and  enlarged  between  teeth;  white,  swollen  ;
bleeding ;  scorbutic ;  itching ;  tumor  size  of  walnut.
"Taste  and  Tongue. Taste:  bitter  after  eating;  sour,  with
burning  in  throat ;  sweet.

I  Tongue:  sensitive,  even  to  soft  food;  bites  it  when  chew-
ing ;  sore  pain ;  red  like  a  beet ;  yellow ;  white,  dry,
mornings ;  green,  with  ptyalism ;  dry  and  fissured  ;
white  with  sore  spots ;  blistered,  with  burning  pain ;
small  painful  pimples  on  sides ;  ulceration  with  tough,
ropy  mucus;  deep,  irregular-shaped  ulcers  on  edge
(syphilis).

I  I  Glossitis,  mercurial  cases.
^^  Inner  Mouth. iiFoul,  cadaverous  smell  from  mouth.

I  Dry  mouth,  no  thirst,  swollen,  hot  lips.

I  Sore  mouth  :  intense  stinging  pain  and  burning,  surface

swollen,  bright  red;  blisters  and  vesicles  on  and  around
lips.

I I  Ulcers:  sticking  pains  as  from  a  splinter;  within
cheeks ;  on  edges  of  tongue ;  deep  eating ;  at  first  lar-
daceous,  later  discolored,  dark,  dirty ;  putrid ;  destruc-
tive ;  syphilitic.

I  Aphthae  or  stomatitis:  mucous  membrane  swollen,  ulcer-
ated ; profuse  salivation,  acrid,  causing  ulceration  of


55  NITRIC  ACID.

lips,  chin  and  cheeks ;  fetor  from  mouth  as  if  mercurial ;

gums tender, could not chew  solid  food ; syphilitic

dyscrasia.
1 1  Mucous  membrane:  gets  between  teeth,  easily  bitten ;

swollen,  ulcerated ;  with  pricking  pains,  especially  after

abuse  of  mercury ; aphthous ; covered  with  white  or

thin,  yellowish-grey  membrane.
llSaliva:  profuse;  fetid,  acrid,  makes  lips  sore;  bloody.
iPtyalism: swelling  of  gums; fetor oris; teeth  black,

carious;  with  ulcers; scorbutic;  mercurial;  syphilitic.
iRanula.
llSwelling of parotid and submaxillary glands, with

loose  teeth  and  bleeding  gums,  after  abuse  of  mercury.

I  Tumor  in  mouth  with  a  streak  down  neck.

^^  Throat. While  eating,  small  pieces  of  food  are  forced  into
choana3,  producing  a  sickening  sensation,  they  are  after-
wards drawn  out  covered  with  mucus.
1 1 A  morsel  sticks  in  pharynx  while  eating,  as  if  pharynx
was  constricted.

■  Pressure  in  throat  on  swallowing  food,  as  if  it  would  not

go  down.

I I  Swallowing:  very  difficult;  distorts  face  and  draws
head  down  ;  cannot  swallow  even  a  teaspoonful  of  fluid  ;
causes  violent  pain  extending  to  ear.

■  Sensations: acrid,  burning  after  eating; sore  pain  in

pharynx ;  scraped  feeling ;  pressure  as  if  swollen ;
sticking;  stitches;  stitches  in  tonsils  and  burning  in
fauces,  behind  uvula ;  pricking  as  from  a  splinter,  <
when  swallowing.

■  Much  mucus  in  throat  posteriorly;  hawking.

■  Mucus  only  discharged  through  posterior  nares.  ^Coryza,

■  Dry  throat,  heat;  gums  sore.

■  Arch  of  palate  and  tonsils  swollen,  painful,  with  injected

vessels.
I  I  Painful  soreness  of  soft  palate,  tongue  and  inside  gums,
stinging  pain.

■  Uvula  and  tonsils  oedematous.

■  Fauces  and  posterior  pharynx  red,  swallowing  difficult.

■  ■Tonsils:  swollen,  red,  uneven,  with  small  ulcers;  yel-

low streak ;  white  patches.

■  Diphtheria:  chilliness  alternating  with  heat;  pricking

as  from  a  splinter  or  piece  of  glass;  acrid  fluid  from
nose,  with  hoarseness ;  difficult,  painful  deglutition  ;
salivation ;  fetor  oris ;  great  uneasiness ;  violent  fever ;
excessive  prostration  ;  tonsils  and  uvula  covered  with
exudate  surrounded  by  a  red  areola;  coating  white  at
margin,  yellowish  in  thicker  portions  and  turning  black
at some points; exudate had disappeared,  there re-


NITRIC  ACID.  56

mained  symptoms  of  adynamia  of  a  marked  character,
local  surfaces,  late  seat  of  exudate,  dark  hue,  verging
on  mahogany  ;  membrane  on  tonsils  and  fauces  ex-
tending to  nose ;  intermittent  pulse ;  swollen  parotid
and  submaxillary  glands;  vomiting  of  ropy,  greenish-
yellow  mucus;  great  prostration;  profuse  discharge
from  nostrils ;  frightful  fits  of  coughing.

■  Ulcerated  sore  throat;  three  large,  deep  ulcers,  having

bluish  margins,  with  red  centres,  near  root  of  tongue ;
tonsils  nearly  sloughed  off;  great  pain  on  taking  least
nourishment ;  fetor  oris  ;  syphilitic  history.

■Suddenly  appearing,  or  slowly  creeping  ulcers  on  fauces
and  soft  palate,  after  abuse  of  mercury  ;  they  destroy
rapidly  the  bony  wall  of  palate  or  whole  soft  palate.

I  Superficial  ulcers  on  1.  palatine  arch.

I  Flat,  white,  or  greyish  ulcers  on  tonsils ;  syphilitic  ulcers
in  pharynx,  flat,  covered  with  pus;  difficult  degluti-
tion ;  ptyalism ;  metallic  taste  in  mouth  ;  fetor  oris.

■  Hypertrophy  of  tonsils,  after  angina.

■  CEsophagitis  (when  Rhustox.  is  insufficient.)

'*  Appetite,  Thirst. Desires,  Aversions. ■Excessive  hun-
.  ger:  with  languor,  sweetish  taste  in  mouth;  weariness
of  life.

■  Appetite:  variable  or  absent.

■  Thirst  violent  in  morning. ^Tuberculosis.

■  ■Longing  for  :  fat;  herring;  chalk;  lime; earth.

■  Averse  to  meat  and  bread.

'^  Eating  and  Drinking. Chokes  while  eating.
During  eating  and  after:  sweat.

After  eating:  bitter  taste;  fulness  in  stomach,  debility
after  least  exertion,  heat,  palpitation;  heavy  weight  in
stomach  ;  sweat.

■  Food  causes  acidity;  fat  food  nausea  and  acidity.

■  Milk disagrees.

'®  Hiccough,  Belching,  Nausea  and  Vomiting. Hiccough,
especially  in  winter.

■  Eructations:  before  and  after  eating;  sour,  with  nausea;

empty.

■  Nausea:  after  eating;  with  heat  in  stomach,  extending

to  throat ;  >  from  moving  about  or  riding  in  carriage  ;
vomiting  of  mucus  and  food,  caused  by  cough.

■  Much  nausea,  cannot  take  food;  vomits  occasionally.

■  Vomiting:  bitter  and  sour,  with  much  eructation  ;  yel-

low mucus ;  constant,  tenacious,  p.urulent  and  bloody
mucus.
'^  Scrobiculum  and  Stomach. ■Stitches  in  pit  of  stomach.

■  Pain  in  cardiac  orifice  on  swallowing  food.

■  In stomach: pressing, gnawing, pulsating; burning;

burning  distress ;  pressure.


57  NITRIC  ACID.

■Sensation  of  a  heavyweight  in  stomach  after  eating;

strong-smeHing  urine;  easy  sweat. ^Dyspepsia.
I  I  Dyspepsia  from  abuse  of  salt.

■  Vascular  and  organic  cardialgia;  erosions  and  ulcers  of

stomach.
^^  Hypochondria, l  i  Stitches  in  hepatic  region.

I J  Jaundice;  pain  in  region  of  liver;  urine  scanty  and

strong-smelling  ;  very  restless  after  midnight.
I  Chronic  affection  of  liver;  hepatic  cough  ;  icterus.
I  Liver  enormously  enlarged  ;  clay-colored  stools.

■  Chronic  hepatitis  and  the  "liver-cake  "  of  ague.

I  Spleen  large  after  yellow  fever.

^^  Abdomen.  'In  abdomen:  uneasiness;  fulness  and  tight-
ness shortly  after  eating ;  pressure  in  1.  side ;  drawing
pain  wdth  shuddering;  pinching  and  rumbling;  vio-
lent cramplike  pains  as  if  abdomen  w^ould  burst,  with
constant  eructations;  pain  when  walking,  must  bend
over;  pain  settles  in  ileo-csecal  region,  dull,  sore,
tender.

I I  Awakened  at  midnight,  wath crampy  pains  in  small
intestines;  chilly;  pain  <  if  he  moved.

I  I  Colic  :  cutting,  < in morning in bed  ;  before stool ;

griping  at  night ;  from  cold.
iBorborygmus,  as  if  a  boiler  was  working  within  bowels;

mucous  or  watery  stools,  great  prostration.

■  Gurgling  in  1.  side  of  abdomen,  cold  feet;  fetor  oris.

■  Abdomen  distended  with  flatus,  very  tender.

■  Incarcerated  flatus  in  upper  part  of  abdomen,  <  morn-

ing and  evening.

■  Chronic intestinal catarrh; acute pain in abdomen

during  stool ;  < in morning ;  discharge brown and
slimy.

■  Intestinal  dyspepsia  with  constipation.

Burning  over  whole  abdomen  as  from  a  hot,  dry  cloth  ;
2  to  3  P.M.,  several  afternoons.

■  Stinging  soreness  of  abdomen  when  touched.

■  ■Suppurating  swelling  in  inguinal  glands. ^Syphilis.

■  Inflamed  buboes  after  coitus,  without  any  other  indica-

tions of  venereal  infection  ;  buboes  after  frequent  and
violent  connection.

■  Inguinal  hernia;  also  of  children.

^^  Stool  and  Rectum.  ■Stools:  bloody,  with  tenesmus;  of
mucus;  putrid,  mucous  ;  undigested;  loose,  much  flat-
ulence, rumbling;  of  yellow-white  fluid  ,_ loose,  morn-
ings; green,  slimy,  acrid ;  pale  from  deficiency  of  bile;
pasty  and  sour;  green,  curdled,  mixed  with  mucus;
green  or  bloody  mucus ;  contain  lumps  of  caseine  or
flakes  of  false  membrane; putrid;  acrid;  sour-smell-


NITRIC  ACID.  58

ing ;  bloody,  brown  and  slimy,  with  great  exhaustion  ;
of  black,  offensive  blood.
1 1  Diarrhoea:  great  straining,  but  little  passes;  as  if  stayed
in  rectum  and  could  not  be  expelled;  with  soreness  and
rawness  of  anus ;  during  typhoid  ;  in  children  of  syphil-
itic parents ;  in  children,  with  putrid  smell  from  mouth  ;
copious  flow  of  saliva  ;  ulcers  in  mouth  and  on  tongue  ;
chronic,  with  soreness  of  intestines,  discharge  of  serous
liquid  and  symptoms  of  intestinal  phthisis.

■  Dysentery:  constant  pressing in rectum  without any

stool,  or  patient  evacuates  mere  mucus,  after  which
tenesmus  continues,  followed  by  headache,  dryness  of
throat,  violent  thirst,  intermittent  pulse  ;  diphtheritic.

■  Disorders  of  bowels:  after  sharp  northwest  winds,  sud-

den manifestation  of  symptoms  after  midnight  or  in
morning  hours;  discharges  from  bowels  from  the  first
very  offensive,  dark  green,  watery,  with  pieces  from  an
inch  to  an  inch  and  a  half  long  floating  in  them,  re-
sembling scrapings  of  intestines ;  lower  part  of  abdo-
men distended,  hard  and  painful  to  touch ;  tongue
clean ;  appetite  not  impaired ;  head  hot  but  without
pain  ;  pulse  variable  ;  soreness  in  extremities  and  gen-
eral debility;  cheerful  mood.

■  Burning  in  rectum  towards  perineum,  with  ineffectual

urging;  straining  without  stool.  ^Diphtheritic  dys-
enter3^

■  Sero-croupous discharge,  with  much straining. ^Dys-

entery.

■  Hemorrhage  bright  red,  not  clotted,  or  black  and  offen-

sive; faint  from  least  motion;  ulcers  in  ileo-csecal
region.

■  Ineffectual  urging  to  stool,  with  sharp,  splinterlike  cut-

ting pains  in  rectum  during  stool.

■  ■Desire  for  stool,  but  little  passes ;' feels  as  if  it  stayed  in

rectum  and  could  not  be  expelled.

■  Ineffectual  urging  to  stool;  colic.

■  ■Constipation:  painful,  hard,  difficult,  scanty,  dry, irreg-

ular stool ;  stool  in  hard  masses ;  with  every  stool  pro-
trusion of  hemorrhoidal  tumors  with  profuse  bleeding,
latter  also  occurring  at  other  times  ;  stools  hard,  pre-
ceded by  great  pressure,  followed  by  mucous  discharges ;
stool  like  sheep  dung,  accompanied  by  a  mucous  secre-
tion ;  stools  alternately  firm  and  liquid ;  in  patients  of
a  bilious  habit,  suffering  from  tedious  hepatic  derange-
ment, syphilitic  affections,  or  suffering  from  effects  of
mercury ;  during  convalescence  from  a  protracted  and
severe  fit  of  sickness  ;  great  pain  during  and  after  pas-
sage, as  though  there  were  fissures  of  anus,  child  fears


59  NITRIC  ACID.

to  have  a  passage ;  and  piles,  with  bearing  down  on
standing;  bread  disagrees.

I  I  Discharge  of  prostatic  fluid  after  difficult  stool.

I  Before  stool:  colic;  drawing  pains;  cutting;  constant
pressing  in  rectum  ;  continual  but  fruitless  desire.

I  During  stool:  nausea;  colic;  tenemus ;  spasmodic  con-
traction of  anus;  cutting  in  anus  and  rectum;  acute
pain  in  abdomen ;  prolonged  straining  (even  with  soft
stool) ;  sensation  as  if  part  of  feces  remained  in  rec-
tum and  could  not  be  expelled ;  sharp,  splinterlike
pains  in  rectum  (with  inefl'ectual  urging);  burning  in
rectum  towards  perineum ;  tearing,  spasmodic  pains
(fissures  in  anus) ;  pressure  upon  rectum  with  desire  for
stool,  but  only  a  little  passes.

I  After stool: continued urging; 1 1  exhaustion  ; irrita-

tion, anxiety  and  general  uneasiness ;  soreness  and
rawness  of  anus ;  violent  drawing  and  cutting  pains
in  rectum,  continuing  for  hours;  burning  and  shooting
in  rectum ;  painful  prolapsus  of  rectum,  and  sensation
of  constriction  of  anus  ;  colic  and  great  prostration  ;
painful  hemorrhoids  with  hemorrhage;  pain  as  though
anus  was  fissured  ;  nervousness  and  debility  ;  sharp,
stitching  pains  ;  scratching  and  stinging  in  anus  and
rectum  ;  succus  prostaticus.

Aggravation  :  on  alternate  days  ;  during  typhoid  fever  ;
after  dinner;  after  milk;  after  abuse  of  mercury;  in
morning.

Amelioration  :  from  riding  (general  condition).

•  Constant  weight  and  pressure  in  rectum.

I I  Burning  in  rectum:  after  micturition;  extending  to
perineum ;  on  waking  at  night  and  in  morning ;  like
coals  of  fire  on  attempting  introduction  of  enemata.

Hitching  in  rectum  and  anus;  moisture.

I  For  several  years  severe  pain  in  small  of  back  and  per-
iodical hemorrhage  from  rectum  ;  pain  in  back  so  severe
and  continuous  that  he  cannot  assume  erect  posture  but
walks  about  bent ;  loss  of  appetite ;  two  or  three  pappy
stools  a  day ;  burning  in  anus  ;  itching  about  genitals ;
many  red  pimples  and  spots  in  face.

■Secondary  hemorrhages  from  rectum,  after  removal  of
hemorrhoids.

■  Fissures  in  rectum  :  tearing,  spasmodic  pains  during
stools ;  lancinating,  even  after  soft  stools.

I  Painful  prolapsus  of  bowels,  and  sensation  of  constric-
tion of  anus.

iFistula;  fissures;  polypi;  cancer  of  rectum.

llHemorrhoids:  constant  pressing  out;  painful  or  pain-
less, prolapsing  with  every  stool,  with  loss  of  blood;


NITRIC  ACID.  60

swelling,  buroing,  pricking ;  sharp,  stitching  pains  after
every  evacuation ;  constant  weight  and  pressure,  <
from  exercise ;  dark  complexion ;  brownish-red ;  bleed-
ing at  night  in  bed ;  pain  and  nausea  during  stool,
which  is  veir}^  difficult,  although  not  hard  ;  great  sensi-
tiveness of  anus ;  with  chronic  catarrh  of  rectum,  diar-
rhoea, and  erythema  around  anus ;  old  and  pendulous
hemorrhoids  cease  to  bleed,  but  become  painful  to
touch,  especially  in  warm  weather;  old  tumors,  secret-
ing much  slime  and  bleeding  profusely  after  stool;
associated  with  fissures.

I  Constriction  of  anus  almost  daily.

I  Feeling  as  if  sharp  sticks  were  being  pressed  into  anus,
on  slightest  touch.

■  Constant  weight  and  pressure  in  anus,  <  from  exercise.

^Hemorrhoids.

I  Moist  soreness  in  anus  and  between  nates,  when  walking.

I  Fetid  discharge  from  anus.

I  I  Eczema  ani.
^'  Urinary  Organs. Contracted  kidney.

lAlbuminuria:  excessive  prostration ;  nausea;  sour  taste;
bilious  diarrhoea  or  constipation ;  dry  skin;  fever;  head-
ache; dull  systolic  sound  of  heart;  pressure  in  kidneys;
turbid,  fetid  urine;  oedema  of  feet;  <  at  night;  espe-
cially in  those  who  have  had  syphilis  and  have  taken
much  mercury.

I  Diabetes  mellitus.

iHgematuria,  urging  after  and  shuddering  along  spine
during  urination ;  blood  flows  actively,  bright  red,  not
clotted  ;  faint  from  least  motion.

I  1  Cramplike  contractive  pain  from  kidneys  towards
bladder.

■  Painless  retention  of  urine.
I  Incontinence  of  urine.

I  Frequent  urging  to  urinate,  with  scanty  discharge,  par-
ticularly at  night,  with  cutting  in  abdomen.

I  Difficult  urination,  must  stand  and  press  along  while
before  urine  appears,  when  flow  is  established  it  passes
in  an  uninterrupted  stream.

I  Spasms  of  urethra;  rectal  fissure.

I  Burning  in  urethra  and  desire  to  urinate,  with  hope  of
relieving  burning  which,  however,  is  increased.

I  I  Cutting  in  urethra;  needlelike  stitches  in  orifice.

■  Violent burning  in  urethra  after urination; renewed

desire;  discharge  of  mucus.

I I  Ulcers  in  urethra;  bloody  mucous  or  purulent  discharge.
I  Very  thin  stream,  as  if  from  contraction  of  urethra.

I  Urine: extremely offensive; like horse urine; stains


61  NITRIC  ACID.

linen  brown ;  orange-colored,  containing  bile ;  greenish ;
filled  with  mucus,  pus  and  blood;  cold  when  it  passes;
turbid,  looks  like  remains  in  a  cider  barrel.
^^  Male  Sexual  Organs.  l Sexual  desire  too  strong;  con-
stantly excited;  painful  spasmodic  erections  at  night;
erections  with  burning  or  stitches  in  urethra;  chordee.

I  I  Sexual  desire  wanting ;  want  of  erections.

I I  Gonorrhoea :  discharge  yellowish  or  bloody;  bloody
mucus ;  greenish  ;  severe  pain  on  urination ;  chancre
on  glans;  bubo;  fever;  horrible  pain,  much  swelling
and  tenderness  in  testicles;  chronic  or  suppressed;  con-
dylomata about  genitals  and  anus.

I  I  Discharge  of  prostatic  fluid  after  a  difficult  stool.

■  Prostatitis  due to  suppressed gonorrhoea; moisture  of

anus ;  pricking  pains.

■  Bad  cases  of  gleet.

■Stricture  resulting  from  gonorrhoea  or  syphilis.
I  Ulcers  in  urethra,  with  purulent  or  bloody  mucous  dis-
charge.

I  Chronic  itching  of  urethra  after  gonorrhoea.

I I  Small  itching  vesicles  on  prepuce,  open  after  a  few  days
.  and  become  covered  with  small  dry  scabs  or  brown

scurf.

llSmall  blisters  on  orifice  of  urethra  and  inner  surface  of
prepuce,  forming  chancrelike  ulcers. (^Gonorrhoea.

I  Pimples  on  glans  penis  and  perineum.

I  Inflammation  and  swelling  of  prepuce,  with  burning-
pain  ;  on  inner  surface  soreness  and  small  ulcers  secret-
ing very  offensive  ichor,  stains  linen  like  bloody  matter.

lUlcer  near  r.  side  of  glans  perforating  frsenum ;  similar
ulcer  on  1.  side ;  erections  at  night  with  severe  bleeding
from  region  of  frsenum.

I  Great  swelling  of  prepuce  with  phimosis,  without  much
,  redness;  suppurating  ulcers  with  flat  edges,  with  in-
flammation of  inner  surface  of  prepuce  and  its  margins,
also  of  orifice  of  urethra,  looking  like  chancres,  with
violent  sticking,  tearing,  especially  <  towards  evening,
lasting  through  night  and  preventing  sleep,  still  <  by
violent  erections  towards  morning.

I  I  Ulcers:  flat,  with  elevated,  zig-zag  edges;  painless;  clean,
looking  like  raw  meat ;  spongy  ;  discharge  thin,  copious,
mixed  with  blood ;  generally  appear  upon  prepuce,
several  usually  appearing  at  same  time ;  deep,  fistulous,
irregular,  ragged ;  edges  often  raised,  lead-colored ;  su-
perficial on  corona  glandis,  looking  clean  but  exuding
an  offensive  moisture ;  bleed  easily  when  touched  ;  exu-
berant, but  pale  and  flabby  granulations;  on  corona
glandis,  about  frsenum,  on  prepuce,  or  on  scrotum,  with


NITRIC  ACID.  62

sensation,  on  slightest  touch,  as  if  sticks  were  jagging
them,  hurting  exceedingly.

I  Sloughing  of  entire  integument  of  penis,  leaving  that
organ  perfectly  denuded ;  at  one  inch  posterior  to
corona  glandis,  on  1.  side  of  corpus  spongiosum,  a  fistu-
lous ulcer  extending  into  urethra,  so  that  in  micturition
a  portion  of  urine  escaped  through  this  orifice ;  integu-
ments covering  pubic  region  sloughed  away,  leaving
muscular  structure  bare,  and  ulceration  was  extending
upward  under  pubis ;  entire  diseased  surface  in  a  very
unhealthy  or  phagadenic  ulcerated  condition ;  urine
emitted  an  intolerably  strong  odor  on  being  voided,
and  caused  much  smarting  and  burning ;  sleep  dis-
turbed at  night;  appetite  poor;  considerable  emacia-
tion ;  frequent  painful  erections  during  latter  part  of
night;  chancre  on  glans,  and  buboes  still  in  an  ulcer-
ated condition, ^S^q^hilis.

I  Chancre :  increasing  very  fast  and  bleeding  easily ;  raised
edges ;  inclined  to  spread  in  circumference,  with  ten-
dency to  fungous  growths ;  pains  as  of  splinters  ;  corro-
sive discharge ;  buboes  threaten  to  suppurate ;  old  cases
for  which  large  doses  of  mercury  have  been  given,  or
when  homoeopathic  doses  of  mercury  have  proved  in-
effectual ;  soft,  in  weakly,  scrofulous  subjects.

I  Brown  spots  upon  glans  penis,  disappear  after  exfoliation
of  skin ;  along  raphe  of  scrotum,  from  penis  to  anus,
brown,  hard  nodules,  which  become  painless  ulcers  and
discharge  much  pus.

I  Brown  and  red  spots  on  glans  penis,  becoming  covered
with  scabs.

llPhimosis;  paraphimosis;  sharp  stitches  in  prepuce.

I  Itching  of  prepuce  and  moisture  around  glans.

I  Burning  of  testicles ;  inflammatory  swelling  with  painful
drawing.

I  Inflammation  and  swelling  of  testicles,  pain  extending
up  spermatic  cords.

■  Violent  itching  on  scrotum.

I  Hard,  brown  nodules  on  scrotum,  suppurating.  ^Syphilis.

I I  Condylomata:  fetid;  bleeding  when  touched;  moist,
resembling  cauliflower ;  on  thin  pedicles ;  oozing ;  after
abuse  of  mercury.

•  Itching  mercurial  herpes  preputialis.

■  Falling  off  of  hair  from  genitals.

■  Secondary  syphilis.

^^  Female  Sexual  Organs.  ■Excrescences  on  vaginal  portion
of  uterus,  as  large  as  lentils;  great  voluptuousness  of
mucous  membrane  in  genitals  after  coitus.

■  Uterine  hemorrhages  from  overexertion  of  body.


63  NITRIC  ACID.

I  Coffee-ground  offensive  discharge  from  uterus  at  climac-
teric period  or  after  labor.

■  Before  menses:  throbbing  in  nape  of  neck  and  small  of

back.
I  Menses:  too early and too profuse, blood very dark
colored  and  thick;  irregular,  scanty  and  like muddy
water.

■  Pressing  down  in  hypogastrium  and  small  of  back,  as

though  everything  would  protrude;  pain  down  thighs;
abdomen  feels  swollen. ^Uterine  displacement.

■  During  menses :  eructations,  cramplike  pain  in  abdomen,

as  if  it  would  burst;  very  offensive  urine;  bruised  pain
in  limbs ;  pain  down  thighs ;  laborlike  pains  in  abdo-
men and  back ;  eructation ;  palpitation,  heat,  anxiety
and  trembling;  tiredness;  burning  in  eyes;  toothache
and  swelling  of  gums.

■  After  menses:  violent  pains through abdomen  and  a

sudden  gush  of  "  muddy  water ;"  brown  or  thick  leucor-
rhoea,  finally  a  thin,  watery,  flesh-colored,  offensive  dis-
charge, sometimes  acrid ;  greenish  mucous  leucorrhoea.

■  Profuse,  brown,  offensive discharge between irregular

periods. ^Cancer  uteri.

■  ■Leucorrhoea:  of  ropy  mucus; of  green  mucus;  flesh-

colored  ;  acrid,  brown,  offensive ;  flows  like  water,  clear
and  acrid,  down  legs;  chronic,  vaginal;  in  cachectic
subjects;  after  mercurialization,  gonorrhoea  or  chancre;
with  suppurating  bubo.

■  Stitches  up  vagina,  or  from  without  inward,  when  walk-

ing in  open  air.

■  Vaginal  fistula;  granular  vegetations.

■  Vaginitis  with  cracks  and  ulcers  on  labia  minora.

■  ■Itching,  swelling  and  burning  of  vulva  and  vagina.

■  Tumors  of  vulva;  syphilitic  taint;  itching  of  parts  when

walking  or  otherwise  irritated.

■  Erectile  tumors;  much  itching  sticking  pain.

■  Cold  aggravates  pruritus  and  leucorrhoea.

■  Plard  knots  in  mammae;  atrophy;  soreness  of  nipples;

cancer.
^'Pregnancy. Parturition. Lactation. ■Uterine  hemor-
rhage in  first  half  of  pregnancy,  after  overexertion  of
body  and  mental  depression.

■  Metrorrhagia  after  abortion  or  confinement.

^®  Voice  and  Larynx. Trachea  and  Bronchia. ■  Hoarse-
ness:  with coryza; from long  talking;  of  singers  or
actors ;  scratching  and  stinging  in  throat.
I  I  Indistinct  speech.

■  Croup :  with  violent  coryza,  hoarseness  and  cough ;  stitches

in  throat;  shooting  pains  in  region  of  larynx;  sharp.


NITRIC  ACID.  64

scratching  roughness  in  throat,  like  a  file,  not  felt  on
swallowing,  but  on  breathing,  with  oppression  of  chest
and  coryza ;  dry,  barking  evening  cough ;  rough,  dry
cough  before  midnight,  giving  no  rest,  shaking  whole
body ;  stitches  through  chest ;  fever ;  shortness  of  breath ;
oppression ;  cough  <  at  night,  and  troublesome  during
day,  when  reclining  or  slumbering.

■  Ulcers in larynx; toneless voice;  previous mercurial

abuse.

■  Large  broad  condylomata  in  larynx,  which  nearly  closed

glottis ;  great  dyspnoea  and  complete  aphonia.

■  Syphilitic  laryngitis.

■  Laryngeal  phthisis;  bronchitis.

^^  Respiration. ■Loss  of  breath  and  palpitation  and  anxiety
on  ascending  steps.
I  I  Sudden  loss  of  breath  and  palpitation,  when  walking
slowly.

■  Loses  her  breath  and  speech,  she  is  so  weak. /^Uterine

displacement.

■  Oppression  of  breathing  caused  by  cough.

■Awakens  often  stopped  up  with  mucus,  must  expectorate

before  he  can  breathe  easily.
■Shortness  of  breath,  wheezing  and  panting,  even  asthma;

panting  during  work.
I  '  Catching  respiration.

■  ■Litermittent  breathing. /^Scarlatina.

^^  Cough.  ■  ■  Cough :  dry,  barking,  from  tickling  in  larynx  and
pit  of  stomach ;  <  at  night,  also  in  day  when  lying
down;  rough,  dry,  before  midnight;  dry,  during  sleep,
before  midnight ;  with  general  physical  depression,  loss
of  flesh,  sleeplessness,  fever,  thirst,  night  sweats,  dry
paroxysmal  retching;  excessively  hard,  dry  racking,
with  complete  ptosis  of  both  eyes,  resulting  from  hard
coughing;  chronic  dry  laryngeal,  with  stinging,  smart-
ing, as  if  small  ulcers  were  in  larynx,  generally  felt  on
one  side  ;  dry,  sputum  raised  with  difficulty ;  in  morn-
ing, followed  by  greenish-white  casts  as  if  from  air
cells  (secondary  syphilis) ;  shattering,  barking,  spas-
modic, excited  by  tickling  in  larynx  and  epigastrium,
with  expectoration  in  daytime  of  dark  blood  mixed
with  coagula,  or  of  yellow,  acrid  pus  of  an  offensive
odor  (whooping  cough);  in  morning,  with  pain  low
down  in  lungs  as  though  something  was  tearing  away,
followed  by  expectoration  of  greenish-dirty  mucus  caus-
ing gagging;  loose,  <  in  warmth,  at  bedtime  and  on
rising  in  morning ;  with  tendency  for  small  ulcers  to
form  in  back  part  of  throat ;  and  symptoms  of  sluggish
liver  with  tendency  to  diarrhoea ;  with  thirst  in  morn-


65  NITRIC  ACID.

ing  (bronchitis);  chronic,  in  winter,  awakens  stopped
up  wiUi  mucus,  short  breath,  panting  during  work  ;
chronic,  accompanied  by  gastric  irritation  and  general
cachexia;  liver  cough.
iSppta:  can  hardly  be  dislodged,  seem  to  stick  like  glue;
dirty  yellowish-green;  in  morning  after  raising  large
lumps  of  mucus,  greenish-white  casts  as  if  from  air  cells,
sometimes  hanging  together  and  spreading  out  in  ves-
sel;  yellow,  acrid,  bitter;  sour;  salt;  offensive;  of
blood  mixed  with  clots  during  day ;  brownish,  bloody,
with  irregular  pulse  (typhus).
^*  Inner  Chest  and  Lungs.  ■  In  chest :  uneasiness ;  op-
pression ;  tightness ;  fulness ;  cramplike  pains ;  sticking
in  r.  side;  violent  stitch  in  upper  part  of  and  within  r.
ribs,  through  abdomen  and  back;  stitches  in  r.  side;
soreness  when  coughing  or  breathing ;  congestion,  with
anxiety,  heat  and  palpitation ;  whistling  and  rales  on.
inspiration.

■  Soreness  at  lower  end  of  sternum.
iRush  of  blood  to  upper  part  of  chest.

■  Pain  suddenly  abates,  yet  pulse  becomes smaller  and

weaker;  pneumonia"  and  pleurisy  of  old  and  cachectic
people ; ,  protracted  cases.
I  Lungs  attacked,  rattling  breathing,  loose  cough;  threat-
ened paralysis;  sputum  brown,  bloody;  pulse  irregular
^Typhoid.

■  Tuberculosis  with  colliquative  night  sweats.

■  Empyema,  with  considerable  muco-purulent  sputum.

■  ■Haemoptysis.

^^  Heart,  Pulse  and  Circulation. ■Nervous  palpitation  of
heart,  caused  by  slightest  mental  excitement.

■  Palpitation  and  anguish  on  going  up-stairs.

■  Pulse:  irregular; one  normal,  followed  by two small

rapid beats; ■■fourth  beat  intermits; alternate  hard,
rapid  and  small  beats.
^^  Neck  and  Back. ■  Swelling  of  cervical  and  axillary  glands.

■  Neck  stiff  and  sore  from  least  cold.

I  I  Small  warts  on  neck  and  sternum,

■  ■Stitches  in  and  between  scapulse;  neck  stiff.

■  Pain  in  small  of  back:  drawing;  as  if  stiff;  from  cold;

burning,  in  a  small  spot.

■  Pain  in  back  at  night,  allowing  to  lie  only  on  abdomen;

pulsations  in  it ;  <  coughing.

■  ■Neuralgic  pains  up  back,  particularly  1.  side.

■  Lightninglike pains of  a sticking character. (^Tabes

dorsalis.

■  Cramplike  stiffness  of  back  and  whole  body.

■  Pain  in  back  and  down  thighs.

VOL.  VIII.— 5.


NITRIC  ACID.  66

I  I  Violent  itching  on  back.
I  I  Stitches  in  sacral  region.
'^  Upper  Limbs, l  Aching  in  r.  shoulder  and  arm  ;  arm  feels
bruised,  at  times  she  cannot  raise  it.
I  Painful  swelling  and  inflammation  of  axillary  glands.
I  1  Drawing  pains  in  arms  and  hands.
I  I  Upper  arm  painful  as  if  beaten.

■  Numbness,  trembling,  tingling  of  r.  forearm.

I  Rheumatic  pains  mostly  in  forearms  and  fingers.

■  Syphilitic  rheumatism  of  arms  and  fingers;  joints  much

swollen.
I  Copper-colored  spots  on  arms;  wens.
I  Aching,  powerless  feeling  in  1,  hand,  like  rheumatism.
I  I  Falling  asleep  of  hands,  particularly  in  morning.

■  Chilblains  on  hands  and  fingers.
I  Cold,  sweaty  hands.

■  Numerous  large  Avarts  on  back  of  hands.

I  I  Large  blue  tubercles  and  spots  on  hands.

■  Eczema  on  inner  side  of  1.  hand.

I  I  Numbness  and  swelling  of  fingers.

■  Swelling  of  finger  joints,  stinging  pains.

■  I  Herpes  between  fingers.

■  Suppurating,  spreading  vesicles  at  tip  of  thumb.

■  Whitlow  :  intense  pain  <  at  night,  great  sensitiveness  to

touch  and  pressure ;  intense  redness  and  swelling  on
one  or  both  sides  of  nail ;  yellow  stripe  on  edge  of  nail,
threatening  suppuration,  extensive  and  violent  inflam-
mation, tendons,  veins  and  cellular  tissues  affected,  irri-
tation extending  up  arm,  all  the  way  to  axilla;  fever;
quick,  tense,  contracted  pulse ;  skin  burning  hot ;  total
want  of  appetite ;  violent  thirst.

■  Hand  is  carried  wrapped  up,  but  finger  exposed,  from  a

sensation  as  if  a  splinter  or  piece  of  glass  was  in  part,
which  friction  of  the  wrappings  aggravates.  ^Paro-
nychia.

■  ■Paronychia  (applied  in  its  incipiency).

■White  spots  and  flaws  on  nails ;  misshapen,  crumbling
and  discolored  or  yellow  curved  finger  nails.
^  Lower  Limbs, l  l  Pain  across  buttocks.

■  Hip  as  if  sprained,  with  limping.

I  1  Pressive-tensive  pain  in  r.  hip  joint.

■  Rheumatic  and  arthritic  pains  in  hip  joint  from  mercu-

rial abuses ;  diseases  of  periosteum  and  necrosis  of  bones
of  joint;  caries,  putrid  decomposition.

■  Bruised  pain  in  legs,  as  from  excessive  fatigue.

I  I  Deep-seated  feeling  as  if  dogs  were  gnawing  flesh  and
bones  and  as  if  sinews  were  being  pulled  up.

!■  Tearing  in  bones  of  lower  extremities,  especially  at
night.


67  NITRIC  ACID.

I  Sticking  pains  as  from  splinters,  especially  on  touch.

I  I  Dry  herpes  on  outer  side  of  thigh.

lParal3^tic pain in leg,  with excessive heaviness and

lassitude.
I  Rheumatic  pains  in  legs  and  feet.

■  Painful  stiffness  in  knees,  feeling  as  if  bends  of  knees

were  swollen.
iPain  in  patella,  impeding  walking;  stiffness  and  stitches

in  knees.
■Soreness  along  periosteum  of  tibia.

I  Itching  of  shins,  bleeding  when  scratched;  small  scabs

form.

I I  Syphilitic  nodes  upon  shin  bones,  with  severe  nightly
pains.

I  Violent  cramp  in  calf,  at  night  and  when  walking  after
sitting.

■  Cramps  in  calves  and  soles  of  feet  at  night.
I  I  Cracking  in  ankle  while  walking.

I  I  Spreading  vesicles  on  feet.

■  Chilblains  with  itching,  swelling  and  pain,  especially  in

very  cold  weather ;  they  inflame  from  a  slight  degree  of
cold ;  skin  cracked.

■  Chilblains  in  irritable  subjects  with  delicate  skin;  great

redness  of  parts  affected  by  the  cold  (locally,  several
drops  in  water).

■  Redness  and  heat  of  great  toe  and  its  ball,  with  sticking  in

it,  as  if  it  had  been  frozen.

■  Ingrowing  toe  nail;  nail  seems  to  have  grown  into  flesh,

but  in  reality  has  not,  very  sore,  with  more  or  less  ulcer-
ation and  feeling  as  if  a  sharp  splinter  was  being  stuck
into  part  on  contact.

■  Phagadenic  blisters  on  toes.

■  Offensive,  profuse  sweat  on  feet,  causing  soreness,  with

sticking  paitis  as  if  walking  on  pins.

■  Foul-smelling  sweat  on  feet,  in  both  sexes,  when  there  is

an  impoverished  state  of  blood,  with  weak  vital  powers.
^  Limbs  in  General. ■  Limbs  restless  in  evening.

■  Dull  pain  as  from  weakness  in  extremities.
I  1  Drawing  in  all  the  limbs.

■  Rheumatic  pains  in  limbs  from  taking  cold.
Emaciation,  especially  of  upper  arms  and  thighs.
I  I  Feet  and  hands  go  to  sleep.

I  I  Itching,  especially  in  bends  of  extremities.
Contraction  of  joints;  cracking  in  joints.

■  Hands  and  feet  swollen.

■  From not very  severe cold,  frozen,  inflamed,  itching

limbs ;  painful  chilblains.

■  Crippled  nails  on  fingers  and  toes.


NITRIC  ACID.  68

^^  Rest. Position. Motion. Lying down : headache >  ;

feeling  as  of  warm  water  flowing  over  and  from  eyes ;

evenings,  unpleasant  smell ;  chill.
When  reclining  :  cough  troublesome. .
Lying  on  parts  :  night  sweats.
Sitting  :  vertigo,  must  lie  down.
Standing  :  piles,  with  bearing  down.
Must  lie  down  :  stitches  in  head.
Can  only  lie  on  abdomen  :  from  pain  in  back.
Cannot  assume  erect  position  :  pain  in  back.
Raising  head  after  stooping:  vertigo.
Rising:  headache  >.
Cannot  raise  arm  :  pain  in  it.
Chewing  :  causes  cracking  in  ears.
When  ascending  steps :  loss  of  breath,  palpitation and

anxiety.
Least  exertion  :  debility ;  faintness.
Motion  :  headache  <  ;  nausea  >  ;  <  pain  in  abdomen ;

chill.
Walking: vertigo, must lie down;  pain in abdomen;

moist  soreness  in  anus  and  between  nates ;  stitches  in

vagina ;  itching  of  tumor  of  vulva  ;  slowly,  sudden  loss

of  breath ;  after  sitting,  violent  cramp  in  calf.
Exercise  :  hemorrhoids  <  ;  pressure  in  anus  <.
During  work  :  panting.
^^  Nerves, ll Excessive  physical  irritability;  hysteria.

iTwitchings  in  various  parts; frequent  starts  in upper

part  of  body.

I  Pains,  even  slight  ones,  affect  him  violently.
Easily  takes  cold.

A  sick  feeling  over  whole  body ;  faint  from  least  motion.

I I  So  weak,  almost  constantly  obliged  to  lie  down;  loses
breath  and  speech.

1 1  Great  weakness;  trembling;  shocks  on  going  to  sleep;
depressed  in  spirits.

1 1  Great  debility,  heaviness  and  trembling  of  limbs,  espe-
cially in  morning.

■  Excessive  prostration,  with  diarrhoea,  especially  in  old

people  and  those  who  sleep  badly.
Epilepsy  ;  fits  relieved  by  riding  in  a  carriage.
Syphilitic  epilepsy  and  melancholia.
Left-sided  paralysis.
^  Sleep. I  Drowsy  all  day,  from  debility,  with  vertigo.

■  Difficulty  of  going  to  sleep;  shocks  on  dropping  off'  to

sleep ;  starting  up  as  if  from  fright.
I  Pains  felt  during  sleep.

■  Sleep: anxious, with sobbing; restless, unrefreshing ;

frightful dreams ; nightmare ; very  restless  after  12 ;
cannot  sleep  after  2  a.m.


69  NITRIC  ACID.

I  On  awaking  feels  as  if  he  had  not  slept  enough.
^'  Time.  Morning:  moody;  vertigo;  towards,  headache  going
off  at  breakfast  time ;  on  waking,  headache ;  burning  in
lids  ;  difficulty  in  raising  lids ;  nosebleed  ;  tongue  dry,
white ;  violent  thirst ;  in  bed,  colic  ;  incarcerated  flatus
in  abdomen  <  ;  acute' pain  in  abdomen  during  stool  <;
sudden  manifestations  of  symptoms ;  stools  loose  ;  ag-
gravati  )ns  during  typhoid ;  burning  in  rectum  ;  cough
followed  by  greenish-white  casts  ;  cough  with  pain  low
down  in  lungs;  cough  <  on  rising;  thirst;  falling
asleep  of  hands ;  heaviness  and  trembling  of  limbs ;
chill ;  perspiration.

After  2  a.m.  :  cannot  sleep.

Afternoon  :  chill.

On  bedtime  :  cough  <.

During  day  :  cough  troublesome ;  cough  with  expectora-
tion of  dark  blood  mixed  with  coagula ;  sputa  of  blood
mixed  with  clots;  drowsy.

Evening  :  depressed  and  very  anxious ;  vertigo  ;  head  <  ;
unpleasant  smell ;  pulsating  in  teeth ;  incarcerated  fla-
tus <;  tearing  in  ulcers  on  prepuce;  barking  cough;
limbs  restless  ;  chill ;  sweat.

Night :  iritis  <  ;  nosebleed ;  cough  ;  pulsating  in  teeth  ;
griping;  burning  in  rectum;  hemorrhoids  bleed ;  urg-
ing to  urinate  <  ;  erections  with  severe  bleeding  from
region  of  frsenum  ;  sleep  disturbed ;  painful  erections ;
cough  <  ;  pain  in  back ;  whitlow  <  ;  tearing  in  bones  of
lower  extremities  <  ;  cramps  in  calves  and  soles ;  dry,
internal  heat ;  blood  seems  hot.

Before  midnight:  rough,  dry  cough.

Midnight :  awakes  with  crampy  pain  in  small  intestine
<  ;  chill.

After  midnight :  very  restless ;  sudden  manifestations  of
symptoms.
^'  Temperature  and  Weather. Warmth : of  flannel  does
not  >  headache  ;  cough  <.

Warm  weather  :  hemorrhoids  painful  to  touch.

On  covering  up  :  night  sweats.

Least  exposure,  in  room  or  at  fire  :  chills.

Open  air:  water  drops  from  nose;  stitches  in  vagina  when
walking ;  itching  nettlerash.

Cold  or  warm  :  causes  tearing  and  shooting  in  teeth.

Change  of  temperature  :  iritis  <  ;  cicatrices  pain.

Washing:  causes  warts  to  bleed.

Slight  degree  of  cold  :  chilblains  swell.

After  sharp  northwest  winds  :  disorders  of  bowels.

Cold  weather:  chilblains  <.

Cold  water :  >  feeling  of  warm  water  flowing  from  eyes.


NITRIC  ACID  70

*"  Fever.  Chill :  afternoon  and  evening  ;  after  lying  down  ;
from  least  exposure ;  in  room  or  at  fire,  in  waves  up
each  side  of  spine  and  over  chest;  with  aversion  to
heat;  continuous;  awakens  at  midnight ;  <  from  un-
covering or  moving  ;  followed  by  heat  and  pricking  as
if  from  needles ;  morning  in  bed  after  previous  heat :
with  internal  heat.

I  Hands  very  cold.

I  Icy  coldness  of  soles  of  feet.

I  Heat :  on  hands  and  face ;  flushes  of  single  parts,  or  over
entire  body  ;  with  moisture  of  hands  ;  with  dryness  of
throat ;  dry,  at  night ;  dry,  internal  at  night,  wants  to
uncover ;  blood  seems  hot  at  night  especially  in  hands,
could  not  sleep  ;  with  sweat  and  debility  after  eating.

I  No  thirst  during  hot  or  cold  stage.

llSweat:  with  cold  hands  and  blue  nails  ;  in  axillte,  of-
fensive, of  a  strong  odor  ;  sour,  offensive,  like  horse's
urine ;  all  over,  after  eating ;  most  on  upper  part  of
body ;  of  feet ;  on  soles  of  feet,  makes  them  sore  ;  in
morning;  offensive  for  several  nights.

I  Night  sweat :  every  night,  or  profuse  every  other  night;

on  covering  up  in  bed ;  only  on  parts  on  which  he  has
been  lying;  mostly  on  feet;  copious  (maltreated  bu-
boes); colliquative,  with  much  emaciation  (tuberculosis).

IlLong-lasting  chronic  cases  of  intermittent,  where  liver
is  involved  and  blood  is  aneemic,  with  general  cachexia.

■  Typhoid:  hemorrhages;  great  sensitiveness  of  abdo-
men ;  green,  slimy,  acrid  diarrhoea  ;  tenesmus ;  white-
coated  tongue  with  sore  spots  ;  inflammatory  affection
of  lungs,  with  rattling  cough  and  breathing;  brownish,
blood}^  expectoration  and  irregular  pulse;  after  Calomel.

I I  Hemorrhages  of  bright  red  blood,  not  clotted  ;  tongue
presents  a  deep  red  appearance,  with  a  sort  of  velvety
look ;  soreness  of  bowels  with  persistent  diarrhoea
streaked  with  blood ;  fetid  urine ;  burning,  pungent
skin  ;  ulcers  in  ileo-csecal  region,  with  gurgling  in  ab-
domen ;  raving  delirium,  getting  out  of  bed;  inflam-
matory affection  of  lungs,  with  rattling  cough  and
breathing ;  brownish,  bloody  expectoration  and  irregu-
lar pulse,  or  quick,  hard  pulse,  with  suffocative  respira-
tion ;  prostration,  listlessness  ;  stupidity,  with  startling,
wild  looks,  deafness,  great  weakness  and  trembling ;
faint  from  least  motion  ;  cold  feet. ^Typhus.

*^  Attacks,  Periodicity. For hours after stool :  pains in
rectum.
Daily  :  two  or  three  pappy  stools ;  constriction  of  anus.
After  dinner  :  aggravation  during  typhoid.
Every  morning  :  green  casts  in  nose.


71  NITRIC  ACID.

Every  night :  night  sweat.

Nightly :  severe  pain  in  nodes.

On  alternate  days  :  aggravation  during  typhoid.

Every  other  night :  ni*ght  sweat.

Several  nights  :  offensive  perspiration.

Several  afternoons  :  burning  over  abdomen.

For  several  years  :  severe  pain  in  small  of  back  and  hem-
orrhage from  rectum.

Winter  :  hiccough  <  ;  chronic  cough  ;  chilblains.
*^  Locality  and  Direction.  Right:  drawing  pain  in  temple;
side  of  head  painful ;  on  lower  lid  a  large  condyloma  ;
eyelashes  point  stiffly  towards  nose ;  ulcer  near  side  of
gians ;  sticking  in  side  and  within  ribs ;  stitches  in  side ;
aching  in  shoulder  and  arm  ;  numbness,  trembling,
tingling  of  forearm  ;  pressive-tensive  pain  in  hip  joint.

Left :  stitches  in  temple ;  throbbing  on  side  of  head ;  pain
like  a  gathering  at  temple  ;  swelling  of  glands  behind
and  beneath  ear ;  ulcers  on  palatine  arch  ;  pressure  in
side  ;  gurgling  in  side  ;  ulcer  on  side  of  glans  ;  on  side
of  corpus  spongiosum  a  fistulous  ulcer ;  neuralgic
pains  <  side  of  back ;  aching,  powerless  feeling  in
hand  ;  eczema  on  inner  side  of  hand  ;  paralysis.

First  r.  then  1.  :  feeling  of  warm  water  flowing  over  eyes.

From  vertex  to  1.  ear,  thence  over  vertex  to  r.  side  of
head :  headache.
"  Sensations.  As  if  head  were  in  a  vise  from  ear  to  ear  over
vertex ;  as  if  some  one  were  forcibly  pressing  head ;  as
if  head  were  tightly  bound  up  ;  as  if  skull  were  con-
stricted by  tape ;  head  as  if  contused  ;  pain  as  of  a
gathering  at  1.  temple  ;  pain  as  from  splinters  in  erup-
tion ;  as  if  water  were  flowing  over  and  from  eyes ;  as  if
an  ulcer  were  being  pressed,  in  eyes  ;  as  of  s'Bnd  in  eyes;
as  of  a  splinter  in  nose ;  teeth  as  if  elongated  ;  as  if
teeth  would  fall  out ;  as  if  teeth  were  soft  and  spongy  ;
as  of  splinter  in  ulcers  in  mouth ;  as  if  pharynx  were
constricted ;  as  if  food  would  not  go  down  throat ;
throat  as  if  swollen  ;  as  if  abdomen  would  burst ;  as  if
a  boiler  were  working  within  bowels  ;  as  of  a  hot,  dry
cloth  on  abdomen  ;  as  if  stool  were  stayed  in  rectum  ;  as
of  splinters  in  rectum  ;  as  of  fissures  of  anus ;  as  if  sharp
sticks  were  being  pressed  into  anus ;  as  if  urethra  were
contracted  ;  as  if  sticks  were  jagging  ulcers  on  scrotum  ;
as  if  small  ulcers  were  in  larynx  ;  as  if  something  was
tearing  away  in  lungs  ;  small  of  back  as  if  stiff;  upper
arm  as  if  beaten  ;  as  if  splinter  or  piece  of  glass  were  in
finger ;  hip  as  if  sprained ;  pain  in  legs  as  from  excess-
ive fatigue  ;  as  if  dogs  were  gnawing  flesh  and  bones,
and  as  if  sinews  were  being  pulled  up  ;  as  if  bends  of


NITRIC  ACID.  72

knees  were  swollen  ;  as  if  -great  toe  and  ball  had  been

frozen ;  as  if  sharp  splinter  were  being  stuck  into  great

toe;  as  if  walking  on  pins  ;  pricking  as  if  from  needles;

as  if  splinters  were  running  through  carbuncles.
Pain:  in  skull;  in  hollow  teeth;  in  cardiac  orifice;  in

region  of  liver ;  in  ileo-csecal  region ;  down  thighs ;  low

down  in  lungs ;  in  back  ;  across  buttocks ;  in  patella ;

in  chilblains  ;  in  bones.
Horrible  pain  :  in  testicles.
Intense  pain  :  in  whitlow.

Severe  pain  :  in  small  of  back ;  in  nodes  upon  shin  bones.
Acute  pain  :  in  abdomen.
Cutting pain : in abdomen ; in rectum ; in anus ; in

urethra.
Lancinating :  in  rectum.
Tearing :  in  malar  bones ;  in  teeth  ;  in  anus ;  in  prepuce ;

in  bones  of  lower  extremities.
Piercing :  in  temples.

Shooting  :  in  teeth ;  in  rectum  ;  in  region  of  larynx.
Boring :  in  teeth.
Splinterlike pain  :  in ulcers in mouth ;  in rectum ;  in

chancre  ;  in  finger;  in  great  toe;  in  eruption.
Stitches  :  in  head ;  in  1.  temple ;  in  throat ;  in  nose  ;  in  root

of  nose ;  in  upper  lip ;  in  tonsils ;  in  pit  of  stomach ;

in  hepatic  region ;  in  urethric  orifice ;  in  prepuce ;  up

vagina ;  in  chest ;  in  r.  side ;  in  and  between  scapulae ;

in  sacral  region  ;  in  knees.
Sticking  pain:  in  occiput;  in  eyes;  in  ulcers;  in  throat;

in  prepuce ; in  erectile  tumors ;  in  r.  side ;  in upper

part  of  chest  and  within  ribs ;  through  abdomen  and

back  ;  in  great  toe  and  ball ;  in  feet ;  in  warts.
Pricking:  in  bones  of  face;  in  mouth;  in  hemorrhoids;

in  vulva ;  through  carbuncles ;  in  warts.
Pinching:  in  abdomen.
Gnawang:  in  stomach.
Griping  pain  :  in  abdomen.
Cramp  :  violent  in  calves  and  soles.
Cramplike  pain  :  in  abdomen ;  in  small  intestines ;  from

kidney towards bladder;  in chest;  stiffness in back

and  whole  body.
Hammering:  on  1.  side  of  head.
Throbbing :  on  1.  side  of  head  ;  in  ears ;  in  nape  of  neck  ;

small  of  back.
Biting :  in  eyes.

Stinging  soreness :  of  abdomen.
Stinging:  eruption  on  head;  in  eyes;  in  teeth;  in  mouth;

corners  of  mouth  ;  in  anus ;  in  throat ;  in  finger  joints ;

through  carbuncles.


73  NITRIC  ACID.

Sore  pain  :  in  tongue ;  in  pharynx.

Soreness  :  in  nose ;  of  mouth ;  of  anus ;  of  intestines ;  of
extremities  ;  moist,  in  anus  and  between  nates  ;  of  inner
surface  of  prepuce;  of  nipples;  of  chest;  at  lower  end
of  sternum;  along  periosteum  of  tibia;  of  feet;  of
tonsils.
Burning  distress :  in  stomach.

Burning:  of  sores  on  scalp;  in  eyes;  in  lids;  of  wings  of
nose;  in  nose;  in  throat;  of  tongue;  in  fauces;  in
stomach ;  over  whole  abdomen ;  in  rectum  ;  in  hemor-
rhoids; in  urethra;  of  vulva  and  vagina;  pain  in
small  of  back.

Smarting :  in  wart  on  upper  lip.

Rawness :  of  anus.

Bruised  pain :  in  legs.

Drawing  pain:  in  r.  temple;  in  abdomen  ;  in  rectum  ;  in
small  of  back;  in  arms  and  hands;  in  all  limbs.

Neuralgic  pain  :  up  back.

Paralytic  pain  :  in  leg.

Pressive-tensive  pain :  in  r.  hip  joint.

Rheumatic  pains:  in  forearms  and  fingers;  in  hip  joint;
in  legs  and  feet ;  in  all  limbs.

Dull  pains  :  in  extremities.

Bruised  feeling :  in  arm.

Scratching :  in  anus  and  rectum  ;  in  throat.

Scraped  feeling :  in  throat.

Aching:  in  eyes;  in  r.  shoulder  and  arm  ;  in  1.  hand.

Painfulness :  of  r.  side  of  skull ;  of  bones  of  face ;  of  soft
palate,  tongue  and  inside  gums.

Pressure:  in  middle  of  brain;  in  forepart  of  head  and
upon  eyes ;  in  throat ;  in  stomach ;  in  1.  side ;  in  rectum  ;
in  anus ;  in  kidneys ;  down,  in  hypogastrium  and  small
of  back.

Heaviness :  in  legs.

Heavyweight:  in  stomach  ;  in  anus.

Stiffness:  painful,  in  knees.

Oppression :  on  chest.

Constriction :  of  anus.

Tension :  painful  within  head  to  eyes ;  in  skin  of  forehead.

Fulness:  painful  in  head;  in  abdomen;  in  chest.

Tightness  :  in  abdomen  ;  in  chest.

Pulsation  :  in  head  ;  in  teeth  ;  in  stomach  ;  in  back.

Tickling :  in  larynx  ;  pit  of  stomach  ;  in  epigastrium.

Tingling :  of  r.  forearm.

Heat :  in  stomach  to  throat ;  of  hands  and  feet.

Lassitude :  in  legs.

Numbness :  of  r.  forearm  ;  of  fingers.

Uneasiness :  in  abdomen  ;  in  cliest.


NITRIC  ACID.  74

Dryness:  of  throat;  of  tongue;  of  mouth;  of  skin.

Icy  coldness:  of  soles  of  feet.

Cold  feeling:  in  teeth.

Itching  eruption  :  behind  ears;  in  nose;  in  lips  ;  of  gums;
in  rectum  ;  about  genitals ;  in  anus  ;  of  urethra ;  of  ves-
icles on  prepuce ;  of  prepuce ;  of  vulva  and  vagina ;
in  erectile  tumors;  violent,  on  back;  of  shins;  of  chil-
blains; in  bends  of  extremities;  of  skin;  of  frostbites.
"Tissues.  I  Emaciation:  gradual;  to  great  thinness;  espe-
cially of  upper  arms  and  thighs.

■  Easily  takes  cold.

1 1  Hemorrhages :  bright;  profuse;  dark;  from  bowels,  in
typhoid  ;  after  miscarriage,  or  post-partum  ;  from  over-
exertion of  body;  uterine;  epistaxis;  haemoptysis;  from
rhagades.

Cracking  in  joints.

I  Inflammation  of  periosteum  and  of  bones;  feeling  as  if
flesh  were  torn  from  bones.

I  Caries  of  bones,  sloughing,  phagedsena  and  gangrene.

I  Bone  tumors  following  mercury  or  syphilis.

llSyphilitic  bone-pains.

Acts  very  powerfully  on  mucous  nrembranes  and  has  a
particular  afflnity  for  outlets  of  mucous  surfaces  where
skin  and  mucous  membrane  join.

Pain  in  old  scars  on  change  of  weather.

I  Post-scarlatinal  dropsy  with  fetid  breath.

I I  Inflammatory  swelling,  enlargement  or  suppuration  of
inguinal  or  axillary  glands,  especially  after  abuse  of
mercury  or  in  syphilitic  subjects.

llDischarges  thin,  oftensive  and  excoriating,  and,  if  pur-
ulent, are  of  a  dirty  yellowish-green  color  and  not  at  all
laudable.

■  Tedious  suppurations.

I  Easily  bleeding  ulcers,  looking  like  raw  flesh,  with  zig-
zag edges,  and  exuberant  granulations  on  base.

llDiseases  clepending  upon  presence  of  syphilitic,  scrofu-
lous or  mercurial  poison  ;  broken  down,  cachectic  con-
stitutions.
*^  Touch.  Passive  Motion.  Injuries.  Touch :  eruption
on  head  painful ;  iritis  <  ;  region  of  eyes  sore ;  condy-
lomata bleed ;  stitches  in  upper  lip  ;  tearing,  shooting
in  teeth;  abdomen  sore;  abdomen  painful;  hemor-
rhoids painful ;  as  if  sticks  were  pressed,  into  anus ;
ulcers  bleed  easily;  pain,  as  if  sticks  w^ere  jagged  into
ulcers;  whitlow  very  sensitive;  pains  as  from  splinters
<  ;  warts  painful.

Pressure  :  of  hat,  head  sensitive ;  on  swelling  on  head  <  ;
whitlow  very  sensitive.


75  NITRIC  ACID.

Lain  on  :  head  <  ;  eruption  on  head  very  sore  ;  swellings
on  scalp  <.

Friction  of  wrappings  around  hand  : <  feeling  of  splinter
in  part.

Scratching :  eruption  on  head  bleeds  easily.

Riding  in  carriage:  headache >;  deafness;  nausea  >  ;
amelioration  of  general  condition;  epileptic  fits  >.

Rattling  of  wagons  over  paved  streets  or  stepping  hard :
head  sensitive.

Injury  to  eye:  flow  of  irritating  tears.
^®  Skin. I  Skin: sallow,  yellow; dirty; brown-red,  copper-
colored and violet spots ; blackness of  pores  ; dark
freckles ;  tight ;  dry ;  scaly ;  itching ;  dry  and  burning  hot.

■  Scarlatina miliaria with very hot skin; intermittent

breathing;  tonsils  swollen  and  sore,  with  great  diffi-
culty of  swallowing  ;  angina  extends  up  to  nares,  with
thin,  purulent  discharge ;  tongue  dry  and  cracked ;
cachectic  children.
■Scarlatina;  ichorous  discharge  from  nose;  neglected
cases.

■  Itching  nettlerash  in  open  air.

■  Large  boils  on  scapulae,  nape  of  neck,  thighs  and  legs.

■  Carbuncles  ;  prickling  stinging  as  if  from  splinters  run-

ning through  them.

■  Eczema  around  edge  of  calvarium,  in  meatus  aud.  ext,

and  on  genitalia.

■  Herpes  in  whiskers,  between  fingers  and  on  alse  nasi.

■  Pityriasis  versicolor.

■  Frostbites;  itching,  inflamed  from  slight  degree  of  cold;

skin  cracked.

■  Painful  chilblains  and  corns.

■  Cicatrices  pain  on  change  of  weather.

■  ■Rhagades,  deep,  bleeding.

■  Ulcers  :  bleed  when  touched  ;  stinging  pains  ;  feeling  as

of  a  splinter;  edges  hard,  everted,  irregular;  exuberant
granulations;  inclined  to  spread  in  circumference  rather
than  in  depth,  tendency  to  fungous  growth;  carious,
mercurial  or  syphilitic.

■  ■Warts: sticking and pricking; wart on upper lip

smarts  and  bleeds  on  washing,  painful  to  touch ;  soft,
with  a  thin  epidermis,  and  moist ;  large,  jagged,  often
pedunculated,  exuding  moisture  and  bleeding  readily  ;
syphilitic  condylomata,  elevated,  exuberant,  cauli-
flower-like.

■  Syphilitic  eruptions of  skin,  in advanced stage,  with

superficial  ulcers,  and  pains  in  bones.

■  Plerpes, condylomata, tubercles,  ulcers and syphilitic

eruptions,  with  sore,  prickling  itching  pains ;  especially
soft  chancres.


NITRIC  ACID.  76

I  Fungoid  or  mucous  tubercles. /^Syphilis.

*'' Stages  of  Life,  Constitution.  iiSuitable  especially  to
lean  persons  of  rigid  tibre,  dark,  swarthy  complexion,
black  hair  and  eyes ;  the  brunette  rather  than  blonde-
nervous  temperament.

I I  Persons  suffering  from  chronic  diseases  who  take  cold
easily  and  are  disposed  to  diarrhoea ;  very  seldom  to
those  who  suffer  with  constipation.

1 1  Old  people,  diarrhoea  with  great  weakness.

Hydrogenoid  constitutions.

Child,  set.  1 ;  pneumonia.

Girl, set. 4, during illness of brother suffering with

diphtheria;  diphtheria.
Boy,  set.  4;  swelling  of  cervical  glands. '
Boy,  set.  5;  suffering  since  two  years  old  ;  ptyalism.
Girl,  set.  6,  after  use  of  mercurial  salve  for  eczema  capitis ;

ulcerated  mouth  and  tongue.
Boy,  set.  7  ;  scrofulous  ophthalmia.
Boy,  set.  7,  deaf  mute  ;  otorrhoea.

Boy,  set.  7,  weak,  suffering  from  amblyopia ;  diphtheria.
Boy,  set.  8 ;  dysentery.
Boy,  set.  8 ;  diphtheria  and  scarlatina.
Boy,  set.  7-8,  thin,  brunette,  dark skin,  when  two  years

old  had  an  attack  of  wdiooping  cough  which  lasted  five

to  six  months,  since  then  suffering ;  cough.
Girl,  set.  9  ;  diphtheria.
Boy,  set.  10,  frequent  epistaxis  ;  diphtheria.
Girl,  set.  10,  after  scarlatina;  dropsy.
Girl,  set.  12,  scrofulous,  chlorotic;  diphtheria.
Boy,  set.  15;  hsematuria.
Girl,  set  17  ;  diphtheria.

Young  man,  18,  phthisical,  suffering  one  year ;  sycosis.
Young  man,  set.  19,  suffering  three days ; gonorrhoeal

ophthalmia.
Young  man,  set.  19 ;  diphtheria.
Lady,  set.  20,  sick  in a  family  where  four  had  died  of

diphtheria  under  allopathic  treatment ;  diphtheria.
Girl,  set.  20,  formerly  anaemic ;  typhoid  fever.
M.  G.,  set.  20,  good  constitution,  suffering  for  four  years;

warts  and  rhagades  on  hands.
Man,  sdt.  21,  assistant  in bookstore,  small  stature,  weak

constitution  ;  diphtheria.
Girl,  set.  22  ;  gonorrhoea.

Man,  set.  23  ;  after  frequent  and  violent  coitus ;  buboes.
Countryman,  set.  24  ;  syphilis.

Woman,  set.  28,  lively  disposition,  small  stature;  condy-
loma on  eyelid.
Woman,  set.  30,  after  a  return  from  India,  had  an  attack

of  angina ;  chronic  affection  of  throat.


77  NITRIC  ACID.

Man,  £et.  30,  mild  disposition,  blonde,  strong  ;  pleurisy.
Man,  set.  30,  blonde,  phlegmatic,  strong,  several  years  had

gonorrhoea  which  was  maltreated  ;  difficult  urination.
Man,  set. 30,  joiner,  strong,  robust, had chancre three

months  previous,  had  taken  calomel ;  syphilis.
Woman,  set.  30,  married,  dark  complexion,  jet  black  hair

and  eyes,  nervous  temperament ;  two  months  ago  had

an  abscess  in  r.  broad  ligament  with  severe  peritonitis,

which  she  thinks  was  induced  by  injections  to  cure  leu-

corrhoea;  ague.
Baroness  W.,  set.  30  ;  whitlow.
Man,  set.  31,  ten  years  ago  suffered  from  itch,  three  years

ago  had  a  chancre,  has  taken  much  mercury  and  co-

paiva;  gonorrhoea.
Woman,  set.  33  ;  diphtheria.
Man,  set.  33,  officer,  had  chancre  which  was  cauterized ;

syphilis.
Officer,  set.  34,  last  eight  years  has  had  several  attacks  of

gonorrhoea  and  chancre  ;  syphilis.
Man,  set.  34,  strong,  syphilitic  history  ;  syphilis.
Man,  set.  35,  had  syphilis  four  years  ago ;  sore  throat.
Man,  set.  35,  had  itch  during  childhood,  syphilitic  history;

syphilis.
Mrs.  S ,  set.  36,  bilious  temperament;  married;  mother

of  one  child  three  years  old ;  suffering  for  the  last  five

years ;  chronic  ulceration  of  bowels.
Man,  set.  38 ;  hemorrhoids.
Man,  set.  38,  syphilitic  history;  ulcer  on  penis.
Man,  set.  40,  former  strength  greatly  reduced  ;  syphilis.
Man,  set.  44,  strong  constitution,  suffering  from  chronic

hemorrhoids,  since  nine  years  syphilis;  rhypia.
Man,  set.  44,  robust,  intemperate ;  chancre.
Weaver,  set.  50 ;  hemorrhoids.
Mrs.  S.,  set.  52,  large  size ;  boils.
Maiden  lady,  set.  55,  suffering for  a  year  or  more  ;  tumor

in  mouth.
Woman,  set.  65,  unmarried;  verucse  planse.
Woman,  set.  80;  chronic  diarrhoea.
Young  farmer ;  whitlow.
Young  woman,  brunette,  badly  formed  throat  and  chest,

menses profuse, disposed to catarrh and angina ; ,

angina.
Woman,  thin,  weak, after  fourth confinement ;  pleuro-
pneumonia.
Woman,  poor,  living  in  damp  house  ;  pleurisy.
^^  Relations. Antidoted  by: Gale  ost,  Hepar,  Mercur.,  Mezer.,

Sulphur.
It  antidotes:  Calc.  ost,  Digit,  Mercur.
Compatible :  is  followed  in  many  cases  by  Calc.  ost.  Put-


NITRUM— NUPHAR  LUTEUM.  78

sat.,  Sulphur;  by  Arnic.  in  collapse  of  dysentery,  by
Kreos.  in  diphtheritic  dysentery,  by  Secale  in  gangrene
of  mucous  membranes,  by  Sulphur  in  scrofulous
ophthalmia.

It  follows  well:  Calc.  osL,  Natr.  carb.,  Pulsat.,  Sulphur;
Carbo  an.  in  bubo;  Kali  carb.  in  phthisis  pulmonalis
and  other  diseases ;  Aurum  in  abuse  of  mercury ;  Thuja
in  rupia ;  Mercur.  in  many  manifestations  of  secondary
syphilis ;  Hepar  in  throat  and  other  affections.

Resembles  Arsen.  in  morbid  fear  of  cholera.

Incompatible :  Laches.

Complementary : Calad.,  Arsen.

Compare :  Mur.  ac.


NITRUM. (See  Kali  Nitricum.)


NUPHAR  LUTEUM.

NixenBlume;  Small  Yellow  Pond  Lily.  Nymphseacese.

A  variety  of  pond  lily  native  to  Europe ;  also  found  at  Manayunk,  near  Phila-
delphia.

The  width  of  the  flower  is  about  two  inches.  The  tincture  is  prepared  from  the
fresh  root.

Proved  by  Pitet,  Journ  de  la  Soc,  Gal.,  vol.  3,  p.  129.

Clinical  Authorities. — Entero-coliiis,  Pitet,  N.  A.  J.  H.,  vol.  3,  p.  259 ;  Diar-
rh(xa,  Shipman,  Blaikie,  Hale's  Therap.,  p.  446;  (3  cases),  Pitet,  N.  A.  J.  H.,  vol.
3,  pp.  258-9;  Diarrhoea  during  <2/pAoic?,  Lilienthal,  Horn.  CI.,  vol.  3,  p.  118;  Diar-
rhoea and  psoriasis,  Lilienthal,  Horn.  CI.,  vol.  3,  p.  118  /  Cholerine,  Lilienthal,  Horn.
CL,  vol.  3,  p.  118 ;  Digestive  disturbances  and  weakness  of  sexual,  organs,  Pitet,  N.  A.
J.  H.,  vol.  3,  p.  259 ;  Seminal,  emissions  (2  cases),  Pitet,  N.  A.  J.  H.,  vol.  3,  p.  257 ;
Bhus  tox  poisoning  {locally),  Sawtelle,  N.  E.  M.  G.,  vol.  11,  p.  198.

^  Mind. Impatience  at  slightest  contradiction.

Excessive  sensibility  giving  one  pain  in  witnessing  suffer-
ings of  animals.

^  Inner  Head. Painful  bruised  shocks  in  r.  anterior  side  of
brain,  in  walking.
Headaches  attending  depressed  conditions  of  generative
organs.

^  Sight  and  Eyes.  iWhen  standing  in  sun  brilliant  sparks
filled  field  of  vision,  converging  from  circumference  to
centre.


20


79  NUPHAR  LUTEUM.

^^  Inner  Mouth. Sweetish  taste  in  mouth.

^^  Scrobiculum  and  Stomach,  i Tongue  white ;  mouth  pasty ;
painful  sensation  of  weariness  in  stomach ;  digestion
slow ;  wind  colic,  principally  early  in  morning,  with
liquid  or  sour-smelling  stools ;  for  several  years  virile
function  had  been  badly  performed ;  frequent  pollutions
during  sleep  ;  constant  itching  of  scrotum  and  perineum ;
small  desire  for  coitus ;  infrequent  and  feeble  erec-
tions; general  weariness;  <  on  day  succeeding  sexual
connection.

^^  Abdomen.  I Appetite  good,  at  times  excessive;  frequent
regurgitation  of  an  acrid  and  corrosive  taste ;  digestion
slow ;  colic  and  rumbling  every  night  and  waked  sev-
eral times  from  5  to  7  a.m.  to  go  to  stool,  which  was
liquid  or  soft,  yellowish,  and  either  sourish  or  fetid;  <
from  least  excess  of  any  kind ;  sleep  agitated ;  heat  in
palms ;  frequent  pulse ;  at  times  dull  pains  in  1.  renal
region,  which  was  sensitive  to  touch.  ^Entero-colitis.
Stool  and  Rectum. Stools :  liquid,  yellow,  fetid.

I  Diarrhoea,  obliging  him  to  get  up  several  times  tow^ards
5  or  6  A.M. ;  burning  at  anus ;  general  depression ;  no
colic.
I  Early  morning  stool,  weakness  of  limbs,  general  ex-
haustion.
iMorning  diarrhoea  with  colic;  between  4  and  6  a.m.,  two
or  three  stools  and  generally  one  in  evening.

■  Stool  liquid,  light  yellow ;  call  urgent,  every  morning  at

six,  followed  by  two  or  three  more  passages  in  a  few
hours  and  no  more  till  next  morning. ^Diarrhoea.

iSoft  stools  preceded  by  colic.

I  I  Diarrhoea:  painless  in  morning;  with  exhaustion  ;  dur-
ing typhoid.

lEntero-colitis,  with  severe  colicky  pains  in  rectum  and
characteristic  stools ;  psoriasis,  on  different  parts  of  body,
with  great  itching.

■  Cholerine  since  a  week;  stools  cause  great  exhaustion,

patient  being  in  last  stage  of  marasmus.
Pricking  pains  in  rectum  as  from  needles.
Male  Sexual  Organs, i  Entire  absence  of  erections and
sexual  desire;  voluptuous  ideas  which  fill  imagination
do  not  cause  erections.

■  Complete absence of sexual desire; penis retracted;

scrotum  relaxed.

■  Weakening  nocturnal  emissions  while  convalescing  from

typhoid.

■  Involuntary  seminal  losses  during  sleep,  at  stool,  and

when  urinating,  with  complete  absence  of  erections ;  in-
ability to  perform  generative  act;  general  weakness;
digestion  impaired ;  pale  and  languid.


NUPHAR  LUTEUM.  80

^^  Tipper  Limbs, i Leprous  eruption  on  arm.

^*  Limbs  in  General, i Sensation  of  weakness and  loss of

power  in  limbs ; <  in  evening.
^  Rest. Position. Motion. Walking : painful shocks in

brain.
^®  Nerves, l General  exhaustion;  weakness  from  loss  of  fluids.
^^  Time. Between  4  and  6  a.m.  :  two  or  three  stools.

From  5  to  7  a.m.  :  wakes  several  times  to  go  to  stool.
Morning :  wind  colic ;  stool  and  colic ;  painless  diarrhoea.
Evening:  one  stool;  weakness  in  limbs  <  ;  itching  <.
*^  Attacks,  Periodicity. Every  morning  at  6  :  stool liquid,
yellow.
Every  night :  colic  and  rumbling.
For  several  years :  virile  function  badly  performed.
*^  Locality  and  Direction. Right :  painful  shocks  in  ante-
rior brain.
Left :  dull  pains  in  renal  region.
*^  Sensations. Painful  shocks :  in  r.  anterior  side  of  brain.
Burning :  at  anus.
Pricking  pains  :  in  rectum.
Weakness :  in  limbs.

Itching:  of  scrotum  and  perineum;  in  different  parts  of
body  ;  violent,  on  skin.
*^  Touch. Passive Motion. Injuries. Touch : renal  re-
gion sensitive.
*^  Skin. Violent  itching.

On  different  parts of  body  red  blotches,  tolerably  reg-
ular in outline, ovoid or circular, prominent and
covered  with  little  silvery white  scales ; violent  itch-
ing, < in evening;  as eruption disappeared scales
ceased  to be  reproduced,  and skin at  place of  each
blotch  became  pale  red  or  yellowish.
I  Rhus  tox  poisoning ;  relieved  pain  and  swelling  and  has-
tened recovery.
I  I  Psoriasis ;  pityriasis  capitis.
*^  Stages  of  Life,  Constitution. Man,  set.  21,  professor  of  lit-
erature ;  suffering  8  days ;  diarrhoea.
Man,  set.  28,  suffering  three  months;  diarrhoea.
Man,  ^t.  33,  jeweler,  suffering  a  fortnight;  diarrhoea.
Man,  set.  37,  wood-carver,  sick  3  months;  digestive  trou-
bles, weakness  of  sexual  organs.
Man,  set.  43,  addicted  to  excesses  of  table  and  venery,  has
domestic  trouble,  has  taken  much  old  school  and  quack
medicine,  suffering  3  years ;  entero-colitis.
Miss  B.,  set.  54,  suffering  several  weeks; diarrhoea  and

psoriasis.
Man,  set.  71,  suffering  a  week ;  cholerine.
Man,  suffering  for  nine  years ;  seminal  emissions.


81  NUX  MOSCHATA

NUX  MOSCHATA.

Nutmeg.  Myristicacese.

The  nutmeg  tree  is  a  native  of  the  East  and  West  Indies.  Tlie  alcoholic  tincture
is  prepared  from  the  powdered  dried  root.

Introduced  by  Helbig.  For  history  and  list  of  provers  and  reports,  covering  a
period  of  more  than  eight  centuries,  see  Hering's  Monograph.

Clinical,  Authorities. — Affection  of  mind,  Lorbacher,  Analyt.  Therap.,  vol.  1,
p.  241 ;  Horn.  CI.,  vol.  4,  p.  13 ;  Mental  disorder,  Sircar,  Eaue's  Eec,  1875,  p.  32;
Sensation  of  looseness  in  brain,  etc.,  Drumm,  Horn.  CI.,  vol.  4,  p.  32 ;  Headache,  Mont-
gomery, Hom.  CI.,  vol.  4,  p.  33 ;  Affection  of  head,  Hahnemann,  Hom.  CI.,  vol.  4^
p.  14  ;  Convulsive  motions  of  head,  Molin,  Hom.  CL,  vol.  4,  p.  15;  Episcleritis,  Mc-
Guire,  Norton's  Oph.  Therap.,  p.  131 ;  Affection  of  eyes,  Berridge,  Organon,  vol.  1,
p.  110;  Toothache,  Hirsch,  Kiick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  5,  p.  207;  Toothache  and  affection,
of  stomach,  Kallenbach,  Hom.  CI.,  vol.  4,  p.  35  ;  Gastralgia,  Eummel,  Kiick.  KL
Erf.,  vol.  1,  p.  642 ;  Dyspepsia,  Lippe,  Hah.  Mo.,  vol.  3,  p.  531 ;  Affection  of  liver,
Bowie,  Trans.  Hom.  Med.  Soc.  Pa.,  1885,  p.  184;  Nervous  irritation  of  digestive  canal^
Hahnemann,  Hom.  CL,  vol.  4,  p.  15;  Irritation  of  intestinal  canal,  Hahnemann,
AnaL  Therap.,  vol.1,  p.  109;  Colic,  Hannes,  Allg.  Hom.  Ztg.,  vol.  106,  p.  67 ;
Thompkins,  Hom.  Phys.,  vol.  8,  p.  356;  Pelvic  congestion,  Morgan,  Hom.  Cl.^
vol.  4,  p.  36  ;  Worm  troubles,  Hannes,  Allg.  Hom.  Ztg.,  vol.  106,  p.  67  ;  Renal  colic,.
Haubold, Eaue's  Eec,  1874,  p.  217 ; Suppressed  menses,  Lippe, Hah.  Mo.,  voL

3,  p.  531;  Houghton,  Hom.  CI.,  vol.  4,  p.  36;  Lorbacher,  Eaue's  Eec,  1871,
p.  157 ;  Menostasia,  Gross,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  2,  p.  237 ;  Disorders  of
'pregnancy,  Lindsay,  Organon,  vol.  1,  p.  471;  Morgan,  Hom.  CL,  vol.  4,  p.  78;
Abortion,  lAMenihal,  Hom.  CL,  vol.  4,  p.  95 ;  Undeveloped  speech,  Minton,  Eaue's
Eec,  1874,  p.  107;  Cough,  Malcom,  Times  Eetros.,  1876,  p.  83;  Affection  of
chest,  Hannes,  Allg.  Hom.  Ztg.,  vol.  106,  p.  67  ;  Sciatica,  Curtis,  Hom.  CI.,  vol.  4,
p.  74;  Hysteria  (3  cases),  Molin,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  2,  p.  287;  Hysteria
with  strangury,  Williamson,  Trans.  Hom.  Med.  Soc.  Pa.,  1873;  Droivsiness,
Farrington,  Hom.  CL,  vol.  4,  p.  91 ;  Attacks  of  somnolency,  Lorbacher,  Hom.  CL,  vol.

4,  p.  34;  Intermittent  fever,  Griggs,  Eaue's  Eec,  1872,  p.  236;  Custis,  T.  A.  J.  H.,
1880,  p.  229;  Typhoid  fever,  Eaue's  Eec,  1875,  p.  281 ;  Cough,  etc.,  during  scarlet

fever,  Hannes,  Allg,  Hom.  Ztg.,  vol.  106,  p.  66;  Hemorrhage  during  typhoid,
Preston,  Eaue's  Eec,  1870,  p.  318 ;  Rheumatism,  Lippe,  Hah.  Mo.,  vol.  3,  p.  531.

^  Mind. 1 1  Stupor  and  insensibility;  unconquerable  sleep.

I  Unconsciousness:  after mental excitement; especially

just  before  menses;  thoughts  vanish  with  fainting;
seemingly  to  her  of  a  half  hour's  duration,  but  really
only  momentary.

I I  Vanishing  of  thoughts  while  talking,  reading  or  writing.

VOL.  VIII.— 6,


NUX  MOSOHATA.  82

■  Gradual  vanishing  of  thoughts  while  reading,  ends  in

falling  asleep.
1 1  Weakness  or  loss  of  memory.

■  Never  accomplishes  what  he  undertakes,  but  remains

standing  in  one  place,  absent-minded  ;  appears  quite
changed  to  his  companions.

■  Listless  and  indifferent;  would  go  out  in  the  night  and

not  return  till  searched  out  and  brought  back ;  he  was
disjDOsed  to  talk,  to  laugh  and  sing  songs.  ^Mental
disorders,

■  Awakening  as  from  complete  absence  of  mind,  does  not

know  where  he  is  nor  what  to  answer.

■  Difficult  comprehension.

■  Sluggish  flow  of  ideas.

■  Gives  answers  which  have  not  the  least  reference  to  ques-

tions put  to  him.

■  Great  incoherency  on  attempting  to  express  her  ideas.

■  ■Uses  wrong  words,  during  headache.

■  While  writing  he  omitted  letters,  wrote  in  different  alpha-

bets against  his  will,  and  changed  from  one  subject  to
another.

■  ■Surroundings  seemed changed;  fanciful,  dreamy  im-

ages ;  does  not  recognize  the  known  street.

■  Clair  voyancy.

I  I  The  outer  world  had  no  existence  for  her ;  automatically
she  attended  to  her  household  duties,  and  on  awaking
from  this  condition  she  had  not  the  slightest  recollection
of  what  she  had  done ;  if  forcibly  aroused  she  fell  into
violent  convulsions ;  if  unmolested  she  would  usually,
after  finishing  her  work,  go  to  bed  and  fall  into  a  quiet
sleep,  from  which  she  awoke  after  forty-eight  hours,  in-
vigorated and  unconscious  of  what  had  happened.

■  Short  time  seems  very  long  to  her.

■  Delirium, violent vertigo, strange gestures,  loud, im-

proper talk,  sleeplessness.

■  Senselessness,  intoxicated  condition,  with  absence  of  mind.

■  Delirium  tremens,  slowness  of  senses,  imaginary  fancies;

awakens  and  knows  not  where  he  is;  laughter  with
stupid  expression.

■  ■Inclination  to  laugh  at  everything,  more  in  open  air.
I  I  Imbecility.

■  Fitful  mood,  changing  from  deepest  sorrow  to  most  frol-

icsome behavior ;  now  grave,  now  gay.

■  Fickle;  irresolute  and  wavering  in  his  undertakings.
Aware  of  danger,  but  no  apprehension.

■  Had  no  power  to  resist  being  led  anywhere,  in  evening.
lAs if  drunk and sleepy; drunken feeling in head;

drunken  appearance.


83  NUX  MOSCHATA.

lAfter  overtaxed  mental  powers:  gastric  complaints;  nerv-
ous irritation  of  intestinal  canal ;  hysteria.

I  The  least  exertion  or  mental  excitement  brought  on
somnolency.

iFright:  causing  trembling  of  heart,  fear  and  sadness.
^  Sensorium. iDulness  of  head,  especially  of  forehead.

iMuddledness  and  vanishing  of  thoughts;  when  rousing
himself  forcibly,  he  has  to  collect  his  thoughts.

I  Seemed  intoxicated  the  whole  day.

I  Vertigo:  as  if  drunk,  staggering;  with  headache  and
nausea;  with  lightness  and  emptiness  of  head;  reeling
when  walking  in  open  air;  swimming  in  head;  weak,
limbs  numb,  feels  as  if  floating  in  air.

I  Giddy,  with  pressing  heaviness,  most  in  forehead.

I  I  Apoplexy;  nervous  affections  of  brain.
^  Inner  HeacL l Forehead:  dull;  feels  as  large  again,  as  if
pushed  out; pressing  heaviness; expansion; beating;
heat.

I  I  Pain  especially  in  temples;  on  shaking  head,  wabbling
as  if  brain  struck  against  sides  of  head;  temples  sensi-
tive to  touch,  his  head  felt  hot.

I  In  temples:  aching;  tearing.

■  Headache  after  breakfast,  with  sleepiness;  region  of
temples  very  sensitive  to  pressure;  wliole  brain  feels
loose;  >  from  heat;  <  from  damp  cold,  loud  talking
unawares;  drowsiness,  with  bewildered  sensation  from
waking  up.

I  Boring  and  heat  over  and  in  1.  eye;  heat  on  top  of  head
and  pain  in  occiput;  pressure  on  head  >  pain;  tongue
coated  yellow.

I  Heat  and  pressure  on  top  of  head;  pain  over  r.  eye,  with
sleepiness.

I  iSensation  as  if  all  vessels  were  pulsating,  particularly
on  head,  a  throbbing  pressing  pain  confined  to  small^
spots,  principally  to  1.  supraorbital  ridge.

I  Very  violent,  constricting,  burning,  stinging  pains  over
r.  eye,  with  redness  of  face,  compression  of  lips  and
jaws ;  when  attacks  are  most  violent,  unconsciousness,
with  immobility  of  1.  leg ;  face  swelled ;  speecKlost,  also
consciousness ;  continuall}^  moving  his  hand  to  painful
place ;  head  convulsively  drawn  from  one  side  to  the
other,  distorts  his  face.

1  I  Pain,  driving  asunder,  pressing  and  stinging  in  occiput;
<  by  stepping  from  room  into  open  air,  still  more  in
morning  and  mostly  on  stooping;  >  from  sitting  and
walking;  with  it  a  tardy  stool,  disturbed  sleep  with
many  dreams;  sore  spots  remaining  where  eruption  was.
^Sequel  to  varicella.


NUX  MOSCHATA.  84

1 1  Severe  tearing  in  occiput,  towards  nape  of  neck.

I  Painless  throbbing  in  head  ;  slie  is  afraid  to  go  to  sleep.

■  Pulsation  of  arteries  and  daily  headache.

I  Head  felt  full  and  expanded,  but  without  pain.  .
I  Pressure  from  within  out ;  as  if  head  would  burst.
I  I  Soreness  in  head  ;  throbbing;  stinging;  expansion.
I  Congestive  headache,  during  catamenia.

■  Headache  from  inward  heat,  with  burning.

■  Sensation  of  looseness  of  brain  when  moving  head  or

walking,  >  during  cold  weather  and  when  sitting  still ;
<  during  hot  weather;  dryness  of  eyes  so  great  that
she  could  not  shut  them,  with  greenish-blue  rings
around  them ;  menstruation  irregular,  one  time  too
early  and  copious,  the  next  too  late  and  scanty ;  hands
and  feet  icy  cold  constantly ;  tongue  coated  yellowish
and  dotted  with  red  pimples;  dryness  in  throat;  alter-,
nately  hard  and  soft  stools.

■  Headache:  with  drowsiness  ;  from  overtaxing  mind;  after

breakfast;  from  disordered  stomach;  from  eating  a
little  too  much ;  with  nausea  and  vomiting ;  from
drinking  wine;  of  drunkards;  before  menses;  from
riding  in  a  carriage ;  from  water  (and  washing),  or  after
getting  wet  in  cold  weather ;  from  change  in  weather ;
after  suppressed  eruptions;  drawing  from  place  to
place ;  going  from  1.  to  r. ;  pain  appears  to  be  congest-
ive; soreness;  pressure;  sensation  as  if  head  would
burst ;  .seat  of  pain  is  not  deep  in  brain,  but  immediately
under  cranial  bones ;  >  when  at  rest,  <  from  motion,
stooping  and  shaking  head ;  feels  her  memory  growing
weaker.

■  Apoplexy;  softening  or  paralysis  of  brain.

*  Outer  Head.  Sensitiveness  of  head  as  from  soreness,  espe-
cially sensitive  to  slightest  touch,  in  a  draft  of  air  (wind),

>  <  in  cold  and  from  lying  down ;  >  from  hard  pressure

and  from  external  heat. ^Nervous  headache.

■  Moves  head  convulsively  from  side  to  side,  distorts  his

face  during  attack  of  headache.

■  Convulsive  motion  of  head  from  before  backward,  in  such

a-manner  that  talking  and  swallowing  are  almost  im-
possible ;  severe  tearing  pains  in  occiput  towards  nape
of  neck ;  face  puffed  and  feet  oedematous.

■  Head  seemed  bulky  and  rolled  around  almost  uncontrol-

lably, being  obliged  to  bring  to  its  support  one  or  both
hands  while  sitting  at  a  table. " ■

■  Could  not  bear  to  have  her  head  raised  from  pillow,  on

account  of  deathly  sickness  produced  thereby.

■  Complaints  aggravated  by  shaking  head.

■  Temples  sensitive  to  touch  and  from  lying  on  them ;  <

in  wet,  cold  weather ;  >  from  warmth.


85  NUX  MOSCHATA.

I  Head  drops  forward  while  sittiDg.

■  Worse  from  shaking  head.

^  Sight  and  Eyes. >  Worse  from  light,  from  exerting  vision ;
>  in  dark.
lObjects:  look  larger;  too  close  together; very  distant;

oblique ;  vanish  ;  red  ;  seem  to  float  before  vision.
I  Motes  before  ej^es.

■  Momentary  blindness;  grasps  head,  it  feels  so  strangely.
I  Pupils  dilated  and  immovable  or  contracted,  with  sensa-
tion of  fulness  in  eyes.

■  Staring.

1  I  On  being  aroused  she  looked  up,  with  eyes  blinking  as

if  bewildered. ^During  pregnancy.
I  I  Sensation  as  though  she  had  been  crying;  in  evening.

■  Sensation  of  fulness  in  eyes,  with  contracted  pupils.

■  ■  Dryness  of  eyes ;  too  dry  to  close  lids.

■  Lids  heavy,  stiff;  feels  sick,  faint.
■Tension  around  eyes  and  in  lids.

■  Drooping  eyelids.

■  Pterygium  over  cornea.

■  Episcleritis,  involving  both  eyes;  nodule  over  each  ex-

ternal rectus,  very  large  and  painful.

■  Blue  rings  around  eyes.

^  Hearing  and  Ears. ■Oversensitiveness  of  hearing.

■  Buzzing  or  ringing  in  ears ;  as  if  stopped  up.

■  Tearing  or  stitches  in  ears;  stitches  in  1.  ear,  <  mov-

ing jaw.
I  1  Pain  in  eustachian  tube  as  from  a  foreign  body ;  before
wind  and  rain.
'^  Smell  and  Nose. ■Oversensitiveness  of  smell ;  loss  of  smell.

■  Sneezing; nose dry, stopped up, must breathe with

mouth  open.

■  Catarrh,  <  in  cold,  damp  weather.

■  Nosebleed,  blood  usually  dark,  black.

^  Upper  Face. •  Foolish,  childish,  stupid,  sleepy,  debauched
expression.
I  I  Agonized  expression  when  recovering  from  a  fainting  fit.

■  Looks  thin  ; suffering  expression ; blue around  eyes  ;

deathly  pale,  <  in  damp  air.

■  Eyes  dull,  heavy  looking;  distressed  look.

■  Face:  pale;  hot;  puffed;  spotted;  freckled.

■  Burning,  constricting,  stinging  over  r.  eye; face red,

swollen ;  lips  and  jaw  compressed  ;  speech  difficult.
Sensation  of  swelling  of  1.  cheek,  with  pricking  as  from
electric  sparks.
^  Lower  Face. ■Compression  of  jaws.
I  I  Cannot  close  jaws ;  as  if  paralyzed.

■  Lips:  swollen  and  sticking  together  ;  burning.


NUX  MOSCHATA.  86

I  I  Drawing  mouth  awry ;  creeping.

I  I  Pustules  with  broad  red  borders  on  chin.
^°  Teeth  and  Gums, i Severe  throbbing  pain  in  hollow  mo-
lar -tooth,  next  to  last,  in  upper  jaw,  pain  extends  to
neighboring  teeth  and  ear ;  aphthae  on  soft  palate ;  <
from  cold,  >  from  w^armth. ^Toothache.

I  Pain  in  front  teeth  during  pregnancy;  stinging,  tearing;
<  during  cold,  damp  weather,  from  washing;  from
touch  or  sucking  teeth  ;  >  from  warmth.

I  I  Nightly  tearing  in  teeth;  she  cannot  close  jaws;  they
are  as  if  paralyzed.

iPainfulness  of  teeth  while  eating.

■  Toothache  and  pain  in  nape  of  neck,  from  damp,  cold

night  air;  it  presses  as  if  teeth  were  held  in  a  grip.
I  Teeth  seem  to  be  loose.
I  Gums  bleed  ;  scurvy.
*^  Taste  and  Tongue. No  taste;  victuals  taste  like  sawdust.
In  morning  taste  on  tongue,  as  after  having  been  tips}^
I  Taste: earthy; foul; chalky; bitter; slimy; sour;  as

after  salted  food.
iSpeech  rather  diflBcult;  could  not  articulate  distinctly ;

tongue  rolled  in  mouth  like  one  intoxicated  ;  tongue

felt  numb.
llTongue:  paralyzed;  child,  though  old  enough,  cannot

talk,  as  if  it  were  difficult  to  move  tongue;  dry,  feels  as

if  gone  to  sleep  or  leather-covered ;  dry  at  night  or  on

aw-aking ; coated  white  or  yellowish,  dotted  with red

papillae;  at  night,  dry,  as  if  it  would  fall  into  powder;

sticks  to  roof  of  mouth  ;  great  complaint  of  its  dryness,

in  reality  not  very  dry.
^^  Inner  Mouth, l Mouth  and  tongue  pasty  and  dry.

llMouth  so  dry  that  tongue  sticks  to  roof,  yet  no  thirst;

in  evening.
llGreatly  troubled with dryness  in  mouth and  throat

while  sleeping,  always  awakes  with  a  very  dry  tongue,

but  without  thirst.

■  Great  dryness  in  mouth  and  throat,  with  violent  thirst.

■  Saliva  lessened ;  feels  like  cotton  in  the  mouth.

■  Saliva  running  together;  waterbrash  before  menses.

■  Bad  smell  from  mouth  ;  tongue  wdiite.

■  Aphthae  of  children.

■  Dryness  of  lips,  palate  and  velum  palati.

^^  Throat. ■Difficult  swallowing,  from  paralysis  of  muscles  of
deglutition.

■  Dryness  in  throat  posteriorly;  it  feels  stiffened  ;  no  thirst.

■  Scratching down throat: when swallowing; causes

cough.
■Sensation  as  if  a  piece  of  bacon  were  in  throat.


87  NUX  MOSCHATA.

I  Pain  along  eustachian tube as from a foreign body
lodged  there ;  before  a  shower.

I  Sore  throat,  hoarseness,  scratching,  dryness.

^*  Appetite,  Thirst. Desires,  Aversions, i  Craving  hunger
or  loss  of  appetite  after  a  few  mouthfuls.

I I  No  thirst,  with  dry  mouth.

^°  Eating  and  Drinking, i  While  eating,  soon  satisfied.
1 1  Eating  a  little  too  much  causes  headache.
I  After  eating:  toothache;  eructations;  pain  in  stomach;
increased  pressure  and  distended  abdomen ; want  of
breath  ;  cough  loose ;  lassitude.
I  After  breakfast:  colic.

■  After  dinner :  cramp  in  stomach ;  stomach  and  abdomen

distended ;  painful  urination ;  drowsy.

■  After  supper:  painful  urination.

■  After  drinking:  pain  in  abdomen;  dry  cough.

■  Cold  drink  causes  colic.

■  After drinking beer, increased pressure in stomach;

strangury.
Brandy had  a  kind  of  electrifying  effect from  roof  of
mouth  downward  in  a  straight  line  to  feet.

■  Complaints  <  after  alcohol.

Milk  causes  diarrhoea;  yeasty  beer  strangury.
'"  Hiccough, Belching, Nausea and Vomiting. ■  ■  Hic-
cough.

■  Nausea and waterbrash : with inclination to sleep;

while  riding  in  a  carriage ;  during  pregnancy.

■  ■Vomiting:  spasmodic;  during  pregnancy ;  from  irrita-

tion of  pessaries ;  and  acid  stomach  ;  flatulence.
^^  Scrobiculum  and  Stomach. ■Pressure  in  pit  of  stomach,
as  from  incarcerated  wind.

■  From  pit  of  stomach  :  dyspnoea  ;  crawling  to  throat.

■  Scrobiculum  painful  to  touch.

I  I  Oppression  from  pit  of  stomach  to  chest. ^Shock  of

injury.
I  I  Turning  in  stomach,  with  some  nausea.

■  Pressure  in  stomach  :  with  running  of  water  from  mouth

(in  hysteria);  before  catamenia.

■  ■Fulness in stomach: impeding breathing; during

pregnancy.

■  Distended stomach and abdomen: with sensation  of

warmth  ;  after  a  meal ;  from  least  contradiction.

■  Feeling  as  though  food  formed  itself  into  lumps  with

hard surfaces and  angles,  which caused  soreness in
stomach.

■  Heat  and  burning  in  stomach.

■  Weak  digestion  especially  in  the  aged.

■  Irritation  of  stomach,  from  overtaxed  mental  powers.


NUX  MOSCHATA.  88

I  Atony  of  digestion  ;  gastric  catarrh  with  flatulent  swell-
ing; voraciousness  or  loss  of  appetite;  twisting  pains
below  stomach,  as  from  colic  ;  severe  pain  in  prsecordia,
with  vomiting;  wants  to  eat  after  taking  a  meal,  but
feels  uncomfortable  and  tired  ;  scratching  eructations  as
from  rancid  oil;  arthritic  and  hysteric  gastralgia.

■  Flatulent  dyspepsia; everything  turns  to  wind;  great

bloating  of  stomach,  oppressing  heart  and  lungs,  and
causing  pain  behind  sternum ;  only  highly  seasoned
food  can  be  digested ;  especially  in  nervous  subjects,
hysterical  and  pregnant  women  ;  unpleasant  mental
emotions  will  bring  on  flatulence.

■  Dyspeptic  symptoms  come  on  while  patient  is  still  at

table.

■  Retrocession  of  gout  to  stomach.

^^  Hypochondria.  iDiaphragmitis;  oppression  of  chest,  like
a  pressive  load,  dry  cough,  loss  of  breath;  from  get-
ting wet.

■  Thinks  his  liver  is  affected  and  that  he  will  'have  to  go

to  bed ;  very  sleepy  and  drowsy  in  daytime ;  limbs  feel
numb;  no  appetite;  tongue  very  dry;  much  wind  col-
lects in  stomach;  is  very  weak;  vertigo  when  walking.

■  ''Livergrown"  children,

■  Enlarged  liver;  bloody  stools;  weight  about  liver;  press-

ure as  from  a  sharp  body  or  stones ;  swollen  feeling.

■  Chronic  enlargement  of  liver,  and  particularly  spleen,

after  tedious  intermittent.

■  Spasmodic  pain  from  r.  to  1.  hypochondrium,  then  in  a

circle  in  lower  part  of  abdomen,  followed  by  diarrhoea.

■  Enlarged  spleen;  loose  bowels.

■  Stitches  in  spleen;  must  bend  double.

^^  Abdomen. ■  Abdomen  enormously  distended;  after  a  meal.

■  Weight  in  upper  part  of  abdomen;  lower  part  tense.

■  Moving  about  in  abdomen,  as  though  colic  would  occur.

■  Coliclike  attacks  in  children,  with  transient  paleness  of

face,  lassitude,  sleepiness  and  faintness.

■  Cutting,  pinching  in  epigastrium  and  navel.

■  Colic:  immediately  after  eating  and  <  after  drinking;

during  day,  with  dry  mouth  and  thirstlessness;  great
sensitiveness  to  pressure,  much  bloating  of  abdomen;  >
from  hot  wet  cloths;  from  incarcerated  flatus;  in  child-
bed ;  with  pain  in  chest.

■  Marked irritation of intestinal canal, after extreme

mental  exertion ;  enormous  distension  of  stomach  and
abdomen;  <  after  dinner  and  from  slightest  mental
emotion.

■  Cutting,  pinching  about  navel,  >  from  pressure;  flatu-

lency, diarrhoea.


89  NUX  MOSCHATA.

I  Sore  ulcerated  navel.  "

I  Umbilical  hernia.

■  Bearing  down  pain  in  abdomen;  drawing  in  limbs.
iCrampy,  forcing  down  pains  in  bowels  and  anus.

I  1  Sensation  of  lump  in  lower  abdomen. ^Uterine  disease.

■  Abdomen  tender,  in  pregnancy.

^^  Stool  and  Rectum,  n Stool:  soft,  but  difficult  to  pass;
rectum  inactive;  slow;  thin,  yellow,  like  beaten  or
stirred  eggs;  undigested,  or  like  chopped  eggs,  with
loss  of  appetite  and  great  sleepiness,  in  Summer  with
children;  slimy,  with,  slimy  taste  in  mouth  and  great
drowsiness  from  drinking  too  much  water;  profuse,
watery,  in  cool,  damp  weather;  exhausting, thin,  yellow,
soaking  into  diaper  (dentition);  bloody  in  putrid  typhus.

I  Constipation  :  from  inactivity  of  bowels;  in  women  who
are  disposed  to  faint  or  who  bolt  their  food ;  with  op-
pression; with  debility;  alternating  with  diarrhoea.

Urging  to  stool  as  if  a  diarrhoea  would  set  in.

iDiarrhoea:  with  loss  of  appetite  and  great  sleepiness;
with  indomitable  disposition  to  sleep ;  stools  offensive,
copious,  <  at  night;  with  disposition  to  faint;  chronic;
rheumatic;  Hin  Summer  of  the  worst  kind  from  cold
drinks ;  after  boiled  milk  ;  from  debility  or  from  getting
cold;  with  collapse,  particularly  in  typhoid;  during
approach  of  cholera;  epidemic  in  the  Fall,  discharges
white,  of  exceedingl}^  bad  smell,  want  of  appetite,  but
frequent  thirst.

■  Chronic  diarrhoea  during  pregnancy,  with  fainting  and

unusual  sluggish  flow  of  ideas;  it  takes  her  a  long  time
to  answer  any  simple  question.

■  Epidemic  cholera;  dysentery.

■  Hemorrhage  from  bowels  during  typhus;  patient  reduced

to  verge  of  grave.

■  Worm  affections  in  children,  with  sleepiness  and  cutting

bellyache.

I  !  Passing  of  fetid  flatus. ^Typhoid  fever.

I  I  Protrusion  of  piles.

Before  stool : cutting.

During  stool:  urging;  stitches  in  anus;  acrid  feeling  in
rectum  ;  painfal  constriction  in  anus  and  rectum;  press-
ing in  hypogastrium  ;  distended  feeling ;  sleepiness.

After  stool : acrid  feeling  in  anus ;  sensation  as  if  more
stool  would pass;  drowsiness; painfal  constriction  in
anus  and  rectum.
^^  Urinary  Organs. ■Penal  colic  and  discharge  of  calculi.

■  Tenesmus  of  bladder.

■  Pain  from  stone  in  bladder.

■  Incontinence  of  urine.


NUX  MOSCHATA.  90

Urging  at  night,  with  scanty  emission.
I  Urine:  scanty  and  high  colored.

■  Burning,  cutting  in  urethra  when  passing  water.

^^  Male  Sexual  Organs, i  Inclined  to  coitus,  but  genitals  are
relaxed.

■  Seminal  emissions.

'^^  Female  Sexual  Organs. '  i  Spasmodic  laborlike  pains,
I  I  Flatulent  distension  of  uterus.

■  Uterus  displaced;  mouth  and  throat  dry  ;  sleepy,  faint ;

abdomen  enormously  distended  after  a  meal ;  pressure
in  back  outward.
I  I  Sensation  of  a  lump  in  1.  lower  abdomen;  anteversion.

■  Relieves  pain  and  vomiting  caused  by  pessaries.

■  Prolapsus  uteri  et  vagin 88 ;  sterility;  leucorrhoea.

■  Loud talking  and  bewildered  manner,  drowsiness;  moist

skin  with  coldness. ^Pelvic- congestion.

■  Menorrhagia;  blood  thick  and  dark,  with  such  as  have

had  catamenia  very  irregularl}'-.

■  Metrorrhagia:  bearing  down  in  abdomen  and  drawing

in  legs;  drowsiness  and  fainting;  blood  thick  and  dark;
threatening  abortion.

■Menses  too  early  and  profuse,  with  an  intolerable  dry-
ness of  mouth,  tongue  and  throat ;  excessive  disposition
to  laugh,  particularly  in  open  air. /^Menorrhagia.

1  I  Violent  pains  low  down  in  back,  with  debility,  pressure
in  stomach,  waterbrash,  pain  in  liver,  all  preceding  the
flow,  which  is  thick  and  black  ;  objects  appear  too  dis-
tant and  grow  larger  on  looking  at  them ;  dry  mouth
and  tongue  on  awakening ;  slowness  of  ideas ;  dulness
of  senses  ;  absentmindedness. ^Dysmenorrhoea.

■  Hysterical  women  who  suffer  at  their  menstrual  periods;

subject  to  dental  neuralgias  ;  sleepy  most  of  time  ;  sleep
at  night  does  not  rest  them  sufficiently.  ^Dysmenorrhoea.

■  During  menses:  great  pressure  in  back  from  within  out-

ward, abdominal  bearing  down  and  drawing  into
limbs;  lassitude,  headache,  pressing  in  stomach,  with
running  of  water  from  mouth  ;  pain  in  liver  ;  straining
in  hypogastrium  and  drawing  pain  in  limbs ;  great  irri-
tation of  pelvic  viscera ;  ovaries  and  uterus  swollen  and
sensitive  to  pressure.

■  Menses  preceded  by  pain  in  small  of  back,  as  if  a  piece

of  wood,  stretched  across  there,  were  pressing  from
within  outward.  ^Dysmenorrhoea.
I  1  At  the  time  when  menses  ought  to  appear,  violent  con-
gestions to  chest  and  neck ;  felt  as  if  head  would  burst
and  heart  would  be  squeezed  off;  violent  stitches  as  if
a  knife  were  plunged  into  chest  and  head ;  frequently
unconsciousness and  epileptic  convulsions ; was bled


91  NUX  MOSCHATA.

once  a  month,  which  made  her  so  weak  that  she  could
scarcely  attend  to  household  duties;  after  mental  ex-
citement, especially  a  short  time  before  catamenia,
vertigo,  vanishing  of  thoughts  and  fainting,  from  which
she  recovered  in  a  few  moments,  without,  however,
being  fully  conscious ;  the  outer  world  had  no  existence
for  her;  automatically  she  attended  to  her  household
duties,  and  on  awakening  from  this  condition  she  had
not  the  slightest  recollection  of  what  she  had  done;  if
forcibly  aroused  she  had  violent  convulsions ;  at  times
she  was  in  a  clairvoyant  state  and  answered  questions
correctly  entirely  out  of  her  sphere ;  on  returning  to
consciousness  she  was  perfectly  ignorant  of  what  she
had  said  ;  pulse  small  and  weak ;  slight  nun's  murmur
in  carotid ;  general  lassitude ;  tired  feeling  in  knees  as
from  a  long  journey ;  great  sleepiness,  with  dizziness  as
if  drunk ;  does  not  know  where  she  is ;  dreaminess,
with  closing  of  eyes ;  weak  memory ;  forgetfulness ;  ab-
sence of  mind ;  gradual  vanishing  of  thoughts  when
reading ;  does  not  carry  out  resolutions,  but  remains
standing  thoughtlessly  on  one  spot ;  appears  to  herself
as  if  chained  to  her  surroundings.

1 1  Menses:  irregular  in  time  and  quantity;  too  early  and
profuse ;  too  late,  preceded  by  pain  in  back ;  flow  gen-
erally dark,  thick;  bearing  down  in  abdomen,  with
drawing  in  limbs;  pains  from  small  of  back  down-
ward ;  limbs  feel  weak,  ache ;  pain  in  small  of  back  as
if  a  piece  of  wood  were  lying  crosswise  and  being  pressed
out;  pain  in  uterus  at  outset;  tension  in  hypogastrium  ;
unconquerable  drowsiness ;  profuse,  with  fainting,  drow-
siness; mouth  dry;  hysteric  laughter,  <  in  open  air;
scanty  or  suppressed,  from  fright,  from  debilit}^,  a  cold,
overexertion,  in  hysteria  ;  cramp  low  down  in  abdomen,
constriction  in  bowels;  sharp  stitches  in  1.  lower  abdo-
men, <  when  sitting.

I  Last  day  of  menstrual  flow  took  a  bath,  wdiich  checked
it  and  caused  intense  pain  below  navel,  extending  to
hip  and  thighs  and  accompanied  by  pain  in  back  just
above  hip ;  pain  intense  like  labor  pains ;  patient
fainted  when  pain  became  most  severe,  recovering  with
a  start  and  an  agonized  expression  of  countenance.

iLeucorrhoea:  in  place  of  menses;  in  women  who  always
awaken  with  a  very  dry  tongue;  with  indigestion.

I  Flatus  from  vagina.

Mammte  too  small.
"Pregnancy. Parturition. Lactation, i During preg-
nancy: <  from  fright,  anger,  etc. ;  toothache;  nausea
and  vomiting;  difiicult  stool; dyspnoea,  with  upward


NUX  MOSCHATA.  92

pressure;  fainting;  drowsiness;  skin  dry,  cold ;  abdo-
men sensitive.

I  I  During  third  month  of  pregnancy,  nausea  and  vomit-

ing, was  hysterical  and  nervous,  turned  deathly  pale  or
faint  on  slightest  excitement;  was  so  faint  in  these
attacks  that  she  could  hardly  speak.

I I  Threatened  abortion;  hysterical  females  disposed  to
fainting,  feel  chilly  and  catch  cold  easily ;  -fears  she  will
abort ;  continued  and  obstinate  flooding.

1  I  During  sixth  week  of  pregnancy  received  a  severe  kick
in  lower  part  of  abdomen  from  a  child  who  was  sleep-
ing with  her,  next  day  after  getting  feet  wet  by  being
exposed  to  a  rainstorm,  severe  paroxysmal  colicky
pains  all  over  abdomen ;  could  not  keep  her  feet  quiet
one  moment,  in  fact  she  was  restless  all  over ;  semi-
sanguinous,  foul-smelling  discharge  from  vagina,  with
bearing-down  pains,  begged  for  something  to  make
her  sleep,  feeling  so  drowsy  and  still  unable  to  sleep.
^Abortion.

I  Labor-pains,  false,  weak;  spasmodic,  irregular;  drowsy,
faint  spells,  pains  being  too  weak.

■  Eclampsia;  head  jerked  forward;  especially  hysterical

women,  who  easily  faint  and  suffer  from  great  languor
in  back  and  knees  ;  drowsy  before  and  after  spasms.
I  In  puerperal  convulsions,  particularly  when  there  is  a
convulsive  motion  of  head,  from  behind  forward.

I  After  deliver}^:  flatulence  with  laborlike  pains;  uterus

remains  uncontracted  ;  ante  version.
iMammee  too  small;  retracted  nipples.
^^  Voice  and  Larynx. Trachea  and  Bronchia. '  i  Girl,  set.
2,  with  apparently  perfectly  developed vocal  organs,
was  unable  to  talk  or  even  lisp  baby-talk ;  there  seemed
to  be  a  constriction  somewhere  about  vocal  organs.

■  Hysterical aphonia,  with  gastro-intestinal  and cardiac

derangements.

I I  Hoarseness  <  from  walking  against  wind.
I  Hysterical  affections  of  air  passages.

Catarrh  and  rawness  of  trachea  from  taking  cold.
^''Respiration, l Breath  short  after  eating;  sudden  loss  of
breath.

I  Loss  of  breath  when  standing  in  water.

■  Sudden  loss  of  breath,  with  cough.

■  Suffocative  sensation.

iSudden  obstruction  of  breath;  panting  and  difficult
breathing.

I I  Difficult  inhalation  ;  hysteric  asthma.

■  Difficult breathing: from oppression of chest; from

weight  on  chest;  from  fulness  in  stomach;  during
pregnancy.


93  p  NUX  MOSCHATA.

1 1  Dyspnoea,  with  feeling  of  weight  in  chest.

■  Oppression  of  breathing  proceeding  from  pit  of  stomach.
I  Constrictive  feeling  in  muscles  of  chest.

I  I  Chest  as  if  too  narrow,  after  cold  washing.

Desire  to  expand  chest  and  to  take  a  long  breath.

I  On  inhalation  pain  in  chest,  hurts  diaphragm.

I  Wheezing  on  chest,  snoring  breathing;  rattling  in  chest.
^^  Cough,  i Cough:  dry,  with  sudden  loss  of  breath;  bark-
ing ;  hacking  during  pregnancy  ;  excited  by  scratching
in  throat,  crawling  in  upper  part  of  windpipe  ;  on  get-
ting warm  in  bed  ;  standing  in  water,  bathing  ;  getting
overheated  ;  living  in  cold,  damp  places ;  loose  after
eating,  dry  after  drinking  ;  dry,  nervous,  hysterical ;
during  pregnancy.

I  Dry,  irritating  cough,  beginning  usually  in  afternoon
and  lasting  until  evening  and  all  night,  while  during
forenoon  she  was  tolerably  free;  by  degrees  there  set  in
great  restlessness,  increased  fever,  sleeplessness,  annoy-
ing dryness  of  mouth,  shortness  of  breath  and  severe
pressing  pain  in  front  of  chest,  <  from  deep  respira-
tion ;  remarkable  sleepiness,  with  imperfect  speech  as  if
it  were  difficult  to  move  tongue. ^Scarlatina.

I  Cough  dry  after  drinking,  rather  loose  after  eating,  only
during  day.

I  Sputa  :  bloody,  dark  ;  slimy,  saltish  ;  must  swallow  loos-
ened phlegm.

I  Catarrh.

iHsemoptysis.

I  Cough  with  great  soreness  in  larynx  or  chest.
^^  Inner  Chest  and  Lungs. ■  Oppression  of  chest  and  rush
of  blood  to  heart.

■  Weight,  pressure  on  chest,  <  on  falling  asleep  at  night

or  waking  from  a  siesta.
I  Full  feeling  in  upper  part  of  chest,  preventing  a  deep
breath.

I  Pale,  sunken  face;  rapid,  short,  superficial  breathing;

short  cough  with  rattling  of  mucus,  yet  unable  to  ex-
pectorate; very  rapid,  small  soft  pulse;  heat;  thirst;
dryness  of  mouth ;  burning  pain  in  chest  above  pit  of
stomach ;  great  weakness ;  frequent  attacks  of  oppres-
sion of  chest  with  rapid  respiration  and  a  sensation  as
if  mucus  obstructed  lungs ;  violent  palpitation,  faint-
like weakness  and  inability  to  speak  ;  extensive  coarse
r^les  in  region  of  r.  shoulder  blade.  ^Affection  of  chest
after  abortion.

I I  Stitches:  in  chest,  tightness,  spitting  of  blood.
Darting  in  forepart  of  chest,  shooting  upward  in  an  ob-
lique direction  and  arresting  breathing.


NUX  MOSCHATA.  ,  94

I  Crawling  and  tickling  in  r.  upper  chest,  in  morning;
causes  cough.

I  Burning  in  chest;  peculiar  dead  feeling  and  swelling.
^^  Heart,  Pulse  and  Circulation, ii Trembling,  fluttering
of  heart,  as  from  fright,  fear  or  sadness.

I  Palpitation:  with  fainting,  followed  by  sleep;  hysteric,
with  weak,  small  pulse  and  irregularity  in  heartbeat ;
paroxysms  after  midnight,  as  if  heart  were  stopping  and
then  beating  violently,  with  loud  belching,  >  drinking
hot  water  and  keeping  warm  ;  must  walk  about.

■  Oppression  of  heart  extends  to  throat.

I  Feeling  as  if  blood  were  rushing  to  heart,  thence  to  head
and  then  all  over  body.

■  Sensation  as  if  something  grasped  heart.

I  i  Feels  as  if  her  head  would  burst  and  her  heart  be
squeezed  off.

■  Violent  action  of  heart.

■  Hysteria  cordis.

■  Pulse  :  small,  Aveak ;  nun's  murmur  in  carotids  ;  frequent,

trembling,  accelerated  after  wine;  intermits,  intervals

so  long  that  they  excite  fear  of  death.
^°  Outer  Chest. On  moving  arm,  a  pain  in  region  of  pector-

alis  muscle  as  from  a  blow,  <  from  touch  and  pressure.
Constrictive  pains  in  muscles  of  chest.
^^  Neck  and  Back. Nape  of  neck  constricted,

■  Drawing  pain  in  muscles  of  neck  from  draft  of  damp  air.

■  Eruptions  spreading  from  face  to  neck.

■  Great  pressure  in  back,  from  within  outward,  during

menses.

■  Pain  between  shoulders  and  along  spine.

■  Pressure  in  back  outward,  with  displaced  uterus.

■  ■Pains  now  in  back,  now  in  sacrum,  knees  very  tired ;  <

during  rest ;  lumbago.

■  ■Backache  while  riding  in  a  carriage.

■  Pain  in  small  of  back :  with  weakness  of  knees  and  legs;

as  if  a  piece  of  wood  lying  crosswise  were  being  pressed
out ;  as  from  a  blow.

■  Pain  from  small  of  back  downward.

■  From  lower  part  of  spine  aching  pain  upward,  with  stiff-

ness, <  in  damp  weather ;  temples  compressed  as  if  in
a  vise.

■  Pain  in  back  just  above  hips  ;  checked  catamenia.

I  I  Pain  in  lumbar  muscles  as  from  a  blow  of  the  fist.

■  ■Pain  in  sacrum  when  riding  in  a  carriage.

■  Tabes  dorsalis.

'^  Upper  Limbs. ■Rheumatism  affecting  1.  deltoid;  pain  in
1.  shoulder  as  if  it  contained  lead.
Pressing  pain  in  both  shoulders.


95  NUX  MOSCHATA.

Tearing  rheumatic  pain  in  r.  shoulder.

I  Bad  smell  under  arms  and  between  breasts  of  women.

I  In  arms  creeping  from  below.

As  if  a  string  were  tied  around  arms.

On  flexor  side  of  upper  arm,  shoulder  and  elbow  joints,

stinging  pain,  seems  to  be  seated  in  bloodvessels.
Pain  in  1.  upper  arm,  near  middle  and  elbow,  as  from

hard  pressure  of  a  grasping  hand.
Numbness  and  fulness  of  hands,  evening ;  trembling  and

weakness  of  hands.

I I  Hands  feel  cold  as  if  frozen,  with  tingling  under  nails,
on  entering  warm  room.

■  Felt  as  if  all  blood  had  rushed  to  her  hands,  as  though

a  string  was  tied  tightly  around  arms.

Violent  pain  in  r.  middle  finger,  as  if  on  bone.

Pain  as  if  sprained  in  joints  of  little  finger  of  1.  hand,
when  closing  it,  in  morning.

Steady  drawing  from  fingers  to  shoulders.
'^  Lower  Limbs. Pain  in  hips  from  cold.

I  I  Acute  lumbago ;  pains  now  in  back,  now  in  sacrum,
with  great  tiredness  in  knees,  <  in  rest.

1  I  Loins  and  legs  as  if  bruised  and  weak.

Painful  drawing  in  thighs  here  and  there.

Flexor  muscles  of  r.  thigh  painful  when  walking ;  when
touched  they  feel  as  though  he  had  had  a  fall,  or  as
from  riding  horseback.

When  crossing  thighs  a  feeling  of  dulness  in  r.  one,  fol-
lowed by  a  sensation  as  if  1.  one  were  going  to  sleep,  as
if  blood  were  going  there,  with  prickling.

I  I  Violent  pains  in  r.  leg,  extending  from  hip  to  knee,  along
posterior  part,  awaking  her  from  sleep  at  12  p.m.,  and
continuing  for  several  hours ;  attacks  several  nights  in
succession,  then  discontinued  for  a  longer  or  shorter
time ;  finally  these  free  intervals  became  less,  she  was
no  longer  free  from  pain  and  became  very  lame ;  when
sitting  quietly  pain  would  suddenly  appear ;  a  sudden
motion  or  jar  would  cause  great  suffering,  and  care  was
constantly  required  on  beginning  to  move;  scarcely
one  night  in  a  week  would  be  passed  quietly;  after
least  exposure  neuralgia  of  1.  side  of  face  ;  great  irrita-
bility, easily  moved  to  tears,  or  great  hilarity  alter-
nated. ^Sciatica,  probably  hysterical,  and  due  to  retro-
lateral  version  of  uterus.

■  Legs  tired  as  after  a  long  journey,  must  move  legs  from

place  to  place.

■  Heaviness  and  coldness  in  legs.
I  I  Immobility  of  1.  leg.

I  I A  hindrance  in  1.  leg;  she  walked  as  if  treading  on  hard
pease.


NUX  MOSCHATA.  96

I  I  Right  knee  pains  as  if  wrenched  or  sprained,  on  moving,

and  especially  on  going  up-stairs.
Sensation  in  anterior  part  of  r.  knee,  as  if  someone  grasped

it,  a  kind  of  lacing.
■Staggers  on  walking,  often  falls ;  weakness  of  small  of

back  and  knees.
I  I  Pain  in  legs  from  knees  to  ankles,  as  if  bone  had  been

smashed,  could  hardly  walk.
Dull  drawing  pain  in  periosteum  of  r.  tibia.
■  Feeling  in  calves  as  from  a  blow.
I  1  Cramps  of  calves  before  going  to  sleep.
I  Feet  cold  with  appearance  of  menses.
I  I  Cramps  in  feet,  with  inward  burning.
I  Boring  in  r.  big  toe,  after  lying  down. ^Gout.
Digging,  pressing  pain  in  middle  of  soles ;  in  morning.
I  Soles  always  wet.

t  I  Buzzing sensation in all  toes,  as  if  they  were  frost-
bitten, especially  at  metatarso-phalangeal  articulations ;

it  spreads  over  soles  to  heels,  with  pain  as  if  bruised

from  jumping.
^*  Limbs  in  General, l  Wandering  digging,  pressing  pains,

confined  to  small  spots;  lasting  but  a  short  time;  soon

returning.
I  Muscular  rheumatism,  from  protracted  exposure  to  cold

and  damp ;  fugitive,  drawing  pains ;  <  in  repose,  from

cold,  damp  air  and  cold,  wet  clothes ;  >  from  warmth.
Rheumatism  of  1.  shoulder  and  r.  hip.
^^Rest. Position. Motion. Rest:  headache  >;  bellyache;

backache  <  ;  rheumatism  <.
Lying  down :  head  <  ;  boring  in  r.  big  toe.
When  head  is  raised  from  pillow :  deathly  sickness.
Cannot  close  jaws :  toothache.
Stooping:  pain  in  occiput  <.

Must  support  head  with  hands  :  w^hen  sitting  at  table.
When  crossing  thighs :  feeling  of  dulness  in  r.  one.
When  closing  little  finger :  pain.
Sitting :  >  pain  in  occiput ;  looseness  of  brain  > ;  pain

in  abdomen  <  ;  sudden  pains  in  r.  thigh.
Must  bend  double :  stitches  in  spleen.
Least  exertion :  fatigue.
Motion :  headache  <  ;  of  head,  as  if  brain  were  loose  ;  of

jaw  <  pain  in  ear ;  of  arm  pain  in  region  of  pectoral

muscles ;  sudden,  causes  pain  in  r.  thigh.
Shaking  head:  wabbling  of  brain  ;  headache  <.
Must  move  about :  restlessness.
Walking :  reeling ;  pain  in  occiput ;  as  if  brain  were  loose ;

almost  impossible,  from  weakness ;  >  palpitation  ;  pain

in  muscles  of  r.  thigh  ;  pain  in  r.  knee.


97  NUX  MOSCHATA.

Going  up-stairs :  r.  knee  pains.
^^  Nerves, i Restless,  must  move  about.

■  Staggers  in  walking;  falls  often.

■  Great  languor.

■  Lassitude,  even  talking  tired  him.

■  Feels as if she had to gather up all her strength.

^Hysteria.

■  Fatigue,  feels  as  if  he  must  lie  down,  after  least  exertion  ;

sleepy ;  chilly,  pale  face.

■  ■  Drowsiness  ;  torpor  ;  lethargy.

■  Sickly,  faint  sensation.

■  Disposition  to  faint;  also  from  pains  even  when  slight.

■  Stiff  and  fainty,  with  palpitation  of  heart.

■  Fainting,  with  palpitation  of  heart,  followed  by  sleep.
As  if  he  had  been  electrified,  it  goes  in  a  straight  line.

from  roof  of  mouth  downward,  towards  his  feet,  after-
wards diffused  over  whole  body.

1  I  At  times  in  a  state  of  clairvoyance,  answers  questions
accurately  on  subjects  entirely  out  of  her  sphere,  on
returning  to  consciousness  is  ignorant  of  what  she  has
said.

I  Difficult  nervous  affections  springing  from  catarrh.

■  Trembling:  in  hands;  from  cold  ;  inner  more  than  outer

parts.

i  i  Anxiety  in  body,  with  disposition  to  trembling.  ^Ty-
phoid fever.

I  I  Nervous  erethism. ^Mania  a  potu.

■  ■Spasms,  hysterics  in  inner  parts;  chronic  hysteric  fits  ;

convulsive  motions. '
I  I  Marked  muscular  erethism,  especially  of  extremities;
simulating  chorea.

■  Jactitation  of  muscles;  chorea;  jerks  in  inner  parts  in

muscles ;  recovers  with  a  start.
I  I  Spasms  of  children  ;  better  suited  to  those  of  feeble  con-
stitution and  scrofulous  diathesis,  frequently  troubled
with  diarrhoea  from  debilit}^ ;  violent  palpitation  of  heart.

■  Convulsive  motion  of  head  from  behind  forward. ^Puer-

peral convulsions.
I  1  Unconscious,  rigid ; slow,  heavy  breathing ; writhing

in  clonic  spasm  ;  opisthotonos.
I  I  Epilepsy,  with  consciousness.
I  I  Catalepsy.
I  I  Violent  convulsions  when forcibly  aroused from  her

trance.
I  I  Continually  and  automatically  he  mcfved  his  hands  to

painful  places  (over  r.  eye).

■  Paralysis: with  spasms  and  trembling; of  tongue,  of

eyelids,  oesophagus ;  with  mental  listlessness.

vol..  VIII. — 7.


NUX  MOSCHATA.  98

1 1  Hysteria :  exhausted  from  least  effort ;  after  intermit-
tent; after  typhus  abdominalis ;  with  disturbance  in
sexual  functions ;  with  strangury ;  catamenia  too  late
and  scanty,  with  sensation  in  sacral  region  as  if  a  stick
of  wood  was  lying  across,  with  headache,  weariness,
pressure  in  stomach,  water  running  from  mouth,  and
pain  in  liver;  blood  from  vagina  thicker  and  darker;
leucorrhcBa  at  right  time  of  catamenia  ;  cardiac;  palpi-
tation with  fainting  and  insensibility ;  with  quickly
changing  mood,  great  sleepiness  and  disposition  to  faint ;
with  globus  hystericus.

■  Hysterical headache,  with weakness, fainting,  tetanic

spasms.

■  Constant  sleepiness  ;  skin  cool  and  sensitive  to  exposure;

oppression of  pit of  stomach to  chest,  slow  rattling
breathing; least  exertion causes great  w^eakness  and'
sleepiness ;  diarrhcsa. ^Shock  from  injuries.
.  Progressive  locomotor  ataxy,  if  disease  was  occasioned  by
exposure  to  cold  and  wet  and  in  rheumatic  subjects.
'''Sleep. 1 1  Complaints  cause  sleepiness;  irresistibly  drowsy ;
sleepy,  muddled,  as  if  intoxicated ;  coma,  lies  silent,
immovable ;  eyes  constantly  closed ;  strange  feeling  on
waking.

■  Great  sleepiness,  with  great  inclination  to  laughter.

I  I  Restless  sleep,  from  congestion  to  heart  or  head,  with
uterine  complaints.

■  Starts  in  sleep  but  does  not  always  waken,  with  shocks

as  if  electricity  were  passing  through  her  body.
^^  Time. Morning :  pain  in  occiput  <  ;  taste  as  after  having

been  tipsy;  crawling  in  chest;  pain  in  1.  little  finger;

pressing  pain  in  soles ;  chill ;  great  dryness  of  throat.
Day :  seemed  intoxicated ;  sleepy  and  drowsy ; pain  in

abdomen ;  cough  dry  after  drinking,  loose  after  eating.
Afternoon :  cough  begins  and  lasts  until  evening.
Evening:  had  no  power  to  resist  being  led  anywhere;

eyes  feel  as  though  she  had  been  crying;  dryness  of

tongue;  numbness  and  fulness  of  hands;  fainting  >.
Night:  tongue  very  dry ;  diarrhoea  < ;  stools  <;  urging;

sleep  does  not  rest ;  cough  ;  pressure  on  chest  <.

12  P.M. :  pain  in  r.  limb.

After  midnight:  as  if  heart  were  stopping.
^^  Temperature  and  Weather. Heat :  headache  >  ;  external

head  >  ;  Summer,  stools  <.
Hot  weather:  loose  feeling  of  brain  <.
Warmth  :  toothache  >  ;  of  bed, cough <  ; palpitation

>;  rheumatism;  chilliness  >.
Entering  warm  room  :  hands  feel  as  if  frozen.
Hot  water:  drinking  >  palpitation.


99  NUX  MOSCHATA.

From  uncovering:  chilliness.

Open  air:  reeling;  from  room  into,  pain  in  occiput  <;

disposition  to  laugh.
Draft  of  air :  head  sensitive ;  pain  in  muscles  of  neck.
Change  in  weather :  headache.
Walking  against  wind  :  hoarseness  <.
Wind  and  rain  :  pain  in  ears.
Damp  weather:  pain  along  spine  <.
Getting  wet:  diaphragm itis;  severe  colicky  pains.
Before  a  shower:  pain  along  eustachian  tube.
Water:  headache  from  washing;  toothache <  standing

in,  loss  of  breath,  cough ;  cold  washing,  chest  as  if  too

narrow.
A  bath  :  checked  menstrual  flow.
Damp,  cold:  headache <; catarrh <; profuse,  watery

stools;  rheumatism  <.
Cold  weather:  looseness  of  brain  >  ;  when  getting  wet,

headache;  head  <.
Cold:  toothache  <;  drinks,  diarrhoea;  cough.
'"  Fever, i  Chilliness :  with  pale  face  in  open,  especially  damp,

cold  air;  from  uncovering;.  >  in  warm  room;  without

thirst.

■  Coldness  commencing  in  1.  arm  and  lower  limbs.
I  Desire  to  sleep  between  chills,  if  left  alone.

I  Skin  cold  and  blue  all  over  body.

iSensation  of  coldness  in  feet,  with  heat  in  hands.

■  Sweat:  red  or  bloody;  with  drowsiness;  with  dislike  to

be  uncovered.

■  ■Want  pf  sweat;  skin  cool  and  dry.

I  I  Chill  in  morning,  two  hours  earlier  every  other  day ;
awakens  bright,  becomes  thirsty,  after  a  little  time  falls
asleep,  has  a  marked  chill,  blue  nails,  fingers  and  tips,
followed  by  high  fever,  flushed  face,  somewhat  restless,
then  profuse  and  general  sweat,  after  which  she  awakens
m  good  spirits;  profound  sleep  during  all  the  stages.
^Intermittent.

'  I  Apparently  nervous  chills;  they  came  on  every  morning
about  7  o'clock ;  as  the  chill  progressed  patient  became
very  drowsy,  and  at  close  of  chill  fell  asleep ;  this  sleep
contmued  through  fever  which  was  very  light;  great
dryness  of  throat  on  awaking  in  morning.  ^Intermittent.

■  Profound  coma,  lying  silent,  immovable,  insensible;  dif-

ficult comprehension;  slowness  of  ideas,  dwells  long  on
her  answer  or  does  not  answer  at  all ;  very  deaf;  putrid
diarrhoea;  rolling,  rumbling  and  gurgling  in  bowels;
a  dreamy  state  with  drowsiness  and  falling  of  eyelids ;
dryness  of  mouth,  tongue  and  throat,  with  fulness  of
stomach  and  loss  of  appetite;  in  evening  dryness  is  so


NUX  MOSCHATA.  100

great  that  tongue  sticks  to  roof  of  mouth,  yet  there  is
no  thirst;  should  often  be  used in  place  of  Phos.  ac.
^Typhoid  fever.
*^  Attacks, Periodicity. Every morning at 7 : nervous
chills.

Daily  :  headache.

Nightly  :  tearing  in  teeth.

Every  other  day*two  hours  earlier :  chill.

Several  days  in  succession  in  morning :  bellyache.

Several  nights  in  succession  :  pain  in  r.  limb.

Summer :  diarrhcea.

Fall :  epidemic  diarrhoea.
*'^  Locality  and  Direction.  Right :  pain  over  eye ;  extensive
coarse  rales  in  region  of  shoulder  blade ;  crawling  and
tickling  in  upper  part  of  chest;  rheumatic  pain  in
shoulder;  violent  pain  in  middle  finger ;  flexor  muscles
of  thigh  painful ;  dulness  in  thigh  ;  violent  pain  in
limb;  pain  in  knee;  as  if  some  one  grasped  knee;  dull
drawing  pain  in  periosteum  of  tibia;  boring  in  big  toe;
rheumatism  of  hip.

Left :  boring  and  heat  over  eye  ;  supraorbital  ridge,  pain  ;
immobility  of  leg ;  stitches  in  ear ;  sensation  of  swelling
of  cheek  ;  sensation  of  lump  in  abdomen  ;  pain  in  shoul-
der ;  rheumatism  in  deltoid ;  pain  in  arm  ;  sprained  pain
in  joint  of  1.  hand,  as  if  thigh  was  going  to  sleep  ;  neu-
ralgia of  face ;  hinderance  in  leg ;  rheumatism  of  shoul-
der ;  coldness  of  arm.

From  1.  to  r. :  headache;  bellyache.

From  r.  to  1. :  spasmodic  pain  in  hypochondrium.

From  before  backward :  convulsive  movement  of  head.

From  behind  forward :  movement  of  head.

From  within  out :  pressure  in  head ;  pressure  in  back.
*^ Sensations.  As  if  drunk;  limbs  as  if  floating  in  air;  fore-
head feels  as  large  again ;  forehead  as  if  pushed  out ;
as  if  brain  struck  against  side  of  head ;  as  if  all  vessels
were  pulsating ;  as  if  head  would  burst ;  brain  as  if
loose ;  eyes  feel  as  if  she  had  been  crying ;  ears  as  if
stopped  up ;  pain  as  of  a  rough  body  in  eustachian  tube ;
pricking  as  of  electric  sparks  on  cheek  ;  jaws  as  if
paralyzed  ;  as  if  teeth  were  held  in  a  grip ;  teeth  as  if
loose ;  as  if  tongue  would  stick  to  palate,  as  if  she  had
eaten  herring  ;  as  if  a  piece  of  bacon  were  in  throat;  as
of  incarcerated  wind  in  stomach ;  as  if  food  had  formed
itself  into  lumps  in  stomach ;  as  if  bellyache  would  set
in  ;  pain  as  if  from  diarrhoea ;  as  if  it  were  full  of  knots ;
as  of  lump  in  abdomen ;  as  if  diarrhoea  would  set  in ;
as  if  more  stool  would  pass  ;  as  if  a  piece  of  wood
stretched  across  small  of  back  were  pressing  from  within


101  NUX  MOSCHATA.

outward;  as  if  heart  would  be  squeezed  off;  as  if  a
knife  were  plunged  into  chest ;  chest  as  if  too  narrow  ;  as
if  it  were  difficult  to  move  tongue ;  as  if  mucus  obstructed
lungs ;  as  if  heart  were  stopping ;  as  if  blood  were  rushing
to  heart,  thence  to  head  and  then  all  over  body ;  as  if
something  grasped  heart;  temples  as  if  in  a  vise;  pain
in  lumbar  muscles  as  from  a  blow  of  a  fist ;  as  if  1.
shoulder  contained  lead;  as  if  a  string  were  tied
around  arms ;  as  of  a  grasping  hand  in  upper  arm ;
hands  as  if  frozen  ;  as  if  all  blood  had  rushed  to  her
hands ;  pain  as  if  on  bone  of  middle  finger ;  joints  of
little  finger  as  if  sprained  ;  loins  and  legs  as  if  bruised  ;
as  if  he  had  fallen  on  r.  thigh  or  as  from  riding  on
horseback  ;  as  if  1.  thigh  were  going  to  sleep,  as  if  blood
were  going  there,  with  pricking ;  1.  leg  caused  her  to
walk  as  if  on  pease;  r.  knee  as  if  sprained  or  wrenched  ;
as  if  one  grasped  anterior  part  of  r.  knee,  a  kind  of  lac-
ing ;_  as  if  bone  from  knees  to  ankles  had  been  smashed
to  pieces ;  as  of  a  blow  on  calves ;  as  if  toes  were  frost-
bitten;  pain  in  soles  as  if  bruised  from  jumping;  as  if
she  had  to  gather  up  all  her  strength  ;  fatigued  as  if  he
must  lie  down;  as  if  he  had  been  electrified;  muddled,
as  if  intoxicated ;  glands  feel  as  if  swollen  ;  parts  on
which  he  lies  as  if  sore.

Pain :  in  temples ;  over  r.  eye ;  in  eustachian  tube ;  in
front  teeth  ;  in  stomach  ;  in  abdomen  ;  behind  sternum ;
in  bowels;  in  chest;  low  down  in  back;  in  liver;  in
uterus;  in  chest;  in  region  of  pectoral  muscle;  between
shoulders  and  along  -spine;  in  1.  shoulder;  in  upper
arm  ;  in  hips  ;  in  neck  bones.

Violent  pain :  in  r.  middle  finger ;  in  r.  limb.

Intense  pain  :  below  navel,  extending  to  hips  and  thighs.

Severe  pain  :  in  prsecordia.

Tearing :  in  temples ;  in  occiput ;  towards  nape  of  neck ;
in  ears  ;  in  teeth.

Pinching  pains:  in  epigastrium  and  umbilical  region.

Cutting :  in  epigastrium  and  umbilical  region ;  in  urethra.

Darting :  in  forepart  of  chest.

Shooting :  upward  in  an  oblique  direction  through  chest.

Boring :  over  and  in  1.  eye;  in  r.  big  toe.

Beating  :  in  forehead.

Throbbing :  in  head  ;  in  hollow  molar  tooth.

Throbbing  pressing  pain :  in  small  spots,  principally  to  1.
supraorbital  ridge.

Stitches :  in  ears ;  in  spleen  ;  in  heart ;  in  anus  ;  in  1.
lower  abdomen ;  in  chest.

Stinging  pain:  over  r.  eye;  in  occiput;  in  teeth;  in
upper  arm,  shoulder  and  elbow  joints.


NUX  MOSCHATA.  102

Pricking:  on  1.  cheek.

Driving-asunder  pain  :  in  occiput.

Tearing  rheumatic  pain  :  in  r.  shoulder.

Severe  colicky  pains  :  all  over  abdomen.

Twisting  pain :  below  stomach.

Spasmodic  pain  :  from  r.  to  1.  hypochondrium.

Forcing-down  pain :  in  bowels  and  anus.

Digging  pressing  pain  :  in  middle  of  soles ;  in  limbs.

Griping :  under  stomach.

Bearing-down  pain :  in  abdomen.

Constricting  pain :  over  r.  eye ;  in  anus  and  rectum  ;  in

muscles  of  chest.
Burning  pain:  over  r,  03^0;  in  bowels;  in  chest.
Burning:  of  lips ;  in  stomach  ;  in  urethra ;  in  feet.
Soreness:  in  head;  of  throat;  of  navel; in  larynx; in

chest.
Rheumatism:  of  1.  deltoid;  of  1.  shoulder  and  r.  hip.
Neuralgia:  of  1.  side  of  face.

Cramp  :  in  stomach  ;  in  abdomen  ;  of  calves ;  in  feet.
Pressing  pain:  in  occiput;  in  head;  in  front  of  chest;  in

shoulders.
Aching :  in  temples ;  in  belly ;  of  parts  on  which  he  lies.
Drawing :  in  head  from  place  to  place ;  around  in  abdo-
men; in  limbs; in  legs; in  muscles  of neck; from

fingers to shoulders; in thighs here and there; in

periosteum  of  r.  tibia.
Heat :  in  forehead  ;  on  top  of  head ;  over  and  in  1.  eye;  in

stomach.
Sensitiveness:  of  head.
Acrid  feeling :  in  anus ;  in  rectum.
Scratching :  in  throat.
Tickling  :  in  r.  upper  chest.
Creeping :  in  arms.

Crav/ling  :  from  pit  of  stomach  to  throat ;  in  windpipe.
Dryness  : of  eyes ; in  throat ; of  mouth ;  of  tongue ;  of

lips ; of  palate ; of  velum  palati ; of  nose ; of  inner

parts.
Buzzing  sensation  :  in  all  toes.
Trembling  fluttering :  of  heart.
Lightness,  emptiness :  of  head.
Numbness :  of  hands.
Dead  feeling :  in  chest.
Dulness :  of  head ;  of  forehead.
Expansion :  in  forehead.
Pressing  heaviness  :  in  forehead.
Pressure:  in  forehead;  in  stomach;  in  pit  of  stomach;  in

hypogastrium ;  in  back.
Pulsation  :  of  arteries.


103  NUX  MOSCHATA.

Fulness :  in  head ;  in  pupils ;  of  stomach  ;  in  upper  part

of  chest ;  of  hands.
Oppression :  from  pit  of  stomach  to  chest ;  of  chest ;  of

heart  to  throat.
Constriction:  about  vocal  organs;  in  muscles  of  chest;  of

nape  of  neck.
Tension:  around  eyes  and  in  lids;  in  hypogastrium.
Weight :  in  upper  part  of  abdomen ;  on  chest.
Heaviness  :  of  lids  ;  in  legs.
Weakness :  of  knees ;  of  back  ;  of  legs ;  of  hands ;  of  small

of  back.
Tired  feeling :  in  knees.
Great  languor :  in  back  and  knees.
Coldness :  in  hands  ;  in  legs ;  in  1.  arm.
**  Tissues. 1 1  Dryness  of  eyes,  nose,  lips,  mouth,  tongue  and

throat,  or  at  least  feeling  of  dryness.
Mucous  membranes  inflamed;  increased  mucous  secretion;
.  roughness  of  inner  parts ;  ailments  after  losses  of  blood.
Want  of  blood,  auEemia.
Glands  feel  as  if  swollen  or  are  relaxed ;  scrofulosis ;  old

ulcers  on  legs.
Rachitis,  scrofula  and  atrophy.
lAll  the  parts  on  which  he  lies  ache  as  if  sore.

■  Pain  in  neck,  bones,  and  generally  as  if  after  taking  cold

in  copious  perspiration,  with  pressing  in  forehead.

■  Rheumatism  or  rheumatic  pain  consequent  upon  taking

cold,  particularly  from  exposure  to  drafts  of  air
while  heated ;  pains  are  fugitive  in  character,  now  here
now  there ;  <  in  cold  or  wet  weather,  or  by  application
of  cold  or  wet  cloths;  >  in  warm,  dry  weather  and
from  warm  applications.
I  Rheumatism  after  getting  feet  wet.

■  Marasmus  of  little  children.

I  Pufiiness ;  swellings ;  dropsy  of  outer  parts.

■  Lameness  of  iimer  organs;  hard  parts  feel  soft.

^^  Touch.  Passive  Motion.  Injuries.  Touch:  temples  sen-
sitive ;  headache  sensitive ;  toothache  <  ;  scrobiculum
painful ;  pain  in  pectoral  muscles  <  ;  muscles  of  r.
thigh  feel  as  if  he  had  fallen.

Pressure :  temples  very  sensitive ;  >  pain ;  hard,  >
head;  abdomen  very  sensitive;  pinching  about  navel
>;  ovaries  and  uterus  sensitive;  pain  in  pectoral
muscles  <.

Lying  on  parts :  causes  soreness.

Pain  and  vomiting  caused  by  pessaries  >.

Riding  in  carriage :  headache ;  nausea  and  waterbrash ;
backache.

Severe  kick  in  abdomen :  severe  colicky  pains.


NUX  MOSCHATA.  104

Shock  of  injury  :  oppression  from  pit  of  stomach  to  chest.
*®Skin. 1  iSensitiveness  of  skin,  especially  to  cold,  damp  air.
liSkin  cold,  dry,  not  disposed  to  sweat.

■  Anasarca,  drops}^  of  external  parts.
I  Blue  spots  on  skin.

■  Irregular  red  scaling  patches  on  face  and  neck  during

congestions,  at  time  of  menses.
I  Complaints  after  suppressed  eruptions.

■  Ulcerations  of  skin,  painful;  with  hysterical  patients.

^^  Stages  of  Life,  Constitution.  Suits  children  and  women
(particularly  during  pregnancy),  and  all  people  with  a
cool,  dry  skin,  who  do  not  easily  perspire.

■  Corresponds  to  the  weakness  of  old  age ;  dyspepsia  of  old

people.

■  Constitutions  with  soft,  straight hair,  more  than  crisp

and  curly.

•Girl,  set.  14  mos.,  bright,  healthy  appearance;  intermittent.

Girl,  set.  2 ;  undeveloped  speech.

Girl,  set.  10,  delicate ;  episcleritis.

Girl,  set.  17,  during  course  of  scarlet  fever ;  cough,  sleepi-
ness, difficult  speech.

Girl,  set.  18,  blonde,  blue  eyes,  very  mild  temperament ;
sensation  of  looseness  in  brain.

Miss  C,  set.  19 ;  sciatica.

Woman,  set.  22,  single,  suffering  eight  days  ;  toothache.

Marquis  of  E.,  set.  24,  nervous  temperament,  good  consti-
tution, suffering  six  years;  affection  of  head.

"Woman,  set.  29,  miner's  wife  with  four  children  ;  affection
of  mind.

Mrs.  F.,  set.  32,  delicate  constitution,  catches  cold  easily,
suffered  with  laryngeal  symptoms  for  seven  years,  but
finally  cured  by  Sulph.,  latterly  was  attacked  by  laryngeal
spasms,  which  were  relieved  by  Canth.,  then  remained
well  for  a  year ;  toothache  and  affection  of  stomach.

A  demoiselle,  set.  32,  cured  three  years  ago  of  ascites  (from
enlargement  of  liver),  suffering  since  two  months ;  con-
vulsive motions  of  head.

Women,  set.  34,  very  nervous  temperament,  good  constitu-
tion, extraordinary  mental  powers,  which  she,  however,
overtaxed,  suffering  eighteen  months;  nervous  irritation
of  digestive  canal.

Woman,  set.  34,  nervous  temperament,  after  extreme  men-
tal exertion  ;  irritation  of  intestinal  canal.

Mrs.  W.,  set.  34,  prematurely  confined,  four  months  ago,
child  stillborn ;  red  appearance  of  white  objects.

Mrs.  C,  set  35,  subject  to  hemorrhage  from  rectum,  cured
a  year  ago  by  Sulph.;  pregnant,  four  months ;  pelvic
congestion.


105  NUX  MOSCHATA.

Mrs.  0.  K.,  set.  35,  last  day  of  menstrual  flow  took  a  bath  ; '
suppression  of  menses.

Mrs.  D.,  a3t.  35,  pregnant  six  weeks,  after  receiving  severe
kick  in  abdomen  from  child  while  in  bed,  and  exposure
to  rainstorm  next  day ;  threatened  abortion.

Mrs.  S.,  Jewess,  set.  42,  married  to  her  second  husband,
had  in  her  first  marriage  two  children,  and  was  vigorous
and  healthy ;  shortly  after  second  marriage,  at  age  of
32,  took  cold  which  was  followed  by  suppression  of
menses ;  attacks  of  somnolence.

Farmer,  set.  60,  bilious  temperament,  sick  one  month  ;
affection  of  liver.

Woman,  set.  70,  still  active ;  gastralgia.

Country  woman,  formerly  robust  and  blooming,  recently
aborted  in  fifth  month,  afterbirth  had  not  passed  and
she  was  suffering  from  laborlike  pains,  Pulsat.  caused
afterbirth  to  be  discharged  next  day,  however,  heat,
thirst,  cough  and  inclination  to  vomit  set  in,  for  which
Bryon.  was  ineffectual ;  affection  of  chest.

Colored  woman ;  drowsiness.

Mrs.  B.,  middle-aged,  strong,  dark  complexion,  suffering
four  weeks ;  headache.
*^  Relations. Antidoted by Camphor., Semen  capi  Lauroc,
Gelsem.,  Nux  vom.,  Opium,  Zincum,  Valerian.

It  antidotes:  Arsen.,  Lauroc,  Rhodo.,  mercurial  inhala-
tions, lead  colic,  oil  of  turpentine,  spiritous  liquors,  bad
beers.

Compatible:  Lycop.,  Nux  vom.,  Pulsat.,  Rhus  tox.,  Stramon.,
Tart.  em..

Compare:  Ambra,  Asaf.,  Ant.  tart,  (sensations),  Arsen.
(fevers),  Bellad.,  Camphor.,  Coccul.  (sides  of  body),  Conium,
Ignat.  (sides  of  body,  chalky  taste),  Lauroc,  Lycop.  (skin),
Moschus,  Nux  vom.  (sides  of  body,  motions  and  sensa-
tions). Opium  (mind,  fever),  Phosphor.,  Pulsat.  (internal
organs),  Rhus  tox.  (motions),  Sassaf.,  Sepia  (sides  of
body),  Silic.  (modalities),  Spigel.  (fever),  Stramon.  (mind).
Sulphur.


NUX  VOMICA.  106


NUX  VOMICA.

Poison  Nut.  Loganiacese.

The  seeds  of  Strychnos  Nux  Vomica  ;  a  tree  native  to  Ilindostan  and  the  East
Indies.

The  alcoliolic  tincture  is  prepared  from  the  finely  pulverized  seed.

Introduced  by  Hahnemann  and  proved  upon  himself,  liis  son  Frederick,  Stapf,
Wahle  and  Flaeming.  Later  provings  by  Kobinson,  Berridge  and  Wilson,  with
high  potencies.

Clinical  Authorities. — Hypochondriasis,  Martin,  Horn.  CI.,  vol.  2,  p.  169  ;
Effects  of  disappointed  ambition,  Hartlaub,  Analyt.  Therap.,  vol.  1,  p.  109 ;  Agora-
phobia, Lilienthal,  Hom.  Times,  1875,  p.  35 ;  Insanity,  Watzke,  B.  J.  H.,  vol.  25,
p.  557;  3Iania  (2  cases),  Diilac,  Hom.  CI.,  vol.  3,  p.  56  ;  Butler,  N.  Y.  S.  Trans.,
1875 ;  Mania  'puerperalis,  Stern,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  5,  p.  8 ;  Delirium  tremens,
Knorre,  Link,  Hartmann,  Hartlaub,  Riick.  KL  Erf.,  vol.  1,  p.  144 ;  3Iental  dis-
turbances, Hartlaub,  Schultz,  Aegidi,  Hartmann,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  1,  p.  33 ;
Widemann,  B.  J.  H.,  vol.  12,  p.  464,  from  A.  H.  Z.,  vol.  4;  Apoplexy,  Schiiler,
Riiclc.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  1,  p.  92 ;  Pommerais,  Elb,  Riick.  Kh  Erf.,  vol.  5,  p.  29;
Nichols,  Hom.  Times,  1876,  p.  32  ;  Syncope,  Hartmann,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf,  vol.  4,  p.
583 ;  Vertigo  (2  cases),  Diez,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf,  vol.  1,  p.  73 ;  Griesselich,  Riick.  Kl.
Erf.,  vol.  1,  p.  74;  Elwert,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf,  vol  1,  pp.  76,  78;  Altschul,  Riick.  Kl.
Erf.,  vol  5,  p.  22 ;  Hofrichter,  B.  J.  H.,  vol.  11,  p.  575;  Skinner,  Hom.  Phys.,
vol.  6,  p.  194 ;  Headache,  Schriin,  Knorre,  Hering,  Tietzer,  Lobethal,  Schreter,
Diez,  Wislicenus,  Griessel,  Plegel,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  1,  pp.  183-90 ;  Haustein,
Kasemann,  Wood,  Riick.  Kl.'  Erf,  vol.  6,  p.  91;  Ker,  B.  J.  H.,'vol.  5,  p.  433;
Hale,  N.  A.  J.  H.,  vol.  10,  p.  70 ;  Nichols,  N.  E.  M.  G.,  vol.  8,  p.  108 ;  Wessel-
hoeft,  Hom.  CI.,  vol.  4.,  p.  41  ;  Cushing,  Hom.  Times,  1875,  p.  114;  Youmans,
Hahn.  Mo.,  vol.  10,  p.  213 ;  Hemicrania,  Eidherr,  B.  J.  H.,  vol.  27,  p.  33  ;  Migraine,
Knorre,  B.  J.  H.,  vol.  21,  p.  10,  from  A.  H.  Z.,  vol.  5,  p.  272 ;  Atrophy  of  optic
nerve,  Norton,  Ophthal.  Therap.,  p.  134;  Paralysis  of  third  pair  of  nerves,  Norton,
Ophthal.  Therap.,  p.  135  ;  Dysecoia,  Diez,  Rentsch,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf,  vol.  1.,  p.  370 ;
Rentsch,  Hom.  Times,  1876,  p.  67,  from  A.  H,  Z.,  vol.  38  ;  Segin,  Hom.  Times,  1876,
p.  67,  from  Hygea,  vol.  18,  No.  1 ;  Tobacco  amaurosis,  Norton,  Ophthal.  Therap.,  p.
135;  Amblyopia  potatorum  and  atrophy  of  optic  nerve,  Norton,  Ophthal.  Therap.,  p.
134 ;  Blurring  of  sight,  Woodyatt,  Raue's  Rec,  1874,  p.  86  ;  Keratitis  pust.,  Nor-
ton, Raue's  Rec,  1875,  p.  52,  from  N.  Y.  S.  Trans.,  1873-4,  p.  432;  Ophthalmia,
Schreter,  Hartmann,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf,  vol.  1,  p.  237  ;  Jachim,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf,  vol.
5,  p.  133 ;  Trinks,  Schwartz,  Schreter,  Hartmann,  B.  J.  H.,  vol.  6,  p.  504 ;  Extra-
vasation of  blood  into  conjunctiva,  Altschul,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf,  vol.  5,  p.  142;  Pain  in
eyes,  Jackson,  Organon,  vol.  1,  p.  293  ;  Hypercesihesia  of  auditory  nerve,  Zwingen-
berg,  B.  J.  H.,  vol.  34,  p.  164 ;  Itching  along  the  eustachian  tube,  Rittenhouse,  Raue's
Rec,  1874,  p.  88,  from  H.  M.  S.  Penna.,  1873 ;  Coryza,  Kafka,  Hering,  Tietze,


107  NUX  VOMICA.

Eaue's  Eec,  1870,  p.  127  ;  Rosenberg,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  5,  p.  167 ;  Facial  neu-
ralgia, Kafka,  Kasemann,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  5,  p.  187 ;  Jousset,  Eaue's  Eec,
1870,  p.  291,  from  A.  H.  Z.,  vol.  78,  p.  192;  Wesselhoeft,  N.  E.  M.  G.,  vol.  9,  p.
99;  Toothache,  Kreuss,  Hrg.,  Knorre,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  1,  p.  469;  Berridge,
Horn.  CI.,  vol.  4,  p.  98 ;  Glover,  Horn.  Phys.,  vol.  8,  p.  618;  Ulcer  on  gum,  Eush-
more,  Horn.  Phys.,  vol.  2,  p.  145 ;  Swelling  of  gums,  Mschk.,  Sclinieber,  Eiick.  Kl.
Erf.,  vol.  1,  p.  511 ;  Tumor  of  gum,  Pemerl,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf,  vol.  5,  p.  207  ;  Pain  in
tongue,  Elwert,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  1,  p.  502 ;  Aphthous  stomatitis,  Hirsch,  Eiick.  Kl.
Erf,  vol.  5,  p.  223 ;  Affections  of  uvula,  Hofrichter,  Hirsch,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  5,
p.  249 ;  Influenza,  Hahn.,  Gross,  Sollier,  Croserio,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  3,  p.  46 ;
Sore  throat,  Kreuss,  Tietze,  Hrg.,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  1,  p.  537;  Diphtheria,
Lippe,  Organon,  vol.  1,  p.  363;  Parsons,  T.  H.  M.  S.  Pa.,  1882,  p.  197;  Wells,
Trans.  World's  Horn.  Conv.,  1876,  p.  552  ;  Desire  for  liquor,  Nichols,  N.  E.  M.  G.,
vol.  8,  p.  108;  Alcoholism,  Kent,  Horn.  Phys.,  vol.  7,  p.  377  ;  Nausea  from  riding,
Eobert,  Horn.  CI.,  vol.  2,  p.  219  ;  Vomiting,  Haustein,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf,  vol.  5,  p.  261 ;
Periodical  attacks  of  vomiting,  Eiickert,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  1,  p.  646;  Hcematemesis,
Hartmann,  Heichelheim,  Frank,  Holeczek,  Fielitz,  Bethmann,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf,
vol.  1,  p.  570 ;  Affections  of  stomach  (40  cases),  Hofrichter,  B.  J.  H.,  vol..  11,  pp.
452-581 ;  Cardialgia,  gastric  disturbances,  vomiting,  etc.,  Bonninghausen,  Lobethal,
Knorre,  Diez,  Bosch,  Kammerer,  Heichelheim,  Weber,  Nenning,  Hirzel,  Hart-
mann, Hoffendahl,  Jahr,  Eiickert,  Bethman,  Elwert,  Frank,  Eichhorn,  Eiick.  Kl.
Erf,  vol.  1,  pp.  642-652;  Cardialgia,  Hesse,  A.  H.  Z.,  vol.  110,  p.  156;  Bojanus,
Hom.  CI.,  vol.  4,  p.  23,  from  A.  H.  Z.,  1870,  No.  24;  Nankivell,  Horn.  Eev.,  vol.
15,  p.  135;  Gastralgia,  Heyberger,  Times  Eet.,  1877,  p.  93,  from  Hom.  Kl.,  vol.
12,  p.  117 ;  Hencke,  Hom.  Eev.,  vol.  1,  p.  270;  Sherman,  N.  E.  M.  G.,  vol.  8,  p.
549  ;  Pratt,  T.  A.  I.  H.,  1888,  p.  340;  Goullon,  Hom.  Times,  1875,  p.  73;  Gastro-
dynia,  Smith,  B.  J.  H.,  vol.  25,  p.  506 ;  Traumatic  cardialgia,  Eobinson,  Hah.  Mo.,
vol.  23,  p.  747,  from  N.  Y.  Med.  Times,  Sept.,  1888;  Irritable  stomach,  Benham,
Hom.  CI.,  vol.  1,  p.'  49 ;  Gastric  disturbance,  Hartman,  Hughes'  Phar.,  p.  579 ;  Han-
sen, A.  H.  Z.,  vol.  113,  pp.  20,  29 ;  Digestive  disorder,  Clarke,  Hom.  Eev.,  vol.  22,
p.  156;  Dyspepsia,  Pope,  B.  J.  H.,  vol.  12,  p.  486;  Benham,  B.  J.  H.,  vol.  26,  p.
493 ;  Stens,  Eaue's  Eec,  1873,  p.  116,  from  A.  H.  Z.,  vol.  85,  p.  157;  Chronic  dys-
pepsia, cardialgia,  Meyer,  B.  J.  H.,  vol.  18,  pp.  256,  262  ;  Gastritis,  Diller,  N.  A.
J.  H.,  vol.  7,  p.  244  ;  III  effects  from  overloading  stomach,  Hencke,  Hom.  Eev.,  vol.
1,  p.  273;  Ulcer  of  stomach,  Perutz,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf,  vol.  5,  p.  318;  Gallstone  colic,
McLaren,  Hom.  Phys.,  vol.  8,  p.  238  ;  Bilious  colic.  Porter,  Eaue's  Eec,  1872,  p.
157,  from  Med.  Inv.,  vol.  8,  p.  251 ;  Bilious  attacks,  Gee,  Hom.  Phys.,  vol.  6,  p.
447 ;  Congestion  of  liver,  Martin,  Hom.  CL,  vol.  2,  p.  191 ;  Inflammation  of  liver,
Hrg,  Kreuss,  Hartmann,  Schron,  Schreter,  Schubert,  Hartlaub,  Thorer,  Eiick.
Kl.  Erf,  vol.  1,  p.  680;  Affection  of  liver,  Wood,  N.  A.  J.  H.,  vol.  4,  p.  342 ;
Hofrichter,  B.  J.  H.,  vol.  11,  pp.  454, 550,  etc.;  Frank,  Linz,  Haustein,  Elwert,  Miih-
lenbaum,  Tietze,  Thorer,  Euck.  Kl.  Erf,  vol.  1,  p.  700  ;  A.  E.,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf,  vol.
5,  p.  341  ;  Bloating  of  abdomen,  colic,  Molinari,  Battmann,  Huber,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf,
vol.  5,  p.  367  ;  Enteralgia,  Huber,  B.  J.  H.,  vol.  16,  p.  293;  Packard,  N.  E.  M.  G.,
vol.  5,  p.  560 ;  Colic,  Hartmann,  Bandiss,  Diez,  Frank,  Elwert,  Pleyel,  Helbig,
Eiick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  1,  p.  756  ;  Bruckner,  N.  A.  J.  H.,  vol.  19,  p.  416  ;  Pain  in
abdomen,  Bullard,  B.  J.  H.,  vol.  33,  p.  567  ;  Pain  in  hypogastrium,  Berridge,  Hom.
Kl.,  vol.  3,  p.  116;  Hernia,  Hrg.,  Kreuss,  Hartmann,  Schron,  Traub,  Gauwerky,
Heichelheim,  Ohlhauth,  Elwert,  N.  in  B.,  Fielitz,  Genzke,  Haustein,  Schweikert,
Tietze,  Miiller,  Schultz,  Stapf,  Seidel,  Schiiler,  Schonke,  Mschk.,  Bethmann,  Schu-


NUX  VOMICA.  108

bert,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  1,  pp.  785-92;  Schelling,  Engelhardt,  Theuerkauf,
Perutz,  Ellinger,  Leydet,  Huber,  Walter,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  5,  p.  381  ;  Gilchrist,
Surg.  Therap.,  p.  434;  Sberbhurne,  Helmutli,  Horn.  Times,  1875,  p.  152;  Wor-
cester, Eaue's  Eec,  1874,  p.  201,  from  Trans.  A.  I.  H.,  1872,  p.  341 ;  Gale,  A.  H.
O.,  vol.  6,  p.  43  ;  Jameson,  Organon,  vol.  1,  p.  470  ;  Manson,  Organon,  vol.  2,  p.
376 ;  Ostrom,  Organon,  vol.  3,  page  205 ;  Gallupe,  Organon,  vol.  3,  362 ;  Cox,
Hom.  CI.,  vol.  3,  p.  114;  Cserno,  Szontagh,  Eaue's  Eec,  1872,  p.  150;  Diarrhoea,
Schelling,  Hartman,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  1,  p.  841 ;  Kafka,  Euck.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.
5,  p.  425 ;  Underwood,  Hom.  CL,  vol.  4,  p.  23 ;  Colburn,  Times  Eet.,  1887,  p.  95  ;
Morning  diarrhaa,  Farrington,  Hom.  KL,  vol.  1,  p.  51  ;  Dysentery,  Hrg.,  Hart-
mann,  Kidd,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  1,  p.  877 ;  Gauwerky,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  5,  p.
446  ;  Preston,  Hah.  Mo.,  vol.  4,  pp.  17-18  (5  cases)  ;  Preston,  Hah.  Mo.,  vol.  9,  p.
9;  Colburn,  N.  E.  M.  G.,  vol.  12,  p.  357;  Cholera,  Engelhard,  Wittmack,  Tiilff,
Eiick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  5,  p.  478 ;  Kurtz,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  1,  p.  951 ;  Cholera  and
Dyszniery,  Drysdale,  B.  J.  H.,  vol.  8,  p.  157  ;  Constipation,  Knorre,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf.,
vol.  1,  p.  817  ;  Goullon,  Hom.  Times,  1875,  p.  82,  from  A.  H.  Z.,  vol.  91,  p.  61 ;
Knorre,  Malaise,  Linder,  Goullon,  Bernard,  Guernsey,  Bernard  and  Strong  on  Con-
stip  ,  pp.  79-83 ;  Guernsey,  Hah.  Mo.,  vol.  5,  p.  62 ;  Frost,  Hah.  Mo.,  vol.  10,  p.  150  ;
Piersons,  Organon,  vol.  1,  p.  325  ;  Impaction  of  feces,  Elb,  A.  H.  Z.,  vol.  110,  p.
11  ;  Prolapsus  of  rectum,  Hirsch,  Miiller,  Verwey,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  5,  p.  491 ;
Prolapsus  ani,  Lobethal,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  1,  p.  994;  Hemorrhoids,  Hrg.,
Hartmann,  Knorre,  Lobethal,  Diez,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  5,  p.  1001 ;  (2  cases)  Sher-
bino,  Hom.  Phys.,  vol.  7,  p.  387;  Nephritis,  Cystitis,  Hcematuria,  Strangury,  Penal
colic,  Calculus,  Gravel,  Inactivity  of  bladder,  Hartmann,  Kreuss,  Goullon,  Matlack,
Hartlaub,  Weber,  Bredenoce,  Schelling,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  2,  p.  24  ;  Nephritis,
Hencke,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf,  vol.  5,  p.  505 ;  Heyne,  Times  Eetros.,  1877,  p.  101,  from
A.  H.  Z.,  vol.  95,  p.  116;  Diabetes  melL,  Erie,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  5,  p.  516;
Penal  colic,  McLaren,  Hom.  Phys.,  vol.  8,  p.  239  ;  Hematuria,  Hesse,  A.  H.  Z.,  vol.
110,  p.  156;  Cystitis,  (with  Sulph.)  Brisken,  Hom.  Times,  1875,  p.  88  ;  Paresis  of
detrusor  vesicce,  Ide,  Allg.  Hom.  Ztg.,  vol.  104,  p.  117 ;  Paralysis  of  bladder,  Mc-
George,  Eaue's  Eec,  1875,  p.  14;  Incontinence  of  urine,  Eosenbach,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf.,
vol.  2,  p.  91 ;  Enuresis,  Johnson,  Hah.  Mo.,  vol.  16,  p.  595  ;  Metcalf,  N.  A.  J.  H.,
vol.  3,  p.  339 ;  Vesical  calculi,  Bahrenburg,  Organon,  vol.  3,  p.  367  ;  Affection  of
urinary  organs,  Berridge,  N.  A.  J.  H.,  vol.  22,  p.  194 ;  Urinary  difficulty,  Hencke,
Hom.  Eev.,  vol.  1,  p.  272;  Pollutions,  Hartmann,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  2,  p.  60;
Koch,  A.  J.  H.  M.  M.,  vol.  1,  p.  15;  Spermatorrhoia,  Pasi,  Hom.  Times,  1876,  p.
113;  Z7?'ei/i?'t^i'.s,  Knorre,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf ,  vol.  2,  p.  91 ;  Orchitis,  Hartmann,  Schre-
ter,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  2,  p.  208 ;  Nymphomania,  Kafka,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  5,
p.  535;  Uterine  neuralgia,  Wesselhoeft,  Hom.  CI.,  vol.  4,  p.  21 ;  Metritis,  Hartmann,
Kreuss,  Knorre,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  2,  p.  448;  Hartmann,  Hughes,  Hughes'
Phar.,  p.  57  ;  Newton,  B.  J.  H.,  vol.  28,  p.  245 ;  Chronic  metritis,  Pratt,  Hom.
Times,  1876,  p.  126,  from  M.  I.,  1876,  p.  132;  Prolapsus  uteri.  Gross,  Tietze,
Holeczeck,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  2,  p.  343  ;  Uterine  fibroid,  Gregg,  T.  A.  I.  H.,  1881,
p.  530 ;  Uterine  hemorrhage.  Frost,  Hah.  Mo.,  vol.  10,  p.  99  ;  Hendricks,  A.  H.  Z.,
vol.  Ill,  p.  119 ;  Uterine  affection,  Bojanus,  Hom.  CI.,  vol.  3,  p.  137  ;  Menorrhagia,
Starke,  A.  J.  H.  M.  M.,  vol.  3,  p.  133 ;  Koeck,  Hom.  Times,  1876,  p.  133,  from
H.  P.,  vol.  7,  p.  271 ;  Amenorrhoea,  Retroversion,  Gorton,  Hah.  Mo.,  vol,  7,  p.  463;
Menstrual  disturbances,  Hahnemann,  Hering,  Hartmann,  Lobethal,  Schwarz,  Wer-
ber,  Schreter,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  2,  p.  237  ;  Kafka,  Eaue's  Eec,  1870,  p.  253,
from  A.  H.  Z.,  vol.  78,  p.  6 ;  Prolapsed  vagina,  Fischer,  Times  Eetros.,  1887,  p.


109  NUX  VOMICA.

106;  Ciimaieric  affections  Lulac,  Horn.  CL,  vol.  3,  p.  129;  Disorders  of  pregnancy,
Hartmann,  Diez,  Eichhorn,  Heichelheim,  Schiiler,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  2,  p.  384;
Gastric  dif^turbances  during  pregnancy,  Spalding,  N.  E.  M.  G.,  vol.  10,  p.  29;
Threatened  abortion,  Hartmann,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  2,  p.  319  ;  Abortion,  Woodyatt,
Organon,  vol.  3,  p.  105 ;  Ineffectual  labor  pains,  Ballard,  Horn.  Phys.,  vol.  7,  p.
378  ;  False  labor  pains,  Haustein,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf,  vol.  5,  p.  656 ;  Dystocia,  Knicker-
bocker, Eaue's  Eec,  1873,  p.  180,  from  N.  Y.  S.  Trans.,  1871,  p.  310;  Puerperal
convulsions,  Wielobicky, Eiick. Kl. Erf.,  vol.2,  p.  408;  After-pains,  Hartmann,  Eiick
Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  2,  p.  393 ;  After-pains  in  rectum.  Potter,  Hom.  Phys.,  vol.  7,  p.  386  ;
Puerperal  fever,  Hartmann,  Kreuss,  Knorre,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  2,  p.  448  ;  Affec-
tions of  b7'easts,  Gross,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  5,  p.  666 ;  Pain  in  nipples,  Kretschmar,
Hartlaub,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf,  vol.  2,  p.  418  ;  Hay  fever,  Gream,  N.  A.  J.  H.,  vol.  2,  p.
395;  Bronchitis,  Gorton,  Hah.  Mo.,  vol.  7,  p.  515;  Asthma,  Hartmann,  Kreuss,
Stapf,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  3,  p.  193 ;  Eussell,  B.  J.  H.,  vol.  14,  p.  387 ;  Parker,
Hah.  Mo.,  vol.  6,  p.  291 ;  Frost,  Hah.  Mo.,  vol.  10,  p.  149 ;  Potter,  Hom.  Phys.,
vol.  7,  p.  385;  Strupp,  Hom.  Times,  1876,  p.  84,  from  H.  K.,  vol.  21,  p.  57  ;  (2
cases)  Peters,  from  Frank's  Mag. ;  Cough,  Miiller,  Schleicher,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.
5,  p.  689  ;  Berridge,  Hom.  CI.,  vol.  4,  p.  92 ;  Gushing,  Hom.  Times,  1876,  p.  83,  from
Mass.  Trans.,  vol.  4,  p.  667;  Cough  and  dyspncea,  Dunham,  Hom.  Phys.,  vol.  6,  p.
21  ;  Whooping  cough,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  5,  p.  726  ;  Ha;moptysis,  Kreuss,  Jahr,
Eiick.  Kl.  Erf,  vol.  3,  p.  220 ;  Catarrhal  affection  of  chest,  Hering,  Hartman,
Kammerer,  Schron,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf,  vol.  3,  p.  20;  Wurmb,  B.  J.  H.,  vol.  11,  p.
49 ;  Infantile  chest  diseases,  Morgan,  Hom.  CI.,'  vol.  4,  p.  77 ;  Pneumonia,  Kreuss,
Hartmann,  Miiller,  Wiirm,  Watzke,  Schneider,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  3,  p.  308  ;
Haustein,  B.  J.  H.,  vol.  24,  p.  671,  from  A.  H.  Z.,  July,  1866 ;  Pleurisy,  Berridge,
Hom.  Times,  1875,  p.  69;  Angina  pectoris,  Jousset,  A.  H.  Z.,  vol.  107,  p.  127;
Torticollis,  Squier,  N.  E.  M.  G.,  vol.  4,  p.  126;  Backache,  Hartmann,  Pulte,  Eiick.
Kl.  Erf,  vol.  3,  p.  475  ;  Pains  in  back,  etc.,  Dixon,  B.  J.  H.,  vol.  28,  p.  375  ;  Back-
ache and  vertigo,  Eushmore,  Hom.  Phys.,  vol.  2,  p.  319 ;  Pain  in  back  and  gastric
disturbances,  Hupfield,  A.  J.  H.  M.  M-,  vol.  1,  p.  13  ;  Lateral  sclerosis  of  cord,  Lutze,
A,  H.  Z,  vol.  105,  p.  132;  Chronic  myelitis.  Stern,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  3,  p.  470;
Whitloiv,  Berridge,  Hom.  CL,  vol.  4,  p.  110 ;  Paresis  crurum,  Huber,  B.  J.  H.,
vol.  16,  p.  295;  Bheumatism,  Ischias,  Kreuss,  Hartmann,  Knorre,  Goullon,  Kam-
mierer,  Fielitz,  Mschk.,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf,  vol.  3,  p.  527 ;  Pain  in  leg,  Gregg,  Hom.
Phys.  vol.  5,  p.  168;  Boils  on  thigh,  Mschk.,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  4,  p.  184;
Frozen  limbs,  Gross,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf,  vol.  4,  p.  176  ;  Tetanic  emprosthotonos,  Davies,
Organon,  vol.  2,  p.  232;  Tetanic  convulsions,  Berretti,  Hom.  Times,  1875,  p.  123;
Traumatic  tetanus,  Conant,  N.  E.  M.  G.,  vol.  9,  p.  29  ;  To7iic  spasm.  Smith,  B.  J.  H.,
vol.  29,  p.  815  ;  Spasms,  Smedley,  Hah.  Mo.,  vol.  7,  p.  59  ;  Epilepsy,  Tonic  spasms,
Spasms,  Twitching  of  muscles.  Cramps,  Hartmann,  Tietzer,  Hoffendahl,  Bethmann,
Lietzau,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf,  vol.  4,  p.  583  ;  Hysteria,  TheuerkaufF,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf,  vol.
5,  p.  612  ;  Chorea,  Bethmann,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf,  vol.  4,  p.  513 ;  Epilepsy,  Bender,  Hah.
Mo.,  vol.  8,  p.  73  ;  Emmett,  Eaue's  Rec,  1871,  pp.  190-1,  from  Med.  Inv.,  vol.  7,
p.  530,  vol.  8,  p.  14  ;  Thayer,  Hom.  Times,  1876,  p.  152,  from  Mass.  Trans.,  vol.
4,  p.  12;  Neuralgia,  Clarke,  N.  E.  M.  G.,  vol.  5,  p.  561 ;  Paresis  of  ai-ms  and  hands,
Paresis  crurum,.  Facial  paralysis.  Left-sided  paralysis.  Paralysis  after  apoplexy.  Paral-
ysis of  I.  arm,  Paralysis  of  foot.  Paresis  of  fingers,  Hartmann,  Knorre,  Kopp,  Son-
nenberg,  Arnold,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf,  vol.  4,  p.  472  ;  Paralysis,  Goodno,  A.  J.  li.  of  M.
M.,  vol.  4,  p.  60;  W.  J.,  Hom.  Times,  1876,  p.  152;  After  diphtheria,'^  eviton,  Hom.
Eev.,  vol.  14,  p.  403 ;  Hemiplegia,  Frost,  Hah.  Mo.,  vol.  10,  p.  149 ;  Locomotor


NUX  VOMICA.  110

ataxy,  Bojanus,  Raue's  Eec,  p.  812;  Ague,  Hrg.,  Knorre,  Gastfreund,  Tripi,
Nagel,  Escalier,  Liedbeck, Griessel,  Biirkner,  Hartlaub,  Baertl,  Miiller,  Seidel,  K.
in  L.,  Haustein,  Sonnenberg,  Mschk.,  Thorer,  T.,  Szontagh,  Kiisem.,  Ruck.  Kl.  Erf.,
vol.  4,  pp.  953-969 ;  Baertl,  Analyt.  Therap.,  vol.  1,  p.  320 ;  Powell,  Eaue's  Rec,

1873,  p.  214,  from  N.  Y.  S.  Trans.,  1871,  p.  265 ;  Partridge  (5  cases),  Raue's  Rec,

1874,  p.  280;  Preston,  Hah.  Mo.,  vol.  4,  p.  17 ;  Hoyne,  Horn.  CI.,  vol.  2,  p.  251 ;
Greenleaf,  Horn.  Times,  1876,  p.  158,  from  N.  Y.  S.  Trans.,  1876-7,  p.  149;  Swan,
Allen's  Int.,  p.  193 ;  Of  children,  Higgins,  Allen's  Int.,  p.  192 ;  Gastric  fever,  Krenss,
Griessel,  Bojanus,  Hartmann,  Seidel,  RUck.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  4,  p.  645;  Typhoid  fever,
Knorre,  Strtcker,  Kidd,  Hartmann,  Miiller,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  4,  p.  759 ;  One-
sided sweats  (3  cases),  Eggert,  Horn.  CL,  vol.  4,  p.  40;  Anasarca,  Peterson,  Elick.
Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  4,  p.  354  ;  Hom.  Times,  1853,  No.  193  ;  Ulcerations,  Hartmann,
Riick.  Kl.  Erf,  vol.  4,  p.  288  ;  Erysipelas  of  face,  foot  or  knee,  Hartmann,  Reisig,
Riick.  Kl.  Erf,  vol.  4,  p.  145;  Nux  moschata  poisoning,  Martin,  Hom.  CI.,  vol.  4,
p.  7 ;  Opium  poisoning,  Raue's  Rec,  1875,  p.  26 ;  Tobacco  poisoning,  Thomson,
Hom.  Pliys.,  vol.  3,  p.  106 ;  Strychnine  poisoning,  Hullhorst,  Oi'ganon,  vol.
2,  p.  113.

^  Mind. '  ■  Defective  memory  ;  manner  shy  and  awkward.

■  Becomes  dizzy  and  faint  in  a  crowd,  or  where  many  gas-

lights are  burning. ^Agoraphobia.

■  Slow  train  of  ideas;  chooses  expressions  which  are  not

suitable.
1 1  Cannot  read  or  calculate,  for  she  loses  the  connection  of

ideas  ;  thinks  she  will  lose  her  reason.
iVer}^  easily  bewildered;  everything  goes  wrong.
I  Ennui ;  the  time  seems  intolerably  long,  j^asses  slowly.

I  bLoss  of  energy.

I I  Suits  very  particular,  careful,  zealous  persons,  inclined
to  get  angry  or  excited,  or  of  a  spiteful,  malicious  dis-
position.

1 1  Irritable,  morose,  sullen  ;  quarrelsome  if  disturbed. .

I  lOversensitiveness  to  impressions  upon  the  senses  ;  noise,
smell,  light  and  music,  and  the  most  trifling  symptoms
are  unbearable;  every  harmless  word  offends,  every
little  noise  frightens,  anxious  and  beside  themselves,
cannot  bear  even  the  least  suitable  medicine.

liCannot  bear  reading  or  conversation;  irritable  and
wishes  to  be  alone.

Ilnclined  to  find  fault  and  scold;  morose  ;  stubborn  ;  an
insane  desire  when  alone  with  her  husband,  whom  she
adores,  to  kill  him.

■  Irritable,  angry  disposition,  anxious  concern  about  little

things. ^Chlorosis.
iFiery,  excited  temperament;  violent;  sensational.

■  Very much  inclined to  violently  reproach  others  for

their  faults.
I  Ull-humored,  resists  obstinately  the  wishes  of  others.


Ill  NUX  VOMICA.

I  I  He  quarrels,  reproaches,  scolds,  insults,  from  jealousy,
mingled  with  unchaste  expressions;  soon  afterwards
howls  and  w^eeps  aloud.

I  I  Is  put  out  of  patience  when  spoken  to ;  gets  angry  and

violent  without  any  provocation ;  headstrong  and  self-
willed.  ^Menorrhagia.
llDelirium  tremens:  with  oversensitiveness,  nervous  ex-
citability and  malicious  vehemence;  indescribable  anx-
iety ;  finds  no  rest  in  any  place ;  sees  different  images ;
trembling  of  limbs;  cannot  bring  glass  to  lips  with-
out spilling  contents ;  terrifying  illusions  while  awake ;
terrible  dreams  causing  him  to  start  from  sleep  in
fright;  sleeplessness;  imagines  himself  surrounded  by
persons  who  carry  on  all  sorts  of  pranks,  or  ply  him
with  questions  which  he  thinks  he  is  compelled  to  an-
swer ;  violent,  seeks  to  escape ;  answers  questions  ra-
tionally and  is  conscious  of  his  condition;  on  third  day
of  attack  fell  to  floor,  stiff",  cold  and  unconscious  ;  shak-
ing of  knees,  can  hardly  keep  erect  without  support;
stuttering,  thick  speech ;  cannot  keep  any  of  his  limbs
quiet;  frequently  answers  questions  incorrectly;  ap-
pears to  be  haunted  by  a  great  fear.

I I  Desire  to  talk  about  one's  condition,  with  anxious  re-
flections about  it.

1 1  Anxiety  with  irritability  and  inclination  to  commit
suicide,  but  is  afraid  to  die.

■  Despondent  and  buoyant  alternately.

I  I  Great  anxiety  of  mind  without  particular  cause ;  thinks
she  will  not  be  able  to  get  along  in  life;  caducity  ;  chill-
iness; sleeplessness;  stool  infrequent,  hard,  although
appetite  is  good;  frequent  and  quick  urination,  at
times  involuntary.

I  I  Gets  frightened  easily  and  is  almost  beside  herself  from

least  thing that may  happen ; shuns the  fresh air.
^Menorrhagia.

I I  Hypochondriasis  :  with  studious  men  sitting  too  much
at  home,  with  abdominal  complaints  and  costiveness ;
after  all  kinds  of  quack  medicinfes,  for  dyspepsia ;  irri-
table temper;  arising  from  liver  or  gastric  troubles,
especially  in  drunkards;  <  after  eating,  with  sensi-
tiveness.

I  I  Melancholic  in  consequence  of  losing  his  position,
morose,  capricious,  irritable,  hasty ;  the  least  contradic-
tion puts  him  out  entirely;  remains  for  hours  without
wishing  to  take  part  in  conversation.

I  I  Melancholia  after  extraction  of  carious  tooth  ;  speaks  of
nothing  but  his  tooth;  retires  to  his  room  and  unlocks
door  only  after  much  entreaty ;  on  entrance  of  physi-


NUX  VOMICA.  112

cian  withdraws  timidly  to  farthest  corner  of  room,  with
his  eyes  cast  down  ;  of  many  questions  answers  but  few
and  speaks  of  nothing  but  his  tooth  ;  intolerance  to
slightest  noise  and  great  aversion  to  labor;  sits  idly
about  whole  day,  crying,  and  complaining  of  his
anxiety.
1 1  Disinclination  to  work  and  great  lassitude  or  weakness
in  morning.

I  He  has  no  patience  for  work,

I I  Ailments  after  continued  mental  exertion;  indisposi-
tion to  it,  particularly  to  that  form  which  involves
elaboration  and  connection  of  subjective  ideas  inde-
pendently of  external  objects.

■  Easily errs in speaking and writing;  manual clum-

siness.
1 1  After  anger:  chilliness  alternating  with  heat;  vomit-
ing of  bile  and  thirst ;  great  laziness  and  aversion  to
occupy  oneself.

■  Mental  disturbance,  patient  tortured  with  a  fixed  idea.

I  I  Lies  awake  in  bed  in  a  stupid  state,  sometimes  with  a
friendly  expression,  sometimes  staring  right  before  him;
cannot  speak  a  word,  yawns,  groans  and  sighs  occasion-
ally ;  often  puts  hand  to  forehead  and  frowns.  ^Effects
of  wounded  honor.

1  I  From  disappointed  ambition,  bewildered,  talks  inco-
herently; does  everything  he  attempts  to  do  wrong;
heaviness  of  head,  pain  in  stomach  and  small  of  back;
feels  weak,  cannot  sit  up ;  face  now  pale,  with  sharp,
pointed  nose,  then  red,  with  irritated  pulse.

1  1  Is  sullen  and  obstinate ;  would  not  eat  nor  speak  ;  eyes
large,  congested ;  urine  high  colored,  with  mealy  sedi-
ment. ^Mania.

I  I  For  hours  together  sits  still  and  absorbed  (generally
in  forenoon),  betraying  great  moral  and  physical  lan-
guor, looking  before  him  with  disturbed  mien,  and
dull,  sunken  eyes,  as  if  he  felt  no  interest  in  anything,
and  answering  questions,  if  at  all,  incoherently ;  some-
times falling  into  a  restless  slumber  for  ten  or  fifteen
minutes,  out  of  which  he  returns  to  full  consciousness
with  difficulty  and  gradually ;  in  afternoon  and  espe-
cially in  evening  is  much  excited,  becomes  talkative
and  even  chatty,  but  jumps  from  subject  to  subject;
eyes  then  have  a  peculiar  brilliancy,  face  wears  an  ex-
pression of  deep  earnest;  launches  into  high-flying,
fantastic  plans,  fancies  himself  rich  and  wants  to  make
presents  of  thousands,  and  makes  large  useless  pur-
chases; does  not  consider  himself  ill;  has  not  slept  for
nearly  a  fortnight,  brooding  all  night  long  over  a  law-


113  NUX  VOMICA.

suit,  by  which  he  may  gain  or  lose  a  million ;  head  hot,
skin  dry,  complexion  yellowish,  pupils  contracted,
tongue  coated,  pulse  hard  and  small,  slightly  accele-
rated ;  constipation ;  replies  reluctantly  and  slowly  to
physician's  questions,  and  takes  it  in  bad  part  if  not
allowed  to  read  indictment  for  said  lawsuit,  a  confused,
irrational  piece  of  work,  on  which  he  has  been  working
all  night. ^Insanity.

I  I  Three  months  ago  mental  shock,  since  then  fears  to  be
alone,  and  menses,  formerly  regular,  have  not  appeared;
in  morning  as  if  stupefied  ;  starting  in  sleep,  nocturnal
sweats ;  pain  in  pit  of  stomach  when  touched  or
pressed  ;  frequent  risings  in  throat  and  feeling  as  if  she
would  choke;  roaring  in  ears;  shooting  headache  from
crown  to  poll,  with  rigor;  inclination  to  sleep;  fear  of
knives  and  the  like,  lest  she  should  kill  herself  or
others ;  attacks  commence  with  palpitation,  the  fever
rises  to  brain  and  she  is  a  prey  to  anxiety ;  thoughts
distracted;  heat  breaks  out  and  yawning  closes  attack.

I  Mania  puerperalis  from  excitement,  sleeplessness  and
prostration ;  had  menorrhagia,  and  for  the  subsequent
weakness  drank  much  whisky  and  strong  coffee ;
cachectic  appearance;  large,  dim,  languid  eyes;  lies  in
bed  half  uncovered,  sits  up  and  then  lies  down  again ;
constantly  complaining,  criticising  or  explaining,  at
times  words  are  well  chosen,  at  others  uses  high-sounding
phrases ;  as  soon  as  she  recognized  physician  she  spoke
of  the  imperfection  of  medical  knowledge  and  declared
it  an  error  that  one  could  not  live  without  a  heart,  in-
asmuch as  she  felt  very  well  without  one,  it  having
come  away  with  the  afterbirth  to  which  it  had  grown
fast,  the  nurse  having  separated  the  two  before  her
eyes ;  complains  of  her  husband,  says  he  wishes  to  con-
vince her  she  is  sick,  although  she  is  able  to  dance  and
sing;  makes  grotesque-  motions  and  wild  leaps,  but
soon  sinks  down  breathless ;  nymphomania ;  often  en-
raged; frequently  sips  at  a  bowl  of  warm  sugar- water,
declaring  it  will  form  her  a  new  heart ;  bloating  of  ab-
domen ;  epigastric,  hepatic  and  uterine  regions  sensi-
tive to  pressure ;  stool  absent  five  to  six  days ;  very
frequent  and  profuse  discharge  of  pale,  watery  urine;
white  mucous  discharge  from  vagina.

I  Dementia  paralytica.

^  Sensorium. ■  Fainting  sort  of  giddiness.

I I  Intoxicated  confusion  in  head.

1 1  Intoxication  or  drunkenness  of  previous  day,  with  van-
ishing of  sight  and  hearing;  <  after  dinner  and  in
sun ;  heaviness  of  head  in  morning.

VOL.  VIII. — 8.


NUX  VOMICA.  114

lA  stupid  feeling  in  head  if  he  holds  it  erect;  if  he  bends
it  down  a  sensation  in  forehead  as  if  something  heavy
fell  into  it,

■  I Stupefaction,  confusion  as  from  nightly  reveling;  dul-

ness  of  head.

I  iSensation  as  if  his  head  were  immensely  larger  than  his

body,  as  large  as  a  church.

I I  Vertigo :  on  rising  from  seat,  or  bed,  or  on  raising  head;
with  vanishing  of  sight  or  loss  of  hearing ;  preceded  by
tensive  headache,  with  heat  in  forehead ;  comes  sud-
denly like  an  electric  shock ;  at  night  awaking  him
from  sleep ;  <  from  tea  or  coffee ;  after  stooping  or
when  looking  up,  she  must  clutch  something  to  keep
from  falling;  objects  seem  to  move  around  him;  from
abdominal  complaints,  with  digestive  disturbances,
flatulency,  constipation,  portal  stasis ;  in  hemorrhoidal
subjects;  after  suppressed  hemorrhoidal  flow;  with  in-
ability to  think ;  loss  of  consciousness ;  falls  forward ;  as
if  he  would  fall  to  one  side  or  backward;  when  stoop-
ing; as  if  brain  were  turning  in  a  circle;  as  if  room  were
whirling;  reeling,  in  morning  and  after  dinner;  with
pains  in  forehead,  heat  and  redness  of  face;  with,  ob-
scuration of  vision  and  staggering;  while  eating  and
immediately  after  eating;  when  walking  and  even  when
lying  down  in  bed;  from  sedentary  habits,  alcoholic
drinks,  smoking,  coffee,  opium,  smell  of  flowers,  gas,
etheric  oils,  etc.;  with  nausea;  after  typhoid;  from
night  watching  and  mental  overexertion.

■  Syncope:  in  morning,  at  night,  or  soon  after  dinner;  in

open  air ;  congestion  to  head  and  chest ;  in  pregnancy ;
in  persons  worn  out  by  mental  labor  or  addicted  to  ex-
cessive use  of  spirits;  nausea,  pale  face,  scintillations
before  eyes,  or  obscurations  of  sight,  pains  in  stomach,
anguish,  trembling.
1 1  Apoplexy:  falls  to  floor- unconscious ;  tendency  to  fall
backward ;  face  pale ;  head  hot ;  pulse  quick,  hard ;
automatic  motions  of  r.  hand  towards  mouth;  whole
1.  side  completely  paralyzed  and  motionless;  mouth
distorted;  loss  of  speech;  stertorous  breathing;  drop-
ping of  jaw,  paralysis;  attack  preceded  by  vertigo,
buzzing  in  ears,  nausea  and  urging  to  vomit;  legs
cold  and  without  sensation ;  after  a  hearty  dinner,
or  abuse  of  liquor  or  coffee ;  of  high  livers,  leading  an
easy  life ;  with  ptyalism  ;  paralysis,  particularly  of  lower
limbs;  when  spoken  to  opens  eyes,  stutters  and  sinks
again  into  sleep ;  eyes  muddy,  lustreless,  with  purulent
matter  in  canthi ;  organs  of  deglutition  and  lower  limbs
completely  paralyzed ;  maxilla  on  r.  side  relaxed ;  pulse
full,  sluggish ;  grasps  at  head  with  1.  hand.


115  NUX  VOMICA.

^  Inner  Head.  1 1 In  forehead :  tensive  headache;  as  if  it  were
pressed  in,  at  night  and  in  morning,  <  on  exposing
head  to  cold  air;  pressive  pain  as  if  he  had  not  slept
enough;  sensation  as  if  eyes  would  be  pressed  out;
lacerating  pains ;  >  when  leaning  head  against  some-
thing or  when  Ij'ing  on  back ;  burning  on  awaking  and
after  eating;  heat,  with  morning  headache;  headache,
with  large,  difficult  stools;  periodical  headache,  sore  as
from  ulceration,  with  constipation;  pain,  above  eyes,
with  fainting  spells ;  pain,  extending  through  base  of
brain  to  occiput.

I  Pressive  headache  over  1.  eye,  and  pain  in  bones  as  if  he
received  a  bruise;  could  not  open  eye.

I  I  Drawing  pain,  first  in  temples,  then  in  forehead,  then
in  occiput.

iSemilateral  headache:  as  if  from  pressing  a  nail  into
brain ;  from  excessive  use  of  coff'ee.

I  Violent  jerking  or  dull  stitches  in  1.  hemisphere  of  brain,
extending  from  orbit  towards  parietal  bone  and  occiput,
soon  after  eating.

I  Stitches  and  pressing  on  one  side  of  head,  commencing

early in morning and increasing in severity until
patient  becomes  unconscious  or  half  delirious.

I I  Bruised  sensation  of  brain,  generally  one  (r.)  sided  ;  >
lying  on  painless  side.

I  I  Tearing  headache  after  eating,  with  a  feeling  of  heat  in
cheeks  and  a  chilly  sensation  over  bod}'-,  at  least  in
hands.

I  I  Drawing-tearing,  jerking  or  burning  pain  in  head  in

morning.

I I  Pressing  headache,  as  if  skull  were  pressed  asunder.

■  Head  feels  as  if  it  would  split  and  scalp  is  sore  to  touch,

pressure  on  head  with  hands  >  pain. ^Pregnancy.

■  I  Stunning  or  stupefying  headache  in  morning,  after  eat-

ing, and  in  sunshine.

I  Brain :  as  if  beaten  or  cleft  with  an  axe ;  as  if  a  pin  were
sticking  in  it ;  contusive  pain ;  feels  shattered  when
walking ;  seems  bruised  and  beaten ;  excessive  sensi-
tiveness to  motion  and  walking ;  as  if  dashed  to  pieces ;
seems  to  shake  when  walking  or  running  in  open  air;
as  if  revolving  rapidly  on  an  axis.

I  I  Headache  in  morning,  a  constant  picking  (dull  sticking,
throbbing) ;  <  on  stooping,  when  it  seems  as  if  a  piece
of  forehead  would  fall  out.

I  I  Throbbing  pain  in  head. ^Haematemesis.

I  I  Pinching  headache.

I  Pressive,  boring  pains  in  head,  beginning  in  morning,
>  by  evening ;  dim  sight,  sour  vomiting  and  palpita-


NUX  VOMICA.  116

tion ;  <  from  mental  exertion,  light,  noise,  coffee  and
after  eating.

■  Pressing  as  if  something  heavy  were  sinking  down  into

head.
1 1  Headache,  in  morning,  as  if  he  had  not  slept  at  night;
heaviness  in  head.

I  I  Whizzing  in  head,  with  vertigo,  or  with  shocks  when

walking.
iHeadache  with  loss  of  consciousness.

I I  Headache  in  middle  of  brain,  on  waking  in  morning;
felt  even  before  opening  ej^es.

I  Congestion  to  head  :  with  burning ;  heat  and  redness  of
bloated  face ;  violent  pains  in  forehead  ;  vertigo ;  nose-
bleed ;  during  stool ;  from  portal  obstruction.

■  Rheumatic  headache,  with  nausea  and  acid  vomiting.

I  I  Headache  accompanied  by  a  feeling  of  suffusion  or  ful-
ness in  eyes. ^Intermittent.

■  Liability  to  take  cold  on  head  mostly  from  dry  wind  or

draft  of  air.

■  In  vertex:  pressive  and  throbbing  headache,  from  fixed

attention  of  mind;  as  if  a  nail  were  driven  into  it;  as  if
skull  were  pressed  asunder.

■  ■In  occiput:  pressive  headache  in  morning,  immediately

after  rising;  pressed  outward  from  both  sides  as  if  skull
were  forced  asunder,  with  heat  in  brain,  momentarily  >
by  pressure  of  hands ;  intense  headache  with  dizziness,
pains  in  eyes  and  deranged  stomach ;  headache  at  time
of  menses  as  from  an  ulcer  in  brain,  as  if  suppurating,
<  lying  down;  bruised  aching;  tearing,  extending
into  nape  of  neck,  with  anxious  sweat;  drawing,  as  if
chilly  ;  pains,  with  bilious  attacks.

■  Periodic  cephalalgia  of  an  aching,  drawing  character,

and  on  one  side  of  head,  which  seems  bruised  or  jarred.

■  Headache  of  hysterical  women,  appearing  as  a  boring

clavus,  or  as  a  fearful  pressure  in  region  of  temple,  com-
pelling them  to  lie  down,  accompanied  by  vomiting.
■Headaches  of  men  of  sedentary  habits  accustomed  to
great  mental  exertion ;  pressure  in  frontal  region  and
temples;  appearing  early  in  morning  on  awaking;
noises  in  ears  when  sitting  up,  synchronous  with  beats
of  heart;  impaired  digestion ;  constipation ;  despondency ;
sympathetic,  from  disturbances  in  ganglionic  nervous
system.

■  Headaches  of  strong,  plethoric  adults,  with  congestion,

giddiness,  flushed  face,  constipation.

■  Headaches  in  young  people  of  both  sexes who have

become  debilitated  by  masturbation ;  suddenly  when
looking  at  an  object  they  see  only  that  part  on  which  the


117  NUX  VOMICA.

eye  is  fixed,  everything  else  seeming  to  swim  around
this  point ;  when  looking  at  hand  see  only  one  finger
or  see  but  one  leg  of  a  chair ;  printed  matter  is  spelled
out  with  difficulty,  cannot  take  in  the  whole  word  at  a
glance;  flashes  from  external  canthi  towards  pupils,
like  a  circle  of  fire ;  lachrymation ;  then  a  severe  head-
ache comes  on,  gradually  growing  worse,  with  vomiting.

Aggravation  :  from  mental  exertion,  chagrin  or  anger ;  in
open  air;  on  awaking;  after  eating;  from  abuse  of
coffee  or  spirits ;  from  sour  stomach ;  in  sunshine ;  on
stooping ;  from  light  and  noise ;  when  moving  or  open-
ing eyes ;  from  leading  an  inactive  life ;  on  coughing ;
from  high  living  or  highly  seasoned  food ;  in  stormy
weather;  after  drugging;  from  masturbation;  from
constipation  or  hemorrhoids.

Amelioration :  in  a  warm  room ;  when  leaning  head
against  something  or  when  lying  on  back  (frontal  head-
ache); when  at  rest;  when  lying  on  painless  side;
when  wrapping  head  up;  after  rising  in  morning
(excepting  sick-headaches).

iBrain  fag  particularly  in  early  stages;  irritable  or  hypo-
chondriacal state  of  mind.

I  I  Child  constantly  passes  its  hand  over  its  face  as  if  try-
ing to  brush  something  off;  spasms,  which  are  renewed
when  feet  are  touched. IBrain  disease.

iCerebro-spinal  meningitis;  "explosive  form;"  shocks
starting  suddenly  from  one  portion  of  body  to  brain ;
attended  by  numbness  and  paralytic  drawing  in  limbs;
fear  of  sleeping ;  frightful  dreams  ;  irritable  humor  and
hypochondriasis.

■  Threatened  cerebral  softening  when  sedentary  habits  and

mental  effort,  as  well  as  intemperance,  have  operated
to  produce  the  disease ;  especially,  too,  in  persons  who  ,
have  been  living  too  high;  memory  fickle;  headache
comes  with  every  attempt  to  exert  mind ;  vertigo  on
awaking  in  morning;  vacillating  gait.
*  Outer  Head. iHead  inclined  towards 1.  shoulder  at  an
angle  of  fortj^-five  degrees;  contraction  could not be
overcome  voluntarily  or  involuntarily; without  pain,
>  in  morning,  <  towards  evening.
I  Scalp sensitive to  touch or to wind;  > from  being
warmly  covered.

■  Integuments  intensely  sore,  as  if  bruised.

■  Hair  on  occiput  (scalp)  seems  painful.

■  ■Liable  to  take  cold  on  head,  mostly  from  dry  wind,  or

from  a  draft.

■  Fetid  sweat  on  one-half  of  head  and  face  which  is  cold,

with  anxiety  and  dread  of  uncovering  head;  sweat  >
pain.


NUX  VOMICA.  118

*  Sight  and  Eyes, i  Atrophy  of  optic  nerve.

iHypersesthesia  of  retina;  pains  on  top  of  head ;  sleepless;
awakens  irritable  in  morning;  intolerance  of  light,  <
in  morning;  least  attempt  to  use  eyes  followed  by  in-
tense pains  and  spasmodic  motion  of  different  ocular
muscles;  excoriating  lachrymation.

■  Vision  extremely  sensitive.

1 1  Photophobia:  in  morning;  with  obscuration  of  vision.

I  I  Streaks  like  lightning  before  eyes.

I  Glittering  appearance  just  outside  of  distinct field of

vision;  also  black  and  grey  points  floating  before  eyes.
I  I  Double  vision  for  one  week,  followed  by  drooping  of  1.

upper  lid  and  complete  paralysis  of  all  filaments  of

third  pair  of  nerves  for  three  days.

■  Diplopia from muscular asthenopia, from paralytic

strabismus.

I  Awakens  at  4  a.m.  with  mental  anguish;  eyeballs  ach-
ing, vision  impaired,  despondent;  fears  she  will  lose
her  sight.

I  I  Dimness  and  glimmering  of  sight;  severe  pains  through
temples;  can  see  better  on  cloudy  day;  when  it  begins
to  grow  dark  can  see  nearly  as  well  as  ever;  if  he  sees  a
team,  away  off,  coming  towards  him,  it  looks  like  two;
after  eating  belching  of  wind;  tongue  cracked ;  trem-
bling of  hands;  tremor  all  over;  pulse  thin,  weak,  70;
face  of  dirty  hue ;  has  taken  many  drugs.  ^Tobacco
poisoning.

I  One  morning  while  reading  noticed  a  blur  before  vision

and  on  covering  r.  eye  found  he  could  not  see  with  1. ;
vision  nearly  returned  in  afternoon,  but  was  again  lost
next  morning  and  did  not  again  return;  r.  v.  f^  diffi-
culty; 1.  v.,  fingers  at  six  feet;  no  improvement  with
glasses;  ophthalmoscope  showed  no  change  in  refrac-
tion, media  or  fundus,  only  some  sensitiveness  to  re-
flected light,  which  caused  a  stinging  j^ain  in  ball.
^Tobacco  amaurosis.

I I  Impaired  vision  in  consequence  of  habitual  use  of  in-
toxicating drinks.

■  Blurring  of  sight  caused  by  overheating.

■  Weakened  power  of  accommodation  from  overexerting

iChorio-retinitis,  with  throbbing  pain,  especially  in  1.
eye,  <  in  morning,  ball  sore  to  touch,  upper  part  of
sclera  bright  red,  burning  pain  in  eye  not  >  by  bath-
ing, symptoms  <  on  lying  down.

I  Choroiditis  disseminata  in  persons  addicted  to  use  of
stimulants.

I  I  Iritis  syphilitica  with  moderate  ciliary  injection,  some


119  "  NUX  VOMICA.

photophobia,  hot  lachrymation,  <  in  morning,  sensi-
tiveness to  air.

■  Dilatation  of  pupils  from  spinal  irritation.

I  Ulcers  and  pustules  on  cornea,  with  excessive  photopho-
bia; morning  aggravation,  much  lachrymation;  sharp
darting  pain  in  eye  and  over  it,  in  some  cases  extend-
ing to  top  of  head  and  always  <  in  morning ;  burning
pain  in*eyes  and  lids;  tearing  pain  in  eye  at  night,
awakening  from  sleep ;  eye  feels  pressed  out  whenever
she  combs  her  hair  ;  sensation  of  hot  water  in  eye;  pain
in  lower  lid  as  if  something  were  cutting  it ;  sometimes
relief  from  pain  by  bathing  eyes  in  cold  water.

■  Large  central  ulcers  of  cornea,  which  have  been  cauter-

ized ;  excessive  photophobia  in  morning,  no  bloodvessels
running  into  it ;  sharp  darting  pains.
I  Neuroparalytic  keratitis.

■  Inflammation  of  sclerotica,  with  stitches  and  aversion  to

light  of  sun.
lEcchymosis  of  sclerotic;  effusion  of  blood  beneath  con-
junctiva, often  following  debauchery  or  sitting  up  late
at  night  to  study,  in  persons  subject  to  dyspepsia.


blood  in  white  of  eyes.

I I  Exudation  of  blood  from  eyes.

■  Trachoma  and  follicular  conjunctivitis  occurring  only  in

Summer  and  <  in  morning.

■  Old  cases  of  trachoma,  if  complicated  with  pannus,  that

have  had  much  treatment.

■  Painless  injection  of  whites  of  eyes.

■  Swelling  of  eyes  with  red  streaks  in  whites,  and  pressive-

tensive  pain.

■  The  eyes  run  water,  as  in  a  moist  inflammation  of  eyes

or  as  in  a  stopped  coryza.

I  [Smarting,  itching  in  lids,  canthi  filled  with  purulent
mucus;  eyes  inflamed;  inability  to  bear  daylight,  es-
pecially in  morning;  tearing  pains  in  eyes  awaking
him  at  night;  hard,  tardy  stools;  hemorrhoids.  /?Oph-
thalmia.

1  I  Tearing  pains  in  eyes;  edges  of  lids  red  and  very  sen-
sitive to  touch  ;  on  opening  eyes  in  morning  cannot  tol-
erate light;  profuse  lachrymation;  bruised  pain  in
small  of  back  ;  stiff  fingers ;  old  gouty  subjects.  ^Arth-
ritic ophthalmia.

■  Ophthalmia  neonatorum,  lids  much  swollen,  bleed  easily

and  child  is  troubled  with  vomiting,  constipation  and
flatulent  colic.

■  Rheumatic  ophthalmia,  at  commencement.

■Severe  scrofulous  ophthalmia,  lies  upon  face  with  a  ban-


NUX  VOMICA.  120

dage  tied  over  eyes ;  eyes  could  not  be  examined  on  ac-
count of  excessive  sensitiveness.
I  Ophthalmia; inner canthi more  inflamed  than  other
parts ;  bloody  exudation ;  smarting  like  salt ;  all  <  in
morning.

■  Severe  pain  in  eyes  during  night,  with  conjunctival  in-

jection, brought  on  by  overuse,  especially  by  artificial
light.

■  Conjunctivitis; <  in  morning,  agglutination  of  lids  and

photophobia.

■  Conjunctivitis  vernalis.

■  Indolent  redness  of  ball  of  eye  remaining  after  primary

disease  has  been  cured.

I  I  Eyes  stand  full  of  water,  with  lachrymation  while  yawn-
ing in  morning.

I  Margin  of  lid  painful,  as  if  rubbed  sore,  especially  on
touch  and  in  morning.

■  Pressure  in  upper  lids,  especially  in  morning.

■  Canthi  painful,  as  if  sore;  purulent.

■  ■Smarting,  dry  sensation  in  inner  canthi,  in  morning,

in  bed.

■  Lids  burn and  itch, especially  their  margins; < in

morning.

■  Biting  in  eyes,  especially  in  external  canthi,  as  from  salt,

with  lachrymation.

■  Ciliary  blepharitis,  with  smarting  and  dryness  of  lids,

especially  in  morning.

■  Heaviness  and  frequent  closing  of  eyelids.

■  Blepharospasmus;  twitching  of  lids;  blinking.

■  Supraorbital  1.  sided  neuralgia;  eyes  injected.

■  Violent  pressure  in  eyes  after  using  them  ever  so  little.

■  Burning  pain  when  looking  at  a  light,  darting  upward

above  eyes,  with  pain  in  region  of  eyebrow  on  going
to  bed.

■  Itching  in  eyes,  >  from  rubbing.

■  Eyes injected,  yellow  and  watery,  dark rings around

eyes. /9Yellow  fever.

■  ■Yellowness  of  eyes  and  face. ^Jaundice.
. ■Eyeballs  (lower  part)  yellow.

■  ■  Paresis  of  ocular  muscles,  <  from  stimulants  or  tobacco.

■  Strabismus,  periodic  in  character,  especially  <  from  men-

tal excitement  or  when  caused  by  an  injury.

■  Nervous  diseases  of  eye,  with  much  irritability  and  morn-

ing aggravation.

■  Eye  affections  associated  with  liver  disease; symptoms

<  in  morning  and  some  of  them  >  by  cold  bathing.
®  Hearing and Ears. ■  Hyperesthesia  of  auditory  nerve ;
every  sound  affects  painfully.


121  NUX  VOMICA.

■  Hardness  of  hearing:  with  roaring,  singing  and  other

noises ;  with  ringing  in  ears,  which  went  off  when  at
rest  but  reappeared  when  she  moved.

■  Sounds  in  ear :  strong  reverberation,  humming ;  ringing;

hissing;  roaring; whistling;  a  whirring  and  noise  Hke
that  of  a  milL

■  Tearing,  stitching  pains  in  ears,  extending  to  forehead

and  temples ; <  mornings,  evening  in  bed,  and  on  en-
tering a  warm  room.

■  Stitches, pressure and shocks in ear, often violent.

^Otalgia.
'  I  I  Feeling  of  tension  in  ears  when  raising  face ;  on  swal-
lowing, pain  in  ears  as  if  pressed  outward.

■  Otalgic  pains  extending  to  forehead  and  temples  or  into

middle  ears.

■  ■Itching  within ear, through  eustachian tube,  which

compels  frequent  swallowing  and  disturbs  rest  at  night.

■  Meatus  and  auditory  canal  dry  and  sensitive.

^  Smell and Nose. ■■Oversensitive  to  strong  odors,  they
cause  even  fainting.

■  Smell  before  nose  like  old  cheese,  brimstone  or  tinder.

■  Food  and  drink  have  a  putrid  smell  to  her;  cannot  bear

the  odor  of  tobacco.

■  ■Frequent  sneezing;  in  morning, in  bed; after  rising

sudden  fluent  coryza.

■  Internal  nose  inflamed  and  painfully  sensitive.
I  I  Scraping  in  nose  and  throat.

■  Constant  heat  in  nose;  frequent  premonition  of  coryza.

■  ■Coryza: acrid discharge from  nose, which  feels  ob-

structed; dry,  <  at  night,  nose  completely  filled  up,  ■
particularly  out-doors,  but  fluent  in-doors ;  with  stop-
page of  nose,  in  infants  at  breast  or  in  measles ;  fluent
during  day,  and  stopped  at  night;  fluent  in  morning;
after  dinner;  with  scraping  in  throat,  crawling  and
creeping  in  nose  and  sneezing;  stufty,  with  dry  cough;
with  heaviness  in  forehead  and  impatient  mood;  with
great  heat  of  head  and  face ;  initial  stages,  if  caused  by
dry,  cold  weather,  or  by  sitting  in  cold  places,  especially
from  sitting  on  cold  steps ;  with  lachrymation ;  <  in
warm  room,  >  in  open  air ;  hot,  feverish  and  chilly  on
moving.
I  I  Great  sneezing ;  ulcers  in  throat  and  watery  discharge
from  nose,  sore  patches  on  mouth  and  tongue.

■  ■Catarrh,  with  headache,  heat in  face,  chilliness and

much  mucus  in  throat.
I  I  After  catching  cold  during  an  attack  of  coryza,  inflam-
matory pains  in  r.  frontal  sinus  driving  him  almost
frantic ;  severe  tearing  and  stitching  pain  in  r.  side  of


NUX  VOMICA.  ^  122

forehead,  as  if  in  bones;  redness  of  eyelids;  complete
dryness  and  obstruction  of  nose;  pain  <  in  morning,
near  fire;  pulse  hard,  full,  frequent;  constipation.

I  I  Distressing  paroxysms  of  sneezing,  prolonged  until  a
state  of  depression  ensues,  and  preceded  by  excessive
irritation  of  Schneiderian  membrane,  conjunctiva  and
face,  latter  being  heated  at  time  of  paroxysm  and  dur-
ing intervals,  as  if  a  hot  plate  of  iron  were  near  it.
^Hay  fever.

llSnuffles  or  fluent  coryza  of  children.

I  Bloody  mucus  in  nose.

■  Nosebleed:  blood  dark;  in  morning; from  suppressed

hemorrhoidal  flow ; during  sleep,  preceded by  head-
ache and  red  cheeks ;  on  stooping ;  caused  by  simple
congestion  to  head.
I  Soreness,  as  if  ulcerated,  of  margins  of  nostrils,  on  mov-
ing nose,  in  evening.

■  Anterior  angles  of  nostrils  painful  as  if  ulcerated  and  as

if  one  were  cutting  into  a  wound.

■  Intolerable  itching  in  nose.

■  Snoring. ^Apoplexy.

I  I  Picking  at  nose;  pain  in  abdomen. ^Worms.

II  Nose  looks  sharper  and  more  pointed  than  usual.
^Labor.

^  Upper  Face.  Face :  pale,  earthy,  sickly,  sallow ;  pale  and
distressed  (hsematemesis) ;  shrunken ;  blue  margins
around  eyes  (labor) ;  chlorotic ;  intensely  red ;  scarlet,
extending  to  entire  body  ;  red,  feeling  as  though  he  was
sitting  before  a  hot  fire ;  red,  swollen,  bloated ;  blue  or
yellow  around  eyes ;  ■  ■yellow,  with  a  red  flush  ;  yellow
around  mouth  and  nose,  or  around  eyes;  jaundiced.
■Swelling  of  one  cheek,  with  faceache  and  pain  in  cheek-
bone.

■  Daily attacks of  sharp, twisting,  boring,  excruciating

pains  in  both  supraorbital  regions,  frequently  shooting
through  whole  forehead  and  occasionally  into  temples,
extorting  groans  of  agony ;  no  external  applications  and
neither  heat  nor  cold  affect  it;  pain  generally  >  after  sun-
down ;  severest  spells  usually  in  forenoon  and  afternoon ;
sometimes  attacks  are  semilateral;  exceeding  restless-
ness with  the  pain  ;  >  walking  and  moving  and  in  open
air ;  <  in  wet  weather  and  when  overworked ;  thinks
attacks  were  brought  on  by  mental  application  and  long
hours  of  sedentary  occupation  ;  uses  cathartics ;  prolap-
sus ani  at  every  stool,  often  difficult  to  reduce.  ^Facial
neuralgia.

■  Every  morning  at  8  o'clock,pressing,  tearing,  boring  and

stitching  pains  along  course  of  1.  supraorbital  nerve,  pain


123  NUX  VOMICA.

affects  whole  1.  side  of  forehead,  and  when  at  its  height
(about  11  o'clock)  extends  to  1.  eye,  which  then  seems  to
be  pulled  deep  into  orbital  cavity  ;  lachrymation  from  1.
eye;  attack  ceases  2  p.m.;  face  earthy;  despondent,  easily
angered ;  yellowish  coating  on  tongue ;  slimy  taste ;
appetite  impaired  ;  nausea  and  vomiting  during  height
of  attack  ;  epigastrium  sensitive  to  pressure ;  stool  every
three  or  four  days.

1 1  Tearing  pain  in  the  infraorbital  and  middle  branch
of  trigeminus ;  clear  water  from  eye  and  nostril  of  af-
fected side;  face  numb  ;  after  abuse  of  coffee,  liquors  or
quinine.

iJntermittent  neuralgia,  <  in  infraorbital  branch  of  tri-
facial, always  markedly  <  in  morning;  >  sometimes
when  lying  in  bed.

■  Intermittent  neuralgia  (in  a  man  who  used  liquor  to  some

extent)  coming  on  every  Spring  ;  attack  appeared  at  9
A.M. ;  and  ceased  at  2  p.m.  ;  pain  over  r.  eye  and  in  r.
,  temple.

■  Neuralgia of  trigeminus, early in morning, < from

standing  and  motion.

■  Twitching  of  muscles  of  face ;  in  evening  on  lying  down ;

spasmodic  distortion.

■  Drawing  and  stiffness  in  masseter  muscles.

■  Flow  of  tears from  1.  eye;  pupil enlarged;  flickering

before  eye,  sees  indistinctly,  and  frequently  wipes  eye  as
if  to  remove  obstruction  ;  ringing  and  roaring  in  1.  ear ;
face  distorted,  1.  side  appears  longer  than  r. ;  when
speaking  or  talking,  -corner  of  mouth  is  drawn  far
towards  r.  side,  so  that  face  appears  slanting ;  speaking
and  especially  chewing  difficult;  while  eating,  food
and  drink  escape  from  1.  corner  of  mouth ;  numbness
and  loss  of  sensation  of  1.  side  of  tongue  and  of  affected
side  of  face;  tongue  goes  to  r.  side  when  protruded  ;  at
times  1.  arm  is  weak  and  appears  to  be  asleep ;  vertigi-
nous heaviness  of  head  ;  weakness  of  memory  and  diffi-
cult thinking.

■  Small  papules,  some  of  which  even  contain  pus,  on  fore-

head, cheeks  and  scalp,  a  kind  of  acne.

■  ■Pimples  on  face  from  dissipation.
I  I  Dry  scurf,  very  itchy,  on  face.

■  Frequently  occurring  attacks  of  erysipelas  always  affect-

ing but  one  side  of  face,  preceded  for  several  days  by
severe  cramps  in  stomach.
®  Lower  Face. ■Drawing  tearing  pain  in  jaws.

■  Closure  of  jaws  with  complete  consciousness. ^Tetanus.

■  Paralysis  of  lower  jaw. ^Apoplexy.
I  I  Dry  lips.


NUX  VOMICA.  124

iPainful  peeling  of  lips,  after  excesses;  crusts,  or  ulcers
that  burn  and  stick.

i  I  Corroding  ulcers  in  corners  of  mouth.

I  I  Eruption  of  itching  pimples  on  chin,  the  larger  of  which
are  surrounded  by  redness.

I  Submaxillary  glands  swollen,  with  stinging  on  swal-
lowing.
^^  Teeth  and  Gums,  l  Toothache  :  drawing,  with  stitches  in
an  indefinite  tooth,  or  in  one  row  of  teeth,  especially  on
drawing  in  air  or  just  after  eating,  at  night  or  in  even-
ing ;  drawing,  tearing  <  from  cold  and  mental  exer-
tion ;  drawing,  boring  and  stinging,  in  decayed  teeth  ;
lacerating,  renewed  by  cold  water ;  tearing,  extending
to  head  and  through  bones  of  face ;  constant  sore  pain  ;
burrowing  ;  in  a  hollow  tooth,  extending  to  head,  if  air
enters  mouth ;  healthy  tooth  painful  and  feels  loose,  or
teeth  seem  too  long,  with  jerking,  shooting  pains  in
lower  jaw;  drawing  and  burning  in  nerves  of  tooth,  as
if  it  were  wrenched  out,  accompanied  by  violent  stitches
which  affect  whole  body,  particularly  on  inspiration ;
boring,  gnawing,  tearing  pain  on  one  side ;  jerking,  or
rheumatic  pains  attended  with  pricking ;  <  when  read-
ing or  thinking ;  >  from  external  warmth  ;  <  after  eat-
ing, drinking  wine  or  coffee,  and  from  exercise ;  glands
beneath  lower  jaw  painful ;  with  swollen  face.

I  I  For  six  weeks  dull  toothache  in  1.  upper  molar ;  <  two
hours  after  dinner  (2  p.m.),  and  at  night  by  lying  on
painful  side,  and  by  cold  drinks;  >  while  eating  and
from  warm  drinks.

I  i  Looseness  of  teeth.

1  I  Swelling  of  gums,  which  seems  about  to  burst;  Igum-
boils.

I  Gums:  swollen;  bleeding;  white.  ^Scurvy.
"Taste  and  Tongue.  iiTaste:  bad,  in  morning;  putrid,
low  down  in  throat,  on  hawking ;  sour  in  morning  or
after  eating  or  drinking;  bitter;  coffee,  milk,  beer,
water,  do  not  taste  right ;  bread  tastes  bitter ;  food  is
tasteless.

■  Tongue:  heavy,  noticed  in  talking;  speech  difficult,
lisping ;  unable  to  articulate ;  dry ;  heavily  coated
white  or  yellow ;  white  or  brownish ;  black  and  dark
red,  cracked  on  edges ;  first  half  of  tongue  clean,  some-
times red  and  shining,  posterior  covered  with  deep  fur ;
red,  sore  and  yellow  at  base ;  painful  blisters.

i  I  Glossitis  with  paralysis;  one-sided  inflammation;  in
persons  of  intemperate  habits.

1  I  Pain  in  edges  of  tongue  as  if  constantly  pierced  by
needles,  <  after  eating  and  from  w^ashing  face  in  cold
water;  muscles  about  mouth  spasmodically  drawn.


125  NUX  VOMICA.

^^  Inner  Mouth,  l Breath:  offensive,  particularly  in  morn-
ing and  after  dinner;  from  indigestion;  sour-smelling;
putrid.

■  Dryness  of  mouth:  in  morning,  without  thirst,  as  if  he

had  taken  alcoholic  stimulants ;  as  if  tongue  stuck  to

palate,  though  with much  accumulation  of  saliva  in

fauces.
I  I  Frequent  accumulation  of  saliva  in  mouth.
I  Roof  of  mouth,  throat,  gums  inflamed  and  swollen.
I  I  Elongation  and  swelling  of  uvula ;  tip  of  uvula  oedema-

tous,  touches  root  of  tongue.

I  1  Mucous  membrane  of  uvula  very  red  and  swollen,  with

sensation  of  ball  in  throat  and  constant  desire  to
swallow.
iSmall  aphthous  ulcers  in  mouth  and  throat,  with  putrid
smell ;  bloody  saliva  runs  out  at  night ;  gums  scorbutic ;
coagulated  blood  is  spit  out ;  voice  altered,  as  if  speak-
ing with  a  full  mouth ;  stomacace  of  gastric  origin.
^^  Throat.  H Scraped  feeling  in  throat  as  after  heartburn;  as
if  skin  was  scratched  off  with  a  sharp  instrument,  not
noticed  on  swallowing.

I I  Throat:  rough  from catarrh;  painful  as  if  raw  and
sore,  at  palate  ;  provokes  coughing  or  hawking.

IIA  sore  rawness  in  fauces  only  noticed  in  drawing  in

cold  air,  not  on  swallowing.
I  Sore  throat,  with  sensation  of  swelling,  or  as  if  a  plug

were  in  throat.

■  Swelling  of  uvula,  stinging  pains.
I  1  Swelling  of  tonsils.

llStitches  into  ear,  when  swallowing;  small  fetid  ulcers
in  throat ;  cases  of  a  "  nervous  "  character.

■  Throat  <  while  eating  and  still  more  afterwards.

■  Swallowing:  impeded;  stitches  in  throat  and  sensation

as  if  it  was  too  narrow  or  constricted.

■  Pain  as  if  pharynx  was  constricted,  or  as  if  a  plug  were

sticking  in  throat,  during  empty  swallowing.
■Stricture  of  oesophagus ;  aroused  at  night  with  a  feeling
of  impending  suffocation.

■  Drawing pain  in  muscles  of  throat,  with  a  desire  to

scratch.

■  Accumulation  of  tenacious  mucus  in  throat,  difficult  to

detach. (^Chronic  bronchitis.

■  Allays  irritation  caused  by  topical  applications,  especi-

ally rawness  and  scraping.

■  Angina:  after catching cold, at onset, slight painful

throbbing;  with  liver  affection.
I  I  Diphtheria  commencing  on  r.  side  of  throat,  and  ex-
tending over both  tonsils;  strong diphtheritic odor;


NUX  VOMICA.  126

complete  prostration ;  acute  pains  in  back  and  limbs ;
roughness,  rawness  and  scraping  in  throat;  deglutition
almost  impossible  on  account  of  severe  scraping  pain
on  attempting  to  swallow ;  chilliness  on  least  motion  ;
<  at  4  A.M.  and  4  p.m.
I  1  Dark  grey  patches  on  r.  tonsil ;  fauces  purplish ;  stitches
through  ears  during  deglutition ;  very  much  concerned
about  himself;  chilly  when  uncovering;  perspiration
smells  like  horse  urine ;  <  4  p.m. ^Diphtheria.

I  I  Diphtheria;  great  exhaustion and prostration;  incli-

nation to  sleep,  awaking  from  short  spells  of  sleep,  and
saying,  "  Oh,  I  am  so  much  better  !  "
■  Diphtheria,  during  convalescence,  partial  paralysis  of
lower  extremities;  obscuration  of  sight;  swelling  of
uvula  and  constriction  of  pharynx.
^*  Appetite,  Thirst.  Desires,  Aversions,  i  Sudden  feeling
of  repletion  after  swallowing  a  small  quantity  of  food.

I I  No  appetite,  with,  complete  loss  of  energy. ^Dyspepsia.
I  Want  of  appetite  and  constant  nausea; food  disgusts.

I  Hunger :  yet  aversion  to  food ;  with  fear  of  eating  (gas-
tralgia) ;  excessive,  with  aversion  to  bread,  or  periodic
bulimia  in  afternoons;  readily  satisfied  (tuberculosis
mesenterica) ;  twenty-four  hours  or  so  before  a  spell  of
dyspepsia ;  ravenous  after  drinking  beer.

I  Thirst:  drinking  is  soon  followed  by  qualmishness;
burning,  with  burning  in  throat;  with  aversion  to
water ;  for  beer  during  chill ;  for  milk ;  in  morning,
with  aversion  to  water  and  beer.

I  Longing  :  for  brandy,  beer,  fat  food  which  disagrees,  or

chalk.

I I  Aversion  :  to  meat;  usual  food  and  drink,  and  custom-
ary tobacco  and  coffee ;  to  water ;  to  ale ;  to  food  just
eaten.

^^  Eating  and  Drinking,  i After  eating:  sour  taste;  press-
ure in  stomach  an  hour  or  two  after  a  meal,  with  hypo-
chondriacal mood  ;  pyrosis ;  tightness  about  waist,  must
loosen  clothing ;  confused,  cannot  use  mind ;  two  or
three  hours  after  a  meal,  epigastrium  bloated,  with
pressure  as  from  a  stone  in  stomach.

I  Milk  sours  on  stomach.

I  I  Feeling  badly  after  eating  bread  or  sour  things.
^Chlorosis.

I  1  Heat  in  head  when  eating.

I  1  After  aromatics  in  food  or  as  medicine,  particularly
ginger,  pepper,  etc.,  and  after  almost  any  kind  of  so-
called  "  hot "  medicines.

PI  Bad  effects  of  coffee  ;  alcoholic  drinks ;  debauchery.
^•^  Hiccough,  Belching,  Nausea  and  Vomiting, i  Hiccough :


127  NUX  VOMICA.

frequent,  violent ;  after  hot  or  cold  drinks ;  from  over-
eating.
I  Belching:  difficult;  wants  to  belch,  but  a  kind  of  oesoph-
ageal constriction  seems  to  prevent  it.

I  Eructations :  sour  or  bitter ;  putrid  in  morning ;  of  water

in  mouth  after  eating  ;  regurgitation  of  food.

■  Heartburn:  with  waterbrash ;  <  before  breakfast ;  with

drunkards.

I I  Qualmishness :  immediately  after  eating;  about  heart,
with  nausea  and  accumulation  of  saliva ;  in  epigastrium
and  abdomen ;  during  morning  sweat.

I A  kind  of  faint  feeling,  with  nausea  and  flushes  of  h
going  off  when  lying  down.

1 1  Nausea:  constant;  in  morning;  affecting  body  here
and  there,  as  if  everything  was  fermenting ;  after  din-
ner; after  anxiety;  from  smoking;  with  fainting.

I  Vomiting :  food ;  drink ;  bile ;  oily,  greasy  or  black  sub-
stances; slime;  sour  mucus;  blood,  after  suppressed
hemorrhoidal  flow ;  before  breakfast ;  of  food  that  was
taken  a  day  or  two  before  (contraction  of  pylorus);
fecal ;  of  pregnant  women  ;  of  greenish  matter  or  undi-
gested food;  in  periodical  attacks.

■  Sickness  from  riding  in  cars  or  seasickness,  deathly  pale-

ness with  ineff'ectual  attempts  to  vomit.
I  Feels  very  sick  at  stomach  and  feels  "If  I  could  only
vomit,  I  would  be  so  much  better."

■  Empty  vomiturition;  straining  to  vomit  (in  drunkards).

■  ■Retching,  as  if  to  vomit,  while  hawking  mucus  from

fauces.

■  Green  vomiting  and  gastric  disorder  remaining  after  a

severe  case  of  cholera  and  the  proper  cholera  evacua-
tions had  ceased.
'^  Scrobiculum and Stomach. ■Spasmodic  pressive  pain
from  pharynx  to  pit  of  stomach,

■  Epigastric region: distended; sensitive to pressure;

pressure  as  from  a  stone;  <  mornings  and  after  meals;
pressure  and  tension  with  tension  opposite,  between
shoulder  blades;  fulness  with  belching  which  affords
relief ;  fluttering,  sinking  feeling  with  palpitation ;  dis-
agreeable sensation  ascending  to  throat,  choking  him
and  stopping  his  breath  ;  scraped  sensation ;  as  if  some-
thing was  twisted  about ;  burning  anxiety  and  pressure ;
pain  in  a  small  space  after  a  meal;  sinking;  pain  and
soreness.

■  ■  In  stomach  :  pressure,  after  eating,  as  from  a  stone ;  pain

and  sense  of  weight  and  heat;  fulness  after  eating ;  ten-
sion ;  throbbing ;  constant  pain ;  cramp,  clawing  after
midnight,  towards  morning,  as  from  a  purge,  changing


NUX  VOMICA.  128

to  a  burning ;  griping,  lacerating,  constrictive,  pinching
pain ; constrictive colic with waterbrash ; colic and
pressure  extending  to  shoulders,  in  morning,  fasting  and
after  eating.
1 1  Colic  of  brandy  and  coffee  drinkers.

■  Burning  in  stomach;  at  pylorus.

1 1  Region  of  stomach  sensitive  to  pressure;  cannot  bear

tight  clothing.
I  I  Loss  of  appetite ;  great  thirst ;  after  eating,  sensation  as

if  food  remained  above  stomach,  and  was  being  pressed

back  into  mouth,  followed by  belching  of  wind  and

rumbling  and  gurgling.

■  Neurotic  and  congestive  gastralgia; light  pressure <

pain,  but  harder  pressure  >  ;  bending  forward  gives
immediate  relief;  vomiting  relieves,  so  that  paroxysm
of  pain  ceases  for  time  being.

I  I  Dull,  gradually  increasing  pain  in  pit  of  stomach,  pass-
ing, after  reaching  its  acme,  to  that  part  of  spinal  col-
umn corresponding  to  pit  of  stomach,  and  becoming
fixed  there ;  as  soon  as  this  pain,  which  he  cannot  clearly
from  most  excruciating  abdominal  colic;  abdominal
walls  spasmodically  drawn  to  spine ;  abdomen  sinks  in
and  he  vomits,  even  as  much  as  forty  times,  large  quan-
tities of  bilious  matter.

I  1  For  many  years  spasms  of  stomach  ;  about  3  o'clock  p.m.
has  a  pressure  and  a  pressing  together,  at  same  time  a
trembling  of  whole  body  and  debility  with  formication
in  limbs.

I  I  After  falling  and  striking  region  of  stomach  two  years

previously ;  severe  pains  in  stomach  on  taking  least  par-
ticle of  food,  and  in  evening;  during  attack  screams,  and
rolls  upon  floor. ^Traumatic  cardialgia.

I I  Clawing,  cramping  pains  in  stomach,  with  pressure  and
tension  between  scapulse ;  pains  extend  to  chest  or  down
back  to  anus,  with  urging  to  stool. ^Gastralgia.

1 1  Gastralgia  <  from  food,  >  from  hot  drinks  and  from
belching ;  morning  before  breakfast.

■  Extreme  gastric  irritability;  food  comes  upas  soon  as

swallowed ;  in  patients  who  have  been  prostrated  by
disease,  in  very  excitable  children,  and  in  men  when
they  have  indulged  in  excessive  eating  or  debauchery.

1 1  Chronic  dyspepsia;  atonic  state  of  digestive  organs;
manifold  symptoms  of  a  nervous  nature.

1 1  Nervous  and  dyspeptic  troubles  caused  by  worry  and
much  mental,  with  too  little  bodily  exertion,  in  busi-
ness men.

I  Catarrh  of  stomach  with  excessive  acidity  and  flatulency,
<  from  starchy  foods.


129  NUX  VOMICA.

1 1  Dyspepsia:  after  abuse  of  drugs;  business  anxiety;
sedentary  habits  ;  long  watching  and  debauchery,  after
too  high  living.

I  I  Patient  lay  as  if  dead ;  hand  cold  as  a  corpse,  with  cold,
clammy  sweat;  no  pulse  at  wrist;  voice  not  above  a
whisper ;  tongue  raw ;  teeth  were  set ;  burning  pain  in
stomach,  everything  taken,  even  smallest  quantity  of
water  immediately  vomited ;  life  had  been  despaired  of
and  she  was  given  up  to  die. ^Gastritis.

I  I  Sudden  and  without  apparent  cause  loss  of  conscious-
ness with  vomiting  of  about  a  pound  of  black,  coagu-
lated blood ;  similar  masses  of  stool. ^Hsematemesis.

I  Vomiting,  whether  she  has  eaten  or  not;  swallowing  a
mouthful  of  water  causes  spasmodic  contractions  of
stomach  and  vomiting;  scrobiculus  cordis  sensitive  to
pressure ;  vomited  matter  consists  of  food  and  coagu-
lated greyish  mucus ;  constipation  with  painful  press-
ing and  urging  during  an  evacuation ;  menses  scanty.
^Perforating  ulcer  of  stomach.
^*  Hypochondria,  i  Sense  of  stricture  or  tightness  around
hypochondriac  region ;  constrictive  pain.

1  iRegion  of  liver:  <  from  pressure,  must  loosen  clothing ;
pressure,  shooting,  stinging ;  fine  sticking  pain,  stitches
<  from  motion  or  contact;  fulness;  dragging  pain;
throbbing  as  if  an  ulcer  would  form  (hepatic  abscess).

IB  Liver  swollen,  indurated,  sensitive,  with  pressure  and
stinging;  cannot  bear  tight  clothing;  caused  by  high
living,  abdominal  plethora,  debauchery.

■  Great  soreness  and  tenderness  in  region  of  liver  with
pain  in  r.  shoulder;  vomiting  at  night  and  diarrhoea.
^Acute  congestion  of  liver.

llBilious  attacks:  loss  of  appetite,  languor,  pain  in  kid-
neys, backache,  skin  yellow,  urine  high  colored.

I  Hepatic  colic,  with  sudden  severe  pain  in  r.  side ;  spasms
of  abdominal  muscles  with  stitching  pains  in  liver.
<?Gall-stones.

IJaundice,  aversion  to  food,  fainting  turns;  gall-stones;
constipation  nearly  always.

I  IJaundice  provoked  by  violent  anger,  abuse  of  quinine,

or  by  too  high  living.

I I  Enlarged  liver  of  drunkards.
I  I  Pain  in  region  of  spleen.

I  I  Face  yellowish ;  very  perceptible  enlargement  of  spleen  ;
distension  of  abdomen ;  weeping  and  hypochondriacal
mood,xlrawing  pain  from  sacrum  and  shoulders  into
thighs ;  vomited  slight  quantity  of  sour-smelling  water ;
sudden  eruption  over  whole  body  of  spots  similar  to
nettlerash,  size  of  hand,  violent  itching  of  eruption.

VOL.  VIII. — 9.


NUX  VOMICA.  130

^^  Abdomen.  iPain  in  abdomen:  violent;  griping-tearing ;
extending  to  chest ;  as  if  intestines  were  beaten,  even  in
loins ;  as  if  everything  in  abdomen  was  sore,  at  every
step  while  walking ;  constrictive ;  like  needle  stitches  ;
drawing  tearing;  griping  and  pinching  about  navel,
whenever  he  eats  anything ;  griping  wlien  she  wishes
to  go  to  stool ;  pinching  ;  cutting ;  pressing  outward  in
side,  during  menses ;  cramplike  in  1.  side,  with  qualmish-
ness ;  griping  drawing  extending  into  abdominal  ring  ;
dragging;  just  below  umbilicus  as  from  a  stone,  takes
away  breath ;  as  from  incarcerated  flatus,  low  down  in
lower  abdomen,  with  pain  in  small  of  back,  in  turning;
pressive  low  down  extending  towards  anus  or  genitals ;
burning ;  as  if  contents  were  sore  and  raw.

■  Pinching pressing colic and  fermenting  rumbling  in

lower  abdomen,  followed  by  watery  diarrhoea,  very  early
in  morning.

1 1  Colic:  cutting,  with  qualmishness;  in  open  air,  as  from
taking  cold,  and  as  if  diarrhoea  would  come  on ;  with
pressure  upward  towards  thorax  ;  pinching,  cutting,  con-
tractive, griping;  periodical,  before  breakfast,  or  after
meals.

I  Constrictive  cramp  in  abdomen  and  uterus,  like  griping
and  clawing  (with  profuse  discharge  of  clotted  blood).

I  Laborlike  spasms  in  abdomen  and  in  uterus,  extending
into  legs.

I  Feeling  of  weakness  in  abdomen  on  rising  in  morning.

■  Sensation  as  if  everything  in  abdomen  would  fall  down,

which  obliged  him  to  walk'  carefully.
I  I  Painful spot in  abdomen  in  region  of  solar  plexus;

pressure  on  this  spot  renews  attack. ^Epilepsy.
I  Jerking  and  twitching  in  abdominal  muscles  under  skin.

■  Contraction  of  abdominal  muscles. ^Yellow  fever.

■  Abdominal  muscles  painful  as  if  bruised,  on  touch,  mo-

tion, coughing  or  laughing.
1  I  Soreness  in  abdomen  from  lifting.

■  Loud  rumbling  and  gurgling,  in  morning.

■  I  Flatulent  distension :  after  eating  or  drinking ;  causing

pressure  and  anxiety ;  with  pressure  under  short  ribs,
as  from  incarcerated  flatus,  <  morning  and  after  meals ;
with  inability  to  wear  tight  clothing  over  abdomen ;
with  pressure  towards  chest  and  head ;  with  pressure  in
region  of  spleen ;  occasional  eructation  gives  slight
relief;  would  like  to  belch,  but  cannot;  pressing  down
upon  bladder  and  rectum.

■  Flatulent  colic  as  if  bowels,  bladder  and  rectum  were

pressed  upon  with  a  sharp  instrument.
I  I  Violent  screaming  and  tossing about,  kicks  his  legs,


131  NUX  VOMICA.

draws  them  up  towards  abdomen ;  refuses  everything
offered  to  him,  and  appears  in  great  dread  of  being
touched ;  face  red,  covered  with  sweat,  pulse  very  rapid
but  not  tense;  respiration  anxious,  rapid;  abdomen
bloated,  tense,  particularly  in  hypochondria  ;  audible
rumbling  in  abdomen  but  no  discharge  of  flatus  ;  dur-
ing the  short  remissions  lies  prostrated  with  eyes  closed.
/^Colic.

>  Colic  of  infants  with  constipation  caused  b}^  stimulating
food  taken  by  mother  or  nurse ;  large  amount  of  flatus ;
constipation,  with  apparent  frequent  desire  and  effort  to
evacuate  bowels.

I  Cold  hands  and  cold  feet  during  paroxysms,  or  even  stu-
pefaction to  unconsciousness. ^Colic.  •

i  Periodical  pressing,  pinching  pains  with  retraction  of
abdomen,  umbilical  region  very  sensitive,  could  not
touch  abdomen  ;  constipation  followed  next  day  by  diar-
rhoea ;  loss  of  appetite ;  nausea  and  vomiting  early  in
morning  on  rising. ^Lead  colic.

llColic  from  suppressed  hemorrhoidal  flow.

I  Colic  from  indigestion,  with  waterbrash;  <  after  coffee,
brandy  or  overeating.

I  iGastro-duodenal  catarrh.

I  Belching,  vomiting  and  constant  pressure  upon  rectum,
as  if  urging  to  stool. ^Peritonitis.

■  Plethora  abdominalis;  congestion  of  portal  system.
I  I  Hysterical,  abdominal  spasms.

I  Intussusception  ;  crampy,  remittent  pain  in  bowels  ;  con-

traction and  restriction  of  bowels ;  sour,  mucous  or
bloody  vomiting ;  quick  spasmodic  pulse  and  hot  skin.

I I  Sensation  of  weakness  in  abdominal  ring,  as  if  a  hernia
would  occur.

1 1  Pain  in  abdominal  ring  in  morning,  in  bed,  as  if  a

hernia  would  become  incarcerated.
1 1  Incarcerated  hernia,  before  occurrence  of  inflammation.

I  I  Inguinal  hernia  of  1.  side  in  a  woman ;  irreducible  by

skilful  manipulation,  vomiting  of  much  fecal  matter ;
singultus.

■  Sudden  violent  pain  in  hernial region; drawing  and

tearing  and  spasmodic  constriction  in  abdomen,  with
nausea  and  vomiting  of  sour  mucus;  constipation  with
constant  ineffectual  urging  to  stool ;  slow  protrusion  in
aged  persons,  with  squeezing  pain  in  hernial  region,
fulness  in  abdomen,  periodical  nausea,  gulping  up  of
salt  or  bitter  water,  vomiting;  hernial  tumor  sensitive
to  touch ;  indications  of  approaching  gangrene,  with
green  or  yellowish-green  spots  on  tumor.

I I  Strangulated,  umbilical  hernia.


NUX  VOMICA.  132

^^ Stool  and  Rectum, n Desire  for  stool:  anxious;  frequent,
ineffectual.

■  Stools:  thin,  brown,  dark  watery,  small,  frequent,  offen-

sive; small,  diarrhoea-like,  corroding  anus;  thin,
brownish,  mucous;  thin,  bloody,  mucous ;  thin,  green,
mucous ;  dark,  thin,  fecal ;  brown,  fluid  ;  offensive ;  in-
voluntary; like  pitch,  with  blood.
I  Diarrhoea:  in  morning,  after  rising,  or  immediately  after
dinner ;  with  constant  urging,  passing  small  quantities,
followed  by  a  feeling  that  more  remains  to  be  passed  ;  from
cold ;  after  taking  diarrhoea  mixture  ;  for  six  years,  hurry-
ing her  out  of  bed  in  morning,  if  she  composed  three
lines  in  afternoon  would  wake  up  next  morning  with
diarrhoea,  showing  preponderating  influence  of  mental
labor ;  after  a  debauch  ;  stools  papescent  or  watery,
scanty  or  often  accompanied  by  urging ;  with  retching
in  morning,  vomiting  perhaps  a  little  froth  or  sour
fluid ;  craves  liquor,  but  stomach  is  so  irritable  that  he
vomits  it  as  soon  as  taken  ;  intolerant  of  milk ;  in  pa-
tients who  catch  cold  easily,  of  nervous  constitution,
easily  exhausted ;  of  infants,  where  artificial  food  dis-
agrees and  causes  vomiting  and  purging ;  alternating
with  constipation ;  during  day;  after  abuse  of  alcoholic
spirits ;  after  drastic  medicines  or  prolonged  drugging ;
after  night  watching;  during  jaundice ;  from  indigestion ;
after  overexertion  of  mind ;  after  anger ;  after  ginger  or
brandy.

■  Before  stool:  cutting  about  umbilicus;  tenesmus;  back-

ache as  if  broken ;  constant  urging  (often  ineffectual).

■  During  stool ;  cutting; backache;  violent  tenesmus.
■After  stool : cessation  of  pains  and  tenesmus ;  burning

at  anus ;  sensation  as  if  not  finished.

■  Discharge  of  blood  with  the  feces.

■  Dysenteric diarrhoea, during cholera season; painful

straining  and  very  scanty  watery  discharge.

■  ■Dysentery:  frequent  urging  to  stool,  urging  ceasing  as

soon  as  bowels  move ;  stools  bloody,  slimy,  watery,  also
scanty;  <  in  morning;  when  resulting  from  a  cold  or
from  suppression  of  a  secretion  or  sweat ;  constant  in-
clination to  stool  as  soon  as  patient  sits  or  stands;  small
quantities  of  jellylike  mucus  streaked  with  blood,  pas-
sages occurring  every  fifteen  minutes,  with  tenesmus
and  great  pain,  causing  her  to  scream  out  when  at  stool ;
much  pain  in  lumbar  region  with  fever  and  headache,
scanty  passages  about  every  hour,  of  bloody  scrapings,
with  great  tenesmus;  pressing  pains  in  loins  and  upper
part  of  sacral  region,  as  if  broken,  great  heat  and  thirst
with  redness  of  face ;  with  cutting  at  navel ;  painful,
spasmodically  closed  anus.


133  NUX  VOMICA.

I  I  Abdomen  enormously  swollen, hard and tense ; no

fluctuation ;  constant  severe  gnawing  pains  a  little  be-
low epigastrium  and  occasionally  stitches  along  colon;
eight  to  ten  thin,  greenish,  putrid  and  bloody  evacuations
in  twenty-four  hours ;  tongue  dry  and  white ;  skin  dry
and  harsh ;  pulse  small  and  weak ;  emaciation ;  skin  pale ;
constant  desire  for  food. ^Chronic  dysentery.

■  Cholera: prodromal stage,  severe  cramps  in  stomach,

nausea,  belching,  obstinate  constipation ;  also  useful  in
primary  stage  with  severe  urging  to  stool  and  very
scanty  discharges,  or  discharges  are  spasmodically  re-
tained ;  severe  cramps  of  stomach  with  vomiting.

I I  Alternate  constipation  and  diarrhoea.
I  First  part  of  stool  soft,  last  hard.

i  I  Constipation:  with  ineffectual  and  frequent  urging  to
stool,  with  a  sensation  as  if  anus  were  contracted;  as
from  inactivity  of  bowels;  as  from  constriction  or
contraction  of  intestines;  stool  very  hard,  dry,  and
for  some  time  after  a  sticking  pain  in  rectum  as
from  hemorrhoids ;  frequent  unsuccessful  desire,  pass-
ing small  quantities,  and  sensation  as  if  not  finished ;
difficult  stool  from  spasmodic  action ;  wdth  rush  of  blood
to  head ;  obstructed  portal  circulation ;  stools  in  hard
masses ;  large,  hard  stools,  frequently  streaked  with
blood;  following  diarrhoea  which  had  been  checked  by
brandy ;  with  headache,  drowsiness,  low  spirits,  or  as  if
he  had  taken  cold ;  wdth  dyspepsia,  flatulence,  tenesmus
and  cardiac  palpitation ;  with  gastric  catarrh ;  whole
body  trembled,  but  especially  hands,  when  he  wrote ;
difficult,  scybalous  stools  at  long  intervals  in  conse-
quence of  spinal  weakness ;  not  due  to  atony  of  rectum
but  to  irregular,  fitful  action ;  in  those  who  lead  a  seden-
tary life  or  are  suff'ering  from  eff'ects  of  prolonged  night
watching,  nursing  or  mental  overwork,  or  those  who
use  in  excess  spirituous  liquors  or  overload  digestive
tract  with  highly-seasoned  food,  or  from  abuse  of  purga-
tives, or  sexual  excitement,  due  to  onanism,  or  when
constipation  has  been  preceded  by  diarrhoea  or  is  the  con-
sequence of  its  sudden  checking  ;  of  pregnant  women  ;
of  active,  irritable  infants  and  of  those  who  have  been
prematurely  fed  on  meat,  or  when  trouble  arises  from
excessive  use  of  coffee ;  antiperistaltic  action  of  intesti-
nal canal.  ^

■  Constipated  stools :  inefficient,  black,  hard,  often  streaked

with  blood  ;  large,  hard ;  black,  dark  or  brown  in  color
and  hard  and  knotty  in  appearance ;  consisting  of  little
balls.

■  ■Hemorrhoids:  blind  or  flowing;  abdominal  plethora;


NUX  VOMICA.  134

congestion  to  head ;  <  from  high  living  or  sedentary
habits ;  witli  burning  and  sticking  in  rectum ;  anus
burning,  smarting,  feels  as  if  cut  some  hours  after  stool ;
with  itching,  keeping  awake  at  night ;  has  to  sit  in  a
tub  of  cold  water  for  relief;  with  shooting  shocks  in
loins ;  during  pregnancy  or  after  parturition ;  inflamed
and  partly  constricted  ;  burning  pains  becoming  intol-
erable on  least  touch ;  can  lie  only  on  abdomen  ;  with
copious  discharge  of  bright  blood  with  the  urging  to
stool  or  after ;  discharge  of  bloody  mucus ;  after  purga-
tive medicines  and  internal  and  external  allopathic
treatment ;  in  persons  addicted  to  the  use  of  coffee,  wine,
liquors,  spices,  etc. ;  with  fissures  of  anus,  with  great
sensitiveness  of  rectum.

II  Prolapsus  of  rectum  after  a  long-continued  diarrhoea
during  childhood;  rectum  protrudes  four  inches ;  pro-
lapsed part  bluish-red,  tumid,  easily  bleeding,  covered
with  a  slimy,  purulent  matter  and  has  an  appearance
of  degeneration ;  at  times  severe  pains  therein,  particu-
larly during  stool,  latter  delayed  and  hard;  no  protru-
sion when  lying  quietly  or  when  in  bed  ;  appetite  poor ;
digestive  disturbances  ;  occasionally  nausea  and  pains
in  stomach.

1 1  Prolapsus  recti  due  to  constipation;  severe  pressing
causing  rectum  to  protrude,  accompanied  by  pain  and
hemorrhage.

B  Tearing,  stinging,  burning  and  itching  of  anus.

B  Dragging  in  anus,  when  not  at  stool.

I  Itching  in  anus  associated  with  a  sore  pain  as  from
hemorrhoids.

■  Itching  on  margin  of  anus,  becoming  a  smarting  and

sore  pain,  as  from  blind  piles.

I  Hemorrhage  from  anus.

I I  Painful  spasmodically  closed  anus.

■  Prolapsus  ani  in  children  suffering  from  constipation  or

when  occurring  with  diarrhoea  during  teething.
I  I  Worms,  in  horses ;  the  animal  seemed  much  out  of
health,  ate  little,  was  languid  and  seemed  to  have  no
spirit  or  life  (after  Nux  vom.  ^°"  in  a  pail  of  water,  an
enormous  quantity  of  worms  passed).
^^  Urinary  Organs.  ■  Diabetes:  from  spinal  lesions;  irritable
temper;  odd  sensations  in  limbs,  fidgets;  numbness
and  paretic  condition  of  lower  extremities;  stomach
and  liver  complaints ;  voids  most  urine  during  night ;
in  high  livers  with  sedentary  habits.

■  Very  great  sensitiveness  in  region  of  r.  kidney,  <  from

touch ;  strangury.

■  Nephritis:  from  stagnation  of  portal  circulation  caused


135  .  NUX  VOMICA.

by  suppression  of  an  habitual  sanguineous  discharge  ;
tension  ;  bloating  of  abdomen  ;  pressure,  heat,  burning
in  loins  and  region  of  kidneys;  after  suppression  of
hemorrhoidal  flow,  abuse  of  liquors  or  when  caused  by
a  calculus.
I  I  Pains  in  small  of  back,  as  if  bruised,  so  violent  he  can-
not move ;  lameness  in  back ;  heaviness  and  stiffness
of  neck;  cough  from  exertion;  dyspnoea;  constipation;
bad  breath; deranged  stomach;  sour taste;  sleepless
forepart  of  night,  with  great  drowsiness  in  morning
and during day ;  drawing in arms  as if  they  were
asleep  ;  loss  of  motion  of  arm. ^Albuminuria.
I  Renal  colic :  pain,  especially  in  r.  kidney,  extending  into
genitals  and  r.  leg ;  nausea ;  vomiting ;  constant  urgnig
to  urinate  ;  insufficient  urging  to  stool ;  inability  tolie
on  r.  side  ;  >  lying  on  back ;  <  on  rising  and  walking
about;  after  palliative  use  of  anodynes;  shortly  after
midnight,  writhing,  moaning  and  wringing  her  hands,
pain  culminated  every  little  while  in  distressing  retch-
ing and  vomiting,  constant  urging  to  stool  and  to  urin-
ate with  the  pain ;  severe  stitches  in  region  of  1.  kidney,
<  rising from  seat  and  motion  but  not  from  touch,
cannot  lie  any  length  of  time  in  one  position,  bathed  in
sweat,  pain  accompanied  by  chilliness,  pain  in  abdo-
men, vomiting,  frequent hsematuria,  finally r.  renal
region  also  affected  pain,  extending  to  r.  thigh.
iHEematuria,  after  abuse  of  alcoholic  stimulants  or  drugs ;
suDpression  of  hemorrhoidal  or  menstrual  discharges ;
full,  tensive  feeling,  .pressure  and  distension  in  abdo-
men, loins  and  region  of  kidneys ;  signs  of  stagnation
in  portal  circulation.
iCystitis:  after  suppression  of  menses  or  hemorrhoidal
flow ;  painful  urging  to  urinate,  with  scant  discharge
and  burning  pains;  sensitive  drawing  pains  in  testi-
cles and  spermatic  cords  and  full  feeling  in  region  of
bladder;  discharge  of  urine  drop  by  drop  with  burn-
ing and  tearing ;  pale  urine  followed  by  thick,  whitish,
purulent  matter  with  violent  burning  pain,  spasmodic
retention  of  urine  after  suppressed  gonorrhcea ;  catar-
rhal cystitis  limited  to parts  directly  around  neck  of

O  I  fi  c\  c\  PT*

iSpasm  of  bladder,  especially  if  caused  by  sexual  excesses
or  by  undue  use  of  stimulants.

I  Spasmodic  retention  of  urine;  discharged  drop  by  drop.

I  I  Difficult  urination  with  pressure  and  tenseness  in  re-
gion of  bladder ;  when  becoming  warm  from  working,
frequent  scanty  urination,  cannot  empty  bladder ;  no
pain  to  speak  of;  urine  clear  and  normal ;  chronic  con-
stipation. 6'Paresis  of  detrusor  vesicae.


NUX  VOMICA.  136

llPainful  ineffectual  urging  to  urinate;  urine  passes  in
drops,  with  burning  and  tearing ;  spasmodic  strangury.

■  Strangury  after  beer.

■  Niglitly  urging  to  urinate.

■  Pressure  to  urinate  at  night  witli  discharge  of  a  few

drops  of  red,  bloody,  burning  urine.

1 1  Paralysis  of  bladder ;  urine  dribbles.

I  I  Enuresis  nocturna  from  infancy  in  a  girl  set.  16 ;  sick
headache;  gastric  derangement;  sour  stomach;  sour
taste  in  mouth ;  constipation;  vomiting;  languor.

I  1  Incontinence  of  urine  after  repeated  attacks  of  gonor-
rhoea; slimy  discharge ;  itching  sensation  during  erec-
tion ;  fossa  navicularis  sensitive.

I  I  Nocturnal  and  diurnal  enuresis,  with  constant  dribbling

of  urine,  so  that  he  could  not  leave  home  for  a  day.

I I  Paralytic  incontinence  of  urine  from  irritation  of  lower
part  of  spine.

■  Involuntary  micturition  when laughing,  coughing or

sneezing.

■  Itching  burning  in  region  of  neck  of  bladder  in  morning

in  bed.

■  Irritable  bladder  of  gout  or  alcoholism.

■  Vesical  calculi.

■  Pain  and  spasm  during  passage  of  urinary  calculi.

■  Frequent  desire  to  urinate,  much  at  a  time,  <  when

lying,  preceded  by  aching  pain  in  bladder.

■  Urine:  seldom  and  scanty;  generally  light-coloreji,  sedi-

ment reddish;  tenacious  mucus  passes  with  urine  ;  pale,
later  thick,  whitish,  purulent ;  reddish  with  brickdust
sediment.

■  Before  urinating  :  pressure  on  bladder ;  pain  in  neck  of

bladder.

■  While  urinating:  burning  and  tearing  in  neck  of  blad-
• der;  burning and fine sticking pain in forepart  of

urethra  ;  itching  and  burning  in  urethra.

■  After  urinating:  contractive  pain  in  urethra.

I  I  Pressing  pain  in  meatus,  between  acts  of  micturition,
accompanied  by  shuddering.

I  1  Sharp  pressure  as  with  a  cutting  instrument  in  forepart
of  urethra,  also  in  bladder,  perineum  and  anus,  with
contractive  pain  between  acts  of  micturition  and  dis-
charge of  mucus.

■  Spasmodic  urethral  stricture.

^"  Male  Sexual  Organs. ■  Sexual  desire  on  slightest  provo-
cation.

■  Painful  erections,  especially  in  morning;  often  excitable,

but  power  is  weak.

■  Erections  after  the  midday  nap.


137  NUX  VOMICA.

■  During  an  embrace  penis  becomes  relaxed.

1 1  Emissions:  during  sleep;  after  onanism  or  too  high
living ;  after  sexual  excesses ;  every  second  or  third  night,
v^ith  erections  and  sensual  dreams ;  cannot  be  in  female
society  without  having  emissions,  followed  by  great  ex-
haustion ;  from  plethora ;  followed  by  excessive  irrita-
bility, despondency  and  prostration ;  in  healthy,  robust
men,  not  due  to  onanism.

1 1  Sexual  impotence  with  great  spinal  exhaustion ;  com-
plete impotence.

I  I  Spasmodic  constricting  pain  in  spermatic  cord  causing
testicle  to  be  drawn  up;  <  standing  or  walking,  at
times  >  sitting;  testicle  swollen  and  indurated..

I  1  Urethritis  after  cessation  of  regular  and  copious  hemor-

rhoidal discharge.

I I  Gonorrhoea :  after  abuse  of  copaiva  and  cubebs;  thin
discharge,  with  burning  on  urinating  and  frequent
urging  to  stool ;  suppressed,  with  swelling  of  testicles.

I  Chronic  prostatitis.

■  Chancroid;  shallow  and  flat-bottomed  ulceration  show-

ing disposition  to  spread  irregularly  and  indefinitely,
exuding  a  thin  serous  discharge.

■  Biting  itching  on  inner  surface  of  prepuce,  soreness  on

margin,  or  on  mons  veneris.

■  Increase  of  smegma.

■  Heat  in  testicles.

■  Inflammation  of  both  testicles  with  swelling  and  hard-

ness ;  testicles  drawn  up.

■  Itching on glans penis;  prepuce retracted;  heat and

stitches  alternating  with  constricting  pain  in  testicles ;
testicles  swollen,  very  sensitive  to  touch ;  constipation,
stool  hard  ;  much  thirst ;  sleepless  at  night  on  account
of  pain. ^Orchitis.

I  I  Left  testicle  swollen,  hard,  elastic,  as  large  as  goose  egg;
scrotum  on  left  side,  hot,  swollen ;  constant  constrict-
ing, drawing,  tearing  pain  along  spermatic  cord  and
extending  up  to  1.  kidney,  <  from  pressure,  motion  and
at  night ;  thirst ;  restless  sleep. ^Orchitis.

I  I  Itching  on  scrotum.

1  1  Hydrocele.
Female  Sexual Organs. ■Great  excitement_  of_  sexual
organs,  with  sexual  dreams  and  orgasm,  in  irritable
and  headstrong  women.

1  I  Burning  in  vulva,  with  desire  for  an  embrace.  ^Nym-
phomania.

■  Irritation  and  inflammation  of  ovaries  occasioned  by
rich  living,  highly  seasoned  food,  stimulating  drinks,  or
by  a  too  sedentary  life.


23


NUX  VOMICA.  138

I  I  Violent  aching  in  hypogastrium,  <  from  pressure  and
contact ;  violent  pains  in  loins ;  constipation  or  hard
stools ;  retention  of  urine,  dysuria  or  ischuria ;  swelling
of  OS  tincse,  with  contusive  pain  and  stitches  in  abdo-
men ;  frequent  desire  to  urinate,  with  scalding  and
burning  pain  ;  <  towards  morning. ^Metritis.

I  I  Severe  pain  in  lumbar  region  shooting  out  to  thighs;
bearing-down  pain  in  abdomen ;  frequent,  painful,
scanty  urine,  sometimes  bloody;  loss  of  appetite;  con-
stipation; low-spirited. ^Chronic  metritis.

I  Chronic  parenchymatous  metritis  with  bearing  down
into  vagina  and  towards  sacrum ;  constant  urging  to
urinate;  constipation.

■  Hardness  and  swelling  of  os  tincse.

I  I  Pale ;  exceedingly  emaciated  ;  hair  turned  quite  white

and  thin  ;  face  bore  an  expression  of  extreme  anguish,
caused  by  almost  incessant  agonizing  bearing-down
pains  in  womb  and  rectum ;  had  miscarried  about  four
months  ago,  in  third  month  of  pregnancy,  and  much
manipulation  was  employed  in  delivery  of  foetus,  and
since  that  time  was  treated  for  "  inflammation  of
womb " ;  constant  bearing  down  pains  of  an  exceed-
ingly grinding,  acute  kind,  causing  her  to  scream  in-
cessantly ;  but  these  symptoms  seem  to  have  been
developed  especially  after  the  harsh  treatment  em-
ployed to  overcome  constipation ;  she  endures  the  terri-.
ble  grinding  ]3ains  until  she  can  bear  them  no  longer,
then  resorts  to  castor-oil  injections,  sufl'ers  indescribable
agony  for  several  days  before  she  has  a  passage,  which
is  followed  by  a  little  rest,  soon  interrupted  again  by
the  above  agony ;  constant  violent  thirst;  each  mouth-
ful of  water  causes  colic  and  bearing  down  with  scream-
ing ;  great  pallor ;  gums  look  retracted  as  after  mercury  ;
nausea  and  occasional  vomiting;  has  some  appetite  and
can  "bear  light  food;  perfectly  helpless  from  loss  of
strength,  must  be  carried  ;  pulse  small,  100  ;  occasional
febrile  paroxysms  in  night  and  towards  morning,  dur-
ing pain. ^Uterine  neuralgia.

I I  Contractive  uterine  spasms ;  with  discharge  of  coagula.

I  1  Sensation  of  heaviness  in  region  of  neck  of  womb;  ris-

ing or  sitting  down  causes  a  soreness  and  distress  in
that  region.

I I  Pressure  towards  genitals  in  morning;  prolapsus  uteri,
from  straining  or  lifting,  or  after  miscarriage ;  bearing
down  towards  sacrum,  with  ineffectual  urging  to  stool,
or  pressure  on  bladder  wdth  urging  to  urinate.

■  Burning,  heaviness  and  sticking  in  uterus.

I  I  Pain  as  if  bruised  in  neck  of  uterus. ^Metritis.


139  NUX  VOMICA.

lUterine'fibroid.

B  Congestion  of  blood  to  uterus,  pressing  weight  and  heat.

1 1  Metrorrhagia  at  climaxis,  from  high  living.

I  I  Uterine  hemorrhage  of  six  weeks  duration,  beginning
every  morning  at  three  and  lasting  until  eleven.

I  Menses:  too  early  and  profuse;  occur  too  soon  and  last
too  long ;  flow  dark,  oversensitive  to  nervous  impres-
sions ;  faints  easily,  especially  in  a  warm  room ;  navel
feels  drawn  in ;  a  few  days  before  the  time  and  rather
too  copious,  or  keeping  on  for  several  days  longer,  with
complaints  at  onset  and  remaining  after  it  is  over ;  re-
cur even  on  fourteenth  day ;  irregular,  never  at  right
time ;  sensation  of  constriction  about  hypogastrium ;
interrupted  and  beginning  again;  with  spasms  and
headache ;  with  nausea  in  morning,  chilliness  and  at-
tacks of  faintness.

I  I  Cramping  pains  in  uterine  region,  causing  her  to  dou-
ble up  and  cry ;  must  stay  in  bed ;  pressing  painful
sensation  extending  from  uterus  upward  to  umbilicus
and  often  to  region  of  stomach,  causing  great  nausea ;
attacks  of  fainting ;  chilliness  with  heat  and  redness  of
face ;  menses  preceded  and  accompanied  by  pressure  in
forehead  and  vertex. ^Dysmenorrhoea.

sDysmenorrhoea:  twisting  pains  moving  about  abdomen,"
with  sickness  of  stomach;  crampy  and  stitching  pains
in  pelvic  region;  soreness  across  pubis;  cramps  in
bladder;  constant  unsuccessful  urging  to  defecate;  after
all  sorts  of  drugs  and  painkillers.

I  1  Eight  days  before  m.enses  j)ain  appears  in  lower  abdo-
men ;  stitches,  tearing,  pressure  and  tension  extending
deep  into  pelvis ;  pains  <  two  hours  after  beginning  of
menses,  when  the  stitching  and  tearing  extend  to  knees ;
cannot  stretch  legs  which  are  painfully  and  spasmodi-
cally flexed ;  hypogastrium  very  sensitive  to  pressure ;
>  from  warmth  of  bed. (^D^^smenorrhoea.

■  During  and  after  menstruation,  appearance  of  new  and

aggravation  of  old  symptoms.

I  1  Menses  very  scanty,  continuing  but  a  day,  preceded

and  followed  by  copious  leucorrhoea ;  appetite  poor ;
obstinate  constipation;  difficult,  imperfect  digestion  and
defective  assimilation. ^Amenorrhoea.

I I  Crampy,  stitching  pains  in  pelvis ;  soreness  across  pubes.
I  Uterine  pains  running  down.

■  Leucorrhoea: fetid, staining yellow; painless, yellow

mucus,

I  Internal  swelling  of  vagina,  like  a  prolapsus,  with  burn-
ing pain,  which  makes  external  touch  intolerable.

•  Burning  in  pudenda.


NUX  VOMICA.  140

I  Prolapsed  vagina  from  heavy  lifting.

I  I  Gnawing,  itching  eruption  on  pudendum.

iTingling  and  itching  of  vulva,  causing  onanism.

■  Corrosive  itching  eruption  on  vulva. ^Pruritus  vulvae.
24  Pregnancy. Parturition. Lactation. 1 1  Constant se-
vere hiccough  so  that  she  could  not  eat,  drink  or  sleep ;
beginning  pain  in  abdomen ;  fourteen  days  after  labor ;
primipara.

■  0  Morning  sicknesss,  nausea  and  vomiting  during  preg-

nancy ;  constipation ;  excessive  irritability.

I  1  Gulping  up  of  bitter,  sour  fluid  at  night ;  nausea  early

in  morning,  and  after  a  meal,  with  vomiting,  constant
pain  and  pressure  in  pit  of  stomach  as  from  a  stone ;
cannot  bear  anything  tight  around  stomach ;  constipa-
tion. ^Reflex  gastric  derangement  during  pregnancy.

I I  During  pregnancy  :  morning  sickness ;  jaundice ;  colic ;
difficult  breathing  from  upward  pressure;  frequent
urging  to  urinate ;  varicose  veins  attributable  to  high
living ; hemorrhoids.

■  Threatened  abortion  due  to  varicosed  condition  of  uterus

brought  about  by  frequently  recurring  congestions;
uterus  in  a  relaxed  condition.

■  Threatened  abortion,  or  retained  placenta  after  abortion

or  parturition,  with  a  constant  feeling  of  uneasiness  in
rectum  as  though  bowels  ought  to  be  moved.

■  Profuse  hemorrhage  after  abortion  at  three  months ;  flow

<  at  3  A.M.
I  1  False  pains  (seventh  month).

■  Labor  pains:  excessive,  violent ;  spasmodic,  cause  urging

to  stool  or  to  urinate;  cause  fainting;  <  in  back;
are  too  violent;  must  stand  or. walk  about;  wants  back
rubbed ;  likes  to  have  room  warm ;  nearly  or  entirely
cease.
1  I  Somnolence ;  unconscious  of  what  had  occurred ;  face
red,  lips  dark,  dry;  tongue  dry,  covered  with  brown
fur ;  wild  expression  of  eyes ;  grating  of  teeth ;  sticks
out  tongue ;  twitching  of  muscles  of  face ;  mouth  filled
with  reddish  mucus;  respiration  nearly  suppressed;
skin  dry,  hot ;  pulse  scarcely  perceptible ;  twitching  of
whole  body  which  was  cold  and  pale.  ^Puerperal
convulsions.

■  After-pains  violent  and  protracted;  in  irritable  women.
■  ■  Metritis  after  parturition.

■  Lochia  scant  and  offensive,  with  bearing-down  pains.

■  Nipples  painful  during  suckling,  with  little  or  no  sore-

ness or  rawness.

■  Severe  tensive  pains  in  nipples,  particularly  when  nurs-

ing ;  nipples  sore,  presenting  a  white  point  in  centre,
but  no  suppuration.


141  NUX  VOMICA.

I  I  Caking  of  milk  in  r.  breast  after  neglecting  to  nurse
child  for  several  days  from  this  breast;  whole  breast
tense,  but  doughy  and  painless.
^^  Voice  and  Larynx.  Trachea  and  Bronchia,  i  Hoarse-
ness :  with  roughness  and  scraping  in  throat ;  catarrhal,
with  viscid  mucus.

■Tension  and  pain  in  larynx  and  bronchia ;  itching  pro-
vokes cough.

I  Dry,  painful  catarrh  in  larynx,  <  early  in  morning;
hands  and  feet  hot.

I  Acute  catarrhal  laryngitis,  chilliness,  headache  and  stop-
page of  nose;  from  exposure  to  drafts,  ot  sitting  in  a
cold  room.

■Spasmodic  constriction  of  larynx  after  midnight,  suffocat-
ing spells.

■  Tickling  itching  in  trachea  in  middle  of  sternum  pro-

vokes cough.

■  Adherent  mucus  high  up  in  trachea  provokes  cough.

■  Shortness  of  breath,  sore  cough  and  great  sensibility  of

bronchial  tubes;  cough  <  at  night;  expectoration
copious,  of  saltish  taste,  white. ^Bronchitis.

■  Chronic  bronchitis  of  old  people.

^^Respiration.  ■Breathing:  short,  oppressed  and  hard;  op-
pressed, from  tightness  around  hypochondria;  tight,
with  hacking  cough.

■  Dyspnoea:  from  pressure  upward  of  diaphragm  in  con-

sequence of  accumulation  of  gas ;  at  night,  on  waking
from  frightful  dreams,  she  could  scarcely  catch  her
breath  ;  in  evening  and  morning ;  on  slightest  exertion,
so  that  he  cannot  work,  patient  lives  well,  drinks  from
six  to  nine  cups  of  coffee  daily  and  uses  an  enormous
quantity  of  tobacco.

■  Anxious  oppression  of  chest;  as  from  a  load.

■  Compression,  chest  as  if  drawn  together,  at  night  in  bed.

■  Asthma,  spasmodic  constriction  of  lower  part  of  thorax.
I  I  Asthmatic  constriction  transversely  through  chest,  when

walking  and  ascending.
I  I  On  motion  or  exertion,  constriction  of  chest  and  dysp-
noea, must  stand  still ;  suffocative  constriction  of  chest
in  evening  on  attempting  to  step  into  bed,  must  sleep
sitting  in  a  chair;  very  severe  attack  after  midnight
towards  morning,  cannot  sit;  severe  dyspnoea,  constric-
tion and  oppression  of  chest  as  of  a  heavy  load  ;  attacks
last  several  hours,  during  which  time  he  supports  him-
self by  leaning  with  hands  upon  table;  slow,  loud,
whistling  respiration  ;  severe  dry  cough,  shocks  causing
pain  in  head  and  abdomen ;  anxiety,  sense  of  suffering
throughout  body ;  suffers  from  gastric  troubles.


NUX  VOMICA.  142

I  I  Sudden  violent  attack  of  asthma  while  working ;  every
attempt  to  work  brought  on  paroxysm ;  >  when  keep-
ing quiet ;  appetite  good ;  tongue  clean ;  gums  pale ;
stool  solid  and  brown ;  prsecordia  tense.

I  I  Awakened  every  night  after  being  asleep  an  hour  by
an  intolerable  sense  of  suffocation;  forced  to  sit  up  in
bed  and  for  half  an  hour  or  an  hour  felt  as  if  room
had  been  exhausted  of  air ;  felt  as  if  he  must  die ;  each
successive  attack  increased  in  duration  and  intensity.
^Nervous  asthma.

■  Spasmodic  asthma,  caused  by  anxious  dreams;  sensation

as  if  clothing  were  too  tight ;  hysterical  or  hypochon-
driacal subjects.

■  Asthma  from  congestion  of  blood  to  chest;  sensation  of

oppression;  skin  warm;  inclination  to  sweat;  pulse
increased,  full,  hard.

I  I  Asthma  appearing  about  1st  of  May  for  several  years;
profound  nervous  debility ;  could  neither  lie  down  nor
sit  up  with  comfort  on  account  of  distress  of  breathing ;
>  in  open  air,  although  scarcel}''  able  to  stand  when
supported  on  either  side;  completely  worn  out  from
protracted  suffering,  from  loss  of  sleep  and  inability  to
take  food.

I  I  Spasmodic  asthma  from  earliest  youth,  <  at  beginning
of  Fall,  gradually  sudsiding  as  Spring  sets  in ;  increas-
ing in  severity  each  year.

■  Asthma  with  fulness  in  stomach;  >  after  belching;  op-

pression mornings,  or  after  eating ;  spasmodic  constric-
tion of  lower  part  of  chest,  <  from  cold  air  or  exercise.

■  Short,  slow,  stridulous  breathing.

■  Spasms. of  chest  from  vapor  of  copper  or  arsenic.

^''  Cough.  ■Cough  :  causes  headache  as  if  skull  would  burst;
racking,  with  pain  in  stomach  and  abdomen  as  if
bruised  ;  violent,  little  or  no  expectoration ;  dry,  fatigu-
ing, from  tittillation  in  larynx ;  <  after  midnight  and
in  morning ;  <  after  eating  ;  with  vomiting  or  bleeding
from  nose  or  mouth;  dry,  persistent,  fatiguing,  about
midnight,  if  she  lies  upon  back,  disappearing  when
lying  on  side ;  dry  from  midnight  till  daybreak ;  at
night,  preventing  sleep ;  from  exercise,  thinking  or
reading ;  violent  before  rising  in  morning,  with  expec-
toration of  clotted  blood  and  soreness  in  chest ;  hoarse,
.  dry  and  hollow ;  convulsive,  excited  by  tickling  in
throat;  scraping  cough;  from  adherent  mucus  high  up
in  trachea ;  dry  with  rattling  of  mucus ;  dry  in  evening
and  loose  in  morning;  of  nervous  or  gastric  origin;
stomach  cough ;  cough  of  students ;  after  gaping,  or  if
gaping  excites  cough ;  <  from  mental  effort,  ascending,


143  NUX  VOMICA.

cold, exertion, on awaking,  from tobacco,  drinking,
eating,  beer;  >  from  warm  drinks.
I  I  Desire  to  eat  during  cough.

■  Spasmodic  cough  with  retching.

I  Sputa:  yellow; grey; cold mucus; sour or sweetish,

bright  red  blood.
I  i  Bad  cough  ;  shortness  of  breath ;  pain  in  chest ;  cheeks

sunken  and  bright  red ;  bitter  taste  in  mouth ;  pain  in

stomach  and  bowels ;  no  appetite.
iRough,  dry,  deep  cough,  from  dryness  in  larynx,  with

tension  and  pain  in  bronchi. ^Bronchitis  chronica.

I  Whooping  cough:  during  coughing  spell  severe  pain  in

region  of  umbilicus  as  if  everything  there  was  being
shattered  and  torn  ;  vomiting,  gating,  choking  spells,
with  bluish  face  and  pain  in  abdomen ;  <  morning
and  after  eating ;  constipation ;  after  cough  mixtures ;
<  in  morning ;  splitting  headache,  child  holds  its  head,
face  blue;  bleeding  from  eyes,  nose  and  mouth.
^^  Inner  Chest  and  Lungs,  i  "Pressing  in  chest  as  from  a
heavy  load.

■  Tightness  across  chest;  during  coryza;  during  chill.

I I  Roughness  and  rawness  in  chest.

1 1  Scraping  in  chest,  causing  hawking.

■  Burning  on  chest.

■  ■Sensation  as  if  something  were  torn  loose  in  chest.

■  Intercostal  neuralgia,  >  when  lying  on  well  side.

■  Angina  pectoris;  loss  of  appetite  and  accumulation  of

gas  in  bowels.

■  ■Congestion  to  chest,  with  heat  and  burning,

■  Hemoptysis:  from  anger;  suppressed  hemorrhoidal  flow;

debauchery ;  in  drunkards.
I  I  Catarrhal  fever,  with  or  without  coryza ;  chilliness ;
creeping  chills  seem  to  spread  over  bones,  first  in  one
locality,  then  in  another,  appearing  on  motion  and  fre-
cjuently  alternating  with  flushes  of  heat;  come  on  in
afternoon  and  gradually  grow  in  intensity,  >  near
warm  stove ;  scratching  sensation  in  pharynx ;  <
mornings,  causing  hoarseness,  hawking  and  rough
cough.

■  In  infantile  chest  diseases  after  much  medication,  when

there  are  present  a  smouldering  fever,  severe  cough  and
wilfulness.
I  I  Shooting  pains  from  centre  of  sternum  around  chest,  on
coughing. ^Pleurisy.

■  Inflammation of  diaphragm; grasping, rooting pain,

with  nausea  or  vomiting  ;  nervous  persons.
I  I  Violent  pain  shooting  inward  in  r.  side  of chest,  <
breathing  deeply,  turning  in  bed,  speaking  and  lying


NUX  VOMICA.  144

on  painful  side;  breathing  short;  teasing  cough,  with
tenacious,  frothy,  bloody  expectoration,  ejected  blood
being  of  a  brownish  color;  with  cough  involuntary
passage  of  urine ;  tearing  in  r.  shoulder,  <  moving
affected  part;  aching  and  tearing  in  head;  weakness,
from  disturbed  sleep ;  frequent  chills,  with  rigor  and
gooseskin ;  sour-smelling  perspiration;  great  thirst;
rapid  pulse ;  no  appetite ;  furred  tongue ;  peevish,  de-
jected spirits. ^Pneumonia.

■  Pneumonia :  of  the  aged,  also  of  children,  with  catarrhal

irritation ;  spasmodic  dry  cough,  or  cough  with  difficult
expectoration  and  oppression  of  chest ;  in  hypochon-
driacal subjects,  or  in  those  suffering  from  hemor-
rhoids ;  gastric  and  bilious  symptoms  pronounced ;
catarrhal  symptoms  predominate  over  inflammatory;
of  drunkards ;  accompanied  by  catarrh  of  bronchia ;  in
sick  people  compelled  to  lie  a  long  time  upon  back ;
with  delirium  tremens ;  after  suppression  of  hemor-
rhoidal flow  from  becoming  chilled  ;  when  hepatization
occurs,  without  fever,  cough  or  any  marked  symptoms
indicating  a  lung  affection.
B Spasms  of  chest  from  vapor  of  copper  or  arsenic.
^^ Heart,  Pulse  and  Circulation,  ii Palpitation:  on  \ying
down;  heart  feels  tired ;  frequent  belching;  spasmodic,
with  sense  of  fluttering  at  pit  of  stomach ;  on  lying
down  after  dinner ;  in  frequent  short  paroxysms,  with
pulsating  throbs  in  direction  of  heart;  from  mental
emotions,  or  protracted  study;  after  coffee,  wine  or
liquors ;  from  indigestion  ;  with  nausea  and  vomiting ;
with  orgasm  of  blood.

■  Distension,  aching  pains  and  anguish  in  region  of  heart

and  hypochondria.

■  Angina  pectoris:  < at  night;  constricting  pains  with

anguish,  patient  cries  out;  pain  affects  whole  thorax,
extends  to  1.  arm,  anterior  j)art  of  neck,  lower  jaw,
back  and  region  of  kidneys ;  pains  end  with  discharge
of  flatus  and  profuse  clear  urine ;  during  attacks  at
night  patient  lies  upon  knees,  with  body  bent  back-
ward ;  attacks  caused  and  aggravated  by  motion  or
mental  disturbances ;  with  loss  of  appetite  and  accumu-
lation of  gas  in  bowels ;  from  using  coffee,  tobacco  or
alcoholic  stimulants  to  excess.

■  Dilatation  of  heart,  with  nervous  palpitation.

■  Hypertrophy  of  heart  from  portal  obstruction.

■  Pulse: hard,  full,  accelerated;  small,  rapid; intermits

every  four  or  five*  beats.

■  ■Portal  stasis.

^^  Neck  and  Back, i  l  Tearing  pain,  in  paroxysms,  in  nape
of  neck,  in  evening.


145  NUX  VOMICA.

iCervico-brachial  neuralgia,  neck  stiff,  <  in  morning  and
after  eating  and  from  touch.

■  Rheumatism  of  muscles  of  neck,  with  or  without  tearing,

drawing  pains;  head  generally  drawn  to  one  side  and

moved  with  great  difficulty.
1 1  Neck  stiff,  with  heaviness  ;  from  cold.
iTorticollis,  head  drawn  to  1.  side;  after  fright;  due  to

spinal  disease.

■  Tension  and  aching  between  shoulder  blades ;  burning,

pressing,  as  from  a  stone  or  stitches.
i  Burning,  tearing,  drawing,  lacerating  or  bruised  pains  in

back.
I  Gets  out  of  bed  at  4  a.m.  on  account  of  pain  in  back,  >

from  rising  and  walking  about. ^Pregnancy.
I  Pain  in  back  starts  from  posterior  wall  of  stomach  and

spreads  under  short  ribs  of  1.  side,  obliging  patient  to

bend  forward.

I  Sudden  stitches  in  back  Avhen  turning,  with  dull  pain

while  sitting.

■  Strong  aversion  to  air,  cannot  turn  in  bed,  if  air  is  let

in  under  bedclothes  it  makes  him  chilly.

I I  Backache,  must  sit  up  to  turn  in  bed.

1 1  Pains  in  small  of  back,  as  if  bruised  or  broken ;  <  3  or

4  A.M.

■  Sensation  in  small  of  back  as  if  lame. ^After  difficult

parturition.
I  Pain  in  back  after  lifting ;  begins  in  lower  lumbar  ver-
tebrae and  extends  to  hypochondria.

I  Pain  across  loins  passing  to  hips.

I I  Rheumatism  of  back,  lumbago.

■  Spinal  irritation  ;  backache  in  lumbar  region,  <  in  bed  ;

sudden  loss  of  power  in  legs  in  morning;  hands  and
feet  go  to  sleep  easily ;  stiffness  and  tension  in  hollow  of
knees;  clothing  about  waist  feels  too  tight;  sensation
as  of  a  band  about  waist ;  desire  to  lie  down ;  numb-
ness and  formication  along  spine  and  into  extremities.
1 1  Spine  affected  by  sexual  excesses ;  complete  prostration.

■  Spinal weakness and general debility, with difficult

evacuation  of  scybalous  stools.

■  Spinal  anaemia;  subjects  who  use  sewing  machines,  or

are  confined  to  house ;  bowels  constipated ;  ineffectual
attempts  to  defecate  or  urinate.

■  Myelitis  and  early  stages  of  locomotor  ataxia,  especially

when  occurring  from  exposure  to  cold  or  from  sexual
Excess.

■  Multiple  sclerosis,  especially  in  beginniiig,  with  gastralgic

attacks,  vertigo,  etc.

■  Progressive  locomotor  ataxy  from  alcoholism.

vol..  VIII. — 10.


NUX  VOMICA. •  146

■  Lateral  spinal  sclerosis.

^^ Upper  Limbs. llShoulders  pain  as  if  bruised; paralytic
heaviness  with  weak  arms.
I  Soreness  in  shoulder  joint.

■  Drawing  in  arms,  extending  from  shoulder  to  finger,  with

sensation  as  if  arm  were  asleep ;  loss  of  motion  of  arm,
especially  at  night.

■  Drawing  pain  from  shoulder  to  fingers.

I  iSensation  of  sudden  loss  of  power  of  arm  in  morning.

I  I  Paralysis  of  1.  arm  ;  loss  of  sensation  and  mobility ;  sen-
sation of  beating  and  throbbing  as  if  blood  would  be
jerked  out  of  veins.

■  I  Paresis  of  arms,  with  shocks  as  if  blood  would  start  out

of  vessels.

■  Arms  and  hands  go  to  sleep;  numb,  stiff" feeling.
I  I  Herpes  on  inside  of  r.  forearm.

■  Veins  on  hands  and  arms  prominent.

■  Hands  cold  and  sweaty,  with  cold  nose.

I  I A  peculiar  feeling  of  duplication  of  touch,  and  an  al-
most painful  sensation  in  ring  and  little  fingers  of  r.
hand  after  being  pressed  upon  during  sleep.

I  I  Whitlow  in  last  phalanx  of  1.  thumb,  gradually  in-
creasing ;  suppuration  in  palmar  surface  of  finger  not
reaching  to  tip  ;  throbbing  pain,  sometimes  with  burn-
ing, <  from  w^armth,  warm  water,  letting  hand  hang
down  and  in  evening  after  sunset;  >  in  bed.
^^  Lower  Limbs.  ■Darting  pains  from  toes  to  hip,  or  from
trochanter  to  hollow  of  knee,  <  at  stool,  from  motion
or  lifting,  and  at  night.

I  I  Severe  pains  extending  downward  from  trochanter  to
popliteal  space ;  cries  out  when  moving  in  bed ;  pains
particularly  severe  when  patient  is  lifted  up  or  attempts
to  stand,  it  seems  then  as  if  upper  part  of  thigh  was
being  broken ;  <  at  night  with  anxious  sweat ;  consti-
pation, stool  accompanied  by  severe  pains,  causing  him
to  cry  out,  thus  spending  much  time  before  evacuation
is  accomplished. ^Ischias.

■  Drawing, tearing, from below upward; > from hot

water ;  limb  stiff  and  contracted ;  parts  feel  paralyzed
and  cold ;  lies  best  on  painless  side  ;  <  during  stool  and
in  morning;  costive;,  sedentary  habits;  addicted  to  al-
coholic stimulants. ^Sciatica.

■  Pain  extends  from  toes  into  hip;  constipation;  severe

pains  drawing  into  foot  during  an  evacuation. ^Ischias.
■Muscles  of  thighs  and  knees  painful,  as if  beaten  or

bruised.
Alternate  contraction  and  relaxation  of  muscles  of  legs.

■  Paralytic  drawing  in  muscles  of  thighs  and  calves  pain-

ful on  walking.


147 .  NUX  VOMICA.

iSensation  of  sudden  loss  of  power  in  lower  extremities,

in  morning,
M  When  walking,  legs  tremble;  unsteady  gait ;  drags  feet.

■  Trembling  of  lower  limbs  and  stiffness.

I  Tottering  and  unsteadiness  of  lower  extremities;  stag-
gering when  walking.

■  Numbness  and  deadness  of  legs.

■  Sensation  of  paralysis,  feeling  as  of  a  painful  stripe  down

inside  of  thigh.

■  Violent  colic  (treated  with  narcotics  and  purgatives)  fol-

lowed by  paresis  of  lower  extremities,  so  that  she  could
neither  walk  nor  stand ;  feeling  of  weight  and  stiffness
in  lower  extremities,  as  if  made  of  wood,  with  inability
to  stand  or  move,  though  sensibility  of  affected  parts  is
not  lost;  when  lying,  can  draw  up  thigh  a  little,  but  it
is  only  with  difficulty  that  she  can  move  leg ;  crawling
and  formication  in  paralyzed  parts,  with  a  feeling  of
heat,  extending  from  feet  over  legs  and  knees,  most  fre-
quently at  night. /^Paresis  crurum.

■  ■Paralysis  of  lower  limbs: from  overexertion,  getting

wet,  sexual  excesses  or  after  apoplexy  ;  limbs  cold,  blu-
ish, emaciated ;  jerks,  tension  of  muscles,  formication.
I  I  Stiffness  of  lower  extremities  remaining  after  an  attack

of  meningitis  spinalis.
I  I  Red  swelling  of  leg  with  dark,  painful  spots  ;  bruised,
.  sore  sensation  low  down  in  abdomen,  with  frequent  de-
sire to  urinate  and  to  defecate ;  powerless,  bruised  sensa-
tion in  legs;  loss  of  apetite,  great  depression  of  spirits..
^Phlegmasia  alba  dolens.

■  Bright  red  swelling  of  legs,  with  black,  painful  spots.

I  I  Frequently  recurring  boils,  mostly  on  posterior  part  of
thigh.

■  Sensation  in  hollows  of  knees  as  if  tendons  were too

short,  when  rising  from  a  seat.

■  Painful  swelling  of  knee.

■  Knee  joint  feels  dry,  with  cracking  when  moved.

■  Arthritic  inflammation  of  knees,  also  nodosities.

I  I  Gout  of  knees  after  an  attack  of  tertian  ague  with  tophi

and  sensation  of  lameness  of  joints.
I  I  Small  boils  on  knees  stiffening  whole  leg;  also  on  thigh,
i  I  Rash  on  knee.

■  Pain  in  r.  leg  and  calf  of  leg, <  from  coughing  and

slightest  motion;  >  from  warmth.

■  Cramps  in  calves  at  night,  also  in  soles,  must  stretch  feet,
i  I  Falling  asleep  (deadness)  of  soles.

I  I  Cannot  stand  without  support  of  cane ;  makes  a  few
steps  with  difficulty,  dragging  foot  after  him  ;  foot  para-
lyzed, cold  and  without  sensation.


NUX  VOMICA.  148

I  I  Erysipelas  of  foot  or  knee  in  irritable  subjects,  particu-
larly women ;  bright  red  swelling  with  severe  pain,  but
no  development  of  vesicles.

I  I  Itching,  burning  in  toes  as  from  freezing.

I  i  Superficial  inflammation,  with  bright  red  swelling,  with
burning  itching  or  when  tumefied  parts  crack  and
bleed. ^Chilblains.

I  Violent  throbbing  in  chilblains,  in  Summer.

I  Chilblains  with  bleeding  rhagades.

I  Corns:  soreness  in  corns.
^*  Limbs  in  General, i  Aching,  drawing  or  bruised  pains  in
limbs; <  during  motion  and  at  night.

I  Sick  feeling  through  all  limbs ;  languor,  dread  of  motion.

■  Great  weariness  and  relaxation  of  all  the  limbs,  after

taking  the  open  air.
I  Trembling  of  limbs  and  jerking  of  heart.

■  Sensation  of  sudden  loss  of  power  of  arm  and  lower  ex-

tremities, in  morning.
Uncomplete  paralysis  of  upper  and lower extremities,

affected  as  if  asleep  and  heavy  as  lead.
■Rheumatism  attacking  mostly  muscles  of  trunk  and  large

joints ;  pale,  tensive  swelling ;  numbness  and  twitching,

<  from  least  jar  and  from  cold.
I  I  Miliary  eruption  on  arms  and  thighs.

■  Fingers  and  toes  red  with  burning  and  itching,  as  if

frozen.
^^  Rest. Position. Motion. Rest : headache > ; ringing
in  ears  >.

Lying  down  in  bed :  syncope ;  on  painless  side,  head-
ache >  ;  headache  < ;  eye  symptoms  <  ;  facial  neural-
gia >  ;  twitching  of  muscles  of  face ;  on  painful  side,
toothache  <  ;  nausea  and  frantic  feeling  going  off;  no
protrusion  of  rectum  ;  desire  to  urinate  <  ;  asthma  with
sneezing ;  palpitation.

Must  lie  down  :  tertian  chill ;  great  relief  when  doing  so.

Ljdng  on  back :  head  >  ;  pain  in  kidney  >  ;  cough  <  ;
with  head  low,  hands  above  head.

Lying  on  side :  cough  disappears ;  not  affected,  intercos-
tal neuralgia  and  sciatica  >  ;  affected,  pains  in  chest  <.

Can  lie  only  on  abdomen:  hemorrhoids.

Lies  upon  knees  with  body  bent  backward :  angina  pec-
toris.

Cannot  lie  on  r.  side :  pain  in  kidney.

Must  sit  up  in  bed :  sense  of  suff'ocation.  ■

Raising  head :  syncope.

Holding  head  erect:  a  stupid  feeling.

Bending  head  down  :  as  if  something  heavy  fell  into  fore-
head.


149  NUX  VOMICA.

Leaning  head  against  something :  head  >.

Child  holds  its  head  :  whooping  cough.

Rising  from  seat  or  bed:  syncope;  pain  in  r.  kidney  <;
causes  soreness  in  neck  of  womb.

Sitting :  tenesmus ;  pain  in  spermatic  cord  >  ;  causes
soreness  in  womb;  dull  pain  in  back.

Must  sit  up  to  turn  over  in  bed :  backache.

Must  sleep  sitting  in  a  chair :  constriction  of  chest.

Bending  forward : >  pain  in  stomach.

Stooping:  syncope;  congestion  to  head ;  headache  <.

Supports  himself  leaning  with  hands  upon  table  :  constric-
tion of  chest.

Standing:  neuralgia  of  trigeminus  <;  tenesmus;  pain  in
spermatic  cord  <  ;  impossible,  paresis  of  lower  limbs.

Slides  down  in  bed :  typhoid.

Must  double  up  :  uterine  pain  ;  pain  in  back.

Letting  hand  hang  down  :  whitlow  <.

When  attempt  is  made  to  stand :  seems  as  if  upper  part
of  thigh  was  being  broken.

Attempts  to  stand  up  in  bed :  typhoid.

Must  stretch  foot :  cramps  in  soles.

Motion :  excessive  sensitiveness  in  brain  ;  ringing  ip  ears
returns ;  of  nose,  causes  soreness ;  facial  neuralgia  <  ;
the  least,  causes  chilliness ;  region  of  liver  <  ;  abdomi-
nal muscles  painful ;  pain  in  1.  kidney  <  ;  constriction
of  chest ;  creeping  chills ;  of  shoulder,  increases  pain ;
causes  and  aggravates  attacks  of  angina  pectoris ;  pains
■from  toes  to  hips  <  ;  of  knee  joint  causes  cracking ;
slightest,  pain  in  r.  leg  <  ;  aching  in  limbs  < ;  brings
on  spasms ;  of  r.  leg  causes  him  to  start  and  distort  face;
bruised  pain  in  limbs  <;  chilliness  <.

Slightest  exertion  :  dyspnoea;  asthma;  heat  <.

When  moving  in  bed :  pains  from  trochanter  to  popliteal
space  <.

Turning  in  bed  :  pain  in  small  of  back,  sudden  stitches.

Swallowing:  pain  in  ears;  stinging  or  stitches  in  throat.

Must  stand  or  walk  about :  labor  pains.

Walking :  syncope ;  brain  feels  shattered ;  brain  seems  to
shake;  shocks;  facial  neuralgia  <;  abdomen  sore;
pain  in  r.  kidney ;  constricting  pain  in  spermatic  cord  < ;
asthmatic  constriction  of  chest ;  pain  in  back  >  ;  stag-
gering ;  impossible,  paresis  of  lower  limbs ;  drags  feet.

Ascending:  cough  <.

Exercise:  toothache  >;  asthma  <;  cough;  of  affected
part  causes  spasmodic  contraction.
^''Nerves.  llOversenfeitiveness:  to  external  impressions,
odors,  light,  noise  or  music,  a  slight  current  of  air ;  to
trifling  ailments;  every  harmless  word  offends,  even
suitable  medicine  aggravates.


NUX  VOMICA.  150

■  Great  reflex  excitability.

■Slightest  touch  of  hand  immediately  brought  on  spasms.

■  Stitches  through  body  in jerks,  feels  sore  all  over,  <

mornings.

■  Violent,  contractive,  painful  sensation through whole

body.

■Sensation  in  muscles  of  limbs,  back,  scapulse,  etc.,  as  if
something  in  them  were  drawn  back  and  forth ;  more
spasmodic  than  painful.

I  I  Shooting  pains  in  head,  face  almost  purple;  suddenly
leaving  head  it  attacks  bowels,  causing  her  to  scream
violently  ;  at  the  same  time  darting  pains  in  arms  and
legs ;  constant  urging  to  urinate,  could  pass  but  little
light-colored  urine  ;  skin  very  dry. ^Neuralgia.

■  Sudden  shocks  from  some  part  of  body  to  brain. ^Cere-

bro-spinal  meningitis.

■  Painful  cramps  in  calves  or  toes,  must  stand  still  while

walking,  <  at  night,  plethoric,  well-nourished  old
people.
I  I  Every  evening  crawling  in  hands  and  feet  extending  to
epigastrium,  where  there  is  a  pressure,  with  great  anx-
iet}^  and  nausea  ;  from  epigastrium  it  extends  to  throat,
as  if  she  would  choke ;  thence  it  goes  into  head  and  she
loses  consciousness ;  spasmodic  motions  of  hands  and
feet ;  after  a  short  time  a  general,  warm  sweat,  and  con-
sciousness returns. ^Hysteria.

■  Hysteria:  convulsive  form;  tetanic  spasms;  no  loss  of

consciousness  ;  spasms  brought  on  by  touch,  motion  or
slightest  noise;  great  anxiety;  outbursts  of  anger;
great  trembling,  blueness  of  hands  and  nails;  complete
anaesthesia  ;  with  profuse  menses.

■  Convulsive  twitching  of  single  muscles  or  of  a  single  limb.

■  Spasms,  with  tetanic  rigidity  of  nearly  all  the  muscles  of

body,  with  interruptions  of  a  few  minutes  during  which
the  muscles  are  relaxed.
I  1  Limbs  drawn  up  with  a  sudden  jerk  to  body  and  then
forcibly  thrust  out;  whole  body  would  be  tossed  to  r.
side,  then  on  back  again  ;  face,  hands  and  limbs  cold  ;
pulse  almost  imperceptible  ;  after  every  spasmodic  toss
of  body  head  would  roll  to  one  side,  without  any  power  of
cervical  muscles  to  control  it ;  lips  and  cheeks  flabby  ;
eyes  expressionless ;  conscious  of  the  spasms  and  felt
his  strength  fast  ebbing  away.  ^Spasms  following  pneu-
monia and  typhoid  fever.

■  Short,  rattling  breathing;  spasmodic  twitching  of  body  ;

head  retracted ;  bloating  of  abdomen  ;  stool  hard,  de-
layed ;  frequent  crying. ^Eclampsia.
M Tetanic  spasms  after  getting  wet  and  catching  cold;


151  NUX  VOMICA.

limbs  first  affected,  then  back,  latter  becoming  so  stiff
that  she  seemed  like  one  suffering  from  catalepsy  ;  at
times  single  twitches  occurred,  accompanied  by  outcries;
lips  blue ;  respiration  very  difficult,  at  times  even  sus-
pended ;  several  attacks  occurred  during  night  (towards
morning),  each  lasting  longer  than  previous  one,  last
attack  of  about  three  hours'  duration  ;  attacks  followed
by  great  prostration  of  limbs.

I  I  Muscles of  fingers  and  thumbs firmly  and painfully

contracted  and  strongly  pressed  against  palms,  so  that
she  was  unable  to  open  hands,  and  any  attempt  to
forcibly  open  them  caused  severe  pain  ;  pains  in  calves.
^Tonic  spasm.

iTen  daj'^s  after  cut  on  r.  side  of  forehead,  difficulty  of
swallowing,  with  stiffness  of  muscles  of  neck  and  jaw ;
after  three  days  jaw  rigidly  closed;  head  constantly
thrown  backward  ;  at  intervals  of  from  half  an  hour
to  an  hour,  violent  painful  paroxysms,  during  which
whole  body  was  thrown  into  a  spasm,  limbs  extended,
hands  and  feet  drawn  inward  (towards  thumbs  and  great
toes),  head  and  trunk  bent  backward  like  a  bow,  mus-
cles of  chest  rigid,  impeding  respiration  to  such  a  de-
gree that  face  became  purple,  intellect  clear;  harassing
cough  between  paroxysms  closely  resembling  a  sneeze,
owing  to  spasmodic  closure  of  lips  coming  on  with
every  attempt  to  cough  ;  almost  any  peripheral  irritation,

.  swallowing  fluids,  attempt  to  pry  open  mouth,  or  mov-
ing patient,  would  induce  spasmodic  action  of  muscles
of  face  and  upper  part  of  body,  and,  if  long  continued,
bring  on  violent  contractions  involving  whole  muscular,
system  ;  wound  had  scarcely  healed  any  and  was  filled
with  a  black  slough. ^Traumatic  tetanus.

iTetanus,  characterized  by  opisthotonos;  clonic  spasms
are  particularly  severe,  and  the  suffering  so  great  that
the  patient  groans  continually.

llSevere  clonic  spasms  every  five  or  ten  minutes;  lips
blue;  eyes  protruded  ;  lower  extremities  stiff;  with  each
spasm  forced  out  a  piercing  cry  so  loud  as  to  waken
neighbors;  foam  at  mouth;  least  motion,  moving  fin-
gers or  eyes,  or  touching  lips  with  spoon,  brought  on
spasm. ^Strychnia  poisoning.

I I  Convulsions :  from  emotions,  as  anger;  from  indigestion;
following  abuse  of  alcohol;  preceded  by  constipation,
jaundice,  etc.;  begin  with  an  aura  from  epigastrium;
opisthotonos  and  emprosthotonos,  with  consciousness ;
limbs  rigid  and  go  to  sleep  ;  choreic,  with  numbness ;  re-
newed by  bright  light,  sudden  jar,  noise  or  least  touch  ;
deep  sleep  follows;  of  extremities;  epileptic,  bending  head


NUX  VOMICA.  152

backward ;  trismus ;  in  inner  parts ;  brought  on  by
pressure  over  solar  plexus.

■  Chorea,  spinal,  sensation  of  numbness  in  affected  muscles ;

crawling  sensation  in  parts  attacked ;  unsteady  gait ;
feet  drag;  movements  renewed  by  least  touch,  but  >  by
firm,  steady  pressure ;  I  I  suddenly  sleepy  and  falls  to
floor,  sleep  lasts  one  or  two  minutes,  when  he  rises  and
goes  about  his  work,  ^Epilepsy.
I  I  Severe  and  frequent  attacks  of  epilepsy ;  frothing  at
mouth;  twitching  of  limbs;  mental  disturbance  brings
on  an  attack  ;  despondent,  dissatisfied.

■  Feeling  as  if  bruised  all  over.

■  Sensation  of  anxiousness  in  body.

I  I  Sensation  of  heaviness  of  body,  alternating  with  sensa-
tion of  lightness.

■  ■General  languor;  inclination  to  sit  or  lie  down  and  be

alone.

■  Sudden  failing  of  strength;  great  weariness;  greater  in

morning  after  rising  than  in  evening  on  going  to  bed.

■  Heat  of  Summer  insupportable;  slightest  exercise  pro-

duces fatigHe,  with  sleepiness  and  gastric  ailments.

■  ■Great  nervous  debility: with  oversensitiveness  of  all

senses;  from  night  watching,  cannot  walk  on  account
of  giving  out  of  lower  extremities,  knees  knock  together;
from  use  of  coffee,  wine,  etc.,  with  heaviness  and  trem-
bling of  limbs,  especially  early,  or  after  a  walk  in  open
air.

■  Tremulous  sensation  over  whole  body  in  morning.

■  ■Trembling  all  over,  mostly  of  hands  ;  in  drunkards.

■  ■  Great  excitement,  with  trembling  of  bowels  and  nerves

generall}^

■  ■Tendency  to  faint:  from  odors;  in  morning;  after  eat-

ing ;  after  attacks  feels  very  sick  or  weak ;  after  a  walk
in  open  air ;  after  every  labor  pain  ;  after  vomiting
spells  or  diarrhoeic  stools.

■  Depression  following  overstimulation.

■  Paralysis:  parts  cold,  numb,  emaciated ;  caused  by  apo-

plexy or  cerebral  softening,  with  vertigo  and  weak  mem-
ory ;  after  sexual  excesses ;  after  abuse  of  alcohol ;  after
spasms ;  after  poisoning  with  Arsenic ;  after  diphtheria ;
after  fits  of  anger ;  labio-glosso  pharyngea ;  multiple
sclerosis;  after  mental  exertion  combined  with  seden-
tary habits  ;  from  exhaustion  of  spinal  cord,  spinal  ante-
mia,  reflex  para  and  hemiplegia,  or  white  softening,  or
where  paresis  of  motor  nerve  centres  remains  after  all
signs  of  irritation  have  passed ;  incomplete,  power  of
motion  not  entirely  gone,  but  impeded  by  painful
twitchings  and  spasmodic  contraction  whenever  affected


153  NUX  VOMICA.

part  is  exercised ;  of  arm  with  violent  jerks  in  it,  as  if
blood  would  start  out  of  veins ;  staggering  walk,  when
he  walks  drags  feet,  cannot  lift  them ;  numbness  and
deadness  of  lower  legs ;  spasmodic  contractions  occur
whenever  the  affected  parts  are  exercised.

I  I  Hemiplegia,  1.  side,  could  not  raise  his  arm  and  could
scarcely  hobble  across  room  ;  attack  caused  by  excessive
hard  work,  loss  of  sleep  and  overindulgence  in  tobacco.

I  Hemiplegia,  1.  side,  after  diphtheria.

■  Paralysis  of  r.  arm  and  leg  resulting  from  poisoning  by

Morphium  aceticum.
I  I  Partial  paralysis  of  lower  limbs  from  overexertion  and
being  drenched  in  rain;  drags  limbs  in  walking;  sensa-
tion of  lower  limbs  impaired,  feels  a  pin  only  wdien  it
penetrates  deep  enough  to  draw  blood ;  legs  cold,  bluish ;
constipation  ;  burning  at  anus  ;  occipital  headache ;  no
painful spot in  whole length  of  spine. ^Locomotor
ataxy.
I  I  Intense  headache  in  occiput ;  dizziness ;  pain  in  eyes ;
furred  tongue ;  bad  taste,  nausea,  vomiting ;  great  tender-
ness of  abdomen,  with spasmodic pains  and watery
diarrhoea;  all  symptoms  except  tenderness  recur  every
other  day; nightly  restlessness,  paroxysms of  pain;
constipation. ^Progressive  locomotor  ataxy.
^^  Sleep, i  I  Stuporlike  sleep,  in  morning.

■  8tupor,  lo'wer  jaw  dropped;  deep  sleep.

I  Yawning,  with  stretching  of  limbs  ;  chilliness.

I  Drowsy  all  day,  <  after  meals.

I  Cannot  keep  from  falling  asleep  in  evening  while  sitting,
hours  before  bedtime,  and  wakes  at  3  or  4  a.m.  ;  falls
into  a  dreamy  sleep  at  daybreak,  from  which  he  is  hard
to  arouse  and  then  feels  tired  and  weak.

■  During  sleep:  blowing,  snoring  expiration.

I  I  Always  seeks  to  lie  on  back  during  sleep,  with  head  low,

arms  above  head,  so  that  hands  lie  on  nape  of  neck.
I  I  Violent  starting  on  going  to  sleep.

■  Dreams: sad or  frightful; of  mutilations; confused;

anxious;  pursued  by  cats  and  dogs,  etc.;  about  fatal
accidents;  of  quarreling;  about  exerting  the  mind;
amorous.

■  Whimpering  and  moaning  in  sleep,waking  from  troubled,

busy  dreams,  frightened,  as  if  some  one  were  in  room.
^Mania  a  potu. /^Typhus.
I  I  Weeping  and  talking  during  sleep.

■  Nightmare  after  a  heavy  supper  or  alcoholic  beverages;

during  sleep  blowing,  snoring  respiration ;  dreams  full
of  bustle  and  hurry ;  springs  up  delirious,  has  frightful
visions;  awakens  in  fright  from  least  noise.


NUX  VOMICA.  154

■  Goes  to  sleep  late  from  crowding  of  thoughts.
■Sleeplessness  after  midnight.

1 1  Awakens  at  3  a.m.;  ideas  crowd  upon  him  ;  if  he  falls
asleep  again  he  aw^akens  much  fatigued ;  morning  sleep
aggravates  all  complaints.

■  Insomnia,  after  mental  strain, abuse of coffee, wine,

liquor,  opium  or  tobacco.
I  I  Better  after  a  short  sleep,  unless  aroused.
^^  Time. Towards  morning :  cramps  in  stomach.

3  A.M. :  ideas  crowd  upon  him ;  restless  sleep  with  nausea
and  vomiting;  hemorrhage  <  ;  pains  in  small  of  back
<  ;  wakes  with  many  complaints ;  falls  into  a  heavy
sleep.

4  A.M. :  diphtheria  <  ;  gets  out  of  bed  with  pain  in  back ;
awakens  with  mental  anguish.

Before  breakfast :  waterbrash.

Morning :  great  weakness  and  lassitude ;  as  if  stupefied ;
syncope ;  reeling ;  heaviness  of  head ;  tensive  pain  in
head ;  stitches  in  head ;  burning  pain  in  head ;  head-
ache as  if  he  had  not  slept ;  pain  in  middle  of  brain ;
headache  with  bilious,  sour  vomiting;  pressing  head-
ache ;  head  drawn  to  shoulder  >  ;  irritable ;  intoler-
ance of  light  <  ;  photophobia ;  vision  of  1.  eye  lost ;
pain  in  eye  <  ;  hot  lachrymation  <  ;  trachoma  and
follicular  conjunctivitis  <  ;  smarting,  itching  in  lids  < ;
on  opening  eyes  cannot  tolerate  light ;  "ophthalmia  <  ;
conjunctivitis  < ;  margin  of  eyelid  <  ;  pressure  in
upper  lids  <  ;  smarting,  dry  sensation  in  inner  canthi ;
burning  and  itching  of  lids  <;  pains  in. ears  <;  fre-
quent sneezing;  coryza  fluent;  pain  in  forehead  <;
nosebleed ;  facial  neuralgia  <  ;  neuralgia  of  trigeminus ;
taste  bad ;  taste  sour ;  breath  offensive ;  dryness  of
mouth  without  thirst ;  thirst ;  putrid  eructations ;  dur-
ing sweat,  qualmishness,  nausea;  colic  and  pressure;
pain  in  small  of  back ;  watery  diarrhoea ;  weakness  in
legs  on  rising;  pressure  under  short  ribs  as  from  incar-.
cerated  flatus ;  pain  in  abdominal  ring  ;  retching;  dys-
entery <  ;  great  drowsiness ;  itching,  burhing  in  neck
of  bladder ;  painful  erections ;  metritis  <  ;  pressure
towards  genitals;  dry,  painful  catarrh  <;  dyspnoea;
cough  <;  cough  violent  before  rising;  pain  around
umbilicus ;  whooping  cough  <  ;  scratching  sensation
in  pharynx;  cervico-brachial  neuralgia  <;  sudden
loss  of  power  in  legs;  sudden  loss  of  power  of  arms;
early,  paresis  of  arms;  sudden  loss  of  power  of  legs;
feels  sore  all  over ;  failing  of  strength ;  tendency  to
faint;  stuporlike  sleep;  sleep  <  all  complaints;  chilli-
ness of  back  and  limbs  with  painfulness  of  skin ;  chill
lasts  till ;  chill  with  constipation  ;  sweat.


155  NUX  VOMICA.

9  A.M. :  intermittent  neuralgia  appears.

11  A.M. :  chill  lasting  one  hour.

Forenoon  :  sits  still  and  absorbed  ;  facial  neuralgia.

Day :  coryza  fluent ;  alternate  diarrhoea  and  constipation ;

great  drowsiness ;  enuresis ;  after  midday  nap  erections ;

drowsy.

2  P.M. :  attack  of  pain  in  face  ceases ;  intermittent  neu-
ralgia ceases.

3  P.M. :  pressure  in  stomach.

Afternoon :  excited  and  chatty ;  lost  vision  returned ;
facial  neuralgia  ;  creeping  chills ;  chill.

Evening:  excited  and  chatty;  headache  >  ;  head  drawn
to  one  side  <  ;  moving  nose,  soreness  of  margin  of
nostrils;  twitching  of  muscles  of  face;  drawing  in
teeth;  pricking  in  teeth ;  pains  in  stomach;  dyspnoea;
constriction  of  chest ;  tearing  pain  in  neck ;  whitlow  <
after  sunset;  irresistible  drowsiness;  chilliness  after
lying  down;  fever  appears ;  itching  <."

Night:  syncope;  tensive  pain  in  head;  photophobia  >;
tearing  pains  in  eyes  wake  him  ;  itching  in  ears  disturbs
rest ;  coryza  <  ;  coryza  stopped ;  drawing  in  teeth ;
bloody  saliva  runs  from  mouth ;  wakes  with  a  feeling
of  impending  suffocation;  vomiting  and  diarrhoea;
itching  of  hemorrhoids ;  voids  most  urine ;  enuresis ;
pressure  to  urinate;  sleepless  on  account  of  pain  in
testicles ;  pain  in  1.  kidney  <  ;  cough  <  ;  waking  from
frightful  dreams;  chest  as  if  drawn  together;  angina
pectoris  <  ;  loss  of  power  of  arm ;  paresis  of  arms  <  ;
pains  from  toes  to  hip  <  ;  ischias  <  ;  paresis  crurum  <  ;
cramps  in  calves  and  soles ;  aching  in  limbs  <  ;  several
attacks  of  spasms ;  sleeplessness ;  bruised  pains  in
limbs.

After  midnight :  clawing  in  stomach ;  renal  colic ;  wakes
and  lies  awake  for  hours;  spasmodic  constriction  of
larynx ;  cough  <  ;  till  daybreak  cough  dry ;  sleepless ;
sweat.
^^  Temperature  and  Weather.  Worse  in  dry,  generally
>  in  wet  weather.

Bad  effects  from  sitting  on  cold  stones.

Excessive  sensitiveness  to  open  air;  liability  to  take  cold.

Likes  to  have  room  warm  and  to  be  well  covered.

Open  air  :  syncope ;  headache  <  ;  nose  filled  up ;  lachry-
mation  >;  facial  neuralgia;  colic;  aversion  to;  flatu-
lence >  ;  asthma  >  ;  weariness  and  relaxation  of  all
limbs ;  after  a  walk  tendency  to  faint ;  chilliness  ;  heat
<;  eyes  sensitive; teeth  sensitive; draft,  sensitive.

In  room  :  coryza  fluent.

If  air  is  let  in  under  bedclothes,  chill,  cannot  turn  over.


NUX  VOMICA.  156

Aversion  to  uncovering :  heat  with  red  face.

Does  not  tolerate  covering:  heat  over  body  during  sweat.

Wrapping  up:  headache  >.

Warm  room :  headache  >  ;  pains  in  ears  <  ;  lachryma-

tion  <  ;  faints  easily  ;  is  desired  in  labor-pains.
Warmth  :  toothache  >  ;  pains  in  abdomen  >  ;  of  stove

>  chills;  whitlow  <;  pain  in  r.  leg  >;  does  not  >
coldness  of  whole  body.

Sunshine:  headache  <.

Heat  of  Summer :  insupportable.

Hot  weather :  gastric  and  bilious  fevers.

Hot  weather :  >  pain  in  leg.

Hot  drinks:  hiccough;  gastralgia  >;  cough  >.

Near  fire:  pains  in  forehead  <.

Getting  wet;  tetanic  spasms;  partial  paralysis  of  lower
limbs ;  feet,  ague.

Bathing :  does  not  >  burning  pain  in  eye.

Wet  weather :  facial  neuralgia  <  ;  wet  and  warm,  gastric
and  bilious  fever.

Stormy  weather:  headache  <.

Dry  wind  :  takes  cold  in  head.

Dry  cold  weather :  coryza.

Cold :  head  <  ;  toothache  < ;  air  causes  rawness  in
fauces ;  drinks  cause  hiccough ;  rooms  caused  laryngi-
tis; air,  asthma  <;  cough  <.

Cold  water:  toothache  <  ;  pain  in  tongue  <.
*°  Fever, i  Coldness  of  whole  body,  with  blue  hands ;  neither

>  by  warmth  of  stove  nor  by  covering.

I  Chilliness :  on  back  and  limbs,  in  morning,  with  painful-

ness  of  skin,  as  if  it  had  been  frozen  ;  numbness  in
limbs,  like  that  caused  by  cold  weather ;  in  back  and
over  arms  (not  on  hands),  in  evening  after  lying  down ;
with  shivering,  after  drinking;  from  slightest  contact
with  open  air ;  with  hot  face ;  alternating  with  heat ;
from  slightest  motion.

I I  Chill :  begins  in  back,  limbs  or  whole  body,  not  >  by
warmth ;  evening  and  night  in  bed,  lasting  till  morn-
ing ;  with  pain  in  small  of  back  and  sacrum ;  with
thirst ;  as  soon  as  he  moves  bedclothes ;  preceded  by
intolerable  drawing  pain  through  thighs  and  legs,
obliging  him  to  alternately  draw  them  up  and  stretch
them  out ;  congestive,  with  vertigo,  headache,  etc. ;  in
afternoon,  goes  to  sleep  between  chill  and  heat;  <
when  .moving  and  from  drinking;  alternating  with
heat;  mornings,  with  constipation  (in  nursing  children).

1 1  Heat:  with  internal  chilliness;  of  single  parts  while
others  are  chilly ;  alternating  with  chilliness;  with  over-
excited senses,  <  from  external  impressions ;  with  anx-


157  NUX  VOMICA.

iety  and  restlessness ;  internal  burning  through  whole
body ;  dry,  over  whole  body,  does  not  tolerate  covering;
with  thirst;  violent,  long-lasting,  with  great  thirst;
with  red  face  and  aversion  to  ijncovering ;  of  hands  and
feet  which  must  be  covered,  because  cold  causes  intoler-
able pain ;  at  night,  without  thirst ;  <  during  least
exertion  or  in  open  air;  ascending  from  throat;  some-
times precedes  chill.
I  I  During  fever  a  round  spot  at  pit  of  stomach  two  inches
in  diameter,  feels  hot  to  patient  but  feels  cold  to  touch.

■  Sweat:  light;  without  thirst;  with  chilliness  from  mo-

tion or  allowing  air  to  strike  him ;  alternating  with
chill ;  profuse  after  severest  paroxysms,  or  attending
congestive  chill ;  only  on  r.  side;  sour,  cold  and  clammy;
relieving  pains  in  limbs;  offensive;  one-sided;  after
midnight  and  in  morning ;  odor  of  musty  straw  ;  only
on  upper  part  of  body ;  wants  to  throw  off  covers ;  dur-
ing sleep,  disappears  on  waking.

I  I  One-sided  sweat,  after  typhoid  fever ;  day  or  night,  as
soon  as  patient  lay  down  to  nap  or  to  sleep,  side  upper-
most commenced  to  perspire  profusely ;  sweat  warm  and
not  offensive,  disappearing  on  getting  up.

I  Smouldering,  lingering,  obstinate,  irritative  fever;  fre-
quent, small,  thumping  pulse.

■  Gastric  or  bilious  fevers  in  plethoric  individuals  or  in

those suffering from portal stasis, occurring in hot
weather  or  in  warm,  wet  days.
I  Slow  fevers  alternating  with  constipation  and  diarrhoea.

■  Anticipating  morningfever;  chill  with  aching  in  limbs,

gaping ;  blue  nails,  no  thirst ;  then  thirst,  long-lasting
fever,  with  stitches  in  temples ;  light  sweat.

I  I  Chill  every  morning  with  neuralgia,  commencing  in
temples  and  extending  down  ramus  of  inferior  maxilla
and  posteriorly  to  occiput,  with  epistaxis.

I  I  Paroxysm  preceded  by  yawming  and  stretching ;  shak-
ing chill  lasting  five  hours,  with  thirst  and  pain  in
joints;  then  heat  and  sweat;  pain  in  head  as  if  it
would  be  torn  asunder ;  yellowness  of  conjunctiva ;  bit-
ter taste ;  white-coated  tongue ;  constipation ;  urine
red;  sleeplessness  at  night  on  account  of  sweat.  ^Ter-
tian ague.

I  I  Two  months  tertian  chill  at  7  a.m.,  lasting  twent}^  min-
utes ;  nails  blue ;  hot  stage  lasts  ten  minutes ;  sweat
nearly  all  day;  violent  headache;  must  lie  down.

I  I  Severe  chill,  with  excessive  vomiting  of  mucus;  only
cold  and  hot  stages  present ;  cold  very  severe,  lasting
about  fifteen  minutes ;  fever  high,  lasting  eight  hours.

I  I  Chill  followed  by  dum'b  ague ;  partial  paralysis  of  legs.


NUX  VOMICA.  158

I  I  Ague  after  feet  had  become  wet  and  cold  ;  irritation  of
Cauda  equina  manifested  by  appearance  of  pain  when
pressure  is  made  upon  spinal  processes.

I  I  Chill  at  11  A.M.,  pasting  one  hour;  nails  blue;  (after
Nux  vom.  an  eruption  appeared  upon  and  about  lips).

1  I  Chill  in  morning,  with  .  pain  in  stomach  and  1.
hypochondriac  region ;  thist  begins  before  chill  and
lasts  during  heat;  in  apyrexia,  dulness  in  head  and
loss  of  appetite;  only  cold  things  taste  good.

I  Chill  and  heat  mixed,  one  internal,  the  other  external,
or  alternating ;  thirst  for  beer ;  portal  congestion ;  apy-
rexia marked  by  gastric  symptoms.

I  Irregular  in  paroxysm;  may  come  on  at  any  hour  of
day  and  return  at  same  hour,  or  earlier  or  later.

I  Congestive  chills,  with  vertigo,  anguish,  delirium,  vivid
visions,  distended  abdomen,  stitches  in  sides  and
abdomen.

■  Children's  intermittents;  shaking  chill,  with  blue-mot-

tled skin,  especially  on  covered  parts;  morning  chill;
thirst  very  great  during  chill  and  fever;  great  tendency
to  spasms  (and  even  convulsions)  as  chill  went  off  and
sweat  came  on ;  bowels  constipated  with  ineffectual
urging  to  stool,  especially  in  nursing  children  ;  appetite
poor ;  iirine  red  and  fetid  and  generally  a  dry,  hacking
cough.
I  I  Intermittent :  every  Spring ;  anticipating  ;  congestive ;
quotidian;  lltertian;  quartan;  monthly;  after  men-
ses; apoplectic.

■  Nervous  manifestations  originating  in  spine  and  appear-

ing in  distant  parts  of  body. ^Ague.

■  Time:  night  or  early  morning;  6  to  7  a.m.  ;  11  a.m.

■  Rheumatic  fever; vertigo,  chilliness alternating with

heat,  pains  in  head,  back  and  limbs;  thirst;  dryness  of
skin ;  scanty,  dark  urine ;  delayed  stool ;  fever  appears
in  evening;  becoming  <  towards  morning,  but  does
not  entirely  disappear.

■  Typhoid fever;  early period;  vertigo;  pressing head-

ache, particularly  in  forehead;  bitter  taste;  tongue
generally  moist  and  clean ;  pressure  in  epigastrium  ;
little  or  no  thirst;  prostration  in  limbs;  constipation;
restless  sleep,  disturbed  by  dreams;  alternate  chilliness
and  heat;  chilliness  on  slightest  movement;  dryness
of  front  of  mouth  and  tip  of  tongue ;  intolerance  of  im-
pressions on  external  senses;  great  sensitiveness  to  open
air ;  thirst,  with  aversion  to  water  ;  strong  desire  to  lie
down  and  considerable  relief  on  doing  so.
I  I  Severe  shaking  chill,  heat,  headache,  and  on  second  day
an  erysipelatous  inflammation  of  r.  leg ;  lies  in  bed  as


159  NUX  VOMICA.

if  intoxicated  ;  recognizes  no  one,  turns  head  from  side
to  side,  unintelligible  muttering,  for  a  moment  regains
his  senses  when  roughly  spoken  to;  great  weakness  of
whole  body,  slides  down  in  bed  ;  at  times  speaks  in  a
louder  voice,  but  still  unintelligibly,  and  attempts  to
stand  up  in  bed ;  cheeks  very  red  and  burning  hot,
palms  of  hands  hot,  normal  temperature  of  rest  of
body ;  pulse  quick  and  weak  ;  lips  very  dry ;  tongue
black  on  dorsum,  edges  red  and  cracked;  constipation
of  three  days'  duration ;  towards  evening,  when  mo-
ments of  intelligence  appear,  complains  of  tearing  pains
in  head ;  cutting  in  abdornen,  palpitation  of  heart,
anxiety  from  which  he  cannot  free  'himself,  asks  fre-
quently for  water  but  only  moistens  mouth,  pushes  all
food  away ;  although  there  is  no  sweat,  an  offensive,
putrid  odor  is  perceptible ;  r.  leg  from  knee  to  ankle
swollen,  bright  red  and  covered  with  dark  spots,  par-
ticularly on  calf  of  leg;  least  motion  of  affected  leg
causes  him  to  start  and  distort  face. ^Typhoid.

I  I  Delirium;  unquenchable  thirst;  tongue  dry,  brown;
face  fiery  red;  eyes  bright,  rolling;  throbbing  of  caro-
tids; pulse  frequent  and  hard  ;  skin  dry,  burning;  res-
piration short;  frequent  slight,  dry  cough;  abdomen
distended  and  painful;  burning  pains  in  small  of  back
becoming  finally  intolerable ;  sleep  not  to  be  thought
of;  throws  herself  about  in  bed,  lamenting  constantly  ;
stool  very  infrequent,  scanty,  hard  lumps ;  profuse
discharge  of  blood  from  rectum,  with  syncope.  ^Typhus
abdominalis.

I  I  Intense  occipital  headache,  vertigo,  pains  in  eyes,  as
from  deranged  stomach ;  mouth  dry,  parched,  without
much  thirst;  aversion  to  food,  fainting  turns;  sick  feel-
ing through  all  the  limbs ;  bruised  pains  in  limbs  <
during  motion  and  at  night;  great  debility,  with  over-
sensitiveness  of  all  the  senses ;  sour,  offensive  sweat,
which  relieves  pain  in  limbs. ^Typhus  recurrens.

■  Yellow  fever;  after  drugging  or  in  persons  accustomed
to  drinking  strong  liquors;  yellow  skin ;  pale  or  yellow-
ish face,  especially  around  mouth  and  nose.
^'  Attacks,  Periodicity.  Alternately  :  despondent  and  buoy-
ant ;  chilliness  and  heat ;  diarrhoea  and  constipation ;
creeping  chills  and  flushes  of  heat ;  contraction  and  re-
laxation of  legs;  feeling  of  heaviness  and  lightness  of
body ;  draws  up  limbs  and  stretches  them  out.

Periodical:  pain  in  head;  strabismus;  bulimia,  in  after-
noon; vomiting;  pains  in  stomach ;  colic  before  break-
fast; pressing,  pinching  pain,  with  retraction  of  abdo-
men ;  nausea ;  chills.


NUX  VOMICA.  160

Ever}^  five  or  ten  minutes :  severe  clonic  spasm.

Every  fifteen  minutes:  passages.

For  fifteen  minutes :  very  severe  cold  stage.

Every  hour  :  scanty  passages.

An  hour  or  two  after  a  meal:  pressure  in  stomach.

Two  hours  after  dinner :  toothache  < ;  epigastrium
bloated.

Two  hours  after  menses:  pains  <.

For  five  hours :  shaking  chill.

Eight  hours  :  fever  lasts.

Every  morning:  pain  in  1.  side  of  forehead  from  6  to  12
o'clock;  at  8  o'clock  pains  along  course  of  1.  supra-
orbital nerve ;  pains  in  stomach  ;  erections  ;  from  3  to
11  uterine  hemorrhage;  chill.

Every  evening :  crawling  in  hands  and  feet.

Every  night :  emissions ;  awakened  by  sense  of  suffocation.

Twenty-four  hours :  before  spell  of  dyspepsia  very  hungry.

After  sundown  :  pain  in  forehead  >.

Every  other  day :  symptoms  of  locomotor  ataxy  recur.

Every  second  or  third  night:  pollutions.

For  three  days:  paralysis  of  all  filaments  of  third  pair  of
nerves  of  eye ;  constipation.

Three  days  after  cut  in  forehead :  jaw  rigidly  closed.

Every  three  or  four  dajs  :  stool.

Eight  days  before  menses :  pain  in  abdomen.

Ten  days  after  cut  in  forehead  :  stiffness  of  muscles  of
neck  and  jaw.

For  one  week  :  double  vision.

For  six  weeks  :  dull  toothache  ;  uterine  hemorrhage.

For  two  months :  at  7  a.m.  tertian  chill,  lasting  twenty
minutes ;  hot  stage  lasts  ten  minutes.

Summer :  trachoma  and  follicular  conjunctivitis  ;  violent
throbbing  in  chilblains.

Every  spring :  intermittent  neuralgia ;  intermittent  fever.

For  several  years  on  first  of  May :  asthma.

For  six  years :  diarrhoea.

For  many  years  :  spasms  of  stomach.
^^ Locality  and  Direction.  Right:  automatic  motions  of
hand  to  mouth  ;  maxilla  on  side  relaxed  ;  bruised  sen-
sation on  side  of  brain  ;  inflammatory  pains  in  frontal
sinus ;  tearing  pains  in  side  of  forehead ;  pain  over  eye
and  in  temple  ;  mouth  drawn  to  side ;  tongue  goes  to
side;  diphtheria  on  side  of  throat ;  patches  on  tonsil;
pain  in  shoulder ;  severe  pain  in  side ;  great  sensitive-
ness in  region  of  kidney ;  pain  in  kidney  extending  to
leg ;  colic  in  renal  region  extending  to  thigh ;  shooting
side  of  chest ;  tearing  in  shoulder  ;  herpes  on  inside  of
forearm ;  a  feeling  of  duplication  of  touch  in  fingers ;


161  NUX  VOMICA.

pain  in  leg  and  calf;  aching  in  joint;  whole  body  ;
tossed  to  side  ;  paralysis  of  arm  and  leg;  sweat  only  on
side;  inflammation  of  leg;  leg  from  knee  to  ankle
swollen  and  covered  with  spots.

Left :  side  completely  paralyzed ;  grasps  at  head  with
hand;  pressive  pain  over  eye;  pain  in  hemisphere  of
brain  ;  stitches  in  temple ;  beating  pain  in  side  of  fore-
head ;  head  inclines  to  shoulder ;  drooping  of  eyelid ;
throbbing  pain  in  eye  _;  supraorbital  neuralgia ;  eye
seems  to  be  pulled  deep  into  cavity  by  pain  ;  lachryma-
tion;  pupil  enlarged  ;  ringing  and  roaring  in  ear  ;  face
distorted  on  side,  seemed  longer  than  r. ;  drink  and  food
escape  from  corner  of  mouth  ;  numbness  and  loss  of
sensation  of  side  of  tongue  and  face  ;  at  times  arm
weak  and  as  if  asleep ;  pain  in  upper  molar ;  cramplike
pain  in  side  of  abdomen  ;  inguinal  hernia ;  testicle
swollen;  side  of  scrotum  swollen,  hot;  pain  from  sper-
matic cord  to  kidney  ;  head  drawn  to  side  ;  pain  under
short  ribs ;  paralysis  of  arm  ;  whitlow  in  last  phalanx
of  thumb;  hemiplegia;  in  hypochondriac  region.

From  below  upward  :  darting  in  limb.
^^  Sensations. Pain  as  if  bruised  in  outer  parts,  especially
where  patient  is  cross  about  it,  doesn't  wish  to  see  any
one,  or  talk  about  it.

Feels  uneasy  and  encumbered  by  clothes.
'■  Itching  or  tickling,  roughness  or  tension  in  inner  parts.

Heaviness  in  outer  and  inner  parts.

As  if  he  would  fall  backward  or  to  one  side ;  as  if  room
were  turning  in  a  circle ;  as  if  room  were  whirling ;  as  if
something  heavy  fell  into  head  ;  as  if  head  were  im-
mensely larger  than  his  body;  as  if  forehead  were
pressed  in  ;  as  if  he  had  not  slept  enough ;  as  if  eyes
would  be  pressed  out;  headache,  as  if  ulcerated  ;  as  if
he  had  received  a  bruise  over  eye;  as  if  pressing  a  nail
into  brain  ;  pain  as  if  over  surface  of  brain ;  as  if  skull
would  burst ;  as  if  skull  were  pressed  asunder ;  as  if
head  would  split ;  brain  as  if  beaten  or  cleft  with  an  axe ;
as  if  a  pin  were  sticking  in  brain ;  brain  as  if  dashed
to  pieces ;  as  if  revolving  on  an  axis ;  as  if  a  piece  of
forehead  would  fall  out;  as  if  something  heavy  were
sinking  d6wn  into  head;  as  if  a  nail  were  driven  into
vertex  ;  as  of  an  ulcer  in  brain,  or  as  if  suppurating  ;
as  of  a_ bruise  in  back  part  of  head;  as  if  skull  Avould
burst;  integuments  of  head  as  if  bruised ;  hair  as  if  pain-
ful ;  as  of  hot  water  in  eye;  as  if  something  were  cutting
lower  lid ;  margin  of  lids  sore  as  if  rubbed ;  as  if  pain  in
ear  pressed  outward ;  as  if  a  hot  plate  of  iron  were  nearly  in
contact  with  face ;  margins  of  nostrils  as  if  ulcerated ;  as

VOL.  VIII. — 11.


NUX  VOMICA.  162

if  some  one  were  cutting  into  a  wound  in  nostrils ;  face
feels  as  if  he  were  sitting  before  a  hot  fire ;  ears  as  if
pressed  outward ;  teeth  as  if  too  long  ;  as  if  tongue  were
pricked  by  needles  ;  as  if  eyes  would  burst ;  as  if  tongue
stuck  to  roof  of  mouth; as  of  a  ball  in  throat;  as  if
skin  were  scratched  off  throat  with  a  sharp  instrument ;
throat  as  if  raw  and  sore;  as  of  a  plug  in  throat;  as  if
throat  were  too  narrow ;  as  if  everything  were  ferment-
ing ;  as  if  a  stone  were  in  abdomen ;  as  if  something
were  twisted  about  in  stomach; as  if  food  remained
above  stomach  and  were  pressed  back  into  mouth ;  as  if
a  hand  were  grasping  inside  of  stomach  ;  as  if  tooth  were
wrenched  out ;  as  if  an  ulcer  would  form  in  region  of
liver ;  as  if  intestines  were  beaten  ;  as  if  everything  in
abdomen  were  sore ;  as  of  a  stone  in  abdomen  ;  as  if
contents  were  raw  and  sore ;  as  if  diarrhoea  would  come
on  ;  as  if  everything  in  abdomen  would  fall  down;  ab-
dominal muscles  as  if  bruised  ;  pressure  as  from  incar-
cerated flatus ;  as  if  bowels,  bladder  and  rectum  were
pressed  upon  with  sharp  instrument ;  pressure  as  if  urg-
ing to  stool;  as  if  a  hernia  would  occur;  back  as  if
broken  ;  as  if  anus  were  contracted  ;  anus  as  if  cut ;
neck  of  uterus  as  if  bruised  ; navel  as  if  drawn  in ;
as  of  a  load  on  chest ;  chest  as  if  drawn  together ;  as
if  room  had  been  exhausted  of  air ;  felt  as  if  he  must
die ;  as  if  clothing  were  too  tight ;  abdomen  as  if  bruised ;
as  if  everything  in  region  of  umbilicus were  being
shattered and torn  ;  as  if  something  were  torn  loose
in  chest ;  back  as  if  bruised  or  broken ;  small  of  back
as  if  lame;  as  of  a  band  about  knees  • shoulder  as  if
bruised  ;  as  if  arm  were  asleep;  as  if  blood  would  be
jerked  out  of  veins ;  muscles  of  thighs  and  knees  as  if
beaten  and  bruised  ;  feeling  as  of  a  painful  stripe  down
inside  of  thighs;  legs  as  if  made  of  wood  ;  in  hollow  of
knees  as  if  they  were  too  short;  toes  as  if  frozen  ;  as  if
something  in  muscles  were  drawn  back  and  forth  ;  as  if
she  would  choke ;  as  if  bruised  all  over ;  as  if  frozen  ;
pains  in  ulcers  as  if  beaten  ;  skin  as  if  sore.
Pain :  in  forehead  ;  over  eyes ;  in  eyes ;  through  base  of
brain  to  occiput ;  in  bones  over  1.  eye ;  on  top  of  head  ;
in  eyebrow  ;  in  frontal  sinus ;  in  abdomen ;  in  cheek-
bone ;  in  edges  of  tongue ;  in  pit  of  throat ; between
shoulder-blades  ;  constant  in  stomach  ;  from  stomach  to
chest,  or  down  back  to  arras;  radiates  from  epigastrium
in  various  directions;  in  r.  shoulder;  in  kidneys;  in
region  of  spleen  ;  in  small  of  back ;  in  abdominal  ring ;
when  at  stool ;  in  lumbar  region; in  kidneys  to  geni-
tals; in  neck  of bladder  before  urinating;  in  uterus


163  NUX  VOMICA.

running  down ;  in  pit  of  stomach;  in  thighs  and  legs;
in  nipples ;  in  larynx ;  in  chest ;  in  stomach  and
bowels  ;  in  bronchi,  affects  whole  thorax,  1.  arm,  part  of
neck,  lower  jaw,  back  and  region  of  kidneys;  in  back,
starts  from  posterior  of  stomach  and  spreads  under
short  ribs  of  1.  side ;  in  back  from  lower  lumbar  verte-
brse  to  hypochondria ;  across  loins  to  hips ;  from  toes
into  hip;  in  r.  leg;  in  calves;  in  small  of  back  and
sacrum;  in  joints;  in  1.  hyjDochondriac  region.

Intolerable  pain :  in  hands  and  feet  from  cold.

Excruciating  pain :  in  both  supraorbital  regions ;  in
abdomen.

Intense  pain  :  in  eyes.

Violent  pain :  in  forehead ;  in  abdomen ;  in  hernial  re-
gion ;  in  loins ;  in  small  of  back.

Severe  pain :  through  temples ;  in  eyes ;  in  r.  side ;  in
prolapsed  rectum  ;  in  lumbar  region ;  in  region  of  um-
bilicus; downward  from  trochanter  to  popliteal  space.

Anguish :  in  region  of  heart.

Acute  pains:  in  back  and  limbs;  bearing  down  in  womb.

Lacerating  pain  :  in  head  ;  in  teeth ;  in  stomach  ;  in  neck
of  bladder ;  in  back.

Cutting  pain:  in  abdomen  ;  about  umbilicus.

Darting  pain :  in  eye  and  over  it ;  from  toes  to  hips ;  in
arms  and  legs.

Shooting  pains:  through  forehead  and  temples;  in  re-
gion of  liver;  in  loins;  from  lumbar  region  to  thighs;
from  centre  of  sternum  around  chest;  in  r.  side  of
chest ;  in  head  ;  in  bowels.

Throbbing  pain  :  in  head  ;  of  eye ;  in  stomach;  in  whitlow
of  1.  thumb.

Beating  pain  :  in  1.  side  of  forehead  to  nape  of  neck,
z3'gomatic  arch  and  teeth.

Jerking  pain  :  in  head  ;  in  teeth.

Violent  jerking:  in  1.  hemisphere  of  brain.

Pulsating  throbs :  in  direction  of  heart.

Dragging  pains  :  in  region  of  liver;  in  arms.

Grinding :  bearing  down  in  womb.

Bearing-down  pain :  in  abdomen  ;  into  vagina  and  to-
wards sacrum  ;  in  womb,  agonizing.

Rooting  pain  :  in  diaphragm.

Boring  pain  :  in  both  supraorbital  regions;  in  teeth.

Splitting  pain :  in  head.

Grasping  pain :  in  diaphragm.

Squeezing  pain  :  in  hernial  region.

Twisting  pain;  in  both  supraorbital  regions;  moving
about  abdomen.

Griping-tearing :  in  abdomen.


NUX  VOMICA.  164

Griping:  in  stomach  ;  about  navel.

Pinching  pain :  in  head  ;  about  navel.

Constrictive  pinching  pain  :  in  stomach.

Clawing :  in  stomach  ;  in  abdomen  and  uterus.

Gnawing  pain  :  below  epigastrium.

Contractive  pain  :  in  urethra.

Constrictive  pain  :  about  hypogastrium  ;  in  abdomen ;  in
spermatic  cord  ;  in  testicles.

Drawing  pain  :  in  temples  ;.  in  forehead  and  occiput ;  in
muscles  of  jaws  ;  in  teeth  ;  in  muscles  of  throat ;  from
sacrum  and  shoulders  into  thighs;  in  abdomen;  in
arms ;  in  testicles ;  along  spermatic  cord ;  in  thighs ;  in
arms  from  shoulders  to  fingers  ;  in  limbs.

Drawing-tearing  pain  :  in  jaws;  in  back;  in  lower  limb.

Tearing  pain :  in  head ;  in  occiput  to  nape  of  neck ;  in
eye;  in  ears;  in  r.  side  of  forehead,  along  course  of  1.
supraorbital  nerve  and  middle  branch  of  trigeminus;
in  teeth;  in  abdomen;  in  anus;  in  neck  of  bladder;
along  spermatic  cord;  deep  into  pelvis;  extends  into
knees;  in  r.  shoulder;  in  nape  of  neck.

Violent  contractive  painful  sensation :  through  whole
body.

Stitches  :  in  1.  hemisphere  of  brain  ;  in  temples ;  on  one
side  of  head  ;  through  body  in  jerks;  in  sclerotica;  in
ears  to  forehead  and  temples;  in  teeth;  in  ears;  in
throat;  like  needles  in  abdomen;  along  colon;  in  re-
gion of  1.  kidney;  in  testicles;  deep  into  pelvis;  in
back;  through  body  in  jerks;  in  sides  and  abdomen.

Violent  stitches:  in  1.  temple.

Stitching  pains :  in  r.  side  of  forehead  ;  along  course  of  1.
supraorbital  nerve;  in  liver;  in  pelvic  region.

Sticking  pain :  in  ulcers  on  lips ;  in  region  of  liver ;  in
rectum  ;  in  uterus.

Stinging  pains:  in  e3^eball;  in  submaxillary  glands;  in
uvula ;  in  region  of  liver ;  in  anus ;  in  skin.

Smarting :  in  lids ;  in  anus.

Biting :  in  eyes  ;  on  inner  surface  of  prepuce.

Burning  :  in  head  ;  in  eye ;  in  lids  ;  in  ulcers  on  lips  ;  in
throat ;  in  stomach ;  in  abdomen ;  at  anus ;  in  hemor-
rhoids; in  loins  and  kidneys;  in  region  of  neck  of
bladder;  in  vulva;  in  uterus;  in  pudenda;  on  chest;
in  back;  in  toes;  internal  through  whole  body;  in
small  of  back.

Cramps:  in  stomach;  in  abdomen  and  uterus;  in  blad-
der; in  calves  and  soles;  in  toes.

Cramplike  pains:  in  abdomen;  in  uterine  region;  in
pelvic  region.

Stunning  or  stupefying  pain  in  head.


165  • NUX  VOMICA.

Rheumatic  pain  ;  in  head ;  in  teeth.
Neuralgic  pains :  in  1.  supraorbital ;  of  trigeminus.
Aching:  in  occiput;  of  eyeballs;  in  blad-der; in hypo-
gastrium;  in  head;  in  region  of  heart;  between  shoul-
ders; in  lumbar  region;  in  limbs.
Fearful  pressure :  in  region  of  temple.

Pressive  pain  :  in  small  of  back  ;  in  uterine  region  ;  from
uterus  upward  to  umbilicus  and  stomach.

Pressive  tensive  pain  ;  in  eyes.

Spasmodic  pressive  pain  :  from  pharynx  to  pit  of  stomach.

Pressing:  on  one  side  of  head;  along  course  of  1.  supra-
orbital nerve ;  towards  anus  and  genitals ;  upward
towards  thorax ;  in  region  of  spleen  ;  upon  bladder  and
rectum;  in  loins;  in  region  of  bladder;  in  meatus.

Pressure  ;  in  forehead  and  vertex ;  in  frontal  region  and
temples  ;  in  upper  lids;  in  eyes  ;  in  stomach ;  in  region
of  liver ;  towards  chest  and  head ;  in  forepart  of  urethra,
bladder,  perineum  and  anus ;  towards  genitals ;  deep
into  pelvis;  in  pit  of  stomach;  in  epigastrium,  then  to
throat.

Tensive  pain  :  in  head  ;  in  nipples.

Tension:  in  ear;  between  shoulder-blades;  in  stomach;
in  abdomen  ;  in  region  of  bladder;  deep  into  pelvis;  in
larynx;  in  bronchi;  in  hollow  of  knees;  in  ulcers.

Dull  pain  :  in  bones  of  jaws  ;  in  pit  of  stomach  ;  in  back.

Contusive  pain:  in  abdomen.

Bruised  sensation :  of  brain  ;  in  small  of  back  ;  in  neck  of
uterus;  in  back;  low  down  in  abdomen;  powerless  in
legs  ;  pain  in  limbs.

Painful  sensitiveness :  of  internal  nose.

Sore  pain  :  in  anus.

Soreness :  all  over ;  in  stomach  ;  in  region  of  liver ;  in  ab-
domen ;  on  margin  of  prepuce  or  on  mons  veneris ;  in
neck  of  womb ;  across  pubis ;  in  chest ;  in  shoulder-
joint;  in  corns.

Great  tenderness :  of  abdomen.

Sensitiveness :  of  rectum  ;  in  region  of  r.  kidney.

Scraping :  in  nose  and  throat ;  in  chest ;  in  pharynx.

Sick  feeling:  through  all  liihbs.

Roughness  :  in  throat ;  in  chest.

Rawness :  in  fauces ;  in  chest.

Tingling :  in  vulva.

Tickling:  in  throat;  in  trachea; in  middle  of  sternum.

Paralytic  drawing :  in  limbs.

Constriction  :  about  hypogastrium  ;  of  larynx ;  of  lower
part  of  thorax.

Tightness:  about  waist;  around  hypochondriac  region.

Throbbing:  in  arms;  in  chilblains;  of  carotids.


NUX  VOMICA. ■  166

Jerking  :  of  heart ;  pain  in  ulcers.

Shocks  :  in  ear ;  from  some  one  part  of  body  to  brain.

Distress :  in  neck  of  womb.

Anxiousness : in  body.

Uneasiness :  in  rectum.

Trembhng : of limbs  ; all over ; of bowels  ; nerves

generally.
Heat :  in  head  ; in  forehead  ; in  cheeks  ; in  nose ; in

stomach  ;  in  loins  and  kidneys  ;  in  testicles  ;  in  uterus  ;

in  chest ;  in  paralyzed  legs ;  in  round  spot  at  pit  of

stomach  ;  in  palms.
Dulness:  of  head.
Stupid  feeling:  in  head.
Numbness  :  in  limbs  ;  on  1.  side  of  tongue  and  affected

side  of  face ;  along  spine ;  of  legs ;  in  affected  muscles ;

of  lower  legs.
Stiffness :  of  neck  ; in  hollow  of  knees ;  of  lower  limbs ;

of  jaw.
Lameness:  of  joints  of  legs.
Deadness :  of  legs ;  of  soles.
Lightness:  of  body.
Heaviness:  of  head;  of  eyelids; in  forehead; in  neck;

in  region  of  neck  of  womb ;  in  uterus  ;  of  chest ;  of  body.
Fulness :  in  eyes  ;  in  abdomen  ;  in  region  of  bladder  ;  in

stomach.
Oppression :  of  chest.

Weight :  in  stomach  ;  in  uterus  ;  in  lower  extremities.
Prostration :  in  limbs.
Weakness :  in  abdomen.
Tired  feeling :  of  heart.
Fluttering:  at  pit  of  stomach.
Creeping :  in  nose.
Crawling :  in  nose ;  in  paralyzed  legs ;  in  hands  and  feet

to  epigastrium.
Buzzing:  in  head.
Dry  sensation :  in  inner  canthi ;  in  auditory  canal  and

meatus ;  in  larynx.
Dryness  of  lips:  on  tongue;  of  mouth;  of  knee  joints;

of  skin.
Disagreeable  sensation  :  in  throat.
Formication :  of  limbs.
Itching  :  of  lids  ;  in  eyes  ;  within  ears ; of  nose ;  of  dry

scurf  on  face;  of  eruption  over  body  ;  of  anus;  during

erection;  in  region  of  neck  of  bladder;  in  urethra;  in

inner  surface  of  prepuce ;  on  glans  penis;  on  scrotum;

eruption on pudendum; of vulva; in trachea; in

middle  of  sternum. ; in  toes ; all  over  body,  extending

to  head  ; of  skin.


167  NUX  VOMICA.

Chilly  sensation  : over  body.

Coldness : of  hands  and  limbs ; of  paralyzed  parts ; of
whole  body.
"  Tissues. Peculiar  irritability  of  tissues,  rendering  patient
oversusceptible,  while  the  functions  are  performed  fit-
fully, spasmodically  or  inharmoniously.

■  Chlorosis,  especially  where  functions  of  stomach,  intes-

tines and  liver  are  principally,  affected,  and  in  those
suffering  the  consequences  of  debauchery  or  of  a  seden-
tary life.

I  Asthenia,  connected  with  slow  and  imperfect  digestion.

•  Disposition  to  catch  cold.

BEmaciation,  especially  of  children.

■  Atrophy  of  infants,  no  appetite  or ravenous  hunger;

desire  to  eat,  with  frequent  vomiting ;  constipation ;
sallow  skin  ;  face  bloated.

■  Gastric  and  bilious  complaints,  especially  of  pregnant

women.

■  Rheumatism:  especially  of  large  joints and muscles;

cannot  bear  least  jar;  of  trunk  or  back;  swelling  in
joints  usually  rather  pale;  symptoms  almost  always  <
towards  morning ;  muscles  palpitate  and  are  cramped ;
parts  feel  torpid,  paralytic.

■  Gout  in  incipient  stage  in  habitual  drinkers  ;  oversen-

sitiveness  to  pain,  constipation;  during  hard  stool,  vio-
lent pain  in  affected  part;  scanty,  dark  urine;  heat
mixed  with  chilliness,  especially  when  moving;  per-
spiration relieves;  torticollis.

■  Congestion  of  blood  to  head,  chest  or  abdomen.

■  Bleeding  from  inner  parts,  especially  if  blood  is  dark;

disposition  to  hemorrhoids.

■  Enlargement  of  veins  without  much  tortuosity;  hard,

black  cords ;  in  persons  of  robust  health,  and  accus-
tomed to  standing  much  on  feet,  or  of  sedentary  habits.
^Varix.
1  I  Inflammation  of  lymphatic  vessels,  with  heat  and  shin-
ing redness,  hardness  and  pain.

■  Anasarca,  with  trembling  of  limbs,  dysuria,  dyspepsia

and  vomiting.

■  Inflammation  of  mucous  membranes;  increased  secre-

tion of  mucus.

I  I  Strictures  after  inflammation.

I  I  Chronic  ulcers  surrounded  by  a  bright  red  swelling,
usually  caused  by  affected  parts  becoming  cold ;  tear-
ing pain.

■  Raised  ulcers with pale red edges;  pain as if  being

beaten to  pieces ;  burning  pain as  if  burnt ;  jerking
pain;  prurient  itching; sensitive  sore  ulcers,  with  a
feeling  of  tenseness ;  pus  greenish  and  corroding.
Scrofulosis  ;  scurvy.


NUX  VOMICA.  168

*'  Touch.  Passive  Motion.  Injuries.  Touch :  pain  in  pit
of  stomach;  scalp  sore;  on  feet  renews  spasms;  scalp
sensitive;  eyeballs  sore;  edges  of  lids  very  sensitive;
stomach  sensitive;  region  of  liver  <  ;  abdominal  mus-
cles painful ;  abdomen  sensitive;  hernial  tumor  sensi-
tive; hemorrhoids  very  sensitive  ;  r.  kidne}^  <  ;  testicles
very  sensitive ;  vagina  intolerable ;  cervico-brachial
neuralgia  < ;  of  hand  brought  on  spasms ;  chorea
renewed.

Pressure :  with  hands  >  headache  ;  epigastrium  sensitive  ;
light  increases  pain,  harder  >  pain;  of  clothes  epigas-
trium painful;  scrobiculus  cordis  sensitive;  region  of
liver  <  ;  pain  in  kidney  <  ;  aching  in  hypogastrium
<  ;  over  solar  plexus  brought  on  spasms ;  firm,  steady
>  movements  in  chorea;  on  spinal  processes  renews
pain.

Tight  clothing:  liver  cannot  bear;  abdomen  cannot  bear.

Rubbing :  itching  in  eyes  >  ;  on  back  desired.

Scratching  :  burning,  itching  or  stinging.

Riding  in  cars:  sickness.

After  injury  :  to  stomach,  severe  pain.

Injury:  caused  strabismus.
*^  Skin. I  I  Excessive  itching  all  over  body,  extending  to  head.

I  I  Terrible  pricking,  stinging  and  itching  of  skin.

Burning  pricking  like  flea  bites.

Burning  itching  or  stinging  after  scratching.

■  Burning  itching  all  over;  <  in  evening;  itching  with

icterus.
iSkin  sensitive  as  if  sore,  or  feels  as  if  asleep.

■  Single  long  stitches,  with  soreness.

I  Yellow  skin  (jaundice);  liver  spots;  nsevi  materni,  ven-
ous capillaries.
lEcchymosis;  blue  spots  as  if  ecchymosed.
I  I  White  miliary  eruption.

■  Urticaria  with  gastric  derangement.
I  Acne,  <  from  eating  cheese.

■  Tendency  to  boils;  especially  if  several  small  ones  unite.

■  Abscesses;  it  often  disperses  them.

■  Eruption  on  pudendum.

*'' Stages  of  Life,  Constitution.  ■■For  very  particular,
zealous  persons,  inclined  to  get  angry  or  excited,  or  of
a  spiteful,  malicious  disposition.

■  ■Ardent  character,  or  a  disposition  disposed  to  anger,

spite  or  deception  ;  always  irritable  and  impatient.

■  Nervous,  melancholic  people,  troubled  with  indigestion;

venous  constitution,  with  tendency  to  hemorrhoids.

■  ■Suits  thin,  irritable,  choleric  persons  with  dark  hair,  who

make  great  mental  exertion  or  lead  a  sedentary  life.


169  NUX  VOMICA.

I  Vigorous  persons  of  dry  habit,  tense  fibre,  ardent  and
irascible  temperament  and  tenacious  disposition.

I  Bilious  temperament. ^Hepatic  affections.

■  Patients  addicted  to  use  of  much  wine  or  coffee  and  to
those  of  sedentary  habits  combined  with  considerable
mental  exertion.

I I  Debauchees,  thin,  of  an  irritable,  nervous  disposition.
1 1  Drugged  subjects.

Child,  set.  6  weeks,  weak,  hectic  father,  delicate  mother,
given  much  coffee  for  nourishment  after  mother  lost
her  milk ;  ophthalmia.

Boy,  set.  several  months ;  incarcerated  scrotal  hernia.

Boy,  set.  6  months ;  eclampsia.

Child,  £et.  1,  healthy;  colic.

Girl,  set.  18  months,  chills  about  six  weeks,  several  times
suppressed  by  quinine;  ague.

Child,  set.  2,  after  swallowing  nearly  an  ounce  of  lauda-
num ;  opium  poisoning.

Boy,  set.  3,  robust,  after  cutting  a  gash  in  r.  side  of  fore-
head by  falling  upon  a  sharp  stone  ;•  tetanus.

Girl,  set.  4,  in  perfect  health  with  exception  of  enlarged
tonsils  and  slight  symptoms  of  worms ;  one  week  after
great  fright,  torticollis.

Boy,  set.  4,'blonde,  after  an  attack  of  gastric  fever ;  cough
and  dyspnoea.

Boy,  set.  5,  suffering  five  days;  gingivitis.

Boy,  set.  5,  every  eight  to  fourteen  days ;  vomiting.

Girl,  set.  Q,  scrofulous  constitution,  lively  temperament,
after  taking  cold  ;  ophthalmia.

Child,  set.  6,  irritable,  passionate ;  hepatic  derangement.

Child,  set.  6,  suffering  three  months,  Sulph.,  with  but  little
result;  chronic  dysentery.

Girl,  set.  7,  blonde,  scrofulous,  small,  suffering  four  months ;
scrofulous  ophthalmia.

Boy,  set.  9,  precocious,  intellect  highly  cultivated,  allowed
no  associates ;  enuresis.

Girl,  set.  10,  suffering  a  long  time;  headache.

Boy,  set.  10,  strong,  light  hair,  delicate  skin,  puffed  appear-
ance; headache.

Boy,  set.  10 ;  inguinal  hernia.

Girl,  set  11,  languid  disposition,  sallow  complexion,  almost
daily  attack  for  last  four  years ;  headache.

Girl.  set.  11,  suffering  six  months;  headache.

Girl,  set.  11,  two  years  ago  fell  while  exercising  and  struck
region jof  stomach,  since  then  suffering;  cardialgia.

Boy,  set.  11,  sanguine  temperament;  congestion  of  liver.

Girl,  set.  11,  suffering  eight  days;  ague.

Girl,  set.  12,  had  been  suffering  four  weeks  with  constipa-
tion ;  dysentery.


NUX  VOMICA.  170

Girl,  set.  12,  nervous,  after  catching  cold  and  getting  wet;
spasms.

Boy,  aet.  13,  when  four  years  old  had  a  fall,  since  then
suffering;  pain  in  head.

Girl,  set.  13,  four  years  ago  caught  severe  cold  by  going
about  in  bare  feet  and  had  an  attack  of  rheumatism ;
lateral  sclerosis.

Girl,  set.  13;  choreic  attacks.

Boy,  set.  15,  after  disappointed  ambition ;  mental  disturb-
ance.

Miss  T.,  £et.  15,  at  seashore,  sick  five  weeks,  her  daily  med-
ication has  been :  Quinine  three  times  a  day,  a  black-
looking  syrup  twice  a  day,  a  cathartic  pill  at  night ;
ague.

Girl,  set.  15,  previously  in  good  health,  after  attending
church  in  winter  seized  with  severe  chill  and  pain  in
limbs;  rheumatism.

Girl,  set.  16,  slender,  healthy,  menses  not  yet  appeared,
attack  without  apparent  cause;  facial  paralysis.

Girl,  set.  16,  suffering  since  infancy; enuresis  nocturna.

Girl,  set.  17,  after  eating  new  bread ;  disorder  of  stomach.

Girl,  set.  17  ;  tertian  ague.

Boy,  set.  17  ;  ague.

Boy,  set.  18,  after  extraction  of  carious  tooth  ;  melancholia.

J.  W,,  set.  18,  nervous  temperament,  smoking  excessively
from  morning  till  late  at  night  and  inhaling  the  smoke ;
tobacco  amaurosis.

Girl,  set.  18,  weak,  irritable,  suffering  several  weeks ;  gas-
tric disturbance.

Man,  set.  18,  turner,  weak,  suffering  three  weeks ;  bloating
of  abdomen.

Girl,  set.  19,  scrofulous,  menses  scanty ;  ulcer  of  stomach.

Girl,  set.  19,  weak  constitution,  phthisical,  menstruated
but  twice ;  hsematemesis.

Girl,  set.  19,  suffering  one  year ;  quartan  ague.

Girl,  set.  19 ;  whitlow.

Young  woman,  set.  20,  unmarried,  suffering  two  months ;
cardialgia.

Young  lady,  set.  20,  treated  for  some  time  by  old  school
'  and  given  up  to  die;  gastritis.

Girl,  set.  20,  w^ell  built,  scrofulous,  suffering  since  one  year
old  ;  prolapsus  of  rectum.

Four  men,  set.  20  ;  spermatorrhoea.

Woman,  set.  20,  unmarried,  four  years  ago  took  much  saf-
fron, since  then  menses  very  profuse  and  debilitating;
dysmenorrhoea.

Woman,  set.  21,  mother  of  two  children;  during  second
month  of  pregnancy,  gastric  disturbance.


171  NUX  VOMICA.

Girl,  set.  21,  slender,  scrofulous,  after  long-continued  diar-
rhoea during  childhood  ;  prolapsus  of  rectum.

Miss  K.  S.,  set.  21,  thin,  choleric  looking  ;  amenorrhoea.

Man,  set.  21,  four  years  ago  had  an  attack  of  smallpox,
since  then  suffering ;  boils  on  thigh.

H.,  set.  21,  suffering  eight  days;  quartan  ague.

Man,  set.  21,  suffering  four  months;  ague,  with  neuralgia
and  epistaxis.

Man,  set.  21,  suffering  four  months;  quotidian  ague.

Man,  set.  22,  had  tinea  in  childhood,  a  chancre  in  his
youth,  occasionally  suffered  from  hemorrhoids,  attacks
come  in  Spring  and  Autumn;  ophthalmia.

Woman,  set.  22,  unmarried  ;  jaundice.

Woman,  set.  22,  nervous,  sanguine,  accustomed  to  use  of
spirits,  during  pregnancy  complained  of  headache,  ring-
ing in  ears,  sensation  of  dryness  and  burning  in  chest,
and  pain  in  epigastrium,  suffering  half  an  hour;  puer-
peral convulsions.

Man,  set.  22,  locksmith,  formerly  scrofulous,  ill  two  weeks;
catarrh  on  chest.

Man,  set.  22,  father  gouty,  leads  an  active  life,  uses  coffee
and  tobacco  to  excess,  suffers  with  hemorrhoids ;  an-
gina pectoris.

Woman,  set.  23,  suffering  eight  weeks  ;  disorder  of  stomach.

Woman,  set.  23,  brunette,  black  hair,  suffering  three
months;  affection  of  stomach.

Mrs.  C.  A.  W.,  set.  23,  primipara,  nervo-sanguine  tempera-
ment, very  fleshy,  with  a  very  small  osseous  develop-
ment; dystocia.

Man,  set.  23  ;  gastric  fever.

Man,  set.  23,  slight  but  of  strong  constitution,  had  small
ulcer  on  leg ;  gastric  fever.

Woman,  set.  24,  weak,  metrorrhagia  after  labor;  mania,

Man,  set.  24,  suffering  daily  for  a  long  time  ;  cardialgia.

Man,  set.  24,  tailor  and  musician,  plays  in  evening  at
public  houses;  cough  and  disorder  of  stomach.

Man,  set.  24,  suffering  twenty-four  hours ;  incarcerated
hernia.

Woman,  set.  24,  delivered  seven  weeks  ago,  suffering  since
first  day ;  pain  in  nipples.

Woman,  set.  24,  single,  sanguine  temperament,  weak  con-
stitution ;  paresis  crurum.

Man,  set.  24,  robust;  gastric  fever.

Man,  set.  25,  ill  four  years ;  headache.

Miss  H.  A.,  set.  25  ;  chronic  headaches.

Mrs.  C,  set.  25  ;  diphtheria.

Man,  set.  25,  beer  drinker,  father  subject  to  gout,  suffering
six  months;  disordered  stomach,  enlarged  liver,  tuber-
culosis.


NUX  VOMICA.  172

Woman,  set.  25  ;  inflammation  of  liver.

Man,  set.  25,  sanguine  temperament,  well  built,  after
catching  cold  during  bath  ;  colic.

Man,  set.  25,  had  an  old,  r.-sided  femoral  hernia;  incar-
ceration.

Man,  set.  26,  agricultural  laborer,  had  itch  when  17,  seve-
ral years  afterwards  gastric  disturbances,  from  which  he
suffered  five  years,  a  year  later  ague ;  dysecoia  of  r.  ear.

Man,  set.  26 ;  hsematemesis.

Innkeeper,  set.  26,  after  retaining  urine  too  long;  paresis
detrusor  vesicse.

Woman,  set.  26,  unmarried,  began  to  have  menstrual  dis-
turbances when  15;  dysmenorrhoea.

Woman,  set.  26,  high  color,  tense  fibre,  good  constitution,
suffering  three  years ;  chronic  myelitis.

Woman,  set.  27,  phlegmatic  temperament,  eight  months
pregnant,  suffering  several  weeks  ; vertigo.

Woman,  set.  27,  sanguine  temperament,  impetuous,  ex-
citable, sensitive ;  headache.

Man,  set.  27 ;  incarcerated  hernia.

Mr.  H.,  set.  27,  dark  complexion,  suffering  three  months ;
pollutions.

Man,  set.  27,  suffering  six  days ;  tertian  ague.

Man,  set.  28,  previously  in  good  health,  working  eight
years  in  fumes  of  lead,  suffering  for  two  years ;  colic.

Man,  set.  28,  strong,  sanguine  temperament ;  suffering  six
days ;  quotidian  ague.

Woman,  set.  28,  nursing  child,  suffering  eight  days;  ague.

Man,  set.  29,  well  built,  dark  hair,  pale  face,  suffering  two
weeks;  cardialgia.

Woman,  set.  29,  confined  six  weeks  ago ;  constipation.

Man,  set.  29,  strong,  had  itch,  sick  four  days  after  anger ;
hepatic  derangement.

Man,  set.  30,  lithographer,  suffering  eight  days ;  vertigo.

Man,  set.  30,  healthy,  sensitive  nature,  of  sedentary  habits,
suffering  five  years ;  headache.

Man,  set.  30,  dark  complexion,  nervous  temperament,  of  a
gentle  and  yielding  disposition,  engaged  in  mercantile
business  compelling  close  mental  application  and  long
hours  of  sedentary  occupation,  suffering  three  years ;
facial  neuralgia.

Man,  set.  30,  servant,  choleric  temperament,  tense  fibre,
mother  similarly  affected,  suffering  three  years ;  car-
dialgia.

Woman,  set.  30,  mother  of  one  child,  after  becoming  chilled
during  a  journey  on  foot ;  gastric  affection.

A  student,  set.  30,  delicate,  weak,  irritable,  sensitive  dis-
position ;  gastric  disturbance.


173  NUX  VOMICA.

Woman,  set.  30,  strong,  suffering  several  years  ; gastric

disturbance.
Woman,  set.  30,  after  sudden  cessation  of  a  chronic  cough;

gastric  disturbance.
Woman,  set.  30,  strong  constitution,  sanguine,  choleric  tem-
perament; inflammation  of  liver.
Man,  88t.  30  ;  bilious  attacks.

Man,  set.  30,  suffering  three  years  ;  hepatic  disorder.
Man,  set.  30,  has  chronic  inguinal  hernia ;  incarceration.
Woman,  set.  30,  had  hernia  for  several  years  for  which

she  wore  no  truss,  after  falling ;  incarcerated  hernia.
Woman,  set.  30 ;  pains  in  kidneys.
Woman,  set.  30,  healthy,  suffering  four  days ;  catarrh  of

larynx.
Farmer,  set.  30,  German,  lives  well,  drinks  six  to  nine

cups  of  strong  coffee  daily,  uses  enormous  quantities  of

tobacco,  smoking  and  chewing  constantly ;  dyspnoea.
Man,  set.  30,  thin,  delicate,  suffering  from  earliest  youth ;

asthma.
Woman,  set.  30,  seven  months  pregnant ;  tonic  spasm.
Woman,  set.  30,  robust,  suffering  eight  days;  hysteria.
Mrs.  B.,  set.  30,  suffering  since  childhood,  seven  months

pregnant,  miscarried  twice  after  attacks ;  epilepsy.
Man,  set.  30,  robust,  ill  eight  days  ;  gastric  fever.
Man,  set.  30,  strong,  well  nourished,  four  years  ago  ague

for  several  months,  suffering  ten  weeks ;  ague.
Man,  set.  30,  formerly  in  good  health,  year  ago  had  ague

for  three  wrecks,  suffering  for  last  seven  months ;  ague.
Woman,  set.  30,  suffering  three  weeks ;  tertian  ague.
Woman,  set.  30,  suffering  seven  months;  quartan  ague.
Woman,  set.  30,  suffering  two  months;  tertian  ague.
Man,  set.  30,  strong;  ague.
Plato  S.,  set.  31,  railroad  official,  emaciated  and  of  delicate

constitution,  suffering eighteen months ; paroxysmal

pains  in  stomach.
Woman,  get.  31,  gastric  disturbance.
Man,£et.  31,  blacksmith,  powerful, dull,  stupid  countenance,

formerly  drank  ale  to  excess ;  dyspepsia.
Pauline  S.,  set.  31,  strong  and  hearty,  four  years  ago,  after

lying-in,  suffered  from  metritis;  uterine  affection.
Man,  set.  31,  weak,  poorly  nourished,  had  four  paroxysms;

quotidian  ague.
Woman, set.  32,  corpulent, lymphatic, suffering many

years  from  a  scrofulous,  fistulous  ulcer  on  knee ;  facial

neuralgia.
Woman,  set.  32,  thin,  pale  yellow  complexion,  disposed  to

illness;  vomiting.
' Man,  a)t.  32,  scholar,  strong  constitution,  quiet  temper.


NUX  VOMICA.  174

suffering  several  years  from  hypochondriacism  which

he  sought  to  relieve  by  resorting  to  spirituous  drinks;

affection  of  stomach.
Man,  set.  32,  robust,  wine  and  beer  drinker,  four  years  ago

had  an  attack  of  hepatitis ;  chronic  affection  of  liver.
Man,  set.  32,  very  intelligent ;  after  riding,  hernia.
Woman,  set.  32 ;  hemorrhoids.  ^

Man,  set.  32,  strong ;  typhoid  fever.
Mrs.  A.,  set.  32,  mother  of  four  children  ;  ague.
Woman,  set.  33,  menses  scanty;  hsematemesis  and  pain

in  stomach.
Cook,  set.  33,  single,  pubescence  premature,  addicted  to

onanism  at  25,  gave  birth  to  a  child,  since  then  has

avoided  the  society  of  men ;  nymphomania.
Mrs.  K.,  set.  33,  mother  of  four  children ;  retroversion  of

uterus.
Man,  set.  34,  drinks  much  beer,  suffered  from  previous

attacks ;  delirium  tremens.
Man,  set.  34,  turner ;  disorder  of  stomach.
Woman,  set.  34,  several members of  family suffering ;

typhoid  fever.
Man,  set.  35,  uses  brandy  but  not  to  excess,  several  pre-
vious attacks ;  delirium  tremens.
Woman,  set.  35,  choleric,  irritable,  suffering  three  years;

headache.
Woman,  set.  35,  unmarried,  strong,  after  overexertion  four

years  ago ;  cardialgia.
Man,  set.  35,  chronic  abdominal  affection.
Man,  set.  35,  suffering  two  days ;  dysentery.
E.  H.,  set.  35,  suffering  three  days ;  dysentery.
Man,  set.  35,  nervous  temperament,  lean,  blonde,  some-
what passionate ;  constipation.
Woman,  set.  35,  troubled with hemorrhoids  for years,

recently  passed  through second confinement after  a

mismanaged  labor ;  after-pains  in  rectum.
Colored  man,  set.  35,  after  a  fall  eight  years  ago ;  pain  in

back,  also  gastric  disturbances  for  last  two  years.
Man,  set.  35,  dark,  choleric,  four  years  ago  suffered  several

months  from  ague;  ague.
Man,  set.  36,  weak  constitution  after  typhoid  fever;  vertigo.
Italian  merchant,  set.  36,  had  chancre,  blennorrhoea,  fond

of  drink,  lives  well  and  is  given  to  women ;  disorder  of

stomach.
Woman,  set.  36,  six  years  ago  fell and  received  severe

blow  upon  stomach ;  disorder  of  stomach.
Woman,  set.  36,  menses  profuse ;  hsematemesis.
Man,  set.  36,  sailor,  single,  phlegmatic  temperament,  short

build,  strong,  suffering  eight  days ;  colic.


175  • NUX  VOMICA.

Man,  set.  36  ;  inguinal  hernia.

Woman,  ^t.  36,  mother  of  many  children,  well  nourished,
brunette,  phlegmatic  temperament,  tendency  to  abdom-
inal complaints,  suffering  eight  days ;  ague.

Woman,  get.  36,  formerly  debauched  and  accustomed  to
drink ;  anasarca.

Woman,  set.  37j  married,  but  childless,  suffering  many
years ;  spasms  of  stomach.

Woman,  set.  37,  week  before  parturition  ;  ague.

Man,  set.  37,  suffering  eight  days;  anteponing  tertian
ague.

Mrs.  B.,  ffit.  38,  black,  coarse  hair,  black  eyes,_  swarthy
complexion,  gloomy  appearance ;  hypochondriasis.

Man,  set.  38,  fruit  dealer;  gastric  disturbance. _

Woman,  set.  38,  suffering  from  periodical  pains  in  liver
after  much  talking  or  after. taking  cold;  inflammation
of  liver.

Man,  set.  38,  suffering  one  year ;  pain  in  abdomen.

AVoman,  set.  38,  pregnant,  ill  four  days ;  pneumonia.

Man,  set.  38,  suffering  four  weeks ;  quotidian  ague.

Woman,  set.  39,  nervous  temperament,  harassing  busi-
ness, subject  to  spasmodic  attacks,  with  dyspepsia,  from
childhood ;  gastrodynia.

Woman,  set.  39,  robust,  choleric  temperament,  irritable
and  vehement,  accustomed  to  use  of  coffee  and  spirit-
uous liquors,  suffering  a  long  time;  affection  of  stomach.

Man,  set.  39,  weaver,  suffering  from  various  chest  affec-
tions, sick  three  weeks;  ague.

Man,  set.  40,  healthy,  ten  years  ago  had  itch,  since  then
suffers  occasionally  from  itching  of  skin;  vertigo. _

Lively  brunette,  a3t.  40,  suffering  nine  years;  migraine.

Man,  set.  40,  strong,  hot-headed,  angry  disposition  ;  head-
ache.

Woman,  set.  40,  gouty,  suffering  several  months;  headache.
Man,  set.  40,  thin,  weak,  light  complexion,  suffering  three
weeks; quinine, morphia, leeches, etc., ineffectual;
facial  neuralgia.

Man,  set.  40 ;  stomacace.

Man,  set.  40,  choleric  temperament,  emaciated, _  suffering
six  years,  after  any  mental  disturbance ;  cardialgia.

Woman,  ast.  40,  weak,  emaciated,  first  attack  twenty  years
ago,  after  vexation,  attacks  gradually  becoming  more
severe cardialgia.

Woman,  ait.  40,  always  regular,  in  habit  of  carrying  heavy

weights;  disorder  of  stomach.
Man,  a3t.  40,  accustomed  to  drink  ;  disorder  of  stomach.
Man,  set.  40,  glove  manufacturer,  suffering  fifteen  years,
under  old  school  treatment ;  gastric  disorder.


NUX  VOMICA.  176

Butcher,  set.  40.  addicted  to  drinking  beer  and  coffee,  suf-
fering one  year,  during  which  time  he  drank  forty  bot-
tles of  Carlsbad  water  ;  affection  of  stomach.

Woman,  set.  40,  large  built,  delicate  skin,  dark  hair,  lively
disposition,  suffering  ten  years  ;  bloating  of  abdomen.

Woman,  set.  40,  incarcerated  hernia.

Man,  set.  40 ;  hemicrania.

Man,  ^t.  40,  suffering  from  constipation  for  which  he
uses  purgatives;  similar  attack  seven  years  ago;  cystitis.

Teacher,  set.  40,  suffering  six  years,  old  school  treatment
and  Carlsbad  waters  ineffectual;  constantly  used  purga-
tives; constipation.

Mrs.  T.  P.,  set.  40,.  fair  complexion,  brown  hair,  happy,
lively  disposition;  strong  and  inclined  to  be  fleshy,  had
always  been  perfectly  well  except  a  painful  neuralgia
of  nipples  and  womb  before  and  after  her  first  confine-
ment, from  which  she  recovered  after  a  miscarriage
about  four  months  ago,  during  third  month  of  preg-
nane}^ ;  uterine  neuralgia.

Woman,  set.  40,  weak,  suffering  sixteen  years  from  pro-
lapsus uteri,  during  which  time  passed  througli  three
labors  and  two  abortions,  last  one  occurring  four  years
ago,  thereafter  wore  a  pessary ;  in  seventh  month  of
pregnancy  removed  pessary ;  after  hard  work  prolapsus
uteri;  after  Nux  vorn.  reduction  became  possible,  then
pains  set  in  and  a  normal  labor  was  accomplished ;
thereafter  parts  returned  to  normal  position.

Mrs.  R.,  set  40,  suffering  several  years;  hay  asthma.

Woman,  set.  40 ;  angina  pectoris.

Man,  set.  40,  robust,  choleric,  passionate,  suffering  one
year ;  paralysis  of  foot.

Man,  set.  40,  nervo-bilious  temperament,  slightly  dyspep-
tic, has  symptoms  indicating  vermicular  troubles ;  epi-
lepsy.

Man,  set.  40,  suffering  eight  days ;  tertian  ague.

Man,  set.  40,  broad  shouldered,  powerful,  six  feet  high,
after  inordinate  use  of  tobacco;  tobacco  poisoning.

Mrs.  G.,  set.  41 ;  climacteric  affection.

Woman,  set.  42,  suffering  three  mos.;  effects  of  mental  shock.

Man,  set.  42,  after  cough  and  coryza ;  headache.

Woman,  set.  42,  married,  regular,  suffering  nine  months  ;
disorder  of  stomach.

Woman,  set.  43,  widow,  mother  of  six  children,  suffering
one  year;  gastric  disturbances.

Woman,  set.  43,  suffering  one  year;  colic.

Mrs.  J.  T.,  set.  43,  medium  stature;  menorrhagia.

Preacher,  set.  44,  robust,  suffering  thirteen  years ;  asthma.

Man,  set.  44;  pains  in  back.


177  NUX  VOMICA.

G.  McL.,  set.  45,  single;  mania.

Man,  set.  45,  sick  two  months  ;  headache.

Woman,  set.  45,  unmarried,  suffering  fifteen  years;  cardi-
algia.

Man,  set.  45,  bilious  temperament,  dark  hair  and  eyes,  sal-
low complexion,  captain  of  whale  ship,  suffered  from
dyspepsia  several  months ;  gastralgia.

Robust  Irish  woman,  set.  about  45,  had  four  or  five  chil-
dren in  rapid  succession  after  she  miscarried  during
eighth  month  ;  prolapsus  uteri.

Woman,  set.  45,  still  menstruating,  uterus  several  times
replaced  by' manipulation;  prolapsus  uteri.

Man,  set.  45;  nervous  asthma.

Mrs.  M.,  set.  46,  choleric  temperament,  very  robust,  fond
of  strong  coffee,  suffered  for  years ;  gastralgia.

Woman,  set.  46,  had  r.  inguinal  hernia  for  one  year ;  in-
carcerated hernia.

Man,  set.  46,  has  had  gonorrhoea  several  times,  and  at  one
time  chancre,  suffering  three  days ;  orchitis.

Woman,  set.  47  ;  cardialgia.

Woman,  set.  47,  blonde,  highly  nervous,  sensitive,  passed
climacteric  a  year  since ;  bronchitis.

Man,  set.  48,  secretary  to  Countess  St.  — ;  choleric  temper-
ament, often  troubled  with  congestion  to  head  and  dis-
orders of  digestive  organs,  younger  brother  died  in  asy-
lum ;  insanity.

Man,  set.  48,  weak,  suffering  twelve  years ;  headache.

Woman,  set.  48, suffering  constantly  for  seven  years;  pain  in
tongue.

Man,  set.  48,  yellow  skin,  cachectic  appearance,  small  stat-
ure, suffering  three  years;  cardialgia.

Man,  set.  48 ;  disorder  of  stomach.

Woman,  set.  48 ;  incarcerated  hernia.

Miss , set. 48,  nervous  temperament,  suffering  six  years,

after  disappearance  of  congestive  headaches  ; morning
.  diarrhoea.

R.  A.,  set.  48,  suffering  four  or  five  days ;  dysentery.

Mr.  J.  S.,  set.  48,  nervo-sanguine  temperament,  full  habit,
strictly  temperate,  suffering  sixteen  years ;  epilepsy.

Woman,  set.  50,  lean  appearance,  after  vexation  ;  gastralgia.

Man,  set.  50,  tall,  spare,  dark  hair,  an  attack  of  malarial
fever  sixteen  years  ago  for  which  he  received  severe
treatment;  irritable  stomach.

Man,  nearly  50,  thin,  yellow  complexion,  not  easily  an-
gered but  when  so  very  passionate ;  digestive  dis-
turbance.

Mrs. S.,  a3t.  about  50,  lymphatic  temperament,  several

years  ago  had  severe  attack  of  ague ;  diarrhoea.
VOL.  vjir. — 12.


NUX  VOMICA.  178

Man,  get.  50,  had  diarrhoea  two  weeks  previously  which

was  checked  by  Arsen.'^'^'^ ;  dysentery.
Miner,  set.  50,  at  one  time  handled  much  lead  and  arsenic,

suffering  sixteen  years,  for  last  six  years  abdominal  com-
plaints; colic.
Man,  set.  50,  suffering  three  years  with  rectal  fistula  after

an  operation  for  stone  in  bladder,  suffering  eight  days ;

orchitis.
Healthy  looking  farmer,  set.  51,  slightly  asthmatic  for

years ;  asthma.
Man,  set.  52,  strong,  healthy,  suffering  ten  days ;  hemi-

crania.
Man,  set.  52,  thin,  choleric temperament,  suffering six

3''ears;  cardial gia.
Woman,  set.  52,  thin,  after  a  fall ;  incarcerated  hernia.
Woman,  set.  52,  suffering  four  years;  hernia.
Man,  set.  52 ;  quartan  ague.

Man,  set.  53,  had  sj^philis  twenty-three  years  ago;  paraly-
sis of  third  pair  of  nerves.
J.  N.,  set.  53,  hard  drinker,  inveterate  smoker;  amblyopia

potatorum  and  atrophy  of  optic  nerve.
Man,  get.  53,  suffering  several  years,  has  taken  cathartics,

tonics,  etc.,  with  no  good  result;  gastralgia.
Woman,  set.  54,  menses  absent  seven  years ;  had  been  bled,

as  apoplexy  was  feared  ;  vertigo.
Man,  set.  54,  incarcerated  hernia.
Man,  set.  55,  born  in  Holland,  night  watchman,  weight

240  pounds,  has  always  been  healthy ;  apoplexy.
Man,  set.  55,  long  time  ill,  confined  to  bed  for  last  six-
teen weeks ;  vertigo.
Man,  set.  55,  suffering  four  years ;  cardialgia.
Woman,  set. 55, strong,  choleric,  hernia  on both sides

eight  years  ago,  after  slipping ;  incarcerated  hernia.
Woman,  set.  55,  slender,  suffering  two  days ;  incarcerated

hernia.
Man,  set.  55,  operated  upon  for  same  trouble  seven,  years

ago ;  hemorrhoids.
Mrs.  P.,  set.  55 ;  neuralgia.
Man,  set.  55,  choleric,  sanguine  temperament,  suffering  two

months;  tertian  ague.
Man,,  set.  57,  formerly  had  itch  which  was  cured  rapidly,

thereafter suffering from various complaints; renal

colic.
Mrs.  Th.,  set.  58,  suffering  ten  years;  dyspepsia.
Woman,  set.  58,  ill  six  months;  disorder  of  stomach  and

vaginitis.
Man,  set.  59,  drunkard,  suffering  six  years  with  rheumatic

pains,  last  four  weeks  confined  to  bed;  rheumatism.


179  NUX  VOMICA.

Miss ,  set.  60,  dark,  thin,  emaciated,  hypochondriacal

temperament,  suffering  since  childhood ;  headache.

Mr.  T.,  set.  60,  dark  complexion,  dyspeptic,  smokes  but
does  not  drink ;  atrophy  of  optic  nerve.

Man,  set.  60,  tall,  lively,  suffering  from  hemorrhoids,  ab-
dominal troubles  since  an  attack  of  ague,  last  few  weeks
noticed  dull  stitching  pains  in  region  of  spleen ;  hsema-
temesis.

Widow,  set.  60 ;  renal  colic.

Man,  set.  60,  suffering  eight  days ;  inactivity  of  bladder.

Man,  set.  60,  suffering  from  chronic  inguinal  hernia,  1.  side ;
incarceration.

Woman,  set.  60  ;  incarcerated  hernia.

Man,  set.  60,  suffering  from  a  catarrhal  affection  to  which
Nux  vom.  was  applicable  ;  hernia.

Man,  set.  63,  uses  much  coffee;  apoplexy.

Man,  set.  64,  for  forty  years  has  had  double  inguinal  her-
nia; incarceration  r.  side.

Man,  set.  64,  passionate,  fond  of  heating  drinks ;  paralysis
of  1.  arm.

Man,  set.  65,  suffering  ten  years;  incarcerated  hernia,  r.  side.

Woman,  set.  65,  has  an  old  1. -sided  inguinal  hernia;  in-
carceration.

Woman,  set.  65,  suffering  several  years;  asthma.

Woman,  set.  70 ;  disorder  of  stomach  and  liver.

Man,  set.  70,  of  gigantic  stature ;  colic.

Woman,  over  70  ;  impaction  of  feces.

Man,  set.  70,  strong,  suffering  six  years,  thinks  first  attack
was  caused  by  overexertion,  attacks  usually  lasting
about  six  weeks ;  hsematuria.

Woman,  set.  71,  had  a  hernia  nine  years;  incarcerated
hernia.

Man,  set.  73 ;  incarcerated  hernia.

Man,  set.  74 ;  tertian  ague.

Man,  set.  75 ;  sickly,  cachectic ;  extravasation  of  blood
into  conjunctiva.

Man,  set.  77,  suffering  a  long  time;  hernia.

Women,  set.  79,  widow,  after  an  apoplectic  stroke  from
which  she  partially  recovered ;  mental  disturbance.

Man,  set.  80,  troubled  several  years ;  inguinal  hernia.

Man,  set.  80 ;  l.-sided  paralysis.

Young  lady,  lately  and  happily  married,  suffering  from
slight  gastric  disturbances ;  mania.

Man,  had  for  several  days  been  drinking  wine,  a  habit  to
which  he  was  accustomed,  and  thereafter  had  constantly
a  sensation  as  of  hair  on  tongue ;  apoplexy.

Man,  suffering  six  months;  vertigo  and  backache.

Working  woman,  well  educated,  formerly  in  good  circum-


NUX  VOMICA.  180

stances,  in  habit  of  drinking  much  strong  coffee  ;  hemi-
crania.

Man,  strong  constitution,  choleric  temperament,  suffering
many  years ;  headache.

Young  painter,  for  many  years  a  hard  drinker  until  cured
by  Cole,  and  Sulph. ;  after  administration  of  Nux  vom.
was  completely  blind  in  healthy  eye  for  twenty-four
hours ;  amaurosis  of  r.  eye.

Man,  sanguine  temperament,  blacksmith  ;  coryza.

Gardener,  with  tendencies  to  neuralgia ;  facial  neuralgia.

Lady,  elderly,  spare,  suffering  six  weeks ;  ulcer  on  gums.

Man,  suffering  two  years ;  tumor  on  gum.

Young  lady,  brunette  ;  hsematemesis.

Woman,  small  stature,  frequently  suffering  from  conges-
tions, flushes  of  heat  and  epistaxis,  for  last  fourteen
days  has  had  a  pressure  in  scrobiculum ;  hsematemesis.

Woman,  suffering  ten  years;  cardialgia.

Man,  choleric, -sick  six  days;  ill  effects  from  overloading
stomach.

Elderly  unmarried  woman  ;  disorder  of  stomach.

Young  lady,  otherwise  in  good  health ;  pain  in  liver.

Blacksmith,  suffering  three  years;  enteralgia.

Woman,  pregnant,  suffering  twenty  years  from  j)eriodical
toothache  or  colic;  colic.

Woman,  suffering  three  days ;  hernia.

Woman,  servant,  suffering  twelve  hours;  crural  hernia.

Mrs.  R. ;  inguinal  hernia.

Miss  E.  C,  frail  constitution,  ill  in  bed  two  days  ;  dysentery.

Young  woman,  chambermaid,  strong  constitution  ;  consti-
pation.

Young  woman,  leading  a  sedentary  life,  suffering  many
months ;  constipation.

Woman,  delicate,  weak,  confined  eighteen  days  ago,  suffer-
ing two  weeks ;  hemorrhoids.

Man,  lawyer,  dark  hair  and  eyes,  bilious  temperament,
troubled  with  indigestion  ;  hemorrhoids.

Man,  corpulent ;  inflammation  of  kidney.

Man,  had  several  attacks  of  gonorrhoea,  but  nevertheless
continued  his  intercourse  with  women ;  incontinence  of
urine.

Man,  corpulent,  fond  of  good  living  and  a  great  gourmand,
after  catching  cold ;  urinary  difficulty.

Young  man,  strong,  after  suppression  of  hemorrhoidal
discharge ;  urethritis.

Woman,  melancholic,  easily  angered ;  menses  irregular.

Man,  robust,  has  short  neck,  fond  of  liquor,  after  overlift-
ing ;  pain  in  back.

Woman,  after  an  attack  of  pneumonia;  paresis  crurum.


181  NUX  VOMICA.

Man,  drunkard,  after  severe  apoplectic  stroke;  paralysis.

Irishman,  had  suffered  many  years;  epilepsy.

Woman,  suffering  many  years  with  gout  and  profuse  leu-
corrhoea;  epilepsy.

Miss  W.,  on  visiting  southern  part  of  New  York,  from  a
malarial  district  in  Michigan,  had  taken  Quinine  with-
out effect ;  ague.

Mrs.  G.,  after  working  in  a  creamery ;  ague.
*^  Relations. Antidoted  by :  wine,  coffee.  Aeon.,  Bellad.,  Cam-
phor., Chamom.,  Coccul.,  Opium,  Pulsat.,  Stramon.

It  antidotes:  narcotic,  drastic  and  vegetable  remedies;
bad  effects  of  aromatics  in  foods,  such  as  ginger,  pepper,
and  of  so-called  hot  medicines;  citrate  of  magnesia;
alcohol ;  tremors  of  mercury  ;  neuralgia  of  Mezereum  ;
ether.

Compatible :  after  Arsen.,  Ipec,  Magn.  mur.,  Phosphor.,  Sepia,
Sulphur ;  before  Bryon.,  Pulsat.,  Sulphur.

Incompatible :  Zincum.

Complementary :  Sulphur.

Compare :  Graphit.  (gastralgia) ;  Laches,  (congestion  of
liver);  Carbo  veg.,  Caustic,  (catarrhal  hoarseness);  Bis-
muth., Arsen.,  Kreosot.,  Carbo  veg.,  Pulsat.,  Bryon.  (gastric
symptoms) ;  Lpcop.,  Carbo  veg.,  Opium,  Bryon.,  Alum.,
(constipation) ;  Chamom.,  Bryon.,  Carduus  mar.  (jaun-
dice); JEsc.  hipp.,  Collinso.,  Aloes,  Sulphur,  Hamam.  (hem-
orrhoids) ;  Mercur.,  Aloes  (dysentery) ;  Lycop.,  Coccul.
(hernia) ;  Ledum,  Arnica,  Hamam.  (ecchymoses  of  scle-
rotic);  Mercur.,  Pulsat,  Phosphor,  (catarrhs);  Zingiber,
Carbo  veg.,  Lycop.  (asthma) ;  Lycop.,  Canthar.,  Berber.,
Ether  (renal  colic)  ;  Sulphur,  Calcar.,  Lycop.,  Staphis.,
Kobalt  (sexual  excesses) ;  Pulsat.  (in  labor) ;  Physostigma
(spinal  irritation) ;  Bellad.  (torticollis) ;  Ambra  grisea,
Asar.  europ..  Castor,  (temperament,  nervousness);  Phos-
phor, (cerebral  softening).


(ENANTHE  OROOATA.  182


CENANTHE  CROCATA.

Drop-  Water  ; Water  Hemlock.  Umbelliferse.

A  plant  indigenous  to  England,  Sweden,  France  and  Spain;  grows  in  moist
places  and  swamps.

The  alcoholic  tincture  is  prepared  from  the  fresh  root.

It  is  mentioned  by  Hahnemann  in  a  letter  to  Stapf  in  1813.  So  far  we  have  had
no  provings,  only  toxicological  reports,  which  are  numerous.  See  Allen's  Encyclo-
pedia, vol.  7,  p.  128.

Clinical  Authorities. — Cough,  Berridge,  N.  E.  M.  G.,  vol.  10,  p.  389;
Spasms  caused  by  puerperal  albuminuria,  CEhme,  Hah.  Mo.,  vol.  12,  p.  644;  Con-
vulsions, CEhme,  N.  E.  M.  G.,  vol.  12,  p.  254 ;  Epilepsy,  CEhme,  N.  E.  M.  G.,  vol.
12,  p.  311  ;  Hansen,  A.  H.  Z.,  vol.  113,  p.  69;  Hendricks,  A.  H.  Z.,  vol.  109,
p.  7 ;  3  Cases  greatly  improved,  Horner,  Trans.  Hom.  Me  J.  Soc,  Pa.,  1886,  p.  102
Martin,  MSS.,  Knerr,  MSS.

^  Mind, Sudden  and  complete  loss  of  consciousness.

Disturbances  of  intellect ;  mad  and  furious,  as  if  drunk.
Extreme  restlessness  approaching  to  mania.
■  Furious  delirium;  hallucinations.

1  I  Delirium like delirium tremens ; constantly moved
from  place  to  place,  talked  without  cessation  and  with-
out  knowing  what  they  said  ;' grasped  at  imaginary
objects.
I  I  Epileptic  insanity ;  sudden  furious  attack.
^Sensorium. ll Apoplectic  conditions; speechless and  in-
sensible, face  puffed  and  livid,  pupils  dilated,  respira-
tion laborious,  limbs  contracted,  tenesmus.
Vertigo: with  falling; with  nausea,  vomiting,  syncope

and  convulsions.
•Suddenly  falls  down  backward.
^  Inner  Head. Pain  all  over,  but  particularly  in  his  head.
Momentary  sensation  of pungent heat determining  to

head.
Hypera?mia  of  brain ;  extravasation  and  serous  exudation.
^  Sight  and  Eyes. Disturbance  of  vision.
Eyes  turned  upward.
I  1  Pupils  first  contracted  then  dilated.
Eyes  are  fixed  and  look  red.
^  Smell  and  Nose. Bleeding  from  nose.
^  Upper  Face. iRapid, convulsive twitchings of muscles
of  face.


183  GENANTHE  CROCATA.

I  1  Risus  sardonicus.

■  Face  ghastly,  livid  and  turgid.

Face  swollen  and  livid,  with  bloody  froth  issuing  from

mouth  and  nostrils.
Rose-colored  spots  on  face.
® Lower Face. l Muscles of mastication in rigid  spasm;

trismus.
^°  Teeth  and  Gums. Convulsive  movements  of  teeth.
"  Taste  and  Tongue. Loss  of  speech.

Tongue:  protruding; swollen; bitter; clean,  moist  and
trembling.
^^ Inner  Mouth. Excoriation;  inflammation;  blisters.

Foaming  at  mouth ;  bloody  mucus. ^Epilepsy.
^^ Throat. Angina; burning  heat  in  pharynx;  throat  very
painful.
Pressure  on  throat  gives  pain  ;  it  is  sore  when  he  swallows.
"Appetite,  Thirst. Desires,  Aversions. Total loss  of
appetite,  with  debility.
Desires  cold  drinks.
^^  Hiccough, Belching, Nausea and Vomiting. Great
retching  to vomit;  vomiting  during  fit;  vomiting  of
blood.
I  Obstinate  vomiting,  continuing  for  days,  not  relieved  by
anything.
^^  Scrobiculum  and  Stomach, i  Burning  heat  in  throat  and
stomach,  with  disturbance  of  intellect;  vertigo,  cardi-
algia,  nausea,  followed  by  alvine  evacuations.
^^  Abdomen. Griping  and  severe  tormina.

Gastro-enteritis,  with  violent  pain  and  vomiting.
Abdomen  tympanitic  ;  swells  with  the  convulsions.
^^Male  Sexuul  Organs. Semipriapism.
^"Respiration. Breathing:  stertorous; spasmodic; convul-
sive; heavy; short; slow; laborious; loud tracheal
rales; hardly  perceptible; sudden  cessation,  followed
by  a  catching  sigh;  spasm  of  diaphragm.
^'' Cough. I  Cough  for  four  or  five  days,  <  at  night,  excited
by  tickling  at  top  of  throat ;  during  cough  rattling  in
lower  chest; sputa  thick,  heavy,  white and yellow,
' adheres  to  vessel,  a  little  frothy,  copious ;  aching  pain
in  1.  side  of  thorax,  <  from  deep  inspiration,  > from
deep  pressure.
Expectoration  :  reddish ;  bloody ;  white ;  frothy.
''^  Inner  Chest  and  Lungs, Lungs  hypersemic; hepatized
in  spots.
Pleuritic  exudation.
^'  Heart,  Pulse  and  Circulation. Pain  in  heart.

Pulse : very  feeble,  heart's  action scarcely  perceptible ;
accelerated  before  the  fit.


CENANTHE  CROCATA.  184

^^  Neck  and  Back. Pain  along  spinal  column.

Intense  action  of  dorsal  and  lumbar  muscles  ;  opisthotonos.
^^  Tipper  Limbs. Arms  flexed  at  elbow  in  a  right  angle.

Rapid  convulsive  twitchings  of  muscles  of  hands.

Hands  are  clenched  during  tetanus.

Irritation of arms  and hands,  with sharp lancinating
pains.
^'  Lower  Limbs. Pain along  track of sciatic and crural
nerves,  commencing  in  spinal  column,  more  especially
lumbar  region.

Cramps  in  calves.

Legs  stretched  straight  out.
^*  Limbs  in  General. Numbness  and  feebleness  of  limbs.
^^  Rest. Position. Motion. Legs  stretched  straight  out.

Body  rigid  during  convulsions.

Whole  body  in  shaking,  convulsive  motion.

Falling :  from  vertigo  ;  in  convulsions.

Swallowing  :  causes  soreness  of  throat.
^®  Nerves. Violent  convulsions,  with  trismus  or  tetanus  ;  risus
sardonicus;  body  rigid  ;  rigors  ;  jactation.

1  1  Terrible  convulsions,  followed  by  coma  or  deep  sleep.

I  He  fell  back  foaming  at  mouth  and  black  in  face.

Gave  a  leap  and  then  fell.

I  I  Sudden  convulsions,  trismus,  biting  of  tongue,  followed
by  unconsciousness  and  oblivion  of  circumstances.

Convulsions,  with  deathly  syncope,  coldness  as  if  dead.

Convulsions,  with^ swollen,  livid  face;  bloody  froth  from
nose  and  mouth ;  convulsive  respirations,  insensibility,
feeble  pulse.

I  1  Child,  set.  22  months,  suddenly  seized  with  convulsions ;
faint  eruption  like  measles  on  body,  which,  however,
soon  disappeared ;  continued  working  of  muscles  and
motion  of  limbs;  frothing  of  mouth  and  rolling  of
half-closed  eyes ;  swallowing  very  difficult ;  attack  two
and  one-half  hours  {Bellad.  and  Zinc,  ineffectual).  After
CEnanthe  croc,  rapid  improvement  and  recovery  ;  three
hours  after  commencement  of  disease,  violent  fever;
next  day  child  quite  well,  except  great  weakness ;  no
eruption.

I  I  Spasms  in  quick  succession,  with  entire  unconscious-
ness, eyes  half  closed  and  set ;  face  and  neck  dark  red
and  swollen ;  foam  about  mouth ;  jaws  and  hands
tightly  closed ;  singular  noise  in  throat,  as  if  being
choked ;  upper  and  lower  extremities  slightly  curved ;
whole  body  in  a  shaking,  convulsive  motion ;  during
seventh  month  of  pregnancy  in  a  woman  with  albumi-
nuria, dropsy,  headache,  etc.

I  Utters  loud  cries  and  falls  to  the  floor,  then  loss  of  con-


185  (ENANTHE  CROCATA.

sciousness,  clonic  spasms  of  limbs,  frothing  at  mouth,
rolling  of  eyes,  clenched  thumbs,  alternate  redness  and
paleness  of  face  and  involuntary  escape  of  stool  and
urine ;  no  aura ;  attacks  often  three  or  four  times  a
week,  at  times  every  two  weeks,  after  attack,  sleep  of
five  or  six  hours  duration,  heaviness  in  head,  lassitude
and  prostration ;  memory  somewhat  impaired;  Bellad.,
Cuprum,  Ignat.  and  Pulsat.  gave  no  relief  except  that
spasms  occurred  less  frequently,  but  they  were  still  as
severe  and  were  accompanied  by  convulsive  motions  of
face,  which  became  lead-colored  and  swollen  during
attack.

I  I  Epilepsy  in  a  girl,  set.  16;  first  attacks  appeared  when
9  years  old ;  convulsions,  salivation  and  complete  loss
of  consciousness  during  attack ;  several  attacks  in
twenty-four  hours  ;  after  using  bromide  of  potash  for  a
year  attacks  ceased  until  her  twelfth  year,  when  men-
struation was  established  ;  attacks  occur  day  or  night ;
menses  very  irregular,  often  absent  several  months ;
great  weakness  ;  face  icteric  ;  expression  stupid.

I  I  One  to  three  epileptic  fits  shortly  before  and  during
menses,  appear  while  asleep  and  awake,  and  commence
with  a  peculiar  outcry,  afterwards  would  fall  into  a
very  deep  sleep  of  several  hours  duration,  or  was  for
several  hours  out  of  her  senses  and  talked  much  and
incoherently ;  there  frequently  followed  cramplike
pains  in  lower  part  of  bowels  (womb)  and  vicinity ;  she
had  no  aura  epileptica,  but  redness  and  a  heavy  ex-
pression of  face,  and"  something  inexpressible  in  her
manner  indicated  an  approaching  attack ;  menses  a
little  too  scant  and  not  of  sufficient  duration.

I  I  Has  two  kinds  of  fits;  one  her  companions  call  a  "funny
spell  "  and  comes  on  very  suddenly;  she  will  jump  up
and  turn  over  the  washstand  or  chair  ;  once  she  started
towards  the  stove,  and  a  number  of  times  has  torn  her
clothes  or  cut  the  buttons  ofi"  her  dress;  if  any  one  inter-
feres she  will  fight  or  become  very  violent ;  will  con-
tinue in  this  condition  fifteen  minutes  or  more  and
then  recover  her  senses  and  normal  condition  as  quickly
as  she  lost  them  ;  knows  nothing  of  what  has  occurred;
in  the  other  kind  she  will  suddenly  shriek,  throw  up
her  hands  and  fall  back  unconscious,  frothing  at  mouth,
eyeballs  turned  up,  and  limbs  and  whole  body  violently
jerking  and  twitching;  this  will  continue  a  few  minutes
and  then  she  will  gradually  recover ;  very  weak  after
such  a  spell,  but  not  so  after  one  of  the  former  kind  ;
attacks  almost  daily,  and  each  one  worse  than  its  pre-
decessor; attacks  < while  menstruating; uterus  un-


CENANTHE  CROCATA.  186

doubtedly  the  origin  of  the  trouble. (Has  had  but  ten
attacks  during  the  three  months  she  has  been  taking
CEnanthe  croc.)
^^Time. Night:  cough  <.

^'  Temperature  and  Weather. Cold  drinks :  desire  for.
^'  Attacks,  Periodicity.  Two  and  one-half  hours :  convulsions.

Alternate  :  redness  and  paleness  of  face.

Three  or  four  times  a  week,  every  two  weeks :  spasms.

Day  or  night :  attacks  of  epilepsy.

Before  and  during  menses:  one  to  two  epileptic  fits.
*^  Locality  and  Direction, Left :  pain  in  side  of  thorax.
**  Sensations. Cold  as  if  dead  during  convulsion,  noise  in
throat  as  if  being  choked.

Pain  :  all  over,  but  particularly  in  head  ;  in  throat ;  in
heart ;  along  spinal  column ;  along  track  of  sciatic
and  crural  nerves.

Violent  pain:  in  stomach.

Sharp,  lancinating :  in  arms  and  hands.

Aching  pain :  in  1.  side  of  thorax.

Cramps :  in  calves.

Cramplike  pains  :  in  lower  part  of  bowels.

Burning  heat :  in  pharynx  ;  in  throat  and  stomach.

Heat:  determining  to  head.

Heaviness :  in  head.

Tickling  :  at  top  of  throat.

Numbness  :  of  limbs.
*^  Touch. Passive  Motion. Injuries. Pressure  :  on  throat

painful ;  deep  pain  in  thorax  >.
*®Skin. Pose-colored  on  face,  chest,  arms  and  abdomen.
*^  Stages of  Life, Constitution. Child,  set.  20 months,
apparently  in  good  health  ;  convulsions.

A  young  girl,  set.  14,  with  hereditary  epilepsy,  was  quickly
benefited ;  attacks  came  in  sleep  and  while  awake ;
no  aura.

Girl,  aet.  14,  well  built,  not  yet  menstruating  ;  epilepsy.

Girl,  get.  16,  father  drunkard,  sufii'ering  since  ninth  year  ;
epilepsy.

Woman,  set.,  26,  primapara,  suffering  with  albuminuria,
dropsy,  headache,  etc.,  during  seventh  month  of  preg-
nancy ;  spasms.

Miss,  set.  36,  consumptive  and  subject  to  asthma.

Woman,  set.  36,  childless,  stout,  healthy  looking,  of  epilep-
tic family,  miscarried  several  times  during  first  year  of
marriage,  and  suffered  diseases  of  sexual  organs;  at
one  time  menstruation  did  not  appear,  and  very  irritat-
ing injections  were  used,  but  the  consequences  were
metritis  and  an  epileptic  fit  and  soon  after  insanity ;
under  homoeopathic  treatment  the  disease  of  mind  was
cured  and  menses  returned;  epilepsy.


187  (ENANTHE  CROC— OLEANDER.

Woman,  Eet.  37,  married,  says  she  suffered  from  chorea
from  seventh  year  until  appearance  of  menses,  then
commenced  the  epileptiform  attacks;  epilepsy.
*^  Relations. Compare :  Cicuta.


OLEANDER.

Nerium  Oleander ;  Rose  Laurel.  Apocynacese.

An  ornamental  slirub  native  to  Southern  Europe,  Northern  Africa  and  West-
ern Asia,  thrives  best  in  moist  ground.

The  tincture  is  prepared  from  the  fresh  leaves.

Introduced  by  Hahnemann  and  proved  by  himself,  Franz,  Gross,  Gutmann
Hartmann,  Langhammer,  etc. — Mat.  Med.  Pura,  vol.  1,  p.  326.

Clinical  Authokitiks. — Headache,  Farrington,  A.  J.  H.  M.  M.,  vol.  2,  p.  193  ;
Too^Aac/ie,  Eushmore,  Hom.  Phys.,  vol.  2,  p.  318;  Lienleric  stools,  Rheumatism,  etc.,
Martin,  T.  A.  I.  H.,  1880,  p.  227  ;  Constipation,  Martin,  T.  M.  H.  S.,  Pa.,  1882,
p.  204.

^  Mind. I  Weak  memory ;  absence  of  mind,  want  of  attention.

■  Slowness  of  perception  ;  difficult  comprehension  of  what
he  reads,  particularly  if  he  makes  great  efforts  to  under-
stand, his  thoughts  then  become  confused.

After  mental  exertion,  flushes  of  heat.

Indolence,  aversion  to  do  anything.

Cannot  bear  contradiction,  becomes  enraged.

Despondency  and  lack  of  self-confidence.

iMelancholy,  with  obstinate  constipation.

I  Peevish,  fretful,  out  of  humor  with  everything.
^  Sensorium.  Vertigo :  for  a  long  time  before  paralysis :
when  rising  from  bed ;  when  looking  fixedly,  or  look-
ing down  while  standing;  when  walking  in  open  air;
he  stood  firmly,  but  the  things  around  him,  trees  and
men,  seemed  to  be  moving  as  in  a  confused  dance,  sight
became  obscured,  scintillations  before  eyes  resembling
dazzling  of  snow,  giddiness  and  diplopia  when  looking
down;  in  forehead,  and  staggering  of  lower  limbs,  as
if  too  weak ;  loss  of  consciousness ;  resulting  from
weakness.

I  I  Heaviness  of  head ;  >  when  lying  down.

I  I  Fainting  as  from  weakness ;  relieved  by  sweat.

Depression  of  sensorium.
'  Inner  Head. Pressive  pain  from  within  outward,  in  fore-
head.


OLEANDER.  188

I  I  Pain  in  foreliead  as  if  it  would  split.

1  iPressive  pain  in  brain.

I  Headache  improved  by  looking  cross-e3^ed.

Sensation  of  tightness  around  head,  which  occasions  a

feeling  of  stupefaction  rather  than  pain.
*  Outer  Head. I  Biting-itching  on  scalp,  as  from  vermin,  <

back part of  head and behind ears; >  when first

scratching  it,  followed  by  burning  and  soreness,  which

gives place to biting-itching; < in evening when

undressing.
I  Humid,  scaly,  biting, itching eruption, especially on

back  part  of  head.
■  Desquamation  of  epidermis  of  scalp.
I  I  Vesicular  eruptions  about  head  of  children,  with  smooth,

shining  surface,  and  drops  of  serum  standing  out  here

and  there. ^Eczema.
I  I  Eruption  on  scalp  and  back  of  ears,  simulating  that  of

crusta  lactea,  oozing  a  fluid  and  breeding  vermin.
'^  Sight  and  Eyes. Momentary  loss  of  sight.
I  I  Double  vision.

Darkness  before  eyes  when  looking  sideways.
I  1  When  reading,  burning  and  tension  in  eyelids ;  lach-

rymation.
i  I  Eyes  sunken  ;  blue  color  about  eyes.
^  Hearing  and  Ears, l  i  Cramj)like  drawing  in  outer  ear.
I  I  Herpes  and  ulcers  in  and  around  ears.
•  Oozing  of  serum  from  behind  ears. ^Eczema.
^  Upper  Face, l  l  Pale,  sunken  face  in  morning,  with  blue

rings  around  eyes.
I  I  Alternate  paleness  and  dark  redness  of  face.
Tuberculous  eruption  on  face  and  forehead.
^  Lower  Face, l  '  Numbness  of  upper  lip.

I  I  Foaming  at  mouth.
^"  Teeth  and  Gums. Toothache  only  when  masticating.

Drawing  in  molar  teeth  at  night  when  lying  down,  with

anxiety,  nausea  and  frequent  micturition.
I  Pain in  second  bicuspid  in  1.  upper  jaw,  very  bad  at

night,  preventing  sleep,  >  getting  out  of  bed ;  frequent

micturition  ;  heat  of  1.  cheek.
Bluish-white  gums.
"  Taste  and  Tongue. Loss  of  speech.

Tongue:  rough,  dirty  white,  with  elevated  papillae;  coated

white,  with  dryness  of  mouth.
I  I  In  evening  all  food  has  a  flat  and  nauseous  taste.
^*  Appetite,  Thirst. Desires,  Aversions, i  Ravenous  hun-
ger, with  trembling  of  hands  and  hasty  eating,  without

appetite.
Much  thirst,  especially  for  cold  water.


189  OLEANDER.

Desire  for  brandy ;  aversion  to  cheese.
^^  Hiccough,  Belching,  Nausea  and  Vomiting. Violent
empty  eructations,  while  eating.
Nausea  and  vomiting.
Vomiting:  of  food,  bitter  greenish  water;  mucous;  of  sour

liquid  food.
After  vomiting,  ravenous  hunger  and  thirst.
^^  Scrobiculum  and  Stomach. Pulsation  in  pit  of  stomach,
as  if  beats  of  heart  were  felt  through  whole  thorax.
Emptiness  in  pit  of  stomach,  even  after  eating; from

nursing.
Sinking  in  pit  of  stomach,  suddenly,  with  nausea  or  vom-
iting ;  wants  brandy,  which  relieves.
1 1  Extreme  debility  of  digestive  power.
^^  Abdomen, l  Stitches  and  gnawing  about  navel.

Rolling  and  rumbling  in  intestines,  with  emission  of  a

great  quantity  of  fetid  flatus.
I  I  Affection  of  the  mesenteric  glands,  with  swelling,  hard-
ness and  tension  of  abdomen  and  frequent  lienteric
stools. ^Favus.
^^  Stool  and  Rectum. Ineffectual  urging  to  stool.
I  1  Emission  of  flatus  smelling  like  rotten  eggs.
I  I  Stools  :  thin ;  yellow  ;  undigested  ; involuntary, when

emitting  flatus ;  sour,  liquid.
■  Passes  food  undigested  in  morning  which  he  ate  the  day

before.
I  I  First diarrhoea,  then hard, difficult stools; during

pregnancy.
Stool  and  urine  involuntary.

I  I  Diarrhoea  with  intestinal  ulcers. ^Tuberculosis.
I  Children  much troubled  with  soiling  of  clothes  when

passing  flatus.
Burning  at  anus  before  and  after  stool.
2^  Urinary  Organs. Frequent  profuse  urination,  especially
after  drinking  coffee.
Urine  brown,  burning,  with  whitish  sediment.
^^  Voice  and  Larynx. Trachea  and  Bronchia. Viscid

mucus  in  trachea.
^^Respiration. Oppressed  breathing  while  lying;  also  as  if
chest  were  too  narrow,  with  long,  deep  breathing ;  as  if
every  breath  were  his  last.
Stertorous  breathing.
""  Cough. Violent,  shaking  cough,  from  tickling  in  larynx.
^®  Inner  Chest  and  Lungs. Dull  stitches  in  1.  chest,  con-
tinuing during  and  in  exhalation.
Sensation  of  emptiness  and  coldness  in  chest.
^'  Heart,  Pulse  and  Circulation. Dull  drawing  pain  over
heart,  <  when  stooping.


OLEANDER.  190

Palpitation  with  weakness  and  empty  feeling  of  chest,

and  at  same  time  fulness  in  pit  of  stomach.
Anxious  palpitation  ;  chest  feels  expanded.
Pulse :  quick,  skin  hot ;  changeable,  irregular ;  weak  and
slow  mornings,  full  and  rapid  evenings.
^°  Outer  Chest. Dull,  continuous  stitch  in  sternum.
'^  Upper  Limbs. Hands  tremble  when  writing.
Fingers  stiff  and  swollen,  with  burning  pains.
Veins  on  hands  swollen.

Itchlike  eruption  on  inside  of  wrist  and  between  fingers.
^^  Lower  Limbs. Itchlike  eruption  between  nates.
Paralysis  of  legs  and  feet ;  painless.
Great  weakness  of  legs,  especially  knees.
I  I  Weakness  of  thighs  and  legs  and  a  sensation  in  forepart'

of  feet,  mostly  in  soles,  as  if  asleep,  while  walking.
I  I  Trembling  knees,  when  standing.
Vesicles  on  thighs.

Buzzing  sensation  in  legs,  especially  in  soles  of  feet.
Feet  constantly  cold.
^*  Limbs in General. Painless  stiffness  and  paralysis of
limbs.
Want  of  animal  heat  in  limbs.
^^  Rest. Position. Motion. Rest :  febrile  shivering  all  over
body.
Lying down : heaviness > ; toothache ; oppressive

breathing.
Rising  from  bed  :  vertigo.
Stooping :  pain  over  heart.

Standing :  looking  down,  vertigo ;  trembling  of  knees.
Mjotion  :  constant,  >  stiffness  of  thighs ;  febrile  shivering

all  over  body.
Exertion:  flushes  of  heat  <.
Masticating :  toothache.
Writing  :  trembling  of  hands.
Walking:  vertigo;  feet  as  if  asleep.
^^  Nerves. Hypersesthesia  or  insensibility  of  whole  body.
I  I  Loss  of  muscular  power ;  trembling.
Faintish  weakness  of  whole  body;  when  standing,  trem-
bling of  knees;  when  writing,  trembling  of  hands.
Fainting  as  from  weakness ;  >  by  perspiration.
Immediately  after  nursing  is  seized  with  tremor  and  is  so

weak  that  she  is  scarcely  able  to  walk  across  room.
I  Painless  paralysis.
I  I  Stiffness  and  coldness  of  limbs.

I  I  Violent  spasmodic  contractions  of  muscles;  more  those
of  upper  part  of  body  and  of  1.  side.
^''  Sleep. Yawning :  with  trembling  of  lower  jaw ;  with  chilli-
ness and  trembling  of  muscles.


191  OLEANDER.

Restless  sleep,  frequent  waking.

1  i  Voluptuous  dreams,  with  seminal  emissions.
^^Time. Morning:  pale,  sunken  face;  passes  food  eaten  day
before  undigested ;  pulse  weak  and  slow.

Evening :  biting-itching  on  scalp  <  ;  food  has  flat  taste.

Night:  draw'ing  in  molar  teeth;  toothache  <.
^®  Temperature  and  Weather. Open  air :  walking,  vertigo.

Getting  out  of  bed  :  toothache  >.

Draft  of  air :  caused  rheumatism.

Cold  water :  thirst.
*"  Fever. Chilliness,  want  of  animal  heat,  or  external  chill,
internal  heat ;  no  thirst.

Chill  all  over,  periodically ;  face  hot,  hands  cold.

I  I  Febrile  shivering  all  over  body,  without  thirst  and
without  subsequent  heat,  during  rest  and  motion.

I  I  Periodical  flushes  of  heat;  <  after  bodily  or  mental
exertion.

Want  of  perspiration.
^'  Attacks,  Periodicity. Periodical :  flushes  of  heat.
*^ Locality and Direction. Right: rheumatic pains  in
shoulder.

Left :  pains  in  tooth  in  upper  jaw ;  heat  of  cheek.;  dull
stitches  in  chest;  violent  contractions  of  muscles,  <
1.  side.

Within  outward  :  pressive  pain  in  forehead.
*^  Sensations.  As  if  inner  parts  were  distended ;_  pulsa-
tions in  outer  parts ;  as  if  forehead  would  split ;  as  if
beats  of  heart  were  felt  through  whole  thorax;  as  if
chest  were  too  narrow-;  as  if  every  breath  were  his  last;
forepart  of  feet  as  if  asleep  ;  chest  as  if  expanded.

Pain :  in  second  bicuspid  in  1.  upper  jaw.

Stitches :  about  navel,  dull,  in  1.  chest ;  dull,  continuous ;
in  sternum.

Gnawing :  about  navel.

Pressive  pain  :  in  forehead ;  in  brain.

Rheumatic  pains:  in  r.  shoulder.

Cramplike  drawing :  in  outer  ear.

Dull  drawing :  over  heart.

Drawing :  in  molar  teeth.

Soreness :  on  scalp.

Burning:  on  scalp ;  in  eyelids;  at  anus;  in  fingers.

Heat :  of  1.  cheek.

Pulsation  :  in  pit  of  stomach  ;  in  outer  parts.

Tension:  in  eyelids;  of  abdomen.

Tightness :  around  head.

Stiffness :  of  thighs ;  of  fingers ;  of  limbs.

Fulness  :  at  pit  of  stomach.

Buzzing  sensation :  in  legs,  <  in  soles.


OLEANDER.  192

Numbness :  of  upper  lip.

Trembling:  of  hands;  of  knees;  of  lower  jaw.

Emptiness:  in  pit  of  stomach;  in  chest.

Sinking :  in  pit  of  stomach.

Dryness:  of  mouth.

Tickling :  in  larjaix.

Biting-itching :  on  scalp  ;  all  over  body.

Intense  itching:  of  skin.

Formication :  all  over  body.

Coldness:  of  chest;  of  feet;  of  limbs.
^^  Touch. Passive Motion. Injuries. Scratching: erup-
tion first  >,  then  burning.

Friction :  on  skin  causes  soreness  and  chapping.
*^  Skin. I  I  Itching  here  and  there  over  bod}^,  so  that  he  was
obliged  to  scratch.

I  Biting-itching  all  over  body,  as  from  an  eruption,  on
undressing,  compelling  him  to  scratch.

I  I  Intense  itching  and  an  insupportable  nocturnal  burn-
ing after  scratching;  affection  of  mesenteric  glands
with  swelling,  hardness  and  tension  of  abdomen  and
frequently  loose  and  undigested  stools.

I  i  Very  sensitive  skin,  so  that  very  slight  friction  causes
soreness  and  chafing,  especially  about  neck,  or  between
scrotum  and  thighs.

Chapping  of  skin.

Skin  yellow.

■  Violent  itching  eruption,  bleeding,  oozing  out  a  fluid,
.  forming  scabs ;  eczema.

Scurf}^  pimples  ;  itchlike  eruption.
*^  Stages  of  Life,  Constitution. Girl,  set.  21 ;  headache.

Man  set.  44,  merchant,  five  feet  ten  inches  in height,
sallow complexion,  nervo-bilious temperament, ill a
year  and  a  half  and  considered  himself  incurable,  father
subject  to  rheum'atism;  lienteric  stools  ;  rheumatism.
*^  Relations. Antidoted  by : Camphor.,  Sulphur.

Compatible :  Conium,  Lycop.,  Natr.  mur.,  Pulsat.,  Bhus  tox.,
Sepia,  Spigel.

Compare:  Anac,  Oinchon.,  CoccuL,  Clemat.,  Nux  vom.,
Staj>his.


193  OLEUM  ANIMALE.

OLEUM  ANIMALE.

Dipper s  Oil ;  Rectified  Animal  Oil.

Dilutions  in  alcohol  or  trituration.

Provings  by  Nenning,  Schreter  and  Trinks,  Hartlaub  and  Trinks,  E.  A.  M.  L.,
vol.  2.

CLiNicAii  Authorities. — Migraine,  Zwingenberg,  Hah.  Mo.,  vol.  10,  p.  562;
Greenish  urine,  etc.,  Dixon,  A.  H.  O.,  vol.  9,  p.  508,  from  Journal  of  Health,  1864,
p.  180 ;  Neuralgia  of  spermatic  cord,  Blakely,  Eaue's  Eec,  1870,  p.  241,  from  H.  M.
P.  H.  Soc,  1859; Asthma  nervosum,  Zwingenberg,  Hah.  Mo.,  vol.  10,  p.  562.

^  Mind. Frequent  vanishing  of  thought.
Fretful  and  ill-humored  or  sad.
Taciturn  or  thoughtful,  absorbed  in  revery.
^Sensorium. Painful  dizziness  early  in  morning  in  bed,  or

in  open  air,  when  stooping.
^  Inner  Head. Numb  and  paralytic  sensation  in  1.  side  of
head.
Pressure  on  vertex  shifting  to  occiput.
Boring  in  1.  frontal  protuberance.

I  I  Migraine  always  day  after  a  party,  where  she  usually

wore  a  heavy  diadem ;  polyuria  of  perfectly  clear  urine.

Sensation  as  if  blood  were  rushing  to  occiput  on  entering

a  room.

*  Outer  Head. '  l  Itching on r. side  of occiput, > from

scratching.
^  Sight  and Eyes. Mistiness  of  sight,  especially  in  after-
noon when  writing.
Burning  in  eyes,  in  open  air,  on  waking,  by  candlelight.
Spasmodic  quivering  of  lids.
I  I  Frequent  twitching  in  1.  upper  lid.
^  Hearing  and  Ears. Sticking  or  boring  in  ears,  with  dry-
ness in  throat.
'  Smell  and  Nose. Itching  in  nostrils.

Pimples  on  septum,  with  burning  and  oozing.
Itching  and  burning  on  tip  of  nose.
Oozing  pimples  on  nose.
^  Upper  Face. Pale,  earthy  complexion.

Kedness  of  cheeks  even  when  skin  is  cold.

Cramplike  pain  in  1.  cheek.

Itching  pimples  and  vesicles  on  cheeks.

VOL.  VIII. — 13.


OLEUM  ANIMALE.  194

Papulee  on  cheek  and  under  skin  of  occiput.
^  Lower  Face. Cracking  in  1.  articulation  of  jaw.

Itching  of  lips ;  chapped  lips.
"  Taste  and  Tongue, i  iSour  taste  in  mouth.
^^  Inner Mouth. Dryness: with  sour  taste  in  mouth; on
waking,  in  morning.
Greasy  feeling  in  mouth  and  on  palate.
I  I  Profuse  accumulation  of  saliva  in  mouth,  sometimes
snow  white.
^^  Throat. Dryness  of  throat,  especially  during  empty  deglu-
tition.
Roughness  in  throat  inducing  dry,  hacking  cough.
Hawking  of  tenacious  mucus  after  a  meal.
Choking  and  constriction  of  throat,  particularly  morning
and  evening.
"  Appetite,  Thirst. Desires,  Aversions. Desire  for  soft-
boiled  eggs.
^'^  Hiccough,  Belching,  Nausea  and  Vomiting. Frequent

empty  eructations  relieving  nausea.
^^  Scrobiculum  and  Stomach. Pressure  in  pit  of  stomach,
also  after  drinking  cold  water.
Sensation  as  if  stomach  were  full  of  water.
Sensation  of  coldness  in  stomach.
Burning  and  heat  from  stomach  to  chest.
Stinging  in  stomach.
Bruised  pain  about  stomach.
'^  Hypochondria. Pressure  with  sticking  in  region  of  liver

and  spleen.
'^Abdomen. Shifting  of  flatus  in  abdomen,  w^ith  rumbling.

Drawing  from  groins  to  testicles.
^"  Stool and Rectum. Difficult  stool ; after  long  urging ;
even  when  natural
Burning  and  stinging  in  anus  and  rectum.
^^  Urinary  Organs. Urine:  greenish,  copious,  clear,  pale,  also
depositing  a  cloud  ;  greenish  and  smells  fishy  ; consti-
pation; dilated  pupils,  and  occasional  rolling  of  eyes
during  sleep.
Much  urging  to  urinate,  with  discharge  of  only  a  few  drops.
Burning  during  micturition.
Itching  in  urethra.
^'  Male  Sexual  Organs. Nocturnal  erections  and  emissions.
BLong-standing  neuralgia  of  spermatic  cord;  excruciating
attacks  three  or  four  times  every  year ; pains  as  if  tes-
ticles were  seized  by  a  hand  and  pulled  very  severely.
Both  testicles  are  drawn  up  and  very  painful.
Pressing  in  prostate  gland.

Burning  stinging  about  root  of  penis  (afternoon).
^^ Female Sexual Organs. ■  Menses: too  early,  preceded


195  OLEUM  ANIMALE.

and  accompanied  by  cutting  in  abdomen  and  small  of
back  and  sticking  in  1.  side  of  head  and  vertex;  scanty,
black  blood,  languor  of  hands  and  feet.
Leucorrhoea  of  thin,  white  mucus.
^^  Voice  and  Larynx. Bronchia  and  Trachea. 1 1  Spasmus
glottidis  with  disturbance  of  abdominal  organs; flat-
ulency, colic  or  diarrhoea ;  tympanitis.
Hoarseness  with  inability  to  talk  loud.
^^Respiration. iChronic asthma nervosum,  for  which  no
organic  basis  could  be  detected,  but  which  was  caused
by  repelled  foot  sweat.
^^  Inner  Chest  arid  Lungs. Rushes  of  blood  to  chest  with
dry  heat  of  face.
Violent  stitch  in  upper  part  of  chest,  near  sternum,  as
with  a  red  hot  needle  burning  in  that  spot,  continuing
a  long  time  after.
Darting  in  mamma  when  standing,  from  behind  forward.
^^  Heart,  Pulse  and  Circulation. Pressure  and  crushing

sensation  about  heart.
^'  Neck  and  Back. Cracking  of  vertebree  on  raising  head.
A  few  pointed  and painful stitches  from  1.  scapula  to

axilla.
Pain  in  small  of  back  when  sitting.
^' Upper  Limbs. Pimples  in  bends  of  elbows.
Numbness  of  single  fingers.

Drawing  and  digging  in  r.  thumb  as  if  it  would  ulcerate.
^^  Lower  Limba. Excoriation  in  bends  of  hips.
Sticking  in  sole  of  foot.

Tingling  in  one  spot  in  middle  of  sole  in  evening.
Cramp  in  toes.

Tearing  in  big  toe,  which  is  painful  as  if  ulcerated,  par-
ticularly near  nail.
^'  Limbs  in  General. Lameness  of  1.  limb  and  1.  arm.
^^Rest. Position. Motion. Raising head: cracking  of
vertebrse.
Standing:  darting  in  mamma.
Stooping:  painful  dizziness.
Sitting :  pain  in  back.
^®  Nerves. Languor  with  indolence,  inclination  to  sit.
Fainting.

Cramplike  drawing  in  different  parts.
^^Time. Morning:  painful  dizziness.
Choking  and  constriction  of  throat.
Afternoon:  mistiness  when  writing; burning  about  root

of  penis.
Evening  :  choking  and  constriction  of  throat;  tingling  in
one  spot  of  sole.
^^Temperature  and  Weather. Open  air:  painful  dizziness;
burning  of  eyes;  walk  in  open  air,  coldness  of  1.  leg.


OLEUM  ANIMALE.  196

On  entering  room  :  as  if  blood  were  rushing  to  occiput.
*^  Fever. Shuddering  from  vertex  to  chest.

Coldness:  after  a  walk  in  open  air;  of  whole  1.  lower
limb.

Dry,  pricking  heat,  particularly  in  face.

Perspiration  during  a  meal.
*^  Attacks,  Periodicity. Every  year  three  or  four  attacks :

neuralgia  of  spermatic  cord.
^^  Locality  and  Direction.  Left:  numb  and  paralytic  sen-
sation in  side  of  head;  boring  in  frontal  protuberance;
twitching  in  upper  lid ;  cramplike  pain  in  cheek  ;  crack-
ing in  articulation  of  jaw ;  sticking  in  side  of  head ;
stitches  from  scapula  to  axilla;  lameness  of  lower  limb
and  arm  ;  coldness  of  lower  limbs.

Right:  itching  on  side  of  occiput;  drawing  and  digging
in  thumb.

From  behind  forward:  darting.
"  Sensations. As  if  blood  were  rushing  to  head ;  as  if  stomach
were  full  of  water; as  if  testicles  were  seized  by  hand
and  pulled  severely;  as  of  red  hot  needles  in  chest;  as

.  if  thumb  would  ulcerate ;  as  if  toe  would  ulcerate.

Pain :  in  small  of  back.

Excruciating  neuralgia :  of  spermatic  cord.

Violent  stitch  :  in  upper  part  of  chest.

A  few  pointed,  painful  stitches:  from  1.  scapula  to  axilla.

Tearing:  in  big  toe.

Darting:  in  mamma.

Cutting  :  in  abdomen  and  small  of  back.
' Cramplike  drawing:  of  different  parts.

Cramp :  in  toes.

Cramplike  pain  :  in  1.  cheek.

Drawing  :  from  groins  to  testicles ;  in  r.  thumb.

Boring :  in  1.  frontal  protuberance ;  in  ears.

Digging :  in  r.  thumb.

Bruised  pain  :  about  stomach.

Crushing  sensation:  about  heart.

Stinging:  in  stomach ;  in  anus  and  rectum.

Burning  stinging :  about  root  of  penis.

Burning:  in  eyes;  of  pimples  on  septum;  of  tip  of  nose;
from  stomach  to  chest;  in  anus  and  rectum;  during
micturition;  in  chest;  of  skin.

Sticking :  in  ears ;  in  region  of  liver  and  spleen  ;  in  1.  side
of  head  and  vertex ;  in  sole.

Dry,  pricking  heat: <  in  face.

Heat :  from  stomach  to  chest ;  of  face.

Excoriations  :  in  bends  of  hips.

Painfulness :  of  both  testicles.

Tingling:  in  one  spot  in  middle  of  sole.


197  OLEUM  ANIMALE.

Roughness :  in  throat.

Dryness :  in  throat.

Pressure :  on  vertex  shifting  to  occiput ;  in  pit  of  stomach  ;

in  region  of  liver  and  spleen ;  in  prostate  gland ;  about

heart.
Constriction :  of  throat.

Numb  and  paralytic  sensation :  in  1.  side  of  head.
Numbness :  of  single  fingers.
Lameness :  of  1.  lower  limb  and  arm.
Biting-itching :  of  skin.
Gnawing-itching :  of  skin.
Itching :  on  r,  side  of  occiput ;  in  nostrils ;  of  tip  of  nose  ;

of  pimples  on  cheeks;  of  lips;  in  urethra.
Shuddering :  from  vertex  to  chest.
Coldness  :  in  stomach;  of  whole  1.  lower  limb.
"Touch. Passive  Motion. Injuries. After  wearing  heavy

diadem :  migraine.
Scratching :  >  itching  on  occiput.
Rubbing:  burning  of  skin  >.
*^Skin. Burning;  biting-itching  >  from  rubbing;  gnawing-
itching.
Itching  like  flea-bites,  disappearing  suddenly  or  changing

to  burning  and  heat.
Vesicles  like  scabious  pimples.
Red  watery  vesicles  after  scratching.
*^  Stages  of  Life,  Constitution. A  lady,  usually  wore  a  heavy

diadem  upon  head ;  migraine.
^  Relations. Antidoted  by:  .Camj^hor.,  Nux  vom.,  Opium.

Compare:  Ignat.  and  Gelsem.  in  headache  and  polyuria;

Agar,  in  twitching  of  eyelids; Arsen.,  Carbo  veg.  and

Phosphor,  in  gastric  symptoms  after  cold  water;  PulsaL

in  male  sexual  organs.


OLEUM  CAJEPUTI.  198


OLEUM  CAJEPUTI.

Oil  of  Cajeput.  Myrtacese.

A  tree  indigenous  to  East  Indian  islands.  The  oil  is  obtained  by  distilling
the  leaves  in  water;  it  is  limpid,  green,  of  an  odor  suggesting  camphor,  rosemary
and  mint. — American  Homoeopathic  Pharmacopoeia.

Clinical,  Authorities. — Hale's  Symptomolbgy  and  Therapeutics  ; Parsons'
A.  O.,  vol.  12;  Affection  of  tongue,  Guernsey,  Hom,  Phys.,  vol.  8,  p.  593.


^  Sensorium. i  l  Nervous  vertigo.

^  Inner  Head. '  l  Headache  (a  few  drops  rubbed  on  affected

locality).
^Hearing  and  Ears, ii Deafness  (mixed  with  almond  oil

and  applied  on  cotton).
^°  Teeth  and  Gums. '  i  Toothache  (applied  to  cavity  of  ca-
rious tooth).
^^  Taste  and  Tongue, i Tongue  felt  swollen,  seemed  to  fill

whole  mouth,  making  her  lisp.
13  Throat. '  i  Persistent  sensation  of  choking.

I  I  Nervous  dysphagia  or  spasmodic  stricture  of  oesophagus.
^^  Hiccough,  Belching,  Nausea  and  Vomiting. 1 1  Spas-
modic hiccough  after  an  attack  of  apoplexia  nervosa.
I  I  Nervous  vomiting  or  vomiting  of  hysterical  persons.
^^  Abdomen. Nervous  distension  of  bowels,  reflex  from  uter-
ine disorder.
Tympanitis  in  typhoids.

I  I  Flatulent  colic,  particularly  when  produced  by  cold  or
by  retrocession  of  inflammation,  gouty  or  otherwise,  of
the  skin  or  extremities.
^^  Stool  and  Rectum, ll  Choleraic diarrhoea from sudden

check  of  perspiration.
^^  Female  Sexual  Organs, i  i Menses  suspended  or  dimin-
ished and  attended  with  pain,  when  caused  by  a  cold
or  check  of  perspiration,
^®  Respiration, l  i  Nervous  dyspnoea.
^®  Nerves. Epilepsy  ;  palsy ;  paralysis ;  hysteria.
^^  Sensations. Tongue  as  if  swollen.
Aching:  in  head  ;  in  teeth.
Choking  sensation  :  in  throat.
"  Tissues. I  '  Chronic  rheumatism.
I  I  Dropsy.


199 OLEUM  CAJ.— OLEUM  JECORIS  ASELLL

*''  Stages  of  Life,  Constitution. Miss  B.,  set.  21,  suffering  a

week  or  moie  ;  affection  of  tongue.
*^  Relations. Compare :  Plantago  in  earache  and  toothache ;

Colchic.  in  gouty  affections  and  rheumatism;  Aeon,  and

Bellad.  in  effects  of  checked  sweat.


OLEUM  JECORIS  ASELLL

Cod-liver  Oil;  Oleum  Morrhum.

Obtained  from  the  liver  of  Gadus  Morrhua,  and  of  other  species  of  Gadus.
The  purest  cod-liver  oil  is  of  a  pale  yellow  color.

Provings  with  Jongh's  Norwegian  oil  by  Neidhard,  U.  S.  Med.  and  Surg,
Jour.,  vol.  8,  p.  1.

Clinical  Authorities. — Hoarseness,  Neidhard,  Eaue's  Eec,  1874,  p.  113;
from  U.  S.  M.  and  S.  J.,  vol.  8,  p.  146  ;  Aching  in  joints  and  fluttering  in  sacrum,
Neidhard,  Eaue's  Eec,  1873,  p.  33,  from  U.  S.  M.  and  S.  J.,  vol.  8,  p.  4;  Bheu-
matism,  Brefeld,  B.  J.  H.,  vol.  6,  p.  438 ;  Gout,  Rheumatism,  Lumbago,  Sciatica,
Bennett,  B.  J.  H.,  vol.  6,  p.  438 ;  Scrofula,  Madden,  B.  J.  H.,  vol.  6,  p.  439.


^  Mind. Sensation  as  if  out  of  her  mind.

^  Inner  Head, l  iDull  aching  pain  in  forehead.

I  I  Aching  pain  about  inner  part  of  r.  eyebrow,  as  if  in
periosteum.

I  I  Bursting hekdache  after  coughing,  as if  head  would
split  open.

I  iPain  from  occiput  to  forehead,  with  nausea.
^  Sight  and  Eyes, l  l  Aching  pain  in  r.  eye,  when  using  it.

I  I  Trachoma;  for  chronic  forms  and  constitutional  troubles.

I  i  Scrofulous  ophthalmia.
^  Hearing  and  Ears. 1 1  Marked deafness  in 1.  ear,  and
abscess  in  right.

I  I  Fetid  discharge  from  ears.
^  Smell  and  Nose, l  i  Dry  coryza,  cough  and  sneezing.

Fluent  coryza,  hoarseness  and  rawness  of  chest.

I  I  Chronic  catarrh  and  ozsena.

I  I  Bleeding  of  nose  when  stooping,  with  amenorrhoea.
^  Upper  Face, i  i  Cachectic  expression  of  countenance.
**  Inner  Mouth, i  i  Fetid  breath.

^^  Throat. i  l  Choking and oppressed feeling when lying
down.

I  I  Chronic  sore  throat,  with  expectoration  of  3^ellow  mucus.


OLEUM  JECORIS  ASELLI.  200

^*  Appetite,  Thirst. Desires,  Aversions, b  Voracious  appe-
tite of  rachitic  children.
^^  Hypochondria, i  i  Region  of  liver  sensitive  to  touch,

I  I  Stitch  in  r.  side  on  motion,  with  cough  on  raising  arm.
I  I  Heavy  pain  in  r.  side,  with  numbness  in r.  arm  as
if  it  were  dead.
'^Abdomen, l Atrophia  mesenterica.

iTabes  mesenterica;  child  pale,  cachectic,  greatly  emaci-
ated, with  large,  tumid  abdomen,  enlarged  liver  and
swollen  mesenteric  glands.
^"  Stool  and  Rectum, l  Chronic  diarrhcea,  supposed  to  have
been  caused  by  ulceration  of  mucous  membrane.
•  Chronic  diarrhoea  in  adults,  with  great  emaciation,  poor
digestion  and  depressed  nutrition.
"'Urinary  Organs, i  i  Incontinence  of  urine.

I  I  Addison's  disease ;  Bright's  disease.
"^Female  Sexual  Organs. 1 1  Soreness  of  both  ovaries;  dys-
menorrhoea.
I  I  Discharge of yellow  matter from womb,  with  weak

back.
I  I  Menstruation  ;  premature  or  copious  ;  obstructed,  from

taking  cold ;  irregular ;  amenorrhoea.
I  I  Leucorrhoea.
^^  Voice  and  Larynx. Trachea  and  Bronchia. "Hoarse-
ness connected with incipient as  well as advanced
stages  of  consumption.
'^^  Cough. I  1  Irritating  cough.

I  Violent  cough,  with  retching  night  and  day.
I  I  Laughing  excites  fits  of  coughing.

I  Cough:  on  raising  arm,  with  stitches; <  from  drafts
of  air;  <  on  lying  down  at  night;  loose  all  day  ;  <  on
lying  down,  preventing  her  from  sleeping ;  severe,  fol-
lowing exposure  to  cold,  damp  weather,  at  times  yel-
lowish expectoration,  at others cough  dry,  hacking ;
long-continued,  w^ith  emaciation,  loss  of  strength  and
appetite,  finally  excessive  weakness,  with  expectoration
of  heavy,  bloody  mucus.
I  I  Expectoration  :  yellow  or  yellowish-green.
^^  Inner  Chest  and  Lungs. ' '  Weakness  in  chest  and  back  ;
more  in  left.
I  I  Soreness: all over  chest  or  in  centre  of  chest,  with
barking  cough  and  aching  between  shoulders ;  in  chest
through  shoulders,  <  r.  side;  in  chest  and  stomach,
with  cough.
I  I  Sore,  dull  pain  in  chest  when  in  motion  or  riding  on

horseback.
I  I  Burning  heat  in  1.  chest  through  to  back,  with  cough.
I  I  Pain  in  upper  part  of  chest  when  coughing.


201  OLEUM  JECORIS  ASELLI.

I  I  Pain  through  lower  part  of  chest,  passing  through  to

back.
I  Haemoptysis: with  hawking of  phlegm in morning;

flying  pains  all  across  chest ; caused  by  a  fall.
I  I  Pneumonia  of  upper  lobes  of  both  lungs.

■  Phthisis  pulmonalis: soreness  in chest and stomach,

with  hard  coughing  spells  in  morning;  loss  of  appetite
and  strength;  expectoration  of  yellow  mucus  or  bloody
sputa ;  affection  of  glands,  bones  or  cutaneous  troubles ;
when  tubercles  have  not  yet  softened  or  even  when
they  are  in  first  stage  of  softening ;  vomica  with  perfect
pectoriloquy  under  r.  clavicle;  excavation  in  apex  of  r.
lung ;  scrofulous  diathesis.
-^  Heart,  Pulse  and  Circulation. '  i  Palpitation  of  heart.

I  I  Pulse  accelerated,  soft  and  small.
^'  Neck  and  Back, l  l  Soreness  from  back  to  chest.

I  I  Pain  through  back.

I  I  Sharp,  heavy,  aching  pain  in  lower  spine.

I  I  Spinal  irritation;  sore  to  touch.

I  Sense  of  fluttering,  like  movements  of  a  watch,  com-
mencing in  region  of  sacrum  and  gradually  rising  to
occiput.

I  I  Often  placed  her  hand  on  sacrum,  as  if  to  support  it,
and  complained  of  pain  in  neighborhood  of  sacro-iliac
synchondrosis;  her  walk  became  gradually  more  and
more  difiicult.

I  I  Rheumatic  pains  in  sacrum.

I  Chronic  lumbago  of  several  years  standing,  with  diffi-
culty in  walking;  cachexia  with  oedema.
^^  Upper  Limbs, l  l  Rheumatic  pains  in  shoulder.
^^ Lower Limbs. iHip  joint  disease;  more  valuable  M^hen
disease originated in bone itself than in synovial
membrane.

iSciatica,  with  atrophy  of  affected  limb.

■  White  swelling  of  knees  ;  scrofulous  hip  disease.

■  Chronic  arthritis  of  ankle  joint.
I  I  Rheumatic  pain  in  1.  foot.

■  Fistulse  and  abscesses  around  joints.

^* Limbs  in  General. ■Continued  aching  and  sore  pain  in
elbow  and  knee  joints.

I  I  Movements  of  joints  more  limited,  especially  in  elbows
and  knees  ;  and  all  attempts  at  flexion  or  extension
caused  most  excruciating  suffering.
^^  Rest. Position. Motion. Lying down : oppressed feel-
ing; cough  <•

Stooping :  bleeding  of  nose.

Motion  :  stitch  in  r.  side;  sore  pain  in  chest.

Raising  arm  :  coughing.


OLEUM  JECORIS  ASELLL  202

Walking:  becomes  more  and  more  difficult;  pain  in  sacro-
iliac synchondrosis ;  chronic  lumbago.
^^  Nerves. Loss  of  vital  power ;  emaciation.
^^  Sleep. I  I  Loss  of  sleep.

I  I  Dreams  of  seeing  objects  iu  room  during  sleep.
28  Time. Morning  :  haemoptysis,  with  hawking  of  phlegm  ;
hard  coughing  spells.

All  day :  cough  loose ;  cold  perspiration.

Evening :  slight  hoarseness.

Day  and  night:  violent  cough,  with  retching.

Night : cough < ; fever ; exacerbations destroyed all
repose.
^^Temperature  and  Weather. Draft  of  air:  cough  <.

Exposure  to  cold :  cough  <.

Damp  weather:  cough  <.
^"^  Fever. l  l  Constantly chilly, feeling as if  she was con-
tinually taking  cold.

I  I  Chills  from  occiput  down  to  back.

BHeat  in  palms  of  hands  every  night.

1  Hectic  fever,  with  nocturnal  aggravations.

I  I  Cold  perspiration  all  day.

B  Night  sweats.
*^  Attacks,  Periodicity. Every  night :  heat  in  palms.

For  six  months  :  amenorrhoea.
*^  Locality  and  Direction.  Right :  pain  about  inner  eye-
brow ;  aching  pain  in  eye ;  abscess  in  ear ;  stitch  in  side  ;
heavy  pain  in  side ;  numbness  in  arm ;  soreness  in
shoulder ;  vomica,  with  perfect  pectoriloquy  under
clavicle  ;  excavation  in  apex  of  lung.

Left:  marked deafness; weakness < in  side  of  back;
burning  heat  in  chest;  rheumatic  pain  in  foot.
*^  Sensations. As  if  out  of  her  mind  ;  as  if  head  would  split
open  ;  as  if  r.  arm  were  dead;  as  if  she  were  continually
taking  cold.

Pain  :  from  occiput  to  forehead  ;  in  upper  part  of  chest ;
through  lower  part  of  chest  to  back  ;  through  back  ;  in
neighborhood  of  sacro-iliac  synchondrosis.

Bursting  pain :  in  head.

Flying  pains  :  all  across  chest.

Stitch  :  in  r.  side.

Aching  pain  :  in  forehead ;  about  inner  part  of  r.  eye-
brow ;  in  r.  eye ;  between  shoulders ;  sharp ;  heavy,  in
lower  spine  ;  in  elbow  and  knee  joints.

Rheumatic  pains :  in  sacrum;  in  shoulders;  in  1.  foot.

Sore  dull  pain:  in  chest;  in  elbow  and  knee  joint.

Erratic  pains :  in  joints.

Heavy  pain  :  in  r.  side.

Soreness: of  both  ovaries; all  over  chest;  in centre  of


203  OLEUM  JECORIS  ASELLI.

chest;  in  chest  through  shoulders;  in  stomach;  from

back  to  chest.
Burning  heat;  in  1.  chest  through  to  back.
Heat:  in  palms.
Eawness :  of  chest.
Sense  of  fluttering,  like  movements  of  watch :  in  region  of

sacrum,  rising  to  occiput.
Oppressed  feeling :  when  lying  down.
Numbness:  in  r.  arm.
Itching:  of  skin.
**  Tissues. I  Weakness,  emaciation  and  ansemia; defective

nutrition,  especially  in  children.
B  Nervous affections, neuralgia, sciatica, lumbago, in

emaciated, pale, ansemic persons,  with deficiency of

animal  heat.

■  Atrophy  of  infants; emaciation,  with hot  hands and

head;  constant  tendency  to  catarrhs;  bones  affected ;
rachitis;  fever  at  night,  with  sweat,  mostly  on  head,
neck  and  hands ;  cannot  take  milk ;  vivid  dreams,  rest-
less and  feverish  at  night.

I  I  Contraction  of  muscles ;  musculo-fibrous  rheumatism.

I  I  Rheumatism,  produced  by  protracted  residence  in  damp
and  cold  localities  ;  affection  confined  to  joints ;  gradual
exhaustion  of  strength  and  impairment  of  nutrition.

I  I  Rheumatism  of  long  standing;  patient  confined  to  bed
or  room,  and  only  in  warm  summer  months  experienced
a  slight  alleviation  of  her  sufferings;  nearly  whole
body  was  attacked,  but  principally  inferior  extremities,
sacrum,  back  and  shoulders  ;  walking  was  entirely  pre-
vented by  the  insupportable  pains,  stiffness  and  swell-
ing of  joints;  a  kind  of  hectic  fever  and  constant
nightly  exacerbations  destroyed  all  repose ;  patient  was
wasted,  of  a  bleachy  whiteness,  of  a  cachetic  appearance
and  habit,  and  had  lost  all  hope  of  relief.

I  I  Chronic  gout  and  rheumatism  of  elderly  persons,
with  rigidity  of  muscles  and  tendons,  joint  nearly
inflexible.

I  I  Erratic  pains  in  joints,  with  oedema.

iScrofulosis :  diseases  of  joints;  in  pale,  thin,  cachectic
subjects.

■  Rachitis; malacosteon,  affecting  female  pelvis; caries

and  strumous  osteitis.
I  I  Caries:  especially  attacking  epiphises  of  long  bones;
in  which  there  is  a  fistulous  ulcer  with  raised  edges,
bleeding  and  discharging  a  flocculent  pus  of  a  nauseat-
ing smell.

■  Softening  of  bones  in  adults.

■Scrofulous  abscesses  and  ulceration  of  glands,  or  when


OLEUM  JECORIS  ASELLI— OPIUM.  204

indolent  ulcer  with  excoriated  edges  remains,  or  one

extending  under  skin  and  beneath  muscles.
■  Cold  abscesses.
"Touch. Passive  Motion. Injuries. Touch:  region  of

liver  sensitive ;  spine  sore.
Riding  on  horseback  :  sore  pain  in  chest.
Caused  by  a  fall :  flying  pains  in  chest.
^^  Skin. Itching.

Skin  red  all  over;  eruption  of  small  red  spots.

Herpes ;  scald  head.

Scrofulous  ulcers  discharging  a  large  quantity  of  pus ;

cold  abscesses.
I  I  Lupus.
I  llcthyosis.
"  Stages  of  Life,  Constitution, l  Strumous  diathesis ;  slender,

lean figure; thin,  transparent skin; frequent  pulse;

great  excitability  of  nervous  system ; urine of  high

specific  gravity.
Boy,  set.  12;  scrofula.
Mrs.  F.,  set.  30;  cough.
' Lady,  set.  30 ;  constant  chilliness.

Mrs.  M.,  set.  30,  formerly  of  strong  robust  constitution  ;

rheumatism.
Mrs.  0.,  set.  36 ;  cough.
*^  Relations. Compare:  Phosphor,  in  catarrh  and  hoarseness;

lod. in  ravenous  appetite  of  rachitic children; lod.,

Phosphor,  and  Spongia  in  lung  diseases.


OPIUM.

Poppy.  Papaveracese.

Introduced  by  Hahnemann.

For  provings  and  toxicological  reports  which  are  numerous,  see  K.  A.  M.  L.,
vol.  1,  p.  278,  and  Allen's  Encyclopedia,  vol.  7,  p.  173.

CLiNicAii  Authorities. — III  effects  of  anger,  Schmid,  B.  J.  H.,  vol.  5,  p.  271 ;
Menial  disturbance;  Idiocy,  Sonnenberg,  Schiiler,  Kiesselbach,  Kiick.,  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.
1,  p.  36;  Bigler,  Hom.  Phys.,  vol.  6,  p.  249;  Delirium,  Elwert,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf.,
vol.  5,  p.  8 ;  Delirium  tremens,  Strecker,  Weber,  Trinks,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  1,  p.
146  ;  Battmann,  Kurtz,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  5,  p.  65  ;  Apoplexy,  Higgins,  N.  A.  J.  H.,
vol.  22,  p.  58  ;  Scliolz,  Schmid,  Knorre,  Frank,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  1,  p.  94 ;  Low,
Eiick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  5,  p.  30 ;  Stupor,  Sawyer,  Hom.  Phys.,  vol.  7,  p.  337  ;  Sunstroke,
Espinay,  N.  A.  J.  H.,  vol.  22,  p.  80  ;  from  Bib.  Franc  ,  Dec,  1872;  Vertlyo,  Miiller,
Eiick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  5,  p.  22;  Schmid,  B.  J.  H.,  vol.  1,  p.  377  ;  Headache,  Schmid,


205  OPIUM.

B.  J.  H.,  vol.  1,  p.  378;  Eilck.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  1,  p.  190;  Meningitis,  Hartmann,
Hirsch,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  5,  p.  46;  Cerebro- spinal  meningitis,  Eaue,  Analyt.
Therap.,  vol.  1,  p.  248  ;  Affection  of  stomach,  vomiting,  Hofrichter,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf.,
vol.  5,  p.  319  ;  Colic,  Welsch,  Times  Eet.,  1875,  p.  73  ;  A.  H.  Z.,  vol.  90,  p.  173  ;
Flatulent  colic,  Hirsch,  B.  J.  H.,  vol.  26,  p.  108  ;  Lead  colic,  Eiickert,  Fleischmann,
Eothhansl.Trinks,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol  1  p.  758 ;  Hnber,  Mattoli,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf.,
vol.5,  p.  369;  Ussher,  Hah.  Mo.,  vol.  23,  p.  601;  Horn.  World,  July,  1888;
Intestinal  catarrh,  Miiller,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  5,  p.  425 ;  Ileus,  Cserno,  Eaue's  Eec
1872,  p.  149 ;  H.  Kl.,  1871,  p.  50 ;  Intestinal  obstruction,  Low,  Kafka,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf.,
vol.  5,  p,  374  ;  Intestinal  obstruction  and  fecal  tumor,  Plimpton,  Hah.  Mo.,  vol.  10,
p.  393;  Abdominal  complaint,  Bartl,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  1,  p.  777  ;  Constipation,
Swan,  Horn.  Times,  vol.  4,  p.  275;  Stoaks,  Horn.  Phys.,  vol.  8,  p.  439;  Foster,
Times  Eet.,  1877,  p.  35;  Am.  Horn.,  vol.  1,  p.  114;  Luchs,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf.,
vol.  5,  p.  396 ;  Lobeth.,  Hrg.,  Mschk.,  Kirsch,  Euck.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  1,  p.  817  ;  Eafin-
esque,  Bernard,  Bernard  and  Strong,  p.  85  ;  Cholera,  Hirsch,  B.  J.  H.,  vol.  26,  pp.
107-112  ;  Lobeth.,  Eentsch,  Both,  Euck.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  1,  p.  952 ;  Engelhard,  Gers-
tel,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  5,  p.  479  ;  Proctitis,  Lindner,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  5,  p.  355 ;
Retention  of  stool  and  urine,  Hrg.,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  2,  p.  28 ;  Renal  colic,  Trinks,
Euck.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  2,  p.  28 ;  Strangury,  Allen,  Horn.  Phys.,  vol.  7,  p.  212 ;  Ureth-
ral stricture,  Eosenberg,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  5,  p.  547 ;  Sloughing  of  scrotum,  Sircar,
Eaue's  Eec,  1875,  p.  169;  Calcutta  M.  J.,  vol.  3,  p.  122;  3Ienorrhagia,  Weil,
Times  Eet.,  1877,  p.  109 ;  Menostasia,  Gross,  Eaue's  Eec,  1872,  p.  179  ;  H.  Kl.,  1871 ;
Constipation  during  pregnancy,  Knorr,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  2,  p.  384;  Disorders  of
pregnancy,  Wheeler,  Times  Eet.,  1877,  p.  113,  Mi^ss.  Trans.,  vol.  4,  p.  883;
Abortion,  Griessel,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  2,  p  319;  Ineffectual  labor  pains,  Afterpaivs,
Battmann,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  5,  p.  656;  Use  in  labor,  Battmann,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf.,
vol.  5,  p.  34;  Paerperal  convulsions,  Hartmann,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  2,  pp.  394,  408  ;
Briry,  N.  E.  M.  G.,  vol.  8,  p.  348 ;  Baer,  Eaue's  Ec-c,  1874,  p.  247 ;  from  Trans.
A.  I.,  1872,  p.  225 ;  Bronchitis  with  dyspncea,  Kafka,  Euck.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  5,  p.  800  ;
Dyspnasa,  Morrison,  Horn.  Eev.,  vol.  21,  p.  157 ;  Asthma  Millari,  Times  Eet.,
1877,  p.  84,  Cough,  Gross,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  3,  p.  46;  Hcemoptysis,  Lobethal,
Eiick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  5,  p.  805;  Pneumonia,  Bernrenter,  Eaue's  Path.,  p.  392  ;  Miil-
ler, Eiick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  3,  p.  310;  Heart  disease,  Knorre,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  3,  p.
447;  Huber,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf.,  .vol.  5,  p.  860;  Spasms,  Epilepsy,  Hrg.,  Attorn.,  Hro-
mada,  Knorre,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  4  p.  586  ;  Spasms,  Pritchard,  Eaue's  Eec,  1875,
p.  248  ;  from  Trans.  N.  Y.  S.,  1873-4,  p.  314 ;  Convulsions,  Ping,  Times  Eet.,  1875,
p.  36,  from  Bib.  Horn.,  vol.  7,  p.  79  ;  Epilepsy,  Groos,  Horn.  CI.,  vol.  4,  p.  93  ;  Stens,
Eaue's  Eec,  1872,  p.  228 ;  from  A.  H.  Z.,  vol.  83,  p.l28 ;  Spalding,  N.  E.  M.  G.,  vol.8,
p.  208 ;  Sleep,  Sleeplessness,  L5w,  Eenlsch,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  5,  p.  60 ;  Cold,  Un-
derwood, B.  J.  H.,  vol.  33,  p.  574  ;  Ague,  Hrg.,  Gauwerky,  Seidel,  Euramel,  Eiick.
Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  4,  p.  968;  Seidel,  Allen's  Int.  Fever,  p.  195;  from  Plom.  CI.,  Lippe,
M.  I.,  vol.  6,  p.  345 ;  Fischer,  A.  J.  H.  M.  M.,  vol.  4,  p.  18  ;  Typhoidfever,  Lobeth.,
Low,  Gross,  Hartmann,  Trinks,  Wislicen.,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  4,  p.  761 ;  Scarlet
fever,  Hahnemann,  Trinks,  Hartmann,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  4,  p.  58.

'  Mind. I  I  Confusion  of  mind.

iDulness  of  head  ;  has  no  mental  grasp  for  anything  and

cannot  comprehend  the  sense  of  what  he  is  reading.
I  Imbecility  of  will,  as  though  annihilated.


OPIUM.  206

I B Insensibility,  accompanied  by  complete  apoplectic  res-
piration.

1 1  Unconscious,  eyes  glassy,  half  closed;  face  pale;  deep
coma.

iStupid  indifference.

B Drunkenness,  with  stupor;  as  if  from  smoke  in  brain;
eyes  burning,  hot  and  dry.

B Sopor:  painless,  complains  of  nothing,  wants  nothing;
with  delirium ;  depression  of  lower  jaw;  dilated  pupils  ;
general  symptoms  of  paralysis  of  brain.

B Profound  coma;  cannot  be  aroused  from  stupor;  pupils
greatly  contracted  or  widely  dilated ;  face  puffed,  with
dark  red  or  cherry  brown  appearance  ;  stertorous  breath-
ing; pulse  full  and  labored  or  slow  and  feeble.

BTalkative;  glistening  eyes  and  mental  activity;  inclines
to  gayety.

I  I  Thinks  he  is  not  in  his  own  house;  imagines  himself
living  in  a  locality  three  hours  distant  from  his  house;
detains  all  passers-by  and  wishes  to  take  them  into  his
house  ;  will  brook  no  opposition,  meets  force  with  force,
face  flushed;  stupor,  forgetfulness,  he  does  not  at  once
recognize  friends ;  anxiety ;  wildness ;  inclination  to
sleep  without. being  able  to  do  so;  constipation  with
meteoric  distension  of  abdomen  ;  urine  retained,  a  pare-
tic condition  apparently  preventing  evacuation ;  while
smoking  forgets  to  draw;  lively  and  cheerful,  yet  very
drowsy.

I  iSaid  many  disconnected  things  and  pointed  to  masked
people  who  seemed  to  approach  him.

BSees  frightful  ghosts;  easily  frightened.

llShe  appears  to  see  most  frightful  animals  and  other
objects.

I  Vivid  imagination,  exaltation  of  mind.

I  Imagines  parts  of  body  very  large.

B  Thinks  she  is  not  at  home.

B Delirious  talking,  eyes  wide  open,  face  red,  puffed  up.

B  Delirium :  muttering ;  violent,  with  red  face,  glistening
eyes  and  great  physical  activity.

I  I  Constant  delirium  day  and  night;  declares  he  is  not
alone  in  bed  ;  when  spoken  to  answers  intelligently,  but
at  once  becomes  delirious  again;  frenzy;  desires  to  es-
cape ;  says  a  regiment  of  horsemen  are  upon  his  bed  and
that  he  fears  to  be  trodden  upon ;  w^hen  told  that  horses
are  very  careful,  answered  that  he  feared  he  would  be
crushed  by  the  wagons  that  followed  them.  ^After
pneumonia.

B I  Mania  a  potu :  with  dulness  of  senses,  at  intervals  sopor,
with  snoring;  in  old,  emaciated  persons;  sees  animals


207  OPIUM.

coming  towards  him  ;  people  want  to  hurt  him,  execute
him  ;  creeping  under  covers  or  jumping  out  of  bed;  in
"  old  sinners  "  whose  long  lives  of  excess  have  thoroughly-
destroyed  their  constitutions;  in  those  who  have  had
the  disease  repeatedl}^,  it  taking  but  a  small  quantity  of
liquor  to  throw  them  again  into  delirium ;  face  wears  a
constant  expression  of  fright  and  terror;  preceded  by
epileptiform  fits;  imagine  they  see  frightful  objects
and  are  in  great  fear;  believe  themselves  to  be  murder-
ers or  criminals  to  be  executed ;  want  to  run  away ;
staring  look ;  twitching  of  muscles  of  face  and  mouth  ;
lockjaw ;  tremor.

I  Fantastical  insanity  with  frightful  visions;  talks  in  a
confused  manner;  commits  indecent  actions;  cheerful-
ness and  feeling  of  great  strength  ;  contempt  of  death  ;
riotous  hilarity  with  buffoonery  and  subsequent  angry
savageness  or  tearful  sorrow;  instability  and  imbecility
of  will ;  indifference  to  joy  and  suffering;  complete  de-
mentia, does  not  recognize  his  own  relatives;  excessive
debility,  stupor,  frequent  sweats  and  eruptions  on  skin;
diminished  secretion  of  urine.  ^Mental  derangement.

I  I  After  practising  masturbation  for  many  years  fell  into
a  state  of  despair  respecting  his  health,  this  degenerated
into  complete  idiocy.

i Nervous  and  irritable;  tendency  to  start.

IB  Ailments  from  excessive  joy,  fright,  anger  or  shame.

IB  After  fright,  fear  of  the  fright  still  remaining.

Anxiety;  apprehension;  fear  of  impending  death.

I  I  Started  at  least  noise  ;■  a  fly  ujDon  any  part  of  body  was  a
burden  to  him.

I  After  a  fright  with  fear,  convulsions,  or  a  hot  head,  with
twitching  about  mouth.

I  I  Grief  over  insults  is  followed  by  convulsions.

Mendacity.*

I  I  Screaming  before  or  during  spasm.

I  I  Dislikes  to  talk  during  sweat.
'  Sensorium. ii  Great  sensibility  to  sound,  light  and  faintest
odors

I  Apoplexy :  vertigo,  congestion  to  head,  with  great  roaring
in  ears ;  eyes  open,  pupils  dilated  ;  face  red,  muscles
twitching;  sinking  of  jaw ;  tongue  drawn  to  one  side;
speech  impeded;  inability  to  swallow;  slow,  irregular,
stertorous  breathing;  limbs  cold,  paralyzed  ;  drowsiness;
in  persons  addicted  to  spirituous  liquors  or  oppressed
by  care  or  grief;  convulsive  motions  of  extremities  or
tetanic  stiffness  of  whole  body;  hot  sweat on head;

*  "Opium  eaters  are  chronic  liars."


OPIUM.  208

after  consciousness  is  restored  cannot  retain  what  he
reads  and  forgets  connection  of  consecutive  thoughts;
paralysis  of  r.  side.
iComa :  incomplete  insensibility;  will  be  aroused  for  a  mo-
ment when  addressed  in  a  loud  tone  of  voice  and  then
relapse  into  stupor ;  extremities  and  face  bluish  or  livid ;
loud,  stertorous  inspirations ;  coldness  of  skin  ;  ursemic.

■  Sunstroke;  unconsciousness  ;  deep  coma  ;  eyes  glassy  and

half  closed.
I  I  After  sleeping  in  sun  during afternoon  could  not  be
awakened following morning;  she  slept  quietly and
normally,  pulse  regular,  skin  cool. ^Sunstroke.

■  Passive  cerebral  congestion,  with  somnolence  after  meals

in  patients  predisposed  to  apoplexy.

■  ■Fainting  turns  with  vertigo  whenever  he  attempts  to

rise  from  bed,  with  sudden  return  of  animation  on  lying
down.

■  Vertigo  :  with  anxiet}^  and  delirium  ;  when  rising  ;  after

typhus ;  from  injuries  to  head  ;  as  after  intoxication  ;
with  darkness  before  eyes;  with  dulness  of  head  and
stupefaction;  sympathetic,  accompanying  diseases  of
prsecordial  organs,  suppressed  hemorrhoids,  menstrua-
tion, heart  affections,  etc. ;  after  fright ;  with  sensation
as  if  he  were  flying  or  hovering  in  air.

■  Sensation  in  head  like  that  following  sleep  after  excess-

ive debauch.

■  Great  heaviness  of  head,  making  thought  and  writing

difficult.

■  Dull,  stupid,  as  if  drunk.

■  Congestion  of  blood  to  head,  with  pulsations  in  it.

^  Inner  Head.  ■  Headache:  pressing  pain  in  temples;  ver-
tigo, red  face,  sleepiness;  <  on  closing  eyes;  congestive,
nervous,  abdominal.

■  Throbbing  of  arteries;  rush  of  blood  to  head.

■  Cerebro-spinal meningitis: stupor; spasms; drawing

body  backward  and  rolling  from  side  to  side;  deep,
slow,  stertorous  breathing;  very  quick  or  very  slow
pulse ;  after  violent  emotions,  fear,  grief,  fright,  which
acted  like  a  blow,  stunning  whole  nervous  system.

■  Meningitis,  particularly  if  caused  by  insulation  or  when

child  has  slept  near  hot  stove.
■ ■Traumatic  encephalitis.

■  Hydrocephalus  acutus: early  and late stages; heavy

and  stupid  sleep,  with  red  face ;  stupid  even  after  wak-
ing; extremely  acute  hearing;  child  seems  to  be  afraid
of  something  and  starts  as  if  frightened ;  constipation,
stools  resemble  small,  black  balls;  chronic.
*  Outer  Head.  iHead  hot  and  covered  with  hot  or  cold
sweat. ^Apoplexy.


209  ,  OPIUM.

lOcciput  feels  heavy  as  lead,  head  falling  back  constantly.
^Apoplexy. ^Cerebro-spinal  meningitis.
^  Sight  and  Eyes. >  Obscuration  of  sight ;  amblyopia.

I  Scintillations  before  eyes.  •

I I  The  pupils  are  dilated  and  insensible  to  light,  con-
tracted or  sluggish.

B  Sensation  as  if  eyes  were  too  large  for  orbits.

■  Eyes:  glassy,  protruded,  immovable  ;  staring  look  ;  half

open,  balls  turned  upward ; red,  half  closed,  burning
hot  and  dry ;  red,  glistening  and  prominent.

I  I  Sensation  of  sand  or  dust  in  eye,  with  burning.

I  I  Swelling  of  lower  lids;  lids  hang  down  as  if  paralyzed.

I  I  Total  paralysis  of  accommodation,  with  impaired  sen-
sibility of  r.  retina,  and  partial  paralysis  of  accommoda-
tion of  1.  eye ;  supposed  to  be  due  to  use  of  cosmetic
which  probably  contained  carbonate  of  lead  ;  almost
constantly  frontal  headache,  vertigo  with  darting  pains
from  occiput  to  forehead,  distressing  feeling  of  empti-
ness in  stomach,  especially  in  morning,  bowels  consti-
pated, and  a  sensation  of  pain  and  constriction  as  of  a
band  encircling  her  chest  in  line  of  pleura.

I  I  Embolism  of  central  artery  of  retina;  arteries  blood-
less, veins  engorged  and  stagnant,  and  hemorrhagic
spots  on  disk;  after  a  severe  attack  of  neuralgia;  face
very  red  and  drawn  to  r.  side,  tongue  protruded  to  r.
side,  speech  imperfect,  nearly  voiceless,  except  with
effort;  pain  in  back ;  all  pains  on  r.  side.
^Hearing  and  Ears.  iiAcuteness  of  hearing;  clocks  strik-
ing and  cocks  crowing'  at  a  great  distance  keep  her
awake.

iBuzzing,  humming  and  violent  roaring  in  ears.

■  Congestion  to  ears  ;  hsematorrhoea.
^  Smell  and  Nose.  ■ b  i  Loss  of  smell.

I  I  Stitches  in  r.  nostril  on  taking  a  long  inspiration.

I  I  Stoppage  of  nose;  dry  coryza.
®  Upper  Face.  >  iFace  :  flushed  ;  red,  bloated,  swollen  ;  livid ;
pale,  earthy,  eyes  weak,  full  of  water ;  pale,  clay-colored,
sunken  countenance  and  eyes,  with  red  spots  on  cheeks;
bluish  (purple),  swollen ;  of  sucklings  three  or  four
weeks  old,  like  that  of  an  old  man  ;  affrighted,  mania
a  potu  ;  debauched,  distorted.

iTrembling,  twitching  and  spasmodic  motions  of  facial
muscles.

■  Muscles  of  face  relaxed,  lower  lip  hangs  down;  veins

distended.

■  Cold  sweat  on  forehead.

'  Lower  Face. iCorners of  mouth twitch; distortion of
mouth.

VOL.  viir. — 14.


OPIUM.  ,  210

I  Lips  livid  ;  foam  at  mouth.

■  Lower  lip  and  jaw  hang  down.

I  I  Lockjaw.

"Taste  and  Tongue, ii Taste:  lost;  bitter;  sour;  disagree-
able, sweet  (lead  colic).

I I  Paralysis  of  tongue  and  difficult  articulation.

I  I  Unable  to  talk  with  mouth  open  ;  answered  in  a  stam-
mering manner  with  interrupted  articulation.

■  Tongue:  quivering;  coated  dirty  yellow,  or  white;  unc-

tuous ;  purple  black.
'^  Inner Mouth. Dryness  of mouth, thirst and want of
appetite.
I  I  Saliva  lessened  or  ptyalism  ;  spitting  of  blood.
I  I  Ulcers  in  mouth  and  on  tongue.
^^  Throat, l  Dryness  of  throat,

I  I  Inability  to  sw^allow ;  daily  attacks  of  distension  and
strangulation.

■  Dysphagia  becoming  true  aphagia,  as  from  paralysis  of

muscles.
"  Appetite,  Thirst. Desires,  Aversions. ■Appetite  raven-
ous or  lost.

■  Disgust  at  food,  or  food  is  desired,  but  no  sooner  is  first

morsel  swallowed  than  it  is  followed  by  oppression.

■  Violent  thirst  or  absence  of  thirst.

■  Desire  for  spirituous  liquors  ;  costive.
I  I  Longing  for  beer  or  brandy.

^^  Eating  and  Drinking.  Aggravation  from  brandy  or  wine.
*®  Hiccough, Belching,  Nausea and Vomiting. ■  Hic-
cough ;  sour  eructations.

■  Nausea  and  inclination  to  vomit  when  moving  and  after

eating.

■  Retching  which  has  come  on  in  consequence  of  a  moral

emotion,  as  loathing.

■  Unsuccessful  vomiturition  in  drunkards.

■  Vomit:  green,  bloody  or  bitter;  putrid;  stercoraceous ;

intussusception,  with  violent  colic  and  convulsions;  first
of  food  then  of  fecal-smelling  substance  (hiccough),
great  thirst,  cold  limbs,  distorted  face  (ileus,  incarcer-
ated hernia) ;  of  enormous  masses  of  mucus  intermixed
with  large  bubbles  of  air,  occasionally  greenish,  accom-
panied by  great  nausea,  pressure  in  stomach,  constipa-
tion, etc.
"  Scrobiculum  and  Stomach,  i  i  Painful  swelling  in  prte-
cordia.

■  Violent  cutting  in  epigastric  and  umbilical  region.

■  Constrictive  pain  in  stomach.

■  Heaviness  and  pressure  in  stomach.

■  Fulness  and  oppression  in  stomach,  with  shortness  and

difficulty  of  breathing.


211  .  OPIUM.

■  Digestion  slow,  disturbed,  weakened,  with  sensation  of

fulness,  heaviness,  pressure,  constriction  and  pain  in
stomach  and  prsecordium;  inactivity  of  digestive  or-
gans ;  atonic  dyspepsia  of  drunkards ;  subacute  gastritis.

^^  Hypochondria. 1 1  Swelling  of  spleen.

'^Abdomen. iRumbling  in  abdomen;  griping,  grumbling.

■  Abdomen tense, distended,  tympanitic,  hard,  swollen,

sensitive  to  touch.

iPressive  pain  in  abdomen,  as  if  intestines  would  be  cut
to  pieces.

I  I  Tension  in  hypogastric  region,  which  is  extremely  pain-
ful to  touch.

I  I  Pressure  and  heaviness  as  from  a  stone  or  weight  in
abdomen,  in  umbilical  region.

I  I  Accumulation  of  gas  in  stomach  and  intestines,  causing

painful  swelling ;  >  for  a  time  by  motion ;  if  gas  passes
off  it  is  immediately  renewed.
^ I  Anxious sensation in epigastrium; colic,  with great
pressure  downward  upon  rectum  and  bladder,  without
any  discharge  of  gas,  feces  or  urine.

I I  Colic:  transient,  very  violent;  griping,  with  constipa-
tion (in  sucklings);  cutting;  flatulent;  as  if  intestines
were  cut  to  pieces;  from  lead  poisoning.

I  I  Intestinal  spasms;  child  cried  day  and  night  and  could
not  be  pacified ;  after  each  attack  pale  and  collapsed  ;
thirsty,  vomits  after  drinking;  stools  hard,  lumpy,
colorless,  or  thin,  j^ellowish  or  greenish  ;  passed  much
urine ;  great  fearfulness,  especially  at  night ;  eyes  wide
open  ;  he  crouched  up  and  perspired ;  whenever  he
cried  scrotum  and  penis  wrinkled  up,  testicles  were
drawn  up  within  abdominal  ring,  and  penis  completely
disappeared.

I  I  Squeezing  pains  as  if  something  were  forced  through  a
narrow  space;  shooting  pains  into  testes  and  bladder;
restless,  anxious,  changing  position;  face  hot;  pulse
slow. ^Nephralgia.

I  I  Severe  vomiting,  with  pains  in  stomach  and  obstinate
constipation  ;  great  confusion  of  head  ;  tongue  coated  ;
metallic  taste  in  mouth  ;  intolerable  pains  in  abdomen,
as  if  stabbed  with  a  knife  ;  umbilicus  spasmodically
retracted;  pulse  tense,  hard,  slow;  skin  dry. ^Colic.

IlVer}'  severe  twitching-tearing  or  lightning-like  pains
shooting  in  all  directions  through  abdomen,  even  ex-
tending down  to  testicles  and  at  times  involving  blad-
der; pains  do  not  remain  long  in  one  place,  but  con-
stantly change  locality,  and  are  not  <  from  -external
pressure ;  no  indications  of  inflammation ;  stool  and
urine  normal ;  pulse  normal. ^Colic.


OPItFM.  •  212

B Flatus  accumulates  in  upper  part  of  bowels,  causing  dis-
tension of  abdomen,  especially  in  umbilical  region,
with  antiperistaltic  motion,  belching  and  vomiting.

1 1  Constant  severe  constricting  pain  in  abdomen,  day  and
night,  compelling  him  to  bend  double  ;  constipation  ;
loss  of  appetite  ;  great  lassitude  ;  lower  limbs  heavy  as
lead. ^Lead  colic.

I  I  Delirium,  with  severe  convulsions;  complains  of  no
pain;  skin  very  hot;  pulse  120;  pupils  greatly  dilated,
sensitive  to  light ;  at  night  complains  of  sudden  loss  of
vision  ;  later,  pain  and  sensation  of  lameness  in  lower
limbs,  with  constriction  in  abdomen. ^Lead  colic.

I  I  Colic  in  a  printer  from  handling  type;  pain  so  severe

as  to  compel  him  to  lie  on  floor  and  make  a  great  out-
cry ;  constipation.

I I  Painter's  colic.

iCrampy  intestinal  motions;  rolling  up  as  of  a  hard  body
in  r.  hypochondrium. ^Ileus.  ,

I  Strangulation  of  bowels;  violent  colicky  pains  and  fecal
vomiting,

B  Digestive  organs  inactive  ;  peristaltic  motion  reversed
or  paralyzed  ;  bowels  seem  closed.

B  Paralysis  of  intestines  from  lead  poisoning.

BLaxness  of  abdominal  organs.

B Incarcerated  umbilical  and  inguinal  hernia;  fecal  vomit.
""Stool  and  Rectum.  BiStool:  involuntary,  especially  after
fright ;  pasty  ;  fluid,  frothy,  with  burning  in  anus  and
tenesmus;  excessively  offensive;  watery;  black,  fetid;
unsatisfactory,  hard;  hard,  preceded  by  griping;  hard,
dark-brown  or  grey;  hard  and  crumbly;  BBhard,
round,  black  balls;  in  small  hard  knots,  accompanied
by  bearing-down  pains,  or  with  sensation  as  if  rectum
were  closed  ;  hard,  dry,  in  black  balls,  like  sheep  clung  ;
in  large  masses;  hard,  alternated  with  liquid,  frothy
stools  ;  come  down  and  recede ;  retained  spasmodically.

B Diarrhoea  :  occasioned  suddenly  by  fear,  a  cold,  or  other
slight  causes ;  after  sudden  joy ;  persistent,  in  those
treated  with- large  doses  of  the  drug;  last  stage  of  in-
fantile, with  characteristic  stools  and  convulsions;  dur-
ing typhoid.

BDysentery:  patient  drowsy  and  stupid;  urine  scanty
and  retained ;  no  appetite ;  rapid  emaciation ;  strong
resemblance  to  second  stage  of  typhus.

BB Cholera  infantum:  with  stupor,  snoring  and  convul-
sions ;  contracted  pupils ;  tonic  spasms ;  face  pale  or
red ;  fatally  advancing  stupor ;  pupils  react  very  slug-
gishly or  not  at  all ;  disease  seems  to  begin  by  involv-
ing brain,  as  yet  there  is  neither  vomiting  nor  diar-


213  OPIUM.

rlicea,  child  appears  as  if  drugged;  lack  of  vitality;
well-selected  remedy  refuses  to  act;  patient  either  slug-
gish or  drowsy.

■  Cholera  Asiatica:  from  emotional  causes,  fright  at  seiz-

ure or  death  of  relatives;  after  failure  of  Verat.  or
Arsen.;  when  too  large  doses  of  Camphor  have  been
given,  and  there  is  great  congestion  to  head  and  threat-
ened apoplexy;  typhoid  symptoms;  asphyctic  stage;
icy  coldness  and  blueness  of  surface;  pulseless;  no
reaction  ;  disturbances  in  circulation  and  respiration
in  consequence  of  violent  and  sudden  implication  of
solar  plexus,  with  cyanosis  and  threatened  suffocation.

■  Constipation  :  from  fright  or  fear;  nervous  and  irritable,

passes  nothing  but  hard,  black  balls  from  bowels;  from
arrested  secretions;  from  ileus  or  paresis  from  intes-
tines;_  almost  unconquerable;  for  weeks  with  loss  of
appetite ;  not  more  than  one  motion  a  week  ;  from  in-
activity of  intestines  ;  the  most  active  purgatives  have
lost  their  power;  decreased  peristaltic  motion  ;  paraly-
sis of  intestines  in  consequence  of  a  protracted  attack
of  diarrhcea  in  subjects  leading  a  sedentary  life  and
also  in  robust,  healthy  men;  associated  with  incarcerated
hernia ;  want  of  sensibility,  hardly  any  inconvenience
is  felt  from  accumulation  of  feces ;  of  corpulent,  good-
humored  women  and  children ;  from  spasmodic  reten-
tion in  small  intestines,  with  feeling  of  pressing  asunder;
from  lead  poisoning;  after  abuse  of  cathartics  ;  bowels
impacted  with  feces ;  resulting  from  pressure  upon  rec-
tum in  consequence  of  a  gravid  uterus  or  abdominal
tumors;  of  nursing  infants,  aged  persons,  and  those  of
a  torpid  or  plethoric  habit;  absence  of  expulsive
efforts;  accompanied  by  hysterical  symptoms;  at  one
time,  after  stool  had  remained  absent  eleven  weeks,
fecal  vomiting  occurred.

■  Before  stool:  no  desire,  or  with  desire  to  go  to  stool  there

is  a  sensation  as  if  anus  were  closed.

■  Proctitis  during course  of  peritonitis (metritis); anus

greatly  retracted.

■  Sensation  of  occlusion  of  anus;  constriction,  anus  spas-

modically closed  during  colic,  with  obstinate  constipa-
tion ;  very  difficult  emission  of  flatus.
"  Urinary  Organs,  l  i  Diabetes  mellitus;  dulness,  sadness,
weak  memory  ;  after  mental  shocks  or  injuries;  irenal
colic;  pressing  squeezing  pains  as  though  something
had  to  force  its  way  through  a  narrow  space ;  shooting
pains  from  different  places  into  bladder  and  testicles  ;
vomiting  of  slime  and  bile;  obstinate  constipation;
dysuria;  greatest  anxiety  and  restlessness;  constantly
changing  position;  face hot ;  pulse  slow.


OPIUM.  214

•

iHematorrhoea.

lUrine  retained:  from  fright;  from  contraction  of  sphinc-
ter or  paralysis  of  fundus  of  bladder;  bladder  full;
post-partum ;  nursing  children  after  passion  of  nurse  ;
in  fever  or  acute  illness  ;  chiefly  caused  by  blunting  of
lining  of  membrane  of  neck  of  bladder  so  that  fulness
is  not  recognized  by  patient.

I  Urine:  suppressed;  passes  with  difficulty,  as  from  atony;
seldom  and  scanty,  dark  brown,  brickdust  sediment;
red  and  cloudy;  lemon  colored,  with  much  sediment;
bloody.

■  Frequent  interruption  of  stream  of  urine,  which  com-

mences to  flow  alter  waiting  a  long  time,  on  account  of
a  cramp  in  sphincter  vesicae.

■  Cutting  in  urethra.

iStrangury  and  retention  of  urine  from  excessive  use  of
tobacco.

■  Involuntary  urination.

■  Nocturnal  enuresis;  urinates  very  often.

^^  Male  Sexual  Organs.  ■Excitement  of  sexual  organs  with
violent  erections ;  impotence.

I  I  Voluptuous  fancies,  with  erections  during  sleep  and
impotence  after  waking;  nightly  emissions  with  amor-
ous dreams.

I  I  Emissions  without  erections,  followed  by  debility  and
great  relaxation  of  parts.

■  Spasmodic stricture after drinking poorly-fermented

liquor  ;  also  in  drunkards.

I  I  Painful  sensation  in  testicles.

I  I  Inflammation  and  sloughing  of  scrotum  following  at-
tacks of  malarious  fever.
"Female  Sexual  Organs, ii Great  excitement  of  sexual
organs,  with  sexual  dreams  and  orgasm.

I  I  Perfect  loss  of  sexual  desire  from  lack  of  nutrition.

■  Softness  of  uterus,  with  fetid  discharge. ^After  metritis.

■  Prolapsus  uteri  from  fright.

■  Severe  laborlike  pains  in  uterus,  with desire  to  go  to

stool.

■  Menses:  irregular,  profuse,  violent  colic  forcing  her  to

bend  over;  urging  to  stool;  suppressed  by  fright.

■  Amenorrhoea from fright; irresistible drowsiness;

eclampsia.

■  Menorrhagia,  or  metrorrhagia;  great  sleepiness,  yet  she

cannot  sleep;  sheets  so  hot  that  she  has  to  change  to  a
cooler  place  every  little  while;  constipation.

■  Menses  suppressed  by  great  fright;  violent  epileptiform

convulsions  followed  b}^  very  profuse  menses.
I  I  Prolapsus  of  vagina  with  strangulation ; very  sleepy  ;
lies  in  a  soporous  condition.


215  OPIUM.

I  Leucorrhoea :  fetid.
^'Pregnancy.  \  Parturition. Lactation, i During  preg-
nancy : insomnia ; retention  of  stool ; continued'  hic-
cough ;  frequent  nausea  and  vomiting  after  eating.

■  Violent  or  painful  movements  of  foetus.

■Abortion  threatening  after  great  fright,  especially  if  in
latter  part  of  pregnancy.

■  Labor  pains:  spasmodic,  extremely  painful,  but  ineffect-

ual; great  pain  in  small  of  back;  false  or  suppressed;
from  fear  or  fright ;  twitching  and  jerking  of  muscles ;
sopor,  red  face,  injected  eyes,  retention  of  stool  and
urine.
I  I  Puerperal  convulsions,  after  cathartics,  not  ceasing  after
child  was  born ;  pulse  120  ;  pallor ;  sunken  eyes ;  pu-
pils much  dilated;  muttering;  borborygmus;  coma;
spasm ;  throws  arms  and  legs  about ;  stretching  arms
and  legs  at  right  angles  with  body ;  trembling;  pulse
working  rapidly ;  eyes  turned  inward  and  upward ;  head
bent  back  over  to  left;  1.  hand  and  foot  turned  to  1.
i  side;  tongue  quivering, coated  dirty  yellow,  unctuous;

the  spasm  would  scarcely  relax,  when  it  would  run  into
another,  more  than  thirty  having  occurred,  finally
stopping  very  suddenly  for  ten  minutes.

■  Puerperal  convulsions;  spasms  commenced  with  rigidity

of  muscles  and  distortion  of  features,  drawing  mouth
down  and  to  one  side;  head  turned  far  back  and  to  r.
i  side ;  then  there  was  jactitation  of  limbs  and  body,  with

lividity  of  face  and  frothing  at  mouth;  this  condition
would  subside  and  be'followed  by  stertorous  breathing;
tongue  much  swollen  and  bloody.

■  During  and  after  labor,  spasm,  with  loss  of  consciousness

and  drowsiness,  open  mouth  ;  coma  between  paroxysms.

■  Puerperal  fever,  especially  when  caused  by  fright;  over-

excitement  of  all  the  senses;  every  distant  sound  an-
noys her ;  very  fetid  discharge  from  uterus ;  case  ap-
proaches a  condition  of  stupor.

■  Extremely  severe  after-pains,  particularly  in  very  sensi-

tive women.

■  After  parturition,  retention  of  urine.

■  Suppression  of  lochia  from  fright,  with  sopor.

■  Newborn  children,  pale,  breathless,  cord  pulsates;  after

Aeon.,  if  pulse  remains  imperceptible,  face  purple.
I  I  Suckling  of  a  few  weeks,  had  not  grown,  but  was  like
an  old  man;  limbs  lax,  skin  wrinkled;  bones  of  skull
had  lapped  over  during  birth,  the  parietals  over  each
other  and  over  the  occiput.
^^  Voice  and  Larynx.  Trachea  and  Bronchia.  "Aphonia,
occasioned  by  fright.


OPIUM.  216

■  Hoarseness,  dry  mouth  and  throat,  white  tongue.
^■Feeble  voice,  it  requires  a  strong  effort  to  speak  loud.

■  Laryngismus  striduhis.

■  Tickling  in  larynx,  with  violent,  dry,  racking cough;

dryness  and  cough  >  by  drinking  water.
^^Respiration.  ■Breathing:  frequent,  involuntary,  deep;
laborious  and  drawn  at  long  intervals ;  short  inspira-
tion, long,  slow  expiration,  epigastrium  drawn  in ;  fine
rales,  constant  cough,  sopor,  face  bluish  ;  great  anguish
and  dread  of  suffocation ;  looks  as  if  dying;  slightly  >
from  cold  air  and  bending  forward ;  <  from  smoking
or  wine;  difficult,  intermittent,  as  from  paralysis  of
lungs;  difficult,  oppressed,  especially  at  night;  loud,
difficult,  rattling ;  long  and  sighing ;  snoring ;  deep, '
stertorous;  puffing;  snoring,  with  wide  open  mouth;
irregular;  moaning,  slow;  four  respirations  to  the
minute.

■  Asphyxia  neonatorum;  pale  and  breathless;  cord  still

pulsates.

■  Nightly  asthma,  with  whizzing  and  rattling  during  ex-

piration, which  is  long  and  attended  with  retraction  of
epigastric  region  ;  inhalation  short  without  noise.

■  Attacks of  difficult breathing, with noisy, stertorous

respiration;  on  taking  an  inspiration  respiration  would
appear  to  be  suspended  and  child  would  struggle  to  get
its  breath.  /^Asthma  Millari.
I  I  Asthmatic  form  of  hay  fever;  paroxysms  of  suffocation
come  on  during  sleep  and  are  apt  to  be  followed  by
violent  fits  of  dry,  racking  cough  >  for  a  time  by
drinking  water.

■  Loss  of  breath  on  going  to  sleep.

■  Suffocative  attacks  during  sleep,  like  nightmare.

■  Tightness  of  breath  and  oppression,  with  great  anguish,
tightness  and  spasmodic  constriction  of  chest.

Cough.  ■Cough:  spasmodic,  dry,  tickling,  paroxysmal,  <
at  night ;  with  gaping,  drowsiness,  yet  cannot  sleep ;
with  spasm  of  lungs  and  blue  face ;  when  drinking ;
with  difficult  sputa,  followed  by  gaping;  suffocative,
with  bluish-redness  efface;  with  profuse  sweat;  severe,
with  difficult  expectoration,  followed  by  yawning;  <
on  swallowing  (haemoptysis).
Sputa  frothy,  containing  blood  and  mucus.

■  Gaping  after  coughing.

^ Inner  Chest  and  Lungs. ■Tension  and  constriction of
chest.

■  Heat  in  chest.

I  I  Bronchitis  after  catching  cold  or  getting  wet,  with  high
fever,  dyspnoea,  bloodstreaked  expectoration  and  press-


27


217  OPIUM.

ure  on  chest;  constant  cough;  at  night  must  sit  up  on
account  of  shortness  of  breath  and  dread  of  suffocation.
I  I  At  times  feels  as  if  he  were  not  in  his  house,  which  he
expresses  by  saying,  "  I  wish  I  could  be  in  the  house
with  my  family;"  although  in  a  desperate  condition  he
is  not  much  alarmed  and  wants  to  sit  up  a  great  part
of  time,  because  bed  feels  too  hot;  whole  body,  except
lower  extremities,  perspires  profusely;  sweat  is  very
hot;  perspiring  parts  covered  by  a  heavy  crop  of
sudamina;  gropes  with  his  hands  about  bed  as  though
hunting  something;  whole  1.  and  considerable  part  of
r.  lung  hepatized. ^Double  pneumonia.

■  Infantile  pneumonia,  where  the  pulmonary  inflammation

is  disguised  by  symptoms  of  cerebral  congestion  and
oppression;  cyanotic  color  of  upper  part  of  body,  with
slow,  stertorous  breathing;  pneumonia  senilis  et  pota-
torum,_  with  similar  symptoms;  difficult  intermitting
breathing,  as  from  paralysis  of  lungs.

■  Suppuration  of  lungs  occurring  in  those  greatly  addicted

to  use  of  intoxicating  liquors;  breathing  labored,  with
rattling  and  snoring;  cough  very  difficult  and  attended
with  smothering  spells ;  face  becomes  blue  during  cough.

I  Congestion  of  blood  to  chest,  or  pulmonary  spasms,  with
deep,  stertorous,  rattling  breathing.

iHsemoptysis:  absence  of  all  pain;  blood  thick,  frothy,
mixed with  mucus;  great  oppression; burning  about
heart,  tremor,  feeble  voice;  anxious  sleep,  with  starts;
legs  cold,  chest  hot;  especially  for  drunkards.
^' Heart,  Pulse  and  Circulation. 1 1  Burning  about  heart.

■  Pulsating  arteries  and  swollen  veins  on  neck.
I  I  Beat  of  heart  could  not  be  felt.

■  Palpitation  of  heart  after  alarming  events,  fright,  grief,

sorrow,  etc.
I  I  Pain  in  cardiac  region,  with  great  anxiety,  violent
beating  of  heart,  trembling,  difficult  respiration,  sleep-
lessness at  night,  delirium;  great  excitement  of  mind,
with  constant  talking  and  motion  of  head  and  hands,
rest  of  body  lying  in  an  elevated  position  ;  talks  of  im-
pending death,  cries,  bids  all  farewell,  then  lies  quiet
as  if  communing  with  herself;  face  expresses  great  fear,
will  not  answer,  or  answers  irrelevantly;  hands  at  one
time  icy-cold  and  covered  with  cold  sweat,  at  another
dry  and  hot;  pulse  small,  thready,  quick,  irregular,  at
one  time  strong,  at  another  weak,  intermittent;  grasps
cardiac  region  with  hands  and  presses  them  hard
againstl.  side  of  chest;  frequent  deep  respirations,  dur-
ing which  she  presses  chest  forward  and  arches  back,
as  if  endeavoring  to  remove  some  obstruction  in  chest


OPIUM.  218

accompanied  by  a  peculiar  motion  of  head  and  mouth
and  gasping  for  air;  notices  most  trifling  actions  of
those  about  lier;  gives  answers  to  conversation  carried
on  in  low  tones  in  adjoining  room ;  at  times  breaks  into
a  monotonous  song ;  on  recovering  consciousness  com-
plained of  great  palpitation ;  urine  hot,  dark,  scanty ;
constipation. ^Heart  disease.

I  Pulse:  varies;  full  and  slow,  with  snoring;  quick,  hard,
with  anxious  breathing;  irregular  and  unequal; im-
perceptible ;  face  purple,  in  cyanosis  neonatorum.
^^  Neck  and  Back. Pulsating  arteries  and  swollen  veins  on
neck.

I  I  Drawing  lacerating  in  back.

I  Back  bent  backward  spasmodically^  curved  like  an  arch,
violent  trembling  motion.

■  Myelitis.

^' Upper Limbs, i  Twitching  and  spasmodic movement  of
arms  and  hands,  as  in  drunkards.

■  Paralysis  of  arms.

■  Numbness and sensation of swelling in hands and

forearms.

■  Trembling  of  hands.

■  Veins  of  hands  distended.

^^  Lower  Limbs. ■Twitching  and  spasmodic  movements.

■  Weakness,  numbness  and  paral3'sis  of  legs.

I  I  Feels  as  if  her  lower  limbs  were  severed  from  her  body

and  belonged  to  some  one  else.
I  I  Distressing  spasmodic  jerking  in  muscles  of  calves.
I  1  Heaviness,  numbness  and  swelling  of  feet.
I  I  Shuffling  and  trembling  gait. ^Myelitis  acuta.
^  Limbs  in  General. ■Tremulous  motion  of  all  limbs.

■  ■Trembling  of  limbs  after  fright.

■Spasmodic  jerkings  and  numbness  of  limbs;  convulsive
movements.

■  Coldness  of  extremities.

I  I  Chilblains  on  fingers  and  toes.
^Rest. Position. Motion. Lying down: animation re-
turned.

Lying  in  an  elevated  position :  during  heart  disease.

Must  lie  on  floor:  colic.

Rising :  from  bed,  vertigo.

Head  falling  back  constantly:  cerebro-spinal  meningitis;
apoplexy.

Stretching  arms:  at  right  angles  to  body,  during  spasm.

Moving: inclination  to  vomit; painful  swelling  of  ab-
domen >.

Bending  forward  :  >  breathing.

Presses  chest  forward  and  arches  back  :  heart  disease.


219  OPIUM.

Must  sit  up  :  from  dread  of  suffocation.
Changing  position :  nephralgia.
Constant  tossing  and  tumbling  about :  at  night.
^'^  Nerves. 'Starts  at  least  noise.
I  i  Buzzing  through  whole  body.

■  Trembling  of  whole  body;  caused  by  fright;  of  1.  arm

in  paroxysms  ; with  external  coldness,  with  jerking
and  twitching  in  limbs;  convulsions.

■  Twitching,  trembling  head,  arms  and  hands;  now  and

then  jerks  of  flexors  ;  body  cold ; stupor ;  motion of
body  and  uncovering  head  relieves.

I  Involuntary  contraction  of  muscles.

I  I  Convulsive  movements  of  one  or  other  arm  to  and  fro.

I  iSpasms :  from  emotion,  fright, anger,  etc. ;  from  approach
of- strangefs  (children) ;  from  crying;  throws  limbs  or
stretches  arms  at  right  angles  to  body,  or,  tetanic
rigidity,  opisthotonos,  with  rolling  laterally ;  spasm
begins  with  loud  screams,  then  foam  at  mouth,  trem-
bling of  limbs,  suffocation ;  eyes  half  open  and  up-
turned, pupils  large  and  insensible  to  light;  after
attack,  deep  sleep,  face  remains  deep  red  and  hot;
stupor  between  spasms;  on  entering  fit,  loud  screams,
as  from  fright;  from  nursing  soon  after  sudden  fright
of  mother;  with  sudden  loud  cries.
•  I  I  Suddenly  seized  with  an  epileptic  fit  without  any
appreciable  cause,  six  weeks  later  second  fit,  third
came  four  weeks  after  second,  and  then  they  followed
every  three  weeks ;  after  attack  soporous  sleep,  lasting
from  twenty-four  to  thirty  hours;  face  dark  red  during
sleep ;  after  sleep  pain  in  front  of  head  ;  constipation.

I  I  Fits  only  after  going  to  sleep;  would  not  sleep  ten
minutes  during  day  or  night  before  she  would,  with  a
sudden  spring,  become  violentl}'^  convulsed ;  foaming
at  mouth  and  bleeding  from  her  bitten  tongue;  face
puffed,  almost  purple;  eyes  dull  and  turned  upward;
lids  half  closed;  head  hot;  severe  opisthotonos;  con-
vulsions last  ten  to  thirty  minutes,  sinks  into  a  deep,
heavy  sleep,  with  loud  snoring  and  rattling  inchest;
in  half  an  hour,  sometimes  not  five  minutes,  suddenly
goes  into  another  convulsion,  thus  she  passes  entire
night ;  wakes  in  morning  lame  and  tired,  but  wholly
unconscious  of  not  having  had  a  quiet  nights  sleep;
during  day  listless  and  drowsy  ;  itching  of  skin  with-
out eruption  ;  indifferent  to  what  transpires  ;  prefers  to
be  left  alone ;  constipation. ^Epilepsy.

I  1  Every  evening  about  11  o'clock,  after  having  slept  fif-
teen minutes,  begins  to  toss  head  from  side  to  side,
raises  head,  flexes  it  upon  chest  and  finally  tosses  it


OPIUM.  220

back  quickly  upon  pillow ;  after  having  repeated  this
for  third  time  stretches  out  and  clenches  r.  hand,  thumb,
however,  not  being  drawn  in,  and  gives  herself  several
forcible  blows  upon  chest;  thereafter  violent  stretch-
ing, followed  by  twitching,  until  cessation  of  attack.
/!^Epilepsy.

■  Emotional  chorea.

I  Faints  every  fifteen  minutes;  eyes  shut;  head  hangs;

unconscious ;  jerks ;  sighing  ;  <  on  rising.
■Muscular  exhaustion  ;  great  depression  of  nervous  centres,

with  stupor  and  coma.
B I  Want  of  susceptibility  to  drugs;  want  of  vital  reaction.

■  Shock  from  injury,  severe  cases;  rapid  breathing,  every

breath  being  a  loud  moan;  livid  or  pale  face;  livid
lips;  great  distress,  oppression  and  angui-sh ;  cool,
clammy  skin ;  thi'oat  emits  sound  of  letter  "  k  "  in
respiration;  eyes  fixed  unequally ;  unconsciousness.

■  Numbness  and  insensibility.

■  ■Paralj^sis,  insensibility  after  apoplexy;  in  drunkards  or

old  people;  stool  and  urine  retained.

■  ■Painlessness  with  all  ailments;  complains  of  nothing

and  asks  for  nothing.
^^Sleop. ■■  Drowsiness:  with headache; amounting almost
to  sopor.

■  Stupid,  comatose  sleep,  with  rattling,  snoring  breathing  ;

slumber  with  half  open  eyes,  contracted  or  sluggish
pupils,  carphologia  and  touching  surrounding  objects.

■  Drowsiness  or  sopor;  red  face;  stertorous  breathing;  hot

sweat.

■  Very  restless  at  night,  constant  tossing  and  tumbling.

■  iSleepy,  but  cannot  sleep  ;  excessive  wakefulness.

■  Sleeplessness,  full of  unwelcome fancies  and  imagina-

tions that  wxre  entirely  distinct  from  surrounding
objects,  as  in  delirium.

■  I  Sleeplessness,  with  acuteness  of  hearing ;  clocks  striking

and  cocks  crowing  at  a  distance  keep  her  awake.

■  Coma  vigil,  with  frightful  visions,  before  midnight.

■  During  sleep  :  picking  of  bedclothes;  sobbing;  groaning  ;

voluptuous  dreams.
^*  Time. Morning:  distressing  feeling  of  emptiness  in  stomach
<  ;  hot,  profuse  sweat.

II  A.M. :  shaking  chill.
Day:  listless  and  drowsy.

Night :  great  fearfulness ;  sudden  loss  of  vision  ;  breathing
difficult  and  oppressed;  cough  <  ;  must  sit  up  from
dread  of  suffocation  ;  sleeplessness  ;  convulsion;  chill.

Before  midnight:  coma  vigil  with  frightful  visions.

Remission  during  day  and  evening;  aggravation  night
and  morning.


221  OPIUM.

^^Temperature  and  "Weather. Uncovering  head  relieves.
Cold  air :  labored  breathing  >.
Drinking  water:  dryness  and  cough  >.
Getting  wet :  bronchitis.
I  Bed  feels  so  hot  she  can  hardly  lie  on  it ;  >  from  cold  ;

<  from  heat.
Very  susqeptible  to  cold  air.

Reappearance  and  aggravation  from  becoming  heated.
^Tever. Coldness:  of  body,  especially  of  extremities ;  and

rigidity.
iStitf  and  cold  ;  chill  and  diminished  heat,  stupor;  weak,

scarcely  perceptible  pulse.
iChill:  latter  part  of  night,  wdth  thirst,  pains  in  limbs,

hot  head,  stupor;  afterwards  heat  with  sleep,  headache,

pale  face,  bilious  vomit;  then  sweat  mostly  on  legs,

with  burning  hot  feeling.

■  Flushed  face,  cold  legs,  sleepy,  but  cannot  sleep.
BHeat:  of 'head,  with  profuse  sweat;  in  chest  and  other

parts  of  trunk;  with  burning  of  cheeks;  in  face,  with
perspiration  in  large  drops;  with  soporous,  snoring
sleep,_  and  open  mouth ;  twitches  through  limbs  and
perspiration  on  hot  body;  body  burning  even  when
bathed  in  sweat;  limbs  twitch  ;  wants  to  uncover.
■Bed  feels  so  hot  she  cannot  lie  on  it;  moves  often  in
search  of  a  cool  place.

■  Sweat: cold,  on forehead or over wdiole bod}^; over

whole  body,  which  is  burning  hot;  sleep  and  snoring;
hot,  profuse  morning  sweat,  wants  to  be  uncovered;  on
upper  part  of  body  ;  lower  part  hot  and  dry.

■  Acute  fevers  characterized by  a  sopor  bordering  upon*

stupor,  and  by  absence  of  any  complaint,  snoring  with
;  mouth  open,  half  jerking  of  limbs  and  burning  heat  of
perspiring  body.

I  I  After  catching  severe  cold;  febrile  symptoms,  sore
throat,  throbbing  headache,  delirious,  troubled  sleep;
hot  surface,  with  chill  creeping  over  body,  especially
from  hips  to  below  knees;  lameness  of  eyeballs;  uncon-
trollable desire  to  weep.

I  I  Shaking  chill  at  11  a.m.  ;  body  cold,  or  coldness  only  of
limbs,  abdomen,  back,  hands  and  feet.

I  I  Sleep  during  chill,  heat  and  sweat;  during  sweat  still
feels  burning  hot;  children  and  old  people. 6'Ague.

■  Congestive  chill;  paroxysms  regular  in  time,  irregular

in  stages.

■  Intermittents  of  old  people  and  children.

■  Somnolency  attended  with  slight  delirium;  lies  quietly

with  a  pleased  expression  of  countenance;  replies  cor-
rectly when  aroused  ;  makes  no  complaint,  on  contrary


OPIUM.  222

is  often  satisfied  with  his  condition  because  his  dreams
are  agreeable ;  continues  awake  but  a  short  time,  then
falls  into  somnolent  state  again. ^Typhoid.

■  Typhoid  type  of  fever,  stupor,  can  scarcely  be  aroused  ;

speechless;  eyes  half  open  ;  mild  delirium  or  loud  talk-
ing, fury,  singing,  desire  to  escape.

■  Typhoid  fever:  with  profound  cerebral  congestion  result-

ing in  paralysis  of  brain;  dark  or  brownish-red  hue  of
face;  dropping  of  lower  jaw  and  stertorous  breathing  ;
body  bathed  in  hot  sweat,  sweat  not  critical ;  feels  as  if
her  lower  limbs  were  severed  from  her  body  and  be-
longed to  some  one  else ;  during  lucid  intervals  com-
plains that  bed  is  too  hot.
*^  Attacks,  Periodicity. Paroxysms  :  chill,  regular.

Alternate  :  hard  and  liquid  stools.

Every  fifteen  minutes :  faints.

Ten  to  thirty  minutes  :  convulsions  last.

Daily  :  attacks  of  distension  and  strangulation.

Every  evening  about  11  o'clock  :  fits  commence.

Nightly :  emissions  ;  asthma.

During  week :  one  motion  of  bowels.

Every  three  weeks :  epileptic  fits,  sleep  lasting  twenty-
four  to  thirty  hours.
*^  Locality  and  Direction.  Right :  paralysis  of  side ;  angle
of  mouth  higher  than  left ;  pulse  full  at  radial ;  eye
turned  upward ;  impaired  sensibility  of  retina ;  face
drawn  to  side ;  tongue  protruded  to  side ;  pains  on
side ;  stitches  in  nostril ;  as  of  a  hard  body  in  hypo-
chondrium  ;  head  turned  to  side;  clenches  hand,  thumb
not  drawn  in.

Left :  eye  turned  to  ear  ;  partial  paralysis  of  accommoda-
tion of  eye ;  head  bent  back  over  to  side  ;  hand  and
foot  turned  to  side ;  presses  hands  against  side  of  chest ;
trembling  of  arm.
*^  Sensations.  As  if  from  smoke  in  brain  ;  as  if  he  were  fly-
ing or  hovering  in  air ;  as  if  drunk  ;  as  if  eyes  were  too
large  for  orbits ;  as  of  sand  or  dust  in  eyes ;  lids  as  if
paralyzed ;  as  of  a  band  encircling  chest  in  line  of
pleura ;  as  if  intestines  would  be  cut  to  pieces ;  as  of  a
stone  or  weight  in  abdomen ;  as  if  something  was  forced
through  a  narrow  space  in  abdomen;  abdomen  as  if
stabbed  with  a  knife ;  rolling  as  of  a  hard  body  in  r.
hypochondrium ;  as  if  rectum  were  closed ;  child  as  if
drugged ;  as  though  anus  were  closed ;  looks  as  if
dying;  as  if  her  lower  limbs  w^ere  severed  from  body.

Pain:  inchest;  in  back  ;  in  lower  limbs ;  in  testicles;  in
cardiac  region ;  in  limbs.

Intolerable  pain  :  in  stomach.


223  OPIUM.

Extremely  severe  after-pains.

Violent  colicky  pains  :  in  abdomen.

Great  pain :  in  small  of  back.

Shooting  pain  :  in  testes  and  bladder.

Darting  pains :  from  occiput  to  forehead.

Lightning-like  pain  :  in  all  directions  in  abdomen.

Spasmodic  pains  :  in  uterus.

Stitches:  in  r.  nostril.

Twitching-tearing  pains:  in  all  directions  through  ab-
domen.

Cutting :  in  abdomen ;  in  urethra.

Drawing  lacerating :  in  back.

Griping :  in  abdomen.

Squeezing  pain  :  in  abdomen.

Constrictive  pain  :  in  stomach ;  in  abdomen.

Pressive  pain  :  in  abdomen.

Pressing  pain  :  in  temples.

Severe  laborlike  pains :  in  uterus.

Bearing-down  pains :  in  abdomen.

Burning:  in  eyes;  in  anus;  about  heart;  of  cheeks;  of
body ;  in  veins.

Heat :  of  face ;  in  chest ;  of  hands.

Throbbing :  of  arteries.

Constriction  :  of  anus  ;  of  chest.

Pressure: in stomach;  upon rectum and bladder;  on
chest.

Tension  :  in  hypogastric  region  ;  of  chest.

Fulness  :  in  stomach.

Oppression  :  in  stomach.

Anxious  sensation  :  in  epigastrium.

Heaviness:  of  head;  of  occiput;  of  stomach;  of  limbs;
of  feet.

Sensation  of  swelling :  in  hands  and  forearms.

Emptiness :  of  stomach.

Tickling :  in  larynx.

Dryness:  of  eyes;  of  mouth;  of  throat;  of  skin;  of  hands.

Lameness :  of  lower  limbs ;  of  eyeballs.

Numbness  :  of  arms ;  of  legs ;  of  feet.

Buzzing  :  through  whole  body.

Trembling  :  of  whole  body.

Coldness:  of  extremities ;  of  body ;  abdomen,  back,  hands
and  feet ;  in  veins.

Itching :  of  skin.
"  Tissues. Increased  excitability  and action in  voluntary
muscles,  with  diminution  of  it  in  involuntary  muscles.

Jerks  ;  only  the  flexors  active.

■  Emaciation  and  debility.

■  Marasmus;  child  wrinkled  and  looks  like  a  little  dried-

up  old  man  ;  stupor.


OPIUM.  224

I  Suspension  of  secretion  from  mucous  surface  of  digestive
canal.

■  Plethora.

I  Venous  congestion,  with  dark  red  surface.

■  Burning  or  sensation  of  coldness  in  veins.
B  Morbus  coeruleus.

■  Suppurations  and  ulcers  painless.

■  ■Lead  poisoning.

■  Dropsical  swelling  of  whole  body.

*^  Touch.  Passive  Motion.  Injuries.  ^Bed  feels  so  hard
she  cannot  lie  upon  it.

Touch  :  abdomen  sensitive  ;  hypogastric  region  painful.

•Scratching  :  red  blotches  after  itching.

From  injury:  to  head,  vertigo;  shocks.

Burns;  especially  in  children  with  disposition  to  convul-
sions and  other  spasmodic  a'tfections  the  result  of  fright
from  accident.
*^  Skin. iSkin  hot  and  damp,  or  sweating  even  in  morning,
and  a  desire  to  uncover.

■  Dryness  of  skin,  without  fever.

■  Very  troublesome  itching  all  over,  fine  pricking,  rarely

sensitive  to  touch.
I  I  Smarting-itching  after  sweating.
I  I  Whole  body  looks  red.
I  I  Redness  and  itching  of  skin,  red  blotches  after  scratching.

■  Paleness  of  skin.

I  I  Skin  of  a  pale  blue,  especially  on  genitals.

■  Blue  spots  on  skin.

■  Scarlatina: burning heat, soporous stupor, agonized

tossing  about,  vomiting,  diarrhoea,  convulsions,  consti-
pation.

■  Sudden  retrocession  of  acute  eruptions;  paralysis  of  brain
• sets  in,  or  convulsions.

*^  Stages  of  Life,  Constitution.  ■Light  hair,  lax  muscles
and  want  of  bodily  irritability ;  the  well-chosen  remedy
makes  no  impression.

■  ■Especially  suitable  for  children  and  old  persons;  dis-

eases of  first  and  second  childhood.

■  Frequently suited to persons addicted to spirituous

drinks.

Girl,  few  days  after  birth  ;  affection  of  heart.

Nursing  child ;  colic.

Baby,  set.  18  months,  suffering  since  five  months  old  ;
spasms.

Girl,  £et.  3,  short,  stout,  dark  hair  and  eyes;  stupor.

Girl,  pet.  3,  after  sleeping  in  sun  during  afternoon  ;  sun-
stroke.

Boy,  set.  4,  suffering  twelve  months ;  asthma.


225  OPIUM.

Boy,  a3t.  5,  healthy  ;  ague.

Boy,  set.  6,  suffering  six  weeks ;  ague.

Girl,  set  6 J,  formerly  suffering  from  urticaria,  which  was
aggravated  whenever  she  ate  a  strawberry;  constipation.

Girl,  set.  7,  had  mesenteric  disease  in  infancy  and  convul-
sions subsequently ;  dyspnoea.

Boy,  set.  9,  suffering  6  weeks ;  ague.

Girl,  set.  12,  suffering  several  years;  constipation.

Boy,  set.  12,  but  one  chill  this  year,  although  subject  to
frequent  attacks  last  season,  always  suppressed  with
quinine;  ague.

Girl,  set.  14,  menses  suppressed  by  fright,  had  convul-
sions; monorrhagia.

Miss  set.  15,  suffering  three  years  ;  epilepsy.

Girl,  set,  17,  fragile  and  delicate,  first  menstruated  when
seventeen  years  old,  and  discharge  suppressed  after  two
days  by  fright;  epilepsy.
•  Man,  set.  18,  after  having  nearly  recovered  from  pneumo-
nia ;  delirium.

Woman,  set.  18,  very  stout,  primipara,  after  cathartics;
puerperal  convulsions.

Girl,  set.  19,  formerly  suffering  with  pain  in  chest  and
feet ;  epilepsy.

Man,  set.  21,  had  an  attack  a  year  ago ;  colic.

Girl,  set.  23,  formerly  robust,  but  for  last  three  years  con-
stantly complaining ;  constipation.

Girl,  set.  23 ;  epilepsy.

Two  men,  set.  20  to  25 ;  delirium  tremens.

Man,  set.  27,  suffering  three  days  ;  colic.

Man,  set.  27,  single,  robust,  one  month  ago  similarly
affected ;  lead  colic.

Woman,  set.  27,  single,  gentle,  quiet  disposition,  thin,
slender  brunette,  suffers  from  epilepsy,  particularly
during  menstrual  period,  mother  phthisical,  father  dis-
solute ;  disease  of  heart.

Woman,  set.  28,  dark  complexion,  pregnant  for  third
time,  suffered  in  previous  pregnancies  with  vomiting
for  about  four  months  ;  disorders  of  pregnancy.

Woman,  set.  30,  during  epidemic  of  influenza ;  cough.

Mrs.  M.,  ^t.  32,  Irish,  cheerful,  fresh-looking  in  health ;
intestinal  obstruction  and  fecal  tumor.

Woman,  set.  35,  after  losing  two  children  in  quick  succes-
sion ;  cerebro-spinal  meningitis.

Woman,  set.  36,  has  tumor  on  r.  side  of  chest,  extending
from  axilla  and  enlarging  breast;  affection  of  stomacli.

Man,  set.  38,  figure  small,  slight,  practiced  masturbation
since  twelve  years  old  ;  idiocy.

Man,  ffit.  40,  short,  fat,  phlegmatic;  delirium  tremens.

VOL.  VIII. — 15.


OPIUM.  226

Man,  set.  40,  drunkard ;  delirium  tremens.

Man,  set.  40,  after  feet  had  become  very  cold  ;  colic.

Man,  set.  40,  gardener ;  catarrh  of  chest.

Man,  set.  40,  phlegmatic  temperament,  Bryon.,  Phosphor.,  etc. ,
given  without  benefit,  on  eleventh  day  of  disease;  Opmm
followed  by  sudden  change  and  satisfactory  recovery  ;
double  pneumonia.

Woman,  set.  43,  after  having  been  beaten  violently  with
fist  about  head,  neck  and  shoulders  ;  spasms.

Dr.  E.  M.,  set.  44,  nervo-bilious,  addicted  to  strong  drink  ;
apoplexy.

Woman,  set.  48,  well  nourished,  in  good  health ;  intes-
tinal obstruction.

Man,  set.  50,  addicted  to  drink,  oppressed  by  care  and
sorrow ;  apoplexy.

Man,  set.  50,  heavy  drinker ;  bronchitis  and  asthma.

Man,  set.  51,  suffering  ten  years ;  constipation.

Mrs.,  set.  56,  suffering  twenty  years ;  constipation.

Woman,  set.  56;  constipation.

Man,  set.  60 ;  constipation.

Man,  set.  75,  tendency  to  apoplexy,  prodromes  of  which
w^ere  several  times  dissipated  by  Bellad.;  apoplexy.

Man,  set.  84,  suffering  from  hemorrhoids;  mental  dis-
turbance.

Miss  C,  rosy,  buxom  ;  epilepsy.

Young  woman,  primipara,  after  a  difficult  labor,  adminis-
tration of  ether  and  use  of  instruments  having  been
necessary  to  accomplish  delivery ;  puerperal  convul-
sions.

Young  man,  strong  constitution,  after  violent  fit  of  pas-
sion ;  headache,  fever,  etc.

Lady,  suffering  several  years;  headache.

Potter,  has  worked  a  long  time  at  glazing ;  colic.

Painter,  well  built,  has  had  frequent  attacks ;  lead  colic.

Man,  drinker,  after  excessive  drinking,  to  which  he  re-
sorted in  consequence  of  vexation  and  grief;  delirium
tremens.

Woman,  suffering  many  years  ;  headache.

Elderly  woman,  robust,  with  rosy  cheeks;  vomiting.
*^  Relations. Antidoted  by :  strong  coffee,  Bellad.,  Ipec,  Nux
vom.,  Vinum,  Vanil.  arom.,  Zincum.

It  antidotes:  charcoal  vapor,  Bellad.,  Digit,  Laches.,  Mercur.,
Nux  vom.,  Strychnia,  Plumhum,  Stramon.,  Tart.  emet.

Compatible:  Aeon.,  Bellad.,  Bryon.,  Hyosc,  Nux  mosch.,
Nux  vom.,  Tart.  emet.

Compare:  Apis  (apoplexy,  coma);  Ipecac,  and  Moschus
(spasm  of  lungs).


227  ORIGANUM.

ORIGANUM.

Siueet  Maifjoram.  Labiatsc.

' Proved  by  CesFoles,  Eev.  Horn,  du  Midi ;  Allg.  Horn.  Zeit.,  vol.  37,  p.  139.

Clinical  Authorities. — Sexual  irritation,  Moore,  Times  Eet.,  1877,  p.  35;
M.  Inv.,  vol.  6,  p.  343  ;  Seminal  emissions  (oil),  Gushing,  Times  Eet.,  1876,  p.  113 ;
Mass.  Trans.,  vol.  4,  p.  512;  Nymphomania,  Elb.,  A.  H.  Z ,  vol.  110,  p.  19;  Onan-
ism, Sexual  irritation,  Erotomania,  Leucorrhoea,  Gallavardin,  Emery,  Cessoles,  N.  A.
J.  H.,  vol.  15,  p.  62.

^  Mind.  I  I  Lascivious  ideas  with  sexual  irritation.
^"  Male  Sexual  Organs,  i  Nocturnal  emissions.
^*  Female  Sexual  Organs.  1 1  Erotomania  and  inclination  to
suicide  in  a  .young  girl ;  great  sexual  irritation ;  deep
moroseness,  believes  herself  lost  and  despised ;  when
awaking  from  her  stupor  cries  out  that  the  devil  comes
near  her,  believes  herself  in  hell,  in  chains,  considered
herself  crazy,  and  those  about  her  feared  that  she  would
become  so ;  has  thoughts  of  destroying  herself.

I  I  Great  sexual  excitement  driving  her  to  onanism,  a  day
scarcely  passing  without  her  indulging  in  this  habit ;
whenever  she  meets  a  man  whose  appearance  is  pleasing
she  is  at  once  driven  to  commit  masturbation.

I  I  After  having  practiced  masturbation  for  a  long  time  be-
came nearly  idiotic;  was  not  able  to  learn  her  cate-
chism (with  Sulph).

I  Abused  herself  daily;  tried  her  utmost  to  overcome  sex-
ual inclinations  and  vainly  gave  herself  up  to  religious
exercises  in  order  to  strengthen  her  will.

I  I  Sexual  irritation  with  leucorrhoea  and  itching  of  pu-
denda, in  an  old  maid,  set.  40.

I  1  Powerful  lascivious  impulses,  producing  anxiety,  from
disinclination  to  religious  duties ;  leucorrhosa ;  a  worthy
married  woman  and  mother  of  a  family.

I  I  Sexual  irritation  in  a  divorced  woman ;  had  neither  rest
nor  quiet  from  voluptuousness.

■  Leucorrhoea,  sterility,  "  flatulency  of  uterus."
^^  Nerves. ■  Hysteria  from  excessive  irritation  of  genitals.
■^^  Sleep. 1  I  Lascivious  ideas  and  dreams.
*'''  Stages  of  Life,  Constitution. Girl,  set.  7;  onanism.

Girl,  ait.  17,  daughter  of  silk  weaver;  onanism  and  men-
tal weakness.


ORIGANUM— OSMIUM.  228

Girl,  set.  20,  well  every  other  way ;  sexual  irritation  and
onanism.

Woman,  set.  29,  single,  teacher  of  languages,  suffering  four
years,  never  had  coitus  ;  nymphomania.

Woman,  set.  35,  married,  mother  of  a  family,  suffering  sev-
eral months ;  leucorrhoea  and  sexual  irritation.

Old  maid,  set.  40  ;  sexual  irritation  with  leucorrhoea.

Woman,  divorced ;  sexual  irritation.
*^  Relations. Compare: Canihar.,  Cann.  ind.,  CoUinson.,  He-
deoma,  Uelon.,  Platin.,  Valeriana.


OSMIUM.

The  Element.  Osmium  tetroxide  {Osmic  Acid)  OSO4.

The  most  refractory  of  all  metals ;  discovered  by  Yaiicquelin,  Tennant  and
Thenard,  in  1804.

Proved  in  1850,  by  Hering,  Neidliard  and  Kaue.

Triturations  of  the  precipitated  metal  were  used  in  ihe  provings.

Clinical  Authorities. — Spasmodic  cough,  Liedbeck,  Analyt.  Therap.  vol.  1,
p.  197  ; Cough,  Burnett,  A.  H.  Z  ,  vol.  3,  from  Horn.  World,  1885.

^  Mind. I  I  Weeping  mood,  screaming,  with  the  cough.
Anxious,  fidgety.
Very  impatient,  with  itching.
Thoughts  of  accidents  having  happened ;  later  of  doing

injury  to  others.
Misplaces  words.
Weak,  gives  up.
^  Sensorium. Dulness,  with  'heat  in  head.
*  Inner  Head. Tearing  in  upper  r.  side  of  forehead.

Aching  like  a  band  around  head  above  ears  ;  in  temples,
with  hoarseness.
','  Outer  Head. Hair  falls  off.

^  Sight  and  Eyes, i  '  Weakness  of  sight,  could  not  tell  night
from  day. ^Glaucoma.
Flame  from  candle  larger,  confused ;  large  rainbow  ring

around  it.
Feels  a  short  motion back and  forward in  ball,  with

closed  eyes.
Eyes  water,  burn  and  itch.
Pains  around  1.  eye  on  bone.


229  OSMIUM.

"  Hearing  and  Ears. '  i  Ringing  in  r.  ear.

Severe  pains  in  1.  petrosum.
"^  Smell  and  Nose. After  sneezing,  phlegm  in  larynx  looser.
Sneezing  and  running  at  nose  with  tickling  in  larynx,

difficult  breathing.
Discharge  of  mucus  from  choange.

Nasal  catarrh;  coryza ;  sneezing  as  from  snuff;  nose  and
larynx  sensitive  to  air ;  small  lumps  of  phlegm  easily
loosened  from  posterior  nares  and  larynx.
^  Lower  Face. Aching  from  base  of  brain  into  jaws.
Cooling  jerks  in  1.  upper  jaw  and  front  teeth.
Chewing  causes  aching  in  muscles.
^^  Teeth  and  Gums. Gums  swell  above  1.  eyetooth.
^'  Taste and Tongue. Taste :  corroding ;  burning ;  clover-
like ;  sweetish.
Red  sore  stripe  in  middle  of  tongue,  edges  rough  and
pimply  ;  most  sensitive  to  slight  touch  when  eating  or
drinking.
Tongue  coated.
"  Appetite, Thirst. Desires,  Aversions. 1 1  Aversion  to

cocoa.
^^  Hiccough,  Belching,  Nausea  and  Vomiting, i Chronic

vomiting,  with  pressure  in  stomach.
'^  Scrobiculum  and  Stomach.  In  stomach :  uneasiness ;  press-
ure; contracting  after  food,  more  by  stimulants;  weakness
at  6  P.M.,  amounting  to  nausea;  all  evening  distension;
feeling  as  if  he  had  swallowed  a  lot  of  broken  stones.
^^  Abdomen. Bowels  distended  in  afternoon  and  evening.

Pressure  on  both  inguinal  rings.
^^  Stool  and  Rectum. Stool : dry,  is  full  of  wind  ;  small ;
hastily  passing,  with  burning  in  anus ;  thin,  bilious  ;
urging,  but  only  wind  passes.
^'  Urinary  Organs. Urine:  dark  brown,  scanty;  suppressed;

in  evening  strongly  scented  like  violets.
^'  Male  Sexual  Organs. Erections  earlier  in  morning  and
firmer ;  ejaculations  lasting  longer.
Violent  pain  on  tip  of  glans  and  in  foreskin.
Pain  in  r.  testicle  and  1.  spermatic  cord;  weakness  in
both  groins  towards  cord.
^^  Voice and  Larynx. Trachea and Bronchia. Voice
hoarse,  weals,  soundless.

■  Hoarseness: after singing; < riding or walking in

open  air.
Tickling  in  larynx.
Irresistible  tickling  causes  short  bursts  of  cough.

■  Severe  pain  in  larynx,  <  coughing  or  talking;  hoarse-

ness.

■  Larynx  dry  with  cough.


OSMIUM.  230

Mucus :  increased  ;  hangs  in  larynx  like  a  string,  hawks,
coughs,  strains  to  vomit ;  sneezing  loosens  it.
^®  Respiration. Chronic  d,yspiioea.

I  Heaves  in  horses.
"  Cough.  I  Cough  :  short,  irresistible  hacking,  caused  by  an
irritation  low  down  in  chest ;  with  tearing  pain  in  ster-
num ;  on  rising,  violent,  without  phlegm,  returning
during  day;  severe,  disturbing  sleep  until  midnight;
spasmodic,  fingers  twitch  ;  sounds  as  if  one  coughed
into  an  empty  tube,  or  as  if  caused  by  resonance  of
contiguous  parts ;  dry,  hard,  shaking  whole  body.

After  sneezing,  a  little  round  lump  loosens  but  has  to  be
swallowed.

■  Paroxysms  of  convulsive  cough.
^  Inner  Chest  and  Lungs, i Soreness in whole sternum,
sensitive  to  touch ;  pain  independent  of  cough.

Iln  sternum,  shooting  upward  and  downward.

A  dull  stitch  near  1.  lower  rib.
^^  Heart,  Pulse  and  Circulation. Anxious  palpitation  of

heart.
^^  Outer  Chest. iSore  sternum,  painful  to  touch,  independent
of  cough.

iTearing  pain  in  sternum  with  cough.

•  Shooting  up  and  down  in  sternum.
^^  Neck  and  Back. Itching  on  back  and  shoulders  as  from

crawling  insects,  <  evenings  going  to  bed.
^^  Upper  Limbs. Sweat in axillte  smelling like garlic,  <
evening  and  at  night.

Pulsating  dull  stings,  inside  of  r.  shoulder  joint.

Very  severe  pinching  pain,  often  repeated,  in  1.  upper
arm  above  elbow.

Sensitive  pain  in  middle  of  1.  humerus,  then  in  fingers.

In  1.  elbow  bone  pains  ;  in  r.  forearm  pinching  ;  drawing
inside  of  r.  forearm,  burning  pressure  outside,  red  spots
on  dorsum.

Aching  in  metacarpo-phalangeal  joint  of  1.  thumb,  pain
in  first  phalanx  of  r.  forefinger;  burning  in  1.  ring  fin-
ger; like  fire  on  inner  border  of  nail.

Stabbing  on  tips  of  fingers.

■Twitching  of  fingers,  with  spasmodic  cough.
^^  Lower  Limbs. Violent itching above  crest of 1. ilium
towards abdomen, the place red with many small
pointed  spots.

Sore  pain  in  1.  gluteus  and  leg.

Itching  and  rash  on  thighs  and  on  ankle.

Legs  and  feet  feel  too  full.

Restless in legs,  quite  unbearable,  has  to lie  down  at

9  P.M.


231  OSMIUM.

Pains  in  r.  ankle,  pinching,  flying,  cutting  in  bones  and
joints  of  r.  foot.

Pain  in  bones  of  heels.

Drawing,  aching  in  tendon  each  side  of  top  of  patella  ;
occasional  shoots  below  external  malleolus  and  on
instep.

Scarlet  rash  on  thighs  and  ankles.
^*  Limbs  in  General. Pain  deep  in  bones,  same  as  in  head.

Aching  of  limbs  and  body  all  day.
^^Rest. Position. Motion. Chewing: causes aching in

muscles.
'"  Nerves. Weak,  easily  tired  for  a  long  time.
^^  Sleep. Itching  and  cough  disturb  sleep.

Restless  nights,  dreams  of  painful  events;  arose  jaded.

I  iLess  sensitive  to  disturbance  of  sleep,  arose  very  tired ;
muddled  head,  aching  limbs  and  body.
^^Time. Morning:  erections  earlier ;  violent  cough.

Day:  aching  in  limbs  and  body.

Afternoon :  bowels  distended.

6  P.M. :  weakness  in  stomach.

9  P.M. :  has  to  lie  down  from  restlessness  in  legs.

Evening:  headache,  eyes  and  ears  worse ;  cough  ;  sweat  in
axilla;  restless  in  legs;  weakness;  itching;  distension
in  stomach  ;  urine  scented  like  violets ;  itching  on  back
<  ;  sweat  in  axillse;  smelling  of  garlic  <.

Till  midnight:  cough  disturbs  sleep.

Night:  sweat  in  axillae  smelling  like  garlic  <  ;  restless.
^^  Temperature  and  Weather. 1 1  Less  subject  to  taking  cold,
in  November.

Air:  larynx  sensitive;  hoarseness  <  walking.
^^  Attacks,  Periodicity.  Cough :  in  attacks.
*^ Locality  and  Direction.  Right:  tearing  in  upper  side  of
forehead;  ringing  in  ear;  pain  in  testicle;  pulsating,
dull  stings  inside  of  shoulder  joint;  pinching  drawing
in  forearm  ;  pain  in  first  phalanx  of  forefinger ;  pain  in
ankle ;  cutting,  pinching,  flying  in  bones  and  joints  of
foot.

Left:  severe  pain  in  petrosum  ;  cooling  jerks  in  upper  jaw
and  front  teeth ;  gums  swell  above  eye  tooth ;  pain  in
spermatic  cord ;  dull  stitch  near  lower  rib ;  pinching
oft  repeated  in  upper  arm;  sensitive  pain  in  middle
of  humerus;  bone  pains  in  elbow;  aching  in  joint  of
thumb  ;  burning  in  ring  finger.

Upward  and  downward  :  shooting  in  sternum.
"Sensations.  As  of  a  band  around  hejad  ;  sneezing,  as  from
snuff;  as  after  having  swallowed  broken  stones;  cough,
as  if  caused  by  resonance  of  contiguous  parts;  as  of
crawling  insects  on  back  and  shoulders ;  legs  and  feet
as  if  too  full.


OSMIUM.  232

Pains:  around  1.  eye;  in  r.  testicle  and  1.  spermatic  cord;
in  bones  of  1.  elbow ;  in  first  phalanx  of  r.  forefinger ;
in  bones  of  heels  ;  in  r.  ankle ;  deep  in  bones.

Violent  pain  :  on  tip  of  glans  and  in  foreskin.

Severe  pains :  in  1.  petrosuin  ;  in  larynx.

Very  severe  pinching  pain :  in  1,  upper  arm  above  elbow.

Pinching,  flying,  cutting  in  bones  and  joints  of  r.  foot.

Stabbing :  in  tips  of  fingers.

Tearing :  in  upper  r.  side  of  forehead ;  in  temples ;  in
sternum.

Pinching  drawing:  in  r.  forearm.

Shooting:  in  sternum;  below  external  malleolus  and  on
instep.

A  dull  stitch  :  near  1.  lower  rib.

Pulsating  dull  stings:  inside  of  r.  shoulder  joint.

Sore  pain  :  in  1.  leg.

Sensitive  pain :  in  middle  of  1.  humerus,  then  in  fingers.

Aching:  around  head  above  ears;  from  base  of  brain
into  jaws ;  in  muscles  of  jaw  ;  in  metacarpo-phalangeal
joint  of  1.  thumb ;  in  tendon  each  side  of  top  of  patella ;
of  limbs  and  body.

Burning  pressure :  outside  of  forearm.

Burning:  in  eyes;  in  anus;  in  1.  ring  finger;  on  inner
border  of  nail.

Heat:  in  head.

Soreness:  in  whole  sternum.

Pressure  :  in  stomach  ;  on  both  inguinal  rings.

Irritation  :  low  down  in  chest.

Restlessness :  in  legs.

Uneasiness :  in  stomach.

Weakness :  in  stomach ;  in  both  groins  towards  cord.

Tickling :  in  lar^^nx.

Dryness :  in  larynx.

Dulness :  in  head.

Sensation  of  short  motion  back  and  forward  :  in  eyeballs.

Cooling  jerks:  in  1.  upper  jaw  and  front  teeth.

Itching:  in  eyes;  on  back  and  shoulders;  violent,  above
crest  of  ilium  towards  abdomen  on  small  spots.
^^  Touch. Passive  Motion. Injuries. Touch  :  tongue  sen-
sitive to  sliglitest;  sternum  sensitive.

Riding:  hoarseness  <.
*"  Skin. Itching  on  small  spots. •

Burning  stitches  on  many  places.

Prickly  heat  going  to  lower  limbs.

I  I  Syphilitic  tetters.
*^ Stages of  Life, Constitution. Girl,  set. 1|  years;  spas-
modic cough.
*^  Relations. Antidoted  by:  sulphuretted  hydrogen,  Plios.  ac  ;


233  OSMIUM— OXALICUM  ACIDUM.

Silic.  (swollen  gums);  Hepar  and  Spongia  (pain  in  larynx);
Bellad.  and  Mercur.  (laryngeal  catarrh).
Compare : Argenium,  Arsen.,  Iridium,  Manganmn, Selen.,
Sulphur,  Tellurium,  Bromine  (eyes  and  lungs).


OXALICUM  ACIDUM.

Sorrel  Acid.  iT^  C^  O4 ,  2  ff^  0.

Introduced  by  Neidhard  in  184-1 ; by  Eeil  in  1851.

Provings  by  Koch,  Neidhard,  Dubbs,  Smith,  Floto,  Williamson,  Kitcbing,
Hering,  Reil,  Honigberger,  Pebrson  and  Gosewich.  See  Hering's  Amerikanische
Arznei  Priifungen. Toxicological  reports  are  numerous.

Clixical  Authorities. — Pain  in  umbilical  region,  Moore,  Organon,  vol.  3,  p.
269  ;  Burning  in  abdomen,  Okie,  Amer.  Arznei  Priif.,  p.  552  ;  Colic,  Brir}',  Or-
ganon, vol.  3,  p.  362;  Inflammation  of  bowels,  Neidhard,  Amer.  Arnzei  Priif.,  p.
522;  Ineffectual  urging  to  slool,  Diarrhrea,  Farrington,  Organon,  vol.  3,  p.  99 ;  Incon-
tinence of  urine,  W.  M.  J.,  Horn.  Phys.,  vol.  6,  p.  232 ;  Disorders  of  pregnancy,
Williamson,  Amer.  Arznei  Priif.,  p.  548;  Congestion  of  I.  lung.  Pneumonia,  Bur-
nett, B.  J.  H.,  vol.  35,  p.  321 ;  Irregular  action  of  heart,  C.  Hg.,  Amer.  Arnzei
Priif.,  p.  561;  Analyt.  Therap.,  vol.  1,  p.  222;  Palpitation  of  heart,  Hale,  Or-
ganon, vol.  2,  p.  222 ;  Angina  pectoris,  Dudley,  Hah.  Mo.,  vol.  6,  p.  70 ;  Cerebro-
spinal pains  (2  cases),  Burnett,  B.  J.  H.,  vol.  35,  p.  519.

^Mind. Diminished  power  to  concentrate  ideas.

I  Very  much  exhilarated  ;  quicker  thought  and  action.

I I  As  soon  as  he  thinks  about  the  pains  they  return.

■  Mania.

Aversion  to  talk;  with  headache,  fulness  in  face.
^Sensorium. Vertigo  :  with  darkness  before  eyes  and  sweat;

weakness  and thirst ; anxiety,  headache  and  sweat ;

when  looking  out  of  window;  when  rising  from  a  seat;

a  swimming  sensation,  when  lying  down.
Sensation  of  emptiness  in  head,  faint  feeling,  as  if  all

blood  had  left  brain.
Upper  part  of  body,  particularly  head,  feels  as  if  blood

were  coursing  upward  and  outward.
'  Inner  Head, l  l  Dulness  in  forehead  in  morning.
I  Dull  headache  of  vertex  and  forehead,  heaviness.

■  Burning  sensation  at  forehead.

■  Headache  in  spots  ;  pressing  pain  on  small  spots.
Compression  in  head,  as  from  a  screw  behind  each  ear.
Pain at a spot between vertex  and occiput, pressing

inwardly.


OXALICUM  ACIDUM.  234

Headache  <  after  wine,  lying  down,  after  sleep  and  on
rising;  >  after  stool.
^  Outer  Head, i  Small  spots  on  head  painful  to  touch.
*  Sight  and  Eyes. Type  blurs  when  reading.

■  Vanishing  of  sight,  with  giddiness and sweat; I  with

nosebleed.
Small,  especially  linear  objects  appear  larger  and  more

distant.
Pain  in  both  orbits,  <  in  left.
Bleared  eyes.
''Smell  and  Nose. Sneezing,  with  chilliness;  with  watery

coryza.
Red,  shining swelling  of r.  side  of  nose,  beginning  at

tip  and  spreading.
Stitches  in  r.  nostril  on  taking  a  long  inspiration.
Pimples  in  r.  side  of  nose;  wing  of  nose  swollen.
I  I  Epistaxis,  with  vanishing  of  sight.
®  Upper  Face. '  '  Face  pale  and  livid.
Pale  color  with  sunken  eyes.

■  Feeling  of  heat  in  face.

Feeling  of  fulness  in  fjice;  face  redder.
Face  covered  with  cold  sweat.
®  Lower  Face. Drawing pain,  with  rigidity  near angle of

lower  jaw,  first  and  longest  in  1.  then  in  r.  side.
^"  Teeth  and  Gums. Pain  in  decayed  molar.
Gums  bleed,  are  painful  in  spots.
Small  ulcers  on  gums.
"  Taste  and  Tongue. iSour  taste.

Tongue:  swollen,  sensitive;  red,  dr}'',  burning; swollen,
with  a  thick,  white  coating;  coated  white,  with  nausea,
thirst  and  loss  of  taste.
^^  Inner  Mouth, i  Watery  saliva  or  mucus  in  mouth.

lAphthffi.
^^  Throat. Dryness  in  throat  (morning)  after  diarrhoea.
Scraping  in  throat,  thick  mucus  accumulates.
Deglutition:  especially  painful  mornings ;  difficult,  with

sour  eructations.
Mucous  secretion  in  throat  increased.

■  Chronic  sore  throat.
I  Angina.

"Appetite, Thirst. Desires, Aversions. Appetite: in-
creased ;  wanting,  with  loss  of  taste.
Thirst,  with  vertigo,  loss  of  appetite,  nausea,  colic.
^^ Eating  and  Drinking. Pain  in  stomach,  >  after  eating;
soup  relieves  gnawing  at  stomach.
After  eating,  eructations,  nausea,  pains  at  navel,  colic,

rumbling  in  abdomen,  urging  to  stool,  weakness.
Sugar  aggravates  pain  in  stomach  ;  and  wine  headache.


235  OXALICUM  ACIDUM.

Sugar,  coffee  and  wine  disagree.
^®  Hiccough,  Belching,  Nausea  and  Vomiting. 1 1  Sudden
hiccough,  witli  eructations.

■  Heartburn  <  in  evening.

I  I  Eructations :  empty  or  sour;  of  tasteless  wind  after  each
meal.

■  Nausea: and frequent  vomiting; during pregnancy;

thirst  and  colic  after  diarrhoea.
'^  Scrobiculum  and  Stomach. Empty  feeling,  compelling
one  to  eat.
I  I  Burning  pain  in  stomach  and  throat.
Awakens  at  night  with  violent  pressive  pain,  like  a  heavy
weight,  coming  and  going  at  intervals;  flatulent  dis-
charge relieves.
Stomach  sensitive; slightest touch causes excruciating

pain.
1  I  Gastritis ;  gastro-enteritis.
*^  Hypochondria. ■  Stitches  in  liver  relieved  by  a  deep  breath.
Continuous  pain in 1. hypochondrium, as if bruised  ;
stitches ;  incarcerated  flatus.
^^  Abdomen. '  l Colic:  cutting  in  abdomen  ;  rumbling  (even-
ing and  night) ;  with  tenesmus ; < at  night,  accom-
panied by  vomiting  ;  pains  seem  tg  occupy  a  small  spot
and  radiate  therefrom  ;  <  from  motion ;  from  eating
sugar.

■  Burning  and  pain  in  abdomen;  in  umbilical  region.

I  I  Burning  in  small  spots  in  abdomen,  return  when  think-
ing of  them.

■  Frequent  pain  and  soreness  about  navel.

■  Colic  about  navel,  as  if  bruifed,  with  stitches  and  diffi-

cult emissions  of  flatus ;  <  on  moving,  >  when  at
rest ;  <  evening  and  night.
I  I  Man  sufl'ering  for  a  long  time  from  indigestion,  was
operated  on  for  strangulated  hernia  two  years  ago;  ever
since  subject  to  pain  in  umbilical  region,  coming  on  two
houi-s  after  food,  accompanied  by  much  flatus  and  bitter,
sour  eructations;  pain  <  at  night, is  roused  by  it  about
3  A.M.  and  kept  awake  by  it ;  burning  sensation  from
throat  downward  to  region  of  pain.

■  Enteritis  ;  chronic  inflammation  of  bowels.

^^  Stool  and  Rectum, i  i  Difficult  discharge  of  flatus.

■  Frequent  ineff"ectual  urging  to  stool,  preceded  by  a  sick,

distressed  feeling  from  navel  downw^ard ;  <  when
thinking  of  it;  at  times  profuse  watery,  gushing
diarrhoea.
I  I  Suddenly  seized  with  distressing  feeling  in  whole  abdo-
men, twisting  around  navel,  bearing  down ;  dark,
muddy,  copious  evacuations,  6  a.m.


OXALICUM  ACIDUM.  236

I  I  Morning  diarrhoea ;  stools  soft  or  watery,  with  colic
around  navel  and  pressing  in  rectum ;  returning  as
soon  as  one  lies  down  again. ^Phthisis.

iStool :  of  mucus  and  blood ;  involuntary.

I  I  Diarrhoea  :  as  soon  as  one  drinks  coffee  ;  lying  down
causes  return.

I  I  Before  stool :  headache  ;  twisting  colic  around  navel.

I  I  During  stool:  micturition;  (fainting,  vomiting);  colic
about  navel ;  violent  urging-griping  pains  in  anus,  so
severe  as  to  cause  headache  and  heat  in  head.

I  I  After  stool:  nausea  and  cramp  in  calves;  dryness  in
throat;  relief  of  pain  in  small  of  back.

■  Constipation.

I  I  Pressing  and  straining  in  rectum;  tenesmus.
"  Urinary Organs. Pain  in  region  of  kidneys.

I  Irritation  of  genito-urinary  tract  with  diuresis.
Frequent  and  copius  urination,  which  is  profuse,  clear,

straw-colored.
Burning  in  urethra,  as  from  acrid  drops.
When  urinating,  pain  in  glans  penis.

■  Thinking  of  urinating  causes  necessity  to  urinate.

I  I  Nocturnal  incontinence  of  urine  ;  sharp,  shooting  pain
in  1.  chest,  close  to  sternum  and  parallel  to  it.
^^  Male  Sexual  Organs. Great  increase  of  sexual  desire.

On  lying  down,  erections  without  any  cause,  afterwards
testicles  and  cords  pain.

Sexual  debility ;  spermatorrhoea!

I  I  Terrible  neuralgic  pains  in  spermatic  cords,  <  from
slightest  motion.

I  I  Testicles  feel  contused  and  heavy ;  bruised  pain  in
small  of  back.

During  a  walk,  pain  and  heaviness  in  testicles,  shooting
along  cords.
^'  Pregnancy.  Parturition.  Lactation.  1 1  Nausea  and
painful  vomiting ;  a  tormenting,  cramplike  feeling  be-
tween pit  of  stomach  and  navel ;  sour  taste,  heartburn
and  waterbrash.
^^  Voice  and  Larynx.  Trachea  and  Bronchia,  i  i  Nervous
aphonia,  with  cardiac  derangement,  violent  palpitation
and  irregular  action ;  change  of  voice,  which  becomes
weak  and  hoarse  ;  no  soreness.

Hoarseness;  larynx  feels  swollen,  contracted,  raw,  with
tickling  in  it.

Hoarseness  and  sensation  of  mucus  in  larynx  during
talking.

I  I  Alteration  of  voice.
^^  Respiration, l  Great  oppression  of  breath  ;  slightly  spas-
modic.


237  OXALICUM  ACIDUM.

I  I  Difficulty  of  breathing,  with  constrictive  pain  in  larynx

and  wheezing ;  oppression  more  towards  r.  side. ^An-
gina pectoris.

I I  Jerking  inspiration  and  sudden,  forced  expiration,  as
though  he  made  a  sudden  effort  to  relieve  intense  pain
by  expelling  air  from  lungs. ^Angina  pectoris.

Paroxysms  of  short,  hurried  breathing,  with  intervals  of

ease.  •

^  Cough. Cough :  from  tickling  in  larynx  while  walking  in

open  air;  larynx  feels  swollen;  dry,  on  taking  violent

exercise; with soreness, stinging, tearing pain in

sternum.
Mucus  hawked  up,  thick,  yellow  white,  with  central  black

lump  of  size  of  pea.
^^  Inner  Chest  and  Lungs. iSharp  shooting  pain  in  1.  lung

and  hepatic  region.

■  Sudden  lancinating  in  1.  lung,  depriving  him  of  breath.
Rheumatic  pains  in  1.  lung ;  >  lying  down.

When  breathing,  stitches  in  chest  and  above  hip.

Dull,  heavy,  sore  pain  in  chest.

Pain  in  middle  of  chest,  through  to  back.

■  Congestion  or  inflammation,  localized  at  base  of  1.  lung.
I  1  Phthisis  pulmonalis.

^^  Heart,  Pulse  and  Circulation.  Pain  in  heart;  soreness,
stitches  from  behind  forward,  or  from  above  down-
ward.

I  I  Sharp  darting  in  heart  and  1.  lung,  extending  to  epigas-
trium. ^Angina  pectoris.

I  I  Pain  commencing  in  prsecordial  region,  extending  up
sternum  and  darting  out  across  chest,  particularly
towards  1.  side;  sharp  stitches  or  lancinating  pains
through  chest,  compelling  him  to  keep  perfectly  quiet
in  one  position,  arms  folded  across  chest;  face  haggard;
trunk  bolt  upright  in  chair,  and  whole  manner  and
appearance  indicative  of  intense  suffering ;  cramps  in
musles  of  extremities ;  short,  sharp  cutting  pains  in
extremities,  especially  arms  and  deltoid  portion  of
shoulders ;  sense  of  suffocation  ;  dyspnoea  manifested  in
short,  jerking  inspirations,  quantity  of  air  inspired  being
less  and  less  at  each  successive  effort,  until  at  greatest
intensity  of  paroxysm  function  seemed  to  be  entirely
suspended ;  paroxysms  lasted  about  one  minute,  with
intervals  of  about  two  minutes,  during  which  there  was
almost  perfect  relief  from  pain ;  pulse  accelerated,  some-
what irregular  in  rhythm  ;  strong  conviction  that  he
will  die  in  next  paroxysm  ;  makes  feeble  effort  to  rise
from  chair,  saying,  "  now  I  must  go;  "this  expression
being  repeated  twice  or  thrice  during  each  paroxysm  ;


OXALICUM  ACIDUM.  238

has  been  troubled  with  ascarides  nearly  all  his  life,
now  more  than  usual ;  paralysis  of  lower  extremities,
lasting  throughout  attack ;  sharp,  stitching  pain  in  del-
toid confined  to  a  small  space ;  costiveness ;  great  pros-
tration ;  pains  mostly  on  r.  side ;  pains  excited  or  <
by  motion ;  jerking  pains  like  short  stitches,  confined
to  a  small  space  and  lasting  but  a  few  seconds ;  jerking
inspiration  and  forced  expiration,  as  though  he  made
a  sudden  effort  to  relieve  himself  of  intense  pain  by
expelling  air  from  lungs. ^Angina  pectoris.

■  Heart  in  a  continual  flutter.

■  Palpitation:  with  action  of  heart  irregular  in  force  and

rhythm,  alternating  with  aphonia;  for  half  an  hour  after
lying  down  in  bed  at  night;  when  thinking  of  it;  from
rheumatic  affection.

I  I  Occasional  omission  of  one  beat  of  heart,  felt  as  "a
stopping,"  causing  patient  to  fear  heart  disease  and
sudden  death  ;  after  an  attack  of  cholera,  cured  by  Qui-
nine, this  omission  appeared  as  soon  as  he  was  talking
or  thinking  of  it.

I  I  Endocarditis;  pericarditis;  valvular  insufficiency.

Pulse :  increased  in  frequency,  almost  imperceptible,  cold-
ness, clammy  sweats,  livid  nails ;  more  rapid  in  morn-
ing, slower,  irregular,  weak.
^^  Neck  and  Back. Pain  under  point  of  scapula,  between
shoulders,  extending  to  loins.

Stitches  from  chest  into  scapula3.

Acute  pain  in  back  gradually  extending  down  thighs,
with  great  torture;  seeks  relief  in  change  of  posture.

Pain  in  small  of  back,  sensation  of  numbness,  or  as  if
broken  or  bruised.

I  I  Numbness,  pricking,  causing  a  cold  sensation ;  back
feels  too  weak  to  support  body, ^Angina  pectoris.

■  Weakness  in  loins  and  hips,  extending  to  lower  extrem-

ities.
I  I  Tongue  and  mouth  sore;  at  times  pain  in  r.  side  of
head,  occiput,  small  of  back  and  calves ;  what  distresses
him  most  are  cold  chills  across  lower  part  of  back  and
in  calves  of  legs,  beginning  in  spine  just  above  sacrum ;
the  chills  are  diurnal,  being  supplanted  at  night  by
heat  as  if  there  were  warm  water  between  flesh  and
bones ;  pains  shoot  up  to  occiput  and  head.

■  Aching  pain  in  low  part  of  back  for  three  months;  pain

between  shoulders ;  pain  and  tenderness  along  cervical
vertebrae;  pain  in  occiput,  vertex  and  forehead  off  and
on  for  weeks ;  all  these  pains  are  brought  on  or  made
<  by  any  kind  of  movement  or  exertion.  ^Cerebro-
spinal pains.


239  OXALICUM  ACIDUM.

I  I  Intense  inflammatory  pains  all through  back; men-
ingitis.
Paralysis  from  inflammation  of  spinal  cord,  limbs  stiff";

paroxysms  of  dyspnoea.
^^  Upper  Limbs. Twitch  first  in  1.,  later  in  r.  deltoid,  with

inclination  to  move.
■  Numbness  from  shoulders  to  tips  of  fingers.
I  I  Sharp  lancinating  pains  in  arms. ^Angina  pectoris.
I  might  wrist  constantly  painful,  as  if  sprained  or  dis-
located.
Right  wrist  feels  sprained,  w^ants to  stretch  it;  cannot

hold  anything.
Pain  in  (r.)  metacarpus  and  fleshy  part  of  r.  thumb,  with

sensation  of  fulness,  heat  and  numbness.
Hands  feel  heavy,  can  move  fingers  but  slowly.
Hands  cold,  as  if  dead.
Arthritic  pains  in  fingers,  which  are  flexed.
Twitching  of  fingers.
Fingers  and  nails  livid ;  dark  nails.
^^  Lower  Limbs. Restlessness  in  legs.

1  1  Lameness  and  stiffness  in  lower  extremities.

Legs  stiff",  numb,  weak.

I  I  Legs  cold,  powerless. ^Angina  pectoris.

I  I  Blueness,  coldness  and  almost  complete  immobility  of

lower  extremities.
Knees  feel  tired.
Very  violent; contracting  pain  in external tendon of

1.  knee.
''*  Limbs  in  GeneraL i  '  Extremities  heavy,  powerless,  numb,

weak. ^Myelitis  acuta.
I  I  Burning  in  hands  and  feet.
I  I  Articular  rheumatism.
^'  Rest. Position. Motion. Motion  and  exercise  increase

the  pains.
Rest:  colic  <.
Lying  down:  swimming  sensations;  <  headache;  colic

and  diarrhoea  return; erections; pain  in  1.  lung  >;

palpitation.
Arms  folded  across  chest,  trunk  bolt  upright  in  a  chair ;

angina  pectoris.
Wants  to  stretch  wrist.
Change  of  position  ;  pains  in  back  >.
Motion: colic; terrible pains  in spermatic  cords  <;

pains  <.
Inclination  to  move :  with  twitches  in  deltoid.
Rising  from  a  seat :  vertigo  ;  headache  <.
Can  move  fingers  but  slowly  :  heaviness.
Slightest  exertion :  heat.


OXALICUM  ACIDUM.  240

'^Nerves, l  l Muscular  twitchings. ^Myelitis  acuta.
Trembling  convulsions.
Numbness  of  whole  body ;  crawling.
I  I  Peculiar numbness approaching to palsy. ^Angina

pectoris.
Loss  of  motory  power.
"I  I  Paralysis  of  1.  side.
Paralysis  from  inflammation  of  spinal  cord;  limbs  stiff;

paroxysms  of  dyspnoea.
^^  Sleep. Yawning ;  sleepy  during  day.

Awakens  at  night :  with  palpitation ;  with  a  violent  press-
ing pain,  like  a  heavy  weight,  coming  and  going  at

intervals;  >  from  emission  of  flatus.
Dreams,  with  fright  and  fear ;  sits  up  and  looks  around.
^^Time. Morning:  dulness  in  forehead;  dryness  in  throat;

deglutition  painful;  diarrhoea;  pulse  more  rapid;  fly-
ing heat  and  sweat.
3  A.M. :  roused  by  pain  in  bowels.
6  A.M. :  evacuations.
Forenoon  :  heat  in  face.
During  day  :  sleepy;  chill.
Afternoon :  diarrhoea.
Evening:  heartburn  <  ;  rumbling  in  abdomen;  colic  <  ;

sneezing  ;  shaking  chill  with  red  face.
Night :  violent  pain  in  stomach ;  rumbling  in  abdomen  ;

colic  <  ;  palpitation  ;  heat ;  sweat  clammy  and  cold.
^^Temperature  and  Weather. Open  air: while  walking

tickling  in  larynx.
*°  Fever, l Extremities  cold,  nails  livid.

Chilliness : with sneezing (evening) ; after diarrhoea

(afternoon).
Shaking  chill,  with  red  face  (evening).
Creeping  chill  up  spine.

Chill  all  day  long,  but  heat  from  even  slightest  exertion.
Shaking  chill  in  evening,  with  small  contracted  pulse,

red  face  and  a  feeling  of  heat  without  external  warmth,

hands  cold,  as  if  dead.
Heat : from  every  exertion ; especially  in face and  on

hands ;  first  in  face,  afterwards  in  1.  leg.
I  i  Flushes  of  heat,  with  sweat.

I  I  Sensation  of  an  inward  heat,  most  in  face,  forenoon.
Flying  heat  and  sweat  in  morning,  with  pain  in  forehead

and  vertex.
Sweat:  clammy,  with  weakness;  with  giddiness;  at  night,

clammy  and  cold.
Cold  sweat  covers  face,  hands  and  feet,  tongue  cool.
I  I  Typhoid  fever, with delirium and involuntary  diar-

rhoeic  stools.


241  OXALICUM  ACIDUM.

"  Attacks,  Periodicity. Symptoms  recur  in  paroxysms  ;  in-
termit for  hours  or  a  day.

Alternately :  palpitation  and  aphonia.

Last  about  one  minute,  with  intervals  of  about  two
minutes.

Paroxysms  of  pain  in  angina  pectoris.

For  half  an  hour  after  lying  down  at  night :  palpitation.

Two  hours  after  food  :  pain  in  umbilical  region.

For  three  months :  pain  in  back.
^  Locality  and  Direction. Pains  appear  in  small  longitu-
dinal spots,  or  occupy  a  spot  an  inch  or  less  in  circum-
ference.

Right:  swelling  of  side  of  nose ;  stitches  in  nostrils;  pim-
ples in  side  of  nose;  oppression  <  on  side;  pains  <  on
side ;  pain  on  side  of  head  ;  wrist  feels  sprained  ;  sprain
in  thumb.

Left:  pain  in  orbit;  pain  in  hypochondrium ;  sharp
shooting  pain  in  chest ;  lancinating  in  lung ;  rheumatic
pain  in  lung;  inflammation  at  base  of  lung;  very  vio-
lent pain  in  tendon  of  knee;  ]3aralysis  of  side;  heat  in
leg.

First  1.  then  r. :  drawing  pain  in  jaw ;  twitch  in  deltoid.

From  behind  forward  :  stitches  in  heart.

From  above  downward  :  stitches  in  heart.

Inwardl}'^ :  pains  in  head.
*^  Sensations. Jerking  pains,  like  short  stitches,  confined  to
small  spots,  lasting  only  a  few  seconds.

Pains:  greatly  aggravated  by  thinking  of  them.

As  if  all  blood  had  left  brain ;  as  if  blood  in  head  was
coursing  upward  and  outward ;  as  from  a  screw  behind
each  ear ;  as  of  a  heavy  weight  in  stomach ;  hypochon-
drium as  if  bruised;  navel  as  if  bruised;  back  as  if
broken  or  bruised ;  wrist  as  if  sprained ;  hands  as  if
dead  ;  during  shaving  as  from  chafing.

Pain  :  between  vertex  and  occiput ;  in  both  orbits ;  in  de-
cayed molar;  in  stomach;  at  navel;  in  1.  hypochon-
drium ;  in  abdomen  about  navel ;  in  region  of  kidneys ;
in  glans  penis ;  in  testicles  and  cords ;  in  middle  of
chest;  through  to  back ;  in  heart ;  in  prsecordial  region;
up  sternum  and  out  across  chest ;  under  point  of  scap-
ula, extending  to  loins ;  in  small  of  back ;  in  r.  side  of
head,  occiput,  small  of  back  and  calves ;  between  shoul-
ders; along  cervical  vertebrse;  in  r.  metacarpus  and
fleshy  part  of  thumb.

Violent  contracting  pain  :  in  external  tendon  of  1.  knee.

Intense  inflammatory  pains  :  all  through  back.

Acute  pain :  in  back,  then  down  thighs.

Terrible  neuralgic  pains:  in  spermatic  cords.

VOL.  VIII.— 16.


OXALICUM  ACIDUM. '  242

Sharp  darting :  in  heart  and  1.  lung.

Lancinating :  in  1.  lung  ;  through  chest ;  in  arms.

Sharp  stitching  pain  :  in  deltoid.

Cutting :  in  abdomen  ;  in  extremities.

Tearing  pain :  in  sternum.

Shooting  pain :  in  1. chest ;  along  spermatic  cords ;  in  1,

lung  and  hepatic  region.
Stitches:  in  r.  nostril;  in  liver;  in  chest  and  above  hip  ;

in  heart;  through  chest;  from  chest  into  scapulae.
Constrictive  pain  :  in  larynx.
Twisting  colic :  around  navel.
Griping  pains :  in  anus.

Cramp  :  in  calves ;  in  muscles  of  extremities.
Tormenting  cramplike  feeling: between  pit  of  stomach

and  navel.
Bruised  pain  :  in  small  of  back.
Rheumatic  pain  :  in  1.  lung
Arthritic  pains :  in  fingers.
Drawing  pain  :  near  angle  of  lower  jaw.
Aching:  in  vertex  and  forehead;  in  lower  part  of  back.
Pressing  pain :  on  small  spots  in  head ;  in  stomach.
Dull,  heavy,  sore  pain :  in  chest.
Stinging :  in  sternum.
Pricking :  in  back.
Soreness:  in  sternum;  in  heart; of  tongue  and  mouth;

about  navel.
Burning:  in  forehead ;  in  stomach  and  throat;  in  abdo-
men ;  in  umbilical  region ;  from  throat to  umbilical

region  ;  in  urethra ;  in  hands  and  feet.
Heat :  in  face ;  in  r.  thumb.
Pressing:  in  rectum.
Fulness:  in  face  ;  in  r.  thumb.
Dulness:  in  forehead.
Scraping :  in  throat.

Sick,  distressed  feeling:  from  navel  downward.
Tickling :  in  larynx.
Dryness :  in  throat.
Stiffness :  of  lower  extremities.
Lameness :  of  lower  extremities.
Emptiness:  in  head.
Numbness:  in  back  from  shoulders  to  tips  of  fingers;  in

r.  thumb ;  of  legs  ;  of  whole  bod3^
Cold  sensation :  in  back.
Coldness:  of  hands;  of  legs.
Itching:  on  neck  and  fingers.
^^  Touch. Passive  Motion. Injuries. Touch  :  small  spots

on  head  painful ;  slightest,  causes  excruciating  pain.
Shaving :  skin  sensitive.


48


243  OXALICUM  ACIDUM.

■'^  Skin. Sensitive  during  shaving,  as  from  chafing.

Exceedingly  sensitive  skin,  with  vesicular  eruption;  <
from  sweats.

Itching:  on  neck  or  fingers;  eruption,  with  redness.

Smarting  and  soreness.

Skin  mottled  in  circular  patches;  marbled  skin.

Warts.
'^Stages of  Life, Constitution. Child, a^t. 5; chronic
inflammation  of  bowels.

Boy,  set.  10,  fair  complexion,  blue  eyes,  has  been  under
all  sorts  of  treatment  and  taken  much  patent  medicine
for  several  years ;  incontinence  of  urine.

Ann  _W.,  set.  16,  suffering  several  months ;  cerebro-spinal
pains.

Man,  aet.  36,  laborer,  three  years  ago  had  hygroma  of
patella,  brought  on  by  much  kneeling  at  work,  has
never  felt  the  "  same  man  "  since  this  was  backed  by
local  applications ;  cerebro-spinal  pains.

Man,  set.  45,  carpenter,  spare  built,  nervous  bilious  tem-
perament, of  good  health  generally,  temperate  in  all
his  habits ;  angina  pectoris.

Woman,  a^et.  50;  congestion  of  1.  lung;  later  pneumonia.

Man,  set.  50,  fleshy ;  irregular  action  of  heart.

Man  suffering  a  long  time  from  indigestion,  operated  on
for  strangulated  hernia  two  years  ago,  since  then  suf-
fering ;  pain  in  umbilical  region.

Mr.^F.,  wealthy  man  ;  omission  of  heartbeat.
Relations. Antidoted  by :  Carbonates  of  Lime  and  Mag-
nesia.

Compare:  Arsen.,  Ipec.  Siud  Veratr.  in  cholera  infantum;
Colchic.  in  gastralgia;  Kreosot.  in  gastric  symptoms;.
Argent,  met,  Phos.  ac.  and  Picric  ac.  in  spinal  disease.


P^ONIA.  244


PiCONIA.

Peony.  Banunculacese.

The  tincture  is  prepared  from  the  fresh  root  gathered  in  Spring.
Provings  by  Helbig,  Geyer  and  Hegel,  Praktische  Mittheilungen,  1827,  and
Schelling,  A.  H.  Z.,  vol.  28,  p.  182.

CLiNiCAii  Authorities. — Fissures  in  anus,  Eafinesque,  Horn.  CI.,  vol.  3,  p.  40,
Raue's  Eec,  1870,  p.  218  ;  Ozanam,  B.  J.  H.,  vol.  26,  p.  58 ;  Anal  and  rectal  fissure,
Eggert,  Kaue's  Rec,  1875,  p.  162,  from  Trans.  A.  I.,  1873,  p.  468  ;  Ulcer  of
coccyx,  of  great  toe,  on  dorsum  of  foot,  on  anterior  surface  of  tibia,  on  r.  leg,  on  sacrum,
on  breast,  Ozanam,  B.  J.  H.,  vol.  26,  p.  53 ;  Ulceration,  Ozanam,  Hughes'  Phar.,
p.  599  ; Varicose  veins,  Eafinesque,  Raue's  Eec,  1870,  p.  200.

^  Mind. Anxious,  afraid  to  talk  with  any  one ;  much  affected

by  bad  news,  after  pinching  in  belly.
^  Sensorium. Vertigo  :  on  every  motion,  with  constant  reel-
ing and  staggering.
Dulness,  heaviness,  vertigo  and  feeling  of  heat  in  head.
Syncope  and  cold  sweat.
^  Sight  and  Eyes. Burning,  itching  and  feeling  of  dryness
in  eyes.
I  I  Violent  tearing  around  r.  eye.
^  Upper  Face. Burning  heat  in  face.
^  Lower  Face. Crawling  in  upper  lip  and  tip  of  nose.
13  Throat. Burning  and  heat  in  throat.

Tenacious  mucus  in  throat,  inducing  hawking.
*^  Scrobiculum  and  Stomach. Pressure  in  pit  of  stomach,

as  from  great  anxiety.
^^  Stool  and  Rectum. Papescent  diarrhoea,  with  qualmish-
ness in  abdomen,  burning  in  anus  after  stool,  followed
by  internal  chilliness.
■  Hemorrhoids  with fissures  in  anus; intolerable pains

during  and  after  stool.
I  I  Hemorrhoids  and  ulceration  of  rectum  for  eighteen
years ;  subject  to  several  operations ;  constipated,  nerv-
ous and  emaciated;  diagreeable  smell  from  body;  anus
and  surroundings  purple  and  covered  with  a  thick
crust;  at  verge  and  entrance, of  rectum  several  fissured
ulcers  with  elevated  and  indurated  edges,  exquisitely
painful ;  whole  mucous  membrane  at  verge  and  higher
up  studded  with  ulcers,  cracks  and  rhagades ;  coating
of  rectum  purple  and  congested.


245  P^ONIA.

■  Very painful and sensitive ulcers  and rhagades in

rectum.

I  Very  painful  ulcer,  partly  in  integument,  round,  sharp-
cut  edges  and  exuding  much  moisture.  ^Ulceration
of  anus.

I  Atrocious  pains,  with  and  after  each  stool,  recurring  after
an  hour  or  two  and  lasting  twelve  hours,  preventing
sleep,  must  walk  floor  nearly  all  night ;  exudation  of
offensive  moisure. ^Fissures  of  anus.

■  Fissures,  with  much oozing,  constantly keeping anus

damp  and  disagreeable ;  great  soreness  and  smarting.
I  Six  months  previously  had  abscess  just  below  coccyx,
large  as  hazelnut,  which  soon  opened,  but  wound,  in
place  of  healing,  remained  open  and  there  resulted  a
funnel-shaped  ulcer,  about  one  centimeter  deep  and
same  in  circumference;  bottom  and  walls  of  bright  red
color,  a  purulent  secretion  constantly  exuded ;  sitting
posture  very  painful.

■  Small  ulcer  on  perineum,  near  anus,  constantly  oozes

moisture  of  very  offensive  odor; is painful  for  eight
days.

I  Biting,  itching  in  anus,  provokes  scratching;  orifice
seems  somewhat  swollen.
^'  Voice  and  Larynx.  Trachea  and  Bronchia.  Complete
loss  of  voice,  could  not  utter  least  sound  for  hours  (after
smelling).
^  Inner  Chest  and  Lungs.  Throbbing  through  r.  chest  and
extending  posteriorly  up  to  nape  of  neck,  where  it
terminates  in  intermittent  pinching.

Violent  shootings  vertically  from  collar  bone  down  through
heart  to  diaphragm,  <  in  walking.

Dull  shooting  from  front  to  back  through  heart.
^"  Outer  Chest. ■  Ulcer  about  a  centimeter  in  diameter  on
lower part of  1.  breast, consequent  upon  an  abscess
which  had  never  healed.
*'  Neck  and  Back. Stinging  in  shoulder-blades.

I  Ulcers  below  coccyx.

I  I  Ulceration  of  seat  from  decubitus,  in  a  bed-ridden  patient.

I  Sacral  sores;  vitality  of  skin  destroyed  by  pressure.
^^  Lower Limbs. '  '  Ulcer on anterior  surface of  r. tibia,
caused  by  a  violent  blow  she  had  received  six  months
ago.

I  I  Chronic  ulcer  of  r.  leg  of  ten  years'  standing,  serpiginous,
crept  slowly  on  destroying  a  vast  extent  of  skin ;  a  por-
tion of  this  cicatrized  and  became  covered  with  a  thin,
violet,  shining  pellicle,  whilst  ulcer  continued  to  spread
four  centimeters  in  diameter ;  severe  shooting  pains
hindering  walking  by  day  and  rest  by  night.


P^ONIA.  246

I  I  After  wearing  a  tight  boot  a  blister  appeared  on  dorsum
of  foot  beneath  which  skin  had  ulcerated,  and  showed
no  tendency  to  heal;  three  centimeters  long  by  two
broad ;  edges  perpendicular  and  very  irregularly  in-
dented ;  its  soft  and  fungoid  surface  was  covered  with  a
brick-red  sanies  mingled  with  violet  and  black  streaks
from  admixture  of  venous  blood.

I  Ulcer  on  external  surface  of  1.  great  toe,  about  level  of
articulation  of  first  phalanx  with  metatarsal  bone,  one
centimeter  in  diameter;  edges  perpendicular;  base
greyish,  fiat  and  exuding  ;  caused  by  wearing  ill-fitting
boot.
^^Rest.  Position.  Motion,  l  l  Pain  compelling  the  sick  to
walk  the  floor  all  night. ^Fissures  of  anus.

I  I  Rolling  on  floor  from  pain. ^Fissures  of  anus.

Sitting  posture:  painful  from  abscess  below  coccyx.

Motion :  vertigo.

Walking :  <  pain  from  collar  bone  to  diaphragm.
^'' Sleep. 1 1  Nightmare.

Dreams :  of  a  figure,  or  ghost  sitting  on  his  chest ;  anxious  ;
vivid;  frightful;  amorous;  quarrelsome.
^^Temperature and  Weather. Coming  into  warm room

after  a  walk  in  cold  air  he  gets  nausea  and  feels  faint.
^'  Attacks,  Periodicity. An  hour  or  two  after  stool :  pains
recur  and  last  twelve  hours.

For  ten  years :  ulcer  on  leg.

For  eighteen  years :  ulceration  of  rectum.
*^ Locality  and  Direction. Right: violent  tearing  around
eye  ;  throbbing  through  chest ;  ulcer  on  tibia  ;  chronic
ulcer  on  leg.

Left :  ulcer  on  breast ;  ulcer  on  great  toe.
^^  Sensations. Intolerable  pain :  during  and  after  stool.

Tearing :  around  r.  eye.

Shooting :  from  collar  bone  through  heart  to  diaphragm  ;
through  heart ;  in  ulcer  on  leg.

Pinching:  in  nape  of  neck.

Throbbing  :  through  r.  chest ;  nape  of  neck.

Stinging :  in  shoulder-blades.

Biting :  in  anus.

Burning:  in  eyes;  in  face;  in  throat;  in  anus.

Heat :  in  head  ;  in  throat.

Pressure :  in  pit  of  stomach.

Heaviness :  in  head.

Dryness :  in  eyes.

Itching:  in  eyes;  in  anus.
**  Tissues. I  Varicose  veins,  ulcers  and  fissures.
^^  Touch.  Passive  Motion.  Injuries. Ulcers  from  decubitus.

Pressure :  destroyed  vitality  of  skin ;  of  boot  caused  ulcer.

Blow  :  caused  ulcer  on  r.  tibia.


247  P^ONIA— PALLADI UM.

^•^  Skin. I  Sensitive,  painful  ulcers  on  lower  parts  of  body.

■  Chronic  ulcers,  particularly  those  seated  on  parts  of  body
below  umbilicus.
^^  Stages  of  Life,  Constitution. Children with  spasmodic
affections.

Engineer  on  railway,  set.  22,  case  not  complicated  by
syphilis  or  varicose  veins ;  ulcer  on  dorsum  of  foot.

Lady's  maid,  set.  27,  after  receiving  violent  blow  six
months  previously  ;  ulcer  on  leg.

Officer  of  African  army,  set.  28,  after  wearing  ill-fitting
boots,  no  history  of  syphilis ;  suffering  five  months ;
ulcer  of  great  toe.

Miss  H.,  £et.  37,  chambermaid,  robust,  but  complained
frequently  of  gastralgia,  pituitous  vomiting  and  chronic
constipation ;  high  living ;  suffering  three  months ;  fis-
sures of  anus.

Woman,  set.  50,  laundress,  otherwise  healthy;  ulcer  of
coccyx.

Man,  set.  52,  suffering  eighteen  years;  anal  and  rectal
fissure.

Woman,  set.  60,  suffering  four  months;  ulcer  of  breast.

Miss  M.,  set.  84,  affected  for  nine  months  with  osteo-
sarcoma of  1.  femur ;  ulceration  of  seat  from  decubitus.

A  poor  old  man,  suffering  ten  years ;  ulcer  of  leg.
*^  Relations. Antidotes:  Aloes  and  Eatanhia.

Compare:  ^am am.  in  varicosis;  Silica  in  ulcers;  Sulphur
in  diarrhoea.


PALLADIUM.

Palladium.  Pd.

A  metal  accompanying  Platina  and  Aurum.

Proposed  as  a  remedy  as  early  as  1833. See  Stapf 's  Archives.

"This  metal  belongs  with  Mercury,  Silver,  Gold,  Platina,  and  others  occurring
in  small  quantities,  like  Iridium,  Rhodium,  Ruthenium,  and  the  very  remarkable
Osmium,  to  the  so-called  precious  metals ;  that  is,  such  as  are  reducible  by  them-
selves, more  easily  separable  from  oxygen  than  the  others,  but  having  greater
affinity  for  Sulphur.  If  we  classify  the  Sulphides  according  to  their  solubility  in
dilute  acids,  Palladium  must  be  placed  with  Argentum,  Rhodium,  Ruthenium  and
Osmium,  and  Platina  remains  with  the  less  soluble  Mercury,  Aurum  and  Iridium.
The  nature  of  solubility  in  dilute  acids  one  would  expect  would  show  itself  in  the
provings.  Platina  and  Palladium  both  proved  in  dust  form  showed  such  sim-
ilarity in  their  effects  that  the  question  arose  whether  corresponding  differences
miglit  be  found.  These  data  can  only  be  furnished  by  frequent  use  of  Palladium
in  practice." — C.  Hg.,  N.  A.  J.  H.,  vol.  9,  new  series,  p.  129.


PALLADIUM.  248

Introduced  and  proved  in  1850  by  C.  Hering,  upon  himself,  Margaret  C,  Eaue,
Tietze,  Pehrson,  Coxe  and  family,  and  Neidhard. — N.  A.  J.  H.,  vol.  9,  N.  S.

Clinical  Authorities. — Ovarian  (rouble  wilh  mental  disturbance,  Williamson,
Hering's  Report,  N.  A.  J.  H.,  vol.  9,  No.  2,  p.  146 ;  Ovaritis,  r.  side,  with  Leucorrhcea,
liippe,  N.  A.  J.  H.,  vol.9,  p.  146;  Chronic  ovaritis,  Cheney,  Times  Ret.,  1877,
p.  112,  from  Med.  Inv.,  vol.  5,  p.  586;  Uterine  and  ovarian  troubles,  wilh  pain  in  r,
groin,  Hg.,  N.  A.  J.  H.,  vol.  9,  p.  146 ;  Leucorrhaa,  Williamson,  N.  A.  J.  H.,
vol.  9,  No.  2,  p.  146 ;  Sciatica,  D.  S.  E.,  Organon,  vol.  2,  p.  236 ;  Kimball,  Organon,
vol.  3,  p.  113.

^  Mind.  Extremely  fatigued  in  evening;  feels  mentally  gone ;
is  averse  to  speaking  a  foreign  language  which  at  other
times  he  speaks  fluently ;  it  is  too  much  of  an  exertion,
he  is  tired  of  it.

Time  seems  longer  to  him,  as  if  it  contained  more  ;  when
he  looks  at  the  clock  far  less  has  been  spent  than  he
ex.pected.

When  walking  in  street  in  evening,  it  seems  to  him  as  if
he  had  grown  taller.

1 1  Great  inclination  to  weep. ^Prolapsus  uteri.

I  They  set  great  store  on  other  people's  opinion,  and  at-
tach great  importance  to  what  others  think,  hence  they
are  very  excitable  in  company  and  their  complaints  are
worse  next  day.

I  I  Apprehension  as  if  something  horrible  would  happen.
Undecided,  in  morning.

I I  Imagines  herself  neglected  ;  wounded  pride. ^Hysteria.
Irritable : in  evening ; and impatient, from  headache,

could  "  knock  people's  heads  off."

Very  impertinent ;  makes  a  face  like  a  savage.

I  All  you  say  or  do  puts  her  out  of  iiumor,  she  trembles,
her  face  changes  expression,  her  eyes  too,  as  if  she  were
going  crazy.

Greatly  inclined  to  use  strong  and  violent  expressions.

Disagreeable  mood ;  as  if  she  could  not  bear  or  brook  any-
thing.

I  She  tries  to  appear  as  amiable  as  possible,  but  is  obstinate.

■  Depressing  news  makes  all  her  symptoms  worse.

■  Mental  excitement,  particularly  company,  also  walking,

aggravate  her  troubles  in  r.  ovary  and  groin ;  she  is  par-
ticularly <  the  day  after  a  musical  evening  or  party.
When  fixing  attention  on  it  headache  disappears.
I  Feels  best  in  company  and  wants  to  be  flattered.
^  Sensorium. Is  so  tired  that  he  reels  on  coming  into  a  room.
^  Inner  Head. Sensation  as  if  head  were  swung  from  behind
forward ;  as  if  brain  were  being  shaken.
Painful  dulness  in  head  with  darting  to  and  fro  in  1.  side
of  it ;  at  noon.


249  PALLADIUM.

Dulness  in  occiput  in  evening.

Dull  sensation  in  forehead,  as  if  a  weight  were  lying  in
brain  ;  each  expiration  is  accompanied  by  a  sensation
as  if  this  load  were  pushed  from  direction  of  occiput  to
forehead ;  it  occupies  central  portion  of  brain,  temples
are  free.

Headache  in  spots  size  of  a  fist,  or  a  dull  crooked  stinging.

Constricting  sensation  in  r.  side  of  head  at  noon  ;  at  1
o'clock  a  different  pain  in  1.  side  of  head  extending
through  head.

On  r.  side,  on  boundary  of  brain,  a  cooling  or  slight  burn-
ing sensation,  and  pressure  as  from  finger  tips.

In  "  cautiousness,"  r.  side,  a  fluttering  pain,  betwe.en  a
stinging  and  pressing,  disappears  when  touching  op  fix-
ing mind  upon  it.

Fulness  in  forehead,  as  if  brain  were  shaken.

Pain  first  in  r.  then  in  1.  temple,  then  in  shoulder,  finally
returning  to  temple.

Pain  in  r.  temple  after  rising,  preceded  by  bellyache.

Pain  in  1.  temple  after  drowsiness.

Pain  in  r,  eye,  temple  and  region  of  ear,  at  8  a.m.,  after
walking;  at  dinner,  1  o'clock,  pain  in  r.  temple  near
eye;  at  same  time  unpleasant  sensation  in  1.  eye.

Pain  in  r.  temple  and  arm,  after  walking  at  noon.

Dull  pain  in  L  orbit  while  walking  in  morning.

The  pain  in  eye  extends  to  forehead  and  vertex.

Pain  to  1.  of  vertex;  at  dinner  it  is  in  vertex,  a  violent
pressure,  produces  numbness  as  from  extreme  heat  or
cold.

Dreamy  headache  in  vertex  and  occiput,  towards  morning.

Pain  in  vertex  and  temples,  in  forenoon.

I  Headache  across  top  of  head  from  one  ear  to  the  other.

Headache  <  in  afternoon,  she  had  to  lie  down  ;  could  not
get  asleep  for  a  long  time ;  violent  throbbing  in  body ;
sensation  as  if  head  were  swung  to  and  fro  from  behind
forward  ;  after  sleep.

Headache :  >  after  sleep,  in  afternoon  and  towards  even-
ing ;  after  drinking  coffee ;  and  weak  back  in  morning ;
acute,  like  neuralgia,  in  1.  side.
*  Outer  Head. Sensation of roughness on forehead and
slight  itching.

Itching  on  sides  of  head.
'  Sight  and  Eyes. Dull,  heavy  pain  in  1.  eye  and  back  of
orbit,  in  evening  after  walking,  for  one  hour;  after  dis-
ap|)earing,  pain  spread  with  greater  intensity  over  fore-
head and  vertex.

Pain  in  r.  eye,  temple  and  region  of  ear.

Violent  itching  on  1.  eyebrow.


PALLADIUM.  250

Pustule  under  r,  eyebrow  near  canthus,  burns  and  bites
when  touched.

Pain  around  1.  eye  extending  beyond  r.  eyebrow,  while
walking,  at  10  a.m.

Disagreeable  sensation  around  1.  eye.

Dryness  and  itching  of  eyes  in  evening,  not  >  by  rubbing.

Itching  of  lids,  has  to  rub  them,  <  on  1.  side.

Dryness  of  edges  of  lids.

Small  watery  blisters  on  edges  of  lower  lids.

Itching  in  face,  first  1.  eye,  zygoma,  ala  nasi,  then  r.  side,
extending  close  to  eye.

•  Sallow  complexion,  blue  half  circles  under  eyes. ^Ova-
rian troubles.
^  Hearing  and  Ears. Pain  in  head  just  above  and  behind
tip  of  r.  ear.

Acutely  sore  pimples  behind  and  above  1.  ear.
^  Smell  and  Nose. Slight  feeling  as  of  having  taken  cold
in  nose  during  day ;  in  evening  burning  in  nose  as  from
horseradish,  followed  by  running  of  water.

When  sneezing  and  coughing,  pain  in  abdomen.

A  deep-seated  red  pustule  on  r.  cheek  near  wing  of  nose,
neither  painful  nor  coming  to  a  head.

Painful  pimple  on  point  of  nose  maturing  slowl}^;  after
being  squeezed  it  bleeds  for  a  long  time.
®  Upper  Face. Burning  pain  on  small  spot  on  r.  cheek  bone
necessitating  rubbing.

Burning  itching  on  small  spot  on  r.  side  of  face  in  morn-
ing; very  severe  in  1.  inguinal  region  in  evening.

Itching  pimples  in  face,  on  nose,  behind  ears.

Pimples  back  of  r.  zygoma  and  on  same  place  1.  side.

Itching  pimples  in  whiskers,  1.  side,  in  evening.

Growth  of  whiskers  is  noticeably  slower.
^  Lower  Face. Pain  in  r.  lower  jaw.

Pain  in  back  part  of  1.  lower  jaw  near  articulation.

Constricting  pain  in  1.  articulation  of  jaw,  with  fine  pajns
in  epigastrium.

Itching  on  upper  lip  on  r.  side  and  on  1.  wing  of  nose.

Pimples  on  inside  of  lower  lip,  near  1.  corner.

Right  corner  of  mouth  sore  and  painful
'"  Teeth  and  Gums. Sensation  as  if  upper  incisors  were  elon-
gated  and projecting, interfering unpleasantly with
under  lip.

Left  upper  and  outer  incisor  is  sensitive  and  feels  like  a
foreign  body.
"  Taste  and  Tongue. Taste  slimy.

Burning  sensation  on  surface  of  tongue  near  tip,  also  in  1.
ear  and  on  various  places  on  face.

Middle  of  tongue  redder  in  morning.


251  PALLADIUM.

"  Inner  Mouth. Much  tough  mucus  in  mouth,  and  slimy-
taste.
^^  Throat. Dryness  of  fauces  and  tongue  without  thirst.

Peculiar  pain  in  throat ;  sensation  when  swallowing  as  if
something  were  hanging  in  neighborhood  of  hyoid  bone,
or  as  if  a  bread-crumb  had  lodged  there ;  disappeais  for
some  minutes,  then  suddenly  returns ;  felt  at  noon  and
again  after  dinner.

Disagreeable  sticking  as  if  a  crumb  were  lodged  in  throat.

Frequent  haw^king  of  small  solid  lumps  which  he  must
swallow.
"  Appetite,  Thirst. Desires,  Aversions. No  desire  for  beer.
*^  Eating and Drinking. At dinner and after drinking

coffee,  headache.
'^  Hiccough,  Belching,  Fausea  and  Vomiting. ■  Nausea,
in  evening.

Tasteless  eructations  in  forenoon.

Belching  of  wind,  finally  acid  taste.

Acid  eructations,  with  spasmodic  pains  in  chest,  back  and
abdomen,  at  6  p.m. ^Ovarian  troubles.

Eructations  which  do  not  relieve;  in  headache.
^^  Scrobiculum and Stomach. Derangement  of  stomach.

^Ovarian  troubles.
'^  Hypochondria. Pressing  pain  in  epigastrium.

Aching  along  edge  of  lower  ribs.

Pains  and  soreness  in  liver;  whitish  stools.

Pain  in  1.  hypochondriac  region,  soon  followed  by  belch-
ing and  relief  of  pain.

Pain  in  region  of  spleen.
^^  Abdomen. Sensation  as  if  intestines  were  strangulated  and
twisted  in  different  directions.

Crawling  sensation  in  abdomen.

Bellyache  in  morning  before  rising,  followed  by  pain  in  r.
temple.

Shooting  pain  from  navel  to  pelvis.

Painful  stitches  in  1.  side  of  abdomen,  followed  by  cutting,
more  r.  than  1.  side,  almost  unbearable,  lasting  for  min-
utes, returns  after  intervals  and  lasts  longer.

Stitches  in  1.  side,  near  hip  bone,  but  more  inward  ;  in  in-
tervals peculiar  pain  as  if  air  bubbles  pressed  forcibly
through  intestines  and  passed  upward,  forenoon ;  re-
peated several  times  an  hour  after  dinner,  first  in  1.  then
less  marked  in  r.  side ;  it  somewhat  resembles  bites,  as
if  an  animal  were  snapping  and  tearing  off  small  portion
from  inside;  the  stitches  return  next  day  in  forenoon
and  extend  to  r.  side.

Violent  sharp  pains,  like  knives,  in  lower  part  of  abdomen,
she  could  not  hold  the  child ;  disappeared  after  a  stool,


PALLADIUM.  252

but  returned  after  breakfast,  with  urging  to  stool,  noth-
ing but  wind  passed.

Violent  cramp  or  colic  in  abdomen,  principally  r.  side,  in-
supportable, accompanied  by  constant  eructation ;  can
only  be  borne  by  lying  very  quietly  on  1.  side;  <  from
sneezing,  coughing  and  urinating  and  in  afternoon;  re-
turning next  day  at  3  p.m.  ;  >  by  external  warmth ;  cold
hands  and  feet;  constant  chilliness;  urine  like  blood
and  water  mixed ;  after  getting  into  bed  cramps  in  legs,
she  could  hardly  move;  cloths  dipped  in  hot  water  re-
lieved.

Unpleasant  sensation  in  flanks  as  if  viscera  were  gone,
painful  to  pressure  and  when  contracting  abdominal
muscles.

■  Soreness  in  abdomen  and  pressure  downward. ^Ovarian

troubles.
Pain  as  if  beaten  in  lower  portion  of  abdomen,  r.  side.
Sensation  as  if  abdomen  were  swelling ;  in  forenoon,  soon

after  taking  drug.

■  Swelling  and  induration  in  r.  side  of  abdomen. ^Ova-

rian troubles.
I  Anxious  sensation  in  r.  groin  with  internal  soreness ;  has

to  keep  thigh  flexed.
On  a  small  spot  on  1.  groin,  very  severe  burning  itching.
With  every  step  it  hurts  in  1.  groin.
Stitches  in  groin.
Transient  pain  in  lower  intestines,  r.  side,  with  sensation

as  if  testicles  were  bruised;  near  noon.
Stitches  in  1.  side,  near  hip  bone  but  deeper  in.
^^  Stool  and  Rectum.  Flatulency  with  distension  of  abdomen.
Frequent  soft  stool.
Diarrhoea  with  very  little  pain,  night  and  day ;  cured  by

Cinchona.
Stool  at  10  P.M.,  hard,  then  pappy;  copious  at  noon ;  in

morning,  thin,  with  quick,  violent  urging  as  if  diarrhoea

would  set  in.
iCostiveness,  stools  often  whitish.
Stool  in  afternoon  and  evening,  instead  of  morning.
Dull stitches felt at approach  of  a  stool;  dull aching

twitches  in  1.  side  of  rectum  ;  morning.
Better  after  stool,  knifelike  pains  in  uterine  region.
Dull  pains  in  rectum,  as  from  too  long  retained  stool,  but

without  urging ;  at  noon.
''  Urinary  Organs. Pressing  pain  in  region  of  1.  kidney,  as

from  retaining  urine  too  long,  <  when  sitting,  disap-
peared from  pressure  but  more  prominent  afterwards ;

felt  somewhat  while  sitting.
Stitches  through  bladder  and  painful  weakness  in  it.


253  PALLADIUM.

Pressing  in  bladder  as  if  it  were  filled.

Frequent urging to urinate and aching in region  of

bladder.
Frequent  urination,  bladder  feels  full  and  but  little  urine

passes,  lasting  a  long  time.
Worse  when  urinating,  cramp  in  abdomen.
Stitches  running  through  urethra  to  glans.
Urine  like  blood  mixed  with  water;  with  colicky  pains  in

abdomen.
Dark  urine  with  red,  sandy  deposit,  or  staining  vessel  red.
Urine  turbid,  not  dark.
^^  Male  Sexual  Organs. In  evening  and  at  night  no  proper

erection could be obtained ; erections, however, in

morning.
Testicles  feel  bruised,  with  pain  in  abdomen.
Extending  to  glans  penis,  stitches  in  urethra.
^^  Female  Sexual  Organs, n  Affects  principally  r.  ovary.

■  Swelling  and  induration  of  r.  ovary,  with  soreness  and

shooting  pain  from  navel  to  pelvis.

■  Right  ovary  swollen,  sore  to  pressure,  with  bearing  down

pains. ^Ovaritis.
I A  drawing  in  r.  ovarian  region  downward  and  forward,

>  by  rubbing.

iPain  in  r.  ovary ;  urgency  to  urinate  with  scanty  emis-
sion, and  sensation  of  weight  and  bearing  down  in
pelvis,  >  lying  down ;  prolapsus  uteri ;  forgets  every
pain  in  society,  but  is  <  next  day ;  attaches  great  weight
to  other  people's  opinions;  likes  to  be  flattered.

I  I  Quick,  excitable,  fond  of  good  opinion  of  others,  disposed
to  use  strong  language ;  has  two  children  ;  while  nurs-
ing last,  menses  reappeared  at  eight  months  ;  pain  in  r.
ovary,  drawing  downward  ;  <  standing  and  on  motion,

>  from  rubbing  and  lying  down ;  bearing  down  and
weight  in  pelvis,  as  if  uterus  would  prolapse;  slimy
mucus  in  throat,  glairy  leucorrhoea ;  soreness  in  abdo-
men, especially  on  r.  side ;  pain  in  liver  and  spleen ;
flatulence ;  constipation ;  frequent  micturition ;  stitches
in  urethra ;  rheumatic  pains  in  different  parts,  changing
frequently ;  great  disinclination  to  any  exertion ;  lassi-
tude, cold  hands  and  feet. ^Chronic  ovaritis.

Unpleasant  sensation  in  sexual  parts ;  heaviness  like  a

load.
Heavy  weight  in  pelvis,  <  when  standing,  >  when  lying

on  1.  side.
Pain  in  region  of  uterus  and  bladder,  in  evening  after

exertion.

■  Bearing  down.

■  Weakness  and  pain  with  sense  of  falling  in  region  cf


PALLADIUM.  254

womb,  all  motions  were  painful,  she  could  hardly  walk
or  stand.

■  Symptoms  of  falling  of  womb,  with  weeping  mood.

■  Right  side  of  abdomen  swollen;  hard  and  painful  as  if

beaten,  occasional  shooting  pains  from  navel  to  pelvis,
all  on  r.  side;  heaviness  as  from  a  load,  with  pressure
deep  in  pelvis  ;  all  gets  <  after  exertion,  feels  >  when
standing,  >  when  lying  on  1.  side.

Reappearance  of  catamenia,  with  pain  in  abdomen.

Catamenia  appeared  later,  at  full  moon  instead  of  new
moon,  and  accompanied  by  headache  and  symptoms
which  were  relieved  by  Glonoine  and  Bellad.

Pain  in  abdomen  and  region  of  spleen  at  return  of  menses.

■  Feels  sore  in  abdomen  after  menses,  with  fear  and  appre-

hension that  something  horrible  will  happen.

■  Yellow  leucorrhoea,  turned  whiter  and  thicker,  then  dis-

appeared.

■  Transparent,  jellylike leucorrhoea,  < before  and  after

catamenia.
^^  Pregnancy.  Parturition. Lactation. Stitches  in  r.  breast
near  nipple,  running  in  deep ;  <  when  taking  a  deep
breath.
Sensation  as  if  her  catamenia  would  appear,  in  afternoon ;
a  nursing  woman.

■  Menstrual  discharge  while  nursing.

^^  Voice  and  Larynx. Trachea  and  Bronchia. Frequent
hawking  of  small  solid  lumps  which  he  must  swallow.
^•^  Respiration. When  making  an  expiration,  sensation  as  if
something  were  pushed  into  head ;  when  taking  a  deep
breath,  stitches  in  chest.
^^  Cough. Coughing  and  sneezing  aggravate  pain  in  abdomen.
^*  Inner  Chest  and  Lungs, Transient  stitches  on  inner  side
of  r.  clavicle.
Stitches  from  middle  of  chest  to  both  shoulders ;  on  bend-
ing body  forward  while  sitting.
Violent  pain  like  pricking  with  a  dull  stick  in  r.  chest  in
ascending  portion  of  eighth  and  ninth  ribs,  two  or  three
inches  to  r.  of  epigastrium ;  later  pressing  pain  in  1.
side  under  ribs ;  afternoon.
Stitches  in  r.  side  of  chest  through  to  back,  <  from  taking

a  long  breath,  >  when  walking  in  open  air.
Stitches  in  chest  and  lameness  in  arm  disappear  while
walking  in  open  air;  but  every  step  hurts  him  in  1.
groin.
After  sitting,  slight  congestion  in  r.  side  of  chest ;  forenoon.
Spasmodic  pain  in  chest.
^^  Heart,  Pulse  and  Circulation. Pressing  in  1.  chest  in
cardiac  region,  comes  in  spells;  forenoon  and  afternoon.


255  PALLADIUM.

Pain  in  cardiac  region  ;  at  2  a.m.  ;  with  lameness  in  arm.
^'  Neck  and  Back. Frequent  painful  spasm  in  single  mus-
cles on  r.  side  of  neck  ;  particularly  in  morning.

Sensation  as  if  neck  were  becoming  stiff,  particularly  both
sides  of  neck  above  first  dorsal  vertebra;  then  a  press-
ing pain  in  lower  portion  of  scapula  and  at  same  eleva-
tion under  vertebral  column  a  sensation  as  if  a  solid
object  were  slowly  pressing  against  it ;  towards  noon.

Painful  drawing  in  neck  and  shoulders  and  down  1.  arm.

Violent  itching  in  back  of  neck.

Pimple  on  r.  side  of  neck,  burns  and  itches.

Spasmodic  pain  in  back.

Pain  in  1.  trapezius,  as  from  bending  forward ;  <  from
turning  head  to  left.

Pressing  in  lower  portion  of  scapula  and  in  spine.

Burning  and  itching  on  a  place  below  and  to  r.  of  point
of  shoulder-blade.

Dull  pressing  backache  in  afternoon,  as  from  sitting  too
long  in  a  stiff  posture.

Backache  around  loins,  from  long  sitting  and  when  rising
in  night.

Crawling  on  back  as  of  fleas.

Weak  back  and  headache  in  morning.

Constant  j)ain  in  back  and  hips,  with  cold  limbs.

Pain  in  small  of  back  extending  to  r.  hip.

I  Tired  feeling  in  small  of  back.
^^  Upper  Limbs. In  shoulder  and  neck  drawing  pains.

Painful  drawing  in  r.  shoulder  and  fleeting  stitches  on
inside  of  clavicle.

A  few  stitches,  quick  as  lightning  in  r.  shoulder,  making
him  cry  out.

Towards  both  shoulders,  stitches  from  middle  of  chest.

Pain  as  if  sprained  in  anterior  portion  of  r.  shoulder  joint,
painful  to  pressure;  felt  when  stretching  arm,  dipping
pen  in  ink,  moving  small  objects,  not  when  writing.

Pheumatic  pains  in  r.  shoulder  in  evening.

Pains  in  r.  shoulder  and  arm.

Tickling  on  r.  shoulder.

Pain  in  r.  arm  and  temple;  at  noon,  after  walking.

In  1.  arm,  drawing  downward  from  neck  and  shoulder.

Left  arm  feels  as  if  paralyzed  and  numb,  for  several  hours
in  forenoon  ;  when  sitting  still,  constant  painless  twitch-
ing, which  bends  fingers,  particularly  forefinger,  disap-
pears without  experiencing  peculiar  sensation  with
which  numbness  generally  passes  off;  accompanied  by
pain  in  region  of  heart;  does  not  pass  off  fully  until
afternoon.

Sensation  in  1.  arm  as  if  it  would  go  to  sleep.


PALLADIUM.  256

Numbness  of  r.  arm  and  hand  at  night.

Crawling  sensation  in  arm.

Violent  itching  on  1.  arm  and  r.  elbow.

Drawing  pain  in  1.  forearm,  as  if  lame,  near  radial  side.

Numbness  of  r.  forearm  extending  into  fingers.

Pain  in  r.  wrist  extending  into  forearm  ;  in  forenoon.

Sudden  jerking  pain  in  r.  wrist  and  metacarpal  bones.

Violent  pain  in  r.  hand,  burning  and  boring  inside  and

feeling  as  if  shattered,  he  is  awakened  by  it  but  goes  to

sleep  again,  towards  morning  has  a  similar  pain  on  1.

side,  but  does  not  remember  the  spot.
Sudden  boring,  stinging  pain  in  metacarpal  bone  of  little

finger  of  1.  hand.
Severe  almost  stinging pain in  metacarpal  bones  of  1.

hand,  including  thumb.
Stitches  in  fingers,  first  1.  then  r,  hand.
Warts  on  knuckles.
^^  Lower  Limbs. Rheumatic  pain  in  r.  hip,  when  walking;

after  7  a.m.
Dull  gnawing  pain  in  1.  hip ;  in  morning.
When  pressing  (as  if  for  stool),  but  not  when  walking,  a

sensation  as  if  heads  of  femurs  were  forced  out  of  their

sockets  and  expanded,  <  on  1.  side.
Pain  as  if  sprained  in  r.  hip  joint,  on  inner  anterior  side.
Jerking  pain  in  1.  hip  joint,  during  morning  and  forenoon.
Rheumatic  pains  in  1.  lower  limb.
■  Darting  pains  from  toes  to  hip,  or  from  trochanter  to

hollow  of  knee.
Sciatica :  r.  side ;  dull  aching  pain  ;  <  towards  night  and

in  evening,  in  cold  and  from  motion ;  >  by  warmth

and  rest.
Itching  on  inner  side  of  r.  thigh.
Crawling  on  different  places  on  thigh  and  leg.
Tearing  pain  in  legs  and  occasional  short  stitches,  as  from

little  pimples.
Pain  above  1.  knee,  extending  from  there  into  chest ;  in

morning.
Above  knee  small  stings,  as  if  a  flea  were  biting.
Painful  tension  in  r.  knee.
Tension  in  1.  calf;  while  walking  in  evening  it  becomes  a

tension  in  hamstrings.
Crawling  sensation  on  ankles.
Itching  on  1.  ankle.
^*  Limbs  in  General. Neuralgic  pains  in  various  parts  of

body ;  in  r.  thumb,  then  in  forefinger,  then  in  r.  temple,

next  in  1.,  then  in  r.  shoulder  and  arm,  and  again  in  r.

temple ;  some  pain  in  small  of  back,  which  extends  to  r.

hip ;  next  in  r.  wrist,  in  1.  hip,  r.  hand  and  r.  lower  jaw.


257  PALLADIUM.

'^  Rest. Position. Motion. Rest:  sciatica  >.

Lying  quietly :  colic  can  be  borne ;  >  pain  in  pelvis.

Lying  on  1.  side  :  abdominal  symptoms  >.

Must  lie  down  :  headache.

Turning  head  to  left:  pain  in  trapezius  <.

Had  to  keep  thigh  flexed :  pain  in  groin.

Stretching  arm :  sprained  pain  in  it.

Sitting:  pain  in  kidney ;  slight  congestion  in  chest;  back-
ache around  loins ;  in  carriage  very  sleepy.

On  bending  body  forward  while  sitting:  stitches  from
chest  to  shoulders.

Standing:  drawing  in  ovary  <;  weight  in  pelvis  <;
difficult,  weakness  in  womb.

Motion:  drawing  in  ovary  <  ;  sciatica  <.

Exertion:  abdominal  symptoms  <.

Walking:  pain  in  eye,  temple  and  ear;  pain  in  temple
and  arm  ;  pain  around  eyes ;  stitches  in  chest  >  ;  pain
in  hip ;  tension  in  hamstrings ;  very  tired.

Every  step  painful  in  groin.
^•^  Nerves. Ver}^  tired  in  evening.

Heavy  and  tired  in  limbs  in  morning ;  inert  and  unde-
cided.

So  tired  while  walking  in  evening  that  he  reels  on  coming
into  room.
^'  Sleep.  Overpowering  drowsiness  at  3  p.m.,  lasting  nearly
an  hour,  passed  off"  with  a  pain  in  1.  temple  ;  unusually
sleepy  in  evening;  very  much  exhausted  and  indis-
posed to  work,  he  takes  first  chance  to  lie  down.

Could  not  fall  asleep  on  account  of  headache.

Wakeful  until  2  o'clock  in  morning.

Starting  in  sleep  ;  afternoon.

Dreams every night, particularly  towards  morning, of
houses  or  buildings,  beside  which  he  stands,  or  in  which
he  stands  before  a  window,  or  walks  over  wide  stairs
through  many  rooms.
'^  Time. 2  a.  m.  :  pain  in  cardiac  region  ;  wakeful  until.

Morning :  undecided  ;  dull  pain  in  orbit ;  towards,  dreamy

-  headache;  weak  back  ;  itching  on  r.  side  of  face  ;  middle
of  tongue  redder;  bellyache;  stool  thin;  erections;
spasms  in  muscles  of  neck;  pain  in  hip;  tired  in
limbs.

After  7  a.m.  :  pain  in  hip.

8  A.M. :  pain  in  ear.

10  A.M. :  pain  around  eyes.

Forenoon  :  tension  in  temple ;  pain  in  temples  and  vertex  ;
tasteless  eructations;  as  if  abdomen  were  swelling;
pressing  pain  in  cardiac  region  for  several  hours ;  1.  arm
as  if  paralyzed  and  numb.

vol..  VIII. — 17.


PALLADIUM.  258

Noon :  darting  in  head ;  constriction  in  head ;  pain  in
temple  and  arm  ;  peculiar  pain  in  throat ;  pain  in  wrist.

Afternoon :  headache  <  ;  headache  >  ;  pressure  in  epi-
gastrium;  stool;  as  if  catamenia  would  appear,  while
nursing;  pressing  pain  in  cardiac  region;  backache;
starting  in  sleep.

Day  and  night :  diarrhoea.

3  P.M. :  overpowering  drowsiness.

6  P.M. :  spasmodic  pains  and  eructations.

10  P.M. :  stool.

Evening:  extremely  fatigued;  when  walking  in  street
seems  tallerthan  usual;  irritability;  dulness in  occiput;
headache  >  ;  pain  in  1.  eye  ;  dryness  and  itching  of
eyes ;  burning  in  nose ;  itching  in  1.  inguinal  region  ;
itching  pimples  in  whiskers;  nausea;  stool;  no  proper
erection;  pain  in  uterus  and  bladder;  rheumatic  pain
in  shoulder;  sciatica  <;  sleepy,  lazy,  out  of  humor;
itching  all  over  body.

Night: no proper erections; backache around loins;
numbness  of  arm  and  hand;  sciatica  <.
^^  Temperature  and  Weather.  Warmth :  >  colic ;  sciatica  >.

Hot- water  cloths  :  >  colic.

Open  air:  stitches  in  chest  >  from  walking;  lameness  in
arm  >.

Cold :  sciatica  <.

Undressing :  itching  all  over  body.
''*'  Fever. Chilliness :  cold  hands  and  feet,  with  colic,  relieved
by  hot  cloths.

Coldness  of  limbs  with  backache.
"  Attacks,  Periodicity. Repeated several times  an  hour
after  dinner:  peculiar  feeling  of  air:bubbles  in  intes-
tines.

Lasts  three  hours:  weight  in  head.

Every  other  day  :  stool.

Day  after  party:  symptoms  <.
Locality  and  Direction.  Right:  constriction  in  head;
cooling  sensation  in  boundary  of  brain;  fluttering  pain
side  of  head;  in  temple;  pain  in  eye;  in  temple- and
arm;  in  temple,  eye  and  ear;  pustule  under  eyebrow;
pain  behind  tip  of  ear ;  pustule  on  cheek ;  burning  pain
on  cheek  bone;  itching  on  side  of  face;  pimples  back
of  zygoma ;  pain  in  lower  jaw ;  itching  on  upper  lip ;
corner  of  mouth  sore  and  painful ;  pain  as  if  beaten  in
abdomen;  anxious  sensation  in  groin;  swelling  and
induration  of  ovary;  drawing  in  ovarian  region;
stitches  in  breast ;  stitches  in  clavicle ;  stinging  pain  in
chest  and  epigastrium  ;  pimple  in  side  of  neck  ;  itching
below point  of  shoulder blade ; painful drawing in


42


259  PALLADIUM.

shoulder;  stitches  in  shoulder;  sprained  pain  in  shoul-
der joint;  rheumatic  pain  in  shoulder;  tickling  in
shoulder;  pain  in  arm  and  temple;  numbness  of
arm  and  hand  ;  itching  of  elbow  ;  numbness  of  forearm
to  fingers;  jerking  pain  in  wrist  and  metacarpal  bone;
violent  pain  in  hand,  pain  in  thumb;  rheumatic  pain
in  hip;  sprained  pain  in  hip  joint;  sciatica;  itching
inner  side  of  thigh;  painful  tension  in  knee;  pain  in
thumb,  forefinger,  temple,  shoulder,  arm,  hip,  w^rist,
hand ;  spots  like  flea-bites  above  lips.

Left :  darting  in  head  ;  pain  in  temple ;  unpleasant  sensa-
tion in  eye;  dull  pain  in  orbit;  pain  in  vertex;  neural-
gia in  head;  itching  in  eyebrow;  pain  around  eye;  dis-
agreeable sensation  around  eye ;  itching  <  on  lid  ;
pimples  above  ear;  itching  in  inguinal  region ;  pimples
back  of  zygoma;  pimples  in  whiskers;  pain  in  lower
jaw ;  itching  on  wing  of  nose ;  upper  and  lower  incisor
sensitive  ;  burning  in  ear ;  pain  in  hypochondrium  ;
stitches  in  abdomen  ;  stitches  in  hip  bone;  lying  on  side,
colic  can  be  borne;  burning  itching  in  groin;  twitches
in  side  of  rectum;  pain  in  region  of  kidney;  pressing
pain  in  chest ;  spasms  in  side  of  neck  ;  drawing  down
arm  ;  pain  in  trapezius ;  drawing  in  arm  ;  arm  as  if  par-
alyzed and  numb ;  arm  as  if  it  WQuld  go  to  sleep ;  itching
in  arm  ;  drawing  pain  in  forearm  ;  violent  pain  in  hand  ;
stinging  pain  in  bones  of  little  finger;  dull,  gnawing
pain  in  hip ;  pain  in  hip  joint ;  rheumatic  pain  in  low^er
limb;  pain  above  knee,  tension  in  calf;  itching  on
ankle ;  spots  like  flea-bites  on  nostril.

First  r.  then  1. :  pain  in  temple.

First  1.  then  r. :  pain  around  eyes;  itching  on  face;
stitches  in  hip  bone;  stitches  in  fingers.

Downward  and  forward :  drawing  in  ovary.

From  behind  forward:  as  if  head  were  swung.
*^  Sensations. The  pains  are  fleeting  and  transient  and  hard

As  if  he  had  grown  taller ;  as  if  something  horrible  would
happen  ;  as  if  she  were  going  crazy  ;  as  if  she  could  not
bear  or  brook  anything ;  as  if  head  were  swung  from  be-
hind forward;  as  if  brain  were  being  shaken;  as  if  a
weight  were  lying  in  brain  and  as  if  this  load  were
pushed  from  direction  of  occiput  to  forehead ;  pressure
on  head  as  from  finger  tips ;  as  if  incisors  were  elon-
gated and  projecting;  as  if  1.  incisors  were  foreign
bodies;  as  if  something  were  hanging  in  neighborhood
of  hyoid  bone,  or  as  if  a  bread-crumb  had  lodged  there  ;
as  if  intestines  were  strangulated  and  twisted;  as  if  air
bubbles  pressed  forcibly  through  intestines  and  passed


PALLADIUM.  260

upward ;  as  if  an  animal  were  snapping  and  tearing  off
small  portions  inside  of  abdomen;  sensation  in  flanks
as  if  viscera  were  gone ;  as  if  abdomen  were  beaten  ;  as  if
abdomen  were  swelling;  as  if  testicles  were  bruised;  as
if  parts  of  groin  would  tear;  as  if  bladder  were  filled ;
as  if  uterus  would  prolapse;  as  if  catamenia  would  ap-
pear ;  as  if  something  were  pushed  into  head  during
expiration;  as  if  neck  were  becoming  stiff;  as  if  solid
object  were  slowly  pressing  against  vertebral  column;
as  of  fleas  crawling  on  back ;  anterior  portion  of  r.
shoulder  joint  as  if  sprained  ;  1.  arm  as  if  paralyzed ;  as
if  1.  arm  would  go  to  sleep;  r.  hand  as  if  shattered;  as
if  heads  of  femurs  were  forced  out  of  their  sockets  and
expanded  ;  r.  hip  as  if  sprained ;  as  if  a  flea  were  biting
above  knee.

Pain :  first  in  r.  then  in  1.  temple,  then  in  shoulder  and
then  back  to  temple;  in  r.  eye;  in  ear;  in  arm;  from
eye  to  forehead  and  vertex ;  to  1.  of  vertex ;  around  1.
eye  extending  beyond  r.  eyebrow ;  in  head  above  and
behind  tip  of  r.  ear;  in  abdomen;  in  r.  lower  jaw;  in
back  part  of  lower  jaw;  in  liver;  in  1.  hypochondriac
region;  in  region  of  spleen;  in  r.  ovary;  in  region  of
uterus  arid  bladder ;  in  cardiac  region  ;  in  1.  trapezius ;
in  back  and  hips;  in  heart;  in  r.  wrist  to  forearm;  in
r.  thumb,  then  in  forefinger,  then  in  temple;  above  1.
knee,  thence  into  chest.

Severe  acute  pain :  in  1.  side  of  head.

Violent  pain  :  in  r.  hand.

Violent  knifelike  pains:  in  lower  part  of  abdomen;  in
uterine  region.

Violent  pain,  like  stinging  with  a  dull  stick :  in  r.  chest.

Cutting :  in  abdomen.

Tearing  pains :  in  legs.

Shooting  pains :  from  navel  to  pelvis.

Darting:  to  and  fro  in  1.  side  of  head;  from  toes  to  hips;
from  trochanter  to  hollow  of  knee.

Jerking  pain :  in  r.  wrist  and  metacarpal  bones ;  in  1.  hip
joint.

Spasmodic  pains:  in  chest,  back  and  abdomen;  in  back.

Severe,  almost  stinging  pain :  in  metacarpal  bones  of  1.
hand.

Stitches:  in  1.  side  of  abdomen;  near  hip  bone;  in
groin;  deep  in  1.  side  through  bladder;  through  ure-
thra to  glans ;  in  r.  breast ;  in  chest ;  in  inner  side  of  r.
clavicle ;  from  middle  chest  to  both  shoulders;  in  r.  side
of  chest;  quick  as  lightning  in  r.  shoulder;  in  fingers;
in  legs.

Transient  pain  :  in  lower  intestines.


261  PALLADIUM.

Small  stings  :  above  knee.

Sudden  boring,  stinging  pain  :  in  metacarpal  bone  of  little

finger  of  1.  hand.
Boring:  inside  in  r.  hand.
Violent  cramp  :  in  abdomen.
Cramps:  in  legs.

Painful  spasm :  in  single  muscles  on  r.  side  of  neck.
Neuralgic  pains  :  in  various  parts  of  body.
Rheumatic  pains:  in  different  parts ;  in  r.  shoulder;  in  r.

hip ;  in  1.  lower  limb.
Aching:  across  top  of  head  from  one  ear  to  the  other;  along

edge  of  lower  ribs ;  in  belly ;  in  region  of  bladder ;  in

hip.
Dull  gnawing  pain  :  in  1.  hip.
Dull  pressing  backache.
Dull  pain:  in  1.  orbit;  in  1.  eye  and  back  of  orbit;  in

rectum.
Painful  dulness :  in  head.
Dreamy  headache:  in  vertex  and  occiput.
Drawing:  in  r.  ovarian  region;  in  neck  and  shoulders;

in  1.  arm.
Painful  tension  :  in  r.  knee;  in  1.  calf;  in  hamstrings.
Pressing  pain  :  in  epigastrium  ;  in  region  of  1.  kidney ;  in

1.  side  under  ribs;  in  1.  chest;  in  scapula.
Fluttering  pain  :  in  r.  side  of  head.
Fine  pains:  in  epigastrium.
Tension :  in  temple.
Violent  pressure  :  in  vertex.
Pressure:  on  r.  side  of  head;  in  epigastrium  ;  in  abdomen

downward;  in  bladder;  in lower  portion of  scapula

and  spine.
Constricting  sensation :  in  r.  side  of  head ;  in  1.  articula-
tion of  jaw.
Violent  throbbing:  in  body.
Pulsations:  over  wliole  body.
Dull,  crooked  stinging:  in  spot  in  head.
Burning:  in  nose;  on  small  spot  on  r.  cheek  bone;  on

surface  of  tongue ;  on  1.  ear  and  various  places  on  face  ;

inside  in  r.  hand.
Slight  burning:  on  r.  side  of  head.
Soreness :  of  pimples  behind  and  above  1.  ear ;  in  liver ;  in

abdomen;  internally  in  groin.
Sensitiveness :  of  upper  and  lower  1.  incisors.
Painful  weakness :  in  bladder.
Anxious  sensation  :  in  r.  groin.
Disagreeable  sensation  :  around  1.  eye.
Unpleasant  sensation  :  in  sexual  parts.
Tired  feeling :  in  small  of  back.


PALLADIUM.  262

Weakness :  in  region  of  womb.

Fulness :  in  forehead.

Weight :  in  pelvis.

Heaviness:  in  sexual  parts.

Lameness:  inarm.

Dulness:  in  occiput;  in  forehead.

Dryness :  of  eyes ;  of  edges  of  lids ;  of  fauces  and  tongue.

Roughness:  on  forehead.

Numbness :  of  1.  arm  ;  of  r.  forearm  to  fingers.

Tickling:  on  r.  shoulder.

Burning-itching:  on  small  spot  on  r.  side  of  face ;  in  1.  in-
guinal region;  on  spot  on  1.  groin ;  on  eyelids;  below
point  of  shoulder  blade;  on  thighs  and  legs.

Crawling:  in  abdomen;  on  back;  in  arm  ;  on  thigh  and
leg ;  on  ankles.

Itching:  on  forehead;  on  sides  of  head  ;  violent,  on  1.  eye-
brow ;  of  eyes ;  of  lids ;  in  face ;  of  pimples  on  face,  nose
and  behind  ears;  in  w^hiskers;  on  upper  lip  and  wing
of  nose ;  violent,  in  back  of  neck  near  point  of  shoulder
blade ;  in  1.  arm  and  r.  elbow ;  on  inner  side  of  r.  thigh  ;
on  1.  ankle ;  above  1.  zygoma.

Cooling  sensation  :  on  r.  side  of  head.

Coldness:  of  limbs.
^^  Touch. Passive  Motion. Injuries. Touch :  on  "cautious-
ness" >  headache;  pustule  under  eyebrow  burns  and
bites.

Pressure:  flanks  painful;  >  pain  in  kidney.

Rubbing:  does  not  relieve  itching  of  eyes;  necessar}'^  on
burning  spot  on  r.  cheek  bone;  >  pain  in  ovary.
*^  Skin. Crawling  as  from  fleas  and  itching  on  various  places
on back, arms, abdomen, thighs  and ankles;  >  by
scratching,  but  soon  appears  in  a  place  near  the  spot.

Tickling  on  r.  shoulder,  then  itching  on  inner  side  of  1.
ankle,  on  inner  side  of  r.  thigh,  on  r.  elbow,  and  more
on  back  of  neck,  on  1.  eyebrow  and  arm.

Itching:  above  1.  zygoma,  around  eyes  and  nostrils,  later
also  on  1.  side  of  face,  near  eyes  and  on  side  of  head.

Burning  itching:  on  face  and  1.  groin  ;  on  eyelids;  pim-
ples on  face ;  on  neck ;  below  point  of  shoulder  blade ;
on  thighs  and  legs.

Spots  like  flea-bites,  above  lips  on  r.  side,  on  1.  nostril  and
on  various  other  places  on  head  and  body;  afternoon.

Small  elevations  here  and  there  like  nettlerash,  red  on  a
.  white  base,  whiter  than  surrounding  skin.

Small  pimples  here  and  there,  with  terrible  itching  all
over  body  when  undressing  in  evening.

Vesicles  on  lids.

Pimples :  beneath  ej'ebrows ;  near  wing  of  nose ;  above  tip


263  PALLADIUM— PAREIRA  BRAVA.

of  nose; on zygoma;  in  whiskers; behind ear; on

nether  lip  ;  on  neck.
*'  Stages  of  Life,  Constitution. A  girl,  £et.  20,  robust,  bloom-
ing, intelligent ;  ovaritis  and  leucorrhoea.
A  married  woman  ;  ovaritis  with  mental  disturbance.

Mrs. ,  set.  30,  mother  of  two  children  ;  chronic  ovaritis.

Mrs.  W.,  set.  30,  not  pregnant  in  seven  years ;  ovaritis,  with

leucorrhoea  and  dyspepsia.
*^  Relations. Antidoted  by : Cinchon.  (diarrhoea) ;  Bellad.  and

Glonoine  (headache). .
Complementary :  Plat.
Compare:  Argent,  met.  and  Lack.  (1.  ovary) ;  Podophyl.  and

Plat.  (r.  ovary);  Helon.  (tired  backache);  Lil.  tig.  (sexual

desire).


PAREIRA  BRAVA.

Virgin Vine.  Menispermaceae.

A  climbing  plant,  native  of  the  West  Indies  and  South  America.

The  tincture  is  pi-epared  €rom  the  fresh  root.

Proving  by  Foss,  Med.  Adv.,  Dec.,  1885,  from  A.  H.  Z.,  vol.  113,  p.  71.

Clinical  Authorities. — Renal  colic  (six  cases),  Turrel,  Hah.  Mo.,  vol.  10,  p.
442 ;  B.  J.  H.,  vol.  33,  p.  591 ;  Di/nuria,  Martin,  T.  H.  M.  S.  Pa.,  1883,  p.  58 ;
Enlargement  of  prostate  gland  and  retention  of  urine,  Fops,  A.  H.  Z.,  ■vol.  113,  p.  70;
Catarrh  of  bladder,  Hull,  N.  A.  J.  H.,  vol.  18,  p.  491 ;  Hastings,  B.  J.  H.,  vol.
13,  p.  691.

^^  Urinary  Organs.  ■  Excruciating  pains  in  1.  lumbar  region;
pain  radiates  from  1.  kidney  to  groin,  following  course
of  ureter. ^Renal  colic.

I  Black,  bloody,  foaming  urine,  depositing  a  brickdust
sediment  of  uric  acid;  deep  red  and  mucous  urine.

I  1  Excessive  pains  in  kidneys,  shooting  down  1.  ureter;
passes  urine  drop  by  drop,  with  violent  tenesmus,  nau-
sea and  vomiting  of  bilious  fluids. ^Nephritic  colic.

I  I  Nephritic  colic ;  patient  suffering  for  seventeen  days ;
attacks  first  appeared  a  year  ago,  come  regularly  now
every  three  months,  last  longer  and  are  more  violent
each  time;  several  times  passed  uric  calculi,  and  suf-
fered from  rheumatic  attacks  when  traveling;  dull
pains  in  lumbar  region;  urine  scanty,  red,  with  brick-
dust  sediment;  dysuria;  thirst;  obstinate  constipation.


PAREIRA  BRAVA.  264

iContusive  pains  in  renal  region;  urine  scanty,  deep  red,
nearly  black,  passed  with  great  tenesmus,  depositing
brickdust  sediment.  *

■  Nephritic  colic  with  hemorrhage  of  ureters  provoked  by

passage  of  stones.

■  For last  ten years  nephritic  colics;  passes  frequently

small  crystals  of  uric  acid ;  attacks  usually  severe  and

obstinate.
Atrocious  pains  with  strangury.
Almost  touches  floor  with  forehead  in  order  to  be  able  to

pass  urine.

■  ■Constant  urging  to  urinate,  violent  pain  in  glans  penis;

straining;  pain  extorts  screams;  must  get  down  on  all
fours  to  urinate ;  urine  contains  much  viscid,  thick,
white  mucus,  or  deposits  red  sand.

■  Pains  down  thighs  during  efforts  at  urination.

■  Paroxysms  of  violent  pain  with  strangury  ;  he  cries  out

loudly  and  can  only  emit  urine  when  he  goes  on  his
knees,  pressing  his  head  firmly  against  floor;  remain-
ing in  this  position  for  ten  or  twenty  minutes,  perspira-
tion breaks  out,  and  finally  urine  begins  to  drop  with
interruptions,  accompanied  by  tearing,  burning  pains
at  point  of  penis.

■  Since  confinement,  two  weeks  previously,  could  not  pass

urine  in  any  position  except  on  knees. ^Dysuria.

Tormenting  feeling  after  urination,  with  shooting  pains
in  orifice  of  urethra.

Intolerable  itching  along  urethra,  with  burning  on  urin-
ation.

Severe  spasmodic  pains  while  urinating.

I  I  Constant  ineffectual  urging  to  urinate;  catheter  had  to
be  used  four  to  six  times  in  twenty-four  hours ;  swell-
ing of  legs  and  feet;  cramps  on  attempting  to  urinate,
patient  had  to  be  put  into  a  warm  bath  before  catheter
could  be  used;  his  last  hour  seemed  to  be  approaching
when  found  kneeling  upon  floor  bathed  in  a  cold  sweat,
head  firmly  pressed  against  floor,  in  which  position
alone  he  was  enabled  to  pass  a  few  drops  of  burning
hot  urine. ^Enlargement  of  prostate  gland.

I  Enlargement  of  prostate  gland  with  retention  of  urine;
two  or  three  times  a  year  patient  is  seized  with  severe
and  painful  attacks,  during  which  catheter  had  to  be
used  for  several  weeks.

I  I  Severe  pains  at  times  in  back  and  bladder  with  painful
retraction  of  1.  testicle;  pain  in  thigh  extending  down
to  big  toe  and  sole  of  foot ;  frequently  an  irritable  erup-
tion on  legs  and  great  irritation  on  scalp;  urine  passed
with  great  difficulty  ;  feels  a  great  desire  to  urinate.


265  PAREIRA  BRAVA.

fancies  quarts  will  come  away,  but  finds  the  greatest
difficulty  to  get  any  to  pass,  notwithstanding  the  severe
pressive  pains  attending  it ;  pains  so  severe  that  he  is
obliged  to  get  on  knees,  press  head  firmly  against  some-
thing and  remain  in  that  position,  forcing  until  he
sweats  profusely  and  "roars  like  a  bull,"  to  use  his  own
expression ;  after  remaining  in  this  situation  ten  or
twenty  minutes,  urine  dribbles  away  with  great  pain
and  frequent  stoppages,  scalding  and  lacerating  at
point  of  penis;  urine  has  strong  ammoniacal  smell,
and  is  loaded  with  thick,  tenacious  mucus;  paroxysms
generally  occur  from  3  to  6  a.m.;  during  day  compara-
tively easy;  cartilaginous  condition  of  inner  coat  of
bladder  which  felt  very  hard  to  the  sound ;  sweats
at  night;  hammering  and  buzzing  noises  in  head.
^Chronic  catarrh  of  bladder.

Flow  of  mucus  from  urethra.
^^  Male  Sexual  Organs. Urethritis  with  prostatic  disorders.

I  Gonorrhoea.
"  Voice  and  Larynx. Trachea  and  Bronchia. ■  Viscous

matter  lodged  in  and  obstructing  bronchi.
^'^  Lower  Limbs. Qi^dematous  swelling  of  lower  limbs.
'^  Rest. Position. Motion. Must  get  down  on  all  fours  to
urinate.

Must  get  on  knees  and  press  head  firmly  against  floor  to
urinate.
*^  Attacks,  Periodicity. For  ten  or  twenty  minutes :  must
remain  on  all  fours  to  urinate.

Every  morning  from  3  to  6 :  paroxysms  of  pain  during
urination.

Every  three  months  :  attacks  of  nephritic  colic.

Two  or  three  times  a  year  :  painful  attacks  of  renal  colic.

For  last  ten  years :  nephritic  colics.
"Locality  and  Direction. Left: pain  in  lumbar  region

radiating  from  kidney  to  groin,  pain  down  ureter.
"  Sensations. Pains  :  down  thighs.

Excruciating  pains  :  in  1.  lumbar  region  ;  in  kidneys.

Violent  pains  :  in  glans  penis  ;  in  bladder;  in  back.

Severe  spasmodic  pains:  while  urinating.

Tearing,  burning  pains  :  at  point  of  penis.

Shooting  pain : down  1.  ureter  into  toes  and  soles.

Contusive  pain :  in  renal  region.

Dull  pains :  in  lumbar  region.
*''  Stages  of  Life,  Constitution. Rheumatic  or  gouty  sub-
jects suffering  from  renal  colics.

Man,  set.  50,  suffers  from  rheumatic  attacks  when  travel-
ing; renal  colic.

Madame  Beretta,  set.  51,  two  years  ago menopause  set  in,
since  then  suffering;  nephritic  colic.


PAREIRA  BRAVA— PARIS  QUADRIFOLIA.  266

Officer  of  navy,  set.  57,  six  months  ago  had  first  attack,
which  confined  him  to  bed  eight  or  nine  days;  renal
colic.

Marine  officer,  set.  58,  suffering  for  last  ten  years ;  ne-
phritic colic.

Man,  set.  60,  temperate  habits ;  catarrh  of  bladder.

Man,  set.  68,  regular  and  temperate  all  his  life,  never  had
syphilis  or  gonorrhoea,  no  profession  or  trade,  suffering
for  years;  catarrh  of  bladder.

Man,  set.  68,  suffering  many  years;  enlargement  of  pros-
tate gland.

Mrs.  P.,  primipara,  confined  two  weeks  ago,  since  then
suffering;  dysuria.

Mrs.  M.,  suffering  from  marasmus  for  last  ten  years  or
since  her  climaxis,  when  she  had  an  attack  of  album-
nous  nephritis,  three  years  ago  had  pneumonia ;  now
suffers  from  parenchymatous  nephritis  ;  renal  colic.

Seafaring  captain,  suffering  for  years  from  rheumatism-
and  later  from  endocarditis  ;  renal  colic.
*^  Relations.  Compare:  Chimaphila  and  Uva  ursi  in  spasm
and  burning  in  bladder,  ropy  urine;  Hydrangea  arb.;
Berberis,  which  has  pains  more  in  back  and  hips,  and
has  a  loamy  sediment.


PARIS  QUADRIFOLIA.

One  Berry ;  True  Love,  Herb  Paris.  Smilacese.

Introduced  by  Stapf;  see  Archives,  vol.  8,  p.  177.

The  provers  were  Hahnemann,  Gross,  Hartm;inn,  Langhammer,  Stapf,  Teut-
horn,  Hering,  Bethmann,  Hartlaub,  Etickert,  Nenning,  Gesner  and  Berridge.

Clinical  Authorities.— fieadac^e,  Dunham,  Raue's  Eec,  1870,  p.  288  ;  Swell-
ing on  gum,  Lippe,,  MSS. ;  Sore  throat  and  wjtammadon  of  eyes,  Hering,  MSS. ;
Dlarrhcea,  Hering,  MSS.  ;  Atony  of  uterus,  Farrington,  Hah.  Mo.,  vol.  14,  p.  8  ;
Irritation  of  meninges  in  cervical  portion,  Terry,  vol.  2o,  p.  309  ;  Affection  of  cerebro-
spinal nerves,  Drysdale,  B.  J.  H.,  vol.  1,  p.  359  ;  Spinal  irritation,  Martin,  Horn.  CI.,
vol.  2,  p.  228  ;  Cramps,  Kitchen,  Horn.  CI.,  vol.  4,  p.  44 ;  Catarrhal  complaints,
iVIartin,  Horn.  CI.,  vol.  2,  p.  228.

*  Mind.  I  I  Loquacious  mania ;  garrulity ;  a  sort  of  vivacity
with  love  of  prattling;  jumping,  with  a  good  deal  of
self-complacency,  from  one  subject  to  another,  merely
for  the  sake  of  talking.


267  PARIS  QUADRIFOLIA.

Silly  conduct ;  inclination  to  treat  others  with  rudeness

and  contempt.
Indisposition  to  any  mental  labor.

■  Thinking  aggravates  pains  in  head  ;  exertion  of  mind  or
memory  causes  severe  pain  in  occiput  and  faintlike
weakness.  . .

^  Sensorium. Vertigo  after  loud  reading  or  when  sittmg,

with  difficult  speech  and  dim  eyes.
*  Inner  Head. Dulness  of  forehead,  with  headache.  _

I  Constrictive  pressure  in  forehead  and  temples,  brain,  eyes
and  skin  feel  tense  and  bones  scraped  ;  <  from  motion,
excitement  or  using  eyes.

Pains  as  if  membranes  of  brain  itself  were  tense,  with
tense  feeling  in  region  of  eye,  as  if  skin  were  thick  and
could  not  be  drawn  into  wrinkles.

I  In  evening  everything  was  worse ;  pain  in  forehead  in-
volved whole  occiput;  it  seemed  as  if  scalp  were  con-
tracted and  bone  scraped  sore ;  margins  of  lid  were
red  and  hot;  it  seemed  as  if  a  thread  were  tightly
drawn  through  eye  to  middle  of  head,  which  was  very
painful.

Tension  in  brain  and  in  forehead.

iPressive  pain  in  r.  temporal  region,  >  from  pressure  of
hand.

Feeling  of  distension,  as  if  head  would  swell  up  and
temples  and  eyes  were  pressed  out.

■  Head  as  if  distended,  too  large;  feels  like  a  bushel  and
as  if  the  walls  were  thin.

Piercing  and  single  stitches  in  head.

■Sticking  pain  in  middle  of  head  and  in  temples ;  after-
wards a  heavy  pressure  upon  forehead,  especially  on
stooping.

I  I  Severe  pains  in  occiput  from  mental  exertion,  after
a  blow.

I  Headache  of  spinal  origin,  which  arises  from  nape  of
neck  and  produces  a  feeling  as  if  head  were  im-
mensel}^  large.

I  Chronic  headache  for  thirteen  years._

I  Headache  aggravated  by  close  thinking.

Headache  from  smoking  tobacco.

I  Acute  congestion  to  brain.
^  Outer  Head. iScalp  sensitive  to  touch ;  sore  pain  in  small
spots  on  forehead.

I  I  Very  sore,  painful  spot,  only  when  touched,  on  1.  parietal
bone.

Sensitiveness  of  vertex  to  contact.
'Sight  and  Eyes. Weak sight,  < from  excitement and
using  eyes.


PARIS  QUADRIFOLIA.  268

Wandering,  unsteady  looks.

I  I  Paralysis  of  iris  and  ciliary  muscle  supposed  to  be  due
to  an  injury  received  two  years  previous  ;  pain  drawing
from  eye  to  back  of  head,  where  there  was  a  sore  spot,
even  pressure  with  finger  would  cause  her  to  cry  out ;
man}^  black,  floating  specks  before  vision.

I  Pain  in  eyes,  as  if  pulled  into  head.

I  I  Double  vision.

I  I  Feeling  of  contraction  in  internal  canthi.

Eyeballs  pain  on  slighest  attempt  at  motion.

I  Stitches  through  middle  of  eye.

I I  Eyes  feel  as  if  too  large,  they  seem  to  have  no  room  in
sockets ;  as  if  lids  could  not  close.

1 1  Eyes  feel  as  if  projecting,  with  a  sensation  as  if  a
thread  were  tightly  drawn  through  eyeball  and  back-
ward into  middle  of  brain  ;  sight  weak.

I  I  Eyes  feel  heavy  as  lead.

Fetid,  ulcerlike  smell  from  eyes.

I  i  Jerking  and  twitching  of  r,  upper  lid.
^  Hearing  and  Ears. '  '  Ringing  in  1.  ear.

Sudden  pain  in  ear  as  if  forced  apart  by  a  wedge,  or  as  if
ear  were  pressed  out  or  torn  out ;  as  if  a  burning  heat
were  rushing  out  of  ears.

I  Pains  in  ears  on  swallowing.
"  Smell  and  Nose. Great  sensitiveness  to  offensive  odors ;
imaginary foul smells; milk and bread smell like
putrid  meat.

I  I  Stopped  coryza.

■  Catarrhal  complaints,  with  stuffed  condition  and  fulness

at  root  of  nose ;  tongue  and  fauces  dry  on  waking,  but
no  thirst ;  constant  hawking  of  tenacious,  white,  taste-
less mucus.
I  I  Alternation  of  fluent  and  stopped  coryza.
I  I  Discharge  of  red  or  greenish  mucus  on  blowing  nose.
^  Upper  Face. Pimples  on  forehead,  under  nose  and  on  chin.

Hot  stitches  in  1.  malar  bone,  painful  when  touched.
^  Lower  Face. Violent  itching,  biting  and  burning  on  edges
of  lower  jaw,  frequently  with  red,  small,  easily-bleeding
(miliary)  eruption.
I  Herpes  around  mouth,  on  lips;  lips  swollen.
Vesicles  on  surface  of  lower  lip.
'"^  Teeth and Gums, ii  Painful  swelling  taking  in  whole

1.  half  of  upper  gum. ^Scarlet  fever.
"Taste  and  Tongue. I Great  dryness  of  tongue  on awak-
ing; tongue  feels  too  large.

■  Tongue white, with roughness; no thirst; bitter or

lessened  taste.
^^  Inner  Mouth. Swelling,  painfulness and  peeling  off of
roof  of  mouth.


269  PARIS  QUADRIFOLIA.

I  I  Tense,  almost  painless  swelling,  size  of  a  pigeon's  egg,
on  roof  of  mouth. ^Scarlatina.

■  Dryness  of  mouth  when  awaking,  without  thirst.

White,  frothy  mucus  in  corners  of  mouth  in  morning.

Collection  of  water  in  mouth ;  tart  saliva.
^'  Throat. '  l  Hawking  caused  by  accumulation  of  mucus  in
fauces.

Burning,  stinging  and  scraping  in  throat.

I  Burning  in  throat  when  eating  or  drinking.

I  I  Sore  throat  in  choanse  and  fauces  extending  downward,
pain  when  talking  or  swallowing,  as  if  a  ball  were
lodged  in  it,  or  as  if  throat  were  constricted,  causing
much  anxiety;  pain  extends  to  ears;  hoarseness,  with
burning  in  throat,  particularly  when  eating  or  drink-
ing ;  at  the  beginning  much  thirst ;  sore  throat  alter-
nates with  inflammation  of  eyes.
^^ Eating  and  Drinking.  Hunger  soon  after  meal.
'®  Hiccough,  Belching,  Nausea  and  Vomiting,  i  i  Hic-
cough ;  after  eating.

I  Painful  eructation.
^^  Scrobiculum and  Stomach. Heaviness  in  stomach  as
from  a  stone  ;.  >  by  eructation.

Burning  in  stomach,  extending  into  lower  abdomen.

I  Cramp  in  stomach.

Weak,  slow  digestion.
'^  Abdomen. Rumbling  and  rolling  in  abdomen.

I  Pain  or  weakness  through  abdomen  during  diarrhoeic
stool.

iColic.

Red  curved  streak  above  umbilicus.
^^  Stool  and  Rectum. Frequent  soft  stools.

Diarrhoeic  stools,  smell  like  putrid  meat.
^'Urinary  Organs. Frequent  micturition,  with  burning.

Urine :  dark  red,  with  red  sediment  and  a  greasy  looking
pellicle  on  surface;  acrid,  excoriating;  containing  a
thick,  red,  fleshy  substance.

Burning  and  stinging  in  urethra.

I  I  Violent  burning  in  orifice  of  urethra,  while  sitting.

I  I  Fine  stitches  in  forepart  of  urethra.
^'Pregnancy.  Parturition.  Lactation.  1 1 Intense  after-
pains  but  very  imperfect  contractions;  suppression  of
lochia,  for  forty-eight  hours,  with  ineffectual  urging  to
stool ;  weak  and  feverish ;  agonizing  headache,  with
sensation  as  though  face  were  drawn  to  root  of  nose,
then  backward  towards  occiput  as  if  by  a  string,  eye-
balls sore  and  pained  on  slightest  attempt  at  motion.
^^  Voice  and  Larynx.  Trachea  and  Bronchia.  1 1  Parox-
ysms of  hoarseness  every  quarter  or  half  hour,  so
violent  that  he  is  unable  to  utter  a  loud  word.


PARIS  QUADRIFOLIA.  270

I  Periodical  painless  hoarseness.

I  Hoarseness,  voice  feeble,  continuous  hawking  of  mucus,
and  burning  in  larynx.

■  Great  hoarseness. ^Sore  throat.

I  I  Burning  in  larynx. ^Bronchitis.

I  I  Trachea  and  mouth  completely  dried  up,  in  morning,

on  waking,  with  some  hoarseness.
I  I  Frequent hacking,  he  endeavors to loosen  tenacious

mucus  that seems  to  be  firmly  adherent  to  posterior

part  of  larynx.  (

■  Green,  tenacious  expectoration,  <  in  morning. ^Laryn-

geal affection.

^^  Respiration. Oppression  of  chest,  with  desire  to  draw  a
long  breath.

*^  Cough.  ■  Cough  :  as  from  vapor  of  sulphur  in  trachea,  or
viscid  phlegm  in  larynx;  commences  as  soon  as  he
turns  upon  1.  side ;  with  expectoration  of  viscid  mucus,
difficult  to  raise  in  morning  and  evening  on  lying
down.
Constant  hawking  and  gagging,  on  account  of  viscid,
green  mucus  in  larynx  and  trachea.

^^  Inner  Chest  and  Lungs. Stitches  in  chest.

^^  Heart,  Pulse  and Circulation. 1 1  Palpitation  of  heart
during  rest  or  motion.
Pulse  full  but  slow.

^'Neck  and  Back. iNape  of  neck  weary,  as  from  a  heavy
load ;  neck  feels  stiff  and  swollen  if  turned  around,
I  Dull  pain  in  nape  of  neck,  increasing  at  times  in  acute-
ness,  with  numbness,  heat  and  weight ; > from  rest
and  in  open  air ;  <  from  exertion.
I  I  Violent  pains  on  both  sides  of  neck,  extending  down  to
fingers, especially 1. side, < from  mental exertion.
^Neuralgia.
Heat  extending  from  neck  down  back.
Stitches  between  scapulae,  and  pulsating  stitch  in  os  coc-

cygis  when  sitting.
I  I  Dull  pain  in  nape  of  neck;  sometimes  it  increases
until  it  becomes  acute,  with  sensation  of  numbness,
heat  and  heaviness  like  a  weight;  pain  located  about
sixth  cervical  vertebra  and  extends  upward  and  down
to  shoulders;  always  with  a  feeling  of  aching,  numb-
ness, heat  and  weight;  eyelids  feel  heavy  also,  some-
times as  if  he  could  not  open  eyes  ;  soreness  on  top  of
head,  can  scarcely  use  hair-brush ;  pain  in  neck  <
in  afternoon  about  2  or  3  o'clock,  >  by  rest  and  out  of
doors ;  <  when  working  or  getting  tired  w'hen  walking ;
pain  in  pit  of  stomach,  about  midnight,  with  bloating
and  eructation  of  flatus ;  food  feels  heavy  after  eating,


271  PARIS  QUADRTFOLIA.

particularly  in  evening,  during  and  after  tea ;  appetite
poor ;  bowels  regular. ^Irritation  of  meninges  in  cer-
vical portion.
II  Pain  in  1.  side  of  neck  and  shoulder,  soon  extending
over  whole  side  and  rendering  arm  quite  powerless ;
violent  pain  exacerbated  at  intervals  on  both  sides  of
' neck,  but  chiefly  on  1.  side,  extending  along  sterno-
cleido-mastoid  niuscles  to  shoulders  and  to  1.  arm  down
to  fingers  and  in  r.  to  elbow ;  moving  hand  or  grasping
anything  excites  pain  in  occiput  and  nape  of  neck ;
feeling  as  of  a  great  weight  on  nape  of  neck  and  shoul-
ders ;  any  exertion  of  memory  or  intellect  causes  violent
pain  in  occiput  and  faintness ;  sleep  difficult  and  dis-
turbed by  frightful  dreams;  on  waking  feels  wearied
and  pained  all  over;  completely  disabled  from  mental
or  bodily  exertion,  and  harm  quite  powerless;  numb-
ness and  pricking  in  hand  ;  disorder  of  sense  of  touch,
so  that  everything  felt  rough. ^Affection  of  cerebro-
spinal nerves.
^^  Upper  Limbs. '  '  Left  arm  feels  stiff,  and  fingers  contracted.
I  I  Numbness  and  pricking  in  1.  hand. 6'Spinal  affection.
■  Fingers  often  feel  as  if  asleep  ;  objects  rough  to  touch.
^^  Lower  Limbs. iLeft  leg  lame  with  spinal  irritation.
Laming  pain  in  feet.
Cold  feet  at  night  in  bed.
^'  Limbs  in  GeneraL Stinging  pains  in  limbs.

All  joints  painful  on  motion.
^^  Rest. Position. Motion. Rest :  palpitation ;  dull  pain  in
neck  >.
Lying  down  :  mucus  difficult  to  raise.
Sitting :  vertigo ; violent  burning  in  orifice  of  urethra ;

stitches  in  os  coc'cygis.
Stooping:  pressure  upon  forehead  <.
Motion  :  pressure  in  forehead  <  ;  of  eyeball  causes  pain  ;
palpitation ;  of  hand  excites  pain  in  occiput ;  all  joints
painful.
Turning  neck  around :  feels  stiff  and  swollen.
Getting  tired  when  walking :  pain  in  nape  of  neck.
^®  Nerves, l  l  Violent  cramp  in  morning,  commencing  in  1.
lower  ribs,  extending  to  1.  arm,  making  arm  stiff";  fingers
clenched  so  that  finger  nails  left  impressions  in  flesh  ;
complete  unconsciousness ; severe  pressure  as  from a
weight  in  back  of  neck ;  attack  every  few  days.
^^  Sleep. Restless,  broken  sleep  with  many  dreams.
'^  Time. Morning :  white  frothy  mucus  in  corners  of  mouth  ;
trachea and  mouth completely dried up; tenacious
expectoration <; mucus difficult to raise; violent
cramp;  sweat.


PARIS  QUADRIFOLIA.  272

Afternoon :  pain  in  neck  <  about  2  or  3  o'clock.

Evening :  mucus  difficult  to  raise ;  food  feels  heavy ;  chilli-
ness; all  symptoms  <,

Night:  cold  feet.

Midnight :  pain  in  pit  of  stomach.
^^  Temperature and Weather. Open  air : dull  pain  in

neck  >.
^^  Fever. Chilliness : mostly  towards  evening,  with  internal
trembling ; in  chest,  abdomen  and  lower  limbs,  with
gooseflesh  and  yawning,  and  icy  cold  feet.

Internal  coldness  as  if  parts  were  contracted  by  cold  and
were  trembling.

Coldness  of  r.  half  of  body.

Small  icy  cold  spots  here  and  there  in  skin.

During  chill  contractive  sensation  in  skin  and  in  all  parts
of  body.

Fingers  are  alternately  hot  and  cold,  as  if  dead,  and  of  a
dead  color.

Heat : descending  back  from  neck ;  with  sweat  of  upper
body.

Sweat  in  morning  when  waking,  attended  with  biting
itching.
*'  Attacks,  Periodicity. Alternately : sore  throat  and  sore
eyes;  fingers  hot  and  cold.

Periodical  painless  hoarseness.

Every  quarter  or  half  an  hour :  hoarseness.

For  fortj^-eight  hours:  entire  suppression  of  lochia.

Every  few  days :  attacks  of  cramp.

For  thirteen  years:  headache.
"  Locality  and  Direction. Right :  pressive  pain  in  temporal
region ;  half  of  body  cold.

Left:  parietal  bone  painful  to  touch;  ringing  in  ear;  hot
stitches  in  malar  bone;  painful  swelling  in  upper  gum  ;
when  turning  upon  side,  cough ;  pain  in  side  of  neck
and  shoulder  extending  over  side  and  arm  ;  arm  power-
less; arm  stiff;  numbness  and  pricking  in  hand;  leg
lame ;  cramp  in  lower  ribs.
^^  Sensations.  As  if  scalp  were  contracted  and  bones  scraped
sore;  as  if  a  thread  were  tightly  drawn  through  eye  to
middle  of  head  ;  as  if  head  would  swell  up  and  temples
and  eyes  were  pressed  out ;  head  as  if  distended ;  as  if
head  were  a  bushel  and  walls  were  too  thin ;  eyes  as  if
pulled  into  head;  eyes  as  if  too  large;  as  if  lids  would
not  close ;  e3^es  as  if  projecting ;  as  if  thread  were  drawn
through  eyeball ;  ear  as  if  forced  apart  by  a  wedge,  or
as  if  ear  were  pressed  out  or  torn  out ;  as  if  a  burning
heat  were  rushing  out  of  ears;  tongue  as  if  too  large;
as  if  ball  were  lodged  in  throat ; as  if  throat  were  con-


273  PARIS  QUADRIFOLIA.

stricted ;  as  of  a  stone  in  stomach;  in  abdomen  as
though  face  were  drawn  to  root  of  nose,  then  back-
ward towards  occiput  as  if  by  a  string ;  as  of  a  heavy
load  on  nape  of  neck ;  as  if  he  could  not  open  eyes  ;
fingers  as  if  asleep ;  as  if  internal  parts  were  contracted  ;
as  if  fingers  were  dead ;  as  if  joints  were  broken.

Pain:  in  forehead,  whole  sinciput,  in  eyes; in  ears; in
pit  of  stomach  ;  in  1.  side  of  neck  and  shoulder.

Violent  pains :  on  both  sides  of  neck  down  to  fingers.

Severe  pain  :  in  occiput.

Stitches:  through  middle  of  eye;  in  forepart  of  urethra  ;
in  chest;  between  scapulae  and  os  coccygis.

Hot  stitches:  in  1.  malar  bone.

Piercing,  single  stitches :  in  head.

Stinging  pains  :  in  limbs.

Itching  pain :  in  middle  of  head  and  temples.

Violent  cramp :  in  1.  lower  ribs  to  1.  arm.

Sore  pain  :  in  small  spots  in  forehead.

Laming  pain  :  in  feet.

Dull  pain :  in  nape  of  neck.

Drawing  pain  :  from  eye  to  back  of  heacf.

Pressive  pain :  in  r.  temporal  region.

Cramp :  in  stomach.

Soreness :  in  throat ;  of  eyeballs ;  on  top  of  head.

Burning,  stinging  and  scraping :  in  throat.

Burning:  in  throat;  in  stomach;  in  urethra;  in  orifice  of
urethra ;  in  larynx.

Violent  itching,  burning,  biting: on  edges  of  lower  jaw.

Pricking:  in  hand.

Heat :  in  neck  ;  from  neck  down  back.

Heav}''  pressure :  on  forehead.

Constrictive  pressure  :  in  forehead  to  temples.

Heavy  feeling :  in  eyes.

AVeight :  in  neck.

Feeling  of  contraction :'  in  internal  parts.

Tension:  of  brain,  eyes  and  skin;  in  forehead.

Stiffness :  of  neck  ;  of  fingers.

Oppression:  of  chest.

Numbness  in  neck  :  in  hands.

Dulness :  of  head.

Dryness:  of  tongue  and  fauces;  of  mouth.

Coldness :  of  r.  half  of  body.
^'Tissues. Feels  as  if  all  joints  were  broken,  swelled  or  dis-
located at  every  motion.
"  Touch. Passive Motion. Injuries. i '  Had received
a  violent  blow  on  occiput. ^Spinal  affection.

1 1  Disorder  of  sense  of  touch,  so  that  everything  felt  rough.

^Spinal  afi'ection.
VOL.  vni. — 18.


PARIS  QUADRIFOLIA— PETROLEUM.  274

Touch:  scalp  sensitive;  on  parietal  bone  painful;  vertex

sensitive;  malar  bone  painful.
Pressure: of  hand >; pressure  in  forehead;  of  finger

upon  sore  spot  on  head  causes  cries.
Injury:  caused  paralysis  of  iris.
After  a  blow:  severe  pain  in  occiput.
*®  Skin. Violent  itching ;  subcutaneous  tingling.
Pain  as  of  excoriation.
Felons;  herpes  about  mouth.
"^  Stages  of  Life,  Constitution. Man  set.  38,  has  been  many

years  in  tropical  climates,  had  cholera,  yellow  fever,

dysentery ;  three  years  ago  had  attack  of  violent  pain

in  shoulder,  next  year  similar  attack  ; three  months

ago received violent blow on occiput ; affection of

cerebro-spinal  nerves.
Man, set. 47, married twenty-four years, spare habit,

nervous temperament, suffering over six months ;

irritation  of  meninges  in  cervical  portion.
^*  Relations. Antidoted  by:  Coffea.

Compatible: Calc.  ost.,  Ledum,  Lycop.,  Nux  vom.,  Phosphor.,

Pihus  tax.,  Sepia,  Sulphur.
Incompatible :  Ferr.  phos.
Compare:  Silica.


PETROLEUM.

Rock  or  Coal  Oil.  Anthracite.

Introduced  by  Hahnemann  and  proved  by  himself  and  Froissac,  Chronische
Krankheiten,  vol.  4  ;  Benson,  Trans.  Horn.  Med.  Soc.  N.  Y.  State,  1868,  p.  297  ;
Schelling,  A.  H.  Z.,  vol.  83,  p.  189 ;  Berridge,  N.  A.  J.  H.,  N.  S.,  vol.  2,  p.  51.

Clinical  Authorities. — Mental  disturbance,  Knorre,  Eiick,  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  1,
p.  39  ;  Analyt.  Ther.,  vol.  1,  p.  115  ;  Hnynel,  Analyt.  Ther.,  vol.  1,  p.  292  ;  3Iental
disturbance  after  confinement,  Berridge,  Hom.  CI.,  vol.  4,  p.  109  ;  Vertigo,  Paj'ne,  H.
M.,  vol.  5,  p.  199;  Drake,  H.  M.,  vol.  10,  p.  406;  Headache,  Stens,  Kane's  Kec,
■1872,  p.  215,  from  A.  H.  Z.,  vol.  83,  p.  135;  Miyraine,  Stens,  A.  II.  Z.,  1871,  p.  91,
B.  J.  H.,  vol.  34,  p.  723 ;  Times  Eet.,  1875',  p.  114;  Occipital  headache,  Farrington,
T.  H.  M.  S.  Pa.,  1884,  p.  316;  Eczema  capitis,  Taylor,  H.  M.,  vol.  15,  p.  700  ;
Scrofulous  ophthalmia,  Knorre,  B.  J.  H.,  vol.  6,  p.  611,  from  A.  H.  Z ,  vol.  5,  p.
306;  Fistula  lachrymcdis  (30  cases  reported  cured),  Kirsch,  Eaue's  Rec,  1870,  p.
101 ;  Hardness  of  hearing,  Lobethal,  Hahnemann,  Tietze,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf,  vol.  1,
p.  375  ;  Rheumatic  dysecoia,  Battmann,  Z.  H.  K.,  vol.  0,  IS'o.  15,  from  Times  Eet.,
1876,  p.  68,  B.  J.  H.,  vol.  34,  p.  022 ;  Intertrigo  behind  ears,  Blake,  H.  M.,  vol.  10,
p.  375; Times  Eet.,  1875,  p.  27  ;.€orpa,. Kafka,  Eaue's  Rec,  1870,  p.  129  ; Use


275  .  PETROLEUM.

after  Teplliz  in  erysipelatous  eruption  on  cheek,  Berridge,  H,  M.,  vol.  10,  p.  75 ;
Abscess  at  root  of  tooth,  Berridge,  Horn.  CI.,  vol.  4,  p.  54;  Sore  throat,  II.  M.,  Riick.
Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  1,  p.  638;  Diphtheria,  Sclimitt,  Horn.  Phys.,  vol.  6,  p.  253  ;  Sea-
sickness, Hayes,  Horn.  Rev.,  vol.  13,  p.  265;  (several  cases),  Gilchrist,  Eaue's  Eec,
1871,  p.  113,  from  Med.  Inv.,  vol.  7,  p.  281 ;  Cardialyia,  Meyer,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf.,
vol.  5,  p.  306,  B.  J.  H.,  vol.  18,  p.  268  ;  Reis,  Raue's  Rec,  1870,  p.  207,  from
Hom.  Kl.,  1869,  p.  12;  Atonic  dyspepsia,  Bayes,  Hom.  Rev.,  vol.  13,  p.  266;
Ulcerated  umbilicus  (Kerosene  and  olive  oils),  Searle,  A.  H.  O.,  vol.  6,  p.  225 ;
Diarrhoea,  Kraizell,  Raue's  Rec,  1870,  p.  210,  from  A.  H.  Z.,  vol.  78,  p.  159 ;
Chronic  diarrhcei,  Reis,  Raue's  Rec,  1870,  p.  210;  Lobetlial,  Riickert,  Riick.  Kl.
Erf.,  vol.  1,  p.  841 ;  Diarrhcea  and  dysentery,  Benson,  H.  M.,  vol.  3,  p.  409,  Raue's.
Rec,  1870,  p.  210;  Hemorrhoids,  Gilchrist,  Gilch.  Surg.,  p.  456;  Piles  and  fissures
of  anus,  Gehme,  N.  E.  M.  G.,  vol.  5,  p.  146  ;  Herpes  on  perineum,  Cochran,  H.  M.,
vol.  4,  p.  401 ;  Chronic  hcematuria,  Houard,  H.  M.,  vol.  15,  p.  146  ;  Dribbling  of
urine,  Martin,  T.  H.  M.  S.  Pa.,  1883,  p.  60  ;  Zhe  in  gonorrhoea,  Attomyr,  Riick
Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  2,  p.  91 ;  Oleet,  A.  H.  Z.,  vol.  90,  p.  92,  from  Times  Ret.,  1875,  p.  90 ;
Herpes  on  scrotum,  Angell,  Hom.  CI.,  vol.  3,  p.  15 ;  Vomiting  of  pregnancy,  Bayes,
Horn.  Rev.,  vol.  13,  p.  267  ;  Cough  and  melancholia.  Small,  Raue's  Rec,  1872,  p.
113,  from  U.  S.  M.  S.  J.,  April,  1871 ;  Palpitation  of  heart.  Gross,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf.,
vol.  3,  p.  461 ;  Pain  in  back  and  tonic  contraction  of  muscles,  Baylies,  Hom.  Phys.,
vol.  8,  p.  42;  Pain  in  coccyx,  Stoaks,  Hom.  Phys.,  vol.  8,  p.  438  ;  Salt  rheum  on
arm  and  hands,  Cochran,  H.  M.,  vol.  4,  p.  401 ;  Skin  affection  of  hands,  Stens,
Raue's  Rec,  1873,  p.  249,  from  A.  H.  Z.,  vol.  85,  p.  170;  Chilblains  on  hand^,
Gross,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  3,  p.  461 ;  •  Fissures  on  tips  of  fingers,  Hatch,  Hom.  CI.,
vol.  1,  p.  31 ;  Sciatica,  Neidhard,  B.  J.  H.,  vol.  27,  p.  554 ;  Sore  and  lams  leg,
Cochran,  H.  M.,  vol.  4,  p.  400  ;  Ulcers  on  toes,  on  fingers,  O.,  Ruck.  Kl.  Erf,  vol.
4,  p.  222;  Ague,  Stens,  Raue's  Rec,  1872,  p.  245,  from  A.  H.  Z.,  vol.  83,  p.  135;
Raue's  Rec,  1875,  p.  275,  from  A.  H.  Z.,  vol.  89,  p.  156  ;  Curative  action  during
Summer  of  1872  (see  chap.  44),  Raue's  Rec,  1874,  p.  9;  Catarrhal  complaints,
Hiller,  Times  Ret.,  1877,  p.  37,  fi-om  M.  I.,  vol.  5,  p.  330 ;  Secondary  syphilis.  Bell,
H.  M,  vol.  4,  p.  402;  Affections  of  skin,  Hahnemann,  Wahle,  Jahr,  Ruramel,
Riick.  Kl.  Erf ,  vol.  4,  p.  253;  Chapping  and  cracking  of  skin,  H.Sirtiiannn,'Ruck.
Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  4,  p.  176;  Eczema  (5  cases),  Closson,  Waters,  T.  H.  M.  S.  Pa.,  1887,
p.  41;  Zona,  Raue's  Rec,  1871,  p.  210,  from  A.  H.  Z.,  vol.  81,  p.  22 ;  Burns
(locally),  Jones,  Raue's  Rec,  1870^  p.  345;  Chilblains,  Hahnemann,  Riick.  Kl.
Erf.,  vol.  4,  p.  176;  Exuberant  granulations  (Kercvene  and  olive  oil),  Searle,  A.
H.  a,  vol.  6,  p.  224.

^  Mind. I  I  Loss  of  consciousness.

I  I  Very  forgetful  and  disinclined  to  think.

I  Did  not  know  where  she  was  in  the  street.

■  I  Delirium  ; thinks  another  person  lies  alongside  of  him,

or  that  one  limb  is  double.
I  i  Since  confinement  two  weeks  ago  when  in  bed,  in  dark

room,  at  night,  delusion  that  there  is  another  baby  in

bed,  which  requires  attention,  also  that  she  has  a  third

leg  which  would  not  remain  quiet.
lExcitable,  irritable,  with  inclination  to  be  angry  and  to

scold;  anxious  and  irresolute.


PETROLEUM.  276

1  Violent,  irritable,  offended  at  trifles.

I  I  Irritable,  vexed,  always  quiet,  sad  thoughts,  turned  to
himself,  no  ambition  to  work  ;  heaviness,  heat  and  pain
in  head  in  morning;  backache;  spasmodic  eructation;
thin,  slimy  stool,  with  cutting  in  abdomen;  pale  and
emaciated;  profuse  night  and  morning  sw^eats.

I  Ailments  from  vexation,  with  fright.

■  Sadness  and  despondency,  inclination  to  weep.
BMelancholy  mood,  imagines  but  little  time  is  left  him  to

make  his  will. ^Cough.

■  Sensation  as  if  there  were  a  cold  stone  in  heart.
■Towards  evening  anxiety  and  apprehension  about  his

family,  wdiich  he  left  behind  wdiile  going  on  a  short
journey;  the  anxiety  increases  until  he  becomes  incon-
solable.

■  Great  fearfulness.

^  Sensorium.  ■  Vertigo:  on  stooping;  on  rising,  in  occiput;
as  if  intoxicated  ;  like  seasickness  ;  with  bilious  vomit-
ing; frequent,  when  walking  ;  commencing  at  dinner  ;
as  if  she  would  fall  forward,  especially  when  raising
eyeballs;  with  nausea  in  evening  in  bed,  especially
when  head  lies  low ;  obliging  him  to  stoop,  with  pale
face  and  nausea ;  more  violent  when  standing  than
when  sitting,  going  off  when  lying,  attended  with
eructations,  yawning,  want  of  appetite,  pressure  in
abdomen,  and  slow  pulse;  when  rising  from  recumbent
position,  with  heat  in  face  when  lying;  in  back  of  head
and  in  1.  side  of  occiput  like  a  whirling  in  head;  it
seems  to  go  all  over  him,  making  him  feel  numb  and
stiff.

I  I  Brain  feels  as  if  wrapped  in  a  fog;  cannot  bear  noise  of
people;  sad  and  discouraged.

1  I  After  eating  a  little,  head  seems  befogged,  dizzy  and
confused.
'  Inner  Head, Headache  in  forehead  ; every  mental  exer-
tion makes  him  quite  stupid.

Frontal  headache,  at  times  quite  severe,  but  <  while
nausea  remains.

Sensation  as  if  everything  in  head  were  alive.

Head  feels  numb,  as  if  made  of  wood,  or  as  if  bruised.

Heaviness  of  head  in  morning,  with  headache.

•  I  I  Pinching  headache.

Pleadache  when  stooping  or  rising  from  bed.

Headache  from  anger.

Pressing  stinging  in  cerebellum.

■  1  tieaviness  like  lead  in  occiput.

■  Pressure  and  sticking  pressure  in  occiput  in  morning.

■  Pinching  or  dull  pulsating  pain  in  occiput.


277  PETROLEUM.


I  I  Occipital  headache  with  general  spasms  and  screaming;
loss  of  appetite;  constipation;  slightest  touch  aggra-
vates pain  which  usually  lasts  ten  days.

I  I  Migraine  since  girlhood,  at  first  every  four  weeks,  after-
guards every  fortnight,  and  in  last  years  almost  every
day ;  after  any  great  exertion  or  mental  excitement
must  go  to  bed  for  several  days;  retching  and  vomiting
of  bile;  aching,  throbbing  pain  chiefly  in  forehead;
attack  commences  in  occiput  then  spreads  to  front  of
head  and  as  it  reaches  its  climax  occiput  is  free.

I  Pain  from  occiput  over  head  to  forehead  and  eyes,  with
transitory  blindness;  he  gets  stiff;  loses  consciousness.
*  Outer  Head. ■  Falling  off  of  hair.

Sensation  as  of  a  cold  breeze  blowing  on  head.

Numbness  of  outer  part  of  head  as  if  made  of  wood.

Scalp  very  sore  to  touch,  followed  by  numbness ;  <  morn-
ings and  on  becoming  heated.

Bitching  on  scalp ;  after  scratching,  a  pain  as  if  sore.

Pimples  on  head  and  nape  of  neck.

Soft  tumors  on  hairy  scalp  ;  crusts.

I  Moist  eczema,  sore  after  scratching.;  tinea  capitis.

■  Nearly  whole  head  covered  with  thick,  yellow,  eczema-

tous  crusts; hair  glued  together  by  exudation,  crusts
•  being  entangled  in  hair  and  very  difficult  to  remove  ;
intense  itching;  scratching  readily  induced  bleeding.

■  Thick, greenish-yellow crusts; burning and  itching;

redness,  rawness  and  moisture ;  soreness  and  swelling
of  scalp;  cracks  bleeding  easily;  thick,  yellowish
exudation.

■  Moist  eczema,  acute  and  chronic,  worse  on  occiput.

*  Sight  and  Eyes. Far-sighted,  cannot  read  fine  print  with-
out glasses.
Floating  black  figures  and  fiery  dots  in  field  of  vision.

■  Eyes  dim,  as  of  a  veil  before  them  ;  visual  power  weak.

■  Cannot  open  eyes  mornings;  sight  misty.

I  I  Pressing  pain  as  of  sand  in  eyes; <  evening  and  by
candlelight; stitches  in  eyes ; lachrymation ; dull  pul-
sating pain  in  occiput ^Syphilitic  iritis.
- ■Skin  around  eyes  dry  and  scurfy.

I  I  Trachoma  with  pannus,  especially  when  scrofulous ;  con-
siderable white  discharge  from  eyes  and  roughness  of
cheek.

Aching  in  eyes,  <  in  evening  and  from  light.

■  Burning,  itching  and  sticking  in  eyes,  and  pressure  with

dimness  on  exerting  them.

■  ■Conjunctivitis pustulosa, with acute  inflammation  of

lids; lids red, inflam.ed and covered wdth scabs  or


PETROLEUM.  278

scurfs;  surrounding  skin  rough;  blennorrhoea  of  lachry-
mal sac;  pain  in  occiput.

I  I  Pain  at  root  of  nose,  lids  swollen,  purulent  discharge

from  eyes  and  nose.

■  Scrofulous  ophthalmia; great  difficulty  in  opening  eyes

in  morning;  skin  deeply  cracked  and  slowly  healing.

I I  Inflammation  of  lachrymal  canal,  when  suppuration
has  commenced  and  a  fistula  has  formed.

I  Blennorrhoea  of  lachrymal  sac.

I  I  An  inflamed  swelling  as  large  as  a  pi<^eon's  egss;  in  inner

canthus ; like  an  incipient  fistula ; dryness  of  r.  side  of

nose.

■  Ciliary  blepharitis  from  conjunctivitis  granulosa  or  from

smallpox,  with  sticking  and  smarting  in  inner  canthus.
llnflammation  of  lids  from  conjunctivitis  granulosa  ;  pain
in  back  of  head  ;  rough  skin.

■  Itching  and  dryness  of  lids.

'^  Hearing  and  Ears. iiSounds:  roaring  as  of  wind;  as  of
rushing  water ;  ringing  as  of  bells ;  cracking.

■  Deafness  :  with  noises  in  ears  ;  of  old  people ;  of  1.  ear,  in

a  subject  treated  with  large  doses  of  mercury  for  syphilis,
noise  as  of  murmuring  water,  with  tearing  pains  at
night;  paralytic,  in  old  people  or  in  arthritic  subjects;
in  those  addicted  to  sexual  excesses  or  drunkenness;  ex-
ternal ear  pale,  cold  to  touch,  cartilaginous  portion  dry,
parchment-like  and  covered  w^ith  small  scales;  no  ear-
wax,  or  a  quantity  of  soft,  thin  cerumen  and  many
hairs;  constant  roaring  or  clear  bell-like  sounds  in  ears;
having  the  stamp  of  nervous  afTection ;  progressive
form  ;  preceded  by  subjective  noises ;  rheumatic,  with
humming,  consequent  upon  a  chill.
I  I  Frequent  pains  in  head  and  toothache  accompanied  by
diminution  of  hearing;  could  not  hear  ticking  of  clock
unless  very  near,  and  at  ten  paces  off  not  at  all ;  con-
stant roaring  and  cracking  noises  in  ears ;  meatus  filled
with  thick  cerumen,  upon  removal  of  which  hearing  was
not  improved  ;  pustular  eruption  upon  chest.

■  ■Eustachian tubes  affected,  causing  whizzing,  roaring,

cracking,  with  hardness  of  hearing.

■  Dryness  or  disagreeable  sensation  of  dryness  in  ear. -
Pol3'pus ;  wax  increased,  thick  or  thin.

■  Inflamed  and  painful  swelling  of  meatus;  diffuse,  with

oozing  of  moisture.

■  Ear  painful  externally.

■  Discharge  of  blood  and  pus  from  ear.

■  Redness,  rawness,  soreness  and  moisture behind ears;

ear  and  surrounding  parts  sore  to  touch ;  surface
bleeds  easily;  intense  itching;  great  pain  about  ear;
swelling;  fissures. ^Eczema,  intertrigo,  etc.


279  PETROLEUM.

"^  Smell  and  Nose. Slight  epistaxis  relieving  headache.

Dry  feeling  in  nose,  frequent  sneezing;  adherent  phlegm,
blown  out  in  small  lumps ;  thick  phlegm  in  posterior
nares,  <  mornings.
I  I  Fluent  coryza,  with  hoarseness.

■  Sneezing; spasmodic cough,  <  at night after lying

down,  and  at  2,  4,  or  6  a.m.,  lasting  from  four  to
six  hours,  each  spell  with  rapid  sinking  of  strength ;
violent  coryza;  expectoration;  great  weakness;  chills
alternating  with  flashes  of  heat  in  face  from  coughing;
violent  cutting  pain  under  sternum  and  in  back ;  pa-
tients seem  to  contract  new  colds  daily,  which  cause
excessive  secretions  of  glairy  mucus,  accompanied  by
rawness  and  soreness  of  chest. ^Catarrhal  complaints.

lOzsena;  scabs  and  purulent  mucus  discharged  from  nose;
nose  sore ;  nostrils  cracked ;  post-nasal  space  filled  with
purulent  mucus  causing  hawking,

I  Ulcerated  nostrils;  pustules.

■  Swelling  of  nose  with  pain  at  its  root; purulent  dis-

charge.

I  Itching  of  tip  of  nose.
*  Upper  Face. iFace  pale  or  yellow ;  hot  after  eating.

I  I  Facial  paralysis,  especially  when  this  seems  to  be  owing
to  constriction  of  nerve  in  canal  of  Fallopius,  constric-
tion being  produced  by  inflammatory  products.

■  Eczema;  heavy,  greenish-yellow  crusts; skin  cracked,

with tendency  to  bleed ; papulated  eruption ; severe
itching; serous  exudation; Assures  with much pain
and  bleeding ; soreness  of  face ; redness,  rawness,  and
moisture.
I  1  After  Teplitz  had  removed  erysipelatous  spot  on  1.  cheek
accompanied  by  headache : perspires  on  walking,  es-
pecially under  arms;  pain  in  r.  scapula;  eyes  water  in
open  air  ;  bowels  irregular;  face  feels  hot  all  over,  after
food;  food  does  not  taste  well;  since  face  got  bad,  at
times  feels  as  if  skin  over  bridge  *of  nose  were  drawn
stiff  and  tight.
"  Lower  Face. Easily  dislocated  jaw,  in  morning  in  bed,
with  much  pain.
External  swelling  on  1.  lower  jaw,  painful  to  touch  and  on

stooping.
■Swelling  of  submaxillary  glands.

■  Scurfs  around  mouth.

I  I  Papular  eruption  at  corner  of  mouth.
'"  Teeth  and  Gums. Sensation  of  coldness  in  teeth.

Toothache  from  contact  with  fresh,  open  air,  at night,

with  swelling  of  cheek.
Numbness  of  teeth ;  they  pain  when  biting  on  them.


PETROLEUM.  280

Swelling  of  gums,  with  stinging,  burning  pain.

I  I  Swelling  externally  on  1.  lower  jaw  opposite  to  decayed
wasdom  tooth;  swelling  painful  to  touch  and  on  stoop-
ing. ^Abscess  at  root  of  tooth.

Bleeding  of  gums.

Fistula  dentalis.
"  Taste  and  Tongue. Taste :  slimy ;  sour ;  putrid,  flat,  mu-
cous ;  pappy ;  bitter.

iTongue:  white;  white  in  centre,  with  dark  streak  along
edges  ;  inflamed,  with  fetid  salivation.
^^  Inner  Mouth, i  l  Smell  from  mouth  :  fetid  ;  like  garlic.

Oftensive  smelling  saliva;  putrid,  slimy  mouth.

I  I  Copious  collection  of  slime  in  fauces,  with  feeling  of
dr3^ness.

Great  dryness  of  mouth  and  throat  in  morning  with  thirst.

I  iSore  mouth,  offensive  saliva,  <  in  morning,  with  thirst.

II Mucous  surface  of  cheek  covered  with  ulcers;  putrid
flat  taste ;  white  coated  tongue :  garliclike  odor  from
mouth;  canine  hunger;  violent  thirst,  especially  for
beer  ;  waterbrash  ;  empty,  weak  sensation  in  stomach  ;
nausea  and  vomiting,  former  especially  when  riding  in
a  carriage. ^Stomatitis.

I  I  Ulcers  on  inner  cheek,  painful  when  closing  teeth.
13  TJij-oat. When  swallowing,  food  enters  into  posterior  nares.

I  I  Induration  and  hypertrophy  of  tonsils.

Throat  feels  swollen  and  raw.

Feeling  of  great  dryness  in  throat,  with  accumulation  of
mucus.

■  Severe  stitching,  burning  pains  in  throat  below  and  pos-

terior to  larynx,  especially  on  swallowing,  when  stitches
shoot  into  ears  and  there  is  a  burning  in  nape  of
neck;  indescribable  suff"ering  on  taking  least  quantity

.  of  food  or  drink;  on  examination  nothing  abnormal
detected  except  a  slight  redness  of  uvula  and  velum
palati ;  speech  muffled  and  nasal ;  great  thirst ;  consti-
pation.

I  Inflammation  of  pharynx,  dry  or  catarrhal.

■  Hawking  of  tough,  disagreeably  tasting  phlegm,  morn-

ings.

■  Diphtheritic membrane commenced on 1. side,  then

spread  to  r.,  then  to  uvula;  tongue  pointed  and  purple;
mucous  membrane  of  throat  dark-red  and  glistening  ;
exudation  white  like  china;  then  followed  a  bland  dis-
charge from  r.  nostril,  then  from  1.;  diphtheritic  mem-
brane in  nose  grey ;  fetid  odor  from  mouth  ;  stitch  in  1.
ear  when  opening  mouth ;  soreness  of  bridge  of  nose,
cannot  bear  slightest  touch  from  the  very  beginning ;
later,  slight  swelling  of  iipper  eyelids;  discharge  from
inner  canthus;  desire  for  beer  and  brandy  in  water.


281  PETROLEUM.

^'  Appetite,  Thirst.  Desires,  Aversions.  Hunger  imme-
diately after  stool.

I  I  Ravenous  hunger;  frequently  awakened  by  it  at  night;
easily  satisfied,  with  repugnance  to  meat,  fats,  cooked  or
hot  food ;  desire  only  for  dainties,  which  are  eaten  with
avidity. ^Tabes  mesenterica.

Loss  of  appetite.

Drinks  all  the  time  and  passes  water  often.

Violent  thirst  for  beer.
^^  Eating  and  Drinking, i After  eating:  giddiness;  heat  in
face;  cutting  in  abdomen;  gastralgia  >.

I  I  After eating, nausea,  colic and eructations, general
languor,  drowsiness and uneasiness. ^Tabes mesen-
terica.
'^  Hiccough,  Belching,  Nausea  and  Vomiting, i '  Heart-
burn towards  evening;  waterbrash.

Eructations  sour  or  bitter ;  hot,  sharp  ;  like  rotten  eggs.

I  i  Nausea :  and  qualmishness  all  day ;  every  morning,  after

waking  ;  she  could  not  eat  breakfast ;  in  morning  with
accumulation  of  water  in  mouth ;  sudden,  on  walking,
with  accumulation  of  water  in  mouth  ;  from  riding  in  a
carriage ;  all  day,  often  so  violent  that  it  takes  away  the
breath,  without  vomiting;  violent,  with  cold  sweat;  in-
cessant ;  with  vertigo  and  vomiting.

■  Vomiting :  of  bitter,  green  substances;  <  from  riding  in

a  carriage;  during  pregnancy  and  in  morning;  violent,
of  bile  and  blood.

I I  Seasickness.

^^  Scrobiculum  and  Stomach,  i  Empty,  weak  sensation  in
stomach.

Sensation  of  repletion  after  a  little  food.

Sensation  of  fulness  or  swelling  of  pit  of  stomach,  with
soreness  when  touched.

Pain  in  pit  of  stomach  as  if  something  were  tearing  off.

I  Gastralgia  with  pressing  drawing  pains,  >  from  eating.

I  I  Violent  pain  in  stomach,  extending  up  into  chest,  with
sweat  and  nausea;  pain  came  at  night,  in  morning,
after  getting  up,  before  dinner,  and  in  afternoon  about
5  o'clock ;  after  moderate  eating  it  did  not  come  on  ;  on
contrary,  if  stomach  was  empty  and  he  felt  it  coming
on,  the  taking  of  some  food  prevented  its  outbreak.
^Cardialgia.

■  Gastralgia  whenever  stomach  becomes  empty.
Weakness  of  digestion.

■  Dyspepsia  relieved  by  taking  food.

■  Atonic  dyspepsia  with  a  tendency  to  diarrhoea  or  to  vom-

iting, with  pains  and  tenderness  in  epigastrium,  occa-
sional pyrosis  and  chilly,  cold  abdomen;  much  colic
and  diarrhoea.


PETROLEUM.  282

I  I  Obstinate  indigestion  ;  cold  feeling  about  heart.
^^  Abdomen, l  l Distension  of  abdomen  with  offensive  flatus;
rumbling.

■  Sensation  of  coldness,  weakness  and  faintness  in  abdomen.
I  I  Disagreeable  itching  in  abdomen.

Going  to  sleep  and  tingling  in  abdominal  muscles.

I  I  Bloating  and  distension  of  abdomen  with  pains,  <  after
eating  or  drinking,  from  accumulation  of  gas,  lying
down  and  in  afternoon ;  distension  and  pain  in  bowels
awakens  child  at  night;  cold  sensation  in  abdomen.
(^Tabes  mesenterica.

■  Violent  colic,  with  efforts  to  vomit.

■  Cutting  :  late  in  evening;  in  abdomen  soon  after  eating;

in  upper  abdomen,  with  nausea  and  diarrhoea;  as  from
taking  cold,  followed  by  diarrhoea  with  pressure.

Awakes  in  morning  with  pinching  colic,  >  from  bending
double.

I  I  Ulcerated  umbilicus  in  an  infant.  (Kerosene  and  olive
oil  equal  parts,  locally.)

Inguinal  liernia.
^"  Stool  and  Rectum. Awakened early  morning  by  urgent
desire  for  stool,  which  is  gushing,  watery;  sharp,  cutting,
colicky  pains  below  navel;  rumbling.

Stools:  of  a  fetid,  camphor-like  odor;  yellowish;  watery  ;
brownisli-yellow,  pasty  ;  brown,  watery  ;  bloody  mucus ;
watery  and  bloody,  containing  scrapings  of  intestines;
mucous;  green,  slimy;  profuse,  gushing;  slimy,  pre-
ceded by  colic  ;  <  only  during  day  ;  of  bloody  mucus  ;
often  profuse ;  weak  feeling  in  bowels  and  rectum ;
slimy,  with  pain  in  bowels  and  palpitation  of  heart.

■  Diarrhoea:  stools  offensive  and  watery,  often  containing

undigested  food ;  with  cutting  colic ;  with  disordered
stomach,  <  from  cabbage,  sauerkraut,  cold-slaw;  stool
offensive,  with  great  flatulence  and  belching  of  gas
tasting  of  cabbage ;  after  riding  in  a  carriage  ;  early  in
morning,  also  during  day  ;  with  emaciation  ;  with  hun-
ger immediately  after  stool  from  weak,  empty  feeling  in
bowels,  but  quickly  satisfied.

■  Weakness  in  rectum  with  pain  more  or  less  sharp  and

cutting  in  bowels,  principally  below  umbilicus,  and  a
desire  for  frequent  movements  between  passages;  dis-
charges light-yellow  and  watery ;  bloody  and  slimy.
^Diarrhoea. ^Dysentery.

Before  stool :  colic;  cutting  and  pinching;  sudden  urging.

During  stool:  colic;  tenesmus.

After  stool :  great  weakness  and  dizziness;  canine  hunger;
urging  ;  much  pressing  as  if  large  quantities  were  yet
to  be  expelled.


283  PETROLEUM.

I  I  Diarrhoea  with  violent  pain  in  bowels,  day  and  night,
since  several  months.

I  I  Dysentery.

Stool  insufficient,  hard,  in  lumps.

a  Hemorrhoids  internal,  with  puffy,  tender  sw^elling  at
posterior  verge  of  anus;  intense  itching  from  coccyx
upward,  also  in  nates  on  either  side;  attacks  preceded
by  weeks  of  intense  itching-biting  of  anus  and  perineum
with  wide-spread  redness  around  anus,  margin  sur-
rounded by  herpetic  eruption,  scaling  off;  itching
changing  to  burning,  with  moisture  after  scratching ;
at  night  after  getting  into  bed  itching  is  intolerable
for  hours,  with  great  moisture  of  perineum  and  dis-
charge of  mucus  from  anus ;  itching  changes  place  on
rubbing  or  scratching;  <  at  night,  from  heat,  heat  of
bed  and  rubbing  or  scratching ;  >  from  cold,  cold  water
and  pinching  parts.

I  I  Hemorrhoids  with  itching  about  anus  which  compels
her  to  scratch  and  rub  until  parts  are  raw  and  sore;  a
moisture  constantly  oozes  from  vulva,  with  violent
itching.

iPiles  and  fissures  of  anus;  great  itching;  scurf  on  bor-
ders of  anus  and  on  perineum.

B Excrescences  on  and  in  anus  moist,  irregular.

I  I  Membranous  shreds  about  anus.

I I  Obstinate  itching  herpes  on  perineum.

^'  Urinary  Organs.  '  i  Chronic  albuminuria,  with  symptoms
of  indigestion.

I  I  Chronic  hsematuria  due  to  renal  hemorrhage;  urine
contained  slender,  cylindrical  pieces  of  fibrin,  these
little  coagula  being  of  whitish  color,  looking  like  mag-
gots or  small  worms;  constant  pain  in  back,  extending
down  both  sides  of  abdomen  to  groins ;  pain  sharp,
heavy,  and  pressing  downward  to  bladder ;  constant
desire  to  urinate,  voiding  about  a  cupful  at  a  time,  after
much  exertion,  causing  trembling  of  whole  body,  with
a  creeping  chill;  frequent  violent  headache,  mostly  on
top  of  head,  as  if  it  would  burst ;  oedema  of  feet ;  every
exertion,  walking,  lifting,  riding,  or  mental  emotions
bring  on  hemorrhage;  excessively  nervous,  especially
while  urinating.

Burning  in  neck  of  bladder  when  urinating.

Very  violent  contraction  in  region  of  bladder.

I  I  In  voluntary  micturition  at  night  in  bed.

■  Dribbling  of  urine  after  micturition.

I  I  Frequent  micturition,  with  scanty,  brown,  fetid  urine.

lUrine :  passes  slowly  ;  white  or  red  sediment,  at  same  time
covered  with  a  shining  pellicle;  dark-brown  flocks.


3

PETROLEUM.  284

Itching  ill  meatus  urinarius  (female)  during  micturition,

preceded  by  an  urgent  desire  to  urinate.
Chronic  blennorrhoea.
Contraction  of  urethra;  burning.

■  Chronic inflammation  of  pars prostatia  urethras,  with

frequent  emissions  and  imperfect  erections.

I  Chronic  urethritis  accompanying  stricture.
^^  Male  Sexual  Organs. Sexual  desire  decreased  in  morning.

Erections  and  pollutions  with  sexual  excitement;  eczema.

I  I  Burning  pain  in  urethra.

I  Gonorrhoea;  chronic  cases,  with  urethral  itching;  pros-
tatitis; gleet.

■  Discharge  of  blood  in  semen.

lEruptions-on  glans;  reddish;  itching  herpes  preputialis.

ilHerpetic  itching,  redness  and  moisture  on  scrotum;
skin  cracked,  rough  and  bleeding ;  extending  to  peri-
neum and  thighs.

I  Obstinate,  dry  eruption  on  genitals  and  perineum.

■Small  pimples  or  vesicles  between  scrotum  and  thigh.

■  Sweat  and  moisture  of  external  genitals  of  both  sexes.

^^  Female  Sexual  Organs. Aversion  to  an  embrace ;  in  cold,
lymphatic  females.
Uterine displacement induced by debility caused by
chronic  diarrhoea,  occurring  only  in  daytime.

■  Prolapsus  uteri,  in  patients  reduced  by  chronic  diarrhoea

during  day.

■  Menses:  too  late  and  scanty  ;  early  and  profuse; men-

strual blood  causes  itching.

■  Before  menses  :  throbbing  in  head.

■  During  menses  :  sad,  inclined  to  weep  ;  singing  and  roar-

ing in  ears  ;  lassitude  ;  heat  in  palms  and  soles ;  tearing
in  thighs  and  spots  on  legs  painful  to  touch  ;  painful
pruritus  ;  herpetic  eruption  here  and  there ; dysmenor-
rhoea.
Burning  in  genital  organs,  with  some  discharge  of  blood.

■  Vulva  very  sore,  with  burning  in  vagina;  discharge  of

mucus  ;  leucorrhoea  acrid,  excoriating  and  exhausting.

■  Leucorrhcea  :  like  albumen,  profuse  every  day,-  or  with

nightly  lascivious  dreams.

■  Labise  perspire  and  itch  excessively  ;  vulvitis.

■  Chronic  gonorrhoea,  discharges  very  acrid.

■  Nipples  itch  and  have  a  mealy  coating.
^'Pregnancy.  Parturition.  Lactation. ■Nausea  and  vomit-
ing of  pregnancy.

■  Gastric troubles of  pregnant  women,  especially  when

head  symptoms  are  prominent.
I  I  During  pregnancy,  diarrhoea  and  vomiting, <  riding.

■  Imagines  she  has  two  babies  and  is  very  concerned  as  to

how  she  is  to  take  care  of  them.


285  PETROLEUM.

I  I  After  confinement  imagines  there  is  another  baby  in

bed  which  requires  attention.
Very  offensive  lochia ;  from  perverted  lymphatic  secretions.
Itching  and  mealy  covering  of  nipples.
"^  Voice  and  Larynx. Trachea  and  Bronchia. « Hoarseness.
Dryness  and  scraping  sensation  in  larynx.
I  Bronchial  catarrh;  subacute  and  chronic  bronchitis.
^®  Respiration. Cold  air  causes  an  oppressed  feeling  on  chest.

Oppression  of  chest  at  night.
^  Cough, i  Cough:  at  night;  with  oppression  of  chest;  dry,
teasing, coming on when  lying  down  at  night,  fre-
quently in  children ;  dry  at  night,  coming  deep  from
chest,  caused  by  a  scratching  in  throat;  with  stitches
under  sternum.
I  I  Melancholy mood, imagines that but little time is
allowed  to  make  his  will.
^^  Inner  Chest  and  Lungs, i Oppression  of  chest; < from
cold  air.
I  I  Phthisis,  first  stages,  especially  tuberculous  variety ;  not
much  expectoration ;  there  may  be  frothy,  yellow  sputa,
and  rattling  without  much  expectoration;  ulceraiion  of
nostrils  and  mouth;  great  hoarseness;  pressing  digging
in  chest;  exhaustion;  low  pulse  and  high  temperature.
^^  Heart,  Pulse  and  Circulation. Cold  feeling  about  heart ;
as  if  there  were  a  cold  stone  in  heart.
I  1  Severe  palpitation,  could  be  detected  through  clothing;

painful  chilblains  upon  hands.
Fainting,  with  ebullitions,  heat,  pressing  on  heart  and

palpitation.
1  I  Angina  pectoris;  pressing  pain, < between  shoulder-
blades.
Pulse:  accelerated  by  every  motion  ;  slow  during  rest.
^"  Outer  Chest, i  i  Herpes  on  chest.

^' Neck  and  Eack. Il-Ieaviness  or  very  painful  distressing
drawing  in  nape  of  neck,  extending  to  occiput.
iStiff  neck;  it  cracks  when  moved.

■  Unable  to  bend  head  forward  or  to  turn  it  on  account  of
pain  caused  by  abscesses  on  nape  of  neck,  associated
with  moist  eruption  on  margin  of  hair,  like  eczema.
iHerpes  or  impetigo  on  neck  and  occiput.

I  iPapulated  eczematous  eruption  affecting  shoulders  and

presenting  an  enormous,  ulcerated  surface,  papulated
and  quite  superficial ;  severe  itching ;  exudation  of
serous  fluid  on  scratching;  fissures  causing  great  pain
and  bleeding  ;  enuresis.

I I  Sharp pains shooting up dorsal spine into  occiput.
^/Confinement.

I  Pain  in  spine  and  pain  all  over  body  with  sciatica.


PETROLEUM.  286

M Catching  pain  in  back  and  diaphragm,  with  gasping;
cannot  breathe  without  pain  ;  after  exposure  to  a  draught
or  too  much  exertion  in  walking,  portions  of  rectus
abdominis,  of  external  oblique  or  lumbar  muscles
affected  with  contractions,  hard  to  touch.

Pain  in  back  which  does  not  allow  him  to  move  or  stand.

Rheumatic  pains  in  back  <  morning  before  rising.

Weakness  and  stiffness  in  back  and  small  of  back.

Great  uneasiness  and  stiffness  in  small  of  back  and  coccyx
in  evening.

I  Pain  and  sensitiveness  in  coccyx  while  sitting.
^^  Upper  Limbs, i  Fetid  sweat  in  axillse.

Tumor  in  axilla.

B  Great  weakness  in  arms.

Salt  rheum  on  1.  arm  for  nine  years,  extending  from
elbow  to  hand,  red,  raw  and  moist  at  times,  at  others
covered  with  a  thick  scab  or  crust ;  unable  to  work.

Erysipelas  on  arms,  or  brown  or  yellow  spots.

Wrists  feel  sprained.

iSkin  of  hands  cracked  and  rough.

iDeep,  bloody  rhagades  on  hands,  thick  crusts;  worse
during  Winter.

I  I  Psoriasis  palmaria,  affecting  whole  palm  of  hand  ;  itch-
ing and  burning  so  that  it  was  impossible  to  do  any
work ;  thick  scales  of  epidermis  through  which  run
moist  fissures ;  red  herpetic,  also  papular  eruption,  on
dorsum  of  hand,  with  tensive  pain  extending  up  arm  ;
eruption  on  scrotum  and  in  hollow  of  knee.

■  Burning  in  palms  of  hands.

■  Salt  rheum  affecting  both  hands,  which  are  completely  raw

from  wrists  to  ends  of  fingers,  which smart  and  burn  ;
constant  watery  oozing ;  can  do  no  work  on  account  of
soreness  of  hands.
llPainful  chilblains  on  hands.

I  I  Drawing  in  fingers.

Rigidity  tirst  of  one  finger,  then  of  others,  extending  up

arm,  with  inclination  to  faint.
Arthritic  stiffness  of  finger  joints.

I I  Tips  of  fingers  rough,  cracked,  fissured  ;  sticking,  cutting
pain.

I  Offensive  smelling  ulcers  on  tips  of  fingers.
I  Finger  nails  painful  when  touched,  as  if  bruised.
^^  Lower  Limbs, i  l  Thighs  stiff  and  heavy  when  walking.
Tearing  in  thigh  and  spots  on  legs  painful  to  touch.

■  Swelling  of  1.  leg  from  knee  to  ankle  joint,  twice  natural

size;  purplish  color;  constant  oozing  of  a  watery  sub-
stance, which  when  dried  became  large  scales  or  scabs,
easily  detached,  leaving  raw  and  tender  surface  ;  intol-
erable itching,  leg  burns  like  fire.


287  PETROLEUM.

I  On  both  legs  crusts  form,  with  copious  exudation
beneath,  surface  exposed  being  moist  and  very  much
reddened  ;  severe  itching,  causing  him  to  rub  skin  off
with  a  rough  towel ;  smarting  pains  ;  skin  cracked  and
bleeding ;  swelling  of  limbs ;  ver}^  restless  at  night  with
disagreeable  dreams ;  nervous  ;  palpitation. ^Eczema.

Spots  on  legs  are  painful  to  touch.

Spreading,  sloughing  ulceration  of  leg.

■Stiffness  in  legs,  knees  and  ankles.

I  I  Stitches  in  knees.

A  cold  spot  on  knee  from  which  a  cold  current  pervades
limb.

■  Herpes  on  knees  and  ankles.
Large  red  spot  on  1.  knee.

I  I  Cramp  in  calves,  thighs  and  feet  all  day.

TrSore, almost crampy pain in r.  calf,  so  much worse

walking  as  to  almost  disable  her  (>  by  Nux  ^°").
Blotches  or  tuberculous  eruption  on  calves  of  legs.
I  I  Heaviness  of  feet.

■  Feet  swollen;  cold.

I  I  Tenderness  of  feet  when  they  are  bathed.

■  Feet  tender  and  bathed  in  a  foul  moisture.
I  I  Cramp  in  soles  at  night.

■  Hot  swelling  of  soles  with  burning.

■  Stitches  as  from  a  splinter  in  heel.

■  Blisters  on  heel.

■  Heel  painfully  swollen  and  red;  chilblains.

■  Obstinate  ulcers  on toes,  originating  in  corroding  blis-

ters ;  high  callous  edges ;  moist,  flat,  red  base.

■  Eruption  between  toes.

■  Burning  or  stitches  in  corns.

BiChilblains; especially  where  they  itch  a  good  deal  and
are  moist;  itching  and  burning  like  fire;  inflammation
sets  in  with  cold  weather.
'*  Limbs  in  GeneraL ■Upper  and  lower  extremities  seem
stiff  and  without  joints  in  morning  after  rising.

■  Limbs  go  to  sleep  and  become  stiff.

I  Rheumatic  stiffness  of  joints,  with  cracking  when  moved.
I  I  Rheumatic  stiffness  oi  shoulders  and  ankles. ^Syphilis.

■  Cracking  of  joints;  inflexibility.

■  Heat  in  soles  of  feet  and  palms  of  hands.

■  Chilblains  on  hands  and  feet.

"Rest. Position. Motion. Rest:  pulse  slow.

Lying  down:  vertigo  goes  off;  vertigo  with  heat  in  face;

cough  <  ;  distension  of  abdomen  <.
When  head  lies  low  :  vertigo.
Must  stoop :  on  account  of  nausea.
Bending  double  :  >  colic.


PETROLEUM.  288

Sitting :  pain  in  coccyx.

Standing:  vertigo  <  ;  impossible  from  pain  in  back.

Stooping:  vertigo;  headache;  swelling  on  jaw  painful.

Rising:  vertigo;  from  bed,  headache.

Constant  changing  position  in  bed  or  in  arms  of  nurse.

Every  exertion :  causes  hemorrhage.

Motion :  of  neck  causes  cracking ;  impossible  from  pain

in  back;  of  joints  causes  cracking.
Every  motion  :  accelerates  pulse.
Shaking  head:  pain  in  occiput  <.
Lifting :  causes  hemorrhage.
Walking : frequent  vertigo ; perspires ; sudden  nausea  ;

causes hemorrhage ; with  too  much exertion causes

catching  pain  in  back  ;  thighs  stiff  and  heavy ;  increases

crampy  pain  in  r.  calf
Riding :  causes  hemorrhage.
^^  Nerves. '  i  Very  weary  in  morning  in  bed.

■  Violent  trembling  of  limbs;  weak  unto  faintness.
Inward  trembling  with  overexcitement.

■  General  debility  with  a  sensation  of  heaviness  in  legs;

great  weakness,  trembling,  uneasiness;  emaciation
with  marked  appetite ;  aversion  to  going  into  air,  which
causes  chilliness.

■  Much  prostration  of  arms  and  legs  ;  excessive  languor.

■  Fainting  with  ebullitions,  heat,  pressing  on  heart  and

palpitation.

I  I  Takes  cold  easily.

Twitching  in  limbs ;  epileptic  attacks.

Catalepsy;  tonic  spasms.

Left-sided  paralysis.
^'^  Sleep.  M  Somnolency  in  daytime,  especially  in  afternoon,
with  insomnia  at  night  and  constant  changing  of  posi-
tion in  bed  or  in  arms  of  nurse ;  does  not  sleep  longer
than  fifteen  minutes  at  a  time;  imagines  another  child
is  sleeping  in  bed  with  it,  and  will  not  be  convinced  to
the  contrary,  talks  continually  about  it  and  becomes
angry  when  contradicted ;  frequent  and  sometimes
involuntary  urination  at  night.

Sleep  restless  and  full  of  distressing,  frightful  dreams.

■  Restless  sleep;  awakens  often  and  imagines  another  per-

son lies  sick  in  same  bed.
^^  Time.  Morning :  heat  and  pain  in  head ;  heaviness  of
head;  pressure  in  occiput;  scalp  sensitive;  cannot
open  eyes ;  thick  phlegm  in  posterior  nares ;  easily
dislocated  jaw;  great  dryness  of  mouth  and  throat;
sore  mouth  with  offensive  saliva,  <  ;  hawking  of  a
tough,  disagreeably  tasting  phlegm  ;  nausea  with  accu-
mulation in  mouth ;  vomiting <  ;  pain  in  stomach ;


289  PETROLEUM.

awakes  with  pinching  colic  ;  awakes  with  urgent  desire
for  stool ;  sexual  desire  decreased  ;  rheumatic  pains  in
back  <  ;  upper  and  lower  extremities  seem  stiff  and
without  joints;  very  weary  in  bed;  heat;  sweats.

In  afternoon :  pain  in  stomach ;  distension  of  abdomen ;
somnolency.

All  day:  nausea  and  qualmishness;  cramp  in  calves,
thighs  and  feet.

Only  during  day :  stools;  chronic  diarrhoea.

At  6  P.M.:  chilliness,  with  blue  nails.

Evening:  vertigo  with  nausea;  pain  in  eyes  <;  towards,
heartburn;  cutting  in  abdomen;  weakness  and  stiff-
ness in  small  of  back  and  coccyx ;  heat  with  cold  feet ;
paroxysms  of  ague.

Day  and  night :  diarrhoea  with  violent  pain  in  bowels ;
somnolency ;  frequent  attacks  of  heat.

Night :  sweats ;  tearing  pains  in  ears ;  spasmodic  cough
<  ;  toothache;  awakened  by  hunger;  pain  in  stomach;
diarrhoea;  pain  in  bowels  wakes  child;  itching  of
hemorrhoids  intolerable ;  involuntary  micturition ;
oppression  of  chest ;  cough  dry ;  very  restless  from
eczema  on  legs;  cramp  in  soles;  insomnia;  bedclothes
intolerable.

After  12  p.m.:  heat.
^^  Temperature  and  Weather. Many  ailments  are  worse
before  and  during  a  thunderstorm.

Amelioration  from  warmth,  warm  air.

After  getting  into  bed  :  itching  of  hemorrhoids  intolerable.

Open  air:  toothache;  inflammation  in  chilblains  sets  in;
aversion  to ;  causes  chilliness ;  after  a  walk  flushes  of
heat;  ecthyma,  <.

Exposure  to  draft :  causes  catching  pain  in  back.

Cold  air:  causes  oppressed  feeling  in  chest;  ulcers  <;
chilblains  <.

Winter:  deep  blood  rhagades  on  hands  <;  ulcers  <  ;
chilblains.

Bathing :  causes  tenderness  of  feet.
^^  Fever. iChilliness: through body followed by violent
itching  of  skin  ; with  aversion  to  open  air; with  trem-
bling, face  cold,  cheeks,  fingers  and  nails  blue; with
dryness  of  mouth  ;  at  6  p.m.,  with  blue  nails.

I  Chill :  with  headache  and  excessively  cold  face  and
hands  ;  shaking  every  evening  at  7  p.m.,  then  sweat  in
face  and  later  all  over  except  on  legs,  which  are  cold  ;
especially  towards  evening,  often  with  heat  at  same  time.

IPIeat:  of  face  and  head;  over  whole  body  with  violent
burning  of  skin; at  night,  bedclothes  intolerable;  in

VOL.  VIII. — 19.


PETROLEUM.  290

evening  after  clnll,  with  cold  feet;  after  12  p.m.,  and
in  morning  in  bed  ;  in  soles  of  feet  and  palms  of  hands.

■  Flushes  of  heat  all  over  in  frequent  attacks  during  day.

I  1  After  a  walk  in  open  air,  or  after  a  slight  fit  of  anger,
flushes  of  heat,  ebullitions  and  perspiration.

■  Sweat:  of  single  parts  at  difi'erent  times,  as  hands,  palms,

head,  back,  chest,  axilla,  arms,  legs,  feet,  etc. ;  on  fore-
arms and  lower  legs;  offensive,  in  axillse  and  on  soles
of  feet;  on  genitals;  profuse  every  night  or  immediately
after  chill.

I  I  Paroxysm  occurring  every  day  ;  pain  from  occiput  over
head  to  front  and  eyes,  with  transitory  blindness  ;  gets
stiff,  loses  consciousness  and  gets  blind  ;  spleen  enlarged
and  painful ; belching  ;  nausea  ;  constipation. ^Ague.

I  I  Pain  in  occiput  commencing  with  chill  and  attended
with  pain  in  spleen ;  pain  in  some  cases  extends  to  front
of  head. ^Ague.

I  I  Evening  paroxysm  predominant.

I  I  Typhoid  fever,  slight  delirium.
^'  Attacks,  Periodicity. Alternately : chills  and  flashes  of
heat  in  face.

Fifteen  minutes  at  a  time  :  sleeps.

At  2,  4  and  G  a.xNl:  cough  <.

Every  morning:  nausea.

Every  evening  at  7  :  shaking  chill.

I  I  Symptoms  appear  and  disappear  rapidly.

Daily :  new  colds ;  profuse  leucorrhoea ;  paroxysms  of  ague.

Nightly  :  lascivious  dreams ;  profuse  sweat.

Almost  every  day  :  migraine.

Ten  days:  pain  in  head  lasts.

Since  several  months:  diarrhoea  and  pain  in  bowels.

For  nine  years:  salt  rheum  on  1.  arm.
^^  Locality  and  Direction. Right:  dryness  of  side  of  nose;
pain  in  scapula;  sore,  almost  crampy  pain  in  calf.

Left:  vertigo  in  side  of  occiput ;  deafness;  erysipelatous
spot  on  cheek;  external  swelling  on  lower  jaw;  stitch
in  ear;  salt  rheum  on  arm;  swelling  of  leg;  large  red
spot  on  knee.

From  1.  to  r. :  diphtheritic  membrane.
*^  Sensations.  Brain  as  if  wrapped  in  a  fog;  as  if  everything
in  head  were  alive ;  head  as  if  made  of  wood  or  as  if
bruised ;  as  if  a  cold  breeze  were  blowing  on  head  ;  as
of  a  veil  before  eyes;  as  of  sand  in  eyes;  as  if  skin  over
bridge  of  nose  were  drawn  stiff  and  tight ;  as  if  some-
thing were  tearing  off  from  pit  of  stomach ;  as  if  head
would  burst;  as  if  there  were  a  cold  stone  at  heart;  as
of  a  splinter  in  heel;  upper  and  lower  extremities  as  if
stiff  and  without  joints.


291  PETROLEUM.

Pain:  in  head;  in  back;  in  occiput;  at  root  of  nose;  in

back  of  head;  in  ear  and  teeth;  in  r.  scapula;  in  jaw;

in  pit  of  stomach; in  epigastrium; in  bowels; from

back  down  sides  of  abdomen  to  groins  towards  bladder ;

in  spine  and  all  over  body ;  in  coccyx ;  from  occiput

over  head  to  front  and  eyes ;  in  spleen.
Violent  pain  :  in  stomach ;  in  bowels.
Very  painful  distressing  drawing  :  in  nape  of  neck  up  to

occiput.
Sharp  paiins :  shooting  up  dorsal  spine  into  occiput.
Tearing :  in  thighs.
Throbbing  pains :  in  head.
Catching  pain  :  in  back  and  diaphragm.
Cutting:  in  abdomen;  under  sternum  and  in  back;  below

navel ;  in  finger  tips.
Pinching:  in  head  ;  in  occiput.
Stitches :  in  eyes ;  into  ears;  in  1.  ear ;  in  throat ;  in  knees  ;

in  heel;  in  corns.
Sticking:  in  eyes;  in  inner  canthus;  in  finger  tips; in

knees.  •
Stinging :  in  gums ;  in  ulcers.
Colicky  pains  :  below  navel.
Cramp:  in  calves,  thighs  and  feet;  in  soles.
Digging:  in  chest.
Drawing:  in  fingers.
Tensive  pain:  from  hand  up  arm.
Aching:  in  eyes.
Aching  throbbing  :  in  forehead.
Dull  pulsating  pain  :  in  occiput.
Rheumatic  pains:  in  back.

Pressing  pain :  in  eyes  ;  in  back ;  between  shoulder  blades.
Sticking  pressure:  in  occiput.
Pressing  stinging:  in  cerebellum.

Pressure:  in  occiput;  in  abdomen;  in  chest;  on  heart.
Soreness: of  scalp; behind  ears; of  chest; of  face; of

mouth;  of  bridge  of  nose ;  of  pit  of  stomach  ;  of  vulva  ;
of  hands ;  in  r.  calf.
Smarting:  in  inner  canthus;  of  ends  of  fingers.
Rawness  of  chest ;  behind  ears;  of  throat.
Burning:  in  eyes;  in  gums;  in  throat;  in  nape  of  neck;
in  neck  of  bladder;  in  urethra;  in  female  genitals;  in
vagina;  of  psoriasis  palmaria; in  palms;  in ends of
fingers;  of  soles;  in  corns;  of  skin;  of  hands.
Heat:  in  head ;  in  face;  in  palms;  in  soles;  pressing  on

heart.
Oppressive  feeling:  in  chest.

Stiffness :  of  small  of  back  ;  in  coccyx  ;  of  finger  joints ;  of
thighs;  in  legs,  knees  and  ankles;  of  shoulders  and
ankles ;  of  neck.


PETROLEUM.  292

Heaviness:  in  head  ;  of  thighs;  of  feet;  in  legs.

.Fuhiess :  in  pit  of  stomach.

Sprained  feeling:  in  wrists.

Weak  feeling:  in  stomach;  in  abdomen;  in  bowels  and
rectum  ;  in  anus.

Tingling :  in  abdominal  muscles.

Scratching:  in  throat.

Dryness :  of  r.  side  of  nose ;  of  lids ;  of  ears ;  in  nose ;  in
fauces;  in  mouth  and  throat;  of  pharynx ;  in  larynx.

Numbness :  of  outer  head  ;  of  teeth.

Itching- biting:  of  anus  and  perineum.

Itching :  on  scalp  ;  in  eyes  ;  of  lids ;  behind  ears;  of  tip  of
nose ;  in  abdomen  ;  intense  from  coccyx  upward,  also
in  nates;  in  vulva;  of  herpes  on  perineum  ;  in  meatus;
of  urethra ;  of  labise ;  of  labia  majora ;  of  nipples ;  of
papulated  eruption  on  shoulders ;  of  psoriasis  palmaria  ;
of  eczema  on  leg ;  of  chilblains ;  violent,  of  skin ;  of
hands;  of  pustules.

Coldness:  in  teeth;  of  abdomen;  about  heart ;  of  feet;  of
face;  of  hands;  of  legs.
"Tissues.  M  Emaciation,  irritability  ;  child  vehement;  sus-
ceptible to  electric  changes  ;  sudden  urging  in  morning;
followed  by  profuse  watery  stool ;  eczema,  excoriations,
cracked,  bleeding  rhagades ;  diarrhoea  only  during  day,
colic,  arising  from  sleep  in  morning,  >  bending  double ;
hunger  after  stool ;  gushing  stool. ^Atrophy  of  infants.

I  Cured  promptly  during  Summer  of  1872  various  forms  of
diseases,  in  all  of  which  the  following  symptoms  were
prominent:  great  chilliness  with  occasional  flushes  of
heat ;  coldness  of  legs  ;  vertigo ;  violent  pressing  pain
in  forepart  of  head;  whizzing  and  ringing  in  ears;
hardness  of  hearing  ;  unpleasant  bitter  taste  ;  loss  of
appetite  ;  diarrhoea  only  during  day,  not  at  night,  or
at  least  <  during  day.

'Congestions;  hemorrhages,  blood  light  red,  from  internal
organs.

lllncreased  secretion  from  mucous  membranes.

I  Chronic  catarrhs,  urethral,  uterine,  intestinal,  bronchial.

1  Sprains  of  joints,  especiall}^  in  old  rheumatic  patients.

■  Rheumatism;  knees  stiff,  with  sharp  sticking  pains;
stiffness  of  neck  and  cracking  sound  when  moving  head.

Easy  dislocations  of  jaw,  etc.

Swelling  and  induration  of  glands ;  also  after  contusions.

Scrofulosis  and  rachitis;  protracted  ill-treated  cases,  with
hectic  fever  and  profuse  fetid  suppuration  ;  unhealthy
skin,  small  wounds  ulcerate  and  spread.

Extensive  varix,  quite  painful,  with  numbness  or  sticking
itching  in  skin.


293  PETROLEUM.

■  After  severe  burn,  here  and  there  upon  dorsum  of  hand

arose  bunches  of  pale  and  unhealthy  granulations,  quar-
ter of  an  inch  high  and  exquisitely  sensitive  (Kerosene
and  olive  oils,  equal  parts,  locally).

I  Brown spots on arms, neck,  chest and lower  limbs;

falling  off  of  hair  ;  rheumatic  stiffness  of  shoulders  and
ankles. ^Secondary  syphilis.

I I  Chilblains.

*^  Touch. Passive  Motion. Injuries. Sprains  and  bruises.
After  burns  or  scalds  (cosmoline  dressing).
SI  Complaints  from  riding  in  a  carriage,  railroad  car,  or  in

a  ship.
Touch:  slightest,  <  pain  in  head; scalp  very  sore;  ear

and  surrounding  parts  sore;  swelling  on  jaw  painful ;

slightest  touch  unbearable;  pit  of  stomach  sore;  legs

painful; finger  nails  painful; spots  on  legs  painful;

must  rub  eruption  on  legs  with  rough  towel  till  skin

comes  off.
Scratching:  on  scalp  causes  a  pain;  causes  burning  with

moisture in hemorrhoids; causes itching to  change

place;  causes  exudation  of  serous  fluid.
When  biting  on  teeth:  pain  in  them.
Hard  pressure  is  not  painful,  but  soft  touch  or  contact  of

clothes  is  unbearable:  zona.
Pinching  parts:  >  itching  of  hemorrlioids.
Riding  in  carriage:  nausea;  vomiting  <  ;  diarrhoea  <.
*^  Skin. iSkin  of  whole  body  sore  and  painful,  unhealthy,  even

slight  wounds  suppurate  and  spread; general  tendency

to  fester,  skin  is  slow  to  heal.
iRliagades,  particularl}'  when  occurring  in  Winter;  hands

chap,  crack  and  burn,  and  itch  intolerably.
Brown  or  yellow  spots  on  skin.
"Itching,  sore,  moist  surfaces  or  deep  cracks.
Welts  and  blisters,  M'ith  raw  feeling.
llEczema; vesicular  eruption  forming  thick  scabs  and

oozing  pus;  skin  harsh  and  dry;  deep  cracks  and  fis-
sures which  bleed  and  suppurate.

■  Herpes  on  malleolus,  on  chest,  nape  of  neck,  perineum

and  knee.

■  Itching  herpes,  followed  by  ulcers.

I  I  External  hard  pressure  is  not  painful,  but  a  soft  touch,
the  contact  of  the  shirt,  is  unbearable. ^Zona.

I  I  Itching  and  burning  pustules,  with  great  weakness  on
exertion;  great  lassitude;  <  in  fresh  air. ^Ecthyma.

■  Many  furuncles  on  neck  and  arms,  with  ulceration  of  ears.

■  I Boils;  fissures.

■  Porrigo  and  tinea  favosa,

■  Burns  (locally).


PETROLEUM.  294

llPainful  chilblains  and  chaps.

I  Ulcers  with  stinging  pain  and  proud  flesh;  often  deep,
with  raised  edges ;  sensitive,  spongy ;  deep  fistulous
ulcers;  discharges  very  offensive;  redness  of  areola;
hard  to  heal;  pus  scanty,  acrid, corroding;  sanious  and
watery;  <  from  cold  and  in  Winter;  chronic.

I  iSores  produced  by  lying  in  bed  ;  decubitus.
*'  Stages  of  Life,  Constitution. 1 1  Light  hair  and  skin.

Especially  suitable  for  lean,  slender  persons.

D.  C,  set.  8  months ;  eczema.

M.  B.,  set.  6;  eczema.

Girl,  set.  7;  eczema.

Boy,  set.  8  ;  eczema.

K.  J.,  set.  11 ;  disease  of  eighteen  months  standing  and
continually  growing  worse,  zinc  ointment  and  other  ap-
palictions  without  benefit ;  eczema.

Man,  set.  29,  suffering  for  a  year ;  hardness  of  hearing.

Man,  set.  29,  strong,  sanguine,  choleric  temperament,  suffer-
ing four  years;  diarrhoea.

Mrs.  G.,  set.  37  ;  pain  in  coccyx.

Lady,  set.  45,  robust  constitution,  choleric,  sanguine  tem-
perament, suffering  since  girlhood;  mother  subject  to
similar  attacks ;  migraine.

Man,  set.  46,  suffering  five  weeks;  sore  throat.

Man,  set.  50,  plethoric,  corpulent,  suffering  several  months;
mental  disturbance.

Woman,,  set.  50;  suffering  for  years ;  headache.

Man,  set.  61  ;  cough  and  melancholia.

Man,  set.  68;  suffering  eight  years ;  sore  and  lame  leg.

Woman,  set.  72 ;  suffering  nineteen  years ;  hsematuria.

Old  lady,  feeble  constitution  ;  vertigo.

Strong  healthy  peasant,  after  a  chill  four  months  pre-
•  viously ;  rheumatic  dysecoia.

Man,  suffering  nearly  a  year;  piles  and  fissure  of  anus.

Man,  mulatto;  herpes  of  scrotum.

Mrs.  G.,  suffering  nine  years ;  salt  rheum  on  1.  arm.

Man,  suffering  six  years  ;  salt  rheum  affecting  hands.

Man,  robust;  psoriasis  palmaris.

Girl,  suffering  three  years ;  eruption  on  hands.

Man,  suffering  for  last  ten  or  fifteen  3^ears ;  cracking  of
finger  tips.

Lady, contracted disease from husband ; secondary
syphilis.
^^  Relations. Antidoted  by: CoccuL,  Nux  vom.

It  antidotes :  lead-poisoning.

Compatible:  Bryon.,  Cole,  ost.,  Lycop.,  Nitr.  ac,  Nux  vom.,
Pulsat.,  Sepia,  Silica,  Sulphur.

Compare:  the  Carbons,  and  especially  Graphit.  and
Sulphur ;  also  Colchic.  and  Tabac.


2Do  PETROSELINUM.

PETROSELINUM.

Parsley.  '  Vmhelliferse.

Tincture  of  the  whole  fresh  plant  when  coming  into  bloom.

Authorities. — Bethmann,  Archives,  vol.  18,  p.  34,  Eoth,  Gazette,  1850,  p.
588;  Sonnenberg,  A.  H.  Z.,  vol.  56,  p.  76;  G^oraorrAcea,  Attomyr,  Hahnemann,
Gross,  Vehsemeyer,  Miiller,  Wurda,  Pley],  Schreter,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  2,
p.  92;  Reil,  Meyer,  Sonnenberg,  Gollmaim,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  5,  p.  548;  Use
in  ague,  Trans.  W.  H.  C,  1876,  p.  421.

''  Sight  and  Eyes. Blind  at  night  with  swelling  of  eyes.
"  Hearing  and  Ears. Shrill  singing  in  ears,  like  a  bell  ring-
ing out  of  tune.
"Appetite, Thirst, Desires, Aversions. Thirsty and

hungry,  3'et  as  soon  as  they  commence  to  drink  or  to  eat

they  lose  all  desire.
"'  Scrobiculum  and  Stomach. Twitching,  jerking  pains  in

epigastrium, flatulent eructations, colic, nausea and

vomiting.
^"  Stool and Rectum. Clayish, whitish stools; chronic

diarrhoea.
Burning  at  anus.
^^  Urinary  Organs, i Sudden  urging  to  urinate.

iCIiild  suddenly  seized  with  desire  to  urinate;  if  he  cannot

be  gratified  immediately  he  jumps  up  and  down  with

pain.
iSo  much  pain  when  he  passes  urine  as  to  cause  him  to

shiver  and  dance  around  room  in  agony.

■  Frequent  desire  to  urinate,  recurring  nearly  every  half

hour,  caused  by  crawling  stitch  behind  navicular  fossa.

I  I  Drawing  and  pressure  in  fossa  navicularis.

During  micturition,  burning  and  tingling  from  perineum,
through  whole  urethra.

Tingling  in  urethra,  followed  by  pressure  in  region  of
Cowper's  gland,  early  morning,  >  sitting  or  standing.

•  Drawing  and  sticking  in  fossa  navicularis,  after  urinat-
ing changed  to  a  cutting  biting.

Drawing,  afterwards  itching  in  fossa  navicularis.

■  Slight  burning  in  fossa  navicularis  while  urinating.

■  Frequent  voluptuous  itching  in  fossa.

■  Discharge  of  milky  fluid  or  mucus  from  urethra,  aggluti-

nating orifice.


PETROSELINUM.  296

I  I  Albuminous  yellow  urethral  discharge. ^Gonorrhoea.
^^  Male  Sexual  Organs. i Priapism  without  curvature of
penis.
Profuse  emissions  towards  morning.

■  Frequent  voluptuous  tickling  in  navicular  fossa.

■  Gonorrhoea.

■  Gonorrhoea  with  sudden  urging  to  urinate  and  strangury.

■  Troublesome  tickling  and  itching  in  urethra,  with  con-

stant desire  to  urinate,  <  in  morning  in  bed;  >
when  sitting  or  standing;  chronic  cases;  old  persons.
•  iGonorrhoea:  inflammation  very  high  ;  intense,  madden-
ing, biting-itching,  deep  in  urethra,  patient  almost  wild
with  it,  feels  as  if  he  must  push  some  rough  article
down  to  the  spot  and  rub  it  for  relief;  discharge  usually
profuse ;  chordee.
I  I  Albuminous  yellow  discharge  from  urethra.

■  Discharge very  scanty,  usually  occurring  after  indul-

gence in  liquor  or  spiced  food  ;  frequent  severe  priapism
with  chordee;  at  times  pains  in  fossa  navicularis;
dribbling  of  urine  after  urination. ^Chronic  gonorrhoea.

■  Gonorrhoeal  affections  when  neck  of  bladder  is  involved

and  there  is  sudden  urgent  desire  to  urinate;  can
hardly  retain  his  urine  until  he  gets  to  a  convenient
place.

■  Urethral  disease,  especially  gonorrhoea,  when  inflamma-

tion has  traveled  back  and  patient  complains  of  pain  at
root  of  penis;  sudden  irresistible  desire  to  urinate.

■  Acute  and  chronic  urethritis.

■  ■Gleet.

^^  Neck  and  Back.  Bubbling  sensation  in  muscles  of  back
and  arms.

^^  Rest. Position. Motion. Sitting : tingling in urethra
and  pressure  in  region  of  Cowper's  gland  >.
Standing:  tingling  in  urethra  and  in  region  of  Cowper's

gland.
Pain  causes  him  to  dance  around  room.

^'  Sleep. Sleep  late  and  full  of  anxious  dreams.

^^  Time. Morning:  tingling  in  urethra  and  pressure  in  region
of  Cowper's  gland  ;  towards,  profuse  seminal  emissions ;
desire  to  urinate  <.
Night:  blind.

^^  Fever.  lAgue,  especially  quotidian  type;  periodicity
strongly  marked  ;  stages  regular  both  in  their  evolution
and  succession  ;  adapted  to  acute,  non-miasmatic  fevers
which  appear  to  depend  upon  defective  assimilation  or
perverted  innervation ;  indicated  in  men,  when  the
pyrexia  is  accompanied  by  flatulent  dyspepsia,  with
heat and twitching in  epigastric  region,  eructations,


297  PETROSELINUM.

nausea,  voiniling  and  colics;  in  women  of  strong
plethoric  constitutions,  whose  menses  are  painful  and
slight  or  even  absent,  with  lumbar  or  inguinal  pains;
slight  cerebral  excitement.

■  Intermittent fevers complicated  with  abdominal  affec-

tions (eight  cases  cured  after  failure  of  Quinine).

■  Intermittent  fevers; complicating  traumatic  or  chronic

inflammation  of  urethra  and  even  stricture.
^'Attacks,  Periodicity. Every  half  hour:  desire  to  urinate.

Periodicity  in  fevers  strongly  marked.
^^  Sensations. Pain  :  during  urination  ;  in  fossa  navicularis;

at  root  of  penis.
Twitching,  jerking  pain  :  in  epigastrium.
Cutting  biting  :  after  urinating.
Drawing  and  sticking:  in  fossa  navicularis.
Burning:  at  anus;  from  perineum  through  whole  urethra.
Drawing  and  pressure :  in  fossa  navicularis.
Pressure:  in  region  of  Cowper's  gland.
Crawling  stitch  :  behind  navicular  fossa.
Bubbling  sensation  :  in  muscles  of  back  and  arms.
Biting-itching :  deep  in  urethra ;  voluptuous  tickling  in

navicular  fossa.
Tickling:  in  urethra.
Titillation :  behind  fossa.
Tingling:  in  urethra.
*'  Stages  of  Life,  Constitution. Man,  set.  19,  suffering  two

weeks ;  gonorrhoea.
Man,  set.  22,  suffering  eight  days ;  gonorrhoea.
Man,  set.  38,  robust,  suffering  six  years ;  gleet.
Man,  set.  70,  when  20,  contracted  gonorrhoea  from  which

he  has  since  suffered.
^^  Relations. Compare: Cannab., Canthar. and Mercur. in

gonorrhoea with sudden and frequent urging to

urinate.


PHELLANDRIUM.  298


PHELLANDRIUM.

Five-Leaved  Water  Hemlock.  UmbellifersR.

Grows  in  swampy  places  and  on  river  banks  in  Europe  and  Northern  Asia.
Proved  by  Nenningand  Richter,  Hartlauband  Trinks,  R.  A.  M.  L.,  vol.  '2,  p.  138_
Turnbull  observed  the effects  of  seeds  in  large  doses. — Pharm.  Journ.,  1853,
p.  590.

Clinical  Authorities. — Headache,  Dudgeon,  B.  J.  H.,  vol.  28,  p.  404  ;  Cough,
GouUon,  Horn.  Kec,  vol.  2,  p.  151 ;  Use  after  Whooping  cough,  A.  R.,  Riick.  Kl.
Erf.,  vol.  5,  p.  727  ;  Bronchitis,  emphysema  and  ulcers  on  legs,  Werner,  Hah.
Mo.,  vol.  14,  p.  116,  from  Horn.  Rundschau ;  Bronchial  catarrh,  Pitet,  Raue's  Rec,
1875,  p.  15,  from  Bib.  Hom.,  p.  32 ;  Pain  in  breast,  Gross,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf,  vol.  2,  p.
418;  Pain  in  nipples,  Gross,  Hughes  Pharm.,  p.  602;  Sleepiness,  Ussher,  Hom.
Rec,  vol.  4,  p.  66,  from  Hom.  World,  Jan.  1889  ;  Ague,  Werner,  Hah.  Mo.,  vol.
14,  p.  117,  from  Hom.  Rundschau.

*  Mind. Anxious,  ill-humored,  sad  and  peevish.
^  Sensorium. Sense  of  intoxication  in  open  air.

Movement  to  and  fro  in  forehead,  almost  as  if  head  were
■moving  to  and  fro.

Vertigo  :  with  heaviness  of  head ;  with  disposition  to  fall
forward,  backward  and  sideways,  particularly  to  side  to
which  one  turns  in  room  ;  no  less  when  sitting  than
during  motion  ;  <  during  walk  in  open  air ;  >  lying.
^  Inner  Head.  Sound  in  brain  as  if  striking  a  piece  of
silver,  early  in  morning,  waking  one,  and  gradually
going  off.

Headache  which  involves  nerves  going  to  eye;  crushing
feeling  on  top  of  head,  with  burning  of  eyes  and  lach-
rymation.

Pressure  at  vertex  with  weak  and  aching  eyes.

I  I  Pain  like  a  heav}'-  weight,  stone  or  lump  of  lead  on  top
of  head,  with  aching,  burning,  shooting  pains  in  tem-
ples. ^Headache.

Dull  headache  and  majority  of  head  symptoms  disappear
after  dinner.

Head  feels  large,  full  and  heavy,  as  if  it  would  be  drawn
backward  by  a  weight  in  nape  of  neck.
^  Sight  and  Eyes,  l  '  Ciliary  neuralgia,  great  pain  on  at-
tempting to  read  or  sew,  fearful  intolerance  of  light ;
must  sit  in  a  dark  corner;  lids  swollen  and  half  closed;
conjunctiva  of  lid  and  caruncle  inflamed,  red,  scarlet;


299  PHELLANDRIUM.

headache  like  a  heavy  weight  on  top  of  head,  witli
burning,  shooting  pains  in  temples.
I  I  Increased  lachrymation  in  both  eyes.

'  Smell and Nose. Red,  burning  nostrils  and  upper  lip
swollen,  with  coryza  and  hoarseness.

"  Taste  and  Tongue.  Red  vesicles  burning  like  fire,  on  r.
border  of  tongue.

"  Appetite,  Thirst.  Desires,  Aversions,  i '  Desire  for
acids.

'*^  Hiccough,  Belching,  Nausea  and  Vomiting.  Eructations
smelling  almost  like  bed-bugs.

"'  Urinary  Organs.  Urging  to  urinate,  with  scanty  emission
and  violent  burning  after  micturition  ;  urine  pale  and
watery,  almost  greenish.

^^  Female  Sexual  Organs. ■  Menses  flowed  only  in  morning
and  evening  and  more  profuse  than  usual.
iVer}'-  painful  tearing  stitches,  extending  through  whole
1.  mamma.

-'  Pregnancy.  Parturition.  Lactation.  iPain  in  nipples
on  each  application  of  child.
■  Always  after  nursing,  intolerable  pain  in  r.  breast,
along  course  of  lactiferous  tubes,  causing  physical
and  great  mental  distress,  so  that  she  lost  her  strength
and  was  seized  with  spells  of  hysterical  weeping.  This
pain  did  not  appear  until  some  time  after  parturition,
but  the  nipples  were  sore  and  there  was  present  a  puru-
lent discharge,  the  pain  appearing  after  nipples  were
healed.

^''  Voice  and  Larynx.  Trachea  and  Bronchia.  1 1  Hoarseness
with  roughness  in  throat;  dry  cough  with  shortness  of
breath ;  stitches  in  chest  and  oppression ;  great  thirst ;
loss  of  appetite;  sleeplessness  on  account  of  cough  ;  small
black  spots,  like  petechise,  disappearing  without  des-
quamation ;  urging  to  urinate,  with  scanty  emission  and
violent  burning  after  micturition ;  urine  pale  and
watery  ;  almost  greenish.  ^Influenza.
1  I  Chronic  bronchial  catarrhs,  with  more  or  less  profuse
expectoration  ;  also  asthma  of  like  character,  especially
when  these  always  return  or  increase  during  the  cold
season  of  the  year,  and  only  abate  on  return  of  warm
weather ;  aged  persons  and  lymphatic  youths.
I  I  Bronchial  catarrh  where  tuberculization  is  suspected;
dry  cough ;  incessant,  persistent,  excited  by  a  tickling
in  trachea.

"^  Cough. I  Continuous  cough  for  an  hour  or  more  early  in
morning,  accompanied  by  dyspnoea  and  prostration.
Dry  cough  with  suffocation  and short  breath,  <  while
walking;  cough  with  mucus  in  throat;  provoking  con-


PHELLANDR[UM.  300

stant  hawking  and  coughing  at  night;  not  relieved  by
sitting  up;  frequent  easy  expectoration  of  mucus  in
morning.

■  Obstinate  nervous  irritation  or  phthisicky  coughs.

I  I  In  consequence  of  whooping  cough  emaciation  with  feb-
rile condition  and  great  oppression  of  chest.
^^  Inner  Chest  and  Lungs,  ii  Violent  stitch  in  r.  mamma
near  sternum,  extending  to  back  between  shoulders,  then
downward  into  r.  side  of  sacrum,  which  is  very  painful
on  breathing.

■  Sharp  stitches  extending  inward  beneath  1.  mamma,  not

affected  by  breathing.

■  Bronchitis  and  emphysema; coarse rales; respiration

short;  cough  continuous  day  and  night,  compelling
him  to  remain  in  sitting  posture;  great  thirst;  loss  of
appetite ;  sleeplessness ;  hands  oedematous ;  atonic
ulcers  on  legs,  with  violent  tearing  stitching  pains;
general  aggravation  during  increase  of  moon,  >  during
decrease.
Phthisis  pulmonum,  especially  where  r.  lung  is  seat  of
lesion  ;  cavity  of  lung,  with  hissing  sound  on  breathing;
continuous  cough  ;  profuse  sweat ;  diarrhoea;  vomiting
of  food  ;  copious  purulent  sputa;  emaciation.

■  Consumption;  last  stages  when  expectoration  is  terribly

offensive.
^'  Neck  and  Back. Sensation  on  1.  side  of  neck  below  jaw,
as  if  a  red-hot  iron  were  moved  along  close  to  that  part.
^^  Rest. Position. Motion. Lying:  vertigo  >.

Sitting:  vertigo; coughing  and  hawking better; cough

compels.
Motion :  vertigo.

Walking: vertigo <; dr}^  cough  with suffocation and
short  breath,  <.
^^  Nerves. Sensation  in  whole  body  as  if  all  the  bloodvessels

were  in  vibrating  motion.
^^  Sleep. ■  Abnormal  sleepiness  for  years,  following  birth  of
last  child  ;  could  liardly  keep  eyes  open  on  account  of
weariness  and  sleepiness ;  would  go  to  sleep  over  her
washtub.
^^  Time. Morning: sound  in  brain  as if  striking silver;
menses  flowing  only ; constant  cough  for  an  hour  or
more ;  easy  expectoration.
After  dinner:  head  symptoms  disappear.
Evening:  menses  only  flowing.
Night :  coughing  and  hawking.
Day  and  night:  continuous  cough.
^^  Temperature  and  Weather. Warm  weather :  asthma  and
catarrhs  abate.


301  PHELLANDRIUM.

Open  air:  sense  of  intoxication;  vertigo  <.

Cold  season :  asthma  and  catarrhs  return  and  increase.
***  Fever.  iChill  every  third  day  at  4  p.m.,  continuing  one
hour  and  preceded  by  severe  rheumatic  pains  in  arms;
fever  and  sweat  lasted  two  hours,  followed  by  violent
headache,  nausea  and  stitching  pains  in  feet;  generally
day  after  attack  there  would  be  entire  inability  to  uri-
nate, or  it  would  pass  off  in  small  quantities  with
urging  and  burning  pains. ^Quartan  ague.

Ague:  in  lymphatic,  feeble  and  very  irritable  persons
without  reaction;  catarrhal  or  pulmonary  affections;
cough  and  muco-purulent  expectoration ;  difficulty  of
respiration;  nervous  trembling ;  anxiety;  want  of  appe-
tite, emaciation,  diarrhoea,  night-sweats,  sleeplessness.
"  Attacks,  Periodicity.  Day  after  attack  of  ague :  inability
to  urinate.

Every  third  da}'^  at  4  p.m.:  chill,  one  hour.

Increase  of  moon  :  general  aggravation.

Decrease  of  moon  :  symptoms

For  years  :  abnormal  sleepiness.
*^  Locality  and  Direction. Right : border  of  tongue  red
vesicles;  intolerable  pain  in  breast;  violent  stitch  in
mamma,  then  to  back  and  down  to  side  of  sacrum;
lung  seat  of  lesion  in  phthisis  pulmonum.

Left :  painful  stitch  through  whole  mamma ;  stitches
inward  beneath  mamma;  as  if  red-hot  iron  were
moved  close  to  neck.
^'Sensations.  As  if  head  were  moving  to  and  fro;  sound  in
brain  as  if  striking  a  piece  of  silver;  as  of  a  stone  or
lump  of  lead  on  top  of  head ;  as  if  head  would  be
drawn  backward  by  a  weight  in  nape  of  neck;  as  if  a
red-hot  iron  were  moved  along  close  to  1.  side  of  neck  ;
as  if  bloodvessels  in  whole  body  were  in  vibrating
motion.

Pain :  in  nipples.

Intolerable  pain  :  in  r.  breast.

Great  pain  :  in  eyes.

Very  painful,  tearing  stitches  through  whole  1.  mamma;
in  ulcers  on  legs.

Stitches:  in  chest,  inward  beneath  1.  mamma;  in  feet;  in
r.  mamma  near  sternum  to  back  between  shoulders,
then  into  r.  side  of  sacrum.

Shooting  pain  :  in  temples.

Rheumatic  pains:  inarms.

Aching :  in  eyes ;  in  temples.

Burning:  of  eyes;  in  temples;  of  nostrils;  of  vesicles  on
tongue;  after  micturition.

Crushing  feeling:  on  top  of  head.


PHELLAND.— PHOSPHOR.  ACIDUM.  302

Pressure :  at  vertex.

Heaviness :  of  head.

Oppression :  of  chest.

Large  feeling:  in  head.

Tickling:  in  trachea.

Roughness :  in  throat.
*''  Stages of Life, Constitution. Adapted  to  persons  of  a
feeble,  irritable,  lymphatic  constitution,  with  weak  and
defective  reaction.

Son  of  Baron  von  Hornstein,  set.  13,  suffering  six  weeks ;
ague.

Lady,  set.  about  50 ;  headache.

Man,  set  53,  stoutly  built,  revenue  officer,  suffering  thirteen
years;  bronchitis,  emphysema  and  ulcers  on  legs.

Mrs.  E.,  spare  build,  has  almost  always  a  slight  cough,  re-
peatedly affected  with  attacks  of  influenza  of  weeks  and
even  months' duration  ;  cough.
**  Relations. Antidoted  by :  Elieum  (diarrhoea).

Compare  : Conium  and  Phytol.  in  symptoms  of  mammse.


PHOSPHORICUM  ACIDUM.

Glacial  Phosphoric  Acid.  HPO^.

Provings  by  Hahnemann,  Becker,  Franz,  Gross,  Gutmann,  Fr.  Hahnemann,
Hermann,  Hartmann,  Langhammer,  Mej-er,  Stapf,  Teuthorn,  Wislicenus,  Hering,
Chronische  Krankheiten  ;  Herinigke,  A.  H.  Z.,  vol.  79,  p.  157 ;  Schelling,  A.  H.  Z.,
vol.  84,  p.  43;  Eobinson,  B.  J.  H.,  vol.  25,  p.  327;  Andrews,  Am.  J,  of  Insan.,

1869,  p.  118  ;  Gale  (from  Farrington),  MSS.

Clinical  Authorities.— A"os/a/(/('a,  Grief,  Woost,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  5,  p.  9  ;
Headache,  Wood,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  5,  p.  92 ;  Occipital  headache,  Bayes,  Horn.
Eev.,  vol.  13,  p.  269;  Chronic  congestion  to  head,  Haynel,  A.  J.  H.  M.  M.,  vol.  4,  p.
136;  Eaue's  Eec,  1872,  p.  2;  Sivelling  of  nose,  Eosenberg,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  5,
p.  173;  Periostitis  of  jaw,  Kunkel,  A.  H.  Z.,  vol.  102,  p.  68;  Toothache,  affection  of
gums,  Hrg.,  Alts.,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  1,  p.  471 ;  Affection  of  teeth,  Altschul,  Eiick.
Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  5,  p.  208  ;  Ulcer  on  tip  of  tongue,  C.  Hg.,  MSS. ;  Cancrum  oris,  Hedges,
Eane's  Eec,  1874,  p.  106,  from  U.  S.  M.  and  S.  J.,  vol.  8,  p.  499  ;  Vomiting  (a  child),
Kick,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  5,  p.  261;  Pains  in  stomach,  Kunkel,  A.  H.  Z.,  vol.  101,
p.  131;  Dyspepsia,  Berghaus,  Eaue's  Eec,  1874,  p.  170,  from  Trans.  A.  I.,  1872,
p.  339;  Swelling  of  inguinal  glands,  Kunkel,  A.  H.  Z.,  vol.  101,  p.  124;  Diarrhoea,
Hrg.,  Griessel,  Lobeth,  L.  in  Z.,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  1,  p.  844;  Kunkel,  A.  H,  Z.,
vol.  101,  p.  131;  Diarrhosa  and  impotence,  Mos?a,  Times  Eet.,  1877;  p.  95;  from


303  PHOSPHORICUM  ACIDUM.

A.  H.  Z.,  vol.  94,  p.  28;  Chronic  diarrhcea,  Cramoisy,  Hah.  Mo.,  vol.  14,  p.  674;
Small,  Eaue's  Eec,  1873,  p.  120,  from  U.  S.  M.  and  S.  J.,  vol.  7,  p.  427 ;  Kimkel,
A.  H.  Z.,  vol.  101,  p.  123,  and  vol.  110,  p.  12 ;  Cholerine,  Engelhard,  Gerstel,  Find-
eisen,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf., vol.  5,  p.  432;  Cholera,  Cholerine,  Quin,  Lobeth,  Reil,  Adler,
Schiiler,  Ruoff,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  1,  p.  957 ;  Use  in  cholera,  Drysdale,  B.  J.  H.,
vol.  8,  p.  163;  Hemorrhoids,  Lobeth,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  1,  p.  1003;  Diabetes,  Lor-
bacher,  H.  K.,  1875,  p.  24;  Pompili,  Walker,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  5,  p.  516;  (9
cases  reported  cured),  Oehme,  Eaue's  Eec,  1874,  p.  211;  Walker,  Eansford,
Hughes,  B.  J.-H.,vol.  16,  p.  456;  vol.  19,  p.  390;  vol.  24,  p.  260;  vol.  31,  p.  369;
Milky  urine  (6  cases),  Hrg.,  Stapf,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  2,  p.  50 ;  Dysuria,  ^gidi,
Eiick.  Kl.  Erf,  vol.  2,  p.  384 ;  Onanism,  impotence,  Wolf,  Lobeth,  Eosenberg,  Kopp,
Eiick.  Kl.  Erf,  vol.  2,  p.  62;  SpermatorrJtoia,  Mossa,  Times  Eet.,  1877,  p.  104,  from
A.  H.  Z.,  vol.  94,  p.  27  ;  Prostatorrhoea,  Pulford,  Med.  Adv.,  Oct.,  1888 ;  Oleet,  Eo-
senberg, Mosaik,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  2,  p.  95;  Menstrual  disturbance,  Kirsch,
Eiick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  2,  p.  243;  Cough  and  hcenioptysis,  IJoffendahl,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf,
vol.  3,  p.  222 ;  Use  in  pneumonia,  Miiller,  Schiiler,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf.,vol.  3,  p.  325  ;  Car-
diac weakness,  Hale,  Eaue's  Eec,  1875,  p.  133  from  H.  W.,  vol.  9,  p.  194;  Spondy-
litis of  cervical  vertebra',,  Kunkel,  A.  H.  Z.,  vol.  101,  p.  122;  Spinal  irritation,  Miller,
T.  H.  M.  S.  Pa.,  1885,  p.  1 80  ;  Neidhard,  B.  J.  H.,  vol.  27,  p.  554 ;  Weakness  of  spine,
Bayes,  Hom.  Eev.,  vol.  13,  p.  269 ;  Pain  in  stump  of  finger,  Schraitt,  Horn.  Phys.,
vol.  5,  p.  168 ;  Pains  in  loins,  Berridge,  N.  E.  M.  G.,  vol.  9,  p.  288 ;  Periostitis  and
necrosis  of  tibia,  Kunkel,  A.  H.  Z.,  vol.  101,  p.  131 ;  vol.  110,  p.  12 ;  Ulcers  on  leg,
Kunkel,  A..  H.  Z.,  vol.  102,  p.  68 ;  Pehility,  Payne,  N.  E.  M.  G.,  vol.  6,  p.  166  ;
Paralytic  xveakncss,  Bayes,  Hom.  Eev.,  vol.  13,  p.  270 ;  Prostration,  Kunkel,  A.  H.  Z.,
vol.  101,  p.  131 ;  Nervous  prostration,  Bayes,  Hom.  Eev.,  vol.  13,  p.  269;  Hysteria,
Williamson,  Eaue's  Eec.,  1872,  p.  2,  from  Trans.  Penn.  Soc. ;  Typhoid  fever,  Bcenning-
liausen,  Hom.  Clin.,  vol.  3,  p.  54;  (3  cases),  Wurmb  and  Caspar,  B.  J.  H.,  vol.  12,
p.  23;  Trinks,  B.  J.  H.,  vol.  29,  p.  295;  Wurmb  (reports  160  cases  cured) ;  Lcew
(reports  35  cases),  Eummel,  Giibel,  Trinks,  Lobeth,  Gross,  Horner,  Hartlaub,  Cas-
par, Eiick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  4,  pp.  769,  776;  Ague,  Bayes,  Hom.  Eev.,  vol.  13,  p.  269 ;
Lade,  Hom.  Eev.,  vol.  14,  p.  544 ;  Fever  attending  caries  of  vertebra},  Goullon,  Eaue's
Eec,  1871,  p.  171,  from  A.  H.  Z.,  vol.  81,  p.  70  ;  Night  sweats,  Bayes,  Hom.  Eev.,  vol.
13,  p.  269; -Er?/s?^ek(.s,  Thorer,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  4,  p.  146;  Variola,  Altschul,
Eiick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  4,  p.  113;  Syphilis,  Eosenberg,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf,  vol.  2,  p.  163.

*  Mind.  Unconsciousness,  no  complaints ;  even  pinching  is  not

noticed.
iWeak  memory;  loss  of  ideas  and  weakness  of  mind;  on

thinking  he  becomes  dizzy;  cannot  collect  his  thoughts

in  proper  order. ^Brain  fag.
Uncapacity  for  thought  in  morning.

I  Hypochondriasis  from  sexual  abuse.

liQuiet,  indifferent,  unwilling  to  speak,  or  hasty  speech.

I I  Listless,  apathetic;  remarl^able  indifference  to  every-
thing in  life;  especially  if  there  be  emaciation  and
debility.

■  Cannot find the right word when talking; answers

either  reluctantly  and  slowly  or  short  and  incorrectly.

■  Homesickness,  with  inclination  to  weep.


PHOSPHORICUM  ACIDUM.  304

■  Hysteria,  in  women  of  dark  complexion; change  of  life.
iSadness,  grief  and  disposition  to  weep.

1 1  Ailments  from  care_,  grief,  sorrow,  chagrin,  homesick-
ness or  disappointed  love;  particularly  with  drowsi-
ness; night  sweats  towards  morning;  emaciation.

I  Anxiety  and  doubt  concerning  his  recovery;  insomnia
and  prostration.

I  Hectic  fever,  sweat  and  flushing  of  face,  especially  in
afternoon,  evening  or  towards  night ;  of  crushing  weight
on  vertex. ^Effects  of  grief.

I  I  Chronic  effects  of  fright,

■  Delirium,  quiet,  not  violent,  with  stupefaction  and  dul-

ness  of  head.

■  Depression  of  sensorium,  and  muttering,  unintelligible

speech;  lies  in  a  stupor,  or  in  a  stupid  sleep,  unconscious
of  all  that  is  going  on  around  him ;  when  aroused  is
fully  conscious.

■  Disinclined  to  work.

■  Dread  of  the  future;  brooding  over  one's  condition.
^Sensorium. ■Vertigo:  head  sinks  forward  or  backward  ;  in

morning;  towards  evening,  while  standing  or  walking;
on  closing  eyes;  in  hypochondriacs  after  excess  in  ven-
ery;  at  climaxis  with  flushes  of  heat  and  sweat;  in
t^^phus,  so  that  they  fall  when  sitting  up ;  lying  in  bed,
as  if  feet  were  going  up,  with  head  remaining  still ;  after
reflection.

■  Sensation  as  if  intoxicated,  in  evening,  in  warm  room,

with  humming  in  head, -which  feels  as  if  it  would  burst

when  coughing.
Confusion  and  painful  cloudiness  of  head,  especially  on

awaking.
Stupefying  pain  in  forehead,  with  somnolency  without

snoring,  eyes  being  closed.

■  Dulness  of  head;  inability  to  think;  as  after  excessive

coition.

Great  heaviness  of  head.
^  Inner  Head.  ■Severe  pressing  pain  in  forehead  and
temples,  every  morning;  aversion  to  food;  nausea  be-
fore eating,  and  vomiting  after  eating;  watery,  at  times
clay-colored  diarrhoea;  pale,  thin,  debilitated  and  weak;
has  grown  too  rapidly.

■Stupefying  pain  in  forehead,  with  somnolency  without
snoring,  eyes  being  closed.

Stitches  over  one  (r.)  eye.

I  I  Dull  headache,  with  tingling  in  head.

■  Pressure  as  from  a  weight  in  head,  from  above  down-

ward.
Pressing  tensive  headache,  especially  on  side  on  which
one  lies.


305  PHOSPHORICUM  ACIDUM.

■  Dreadful  pain  on  top  of  head,  as  if  brain  were  crushed,

after  long-continued  grief.
Headache  forces  one  to  lie  down  and  is  insupportable,  <
from  least  shaking  or  noise,  especially  music.

■  Headaches  usually  go  from  behind  forward  and  are  >  by

lying  down.
■Morning  headache.

■  ■Schoolgirl's  headache;  from  overuse  of  eyes.

■  ■Occipital  headache  and  pain  in  nape  of  neck  from  ex-

hausted nerve-power  or  excessive  grief.
I  I  Great  heaviness  of  head.

■  Chronic  congestions  to  head,  caused  by  fright  or  grief.

■  Cerebral  weakness  from  brain  fag.

*  Outer  Head.  ■  Periosteal  pains:  bones  ache  as  if  scraped  ;
>  in  motion ;  when  l^ang  pain  shifts  to  side  on  which
he  lies.

■  Hair  turns  grey  early;  flaxen  and  very  greasy;  falls  off

after  grief  and  sorrow,  or  after  fevers.
I  i  Itching  on  scalp.

I  I  Erysipelas,  traumatic  form,  where  periosteum  is  affected.
^  Sight  and  Eyes. Eyes  sensitive  to  light ;  lachrymation.
Aversion  to  sunlight,  sees  colors,  as  of rainbow,  or is

dazzled  on  looking  at  bright  objects;  sees  variegated

colors  where  there  is  but  one.

■  Amblyopia:  optic  nerve  appears  torpid.

I  I  Blindness  with  frequent  desire  to  wink.

■  Torpid  amaurosis,  caused  b^^  debilitating  losses.

■  Headaches  of  school  children from  overuse  of  eyes  (as-

thenopia.)

I  I  Pupils  dilated.

1  I  Eyes  look  glassy,  lustreless  or  staring.

Pressing  in  eyes,  as  if  eyeballs  were  too  large.

Burning  of  eyelids  and  corners  of  eyes,  especially  in  even-
ing by  candlelight.

Yellow  spots  in  white  of  eye.

Coldness  of  inner  surface  of  e^'elids.

■  Margins  of  lids  swollen,  red,  rounded ;  lashes  fall  out;

particles  of  pus  on  lashes  and  in  canthi;  itching  and
burning;  sensitiveness  to  candlelight;  difficult  opening
of  eyes  in  morning.

■  Hordeolum.

^Hearing  and  Ears. '  i Intolerance  of  noise,  especially  of
music, ^lieadache.
Every  sound  re-echoes  loudly  in  ears.
Shrill  sound  in  ears  on  blowing  nose.

■  ■Roaring  in  ear,  with  difficult  hearing.

■  Nervous  deafness,  after  typhoid  diseases.

■  Dull  hearing:  stupefaction;  especiall}^  to  distant  sounds'
vol..  VIII. — 20.


PHOSPHORICUM  ACIDUM.  306

from  mental  or  bodily  exhaustion ;  after  severe  acute
diseases ;  does  not  hear  tick  of  watch  held  at  moderate
distance,  when  held  close  to  ear  hears  no  tick,  only  a
hissing,  hears  it  more  distinctly  at  a  distance  of  a  foot
and  a  half.

1  1  Spasmodic  drawing  pain  in  ear.

Earache  on  blowing  nose.

I  I  Otalgia:  stitches  in  ears  and  drawing  pains  in  cheeks
and  teeth  ;  from  music.
^  Smell  and  Nose. Sense  of  smell  too  acute.

Fetid  smell  from  nose.

■  Bleeding  from  nose.

I  Nosebleed  in  typhus,  giving  no  relief.

Discharge  of  bloody  pus  from  nose.

I  I  Violent  coryza;  oza^na.

iSwelling  of  dorsum  of  nose,  with  red  patches  or  pimples

on  tip  of  nose,  and  throbbing  sensation  therein; cold

swelling  of  nose,  with  itching  and  burning.
Inclination  to  bore  with  fingers  in  nose.
^  Upper  Face. Hippocratic  face,  lips  and  tongue  very  pale.
I  Sickly,  pale  or  earthy  complexion; lustreless,  sunken

eyes  with  blue  margins.
Skin  of  face  feels  tense,  as  if  white  of  egg  had  dried  on  it.
Burning  in  skin  of  cheeks.
Heat  of  side  efface  on  which  he  is  not  lying.
I  I  Eruptions  of  large  pimples  on  face.
iPimples  on  forehead  and  body  of  onanists.
Eruptions  on  face,  yellow  'brown  crusts.
I  Hairs  of  beard  fall  out,  especially  after  grief  and  sorrow.
I  I  Sensation  of  coldness  on  one  side  of  face.
^  Lower  Face.  Sensation  as  if  lower  jaw  were  going  to  break.
Large  pimples  and  herpes  on  face  and  chin.
Lips  dry,  scurfy  and  suppurating.
Yellow  brown  crustlike  eruptions,  with  pus  on  lower  lip

near  corner  of  mouth.
Pimples  and  scurfs  on  vermilion  borders  of  lips.
Scrofulous  swelling  on  nose  and  lips,  with  tendency  to

bleeding.

■  Periostitis  of  upper  and  lower  jaw.

'"  Teeth  and  Gums. Sensation  of  coldness  in  roots  of  molars.
I  Pains  from  hollow  teeth,  extending  into  head.
I  Hollow  teeth  ache  only  when  food  gets  into  them.
I  Caries  of  teeth  in  scorbutic  subjects.
Teeth  become  yellow  and  feel  dull.

■  Bleeding,  swollen  gums;  tearing  pains  in  teeth,  <  when

warm  in  bed,  and  from  heat  or  cold ;  burning  in  front
teeth  during  night.

■  Scorbutic affection of  gums, after abuse  of  mercury;


307  *  PHOSPHORICUM  ACIDUM.

gums  white,  swollen,  easily  bleeding,  standing  off  from
teeth ;  teeth  yellow  and  very  loose ;  fetid,  putrid  odor
from  mouth.

Painful  tubercle  on  gums.

iDiseases  of  children  during  dentition.
"  Taste  and  Tongue. Taste  as  from  rotten  eggs  in  mouth  in
morning.

Bread  tastes  bitter.

iTongue:  coated  white;  pale  and  flabby;  and  lips  pale,  in
typhus;  clammy,  sticky;  gluey,  in  choleraic  diseases;
red  streak  in  middle ;  dry ;  swollen  with  pain  on  talk-
ing; burning;  smarts  only  at  night.

Smarting  in  mouth  when  masticating.

I  Bites  side  of  tongue  involuntarily,  also  at  night,

I  I  Bites  her  tongue  frequently  and  has  a  hard  nodule  on
tip,  upon  which  forms  a  vesicle  resulting  in  an  unclean
looking  ulcer  with  a  hard  edge ;  burning  pains  <  at
night.
'^  Inner  Mouth.  Dryness  of  mouth  and  throat;  grey  whitish
coating  of  tongue.

Tenacious  mucus  in  mouth  and  fauces.

Ulceration  of  soft  velum  with  burning  pain.

I  iCancrum  oris,  following  measles  in  syphilitic  children.

■  Mercurial  syphilitic  ulceration  of  lips,  gums  and  soft

palate,  with  swelling  of  bones ;  condylomata.
"  Throat. Dryness  of  palate  and  whole  mouth,  without  thirst.
Velum  palati  feels  excoriated  with  burning.
Sore  throat,  soreness,  scraping,  stinging, <  swallowing

food.
Hawks  up  tough  mucus.
Nasal  voice.
"  Appetite,  Thirst. Desires,  Aversions, i Canine  hunger
or  loss  of  appetite ;  the  little  food  taken  comes  up  with
acid eructations; half  an hour  after  eating  crampy
pains  in  stomach,  with  distress  from  acid  eructations.
. Excessive,  unquenchable  thirst;  a  sensation  of  dryness  of
whole  body.
Inclination  for  warm  food.

■  Longs  for  something  refreshing  and  juicy;  bread  is  too

dry.

Desire  for  beer  and  milk.

Averse  to  coffee,  wine,  beer,  or  spirituous  liquors.

Sour  food  causes  bitter  eructations  or  flatulency.
*°  Eating  and  Drinking. Bad  effects  from  sour  food  and

drink.
'"Hiccough,  Belching,  Nausea  and  Vomiting, i Sourish,
acid,  or  bitter  eructations.

Nausea:  as  if  in  soft  palate;  continuous  in  throat;  vomit-
ing of  food.


PHOSPHORICUM  ACIDUM.  *  308

"  Scrobiculum  and  Stomach. Sensation  as  if  stomach  were
being  balanced  up  and  down.
1  I  Pressing  in  stomach:  as  from  a  heavy  load  ;  after  eat-
ing, <  from  touch  and  motion  ;  with  drowsiness.

■  Pressing  pain  in  stomach  whenever  pit  of  stomach is

touched  ;  cannot  button  clothes  tightl}'.

I  I  Violent  pressure  in  pit  of  stomach  through  to  back  ;  <
from  touch. ^Gastralgia.

I  I  Paroxysmal  pressing  pains  in  stomach,  several  times  a
day,  momentarily  >  from  warm  food  and  drink,  but  <
after  an  hour  or  two;  constant  drawing  rheumatic  pains
in  1.  lower  extremity,  <  when  part  becomes  cold,  >  from
warmth  of  bed;  tendency  to  sweat ;  sensitive  to  draught
or  wind  ;  pressure  in  stomach  <  after  a  connection  ;
hypochondriacal  mood  and  expression  of  face;  irritable;
cannot  tolerate  a  Avarm  room  nor  coffee;  awakes  be-
tween 1  and  3  A.M.;  frequent  urination;  much  collec-
tion of  mucus  in  mouth,  particnlarl}^  in  morning;  flatu-
lence, great  rumbling,  in  abdomen  from  umbilicus  into
epigastrium  and  in  both  sides  of  chest.

I  Acidity  of  stomach.

iLoss  of  appetite;  the  little  food  taken  comes  up  with
acid eructations  half  an  hour after eating; crampy

-  pains  in  stomach,  with  distress  from  acid  eructations.
^Dyspepsia.

■  Dyspepsia  after  loss  of  vital  fluids.

'"  Hypochondria.  Heaviness,  stitches,  burning  of  one  spot
in  region  of  liver  in  passage  of  gall-stones;  jaundice
in  scrofulous  children  or  from  grief.

Pain  universally  in  liver  during  menses.

I  I  Pygemic  symptoms. ^Hepatitis.
'^■Abdomen. l  i Spleen enlarged,  extending beyond ribs.
/^Typhoid.

iMeteoristic  distension  of  abdomen;  rumbling  and  gur-
gling and  noise  as  from  water;  painless  stools.

I  Flatulency  much  augmented  by  sour  food.

I  J'ain  in  umbilical  region,  audible  rumbling  and  gurgling
in  abdomen  on  making  pressure.

I  I  Griping  colic.

I  I  Pressure  in  several  places  in  lower  abdomen.

I  I  One  year  ago  suffered  from  gonorrhoea  for  seven  or
eight  days  ;  eight  days  ago,  although  he  had  no  connec-
tion, inguinal  glands  became  swollen  and  painful;  lame
sensation  in  legs;  heavy  sleep;  on  waking  feels  tired
and  mouth  is  full  of  mucus;  pain  in  forehead,  <
motion;  urine  turbid,  offensive.

I  I  Spleen  enlarged,  extending  be3'ond  ribs. ^Typhoid.
^^  Stool  and  Rectum. Frequent  desire  for  stool.

JStools:  yellow,  watery,  with  mcallike  sediment;  whitish


^^^  PHOSPHORICTJM  ACIDUM.

,  watery ;  involuntary  while  passing  flatus ;  painless  •
very  offensive  ;  involuntary,  liquid-orey  ;  yellow,  mixed
with  mucus;  undigested,  greenish-'white,  painless-
thin,  whitish-grey  ;  watery,  with  rumbling  in  bowels  •
yellowish  and  very  offensive,  child  listless,  wants  noth-
ing and  cares  for  nothing;  undigested,  painless.

"White  or  yellow  watery  diarrhoea,  chronic  or  acute,
without  pain  or  any  marked  debility  or  exhaustion.

■  Diarrha^a:  not  prostrating;  after  catching  cold  during
heat  of  summer;  watery,  chronic:  violent  bilious  or
mucous,  of  twenty  months  standing,  has  the  appearance
of  an  old  man ;  from  acids  in  young  persons  who  grow
too  rapidly;  after  eating  ;  undigested  ;  greenish-white  •
painless.  '

I  I  Diarrhoea  for  months,  coming  usually  at  night ;  pain  in
bowels  before  a  passage;  .much  rumbling  in  abdomen  ;
great  weakness  in  legs ;  almost  complete  impotence.

I  I  Ji-vacuations  particularly  one  hour  after  dinner  and  at
times  at  night;  stool  preceded  by  griping  in  abdomen  •
feces  white,  grey,  undigested,  often  consisting  only  of
mucus ;  urine  dark,  on  standing  a  little  while  is  like  but-
termilk; much  rumbling  in  abdomen  ;  great  prostration.
c/Chronic  diarrhoea.

I  Diarrhoea  from  taking  cold  on  hot  Summer  days  with
cool  evenings.

■  Infantile  diarrhoea;  Summer  complaint.

I  Diarrhoea  caused  by  fear  during  cholera  Season; rest-
essness; constant  rumbling  in  abdomen  ; hot  hands  ;
body  bathed  in  anxious  sweat;  great  thirst;  thin, pain-
less stools.

■  Diarrhoea  remaining  after  an  attack  of  cholera; feces

greyish-white;  urine  becomes  milky  on  standing;  at
times  pains  in  abdomen  ;  morose  and  irritable;  pains
in  legs;  emaciation.

■  Cholerine  during  cholera  epidemic,  especially  when  pa-

tient IS  debilitated  and  relaxed  by  heat  of  Summer;
no  pain;  lassitude;  prostration;  general  ill-feeling-
abdomen  bloated,  rumbling  therein";  small  painless
discharges.

■  Tongue  covered  with  thick  tenacious  mucus;  finger  ad-

heres to  tongue. ^Choleraic  dysentery.

■  Cholera  infantum  ;  great  exhaustion  ;  sunken  eyes,  with

blue  margins;  stools  generallv  painless.

■  Diarrhoea  which  precedes  cholera.

■  Cholera:  on  fourth  day;  roaring  in  head  and  ears;  pho-

tophobia and  redness  of  eyes ;  deafness ;  dry  mouth  and
tongue;  alternate  heat  and  coldness  of  limbs;  trismus;
severe  retching  and  vomiting;  hiccough;  pains  in  ab-


PHOSPHORICUM  ACIDUM.  310

domen,  with  frequent  white,  greenish,  or  black  evacua-
tions; limbs  numb  and  motionless;  dark-red  spots  and
stripes  on  skin;  prostration;  despondency;  after  cam-
phor had  checked  vomiting,  purging,  cramps,  etc.,  there
remained  frequent  whitish,  watery  motions,  vomiting
about  once  in  an  hour  ;  tongue  white;  pulse  quick,  face
pale,  eyes  sunken,  skin  warm ;  consecutive  fever  on
fourth  or  fifth  day  of  disease,  restless,  tossing  about;
semi-stupor;  sunken  features;  yellowish  diarrhoea ;  fre-
quent sighing;  stupor,  difficult  speech,  deafness,  slow
pulse,  etc.

■  During  stool,  profuse  emission  of  flatus.
With  emission  of  wind,  stool  escapes.
Difficult  discharge  of  even  soft  stool.

1 1  No  stool.

Hard,  difficult  stool.

Stools  are  hard  and  in  pieces.

Intestinal  hemorrhage  in  typhoid.

■  Hemorrhoids :  bleeding,  with  intolerable  pain  in  sitting ;

with  cramps  of  upper  arm;  forearm  and  wrist.
^^  Urinary  Organs.  i  i  Great  torpor,  melanotic  dyscrasia,
similar  to  scurvy  and  stupid  typhoids;  heart  relaxed,
dilated,  with  thin  walls;  atheroma  of  the  arteries,
petechise ;  insidious  appearance  of  the  renal  degenera-
tion; careless  and  apathetic;  perfect  prostration  with  low
delirium  ;  neither  hunger  nor  thirst;  nausea  and  vom-
iting ;  bleeding  gums;  urine  contains  much  phos-
phates; fibrinous  casts  and  epithelial  cells,  fatty  cor-
puscles, rarely  carbonate  of  ammonia,  and  never  much
albumen  ;  costiveness  or  light-yellowish  diarrhoea ;  no
fever  or  heat';  cool  wrinkled  skin,  cool  breath,  cool
sweat.  ^Morbus  Brightii.
I  I  Urine  thick,  like  milk  (chyluria)  or  lime  water,  with
whitish  curds,  with  stringy,  bloody  lumps,  or  clear,
limpid,  containing  much  sugar ;  pain  in  back  and  kid-
neys; dull  pressure  in  bladder;  greatest  weakness  and
emaciation ;  furunculosis. ^Diabetes.

■  Diabetes  mellitus ;  urine  clear  as  water,  three  times  larger

in  quantity  than  fluids  taken  in  twenty-four  hours  ;  con-
stant urging  to  urinate;  sugar  in  urine;  sleeplessness;
unquenchable  thirst;  particularly  at  night;  extreme
weakness  and  emaciation.

■  Diabetes  mellitus;  sugar  and  albumen  in  urine;  largely

increased  secretion  and  excretion  of  urine ;  skin  dry ;
progressive  emaciation.
1  I  Diabetes  in  a  man  suffering  from  myelitis  ;  after  latter
disease  had  been  cured  former  still  remained  ;  constant
thirst  and  great  desire  for  effervescing  liquids;  specific


311  PHOSPHORICUM  ACIDUM.

gravity  of  urine  1038,  varying  in  quantity  from  eight
to  twelve  pints  in  twenty-four  liours,  fermenting  with
extreme  briskness  on  addition  of  yeast  and  precipitating
abundantly  metallic  copper  when  boiled  with  the  Pot-
ash Sulphate  of  Copper.
Spasmodic  constriction  of  bladder.

■  Weakness  of  muscular  structure  of  bladder; easy  and

involuntary  discharge  of  urine  on  motion,  coughing  or
sneezing.

■  Enuresis  when  urine  is  passed  in  first  sleep  and  fairly

floods  the  bed.
Constant  desire  to  urinate; sudden  irresistible urging;
desire  with  scanty  emission.

■  Copious  and  frequent  micturition.

■  Must  often  rise  at  night  to  pass  large  quantities  of  color-

less urine.

■  Urine  so  thick  that  flow  is  interrupted;  stops  and  flows

again;  as  if  mixed  with  flour,  containing  stringy,  jelly-
like masses,  or  cheesy  masses,  like  curdled  milk ;  pain
in  back  and  kidneys ;  at  times  dull  pressure  in  region
of  bladder ;  emaciation  during  pregnancy.

■  After  every  emotion  urine  as  if  stirred  up  with  chalk.

■  Milky  urine,  smelling  like  raw  meat,  containing  bloody

clots.

■  Urine  like  whey  or  milk;  usually  shortly  before  menses.

■  Urine  decomposes  rapidly.
Burning  in  urethra  while  urinating.

1  I  Creeping  in  urethra  between  acts  of  micturition.
■^  Alale  Sexual  Organs. Erections without  sexual desire;
morning  when  standing.

■  During  coition  sudden  relaxation  of  penis  preventing

emission.

■  Weakness  after  coition;  also  after  pollutions.

■  Emissions: frequent,  profuse  and  debilitating,  causing

hypochondriasis ;  from  weakness  of  parts  from  onanism ;
with  very  little  sexual  excitement;  during  stool;  with
dragging  aching  in  testes.

■  ■Onanism  when  patient  is  distressed  by  culpability  of  his

indulgence.

■  Sexual  desire  suppressed,

■  Impotence,  especially  when  sensibility  of  part  is  exces-

sive and  semen  is  discharged  shortly  after  an  erection,
or  before  an  erection.
.  ■Remote  eff*ects  of  loss  of  animal  fluids;  long-lasting
effects  of  seminal  emission,  whether  occurring  during
sleep  or  when  awake,  with  every  efibrt  at  stool  or  urina-
tion, or  from  excessive  venery;  whole  system  seemed
weakened.


PHOSPHORICUM  ACIDUM.  312

■  I  I  Nightly  pollutions,  sometimes  several  in  one  night,  and
even  after  coitus;  immediately  after  pollution  wakes
with  an  erection;  after  an  emission  has  more  sexual
desire  than  at  any  other  time;  for  desire,  as  a  rule,  is
reduced  to  a  minimum  ;  after  a  pollution  has  all  day  an
itching  sensation,  as  if  ants  were  crawling  over  body,
but  particularly  on  genitals;  also  constant  desire  to
urinate,  quantity  passed  being  larger  than  usual ;  after
coitus  urine  flows  in  a  broken  stream  ;  looks  like  chalk
and  water,  or  like  buttermilk,  causing  a  burning  sensa-
tion at  the  orifice  of  urethra  ;  appetite  good  ;  emacia-
tion ;  sad,  depressed,  despairing  of  recovery,  ^Sperma-
torrhoea.

i  Prostatorrhoea :  immediately  after  every  erection  dis-
charge of  a  teaspoonful  or  more  of  prostatic  fluid.

■  Chancres :  with  raised  edges;  like  an  indolent  ulcer;
edges  thick,  rounded  and  prominent;  granulation  pale
and  flabby  or  absent;  corroding  itching  herpes  prepu-
tialis  ;  blisters  and  condylomata  on  glans.

iFew  drops  of  white  gleety  discharge  mornings,  and  pros-
tatic fluid  in  evening.

1  I  Feeling  of  heaviness  in  glans,  especially  during  urina-
tion ;  also,  with  tingling  oozing  vesicles  around  fra^num;
in  balanorrhoea.

Pricking  pain  in  glans  penis.

Tingling  and  humid  secretions  at  frsenulum.

I  Herpes  preputialis,  with  tingling.

Swelling  of  testes,  with  swelling  and  tension  in  spermatic
cords ;  testes  tender  to  touch ;  gnawing  pain  or  exco-
riated feeling  in  testes.

Epithelium  of  scrotum  denuded  in  large  spots  with  sore-
ness.

Inflammatory  swelling  of  scrotum.

Hair  of  sexual  parts  falls  off*.  ■

iSycotic  excrescences,  chronic,  with  heat,  burning  and  sore-
ness when  sitting  or  walking.-

i Fig-warts  complicated  with  chancre.'  .

Female  SexualOrgans.'i  Ovaritis,  metritis,  or  prolapsus
from  debilitating  or  emotional  influences;  amenorrhcea.

BUterus  bloated,  as  if  filled  with  wind.

.1  I  Very  irritable  uterus.

Uterine  ulcer,  with  copious,  putrid,  bloody  discharge;
itching  or  corroding  pain,  or  no  pain.

I  I  Dysmenorrhoea,  with  pain  in  region  of  liver.

I  Menses  :  too  early  and  too  long;  too  late;  dark,  clotted,
appearing  every  fourteen  days,  preceded  by  leucorrhoea
and  for  one  or  two  days  by  griping  and  rumbling  in
abdomen.


25.


313  PHOSPHORICUM  ACIDUM.

iLeucorrhoea:  yellow,  mostly  after  menses,  with  itching;
profuse,  yellow;  thin,  acrid,  mucous;  with  chlorosis.
^*  Pregnancy. Parturition. Lactation. Itching,  pricking
like  flea-bites  between  mammse,  obliging  her  to  rise  at
night.

I  I  Dysuria  during  pregnancy  ;  cutting  pain.
Eclampsia  and Bright's disease  during  childbed;  hem-
orrhage.

Sharp  pressure  in  1.  mamma.

Scanty  milk  with  debility  and  great  apathy.

I I  Deterioration  of  health  from  nursing.

I  I  Constant  vomiting  of  milk  in  a  suckling ;  waxy  color  of
face; blue rings  around eyes; child does not cry;
mother  has  very  little  milk.
-'  Voice  and  Larynx.  Trachea  and  Bronchia. Nasal  voice.

Contraction  in  suprasternal  fossa,  >  when  bending  neck.

Burning  in  throat  and  chest.

I  Inability  to  speak  long  on  account  of  weakness  of  chest.

B  Hoarseness  and  roughness  in  throat  hindering  speech.

Tenacious  mucus  in  mouth  and  fauces  causes  hawking.

I  I  Excessive  hoarseness  and  loose  cough,  produced  by
titillation  in  pit  of  stomach;  dry  cough  in  evening  or
morning  with  expectoration  of  whitish  or  yellowish
mucus;  pressive  pains  in  chest. ^Laryngotracheitis.

I  I  Exceedingly  violent  bronchitis;  seemed  to  be  capillar}',
associated  with  fever,  with  exacerbation  in  evening,
dyspnoea,  pressive  pain  under  sternum,  violent  sneezing,
great  thirst,  violent  coryza;  profuse  secretions,  puru-
lent, rather  than  slimy  and  serous.

■  Chronic  lar^mgeal  and  bronchial  catarrh  with  tendency
to  hemorrhage.
*"  Respiration, l Respiration  difficult  and  oppressed.

I  I  Dyspnoea:  as  from  weakness  of  chest;  caused  by  odors  ;
by  talking  or  by  any  effort.

Oppression of  chest: with contraction; with anxiety;
when  beginning  to  walk  ;  at  night.
^^  Cough. iCough  : seems to be caused by  tickling  of a
feather,  extending  from  middle  of  chest  to  larynx;  dry,

'  caused  by  tickling  low  down  in  chest;  from  tickling  in
pit  of  stomach  and  throat,  with  expectoration  only  in
morning;  constant,  irritable;  spasmodic,  tickling,  as
from  down;  evening  without,  morning  with  expecto-
ration of  dark  blood,  or  of  tenacious  whitish  mucus  of
sourish,  herby  taste;  arising  from  tickling  in  chest,
about  ensiform  cartilage,  <  evening  after  lying  down ;
expectoration  in  morning  yellowish  or  muco-purulent
and  usually  tasting  salty;  every  draft  of  air  gives
him  fresh  cold;  wraps  chest  up  warmly;  cannot  bear


PHOSPHORICUM  ACIDUM.  314

draft  of  air  to  touch  chest;  with  hawking  of  mucus
in  little  balls ;  in  morning  with  yellow  expectoration;
violent  with  copious  expectoration ;  with  headache,
nausea  and  vomiting  of  food,  or  with  involuntary  emis-
sion of  urine ;  with  purulent,  very  offensive  expectora-
tion ;  in  overgrown  youths.
I  I  For  several  years  cough  with  expectoration  of  blood,
severe  pains  in  chest  and  digestive  disturbances;  sensa-
tion of  fulness  and  great  internal  restlessness,  so  that  he
is  filled  with  anxiety,  with  tickling  cough  and  expecto-
ration of  a  quantity  of  bright-red  frothy  blood,  often
preceded  by  hawking;  stitches  in  chest,  particularly
on  inspiration  ;  drawing  pains  in  small  of  back;  ano-
rexia; constipation;  paleness  of  face.

■  Expectoration  of  a  salty  taste.

^'^  Inner  Chest  and  Lungs.  iWeak  feeling  in  chest  from
talking,  coughing  or  sitting  too  long;  >  by  walking.

Talking  causes  a  weakness  in  chest.

I  Pain  in  chest  as  from  weakness.

Burning  in  whole  chest,  with  pressure.

Spasm  in  chest  and  diaphragm,  sudden  and  unexpected  ;
must  sit  bent.

Loud  whistling  and  rattling  in  chest,  with  but  little
cough.

■  Tuberculosis; great  weakness  of  chest,  so  that  patient

can  hardly  talk,  and  causing  dyspnoea.

■  Haemoptysis;  phthisis  ;  typhoid  fever  with  diarrhoea  and

great  rumbling  in  bowels ;  fast-growing  youths.
I  I  Restless  but  weak  with  haemoptysis.

■  Useful  in  pneumonia  when  disease  cannot  take  normal

course,  owing  to  great  prostration  of  patient  from  loss
of  vital  fluids  ;  diarrhoea,  depressing  emotions,  etc.
I  I  Hypostatic  pneumonia. ^Bright's  disease.
^^  Heart,  Pulse  and  Circulation. Stitches  through  heart.

■  Palpitation:  in  children  and  young  persons  who  grow

too  fast;  in  onanists;  after  depressing  emotions.

'  I  After  severe  disappointment  in  her  affections,  no  out-
ward demonstrations  of  grief,  but  her  color  faded,
plumpness  disappeared  ;  extremities  cold  ;  dry  hacking
cough;  breathing  shallow;  dyspnoea  from  slightest  ex-
ercise ;  mind  obtuse,  brooding  over  her  sorrow;  heart
beats  feebly  and  quick ;  pulse  almost  imperceptible.
^Cardiac  weakness.

Pulse:  irregular, sometimes  intermitting  one  or  two  beats;
generally  small,  weak  or  frequent,  at  times  full.

Violent  ebullitions,  with  great  restlessness.

Swollen  veins.
^^  Neck  and  Back. I  l Spondylitis  of  cervical  vertebrae;  fre-


315  PHOSPIIORICUM  ACIDUM.

quent  formation  of  abscesses;  three  or  four  fistulous
passages,  at  bottom  of  whicli  caries  vertebrae  could  be
felt  with  sound ;  body  of  vertebrae  considerably  en-
larged; painless  diarrhoea  with  much  rumbling  in  ab-
domen ;  stools  white  or  greyish-white,  often  undigested ;
involuntary;  stool  escapes  when  child  is  moved  or
turned ;  urine  profuse,  clear,  becoming  turbid  and
milky,  of  offensive  odor,  escaping  involuntarily,  espe-
cially on  passive  motion;  child  morose,  will  not  tolerate
brothers  or  sisters  near  him ;  face  pale ;  great  emacia-
tion ;  loss  of  appetite ;  marked  sleepiness  and  yet  does
not  go  to  sleep;  cannot  move  head;  cries  out  at  least
careless  handling.

Gnawing  on  scapulae.

I  I  Burning  and  soreness  between  shoulders.  ^Irritable
spine.

Violent  pain  in  back  on  rising,  after  stooping.

Burning  pain  in  a  spot  about  small  of  back.

Burning  in  lower  half  of  body,  from  small  of  back  to  pit
of  stomach  downward  ;  extremities  are  cold  to  touch.

Formication  in  back  and  small  ofback.

■  Weakness  in  spine  and  spinal  nerves,  giving  rise  to  great

fatigue  on  exertion  and  frequent  desire  to  urinate,  espe-
cially in  morning.

■  Burning  in  anterior  half  of  soles  of  feet;  cold,  uncom-

fortable feeling  in  anterior  tibial  region ;  heat  of  occi-
pital region,  with  erratic  pains;  increased  sexual  desire
from  sexual  excesses.;  spinal  irritation.

■  Heaviness  in  lumbar  region,  increases  to  pain  in  legs.

^Tabes  dorsalis.

■  Dull  pains  in  loins,  going  down  back  of  legs  to  lower

part  of  calves ;  pain  in  loins  >  from  walking,  rest  or
pressure;  is  subject  to  these  attacks  and  they  make  him
ill  for  several  days.

■  Great  debility  and  profuse  night  sw^eats  and  symptoms

of  slow  hectic  fever;  violent  smarting  or  burning  pains
in  lumbar  region. ^Spinal  abscess.

■  Psoas  abscess.

I  I  Itching  stitch  in  coccyx ; fine  stitches  in  coccyx  and

sternum.
I  I  Boils  on  nates.
^*  Upper  Limbs. Tearing  in  shoulder  and  1.  hand.

Burning  as  from  a  red-hot  coal,  in  different  parts  of  arm

and  on  shoulder.
Hydroadenitis  in  axillae.
Boring,  drawing,  digging  pains  in  nerves,  awaken  him

from  sleep.
Stiffness  and  cramps  in  joints.


PIIOSPHORICUM  ACIDUM.  316

I  Weakness  of  arms.

Cramps  of  upper  arm,  forearm  and  wrists.

Shrivelled,  dry  skin  of  hands  and  fingers.

I  Wens  on  hand,  between  metacarpal  bones.

Sharply  marked  deadness  of  one-half  of  fingers.

Hands  tremble  when  writing.

Burning  of  hands  and  heaviness;  blood  rushes  into  them
when  the}^  hang  down.

Stitches  in  finger  joints.
^^  Lower  Limbs. Heaviness  and  paralytic  sensation  in  hip
joint,  <  commencing to  walk after sitting;  >  after
walking  a  little.

Painful  spasm  in  hip  joint.

iCoxalgia;  emaciation  from  excessive  suppuration;  gen-
eral debility ;  sensation  as  if  bones  w^ere  scraped  with
knife  ;  disease  originating  from  suppressed  or  misman-
aged scarlatina  or  other  exanthemata.

■  Osteomyelitis  in  hip  joint;  tongue  dry;  great  excita-
tion ;  much  complaining  and  lamenting ;  great  fear  ;
sleeplessness.

1  I  On  1.  hip  jointr  and  1.  thigh,  neuralgic  or  rheumatic
pain,  running  from  gluteal  muscles  or  hip  joint  down
leg  to  knee,  and  often  to  calf  of  leg  or  ankle,  slightly  >
after  walking,  but  still  severe.

Burning,  in  posterior  muscles  of  thigh  when  standing,  >
when  walking;  in  tibise  and  soles  at  night.

Itchlike  pustules  on  nates  and  balls  of  toes.

Weakness  of  legs ;  he  falls  easily  from  a  misstep  or  on
tripping.

I  Pains  in  tibice  at  night.

I  I  Necrosis  of  r.  tibia;  sequestrum  extending  over  nearly
two-fifths  of  length  of  bone  and  about  J  cm.  in  thick-
ness;  enormous  discharge  of  mucus  from  mouth  every
morning;  difficult  and  very  annoying;  conjunctivitis
of  r.  eye.

I  Ulcers  on  tibia;  periosteum  affected,  profuse  watery
ofi'ensive  discharge.

I  Ulcers  on  legs.

Pimples  on  knees  and  calves  of  legs,  becoming  confluent
and  forming  easily-bleeding  ulcers.

Blisters  on  balls  of  toes;  feet  swollen  and  sweaty.

Beating,  swelling  and  burning  in  joint  of  big  toe.
*'  Limbs in General. Drawing  and  twitching  tearing  in
limbs.

Smarting  at  night  in  bones  of  limbs.

Limbs  feel  weak  from  loss  of  fluids,  with  no  other  pain
than  burning.

Formication  in  limbs.


317  PHOSPHORICUM  ACIDUM.

Feeling  as  if  periosteum  were  being  scraped  with  knife,
after  injuries.

Interstitial  distension  of  bones;  mercurial,  syphilitic  or
scrofulous.

Arthritic  pains  brought  on  by  least  cold,  with  irritable
cough ;  swallowing  excites  pains ;  fear  of  touching
parts.

Cold  hands  and  warm  feet.

Boils  in  axillee,  on  shoulders  and  nates.

Bruised  pain  in  all  joints,  in  morning,  in  arms  and  lower
extremities.
^'^  Rest. Position. Motion. Rest:  pain  in  loins  >.

Lying  in  bed  :  vertigo;  headache  >  ;  tickling  in  chest  <.

Side  on  which  he  lies:  pressive  headache.

Desire  to  lie  down:  fainting.

Must  lie  down :  headache.

Sitting:  vertigo  causes  them  to  fall ;  intolerable  pain  in
hemorrhoids ;  soreness  in  sycotic  excrescences  ;  too  long,
weak  feeling  in  chest.

Must  sit  bent :  spasm  in  chest.

Bending  neck :  contraction  in  suprasternal  fossa  <.

Rising  after  stooping:  violent  pain  in  back.

Standing :  vertigo  ;  burning  in  posterior  muscles  of  thigh.

When  hands  hang  down  :  blood  rushes  into  them.

Motion  :  pain  in  bones  >  ;  pressing  in  stomach  <  ;  pain
in  forehead  <  ;'  involuntary^  discliarge  of  urine.

Slightest  exercise :  dyspnoea.

Writing:  hands  tremble.

Walking:  vertigo;  soreness  in  sycotic  excrescences  ;  when
beginning,  oppression  of  chest  >  ;  weak  feeling  in  chest ;
pain  in  loins  >  ;  after  sitting,  heaviness  in  hip  joint  <,
then  >  ;  pain  in  hip  joint  and  thigh  >  ;  burning  in
musclesof  thigh  <.
^^  Nerves, l  ils  very  weak  and  indifferent  to  the  affairs  of  life.

iTrembling:  legs  weak,  stumble  easily  or  make  missteps.

I  Weakness  :  of  parts  of  body  ;  disinclination  for  business ;
prostrated;  apathetic  in  morning;  from  loss  of  fluids;
from  typhoid  fever;  from  grief;  from  sorrow  or  unfor-
tunate love  ;■  from  suppression  of  eruptions;  from
talking;  from  seminal  loss,  perspiration,  leucorrhoea  or
excessive  grief ;  paleface;  paralytic,  or  semi-paralytic;
with  or  without  sciatic  pains.

■  Child  weak,  pale,  cold  ;  painless  stool;  bones  diseased.

■  Nervous  debility,  with  cold  clammy  sweats  or  profuse

perspiration.

■  Fainting:  after  a  meal;  from  loss  of  fluids;  from  emo-

tions ;  with  desire  to  lie  down.

■  ■Neurasthenia: cerebro-spinal exhaustion from over-


PHOSPHORICUM  ACIDUM.  318

work  ;  least  attempt  to  study  causes  heaviness,  not  only
in  head,  but  also  in  limbs.

I  I  Hysteria  in  a  woman  of  dark  hair,  eyes,  complexion,
during  change  of  life.

I  Hysterical  affections  of  young  women  with  irritable
fibre,  accompanied  with  extreme  delicacy  and  spongi-
ness  of  organic  tissue ;  vascular  orgasm  or  atonic  debilit}'.

1  I  Bruised  sensation  in  hips,  arms,  thighs  and  nape  of
neck,  as  from  growing  pains.

Formication  in  different  parts  of  body.

Cramps:  spasmodic,  in  chest  and  diaphragm,  in  onanists.

Spasm,  painful  in  hip  joint.

Spasmodic  jerking  of  head.

Twitching  or  quivering  of  muscles  of  thigh.

Tosses  hands  about,  restless  in  evening.
^^  Sleep. iGreat  apathy  and  drowsiness.

I  I  Lies  in  a  deep  sleep,  but  when  aroused  is  fully  con-
scious. ^Typhoid.

II Dreams:  with  erections;  lascivious  with  emissions;
anxious;  restless  sleep;  after  midnight.

■  Awakened  by:  canine  hunger;  dry  heat;  sensation  of  fall-
ing ;  sad  thoughts.

I  Patient,  though  quite  weak,  is  rested  by  a  very  short
sleep.
^^  Time.  Morning:  incapacity  for  thought;  towards,  night
sweats;  vertigo;  headache;  difficult  opening  of  eyes;
much  collection  of  mucus  in  mouth  ;  dry  cough  ;  expec-
toration; desire  to  urinate;  bruised  pain  in  arms;  apa-
thetic; profuse  sweat.

Afternoon:  flushing  of  face  and  sweat.

Evening:  sweat  and  flushing  of  face;  vertigo;  as  if  in-
toxicated ;  burning  in  eyes ;  dry  cough ;  bronchitis  with
exacerbation  ;  cough  without  expectoration  ;  tickling  in
chest  <  ;  restless;  chill ;  heat  over  whole  body.

Night :  tongue  smarts ;  bites  tongue  involuntarily ;  burn-
ing pains  in  tongue  < ;  diarrhoea ;  unquenchable
thirst ;  rises  often  to  urinate ;  several  pollutions ;  must
rise  with  itching  between  mammae ;  oppression  of  chest ;
burning  in  tibia  and  soles;  pains  in  tibia;  smarting
in  bones  of  limbs.

Between  L  and  3  a.m.  :  awakes.

After  midnight :  dreams.
^'Temperature  and  Weather. Warm  food:  inclination  for;
pressing  pain  in  stomach  >.
*Warm  room:  as  if  intoxicated;  cannot  tolerate.

Warmth  of  bed :  >  pains  in  limbs.

Averse  to  uncovering:  heat.

Sensitive  to  draft,  wind  or  snowy  air.

Cannot  bear  draft  of  air  to  touch  chest.


40


319  PHOSPHORICUM  ACIDUM.

Every  draft  of  air  gives  him  fresh  cold.

After  catching  cold  during  heat  of  Summer  :  diarrhoea.

Least  cold :  causes  arthritic  pains.

Coldness  of  part :  <  pains  in  limbs.
Fever. iChilliness  over  whole  body ;  internal  shivering.

I  Chill,  with  shuddering  and  shaking,  always  in  evening;
and  heat  alternate  frequently ;  peculiar  cold  sensation
in  tips  of  fingers  and  in  abdomen,  with  weakness  in
arms  and  tearing  in  wrist  joints.

I  Heat:  over  whole  body,  in  evening;  averse  to  uncov-
ering ;  internal,  without  being  hot  to  touch  ;  with  loss
of  consciousness  and  somnolency;  in  head,  with  cold
feet.

I  Sweat:  profuse,  in  morning;  mostly  on  occiput  and
neck,  with  sleepiness  during  daytime;  profuse  during
night  and  in  morning,  with  anxiety;  clammy.

I  Thirst  only  during  sweat.

I I  Typhoid:  complete  apathy  and  indifference;  takes  no
notice,  even  when  pinched ;  utterly  regardless  of  sur-
roundings; face  pale;  nose  pointed;  eyes  sunken;
staring,  stupid,  vacant  gaze;  eyes  glassy;  desires  noth-
ing, asks  for  nothing;  grasps  about  him  with  hands  as
if  he  wished  to  seize  something  ;  answers  questions  not
at  all  or  unwillingly  ;  gives  short,  unintelligible  answers,
which  at  times  are  inappropriate,  as  of  one  slumbering;
sopor,  falls  asleep  while  talking;  when  awake  complains
of  great  and  very  annoying  confusion  and  cloudiness
in  head,  with  great  anxiety ;  when  slumbering  sees
many  visions  ; great  roaring  in  ears ;  hardness  of  hear-

,  ing;  lies  with  eyes  half-closed,  indiflferent  to  all  around
her ;  reflects  long,  then  answers  correctly,  but  slowly ;
vertigo;  pointed  nose;  dark  blue  rings  around  eyes;
rapid  sinking  of  strength  ;  nose  bleeds,  which,  however,
gives  no  relief  to  symptoms  in  early  stages;  bores  fingers
into  nose ;  itching  of  nose  from  irritation  of  Peyer's
patches  ;  crusty  lips;  sordes  on  teeth  ;  fetor  oris  ;  thirst ;
abdomen  distended  and  bloated,  with  much  gurgling
and  rumbling;  1.  side  of  abdomen  sensitive  to  touch;
stools  watery,  sometimes  involuntary,  and  contain
undigested  food ;  milk  passes  more  or  less  undi-
gested ;  copious  escape  of  flatus  with  stool ;  stool  bloody
and  slimy  ;  tongue  dry,  may  have  dark  red  streak  down
centre,  but  is  apt  to  be  pale  and  clammy  and  sometimes
covered  with  slimy  mucus;  bites  tongue  involuntarily
while  asleep ;  urine  highly  albuminous,  milky  in  ap-
pearance, and  decomposing  rapidly,  loaded  with  earthy
phosphates;  petechise;  ecchymosis;  decubitus;  enlarge-
ment of  spleen.


PHOSPHORICUM  ACIDUM.  320

Typhoid  fever:  loquacity;  delusion  of  senses;  hallucina-
tions even  when  awake.

■  Intermittent  fevers; shaking chills over whole  bod}',

fingers  being  as  cold  as  ice,  without  thirst,  followed  by
heat,  without  thirst;  excessive  lieat,  depriving  one
almost  of  consciousness  ;  profuse  exhausting  sweats.

■  Tertian ague:  stages  well-marked  ;  foul  tongue;  thirst;

vomiting;  loss  of  appetite;  great  prostration  ;  unusual
expression  of  anxiety  on  face.

■  Intermittent  fever  with  great  apathy  and  night  sweats.

■  Fever and burning thirst attending caries of lower

lumbar  vertebrae,  with  painful  fistulous  openings  dis-
charging pus.
^'  Attacks, Periodicity. Alternate heat  and coldness of
limbs;  chill  and  heat.

Once  an  hour:  vomiting.

Several  times  a  day:  paroxysmal  pressing  pains  in
stomach.

Every  morning:  severe  pressing  pains  in  forehead  and
temples;  enormous  discharge  of  mucus  from  mouth.

One  hour  after  dinner  and  at  times  at  night:  evacuations.

Every  fourteen  days :  menses.

Twenty  months' standing:  diarrhoea.

For  several  years :  cough  with  expectoration  of  blood.
*^.  Locality  and  Direction. Right:  stitches  over  eye; ne-
crosis of  tibia;  conjunctivitis.

Left:  rheumatic  pains  in  1.  lower  extremity;  sharp  press-
ure in  mamma;  tearing  in  hand;  in  hip  joint  and
thigh  neuralgic  pains  ;  side  of  abdomen  sensitive  to
touch.

From  above  downward  :  pressure  in  head.

From  behind  forward  :  headache.
*^  Sensations.  As  if  intoxicated ;  as  if  head  would  burst ;  as
if  feet  were  going  up ;  as  of  a  weight  in  head ;  as  if
brain  were  crushed ;  bones  as  if  scraped  with  a  knife ;
as  if  eyeballs  were  too  large ;  as  if  white  of  egg  had  dried
on  face;  as  if  lower  jaw  were  going  to  break;  nausea
as  if  in  soft  palate ;  as  if  stomach  were  being  balanced
up  and  down ;  as  of  a  heavy  load  in  stomach  ;  as  if  ants
were  crawling  over  body;  uterus  as  if  filled  with  wind;
tickling  in  chest  as  of  a  feather;  as  of  down  in  larynx  ;
as  of  a  red-hot  coal  on  arm  and  shoulder;  as  if  perios-
teum were  being  scraped  with  a  knife.

Pain:  in  nape  of  neck;  from  hollow  teeth  into  head  ;  in
tongue;  in  liver;  in  umbilical  region;  in  forehead;  in
bowels;  in  legs;  in  back  and  kidneys;  in  tibiae;  in
bones;  in  stump  of  amputated  finger.

Intolerable  pain  :  in  hemorrhoids.


321  PHOSPHORICUM  ACIDUM.

Dreadful  pain  :  on  top  of  head.

Violent  pain  :  in  back.

Severe  pains :  in  chest.

Tearing  pain:  in  teeth;  in  shoulders  and  1.  hand;  in
wrist  joints.

Twitching  tearing:  in  limbs.

Stupefying  pain  :  in  forehead.

Gnawing  pain:  in  testes;  on  scapulae.

Stitches :  over  one  eye ;  in  ears ;  in  region  of  liver ;  in
chest ;  through  heart ;  in  coccyx  and  sternum ;  in  fin-
ger joints.

Burning,  drawing,  digging  pains :  in  nerves.

Severe  pressing  pain  :  in  forehead  and  temples.

Pressive  pain  :  inchest;  under  sternum.

Pressing  tensive  pain :  in  head.

Constant  drawing,  rheumatic  pains :  in  1.  lower  extremity.

Drawing  pain  :  in  cheeks  and  teeth  ;  in  small  of  back ;  in
limbs.

Dragging  aching :  in  testes.

Spasmodic  drawing  pain  :  in  ear.

Paroxysmal  pressing  pains:  in  stomach.

Neuralgia :  in  hip  joint  and  thigh  ;  down  leg  to  knee.

Bruised  pain  :  in  all  joints ;  in  hips,  arms,  thighs  and  nape
of  neck.

Griping:  in  abdomen.

Cramps:  in  joints;  of  upper  arm,  forearm  and  wrist;  in
chest  and  diaphragm.

Crampy  pains :  in  stomach ;  in  upper  arms,  in  forearm
and  wrist.

Spasm:  in  chest;  in  hip  joint.

Burning  pain  :  in  a  spot  about  small  of  back.

Burning:  of  eyelids  and  corners  of  eyes;  in  nose;  in  skin
of  cheeks ;  in  front  teeth ;  in  soft  velum ;  in  region  of
liver;  in  urethra;  at  orifice  of  urethra;  in  throat  and
chest;  between  shoulders;  in  lower  half  of  body;  from
small  of  back  to  pit  of  stomach  ;  in  anterior  half  of  soles;
in  different  parts  of  arm  and  shoulder;  of  hands;  in
posterior  muscles  of  thigh  ;  in  tibia  and  soles;  in  joint
of  big  toe.

Stinging:  of  throat.

Pricking  pain  :  in  glans  penis.

Smarting:  in  mouth;  in  lumbar  region;  in  bones  of
limbs;  of  wounds,  even  of  bones.

Soreness:  of  throat;  between  shoulders.

Scraping :  of  throat.

Excoriated  feeling:  in  testes.

Heat:  of  limbs;  of  occipital  region;  over  whole  body.

Throbbing :  in  nose.

VOL.  VIII. — 21.


PHOSPHORICUM  ACIDUM.  322

Dull  pain :  in  loins,  down  back  of  legs  to  calves.

Paralytic  sensation:  in  hip  joint.

Lame  sensation  :  in  legs.

Weakness :  of  chest ;  of  spine ;  of  arms ;  of  legs.

Tension  :  in  spermatic  cords.

Pressure:  in  head  ;  in  eyes;  in  stomach;  in  pit  of  stomach

through  to  back;  in  several  places  in  abdomen  ;  dull  in

bladder;  sharp,  in  1.  mamma.
Oppression :  of  chest.
Heaviness :  of  head ;  in  one  spot  in  region  of  liver ;  in

glans ;  in  lumbar  region;  in  hands;  in  hip  joint;  in

limbs.
Dryness  :  of  mouth  and  throat;  in  whole  body.
Tingling:  in  head  ;  at  frsenum  ;  at  frenulum.
Tickling :  low  down  in  chest ;  in  pit  of  stomach  and  throat.
Pricking;  between  mammaB.
Formication:  in  back  and  small  of  back;  in  limbs;  in

different  parts  of  body.
Creeping:  in  urethra.
Itching:  on  scalp;  in  nose;  between  mammae ;  stitch  in

coccyx;  between fingers,  or  in  folds  of  joints,  or on

hands.
Coldness:  of  inner  surface  of  eyelids ;  on  one  side  of  face;

in  roots  of  molars ;  of  limbs;  in  tibial  region;  in  tips  of

fingers;  in  abdomen.
"  Tissues. 1  Nervous  system  in  a  state  of  debility  without

erethism ; brain or cord, sight or hearing, aftected

from  continued grief,  overexertion, sexual excesses,

or  drain  on  system,  or  remaining  after  typhus  or  ty-
phoids.
Emaciation ;  also  of  single  parts.
Hemorrhages,  blood  dark.

■  Purpura  and  passive  hemorrhages.

iPhosphatic  deposits,  depending  on  excess  of  phosphoric
acid,  from  waste  of  nervous  tissue,  or  upon  alkalinity  of
urine  from  nervous  dyspepsia.

I  iTearing  pains  in  limbs;  swelling  of  bones  of  hands  and
feet;  ulceration  of  skin,  appearing  first  on  furuncles,
which  burst  and  leave  an  unclean  ulcer;  scrofulous
syphilitic  subject;  after  impure  coitus  had  another
chancre  on  penis,  round,  lardaceous,  surrounded  by
coppery-red  areola,  edges  appear  as  if  eaten  away,  are
violet  in  color,  soft  and  easily  bleeding. ^Syphilis.

■  Mercurial syphilis; ulceration  of  lips,  gums  and  soft

palate;  swelling  of  bones;  pain  in  bones;  condy-
lomata ;  carbuncle-like  ulcers  of  skin,  with  copper-
colored  circumference.

■  ■Interstitial  inflammation  of  bones;  scrofulous;  syphilitic

or  mercurial.


323  PHOSPHORICUM  ACIDUM.

I  Caries  (not  necrosis).

I I  Periosteal  inflammation,  with  burning,  gnawing,  tearing
pains.

I  Pains  at  night,  as  if  bones  were  being  scraped  with  a

knife  (after  contusions).

Inflammation  of  bones,  with  burning  at  night.

n Scrofulous  affections  of  children;  hip  disease;  curva-
ture of  spine  from  caries  of  vertebrse ;  rachitis  ;  feeling
as  if  bones  were  being  scraped  with  knife  (inflammation
of  periosteum) ;  >  at  night,  after  abuse  of  mercury.

Painless  swelling  of  glands ;  chronic  suppuration.

I I  Growing  pains.

I  1  Smarting  in  wounds,  even  of  those  of  bones.

I  Pain  in  stump  of  amputated  finger,  >  from  breathing.

B  Passive  flux  from  skin  and  mucous  membrane.

■  External  parts  become  black;  senile  gangrene.
I  I  Blood-boils;  flat,  itching  ulcers.

*^  Touch. Passive  Motion. Injuries. Touch :  pressing  in

stomach  <  ;  pressure  in  pit  of  stomach  through  to  back;

testes  tender;  afraid  of;  1.-  side  of  abdomen  sensitive.
Pressure : >  pains  in  loins.
Pinching:  takes  no  notice  of,  in  typhoid.
When  child  is  moved  or  turned:  escape  of  stool.
Careless  handling:  child  cries  out.
Shaking:  headache  <.
After  injuries :  as  if  periosteum  were  being  scraped  with  a

knife.
Overlifting.
*®  Skin. Formication  over  whole  body.

Iltching  between  fingers,  or  in  folds  of  joints  or  on  hands.

Vesicles  on  various  parts.

Bed  pimples  on  neck,  chest,  back,  scrotum  and  back  of

penis.

■  Herpes,  dry  or  humid,  squamous.
Rash  all  over;  clusters  of  red  fine  rash.
Red  spots  on  back  of  hands  and  limbs.
Scarlet  exanthems ;  repercussion  of  scarlatina.

■  Exanthemata,  suppressed  by  cold, cause  brain symp-

toms, hardness  of  hearing,  or  dropsy.

■  Erysipelas  upon  arms; occiput  and  nape  of  neck  in-

flamed and  bluish-red  in  appearance ;  colliquative,
watery  yellowish-brown  diarrhoea;  tympanitis.

■  Variola:  in  typhoid  state;  eruptions  do  not  fill  with  pus,

but  degenerate  into  large  blisters  which,  bursting,  leave
surface  excoriated ;  watery  diarrhoea;  subsultus  tendi-
num;  fear  of  death.

■  Burning  sphacelus.

Inveterate  or  flat  ulcers,  with  dirty,  fetid  pus  or  indented
bases.


PHOSPHORICUM  ACIDUM.  324

lUlcers:  like  carbuncles  on  skin,  with  a  coppery  circum-
ference; with  smarting  pain;  flat,  itching.

No  tenderness  about  ulcer,

I  I  Large,  jagged,  often  pedunculated  warts,  exuding  moist-
ure and  bleeding  readily ;  indented  warts.

I  Condylomata:  with  bone  pains;  complicated  with
chancre;  heat  and  burning.

Chilblains,  wens ;  corns  with  stinging  burning.

I  Parts  get  black.
*^  Stages  of  Life,  Constitution,  i Suited  to  individuals  of
originallj^  strong  constitution,  but  who  have  become
weakened  by  loss  of  animal  fluids,  by  excesses,  violent
acute  diseases,  chagrin  or  a  long  succession  of  moral
emotions.

I  Mild  disposition.

IB  Children  and  young  people  who  have  grown  too  rapidly,
tall,  slender  and  slim  ;  pains  in  back  and  limbs  as  if
beaten  ;  growing  pains.

Girl,  set.  6  months,  soon  after  birth  had  vaginal  hemor-
rhage ;  suffering  from  whooping  cough  ;  er3"sipelas.

Boy,  £et  11  years,  ill  about  two  months;  spondylitis  of
cervical  vertebrae.

Boy,  set.  2|  years ;  chronic  diarrhoea.

Boy,  set.  3,  suffering  ten  months,  after  an  attack  of  cholera ;
diarrhoea.

Boy,  set.  3J,  always  delicate;  loss  of  appetite;  prostration.

Child,  set.  7,  ill  five  days;  cholera.

Girl,  set.  9,  weak,  thin,  pale,  subjected  to  frequent  emotional
disturbances ;  has  grown  up  rapidly  ;  headache.

Man,  set.  14,  weak  constitution  ;  typhoid  fever.

Girl,  set.  15;  necrosis  of  tibia.

Girl,  set.  17,  menstruating  two  years;  menstrual  disturb-
ance.

Shoemaker,  set.  18,  one  year  ago  suffered  from  gonorrhoea
for  eight  days;  swelling  of  inguinal  glands.

Man,  set.  18;  variola.

Man,  set.  19,  year  ago  suffered  two  months  with  gonorrhoea;
prostration.

Girl,  set.  20,  after  cholera ;  diarrhoea.

Man,  set.  20,  suffering  several  years ;  cough  and  hsemoptysis.

Man,  set.  20,  robust ;  typhoid  fever.

Mrs.  H.,  set.  22,  mother  of  two  children,  suffering  since
birth  of  last  child;  debility.

Man,  set.  26,  powerful  frame,  stout  habit;  typhoid  fever.

Woman,  set.  30,  during  childhood  suffered  from  attacks  of
colic,  later  eyes  afiFected,  ill  nine  months;  diarrhoea.

Hearty  woman,  set  30 ;  milky  urine.

Man,  set.  30,  strong  constitution,  hitherto  in  good  health;
typhoid  fever.


325  PHOSPHORICUM  ACIDUM.

Man,  set.  33,  in  second  stage  of  disease,  camphor  had  been

given  with  good  effect;  cholera.
Man,  set.  36,  married,  had  gonorrhoea  several  times,  and

had  taken  large  doses  of  mercury ;  spermatorrhoea.
Man,  set.  36,  five  years  ago  had  ague;  typhoid  fever.
Man,  set.  40 ;  diabetes  mellitus.

Man,  £et.  40,  suffering  for  months;  diarrhoea  and  impotence.
Mrs.  R.,  set.  42 ;  dyspepsia.

Carpenter,  set.  42,  suffering  twenty  months  ;  diarrhoea.
Officer,  set.  45,  syphilitic  and  scrofulous,  taken  much  mer-
cury; syphilis.
Gentleman,  set.  52,  stout,  well  formed,  of  active  habits,  had

myelitis ;  diabetes  mellitus.
Mrs.  C,  set.  55 ;  ague.

Woman,  set.  56,  unmarried,  weak ;  typhoid  fever.
Man,  set.  58,  short  build,  strong,  dark  hair,  thirty  years

ago  had  gonorrhoea  ;  pains  in  stomach.
Two  men,  both  of  phlegmatic  temperament;  milky  urine.
Negro ;  milky  urine.
*^  Relations. Antidoted  by  : Camphor.,  Coffea,  Staphis.

Compatible: Oinchon., before or after in colliquative

sweats,  diarrhoea  and  debility ;  Ferrum,Rhustox.,  Veratr.;

after  Nux  vom.  in  syncope  after  a  meal.
Compare: Phosphor.,  Pulsat.,  Sepia,  Lycop.,  Sulphur,  Silica,

Picric  ac,  Mar.  ac.  and  Fluor,  ac.


PHOSPHORUS.  .  326

PHOSPHORUS.

Phosphorus.  The  Element.

Introduced  by  Hahnemann  and  proved  by  himself,  Coullon,  Gross,  Hering,
Schreter,  Stapf,  Hartlaub,  etc.  Toxicological  reports  are  very  numerous.  See
Allen's  Encyclopedia,  vol.  7,  p.  366.

Provings  of  Amorphous  Phosphorus  by  H.  N.  Martin.  See  Hah.  Mo.,  vol.  12,
p.  353  and  Tr.  H.  M.  Soc,  Pa.,  1874-8,  p.  174.

Clinical  Authorities. — Mental  disturbance,  Sclimidt,  Hartung,  Kiick.  Kl.
Erf.,  vol.  1,  p.  39 ;  Kent,  Med.  Adv.,  vol.  21,  p.  362  ;  Deliria,  Jahr,  A.  J.  H.  M.  M.,
vol.  1,  p.  195  ;  Vertigo,  Hesse,  A.  H.  Z.,  vol.  110,  p.  156;  Miiller,  Euck.  Kl.  Erf.,
vol.  5,  p.  22;  Syncope,  Haynel,"  A.  J.  H.  M.  M.,  vol.  4,  p.  40;  Apoplexy,  Schmid,
Sturm,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  1,  p.  95 ;  Headache  and  vertigo,  Berridge,  Hah.  Mo.,
vol.  10,  pp.  77,  179 ;  Headache,  Wesselhceft,  A.  J.  H.  M.  M.,  vol.  3,  p.  89 ;  Eaue's
Eec.,  1871,  p.  181  ;  Mills,  Org.,  vol.  3,  p.  91;  Cooper,  Horn.  Rev.,  vol.  14,  p.  273;
Hemicrania,  Kafka,  Hah.  Mo.,  vol.  12,  p.  637  ;  Shocks  in  head,  Bauer,  Org.,  vol.
3,  p.  359,  from  N.  A.  J.  H.,  Feb.,  1880;  Noises  in  occiput,  Ussher,  A.  H.  Z.,  vol.
112,  p.  6,  from  Horn.  World,  Oct.,  1885  ;  Congestion,  Gale,  Org.,  vol.  3,  p.  301 ;  Con-
gestion, ivith  cold  feeling  in  cerebellum,  Farrington,  Trans.  Horn.  Med.  Soc.  Pa.,
1884,  p.  317  ;  Cerebral  cedema,  Buchner,  A.  J.  H.  M.  M.,  vol.  2,  p.  139  ;  Hydroceph-
alus, Mossa,  A.  H.  Z.,  vol.  105,  p.  156;  Numbness  in  forehead,  B.  J.  H.,  vol.  27,  p.
553;  Tumor  in  head,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  4,  p.  306  ;  Exostoses  on  skull,  Knorre,  Eiick.
Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  4,  p.  439 ;  Alopecia,  Sager,  Barnard,  A.  H.  Z.,  vol.  102,  pp.  93,  135 ;
Loss  of  vision,  Ussher,  Eaue's  Eec,  1875,  p.  61,  from  H.  W.,  vol.  9,  p.  62;
Amaurosis,  Goullon,  B.  J.  H.,  vol.  36,  p.  93,  from  A.  H.  Z.,  vol.  92,  No.  24  ;  Schwarz,
Eiick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  1,  p.  345;  Gastier,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol  5,  p.  152;  Amblyopia,
Buchmann,  A.  H.  Z.,  vol.  108,  p.  97 ;  Asthenopia,  Hall,  H.  M.,  vol.  4,  p.  403 ;
Glaucoma,  Weber,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  1,  p.  342;  Wanstall,  Norton's  Ophthal.
Therap.,  p.  140 ;  Use  in  retinitis  albuminurica,  Squier,  Hah.  Mo.,  vol.  11,  p.  568 ;
Pustide  on  cornea,  Berridge,  A.  J.  H.  M.  M.,  vol.  4,  p.  84;  Ophthalmia,  Beretti,
Times  Eet.,  1875,  p.  42,  from  Eiv.  Om.,  1875 ;  Berridge,  N.  E.  M.  G.,  vol.  10,  p.
165  ;  Knorre,  B.  J.  H.,  vol.  6,  p.  5l3 ;  Feeling  of  sand  in  eye,  Berridge,  A.  J.  H.  M.
M.,  vol.  4,  p.  81 ;  Affection  of  eye,  Schiiler,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  1,  p.  331  ;  Dysecoia,
Altschul,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  5,  p.  160 ;  Goullon,  B.  J.  H.,  vol.  34,  p.  697 ;  Lobe-
thai,  Schwarze,  Eentsch,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  1,  p.  372 ;  Otorrhea,  Theobald,  Hah.
Mo.,  vol.  7,  p.  329 ;  Coryza,  Neuschafer,  Trinks,  Kafka,  Eaue's  Eec,  1870,  p.  127 ;
Berridge,  Times  Eet.,  1875,  p.  28;  Inflammation  of  nose,  Schiiler,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf.,
vol.  1,  p.  398 ;  Nosed  polypus,  Tietze,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  1,  p.  403 ;  Affections  of
nose,  Eosenberg,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  5,  pp.  167,  173  ;  Prosopalgia,  Gaspary,  Hau-
stein,  Ker,  Schindler,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  1,  p.  428  ;  Cooper,  Horn.  Eev.,  vol.  14,  p.
273;  Ker,  B.  J.  H.,  vol.  7,  p.  490;  Neuralgia  of  head  and  face,  Sorge,  B.  J.  H.,  vol.
32,  p.  12,  from  Ann.  d.  Horn.  Klin.,  vol.  3,  p.  30;  Erysipelas  of  the  face,  Schmid,
Eiick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  4,  p.  146;  Ulcer  on  lower  lip,  Ivan,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  1,  p.
445;  Tumor  on  lip,  Freschi,  A.  J.  H.  M.  M.,  vol.  4,  p.  42,  from  Eiv.  Om.,  July,


327  PHOSPHORUS.

1870;  Eczema  of  chin,  Bayes,  Horn.  Rev.,  vol.  13,  p.  269;  Swdling  of  jaiu  bone,
Schmidt,  Ruck.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  1,  p.  471,"  C.  Hg.,  MSS. ;  Toothache,  Gosewich,  Org.,
vol.  3,  p.  221 ;  Cooper,  Horn.  Rev.,  vol.  14,  p.  272;  Hemorrhage  from  gums,  Simp-
son, A.  H.  Z.,  vol.  107,  p.  140,  from  Hom.  World,  Oct.,  1883;  Caries  of  teeth,  Alt-
sclinl,  Riick.  KI.  Erf.,  vol.  1,  p.  471  ;  Affection  of  teeth  and  gums,  Bayes,  Hom.  Rev.,
vol.  13,  p.  268  ;  Inflammation  and  ulceration  of  soft  palate,  Siegrist,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf.,
vol.  1,  p.  511;  Tonsillitis,  Berridge,  Hah.  Mo.,  vol.  10,  p.  158;  Stricture  of  esoph-
agus, Guernsey,  Raue's  Rec,  1872,  p.  104,  from  A.  J.  H.  M,  M.,  vol.  5,  p.  19;
Regurgitation  of  food  and  urticaria,  Payne,  Hah.  Mo.,  vol.  5,  p.  199 ;  Vomiting,  Ker-
shaw, Org.,  vol.  2,  p.  115;  Cold  feeling  in  stomach,  Allen,  Med,  Adv.,  vol.  20,  p.  75;
Fulness  in  stomach,  Landesmann,  Raue's  Rec,  1873,  p.  115,  from  A.  H.  Z.,  vol.  85,
p.  147;  Pains  in  stomach  and  head,  Brown,  A.  J.  H.  M.  M.,  vol.  2,  p.  243;  Gas-
tralgia.  Garrison,  Times  Ret.,  1877,  p.  93,  from  Hom.  Times,  vol.  5,  p.  96;  Gar-
dialgia,  Brown,  T.  A.  I.  H.,  1880,  p.  225  :  Meyer,  B.  J.  H.,  vol.  18,  p.  265  ;  Schron,
Gross,  Kretschmar,  Hirsch,  Vehsem.,  Hartlb.,  Riick.  KI.  Erf.,  vol.  1,  p.  652;  Gas-
tric neurosis,  Percussel,  A.  J.  H.  M.  M.,  vol.  2,  p.  277 ;  Gastric  disturbances,  Guern-
sey, H.  M.,  vol.  5,  p.  22 ;  by  editor  Org.,  vol.  3,  p.  31 ;  Gastritis,  Sharp,  Riick.  Kl.
Erf.,  vol.  5,  p.  287 ;  Gastro-intestinal  inflammation,  Scharp,  N.  A.  J.  H.,  vol.  4,  p.
343 ;  Chronic  catarrh  of  stomach,  Mtiller,  Meyer,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  15,  p.  278  ;
Hcematemesis,  Holeczek,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf,  vol.  1,  p.  575;  Neiicker,  Raue's  Rec,  1870,
p.  2('9,  from  A.  H.  Z.,  vol.  79,  p.  32 ;  Ulcer  of  the  stomach,  Heyne,  Raue's  Rec,  1873,
p.  118,  from  A.  H.  Z.,  vol.  85,  p.  188  ;  Elb,  Ruck.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  5,  p.  320 ;  Cancer
of  stomach,  Bolle,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  5,  p.  321 ;  Nicol,  Raue's  Rec,  1870,  p.  208,
from  A.  H.  Z.,  vol.  46  ;  Affection  of  stomach,  C.  P.  S.,  Hah.  Mo.,  vol.  14,  p.  6)  ;
Disordered  liver,  hepatic  congestion,  Cooper,  Hom.  Rev.,  vol.  14,  p.  274;  Jaun-
dice, Gross,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  1,  p.  703;  Chronic  icterus,  Raue's  Rec,  1870,
p.  229,  from  Hom.  World,  vol.  4,  p.  101;  Fatty  degeneration  of  liver,  Bayes,
Hom.  Rev.,  vol.  13,  p.  268;  Flatulency,  Berridge,  Hom.  Rev.,  vol.  16,  p.  496;
Boparius,  T.  A.  I.  H.,  1880,  p.  225;  Moroe,  Times  Ret,  1876,  p.  94,  from
M.  I.,  vol.  4,  p.  492 ;  Flatulent  colic,  Hartmann,  Ruck.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  1,  p.  761  ;  Flat-
ulency and  diarrhcea,  Bojanus,  A.  J.  H.  M.  M.,  vol.  3,  p.  112;  Intestinal  catarrh,
Raue's  Rec,  1870,  p.  210,  from  Hom.  CI.,  1869,  p.  63;  Inflammation  of  superior  vena
mt'o,  Kiisemann,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.1,  p.  727 ;  Diarrhcea,  Rummel,  Schwarze,
Lobethal,  Henke,  Diez,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  1,  p.  843  ;  Hofrichter,  Kafka,  Muller,
Weber,  Horner,  Ruck.  Kl.  Erf,  vol.  5,  p.  426  ;  Kunkel,  A.  H.  Z.,  vol.  107,  p.  11 ;
Chamberlain,  Times  Ret.,  1876,  p.  18,  from  Mass.  Trans.,  vol.  4,  p.  366  ;  Cooper,
Hom.  Rev.,  vol.  14,  p.  274;  Lilienthal,  A.  J.  H.  M.  M.,  vol.  3,  p.  138;  Nelson,
Med.  Adv.,  vol.  20,  p.  63;  Gage,  Times  Ret.,  1877,  p.  30,  from  Am.  Horn.,  vol.  1,
p.  231 ;  Dysentery,  Wakeman,  Med.  Adv.,  vol.  20,  p.  29  ;  Dake,  Org.,  vol.  3,  p.  355;
Guernsey,  H.  M.,  vol.  5,  p.  22;  Chronic  dysentery,  Bell,  Hah.  Mo.,  vol.  6,  p.  286;
Cholera  infantum,  FeiterhoflfJ  Times  Ret.,  1876,  p.  146,  from  M.  I.,  1876;  Cholerine,
Gerstl,  Reubel,  Fleischmann,  Roth,  Sclimid,  Rummel,  Vehsem.,  Montagk,  Schwei-
kert,  Lobeth,  Kurtz,  Ruck,  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  1,  p.  953;  Pemerl,  p]ngelhard,  Gerstl,
Schweikert,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf,  vol.  5,  p.  480;  Cholera,  Lippe,  Org.,  vol.  3,  p.  219  ;
Proctor,  B.  J.H.,  vol.  2"),  p.  95;  Involuntary  stool,  Lillie,  A..J.  H.  M.  M.,  vol.  4,  p.  80  ;
Involuntary  stool  and  urination,  Dufresne,  N.  A.J.  H.,  vol.  3,  p.  331,  from  Bib.  Horn.,
vol.  4,  p.  179;  Kent,  Hom.  Phys.,  vol.  4,  p.  292;  Fetid  stools  and  flatus,  Gregg,
Times  Ret.,  1876,  p.  18,  from  N.  Y.  S.  T.,  1876,  p.  134  ;  Pain  during  stool,  Berridge,
Plom.  Pliys.,  vol.  4,  p.  289  ;  Paralyds  of  rectum,  Hafen,  A.  H.  Z.,  vol.  105,  p.  116,
Bleeding  from  rectum,  Hirsch,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  5,  p.  495;  Hemorrhoids,  Gillet,


PHOSPHORUS.  328

Euck.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  1,  p.  1002;  Tapeworm,  Linz,  Riick.  KI.  Erf.,  vol.  1,  p.  806;
Nephritis,  Pfander,  A.  H.  Z.,  vol.  108,  p.  37;  Morbus  Brightvi,  Bucliner,  A.  J.  H.
M.  M.,  vol.  3,  p.  139  ;  Kane's  Eec,  1871,  p.  131  (relieved) ;  Albuminuria  of  gesta-
tion, Wesselhoeft,  T.  A.  I.  H.,  1883,  pp.  688-690  ;  Impotence,  Spech,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf.,
vol.  5,  p.  536;  Sexual  debility,  Gramm,  T.  H.  M.  S.  Pa.,  1886,  p.. 162;  Effects  of
masturbation,  Eidherr,  B.  J.  H.,  vol.  27,  p.  33 ;  Gleet,  Meyer,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.
5,  p.  549;  Hydrocele,  Rockwitli,  A.  J.  H.  M.  M.,  vol.  3,  p.  47;  Nymphomania,
Guernsey,  Obstet.,  p.  554;  Weakness  of  wmnb,  Simmons,  Hem.  Rev.,  vol.  15,  p.  178  ;
Menorrhagia,  Haustein,  Riick.  Ki.  Erf.,  vol.  5,  p.  592 ;  Dysmenorrhea,  Jiummel,
Riick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  2,  p.  61  ;  Gross,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  5,  p.  369 ;  Menstrual  dis-
turbances, Fielitz,  Velisemann,  Gmss,  Elwart,  Wiileniann,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf,  vol.  2,
p.  240  ;  Ludlam,  Times  Ret.,  1876,  p.  132,  from  M.  I.,  vol.  4,  p.  279 ;  Leucorrhoea,
Miiller,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf,  vol.  5,  p.  643;  Condyloma,  of  vagina,  Horn.  Quarterly,  vol.
2,  p.  88;  see  Gilchrist  Surg.,  p.  162;  Nodosities  in  breasts,  Altraiiller,  Riick.  Kl.
Erf.,  vol.  2,  p.  377;  Galactorrhcea,  Vehsemann,  Ruck,  Kl.  Erf,  vol.  2,  p.  413;
Mastitis,  Knorre,  Lobeth,  Weber,  Vehsemann,  Gross,  Haustein,  Dietz,  Stapf,  H.  in
F.  E.,  Ruck.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  2,  p.  419;  Helmiith,  Times  Ret.,  1875,  p.  149  ;  Mam-
mary abscess  and  fistula,  Webster,  N.  A.  J.  H.,  vol.  13,  p.  255  ;  Vomiting  of  pregnancy,
Simpson,  Horn.  Rev.,  vol.  18,  p.  211 ;  Paralysis  of  vocal  chords,  Welscli,  Times  Ret.,
1875,  p.  63,  from  A.  H.  Z.,  vol.  91,  p.  101 ;  Aphonia,  Morse,  Times  Ret.,  1876,  p.
82,  from  M.  I.,  vol.  4,  p.  491  ;  Moffat,  N.  A.  J.  H.,  vol,  5,  p.  376;  Hoarseness,
Hansen,  A.  H.  Z.,  vol.  113,  p.  37  ;  GouUon,  P>.  J.  H.,  vol.  34,  p.  697  ;  (xross,  Schron,
Tietze,  Kramer,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf,  vol.  3,  p.  171  ;  Fischer,  Times  Ret.,  1876,  p.  81,
from  A.  H.  Z.,  vol.  92,  p.  93 ;  Croup,  Kreuss,  Rummel,  Weber,  Hartmann,  Riick.
Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  3,  p.  134 ;  Hirsch,  Vehsemeyer,  Ruck.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  5,  p.  763 ;  Ma-
renzeller,  Liedbeck,  B.J.  H.,vol.  5,  p.  307;  Goullon,  Times  Ret.,  1876,  p.  82,  from
II.  K.,  vol.  21,  p.  35;  Influenza,  Lobeth,  Gross,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf,  vol.  3,  p.  47  ;  Bell,
N.  E.  M.  G.,  vol.  4,  p.  85;  Bronchitis,  Riick,  Kl.  Erf,  vol.  3,  p.  97  ;  Kafka,  Riick.
Kl.  Erf,  vol.  5,  p.  691  ;  Gerstel,  Times  Ret.,  1876,  p.  84,  from  A.  H.  Z.,  vol.  92,  p.
149;  Asthma,  Lobeth,  Gross,  Riick,  Ki.  Erf,  vol.  3,  p  194;  Cough,  Pemerl,  Riick.
KI.  Erf.,  vol.  3,  p.  22;  Morse,  Times  Ret.,  1876,  p.  83,  from  M.  L.,  vol.  4,  p.  491  ;
Nankivell,  Raue's  Rec,  1873,  p.  104,  from  H.  W.,  vol.  7,  p.  279;  Kankivell,  Raue's
Rec,  1874,  p.  133,  from  H.  W.,  vol.  8,  pp.  8,  114;  Hawley,  N.  Y.  S.  T.,  1876-7,  p.
27;  Miller,  Hah.  Mo.,  vol.  7,  p.  527;  Iszard,  Hah.  Mo.,  vol.  10,  p.  418;  Baye.s,
Hom.  Rev.,  vol.  13,  p.  267  ;  Gushing,  N.  E.  M.  G.,  vol.  5,  p.  -560  ;  Bm-chfield,  Med.
Adv.,  vol.  20,  p.  349  ;  Berridge,  Hom,  Phys.,  vol.  8,  p.  547  ;  Boenninghausen,  A  J.
H.  M.  M.,  vol.  3,  p.  92,  from  Neues  Archiv,  vol.  2,  No.  1,  p.  91  (during  measles)  ;
Hirdchel,  B.  J.  H.,  vol.  31,  p.  250;  Affection  of  ched,  Dunn,  Hom.  Rec,  vol.  3,  p.
255;  Wakemann,  Med.  Adv.,  vol.  20,  p.  27 ;  Pftew?Konfa  (remarks  with  twenty-
three  cases),  Fleischmann,  Hartmann,  Wurm,  Trinks,  Buchner,  Watzke,  Griessel,
Rothansl,  Hartlaub,  etc.,  etc.,  Riick,  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  3,  pp.  311-324;  Kraisell,  Raue's
Rec,  1870,  p.  188,  from  A.  H.  Z.,  vol.  78,  p.  53;  Newton,  Hom.  Rev.,  vol.  15,  p.  474  ;
Pearson,  Times  Ret.,  1875,  p.  67,  from  M.  I.,  1875,  p.  26;  Bronchitis,  Ozanne,  B.
J.  H.,  vol.  8,  pp.  505-34,  Fleischmann,  Reiss,  Linz,  Black,  B.  J.  H.,  vol.  9,  p.  141 ;
S  einranf,  Hom.  Phys.,  vol.  6,  p.  340;  Kafka,  Raue's  Rec,  1871,  p.  100,  from  H.
Kl.,  1870,  p.  61  ;  Croupous  pneumonia  (two  cases),  Brown,  Times  Ret.,  1877,  p.  87,
from  H.  R.,  p.  31;  Haemoptysis,  Knorre,  Hartm.,  Lembke,  Elweit,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf.,
vol.  3,  p.  221 ;  Rossel,  Times  Ret.,  1875,  p.  67,  from  A.  H.  Z.,  vol.  90,  p.  109;  S.
Schmid,  B.  J.  PL,  vol.  5,  p.  275  ;  Incipient  tuhtrculosis,  Bl  ike,  Ilom.  Rev.,  vol.  11,
p.  759;  Pdbmnary tuberculosis, Sten<,  Lime's  Rec,  1870,  p.  193,  froui  A.  H.  Z.,  vol.


329  PHOSPHORUS.

79,  p.  118;  Phthisis,  Libert,  Hartniann,  Argenti,  Betlimann,  Knorre,  Riick.  Kl.
Erf.,  vol.  3,  p.  386;  Morse,  Times  Eet.,  1876,  p.  87,  from  M.  T.,  vol.  4,  p.  491  ;
(Edema  of  lungs,  Baehr,  Med.  Adv.,  vol.  20,  p.  28;  Palpitation  of  heart,  Brauns,
Eaue's  Eec,  1871,  p.  107  ;  Wolf,  Ehrhardt,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  3,  p.  448  ;  Cardiac
rheumatism,  Wells,  Hom.  Eev.,  vol.  3,  p.  303  ;  Fatty  degeneration  of  heart,  Smith,
Times  Ret.,  1877,  p.  91;  Threatened  heart  failure,  Zwingenberg,  B.  J.  H.,  vol.  34,
p.  167  ;  Spinal  affection,  Gross,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  3,  p.  471 ;  Rheumatism  of  arm,
Ide,  A.  H.  Z.,  vol.  107,  p.  27 ;  Pain  in  arm,  Berridge,  N.  A.  J.  H.,  vol.  22,  p.  189 ;
Growth  on  thumb,  with  hemorrhage,  Everett,  A.  J.  H.  M.  M.,  vol.  4,  p.  41 ;  Coxalgia,
Maly,  Weber,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  3,  p.  575  ;  Paralysis  of  legs,  Engelhardt,  Eiick.
Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  4,  p.  475 ;  Hafen,  A.  H.  Z.,  vol.  105,  p.  194 ;  Vandenbergh,  Eaue's
Rec,  1870,  p.  305,  from  A.  H.  Z.,  vol.  79,  p.  31  ;  Freezing  of  toes,  Schwarze,  Eiick.
Kl.  Erf,  vol.  4,  p.  176 ;  Neuralgia,  McCiatchey,  Hah.  Mo.,  vol.  9,  p.  91 ;  Rheumatic
neuralgia,  Wakemann,Med.  Adv.,  vol.  20,  p.  25;  Convulsions,  Palmer,  N.  E.  M.  G.,
vol.  5,  p.  659;  Nervousness,  Wakemann,  Med.  Adv.,  vol.  20,  p.  28  ;  Nervous  debility,
Elwert,  A.  J.  H.  M.  M.,  vol.  4,  p.  59,  from  Hyg.,  vol.  21,  p.  130  ;  Numbness,  etc.,  after
diphtheria,  Cochran,  Hah.  Mo.,  vol.  6,  p.  398  ;  Paralysis  of  sixth  pair  of  nerves,  Sorge,
B.  J.  of  H.,  vol.  21,  p.  147 ;  Paralysis,  Arnold,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  5,  p.  55,
Trinks,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  5,  p.  873;  Duchenne^s  pseudo-hypertrophic  paralysis,
Clifton,  B.  J.  H.,  vol.  36,  p.  127  ;  Paralytic  rheumatism,  Sorge,  B.  J.  H.,  vol.
22,  p.  565;  Lorbacher,  Hah.  Mo.,  vol.  9,  p.  460;  Spasmodic  irritation  of  vagus,
Hirschel,  A.  J.  H.  M.  M.,  vol.  3,  p.  135  ;  Disease  of  sympathetic  nervous  system.,
Hendrichs,  Hah.  Mo.,  vol.  14,  p.  61,  from  A.  H.  Z.,  Aug.  15th,  1878  ;  Restless  sleep,
Morse,  Times  Ret.,  1876,  p.  32,  from  M.  I.,  vol.  4,  p.  412;  Scarlet  fever,  Trinks,
Lobelh,  Riick,  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  4,  p.  60  ;  Hilberger,  Riick.  HI.  Erf.,  vol.  4,  p.  372  ;
Neiischaffer,  A.  J.  H.  M.  M.,  vol.  2,  p.  239,  from  A.  H.  Z.,  vol  74,  p.  140;  Ty-
phoid fever,  Goullon,  Kidd,  Vehsem.,  Kallenbach,  Conrad,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.
4,  p.  765 ;  Typhus  abdominalis,  Trinks,  B.  J.  H.,  vol.  29,  p.  322 ;  Hectic  fever,
Schmid,  B.  J.  H.,  vol.  5,  p.  276;  Ancemia,  Widmann,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  2,  p.  275  f
Purpura  hemorrhagica,  Arnold,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.4,  p.  205;  Miiller,  Arnold,  B.
J.  H.,  vol.  36,  p.  361 ;  Boyce,  Hom.  Rev.,  vol.  5,  p.  566 ;  Fungus  hcematodes,  Ro-
mark,  Raue's  Rec,  1870,  p.  327,  B.  J.  H.,  vol.  26,  p.  658;  Hughes,  Remark,  B.  J.
H.,  vol.  29,  p.  794;  Hering,  Riick.  HI.  Erf.,  vol.  4,  p.  306;  Rheumatism,  Gaspary,
Tietze,  Gross,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  3,  p.  530;  Hansen,  A.  H.  Z.,  vol.  113,  p.  4;  Gout
and  rheumatism  (inhalation),  Marcy,  N.  A.  J.  Y.,  vol.  4,  p.  96  ;  Broun  spots  on  body,
impetigo,  Knorre,  Eulenberg,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  4,  p.  253 ;  Eczema,  Lichen,
Marcy,  N.  A.  J.  H.,  vol.  4,  p.  96  ;  Psoriasis,  Heyne,  Raue's  Rec,  1873,  p.  249,  from
A.  H.  Z.,  vol.  85,  p.  188  ;  Kafka,  Times  Ret.,  1875,  p.  137  ;  Boils,  ulcers,  Cooper,
Horn.  Rev.,  vol.  14,  p.  274  ;  Editor  of  Org.,  vol.  1,  p.  237  ;  Measles,  Tuelff,  Schwarze,
Eiick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  4,  p.  97  ;  Schwarze,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  4,  p.  98 ;  Variola,
Fleischmann,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  4,  p.  113.


'  Mind.  Excited  imagination;  zoomagnetic condition;  ecstasy ;
clairvoyance.

I  Mind  is  overactive;  great  flow  of  thoughts  difficult  to
arrange.

I  I  Memory  generally  quick.

■  Irritability  of  mind  and  body;  prostrated  from  least  un-
pleasant impression.


PHOSPHORUS.  330

I  Any  lively  impression  is  followed  by  heat,  as  if  immersed

in  hot  water.
•  Excitable,  easily  angered,  vehement,  from  which  he  after-
wards suffers.

I I  Anxious :  filled  with  gloomy  forebodings ;  as  if  about  to
die;  about  termination  of  her  illness;  and  restless;  at
twilight;  when  alone;  about  the  future ;  during  a  thun-
derstorm ;  with  palpitation  ;  as  if  below  her  1.  breast,
so  painful  that  her  whole  body  trembled,  at  times  with
bitter  eructations  and  palpitation;  and  restless  with
much  sweat  on  forehead  and  heat  of  head  ;  oppression.

iFear  and  dread:  in  evening;  of  death;  as  if  something
were  creeping  out  of  every  corner ;  late  in  evening  as  if
a  horrible  face  were  looking  out  of  every  corner.

■  Mental  depression  and  a  most  uncommon  fearfulness  or

timidity  with  great  sense  of  fatigue.
II Great  indisposition  to  mental  or  physical  exertion.
I  No  capacity  for  mental  work,  absence  of  thought,  as  if  he

could  not  grasp  any  thought ;  disinclination  to  study  or

converse;  slow  flow  of  ideas,  absence  of  mind.
I  I  Unable  to  collect  his  senses,  in  morning  on  rising ;  head

dizzy,  heavy,  painful,  as  if  he  had  been  lying  at  night

with  head  too  low.

■  While  reflecting  :  headache  and  dyspnoea  ;  feeling  of  ap-

prehension at  pit  of  stomach;  weak  feeling  in  head.
IB  Apathy  :  indifferent  even  to  his  own  children  ;  answers
no  questions,  or  replies  wrongly; took no notice of
things  about  him,  but  his  responses  were  always  correct;
answers  slowly,  moves  sluggishly.

■  Seemed  dumb  and  dazed  for  many  days.

■  Stupor,  delirium,  grasping  at  flocks.

■  Sadness  and  anxiety,  regularly  recurring  at  twilight;

from  nervous  exhaustion.

■  Does  not  like  to  be  alone.

■  ■  Weary  of  life  ;  full  of  gloomy  forebodings.

■  Gloomy,  taciturn,  sad  and  reflective.

■  Dejection;  thought  he  would  die.

■  Hypochondriasis;  sadness  alternating  with mirth and

laughter  ;  uneasy  about  one's  health  ;  paroxysms  of  an-
guish, when  alone  or  in  stormy  weather,  with  timorous
disposition  ;  told  those  about  him  repeatedly  that  he
could  not  possibly  recover,  and  gave  some  disjointed
directions  about  his  business  affairs.

■  Melancholy,  sheds  tears;  or  wdth  attacks  of  involuntary

laughter.

■  Hysterical  alternation  of  laughter  and  weeping.

■  Amativeness;  erotic  melancholia.

■  Shamelessness;  uncovers  herself  and  wishes  to  go  naked,

as  if  insane.


331  PHOSPHORUS.

I  I  Destroys  what  comes  into  her  hands;  talks  in  a  vehe-
ment, commanding  tone;  spits  at  nurse,  lifts  up  her
clothes  and  kisses  hotly  all  who  come  near  her;  does
things  wrongly  and  talks  disconnectedly;  tongue  whit-
ish ;  sleeplessness ;  menses  scanty,  pale  and  watery.
I  Delirium:  loquacious;  violent,  at  first  alternating  with
intervals  of  consciousness,  afterwards  interrupted;  erotic
with  indications  of  great  excitement  of  sexual  system  ;
violent,  forgot  to  pass  water;  respiration  very  difficult,
pulse  very  small,  skin  dry,  tongue  brown ;  fancied  he
was  in  several  pieces  and  could  not  get  the  fragments
properly  adjusted.
■  Crazy  deliria  in  a  young  woman  who  was  strictly  moral
and  unhappy  in  her  love ;  accused  herself  of  the  most
obscene  actions,  of  which  she  never  was  guilty ;  simul-
taneous hysterical  laughing  and  crying  spells.
I  I  Delirium  tremens: increasing  prostration; pulse  fre-
quent, soft,  tremulous,  intermittent;  skin  cool,  clammy,
moist ;  respiration  rapid,  rattling,  blowing ;  breath  cool ;
stupor  with  muttering ;  twitching  of  muscles  ;  jerkings ;
singultus;  trembling  of  tongue ; difficult  deglutition;
rattling  sound  when  swallowing;  great  nervous  irrita-
bility ;  salacity.
I  Chronic  alcoholism:  great  mental  and  physical  exhaus-
tion; trembling  of  limbs  when  trying  \o  use them  ;
jerking  of  single  muscles;  arms  powerless;  legs  para-
lyzed; vertigo  with  loss  of  consciousness;  indifference
even  towards  dearest  friends;  forgetful  and ^stupid,  he
does  something  else  than  he  intended ;  monomania  de
grandeur  et  de  la  richesse; idiocy; inclined  to  diar-
rhoea, stools  and  flatulency  ;  dry  scaly  skin.
I  I  Maniacal  attacks,  coming  on  during  sleep  ;  fury  and  ex-
treme violence,  so  that  no  one  dare  approach  him  ;  de-
stroys everything  in  the  room  ;  eyes  remain  closed;  after
two  or  three  hours  lies  down  and  sleeps  a  few  minutee,
recollects  nothing  on  waking.
iDementia  paralytica;  brain  weak,  exhausted;  silliness;

idiocy.
I  I  Mental  symptoms  come  on  after  excitement  at  theatre
and  she  becomes  sleepless;  then  full  of  fear,  especially
at  piano;  constantly  on  lookout  for  something  to  hap-
pen; hears  voices;  hot  head  and  face;  sexual  dreams
and  violent  sexual  excitement.
I  Brain  fag  from  mental  overwork  and  constant  strain  of
eyes.
*  Sensorium. l  l Suddenly  fell to  ground  unconscious,  life
apparently  extinct;  pulse  and  respiration  lost ;  face  red
and  like  rest  of  body  cool  to  touch ;  irresponsive  to  loud


PHOSPHOHUS.  332

calls ;  friction  brought  about  no  reaction  and  only  when
a  needle  was  plunged  deeply  into  sole  of  foot  there  oc-
curred a  slight  twitching ;  after  grief  from  disappointed
love. ^Apoplexy.

I  Apoplexy,  grasps  at  head  ;  mouth  drawn  to  left.

I I  Vertigo:  several  times  a  day;  staggers  while  walking
so  that  people  might  think  her  intoxicated  ;  in  forenoon
while  walking  everything  turned  around  with  her;  as
if  chair  were  rising;  as  if  all  the  blood  rushed  to
head;  with  roaring  in  ears,  on  rising;  in  morning  con-
stantly increasing,  like  a  heavy  pressing  downward  of
forepart  of  head;  with  headache;  as  soon  as  he  makes
any  effort  to  rise;  on  rising  from  a  seat;  on  looking  up
or  down;  on  moving  head  as  if  he  would  fall;  in
morning,  after  rising  from  bed ;  nervous,  from  abuse  of
narcotics,  coffee;  with  fainting;  <  after  meals  and  in
morning;  in  evening  in  bed;  with  congestion  of  blood
to  head,  nausea  and  oppressive  headache;  on  rising  in
morning  with  weakness  in  legs,  so  that  for  a  few  mo-
ments after  getting  out  of  bed  they  cannot  stand ;  must
lie  down  a  few  minutes  before  they  can  go  about;  <

„  towards  evening  and  in  open  air;  pain  in  r.  side  of
head  after  attack,  cannot  lie  on  1.  side  because  of  palpi-
tation ;  from  overexertion  of  eyes,  with  muscse  voli-
tantes ;  from  smell  of  flowers,  gas,  ethereal  oils,  turpen-
tine, with  fainting;  from  loss  of  vital  fluids;  followed
by  nausea  and  an  oppressive  pain  in  centre  of  brain  ;
with  stupefaction  and  a  sensation  as  if  he  would  fall  for-
ward ;  as  if  chair  on  which  he  was  sitting  were  rising
and  as  if  he  were  looking  down ;  with  sensation  of  emp-
tiness in  head.

llGreat  heaviness,  confusion  and  dulness  in  head.

■  Great  weakness  of  head  so  that  she  could  not  endure

sound  of  piano.

■  Sense  of  exhaustion  and  bewilderment  in  brain,  with

vertigo  and  disposition  to  fall  down;  >  in  cool  air.
^  Inner  Head.  Hn  forehead  :  dull  pain,  to  root  of  nose  and
to  upper  lids,  with  vertigo,  <  turning  head  or  any  vio-
lent motion  ;  >  in  open  air ;  pressure  extending  into
eyes,  as  if  they  would  be  pressed  out;  pressive  headache
above  eyes,  aching  weight  with  stuffed  feeling  in  nose,
>  in  open  air;  headache  as  if  a  weight  pressed  down
into  eyes ;  weight  and  throbbing  on  waking,  >  by  cold
washing,  <  on  stooping,  sometimes  lasting  all  day;
burning  headache;  drawing  and  boring  on  one  side  ex-
tending into  bones  efface  and  parietal  bone;  headache
on  walking  with  heat  in  head,  disinclination  to  rise  or
move  about ;  numbness  and  aching,  with  weakness  in
sacral  region ;  headache  over  1.  eye.


333  PHOSPHORUS.

I  In  temples  :  throbbing  pain  ;  pulsation  in  left.

iCold  crampy  pain  on  whole  1.  side  of  head.

I  I  Cephalalgia,  of  five  years  standing;  came  on  at  irregu-
lar intervals,  but  generally  from  stooping;  pain  shoots
from  one  temple  to  other  and  at  times  flies  through  to
occiput,  <  in  front  of  head;  paroxysms  preceded  by  dim-
ness of  sight  and  accompanied  by  a  feeling  of  sickness ;
bowels  relaxed  for  a  day  or  so,  and  then  constipated  for
a  week ;  it  appears  to  him  as  if  food  did  not  digest
properly;  appetite  very  indifferent;  does  not  relish
anything.

I  1  Intense  pain  in  whole  head  and  in  eyes,  <  in  1.  eye,  in
forenoon  or  from  stooping;  >. while  eating,  lying  down
and  after  sleeping.

I  I  Severe  pains  in  head  like  a  kind  of  stupefaction,  with
rush  of  blood  and  pulsation.

I  Terrible  attacks  of  headache  from  mental  work,  with
weakness  and  strained  feeling  of  eyes.

1  I  For  an  hour  roaring  in  head  and  r.  ear;  <  lying  on  1.
side;  >  lying  on  r.,  with  headache.

■  Headache  many  years;  <  in  1.  side,  through  eye  into
back  of  head,  with  nausea;  sensation  of  faintness  at
stomach;  always  very  hungry  during  headaches;  at-
tacks once  a  week,  lasting  from  one  to  three  days ;  <
at  noon;  increasing  from  morning  till  noon,  decreasing
from  noon  till  evening.

I  Sick-headache:  with  pulsations  and  burning  mostly  in
forehead ;  with  nausea  and  vomiting  from  morning
until  noon ;  <  from  music,  while  masticating,  and  in
warm  room.

iHemicrania :  face  congested  ;  forehead  or  occiput  swollen ;
touching  swollen  part  causes  most  excruciating  pain ;
unilateral,  pulsating,,  pressing,  boring  and  burning
pains  in  one  or  the  other  temple,  radiating  to  forehead,
eyes  and  vertex,  with  sensation  as  if  there  were  painful
nodes  under  scalp,  painful  to  touch ;  a  sensation  as  if
patient  were  pulled  by  hair,  or  as  if  head  would  burst
in  consequence  of  pressure  and  fulness  of  brain ;  pain
appears  mostly  in  evening  and  morning,  with  frequent
yawning  and  turgescent  face,  and  watery  urine;  <  by
speaking,  eating,  in  warm  room  ;  >  in  fresh  air,  by  rest
and  sleep ;  after  attack  lassitude  prevails,  and  patient
is  liable  to  fresh  colds ;  after  every  attack,  which  came
nearly  every  week  and  lasted  twenty-four  hours,  looked
pale  and  haggard ;  felt  very  tired  when  walking  or  stand-
ing, and  had  to  rest  during  every  exertion  ;  extremities
felt  cold  for  many  hours  after  an  attack  and  got  warm
after  being  in  bed  some  time;  is  unable  to  answer
promptly  any  question  addressed  to  her.


PHOSPHORUS.  334

■  Neuralgia :  head  must  be  warmly  wrapped  up  night  and

day ;  from  ansemia  from  loss  of  blood  and  severe  ex-
hausting diseases ;  from  scrofulous  or  tuberculous  (non-
syphilitic)  exostoses.

■  Dull  stupefying  headache.

I  Compression  and  weight  of  head  with  pressure  on  upper
lids,  >  by  washing  face  in  cold  water  and  in  open  air.

B Headache :  every  other  day  ;  sets  in  while  reflecting ;  with
increased  sensitiveness  to  odors ;  congestive,  nervous,
hysterical,  from  grief,  anger,  chagrin  or  abuse  of  spirits,
or  excessive  study.

I  Hot  vertex  after  grief.

•Sensation  of  coldness  in  cerebellum,  with  stiffness  in
brain.

I  1  Pains  darting  about  different  parts  of  body,  <  morning

and  evening,  and  often  severely  affect  head  in  children.

I I  Congestion  to  head:  seeming  to  come  up  spine  and
thence  into  head;  burning,  stinging  pains  and  pulsa-
tions, commencing  in  occiput ;  red  face,  puffy  under
eyes;  whenever  she  washes  clothes  or  walks  fast;  chronic,
with  stinging  in  occiput  and  pulsations  there  and  in
whole  head; <  from  mental  work,  brain  fag,  etc.

I  I  Shocks  in  occiput  or  all  parts  of  head. ^Epilepsy.

I  I  Shocks  in  head  always  following  a  day  of  overwork,
either  mental  or  physical,  and  always  occurred  after  re-
tiring when  just  losing  herself  in  sleep;  they  consisted
of  a  loud  snap  in  occiput,  and  would  rouse  her  to  full
consciousness,  with  a  shattered  sensation  in  head  as  if
something  had  really  exploded  there ;  head  felt  jarred
for  a  few  moments;  fatigue  and  especially  worry  ex-
cited them.

I  I  Noises  in  back  part  of  head,  appearing  and  disappearing
suddenly  ;  sometimes  injected  eyes.

I  I  Heat  on  top  of  head,  dizziness,  buzzing  and  throbbing
in  head;  swelling  under  eyes;  palpitation  from  menfal
emotions;  emphysema. ^Hypersemia  of  brain.

I  lApoplexia  nervosa  in  an  old  woman  who  was  greatly
weakened  by  previous  bleeding  and  venesection.

I  Impending  paralysis  of  brain  and  collapse ;  burning  pain
in  brain.

■  Hydrocephalus  acutus;  child  dull  and  inclined  to  sleep

all  the  time ;  vomits  drinks  as  soon  as  they  become
warm  in  stomach;  profuse  greenish  diarrhoea;  great
prostration.

iHydrocephaloid  symptoms  from  great  exhaustion.  ^Sum-
mer complaint.

1  1  Cerebral  oedema;  takes  no  interest  in  anything;  can
only  be  brought  to  consciousness  for  a  few  minutes;


335  PHOSPHORUS.

does  not  answer  any  questions  or  does  it  wrongly ;  suf-
fers from  dilatation  of  r.  heart,  caused  by  atheroma  of,
pulmonary  arteries  and  from  fatty  liver ;  urine  shows  a
moderate  quantity  of  albumen  and  nephritic  elements,
no  ammonia.

HChronic  meningitis.

BlSoftening  of  brain,  with  constant  wearied,  tired  feeling,
persistent  headache,  slow  at  answering  questions,  ver-
tigo, feet  drag,  formication,  numbness  in  limbs.

I  Incipient  hemiplegia.

I  Acute  atrophy  of  brain  and  medulla  oblongata,  with
ureemia.

I  I  Tendency  to  atrophy  of  brain  in  old  age.
*  Outer  Head, l Tension  in  face  and  skin  of  forehead  as  if
too  tight :  frequently  only  on  one  side ;  <  from  change
of  temperature  and  while  eating;  >  after  eating;  with
anxiety.

iDry,  painful  heat  of  scalp,  compelling  one  to  uncover
.head;  temperature  of  body  not  increased;  >  when
lying  down.

I  I  Clammy  perspiration  on  head  only,  and  in  palms  of
hands,  with  discharge  of  much  turbid  urine.

•  Violent  itching  on  scalp.

■  Unnatural  accumulation  of  dandruff.

I B Dandruff  copious,  falls  out  in  clouds ;  roots  of  hair  turn
grey  and  dry,  and  hair  comes  out  in  bunches ;  itching
<  from  scratching,  >  at  the  time,  but  <  after
scratching.

I  I  Denuded  part  of  scalp  clear,  white  and  smooth.  ^Tinea
decalvans. ^Favus.

■  Scaly,  bald  spots  on  head.

I  I  Itching  pimples  on  scalp.

I  I  Soft,  elastic  tumor,  as  large  as  a  hen's  egg,  on  parietal
bone;  visible  pulsations  in  tumor,  around  which  a
sharp,  rough,  indented  opening  could  be  felt  in  under-
lying bone;  entire  surface  of  tumor  denuded  of  hair;
no  inflammation.

■  Exostoses  on  frontal,  1.  parietal  and  occipital  bones,  vary-

ing in  size  from  bean  to  hazelnut,  looking  like  tophi.

■  Periostitis  of  skull.

■  Head  affected  :  from  taking  cold ;  from  remaining  in  hot

rooms ;  after  having  hair  cut.

■  A  sensation  as  if  pulled  by  the  hair.

®  Sight  and  Eyes.  ■Appearance  before  eyes:  sparks  in  the
dark;  luminous,  especially  red ;  various  flashing  lights;
rauscse  volitantes ;  flashes  of  light ;  halo  around  light ;
various  flashes  of  light  and  color;  green  halo  around
candle;  misty,  with  attacks  of  vanishing  of  sight;  black-


PHOSPHORUS.  336

ness  or  black  points  or  sparks;  flickering,  with  roaring

in  head.
I  Eyes  very  sensitive  to  light  or  dazzled  by  bright  lights.
I  I  Aversion  to  light.
I  On  reading,  letters  look  red,  outline  undefined;  objects

tremble.

■  Objects  look  green  or  grey.

■  Colors  appear  black  before  eyes.

■  All  objects  appear  to  be  covered  with  a  grey  veil.

I  Eyes  give  out  while  reading;  after  reading,  dull  pain
deep  in  eyes.

I  I  Obliged  to  hold  objects  near  to  see  distinctly;  at  a  dis-
tance everything  seems  enveloped  in  a  smoke  or  mist.

■  Sees  more  distinctly  in  morning  in  twilight  than  during

day,  or  by  shading  eyes  with  hand.

■  Eyes  very  weak,  seem  large,  and  difficult  to  get  lids  over

them.
I  Shortsightedness.

■  Dimness  of  sight,  photophobia ;  unable  to  read  by  candle-

light. ^Excessive  use  of  tobacco.
Distant  objects  appear  to  be  covered  with  a  mist.
It  seems  as  if  a  black  veil  were  before  r.  eye.

■  Momentary  blindness,  as  from  fainting.

■  Paroxysm  of  nyctalopia;  or  of  a  sensation  as  if  things

were  covered  with  a  grey  veil.

■  ■Amaurosis  and  amblyopia.

■  ■Amaurosis  of  r.  eye  of  seven  years'  duration;  conse-

quent upon  sexual  excesses,  especially  if  associated  with
fattj^  liver.

■  Gradually  or  rapidly  increasing  myopia;  incipient  amau-

rosis, particularly  of  1.  eye;  could  harclly  see  large  type
when  held  close  to  eyes  during  daylight,  much  less
other  objects.

■  Amblyopia  from  loss  of  fluids;  also  in  morbus  Brightii.
I  I A  woman,  aet.  21,  had  been  troubled  some  time  with  a

blurring  of  vision  which  came  on  suddenly  after  read-
ing; since  then  has  had  a  dull  pain  in  eye  after  read-
ing a  short  time,  compelling  her  to  desist;  at  times  her
sight  is  very  dim  and  black  spots  pass  before  eyes ;  is
always  <  from  looking  at  any  bright  shining  object  and
in  lamplight,  but  is  >  in  twilight;  lids  feel  heavy  in
morning. ^Asthenopia.

■  Blindness  after  lightning-stroke.

■  ■Upon  falling asleep  at  night,  frequent  deceptions  of

vision,  sparks  before  eyes,  shooting  pains  through  eyes,
appearance  of  flashes  of  lightning  ;  very  great  weight  of
head,  throbbing,  beating  and  pressure  <  in  1.  temple,  al-
most intolerable;  by  day  flickering  before  eyes ;  in  even-


^'^^  PHOSPHORUS.

ing  in  darkness  flashes  before  eyes,  violent  burning
and  transient  shooting  in  them,  sometimes  even  when
eyes  were  closed,  seemed  to  be  looking  into  a  sea  of  fire
or  into  a  vessel  full  of  glaring,  red,  molten  iron;  finally
deceptions  of  light  occurred  also  by  dav  ;  eyes  extremely
sensitive  to  light ;  deathly  paleness  of  face  ;  if  room  was
darkened  appearances  of  light  became  more  pronounced
and  they  increased  with  the  pains  towards  evening  un-
til far  into  night  to  such  a  degree  of  severity  that  he
feared  he  would  go  mad;  slight  pale-reddish  color  of  the
sclerotic,  especially  in  external  canthi. ^Glaucoma.

I  I  Glaucoma  after  iridectomy,  pulling  as  if  something
were  pulled  tight  over  eyes,  with  spangles  (white)  around
gas  and  a  boring  in  eye  exteliding  into  head.

iGlaucoraa ;  useful  in  improving  vision  and  removing  sub-
jective symptoms  after  an  iridectomy;  halo  around  light;
vision  hazy  ;  objects  appear  red.

■  Ciliary  neuralgia  accompanying  glaucoma.

I  I  Rapidly  progressing  chorio-retinitis,  in  a  man  who  had
been  writing  in  a  cellar  by  poor  light  for  several  months
and  using  tobacco  to  excess;  atrophied  spots  in  choroid
very  marked,  surrounded  by  areola  of  active  inflamma-
tion; retina  hazy,  blurred;  optic  disk  red,  somewhat
swollen,  with  an  undefined  margin;  vitreous,  slightly
turbid,  with  floating  opacities;  complained  of  a  mist
and  of  pinkish  globules  before  vision,  especially  after  a
bright  light;  outlines  of  objects  seemed  uneven,  wav-
ering, trembling,  on  reading  letters  looked  red,  especially
by  gaslight  and  flashing  of  lights  before  vision  ;  patient
weak  and  perspired  easily.

■  Retinitis  nyctalopia,  albuminurica  or  apoplectica.

I  I  Congestion  of  retina,  balls  sore  on  motion,  no  photopho-
bia, pains  extending  from  eyes  to  top  of  head.

■  Cherry-red  color  before  vision  in  optic  neuritis  and  other

diseases  of  fundus.

■  ■Disease  of  fundus  and  disturbance  of  function  of  optic

nerve.

■  Choroid  hypersemia  and  muscse  volitantes.

I  I  Arthritic  ophthalmia  with  leucomatous  opacity  of  cor-
nea, which  upon  clearing  up  showed  lens  to  have  the
color  similar  to  a  beginning  cataracta  glaumatosa.

I  I  An  old  lady  with  incipient,  progressive,  hard  cataract;
hard,  white,  convergent  striae  in  lens  with  diff'use  hazi-
ness; on  reading  letters  seemed  as  if  printed  in  red  ink,
although  paper  looked  white  and  natural ;  vision  ^\,
under  Phosphor,  the  haziness  disappeared,  no  morestriie
appeared,  and  in  six  months  vision  improved  to  -ff.

I  I  Cataracta  viridis.

VOL.  VIII.— 22.


PHOSPHORUS.  338

I  i  White  pustule  on  outer  segment  of  1.  cornea.
I  I  Maculae  cornese.

I  I  Paralytic  affection  of  sixth  pair  of  nerves  in  r.  eye;
nocturnal  emissions.

■  Paralysis  of  muscles ;  spermatorrhoea,  sexual  abuse,  hem-

orrhoids, etc.

I  I  Total  paralysis  of  third  pair  of  nerves,  ptosis,  eye  turned
outward ;  mj^driasis  in  a  woman.

I  I  Weakness  of  internal  recti  muscles,  asthenopia  muscu-
laris,  pain  and  stiffness  on  moving  them  and  at  times  a
feeling  of  heat  in  eyes  as  after  looking  at  a  fire.

Pupils  contracted  ;  dilated;  dilated,  sluggish.

Inflammation  of  eyes^  with  pressing  burning  pains.

I  I  Photophobia  with  great  pain. ^Ophthalmia.

I  iFor  six  days,  from  being  in  a  hot,  close,  crowded  room,
r.  eye  has  been  red,  waters,  with  feeling  of  dust  in  it  un-
der lower  lid;  <  in  evening  when  it  also  feels  hot;
swelling  of  r.  ej^elid,  with  adhesion;  r.  eye  looks  small.

■  Subacute  conjunctivitis,  lachrymation  ;  swelling  and  sup-

puration of  lids  and  Meibomian  glands,  with  itching
and  burning  pains.

I  I  Inveterate  catarrhal  ophthalmia ;  both  eyes  and  lids  in-
flamed ;  edges  of  lids  as  if  corroded ;  constant  lachry-
mation causing  smarting  and  burning;  copious  secre-
tion of  thin,  muco-purulent  matter;  itching  and  burn-
ing in  eyes;  agglutination  of  lids  in  morning;  indis-
tinct vision.

I  I  Burning  in  e3'es,  with  profuse  lachrymation  in  wind.

■  Small  burning  spots  on  eyeballs.

I  I  Feeling  of  sand  in  1.  eye,  >  by  rubbing.

■  Aching  in  eyes,  forehead  and  orbits.
I  1  Stiffness  in  eyes.

I  I  Pain  in  bones  of  orbit  of  eye.

I  I  Balls  pain  as  if  compressed,  <  on  looking;  aching  and
heaviness  in  eyes,  like  sleepiness.

■  Balls  seem  large  and  difficult  to  get  lids  over  them.

■  Sensation  as  if  eye  were  swollen  and  pushed  out  of  orbit.

^Morbus  Basedowii.

■  Yellow,  jaundiced  conjunctiva,  in  fatty  liver.
I  I  Watering  of  eyes.

■  Eyelids  tremble  and  quiver;  eyes  fill  with  water.
I  iTwitching  of  lids  and  external  canthus  of  1.  eye.
I  I  Itching  in  lids ;  stye  on  lower  lid.

■  QEdema  of  lids  and  about  eyes.

■  Blue rings; puffiness and swelling about  eyes; eyes

sunken.

■  Fungus  oculi.

^  Hearing  and  Ears. ■Hearing  too  acute.


■  ^^^  PHOSPHORUS.

■  Words  and  sounds  reverberate  in  ears,  music  especially

resounding  of  own  voice ;  ringing  with  palpitation ;  con-
stant buzzing.
I  Noises  in  ears:  roaring  from rush  of  blood;  constant
buzznig;  nngmg,  with  palpitation  ;  reverberation

■  ■Hearing  difficult.

■  Difficult  hearing,  especially  of  human  voice;  also  after

typhus;  with  cold  extremities.

I  I  Rapid  diminution  of  hearing;  at  times  sensation  as  if
somethnig  lay  before  ears,  particularly  r. ;  momentary
relief  by  external  pressure ;  humming  in  ears ;  sensation
ot  gauze  over  ear;  loud  reverberation  of  words  in  ears
whether  he  or  others  speak.

NFor  many  years  hardness  of  hearing  and  ringing  in
ears;  ticknig  of  watch  only  heard  when  held  close  to  r
ear,  1.  an  inch  and  a  half;  auditory  canals  dry;  r  tvm-
panum  whiter  than  left.

I  'Hardness  of  hearing  due  to  congestion  to  ears  after  tv-
phoid  fever  in  blonde  subjects  and  intellectual  men
with  large  heads  and  prominent  mastoid  processes

■  Dysecoia;  dry  condition  of  tympanum,

■  Something  seems  lying  constantly  in  front  of  ears

I  I  Sensation  as  if  foreign  body  were  lodged  in  ears ;  stopped-
up  feeling.  ^^

■  Violent  itching  or  tickling  in  ear.

I  I  Congestion  to  ears,  with  throbbing;  earache

■  Shooting  through  ears  especially  at  night ;  ear  discharges
I  iDraggmg  pain  in  ears.

I  lA  painful  and  inflamed  gathering  in  r.  ear  first  in  1  •
matter  and  blood  are  discharged;  shooting  pam
through  ear,  especially  at  night,  preventing  sleep ;  rather
deat  in  1.  ear,  if  ear  gets  well  has  styes  on  eyelids  or
eruptions  at  root  of  nose,  under  septum  and  a  stye  on  1
lower  eyehd;  no  appetite,  especially  dislikes  meat;  con-
stipation. /^Otorrhoea.

■  Polypi  in  ears.

'Smell  and  Nose,  l  i Imaginary  foul  smells,  ■sense  of
smell  very  acute;  faints  from  smell  of  flowers;  with
headache.

■  Sneezing:  frequent;  causes  pain  in  throat.

I  'Stoppage  of  nose :  with  frequent  sneezing,  >  in  open  air  •
with  dulness  of  head  as  if  coryza  would  develop.

I  'Sensation  of  fulness  in  nose,  especially  high  up  in  1
nostril,  with  loose  mucus.

I  'Sensation  of  dryness  in  nose,  with  a  sensation  as  if  it
would  be  stuck  together.

■  Painful  dryness  of  nose.

"Sore  pain  in  both  nostrils,  even  when  touched;  ulcer-
ated nostrils.


PHOSPHORUS.  340

I  I  Soreness  of  Schneiderian  and  mucous  membranes,  with
bloody  scabs  on  margins  of  nostrils.

I  I  Internal  inflammation  of  nose,  with  sensation  of  dryness
and  slow  bleeding  of  nose.

llCoryza:  frequent  alternations  of  fluent  and  stopped  co-
ryza  ;  with  sore  throat  and  great  dulness  of  head  ;  fever-
ish, dry;  secretion  dries  to  crusts  which  adhere  tightly;
complicated  with  hoarseness  and  bronchial  catarrh ;
obstruction  often  in  morning;  discharge  from  one  and
stoppage  of  other  nostril ;  sneezing  causes  pain  in  throat
or  head  ;  smell  and  taste  gone ;  with  sleepiness,  especi-
ally during  day  and  after  meals;  blowing  blood  from
nose  ;  profuse  discharge  flowing  down  into  fauces.

I  I  Ominous  coryza  in  scarlatina;  great  discharge  from
nose;  on  lying  down  it  flows  into  fauces,  w^here  it
rattles  from  breathing;  neck  greatly  swollen  and  eyes
staring  in  consequence  of  stagnation  of  blood  by  this
swelling;  great  weakness  and  great  frequency  of  jDulse;
<  at  night;  hands  icy-cold  and  bluish.

■  Nostrils  filled  with  green  mucus.

iNasal  discharge;  profuse, greenish, yellow;  blood-streaked
mucus;  <  in  morning.

I  Chronic  inflammation  of  nasal  membrane  with  suppressed

or  oversensitive  smell.
iBad  smell  from  nose;  foul  smell.

I I  Frequent  blowing  of  blood  from  nose.

lEpistaxis:  several  times  a  day,  often  quite  profuse ;  later
attacks  accompanied  by  profuse  sweat;  while  straining
at  stool ;  early  in  morning;  in  tall,  slim  girls  approach-
ing puberty ;  in  diphtheria  following  detachment  of
membrane  from  nose.

llSwelling  of  nose:  red,  shining;  painful  to  touch  ;  with
coryza ;  of  nasal  bones.

iNecrosis ;  periosteum  raised,  forms  a  new  stratum  of  bone.

•  Swelling  and  dark-redness  of  one  ala  nasi;  pimples  and
pustules  on  nose ;  scrofulous  inflammation  of  nose  with
plugs  in  nose.

■  Nasal  polypi ;  they  bleed  easily.

■  Point  of  nose  red  and  shining.
I  I  Fanlike  motion  of  alas  nasi.

I  I  Freckles  on  nose.

^  Upper  Face.  iFace :  expression  of  general  weakness  ;  pale,
sickly;  sunken,  earthy;  ej'es  deep-seated,  hollow,  sur-
rounded by  blue  rings;  pale,  almost  waxen;  ashy;
sickly-yellow  ;  livid  ;  bloated  ;  lips  blue ;  hippocratic ;
from least emotion; color  very  changeable;  swollen,

.:  ■■  oedematous,  puffy ;  puffy  under  eyes;  lips  and  eyelids
oedematous.


341  PHOSPHORUS.

I  Sensation  as  if  skin  were  too  tight.

I  Pain:  tearing;  shooting  from  heye  to  vertex;  from  fore-
head into  eyes  (right)  and  from  temples  and  vertex
down  to  zygoma ;  tearing  about  lower  margin  of  r.
orbit,  extending  under  r.  ear,  involving  bones  of  face,
as  if  everthing  were  torn  out ;  drawing  and  tearing  in
jaws,  root  of  nose,  eyes  and  temples,  from  taking  cold
over  washtub ;  twitching,  tearing,  darting  and  tension
in  cheek  bones  and  jaw,  with  threatening  caries.

IJerking,  tearing  pain  in  teeth  and  cheek  of  1.  side,  ex-
tending to  forehead  and  r.  temple,  <  taking  anything
cold  into  mouth  or  in  cold,  wet  weather,  >  from
warmth;  as  if  nails  were  driven  into  jaws;  darting  in
different  parts  beginning  in  uncertain  places,  attacks
brought  on  by  speaking,  eating  or  slightest  touch.

I  I  For  ten  years  tearing-shooting  pain  in  r.  cheek  up  into
head;  <  speaking,  eating,  swallowing;  tendency  to
sweat ;  weariness ;  vertigo,  could  hardly  walk  without
falling.

I  I  Prosopalgia  <  by  opening  mouth,  especially  if  there
be  congestion  of  blood  to  head.

■  Facial  neuralgia,  especially  involving  jaw ;  pains  go  to

root of nose,  temples; hot,  bloated face,  <  talking,
eating ;  caries  of  lower  jaw.

•  Neuralgia  of  head,  it  has  to  be  w^rapped  up  night  and
day ;  <  in  windy  weather  and  in  morning.

I  I  Small  pimples  on  face  and  head,  which,  when  touched,
give  rise  to  excruciating  pain.

I  I  Scabby  herpes  on  face.
"Lower  Face. iLips: parched; dry  with  sooty  coating;
bluish,  black  (measles);  deep  crack  in  middle  of  lower.

iNose,  lips,  mouth  and  throat  dry;  no  relief  from  water.

I  Tough,  viscous  expectoration,  hangs  on  lips  and  tongue,
in  typhoid  conditions.

I  I  In  centre  of  lower  lip  tumor  size  of  walnut,  surrounded
at  its  base  by  a  bluish  areola  of  veins  and  covered  by  a
black  crust,  which  broke  into  fissures  at  least  touch,
discharging  pus  and  blood;  tumor  felt  elastic,  swelling
up  when  touched,  but  root  felt  hard  and  was  as  large
as  a  bean;  lacerating  pains  in  interior  of  tumor,  with
burning  and  itching  .outside  of  it ;  has  inguinal  hernia
and  an  indurated  testicle;  mind  constantly  occupied
with  his  disease  and  is  afraid  his  days  are  numbered.

I  I  Ulcerated  corners  of  mouth.

■  Tearing  in  jaw  bones,  evening  <  lying  down,  >  moving

jaw.
I  I  Deep  rodent ulcer  on  lower  jaw; smaller  one  on  r.
zygoma;  larger  ulcer  is  surrounded  by  smaller  ones.


PHOSPHORUS.  .342

■  Necrosis  of  lower  jaw,  rarely  of  upper.

I  I  Disfiguring  eczeraatous  condition  of  chin.

I  Parotitis,  when  suppuration  sets  in.
'*^  Teeth  and  Gums.  iPain  in  teeth  :  pricking-stinging  <  in
open  air  and  from  warm  food ;  boring  sometimes  pass-
ing into  numbness,  <  by  cold,  heat  and  chewing,  com-
bined with  soreness  and  swelling  of  gums  ;  throbbing,
much  <  when  cold  air  strikes  carious  tooth ;  jerking  or
twitching,  periosteun:*  of  tooth  inflamed  and  tender  to
pressure  ;  of  washerwomen  ;  washing  always  increases
or  provokes  it;  in  decayed  teeth,  accompanied  by  gum-
boils; from  having  hands  in  cold  or  warm  water;  tear-
ing, shooting,  extending  from  carious  tooth  all  over
bones  of  face  and  head.

I  Rapid  decay  of  teeth,  inflammation  of  gums  and  gum-
boils in  lower  jaw;  ill  and  irregular  formation  of  teeth
of  lower  Jaw  of  scrofulous  children  with  mesenteric
disease.

iGums:  stand  off  from  teeth  and  bleed  easily;  inflamed,
ulcerated,  with  loose  teeth  ;  gumboils.

I  Irritation  of  carious  tooth,  causing  frequent  gumboils

and  incipient  disease  of  maxilla,  and  where  for  some
reason  the  tooth  cannot  be  extracted.

II  Obstinate,  profuse  bleeding  of  gums;  pulse  scarcely
perceptible;  ecchymoses  around  mouth  and  eyes;
petechise  on  chest  and  legs;  urine  and  stool  contain
blood.

I  Profuse  obstinate  hemorrhage  from  gums  after  extrac-
tion of  teeth  so  severe  as  to  threaten  speedy  death.

I  (After  extraction  of  several  teeth  marked  painful  swell-
ing of  1.  lower  jaw  and  formation  of  an  external  fistulous
opening ;  profuse  expectoration  of  saliva ;  jerking  stitch-
ing pains  in  cavities  with  bleeding;  skin  over  1.  jaw  red
and  tense.

•Necrosis  of  1.  lower  jaw  ;  swelling  of  jaw  bones.
^' Taste  and  Tongue. iSpeech:  difficult  and  weak;  slow;
answers  questions  with  difficulty ;  stuttered  when  en-
deavoring to  articulate.

iTaste:  bitter;  sour  after  taking  milk;  saltish;  sour;
sweetish;  better  after  eating;  slimy;  of  rotten  eggs  in
morning.

■  Tongue:  coated  like  fur;  coated  with  dirty  thick  mucus

(measles);  slimy;  dry,  white;  chalky  white;  uniformly
,  white;  yellow,  grey,  dry  in  middle;  red  and  dry;  red
in  middle;  red,  dry,  streak  down  middle;  brown  and
dry  in  middle;  dry  and  black;  swollen  dry  and  blackish,
along  median  line;  dry, immovable,  covered  with  black
crusts;  cracked,  parched,  or  glossy;  dry,  coated  white,
with  stinging  in  tip;  coated  only  in  middle.


343  PHOSPHORUS.

I  I  Burning  on  tongue  extending  to  palate.

I  Tip  of  tongue  somewhat  swollen,  with  enlargement  of  it^

papillae  and  feeling  as  if  it  had  been  burnt.
'^  Inner  Mouth, l Dryness  in  mouth;  dry  and  sore  feeling,

with  increased  thirst.
1 8 Soreness  of  mouth,  easily  bleeding.

■  Aphthous  patches  on  roof  of  mouth  and  tongue.

I  Bloody  erosions  here  and  there  in  inner  surface  of  cheek.

I  I  Painless  ulcer  on  inner  surface  of  lower  lip  ;  edges  hard,
serrated  ;  base  lardaceous ;  after  suppression  of  a  brown
herpetic  eruption  on  face.

llSoft  palate  dark,  bluish-red;  ulcer  above  uvula  about

IJ  inches  in  length,  causing  soft  palate  to  appear  as  if

torn, uvula hanging far into pharynx ; deglutition

extremely  difficult; part  of  food  regurgitates  through

♦ nose  ;  general  prostration ;  no  history  of  syphilis.

■  Nursing  sore  mouth,  especially  if  breasts  are  sore.

■  Much  watery  saliva  in  mouth.

■Saliva  increased,  tasting  saltish  or  sweetish.
*■' Throat. ■  Dryness of throat day and night; it fairly
glistens.

■  Roughness,  rawness  and  scraping  in  pharynx,  <  towards

evening  ;  hawking  in  morning.

■  ■Sensation  as  of  cotton  in  throat.

■  ■Tonsils  and  uvula  much  swollen  ;  uvula  elongated  ;  with

dr}^  and  burning  sensation.

■  Great  swelling  of  tonsils.

I  I  For  eighteen  months  swelling  of  r.  tonsil;  mucus  in
throat  removed  with  difficulty,  is  quite  cold  when  it
comes  into  mouth,  white,  nearly  transparent,  in  lumps.

■  Muscular  angina,  with  fatty  degeneration.

■  Diphtheritis,  especially  where  the  adynamic  character

shows  itself  early,  strength  fails  rapidly  and  paralysis
of  heart  threatens.

■  Burning  in  oesophagus.

■  Inability  of  swallowing  nourishment. ^Oesophagitis.

■  Spasmodic  stricture  of  oesophagus.

I  I  Great  weakness  and  emaciation,  owing  to  inability  of
taking  nourishment;  weak  and  empty  feeling  across
abdomen,  occasional  shooting  pain  in  same  region;  sen-
sation of  heat  extending  up  back;  great  nervous  irrita-
bility. ^Stricture  of  oesophagus.
'*  Appetite,  Thirst.  Desires,  Aversions.  ■■Hunger:  soon
after  eating;  must  eat  during  chill,  before  he  can  get
up;  ravenous  at  night,  feels  faint;  with  nausea  and
anxiety  about  heart  recurring  several  successive  even-
ings, >  by  eating  but  afterwards  tormenting  him  for
hours  in  bed.


PHOSPHORUS.  344

I  Want  of  appetite:  caused  by  a  fulness  in  throat;  with
weariness  alternating  with  bulimia;  burning,  cutting,
pressing  in  stomach,  nausea  and  vomiting.

I  Wants  to  eat,  but  as  soon  as  food  is  offered  does  not  want  it.
i  iThirst:  with  desire  for  very  cold  drinks  ;  for  refreshing

drinks,  >  thereby  until  they  become  warm,  when  they
are  vomited  ;  excessive ;  unquenchable.

I I  Wants  cold  food  and  drink,  ice-cream,  refreshing  and
spic}''  things.

1 1  Desire  for  wine.

I  Cures  the  longing  of  inebriates  for  alcohol,  by  removing
the  irritation  of  stomach,  which  causes  morbid  appetite.

I  Aversion:  to  sweets:  to  meat;  to  boiled  milk ;  to  salt  fish ;
to  beer;  to  puddings;  to  coffee  and  tea.

I  I  Cannot  smoke  much  though  tobacco  is  relished.
'■''Eating  and  Drinking, li Pains  always  commence wfien
eating  and  last  as  long  as  he  continues  to  eat.

lAfter  eating:  sick,  and  fulness  of  abdomen;  sleepiness;
belches  much  even  after  a  little  food.

llBad  effects  from  excessive  use  of  salt.
"Hiccough, Belching, Nausea and Vomiting, i Hic-
cough: painful  in  epigastrium;  frequent  during  day,
even  before  eating.

■  Eructations:  frequent,  empty ;  of  vast  quantities  of  wind,

after  eating;  tasting  of  food;  even  several  hours  after  eat-
ing; sour;  ineffectual  with  pressure  in  chest;  spasmodic.

■  Excessive  heartburn  and  sour  eructations ;  waterbrash.

I  Uprising  of  food:  without  nausea;  in  mouthfuls;  undi-
gested, very  soon  after  swallowing  it,  urticaria,  hands,
arms  and  body  covered  with  itching  blotches,  conscious
and  annoying  pulsations  of  heart ;  scarcely  swallowed
comes  up  again  ;  spasms  of  oesophagus  at  cardiac  end  ;
with  qualmishness  at  night.

■  Nausea:  constant,  with  confusion  of  head,  tightness  in

prsecordial  region  and  weariness;  disappearing  on
drinking  water.

I  lis  not  able  to  drink  water,  even  sight  of  it  causes  nau-

sea and  vomiting,  must  close  her  eyes  wdien  bathing.

I I  As  soon  as  water  becomes  warm  in  stomach  it  is  thrown  up.
1 1  Vomiting of  food: violent;  of  sour matter;  of  acid

liquid;  of  white  or  yellow  bitter  mucus;  of  bile;  of
blood,  pure  or  brown ;  >  for  a  time  by  ice  or  very  cold
food  or  drink ;  in  chronic  dyspepsia  when  there  seems
to  be  simple  exhaustion  of  stomach;  sourish,  offensive
fluid  in  large  quantity,  looking  like  water,  ink  and  coffee-
grounds  ;  after  food,  or  even  a  swallow  of  water  ;  of  dark,
filamentous  substances,  consisting  of  blood  mixed  with
bile  and  mucus  ;  of  dark  acid  matter  always  mixed  with
some  blood  ;  of  black  substances ;  of  matter  black  as  soot.


S'^^  PHOSPHORUS.

'^  Scrobiculum  and  Stomach,  i Epigastric  region:  very  sen-
sitive; greatly  distended  and  painful  to  pressure;  sinking
feeling;  oppression;  griping;  pressure;  sharp  pressure
with  every  cough.
I  I  Contractive  pain  in  pit  of  stomach  extending  to  1.  hy-
pochondrium,  later  to  head  and  1.  shoulder,  >  from
warmth.

I  iSensation  of  weakness  and  emptiness  in  stomach  and

abdomen.

■  Empty  feeling  about  11  a.m.

I I  Goneness  in  region  of  stomach  as  if  stomach  had  been
removed.

■  Fulness  and  painfulness  in  stomach;  sometimes  a  gur-

gling and  stitching  in  pit  of  stomach.

■  Distension  with  aching  in  stomach.

I  I  Aching  in  gastric  region  as  from  a  blow,  followed  by
pressure,  retching-  eructation  and  rising  of  food.

■  Sensation  as  if  something  were  pressing  heavily  upon

stomach.

■  Pressure  at  cardiac  orifice  of  stomacli,  especially  on  swal-

lowing bread,  which  remains  there.

■  ■  Pressure  as  from  a  hard  substance  above  pit  of  stomach,

with  coldness.

■  Pressure  ii^  stomach  after  eating  as  if  a  heavy  weight

were  in  it.

■  Oppression  and  burning  in  stomach ;  loss  of  appetite,  un-

quenchable thirst,  <  after  eating  or  drinking.

■  Painfulness  of  stomach:  in  morning;  to  touch  and  when

walking.

■  Sensitiveness  to  pressure  in  region  of  pylorus.

■  Burning  or  drawing  pain  in  stomach  often  extending

into  chest.

■  Coldness  as  if  freezing  in  stomach.

I  I  Dyspeptic  pain  in  stomach  with  pain  in  back  opposite
stomach,  >  by  eating  a  few  mouthfuls  of  food,  about

11  A.M.

■  Paroxysms  of  excruciating,  knifelike  pain  in  stomach.

I  I  Violent  pain  in  stomach,  gradually  spreading  over
whole  abdomen,  with  vomiting  at  first  of  green,  after-
wards of  blackish  substances.

■  Pains  in  stomach,  >  by  cold  food,  ice-cream,  ice,  etc,

I  I  Very  feeble,  could  not  walk  more  than  a  square  or  two,
for  want  of  breath  ;  palpitation  of  heart  and  oppression
of  chest,  which  seemed  to  come  from  stomach  and  was  <
after  eating;  belching  of  large  quantities  of  wind  after
eatmg  and  great  drowsiness;  variable  appetite;  sensa-
tion of  great  weakness  in  abdomen,  particularly  across
and  below  umbilicus;  stools  scanty,  dry  and  difiicult
to  evacuate.


PHOSPHORUS.  346

I  I  One  or  two  hours  after  eating  slightest  quantity  of  food
sudden  severe  constricting  pain  in  epigastrium,  soon
extending  thence  to  1.  hypochondrium,  then  to  region
of  heart  and  L  shoulder ;  attacks  last  one-half  and  three-
quarters  of  an  hour  and  end  in  violent  tasteless  belch-
ing, pain  in  epigastrium  meanwhile  growing  less,  but
constriction  appearing  in  chest  under  sternum;  >  from
heat  of  bed.

I  I  Constant  stitching,  burning  and  pi-essure  in  stomach,  <
several  hours  after  eating ;  he  is  afraid  to  eat  heartily  ;
<  evening  and  at  night ;  burning  sensation  frequently
extended  into  throat;  when  pains  are  very  severe  a
cold  shudder  extends  over  body  and  there  is  a  sensation
as  of  something  cooking  in  stomach  ;  at  times  sour
belching  and  vomiting  of  water;  stool  irregular,  hard,
difficult;  burning  in  rectum;  loss  of  strength.  ^Car-
dialgia.

I  I  Severe,  frequent,  griping  pains  in  stomach,  going
through  to  back  and  into  shoulders;  cold,  easily
chilled  if  not  well  covered ;  lassitude;  no  appetite,  no
thirst;  slow  pulse;  tongue  pale;  belching  and  water-
brash;  stool  dark,  evacuated  with  much  pressure;  small
hemorrhoids;  urine  frequent,  copious ;  <  after  eating.
^Cardialgia.

I  I  Severe  pains  in  stomach  in  paroxysm^  lasting  for  three
days  ;  in  a  few  hours  after  leaving  stomach  same  kind
of  pains  appeared  in  1.  temple,  extending  to  eye,  teeth
and  side  of  head,  like  a  knife.

MCardialgia  due  to  perforating  ulcer  in  stomach ;  occa-
sional appearance  of  blood  in  ejected  matter  ;  painless
intervals  but  brief;  emaciation  and  anasmia.

I  I  Twisting  constricting  pains  in  epigastrium,  with  vomit-
ing of  clear  sour  fluid,  towards  evening  and  at  times  at
night,  with  sour  belching. MCardialgia.

I  iCardialgia:  with  gnawing;  >  by  eating;  <  from  mo-
tion ;  with  a  sensation  of  distension  ;  excessive  forma-
tion of  acidity;  with  violent  palpitation  of  heart,  espe-
cially after  dinner.

I  I  Cramps  in  stomach,  radiating  to  liver,  simulating  hepatic
colic;  bilious  color  of  skin;  vomiting  of  all  food  or
glairy,  burning  water,  without  any  odor  or  bitterness  ;
retained  more  than  half  of  pickled  herrings,  sardines,
salads,  etc.,  whereas  all  animal  food  or  milk  was  rejected  ;
agitated  sleep;  dry,  hard,  beaded  stool,  every  three  or
four  days;  copious  colorless  urine;  genital  hyperexci-
tation. ^Gastric  neurosis.

iCardiac  opening  of  stomach  seems  contracted;  food
scarcely  swallowed  comes  up  again.


347  *  PHOSPHORUS.

iSpasms  of  stomach,  cspeciall}'  at  cardiac  extremity.

■  Hemorrhage from stomach: > from drinking cold

water ;  after  dancing.

■  Dyspepsia  with  excessive  flatulency,  frequent  palpitation

of  heart,  intermittent  pulse  and  much  despondency ;
sour  risings,  heat  at  epigastrium,  flatulence  and  canine
hunger;  great  weakness,  earthy  color  of  face,  tongue
dry,  dotted;  dryness  of  throat;  sour  taste  in  mouth;
after  eating  swelling  at  epigastrium  ;  regurgitation  of
food  soon  after  eating;  burning  in  stomach,  >  by  cold
water,  but  is  soon  thrown  up  again  as  it  becomes  warm
in  stomach;  tympanitis,  especially  in  csecum  and  trans-
verse colon;  loud  borborygmi,  tiring  one  out  by  their
noise ;  momentary  relief  by  passage  of  wind ;  soft,  watery
stools,  without  pain;  slight  hypertemia  of  liver;  beat-
ing of  heart;  heat  and  congestion  of  head ;  hectic  fever  ;
night  sweats.

■  Gastritis: severe  pains,  cannot  tolerate  least  pressure,

even  of  bedclothes ;  delirium;  weak,  rapid  pulse;  thick,
white  coating  on  tongue ;  respiration  rapid ;  face
sunken,  deathly  pale;  with  heartburn,  ending  in  an
unconquerable  scratching  in  throat;  cutting-burning
pains  in  stomach.

■  Perforating  ulcer  in  stomach;  pain  ;  vomiting  of  food  as

soon  as  swallowed  ;  vomited  matter  contains  a  dark,
grumous,  semisolid  substance,  looking  like  coffee-
grounds.
I  I  Cancer  of  stomach,  especially  when  it  is  about  to  pass
into  a  state  of  ulceration.
'^  Hypochondria.  ■Jaundice :  with  confusion  of  consciousness,
with  pneumonia  or  brain  disease  ;  during  pregnancy  ;
from  nervous  excitement;  dry  cough  <  from  least  mo-
tion, with  headache,  involuntary  urination,  chilliness
and  thirst ;  from  acute  atrophy  of  liver  ;  chronic,  super-
vening on  an  acute  attack,  conjunctiva?,  face,  trunk  and
extremities  brownish-yellow,  every  morning  copious
evacuations,  characteristic  of  those  of  jaundice,  urine
blackish-brown  and  thick,  pulse  slow,  chilliness  even  in
a  warm  room,  dejected,  thought  he  would  die  and  was
incapable  of  exertion ;  complete  aphonia  and  trouble-
some cough.

■  Aching  in  hepatic  region.

■  Hepatitis  when  suppuration  ensues,  with  hectic  fever,

night sweats,  enlargement  in r.  hypochondrium  and
marked  soreness  over  liver.
M  Hepatic congestion, quantities of bright, sometimes
dark  blood  discharged  with  stool.

■  Hypertemia  and  enlargement  of  liver;  jaundice;  stools


PHOSPHORUS.  348

greyish-white;  abdomen  tympanitic;  pulse  weak  and
threadlike.

■  Beginning  atrophy  of  liver;  ascites;  varicose  veins  all

over  abdomen  ;  urine  albuminous.

■  Diffuse  hepatitis;  liver  hard,  large ;  subsequent  atrophy.
I  Acute  yellow  atrophy  of  liver;  malignant  jaundice.

I  Fatty  degeneration  of  liver:  large  petechial  spots,  size  of
a  five  shilling  piece  on  arms  and  other  parts  of  body  ;
with  malignant  jaundice  and  a  weak,  gone  sensation  in
abdomen,  with  stitches  in  liver;  great  debility;  as  a
sequel  of  heart  disease.

1  Waxy  liver,  dependent  upon  long-lasting  bone  disease,
as  caries  of  vertebrae  or  of  hip  joint.

■  Alcoholic  cirrhosis  of  liver.

■  Disordered  livers  in  men  invalided  from  tropical  cli-

mates; bilious  complexion  ;  irregular  bowels.

■  Spleen  enlarged;  fatty  degeneration.

■  Fatty  degeneration  of  pancreas; gastric disturbances;

oily  stool ;  sometimes  stool  looks  like  frog's  spawn  or
like  cooked  sago.
'^Abdomen. ■Very  sensitive abdomen,  painful to touch;
rolling  and  rumbling in abdomen during  and  after
drinking.

■  Emptiness  and  feeling  of  weakness  in  abdomen.

■  Painful  feeling  of  weakness  across  whole  abdomen,  <  in

hypogastric  region  after  short  walk  ;  must  lie  down.

■  Weak,  gone  feeling  in  abdomen,  with  burning  between

shoulders.

■  Relaxed  feeling  in  abdomen.
■Sensation  of  coldness  in  abdomen.

■  Abdomen  very  full,  tense,  tympanitic.

■  Distension  of  abdomen though  much  flatus  has  been

passed.

■  Incarceration  of  flatus  beneath  the  ribs,  with  oppression

of  chest.

■  Loud  rumbling  and  rolling  in  intestines  ;  fermenting  in

bowels  with  empty  eructations.

■  Feeling  of  incarcerated  flatus  moving  in  abdomen,  catch-

ing breath  and  causing  cough ;  paroxysmal,  <  from
excitement  or  sitting;  >  lying  down,  straightening  up
or  by  eructations ;  pressure  on  abdomen  <  suffocative
feeling.

■  Tympanitis,  mostly  about  csecum  and  transverse  colon.

■  Flatulency  of  old  people;  painful  constipation.

■  Flatulent  colic,  <  when  lying  down.

I  1  Abdomen  flaccid,  with  clironic  loose  bowels.
I  I  Cutting  in  bowels  with  ineffectual  urging  to  stool.
I  I  Frequent  pinching  in  bowels  as  if  diarrhoea  were  about
to  come  on.


^^^  PHOSPHORUS.

iSliooting  in  abdomen  with  empty  feeling.

I  I  Neuralgia  of  coeliac  plexus.

I  I  Inflammation  of  superior  vena  cava.

I  I  Peritonitis  with  tympanitis  ;  abdomen  excessively  sensi-
tive to  touch;  burning  and  pressure;  sharp  cuttin<r
pains ;  paralysis  of  intestines.  *'

I  Yellow  or  brownish  spots  on  abdomen.

I  I  Boils  on  abdomen.

I  I  Inguinal  hernia  with  relaxed  abdomen  ;  protrudes  even
with  soft  stool ;  sensitive.
^"  Stool  and  Rectum, n  Emission  of  much  flatus

iFetid  stools  and  flatus  ;  the  fetor  is  like  that  given  off*  by
lime  used  at  gasworks  to  purify  gas  of  sulphur  and  other
impurities.

iStools :  soft,  paplike  ;  scanty,  semifluid  ;  green ;  whitish-
grey;  grey;  green  mucous;  I  white  mucous;  white  wa-
tery; I  green  watery;  yellow  watery;  bilious;  llwatery
with  lumps  of  white  mucus,  or  little  grains  like  tallow '
Bundigested;  ibloody;  brown  fluid;  I  bloody  and  puru-
lent; 1 1  involuntary,  oozing  from  constantly  open  anus
(green  and  bloody);  Ibloody  water,  like  washings  of
meat;  profuse;  alternating  with  constipation;  hot  •
Imvoluntary  (on  least  motion);  when  coughing-  pass-
ing out  with  force;  Bfetid;  sour-smelling;  corrosive-
black  or  green ;  watery,  with  flakes  of  mucus;  involun-
tary ;  undigested ;  profuse,  watery,  pouring  awav  as  from
a  hydrant  >  after  sleeping;  copious,  light-colored;
greenish,  bloody  ;  1 1  bloody,  with  small  white  particlesi
like  opaque  frog's  spawn;  painless,  blood-streaked,  like
flesh-colored  water  ;  discharge  of  pure  blood

■  Before  stool:  rumbling;  colic;  heat  or  chilliness;  sudden

urging.

iDuring  stool:  smarting  in  rectum  ;  protrusion  of  hemor-
rhoids and  sharp,  stitching  pains  from  coccyx  to  inter-
scapular region  and  even  to  vertex;  great  eff'orts
although  stool  IS  not  hard  ;  cutting  pains  in  anus,  with
liard  stool;  constriction  of  rectum.

■  After  stool :  painful  cramps  in  rectum  ;  burning  at  anus-

tenesmus;  empty  feeling  in  abdomen;  weakness, obliging
one  to  he  down  ;  exhaustion ;  fainting.

■  iDiarrhcea:  profuse  passages;  pours  out  in  great  quan-

tit}^,  like  water  from  a  hydrant;  very  exhausting;
watery,  with  abdominal  burning;  watery,  in  mornino--
m  warm  weather;  in  cholera  time;  painless,  debili-
tating, <  in  mornings ;  as  soon  as  anything  enters  rec-
tum ;  while  coughing;.  <  from  warm  or  hot,  >  from
cold  drinks  or  food;  >  after  beer;  advancing  debility,
rapid  loss  of  flesh  ;  constant  irritation  of  throat ;  during


PHOSPHORUS.  350

pregnancy  or  confinement;  colliquative  of  consump-
tives; during  typhoid  fever;  involuntary,  during  low
fevers.

I  1  After  a  great  fright,  two  years  previously,  involuntary
passages  of  stool  and  urine,  especially  at  night,  so  that
he  was  always  wet  and  dirty;  pain  in  stomach  and
bowels ;  frequent  eruption  of  pimples  on  scalp.

I  I  When  threatened  with  a  whipping  would  immediately
soil  himself  from  fright.

I  I  Chronic  painless  diarrhoea  of  undigested  food,  with
much  thirst  for  water  during  night.

I  I  Chronic  diarrhoea  of  eight  j^ears'  standing,  never  had  a
day  free  from  it ;  two  to  fifteen  stools  a  day ;  <  in
warm  weather;  stool  light  yellow  and  painless;  appe-
tite good;  health  not  much  impaired.

llChronic  diarrhoea,  with  soft,  thin  stools,  especially  in
nervous  subjects  and  delicate  children.

iCholera  infantum:  with  cough  and  golden-yellow  stools;
chronic  cases,  painless  discharges  and  gradual  loss  of
strength.

llDysentery:  desire  for  stool  immediately  on  turning
over. in  bed  upon  1.  side;  painless  discharges  of  blood
and  mucus;  bilious  variety  with  sensation  of  great
weakness  in  abdomen,  particularly  across  and  below
umbilicus;  last  stages,  painless  discharge  of  bloody
mucus,  with  paralysis  of  sphincter  ani,  anus  remaining
wide  open,  so  as  to  expose  the  dry,  black,  sloughing
mucous  membrane  to  full  view  for  two  or  three  inches;
stool  escapes  as  if  from  a  metallic  tube,  with  little  or  no
effort;  chronic,  stools  bloody, small,  white  particles  like
opaque  frog-spawn  mixed  with  brownish,  bloody  fluid,
very  frequent,  twenty-five  to  fifty  in  24  hours ;  before
stool,  which  he  cannot  retain,  violent  urging;  after
stool  relief,  <  from  lying  on  1.  side,  warm  food  and
drinks,  lying  on  back;  >  from  lyingonr.side,  after  sleep-
ing, cold  food  and  drinks,  tongue  dry,  red  and  cracked,
burning  and  distress  in  stomach,  with  hot  eructations,
occasional  vomiting  of  food  or  mucus,  anorexia,  intense
thirst  for  very  cold  food  or  drinks;  sleeplessness,  great
debility.

iGaping  of  anus,  in  diarrhoea  and  dysenter3^

iCholerine:  face  emaciated  ;  voice  hoarse ;  tongue  clean;
great  thirst,  but  least  amount  of  drink  is  followed  by
rumbling  and  gurgling  in  abdomen  and  watery  diar-
rhoea ;  skin  dry ;  spasmodic  tension  in  lower  limbs ;
prostration ;  confusion  of  head ;  discharges  of  watery,
greenish  or  black  fluid  which  comes  in  gushes  as  ffom
a  hydrant,  at  times  involuntary,  at  others  with  urging;


351  PHOSPHORUS.

.  increased  frequency  of  pulse;  heat;  thirst;  stools  yel-
lowish or  like  rice-water,  containing  epithelial  flakes ;
dryness  of  mouth  and  great  thirst.

iCholera:  great  thirst;  had  to  drink  large  quantities  of
cold  water  and  felt  >  afterwards,  till  water  became
warm  in  stomach,  in  from  15  to  20  minutes,  when  he
had  to  vomit  it  up  again  ;  to  be  relieved  of  this  exhaust-
ing painful  vomiting  and  thirst,  had  to  drink  another
large  quantity  of  water ;  great  exhaustion ;  asphyctic
variety,  d3^spnoea ;  pain  in  1.  side,  in  region  of  lower
ribs,  posteriorly ;  drain  of  brownish  fluid  from  bowels
after  the  other  symptoms  had  been  removed,

I  I  Hiccough  after  eating,  making  pit  of  stomach  sore  and
aching;  diarrhoea  with  violent  thirst,  rumbling  in  ab-
domen and  debility. ^Sequel  of  cholera.

I  I  No  stool ;  bowels  sluggish  ;  difficult  evacuation.

i  I  Constipation:  feces  slender,  long,  narrow,  dry,  tough,
and  hard,  like  a  dog's;  voided  with  difficulty;  pipe-
stem  stools.

E  Alternate  diarrhoea  and  constipation  of  old  people.

Iln  rectum:  burning;  needlelike  stitches;  smarting
during  evacuation  of  stool  that  was  not  hard.

■Spasms  in  rectum.

I  I  Incipient  stricture  in  rectum,  feces  flattened,  concomi-
tant mucous  discharge ;  had  acute  proctitis  nine  months
previously.

I  I  Paralysis  of  rectum  ;  stool  occurred  only  after  an  injec-
tion and  then  he  would  sit  for  hours  on  a  vessel ;  could
make  no  efforts  at  expulsion  and  was  not  aware  when
feces  escaped,  so  that  he  often  soiled  himself;  feces  when
passed  seemed  old;  after  an  injection  evacuations  oc-
curred for  six  or  eight  days.

■  Paralysis of  bowels,  particularly  when  lower portions

(colon  and  rectum)  are  affected ;  anus  seems  to  stand
wide  open  and  exudes  moisture.

I  I  Chronic  diseases  of  rectum  ;  discharge  of  blood  and  pus,

with  tenesmus,  for  eighteen  months.

I I  Hemorrhage  from  bowels.

■  With  stool,  discharge  of  dark,  coagulated  blood,  with

comfortable  feeling  in abdomen  but  no  pain; stools
mucous.

■  I  Polypi  recti  with  proctitis.

I  I  Severe  burning  pain  in  epigastrium  extending  up  into
throat,  again  into  abdomen  with  prostration  and  faint-
ing; soreness  in  mouth  and  pharynx,  with  slimy  offen-
sive taste  and  heavily  coated  tongue;  facial  expression
disturbed;  emaciation;  tendency  to  diarrhoea;  after
Phosphor,  frequent  passages  of  segmenta  of  tapeworm  and
masses  of  mucus.


PHOSPHORUS.  352

I  Hemorrhoids:  bleeding,  protrude  very  easily,  coming
down  even  during  emission  of  flatus;  relaxation  of
sphincter  ani ;  discharge  of  mucus  from  varices;  sensa-
tion of  weakness  or  sinking  in  abdomen ;  very  painful,
burn  like  fire,  from  inflammation,  and  bleed  pro-
fusely; in  consumptives;  bleeding,  with  severe  lanci-
nating; blood  flows  in  a  small  stream  with  each  stool;
with  a  chronic  relaxed  condition  of  abdominal  organs.

I  In  anus:  stitches;  biting  and  itching;  stinging.

■  Fissure  of  anus.

I  Anus  feels  as  if  it  were  open.
"^  Urinary Organs. '  i  Nervous exhaustion ; sensation of
weakness  and  emptiness  in  stomach  ;  painless  watery  di-
arrhoea; dimness  of  sight. ^Bright's  disease.
I  Albumen  and  exudation  cells  in  urine;  morbus  Brightii.

■  Diabetes  mellitus  and  Bright's  disease  preceded  or  accom-

panied by  disease  of  pancreas.

■  Glycosuria;  gouty  diathesis;  disease  of  brain;  cerebral

symptoms;  cheesy  degeneration  of  lungs;  phthisis.

■  Fatty  or  amyloid  degeneration  of  kidneys,  especially  if

associated  with  a  similar  pathological  condition  of  liver
and  of  r.  heart;  venous  stagnation  and  hypersemia  in
different  organs;  oedema  of  lungs  and  pulmonary  en-
gorgement; urine  contains  epithelial,  fatty  or  waxy
casts.

■  Hydrops  accompanied  by  diarrhoea. ^Nephritis.

■  Uraemia  where  there  is  acute  atrophy  of  brain  and  of

medulla  oblongata.
1  1  Languor,  thirst,  excessive  secretion  of  urine,  swollen
feet;  boring  pain  in  region  of  navel,  <  from  touch  and
being  covered;  great  sensitiveness  over  sacrum  and
kidneys;  pains  burning;  could  not  lie  on  back;  pain
in  navel  >  b}^  passing  large  quantities  of  water,  <
when  flow  was  scanty  and  dark-colored ;  urination
caused  cutting  pains  and  afterwards  violent  tenesmus ;
constipation;  complete  sleeplessness;  menses  suppressed;
neither  albumen  nor  sugar  in  urine;  stitching  pain  in
region  of  liver;  boring,  pressing  pain  in  forehead  and
root  of  nose,  which  caused  momentary  numbness,
^Affection  of  sympathetic  nervous  system.

■  Renal  calculi,  congestive  and  inflammatory  symptoms,

with  purulent,  chalky  or  sandy  sediment.
I  iDuU  pain  in  renal  region.
I  I  Tension  over  region  of  bladder.

■  Bladder  is  full  but  urine  does  not  flow  because  of  absence

of  urging ;  in  great  debility,  as  after  typhus.
I  I  Urine  impeded  by  pain  in  hypogastrium  (fundus  vesicae).

■  Urine: profuse, pale, watery; frequent and scanty;


353  PHOSPHORUS.

scanty  and  completely  suppressed;  turbid,  whitish  like
curdled  milk,  with  brickdust  sediment  and  variegated
cuticle  on  surface;  with  red  sediment;  sediment  of
white  flocculi;  deposits  a  white  cloudy  sediment;  con-
tains quantities  of  grey  sand;  thick,  turbid  and  scanty;
turbid  and  high-colored;  brown,  with  red  sandy  sedi-
ment; much  vesical  and  renal  epithelium  and  mucous
sediment;  acrid,  offensive  smelling;  albuminous;
bloody,  largely  albuminous.

■  Sudden  call  to  make  water  without  pain  when  it  is  passing,
llnvoluntary  urination  :  during  typhus;  at  night,  in  chil-
dren of  Phosphor,  build;  children  who  grow  too  rapidly.

iHsematuria,  from  debility  after  sexual  excesses;  blood
deficient  in  fibrin  ;  general  dissolution  of  blood.

I  I  Burning  in  urethra:  with  desire  to  urinate;  when  uri-
nating and  at  other  times.

iTwitching  and  burning  in  urethra.
^^Male  Sexual  Organs. iSatyriasis;  lascivious,  strips  him-
self, sexual  mania ;  extreme  irresistible  desire  for  coition  ;
frequent  erections  and  emissions; strong  desire  with
feeble  erections ;  all  erectile  power  gone.

■  Erections:  frequent  and  painful;  day  and  night;  ineffect-

ual during  coition ;  absent  with  inward  sexual  desire.

■  Seminal  emissions  :  at  night;  with  or  without  lascivious

dreams;  caused  by  exuberance  of  strength  and  nervous
excitement,  followed  by  impotence;  nearly  every  night
with  great  prostration  and  burning,  aching  distress  in
lumbar  region;  paralysis;  soon  after  coition;  too  rapid
during  coition ;  patient  is  anxious  or  irritable,  emaci-
ated, easily  alarmed,  with  difficult  breathing  and  stick-
ing pains  in  chest,  has  lost  his  memory,  has  occipital  and
frontal  headaches,  painless,  watery  diarrhoea,  blotches
on  his  face  and  no  appetite.

■  Sexual  debility  from  inordinate  use  of  table  salt.

■  ■Impotence:  after  excessive excitement  and onanism;

from  or  preceded  by  overexcitement  of  sexual  organs,
as  in  young  men  who,  trying  to  restrain  their  natural
passion,  have  this  local  erethism  by  reason  of  celibacy
or  sexual  excesses.
I  I  Frequent  discharge,  day  and  night,  of  thin,  slimy,  col-
orless fluid  from  urethra,  without  an  erection;  paralytic
or  spasmodic  symptoms  in  extremities.

■  Sexual  abuse  producing  dorsal  consumption,  trembling,

imbecility,  mania,  epileptic  fits  and  indigestion.

■  Discharge  of  prostatic  juice  during  hard  stool.

■  Chronic  urethral  discharge  due  to  hypertrophy  of  prostate.

■  Gleet: discharge  very  scanty;  small  drops of  watery

fluid  at  orifice  of  urethra  in  morning,  at  times  gluing
VOL.  vrii. — 23,


PHOSPHORUS.  354

it  together,  but  leaving  scarcely  any  stain  on  clothing  ;
no  pain  or  any  difficulty  in  urination  ;  discharge  caused
by  atony  of  mucous  membrane.
I  1  Ulcers  on  prepuce.

■  Testes  sore;  cord  swollen,  painful.

■  Hydrocele:  after  gonorrhoeal  orchitis,  with  sexual  weak-

ness; after  seminal  losses.
-^Female  Sexual  Organs, n Nymphomania.

■  Sterility  from  excessive  voluptuousness  or  with  late  or  pro-

fuse menses.
I  I  Unusual  irritation  of  genitals.

■  Aversion  to  coition.

■  Pain  in  ovaries  (1.)  extending  down  inner  side  of  thigh;

during  menses ;  ovaritis.

■  Metritis:  after  frequent  pregnancies;  with  pytemia  and

phlebitis;  in  fair,  graceful  women.

■  Prolapsus  with  weak,  sinking  feeling  in  abdomen.

■  Hemorrhages  from  genital  organs;  hypersemia;  parietes

of  vessels  lowered  in  power  of  resistance  by  fatty  meta-
morphosis, hemorrhages  become  so  severe  that  general
ana?mia  follows ;  chronic  indigestion.

■  ■Frequent  and  profuse  metrorrhagia  pouring  out  freely

and  then  ceasing  for  a  short  time. ^Cancer  uteri.

■  Before menses: weeping; bearing down; relaxation;

weakness  felt  in  abdomen;  cramps  in  calves;  nympho-
mania.

■  Menses:  too  early,  bright-red;  too  frequent  and  too  pro-

fuse with  discharge  of  blood  between  periods;  profuse,
too  early  and  lasting  too  long ;  too  late  but  very  copious;
profuse  with  sexual  excitement,  great  heat  running  up
back;  profuse,  bright;  early,  scanty  and  pale;  vicari-
ous through  urethra  or  from  lungs ;  too  late  or  not  ap-
pearing, tight  feeling  in  chest,  with  dry,  tight  cough ;
spitting  of  blood ;  tardy  and  intermittent,  alternating
with  bronchial  trouble.

■  During  menses: cold feet and hands;  nausea;  severe

pain  in  back,  as  if  broken  ;  cutting  pain,  even  into  chest;
palpitation;  milky,  excoriating  leucorrhoea;  very  sleepy,
can  hardly  keep  awake;  cutting  pains  in  1.  ovarian
region.

■  After  menses  :  great  weakness ;  blue  rings  around  eyes;

losing  of  flesh  and  great  fearfulness.

■  Menorrhagia:  blood  pale  or  bright;  in  nursing  women.

■  Amenorrhoea:  with  blood-spitting;  bleeding  from  anus,

or  heematuria ;  stitches  in  mammse,  eyelids  puffed  ;  milk
in  breasts ;  with  chlorosis.

■  Effects  of  excessive  masturbation;  great  debility,  especi-

ally ready  fatigue  from  walking;  trembling  of  legs.


355  PHOSPHORUS.

iLeucorrhoea :  profuse  with  sense  of  great  weakness  in  ab-
domen ;  during  or  instead  of  menses ;  of  white,  watery
'  mucus  ;  acrid  and  excoriating ;  milky  early  in  morning,

when  w^alking;  slimy,  reddish,  in  an  old  woman;  pre-
cedes menses;  inconsequence  of  chlorosis;  acrid,  caus-
ing blisters  or  soreness.

■  Smarting leucorrhoea,  causing blisters; burning after

menses.
I  Stitches  upward  from  vagina  into  pelvis.
I  Vaginal  anaesthesia  during  coitus.

■  Condyloma,  in  immense  numbers,  of  large  size,  rough  and

dry,  filling  vagina.
I  I  Dull  tearing  in  labia,  during  or  after  walking  in  open  air.
I  Great  oedema  of  labia.

■  Erectile  tumors  on  external  genitals.

■  Fungus ha3matodes;  cauliflower  cancers  bleeding  pro-

fusely.

■  Hard,  extremely  painful  nodosities  as  large  as  goose-eggs

in  breasts ;  no  inflammation.

■  Fibroid  tumors  of  breast.

^'Pregnancy.  Parturition.  Lactation.  1 1  Nymphomania
with  spasms  during  seventh  month  of  pregnancy  ;  weak
empty  feeling  in  abdomen,  cutting  pains;  narrow,  dry,
long  and  difficult  stool,  like  a  dog's  stool.

■  Vomiting  of  pregnancy:  nausea  to  faintness,  <  fasting,

drinking  at  night,  assuming  an  erect  posture,  cold  ex-
tremities, flow  of  water  from  mouth,  vertigo,  vomiting
of  sour  and  bilious  matters;  unable  to  drink  water,
sight  of  it  causes  vomiting,  must  close  her  eyes  when
bathing.

■  During  pregnancy  :  pale,  bluish,  puffed  face,  blue  lips  and

nails,  undulation  of  jugular  veins;  cramps.

■  Labor  pains  :  distressing  but  of  little  use;  cutting  pains,

through  abdomen.

■  Puerperal  eclampsia:  convulsions  preceded  by  sensation

of  heat  rushing  up  spine  to  head  ;  urine  frequent  and
scanty;  containing  albumen  and  exudation  cells;  labor
pains  light  and  unavailing,  but  causing  great  distress;
supersensitive  to  light,  noises,  touch,  etc. ;  frequent  syn-
cope; may  retain  consciousness  during  spasms.

■  Pains  in  sacrum  after  labor.

■  Increased  secretion  of  milk,  great  debility;  deterioration

of  healtli  from  nursing;  cramps  in  stomach.
I  I  Stitching  pains  in  mammary  glands,  threatened  abscess.

■  Mastitis,  ulceration  of  mammse,  erysipelas  even  after  pus

has  formed  ;  abscesses  and  indurations.
I  I  Left  breast  swollen  three  times  natural  size,  hard,  livid
and  extremely  sensitive  to  touch;  scanty  watery  dis-


PHOSPHORUS.  356

charge  from  nipple  beneath  which  a  fluctuating  point
could  be  felt;  very  irritable ;  lachrymose;  emaciation;
fever  towards  evening.

I  I  Breast  swollen,  inflamed;  fistulous  ulcers,  with  callous
edges  and  continuous  suppuration ;  hard  nodules  in
breast;  dry  cough  with  occasional  expectoration  of
blood ;  respiration  oppressed ;  face  pale  with  circum-
ing followed  by  dry  heat,  particularly  in  palms  of
hands ;  clammy  night  sweats.

I  I  Excruciating  pains  extending  even  into  chest;  gnawing
burning  with  shortness  of  breath  and  dry  cough ;  hectic
fever  with  colliquative  sweats  and  diarrhoea ;  whole
breast  hard,  dark,  swollen,  dark-red  ;  stitching,  burn-
ing pains  on  slightest  touch ;  seven  fistulous  ulcers  in
breast,  partly  covered  with  proud  flesh,  from  which  an
offensive,  ill-looking,  profuse,  purulent  discharge  had
escaped.

I  I  Two  fistulous  passages  in  one  breast,  and  three  in  other,
some  of  them  extending  deep  into  gland,  and  others
more  superficial  but  diverging  at  right  angles,  all  dis-
charging a  thin,  serous  fluid  so  acrid  as  to  corrode  adja-
cent parts ;  hectic  fever ;  emaciation  ;  violent  cough  ;
tongue  dry  and  livid  ;  night  sweats ;  tender  and  painful
stomach ;  irritable bowels ;  great nervous  restlessness.

I  I  Fistulous  passage  in  1.  breast,  extending  three  inches
into  gland;  thin,  acrid,  serous  discharge;  general  de-
bility.

I  I  Mastitis;  preternatural  enlargement  of  mammary  gland.

■  Cancer  mamm£e,  with  sharp  lancinating  pains,  or  bleed-

ing easily  ;  inflamed  indurations  ver}^  painful,  <  by  ex-
posure to  air.
I  Nipples  hot  and  sore.

I  I  Papular  eruption;  very  painful  inflammation  and
swelling  followed  by  pus  formation.  ^Sore  nipples.
^'  Voice  and  Larynx.  Trachea  and  Bronchia,  i  i  Hoarse-
ness in  morning ;  voice  husky,  rough  ;  with  cough  and
rawness  in  larynx  and  bronchia;  <  in  evening;  larjmx
seems  coated;  is  unable  to  speak  a  loud  word;  could
hardly  speak  above  a  whisper ;  voice  lost  or  altered  from
catarrh  or  laryngeal  pain  ;  after  prolonged  speaking;  of
clergymen;  after  diphtheria;  after  typhus;  in  evening,
amounting  to  complete  aphonia;  chronic;  in  phthisis.

■  Irritable  weakness  of  vocal  organs;  violent  tickling  in

larynx  while  speaking  ;  dry,  spasmodic  cough,  with  con-
striction of  throat.

■  Lining  of  vocal  cords  highly  injected,  with  ulceration;

suppressed  voice. ^Phthisis.


357  PHOSPHORUS.

I  Aphonia:  with  rawness  in  larynx, <  in  evening;  with  sen-
sitiveness and  dryness  of  larynx,  with  a  feeling  as  if  it
were  lined  with  fur;  inability  to  utter  a  word,  every
effort  to  do  so  being  painful;  nervous  exhaustion,  sus-
pected atrophy  of  nerve  tissue;  from  prolonged  loud
talking;  catarrhal  or  nervous;  larynx  sensitive  to  touch;
painless,  <  towards  evening;  sudden,  cannot  utter  a
loud  word  and  can  with  difficulty  be  understood  when
ear  is  placed  close  to  her  mouth  ;  in  tuberculous  patients.

I  I  Hysterical  paralysis  of  vocal  cords  coming  at  times;

for  eight  weeks  complete  loss  of  voice;  both  vocal  cords
broad  and  relaxed  ;  feels  tired,  is  pale ;  chest  oppressed ;
menses  every  ten  days.

I I  Cannot  talk  on  account  of  pain  in  larynx.

■  Sensation  as  from  a  skin  in  larynx.

■  Stitches,  soreness,  roughness  and  dryness  in  larynx.

■  Rawness  in  larynx  and  trachea,  with  frequent  hacking

cough  and  hawking.

■  After  waking  at  night  a  feeling  of  contraction  in  larynx

and  trachea  as  if  he  must  suffocate.

■  Irritability  of  lower  portion  of  trachea,  with  suffocative

pressure  in  upper  part  of  chest.

■  Croup:  hoarseness,  raw  pain  and  soreness  in  chest,  as  if

excoriated;  continual  irritation  in  larynx  and  trachea,
low  down,  with  oppression  of  chest ;  pain,  roughness  and
burning  m  larynx  ;  velvety  look  about  fauces  ;  sensation
as  if  a  piece  of  flesh  or  skin  were  hanging  loose  in  lar-
ynx ;  burning  and  dryness  in  throat;  swollen  tonsils;
hoarse,  trembling,  hissing  or  croupous  deep  voice;
aphonia;  dry,  tickling,  not  very  harsh-sounding  cough  ;
dry,  hacking  or  loose  cough;  hollow,  hacking,  shrill,
spasmodic  cough;  cough  from  tickling  in  chest;  <  at
night;  shortness  of  breath;  hollow  cough,  with  expec-
toration of  mucus ;  respiration  hurried  ;  constant  expec-
toration in  morning  and  during  day;  great  oppression
of  breathing,  <  during  inspiration ;  useful  for  sequelae
when  improvement  seems  to  stop;  child  starts  from
sleep  affrighted  and  clings  closely  to  mother  or  any  ob-
ject that  is  near,  and  appears  unable  to  get  breath  ;
cough  becoming  so  severe  as  to  threaten  suffocation  ;
starts  suddenly  from  a  restless  sleep,  clings  to  bed  or
any  one  near  and  gasps  for  air,  attack  lasting  several
minutes;  constant  rattling  of  mucus;  small,  quick
pulse ;  burning  fever.

■  Laryngeal  croup:  aphonia;  rapid  sinking;  cold  sweat;

dropped  jaw;  sunken  face;  rattling  breathing;  ten-
dency to  frequent  relapses.

■  Membranous  croup  :  tracheotomy  expected  as  only  means


PHOSPHORUS.  358

of  saving  life;  death  imminent;  to  remove  hoarseness
and  catarrhal  cough,  prevent  paralysis  and  narcosis
from  carbonized  blood  ;  with  suffocation,  cold  clammy-
sweat,  small  pulse.

■  Croupous  cough  preceding  or  accompanying  eruption  of
measles.

I  Croup  in  combination  with  bronchitis  ;  great  weakness ;
aggravation  evening  up  to  midnight;  lying  on  back  pro-
vokes cough.

lEpidemic  influenza:  rawness  and  scraping  in  pharynx
<  towards  evening;  hawking  of  mucus  in  morning
fluent  coryza  with  great  dulnessof  head  and  sleepiness
more  during  day  and  after  meals;  blowing  of  blood
from  nose ;  profuse  hemorrhages  from  nose  and  mouth  ;
much  sneezing;  frequent  alternation  of  dry  and  fluent
coryza;  sensitiveness  in  region  of  liver,  with  stitches
there ;  hoarseness,  rawness  in  larynx  and  trachea;  cough
excited  by  tickling  in  chest,  generally  dry  evening  and
night,  wdth  mucous  expectoration  in  morning  and  dur-
ing day,  <  talking,  laughing,  crying  (children),  lying
on  back  orl.  side;  much  fever  and  thirst;  lassitude  and
prostration  out  of  proportion  to  duration  of  disease ;
much  heat  and  great  pain  in  larynx  or  chest,  with  dry
cough  and  tendency  to  diarrhoea.

I  Larynx  feels  sore  and  dry;  passage  of  inspired  air  gives
to  parts  a  sensation  of  rawness ;  cough  hoarse,  expecto-
ration scanty;  constant  tickling  in  suprasternal  fossa ;
dryness  of  throat  night  and  day  ;  hawking  of  mucus  in
morning ;  hoarseness,  loss  of  voice.

I  I  Voice  a  husky  whisper  ;  feeling  of  weight  and  strangu-
lation at  larynx,  which  provokes  incessant  coughing,
hawking  and  spitting;  sputum  is  a  fine,  white, tasteless
froth,  expectorated  every  half  minute ;  extreme  dryness
of  throat  and  back  part  of  mouth,  <  at  night,  when  she
is  obliged  to  rise  every  half  hour  to  moisten  throat;
looks  pale  and  haggard  from  loss  of  sleep.

iBronchitis:  tight  cough,  <  from  evening  until  mid-
night; tightness  across  chest;  pain  in  head,  larynx  and
chest  when  coughing;  cough  <  from  speaking,  laugh-
ing, eating,  motion  and  on  going  into  cold  air;  useful
after  onion  syrup  ;  severe  and  exhausting  cough,  which
child  dreads  and  avoids  as  long  as  possible;  <  in  even-
ing and  continues  so  during  night;  fever  high,  pulse
rapid ;  lies  upon  back  breathing  very  fast,  respiratory
movements  chiefly  abdominal ;  every  inspiration  very
short,  half  suppressed  and  accompanied  by  a  sort  of
-  groan ; child's  attention  could  only  with  difficulty  be

called  to  anything;  much  general  heat;  short  cough;


359  PHOSPHORUS.

sibilant  rales  in  lungs ;  hollow,  dry,  deep  cough,  without
irritation ;  in  tall,  slender  persons  of  tuberculous  habit ;
capillary;  subacute  attacks  in  emaciated,  cachectic  or
young  overgrown  invalids;  broncho-pulmonary  ca-
tarrhs from  dilatation  or  fatty  degeneration  of  heart ;
cough  abrupt,  rough,  sharp,  dry;  between  each  cough-
ing spell  a  short  interval;  dry  ticlvling  cough  in  even-
ing, with  tightness  across  chest  and  expectoration  in
morning;  pain  in  chest  when  coughing,  >  from  ex-
ternal pressure ;  trembling  of  whole  body  while  cough-
ing ;  cough  <  when  other  people  enter  room ;  tingling
soreness  and  rawness  in  air  passages,  dry  cough  with
expectoration  of  viscid  or  bloody  mucus ;  dilatation  of
bronchi.
SChronic  bronchitis;  profuse  expectoration  of  white  or
yellowish  mucus,  auscultation  showing  bronchial  tubes
to  be  filled  with  secretion ;  prostration  <  by  night-
sweats  ;  emaciation.

I  Chronic  bronchial  catarrh  ;  cough  dry,  or  expectoration

of  abundant  tough  mucus,  especially  in  morning ; at
times  expectoration  is  cool;  tremor  when  coughing.

■  Chronic  bronchitis,  when  an  exacerbation  occurs  and  ex-
pectoration is  streaked  with  blood.

Respiration. ■  Inclination  to  take  a  deep  breath.

■  Oppression  and  anxiety  in  chest,  <  evening  and  morning.

I I  Breathing:  very  much  oppressed,  short;  impeded  by
rapid  walking ;  very  short  after  coughing ;  tight  after
slightest  food  ;  short  with  violent  pressive  pain  in  upper
part  of  sternum;  difficult;  superficial;  anxious,  pant-
ing, oppressed;  anxious,  short  and  hurried,  with  ele-
vation of  whole  thorax,  and  especially  of  1.  side ;  very
labored,  noisy,  panting.

I  I  Complained  of  want  of  air,  though  she  frequently  took
a  deep  breath.

■  Feeling  of  suffocation ;  also  after  waking  at  night.

■  Dyspnoea,  wdth  inability  to  exert  himself;  extreme  pros-
tration.

■  Spasmodic  constriction  of  chest.

■  Difficult  respiration,  chest  feels  full  and  heavy,  with  ten-
sion.

■  iStridulous  inspiration  in  evening  on  falling  asleep;
nightly  suffocative  spells,  as  if  lungs  were  paralyzed.

I  I  Mucous  rales  easily  distinguishable  in  different  portions

of  both  lungs,  but  more  noticeable  in  lower  lobes.
I  I  Could  breathe  only  with  a  loud  rattling  noise.

■  Asthma:  with  fear  of  suffocation  ;  due  to  increased  irri-
tability of  respiratory  organs,  as  after  inflammation,
etc. ;  in  irritable,  lively,  blonde  subjects;  congestive,  <
while  lying  on  back,  or  on  falling  asleep.


26


PHOSPHORUS.  360

I  I  Boy,  a3t.  10,  without  apparent  cause  became  dull,  indis-
posed to  learn,  irritable  and  cross;  face  pale,  appetite
impaired  ;  finally  complained  of  sudden  cutting,  stitch-
ing in  abdomen  which  soon  extended  to  chest  and
developed  into  an  asthmatic  attack;  can  get  no  air;
face  deathly  pale,  eyes  sunken  and  encircled  by  blue
rings;  attacks  last  several  minutes  and  occur  frequently.

■  Labored  breathing,  threatened  paralysis  of  lungs.

■  Fulness  in  chest  as  after  eating  too  much.

^'' Cough.  B Cough:  tickling;  constant  tickling  in  throat;
dry,  from  tickling  in  throat  and  chest;  dry,  tickling,
caused  by  irritation  in  larynx  and  beneath  sternum  ;
<  lying  on  sides,  especially  1. ;  frequent,  irritable,  from
scratching  in  throat;  frequent,  short,  dry,  hacking;
violent,  dr}^,  on  reading  aloud;  dry,  with  pain  in  head
as  if  it  would  burst;  dry,  troublesome,  causing  soreness
in  forepart  of  chest,  woke  her  from  sleep ;  with  great
exertion,  until  expectoration  of  tenacious  mucus;  dry,
tickling  in  evening,  with  tightness  across  chest,  expecto-
ration in  morning;  hard,  tight,  dry,  racking,  exhaust-
ing, >  on  going  into  open  air;  abrupt,  rough,  short,
dry,  from  ticking  in  trachea  low  down;  sensation  of
tightness  across  chest,  rawness  and  soreness  in  trachea
and  bronchi ;  hollow,  mostly  in  morning  in  bed,  also  at
night,  prevents  falling  asleep  ;  hollow,  dry,  with  pressure
in  pit  of  stomach;  he  could  not  sleep  all  night;  dry,
short,  barking ;  excited  by  tickling  in  chest  and  fol-
lowed by  expectoration  of  stringy  sputa  of  a  salty  taste;
chronic,  incessant  barking,  night  and  day  ;  deep,  thrill-
ing; no  expectoration;  spasmodic,  with  oppression  of
chest ;  dry,  intolerable,  with  bronchial  catarrh ;  was
obliged  to  sit  up  when  coughing ;  with  trembling  of
whole  body  ;  with  sticking  in  epigastrium  ;  must  press
it  with  hand  ;  nervous,  when  any  one  enters  room ;
from  strong  odors ;  before  a  thunderstorm;  on  appear-
ance of  strangers ;  with  stitches  over  one  eye,  splitting
headache,  burning  dryness  in  throat;  with  hoarseness,
aphonia ;  soreness  and  roughness  in  larynx ;  <  evening
and  night;  <  from  talking  or  laughing;  short,  abrupt,
with  a  sensation  of  concussion  ;  from  spasmodic  irrita-
tion of  vagus;  in  morning  after  rising  with  expectora-
tion of  transparent  mucus  and  a  sensation  in  middle  of
sternum  as  if  something  were  torn  loose ;  with  white
expectoration,  difficult  to  loosen;  with  expectoration  in
morning,  none  in  evening;  loose  rattling  when  eating.
I  I  Cough  of  eighteen  years  duration ;  patient  appeared  past
recovery  and  was  given  up  to  die  speedily  of  consump-
tion ; white,  tenacious, sweetish, raw expectoration  ;


361  PHOSPHORUS.

extreme  sliortness  of  breath,  preceding  each  paroxysm
of  coughing;  cough  <  from  motion;  nose  stopped  up
every  morning;  much  itching  in  anus;  sauer-kraut
causes  considerable  bloating;  <  towards  evening.

I  I  Troublesome  chronic  cough,  with  expectoration  of
tough,  reddish-brown  mucus.

I  I  Cough  caused  by  a  tight  feeling  in  1.  ovarian  region,  at
same  time  spasmodic  constriction  of  larynx,  with  con-
tinual hawking  of  mucus.

I  I  During  evening  cough  after  lying  down  ;  he  can  raise
better  if  he  turns  from  1.  to  r.  side.

I  I  On  going  into  cold  wind  felt  something  strike  icy-cold
in  centre  of  lower  chest;  since  then'  cough  caused  by
lying  on  r.  side,  <  while  eating  and  sometimes  for  a
short  time  afterwards;  also  <  rising  from  bed  in  morn-
ing ;  sputa  thick,  yellow,  tasteless ;  cough  causes  pain
like  a  smarting  at  front  of  throat,  about  root  of  tongue  ;
constant  pain  in  centre  of  lower  chest,  as  if  stopped  up  ;
cannot  draw  a  long  breath  on  account  of  a  feeling  of
weight  in  centre  of  lower  chest,  >  by  sighing.

Ilf  towards  the  end  of  whooping  cough  disease  threatens
to  take  an  unfavorable  course.

iCough  with  intolerable  pain  in  larynx.

"Cough:  causing  pain  in  abdomen,  is  obliged  to  hold
abdomen.

■  Involuntary  stool  while  coughing.

iCough  with  tingling,  soreness  and  rawness  in  air  pas-
sages, <  from  cold  air.

I  Coughs  and  chest  symptoms  supervening  and  compli-
cating typhoid  and  typhus  fever;  expectoration  of  rusty
or  greenish,  sometimes  fetid  sputa.

ICough:  with  tightness  across  chest;  larynx  sensitive;
veins  of  hands  swollen ;  sacrum  feels  as  if  broken  ;
trembling  all  over.

■  Speaking  excites  laryngeal  and  tracheal  cough.

■  Cough:  with  faintness.

■  Cough  worse:  from  change  from  warm  to  cold  air;  from

laughing  or  loud  talking;  reading  aloud;  change  of
weatlier;  eating  or  drinking;  drinking  anything  cold
or  warm ;  from  exercise ;  lying  on  1.  side  or  back ;
strong  odors.

■  Cough  in  tall,  slender,  tuberculous subjects,  with  pale

complexion,  clear  sclerotica,  great  nervous  irritability
and  sensitiveness  to  external  impressions ;  pale,  waxy
face,  sunken  eyes ;  weak  nervous  persons.

■  Expectoration: most  in morning,  less  in  evening; of

bloody,  purulent  matter;  of  yellow  matter;  of  sour
taste;  frothy,  bloody,  rust-colored;  purulent, white  and


PHOSPHORUS.  362

tough  ;  cold  mucus,  tasting  sour,  salt  or  sweet ;  of  a  dirty
appearance,  resembling  pus,  but  thinner,  and  when  fall-
ing on  a  hard  surface  will  break  and  fly  like  thin
batter;  large  quantities  of  greyish  phlegm,  as  if  mixed
with  dust;  of  tenacious  mucus;  albuminous  and  blood-
streaked  ;  difficult  to  expectorate,  with  hsemoptoe  from
the  exertion  to  detach  them  and  leaving,  after  cough,
severe  dyspnoea  and  short  breathing;  containing  streaks
of  blood.
I  Haemoptysis.

■  Vicarious  spitting  of  blood  for  menses  ;  tubercular  dia-

thesis, dry,  tight cough,  <  from  evening  until mid-
night; bronchitis.
^"^ Inner  Chest and  Lungs. ■  Anguish  and heat  in  chest;
anxiety,  with  want  of  breath.
llHeaviness  of  chest,  as  if  a  weight  were  lying  upon  it.

■  Feeling  of  fulness  in  chest  up  to  throat,  as  if  from  eating

too  much.
I  Lungs  felt  clogged;  troublesome  dyspnoea.

■  Cannot  fill  lungs  as  usual.

■  Weakness  of  chest.

■  Oppression  of  chest: as  if  clothes  were  too  tight; in

morning;  in  bed;  after  walking  in  open  air,  at  night,
so  that  she  could  not  perfectly  yawn  ;  of  lower  portion,
with  shortness  of  breath ;  with  anxiety,  after  dinner ;
with  a  constrictive  sensation  under  sternum.

■  Distressing  anxiety  and  pressure in  chest,  amounting

to  real  suffocation,  so  that  deep  inspiration  was  difficult
but  not  impossible,  with  burning  and  sticking  pains
behind  sternum.

■  Great  pressure  on  middle  of  sternum.

■  Tightness  of  chest :  as  from  rush  of  blood  ;  of  upper  part

of  chest ;  across  upper  third  of  lungs ;  as  if  lungs
themselves  were  constricted  ;  as  if  air  were  forcibly  kept
out ;  with  feeling  of  dryness;  with  dyspnoea;  with  pain  ;
as  if  a  band  were  about  it;  with  aching  in  cardiac
region,  >  by  eructation.

■  Constrictive  pinching  sensation  high  up  in  chest.

I  I  Constrictive  spasms  in  chest ;  cramp,  at  night,  thinks
he  will  suffocate.

■  Stitches: in  various  parts  of  chest ;  frequent  through

lungs,  especially  on  deep  inspiration;  on  r.  side  under
false  ribs ;  in  1.  side  beneath  ribs ;  in  1.  side  on  breath-
ing; 8  ■in  1.  chest,  >  lying  on  r.  side.
I  I  Cutting  from  middle  of  sternum  to  r.  scapula,  <  during
inspiration,  >  during  motion.

■  Raw  feeling  of  lungs;  soreness,  great  difficulty  in  taking

a  full  breath.


363  PHOSPHORUS.

8Heat:  in  chest;  in  lungs;  intense  behind  sternum.

I  I  Burning,  excoriated  pain  in  chest,  especially  on  1.  side,
on  which  patient  cannot  lie. ^Bronchitis.

■  Burning,  piercing  soreness  and  tension  in  chest.

I  Pain  acute,  especially  in  r.  chest,  <  from  pressure,  even
slight  in  intercostal  spaces,  and  lying  on  1.  side.

B I  Acute  pain  in  lower  part  of  1.  lung  ;  <  by  lying  on  1.
side.

I  Pain  in  chest  when  coughing,  >  by  external  pressure.

IB  Congestion  to  chest;  oppression;  anxiety;  <  from  any
emotion;  cramp  between  scapulae ;  palpitation.

I  I  Expectoration  of  bright-red  fluid  blood,  which  feels
warm  in  mouth  and  is  accompanied  by  no  pain  and
but  very  slight  cough  ;  respiration  free ;  <  at  night ;
after  repeated  colds  and  exposure  to  rain.

iHsemoptysis:  pain  in  chest,  tickling  and  spitting  of
blood ;  with  gurgling  and  bubbling  sounds  in  air
passages ;  blood  coming  from  choanse ;  suffering  ex-
pression of  face;  limbs  cold;  pulse  small,  rapid;  with
occasional  attacks  of  profuse  hemorrhage;  in  Tvomen
with  delayed  and  scanty  menses,  congestion  of  blood  to
chest;  in  those  of  sanguine  temperament;  in  young
phthisical  subjects.

I  I  Percussion  over  lower  portion  of  thorax,  dull  on  r.  side,
with  indistinct  bronchial  respiration  and  numerous
rales,  partly  dr}^  partly  moist;  on  1.  side  vesicular
murmurs  and  some  moist  bronchial  rales.

I  I  After  laboring  under -a  severe  cold  for  a  week  or  ten
days,  sudden  very  violent  stitching  pains,  starting  in
just  beneath  skin  upon  acromial  extremity  of  1.  clav-
icle and  shooting  thence  downward  through  1.  lung
and  out  at  1.  side  of  abdomen,  just  below  ribs  ;  severe
chill ;  utter  inability  to  take  any  but  shortest  inspira-
tions ;  <  upon  slightest  movement  of  body ;  cannot  lie
on  1.  side.

iBronchitis:  involving  bronchial  tubes  high  up  or  ex-
tending down  into  bronchioles  ;  cough  with  tearing
pain  under  sternum,  as  if  something  were  being  torn
loose;  sufltbcative  pressure  in  upper  part  of  chest,  with
constriction  of  larynx ;  lungs  engorged  with  blood ;
mucous  rales  through  lungs ;  panting  and  labored  in-
spiration, even  emphysema;  sputum  of  yellowish  mu-
cus, streaked  with  blood,  rust-colored  or  purulent  and
of  sweetish  or  salty  taste.

B  Capillary  bronchitis  :  severe,  hard,  dry,  exhausting  cough,
<  in  evening ;  pulmonary  oedema.

BBroncho-pulmonary  catarrh,  with  dilatation  or  fatty
degeneration  of  heart.


PHOSPHORUS.  36-A

llCrepitation  in  lungs,  with  or  without  expectoration,  and
a  sensation  of  heat  and  sharp  pain  during  inspiration.

10  After  an  acute  attack  of  pneumonia,  percussion  gives  a
dull  sound  ;  no  natural  respiratory  murmur  ;  lung  is
hepatized,  cough  short,  dry  and  hacking,  cannot  lie  on
back  or  on  1.  side,  but  rests  >  on  right.

■  Cold  on  the  lungs :  threatening  pneum^onia,  with  tight-

ness and  oppression;  sore  aching  pain,  chilly  and
feverish,  with  anguish  and  restlessness  (after  Aeon.).

■  Pneumonia: stupor  with  burning,  hot  head,  red,  hot

cheeks,  red  ears,  contracted  pupils,  closed  mouth;  mur-
muring and  gesticulating  in  delirium  ;  face  expressive  of
much  anxiety;  takes  water  when  offered,  greedily,  but
cannot  swallow  more  than  one  sip,  on  account  of  short-
ness of  breath;  winglike  motion  of  alse  nasi;  breathing
difficult,  catching,  inspirations  being  suddenly  sup-
pressed when  half  completed  and  attended  by  a  half-
stifled  groan;  lies  upon  back,  head  thrown  back  as  far
as  possible,  so  as  to  extend  larynx;  short,  dry  cough
every  now  and  then ;  carotids  pulsate  violently  ;  heart
beats  strong ;  pulse  very  quick  ;  skin  dry  and  hot ;  lower
portion  of  posterior  r.  lung  hepatized ;  great  tightness
across  chest;  diarrhoea;  expectoration  when  falling
upon  paper  will  break  and  fly  like  thin  batter;  dryness
of  air  passages;  excoriated  feeling  in  upper  chest;  great
weight  on  chest  or  tightness ;  chest  sore,  bruised ;  well-
developed  coexisting  bronchitis  ;  hepatization,  especially
of  lower  half  of  r.  lung ;  threatened  paralysis  of  r.
lung ;  latter  part  of  period  of  deposit  and  early  part  of
that  of  absorption;  inspiration  almost  impossible,  after
every  attempt  severe  cough  with  scanty  expectoration  ;
lies  best  upon  back,  every  other  position  causing  pain
and  stitches  in  1.  chest.

■  Beginning hepatization; face livid, features pointed;

cold  sweats,  small,  quick,  hard  pulse ;  frequent  cough,
with  frothy,  brown  or  gelatinous  expectoration.  ^Pneu-
monia.

■  Typhoid  pneumonia,  with sensitiveness and  gurgling

in  ileo-c8ecal  region  and  diarrhoea.
I  I  Sudden,  sharp,  lancinating  pain  in  r.  side  of  iliac  fossa,
<  from  motion ;  after  five  days  this  pain  ceased  and  a
cough  set  in  ;  pulse  in  evening  150,  temperature  106|;
vomiting  of  large  quantities  of  pure  blood.  ^'Pneu-
monia.

■  Pleuro-pneumonia,  violent,  and  extending  over  a  large

surface,  with  dyspnoea  and  dry  cough,  and  rust-colored
sputa,
i  I  Pneumonia  stage  of  hepatization ;  1.  chest ;  dull,  dead


365  PHOSPHORUS.

percussion  sound  on  1.  side  posteriorly;  in  front,  less
dull;  bronchial  breathing  through  1.,  mucous  rattling  of
large  bubbles  in  r.  chest;  livid  color  of  face;  lips  and
tongue  dry,  with  a  sooty  coating;  skin  burning  hot  and
brittle ;  pulse  very  frequent,  weak  and  suppressible ;
breathing  quick  and  short ;  dry,  hard  cough  ;  frequent
diarrhoeic  stools.

■  Expectoration  of  dirty  appearance,  resembling  fur,  but

thinner,  when  falling  on  any  hard,  smooth  surface,  will
break  and  fly  like  thin  batter. ^Pneumonia.
I  I  Infantile pneumonia: feverish,  irritable; respirati6n
hurried  ;  cries  on  taking  a  deep  breath ;  small  crepita-
ting rales  in  bases  of  lungs  posteriorly.

■  Typhoid pneumonia; not a genuine inflammation,

rather  an  accumulation  of  blood  in  veins  and  extrava-
sation of  fluid  blood  in  lung  tissues ;  weakness,  feeble
pulse,  occasional  sighing,  unable  to  use  lungs,  not  from
pain,  but  merely  from  weakness  and  hypersemic  stag-
nation ;  pulse  thready ;  cold  sweat.

lOn  seventh  to  ninth  day  of  pneumonia,  breath  cold;
cold,  clammy  sweats ;  fluttering,  scarcely  perceptible
pulse;  sputa  rust-colored,  expectorated  with  difficulty;
great  anxiety;  hippocratic  face;  both  sides  of  chest
dull  on  percussion.

I  I  On  sixth  day  of  disease,  severe  suffocative  attack;  respi-
ration very  difficult;  voice  weak,  lisping;  great  pros-
tration ;  pulse  rapid,  w^eak ;  hepatization  of  r.  lung.
/^Pneumonia.

■  Threatened  paralysis  of  lungs  at  an  early  stage  of  pneu-

monia in  old  people  who  previously  w^ere  asthmatic  or
suffered  from  chronic  mucorrhoea.
Respiratory  organs  become  rapidly  involved  and  lungs
rapidly  suppurate,  with  formation  of  cavities  and
purulent  exudation  into  cavity  of  thorax,  with  infiltra-
tion of  mesenteric  glands  and  tubercular  ulcers  in
intestines;  tubercles  of  lungs  develop,  with  hectic  fever.

■  Lobular  pneumonia,  terminating  in  gangrene  of  lung

and  pyohsemia.

■  ■Tuberculosis:  incipient  stage.

I  I  Emaciation,  easily  fatigued;  face  pale;  cheeks  sunken;

severe  cough,  copious,  yellow  expectoration  ;  chest  sore,

as  if  eviscerated  ;  fever;  night  sweats. /^Consumption.
I  I  In second  and third stage of  phthisis; hoarseness;

aphonia; hsemoptysis; salty,  purulent  expectoration;

soreness  in  chest ;  great  irritability  of  sexual  organs.

■  Phthisis pulm.  seu abdom., face pale or  cheeks  red;

bowels  loose ;  stools  bloody  or  contain  lumps  like
tallow;  flashes  of  heat  with  debility;  weak  knees.


PHOSPHORUS.  ^  366

■  Tuberculosis  in  tall,  slender,  weak-chested  persons  grow-

ing rapidly ;  repeated  haemoptysis ;  great  debility  ;  fre-
quent attacks  of  bronchitis.

I  (Edema  pulmonum.

iPleuritis ;  late  stages ;  heart  dilated ;  purulent  infiltration.

■  Threatened  paralysis  of  lungs,  prostration,  viscid  sweat;

small  pulse;  face  sunken;  rattling  in  windpipe.
"Heart,  Pulse  and  Circulation,  ii Palpitation:  violent;
on  slight  motion;  frequent  and  violent  wliile  lying  on
1.  side,  at  night;  and  anxiety  in  evening  and  morning,
on  waking,  in  bed ;  severe  with  preecordial  anguish ;
from  every  emotion ;  with  rush  of  blood  to  chest,  espe-
cially in  rapidly  growing  youths  ;  with  cramp  between
scapulae ;  of  nervous  origin  ;  in  ansemia  with  tightness
across  chest;  dyspnoea  and  nervous  weakness.

I  I  Violent  hammering  in  chest,  aggravated  by  motion,
benumbing  all  over;  dyspnoea,  tightness  across  chest,
great  weakness  after  any  little  mental  excitement.

I  I  Anxiety  about  heart  associated  with  nausea  and  a  pe-
culiar sensation  of  hunger,  somewhat  relieved  by  eat-
ing, distressing  her  even  in  bed,  sometimes  for  several
hours.

iPressive  sensation  about  heart.

I  I  Pressing  pain  <  under  sternum. ^Angina  pectoris.

■  Great  pressure  on  middle  of  sternum  ;  orthopnoea;  dysp-

noea with  inability  to  exert  himself;  palpitation
li  Frequent  stitching,  pinching  pains,  pressure  and  anx-
iety; sensation  as  if  heart  had  grown  fast;  as  of  a  nar-
row band  encircling  body  and  lying  upon  heart;  vio-
lent throbbing  and  beating  of  heart;  extending  up  into
throat  and  head ;  numbness,  stiffness  and  coldness  of  1.
arm  and  thigh;  great  anxiety  of  mind  as  if  he  had
committed  murder,  allowing  no  rest  day  or  night,  pre-
venting him  even  from  lying  down  ;  respiration  short,
oppressed,  wheezing,  difficult ;  pulse  full,  hard,  frequent;
heaviness  of  head  with  vertigo,  roaring  in  ears  and  dark-
ness before  eyes ;  at  night  chilliness  with  stretching  of
back  and  legs;  when  pains  in  heart  cease  suffers  from
stitches  in  chest  with  sudden  orthopnoea  or  has  tearing,
cramping  pains  and  retraction  of  testicles  or  cramps  in
calves  of  legs.
1  I  Pressure  as  of  a  great  weight  lying  on  middle  of  sternum ;
great  pressure  in  upper  part  of  chest ;  cough  excited  by
drinking;  excoriation  of  chest  when  coughing;  cough
wakes  him  constantly  at  night  and  excites  great  pain
in  breast;  impossible  to  lie  on  back;  has  had  two  pre-
vious attacks;  since  first  has  short  breath  and  cough,
inability  to  exert  himself,  palpitation,  depression  arising


367  PHOSPHORUS.

from  belief  that  he  has  an  incurable  disease  of  heart,
which  drove  him  to  reckless  courses  of  life ;  in  third
attack  had  loud  friction  and  bellows'  sounds  ;  extremely
petulant;  least  trifle  drove  him  to  greatest  anger;
scolded  violently  if  opposed  in  the  least.  ^Cardiac
rheumatism.

I  I  Impulse  of  a  whirring  character ;  first  sound  of  heart  at
apex  is  blowing,  the  second  clear;  systolic  murmur  at
orifice  of  heart.

I  I  Bruit  de  souffle  with  first  sound  of  heart.

I  I  Peculiar  blowing  sound,  synchronous  with  s^'stole  of
lieart,  over  arch  of  aorta.

I  I  Marked  bellows'  murmur  with  first  sound  of  heart.

■  Endocarditis  or  myocarditis  during  course  of  acute  in-

flammatory rheumatism  or  during  pneumonia.

■  Disease  of  r.  heart  with  consequent  venous  stagnation.

I  IR.  heart  considerably  enlarged;  superior  thirds  of  both
lungs,  notably  1.,  consolidated;  constant  tickling  at
throat  pit,  causing  desire  to  cough,  which,  however,  only
resulted  in  a  little  white,  frothy  sputa  being  raised  with
a  hacking  which  made  his  chest  more  sore ;  liver  en-
larged downward  about  two  inches,  but  not  sensitive  to
touch ;  shortness  of  breathing  upon  least  exertion,  to-
gether with  tumultuous  beating  of  heart;  sensation  of
constriction  across  chest ;  soreness  to  touch  of  1.  subcla-
vicular space;  says  life  has  become  a  burden  as  he  can
get  no  restful  sleep;  sleeps  for  a  short  time,  during
which  he  constantly  tosses  about,  then  awakens  feeling
sore  and  tired  all  over  and  must  get  up  and  sit  in  a
chair  a  few  minutes,  then  to  bed  again,  and  this  all
night;  food  does  not  seem  to  agree,  except  salt  fish,
which  he  does  not  like;  has  an  all-gone  feeling,  be-
coming <  as  digestion  proceeds  and  which  is  somewhat
>  after  a  meal.

I  I  Retardation  of  heart's  beats  owing  probably  to  fatty
heart;  pulse  gradually  fell  to  20  and  death  seemed  im-
minent; in  an  old  man  aged  70.

■  Hypertrophy  of  1.  ventricle  with  congestion  to  head  and

face;  dilatation  of  r.  ventricle;  fatty  degeneration  of
heart;  emphysema;  bronchial  catarrh.

■  Dilatation  of  heart,  following  endocarditis,  or  fatty  de-

generation.
I  I  Muscular  angina  with  fatty  degeneration.

■  Fatty  degeneration  of  r.  heart;  venous  stagnation  ;  puffi-

ness  of  face,  particularly  under  eyelids.

■  Pulse: accelerated,  full  and  hard; sometimes  double;

small,  weak  and  frequent;  irregular;  feeble;  small
cornpressible,  80;  small  and  soft;  rapid  and  weak;
rapid,  soft;  intermittent,  from  dyspepsia.


PHOSPHORUS.  368

1 1  Orgasm  of  blood  ;  blood  excited  by  sensual  impressions.
^°  Outer  Chest. '  l  Swelling  of  clavicle.

I  Acute  and  frequently  recurring  paroxysms  of  neuralgia

of  chest-walls.
I  Intercostal  neuralgia.
I  Yellow  or  brownish  spots  on  chest.
^*  Neck  and  Back. iStitfness  in  nape  of  neck.
:  Bronchocele.

■  Lipoma  on  neck  with  hectic  fever.

■  Between scapulae: heat; pains; burning  pain; dull

pain  ;  throbbing  pain  in  small  spot;  throbbing  burning
distress.
I  I  Stitches  in  r.  scapula;  in  shoulder  blades.

■  Spinous  processes  of  dorsal  vertebrae  between  scapulae  be-

came exceedingly  sensitive  to  pressure,  also  muscles  be-
tween processes  and  1.  scapula  were  sensitive,  much  <
on  1.  side ;  <  from  unpleasant  emotional  excitement
and  by  vexation.

■  Hot  spot  on  spine;  burning  in  spots  along  spine.

■  ■Feeling  of  intense  heat  running  up  back.

■  Feeling  of  weight  and  dull  pressure  in  whole  spine.
1  I  Throbbing  and  pulsating  in  back.

■  Pains:  in  small  of  back;  as  if  broken,  dragging  sensa-

tion, cannot  laugh  because  of  it;  cannot  move;  when
rising  from  stooping  ;  burning.
1  I  Burning  in  a  small  spot  in  small of  back,  > from
rubbing.

■  Much  heat  in  low^er  part  of  back  across  renal  region.

■  Pain  in  sacral  region  after  confinement.

■  Weakness  and  paralytic  feeling  at  junction  of  lumbar  and

sacral  vertebrae.

■  Pain  in  coccyx  as  if  ulcerated,  hindering  motion,  followed

by  painful  stiff  neck.  ^Rachitis.  ^Coccygodynia.
I  I  After  unusual  exposure,  violent  neuralgic  pains,  im-
plicating whole  spinal  column,  continued  several  years,
at  times  assuming  form  of  rheumatism  of  joints  and
muscles,  then  purely  neuralgic;  for  months  at  a  time
could  not  dress  himself,  turn  in  bed  or  raise  hands  to
head ;  helpless,  with  the  most  excruciating  pain,  <  morn-
ing and  evening  and  after  eating,  but  usually  appetite  was
good  ;  violent  craving  for  fish. ^Rheumatic  neuralgia.

■  Spinal  irritation  :  palpitation  of  heart,  <  from  any  emo-

tion ;  spine  exceedingly  sensitive  to  touch  ;  weakness  of
spine;  back  feels  weak,  as  if  it  would  soon  give  out;
weakness  of  limbs,  with  trembling  on  beginning  to  walk  ;
stumbles  a  great  deal,  catching  his  toes  in  every  little
projection  of  floor  or  pavement ;  totters  and  there  seems
to  be  imperfect  co-ordination;  sleepless  from  excessive


369  PHOSPHORUS.

heat;  horribly  exciting  dreams;  in  chest  diseases,  con-
finement, reflex  uterine  troubles,  caries,  etc. ;  burning
pains ;  burning  in  spots,  >  from  rubbing ;  throbbing
burning  neck,  thence  over  head  to  forehead,  with  burn-
ing on  vertex.

iSpinal  anaemia  in  those  given  to  sexual  excesses ;  tall,
lean  people ;  night  sweats  with  hectic  fever ;  early
morning  diarrhoea,

I  I  Pain  in  back  and  weakness  of  legs,  gradually  increasing
until  locomotion  became  extremely  difficult  and  he  was
compelled  to  stay  in  bed;  on  endeavoring  to  walk,  very
peculiar  motion  of  legs,  they  are  bent  and  unsteady  and
are  moved  forward  as  if  it  were  an  effort  for  him  to  sup-
port spinal  column  ;  formication  and  numbness  in  lower
half  of  spinal  column ;  spinous  processes  very  prominent;
trembling  of  limbs  ;  torpidity  of  alimentary  canal.

■  Myelitis;  after  sexual  excesses  or  getting  wet;  also  when

in  connection  with  an  inflammatory  process  of  vertebrse ;
burning  pain  in  spine ;  some  vertebrae  sore  to  touch  ;
dyspnoea  and  cough;  weakness  of  sight;  transient  ver-
tigo ;  constipation,  stools  narrow,  dry ;  numbness  and
insensibility  of  extremities.

■  Softening  of  spine.

■  Progressive  spinal  paralysis,  with  partial  contraction  of

affected  muscles,  formication  and  tearing  in  limbs,  anaes-
thesia with  increased  heat;  periodically  returning,  in-
supportable pains  in  spine,  preventing  walking;  heavi-
ness and  sensation  of  fatigue,  especially  when  ascending
steps;  pains  in  soles  of  feet  as  if  she  had  walked  too
much,  with  sensation  as  if  they  were  asleep;  great  irri-
tability and  nervousness.

■  Locomotor  ataxia:  burning  heat  in back;  hands and

feet  numb,  clumsy ;  limbs  tremble  from  every  exertion;
when  walking  makes  missteps  from  weakness ;  swelling
of  hands  and  feet  with  stinging  pains ;  paralysis,  formi-
cation and  tearing  in  limbs;  anaesthesia;  increased
heat;  sexual  irritation ;  nocturnal  emissions;  great  irri-
tability and  nervousness;  from  excessive  loss  of  animal
fluids  and  semen.
•  Multiple  sclerosis :  weakness  of  extremities  and  trembling
on  making  an  effort;  legs  weak,  gait  tottering  as  if  he
were  not  sure  of  himself;  speech  embarrassed  ;  amauro-
sis with  widely  dilated  pupils;  deafness.

■  Caries  of  vertebrae:  in  scrofulous  children;  diarrhoea  <

in  morning,  containing  undigested  food  ;  tendency  to
involvement  of  lungs;  catches  cold  easily  with  marked
tendency  to  bronchitis; when inflammation  has ex-
VOL.  VIII. — 24.


PHOSPHORUS.  ,  370

tended  inward  and  involved  spinal  cord  itself;  burning
in  certain  portions  of  spine;  cannot  tolerate  any  heat
near  back;  hot  sponge  on  back  causes  him  to  wince ;
feeling  as  of  a  band  around  body  ;  difficulty  in  walking
increasing  until  child  cannot  walk  at  all;  partial  loss  of
control  over  sphincters.

■  Spinal  diseases  from  inflammation  of  vertebrae.
I  Spondy  larthrocace.

^"  Upper  Limbs. iSwelling  of  axillary  glands.
I  I  Violent  itching  in  r.  axilla.
I  Boils  in  1.  armpit.
I  I  Tearing  in  1.  shoulder,  especiall}^  at  night,  in  bed.

■  Paralytic  drawing  in  muscles  of  shoulder  and  upper  arm.
I  Great  weakness  of  upper  arms.

I  Arms  weak,  can  hardly  move  them,  they  tremble,  become
numb.

I  I  Rheumatic  pains  in  arms,  especially  in  joints.

I  I  Severe  pains  in  muscles  of  r.  shoulder,  extending  to
elbow;  pain  constant,  preventing  sleep  at  night  and  so
severe  as  to  cause  fainting  ;  fever  with  sweat ;  numbness
and  flexion  of  fingers ;  all  motion,  even  passive,  is  impos-
sible.

I  Distressing  pain  in  r.  arm  and  shoulder;  early  in  morn-
ing, on  rising,  arm  felt  paralyzed  and  weary,  sometimes
from  shoulder  to  elbow;  >  after  work,  <  in  evening
when  at  rest ;  paralyzed ;  <  after  unusual  exertion,  and
morbid  sensitiveness  of  upper  arm  to  pressure  ;  no  ema-
ciation of  arm;  after  PJiosphor.,  spotted,  itching,  erythema-
tous eruption  appeared  on  lower  part  of  forearms  and
hands. ^Paralytic  rheumatism.

I  I  Left  arm  painful;  numbness  of  1.  forefinger  ("  like  pins
and  needles"),  extending  up  radial  side  of  hand  and
wrist;  first  phalanx  of  1.  thumb  feels  at  times  as  in  a
vise;  gnawing  pain  in  1.  forefinger;  when  severe  ex-
tends up  radial  side  of  arm  to  elbow,  where  bone  feels
as  if  it  would  come  through  ;  sensation  of  heat  in  these
parts,  <  at  night;  the  gnawing  seems  in  bone;  gnaw-
ing and  burning  lying  on  back  or  leaning  back  ;  on
letting  1.  arm  hang  down,  feeling  of  rush  of  blood  to
forefinger  and  as  if  nail  were  being  pulled  out;  menses
scanty,  regular;  before  menses  much  flatus  rolling  in
abdomen,  causing  great  pain,  >  bending  double  and  by
hot  drinks ;  flatulence  and  pain  come  on  fourteen  days
before  menses  and  last  during  period;  after  drinking,
especially  warm  drinks,  face  and  arms  are  red  ;  feels  as
if  she  could  not  get  her  breath  after  warm  drinks;  first
and  second  fingers  of  1.  hand  swell  for  three  hours  every
day ;  1.  first  finger  contracted,  cannot  straighten  it  ex-


371  PHOSPHORUS.

cept  by  aid  of  other  hand  ;  pain  in  hand  prevents  sleep ;
bruised  feeling  at  root  of  1.  thumb  ;  dislocated  pain  in  1.
knuckles  and  wrist,  extending  to  elbow.

■  Drawing,  tearing  pains  in  joints  of  elbow  and  hands  and

in  fingers,  worse  at  night  and  when  lying  on  1.  side.
^Rheumatism.
I  I  Tetter  on  elbow.

■  Tremor  of  hands.

■  Falling  asleep  of  hands,  in  morning,  on  waking,  sensa-

tion of  numbness.

■  ■Hands  and  arras  cold,  with  diarrhoea.

■  Emaciation  of  hands.

■  Veins  on  hands  are  distended.

■  Burning  palms;  or  clammy  sweat  on  head  and  palms.
I  I  Paralysis  of  fingers.

■  Periodical  contraction  of  fingers,  like  cramp.

■  Numbness  and  insensibility  of  fingers; fingers  are  all

thumbs.

■  Finger  tips  feel  numb  and  insensible;  numb,  crawling.
I  I  Cracked  skin  of  finger  joints,  as  if  by  cold.

redness  on  extremity  of  1.  thumb,  extending  one-eighth
of  an  inch  beneath  integument ;  after  a  while  there  came
in  it  a  round  opening  as  if  punctured,  and  finally  a  dark
red  globular  outgrowth,  which  bled  profusely  at  slight-
est touch,  one  day  about  a  teacupful;  aching  in  thumb
on  attempting  to  use  it.

I  I  At  root  of  nail  of  r.  little  finger,  a  small  bluish  vesicle,
from  which,  after  eight  days,  blood  began  to  ooze,  flow
gradually  growing  more  severe,  until  at  times  it  could
not  be  checked  ;  around  the  swelling  was  a  bright  red
areola,  surrounded  by  other  bright  red  vesicular  eleva-
tions;  the  tumor  increased  in  size  and  a  small  wound
in  foot  became  ulcerated ;  sleep  disturbed ;  pain  in
stomach  and  epigastrium  after  eating;  marked  ema-
ciation ;  red  stitches  on  nape  of  neck  ;  itching  wheals  on
r.  arm;  severe  itching  at  anus;  tumor  was  smooth  and
shining.  ^Fungus  hsematodes.
^^  Lower  Limbs, l  l  Nates  painful  as  if  suppurating.

I  I  Right  hip  joint  painful ;  morbus  coxarius.

■  Hectic  fever: dry,  hacking  cough; chronic  diarrhoea;

urine  turbid  on  voiding,  precipitating  a  white  sediment
on  cooling;  thin,  watery  pus  oozing  from  diseased  joint.
^Coxalgia.

■  Great  uneasiness  in  lower  extremities.

■  Heaviness,  weakness  and  weariness  in  lower  extremities,

especially  on  ascending  steps.

■  Complete  insensibility  of  lower  extremities  and  of  body

as  far  up  as  chest.


PHOSPHORUS.  372

I  Unsteady,  stumbling  gait.

iParalj^sis  of  lower  extremities;  unable  to  move  limbs
which  were  of  low  temperature  and  sensibility;  back
very  stiff;  at  a  certain  part  of  sacrum  no  sensibility;
frequent  tearing  and  formication  from  back  to  legs.

I  Paralysis  after  spondylitis;  use  of  lower  extremities  sud-
denly and  completely  lost;  cannot  move  a  step;  on
wishing  to  change  position  of  legs  must  use  hands,  as  if
legs  were  made  of  wood.

I  I  An  attack  of  lumbago,  three  years  ago,  was  followed  by
pain  in  r.  pelvic  region  ;  loss  of  feeling  and  motion  of
limb;  no  shrinking  of  limb;  sensation  like  creeping
of  ants  in  limb.

I  Acute  arthritis  with  paralytic  weakness  of  thighs  and
inability  to  flex  knees  to  any  extent.

■  Drawing,  tensive  pains,  from  slightest  exposure  to  cold,
with  vertigo,  oppression  and  sense  of  lameness  and
weakness  in  lower  limbs. ^Muscular  rheumatism.

I  I  Exceedingly  troublesome  nightly  attacks  of  fidgets  in  r.
leg  and  hip,  soon  after  retiring,  preventing  sleep  and
driving  him  out  of  bed  many  times.

I  iSwellingon  upper  part  of  r.  thigh,  near  groin,  looking
like  a  boil,  surrounded  by  smaller  swellings  ;  each  of  the
largest  swellings  had  a  scab  upon  it,  which,  when  picked
off,  showed  a  purple  or  bluish-red  surface  beneath  ;  after
squeezing  it  it  opened  like  a  cauliflower,  edges  being
everted ;  it  was  elliptical,  nearly  two  inches  long  and
more  than  an  inch  wide,  and  projected  about  one-fourth
of  an  inch,  of  dark  purple  hue;  the  dressing  when
removed  was  found  to  be  full  of  blood,  no  pus  ;  ex-
tremely sensitive  to  touch,  contact  of  sponge  caused
fainting ;  fine  pricking  pain,  like  that  of  a  needle,  <
from  motion ;  around  this  were  several  prominences
about  size  of  half  a  small  pea,  purplish  on  their  tops,  and
looking  as  if  ready  to  break  out  as  the  first  one  had.
^Fungus  hsematodes.

I  I  Tumor  on  r.  thigh  near  trochanter,  round  in  shape,  base
being  about  size  of  fist ;  tumor  hard,  elastic,  slightly
movable  at  base,  with  but  little  pain  or  heat;  no  pulsa-
tions ;  at  most  pendant  portion  an  abscess  had  formed
and  opened,  from  which  there  was  a  continuous  dis-
charge of  venous  blood,  which  when  wiped  away
allowed  the  texture  of  the  fungus  hsematodes  to  be  dis-
tinctly seen ;  blood  oozed  out  in  drops  and  at  times
trickled  away  in  a  stream  ;  great  weakness  from  loss  of
blood;  on  1.  thigh  in  same  location  a  smaller  tumor  had
formed,  which  felt  like  an  indurated  gland  and  was  les^
movable;  irritability  of  mind,  with  fear  and  anxiety.
^Fungus  hsematodes.


373  PHOSPHORUS.

I  I  Fungus  hseraatodes  on  r.  thiorh  of  a  newlv  born  child.

I  Lower  limbs  covered  with  fetid  sweat.

I  Weak  feeling  in  knees.

I  I  Heaviness  in  hollows  of  knees.

■  Rheumatic  stiffness  of  knees ;  pains  from  knees  to  feet.
I  White  swelling  of  knee  joint.

I  Ulcer  below  r.  knee,  over  head  of  tibia,  surrounded  by
smaller  ulcers.

■  Legs  feel  heavy  and  weary.

I  Legs  so  weak  she  makes  missteps ;  face  hot.
I  I  Blue-red  spots,  like  petechise,  on  legs  and  feet.
I  iTroublesome  itching  of  both  legs.
I  Cold  legs  and  feet. ^Amenia.

I  Bruised  pain  in  periosteum  of  tibia,  always  sore  to  touch.
B Swelling  of  tibia.

I I  Extensive  gangrenous  periostitis  of  tibia,  with  severe
febrile  disturbance ;  periosteum  peeled  off  from  a  large
area  upward,  as  far  as  knee  joint ;  the  bone  was  rough.

I  I  Blotches  on  edges  of  tibia.

I  I  Small  spots,  like  freckles,  on  lower  part  of  tibia.
Suddenly  formed,  red,  inflamed  tumor  between  calf  of  leg
and  bend  of  knee.

Tension  in  tendons  of  flexor  muscles  of  leg,  with  weak-
ness.

I  I  Cramp  in  calves.

I  I  Pain  in  ankle  as  if  sprained,  on  walking.

I  I  Sensation  as  if  she  had  wrenched  foot,  causing  her  to  be
careful  not  to  make  a  misstep ;  could  not  walk  over
rough  street  paving ;  when  walking  over  smooth
surface,  as  floor,  suffers  from  acute  pain  in  heel,
and  on  steping  out  and  flexing  ankle  joint,  pahiful
tension  in  tendo-achill  is,  extending  to  calf ;  every  step
causes  pain  throughout  whole  joint  and  feet,  extending
forward  to  toes. ^Rheumatism.

iCEdemaof  ankles  and  feet  from  heart  disease  or  fatty
degeneration  of  kidneys ;  albuminuria.

I  Swelling  of  feet:  in  evening;  on  walking;  with  stinging.
J  Weariness  and  heaviness  of  feet ;  paralyzed  feeling.

•  Twitching  of  feet;  nightly  tearing  during  pregnancy.

I I  Feet  icy  cold.

I  Pains  in  soles  of  feet :  as  if  bruised ;  as  if  she  had  walked
too  much,  with  sensation  as  if  they  were  asleep ;  as  after
a  journey.

I  I  Blisters  on  heels.

I  Numbness  of  toes.  '  ■

I  I  Corns  and  chilblains  on  toes.
^' Limbs  in  General, i Great  weakness  of  limbs.

I  Loss  of  power  over  all  limbs,  especially  in  joints  and  as
if  paralyzed,  with  good  appetite.


PHOSPHORUS.  374

■  Heaviness  of  hands  and  feet.

Extremities  became  as  heavy  as  lead  and  at  last  paralyzed,

with  pains  in  muscles.
iHands  and  feet  numb,  clumsy;  ankles  feel  swollen  and

as  if  skin  were  tense.
iLimbs  tremble  from  every  exertion;  also  icy  coldness  of

limbs.
I  When  walking  makes  missteps  from  weakness.
I  1  Feeling  of  going  to  sleep  in  arms,  hands,  fingers  and

toes.
I  Paralysis  confined  to  extremities,  upper  and  lower,  and

originating  from  pressure  on  spinal  cord.
I  I  Scaly  herpes  on  arms  and  knees.
I  I  Vesicles:  around  joints ;  between  fingers  and  in  bends

of  knees.

■  Swelling  of  hands  and  feet,  with  stinging  pains.

■  Drawing  pains  in  back  and  legs;  could  only  walk  with

great  exertion;  feet  felt  lifeless;  sensation  in  spinal  cord
as  if  quicksilver  moved  up  and  down ;  paralytic  heavi-
ness in  arms,  preventing  work;  vertigo;  transient;
movements  of  co-ordination  normal;  some  lumbar  ver-
tebrse  sensitive  to  touch  ;  transient  weakness  of  sight ;
anaemia;  emaciation.  ^Paralytic  rheumatism.
^*  Rest.  Position.  Motion.  Rest :  pain  in  arms  and  shoul-
ders <.

Lying  down  :  intense  pain  in  eyes  ;  heat  of  scalp  >  ;  tear-
ing in  jaw  bones  <  ;  incarcerated  flatus  >  ;  flatulent
colic  <.

Must  lie  down :  painful  weakness  of  abdomen  ;  after  uri-
nating.

Lying  on  back  :  diarrhoea  <  ;  impossible,  pain  in  navel ;
provokes  cough  ;  congestive  asthma  <  ;  >  pneumonia ;
pain  in  arm  >  ;  dorsal  decubitus.

Lies  upon  back:  head  thrown  back  as  far  as  possible;
pneumonia.

Lying  on  r.  side :  constantly ;  pain  in  r.  ear  >  ;  diarrhoea
>  ;  stitches  in  chest  >  ;  >  after  pneumonia.

Lying  on  1.  side :  pain  in  r.  ear  <  ;  diarrhoea  <  ;  cough
<  ;  tearing  in  joints  and  fingers  <.

Cannot  lie  on  1.  side :  because  of  palpitation ;  pain  in
chest;  pneumonia.

Must  sit  erect :  general  anasarca ;  dyspnoea.

Must  sit  up:  during  cough;  during  night  feels  sore  and
tired  all  over.

Sitting  :  feeling  of  incarcerated  flatus  <  ;  could  move  feet
a  little  but  could  not  keep  them  stretched  out.

Letting  1.  arm  hang  down  :  rush  of  blood  to  forefinger.

Leaning  back  :  pain  in  1.  arm  >.


375  PHOSPHORUS.

Bending  double:  flatulent  colic  >.

Had  to  hold  abdomen :  cough  caused  pain.

Stooping:  throbbing  in  forehead  <;  cephalalgia;  intense
pain  in  eyes  <.

Standing:  very  tired;  knees  bend  under  him;  there  is  a
deep  anterior  curve  of  lumbar  vertebrae.

Change  of  position :  compelled  by  burning  of  skin.

Wishing  to  change  position  of  legs:  must  use  hands.

Leaning  from  1.  to  r.  side :  can  raise  better.

Rising:  vertigo  with  roaring  in  ears;  weakness  in  legs;
must  lie  down  again  for  a  few  moments;  cough  <;
from  stooping,  pains  in  small  of  back.

Opening  mouth:  prosopalgia  >.

Writing :  hands  tremble.

Desire  to  stretch  limbs.

Could  not  dress  himself,  turn  in  bed,  raise  hands  to  head:
excruciating  pain.

Capacity  for  movement  lost.

Motion:  of  head,  vertigo,  as  if  he  would  fall;  of  head,
dull  pain  in  forehead  < ;  of  e3^eballs,  sore ;  of  jaw,
>  tearing  in  it;  cardialgia  <;  cough  <;  least,  invol-
untary stools ;  cutting  from  sternum  to  scapula ;  pains
in  chest  <;  pain  in  r.  side  of  iliac  fossa  <;  slight
causes  palpitation ;  even  passive,  impossible,  pain  in
shoulder ;  <  hammering  in  chest ;  dreaded  and  difficult
from  weakness;  slightest  causes  redness  of  face;  rum-
bling in  abdomen;  causes  epistaxis ;  of  joints  >  pain.

Every  exertion:  had  to  rest;  limbs  tremble;  unusual,  arm
and  shoulder  paralyzed  <  ;  causes  trembling  and  weak-
ness of  extremities ;  causes  sweat,  very  profuse.

Walking:  staggers  from  vertigo;  everything  turned
around  with  her;  very  tired  ;  fast  causes  congestion  to
head;  stomach  painful;  difficult  for  want  of  breath;
painful  weakness  across  abdomen ;  ready  fatigue ;  leu-
corrhoea;  during  and  after,  tearing  in  labia;  breathing
impeded;  trembling;  impossible;  pains  in  spine;  makes
missteps  from  weakness ;  causing  very  peculiar  mo-
tion of  legs ;  pain  in  ankle ;  over  rough  pavement  im-
possible; on  smooth  surface  acute  pain  in  heel;  swelling
of  feet;  makes  missteps  from  weakness;  causes  exhaus-
tion ;  in  a  side  to  side  waddling  manner.

Stepping  out  and  flexing  ankle  joint:  painful  tension  in
tendo-achilles.

Ascending  steps :  heaviness  and  sensation  of  fatigue ;  wea-
riness, weakness  and  heaviness  in  lower  extremities ;
muscles  of  lower  extremities  seem  to  refuse  to  act.

Exertion  causes  nosebleed.

Exercise:  cough  <.


PHOSPHORUS.  376

^* Nerves,  l  lOversensitiveness  of  all  senses;  oversensitive  to
external  impressions,  light,  odors,  noises,  touch,  etc.

I  I  Great  languor  and  disinclination  to  move;  heaviness  in
whole  body  ;  great  weariness ;  prostration  ;  exhausted
after  a  walk ;  remarkably  weak  and  depressed,  without
slightest  desire  to  attend  to  ordinary  business;  weak-
ness so  great  that  patient  could  hardly  speak ;  general
nervous  exhaustion ;  inexpressible  lieaviness  of  whole
body,  so  that  every  motion  was  difficult  and  unpleas-
ant; desired  to  keep  bed  and  dreaded  motion.

I  I  Feeling  of  weakness  in  back  as  if  crushed,  followed  by
weakness  of  extremities  and  trembling  after  least  ex-
ertion ;  both  lower  limbs  so  feeble  that  he  was  only  able
to  stagger  for  a  moment  or  two  with  a  trembling  step ;
when  attempting  to  stand  knees  shook  and  gave  way  ;
hands  and  arms  trembled  when  he  attempted  to  use
them.

1  I  After  urinating  in  morning  is  so  weak  he  has  to  lie
down.

lExhaustion:  especially  in  chest;  of  mind  and  body,  in
morning;  sudden  attacks;  from  loss  of  vital  fluids;
with  increased  susceptibility  to  external  impressions ;
with  irritable  weakness.

I  I  Paralyzed  and  sick  feeling  in  whole  body.

I  [General  relaxation  of  muscular  power;  when  going  up-
stairs muscles  of  lower  extremities  seem  to  refuse  to  act,
so  that  she  was  in  danger  of  falling.

■  Motions  involuntary  and  uncertain,  as  one  attacked  with

palsy.

■  Trembling:  especially  of  hands  while  writing;  all  over

body  or  in  single  limbs ;  with  nervous  debility.  -«
■Nervous  debility :  from  simple  weakness  to  complete  paral-
ysis; often  in  pneumonia, typhus, exanthematic  diseases,
croup,  bronchitis,  vitality  reaches  its  lowest  ebb,  cerebro-
spinal system  is  depressed,  surface  is  cold,  pulse  like  a
thread,  rattling  breathing,  trembling  of  whole  frame;
frequent  fainting  spells,  caused  by  intemperance  ;  con-
stitution undermined  by  grief,  care  or  excessive  mental
exertion;  excesses  in  venery,  or  onanism.

■  Frequent  fainting:  pale,  cold;  sudden  syncope,  lying  as

if  lifeless.

I  I  Numbness  of  whole  body,  accompanied  by  a  pricking
sensation.

I  I  Gradual  loss  of  strength ;  coition  causes  prostration  for
several  days ;  paretic  condition  of  1.  side  of  body,  partic-
ularly of  limbs,  face  and  tongue  less  affected,  although
speech  is  impaired ;  movements  of  limibs  unsteady ;
sensibility  not  entirely  impaired;  pain  in  affected  limbs


377  PHOSPHORUS.

at  times  severe,  with  frequent  involuntary  motions  of
same,  they  are  also  stiff,  so  that  flexion  is  difficult;  fre-
quent attacks  of  vertigo ;  confusion  of  head ;  mental
dulness,  recollection  tardy  and  incomplete  ;  answers  to
questions  are  slow,  short  and  unsatisfactory;  appetite  im-
paired, stool  delayed  and  difficult;  sleep  restless,  dis-
turbed ;  feels  <  after  sleep,  and  formerly  when  he  could
leave  bed  arose  very  late;  although  he  has  control  of
his  motions  they  are  very  unsteady;  hand  trembles
when  reaching  for  an  object,  and  when  grasping  or  lift-
ing anything  there  is  no  strength;  complete  mental
and  physical  weakness  and  prostration ;  veil  before
eyes;  face  pale,  becomes  red  on  slightest  motion  ;  easily
overheated  but  quickly  becomes  cool  again,  feels  chilly
and  desires  to  stretch  limbs.

I  All  feeling  annihilated  in  upper  extremities  as  far  as

elbows  and  in  the  lower  up  to  glutei,  this  taking  place,
progressively,  first  in  tips  of  fingers  and  toes,  then  in
hands  and  soles  of  feet,  and  so  on  ;  complete  ansesthesia
of  nerves  of  sensation;  capacity  for  movement  lost;
could  grasp  large  objects  with  fingers,  but  could  not
hold  them  fast ;  could  sit  on  bed  or  chair,  but  on  at-
tempting to  stand  knees  bent  under  him  and  he  had  to
be  held  upright;  walking  or  stepping  out  with  feet
quite  impossible,  in  sitting  could  move  them  a  little,
but  could  not  keep  them  stretched  out;  muscles  of  all
extremities  flaccid,  losing  all  firmness  and  tone  and
atrophied  ;  temperature  of  limbs  same  as  that  of  body ;
stool  seldom,  never  without  aid  of  injections ;  urine
acid,  passing  frequently,  sphincter  of  bladder  having
lost  its  energy  ;  must  satisfy  desire  to  urinate  promptly
or  urine  would  pass  involuntarily,  especiall}'^  at  night;
brain  unaffected;  mind  clear;  no  head  symptoms;  no
pain  along  whole  length  of  spine,  even  from  strong
pressure. ^Paralysis.

I I  Paralysis:  formication  and  tearing  in  limbs;  traced  to
cerebral  or  spinal  softening,  or  atrophy,  which  were
preceded  by  overexcitement;  progressive  muscular
atrophy,  the  intellect  remaining  clear ;  paralysis  of
spinal  origin;  tingling  and  formication  in  limbs  >
from  friction;  heat  in  paralyzed  part;  auEesthesia;
caused  by  onanism,  chlorosis,  Bright's  disease,  etc.;  after
sexual  excesses ;  after  confinement;  with  tingling  and
tearing  from  back  down  into  limbs  ;  gressus  vaccinus  ;
hemiplegia,  facial  and  aphasic,  from  thrombosis  of  1.
middle  cerebral  artery,  or  from  pressure  on  spinal  cord.

iWith  great  difficulty  can  walk  a  few  yards,  when  she
does  so  it  is  with  her  shoulders  thrown  backward,  ab-


PHOSPHORUS.  378

domen  prominent,  legs  separated  in  a  waddling  side  to
side  manner;  it  is  with  difficulty  she  can  even  stand,
as  her  legs  feel  as  if  they  would  give  way  except  when
widely  separated  ;  cannot  rise  from  chair  without  assist-
ance, nlimbness  and  pins-and-needles  sensation  in  lower
extremities;  in  upper  extremities  no  pain  or  numbness,
but  some  stiffness ;  can  grasp  an  object  but  cannot  retain
grasp  long ;  face  pale  and  antemic,  appetite  poor,  pain
in  1.  side ;  bowels  act  every  third  or  fourth  day ;  cata-
menia  irregular,  occurring  every  six,  seven  or  eight
weeks,  very  little  and  pale;  urine  normal,  no  vertigo,
headache  or  defective  vision  ;  tenderness  of  lower  dorsal
vertebrae;  when  standing  there  is  a  deep  anterior  curve
of  lumbar  vertebree,  much  diminished  in  a  prone  posi-
tion; glutei  muscles  firm,  hard  and  somewhat  enlarged,
also  oblique  abdominal  muscles;  muscles  of  upper  arm
enlarged,  hard  and  firm  ;  r.  arm  across  middle  of  biceps
when  arm  is  extended  measures  9|  inches  in  circumfer-
ence, and  1.  arm  in  same  place  9|;  forearms  appar-
ently normal ;  muscles  of  thighs  and  legs  are  much
larger  and  harder  than  normal  ;  circumference  of
middle  of  r.  thigh  is  19|  inches,  that  of  1.  19|;  r.  calf
14|  inches,  1.  14^.  ^Duchenne's  pseudo-hypertropliic
paralysis.

1 1  Progressive  locomotor  ataxia.

I  Apparently  lifeless  state,  with  occasional  convulsive  move-
ments, followed  by  greenish  vomiting;  vomits  drink  as
soon  as  it  gets  warm  in  stomach  ;  copious,  easy,  gushing
vomiting ;  cadaverous  face ;  hemorrhage  of  bright
blood. ^Shock  from  injury.

I  Restless  moving  because  of  burning  heat;  anxiety  at
twilight.

I  Jerking  of  single  muscles.

I  After  severe  nervous  shock,  sleeplessness,  followed  in  a
few  days  by  cutting  pains  in  region  of  heart,  with  severe
chills,  increasing  to  convulsive  violence,  and  ending  by
his  falling  to  floor  apparently  dead,  rigid  and  pulseless;
after  half  an  hour  would  revive  and  act  as  if  insane;
after  a  time  paroxysm  changed  and  he  would  feel  from
r.  ear  to  top  of  head  as  if  everything  had  stopped,  and
would  instantly  fall  into  a  sound  sleep,  from  which  ho
would  awake  completely  mesmerized  ;  during  his  whole
illness  had  never  aw^akened  in  morning  in  his  right
mind. ^Convulsions.

■  Chorea  in  children  who  are  growing  too  fast;  very  weak,
walks  as  if  paralyzed.

I  Spasms  on  paralyzed  side.

I  Epilepsy,  with  consciousness.


379  PHOSPHORUS.

llNeuralgia,  in  many  parts  of  body,  with  great  anaemia

and  a  broken-down,  emaciated  constitution.
I  Pains: tearing,  drawing, tensive,  excited by  slightest

chill ;  body  feels  bruised,  with  sensation  of  coldness  ;

open  air  intolerable.
I  I  Takes  cold  easil}^  in  open  air.
^' Sleep. iSleepy,  coma  vigil.

I  Sleepy  all  day,  all  night  restless; awakened  by  vivid

dreams.

■  Stupor, burning heat of head; muttering delirium.

^Pneumonia.
I  Sopor,  dry  lips,  black  tongue,  open  mouth.
•  Sleeplessness  and  uneasiness  in  evening,  in  bed.
iSleep  restless,  full  of  dreams;  headache  in  morning,  on

waking.
lAfter  waking,  in  evening  and  night,  cannot  fall  asleep

again  for  a  long  time.
I  Difficulty  of  falling  asleep  on  account  of  excitement,  and

then  uneasy,  dreamful  sleep.

■  Starts  in  sleep,  wakens  anxious.

I  Restless,  especially  before  midnight.
I  I  Cannot  fall  asleep  before  10  o'clock,  on  account  of  rest-
lessness, also  cannot  get  feet  warm.

I  Sleep  disturbed  by  heat  of  body;  ebullitions,  oppression

of  chest,  hunger.

I I  Feels  in  morning  as  if  he  had  not  slept  enough.
I  iSomnambulism.

I  Dreams  vivid:  full  of  restless  work  and  business,  which
he  could  not  finish  ;  of  fire;  anxious;  of  biting  animals;
lascivious,  with  emissions.

I  I  Lies  only  on  r.  side ;  lying  on  1.  causes  anxiety.
'^  Time.  Morning:  on  rising  unable  to  collect  his  senses;
vertigo  constantly  increasing  after  rising  from  bed  ;  ver-
tigo; headache  appears;  darting  pains  in  difi"erent
parts  of  body  <  ;  sees  more  distinctly ;  agglutination  of
lids;  obstruction  in  nose;  nasal  discharge;  early  epis-
taxis;  neuralgia  <;  taste  of  rotten  eggs;  hawking;
painfulness  of  stomach;  watery  diarrlioea;  gleet;  dis-
charge of  watery  fluid ;  milky  leucorrhoea  early ;  hoarse-
ness ;  constant  expectoration ;  cough  with  expectoration  ;
hawking;  hawking  of  mucus;  hollow  cough ;  expecto-
ration <  ;  oppression  of  chest;  palpitation  and  anxiety ;
rheumatic  neuralgia  <  ;  diarrhoea;  weakness  after  uri-
nating; exhaustion  of  mind  and  body;  pain  in  arm
and  shoulder;  falling  asleep  of  hands;  headache;  feels
as  if  he  had  not  slept  enough  ;  sweat  in  bed ;  rheumatic
stiff'ness.

Forenoon  :  vertigo ;  intense  pain  in  eyes.


PHOSPHORUS.  .  380

11  A.M.:  empty  feeling;  dj^speptic  pain.

Noon:  headache  from  morning  <,  >  towards  evening.

Day:  flickering  before  eyes;  dryness  of  throat;  frequent
hiccough;  erections;  constant  expectoration;  coryza,
dulness  of  head  and  sleepiness;  cough  with  expectora-
tion ;  dryness  of  throat ;  incessant  barking  cough ;  sleep.

Afternoon :  heat.

Evening :  fear  and  dread ;  as  if  horrible  faces  were  look-
ing out  of  every  corner;  in  bed,  vertigo;  vertigo  <;
headache  appears  mostly ;  darting  pains  in  body  <  ;
in  darkness  flashes  before  eyes;  r.  eye  red  and  hot,
waters  <;  tearing  in  jaw  bones;  scraping  in  pharynx

<  ;  stitching  pain  in  stomach  <  ;  pains  and  vomiting
towards;  chilliness;  hoarseness  <  ;  aphonia  <  ;  epidemic
influenza  <  ;  cough  dry;  bronchitis  <  ;  cough  <  ;  op-
pression and  anxiety  in  chest  <.

Stridulous  inspiration:  dry  tickling  cough;  cough  after
lying  down ;  less  expectoration  until  midnight  cough
<;  capillary  bronchitis  <;  palpitation  and  anxiety;
rheumatic  neuralgia  <  ;  pain  in  arm  and  shoulder  <  ;
swelling  of  feet;  sleeplessness  and  uneasiness;  after
waking  cannot  fall  asleej)  again ;  chilliness  with  anxiety ;
rigors  ;  heat.

From  3  to  G  p.  m.  :  burning  thirst.

Twilight:  anxious;  sees  more  distinctly;  asthenopia  <.

From  evening  until  midnight:  chill.

Night:  falling  asleep,  frequent  deception  of  vision  ;  shoot-
ing through  ears;  coryza  <  ;  dryness  of  throat;  raven-
ous hunger;  qualmishness;  stitching  pains  in  stomach

<  ;  pains  and  vomiting;  involuntary  passages  of  stool
and  urine;  much  thirst  for  water;  involuntary  urination;
erections;  seminal  emissions; clammy  sweats; croup

<  ;  cough  dry;  dryness  of  throat;  cough  <  ;  suffocative
feeling ;  incessant  barking  cough  ;  oppression  of  chest ;
cramp  in  chest;  expectoration  of  blood  <;  chilliness
with  stretching  of  back  and  legs;  restless  sleep  ;  tearing
in  1.  shoulder ;  pain  prevents  sleep ;  heat  in  arm  <  ;
tearing  pains  in  joints  and  fingers  <;  involuntar}^  uri-
nation ;  restless ;  after  waking  cannot  fall  asleep  again  ;
cannot  fall  asleep  before  10  o'clock  ;  chill ;  heat  without
thirst  and  sweat ;  exostosis  <  ;  itching  of  spots  on  skin

<  ;  hands  very  cold  and  bluish.
Before  midnight :  restless.

After  midnight:  sweat  lasting  till  morning.
'^  Temperature  and  Weather. Heat:  boring  in  teeth  <;
cannot  tolerate  near  back  ;  itching  of  spots  of  skin  <.
Hot  drinks:  flatulent  colic  >.
Hot  room  :  head  affected  ;  r.  eye  affected.


381  PHOSPHORUS.

Heat  of  stove :  does  not  >  chilliness.

Warmth :  tearing  in  teeth  >  ;  pain  in  stomach  or  hypo-
chondrium.

Warm  weather :  diarrhcea.

In  warm  room :  sick-headache ;  chilliness.

Warm  food:  pain  in  teeth  <;  diarrhoea  <.

Warm  drinks:  cough  <  ;  cause  face  and  arms  to  become
red  ;  as  if  she  could  not  get  her  breath.

Warm  water :  hands  in,  cause  toothache.

Being  covered  :  <  pains  in  navel.

Must  uncover  head  :  painful  heat  in  scalp.

Aversion  to  uncovering  :  chilliness.

Warmly  wrapped  up  day  and  night:  neuralgia  in  head.

When  water  becomes  warm  in  stomach  it  is  thrown  up.

From  warm  to  cold  air:  cough  <.

Air  :  cancer  mammse  <  by  exposure-
Open  air:  vertigo  <  ;  pain  in  forehead  >  ;  stuffed  feeling
•  in  nose  >  ;  hemicrania  >  ;  weight  on  head  and  press-
ure on  upper  lids;  pricking  stinging  in  teeth  <  ;  walk-
ing causes  tearing  in  labia ;  cough  <  ;  oppression  of
chest;  intolerable;  takes  cold  easily.

Change  of  temperature :  tension  of  face  <  ;  cough  <.

In  wind : profuse  lachrymation  ;  neuralgia  of  head  <  ;
*  felt  something  strike  icy  cold  in  centre  of  lower  chest.

During  a  thunderstorm  :  anxious  ;  before,  cough.

Tropical  climate :  disordered  livers  in  men  invalided  from.

Water:  does  not  relieve  dryness  in  throat  and  lips;  drink-
ing cold  >  cholera ;  cold  >  burning  thirst.

Getting  M^et:  myelitis.

Washing  clothes:  causes. congestion  to  head.

Cold  wet  weather:  tearing  in  teeth  and  cheek.

Cold :  boring  in  teeth  <  ;  desire  for  drinks ;  food  >  ;  pain
in  stomach  ;  exposure,  causing  drawing  tensive  pain  in
limbs ;  weather,  rheumatism  <.

Cool  air:  >  vertigo,  exhaustion  and  bewilderment  of  brain  ;
throbbing  in  teeth  much  <  ;  bronchitis  <.

Cold  water:  hands  in,  cause  toothache;  hemorrhage  from
stomach  >  ;  burning  in  stomach  >.

Taking  anything  cold  into  mouth :  pain  in  teeth  and
cheek  <.

Cold  washing:  throbbing  in  forehead  >  ;  weight  of  head
and  pressure  on  upper  lids  >  ;  always  increases  or  pro-
vokes pain  in  teeth.

Ice  or  very  cold  drinks :  >  vomiting ;  diarrhoea  >  ;
cough  <.

From  taking  cold  over  washtub:  tearing  in  head  and  face.

From  taking  cold:  head  affected.
*°  Fever, i Coldness  of  limbs.


PHOSPHORUS.  382

I  llcy  coldness  of  hands,  knees  and  feet,  even  in  bed.

iChilliness:  towards  evening;  internal,  several  after-
noons, for  half  an  hour  or  an  hour ;  in  evening,  on  fall-
ing asleep;  every  evening,  with  shivering,  without
thirst;  great  anxiety  in  evening;  evenings  rigors,  diar-
rhoea and  aversion  to  uncover;  internal,  afternoons,
with  sensation  of  hot  water  in  stomach ;  not  >  by  heat
of  stove.

iChill:  generally  only  in  evening;  no  thirst;  <  from
•uncovering;  veins  on  hands  swollen;  from  evening
until  midnight,  with  great  weakness  and  sleep;  at
night,  alternating  with  heat ;  with  diarrhoea ;  descends,
heat  ascends  back;  r.  sided;  >  drinking  and  eating
(accompanying  debility).

■  Flushes  all  over,  beginning  in  hands.

I  Heat:  sensation  of;  with  anxiety  and  burning  in  face
and  hands,  afternoon  and  evening ;  from  stomach  into
chest  and  throat;  causes  frequent  waking;  rising  into
chest;  running  up  back;  with  desire  to  sleep ;  at  night,
without  thirst  and  sweat,  from  which  he  frequently
woke;  of  cheeks;  glowing  of  one  or  other  cheek;  in
afternoon;  with  thirst;  with  desire  for  drink  without
thirst.

■  Sweat:  anxious;  profuse  over  whole  body ;  very  profuse

on  slight  exertion ;  all  over,  every  morning  exhausting
him  ;  in  morning  in  bed  ;  during  sleep,  after  midnight,
lasting  till  morning,  without  thirst;  with  feeling  of
anxiety,  tow^ards  morning;  on  head  and  hands,  fre-
quently alternating  with  transient  coldness;  mostly
on  head,  hands  and  feet,  with  increased  urine ;  only
'  on  forepart  of  body;  clammy;  cold,  clammy;  smells

of  sulphur.

■  ■Profuse  night  sweat,  <  during  sleep. ^Phthisis.

■  Intermittent  fever:  heat  at  night  beginning  in  stomach  ;

faint  and  hungry;  then  chilly,  followed  by  internal
heat, especially  in  hands,  external  cold  continuing;  apt
to  become  remittent  or  typhoid,  or  a  remittent  fever
takes  on  after  a  time,  or  after  partial  or  complete  sup-
pression, an  intermittent  type,  usually  the  quotidian.

■  Typhoid  forms  of  fever;  typhoid  and  typhus,  with  im-

pending paralysis ;  soporous  condition,  dry  black  lips
and  tongue  and  open  mouth.
I  I  Evacuations  brown,  dark-green,  grey,  black,  like  coffee-
grounds,  like  tea,  of  decomposed  blood,  w^atery  and
streaked  with  blood;  pressing  or  throbbing  pain  in
forehead ;  early  and  rapid  prostration ;  face  pale ;
sunken;  eyes  dim,  lustreless;  tongue  white,  coated  with
mucus;  constant  thirst;  region  of  stomach  tense,  sensi-


383  PHOSPHORUS.

live  to  pressure;  nausea;  vomiting  of  mucus  and  bile
abdomen  bloated; meteoric  distension; audible  rum
bling  in  abdomen  on  motion  ;  ileo-csecal  region  painful
urine  scanty,  turbid,  jumentous,  depositing  a  mucous
sediment,  without  getting  clear  after  doing  so  ;  in  some
cases  urine  may be clear; at  this  stage  respiratory
organs  not  much  affected;  dry,  annoying  cough;  ex-
pectoration transparent  sticky,  tough,  adherent;  as  rae-
teorism  increases,  respiratory  symptoms  become  more
pronounced; pulse rapid,  weak, 100-110; skin hot,
frequently covered with sweat, but without relief;
sleeplessness ;  aroused  from  sleep  by  frightful  dreams.
^Typhoid  fever.

I  I  Hot,  dry  skin  ;  pulse  120,  full ;  tongue  coated  ;  abdomen
sensitive  during  first  stage;  stool  frequent, bloody, look-
ing like  meat  washings;  tongue  cracked,  bright-red  at
edges. ^Typhoid  fever.

I  I  On  fourteenth  day  of  bilious  fever  great  prostration ;
singultus;  difficult  deglutition;  audible  descent  of
fluids  when  drinking;  somnolence;  rattling  breathing,
without  sufficient  strength  to  expectorate;  body  dry,
weak,  emaciated  ;  pulse  rapid,  weak  ;  cold  extremities ;
cold, clammy  sweat  on  face;  eyes  dim,  dull,  ulcerated;
smooth,  red,  dry  tongue. ^Typhoid.

iTj^phoid  fever:  with  oppression  of  chest  and  difficult
respiration;  stitches  in  pleura;  racking  cough  with
thick,  yellow  or  reddish  expectoration;  frequent,  pain-
less diarrhoea,  with  meteorism  or  rumbling  in  abdo-
men ;  lips,  tongue  and  nose  dry  and  brown  ;  bronchitis.

■  Typhoid  types  of  fever :  great  cerebro-spinal  exhaustion;

brain  and  spine  particularly  affected  ;  ashy  or  waxen
face;  tongue  covered  with  viscid,  thready  slime,  diffi-
cult to  expectorate,  it  seems  to  collect  on  teeth,  around
gums  and  on  tongue;  body  hot,  head  rather  cool  and
limbs  decidedly  cold  ;  congestion  of  both  chest  and  abdo-
men; breath  hot;  bronchial  catarrh,  pneumonia  or
pneumonic  infiltration  of  lungs;  burning  thirst,  <  from
3  to  6  P.M.;  >  drinking  cold  w^ater,  until  it  becomes  warm
in  stomach,  when  it  is  violently  ejected ;  liver  and
spleen  sore  to  touch  and  usually  enlarged ;  diarrhoea  as
soon  as  he  eats ;  stools  flaky,  dark,  often  bloody;  external
weakness  after  stool ;  continually  throws  off  bedclothes;,
puts  arms  out  of  bed  to  cool  off;  profuse  sweat  without
relief;  threatened  paralysis  of  lungs;  coma,  with  hot
breath  and  rattling,  as  if  a  large  quantity  of  phlegm
were  rattling  in  lungs ;  limbs  cold  and  covered  with  cold
sweat ;  pulse  scarcely  perceptible.

■  Yellow fever:  hemorrhagic  form  with  petechial  spots

and  hemorrhages  at  an  early  stage.


PHOSPHORUS.  384

I  I  Hectic  fever  :  loss  of  appetite ;  no  desire  for  work  or
even  amusement;  gradual  diminution  of  strength;
sleep  restless,  dreamy,  unrefreshing;  drowsy  during  day,
difficult  to  keep  awake  over  her  work  ;  short  cough,  pain
and  dryness  in  windpipe;  pale  face;  distinct  but  mod-
erate fever;  shooting  pains  in  forehead,  tinnitus  aurium,
general  lassitude;  indeterminate  pains  in  legs,  dryness
in  mouth  and  throat;  mucous  membrane  of  tongue
as  if  polished  away,  tongue  red;  lungs  become  rap-
idly involved,  with  suppuration ;  formation  of  cavi-
ties, and  purulent  exudation  into  cavity  of  thorax,  with
infiltration  and  ulceration  of  intestinal  canal,  with
chronic  diarrhoea.
*^  Attacks,  Periodicity.  Alternate :  laughing  and  weeping  ;
violent  delirium  and  consciousness;  fluent  and  stopped  '
coryza  ;  weariness  and  bulimia;  diarrhoea  and  consti-
pation; chill  and  heat;  sweat  with  transient  coldness.

Periodically  returning:  insupportable  pains  in  spine.

Ever}'^  half  minute :  expectorates.

Every  half  hour:  must  rise  at  night  to  moisten  throat.

For  half  or  three-quarters  of  an  hour  :  attacks  of  pain  in
epigastrium.

For  an  hour:  roaring  in  head  and  r.  ear.

Several  hours :  after  eating,  eructations  ;  sudden  constrict-
ing pain  in  epigastrium.

For  many  hours:  cold  extremities.

In  twenty-four  hours :  25  to  50  stools.

Every  morning :  copious  evacuations ;  nose  stopped  up ;
exhausting  sweat  all  over.

Every  day  for  three  hours  :  fingers  swell.

Several  times  a  day  :  vertigo ;  epistaxis.

A  day :  two  to  fifteen  stools.

Every  evening :  chilliness  with  shivering

Nightly :  attacks  of  fidgets  in  r.  leg  and  hip ;  tearing  in  feet.

From  morning  until  noon:  vomiting  with  sick-headache.

Nearly  every  night :  seminal  emissions.

Several  afternoons  for  half  an  hour  to  an  hour :  chilliness.

Several  successive  evenings :  anxiety  about  heart. .

Every  other  day :  headache.

For  three  days:  severe  pains  in  stomach  in  paroxysms.

Every  three  or  four  days:  hard,  dr}^  beaded  stool.

For  six  days :  r.  eye  red  and  waters.

Once  a  week: attacks  of  headache,  lasting  from  one  to
three  days;  hemicrania.

Every  ten  days :  menses.

For eighteen months :  swelling  of  r. tonsil ;  disease  of
rectum.


385  .  PHOSPHORUS.

For  five  years :  cephalalgia.

For  seven  years:  amaurosis  of  r.  eye.

For  eight  years :  chronic  diarrhoea.

For  ten  years :  shooting  in  r,  cheek.

For  twelve  years :  eczema.

Man}^  years:  headache;  hardness  of  hearing.
^'locality  and  Direction.  Right:  pain  in  side  of  head;
roaring  in  ear;  pain  in  ear  >  lying  on  side;  dilatation
of  heart  ;  as  of  a  black  veil  before  eye ;  amaurosis ;  par-
alytic affection  of  sixth  pair  of  nerves  of  eye ;  redness  of
eye,  waters;  swelling  of  eyelids;  eye  looks  small;  in-
flamed gathering  in  ear;  tearing  about  margin  of  orbit,
extending  under  ear;  shooting  in  cheek;  ulcer  on  zy-
goma; swelling  of  tonsil ;  enlargement  of  hypochon-
drium ;  fatty  degeneration  of  heart ;  lying  on  side
excites  cough  ;  stitches  under  ribs ;  cutting  from  ster-
num to  scapula;  acute  pain  in  chest;  percussion  dull
over  lower  portion  of  thorax  ;  lower  portion  of  lung  hep-
atized  ;  threatened  paralysis  of  lung;  pain  in  side  of  iliac
fossa;  disease  of  heart;  heart  considerably  enlarged;  di-
latation of  ventricle;  fatty  degeneration  of  heart;  stitches
in  scapula;  itching  in  axilla;  severe  pain  in  shoulder;
distressing  pain  in  arm  and  shoulder,  at  root  of  nail
of  little  finger;  itching  wheals  on  arm;  hip  joint  pain-
ful ;  pain  in  pelvic  region  ;  fidgets  in  leg  and  hip ;  swell-
ing of  upper  part  of  thigh ;  tumor  on  thigh ;  fungus
hfematodes  on  thigh  ;  ulcer  below  knee;  from  ear  to  top
of  head,  as  if  everything  had  stopped  and  would  fall
asleep;  lies  only  on  side;  chill;  impetigo  sparsa,  afFect-
ifig  leg.

Left:  anxiety  below  breast;  mouth  drawn;  cannot  lie  on
side  because  of  palpitation ;  headache  over  eye ;  pulsa-
tion in  temple;  cold  crampy  pain  on  whole  side  of
head;  intense  pain  in  eye;  pain  in  r.  ear  <  lying  on
side;  headache  <  in  side  through  eye  into  back  of
head;  exostosis  on  parietal  bone ;  incipient  amaurosis;
pressure  in  temple ;  white  pustule  on  outer  segment  of
cornea;  feeling  of  sand  in  eye;  twitching  of  lid  and  exter-
nal canthus  of  eye ;  rather  deaf;  stye  on  lower  lid  ;  ful-
ness high  up  in  nostril;  shooting  from  eye  to  vertex;
tearing  in  cheek;  painful  swelling  of  lower  jaw;  skin
over  jaw  red  and  tense ;  necrosis  of  lower  jaw;  pain  from
stomach  to  hypochondrium  and  then  in  shoulder ;
pains  from  stomach  to  temple;  turning  on  side  desire
for  stool ;  lying  on  side  diarrhoea  <  ;  pain  in  region  of
lower  ribs;  pain  in  ovary;  breast  extremely  sensitive;
fistulous  passage  in  breast;  side  of  thorax  elevated  dur-
ing breathing;  tight  feeling  in  ovarian  region;  stitches

VOL.  VII  r. — 25.


PHOSPHORUS.  386

under  ribs  and  in  chest;  excoriated  pain  <  side;  pain  in
lower  part  of  lung  <  ;  lying  on  side,  vesicular  murmurs
and  moist  broncliial  rales;  stitching  in  acromial  ex-
tremity of  clavicle,  thence  downward  through  lung  and
out  at  side  of  abdomen ;  dead  percussion  sound  on  side ;
numbness,  stiffness  and  coldness  of  arm  and  thigh ;  upper
third  of  lung  consolidated;  subclavicular  space  sore  to
touch;  hypertrophy  of  ventricle;  sensitiveness  of  mus-
cles of  back  to  pressure;  boils  in  armpit;  tearing  in
shoulder;  arm  painful;  numbness  and  pain  of  forefinger;
first  phalanx  of  thumb  as  if  in  a  vise ;  letting  arm  hang
feeling  of  rush  of  blood  to  forefinger;  first  and  second
fingers  swell;  first  finger  contracted  ;  bruised  feeling  at
root  of  thumb;  dislocated  pain  in  knuckles  and  wrist;
redness  on  extremity  of  thumb;  tumor  in  thigh  ;  pare-
tic condition  of  side  of  body;  movement  of  limbs  un-
steady; lying  on  side  causes  anxiety.
"^  Sensations.  As  if  about  to  die ;  as  if  immersed  in  hot  water ;
anxiet}^  as  if  below  her  1.  breast;  as  if  head  would
burst ;  as  if  he  had  been  lying  at  night  with  head  too  low ;
as  if  everything  had  stopped  in  head  ;  as  if  chair  were
rising;  as  if  he  would  fall  forward;  as  if  eyes  would  be
pressed  out;  as  if  a  weight  pressed  down  pain  into  eyes;
as  if  food  did  not  digest  properly  ;  as  if  there  were  pain-
ful nodes  under  scalp  ;  as  if  patient  were  pulled  by  hair;
as  if  head  would  burst;  as  if  something  had  exploded
in  head  ;  as  if  skin  of  face  were  too  tight ;  as  if  objects
were  covered  with  a  grey  veil ;  as  if  something  were
pulled  tight  over  eyes;  as  of  dust  in  r.  eye;  as  of  sand
in  1.  eye ;  eyeballs  as  if  large ;  as  if  eye  were  'swelled
and  pushed  out  of  orbit ;  as  if  something  lay  before  ears;
as  of  gauze  over  ears ;  as  if  foreign  body  were  lodged
in  ears ;  as  if  coryza  would  develop ;  as  if  nose  were
stuck  together;  as  if  everything  were  torn  out;  as  if
nails  were  driven  into  jaws;  as  if  tongue  had  been
burnt;  as  of  cotton  in  throat;  as  if  stomach  had  been
removed ;  as  if  something  were  pressing  heavily  upon
stomach;  as  if  a  heavy  weight  were  in  stomach;  stomach
as  if  freezing';  as  of  something  cooking  in  stomach ;  as
if  anus  were  open  ;  back  as  if  broken  ;  larynx  as  if  it
were  lined  with  fur  ;  as  of  skin  in  larynx  ;  as  if  a  piece
of  flesh  or  skin  were  hanging  loose  in  larynx;  as  if
something  in  middle  of  sternum  were  torn  loose;
chest  as  if  excoriated;  chest  as  if  stopped  up;  as
if  heavy  weight  were  lying  on  chest;  fulness  in  chest
and  throat,  as  if  from  eating  too  much  ;  as  if  air  were
forcibly  kept  out;  as  if  a  band  were  about  chest;  as  if
something  were  being  torn  loose  under  sternum;  chest


3S7  PHOSPHORUS.

as  if  eviscerated ;  as  if  heart  had  grown  fast ;  as  if  nar-
row band  encircled  body  and  lying  upon  heart;  anx-
iety as  if  he  had  committed  murder ;  as  if  a  great  weight
were  lying  on  middle  of  sternum ;  small  of  back  as  if
broken ;  coccyx  as  if  ulcerated  ;  back  as  if  would  soon
give  out;  pains  in  soles  as  if  she  had  walked  too  much;
as  if  soles  were  asleep ;  gait  as  if  he  were  not  sure  of
himself;  first  phalanx  of  1.  thumb  as  if  in  a  vise ;  as  if
bone  wo-uld  come  through  elbow ;  as  if  nail  were  being
pulled  out;  nates  as  if  suppurating;  as  if  legs  were
made  of  wood  ;  as  of  ants  creeping  in  limb ;  ankle  as  if
sprained ;  as  if  she  had  wrenched  foot ;  feet  as  if  bruised ;
as  if  she  had  walked  too  much  ;  as  if  feet  were  asleep  ;
limb  as  if  paralyzed  ;  as  if  skin  of  ankles  were  tense;  as  if
quicksilver  moved  up  and  down  spinal  cord  ;  back  as  if
crushed;  as  if  lifeless;  legs  feel  as  if  tliey  would  give
way  ;  as  if  he  had  not  slept  enough  ;  as  if  a  large  quan-
tity of  phlegm  were  rattling  in  lungs ;  mucous  mem-
brane of  tongue  as  if  polished  away.

Pain :  in  r.  side  of  head ;  in  centre  of  brain;  from  eyes  to
top  of  head;  in  recti  muscles;  in  bones  of  orbit  of  eye;
in  throat;  in  teeth;  in  back,  opposite  stomach;  in
stomach  and  bowels;  in  1.  side;  in  navel;  in  hypogas-
trium  ;  in  ovaries ;  down  inner  side  of  thigh  ;  in  sacrum  ;
in  larynx;  in  chest;  in  centre  of  lower  chest;  between
scapulae;  small  of  back;  in  sacral  region;  in  coccyx;
in  spine;  pains  in  soles;  in  1. ,  arm ;  in  hand;  in
stomach;  in  r.  pelvic  region;  from  knees  to  feet;  in
ankles;  through  whole  joint  and  feet  to  toes;  in  soles;
in  muscles  of  extremities ;  in  affected  parts ;  in  wind-
pipe ;  in  legs.

Intolerable  pain  :  in  larynx.

Insupportable  pains:  in  spine.

Excruciating  pains:  from  breast  into  chest;  in  whole
spinal  column.

Excruciating,  knifelike  pains :  in  stomach.

Intense  pain  :  in  whole  head  and  in  eyes.

Violent  pain  :  in  stomach.

Severe  pains:  in  head;  in  throat;  in  stomach;  in  1.
temple,  eye,  teeth  and  side  of  head  ;  in  back  ;  in  breast ;
in  muscles  of  r.  shoulder  extending  to  elbow.

Acute  pain  :  in  r.  chest;  in  lower  part  of  1.  lung;  in  heel.

Distressing  pain  :  in  r.  arm  and  shoulder.

Anguish :  in  chest.

Lacerating  pain  :  in  tumor  on  lip.

Tearing :_  about  lower  margin  of  r.  orbit,  extending  under
r.  ear,  in  cheek  bones  and  jaws;  in  teeth;  iii  labia;  un-
der sternum;  in  testicles;  in  1.  shoulder;  from  back  to
legs.


PHOSPHORUS.  388

Darting:  in  cheek  bone  and  jaw;  in  different  places.

Shooting:  from  one  temple  to  the  other;  through  eyes;
through  ears ;  from  1.  eye  to  vertex;  from  forehead  into
eyes ;  from  carious  tooth  all  over  bones  of  face  and  head ;
across  abdomen ;  from  rectum  up  spine  to  occiput ;  in
forehead.

Lancinating :  in  hemorrhoids ;  in  cancer ;  in  r.  side  of
iliac  fossa.

Cutting:  in  bowels;  in  anus;  into  chest ;  in  1.  ovarian  re-
gion ;  in  abdomen ;  from  middle  of  sternum  to  r.  scap-
ula ;  in  region  of  heart.

Violent  hammering:  inchest.

Jerking  pains:  in  cavities  of  teeth.

Throbbing:  in  forehead;  in  temples;  in  carious  tooth;
of  heart  extending  into  throat;  of  small  spot  between
scapulae  ;  in  back  ;  in  neck.

Boring :  on  one  side  of  head ;  in  eye  to  head ;  in  region
of  navel ;  in  forehead  and  root  of  nose.

Stitches :  in  liver ;  in  anus ;  in  mammge ;  from  vagina  into
pelvis;  in  larynx;  over  one  eye;  in  r.  side  under  false
ribs;  in  1.  side  beneath  ribs;  in  r.  scapula;  in  shoulder
blades.

Stitching:  in  cavities  of  teeth  ;  in  stomach  ;  from  coccyx  to
interscapular  region;  in  region  of  liver;  in  mammary
glands ;  in  abdomen ;  through  lungs ;  upon  acromial
extremity  of  1.  clavicle,  thence  through  1.  lung  out  at  1.
side  of  abdomen.

Neuralgia :  of  coeliac  plexus.

Gnawing  pain:  in  1.  forefinger  into  arm.

Sticking  pains:  in  chest;  in  epigastrium  ;  behind  sternum;
in  various  parts  of  chest.

Cutting-burning  pains  :  in  stomach.

Pinching :  in  bowels ;  high  up  in  chest.

Griping :  in  epigastric  region  ;  in  stomach.

Cramping  pain :  in  testicles.

Cold,  crampy  pain  :  on  1.  side  of  head.

Cramps :  in  stomach ;  in  rectum ;  in  calves ;  between
scapulae.

Contractive  pain :  in  pit  of  stomach,  thence  to  1.  hypo-
chondrium,  to  head  and  shoulder.

Constricting  pain  :  in  epigastric  region  under  sternum ;  in
throat ;  high  up  in  chest.

Excoriated  pain :  in  chest.

Bruised  pain :  in  periosteum  of  tibiae.

Sore  pain  :  in  both  nostrils.

Biting:  in  anus.

Stinging:  in  occiput;  in  tip  of  tongue ;  in  anus;  in  hands
and  feet ;  of  inner  parts.


389  PHOSPHORUS.

Smarting:  in  rectum;  in  front  of  throat.

Soreness:  of  mouth;  over  liver;  in  pharynx;  of  larynx;
in  chest;  in  trachea  and  bronchi;  in  lungs.

Pricking  pain  :  in  r.  thigh  ;  over  whole  body.

Burning:  in  forehead;  in  temples;  pain  in  brain;  in  lids;
in  eyes;  in  spots  in  eyeballs;  outside  of  tumor  on  lip;
on  tongue;  in  uvula;  in  oesophagus;  in  stomach;  in
rectum  ;  between  shoulders ;  at  anus ;  in  epigastrium  ;
of  hemorrhoids;  in  urethra;  behind  sternum  ;  in  chest;
between  scapulae;  in  spots  along  spine;  in  small  of
back;  in  small  spot  in  small  of  back;  in  neck;
thence  over  head  to  forehead;  in  palms;  in  skin.

Heat:  in  top  of  head;  in  scalp;  in  eyes;  extending  up
back;  at  epigastrium;  running  up  back;  in  larynx;
in  chest;  between  scapulae;  in  spots  in  spine;  intense,
running  up  back ;  in  lower  part  of  back  across  renal
region  ;  in  paralyzed  parts ;  burning  of  head ;  in  face
and  hands;  from  stomach  into  chest  and  throat;  of
cheeks.

Pricking-stinging :  in  teeth.

Tingling  soreness  and  rawness :  in  air  passages.

Dislocated  pain :  in  1.  knuckles  and  wrist.

Pressive  pain :  above  eyes;  in  temples;  in  forehead  and
root  of  nose ;  in  upper  part  of  sternum  ;  about  heart ;
<  under  sternum.

Dull  pain:  from  forehead  to  root  of  nose;  stupefying,  in
head;  deep  in  eyes;  in  renal  region  ;  between  scapulae.

Rheumatic  pains:  in  arms.

Drawing:  on  one  side  of  head ;  in  jaws  ;  root  of  nose,  eyes,
temples;  in  stomach;  paralytic, in  shoulder  and  arm  ;  in
joints  of  elbows  and  hands  and  in  fingers ;  in  back  and
legs.

Dragging :  in  small  of  back.

Aching:  in  sacral  region;  in  eyes;  in  forehead  and
orbits ;  in  stomach ;  in  gastric  region ;  in  hepatic  re-
gion ;  distress  in  lumbar  region ;  in  cardiac  region ;  in
thumb.

Sensitiveness:  over  sacrum  and  kidneys;  of  larynx;  in
region  of  liver.

Painfulness:  of  stomach;  of  cord.

Contraction:  in  larynx  and  trachea.

.Constrictive  sensation:  under  sternum  ;  spasm  in  chest;
in  larynx;  across  chest.

Pressure:  from  forehead  to  eyes;  on  upper  lids;  in  chest;
in  epigastric  region;  in  gastric  region ;  at  cardiac  ori-
fice of  stomach  ;  in  upper  part  of  chest;  in  pit  of  stom-
ach; in  chest;  in  middle  of  sternum;  upper  part  of
sternum  ;  in  whole  spine.


PHOSPHORUS.  390

Tension:  in  face;  in  cheek  bones  and  jaw;  over  region  of

bladder;  inchest;  in  tendons  of  flexor  muscles  of  legs  ;

in  tendo-achillis.
Tightness:  in  prsecordial  region;  in  chest;  in  1.  ovarian

region  ;  of  chest ;  across  upper  third  of  lungs.
Weight: in forehead; in  larynx; in centre  of lower

chest;  in  whole  spine.
Heaviness:  in  head;  in  lids;  in  chest;  in  spine;  in  lower

extremities;  in  hollows  of  knee;  of  feet;  of  hands.
Irritation:  in  larynx  and  trachea.
Fulness :  in  nose ;  in  stomach  ;  of  chest.
Oppression:  in  epigastric  region;  in  stomach;  in  chest.
Dulness:  in  head.
Stuffed  feeling :  in  nose.
Pulsation:  in  temples;  in  occiput;  in  tumor  on  head;

annoying,  of  heart;  in  spine.
Twitching :  of  feet.
Strained  feeling :  in  eyes.
Scraping :  in  pharynx.
Scratching :  in  throat.
Rawness:  in  pharynx  ;  in  larynx  and  bronchia;  in  chest;

of  lungs.
Roughness:  in  pharynx  ;  of  larynx.
Tickling:  in  ear; in  larynx; in  throat; in  chest; at

throat  pit.
Dr3mess : in  nose; lips  and  throat;  mouth  of  uvula;  of

skin  of  larynx; burning,  in  throat;  in air  passages;

in  windpipe.
Empty feeling : across abdomen ; in abdomen ; in

stomach.
Trembling:  of  legs;  all  over;  of  limbs.
Relaxed  feeling:  in  abdomen.
Weakness:  in  head; in  sacral  region; of  internal  recti

muscles; in stomach and abdomen; at  junction of

lumbar  and sacral  vertebrse ; of  back ; of  limbs ; of

legs;  of  upper  arm;  in  knees.
Weariness :  of  lower  extremities  ;  of  feet.
Fidgets:  in  r.  leg  and  hip.
Paralyzed  feeling:  in  feet;  in  whole  body.
Going-to-sleep  feeling :  in  arms,  hands,  fingers  and  toes.
Stiffness:  in  brain;  in  recti  muscles;  in  eyes;  of  1.  arm

and  thigh;  in  nape  of  neck;  of  back; rheumatic,  of

knees.
. Numbness: in  sacral  region; in  limbs;  of  1.  arm  and

thigh;  of  extremities;  of  fingers; of  1.  forefinger; in

hands;  of  toes;  of  whole  body.
Itching:  on  scalp;  of  pimples  on  scalp;  in  lids;  in  ears;

outside  of  tumor  on  lip;  in  anus;  violent  in  r.  axilla;


391  PHOSPHORUS.

eruption  on  lower  part  of  forearm  and  hands;  wheals
on  r.  arm;  of  both  legs;  over  whole  body;  of  eczema.

Formication :  in  limbs;  from  back  to  legs.

Coldness:  in  cerebellum; in  stomach; in  abdomen; of
hands  and  feet ;  of  1.  arm  and  thigh ;  of  hands  and  arms  ;
of  legs  and  feet.
*'  Tissues. I  lEmaciation  ;  extreme,  rapid  ;  is  reduced  almost
to  a  skeleton.

■Atrophy  of  cliildren;  child  overtall,  slender,  emaciated,
big-bellied ;  faoe  pale,  almost  waxen ;  delicate  eye-
lashes, soft  hair,  rapid  breathing;  diarrhoea  with  dry
cough  ;  child  often  awakens  at  night,  hot  and  restless,
and  will  drop  off  to  sleep  if  fed  ;  irascible,  vehement,
susceptible  to  external  impressions  and  to  electrical
changes  in  atmosphere.

Suitable  to  young  people  with  blonde  hair,  blue  eyes,
delicate  skin,  slender  stature,  with  cachectic  cough,  diar-
rhoea, frequent  exhausting  sweats,  great  debility,  with
orgasm  of  blood  -,  palpitation  of  heart  or  oppression  of
chest  after  exercise;  copious  stools,  pouring  away  like
water  from  a  hydrant,  with  great  exhaustion;  glandular
swellings, suppuration;  appetite  good;  craves  cold  food,
ice  cream,  etc.

1 1  Chlorosis,  anaemia:  with  too  rapid  growth;  with  excess-
ive muscular  debility,  but  without  loss  of  adipose
tissue,  in  patients  with  precocious  puberty;  deep-seated
chronic  cases,  with  tubercular  diathesis;  brought  on
by  depressing  mental  influences,  or  by  exhausting
bodily  causes;  puffiness  around  eyes;  dry,  hacking
cough ;  great  weakness  in  sexual  organs,  consequent
upon  previous  irritation  of  these  parts;  leucorrhoea  of
whitish,  watery  slime,  especially  profuse  during  menses,
sometimes  acrid  and  corroding;  total  loss  of  energy  in
all  organic  functions  of  body.

Blood  when  drawn  seemed  very  pale,  and  under  micro-
scope exhibited  only  about  twice  as  many  red  as  white
corpuscles.

II  Ebullitions  and  congestions.

]^g=^  Slight  wounds  bleed  much.

I  I  Hemorrhages  :  profuse;  frequent  and  profuse,  pouring

out  freely,  then  ceasing  for  a  time  ;  from  free  surface
and  from  tissues;  from  various  parts  of  body,  hsemop-
tN^sis,  bleeding  of  gums,  hemorrhoids ;  metrorrhagia,
etc.;  blood  very  fluid  and  difficult  to  coagulate ;  vica-
rious, from  nose,  stomach,  anus,  urethra;  associated
with  Bright's  disease  ;  from  internal  organs.

I I  Purpura  hsemorrhagica.

I  I  Expectoration  of  bloody  saliva ; small  spots  of  extra-


PHOSPHORUS.  392

vasated  blood  all  over  body ;  least  hurt  immediately
followed  by  a  large  black  spot  of  extravasated  blood  ;
any  little  scratch  bled  profusely  and  continuously ;  acci-
dental scratch  of  pin  would  bleed  so  as  to  saturate  cloth
after  cloth  ;  little  red  points  on  tongue  and  on  whole
buccal  cavity  oozing  continuously;  blood  settled  be-
neath conjunctiva  so  that  eyes  appeared  entirely  blood-
shot; breath  peculiarly  offensive;  discharge  from  mouth
of  bloody  saliva  filled  with  shreds  of  decomposed  or
disorganized  blood;  pulse  regular  but  quick;  even
ordinary  handling  would  leave  marks  on  fingers,  as  if
she  had  been  struck  violently,  and  these  spots  were
inclined  to  extend  indefinitely;  slight  knock  near  eye
involved  whole  eye  and  surroundings  in  a  black,  un-
sightly spot;  all  the  secretions  were  bloody;  nose-
bleed from  exertion  and  especially  from  straining  at
stool ;  blows  much  blood  from  nose;  swollen  and  easily
bleeding  gums;  discharge  of  blood  from  rectum  with
stool;  great  weakness,  tottering  gait.  ^Purpura  ha3mor-
rhagica.

■  Large  number  of  petechia  over  body,  especially  about

soft  parts ;  hemorrhagic  patches  and  streaks  on  tongue
and  in  cavity  of  mouth ;  hemorrhages  from  nose  and
mouth  without  cause ;  hawks  and  coughs  up  much
blood,  particularly  after  awakening  from  sleep,  which
usually  is  short;  discharge  of  blood  with  stool;  feces
coated  with  blood  ;  debility. (^Purpura  heemorrhagica.

I  I  Red  spots  streaks  over  whole  body,  particularly  on  parts

covered  with  clothing;  face  and  hands  free  from  pete-
chia; epistaxis,  frequent,  without  cause,  or  after  a
sudden  movement;  occasional  bleeding  of  gums.  6'Pur-
pura  hsemorrhagica.

I I  Fungus  hgematodes.

1 1 Fatt J' degeneration  of  liver,  heart,  kidneys,  etc.;  anaemia.
I  Dropsy  of  face,  hands  and  feet.
-  I  Dropsy  after  scarlet fever;  urine  deposits  a  grey  sandy

sediment; scrotum and penis enormously  swollen;

general anasarca, which compels him  to sit erect;

albuminuria.
llMucous  membranes  pale;  increased  secretion  of  mucus.

■  Inflammation  with  stinging  of  inner  parts.

■  ■Lax  muscular  system;  muscles  flabby  ;  fatty  degenera-

tion.

■  Rheumatic  stiff'ness  with  morning  aggravation.

■  Rheumatism:  drawing,  tearing,  tight  feeling  in  affected

part;  headache,  vertigo;  <  from  cold  weather;  affects
chest  with  oppression,  cough,  dyspnoea,  forcing  patient
to  sit  up  (endocarditis).


393  PHOSPHORUS.

I  Sprains;  joints  easily  dislocated.

I  Pains  in  various  joints  and  muscles,  >  by  moving.

I  iSwelling  of  bones  ;  necrosis  (lower  jaw).

■  Exostoses,  especially  of  skull;  tearing,  boring  pains;  <

at  night.
I  Hip  joint  diseased  ;  oozing  a  watery  pus.
iHydrocephaloid.

■  Erectile  tumors.

I  Polypus :  of  nose  or  ears.

■  Hard  swellings  here  and  there  on  body.

■  Scrofulous,  glandular  swellings.

■  Glands  enlarged,  especially  after  contusions;  glandular

affections  in  weak  cachectic  individuals  suffering  from
diarrhoea  and  colliquative  sweats.

■  Lymphatic abscesses,  full of  fistulse; callous feeling;

hectic  fever;  pus  copious  and  yellow,

■  Wounds  which  appear  to  have  healed  break  out  again

and  bleed.

■  Scirrhous  tumors.

■  Open  cancers  and  polypi  bleed  profusely  on  slight  provo-

cation.
I  Lipoma:  encephaloma;  colloid  cancer.

■  Cancer:  medullary;  fungus  hsematodes;  of  stomach  with

coffee- ground  vomit.

■  Syphilis:  falling  out  of  hair,  leaving  exposed  ulcers  on

scalp,  implicating  cranial  bones;  syphilitic  psoriasis  on
palms  and  soles;  syphilitic  roseola;  squamous  erup-
tions; mercurio-syphilitic  ulcers  on  prepuce;  bone
pains  and  exostoses.
^''  Touch.  Passive  Motion.  Injuries.  Touch :  on  swollen
parts  of  head  causes  excruciating  pain ;  nodes  under
scalp  painful;  sore  pain  in  both  nostrils;  swelling  of
nose;  darting  in  face;  pimples  on  face  cause  excruciat-
ing pain ;  tumor  breaks  into  fissures ;  tumor  swelled  up ;
stomach  painful ;  abdomen  very  sensitive  ;  <  boring
pain  in  navel ;  supersensitive ;  1.  breast  extremely  sen-
sitive ;  excruciating  pains  in  chest ;  larynx  sensitive  ;  1.
subclavicular  space  sore  ;  spine  very  sensitive;  swelling
on  thigh  sensitive  ;  periosteum  of  tibiae  sore ;  some  lum-
bar vertebrae  sensitive.
Pressure  :  >  feeling  of  something  before  ears  ;  periosteum
of  tooth  tender  ;  epigastrium  painful ;  region  of  pylorus
sensitive ;  cannot  tolerate  least,  gastritis ;  on  abdomen
<  suffocative  feeling;  external  >  pain  in  chest;  with
both  hands  on  epigastrium  >  sticking  pains ;  intercostal
spaces,  acute  pain  in  chest  <  ;  pain  in  chest  when
coughing  >  ;  dorsal  vertebrae  between  scapulae  sensi-
tive ;  muscles  between  processes  and  1.  scapula  sensitive;
morbid  sensitiveness  of  arm  ;  region  of  stomach  sensitive.


PHOSPHORUS.  304

Rubbing:  feeling  of  sand  in  eye  >;  burning  in  spot  in

back  >.
Friction :  >  paralysis.

Scratching :  itching  of  scalp  <  ;  causes  red  streaks.
Contusions:  glands  enlarged.
*^  Skin. lAnsesthesia  of  skin.

■  Formication  and  itching  in  paralyzed  parts.
I  I  General  itching  over  whole  body.

iBurning  in  skin,  or  burning,  itching  and  stinging;  rest-
less, compelling  change  of  position.

■  Remarkable  paleness  of  skin  and  mucous  membrane.
I  Yellow  spots  on  chest  and  abdomen.

M  Brown  irregular  spots  on  body,  small  or  extending
over  a  large  surface,  generally  on  throat,  chest,  back  or
inner  side  of  arms,  rarely  on  abdomen  or  legs;  they  are
not  beneath  epidermis,  as  are  true  liver  spots,  but  affect
epidermis  itself;  they  are  but  slightly  raised,  are  dull
in  appearance,  feel  slightly  rough  to  touch,  and  when
finger  is  passed  slowly  over  them  innumerable  small
wrinkles  are  formed  ;  at  times  itching,  particularly  at
night  and  from  heat;  if  patient  becomes  heated  redness
of  skin  appears  through  them  and  they  lose  the  brown
appearance;  at  times  they  are  slightly  scurfy;  appear
and  disappear  very  slowly.

I  iPtyriasis:  brown,  bluish-red  or  yellow  blotches  on  ab-
domen and  chest.

I  I  Reddish-brown  spots  on  skin.

I  I  Brownish  and  bluish-red  blotchlike  spots.

■  Hepatic  spots ;  freckles.

■  ■Jaundice: with anaemia,  brain  disease during  preg-

nancy, or  malignant  disease  of  liver.

■  ■Red  sanguinous  spots;  petechia;  purpura;  ecchymosis.

■  Red  streaks  after  scratching.

I  I  Hard  blotches  here  and  there.

■  Distended  veins;  hemorrhages.

■  8  Dry,  scaly  skin  ;  desquamation ;  dry,  furfuraceous  herpes.
I  I  Round  herpetic  spots  all  over.

■  Eruptions  dry,  even  if  pustular,  sometimes  burning  and

itching.
I  I  Impetigo  sparsa, affecting r.  leg ;  epidermis,  particu-
larly of  legs,  dry  and  frail,  could be  scraped  oft"  in
scales.

■  Psoriasis  on  knees,  elbows,  legs  and  eyebrows.
I  I  Lichen.

I  I  Small  vesicular  eczema  in  neighborhood  of  joints,
which  itched,  dried  up  rapidly  and  frequently  recurred.

I  I  Eczema  erythematosum  on  forehead,  following  confu-
sion of  head.


395  PHOSPHORUS.

I  I  Eczema  of  twelve  years  standing.

I  I  Pemphigus:  painful  hard  blisters,  full  to  bursting,  not
itching.

■  Urticaria,  hands,  arms  and  body  covered  with  itching

blotches.
I  I  Pimples  on  face,  in  bend  of  elbow  and  in  axillae.

I  I  Small  boils  on  nape  of  neck,  chest  and  thighs.
iFurunculosis;  tendency  to  formation  of  boils;  prevents

formation  of  styes;  small  purulent  collections  around
ulcer  ;  ulcer  after  boils  on  other  parts  of  body.

I I  Blood-boils.

I  I  Sore,  excoriated  spots  on  skin;  rhagades.

BPhlegmonous  inflammations;  chronic  suppurating  open-
ings with  hectic  ulcers ;  often  with  caries,  painless,  or
with  a  "  festering  "  sensation  ;  bleeding.

■  Fistulous ulcers  with callous edges; gnawing pain;

hectic  fever;  pus  fetid  and  badly  colored,  scanty,  and
again  is  easily  secreted.
I  I  Large  ulcer  surrounded  by  smaller  ones,  some  healing,
some  healed,  with  accompanying  eczema.

■  Fistulous  ulcers  with  high  edges,  from  exuberant  granu-

lations; purulent  discharge, thin  and  ichorous;  erysipe-
latous blush,  often  radiating  around  ulcer; burning,
stinging  pains  ;  hectic  fever,  with  night  sweat,  diarrhoea
and  anxiety  towards  evening.
Obstinate  ulcer  about  nail  that  would  not  heal.

■  ■  Ulcers  bleed  on  appearance  of  menses.

■  Fistulse  in  glands  and  about  joints.

I  I  Black  blood  oozes  from  an  old  cicatrix.

■  ■Open  cancers  and  poh'pi  bleed  readily;  fungus  heema-

todes.

I  I  Chilblains;  corns.

Leprosy,  later  stages;  brown  spots  on  an  even  base;  tuber-
cles on  trunk  and  buttocks;  thick  patches  on  face  and
arms;  discolored  bordt^s  around  white  spots;  tension
in  fingers  and  dulness  towards  the  ends.

■  Scarlatina:  with  suddenly  repelled  rash  ;  chest  affected  ;

typhoid  symptoms,  restless  yet  apathetic;  threatened
cerebral  or  pulmonary  paralysis;  rattling  in  chest, with
sweat  on  face;  sopor  with  dry  tongue,  loss  of  sf)eech
arid  hearing;  difficult  deglutition;  urine  involuntary ;
mouth  open;  burning  in  various  parts  compels  change
of  position  ;  parotids  inflamed  and  swollen  ;  slight  fluc-
tuation at  several  points;  submaxillary  gland  involved;
on  third  day  ominous,  coryza,  on  fourth  day  throat
swollen  and  congestion  to  head,  difficult  breathing,  con-
tinuance of  copious  coryza,  alarming  v/eakness  and  in-
creasing frequency  of  pulse,  during  night  hands  very


PHOSPHORUS.  396

cold  and  bluish  ;  oversensitiveness  of  all  the  senses,  and
yet  an  apathetic  quietness  and  "  don't  care  "  disposition.

iMeasles:  slow  and  scanty  development  of  eruption;  on
third  day  it  looked  pale  and  as  if  about  to  disappear ;
violent  and  very  exhausting  cough  ;  dry  cough,  with
desire  to  vomit  or  vomiting;  typhoid  symptoms,  with
loss  of  consciousness ;  watery  diarrhoea ;  tongue  coated
with  dirty,  thick  mucus;  black  lips;  debility;  typhoid
bronchitis;  loud  rattling  in  chest  when  breathing  and
coughing,  and  particularly  during  sleep;  pneumonia.

I  Variola  with  blood  in  pustules;  hemorrhagic  diathesis.

I  Repercussion  of  eruptions.

*^  Stages  of  Life,  Constitution.  iiTall,  slender  persons  of
sanguine  temperament,  fair  skin,  blonde  or  red  hair,
quick,  lively  perceptions  and  sensitive  nature.

I I  Young  people,  who  grow  too  rapidly,  are  inclined  to
stoop;  chlorosis;  anaemia.

1 1  Tall,  slender,  phthisical  patients ;  delicate  eyelashes,  soft
hnir.

I  iTall,  slender  (slim)  women  ;  disposed  to  stoop.

I I  Nervous,  weak  ;  desires  to  be  magnetized.

H  Hemorrhagic  diathesis  ;  slight  wounds  bleed  profusely.
Child  overtall,  slender,  emaciated,  but  big-bellied.
Girl,  set.  3  months;  nephritis.
Boy,  set.  16  months,  one  month  ago  vaccinated,  since  then

ill ;  diarrhoea.
Boy,  set.  26  months,  bronchitis.
Child,  set.  2;  previously  had  pneumonia,  followed  by  ce-

rebro-spinal  meningitis ;  amaurosis.
Child,  set.  2  ;  obstinate  vomiting.
Boy,  set.  2,  suffering  two  weeks ;  diarrhoea.
Child,  set.  2,  weak,  pale,  suffering  from  worms;  croup.
Boy,  set.  3 ;  tubular  pneumonia.
Girl,  set.  3,  weak ;  measles.
Boy,  set.  3 ;  scarlatina. ,
Girl,  set.  8;  healthy,  well  nourished;  purpura  hsemorrha-

gica.
Boy,  set.  9,  never  could  distinguish  anything  but  near  ob-
jects; amaurosis.
Boy,  set.  9;  palpitation  of  heart.
Girl,  set.  10  ;  erysipelas  of  face.
Girl,  a3t.  10;  slight  build,  brown  hair,  scrofulous,  during

second  week  of  scarlet  fever  ;  swelling  of  parotids.
Healthy  boy,  set.  10,  of  poor  family,  after  a  great  fright,

twenty-three  months  previously ;  involuntary  stool  and

urination.
Boy,  set.  10,  scrofulous  ;  asthma.
Girl,  set.  10 ;  pneumonia.


397  PHOSPHORUS.

Boy,  set.  4;  paralysis  of  rectum.

Girl,  set.  5  ;  otorrhoea.

Girl,  set.  5;  croup.

Child,  set.  6;  coxalgia.

Boy,  set.  6,  weak,  frequently  dark  red  spots  suddenly  ap-
pear upon  body;  fungus  hsematodes.

Boy,  set.  7,  troubled  with  worms;  croup.

Girl,  set.  7,  perfectly  healthy,  never  sick  since  born;  pur-
pura hemorrhagica.

Boy,  set.  8,  suffering  five  years ;  involuntary  stool  and  uri-
nation.

Boy,  set.  10,  strong,  well  nourished ;  purpura  hsemorrha-
gica.

Girl,  set.  11,  weak,  scrofulous;  typhoid  fever.

Boy,  set.  12,  good  constitution,  complaining  for  some  time;
spinal  affection.

Girl,  set.  13;  alopecia.

Girl,  set.  13,  two  of  her  family  had  died  of  consumption  ;
pulmonary  tuberculosis.

Boy,  set.  14,  three  years  ago  suffered  from  itch,  which  was
suppressed,  since  then  cough  and  digestive  disturbance;
diarrhoea.

Boy,  set.  14,  after  having  received  severe  nervous  shock
by  burning  of  house  in  which  he  lived;  convulsions.

Boy.  set.  15,  suffering  eighteen  months;  tonsillitis.

Girl,  set.  16,  sanguine  temperament,  gracile  build,  menses
have  but  recently  appeared  yet  are  profuse;  cardialgia.

Boy,  set.  IB,  gross,  suffering  eight  days;  diarrhoea.

Girl,  set,  16;  ansemia.

Miner,  set.  17,  slight,  dark,  scrofulous  history ;  incipient
tuberculosis.

Girl,  set.  18,  light  complexion,  blue  eyes,  hectic  flush,  father
and  several  members  of  family  died  of  consumption,

, suffering  six  months ;  cough.

Man,  set.  18,  formerly  robust,  caught  cold  after  dancing,
two  months  ago  ;  consumption.

Student,  set.  18,  after  suppression  of  itch  by  cold  bath ;
coxalgia.

Miss -,  set.  18,  gracile  build,  weak  chest,  transparent

complexion,  prominent  forehead ;  growth  on  thumb
with  hemorrhage.

Girl,  set.  18,  ill  more  than  a  year ;  about  a  year  ago  noticed
purple  spots,  about  size  of  shilling,  on  legs,  and  felt  very
weak ;  next  catamenial  discharge  scanty,  pale,  lasting
but  a  few  hours,  after  which  she  continued  weak,  lost
her  appetite,  had  headache  and  palpitation  of  heart ;  as
a  child  suffered  from  violent  attacks  of  epistaxis,  fre-
quent lienteric  diarrhoea,  profuse  flow  of  urine  for  sev-


PHOSPHORUS.  398

eral  days  together ;  from  twelve  to  fifteen  growth  was
very  rapid,  causing  weakness  and  fainting ;  pseudo-hy-
pertrophic  paralysis.

Miss  N.,  fet.  19,  paralyzed  in  infancy,  from  which  she  par-
tially recovered ;  arm  normal,  but  leg  small  and  weak
in  joints;  face  flushed,  body  well  nourished,  short  and
stout;  has  suffered  mentally  and  was  placed  in  asylum
many  months;  came  out  heart-broken  and  feeble-
minded; mental  disturbance.

Young  lady,  set.  19,  scrofulous  diathesis;  diarrhoea.

Boy,  set.  19,  father  died  of  phthisis;  pneumonia.

Girl,  set.  19,  ill  four  months;  hectic  fever.

Miss  W.,  set.  20;  asthenopia.

Woman,  set.  20,  married,  blue  eyes,  light  hair,  small  stat-
ure, thin,  first  attack  occurred  during  sixth  month  of
first  pregnancy;  pains  in  stomach  and  head.

Woman,  set.  20,  after  labor;  diarrhoea.

Girl,  set.  20,  slender  build  ;  amenorrhoea.

Man,  set.  20,  blonde  complexion,  delicate  build,  small  face,
flat  chest,  formerly  liad  fainting  spells,  after  cold  and
exposure  to  rain ;  hsemoptysis.

Girl,  set.  21,  short  stature;  apoplexy.

Man,  set.  21,  gracile  build  ;  swelling  of  lower  jaw.

Girl,  set  21 ;  nodosities  in  breasts.

Girl,  set.  22,  suffering  two  weeks ;  headache  and  vertigo.

Lady,  set.  22 ;  pale  but  healthy  complexion,  pretty  fair  con-
stitution, suffering  eight  years  ;  hemicrania.

Woman,  set.  22,  suflering  six  years ;  inflammation  of  nose.

School  teacher,  set.  22;  sexual  debility.

Woman,  set.  22,  brunette,  nervous  disposition,  tall,  slen-
der, has  nursed  three  children ;  mastitis.

Woman,  set.  22 ;  chronic  cough.

Man,  set.  22 ;  pneumonia.

Young  lady,  set.  22,  delicate,  had  severe  attack  of  pleurisy
four  years  ago ;  about  two  weeks  ago  had  an  attack  of
bronchitis;  double  pneumonia.

Woman,  set.  23,  graceful  build,  lively,  three  months  ago
delivered  of  third  child,  since  then  suffering;  mastitis.

Butcher,  set.  23,  scrofulous  during  childhood,  tendency  to
formation  of  boils  and  ulceration  of  skin;  capillary
bronchitis.

Girl,  set.  23,  well  built,  not  yet  menstruated,  after  dancing,
hsematemesis.

Girl,  set.  23,  well  in  other  respects ;  psoriasis.

Man,  set.  24,  tall,  slim,  small  boned,  pale  complexion,  of
reflective  disposition,  suffering  two  years  from  pains  in
head  ;  four  years  ago  had  itch  rapidly  cured  by  a  grey
ointment,  since  then  suffering;  glaucoma.


399  PHOSPHORUS.

Woman,  set.  24,  fine  skin,  mother  of  two  .children,  had
abscess  of  breasts  while  nursing  first  child  ;  after  fright,
anger  and  exposure ;  mastitis.

Man,  set.  24,  tall,  strong,  florid  complexion,  subject  to  con-
gestions of  head  and  chest,  had  pneumonia  and  an  in-
flammatory affection  of  heart,  since  then  suffering;
heart  disease.

Woman,  set.  25,  single,  choleric  temperament,  brunette,
twice  cured  of  same  affection  by  blistering,  cutaneous
irritation ;  aphonia.

Man,  set".  26,  lithographer ;  vertigo.

Woman,  set.  26,  thin,  spare,  suffering  six  weeks ;  facial
neuralgia.

Carpenter,  set.  26 ;  hoarseness.

Girl,  set.  28;  ulcer  of  stomach.

Man,  set.  28,  narrow-chested,  slender,  stoop-shouldered,
blonde,  suffering  several  w-eeks;  cough.

Woman,  set.  28,  after  exposure  to  heat  and  cold  ;  pneu-
monia.

Mrs.  B.,  set.  29,  confined  ten  days,  took  cold  ;  cough.

Man,  set.  30,  dark  eyes  and  hair,  suflering  many  years  ;
headache.

Mrs.  M.,  set.  30,  has  a  permanent  hard  protuberance  on  1.
side  of  head,  also  one  on  metacarpal  bone  of  1.  hand
and  one  on  r.  foot ;  congestion  of  blood  to  head.

Man,  set.  30,  robust  frame,  eight  years  ago  got  a  chill
while  in  arm}',  since  then  suffering;  prosopalgia.

Man,  set.  30,  slight  build,  health  at  no  time  very  good ;
cardialgia.

Man,  set.  30,  hard  drinker;  diarrhoea.

Man,  set.  30,  dark  complexion,  suffering  several  weeks ;
bleeding  from  rectum.

Man,  set.  30,  slight  build,  brunette,  since  fourteenth  year
addicted  to  sexual  excesses,  frequently  had  chancre  and
gonorrhcea  ;  impotence.

Woman,  set.  30,  choleric  temperament,  mother  of  four
children,  after  catching  cold  ;  uterine  affection.

Woman,  sot.  30,  suffering  six  months;  monorrhagia.

Woman,  set.  30  ;  dysmenorrhoea.

Woman,  set.  30,  servant;  fatty  degeneration  of  heart.

Man,  set.  30,  for  a  long  time  has  had  pain  in  arm ;  rheu-
matism.

Negro,  set.  31 ;  glaucoma  simplex.

Man,  set.  31,  well  nourished,  brunette,  eighteen  years  ago
had  typhoid  fever,  since  then  suffering;  dysecoia.

Woman,  let.  31,  sanguine,  choleric  temperament;  mastitis.

Woman,  set.  32,  mother  of  seven  children,  last  labor  short,
but  attended  by  great  pain  and  mental  excitement,  at-
tacked soon  after  getting  up;  diarrhoea.


PHOSPHORUS.  400

Man,  set.  32,  thin,  suffering  lialf  a  year;  tapeworm.

Woman,  set.  32,  slender,  suffering  four  years;  weakness  of
womb.

Woman,  set.  32,  ill  three  months;  disease  of  sympathetic
nervous  system.

Man,  set.  32,  large,  plethoric,  light  hair  and  eyes,  formerly
had  scrofulous  affection,  for  which  he  took  blue  pill  and
later  corrosive  sublimate  ;  fungus  hsematodes.

Woman,  set.  33;  affection  of  stomach.

Mrs.  v.,  set.  33,  suffering  since  second  week  of  confinement,
three  months  ago  ;  mammary  abscess.

Mrs.  S.,  set.  35,  suffering  five  years;  prosopalgia.

Woman,  set.  35,  ill  eight  years  ;  ulcer  of  stomach.

Joiner,  set.  35,  phthisical,  subject  to  attacks  of  pneumonia;
consumption.

Mrs.  — ,  set.  35  ;  pain  in  arm.

Gamekeeper,  set.  30,  few  months  ago  received  severe  chill
by  falling  into  water  and  being  compelled  to  remain
some  time  in  his  wet  clothes  ;  prosopalgia.

Brunette,  set.  36,  slender  build,  irritable,  easily  angered,
menses  appeared  at  nineteen,  gave  birth  to  child  14
years  ago,  menses  then  disappeared  for  six  3'ears  with-
out affecting  her  health,  seven  years  ago  epileptic  spasms,
after  which  menses  appeared  regularly ;  two  years  ago
menses  suppressed  by  cold  bath  ;  this  occurred  again  one
month  ago;  and  five  days  ago,  after  catching  a  fresh
cold,  menses  were  again  suppressed;  inflammation  of
superior  vena  cava.

Man,  set.  36,  medium  height,  brunette,  black  hair,  well
nourished,  suffering  ten  weeks;  diarrhoea.

Man,  set.  36,  good  constitution  ;  pneumonia.

Man,  set.  36,  hunter,  several  months  ago  fell  into  a  stream,
since  then  suffering;  rheumatism.

Woman,  set.  36,  seized  soon  after  her  marriage;  paralysis
of  legs.

Woman,  set.  37,  married,  eight  months  previously  caught
cold,  since  then  suffering;  aphonia.

Woman,  set.  38;  mastitis.

Man,  set.  39,  always  weak  after  mental  worry,  suffering  a
year;  prosopalgia.

Man,  set.  40,  usually  in  good  health ;  dysecoia.

Woman,  set.  40,  suffering  several  days;  cholerine.

Man,  set.  40,  suffering  eight  days;  cough.

Woman,  set.  40,  slender,  weak,  has  had  several  attacks  of
pleurisy ;  pneumonia.

Man,  set.  40,  weak  since  childhood,  married  ten  years,  no
children ;  paresis.

Man,  set.  40,  weak,  suffering  many  months;  impetigo
sparsa.


401  PHOSPHORUS.

Man,  set.  41,  mother  died  of  haemoptysis,  has  had  previous
attacks;  haemoptysis.

Man,  set.  42,  suftering  eighteen  days ;  diarrhoea.

Woman,  set.  42 ;  mastitis.

Woman,  set.  43,  dark  complexion,  bilious  temperament,
accustomed  to  hard  labor,  nursing  a  large  baby;  suffer-
ing two  months;  diarrhoea  and  vomiting.

Woman,  a^t.  43,  delivered  of  ten  children,  suffered  for
years  from  periodical  headaches  ;  monorrhagia.

Farmer,  set.  44,  accustomed  to  exposure,  two  years  ago
had  chill,  since  then  suffering  ;  neuralgia.

Man,  set.  44,  accustomed  to  exposure,  caught  cold  two
years  ago,  since  then  suffering;  rheumatism.

Sailor,  set.  44 ;  rhe-umatism.

Beggar,  set.  about  45 ;  tumor  on  lip.

Miss  L.  L.,  set.  about  45,  after  going  into  cold  wdnd,  six
weeks  ago  ;  cough.

Mr.  Pellman,  set.  46,  master  tiller,  strongly  built  and  of
good  constitution,  subject  to  rheumatic  and  gastric  dis-
turbances ;  paralysis.

Man,  set.  48,  suffering  from  hemorrhoids  ;  cardialgia.

Man,  set.  48,  suffering  eight  years;  diarrhoea.

Lady,  set.  48 ;  condyloma  of  vagina.

Woman,  set.  49,  choleraic-sanguine  temperament,  was
placed  in  an  insane  asylum  nine  years  ago,  suffering
four  weeks ;  mental  disturbance.

Man,  set.  49  ;  cough.

Man,  set.  50,  suffering  several  3'ears;  prosopalgia.

Man,  set.  50,  choleraic  temperament,  well  nourished,  a  year
ago  after  catching  cold  was  very  ill ;  cardialgia.

Tailor,  set.  50,  sharp-featured,  emaciated  man,  on  previous
day  ate  blood-pudding  and  cucumber-salad;  cholera.

Man,  set.  50,  suffering  two  months ;  cough.

Farmer,  set.  50,  twenty-three  years  ago  had  abscess  of
lung ;  affection  of  chest.

Man,  set.  50,  hard  worker  mentally  and  physically,  after
unusual  exposure  ;  rheumatic  neuralgia.

Man,  set.  51,  bilious  temperament,  ill  twenty  years,
thinks  it  resulted  from  a  blow  upon  1.  side  of  abdomen  ;
dysentery.

Man,  set.  52,  suffering  seven  years ;  amaurosis.

Man,  set.  52,  teacher,  after  suppression  of  eruption  on  face ;
ulcer  on  lower  lip.

Man,  set.  52,  mason  ;  pneumonia.

Man,  set.  53,  well  educated,  in  good  circumstances,  san-
guine, choleraic  temperament,  rather  weak  constitution,
suffering  several  years;  flatulency  and  diarrhoea.

Woman,  set.  54,  had  lost  three  sons,  from  eighteen  to  thirty

VOL.  VIII. — 26.


PHOSPHORUS.  402

years  of  age,  one  after  another,  with  tuberculosis,  since
that  time  has  suffered  from  obstinate  constipation,  sev-
eral times  causing  a  syphilitic  stercoralis;  amblyopia.

Woman,  set.  56,  suffering  since  childhood  from  con-
tracture of  joints,  and  for  last  twenty-eight  years  from
intermittent  fever,  for  which  much  quinine  was  given  ;
dysecoia.

Carpenter,  set.  58,  German,  when  young  had  gonorrhoea,
lasting  some  years,  followed  by  seminal  weakness,  later
in  life  tuberculosis,  of  which  he  seemed  cured  after  a
critical  diarrhoea ;  hydrocele.

Master  carpenter,  set.  5^,  suffering  one  year;  paralytic
rheumatism,

Mrs.  A.,  set.  about  60,  bilio-sanguinous  temperament,
strong  constitution,  lively  and  passionate,  suffering  sev-
eral years;  gastric  neurosis.

Man,  set.  60,  hearty,  strong,  muscular,  short  stature,  form-
erly healthy  and  leading  a  healthy  life;  cancer  of
stomach.

Man,  set.  60,  cabinet  maker,  ill  six  months;  diarrhoea.

Woman,  set.  60,  eight  years  ago  had  pneumonia,  later  suf-
fered from  a  catarrhal  affection  of  lungs  which  grew
<  after  an  attack  of  gastric  fever;  phthisis.

Farmer,  set.  60,  nervous  temperament,  six  feet  tall,  slender
and  having  a  decided  stoop,  health  poor  for  many  years,
four  months  previously  had  severe  attack  of  what  was
pronounced  by  an  allopath  neuralgia  of  heart,  pain
being  entirely  controlled  by  injections  of  Morphine,  has
not  recovered  from  this  attack  entirely  since ;  affection
of  heart.

Man,  set.  62,  formerly  had  gout,  apparently  in  articulo
mortis;  cerebral  oedema.

Man,  set.  62  ;  morbus  Brightii.

Clergyman,  set.  63;  chronic  jaundice.

Woman,  set.  63,  suffering  four  years ;  pain  during  stool.

Woman,  set.  64,  suffering  one  year;  cardialgia.

Lady,  set.  about  70  ;  noises  in  head.

Woman,  near  70,  no  history  of  syphilis ;  inflammation  and
ulceration  of  soft  palate.

Old  gentleman,  set.  70 ;  threatened  heart  failure.
. Man,  set.  71 ;  typhoid  fever.

Woman,  set.  74,  suffering  ten  years;  prosopalgia.

Woman,  set.  75,  w^eakened  by  previous  venesection ;
apoplexy.

Young  woman  ;  crazy  deliria.

Middle-aged  woman,  suffering  one  j^ear ;  exostoses  on  skull.

Young  lady,  tall,  slim  ;  stricture  of  oesophagus.

Mrs.  — ,  suffering  two  months ;  flatulency.


403  PHOSPHORUS.

Lady,  suffering  over  a  year ;  cardialgia.

Man,  very  stout,  plethoric,  worker  in  a  brewery,  suffering

three  months ;  hepatic  congestion.
Woman,  slender,  irritable,  married  two  years;  dysmenor-

rhoea.
Man,  suffering  eighteen  years ;  cough.
Man,  powerful,  after  suffering  from  cold  a  week  or  ten

days ;  pain  in  chest.
Infant  at  breast,  after  being  exposed  to  rain  ;  pneumonia.
Man,  suffering  for  years  ;  neuralgia  of  chest  walls.
Young  woman,  gracile  build,  suffering  several  years,  lately

took  large  doses  of  nitrate  of  silver ;  nervous  debility.
Woman,  suffering  seven  years; spasmodic  irritation  of

vagus.
Negro,  two-and-a-half  years  ago  had  a  bleeding  tumor

on  knee,  which  was  excised, after  which he slowly

recovered ;  fungus  h^ematodes.
Soldier,  had been exposed during the  war to  several

drenching  rains;  paralytic  rheumatism.
*^  Relations. An ti doted  by  :  Nkx  vom.,  Ooffea,  Terehinth.

It  antidotes: Terebinth.,  Rhus  ven.;  removes  ill  effects  of

camphor,  iodine  and  excessive  use  of  table  salt.
Compatible: Arsen.,  Bellad.,  Bnjon.,  Calc.  os.,  Carbo  veg.,

C Inchon.,  Kali  carb.,  Lycop.,  Nux  vom.,  Pidsat.,  Rhus  tox.,

Sepia,  Silica,  Sulphur.
Incompatible:  Caustic.
Complementary:  Arsen.,  Cepa.
Compare:  Acalypha  in  pulmonary  hemorrhage.


PHYSOSTIGMA.  404

PHYSOSTIGMA.

Calabar  Bean  ;  Eserine.  Leguminosse.

A  climbing  plant,  native  to  Africa.

The  alcoholic  tincture  is  prepared  from  the  finely  pulverized  bean.
Toxicological reports,  experiments  and provings  are  numerous. See  Allen's
Encyclopedia,  vol.  7,  p.  466.

"Clinical  Authorities. — Mental  disorder,  Kenyon,  Raue's  Eec,  1875,  p.  32,
from  Trans.  N.  Y.  S.,  1873-4,  p.  293;  Nervous  exdfability,  Nash,  Times  Ret ,  1875,
p.  37,  from  Trans.  N.  Y.  S.,  1875,  p.  176  ;  Cerebrospinal  meningitis,  Hale,  A.  H.
O.,  vol.  10,  p.  134;  Wells,  A.  H.  O.,  vol.  10,  p.  476;  3Ii/opia  (3  cases),  Woodyatt
Times,  Ret.,  1877,  p.  64;  III  effects  of  bloiv  upon  eye,  Dudgeon,  Org.,  vol.  3,  p.  267,
from  B.  J.  H.,  Jan.,  1880;  Eserine  in  c/laucoma,  Cant,  Smith,  Buzzard,  Fitzgerald,
Brailey,  Snell,  T.A.J.  H.,  1886,  p. 423;  Nervous  disorders  durinc/dentition,'Pen^e\d,
T.  A.  J.  H.,  1884,  p.  256;  Files,  Swan,  Hah.  Mo.,  vol.  9,  p.  267;  Sighing  during
menses,  Fiske,  Raue's  Rec,  1875,  p.  176;  Neuralgic  pains  in  limbs,  Kenyon,  Raue's
Rec,  1875,  p.  246,  from  Trans.  N,  Y.  S.,  1873-4,  p.  293;  Tetanus,  Helmuth,  Raue's
Rec,  1875,  p.  250,  from  Trans.  N.  Y.  S.,  1873-4,  p.  295.

^  Mind. I  'Uncommon  mental  activity.

I  I  During  climacteric  change,  after  severe  mental  suffer-
ing (lost  three  children),  palpitation  of  heart;  beats
irregular;  some  three  months  ago,  at  time  for  return  of
menstruation,  was  suddenly  taken  with  a  feeling  of  par-
tial faintness,  loss  of  memory,  face  very  red,  eyes  con-
gested, violent  pain  all  over  and  through  head,  constant
disposition  to  talk,  which  made  her  cough,  feeling  as
if  stomach  were  full,  even  up  to  pit  of  throat,  belch-
ing of  wind ;  sensation  of  heart  beating  hard  and  fu-
riously, yet  its  motion  could  hardly  be  discovered,  and
in  a  few  moments  a  violent  tonic  spasm,  lasting  nearly
an  hour;  every  muscle  in  body  rigid,  no  loss  of  con-
sciousness; when  passing  off  roaring  in  ears,  great  dysp-
noea and  excessive  soreness  of  muscles  of  whole  body!

I  I  Constant  pain  and  distress  on  top  of  head;  feels  as  if
she  must  lose  her  mind  and  become  insane  or  de-
spondent ;  constant  moaning;  thinks  she  is  a  castawa}^ ;

,  insomnia  with  desire  to  sleep ;  terrible  tlioughls  on
awaking ;  fears  she  is  crazy  or  will  certainly  lose  her
mind ;  weak  feeling  at  stomach  ;  sighing  respiration ;
constipation  ;  stools  light-cblored ;  map-tongue.  ^Nerv-
ous excitability.

I  I  Inability  to  stop  thinking  with  headache.


405  PHYSOSTIGMA.

*  Sensorium.  ll  Vertigo:  staggers  like  a  drunken  man,
with  constrictive  feeling  of  head,  with  torpor  of  body
and  fear  of  getting  crazy ;  with  sensation  of  wavering
in  brain  while  walking  ;  <  when  walking,  reading  and
going  down-stairs ;  dimness  of  sight ;  with  faintness.
'  Inner  Head- l  '  Intolerable  pain  over  both  orbits.

I  I  Dull  pressing  headache  for  nearly  six  months ;  compar-
atively free  from  it  in  morning,  on  rising,  but  <  from
least  mental  exertion,  until  at  night  after  retiring  it  is
almost  unbearable;  with  the  pain,  sleeplessness  and  ina-
bility to  stop  thinking;  in  course  of  an  hour  or  two
passes  off  suddenly,  with  a  sharp,  radiating  flash  of
pain,  sometimes  starting  from  occiput  and  passing  for-
ward, at  other  times  from  before  backward.

I  I  Intense  painful  pressure  in  vertex  and  temples;  pressure
in  vertex  extending  over  to  occiput;  pain  so  severe
must  lie  down.

I  I  Heavy  headache.

1  I  Congestion  of  brain,  with  epileptiform  attacks.

iCerebro-spinal  meningitis;  stage  of  general  tetanic
rigidity;  retraction  of  head;  severe  headache,  with
great  heat  in  head,  flushed  face;  vomiting  when  raised
up;  respiration  hurried  and  irregular;  pulse  100;  urine
scanty.

iCerebro-spinal  meningitis; primary  contraction  of  pu-
pils, secondary  dilatation  ; heart's  action  tumultuous,
feeble  and  irregular.
^  Sight and  Eyes. l Felt  film  over  eyes  and  blur;  objects
mixed;  after  which  dull  pain  over  and  between  eyes.

I  Eyes  feel  weak.

■  Dimness  of  vision.

llPain  after  using  eyes,  muscte  volitantes,  flashes  of  light,
twitching  of  lids  and  around  eyes;  myopia.

■  Acquired  myopia,  resulting  from  ciliary  spasm.

■  Partial  blindness,  on  attempting  to  write  was  unable  to

see  a  line ;  dimness  of  vision  ;  nystagmus.

I  I  Glaucoma;  may  relieve  intraocular  tension  tempo-
rarily, if  not  permanently,  by  acting  upon  muscular
tissues  of  vessels;  it  causes  a  contraction  in  their  calibre,
or,  as  is  more  probable,  by  drawing  iris  from  angle  of
anterior  chamber  the  filtration  passages  are  opened
and  excretion  thus  accelerated ;  should  not  be  substituted
for  iridectomy,  however;  useful  when  operation  must
be  postponed  for  some  reason,  or  when  tension  in-
creases after  iridectomy,  or  in  some  cases  of  secondary
glaucoma.

I  I  Woman,  set.  65,  lost  r.  eye  by  glaucoma;  1.  lens  be-
came cataractous, and preliminary iridectom}'- was


PHYSOSTIGMA.  406

made;  eleven  daj^s  after  patient  instilled  some  Atrop.
and  brought  on  an  acute  attack  of  glaucoma,  which  was
overcome  by  use  of  Eserine.

I  iMan,  set.  29,  received  a  blow  of  cane  on  r.  e3'e;  glau-
coma followed  ;  Eserine  was  instilled ;  recovery  com-
plete and  permanent.

I  I  Lady,  set.  70 ;  on  fifth  day  after  a  fall  became  glaucoma-
tous (Eserine).

I  I  Lady,  set.  64,  suffering  from  severe  neuralgia  of  supra-
orbital nerves,  had  been  treated  by  Gels.,  typical
symptoms  of  acute  glaucoma  were  found;  Eserine  disks
caused  immediate  improvement  and  in  six  weeks  com-
plete and  permanent  recovery.

I  I  Acute  glaucoma  in  a  woman  set.  35,  caused  by  frequent
instillation  of  strong  solution  of  Atroj:).  for  the  testing  of
refraction.

Causes  slight  twitching  of  lids,  soon  followed  by  contrac-
tion of  pupils  and  spasm  of  ciliary  muscle  from  its
action  as  an  irritant  to  the  oculo-motor  nerve  (antago-
nistic to  Atrop.,  which  causes  dilatation  of  pupil  and  pa-
ralysis of  ciliary  muscle  by  paralyzing  filaments  of  third
pair).

I  I  After  a  blow  upon  inferior  and  outer  part  of  1.  eyeball;
pupil  sluggish,  not  much  dilated;  could  not  see  objects
clearly  beyond  a  distance  of  four  inches  from  1.  eye  and
then  they  seemed  too  large.

I  I A  woman  had  a  cataractous  lens  dislocated  into  anterior
chamber  by  a  blow  on  temple  two  days  previously ;
there  were  conjunctival  irritation,  much  photophobia
and  lachrymation,  with  severe  throbbing  pain  in  eye
and  r.  side  of  head ;  tension  of  eyeball  increased ;  lens
after  some  difficulty  was  removed  ;  during  next  twenty-
four  hours  tension  remained  normal  and  wound  tended
to  heal  kindly ;  on  second  morning  following  removal
of  lens  complained  greatly  of  pain,  which  had  kept  her
awake  during  night  and  still  continued;  upper  lid  was
swollen  and  oedematous ;  borders  of  cut  for  a  space  of
two  or  three  lines  were  hazy  and  infiltrated ,  a  slight  stringy
and  mucous  discharge  had  occurred  and  tension  of  eye-
ball had  again  increased;  a  solution  of  Eserine  ^^O)  one
drop  every  two  hours,  was  instilled  into  eye,  and
twenty-four  hours  the  tendency  to  sloughing  had  ceased,
and  a  rapid  recovery  followed.

■  Prolapsus  of  iris:  from  injuries  even  when  whole  globe
is  vascular  and  irritated  and  sight  impaired;  from
sloughing  of  cornea.

I  I  Paresis  of  accommodation  after  diphtheria,  and  in  mus-
cular asthenopia.


407  PHYSOSTIGMA.

I  Astigmatism.

I  I  Continued  drawing,  twisting  sensation  in  eyes.
I  I  Sharp  shooting  and  drawing  sensation  in  r.  eye.
I  I  Drawing,  twisting  sensation  in  eyes  at  3  p.m.
I  I  Pain  in  eyeballs.

I  I  Eyes  sore  and  give  pain  when  moved  from  side  to  side.
I  I  Eyes  smart;  lids  feel  sore.

I  I  Internal  muscle  does  not  seem  to  do  its  work  rightly
and  axis  of  eyes  differs  in  each ;  eyes  felt  weak,  with
lachrymation,  especially  of  1.,  from  which he  suffered
when  having  usual  headaches.
I  I  Twitching  of  lid,  combined  with  spasm  of  ciliary  mus-
cle ;  twitching  around  eyes,  patient  cannot  read  without
much  pain,  frontal  headache,  <  from  light.
I  I  Cannot  bear  to  raise  lids.
I  I  Profuse  lachrymation.
^  Upper  Face, l Sensation  of  contraction  of  whole  1.  side  of

face.
'°  Teeth  and  Gums.  I  l  Nervous  children  whose  pupils  alter-
nately dilate  and  contract  and  who  have  much  trouble
w^hen  nursing  or  taking  food,  pain  coming  in  stomach  as
soon  as  they  begin  to  nurse,  but  passing  off  if  they  con-
tinue to  nurse.  ^Dentition.
"  Taste and  Tongue, i  i  Tongue  feels  sore  on  tip.

I  I  Smarting  of  end  of  tongne.
13  Throat. I  I  Feeling  as  if  a  ball  were  coming  up  to  throat.
'*  Appetite,  Thirst. Desires,  Aversions. Disgust  for  cold

drinks.
^^  Scrobiculum  and  Stomach, i  i  Dyspepsia  with  great  pain

immediately  after  eating.
*"  Stool  and  Rectum. 1 1  Constipation  of  years  duration,  from
atony  of  bowels.
I  I  Severe  piles  following  childbirth.
"  Female  Sexual  Organs. 1 1  With  disordered  menstruation.
I  I  Great  muscular  prostration,  with  continual  inclination
to  sigh  ;  leucorrhoea  <  by  exercising  during  day,  espe-
cially about  4  P.M.;  sighing  <  when leucorrhoea  is  <  ;
dread  of  cold  water.
■  Leucorrhoea  profuse,  with  great  weakness; milk-white,
bloody,  scanty,  stringy.
"  Voice  and  Larynx, Trachea  and  Bronchia. 1 1  Chronic

bronchial  catarrh,  <  by  talking.
^^  Respiration. ■  Respiration  :  labored  ;  yawning  and  sighing.
^'  Cough. I  I  Cough  with  inability  to  raise  mucus.
^^  Heart,  Pulse  and  Circulation, i Tremor  of  heart  due  to

emotional  disturbance;  violent  palpitation.
^'  Neck  and  Back, l  Spinal  irritation;  every  nerve  of  spinal
origin  is  irritated  under  this  drug;  pressure  of  finger


PHYSOSTIGMA.  408

between  vertebree  causes  patient  to  wince;  rigidity  of
muscles  from  meningeal  irritation  ;  trismus ;  tetanus ;
burning  and  twinging  sensations,  referable  to  spinal
column,  with  numbness  of  feet  and  hands  and  other  parts
of  body ;  crampy  pains  in  hands ;  sudden  jerking  of
limbs  on  dropping  off  to  sleep ;  muscles  of  back  rigid,
even  a  tetanic  condition  may  ensue.

I  I  Congestive  state  of  paralysis  of  spinal  cord,  with  tetanic
spasms ;  stiffness  of  neck,  with  a  feeling  of  drawing  and
tension;  back  very  weak,  unable  to  stand  erect;  stiff-
ness and  pain  down  spine,  with  inclination  to  bend  for-
ward, as  if  hard  to  sit  up  straight;  limbs  weary  as  after
great  fatigue. ^Myelitis  acuta.

I  I  On  walking  feeling  of  unsteadiness  from  knees  down-
ward so  that  he  must  tread  carefully,  especially  when
eyes  are  closed;  must  look  to  see  where  he  is  going;
wants  a  cane  to  support  himself ;  stiffness  in  recti  femo-
ris;  languor,  flatulence. ^Tabes  dorsalis.

I  I  The  will  is  strong,  but  a  difficulty  lies  in  the  way  of  car-
rying out  its  purpose ;  the  palsy  is  commonly  preceded
by  twitching  or  trembling  of  muscles ;  attacks  of  partial
blindness;  nystagmus;  trembling  all  over.  ^Multiple
sclerosis.
^*  Limbs  in  General,  i Neuralgic  pains  sometimes  in  upper
arms,  again  in  lower  limbs  whole  length,  but  more  se-
vere from  hip  to  knee,  more  frequently  on  r.  side;  pain
dull,  grinding,  crushing,  increasing  until  it  became  in-
tolerable; gradual  loss  of  motion  of  limbs;  long  standing,
obstinate  constipation ;  if  pain  began  at  any  hour,  it
always  continued  until  12  o'clock  following,  either
noon  or  midnight,  and  then  frequently  would  entirely
cease  within  ten  minutes.
^^  Rest.  Position.  Motion.  Must  lie  down :  pressure  in
head.

Unable  to  stand  erect :  from  weakness  in  back.

Inclination  to  bend  forward,  as  if  hard  to  sit  up  straight :
myelitis.

When  raised :  vomiting.

Motion  :  of  eyes  from  side  to  side  causes  pain.

Going  down  stairs :  feeling  of  wavering  in  brain.

Walking : feeling of wavering in brain ; feeling of
unsteadiness  from  knees  downward.
^*'  Nerves. '  l  Great  prostration  of  muscular  system;  progres-
sion difficult.

I  I  Trembling,  dizziness  and  loss  of  power  in  limbs.

iTremors  of  young  persons  from  emotional  or  physical
disturbances;  staggering  gait  as  if  drunk;  feeling  of
constriction  around  head  and  waist ;  feeling  of  weakness


409  PHYSOSTIGMA.

as  if  paralyzed;  passes  down  from  occiput  through
back  to  lower  extremities,  which  feel  as  if  asleep  ;  slight
exertion  causes  great  weakness. ^Myelitis.

I  I  Paralysis  agitans  as  long  as  structural  lesion  has  taken
place.

I  Progressive  muscular  atrophy.

I  Muscular  paralysis.

I  I  General  paralysis  of  the  insane.

I  Chorea:  of  r.  side,  tongue  feels  as  if  swollen  and  paralyzed.

I  I  Tetanus  in  consequence  of  a  slight  hurt  of  palm  of  hand
by  a  small  fragment  of  glass ;  no  sleep  ;  spasms  of  mus-
cles of  jaws  so  violent  that  a  breath  of  air  caused  by  a
person  passing  w^ould  induce  them.

■  Idiopathic  or  traumatic  tetanus.

■  Epileptiform  convulsions.

■  Cerebro-spinal  meningitis,  in  the  tetanic  stage.

^^  Sleep. I  I  Irresistible  desire  to  sleep;  soporific  sleep.
^^  Time. Morning:  headache  >.

3  P.M. :  drawing  twisting  sensation  in  eyes.

4  P.M. :  leucorrhoea  <.
Night:  headache  unbearable.

If  pain began  at any  hour it  always  continued  until
12  o'clock  following  either  noon  or  midnight.
^^  Temperature and Weather, i  i  Perfect  horror  of cold

water;  disgust  for  cold  drinks.
■"  Attacks,  Periodicity. Alternate:  dilatation  and  contraction
of  pupils.

Six  months:  dull  pressing  headache.

Years' duration :  constipation.
*^  Locality  and  Direction.  ■  Right :  glaucoma  following  blow
upon  eye ;  throbbing  pain  in  side  of  head  ;  shooting  and
drawing  sensation  in  eye;  neuralgic  pains  in  limbs  <  ;
chorea.

Left :  eye,  lens  became  cataractous ;  could  not  see  objects
clearly  beyond  a  distance  of  four  inches  from  eye ;  lach-
rymation  <  ;  contraction  of  whole  side  of  face.

From  before  backward  :  flash  of  pain  in  head.
*^  Sensations. As  if  stomach  were  full ;  as  if  she  must  lose
her  mind;  as  if  a  ball  were  coming  up  throat;  lower
extremities  as  if  asleep ;  back  as  if  paralyzed  ;  tongue  as
if  swollen  and  paralyzed.

Pain:  in  top  of  head;  in  eyeballs;  in  stomach;  down
spine.

Intolerable  p)ain  :  over  both  orbits.

Violent  pain  :  all  over.

Sharp,  radiating  flash  of  pain:  through  head.

Sharp  shooting:  in  r.  eye.

Throbbing  pain:  in  eye  and  r.  side  of  head.


PHYSOSTIGMA.  410

Intense,  painful  pressure:  in  vertex  and  temples.
Neuralgic  pains :  sometimes  in  upper  arras,  again  in  lower

limbs.
Crampy  pains :  in  hands.
Heavy  pain  :  in  head.
Drawing:  in  r.  eye;  in  neck.
Drawing,  twisting:  in  eyes.
Dull  pressing  headache.
Dull  pain :  over  and  between  eyes.
Pressure:  in  vertex.
Constrictive  feeling :  of  head  ;  of  waist.
Contraction  :  of  whole  1.  side  of  face.
Tension  :  in  neck.

Smarting:  of  eyes;  of  end  of  tongue.
Soreness :  of  muscles  of  whole  body ;  of  eyes ;  of  lids  ;  of

tip  of  tongue.
Heat:  in  head.
Wavering :  in  brain.
Distress:  on  top  of  head.
Stiflhess :  of  neck ;  of  spine ;  in  recti  femoris.
Weak  feeling:  at  stomach  ;  in  eyes.
Numbness:  of  hands  and  feet  and  other  parts  of  body.
^^  Touch. Passive  Motion. Injuries. Pressure:  of  finger

between  vertebrae  causes  wincing.
Hurt  in  hand  from  small  piece  of  glass  causes  tetanus.
Fall  caused  glaucoma.
Blow  upon  eye  caused  glaucoma.
^^  Stages  of  Life,  Constitution. Miss  K.,  set.  17  ;  myopia.
Miss  M.,  £et.  22;  mj^opia.
Man,  «t.  30,  student;  myopia.
Lady,  set.  49,  passing  througli  climacteric  change,  after

severe  mental  suffering,  having  lost  three  children  in

last  eight  years  ;  mental  disturbance.
Mrs.  C,  set.  65,  medium  size,  dark  complexion,  lost  two

daughters  six  years  ago  ;  nervous  excitability.
Mrs.  P.,  set.  69;  neuralgic  pains  in  limbs.
Young lady, after  injury to hand by piece of  .glass;

tetanus.
*^  Relations. Compare:  Agaric,  in  irritable  weakness  of  ac-
commodative apparatus  of  eye ;  Bellad.,  Conium,  Curare,

Gelsem.,  Passi flora,  Solanum.


411  PHYTOLACCA.


PHYTOLACCA.

Poke  Root.  Phytolaccacese.

Tliis  plant  is  indigenous  to  North  America  and  grows  abundantly  in  all  parts  of
the  United  States. It  is  also  found  in  the  north  of  Africa  and  south  of  Europe.

The  fresh  root  is  cliopped  and  pounded  to  a  pulp;  from  this  is  made  the  alco-
holic tincture.

Provings  by  Burt,  Fellows,  Marshall,  Hale's  New  Eemedies,  Cooley,  Horn.  Med.
Soc,  N.  Y.,  1870;  toxicological  reports  are  numerous. See  Hering's  Monograph.

CiiiNicAL  Authorities. — Difficult  dent'tion,  Merrill,  A.  H.  O.,  vol.  3,  p.  554;
Nash,  Hom.  Phys.,  vol.  5,  p.  122;  Stomatitis  ulcerosa,  Lilienthal,  A.  H.  O.,  vol.  4,  p.
256;  Syphilitic  affections  of  mouth.  Small,  A.  H.  Z.,  vol.  110,  p.  158,  from  Hom.
World,  Nov.,  1884;  Tonsillitis,  Guernsey,  Hom.  Phys.,  vol.  4,  p.  357  ;  Enlarged
tonsils,  Brown,  A.  H.  O.,  vol.  1,  p.  108 ;  Enlarged^  tonsils  and  nvula,  Haggart,  Med.
Journ.,  vol.  8,  p.  161 ;  Sore  throat,  Knerr,  Heiing's  Monograph,  p.  63  ;  Edmunson,
H.  M.,  vol.  9,  p.  358 ;  Lodge,  A.  li.  O.,  vol.  7,  p.  333 ;  Gregg,  N.  E.  M.  G.,  vol.  4,
p.  175;  Aphthous  patches  on  tonsils,  Stillman,  Times  Ret.,  1876,  p.  72,  from  Med.
Journ.,  1876,  p.  488 ;  Diphtheritic  sore  throat,  'Saah,  Hom.  Phys.,  vol.  5,  p.  122;
Diphtheria,  Scales,  Mass.  Trans.,  vol.4,  p.  657;  Times  Eet.,  1875,  p.  73;  Small,
R.uie's  Eec,  1873,  p.  84,  from  U.  S.  Med.  and  Surg.  Journ.,  vol.  7,  p.  151  ;
Hughes,  B.  J.  H.,  vol.  28,  p.  736;  Matheson,  Hom.  Rev.,  vol.  10,  p.  117  ;  Blake,
Bubb,  Reed,  Hom.  Rev.,  vol.  10,  p.  240;  Newton,  Hom.  Rev.,  vol.  14,  pp.  403-10  ;
Burt,  A.H.  O.,  vol.  1,  p.  35;  Lee,  A.  H.  O.,  vol.  1,  p.  183;  Eldridge,  A.  H.  O.,
vol.  4,  p.  435  ;  Merryman,  M.  J.,  vol.  6,  p.  37 ;  James,  Hom.  Phys.,  vol.  4,  p.  360 ;
Bayes,  Hom.  Rev.,  vol.  9,  p.  065  ;  Chronic  sore  throat,  Ussher,  Hom.  Rev.,  vol.  14,
p.  421  ;  Pharyngitis,  Nash,  Hom.  Phys.,  vol.  7,  p.  113;  Chronic  pharyngitis,  Allen,
Am.  Hom.  Rev.,  1865,  p.  454;  Spasm  of  stomach  and  pain  in  hip  joint,  Gate,  Hale's
Tlierap ,  p.  499,  from  Boston  Qiiar.,  vol.  1,  No.  4;  Constipation,  Gause,  Hah.  Mo.,
vol.  6,  p.  452;  Orchitis,  Schmucker,  H.  M.,  vol.  11,  p.  200;  Dysmenorrhea  and
constipation,  Williamson,  Hering's  Monograph,  p.  77 ;  Irritable  breast,  Hale,  Hale's
Therap.,  p.  515 ;  Pain  in  breasts,  Qi^bme,  Organon,  vol.  2,  p.  132  ;  Tumor  of  breast,
Huglies,  B.  J.  H.,  vol.  23,  p.  258;  Mastitis,  Small,  Raue's  B.ec.,  1873,  p.  187;  (3
cases)  Riggers,  Raue's  Rec,  1874,  p.  238;  Sanford,  N.  E.  M.  G.,  vol  4,  p.  175;
Lukens,  A.  H.  O.,  vol.  5,  p.  77;  (3  cases)  Riggers,  A.  H.  O.,  vol.  10,  p.  562  ;  Car-
penter, Hom.  World,  vol.  4,  p.  260;  Guernsey,  Hom.  Phys.,  vol.  4,  p.  358 ;  Mam-
mary abscess,  Searle,  Times  Ret.,  1875,  p.  140,  from  Med.  Union,  vol.  11,  p.  174;
Compton,  Times  Ret..  1875,  p.  99,  from  O.  M.  and  S.  Rep  ,  vol.  9,  p.  28  ;  Ulceration
of  mamma.  Hale,  Hale's  Therap.,  p.  513;  3Iamm.ary  fistula,  Caryienter,  Raue's  Rec,
1875,  p.  181 ;  Cracked  nipples,  Small,  U.  S.  Med.  and  Surg.  Journ.,  vol.  7,  p.  153  ;
Disease  of  breast.  Hale,  B.  J.  H.,  vol.  21,  p.  201 ;  Aphonia,  Usslier,  Hom.  Rev.,  vol.
14,  p.  421 ;  Laryngismus  stridulus,  Knapp,  Amer.  Journ.  Horn.,  vol.  6,  p.  141  ;  also,
Raue's  Rec,  1870,  p.  157  ;  Cough,  Stillman,  Raue's  Rec,  1873,  p.  104,  from  Med.
Journ.,  vol.  5,  p.  542;  A.  J.  H.  M.  M.,  vol.  6,  p.  184;  Carter,  Horn.  Recorder,
vol.  .3,  p.  125  ;  Rheumatism  of  back,  Small,  Raue's  Rec,  1873,  p.  l'J3,  from  U.  S.
Med.  and  Surg.  Journ.,  vol.  7,  p.  152;  Mhemnatvsm  inback.  Smith,  Hering's  Muno-


PHYTOLACCA.  412

graph,  p.  83;  Aching  in  scLcrum,  Neidhard,  Bering's  Monograph,  p.  83;  Pain  in
r.  shoulder,  Neidhard,  Hering's  Monograph,  p.  83 ;  Sciatica,  Guernsey,  Horn.  Phys.,
vol  4,  p.  358 ;  Periostitis  of  femur,  Smart,  Hale's  Therap.,  p.  502 ;  Ulceration  of  leg,
Wood,  T.  P.  H.  M.  Soc,  1871,  Hering's  Monograph;  Aching  of  heels,  Hale,
Pane's  Eec,  1875,  p.  206;  from  A.  J.H.  M.  M.,  vol.  7,  p.  206  ;  Ulcers  of  feet.
Hale,  B.  J.  H.,  vol.  26,  p.  488;  Rheumatism,  Hering's  Monoa;raph,  p.  87;  Sarchet,
Smith,  Times  Pet.,  1876,  p.  149,  from  M.  J.,  vol.  3,  p.  452,  and  vol.  4,  p.  266  ;
Kendall,  Kimball,  Cate,  O'Brien,  Hale,  Gushing,  Smart,  Neidhard,  Hale's  Therap.,
pp.  499-502;  Syphilis,  Mercer,  Hah.  Mo.,  vol.  1,  p.  458;  Secondary  syphilis,  Blu-
menthal,  Times  Ret.,  1875,  p.  92,  from  Med.  Union,  vol.  1,  p.  44;  To  control  sup-
puration, Ussher,  Hom.  Eev.,  vol.  14,  p.  421  ;  Chronic  ulceration,  Wood,  T.  H.  M.
S.  Pa.,  1871,  p.  132;  Scarlet  fever,  Sibly,  M.  J.,  vol.  5,  p.  38;  Times  Pet.,  1877,  p.
37  ;  Rupia  syphilitica,  O'Brien,  B.  J.  H.,  vol.  26,  p.  327.

^  Mind. I  I  Delirium.

■  Indisposition  to  mental  exertion;  disgust  for  business  of

day,  on  waking  early  in  morning.

■  Melancholy,  gloom  ;  indifference  to  life.

■  Great  fear;  is  sure  she  will  die.

I  i  Complete  shamelessness  and  indifference  to  exposure  of
her  person.

■  Irritability;  restlessness.

■  ■Irresistible  desire  to  bite  teeth  together.

■  Cannot  be  persuaded  to  take  nourishment.

■  Remarkable  nervous  phenomena  in  diphtheria.
I  I A  form  of  insanity  with  albuminuria.

■  Oversensitiveness  to  pain;  pain  is  unbearable.

^  Sensorium.  ■Vertigo:  cannot  walk;  staggering,  with
danger  of  falling;  with  dim  vision;  ■■when  rising  from
bed  feels  faint.

^  Inner  Head.  ■Headache:  severe;  violent;  one-sided,  just
above  eyebrows,  with  sickness  of  stomach;  dull,  heavy
in  forehead;  dull,  pressive,  with  vertigo  and  impair-
ment of  vision;  in  diphtheria;  rheumatic,  syphilitic  or
neuralgic.

■  ■Painful  pressure  on  forehead  and  upperpartof  both  eyes.

■  Dull  pressing  pain  in  forehead,  accompanied  by  slight

nausea,  with  cool  perspiration  in  forehead  and  feeling
of  weakness.
I  I  Shooting  pain  from  1.  eye  to  vertex.

■  Pain  extending  back  from  frontal  region.
I  I  Sharp,  shooting  pains  in  r.  temple.

I  I  Pressure  in  top  of  head  with  dryness.

■  Pain  in top  of head  and  a  feeling  as  if brain were

bruised,  when  stepping  from  a  high  step  to  ground.

■  Heavy  aching  feeling  in  head  at  1.30  p.m.

■  Sore  pain  over  head,  <  r.  side.

■  Sensation  of  soreness  deep  in  brain.

■  Sick-headache:  in  forehead;  with  backache  and  bearing

down  ;  weekly.


413  PHYTOLACCA.

iPain  in  back  of  head  and  neck.
*  Outer  Head. iRheumatism: of  r.  frontal region, with

nausea,  <  in  morning;  of  scalp;  dull  pains,  come  on

every  time  it  rains,  with  depression  of  spirits ;  especially

following  diphtheria.
I  I  Scaly  eruption  on  scalp.
I  Eczema  capitis,  moist,  fearful  itching,  little  raw  tubercles

on  scalp,  face  and  arms.
iTinea  capitis;  <  washing  it  when  he  is  warm.

■  Syphilitic  nodes  on  skull.

^  Sight  and  Eyes. iPhotopliobia.

I  I  Double  vision  with  giddiness  and  headache.

I  Dimness  of  vision.

I  I  Pupils  contracted ;  tetanus.

■  Ej^es  staring.

■  Blue  around  eyes.

■  Feeling  of  sand  in  e3^es,  with  soreness  and  burning.

■  Burning  and  smarting  in  eyes  and  lids,  with  profuse

lachrymation,  >  in  open  air.

■  Sharp pain goes through ball  of  eye on reading  or

writing.

■  Dull  aching  pains  in  eyes, < from  motion,  light,  or

exercise.

■  Rheumatic  pain  in  and  about  eye.

I  I  Pressure  around  eyes  in  afternoon,  as  if  eyes  were  too
large.

■  Circumorbital  pains  in  syphilitic  ophthalmia.

I  I  Suppurative  choroiditis  (pan-opthalmitis)  in  r.  eye  of
a  child,  after  a  needle  operation  for  cataract;  lids' enor-
mously swollen,  very  hard  and  red,  conjunctiva  in-
jected, chemosis,  anterior  chamber  filled  with  pus  and
cornea  tending  towards  suppuration ;  child  pale,  weak
and  restless.

■  Cellulitis:  inflammation  slow  in  its  course  and  not  at-

tended by  severe  pain;  infiltration  of  cellular  tissue  of
orbit  very  pronounced,  hard  and  unyielding  to  touch;
eyelids  reddish-blue,  hard  and  swollen  ;  eyeball  pressed
forward  and  its  mobility  impaired  or  lost  entirely  ;  che-
mosis; more  or  less  dull  aching  pain;  lachrymation;
photophobia.
Eyes  inflamed.

■  Rheumatic  ophthalmia;  lids  much  swollen.

■  Catarrhal  ophthalmia;  burning, smarting,  tingling  pain;

itching  <  by  gaslight ;  abundant  flow  of  tears.

■  Granular  conjunctivitis,  with  circumorbital  pain;  sore-

ness in  periosteum  and  scalp,  as  of  rheumatic  origin.

■  Motions  of  one  eye  independent  of  the  other.

■  Lachrymation,  with  coryza.


PHYTOLACCA.  414

I  I  Fistula  lachrymalis.

I  I  Lids  feel  as  if  granulated  and  tarsal  edges  have  a
scalded,  hot  feeling,  as  if  raw  ;  granulated,  sandy  sensa-
tion in  lids,  with  same  sensation  upon  edges.

■  Lids  feel  as  if  on  fire. ^Acute  rheumatic  ophthalmia.

■  Eyelids  agglutinated  and  oedematous.

I  Reddish-blue  swelling  of  eyelids,  <  on  1.  side  and  in
morning  ;  hard,  unyielding  cellulitis.

■  Scrofulous  swelling  of  glands  of  eyelids.

I  I  Malignant  ulcers  on  lid:  lupus,  epithelioma,  etc.
^  Hearing-  and  Ears. iShooting  pains  through  both  ears
when  swallowing;  r.  side  worse.

■  Eustachian  tubes  feel  obstructed.

"^  Smell  and  Nose, i  Drawing  sensation  about  root  of  nose.
I  I  Sensation  in  nostril  as  if  tickled  with  a  stiff  feather.

■  Feeling  iii  nose  and  eyes  as  if  cold  would  come  on.

■  Total  obstructions of  nose,  when  riding  must  breathe

through  mouth ;  not  >  by  blowing  nose ;  mucus  dis-
charged with  difficulty  ;  constant  hawking. ^Coryza.

■  Flow  of mucus from  one  nostril,  while the  other is

stopped;  both  stopped  up  while  riding. ^Coryza.
I  I  Wakes at 3 a.m., with  nose stopped up,  discharges
clinkers  from  both  nostrils  in  morning.

■  Thin  watery  discharge  from  nostril,  increasing  until  nose

becomes  stuffed.

■  Cor3'za  and  cough  with  redness  of  eyes  and  lachryma-

tion,  photophobia;  feeling  of  sand  in  e3'^es,  with  sore-
ness and  burning.

■  Acrid  discharge  from  nose  excoriating  nose  and  uj^per

lip. ^Scarlatina.

■  Syphilitic  ozsena,  with bloody,  sanious  discharge  and

disease  of  bones.

■  Noli  me  tangere  and  cancerous  affection  of  nose.

^  Upper  Face. Stupid  expression  of  face,  enlarged  pupils,
violent  headache,  staggering.
I  I  Distortion  of  face.

■  Face: sunken; pale,  hippocratic; blue around eyes;

yellowish  complexion  ;  looking  blue  and  suffering.
I  I  Cool  sweat  on  forehead.
I  I  Heat  in  face  (1.  side),  after  dinner;  with  redness  of  face,

cold  feet,  eruption  on  1.  upper  lip.

■  Pains  in  bones  of  face  and  head,  at  night.

■  Prosopalgia  in  syphilitic  and  rheumatic  subjects.

■  Blotches  in  face;  <  in  p.m.,  after  washing  and  eating.

■  Swelling  around  1.  ear  and  side  of  face,  like  erysipelas;

thence  over  scalp  ;  very  painful.

■  Ulcers  and  eruptions  (scaly)  on  face.

^  Lower  Face. ■Chin  drawn  closely  to  sternum  by  convul-
sive action  of  muscles  of  face  and  neck. ^Tetanus.


415  PHYTOLACCA.

I  Lips  everted  and  firm. ^Tetanus.

■  Upper  lip  excoriated. ^Coryza.
I  I  Eruption  on  upper  lip.

i  Cancerous  sore  on  upper  lip  and  nose  (application  of  leaf
and  root).

I  Ulcers  on  lips.

I  Parotid  and  submaxillary  glands  swollen.
^°  Teeth  and  Gums. ■ '  Disposition  to  bite  teeth  together.

iTeeth  all  ache:  feel  sore  and  elongated.

I  Rheumatic,  neuralgic,  mercurial  or  syphilitic  toothache.

iDiflBcult  dentition;  child  crying,  moaning,  restless  and
feverish,  particularly  at  night;  in  hot  weather  vom-
iting and  diarrhoea;  retarded  dentition;  wants  to  bite
on  something  hard  continually  and  seems  relieved
by  it.
''  Taste  and  Tongue, i  Taste  :  disagreeable,  metallic.

•  Great  pain  in  root  of  tongue,  fauces,  etc.

I  Burnt  feeling  on  back  part  of  tongue.

iTongue:  thickly  coated  at  back ;  coated  yellow  and  dry;
furred;  fiery  red  at  tip;  feels  as  if  scalded;  coated
greyish-yellowish ;  hot,  rough,  tender  and  smarting  at
tip;  small  ulcers  like  those  caused  by  mercury;  thick;
protruding.

I  I  Tongue  and  lips  dry,  much  pain  in  fauces  when  swal-
lowing.
^^  Inner  Mouth, i  Profuse  saliva,  sometimes  yellowish,  often
thick,  ropy,  tenacious ; mercurial ptyalism,  with  in-
flamed gums.

■  Salivation  with  metallic  taste  in  mouth. ^Diphtheria.

■  Sensation  of  dryness  in  mouth  with  cough.

■  Roof  of  mouth  sore ;  profuse  salivation.

■  Ulcerated  sore  mouth.

■  Small  ulcers  on  inside  of  r.  cheek,  very  painful;  he  can-

not chew  on  tha.t  side.

I  I  Inflammation  of  posterior  nares,  pharynx,  tonsils  and
soft  palate  ;  uvula  and  tonsils  ulcerated  ;  extreme  sensi-
tiveness of  mucous  membrane;  deglutition  painful;
tongue  coated ;  fetor  oris ;  eruption  on  face,  arms  and
body  ;  has  taken  much  mercury. ^Syphilis.

I  I  Severe  glossitis  ;  deep  ulceration  of  tongue  and  gums  ;
looseness  of  teeth  ;  tonsils,  uvula  and  velum  palati  ul-
cerated ; in  consequence  of large  doses  of mercury,
^Syphilis.
13  Throat. ■Fauces  and  pharynx  look  dry.

■  Dryness:  of  throat; in  throat  and  posterior  fauces ; in

upper  part  of  pharynx,  disposition  to  hawk  and  clear
throat,  without  aff'ording  relief;  in  fauces  provoking
hacking,  dry  cough; in  throat inducing cough; in


PHYTOLACCA.  416

throat  <  morning  and  evening ;  of  throat  soon  pro-
duces soreness.

I  Throat:  very  dry,  rough  and  sore;  dryness,  roughness,
burning  and  smarting  in  fauces.

I  Hot  feeling,  as  if  a  ball  of  red-hot  iron  had  lodged  in
throat.

■Sensation  of  a  lump  in  throat,  causing  a  continuous  de-
sire to  swallow;  like  a  plug  in  throat; <  1.  side.

I  I  Sensation  of  throat  being  so  full  that  it  felt  choked;
hawking  to  rid  throat  and  posterior  nares  of  mucus.

■  Pressing  pain  in  r.  side  of  throat.

I  I  Increased  discharge  of  mucus  from  posterior  nares,  de-
tached with  difficulty,  continually  excited  a  disposition
to  hawk.

■  Uvula  large,  almost  translucent.

■  Strings  of  mucus  adhering  to  upper  part  of  pharynx.

■  Deglutition:  painful;  difficult;  with every  attempt  ex-

cruciating shooting  pains  through  ears ;  regurgitation
through  nostrils;  unable  to  swallow  even  water;  almost
impossible  because  throat  felt  so  dry  and  rough.

■  Tonsils:  and  palate congested,  bluish  or  dark-purple;

sore,  red  and  swollen  ;  r.  much  enlarged,  dark-red,  burn-
ing in  fauces  and  whole  length  of  oesophagus;  large,
bluish,  ulcerated ;  throat  feels  as  after  eating  choke-
pears;  induration  and  ulceration;  chronic  enlargement;
aphthous  patches  with  rheumatic  pain  in  lumbar  re-
gion;  follicular  sore  throat;  quinsy.

■  Cannot drink hot fluids; choking; ulcers  on  tonsils.

/^Syphilis.

■  Feeling  of  rawness,  scraping  and  excoriation  in  throat.

■  ■Throat  sore;  the  isthmus  congested  and  of  a  dark-red

color;  dryness  of  throat,  with  some  swelling  of  tonsils.

■  General  soreness  of  posterior  fauces  and  apparent  exten-

sion of  irritation  into  Eustachian  tubes.

■  Darkish-red inflammation of fauces, tonsils swollen;

ulcerated  ;  thick,  white  or  yellow  mucus.
I  I  Soreness  of  throat,  and  a  feeling  as  of  a  lump  when
swallowing  saliva ;  same  sensation  felt  on  turning  head
to  1.  side.

■  Sore  throat,  with  derangement  of  digestive  organs;  fetid

breath  and  constipation  ;  after  diphtheria  or  scarlatina ;
tubercular ;  after  syphilis.
I  I  Sore  throat  on  r.  side;  throat  red  and  tumefied;  no
pain  when  swallowing  food,  but  when  swallowing
saliva ;  low-spirited,  indiff"erent  to  his  surroundings,
wishes  some  one  would  knock  him  on  the  head  and  kill
him ;  tongue  coated  white  and  slimy  ;  has  to  drink  often
to  keep  throat  moist;  weight  on  back  of  neck  ;  pressing


417  PHYTOLACCA.

pain  going  up  back  of  neck,  on  r.  side  only;  r.  side  of
head  feels  as  if  firmly  pressed,  causing  pain  in  eyes;
pain  in  throat  from  root  of  tongue  downward  towards
outer  attachment  of  clavicle ;  cannot  bear  clothes  on
throat;  drawing,  stinging,  pressing  pain  down  r.  side  of
neck  towards  shoulder  blade.
■Scarlatina  anginosa :  tending  to  suppuration  or  ulcera-
tion ;  fever  rages  with  unwonted  severity ;  no  eruption  ;
nose  and  upper  lip  much  excoriated  by  an  acrid  dis-
charge; slight  delirium;  great  prostration.

■  Hoarseness  and  persistent  sore  throat  after  diphtheria.

I  I  Chronic  sore  throat:  fauces  and  pharynx  look  dry  and
of  a  dark  color,  with  a  few  adherent  strings  of  mucus
high  up ;  hawking  of  phlegm  morning  and  evening ;
aphonia.

iPharynx  dry,  rough,  feels  like  a  cavern.

I  I  Chronic  follicular  pharyngitis;  membrane  lining  fauces
and  pharynx  as  well  as  velum  pendulum  and  uvula  pale,
puffed  and  flabby;  uvula  large, almost  translucent;  dis-
tressing sensation  of  enlargement  of  calibre  of  pharynx
and  oesophagus  from  choanse  to  epigastrium,  provokes  a
cough,  paroxysmal,  extremely  distressing,  and  attended
by  very  profuse  and  exhausting  expectoration  of  thick
starchlike  mucus;  whole  chest  feels  like  a  big  empty
cask,  as  if  its  calibre  were  enlarged  tenfold ;  great  de-
bility; patient,  who  is  intolerant  of  stimulants,  can
take  whisky  to  any  extent  and  with  great  temporary
relief.

■  Chronic  granular  phar3'ngitis ;  burning  sensation  as  of

a  hot  substance  in  throat;  voice  gives  out; burning
and  soreness,  greatly  <  by  prolonged  use  of  voice.

■  Catarrhal  inflammation  of  head  and  throat,  closely  simu-

lating diphtheria ; tough,  white  mucus  iVom  posterior
nares, clinging tightly to posterior wall of throat,
resembling  large  patch  of  diphtheritic  membrane.
I  I  Swollen glands; tonsils swollen and covered with
greyish  patches;  dizziness  and  backache.

■  Diphtheritic  inflammation  and  ulceration  of  throat.

■  ■Diphtheria:  sick  and  dizzy  when  trying  to  sit  up;  frontal

headache ;  pains  shooting  from  throat  into  ears,  espe-
cially on  trying  to  swallow;  face  flushed  ;  tongue  much
coated,  protruded  ;  thickly  coated  at  back,  fiery  red  at
tip;  breath  fetid,  putrid;  vomiting;  difficulty  of  swal-
lowing; tonsils  swollen,  covered  with  membrane,  first
upon  1.,  three  or  four  patches;  tonsils,  uvula  and  back
part  of  throat  covered  with  ash-colored  exudation  ;  ton-
sils covered  with  dirty,  white,  pseudo  membrane;  small
white  or  yellow  spots  on  tonsils  coalesce  and  form
VOL.  VIII.— 27.


PHYTOLACCA.  418

patches  of  membrane;  membrane  has  appearance  of
dirty  washleather;  exudation  pearly  or  greyish  white;
great  thirst ;  <  from  hot  drinks ;  dyspnoea ;  ropy,
offensive  mucus  lining  mouth  and  throat;  glands  of
neck  very  tender;  pain  in  neck  and  back,  body  sore  as
if  bruised,  groans  with  pain,  especially  when  trying  to
move  or  turn  in  bed ;  aching  limbs ;  great  prostration  ;
violent  chill,  soon  followed  by  high  fever ;  fever  with-
out chill ;  pulse  120, 140,  weak  ;  rash  on  skin  ;  remark-
ably nervous  phenomena;  consecutive  paralysis;  leaves
vision  impaired,  hearing  dull;  in  cold  weather  gener-
all}^  epidemic ;  usually  of  catarrhal  or  rheumatic  ori-
gin, brought  on  by  exposure  to  damp  and  cold  atmos-
phere or  sleeping  in  damp,  ill-ventilated  rooms.
I  I  Ulceration  of  mucous  membrane  of  upper  part  of  ali-
mentary tract. ^Diphtheria.

■  Scarlet  fever,  with  diphtheritic  complications,
I  Induration  of  parotid  glands  in  diphtheria.

■  Parotitis:  inflammation  of  submaxillary  glands.

^' Appetite,  Thirst. Desires,  Aversions. ■  Great  thirst.
I  I  Hunger  soon  after  eating.

■  Loss  of  appetite.

^^  Hiccough,  Belching,  Nausea  and  Vomiting.  ■  Violent
etibrts  to  eructate  to  relieve  restricted  sensation  in  r.  hy-
pochondrium.

■  Nausea:  with  eructations  of  flatus  and  sour  fluids;  with

severe  pain  in  umbilical  region.

■  Vomiting:  easy,  without  much  nausea;  of  ingesta,  bile

and  blood,  with  great  accumulation  of  flatus  in  stomach
and  bowels;  violent,  every  few  minutes;  comes  on
slowly,  preceded  by  nausea  and  is  excessive;  of  mucus,
bile,  ingesta,  worms,  blood ;  and  purging  with  griping
pains  and  cramps  in  abdomen,  without  relief ;  of  food
and  milk,  in  teething  children ;  in  diphtheria.

■  Frequent  vomiting,  prostration,  sometimes  fainting,  even

convulsions,  followed  slowly  by  gripes,  cramps,  vomiting
of  dark  bilious  substance.
I  1  Violent  vomiting  of  clotted  blood  and  slime,  with  retch-
ing, intense  pain  and  desire  for  death  to  relieve.
^^  Scrobiculum  and  Stomach. ■Bruised  and  sore  feeling  at
pit  of  stomach.

■  Heat  in  stomach.

i  I  Pain  in  pit  of  stomach  as  from  a  heavy  blow  or  concus-
sion there,  followed  by  cramps  in  abdomen  and  coolness.

■  Cutting  in  pit  of  stomach,  which  is  tender  to  touch.

I  I  Pains  in  cardiac  portions  of  stomach  <  by  a  full  inspi-
ration and  by  walking.

■  Pain  in  region  of  pylorus.


419  PHYTOLACCA.

^*  Hypochondria. lA sore  spot in r.  hypochondrium  not
larger  than  a  dollar,  extremely  sensitive  to  touch.

I  I  Digging  pain  in  r.  hypochondrium,  in  upper  and  lower
portions  of  liver.

I  1  Cannot  lie  on  r.  side  on  account  of  penetrating  pain  in
r.  hypochondrium.

I  I  Soreness  and  pain  in  r.  hypochondrium  during  preg-
nancy.

I  I  Chronic  hepatitis,  with  enlargement  and  induration.
^^  Abdomen, l Griping  and  cramps  in  abdomen.

■  Burning,  griping  pains  in  umbilical  region.

■  Great  rumbling  in  abdomen  and  pain  in  umbilicus,  with

stools  of  mucus  and  blood  ;  gastro-enteritis.

I  Bearing-down  pains.

I  I  Violent  pains  in  abdomen  during  menstruation  in  a
barren  female.

I  I  Chronic  inflammation  of  bowels,  of  five  years'  standing.

I  I  Ulceration  of  mucous  membrane  of  upper  part  of  ali-
mentary tract. ^Diphtheria.

■  Rheumatism  extending  to  abdominal  muscles.

^^  Stool  and  Rectum. I  l  Continual  inclination  to  go  to  stool,
but  passes  constantly  fetid  flatus.
I  I  Diarrhoea  with  sickly  feeling  in  bowels;  copious  dis-
charge of  blood,  mucus  and  what  looked  like  scrapings
of  inner  surface  of  intestines.

■  Diarrhoea  early  in  morning;  after  lemonade.

■  Stools :  thin,  dark  brown  ;  of  mucus  and  blood ;  like  intes-

tinal scrapings ;  tenesmus ;  of  bile.

■  Dysentery,

I  I  Intense  vomiting  and.  purging,  with  prostration  and
cramps,  as  in  cholera.

1  I  Feeling  of  fulness  in  abdomen  before  stool,  which  re-
mains after  stool  as  if  all  had  not  passed.

■  Constipation:  hard  stools;  from  torpor  of  rectum;  ha-

bitual, says  bowels  will  not  move  without  aid  of  purga-
tives; of  long  standing,  pain  shooting  from  anus  to  lower
part  of  rectum  along  perineum  to  middle  of  penis ;  of
the  aged  or  those  with  weak  heart.

■  Ulceration  and  fissure  of  rectum.

■  Hemorrhoids:  permanent  and  obstinate;  bleeding  and

mucous.
I  I  Bloody  discharge  with  heat  in  rectum.

■  Fissures  of  anus.

^^  Urinary  Organs, i  i  Weakness,  dull  pain  and  soreness  in

region  of  kidneys;  most  on  r.  side  and  connected  with

heat;  uneasiness  down  ureters;  chalklike  sediment  in

urine.

I  I  Albuminuria:  after  scarlatina  or  diphtheria;  chills  at


PHYTOLACCA.  420

night  without  special  fever,  accompanied  by  a  form  of
insanity.

I  Pain  in  region  of  bladder  before  and  during  urination.

Pain  in  region  of  bladder,  dark  red  urine  which  stains
vessel  and  is  hard  to  remove,  urine  excessive  in  quan-
tity, decidedly  albuminous,  with  greatly  increased  spe-
cific gravity.

■  Urgent  and  painful  inclination  to  pass  water.
I  I  Copious  nocturnal  urination.

I  Urine:  albuminous;  excessive  or  scanty  ;  dark  red,  stains
vessel ;  color  of  coffee,  stains  clothes  yellow.
^^  Male  Sexual  Organs, i Impotence.

■  Gonorrhoea  and  gleet;  orchitis.

iSyphilis:  chancres;  ulcerated  throat;  ulcers  on  genitals;
inguinal  bubo  ;  rheumatism.

I  I  Much  soreness  and  rheumatic  pains  in  spermatic  cords,
with  rheumatic  orchitis.

I  I  Orchitis:  acute  and  chronic,  with  suppuration  and  fist-
ulous ulcer.
^^  Female  Sexual  Organs, l Ovarian  neuralgia  and  ovaritis ;
sometimes  with  rheumatic  complications.

■  Uterine  leucorrhoea,  proceeding  from  glandular  portion

of  cervix ;  ulceration  of  os  ;  scirrhus.

■  Metrorrhagia.

■  Menses:  too  frequent  and  too  copious ;  mammse  painful ;

increase  of  tears,  saliva,  bile  and  urine ;  rheumatic
females.

I  I  Menorrhagia ;  involuntary  straining  and  hemorrhage
per  vagina.

I  I  Shreds  of  membrane  passed  with  menstrual  flow.

I  I  Violent  pains  in  abdomen  during  menstruation,  in  a
barren  woman.

I  I  Dysmenorrhoea  and  costiveness  from  the  time  menstru-
ation commenced ;  for  several  years  has  been  subject  to
attacks  of  colic,  preceded  by  weakness,  oppression,  incli-
nation to  take  a  deep  breath,  soon  followed  by  a  sore
spot,  in  beginning  not  larger  than  a  dollar,  in  r.  hypochon-
drium,  extremely  sensitive  to  touch ;  spot  enlarged  and
became  very  painful,  with  sensation  of  constriction  or
choking  in  part  as  if  from  flatus,  which  gave  rise  to  vio-
lent eff'orts  to  eructate,  frequently  ending  in  vomiting,
which  gave  no  relief;  slightly  >  by  sitting  up  in  bed
and  leaning  forward ;  could  lie  in  no  position,  except
on  stomach,  when  pain  got  easier  she  fell  asleep  in  that
position ;  sometimes  painful  inclination  to  pass  urine
the  color  of  coflee,  which  stained  her  clothes  yellow ;
disagreeable  taste  in  mouth,  as  soon  as  pain  moved
downward  she  was  >  ; attack generally  commenced


421  PHYTOLACCA.

about  an  hour  and  a  half  after  dinner,  sometimes  about
an  hour  and  a  half  after  supper,  never  at  any  other
time.

■  Dysmenorrhea,  accompanying  erosion  or  ulceration  of

cervix.
I  I  Amenorrhoea,  complicated with ovarian  irritation or
disease.

■  Leucorrhoea : uterine,  thick,  tenacious  and irritating;

profuse,  thick,  tenacious  from  swollen  Nabothian  glands
in  women  who  have  suffered  from  inflamed  or  broken
breasts  and  various  glandular  swellings  and  abscesses.

■  Neuralgic  affections  of  breast.

■  Irritable  mammae: no  swelling,  induration or  tumor,

only  a  painfulness  at  menstrual  period ;  during  lactation.

■  Neuralgia  of  mammae.

I  I  Irritable  tumor  of  breast;  very  sensitive  and  painful,  <
at  menstrual  periods;  pain  extended  down  arm  of
affected  side,  and  at  times  caused  sympathetic  enlarge-
ment of  a  gland  in  axilla.

I  I  Mastitis  (after  Bryonia).

■  Inflammation,  swelling  and  suppuration  of  mammae.

■  ■  Abcesses  or  fistulous  ulcers  of  mammae.

I  I  Tumors,  scirrhus  and  cancer  of  mammae.

■  Hyperthrophy  of  breast  and  uterus.

■  Left  breast  fearfully  tumefied  for  six  weeks.

■  Nipples  cracked  and  excoriated.

^*  Pregnancy.  Parturition.  Lactation.  ■Pain  in  sacrum,
down  to  knees  and  ankles,  then  up  to  sacrum ;  jerks
here  and  there,  after  confinement.

I  I  Suppression  of  lochia.

I  I  Every  two  or  three  hours  sudden,  severe  stinging  pains
throughout  breasts,  lasting  several  minutes,  >  from
pressure  with  hands;  at  same  time  milk  began  to  ooze
out;  is  nursing  second  child  three  months  old.

I  I  On  second  day  after  confinement  excessive  flow  of
milk ;  nipples  so  sensitive  that  nursing  produced  in-
tense suffering,  seeming  to  start  from  nipples  and  radi-
ate over  whole  body,  going  to  backbone  and  streaking
up  and  down  it,  causing  unbearable  pain ;  nipples  ex-
coriated and  fissured.

■  Right  breast  seems  full  to  overflowing,  stony  hard  and

painful ;  for  several  days  excessive  flow  of  milk,  causing
prostration;  fever;  indifferent  to  life;  predicts  death.
M Hardness  of  mammae; breast hard  as  a  stone,  after
weaning.

■  Four  days  after  confinement  severe  chill,  followed  by

fever ;  in  a  few  hours  both  mammae  hard,  swollen  and
painful ;  nipples  very  sensitive.


PHYTOLACCA.  422

I  Mamma  hot,  painful,  swollen  ;  third  week  after  confine-
ment.

I  I  Breast  inflamed,  tender,  greatly  swollen,  hard,  pain-
ful ;  on  using  breast-pump  milk  that  came  was  thick
and  stringy;  in  former  pregnancy  suffered  from  mam-
mary abscesses.

■  ■Mammary  gland  full  of  hard,  painful  nodosities.

■  Redness,  tenderness  and  nodulated  indurations  of  breast,

with  an  acuminated  appearance  of  nodules;  chills  and
great  tendency  to  early  suppuration.
I  I  Few  days  after  confinement  breast  suddenly  became
hard  and  inflamed  and  flow  of  milk  ceased  ;  blistered
and  poulticed  for  six  weeks  and  finally  lanced,  but  all
to  no  purpose;  1.  breast  greatly  swollen;  sharp,  lanci-
nating pains.

■  ■Breast  shows  an  early  tendency  to  cake;  especially  use-

ful when  suppuration  is  inevitable ;  when  child  nurses

pain  goes  from  nipple  all  over  body.
I  llnflammation  of  mammse  ; pus  formed,  w^as  lanced;

fistulous openings downward and backward ; four

inches  in  extent;  emaciated,  cold  hands  and  feet  and

trembling.
I  I  Mammary  abscess;  several  painful  nodules  and  three

fistulse  discharging ichorous pus; erratic rheumatic

pains,  the  two  alternating  in  intensity.

■  Gathered  breasts  with  large  fistulous,  gaping  and  angr}"

ulcers,  discharging  a  watery,  fetid  pus.
I  I  Enlarged  mammary  gland,  with  fistulous  opening  of
five  years'  standing.  "

■  Fistulous ulcers  and  unhealthy  granulation  with  fetid

discharge.

■  ■Caked  breasts;  nipples  cracked  and  excoriated.

I  I  Ulcer  of  breast,  an  inch  in  diameter,  gaping,  angry,
filled  with  unhealthy  granulations;  probe  passed  ob-
liquely downward  until  it  reached  a  hard,  sensitive
tumor,  about  size  of  hen's  egg;  discharge  offensive  and
sanious.

■  Nipples  ver}^  sensitive.

■  Nipples  sore  and  fissured,  with  intense  suffering  on  put-

ting child  to  breast ;  pain  seems  to  start  from  nipple
and  radiate  over  whole  body.
^^  Voice  and  Laryax. Trachea  and  Bronchia. ■Hoarse-
ness and  aphonia.

■  Aphonia  in  consequence  of  a  cold.

■  Dryness  of  larynx  and  trachea,  <  towards  evening.
I  I  Tickling  in  1.  side  of  larynx  with  hacking  cough.

I  I  Burning  in  larynx  and  trachea,  with  a  sensation  of  con-
traction of  glottis;  labored  breathing.


423  PHYTOLACCA.

I  I  Laryngismus  stridulus;  frequent  spasmodic  closure  of
larynx  ;  drawing  of  thumbs  into  palm  ;  flexion  of  toes ;
distortion  of  face ;  muscles  of  eye  affected  so  that  mo-
tions of  one  eye  were  independent  of  other.
iDry  bronchial  cough,  with  sensation  of  roughness  and
slight  increase  of  heat  in  trachea  and  bronchia ;  can  only
expectorate  when  pressing  finger  against  sore  spot  in
trachea.
■Influenza  with  derangement  of  digestive  organs;  thin,
watery  discharge  from  nose,  increasing  till  nose  became
stuffed;  cannot  breathe  through  nose;  difficulty  of  swal-
lowing; dry,  hacking  cough,  with  hawking,  excited  by
tickling  in  larynx  and  dryness  of  pharynx.
^^  Respiration, l  Respiration  difficult,  oppressed ;  loud  mucous
rales.
I  Constant  moaning  and  gasping  for  air. ^Diphtheria.
I  Faint  with  sighing,  slow  breathing.
■  Panting  for  breath.
Asthma.
^  Cough. iCough:  hacking,  dry,  with  hawking;  excited  by
tickling  in  larynx  or  dryness  in  pharynx; <  at  night
as  soon  as  he  lies  down  ;  hard,  accompanied  by  scraping
and  tickling  in  throat;  harassing,  hacking  after  every
cold ;  incessant,  with  sensation  of  an  ulcerated  spot  in
windpipe  just  above  breastbone  ;  could  only  expectorate
(pus)  by  pressing  on  this  spot;  paroxysmal,  distressing,
with  pharyngitis;  with  pain  in  chest  and  side;  chronic,
generally  hard  and  dry.
I  I  Hoarse,  dry,  croupy  cough  ;  burning  pain  in  larynx  and
trachea;  < at  night; pains  have  upward direction;
breathing  labored  ;  cough  became  loose  and  ceased  with
copious  expectoration  of  yellow  mucus.
II Barking, harsh, croupy cough; <  out-doors  and at
night  in  bed ;  tonsils  enlarged,  fauces  congested,  dry  and
glazy-looking ;  the  boy  had  had  this  cough  for  at  least
two  years,  as  soon  as  damp,  cold  weather  put  in  an  ap-
pearance.
iCough  with  burning  pains  in  trachea  and  larynx,  with
a  sensation  of  contraction  of  glottis ;  labored  breathing.
I  Expectoration  :  thick,  tough  ;  of  thick,  starchlike  mucus,
profuse  and  exhausting  with  pharyngitis.
^^  Inner  Chest  and  Lungs, i Pains  and  suffocating  feeling
in  throat  and  lungs.
I  Aching  pains  in  chest  and  side,  with  cough.
I  I  Aching  pain  in  r.  side  of  breast,  passing  through  to  back ;

<  on  taking  a  long  breath  and  lying  on  r.  side.
I  i  Bruised  feeling  of  muscles  of  chest  and  ribs.
I  Pain  through  midsternum  with  cough.
iStitch  from  chest  to  back.


PHYTOLACCA.  424

^^  Heart,  Pulse  and  Circulation.  1 1  Occasional  shocks  of  pain
in  region  of  lieart,  as  soon  as  pain  in  heart  ceases  a  sim-
ilar pain  appears  in  r.  arm. ^Angina  pectoris.

I  I  Rheumatic  diathesis  ;  lame  feeling  in  1.  side  of  chest  near
cardiac  region,  with  much  nervous  restlessness,  <  from
motion  and  particularly  during  expiration ;  pains  and
suffocating  feeling  in  throat  and  lungs;  pulse  weak  and
soft  or  intermittent ;  weak  heart's  action,  with  constipa-
tion ;  constrictive  feeling  at  prsecordium,  with  pressure
on  temples;  feeling  of  lassitude  and  indisposition  to
move ;  great  exhaustion  and  prostration ;  occasional
shocks  of  pain  in  region  of  heart,  and  as  soon  as  it
ceases  a  similar  pain  appears  in  r.  arm;  fatty  degenera-
tion of  heart. ^Angina  pectoris.

1  I  Awakens  with  lameness  near  heart;  <  during  expira-
tion ;  cannot  go  to  sleep  again.

I  1  Fatty  degeneration  of  heart ;  feeling  of  lassitude  and  in-
disposition to  move.

■  Pulse:  small,  irregular,  with  great  excitement  in  chest,

especially  in  cardiac  region  ;  full  but  soft;  intermittent;
110,  soft;  weak  and  soft;  pulselessness.
^"  Outer  Chest. '  'Rheumatism  of  lower  intercostal,  extend-
ing to  abdominal  and  lumbar  muscles,  from  exposure
to  cold  and  dampness.
I  I  Stitch  from  r.  chest  to  back.
Spots  size  of  a  lentil  on  chest.

I  I  Hard  tender  swelling  about  midway  between  nipple  and
sternum,  but  nearer  latter ;  restless  nights ;  in  a  baby  a
few  months  old.
^^  Neck  and  Back, l  i  Convulsive  action  of  muscles  of  face
and  neck. /9Tetanus.

■  Stiff  neck  ;  <  on  r.  side  and  in  bed,  after  midnight.
I  I  Awoke  in  morning  with  stiffness  about  neck.

■  Stiff  neck  ;  tonsils  swollen.

■  Glands  of  r.  side  of  neck  hard.

I  I  Bronchocele ;  swelling  nodulated ;  great  weight  in  parts.
I  I  Pale  red  spots  on  neck. ^Syphilis.

■  Back  very  stiff,  every  morning  and  in  damp  weather.

■  Pain  streaking  up  and  down  backbone.

■  Rheumatism: of  spine;  pain  passes  up  neck  to  back  of

head;  in  small  of  back  for  several  weeks;  chronic  of
back  and  hip  joint ;  in  lumbar  muscles.

■  Constant  dull,  heavy  pain  in  lumbar  and  sacral  regions.

■  Persistent,  unremitting  aching  in  lumbar  region  day  and

night  (no  position  giving  relief),  with  severe  sore  throat
with  numerous  white  ulcerated  spots  on  both  tonsils ;
thickly  coated  tongue  and  bad  odor  from  mouth.

■  Lumbago;  back  is  very  stiff  every  morning.


425  PHYTOLACCA.

I  Pains  shooting  from  sacrum  down  both  hips.

■  Aching  in  sacrum.

I  I  After  confinement  aching  pain  in  sacrum,  very  suddenly-
down  limbs  to  knees,  like  in  bone,  passing  down  gradu-
ally to  ankle  and  returning  again  to  sacrum,  jerking
pain  in  different  parts  of  body,

■Spinal  irritation.

■  Backache  with  diphtheria.

^^  Upper  Limbs, l  i  Glandular  enlargements  in  axillse.

■  Both  scapulae  ache  continually.

I  I  Shooting  pain  in  r.  shoulder  joint,  with  stiffness  and  in-
ability to  raise  arm ;  aching  and  tenderness  along  top
of  r.  trapezius ;  after  dislocation.

I  I  Rheumatism  of  1.  shoulder  without  fever.

■  Rheumatic  affections  of  shoulder  and  arms,  especially  in

syphilitic  subjects ;  pains  fly  like  electric  shocks  from
one  part  to  another,  <  at  night  and  in  damp  weather.

I  I  Pains  in  arms  always  about  midway  between  articula-
tions, especially  about  attachment  of"  deltoid  ;  pain  dull,
aching,  <  at  night ;  had  syphilis  a  year  ago.

I  I  Pain  in  muscles  of  both  arms.

■  Rheumatic  pains  in  arms.

I  I  Pain  from  tumor  in  breast  extending  down  arm.
I  I  Inability  to  raise  arm.

■  Lame  feeling  in  arms.

■  Pale  red  spots  on  arms,  in  syphilis.

■  Rheumatic  drawing  in  both  forearms.

■  Hands  tremble.

I  I  Rheumatic  pains  in  hands;  sudden  pricking,
I  I  Rheumatism  for  several  years;  past  year  joints  of  all
the  fingers  badly  swollen;  very  painful,  hard  and
shining.
I  I  Bony  growth  on  palmar  aspect  of  one  finger  (internally
and  externally  for  three  months  reduced  its  size  one-
half).

■  Whitlow;  felon.

^  Lower  Limbs. ■Pains  shooting  from  sacrum  down  outside
of  both  hips.

■  Sharp,  cutting  pains  in  hip,  drawing ;  leg  drawn  up,  can-

not touch  floor ;  hip  disease  on  r.  side  after  mercury  or
in  syphilitic  children.

■  Syphilitic  and  gonorrhoeal  sciaticas,  with  sharp,  lanci-

nating pain,  not  inclined  to  remain  in  one  part  long  at
a  time;  often  darting  along  whole  length  of  limb  in
quick,  successive  impulses,  rendering  leg  powerless,
numb  and  heavy,  even  to  extremity  of  toes.
I  I  Pain  in  outer  side  of  thigh  ;  soreness  in  1.  groin  ;  press-
ing, shooting,  drawing,  aching  in  thigh;  great  lassitude
and  desire  to  lie  down, ^Sciatica.


PHYTOLACCA.  426

■  Sciatica;  periostitis;  nodes  on  tibia.

I  Chronic  rheumatism  of  1.  hip  joint,  use  of  which  was  lost;
synovial  membrane  implicated ;  considerable  tumefac-
tion from  effusion  ;  no  swelling  of  limb ;  pain  obtuse,
heavy,  aching,  <  in  damp  weather;  complained  of
coldness  of  limb;  pain  <  in  warmth;  much  emacia-
tion ;  night  sweats,  acid  in  reaction  ;  urine  generally
scanty,  but  sometimes  very  clear;  enlargement  of  glands
of  neck  and  axillae.

I  I  Occasional  spasms  of  stomach  and  diaphragm  for  some
years,  and  for  the  last  six  months  severe  pain  in  hip
joint,  mostly  behind,  trochanter  major ; pains  sharp,

•  cutting,  drawing,  and  occurred  from  4  to  5  a.m.,  driving
him  immediately  from  bed  ;  on  first  rising  leg  drawn
up  so  that  only  toe  would  reach  floor;  rubbing  and  heat
would  afford  some  slight  relief,  but  energetic  walking
was  the  only  means  of  rendering  it  endurable ;  after  a
few  hours  in  morning  severe  pains  passed  off  and  only
a  soreness  and  dull  pain  disturbed  him  till  next  morn-
ing ;  pains  sometimes  appeared  in  middle  of  tibia  and
fibula  and  down  great  toe.

■  Neuralgic  pain  on  outer  side  of  thighs.

I  I  Tearing  pains  in  front  and  exterior  surface  of  r.  thigh,
when  standing;  much  <  sitting  down  ;  >  lying  down  ;
frequently  in  r.  heel  alone. ^Rheumatism.

■  Almost  constant  pain  in  outer  and  back  part  of  r.  limb,

<  at  night,  but  never  absent  entirely;  unable  to  bear
weight  of  limb  or  to  move  it  without  extreme  pain,
which  is  dull,  aching,  and  at  times  lancinating;  pain
came  first  in  hip  and  extended  thence  into  lower  por-
tion of  limb.

I  I  Periostitis  of  r.  femur  after  exposure  to  cold  and  wet ;
after  five  months  limb  greatly  swollen,  surface  red  and
shining;  inability  to  stir  limb;  much  pain,  <  towards
evening ;  chills  occasionally  and  nearly  constant  fever ;
no  appetite;  furred  tongue.

I  I  Dull  heavy  pain  in  joints,  <  from  exposure  to  air,
especially  in  damp  weather ;  sensation  like  shortening
of  tendons  behind  knee  when  walking ;  pains  extend
either  upward  or  downward  along  shafts  of  femur  and
tibia,  r.  side,  <  from  motion  and  pressure. ^/Synovitis.

■  Legs  tremble.

■  Leg  is  drawn  up.

■  Aching  down  limbs  to  knee  and  ankle  and  returning.

■  Severe rheumatic pains in lower extremities, with

nightl}^  bone  pains.

■  Chronic  rheumatism  in  lower  extremities.

■  Ulcers  and  nodes  on  legs.


427  PHYTOLACCA.

I  Rheumatic  pain  in  r.  knee,  <  in  open  air  and  damp
weatiier.

■  Rheumatism  of  1.  knee;  hamstrings  feel  shortened.

■  Chronic  inflammation  of  knee  joints.

■  Rheumatic  pain  below  knee  and  in  feet.

■  Nightly  pains  in  tibia. ^Periosteal  rheumatism.

■  Pain  in  middle  of  tibia  and  fibula.

■  CEdema  of  ankles;  swollen  feet.

I  I  Pain  on  dorsum  of  r.  foot,  4  a.m.

■  Feet  puffed,  soles  burn  ;  severe  pains  through  ankles,  feet

and  on  dorsa  of  feet.

I  I  Obstinate  ulcers  (probably  syphilitic)  on  inner  sides
and  bottoms  of  both  feet;  ulcers  appear  as  if  punched
out,  round,  with  sharp  edges,  smooth  sides,  lardaceous
base  and  about  one-sixteenth  of  an  inch  deep,  five  on
one  foot  and  several  on  other  ;  feet  swollen,  ankles  oede-
matous;  burning,  aching  pain,  with  soreness  on  press-
ure, <  walking  or  using  sewing  machine ;  dark,  knotted
veins  traversed  sides  of  feet  near  ulcers.

I  i  Aching  of  heels  of  a  dull,  wearing  character,  making  life
almost  intolerable  ;  >  elevating  feet  higher  than  body;
subject  to  rheumatism.

I  I  Flexion  of  toes.

■  Neuralgic  pains  in  toes.

■  Pain  in  great  toe.
Limbs  in  General. ■  Pains  in  middle  of  long  bones,  or  at-
tachment of  muscles.

I  I  Pain  in  joints  with  great  heat  tormented  him  for  weeks,
first  in  fingers  of  1.  hand,  then  in  other  joints,  then  in  r.
side,_ changing  locality  continually;  when  it  attacked
one  joint  it  increased  for  five  or  six  hours  to  an  unbear-
able height,  as  if  joint  were  being  chopped  with  an  axe;
then  it  decreased  for  five  or  six  hours,  but  before  it  had
fully  abated  it  had  begun  in  another  joint;  >  from
midnight  till  morning;  after  pain  had  left  joint  re-
mained immovable  for  a  long  while.

■  Rheumatic  pains  below  knees  and  in  arms.

■  Severe  pains  in  arms  and  legs  from  elbows  and  knees  to
fingers  and  toes ;  <  from  motion  and  contact ;  syphilis.

I  1  Ulceis  on  arm  and  leg  from  one-half  of  an  inch  to  three
inches  in  size,  irregular  in  shape,  with  ragged  edges
and  surface  studded  with  minute  granulations  which
bled  readily ;  ankles  and  knees  swollen  and  inflamed,
skin  over  swelling  glistening  and  exceedingly  sensitive
to  touch. ^Secondary  syphilis.

■  Cold  hands  and  feet.
Rest. Position. Motion. Desire  to  lie  down  : soreness.

in  groin  and  pains  in  thigh.


31


PHYTOLACCA.  428

Lying  down:  a L  night,  cough.

Lying  on  r.  side:  pain  in  breast  <.

Cannot  lie  on  r.  side:  pain  in  r.  hypochondrium.

Can  lie  in  no  position  except  on  stomach:  pain  in  r.  hy-
pochondrium.

When  rising  from  bed :  feels  faint.

Elevating  feet  higher  than  body :  aching  of  heels  >.

Cannot  raise  arm  :  pain  in  r.  shoulder  joint.

Turning  head  to  1.  side :  feeling  of  a  lump  in  throat.

Sitting  up:  sick  and  dizzy;  and  leaning  forward  pain  in
hypochondrium  slightly  >.

Standing:  tearing  pains  in  thigh  ;  faint  and  dizzy.

When  stepping  from  a  high  step  to  ground  :  feeling  as  if
brain  were  bruised.

Indisposition  to  move :  fatty  degeneration  of  heart.

Motion:  pains  in  eyes  <;  groans  with  pain;  rheumatic
diathesis  <;  of  limb  causes  extreme  pain;  of  limb  im-
possible, rheumatism;  pains  in  joints  <  ;  pain  in  arms
and  legs  <;  complains  of  soreness  ;  rheumatism  <.

Swallowing:  pains  shooting  from  throat  into  ears.

Cannot  chew  on  r.  side  :  ulcers  on  inside  of  cheek.

Exercise:  pains  in  eyes  <.

Walking:  pains  in  cardiac  region  <;  energetic,  relieved
pain  in  hip  ;  sensation  of  shortening  of  tendons  behind
knee;  ulcers  on  feet  <.

Cannot  walk :  vertigo.
Nerves, l Feeling  of  soreness  in  all  the  muscles;  aching  of
back  and  legs,  feeling  as  if  pounded  all  over,  with  pros-
tration.

■  Restlessness  and  moaning  from  general  pains.

■  Great  lassitude  and  desire  to  lie  down,  with  rheumatism.
I  I  Faint  and  dizzy  from  standing.
I  Weakness  and  oppression  ;  great  exhaustion.

■  General  and  rapid  prostration,  in  diphtheria.

■  Great  exhaustion,  prostration,  muscular  paresis.

■  Legs  heavy,  weak;  he  staggers.

■  Tremblings.
•  Paralysis  in  diphtheria.
I  I  Drawing  of  thumbs  into  palms.
I  I  Limbs  stiff,  hands  firmly  shut,  feet  extended  and  toes

flexed,  teeth  clenched  and  lips  everted,  opisthotonos ;  chin
drawn  to  sternum.
STetanus;  extremities  stiff;  hands  firmly  shut;  feet  ex-
tended and  toes  flexed  ;  eyes  bleared  and  dancing ;  pu-
pils contracted  ;  teeth  clenched  ;  lips  everted  and  firm ;
general  muscular  rigidity ;  opisthotonos ;  respiration
difficult  and  oppressed  ;  convulsive  action  of  muscles  of
face  and  neck  followed  by  partial  relaxation,  which
again  was  succeeded  by  same  tetanic  condition.


36


429  „  PHYTOLACCA.

^^  Sleep. I  I  Frequent  gaping ;  drowsiness.

liiestlessness  at  night;  pains  drive  him  out  of  bed.

I  I  On  awaking  feels  wretched.
^®  Time. Morning:  rheumatism <;  swelhng  of  eyelids <;
discharge  of  clinkers  from  both nostrils ; dryness of
throat  <  ;  diarrhoea ;  awoke  with  stiff  neck ;  pain  in  hip
passed  off.

8  A.M. :  wakes  with  nose  stopped  up.

4  A.M. :  pain  in  dorsum  of  r.  foot.

4  to  5  A.M. :  pains  in  hip  joint  drive  him  out  of  bed.

Afternoon:  pressure  around  eyes;  blotches  in  face  <.

1.30  P.M. :  heavy  aching  feeling  in  head.

Evening:  dryness  of  throat  <  ;  pain  in  r.  femur  <.

Day  and  night :  persistent  aching  in  lumbar  region.

Night :  pains  in  bones  of  face  and  head ;  child  restless  and
feverish  <  ;  chills  without  fever ;  cough  <  ;  rheuma-
tism <  ;  rheumatism  in  r.  limb  <.

From  midnight  till  morning:  pains  in  joints  >.

After  midnight :  stiff  neck.
^^  Temperature  and  Weather. Heat :  slightly  relieves  hip
joint.

Hot  drinks  :  diphtheria  <.

Hot  weather :  vomiting  and  diarrhoea.

Warmth:  pain  in  hip  joint  <.

Exposure  to  air:  pains  in  joints  <.

Open  air :  burning  and  smarting  in  eyes  and  lids  >  ;
cough  <.

Washing:  blotches  in  face  <.

When  it  rains :  rheumatism  comes  on.

Exposure  to  damp  and  cold  weather:  diphtheria;  cough;
rheumatism  of  lower  intercostal  extending  to  abdominal
and  lumbar  muscles ;  stiff  neck ;  rheumatism  <  ;  peri-
ostitis of  r.  femur;  pains  in  joints  <.
*°  Fever,  l  Coldness,  faintness,  dyspnoea ;  limbs  cold,  head  and
face  hot.

I  Chill:  every  morning;  sudden,  followed  by  fever  after
confinement;  at  night  without  special  fever.

I  Heat:  with  pain  in  joints;  high  fever.

■  Sweat:  cold  on  forehead;  toes  sweat;  night  sweat,  hav-
ing an  acid  reaction.
*'  Attacks,  Periodicity. Every  few  minutes :  vomiting.

One  hour  and  a  half  after  dinner,  sometimes  one  hour
and  a  half  after  supper:  pains  in  hypochondrium.

A  few  hours  after  chill :  breasts  hard,  swollen  and  painful.

Every  two  or  three  hours :  sudden  severe  pains  throughout
breasts.

For  five  or  six  hours :  pains  in  joints  increased,  then  de-
creased same  length  of  time.


PHYTOLACCA.  430

Ever}'  morning:  back  very  stiff;  cliill.

Nightly  :  bone  pains;  pains  in  tibia.

For  several  days :  excessive  flow  of  milk.

Weekly:  sick-headache.

Third  week  after  confinement:  mammse  hot,  swollen  and
painful.

For  several  weeks:  rheumatism  of  spine.

For  six  weeks :  fearfully  tumefied  tumor  of  1.  breast.

At  menstrual  period  :  tumor  of  breast  <.

For  six  months  :  severe  pain  in  hip  joint.

Five  years'  standing:  chronic  inflammation  of  bowels;
enlarged  mammary  gland  with  large  fistulous  opening.

For  several  years :  attacks  of  colic ;  rheumatism  ;  spasms
of  stomach  and  diaphragm.
*^  Locality  and  Direction.  Right:  shooting  in  temple;  pain
over  head  < ;  rheumatism  of  frontal  region ;  suppura-
tive choroiditis  in  eje;  shooting  pains  through  ears
■when  swallowing  <  ;  small  ulcers  on  inside  of  cheek  ;
pressing  pain  in  side  of  throat;  tonsil  much  enlarged;
sore  throat;  pressing  pain  up  back  of  neck;  side  of
head  feels  as  if  firmly  pressed  ;  constricted  sensation  in
hypochondrium  ;  sore  space  in  hypochondrium ;  dig-
ging pain  in  hypochondrium  ;  cannot  lie  on  side  on  ac-
count of  pain  in  hypochondrium;  soreness  and  pain  in
hypochondrium;  pain  in  kidneys,  <  side;  breast  full
to  overflowing  of  milk  ;  aching  ])ain  in  side  of  breast  >
lying  on  same  side ;  shocks  of  pain  appear  in  arm  ;
stitch  from  side  to  back;  stiff  neck  <  side;  glands  of
neck  hard;  pain  in  shoulder  joint;  aching  and  tender-
ness along  top  of  trapezius;  tearing  pains  in  thigh;
rheumatism  in  heel ;  constant  pain  in  outer  and  back
part  of  limb ;  periostitis  of  femur ;  pains  in  joints  <  ;
rheumatic  pain  in  knee ;  pain  on  dorsum  of  foot.

Left :  shooting  from  eye  to  vertex  ;  swelling  of  eyelids  <  ;
heat  in  face  <  ;  eruption  on  upper  lip ;  swelling  around
ear;  sensation  of  lump  in  throat  <;  turning  head  to
side  feeling  of  a  lump  in  throat;  tumefied  tumor  of
breast;  tickling  in  side  of  larynx;  lame  feeling  in  side
of  chest;  rheumatism  of  shoulder;  soreness  in  groin;
chronic  rheumatism  of  hip  joint;  rheumatism  of  knee.

First  in  fingers  of  1.  hand,  then  in  other  joints,  then  in  r.
side,  changing  locality  continually.
*^  Sensations.  As  if  brain  were  bruised  ;  as  of  sand  in  eyes ;
as  if  eyes  were  too  large ;  lids  as  if  granulated  ;  edges  of
eyelids  as  if  raw ;  lids  as  if  on  fire ;  nostril  as  if  tickled
with  a  stiff  feather ;  nose  and  eyes  as  if  cold  would  come
on  ;  tongue  as  if  scalded  ;  as  if  a  ball  of  red-hot  iron  had
lodged in  throat ;  as  of  a  lump  in  throat ;  as  if  throat


431  PHYTOLACCA.

were  so  full  it  felt  choked  ;  r.  side  of  head  as  if  pressed
firmly ;  pharynx  feels  like  a  cavern ;  as  if  chest  were  a
big  empty  cask;  body  as  if  bruised;  as  if  pounded  all
over;  as  if  joint  were  being  chopped  with  an  axe.

Pain  :  from  frontal  region  back ;  in  back  of  head  and  neck ;
from_  root  of  tongue  downward  to  outer  attachment  of
clavicle  in  neck  and  back  ;  in  pit  of  stomach  ;  in  cardiac
portions  of  stomach  ;  in  region  of  pylorus ;  in  r.  hypo-
chondrium;  in  region  of  bladder;  in  sacrum  to  knees
and  ankles,  thence  up  to  sacrum  ;  in  joints  ;  in  chest  and
side;  in  throat  and  lungs;  through  midsternum;  in
region  of  heart,  streaking  up  and  down  backbone;  up
neck  to  back  of  head  ;  small  of  back  ;  in  arms  midway
between  articulations;  in  muscles  of  both  arms;  from
tumor  in  breast  down  arm;  in  outer  side  of  thigh;  in
outer  and  back  part  of  r.  limb;  in  middle  of  tibia  and
fibula;  on  dorsum  of  r.  foot;  in  great  toe.

Unbearable  pain  :  from  nipples  radiating  over  whole  body.

Violent  pains :  in  abdomen.

Great  pain  :  in  root  of  tongue ;  fauces.

Severe  pain:  in  head;  in  umbilical  region  ;  in  hip  joint;
through  ankles;  in  arms  and  legs  from  elbows  and
knees  to  fingers  and  toes.

Sharp  pain  :  through  eyeball.

Lancinating  pain:  in  breast;  in  limb.

Cutting:  in  pit  of  stomach;  in  hip.

Tearing  pains :  in  front  and  exterior  surface  of  r.  thigh.

Shooting  pain:  from  1.  eye  to  vertex;  in  r.  temple;
through  ears ;  from  throat  into  ears ;  from  anus  to  lower
part  of  rectum  along  perineum  to  middle  of  penis ;  from
sacrum  down  both  hips;  on  r.  shoulder  joint;  in  thighs.

Drawing:  about  root  of  nose;  down  r.  side  of  neck;  in
thigh ;  in  cicatrices.

Shocks  of  pain  :  in  region  of  head  ;  then  in  r.  arm.

Jerking  pains :  in  different  parts  of  body.

Stitch  :  from  r.  chest  to  back.

Digging  pain :  in  r.  hypochondrium  ;  in  upper  and  lower
portions  of  liver.

Griping  pains:  in  abdomen  ;  in  umbilical  region.

Neuralgic  pains :  on  outer  side  of  thigh  ;  in  toes.

Rheumatic  pain  :  in  and  about  eye ;  in  lumbar  region ;  in
spermatic  cord ;  of  1.  shoulder;  inarms;  in  hands;  of
1.  hip  joint;  lower  extremities;  in  knees;  below  knee
and  in  feet.

Aching  pains  :  in  eyes ;  in  chest  and  sides ;  in  r.  side  of
breast;  in  lumbar  region  day  and  night;  in  sacrum;
down  limbs  to  knees  to  ankles,  returning  to  sacrum
along  top  of  r.  trapezium  ;  in  thigh  ;  up  and  down  limbs
to  knees  and  ankles ;  in  feet ;  of  heels.


PHYTOLACCA.  432

Cramps :  in  abdomen.

Sore  pain  :  over  head.

Dull,  pressive  pain:  in  head;  in  r.  side  of  throat;  going
up  back  of  neck.

Dull,  heavy  pain  :  in  forehead ;  in  lumbar  and  sacral  re-
gions; in  joints.

Dull  pain  :  in  region  of  kidneys.

Heavy,  aching  feeling:  in  head.

Burning :  in  eyes ;  in  fauces  and  whole  length  of  oesopha-
gus; in  umbilical  regions;  in  larynx  and  trachea;  in
feet.

Heat:  in  face;  in  throat;  in  stomach;  in  rectum;  in
trachea.

Stinging  :  down  r.  side  of  neck  through  breasts.

Smarting:  in  eyes  and  lids;  at  tip  of  tongue;  in  fauces.

Soreness :  deep  in  brain ;  in  eyes ;  in  periosteum  and  scalp;
of  teeth ;  of  roof  of  mouth ;  at  pit  of  stomach ;  in  r.  hy-
pochondrium  ;  in  region  of  kidneys ;  in  spermatic  cord ;
in  spot  in  r.  hypochondrium ;  in  all  the  muscles;  in  1.
groin.

Excoriation :  in  throat.

Bruised  feeling :  at  pit  of  stomach ;  of  muscles  of  chest  and
ribs.

Burnt  feeling :  on  back  part  of  tongue.

Scraping :  in  throat.

Rawness :  in  throat.

Roughness :  in  trachea  and  bronchia.

Suffocating  feeling:  in  throat  and  lungs.

Tickling :  in  1.  side  of  larynx ;  in  larynx.

Dryness :  in  top  of  head  ;  in  mouth ;  of  throat ;  in  fauces;
pharynx ;  of  larynx  and  trachea.

Contraction :  in  glottis.

Pressure :  on  forehead  and  upper  part  of  both  eyes ;  in  top
of  head;  around  eyes;  on  temples;  on  thigh.

Constriction  :  in  r.  hypochondrium  ;  at  prsecordium.

Fulness :  in  abdomen.

Distressing  sensation  of  enlargement :  of  calibre  of  phar-
ynx and  oesophagus.

Sickly  feeling:  in  bowels.

Lame  feeling :  in  1.  side  of  chest,  near  cardiac  region ;  in
arms.

Stiffness :  in  back.

Coolness :  in  abdomen.
"  Tissues. Loss  of  fat  (animals) ;  emaciation,  chlorosis.

I  Ulceration  of  mucous  membrane  in  any  part  of  body,  but
particularly  in  nose,  throat  and  rectum.

I  Feels  sore  all  over  from  head  to  foot,  especially  muscular
soreness ;  groans  when  he  moves,  he  is  so  sore.


433  PHYTOLACCA.

■Swelling  and  redness,  with  rheumatism.

iSwelling  hard  but  tender;  intensely  hot.

I  Pains  shifting  rapidly;  swelling  pale,  puffy,  aneemic;  no
appetite ;  constipation ;  <  from  motion  and  at  night.
^Rheumatism.

I  Rheumatism  of  back  and  hip  joints;  chronic  form;  ob-
tuse ;  heavy,  aching  pain,  generally  <  in  damp  weather.

■  Arthritis  vaga,  or  wandering  gout; passing  from  one

joint  and  place  to  another,  with  swelling  and  redness.

iRheumatism  affecting  periosteum,  sheaths  of  nerves  and
fasciae.

IRheumatism :  of  r.  frontal  region,  accompanied  by  nausea,
pain  <  in  morning;  of  shoulder  and  arm,  pains  fly
from  one  part  to  another,  like  an  electric  shock,  <  at
night ;  of  several  years'  standing,  joints  of  all  the  fingers
badly  swollen,  very  painful,  hard  and  shining ;  chronic
of  1.  hip  joint;  pain  obtuse,  heavy,  aching,  generally  <
in  damp  weather ;  coldness  of  limb,  pain  <  by  warmth  ;
pain  in  outer  and  back  part  of  r.  limb,  <  at  night  but
never  going  away  entirely,  unable  to  bear  any  weight
on  limb  or  to  move  it  without  extreme  pain,  which  is
dull,  aching  and  at  times  lancinating;  chronic,  of  lower
extremities,  and  knee  joints  with  or  without  effusion  ;
periosteal,  with  syphilitic  taint;  enlargement  of  glands
of  neck  and  axilla.

■  Rheumatic  and  neuralgic  affections  after  diphtheria.
iRheumatic  or  syphilitic  affections  of  fibrous  tissues  and

periosteum,  it  not  only  affects  the  fibrous  coverings  of
muscles  but  the  fibrous  envelopes  or  sheaths  of  the  nerves.
■Syphilitic  and  mercurial  rheumatism ;  nightly  pains  in
tibia,  with  nodes  and  irritable  ulcers  on  lower  leg.

■  Gonorrhoeal  rheumatism.

■  Rupial  sores  in  great  numbers  all  over  body ;  depression.

^S3^philis.
I  I  Sore  throat,  ulcers  on  genitals ;  severe  pains  in  arms  and
legs,  from  elbows  and  knees  down  to  fingers  and  toes,  with
oedematous  swelling  of  affected  parts ;  pain  <  from  mo-
tion and  contact;  feet  and  legs  covered  with  pale,  red
spots,  about  size  of  dime;  more  scattered  on  arms,  face
and  neck ;  previous  use  of  mercury.  ^Constitutional
syphilis.

■  Bones  inflamed,  swoUen  ;  nightly  pains.

■  Hard  and  painful  nodosities.

I  I  Tumors :  irritable ;  fatty  ;  glandular.
I  iSuppuration  of  painless  tumors.

■  Glands,  inflamed,  swollen,  indurated.

■  Carcinoma  mammae ;  shooting,  lancinating  pains,  <  after

sleeping ;  great  exhaustion  and  prostration.

VOL.  VIII. — 28.


PHYTOLACCA.  434

1  iGonorrhoeal  buboes,  epididymitis  and  other  inflamma-
tory glandular  swellings,
lit  hastens  suppuration.

I  Fetid  discharge  from  breasts.

■  Pus  watery,  sanious,  fetid,  ichorous.

*^  Touch.  Passive  Motion.  Injuries.  Touch :  abdomen
tender;  sore  spot  in  r.  hypochondrium  ;  pains  in  arms
and  legs  <  ;  skin  on  swelled  ankles  and  knees  sensitive.

Pressure:  of  hands  >  pain  in  breasts;  of  finger  on  sore
spot  of  trachea  the  only  way  to  expectorate ;  pains  in
joints  <  ;  on  ulcers  of  feet  causes  soreness.

Rubbing:  slightly  relieves  pain  in  hip  joint.

When  riding: total  obstruction  of  nose, must breathe
through  mouth.
"•^Skin. iSkin  cool,  shrivelled,  dry,  lead-colored.

I I  Barber's  itch  (local  application  of  tincture).

Itch  (a  salve  made  from  the  roots),  old  cases  where  Sul-
phur did  no  good.
I  iSalt  rheum  and  itch.

I  I  Tinea  capitis ;  shingles.

I I  Ringworm  ;  herpes  circinatus.
llSquamous  eruptions,  pityriasis;  psoriasis.
I  Tinea  capitis;  crusta  lactea;"  lupus  ;  ulcers.

I  Lichen-like  eruptions,  with  great  itching  of  skin.
I  I  Warts,  whitlow,  syphilitic  sores,  scarlatina;  measles.
I  I A  very  ugly,  black-looking,  tettery  eruption,  communi-
cated from  one  person  to  others  (decoction  from  roots).
Blackness  like  gangrene.

■  Lipoma.

iBoils:  disposition  to  boils;  especially  near  ulcers;  painful,
on  back,  behind  ears.

I  Ulcers:  looking  as  if  punched  out;  lardaceous  base;  pus
watery,  fetid,  ichorous;  shooting,  lancinating,  jerking
pains;  syphilitic,  cancerous  (also  on  breast).

Cancer  of  mammae  and  other  parts  of  body  ;  large  cancer
on  forehead,  and  one  size  of  hen's  egg  in  breast.

iScirrhus  especially  of  mammse;  cancer  of  lips  and  can-
cerous ill-conditioned  ulcers  of  face.

I  Erythematous  blotches,  irregular,  slightly  raised,  pale
red,  ending  in  dark  red  or  purple  spots.

I  Rash  on  body;  measles.

I  Scarlet  eruption  all  over  body.

■  Scarlatina;  high  fever,  headache,  both  sides  of  throat

covered  with  membrane,  with  rash  on  body.
I  I  Eruption  dry,  of  a  shrivelled  appearance;  in  passing
hand  over  skin  it  feels  like  brown  paper;  urine  sup-
pressed ;  hands  and  feet  burning  hot,  cannot  keep  them
covered;  restless  and  sleepless;  tongue  dry  in  centre;


435  PriYTOLACCA.

sides  coated  brown  ;  throat  covered  with  a  diphtheritic
deposit  of  an  ash  color. ^{Scarlatina.

■  Scarlatina;  with  angina;  acrid  coryza ;  delirium;  non-

appearing  eruption.

■  Red  spots. ^Syphilis.

I  I  Drawing  in  cicatrices.
*^  Stages  of  Life,  Constitution. Patient  is  of  a  rheumatic
diathesis,  and  is  frequently  afflicted  with  rheumatism
of  the  periosteal  and  fibrous  tissues,  or  is  suffering  from
secondary  or  tertiary  syphilis.

Child,  set.  3 ;  scarlet  fever.

Boy,  set.  4 ;  diphtheria.

Henry ,  set.  4 ;  diphtheria.

Boy,  set.  10,  after  exposure  to  cold  and  wet ;  periostitis  of
r.  femur.

Girl,  set.  20,  servant,  strong,  healthy  ;  diphtheria.

Miss  B.,  set.  20 ;  diphtheria.  "

Mrs.  G.,  set.  21, nursing  a  babe;  diphtheria.

Mrs. ,  set.  22,  second  child,  delicate,  nervous  tempera-
ment; irritable  breast.

Miss-E.,  set.  23,  light  complexion,  sandy  hair,  black  eyes,
nervous  temperament,  became  ill  a  few  hours  after
death  of  a  niece  whom  she  had  nursed  during  attack  of
diphtheria;  diphtheria.

Woman,  set.  25,  syphilitic,  after  large  doses  of  mercury;
inflammation  and  ulceration  of  mouth.

Miss  H.,  set.  25;  diphtheria.

Mariner,  set.  25,  bilious  temperament,  contracted  syphilis
two  years  ago,  suffering  for  last  eight  months;  rupia.

Man,  set.  26;  diphtheria.

Man,  set.  30,  tall,  strong,  muscular ;  diphtheria.

Mrs.  B.,  set.  31;  diphtheria.

Mrs.  L.,  set.  32,  confined  eight  weeks  ago ;  mastitis.

M]"S.  H.,  set.  36,  of  good  family,  mother  of  several  chil-
dren ;  syphilis.

S. ,  set.  39  ;  diphtheria.

Woman,  set.  40,  one  year  previously,  after  birth  of  seventh
child,  suffered  from  an  abscess  which  was  neglected;
ulcer  of  breast.

Man,  set.  40,  had  similar  attack  fourteen  years  ago,  from
which  he  did  not  recover  for  over  a  j'^ear ;  rheumatism.

Mr.  H.,  set. 40,  blacksmith;  chronic  rheumatism.

Mrs.  S.,  set.  40,  scrofulous  diathesis,  fifteen  years  ago  had
severe  attack  of  inflammatory  rheumatism  which  be-
came chronic ;  rheumatism.

Mrs.  S.,  set.  43,  suffering  several  weeks;  rheumatism.

Man  set.  45,  suffering  several  years;  pharyngitis.

Mrs.  B.,  set.  45,  suffering  several  years ;  rheumatism.


PHYTOLACCA.  436

Rev.  W.,  aet.  50,  suffering  many  months;  rheumatism.

Merchant,  syphilitic,  was  given  mercury  until  salivated ;
inflammation  and  ulceration  of  phar3'nx.

Primipara,  very  corpulent,  in  poor  circumstances,  few
days  after  confinement  had  chills  and  fever;  very  im-
properly breast  was  poulticed  for  nearly  two  weeks,
when  several  large  abscesses  opened ;  ulceration  and
fistulse  of  mammary  gland.

Mrs.  C,  large,  well-proportioned,  sanguine  temperament,
strongly  scrofulous  diathesis,  had  mammary  abscesses
during  former  pregnancy;  abscess  of  mammse.

Man,  tall,  splendid  physique,  suffering  for  years ;  sciatica.

Young  girl,  suffering  several  weeks;  periosteal  rheu-
matism.

Middle-aged  woman  ;  ulcers  of  feet.

Man,  subject  to  rheumatism  ;  aching  in  heels.
*' Relations. Antidoted by: milk  and salt;  Bellad.,  Coffea
(vomiting),  tllgnat,  3Iercur.,  Mezer.,  Sulphur  {eye  symp-
toms). Opium  (large  doses).

Compare:  Camphor.,  Ar sen.,  Arum  tri.,  Iris  vers.,  Guaiac,
Kali  bich.,  Kalijod.,  Rhus  tox.,  Ipecac.


437  PICRIC  ACID.


PICRIC  ACID.

Picric  Acid.  HC^  H^  {NO^)^  0.

Discovered  by  Hausman  in  1788.
Crystallizes  in  bright  yellow  needles  ■or  scales.

Provings  by  Couch,  N.  Y.  J.  of  Horn.,  1874,  vol.  2,  p.  149  ;  T.  F.  Allen,  Linsley
and  S.  A.  Jones,  Allen's  Ency.,  vol.  7,  p.  519.

Clinical  Authorities. — i??~am /ajr,  Allen,  Organon,  vol.  3,  p.  94;  Headache,
Hale,  B.J.  H.,  vol.  S6,  p.  3895  OfJtYts,  Houghton,  T.  W.  H.  Con.,  1876,  p.  649
Boils  in  meatus  auditoriws,  Houghton,  B.  J.  H,,  vol.  34,  p.  356,  from  Horn.  Times
Nov.  1875,  N.  E,  M.  O.,  vol.  11,  p.  188;  Enuresis,  Martin,  Trans.  H.  M.  S.  Pa.
1883,  p.  59 ;  Satyriasis,  Allen,  Hah.  Mo.,  vol.  13  ;  p.  202  ;  Spermatorrhcea,  Allen
Times  Ket.,  1875,  p.  89,  from  N.  Y.  J.  H.,  1874,  p.  412 ;  Posterior  spinal  sclerosis.
Lilienthal,  N.  A.  J.  H.,  vol.  24,  p.  64  ;  Debility,  Morgan,  Hah.  Mo.,  vol.  19,  p.  101
Nej'vous  disorder^  Jones,  Hoto.  Times,  vol.  6,  p.  70.

^  Mind- iGreat  indifference,  lack  of  will-power.

I  I  Cannot  collect  thoughts ;  quickly  prostrated  from  using

mind.
I  Disinclination  for  mental  and  physical  work;  desire  to
sit  still  without  taking  any  interest  in  surroundings.

■  Mental  prostration  after  least  intellectual  work;  any  at-

tempt to  study  brings  on  brain  symptoms  anew,  and
develops  burning  along  spine,  with  great  weakness  of
legs  and  back,  with  soreness  of  muscles  and  joints.

■  Brain  fag.

^  Sensorium. Vertigo and nausea, with  intense  pain in
frontal  region  and  vertex ;  could  not  sit  up ;  <  from
raising  head.
Vertigo  <  from  stooping,  walking,  going  upstairs.
^  Inner  Head. Dull  headache  in  forehead  or  occiput,  may
extend  down  spine ;  <  from  slightest  attempt  at  using
mind.
Severe  pains  in  neck  and  occiput  going  up  to  supraorbital
notch  or  foramen,  then  extending  into  eyes.

■  Headaches,  with  dull  throbbing,  heavy  feeling  or  sharp

pains; <  from  study  or  movement  of  eyes;  >  from
rest,  open  air  and  binding  head  tightly.
Any  attempt  at  using  mind  brings  on  headache  and  causes
burning  along  spine.

■  After  every  severe  mental  effort,  intense  throbbing  head-

ache, <  at  base  of  brain  ;  often  with  congestion  of  spine,
increase  of  sexual  excitement  and  violent  erections.


PICRIC  ACID.  438

■  Headache  of  students  and  overworked  business  men,  or

when  grief  or  other  depressing  emotions  have  resulted
in  nervous  exhaustion  with  passive  congestion ;  seat  of
pain  is  in  occipito-cervical  region.
I  I  Brain  fag  in  a  school-teacher  ;  so  tired  after  her  labors
can  scarcely  reach  home;  headache  completely  in-
capacitating her  for  work,  begins  in  morning  on  '
waking,  increases  as  day  advances,  always  >  by  sleep
at  night;  chiefly  affects  forehead,  extending  gradually
to  vertex  and  involving  entire  cerebrum,  with  constant
vertigo,  <  from  motion,  mental  exertion,  especially
schoolwork  and  going  up-stairs ;  at  times  intense  throb-
bing, at  others  dull  pressing;  always  >  by  quiet;  pain
in  eyes  <  moving  them;  with  the  headache  sense  of
terrible  prostration,  she  feels  so  tired ;  feels  >  in  open
air,  but  too  tired  and  exhausted  to  walk  ;  after  walking
a  few  yards  thinks  she  will  never  reach  next  block,  it
seems  so  far  away  ;  sometimes  unrefreshing  sleep.

■  Brain  fag  of  literary  or  business  people; slightest  ex-

citement or  mental  exertion,  or  any  overwork, brings  on
headache.

Congestion  of  head  with  nosebleed.

Cerebro-spinal  congestion.
^  Sight  and  Eyes. Sparks  before  eyes.

Sight  dim,  confused.

Has  to  bring  objects  close  to  eyes  to  see  them;  every-
thing blurred  as  from  looking  through  fog.

Pupils  dilated.

Dryness  of  eyes;  tingling  and  smarting,  <  hj  constant
use  and  by  lamplight;  acrid,  thick  matter  in  corners  in
morning.

Feeling  of  sand  in  eyes,  smarting  pain,  acrid  tears.

On  waking  and  for  an  hour,  feeling  of  sticks  in  eyes.

Pressure  over  eyes  <  from  studying  and  motion,  >  sit-
ting still.

Severe  pain  over  r.  eye,  sharp,  vibrating,  intermittent.

ConjunctivsB  yellow.

Eyes  smart  and  burn.

Thick  matter  forms  in  canthi.

Eye  symptoms  <  from  artificial  light.
^  Hearing  and  Ears. Otitis  externa  circumscripta,  furuncle
in  ear ;  burning  sensation  in  external  ear ;  pain  behind
r.  ear,  running  down  side  of  neck.

chronic  or  subacute  forms ;  debilitated  cases  with  red-
ness and  localized  tenderness  of  meatus, ^Otitis.

■  Furuncles  in  external  auditory  canal.
^  Smell  and  Nose. Nose  full  of  mucus ;  can  breathe  only
with  mouth  open.


439  PICRIC  ACID.

^  Upper  Face. Papules on face,  which turn into small

boils.
^"  Taste  and  Tongue, i  i Sour,  bitter  taste  in  mouth.

I  I  Bitter  taste  with  thirst.
^^  Inner  Mouth. Saliva  frothy ;  stringy.
^^  Throat. Thick  white  mucus  on  tonsils.

Throat  feels  rough  and  scraped  ;  >  from  eating,  <  from

empty  swallowing  and  after  sleep.
On  swallowing  throat  feels  sore,  as  if  it  would  sj^lit.
^^  Hiccough,  Belching,  Nausea  and  Vomiting. Wants  to
belch  but  has  not  the  power.
Sour  eructations  with  frontal  headache.
Nausea,  <  in  morning  and  on  attempting  to  rise  and

move  about.
Nausea,  <  5  a.m.  and  when  attempting  to  rise.
^''  Scrobiculum  and  Stomach. Pressure  and  weight  about

stomach.
'^  Hypochondria. Tendency  to  jaundice.

Liver  full  of  fat  granules.
'^  Abdomen. Rumbling  of  flatus  in  abdomen.
^"  Stool  and  Rectum. Stools:  thin,  yellow,  sometimes  oily,
with  much  burning  and  smarting  at  anus  ;  prostration
and  ineffectual  urging  to  stool ; yellowish-grey  (like
gruel).
During  stool:  burning,  smarting  and  cutting  at  anus.
After  stool :  great  prostration ;  burning  and  smarting  at

anus.
Diarrhoea  in  persons  exhausted  by  mental  overwork.
^'  Urinary  Organs. Kidneys  congested.

Urine  of  abnormally  high  specific  gravity  and  containing

sugar ;  albuminous.
Urine  rich  in  phosphates  and  uric  acid,  and  poor  in  sul-
phates and  urates.
Albumen  and  sugar  in  urine.
Urine  red  as  blood.
I  I  Dribbling  after  urinating.
I  I  Great  sexual  desire,  with  emissions;  emissions  every

other  night.
I  1  Violent  erections  all  night;  profuse  seminal  emissions.

■  Terrible  erections,  with  restless  sleep.

I  lOverexcitement  of  sexual  organs from irritation of
cerebellum,  in  both  sexes.

■  Priapism,  associated  with  spinal  disease;  erections  vio-

lent, penis  distended  almost  to  bursting.

■  Satyriasis  of  three  years'  standing.

I  I  Impotence  or  weakness  with  irritability;  penis  relaxed
and  shrunken  ;  coldness  of  genitals.

■  Spermatorrhoea.


PICRIC  ACID.  440


21


Pregnancy. Parturition. Lactation, i  i  In diseases
of  nipples;  (locally)  inflammatory  symptoms  cease  and
skin  becomes  tougher.
^'  Neck  and  Back. Heaviness  in  small  of  back.

■  Burning  along  spine  and  very  great  weakness  of  legs

and  back,  with  soreness  of  muscles  and  joints;  <  from'
study.
iTired aching  feeling  and some  burning  in  back  and
legs ;  in  women.

■  Heat  in  lower  part  of  spine;  aching  and  dragging  iiT

lumbar  region,  <  from  motion.

Tired,  aching  in  lumbar  region  on  awaking.

II Urine  intense  red;  violent,  long-lasting,  painful  pria-
pism ;  anaesthesia  of  legs,  with  a  feeling  as  if  enclosed  in
an  elastic  stocking;  chest  feels  as  if  encircled  in  a  tight
band;  pricking,  as  if  from  needles,  in  legs  and  feet;
<  from  least  motion. ^Myelitis.

I  I  Tonic  and  clonic  spasms;  keeps  legs  wide  apart  when
standing ;  looks  steadily  at  objects,  as  if  unable  to
make  them  out;  limbs  too  weak  to  support  body.
^Myelitis.

I  I  After  doing  much  fine  work,  especially  at  night,  grad-
ual failing  of  eyesight,  blur  before  eyes;  hands  became
very  tired,  even  when  doing  but  little,  and  was  unable  to
manage  them  skilfully;  this  tired  sensation  was  noticed
first  of  all  in  hands;  sat  in  a  chair  and  desired  to  re-
main very  still ;  on  attempting  to  walk  pressed  hand
upon  loin  and  slid  feet  along  ground, as  in  a  paretic  con-
dition, soon  becoming  exhausted ;  constipation ;  could  not
read  a  line  without  becoming  much  exhausted ;  played-out
feeling  of  whole  body ;  no  will  or  power  at  all ;  chilli-

,  ness  down  back,  in  immediate  region  of  spine,  during
damp  weather ;  paretic  condition  of  lower  extremities  i
dull  and  heavy  headache  in  occiput;  bodily  exhaus-
tion with  mental  clearness;  sleepless  at  night  from  ex-
hausted feeling;  as  soon  as  he  falls  asleep  priapisms
and  seminal  emissions,  with  or  without  sensual  dreams;
semen  ejaculated  too,  quickly  during  coition.  ^Posterior
spinal  sclerosis.

1  I  Completed  the  cure  of  a  case  of  spinal  exhaustion  fol-
lowing acute  disease.
^^  Lower  Limbs. '  i  Great  weakness  and  heaviness  of  lower
limbs  and  back,  with  soreness  of  muscles  and  joints.

■  Great  weakness  of  legs,,  especially  1.,  which  trembles;

heavy,  like  lead ;  lifted  from  floor  with  difficulty.

■  Great  weakness  in  region  of  hips.

Numbness  and  crawling  in  legs,  with  trembling  and  prick-
ing as  if  from  needles.  ,
Heaviness  of  feet,  with  dull  frontal  headache.


441  PICRIC  ACID.

I  I  Great  coldness  of  feet.
^*  Limbs  in  General, ii  Great  heaviness  in  arms  and  legs,
especially  legs,  on  exertion.

I  I  Extremities  cold.
^^  Rest. Position. Motion. Rest :  headaches  >  ;  pressure
over  eyes.

Lying  down  :  headache  better.

Raising  head :  vertigo  worse.

Could  not  sit  up  :  vertigo.

Stooping :  vertigo  worse.

Motion :  vertigo  <  ;  pressure  over  eyes  < ;  nausea  <  ;
aching  and  dragging  in  lumbar  region;  pricking  in
legs  worse.

Walking :  vertigo  <  ;  up  hill,  readily  winded.

Going  up-^tairs :  vertigo  worse.
^®  Nerves.  1 1  Tired  feeling :  on  least  exertion ;  all  over  body ;
with  heaviness;  excessive  languor;  no  desire  to  talk  or
do  anything;  indifferent  to  everything;  is  obliged  to
lie  down  ;  it  seems  difficult  to  move  limbs  ;  great  mus-
cular debility ;  readily  winded  by  walking  up  hill ;  in-
clined to  day-sleepiness ;  poor  appetite ;  general  sense
of  torpidity.

I  I  Generally  "run  down,"  owing  to  anxiety,  loss  of  sleep,
etc. ;  1.  lower  first  and  second  molars  had  been  recently
filled  and  the  gum  between,  in  contact  with  tha  metal,
became  sore  and  painful;  inflammation  extended  to
third  molar,  which  .was  painfully  loose,  and  also  to
upper  jaw  and  auditory  meatus;  a  furunculoid  swell-
ing, as  from  lymphatic  extension,  appeared  on  the
lower  wall  of  latter,  with  soreness  going  from  teeth  to
ear,  on  pressing  jaws  together;  dull  pain  in  back  of
neck  and  head,  due  to  astigmatism,  returned  in  spite  of
glasses ;  sexual  system  irritable  but  weak  ;  despondent
yet  enduring  mood,  with  sensitive  feelings.

I  I  Great  prostration  ;  ears  transparent ;  face,  neck,  lips  and
hands  .of  a  deathlike  whiteness;  three  to  five  attacks  of
vomiting,  coming  on  suddenly  and  without  warning,
ejected  matter  being  of  bright-yellow  color  and  very
bitter ;  easily  prostrated,  slightest  exertion  obliging  him
to  quit;  often  the  prostration  caused  by  some  little  out-
door work  in  morning  compels  him  to  keep  his  bed  the
remainder  of  the  day;  sometimes  feels  like  dropping
down  where  he  is,  as  if  he  were  unable  to  reach
house;  mouth  badly  ulcerated  ;  tongue  smooth,  cracked,
having  appearance  of  alligator's  hide ;  mouth  very  dry ;
dry  feeling  commencing  in  throat  and  working  upward,
causing  him  to  drink  often,  but  little  at  a  time;  cannot
double  tongue;  a  feeling  as  if  tongue  would  crack
were  it  not  moistened;  sensation  as  of  a  lump  back  of


PICRIC  ACID. -  442

thyroid  cartilage ;  very  troublesome  when  swallowing;
appetite  poor;  no  desire  for  any  particular  kind  of  food,
eats  what  is  set  before  him  ;  what  he  eats  tastes  well
and  seems  to  digest  well ;  retires  about  10  p.m.  almost
prostrate,  but  in  a  short  time  it  passes  away,  and  he
quickly  goes  to  sleep;  awakens  a  number  of  times  in
night  to  moisten  tongue, but  readily  goes  to  sleep  again ;
when  he  awakens  in  morning  feels  quite  strong,  but  this
soon  passes  away  and  he  dreads  the  day ;  constipated
eight  months ;  evacuation  once  in  four  or  five  days ;
stool  hard  as  a  rock,  sometimes  bloody ;  great  straining,
with  pain  during  and  after,  easing  up  after  a  little ;
head  feels  badly  all  through,  but  pain  is  on  r.  side,  ex-
tending from  forehead  back  and  in  top  of  orbit  of  eye ;
>  in  a  cool  room  or  lying  down  ;  inclined  to  be  drowsy;
sometimes  feels  as  if  he  could  sleep  all  day ;  when
walking  up-stairs  or  up  a  hill  has  a  sensation  as  if  stairs
or  ground  were  coming  up  to  meet  him  ;  vertigo  on
rising  from  bed,  chair  or  stooping  position  and  imme-
diately after  work;  unable  to  retain  urine,  it  was  hot,
almost  scalding,  but  soon  passed  off,  leaving  him  weak;
no  erections ;  scrotum  lengthened,  hanging  down  almost
to  knees;  penis  retracted.

■  After  a  severe  mental  shock  from  a  death,  languor,  ex-

haustion, feels  so  tired,  wants  to  lie  down  and  sleep  all
the  time,  which  she  would  do  if  not  aroused.

1 1  Neurasthenia.

I  Weariness  progressing  from  a  slight  feeling  of  fatigue  on
motion  to  complete  paralysis.

■  Paralysis  from  softening  of  cord.

■  Tingling  of  lips,  formication  about  head  and  crawling,

as  of  ants  over  surface.
^^  Sleep. Sleep  restless  and  disturbed  "by  erections.
^"^  Time. Morning :  thick  matter  in  corners  of  eyes ;  nausea
<  ;  out-door  work  easily  prostrates.  '

5  A.M. :  nausea  worse.
Night:  sleeplessness.
^^  Temperature  and  Weather. Open air :  headache >  ;
work  in,  prostrates.
Cool  room  :  headache  better.

■  Pains  <  wet  weather. ^Locomotor  ataxia.
Amelioration  from  cold  air  and  water.

'"*  Fever. '  l  Chilliness  followed  by  clammy  sw^eat.

Useful  in  typhoid  conditions.
*'  Attacks,  Periodicity. Every  other  night :  emissions.

Every  four  or  five  days:  evacuations.

Three  years :  satyriasis.
^^  Locality  and  Direction.  Right:  severe  pain  over  eye;  pain
behind  car.


443  PICRIC  ACID.

Left :  leg  trembles.
^^  Sensations.  As  of  sand  in  eyes;  as  of  sticks  in  e^'es;  as  if
throat  would  split ;  legs  as  if  enclosed  in  an  elastic
stocking;  chest  as  if  encircled  in  a  tight  band  ;  pricking
as  if  from  needles  in  legs  ;  as  of  a  lump  back  of  thyroid
cartilage ;  as  if  stairs  or  ground  were  coming  up  to  meet
him  ;  as  of  ants  crawling  over  surface.

Pain :  in  eyes ;  behind  r.  ear ;  running  down  side  of  neck.

Intense  pain:  in  frontal  region  and  vertex.

Severe  pain :  in  neck  and  occiput  to  supraorbital  notch
or  foramen,  thence  into  eyes ;  over  r.  eye.

Cutting:  at  anus.

Dull,  throbbing,  heavy,  sharp  pains :  in  head.

Aching :  in  back.

Dull  pain:  in  head;  in  back  of  neck.

Smarting  pain:  in  eyes;  at  anus.

Burning :  along  spine ;  of  eyes  ;  in  external  ear ;  at  anus.

Heat :  in  lower  part  of  spine.

Soreness  of  muscles  and  joints ;  of  throat ;  from  teeth  to  ear.

Pressure:  over  eyes;  about  stomach.

Heaviness:  in  small  of  back  ;  in  legs.

Dryness:  of  eyes  ;  of  throat.

Numbness:  in  legs.

Played-out  feeling :  of  whole  body.

Weakness:  of  legs  and  back  ;  in  region  of  hips.

Coldness:  of  genitals;  down  back  ;  of  feet.

Crawling :  in  legs.
*'  Tissues. Restorative  of  a  wasted  and  worn-out  system.

Progressive  pernicious  anaemia.

Cortex  cerebri  cerebellum,  medulla  oblongata  and  spinal
cord  were  found  reduced  to  a  soft,  pulpy  mass,  dark  brown
in  color  and  loaded  with  shining,  greasy  particles.
'^  Touch. Passive Motion. Injuries. Binding head

tightly;  headache  >.
***  Skin. iSmall  furuncles  in  any  part  of  body,  particularly  in

ears.
"  Stages  of  Life. Man,  set.  about  30;  enuresis.

Man,  set.  35,  lithographer,  marked  hydrogenoid  constitu-
tion, father  of  two  children;  posterior  spinal  sclerosis.

Man,  set.  62,  weight  140  lbs. ;  nervous  disorder.

Woman,  principal  of  school ;  brain  fag.
Relations.  Compare:  Arg.nitr.  (headache  and  backache) ;
Gelsem.  (brain  fag,  occipital  headache  in  sexual  neu-
rasthenia); Phos.  ac.  (tired  feeling,  exhaustion  from
sexual  excesses) ;  Phosphor,  (effects  of  mental  applica-
tion); Petrol,  (occipital  headache);  Oxal.  ac.  (softening
of  spinal  cord);  Sulphur  (congestion  of  lumbar  spine);
^/wmma  (spinal  pains);  *S%'ca (nervous  exhaustion, sensi-
tive spine).


48


PIX  LIQUIDA.  444

PIX  LIQUIDA.

.Liquid  tar.

Introduced  by  Jeanes.

^^  Inner  Chest  and  Lungs,  i  Expectoration  of  purulent  mat-
ter, offensive  in  odor  and  taste  and  accompanied  by
pain,  referred  to  third  costal  cartilage  (really  in  1.
bronchus);  pain  mayor  may  not  go  through  to  back.
^Bronchial  catarrh.  ^Phthisis.
Useful  in  third  stage  of  phthisis.

I  Pain at  third 1.  costal cartilage,  where  it  joins with
rib ; rales  through lungs and muco-purulent sputa.
.  ^Phthisis.

■  Suppurative  processes  affecting  1.  lung,  with  pain  at  third
1.  costal  cartilage.
*^  Sensations. Pain  :  in  1.  third  costal  cartilage.

Intolerable  itching :  of  eruption  on  hands.
*^  Skin. Eruption,  especially  on  backs  of  hands,  itching  in-
tolerably at  night  and  bleeding  when  scratched.
Violent  itching.

Skin  cracked,  bleeding  when  scratched,  with  sleeplessness.
*^  Relations. Compare  Anisum  stellatum  in  chest  pains.


445  PLANTAGO  MAJOR.


PLANTAGO  MAJOR.

Plantain.  Plantaginacese.

The  greater  plantain  is  common  in  Europe  and  North  America.  The  fresh
plant  is  gathered  when  coming  into  flower,  and  from  it  is  prepared  the  alcoholic
tincture.

Provings  by  Heath,  Hah.  Mo.,  1868,  vol.  3,  p.  332  {  F.  Humphreys,  Earhart,
Fox,  Warren,  Wood,  Bishop,  Freeman,  Slocum,  Bunting,  Leavanway,  Hum-
plireys  Monograph,  1871 ;  an  additional  proving  by  Heath,  N.  Am.  J.  of  Horn.,
1873,  p.  502.

Clinical,  Authorities. —  Otalgia,  Houghton,  N.  E.  M.  G.,  vol.  11,  p.  188
Woodyatt,  Times  Ret.,  1876,  p.  48 ;  Toothache,  Plympton,  Hah.  Mo.,  vol.  10,  p
411 ;  Eeutlinger,  A.  H.  O.,  vol.  6,  p.  140 ;  Neuralgia  of  teeth,  Boynton,  Hom.  Times
vol.  3,  p.  204;  Times  Ret.,  1875,  p.  119 ;  Tobacco  habit.  Price,  Organon,  vol.  2,  p
118;  Chronic  diarrhoea;  Times  Ret.,  1877,  p.  95;  Polyuria,  Allen,  Hom.  CI.,  vol
4,  p.  61  ;  Enuresis,  Chamberlain,  B.  J,  H.,  vol.  25,  p.  319 ;  Nocturnal  emissions.
Jones,  N.  E.  M.  G.,  vol.  2,  p.  175;  Delayed  urination,  Chamberlain,  B.  J.  H.,  vol
25,  p.  319 ;  Ague,  Higgins,  N.  A.  J.  H.,  vol.  22,  p.  181.

^  Mind. Mind  inactive,  with  dull,  muddled  feeling  in  head.
Despondency;  confusion  of  thought.
I  Irritable,  morose  disposition;  impatient,  restless  mood,
with  dull,  stupid  feeling  in  brain.

■  Great  mental  prostration,  <  by  mental  exertion,  which

also  causes rapid respiration  and  a  feeling  of  great

anxiety.
'  Inner  Head. Twinges  of  pain  in  different  parts  of  head ;

now through r.  temple, extending backward ; then

through  occiput  from  ear  to  ear ;  then  in  other  parts  of

head,  more  or  less  severe.
Severe  pain  in  1.  side  of  head,  from  forehead  extending

deep  into  brain,  coming  on  in  paroxysms.
Intermittent  pulsative  pain  in  vertex  and  in  small  spot

beneath  scalp.
Headache  accompanied  by  toothache.
Dull  headache.
^  Sight  and  Eyes, i  Ciliary  neuralgia  from  decayed  teeth ;

dull,  heavy  ache  in  1.  eye,  with  exquisite  tenderness  of

ball ;  1.  upper  incisor  decayed.
^  Hearing  and  Ears. iPain  in  ear  with  pain  in  teeth  and

face;  pains  are  sharp,  twinging,  running.

■  Otalgia,  independent  of  organic  lesions.


PLANTAGO  MAJOR.  446

B Neuralgic  earache,  associated  witli  toothache;  darting,
twinging,  sharp,  stabbing  pains  in  inferior  maxillary
branch  of  trifacial  nerve.

I  Earache,  twinging,  sharp  pains,  with  pains  in  teeth.

■  Neuralgic  earache,  associated  with  odontalgia.

"^  Nose  and  Smell. iFrequent  sneezing,  with  sudden  attacks
of  profuse,  watery,  bland  coryza.
Sudden  discharge  of  yellowish  water  from  r.  nostril.
Yellow  water  from  nose  like  saffron.
Red  papulae  around  nose.
^  Upper  Face. Neuralgia  in  1.  side  of  face,  pains  shooting
and  tearing,  extending  from  jaw  to  ear.
Violent  bruised  aching  pain  in  r.  side  of  face.
Eruption  on  forehead.

Small,  red,  rough,  scaly  erythematous  patches,  size  of  pea,
on  face,  especially  1.  side.
^  Lower  Face. Dry,  scaly  eruption  on  lower  lip.
'"Teeth and  Gums. iTeeth  (1.  side)  feel  elongated,  sore;
pain  unbearably  severe,  boring,  digging  in  sound  teeth  ;

<  from  contact  and  extremes  of  heat  and  cold.

I  Aching  in  decaj^ed  teeth,  or  shooting  up  1.  side  of  face;

face  red.
Excessive  boring  and  digging  pain,  profuse  flow  of  saliva,

<  by  walking  in  cold  air  and  by  contact;  teeth  feel
elongated  and  sore;  soreness  even  of  sound  teeth  while
eating;  very  rapid  decay  of  teeth;  bleeding  of  gums.

I  I  Continuous  aching  in  badly  decayed  wisdom  tooth  in  1.
lower  jaw,  after  ride  across  ferry  in  a  sharp  wind,  five
weeks  previously ;  sharp  pain  shooting  up  1.  side  of
face  towards  temples  and  ears,  with  considerable  red-
ness of  face.

■  Neuralgia  of  inferior  dental  nerve.
I  I  Grinding  of  teeth  at  night.
Gums  bleed  easily.

"  Taste  and  Tongue. Food  tasteless.

Tongue  coated  white,  with  dirty,  putrid  or  clammy  taste.
''  Inner  Mouth. Breath  putrid,  offensive.

lAphthse  in  children.
'•'  Throat. Dry,  parched  throat.

Sensation  of  scraping  in  throat.
"  Appetite,  Thirst. Desires,  Aversions. Appetite  poor.

Thirst.

■  Bad  effects  of  excessive  use  of  tobacco  (causes  disgust  for

tobacco  in  chewers).
'"  Hiccough,  Belching,  Nausea  and  Vomiting.  Eructations,

tasting  like  sulphur  or  carbonic  acid  gas.
Nausea  with  drowsiness  or  faint,  tremulous  feeling.
'^  Scrobiculum  and  Stomach. Sinking  feeling  at  stomach.


19


20


447  PLANTAGO  MAJOR.

Heaviness  of  stomach  even  after  a  light  meal;  sensation
of  heat  in  prsecordia,  with  fulness  in  abdomen  while
walking  in  fresh  air ;  >  sitting  down  ;  faint  and  tremu-
lous feeling,  with  nausea;  slight  appetite  and  speedy
satiety ;  food  tasteless  ;  rumbling  in  abdomen  after  eat-
ing; loud  and  copious  flatulency;  diarrhoea,  with  loose
frequent  stools  and  flatulency;  hemorrhoids.
Abdomen. Sensation  of  goneness  in  abdomen.

Distension  of  abdomen,  with  frequent  loud  and  copious
discharge  of  fetid  flatus.

Rumbling  and  uneasiness  in  bowels.

Violent  griping  pains,  mostly  in  upper  part  of  abdomen.

I  Colic:  >  by  eating;  flatulent.
Stool and  Rectum. Stool:  l brown,  fermented, frothy;
I  watery, brown; watery; papescent; excoriating
(watery,  brown).

I  Diarrhoea  :  with  loose  frequent  stools  with  flatulency ;  <
8  to  10  A.M.

Before  stool:  colic;  frequent  discharge  of  offensive  flatus.

During  stool:  violent  griping  pains,  with  tenesmus  (or
absence  of  painj,  partial  prolapse  of  rectum,  weakness;
faintness.

I  I  Chronic  diarrhoea  of  two  years'  duration  ;  at  least  five
stools  during  day  and  one  or  two  during  night;  stools
loose,  watery,  but  not  bloody ;  gurgling  in  bowels,  with-
out colic;  tongue  clean;  no  appetite,  could  eat  no  meat,
lived  chiefly  on  fish  and  vegetables ;  great  thirst ;
sallow  complexion;  great  emaciation,  but  strength  not
much  reduced,  though  complained  frequently  of  feel-
ing of  emptiness  and  faintness  in  head  ;  pulse  weak  but
regular.

I  I  Chronic  diarrhoea,  with  flatulency  and  prolapsus  of
rectum.

■  Cholera  infantum.

I  I  Dysentery.

I  Blind  piles;  hemorrhoidal  tumors  inflamed  and  ex-
ceedingly painful,  interfering  entirely  with  the  work
(locally).

■  Angry  inflamed  hemorrhoidal  tumors.
I  I  Worms.

Urinary  Organs,  i  i  Frequent  passages  of  large  quantities
of  pale  urine;  every  night,  besides  being  taken  up  two
or  three  times  to  urinate,  he  soaked  two  mattresses ;
stools  grey  or  mixed  grey  in  color;  irritable;  puffy
under  eyes;  eats  heartily  and  sleeps  soundly.

■  Nocturnal  copious  enuresis  from  laxity  of  sphincter
vesicae.

■  Irritable  bladder  and  frequent  micturition.


PLANTAGO  MAJOR.  448

I  I  Nocturnal  enuresis ;  profuse  colorless  urine,  depositing
a  white  sediment;  occurs  from  midnight  to  morning.

■  Enuresis  in  children  where  urine  is  scanty,  acrid  and

loaded  with  uric  acid  and  its  deposits;  bladder  and
sphincter  in  an  irritable  condition,  causing  frequent
micturition  day  and  night.

1  I  Delayed  dribbling  urination  in  a  woman.
"  Male  Sexual  Organs. Sexual  debility.

^^  Female  Sexual  Organs, l  l  Erysipelas  of  mammse.
2»  Pregnancy. Parturition. Lactation. i  i  Erysipelas  of
the  mammse.
■  iMastitis;  heat,  swelling,  pain.
^^  Heart,  Pulse  and  Circulation. Palpitation  of  heart.
^^  Lower  Limbs. Hard,  white,  flattened,  isolated  papulae  on

inside  of  thighs  ;  some  having  red  point  in  centre.
^  Rest. Position. Motion. Sitting  down :  fulness  in  ab-
domen >.
•  Moving  about:  gooseflesh  <.
Walking:  fulness  in  abdomen.
^^  Nerves, l  Weariness  and  prostration,  with  desire  to  yawn
and  stretch.

■  Neuralgia  from  use  of  tobacco.

^^  Sleep. Insomnia  from  abdominal  troubles; cannot  sleep
after  4  a.m.  ;  tosses  about  or  falls  into  a  dreamy  sleep,
full  of  gloom  and  fright,  which  rouses  him.
Grinding  of  teeth  during  sleep.
Sleep  restless ;  disturbed  by  dreams.
^^  Time. After  4  a.m.  :  cannot  sleep.
8  to  10  A.M. :  diarrhoea  <.
Day :  frequent  micturition.

2  P.M. :  gooseflesh.

Night :  grinding  of  teeth  ;  passages  of  large  quantities  of
pale  urine;  frequent  micturition  ;  itching  of  skin  <.
^'  Temperature  and  Weather. Heat  of  room  unbearable.

Warm  room  :  hands  cold.

Fresh  air :  walking,  fulness  in  abdomen.

Heat  and  cold:  toothache  <.

Cold  air:  toothache  <.

Sharp  wind :  ride  in,  aching  in  teeth.
^**  Fever, n Erratic  pains in  chest; dulness  in head and
stretching  of  limbs.

Chill:  without  thirst;  with  gooseflesh,  2  p.m.,  running
over  body,  <  when  moving  about;  fingers  cold;  cold-
ness of  body  with  shivering ;  head  feels  irritable ;  feet
and  legs  cold ;  hands  cold,  even  in  warm  room.

Heat,  with  thirst;  great  excitability,  anxiety,  mental
agon}^  restlessness ;  room  seems  hot  and  close ;  oppres-
sion of  chest,  rapid  respiration ;  breathing  difficult,  as  if


449  PLANTAGO  MAJOR.

there  was  no  air  in  room ;  burning  heat  of  head,  face,
hands  and  feet;  head  feels  hot, painful, dull  and  stupid;
hands  hot  and  clammy.

Sweat :  cold  over  lumbar  and  sacral  region  ;  heat  of  room
unbearable,  producing  perspiration.

I  Fever,  which  runs  its  course  for  many  weeks  or  months,
either  in  daily  paroxysms  or  repeated  every  two,  three,
four,  seven  or  fourteen  days;  relaxation  of  sphincter
vesicae.

■  Chronic intermittent fever, especially after abuse of
quinine.
^^  Attacks,  Periodicity. Daily  paroxysms  of  fever,  or  re-
peated every  two,  three,  four,  seven  or  fourteen  days.

During  day  :  five  stools.

During  night:  one  or  two  stools.

From  midnight  to  morning :  nocturnal  enuresis.

Two  years'  duration  :  chronic  diarrho^ia.
*^  Locality  and  Direction. Right :  twinges  of  pain  through
temple;  sudden  discharge  of  yellowish  water  from  nos-
tril; bruised  aching  in  side  of  face.

Left :  severe  pain  in  side  of  head  ;  dull,  heavy  ache  in  eye ;
upper  incisor  decayed ;  neuralgia  in  side  of  face ;  ery-
thematous patches  on  face ;  teeth  feel  elongated.
"  Sensations. Pains  are  tearing  in  nature.

Teeth :  as  if  elongated  ;  as  if  there  was  no  air  in  room.

Pain:  in  ear,  in  teeth,  in  face.

Severe  pain :  in  1.  side  of  head.

Boring,  digging:  in  teeth.

Shooting:  in  1.  side  of  face.

Twinges  of  pain :  in  different  parts  of  head ;  in  ear.

Griping  pains :  in  upper  part  of  abdomen.

Pulsative  pain  :  in  vertex  and  in  small  spot  beneath  scalp.

Erratic  pains :  inchest.

Violent  bruised,  aching  pain  :  in  r.  side  of  face.

Neuralgia:  in  ear;  in  1.  side  of  face;  in  inferior  dental
nerve.

Dull,  heavy  ache :  in  1.  eye.

Aching:  in  decayed  teeth.

Dull  pain  :  in  head.

Soreness:  of  teeth;  even  of  sound  teeth.

Exquisite  tenderness :  of  eyeball.

Scraping :  in  throat.

Heat:  in  prsecordia;  burning  of  head,  face,  hands  and
feet.

Heaviness:  of  stomach.

Fulness:  in  abdomen.

Sinking  feeling :  at  stomach.

Goneness :  of  abdomen.

VOL.  VIII. — 29.


PLANTAGO  MAJOE.  450

Coldness:  of  body.

Itching:  of  skin.
"  Tissues. ■  111  effects  of  tobacco.

I  I  Inflammation  of  glands,  particularly  of  mammse.

I  I  Incised  wounds  become  highly  inflamed,  erysipelatous
and  even  gangrenous.

I  I  Lacerated  or  incised  wounds  or  injuries,  especially  when
attended  with  painful  swelling  and  tendency  to  ery-
sipelatous inflammation  or  sphacelus.

I  1  Bruises.

I  I  Bites  of  animals.

I  I  Frost-bites ;  chilblains.
*^  Touch.  Passive  Motion.  Injuries,  i  i  A  lady,  while
dressing  a  codfish,  thrust  one  of  the  fins  into  palmar
surface  of  middle  finger,  just  over  second  or  third  large
joint;  the  wound  was  deep  and  bled  profusely;  the
night  following  the  part  became  excessively  painful,
pain  extending  from  wound  up  to  shoulder,  causing
great  distress ;  next  morning  the  whole  hand  swelled,
back  and  front,  especially  the  injured  finger;  arm
swelled  up  to  shoulder,  two  distinct  light  pinkish
streaks  running  up  front  of  arm,  from  hand  to  shoulder;
third  day,  after  some  fruitless  applications,  being  almost
agonized  with  pain  and  suffering,  she  applied  bruised
plantain  leaves  to  part,  removing  them  as  often  as  they
became  dry;  in  about  half  an  hour  after  application
she  felt  so  relieved  that  she  fell  asleep  and  slept  proba-
bly an  hour,  the  first  sleep  she  had  after  the  accident ;
in  two  or  three  days  the  finger  was  well.

I  I A  young  man  cut  his  thumb  through  root  of  nail;  it
was  dressed  and  treated  by  an  allopathic  physician  for
two  or  three  weeks ;  it  became  inflamed,  fearfully,
swelled  and  was  very  painful.  {Plantago  externally  and
internally.)

I  I A young man had  his finger  bitten through first
joint,  so  as  to  almost  sever  end  of  finger ;  it  was  swollen
to  about  the  size  of  a  hen's  egg,  and  very  much  inflamed.
(Two  or  three  external  applications  cured  finger.)
^®  Skin. Violent  itching.

Intolerable  itching  of  skin,  <  at  night.

Pricking,  stinging  pains.

Tensive  sensation.

Burning  after  rubbing  and  when  scratched.

Redness,  swelling  and  vesicles  on  hands  and  face.

PapulEe  which  exude  a  yellowish  humor  and  form  a  crust.

I  I  Erythema.

I  I  Burns.

I  I  Poisoning  with  ivy;  the  hand  and  a  portion  of  the  face


451  PLANTAGO  MAJOR.

red,  swollen,  itching  violently,  and  in  places  covered
with  vesicles  (pellets  medicated  with  Plant  ago  and  a
lotion  made  by  a  teaspoonful  of  the  tincture  to  a  cup  of
water).

Inflammatory  affections  of  skin,  with  involvement  of  cel-
lular tissue.

Aggravation  from  rubbing  and  scratching.
^^  Stages  of  Life,  Constitution. Boy,  set.  5 ;  polyuria.

Boy, set. 14, bilious, sanguine temperament,  healthy;
enuresis.

A  young  lady ;  poisoning  with  ivy.

Man,  set.  45,  suffering  two  years ;  diarrhoea.
^^  Relations. Plantago  antidotes  ^p^s,  and  produces  a  taste
for  tobacco.


PLATINUM.  452


PLATINUM.

Platinum.  An  Element.


Introduced  by  Stapf.

Proved  by  Hahnemann  and  Gross  (Hahnemann's  Chronische  Krankheiten),  and
by  Musits,  Allen's  Encyclopedia,  vol.  7,  p.  574.

Clinical  Authorities. — Melancholia,  Hirsch,  A.  H.  Z.,  vol.  95,  p.  57;  Times
Eet.,  vol.  77,  p.  56  ;  Gross,  B.  J.  H.,  vol.  18,  p.  247,  from  Hom.  V.  J.  S.,  vol.  9,  pt.  4  ;
Mental  disturbance,  Miiller,  -Kiick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  1,  p.  40 ;  Gerson,  Hermel,  Eiick.
Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  5,  p.  9;  Dulac,  Kane's  Eec,  1873,  p.  45;  Sorge,  Hah.  Mo.,  vol.  11,
p.  233;  Stiles,  Hah.  Mo.,  vol.  23,  p.  816;  Headache,  Seidel,  Black,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf.,
vol.  1,  p.  192;  Baylies,  Hom.  Phys.,  vol.  8,  p.  41 ;  Nervous  headache.  Black,  B.  J.
H.,  vol.  5,  p.  432  ;  Otalgia,  Hrg.,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  1,  p.  378 ;  Oversensitiveness  of
smell,  Sorge,  Hah.  Mo.,  vol.  11,  p.  233;  Prosopalgia,  Ker,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  1,  p.
430;  (2  cases)  Gerson,  B.  J.  H.,  vol.  20,  p.  420;  Toothache,  Bonninghausen,  Eiick.
Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  1,  p.  471  ;  Swelling  of  liver  and  spleen  and  pain  in  rectum,  Sorge,  Hah.
Mo.,  vol.  11,  p.  232 ;  Colic,  Beyer,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  5,  p.  369 ;  Constipation  with
mental  symptoms,  N.  N.,  Acalyt.  Therap.,  vol.1,  p.  169  ;  Onanism,  Fischer,  Deventer,
Hah.  Mo.,  vol.  11,  p.  233;  Nymphomania,  Stapf,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  2,  p.  62;  Ova-
rian tumor  (3  cases),  Jackson,  N.  A.  J.  H.,  vol.  22,  p.  90 ;  Oophoritis,  abortion,
Trager,  Walz,  Hah.  Mo.,  vol.  11,  p.  233;  Chronic  ovaritis  and  leucorrhaa,  Hempel,
Horn.  Phys.,  vol.  2,  p.  235  ;  Suspected  ovarian  disease  with  sterility,  Smith,  B.  J.  H.,
vol.  25,  p.  156 ;  Uterine  displacement,  Lippe,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  5,  p.  635 ;  Uterine
affection,  Qilhme,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  5,  p.  640  ;  Metrorrhagia,  Hrg.,  Hartmann,
Stapf,  Kammer,  Liedbeck,  Elwart,  Ruck.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  2,  p  319  ;  Hesse,  A.  H.
Z.,  vol.  3,  p.  44 ;  Hempel,  Hom.  Phys.,  vol.  2,  p.  235 ;  Stapf,  Lobethal,  Knorr,  Riick.
Kl.  Erf,  vol.  2,  p.  243  ;  Itching  in  uterus,  Hempel,  Hom.  Phys.,  vol.  2,  p.  235 ;  Dys-
menorrhoea,  Widemann,  Schron,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  2,  p.  244;  Hirschel,  Hom.  CI.,
vol.  3,  p.  127,  from  H.  KL,  1870,  p.  37,  Raue's  Rec,  1871,  p.  159 ;  Suppression  of  menses
and  mania,  Sorge,  Hah.  Mo.,  vol.  11,  p.  232  ;  Supprtssion  of  menses  and  spasms,
Hah.,  N.  A.J.  H.,  vol.  12,  p.  548  ;  Menstrual  disturbance,  Hirsch,  B.  J.  H.  vol.  36,  p.
102 ;  Gain,  Times  Ret.,  1877,  p.  109  ;  Pain  in  genital  organs,  Martin,  T.  H.  M.  S.  Pa.,
1880,  p.  242;  Sensitiveness  of  vulva  and  vagina  during  labor,  Biegler,  Organon,  vol.  3,
p.  216 ;  Pruritus  vagince,  Goeze,  B.  J.  H.,  vol.  34,  p.  159 ;  Pruritus  of  vulva,  Goeze,
A.  H.  Z.,  vol.  91,  p.  77  ;  Times  Ret.,  1875,  p.  98  ;  Threatened  abortion,  Dietz,  Ruck.
Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  2,  p.  321 ;  Retarded  labor,  Swift,  Hom.  Phys.,  vol.  4,  p.  61 ;  Puerperal
convulsions,  Hirsch,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  4,  p.  587  ;  Puerperal  fever,  Lobeth,  Hart-
mann, Riick.  Kl.  Erf,  vol.  2,  p.  452 ;  Excessive  lochial  discharge,  Rinehart,  T.  H.
M.  S.  Pa.,  1885,  p.  188;  Par  cdy  zed  feeling  of  arms,  Goldsbrough,  A.  H.  Z.,  vol.  Ill,
p.  45,  from.  Hom.  Rev.,  Feb.  1885 ;  Neuralgia  and  menorrhagia,  Hughes,  B.  J.  H,,
vol.  22,  p.  229  ;  Hysteria,  Gerson,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  5,  p.  612 ;  Spasms,  Mey-
berger,  Times  Eet.,  1876,  p.  132,  from  H.  K.,  vol.  21,  p.  61;  Eclampsia,  Hartmann
Kammerer,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf,  vol.  4,  p.  587.


453  PLATINUM.

*  Mind. I  Sensitive  mood.

Inclination  to  embrace  everybody.

Attacks  of  cheerfulness;  increased  feeling  of  strength.

I  I  Very  absent-minded  and  forgetful.

■  Great  indifference.
Ill-humor  in  morning.

■  Morose  and  discontented.

■  Arrogant,  reserved,  absent-minded.

■  ■Pride  and  overestimation  of  one's  self;  looking  down

with  haughtiness  on  others.

■  Cold,  haughty,  too  well  satisfied  with  one's  self,  and  not

at  all  anxious  about  the  future.

■  ■Contemptuous,  pitiful,  looking  down  upon  people  usu-

ally venerated,  with  a  kind  of  casting  them  off,  in  par-
oxysms against  her  will.
I  I  Dislikes  her  children  ; calls  them  too  little. ^Indura-
tion of  OS  tincse.

■  Any  serious  thought  is  terrifying.

■  Anxiety  with  trembling  of  hands  and  flushes  of  heat  over

whole  body.

■  Deathly  anxiety, as  if her  senses  would  vanish,  with

trembling  of  all  the  limbs,  oppression  of  breath  and
violent  palpitation.

■  Very  peevish  and  easily  excited ;  he  could  have  beaten

any  one  without  provocation.

■  After  anger  alternate  laughing  and  weeping,  with  great

anguish  and  fear  of  death.

■  Trifling  things  produce  profound  vexation;  remains  a

long  time  in  the  sulks.

■  Anxiety,  weeping  and  palpitation,  with  numb  feeling  in

malar  bones,  as  if  the  parts  were  between  screws.

■  Ever^'thing  seems  strange  and  horrible  to  her.

■  She  thinks  all  persons  are  demons.

■  Past  events  trouble  her.

■  Satiety  of  life,  with  taciturnity  and  fear  of  death.

■  Much  anguish;  she  feels  as  if  she  would  lose  her  senses

and  die  soon.

■  Out  of  sorts  with  the  whole  world;  everything  seems  too

narrow ;  weeping  mood.

■  Silence,  with  involuntary  weeping.

■  Sits  alone,  sad  and  morose,  without  talking; followed

by  inconsolable  weeping,  especially  when  spoken  to.

■  Thinks  she  is  left- entirely  to  herself  and  stands  alone  in

the  world.

■  Very  restless  disposition,  so  that  she  could  not  remain

anywhere,  with  sadness ;  the  most  joyful  things  dis-
tressed her;  thought  she  had  no  place  in  the  world ;  life
was  wearisome,  but  had  great  dread  of  death,  which  she
belie^'ed  near  at  hand.


PLATINUM.  454

■  Weeping mood  and  sadness;  <  in  house;  >  in  open  air.
iLow-spirited;  inclined  to  shed  tears; < in evening;

weeps  with  the  pains.
I  Weeping  mood  and  crying  after  being  mildly  reproached.
iMood  changing;  cheerful  or  depressed.

■  Physical  symptoms  disappear  and  mental  symptoms  ap-

pear, and  vice  versa.

■  Prsecordial  anguish  with  palpitation  and  fear  of  death

and  of  imaginary  forms,  ghosts.

I  1  While  suflfering  from  a  slight  erysipelas  faciei,  took  leave
of  her  children,  exhorted  her  husband  to  join  church,
wanted  people  to  join  her  in  prayer,  felt  happy  to  join
her  Redeemer.

I  I  Irritable,  easily  angered,  sometimes  quite  violent,  at
same  time  great  bodily  activity;  at  other  times  very
melancholy  and  lachrymose,  with  indifference ;  de-
pressed condition  of  physical  powers;  she  would  lie  on
sofa,  would  hardly  speak,  anxiousness  and  fear  of
approaching  death ;  menses  much  too  frequent,  with
copious  leucorrhoea  between  periods,  consisting  of  clear
mucus;  menstrual  flow  intermingled  with  clots  which
were  discharged  with  preceding  pain  in  belly  and  a
certain  feeling  of  bearing  down  ;  aversion  to  coition  and
yet  dreams  of  intense  lasciviousness,  terminating  in  an
emission  of  profuse  sticky  fluid ;  bowels  constipated  or
diarrhoeic. ^Melancholia.

■  ■  Illusions  of  fantasy  on  entering  the  house  after  walking

an  hour,  as  if  everything  about  her  were  very  small  and
all  persons  mentally  and  physically  inferior,  but  she
herself  physically  large  and  superior;  the  room  seemed
gloomy  and  unpleasant,  with  apprehensive  and  fretful
mood.

■  It  seems  to  her  as  if  she  does  not  belong  to  her  own  fam-

ily; after  a  short  absence  everything  seems  entirely
changed.

■  Disturbed  state of  mind; religious, with taciturnity,

haughtiness,  voluptuousness  and  cruelty.

■  Delirium,  with  fear  of  men;  often  changing,  with  over-

estimation  of  oneself.

■  Mania:  with  great  pride;  fault-finding;  unchaste  talk ;

trembling  and  clonic  spasms;  caused  by  fright  and
anger.

■  Involuntary disposition to whistle or sing; canine

hunger ;  eats  greedily.
I  iTalks  almost  continually  about  fanciful  things  or  such
as  have  really  occurred  ;  of  faithless  love ;  of  her  teacher
and  school  days ; laughs,  sings,  dances,  weeps,  makes
grimaces,  and  gesticulates; clings  obstinately  to  her


455  PLATINUM.

ideas,  without,  however,  growing  angry  about  it ;  face
distorted ;  eyes  fixed  ;  no  desire  to  eat  or  drink ;  things  of-
fered her  are  hastily  dispatched.

I  I  Forgetful,  absent-minded;  listens  often  attentively  to
conversation,  and  at  the  end  knows  nothing  about  it;
melancholy  with  great  fear  of  death  ;  imagines  himself
superior  to  his  wife;  griping  in  umbilical  region,  par-
ticularly towards  evening,  as  if  he  had  drunk  unfer-
mented  beer;  although  there  are  frequent  urging  and
pressure  in  rectum,  stool  does  not  occur  daily,  is  difficult
and  discharged  in  pieces,  with  much  pressure  of  ab-
dominal muscles.

I  I  Melancholia  in  a  woman  set.  60;  twelve  years  ago,  after
catamenia  had  been  absent  for  months,  there  occurred  a
permanent  leucorrhoea,  of  very  fetid  odor;  one  morning
did  not  quit  her  bedroom  as  usual  and  never  left  it  for
twelve  years ;  spent  her  time  seated  on  bed,  in  deep
meditation  or  praying  aloud ;  complaining,  weeping  and
howling;  rejected  all  cooked  food  and  took  no  notice  of
anything  about  her;  only  at  night  got  out  of  bed  and
ran  about  room  without  apparent  object;  suffers  un-
speakable pangs  of  conscience  in  consequence  of  a  faux
pas  when  thirty-two  years  old ;  says  she  has  brought
disgrace  upon  her  family,  and  that  she  has  in-
curred the  penalty  of  damnation ;  in  order  to  do  pen-
ance gave  away  whatever  she  could  lay  her  hands
upon,  so  that  she  had  to  be  constantly  watched ;  after
her  confessor  asserted  that  she  could  not  hope  for  pardon
or  heaven,  she  seemed  in  absolute  despair;  bemoaned
her  misery  throughout  the  night,  wringing  her  hands  and
beseeching  that  she  might  be  delivered  from  the  hell  of
her  conscience;  twice  attempted  self-destruction;  in
spite  of  her  tendency  to  suicide,  dreaded  death  and  dis-
liked any  conversation  pertaining  thereto ;  wished  to
live  and  do  penance  in  order  to  mitigate  her  eternal
punishment.

I  Mental  disturbance  after  fright,  grief  or  vexation.

■  Mental  depression  from  onanism.

■  Affections  from  pride.

I  I  Puerperal  mania  of  a  violent  type ;  she  would  dance,
sing,  talk  rapidly  and  continuously,  when  awake ;
everything  was  removed  from  the  room  in  which  she
was  confined  (except  her  piano,  of  which  she  was  fond),
because  she  would  destroy  everything  she  could  lay
hands  upon ;  she  would  play  for  hours  at  a  time  upon
her  piano,  sometimes  beautifully,  and  at  other  times
would  bang  and  pound  without  any  attempt  at  harmony;
assumed  or  seemed  to  feel  herself  a  person  of  great  supe-


PLATINUM.  456

riority ;  when  her  violent  paroxysms  were  off,  or  more
moderate,  she  complained  of  pain  in  back.
*  Sensorium.  Vertigo  :  passing  attacks  in  quick  succession
in  evening  when  standing,  as  if  he  would  lose  his
senses;  violent,  she  dare  not  move  her  eyes;  more  in
daytime  than  at  night,  generally  attended  with  palpita-
tion of  heart;  followed  by  headache;  vertigo,  as  if  torn
and  pulled  into  threads,  especially  on  sitting  down  or
going  down  stairs.
^  Inner  Head,  i  l  Numb  sensation  in  forehead,  as  if  constricted ;
in  a  warm,  crowded  room,  soon  increasing  to  a  violent,
dull,  burrowing  compression,  with  fretful  impatience
and  heat  in  upper  part  of  body,  especially  in  head,  as  if
anxious  sweat  would  break  out.

I  I  Tensive  numb  sensation  in  whole  forehead,  as  after  a
blow,  extending  to  nasal  bone.

I  Cramplike  drawing  constriction  in  head  from  time  to
time,  especially  about  forehead  ;  commencing  slight,  in-
creasing till  violent,  and  ending  slight.

iCramplike  pain  in  forehead,  as  if  screwed  in.

■  Headache  with  leucorrhoea;  nervous,  tensive,  cramping
pains,  affecting  forehead  and  orbital  regions.

Squeezing,  constricting  pain ;  as  if  a  board  were  pressed
against  forehead.

I  I  Pressing  pain  in  forehead,  from  without  inward,  grad-
ually increasing  and  decreasing;  flushes  of  heat  with
burning  in  face,  interrupted  by  chilliness  ;  ill-humor,
aversion  to  food  on  account  of  feeling  low-spirited;
pressing  downward  during  menses  and  discharges  of
dark  clotted  blood ;  says  uterus  "  feels  hard,"  i.  e.,  sub-
jectively ;  cramp,  pain  in  legs,  >  by  heat ;  sleeps  with
arms  over  head,  knees  drawn  up ;  shortness  of  breath,  as
if  chest  were  constricted  ;  palpitation.

■Sensation  as  of  water  in  forehead.

I  Cramplike  pain  in  r.  temple  in  afternoon.

Crawling  like  formication  on  r.  temple ;  afterwards  ex-
tending down  along  lower  jaw,  with  a  feeling  of  cold-
ness in  it.

iPressive  cramplike  pain  in  1.  temple,  beginning  gently;
increasing  and  decreasing.

I  Tense  numb  sensation  in  zygomata  and  mastoid  proces-
ses as  if  head  were  screwed  together.

iCramplike  tension  in  temples,  as  if  screwed  in.

sSudden  spasmodic  contractive  shocks  through  _  head,
from  r.  to  1.  temple  ;  followed  by  a  numb  sensation,  as
if  too  tightly  bound,  with  tremulousness  of  both  sides
of  head.

I  I  Pain  begins  behind  ear,  affects  side  of  face,  lips,  fore-


457  PLATINUM.

head  and  crown  of  head  ;  pain  is  severe,  dull ;  <  from
light  and  touch ;  ushered  in  by  cold  feet;  commences
on  waking,  gradually  increases  and  about  noon  be-
comes sharp ;  continues  so  for  two  or  three  hours  and
about  six  in  the  evening  goes  off;  tongue  apt  to  get  red
and  dry  ;  weight  in  stomach  ;  tendency  to  constipation  ;
appetite  indifferent;  dislike  to  animal  food  during
menses,  which  are  regular  and  natural,  pains  in  head
and  face  disappear. ^Nervous  headache.

I  Numb  pain  on  top  of  vertex,  as  if  scalp  would  be  con-

tracted, and  as  if  a  heavy  weight  were  lying  upon  it.

■  Headache,  as  if  tense.

i  Feeling,  as  if  head  were  enlarged.

I I  Headache  gradually  increasing  till  very  severe,  and
then  decreasing  as  gradually.

■Sensation  of  numbness  in  head  and  externally  on  vertex,
preceded  by  a  sensation  of  contraction  of  brain  and
scalp ;  <  in  evening  and  while  sitting  ;  >  from  motion
and  in  open  air.

■  Neuralgic  headaches  in  sensitive  or  hysterical  persons  ;

cramplike  pressing  inward,  with  hot  and  red  face  and
roaring  in  head  ;  pains  gradually  increase  and  as  gradu-
ally decrease.

■  Numb  feeling  in  brain.

■  Hysteric  migraine,  with uterine derangements; great

languor ;  trembling  sensation  through  whole  body ;
qualmishness ;  eructations  in  morning  and  after  break-
fast.

■  Headache  from  anger  or  chagrin  ;  from  uterine  disease,

with  many  hysterical- symptoms.

^  Outer  Head.  ■Formication  in'  r.  temple,  extending  to
lower  jaw,  with  sensation  of  coldness  in  that  spot ;  <
in  evening  and  when  at  rest ;  >  from  rubbing.

^  Sight  and  Eyes. ■Scintillations  before  eyes  ;  headache.

■  Objects  appear  smaller  than  they  really  are.
Spasms  of  eyelids,  in  hysteria.

Painful  crampings  and  compression  around  orbital  region,
particularly  supraorbital,  globe  of  eye  sometimes  par-
ticipating and  feeling  sore.

I  I  Sore  biting,  as  if  denuded  on  upper  margin  of  orbit.

I  I  Intermitting  cramplike  pain  near  outer  margin  of  r.
orbit.

I  I  Wavelike  benumbing  pressure  above  r.  orbit.

■Sensation  of  coldness  in  eyes.

■  Spasmodic  trembling  and  twitching  of  eyelids.
^Hearing and Ears. Nervous  deafness;  great  variety of

noises  in  ear ;  reports  in  r.  ear  like  distant  thunder.

■  Ringing,  rolling  or  rumbling  sound  in  ears.


PLATINUM.  458

I  Otalgia,  with  cramp  pain,  often  with  rumbling  in  ears.

■  Sensation  of  coldness  in  ears,  with  sensation  of  numb-

ness extending  to  cheeks  and  lips.
^  Smell  and  Nose. lOversensitiveness  of  smell.
Catarrhal  obstruction  of  nose.
Fluent  coryza  in  open  air  stopped  up  in  house.
lEpistaxis  with  dark,  coagulated  blood.
Numbness  and  cramp  pain  in  nose.
Violent  crampy  pain  at  root  of  nose,  with  heat  and  red

face.
Corrosive  sensation  on  nose  as  from  something  acrid.
^  Upper  Face. Face pale,  sunken ; frequent changing of

color ;  red and burning hot, with violent  thirst, <

towards  evening.
Face  feels  cold  and  numb.

■  Sensation  of  coldness,  crawling  and  numbness  in  whole

r.  side  of  face.
I  I  Creeping  pains  with  coldness  and  numbness,  especiall}''

r.  side;  <  at  night  and  during  rest. ^Prosopalgia.
I  I  Sharp  neuralgic  pain  in  1.  malar  bone.

■  Painful  cramplike  sensation  of numbness  in  1.  malar

bone.

■  Cramp  pain,  steady  compression,  numb  feeling  and  bor-

ing in  malar  bones.

■  Tearing,  boring  pain  in  r.  side  of  face,  near  canthus  of

eye,  and  extending  along  nasal  branch  of  trifacial
nerve ;  profuse  lachrymation  and  swelling  of  face ;
attack  generally  comes  on  at  night.

I  I  Prosopalgia  affecting  pes  anserinus;  paroxysms  in  fore-
noon ;  pains  pinching,  boring,  burning ;  facial  muscles
horribly  distorted  ;  trismus ;  face  hot,  dark  red ;  great
lachrymation  and  ptyalism  ;  convulsions  of  upper  ex-
tremities and  pectoral  muscles;  loud  crying,  insane  toss-
ing about  and  striking  out  on  all  sides ;  last  six  to  eight
hours,  paroxysms  in  several  short  remissions,  during
which  patient  sat  wrapped  up  in  herself,  menses  pro-
fuse ;  uterine  spasms,  headache,  palpitation  of  heart,
variable  humor  and  megrims.

I  I  Boring  pain,  cramplike;  painful  feeling  of  numbness
in  malar  bones  and  mastoid  ])rocesses  and  chin  as  if
parts  were  between  screws,  with  anxiety,  weeping  and
palpitation  of  heart ;  menses  profuse.  ^Neuralgia.
®  Lower  Face.  Purple,  netlike  appearance  on  chin.
^"  Teeth  and  Gums.  llNumb  pain  in  1.  lower  teeth,  in
morning  after  rising.

■  Pulsating  digging  through  whole  r.  jaw,  <  towards  even-

ing and  at  rest;  followed  by  numbness;  pains  come
and  go  gradually.


459  PLATINUM.

"  Taste  and  Tongue. ■  Crawling  on  tongue.

I  Sensation  as  if  tongue  were  scalded.

I  I  Sweet  taste  on  tip  of  tongue.
'^  Inner  Mouth. Rbagades  in  gums.

Sensation  of  coldness,  especially  in  month.
^^  Throat. Cramplike  drawing  in  throat,  as  if  it  were  con-
stricted.

Hawking  of  mucus  with  scraping  in  throat.

Sensation  as  if  palate  were  elongated.

Rising  in  throat.
^*  Appetite,  Thirst.  Desires,  Aversions. Loss  of  appetite  on
account  of  depressed  mood.

I  Ravenous  appetite  and  hasty  eating,  detests  everything
around  him.

Thirstlessness;  or  thirst  during  heat,
*'  Eating  and  Drinking. Feels  <  on  an  empty  stomach.
^•^  Hiccough,  Belching,  Nausea  and  Vomiting. Eructa-
tions empty,  mornings.

Continuous nausea, with  great weakness, anxiety and
■ trembling  sensation  through  whole  body.
^^  Scrobiculum  and  Stomach. 1 1  Fermentation  in  epigastric
region.

Pressure  in  stomach,  especially  after  meals.

Sensation  of  constriction  in  pit  of  stomach  and  in  abdomen.

Burning  in  pit  of  stomach,  extending  into  abdomen.

I  I  Griping  in  region  of  pit  of  stomach,  immediately  fol-
lowed by  pressure  downward  towards  lower  abdomen,
like  a  sensation  of  flatulence.

I  Much  fermentation  in  stomach ,  flatulence  and  constipation.

Jactitation  of  muscles  in  region  of  stomach.
*"  Abdomen, l  Sensation  as  if  whole  abdomen  were  tightly
constricted.

I  I  Loss  of  appetite ;  pain  in  limbs ;  constipation ;  stool
resembling  sheep's  dung;  severe  pain  in  umbilical
region,  extending  to  small  of  back,  dull  boring  in
character,  <  in  paroxysms,  with  great  anxiety,  deeply
sunken  eyes  and  distortion  of  face ;  during  paroxysm
he  screams  and  tosses  about  in  bed  in  order  to  find
relief  by  turning  in  all  possible  positions  ;  abdomen  re-
tracted ;  hand  pressed  gently  over  umbilicus  affords
relief;  tongue  clean  ;  tenesmus  during  urination  ;  lassi-
tude ;  sleeplessness.

iPainter's  colic;  pain  in  umbilical  region,  extending
through  into  back  ;  patient  screams  and  tries  to  relieve
pain  by  trying  all  possible  positions.

I  Pressing  and  bearing  down  in  abdomen,  extending  into
pelvis.

■  Pressure  in  lower  abdomen,  with  ill-humor,  during  pro-
fuse menses.


PLATINUM.  460

■  Painful  drawing in both groins,  as if  menses  would

come  on.

■  Obstinate  incarceration  of  flatus.

I  Torpor  of  intestinal  canal,  with  flatulence  and  constipa-
tion.
^°  Stool  and  Rectum, l  Frequent  emission  of  odorless  flatus.

■  Stools: half-digested, papescent; hard, as if burnt;

scanty,  difficult ;  glutinous,  adherent;  adhere  to  rectum
and  anus  like  soft  clay.

■  Frequent  urging  with  scanty  stool,  that  is  passed  only  in

pieces,  after  great  pressure,  with  a  painful  sensation  of
weakness  and  a  tight  sensation  in  abdominal  muscles.

■  Stool  retarded;  feces  scanty,  hard,  evacuated  with  diffi-

culty and  almost  dry,  requiring  great  effort  of  abdomi-
nal muscles,  and  followed  by  great  weakness  in  abdomen,
with  sharp  stitches  in  rectum.

■  Constipation  from  inertia  of  bowels  ;  frequent  unsuccess-

ful urging  to  stool ;  stools  when  passed  seem  to  be  like
putty  or  glue  and  adhere  tenaciously  to  anus.

■  ■Constipation: after  lead  poisoning; while  traveling;

frequent  urging,  with  expulsion  of  only  small  portions,
with  great  straining;  obstinate  cases  after  failure  of
Nux  vom.;  evacuations  only  after  violent  efforts,  neces-
sitating manual  assistance  and  composed  of  small
black,  hard  masses  ;  chronic,  depending  upon  neurosis,
with  spasmodic  constriction,  producing  displacement  of
uterus  ;  in  lying-in  women  ;  in  sedentary  subjects  with
co-existing  menstrual  troubles ;  of  emigrants  ;  of  preg-
nancy.

Before  stool :  frequent  and  ineffectual  desire ;  prolonged
efforts ;  violent  pressure  in  rectum  ;  violent  shooting  in
rectum  compelling  an  outcry  ;  slight  tenesmus.

During  stool :  cutting  pains,  burning  and  protrusion  of
hemorrhoids  ;  burning  in  rectum.

After  stool :  sensation  of  great  w^eakness  in  abdomen  and
chilliness;  slight  tenesmus  and  tingling  in  anus;
shooting  pains  in  anus  with  spasmodic  contractions  in
thighs;  violent  itching  in  anus  ;  chilliness  about  head,
breast  and  arms,

I  I  Old  swellings  of  liver  and  spleen ;  complains  of  nervous
pains,  especially  of  a  pushing  pain  in  rectum,  which
sometimes  becomes  excruciating;  has  lost  all  courage
and  fears  she  will  die  of  cancer  of  rectum,  although  ex-
amination of  rectum  and  sexual  organs  reveals  nothing
abnormal.

■  Itching,  tingling  and  tenesmus  at anus,  especially  in

evening.
I  I  Crawling  tenesmus  in  anus  as  in  diarrhcea,  every  even-
ing before  going  to  sleep.


23


461  PLATINUM.

Tapeworm,  other  symptoms  agreeing.
^'  Urinary  Organs. Frequent  micturition,  with  slow  flow  of
urine.

Urine:  pale,  watery;  red,  with  white  clouds;  turbid,  de-
positing a  red  sediment.
^^  Male  Sexual  Organs, i  Satyriasis.

I  Sexual  desire  excessive,  with  violent  erections,  especially
at  night.

iToo  frequent  pollutions;  epilepsy  arising  from  onanism.

I  Morbid  excitement  inducing  onanism,  especially  if  pre-
pubic ;  child  has  a  melancholy  and  sheepish  look ;  epi-
leptiform spasms;  hollow  eyes;  yellow  skin;  face  pale
and  sunken;  consciousness  not  often  lost;  limbs  usu-
ally drawn  up  and  spread  apart.
Female  Sexual  Organs.  i  Nymphomania,  <  in  the
lying-in ;  tingling  or  titillation  from  genitals  up  into
abdomen.

■  Voluptuous  crawling  in  genitals  and  abdomen,  with
anxious  oppression  and  palpitation,  followed  by  painless
pressure  downward  in  genitals,  with  exhaustion  and
stitches  in  sinciput;  sympathetic  with  ovarian  and
uterine  troubles,  especially  in  barren  women,  driving  to
despair.

■  Excessive  sexual  desire,  particularly  in  virgins ;  prema-
ture or  excessive  development  of  sexual  instinct.

I  I  Erotomania  of  a  hysterical  girl ;  insatiable  desire ;  hyper-
irritation  ■;  itching  in  uterus ;  restlessness  and  sleepless-
ness; either  moroseness  or  excessive  hilarity;  cries
very  easily ;  menses  profuse,  lasting  six  to  eight  days.

I  I  Sudden  sexual  passion  in  a  w^oman  of  40,  of  very  phleg-
matic temperament  and  without  the  least  sexual  incli-
nation ;  terrible  sexual  excitement,  so  that  her  whole
nature  seemed  changed;  wanted  only  to  satisfy  this
passion,  which  seemed  to  stifle  everything  else;  al-
though fulfilling  her  marital  duties,  was  insatiable  ;  in
her  dreams  saw  only  voluptuous  pictures,  and  awake
spoke  of  nothing  else ;  unusual  voluptuous  itching  in
uterine  region.

■  Genitals  excessively  sensitive ;  cannot  bear  to  be  touched ;
w^ill  go  into  spasms  from  an  examination ;  will  almost
faint  during  intercourse.

■  Pain  in  1.  ovarian  region  ;  feeling  of  internal  soreness,  as
if  caused  by  a  partially  healed  wound  ;  sterility  of  twelve
years'  standing.

I  I  Pinching,  pressing  down  in  ovarian  region  or  groins  or
in  pudenda,  or  alternating  between  the  two;  parox-
ysmal burning  pains  in  ovary ;  attended  with  stitches
in  forehead  and  excessive  sexual  excitement;  suppura-


PLATINUM.  462

tion  after  pus  has  been  discharged  under  influence  of
Laches. ^Disease  of  ovaries.

1  I  Young  lady,  set.  20;  when  twelve  years  old  was  at-
tacked with  leucorrhoea,  which  continued  ever  since;
discharge  uninterrupted  day  and  night,  like  the  white
of  an  egg;  otherwise  inoffensive  but  debilitating;  began
to  menstruate  at  fourteen ;  no  pain ;  at  age  of  fifteen
was  seized  with  violent  dragging,  tearing  pain  and  sore-
ness in  region  of  1.  ovary,  the  dragging  extending
through  small  of  back ;  pain  <  at  times  of  menses,
otherwise  as  permanent  as  the  leucorrhoea;  menses
blackish,  in  clots ;  flow  lasted  from  eight  to  ten  days ;
violent  compressive  pain  in  temples  and  sense  of  weight
upon  chest,  as  if  it  would  be  crushed  by  a  mass  of  lead  ;
soreness  in  region  of  ovary  gradually  extended  over
whole  1.  side;  especially  violent  in  small  of  back;  two
or  three  times  a  day,  violent  shootings  from  side  along
lower  portion  of  1.  mamma,  with  nausea  and  giddiness ;
for  last  three  years  has  not  been  able  to  rest  on  1.  side,
partly  on  account  of  soreness  and  partly  on  account  of
those  shootings,  which  came  on  as  soon  as  she  attempted
to  lie  on  that  side ;  pain  dull,  heav}^  gnawing ;  when
rising  from  bed  felt  w^eary  and  broken  down,  eyes  sur-
rounded with  blue  circles :  spirits  drooping ;  avoided
society  ;  extremely  melancholy.  ^Chronic  ovaritis  and
leucorrhoea.

I  Ovaries  inflamed,  with  burning  pain  in  paroxysms;
stitches  in  forehead.

■  Ovaritis  during  climaxis,  with  menorrhagia; and  hot

flushes ;  chronic  ovaritis.
I  Ovarian  tumors  and  cysts.

■  Chronic  gonorrhoea,  with  ovarian  pain.

■  Dreadful  and  excessive  itching  in  uterus  in  a  woman

affected  with  spinal  irritation.
•  Frequent  uterine  spasms,  sometimes  so  severe  as  to  con-
fine her  to  bed  for  several  months ;  hard  tumor,  like  a
ball,  nearly  painless  on  pressure  in  r.  side  of  abdomen.

■  Tensive  drawing  pains  in  ovaries  and  uterus  after  coi-

tion, lasting  several  hours. ^Uterine  affection.

■  Indurations  of  uterus,  with  excessive  sensitiveness.

■  Painful  sensitiveness  and  continual  pressure  in  region  of

mons  veneris  and  genital  organs ;  body,  except  face,
feels  cold. /^Prolapsus  uteri.

■  Induration  of  uterus;  ulceration  with  coexisting  ovarian

irritation.

■  Indurated  and  prolapsed  uterus,  with  continual  pressure

in  groins  and  back  ;  parts  painfully  sensitive  to  touch  ;
sensitiveness,  even  vaginismus  during  coition.


463  PLATINUM.

I  Heaviness  and  pressure  in  genital  organs,  <  during  and
after  walking,  particularly  after  going  up-stairs;  co-
pious painless  leucorrhoea;  constipation.  ^Uterine
displacement.

Polypus  uteri;  scirrhus.

■  Hemorrhages  in  clots,  with  uterine  cancer,  fibroids,  etc.
■Metrorrhagia:  body  feels  as  if  growing  large;  genitals

very  sensitive ;  nymphomania  ;  discharge  of  thick,  black
blood ;  discharge  occurred  every  fifteen  minutes,  finally
every  five;  sensation  as  if  body  were  growing  larger
and  longer,  particularly  lower  limbs ;  rigor  of  r.  arm ;
globus  hystericus;  violent  pressure  upon  chest;  com-
pressive pain  in  both  temples,  so  violent  that  she  would
take  her  life  if  not  prevented  by  force  ;  <  during  men-
strual period.

llBlood  flows  in  black  clots  and  fluid,  or  in  one  gru-
mous  mass,  thick,  black  and  tarry;  feeling  of  horror  at
what  may  happen;  horror  at  thought  of  death,  etc.
^Uterine  hemorrhage.

I  I  After  an  abortion  with  profuse  hemorrhage;  mepses
every  fourteen  days,  too  copious  and  too  loug-lasting;
discharge  at  first  coagulated  and  dark,  later  more  fluid
and  brighter  and  of  oftensive  odor ;  flatulency  ;  stool
only  after  an  injection  ;  blood  does  not  cease  to  flow  en-
tirely between  the  periods,  so  that  she  has  been  confined
to  bed  eight  weeks. ^Metrorrhagia.

■  Frequent  sensation  as  if  menses  would  appear.

■  Discharge  of  much  clotted blood  during first  day  of

menses.

■  Menses :  too  early,  too  profuse  and  too  short-lasting ;  flow

dark,  clotted;  thick,  tough,  stinking;  preceded  by
cramps;  too  late  and  profuse;  much  bearing  down ;  de-
sire for  stool,  with  backache;  during  flow  pinching  in
abdomen ;  excruciating  pains  in  uterus ;  twitchings
with  screams;  melancholy;  strong  sexual  desire;  too
early;  scanty,  with  diarrhoea;  chilliness  and  sensitive-
ness of  vulva;  much  prostration;  twitchings  with
screams ;  haughty  disposition ;  pulling  pain  in  groins.

■  Menorrhagia  of  older  women,  associated  with  melancholy.

■  Chronic  menstrual  disorders;  menses  every  fourteen  days

and  excessive  in  quantity.

■  Amenorrhoea:  with  painful  pressure,  as  if  menses  would

appear;  pain  in  small  of  back;  in  emigrants;  with
extreme  anguish  and  fear  of  dying;  from  catching  cold  ;
religious  mania,  constant  restlessness,  sleeplessness.
I  I  Complained  of  pain  in  stomach,  which  extended  up
into  breast ;  suffers  when  passing  water,  and  has  burn-
ing in  privates;  it  hurts  her  to  sit  down.


PLATINUM.  .  464

Vagina  sensitive  and  tender.
Spasms  and  constriction  of  vagina.

■  Pruritus  vulvae;  voluptuous  tingling,  with  anxiety  and

palpitation  of  heart.
1 1  Vulva  painfully  sensitive  during  coitus.
I  I  Painful  sensitiveness  with  inward  coldness  of  vulva.
Mons  veneris cold and excessively  sensitive to touch,

cannot  bear  napkins  usually  applied.
iLeucorrhoea:  like  white  of  egg,  only  by  day,  without

sensation,  after  urination  and  after  rising  from  a  seat.
24  Pregnancy. Parturition. Lactation. •  Nymphomania,

in  lying-in women, with voluptuous tingling from

genitals  into  abdomen.

■  Melancholia  during  pregnancy,  with  occasional  uterine

hemorrhage  and  cramps.

■  Threatened  abortion,  especially  in  women  who  have  had

children.

■  Profuse,  exhausting  hemorrhage  after  abortus ;  discharge

black,  clotted.

■  During  labor:  contractions  interrupted  by  sensitiveness

of  vagina  and  external  parts ;  labor-pains  spasmodic,
painful  but  ineffectual ;  pains  reach  a  certain  point,
then  cease,  great  suffering  on  examination,  great  tender-
ness of  OS,  walls  of  vagina  and  vulva ;  spasms ;  alternate
convulsive  actions  and  opisthotonos.

■  Eclampsia  after  parturition ;  profuse  hemorrhage ;  yawn-

ing; convulsions.

■  Convulsions  fourteen  hours  after  an  ordinary  confine-

ment, recurring  thirteen  times  in  twenty-four  hours,
senseless  to  sopor.

■  After  labor  so  sensitive  she  cannot  bear  touch  of  napkin.
I  I  Lochial  discharge  so  copious  as  to  cause  fear  of  fatal

termination  unless  speedily  relieved ;  genitals  so  sensi-
tive that  she  shrank  from  least  touch.
I  I  Puerperal  fever;  acute  pain  in  lower  abdomen  ;  conges-
tions to  head;  wild,  vivid  illusions;  anxiety  and  fear
of  death ; sexual  excitation  ; nymphomania  ; copious
discharge  of coagulated blood ; painful pressure in
genitals ;  severe  pains  in  small  of  back  with  internal
chilliness ; pressure in forehead < from motion ;
anxiety,  with  burning  heat  in  face  and  great  thirst;
restlessness;  fear  of  death.
"  Voice  and  Larynx. Trachea  and  Bronchia. Loss  of
voice.
Hysterical or reflex aphonia, associated with uterine

troubles.
Stuttering,  her  voice  sounds  as  if  she  had  something  in
her  mouth,  as  if  posterior  organs  of  speech  were  covered
and  clumsy.


465  PLATINUM.

Spasm  of  glottis.
^^  Respiration. Difficult,  anxious  respiration.

I  shortness  of  breath  as  if  chest  were  constricted.
I  Deep  breathing  from  sensation  as  of  weight  on  chest.
Sudden  arrest  of  breathing  when  walking  against  wind.
^^  Cough. Hysterical  dry  cough,  from  stifling  beneath  upper
fourth  of  sternum.
Chronic  cough  dependent  on  uterine  diseases  with  mental
disturbance.
^'  Inner  Chest  and  Lungs, i  Weakness  in  chest,  as  if  respi-
ration failed  her ;  breathed  deeply,  but  could  not  breathe
deeply  enough ; prevented  by  weakness  of  respiratory
organs.
I  I  Dull  shocks  of  pressure  in  1.  half  of  chest.
I  I  Cramplike  pain  in  1.  chest,  gradually  decreasing  and
increasing  in  intensity.
^^  Heart,  Pulse  and  Circulation, i  i  Incipient  state  of  endo-
and  pericarditis  in  consequence  of  articular  rheumatism ;
intense  anxiety  and  great  palpitation  of  heart ;  rise  of
temperature; pulse  thread}^,  cannot  be  counted; mo-
mentarily expectant  of  death ; constant  severe  pressure
on  chest;,  sleeplessness  of  eleven  days'  duration.
■  Palpitation  after  mental  exertion,  accompanied  by  anx-
iety and  weeping.
Pulse  regular,  but  small  and  weak,  sometimes  tremulous.
^^  Neck  and  Back, l  Tense  numb  sensation  in  nape  close  to
occiput,  as  if  tightly  bound  ;  cramp  in  posterior  muscles
of  neck ;  tensive  numb  feeling,  close  to  occiput,  as  if
tied  together.

I  I  Nape  of  neck  weak ;  head  inclines  forward.

Pains  in  back  and  small  of  back,  as  if  bruised  or  broken  ;

<  from  pressure  or  bending  backward.
Pressing  from  small  of  back  upon  pelvic  organs.
Pain  in  small  of  back,  going  to  groins  and  down  limbs.
Numbness  in  sacrum  and  coccyx.

I I  Sensation  of  numbness  in  coccyx  as  after  a  blow,  while
sitting.

^^  Upper  Limbs,  l Cramplike  pains  close  to  shoulder,  as  if
everything  in  chest  were  tightly  constricted.

I  I  Weak,  relaxed  feeling  in  both  arms,  as  after  holding  a
heavy  weight,  >  from  motion  of  arms.

I  I  Sensation  as  if  paralyzed  in  arms  and  hands  during-
sleep ;  on  awaking  normal  sensibility  is  restored,  but
arms  are  very  painful ;  same  symptoms  occur  at
intervals  during  day,  but  last  only  a  short  time  and
can  be  produced  by  pressure  upon  parts  where  nerves
are  easily  reached  ;  menses  profuse,  lasting  eight  days.

I  I  Paralyzed  sensation  in  1.  arm.

VOL.  VIII. — 30.


PLATINUM.  466

iSore  burning  at  elbow,  as  if  scraped.
■Sensitive  numb  sensation  and trembling  of  r.  thumb,
as  if  bruised.

■  Numbness  of  little  finger.

^^ Lower Limbs. l  Tightness of  thighs, as if  too tightly-
wrapped,  with  a  feeling  of  weakness  in  them.

'I  I  Sensation  of  great  weakness  in  and  about  knee  joints.

I  Weakness  of  thighs  and  knees,  as  if  beaten.

1  I  Pain  as  after  a  severe  blow,  in  1.  knee.

■i Tremulous  restlessness  in  legs,  with  numb  and  torpid
feeling  when  sitting ;  <  evenings.

iNumb  and  weary  sensation  in  feet,  as  after  fatigue  from
standing,  only  while  sitting.

Cold  feet.

I  Pain  in  great  toe,  as  if  too  tightly  enveloped.
'^' Limbs  in  General. Feeling  of  lassitude  in  limbs.

■  Tension  in  limbs,  as  if  tightly  wrapped.
Cramplike  pains ;  numbness  in  limbs  and  joints.
Spasmodic  jerking  and  drawing  pains  in  limbs  and  joints.
Contortions  of  limbs.

Ulcers  on  fingers  and  toes.
^^IRest. Position. Motion. Rest :  formication  in  r.  temple
<  ; creeping  pains  <  ; digging  in  jaw  <  ;  paralytic
weakness  <  ;  restlessness  and  "fidgets"  <.

Lies  on  back  :  thighs  drawn  up;  legs  uncovered.

Limbs  usuall}''  drawn  up  and  spread  apart ;  spasms.

•Sitting:  numbness,  constriction  of  head  <;  painful  burn-
ing in  privates ;  numbness  in  coccyx  ;  tremulous  rest-
lessness in  legs  ;  numb,  weary  sensation  in  feet;  weak-
ness; hysteric  rheumatism  <•

After  rising  from  a  seat :  leucorrhoea.

^Standing:  hysteric  rheumatism  <.

Bending  backward:  pain  in  back  <.

Motion :  numbness  and  constriction  of  head  >  ;  pressure
in  forehead  <  ;  of  arms,  weak  feeling  >.

Turning  head :  pain  in  head  and  nape.

Turns  in  all  possible  positions  to  relieve  colic.

Walking :  on  entering  house ;  illusions  of  fantasy ;  press-
ure in  genital  organs  <  during  and  after ;  against  wind,
sudden  arrest  of  breathing;  hysteric  rheumatism  >.

Going  up-stairs;  pressure  in  genitals  <.
■^Nerves, i Weary,  relaxed,  prostrated.

■  Paralytic  weakness,  <  at  rest;  numbness,  stiffness  and

coldness.
•  I  Weakness,  especially  while  sitting;  feet  seemed  tired  out;

full  of  tremulous  restlessness,
i  Tremulous  sensation  at  times  through  whole  body.
^J Painful  tremulousness  of  whole  body,  with  throbbing  in

veins.


467  PLATINUM.

■  Great  numbness.

I  Painful  numb  sensation  as  from  a  blow,  here  and  there,
especially  on  head,  always  in  small  spots.

I  Feeling  of  numbness  and  rigidity  here  and  there.

•  Transient,  cramplike  drawing  here  and  there.

I  Parts  affected  by  cramplike  pain  are  painful  to  pressure,
as  if  bruised.

■  Neuralgic  pains  varied  and  shifting.

■  Uneasy,  general  restlessness  and  "  fidgets  "  in  limbs,  <

at  rest.

■  Weak  hysterical  women  sigh  much; lungs  feel  so  weak

they  cannot  take  a  full  breath.

■  Palpitation  and  trembling  of  heart;  laborlike  pains  in

uterine  region ;  lower  lumbar  vertebrse  sensitive  to
pressure. ^Hysteria.

■  Spasmodic  affections  of  hysterical  women  and  children;

tetanic  spasms,  with  wild  shrieks,  alternating  with
catalepsy ;  twitches  of  single  muscles,  trembling,  shiv-
ering ;  <  at  dawn.

■  Spasms:  from  sexual  erethism;  alternating  with dysp-

noea to  suffocation ;  preceded  or  followed  by  constric-
tion of  oesophagus  and  respiratory  embarrassment ;
tonic,  without  loss  of  consciousness  ;  face  pale,  sunken  ;
child  after  spell  lies  on  its  back,  kicks  off  clothes,  and
draws  up  knees  and  spreads  them  apart.
I  I  Spasmodic  rigidity  of  limbs  without  loss  of  conscious-
ness, with  spasmodic  yawning,  followed  by  locking  of
jaws ;  loss  of  speech ;  distortion  of  eyes ;  involuntary
twitching  of  corners  of  mouth  and  of  eyelids ;  during
intervals  restless  sleep,  in  which  child  lies  upon  back,
with  legs  flexed,  knees  separated  and  drawn  towards
abdomen  ;  constantly  kicks  covering  off  legs ;  face  pale,
sunken;  eclampsia  with  ansemia.

■  Vertigo  and  stupefaction,  with  a  feeling  of  emptiness;

redness  and  targescence  of  face,  with  spasmodic  twitch-
ings  of  facial  muscles ;  protrusion  of  eyes,  which  look
glassy  and  react  weakly  to  light ;  tongue  blue,  thick,
with  heav}^  motion,  so  that  she  could  hardly  be  under-
stood ;  tonic  spasms  in  joints  of  hands,  elbow  and
ankle,  with  a  feeling  as  if  extremities  were  going  to
sleep ;  consciousness  undisturbed ;  menses  suppressed
two  months.
I  1  Spasms  followed  by  an  adynamic  condition  in  which
she  would  lie  motionless  upon  back  for  days  unable  to
speak,  partly  on  account  of  trismus  and  partly  on  ac-
count of  aphonia ;  consciousness  unimpaired  ;  this  con-
dition alternated  at  times  with  constriction  of  chest;
twitching  of  eyelids ;  eyes  distorted,  rolled  upward,  so


PLATINUM.  468

that  only  whites  are  visible ;  roaring  in  head  like  the
noises  of  a  mill;  short,  dry  cough;  difficult,  anxious,
deep  respiration  ;  tension,  pressure  and  stitches  in  both
sides  of  chest,  so  that  she  cannot  lie  upon  sides ;  stiff-
ness of  nape  of  neck  and  pain  on  turning  head  ;  pain
in  abdomen ;  constipation ;  stool  only  after  much  ex-
ertion ;  pressure  in  stomach  after  eating ;  aversion  to
meat ;  at  times  rigid  extension  of  arms,  fingers  and
feet;  paroxysms  at  daybreak;  pulse  soft,  small.

■  Spasms  alternate  between  convulsive  actions  and  opis-

thotonos ;  full  consciousness.

■  Catalepsy  during  menstruation.

•  I  Clonic  and  tonic  spasms,  with  convulsive  laughter.
^^  Sleep. I  Great inclination to violent, almost spasmodic
yawning.
Sleeplessness  from  extreme  nervous  excitability.

■  Intense  nervous  wakefulness.

I  I  Awakes  at  night  and  has  difficulty  in  collecting  his
senses.

■  During  sleep  lies  on  back,  arms  over  head,  thigh  drawn

up,  legs  uncovered.

Dreams :  amorous,  with  debility,  in  both  sexes ;  of  fire,
wants  to  go,  but  cannot  get  there.
^^  Time. Morning:  ill-humor;  eructations;  pain  in  teeth.

Dawn :  spasmodic  affections.

Waking:  headache  commences,  gradually  increases,  be-
comes sharp  about  noon,  continues  so  for  two  or  three
hours  and  at  six  in  evening  goes  off.

Forenoon :  paroxysms  of  prosopalgia.

During  day :  paralyzed  feeling  in  arms  and  hands.

Afternoon  :  cramplike  pains  in  temple.

Evening :  weeping  mood  <  ;  griping  in  umbilical  region
<  ;  numbness  of  head  <  ;  formication  in  r.  temple  <  ;
changing  of  color  of  face,  with  thirst  <  ;  digging  in  r.
jaw  <  ;  tingling  and  tenesmus  in  anus ;  tremulous,
restlessness  in  legs  <  ;  chill  with  trembling ;  ephemeral
fevers  <.

Night:  creeping  pains  <;  pains  in  face  <;  great  desire
with  violent  erections  <  ;  cannot  collect  his  senses ;
hysteric  rheumatism  >.
^^  Temperature  and  Weather.  Open  air :  weeping  mood  >  ;
numbness  and  constriction  of  head  >;  fluent  coryza;
shaking  chill,  going  from  room.

In  house:  weeping  mood  <  ;  on  entering  illusions  of  fan-
tasy ;  stopped  up  (coryza).

In  warm  room :  numb  sensation  in  forehead.

Heat :  >  cramp  pains  in  legs ;  >  irritability  and  chilli-
ness.


469  PLATINUM.

*"  Fever, l Sensation  of  coldness,  crawling  and  numbness  in
whole  r.  side  of  face.

Internal  chilliness  and  external  coldness.

Chill  in  evening,  with  trembling  and  tremulous  feeling
through  whole  body.

Shaking  chill  when  going  from  room  into  open,  even
warm  air.

Chilliness  predominates,  with  irritability,  which  ceases
during  heat.

Flushes  of  heat  interrupted  by  chilliness.

Heat  with  sensation  of  burning '"in  face,  without  any  visi-
ble change  of  color  of  face.

1  I  Great  heat  in  face.

I  I  Burning  heat  in  face,  with  glowing  redness.

Heat  gradually  increasing  and  in  like  manner  decreasing.

Sweat  only  during  sleep,  ceases  on  waking.

Ephemeral  fevers,  especially  evenings.

Yellow  fever :  intense  nervous  wakefulness,  black,  men-
strual blood  amounting  to  hemorrhage  or  in  cases  of
pregnancy.
*^  Attacks,  Periodicity.  Paroxysms :  six  to  eight  hours,  pro-
sopalgia ;  with  several  short  remissions ;  of  burning  pain
in  ovaries.

Alternate :  laughing  and  weeping ;  tetanic  spasms  and
catalepsy ;  spasms  and  dyspnoea.

Every  fifteen  minutes,  then  every  five  minutes :  discharge,
metrorrhagia.

For  several  hours  after  coitus:  pains  in  ovaries  and
uterus.

Thirteen  times  in  twenty-four  hours :  convulsions.

Two  or  three  times  a  day :  violent  shooting  from  side
along  1.  mamma.

Every  evening :  crawling  tenesmus  in  anus.

Eleven  days :  sleepless.

Every  fourteen  days :  menses.

For  three  years :  has  not  been  able  to  rest  on  1.  side.
*^  Locality  and  Direction.  Right:  cramplike  pain  in  tem-
ple; formication  in  temple;  intermitting  cramplike
pain  near  outer  margin  of  orbit;  pressure  above  orbit;
reports  in  ear;  coldness, crawling  and  numbjiess  in  side
of  face;  creeping  pains  <  side;  tearing,  boring  pain  in
side  of  face;  pulsating,  digging  through  jaw;  rigor  of
arm;  numbness  and  trembling  of  thumb.

Left:  pressive  cramplike  pain  in  temple  ;  neuralgic  pain
in  malar  bone;  numbness  in  malar  bones;  numb  pain
in  lower  teeth ;  pain  in  ovarian  region  ;  soreness  in
region  of  ovary  extending  over  whole  side ;  cannot  rest
on  side;  dull  shocks  of  pressure  in  half  of  chest;  cramp-


PLATINUM.  470

like  pain  in  chest ;  paralyzed  sensation  in  arm ;  pain  in
knee.

From  r.  to  1, :  sudden  constrictive  shocks  in  temples.
*^  Sensations.  As  if  her  senses  would  vanish  ;  as  if  parts  of
malar  bones  were  between  screws;  as  if  everything  about
her  were  very  small ;  as  if  she  did  not  belong  to  her
own  family;  as  if  he  had  drunk  fermented  beer;  ver-
tigo, as  if  torn  and  pulled  into  threads ;  forehead  as
if  constricted ;  as  if  anxious  sweat  would  break  out ;
forehead  as  if  screwed  in ;  as  if  a  board  were  pressed
against  forehead  ;  as  if  chest  were  constricted  ;  sensation
of  water  in  forehead;  as  if  head  were  screwed  together;
as  if  screwed  in  ;  as  if  temples  were  too  tightly  bound ;
as  if  scalp  would  be  contracted ;  as  if  a  heavy  weight
were  lying  upon  scalp;  as  if  head  were  enlarged;  as  if
tongue  were  scalded;  as  if  throat  were  constricted;  as
if  palate  were  elongated ;  as  if  whole  of  abdomen  were
tightly  constricted ;  as  if  menses  would  come ;  as  if
chest  would  be  crushed  by  a  mass  of  lead  ;  body  as  if
growing  larger  and  longer;  as  if  menses  would  appear;
voice  sounds  as  if  she  had  something  in  her  mouth  ;  as
if  posterior  organs  of  speech  were  covered  and  clumsy;
as  if  respiration  failed  her;  as  if  nape  of  neck  were
tightly  bound ;  back  and  small  of  back  as  if  broken ;
numbness  of  coccyx  as  from  a  blow ;  pain  as  if  every-
thing were  tightly  constricted  in  chest;  weakness  in
arms  as  after  holding  a  heavy  weight;  arms  and  hands
as  if  paralyzed ;  elbow  as  if  scraped ;  r.  thumb  as  if
bruised ;  thighs  as  if  too  tightly  wrapped ;  thighs  and
knees  as  if  beaten  ;  1.  knee  as  after  a  blow  ;  great  toe  as
if  too  tightly  enveloped ;  limbs  as  if  tightly  wrapped ;
as  if  extremities  were  going  to  sleep.

Pain :  behind  ears,  side  of  face,  lips,  forehead,  crown  of
head;  in  limbs;  in  umbilical  region;  in  1.  ovarian
region  ;  in  stomach,  extending  into  breast ;  in  back  and
small  of  back ;  in  small  of  back  going  to  groins  and
small  of  back  ;  in  1.  knee ;  in  great  toe.

Excruciating  pains :  in  uterus.

Acute  pain :  in  lower  abdomen.

Severe  pain  :  in  umbilical  region.

Sharp  stitches :  in  rectum ;  in  sinciput ;  in  forehead ;  in
both  sides  of  chest.

Shooting:  in  rectum;  in  anus;  from  side  along  lower
portion  of  1.  mamma.

Pinching  pressing  down :  in  ovarian  region  or  groins  or
in  pudenda.

Pinching:  in  abdomen.

Violent  compressive  pain  :  in  temples.


471  PLATINUM.

Griping :  in  umbilical  region.

Constricting  pain  :  in  forehead.

Boring :  in  malar  bones.

Dragging,  tearing  pain  :  in  region  of  1.  ovary.

Tearing,  boring  pain  :  in  r.  side  of  face.

Pulsating  digging :  through  whole  r.  jaw.

Spasmodic  drawing  jerking  pains:  in  limbs  and  joints.

Pushing  pain  :  in  rectum.

Pulling  pain  :  in  groins.

Tensive  drawing  pain  :  in  ovaries  and  uterus.

Pressing  pain  :  in  forehead  ;  in  abdomen.

Neuralgic  pain :  in  1.  malar  bone.

Cramp  pain  :  in  legs;  in  ears;  in  nose;  at  root  of  nose;
in  malar  bone  ;  in  posterior  muscles  of  neck.

Cramplike  pain  :  in  forehead;  in  r.  temple;  in  1.  temple;
near  outer  margin  of  r.  orbit ;  in  ears ;  in  1.  chest ;  close-
to  shoulder.

Cramplike  drawing  constriction  :  in  head  ;  in  temples ;  in
throat;  here  and  there.

Cramplike  pressing  inward  :  in  head.

Cramplike  sensation  of  numbness:  in  1.  malar  bones.

Sudden  spasmodic  contractive  shocks:  through  head..

Painful  drawing :  in  both  groins.

Creeping  pains :  in  face.

Bearing  down  :  in  abdomen.

Numb  pain  :  on  top  of  vertex  ;  in  1.  lower  teeth.

Sore  biting :  on  upper  margin  of  orbit.

Sore  burning :  at  elbow.

Burning :  in  face.

Burning :  in  pit  of  stomach ;  in  rectum  ;  in  ovary ;  pain
in  ovaries ;  in  privates.

Soreness:  internal;  in  region  of  1.  ovary;  in  small  of
back.

Corrosive  sensation  :  on  nose.

Heat :  in  upper  part  of  body.

Scraping :  in  throat.

Painful  sensitiveness:  in  mons  veneris;  of  genitals;  of
vulva.

Tenderness :  of  os  uteri ;  walls  of  vagina  and  vulva.

Weight:  in  stomach;  upon  chest.

Heaviness :  in  genital  organs.

Pressure :  in  stomach ;  towards  lower  abdomen ;  in  rec-
tum ;  in  region  of  mons  veneris  and  genital  organs ;  in
groins  and  back ;  upon  chest ;  shocks  of,  in  1.  half  of
chest;  in  both  sides  of  chest.

Wavelike  benumbing  pressure  :  above  r.  orbit.

Contraction  :  of  brain  and  scalp.

Constriction : in pit of  stomach and in abdomen ; of

• vagina.


PLATINUM.  •  472

Tension :  in  limb.

Tight  sensation  :  in  abdominal  muscles  and  thighs.

Numb  feeling :  in  malar  bones ;  in  forehead ;  in  zygo-
mata and  mastoid  processes;  in  temples;  in  head;  in
brain  ;  in  nose ;  in  r.  side  of  face ;  in  nape,  close  to  occi-
put ;  in  coccyx  and  sacrum ;  in  r.  thumb ;  in  little
finger ;  in  legs ;  in  feet ;  here  and  there.

Torpid  feeling :  in  legs.

Tingling:  in  anus;  from  genitals  up  into  abdomen.
• Trembling  sensation  :  through  whole  body ;  in  legs.

Weakness :  in  abdomen  ;  in  chest ;  in  respiratory  organs ;
of  nape  of  neck ;  in  arms ;  in  thighs ;  in  and  about
knee  joints ;  of  lungs.

Weary  sensation :  in  feet ;  in  limbs.

Restlessness :  iii  legs.

General  restlessness.

Paralyzed  sensation :  in  both  arms.

Stifling :  beneath  upper  fourth  of  sternum.

Crawling:  in  r.  temple;  in  r.  side  of  face;  on  tongue;  te-
nesmus in  anus;  in  genitals  and  abdomen.

Formication  :  in  r.  temple.

Chilliness:  about  head,  breast -and  arms;  of  vulva.

Coldness:  in  temple;  of  feet;  in  eyes;  in  r.  side  of  face;
in  mouth ;  of  vulva ;  of  mons  veneris.

Itching:  in  anus:  in  uterus;  in  uterine  region.
^*  Tissues. Chlorosis.

Hemorrhage;  blood  flows  in  thick  clots,  fluid,  or  in  one
grumous  mass,  thick,  black  and  tarry ;  feeling  of  hor-
ror at  what  may  happen,  thoughts  of  death,  etc.;  sen-
sation of  growing  larger  in  every  direction.

Hysteric  rheumatism,  <  sitting  or  standing,  >  walking;
greatly  aggravated  at  night.
*^  Touch. Passive  Motion. Injuries. Touch : headache
<;  on  genitals  unbearable;  groins  and  back  painfully
sensitive ;  mons  veneris  very  sensitive.

Rubbing:  formication  in  r.  temple  >.

Pressure:  on  r.  side  of  abdomen,  tumor  nearly  painless;
pain  in  back  <  ;  upon  parts  where nerves  are  easily
reached  produces  paralyzed  feeling ;  lower  lumbar  ver-
tebrae sensitive.
*^  Skin. Great  paleness  of  skin.

Sensation  of  soreness,  tingling,  smarting  and  itching  or
pricking  stinging,  burning,  with  inclination  to  scratch
on  diff'erent  parts  of  body.

Pain  as  if  excoriated.

Tingling,  gnawing  pains ;  shooting.

I  iSore,  biting  and  smarting.

Fine  capillary  network  like  marble.


473  PLATINUM.

*''  Stages  of  Life,  Constitution.  Women  with  dark  hair,
tliin,  of  a  sanguine  or  bilious  temperament,  and.  who
suffer  from  too  frequent  and  too  profuse  menstruation,
and  whose  sexual  organs  are  exceedingly  sensitive.

Suits  hysterical  and  hemorrhoidal  patients  and,  perhaps,
such  as  suffer  from  gout  or  worms,  especially  those  of
mournful  mind,  or  alternately  sad  and  gay,  who  cry
easily,  are  pale,  easily  fatigued,  suffer  from  wandering
pains,  are  inclined  to  spasms.

Girl,  set.  about  18,  delicate  phlegmatic  appearance,  had  a
mild  bilious  fever,  lasting  ten  da3's,  since  then  suffering
from  dyspepsia,  and  gradually  the  neuralgic  affection
showed  itself;  nervous  headaches.

Girl,  set.  19,  weak,  four  years  ago  had  an  eruption  on  head,
and  ague,  suffering  three  years  ;  mental  affection.

Miss  P.,  set.  19,  menses  set  in  regularly  when  17  ;  dysmen-
orrhoea.

Girl,  set.  19,  perfectly  developed,  worked  four  years  in  a
match  factory,  but  enjoyed  her  usual  good  health,
menses  usually  regular,  suppressed  last  two  months ;
spasms.

Woman,  set.  20,  suffering  two  years,  particularly  after  an
attack  of  typhoid  fever ;  prosopalgia.

Man,  set.  20,  manufacturing  lead  paint;  colic.

Lady,  set.  20,  suffering  since  twelve  years  old  ;  leucorrhoea
and  ovaritis.

Girl,  set.  20,  suffering  ten  months  ;  eclampsia.

Emily  N.,  set.  23  ;  neuralgia  and  menorrhagia.

Girl,  set.  25,  irritable  and  very  sensitive,  hysterical ;
erotomania.

Woman,  set.  27,  sanguine  phlegmatic  temperament,  has
aborted  three  times,  now  ten  weeks  pregnant ;  threat-
ened abortion.

Primapara,  set.  27  ;  convulsions.

Woman,  set.  28;  uterine  displacement.

Woman,  set.  29,  married  three  months ;  'metrorrhagia.

Woman,  set.  30,  menses  usually  very  profuse ;  suppres-
sion of  menses  and  mania  after  catching  cold.

Woman,  set.  30,  eight  years  ago  gave  birth  to  child,  since
then  aborted  six  times,  has  suffered  for  years  from
leucorrhoea,  which  yielded  a  few  months  ago  to  Calc.
and  Sulph. ;  uterine  affection.

Woman,  set.  32,  married  twelve  years,  under  old  school
treatment  was  cured  of  hypertrophy  and  ulceration  of
cervix ;  suspected  ovarian  disease  and  sterility.

Woman,  set.  33,  mother  of  three  children,  youngest  eight
years  old,  has  had  several  miscarriages,  complaining  for
two  or  three  months,  health  otherwise  good;  paralyzed
sensation  in  arms.


PLATINUM.  474

Woman,  set.  35,  dark  hair,  well  built,  pale  face,  has  passed
through  many  labors,  and  later  has  had  several  abor-
tions, last  one  being  accompanied  by  profuse  hemor-
rhage, since  then  suffering ;  metrorrhagia.

Woman,  set.  38,  cachectic  appearance,  suffering  two  years ;
dysmenorrhoea.

Woman,  set.  40;  melancholia.

Woman,  set.  40,  very  phlegmatic  temperament  and  with-
out the  least  sexual  inclination,  mother  of  several  chil-
dren, usually  enjoying  very  good  health  ;  sudden  sexual
excitement.

Lady,  set.  40,  thin,  in  former  years  frequently  treated  for
nervous  and  uterine  symptoms  of  various  sorts  and
always  successfully  ;  menstrual  disturbance.

Woman  set.  40,  married  twenty  years,  childless ;  uterine
spasms.

Woman,  set.  40,  menses  regular ;  metrorrhagia.

Woman,  set.  60,  single,  daughter  of  wealthy  parents,  grew
up  with  hysteria,  atony  of  uterine  system  and  torpor
of  vegetative  sphere,  was  always  cold  and  suffered  from
pains  and  nervous  attacks,  when  32  became  enceinte,
suffering  twelve- years;  melancholia.

Mrs.  Z.,  about  60,  thin ;  swellings  of  liver  and  spleen  and
pain  in  rectum.

Primipara,  labor  protracted  and  delivery  accomplished
with  forceps,  considerable  post-partum  hemorrhage ;
excessive  lochial  discharge.

Two  childless  married  women;  prosopalgia.
*^  Relations. Antidoted  by  :  Fulsat,  Spir.  nitr.  dulc.

It  antidotes :  lead-poisoning.

Compatible :  Bell.,  Ignat,  Lycop.,  Pulsat,  Rhus  tox.,  Sepia,
Veratr.

Compare:  Aurum,  Asaf.,  Bellad.,  Crocus,  Ignat.,  Lycop.,
Plumb.,  Pulsat.,  Rhus  tox.,  Sabad.,  Sepia,  Sulphur.


475  PLUMBUM.

PLUMBUM.

Lead;  the  Metal,  the  Acetate  and  Carbonate.

Introduced  by  Hartlaub.

Provings  and  toxicological  reports  are  numerous.  See  Allen's  Encyclopedia,
vol.  8,  p.  1.

Clinical,  Axjthokities. — Mental  disturbance,  Chapman,  B.  J.  H.,  vol.  3,  p.  170 ;
Uypopion,  Theuerkauf,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  5,  p.  118  ;  Affection  of  eye,  Woodyatt,
Organon,  vol.  1,  p.  483 ;  Erysipelatous  inflammation  of  nose,  Eosenberg,  Riick.  Kl.
Erf.,  vol.  0,  p.  173  ;  Stricture  of  esophagus,  Sommer,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  5,  p.  249;
Gastralgia,  Bute,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  1,  p.  657  ;  Cardialgia,  Kunkel,  A.  H.  Z.,  vol.
106,  p.  189 ;  Lilienthal,  Horn.  CI.,  vol.  3,  p.  43 ;  Affections  of  stomach,  Gross,  Eiick.
KL  Erf.,  vol.  1,  p.  656 ;  Kunkel,  A.  H.  Z.,  vol.  102,  p.  172 ;  Jaundice,  Guernsey,
Hah.  Mo.,  vol.  5,  p.  238 ;  Colic,  Miiller,  Lorenz,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf,  vol.  5,  p.  370  ;
Hesse,  A.  H.  Z.,  vol.  Ill,  p.  43 ;  Holland,  B.  J.  H.,  vol.  32,  p.  79 ;  Miserere,  Lor-
bacher,  M.  A.  J.  H.,  vol.  4,  p.  340;  Enteralgia,  Hughes,  B.  J.  H.,  vol.  22,  p.  239;
Intussusceptio,  Lorbacher,  Theuerkauf,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  5,  pp.  375,  383;  Tumor
cceci,  Marcy,  N.  A.  J.  H.,  vol.  4,  p.  343 ;  Impaction  of  feces,  Lorbacher,  B.  J.  H.,  vol.
29,  p.  611 ;  Hernia,  Baumann,  Eaue's  Rec,  1873,  p.  127,  from  A.  H.  Z.,  vol.  85,  p.
11;  Incarcerated  Aenii'o,  Baumann,  B.  J.  H.,  vol.  31,  p.  24;  Diarrhcea,  Fanning,
Horn.  CI.,  vol.  2,  p.  193 ;  Cholerct,  Henke,  Kurtz,  Ruck.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  1,  p.  95  ;
Gerstl,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  5,  p.  482;  C'onstij)ation,  Hartlaub,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf,  vol.
1,  p.  818  ;  Dixon,  B.  J.  H.,  vol.  28,  p.  390;  Dudgeon,  B.  J.  H.,  vol.  29,  p.  612  ;
Dake,  Organon,  vol.  3,  p.  355 ;  C.  D.  F.,  Organon,  vol.  3,  p.  363 ;  Spasms  of.  rectum,
Chapmann,  B.  J.  H.,  vol.  3,  p.  173 ;  Qirrhotic  kidney,  Gatchell,  Times  Eet.,  1877,
p.  38,  from  A.  O.,  vol.  1,  p.  235 ;  Jones,  A.  H.  O.,  vol.  12,  p.  561 ;  Desquamative
nephritis,  Weil,  A.  H.  Z.,  vol.  103,  p.  131 ;  Strangury,  Brener,  A.  H.  Z.,  vol.  107,  p.
99;  Ovarian  dropsy,  Young,  Times  Eet.,  1875,  p.  93;  Metrorrhagia,  Griessel,  Eiick.
Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  2,  p.  322 ;  Hcemoptysis,  Hartmann,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  3,  p.  222;
Phthisis,  Trinks,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  3,  p.  390;  Schleicher,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  5,
p.  843 ;  Weakness  and  paralysis  of  extensor  muscles  of  fingers,  Chalmers,  Horn.  Eev.,
vol.  13,  p.  145 ;  Nervous  affection  of  leg,  Eussell,  B.  J.  H.,  vol.  14,  p.  376  ;  Sciatica,
Garay,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  5,  p,  902;  Offensive  foot-sweat,  Lilienthal,  N.  A.  J.  H.,
vol.  14,  p.  137  ;  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  3,  p.  592;  Chorea,  Peters,  N.  A.  J.  H.,  vol.  3,  p.
144;  Epilepsy,  Tietzer,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  4,  p.  589 ;  Burnett,  Hom.  Eev.,  vol.  22,
p.  20 ;  Brown,  Hom.  Eev.,  vol.  22,  p.  267 ;  Paralysis,  Hahnemann,  Munnecke,
Eiick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  4,  p.  475;  Kunkel,  A.  H.  Z.,  vol.  102,  p.  173  ;  Paraplegia,
Martin,  T.  H.  M.,  S.  Pa.,  1885,  p.  200 ;  Chlorosis,  Winter,  Buck.  Kl.  Erf,  vol.  2,
p.  275  ;  Winter,  B.  J.  PL,  vol.  3,  p.  218  ;  Lead  poisoning,  Griffin,  Times  Eet.,  1875,
p.  160.

'  Mind. I  Weakness  or  loss  of  memory  ;  unable  to  find  the
proper  word.
I  Slow  of  perception; intellectual  torpor; gradually  in-
creasing apathy.


PLUMBUM.  476

I  Anxiety,  with  restlessness  and  yawning.
I  I  Gloom  alternates  with  excitement.

■  Much  depression  of  spirits,  especially  with  colic.
I  Quiet  and  melancholic  mood.

Indifference  and  somnolence,  with  lamentations  about  dif-
ficulty of  breathing  and  headache.

■  Deep  melanchol_y,  with  timidity  and  restlessness;  anxiety

at  heart,  with  sighing  and  trembling;  dislikes  to  talk
or  work;  maniacal  rage,  with  cries  and  convulsions;
absence  of  mind;  stupidity;  pale,  miserable,  cachectic
appearance  ;  somnolency  ;  colic.

■  Wild  delirium  with  distorted  countenance.

■  Delirium,  alternating  with  colic; bites  and  strikes  at

those  near  him ;  tremor  of  head  and  hands ;  yellow
mucus  collects  about  mouth  and  teeth.

I  I  Delirium  furious  at  night,  milder  by  day,  with  halluci-
nations and  sleeplessness  at  night  and  sopor  by  day ;
tremulousness  mostly  in  head  and  hands ;  face  red  or
straw-colored,  with  mucus  in  mouth,  black  teeth,  fetid
odor;  grinds  teeth;  eyes  swollen,  or  look  is  suddenly
changed,  as  if  frightened;  throws  off  bedclothes;  loss
of  all  senses;  delirium  increases  as  senses  diminish;
puffing  of  cheeks,  especially  if  paralysis  is  a  sequel
or  is  caused  b}^  suppressed  colic,  with  bloated  abdomen.

I  I  Sudden  fainting  on  going  from  one  room  to  another
full of  company,  with  screams,  fright  without  cause,
spasms  in  muscles  of  face,  but  mind  remains  sound.
'  I  1  Thought  his  life  was  in  danger  from  assassination  or
■  poison  and  that  every  one  about  him  was  a  murderer.

■  Insomnia,  severe  headache,  occipital  or  frontal,  with  or

without  vertigo ;  noises  in  ears ;  disordered  vision  ;  di-
plopia; amaurosis;  contraction  of  pharynx,  though
liquids  are  swallowed  in  gulps  and  greedily  ;  mind
weak,  morose  and  sad  ;  preceded  by  albuminous  urine.
I  1  Great  depression  of  spirits ;  though  habitually  very
temperate  had  recourse  to  various  stimulants,  at  first
in  moderation  and  openly,  but  soon  immoderately  and
by  stealth  ;  sleeplessness ;  gloom  ;  despair  of  her  salva-
tion ;  moody  taciturnity ;  fixed  idea  that  she  could  only
obtain  peace  and  safety  through  absolution  from  a
priest  of  the  Papal  Church,  although  she  had  been  a
zealous  Protestant ;  face  nearly  of  a  leaden  hue ;  perpet-
ual movement  of  lips,  as  of  one  smoking,  accompanied
by  a  slight  sound;  very  silent,  but  when  spoken  to
answered  rationally ;  severe  pain,  starting  up  from  back
into  head,  as  if  something  were  working  at  top  of  head,
with  a  sense  of  screwing  from  behind  forward;  some
flatulence; frequent  drowsiness  by  day,  sleeplessness


477  PLUMBUM.

by  night ;  profound  melancholy  and  frequent  sighs ;
brooded  over  any  forbidden  thing;  would  steal  from
house  in  servant's  cloak  and  bonnet  to  obtain  stimu-
lants, but  from  the  moment  their  prohibition  was  with-
drawn ceased  to  have  any  desire  for  them  ;  after  being
permitted  to  visit  a  priest  and  converse  with  him  ceased
to  talk  and  think  of  the  Church.

i  I  Mental  disturbance  of  eight  or  ten  years'  duration  in  a
man  addicted  to  masturbation  ;  has  several  times  at-
tempted suicide ;  has  been  in  seclusion  ;  greatest  dejec-
tion and  despair;  fixed,  moody  look,  with  a  constant
scowl;  believes  himself  lost;  has -the  sounds  of  hell
constantly  in  his  ears ;  hears  voices  and  sees  shadows  of
demons  ;  great  disposition  to  make  away  with  himself,
or  do  himself  some  bodily  injury ;  gloom  and  taciturnity
alternate  with  frantic  delirium;  drowsy  sometimes  in
day,  sleepless  at  night;  constant  pain  and  weight  in  upper
part  of  neck  and  back  of  head  ;  complexion  dark  ;  vio-
lent palpitation  of  heart,  <  after  eating  and  lying  on  1.
side  ;  pulse  weak  ;  bowels  regular  but  evacuations  very
dark ;  seminal  emissions  very  frequent,  often  occurring
during  stool ;  testes  wasted ;  spasmodic  stricture ;  goose-
skin.

Affections  more  of  the  emotions  than  the  intellect.
^  Sensorium. Sopor  after  spasms;  coma;  stertorous  breath-
ing, with  jaws  fixed  ;  motion  with  mouth  as  if  smoking;
puffing  of  cheeks.

■  Apoplexy;  consciousness  blunted;  memory  deficient;
speech  impeded,  single  syllables  are  omitted  or  cannot
be  combined  into  words;  mimic  spasms  of  face  while
speaking;  trembling' of  tongue  when  put  out;  semi-
paralysis  of  buccinator  muscles  and  of  velum  palatinum
manifested  by  violent  snoring ;  sleeplessness ;  fear  of
death  ;  organs  of  sense  torpid  and  insensible  ;  eyes  prin-
cipally afi'ected ;  eyelids  droop  as  if  paralyzed ;  pupils
constantly  dilated;  all  objects  seem  smaller  and  farther
removed  from  focus  of  vision,  they  may  be  seen  as
through  a  gauze;  diplopia;  pulse  always  slow,  50  to
60,  sometimes  hard  and  tense  like  wire ;  all  the  muscles
.  may  be  paralyzed,  especially  of  1.  side;  paralysis  aff'ects
equally  motor  and  sentient  nerves,  is  often  attended
with  violent  pains  in  paralyzed  parts  and  considerable
contractions,  especially  of  extensor  muscles,  which  feel
as  hard  as  wood ;  in  other  cases  spasms  are  tonic,  and
if  they  reach  their  full  development  run  into  complete
epileptic  convulsions;  muscles  of  affected  parts  become
atrophied  ;  if  paralysis  is  not  complete  gait  is  unsteady,
with  particular tendency  to  fall forward ; paralyzed


PLUMBUM.  478

respiratory  muscles  often  occasion  a  high  degree  of  dysp-
noea; sphincters  scarcely  ever  paralyzed.

■  Stupefaction  of  head;  he  falls  down  unconscious.

■  Stupefaction  with  somnolence.

Vertigo  :  on  stooping ;  when  looking  upward ;  >  in  open
air ;  epileptic.
^  Inner  Head. •  Heaviness  in  head,  especially  in  cerebellum.

■  Headache:  violent;  frontal;  pulling  andpressive,  chronic

in  forehead,  <  from  mental  labor  and  intolerable  in
large  company;  in  temples,  <  in  r. ;  as  if  a  ball  were
rising  from  throat  into  brain  ;  with  vomiting  and  vio-
lent pains  in  umbilical  region.
iSick-headache,  with  pain  in  occiput,  umbilical  colic  and
bilious  vomiting ;  yellow  skin,  especially  of  face.

■  Chronic  dull  headaches,  with  depressed  spirits  and  con-

stipation.

■  Congestion  of  blood  to  head,  wnth  heat  and  beating  in  it.

■  Paralysis  occurring  early;  cerebro-spinal  meningitis.

■  Meningitis, chronic, when paralyzed parts soon fall

away  in  flesh  ;  limbs  become  painfully  contracted  ;  fre-
quent spells  of  colic  with  retraction  of  abdomen.

■  Cerebro-spinal  meningitis,  with  early  paralysis.

■  Chronic  encephalitis  and  myelitis.

■  Sclerosis of brain,  or progressive muscular atrophy,

alternating  with  colic  and  constipation.

*  Outer  Head. ■  Violent  pains  in  integuments  of  skull,  from

occiput  to  forehead.

■  Great  dryness  of  hair,  it  falls  off  even  in  beard  and  eye-

brows.

*  Sight  and  Eyes, i '  Diplopia.

■  Cloudiness  before  eyes,  inducing  one  to  rest  them.

I  I  Dimness  of  vision,  especially  on  r.  side ;  sudden  loss  of
sight  or  transient  amaurosis  and  deafness  complicating
motor  palsy  in  some  cases.

I  I  Neuritis  optici ;  papillee  swollen  (examination  after
death  showed  interstitial  hyperplasia  of  connective
tissue;  sheaths  of  optic  nerves  were  distended  by  fluid  ;
cerebro-spinal  fluid  was  greatly  increased ;  brain  sub-
stance ansemic  and  the  gray  portion  yellowish).

Ophthalmoscopic  examination  between  the  paroxysms
showed  that  the  disk  was  prominent,  its  outline  hazy,
its  color  an  opaque  bluish-white.

I  I  Left  eye  affected  for  two  weeks,  badly  for  five  or  six
days ;  drooping  upper  lid ;  intense  photophobia ;  very
profuse,  hot  lachrymation,  pericorneal  injection,  deep
bluish-red,  marked  at  corneal  margin  and  fading  oflp
towards  reflexial  fold  of  conjunctiva ;  slight  redness  of
conjunctiva  of  lid,  cornea  very  delicately  hazy  through-


479  PLUMBUM.

out  its  entire  extent,  as  if  breathed  upon  so  as  to  dim  its
lustre ;  and  at  lower  inner  quadrant  opacity  was  a  little
denser  and  seemed  as  if  it  might  develop  into  an  ulcer ;
cornea  not  normally  sensitive  to  touch;  pupil  con-
tracted ;  vision  impaired  ;  tension  of  eyeball  diminished ;
neuralgic  pains  in  and  around  eye,  <  at  night ;  atropine
only  partially  dilated  iris.

I  I  Pupils  contracted  or  dilated.

iHypopion  after  iritis,  extending  up  nearly  to  centre  of
cornea ;  nightly  tearing  pains  in  eye  and  forehead ;
could  hardly  distinguish  day  from  night.

I  Eyeball  feels  too  large.

I  Ophthalmia,  lachrymation,  photophobia,  redness  of
whole  ball.

I  I  Inflammation,  varicose  distension  of  vessels  of  cornea,
obscuring  light.

I  I  Passive  congestion,  with  soft  large  granulations.

I  Yellowness  of  whites  of  eyes.

I  Lids  spasmodically  contracted.

■  Paralysis  of  upper  lids.

^Hearing  and  Ears, i Hardness  of  hearing;  often  sudden
deafness.

Buzzing  in  ears.

I  I  Hears  music;  with  frightful  delirium.

•  Stitches  and  tearing  in  ears,
'  Smell  and  Nose. Smell  too  sensitive  or  too  feeble ;  even
total  loss  of  smell.

I  I  Loss  of  smell  with  epilepsy.

I  I  Fetid  odor  before  nose.

iMuch  tough  mucus  in  nose,  which  can  only  be  dis-
charged through  posterior  nares.

I  Cold  nose.

I  I  Puffiness  of  nose.

I  I  Erysipelatous  inflammation  of  nose,  mostly  in  alse  nasi,
with  redness  and  vesicles  discharging  a  thick  pus  when
slightly  pressed.
^  Upper  Face.  iFace  expressive  of  extreme  anxiety  and  suf-
fering; pale,  ash-colored ;  yellow,  corpse-like;  bloated;
cheeks  sunken.

I  Sallow  complexion;  discolored  sclerotic.

■  Swelling  of  one  side  of  face.

■  Skin  of  face  greasy,  shining.
1  I  Vesicles  on  face  and  nose.

*  Lower  Face, ii  Violent  loud  motion  of  lower  jaw  and
frightful  grinding  of  teeth.

■  Lockjaw.

I  iTearing  in  jaws  relieved  by  rubbing  them.
I  I  Lips  peel  ofl"  without  pain  or  dryness.


PLUMBUM.  480

I  Swelling  of  submaxillary  and  sublingual  glands.
'"  Teeth  and  Gums, i  Grinding  of  teeth.
I  I  Teeth  become  black.
I  1  Yellow  mucus  on  teeth.

I  Teeth  hollow,  decayed,  crumbling,  smelling  offensively.

I I  Distinct  blue  line  along  margin  of  gums.

1 1  Gums:  pale;  swollen;  show  a  lead-colored  line;  blue,
purple,  or  brown  ;  painful,  with  hard  tubercles.
^^  Taste  and  Tongue. ■  Taste:  sw^eetish;  metallic;  bitter.
I  Cannot  put  out  his  tongue.

I  Tongue:  dry,  brown,  cracked ;  coated  yellow  or  green;

dry,  red,  glazed,  in  chronic  gastritis;  dry  and  white
(colic) ;  red  at  edge ;  brown  far  down  centre ;  inflamed,
swollen ;  heavy,  paralyzed  ;  hurts  as  if  bitten.
^^  Inner  Mouth. '  i  Saturnine  breath.

I I  Breath  fetid.

■  Dryness  of  mouth.

I  Accumulation  of  sweetish  saliva  in  mouth.

I  1  Froth  in  mouth.

A  yellowish  mucus  in  mouth  and  on  teeth.

Saliva  increased;  of  a  bluish  color.

Salivation,  with  painful  tongue  and  lips  ;  fetid  smell  and

languor  (after  abuse  of  mercury),  with  yellow  purple

ulcers  on  tip  of  tongue  and  mouth.
Salivation  (mercurial)  so  profuse  in  damp  weather  as  to

saturate  pillow.

■  Aphthae: dirty  looking  ulcers  and  purple  blotches  in

mouth  and  on  tip  of  tongue.
Ulcers  in  mouth,  with  fetid  smell ;  they  turn  yellow.
^^  Throat. ■  Constriction  in  throat  when  trying  to  swallow,
with  great  urging  to  do  so.

■  Sensation  of  a  plug  in  throat;  globus  hystericus.
I  I  Difficult  swallowing.

■  Fluids  can  be  swallowed,  but solids  come  back into

mouth  ;  burning  in  oesophagus  and  stomach  some  hours
after  eating. ^Stricture  from  spasm.

■  Paralysis  of  throat  with  inability  to  swallow.

■  Tonsils:  swollen;  inflamed,  covered  with  small,  painful

abscesses.
I  I  Tonsillitis :  going  from  l.to  r.,  with  yellow  granulous  or
follicular  ulcers ; small  and  very  painful,  with  burn-
ing, stinging  pains.

■  Tough  mucus  in  fauces  and  posterior  nares.

■  Angina  granulosa,  going  from  1.  to  right.

■  Angina  on  1.  side,  with  copious  flow  of  purplish  saliva

and  spasms.

■  Diphtheria,  with  tendency  to  sloughing  and  implication

of  larynx  (also  Plumb,  iod.).


481  PLUMBUM..

'*  Appetite,  Thirst. Desires,  Aversions. Great  hunger  or
complete  loss  of  appetite.
I  Violent  thirst,  especially  for  cold  water.
Desire :  for  cakes ;  rye  bread  ;  tobacco.
'' Hiccough,  Belching, Nausea  and  Vomiting, a  Eructa-
tions: empty;  sweetish;  of  offensive  odor ;  sour.

■  Gulping  up  of  sweetish  water.

iNausea:  frequent;  constant;  occasional,  sometimes  fol-
lowed by  vomiting  of  food.

■  Vomiting:  most  distressing; stomach  rejecting almost

everything;  of  food  ;  constant,  of  everything  taken  ;  in
the  night,  especially  early  morning ;  spasmodic ;  with
violent  cardialgia;  violent  of  sweetish,  sour,  or  bitter
substance,  like  white  of  egg,  in  chronic  gastritis  ;  of
grass-green  substance,  afterwards  changing  to  retching;
of  a  brownish  liquid,  streaked  with  blood ;  of  food  and
of  discolored  substances,  with  violent  colic ;  of  food,_in
morning,  with  great  weakness ;  of  greenish  and  blackish
substances ;  of  a  blackish  substance ;  stercoraceous.
I  Vomited  matter  has  a  fecal  odor.
''  Scrobiculum  and  Stomach.  i Feeling  as  if  a  ball
ascended  from  epigastrium  along  thorax  to  throat,
where  it  causes  a  kind  of  suffocation ;  at  such  times  can
neither  speak  nor  swallow,  and  suffers  the  greatest
anxiety.

■  Contraction  in  oesophagus  and  stomach ;  fluids  can  be

swallowed,  but  solids  return  ;  some  hours  after  eating  a
burning  m  stomach  and  oesophagus ;  constipation ;  pros-
tration ;  emaciation.

■  Heaviness as  from  a' load  in  stomach,  with heaviness

in  occiput.

■  Pressure  and  tightness  about  stomach.

■  Severe  pain  in  stomach,  radiating  to  both  groins,  down

both  legs,  particularly  left.

■A^iolent  pressure  in  stomach  and  pain  in  back;  at  times
>  bending  backward,  at  others  bending  forward;  >
from  hard  pressure.

I  I  Pressure  in  stomach,  as  from  a  heavy  weight,  increasing
to  a  strangling  sensation  during  the  severe  colicky  par-
oysms  and  followed  by  sour  and  bilious  vomiting;  loss
of  appetite ;  excessive  thirst ;  pains  in  back  >  some-
times bending  forward,  sometimes  backward ;  constipa-
tion, hard,  knobby  stool  once  a  week ;_  taste  always
sweetish;  abdomen  compressed  hard,  like  a  board;
constriction  of  throat ;  paralytic  weakness  in  extremi-
ties, especially  on  r.  side ;  hands  and  feet  cold ;  total
and  striking  want  of  perspiration  ;  paroxysms  increase

VOL.  VIII. — 31.


PLUMBUM.  482

in  severity  and  duration  and  she  is  already  atrophied
and  anaemic. ^Cardialgia.

I  I  Constant  pressure  in  epigastrium  ;  severe  constricting
pain  alter  eating  heavy  food ;  rolls  about  the  floor  in
extremity  of  pain ;  attack  lasts  from  ten  to  twelve
hours,  at  times  longer;  slight  relief  when  lying  down;
at  times  has  terrible  pains  when  rising  in  morning  and
when  stomach  is  empty ;  epigastrium  hard  and  swollen
during  paroxysm ;  <  belching  and  at  night ;  feces  scanty,
knotty,  hard  as  a  stone,  evacuated  with  difficulty;  at
times  sweetish  taste.

I  I  Periodical  pressing,  burning  and  sensation  of  heaviness
in  epigastrium,  as  if  everything  were  weighted  down,
with  general  indisposition;  whole  abdomen  felt  tense
and  rough  to  touch ;  stool  hard,  knotty ;  frequent  at-
tacks of  shortness  of  breath  without  cause ;  offensive
foot  sweat  since  childhood ;  debility ;  emaciation ;  pro-
fuse night  sweats.

1  I  Sudden  severe  pains  in  epigastrium,  compelling  her  to
bend  backward  and  press  something  hard  against
abdomen  for  relief;  <  from  motion;  >  from  belch-
ing ;  after  every  attack  eyes  are  deeply  jaundiced.
^'Gastralgia.
'^  Hypochondria. Hepatic  region  sensitive  to  pressure.

Sensation  of  heat  and  burning  in  liver  and  spine.

Persistent  sticking  pain  in  hepatic  region,  first  anteriorly,
then  posteriorly.

Continued  darting  pain  in  region  of  liver.

I  I  Weak  and  exhausted;  skin  and  white  of  eyes  yellow;

urine  very  yellow ;  stools  light  in  color ;  much  nausea,
particularly  in  evening  or  at  night,  when  she  vomits
her  food;  restless,  sleep  broken  at  night;  not  able  to
leave  her  bed. ^Plumbum.

II  Icterus:  skin  and  sclerotica  yellow;  yellow  ulcers  in
mouth;  sweetish  risings;  abdomen  bloated;  colic;
stinging  in  region  of  liver,  >  from  rubbing.

Cirrhosis  of  liver;  first  enlarged  then  contracted.
•  Spleen  enlarged.
^^  Abdomen.  A  sensation  in  abdomen  at  night  in  bed,  which
causes  her  to  stretch  violently  for  hours  together ;  feels
that  she  must  stretch  in  every  direction ;  the  will  to  do
so  alone  cannot  accomplish  it;  as  if  from  paralysis;
irritation  of  sentient  nerves.

I  iBorborygmi ;  rumbling  in  abdomen.

■  Drawing  pain  from  abdomen  to  back.

iSevere  colic,  contracted  abdomen ;  bends  backward ;
motor  nerves  most  affected.

Abdomen  retracted ;  hard,  painful ;  pain  commenced  at


483  PLUMBUM.

umbilicus  and  radiated  to  lumbar  region  and  to  iliac

fossae;  rolled  upon  ground  and  pressed  abdomen  with

violence.
Navel  seems  to  adhere  to  spine  and  the  pain  also  involves

pectoral  region.
B Sensation  as  if  abdominal  walls  were  pulled  inward;  as

if  abdomen  and  back  were  too  close  together.
I  I  Severe  pains  in  abdomen,  especially  around  navel,  as  if

bowels  were  twisted.
lExcruiating  tearing  pains  in  all  the  bowels,  but  <  at

navel.
I  I  Lacerating  pains  at  umbilicus  and  epigastrium.

■  Intense  retraction  of  the  integuments  of  abdomen  towards

spine,  and  a  hard,  knott}^  feeling  of  the  muscles  in
various  places  over  its  surface.

■  Extremely  violent  pains  in  umbilical  region,  shooting

to  other  portions  of  abdomen,  somewhat  >  by  pressure;
at  times  they  became  so  violent  that  he  was  almost  wild,
tossed  about,  pressed  fists  into  abdomen  and  declared
he  must  go  to  stool  immediately,

I  I  Pain  often  extended  to  other  regions,  to  chest,  threat-
ening suffocation,  to  small  of  back,  kidneys,  bladder
and  lower  extremities.

llExcessive  pain  in  abdomen,  radiating  thence  to  all
parts  of  body.

■  Violent  colic;  abdomen  drawn  in,  as  if  by  a  string,  to

spine ;  cutting,  contractive  pains  with  restless  tossing ;
>  from  rubbing  or  hard  pressure ;  abdomen  hard  as  a
stone;  knots  in  recti  muscles;  anxious,  with  cold  sweat
and  deathly  faintness.

■  Constriction of intestines; navel and anus violently

retracted.

I  I  Pain  above  umbilicus,  coming  on  every  forenoon,  ac-
companied by  vomiting. ^Enteralgia.

I  I  Severe  paroxysmal  pains  in  r.  side  of  abdomen,  com-
pelling him  to  bend  double,  >  from  pressure  of  hand,
<  at  night,  causing  sleeplessness;  abdomen  slightly
bloated  ;  whole  r.  side  sensitive  to  pressure;  stool  every
second  or  third  day.

I  I  Extremely  severe  pains  in  abdomen,  recurring  periodi-
cally, with  spasmodic  contraction  of  abdomen  and  ob-
stinate constipation  ;  hard,  knotty  elevations  here  and
there  over  abdomen  ;  intestines  as  if  constricted;  pains
and  cramping  of  limbs.

I  I  Colic,  with  hard  abdomen,  great  sensitiveness,  relief
only  obtained  by  bending  body  forward  and  drawing
up  knees;  obstinate  constipation;  abdominal  walls  re-
tracted.


PLUMBUM.  484

I  I  Abdomen  hard  as  a  stone ;  not  ver}^  tympanitic ;  recti
muscles  drawn  into  knots  nearly  as  large  as  a  fist;  no
alvine  evacuation  for  two  days,  and  no  urine  for
eighteen  hours ;  countenance  eypressive  of  greatest
anxiety  ;  face  and  forehead  bedewed  with  cold,  clammy
perspiration;  pulse  feeble,  not  very  quick;  during  spasms
(every  three  minutes)  vomiting  of  a  blackish,  grumous
fluid;  deathly  faintness;  body  bending  backward,  so
as  to  form  a  semicircle,  and  so  sudden  as  to  throw  him
from  bed  ;  pressure  from  flat  hand  gave  some  relief.

■  Colicky  pains  proceeding  from  spinal  cord,  with  sensa-
tion as  of  drawing  in  of  abdomen  to  back,  with  great
depression  of  spirits.

I  iSuflering  expression  of  face;  pulse  small  and  frequent;
forehead  and  limbs  cold,  covered  with  clammy  sweat;
constant  belching  of  off'ensive  odor  and  at  times  vomit-
ing of  fecal-like  masses ;  tearing,  burning  pains  in  abdo-
men, which  seem  to  concentrate  around  umbilicus;  <
from  touch,  motion,  and  particularly  vomiting,  which
is  caused  by  drinking  slightest  quantity  of  water;  abdo-
men bloated;  intestines  distended  with  gas, so  that  they
could  be  traced  by  finger;  extremely  sensitive  swelling
as  large  as  fist,  on  1.  side  of  umbilicus ;  great  thirst ;  stool
absent.

I  I  Colic,  accompanied  on  third  day  by  vomiting  of  asca-
rides ;  next  day  continuous  hiccough  and  offensive
belching,  with  retching,  followed  at  once  by  vomiting
on  drinking  water;  tongue  coated ;  foul  taste  in  mouth;
dryness  of  mouth  without  thirst;  anorexia;  no  fever;
pressing,  burning  and  tearing  in  abdomen,  which  was
distended  ;  around  umbilicus  spot  as  large  as  fist,  sensi-
tive to  pressure,  from  whence  the  pains,  mostly  period-
ical, originated;  intestines  as  if  distended  with  wind,  so
that  course  of  each  could  be  felt;  constant  borbo-
rygmus;  constipation  of  four  days'  duration,  with
frequent  ineffectual  urging  to  stool ;  two  days  later
fecal  vomiting;  belching  of  wind  of  fecal  odor.  ^In-
tussusception.

I  I  Distension  and  hardness  of  CEecum  and  ascending
colon,  whole  region  swollen,  painful  to  touch,  on  mo-
tion; tongue  dry;  brown  in  centre;  skin  hot  and  dry ;
much  thirst;  nervousness;  headache;  general  depres-
sion ;  expression  anxious ;  feeling  of  lameness  in  lower
extremities;  sour  eructations;  nausea;  inclination  to
vomit ;  umloilicus  retracted.  ^Tumor  cseci.
■  Large,  hard  swelling  in  ileo-csecal  region;  painful  to
touch  and  motion. ^Typhlitis.

I  I  Sensation  as  if  an  abscess  were  forming  near  umbilicus;


485  PLUMBUM.

abdominal  walls  hard  and  contracted,  knotted  in  certain
points. ^Rheumatism  of  bowels.

I  Excruciating  colic  from  poisoning  with  carbonate  of  lead.

I  Colic,  with  paralysis  of  lower  extremities.

I  I  Inflammation,  ulceration  and  gangrene  of  bowels.

■  Incarcerated  hernia.

I  Intussusception,  with  colic  and  fecal  vomiting.

I  I  Strangulated  femoral  hernia,  1.  side;  severe  pain  ;  con-
tinual vomiting  of  feculent  matter.

I  'Strangulated  scrotal  hernia,  r.  side.
^'' Stool  and  Rectum. I  Diarrhoea:  violent;  painful; fetid;
3'ellow; bloody, watery, with vomiting and violent
colic.

I  I  Dysentery :  with  violent  colic ;  in  violent  cases  with
bloody  masses  of  exudation ;  violent  fever,  cutting  in
stomach  and  bowels,  burning  in  anus  during  discharge
and  long-lasting  tenesmus ;  spasm  of  sphincter  ani  as
if  drawn  in;  burning  in  rectum  and  perineum.

iCholera,  severe  cases,  particularly  with  spasms  of  abdom-
inal muscles.

iStools:  dark,  offensive,  watery;  yellow;  mucous  and
bloody;  bloody;  profuse,  watery;  involuntary;  fetid,
yellow  and  fecal ;  watery,  with  vomiting  and  violent
colic ;  bloody  masses.

I  I  Stool  only  once  in  eight  or  ten  days,  of  scanty,  blackish
feces;  expulsion  of  which  caused  acute  suffering.

llConstipated  stools:  hard,  lumpy,  like  sheep's  dung;
with  urging  and  terrible  pain  from  constriction  or
spasm  of  anus ;  knotty,  feces  in  form  of  balls,  often
hard,  black  or  green;  nearly  always  of  a  dark  color;
ball-shaped,  hard  as  a  stone;  small,  hard  balls  covered
with  greasy  pellicle ;  large  and  hard  and  covered  with
glairy  mucus;  dark-colored.

Before  stool:  ineffectual  urging  w^ith  or  without  tenesmus;
complete  atony  of  rectum ;  severe  coliclike  pains  with
constriction  or  spasm  of  anus.

During  stool :  great  effort ;  violent  colic  pains.

After  stool :  colic  and  at  times  diarrhoeic  discharges.

I  I  Attacks  of  constipation  ;  enemas  of  little  or  no  service ;
stool  attended  with  terrible  agony,  as  bad  almost  as
labor ;  stools  were  in  hard  balls ;  during  worst  pain  felt
a  drawing  from  navel  backward  to  spine.

I  I  For  last  three  weeks  stools  which  were  always  rather
costive  became  more  scanty  and  difficult,  injections
and  purges  brought  away  small  lumps  of  healthy-look-
ing feces ;  abdomen  began  to  swell  and  increased  daily
in  size  until  it  was  as  large  as  that  of  a  woman  seven
months  pregnant ;  swelling  greater  on  1.  side,  and  com-


PLUMBUM.  486

pletel}'^  filled  up  space  between  spine  and  navel ;  con-
volutions of  bowels  filled  with  hard  feces  could  be  dis-
tinctly seen  and  felt ;  on  r.  side  it  felt  as  if  a  bag  not
quite  filled  with  fluid  lay  there ;  sw^elling  not  very  ten-
der to  pressure,  but  prevented  her  lying  upon  side ;  at
times  very  violent,  spasmodically  contractive,  cutting
pains  with  great  restlessness,  anxiety  and  cold  sweat,
whereupon  lumps  size  of  fist  appeared  on  1.  side;  after
eating,  violent  retching  and  vomiting  sometimes  of  food
sometimes  of  mucus ;  loss  of  appetite ;  tolerably  clean
tongue;  great  thirst;  flow  of  urine  slightly  diminished  ;
skin  somewhat  shrivelled ;  weak,  pale,  emaciated,  hol-
low-eyed.

I  I  Gradual  loss  of  strength;  constant  sickness;  acid  eruc-
tations; vomiting  of  every  article  of  food  taken;  con-
stant dull  pain  in  hepatic  region ;  violent  attacks  of
enteralgia ;  constipation,  bowels  wall  not  act  without  a
purgative,  motions  hard  and  dark;  numbness  of  upper
and  lower  extremities;  a  sort  of  semi-paralytic  condi-
tion of  arms  so  that  knife  would  frequently  drop  from
hand  ;  expulsive  power  of  bladder  weakened,  urine
expelled  with  difficulty  and  in  a  dribbling  manner;
urine  high-colored  and  fetid  ;  sexual  functions  much
weakened  ;  pulse  weak  and  quick;  extremely  weak  and
emaciated.

I  I  Constipation  interrupted  by  an  attack  of  diarrhoea
every  week  or  ten  days ;  latter  always  came  on  between
midnight  and  morning  with  great  urgency  for  stool
and  violent  pains  in  abdomen,  >  by  passage  of  copious
liquid  discharge ;  several  discharges  would  occur  during
morning,  sometimes  continuing  through  day,  and  then
she  would  be  costive  again  ;  with  diarrhoea,  sensation
as  of  something  pulling  at  umbilicus  with  actual  retrac-
tion of  navel.

■  Obstinate  habitual  constipation:  when  the  stools  are  dry

and  lumpy  and  the  intestines  half  paralytic  and  half
crampy;  in  pregnant  women  and  in  persons  of  a  para-
lytic diathesis,  or  when  due  to  paralysis  of  intestines  ;
especially  when  there  are  present  dryness  of  the  excre-
tions and  a  muscular  atony ;  often  there  is  an  absence
of  intestinal  mucus  and  bile;  when  Platina  fails.

■  Alternation  of  constipation  and  diarrhoea.
I  I  Light-colored  stools. ^Jaundice.

■  Impaction  of  feces.

I  I  Intolerable  pain,  from  spasms  of  rectum,  with  everj'
as  that  of  horrible  constriction  and  spasmodic  contrac-
tion, very  much  increased  if  feculent  matter  is  solid  ;


487  PLUMBUM.

for  last  ten  years  has  taken  aperients ;  if  evacuation
were  not  liquid  his  torture  was  extreme  ;  if  he  passed  a
day  without  an  evacuation  the  suffering  lasted  several
days.

I  Spasmodic  condition  of  rectum  and  anus.

I  I  Anus  violently  constricted  and  drawn  up ;  contraction
of  sphincter.

■  Prolapsus  ani  with  paralysis.

■  Fissures  of  anus.

^^  Urinary  Organs.  '  '  Must  get  up  two  or  three  times  at  night
to  urinate;  urine  profuse,  acid,  albuminous,  containing
fine  granular  and  hyaline  casts  of  small  diameter  and
no  renal  epithelium;  much  oppression  for  breath,
making  locomotion  ahiiost  impossible ;  when  walking
is  seized  with  severe  cramplike  pain  in  region  of  um-
bilicus, >  standing  still ;  perspires  all  over  as  soon  as
he  gets  into  bed,  perspiration  comes  and  goes  all
through  night;  cough  on  first  waking,  as  he  gets  out
of  bed  continues  till  after  breakfast;  is  caused  by  a
sensation  as  if  a  "  wheat-hull"  were  in  throat  just  be-
hind manubrium  sterni;  lying  on  back  or  r.  side  brings
on  cough ;  when  lying  on  back  feels  as  if  fluid  rolled
from  one  side  of  chest  to  other  (subjective) ;  in  morning
mouth  and  lips  dry  and  lips  swollen;  tongue  dry  ;  lips
crack  open  when  coughing;  drinks  at  night  on  account
of  dry  mouth;  marked  weakness;  pasty,  yellow  look;
lungs  are  hepatized  and  heart  diseased.  ^Cirrhotic
kidney.

I  I  General  indisposition,  loss  of  appetite,  frontal  headache,
made  <  by  mental  application;  difficulty  of  breathing
at  all  times,  but  especially  noticed  when  lying  down  at
night,  causing  discomfort  and  loss  of  sleep;  both  ankles
highly  oedematous;  skin  dry,  does  not  perspire,  even
when  taking  active  exercise  on  a  hot  day;  a  slight,  dark
cloud  in  urine,  settles  on  standing;  urine  acid,  specific
gravity  1016 ;  albumen,  -^y ;  finely  granular  casts  and
some  blood  corpuscles.

I  I  Urine  decreased  in  quantity,  red,  albuminous,  contain-
ing blood  corpuscles  and  epithelial  cells,  crystals  of
oxalate  of  lime  and  hyaline  casts ;  headache  in  occiput
extending  to  forehead ;  heavy,  oedematous  eyelids ;
sunken  eyes,  staring  look  ;  pains  in  limbs;  emaciation;
small,  slow  pulse ;  hoarse  voice  ;  catarrh  of  air  passages
with  discharge  of  tough  mucus ;  dry,  short  cough ;
cough  with  expectoration  of  blood ;  constriction  and
oppression  of  chest;  coated  tongue;  complete  loss  of
appetite;  vomiting;  nausea  for  food  ;  belching;  vomit-
ing of  mucus;  constipation  ;  retention  of  urine;  cramps


PLUMBUM.  488

of  bladder;  painful  urination;  urine  fiery-red,  bloody,
albuminous;  restless  sleep;  obstinate  sleeplessness;
great  despondency  and  indifference.  ^Desquamative
nephritis.

■  Granular  degeneration  or  cirrhosis  of kidneys; little

dropsy  or  albuminuria,  but  a  marked  tendency  to
ursemic  convulsions.

■  Morbus Brightii: colicky pains; retracted abdomen;

cutaneous  ansesthesia;  albuminuria;  rapid  emaciation
and  excessive  debility.
1 1  Morbus  Brightii,  contracted  kidney.

■  Diabetes: lowness  of  spirits,  anguish  and  melancholy;

diminution  of  sight;  dryness  of  mouth;  dry,  cracked
tongue;  suppuration  of  lungs;  hectic  fever;  impotence;
dryness  and  brittleness  of  skin  ;  emaciation  ;  gangrene.

I  I  Urine  dark-colored,  brownish-red,  turbid,  with  floccu-
lent  sediment,  sp.gr.  1017,  acid,  albuminous;  sediment
consisting  of  a  number  of  red  blood  corpuscles  and  a
large  number  of  short,  rather  thick  turbid  cylinders
studded  with  red  blood  corpuscles.

I  I  Albumen  gradually  diminished  in  quantity  as  less  lead
was  found  in  urine;  later,  albumen  rapidly  increased,
and  there  was  not  an  atom  of  urea  in  urine,  sp.  gr.  being
1002.

I  I  Amaurosis  and  cerebral  symptoms  appeared  and  ceased'
coincidently  with  the  appearance  and  cessation  of
albuminuria.

■  Hsematuria.

I  I  Complete  suppression  of  urine.

I  I  Frequent  vesical  tenesmus:  ineffectual  urging  to  uri-
nate; sometimes  after  much  effort,  which  increases  the
pains,  urine  passes  in  drops.

■  Urine-:  scanty, high-colored ;  passed  in  drops;  strangury;

will  not  pass  as  from  atony  of  bladder ;  dribbles,  is  high-
colored  and  fetid;  albuminous.
I  I  Complete  paralysis  of  urinary  organs  from  spinal  de-
generation.

■  Much  trouble  with  urine  in  not  being  able  to  pass  it,  ap-

parently from  want  of  sensation  to  do  so ;  the  will  to  dp
so  cannot  affect  it,  as  if  from  paralysis.

■  Chronic  paralysis  of  sphincter  vesicae.

I  I  Necrotic  inflammation  of  bladder,  caused  by  a  decom-
position of  urea  and  formation  of  carbonate  of  ammonia,
brought  on  by  catheterization  and  introduction  of  bac-
teride  germs.

I  I  Urging  to  urinate  every  ten  minutes;  urine  discharged
in  drops,  with  extreme  pain;  burning  during  and  after
urination  ;  sensation  of  constriction  behind  glans  penis


489  PLUMBUM.

after  urination ; urine  at  times  containing  blood  ; <
from  motion;  >  from  absolute  rest;  uses  salt  to  excess.
^Strangury.
^^  Male  Sexual  Organs, i Increased  sexual  desire  and  violent
erections.  . .

I  Slight  provocations  produce  erections  and  emissions.  _

■  Loss  of  sexual  desire;  impotence;  chronic  degeneration

of  cord.
1  I  Emissions,  with  relaxed  organs,  after  wme.
I  I  Prolonged,  painful,  spasmodic  stricture.
iTesticles:  drawn  up;  feel  constricted ;  swollen,  inflamed

and  painful.
I  I  Genitals  swollen  and  inflamed.
I  I  Prostatorrhoea.

■  Chronic  gonorrhoea.

2' Female  Sexual  Organs. 1 1  Nymphomania.

a  Wants  to  stretch  limbs  during  ovarian  pains  ;  ovarian

dropsy.
I  I  Cessation  of  menses  on  invasion  of  colic;  may  reappear

after  paroxysm,  or  not  again  until  next  period.
I  I  Spasmodic  dysmenorrhoea.

■  Menorrhagia,  with  a  sensation  of  a  string  pulling  from

abdomen  to  back  ;  during  climacteric  period  dark  dots,
alternating  with  fluid  blood  or  bloody  serum,  with  a
sensation  of  fulness  in  pelvis  and  bearing-down  pams
in  small  of  back ;  skin  dry,  pale,  yellowish  ;  "  liver
spots"  here  and  there;  short  of  breath  on  going  up
stairs;  debility;  depressed  spirits.

■  Vaginismus.

I  I  Strangulation  of  prolapsed  portion  of  vagina ;  intense

pain.
I  I  Leucorrhoea,  with  inclination  to  miscarriage.

I  I  Mucous  discharge  from  vagina.

*' Pregnancy.  Parturition.  Lactation.  Feeling  as  if  there
were  not  room  enough  in  abdomen,  at  night  m  bed ;
must  stretch  violently.

II  Pain  drawing  from  abdomen  to  backbone,  as_  it
abdomen  were  drawn  upward  by  a  string;  depression
of  spirits;  constipation. Abortion.

■  She  feels  alack  of  room  for  foetus  in  uterus;  inability  ol

uterus  to  expand;  threatening  abortion.

Abortion  from  lead  poisoning ;  or,  if  born,  the  child  lives
but  a  year  or  two.

1  I  Can  scarcely  pass  urine  ;  apparently  from  want  ol  sen-
sation to  do  so;  the  will  to  do  so  cannot  effect  it,  as  if
from  paralysis.

I  I  Puerperal  eclampsia,  especially  with  history  of  epilepsy;
albuminuria.


PLUMBUM.  490

I  Milk  scanty  and  watery,  with  great  emaciation.

I  I  Pulling,  tearing,  contractive  pains  in  mammse,  uterus,
and  vagina,  with  or  without  colic;  the  breasts  be-
come momentarily  harder,  or  with"  the  colic  they  seem
smaller.

I  1  Induration  and  inflammation  of  mammae.
^^  Voice  and  Larynx. Trachea  and  Bronchia. ■  Aphonia
from  paralysis  of  vocal  cords.

Voice  diminished  both  in  power  and  vibration ;  during
paroxysms  rough  and  stuttering  speech  or  voice  entirel}^
gone ;  pants  in  talking  as  if  out  of  breath.

Spasmodic  closure  of  rima  glottidis ;  mucus  rattling
in  throat,  with  sudden  difficulty  of  breathing  and
asphyxia.

Lar^aigismus  stridulus.

Constriction  of  larjaix.

I  Bronchitis,  with  copious  muco-serous  or  purulent  expec-
toration ;  periodical  asthmatic  paroxysms.
^^  Respiration. Respiration  anxious  and  sighing  with  lamen-
tations and  moaning.

Want  of  breath ;  oppression  from  motion ;  short  breath
on  going  up  stairs.

Heavy  difficult  breathing.

Spasmodic  dyspnoea  ;  sudden  paroxysms  force  him  up  at
night  to  the  open  window,  with  paralytic  symptoms  of
laryngeal  muscles.
^"  Cough.  I  Cough:  short,  dry,  nervous,  fatiguing;  dry,
spasmodic;  <  during  inspiration;  with  purulent  expec-
toration ;  frequent,  with  bloody  expectoration ;  after
hemorrhage  from  lungs,  <  lying  on  back  and  after
getting  out  of  bed  in  morning;  dry,  hacking,  with  tu-
berculous diathesis ;  in  chlorosis.

Expectoration: copious, muco-purulent or purulent;
tasting  sweetish ;  bloody.
^^  Inner  Chest  and  Lungs, i  i  Pressure  upon  chest,  with  diffi-
culty in  breathing  and  short,  dry,  nervous  cough.

Stitches  in  chest  and  sides.

I  I  Great  emaciation  :  fever  with  evening  exacerbation  ;
night  sweats ;  diarrhoea ;  good  appetite ;  hectic  flush  ;
constant  cough,  da}'  and  night,  with  profuse  greenish,
purulent,  lumpy,  blood-streaked  expectoration ;  dul-
ness  on  percussion  in  apex  of  right  lung,  with  rales.
^Phthisis.

■  Haemoptysis: phthisical disposition, when bloody or

purulent  sputa  alternate.
I  Haemoptysis,  with  pus  and  blood  and  stitch  pains  in  chest.
iPhthisis;  suppuration  of  lungs;  large  vomica  in  lungs;

chronic  cough,  with  bloody  expectoration ;  palpitation.

■  Suppuration  of  lungs.


491  PLUMBUM.

pneumonia.  •  i .

''Heart,  Pulse  and Circulation, i  Palpitation :  violent;
spasmodic,  with  anxiety  about  heart.

1  1  Beats  of  heart  very  tumultuous,  rapid  and  resonant.

Stitch  in  region  of  heart  during  an  inspiration,  with  anx-
iety, heat  and  redness  of  face;  rushing  of  blood  in
region  of  heart,  during  a  rapid  walk;  anguish  about
heart,  cold  sweat; violent  palpitation  and  a sort  of

angina  pectoris.
Hypertrophy  and  dilatation  of  heart.  _

Change  in  muscular  structure  of  heart  without  coincident
disease  of  valves  and  with  or  without  atheromatous  de-
generation of  vessels ;  usually  hypertrophy  and  dilata-
tion of  1.  ventricle;  ten  cases  out  of  twenty-five  were
associated  with  parenchymatous  nephritis  in  stage  of

atrophy.

I  I  Bruit  de  souffle  at  base  of  heart ;  cat's  fremitus  at  apex.

Pulse:  rapid;  weak  and  slow,  about  40; variable,  gen-
erally small  and  slow,  contracted ;  at  times  hard  and
slow; at others small and accelerated; dicrotic or
undulating.
'"  Outer  Chest. Chronic  myalgia.

^'  Neck  and  Back. Tension  in  neck  extending  to  ears  when
moving  head.  -14.

Pains  in  back  sometimes  >  by  bending  forward,  at
others  when  bending  backward.

Stitches  in  back  and  small  of  back  and  between  shoulder
blades.

Pain  in  back,  with  sensitiveness  of  affected  spot,  by  lean-
ing on  it ;  in  afternoon  >  after  rubbing.

Chronic  spinal  meningitis,  with  sudden  loss  of  flesh ;
painful contraction of limbs; colic with retracted

abdomen.  ^  j> *  -^-u

;  I  Wasting  palsy:  local  paralysis,  chiefly  of  forearm,  with

atrophy  of  muscles  and  absence  of  anaesthesia.
Multiple  sclerosis :  tremor  of  r.  arm  during  voluntary  mo-
tion ;  arms  are  "  shaky  "  when  he  attempts  to  use  them  ;
tremor  of  arms  preceded  by  weakness  and  numbness;
tongue  trembles  when  being  protruded  or  when  he  tries
to  articulate;  speech  dragging  and  slow;  diplopia;  dim-
ness of  sight ;  neuritis  of  optic  nerve.  _
Paralysis: aneesthesia and  hyperansesthesia in spinal

QISGRSGS.

^^  Upper  Limbs. Convulsive  motion  of  arms  and  hands,  with
pains  in  joints.  .

Debility  of arms,  with  atrophy,  loss  of  sensation  and

• trembling.


PLUMBUM.  492

Weakness  and  painful  lameness  of  arms.

I  I  Numbness  and  want  of  power  in  extensor  muscles  of  r.
forearm,  those  of  thumb  and  index  finger  being  almost
paralyzed;  attack  commenced  eighteen  months  ago  and
was  attributed  to  continuous  knitting.

I  I  Very  numerous  dilatations  of  cutaneous  veins  of  fore-
arm, and  under  surface  of  lower  third  of  upper  arm.

I  I  Very  numerous  moniliform  dilatations  of  veins  on  fore-

arm, upper  arm  and  back  of  hand,  chiefly  correspond-
ing to  the  points  of  union  of  veins.

I I  Wrist-drop.

t  I  Right  hand,  wrist  and  forearm  mostly  affected  by  paral-
ysis (parts  chiefly  exposed  to  contact  with  paint).
I  I  Trembling  of  hands.
I  I  Knife  drops  from  his  hands. ^Constipation.

■  Paralysis  of  extensor  muscles  of  fingers  of  r.  hand  ;  severe

pains  in  abdomen ;  constipation ;  extraordinary  ten-
dency to  sweat. ^Lead  poisoning.

Wens  on  hands.

Paronychia;  onychia  maligna  and  ingrowing  toe  nails-.

Swollen  red  spots  on  fingers.
^^  Lower  Limbs. Lacerating  pain  without  redness  or  swelling
in  forepart  of  thighs  and  knees ;  <  at  intervals ; de-
cidedly  < by  movement  and scarcely  alleviated  by
pressure.

Violent  pains  in  lower  extremities,  chiefly  in  anterior  por-
tion of  thighs  and  calves.

Most  violent  pains,  extending  from  hips  to  knees,  as
if  pierced  with  needles.

I  I  Feeling  of  numbness  outside  of  r.  leg,  from  hip  to  knees,
always  coming  on  at  night  and  continuing  for  an  un-
certain time,  also  felt  in  morning ;  of  late  it  had  in-
creased to  actual  insensibility,  so  that  he  could  run  a
pin  into  skin  without  pain ;  skin  and  parts  below  felt
hard ;  frequently  came  on  after  walking  about  room  in
morning.

Paralytic  sensation  in  hip,  knee  and  foot  joints,  especially
the  latter  two,  the  feet  are  pressed  to  the  floor  with  diffi-
culty, as  if  they  were  made  of  wood.
I  I  Drawing  pressing  pain  in  posterior  part  of  thigh  along
course  of  sciatic  nerve,  extending  to  knee;  gait  limp-
ing, difficult;  very  tired  after  walking;  after  Sulph.,
pains  became  periodic,  appearing  with  great  severity
.  every  other  evening  and  lasting  several  hours,  followed
by  great  weakness  of  thigh;  headache.

■  Sciatica:  drawing  pressive  pain  in  course  of  nerve  from

posterior  part  of  thigh  to  knee,  especially  when  the
painful  space  is  wider  than  the  nerve  track ;  walki'ng  is
difficult  and  exhausting;  colic.


493  PLUMBUM.

iSciatica, when there is marked consecutive muscu-
lar atrophy; or earlier, then walking causes great
exhaustion.
Painfulness  of  loins,  nates,  posterior portion of  thigh,
knee,  sole  of  foot  and  toes;  pain  is  equally  severe  on
both  sides  and  is  felt  somewhat  on  inner  surface  of  lower
limb ;  usually  consisting  of  prickings  or  lancinations,
with  occasional  attacks  of  cramps.
From  time  to  time  very  sharp  neuralgic  pains,' always
seated  in  lower  limbs,'though  not  limited  to  the  joints
or  to  any  particular  spot.
Extremely  acute  and  paroxysmal  pains,  as  well  as  cramps,

in  lower  limbs.
Pains  in  lower  limbs  <  in  paroxysms.
I  Lightning-like  pains  in  lower  limbs.
iLame  feeling  in  legs.

■  Paralysis  with  atrophy  of  legs  after  parturition;  loss  of
motion  and  sensation ;  coldness  of  affected  parts ;  im-
possible to  stand  ;  involuntary  stool  and  urination.
Pains  in  legs,  especially  at  night.
I  I  Enlarged veins on calves, with numerous varicose

dilatations.
I  I  Cramps  in  calves.
Swelling  of  feet.
I  Fetid  foot  sweat;  fetid  sweat  on  soles; sweat  smelling

like  old  cheese.
I  I  Li tense pain in great toe at night, which nothing

relieves.
Li growing  toe  nail^.
*'  Limbs in General. Violent pains  in extremities, be-
ginning in  fingers,  extending  through  elbows  and  upper
arms; then beginning  in feet and finally affecting
whole  body.
I  Pains  in  extremities,  especially  in  evening  and  night.
•  Neuralgic  pains  in  limbs.
I  Pains  in  limbs  <  in  paroxysms,  so  severe  that  he  cries

out;  somewhat  >  by  pressure;  <  from  motion.
iVague  wandering  pains  in  limbs.

Lancinating  pains  all  along  inner  surface  of  upper  and
lower  limbs; sometimes  cramps; at  times  these  neu-
ralgic pains  cause as  great  suffering  as the colicky
paroxysms.
iThe  pains  in  limbs  are  <  at  night  and  are  >  by  rub-
bing; <  from  pressure  but  >  from  friction;  durmg
pain  desires  to  extend  upper  and  lower  extremities.
The  1.  side  twitches,  tingles  and  then  "  goes  to  sleep."
■  Alternate  jerks  of  flexors  and  extensors.
llJerking,  trembling  or  numbness  of  limbs.


PLUMBUM.  494

iNot  a  loss  of  power,  but  uncertain,  irregular  motions  of
limbs  during  height  of  pains,  ceasing  when  pains  stop.

I  I  Paralysis  of  limbs.

■  Paralytic  weakness  of  extremities,  especially  on  r.  side;
hands  and  feet  cold  ;  total  want  of  sweat.

I  I  Paralysis  of  extensor  muscles  of  fingers  and  toes,  both
sides,  after  injections  of  morphine  for  rheumatic  pains.

I  Paralysis :  of  wrist  or  arms ;  first  cramp,  then  loss  of  sen-
sation and  sudden  emaciation,  with  coldness  of  parts;
feet  are  shortened ;  extensors  most  affected ;  preceded
by  trembling  colic,  apoplexy  or  spasms;  the  paralyzed
parts  may  swell  after  the  emaciation.

I  I  Paroxysms  of  paralj'sis.
^'^  Rest. Position. Motion. Rest:  constriction  behind  glans
penis  >.

Lying  down:  pressure  in  epigastrium  >;  difficulty  of
breathing;  all  symptoms  better.

Lying  on  r. ride:  impossible,  swelling  in  abdomen;  brings
on  cough.

Lying  on  1.  side :  violent  palpitation  worse.

Lying  on  back :  brings  on  cough  ;  feels  as  if  fluid  roiled
from  one  side  of  chest  to  the  other;  cough  worse.

Stooping  :  vertigo.

Bending  forward  :  pressure  in  stomach  ;  pains  in  back
better.

Bending  backward  :  pressure  in  stomach  >  ;  pain  in  epi-
gastrium >  ;  pains  in  back  better.

Bending  double:  >  colic.

Leaning  on  back  :  sensitiveness.

Inclination  to  take  strange  attitudes  and  positions  in  bed.

Wants  to  stretch  limbs-:  during  ovarian  pains.

Rising  in  morning:  terrible  pains  in  stomach.

Motion:  pain  in  epigastrium  <;  pain  in  abdomen  <;
caecum  and  ascending  colon  <  ;  constriction  behind
glans  penis  <  ;  of  head,  tension  in  neck  and  ears ;  pain
in  thighs  >.

Walking  about  room  :  numbness  of  leg;  very  tired.

Going  up  stairs  :  shortness  of  breath.

Rapid  walk :  rushing  of  blood  in  region  of  heart.

Active  exercise:  does  not  perspire;  coldness.
^^  Nerves. ■  Anaesthesia  or  excessive  hyperesthesia.

1  I  Diminished  sensibility  on  whole  r.  side  of  body.

iLassitude;  faintness;  faints  on  going  into  a  room  full  of
compan}'.

•  General  debility;  great  prostration.

B Restlessness  and  uneasiness.

iSpasms:  clonic;  tonic;  convulsive  movements  of  limbs;
from  cerebral  sclerosis  or  tumor ;  epileptic;  epileptiform.


495  PLQMBUM.

Immobility  of  afFecterl  part.

I  I  Epileptic  fits,  at  first  seldom  and  irregular,  but  soon
regularly  and  coincident  with  menses ;  attacks  very  se-
vere, lasting  for  hours,  followed  by  great  drowsiness  and
lassitude,  compelling  her  to  pass  following  day  in  bed ;
menstruation  exceedingly  painful,  so  that  its  approach
fills  her  with  great  fear  ;  severe  frontal  cephalalgia ;  con-
stant sleepiness ;  for  several  years  severe  colic  and  ob-
stinate constipation ;  face  dirty  pale  ;  very  poor  mem-
ory;  low-spirited,  frequently  sits  in  abject  despair;
strabismus,  jerking  with  head,  dragging  speech,  with
slight  frothing  at  mouth  while  talking.

■  Epilepsy,  chronic  form  ;  before  spell  vertigo;  legs  heavy

and  numb,  tongue  swollen ;  afterwards  long-lasting
stupid  feeling  in  head  and  prolonged  snoring  sleep  ;  no
aura,  but  sighing  may  precede  the  attack.

I  I  Epilepsy ;  after  fit  consciousness  returns  slowly  and
symptoms  of  paralysis  remain;  chronic  cases,  with
earthy  color  of  face,  stupor  and  debility  after  fit ;
periodicity.

1  I  Epilepsy,  proceeding  from  splanchnic  system;  swelling
of  tongue,  which  hangs  from  mouth  and  gets  bitten.

I  I  Chorea  of  three  years'  standing ;  1.  arm  partially
paralyzed.

■  Globus  hystericus;  hysterical  paralysis.

I  iHemi-  and  paraplegic  anEesthesia;  hemiplegia  which  is
often  accompanied  by  hypertesthesia  of  opposite  side ;
hysteria.

I  I  Arthralgic  and  neuralgic  pains  in  trunk  and  limbs.

I  Tremor;  tremor  followed  by  paralysis.

I  I  General  paresis;  wrist-drop  very  prominent  and  pro-

nounced; wasting  away  of  muscles;  humerus  seems
covered  only  by  integument;  can  walk  only  with  assist-
ance; urine  scanty  and  high-colored;  icteroid  appear-
ance; no  appetite;  thirsty;  paroxysms  of  intense  colic,
with  retraction  of  abdominal  walls  and  often  vomiting;
obstinate  constipation ;  has  desire  but  not  power  to
evacuate  bowels;  injections  sometimes  enable  him  to
pass  small  hard  balls. ^Paraplegia.

I I  Paralysis :  preceded  by  mental  derangement,  trembling,
spasms  or  by  shooting,  darting,  intense,  tearing  pains
in  tracks  of  larger  nerves;  the  parts  emaciate;  wrist-
drop, caused  by  apoplexy,  sclerosis  of  brain  or  muscular
atrophy,  alternating  with  colic;  after  apoplexy  rapid
emaciation,  atrophy  and  loss  of  sensation  of  affected
part;  of  arms,  with  pain,  dryness,  deathly  paleness  and
coldness  of  hands.

■  Paralyzed  parts  soon  fall  away  in  flesh  and  the  limbs  are


PLUMBUM.  496

painfully  contracted :  complete  palsy,  with  excessive
waste  of  tissue;  lowness  of  spirits  and  indifference;
loss  of  memory;  sleeplessness,  or  sleep  disturbed  with
dreams  or  hallucinations ;  ringing  in  ears ;  weakness  of
sight;  diplopia;  vertigo;  sunken  features ;  weakness  of
sexual  powers ;  oppression  of  chest;  incomplete,  diffi-
cult, noisy,  moaning  respiration;  constriction  in  prse-
cordial  region;  paralysis  of  upper  and  lower  limbs;
pulse  small, soft,  easily  compressible;  deep-seated  anses-
thesia  of  limbs  and  trunk.

I  I  Progressive  locomotor  ataxia.
^^  Sleep. I  I  Drowsiness;  somnolency.

Great  disposition  to  yawn  and  stretch,  with  restlessness.

I  Great  sleepiness  during  day  ;  sleepless  at  night;  sleepless
from  colic.

■  Inclination  to  take  strangest  attitudes  and  j^ositions  in
bed.

I  I  All  symptoms  <  at  night  and  by  lying  in  bed.
^*  Time. Morning :  several  discharges  ;  mouth  and  lips  dry
and  lips  swollen  ;  cough <  getting  out  of  bed ;  after
walking  about  room  numbness  of  leg.

Day  :  sopor  ;  great  sleepiness.

Afternoon  :  pain  in  back.

Evening:  weak  and  exhausted ;  vomiting;  exacerbation;
pains  in  extremities  < ;  chill  increases ;  internal  chill
and  external  heat ;  heat.

Night:  delirium  furious;  sleeplessness;  neuralgic  pains
in  and  around  eye  <  ;  vomiting  especially  early  morn-
ing ;  weak  and  exhausted ;  sensation  in  abdomen  caus-
ing her  to  stretch ;  pain  in  abdomen  < ;  must  get  up
several  times  to  urinate;  drinks  on  account  of  dry
mouth  ;  difficulty  of  breathing  when  lying  down,  must
stretch  violently;  sweats;  numbness  of  leg;  intense
pain  in  great  toe ;  pain  in  extremities  <  ;  sleepless  ;  all
symptoms  <  ;  heat;  violent  pains  in  bones.
^^  Temperature  and  Weather.  Effects  most  marked  in  rough
and  foggy  weather.

Open  air :  vertigo  >  ;  coldness  ;  sensitive.

Damp  weather :  salivation  profuse.

Cold  water  :  violent  thirst.
'"  Fever. Coldness : in open air and  when  exercising ; of
hands  and  feet.

Chill  predominates,  increasing  towards  evening,  with  vio-
lent thirst  and  redness  of  face.

Internal  chill  and  external  heat,  in  evening.

Chilliness  in  all  the  limbs.

Heat:  with  thirst,  anxiety,  redness  of  face  and  sleepiness,
in  evening  and  at  night,  with  yellowness  of  buccal
cavity.


497  PLUMBUM.

Sweat :  anxious,  cold,  clammy,  as  soon  as  he  gets  into
bed  ;  cold,  viscid,  with  anxiety.

I  Absolute  want  of  sweat.
^'Attacks,  Periodicity. The  ailments  develop  slowly  and
intermit  for  a  time;  intermission  every  third  day.

Periodical :  pains  in  abdomen ;  asthmatic  paroxysms ;
epilepsy.

Paroxysmal  pains:  in  r.  side  of  abdomen;  in  lower  limbs.

Alternating:  delirium  with  colic;  gloom  and  taciturnity
and  frantic  delirium,  colic  and  constipation ;  diarrhoea
and  constipation  ;  dark  clots  and  fluid  blood  during
menses;  jerks  of  flexors  and  extensors;  paralysis  and
colic.

Every  three  minutes  :  spasms.

Every  forenoon  :  pain  above  umbilicus.
- Nightly  :  tearing  pains  in  eys.

Every  other  evening  :  pains  in  thigh.

Every  second  or  third  day  :  stool.

Every  week  or  ten  days :  constipation  interrupted  by  an
attack  of  diarrhoea.

Every  ten  days:  urging  to  urinate.

For  three  years  :  chorea.
*"  Locality  and  Direction.  Right :  pain  in  temple  ;  dimness
of  vision ;  paralytic  weakness  of  side ;  pain  in  side  of
abdomen;  side  sensitive  to  pressure;  strangulated  her-
nia; as  if  a  bag  filled  with  fluid  lay  in  abdomen;
tremor  of  arm  ;  numbness  and  want  of  power  in  exten-
sor muscle  of  forearm  ;  wrist  and  forearm  most  affected
by  paralysis;  numbness  in  outside  of  leg;  paralytic
weakness  of  extremities;  diminished  sensibility  of  side
of  body.

Left:  muscles  of  side  paralyzed;  eye  affected;  angina;
severe  pain  in  leg;  sensitive  swelling  on  side  of  umbil-
icus; strangulated  hernia;  lumps  size  of  fist  appear  on
side ;  hypertrophy  and  dilatation  of  ventricle ;  side
twitches,  tingles  and  then  "  goes  to  sleep ; "  arm  partially
paralyzed.

From  1.  to  r. :  tonsillitis ;  angina  granulosa.
^^  Sensations.  As  if  something  were  working  at  top  of  head,
with  a  sense  of  screwing  from  behind  forward ;  eyelids
as  if  paralyzed  ;  as  if  a  ball  were  rising  from  throat  into
brain  ;  cornea  as  if  breathed  upon  ;  eyes  as  if  too  large ;
as  of  a  plug  in  throat;  as  if  everything  were  weighted
down,  with  general  indisposition;  as  if  abdominal  walls
were  pulled  inward ;  as  if  abdomen  and  back  were  too
close  together ;  as  if  bowels  were  twisted ;  as  if  abdo-
men were  drawn  to  spine  by  a  string;  intestines  as  if
constricted;  as  if  drawing  in  from  abdomen  to  back;

VOL.  VIII. — 32.


PLUMBUM.  498

intestines  as  if  distended  with  gas ;  as  if  abscess  were
forming  near  umbilcus;  sphincter  ani  as  if  drawn  in ;
as  if  a  bag  not  quite  filled  with  fluid  lay  in  bowels  ;  as
if  a  wheat-hull  were  in  throat;  as  if  fluid  rolled  from
one  side  to  other  in  abdomen ;  as  if  there  were  not  room
enough  for  foetus  in  uterus ;  as  if  thighs  w^ere  pierced
with  needles ;  as  if  feet  were  made  of  wood.

Pain  :  in  upper  part  of  neck  and  back  of  head  ;  in  occi-
put; in  back;  at  umbilicus  radiating  to  lumbar  region
and  extending  to  chest,  to  small  of  back,  kidney,  bladder
and  lower  extremities;  in  limbs;  in  joints;  in  lower
limbs.

Extremely  acute  pains:  in  lower  limbs.

Excessive  pain :  in  abdomen.

Terrible  pains:  in  epigastrium.

Intolerable  pains  :  with  ever}^  evacuation.

Intense  pain:  in  vagina;  in  great  toe.

Excruciating,  tearing  pains  :  in  all  the  bowels.

Excruciating  colic.

Violent  pains:  in  paralyzed  parts;  in  integuments  of
skull;  in  umbilical  region;  in  abdomen;  in  lower  ex-
tremities ;  from  hips  to  knees;  in  extremities.

Severe  pain  : in  stomach;  in  abdomen.

Severe  shooting  pains :  through  body.

Tearing  pains:  in  eyes  and  forehead;  in  ears;  in  jaws;
in  abdomen  ;  in  mammas.

Lancinations  :  in  lower  limbs.

Lacerating  pains:  at  umbilicus  and  epigastrium;  in  fore-
part of  thighs  and  knees.

Cutting,  contractive  pains  :  in  bowels.

Cutting  :  in  stomach  and  bowels.

Lightning-like  pains:  in  lower  limbs.

Darting  pain  :  in  region  of  liver.

Stitches  in  ears;  in  chest  and  sides;  in  region  of  heart;
in  back  and  small  of  back  and  between  shoulder-
blades.

Pulling  pain  :  in  mammae.

Pulling,  pressive  pain  :  in  head.

Drawing  pain  :  from  abdomen  to  back  ;  in  posterior  part
of  thigh  ;  in  course  of  sciatic  nerve.

Neuralgic  pains:  in  and  around  eye;  in  lower  limbs;  in
trunk.

Vague,  wandering  pains  :  in  limbs.

Paroxysmal  pains :  in  r.  side  of  abdomen.

Contractive  pain  :  in  mammae.

Bearing-down  pains  ;  in  small  of  back.

Cramping:  of  limbs;  of  bladder;  in  calves.

Sticking  pain  :  in  hepatic  region.


499  PLUMBUM.

Prickings  :  in  lower  limbs.

Stinging :  in  region  of  liver.  _  ...

Burning:  in  oesophagus  and  stomach;  in  tonsils;  m  epi-
gastrium ;  in  liver  and  spine ;  in  abdomen  ;  in  anus  ;  in
perineum  and  rectum  ;  in  ulcers.

Heat :  in  liver  and  spine.

Dull  pain  :  in  hepatic  region.

Pressure :  about  stomach ;  upon  chest.

Constriction  :  in  throat ;  of  intestines  ;  of  navel ;  of  anus ;
of  chest ;  behind  glans  penis  ;  of  testicles  ;  of  larynx.

Painful  lameness  :  of  arms.  i- i  • .

Painfulness:  of  loins,  nates,  posterior  portion  of  thigh,
knee,  sole  of  foot  and  toes.

Tightness :  about  stomach.

Tension  :  in  neck  to  ears.

Weight :  in  back  part  of  head.

Heaviness  :  in  head  ;  in  stomach  ;  in  occiput.

Fulness :  in  pelvis.

Oppression :  of  breath.

Hard,  knotty  feeling  of  the  muscles  in  various  places.

Weakness  :  of  thigh.

Lame  feeling  :  in  legs.

Trembling  :  of  tongue  ;  of  hands.

Numbness;  of  upper  and  lower  extremities;  of  extensor
muscles  of  r.  forearm.  _  ,

Paralytic  sensation  :  in  hip,  knee  and  foot  joint.

Dryness :  of  hair  ;  of  lips ;  of  mouth  ;  of  hands  ;  of  skm.

Chilliness :  of  all  the  limbs.

Coldness :  of  legs ;  of  hands  and  feet.
^'Tissues. 1  Anaemia.  . .

I  Chlorosis:  orthopnoea;  obstinate  constipation;  oidema
of  feet  and  anasarca ;  unusual  muscular  debility ;  scanty
or  suppressed  catamenia.  .

The  number  of  red  blood  corpuscles  is  very  largely  dimin-
ished, but  their  size  becomes  greatly  increased,  being
relatively  to  the  size  of  healthy  blood  corpuscles  as  nine
to  seven,  true  macrocythemia.
Blood  under  microscope  shows  an  abnormal  number  ot

white  globules.
llEmaciation: extreme,  with  anaemia  and great  weak-
ness ;  of  paralyzed  parts  followed  by  swelling.

I  Great  muscular  weakness.

■  Constriction of muscular fibre, both voluntary and

involuntary.  . ,

I I  Muscular atrophy from sclerosis of cerebro-spinal

system.
1 1  Arthralgia.  x  -u  a

■  Wandering  pains;  severe  shooting  pains  through  body.


PLUMBUM.  500

Pains  in  joints  as  if  being  paralyzed.

Suddenly  violent  tearing,  jerking,  cracking  in  bones,  oc-
curring at  night  and  depriving  one  of  sleep.

Gout  is  more  frequent  in  persons  suffering  from  lead-
poisoning.

■  Dropsical  swellings;  anasarca.

Small  wounds  inflame  and  suppurate  easily.

Stab  wounds  inflame,  suppurate  and  heal  rapidly.

Indurations  after  inflammation.
^■'  Touch. Passive  Motion. Injuries. Touch :  pain  in  ab-
domen <  ;  caecum  and  ascending  colon  sensitive ;  ileo-
csecal  region  painful ;  sensitive  especially  on  arms  and
eyelids.

Pressure :  hepatic  region  sensitive ;  >  pain  in  abdomen ;
whole  r.  side  sensitive;  spot  around  umbilicus  sensi-
tive ;  pain  in  thighs  scarcely  alleviated ;  pains  in
limbs  <.

Hard  pressure:  pressure  in  stomach  >  ;  colic  >.

Rubbing :  stinging in  liver >  ;  colic  >  ;  pain  in  back
>  ;  pains  in  limbs  >.
^'^  Skin. Sensitive  to  open  air;  to  touch,  especially  on  arms
and  e3^elids.

I  Skin: rough,  dry;  scaly;  feels  dry  and cool; yellow,

or pale bluish ; pale clay-colored, dingy ; withered
yellow ;  surface  pale.

I I  Yellow  skin;  jaundice.

iDark  brown  spots  on  skin;  "liver  spots"  in  climacteric

years.
Burning  and  smarting  as  from  fire.
Erysipelas  of  nose.

Serous  infiltration  and  puff'y  appearance  of  skin.
Serous  infiltration  of  mammae.
Excoriations;  decubitus.
I  Burning  in  ulcers ;  small  wounds  become  easily  inflamed

and  suppurate.
I  I  Gangrene.
I  1  Burns  when  there  are  yellow  ichorous  vesicles,  burning,

itching,  threatening  gangrene.
*"  Stages  of  Life,  Constitution. Girl,  set.  10,  suffering  three

years;  chorea.
Woman,  set.  25,  single,  well  built, suff'ering  five  days  ;

colic.
Man,  set.  26,  suffering  since  childhood,  mother  similarly

afflicted ;  cardialgia.
Woman,  set.  26,  poor,  of  delicate  frame,  after  hard  work

and  a  fit  of  anger  ;  miserere.
Mrs.  C,  set.  28,  small  frame,  quick,  nervous  temperament,

dark  hair  and  eyes,  had  typhoid  fever,  since  then  suffer-
ing ;  diarrhoea.


501  PLUMBUM.

Man,  set.  30,  strong,  after  catching  cold  five  months  ago  ;
affection  of  stomach.

Woman,  set.  30 ;  intussusception.

Man,  set.  30,  suffering  since  childhood ;  offensive  foot
sweat.

Lady,  single,  about  30,  middle  height,  thin  and  wiry,  dark
brown  hair,  parents  are  cousins,  suffering  thirteen
years;  epilepsy.

Engineer,  set.  30,  has  had  three  similar  attacks ;  paralysis
of  extensors  of  fingers  and  toes.

Man,  set.  30,  for  fifteen  years  has  followed  the  sea,  handling
iriuch  paint  and  painting;  lead  paralysis.

Woman,  set.  32,  married,  weakly,  slender,  tuberculous,
suffering  w'ith  chronic  cough  ;  sciatica.

Man,  set  33,  cheesemonger,  suffering  nine  or  ten  weeks;
constipation.

Lady,  set.  36,  subject  to  bilious  attacks ;  jaundice.

Ij&dy,  set.  36,  sanguine  nervous  temperament ;  tumor
cseci.

Woman,  set.  36,  mother  of  four  children  ;  phthisis.

Man,  set.  39,  during  youth  addicted  to  masturbation,  mar-
ried at  23,  but  soon  after  was  separated  from  wife,  when
he  resumed  the  habit  and  continued  it  for  seven  or  eight
years,  suffering  eight  or  ten  years ;  mental  disorder.

Mrs.  E.,  set.  40,  suffering  one  year ;  cardialgia.

Man,  set.  40,  brewer,  corpulent,  accustomed  to  drink  con-
siderable quantities  of  beer  and  wine,  was  seized  with
an  attack  of  ague  which  was  suppressed  by  quinine,
after  which  he  suffered  from  great  prostration  accom-
panied by  gastric  disturbance  and  icterus,  on  return  of
paroxysm  of  ague,  a  nephritis  and  r.  sided  lobular  pneu-
monia developed,  latter  yielding  to  Tart,  stibiat.;  des-
quamative nephritis.

Lady,  set.  44,  eighteen  months  ago  confined  to  house,  when
she  knit  continuously,  since  then  suffering;  weakness
and  paralysis  of  extensor  muscles  of  fingers.

Man,  set.  46,  florid  complexion,  stout,  active  habits,  tem-
perate in  diet,  suffering  fifteen  months;  nervous  affection
of  leg.

Man,  set.  50;  stricture  of  oesophagus.

Mrs.  R.,  set.  50 ;  constipation.

Man,  set. 50,  suffering  ten  years;  spasms  of  rectum.

Man,  set.  50,  good  habits,  well  nourished,  has  always  en-
joyed good  health  ;  cirrhotic  kidney.

Man,  set.  50,  after  severe  abdominal  affection,  accompanied
by  constipation,  was  subject  to  profuse  bleeding  piles ;
ansemia.

Man,  set.  52,  lawyer,  good  stature,  robust  frame,  family  his-


PLUMBUM.  502

tory  good,  ailing  three  years,  disease  said  to  be-  fatty
degeneration  of  heart,  had  severe  double  pneumonia,  is
prone  to  attacks  of  bronchitis;  cirrhotic  kidney.

Man,  set.  53  ;  constipation.

Mrs.  — ,  set.  54,  subject  to  severe  attacks  of  hysteria,  from
puberty  till  cessation  of  menstruation  nine  years  ago,
after  being  excited  by  religious  disputes  and  receiving
a  sudden  shock  from  seeing  a  lady  on  her  death-bed ;
mental  disturbance.

Mrs.  Kiichler,  set.  58,  laborer's  wife,  passed  through  cli-
maxis  without  any  particular  ailments,  tendency  to
constipation  ;  impaction  of  feces.

Widow,  set.  60;  intussusception.

Man,  set.  60,  teacher,  uses  salt  to  excess  and  drinks  much
beer,  suffering  three  months ;  strangury.

Girl,  suffering  several  years;  gastralgia.

Man,  baker;  enteralgia.

Mrs.  R.,  suffering  many  years  from  large  femoral  hernia;
strangulated  hernia.

Teamster;  paraplegia.
*^ Relations. Antidoted by: Alumen,  Arsen.,  ilAlum.,  Ant.
crud.,  Bellad.,  CoccuL,  Hepar,  Kreos.,  Nux  vom.,  Opium,
1 1  Petrol., Platin.,  llSulph. ac,  Zincum. i^lcohol is a
preventive.

Compatible:  Arsen.,  Bellad.,  Lycop.,  Mercur.,  Phosphor.,
Pulsat.,  iiilica,  ISnlphur.

Compare:  Lycop.,  Phos.  ac.,\n  mental  conditions;  Pulsat.
in  venous  circulation ;  Alumina,  Platin.,  Opium,  in  colic
and  enteralgia;  Bellad.,  Nux  vom., in  strangulated  hernia;
Natr.  nitr.,  Podoph.,  in  retraction  of  navel ;  Arsen.  in  skin
symptoms,  especially  burns; Thallium  in  sciatica.


503  PODOPHYLLUM  PELTATUM.


PODOPHYLLUM  PELTATUM.

May  Apple ;  Mandrake.  Berberidacese.

Grows  extensively  in  the  United  States,  in  moist,  shady  woods ;  flowers  early  in
June,  the  fruit  ripens  in  September.  The  tincture  is  prepared  from  the  root,
gathered  after  the  fruit  has  ripened.

Proved  by  Williamson,  Jeanes,  Ward  and  Husemann,  Trans.  Amer.  Inst,  of
Horn.,  vol.  1,  p.  209.

Clinical  Authorities. — Headache,  Bell,  N.  A.  J.  H.,  vol.  20,  p.  9 ;  Bayes,  B.
J.  H.,  vol.  31,  p.  339;  Bilious  headache,  Moore,  B.  J.  H.,  vol.  31,  p.  335;  Rolling
of  head,  Beriidge,  N.  E.  M.  G.,  vol.  11,  p.  15;  Vomiting,  Morgan,  Hah.  Mo.,  vol.
8,  p.  444;  Hepatic  derangement,  Winans,  Times  Ret.,  1877,  p.  38,  from  M.  J.,  vol.  6,
p.  24;  Hills,  N.  Y.  Med.  Times,  vol.  9,  p.  308  (see  Bernard  &  Strong)  ;  Harris,
B.  J.  H.,  vol.  31,  p.  341  ;  Hepatic  disorder,  Dixon,  B.  J.  H.,  vol.  28,  p.  386  ;  Jaun-
dice, R.  S.  A.  H.  O.,  vol.  2,  p.  42;  Blake,  Horn.  Rev.,  vol.  16,  p.  405;  Rickaby,
Times  Ret.,  1875,  p.  75,  from  Med.  Union,  vol.  2,  p.  254;  With  olive  oil  for  expul-
sion of  gall-stones,  Hale,  N.  A.  J.  H.,  vol.  12,  p.  258  ;  Pain  in  rectus  abdominis
muscles,  Harrity,  Rev.  Horn.,  Beige,  vol.  3,  p.  313 ;  Abdominal  congestion,  Bayes,
B.  J.  H.,  vol.  31,  p.  339;  Diarrhoea,  Colburn,  N.  E.  M.  G.,  vol.  12,  p.  356;  Jen-
nings, Horn.  Phys.,  vol.  4,  p.  262 ;  Pretsch,  A.  H.  O.,  vol.  1,  p.  324 ;  Morrison,  Horn.
Rev.,  vol.  18,  p.  687 ;  Hughes,  B.  J.  H.,  vol.  24,  p.  673  ;  Harris,  B.  J.  H.,  vol.  31,
p.  342;  Deck,  B.  J.  H.,vol.  31,  p.  .571;  Young,  Brewster,  Seward,  Cin.  Med.  Adv.,
vol.  3,  p.  380 ;  Martin,  Hah.  Mo.,  vol.  8,  p.  442 ;  Lilienthal,  Hah.  Mo.,  vol.  9,  p.
218;  Miller,  Hah.  Mo.,  vol.  9,  p.  202;  OShme,  Hah.  Mo.,  vol.  9,  p.  319  ;  Smith,
Eaue's  Rec,  1872,  p.  143,  from  Med.  Inv.,  vol.  9,  p.  7  ;  Angell,  A.  J.  H.  M.  M.,
vol.  3,  p.  20;  Moore,  Med.  Inv.,  vol.  6,  p.  343;  Clark,  U.  S.  Med.  Inv.,  1876,  p.
229  (MSS.)  ;  Seward,  Young,  Brewster,  U.  S.  Med.  Inv.,  1875,  p.  418  (MSS.)  ;
Greenleaf,  Times  Ret.,  1876,  p.  92,  from  Trans.  N.  Y.  S.,  1876,  p.  148  ;  Berridge,
Times  Ret.,  1875,  p.  76,  from  N.  Y.  J.  H.,  vol.  2,  p.  308  ;  Seward,  Times  Ret.,  1875,
p.  76  ;  Young,  Brewster,  Times  Ret.,  1875,  p.  76,  from  Trans.  N.  Y.  S.,  1875;
Colburn,  Times  Ret.,  1877,  p.  95;  Dever,  U.  S.  Med.  Inv.,  1875,  p.  330  (MSS.)  ;
Chronic  diarrhoea,  Burt,  McClelland,  Raue's  Rec,  1872,  p.  139;  Lennard,  B.
J.  H.,  vol.  26,  p.  654;  Dysentery,  Smith,  B.  J.  H.,  vol.  29,  p.  399  ;  Angell,  A.  J.
H.  M.  M.,  vol.  1,  p.  141 ;  Cholera  infantum,  Fairbanks,  Raue's  Rec,  1871,  p.  119,
from  Med.  Inv.,  vol.  8,  p.  126;  Constipation,  Bayes,  B.  J.  H.,  vol.  31,  p.  339;
Prolapsus  ani,  McClelland,  Raue's  Rec,  1872,  p.  153,  from  Trans.  Pa.  Hom.  Soc,
1870,  p.  56  ;  Blake,  Hom.  Rev.,  vol.  16,  p.  405 ;  Richards,  Fahnestock,  Times  Ret.,
1876,  p.  96,  from  Med.  Inv.,  1876,  pp.  94,  236  ;  Incontinence  of  urine,  Lobstein,  B.  J.
H.,  vol.  16,  p.  329 ;  Diabetes  insipidus.  Palmer,  Times  Ret.,  1875,  p.  87,  from  Trans.
N.  Y.  S.,  1875,  p.  56 ;  Diabetes,  Palmer,  Times  Ret.,  1876,  p.  19,  from  Trans.  N.  Y.
S.,  1876-77,  p.  144;  Diabetes  mellitus,  Palmer,  Times  Ret.,  1877,  p.  102;  Pain  in
r.  ovary,  Neidhard,  Raue's  Rec,  1870,  p.  374;  Ovarian  tumor,  Hawley,  U.  S.  Med.
Inv.,  1875,  p.  416,  Times  Ret.,  1875,  p.  93;  Seward,  U.  S.  Med.  Inv.,  1875, p.


PODOPHYLLUM  PELTATUM.  504

416,  Trans.  N.  Y.  S.,  1875,  p.  78,  Times  Eet,  1875,  p.  93  ;  Gallupe,  Trans.  Am.
Inst.,  1869,  p.  114,  Eaue's  Kec,  1871,  p.  146;  Ovarian  pains,  Keidhard,  Hah.  Mo.,
vol.  20,  p.  262;  Prolapsus  uteri,  Martin,  Hah.  Mo.,  vol.  9,  p.  411 ;  Klein,  A.  H.  ().,
vol.  2,  p.  75;  Thatcher,  Kane's  Kec,  1873,  p.  167,  from  A.  J.  H.  M.  M.,  vol.  5,  p.
232  ;  After-pains,  Miller,  Hah.  Mo.,  vol.  7,  p.  529  ;  Asthma,  Moore,  B.  J.  H.,  vol.
31,  p.  332;  Chronic  bronchitis,  Moore,  B.  J.  H.,  vol.  31  p.  333;  Fever  and  indura-
tion of  /iwer,  Williamson,  Hering's  Analy.  Therap.,  p.  159;  Ague,  Lippe,  Med.
Inv.,  vol.  6,  p.  345  ;  Alien,  Allen's  Int.  Fever,  p.  203,  from  Amer.  Hom.,  vol.  3,.
p.  208;  Bruckner,  A.  J.  H.  M.  M.,  vol.  1,  p.  51 ;  Allen,  Times  Ket.,  1876,  p.  161,
from  Hom.  Times,  vol.  4,  p.  102;  Kushmore,  Horn.  Phys.,  vol.  5,  p.  149;  Gout,
Moore,  B.  J.  H.,  vol.  31,  p.  331.

^  Mind. Conscious during chill, but cannot  talk, forgets

words.
Delirium,  loquacity  during  heat;  afterwards  forgetful  of

what  has  passed.
I  Depression:  imagines  he  is  going  to  die  or  be  very  ill ;

in  gastric  affections.
Disgust  for  life;  headache  ;  bilious  disorders.

■  Overfatigue  of  mind  from  business;  when  in  bed  he

rolled  his  head  on  w^aking  and  while  awake.
^ Sensorium. l Vertigo: while  standing,  in  open  air;  with
tendency  to  fall  forward  ;  with  sensation  of  fulness  over
eyes  ;  from  gastric  or  bilious  disorders.
^  Inner  Head. Momentary  darts  of  pain  in  forehead,  oblig-
ing one  to  shut  eyes.

Stunning  headache  through  temples,  >  from  pressure.

Pressing  in  temples  in  forenoon,  with  drawing  in  eyes  as
if  strabismus  would  follow.

iThrobbing  temples,  aching,  eyes,  hot  head,  in  morning.

I  I  Burning  pain  at  top  of  head  and  over  forehead;  attack
lasts  twenty-four  hours  and,  if  very  severe,  ends  in  vom-
iting ;  urine  pale  during  attack  ;  passes  much  bile  day
after ;  <  from  overexcitement  or  walking.  ^Bilious
headache.

I  Morning  headache,  with  flushed  face  and  heat  in  vertex.

I  Dull  headache,  wdth  pain  behind  eyes  ;  liver  affected.

■  Bilious  and  rheumatic  headaches,  based  on  torpidity  of

liver.

■  Headache  alternating  with  diarrhoea.

I  I  When  feeling  as  well  as  usual  there  suddenly  appears  a
blur  before  vision  ;  objects  look  much  as  if  one  had
been  looking  at  sun  for  a  moment,  or  perhaps  the  part
at  which  the  eye  is  directed  appears  clearly  and  the
rest  of  the  object  blurred  and  indistinct;  a  more  or
less  distinct  wavering  or  whirling  of  mist  also  be-
comes perceptible  and  can  be  perceived  with  closed
eyes,  both  ej^es  alike ;  in  five  minutes  fleeting  pains


505  PODOPHYLLUM  PELTATUM.

appear  in  head,  more  in  back  part,  gradually  increase
in  intensity,  occupying  mostly  occipital  protuberances,
with  disgusting  nausea  and  often  sour  vomiting  with-
out relief;  pains  extend  into  neck  and  shoulders;
numbness  of  fingers,  like  that  in  beginning  of  anaesthe-
sia ;  a  peculiar  feeling  of  disgust  of  life ;  pain  in  upper
part  of  head  like  that  produced  by  holding  a  piece  of
ice  for  a  short  time  on  occipital  protuberances  ;  lying
down  in  a  dark  and  quiet  place  ameliorates,  and  often
produces  sleep,  during  which  the  more  urgent  symp-
toms pass  off;  in  severe  attacks  there  were  always  pecu-
liar symptoms  of  want  of  power  of  expression  (aphasia)
even  of  simplest  ideas,  very  absurd  words  being  chosen
in  place  of  right  ones,  head  does  not  get  fully  settled
until  next  day  ;  attacks  appear  at  any  time  of  day.
^Headache.
I  Sick-headache  accompanied  by  constipation.

■  Head hot, rolling head from side to side,  moaning.

^Dentition.

■  Reflex  irritation  of  brain  from  disorders  of  bowels;  grind-

ing of  teeth  at  night.

■  Polling  of  head,  with moaning in sleep,  eyelids half

closed ;  hydrocephaloid.
I  I  Hydrocephaloid  after  cholera  infantum.
*  Outer  Head. iRolling  head;  grinding  teeth  ;  whining  at
night ;  head  sweaty  in  sleep,  flesh  cold ;  difficult  den-
tition.
^ Sight  and  Eyes. Ulceration  of  cornea;  conjunctiva hy-
persemic;  smarting,  aching,  heaviness  (from  grinding
the  root).
I  I  Scrofulous  ophthalmia,  <  in  morning.
^  Smell  and  Nose, l  i  Soreness  with  small  pustules  in  nose.
^  Upper  Face, l  Hot,  flushed  cheeks. ^Infantile  diarrhoea.

iComplexion  sallow,  dingy.
'"Teeth  and  Gums, n Great  desire  to  press  gums  together  ;
jaws  clenched;  grinds  teeth  at  night;  difficult  dentition.

■  During  dentition:  catarrhal  cough  and  catarrh  of  chest;

cholera  infantum;  hydrocephaloid,
"Taste  and  Tongue, i  i Total  loss  of  taste,  could  not  tell
sweet  from  sour;  sleepless,  restless.
Everything  tastes  sour  or  putrid.

I  I  Feeling  as  if  tongue  and  sometimes  throat  and  palate
had  been  burned.

■  Tongue:  furred  white,  with  foul  taste;  white,  moist,  shows

imprints  of  teeth;  dry,  yellow;  full  and  broad  with  a
pasty  coat  in  centre ;  red,  not  bright  red ;  rough  with
uniformly  erect  papillae;  dull  bluish  color;  red,  dry,
cracked,  somewhat  swollen  and  often  bleeding.


PODOPHYLLUM  PELTATUM.  506

'^  Inner  Mouth. lOffensive  odor  from  mouth.

lOffensiveness  of  breath  at  night,  perceptible  to  patient.

■  Copious  salivation.

I  Mouth  and  tongue  dry  on  awaking.
I  I  Nursing  sore  mouth,  canker.
^^  Throat. iDryness  of  throat.

■  Soreness  of  throat:  extending  to  ears;  r.  to  1.;  1.  side

sore,  <  when  swallowing  liquids  and  in  morning.
I  I  Rattling  of  mucus  in  throat.
I  I  Goitre.

I  1  Pharynx  dr}^,  deglutition  painful.
^*  Appetite, Thirst. Desires,  Aversions, i Indifference  to
food;  loss  of  appetite;  smell  of  food  produces  loathing.

■  Satiety  from  a  small  quantity  of  food,  followed  by  nau-

sea and  vomiting.

■  Appetite  variable,  at  times  voracious.

■  Great  thirst  for  large  quantities  of  cold  water;  moderate

thirst  during  fever.

■  Desire  for  something  sour.

'■^Eating  and  Drinking. ■After eating: regurgitation of
food,  sour;  hot,  sour  belching;  diarrhoea;  vomits  food
an  hour  after,  craving  appetite  afterwards;  depression
of  spirits.
After  acid  fruit  and  milk:  diarrhoea.
After  eating  and  drinking:  diarrhoea.
*^ Hiccough,  Belching,  Nausea  and  Vomiting. ■Heart-
burn, waterbrash,  heat  in  stomach.

■  Eructations:  smelling  like  rotten  eggs;  hot;  sour.

■  Sour  regurgitation  of  food.

■  Nausea:  distressing  and  extreme;  with  attempts  to  vomit;

motion  of  gagging  is  made  with  mouth  and  not  accom-
panied with  the  effort  in  stomach  seen  in  retching ;
stomach  contracts  so  hard  and  rapidly  that  the  wrench-
ing pain  causes  the  patient  to  utter  sharp  screams;  gag-
ging or  empty  retching.

■  Gagging:  in  infantile  diarrhoea.

■  Nausea  and  vomiting  with  fulness  in  head.

■  Vomiting:  of  milk  in  infants,  with  protrusion  of  anus;

of  food,  with  putrid  taste  and  odor;  of  thick  bile  and
blood ;  of  hot,  frothy  mucus ;  with  congestion  of  pelvic
viscera,  during  pregnancy.
'^ Scrobiculum  and  Stomach.  ■Sensation  of  hollowness  in
epigastrium;  empty  feeling  in  stomach;  weakness  in
epigastric  region.

■  Stitches  in  epigastrium  from  coughing.

■  Dyspepsia  after  abuse  of  calomel ;  tongue  shows  imprint

of  teeth;  conjunctiva  yellow;  aching  behind  eyes;
clayey  stools.


507  PODOPHYLLUM  PELTATUM.

■  Gastric  catarrh.

I  I  Acute  burning  pain  in  region  of  pyloric  orifice,  with
violent  retching  and  vomiting  of  bile,  and  belching  of
wind  ;  constipation  ;  after  attacks  which  occurred  some-
times twice  or  thrice  a  day,  prostration,  slight  jaundice
and  persistent  tenderness  to  touch  in  one  spot  corre-
sponding to  entrance  of  common  chodedic  duct  into
duodenum.
^^Hypochondria,  l Fulness  in  r.  hypochondrium,  with  flat-
ulence, pain  and  soreness.

■  Twisting  pain  in  r. hypochondrium,  with  sensation  of

heat  there.
Stitches,  <  while  eating.

■  Pain  in  region  of  liver,  inclination  to  rub  part  with

hand.

■  ■Excessive  secretion  of  bile;  great  irritability  of  liver.

■  Biliousness;  nausea  and  giddiness;  bitter  taste  and  ris-

ings; tendency  to  bilious  vomiting  and  purging,  dark
urine.
I  I  For  years  subject  to  diarrhoea  which  would  come  on
now  and  then  after  eating  breakfast,  with  considerable
pain  in  rectum,  obliging  her  to  remain  at  stool  as  long
as  pain  lasted  ;  an  acute  attack  caused  by  bad  news
caused  an  early  morning  aggravation,  as  well  as  after
eating;  attack  would  also  be  induced  by  any  depress-
ing emotions  or  excitement  of  any  kind;  stools  vari-
able, mostly  deep  yellow  or  greenish,  much  belching,
often  severe  retching,  with  almost  complete  anorexia;
great  distension  of  r.  hypochondriac  region,  but  no
painfulness  to  pressure;  sensation  as  "of  a  thousand
live  things"  moving  about  in  abdomen,  or  of  fish  turn-
ing over  each  other;  chills  occasionally,  which  would
commence  over  region  of  liver  and  pass  around  to  back.
^Hepatic  derangement.

■  Congestion  and  enlargement  of  liver;  acute  and  chronic

hepatitis.

■  Torpidity  of  liver  and  portal  system;  jaundice.

■  Inactivity  of  liver;  great  mental  depression;  chilliness  ;

cold  perspiration ;  restless  sleep ;  furred  tongue,  show-
ing imprints  of  teeth  ;  nausea  ;  clayey,  delayed  stools  ;
fulness,  tenderness  and  stitchlike  pain  in  region  of
liver;  irregular  action  of  lieart ;  general  prostration.

I  I  Liver  much  congested,  interfering  with  portal  circula-
tion and  causing  passive  congestion  of  all  the  pelvic
organs,  with  prolapse  of  uterus  and  rectum  and  a  thick,
transparent  albuminous  leucorrhoea.

M  Disorders  of  liver  attended  by  constipation,  yellow
furred  tongue,  dark  or  brown  stools,  dry,  bilious  tem-
peraments.


PODOPHYLLUM  PELTATUM.  508

I  I  Torpidity  of  liver,  constipation,  or  diarrhoea  alternating
with  constipation,  depression  of  spirits,  irritability  of
temper,  malaise,  urine  dark  colored  and  defective,  or
full  of  lithates.

I  Diarrhoea  in  the  morning,  stools  black,  green,  watery,  or
natural  but  exhaustive ;'  jaundice  in  complication  with
gall-stones;  pain  extending  from  region  of  gall-bladder,
when  at  its  height  attended  with  nausea ;  fulness,  pain
and  soreness  in  r.  hypochondrium  ;  twisting  pain  with
sensation  of  heat  in  liver;  patient  is  continually  chafing
and  shaking  the  hypochondriac  region;  prolapsus  ani ;
belching  of  hot,  very  sour  flatus  ;  tongue  coated  white  ;
emission  of  fetid  flatus;  eructations  smelling  like  rot-
ten eggs;  <  evening  and  before  midnight.  ^Affections
of  liver.

I  I  Jaundice :  with  gall-stoneSj  pain  from  region  of  stomach
to  region  of  gall-bladder,  with  excessive  nausea;  with
hypersemia  of  liver,  fulness,  soreness  and  pain  ;  alter-
nate constipation  and  diarrhoea;  itching  of  skin,  urine
high  colored;  feces  sometimes  white,  at  others  dark;
of  children  ;  returning  again  and  again  after  China  and
MercuT.;  mistaken  for  cancer  of  stomach.

iChronic  hepatitis,  with  costiveness ;  tenderness  and  pain
in  region  of  liver,
^^  Abdomen. iFlatus:  in  r.  abdomen,  palpitation,  sleepy  in
morning;  during  dentition,  with  green,  sour  stools  in
morning.

■  Tympanitic  distension  in  typhoid,  and  in  children  with

diarrhoea.
iRumbHng  in  ascending  colon.

I  I  Pain  in  transverse  colon  3  a.m.,  followed  by  diarrhoea.
■Severe  pain  and  heat  in  bowels,  with  inclination  to  go

to  stool.
I  I  Pains  in  abdomen  and  back  are  <  during  stool  and

continue  after.

■  Dull,  unpleasant  pain  or  weight  in  hypogastric  region.

■  Sharp  pain  in  r.  groin,  preventing  motion,  latter  months

of  pregnancy.

■  Frequent  but  transient  abdominal  pains,  during  day,  >

from  pressure.

■  Pain  in  bow-els  at  daybreak,  >  from  external  warmth

and  bending  forward  while  lying  on  side ; <  lying  on
back.
•  I  Cramplike  pain  in  bowels,  with  retraction  of  abdominal
muscles,  10  p.m.,  and  again  at  5  a.m.  until  9  a.m.;  lead
colic.

■  Colic:  with  cramplike  knots;  every  morning  with  stools

of  mucus  and blood  ;  biliary ;  of  a  high  grade,  pain


509  PODOPHYLLUM  PELTATUM.

originating  from  a  depraved  and  excessive  secretion

caused  by  a  morbid  state  of  solar  plexus.
I  I  Pains  and  stool  <  mornings  and  excited  by  eating  and

drinking. ^Colic.
B Myalgia  of  abdominal  muscles;  after  abuse  of  purgatives.
I  Sharp  pain  and  numbness  in  rectus  muscles.

■  Enteritis  affecting  jejunum  and  ileum;  duodenitis.

•  Duodenitis;  catarrhal process  extending along  biliary
ducts  and  causing  jaundice.

■  Conditions  simulating  puerperal  peritonitis,  when  it  has

been  preceded  by  diarrhoea  or  abuse  of  purgatives.

I  Abdominal  plethora  :  abdomen  feels  bloated,  distended  ;
soreness  and  uneasiness;  >  after  stool;  causing  uterine
troubles,  constipation  and  headache  in  women,  and  in
men  headaches,  constipation,  sometimes  variocele.
^°  Stool  and  Rectum, i Emission  of  fetid  flatus.

I  I  Morning  diarrhoea  and  then  no  more  stools  during  day.

■  Diarrhoea  early  in  morning,  continuing  through  forenoon,

followed  by  natural  stool  in  evening.

■  Profuse  gushing  diarrhoea,  coming  on  in  morning,  or

more  during  day  than  at  night ;  stools  may  contain
undigested  food  and  often  in  children  deposit  a  mealy
sediment.

■  Early  morning  diarrhoea,  hurrying  patient  out  of  bed,

continues  through  day,  but  is  <  at  noon;  stools  change-
able in  color.
I  I  Liquid,  green  stools  with  colic,  early  in  morning,  with
fainting.

■  Green,  sour  stool  in  morning,  with  flatulence. ^During

dentition.

■  Morning  diarrhoea,  stools  green,  slimy,  very  offensive,

with  gagging  and  excessive  thirst,  in  children.

■  Evacuations  in  morning  attended  with  strong  urgings

in  bowels,  heat  and  pain  in  anus.

■  ■Stools watery, gushing, profuse,  green,  wdth sudden

urging,  often  painless;  offensive,  <  in  hot  weather.

■  ■Diarrhoea:  with  great  sinking  at  epigastrium, sensation

as  if  everything  would  drop  through  pelvis;  painful
with  screaming,  and  grinding  of  teeth;  immediately
after  eating  and  drinking;  from  acid  fruit  and  milk;
after  or  while  being  washed ;  dirty  water  soaking  nap-
kin through ;  with  prolapsus  ani  at  every  stool ;  stool
changes  constantly  in  appearance,  now  green,  now  yel-
lowish, now  whitish,  slimy,  etc.

■  ■  Stools :  too  frequent,  but  natural  in  appearance;  frequent,

profuse,  painless,  watery,  fetid  ;  yellow,  pasty;  gushing
out;  yellow,  watery,  with  meal-like  sediment;  green,
sour,  with  flatulence ;  greenish,  watery ;  dark yellow,


PODOPHYLLUM  PELTATUM.  510

mucous;  smell  like  carrion;  white,  slimy,  mucous;
bloody  and  green  mucous;  mucous  and  blood-streaked;
changeable ;  frothy ;  involuntary  (during  sleep)  and
when  passing  flatus ;  morning  during  dentition  ;  green-
ish-yellow, slimy,  bloody,  gelatinous,  mixed  with  feces;
with  severe  straining,  much  flatus  emitted ;  mucous,
with  spots  and  streaks  of  blood ;  black,  only  in  morn-
ing; chalklike, fecal,  undigested;  muco-gelatinous  stools
preceded  by  griping  and  colic;  coated  with  iihreds  of
yellow  mucus;  tarlike.
I  Before  stool:  intense  nausea;  sudden  urging;  loud  gur-
gling as  of  water;  rumbling  in  1.  side;  violent  colic  or
absence  of  pain  ;  prolapsus  ani.

■  During  stool:  urging  in  bowels;  heat  and  pain  in  anus;

sensation  as  if  genital  organs  would  fall  out;  in  women,
bearing  down  as  if  from  inactivity  of  rectum  ;  nausea;
gagging,  tormina  and  pain  in  lumbar  region  ;  prolapsus
ani ;  colic  or  absence  of  pain ;  pains  in  sacrum ;  emis-
sion of  flatus;  tenesmus  (dysenteric  stools).

■  After  stool: extreme  weakness and cutting pains in

intestines;  exhaustion  ;  cutting  pains;  weak,  even  after
natural  stool ;  flashes  of  heat  running  up  back,  cutting
in  bowels,  severe  and  painful  tenesmus;  great  weakness
and  faintness  and  pain  in  lumbar  region ;  prolapsus
ani;  flushes  of  heat  up  back  ;  colic  continues;  sense  of
weakness  and  emptiness  in  abdomen  and  rectum  ;  sore-
ness of  anus.

I  I  Stools  offensive  and  dark  colored;  lies  upon  mother's
lap  moaning,  eyes  half  closed  ;  rolling  head.

I  I  Following  a  miscarriage:  muco-gelatinous  stools,  pre-
ceded by  undefined  pain  all  over  abdomen,  <  after
stool ;  tongue  red  and  pointed.

llDiarrhoea  from  indigestion  after  eating  canned  fruit;
stools  dark-brown,  mushy,  copious,  with  much  wind ;
following  night  driven  out  of  bed,  suddenly,  about  3
A.M. ;  stool  watery,  scanty,  though  gushing,  as  if  abun-
dant; stools  became  frequent ;  occasionally  slight  pain
in  abdomen;  much  rumbling  and  gurgling,  finally
three  to  six  stools  every  hour;  dark  green,  with  yellow
water,  somewhat  mealy;  tenesmus;  tendency  to  pro-
lapsus ani;  pains  frequent  and  threatening  to  become
intense  and  incisive;  urine  almost  suppressed;  tongue
moist  but  beginning  to  become  moist  and  white  and
slimy.

I  i  Frequent  copious,  slimy,  stringy,  green,  offensive  stools,
with  straining;  <  after  food;  child  rolls  head  in  pillow;
wants  to  be  carried.

I  I  Diarrhoea  thin,  having  the  appearance  of  soapsuds,  pain


511  PODOPHYLLUM  PELTATUM.

preceding  evacuation,  >  by  pressure  on  abdomen;  no
pain  during  evacuation.

I  I  Diarrhoea  for  a  week  in  a  teething  girl,  set.  20  months ;
passages  smell  like  carrion,  are  watery  and  pass  through
diaper  leaving  a  doughy  sediment.

■  Diarrhoea  during  dentition  ;  stools  resemble  dirty  w^ater  ;
sleeping  with  eyes  partially  closed.

iBowel  complaints  of  children;  colic  with  spasmodic  re-
traction of  abdominal  muscles;  spasmodic  tenesmus;
tendency  to  prolapsus  ani.

I  I  Chronic  diarrhoea;  bowels  moved  every  half  hour,  pas-
sages looking  like  washings  of  fresh  meat;  severe
straining  and  tenesmus  with  stool,  and  for  ten  minutes
thereafter  severe  burning  pain  deep  in  rectum ;  severe
cough  ;  tongue  coated  with  thick  brown  fur;  stomach  so
weak  that  rice  would  not  digest;  said  he  had  a  large
ball  in  stomach.

I  I  Chronic  diarrhoea  of  two  years'  standing ;  great  emacia-
tion ;  bowels  flat  and  hard ;  yellowish,  watery,  slimy
discharges,  mixed  with  undigested  food,  accompanied
by  soreness  of  abdomen.

i  I  Every  fifteen  minutes  severe  pain  in  abdomen,  followed
by  passage  of  small  quantity  of  mucus  and  blood.
/^Diarrhoea.

I  I  Dysenteric  diarrhoea  affecting  rectum;  discharge  of
mucus  and  dark-colored  scybala.

■  Dysentery  commencing  with a  watery  diarrhcea; dis-

charges become  muco-sanguineous,  accompanied  by
sickness  at  stomach,  especially  if  preceding  diarrhoea
manifested  itself  early  in  morning.

■  Bilious  dysentery;  stools  look  like  pea  soup  and  consist

of  yellowish,  greenish,  or  bloody  mucus  of  disagreeable
odor,  and  accompanied  by  violent  pains  in  region  of
colon,  rectum  and  anus.

■  Severe  straining  during  stool,  with  emission  of  much

flatus;  mucous  stools  with  spots  and  streaks  of  blood;
thirst,  but  no  appetite. ^Endemic  dysentery.

■  Cholera  infantum  in  hot  weather; gagging  or  empty

retching;  greenish,  watery,  white  or  dark -yellow  stools;
profuse,  painless,  very  offensive;  great  prostration;
rapid  emaciation ;  rolling  of  head  ;  restless  sleep ;  half-
closed  eyes.

■  Frequent  loose  stools,  remaining  after  attack  of  cholera

infantum.

■  Diarrhoea  of  children  during  epidemic  of  cholera;  catar-

rhal affections  of  respiratory  organs  sometimes  precede
attack;  all  desire  for  food  gone;  great  thirst;  upper
part  of  intestinal  tract  affected  and  vomiting  more  fre-


PODOPHYLLUM  PELTATUM.  512

quent  than  diarrhoea ;  copious,  foul-smelling,  exhaust-
ing stools.

■  Cholera morbus; especially when characterized by

absence  of  pain;  generally  during  summer;  stools
watery,  come  out  with  a  gush  and  a  splutter  like  water
from  a  hydrant;  marked  loathing  of  food;  stools  very
liable  to  change  color ;  <  after  midnight  and  towards
morning.

1  Painless  cholera  morbus;  stools  profuse  and  gushing,
each  seeming  to  drain  patient  dry,  but  soon  he  is  full
again  ;  there  may  also  be  violent  cramps.

I  Camp  diarrhoea.

■  Alternate  diarrhoea  and  constipation.

■  Stool  difficult:  from  inactive  bowels;  hard,  dry,  pale  or

clayey;  voided  with  difficulty;  hard,  crumble  when
evacuated,  clay-colored,  often  streaked  with  green;
hard,  coated  with  yellow,  tenacious  mucus;  thick,  trans-
parent mucus  or  mixed  with  blood.
1  I  Constipation  waking  her  almost  every  night,  not
always  at  same  hour,  with  severe  abdominal  colic  in
umbilical  region,  which  lasted  from  one  to  two  hours.

■  Constipation:  old  intermittent  cases  or  those  due  to  a

residence  in  India;  succeeds  diarrhoea  in  infants  artifi-
cially nourished  ;  with  irritation  in  persons  of  sedentary
habits;  infantile  with  prolapsus  of  rectum  ;  of  bottle-fed
babies,  with  dry,  crumbling  stools;  after  uterine  dis-
ease; attacks  of  tenesmus  uteri,  vesicae,  abdominal  colic
and  severe  and  nervous  headache,  with  abdominal
venous  congestion.
I  I  Enteritis  folliculosa ;  larger  stools  than  are  to  be  ex-
pected from  the  amount  of  ingesta  taken,  with  excessive
fetor.

■  Acute  and  chronic  colitis.

■  ■Prolapsus  ani:  with  stool,  even  from  least  exertion,  fol-

lowed by  stool  or  thick  transparent  mucus  or  mixed
with  blood ;  even  with  loose  stool ;  from  debility  of  in-
fancy and  childhood,  stools  too  large  and  frequent,  but
natural  in  color  and  consistence ;  with  diarrhoea  ;  most
frequently  in  morning;  following  parturition;  compli-
cated with  and  sequential  to  uterine  displacement ;  of
children.

■  Anus  feels  very  sore,  sensitive  and  swollen.

■  Chronic,  painful,  hemorrhoidal  tumors  all  around  anus,

some  of  them  bleeding.

■  Internal  hemorrhoids,  with  prolapsus  recti.

■  ■Piles,  with  prolapsus  ani  and  long-standing  diarrhoea,

<  mornings;  or  constipatjon.

■  External  piles,  bleeding  or  not.


22


513  ■  PODOPHYLLUM  PELTATUM.

^^  Urinary  Organs,  i Diabetes  mellitus  and  insipidus;  chalk-
like stools;  urinating  immediately  after  drinking  ;  mic-
turition profuse  and  frequent;  thin,  auEemic.
I  I  Urinary  tenesmus.
I  Irritability  of  bladder.
I  Incontinence  of  urine ;  enuresis.

■  Frequent  nocturnal  urination  during  pregnancy.
I  I  Profuse  and  frequent  micturition.

I  Urine: dark brown; increased, diminished or sup-
pressed ;  yellow,  containing  a  sediment.
-  Male  Sexual  Organs. Stitching  pain  above  pubis  and  in
course  of  spermatic  cords.

I  I  Diseases  of  prostate  gland  associated  with  rectal  troubles.
Female  Sexual  Organs. iNumb  aching  in  region  of  1.
ovary ;  heat  down  thigh  ;  third  month  of  pregnancy.

I  Pain  in  region  of  ovaries,  especially  the  right.

I  I  Pain  commences  in  r.  ovary,  and  descends  anterior
crural  nerve,  increasing  in  intensity  as  it  goes  down,  <
by  straightening  out  limb.

I  Shooting  pain  in  r.  ovary,  before  and  during  menstru-
ation.

a  Tired  pain  in  ovaries,  with  swelling  and  pain  in  both
limbs,  extending  below  knees,  <  on  r.  side.

I  Pain  in  ovaries  connected  with  diseases  of  liver;  light-
colored  evacuations.

■  Dragging  pains  in  ovarian  regions.
I  Pain  in  r.  ovary  and  uterus.
1  I  On  catching  cold  after  confinement,  drawing  dragging

pain  in  r.  iliac  region,  shooting  along  inside  of  thigh
and  crural  nerve  to  knee  ;  pain  intermitted  every  half
hour  to  an  hour,  lasting  about  ten  minutes,  very  severe,
not  >  by  passage  of  flatus ;  pain  could  be  traced  from
r.  ovary,  through  internal  spermatic  nerve  to  lumbar
plexus,  and  from  there  along  anterior  crural  nerve  to
knee.
I  I  For  three  months  beating  and  throbbing  in  r.  ovary,
pain  shooting  down  knee  inside  of  thigh.

■  Right  sided  ovaritis  in  women  who  have  borne  children,
. coming  on  suddenly  from  an  imprudence  in  walking,

getting  wet,  or  from  sexual  intercourse  during  or  too

soon  after  menstruation,  or  from  excessive  use  of  sewing

machine.
I  I  Ovarian tumor with pains extending upward to

shoulder.
I  Four  cases  of  ovarian  tumor  from  size  of  a  hen's  egg  to

half  the  size  of  fist,  all  on  r.  side ;  pain  and  numbness

extending  down  corresponding  thigh.

■  Pressing  and  bearing  down  in  uterine  region.
voT.  VIII. — 33.


PODOPHYLLUM  PELTATUM.  514

I  Sensation  at  stool  as  if  genital  organs  would  fall  out.

I  Pain  in  uterus.

I  Prolapsus  uteri :  with  aching  and  bearing-down  pains;
womb  disposed  to  fall  very  low,  even  painfully  so ;  with
much  aching  pain  in  region  of  1.  ovary,  heat  running
down  to  1.  thigh,  in  pregnancy,  must  lie  on  stomach ;
after  confinement ;  with  diarrhoea  and  prolapsus  recti ;
with  pain  in  sacrum;  from  washing;  with  amenorrhoea;
stool  frequent  though  natural ;  after  overlifting  or  strain-
ing; after  parturition.

'  I  Prolapsus  uteri  for  twenty-four  years,  wore  a  glass  pes-
sary for  fifteen ;  dull  pain  in  back,  removal  of  pessary
followed  by  procidentia.

■  Induration  of  os  uteri.

I  I  Menorrhagia  from  straining.

I  I  Bearing  down  in  abdomen  and  back  during  menses  ;
ovarian  pain  on  both  sides  of  abdomen,  with  a  numb
and  aching  pain  running  down  into  thighs.  ^Dys-
menorrhoea.

■  Retarded  menses,  with  ovarian  pains,  burning  in  hypo-

gastrium and sacral region ; pain from motion, >
lying  down.
iLeucorrhoea : discharge of  thick, transparent mucus;

with  constipation  and  bearing  down.
I  I  Sw^elling  of  labia  during  pregnancy.
^*  Pregnancy. Parturition. Lactation, i  Can  lie  comfort-
ably only  on  stomach,  early  months.

■  Morning sickness or excessive vomiting of  pregnant

women.

■  Excessive  vomiting  in  pregnancy  and  conditions  arising

from  a  congested  condition  of  the  pelvic  viscera.

■  Swelling  of  labia  during  pregnancy.

Pain  in  region  of  ovaries,  especially  at  night,  disturbing
sleep;  very  nervous  and  restless;  condition  may  recur
night  after  night  until  finally  symptoms  of  abortion
set  in.

■  Severe  after-pains,  with  strong  bearing  down  sensation.

■  After-pains  with  heat  and  flatulency  ;  also  with  strong

bearing  down.

■  Hemorrhoids  and  prolapsus  recti;  after  confinement.
Pendulous  abdomen.

^^  Voice  and  Larynx. Trachea  and  Bronchia. 1 1  Chronic

bronchitis.
^®  Respiration. Inclined  to  breathe  deeply ;  sighing.
Shortness  of  breath.

Sensation  of  suffocation,  at  first  when  lying  down  at
night.

■  Bronchial  asthma; <  after  catching  cold.


515  PODOPHYLLUM  PELTATUM.

"^  Cough.  I  Cough:  loose,  hacking;  with  remittent  fever;  dry;
loose ;  rattling  on  chest,  during  dentition ;  whooping,
with  constipation  and  loss  of  appetite ;  from  disease
of  liver.

^^  Inner  Chest  and  Lungs. ■  Catarrh  of  chest  during  den-
tition.
I  I  Pneumonia.

^'  Heart,  Pulse  and  Circulation, i  Sensation  in  chest  as  if
heart  were  ascending  to  throat.
■Stinging  pain  in  region  of  heart.

■  Palpitation: with a clucking sensation rising up to

throat,  obstructing  respiration ;  from  mental  emotion
or  exertion,  with  rumbling  in  ascending  colon,  heavy
sleep,  fatigue  on  awakening  in  morning,  drowsy  all
forenoon ;  from  physical  exertions ;  nervous  in  conse-
quence of  excessive  hepatic  action.

I  Pulse  slow,  scarcely  perceptible;  pulseless.
^^  Neck  and  Back. Nape  of  neck  stiff,  with  soreness  of  mus-
cles of  neck  and  shoulders.

Pain  under  r.  scapula.

Pain  between  shoulders,  in  morning.

Flashes  up  back,  with  stool.

Weakness  and  soreness  of  back.

I  Lumbar backache after washing. ^Prolapsus uteri.
^Diarrhoea.

I  Pain  in  lumbar  and  sacral  regions,  <  during  stool  and
still  <  afterwards.

Pain  in  lumbar  region,  withered  sensation,  <  at  night
and  from  motion.

Pain  in  loins,  <  when  walking  on  uneven  ground  or  from
a  misstep.

iSacral  pain. ^Uterine  displacement.
^^  Upper  Limbs. iPain  in  course  of  ulnar  nerve  of  both  arms.

■  Rheumatism  in  1.  forearm  and  fingers.

I  I  Pains  from head into neck and shoulders; fingers

numb.
Weakness  of  wrists,  soreness  to  touch.
■"  Lower  Limbs. ■  Sharply  defined  ache  in  sacro-ischiadic

foramen,  with  tenderness  on  pressure.
Pain  and  weakness  in  1.  hip,  like  rheumatism  from  cold;

<  going  uj)  stairs.

■  Slight  paralytic  weakness  of  1.  side.

■  Cramps  in  calves,  thighs  and  feet,  with  painless  watery

stools.
Knee  joints  crack  during  motion.
Joints  weak,  especially  knees.
Legs  heavy  and  stiff,  as  after  a  long  walk.
Aching  of  limbs  <  at  night.


PODOPHYLLUM  PELTATUM.  516

I  I  Severe  pain  and  swelling  of  ankle  joints.

Feet :  cold  ;  sweat  in  evening.
^  Rest. Position. Motion. Ljdng  down :  ovarian  pain  >  ;
sensation  of  suffocation  ;  chilliness.

Must  lie  on  stomach  :  during  pregnancy.

Lying  on  back :  pain  in  bowels  worse.

Bending  forward  when  lying  on side; pain  in  bowels
better.

Straightening  out  limb ;  pain  down  leg  worse.

Stretching  in  bed  :  >  restlessness.

Standing:  vertigo.

Motion  :  ovarian  pain ;  pain  in  lumbar  region  <  ;  knee
joints  crack  ;  during  fever  chilliness.

Walking:  bilious  headache,  <  pain  in  loins  <  from  walk-
ing on  uneven  ground  ;  misstep.

Going  up  stairs :  pain  in  1.  hip.

From  physical  exertion  :  palpitation.
^^  Nerves. Nervous  irritability  and  sleeplessness ;  feels  as  if
weak  and  unable  to  move  about.

I  iFaintness,  with  sensation  of  emptiness  in  abdomen  after
stool.

■  Sensation  of  great  prostration  with  pain  in  stomach.

■  Slight  paralytic  weakness  of  whole  1.  side.
Sudden  shocks  of  jerking  pains.

■  Convulsions  from  reflex  irritation  in  teething  children ;

rolling  of  head ;  variegated,  slimy  stools.
•^^  Sleep. ■Sleepiness:  in  daytime,  especially  in  forenoon;  with
rumbling  in  bowels,  in  morning.

■  Heav}^  sleep ;  fatigue  on  w^  aking.

■  Drowsy,  half-closed  eyes,  moaning,  whining,  especially

children.
Great  restlessness,  tossing  about in bed,  yawning and
stretching,  with  entire  relief  on  doing  so.

■  Very  w^orrying  and  sleepless  early  part  of  night,  appar-

ently from  nervous  irritability. ^Dentition.

■  Moaning  in  sleep,  with  eyelids  half  closed.

■  Restless  sleep,  whining.

■  Drowsiness  or  restless  sleep,  with  grinding  of  teeth  or

rolling  of  head.

■  Unrefreshed  by  sleep  on  waking  in  morning.

•^^  Time.  Morning :  throbbing  temples ;  aching  in  eyes ;  head-
ache ;  scrofulous  ophthalmia  <  ;  sore  throat  <  ;  early,
aggravation  of  diarrhoea  and  pain  ;  diarrhoea ;  sleepy  ;
green,  sour  stools ;  pain  and  stools  <  ;  diarrhoea  <  ;
green  stools  with  colic  and  faintness;  sickness;  fatigue
on  awakening;  pain  between  shoulders;  dull,  throb-
bing headache.
3  A.M.:  pain  in  transverse  colon;  sudden  diarrhoea.


517  PODOPHYLLUM  PELTATUM.

5  A.M.  until  9  A.M. :  cramplike  pains  in  bowels.
7  A.M. :  chill.
11  A.M.:  shaking  chill.

Forenoon  :  pressing  in  temples ;  diarrhoea ;  drowsy.
Noon:  diarrhoea  <.

Day :  frequent  transient  abdominal  pain.
Afternoon :  feverish.  . j  •

Evening :  diarrhoea  <  ;  natural  stools  after  morning  diar-
rhoea ;  cold  foot  sweat.
10  P.M. :  cramplike  pains  in  bowels.  _

Night :  whining ;  grinds  teeth ;  offensive  breath ;  pain  m
region of  ovaries ;  sensation of  suffocation ; pain in
lumbar  region  <  ;  aching  of  limbs  <  ;  very  worrying
and  sleepless ;  fever.
Before  midnight:  diarrhoea  <.
After  midnight:  stools  <.  .

^^Temperature and Weather. Open  air: vertigo while
standing.
After  or  while  washing :  diarrhoea.
External  warmth  :  pain  in  bowels  >.
Hot  w^eather :  offensive  stools ;  cholera  infantum.
Covering  up  warmly  in  bed : >  chilliness.
Catching  cold:  bronchial  asthma  <.
Chilliness :  not  >  by  heat  of  stove.
'"Fever. l Chilliness while moving about during lever
and in act of  lying down,  with  sweat immediately
afterwards.  .

I  Chilly  at  first  on  lying  down  in  evening,  toiiowed  by

fever  and  sleep  with  talking  and  imperfect  waking.  _
lChill,7  A.M.,  pressing  in  both  hypochondria;  dull  aching

in  knees  and  ankles,  elbows  and  wrists.
iBackache  before  chill.
■  During  chill,  great  loquacity.
I  I  Shaking  and  sensation  of  coldness  continue  lor  some

time  after  heat  commences.
I  I  Heat  begins  during  chill  or  while  he  is  yet  chilly.
Feverish  during  afternoon,  with  occasional  chilliness,  not
>  by  heat  of  stove,  but  > by  covering  up warmly

in  bed.  ,  ,

I  Pain  in  bow^els  first  attended  with  coldness,  loUowed  by

heat  and  warm  sweat.
I  Heat  with  violent  pains  in  head  ;  excessive  thirst ;  great
loquacity,  constantly  talking,  which  continues  with  de-
lirium until  fever  reaches  climax,  when  he  falls  asleep
and  sweats  profusely,  with  forgetfulness  of  all  be  had

I  Flashes  up  back  and  abdominal  pains  during  stool.
I  Sweat  warm  on  head  and  legs;  feet  cold;  head  sweat
with  coldness  of  skin  ;  sleep  during  sweat.


PODOPHYLLUM  PELTATUM.  518

I  I  Moaning,  groaning,  restlessness  and  ravenous  hunger
with  thirst  during  fever,  white  tongue,  heat  in  abdo-
men, especially  in  region  of  liver,  liver  indurated;  asth-
matic cough.

I  I  Shaking  chill,  11  a.m.,  with  pain  in  wrists,  knees  and
ankles,  followed  by  heat  without  pains,  then  sweat  on

.  back,  head,  face  and  hollow  of  elbows. ^Ague.

■  Loquacity  during  chill  and  far  into  heat,  with  complete

forgetfulness  afterwards  of  all  that  had  passed;  falls
asleep  at  climax  of  heat,  and  sleeps  during  perspiration.

I  I  Chill  with  pressing  pain  in  both  hypochondria;  dull
aching  pain  in  joints ;  great  desire  to  talk,  but  cannot
because  he  forgets  words. ^Intermittent.

I  I  Obstinate  constipation,  all  bones  ache;  fever,  sweat,  full
pulse,  with  congestion  to  head;  chill  followed  by  fever
at  night ;  an  hour  of  chilliness  followed  by  an  hour  of
fever,  such  a  succession  continuing  during  whole  twenty-
four  hours. ^Ague.

I  Backache  severe  in  lumbar  region;  gastric  and  bilious
symptoms  are  marked,  sometimes  for  days  before  parox-
ysm. ^Ague.

1  I  Bilious  remittent  fever;  dull  throbbing  headache  when
waking  in  morning  with  dread  or  fear  that  he  would
be  very  ill;  dry  mouth  with  bad  taste;  heavy,  dirty-
white  coating  on  tongue;  preceding  paroxysm  of  fever,
nausea  and  vomiting  of  a  bilious  substance,  accompa-
nied by  first  a  yellow,  then  a  greenish  diarrhoea  ;  during
paroxysm  patient  stupid,  inclined  to  talk,  but  would
drop  a  sentence  before  half  finished  ;  great  thirst,  hot
face,  protruding  eyes  and  continued  talking,  finally
sleep  with  sweat.

■  Bilious  fever:  with  much  vomiting  of  bile;  bilious  diar-

rhoea; tongue  coated  yellow;  great  thirst;  much  intes-
tinal irritation;  remittent  or  intermittent.

■  Remittent  fever  from  excessive  hepatic  action.

■  L'ritative  fever  and  infantile  remittent.

^'Attacks,  Periodicity. Alternate:  headache  and  diarrhoea;

constipation  and  diarrhoea.
An  hour  of  chilliness  followed  by  an  hour  of  fever,  during

whole  twenty-four  hours.
For  ten minutes after stool : severe burning pain in

rectum.
Every  fifteen  minutes  :  severe  pain  in  abdomen.
Every  half  hour:  bowels  moved;  shooting  along  thigh

lasting  about  ten  minutes.
An  hour  after  eating:  vomits  food.
Every  hour :  three  to  six  stools.
From  one  to  two  hours:  colic.


519  PODOPHYLLUM  PELTATUM.

Every  morning :  colic  with  mucous  stools.

Almost  every  night :  constipation  wakes  her.

Attack  lasts  twenty-four  hours :  burning  pain  at  top  of

head.
Day  after  attack :  passes  much  bile.
For  three  months :  beating  and  throbbing  in  r.  ovary.
Two  years  standing :  diarrhoea.
For  years:  subject  to  diarrhoea.
*' Locality  and  Direction. Right: fulness  m  hypochon-
drium;  twisting pain in hypochondrium ;  great  dis-
tension  in hypochondriac region;  soreness  in hypo-
chondrium ;  flatus  in  abdomen ;  sharp  pain  in  groin ;
pain  in  region  of  ovary  ;  pain  commences  in  ovary  and
descends anterior crural nerve; shooting in ovary;
dragging  pain  in  iliac  region ;  pain  traced  from  ovary
through  internal  spermatic  nerve  to  lumbar  plexus;
beating  and  throbbing  in  ovary  ;  ovarian  tumor ;  pain
under  scapula.
Left:  side  of  throat  sore;  rumbUng  in  side ;  numb  aching
in  region  of  ovary;  aching  pain  in  region  of  ovary;
heat  down  thigh ;  rheumatism  in  forearm  and  fingers  ;
pain  in  hip  ;  weakness  of  side.
From  r.  to  1. :  sore  throat.  • • u ^

'•'  Sensations.  As  if  strabismus  would  occur ;  pam  m  head
as  if  having  held  a  piece  of  ice  on  occipital  protuber-
ances ;  as  if  tongue,  throat  and  palate  had  been  burned  ;
as  of  a  thousand  live  things  moving  about  in  abdomen,
or  of  fish  turning  over ;  as  if  everything  would  drop
through  pelvis;  as  if  genital  organs  would  fall  out;
bearing  down  as  if  from  inactivity  of  rectum  ;  as  if
heart  were  ascending  to  throat ;  as  if  weak  and  unable
to  move  about.  • i- n

Pain:  in  region  of  liver;  in  rectum;  m  region  ol  gall-
bladder; in  transverse  colon;  in  anus;  m  lumbar
region;  in  sacrum;  all  over  abdomen;  in  region  of
ovaries ;  first  in  ovary,  ascends  crural  nerve ;  m  both
limbs ;  in  r.  ovary  and  uterus ;  under  r.  scapula ;  between
shoulders  ;  in  loins ;  in  course  of  ulnar  nerve  of  both
arms  ;  in  1.  hips  ;  in  stomach  ;  in  bowels ;  in  wrists ;  m
knees ;  in  ankles.
Violent  pains  :  in  head.  .  .

Severe  pain:  in  bowels;  in  abdomen;  of  ankle  joints.
Sharp  pain  :  in  r.  groin  ;  in  rectus  muscles.
Darts  of  pain  :  in  forehead.
Shooting  pain:  in  r.  ovary;  along  mside  of  thigh and

crural  nerve  to  knee.
Cutting  pains  :  in  intestines.
Stitches :  in  epigastrium.


PODOPHYLLUM  PELT  ATOM.  520

Stitchlike  pain: in  region  of  liver

Stitching  pains:  above  pubis  and  in  course  of  spermatic
cords.

Fleeting  pains :  in  head,  extend  into  neck  and  shoulders.

Twisting  pain  :  in  r.  hypochondrium.

Dragging  pains:  in  ovarian  region;  in  r.  iliac  region.

Pressing  pain:  in  both  hypochondria.

Stunning  pain  :  through  temples.

Burning  pain :  at  top  of  head  and  over  forehead  ;  in  re-
gion of  pyloric  orifice;  deep  in  rectum  ;  in  hypogas-
trium  and  sacral  region.

Stinging  pain  :  in  region  of  heart.

Cramplike  pains:  in  bowels.

Cramps :  in  calves,  thighs  and  feet.

Dull,  unpleasant  pain:  in  hypogastric  region;  in  back.

Tired  pain  :  in  ovaries.

Pheumatic  pain :  in  1.  forearm  and  fingers.

Aching  :  in  eyes ;  behind  eyes  ;  in  region  of  1.  ovary  ;
running  down  into  thighs ;  sharply  defined  in  sacro-
ischiadic  foramen ;  of  limbs ;  in  ankles  and  joints,
elbows  and  wrists  ;  dull  in  joints;  in  bones.

Numb  aching :  in  region  of  1.  ovary.

Beating :  in  r.  ovary.

Drawing :  in  eyes.

Throbbing:  in  temples;  in  r.  ovary.

Bearing  down  :  in  uterine  region  ;  in  abdomen ;  in  back.

Pressing:  in  temples;  in  uterine  region.

Smarting :  of  eyes.

Soreness  :  of  nose  ;  of  throat ;  in  hypochondrium  ;  in  ab-
domen ;  of  anus ;  of  muscles  of  neck  and  shoulders ;
of  back.

Heat:  in  head;  in  vertex;  in  stomach;  in  hypochon-
drium; in  bowels;  in  anus;  down  thigh;  in  abdomen.

Heaviness  :  of  eyes.

Weight :  in  hypogastric  region.

Fulness  :  in  head  ;  in  r.  hypochondrium.

Dryness :  of  throat.

Weakness :  in  epigastric  region ;  of  back  ;  in  wrists ;  in  1.
hip ;  of  1.  side.

Withered  sensation  :  in  lumbar  region.

Numbness :  of  fingers  ;  of  rectus  muscles  ;  down  r.  thigh  ;
of  fingers.

Empty  feeling :  in  stomach.

Itching:  of  skin.

Coldness :  of  feet ;  of  skin.
**  Tissues. I  I  Emaciation  ;  many  stools  daily,  all  of  which  are
natural ;  morning  diarrhoea. ^Atrophy  of  children.

■  Softness  of  flesh,  with  debility;  children.


521  PODOPHYLLUM  PELTATUM.

Relaxes  the  sphincters.

iFuhiess  of  superficial  veins,  indicating  impairment  of

innervation  of  sympathetic  system  of  nerves.
I  Hepatic  and  intestinal  congestion.
I  Mercurial  rheumatism.

I  I  Useful  in  gout  after  acute  symptoms  have  subsided,  or

in  cases  where  attack  is  preceded  by  premonitory  symp-
toms it  is  indicated  at  once;  it  will  ward  off  an  impend-
ing attack  of  gout.
''  Touch.  Passive  Motion.  Injuries.  Touch :  tenderness
in  one  spot,  corresponding  to  entrance  of  common  cho-
ledic  duct  into  duodenum.
Pressure :  pain  in  temples  >  ;  abdominal  pains  >  ;  ten-
derness of  foramen.

I I  Inclination  to  rub  region  of  liver  with  hand.
^''Skin. I  Sallow  skin;  jaundice;  also  in  children.

iSkin  moist  with  preternatural  warmth.

Scabs  on  skin.

■  Rawness  and  itching  about  genitals;  also  pustules  (from
grinding  the  root).

Cold,  clammy  skin.

I  I  Erysipelas.
*^  Stages of Life,  Constitution, i Bilious temperaments,
especially  after  mercurialization.

Child,  set.  4  months  ;  diarrhoea.

Child,  set.  18  months,  suffering  several  months ;  diarrhoea
after  cholera  infantum.

Boy,  ffit.  1 ;  diabetes  mellitus.

Boy,  set.  2,  fair  complexion,  blue  eyes,  light  hair,  impul-
sive and  vehement  disposition,  suffering  since  beginning
of  dentition  ;  diarrhoea.

Boy,  set.  about  3  ;  diarrhoea.

Boy,  set.  9  ;  diabetes  insipidus.

Maud  B.,  child  ;  diarrhoea.

Man,  £et.  33,  cachectic  appearance,  liver  or  spleen  or  both
disordered;  asthma.

Man,  a^t.  35,  treated  allopathically  from  childhood  for
disorders  of  liver  and  stomach,  has  been  regarded  as
having  "  disease  of  neck  of  stomach,"  has  taken  mer-
curials and  potash  ;  hepatic  disorder.

Minister,  set.  38,  nervo-bilious  temperament ;  headache.  _

Woman,  set.  45,  subject  to  occasional  dyspepsia ;  hepatic
derangement.

Mrs.,  ffit.  45 ;  dysentery.

Mrs.  M.,  set.  45,  sanguine  temperament,  full  habit,  not
through  "  change  of  life,"  sensitive  to  all  atmospheric
changes,  for  fourteen  years  has  suffered  from  uterine
disease ;  constipation  and  colic.


PODOPHYLLUM  PELTATUM.  522

Mrs.  H.,  8et.  45,  suffering  twenty-four  years;  prolapsus
uteri.

Man,  set.  45,  bilious  temperament ;  gout.

Man,  set.  50,  blue  eyes,  light  hair,  fair  skin,  nervous  tem-
perament, suffering  two  years ;  chronic  diarrhoea.

Woman,  past  60,  mother  of  large  family,  suffering  for
years ;  hepatic  derangement.

Miss  T.,  set.  66  ;  ovarian  tumor.

Stout  lady,  set.  71 ;  chronic  bronchitis.

Man,  set.  76,  never  had  a  severe  illness  of  any  kind ;
ague.

Soldier,  has  taken  much  opium  and  acids ;  chronic
diarrhoea.

Mrs.  B.,  confined ten weeks ago  with  a healthy  baby,
when  she  took  cold,  since  then  suffering ;  pain  in  r.
ovary.
^'^  Relations. Antidoted by: Lad. ac, Nux  vom., Colocyn.,
Leptan.

It  antidotes:  Mercur.

Compatible  :  after  Ipec.  and  Nux  vom.  in  gastric  vomiting  ;
after  Calc.  ostr.  and  Sulphur  in  liver  diseases.

Incompatible:  Salt,  which  increases  its  action.

Compare:  jEscuL,  Aloes,  Apis,  Arnic,  Bryon.,  Chelid.,  Col-
lin., Colchic,  Helleb.,  Iris,  Leptan.,  Lilium,  Mercur.,  Nitr.
ac,  Nux  vom.,  Pulsat.,  Sulphur,  Veratr.


523  POLYGONUM.


POLYGONUM.

Smart  Weed ; Water  Pepper.  Polygonacese.

Provings  by  Payne,  Trans.  Amer.  Inst,  of  Horn.,  1859,  p.  82,  and  Joslin  and
Cameron,  Hale's  New  Remedies.

We  include  the  symptoms  arranged  by  Dr.  Edward  Bayard,  Hom.  Phys.,  vol.  5,
1885,  p.  328.

Clinical  Authorities. — Bysuria,  Eosenberg,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  2,  p.  94 ;
Amenorrhoea,  Small,  Raue's  Rec,  1873,  p.  172  ;  Sciatica,  Shaw,  Org.,  vol.3,  p.  377 ;
Ulcers,  Small,  Raue's  Rec,  1873,  p.  246.

^  Mind. Great  depression,  followed  by  excessive  irritability.

Gloomy  views of  life, dislike  of  change  and  excessive
dread  of  death.
^  Sensorium. Dizziness.
^  Inner  Head, l  iPulsative  and  acute  pain  in  1.  temple.

Under  pressure  of  great  weariness  or  excitement  a  dull
depressing  pain  through  whole  head,  causing  a  sensa-
tion of  torpor  and  a  strong  desire  to  sleep  with  inability
to  do  so.

Pressure  in  back  of  head  on  lying  down.

Pressure  and  soreness  in  head  during  menses.

Pain  upon  sudden  rising,  in  back  of  head  with  pain  over
eyes.

Headache  <  in  damp  weather,  >  in  moderately  warm
temperature.
^  Outer  Head. A  sensation  of  sudden  rising  of  scalp,  with

extreme  irritation  and  increased  dry  exfoliation.
^  Sight  and  Eyes. Burning  in  eyeballs ; dry  sensation  in
lids.

Convulsive  twitching  of  lids  when  closed  and  when  lying
down,  dizziness  and  wavering  of  sight.

Inflammation  of  edges  of  lids.
*  Hearing  and  Ears. Dulness  of  hearing.

Ringing  sounds  in  ears.

Sudden  sounds  on  tympanum,  producing  momentary  ces-
sation of  hearing.

Acute  pain  in  ear  when  bending  head  down ;  >  bending
head  backward.

Ear  symptoms  <  in  moist  atmosphere.

Secretion  of  ears  increased.


POLYGONUM.  524

'  Smell  and  Nose. Inflammation  of  mucous  membrane  of
nose.
Tickling  sensation  in  nostrils.
Reddened or inflamed appearance of nostrils with a

swollen  sensation.
Feeling  of  congestion  through  eyes  and  nose.
Coldness  in  external  nose.
'^  Upper  Face. Acute  pain  in  1.  side  of  face,  extending  to
temple,  sometimes darting through  whole  1.  side  of
head.
Excruciating  pain  and  heat  in  1.  side  of  face,  <  by  cold  or

damp.
Coldness  in  r.  side  of  face  when  pain  is  most  severe  in

left.
After  severe  pain,  sometimes  drawing  in  1.  side  of  face
from  chin to  temple; paleness,  with  a  drawn,  tired
look.
"^  Teeth  and  Gums. Tenderness  of  gums.

Cold  or  cooling  temperature  in  mouth,  producing  acute
toothache.
'^  Taste  and  Tongue. Bitter  taste.

''  Inner  Mouth. Heat  in  roof  of  mouth,  with  excitation  of
salivary  glands.
Increased flow  of  heated saliva,  affording  no  relief  to
parched  condition.
13  Throat. Throat  dry  and  hot,  with  sense  of  excoriation.
Glands  feel  swollen ;  <  from  cold  or  moist  air.
Contracted  feeling  in  throat  after  swallowing,  followed  by
thirst.
^*  Appetite,  Thirst. Desires,  Aversions. Loss  of  appetite.
Food  is  tasteless,  or  nearly  so.
Repulsion  to  swallowing.
No  relief  after  drinking.
^^  Scrobiculum  and  Stomach. Slight  acidity.
Feeling  of  weight  in  stomach.
■  Pressure  of  clothes  causes  distress.

Pain  upon  pressure,  followed  by  throbbing  and  distress.
General  uneasiness  in  stomach  and  abdomen.
'^  Abdomen. Pain  and  uneasiness  in  abdomen.
Burning  heat  in  stomach  and  bowels.
1  I  Tympanitis  and  flatulent  colic.

I  I  Cutting,  lancinating,  griping  pains,  with  great  rumbling
as  if  whole  intestinal  contents  were  in  a  fluid  state  and
in  violent  commotion,  the  movement  proceeding  from
below  upward,  producing  nausea  and  disposition  to
vomit,  with  liquid  feces  which  were  discharged  with
considerable  force,  with  pain  in  loins.
^^  Stool  and  Rectum.  Copious  stool,  followed  by  smarting  in
anus.


525  POLYGONUM.

Straining  at  stool,  with  mucous,  jellylike  discharges.
Dark  discharges,  followed  by  burning  in  rectum.
I  1  Cholera  morbus  and  cholera  infantum,
a  Dysentery,  with  burning  and  smarting  in  rectum.
■  Evacuations  and  pain  <  in  cold  temperature.
I  I  Interior  of  anus studded  with  itching  eminences,  as
from  corrugation  without  contraction,  a  kind  of  hemor-
rhoidal tumor.
I  I  Hemorrhoids,  with  itching  and  burning  in  tumors.
I  Pruritus  ani  (used  as  a  wash).
^'  Urinary  Organs. '  '  Painful  cutting  and  feeling  of  strangu-
lation at  neck  of  bladder  while  urinating,  lasting  a  long
time  after,
i Strangury;  dysuria.

During  an  attack  of  gonorrhoea  extremely  violent  pains
on  urinating  causing  him  to  tremble  and  cry,  he  be-
came feverish,  slept  and  ate  but  little,  and  within  five
days  grew  perceptibly  thinner.
Pains  in  bladder.

I  I  Deposit  in  urine  of  mucus  and  phosphates.
Frequent  and  profuse  discharge  of  clear,  light  or  straw-
colored  urine.
BKidneys  affected  by  a  cold;  inflammation,  urine  high-
colored,  dark-red.
I  I  Albuminuria.
'"'  Male  Sexual  Organs. Irritation  of  genitals.

Loss  of  power  and  semen,  sometimes  followed  by  inflam-
mation of  glans  penis.
Extremely  convulsive  action  in  the  functional  uses.
"  Female  Sexual  Organs. Intense  dislike  for  coition  fol-
lowed by  a  perturbation  and  irritation  if  approached ;
inaction  of  the  flow  of  secretions.
I  I  Aching  pains  in  hips  and  loins  and  sensation  of  weight

and  tension  in  pelvis.
lAmenorrhoea.

i:P^Ienses:  delayed  six or seven  days  with  distress  and
pain ;  too  copious,  amounting  almost  to  hemorrhage  ;
tardy,  from  inaction  ;  fetid.
During  menses :  pressure  and  soreness  in  head  ;  gnndnig

pain  through  abdomen.
Congestive  weakness  and  loss  of  power.
Congestion  of  ovaries ;  tearing  sensation  in  groin,  espe-
cially right.
Acrid,  excoriating  leucorrhcea.
"Pregnancy. Parturition. Lactation, i Shooting  pams
through mammse,  with  great  soreness,  distension  and
tonciGriiGSS.
'■•  Voice  and  Larynx. Trachea  and  Bronchia. Stifling


POLYGONUM.  526

sensation  in  larynx ;  irritability  of  whole  system ;  weak-
ness of  sexual  function.
Crowding  and  pressure  about  larynx,  with  irritation  of

bronchi.
Roughness  as  of  adhesion  of  mucus  to  larynx,  producing
spasmodic  hacking  and  hoarseness.
^^  Respiration. Lungs  enfeebled,  breathing  labored ;  move-
ment of  abdomen  on  breathing  becomes  labored.
'"  Cough. Hacking  cough  <  b}^  change  of  temperature.
^'  Heart,  Pulse  and  Circulation. Increased  action  of  heart

with  loss  of  rhythm.
^^  Neck  and  Back. iPain  in  back  and  at  lower  extremity,
at  times  acute,  and  again  a  drawing  pain,  lateral  in  its
action,  as  if  hips  were  being  drawn  together. ^Kidney
affection.
Tearing  and  drawing  in  loins  and  on  exposure  to  cold,
followed  by  lameness  and  soreness.
'^  Upper  Limbs. Pain in arms and inability  or sense  of

weakness  in  lifting  slightest  weight.
**  Lower  Limbs. '  l Sciatica;  the  pain  put  him  in  mind  of
the  Aurora  Borealis.
Swelling  of  legs  and  feet.

■  Superficial  ulcers  and  sores  upon  lower  extremities.
^*  Limbs  in  General. Sensation  of  weakness  in  upper  and
lower  limbs.
Distension  of  bloodvessels  in  hands  and  feet.
^'  Rest. Position. Motion. Lying  down  :  pressure  in  back
of  head  ; dizziness  and  wavering  of  sight.
Rising  :  sudden  pain  in  back  of  head.
Bending  head  down :  acute  pain  in  ears.
^^  Nerves. Hysteria;  slight  vertigo,  with  sensation  in  extrem-
ities as  of  a  galvanic  shock  passing  through  them ;  con-
stant desire  to  urinate;  warmth  and  peculiar  sensation
of  tingling  through  whole  body.
I  I  Epilepsy ;  a  protracted  case  (cured  by  the  extract).
^^  Temperature  and  Weather. Warm  temperature : head-
ache >.
Damp  weather:  headache  <  ;  ear  symptoms  <  ;  heat  in

side  of  face  <  ;  glands  of  throat  feel  swollen  <.
Cold :  heat  in  side  of  face  <  ;  swollen  glands <  ;  evac-
uations and pain  <  ; kidneys affected ; tension and
drawing  in  loins.
Change  of  temperature  :  hacking  cough  <.
*^  Locality  and  Direction. Right :  coldness  in  side  of  face  ;
tearing  in  groin.
Left :  pain  in  temple ;  acute  pain  in  side  of  face ;  darting

through  side  of  head  ;  heat  in  side  of  face.
From  below  upward :  movement  in  bowels.


527  POLYGONUM.

^^  Sensations.  As  of  sudden  rising  of  scalp  ;  as  if  whole  intes-
tinal contents  were  in  a  fluid  state  and  in  violent  com-
motion ;  as  if  hips  were  drawn  together ;  pain  put  him
in  mind  of  Aurora  Borealis ;  as  of  a  galvanic  shock  pass-
ing through  extremities.

Pain  :  in  head  ;  over  eyes  ;  in  loins;  in  bladder;  in  back
and  lower  extremities ;  in  arms.

Excruciating  pain  :  in  1.  side  of  face.

Extremely  violent  pains :  when  urinating.

Acute  pain :  in  1.  temple ;  in  ears  ;  in  1.  side  of  face  and
head ;  in  teeth.

Lancinating :  in  bowels.

Shooting  pains  :  through  mammse.

Tearing  sensation  :  in  groin  ;  in  loins.

Cutting  :  in  bowels ;  in  neck  of  bladder.

Griping :  in  bowels.

Grinding  pain  :  through  abdomen.

Pulsative  pain  :  in  1.  temple.

Aching  pains :  in  hips  and  loins.

Dull,  depressing  pain :  through  whole  head.

Drawing:  in  1.  side  of  face  from  chin  to  temple;  as  if  hips
were  drawn  together ;  in  loins.

Burning  :  in  eyeballs ;  in  rectum ;  in  tumors.

Heat:  in  1.  side  of  face;  in  roof  of  mouth;  in  throat;  in
stomach  and  bowels.

Smarting :  in  anus  ;  in  rectum.

Soreness  :  in  head  ;  of  mammae ;  in  loins.

Tenderness  :  of  gum.s ;  of  mammae.

Tingling:  through  whole  body.

Pressure  :  in  back  of  head  ;  in  head  ;  about  larynx.

Weight :  in  stomach  ;  in  pelvis.

Tension  :  in  pelvis.

Swollen  sensation  :  in  nostrils.

Feeling  of  congestion:  through  eyes  and  nose.

Contracted  feeling  :  in  throat.

Distress  :  in  stomach.

Stifling  sensation  :  in  larynx.

Uneasiness:  in  stomach  and  abdomen.

Weakness :  in  sexual  functions  ;  in  arms  ;  in  upper  and
lower  limbs.

Tickling  sensation  :  in  nostrils.

Dry  sensation :  in  lids ;  in  throat.

Itching :  in  tumors.

Coldness  :  in  external  nose  ;  in  r.  side  of  face.
"  Tissues. Has  a  reputation  in  domestic  practice  as  a  fomen-
tation in  all  internal  inflammations.

Sprains ;  lameness  and  bruises  therefrom  (locally).
*^  Touch. Passive  Motion. Injuries. Pressure :  of  clothes
causes  distress.


POLYGONUM— POLYPORUS  OFF.  528

*^  Skin. I  I  Chronic  erysipelatous  inflammations.

I  Old  and  indolent  ulcers.
*^  Stages  of  Life,  Constitution. Miss  C.  C,  nervo-bilious
temperament ;  amenorrhoea.
Man,  subject  to  urinary  difficulties,  now  suffering  from
gonorrhoea ;  dysuria.
^^  Relations. Compare: Asarum, Ammon. carb., Caulophyl,
Capsic,  Pulsat.,  Senega,  Senecio,  Xanthoxylum.


POLYPORUS  OFFICINALIS.

Larch  Agaric.  Fungi.

A  fungus  growing  on  the  larch  tree ;  formerly  called  Boletus  laricis.
Provings  by  Burt,  Am.  Hom.  Obs.,  1868,  p.  116;  Lord,  Am.  Hom.  Obs.,  1868,
p.  60 ;  Smedley,  Wood,  Cooley  and  Miller,  Allen's  Encyclop.,  vol.  8,  p.  142.

Clinicai.  Authorities. — Sick-headache,  periodical  headache,  Shepherd,  Smedley,
Burt's  Monograph  ;  Facial  neuralgia,  Burt's  Monograph  ;  Jaundice,  Burt's  Mono-
graph ;  Diarrhoea,  chronic  diarrhoea,  lienteria,  dysentery,  Holcombe,  Wood,  Burt's
Monograph  ;  Ague  (26  cases).  Lord,  Franklin,  Shepherd,  Wakeman,  Eice,  Scott,
Burt's  Monograph  ;  Cooley,  A.  H.  O.,  vol.  5,  p.  481 ;  Continued  fever,  Lord,  Burt's
Monograph  ;  Remittent  and  bilious  fever,  Franklin,  Burt's  Monograph.

'  Mind. Low-spirited,  gloomy,  desponding,  irritable.

Absence  of  mind  and  loss  of  memory.
-  Sensorium. Head feels light and hollow, with deep
frontal headache and much faintness ; in malarial
intermittents.

Congestion  of  blood  to  head  with  vertigo.
^  Inner  Head, l  i  Headache,  dull,  frontal,  with  fever.

I  I  Dull  aching  pain  in  head.

I  I  Headache  with  qualmishness.

I  I  Sick-headache:  from  organic  lesion  of  liver;  every
month,  with  chilliness  along  spine.

■  Headache  in  intermittent,  remittent  or  bilious  fevers.

I  Periodical  headache,  coming  on  at  regular  hour  each
day.
^  Upper  Face. '  i  Facial  neuralgia,  of  a  periodical  character ;
from  torpid  liver.

I  I  Weak  and  languid ;  poor  appetite;  every  day  for  the  last
week,  at  12  m.,  burning  pain  in  upper  teeth,  1.  side  of
jaw,  also  in  1.  temple;  pain  intense,  lasts  until  mid-
night, when  it  gradually  passes  off;  feels  it  slightly
through  forenoon. ^Intermittent  neuralgia.


529  POLYPORUS  OFFICINALIS.

I  Intermittent  neuralgia  1.  side  of  head  and  temple.
"  Taste  and  Tongue, i  Taste :  bitter,  coppery,  nauseous.

I  Tongue:  coated;  white;  yellow;  thickly  yellow.
^*  Appetite,  Thirst. Desires,  Aversions. Perfect  loss  of
appetite;  pale,  ansemic ;  chronic  malaria.
Sometimes  has  ravenous  appetite ;  but  more  often  none.
Desire  for  sour  things,  which  relieve.
'"  Hiccough,  Belching,  Nausea  and  Vomiting.  Nausea  and

vomiting.
'^  Scrobiculum  and  Stomach. Great  faintness  or  all  gone
feeling  in  epigastric  region.
Burning  distress  in  stomach,  with  dragging  pains  in  liver.
'^Hypochondria. ■  Severe  aching  pains  in  region  of  liver,
extending  over  whole  dorsal  region ;  portal  congestion.
I  Pain  in  liver,  with  jaundice  of  skin  and  great  lassitude.
I  Hepatic  complaints,  especially  jaundice.
^^  Abdomen. Loud  rumbling  in  bowels.

Constant  distress  in  region  of  umbilicus,  with  a  feeling  as
if  small  intestines  were  being  tied  in  knots;  summer
diarrhoea.
Pain  in  abdomen  between  stomach  and  navel.
^^  Stool  and  Rectum, i  Loose  stool.

Sudden  distress  in  hypogastric  region,  with  great  desire
for  stool; light-colored,  papescent stool, _  followed by
dragging  pains  in  liver  and  sinking  in  epigastrium.  ^
I  Stools  of  pure  mucus,  or  mucus,  blood  and  bile, with

great  faintness  and  distress  in  solar  plexus  after  stool.
I  I  Stools  run  from  bowels  with  great  force,  composed  of
bile,  mucus  and  black  fecal  matter,  preceded  by  great
burning  pain  and  distress  in  epigastrium,  r.  lobe  of
liver,  and  umbilicus  and  followed  by  symptoms  of  portal
congestion.
iLienteria;  stools  undigested ;  chronic  anaemia.
I  I  Dysentery,  with  intermittent  fever,  in  a  young lady;
passages  of  pure  blood  and  a  little  mucus  every  half
hour, with severe tenesmus and colicky pains in
hypogastrium.
•  Intermittent  diarrhoea  and  dysentery.
■  Chronic  diarrhoea  and  dysentery.
I  I  Constipation,  dull  headache  and  great  languor.
^'  Urinary  Organs, i  Urine  very  high  colored  and  scanty,

bilious.
''Inner  Chest  and  Lungs. Phthisis,  with copious  night

sweats  and  watery  diarrhoea.
^'  Neck  and  Back. '  i  Severe  headache.

I  I  Dull  aching  pain  in  back  and  hips.
"  Lower  Limbs. Pain  in  knees  and  ankles.
VOL.  VIII. — 34.


POLYPORUS  OFFICINALIS.  530

^*  Limbs  in  General. Great  aching  distress  in  all  the  large
joints.

Severe  pains  in  arms  and  legs.
^*  Best. Position. Motion. Can  hardly  stand  up,  knees  are

so  weak.
^®  Nerves. ■  Great  languor  with  severe  aching  pains  in  back,
large  joints  and  bones  of  legs ;  yawns  and  stretches.

Feels  weak  and  depressed  and  indisposed  to  any  exertion,
physical  or  mental.

Great  debility  at  times;  can  hardly  stand  up,  knees  are  so
weak.
^^  Sleep. Disposition  to  yawn  and  stretch,  with  chilliness.

Restless  night;  sleep  disturbed  by  dreams,  very  restless
and  uneasy  all  night.
^^  Time. Forenoon  :  neuralgia  slight.

Night :  sweat ;  restless ;  uneasy ;  fever  and  distress.

After  midnight :  profuse  sweat.
^^  Temperature and Weather. Cannot  bear open air :
chilliness.

Damp  change:  causes  cold.
*''  Fever. Cannot  bear  the  open  air;  it  makes  him  so  chilly;
takes  cold  from  least  damp  change.

Chilliness,  with  disposition  to  yawn  and  stretch.

Frequent  creeping  chills  along  spine,  between  shoulder-
blades  up  back  to  nape  of  neck.

■  Chills  commencing  in  back,  between  shoulder  blades.

Coldness  of  nose,  hands  and  feet.

I  1  Chills  creeping  along  spine,  intermingled  with  hot
flashes.

I  I  Chill  alternates  with  fever  several  times  a  day.

I  I  Skin  hot  and  dry;  especially  palms  of  hands;  face  hot
and  flushed.

1  I  Very  restless  all  night,  with  fever  and  aching  distress
in  large  joints.

Sweat  profuse  after  midnight.

I  I  Extremities  cold,  bluish;  feeble  pulse;  face  bluish ;
chills  every  other  day,  every  succeeding  attack  being
more  severe ;  gloomy  and  despondent,  irritated  at  least
trifle ;  thick  yellow  coating  on  tongue ;  no  appetite ;
constant  nausea ;  slight  headache ;  slight  pain  in  lum-
bar vertebrae. ^Ague.

I  I  Ague  of  two  years  duration,  contracted  while  in  army ;
had  been  drugged  with  quinine,  opium  and  mercurials ;
chills,  fever  and  sweat  every  other  day ;  great  thirst  be-
tween paroxysms ;  very  sick  at  stomach ;  vomiting ;  no
appetite;  pain  in  back;  pain  in  bones;  pulse  115;  rest-
less and  nervous.

Chill  light  and  short ;  fever  long  and  followed  by  per-
spiration ;  in  some  cases  perspiration  is  copious.


531  POLYPORUS  OFFICINALIS.

■  Obstinate  intermittent  fevers  <  by  exposure  and  neglect

or  abuse  of  quinine.
Intermission  very  short ;  almost  continued  fever.

■  During apyrexia : headache; bitter taste in mouth;

tongue  coated  white  or  yellow ;  loss  of  appetite ;  more

or  less  pains  in  abdominal  viscera,  especially  liver,  with

great  lassitude.
I  I  Intermittent,  remittent  and  bilious  fevers.
Hectic  chills  and  fever  in  phthisis,  with  copious  night

sweats.
*^  Attacks, Periodicity. Periodical:  headache, coming  on  at

regular  hour  each  day  ;  facial  neuralgia.
Alternate :  fever  and  chill  several  times  a  day.
Every  half  hour: passages  of  pure  blood  and a little

mucus.
Every  day : at  12  m.,  burning  pain  in  teeth ; lasts  till

midnight.
Every  other  day :  chills.
Every  month :  sick-headache.
^^  Locality  and  Direction. Right :  distress  in  lobe  of  liver.
Left :  pain  in  side  of  jaw ;  pain  in  teeth  and  temples ;  in-
termittent neuralgia  side  of  head.
*^  Sensations. Pain:  in  liver;  in  abdomen,  between  stomach

and  navel ;  in  knees  and  ankles ;  in  lumbar  vertebrae :

in  back  ;  in  bones  ;  in  abdominal  viscera.
Severe  pains :  in  arms  and  legs ;  in  back,  large  joints  and

bones  of  legs.
Severe  aching  pains :  in  region  of  liver.
Dragging  pains :  in  liver.
Colicky  pains :  in  hypogastrium.
Burning  pain  :  in  teeth ;  in  1.  temple.
Burning distress: in stomach; in epigastrium; in

umbilicus.
Neuralgia :  1.  side  of  head  and  temple.
Dull  aching  pain :  in  head  ;  in  back  and  hips.
Dull  pain  :  in  frontal  region.
Distress:  in  region  of  umbilicus;  in  hypogastric  region;

in  all  large  joints.
Light,  hollow  feeling :  in  head.
Coldness :  of  nose,  hands  and  feet.
*^  Stages  of  Life, Constitution. Mrs. R.,  set. 35, bilious

temperament ;  facial  neuralgia.
Man,  aet.  35,  contracted  disease  two  years  ago  while  in  the

army ;  ague.
Lady,  set.  47,  just  passed  change  of  life ;  sick-headache.
*^  Relations. Compare:  Agaric,  Bryon.,  Cinchon.,  Cornus,  Gel-

sem.,  Ipec,  Leptand.,  Nux  vom.,  Fodophyl.


PRUNQS  SPINOSA.  532


PRUNUS  SPINOSA.

Sloe;  Blackthorn.  Bosaceae.

Tlie  Blackthorn  (Schwarzdorn)  is  a  native  of  Europe,  but  is  found  in  New  Eng-
land and  southward  to  Pennsylvania.

The  tincture  is  prepared  from  the  fresh  flower  buds.

Introduced  by  Wahle,  Archiv.  fiir  Horn.,  14,  3,  169;  and  Kretschmar,  AUg.
Horn.  Zeit.,  vol.  1,  p.  124.

Clinical  Authorities. — Glaucoma,  J.  A.  I.  H.,  1883-1886  ;  Chorio-retinitis,
Choroiditis,  O'Connor,  Norton,  Norton's  Ophth.  Therap.,  p.  146 ;  Affection  of
heart,  Kurtz,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  3,  p.  449;  Sprained  ankle  and  respiratory  diffi-
culty, Lippe,  N.  E.  M.  G.,  vol.  10,  p.  456 ;  Dropsy,  Hartmann,  Miiller,  Euck.  Kl.
Erf.,  vol.  4,  p.  354.

^  Inner  Head.  iSharp  pain  beginning  in  r.  side  of  forehead
shooting  like  lightning  through  brain  and  coming  out
at  occiput.

I  I  Painful  jerks  in  forehead  shooting  backward.

I  Pain  pressing  from  within  outward,  extending  from
beneath  r.  temporal  bone  to  frontal  bone,  <  from  exter-
nal pressure.

I  1  Twinging  pain  in  r.  temporal  bone  extending  into  ear
and  causing  a  kind  of  earache.

I  I  Pressive  pain  in  r.  side  of  vertex  as  if  a  sharp  corner
were  pressing  against  it.

I  I  Jerking-sticking  pain  at  posterior  portion  of  parietal
bone.

I  I  Painful  jerking  thrust  through  r.  hemisphere  of  brain
on  motion.

1  I  Pressing  asunder  headache,  so  violent  that  he  almost
lost  his  reason.

I  I  Pressive  pain  beneath  skull  as  if  skull  would  be  pressed

outward  by  a  sharp  plug.
^  Sight  and  Eyes. ■  Pain  in  r.  eyeball,  as  if  inner  portion
of  eye  would  be  torn  out.

I I  Ciliary  neuralgia  :  pain  in  eyeball  as  if  crushed,  or  pain
as  if  pressed  asunder ;  sharp  shooting  pain  extending
through  eye  back  into  brain,  or  above  eye  extending
into  and  around  it  or  over  corresponding  side  of  head  ;
pain  commences  behind  ear  and  shoots  forward  to  eye ;
<  from  motion ;  >  in  rest ;  pains  occasionally  periodic
in  character  and  may  be  <  at  night.


533  PRUNUS  SPINOSA.

iChorio-retinitis  in  myopic  patients  with  sclerectasia  pos-
terior and  fluidity  of  vitreous,  with  floating  opacities  in  it
(hemorrhagic).

I  llrido-choroiditis,  no  fluidity  of  vitreous  and  no  floating
opacities.

I  I  Irido-cyclitis  with  anterior  synechi?e.

1  I  An  old  lady,  set.  76,  had  paralysis  of  r.  side,  and  cornea
nearly  opaque,  with  excessive  congestion  of  superficial
and  deep  vessels  of  conjunctiva  and  sclerotic.

I  Choroiditis,  either  with  or  without  retinal  complication.

II  Opacities  and  haziness  of  vitreous  during  course  of
choroidal  troubles.

Glaucoma ;  pain severe,  crushing in eye  as if  pressed
asunder, or sharp shooting through eye and  corre-
sponding side  of  head ;  aqueous  and  vitreous  humor
hazy ;  fundus  hypersemic.
®  Hearing  and  Ears. Pressing-asunder  pain  in  r.  ear  like

earache.
^  Smell  and  Nose. Pain as  from pressing  asunder  above

nasal  bones.
'"  Teeth  and  Gums. '  '  Wrenching  pain  in  several  back  teeth
whenever  anything  warm  is  taken  into  mouth.

I  I  Pain  in  last  1.  lower  back  tooth  as  if  tooth  would  be
torn  out.

I  iVery  piercing  nervous  pain  in  1.  upper  molar.

I  I  Fine,  sticking  pains  in  various  teeth.

I  I  Toothache  as  if  tooth  would  be  raised ;  pain  also  shoots
from  one  tooth  to  another.
"  Taste  and  Tongue. '  '  Burning  on  tongue  as  if  she  had

burned  it.
^^  Scrobiculum  and  Stomach, i  l  Fulness  and  distension  in
pit  of  stomach.

Sensation  of  fulness  in  pit  of  stomach,  as  after  a  full  meal
or  as  from  overlifting,  with  shortness  of  breathing.

I  I  Sensation  of  repletion  in  stomach  ;  a  very  small  quan-
tity of  food  satisfies.
^^  Abdomen, l  '  Flatulence  presses  upon  bladder  and  causes
cramps  in  bladder,  so  that  he  is  obliged  to  completely
double  up.

Obliged  to  walk  very  carefully  and  softly  on  account  of
cramps  in  abdomen,  so  that  abdomen  should  not  be
shaken,  otherwise  urinary  troubles  were  greatly  aggra-
vated.

Pain  in  r.  inguinal  region  as  if  hernia  would  protrude.

I  I  Ascites ;  swelling  of  abdomen  ;  loss  of  appetite  ;  scanty
micturition  ;  hard,  nodular  stool,  discharged  with  pain
in  rectum.
^^  Stool  and  Rectum. Diarrhoea  with  nausea,  feces  consist-
ing of  mucus,  with  burning  in  rectum  as  from  a  wound.


PRUNUS  SPINOSA.  534

I  Hard  stool,  intermitting,  looking  like  excrements  of
dogs,  in  small  lumps  with  stitches  in  rectum,  extort-
ing cries.

I  I  Pressive,  cramplike  pain,  as  if  an  angular  body  were
pressed  inward,  on  r.  side  of  rectum  an  inch  above  anus.

Violent  burning  in  anus,  as  from  salt  in  a  wound  after  a
slimy,  diarrhoea-like  stool.
^^  Urinary  Organs. I Tenesmus  of  bladder;  every  other  quar-
ter of  an  hour  for  eight  hours.

Spasms  in  bladder  disturbing  sleep  at  night ;  burning  in
sphincter  vesicae.

Efforts  to  pass  urine  torment  him  for  a  whole  hour,  with
violent  burning-biting  pains  in  bladder  and  urethra.

Strangury;  continuous  urging  to  urinate,  with  burning-
biting  in  bladder  and  urethra ;  when  effort  is  made  to
urinate,  burning  in  urethra,  so  that  one  must  bend
double  without  being  able  to  urinate.

Very  urgent  desire  to  urinate,  if  not  attended  to  immedi-
ately causes  severe  sharp,  crampy  pains  in  bladder.

Urgent  desire  to  urinate;  the  urine  only  reaches  glans
penis  and  causes  there  violent  pain  and  spasms,  also  with
tenesmus  in  rectum  ;  pain  in  bladder  momentarily  >
as  soon  as  urine  descends  into  urethra.

lis  hurriedly  impelled  to  pass  urine  which,  however,
seems  to  pass  forward  into  glans  penis,  and  then  seems
to  return  and  cause  most  violent  pain  in  urethra.

I  Dared  not  take  hold  of  urethra  on  account  of  pain,  as
from  suppuration  or  ulceration.

I  As  urine  passes  he  is  momentarily  relieved  of  pains,  yet
there  remains  a  sticking  in  glans  penis,  which  causes  a
most  frightful  spasm  of  urethra  (ischuria  urethralis)
with  tenesmus  recti.

■  Must  press  a  long  time  before  urine  appears.

Scanty  secretion  of  urine,  brown ;  must always press  a
long  time  before  passing  any  urine,  and  then  in  a  feeble
stream.
^^  Male  Sexual  Organs. The  prepuce  is  drawn  behind  the
corona  glandis,  the  penis  becoming  smaller.

Burning  biting  in  urethra;  great  soreness,  so  that  he  can-
not touch  it.
^^  Female  Sexual  Organs. Tickling,  itching  in region  of
ovaries  not  >  by  scratching  and  rubbing.

Menstruation  too  early,  with  violent  pain  in  small  of  back.

Metrorrhagia  of  thin,  pale  blood,  becoming  very  watery
the  longer  it  lasts.

Leucorrhoea  excoriating,  coloring  linen  yellow.
^'Respiration, l  Anxious,  short  respiration;  tight  and  diffi-
cult, with  anxiety  about  heart.


28


29


535  PRUNUS  SPINOSA.

I  Shortness  of  breath,  while  walking;  sighing,  as if  he

were  climbing  a  high  and  steep  mountain.
Breathing  difficult,  caused  by  a  sensation  of  heaviness  in
lower  part  of  thorax.

1  I  Left  ankle  and  foot  much  swollen  after  being  sprained ;
as  swelling  and  pain  abated  new  symptoms  developed ;
breathing  became  rapid ;  great  oppression  of  chest  with
constantly  recurring  desire  to  take  a  long  breath ;  felt
as  if  air  she  inhaled  did  not  reach  pit  of  stomach,  and
till  she  could  force  air  so  far  down  had  to  yawn  and  try
to  take  a  deep  inspiration.
Inner  Chest  and  Lungs. Heaviness  and  oppression  of  chest.

Heavy  and  anxious  sensation  in  lower  portion  of  chest,
frequently  compelling  him  to  take  a  deep  breath.

Sensation  of  heaviness  in  1.  chest,  frequently  obliging  him
to  take  a  deep  breath.

Tightness  in  upper  part  of  1.  chest.
Heart,  Pulse  and  Circulation. 1 1  Furious  beating  of  heart,
even  when  at  rest,  and  great  danger  of  suffocation  from
shghtest motion; visible pulsation of  carotids; face
bloated  and  purple ;  lips  purple ;  menses  suppressed.

Knocking  at  heart  with  labored  breathing.

Even  from  a  very  moderate  motion  beats  of  heart  are
fearfully  aggravated.

I  I  Far  advanced  oedema  pedum  in  a  girl  set.  14,  depend-
ent on  hypertrophy  of  heart.
^^  Neck and Back. Stitches between shoulder  blades on
drawing  a  long  breath.

I  lAll  parts  of  back  and  small  of  back  seem  stiff,  as  if  he
had  been  injured,  or  from  overlifting.

Pains  in  small  of  back,  while  sitting.
^^  Upper  Limbs. Pressure  on  r.  shoulder  extending  to  deltoid
muscle,  preventing  one  from  raising  arm.

Sensation  as  if  sprained  in  r.  thumb,  hindering  writing ;
cannot  hold  pen.
^^  Lower  Limbs. Pain  in  hip,  <  in  forenoon ;  free  from  it
after  midnight.

Restlessness  in  legs,  must  change  position  continually.

I  I  Pain  as  from  a  sprain  in  1.  ankle.

Pain  in  first  joint  of  big  toe,  as  if  it  were  pulled  out.
^'Rest. Position. Motion. Rest:  ciliary  neuralgia  >.

Sitting:  pain  in  small  of  back.

Must  double  up  :  cramps  in  bladder ;  burning  in  urethra.

Is  inclined  to  stretch.

Cannot  hold  pen  :  pain  in  thumb.

Cannot  raise  arm  :  pressure  on  r.  shoulder.

Must  change  position  continually :  restlessness  in  legs.

Motion :  painful  thrust  through  brain ;  neuralgia  in  eyes  <.

Must  walk  very  carefully:  cramps  in  bladder.


PHUNUS  SPINOSA.  536

^®  Time. Forenoon :  pain  in  hip.

Evening:  chilliness.

Night :  pain  in  eyes  <  ;  spasms  in  bladder,  disturbing
sleep.

After  midnight :  free  from  pain  in  hip.
^^  Temperature  and  Weather. Warm  food :  causes  pain  in

back  teeth.
*"  Fever. Chilliness  in  evening,  must  go  to  bed,  is  inclined
to  stretch.

Dry  heat  over  whole  body,  with  pain  in  corona  glandis
and  redness  of  prepuce  ;  burning  on  genitals,  >  from
perspiration  and  ceasing  when  going  to  bed.

Perspiration  during  sleep,  only  in  face.
*^  Attacks,  Periodicity. Periodic:  pains  in  eyes.

Every  other  quarter  of  an  hour  for  eight  hours :  tenesmus
of  bladder.

For  whole  hour :  efforts  to  pass  urine.
*^  Locality  and  Direction.  Right:  pain  beginning  in  side  of
forehead  ;  pain  from  beneath  temporal  bone;  pain  in  r.
side  of  top  of  head  ;  painful  thrust  through  hemisphere
of  brain ;  pain  in  eyeball ;  paralysis  of  side ;  pain  in
ear ;  pain  in  inguinal  hernia ;  pain  on  side  of  rectum
an  inch  above  anus ;  pressure  on  shoulder  ;  sensation  as
if  sprained  in  thumb.

Left :  pain  in  last  lower  back  tooth;  piercing  pain  in  upper
molar;  pain  as  from  a  sprained  ankle.

From  within  outward  :  pain  from  beneath  temporal  bone
to  frontal  bone.

Backward  :  pain  in  forehead.
*^  Sensations.  As  if  a  sharp  corner  were  pressing  against  top
of  head ;  as  if  skull  would  be  pressed  outward  by  a  sharp
plug;  as  if  inner  portion  of  eye  would  be  torn  out;  eye-
ball as  if  crushed,  or  as  if  pressed  asunder;  as  if  tooth
would  be  torn  out ;  as  if  tooth  would  be  raised ;  as  if
tongue  had  been  burned;  as  if  hernia  would  protrude;
burning  as  from  a  wound  in  rectum  ;  as  if  an  angular
body  were  being  pressed  inward  in  rectum ;  as  from
salt  in  a  wound  in  anus;  sighing  as  if  he  were  climbing
a  high,  steep  mountain ;  as  if  air  she  inhaled  did  not
reach  pit  of  stomach  ;  as  if  small  of  back  had  been  in-
jured; as  if  r.  thumb  were  sprained;  as  if  ankle  were
sprained ;  as  if  first  joint  of  big  toe  were  pulled  out.

Pain :  in  r.  eyeball ;  in  last  1.  lower  back  tooth ;  in  r.  in-
guinal region  ;  in  rectum ;  in  small  of  back  ;  in  hip ;  in
1.  ankle ;  in  joint  of  big  toe ;  in  corona  glandis.

Sharp  pain :  from  r.  side  of  forehead  through  brain  and
coming  out  at  occiput.

Violent  pain :  in  glans  penis ;  in  urethra ;  in  small  of
back.


537  PRUNUS  SPINOSA.

Sharp shooting pain : through eye back into  brain ;

behind  ear  forward  to  eye ;  from  one  tooth  to  another.
Severe  sharp  crampy  pains  :  in  bladder.
Piercing  nervous  pain  :  in  1.  upper  molar.
Violent  burning  biting  pains:  in  bladder;  in  urethra.
Stitches  in  rectum  :  between  shoulder  blades.
Jerking  sticking  pain  : at  posterior  portion  of  parietal

bone.
Painful  jerking  thrust :  through  r.  hemisphere  of  brain.
Twinging  pain  :  in  r.  temporal  bone  into  ear.
Pressing  asunder  pain :  in  head ;  in  r.  ear ;  above  nasal

bone.
Pressing  pain :  from  beneath  r.  temporal  bone ;  in  r.  side

of  top  of  head ;  beneath  skull ;  on  r.  side  of  rectum ;  on

r.  shoulder.
Fine  sticking  pain :  in  various  teeth ;  in  glans  penis.
Cramps:  in  bladder;  in  abdomen.
Burning:  on  tongue; in  rectum;  in  anus;  in  sphincter

vesicae ;  in  urethra ;  on  genitals.
Heat  over  whole  body.
Soreness :  in  urethra.
Painful  jerks:  in  forehead.
Restlessness :  in  legs.
Tightness:  in  upper  part  of  1.  chest.
Heaviness:  in  lower  part  of  thorax;  of  chest.
Fulness :  in  pit  of  stomach.
Distension :  in  pit  of  stomach.
Oppression :  of  chest.
Tickling :  in  region  of  ovaries.
Itching :  in  region  of  ovaries.
"  Tissues. ■  Ciliary  neuralgia.

■  Dropsy  caused  by  defective  heart;  abdominal  dropsy;

anasarca  after  any debilitating,  chronic  diseases,  and

particularly  in those connected  with  cachectic affec-
tions.
^'  Touch. Passive  Motion. Injuries. Touch  :  painful  from

soreness  in  urethra.
Pressure:  pain  in  head  <.
J!^I^  Scratching  or  rubbing  does  not  >  itching  in  ovaries.
"  Stages  of  Life,  Constitution. Girl,  set.  14 ;  hypertrophy  of

heart  and  dropsy.
Young  lady,  set.  16,  after  jumping  from  a  carriage  while

horse  was  running  away ;  sprained  ankle.
Woman,  set.  32,  single,  suffering  six  months  ;  affection  of

heart.
Woman,  set.  65;  dropsy.
Woman,  has  had  much  trouble  and  sorrow;  affection  of

heart.
*^  Relations. Compare :  Laurocerasus.


PSORINUM.  538


PSORINUM.

A  salt  from  a  product  of  Psora.  A  Nosode.

The  sero-purulent  matter  contained  in  the  scabies  vesicle  was  used  for  Hahne-
mann's provings.  The  product  of  "Psora  sicca"  (epidermoid  efflorescence  of
pityriasis)  was  used  for  the  provings  of  Gross.

The  salt  from  a  product  of  Psora  was  used  by  Hering.

Clinical  Authorities. — Melancholy,  Brenfleck,  Analy.  Therap.,  vol.  1,  p.  294
from  Hygea,  vol.  6,  p.  131 ;  Religious  melancholy  and  epilepsy,  Tietze,  Analy.  Therap.
p.  248;  Mental  disturbance,  Gross,  Analy.  Therap.,  vol.  1,  p.  84;  Hypochondriasis,
I'.ell,  N.  E.  M.  G.,  vol.  6,  p.  532;  Eruption  on  head,  Attomyr,  MSS. ;  Haynel
MSS. ;  Affection  of  scalp.  Small,  MSS. ;  Partial  canities,  Swan,  Organon,  vol.  2,  p,
446 ;  Plica,  Rosenberg,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  4,  p.  317  ;  Necrosis  of  temporal  bone.
Houghton,  MSS. ;  Amaurosis,  Hendrichs,  MSS.,  from  A.  H.  Z.,  vol.  44,  p.  69  ;  Se-
rous choroiditis,  Norton,  Ophth.  Therap.,  p.  147  ;  Pustular  keratitis,  Searle,  A.  H.  O.
vol.  9,  p.  571 ;  Inflammation  of  eyes,  Eberhard,  MSS. ;  Scrofulous  inflammation  of  eyes.
Stapf,  Euck.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  1,  p.  276 ;  Otorrhoia,  Gale,  Hom.  Phys.,  vol.  2,  p.  469
Houghton,  MSS. ;  Hay  fever,  Kent,  Hom.  Phys.,  vol.  7,  p.  375  ;  Chronic  catarrh  of
nose,  Ockford,  Times  Eet.,  1877,  p.  73 ;  Eruption  on  face,  Attomyr,  A.  H.  Z,
vol.  4,  p.  13;  Toothache,  Liedbeck,  Hygea,  vol.  6,  p.  4;  Gastric  disturbance
McGeorge,  Hah.  Mo.,  vol.  12,  p.  268 ;  Diarrhoea,  Bell,  Hah.  Mo.,  vol.  4,  p.  399
Ockford,  Raue's  Eec,  1875,  p.  146,  from  H.  W.,  vol.  9,  p.  198  ;  Gurnsey,  Times
Eet.,  1876,  p.  22,  from  Bib.  Hom.,  vol.  8,  p.  30 ;  Bounds,  Times  Eet.,  1877,  p.  69
Martin,  Hom.  CI.,  vol.  4,  p.  43 ;  Morgan,  T.  H.  M.  S.  Pa.,  1880,  p.  232 ;  Diar-
rhcea  and  cough,  Swan,  MSS. ;  Chronic  diarrhoea,  Pirtle,  Times  Eet., 1876,  p.  92,  from
M.  I.,  vol.  3,  p.  70  ;  Cholera  infantum.  Smith,  Times  Eet.  1876,  p.  22 ;  Eaue's  Eec,
1872,  p.  143,  from  M.  I.,  vol.  9,  p.  7;  Constipation,  AXihev,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  1,  p.
818 ;  Gonorrhoea,  Bullard,  Hom.  Phys.,  vol.  7,  286 ;  Chronic  blennorrhcea  of  urethra  (2
cases).  Ilka,  Gross,  Archiv.,  vol.  15,  p.  183  ;  Condylomata  on  prepuce,  Attomyr,  Eiick.
Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  2,  p.  166  ;  Inguinal  hernia,  Goullon,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  1,  p.  792  ;
Hydrocele,  Goullon,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  2,  p.  215;  Amenorrhea  and  pediculi  cor-
poris, Simpson,  Hom.  Eec,  vol.  3,  p.  122;  Affection  of  breasts,  Hartmann,  A.  H.  Z.,
vol.  4,  p.  69 ;  Asthma  and  cough,  Hering,  MSS. ;  Dyspnoea  of  heart  disease,
Landesmann,  Eaue's  Eec,  1873,  p.  112,  from  A.  H.  Z.,  vol.  85,  p.  145;  Cough,
Kretschmar,  Euck.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  3,  p.  22;  Berridge,  Hom.  Phys.,  vol.  6,  p.  307;
Schiiler,  MSS. ;  Pain  in  chest,  Eberhard,  MSS. ;  Pneumonia,  Greenleaf,  Hah.  Mo.,
vol.  10,  p.  154 ;  Hydrothorax,  Lobethal,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  4,  p.  358 ;  Phthisis,
Emmerich,  Baertl,  Griessel,  Brenfleck,  Liedbeck,  Fielitz,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  3,  p,
390 ;  Affection  of  chest,  Eberhardt,  MSS. ;  Rheumatic  carditis.  Weld,  N.  A.  J.  H.,
vol.  24,  p.  190 ;  Boil  on  hand,  Schron,  A.  H.  Z.,  vol.  3,  P-  116 ;  Sensation  as
if  foot  were  pulled  inward,  Berridge,  Hom.  Phys.,  vol.  6,  p.  210  ;  Debility,  Bell,  Hah.
Mo.,  vol.  4,  398  ;  Sleeplessness,  Guernsey,  Hom.  Phys.,  vol.  7,  p.  62 ;  Morbid  sweats,
Miller  Hah.  Mo.,  vol.  10,  p.  164; Ussher,  Organon,  vol.  2,  p.  347  ; Night  siveats.


539  PSORINUM.

Bell,  Hah.  Mo.,  vol.  4,  p.  399;  Skin  diseases,  Hartmann,  Attomyr,  Sturm,  Dilz,
Schiller,  Tietze,  Gauwerky,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  4,  p.  254;  Affections  of  skin,  Korn-
doerfer,  Hah.  Mo.,  vol.  10,  p.  365  ;  Eczematous  eruption,  Griessel,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf.,
vol.  4,  p.  201 ;  Eczema,  Hawley,  Horn.  Phys.,  vol.  8,  p.  269;  Houghton,  MSS. ;
Impetigo,  Williamson,  MSS. ;  Dark  spots  on  body,  Schluter,  A.  H.  Z.,  vol.  6,  p.  221,
Psoriasis,  Preston,  A,  J.  H.  M.  M.,  vol.  3,  p.  104;  Itch,  Loheth,  Gross,  Alt-
miiller,  Attomyr,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  4,  p.  212.

^  Mind. Thoughts  vanish  after  overlifting.

Memory  weak,  cannot  remember ;  does  not  even  know  his
room.

Thoughts  which  he  cannot  get  rid  of  constantly  reappear
in  his  dreams.

Dull  all  forenoon,  disinclined  to  work.

Dull,  stupid,  foggy,  as  after  a  debauch,  on  awaking  in
night ;  dizziness,  he  falls  down.

As  if  stupid  in  1.  half  of  head,  morning.

Mental  labor  causes  :  fulness  in  head  ;  intense  headache ;
throbbing  in  brain ;  pain  in  1.  temple.

I  Very  disagreeable  tnood ;  impatient;  extremely  ill-
humored.

■  Irritable, peevish, passionate, noisy; nervous, easily

startled ;  restless,  hands  tremble.
I  '  Intolerably  self-willed,  annoys  those  about  him  ;  a  boy,
suffering  from  an  eruption.

■  She  is  very  irritable,  easily  angered; always  thinks  of

dying.
I  Vacillating,  fearful;  mania.

I  Anxiety,  with  oppression  of  chest.

I I  Anxious,  full  of  fear,  melancholic;  evil  forebodings.

I  Great  fear  of  death;  anxiety  about  heart  and  dyspnoea,

with  attacks  of  pain  in  chest.
I  I  Believes  the  stitches  in  heart  will  kill  him  if  they  do

not  cease.

■  Restlessness:  with  eruption,  in  a  child;  with  oppression

of  chest.

■  Sentimental;  full  of  spleen,  very  low-spirited.

■  Discouragement.

■  His  ideas  are  sad  and  joyless.

■  ■Very  depressed,  sad,  suicidal  thoughts.
I  I  Depressed  in  spirits  and  hopeless.

■  Melancholy,  sorrowful,  depairing.

■  Despairing  mood;  fears  he  will  fail  in  business.

I  I  Much  depressed  on  account  of  an  eruption  on  dorsum
of  hand  which  appeared  over  night.

■  Greatest  despondency,  making  his  own  life  and  those

about  him  intolerable ;  dry  cough ;  evening  fever.

■  Is  so  downhearted  she  could  commit  suicide,  then  is  full

of  phantasms.


PSORINUM.  540

■  Great  depression  of  mind  during  climaxis,  with  chronic

abdominal  disorders.

■  Hypochondriasis,  with  hemorrhage  from  rectum.

■  Religious  melancholy.

■  Despairs  of  recovery;  thinks  he  will  die;  hopeless;  espe-

cially after  typhus,  >  from  nosebleed.

I  I  Melancholy  after  suppressed  itch;  emaciated,  pale,
earthy  complexion,  weakness  of  limbs;  flushes  of  heat
and  palpitation  prevent  sleep ;  sleep  comes  towards
morning;  would  like  to  stay  in  bed  until  midday;
aversion  to  work,  indifference,  weeping  ;  seeks  solitude,
despairs  of  recovery ;  she  is  irritable  and  forgetful.

I  I  Feels  the  greatest  anguish  in  head,  with  a  whirling  be-
fore eyes  every  day,  from  5  a.m.  until  5  p.m.,  since  two
3^ears ;  walks  up  and  down  his  room  wringing  his  hands
and  moaning  continually,  "  Oh,  such  anguish  !  oh,  such
anguish!"  only  when  he  takes  his  meals  he  ceases
moaning;  appetite  is  good,

I  I  Has  been  nervous  about  nine  months;  was  obliged  to
abandon  all  business;  has  taken  much  quinine  and
other  drugs ;  a  very  disagreeable  feeling  about  head ;
mental  depression ;  thinks  he  will  not  recover;  has  lost
all  hope ;  cannot  apply  his  mind  to  business ;  confusion
of  senses,  he  cannot  reckon ;  attacks  of  numbness  of
leg  and  arms,  1.  side  <  ;  <  on  going  to  bed;  formica-
tion and  crawling,  with  pricking  and  smarting  on
scalp,  and  some  on  extremities ;  tongue  white.

■  ■Driven  to  despair  with  excessive  itching.
Every  moral  emotion  causes  trembling.
Severe  ailments  from  even  slight  emotions.

^  Sensorium.  ■Vertigo :  mornings ;  objects  seem  to  go  round
with  him ;  with  headache ;  eyes  feel  pressed  outward ;
with  confusion  and  drawing  in  forehead,  with  roaring
in  ears.

Great  dulness  of  head ;  he  fears  inflammation  of  brain ;
nosebleed  relieves.

Fulness  and  heaviness  in  head.
'  Inner  Head. Frontal  headache,  with sensation  of  weak-
ness in  forehead.

Pain  as  if  brain  had  not  room  enough  in  forehead,  when
rising  in  morning,  a  forcing  outward  ;  >  after  washing
and  eating.

Pressing  headache  in  small  spots  in  forehead  and  tem-
ples, <  1.  side ;  feels  intoxicated,  stupid.

Morning  headache,  with  pressing  in  forehead ;  stupefac-
tion, staggering ;  eyes  feel  sore.

Sensation  as  from  a  heavy  blow  received  on  forehead
awakens  him  ;  1  a.m.


541  PSORINUM.

I  I  Surging,  drawing  and  digging  in  forehead  with  vertigo.

I  I  Pain  begins  over  1.  eye  and  goes  to  r. ;  <  from  hour  to
hour,  then  diarrhoea  and  nausea,  finally  bloody  vom-
iting ;  dizziness,  obliges  her  to  lie  down  ;  blur,  and  blue
stars  before  eyes;  veins  of  temples  much  distended;
day  before  headache  inordinate  appetite ;  also  during
first  hours  of  pain ;  <  and  brought  on  by  change
of  weather,  so  that  even  in  middle  of  night  she  is
awakened  by  pain  and  always  knows  there  has  been  a
change;  soreness  of  stomach,  sensitive  to  touch  and
pressure  of  clothes;  catamenia  regular.  ^Chronic
cephalalgia.

I  Headache  preceded  by :  flickering  before  eyes  ;  dimness
of  sight  or  spots  ;  spectres;  objects  dancing  before  eyes,
black  spots  or  rings.

■  Headache  from  repelled  eruption.
Pressing  headache,  especially  unilateral.
Cramplike  contractive  headache.

Like  hammers  striking  head  from  within  outward;  all
through  head  as  from  a  hammer.

Fulness  of  head  during  mental  labor.

Fulness  in  vertex  as  if  brain  would  burst,  with  formi-
cation in  head,  followed  by  heavy  sleep.

Pain  in  back  of  head  as  if  sprained ;  pressure  in  r.  side  of
occiput  as  if  luxated.

Peculiar  pain  in  occiput,  as  if  a  piece  of  wood  were  lying
across  back  of  head,  from  r.  to  left.

I  lis  always  very  hungry  during  headaches.

I  I  Congestion  of  blood  to  head  immediately  after  dinner.

■  Great  congestion  of  brain,  relieved  by  nosebleed.
Congestion  to  head,  heat ;  awakened  at  night  stupefied ;

could  not  recollect ;  after  sitting  still  awhile  had  to  rise
to  collect  his  senses.

'  I  Congestion  to  head,  cheeks  and  nose  red  and  hot;  erup-
tion oh face reddens; great  anxiety  ever}'  afternoon
after  dinner. /^Fifth  month  of  pregnancy.
*  Outer  Head. iHair:  dry,  lustreless ;  tangles  easily;  glues
together ;  must  comb  it  continually.

I  1 A  man,  set.  28,  dark  complexion,  dark  brown  hair,  had
a  spot  on  1.  frontal  region,  commencing  at  edge  of  hair
and  extending  upward  three-fourths  of  an  inch ;  the
skin  covering  spot  was  many  shades  whiter  than  the
surrounding  skin,  and  the  lock  of  hair  growing  on  it
had  turned  perfectly  white ;  after  Psor.  hair  and  spot
became  of  natural  color.

I  I  Sensation  as  if  head  were  separated  from  body.

Averse  to  having  head  uncovered ;  wears  a  fur  cap  in
hot  weather.


PSORINUM.  542

Viscid  sweat  about  head.

Whole  head  burns.

Pustules,  boils  on  head,  mostly  scalp,  which  looks  dirty

and  emits  an  offensive  odor.
llMoist,  suppurating,  fetid,  also  dry  eruptions  on  scalp.
iScurfy  eruption  of  children ;  large  yellow  vesicles  around

and  between  scabs.

■  Profusely  suppurating  fetid  eruption  on  head;  rawness

and  soreness  behind  ears.

I  Large  humid  blotches  on  head,  with  scabby  eruptions  on
face.

I  Pustules  and  boils  on  head,  containing  large  quantities
of  pus;  severe  itching,  causing  child  to  scratch  vio-
lently so  that  blood  flows ;  formation  of  thick,  dirty
yellow  scabs,  which  when  removed  show  a  raw  surface
from  which  a  yellow  lymph  exudes,  which  makes  the
linen  stiff;  after  removal  new  scabs  form;  eruption
spreads  over  nape  of  neck,  scalp  and  most  of  forehead  ;
the  eruption  is  of  very  offensive  odor ;  such  large  quan-
tity of  lymph  is  exuded  that  head  seems  to  stick  to  pil-
low; child  very  restless,  scratches  head  violently,  and  if
prevented  becomes  irritable  and  screams ;  large  pustules
on  arms  and  body,  which  show  no  tendency  to  heal.

■  Eruption  on  head,  particularly  on  occiput,  completely

hiding scalp from  view  ; profuse  exudation,  soiling
pillow  at  night  and  causing  excoriation  of  skin  of  nape
of  neck  ;  offensive  smelling ;  innumerable  lice.
I  Humid,  scabby  itching;  offensive  smellmg  eruption  on
head,  full  of  lice ;  glandular  swellings.

I  Head  so  covered  with  eruptions  that  no  part  of  scalp  was

visible.

■  Eruption on head: with swelling of glands; with

urticaria.

I I  Tinea  capitis  et  faciei.
iCrusta  serpiginosa.

^  Sight  and  Eyes. Aversion  to  light.

I  I  Great  photophobia,  walks  with  eyes  bent  upon  ground  ;
scurfy  eruption  on  face.

■  Photophobia:  when  walking  in  open  air;  with  inflam-

mation of  lids.

■  Fiery  sparks  before  eyes.

■  Objects  seem  to  tremble  for  a  few  moments  and  get  dark,

■  Confusedness  before  eyes  after  anxiety.

■  Vision  blurred; black spots before eyes; flickering;

dancing  about  of  objects.

■  Darkness  before  eyes  and  ringing  in  ears.

■  Amaurosis,  with  scabby  eruption  on  occiput  and  ears.

I  I  Serous  choroiditis ;  some  ciliary  congestion  and  great


543  PSORINUM.

haziness  of  vitreous,  so  that  optic  nerve  was  only  dis-
cerned with  great  difficulty  and  then  was  found  decid-
edly hypera^inic,  as  was  the  whole  fundus;  headache,
-  especially  in  morning;  constant  profuse  sweating  of
palms  of  hands.
I  I  Lids  spasmodically  closed;  intense  photophobia  and
profuse  flow  of  hot  tears ;  much  pustular  eruption  on
face ;  large  brown  scab  on  r.  eye,  from  beneath  which
pus  pours  forth  abundantly  when  touched ;  bowels  cos-
tive; appetite  poor  and  only  for  dainties.  ^Pustular
keratitis.

■  Recurrent  pustular  inflammation  of  cornea  and  conjunc-

tiva ;  chronic  form ;  scrofulous  basis.
Pterygium.
Eyes  feel  tired  in  evening.

■  Lachrymation.
Stitches  in  eyes.

Soreness  of  eyes  and  burning,  must  close  them  frequently.

Heat  and  redness  of  eyes  with  pressing  pains.

Burning,  pressing  pains  in  eyes.

I  Heat,  redness  and  pressure  in  eyes;  tendency  to  catar-
rhal inflammation;  lids  slightly  agglutinated  during
morning.

I  Inflammation  of  eyes  with  burning.

Eyes  water, inflamed ;  hurt  so  she  can  scarcely  open  them;
pains  over  eyebrows,  down  nose,  also  back  of  head  ;
complained  mostly  of  head.

Right  eye  inflamed,  pressure  as  from  foreign  body  when
lids  are  closed.

■  Ophthalmia,  with  pressing  pains,  as  if  sand  were  in  eyes.
I  I  Right  eye  red,  internally  and  externally ;  vesicles  on

cornea  ;  eruption  on  head.

■  Acute  ciliary  blepharitis;  internal  surface  of  lid  chiefly

aflected ; photophobia ; strumous  diathesis,  with un-
healthy, offensive  discharges.

■  Ciliary  blepharitis  r.  to  1.,  <  morning  and  during  day;

chronic  cases  ;  subject  to  exacerbations.

■  Scrofulous  inflammation  of  eyes;  ulceration  of  cornea.

■  Rheumatic,  chronic  and  blepharophthalmia.

■  Eyes  become  gummy.

■  Inflammation  of  lids,  internal  surface  much  congested;

great  photophobia,  cannot  open  eyes,  lies  on  face.

■  Eyelids:  swollen;  inflamed;  bloated;  child rubs  eyes;

.  puffy ;  greatly  swollen,  closely  pressed  together ;  thick-
ened ;  tendency  to  styes  ;  itching,  especially  in  canthi ;
herpetic  eruption;  scrofulous  inflammation,  covered
with  thick  crusts,  whole  body  covered  with  branlike
tetter.


PSORINUM.  544

^Hearing  and  Ears. iSinging,  cracking,  humming,  buzzing

and  ringing  in  ears  with  hardness  of  hearing.
Sensation  as  if  he  heard  with  ears  not  his  own.
Severe  pain  in  ear,  confined  him  to  bed  for  four  days;  ear

swollen  ;  thought  pain  would  drive  him  crazy.
I  Discharge  of  reddish  earwax  or  fetid  pus.
llOtorrhoea  :  with  headache;  thin,  ichorous  and  horribly

offensive,  like rotten meat ; very offensive,  purulent

(watery,  stinking  diarrhoea) ;  brown,  offensive,  from  1.

ear, for almost four years ; chronic cases following

scarlet  fever.
I  Ulceration  of  membrana  tympani.
I  Itching  in  ears;  child  can  hardly  be  kept  from  picking

or  boring  in  meatus.

■  Meatus  externus  scabby.

■  External  ears  raw,  red,  oozing,  scabby;  sore pain be-

hind ears.

I  Soreness  of  whole  external  ear,  with  abundant  yellow,
offensive-smelling  discharge;  severe  itching  <  in  even-
ing and  lasting  till  midnight,  preventing  sleep  and
nearly  driving  him  crazy ;  loss  of  appetite ;  great
despondency.

I  Herpes  from  temples  over  ears  to  cheeks;  at  times  throws

off  innumerable  scales;  at  others  shows  painful  rha-
gades  with  yellow  discharge,  forming  scurfs ;  fetid  hu-
mor; itching  intolerable.
'  I  Right  ear  a  mass  of  crusts  and  pus,  the  crusts  extended
behind  auricle  to  occiput  upward  upon  parietal  bone
nearly  to  vertex,  forward  to  r.  ear  and  over  cheek;
upon  edge  of  region  involved  small  vesicles  filled  with
clear  fluid,  which  became  yellow,  then  crusted,  and  pus
flowed  from  beneath  crusts.

I I  Humid  soreness  behind  ear.

I  iScurfs  on  ears,  and  humid  scurfs  behind  ear.

;rScabby  eczema  behind  r.  ear  came  out,  curing  child's  old

dry  deafness.
iPustules:  on  and  behind  concha;  behind  1.  ear.
''  Smell  and  Nose. Loss  of  smell ;  with  coryza.
Smell  of  blood.

Soreness  of  nose ;  nose  sensitive  when  inhaling  air.
Boring, stinging in r. nostril, followed by excessive

sneezing.
Burning  followed  by  thin  nasal  discharge,  which  relieves.
I  I  Dry  coryza  with  stoppage  of  nose.
I  I  Septum narium inflamed, with white, suppurating

pustules.
Tough  mucus  in  nose ;  feels  like  a  plug  there;  it  nauseates

him ;  >  when  stooping.


545  PSORINUM.

Catarrh,  with  cough  and  expectoration  of  yellow-green
mucus.

I  1  Bloody,  purulent  discharge  from  nose.

I  I  Chronic  catarrh;  dropping  from  posterior  nares,  so  as
to  awaken  him  at  night;  hawking  quantities  of  lumpy
mucus  gave  temporary  relief  from  feeling  of  fulness ;
mucus  in  nose  would  dry  like  white  of  egg,  needed  to
be  forcibly  removed.

1  I  Pain  in  liver,  <  from  sneezing.

I  Acne  rosacea.
®  Upper  Face. Face  :  pale,  yellow,  sickly ;  broad  blue  rings
around eyes ; bluish appearance ;  burning heat and
redness;  swollen,  with  eruption.

1  I  Painful  tension  and  pressure  in  ,r.  zygoma,  towards  ear.

Cheek  bones  pain  as  if  ulcerated.

I  I  Pain  as  if  lame  in  condyle  of  jaw.

I  I  Sweat  efface  with  general  heat.

I  Much  roughness  of  skin  of  face;  eruption  on  forehead
between  eyes ;  stools  very  offensive.  ^Eczema.  ^Scrof-
ulous ophthalmia.

I  Scabby  face;  especially  cheeks  from  ears;  lips  and  eye-
lids swollen,  sore  about  eyes.

iCrusta  lactea  on  face  and  scalp,  especially  over  either
ear  and  cheek,  exfoliating  numerous  scabs,  or  it  cracks
and  discharges  a  yellow,  fetid  humor.

i  I  Moist  scab  behind  ears  with  dry  tetter  on  back  of  head,
on  both  cheeks  extending  upward  to  eyes  and  down-
ward to  corners  of  mouth,  reddish,  very  closely  packed,
millet-seedlike,  itching,  dry  pimples,  with  frequent  loose
stools  ;  a  child  one  and  half  years  old.

I  I  An  offensive-smelling,  crusty  eruption  extending  over
whole  face  for  three  months,  had  completely  closed  eyes.

I  I  Eruption  on  face  of  a  child ;  whole  face  covered  with  a
crust,  lips  and  eyelids  swollen,  aversion  to  light,  large
moisteniDg  spots  on  head  and  behind  ears.

I  Humid  eruptions  on  face;  whole  face  covered  with  hu-
mid scurfs  or  crusts,  with  swelling  of  lips  and  eyelids
and  humid  soreness  behind  ears.

Pimples  on  forehead.

Red,  small  pimples  on  face,  especially  on  nose,  chin  and
middle  of  cheeks.

■  Closely  packed,  itching  pimples  on  both  cheeks  from  eyes

to  corners  of  mouth.
1  Ulcers  in  face.

■  Coppery  eruption  on  face.
•  Tinea  faciei.

^  Lower  Face. iLips:  painful;  swollen,  particularly  upper;
VOL.  VIII. — 35.


PSORINUM.  546

dry  ;  burning ;  brown  and  black,  dry  ;  ulcerated  ;  swol-
len and  covered  with  scurfs.

■  Corners  of  mouth  sore,  often  ulcerated;  sycotic  condy-

lomata.
Soreness  of  jaw,  r.  side,  around  ear;  could  not  open  wide

enough  to  admit  fingers.
Submaxillary  and  lingual  glands  swollen,  sore  to  touch  ;

at  same  time  suppurating  pustules  on  same  place.
^"  Teeth  and  Gums. Stitching in teeth from one  side  to

other,  radiating to head,  with burning in r.  cheek,

which  is  swollen.
Sensation  of  soreness  of  teeth.
Stinging  in  teeth  (while  eating).
I  I  Looseness  of  teeth ;  they  feel  so  loose,  fears  they  may

fall  out,  <  from  touch,  especially  front  teeth.

■  Toothache  : <  at  night  and  from  cold ;  >  from  warmth.
I  Gums:  ulcerated:  bleeding.

^'  Taste  and  Tongue. iLoss  of  taste  with  coryza.

I  Taste:  bitter,  goes  off  when  eating  or  drinking;  foul,
much  mucus  in  mouth ;  >  in  fresh  air ;  bitter  with
yellow-coated  tongue ;  fiat,  sticky,  dinner  tastes  oily.

■  Tongue:  dry;  tip  feels  burnt  as  far  as  middle,  he  has

hardly  any  taste ;  tip  very  dry,  as  if  burnt,  painful ;
white;  yellow ;  thickly  coated  with  whitish-yellow  slime;
ulcerated.
'^  Inner  Mouth.  Adhesion  of  tough  mucus  to  posterior  sur-
face of  soft  palate,  necessitating  hawking.
Tough  mucus  in  mouth  of  a  foul,  nauseous  taste,  teeth
stick  togethe]"  as  if  glued.

■  Dryness  of  mouth  ;  burning.

Tickling,  burning ;  mouth  inflamed,  sore,  <  from  warm

food;  not  annoyed  by  cold  food.
Blisters  inside  lower  lips  ;  burning  jDainful.

■  Ulcers  in  mouth.

13  Throat. ■Accumulation  of  mucus  in  throat  and  mouth.

■  Tough  mucus  in  throat,  hawking. ^Typhoid.

■  ■Sensation  of  a  plug  or  lump  in  throat  impeding  hawking.

■  Dryness  in  throat  with  thirstlessness.

■  Dryness;  scraping  sensation  in  throat.
I  I  Throat  burns,  feels  scalded.

1  I  Tension  and  swollen  feeling  in  throat.

■  Difficult  swallowing,  throat  feels  swollen.
Pain  when  swallowing  saliva.

I  I  Cutting  tearing  pain  in  throat  on  swallowing.

I  I  Steam  arising  from  fat  causes  immediate  constriction  of

throat  and  chest.
Severe  angina  ;  on  r.  side  an  ulcer,  with  a  sore  pain  deep

inside  and  burning  in  fauces.


547  PSORINUM.

Tonsillitis ;  submaxillary  glands  swollen ;  fetid  otorrhoea.

Ulcerated  sore  throat.

Ulcers  on  r.  side,  with  deep-seated  pains  and  burning  in
fauces.
"  Appetite,  Thirst.  Desires,  Aversions,  i  Good  appetite,
with  daily  attacks  of  anxiety,  easily  satisfied ;  great
hunger,  even  after  a  hearty  meal ;  canine  hunger  pre-
ceding attacks  (diarrhoea).

I  Diminished  appetite :  after  typhus  ;  but  great  thirst ;
during  convalescence.

I  I  Thirst:  during  dinner;  with  dryness  of  throat;  espe-
cially for  beer,  mouth  feels  so  dry.

Desire  for  acids.

Loathing  of  pork.
'®  Eating  and  Drinking, i  i  While  eating,  ceases  complaining.

I  i  Immediately  after  dinner,  congestion  of  blood  to  head.

I  I  Pain  in  chest  extending  to  shoulder,  <  after  cold
drinks.

■  Drinking  causes  cough.

^^  Hiccough,  Belching,  Nausea  and  Vomiting.  ■  Eruc-
tations :  sour,  rancid ;  tasting  and  smelling  like  rotten
eggs ;  room  is  filled  wdth  an  offensive  odor.

I  I  Waterbrash  when  lying  down,  >  on  getting  up.

iNausea:  with  poor  appetite;  in  morning;  with  backache,
after  suppressed  itch ;  morning  with  pain  in  small  of
back  ;  all  day,  with  vomiting.

Vomituritio,  followed  by  vomiting,  first  of  blood,  then  of
sour,  slim}^  fluid.

Constant  nausea  during  day,  with  inclination  to  vomit ;  a
kind  of  vomiting  of  sweet  mucus  every  morning  at  ten
and  in  evening.

Vomiting  of  sour  mucus  in  morning  before  eating.
^^  Scrobiculum and Stomach. Stitching  pain  in  pit  of
stomach.

I  I  Weakness  of  stomach.

I  I  Frequent  oppression  of  stomach,  especially  after  eating.

Cramps  in  stomach.

■  Dyspepsia;  eructations,  flatus  and  stools  like  spoiled  eggs.
I  I  Gastric  bilious  affections.

^^Hypochondria, l  i Deep-seated  stitching,  pressing  pain  in
region  of  liver,  <  from  external  pressure  and  lying  on  r.
side  ;  pain  hinders  sneezing,  laughing,  yawning,  cough-
ing, deep  inspiration  and  walking.
Stinging,  sharp  pain  in  region  of  liver  and  spleen.

■  Chronic  hepatitis.

Stitches  in  spleen,  >  when  standing ;  <  when  moving,
and  continuing  when  again  at  rest.

■  Chronic  indurations  of  spleen.


PSORINUM.  548

'^Abdomen, l  Bloated  abdomen.

I  I  Flatulency  with  disorders  of  liver.

■  Constant  feeling  of  emptiness  and  looseness  in  abdomen;

sensation  as  if  intestines  were  hanging  down.
I  Pains  in  abdomen  after  eating;  flatulency  and  tendency

to  diarrhoea ;  >  when  flatus  passes.
Pain  in  abdomen  while  riding.
Cutting  pains  in  intestines.

I  I  Colic  :  removed  by  eating ;  >  passing  fetid  flatus.
Painful  bearing  down,  with  painful  burning  micturition.
Stinging,  sharp  pains  in  inguinal  glands.
Pain  through  r.  groin  when  walking.
Lumps  in  r.  groin,  preventing  stooping.

■  Inguinal  hernia;  hernial  sac  infiltrated.

■  Chronic  abdominal  affections.

■  Abdominal  affections  during  climaxis,  with  a  high  de-

gree of  ill-humor.
^"^  Stool  and  Rectum. Emission  of hot,  fetid,  sulphurous
flatus ;  smelling  like  rotten  eggs.
Griping  and  desire  for  stool  while  riding.

■  Diarrhoea,  preceded  by  colic.

■  Frequent  thin  stool,  with  eruption  on  head.
Green  bilious  diarrhoea,  mixed  with  mucus.

■  Stool:  dark  brown, very  fluid  and  foul-smelling;  having

the  smell  of  rotten  eggs ;  mostly  in  children  in  their
first  or  second  summer;  green  mucus, or  bloody  mucus;
smells  like  carrion,  <  at  night ;  frequent,  liquid ;  in-
voluntary ;  nearly  painless.

llSemiliquid,  brownish,  indelible,  insuff'erably  nasty;
passed  during  sleep,  at  1  and  4  a.m.,  with  undigested
food. ^Infantile  diarrhoea.

I  I  Horribly  offensive,  nearly  painless,  almost  involun-
tary, dark  and  watery  stool ;  only  at  night  and  most
towards  morning.

I  I  Involuntary  stool  during  sleep.

I  I  Boy,  set.  4  months,  whitish  bad-smelling  diarrhoea;
constantly  crying,  with  drawing  up  of  knees  as  if  in
pain ;  rattling  cough,  cries  all  night ;  kcts  as  if  he  had
earache  in  1.  ear,  from  which  was  a  slight  discharge ;
seldom  urinates;  after  second  dose,  sixteen  hours  after
first,  broke  out  all  over  his  head  and  face,  with  a  small
pimply  eruption,  a  vesicle  at  the  apex  of  each  pimple,
which  exuded  lymph  which  dried  in  a  thick  brown
scab,  which  gradually  fell  off"  in  a  day  or  two,  and  in
two  weeks  left  the  skin  perfectly  clean.

■  Diarrhoea:  after  severe  acute  disease ;  at  night;  early  in

morning;  when  rising  in  morning;  in  childbed;  when
weather  changes  (general  condition).
Before  stool :  griping  pains  about  navel.


549  PSORINUM.

iCases  which  do  not  respond  promptly  to  the  indicated
remedy,  the  children  having  dirt}^  yellow,  greasy  skin,
with  a  partially  developed  eruption  on  forehead  and
chest,  with  constant  fretting  and  worrying.

iLienteria.

I  Chronic  diarrhoea  ;  offensive  stools.

,  I  Cholera  infantum;  stools  dark  brown,  watery,  of  an  in-
tolerably offensive  odor;  liquid,  mucous  or  bloody  and
excessively  fetid.

I  Cholera  infantum  in  Summer;  nervous  and  restless  at
night,  awake  at  night  as  if  frightened,  or  cry  out  during
sleep ;  then,  two  or  three  nights  afterwards,  they  begin
with  diarrhoea;  stools  are  profuse  and  watery,  dark
brown  or  even  black  in  color,  very  offensive,  almost  pu-
trid in  odor,  <  at  night.

■  Cholera.

I  Soft  stool:  passed  w^th  difficulty;  from  weakness.

■  Obstinate  constipation:  with  coryza  and  obstruction  of

nose ;  pain  in  small  of  back  ;  blood  from  rectum;  due  to
torpor  of  rectum ;  lasting  three  or  four  days,  due  to  in-
activity of  rectum ;  stool  on  third  or  fourth  day  was  ac-
companied by  severe  pains  which  induced  patient  to
withhold  effort  as  much  as  possible.
I  I  Sensitive  hemorrhoidal  pain  in  rectum.

■  Unpleasant  burning  in  rectum.
Soreness  in  rectum  and  anus  while  riding.

1  I  Hemorrhage  from  rectum;  in  old  women  large  quanti-
ties of  blood  discharged  at  once,  with  constipation  and
hypochondriasis.
Burning  hemorrhoidal  tumors.
^^  Urinary Organs, i  i  Involuntary urine,  cannot  hold  it ;
vesical  paresis. ^Typhus.

■  Enuresis:  wets  bed  at  night;  again  during  full  moon ;

obstinate  cases.
I  I  Scanty  urination  nearly  every  half  hour,  with  burning
in  urethra  and  in  condylomata.

■  Urine: dark  brown,  with  reddish  sediment; frequent,

scanty  ;  burning  and  cutting  in  urethra ;  thick  whitish  ;
turbid;  red  deposit;  cuticle  forms  on  surface;  profuse.
^^  Male Sexual Organs. Excessive,  uncontrollable sexual
instinct.

■  Aversion  to  coition;  impotence;  want  of  emission  during

coitus.

■  Absence  of  erections ;  parts  flabby,  torpid.
Prostatic  fluid  discharged  before  urinating.
Drawing  pains  in  testicles  and  spermatic  cords.
Inflamed  ulcer  on  glans,  with  swelling  and  heaviness  of

testicles.
I  I  After suppressed  gonorrhoea ; rheumatism,  lameness;


PSORINUM.  550

conjunctivitis,  with  granulations;  intense  photophobia;
pain  darting  around,  through  head ;  other  eye  sensitive
to  light.

I  Chronic  painless  discharge  from  urethra,  leaving  yellow
stain  upon  linen.

I  I  Gleet  of  twelve  years  duration.

I  I  Seven  large,  moist,  itching,  occasionally  burning  condy-
lomata on  prepuce;  every  night  nocturnal  enuresis;
during  day  must  urinate  nearly  every  half  hour;
urination  scanty  and  accompanied  by  burning  in
urethra  and  condylomata;  lips  ulcerated,  particularly
at  corners  of  mouth  ;  in  several  localities,  but  particu-
larly in  popliteal  spaces,  dry,  herpetic  eruption,  not
itching.

I  I  Sycotic  excrescence  on  edges  of  prepuce,  with  itching
and  burning.

I  I  Boy,  set.  7,  suffering  since  birth;  r.-sided  inguinal
hernia,  about  three  inches  of  intestine  descending  to
testicle  through  widely  opened  inguinal  canal;  upon
applying  a  bandage  severe  inflammation  of  tunica  vag-
inalis occurred,  which  yielded  to  Pulsat.,  but  returned
every  time  bandage  was  applied ;  child  gradually  grew
miserable  and  thin  and  lost  all  appetite;  fever  set  in,
and  a  large  amount  of  water  collected  in  tunica  vagi-
nalis ;  as  the  case  improved  a  painful,  burning,  itching
excoriation  with  acrid  discharge  appeared  upon  inner
surface  of  prepuce  and  upon  corona  glandis.

I  Hydrocele.

I  I  Hydrocele,  caused  by  repeated  inflammation,  in  conse-
quence of  pressure  from  a  truss.
^^  Female  Sexual  Organs, i  '  Left  ovary  indurated  after  a
violent  knock ;  followed  by  itching  eruption  on  body
and  face.

I  I  Knotty  lump  above  r.  groin  ;  even  a  bandage  hurts.

Pinching  in  pubic  region  in  women.

Cutting  in  1.  loin ;  cannot  walk  without  assistance.

I  1  Metrorrhagia.

Menses  delayed  and  scanty.

I  Amenorrhoea:  in  psoric  subjects  when  tetter  is  covered  by
thick  scurfs  ;  with  phthisis.

I  I  D3'Smenorrhoea  near  climaxis.

I  I  Menstrual  disorders  during  climaxis.

I  I  Leucorrhoea,  large  lumps,  unbearable  in  odor ;  violent
pains  in  sacrum  and  r.  loin ;  great  debility.

■  Ulcers  of  the  labia.
^*  Parturition. Pregnancy. Lactation. i  During  preg-
nancy :  congestions ;  foetus  moves  too  violently ;  abdo-
men tympanitic ;  nausea;  vomiting;  obstinate  cases.


551  PSORINUM.

I  I  Mammge  swollen,  painful ;  redness  of  nipples,  burning
around  them.

1  I  Pimples  itching  violently,  about  nipples ;  oozing  a  fluid.
(^Second  month  of  pregnancy.

I  I  Mammary  cancer.
^^  Voice  and  Larynx. Trachea  and  Bronchia. •  Hoarse-
ness ;  when  talking,  phlegm  sticks  in  larynx.

■  Talking  is  very  fatiguing.
1  I  Voice  weak,  trembling.

I  Suffocating  and  crawling  sensation  in  larynx,  producing
a  paroxysmal,  dry,  hacking  cough.

Tickling,  throat  as  if  narrowing,  must  cough  to  relieve  it.

I  I  For  eleven  years  hay  fever,  coming  on  about  20th  of
August.
^•^Respiration, l  Short  breath  or  want  of  breath.

I  I  Convalescents  go  out  for  a  walk,  instead  of  being  invig-
orated return  home  in  order  to  get  breath  or  to  lie  down
so  they  can  breathe  more  easily,  feel  <  instead  of  >
from  being  in  open  air.

I  Chest  expands  with  great  diSiculty ;  cannot  get  breath.

I  Anxious  dyspnoea,  with  palpitation  and  pain  in  cardiac
region.

■  Dyspnoea:  <  when  sitting  up  to  write,  >  when  lying

down,  congestion  to  head  after  dinner,  great  despond-
ency ;  <  the  nearer  arms  are  brought  to  body.

1  Asthma,  as  if  he  would  die  ;  precursor  of  hydrothorax.

Stitches  from  behind  forward,  in  chest  and  back,  when
breathing.
"  Cough.  1  Cough  :  from  tickling  in  larynx ;  dry,  hard,  caused
by  tickling  in  trachea  ;  in  evening  with  pains  in  chest
and  throat,  passing  off  when  she  is  quiet ;  produced  by
talking;  with  sensation  of  weakness  in  chest;  dry,  with
sensation  of  heaviness  on  chest;  dry,  with  soreness
under  sternum ;  with  stitches  in  chest ;  dry,  with  con-
stricting pain  in  chest;  <  mornings  when  awaking
and  evenings  on  lying  down  ;  coughs  a  long  time  before
expectorating ;  periodic  attacks ;  chronic,  spasmodic ;  of
twenty -five  years  duration.

1  I  Severe,  dry  cough  with  oppression  of  chest  and  pain  as
if  everything  in  chest  were  raw  and  scratched  ;  fever  in
evening ;  great  depression  of  spirits,  making  life  bur-
densome to  him.
I  I  Cough,  causing  tearing  from  centre  of  chest  to  throat,
all  on  r.  side;  cough  <  at  night;  urine  escapes  when
coughing.

TcAn  old,  dull  cough,  palpitation  and  a  fixed  pain  in  chest
disappear,  the  entire  feeling  is  better,  only  the  lower
white  of  eye  turns  red  and  ulcers  form  on  it,  eye  waters,
without  pain,  with  photophobia,  >  in  fresh  air.


PSORINUM.  552

I  1  Dry  cough,  pain  in  chest  for  last  three  months,  a  con-
stricting pressure  at  fourth  and  fifth  ribs  near  sternum,
excessive  irritability  and  ill-humor.

I  I  Cough  with  expectoration  ;  asthma,  thinks  he  will  die.

I  Cough  with  expectoration  of  green  mucus,  nearly  like
matter;  especially  in  morning  when  waking  and  in
evening  when  lying  down,  with  nausea;  it  sticks  firml}"
and  he  can  only  expectorate  with  difficulty.

I  I  Cough  with  salty-tasting,  green  and  yellow  expectora-
tion ;  oppression  of  chest ;  gradual  loss  of  strength ;
after  suppressed  itch.

■  Expectoration:  of  blood  with  hot  sensation  in  chest;  yel-

lowish-green.

■  Chronic  blennorrhoea  of  lungs,  threatening  phthisis.

■  Drinking  causes  cough.

I  I  Cough  aggravates  pain  in  liver  and  pain  in  chest  ex-
tending to  shoulder.
^^  Inner  Chest  and  Lungs. Oppression  :  in  chest ;  anxious,
every  morning  ;  with  cough.

Pressure  on  chest.

Burning  pressing  pain  in  chest.

Pain  in  chest,  great  anxiety  by  spells.

I  [Constriction  of  chest  when  inhaling  steam  from  fat.

Excruciating  pains  in  chest.

Cutting  as  of  knives  in  chest.

Feels  as  if  everything  were  torn  in  chest.

Whole  chest  feels  sore.

At  times  bruised,  suppurative  pain  through  whole  chest,
extending  towards  r.  shoulder  and  becoming  fixed
there;  <  after  frequent  coughing;  after  cold  drinks.

I  I  Pain  in  chest,  as  if  raw,  as  from  subcutaneous  ulcer-
ation.

Ulcerative  pain  in  chest  under  sternum.

I  I  Stitches  :  in  sternum,  with  backache;  from  behind  for-
ward in  chest  and  back  when  breathing ;  in  r.  side  of
chest  when  breathing ;  in  chest  (1.  side).

Sharp  pain,  r.  side,  opposite  tenth  rib.

I  I  Fixed  pain. in  r.  side  of  chest.

Pains  in  r.  side  of  chest  <  from  motion,  laughing,  cough-
ing, with  sweat.

I  I  Chest  pains  from  coughing.

I  I  Pains  in  chest  grow  more  severe  two  or  three  times  a
day,  begin  with  chilliness  and  trembling,  followed  by
heat  one  hour  in  duration ;  great  anxiety  of  heart  and
mind  with  fear  of  death,  dyspnoea  and  restlessness;  at-
tacks pass  off"  with  sour,  clammy  sweat  and  chilliness;
sweat  however  occurs  every  night  independent  of  attack.

I  I  Hot  sensation  in  chest.


553  PSORINUM.

I  I  Tedious  recovery  in  pneumonia.

I  I  Dull  pressure  in  r.  side  of  chest,  extending  thence  over
whole  chest,  <  bending  forward  in  writing,  not  by  mo-
tion or  deep  inspiration  ;  dry  cough  with  expectoration
of  small  lumps  of  mucus;  speaking  affects  him  very
much  ;  great  prostration  after  preaching,  so  that  he
must  rest  a  long  time  to  recuperate ;  voice  is  not  husky,
but  it  requires  all  his  strength  to  get  through  with  his
work;  chest  narrow,  shoulders  projecting. ^Phthisis.

I  I  Pain  in  chest  comes  by  fits  ;  great  anxiety ;  a  feeling  of
ulceration  under  sternum ;  chest  inflates  only  with
much  exertion ;  coughs  a  long  time  before  beginning
to  expectorate. ^Phthisis  pulmonalis.

■  Suppuration  of  lungs. /^Phthisis  pulmonalis.
I  Chronic  blennorrhoea  of  lungs.
iHydrothorax.

Chest  symptoms  >  when  lying  down.
^^  Heart,  Pulse  and  Circulation. 1 1  Stitches  in  cardiac  re-
gion, low  gurgling  extending  towards  heart,  for  a  mo-
ment breathing  is  impossible.

I  Pain  in  heart  >  when  lying  down,  thinks  the  stitches
will  kill  him  if  they  continue.

I  I  Gurgling  (gluckern)  in  region  of  heart,  particularly
noticeable  when  lying.

■  Palpitation:  with  anxiety;  mental  disquietude,  dislike

for work; from coughing; in those suffering from
hepatic  disorders.

■  Dyspnoea:  with  palpitation;  with  pain  in  cardiac  region.
Sounds  of  heart  indistinct;  bellows'  murmur  with first

sound.

I  1  Stenosis  of  1.  osteum  venosum ;  purring  in  region  of
apex ;  cyanotic  lips ;  dyspnoea  and  shortness  of  breath
when  walking  in  open  air ;  >  lying  down.

I  1  Rheumatic  pericarditis;  pulse  144;  skin  dry;  pain  in
head  and  limbs,  but  more  particularly  in  shoulder;
dyspnoea,  with  pain  in  region  of  heart;  effusion,  indis-
tinct heart  sounds;  bellows'  murmur  with  first  sound;
inability  to  lie  down.

■  Pericarditis  of  psoric  origin  ;  >  lying  quietly.

Pulse :  weak,  feeble  ;  irritable,  indicating return  of  ab-
scesses on  neck.
"  Neck  and  Back. Painful  stiffness  of  neck,  soreness  and
: tearing  on  bending  backward.
Glands  of  neck  swollen  on  both  sides,  painful  to  touch,  as

if  bruised;  pain  extends  to  head.
1  I  Herpetic  eruption  on  side  of  neck  extending  from  cheek.
I  I  Nape  of  neck excoriated by  discharge from  eczema
capitis.


PSORITnIUM.  554

Tearing  and  stitches  between  scapulae.

Weakness  and  pain  in  small  of  back ;  <  from  motion.

i  I  Constant  pressing  pain  in  small  of  back,  <  from  motion.

•  Excessive  backache.

When  breathing, frequent stitches from back towards

chest.
I  I  Backache  when  walking,  with  stitches  in  sternum.

■  Severe  backache,  as  if  bruised,  cannot  straighten  out.
I  I  Backache  with  constipation.

■  Backache  after  suppressed  eruption.

■  Spina  bifida.

^^  Upper  Limbs. Attacks  of  lameness  and  soreness  in  r.  shoul-
der, extending  to  hand.
Arms  as  if  paralyzed  and  lame  from  shoulders  to  hands;

■  Tearing  in  arms.

I  I  Tetter  on  arm  with  small  millet-like  eruption  exuding
a  yellow  fluid  ;  itches  intensely  in  heat.

■  Eruption  in  bends  of  elbows  and  around  wrists.

I  I  Itchlike  eruption  on  wrists  with  tearing  in  limbs.
I  I  Dry  tetter  on  wrists  with  rheumatism  in  limbs.

■  Trembling  of  hands.

I  I  Swelling  and  tension  of  backs  of  hands  and  of  fingers.

■  Malignant  boil ;  on  hand  a  cone-shaped  scab  the  size  of

a  quarter  of  a  dollar  on  a  base  as  large  again,  bluish-red
and  strongly  demarcated,  where  scab  extends  over  ring
there  is  another  moist,  white  ring  which  forms  a  new
scab  ;  much  tension  and  burning.

■  Pustules  on  hands,  near  finger-ends  suppurating.

I  I  Copper-colored  eruption  or  red  blisters  on  backs  of
hands.

■  Itching  between  fingers;  vesicles.

I  I  Herpes  in  palms  of  hands;  itching  tetter.

■Sweaty  palms,  especially  at  night.

Small  warts  size  of  pin's  head  on  1.  hand.

1  I  Nails  brittle.

Itch :  in  axillse  ;  bends  of  elbows  ;  arm  ;  forearm  ;  elbow

and  wrist ;  hands  ;  finger  joints.
^^  Lower  Limbs. Pain  in  hip  joints  as  if  dislocated,  <  when

walking,  with  weak  arms.
Sciatic  pains  ;  tension  down  to  knee  while  walking.
I  I  Ischias  :  sciatica.

■  Paralysis  of  legs  from  suppression  of  eruption  on  arms.
I  I  Purpura  on  inner  side  of  thigh.

I  I  Old  itch  eruption  on  inner  side  of  thigh  and  in  popli-
teal space.

I  I  Knees  give  way  under  him.

I  I  Dry  herpes,  especially  in  bend  of  knees.

I  I  Eruption  about  joints  makes  walking  difficult,  as  if  en-
cased in  armor.


555  PSORINUM.

I  Pain  in  knee  caused  by  a  fall  a  year  ago.

I  Chronic  gonitis.

Pains  in  legs,  especially  in  tibi^  and  soles  after  too  much
exercise  in  walking,  with  a  peculiar  restlessness  in  legs,
so  that  he  frequently  changes  position,  passing  off  after
rising,

I  Oozing  blisters  on  legs,  from  small  pustules,  increasing
in  size,  with  tearing  pains.

I  I  Vesicles  becoming  ulcers,  on  feet.

I  Ulcers:  on  legs  usually  about  tibise  and  ankles  or  other
joints ;  ulcers  are  indolent,  slow  to  heal ;  on  lower  legs
with  intolerable  itching  over  whole  body ;  on  feet.

I  I  Large  swelling  about  ankle.

I  I  For  four  or  five  weeks,  feeling  when  walking  as  if  1.  foot
were  pulled  around  inward  ;  <  for  last  two  weeks,  so
that  he  sometimes  looked  to  see  if  it  were  really  so.
^Locomotor  ataxia.

Feet  go  to  sleep.

Eruption  on  insteps  soon  becoming  thick,  dirty,  scaly,  sup-
purating; painful  and  itching  at  times,  keeping  him
awake.

Heat  and  itching  on  soles.

I  I  Corns  between  second  and  third  toes  of  1.  foot.

I  I  Gout  in  lower  extremities.
'*  Limbs  in  General. Weakness  in  all  the  joints  as  if  they
would  not  hold  together.

Trembling  of  hands  and  feet.

1  I  Hands  and  feet  feel  as  if  broken  early  in  morning  and
after  a  little  work.

■  Herpetic  and itching  eruption  especially  in  bends  of

joints,  in  bends  of  elbows  and  in  popliteal  spaces.
•Tearing  in  limbs ;  in  1.  knee  and  1.  axilla.
I  I  Chronic  rheumatism  in  limbs,  with  a  dry  eruption  on

wrists.

■  Arthritis:  rheumatism,  especially  in  chronic  forms.

I  I  For  many  weeks  gouty  pains,  etc.;  dry  cough;  constric-
tive pressure  and  cutting,  tearing  pain  at  sternum  near
fourth  and  fifth  ribs;  greatest  despondency  and  ill-
humor.

■  Heat  in  hands  and  feet.

I  I  Hands  moist,  with  cold,  clammy  sweat,  the  very  touch

of  which  was  unpleasant ;  profuse  sweating  of  feet;  feet

very  painful,  causing  shuffling  gait.
I  I  Caries ;  rachitis.
^'Rest. Position. Motion. Sitting aggravates dyspnoea

(asthma)  and  pain  in  heart ;  these  and  other  ailments

are  >  while  lying  down.
Many  ailments  are  <  or  come  on  when  riding  in  a  car-


PSORINUM.  556

riage,  and  when  exercising  in  open  air,  and  >  by  rest
and  in  room.

Rest:  stitches  in  spleen.

Lying  down :  waterbrash  ;  cough  < ;  chest  symptoms  > ;
pain  in  heart  >  ;  gurgling  in  region  of  heart ;  pericar-
ditis better.

Lies  in  same  position  in  morning  as  when  he  fell  asleep.

Lies  on  face :  inflammation  of  eyes.

Lying  on  r.  side:  pain  in  region  of  liver  <.

Must  lie  down:  dizziness;  to  breathe  more  easily.

Cannot  lie  down  :  rheumatic  pericarditis.

Cannot  straighten  out :  backache.
• Changes  position :  restlessness  in  legs.

Sitting  up  to  write:  dyspnoea  <.

The  nearer  arms  are  brought  to  body,  dyspnoea  <.

Bending  forward:  pressure  in  chest  <.

Bending  backward  :  painful  stiffness  of  neck.

Stooping  :  tough  mucus  in  nose;  lumps  in  groin  prevent.

Had  to  rise  at  night  to  collect  his  senses.

Getting  up  :  waterbrash  >.

Standing:  stitches  in  spleen  >.

Morning :  stitches  in  spleen  <  ;  pain  in  chest  < ;  does
not  <  pressure  in  chest;  pains  in  small  of  back  <.

Exertion  :  causes  perspiration ;  eczematous  eruption ;
urticaria.

Slightest  exercise :  profuse  perspiration.

Walking:  pain  in  region  of  liver  hinders;  pain  through
groin;  cannot  without  assistance;  cutting  in  1.  loin;
shortness  of  breath  in  open  air ;  backache ;  pain  in  hip
joints  <  ;  tension  to  knees;  difficult,  eruptions  above
joints,  as  if  1.  foot  were  pulled  around  inward;  profuse
sweat  with  debility.
^^  Nerves, l  Nervous,  restless,  easily  startled.

I  I  Subsultus  tendinum.

iMalaise:  feels  tired  out.

■  Constantly  tired  and  sleepy;  very  little  labor  exhausts
him  ;  exhausted  after  riding  in  a  wagon.

Looks  pale,  exhausted  and  thinner  than  usual.

I  I  Very  weak  and  miserable  after  suppressed  itch.

I  I  Loss  of  strength,  with  cough,  with  oppression  of  chest.

I  I  Trembling  and  chilliness,  with  attacks  of  pain  in  chest.

Stormy  weather  affects  him.

I  I  Debility :  independent  of  any  organic  disease ;  loss  of
appetite ;  tendency  to  perspiration  on  exertion  and  at
night;  after  acute  diseases;  after  protracted  diseases  or
loss  of  fluids;  after  typhus,  with  despair  of  recovery;
thinks  he  is  very  ill  when  he  is  not ;  appetite  will  not
return  ;  in  the  evil  consequences  of  suppressed  itch,  es-
pecially after  large  doses  of  sulphur.


557  PSORINUM.

■  Constantly  increasing  debility,  with  abdominal  affections.

I  I A  man,  set.  21,  was  obliged  to  run  until  nearly  ex-
hausted ;  although  strong  and  well  before,  he  now  be-
came weak,  perspiring  easily  and  had  severe  pain  in  r.
side,  <  by  coughing,  laughing,  motion.

Frequent attacks of epilepsy; religious melancholy
(improved).
^"^  Sleep. •  Sleepy  by  day;  sleepless  at  night,  from  intolerable
itching ;  dyspnoea ;  congestion  to  head.

iSleepless  after  12  p.m.,  from  congestion  to  head.

I  I  Child  apparently  well,  but  at  night  would  twist  and
turn  and  fret  from  bedtime  till  morning  and  next  day
be  as  lively  as  ever.

I  Sick  babies  will  not  sleep  at  night,  but  worr}^  and  fret
and  cry.

Dreams :  anxious ;  vivid,  continue  after  waking ;  of  rob-
bers, danger,  traveling,  etc.

On  waking :  cannot  get  rid  of  the  one  persistent  idea.

I  I  In  morning  lies  in  same  position  as  when  he  fell  asleep.
^^  Time. Aggravations  in  the  evening  and  before  midnight.

Morning:  1.  half  of  head  stupid;  vertigo;  when  rising,
forcing  outward  in  head ;  headache  <  ;  eyes  slightly
agglutinated ;  ciliary  blepharitis  <  ;  nausea  towards
stools ;  early,  diarrhoea ;  when  rising,  diarrhoea ;  cough
<  when  awaking ;  hands  and  feet,  as  if  broken.

Forenoon :  dull.

Day :  ciliary  blepharitis  worse ;  nausea  and  vomiting ;
sleepy.

Evening:  fever;  eyes  feel  tired;  itching  in  ear  <  ;  vom-
iting ;  cough  ;  chilliness  in  upper  arm  and  thighs,  as  if
he  should  lose  his  senses ;  heat,  with  delirium,  itching
and  heat  in  eyes.

Night:  feels  dull,  stupid ;  dropping  from  posterior  nares
awakens  him ;  toothache  <  ;  stools  <  ;  stools  only ;  di-

•  arrhoea ;  nervous,  restless ;  awakens  as  if  frightened ;
wets  bed  ;  cough  <  ;  sweaty  palms ;  perspiration  ;  sleep-
less ;  child  twists,  turns  and  frets ;  heat ;  terrible  itch-
ing of  whole  body ;  screaming.
^^  Temperature  and  Weather.  Great  sensitiveness  to  cold
air  or  change  of  weather;  wears  a  fur  cap,  overcoat  or
shawl,  even  in  hottest  summer  weather.

Aggravation  from  sudden  changes  of  weather.

Feels  a  restlessness  in  his  blood  days  before  and  during  a
thunderstorm.

Cough :  returns  every  Winter.

Air:  nose  sensitive  when  inhaling.

Open  air:  when  walking,  photophobia;  taste  >;  feels  <;
cough  >  ;  shortness  of  breath  ;  itching  >.


PSORINUM.  558

Averse  to  having  head  uncovered.

While  in  bed  :  itching  of  body.

Warmth:  toothache  >  ;  of  body  causes  itching;  intoler-
able itching.

Warm  food:  inflamed  mouth  <.

Summer :  cholera  infantum ;  dry  scaly  eruption  dis-
appeared.

Cold :  toothache  <  ;  drinks,  <  pain  in  chest ;  weather,
dry  scaly  eruption  returned.

Change  of  weather:  headache  caused  and  made  <;
diarrhoea.

Washing:  >  pressure  in  head.
*"  Fever, l Chilliness  in  evening  on  upper  arms  and  thighs,
with  thirst; drinking  causes  cough,  then heat and
cough,  with  ojDpression  of  chest ;  and  trembling,  with
attack  of  pain  in  chest.

I  Internal  shivering,  creeping  chills  and  icy-cold  feet.

I  Heat:  at  night  and  dryness  in  mouth;  in  afternoon  or
evening, feels  as  if  he  would  lose  his  senses,  with  thirst;
in  evening,  with  delirium,  great  thirst,  followed  by  pro-
fuse sweat;  when  riding  in  a  carriage;  sudden  over
whole  body,  with  trickling  perspiration  all  over  face.

■  Sweats  easily,  weak.

Sweat :  profuse ;  cold,  clammy  from  least  exertion  ;  pro-
fuse w^hen  taking  slightest  exercise ;  when  walking ;  at
night ;  on  face,  palms  of  hands  and  perineum  when
moving  about;  profuse  sour,  clammy,  with  faint  oppres-
sion of  chest  after  chill  and  heat ;  after  typhus ;  colli-
quative.

I  I  When  taking  a  walk  profuse  sweat  with  consequent
debility,  taking  cold  easily.

I  I  Profuse  sweating  relieves  all  the  complaints;  chronic
diseases.

I  Profuse  night  sweats  of  phthisis.

I  Want  of  perspiration;  dry  skin.

I  Typhus:  picks  bedclothes,  reaches  for  objects  in  air;
profound  debility.

I  I  After  ague  color  of  face  worse.
*^  Attacks,  Periodicity. Every  other  day  :  headache,  thirst,
cold.

Nearly  ever}^  half  hour  :  urination.

Two  or  three  times  a  day  :  pains  in  chest  grow  severe.

1  A.M. :  sensation  as  of  a  heavy  blow  on  forehead ;  diarrhoea.

Immediately  after  dinner:  congestion  of  blood  to  head.

Every  morning  at  ten :  vomiting  ;  oppression.

Every  afternoon  :  great  anxiety.

Every  day,  from  5  a.m.  until  5  p.m.  ;  anguish  in  head.

Every  night :  nocturnal  enuresis ;  sweat.


559  PSORINUM.

Day  before  headache  :  inordinate  appetite.

For  three  or  four  days  :  constipation.

During  full  moon  :  wets  bed.

For  four  or  five  weeks :  feeling  when  walking  as  if  1.  foot
were  pulled  around  inward.

Nine  months :  has  been  nervous.

For  four  years  :  discharge  from  ear.

For  eleven  years  on  20th  of  August:  hay  fever.

Twelve  years  duration :  gleet.

For  twenty-five  years :  cough.
*^  Locality  and  Direction.  Right :  pressure  in  side  of  occi-
put ;  large  brown  scab  on  eye ;  eye  inflamed  ;  ear  a
mass  of  crusts ;  eczema  behind  ear  cured  deafness ;
stinging  in  nostril ;  soreness  of  jaw ;  burning  in  cheek  ;
ulcer  on  side  of  throat ;  pain  through  groin  ;  lumps  in
groin  ;  inguinal  hernia  ;  knotty  lump  over  groin  ;  vio-
lent pain  in  loin  ;  tearing  in  side  from  cough;  pain  ex-
tending to  shoulder;  stitches  in  side  of  chest;  sharp
pain  opposite  tenth  rib ;  fixed  pain  in  side  of  chest ;  dull
pressure  in  chest ;  lameness  and  soreness  in  shoulder ;
small  vesicles  behind  ear.

Left :  half  of  head  stupid  ;  pains  in  temple ;  numbness  of
arm  and  leg ;  pressing  headache  <  ;  pain  over  eye ;
spots  on  frontal  region  much  whiter  than  surrounding
skin ;  discharge  from  ear ;  pustules  behind  ear ;  ovary
indurated  after  violent  knock  ;  cutting  in  loin  ;  stitches
in  chest ;  stenosis  of  osteum  venosum  ;  small  warts  on
hand  ;  as  if  foot  were  pulled  inward  ;  corns  between
toes  ;  tearing  in  knee  ;  in  axillas.

From  r.  to  1. :  pain  in  occiput ;  ciliary  blepharitis.

From  1.  to  r. :  pain  in  eyes.

From  within  outward  :  as  of  hammers  striking  head.

From  behind  forward  :  stitches  in  chest.
"  Sensations.  As  if  stupid  in  1.  half  of  head ;  eyes  as  if
pressed  outward  ;  as  if  brain  had  not  room  enough  in
forehead ;  as  from  a  heavy  blow  on  forehead ;  as  if
brain  w^ould  protrude ;  back  of  head  as  if  sprained  ;  r.
side  of  occiput  as  if  luxated ;  as  if  piece  of  wood  were
lying  across  back  of  head ;  as  if  head  were  separated
from  body ;  as  of  a  foreign  body  under  eyelid ;  as  if
sand  were  in  eyes ;  as  if  he  heard  with  ears  not  his
own ;  cheek  bones  as  if  ulcerated  ;  condyle  of  jaw  as  if
lame ;  tongue  as  if  burnt ;  teeth  as  if  glued  together ;  as
of  a  plug  in  throat;  as  if  intestines  were  hanging  down;
as  if  frightened  ;  throat  as  if  narrowing;  asthma  as  if
he  would  die  ;  as  if  everything  in  chest  were  raw  and
scratched  ;  as  if  everything  w^ere  torn  in  chest ;  glands
of  neck  as  if  bruised ;  back as  if  bruised ;  arms  as  if


PSORINUM.  560

paralyzed ;  hip  joint  as  if  ulcerated ;  joints  as  if  encased
in  armor;  as  if  1.  foot  were  pulled  around  inward;  as

■  if  joints  would  not  hold  together  ;  hands  and  feet  as  if
broken  ;  as  if  he  would  lose  his  senses.

Pain  :  in  1.  temple;  in  chest ;  over  1.  eye  to  r. ;  in  back  of
head;  over  eyebrows;  down  nose;  in  liver;  in  cheek
bones;  in  condyle  of  jaw;  in  throat;  in  chest  extend-
ing to  shoulder;  in  small  of  back;  in  abdomen;  through
r.  groin  ;  in  rectum ;  in  cardiac  region  ;  in  chest  and
throat;  in  heart;  in  head  and  limbs;  in  hip  joint;  in
knee ;  in  legs.

Excruciating  pains :  in  chest.

Intense  pain  :  in  head.

Violent  pains :  in  sacrum  and  r.  loin.

Severe  pain:  in  ear  ;  in  limbs.

Sharp  pain :  r.  side  opposite  tenth  rib.

Anguish  :  in  head.

Cutting,  tearing  pain :  in  throat.

Cutting  pains  :  in  intestines  ;  in  urethra;  in  loin.

Tearing:  from  centre  of  chest  to  throat;  in  neck ;  between
scapulse ;  in  arms  ;  in  limbs  ;  in  legs  ;  in  1.  knee  and  1.
axillae.

Cutting :  in  chest.

Stitches:  in  heart;  in  eyes;  in  teeth  ;  in  spleen;  in  chest
and  back  ;  in  sternum  ;  in  r.  side  of  chest ;  in  cardiac
region  ;  between  scapula? ;  from  back  towards  chest.

Stitching  pain  :  in  pit  of  stomach  ;  in  region  of  liver.

Throbbing  :  in  brain.

Fixed  pain  :  r.  side  of  chest.

Griping  pains  :  about  navel.

Cramps  :  in  stomach.

Cramplike  contractive  pain  :  in  head.  .  ,

Ulcerative  pain  :  in  chest  under  sternum.

Suppurative  pain  :  through  whole  chest.

Pinching  pain  : in  pubic  region.

Constricting  pain  :  in  chest.

Boring  :  in  r.  nostril.

Digging :  in  forehead.

Drawing  :  in  forehead ;  in  testicles  and  spermatic  cords.

Pressing  pain  :  in  small  spots  in  forehead  and  temples ;
in  eyes ;  in  region  of  liver ;  in  small  of  back.

Sore  pain  :  behind  ears.

Burning  pressing  pain  :  in  chest.

Stinging:  in  r.  nostril;  in  teeth;  in  region  of  liver  and
spleen ;  in  inguinal  glands ;  in  many  parts  of  skin.

Burning :  of  eyes  ;  in  nose ;  of  face ;  in  r.  cheek  ;  of  blis-
ters on  inside  of  lower  lip  ;  of  throat;  in  fauces;  in  rec-


561  PSORINUM.

turn;  in  urethra;  in  condylomata;  of  excrescences  on
prepuce ;  around  nipples.

Smarting  :  on  scalp.

Soreness  :  of  eyes  ;  of  stomach  ;  behind  ears  ;  of  external
ear;  of  nose;  of  jaw;  of  teeth;  of  mouth;  in  rectum
and  anus  ;  under  sternum;  of  whole  chest;  in  neck;  in
r.  shoulder.

Rawness:  behind  ears.

Hot  sensation  :  in  chest.

Pricking :  on  scalp.

Heat :  of  eyes ;  of  hands  and  feet.

Rheumatism  :  in  limbs.

Constricting  pressure :  at  fourth  and  fifth  ribs  near  ster-
num ;  at  sternum.

Constriction  :  of  throat  and  chest.

Pressure  :  in  r.  side  of  occiput;  in  r.  zygoma ;  on  chest ;  in
r.  side  of  chest.

Heaviness  :  of  head  ;  of  testicles ;  in  chest.

Tension  :  in  r.  zygoma ;  in  throat ;  of  hands  and  of  fin-
gers ;  of  boil  on  hand  ;  down  to  knees.

Fulness:  in  head ;  in  vertex.

Oppression  :  of  chest ;  of  stomach.

Singing :  in  forehead.

Tired  feeling  :  in  eyes.

Dulness  :  of  head.

Painful  stiffness :  of  neck.

Lameness :  of  shoulders  and  arms.

Numbness :  of  legs  and  arms.

Weakness :  in  forehead ;  of  stomach ;  in  chest ;  in  small
of  back  ;  in  joints.

Trembling  :  of  hands ;  of  feet.

Restlessness  :  in  legs.

Dryness  :  of  tongue  ;  of  mouth  ;  of  throat.

Tickling:  in  throat;  in  larynx;  in  trachea.

Crawling:  on  scalp;  in  larynx.

Formication  :  on  scalp ;  in  head.

Itching :  eruption  on  head  ;  in  canthi ;  in  ears ;  of  exter-
nal ear;  of  pimples  of  cheeks ;  of  excrescence  on  prepuce ;
of  pimples  around  nipples  ;  of  tetter  on  arm  ;  of  body
in  bed ;  between  fingers ;  tetter  on  palms ;  intolerable
over  whole  body;  of  eruption  on  instep;  on  soles;  inner
angles  of  eyes ;  of  condylomata ;  of  herpes.
^*  Tissues. Thinner  than  usual,  pale,  exhausted.

Great  emaciation,  in  children  ;  they  are  pale,  delicate,
sickly,  will  not  sleep  day  or  night,  but  worry,  fret  and
cry,  or  child  is  good,  plays  all  day,  is  restless,  trouble-
some, screaming  all  night.

■  Glandular  swellings  with  eruption  on  head.

VOL.  VIII. — 36.


PSORINUM.  562

I  All  excretions,  diarrhoea,  leucorrhoea,  menstrual  flow  and
perspiration,  have  a  carrion-like  odor.

■  Body  has  a  filthy  smell  even  after  a  bath.

■  Whole  body  painful,  easily  sprains  and  hurts  himself.
RkeunJatism  and  arthritis.

Deeply  penetrating  ichorous  ulcers.
iCaries;  rachitis;  dropsy.
*^  Touch. Passive  Motion. Injuries. Touch : stomach

sensitive  ;  lingual  glands  sore ;  teeth  <  ;  vesicles  sore.
Pressure: stomach  sensitive;  pain  in  region  of  liver  <  ;

from  a  truss ;  inflammation.
Bartdage  :  caused  inflammation  of  tunica  vaginalis.
Rubbing:  causes  small  vesicles  to  arise.
Riding :  pain  in  abdomen  ;  griping  and  desire  for  stool ;

soreness  in  rectum  and  anus ;  in  a  wagon,  exhausted  ;

sweat.
Violent  knock :  1.  ovary  indurated.
Fall :  caused  pain  in  knee.
*^  Skin. I  Abnormal  tendency  to  receive  skin  diseases.

I  I  Large  suppurating  pustules  on  hands,  particularly  near

ends  of  fingers ;  had  eight  or  ten  within  a  few  weeks,

itching  of  body  particularly  while  in  bed.
iSkin  inactive;  want  of  perspiration.

■  Itching:  when  body  becomes warm;  and stinging  in

many  parts  at  same  time;  intolerable,  <  in  bed  and
from  warmth ;  scratches  until  it  bleeds ;  over  whole
body,  w^hen  rubbed,  small  papules  and  vesicles  arise  ;
between  fingers;  in  knee  joints;  in  bends  of  knees;
terrible,  of  whole  body  at  night,  preventing  sleep.

I  I A  girl,  set.  18,  sallow  complexion  but  cleanly  appear-
ance ;  constant  irritation  of  different  parts  of  body,  day
and  night,  compelling  her  to  scratch;  numerous  pedi-
culi  corporis  cling  to  neck,  back  and  shoulders;  men-
struation had  never  occurred  ;  anxious,  depressed  and
tearful ;  inner  angles  of  eyes  filled  with  gummy  mucus,
heat  and  itching  in  them, in  evening;  corners  of  mouth
sore.

1  iSkin  has  a  dirty,  dingy  look,  as  if  patient  never  washed  ;
in  some  places  looks  coarse  as  if  bathed  in  oil;  seba-
ceous glands  secrete  in  excess.

■  Skin dirty,  greasy -looking,  with yellow  blotches here

and  there.

I  1  Severe  pains  in  limbs  and  dark,  burning  spots,  so  that
skin  of  whole  body  except  face  resembled  that  of  a
mulatto ;  itch  had  been  suppressed  five  times.

I  I  Scaly  condition  of  skin  of  whole  body;  skin  has  a  dirty,
tawny  color,  although  carefully  kept ;  much  itching
causing  desire  to  scratch;  which  gave  but  temporary


563  PSORINUM.

relief;  some  months  back  instep  showed  signs  of  erup-
tion, which  soon  became  a  thick,  dirty-looking  mass  of
scales  and  pus,  painful  and  violently  itching;  at  times
pain  kept  her  awake  at  night ;  diseasB  of  at  least  a
dozen  years  standing.

Rash  on  back  and  neck.

Urticaria  with  eruptions  on  head.

Fine,  red  eruption,  forming  small  white  scales.

Dry  and  scaly  eruption,  with  little  pointed  vesicles  around
reddened  edges,  disappearing  during  Summer,  but  reap-
pearing when  cold  weather  comes  on.

Eczematous  eruption  after  any  severe  exertion,  accompa-
nied by  sensation  of  tension  and  swelling  on  fingers,
dorsum  of  hands,  nape  of  neck  and  towards  ears;
slightly  elevated  blotches  upon  an  erysipelatous,  swol-
len, hard  base;  eruption  of  numberless  small  vesicles;
face  in  several  places  affected ;  eyelids  swollen ;  intol-
erable itching,  disturbing  sleep  ;  fingers  so  swollen  that
they  cannot  be  flexed  ;  after  several  days  desquamation
in  very  fine  scales  occurred.

1 1  Eczema  behind  ears,  on  scalp  and  in  bends  of  elbows
and  armpits,  accompanied  by  abscesses  affecting  bones;
nothing  relieved,  but  the  eruption  disappeared,  to  reap-
pear again,  years  after,  on  wrists;  there  was  then  a
patch  on  each  wrist  as  large  as  a  half  dollar,  with  in-
tense itching,  preventing  sleep,  with  constant  desire  to
scratch.

Eruption  of  small  vesicles,  quickly  filling  with  a  yellow
lymph,  painful,  like  sores,  to  touch,  drying  up  after  a
few  days,  on  forehead  and  several  places  on  face,  also
behind  r.  ear.

iMoist  herpes  after  suppressed  scabies;  intolerable  itch-
ing when  getting  warm ;  <  before  midnight  and  in
open  air.

■  Herpes:  with  itching  and  burning;  with  biting-itching,

with  meal-du&t,  humid.

■  Herpetic  eruptions.

On  face,  hand  and  back,  also  on  legs,  an  itchlike  eruption
appears  and  the  eyes  agglutinate  so  that  they  cannot  be
opened.

■  ■Itch:  dry  on  arms  and chest,  most  severe  on finger

joints;  followed  by  boils;  inveterate  cases  with  symp-
toms of  tuberculosis ;  in  recent  cases,  with  eruptions  in
bends  of  elbows  and  around  wrists ;  repeated  outbreak-
of  single  pustules  after  main  eruption  seems  all  gone.

■  After  suppressed  itch:  urticaria  in  attacks,  after  every

exertion  ;  tuberculosis  ;  single  pustules  often  appear.

■  Consequences  of  itch  suppressed  by  sulphur  ointment.


PSORINUM.  664

I  I  Psoriasis ;  psoriasis  syphilitica.

Copper-colored  pustules,  no  itching.

Pustules  on  forehead,  chin  and  chest.

1  I  Pustules  or  boils  on  head,  particularly  on  scalp ;  scalp
had  a  dirty  look  and  emitted  an  offensive  odor ;  fine,
red  eruption,  forming  small  white  scales ;  pustules  on
hands.

I  I  Burning  itching  pustule  after  vaccination.

lEruptions  bleed  easily  and  constantly  tend  to  suppurate.

I  Crusty  eruptions  all  over  body.

■  Crusta  serpiginosa.
I  Pemphigus.

'  I  Retrocession  of  eruption. ^Measles.

■  Ulcers :  deep,  penetrating  ichorous;  on  face  and  legs;

old,  with  fetid  pus  ;  violently  itching  ;  scrofulous,  with
swelling  of  bones.

I  'Moist,  itching  condylomata.

I I  Suppressed  eruptions.

*^  Stages  of  Life,  Constitution.  Scrofulous;  nervous,  rest-
less, easily  startled.

Psoric  constitutions;  especially  when  other  remedies  fail
to  permanently  improve ;  lack  of  reaction  after  severe
diseases.

Complaints  of  psoric  origin ;  patient  emits  a  disgreeable
odor.

Pale,  sickly,  delicate  children.

Peevish,  unhealthy-looking  children,  who  have  a  disa-
greeable odor  about  them.

Dirty  people,  in  whom  the  body  has  a  filthy  smell.

Child,  ast.  3  months;  pustules  and  boils  on  head.

Boy,  set.  4  months ;  diarrhoea,  cough.

Child,  set.  6  months ;  eruption  on  face.

Girl,  set.  1  year,  suffering  six  months  ;  pustules  and  boils  on
head.

Child,  set.  18  months ;  eruption  on  head  and  face.

Child,  set.  3  years,  suffering  since  birth;  Psorin.  cured  after
failure  of  Sulphur,  Alumina,  Opium ;  constipation.

Girl,  set.  3  ;  eczema.

Child,  set.  4;  itch.

Boy,  set.  7,  suffering  since  birth ;  inguinal  hernia.

Child,  set.  8 ;  eruption  on  head.

Girl,  set.  8,  a  puny,  petted  and  slender  child,  spent  six
3^ears  in  a  darkened  room,  and  until  a  few  months
since  has  been  under  allopathic  treatment;  pustular
keratitis.

Girl,  set.  11,  light  complexion,  full  face,  ruddy  cheeks,  ill
about  a  week,  four  years  ago  had  severe  rheumatic  at-
tack ;  rheumatic  carditis.


565  PSORINUM.

Boy,  £et.  13,  had  whooping  cough,  when  one  year  old,
since  then  suffering ;  otorrhoea.

Youth,  8et.  15,  suffering  two  years;  condylomata  on
prepuce.

Girl,  set.  18,  sallow  complexion,  of  cleanly  appearance,
suffering  three  and  a  half  years ;  amenorrhoea  and  ped-
iculi  corporis.

Girl,  set.  19,  suffering  nine  months ;  itch.

Girl,  set.  20,  when  nine  years  old  had  itch,  which  was  sup-
pressed, suffering  two  years  ;  eruption  on  head.

Farmer,  set.  20,  sanguine  temperament;  pneumonia.

Young  lady,  set.  21 ;  serous  choroiditis.

Man,  set.  21,  strong  and  well  until  one  day  he  was  com-
pelled to  run  after  a  horse  until  exhausted ;  debility
and  sweating.

Man,  set.  25 ;  necrosis  of  temporal  bone.

Woman,  set.  28,  after  suppressed  itch;  melancholy.

Man,  set.  28,  dark  complexion,  dark  brown  hair ;  affection
of  scalp.

Man,  set.  30;  religious  melancholy  and  epilepsy.

Man,  set.  30,  clergyman,  tall,  thin,  stooping  gait,  formerly
scrofulous,  two  years  ago  caught  cold,  since  then  suffer-
ing; phthisis.

Mrs.  B.,  set.  30 ;  pustules  on  hands.

Man,  set.  30,  suffering  from  progressive  locomotor  ataxy  ;
sensation  as  if  foot  were  pulled  inward.

Man,  set.  40,  robust,  choleric,  brunette,  suffering  three
years ;  eruption  on  ear.

Man,  set.  40,  several  years  ago  had  itch,  which  was  sup-
pressed by  lotions  of  Sulphur,  suffering  two  years ;  ecze-
matous  eruption.

Man,  set.  43,  spare  figure,  dark  complexion,  suffering  nine
months ;  hypochondriasis.

Mrs.  Dorsche,  set.  47,  blue  eyes,  light  complexion,  strong,
muscular,  mother  of  four  children,  suffering  twenty
years ;  headache.

Man,  set.  50,  has  been  deeply  engrossed  in  care  in  building
a  store;  debility.

Mrs.  — ,  set.  53,.  suffering  at  least  a  dozen  years ;  affection
of  skin.

Miss  C,  a  young  lady  of  culture,  after  recovering  from  a
a  mild  attack  of  typhoid  fever ;  debility.

Man, of strumous appearance, large lower lip, much
saliva  in  mouth,  bad  digestion ;  sweating  of  hands  and
feet.
*^  Relations. Antidoted  by:  Coffee.

Compatible: Carh.  veg.,  Cinchon.,  Sulphur.

Complementary : After  Lad.  ac,  Psorin.,  in  vomiting  of


PSOPJNUM— PTELEA  TRIFOLIATA.  566

pregnancy; after  Arnic.  in  effects  of  blow  on  ovary;
Sulphur  after  Psorin.  in  mammary  cancer.
Compare : Oarb.  veg.,  Oinchon.,  Phos.  ac.


PTELEA  TRIFOLIATA.


Hop  Tree; Wafer  Ash.  Rutacex.

An  indigenous  shrub,  from  six  to  eight  feet  high,  growing  west  of  the
Alleghanies.

The  tincture  is  prepared  from  the  fresh  bark.

Provings  by  Hale,  Trans.  Am.  Inst.  Horn.,  1868.  The  provers  were  Nichol,  Fish,
Train,  Burt,Cowles,Cowperthwait,  Lutes,  Pierce,  Marshall,  Parsons  and  Hayward;
fragmentary  proving  by  Williamson,  Trans.  Amer.  Inst.,  1870,  sec.  2,  p.  381.

Clinical  Authorities.  —  PUyriasis  versicolor,  Hale;  Erysipelas  (two  cases),
Miller,  Hale's  Monograph.

^  Mind. I  I  Marked  forgetfulness.

Memory  weak ; intellect slow ; by collecting  thoughts
could  recall  things  read  many  years  ago.

I  I  Dull  and  stupid  feeling.

Inability  to  concentrate  thoughts,  they  seem  to  be  chasing
each  other  through  the  brain.

Disinclined  to  mental  work,  with  languor rather  than
inability.

I  I  Malaise  of  body  and  mind.

I  I  Aversion  to  society ;  a  wish  to  be  alone.

1  I  Fretful  and  irritable  at  very  slight  causes.

I  I  Annoyed  and  irritated  by  ordinary  conversation  ;  intol-
erance of  noise.

Nervous,  irritable;  starts  at  the  sound  of  a  voice.

I  General  depression  of  spirits.

Sad,  irritable;  hurried  manner,  but  dazed  and  confused,
with  muddled  feeling  in  head.
^  Sensorium. Dazed,  confused,  as  in  a  bilious  attack;  raises
a  bitter  fluid.

I  I  Feels  sick  and  faint.

Vertigo,  <  turning  head  or  from  sudden  motions ;  with


567  PTELEA  TRIFOLTATA.

dulness and  languor,  rumbling  about  navel; nausea,
griping,  aching  in  stomach  ;  <  when  writing,  rising  or
in  a  warm  room.
II  Giddiness of  head, and when walking reeling  as  if
intoxicated.
^  Inner  Head. Dull  aching  in  forehead,  with  depression  and
sour  stomach  ;  racking  pain,  with  hurried  manner  and
red  face.
Pain  from  forehead  to  root  of  nose; sensation  of  nail

driven  into  brain  ;  <  in  morning  on  rising.
Racking  frontal  headache,  with  heat  of  face  and  head,

and  great  desire  to  hurry  his  business.
I  I  Frontal headache all day ; pressing from within

outward.
I  I  Headache  over  eyes.
Throbbing  over  one  eye.
Darting  pains  over  1.  eye,  deep  into  head.
Hot  flushes  and  pain  in  top  of  head  and  eyes.
Pain  in  1.  temple  running  across  to  right.
1  I  Sudden,  pressive  pains  in  temples,  <  in  right._
I  I  Piercing  pain  shooting  through  temples,  with  increased

headache  and  nausea.
I  I  Frontal  and  occipital  headache.

Headache  in  occipital  region,  passing  to  frontal  over  eyes.
Pressive  feeling  at  base  of  brain,  compared  to  the  bruised

headache  of  Ipec.
I  I  Shooting  pains  in  head,  before  rising  in  morning.
I  [Constant  dull  headache,  <  by  going  up-stairs  and  by

walking.
I  1  Headache  while  reading.

Headaches  <  from  mental  exertion,  moving  eyes,  stoop-
ing, walking,  noise,  warmth  and  on  waking.
Headache  in  bones  of  skull.
■  Bilious  headache.
'  Sight  and  Eyes. 1 1  Heavy  feeling  over  eyes.

I  I  Pain  in  eyes.
''Hearing and  Ears, l  l  Sensitiveness to  sounds ;_  impres-
sion of  sounds  last  heard  continues  for  a  long  time.
Intolerance  of  loud  talking.
Ringing  in  ears;  slight  giddiness.
^  Smell and Nose. Breath seems so hot that it burns
nostrils.
Nasal  passages  sore.

Sneezing.  .

^  Upper Face. Expression  sickly, pale,  especially around
eyes ;  color  yellow,  skin  dry  and  hard.
1  1  Burning  heat  of  cheeks  and  face.
Heat  of  head  and  face,  especially  of  forehead.


PTELEA  TRIFOLIATA.  568

I  1  Yellowish  face,  with  dry  hot  skin.

Sickly  paleness  of  face,  especially  around  eyes.

I  I  Pressure  at  root  of  nose.
^^  Teeth  and  Gums. Teeth  feel  as  if  elongated.

Carious  teeth  sensitive ;  gums  sore.
"  Taste  and  Tongue. Taste :  sour,  mornings ;  bitter.

I  I  Frequent  bitter  taste  in  mouth,  with  dryness.

Food  seems  tasteless.

I  I  Fine  prickling  sensation  over  whole  surface  of  tongue.

I  I  Coating  :  white  fur,  tongue  swollen ;  yellow,  feels  rough ;
papillae  red  and  prominent;  brown,  yellow,  dry.
^^  Inner  Mouth. Dry,  with  bitter  taste.

I  I  Great  dryness  of  mouth  and  throat.

Saliva  profuse ;  drooling  at  night.
'^  Throat. Hawking  of  mucus  from  pharynx ;  lips  and  tongue
dry.

I  I  Roughness  of  fauces  with  nausea.

I  I  Soreness  and  inflammation  of  fauces;  soft  palate  and

uvula  (<  r.  side).
"  Appetite,  Thirst. Desires,  Aversions, i  i  Voracious  ap-
petite; food  had  not  its  natural  taste;  pain  in  epigas-
trium following  every  meal ;  despondency.

■  Appetite  poor,  with  muddled  feeling  or  pains  in  liver.
Thirst;  or  no  thirst,  with  bitter  taste.

Craves  acid  food.

■  Repugnance  to  animal  food  and  rich  puddings,  of  which

he  is  ordinarily  fond ;  to  butter  and  fatty  foods ;  even  a
small  quantity  aggravated  epigastric  pain.
^^  Eating  and  Drinking. Worse  from cheese,  meat,  pud-
ding, etc.

■  Hepatic  and  gastric  symptoms  <  after  meals.

*^  Hiccough,  Belching,  Nausea  and  Vomiting.  1 1  Eructa-
tations  :  sour,  bitter :  tasting  of  rotten  eggs.
Nausea:  rising  of  a  bitter  fluid,  confused  head,  dizzy,
sweat  on  forehead,  bilious ;  with  distress  in  umbilical
region  and  headache ;  with  heat  of  skin  and  profuse
perspiration  on  forehead  after  dinner;  and  vomiting,
without  relief  from  frontal  headache.

II  Persistent  nausea  and  vomiting,  with  giddiness  and
unsteadiness  of  legs ;  >  by  walking.

'^  Scrobiculum  and  Stomach.  ■  Pressure  as  of  a  stone  at  pit
of  stomach,  >  by  a  light  meal.

■Sense  of  weight  and  fulness  even  after  a  moderate  meal.

Distress  in  epigastrium  and  r.  hypochondrium,  with  draw-
ing pains  in  fingers  and  ankles.

I  I  Stomach  feels  empty  after  eating  ;  a  sensation  of  gone-
ness.

I  1  Empty  feeling ;  faint  feeling  in  stomach ;  sour  risings.

I  I  Pain  in  epigastrium,  with  nausea.


569  PTELEA  TRIFOLIATA.

I  Burning  distress;  oppression;  vomiting;  chronic  gastric
catarrh.

Griping,  cutting  pains  in  epigastrium ;  pressure  causes
nausea.

I  I  Griping  in  epigastric  region,  with  dryness  of  mouth,
yellow-coated  tongue  and  a  bitter  taste.

I  I  Griping,  contractive  pain  in  stomach,  moving  down-
ward.

iGastralgia.

■  Obstinate  chronic  dyspepsia.

I  Chronic  gastritis;  a  constant  sensation  of  corrosion,  heat
and  burning  in  stomach,  with  vomiting  of  ingesta,  con-
stipation and  afternoon  fever.

■  Gastric  symptoms  <  after  meals.

'^  Hypochondria.  '  '  Constant  feeling  of  weight  in  both  hypo-
chondria when  walking ;  a  dragging  pain.

I  I  Occasional  pains  in  r.  hypochondrium,  shooting  down-
ward.

I  I  Sharp  pains  in  r.  hypochondrium.

I  I  Awoke  with  hard,  aching  distress  in  base  of  liver,

■  Weight,  aching  distress in  hepatic  region;  dull pain,

heaviness,  >  lying  on  r.  side ;  turning  to  1.  causes  a

dragging  sensation.
Sharp,  cutting  pain  in  liver,  <  from  deep  inspiration.
I  I  Liver  swollen  and  tender  to  a  light  touch.

■  Liver  swollen,  sore  on  pressure,  causing  dull  and  aching

pain  or  stitches ;  griping  in  bowels ;  clothes  feel too
tight.
I  IJaundice with hypersemia  of  liver; stools generally
brown  or  grey,  with  considerable  odor.

■  Congestion  of  liver;  "chronic  hepatitis.

Hepatic  and  gastric  symptoms,  <  towards  morning,  awak-
ing at  4  o'clock.

I  I  Severe  aching  distress  in  1.  hypochondrium.

I  I  Tenderness  of  splenic  region,  with  soreness  on  pressure.
'^  Abdomen. Bloating  with  weight  on  stomach.

I  I  Abdomen  swollen  and  tender  with  severe  splenic  pain.

I  I  Rumbling  in  bowels  and  bloating,  with  tenderness  on
pressure.

Feeling  of  warmth  in  abdomen.

Aching  distress  in  bowels,  back  and  legs.

I  I  Aching  of  bowels  while  walking.

Pulsation  in  umbilical  region,  synchronous  with  heart.

I  I  Soreness  of  abdomen,  <  by  motion,  >  supporting  it
with  hands.

1  I  Pain  and  soreness  across  abdomen  and  in  epigastrium,
<  by  standing  and  sitting  erect  and  >  by  stooping
forward.


PTELEA  TRIFOLIATA.  570

1  I  Severe  abdominal  pain  near  umbilicus ;  <  on  motion.

I  I  Stitches  in  abdomen,  >  by  pressure.

I  I  Frequent  drawing  pains  in  epigastric  and  umbilical
regions.

Griping,  colicky  pains;  heavy  aching  ;  throbbing;  about
navel.

I  I  Colic,  bitter  taste;  rumbling  and  discharge  of  wind
from  bowels.

I  I  Pain  in  hypogastrium  and  bladder,  with  headache,  in-
termitting during  paroxysms.

I  I  Retraction  of  abdomen  with  pulsations  isochronous  with
heart.

I  I  Chronic  intestinal  catarrh.

1  I  Ascites,  probably  from  hepatic  disease.
^^  Stool  and  Rectum, l  l Sudden  and  unexpected  urging  to
go  to  stool,  which  was  diarrhoeic  with  slight  tenesmus,
accompanied  by  sweat  on  forehead  and  head.

■  Diarrhoea:  bilious,  thin,  fecal,  dark,  offensive,  even  cadav-
erous in  smell,  or  sulphuric;  with  tenesmus;  preceded
by  griping  pains  and  rumbling ;  smarting  in  anus.

I  I  Chronic  diarrhoea.

I  I  Constipation  with  a  continual  urging  in  rectum.

I  I  Constant  ineffectual  urging  to  stool;  a  continual  press-
ure in  rectum.

Continual  urging,  with  pressure  on  rectum ;  with  scanty
or  absent  stool ;  rectal  torpidity.

I  I  Constant  urging  to  stool,  with  rumbling  in  bowels,
all  day.

I  I  Small,  hard  stool,  with  much  straining.

I  I  Hard  and  difficult  stool,  followed  by  smarting  in  anus.

Constipation  ;  passes  balls  of  haTdened  feces.

I  Constipation  and  diarrhoea  alternately.

^'Urinary Organs. lUrine: high-colored; yellowish-red;

of  a  deep  color  and  scalding  slightly  on  its  passage;

clear  or  deep  reddish-yellow, scanty ;  deposit  of  epithelia,

phosphates  and  urates ;  scalding,  scanty  and  difficult

of  retention ; smarting in urethra during and  after

micturition.

^^  Male  Sexual  Organs. Sexual  desire  increased  ;  later  lost.

^^  Voice  and  Larynx. Trachea  and  Bronchia. 1 1  Great

hoarseness;  inability  to  speak  aloud.
^®  Respiration. L  l  Uneasiness  and  difficulty  in  breathing.

Feeling  of  pressure  on  lungs  and  of  suffocation  when  lying
on  back ;  on  awaking  1  a.m.

1  I  Pressure  on  lungs  with  a  sense  of  suffocation.

I  I  Dyspnoea;  walls  of  chest  feel  as  if  they  would  sink  in.
I  I  Asthma  (from  retrocession  of  erysipelas).
^^  Inner  Chest  and  Lungs. Uneasiness,  difficulty  in  breath-


571  PTELEA  TRIFOLIATA.

ing,  dull pain in r. infraclavicular region,  hacking

cough;  dulness on percussion  (following  gastric and

hepatic  symptoms).
1  I  Phthisis  with  purulent  expectoration  of  sweetish  taste

and  hectic  form  (probably  a  bronchial  catarrh).
I  I  Hectic  fever  with  purulent  expectoration  of  a  sweetish

taste,  but  without  any  other  chest  symptoms  than  a

slight  mucous  rhonchus  and  sibilant  rale.
^^  Heart,  Pulse  and  Circulation. 1 1  Cramplike  pain  in  cardiac

region.
I  I  Pulse  accelerated  and  intermittent.
^^  Neck  and  Back, l  '  Drawing  aching  pains  in  1.  scapula  and

shoulder  joint.
I  iDull  backache  every  morning  on  waking.
I  I  Hard  aching  distress  in  dorsal  region,  for  an  hour  in

morning.
Aching  distress  in  back,  bowels  and  legs;  rumbling  of

wind.
I  I  Severe  aching  in  lumbar  and  sacral  regions
Lumbar  pains ;  severe  aching  distress,  soreness  on  awaking,

or  awakes  him  at  4  a.m.
^^  Upper  Limbs, ll  Hands  and  fingers  cold,  numb,  clumsy

and  stiff.
I  I A  tickling  prickling  in  fingers  and  hands,  like  that  pro-
duced by  electricity.
1  I A  prickling numbness  in hands,  which  seem  larger

than  usual  and  clumsy.
^^  Lower  Limbs, n  Great weariness of lower limbs with

trembling.
I  I  Aching  pains  in  back  part  of  thighs.
I  I  Constant  aching  distress  in  calves  of  legs.
^'  Limbs  in  General. Aching  bruised  feeling  in  muscles

and  joints  on  waking  ;  drawing  pains  in  gastro-hepatic

region.
I  I  Hands  and  feet  hot,  dry  and  feverish.
^'E-est. Position. Motion. Supporting abdomen with

hands:  soreness  >.
Sitting  erect:  soreness  of  abdomen  >.
Lying  on  back  :  suffocation.
Lying  on  r.  side:  liver  >.
Standing:  soreness  of  abdomen  <.
Stooping:  headache  <  ;  soreness  of  abdomen  >,
Motion : sudden,  causes  vertigo ; of  eyes,  headache  <  ;

soreness  of  abdomen  <  ;  abdominal  pains  <.
Rising:  vertigo  <.
Turning  head  :  vertigo  <•

Walking :  giddiness  <  ;  constant  dull  headache  <  ;  nau-
sea, vomiting  and  giddiness,  weight  in  both  hypochon-
dria; aching  of  bowels.


PTELEA  TPvIFOLIATA.  572

Going  up  stairs :  dull  headache  <.

Writing :  vertigo  <.
^^  Nerves. Restless,  uneasy  ;  malaise.

I  I  Great  languor  and  indifference  to  duties.

I  I  Loss  of  energy;  languor  and  depression  of  spirits.

Feeling  of  weaknesi3,  languid,  irritable ;  sick,  faint  sen-
sations, as  in  bilious  patients.

I  iVery  languid  and  faint,  with  flushed  face  and  feverish.

I  I  Aching  distress  in  all  the  joints,  with  great  languor.

I  I  Great  lassitude  and  weariness,  with  a  disposition  to
hurry  through  duties.

I  I  Extreme  weakness  of  limbs,  brain,  memory,  thought
and  will  as  if  from  a  powerful  and  all  pervading  disease.
^^  Sleep. Heavy  sleep.

Awoke  2  A.M.,  restless  ;  headache,  etc.

At  4  A.M.,  aroused  by  gastric  and  hepatic  symptoms.

I  I  Sleep  broken  and  restless  and  disturbed  by  frightful  or
annoying  dreams ;  awaking  in  a  profuse  perspiration.

I  I  Nightmare.

1  I  Languid  on  awaking  and  unrefreshed.
^^  Time. 1  a.m.  :  suffocation.

2  A.M. :  awoke  restless,  headache.

4  A.M. :  aroused  by  gastric  and  hepatic  symptoms.

Morning :  pain  from  forehead  to  root  of  nose  <  ;  before
rising  shooting  pains  in  head ;  hepatic  and  gastric  symp-
toms <,  awaking  at  4  a.m.

Afternoon :.  fever.

All  day  :  frontal  headache ;  urging  to  stool  and  rumbling
in  bowels ;  feverish  heat.

Night : drooling.
^'  Temperature  and  Weather. Wants  to  be  near  fire  :  chil-
liness.

Warmth:  headache  <  ;  spots  on  limbs  <.

Warm  room:  vertigo  <.

Generally > in open air  (except  lung);  < in warm
room.
^"  Fever. Chilliness:  shivering  ;  with  stool ;  wants  to  be  near
fire.

Dry,  general  heat ;  <  face  and  hands ;  irritable,  intolerant

of  noise.
I  I  Hot,  dry  feeling  on  body,  with  cold  feet.  .

Hot  flushes  and  slight  headache ;  feverish  hot  head,  dull

frontal  headache.
1  I  Feverish  heat,  lasting  all  day,  with  pains  in  limbs  and
nausea.

Sweat  profuse  on  awaking ;  on  forehead  during  stool  or

with  raising  of  a  bitter  fluid.
I  I  Tertian  ague,  with  profuse  vomiting  of  bilious  matter.


573  PTELEA  TRIFOLIATA.

I  Attacks  of  quartan  ague,  continuing  for  two  years,  re-
sisting many  remedies.
*^  Locality  and  Direction.  Right :  pressive  pain  in  temple  <  ;
soreness  of  uvula  <  ;  fauces  <  ;  distress  in  hypochon-
drium  ;  occasional  pains  in  hypocbondrium  ;  sharp  pains
in  hypocbondrium;  dull  pain  in  hepatic  region  >
lying  on  side;  pain  in  infraclavicular  region;  white
blisters  on  red  base  on  ear.

Left:  darting  pains  over  eye  ;  pain  in  temple;  turning  to
side  causes  a  dragging  sensation;  aching  distress  in
hypocbondrium  ;  pain  inl.  scapula  and  shoulder  joint.

From  wdthin  outward  :■  pressing  frontal  headache.
*^  Sensations. Reeling  as  if  intoxicated ;  as  of  a  nail  driven
into  brain  ;  teeth  as  if  elongated ;  as  of  a  stone  at  pit  of
stomach;  as  if  walls  of  chest  would  sink  in.

Pain:  from  forehead  to  root  of  nose;  in  top  of  head  and
eyes;  from  1.  temple  to  r. ;  in  eyes;  in  epigastrium;
In  liver ;  in  r.  hypocbondrium ;  in  hypogastrium  and
bladder.

Racking  pain  :  in  brain.

Severe  pain:  near  umbilicus.

Sharp  pains :  in  r.  hypocbondrium.

Cutting:  in  epigastrium;  in  liver.

Darting :  over  1.  eye,  deep  into  head.

Piercing :  through  temples.

Shooting:  in  head.

Stitches :  in  abdomen.

Pricking  pain  :  in  throat.

Prickling:  all  over  tongue;  in  fingers  and  hands.

Drawing :  in  epigastric  and  umbilical  region ;  in  gastro-
hepatic  region.

Dragging :  in  hypochondria.

Cramplike  pain  :  in  cardiac  region.

Griping:  in  epigastric  region ;  in  stomach;  in  bowels.

Burning:  in  stomach.

Smarting  :  in  anus ;  in  urethra.

Soreness  :  of  fauces  ;  in  epigastrium  ;  of  abdomen.

Tenderness :  of  splenic  region.

Dull  pain  in  head ;  in  hepatic  region  ;  in  liver ;  in  r.  infra-
clavicular region  ;  in  back.

Aching :  in  stomach  ;  in  forehead ;  in  frontal  and  occi-
pital regions  ;  in  hepatic  region ;  of  bowels;  about  navel;
in  lumbar  and  sacral  regions ;  in  back  part  of  thighs  ;
in  muscles  and  joints.

Drawing,  aching  pains  :  in  1.  scapula  and  shoulder  joint.

Aching  distress :  in  umbilical  region  ;  in  hepatic  region  ;
in  1.  hypocbondrium;  in  bowels,  back  and  legs;  in
dorsal  region;  in  calves;  in  all  joints.


PTELEA  TRIFOLIATA.  574

Pressive  pains  :  in  temples.

Pressure:  in  forehead;  at  base  of  brain;  at  root  of  nose;
at  pit  of  stomach  ;  in  rectum;  on  lungs.

Heavy  feeling  :  over  eyes.

Fulness :  in  stomach.

Weight:  in  stomach  ;  in  both  hypochondria.

Goneness:  in  stomach.

Empty  feeling:  in  stomach.

Faint  feeling:  in  stomach.

Throbbing:  over  one  eye;  about  navel.

Weariness :  of  lower  limbs

Heat:  efface  and  head;  of  skin;  in  stomach.

Itching :  all  over.

Roughness:  of  fauces.

Dryness :  in  mouth  ;  of  throat ;  of  lips.
"  Tissues.  Mucous  membranes  are  congested  and  irritated,
with  sense  of  roughness,  smarting  or  prickling;  causes
congestion  of  liver,  stomach  and  bow^els  and  secondarily
of  lungs  ;  is  indicated  briefly  when  there  are  irritability,
and  dull,  confused  frontal  headache ;  bitter  taste,  eruc-
tations like  rotten  eggs  or  bitter;  swollen  liver,  relief
from  lying  on  r.  side,  bilious  stools;  languor;  muscular
soreness.
^^  Skin. Itching  all  over  as  from  flea-bites.

^Vliite  blisters  on  a  red  base  on  r.  ear,  discharging  a  watery
fluid  ;  later  desquamation  or  pus  and  scabs  form  ;  boils.

Spots  on  limbs  red,  later  purple ;  <  when  warm  or  ex-
cited ;  annoying  itching;  on  disappearing  they  leave
3'ellowish  marks  like  bruises.

I  I A  peculiar  reddish,  clouded  appearance  of  entire  surface
of  skin,  lasting  two  days.

I  I  Erysipelas;  quinia  and  iron  had  been  used  in  large
doses  without  success,

I  I  Pityriasis  versicolor ;  eruption  on  all  parts  of  body  ex-
cept hands  and  face.
'^  Stages  of  Life,  Constitution. Erysipelas ;  two  cases.

A  middle-aged  man;  pityriasis  versicolor.
■•^  Relations. Compare :  Other  Rutacese,  Arnic,  Bryon.,  Chelid.,
Nux  vom.,  Berber.,  Podoph.,  Hydrast.,  Mercur.


575  PULSATILLA.


PULSATILLA.


Meadow  Anemone.  Ranunculacese.

This  plant  is  found  growing  in  sunny  sandy  soil  and  pasture  grounds  in  central
and  northern  Europe.

The  tincture  is  prepared  from  the  fresh  plant.

Introduced  and  proved  by  Hahnemann  and  his  provers,  Fr.  H.,  Hornberg,
Michler,  Eiickert,  Stapf,  etc.

Clinical  Authorities. — Mental  disturbance,  Eiickert,  Sztaroveszky,  Malaise,
Horner,  Bethmann,  Attomyr,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  1,  p.  41 ;  Hering's  Analy.
Therap.,  pp.  91,  124,  139,  179,  184,  226;  Melancholia,  Fisher,  A,  H.  Z.,  vol.
93,  p.  5 ;  Bonino,  Horn.  Recorder,  vol.  3,  p.  66  ;  Insanity,  Bahrenburg,  Orgn.,
vol.  3,  p.  367 ;  Mania,  Rockwith,  Horn.  CI.,  vol.  4,  p.  68  ;  Vertigo,  Bethmann,
Diez,  Riickert,  Kiick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  1,  pp.  76,  78  ;  Headache,  A.  R.  Hirsch,
Huber,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  5,  p.  92;  GaUupe,  N.  E.  M.  G.,  vol.  6,  p.  280;  Haw-
ley,  Miller,  Hah.  Mo.,  vol.  10,  p.  458  ;  Parsons,  Hoyne,  A.  H.  O.,  vol.  12,  p.
309 ;  Miller,  Hah.  Mo.,  vol.  7,  p.  404 ;  Headache  and  suppression  of  menses,
A.  H.  Z.,  vol.  49,  p.  149,  from  Horn.  CI.,  vol.  3,  p.  42 ;  Inflammation  of  brain,
Altschul,  Schelling,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  5,  p.  46 ;  Neuralgia  of  temple,  Eampal,  Hom.
Times,  vol.  1,  p.  36;  Neuralgic  pains  in  head  and  face,  Preston,  Hah.  Mo.,  vol.  4,
p,  14;  Loss  of  vision,  Bethmann,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  1,  p.  340;  Blindness,  Small,
A.  H.  O.,  vol.  12,  p.  309  ;  Glaucoma  incipiens,  Lorbacher,  A.  H.  Z.,  vol.  94,  p.  100;
Keratitis,  Norton,  N.  Y.  S.  Tr.,  1873-74,  p.  432 ;  Pustule  on  cornea,  Allen,  Hom.
CI.,  vol.  3,  p.  73;  Ophthalmia,  Bolles,  N.  A.  J.  H.,  vol.  3,  p.  144  ;  Malaise,  Kopp,
Fischer,  Caspari,  Y.  B.  J.  H.,  vol.  6,  p.  515 ;  Scrofulous  ophthalmia.  Dudgeon,  N.  A.  J.
H.,  vol.  4,  p.  334;  Inflammation  of  eyes,  Caspari,  Weber,  Schelling,  Kreuss,  Lobethal,
Ruck.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  1,  p.  237 ;  Link,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  1,  p.  289;  Weber,  Diez,
T.,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  1,  p.  312;  Covjunctivitis,  Hills,  A.  H.  O.,  vol.  12,  p.  309;
Granular  conjunctivitvi.  Hills,  N.  Y.  J.  H.,  vol.  l,p.  66;  Blepharitis,  Norton,  N.  A.
J.  H.,  vol.  23,  p.  354;  Hordeola,  TiilfF,  Jachimowicz,  Dudgeon,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf.,
vol.  5,  p.  108;  Diseases  of  the  eye,  Norton,  Hah.  Mo.,  vol.  11,  p.  262;  Supraorbital
neuralgia,  Pitcairn,  T.  H.  M.  S.  Pa.,  1882,  p.  160;  Dysecoia,  Otitis,  Otorrhoea,  Hart-
mann,  Bethmann,  Tietze,  Segin,  Rentsch,  Kreussler,  Hirzel,  Jahr,  Moor,  Riick.  Kl.
Erf.,  vol.  1,  p.  374 ;  Otitis,  Cooper,  H.  W.,  1876,  pp.  475,  523 ;  Otitis  media,  Hough-
ton, B.  J.  H.,  vol.  34,  p.  356,  Hah.  Mo.,  vol.  11,  p.  160 ;  Olorrhoia,  Hoyne,  A.  H.
O.,  vol.  12,  p.  309;  Swelling  of  the  ears,  MuUer,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  4,  p.  147;
Coryza,  Hahnemann,  A.  M.  L.,  vol.  2,  p.  274  ;  Hering,  Raue's  Rec,  1870,  p.  128  ;
Genzke,  A.  PI.  Z.,  vol.  22,  p.  145  ;  Kafka,  Therap.  vol.  1,  p.  13  ;  Coryza  and  headache,
Amberg,  A.  H.  Z.,  vol.  106,  p.  203  ;  Nasal  catarrh,  Stapf,  Genzke,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf.,
vol.  1,  p.  390;  Ehrmann,  A.  H.  Z.,  vol.  113,  p.  24;  Ozaina  and  dysmenorrhoea,
Wesselhceft,  N.  E.  M.  G.,  vol.  6,  p.  164;  Epistaxk,  Kreuss,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf.,
vol.  1,  p.  413;  Lippe,  Orgn.,  vol.  1,  p.  269;  Facial  neuralgia,  Payr,  N.  Z.  fiir,  Hom.
Kl.,  1869,  p.  3;  Hesse,  A.  H.  Z.,  vol.  113,  p.  130;  Stens,  B.  J.  H.,  vol.  15,  p.  132;


PULSATILLA.  576

Cumbacker,  Am.  Horn.,  vol.  1,  p.  222  ;  Prosopalgia,  Perry,  Vehsem,  Martin,  Biiok.
Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  1,  p.  430 ;  Hesse,  Horn.  Phys.,  vol.  7,  p.  24,  from  A.  H.  Z.,  vol.  17,  p.  19  ;
Facial  paralysis,  Bender,  Trans.  A.  I.  H.,  1888,  p.  325  ;  Acne  faciei,  Miiller,  B.  J.
H.,  vol.  23,  p.  372 ;  Toothache,  Kreuss,  Hartmann,  Hrg.,  Maly,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf,  vol.

I,  p.  472  ;  Hesse,  A.  H.  Z.,  vol.  113,  p.  131  ;  Boenninghausen,  Horn.  Phys.,  vol.  6,
p.  370;  Bad  taste  in  mouth.  Scales,  A.  H.  Z.,  vol.  101,  p.  191,  from  Amer.  Horn.,
vol.  6,  p.  261 ;  Glossitis,  Segin,  Kiick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  1,  p.  496  ;  Constriction  in  throat.
Sircar,  Calcut.  J.  of  M.,  vol.  2,  p.  261;  Pharyngitis,  Peters,  N.  A.  J.  H.,  vol.  4,  p.
535 ;  Angina,  Tietze,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  1,  p.  539 ;  Vomiting  of  food,  Kummel,
Wislicenus,  Kiick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol  1,  p.  558  ;  Vomiting,  Berridge,  Hom.  Phys.,  vol.  4,
p.  288  ;  Cardialgia,  Lutze,  A.  H.  Z.,  vol.  107,  p.  195 ;  Gastralgia,  Diez,  Riimmel,  J.,
Eiick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  11,  p.  65;  Meyer,  B.  J.  H.,  vol.  18,  p.  267 ;  Oastrodynia,  Burt,
U.  S.  M.  &  S.  Jour.,  Jan.,  1871  ;  Maffey,H.  W.,  vol.  8,  p.  241 ;  Gastric  disturbance,
Hahnemann,  Scholz,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  1,  p.  592;  Hahnemann,  Kreuss,  Hartm.,
Bojanus,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  4,  p.  648  ;  Hesse,  A.  H.  Z.,  vol.  113,  p.  130 ;  Hofrichter,
B.  J.  H.,  vol.  11,  pp.  453-54,  557,  574 ;  Gastric  disturbance  during  pregnancy,
Butler,  Hom.  Phys.,  vol.  8,  p.  93 ;  Rickey,  C.  M.  A.,  p.  580 ;  Times  Ret.,  1877,  p.
114 ;  Indigestion,  Hahnemann,  Hom.  CI.,  vol.  1,  p.  92  ;  Marston,  Hom.  Rev.,  vol.

II,  pp.  542,  614,  694 ;  Dyspepsia,  Spence,  Ohio  M.  &  S.  Rep.,  vol.  5,  p.  47  ;  Marston,
Hom.  Rev.,  vol.  12,  p.  94;  Dyspepsia  with  am.enorrhoc:a,  Sircar,  Calcut.  Journ.,  vol.
1,  p.  415  ;  Gastro-intestinal  catarrh,  GouUon,  A.  H.  Z.,  vol.  78,  p.  57  ;  Goullon,  A.
H.  O.,  vol.  12,  p.  313;  Hepatic  disorders,  Hartmann,  Lobeth,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.
1,  pp.  683,  702;  Biliary  calculi,  Morgan,  T.  H.  M.  S.  Pa.,  1884,  p.  41  ;  Colic,  Hrg.,
Hartm.,  Riick.,  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  1,  p.  761 ;  Diarrhcea,  Hrg.,  Hartm.,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf.,
vol.  1,  p.  845 ;  Metcalf,  N.  A.  J.  H.,  vol.  4,  p.  343 ;  Moore,  U.  S.  M.  &  S.  J.,  Jan.,
1871 ;  Cushing,  Med.  Inv.,  vol.  10,  p.  442;  Cholera  morbus,  Moore,  U.  S.  M.  &  S.
Journ.,  Jan.,  1871 ;  Cholera  infantrnm,  Lippe,  Orgn.,  vol.  3,  p.  25 ;  Wilder,  M.  I.,
vol.  4,  p.  398  ;  Chronic  diarrhoea,  Metcalf,  N.  A.  J.  H.,  vol.  3,  p.  88 ;  Constipation,
Hofrichter,  B.  J.  H.,  vol.  11,  p.  681 ;  Hemorrhoids,  Hrg.,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  1,  p.
1003 ;  Hccmaluria,  irritability  of  bladder,  dysuria,  retention  of  urine,  Kreuss,  Hartm.,
Jean,  Lobeth,  Hartlaub,  Ivanowich,  Riick.,  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  2,  p.  28;  Retention  of
wine  with  hcematuria,  Hawley,  Hom.  Phys.,  vol.  3,  p.  95  ;  Enuresis  nocturna,  Gau-
werky,  B.  J.  H.,  vol.  8,  p.  559  ;  Paralysis  of  sphincter  vesicce,  Liedbeck,  Hygra,  vol.  5,
p.  434 ;  N.  A.  J.  H.,  vol.  3,  p.  340 ;  Chroiiic  cystitis,  Morgan,  T.  H.  M.  S.  Pa.,  1884,  p.
73;  Soreness  of  meatus  urinarius,  Biegler,  Hom.  Phys.,  vol.  7,  p.  478;  Nocturnal
enuresis,  Gauwerky,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  2,  p.  45 ;  Nocturnal  emissions,  Sircar,  Calcut.
Journ.,  vol.  2,  p.  456 ;  Suppressed  gonorrhoea,  orchitis,  gleet,  Attomyr,  Hartlaub,
Kammer,  Gulyas,  Liedbeck,  Mosaik,  Rosenberg,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  2,  p.  95 ;
Orchitis,  Pope,  B.  J.  H.,  vol.  12,  p.  487  ;  (2 cases)  A.  H.  Z.,  vol.  90,  p.  92;  Affection
of  testicles,  Mschks.,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  2,  p.  209  ;  Metritis,  Stow,  N.  Y.  S.  Trans.,
1871,  p.  317  ;  Prolapsus  uteri,  Gorton,  Hah.  Mo.,  vol.  7,  p.  464;  Ulceration  of  cervix
uteri,  Monroe,  Mass.  Trans.,  vol.  4,  p.  599 ;  Metrorrhagia,  threatened  abortion,  Lo-
beth, Weber,  Elw.,  Ng.,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  2,  p.  322  ;  Menstrual  disorders,  Hahne-
mann, Hrg.,  Hartm.,  Griessel,  Knorr,  Heichelh,  Bernst,  Seidel,  Kopp,  Schron,
Vehsem.,  Sommer,  Nunez,  Eampal,  Riickert,  Tietze,  Schiiler,  Gross,  Attomyr,
Diez,  Widemann,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  2,  p.  244;  Menstrual  disturbance,  Giover,
Med.  Adv.,  vol.  21,  p.  150  ;  Kent.,  Hom.  Phys.,  vol.  7,  p.  301 ;  Dysmenorrhosa,  Goul-
lon, A.  H.  Z.,  vol.  80,  p.  7  ;  Cushing,  Orgn.,  vol.  3,  p.  364;  Gorton,  Hah.  Mo.,  vol.
7,  p.  463 ;  Martin,  vol.  3,  p.  9 ;  Amenorrhea,  Rushmore,  Orgn.,  vol.  3,  p.  45  ;
Hughes,  B.  J.  H.,  vol.  24,  p.  328  ;  Richards,  Bib.  Horn.,  vol.  8,  p.  25 ;  Sircar,


577  PULSATILLA.

Calcut.  M.  J.,  vol.  1,  p.  415;  Bearing  doivn  sensation,  Gorton,  Hali.  Mo.,  vol.  7,  p.
464;  Leucorrhcea,  Molin,  Hartm.,  Ruck  Kl.  Erf.,  vol,  2,  p.  365 ;  Martin,  N.  Y.  S.
Trans.,  1869,  p.  175 ;  False  pregnancy,  Betts,  Orgn.,  vol.  3,  p.  270,  from  Horn.
Jonrn.  of  Obstet.,  Nov.,  1879  ;  Disorders  of  pregnancy,  Hahnemann,  Diez,  Eumm.,
Tietze,  Eiick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  2,  p.  385 ;  Violent  fcetal  movements.  Gale,  Hom.  Phys.,
vol.  2,  p.  468  ;  Pains  during  pregnancy,  Berridge,  Hom.  Phys.,  vol.  2,  p.  97  ;  Insuffi-
cient labor  pains,  Ballard,  Hom.  Phys.,  vol.  7,  p.  378 ;  False  labor  pains,  Hendricks,  A.
H.  Z.,  vol.  103,  p.  14  ;  Threatened  abortion,  Goodno,  Hom.  CI.,  vol.4,  p.  131 ;  Dystocia,
Hahnemann,  Stnpf,  Tietze,  Diez,  Kallenbach,  Riickert,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf,  vol,  2,  p.
395;  Wiirzler,  Haustein,  Hureau,  Petrasch,  Engelhardt,  Walter,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf.,
vol.  5,  p.  656 ;  Heath,  Orgn.,  vol.  3,  p.  365  ;  Malpresentations,  Bethmann,  Croserio,
Hureau,  N.  A.  J.  H.,  vol.  3,  p.  366;  Jackson,  Hom.  Rev.,  vol.  4,  p.  505;  Jackson,
Med.  Inv.,  vol.  6,  p.  243 ;  Jackson,  Hah.  Mo.,  vol.  3,  p.  321 ;  (15  cases)  Jackson,
Hah.  Mo.,  vol.8,  p.  274;  Mai  tin,  Kenyon,  Hah.  Mo.,  vol.  8,  p.  504;  Fletcher,
Hall.  Mo.,  vol.  14,  p.  275 ;  Dodge,  B.  J.  H.,  vol.  29,  p.  422 ;  Biegler,  Orgn.,  vol.  1,
p.  216 ;  E.  C.  P.,  Am.  Obs.,  vol.  4,  p.  432 ;  Smith,  A.  H.  O.,  vol.  7,  p.  126 ;  Trans-
verse position  of  foetus,  Holcombe,  Ohio  M.  &  S.  Rep.,  vol.  11,  p.  153  ;  Irregular  labor
pains  and  retained  placenta,  Enos,  M.  I.,  vol.  3,  p.  266 ;  Retained  placenta,  post-
partum hemorrhage,  Bernstein,  Bethmann,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf,  vol.  2,  p.  403  ;  Puerperal
mania,  Morgan,  H.  W.,  vol.  12,  p.  76  ;  Puerperal  metritis,  Kiisemann,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf.,
vol,  5,  p.  669;  Puerperal  fever,  Lippe,  N.  A.  J.  H.,  vol.  20,  p.  167;  Puerperal  fever,
suppression  of  lochia,  phlegmasia  alba  dolens,  Kreuss,  Hahnemann,  Hartm.,  Riick.
Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  2,  p.  452 ;  Affection  of  breasts,  Watzke,  B.  J.  H.,  vol.  25,  p.  554 ;  Oa-
lactorrhosa,  Croserio,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf,  vol.  5,  p.  665;  Phlegmasia  dolens,  Hawkes,  H.
W.,  vol.  8,  p.  260;  Aphonia,  Waldo,  Times  Rt.,  1875,  p.  62;  Aphonia  nervosa,
Kafka,  A.  H.  Z.,  vol.  89,  p.  19  ;  Influenza,  Sollier,  Croserio,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf,  vol.  3,  p.
47  ;  Bronchitis,  Hoyne,  A.  H.  O.,  vol.  12,  p.  311 ;  Chronic  brnnchicU  Crttar/-A,  Watzke,
B.  J.  H.,  vol.  26,  p.  45;  Asthma,  Neumann,  Wislicenus,  Hartmann,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf,
vol.  3,  p.  195 ;  Hysterical  asthma,  Pfander,  A.  H.  Z.,  vol.  113,  p.  203;  Cough,  Hrg.,
Kreuss,  Hartmann,  Knorre,  Balogh,  Seidel,  Strecker,  Elvvert,  Kiimpfer,  Rohl, Gross,
Riick.  Kl.  Erf,  vol.  3,  p.  22;  Colbu-rn,  Hom.  CI.,  vol.  3,  p.  113;  Berridge,  Hom.
Phys.,  vol.  4,  p.  292 ;  Whooping  cough,  Knorre,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf,  vol.  3,  p.  83 ;  Boen-
ninghausen,  Miiller,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf,  vol.  5,  p.  727  ;  Affections  of  heart,  Hartmann,
Miiller,  Kiisem,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf,  vol.  3,  p.  452;  Walker,  M.  I.,  vol.  5,  p.  323  ;  In-
sufficiency of  mitral  valve,  Schneider,  N.  A.  J.  H.,  vol,  22,  p.  82,  from  Internat.
Presse,  3,  2 ;  Palpitation  of  the  heart,  A.  H.  Z.,  vol.  49,  p.  149  ;  Affection  of  chest,
Spence,  Ohio  M.  &  S.  Rep.,  vol.  5,  p.  212;  Acute  pulmonary  catarrh,  Watzke,  B.  J.
H.,  vol.  25,  p.  547 ;  Catarrhal  affections  of  chest,  Meyer,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf,  vol.  5,  p.
692 ;  Pneumonia,  Thorer,  Schneider,  Wurm,  Schelling,  Buchner,  Miiller,  Riick.
Kl.  Erf,  vol.  5,  p.  326;  Hcemoptysis,  Knorre,  Kasemann,  Hartmann,  Riick.  Kl.
Erf,  vol.  3,  p.  223 ;  Bhtumatism  in  nrist,  Metcalf,  N.  A.  J.  H.,  vol.  3,  p.  88 ;  Bheu-
matism  in  joints  of  hand,  Metcalf,  N.  A.  J.  H.,  vol.  4,  p.  542;  Phlebitis  cruris,
Hornby,  N.  A.  S.,  vol.  17,  p.  409  ;  Neuralgia  rheumatica  of  leg,  Metcalf,  N.  A.  J.  H.,
vol.  3,  p.  89 ;  Pain  in  leg,  Metcalf,  N.  A.  J.  H.,  vol.  4,  p.  543 ;  Swelling  of  knee,
Wurda,  Griessel,  Diez,  Ruck.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  3,  p.  587  ;  Hoyne,  A.  H.  O.,  vol.  12,  p.
318  ;  Eruption  on  leg,  and  otorrhea,  Martin,  Hom.  CI.,  vol.  1,  p.  124;  Ulcer  on  leg,
Kent,  Hom.  Phys.,  vol.  7,  p.  124 ;  Gilchrist,  Gilch.  Surg.  Therap.,  p.  84;  Swelling
of  glands  of  neck,  Rentsch,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf,  vol.  4,  p.  387  ;  Pa;ins  in  sacrum  and  hips,
Wakeman,  Med.  Adv.,  vol,  21,  p.  402;  Lumbosacral  neurcdgia,  Wakeman,  Med.
Adv.,  vol,  21,  p.  403;  Lumbago,  rheumatism,  l^ip-pe,  James,  Orgn.,  vol.  3,  p.  34;.

voii,  VIII, — 37.


PULSATILLA.  578

Freezing  of  limbs,  Gross,  Tieize,  RiicV.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  4,  p.  176;  Nervous  affection,
Wells,  Horn.  Rec,  vol.  3,  p.  68 ;  Hysteria  and  debility,  Nankivell,  Horn.  Rev.,  vol.

11,  p.  208 ;  Spasms,  Burclitield,  Med.  Adv.,  vol.  20,  p.  351 ;  Spasms  preceding  menses,
Looseveldt,  Hah.  Mo.,  vol.  13,  p.  319;  Epilepsy,  Cox,  Horn.  CI.,  vol.  3,  p.  103;
Sleeplessness,  Rushmore,  Horn.  Phys.,  vol.  2,  p.  146;  Ftbrile  disturbance,  Morgan,
Horn.  CI.,  vol.  1,  p.  16;  Ague,  Hahnemann,  Hrg.,  Heiclil.,  Gross,  Lobetli,  Nagel,
Escalier,  Baertl,  Miiller,  Pulte,  K.  in  L.,  Schreter,  Thorer,  Ruck.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  4,
p.  869;  Watzke,  Zeitschr.,  fiir  Horn.,  vol.  2,  Horn.  Journ.,  vol.  1,  p.  216;
"Weber,  A.  H.  Z.,  vol.  91,  p.  146 ;  Slow,  Hah.  Mo.,  vol.  5,  p.  237;  Fisher,  N.
A.  J.  H.,  vol.  25,  p.  178;  Terry,  N.  A.  J.  H.,  vol.  25,  p.  311;  Hoyne,  Horn.
CI.,  vol.  1,  p.  148;  vol.2,  p.  251;  Morgan,  Horn.  CI.,  vol.  4,  p.  78;  Colburn,
Horn.  CI.,  vol.  4,  p.  86;  Hoyne,  A.  H.  O.,  vol.  12,  p.  318  ;  Colton,  A.  H.  O.,  vol.

12,  p.  425;  Vance,  Orgn.,  vol.  2,  p.  126;  Couch  (3  cases),  Orgn.,  vol.  2,  p.  227;
Orgn.,  vol.  3,  p.  112;  Pearson,  Med.  Inv.,  vol.  8,  p.  152;  Bilious  intermit-
tent fever,  Brigham,  Orgn.,  vol.  2,  p.  134;  Chagres  fever,  Dunham,  Lectures  on
Mat.  Med.,  p.  63;  Typhoid  fever,  Morgan,  A.  J.  H.  M.  M.,  vol.  6,  p.  123;  Turrel,
Horn.  CL,  vol.  3,  p.  55 ;  Chlorosis,  Kreuss,  Hartniann,  Sommer,  Diez,  Fleischmann,
Riick.  Kl.  Erf,  vol.  2,  p.  277  ;  Muller,  N.  A.  J.  H.,  vol.  7,  p.  164;  Goullon,  Horn.
CL,  vol.  1,  p.  199;  PJieumatic  pains,  Dixon,  Hom.  Rev.,  vol.  18,  p.  564;  Rheuma-
tism, Kreuss,  Hrg.,  Heichelh,  Muller,  Schron,  Schelling,  Rothansl,  Gross,  Riick.
Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  3,  p.  532 ;  Goldsborough,  A.  H.  Z.,  vol.  Ill,  p.  53,  from  Hom.  Rev.,
Feb.,  1885  ;  Bayes,  Hom.  Rev.,  vol.  15,  p.  14;  Stow,  N.Y.  S, Trans.,  1869,  p.  306;
Frost,  N.  Y.  S.  Trans.,  1871,  p.  243 ;  Dixon,  B.  J.  H.,  vol.  28,  p.  384 ;  Neuralgic
rheumatism,  Hughes,  B.  J.  H.,  vol.  28,  p.  110 ;  Periostitis,  Guernsey,  Hom.  Phys.,
vol.  7,  p.  345 ;  Chronic  phlebitis,  Hornby,  B.  J.  H.,  vol.  24,  p.  496,  from  N.  Y.  S.
Trans.;  Anasarca  after  intermittent  fever.  Sircar,  Calcut.  Journ.,  vol.  1,  p.  457;
Medsles,  Schwarze,  Hartmann,  Jalir,  Genzke,  Kreuss,  TiilfT,  Bethmann,  Weber,
Watzke,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  4,  p.  98 ;  Eidherr,  B.  J.  H.,  vol.  19,  p.  145 ;  Hoyne,
A.  H.  O.,  vol.  12,  p.  318 ;  Zona,  Gaspary,  Riick.  Kl.  Erf.,  vol.  4,  p.  161  ;  Supposed
poisoning  by  "  toad  stools,"  Farrington,  Hom.  CL,  vol.  4,  p.  83.

^  Mind. I  I  Absent-minded.

I  Mental  labor  fatigues  and  affects  the  head.

1  I  Great  difficulty  in  speaking  to  find  the  right  expres-
sion ;  fixed  ideas. ^Typhoid.

I A  great  many  wandering  thoughts  in  head.

1  I  Fancies  a  naked  man  is  wrapped  in  her  bedclothes ;
dreams  of  men.

"When  closing  eyes  sees  all  sorts  of  strange  sights,  and
hears  all  kinds  of  operatic  airs.

1  I  Frightful  visions,  delirium.

I  In  early  morn  depressed,  full  of  cares  about  domestic
affairs.

I  SI  luns  business;  irresolute;  sighing  respiration ;  feels  as
if  he  were  beside  himself.

I  Cannot  think  of  his  business  without  grieving,  in
morning.

I  Morose  mood,  bursts  into  tears  when  interrupted  in  his
• business.


579  PULSATILLA.

■  Satisfied  with  nothing,  yet  not  vexed; everything  dis-

gusts him.

■  Extremely capricious and peevish about everything,

himself  included.

1 1  Hypochondriac  moroseness; out  of  sorts  with  every-
thing.

1 1  Gloomy,  melancholic  mood.

■  Restless and changeable; easily  moved to tears or

laughter;  well  one  hour,  miserable  the  next.

■  Child  longs  for  this,  now  for  that,  even  with  good  humor.

■  iMild,  bashful,  gentle,  yielding  disposition.

■  ■Silent mood; inclined to silent grief  with submis-

siveness.

■  Gloomy,  melancholy,  full  of  care.

■  Continuous  crying  with  great  melancholy  and  fear  of

losing  her  reason,  or  that  she  might  commit  suicide.

■  ■Weeping: sad,  bursting  into  tears very easily; can

hardly tell her symptoms for weeping ; at every
nursing ; at everything, whether  joyful or sad ; at
answering  a  question  ;  with  almost  all  her  sufferings.
I  I  Disposition  mild  and  gentle,  never  cross. ^Habitual
constipation.

■  The  pain  is  so  violent  that  she  tosses  in  every  direction,

with  cries  and  tears.

■  Weary  of  life ;  thinks  with  pleasure  of  drowning.

■  Anxiety  :  thinks  to  die;  does  not  know  what  to  do;  as  if

in  a  hot  atmosphere ;  in  region  of  heart ;  even  to  sui-
cide ;  in  evening,  with  sensation  of  qualmishness  in  pit
of  stomach  ;  in  evening  after  going  to  sleep,  with  a  rush
of  ideas  and  determination  of  blood  to  head  that  forces
him  to  get  up ;  at  night,  as  from  heat.

■  Anguish  in  region  of  heart,  sometimes  increasing  to  a

desire  for  suicide.

■  Tremulous  anguish:  as  if  death  were  near; <  during

rest,  while  sitting  and  lying  ; >  by  motion.

■  When  evening  comes  he  begins  to  dread  ghosts.

■  Hypochondriac  peevishness.

I  I  Confused,  fretful,  ver}^  chilly.

I  1  Ill-humored,  fretful,  easily  enraged.

■  Children  are  peevish,  changeable,  pale  and  chilly.

■  Fretful  and  without  appetite;  dread  of  work.
I  I  Taciturn,  morose,  aversion  to  talking.

■  Mistrust;  envy;  covetousness ;  dislike  to  people.

■  Mild,  cold  and  phlegmatic.

■  Patient  seeks  consolation.

■  Children  are  extremely  affectionate,  which  they  manifest

by  kissing  and  caressing.

■  Religious  mania;  sees  the  devil  coming  to  take  her;  the


PULSATILLA.  580

world  on  fire  during  niglit;  fear,  rage  in  spells,  or
weeping  ;  forgetful  during  lucid  moments.

llMania  from  suppressed  menses.

I  Tearful,  easily  discouraged  ;  full  of  anxiety,  forebodings
of  impending  disaster;  anxiety  from  epigastrium,  likely
to  be  associated  with  indigestion  ;  chattering  teeth  ;  pal-
pitation ;  flushes.

I  I  Sleepless  nights  on  account  of  great  fear  and  anxious
restlessness ;  despairs  of  her  salvation  and  seeks  aid  in
constant  prayer ;  irregular  catamenia ;  heat  and  con-
gestion to  head  and  face ;  headache,  prsecordial  weight
and  backache.

I  1  Throbbing  pain  in  brain;  dimness  of  vision,  as  if
looking  through  a  sieve ;  frightful  visions  in  the  dark,
or  when  closing  eyes  ;  strikes  at  them  and  holds  up  the
cross.

II Insanity;  he  was  continually  crying;  ran  about  the
.streets  at  night.

1  iDark,  suspicious  and  reserved  manner;  disturbed  look
on  face;  sleepless;  looks  for  her  bed  in  the  yard;
hides  in  a  corner  to  escape  from  a  little  grey  man  who
wanted  to  pull  out  her  leg ;  in  eighth  month  of
pregnancy.

I  I  Unquiet  look;  lips  bluish-red  ;  weak  memory;  pangs  of
conscience  about  religion  and  the  female  sex ;  violent
palpitation  in  the  presence  of  women ;  abhors  and  hates
the  sex;  must  go  out  of  their  way  for  fear  of  injuring
them  ;  looks  upon  them  as  evil  beings  and  is  afraid ;
considers  their  presence  injurious  to  his  soul ;  respira-
tion short  and  difiicult;  painful  pressure  in  chest.

1  I  Sleepless  at  2  a.m.;  pulsating,  beating  headache  pro-
ceeding from  vertex;  lamentations;  despaired  of  her
soul's  salvation  ;  did  not  believe  she  would  be  restored
to  health;  irresolute  disposition;  taciturn.  ^Melancholy.

■  Gasping  breathing;  inconsolable.

■  After  slight  emotions,  difficult breathing; bad effects

from  fright,  mortification  or  excessive  joy.

■  Sinks  into  a  condition  of  sadness  and  despondency  from

disagreeable  news.
I  I  After  mortification,  sad,  gloomy  and  weary  of  life;  fre-
quent pain  in  forehead,  earthy  face;  dark  rings  around
eyes;  bitter,  vapid  taste  in  mouth;  dislikes  meat  and
bread ;  nausea,  with  pain  in  stomach  ;  occasional  bitter,
slimy  vomiting ;  frequent,  profuse  nosebleed ;  stitches
in  side,  when  coughing,  with  frothy,  bloody  expectora-
tion ;  palpitation;  labored  breathing;  hard,  scanty
stools ;  frequent  cutting  pain  in  bowels ;  heaviness  of
legs; limbs  feel  bruised; swelling on upper  part of


581  PULSATILLA.

foot;  anxious  dreams;  is  anxious,  sad;  weary  of  life,
thinks  of  drowning  with  great  pleasure ;  bursts  into
tears  ;  dissatisfied  with  everything ;  easily  enraged  ;  ret-
icent; very  easily  frightened.
1  I  After  vexation,  mental  depression ;  is  in  constant  dread ;
palpitation  ;  afraid  of  everybody ;  considers  every  one
her  enemy,  despairs  of  everything ;  cries  easily ;  trusts
no  one  ;  pale,  earthy  complexion,  with  dim,  desponding
look  ;  no  appetite,  much  thirst ;  limbs  feel  as  if  asleep  ;
is  weak  and  weary ;  cannot  sleep  at  night  on  account  of
fear  and  dread.

■  Fright,  followed  by  diarrhoea,  with  internal  heat  and  ex-

ternal coldness  of  body.
I  Dread  of  people.

I  I  Hysterical  laughter,  after  meals.

^  Sensorium.  l  Confusion  of  head :  with  pains,  as  after  intox-
ication or  watching  ;  with  a  hollow  feeling;  with  ver-
tigo, caused  by  motion.

I I  Vertigo:  excessive,  like  intoxication;  as  if  one  had
turned  in  a  circle  a  long  time,  with  nausea ;  on  looking
upward,  as  if  he  would  fall,  or  as  if  he  were  dancing  ;
thought  he  was  unable  to  stand  or  grasp  an  object;
with  heat,  nausea  and  loss  of  sight,  in  evening;  with  in-
clination to  vomit;  when  stooping;  when  rising  from
a  seat ;  after  eating ;  when  lifting  up  eyes  ;  as  from
heaviness  in  head  ;  especially  while  sitting  ;  in  morning
on  rising  from  bed,  has  to  lie  down  again;  <  sitting
or  lying ;  >  by  walking  and  in  open  air ;  caused  by  in-
digestion ;  in  consequence  of  scanty  menses.

I  Stupefaction  in  evening,  in  warm  room,  with  chilliness.
I  I  Faint  all  the  morning;  frequent  calls  for  water.
I  I  Apoplexy,  unconscious;  face  purplish,  bloated  ;  violent
beating  of  heart;  pulse  collapsed;  rattling  breathing.
^  Inner  Head. Humming  in  head.

■  Heaviness  of  head;  cannot  hold  it  upright  or  raise  it ;

on  stooping  it  seems  as  if  head  were  too  heavy.
llDulness  of  head:  like  a  bruised  sensation  in  forehead;
as  if  his  memory  failed  ;  with  aching  eyes ;  especially
pressive  in  forehead.

■  Headache :  like  a  throbbing  in  arteries  of  brain.

■  Bubbling:  in  head  at  night;  distinctly  heard  beating  of

pulse  in  it.
I  I  Stitches,  as  if  extending  through  whole brain,  after

dinner,  lasting  until  going  to  sleep  in  evening,  with

shivering  attacks  of  faintness.
I  I  Frequent  boring  in  r.  side  of  forehead.

■  Pressive  pain  in  forehead,  above  orbits,  involving  whole

head.


PULSATILLA.  582

■  Constrictive  headache  above  eyes,  <  looking  intently  at

anything.

■  Tensive  drawing  pain  in  forehead  above  orbits,  <  raising

eyes.
I  I  Tearing  in  1.  side  of  frontal  bone,  in  evening.

■  iHeadache  in  evening.

I  I  Headache  in  evening,  as  in  stopped  catarrh; followed
by  dry  heat  in  bed  and  an  intoxicated  sleep.

■  One-sided  headache,  as  if  brain  would  burst  and  fall  out

of  head.

■  ■Headache,  as  if  one  had  eaten  too  much,  or. as  if  stom-

ach had  been  disordered  by  being  overloaded  by  too
much  fat  meat.

■  Headache extending  into  eyes,  so  that  they  ache,  in

evening.

■  Pressive  headache  on  stooping.

■  Tensive  headache  over  brain.

■  iThrobbing,  pressive  headache,  >  from  external  pressure.

■  Violent  pressure  in  1.  temple.

■  Headache  in  temples  as  if  constricted.

■  Stitches  in  temples.

■  Frequent  tearing  pain  in  r.  side  of  head.

■  ■Headache,  chiefly  in  forehead,  supraorbital  region,  and

in  temples ;  pains  heavy,  bursting  and  throbbing ;  <
from  mental  exerti'on,  stooping,  and  in  evening.

■  Tension  in  forehead,  as  if  it  were  in  a  vise.

■  Stupefying  headache,  running  chills,  with  humming  in

head; <  when  lying  or  sitting  quietly  or  in  the  cold.
■Soreness  as  from  subcutaneous  ulceration  in  one  or  both
temples;  <  evening  at  rest,  in  warm  room ;  >  walking
in  open  air.

■  Twitching  tearing  in  temple  lain  on,  goes  to  other  side

when  turning  on  to  it; <  evenings  and  on  raising
eyes.

■  Headache  as  if  it  would  burst;  <  from  moving  eyes.

■  Stinging  pulsating  in  brain  ;  <  w^hen  stooping.

■  Pulsating  in  evening  and  from  mental  exertion;  throb-

bing, with  amenia.

■  Violent  pain  in  one  side  of  occiput,  as  if  a  nail  were

driven  in.

■  ■  Sick-headache  from  suppression  of  menses, or  menstrual

or  gastric  disorder.

■  Stitches  in  one  side  of  head,  generally  in  one  temple  or

in  back  part  of  head,  with  vertigo,  ringing  in  ears  and
vanishing  of  sight.

■  1  Semi-lateral headache, at times with nausea and

vomiting.

■  Beating,  jerking,  lacerating  pains,  or  as  if  in  a  vise.


583  PULSATILLA.

1 1  Headache  from  overloaded  stomach,  from  pastry,  fats,

ice-cream.
I  Acute  pains  in  temples,  with  giddiness.
I  Pain  as  if  brain  were  lacerated,  on  or  soon  after  waking.

I  Headache  arising  from  nape  of  neck.

I I  Throbbing  headache  with  amenorrhooa.

I  I  Pain  in  1.  side  of  forehead,  throbbing,  beating,  stitch-
ing; alternately  in  morning  after  rising  and  evening
after  lying  down ;  >  from  pressure  and  in  open  air;  <
in  room,  lying, moving  eyes;  attacks  last  several  hours,
increase  to  an  intolerable  degree  of  severity,  so  that  she
tosses  and  rolls  about ;  after  attack  severe  pain  in  stom-
ach, and  sour,  bilious  vomit,  then  pinching,  constrict-
ing, griping  pains  in  abdomen  ;  sometimes  these  three
pains  appear  in  alternation,  sometimes  one  day  after
another.

1  1  Headache  throughout  day ;  <  in  evening,  but  >  at
night,  yet  she  cannot  sleep ;  pain  seems  to  rise  from
nape  of  neck  and  becomes  fixed  in  parietal  bones,  is
very  severe,  must  lie  down ;  nape  of  neck  as  if  con-
stricted ;  roaring  in  ears ;  vertigo  when  walking  ;  dark-
ness before  eyes;  pain  boring,  stitching,  tearing,  at
times  extends  to  scapulae ;  twitching  in  1.  eyelid  ;  biting
and  pressure  in  1.  eye,  with  lachrymation;  constipation;
stitches  in  limbs  with  chilliness.

I  I  Pains  in  head  as  if  between  screws,  with  vertigo,  heavi-
ness of  head  on  raising  it  from  pillow;  <  from  thinking
and  talking ;  lassitude ;  trembling  and  unsteadiness  of
limbs;  alternate  redness  and  paleness  of  face;  nausea;
gnawing  in  epigastrium ;  dryness  of  mouth  without
thirst;  aversion  to  food;  constriction  of  chest;  transient
shudderings;  weak,  scarcely  perceptible  pulse;  over-
sensitiveness  ;  crying  ;  menses  irregular.

I  I  After  catching  cold,  two  months  ago,  headache;  stitch-
ing, boring  pains,  becoming  intolerably  severe  evening
and  at  night,  affecting  1.  side  of  head  from  temple  to  oc-
ciput and  extending  into  sides  of  neck  and  auditory
meatus;  head  as  if  numb;  mind  as  if  paralyzed,  so  that
he  is  fit  for  nothing.

I  1  Extremely  severe  tearing  in  temples,  with  bitter  vomit-
ing; vertigo  and  constant  nausea  compel  her  to  remain
perfectly  quiet  in  recumbent  posture,  with  closed  eyes;
pain  as  if  head  would  burst  on  opening  eyes  or  on  least
motion  of  eyes ;  pulse  rapid,  full ;  skin  hot,  but  not  en-
tirely without  moisture ;  after  catching  cold  eight  days
after  labor.

I  I  Stitching  pain  in  forehead,  or  in  temples;  chilliness,
tongue  coated  white ;  thirstlessness,  bitter  taste;  severe


PULSATILLA.  584

stitching  pains  in  epigastrium ;  pain  in  stomach  as  from
hunger,  causing  faintness ;  urination  more  frequent
during  attack  ;  anxious  palpitation  of  heart  when  lying
on  1.  side ;  legs  very  heavy  and  tired  ;  cannot  sleep  on
account  of  heat,  flushes  and  restlessness ;  acrid,  excoriat-
ing leucorrhoea.

I  I  Tearing  pain  from  1.  temple  over  whole  1.  side  of  head,
at  times  extending  to  1.  ear  and  1.  lower  jaw;  <  at  night,
in  sudden  changes  of  w^eather  or  storms,  from  external
warmth,  warmth  of  bed  ;  >  in  cool,  open  air;  face  pale;
eyes  dull,  surrounded  b}^  blue  rings ;  heat  in  head ;
ringing  in  ears  during  attack ;  profuse,  milky  leucor-
rhoea; palpitation  of  heart  on  exertion;  pain  in  small
of  back;  dulness,  lassitude;  chilliness;  restless, sleepless
nights.

I  1  Stitching,  gnawing  headache,  especially  in  forehead,
from  slightest  cold  or  mental  disturbance,  <  from  touch,
w'ith  hot,  red  face ;  rheumatism  in  knee.

I  I  Severe  pains  in  r.  side  of  head;  stitches  in  forehead,
temples  and  r.  ear,  extending  into  teeth  ;  also  throbbing,
pulsating  pain  in  head ;  pain  lasts  all  day  and  is  <  at
night  lying  in  bed;  thirst;  constipation;  chilliness;
loss  of  strength.

I  I  Neuralgia  of  r.  temple,  extending  to  back  of  head  and
side  of  neck  and  into  ear ;  pain  lancinating,  boring,  as
from  a  gimlet  piercing  skull ;  <  at  night;  during  par-
oxysm, numbness  of  rest  of  head.

1  I A  lady,  blue-ej'ed,  light  hair,  fair;  severe  pain  in  1.  caus-
ality, continuing  all  day,  since  waking  in  a.m.  ;  <  from
heat  of  stove  and  from  passing  a  hot  stove ;  bad  breath.

I  I  Neuralgic  pains  commencing  in  r.  temporal  region  and
rapidly  extending  over  whole  r.  side  of  head  and  face;
pains  so  intense  as  to  distract  the  mind,  causing  her  to
resort  to  all  sorts  of  applications  without  slightest
relief;  lachrymation  of  affected  eye  with  scalding  tears;
paroxysms  at  7  a.m.,  continuing  to  increase  until  11
A.M.,  then  gradually  subsiding  until  5  p.m.

1  1  Pains  in  forehead  passing  through  whole  head,  in-
creasing for  ten  or  fifteen  minutes,  until  they  become
agonizing;  heat  and  rush  of  blood  to  the  part,  with  red-
ness and  suffusion  of  eyes ;  walks  room  in  agony,  hold-
ing his  head  with  both  hands,  crying  out  with  anguish  ;
after  ten  or  fifteen  minutes  pain  begins  to  diminish,  in
fifteen  minutes  more  he  becomes  quiet ;  restless  feeling
for  ten  or  fifteen  minutes,  with  a  desire  frequently  to
change  position,  sitting,  standing,  or  walking  room ;
pains  about  small  of  back  or  loins  go  through  with
nearly  same  paroxysm,  followed  by  same  remission  ;  a


585  PULSATILLA.

third  series  commences  in  groins  and  thighs,  and  a
fourth  in  ankles  and  feet,  passing  through  with  same
course,  but  with  rather  more  severity ;  after  this  an  in-
termission of  an  hour  or  so,  and  he  either  sleeps  or  sits
quietly,  but  with  a  feeling  of  languor  and  exhaustion,
before  another  attack  in  head  begins;  pains  >  by
quick,  hard  rubbing  with  dry  hand ;  warm  applications
intolerable.

I  I  Catamenia  at  times  too  early  and  profuse,  at  others  too
late  and  scanty ;  had  an  attack  of  pleurisy  for  which
she  was  bled ;  two  weeks  later,  most  violent,  tearing,
boring  headache,  every  evening;  constant  sensation  as
if  brain  were  to  be  pressed  through  skull ;  violent  jerk-
ing and  tearing  at  tongue,  as  if  it  were  to  be  torn  out;
head  very  hot;  face  dark  red;  at  first  pains  commenced
at  10  P.M.,  each  time  after  lying  down ;  later  at  7  p.m.  ;
in  beginning  they  lasted  until  3,  later  until  5  a.m.  ;  they
were  most  severe  after  lying  down  until  an  hour  after
midnight;  remission  during  day;  very  despondent,
longed  for  death.

I  I  Headache  with  wakefulness  at  night;  patient  cried  from
pain  ;  had  a  Nux  temperament.

J I  Headache,  pain  recurring  in  paroxysms  increases  to  an
intense  point  of  severity,  then  decreases  to  a  complete
cessation.

I  I  Attacks  of  headache,  lasting  two  to  three  days,  ending
with  vomiting  and  sleep ;  pains  most  severe  in  sides  of
head  and  in  eyes,  as  if  pushing  them  out ;  pain  almost
unbearable,  especially  on  going  into  a  warm  room ;  ex-
ternal chilliness  during  attacks.

■  Periodical  spells  of  sick-headache  two  or  three  days  be-

fore menses,  with  vomiting,  diarrhoea  and  chilliness ;
menses  scanty.

I  I  Headache  at  appearance  and  cessation  of  menses;  press-

ing, boring,  throbbing  in  vertex  almost  driving  her
crazy  ;  cannot  tolerate  anything  upon  head  ;  feels  to  her
like  a  boil,  yet  presses  hand  involuntarily  upon  painful
place;  stool  not  hard,  but  expulsion  difficult;  sleep  full
of  dreams;  chilly;  thirstless.

I I  Headaches  from  excessive  study,  suppressed  sexual  ex-
citement; indigestion,  abuse  of  coffee  or  spirits,  or  rich
fat  food  ;  from  abuse  of  Quinine,  Iron,  Sulphur,  Mer-
cury, Chamomile  tea ;  from  long  watching,  or  a  cold.

■  Headache,  attended  with  nausea  from  presence  of  bile  in

stomach ;  beating  headache,  with  vomiting  of  bile  and
mucus.

■  Headache  <  in  evening  after  lying  down;  is  <  by  lift-

ing eyes,  by  meditation  in  warm  room  ;  >  from  com-
pression and  when  walking  slowly  in  open  air.


PULSATILLA.  586

I  I  Irritation  of  brain  after  sudden  suppression  of  otorrhoea;
head  hot;  cannot  be  kept  erect;  skin  dry;  urine  scanty;
somnolence,  with  starting  at  slightest  noise,  alternating
with  sopor  and  photophobia ;  fever ;  vomiting  of  sour
bitter  fluid  ;  grasping  at  head.

■  Congestion  of  brain,  face  looks  yellowish  and  yet  feels

hot,  with  constant  chilliness.

I  Congestion  of  blood  to  head,  with  stinging  pulsation  in
brain,  especially  when  stooping.

I  I  High  fever,  vertigo,  roaring  in  head,  stitches  and  tear-
ing in  forehead,  temples  and  vertex ;  burning  in  eyes ;
chilliness  and  heat;  so  weak  he  could  scarcely  raise
himself  in  bed;  sleepless  at  night;  face  bloated,  at  one
time  pale,  at  another  dark  red ;  mouth  dry,  without
thirst;  pulse  rapid,  small;  eyes  dull,  distorted,  expres-
sionless ;  dry  cough ;  delirium  at  night,  sees  ghosts ;
during  day,  somnolence,  with  eyes  distorted  and  rolled
upward  ;  epistaxis. ^Inflammation  of  brain.

I  I  Inflammation  of  brain  after  sudden  suppression  of  leu-
corrhoea  by  cold  ;  severe  chill  followed  by  high  fever
headache,  nausea  and  vomiting  of  sour,  bitter  fluids
next  morning,  head  hot,  cannot  hold  it  erect;  skin  dry
urine  scanty ;  drowsiness  with  startings ;  confusion  of
head;  photophobia;  dilatation  of  pupils;  moderate
fever ;  grasping  at  genitals ;  vaginal  mucous  membrane
swollen,  congested,  excoriated  in  places,  dry.

I  I  Hydrocephalus  or hydrocephaloid  ; slimy  vomiting;
varying  stools ;  diarrhoea  at  night.
*  Outer  Head, i '  Biting  itching  of  scalp.

iRheumatic  headache,  <  on  one  side,  and  from  5  to  10
P.M. ;  crazing  pains  into  face  and  teeth.

■  Tingling,  biting,  itching  on  scalp,  mostly  on  temples  and

behind  ears,  followed  by  swelling  and  eruptions ;  sore
pain;  <  in  evening  and  when  undressing,  also  from
getting  warm  in  bed.

■  Tumors  on scalp,  suppurating and  affecting skull,  <

lying  on  well  side.

■  Fetid,  often  cold  sweat  on  one  side  of  head  and  face;

great  anxiety  ;  stupor ;  <  at  night  and  towards  morn-
ing; >  after  waking  and  rising.

■  Disposition  to  take  cold  in  head,  <  when  it  gets  wet;

head  sweaty.

■  Cannot  hold  head  upright,  cannot  raise  it;  it  seems  too

heavy.

■  Sweat  on  hairy  scalp.

^  Sight  and  Eyes. ■Oversensitiveness  to  light.

■  Flashing  of  fire,  as  if  slapped  in  face.
I  I  Fiery  circles  before  eyes.


587  PULSA.TILLA.

I  I  Flame  of  light  seems  surrounded  by  a  starry  halo.

I I  Like  a  veil  before  eyes,  >  rubbing  or  wiping  them.

1 1  Dryness  of  eyes  and  lids,  with  sensation  as  if  darkened
by  mucus,  which  ought  to  be  wiped  away.

iDimness  of  sight:  with  lachrymation  in  open  air;  like
a  fog  or  mist ;  especially  on  getting  warm  from  exer-
cise ;  with  inclination  to  vomit  and  paleness  of  face.

I  I  Dizzy  obscuration  of  vision  after  sitting,  on  rising  and

beginning  to  walk  about.

I I  Transient  obscuration  of  vision.
I  I  Diplopia.

I  I  Sensation  as  of  a  veil  before  eyes,  especially  in  a  bright

light,
lit  seems  dark  before  eyes  in  morning, on  rising  from  bed.

■  During  menses  it  became  black  before  eyes  and  she  felt

<  on  going  into  a  warm  room.
I  I  Loss  of  vision  at  night,  as  if  eyes  were  tightly  bound  by
a  cloth,  with  menstrual  disturbances.

I  I  During  an  attack  of  inflammatory  rheumatism  eyes  be-

came affected,  causing  blindness.

■  Amblyopia:  from  suppression  of  any  bloody  discharge;

from  metastasis  of  gout  or  rheumatism ;  from  gastric
derangement  with  heart  disease;  with  diminished
hearing.

I I  Amaurosis;  paralysis  of  optic  nerve.

I  I  Photophobia,  with  stitches  in  eyes,  when  light  impinges
upon  retina.

I  I  Great  tension  and  hardness  of  bulbus ;  appearance  of
bright  streaks  and  rainbow  colors  before  field  of  vision,
and  dimness  of  vision  in  outer  portions  of  visual  field  ;
slight  feeling  of  pressure  in  eye.

I  I  Subacute  cases  of  choroiditis  in  persons  subject  to
arthritis  vaga,  venous  hypersemia  of  capillaries,  press-
ing, tearing  and  throbbing  pain  in  head,  with  heavi-
ness and  vertigo,  dull  sight,  photophobia  and  fiery
circles  before  eyes.

N  Asthenopia  accommodativa,  with  much  aching  sensa-
tion in  eyes  after  using;  darting  pains  in  eyes  after
sewing  ;  asthenopia  from  general  prostration.

1  'Hemeralopia  with  amenorrhoea.

I  I  Conical  cornea  in  a  colored  girl,  set.  23;  occasional
shooting  pain  through  r.  eye;  fingers  could  only  be
counted  at  four  feet  with  r.  eye,  and  ten  feet  with  1.  eye ;
two  months  afterwards,  under  Puls.^^,  was  able  to  count
fingers  at  seven  feet  with  r.  eye,  and  twenty  feet  with  1.
eye.

I  Hypersemia  and  inflammation  of  optic  nerve  and  retina.


PULSATILLA.  588

ternal  recti  muscles;  highly  myopic;  sclera  slightl}^
bulged,  some  itching,  sticking  pain  in  ball,  with  dim-
ness of  vision  ;  eyes  >  in  open  air.

I  I  Iritis  with  dry  burning  heat  in  and  about  eye ;  oedema
of  lid,  secretion  of  mucus.

llHypersemia  of  retina,  after  suppression  of  acne;  she
sees  as  through  a  veil  and  mostly  double ;  reading  is
difficult ;  <  by  candlelight ;  after  exerting  eyes,  pain
in  r.  side  of  head,  and  ringing  in  r.  ear ;  menses  often
omit,  are  too  scanty,  of  too  short  duration,  with  excru-
ciating colicky  pains  and  bearing  down ;  constipated ;
hypersemia  of  retina;  injection  of  central  vessels  and
varicosity  of  veins.

I  I  Hypera3mia  of  choroid  consequent  upon  hyperopia ;
could  not  look  long  at  any  object ;  was  subject  to  severe
neuralgic  headaches  extending  into  eyes ;  head  felt  full
and  congested  ;  is  a  great  tea  drinker.

I  Trachoma,  usually  uncomplicated  with  pannus;  granu-
lations fine,  eye  dry,  or  accompanied  by  excessive  secre-
tion of  bland  mucus;  soreness  of  ball  to  touch  and  itch-
ing or  pain  in  eye,  <  in  evening  and  >  in  cool  air  or
by  cold  applications.

I  I  Pannus  dependent  upon  trichiasis.

I  Incipient  cataract.

Anchylops.

I  I  Pustule  forming  on  lower  border  of  cornea,  stye  on
lower  lid  ;  subject  to  eye  troubles  with  every  cold.

I  Conjunctivitis  pustulosa:  in  a  child  fifteen  months  old;
teething,  but  not  cross,  a  stye  preceded  attack ;  after
whooping  coagh,  agglutination  in  mornings,  feels  best
in  open  air  and  by  cold  aj)plications,  no  thirst;  with
profuse  whitish  discharge.

I  I  Two  pustules  on  conjunctiva  near  border  of  cornea  of  r.
eye,  Ijds  inflamed,  subject  to  styes;  eruption  on  hands.

I  I  Pustule  on  cornea  which  feels  <  in  evening,  lachry-
mation.

I  I  Pustule  on  centre  of  cornea  and  another  on  its  lower
margin ;  excessive  photophobia  and  constant  pain  in
eyes  and  ears,  wants  to  be  in  open  air  and  is  restless  at
night.

I  I  Pustule  with  a  constant  feeling  of  sand  in  eye.

I  i  Pustule  on  edge  of  cornea,  much  lachrymation,  edges  of
lids  red,  herpes  circinatus  on  each  cheek.

I  I  Pustules  on  conjunctiva,  with  sharp  stinging  pains,  great
lachrymation  and  redness.

I  I  Pustules  on  edge  of  cornea,  with  profuse  whitish-yellow
discharge,  lids  somewhat  swollen  and  inflamed.

■  Pustules  on  cornea  and  conjunctiva;  not  much  photo-


589  PULSATILLA.

phobia ;  some  redness  and  a  profuse  bland  white  or
yellow  discharge.

■  Keratitis  pustulosa  with  much  lachrymation  and  photo-

phobia ;  itching  in  eyes.

■  Ulcers  of  cornea  superficial,  resulting  from  phlyctenules.

■  Small  ulcers  occurring  near  centre  of  cornea,  with  no

vascular  supply,  especially  in  strumous  subjects,  with
phlyctenules  on  cornea  or  conjunctiva;  considerable
photophobia  and  pain.

■  Maculse  cornese.

■  Ulcers  of  cornea;  thick,  white  or  yellow,  bland  discharge,

>  in  open  air.

■  Pustular  keratitis,  with  profuse  lachrymation.
I  1  Obscuration  of  cornea.

■  Dryness  of  eyes,  with  sensation  in  morning  as  if  a  foreign

body  were  pressing  in  eye.

■  Pressure  as  from  sand  in  eye  when  reading.

■  Pressive  pain  in  eyes,  as  if  there  were  heat  in  them.

■  Pressive  pain  in  1.  eye.

■  Pressing,  tearing  and  stinging  in  eyes.

■  Pressive-burning  pain  in  eye,  as  if  a  hair  were  in  it.

■  ■Burning, itching in eyes, provokes rubbing and

scratching.

■  Tearing  and  shooting  in  eyes.

■  Stitches,  especially  from  light  and  in  sunshine.

I  I  Itching  of  ball,  in  external  canthus,  evenings,  and  ag-
glutination mornings.

■  Itching  of  eyes.

■  ■  Child  frequently  rubs  its  eyes.

I  I  Sensation  of  dryness  and  burning  heat  in  eyes,  <  in
evening ;  edges  of  lids  red  and  swollen ;  muco-purulent
matter  in  cantlii,  gluing  up  lids  in  morning;  conjunc-
tiva lax,  flaccid  and  unequally  red,  as  if  spotted.  ^Ca-
tarrhal ophthalmia.

I  I  Ophthalmia,  with  great  lachrymation  and  mucous  secre-
tion from  Meibomian  glands ;  agglutination  of  lids  in
morning.

I  I  Inner  surface  of  lids  congested  and  swollen ;  bundles  of
injected  vessels  on  conjunctiva,  converging  towards
cornea;  intense  redness  of  sclerotica ;  phlyctenulse  upon
cornea;  lachrymation  and  discharge  of  mucus;  great
photophobia;  stitching  pains  in  eyes, forehead  and  tem-
ples, <  evening  to  midnight ;  menses  scanty.

I  I  Inflammation  of  eyes;  severe  pain  around  eye;  sclerotic
injected;  bright  red  ring  around  cornea;  iris  affected ;
but  slight  inflammaton  of  conjunctiva ;  oedema  of  upper
lid  ;  profuse  mucous  discharge.

I  I  Lachrymation  in open  air,  when carrying anything


PULSATILLA.  590

upon  back;  agglutination  of  lids  in  morning;  severe
pressure  in  eyes,  as  of  sand.
I  I  Conjunctivitis  palpebrarum  et  oculi;  profuse  lachryma-
tion  during  day ;  dimness  of  vision  by  candlelight,  ne-
cessitating constant  wiping  of  eyes  and  accompanied  by
profuse  discharge,  which  agglutinated  lids  at  night  and
had  to  be  rubbed  off  in  morning  like  sand  ;  burning
and  itching  and  sensation  as  if  a  grain  of  sand  were  be-
tween eye  and  lid.

■  Granular conjunctivitis; want  of  thirst; granulations

generally  very  fine,  sometimes  dry  and  at  others  accom-
panied by  excessive  secretion  of  bland  mucus  and  not
much  photophobia;  heat  of  sun  not  agreeable;  wind
frequently  increases  lachrymation ;  >  from  cold
applications.
I  I  Stinging,  tearing  pains,  <  in  evening.  ^Rheumatic
ophthalmia.

I  I  Scrofulous  inflammation  of  conjunctiva,  with  abscesses

similar  to  styes  on  one  lid  of  each  eye;  photophobia;
lachrymation.

I I  Inflammation  of  eyes  after  suppressed  gonorrhoea.

■  Traumatic  inflammation  of  eye.

1 1  Pustular  conjunctivitis,  lachrymation  more  in  open  air
or  wind ;  discharge  thick,  yellow^,  bland,  profuse.

■  Ophthalmia  with  amenorrhoea.

■  ■Severe  ophthalmia; pain  relieved  from  cold  applica-

tions.

■  Blennorrhoea  of  conjunctiva  from  gonorrhoeal  contagion.

■  Ophthalmia  neonatorum;  profuse  yellow  purulent  dis-

charge, gluing  lids.

■  Catarrhal  conjunctivitis; especially  acute  form,  either

resulting  from  a  cold,  from  bathing,  or  an  attack  of
measles;  with  gastric  bilious  symptoms.

■  Early  stages  of  acute  phlegmonous  dacryocystitis.

■  ■Affections  of  lachrymal  sac,  in  children.

■  ■Fistula  lachrymalis,  discharging  pus  when  pressed.

■  ■Weeping  e3'es;  bleared  eyes.

■  Pupils  dilated  or  contracted.

■  Twitching  of  eyelids  with  dazzling  of  sight.
■Violent  sticking  in  eyelids  and  canthi  in  evening.

■  ■Itching  (biting)  burning  in  lids  in  evening.

■  Itching  in  inner  canthi,  like  the  healing  of  an  ulcer,  in

evening  after  sundown  ;  pressive,  fine,  sticking  pain
after  rubbing.

■Margin  of  lower  lid  inflamed  and  swollen,  with  lachry-
mation in  morning.

I  I  Stye  on  lid,  with  inflammation  of  white  of  eye,  now  in
one,  then  in  the  other  canthus,  with  drawing  tensive


591  PULSATILLA.

pains  in  eyes  on  moving  muscles  of  face,  and  with  ul-
cerated nostrils.

■  Inner canthus seems agglutinated with matter in

morning.

■  Great  itching and  burning  of lids,  <  in  evening,  in

a warm room,  from  a  cold  draft of  air;  > in  cold
open  air.
I  iStyes,  especially  on  upper  lid.

■  Swelling  and  redness  of  eyelids.

■  Recurrent  blepharitis,  conjunctiva  somewhat  congested,

lids  thick  and  red  on  margins.

■  Ciliary  blepharitis,  with  styes.

■  Lids  swollen,  itch,  burn,  not  excoriated;  >  from  rub-

bing ;  subject  to  styes,  especially  on  upper  lid.

■  Granular  lids,  dry  or  with  excessive  bland  secretion;  >

in  open  air,  but  not  in  wind.

■  Blepharitis  resulting  from  indulgence  in  high  living  or

fat  food,  accompanied  by  acne  of  face.
■Tarsal  tumors,  especially  of  recent  origin,  subject  to  in-
flammation or  wljen  accompanied  by  catarrhal  condi-
tion of  eye.

■  Spasmodic  action  of  lids,  with  lachrymation  and  photo-

phobia.

■  Stye  on  1.  side.

■  Troubles  of  lids  in  negroes.

^Hearing  and  Ears. ■■Sensation  as  if  ear  were  stopped,
with  roaring  in  it  like  a  loud,  distant  noise.

■  Noises  in  ear:  humming,  tinkling,  on  moving  head  or

body ;  ringing ;  sounds  of  wind  or  rushing  water,  after
4  P.M.;  roaring,  >  out-doors.

■  ■Deafness:  as  if  ears  were  stopped  up;  after  suppressed

measles;  with  otorrhoea;  from  cold  after  cutting  hair ;
from  catarrh  of  Eustachian  tube ;  with  hard,  black
cerumen;  chronic;  can  hear  better  on  the  cars.

I  I  Hearing  in  1.  ear  completely  lost;  roaring;  severe  pains
in  forehead  extending  to  root  of  nose,  with  rotary  ver-
tigo ;  <  in  evening.

I  I  For  several  years  hearing  in  r.  ear  impaired;  after
catching  cold  complete  deafness  in  it,  and  but  slight
hearing  in  left.

■  Hardness  of  hearing,  >  in  a  warm  room  and  <  in  cold,

damp  w^eather.
I  I  Jerking  in  outer  ear,  followed  by  heat  in  ear.

■  ■Otalgia:  pain  violent  as  from  something  forcing  out-

ward; jerking;  tearing;  darting;  tearing,  shooting;
pulsating  at  night.

■  Stitches  in  ears;  itching,  sticking,  deep  in.

I  I  Itching  in  ears,  is  almost  frantic,  rolls  eyes,  red  spots
on  cheeks,  palpitation  with  anxiety,  in  evening.


PULSATILLA.  592

iPhlyctenulse  on  drum  (to  prevent  ulceration).

I  I  Sudden  severe  pain  in  1.  ear,  she  nearly  lost  conscious-
ness; stitching,  tearing  pain  as  if  a  thick  body  were
being  forcibly  driven  into  ear,  extending  to  larynx  and
hindering  swallowing;  lachrymation  from  1.  eye;  twitch-
ing of  lids ;  flow  of  acrid-tasting  saliva.

iSevere  pain  in  ear,  continuing  through  night,  with  par-
oxysms of  increasing  severity,  but  causing  little  con-
cern during  day;  bland,  nearly  inoffensive  discharge
of  mucus  and  pus.

iSharp  pain  increasing  gradually  to  great  intensity,  then
ceasing  suddenly,  but  soon  increasing  again  ;.  external
meatus  red  and  swollen;  profuse  discharge,  or  dryness
of  auditory  canal ;  threatened  ulceration  and  perfora-
tion ;  sw^elling  of  cervical  glands. ^Otitis  media.

■  Severe  tearing  pains  deep  in  ears,  with  roaring  and
humming ;  pains  often  intolerable,  affecting  whole
head  ;  burning  heat  in  head  and  confusion  of  head  ;
eyes  inflamed,  protruding;  sensation  as  if  ears  would
burst  on  sneezing;  meatus  swollen  ;  discharge  of  blood
and  pus  from  ear ;  deafness  ;  fever.

I  I  After  suppressed  eruption  of  measles,  tearing  pain  in
head,  particularly  in  and  behind  r.  ear,  from  which  there
is  a  watery,  yellowish  discharge ;  region  behind  ear  in-
flamed and  swollen;  hardness  of  hearing;  fever,  thirst,
pulse  110.

I  I  Otitis  after  erysipelas;  erysipelatous  swelling  of  exter-

nal ear  and  of  meatus  so  that  latter  is  closed  and  hear-
ing prevented  ;  severe,  tearing,  stitching  pains,  occur-
ring in  shocks,  every  minute  or  so,  extending  from  ears
to  temples  and  followed  by  a  dulness  of  head  as  if  all
life  had  been  taken  out  of  head  ;  no  sleep  on  account  of
restlessness  and  anxiety ;  sensation  as  if  all  the  blood
would  go  to  heart;  starting  in  sleep,  delirium  ;  fever,
with  tossing  about,  dryness  of  mouth  and  throat,  with
frequent  desire  for  small  quantities  of  water ;  urine  red;
stool  hard,  dry;  fear  of  death.

I I  Otitis  media:  profuse,  thick,  yellowish  or  yellowish-green
discharge;  in  children;  severe  pain  in  ear,  especially  as
evening  sets  in,  continuing  through  night,  with  parox-
ysms of  increasing  severity,  but  causing  little  concern
during  day ;  later  a  bland  discharge,  not  especially  of-
fensive, consisting  of  mucus  and  pus.

1 1  Catarrhal  otitis;  deafness  with  feeling  as  if  ears  were
stopped  up,  with  rushing  noises  in  ears,  isochronous
with  pulse.

1 1  Otitis  externa:  pains  very  severe;  external  ear  and
meatus  red  and  swollen  ;  pains  <  at  night ;  sensation
as  if  something  were  crawling  out  of  ear.


593  PULSATILLA.

■  Otitis  with  delirium,  horrid pain,  swelling  of  internal

meatus,  ear  and  adjoining  parts.

lOtorrhoea  :  after  a  cold,  or  as  sequel  to  scarlet  fever,  mea-
sles, etc. ;  tearing,  stitchlike  pain  ;  redness  and  swelling
of  meatus ;  inflammation  of  Eustachian  tubes;  purulent
discharge;  flow  of  mucus  or  thick  pus;  chronic.

f  I  Sudden  swelling  of  lobes  of  ears  so  that  they  were  twice
the  natural  size;  swelling  bright  red,  with  burning,
perceptible  even  to  finger;  miliary  burning-stitching
eruption  on  chin,  about  umbilicus  and  on  scrotum.

I  Scabs  on  tragus.

I  I  Pressure  in  bone  above  r.  ear.
'Smell  and  Nose, i Imaginary  smells.

I  Loss  of  smell  with  catarrh.

I  Smell  as  of  old  catarrh  ;  objective  stench  from  nose.

iPressive  sensation  in  root  of  nose.

iPain  in  bones  on  both  sides  of  nose,  as  if  nose  would  be
forced  asunder.

■  Tickling  in  nose:  constant;  as  from  fine  snuff,  followed

by  violent  sneezing.

1  I  Sneezing :  in  evening,  in  sleep  ;  in  morning  in  bed.

•  iCoryza:  with  loss  of  smell  and  taste;  dry  and  fluent
alternately,  or  stopped  up  in  evening,  with  loss  of  smell
and  taste  and  appetite;  obstruction  of  nose  in  evening;
yellow  or  yellow-green  in  morning ;  nostrils  sore ;  wings
of  nose  externally  ulcerated  ;  oozing  of  watery  fluid  ;
conjunctiva  bulbi  inflamed,  with  sensation  as  if  eyes
were  covered  with  mucus  which  could  be  wiped  away;
chilliness  intermingled  with  heat,  with  headache ;  fluent
in  open  air ;  stopped  up  in  house ;  frontal  headache ;
photophobia;  rough  voice;  tearing  pains  in  sinus  max-
illaris,  extending  into  ear ;  dry  cough  at  night,  ceasing
on  sitting  up,  coming  back  on  lying  down  again  ;  after
inflammatory  stage  when  there  is  a  profuse  secretion  of
phlegm  ;  patient  feels  well  in  open  air,  but  is  attacked
with  violent  catarrh  as  soon  as  he  enters  a  room  and  in
evening.

I  I  After  catching  cold,  pain  in  one  side  of  head  and  face,

lasting  day  and  night;  profuse  discharge  of  mucus  from
nose,  at  times  bloody.

■  Frequent  alternation  of  fluent  and  dry  coryza,  with  nose-

bleed; loss  of  appetite  and  smell,  and  thick  yellow  or
green  and"  fetid  discharge. <?Coryza.

I I  Stoppage  of  nose  as  from  catarrh,  in  evening  on  going
to  bed,  and  in  morning  a  thick,  yellow,  opaque  mucus
as  in  old  catarrh,  is  blown  from  nose.

1 1  Nasal  mucus  offensive,  as  in  old  catarrh.
I  Green,  off'ensive  discharge  from  nose.

VOL. VIII. — 3.S.


PULSATILLA.  594

I  Purulent  discharge  from  r.  nostril.

iColds  of  newborn  children;  nose  obstructed  b}'  puru-
lent, thick,  crusty  mucus.
I  Nose  swollen  and  itching  in  evening.
I  Nose  feels  sore  internall}^  and  externally.
I  Abscess  at  root  of  nose,  near  inner  can  thus,  as  if  a  lachry-
mal fistula  would  form.
I  Bleeding  of  nose :  blood  coagulated ;  with  dry  coryza  ;
frequent,  profuse ;  with  suppressed  menses ;  in  anaemia ;
of  anaemic  children,  with  blue  eyes  and  blonde  hair.
■  Blowing  of  blood  from  nose,  in  morning.
I  I  For  two  weeks  profuse  discharge  of  blood  from  nose ;
hemorrhages  increased  in  spite  of  styptics;  discharge
partly  pale,  partly  clotted  blood,  intermitting  in  intens-
ity ;  attack  brought  on by  going  from cold air  into
warm  room ;  on  lying  down  would  pour  from  nose  and
it  stopped  on  raising  himself  up;  dull,  heavy  feeling-
over  frontal  sinuses;  ver}'  despondent,  especially  after
last  hemorrhage,  which  filled  a  pint  measure.
Upper  Face. ■  Sandy  hair,  blue  eyes,  pale  face.

I  Face:  pale  with  vertigo  ;  livid;  cold,  clammy  and  pale;
earthy,  with  dark  rings  around  eyes  ;  yellowish,  yet  feels
hot,  with  chilliness  (hypersemia  of  brain) ;  red,  every
evening ;  alternatel}^  red  and  pale ;  one  cheek  red,  the
other  pale;  pale  or  yellowish,  with  sunken  eyes;  puffed,
blue,  red  ;  cheeks  and  nose  puffed  ;  flushes.
I  Burning  of  r.  cheek.
I  I  Tension  efface  and  of  fingers,  as  if  parts  would  become

swollen.
I  I  Pressing,  constricting,  dull  throbbing  pains  in  r.  supra-
orbital region  extending  over  whole  r.  side  of  face,  par-
ticularly severe  in  zygomatic  region  and  hairy  portion
of  head  where  parts  feel  as  if  seized  by  pincers ;  attack
ends  with  profuse  lachrymation  from  r.  eye ;  coryza
and  stoppage  of  r.  nostril;  pinching  pressive  sensation
at  root  of  nose ;  ears  feel  as  if  stopped  up ;  sense  of
smell  impaired,  often  entirely  lost ;  thick,  yellow  dis-
charge from  r.  nostril  on  blowing  nose;  oppression  of
chest  during  attack ;  migraine  and  digestive  disturb-
ances; pain  <  from  least  occupation.  ^Facial  neu-
ralgia,
t  I  Neuralgia  r.  side  of  face  and  head,  <  at  night;  throb-
bing pain,  causing  intense  suffering;  face  flushed,  par-
ticularly r.  side ;  external  soreness  and  pulsation  in
head,  all  <  in  evening  and  when  stooping ;  says  she
always  had  these  spells  when  nursing  her  children,
and  that  now  menses  have  been  absent  seven  or  eight
months.


595  PULSATILLA.

I  I  Pain  in  1.  side  of  face  extending  from  supraorbital
region  to  teeth,  zygoma,  ear  and  nape  of  neck,  <  in  a
warm  room,  warmth  of  bed,  lying  with  head  low,  rest,
before  midnight,  and  from  warm  food  ;  chilliness  with
the  pain;  aversion  to  fat;  thirst  at  night;  constipation.

I  I  Every  morning  at  11  o'clock,  severe  pain  along  course
of  1.  infraorbital  nerve,  with  discharge  of  thick,  white
offensive-smelling  mucus  from  1.  nostril ;  pain  and  dis-
charge cease  at  4  p.m.  ;  pain  >  in  open  air.

I  I  Facial  neuralgia  1.  side,  commencing  in  foramen  men-
tale  and  extending  up  into  ear  ;  drawing,  tearing,  jerk-
ing, with  sensation  of  heat  and  dulness  of  head ;  ring-
ing in  ears,  and  great  nervous  excitation ;  comes  in
regular  intervals ;  <  from  talking,  chewing  and  lying
upon  affected  side,  from  taking  warm  or  cold  things  in
mouth  ;  more  through  day  than  through  night ;  she
cannot  bear  any  cold  application,  is  subject  to  vagrant
rheumarthritis,  and  has  been  treated  for  ten  days  with
quinine,  and  morphine  injections.

I  I  Peripheral  facial  paralysis ;  on  trying  to  move  facial
muscles  but  one  side  responded,  leaving  the  other  ex-
pressionless; levator  of  eye  and  of  nose  refused  to  act;  no
numbness  of  muscles;  metallic  taste;  could  not  restrain
his  tears ;  chilly  in-doors,  >  in  open  air ;  reflex  move-
ments intact.

■  Violent  faceache  of  a  jerking,  tearing  character;  parox-

ysms every  evening  at  six,  which  increased  in  intensity
till  midnight ;  pain  <  lying  down  and  from  heat ;  >
rising  up  and  from  cold.

I  I  Prosopalgia,  <  in  a  warm  room,  in  bed  and  from  hot
food ;  in  evening  till  midnight,  lying  with  head  low,
on  1.  side  or  on  side  not  affected ;  disgust  for  fat.

I  I  Facial  neuralgia;  lower  lip  is  swollen  with  a  deep  crack
in  middle ;  pain  is  often  attended  with  a  sensation  as  if
part  were  being  drawn  tighter  and  tighter  and  then  sud-
denly let  loose,  as  if  cutting  a  tight  string.

I  I  Pufhness  of  cheeks  and  nose.

I  I  Sweat  on  (one  side  of)  face  and  on  hairy  scalp.

■  Facial erysipelas, with stinging, pricking pain, skin

peels  off.
I  Skin  of  face  painfully  sensitive.
I  Acne  faciei  of  young  growing  girls.

I  I  Red  nodosities  on  cheek  bones.

I I  Mumps,  particularly  when  inflammation  is  transferred
to  mammary  gland  or  testicle.

'  Lower  Face. iBiting,  smarting  sensation  about  mouth.

I  I  Lower  lip  swollen  and  cracked  in  middle.
'"  Teeth  and  Gums, i  Looseness  of  painful  teeth.


PULSATILLA.  596

I  Drawing  jerking,  as  if  a  nerve  were  put  on  stretch,  and

then  let  loose ;  shooting  in  gums.
iLeft  side  of  face  sensitive;  stinging  in  decayed  teeth.
I  Throbbing,  digging  in  hollow  teeth,  with  drawing  ex-
tending to  eye;  also,  with  otalgia.
■  Toothache:  always  on  eating;  painful  on  chewing  and
biting  ;  as  if  teeth  would  be  forced  out;  on  taking  any-
thing hot  into  mouth ;  jerking,  especially  in  morning,
>  when  cold  water  taken  into  mouth  becomes  w^arm ;
caused  by  picking  teeth ;  tearing  pain ;  fine  sticliing,
gnawing  in  gum,  especiall}^  towards  evening,  <  from
warmth  of  bed,  >  by  uncovering  and  by  a  draft  of  cold
air;  rheumatic  tearing  in  side  of  face  sometimes  extend-
ing to  head  and  neck  ;  stinging,  in  decayed  teeth,  with
heat  in  head  and  chilly  over  whole  body ;  jerking  and
tearing  as  if  tooth  would  start  from  jaw; caused  by
drinking chamomile  tea  or  from abuse  of  quinine;
with  much  swelling,
i  I  Drawing,  tearing,  stitching  pains  along  alveolar  border,
extending  up  to  ears  and  temples,  <  in  evening  on  en-
tering warm  room,  >  in  open  air.
1  I  Tearing  in  r.  upper  and  lower  teeth,  <  towards  evening,
lying  with  head  low,  lying  on  sound  side,  from  warm
food  or  drink;  cannot  keep  quiet  during  pain,  walks
constantly about shaking her head ; pain prevents
sleeping  before  midnight;  is  sensitive  to  wind  and  draft
of  air;  during  fifth  month  of  pregnancy.
Toothache  ceases  out  of doors,  returns  on  coming  into

room.
I  Toothache  w^orse :  i  n  Spring  ;  at  night ;  from  picking  teeth  ;
in  warm  room  ;  in  warmth  of  bed  ;  when  eating,  but  not
.  from  chewing ;  when  sitting ;  from  cold  water,  or  from

anything  warm  in  mouth  ;  during  pregnancy.
■  Toothache better:  walking  about;  in  open  air;  when  cold

water  taken  into  mouth  becomes  warm.
iGums  painful  as  if  sore.
"Taste  and  Tongue.  iiTaste:  bad,  especially  early  in
morning;  nothing  tastes  well ;  no  taste  at  all;  .of  bad
meat ;  on  hawking,  especially  in  morning ;  slimy ;
pappy,,  sticky,  without  thirst ;  disgusting,  with  white
tongue,  in  morning ;  foul,  clammy.  Insipid ;  clammy,
wants  to  rinse  mouth  frequently ;  filthy,  tongue  much
coated, appetite  gone;  nauseous,  from  smoking  tobacco;
nauseous,  as  of  fasting,  as  if  one  had  risen  too  early,  in
morning;  burnt  taste;  bitter,  after  drinking  beer  in
evening,  continuing  even  when  smoking ;  bitter,  even
of  food ;  bitter,  bilious,  especially  after  eating  and
smoking ;  bitter,  with  desire  for  citric  acid ;  bitter,  for


597  PULSATILLA.

quarter  of  an  hour  after  eating,  with  good  appetite;

sweetish  ;  beer  tastes  sweet.
I  I  Greasy  taste  in  mouth. ^Chronic  nasal  catarrh.
Qualmish  nausea,  in  morning.
I  Diminished  taste  for  all  food.
I  Loss  of  taste,  with  catarrh  ;  nothing  tastes  well.

■  Painful  blister  on  side  of  tip  of  tongue.

llTongue covered with tenacious mucus, as with  a
membrane.

■  Dryness  of  tongue  in  morning.

■  Sensation  on  middle  of  tongue,  even  when  it  is  moistened,

as  if  it  had  been  burnt  and  were  insensible,  at  night
and  in  morning.

■  Biting  in  tip  of  tongue.

■  Edges  of  tongue  feel  sore  as  if  scalded.

■  ■Tongue: white  or  yellow  and  coated  with  tenacious

mucus;  parched,  dry,  no  thirst;  feels  too  broad,  too
large.
I  I  Tongue  greatly  swollen,  dorsum  bright  red  and  covered
with  a  network  of  dilated  and  congested  veins ;  varicose
swelling  on  1.  side  of  tongue;  use  of  tongue  greatly
hindered ;  tensive  burning  pains ;  no  fever ;  mental
and  physical  depression  ;  hemorrhoids  ;  gout.
^^  Inner  Mouth.  ■Putrid  smell  from  mouth,  especially  in
morning.

■  In  morning,  mouth  and  pharynx  dry  and  covered  with

tasteless,  insipid  mucus,  with an  offensive  odor  from
mouth  not  perceptible  to  himself.

■  ■Great  dryness  of  mouth  in  morning,  without  thirst.

I  I  Painless  sensation  as  if  roof  of  palate  were  covered  with
tenacious  mucus  or  were  swollen.

■  Accumulation  of  saliva  and  much  mucus  in  mouth.

■  Mouth  covered  with  offensive mucus,  in morning on

waking.

■  Discharge  of  watery  saliva  like  waterbrash.

■  Flow  of  sweetish  or  tenacious  saliva.

■  ■Constant  spitting  of  frothy,  cottonlike  mucus.

■  ■Parotitis;  metastasis  to  testicles  or  to  mammae.

13  TJiroat. ■Sensation  as  from  sulphur  vapor  in  throat  while
coughing.

■  Scraping  and  dryness  in throat,  causing  paroxysms  of

two  or  three  coughs.

■  Rawness,  scraping  and  scratching  in  throat,  with  dryness

of  mouth.

■  Constricted  feeling  about  throat.

■  Throat  posteriorly  painful,  as  if  raw,  with  drawing  pain

in  cervical  muscles.

■  Feeling  in  oesophagus  as  if  food  were  lying  there.


PULSATILLA.  598

■  Sensation  as  of  a  worm  creeping  up  into  throat.

■  When  swallowing:  stinging  with  pressure  and  tension  ;

cutting  burning ;  stitches  between  acts  of  swallowing ;
as  if  swollen,  or  a  lump  in  throat;  <  swallowing  saliva
and  after  food.

■  Veins  distended,  throat  inflamed,  bluish-red.
llThroat dry, < mornings; tough mucus, especially

night  and  morning.
I  Sore  throat,  with  sense  of  dysphagia  ;  she  feels  as  if  she
would  be  choked.

■  Globus  hystericus.

I  I  Stitching  pains  in  throat,  difficult  deglutition  with
fever,  <  in  evening ;  dark  redness  of  throat,  tensive
tearing  pains,  particularly  in  nape  of  neck  and  occiput.

I  I  Throat  and  pharynx  swollen ;  throat  pains  as  if  sore,
particularly  on  swallowing,  when  there  is  a  sensation  as
if  he  had  to  swallow  over  a  lump;  velum  and  pharynx
congested,  bluish-red,  roof  of  mouth  being  rather  white;
severe  sore  pain ;  diarrhoea ;  chilliness,  often  followed
by  heat.

■  Catarrh  of  throat;  marked  redness  of  tonsils;  varicose

condition  of  bloodvessels  ;  fauces  dark-red  or  purplish  ;
stinging  pains  in  throat,  <  swallowing  saliva  or  after
food.

M Catarrhal-rheumatic  pharyngitis;  for  several  days  se-
vere pains  in  back  and  limbs,  headache,  sore  throat.

I  I  Dilated  or  varicose  veins  in  throat.

1  I A  girl,  set.  15,  while  dining  felt  a  constriction  in  throat,
could  not  eat,  wept,  lost  all  power  of  speech  ;  oppression
and  tightness  of  chest ;  crampy  pain  in  stomach  ;  dis-
turbed sleep  at  night;  head  rather  heavy;  since  first
menstruation  courses  irregular,  rather  scanty,  not  of
natural  color.
^*  Appetite,  Thirst.  Desires,  Aversions.  ■Hunger:  but
does  not  know  for  what ;  does  not  relish  anything  he
eats ;  eats  greedily,  followed  by  vomiting.

■  Entire  loss  of  appetite;  child  refuses  breast.

I  I  Thirst:  drinks  often,  but  little  at  a  time,  it  provokes
inclination  to  vomit ;  during  heat ;  for  beer,  chiefly  in
morning;  for  alcoholic  drinks.

■  ■Thirstlessness,  with  moist  or  dry  tongue.

■  Desire  for:  sour,  refreshing  things;  herring;  lemonade.

■  Aversion  to:  meat,  butter,  fat  food,  pork,  bread,  milk,

smoking.
^^  Eating  and  Drinking. ■Stomach  disordered  from  cakes,
pastry,  rich  food,  particularly  fat  pork.
I  I  Complaints  from  eating  buckwheat.
I  I  Bad  effects  from  onions.


599  PULSATILLA.

I  Better  from  cold  thing;s,  <  from  warm.
^^  Hiccough, Belching, Nausea and  Vomiting. 1 1  Hic-
cough while  smoking ;  after  cold  fruit ;  after  drinking ;
at  night.

■  Eructations  :  loud ;  of  gas ;  tasting  and  smelling  of  food  ;

bitter,  bilious  ;  rancid;  sour;  like  bile,  in  evening;  tast-
ing of  cold,  rancid  tallow,  after  eating  cakes  ;  as  of  bad
meat,  after  dinner;  taste  remains  in  mouth,  with
qualmish  nausea ;  of  sour  liquid  after  drinking  coffee.

■  Uprisings  into  throat,  preceded  by  rumbling  in  abdo-

men and  colic.

■  Incomplete  inclination  to  eructate;  eructations  are  inef-

fectual and  do  not  actually  occur.

■  Heartburn,  waterbrash.

■  Qualmishness  with  chilliness.

■  Nausea:  frequent;  rises  up  into  throat  and  mouth  ;  dur-

ing menses,  at  night,  water  rose  from  stomach  with
retching  like  waterbrash ;  felt  in  upper  part  of  abdo-
men ;  while  eating,  food  is  repulsive;  with  heartburn;
with  rumbling  and  gurgling  in  hypochondria;  qualm-
ish, without  vomiting;  with  colic,  ceasing  after  vomit-
ing ;  at  night,  with  sticking,  drawing  pains  in  back,
extending  towards  scapulae  ;  of  food,  in  evening,  fol-
lowed by  bitterness  in  mouth,  with  teeth  set  on  edge;
of  food  that  had  been  eaten  a  long  time  before.

■Vomiting:  of  mucus,  of  blood,  from  a  cold  in  stomach
or  suppressed  menses ;  of  bilious  matter ;  sour,  green ;
chronic,  after  eating;  caused  by  fruit,  fats,  pastr}^,  ices;
with  pale  face  and  chilliness.

I  I  Vomiting  of  food  after  dinner;  if.  food  is  warm  and
hastily  eaten  it  is  vomited  very  soon  after  eating,  if
cold  and  eaten  slowly  it  is  retained  for  a  longer  period,
if  hot  it  is  vomited  immediately  ;  oppressive  sensation
in  epigastrium  when  pressed  upon ;  oppression,  tension
and  shortness  of  breath  on  walking  fast;  appetite  good;
tongue  clean  ;  awakes  at  night  from  sensation  of  inter-
nal heat,  sweat  towards  morning.

I  I  Cannot  retain  food;  it  comes  up  hours  afterwards  just
as  swallowed;  vomiting  and  purging  at  same  time;
during  retching,  cold  sweat ;  constant  shivering;  bitter
taste,  even  saliva  is  bitter.

I  I  Chronic  vomiting  of  food,  often  several  hours  after
eating,  with  paleness  of  face,  colicky  pains  and  irri-
tability.

■  Morning  sickness;  nausea  and  vomiting  during  preg-
nancy.
'^  Scrobicuium  and  Stomach.  iPain  in  pit  of  stomach,  dur-
ing an  inspiration  ;  also  on  pressure.


PULSATILLA.  600

■  Pressure  in  pit  of  stomach,  with  difficult  breathing ;  after

every  meal,  vomiting  of  food.
•  Sensation  as  if  food  were  lodged  above  pit  of  stomach

undigested ;  weight  as  from  a  stone,  early  morning  on

waking.
Weight  in  epigastrium  an  hour  after  eating,  >  after  eating

again.

■  Tension  from  stomach  to  chest.

■  Throbbing  in  epigastrium;  perceptible  pulsation.

■  Griping  pain  in  pit  of  stomach.

■  Sensation  in  stomach  as  if  one  had  eaten  too  much ;  food

rises  up  into  mouth,  as  if  one  would  vomit.

■  Constant pressure in  stomach,  <  after fat  food;  sour

belching and vomiting; diarrhoea alternating with
constipation;  menses  scanty.

■  Feeling  of  fulness  and  heaviness  in  stomach  after  eating.

■  Stitching  pains  <  when  walking  or  making  a  misstep.

■  Crampy  pains  before  breakfast  or  after  meals.

■  Gnawing  distress  like  ravenous  hunger  when  stomach  is

empty  ;  pressure  and  pinching  after  eating.

■  Painful  crawling  in  stomach.

■  Dull  pain  and  sensation  of  fulness  in  stomach.

■  Cardialgia  during  menses.

■  Pain  in  stomach  an  hour  after  eating.

■  Pinching-pressive or retching pain  in  stomach,  takes

away  breath,  in  afternoon.

■  ■Scraping  sensation  in  stomach  and  oesophagus  like  a

heartburn.

■  Feeling  of  rawness  in  stomach  as  from  ulceration.

M  Pressure  in  stomach,  tearing  between  shoulder  blades,
and  during  pain  there  is  great  flow  of  saliva;  pains
sometimes  begin  in  abdomen,  vomiting  of  food  with
the  pain. ^Cardialgia.

1  I  After  eating,  pain  in  epigastrium  extending  to  back  and
abdomen,  lasting  about  an  hour  and  terminating  in
waterbrash  ;  bowels  costive ;  pain  and  vomiting  most
severe  in  evening;  for  two  j^ears  troublesome  cough,
with  thick,  white  expectoration. ^Lidigestion.

I  I  Every  morning,  2  or  3  o'clock,  tensive,  stitching  pain
in  epigastric  region,  disturbing  sleep,  must  rise  and
walk  about,  <  lying  down  ;  pains  cease  S  to  9  a.m.  ;  six
months  pregnant.

I  1  Cramping  pains  begin  in  evening  with  shaking  chill,  last
all  night,  often  so  severe  that  he  rolls  about  floor  as  if
mad,  cease  towards  morning  with  retching  of  bitter,
watery  fluid  ;  vertigo,  headache,  dry  mouth  with  thirst-
lessness;  poor  appetite,  can  drink  no  water,  constipa-
tion, sleep  disturbed  even  during  day.


601  PULSATILLA.

I  1  GastrodyDi£l,  lasts  from  one  to  two  weeks ;  she  sat  in  a
rocking  chair  bent  forward,  constantly  rocking,  suffer-
ing so  much  that  sweat  was  running  from  her  face ;
constant  pain  in  stomach,  but  every  few  minutes  she
would  cry  out  from  severity  of  pain ;  had  been  suffer-
ing about  two  hours,  and  in  that  time  had  vomited
frequently,  jfirst  food,  but  now  only  a  slimy  mucus  of
intense  acid  odor,  setting  teeth  on  edge;  bowels  inclined
to  be  costive.

1  I  Pain  in  stomach,  <  from  food,  after  which  there  are
violent  pulsations  at  pit  of  stomach ;  pyrosis ;  pain  in
front  and  back  of  head  after  sickness;  impaired  ap-
petite. ^Indigestion.

i  I  Region  of  stomach  extremely  sensitive  to  pressure,  par-
ticularl}^  on  1.  side;  stitches  in  1.  side;  menses  absent
several  months. ^Cardialgia.

iStomach  bloated,  hard;  flatulency.

J  i Lassitude,  confusion  of  head,  loss  of  appetite;  attacks
of  chilliness  and  heat,  confining  her  to  bed;  headache;
sensorial  dulness ;  sleepy,  dreamy  condition,  with  lan-
guid eyes ;  offensive,  bitter  taste  in  mouth  ;  tongue  dry
at  tip  and  sides ;  nausea  and  several  times  voluntary
vomiting;  pulse  rapid,  hard  ;  vomiting  of  bile  ;  bilious
stools. ^Gastric  fever.

^  I  Want  of  appetite,  especially  at  night;  tympanitis  with
rumbling  commencing  in  evening  and  increasing  at
night;  three  or  four  thin  stools,  sometimes  containing
ingesta,  only  at  night;  weakness  and  anaemia;  has  been
suffering  since  menses  ceased.  ^Dyspepsia  with  amen-
orrhoea.

i  I  Pains  in  abdomen  and  chest  and  under  shoulder;  flat-,
ulence;  food  tastes  a  long  time  after  it  has  been  taken  ;
aching  in  forehead,  sometimes  coming  up  from  back  of
head,  >  in  morning,  <  towards  evening;  bowels  regu-
lar. 6'Indigestion.

I  Aching  in  stomach  <  after  eating;  bitter  taste  in  mouth
in  morning;  feels  bloated  two  hours  after  eating;  can-
not bear  clothes  tight  on  abdomen ;  empty  feeling  of
stomach  and  bowels;  no  thirst;  light  hurts  her  eyes
and  makes  her  nervous;  >  in  open  air;  bearing  down
at  anus  not  >  by  stool ;  leucorrhoea.

1  I  Swelling  of  scrobiculus  cordis,  with  hardness  extending
more  to  r.  side  (1.  lobe  of  liver) ;  appetite  good,  often
hungry,  eats  and  drinks  a  great  deal ;  is  obliged  to
loosen  all  her  clothes  after  eating;  cannot  lie  on  1.  side ;
stool  firm  ;  passes  but  little  urine  during  night,  but
often  a  large  quantity  after  eating;  if  she  refrains  from
passing  urine, has  cutting  pains  in abdomen  wdiicli


PULSATILLA.  602

extend  even  to  tongue  and  limbs;  soreness  of  chest
after  speaking  and  motion;  throat  seems  swollen,  fre-
quent attempts  to  clear  throat;  menses  pale  and  scanty.

•  Gastric  catarrh  from  cold  beverages,  ice-cream,  fruit  and

pastry  ;  pain  as  from  subcutaneous  ulceration.
'^Hypochondria, l Darting,  tensive  pains  in  hepatic  region.

•  Sticking  in  region  of  liver,  particularly  when  walking.

•  Feeling  of  lassitude  in  hypochondria.

•  Jaundice in consequence of  chronic susceptibility to

hepatitis  and  derangement  of secretion  of bile,  with
looseness  of  bowels ;  duodenal  catarrh  ;  disordered  di-
gestion; feverishness  and  thirstlessness ;  after  quinine.
I  I  Spleen  enlarged. ^Ague.

•  Catarrh  of  pancreatic  duct,  in  girls.

'^Abdomen. Abdomen and  stomach distended ;  she must
unlace. -

•  Flatulent  distension,  always  after  eating.

•  •Rumbling  and  gurgling  in  abdomen.

•  •Flatus  moves  from  one  part  of  intestines  to  another^

with  loud  rumbling  and  gurgling  and  a  griping  sensa-
tion, <  on  walking  just  after  supper,  or  in  evening
in  bed.

•  Emission  of  fetid  flatus.

•  •Incarcerated  flatus,  with  colic  in  evening.

•  Colic  and  rumbling  of  wind  especially  in  upper  abdomen.

•  Fulness  after  eating,  and  from  time  to  time  colic,  with

rumbling.

•  Dull  pain  and  sensation  of  tense  distension  in  upper

abdomen.

•  iPressive  pain  in  abdomen  and  small  of  back,  pressing

downward  like  a  stone,  during  menses  lower  extremi-
ties inclined  to  fall  asleep,  while  sitting;  ineffectual
desire  for  stool.

•  •Pressure  in  abdomen  and  small  of  back,  just  before

menses,  as  from  a  stone,  with  disposition  of  lower  limbs
to  go  to  sleep,  while  sitting;  ineffectual  desire  for  stool.

•  •Drawing  and  drawing- tensive  pains,  extending  from

abdomen  through  spermatic  cords  into  testicles,  which
hang  low.

•  •Drawing- tensive  pains  in  abdomen  like  labor  pains.

•  Constrictive  and  pinching  sensation  in  upper  abdominal

and  hypochondriac  regions,  as  from  incarcerated  flatus^
especially  after  eating;  changes  to  chest  and  takes  away
breath.

•  Cutting  pains  in  abdomen  above  umbilicus,  as  if  diar-

rhcea  would  set  in.

•  Pressive  constrictive  pain  like  a  stone  in  lower  abdomen,

extending  to  bladder.


603  PULSATILLA.

I  Violent  cutting  pain  low  down  in  abdomen;  a  forcing

down  into  pelvis,  with  sensation  as  if  stool  would  occur,
<  when  drawing  in  walls  of  abdomen.

I I  Cutting  and  dragging  in  hypogastric  region  around  to
loins,  making  her  feel  faint.

.iStitches  and  cutting  in  abdomen  in  evening; <  on  sit-
ting still.
I  Griping  pains  in  upper  abdomen.

I  Jerking  or  tearing  in  bowels.

I I  Pain  in  lower  chest  and  abdomen,  obliging  her  to  bend
forward.

I  Colic:  after  drinking ;  as  if  diarrhoea  would  ensue,  but
only  a  normal  stool  results ;  after  stool ;  with  nausea,
ceasing  after  vomiting;  laborlike  pains,  in  pregnant
women ;  with  chilliness,  while  menstruation  is  sup-
pressed;  from  cold,  with  diarrhoea;  from  ices,  fruits,
pastries ;  from  getting  feet  wet ;  pains  <  sitting  or  lying,
>  walking ;  flatulent,  after  a  meal,  or  very  early  in
morning,  while  in  bed ;  before  or  after  eating,  in  even-
ing; of  hysteric  women;  brought  on  by  eating  fat  or,
greasy  things.

■  Painful  sensitiveness  of  abdomen.

I  Externally  abdominal  walls  are  tender  to  touch,  when

coughing  or  sitting,  especially  at  stool.
I  Sensitiveness  and  inflammation  of  abdominal  walls.
I  I  Abdominal  spasms;  also  of  pregnant  women.

■  Lumps  in  both  groins  hard  and  painful.

■  Small  pustules  in  groins.

^  Stool  and  Rectum. ■  Frequent  urging,  as  if  diarrhoea  would
occur.

■  Diarrhoea:  watery; not exhausting; with or without

colic;  with  cutting  in  abdomen;  nightly,  with  rum-
bling in  abdomen ;  after  errors  in  diet,  especially  pork
or  fat  food,  fruit  or  ice-cream.

■  ■Stools:  watery,  only  or  usually  at  night,  sometimes  un-

consciously evacuated ;  greenish-yellow,  slimy,  very
changeable;  like  bile,  following  rumbling  in  abdomen;
offensive,  corrosive;  of  white  and  bloody  mucus;  pu-
rulent; soft,  mixed  with  mucus;  of  green  mucus;  at
first  green,  then  slimy  ;  as  green  as  bile;  white,  slimy,
bilious ;  resembling  stirred  eggs ;  perfectly  white ;
changeable,  no  two  alike ;  variable,  >  and  <  ;  as  soon
as  they  begin  to  eat  they  must  go  to  stool ;  after
measles.

■  Discharge  of  blood  and  mucus; face  pallid; fainting;

dysuria.

■  Frequent  desire  for  stool,  with  insufiicient  evacuation  or

no  feces;  instead  thereof,  yellowish  mucus,  sometimes
mixed  with  blood.


PULSATILLA.  604

I  I  After  getting  feet  wet,  attacks  of  mucous  diarrhoea,  more
or  less  every  week,  discharges  occur  nearly  every  hour ;
she  passes  sometimes  a  tumblerful  of  slime  at  once;
evacuations  are  accompanied  by  nausea,  faintness,  some-
times vomiting  of  mucus;  <  about  bedtime.  ^Diar-
rhoea mucosa.

■  Before  stool:  headache;  rumbling,  cutting  colic;  pains

in  small  of  back.

■  During  stool:  burning  and  cutting  in  rectum;  pain  in

abdomen,  back  and  head;  eructation,  nausea;  attacks
of  faintness,  shaking  chills.

■  After  stool:  colic  as  from  flatulence;  chilliness  in  small

of  back;  smarting  of  anus;  pressing,  stinging  and  cut-
ting in  rectum ;  pressing  in  epigastrium ;  stiffness  of
neck ;  backache.
I  Aggravation  :  at  night;  after  measles,  pork  or  fat  food,
ice-cream,  fruit,  tobacco  or  cold  drinks;  from  damp
places ;  from  warmth  or  in  a  warm  room.

■  Amelioration:  in  open  air,  or  in  a  cool  place.

■  Dysenteric  stools  of  clear  yellow,  red  or  green  slime;  pain

in  back ;  straining.

■  Dysentery  during  cholera  time.

■  Frequent  stools  of  mucus  only,  after  dysentery.

I  I  Cholera  morbus  from  drinking  ice-water;  tongue  white;
clammy  taste ;  restless  and  sleepless  during  night  but
gets  an  hour's  quiet  sleep  at  about  6  a.m.;  no  appetite;
bowels  torpid,  >  in  morning.

■  Stools  of  deep-green  mucus ;  pain  in  abdomen  ;  no  thirst.

^Cholera  infantum.

■  Cholera  infantum  ;  slight  nightly  attacks;  disturbed  lac-

teal secretion  of  mother.

■  Difficult  soft  stool  with  straining  and  backache.

■  Costive  stools:  hard  and  large  after  suppressed  intermit-

tent fever  by  quinine ;  hard,  scanty ;  bloody.

■  Obstinate  constipation,  nauseous  bad  taste  in  the  morn-

ing, must  wash  out  mouth.

■  Constipation  with  headache,  at  intervals  of  one,  two  or

three  days.

■  Chronic  constipation;  menstrual  function  irregular.

■  Alternation  of  hard  and  soft  stools.

■  Pressure  in  rectum  after  stool.

■  Persistent  dull  stitches  in  rectum,  as  from  incarcerated

flatus.

■  Hemorrhoids:  painful,  protruding,  blind;  with  itching

and  stitches  in  anus ;  preceded  by  pains  in  small  of
back,  in  morning ;  with  great  soreness ;  itching,  in  even-
ing ;  discharge  of  blood  and  mucus  with  stool,  accom-
panied by  painful  pressure ;  pale  face,  tendency  to  faint.


605  PULSATILLA.

■  Profuse  bleeding  from  anus  during  stool.

■  Worms:  vomits  mucus; bad  smell  from  mouth ; slimy

passages ;  belching  watery  fluid.
I  I  Tapeworm.  '^^^

''Urinary  Organs.  Il  Pains  in  kidneys,  also  on  urinating;
discharge  of  blood  and  mucus,  purulent  sediment  in
urine ;  emaciation.  ^^\^/](^

■  Tenesmus  of  bladder;  stinging  in  neck  of  bladder.

■  Region  of  bladder  painful  to  external  touch.

1  I  Sharp,  almost  cutting  pressure  upon  neck  of  bladder,
while  walking  in  open  air,  as  from  flatulence,  though
without  desire  to  urinate.

■  Ischuria,  with  redness  and  heat  over  region  of  bladder.

■  ■Frequent  desire  to  urinate;  great  urgency,  it  seems  im-

possible to  delay  ;  wdien  going  to  urinate  there  is  a  sen-
sation as  if  it  would  gush  away,  can  scarcely  wait.

■  Frequent  desire  to  urinate  with  drawing  in  abdomen,

particularly  in  pregnant  women.

■  Frequent  almost  inefiectual  urging  to  urinate,  with  cut-

ting pains.
1  i  Urging  to  urinate ;  severe  burning  stitching  pains  in
neck  of  bladder ;  mucous  sediment  in  urine  adhering
firmly  to  vessel; must  urinate  every  hour; pain  on
urinating  lasting  several  minutes.

■  Retention  of  urine  with  heat  in  region  of  bladder  and

uneasy  pain  in  abdomen,  accompanied  by  urinary
tenesmus.

I  I  After  exposure  to  rain  and  sitting  in  a  cold  room  next
morning  could  not  void  urine,  which,  when  drawn  by
catheter,  w^as  quite  bloody  ;  retention  of  urine  with  con-
stant urgency  ;  no  thirst;  slight  fever ;  flatulent  condi-
tion of  stomach  and  bowels.

I  I  For  twenty-four  hours  no  discharge  of  urine ;  every  half
hour  a  paroxysm,  during  which  child  presses  anxiously
upon  abdomen,  groans,  cries  out,  arches  body,  gets  red
and  distorts  face ;  region  of  bladder  red  and  hot  to
touch.

■  Difficult  urination,  urine  discharged  drop  by  drop.

■  Spasm  of  bladder  in  hysterical  woman;  constrictive  pain

in  region  of  bladder,  with  urinary  tenesmus  and  invol-
untary emissions  of  a  little  urine.

■  ■Tenesmus  vesicae.

■  Cystitis  or  catarrh  of  bladder;  frequent  urging  to  uri-

nate from  pressure  on  bladder;  as  if  bladder  were  too
full;  pain  in  urethra;  urine  turbid  from  admixture  of
m  ucus.

■  Vesical  catarrh :  incontinence  of  urine;  enuresis  nocturna;

frequent  desire  to  urinate,  with  a  drawing  sensation  in


PULSATILLA.  606'

abdomen;  spasmodic  pain  in  neck  of  bladder  after  mic-
turition, extending  to  pelvis  and  thighs ;  involuntary
discharge  of  urine  when  coughing ;  urine  is  discharged
in  drops  when  sitting  or  walking ;  burning  in  urethra
while  urinating;  hsematuria;  scanty  red-brown  urine,
with  brick-colored  sediment ;  bloody  or  mucous  deposit.

I  Irritability  and  catarrhal  inflammation  of  bladder.

I  I  Urinary  difficulties  increased  by  taking  cold.

I  I  Cystic  symptoms  accompanying  pregnane}^ ;  retention
of  urine  after  childbirth.

■  Irritability  of  bladder;  frequent  desire  to  urinate;
painful  sensation  on  turning  over  in  bed,  as  if  bladder
would  fall  towards  side  on  which  he  is  lying;  pain
in  region  of  bladder  on  walking,  >  from  pressure  of
hand.

I  Involuntary  micturition:  urine  dribbles  while  sitting  or
walking ;  while  coughing  or  passing  wind ;  at  night  in
'bed,  especially  in  little  girls.

J  1  Incontinence  of  urine  since  birth  of  eighth  child,
a  year  ago;  urging  to  urinate,  with  scanty  secretion;
discharge  of  urine  while  l3nng  down,  with  sensation  as
if  movement  of  bowels  would  follow ;  pain  in  external
parts  when  walking;  leucorrhoea.  ^Paralysis  of  sphincter
vesicae.

i  I  Enuresis  nocturna  for  two  years,  in  a  girl  set.  5|,of  mild
disposition,  fair  complexion,  frequently  changing  color,
delicate  frame ;  the  complaint  has  been  preceded  by  an
acute  exanthema,  jDrobably  measles.

•  Nocturnal  enuresis:  after  measles;  <  in  Autumn;  par-
ticularly little  girls.

I  After  micturition  spasmodic  pains  in  neck  of  bladder,
extending  to  pelvis  and  thighs.

I  At  end  of  urination,  dropping  of  blood  ;  ha3maturia.

i  I  Hsematuria ;  burning  pain  at  orifice  of  urethra;  con-
stricting, cutting  pain  about  navel,  extending  to  small
of  back,  where  it  is  particularly  severe  and  of  longest
duration ;  penis  and  scrotum  spasmodically  drawn  up  ;
cramping  pain  in  r.  leg,  from  knee  up  to  inguinal
region.

.1  Urine:  profuse,  watery,  colorless,  in  hysterical  com-
plaints; brown;  scanty,  no  thirst;  sediment  reddish,
bloody  or  mucous,  jellylike,  sticking  to  vessel ;  loaded
with  large  quantities  of  urate  of  ammonia,  showing  a
wasting,  hectic  condition.

I  Constitutional  disturbances  in  children,  associated  with
copious  excretion  of  urate  of  ammonia.

iBurning  in  urethra :  in  orifice  of  urethra,  during  and
after  urination.


^07  PULSATILLA.

I  I  Soreness of external meatus and burning  sensation
when  urinating,  >  bathing  in  cold  water.

■  Before urinating: burning in urethra; pressing in

bladder ;  colicky  pains.

■  During  urination:  burning,  cutting,  stinging;  discharge

of  acrid,  mucous  stools,  with  sensation  of  weakness  in
loins.

•  After  urination:  burning;  pressing,  creeping  in  glans  or

meatus ;  spasmodic  pain  of  neck  of  bladder  extending
into  thighs ;  dropping  of  blood.
^^  Male  Sexual  Organs. iSexual  desire  too  strong;  almost
priapism.
I  Long-lasting  morning  erections.

■  Nightly emissions: two in one night,  with amorous

dreams ;  with  mental  depression ;  eyes  felt  as  if  they
would  push  back  into  orbit,  head  light  and  empty,  as  if
it  were  off  shoulders ;  after  onanism.

■  Sexual  excesses  resulting  in  headache;  backache;  limbs

heavy.

■  ■Burning and aching of testicles, with or without

swelling ;  orchitis.

■  ■Gonorrhoea: with thick  yellow  or  yellow  green dis-

charge ;  in  blonde  men  of  mild  temperament ;  in  Avomen.

■  ■Suppressed  gonorrhoea:  with  swelling  of  testicles,  con-

traction of  urethra  and  discharge  of  dark-colored  blood,
with  tendency  to  inflammation  of  eyes;  prostatitis;
rheumatism,  pains  Avander  quickly  from  one  part  to  an-
other ;  strictures  of  urethra ;  chordee.

■  Venous  congestion  of  penis.

■  Prostatitis,  with  great  heat  and  pressure  in  perineum,

frequent  and  almost  ineffectual  urging  to  urinate  ;  fre-
quent erections  with  loss  of  prostatic  fluid  ;  constrictive
pain,  extending  to  bladder,  with  pressure  as  from  a
stone.
<  I  After  urinating,  severe  pinching  pressing  pain  in  peri-
neum, in  region  of  neck  of  bladder,  somewhat  to  1.  side
and  extending  throughout  whole  lower  pelvis  and
down  into  thighs ;  pain  so  severe  that  patient  cannot
move  for  several  moments  and  limps  for  some  time  after-
wards ;  urine  escapes  in  gushes  so  that  the  pain  is  felt  ten
to  twelve  times  during  an  evacuation  ;  region  of  neck  of
bladder  swollen  and  very  painful  when  sitting  and
standing ;  lame  sensation  and  restless  feeling  in  1.  thigh
when  standing. ^Inflammation  of  prostate.

■  ■  Prostate  gland  enlarged  ;  feces  flat,  small  in  size.

•  Spermatic  cord  inflamed  by  a  badly  fitting  truss.
'Drawing,  tensive  pains,  from  abdomen  through cords

into  testicles.


PULSATILLA.  608

■  Testicles  hang  down  a  long  way.

I  I  Right  testicle  drawn  up  and  swollen,  spermatic  cord

swollen,  with  tensive  pain,  while  1.  testicle  hangs  down
low.

•  Soreness  of  testicles,  so  that  pants  seem  too  tight;  un-

pleasant when  sitting.

I I  Tearing,  lacerating  pain  in  testicles.

I  I  After  suppressed  gonorrhoeal  discharge,  swelling  of  1.
testicle  and  epididymis ;  two  months  later,  after  catch-
ing cold,  swelling  of  r.  testicle  and  spermatic  cord  ;
chilliness,  lassitude,  nausea,  diarrhoea,  griping,  pressing,,
cutting  pains  in  abdomen  extending  up  to  loins  and
region  of  kidneys,  loss  of  appetite,  thirst ;  severe  pain
when  genitals  are  allowed  to  hang  down  without  sup-
port ;  after  Pulsat.  a  yellowish-green  discharge  appeared
from  urethra.

I  I  After  suppression  of  gonorrhoea,  orchitis,  1.  side,  with
hot,  hard  swelling  and  severe  pressing  pain  in  testicle
and  spermatic  cord,  <  standing;  thirst;  evening  fever;
irritable  pulse.

I  I  Severe  pain  across  sacrum,  from  a  strain  while  lifting  a
heavyweight;  acute  deeply  seated  pain  in  groins,  ex-
tending along  cords  to  testicles,  the  r.  swollen  and  very
tender  to  touch,  can  hardly  walk. ^Orchitis.

I  I  Injury  to  testicle  by  a  fall,  followed  by  trismus,  which
yielded  to  Bellad.;  two' days  afterwards  r.  testicle  greatly
swollen,  with  pressure  and  annoying  pain  extending  up
into  abdomen,  with  nausea  and  occasional  vomiting;  at
times  aggravation  of  pain  with  chilliness ;  scrotum  red^
hot;  urine  saturated;  pain  >  in  rest.

I  Sarcocele,  not  syphilitic;  varicocele:  hydrocele;  swelling
of  a  bluish  color.

1  I  Itching-biting  pain  in  inner  and  upper  portion  of  pre-
puce.
"  Female  Sexual  Organs, i  '  Nymphomania.

•  Ovaritis  after  getting  feet  wet; suppression  of  menses^

with  nausea,  coldness  of  body,  chilliness  and  trembling
of  feet ;  pressure  on  bladder  and  rectum.
iDrawing-pressive  pain  extending  towards  uterus,  with
qualmishness,  towards  morning.

I  Contractive  pain  in  1.  side  of  uterus,  like  labor  pains,

obliging  her  to  bend  double.

I I  Tensive,  cutting  pain  in  uterus,  which  is  very  sensitive
to  touch  and  during  coitus.

1 1  Pains  in  uterus,  with  amenorrhoea.

■  Uterine  colic,  resembling  labor  pains.

I  1  Threatened  metritis  day  after  labor  in  consequence  of
catching  cold ;  two  days  later  pains  in  r.  thigh,  and  par-


609  PULSATILLA.

ticularly  severe  pain  in  r.  side  of  abdomen  ;  sleepless-
ness; suppressed  lochia;  pain  <  from  least  motion;
some  sweat;  palpitation;  rapid,  strong  pulse;  intense
thirst;  urine  dark,  like  brown  beer;  anxiety  and  fear;
milk  scanty;  hypogastric  region  sensitive  to  pressure;
abdomen  hot;  loss  of  appetite;  thick  white  coating  on
tongue ;  bad  taste  in  mouth.

llMetritis  after  getting  feet  w^et,  or  from  suppression  of
lochial  discharge,  with  a  deficiency  of  milk,  chilliness
and  thirstlessness.

1 1  Prolapsus  uteri,  with  pressure  in  abdomen  and  small  of
back,  as  from  a  stone,  limbs  tend  to  go  to  sleep;  ineffect-
ual urging  to  stool.

■  To  promote  the  expulsion  of  moles,  or  a  dead  foetus.

I  She  can  hardl}^  find  an  easy  position  through  night,
owing  to  pain  in  pelvic  articulation.

I  Pains  in  loins  from  passive  congestion  of  uterus.

I I  Metrorrhagia:  blood  dark  and  coagulated,  emitted  in
paroxysms,  <  in  evening  with  laborlike  pains;  menses
usually  scanty  ;  habitual  looseness  of  bowels  ;  especially
during  climaxis ;  blood  changeable,  stops  and  flows ;
profuse  at  times,  at  others  scanty,  mixed  with  clots;  in
chlorosis;  after  abuse  of  quinine  and  iron.

I  iTen  days  after  labor  severe  chill  followed  by  heat,  inter-
mingled with  chilliness,  particularly  when  turning  in
bed ;  oppression  of  chest ;  asthma,  with  pain  in  chest
and  palpitation  ;  sleeplessness ;  thirst ;  sweats ;  bitter-
tasting  expectoration  ;  marked  decrease  of  milk  ;  labor-
like pains,  with  discharge  of  blood  in  gushes ;  frequent
fainting  spells ;  darkness  before  eyes.

I  iMenstrual  colic :  with  great  restlessness,  tossing  in  every
possible  direction  ;  paleness  of  face ;  pain  violent  and
causing  her  to  cry  out  and  toss  about ;  flow  by  fits  and
starts,  thick  and  dark,  or  pale  and  watery ;  chilliness;
stretching  and  yawning ;  thirstlessness ;  disposition  to
vicarious  blood  losses;  pale,  mild,  light-haired,  blue-
eyed  and  tearful ;  loud  grief;  feels  >  in  open  air.

I  I  Menstruation  painful  from  puberty;  cramps,  vomiting
and  even  spasms  attending  first  appearance,  which,
light-colored  at  outset,  soon  becomes  dark  and  clotty;
during  menses  nervous  and  excitable ;  at  night  restless
and  sleepless ;  constipated. ^Dysmenorrhoea.

I  I  Heaviness  in  abdomen,  as  from  a  stone;  heavy  pressure
low  down,  also  in  small  of  back ;  drawing  in  thighs  ;
thighs  go  to  sleep  while  sitting;  painful  pressure  in
rectum  as  if  to  stool,  with  pain  in  back.  ^Menstrual
colic.

I  i  Dysmenorrh'oea ;  from  twenty-four  to  forty-eight  hours

VOL.  VIII. — 39.


PULSATILLA.  610

would  suffer  horrid  pains,  vomited  till  her  strength  was
gone,  flesh  cold,  could  sit  up  but  little  for  a  week,  appe-
tite poor.

■  Tension  and  contraction  in  abdomen  as  if  menses  would

come  on,  nausea  and  mucous  vomiting.

I  Dysenteric  diarrhoea  at  the  periods,  especially  if  coming
on  at  night.

•  I  Dark  purple,  liquid,  hot  blood  ;  when  discharge  is  most
profuse  there  is  most  pain;  most  discharge  when  lying
down  ;  pain  causes  nausea  and  headache ;  cutting  pain
in  hypogastric  region  and  in  region  of  1.  ovary ;  bland,
yellow  leucorrhoea  before  and  after  menses.  ^Dys-
menorrhoea.

I  I  Spasms  preceding  menses;  face  alternately  pale  and
red  ;  eyes  wildly  staring,  swollen,  injected,  brilliant
and  sometimes  bathed  in  tears;  features  agitated  by
convulsive  movements,  mouth  distorted  ;  trunk  and
limbs  convulsed,  sometimes  tonic,  sometimes  clonic
spasms,  and  limbs  often  strongly  extended  ;  throat  con-
stricted, chest  oppressed,  respiration  slow  and  spas-
modic ;  greatest  anxiety,  crying  that  she  would  suffb-
cate  ;  occasionally  a  few  moments  of  relaxation  of  mus-
cles, depression,  yawnings,  somnolence  and  menaces  of
syncope ;  constrictive  pains  in  region  of  r.  ovary ;  de-
sire for  stool;  sweetish  taste  in  mouth  and  throat;  sin-
apisms to  thighs  relieved  the  oppression,  but  induced
such  frightful  nervous  symptoms  that  they  had  to  be
removed  immediatel}'.

llMenses  :  too  late  and  scanty,  or  suppressed,  particularly
by  getting  feet  wet ;  profuse,  of  a  dark  or  blackish  color,
with  sexual  excitement ;  too  early  ;  too  long ;  too  short ;
flow  only  in  daytime  and  mostly  on  walking;  change-
able in  appearance;  intermittent;  delayed,  with  cold-
ness of  body,  chilliness  and  trembling  of  feet;  flow
thick,  black,  clotted,  or  thin  and  watery;  too  late,
scanty,  slimy.

■  First  menses  delayed,  soreness  of  apices  of  lungs.

I  I  Menses  delayed  three  weeks;  at  times  nausea;  fears  she
is  pregnant,  cries,  and  begs  physician  to  produce  abor-
tion ;  distress  in  hypogastrium  and  epigastrium ;  flying
neuralgic  pains;  d^^spncea  from  warm  room;  at  times
slight  attacks  of  indigestion.

■  In  girls  of  mild  disposition  when  puberty  is  unduly  de-

layed or  menstrual  function  is  defectively  or  irregularly
performed;  they  are  pale  and  languid  and  complain  of
headache,  chilliness  and  lassitude.

■  iSuppression  of  menses : after  getting  feet w^et ;  from

a cold;  with nausea  and disposition  to  vomit;  with


611  PULSATILLA.

convulsions  ;  with  paroxysms  of  hemicrania  and  stick-
ing pains  in  face  and  teeth  ;  in  chlorosis ;  from  nervous
debility ;  with  throbbing  headache  ;  pressure  in  stom-
ach; pain  in  uterus;  dysuria;  ophthalmia;  morning
nausea ;  bad  taste  in  mouth ;  nosebleed  relieves  vica-
riously.

I  I  Pain  in  1.  side,  from  under  false  ribs,  around  to  back  ;
3'ellow  leucorrhoea,  not  very  thick,  constant,  most  at
menstrual  period ;  back  always  feels  weak  ;  occasional
sharp,  shooting  pains  through  head,  sometimes  in  oc-
cipital, sometimes  in  frontal  region;  feels  very  tired  in
morning;  in  daytime  feels  >  after  a  short  sleep  than
after  a  long  one;  palpitation;  exercise  is  exhausting;
perspires  easil}';  sleeps  at  night  with  her  arms  over  her
head,  and  feels  stiff  on  rising.

I  I  Pain  in  heels  like  pricking  of  tacks  or  nails;  hot  flushes
followed  by  chilliness  ;  menstrual  flow  black  and  clot-
ted ;  puts  feet  out  of  bed  to  cool  them,  they  burn  so;
she  must  put  her  shoes  on. before  she  can  walk,  heels
ache  so ;  vertigo  mostly  before  menses ;  deaf  since  child-
hood, from  scarlet  fever  ;  constipation ;  craves  open  air,
w^arm  room  is  oppressive,  suffocates  and  must  go  out ;
watery  discharge  from  eyes  and  nose ;  purplish  appear-
ance of  skin  of  heel ;  sprained  feeling  in  ankles,  weak
ankles;  rattling  cough  ;  loses  urine  when  coughing;  men-
ses every  two  weeks,  profuse,  dark,  offensive;  urine  offen-
sive, strong ;  sharp  pains  in  rectum  ;  toe  joints  very  sore ;
hot  flushes;  limbs  tire  easily  when  walking;  heat  in  vulva,
was  compelled  to  apply  a  cold  cloth ;  no  appetite ;  sleep-
less ;  burning  heat  all  over  body;  throws  off  all  bed-
clothes; feels  no  two  days  alike  ;  fidgety.

I  Uterine  irregularities  occurring  in  the  anaemic  or  in
those  of  venous  constitution.

I  Before  menses :  leucorrhoea ;  desire  to  urinate ;  gastralgia ;
running  of  water  from  mouth  ;  vomiting  ;  pain  in  abdo-
men, liver  or  back  ;  asthma;  abdomen  swells;  stitches
in  sides;  vertigo  and  eructation;  chills,  gaping  and
stretching;  convulsions.

■  During  menses:  laborlike  pains  in  abdomen  and  back;

ineffectual  straining  at  stool;  nausea  and  vomiting;
running  of  water  from  mouth  at  night;  stitches  in
chest;  sick-headache,  obscure  vision ;  toothache;  chills
and  paleness  of  face ;  sadness  and  weeping ;  convulsions ;
numbness  in  legs.
lln  the  beginning  and  at  end  of  menses:  headache  or
toothache.

■  After  menses:  leucorrhoea;  difficult  respiration.

■  Crampy constriction of vagina; indurations; fistula;

polypus ;  serous  cysts.


PULSATILLA.  612

I  I  Burning  in  vagina  and  pudenda; thin,  acrid,  biting

discharge.
IlLeucorrhoea:  painless;  with  thickish  mucus,  color  of
milk,  especiall}^  noticed  on  lying  down ;  painless,  creamy ;
with  swelling  of  pudenda;  acrid,  thin;  with  burning;
with  pruritus  near  change  of  life ;  occasioned  by  fright,
in  3^oung  girls  before  menstruation  is  fairly  established ;
thick,  white,  mucous;  with  backache;  servant  girls
from  the  country  become  chlorotic  in  the  city;  after
masturbation ;  with  hysterical  symptoms ;  in  young
girls,  discharge  <  in  morning.

I I  Gonorrhoea;  painless  discharge  of  thick,  milky  mucus,
with  burning,  stinging  pain,  swelling  of  labia  and
cutting  pains  at  mouth  of  uterus.

iLumps  occurring  in  breasts  of  young  girls;  painful
and  affecting  arm  of  corresponding  side.

I  lA  thin,  acrid,  milklike  fluid  runs  from  breasts  before
puberty.
^^  Pregnancy.  Parturition.  Lactation.  1 1  Nearly  a  year
before,  enlargement  of  abdomen ;  soon  afterwards  felt
very  distinct  movements  as  from  a  foetus;  for  next
month  or  two  had  morning  sickness  just  as  in  previous
pregnancies,  also  same  longing  and  craving  for  unnat-
ural articles  of  food ;  abdomen  kept  on  gradually  en-
larging; breasts  became  fuller,  and  finally  contained
milk ;  all  symptoms  of  former  pregnancies  present
except  that  she  had  a  regular  monthly  flow  lasting
three  or  four  days,  somewhat  scanty,  painless  and  too
pale;  when  seated  very  decided  movements  as  from  a
foetus  could  be  seen  through  dress. ^False  pregnancy.

I  I  Vomiting  of  ingesta  after  each  meal;  frequent  eructa-
tions of  sour,  hot,  rancid  food ;  foul  taste.

I  I  Severe  nausea  and  occasional  vomiting,  only  late  in
afternoon  and  evening;  appetite  good  when  not  nau-
seated; no  thirst;  tendency  to  be  chilly  all  the  time;
during  fourth  month  of  pregnancy.

iMorning  sickness  and  vomiting:  throbbing  in  epigastric
region  ;  vomiting  of  sour  mucus.

■  Varicose  veins;  pains  from  varicose  veins  and  the  gen-
eral symptoms  <  towards  evening ;  varices  present  a
bluish  appearance.

iLame  pelvis;  cannot  walk  so  well  towards  evening;  feels
<  when  warm  in  bed;  can  hardly  find  an  easy  position
through  night,  owing  to  pain  in  pelvic  articulations.

I  I  Pain,  sharp  and  sore,  in  sacrum  and  each  hip  ;  came  on
as  soon  as  she  went  to  bed,  rendering  a  change  of  posi-
tion frequently  necessary;  pains  which  come  on  while
lying  on  back  are  >  by  turning  to  either  side,  and


613  PULSATILLA.

those  which  came  on  when  lying  on  either  side  are
much  >  by  turning  on  back,  to  effect  which  change
she  was  compelled  to  rise  up  in  bed  and  then  lie  down,
as  she  could  not  turn  herself  in  bed ;  sufferings  <  as
night  advanced,  much  >  by  sitting  up  in  bed,  and
wholly  relieved  by  getting  up  and  walking  about  room.

■  During  pregnancy  :  fiuoralbus;  false  labor  pains;  rheu-

matic pains  in  uterus  shortly  before  parturition,  <
evening  and  night,  disturbing  sleep;  constant  urging
and  pressure  to  urinate,  with  tension  in  abdomen ;  sore-
ness of  uterus  and  abdominal  walls ;  vague  troublesome
pains  in  ninth  month  ;  says  child  turns  over  and  does
not  lie  right,  so  that  it  pains  her.

I  I  Every  two  hours  sudden  severe  stitching  pains  in  abdo-
men compelling  her  to  cry  out;  frequent  urging  to
urinate  with  scanty  discharge  and  burning  in  urethra;
fifth  month  of  pregnancy.

i  I  Tearing  tensive  pain  in  a  small  spot  in  lower  abdomen
during  latter  half  of  pregnancy,  corresponding  to  seat
of  placenta,  <  at  night  when  "'lying  on  affected  side,
and  sore  to  touch  as  if  ulcerated.

I  I  During  seventh  month  of  pregnancy;  abdomen  flattened
in  front  and  bulging  out  in  each  lumbar  region,  move-
ments of  foetus  very  violent  in  r.  lumbar  region.

I  I  Pain  as  from  an  ulcer,  over  seat  of  placenta,  when  lying
on  r.  side  and  on  pressure.

■  False  labor  pains:  cannot  sit  long  at  a  time,  must  walk

about  to  relieve  pain ;  close  room  is  very  oppressive,
feels  as  if  she  must  be  in  open  air,  which  is  extremely
grateful  to  her.

I  I  At  4  P.M.  sudden  severe  pain  in  sacral  region  with  dis-
charge of  clear  mucus  from  vagina  ;  on  examination  no
uterine  contractions  and  os  high  and  closed;  patient
greatly  excited  and  fearful  concerning  oncoming  labor,
fear  of  deatli. ^False  labor  pains.

I  I  After  night  watching  and  mental  disturbance  during
pregnancy,  constant  chilliness,  small  pulse,  face  alter-
nately pale  and  red,  eyes  dim,  sunken,  tongue  white,  no
appetite,  constipation,  stitches  in  chest;  lalaorlike  pains
in  uterine  region  and  discharge  of  blood  from  vagina ;
pain  <  from  motion,  >  in  rest ;  nausea  after  eating.

N  In  fourth  month  of  pregnancy,  after  a  fright,  was  obliged
to  walk  a  mile  through  deep  snow ;  in  a  few  hours  labor
pains ;  two  days  later  violent  labor  pains  confined  al-
most entirely  to  1.  side  which  cause  her  to  cry  out  and
weep,  occur  every  fifteen  minutes ;  flow  of  dark  blood
between  pains,  with  large  clots;  violent  chills  between
pains,  shakes  so  violently  she  jars  the  bed,  wants  much


PULSATILLA.  614

covering;  chilliness  during  pains ;  no  thirst;  slimy  taste;
OS  considerably  dilated. ^Threatened  abortion.

I  I  One  month  before  proper  time  was  seized  with  labor
pains ;  os  uteri  dilated  to  about  size  of  silver  quarter,
pains  nearly  an  hour  apart;  although  finger  could  be
passed  a  considerable  distance  into  uterus,  head  could
not  be  felt,  but  by  palpation  was  detected  near  fundus ;
after  Pulsat.  pains  ceased ;  next  month  head  presented.

I  I  Regular,  hard,  downward-pressing  pains  at  beginning
of  fifth  month  of  pregnancy  ;  every  pain  is  accompanied
by  loss  of  breath.

I  I  Hemorrhage  with  laborlike  pains;  blood  dark,  now
fluid,  now  coagulated;  vagina  constricted,  dry,  exami-
nation painful. ^Threatened  abortion.

llTlireatened  abortion;  flow  ceases  and  then  returns  with
double  force,  ceases  again,  and  so  on.

I  Shivering  and  chattering  of  teeth  between  pains  without
chilliness ;  started  each  time  from  anterior  portion  of  r.
thigh,  where  there  is  also  a  sensation  of  shivering;  dis-
position to  weep  with  ever}^  pain.

iLabor  pains:  extend  from  sacrum  up  into  region  of
stomach  causing  severe  pain  in  stomach  and  vomiting;
alternating  with  hemorrhage  and  restlessness;  grow  <
towards  evening ;  irregular;  cause  palpitation,  fainting
and  suflbcation ;  must  have  doors  and  windows  wide
open,  and  plenty  of  air ;  spasmodic  and  ineffectual,
uterus  inactive;  in  sacrum,  where  there  is  a  constant
severe  pressure,  causing  tensive  pains  in  thighs;  defi-
cient; sluggish;  too  weak  or  ceasing,  with  somnolence.

■  Want  of  expulsive  power;  inertia  of  uterus.

iSThe  child's  head  is  in  the  opening  of  pelvis  and  the

action  of  womb  is  insufficient  for  expulsion.
I  Weeps  because  she  is  not  delivered.

■  Malpositions  of  foetus.

I  I  During  first  stage  of  labor  child  was  lying  trans-
versely (first  position,  shoulder  presentation),  in  thirty
minutes  vertex  presented.

iPost-partum  secondary  hemorrhages  from  retained  pla-
centa or  coaguia.

I  I  Profuse  hemorrhage;  lies  motionless  with  pale  face,
bathed  in  cold  sweat;  could  scarcely  talk;  roaring  in
head  and  darkness  before  eyes ;  uterine  contractions
entirely  absent;  placenta  high  up  in  fundus  of  uterus
and  could  not  be  removed  by  gentle  traction  ;  blood
escaped  in  streams;  distortion  of  eyes  and  twitching  of
muscles  of  face  ;  uterus  feels  flabby  and  soft.

■  Convulsions  following  sluggish  or  irregular  labor  pains;

unconscious ;  cold,  clammy,  pale  face  ;  stertorous  breath-
ing and  full  pulse.


615  PULSATILLA.

■  Retained  placenta,  want  of  action  or  spasmodic  contrac-
tion.

I  After-pains  too  long  and  too  violent ;  <  towards  evening.

■  Lochia  scanty,  becoming  milky  ;  feverish,  but  no  thirst.

■  Suppression  of  lochial  discharges.

I  I  Puerperal  mania  after  sudden  suppression  of  lochia  ;
looks  about  shyly  and  hides  under  bedclothes  at  sight
of  any  one ;  sometimes  jumps  out  of  bed  with  the
clothes  hanging  over  her  head ;  answers  confusedly ;
eyes  shine  and  stare ;  uterus  tender,  she  winces  under
pressure  of  hand.

I  I  Hands  and  feet  cold;  head  hot;  skin  moist;  on  closing
eyes  sees  strange  sights ;  was  compelled  to  keep  eyes
open  and  look  into  light ;  pulse  small,  hard  and  frequent,
140 ;  great  thirst  for  cold  water ;  <  after  Bellad. ;  did
not  sleep,  felt  as  if  she  was  no  longer  herself ;  could  not
see  anything  right ;  said  doctor  was  making  faces  at  her,
that  he  looked  black ;  could  not  discern  any  one's  feat-
ures, in  fact  knew  no  one;  head  was  pulsating,  felt  too
full,  as  if  skull  was  lifted  up ;  on  closing  eyes  saw
pictures  and  all  sorts  of  strange  sights  ;  heard  all  kinds
of  operatic  airs  ;  could  not  lie  on  sides,  must  continually
lie  on  back; desires  no  food;  some  pain  in  r.  groin,

■  where  the  lymphatics  were  swollen;  during  night
urinary  secretion  suppressed  but  since  morning  normal ;
cold  perspiration  over  whole  body;  felt  cold  and  re-
c^uired  an  extraordinary  amount  of  covering;  lochial
discharge  ceased  ;  eyes  sunken  ;  hands  and  wrists  cool ;
tongue  clean  and  moist;  stares  at  her  husband;  says
her  baby  looks  odious;  everybody  looks  fearfully  ugly,
making  faces  at  her ;  labor  pains  compelling  her  to  press
downward  ;  trembles  all  over  and  says  she  is  dying  ;
after  Pdsat.  says  something  snapped  in  abdomen,  after
which  a  large  quantity  of  retained  spurious  liquor
amnii  was  discharged,  with  relief  of  all  symptoms.
^Puerperal  fever.

■  Phlegmasia  dolens ;  limb  pale  white,  swollen,  veins  hard,

knotty,  intensely  painful  to  touch  and  motion  impossible.

■  Weeps  every  time  child  is  put  to  breast;  pain  extends

into  chest  up  into  neck,  down  back,  changes  from  place
to  place.

■  Mild,  tearful  women  who  have  but  little  milk.

■  Milk thin and watery,  the true  milk  globule  almost

entirely  absent.

■  Painful  sticking  and  discharge  of  thin,  acrid  milk.

■  iSuppression  of  or  very  scanty  supply  of  milk.

■  Milk  suddenly  suppressed,  lochia  become  milky-white.

■  Galactorrhoea,  particularly  in  women  who  are  not  nurs-

ing their  children.


PULSATILLA.  616

llSwelling  of  breasts.

■  After  weaning: breasts  swell,  feel  stretched,  tense,  in-

tensely sore;  milk  continues  to  be  secreted.
iMammse:  lumps  in  breasts  of  girls  before  puberty;  or,
escape  of  thin,  milk-white  fluid.

■  Breast  swollen; rheumatic  pains  extend  to  muscles  of

chest,  also  to  shoulders,  neck,  axillse  and  down  arms,
change  from  place  to  place;  during  nursing.

■  Swelling  of  breasts,  with  pressing  tension  as  if  milk  would

appear  in  them.
^'  Voice  and  Larynx.  Trachea  and  Bronchia.  ■  Hoarseness
and  roughness  of  throat;  cannot  speak  loud.
I  I  Loss  of  voice  since  six  years;  talks  in  a  whisper,  if  long
continued  it  causes  a  dry  straining  cough,  with  a  feel-
ing of  compression  of  chest ;  constant  dryness  in  throat
and  burning  in  last  cervical  vertebra,  which  is  sore  to
touch ;  mucous  membrane  of  fauces  dry  and  red ;
menses  scanty,  sleep  disturbed  by  frightful  dreams,  with
crying  and  moaning,  tearful  disposition,  easily  irritated.
^Aphonia  nervosa.

■  Constriction  in  throat,  feels  something  there  preventing

speech  ;  cannot  eat,  weeps.
■Violent  tickling  and  scraping  in  larynx,  bringing  tears

to  eyes  and  causing  dry  cough.  *

I  I  Scraping  sensation  in  epiglottis,  as  in  hoarseness.
I  I  Tickling  in  region  of  thyroid  cartilage,  causing  a  short

cough.

■  Lifluenza;  loose  cough,  <  at  night,  with  frequent  expec-

toration of  tenacious  mucus ;  or  at  beginning  of  coryza
with  redness  of  eyes  and  lachrymation ;  pains  in  fore-
head or  maxillary  sinuses,  with  copious  thick  expector-
ation, chilliness,  vomiting,  loss  of  appetite,  loose  stools,
sleeplessness  and  restlessness.

1  I  Cough  first  dry,  afterwards  loose,  with  expectoration  of
much  salt,  bitter,  yellowish  or  whitish  matter,  or  else
of  sanguinolent  mucus;  hoarseness  with  almost  com-
plete extinction  of  voice ;  lancinating  pains  in  throat
and  palate;  coryza,  with  oozing  of  yellowish,  greenish,
fetid  matter;  loose  cough,  with  pain  in  chest;  cough  <
when  lying  down,  with  sensation  of  suffocation  ;  sore-
ness in  abdomen ;  painful  shocks  in  arms,  shoulder  and
back. 6'Laryngo-tracheitis.

1  I  Five  months  ago  took  a  sudden  chill  while  heated  from
dancing  which  caused  cessation  of  menses;  loss  of
appetite,  weariness  of  limbs,  cough  ;  no  trace  of  menses
at  next  period ;  gradually  there  came  on  a  regular
cough,  <  morning  and  evening,  with  white  frothy  ex-
pectoration and  pain  in  chest ;  during  forenoon  rigor


26


617  PULSATILLA.

and  formication  over  back,  with  heat  of  head  and  face ;
loss  of  flesh  and  great  weakness;  going  up  stairs,  walk-
ing quickly,  even  loud  talking  causes  attacks  of  coughing
and  palpitation ;  always  sleepy ;  takes  interest  in
nothing,  weeps  much  and  despairs  of  her  recovery;  in
place  of  menses,  has  often  attacks  of  coliclike  pains  in
abdomen. ^Chronic  bronchial  catarrh.

■  Bronchitis;  cough  is  very  loose;  with  all  the  fever  there

is  but  little  or  no  thirst ;  difficulty  of  breathing  when
lying  on  side.
I  Fifth  and  sixth  dorsal  vertebrae  are  painful  to  pressure,
palpitation  therefrom.
Respiration, l  Breathing,  groaning  or  rattling.

■  Oppression  of  chest  on  walking  fast,  ascending  an
eminence  or  exercising.

■  Oppression  of  breathing  accompanying  symptoms  in
parts  not  involved  in  the  act  of  breathing.

■  Shortness  of  breath,  immediately  after  dinner.
■Want  of  breath  on  attempting  to  breathe  through  nose.

■  Difficulty  in  breathing:  after  slight  emotions;  when
walking;  anxious,  as  if  throat  were  constricted,  mostly
in  evening  and  at  night  when  lying  down.

■  Spasmodic,  contractive  tightness  in  chest,  especially  when
drawing  breath,

■  Sensation  of  dyspnoea  in  lower  portion  of  chest  as  if  it
were  too  full  and  tight  in  morning.

■  Dyspnoea:  in  evening;  as  from  spasmodic  tension  in
lower  part  of  chest,  below  false  ribs;  when  lying  on
back,  at  night,  with  giddiness  and  weakness  in  head ;
as  if  fumes  of  sulphur  had  been  inhaled.

■  Suffocative  paroxysms  at  night.

■  The  child  has  more  difficulty  in  breathing  when  it  lies
on  its  side.

■Tension  and  constriction  in  chest  with  dyspnoea  and
asthmatic  symptoms.

■  ■Asthma:  of  children  after  suppression  of  rash;  in
hysteria,  or  with  suppressed  menses ;  in  evening
especially  after  a  meal;  at  night  as  from  vapors  of
sulphur;"  from  deranged  menstruation  or  suppressed
urticaria.

I  I  Every  night  at  12  o'clock  dyspnoea  awakes  him  ;  cough
with  expectoration  of  white  tenacious  mucus,  caused  by
tickling  at  velum  palati ;  cough  so  continuous  and  rapid
that  he  can  hardly  get  breath  and  must  vomit ;  yawning
causes  cough,  awakes  after  12  with  too  slight  coughs,
with  constriction  of  throat  and  difficult  expiration  ;
attack  lasts  several  moments,  during  which  he  anxiously
moves  about  from  side  to  side  on  knees,  after  which  a


27


PULSATILLA.  618

forcible  expiration  and  attack  is  over  ;  must  swallow
several  times  as  if  to  remove  something  in  throat,
followed  by  belching  and  urging  to  urinate ;  sensation
as  if  a  coat  of  mucus  extended  from  velum  palati  to
tongue  causing  the  suffocative  attacks. ^Asthma.

■  Relieves  the  rattle  in  the  throat  of  a  dying  person.
Cough.  1 1  Cough:  caused  by  inspiration;  from  irritation
in  pit  of  stomach  ;  on  coming  into  a  warm  room ;
shattering,  spasmodic,  often  in  paroxysms  of  two  coughs
each  ;  dry,  with  scraping  and  rawness  in  larynx  ;  excited
by  itching,  scratching  and  dry  feeling,  as  from  vapor
of  sulphur  in  trachea  and  chest;  caused  by  constrictive
sensation  in  larynx,  especially  after  eating ;  dry  at  night,
going  off"  when  sitting  up  in  bed  ;  loose  by  day ;  dry,  after
every  sleep;  evenings,  after  lying  down,  when  warm  in
bed;  with  retching  and  desire  to  vomit;  loose,  vomits
mucus ;  with  diarrhoea ;  <  at  night ;  with  yellow  mucous
sputa,  bitter  or  greenish  ;  with  purulent  expectoration  ;
with  expectoration  of  pieces  of  dark,  coagulated  blood,
menses  suppressed ;  short,  and  dry,  as  soon  as  he  gets
warm ;  after  dancing.

I  During  cough  :  dryness,  sensation  of  being  swollen,
constriction  and  feeling  like  that  caused  by  sulphurous
vapors  in  throat;  hoarseness;  catching  of  breath ;  palpi-
tation ;  stitches  in  side ;  shocks  and  bruised  painfulness
in  abdomen;  concussions  of  body  ;  turning  of  stomach,
retching  and  vomiting  of  mucus,  bile  or  food ;  cutting
in  region  of  spleen  ;  pains  in  head,  back,  lumbar  region,
shoulders  and  arms;  epistaxis;  perspiration;  gaping;
dyspnoea  and  asthmaticoppression, palpitation  especially
when  lying  on  1.  side  and  sensation  like  that  of  an  ulcer
in  middle  of  thorax  ;  in  women,  involuntary  escape  of
urine;  anxious  expression  on  face.

I  I  Spasmodic  cough  especially  in  evening  and  at  night;
constant  coughing  from  tickling  in  air  passages ;  dryness
of  air  passages ;  pain,  oppression  and  anxiety  in  chest ;
palpitation;  catarrhal  cough,  long-lasting  and  tedious
and  threatening  to  run  into  consumption  ;  expectoration
of  large  quantities  of  yellow,  thick,  lumpy  mucus,
particularly  in  morning,  with  hoarseness,  dryness  and
soreness  in  throat,  burning,  splitting  pain  and  constric-
tion in  chest ;  prostration,  emaciation,  fever,  constant
burning  heat  with  tliirst,  followed  by  sweat.

I I  Expectoration  :  of  copious  yellow  mucus;  bitter;  green-
ish ;  of  blood  ;  pieces  of  dark,  coagulated  blood  ;  during
suppression  of  menses;  after  rising  in  morning;  salty;
blood-streaked;  copious,  muco-purulent;  salty,  offensive,
tasting  like  discharge  in  chronic  catarrh  ;  easy,  thick,
yellow.


619  PULSATILLA.

I  I  Chronic  cough  after  whooping  cough;  <  at  night,
talking  and  walking,  sounds  loose,  but  there  is  little
expectoration  despite  rattling  and  crackling  in  chest,
at  times  retching;  sore  pain  in  chest;  expectoration
yellow  and  thick  or  white  and  thin  ;  restless  sleep  with
groaning ;  sweat  on  face  in  morning ;  1.  eye  inflamed ;
nose  dry,  stopped  up ;  epistaxis ;  deafness  in  one  ear ;
lips  swollen,  cracked ;  gums  swollen ;  teeth  black  ;
swollen  glands  under  chin.

IB  Chronic  loose  cough  after  measles.

I  Whooping  cough:  blonde  hair;  mild, yielding  disposition;
after  Drosera;  dry  cough  with  vomiting  oi^  mucus  and
food,  >  sitting  up,  <  at  night.

■  Spitting  of  dark,  coagulated  blood;  pain  in  lower  part

of  chest;  anguish,  shuddering;  qualmishness.

■  Haemoptysis: with soreness or passive congestion of

chest;  dependent  upon  suppressed  menstruation.
^^  Inner  Chest  and  Lungs.  lOpprepsion  of  chest:  with
cough,  with  or  without  expectoration,  in  morning  after
rising;  on  lying  upon  1.  side,  with  anxiety  and  palpi-
tation.
llEvery  evening  sensation  of  great  fulness  of  chest,  sleep
at  night  is  often  interrupted  by  a  beating  through  chest.

■  Pressure  upon  chest  and  soreness.

■  Constriction  across  chest.

■  Constant  spasmodic  tension  in  lower  portion  of  chest.

■  Tension  in  chest,  especially  on  drawing  a  long  breath.
■Anxious  and  spasmodic  tightness  of  chest,  as  if  it  were

too  full  and  larynx  constricted,  especially  in  evening
and  at  night.

■  Cramplike  sensation  through  chest.

■  Scraping  in  chest  (trachea)  causing  cough.

■  Pain  as  from  an  internal  ulcer  in  middle  of  chest,  in

sternum,  with  headache  in  forehead,  before  midnight.

■  ■Soreness  in  chest;  under  clavicles,

■  Pain  in  chest  as  from  subcutaneous  ulceration.
I  I  Small  spot  in  region  of  sternum  painful.

■  Sensation  of  dryness,  rawness,  painfulness  and  illusory

sensation  as  if  air  passages  were  internally  constricted
by  an  excessive  amount  of  tenacious  and  firm  mucus
that  could  not  be  loosened.

■  Feeling  of  soreness  referred  to  either  subclavicular  region

or  apex  of  one  or  other  lung;  soreness  which  is  felt
when  patient  lies  on  that  side  or  presses  against  1.  chest;
seems  to  involve  muscular  structures  about  shoulder
and  even  down  arm  of  affected  side ;  cough  and  expec-
toration. ^Incipient  tuberculosis.
■Tearing,  cutting,  stitching  in  chest.


PULSATILLA.  620

■  Stitches  ill  side  only  when  l^'ing,  particularly  at  night.
Sticking  in  chest,  <  from  deep  breath  or  coughing.
Paroxysms  of  burning  in  chest.

I  I  Tickling  on  sternum.

I  I  Pains  inside  chest  at  both  nipples.

I  I  Has  had  several  hemorrhages;  smothered  feeling  in  1.
chest  with  sensation  of  fluid  dropping  or  gurgling ;
menses  every  three  weeks,  clotted  and  dark ;  flushed
face  and  fulness  of  head  at  periods  ;  hacking  cough  and
soreness  of  lung,  <  at  periods ;  milk  bloats  her  and
causes  fulness  of  head ;  cold  feet  and  hands,  feeling  as
of  damp  stockings ;  >  in  morning  and  open  air  ;  <  in
a  warm  room  ;  craves  acids.

I  I  Dry  spasmodic  cough,  more  protracted  and  violent  at
night,  accompanied  by  painful  stitches  in  chest,  disturb-
ing sleep;  occasional  chill;  no  appetite  or  thirst;
constipation  ;  menses  regular,  but  scanty,  pale  and  pain-
ful;  day  before  appearance  of  menses,  vertigo  with
darkness  before  eyes. ^Acute  pulmonary  catarrh.

1  I  Bronchitis  following  measles,  accompanied  by  chilli-
ness, thirstlessness  and  greenish  exjDCctoration.

■  Obstinate  bronchial  catarrh.

■  Congestion  to  chest  and  heart  at  night;  with  anxious

dreams.

■  Haemoptysis:  blood  dark,  coagulated;  cough <  morn-

ings; oppression  of  chest;  after  suppression  of  menses.

I  I  Rapid,  short  respiration  ;  dry,  short  cough,  after  a  few
days  scanty  expectoration ;  cough  with  painful  expres-
sion of  face ;  quick,  small  pulse;  burning  heat  of  skin
with  profuse  sweats ;  subsultus  tendinum  and  twitching
of  muscles  of  face;  startled  and  frightened  in  sleep,  fol-
lowed by  crying ;  great  thirst ;  tongue  coated,  moist ;
thin  stools,  or  constipation  ;  tossing  about ;  mild  de-
lirium ;  anxiety  and  despondency ;  scanty,  red  urine.
^Pneumonia.

1  I  After  severe-  catarrh,  chill,  great  lassitude,  dry,  painful
cough,  short  oppressed  respiration,  pressure  on  chest  as
from  a  stone,  dry  mouth,  nausea,  coated  tongue,  stitch-
ing, tearing  pains  in  limbs,  in  swollen  finger  joints,
shoulders  and  arms. ^Pneumonia.

I  I  Lies  on  back,  cannot  lie  on  sides;  semilateral  perspira-
tion (1.  side  of  chest) ;  can  scarcely  speak  above  a
whisper  ;  respirations  50  per  minute. ^Pneumonia.

■  Pneumonia  biliosa  or  morbillosa.

■  Broncho-pneumonia  in  chlorotic  and  anaemic  women.

■  Pneumonia after sudden disappearance of  menses or

after  a  catarrh  which  has  lasted  a  long  time  and  was
accompanied  by  thick  mucous  expectoration.


621  PULSATILLA.

iChronic  or  tedious  cases  of  pneumonia;  dull,  pressive,
raw,  sore  pains  in  chest,  and  sensation  of  dryness  and
roughness  as  if  chest  were  oppressed  by  tough  tenacious
mucus.

I  Phthisis  florida,  suppurative  stage;  chlorotic  girls.

I  Acute  suppuration  of  lungs.
^^  Heart,  Pulse  and  Circulation, i  Catching  pain  in  cardiac
region,  >  for  a  time  from  pressure  of  hand.

I  1  Dull  stitches  and  constant  pressure  in  praecordial  region,

with  anxiety  that  impedes  respiration  ;  >  walking.

■  Burning  in  region  of  heart.

I I  Heaviness,  pressure  or  sensation  of  fulness  about  heart
every  evening.

I  Rheumatic  irritation  of  heart,  pains  shifting  rapidly  from

one  portion  of  body  to  another.

I I  Palpitation:  in  violent  paroxysms,  often  with  anguish
and  obscuration  of  sight ;  trembling  of  limbs ;  from
chagrin,  fright  or  joy;  with  amenia,  chlorosis;  strong,
with  suppressed  pulse;  after  dinner;  from  talking;
with  soft  and  irregular  pulse ;  nightly,  so  strong  as  to
raise  bedcover.

I  I  Palpitation,  with  anguish  ;  asthmatic  diificulties,  with
moderate  bronchial  catarrh  ;  clear  systolic  murmurs  at
apex  of  1.  ventricle;  cough  ;  some  difficulty  in  moving
about. ^Insufficiency  of  mitral  valve.

I  Nervous  palpitation  in  young  girls  during  puberty,  or
from  amenorrhoea.

■  Early  stages  of  ansemic  palpitation.

■  Beat  of  pulse  is  felt  in  pit  of  stomach.

■  Beating  through *chest  interrupts  sleep;  old  maids.

■  Pulse:  accelerated,  small,  weak  ;  frequent  evenings,  with

distended  bloodvessels,  slow^er  in  mornings;  often
scarcely  perceptible.

■  Murmur  in  jugular  veins.

■  Heart  symptoms  reflex  from  indigestion.
'"  Outer  Chest. ■  ■  Chest  pains  as  if  bruised.

■  Left-sided  inframammary  pain.

''Neck  and  Back. ■Stiffness  and  pressive  pain  in  1.  side  of
cervical  muscles.

■  In nape of  neck:  rheumatic, drawing, tensive pain;

drawing,  fine  sticking  also  between  scapulae  and  in
back ;  pain  as  if  he  had  lain  in  an  uncomfortable
position,  ,,

■  Swelling  of  cervical  glands.

■  Interscapular  pain,  worse  b}^  inspiration.

Curvature  of  upper  part  of  spine  ;  interstitial  distension
of  upper  dorsal  vertebrae.

■  Back  painfully  stiff,  like  a  board.


PULSATILLA.  622

I  Sticking  pain  in  back  and  across  chest.

llSensation  like  cold  water  poured  down  back.

i  I  Pains  in  back  and  chilliness  from  suppressed  men-
struation.

iFine  sticking  pain  in  back;  stitches  in  small  of  back.

llPain  in  small  of  back  :  as  if  sprained,  on  motion  ;  after
sitting,  can  scarcely  rise;  like  labor  pain;  as  if  a  band
passed  through  small  of  back  and  everything  were  con-
stricted, taking  away  her  breath,  especially  in  morning ;
after  sitting,  or  from  long  stooping ;  as  if  weary.

■  Back  and  knees  feel  bruised  while  lying  still  in  bed,  >

rising  and  walking  about.

■  Drawing,  tensive  pains  in  loins.

■  Pressive  pain  as  from  fatigue,  in  sacrum,  in  evening.

■  Chilliness and pain in sacral region during men-

struation.

■  Spinal  irritation  due  to  sexual  excesses  or  masturbation  ;

weariness  and  stiffness  of  back,  seminal  emissions,  ex-
cited sexual  desire.
■Spinal  irritation ;  neck  and,  in  fact,  whole  body  feel  as
stiff  as  a  board ;  small  of  back  feels  as  if  tightly  band-
aged ;  pains  in  sacral  region,  <  sitting  or  bending
backward ;  joints  feel  weak,  as  if  they  would  become
readily  dislocated;  >  after  rest  and  sleep.

■  Lumbago;  must  move,  yet  motion  gives  no  relief.

I  I  Pains  in  back  and  sides,  low  down;  came  on  while  in
bed,  usually  in  after-part  of  night,  and  de{)rived  him  of
rest;  pains  which  are  excited  or  <  by  lying  on  side  are
>  by  lying  on  back ;  come  on  early,  wake  him  from
sleep,  pass  off  on  getting  up,  after  gentle  exercise  for
two  or  three  hours,  to  return  again  following  night.

^Lumbo-sacral  neuralgia.

■  Curvature  of  spine,  with  open  fontanelles,  in  children.
^'  Upper  Limbs. ■  Severe  pains  in  both  shoulder  joints.

I  I  Hard,  painful,  throbbing  glandular  swelling  in  r.  axilla.

■  Heaviness in arms from shoulders to fingers, numb

feeling.

■  Numbness  and  heaviness  in  arm  on  raising  or  using  it.

■  Arms  feel  as  if  broken  and  dislocated  ;  <  on  pressure  and

from  movement.

■  Drawing,  jerking  and  tearing  pains  in  shoulder  joints

and  arms.

■  Drawing  pains,  extending from  shoulder to  wrist,  in

transient  recurrent  attacks.

■  Constant  tearing  pain  in  shoulder  joint,  obliges  him  to

move  arm.

■  Arm painful even  while  at  rest, as  if  humerus were

beaten  in  middle;  pain  extended  down  into  thumb  so
that  she  could  not  use  it.


623  PULSATILLA.

iTensive  pain  in  tendons  in  bends  of  elbows  on  moving
arms.

I  I  Elbow  swollen  after  a  contusion.

I I  Veins  in  forearms  and  hands  swollen.

I  I  Small  swelling  under  skin  above  elbow  joints.

I  I  .Region  of  wrist  slightly  swollen  and  reddened ;  pain
came  on  about  3  p.m.,  continued  to  increase  in  vio-
lence and  was  accompanied  by  swelling  and  redness
until  about  midnight,  entirely  preventing  sleep ;  it  then
diminished  and  he  felt  but  little  inconvenience  from  it
except  pain  and  stiffness  on  moving,  until  next  after-
noon about  the  same  hour. ^Rheumatism.

iRheumatism  in  joints  of  hand,  with  redness  and  swelling.

I  Itching  chilblains  on  hands.

^^  Lower  Limbs. iPain  as  from  festering,  in  muscles  of  but-
tocks, legs  and  soles.
I. Jerking  pain  in  hip  joint,  extending  to  knee. ^Coxalgia.

I I  Hip  joint  painful  as  if  dislocated.

■  Sciatica: pain < towards  evening  and  at  night,  with

inclination  to  constantly  change  position  ;  <  in  warm
room;  >  in  open  air;  left-sided,  cannot  rest  although
motion  aggravates,  the  <  the  pain  the  more  severe  the
chills.
1  Unable  to  move  affected  thigh  and  leg  at  night,  she  was
obliged  to  let  it  lie  wherever  it  happened  to  be  on
account  of  a  bruised  pain  in  and  below  knee.

■  Excessive  weariness  of  thighs  with  trembling  of  knees.
I  Acute  drawing  in  lower  extremities  as  far  as  knees,  in

evening,  with  more  chilliness  than  during  day  without
subsequent  heat.

iCrampy  pain  in  r.  leg,  from  knee  to  groin.

iPain  as  if  bruised,  in  thighs,  not  in  flesh  but  in  bones;
when  pressing  upon  part  it  seemed  to  be  felt  in  bone;
she  was  unable  to  bend  knee  and  could  not  kneel;  it
seemed  as  if  bone  would  break.

I  i Drawing  and  tension  in  thighs  and  legs  in  evening.  _

I  I  Left  thigh  and  leg  swollen  to  twice  natural  size;  thigh
looked  flushed;  leg  from  knee  to  ankle  of  a  crimson
color,  deepening  to  a  livid  hue  as  it  neared  the  toes,
which  were  just  discernible  under  swollen  and  overlap-
ping instep;  veins  varicosed;  from  knee  to  instep
several  ulcers,  two  of  largest  about  one  and  a  half  inches
in  diameter,  the  lesser  ones  about  one  inch,  and  the
smaller  and  smallest  from  half  an  inch  to  size  of  pea,
giving  out  a  sanious  discharge  and  very  tender  to  touch ;
limb  difficult  to  move,  from  its  size  and  weight,  and
occupied  with  a  dull  aching  pain,  keeping  her  in  con-
stant  misery, depicted in her  countenance; general


PULSATILLA.  624

health much impaired,  appetite poor, sleep restless,
strength  reduced. 6'Chronic  phlebitis,
llPainless  swelling  of  knee.

■  Cracking  in  knees.

I  Painful  stiffness  in  r.  knee  while  walking,  whenever  thigh
is  stretched  out  straight.

■  Weariness  of  knees.

■  Tension  in  hollow  of  knees.

■  ■Tearing,  jerking  and  drawing  pain  in  knees,

■  Phlebitis  cruris.

I  I  Sudden  severe  pain  in  1.  knee  joint,  so  violent  as  to
cause  him  to  groan  aloud ;  could  scarcely  walk ;  knee
very  much  swollen,  but  not  discolored  ;  sensitiveness  so
great  that  slightest  touch  or  movement  caused  him  to
groan ;  inability  to  let  limb  hang  down,  must  have  it
supported  in  a  chair ;  pain  most  violent  on  first  begin-
ning to  move,  yet  every  movement  was  attended  with
suffering ;  felt  as  if  he  must  move,  yet  motion  gave  no
relief.

■  iHot  inflammatory  swelling  of  knee.

■  i Knees  inflamed,  swollen,  with  shooting  pains.

■  ■Soft  wdiite,  shining  swelling  of  knees.

■  Heaviness  of  legs  during  day.

■  Legs  seem  asleep  when  rising  after  sitting,

■  Drawing  pain  in  legs  in  evening.

■  Cramp  in  leg  in  evening,  after  lying  down,  wdth  chilli-

ness.

■  Tensive  pain  in  calves.

■  Drawing,  heaviness  and  weariness  of  legs.

■  Drawing  pain  in  tibia.

I  I  Jerking,  lacerating  pain  through  1.  leg  and  foot  which
soon  became  oedematous  and  numb ;  extremely  sensi-
tive to  jars,  touch  or  pressure;  could  not  bear  to  have
anybody  come  near  her ;  sat  on  edge  of  chair,  with  leg
flexed  upon  thigh ;  weeps  easily ;  extremely  sensitive  to
touch;  1.  side  gets  chilly,  and  then  the  greater  pains;  <
at  night  and  before  midnight;  >  by  shifting  position
and  warmth. ^Rheumatism.

■  Aching  in  calves,  which  are  swollen.

'  I  Pain  in  calf  of  r.  leg,  following  upon  a  moderate  attack
of  influenza;  pain  aching,  drawing,  came  on  in  even-
ing, much  <  by  heat  of  bed ;  >  from  application  of
cloths  dipped  in  cold  water ;  nearly  sleepless  from  pain
for  two  nights ;  >  during  day. ^Neuralgia  rheumatica.

1  i  Eruption  on  inner  side  of  r.  leg,  more  in  popliteal
space;  blisters  form  and  discharge  a  yellow  thick  mat-
ter which  forms  a  scab,  and  after  scab  comes  off"  there
is  left  a  purple  spot; these  sores  come  in  successive


625  PULSATILLA.

crops  and  are  very  sensitive  to  tonch ;  thick,  dark,
offensive  discharge  from  ears;  stupid,  dull  and  sleepy  in
afternoon  ;  cannot  keep  awake  until  teatime.

II  Varices  on  legs.

I  Bleeding  of  varicose  veins  on  legs.

I  Feet  red,  inflamed,  swollen,  also  soles;  swelling  of  top
of  foot.

I  Red  and  hot  swelling  of  feet,  with  tensive  burning  pains,
on  standing  change  to  a  sticking.

llSwelling  of  feet;  varicose  veins  swell  up.

I  Great  inclination  to  stretch  feet,  while  sitting.

i  I  Heaviness  and  drawing  in  feet.

I  Weakness  or  weariness  of  feet.

■  Tingling  and  grumbling  in  feet,  while  standing,  >  while

walking.

■  Tearing  pain  extending  across  back  of  foot  to  heel.

■  Burning  pain  on  back  of  foot.

■  Boring,  sticking  pain  in  heel.

■  ■Boring  pain  in  heels,  towards  evening.

■  Burning,  sticking  pain  with  itching,  like  that  in  frost-

bitten limbs,  in  ball  of  heel.

■  Soles  of  feet  painful,  as  if  beaten.

■  Burning  pains  in  soles  of  feet.

■  Sensation  of  soreness  in  soles  of  feet.

I  I  Burning  as  from  glowing  coals,  near  or  above  an  ulcer
on  foot,  just  before  dressing  it,  morning  and  evening.

I  1  Soreness  of  1.  heel,  soon  becoming  very  tender  on  walk-
ing ;  soreness  so  great  as  to  compel  her  to  use  crutches,
least  pressure  upon  it  being  intensely  painful ;  for  last
two  years,  could  not  move  even  about  house  without
crutches;  has  taken  much  quinine. ^Periostitis.

I  I  Red,  elevated  spot  on  dorsum  of  foot.

i  1  Tearing,  stitching  pains  in  feet;  ankles  swollen  and
red,  particularly  1.;  papillae  of  skin  on  legs  red  and
elevated  ;  painful,  brown,  burning  spot  over  ankle ;  heat
and  burning  pain  in  whole  foot;  on  attempting  to  stand
on  foot  severe  stitching  pains  causing  her  to  cry  out;
vertigo;  headache;  nausea;  slimy  taste;  coated  tongue;
loss  of  appetite ;  palpitation  of  heart ;  sleepy  by  day,
sleepless  at  night. ^Rheumatism.

■  Nervousness  felt  especially  about  ankles.

■  Offensive  toe  sweat.

■  Chilblains;  swelling  bluish,  hot,  with  throbbing  pains

and  intense  itching,  especially  in  soles,  after  getting
warm  in  bed.

■  Frostbitten  toes,  severe  burning  pain,  bluish  red  swelling,

hot  to  touch,  with  want  of  sensation  in  affected  parts.
I  Complaints  <  when  allowing  feet  to  hang  down.

VOL.  VIII. — 40.


PULSATILLA.  626

•  She  cannot  walk  so  well  towards  evening.
^*  Limbs  in GeneraL i Anxious  tremulous  sensation in
limbs  ;  weakness,  weariness  and  heaviness.

■  Drawing,  tearing  in  limbs,  with  chilliness  and  coldness.

■  Drawing,  fine  sticking"  pains  in  limbs,  especially  in  joints,

which  are  painful  to  touch  as  if  beaten.
I  Limbs  feel  beaten.

■  Limbs  upon  which  he  lies  while  asleep  seem  asleep,  with

crawling  on  waking.

■  ■Wandering  pains,  shift  rapidly  from  one  part  to  another,

also  with  swelling  and  redness  of  joints.

■  Tension  which  increases  until  very  acute,  and  then  lets

up  with  a  snap ;  <  evenings  before  midnight.

■  Jerking,  tearing,  drawing  in  muscles,  shifting  rapidly

from  place  to  place ;  <  at  night,  from  warmth ;  >  from
uncovering.

I  I  After  catching  cold,  fever,  headache,  racking  pains  in
upper  and  lower  limbs;  suppression  of  menses;  was
crippled  hand  and  foot ;  nothing  seemed  to  >  her  and
she  fancied  the  remedies  employed  made  her  < ;  had
all  the  sensations  and  appearances  of  a  person  afflicted
with  acute  rheumatism,  with  the  exception  that  the
joints  were  not  swollen  or  red  though  exquisitely  pain-
ful to  touch  ;  constipation ;  no  appetite ;  thirst ;  sleep
broken ;  pulse  feeble  and  quick  ;  palpitation  but  no
bruit;  skin  pale  and  perspiring;  cannot  sit  up  in  bed
because  of  pain  across  loins. ^Neuralgic rheumatism.

I  I  Tensive,  stitching,  tearing  pains  in  nape  of  neck,
shoulders,  and  in  arms  down  to  finger  tips ;  tensive
pains  from  small  of  back  over  hips  and  thighs,  to  feet ;
fever,  chilliness  and  shuddering  intermingled  with  heat ;
headache,  confusion  of  head;  offensive  taste;  slimy
mouth;  loss  of  appetite;  great  sleepiness  during  day,
restless  at  night. ^Rheumatism.

i  I  Drawing  tearing  pains,  first  in  one  knee,  then  in  other,
then  in  arms  and  hands,  slioulders,  nape  of  neck  or
feet;  pains  so  severe  as  to  hinder  mqtion  of  affected
part ;  after  the  pains  have  lasted  several  hours  affected
part  becomes  swollen,  pain  grows  less  severe,  and
another  part  is  attacked ;  constant  chilliness  over  whole
body,  except  affected  part,  which  is  hot;  pulse  hard,
small,  contracted ;  tongue  coated  white ;  impaired  appe-
tite; no  sleep  before  midnight  on  account  of  evening
exacerbation,  remission  about  3  or  4  a.m.  and  sleep;
pale  face. /^Rheumatism.

I  I  Acute  twitching  pains  and  constant  numbness  in  affected
joints;  pain  on  touch  and  when  attempting  to  move;
<  at  night  preventing  sleep,  >  towards  morning ;  ten-


627  PULSATILLA.

sion  in  legs  as  if  tendons  were  too  short;  after  getting
wet. ^Rheumatism.

M  Chronic  rheumatism  brought  on  by  working  in  hot
rooms  and  cold  vaults;  rheumatic  fever,  <  in  evening
and  forepart  of  night;  <  every  other  night;  very
severe  pains  in  ankles  and  feet  and  in  upper  limbs
from  elbows  to  fingers ;  dull,  aching  pains,  sometimes
stinging;  >  by  drinking  cold  water.

llRheumatism  caused  by  getting  wet,  especially  feet;
from  protracted  wet  weather.

■  Redness  and  swelling  of  joints,  with  stinging  pains.

■  Frostbitten  limbs;  dark,  red  bluish  sw^elling.

^^  Rest.  Position.  Motion.  Rest ;  tremulous  anguish  <  ;
soreness  in  temples ;  pain  in  face  <  ;  pain  in  testicles
>  ;  laborlike  pains  >  ;  weakness  of  joints  >  ;  arm
painful.

Cannot  rest  although  motion  < :  sciatica.

Must  keep  in  recumbent  position :  from  nausea  and
vertigo.

Must  lie  down  :  from  weariness  ;  and  sleep  for  hours.

The  longer  he  lies  in  morning  the  longer  he  wishes  to  lie.

Lying:  tremulous  anguish  <,  vertigo  <,  headache  <  ;
on  well  side  tumors  on  scalp  <  ;  cough  comes  on;  blood
pours  from  nose ;  head  low,  pain  in  face  <  ;  upon  affected
side  facial  neuralgia  <  ;  <  pain  in  epigastric  region  ;
discharge  of  urine ;  menstrual  discharge  <  ;  leucorrhoea
<  ;  suffering  much  > ;  cough  < ;  stitches  in  side ;
bruised  pain  in  back  and  limbs;  ulcers  <  changing
position.

Lying  on  back :  pains  which  come  on  are  >  by  turning
to  either  side,  and  vice  versa;  must  sit  up  and  turn;
only  position  possible;  dyspnoea;  pains  >.

Lies  in  bed  on  back  with  feet  drawn  up.

Lying  with  head  low:  tearing  in  teeth  <.

Lying  on  sound  side:  tearing  in  teeth  <.

Lying  on  side:  difficulty  of  breathing;  soreness  of  chest;
pains  <.

Lying  on  1.  side :  palpitation  ;  dreams.

Sitting :  tremulous  anguish  <  ;  vertigo  < ;  headache  < ;
after,  dizzy  obscuration  of  vision ;  cough  ceases ;  blood
stopped  pouring  from  nose ;  toothache  <  ;  lower  ex-
tremities inclined  to  fall  asleep ;  limbs  go  to  sleep ;  cut-
ting in  abdomen  <  ;  colic  <  ;  urine  is  discharged  in
drops ;  urine  dribbles ;  bladder  painful ;  unpleasant
soreness  of  testicles  ;  ulcers  <.

Sitting  up  in  bed:  cough  goes  off;  whooping-cough  >;
after,  can  scarcely  rise ;  pain  in  back ;  pain  in  sacral
region  <  ;  rising  from,  legs  seem  asleep ;  great  inclina-
tion to  stretch  feet.


PULSATILLA.  628

Child  sits  up  in  bed  to  cough.

Cannot  sit  long,  must  walk  about :  false  labor  pains.

Cannot  sit  up  in  bed :  pain  across  loins.

Sleeps  with  her  arms  over  head  and  feels  stiff  on  rising.

Cannot  hold  head  erect,  heaviness.

Bending  backward :  pain  in  sacral  region  <  ;  pain  in  hip.

Must  bend  forward:  pain  in  chest  and  abdomen.

Stooping :  vertigo ;  head  feels  too  heavy ;  pressive  head-
ache ;  pulsating  in  brain  <  ;  long,  pain  in  back.

Standing:  bladder  painful;  lame  and  restless  feeling  in
thigh ;  pressing  pain  in  testicles  <  ;  tensive  pain  in  feet
changes  to  sticking  ;  tingling  in  feet.

On  attempting  to  stand:  severe  pain  in  foot.

When  feet  hang  down:  complaints  <.

Inclination  to  change  position  :  sciatica.

Desire  to  change  position:  neuralgia  ;  pain  in  leg.

Can  hardly  find  an  easy  position  through  night,  owing  to
pain  in  pelvis.

Motion :  tremulous  anguish  >  ;  causes  vertigo  ;  of  eyes
causes  pain  in  them  ;  of  •  head  or  body,  noises  in  ear;
soreness  of  chest;  pain  in  abdomen  <  ;  laborlike  pain
<;  impossible,  phlegmasia  dolens;  pain  in  small  of
back;  craves  but  gives  no  relief;  of  arm  pain  <;  of
arms  pain  in  tendons ;  of  swollen  knee  very  painful ;
causes  pain,  rheumatism  ;  >  discomfort  of  whole  body ;
>  heat ;  desire  for,  aching  in  1.  lower  extremity.

Beginning  to  move:  ulcers  <.

After  moving:  ulcers  <.

Disinclination  to  move.

Moves  about  anxiously  from  side  to  side  on  knees :  diffi-
culty of  breathing.

Tosses  about:  colic.

Turning  over  in  bed :  as  if  bladder  would  fall  towards
side  on  which  he  is  lying;  chilliness.

Raising  eyes:  tearing  in  temple  <.

Chewing:  does  not  <  toothache.

Rising:  head  sweat  >  ;  faceache  >.

Rising  from  a  seat :  vertigo.

Raising  arm  or  using  it:  numbness  and  heaviness.

Must  move  arm  :  tearing  pain  in  it.

Cannot  bend  knee  or  kneel :  pain  in  leg.

Cannot  move  affected  thigh  and  leg :  sciatica.

Making  a  misstep:  stitching  pains  in  stomach  <.

Walking:  vertigo  >  ;  dizzy  obscuration  of  vision  ;  tooth-
ache >  ;  oppression,  tension,  shortness  of  breath ;  stitch-
ing pain  in  stomach <;  >  pain  in  epigastric  region;  stick-
ing in  region  of  liver;  just  after  supper  griping  in
bowels ;  colic  >  ;  cutting  pressure  upon  neck  of  bladder ;


629  PULSATILLA.

urine  is  discharged  in  drops ;  pain  in  region  of  bladder  on
walking;  urine  dribbles;  pain  in  external  urinary
organs;  menses  flow  mostly  ;  tires  limbs  easily;  wholly
relieves  suffering ;  causes  cough ;  fast,  oppression  of
chest;  stitches  in  precordial  region  >;  bruised  pain
in  back  and  knees  > ;  stiffness  of  knee ;  tingling  in
feet  >  ;  soreness  of  heel  <  ;  feels  cold  ;  almost  impossi-
ble, tertian  ague;  bleeding  tumors  <.

Going  up-stairs:  causes  cough.

Ascending  an  eminence  :  oppression  of  chest.

Exercising:  oppression  of  chest;  gently,  relieves  pains  in
back  and  sides.

Exercise :  is  exhausting.

Exertion :  palpitation.
'^  Nerves, l  Heaviness  of  whole  body  ;  inclination  to  stretch.

I  Everything  about  body  seems  tight;  wishes  to  throw  off
her  clothes.

■  Sensation  in  whole  body  as  if  he  had  been  awake  all

night,  with  confusion  in  head,  as  after  intoxication.

■  Feeling  of  discomfort  over  whole  body,  in  morning  after

rising,  >  moving  about.
I  Excessive  weariness  from  a  short  walk.

■  Weakness  of  whole  body;  he  is  obliged  to  lie  down.

■  Tremulous  weakness.

■  The  longer  he  lies  in  morning  the  weaker  he  becomes

and  the  more  he  wishes  to  lie  and  fall  asleep  again.

■  Languor,  prostration  and  desire  to  yawn.

■  Indolent,  constantly  wishes  to  lie  or  sit.

■  Tired  worn-out  feeling.

■  Nervous  debility,  with  amenorrhoea.

■  Excessive  debility  and  bruised  feeling  in  limbs;  lameness

in  ligaments ;  troublesome  beating  of  arteries  of  whole
body,  most  perceptible  when  touching  parts.

■  ■Neuralgia: from bad diet,  late hours, fat pastries,

gravies;  erratic  pains,  which  fly  from  one  part  of  body
or  limbs  to  another,  short  and  sharp,  and  attended  by
bruised  sore  sensation.

■  ■Numbness  of  suffering  parts.

■  Restless  mood,  as  if  he  had  not  done  his  duty.

■  Cannot  sit  long  at  a  time;  must  walk  about  to  relieve

pain.

■  Anxious  feeling  of  trembling,  or  violent  trembling  all

over,  sometimes  with  cold  perspiration.

■  Child  becomes  very  rigid,  from  fretfulness.

■  Lies  in  bed  on  back,  with  feet  drawn  up.

■  Oversensitiveness  to  pain.

■  ■Hysteria;  symptoms  ever  changing.

■  ■Fainting  fits,  great  paleness  of  face  ;  shivering,  coldness.


PULSATILLA.  630

I  Chorea  caused  by  amenorrhoea  or  dysmenorrhoea.

I  Epileptic  convulsions  :  violent  tossing  of  limbs,  followed

by  relaxation,  disposition  to  vomit,  eructations ;  from
suppressed  menses.
^'' Sleep. I  Yawning; drowsy  by  day,  and  during dinner;
can scarcely keep awake in evening, yet without
weariness.

I I  While  sleeping  lies  upon  back,  with  hands  overhead,
or  with  arms  crossed  on  abdomen  and  feet  drawn  up.

1  Feverish  somnolence.

1  Sleep  dull,  stupid,  restless,  tosses  about;  intolerable  sen-
sation of  heat,  throws  off  covers ;  moves  to  and  fro.

II Talking,  whining  or  screaming  during  sleep;  starts,
talks,  weeps,  cries  out;  stertorous  inspirations.

I  Dreams:  confused,  frightful ; anxious,  vivid  ; of  fright

and  disgust;  sad,  with  weeping;  anxious,  when  lying
on  1.  side  ;  of  black  beasts;  that  he  is  falling,
i  Wakes  very  frequently  during  night.

I I  Unable  to  fall  asleep,  in  evening.

ilSleep  before  midnight  prevented  by  a  fixed  idea;  for
example,  a  melody  constantly  recurred  to  his  mind,  yet
sleepiness  prevented  activity  of  memory  and  fantasies.

I  Sleeplessness:  on  account  of  orgasm  of  blood;  with  ex-

treme restlessness  ;  on  account  of  an  anxious  sensation
of  heat;  until  2  a.m.;  till  after  midnight,  with  weeping
because  slie  could  not  sleep,  girl  set.  8  ;  after  late  supper,
or  eating  too  much  ;  from  ideas  crowding  on  mind ;
first  part  of  night,  sleeps  late  in  morning.

I I  Wide  awake  in  evening,  does  not  want  to  go  to  bed  ;
first  sleep  restless  ;  sound  sleep  when  it  is  time  to  get  up  ;
wakes  languid  and  not  refreshed  ;  indigestion.

'*  Time. I  l  Aggravation  in  evening;  in  twilight.

Morning:  depressed;  thinks  of  business  with  grieving;
vertigo  on  rising,  faint ;  towards,  fetid  sweat  on  head
and  face  ;  it  seems  dark  before  eyes  ;  agglutination  as
if  foreign  body  were  pressing  in  eye;  lachrymation;
sneezing;  yellow  or  yellow  green  coryza;  blowing  of
blood  from  nose;  jerking  in  teeth;  bad  taste  on  hawk-
ing ;  qualmish  nausea  ;  dryness  of  tongue  ;  as  if  tongue
Lad  been  burnt;  putrid  smell  from  mouth  ;  mouth  and
pharynx  dry  and  covered  with  mucus  ;  thirst  for  beer ;
weight  in  stomach  ;  aching  in  forehead  >  ;  cholera  >  ;
bad  taste ;  hemorrhoids  with  pain  in  back ;  towards,
pain  in  uterus  with  qualmishness;  nausea,  feels  very
tired ;  leucorrhoea  < ;  cough  <  ;  dyspnoea ;  expectora-
tion < ;  sweat  on  face  ;  oppression  of  chest ;  constric-
tion of  larynx ;  pulse  slower ;  burning  near  an  ulcer  on
foot;  sweat  profuse;  bad  flat  taste  <.


631  PULSATILLA.

2  A.M. :  sleepless.

3  to  4  A.M. :  remission  of  pain.

6  A.M. :  gets  an  hour's  sleep  after  restless  night.

7  A.M. :  neuralgia  of  head.

10  A.M. :  chill.

11  A.M.:  chill  commences  in  hands.
Forenoon  :  rigor  over  back.

Day  :  headache  throughout ;  pain  in  1.  causality  ;  somno-
lence; lachrymation,  facial  neuralgia  <;  menses  flow
only;  feels  >  after  short  sleep  than  long  one;  heavi-
ness of  legs ;  pain  in  calf  of  r.  leg  >  ;  sleepy,  shiver-
ing up  back;  looked  cold  and  blue;  two  or  three
diarrhoeic  stools ;  bleeding  tumors  <.

Day  and  night:  pain  in  one  side  of  head  and  face.

Afternoon :  pain  in  stomach  takes  away  breath ;  nausea
and  vomiting;  dull  and  sleepy;  ulcers  <.

3  P.M. :  pain  in  wrist  came  on,  increased  till  midnight,  di-
minished till  next  afternoon;  attacks  with  coldness
extending  from  body  to  legs.

4  P.M. :  sounds  in  ears ;  pains  in  face  cease ;  as  if  limbs
would  fall  asleep ;  chill ;  sudden  severe  pain  in  sacral
region.

5  P.M. :  chill.

6  P.M. :  bilious  intermittent  paroxysm.

Evening:  anxiety;  dreads  ghosts;  vertigo  with  nausea,
heat  and  loss  of  sight;  stupefaction;  until  going  to
sleep  stitches  in  brain ;  tearing  in  frontal  bone ;  head-
ache; eyes  ache,  tearing  in  temples;  pulsating  in  head,
headache  <  :  sore  pain  in  scalp  <  ;  eyes  <  ;  dryness
and  heat  in  eyes  <  ;  stitching  pain  in  eyes,  forehead
and  temples  <  ;  stitching  in  eyelids  and  canthi,  itching
burning  in  lids ;  after  sundown  itching  in  inner  canthi ;
palpitation  with  anxiety  ;  severe  pain  in  ear ;  sneezing;
stopped  up  coryza;  violent  catarrh;  nose  swollen  and
itching  ;  sticking  in  gums ;  tearing  along  alveolar  bor-
der <;  bad  taste  after  drinking  beer;  difficult  deglu-
tition with  fever  <  ;  eructations  like  bile,  nausea,  of
food;  pain  and  vomiting  most  severe;  crampy  pains
begin  and  last  all  night;  tympanitis  with  rumblmg;
aching  in  forehead  < ;  bitter  taste ;  griping  in  intes-
tines; incarcerated  flatus  with  colic;  cutting  in  abdo-
men ;  colic  >  ;  hemorrhoids  with  itching ;  fever ;  me-
trorrhagia <;  nausea  and  vomiting;  all  symptoms  <
cannot  walk  so  well ;  pain  in  uterus  <  ;  labor  pain  <
cough  <  ;  difficulty  of  breathing  <  ;  asthma ;  after
lying  down,  cough;  spasmodic  cough;  constriction  of
larynx;  pulse  frequent;  pain  in  sacrum,  sciatica  <;
acute  drawing  in  lower  extremities;  towards,  boring  in


PULSATILLA.  632

heels ;  burning  near  an  ulcer  on  foot  <  ;  unable  to  fall
asleep;  feels  cold;  chilliness  <;  cold  creeps  on  back;
dry  heat;  cannot  walk  so  well;  attacks  begin  with  chill
in  back;  jaundice  <  ;  ulcers  <.

J^ight :  anxiety  as  from  heat ;  sees  the  world  on  fire ;
bubbling  in  head ;  headache  >  ;  tearing  in  head  ;  neu-
ralgia in  head  < ;  pains  until  an  hour  after  midnight ;
wakefulness  with  headache;  delirium;  vomiting  and
diarrhoea ;  fetid  sweat  on  head  and  face  <  ;  loss  of
vision;  restless  pulsating  in  ear;  dry  cough;  neu-
ralgia <  thirst;  toothache  <  ;  as  if  tongue  had  been
burnt ;  hiccough  ;  nausea ;  disturbed  sleep,  wakes  from
internal  heat;  want  of  appetite;  tympanitis  with  rum-
bling <  ;  three  or  four  thin  stools ;  urine  dribbles ;
running  of  water  from  mouth ;  sufferings  < ;  pain  in
uterus  <  ;  urinary  secretion  suppressed  ;  influenza  <  ;
difficulty  of  breathing  <;  dyspnoea;  asthma;  awakes
after  12  with  cough ;  cough  <  ;  spasmodic  cough ;
whooping  cough  <  ;  stitches  in  side  <  ;  congestion  to
chest  and  heart;  pain  in  back  and  sides,  usually  in
after-part ;  sciatica  <  ;  1.  leg  < ;  pain  in  muscles  <  ;
restless  at  night,  rheumatism  ;  wakes  frequently ;  cold
creeps  on  back;  heat;  sweat  with  stupid  slumber;  sev-
eral watery  stools;  typhoid  fever  <  ;  delirium;  ulcers  <.

Before  midnight :  pain  in  face  <  ;  pain  in  teeth  prevents
sleep  ;  pain  in  chest ;  left  leg  <  ;  no  sleep,  rheumatism ;
sleep  prevented  by  fixed  idea.

Midnight :  fever  sets  in.
^®  Temperature  and  Weather. Worse  before  a  thunderstorm.

Heat:  faceache  <;  chill  >.

Sun:  symptoms  <.

Heat  of  stove:  pain  in  1.  causality  <  ;  symptoms  <.

Hot  rooms  and  cold  vaults:  cause  rheumatism.

Hot  food:  vomited  immediately.

In  summer:  chilliness.

Warm  weather:  ulcers  >.

Warmth  :  of  bed  tearing  in  head  <  ;  external  tearing  in
head  <  ;  pain  on  scalp  <  ;  from  exercise,  dimness ;
pain  in  face  < ;  of  bed,  toothache  <  ;  stools  < ;  of  bed
feels  <  ;  pain  in  calf  of  r.  leg  much  <  by  heat  of  bed  ;
of  bed,  causes  pain  and  itching  in  chilblains  ;  pain  in
muscles  <  ;  external,  is  intolerable ;  of  bed  causes  itch-
ing over  whole  body.

When  warm  in  bed  :  cough  ;  cough  becomes  dry.

Covering  warmly  :  >  chilly  feeling.

Warm  room :  stupefaction ;  soreness  of  temples  <  ;  pain
in  forehead  <  ;  blackness  before  eyes  <  ;  itching  of
lids  worse;  hardness  of  hearing  >  ;  attack  of  violent


633  PULSATILLA.

catarrh ;  from  cold  air  into,  attack  of  profuse  discharge
of  blood  from  nose ;  pain  in  face  <  ;  tearing  along
alveolar  border  < ;  toothache  returns ;  abdominal
symptoms*<;  dyspnoea;  coming  into,  cough,  sciatica  <;
chilliness  on  going  into  cold  air  from  ;  chilliness ;  can-
not remain  in.

Warm  food  :  pain  in  face  <  ;  toothache;  tearing  in  teeth
<  ;  symptoms  <  ;  vomited  soon  after  taking.

Warm  applications :  intolerable  during  neuralgia.

In  house:  coryza  stopped ;  chilly.

Close  room :  very  oppressive.

Open  air :  vertigo  >  ;  soreness  in  temples  >  ;  pain  in
head  >  ;  tearing  in  head  >  ;  walking  slowly,  headache

>  ;  _  eyes  >  ;  wants  to  be  in ;  lachrymation  ;  itching
of  lids  >  ;  roaring  >  out-doors;  fluent  coryza ;  patient
feels  well ;  pain  in  face  >  ;  tearing  in  alveolar  border

>  ;  toothache  ceases ;  painful  pressure  upon  neck  of
bladder; walking,  menstrual colic  >; craves; must

- have,  during  labor  pains;  sciatica  >;  ulcers  >.

Cool  air:  eyes  >  ;  stools  >.

Draft  of  cold  open  air:  toothache  >.

Puts  feet  out  of  bed  to  cool  them.

Uncovering:  toothache  >  ;  pain  in  muscles  >.

Cold  :  stupefying  headache  <  ;  draft,  itching  of  eyes  <  ;

faceache  >  ;  food  >  ;  colic ;  room,  cannot  void  urine ;

ulcers  >.
Cold  food  :  retained  longer  than  warm.
Cold  drinks :  gastric  catarrh  ;  abdominal  symptoms  <.
Cold  applications :  eyes  >  ;  facial  neuralgia  <  ;  heat  of

vulva;  pain  in  calf  of  leg  >.
Taking  cold  :  swelling  of  r.  testicle  ;  threatened  metritis ;

suppression  of  menses.
Cold,  damp weather : hardness of hearing <  ; rheu-
matism <.
Damp  places:  abdominal  symptoms  <.
Getting  wet:  colic;  attacks  of  mucous  diarrhoea;  cannot

void urine; ovaritis; metritis; suppressed menses;

rheumatism.
Wetting  affected  parts  : >  ulcers.
Washing: >  heat.
Bathing:  catarrhal  conjunctivitis.
Cold water : in mouth becomes  warm, toothache >  ;

toothache  <  ;  bathing  >  soreness  of  external  meatus  ;

rheumatism  >  by  drinking.
Ice  water :  cholera.

Changes, of  weather  or  storms:  tearing  in  head  <.
Wind : does not > itching of lids ; teeth sensitive ;

ulcers  <.


PULSATILLA. .  634

^"  Fever,  ll Chilliness:  through  whole  body,  especially  in
back,  with  cold  hands;  with  yawning  and  stretching
before  appearance  of  menses  ;  all  over  without  shiver-
ing ;  feels  cold  in  evening ;  whole  evening,  before  bed-
time, even  while  walking;  on  going  from  a  warm  room
into  cold  air ;  with  the  pains ;  in  evening,  after  lying
down  ;  without  thirst ;  without  sensation  of  being  cold  ;
internal,  even  in  a  warm  room  ;  towards  evening,  even
in  summer,  when  warmly  clad  ;  with  trembling ;  over
upper  part  of  abdomen  and  upper  arms,  after  dinner;
over  abdomen,  extending  around  to  lower  portion  of
back ;  in  sacrum  ;  along  back.

I  One-sided  coldness,  with  numbness.

llFlitting  chilliness;  chills  in  spots, now  here, now  there;
<  in  evening.

■  Febrile  chill,  without  thirst;  thirst  during  heat.

■  Shivering  in  back,  extending  into  hypochondria  and  es-

pecially into  anterior  portion  of  arms  and  thighs,  with
coldness  of  limbs  and  a  feeling  as  if  they  would  fall
asleep,  about  4  p.m.

I I  Cold  creeps  on  back  in  evening  and  night.

■  Shivering  running  up  back  all  day,  without  thirst.

■  Creeping  shiverings  over  arms,  with  heat  of  cheeks;  air

of  room  seems  too  hot.

■  Cold  hands  and  feet ;  they  seem  dead.

■  Thirst  before  chill  or  heat,  seldom  during  hot  stage.

■  ■Chill  4  P.M.,  no  thirst;  anxiety,  dyspnoea;  vomiting  of

mucus  when  chill  comes  on.

■  Coldness,  paleness,  with  sweat  over  whole  body.

■  Chill  as  if  drenched  with  cold  water.

■  Shivering  before  colic  commences.

■  Chill  followed  by  heat,  with  anxiety  and  heat  of  face.

■  ■Heat:  dry,  in  evening,  with  distended  veins  and  burn-

ing hands,  that  seek  out  cool  places;  internal,  with
thirst ;  attacks  of  flushes ;  at  night,  without  thirst ;  ex-
ternal warmth  is  intolerable ;  of  hands  and  feet ;  fol-
lowed by  shivering  ;  of  whole  body  except  hands,  which
are  cool,  with  pressive  headache  above  orbits  and
anxious  lamentations ;  anxious ;  as  if  he  were  dashed
with  hot  water,  with  cold  forehead  ;  wishes  to  be  covered,
licks  lips  and  does  not  drink,  moans  and  groans  ;  in-
tolerable burning  at  night  in  bed  with  uneasiness ;  with
red  face,  or  one  cheek  pal©  and  one  red ;  internal,  dry,
evening  and  night,  without  external  heat ;  of  r.  side  or
on  upper  part  of  body,  >  by  moving  or  washing ;  of
face  or  of  one  hand,  with  coldness  of  other,  body  hot,
limbs  cold ;  of  body  with  coldness  of  extremities ;  dur-
ing evening,  veins  are  enlarged.


635  PULSATILLA.

llSweat:  profuse,  in  morning  ;  only  on  one  side  of  body  ;
on  face  and  scalp;  sour,  musty,  at  times  cold  ;  sweetish
acid  odor  to  sweat;  at  night  with  stupid  slumber  ;  like
musk  ;  during  sleep,  disappears  on  waking.

I  I  Chilliness,  commencing  every  morning  10  a.m.,  and
lasting  one  hour,  followed  by  fever,  lasting  about  two
hours,  then  sweat,  disappearing  in  a  short  time  ;  thirst
before  chill,  also  with  fever  and  sweat,  absent  during
chill ;  pain  in  r.  side  of  head  ;  dulness  of  hearing ;
constant  sticking  pain  in  chest  on  drawing  a  deep
breath;  cough,  principally  in  morning,  at  which  time^
she  expectorated  a  bloody-yellowish  matter  which  oc-
casionally became  mixed  with  green  mucus ;  bitter
taste  in  mouth  ;  constant  nausea ;  restlessness,  wdth
sleeplessness  after  midnight ;  watery  diarrhoea  after  eat-
ing anything  unusual,  especially  apples  ;  has  not  men-
struated for  several  months. ^Ague.

I  I  Chill  10  A.M.,  beginning  in  feet,  legs  and  neck  ;  shak-
ing, lasting  two  hours;  thirst;  wants  to  be  covered;
heat,  with  frontal  headache;  pale  f^ice;  thirst  for  much
water  and  often  and  for  hot  lemonade  ;  wants  to  be  un-
covered ;  sweats  sleeping,  more  on  neck  and  chest ;
thirst  and  headache,  when  awake;  wakes  weeping;
during  night  and  morning  previous,  thirst. ^Ague.

I  I  Chill  on  alternate  days  at  noon,  first  in  feet,  then  in
hands,  then  general;  lasts  one  hour,  without  thirst;
fever  for  about  half  an  hour,  with  slight  thirst ;  aching
in  legs  before  chill  and  during  fever;  headache,  dur-
ing chill  especially,  stitches  in  temples;  appetite  poor.
^Ague.

I  I  Chill  alternate  days,  at  noon,  commencing  in  knees,
with  cold  legs  and  feet,  lasting  twenty  minutes;  no
thirst ;  fever  lasts  an  hour  and  a  half,  no  thirst,  sleeps
much ;  after  fever,  hunger,  with  beating  and  throbbing
in  forehead  ;  no  sweat ;  daily  epistaxis ;  appetite  poor.
^Ague.

n  Chill  generally  begins  about  umbilical  region,  some-
times in  tips  of  fingers ;  sensation  of  coldness  as  from  a
piece  of  ice  between  scapula? ;  >  by  heat;  chill  lasts
two  minutes,  heat  for  half  an  hour,  then  chill  again,
no  sweat ;  a  draft  of  air  or  dampness  will  at  any  time
produce  the  chilly  feeling  which  is  >  by  covering
warmly;  drinks  little,  water  disagrees;  bad,  flat  taste,
<  in  morning  ;  menses  scanty,  feels  often  like  crying ;
symptoms  <  from  heat  of  stove  or  sun.  /^Intermittent
fever.

I  I  Chill  commences  in  hands  at  11  a.m.  with  thirstless-
ness  ;  excessive  bone  pains ;  fever  lasts  an  hour,  with


PULSATILLA.  63&

•

slight  thirst  and  sharp  shooting  pains  in  forehead;  slight
sweat. OAgue.

I  I  Chill  every  day  at  noon  ;  aching  of  head,  back,  and  ex-
tremities ;  sore,  bruised  spots  over  body ;  fever  sets  in
at  midnight  without  thirst. ^Ague.

I  I  First  attack  3  p.m.,  later  ones  at  1  a.m.;  during  chill
great  coldness  with  shuddering,  chills  up  and  down
back,  with  aching  and  drawing  in  bones  and  muscles
of  hips  ;  chilliness  lasting  three-quarters  of  an  hour  ;
fever  high  with  faintness  and  restlessness  from  want  of
air  and  heat  of  room  ;  considerable  perspiration  after
fever,  but  easily  chilled  ;  cannot  remain  in  warm  room-
pulse  small  and  quite  full ;  tongue  moist  and  dirty
white ;  no  thirst.

I  I  Chill  followed  by  fever  and  sweat,  nearly  every  day^
coming  on  towards  evening ;  no  thirst  in  any  of  the
stages,  aversion  to  fat  or  rich  food  and  but  very  little
appetite ;  the  little  eaten  distressed  her,  had  to  live
quite  abstemiously ;  severe  pain  in  1.  chest,  with  trouble-
some cough,  <  lying  down. ^Ague.

U Quotidian:  chill  from  3  p.m.  until  bedtime;  began  on
buttocks,  descended  legs  and  ascended  to  head,  making^
hair  stand  on  end,  with  feeling  in  head  as  if  it  would
break  ;  if  he  coughed,  head  felt  as  if  it  cracked  ;  woke
in  morning  with  sweat;  with  chill,  painful  stiffness  of
neck  ;  epigastrium  somewhat  swollen  and  allowing  na
pressure;  by  day  he  looked  cold, nose  blue  and  pointed.

I  I  Tertian  ague:  during  apyrexia,  great  heaviness  of  whole
body  with  chilliness  and  sleepiness  during  day ;  great
lassitude,  can  hardly  walk  across  floor,  must  lie  for
hours  and  sleep,  <  towards  evening;  sleep  at  night  rest-
less, with  talking  and  tossing  about;  several  watery
stools  at  night.

I  I  Attacks  begin  in  evening  with  severe  chill  in  back,  fol-
lowed by  moderate  heat  mostly  in  head,  with  headache
and  delirium  lasting  until  morning,  followed  by  profuse
sweat ;  thirst  present  only  before  chill ;  before  and  dur-
ing chill,  severe  cough  and  pain  in  chest ;  during  apy-
rexia pains  in  lower  limbs  ;  menses  suppressed  ;  leucor-
rhoea ;  postponing  type. ^Quartan  ague.

I  I  Severe  general  chill,  lasting  half  an  hour,  then  great
heat  followed  by  profuse  sweat  lasting  several  hours;
moderate  thirst  during  heat ;  during  paroxysm  severe
headache;  during  apyrexia  lassitude,  loss  of  appetite,
intolerable  stitching  pain  in  1.  hypochondrium,  two  or
three  diarrhoeic  stools  during  day  ;  tongue  moist,  white ;
slight  murmur  during  systole;  murmur  in  jugular
veins;  pulse  88,  weak;  spleen  greatly  enlarged. OAgue.


637  PULSATILLA.

I  I  Every  evening  at  6  severe  chill  lasting  one  hour,  fol-
lowed by  great  heat  and  headache,  and  then  sweat  last-
ing half  the  night;  during  apyrexia,  constant  severe
headache,  pain  in  chest,  severe  cough  with  expectora-
tion of  bitter  taste. ^Quotidian  ague.

I  Chill  4  P.M.,  with  icy  coldness  and  clamminess  of  hands
and  paleness  of  face  and  lips,  lasting  an  hour,  followed
by  heat  of  two  hours  duration,  sweat  absent ;  during
apyrexia,  headache  in  r.  half  of  forehead,  every  day
tearing  pains  in  r.  eye ;  severe  pains  like  tic  douloureux
when  region  supplied  by  pes  anserinum  is  touched  ;  has
had  nosebleed  for  several  paroxysms;  tongue  clean,
moist ;  offensive  taste ;  offensive  smell  before  nose,  three
stools  daily. ^Tertian  ague.

i  I  Attack  preceded  by  numbness  of  fingers;  chill  lasting
one  to  two  hours;  heat  with  thirst ;  profuse  cold  sweat
standing  out  upon  body  in  drops ;  congestion  to  head
with  throbbing  in  temporal  arteries,  >  from  hard  press-
ure ;  nausea  and  sensation  as  if  head  would  burst  on
coughing;  heat  and  headache  continue  until  next
paroxysm  on  following  day;  at  beginning  of  paroxysm
looseness  of  bowels  and  cough  with  mucous  expectora-
tion, especially  during  heat. ^Ague.

1  Quotidian  ague;  great  prostration  ;  face  greenish  yellow.

I  I  Attacks  at  3  p.m.  with  coldness  extending  from  body  to
legs,  and  going  to  head,  with  bristling  of  hair,  so  that
cap  was  raised  from  head,  with  this  a  feeling  of  fulness
in  head  as  if  it  would  burst;  if  he  coughed  at  this  time,
cracking  in  head  ;  cold  stage  lasted  until  bedtime;  some
sweat  next  morning. ^Quotidian  intermittent.

1  I  By  day  patient  looked  cold,  with  a  pointed,  blue  nose.

■I  I  Painful  stiffness  of  muscles  of  neck  during  chill.

I  I  Aversion  to  rye-bread. ^Intermittent  fever.

I  I  Chills  after  being  suppressed  for  ten  days  by  quinine,

returned  again  every  other  night  before  midnight;  not
amounting  to  a  shake,  but  a  chilly  cold  feeling,  lasting
irom  one  to  two  hours,  followed  by  high  fever  which
lasted  fully  eighteen  hours,  ending  in  slight  sweat;
little  thirst  at  any  time  ;  severe  headache  during  fever;
nausea  before  chill. ^Ague.

I I  Paroxysms  of  increasing  severity  and  ever  changing
symptoms;  no  two  attacks  alike. 6 Ague.

iSomnolence  before  fever. ^Quartan  ague.

I  Ague;  during  febrile  stage,  pains  threatening  abortion  in

early  months  of  pregnancy.
JAgue  after  abuse  of  quinine;  thirst  2  or  3  p.m.,  then

chill  without  thirst  and  anxiety  and  oppression  from

venous  congestion  of  chest;  sleepy,  yet  cannot  sleep;

one  hand  hot,  the  other  cold.


PULSATILLA.  688

I  Intermittent  fevers,  with  gastric  and  bilious  symptoms
or  consequent  upon  abuse  of  Cinchona  or  quinine,  Avith
bitter  taste  of  food  and  constipation.

I  Vomiting  of  mucus  when  cold  stage  comes  on;  absence
of  thirst  during  hot  stage  and  during  sweat.

■  Severe  bilious  intermittent ;  congestive  collapse ;  no  pulse

for  hours ;  complete  paralysis  of  throat ;  paralysis  of
optic  and  auditory  nerves;  cold,  blue  nose;  cold  hands,
feet  and  limbs;  had  taken  much  quinine;  paroxysm
had  set  in  about  6  p.m.

■  During  apyrexia:  headache;  mucous  diarrhoea,  nausea

and  loss  of  appetite  ;  enlarged  spleen.

I  After  suppression  of  ague  :  earache,  toothache,  headache,
pains  in  limbs,  etc.

1  I  During  convalescence  from  Chagres  fever,  slight  chill
every  afternoon,  followed  by  a  flush  of  fever  and  a  sweat
at  night ;  no  appetite ;  depression  of  spirits ;  little  thirst;
irritability  and  peevishness ;  perverted  taste,  so  that  all
food  tasted  as  if  saturated  with  salt.

I  I  Chill :  at  5  p.m.  beginning  in  sacrum  and  going  down-
ward ;  constipation  ;  at  6  p.m.  next  day,  chill,  with  heat
and  moisture  half  an  hour  after  ;  face  hot,  pale,  sallow  ;
feels  very  nervous  and  prostrated  ;  abdomen  tender,  <
in  r.  iliac  region  ;  gurgling  in  r.  iliac  region  on  press-
ure; pulse  rapid,  compressible  ;  much  dryness  of  mouth,
back  to  throat,  with  thirst,  but  dared  not  drink  much
at  a  time,  because  it  made  her  sick  at  stomach,  drank
frequently ;  aching  pain  in  whole  1.  lower  extremity  on
outer  aspect,  requiring  her  to  move  it  frequently,  with
momentary  >  ;  sore  breasts  ;  loss  of  milk.

■  Typhoid  fever:  early  stage;  external  heat  intolerable,

causing  sense  of  heat  with  distress ;  uncovering  is  fol-
lowed by  a  chill;  heat  only  on  one  side  with  coldness
of  other,  or  sweat  of  one  side ;  drowsiness ;  delirium ;
frightful  visions ;  dry  tongue,  as  if  burnt,  yet  no  thirst ;
rumbling  in  bowels  and  diarrhoea,  with  pinching  pain,
<  at  night;  pulsating  in  epigastrium.
I  I  Since  three  days  drowsiness  ;  fever  ;  continual  delirium,
especially  at  night ;  throws  himself  about  in  bed,  and
wants  to  rise;  tongue  red,  and  covered  wdth  a  yellow
coating ;  skin  dry,  burning,  and  covered  since  tAvo
days  with  an  eruption  resembling  flea-bites;  lies  on
back,  legs  turned  on  stomach ;  drowsiness,  from
which  he  can  be  easily  roused,  though  replying  in  an
embarrassed  manner  ;  tongue  sticky  and  yellow  ;  cere-
bral congestion  ;  nostrils  dry  ;  burning  heat,  and  dry-
ness of  skin  ;  pulse  140  ;  insensibility  of  stomach  ;  con-
stipation since  six  days  ;  urine  scanty,  red,  depositing,


639  PULSATILLA.

when standing, a greyish sediment; repugnance to
drink. ^Typhoid  fever.
^'  Attacks, Periodicity. i  Pains appear suddenly, leave
gradually.
1 1  Wandering  pains  shift  rapidly  from  part  to  part.

■  Symptoms  ever  changing.

I  The symptoms are especially  violent every alternate
evening.

■  When  rising  up,  the  red  face  turns  deathly  pale.

■  Paroxysms  increasing  to  an  intense  point  of  severity,

then  decreasing  to  complete  cessation.
Regular  intervals :  facial  neuralgia.
Recurrent  attacks  :  pain  from  shoulder  to  wrist.
Alternately  :  pain  in  forehead,  in  morning  after  rising,  and

evening  after  lying  down ;  pains  in  forehead,  stomach

or  abdomen;  paleness  and  redness  of  face;  somnolence

and  sopor  with  photophobia;  dry  and  fluent  coryza;

diarrhoea  and  constipation ;  hard  and  soft  stools ;  face

pale  and  red ;  labor  pains,  and  hemorrhage.
Every  minute  or  so :  shocks  of  pain  in  ear.
Quarter  of  an  hour  after  eating :  bitter  taste.
From  5  to  10  p.m.:  rheumatic  headache.
Every  hour:  diarrhoeic  discharge;  must  urinate.
One  hour  after  eating:  pain  in  stomach.
Two  hours  after  eating :  feels  bloated.
Every  two  hours :  severe  stitching  pains  in  abdomen.
From  3  p.m.  till  bedtime :  chill.
Hours  after  eating:  vomiting  of  food.
Stop  and  return  in  a  few  hours  :  hemorrhages.
For  hours:  no  pulse.
For  twenty -four  to  forty-eight  hours:  suffers  horrid  pains,

dysmenorrhoea.
For  twenty-four  hours  :  no  discharge  of  urine;  every  half

hour,  paroxysm  of  pain.
Every  morning:  at  11  o'clock,  severe  pain  along  course

of  1.  infraorbital  nerve;  2  or  3  o'clock,  stitching  pain

in  epigastric  region;  chilliness,  10  a.m.,  for  one  hour

followed  by  fever  lasting  two  hours.
Every  day : for  several  hours,  bad taste ; epistaxis ; at

noon,  chill;  chill,  fever,  and  sweat ;  tearing  pains  in  r.

eye ;  three  stools.
Every  afternoon  :  slight  chill.
Every  evening : tearing,  boring  headache,  red  face ; at

6  o'clock  faceache ;  great  fulness  of  chest,  fulness  about

heart,  severe  chill  lasting  one  hour.
Every  night :  at  12  o'clock,  dyspnoea,  palpitation  ;  pain

in  back  and  sides.
Alternate  days :  chill  at  noon.


PULSATILLA.  640

Every  other  night:  rheumatism  <  ;  chills.

One  day  after  another :  pains  in  forehead,  stomach  and
abdomen.

At  intervals  of  one,  two  or  three  days :  constipation  with
headache.

Two  or  three  days  :  attacks  lasting.

Six  days :  constipation.

Ten  days  after  labor :  severe  chill  followed  by  heat.

From  one  to  two  weeks  :  gastrodynia.

Every  two  weeks:  menses.

For  three  weeks:  menses  delayed.

Periodical :  sick-headaches  two  or  three  days  before
menses.

For  several  months :  menses  absent.

Spring:  toothache  <.

Autumn:  nocturnal  enuresis.

For  two  years :  troublesome  cough  ;  cannot  move  about
house  without  crutches  on  account  of  soreness  of  heel ;
nocturnal  enuresis.

Since  six  years  :  loss  of  voice.
"  Locality  and  Direction.  Right :  frequent  boring  in  side
of  forehead;  tearing  in  side  of  head;  pain  in  ear;
neuralgia  of  temple;  shooting  pain  through  eye;  in
side  of  head;  ringing  in  ear;  two  pustules  on  conjunc-
tiva; hearing  impaired;  tearing  pain  behind  ear;
pressure  in  bone  above  ear;  purulent  discharge  from
nostril;  burning  of  cheek;  pain  in  supraorbital  re-
gion over  whole  side  of  face,  <  in  zygomatic  region  and
hairy  portion  of  head  ;  profuse  lachrymation;  neuralgia
on  side  of  face  and  head ;  swelling  of  scrobiculus  cor-
dis, with  hardness  extending  more  to  side  (1.  lobe  of
liver) ;  cramping  pain  in  leg ;  testicle  drawn  up;  swelling
of  testicle  ;  testicle  tender  to  touch  ;  pain  in  thigh ;  se-
vere pain  on  side  of  abdomen,  constrictive  pains  in
ovary ;  movement  of  foetus  very  violent  in  lumbar  re-
gion ;  pain  over  seat  of  placenta  when  lying  on  side  ;
pain  starts  from  anterior  portion  of  thigh ;  pain  in
groin ;  swelling  in  axilla ;  crampy  pains  in  leg ;  stiff-
ness of  knee ;  pain  in  calf  of  leg ;  eruption  on  inner
side  of  leg ;  heat  of  side ;  pain  in  half  of  forehead.

Left:  tearing  in  frontal  bone;  violent  pressure  in  temple;
pain  in  side  of  forehead ;  twitching  in  eyelid ;  biting
and  pressure  in  eye  with  lachrymation  ;  lying  on  side,
palpitation  ;  tearing  pain  from  temple  over  side  of  head
and  to  ear  and  jaw;  pain  in  causality;  pressive  pain
in  eye  ;  stye;  hearing  completely  lost;  sudden  severe
pain  in  ear;  lachrymation,  pain  in  side  of  faoe  ;  offen-
sive mucus  from  nostril ;  side  of  face  sensitive;  varicose


641  PULSATILLA.

swelling  on  side  of  tongue;  side  of  region  of  stomach
very  sensitive  to  pressure,  cannot  lie  on  side,  swelling
of  scrobiculus  cordis;  side  of  neck  of  bladder  pains'^
lame  and  restless  feeling  in  thigh ;  testicle  hangs  low|
swelling  of  testicle  and  epididymis;  orchitis;  pain  in
side  of  uterus  ;  cutting  pain  in  ovary  ;  pain  in  side  from
under  false  ribs ;  labor  pains  confined  to  side ;  palpita-
tion when  lying  on  side ;  eye  inflamed ;  pressure  against
chest,  soreness; smothered  feeling  in  chest; perspira-
tion on  side  of  chest;  systolic  murmur  at  apex  of  ven-
tricle ;  inframammary  pain ;  pain  in  clavicle  muscles
sciatica;  thigh  and  leg  swollen  to  twice  natural  size
sudden  pain  in  knee  joints;  pain  through  foot  and  leg,
soreness of heel; ankle swollen; stitching  pains  in
hypochondrium  ;  aching  in  lower  extremity.
"  Sensations. Feels  as  if  he  were  beside  himself;  as  if  in  a
hot  atmosphere;  as  if  death  were  near;  as  if  looking
through  a  sieve ;  limbs  as  if  bruised  ;  limbs  as  if  asleep;
as  if  one  had  turned  in  a  circle  a  long  time,  as  if  he
would  fall,  as  if  he  were  dancing; as if  head  were
too  heavy;  as  if  his  memory  failed;  as  if  brain  would
burst  and  eyes  fall  out  of  head ;  as  if  one  had  eaten  too
much;  as  if  stomach  had  been  disordered;  temple  as  if
constricted;  as  if  forehead were  in  a  vise;  as  if  head
would  burst ;  as  if  a  nail  were  driven  into  occiput ;  as  if
brain  were  lacerated  ;  nape  of  neck  as  if  constricted  ;
head  as  if  between  screws;  as  of  a  gimlet  piercing  skull;
as  if  brain  were  to  be  pressed  through  skull ;  as  if  tongue
were  to  be  torn  out ;  as  of  a  veil  before  eyes ;  as  if  eyes
were  tightly  bound  by  a  cloth  ;  as  if  a  foreign  body  were
pressing  in  eye ;  as  of  sand  in  eye ;  as  if  ear  were  stopped ;
as  if  a  thick  body  were  being  forcibly  driven  into  ear ;
as  if  ear  would  burst  on  sneezing  ;  as  if  all  life  had  been
taken  out  of  head  ;  as  if  all  the  blood  would  go  to  heart;
as  if  something  were  crawling  out  of  ear;  as  if  nose
would  be  forced  asunder;  as  of  fine  snuff  in  nose;  as
if  eyes  were  covered  with  mucus  which  could  be  wiped
away ; as if  a lachrymal fistula would form ; as if
parts  would  become  swollen ;  r.  zygomatic  region  as  if
seized  with  pincers;  as  if  face  were  being  drawn  tighter
and  tighter  and  then  suddenly  let  loose  as  if  a  string
were  cut;  as  if  a  nerve  in  tooth  were  put  on  stretch  and
then  let  loose ;  as  if  teeth  would  be  forced  out;  as  if  tooth
would  start  from  jaw ;  gums  as  if  sore;  as  if  tongue  had
been  burnt;  edges  of  tongue  as  if  scalded ;  as  if  roof  of
palate  were  covered  with  tenacious  mucus  or  were  swol-
len; as  of  sulphur  vapor  in  throat;  throat  as  if  raw;
oesophagus as if  food  were lying in; as  of  a  worm

VOL.  VIII, — 41.


PULSATILLA.  642

creeping  up  into  throat ;  as  if  throat  were  swollen ;
as  if  she  would  be  choked;  as  if  he  had  to  swallow
over  a  lump ;  as  if  food  were  lodged  above  pit  of  stom-
ach undigested;  as  of  a  stone  in  stomach;  as  if  one  had
eaten  too  much  ;  as  if  one  would  vomit ;  as  of  a  stone  in
abdomen ;  as  if  diarrhoea  would  set  in ;  as  if  stool  would
occur;  as  if  urine  would  gush  away;  as  if  bladder  were
too  full ;  as  if  bladder  would  fall  towards  side  on  which
he  is  lying;  as  if  bowels  would  be  moved;  eyes  felt  as  if
they  would  push  back  into  orbit;  as  if  head  were  off
shoulders ;  as  from  a  stone  in  bladder ;  as  of  a  stone
in  abdomen;  pressure  in  rectum,  as  if  to  stool;  as  if
menses  would  come  on;  as  if  tacks  pricked  heels;  spot
in  abdomen  sore  as  if  ulcerated  ;  as  if  she  must  be  in
open  air;  as  if  she  were  not  herself;  as  if  skull  were  lifted
up;  as  if  milk  would  appear  in  breasts;  as  if  throat
were  constricted ;  as  if  chest  were  too  full  and  tight;  as  if
fumes  of  sulphur  had  been  inhaled ;  as  if  trying  to  re-
move something  from  throat;  as  if  a  coat  of  mucus
extended  from  velum  palati  to  tongue;  as  of  an  ulcer
in  middle  of  thorax;  as  if  air  passages  were  internally
constricted  by  mucus ;  as  of  fluid  dropping  and  gurgling
in  chest;  as  of  damp  stockings;  as  of  stone  in  chest;  as
if  chest  were  oppressed  by  mucus;  chest  as  if  bruised;
as  if  he  had  lain  in  an  uncomfortable  position;  as  of  cold
water  poured  down  back;  small  of  back  as  if  sprained;
as  if  a  band  passed  through  back,  and  as  if  everything
were  constricted;  back  as  if  weary;  back  as  if  tightly
bandaged;  as  if  joints  would  easily  become  dislocated;
arms  feel  as  if  broken  or  dislocated;  as  if  humerus  were
beaten  in  middle;  as  of  festering  in  muscles  of  buttocks,
legs  and  soles;  hip  joints  as  if  dislocated;  thighs  as  if
bruised;  as  if  bone  would  break;  as  if  he  must  move,/
yet  motion  gave  no  relief;  soles  of  feet  as  if  beaten ;
joints  as  if  beaten;  limbs  as  if  beaten;  as  if  tendons  of
legs  were  too  short;  as  if  he  had  been  awake  all  night;
as  if  limbs  would  fall  asleep;  chill  as  if  drenched  with
cold  water;  as  if  he  were  dashed  with  hot  water;  as  of
piece  of  ice  between  scapulge;  with  chill,  as  if  head  would
break;  with  cough,  head  as  if  it  cracked;  as  if  head
woul.d  burst  on  coughing;  food  as  if  saturated  with  salt;
tongue  as  if  burnt;  as  if  thigh  were  bruised;  pain  as
from  subcutaneous  ulceration  or  as  from  inward  fes-
tering; itching  as  from  fleas;  as  of  a  hot  coal  above
ulcer.
Pain  :  in  stomach  ;  in  1.  side  of  forehead  ;  rising  from  nape
of  neck  ;  in  small  of  back  ;  in  whole  head ;  in  loins  ;  in
thighs  and  groins; in  ankles  and  feet;  in  r.  side  of


643  PULSATILLA.

head ;  in  bones  of  nose  ;  in  one  side  of  head  and  face  ;
m  pit  of  stomach ;  in  epigastrium  to  back  and  abdo-
men ;  m  front  and  back  of  head  ;  abdomen,  chest  and
under  shoulder  ;  in  lower  chest  and  abdomen  ;  in  kid-
neys; in  urethra;  in  uterus;  in  r.  thigh;  in  pelvic
articulations;  in  loins;  in  chest;  in  1.  side  from  under
false  ribs  around  to  back  ;  in  heels;  in  r.  groin;  in  max-
illary sinuses ;  in  sacral  region ;  in  back  and  sides,  low
down ;  in  hip  ;  across  loins.

Anguish  :  in  region  of  heart.

Violent  pain  :  in  one  side  of  occiput ;  in  ear.

Severe  pains  :  in  r.  side  of  head  ;  in  1.  causality  ;  in  fore-
head ;  in  ear;  along  course  of  1.  infraorbital  nerve;
across  sacrum ;  in  r.  side  of  abdomen  ;  in  stomach ;  in
both  shoulder  joints;  in  1.  knee  joint;  in  ankles  and
feet ;  from  elbows  to  fingers  in  bones  ;  in  1.  chest.

Acute  pain:  in  temples;  in  groins,  along  cord  to  tes-
ticles ;  of  heels.

Sharp  pain  :  in  ear  ;  in  rectum  ;  in  sacrum  and  hips.

Crazing  pain  :  into  face  and  teeth.

Racking  pains:  in  upper  and  lower  extremities.

Sphtting  pain:  in  chest.

Stupefying  headache.

Tearing  pain :  in  r.  side  of  head,  in  temples ;  over  1.  side
of  head;  at  tongue  ;  in  forehead  and  vertex;  in  eyes;
in  r.  eye;  in  ears;  in  sinus  maxillaris;  in  face;  in
teeth;  along  alveolar  border  to  ears  and  temples;  be-
tween shoulder  blades;  in  bowels;  in  testicles;  in
chest ;  in  limbs  ;  in  shoulder  joints  and  arms ;  in  knees  ;
across  back  of  foot  to  heel ;  in  feet ;  in  muscles  ;  in  nape
of  neck,  shoulders  and  arms.

Lacerating  pain:  in  testicles;  through  1.  leg  and  foot;
in  bones  of  forearm.

Cutting  pain:  in  bowels;  in  throat;  in  abdomen,  even
to  tongue  and  limbs ;  in  hypogastric  region  ;  in  rec-
tum ;  about  navel,  to  small  of  back  ;  in  region  of  1.
ovary;  at  mouth  of  uterus;  in  region  of  spleen;  in
chest ;  in  abscesses.

Darting  pain  :  in  eyes  ;  in  hepatic  region.

Shooting  pain  :  through  r.  eye;  in  ears;  in  gums  through
head;  in  knee;  in  forehead.

Throbbing  pain:  in  brain;  in  head;  in  forehead;  in
teeth  ;  in  soles.

Pulsating  pain:  in  head;  in  brain  ;  in  ear.

Dull,  throbbing  pains  :  in  r.  supraorbital  region.

Jerking:  at  tongue;  in  outer  ear;  pain  in  face;  in  teeth;
in  bowels;  in  shoulder  joints  and  arms;  in  hip  joints
in  knees ;  through  1.  leg,  in  muscles ;  in  bones.


PULSATILLA.  -  644

Beating:  in  head  ;  in  forehead.

Boring:  in  r.  side  of  forehead  ;  in  L  side  of  head  from
temple  to  occiput  and  into  side  of  neck  and  auditory
meatus ;  in  heels  ;  in  bones.

Stitches  :  in  side ;  in  brain  ;  in  temples  ;  in  limbs ;  fore-
head and  vertex;  in  ej^es ;  in  ears;  in  throat;  in  1.
side ;  in  abdomen  ;  in  rectum ;  in  chest ;  in  small  of
back.

Stitching :  in  forehead ;  gnawing,  in  head ;  in  eyes ;  along
alveolar  border;  in  stomach;  in  epigastrium;  in  neck
of  bladder;  in  abdomen  ;  in  chest;  in  limbs;  in  feet;
in  nape  of  neck  ;  in  1.  hypochondrium.

Pinching  pain  :  in  abdomen  ;  at  root  of  nose ;  in  stomach.

Sticking  pain:  in  eyeball;  in  eyelids  and  canthi ;  in  ear
in  gum ;  in  back ;  in  region  of  liver ;  in  face  and  teeth
in  chest ;  between  scapulae ;  in  back  and  across  chest
in  ball  of  heel ;  in  limbs;  in  joints.

Pricking  pain  :  in  face.

Contractive  pain  :  in  1.  side  of  uterus.

Constrictive  pain  :  above  eyes ;  in  abdomen ;  in  r.  supra-
orbital region;  in  upper  abdominal  and  hypo-
chondriac region;  in  region  of  bladder;  in  region  of  r.
ovary.

Tensive  pain:  over  brain  ;  in  throat,  nape  of  neck  and  oc-
ciput; in  hepatic  region;  in  a  small  spot  in  lower  ab-
domen; in  thighs;  in  tendons;  in  bends  of  elbows;  in
calves ;  in  feet ;  in  nape  of  neck ;  from  small  of  back
over  hips  and  thighs  to  feet.

Drawing,  tensive  pain  :  in  eyes ;  from  abdomen  through
spermatic  cords  into  testicles ;  in  loins ;  in  thighs  and
legs.

Tensive,  drawing  pain :  in  forehead  above  eyes.

Drawing,  pressive  pain  :  towards  uterus.

Pressive  pain :  in  forehead ;  in  eyes  ;  in  r.  supraorbital
region  ;  in  upper  abdomen  and  small  of  back  ;  in  lower
abdomen;  in  testicles  and  spermatic  cord;  in  rectum;
in  clavicle  muscles ;  in  sacrum.

Laborlike  pains:  in  abdomen  and  back.

Griping  pain :  in  abdomen ;  in  pit  of  stomach  ;  in  upper
abdomen.

Crampy  pains:  in  stomach;  through  chest;  in  r.  leg  from
knee  to  groin ;  in  legs.

Coliclike  pains :  in  abdomen.

Digging :  in  decayed  teeth.

Gnawing:  in  epigastrium ;  in  gum.  *

Gnawing  distress :  in  stomach.

Catching  pains :  cardiac  region.

Spasmodic  pain :  in  neck  of  bladder.


645  PULSATILLA.

Erratic  pains:  flying  from  one  part  of  body  to  another.
Painful  shocks:  in  arms,  shoulder  and  back;  in  abdomen.
Rheumatic  pain  :  in  head  ;  in  uterus ;  in  nape  of  neck  ;

in  joints  of  hand;  in  feet.
Neuralgia :  of  r.  temple,  into  back  of  head,  neck  and  ear ;

r.  side  of  face  and  head.
Aching:  in  eyes;  in  forehead ;  in  stomach;  of  testicles;

in  calves ; in  legs ; head,  back  and  extremities ; in

bones  and  muscles  of  hips  ;  of  ears  ;  of  teeth  ;  of  head ;

in  1.  lower  extremities.
Anxiety :  in  chest.

Dull  pain  :  in  stomach ;  in  upper  abdomen.
Sore  pain :  in  chest.
Itching,  biting pain : in inner  and  upper  portions  of

prepuce.
Stinging:  in  eyes;  pain  in face; in  decayed  teeth;  in

throat;  in  anus; in  neck  of bladder; in  joints; in

abscesses ;  in  ulcers.
Stinging  pulsating:  in  brain.
Burning:  in  eyes;  in  eyelids  ;  of  eruption  on  chin ;  about

umbilicus  and  on  scrotum ;  of  r.  cheek  ;  in  throat ;  in

rectum  ;  in  neck  of  bladder  ;  in  urethra ;  in  glans  or

meatus  ;  of  testicles  ;  of  feet ;  in  vagina  and  pudenda  ;

in  last  cervical  vertebrae ;  in  chest,  in  region  of  heart ;

in  feet;  in  ball  of  heel ;  in  soles  of  feet ;  near  an  ulcer

on  foot ;  here  and  there  on  skin.
Heat :  in  ear  ;  in  head  ;  in  neck  of  bladder  ;  in  perineum ;

in  vulva ;  all  over  body  ;  of  face.
Biting : in  1.  eye ;  on  scalp  ; around  mouth  ;  in  tip  of

tongue.
Smarting:  around  mouth ;  of  anus.
Soreness : in  temples ; of  eyeball ;  of  nostrils ;  of  nose,

externally  and  internally;  of  chest;  in  soles  of  feet;

of  1.  heel ;  of  external  meatus ;  of  testicles  ;  of  apices

of  lungs  ;  of  toe  joints ;  of  uterus  and  abdominal  walls ;

of  breasts ;  in  abdomen.
Scraping: in  throat; in stomach and oesophagus; in

larynx ;  in  epiglottis.
Sprained  feeling :  in  ankles.
Bruised feeling: in forehead; in back  and  knees; in

and  about  knee;  in  limbs.
Painful  sensitiveness:  of  abdomen;  of  abdominal  walls.
Rawness :  in  stomach.
Irritation  :  in  pit  of  stomach.
Scratching :  in  trachea.
Violent  pressure :  in  1.  temple.
Pressure: in  chest; in  1.  eye; in  bone  above  r.  ear;  in

throat; in  pit  of  stomach; in  stomach;  in  abdomen


PULSATILLA.  646

and  small  of  back  ;  sharp,  upon  neck  of  bladder ;  in
glans  or  meatus ;  in  perineum  ;  on  bladder  and  rectum ;
low  down  in  abdomen ;  in  prsecordial  region.

Pressive  sensation :  in  root  of  nose ;  in  anus,  in  epigas-
trium.

Heaviness :  of  legs ;  of  head ;  over  frontal  sinuses ;  in
stomach;  of  abdomen;  about  heart;  in  arms;  of  legs;
of  feet ;  of  whole  body.

Weight:  in  epigastrium.

Oppression:  of  chest;  of  epigastrium.

Tightness :  of  chest.

Smothered  feeling:  in  1.  chest.

Dragging :  in  hypogastric  region.

Drawing :  from  teeth  to  eye ;  along  alveolar  border  to
ears  and  temples;  in  cervical  muscles;  in  back;  in
abdomen ;  in  thighs ;  in  nape  of  neck  ;  in  shoulder-
joints  and  arms ;  from  shoulder  to  wrist ;  in  lower  limbs  ;
in  knees;  in  legs;  in  tibia;  in  feet;  in  muscles,  arms,
hands,  shoulders.

Tension :  of  face  and  of  fingers ;  of  throat ;  from  stomach
to  chest ;  in  breasts ;  in  nape  of  neck ;  in  hollow  of
knees;  in  inner  parts  or  in  joints.

Constriction:  of  chest;  about  throat;  crampy,  of  vagina;
of  larynx.

Contraction :  in  abdomen.

Throbbing:  in  epigastrium;  in  temporal  arteries.

Pulsations :  violent  at  pit  of  stomach ;  in  epigastrium  ;
through  whole  body.

Distension  :  in  upper  abdomen.

Fulness :  in  stomach  ;  in  chest ;  about  heart.

Lame  sensation  :  in  1.  thigh  ;  in  ligaments.

Stiffness  :  of  neck  ;  of  clavicle  muscles  ;  of  r.  knee.

Numbness :  of  legs ;  of  arms ;  of  suffering  parts ;  of
fingers.

Empty  feeling:  of  stomach  and  bowels.

Distress  :  in  hypogastrium  and  epigastrium.

Weariness  :  of  limbs  ;  of  thighs  ;  of  legs ;  of  feet.

Weakness  :  in  loins  ;  in  ankles  ;  of  feet.

Trembling  :  of  knees  ;  sensation  in  limbs.

Bubbling :  in  head.

Dryness :  of  mouth ;  of  eyes  and  lids ;  of  tongue ;  of
throat ;  of  tip  and  sides  of  tongue ;  in  trachea.

Tickling :  in  nose ;  in  region  of  thyroid  cartilage ;  at
velum  palati ;  in  air  passages  ;  on  sternum.

Tingling:  in  feet.

Crawling:  in  stomach ;  in  limbs.

Formication :  over  back.

Itching: on  scalp;  in  eyeball;  in  eyes; in  eyelids;  in


647  PULSATILLA.

inner  canthi ;  in  ears  ;  of  nose;  in  anus  ;  in  trachea  ;
of  chilblains  on  hands  ;  in  ball  of  heel ;  in  soles ;  here
and  there  in  skin  ;  in  ulcers.

Creeping:  in  glans  or  meatus.

Chilliness :  in  small  of  back ;  of  feet ;  through  whole
body ;  over  abdomen  to  lower  part  of  back ;  sacrum  ;
along  back.

Coldness :  of  one  hand,  of  limbs ;  of  extremities  between
scapulae ;  of  body  to  legs  and  head ;  of  face  and  skin.
"Tissues.  I  Chlorosis;  great  weakness  and  sluggishness  in
circulation,  manifesting  itself  in  constant  chilliness,
coldness  and  paleness  of  face  and  skin,  with  hot  flushes
and  transitory  redness  of  cheeks ;  soft,  irregular  pulse  and
palpitation ;  oppression  of  chest  and  shortness  of  breath ;
disinclination  to  move;  sad,  tearful;  appetite  generally
absent,  no  thirst;  whole  digestion  disturbed  and  conse-
quently the  assimilation  of  nutriments  for  the  blood
does  not  take  place  properly ;  ansemia,  dizziness,  espe-
cially when  rising,  amenorrhoea,  or  scanty,  slimy  menses,
which  appear  too  late;  >  in  open  air;  disposition  to  in-
termittents ;  melancholia,  hysteria,  heart  and  kidney
diseases ;  discharge  from  ears.

I  I  Erethitic  chlorosis,  with  depression  of  vital  power  on  one

side  and  increased  irritability  on  the  other;  complete
prostration  of  digestion  and  sanguinification ;  menses
absent  or  consist  of  discharge  of  mucus  or  a  little  watery
blood  ;  leucorrhoea ;  body  and  mind  in  a  state  of  torpor
and  atony  with  intercurrent  erethism ;  want  of  energy
in  circulation,  coldness  and  pallor  of  skin  and  extremi-
ties, weak,  soft  pulse,  weak  and  irregular  cardiac  pulsa-
tion, relaxed  cutaneous  veins,  superficial  respiration,
oppression  of  chest,  without  well-marked  dyspnoea,  dis-
inclination to  move,  sad  and  depressed.

I I  Chlorosis,  especially  after  large  doses  of  iron.
iMalassimilation,  with  signs  of  ansemia;  dizziness  when

rising.

■  Circulation  weak,  sluggish,  with  paleness  and  constant

chilliness ;  anaemia.

■  Congestion  to  single  parts.

■  Hemorrhages:  block  dark,  easily  coagulating;  seemingly

stop  and  in  a  few  hours  return.

■  ■Veins  varicose  or  inflamed;  aff'ected  parts  bluish;  sore-

ness and  stinging  pains.

■  Emaciation,  especially  of  suffering  parts.

■  Liflammation  of  internal  parts,  with  disposition  to  sup-

purate.

■  ■Pains,  rheumatic,  shifting  from  one  place  to  another.

■  Rheumatic  and  gouty  aff'ections;  also  with  swelling.


PULSATILLA.  648

I  Curvature  of  bones;  drawing,  lacerating  pains  in  bones

of  forearm  ;  pain  in  thigh  bones  as  if  bruised  ;  tibia
painful  when  touched  ;  drawing  in  bones  of  legs.

■  Scraping  or  tingling  in  periosteum;  jerking,  boring  in

bones.

■  Anasarca.

I I  Affections  of  mucous  surfaces ;  discharges  usually  bland,
yellowish-green,  thick.

1 1  Glands  swollen,  painful,  hot.

•  Abscesses:  bleeding  readily,  stinging  and  cutting  pains;

bluish-red  swelling  [varices]  in  surrounding  parts,  with
itching,  stinging,  burning  pains  ;  after  violent  and  long-
continued  inflammation;  pus  blood}^  or  copious,  green-
ish or  yellow.

■  Suppurations:  pus  very  profuse;  green,  yellow,  bloody

or  yellowish-green,  unirritating.
1 1  Pain  as  from  subcutaneous  ulceration  or  festering.

•  Tension  in  inner  parts  or  in  joints.
I  Burning,  stinging  pains.

iPains  and  other  symptoms  are  often  accompanied  by
chilliness,  thirstlessness  and  oppression  of  chest.

■  Pulsation  through  whole  body.

■  Frequent  anxious  trembling  of  limbs.

■  ■Hysterical  complaints.

*^  Touch.  Passive  Motion.  Injuries.  Touch :  stitching
headache  < ;  soreness  of  eyeball ;  abdominal  walls
tender;  region  of  bladder  painful;  r.  testicle  tender;
abdomen  sore ;  phlegmasia  dolens  intensely  painful ;
last  cervical  vertebrae  sore;  swollen  leg  tender;  ulcers
on  leg  tender;  sores  on  legs  very  sensitive;  beating  of
arteries  felt;  on  region  supplied  with  pes  anserinum,
severe  pain  like  tic  douloureux ;  painful  on  tibia.

Quick  hard  rubbing  with  dry  hand :  >  pains.

Wishes  to  throw  off  her  clothes.

Part  lain  on:  tearing  in  temple.

Clothes  tight:  cannot  bear  them  on  abdomen.

Pressure:  throbbing  headache  >;  oppressive  sensation
in  epigastrium ;  region  of  stomach  very  sensitive ;  >
pain  in  region  of  bladder ;  hypogastric  region  sensitive  ;
pain  over  seat  of  placenta ;  fifth  and  sixth  dorsal  verte-
brse  painful ;  against  1.  chest,  soreness  of  chest ;  of
hand  >  pain  in  cardiac  region ;  of  arm  pain  <  ;  upon
leg  felt  in  bone;  left  leg  and  foot  tender;  least  upon
heel  intensely  painful ;  hard  >  throbbing  of  arteries ;
on  opposite  limb  ulcers  <.

Scratching:  <  itching  of  skin;  ulcers  <.

Rubbing :  >  veiled  feeling  in  eyes ;  pain  in  canthi ;  >
itching  of  lids;  ulcers  <.


649  PULSATILLA.

Contusion :  elbow  swollen.

Jars :  left  leg  sensitive.

Badly  fitting truss: causes inflammation of  spermatic

cord.
Wound  in  ankle :  ulcer  one  year  after.
Fall :  injury  to  testicle  followed  by  trismus.
From  lifting  heavy  weight :  pain  in  sacrum.
'"^  Skin. iPale ;  burning  itching  here  and  there.

B  Burning  itching  over  whole  body,  on  becoming  warm  in

bed,  before  midnight,  <  from  scratching ;  is  unable  to

sleep  on  account  of  it;  there  is  no  appearance  of  an

eruption.

■  Itching,  fine  sticking  sensation  in  skin,  as  from  numerous

fleas.
■Jaundiced  appearance  ;  loss  of  appetite,  vomiting  of  mu-
cus, thirstless,  <  towards  evening.

■  Urticaria:  with  diarrhoea;  itching  <  at  night;  from  pas-

try or  pork  ;  from  delayed  menses.

■  Erysipelas :  bluish,  spreads  rapidly  ;  especially  about  but-

tocks and  thighs  ;  smooth  skin;  neonatorum,  infantile;
erraticum  ;  induration  of  cellular  tissue.

■  Pimples  :  from  scalp  to  middle  of  back  ;  on  side  of  neck  ;

on  neck  below  chin ;  on  leg,  discharging  a  watery  fluid  ;
between  fingers,  containing  water.

■  Zona.

■  Eruptions  from  eating  much  pork;  itching  violently  in

bed.

■  ■  Moles  or  freckles  on  young  girls.

■  ■Measles: catarrhal  symptoms  prominent; coryza  and

profuse  lachrymation ;  cough  usually  dry  at  night  and
loose  by  day;  child  sits  up  in  bed  to  cough;  earache;
not  indicated  in  beginning  when  fever  is  high ;  even
with  typhoid  symptoms;  catarrh  prominent;  eruption
tardy;  earache;  ophthalmia;  short,  dry  cough,  with
pain  in  chest,  or  rattling  loose  cough  which  is  prone  to
remain  as  a  sequel ;  repercussion.

■  After  scarlet  fever:  pain  in  ears,  deafness.

■  ■Varices,  especially  of  pregnant  women  ;  highly  inflamed

varices.

■  Bleeding  tumors;  changeable  blood,  <  while  walking

during  day.

■  Ulcers:  bleed  easily,  burn,  itch  and  sting  in  circumfer-

ence, which  is  hard  or  red;  fistulous,  inflamed,  or  pu-
trid, with  shining  hardness,  easily  bleeding ;  flat,  putrid,
carious;  itching,  burning  or  excoriated  feeling;  smart-
ing and  shooting  pains;  surrounding  parts  discolored  ;
indurated  and  elevated  edges;  surrounded  by  papillae;
pus  copious,  albuminous  and  yellow,  bloody  or  green  ;


PULSATILLA.  650

<  evening,  afternoon  and  at  night  before  midnight;
also  on  changing  position  while  lying  on  sound  side,
after  lying  down,  during  menstruation,  on  beginning
to  move,  after  moving,  from  pressure  on  opposite  limb,
rubbing  or  scratching,  sitting,  in  windy  or  wintry
weather ;  >  in  open  air,  cold  in  general,  wetting  af-
fected parts,  motion  and  walking.

I  I  Burning  as  from  a  hot  coal  above  ulcer.

I  I  After  being  wounded  in  ankle  in  battle  by  fragment  of
a  shell,  one  year  later  ulcer  at  seat  of  injury,  wound
never  having  closed,  circular  in  form,  as  large  as  palm
of  hand ;  regular  outline ;  flattened  edges ;  filled  with
firm,  florid  granulations,  discharging  profusely  a  thick,
greenish-yellow  pus  ;  red,  shining  areola ;  much  sting-
ing and  itching  in  ulcer  and  surrounding  parts  ;  pain
of  varying  character,  <  evening  and  before  midnight ;
>  in  all  respects  in  open  air  and  from  cold  applications
and  in  warm  weather.

■  Wounds  suppurate;  pus  thick,  bland,  too  profuse.
iChilblains,  inflamed,  with  bluish-red  swelling  and  rha-

gades.
*^  Stages  of  Life, Constitution. ib  Persons of  indecisive,
slow,  phlegmatic  temperament;  sandy  hair,  blue  eyes,
pale  face,  easily  moved  to  laughter  or  tears;  aff'ectionate,
mild,  gentle,  timid,  yielding  disposition.

■  Especially  suitable  for  slow,  phlegmatic,  good-natured,

timid  people;  for  women,  and  especially  during  preg-
nancy.

IlSandy  hair,  blue  eyes,  pale  face,  inclined  to  grief  and
submissiveness.

llOften  indicated  with  women  and  children.

■  Women  inclined  to  be  fleshy,  with  scanty  menstruation.
Child,  £et.  8  months;  retention  of  urine.

Boy,  set.  IJ  years;  cholera  infantum.

Boy,  set.  4|^,  after  an  attack  of  ague ;  anasarca.

Girl,  set.  5,  suff'ering  from  a  leucorrhcea  which  was  sud-
denly suppressed  by  cold  ;  meningitis.

Girl,  set.  5,  two  years  ago  had  measles,  since  then  suffer-
ing ;  hardness  of  hearing.

Boy,  set.  5,  suffering  two  years ;  eruption  on  leg  and
otorrhoea.

Girl,  5J,  mild,  gentle  disposition,  delicate  features,  color  of
face  readily  changing,  slender  build,  suff'ering  since  an
attack  of  measles,  two  years  ago  ;  nocturnal  enuresis.

Boy,  set.  6,  strong ;  scrofulous,  after  sudden  suppression  of
otorrhoea  by  cold  ;  irritation  of  brain.

Boy,  set.  6,  lymphatic  temperament;  typhoid  fever.

Boy,  set.  7,  scrofulous,  patient,  lachrymose  disposition,  two


651  •  PULSATILLA.

years  ago  had  whooping-cough,  since  then  suffering ;
cough.

Girl,  £et.  8,  gentle,  tearful  disposition,  suffering  six  months;
headache.

Girl,  set.  8 ;  pustule  on  cornea.

Girl,  set.  8,  complaining  two  weeks;  sleeplessness.

Boy,  set.  9|^,  two  and  a  half  years  previously  had  necro-
sis of  r.  humerus,  and  one  year  previous  an  itching
humor  cured  by  red  precipitate  ointment ;  headache.

Boy,  set.  10,  during  wet  and  cold  weather;  swelling  of  ears.

Girl,  set.  12,  after  suppressed  eruption  of  measles;,  otitis.

Girl,  set.  12,  delicate  build,  gentle,  quiet  disposition ;
chronic  nasal  catarrh.

Girl,  set.  12,  scrofulous,  one  year  ago  suffered  from  oppres-
sion of  chest  and  eczema  on  knee;  measles  and  threat-
ened tuberculosis.

Girl,  set.  12 ;  measles.

Boy,  set.  13  ;  inflammation  of  eye.

Boy,  set.  14;  inflammation  of  brain.

Girl,  set.  15,  weak,  scrofulous,  suffering  12  days ;  inflamma-
tion of  eyes.

Girl,  set.  15,  suffering  three  months  ;  facial  neuralgia.

Girl,  set.  15  ;  constriction  in  throat.

Girl,  set.  15 ;  amenorrhoea.

Girl,  set.  15;  dyspepsia  with  amenorrhoea.

Boy,  set.  15  ;  ague.

Youth,  set.  16,  suffering  ten  days;  religious  mania.

Girl,  set.  16,  after  having  taken  cold  in  feet;  diarrhoea.

Girl,  set.  16,  mild-looking,  intelligent  blonde,  three  months
ago  had  violent  attack  of  cholera  morbus,  for  which  she
took  calomel,  got  her  feet  wet  and  has  been  suffering
since;  chronic  diarrhoea.

Girl,  set.  16,  after  catching  cold  while  menstruating  a  year
ago ;  amenorrhoea.

Girl,  set.  17,  menses  not  yet  appeared  ;  chlorosis.

Girl,  set.  17,  menses  regular,  suffering  two  weeks;  ague.

Young  man,  set.  17,  quiet,  cheerful  disposition;  freezing
of  toes.

Young  woman,  set.  18,  sanguine  temperament,  several
years  ago  ansemic,  menses  not  yet  appeared,  but  suffers
every  month  from  various  complaints,  after ,  an  illness  ;
mental  disturbance.

Girl,  set.  18,  sensitive,  lachrymose  disposition,  fair  hair,
blue  eyes  ;  ozsena  and  dysmenorrhoea.

Girl,  set.  18,  healthy  ;  swelling  of  knee.

Young  man,  set.  18,  suffering  three  days;  ague.

Girl,  set.  18,  suffering  several  months  ;  ague.

Young  woman,  set.  19,  tall,  strong,  lively,  cheerful,  good-


PULSATILLA.  652

natured,  during  eighth  month  of  first  pregnancy ;  men-
tal disturbance.

Young  lady,  set.  19,  sanguine  temperament,  blon'de,  deli-
cate skin,  weak  constitution,  menstruation  not  yet  es-
tablished ;  headache.

Girl,  set.  19,  menses  appeared  at  14,  periods  lasting  six
days ;  gastric  disturbance.

Mrs.  H.,  set.  19,  small  and  delicate,  nursing  first  child,  set.
6  months;  constant  bearing  down  sensation.

Girl,  set.  19,  five  months  ago  was  chilled  after  dancing,
which  caused  suppression  of  menses,  since  then  ill ;
chronic  bronchial  catarrh.

Girl,  set.  19;  chlorosis.

Woman,  set.  20,  silent,  gentle  disposition,  suffering  since
first  labor  several  years  ago ;  mental  disturbance.

Man,  set.  20,  phlegmatic  temperament,  dark  complexion,
'  suff"ering  two  days ;  angina.

Miss  R.,  set.  20,  menses  appeared  late;  gastric  disturb-
ance.

Miss ,  set.  20,  suff'ering  since  puberty  ;  dysmenorrhoea.

Girl,  set.  20,  blue  eyes,  auburn  hair,  pale  face,  easily
flushed  ;  menstrual  disorder.

Primipara,  set.  20,  robust;  retained  placenta  and  hem-
orrhage.

Girl,  set.  20 ;  hysterical  asthma.

Girl,  set.  20,  weak,  delicate,  suff'ering  since  four  years,
when  menses  appeared  ;  asthma.

Young  lady,  set.  20,  slender  build,  delicate  white  skin,
eight  years  ago  suff'ered  from  same  disease ;  ague.

Man,  set.  20,  strong,  muscolar ;  ague.

Young  lady,  set.  21,  suff'ering  five  weeks;  gastralgia  and
amenorrhoea.

W.  B.,set.  21,  ten  weeks  ago  caught  cold,  since  then  suffer-
ing ;  gastrodynia.

Miss  C,  set.  21,  phlegmatic  temperament,  stout,  suff'ering
two  years ;  epilepsy.

Girl,  set.  22,  menstrual  function  deranged,  had  an  attack
of  pleurisy  for  which  she  was  bled ;  headache ;  pre-
viously had  palpitation  of  heart,  also  cured  by  Pulsat.

Man,  set.  22,  suffering  from  inflammatory  rheumatism;
blindness.

Woman,  set.  22,  single ;  chlorosis.

Man,  set.  23,  robust,  strong,  apparently  healthy;  bad  taste
in  mouth.

Woman, set.  23,  well  built;  threatened  abortion.

Man,  set.  23,  very  strong ;  ague.

Woman,  set.  24,  gentle  disposition,  tearful,  pale  appear-
ance, after  catching  cold  during  lying-in  period  ;  head-
ache.


653  PULSATILLA.

Woman,  set.  24,  single,  healthy,  yielding  disposition;
headache.

Lady,  set.  24,  fair  complexion,  mild  and  gentle  expression,
pensive  and  retiring,  suffering  six  months ;  dyspepsia.

Woman,  set.  24,  single,  hereditary  tendency  to  arthritic
affections;  rheumatism.

Girl,  set.  25,  in  consequence  of  unrequited  love,  and  after
hearing  of  death  of  a  friend;  melancholia.

Man,  set.  25,  strong,  well  built,  lymphatic  temperament,
sanguine,  calm,  quiet  character,  suffering  two  months ;
neuralgia  of  temple.

Man,  set.  25,  two  months  ago  caught  cold,  since  then  suf-
fering; headache.

Man,  set.  25,  German,  blonde,  suffering  two  weeks;  epis-
taxis.

Woman,  set.  25,  slim,  suffering  nine  months;  gastric  dis-
turbance.

Mrs.  B.  H.,  set.  25 ;  leucorrhoea.

Mrs.  L.,  set.  25,  gentle,  phlegmatic,  blonde,  after  suddenly
weaning  child ;  affection  of  breasts.

Woman,  set,  25,  married,  has  borne  two  children;  hysteria
and  debility.

Woman,  set.  25,  had  a  child  eighteen  months  ago,  has
undergone  successful  operation  for  laceration  of  peri-
neum ;  nervous  affection.

Woman,  set.  25,  tailoress,  suffering  six  months ;  rheuma-
tism.

Woman,  set.  26,  yellow,  cachectic  appearance,  suffering  six
months;  vertigo.

Mrs.  J.,  set.  26,  one  week  after  confinement;  phlegmasia
dolens.

Woman,  set.  26,  single,  light  brunette,  phlegmatic,  melan-
cholic temperament,  tendency  to  fatness,  sister  died  of
phthisis,  suffering  three  months;  cough.

Man,  set.  27,  weak  constitution,  after  suppressed  gonor-
rhoea ;  orchitis.

Miss  E.  B.,  set.  27,  had  ague  in  the  South  for  one  year,
and  used  much  quinine  without  being  able  to  stop  it
entirely ;  ague.

Woman,  set.  28,  nursing  an  infant  6  months  old,  much
exposed  for  five  weeks  while  traveling,  sleeping  in  a
wagon  at  night ;  ague.

Woman,  set.  28,  weak ;  inflammation  of  1.  eye.

Woman,  set.  28,  married  eight  years,  has  had  three  chil-
dren, now  in  third  month  of  pregnancy;  gastric  dis-
turbance.

Woman,  set.  28,  delicate,  five  months  pregnant ;  pains  in
abdomen.


PULSATILLA.  654

Mrs.  F.,  set.  28,  married  three  years,  had  several  miscar-
riages, suffered  from  prolapsus  uteri,  and  a  chronic
diarrhoea  supposed  to  be  caused  by  tuberculosis  of  in-
testines, had  not  been  able  to  leave  couch  for  more
than  a  year;  Natr.  sulph.  cured  diarrhoea,  and  Sulph.
and  Natr.  carb.  cured  prolapsus ;  was  subsequently  de-
livered of  two  children  ;  puerperal  fever.

Woman,  set.  29,  single,  sanguine  temperament,  pretty
strong,  menses  regular,  but  scanty ;  headache.

Woman,  set.  29,  during  fourth  month  of  second  preg-
nancy ;  nausea  and  vomiting.

Sophia  T.,  set.  29,  suffering  three  or  four  years ;  rheu-
matism.

Man,  set.  30,  strong,  choleric,  addicted  to  drink;  mental
disturbance.

Woman,  set.  30,  eight  days  after  labor  caught  cold ;  head-
ache.

AVoman,  set.  30,  good  constitution,  suffering  several  years
from  cardialgia,  accustomed  to  being  bled,  nursing  a
three  months  old  child ;  headache.

Woman,  set.  30,  headstrong,  irritable,  fault-finding;  head-
ache.

Mrs.  W.,  set.  30 ;  headache.

Man,  set.  30,  suffering  a  week ;  catarrhal  ophthalmia.

Man,  set,  30,  suffering  seven  days  ;  inflammation  of  eyes.

Woman,  set.  30,  single,  suffering  four  years ;  prosopalgia.

Woman,  set.  30,  gave  birth  to  child  several  months  ago ;
facial  neuralgia.

Man,  set.  30,  suffering  a  long  time ;  hsematuria.

Woman,  set.  30,  suffering  eight  years  from  oppression  of
chest  with  expectoration  of  mucus,  ten  days  after  labor ;
metrorrhagia.

Woman,  set.  30,  brunette,  gentle  disposition,  delicate  con-
stitution, after  night-watching  and  mental  disturbance ;
threatened  abortion.

Woman,  set.  30,  four  months  pregnant,  after  a  fright  was
obliged  to  walk  home,  being  about  a  mile,  through
deep  snow  ;  threatened  abortion.

Woman,  set.  30,  robust,  healthy;  ague.

Man,  set.  31,  lymphatic  temperament,  suffering  several
years ;  dysecoia.

Woman,  set.  31,  blonde,  five  months  pregnant;  toothache.

Woman,  set.  31,  six  months  pregnant;  gastralgia.

Woman,  set.  31,  multipara;  puerperal  metritis.

Woman,  set.  32,  German,  mother  of  five  living  children,
husband  a  drunkard,  ansemic  from  nursing  and  want
of  food ;  religious  mania.

Barber,  set.  32,  light  complexion,  nervous  temperament,


655  rULSATILLA.

has  not  been  well  for  some  time,  four  weeks  ago  had  a
"  kidney  trouble  ;"  neuritis.

Woman,  set.  32,  good  physique,  when  eighteen  had  pneu-
monia, from  which  she  made  a  slow  recovery,  six  years
after  that  her  first  child  was  born,  labor  being  instru-
mental, and  child  was  stillborn,  from  this  she  was  ill  a
long  time,  second  child  born  two  years  later,  from
which  she  was  much  debilitated  and  terribly  despond-
ent for  a  long  time;  periostitis;  later,  delayed  menses.

Woman,  set  32,  corpulent,  mother  of  three  cliildren,  labors
all  difficult,  carried  fourth  child  with  difficulty  to  full
term  ;  false  labor  pains.

Lady,  aet.  32,  suffering  six  years ;  aphonia  nervosa.

Woman,  set.  33,  phlegmatic  temperament ;  gastric  fever.

Mrs.  Judge  A.,  a3t.  33,  mother  of  several  children,  nerv-
ous temperament,  good  constitution,  of  slender  form
and  appearance,  laboring  under  a  slight  attack  of  bil-
ious fever,  for  which  she  had  appropriate  remedies
which  relieved  her  in  two  or  three  days,  but  found  that
she  had  been  subject  to  semi-annual  attacks  of  proso-
palgia for  several  years,  pain  appeared  during  sixth
month  of  pregnancy,  and  was  still  present  one  month
after  parturition ;  pains  in  hips  and  sacrum.

Woman,  set.  33,  single,  robust,  after  getting  wet;  rheu-
matism.

Mrs.  D  ,  a3t.  34,  nervous  temperament,  fretful,  timid  dis-
position, suffering  three  days  ;  headache.

Woman,  set.  34,  menses  suppressed  after  catching  cold,
since  then  suffering ;  nasal  catarrh.

Woman,  set.  34,  single,  strong,  after  catching  cold  ;  swell-
ing of  knee.

Lady,  set.  35,  large,  lymphatic,  has  had  the  disease  several
times  before,  always  treated  allopathically;  gastrodynia.

Woman,  get.  35,  seven  months  pregnant;  violent  foetal
movements.

Woman,  set.  35,  mother  of  five  children,  dark  complexion,
enfeebled  constitution,  six  years  ago,  after  a  confine-
ment, arose  from  bed  before  usual  time  in  order  to
attend  to  household  work,  then  took  cold  and  was  con-
fined many  days  to  bed,  and  ended  in  symptoms  of
milk-leg ;  chronic  phlebitis.

Man,  3et._35,  strong,  vigorous,  wounded  at  battle  of  Gettys-
burg, in  ankle,  by  fragment  of  shell,  since  then  suffer-
ing ;  ulcer  on  leg.

Man,  set.  35,  dark  complexion,  contracted  disease  while  in
army,  in  Savannah  marshes,  took  much  quinine  and
Avhisky ;  ague.

Woman,  set.  35,  single,  mild  character,  blonde,  year  ago
had  rheumatic  fever;  rheumatic  pains.


PULSATILLA.  656

Woman,  set.  36,  healthy,  suffering  many  years ;  inflamma-
tion of  eyes.

Woman,  set.  36,  lost  much  blood  during  last  labor,  nine
years  ago,  since  then  suffering ;  gastralgia.

Woman,  set.  36,  had  five  children  and  three  miscarriages;
false  pregnancy.

Mrs.  C,  set.  37,  large,  plethoric,  light  hair,  blue  eyes,  suf-
fering for  years ;  headaches.

Mrs.  C,  set.  37  ;  dyspepsia.

Man,  set.  37,  choleric  temperament,  from  youth  suffered
from  catarrhal  affection  of  throat,  after  catching  cold  ;
asthma.

Miss,  set.  37,  out  of  health  for  years,  has  had  several
hemorrhages,  has  been  treated  allopathically,  supposes
herself  incurable ;  affection  of  chest.

Woman,  set.  37,  lady's  maid,  single,  few  weeks  ago  caught
cold,  since  then  suffering;  neuralgic  rheumatism.

Mrs.  S.,  set.  38,  swarthy,  stout,  sensitive,  confined  two
months  ago,  since  then  weak ;  ague.

Man,  set.  39,  suffering  three  months ;  indigestion.

Woman,  set.  40,  sudden  suppression  of  lochia  on  tenth
day ;  puerperal  mania.

AVoman,  set.  40,  after  sudden  suppression  of  lochia  ;  puer-
peral mania.

Woman,  set.  40,  weak,  irritable ;  otitis.

Man,  set.  40,  of  healthy  appearance,  suffering  several
years ;  gastric  disturbance.

Woman,  set.  40,  fat,  fair,  florid ;  biliary  calculi.

Locksmith,  set.  40;  constipation.

Man,  set.  40;  orchitis.

Woman,  set.  40,  weakly,  poorly  fed,  living  in  very  sorrow-
ful circumstances,  wife  of  an  actor,  attacked  for  years
with  catarrh ;  acute  pulmonary  catarrh.

Man,  set.  40,  suffering  over  a  year ;  lumbo-sacral  neuralgia.

Man,  set.  40;  swelling  of  knee.

Man,  set.  40,  robust,  has  taken  much  quinine,  suffering
two  years ;  ague.

Man,  set.  40;  ague.

Woman,  set.  40  ;  rheumatism.

Man,  set.  40,  sickly,  suffering  from  scrofulous  ulcerations
and  swelling  of  glands;  zona.

Man,  set.  42,  weakly,  pale,  mild,  soft,  patient  disposition,
constantly  kept  by  business  at  his  desk;  indigestion.

Man,  set.  42,  mild,  gentle,  patient  disposition,  weak,  pale,
occupied  much  at  writing-desk ;  gastric  disturbance.

Mrs.  P.,  set.  42,  suffering  several  years;  menstrual  dis-
turbance.

Woman,  set.  43,  thin,  pale,  gentle  disposition,  after  an  in-
unction of  mercury  for  angina;  headache.


657  PULSATILLA.

Lady,  set.  43,  subject  to  attacks  of  hysteria,  proceeding  from
prolapse  of  uterus  ;  spasms  preceding  menses.

Woman,  set.  44,  weak  constitution,  menses  absent  four
months,  since  then  suffering  ;  asthma.

Woman,  set.  44,  single,  suffering  two  years;  rheumatism.

Woman,  set.  45,  after  vexation ;  mental  disturbance.

Man,  set.  45,  suffering  twelve  months ;  indigestion.

Man,  set.  45,  Italian  ;  chronic  cystitis.

AVoman,  set.  46 ;  gastric  disturbance.

Woman,  set.  46  ;  indigestion.

Woman,  ^t.  49,  mild  disposition,  predisposed  to  lung
affections,  after  catching  cold  ;  bronchitis.

Man,  set.  50,  suffering  three  days ;  neuralgic  pains  in  head.

Woman,  set.  50,  after  erysipelas  ;  otitis.

Man,  set.  50,  formerly  addicted  to  brandy  drinking,  suf-
fering ten  years ;  gastralgia.

Man,  set.  50,  had  gonorrhoea  twice,  cured  without  any
sequelse  remaining ;  dysuria.

Man,  set.  50,  weak,  suffering  three  weeks;  cough.

Woman,  set.  50  ;  rheumatism.

Man,  set.  50,  quiet  disposition  ;  chronic  rheumatism.

Mrs.  S.,  set.  51,  had  lateral  spinal  curvature,  suffering  over
six  years ;  metritis.

Woman,  set.  54 ;  indigestion.

Man,  set.  54,  suffering  nine  days  ;  ague.

Woman,  set.  55,  irresolute  disposition,  and  as  a  girl  very
taciturn ;  melancholia.

Woman,  set.  59,  hearty,  lively  disposition,  sufi'ering  three
years;  vertigo.

A.  T.,  set.  60,  robust  health,  good  disposition  ;  ague.

Man,  set.  62,  director  of  sugar  manufactory,  suffering  six
years;  insufficiency  of  mitral  valve.

Mrs.  S.  E.,  set.  about  65,  suffering  several  months  through
last  Winter  and  Spring,  and  had  called  for  no  medical
treatment ;  ague.

Woman,  set.  66;  headache.

Man,  set.  68 ;  vertigo.

Woman,  set.  70,  belonging  to  upper  class  of  society,  small,
choleric  temperament,  suffering  for  years  with  hemor-
rhoids and  gout;  glossitis.

Lady,  set.  72 ;  soreness  of  meatus  urinarius.

Woman,  set.  73  ;  ulcer  on  leg.

Lady,  blue  eyes,  light  hair  and  complexion;  headache.

Lady,  phlegmatic,  lachrymose,  suffering  several  weeks;
facial  neuralgia.

Young  woman,  strong  and  energetic,  black  hair,  red
cheeks,  after  catching  cold;  coryza  and  headache.

vol..  VIII. — 42.


PULSATILLA.  658

Miss  M.,  slender  young  lady,  of  dark  complexion,  still  at

school,  suffering  two  months ;  amenorrhoea.
Mrs.  J.  M.,  eight  months  pregnant,  after  catching  cold  ;

cough.
Man,  stout,  full-blooded,  suffering  ten  days ;  rheumatism

in  wrist.
Man,  plethoric  habit,  subject  to  attacks  of  rheumatic  gout;

rheumatism  in  hand.
Lady,  exceedingly  mild  and  gentle  disposition,  after  an

attack  of  influenza  ;  neuralgia  rheumatica  of  leg.
Mrs.  S.,  married  four  years,  blonde,  in  girlhood had a

fright,  followed  by  cholera,  since  her  marriage  has  been

in  good  health until  last  pregnancy,  j^oungest  child  3

months  old ;  spasms.
Fleshy  man,  brewer,  crippled  for  years  ;  rheumatism.
Mrs.  W.,  red  hair,  light  skin,  freckles  easily;  ague.
*^  Relations. Antidotecl  by : Chamom.,  Coffea,  Jgnat.,  Nux  vom.
It  antidotes  : Cinchon.;  iron,  Cjuinine  ;  Sulphur,  iSulph.  ac.  ;

vapors  of  mercury  and  copper;  Bellad.,  Chamom.,  Coffea,

Colchic,  Lycop.,  Platina,  Stramon.,  Sabadilla,  Antim.  tart.;

whisky ;  poisoning  b}^  toad-stools.
Compatible: Arsen., Bryon., Bellad., Ignat., Kali bich.,

Lycop.,  Nux  vom.,  Phosphor.,  Blms,  Sepia,  Sulphur.
Complementary:  Lycop.,  Sulpli.  ac.
Compare: Actsea  rac, Antim.  cruel., Caulophyl., Conium,

Cyclamen,  HamameL,  Sabina.


/


^
